The Rig Veda (Ralph T. H. Griffith, 1896-1897)
==============================================
Ralph T. H. Griffith's complete English verse translation of the Rig Veda — the oldest and most important of the four Vedas, 1,028 hymns across ten mandalas — from the 1896-1897 Benares edition (Vol. I: Books I-VI; Vol. II: Books VII-X), public domain. The foundational scripture of Hinduism and the single most pivotal Vedic text for the library. Scan via Internet Archive (Digital Library of India).

GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA


DEPARTMENT  OF  ARCHAEOLOGY

CENTRAL  ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY


5+2VI  _ Cm

VbL.I  _


Call  No.


- M

BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR.


THE  HYMNS  OF  THE  SAMAVEM;  m'oneVol,
Royal  8  vo.,  cloth  boards,  gilt  lettered,  Rs.  4-0-0.

THE  HYMNS  OF  THE  ATHARVA-VEDA,  in  two
Volumes,  Royal  8vo.,  cloth  bound,  gilt  lettered,

Rs.  6-0-0,  each  Volume.

A  METRICAL  TRANSLATION  OF  vALMiKI’S
Ri.Mi.YAN,  complete  in  one  Volume,  Crown
8vo.,  cloth  bound,  gilt  lettered,  Rs.  6-0-0.


HYMNS  OP  THE  RIGLVEDA


TRANSLATED  WITH  A  POPULAR  COMMENTARY

BY

.  RALPH  T.  H.  GRIFFITH,  M.  A.,  C.  I.  E.

FORMER  PRINCIPAL  OP  THE  BEN  ARBS  COLLEGE,  AND  LATE  DIRECTOR
PUBLIO  IN8TRUCTIQN  N.-W.  P.  AND  OUDH.


Second  Edition.

COMPLETE  IN  TWO  VOLUMES.


SclZVI

(x^6


VOL.  I.


BENARES:

PRINTED  AND  PUBLISHED  BY  E.  J.  LAZARUS  AND  00.


1896.

All  rights  reserved.


013^


CENTRAL  ARCH  AGO!  OGIGAI
LIBRARY,  NEWHKl  HI.

A 00.  No . . mm

»*> . .aette/sJX2U*a


-a  t'ii


*-  \'A


CONTENTS.


?  -

v  -r;%

Prrpaoe  to  the  first  edition.

Aj  Hymns,  Translation  and  Commentary  : —


Appendix  I.-— Hymn  I.
Appendix  II. — Metre...
Index  of  Hymns
Index  of  Namos,  Etc.
Corrigonda  et  Addenda


126.  6,  7;  and  I.  179.


*


PREFACE

TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


"  What  can  be  more  tedious  than  tho  Veda,  and  yet  what  can  bo  more
interesting,  if  ouco  wo  know  that  it  is  the  first  word  spoken  by  the  Aryan
man  T  ”

“ThoVodahaan  two-fold  interests  it  belongs  to  tho  history  of  tho

world  and  to  tho  history  of  India . As  long  as  man  continues  to  take  an

Into  root  in  tho  history  of  his  race,  aud  as  long  ae  we  colleot  in  libraries  and
museums  the  relics  of  formor  agos,  tho  first  place  in  that  long  row  of  books
whioh  contains  tho  records  of  tho  Aryan  branch  of  mankind,  will  belong  for
over  to  tho  Rig-voda."  F.  Max  Mcli.br.

This  work  is  an  Attempt  to  bring  within  oasy  roach  of  all
roadors  of  English  a  translation  of  tho  Hymns  of  tho  Rigvoda
which,  while  aiming  ospocially  at  closo  fidolity  to  tho  lottor  and
tho  spirit  of  tho  original,  shall  bo  as  rcadablo  and  intelligible  aB
tho  naturo  of  tho  subject  and  other  circmnstancos  permit.

Voda,  moaning  literally  knowledge,  is  tho  namo  givon  to
oortain  ancient  works  whioh  formed  tho  foundation  of  tho  early
religious  boliof  of  tho  Hindus.  Those  aro  tho  Rigvcda,  tho  Sima-
voda,  tho  Yajurvcdo,  and  tho  Atharvavcda ;  and  of  thoee  the
Rigvoda — so  oallod  because  its  SanhitA  or  collection  of  mantras
or  hymns  consists  of  Richas  or  verses  intended  for  loud  reoitation
— is  tho  oldest,  the  most  important,  and  tho  most  generally  in¬
teresting,  some  of  its  hymns  being  rather  Iudo-European  than
Hindu,  aud  representing  the  condition  of  tho  Aryans  before  their
final  settlement  in  India.  These  four  Vedas  aro  considered  to  bo
of  divine  origin  and  to  have  oxisted  from  all  eternity,  tho  Rishis
or  saored  poets  to  whom  the  hymns  are  ascribed  being  merely  in¬
spired  seers  who  saw  or  received  them  by  sight  directly  from  the
Supreme  Creator.  In  accordance  with  this  belief  these  sacrod
books  have  been  preserved  and  handed  down  with  the  most  re¬
verential  care  from  generation  to  generation,  and  havo  accom-


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


Vl

panied  tho  great  army  of  Aryan  immigrants  in  their  onward
march  from  the  Land  of  the  Seven  Rivers  to  tho  Indian  Ocean
and  the  Bay  of  Bengal.  Each  of  these  four  Vedas  is  divided  into
two  distinct  parts,  one  the  Mantra  containing  prayer  and  praise,
tho  other  tho  Br&lfmaua  containing  detailed  directions  for  tho
performance  of  the  ceremonies  at  which  the  Mantras  were  to  bo
used,  and  explanations  of  tho  legends  connected  with  them,  the
whole  forming  a  vast  body  of  sacred  literature  in  verse  and  in
prose,  devotional,  coremonial,  expository  and  theosophic.

Tho  SanhitA  of  the  Rigvcda  is  a  collection  of  hymns  and
songs  brought  by  tho  remote  ancestors  of  tho  present  Hindus
from  their  ancient  homes  on  tho  banks  of  the  Indus  whero  thoy
had  been  first  used  in  adoration  of  the  Father  of  Heaven,  of  tho
Sun,  of  Dawn,  of  Agni  or  tho  God  of  fire,  in  prayers  for  health,
wealth,  long  life,  offspring,  cattlo,  victory  in  battlo,  and  froodom
from  the  bonds  of  sin ;  and  celobration  of  tho  ever-renewed  war¬
fare  between  tho  benoficont  thunder-wielding  Indrn,  tho  special
champion  of  the  Aryans,  and  tho  malovolont  powers  of  darkness
and  tho  demons  of  drought  who  withhold  tho  rain  of  heaven.

Of  these  hymns  there  aro  more  than  a  thousand,  arranged  in
ten  Maiidalos,  Circles,  or  Books,  in  accordanoo  with  an  anoient
tradition  of  what  we  should  call  authorship,  tho  hymns  asoribed
to  the  same  Rislii,  inspired  poot  or  socr,  or  to  tho  samo  school  or
family  of  Rishis  being  placod  together.  Within  these  divisions
the  hymns  aro  gonorally  arranged  moro  or  less  in  tho  order  of  tho
doities  to  whom  they  are  addressed.  Agni  and  Indra  aro  tho  Gods
most  frequently  invoked.  Hymns  to  Agni  generally  oomo  first,
next  come  those  addressed  to  Indra,  and  after  them  those  in
honour  of  other  deities  or  deified  objects  of  adoration.  The  ninth
Book  is  devoted  almost  entirely  to  Soma,  the  deified  juice  used  in
pouring  libations  to  the  Gods,  and  the  tenth  forms  a  sort  of  ap¬
pendix  of  peculiar  and  miscellaneous  materials.  Independently
of  the  evidence  afforded  by  Indian  tradition,  there  can  be  no  rea¬
sonable  doubt  of  the  great  antiquity  of  the  Rigvcda  SanhitA


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


vli

which,  with  the  exception  of  the  Egyptian  monumental  records
and  papyrus  rolls,  and  the  recently  discovered  Assyrian  literature,
is  probably  the  oldest  literary  document  in  existence.  But  it
seems  impossible  to  fix,  with  anything  approaching  to  certainty,
any  dato  for  the  composition  of  the  hymns.  In  the  first  Hymn
of  Book  I.  ancient  and  recent  or  modern  Rishis  or  seers  are
spokon  of,  and  there  is  other  internal  ovideuco  that  some  hymns
are  much  oldor  than  others.  Colebrooke  came  to  the  conclusion,
from  astronomical  calculations,  that  a  certain  Yedic  calendar  was
composed  in  the  fourteenth  century  before  tho  Christian  era  j
from  which  it  would  follow,  that  as  this  calendar  must  havo  been
prepared  after  tho  arrangement  of  the  Rigveda  and  tho  inclusion
of  tho  most  modern  hymn,  tho  date  of  the  earliost  hymn  might
he  carried  back,  perhaps,  some  thousand  years.  The  corroctnoaa
of  Colebrooko’s  conclusions,  however,  has  been  questioned,  and
somo  reoent  scholars  considor  that  his  calculations  are  of  a  very
vague  character,  and  do  not  yiold  any  Buoh  dofinito  dato.  In  tho
absonco  of  any  direct  ovidonoe,  tho  opinions  of  scholars  vary  and
must  continuo  to  vary  with  rogard  to  tho.  ago  of  tho  Hymns  of
tho  Rigvoda.  "Tho  reasons,  howevor,”  (to  quote  Professor
Weber*)  "  by  which  wo  arc  fully  justified  in  regarding  tho  liter¬
ature  of  India  ns  the  moBt  anciont  literaturo  of  which  writton
records  on  an  extensivo  scalo  havo  been  handed  down  to  us  are
theso In  tho  more  ancient  parts  of  tho  Rigvoda  Sanhitft,  wo
find  tho  Indian  race  scttlod  on  the  north-western  borders  of  India,
in  tho  Punjab,  and  ovon  beyond  tho  PanjSb,  on  tho  Kubh4,  or
K (x)(p{]v,  in  Kabul.  The  gradual  spread  of  tho  raco  from  these
scats  towards  tho  cast,  beyond  tho  Sarosvati  and  over  Hindustan
as  far  as  the  Gauges,  can  bo  traced  in  tho  later  portions  of  the
Vedic  writings  almost  stop  by  step.  The  writings  of  tho  follow¬
ing  period,  that  of  tho  opio,  consist  of  accounts  of  the  internal
conflicts  among  the  conquerors  of  Hindustan  themselves,  as,  for


*  The  Hiitonj  of  Indian  Literature,  by  Albrecht  Weber.  Triibner'a
Oriental  Series,  1878.  ••  —


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION'.


viii

instance,  the  Mahibhiirata ;  or  of  the  farther  spread  of  Brah¬
manism  towards  tho  south,  as,  for  instance,  the  R4mJiyana.  If
we  conneot  with  this  the  first  fairly  accurate  information  about
India  which  wo  have  from  a  Greek  source,  viz.,  from  Megasthenes,*
it  becomes  clear  tfeat  at  the  time  of  this  writer  the  Brahmanising
of  Hindustan  was  already  completed,  while  at  the  time  of  tho
Periplus  (see  Lassen,  I.  AK.,  ii.  150,  n;  I.  St.,  ii.  192)  the  very
southern-most  point  of  tho  Dekhan  had  already  bocome  the  seat
of  the  worship  of  tho  wifo  of  &iva.  What  a  series  of  yoars,  of
conturies,  must  necessarily  havo  elapsed  before  this  boundless
traot  of  country,  inhabited  by  wild  and  vigorous  tribes,  could
havo  beon  brought  over  to  Brahmanism  !  ”

I  must  beg  my  European  roadors  not  to  oxpcct  to  find  in
those  hymns  and  songs  tho  sublime  pootry  that  they  moot  with
in  Isaiah  or  Job,  or  tho  PsalmB  of  David.  “  To  mo, "‘says  Profossor
Wilson,  “  tho  versos  of  tho  Voda,  except  in  thoir  rhythm,  and  in
a  fow  raro  passages,  appear  singularly  prosaic  for  so  early  an  era
I  as  that  of  thoir  probable  composition,  and  at  any  rato  thoir  ohiof
valuo  lios  not  in  their  fancy  but  in  thoir  facts,  social  and  religious.”
Professor  Cowell,  also,  says  :  “Tho  poetry  of  tho  Rig-Voda  is  sin¬
gularly  deficient  in  that  simplicity  and  natural  pathos  or  sublimity
whioh  wo  naturally  look  for  in  tho  songs  of  an  oarly  period  of
civilisation.  Tho  language  and  stylo  of  most  of  tho  hymns  is  sin¬
gularly  artificial . Occasionally  wo  moot  with  fine  outbursts  of

pootry,  especially  in  tho  hymns  addressed  to  tho  dawn,  but  theso
are  never  long  sustained,  and  as  a  rule  wo  find  fow  grand  similos
or  motaphora."  The  worst  fault  of  all,  in  tho  Collection  regarded
as  a  wholo,  is  tho  intolerable  monotony  of  a  great  number  of  the
hymns,  a  monotony  which  reaches  its  climax  in  tho  ninth  Book
which  consists  almost  entirely  of  invocations  of  Soma  Pavamilua,
or  the  deified  Soma  juice  in  process  of  straining  and  purification.

*  Who  as  ambassador  of  Seleucus  resided  for  somo  time  at  the  court  of
Cfcnndragupta.  His  reporta  are  preserved  to  us  chiefly  in  the  'IvSncd  of
Arrian  who  lived  in  the  second  century  A.  D.


f


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION*.


IX


’  The  great  interest  of  tho  ltigveda  is,  in  fact,  historical  rather  than
poetical.  As  in  its  original  language  wo  sec  tho  roots  and  shoots
of  the  languages  of  Greek  and  Latin,  of  Kelt,  Teuton  and  Slavonian,
so  the  deities,  tho  myths,  and  tho  religious  beliefs  and  practices
of  the  Veda  throw  a  flood  of  light  upon  the  religions  of  all  European
countries  before  the  introduction  of  Christianity.  As  tho  science
of  comparative  philology  could  hardly  have  existed  without  tho
study  of  Sanskrit,  so  the  comparative  history  of  the  religions  of
tho  world  would  have  been  impossible  without  tho  study  of  tho
Veda.

My  translation,  which  follows  tho  text  of  Max  Muller's  splendid
six-volume  edition,  is  partly  based  on  tho  work  of  tho  groat
scholiast  Sdyana  who  was  Prime  Minister  at  the  court  of  tho  King  of
Vijayanagar— in  what  is  now  tho  Madras  District  of  Bollary— in
the  fourteenth  century  of  our  ora.  Siyana’s  Commentary  has
been  consulted  and  carefully  considered  for  tho  gonoral  eenso  of
every  vorso  and  for  tho  moaning  of  every  word,  and  his  interpreta¬
tion  has  boon  followed  whenever  it  soomod  rational,  and  consistent
with  tho  oontext,  and  with  other  passages  in  whioh  tho  sarao  word
or  words  occur.  With  rogard  to  S&yana’s  qualifications  as  an  in¬
terpreter  of  tho  Veda  there  is,  or  was,  a  oonfliot  of  opinion  among
European  scholars.  Professor  Wilson — whoso  translation  of  tho
ltigveda  is  rathor  a  vorsion  of  S&yana’s  paraphraso — was  firmly
pereuadod  that  ho  had  a  “  knowlodgo  of  his  text  far  boyond  tho
pretensions  of  any  European  soholar,  and  must  havo  been  in
possession  of  all  the  interpretations  whioh  had  been  porpotuatod
by  traditional  teaching  from  the  earliest  times."  Yet,  as  Dr.  J.
Muir  has  pointed  out,  Professor  Wilson  in  tho  notes  to  his  transla¬
tion  admits  that  ho  “  occasionally  failed  to  find  in  S&yapa  a  per¬
fectly  satisfactory  guide,”  that  “  the  scholiast  is  evidently  puzzled,"
and  that  his  explanations  are  obsourc.  On  the  other  hand  Pro¬
fessor  Roth — tho  author  of  tho  Vedic  portion  of  tho  great  St.
Petersburg  Lexicon — says  in  his  preface  to  that  work:  “so  far
,  as  rogards  one  of  tho  branches  of  Vedic  literature,  the  treatises


X


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


on  theology  and  worship,  we  can  desire  no  better  guides  than
these  commentators,  so  exact  in  all  respects,  who  follow  thoir
texts  word  by  word,  who,  so  long  as  even  the  semblance  of  a  mis¬
conception  might  arise,  are  never  weary  of  repeating  what  they
have  frequently  said  before,  and  who  often  appear  as  if  they  had
been  writing  for  us  foreigners  rather  than  for  their  own  priestly
alumni  who  had  grown  up  in  the  midst  of  these  conceptions  and
impressions.  Here.... -..thoy  are  in  their  propor  ground.  The
case,  however,  is  quite  different  when  tho  same  men  assQmo  the

task  of  interpreting  tho  anoient  collections  of  hymns .

Hero  wero  required  not  only  quite  difforont  qualifications  for  in¬
terpretation  but  also  a  greater  froedom  of  judgmont  and  a  greater
breadth  of  viow  and  of  historical  intuitions.  Frcodomof  judgment,
however,  was  wanting  to  priestly  learning,  whilst  in  India  no  ono
has  ovor  had  any  conception  of  historical  development.  Tho  very
qualities  whioh  have  mado  those  commentators  oxcollont  guides
to  an  understanding  of  the  thoological  treatises,  rondor  them  un¬
suitable  conductors  on  that  far  oldor  and  quite  differently  circum¬
stanced  domain.  As  tho  so-cpllcd  classical  Sanskrit  was  perfectly
familiar  to  them,  they  sought  its  ordinary  idiom  in  the  Vedio
hymns  also.  Since  any  difforonce  in  the  ritual  appeared  to  thorn
inconceivable  and  the  present  forms  woro  believed  to  havo  existed
from  tho  boginning  of  the  world,  thoy  fanciod  that  tho  patriarchs
of  the  Indian  roligion  must  havo  sacrificed  in  tho  very  same  man¬
ner..  As  tho  recognized  mythological  and  classical  systoms  of  their
own  age  appeared  to  them  unassailable  and  rovoaled  verities,  thoy
must  necessarily  (so  tho  commentators  thought)  bo  discoverable
in  that  centre  point  of  revelation,  tho  hymns  of  the  anciont  Rishis,
who  had,  indeed,  livod  in  familiar  intercourse  with  tho  Gods,  and

possessed  far  highor  wisdom  than  the  succeeding  gonorations .

It  has  never  occurred  to  any  ono  to  make  our  understanding  of  the
Hebrew  books  of  the  Old  Testament  depend  on  the  Talmud  and
the  Rabbins,  while  there  arc  not  wanting  scholars  who  hold  it  as
tho  duty  of  a  conscientious  interpreter  of  the  Veda  to  translate  in


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION".


xl


conformity  with  S&yana,  Mahidhara,  etc.  Consequently,  we  do
not  believe  like  H.  H.  Wilson,  that  S&yana,  for  instance,  under¬
stood  the  expressions  of  the  Veda  better  than  any  European  in¬
terpreter ;  but  we  think  that  a  conscientious  European  interpreter
may  understand  the  Veda  far  better  and  morS  correctly  than
S&yana.  Wo  do  not  esteem  it  our  first  task  to  arrive  at  that  un¬
derstanding  of  tho  Veda  which  was  curront  in  India  somo  centuries  *
ago,  but  to  search  out  the  sense  which  tho  poets  themselves  havo
put  into  their  hymns  and  utterances.  Hence  we  are  of  opinion
that  tho  writings  of  S&yaya  and  the  other  commontators  do  not
form  a  rulo  for  tho  interpreter,  but  are  merely  one  of  thoso  helps
of  whioh  the  latter  will  avail  himself  for  tho  oxocution  of  his  un¬
doubtedly  difficult  task,  a  task  which  is  not  to  bo  accomplished
at  tho  first  onset,  or  by  any  singlo  individual.... Wo  havo,  there¬
fore,  endeavoured  to  follow  tho  path  prescribed  by  philology,  to
derive  from  tho  texts  thomsclvos  tho  sonso  which  thoy  contain,
by  a  juxtaposition  of  all  tho  passages  which  aro  cognate  in  diction
or  contonts a  todious  and  laborious  path,  in  whioh  neither  the
commontators  nor  tho  translators  havo  procoded  us.  Tho  double
duty  of  oxogoto  and  loxicographor  has  thus  devolved  upon  us.  A
i  simple  etymological  procedure,  practised  as  it  must  bo  by  thoso
who  seok  to  divino  tho  sonso  of  a  word  from  tho  solo  consideration
of  tho  passngo  boforo  thorn  without  regard  to  tho  ton  or  twenty
other  passages  in  which  it  recurs,  cannot  possibly  lead  to  a  corroot
result.”*

Professor  Mux  Milllor  says  :  “  As  tho  authors  of  the  Br&h-
manas  were  blinded  by  theology,  tho  authors  of  the  still  later
Niruktas  wore  deccivod  by  otymological  fictions,  and  both  conspir¬
ed  to  mislead  by  their  authority  lator  and  more  sensible  common¬
tators,  such  as  S&yana.  Where  S&yaria  has  no  authority  to  mislead
him,  his  commentary  is  at  all  events  rational ;  but  still  his  schol¬
astic  notions  would  nover  allow  him  to  accept  the  free  interpreta¬
tion  which  comparative  study  of  thoso  venerable  documents  foroes


*  On  (he  Interpretation  of  the  Veda,  by  J.  Muir  Esq.


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION*.


'  xii

upon  the  unprejudiced  scholar.  Wo  must  therefore  discover  our¬
selves  the  real  vostigos  of  these  ancient  poets.”

Professor  Benfey  says  :  “  Every  one  who  has  carefully  studied
the  Indian  interpretations  is  aware  that  absolutely  no  continuous
tradition  extending  from  tho  composition  of  the  Veda  to  their  ex¬
planation  by  Indian  scholars,  can  be  assumed ;  that,  on  tho  con¬
trary,  between  tho  genuine  poetio  romains  of  Vcdic  antiquity  and
their  interpretations  a  long-continued  break  in  tradition  must  have
intervened,  out  of  which  at  most  tho  comprehension  of  some  par¬
ticulars  may  havo  been  rescued  and  handed  down  to  later  times
by  means  of  liturgical  usages  and  words,  formulte,  and  perhaps,
also,  poema  connected  therewith.  Bosidos  these  romains  of  tradi¬
tion,  which  must  bo  estimated  as  very  scanty,  tho  interprotors  of
tho  Veda  had,  in  tho  main,  scarcely  any  othor  helps  than  thoso
whioh,  for  tho  most  part,  are  still  at  our  oommand,  tho  usage  of
the  classical  speech,  and  tho  grammatical  and  otymological-loxico-
J  graphical  investigation  of  words.  At  the  utmost,  thoy  found  somo
aid  in  materials  prosorved  in  local  dialects;  but  this  advantage  is
almost  entirely  outwoighod  by  tho  comparison  whioh  wo  aro  ablo
:  to  institute  with  tho  Zend,  and  that  which  wo  can  mako  (though
|  hero  wo  must  of  courso  proceed  with  caution  and  prudonco)  with
i  tho  languages  cognato  to  tho  Sanskrit,— a  comparison  which  has
■  already  supplied  so  many  holps  to  a  clearer  understanding  of  tho
j  Vedas.  But  quite  irrespectively  of  all  particular  aids,  tho  Indian
method  of  interpretation  becomes  in  its  wholo  cssonco  an  ontircly
false  one,  owing  to  the  projudico  with  which  it  chooses  to  concoivo
tho  ancient  oironmstancos  and  idoas  which  havo  bccomo  quito
strange  to  it,  from  its  own  religious  stand-point,  so  many  oonturiea
moro  rocont,  whilst,  on  tho  other  hand,  an  advantage  for  the  com¬
prehension  of  the  whole  is  secured  to  us  by  tho  acquaintance  (drawn
from  analogous  relations)  with  the  life,  the  conceptions,  the  wants,
of  ancient  peoples  and  popular  songs,  which  wo  possess, — an
advantage  which,  oven  if  tho  Indians  owed  more  details  than  they
actually  do  owe,  to  tradition,  would  not  be  eclipsed  by  their  inter¬
pretation.”*


*  On  the  Interpretation  of  the  Veda,  by  J.  Muir  Esq.


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


.  xiil


i


A  very  different  opinion  of  the  valno  of  the  Indian  commenta¬
tors  was  held  and  expressed  by  Professor  Goldsttlcker.  “  Without
the  vast  information,”  he  Bays,  “  which  those  commentators  have
disclosed  to  us, — without  their  method  of  explaining  tho  obscurest
text, — in  one  word,  without  their  scholarship,  wo  should  still  stand
at  tho  outer  doors  of  Hindu  antiquity."  Ho  ridicules  the  assertion
that  a  European  scholar  can  understand  tho  Veda  more  correctly
than  Siiyana,  or  arrivo  moro  nearly  at  the  meaning  which  tho
Rishis  gave  to  their  own  hymns,  and  yet  oven  this  stanch  champion
of  tho  Indian  commentators  “  cannot  bo  altogether  acqnittod  (os
Dr.  J.  Muir  says  and  shows)  of  a  cortain  heretical  tendency  to  dovi-
ato  in  practico  from  tho  interpretations  of  S&yana.”

Tho  Inst  quotation  whioh  I  shall  mako  in  connexion  with  this
question  is  from  Professor  E.  B.  Cowell’s  Profaco  to  his  edition  of
Vol.  V.  of  Wilson’s  Translation  of  the  Riy-  Veda  Sanhitd :  “This
work  doos  not  pretond  to  givo  a  complete  translation  of  tho  fy'g-
Veda,  but  only  a  faithful  imago  of  that  particular  plmso  of  its  in¬
terpretation  which  tho  moditoval  Hindus,  as  represented  by  SAynnn,
havo  presorved.  This  view  is  in  itsolf  interesting  and  of  an  his¬
torical  valuo;  but  far  widor  and  dcopor  study  is  needed  to  pioroo
to  tho  real  meaning  of  thoso  old  hymns.  SAya^a’s  oommontary
will  always  retain  a  value  of  its  own,— oven  its  mlstakos  aro  often
interesting, — but  his  explanations  must  not  for  a  moment  bar  tho
progress  of  scholarship.  Wo  can  bo  thankful  to  him  for  any  real
holp ;  but  lot  us  not  forgot  tho  dobt  which  wo  owo  to  modem
scholars,  especially  to  thoso  of  Germany.  Tho  groat  St.  Petersburg
Dictionary  is  indcod  a  monument  of  triumphant  erudition,  and
it  has  inaugurated  a  now  ora  in  tho  interpretation  of  tho  Rig-
Voda.”

My  translation,  then,  is  partly  based  on  the  commentary  of
S&yarm,  corrected  and  regulated  by  rational  probability,  context,
and  intercomparison  of  similar  words  and  passages.  For  constant
and  most  valuable  assistance  in  my  labour  I  am  deeply  indebted
to  the  wovks  of  many  illustrious  scholars,  some  departed,  and  somo,


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


xiv

happily,  still  flourishing.  I  am  thankful  to  S&yana,  my  first  guide
to  the  hymns  of  the  Rigveda ;  to  my  revered  Master,  Professor  H.
H.  Wilson ;  to  Professors  Rotl^  Bonfey,  Weber,  Ludwig,  Max
Mtlller,  Grassmann,  and  Monier  Williams,  and  Dr.  John  Muir  and
Mr.  Wallis.  I  have  also  consulted,  and  shall  probably  make  more
use  hereafter  of,  the  works  of  M.  Bergaigno  and  Dr.  Oldenborg ;
nor  can  I  omit  to  mention  the  Siebetuig  Lieder  des  Rigveda  by
Geldner  and  Kaegi,  Der  Rigveda ,  by  Kaogi,  and  Hymns  from  the
Rigveda,  by  Profossor  Peterson  of  Bombay,  all  of  which  Ihavo
road  with  pleasure  and  profit.

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  European  students  and  in¬
terpreters  of  the  Veda  claim  anything  liko  infallibility,  complo-
tojiess,  or  finality  for  tho  results  to  which  thoir  researches  have
lod  them.  All  modorn  soholars  will  allow  that  many  hymns  are
dark  as  tho  darkest  omolo,  that,  as  Professor  Max  Milllor  says,  there
are  wholo  versos  which,  as  yet,  yield  no  sense  whatovor,  and  words
tho  meaning  of  which  wo  can  only  guess.  As  in  tho  interpretation
of  the  moro  difficult  books  of  tho  Old  Tcstamont  and  tho  Homorio
poems,  so  in  tho  explanation  of  tho  Voda  comploto  success,  if  ovor
attainable,  can  bo  attainod  only  by  tho  labours  of  generations  of
scholars.

Tho  Hymns  aro  composod  in  various  metres,  somo  of  whioh
aro  oxceodingly  siraplo  and  others  comparatively  complox  ai\d
elaborate,  and  two  or  moro  different  motros  arc  frequently  found
in  tho  same  Hymn ;  ono  Hymn,  for  instanco,  in  Book  I.  shows
nine  distinct  varieties  in  the  samo  number  of  versos.  Tho  verses
or  stanzas  oonsist  of  throo  or  more— generally  throe  or  four
r-Pddas,  somi-homistichs  or  lines,  each  of  which  contains  eight,
eleven,  or  twelve  syllables,  sometimes,  but  rarely,  five,  and  still
less  frequently  four  or  more  than  twelve.  As  regards  quantity
the  first  syllables  of  the  line  are  not  strictly  defined,  but  tho  last
four  aro  regular,  the  measure  being  iambic  in  the  oight  and
twelve  syllabic  verses  and  trochaic  in  these  of  eleven  syllables.
Partly  by  way  of  safeguard  against  tho  besetting  temptation  to


PREFACE  TO  TUB  FIRST  EDITION.


XV

paraphrase  and  expand,  and  partly  iu  the  hope  of  preserving,
however  imperfectly,  something  of  the  form  of  the  Hymns,  I  have
translated  each  verse  by  a  versg  syllabically  commensurate  with
the  original  and  generally  divided  into  corresponding  hemistiebs.

The  verses  consisting  of  three  or  four  octosyllabic  lines  are
tolerably  well  represented  by  the  common  octosyllabic  or  dimeter
iambic  metro  which  I  have  employed.  In  other  verses  I  have  not
attempted  to  reproduce  or  imitate  tho  rhythm  or  metro  of  the
original :  auoh  a  task,  supposing  its  satisfactory  completion  to  bo
possible,  would  require  more  time  and  labour  than  I  could  sparo
for  tho  purpose.  All  that  I  have  dono,  or  triod  to  do,  is  to  show
to  some  oxtont  tho  original  external  form  of  tho  Hymns  by  render¬
ing  thorn  iu  syllabically  commonsurato  homistiobs  and  vorses,  as
llcnfoy  and  tho  translators  of  tbo  Seventy  Hymn s  have  dono  for  a
portion  of  tho  Kigvcda,  and  Grassmann  for  noarly  tbo  wholo  of
tho  Collection.

For  furthor  information  regarding  tho  Rigvcda  tho  English
reader  is  referred  to  Max  Muller’s  History  of  Ancient  Sanskrit
Literature,  Muir’s  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  and  Woboi-’s  History
of  Indian  Literature;  or  if  a  simplor  and  more  popular  exposition
bo  required,  to  Mrs.  Manning’s  India,  Ancient  and  Medianal,  or
to  Kaogi’s  Der  Higveda,  of  which  an  English  translation  boa
recently  appeared.  Tho  student  who  roads  German  and  l’rench
will,  as  a  matter  of  oourso,  consult  Ludwig’s  groat  work  Der  lligveda
and  Bergaigno’s  Etudes  sur  la  Religion  VIdique,

To  ooncludo,  my  reasons  for  publishing  this  work  arc  cbiofly
theBO  :  thoro  is  at  present  no  complete  translation  of  the  lligveda
in  English,  Professor  Wilson’s  version— of  which  the  last  two
volumes  have  only  lately  appeared— being  “  only  a  faithful  image
of  that  particular  phase  of  its  interpretation  which  tho  modueval
Hiudus,  as  represented  by  Sfiyana,  have  preserved,”  and,  more¬
over,  the  price  of  Wilson’s  six  volumes — upwards  of  ninety  rupees
— puts  the  work  boyond  the  reach  of  the  great  majority  of
readers  in  India.


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITIOK.


xvi

I  can  hardly  hope  that  my  work  will  find  acceptance  with
Pandits  and  Indian  scholars  inasmuch  as  I  venture  to  deviate
both  widely  and  frequently  from  Siyana  whom  they  havo  beeii
taught  to  regard  as  infallible.  No  arguments  are  likely  to  shake
this  belief.  Nothing  short  of  a  course  of  study  similar  to  that  to
which  the  leaders  of  the  modern  school  of  Vcdic  interpretation
havo  devoted  half  their  livos  will  enable  them  to  see  with  our  oyes
and  accept  our  views.  I  trust,  howevor,  that  thoy  will  at  any
rato  givo  the  loaders  and  tho  followers  of  this  modern  school
credit  for  deep  devotion  to  anoient  Indian  litoraturo  and  duo
admiration  of  tho  great  Indian  scholars  who  havo  expounded  it ;
and  will  acknowledge  that  theso  modem  scholars — howovor  mis¬
taken  their  viows  may  appear  to  bo— aro  labouring  sincoroly  and
solely  to  discovor  and  declaro  tho  spirit  and  the  truth  of  tho  most
anciont  and  vonornted  literary  records  that  aro  tho  hcritago  of
Aryan  man.

R.  T.  H.  GRIFFITH.

Kotaoiri,  Niloiri  :

May  fflh,  1S80.


Note.


This  second  edition  of  my  translation  is  in  tho  main  a  re¬
print  in  compactor  and  cheaper  form,  with  some  corrections  and
other  improvements  in  text  and  commentary,  of  the  original  four-
volumo  edition.

R.  T.  H.  G.

Kotaoim  :


15th  October,  189G.


f


THE  HYMNS  OF  THE  RIGVED A.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


HYMN  I.  Agni.

T  i.aud  Agni,  the  chosoh  Priest,  God,  minister  of  sacrifice,

The  Hotnr,  lavishcst  of  wealth.

2  Worthy  is  Agni  to  bo  praised  by  living  as  by  ancient  seers  :

Ho  shall  bring  hithorward  the  Gods.

3  Through  Agni  man  obtaincth  wealth,  yoa,  plenty  waxing  day

by  dav,

Most  rich  in  heroes,  glorious.

4  Agni,  the  perfect  sacrifice  which  thou  oncompasscst  about
Vorily  goeth  to  tho  Gods.

5  May  Agni,  snpiont-minded  Priest,  truthful,  most  gloriously  groat,
Tho  God,  come  hither  with  tho  Gods.

6  Whatever  blessing,  Agni,  thou  wilt  grant  unto  thy  worshippor,
That,  Angirns,  is  indeed  thy  truth.


Tho  first  two  hymns  of  this  Book  are  ascribed  to  tho  (lishi  or  soor  Madhu-
ohohhaudas  VaifvAmitr*.  a  sou  or  dsaoemlaut  of  tho  famous  Vfjvamitm.  Tho
deity  to  whom  this  liymu  is  addressed  is  Agni,  tho  (Jod  of  fire,  tho  most
prominent,  next  to  Indra,  of  the  doitios  of  tho  Rigvcdo.  Agni  is  the  mes¬
senger  and  mediator  between  earth  and  heaven,  announcing  to  tho  Oods  tho
liymns,  and  oonveying  to  them  the  oblations,  of  their  worshippers,  inviting
them  with  the  sound  of  his  crackling  flames  and  bringing  them  down  to  tho
place  of  sacrifice.  As  concentrating  in  hinisolf  tho  various  sacrificial  duties  of
different  classes  of  human  priests,  Agni  is  called  the  PurohxUt  or  chosen  priest,
the  }>r<rpoiiliii  or  prmti.  He  is  a  IfUvfj,  a  priost  or  minister  who  sacrifices  at
tho  proper  seasons,  and  a  L/otar,  an  invoking  priest,  a  herald  who  calls  tho
Gods  to  enjoy  tho  offering.  All  riches  are  at  his  dispwial,  and  ho  it  tho  most
bountiful  rewarder,  both  directly  and  indirectly,  of  tho  pious  whose  oblations
he  carries  to  tho  Gods.

2  Ancient  itert:  said  by  Sftyana  to  be  Blifigu,  Angiras,  and  other*.  The
expression  indicates  the  existence  of  earlier  liymns.

8  Moft  rich  in  htroet :  the  heroes  hero  spoken  of,  who  accompany  the
acquisition  and  increase  of  wealth,  are  brave  sons  and  dejxsndents.

4  Perfect :  uninteiTuptcd  by  RAkshoBas  or  fiends,  who  are  unable  to  mar  a
sacrifioe  which  Agni  protects  on  all  sides.

6  Align'd :  here  a  name  of  Agni.  The  Angirasw  appear  to  hare  been
regarded  as  a  race  of  higher  beings  between  Gods  and  men,  tho  typical  first
sacrifice!-*,  whose  ritual  is  the  pattern  which  later  priests  must  follow.


3


THE  HYM2K  OF


[HOOK  /.


7  To  thee,  dispeller  of  the  night,  0  Agni,  day  by  day  with  prayer
Bringing  thee  reverence,  we  come ;

8  Ruler  of  sacrifices,  guard  of  Law  eternal,  radiant  One,
Increasing  in  thine  own  hIxmIc.

9  Be  to  us  easy  of  approach,  even  as  a  father  to  his  son  :

Agni,  bo  with  us  for  our  weal.

HYMN  II.  YAyu.

Beautiful  VAyn,  come,  for  thee  theso  Soma  drops  have  been
prepared :

Drink  of  them,  hcarkon  to  our  call.

2  Knowing  the  days,  with  Sonia  juice  i>ourcd  forth,  tho  singers

glorify

Thee,  Vayu,  with  their  hymns  of  praise.

3  VAyu,  thy  |>onctruting  stream  goes  forth  unto  the  worshipper,
Far-spreading  for  tho  Soma  draught.


8  Ia iw  eternal  The  word  used  to  denote  the  conception  of  tho  order  of  the
world  is  pita.  Everything  in  tho  universe  which  in  oonceived  a*  allowing
regularity’ of  action  may  be  said  to  have  tho  ritd  for  its  principle.  In  its
most  general  application  tho  conception  expressed  by  the  word  occupied  to
Dome  extent  tho  place  of  natural  and  moral  law,  fate,  nr  tho  will  of  a  supremo
God.  See  Wallis,  The  Cutmoloyy  of  the  Riijredu,  p.  02.

/m  thine  otto  II Me :  trd  rfdme,  iifd  down,  in  the  sacrificial  hall  nr  ohamber
in  which  tiro- worship  is  informed,  and  in  which  tho  Are  (Agni)  incrcasos  as
the  oblatlona  of  clarified  butter  aro  poured  upon  it  by  tho  priost.

1  YAyu :  God  of  the  wind.

»  Soma  drop$;  libations  of  thejuico  of  tho  Soma,  or  Monn -plant,  said  to  lio
1  tho  Acid  Asclepia*  or  Snrcoeteina  ViminnlU.  Tho  plant  was  gathered  by
1  mooulight  on  certain  mountains,  atrlp|«d  of  its  loaves,  and  then  carried  to  the
i  place  of  sacrifice ;  tho  stalks  having  lieon  thoro  crushed  by  tho  prioat*  were
,  sprinkled  with  water  and  placed  on  a  siovo  or  strainer,  whonco,  after  further
pressure,  the  acid  juice  trickled  Into  a  vcssol  called  Droiia  :  after  which  it
|  was  mixed  with  flour  etc.,  made  to  ferment,  and  then  nflbrod  in  libations  to
the  Gods  or  drunk  by  the  llrfthinans,  by  both  of  whom  its  exhilarating  quail-
,  tics  were  supposed  to  l>o  highly  prized.  This  famous  plant  has  romainod
|  unidentified  till  recently  (see  Max  Mllllor,  Biographies  of  Words,  Appendix
III.)  ‘  Dr.  Aitchison  has  lately  stated  that  Soma  must  he  tho  Ephedra  pachy-
j  chute,  which  in  tho  HarirOd  valley  is  said  to  bear  tho  name  of  hum,  A uma,  and
,  wAnia.  This  supposition  is  confirmed  by  Dr.  Joseph  Bom m Uller,  a  botanist
i  long  resident  in  Kerman,  who  identifies  the  Soma  plant  with  some  kind  of
\  Ephedra,  probably  Ephedra  HiiUuhyo,  but  who  remarks  that  different  vario-
‘  ties  of  Ephedra- are  to  be  found  from  Siberia  to  tho  Iberian  peninsula,  so  that
\  wo  must  givo  up  the  hope  of  determining  tho  original  homo  of  the  Aryan  by
I  means  of  tho  habitat  of  tho  Soma  plant'  (Quarterly  Review,  No.  854,  October
J  1894,  p.  455).

2.  Knotciny  the  day ;  knowing  the  proper  days  for  sacrifices  ;  or  perhaps,
knowing  or  marking  tho  time  of  daybreak,  the  exact  time  for  the  commence¬
ment  of  sacrificial  rites.

8  Hymu$  of  profit:  nkthat,  lauds  recited  or  spoken,  in  opposition  to  verses
that  are  chanted  or  sung.


JIYifX  8.]  THE  MOVE  HA.  3

4  These,  Indra-Vnyu,  liuve  been  shed;  come  for  our  offered
dainties*  sake :

The  drops  are  yearning  for  you  both.

,5  Well  do  ye  murk  libations,  ye  Vayu  und  Iiwlra,  rieli  in  spoil  1
So  come  ye  swiftly  hitherward.

C  Vilyu  and  Indra,  come  to  what  the  Soma-presser  hath  prepared:
Soon,  Heroes,  thus  I  make  my  prayer.

7  Mitra,  of  holy  strengtli,  I  call,  and  foe-destroying  Vurunu,

Who  make  the  oil dgd  rite  complete.

8  Mitra  and  Vttruna,  through  Law,  lovers  and  cherishers  of  Low,
Have  ye  obtained  your  mighty  power.

1 *  Our  Sages,  Mitm-Vuruuu,  of  wide  dominion,  btroim  by  birth,
Vouchsufe  us  strength  t-hut  workelli  well.

HYMN  III.  Afviua.

Yk  Asvins,  rich  in  troarnno,  Ixmln  of  aplondour,  having  nimblo
hands,

Accept  tho  sacnlicial  food.


4  Imlrn  and  VAyu  art*  li.no  con jointly  addressed  in  a  dual  uomixniDd,  Hidra-
vAyfl.  Indru  wn-  ilio  favourite  imliunal  deity  of  tin*  Aryan  Indians  in  the
Vedio  Ago,  und  mere  hymns  nro  dedicated  to  his  honour  than  to  tho  praise  of
any  other  divinity.  He  Ik  the  God  who  r*dgn»  ..voi-  tho  intermediate  roglou  or
atmosphere  ;  lie  tights  against  and  conquers  with  his  thunderbolt  tho  demons
of  drought  and  darkness,  and  U  iu  general  tlie  type  of  noble  hero  Uni.

7  According  to  81ya\*»,  Mitra  )tresidw  over  the  tiny  as  Varutiu  over  the
night ;  heitoe  tho  closest  connexion  subsists  between  these  two  doitloe  wlu>
arc  more  frequently  invoked  together  than  Vnrupa  U  invoked  siugly ;  together

H  uphold  und  rule  the  earth  and  sky,  together  they  guajd  tTio  world,  to-
•r  they  promote  religious  rites,  avenge  tun,  and  are  tho  lords  of  truth  und
-

Oil- fid >  performed  with  fib rih.hu  (the  modern  f/ki),  and  clarified  butter,  or
butter  which  has  boon  boiled  gently  and  then  allowed  to  cool.  The  butter
is  thou  used  for  ouliiferv  purpose  and  also  offered  in  sacrifice  to  tho  Uods.
VompItU:  by  granting  the  worshipper’s  prayer.

8  Through,  Law :  S.  e.  in  accordance  with  rila,  the  eternal  law  or  everlasting
order  of  the  universe.  See  I.  1.  8.

1  '  The  Afviua  seem  to  have  beeu  a  pus/.le  oven  to  the  oldest  Indian  Com¬
mentators.  Yiska  thus  refers  to  them  iu  tho  Nirukta,  XU.  1  'Next  in  order
aie  the  deities  whose  sphere  is  tho  heaven  ;  of  these  tho  Asvins  are  the  first
to  arrive. ..Who  then  are  these  Asvins/  •  Heaven  and  Earth,’  say  some  ;  1  Day
and  Night,’  say  others  ;  ‘The  Suu  and  Moon,’  say  others  ;  'Two  Kings,  per¬
formers  of  holy  acta,’  say  the  legendary  writers.’  Professor  Roth  thus  a|<eaks
of  these  Gods :  '  The  two  Afvins.  though,  like  tho  ancient  interpreters  of.  tlie
Veda,  we  are  by  no  means  agreed  os  to  tho  conception  of  their  character,  hold,
nevertheless,  a  perfectly  distinct  position  in  the  entire  body  of  the  Vfdi©
deities  of  light.  They  are  the  earliest  bringsrs  of  light  iu  the  morning  sky,


6  THE  BY  MM.  OF  [BOOK  /.

2  Come  thou  to  our  libations,  drink  of  Soma,  Soma-driukcr  thou!

The  rich  One’s  rapture  giveth  kine.

3  So  may  we  be  acquainted  with  thine  innermost  benevolence :

Neglect  us  not,  come  hitherward.

4  Go  to  the  wise  unconqucrod  One,  ask  thou  of  Indra,  skilled  in

song,  0

Him  who  is  better  than  thy  friends.

5  Whether  the  men  who  mock  us  say,  Depart  unto  another  place,

Ye  who  serve  Indra  and  none  else ;

6  Or  whether,  God  of  wondrous  deeds,  all  our  true  people  cull  us

blest.

Still  may  we  dwell  in  India’s  care.

7  Unto  the  swift  Ouo  bring  tho  swift,  man-cheering,  grace  of

sacrifice,

That  to  tho  Friend  gives  wings  and  joy.

8  Thou,  Satakratu,  drankost  this  and  wast  tho  Vjitru*'  slayer ;

thou

Holpcat  tho  warrior  in  tho  fmy.

9  Wo  strengthen,  Satakratu,  thoo,  vea,  thee  tho  powerful  in  fight,

That,  India,  we  may  win  us  woalth.

10  To  him  tho  mighty  stream  of  wealth,  prompt  friend  of  him  who

pours  the  juice,

You,  to  this  India  sing  your  song.

2  Indra  U  especially  the  lord  of  Soina  and  iU  chief  dr  inker.  Tho  exhifar-
alien  produced  by  drinking  the  formotitod  juice  offered  in  libation*  stimulate*
his  warliko  energies  and  dispose*  him  to  give  out  of  hi*  ho  undle**  riclioa
liberal  rewards  in  the  shape  of  cattle  and  other  wealth  to  tlioeo  who  worship
him.

8  The  general  moaning  of  this  and  the  two  preceding  vcrae«  seem*  to  l>o :
Indra  ia  tho  beat  friend  awl  protector,  and  so  long  as  we  enjoy  his  friendship
and  protection  we  care  nothing  for  the  reviling*  of  the  ungodly  who  mock  at
our  faithful  worship.

7  Thtmift  One :  Indra.  The  Soma  juice  which  exhilarates  men  or  heroes
and  aocornpaniea  or  grace*  tho  sacrifice  is  also  called  swift  both  because  it
flows  quickly  and  because  it  makes  Indra  hasten  to  tho  solemnity.  The
Friend,  is  Indra  whom  tho  juice  exhilarates  and  sends  quickly  to  tho  sacrifice.

8  tyitalcretln,  a  name  of  Indra,  ‘is  ©xplaincd  by  SAyaua,ho  who  ia  connected
with  a  hundred  (many)  acta,  religious  rites  (bahuiarmaj/ukta),  either  as  their
performer  or  thou*  object :  or  it  may  be  rendered  *  endowed  with  great  wis¬
dom;'  iralu  implying  either  karma,  act,  or  prqjnd,  knowledge.’  Wilson.
The  Vritrae,  the  enemies,  the  oppressors,  or  obstructors,  are  ‘the  hostile
powers  in  tho  atmosphere  who  malevolently  shut  up  the  watery  treasures  in
the  clouds.  These  demons  of  drought,  called  by  a  variety  of  names,  as  Vrittra
Ahi,  Sushna,  Namuchi,  Pipru,  «j?*iubara,  Ifraun,  etc.,  etc.,  armed  on  their  sido,
also,  with  every  variety  of  celestial  artillery,  attempt,  but  in  vain,  to  reois,
the  onset  o £  tho  gods.'  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  l»5.


HYMN  6.J


7


THE  RIG  VEDA.

HYMN  V.  Iudro.

O  come  ye  hither,  sit  ye  down  ;  to  Indra  sing  ye  forth  your  song,
Companions,  bringing  hymns  of  praise ;

2  To  him  the  richest  of  the  rich,  the  Lord  of  treasures  excellent,
Indra,  with  Soma  juice  outpoured.

3  May  he  stand  by  us  in  our  need  and  in  abundance  for  our

wealth  :

May  ho  come  nigh  us  with  his  strength  ;

4  Whoso  pair  of  tawny  horses  yoked  in  battles  foomen  challenge

not:

To  him,  to  Indra  sing  your  song.

0  Nigh  to  the  Soma-drinkor  como,  for  his  enjoyment,  these  pure
drops,

Tho  Somas  mingled  with  the  curd.

6  Thou,  grown  at  onco  to  porfoct  strongth,  wast  born  to  drink

tho  Soma  juice,

Strong  Indra,  for  preeminence.

7  0  India,  lover  of  tho  song,  nmy  thoso  quick  Somas  outer  thee  :
May  thoy  bring  bliss  to  thee  tho  Sage.

8  Our  chants  of  praise  havo  strengthened  thoo,  0  Satakratu,  and

our  lauds :

So  strengthen  thee  tho  songs  wo  sing.

9  Indra,  whose  succour  never  fails,  accept  those  viands  thousand¬

fold,

Wherein  all  manly  powers  abide.

10  0  Indra,  thou  who  lovest  song,  lot  no  man  hurt  our  bodies,  keep
Slaughter  far  from  us,  for  thou  canst.

HYMN  VI.  Indra.

They  who  stand  round  him  as  he  moves  harness  the  bright,
the  ruddy  Steed :

The  lights  aro  shining  in  the  sky.

1  Companion t.  Tho  coll  ia  addressed  to  tho  ministering  priest*.

3  'Two  separate  *  com*  appear  to  bo  meant:  yoye,  whore  the  God  must
recognise  the  nooessity  of  his  intervention,  and  purandhytfm,  whero  he  may
deem  it  superfluous.'  Ludwig.

4  At  the  sight  of  whose  chariot  and  horses  all  enemies  flee.

9  Wherein  all  manly  poictri  abide.  Tho  oblationB  of  worshippers,  as  well  as
their  hyuinB  of  praise,  stimulate  and  strengthen  the  Gods  for  deeds  of  heroism.

1  They  who  stand  round:  loleatrayamrtinnh.  prdninoh,  ‘  tho  living  beings  of
the  three  worlds,'  is  SiyanVa  explanation.  Probably  the  Maruts,  Indra’*
constant  companions  aro  intended.

The  bright,  the  ruddy  Steed,  fbradhndm  anuhdmj,  is  probably  the  Sun,  with
whom  Iuilra  is  frequently  connected.


8  THE  II YU. VS  OF  [HOOK  /.

2  On  both  sides  to  the  car  they  yoke  the  two  bay  coursers  dear

to.  him,  *

Bold,  tawny,  bearers  of  the  Chief.

3  Thou,  making  light  where  no  light  was,  and  form,  0  men  !

where  form  was  not,

Waat  born  together  with  the  Dawns.

■1  Thereafter  they,  as  is  their  wont,  threw  oft’  the  state  of  babes
unborn,

Assuming  sacrificial  names.

5  Thou,  Indra,  with  tho  Tempest-Gods,  the  breakers  down  of1

what  is  firm,

roundest  tho  kino  oven  in  the  cavo.

6  Worshipping  even  as  they  list,  singers  laud  him  who  findeth

wealth,

The  far-renowned,  tho  mighty  One.

7  Maycst  thou  vorilv  bo  seen  coming  by  fearless  Indra’s  side  :
Both  joyous,  oquul  in  your  sheen.

8  With  Iudra’s  wcll-belovM  hosts,  the  blameless,  hastening  to

heaven,

The  sacrifice!'  cries  aloud.


2  On  both  lidtt :  tlpuhhaid :  harno*»od  on  different  sides.

3  Thou,  1.  o.  tho  Sun.  0  men  /  In  porhapa  morely  mi  exclamation  expressive
of  admiration.  If  marytty,  mon,  bo  takon  U»  mean  tho  Marut*,  tho  words
thou,  making,  twist  6orii,althuugh  in  tho  singular  numbor,  may  apply  to  thano
Oods  rognulod  as  ono  host  or  company  and  born  at  ouo  birth.

4  Threw  off  the  state  of  lubes  unboi'it:  according  to  Prof.  M.  MUllor  'as¬
sumed  again  tho  form  of  new-born  babes.’  'Tho  idoa  that  the  Moruts
assumed  the  form  of  a  gnrbha,  lit.  of  an  ombryo  or  a  new-born  child,  is  only
meant  to  express  tliat  the  storm*  burst  forth  from  the  woiub  of  tho  sky  oh
soon  as  Indra  arise*  to  do  battle  against  tho  demon  of  darkness.  As  assisting
Indra  iu  thi*  battle,  tho  Maruts,  whose  namo  retained  for  a  long  time  ita
purely  appellativo  meaning  of  storms,  attained  their  rank  as  doities  by  tho
•ido  of  Indra,  or  as  tho  poet  expresses  it,  they  assumed  their  sacred  name.
This  seems  to  bo  tho  whole  meaning  of  tho  later  legoml  that  tho  Murubi,  like
tho  llibhus  were  not  originally  gods,  but  becamo  doitlcd  for  their  works.'
il.  Milller.  Rigreda  SnnhiUt,  L  p.  26.

6  The  Tempul  Goda :  the  MaruU,  tho  friends  and  helpers  of  Indra.

The  hint:  arc  streams  of  water  and  the  beams  of  light  which  follow  their
effusion.  The  enve  is  the  thick  dark  cloud  which  holds  tho  imprisoned  waters
and  which  Indra  cleaves  nsundcr  m’tli  his  thunderbolt  or  lightning.

7  Thou:  the  host  of  Maruts.  According  to  Bonfoy,  the  Sun.

8  The  sacrificer  cries  aloud.  This  is  the  interpretation  projKwed  by  Professor
Max  MUllor, .but  it  is  only  conjectural  and  not  nlUigother  satisfactory.  Bonfoy
translates :  Mightily  shines  the  sacrifice ;  and  Ludwig  *  Tho  warrior  sings
triumphantly.


f


n  YHX  7.J  TUP.  It /G VEDA.  g

9  Come  from  this  place,  0  Wanderer,  or  downward  from  the
light  of  heaven :

Our  songs  of  praise  all  yearn  for  this.

10  Indra  we  seek  to  give  us  help,  from  here,  from  heaven  above
the  earth,

Or  from  the  spacious  firmament.  t

HYMN  VII.  Injro,

Indka  the  singers  with  high  praise,  Indra  reciters  with  their
lauds,

Indra  the  choirs  have  glorified.

2  Indra  hath  ever  close  to  him  his  two  hay  steeds  and  word-yoked

car,

Indra  the  golden,  thunder-armed.

3  Indra  hath  raised  the  Sun  on  high  in  heaven,  that  ho  may  sco

afar :

Ho  burst  tho  mountain  for  the  kino.

4  Holp  us,  0  Indra,  in  tho  frays,  yea,  frays  where  thousand  sjioilH

are  gained,

With  awful  aids  ,  0  awful  One.

5  In  mighty  battlo  wo  invoko  Indra,  Indra  in  lesser  fight,

Tho  Friend  who  bonds  his  bolt  at  fiends.

C  Unclose,  our  manly  Hero,  thou  for  over  bounteous,  yondor
cloud,

For  us,  thou  irresistible.

7  Still  higher,  at  each  strain  of  mine,  thundor-armed  India’s

praises  rise :

I  find  no  laud  worthy  of  him.

8  Even  as  tho  bull  drivos  on  the  herds,  ho  drives  the  people  with
""ins  might,  '

Tho  liuler  irresistible :


9  Prom  this  place:  from  earth.

Mcntfew:  (partisan)  here  applied  to  Indra.

10  The  rpuciow  firmament :  the  expanse  between  earth  and  hcavon.

1  The  chain  :  (rd'ni)  referring  perhaps  to  both  singer*  and  chanters.

2  The  golden :  i.  e.  richly  decorated  (larvdbluiranabhlUhitah J  according  to
Silynna.

3  The  moutain :  is  the  mountain-shaped  moss  of  thick  cloud,  and  the  hint
arc  the  water*  os  in  I.  6,  5.  Tho  word*  dtlri  and  parmta  mean  both  mountain
and  cloud,  those  being  oonfttant.lv  soon  in  close  juxtaposition  uud  being  often
iudinlingumhablo  one  from  the  other.


10  THE  BY  MSS  OP  [BOOK  /.

9  Indra  who  rules  with  single  sway  men,  riches,  and  the  fivefold

.  race

Of  those  who  dwell  upon  the  earth.

10  For  your  sake  from  each  side  we  call  Indra  away  from  other

men :

Ours,  and  uoye  others’,  may  he  be.

HYMN  VIII.  Indra.

Indra,  bring  wealth  that  gives  delight,  the  victor’s  over-con¬
quering  wealth,

Most  excellent,  to  bo  our  aid  ;

2  By  means  of  which  wo  may  repel  our  foes  in  battle  hand  to

hand,

By  thoo  assisted  with  the  air.

3  Aided  by  thoo,  the  thundor-armod,  Indra,  may  we  lift  up  tho

bolt,

And  conquer  all  our  foes  in  fight.

4  With  thoo,  0  Indra,  for  ally  with  missile-darting  heroes,  may

Wo  conquer  our  embattled  foes.

6  Mighty  is  Indra,  yea  supreme  ;  greatness  bo  his,  the  Thunderer :

Wide  us  tho  hcavon  oxtends  his  power ;

6  Which  aidoth  those  to  win  them  sons,  who  como  as  heroes  to

the  fight,

Or  singers  loving  holy  thoughts.

7  His  bolly,  drinking  doopcst  draughts  of  Soma,  like  an  ocean

swells,

Like  wide  streams  from  tho  copo  of  heaven.

8  So  also  is  his  excellence,  great,  vigorous,  rich  in  cattle,  liko

A  ripe  brunch  to  the  worshipper.

9  For  verily  thy  mighty  powers,  Indra,  aro  saving  helps  at

once

Unto  a  worshipper  liJto  me.

I*  The  Jirtfo'il  race :  Benfoy  explain*  this  a*  '  the  whole  inhabited  world.’
But  tho  expression  mnu  to  mean  tho  Aryan  settlements  or  tribes  only,  and
not  the  indigenous  inhabitants  of  the  oountry.  Tho  five  tribes  or  uottlemont*
were  probably  the  confederation  of  tho  Turva?**,  Yadus,  Anus,  Druhyue,  and
PftruR.  S&yapa’s  explanation  is  ‘  those  who  are  fit  for  habitations,’  mid  tho
phimee  is  said  to  imply  the  four  castes  and  NWiSdas  or  indigenous  lmrltarians.
But  there  were  no  such  distinctions  of  caste  when  tho  hymn  was  composed.

2  With  the  car:  armtd.  literally,  with  a  horse,  is  explained  by  Sflyana  to
mean  fighting  on  horseback.  But  horses  seem  to  have  been  used  in  war  as
drawers  of  chariots  only,  and  drrafd  hero  stands  for  rathena,  with  a  car  or
chariot.

3  May  toe  lift  up  the  boll.  The  thunderbolt  hero  spoken  of  is  aacrifico  which,
when  employed  against  enemies,  U  as  powerful  a  \vcapou  us  the  bolt  of  Indra.


10  THE  II Y  MSS  OF  ( BOOK  I.

9  Indra  who  rules  with  single  sway  men,  riches,  and  the  fivefold

.  race

Of  those  who  dwell  upon  the  earth.

10  For  your  sake  from  each  side  we  call  Indra  away  from  other
men :

Ours,  and  uoyc  others’,  may  he  be.

HYMN  VIII.  Indra.

Indra,  bring  wealth  that  gives  delight,  the  victor’s  ever-con¬
quering  wealth,

Most  excellent,  to  be  our  aid  ;

2  By  means  of  which  we  may  repel  our  foes  in  battle  hand  to

hand,

By  thee  assisted  with  the  car.

3  Aided  by  thee,  the  thunder-armed,  Indra,  may  we  lift  up  the

bolt,

And  conquer  all  our  foes  in  fight.

4  With  thee,  0  Indra,  for  ally  with  missile-darting  heroes,  may
We  conquer  our  embattled  foes.

5  Mighty  is  Indra,  yea  supreme ;  greatness  be  his,  the  Thunderer :
Wide  as  the  heaven  extends  his  power ;

6  Which  aideth  those  to  win  them  sons,  who  corne  as  heroes  to

the  fight,

Or  singers  loving  holy  thoughts.

7  His  belly,  drinking  deepest  draughts  of  Soma,  like  an  ocean

swells,

Like  wide  streams  from  the  cope  of  heaven.

8  So  also  is  his  excellence,  great,  vigorous,  rich  in  cattle,  like
A  ripe  branch  to  the  worshipper.

9  For  verily  thy  mighty  powers,  Indra,  are  saving  helps  at

once

Unto  a  worshipper  like  me.

9  The  firefo’d  race:  Benfoy  explains  this  as  ‘the  whole  inhabited  world.’
But  the  expression  seems  to  mean  the  Aryan  settlements  or  tribes  only,  and
not  the  indigenous  inhabitants  of  .the  country.  The  five  tribes  or  settlements
were  probably  the  confederation  of  the  Turvaaas,  Yadus,  Anus,  Druhyus,  and
Pftru*.  Silyana’s  explanation  is  ‘those  who  are  fit  for  habitations,’  and  the

Case  is  said  to  imply  the  four  castes  and  Nish  Adas  or  indigenous  Barbarians,
t  there  were  no  such  distinctions  of  caste  when  the  hymn  was  composed.

2  With  the  car:  arrald.  literally,  with  a  horse,  is  explained  by  SAyana  to
mean  fighting  on  horseback.  But  horses  seem  to  have  been  used  in  war  os
drawers  of  chariots  only,  aud  diva/ 6  here  stands  for  rathenu,  with  a  car  or
chariot.

3  May  we  lift  up  thehch.  The  thunderbolt  here  spoken  of  is  sacrifice  which,
when  employed  against  enemies,  is  os  powerful  a  weapon  as  the  bolt  of  Indra.


THE  RIOT EDA.


IIYMN  0  ]


II


10  So  arc  his  lovely  gifts;  let  lauds  and  praises  be  to  ludra sung,
That  he  may  drink  the  Soma  juice.

HYMN  IX.  in*..

Come,  Indra,  and  delight  thee  with  the  juice  at  all  the  Soma

feasts,  ,

Protector,  mighty  in  thy  strength.

2  To  Indra  pour  ye  forth  the  juice,  the  active  gladdening  juice

to  him

The  gladdening,  omnific  God.

3  0  Lord  of  all  men,  fair  of  check,  rejoice  thee  in  the  gladdening

lauds,

Present  at  these  drink-offerings.-

4  Songs  have  outpoured  themselves  to  thee,  Indra,  the  strong,

the  guardian  Lord,

And  raised  themselves  unsatisfied.

5.  Send  to  us  bounty  manifold,  O  Indra,  worthy  of  our  wish,

For  power  supreme  is  only  thine.

6  O  Indra,  stimulate  thereto  us  emulously  fain  for  wealth,

And  glorious,  O  most  splendid  One.

7  Give,  Indra,  wide  and  lofty  fame,  wealthy  in  cattle  and  in

strength,

Lasting  our  life-time,  failing  not.

8  Grant  us  high  fame,  O  India,  giant  riches  bestowing  thousands,

those  i

Fair  fruits  of  earth  borne  home  in  wains.

9  Praising  with  songs  the  praise-worthy  who  comcth  to  our  aid,

we  call

Indra,  the  Treasure-Lord  of  wealth.  *

10  To  lofty  Indra,  dweller  by  each  libation,  the  pious  man
Sings  forth  aloud  a  strengthening  hymn.

10  Let  buds  a»d  praises  U  to  Indra  aim//  .*  more  exactly,  ‘  be  lauds,  spoken
and  aung,  to  Indra  given  ;  ’  ttWut  being  properly  the  laud  that  is  recited,  and
Stoma  the  hymn  of  praise  that  is  sung.

4  And  raised  themselves  unsatisfied:  djofhdh,  not  contented,  that  is,  with
pray  era  ever  new.  Ludwig  observes  that  the  SAmaveda  has  preserved  the
correct  reading  sajfahdh,  1  with  one  accord.’

8  Those  fair  fruits  of  earth  brought  home  in  wains.  ‘  The  original  of  this
hymn,  as  of  many  others,  is  so  concise  and  elliptical  as  to  be  unintelligible
without  the  liberal  amplification  of  the  Scholiast.  We  have  in  tho  text  simply
"  those  car-having  viands,"  Id  mthintr  ishoh.  meaning,  SAyana  says,  those
articles  of  food  which  are  conveyed  in  cars,  carta,  or  waggons,  from  the  site  of
their  production  ;  as  rice,  barley,  and  othor  kinds  of  grain.’  Wilson.

Tho  meaning  of  mthinlr  is  not  clear.


12


TUP  tiruxs  OF


[Book  t.


HYMN  X.  Indra.

The  chanters  hymn  thee,  they  who  say  the  word  of  praise
magnify  thee.

The  priests  have  raised  thee  up  on  high,  0  Satakratu,  like  a
polo.

2  As  up  he  ctomb  from  ridge  to  ridge  and  looked  upon  the

toilsome  task,

Indrn  observes  this  wish  of  his,  and  the  Ram  hastens  with  his
troop.

3  Harness  thy  pair  of  strong  bay  steeds,  long-maiicd,  whoso

bodies  fill  the  girths,

And,  Indra,  Soma-driuker,  come  to  listen  to  our  songs  of
praise.

4  Come  hither,  answer  thou  the  song,  sing  in  approval,  cry

aloud.

Good  Indra,  make  our  prayer  succeed,  and  prosper  this  our
sacrifice.

6  To  Indra  must  a  laud  bo  said,  to  strengthen  him  who  freoly
gives,

That  Sakra  may  tuko  pleasure  in  our  friendship  and  drink-offer¬
ings.

6  Him,  him  wo  seok  for  friendship,  him  for  richos  and  heroic

might.

For  Indra,  ho  is  Sakm,  ho  shall  aid  us  while  ho  gives  us  wealth.

7  Easy  to  turn  and  drive  away,  Indra,  is  spoil  bestowed  by  thee.


1  'The  concluding  phrase,  tied  ..nd  tafliaux  iva  yen  ire,  "thoy  have  raised

bliko  »  bamboo,"  is  rath  or  obscure.  Tho  Scholiast  says,  they  have  ole-
Indra,  ns  tumblers  raise  a  bamboo — on  tho  summit  of  which  thoy
balauce  Uiemsolves  ;  a  feat  not  uncommon  in  India  :  or,  as  easfa  means,  also,
a  family,  it  may  be  rendored,  as  ambitious  persons  raw-  their  family  to  con-
•oquonc©.’  Wilson.

2  Tho  text  lias  only,  mounting  front  ridge  to'  ridge1 2 * * 5 * 7,  or  from  height  to  height,
which  tho  Scholiast  oomplctes  by  observing  that  this  is  said  of  the  Yajamfrna,  the
person  who  institutes  or  performs  a  regular  sacrifice  snd  pays  tho  expense*  of
it,  who  goes  to  the  mountain  to  gather  the  Soma-plant,  fuel,  etc.  Ludwig
thinks  that  Indra  is  mcfcilt,  rising  higher  and  highor,  and  yet  not  delaying  to
come  to  the  sacrifice.

The  Rum,  (rriihnih)  is  Indra,  and  fcis  flock  or  troop  are  tho  M units.

I/atlent :  comes  quickly  to  the  sacrifice.


5  &tkra,  a  oommon  name  of  Indra,  used  in  the  next  stanza  as  an  epithet  =

1  tho  powerful,’  from  tak,  to  be  ablo.

7  Kuty  to  turn  :  The  booty  spoken  of  in  the  Itigvcda  consists  chiefly  of
cattle,  which  with  Indra’*  assistance  are  easily  turned  and  driven  away  from
tho  enemy  who  possesses  them.


JIYM  X  11.]  THE  MOVED  A.  13

•  U  stable  .pi  .tlioJtiup,  £nd  .gi  vo  us  wealth  0  Thunder.

■ '  arnica.

8  Tho  heaven  and  earth  contain  thee  not,  together,  in  thy  wrath¬

ful  mood.

Win  us  tho  waters  of  tho  sky,  and  send  us  kino  ftbundautly.

9  Hoar,  thou  whoso  ear  is  quick,  my  call ;  take’  to  thco  roadily

my  songs.

0  Indra,  lot  this  laud  of  mino  conic  nearer  oven  than  thy
friend.

10  Wo  know  thoo  mightiest  of  all,  in  battlos  hoaror  of  our  ory.

Of  thoo  most  mighty  wo  invoke  tho  uid  that  givoth  thousand¬
fold.

11  0  Indra,  Son  of  Kusikn,  drink  our  libation  with  dolight.
Prolong  our  lifo  anew,  and  cause  tho  seor  to  win  a  thousand

gifts.

12  Lovor  of  song,  may  these  our  songs  on  every  sido  onoompass

thee  :

Strengthening  thee  of  lengthened  life,  may  they  bo  dear  de¬
lights  to  thee.

HYMN  XI.  Indra.

Ai.l  sacred  songs  have  magnified  Indra  expansive  as  the  sea,
The  best  of  warriors  bomc  on  cars,  the  Lord,  the  very  Lord  of
strength.

2  Strong  in  thy  friendship,  Indra,  Lord  of  power  and  might,  wo

have  no  fear.

We  glorify  with  praises  thco,  tho  never-conquered  conqueror.

3  Tho  gifts  of  Indra  from  of  old,  his  wiving  succours,  nevor  fail,
When  to  tho  praise-singors  ho  gives  tho  boon  of  substaneft

rich  in  kino.

Juclotr  the  tUihh  of  the  hint  :  Open  thn  thick  oloud  that  holds  tho  water
Imprisoned,  nnd  fertilize  our  fields  with  rain.

9  Thy  /riW ;  probably  tho  v4jra  or  thundorbolt  which  is  I  mint's  insepar¬
able  associate  and  ally.

11  Son  of  Kuaika :  Kusika  was  tho  father  or  tho  grandfather  of  Visvrtmitra
who  was  the  futher  of  the  poet  or  seor  of  this  hymn.  This  opithot  Kausika,
son  of  Kiifika,  is  lioro  applied  to  Indra  as  being  tlie  cliiof  or  spooial  Clod  of  tho
aoer's  family.

12  Of  lengthened  liftm  immortal.

1  This  hymn  is  asorlbod  to  Jctar  the  son  of  Madhuchchhandas  the  seer  of
tho  preceding  hymn.

Expantire  at  the  tea  :  of.  I.  S,  7.  Or  tho  oxpre**ion  may  be,  as  Wilson  says,
'  a  vaguo  mode  of  indicating  the  universal  diffusion  of  Indra  as  tho  firma¬
ment. ’


HYMN  9.]


THE  It  10 VEDA.


11


10  So  arc  bis  lovely  gifts;  let  lauds  and  praises  bo  to  lndra  sung,
That  he  may  drink  the  Soma  juice.

HYMN  IX.  lndra.

C'omk,  lndra,  and  delight  thee  with  the  juice  at  all  the  Sonia
feasts,

Protector,  mighty  in  thy  strength.

2  To  lndra  pour  yo  forth  tho  juico,  the  active  gladdening  juice

to  him

Tho  gladdening,  omnific  God.

3  0  Lord  of  all  nion,  fair  of  chook,  rojoioo  thee  in  the  gladdoning

lauds,

Present  at  these  drink-offerings.-

4  Songs  have  outpoured  thcmsolvcs  to  thee,  India,  the  strong,

the  guardian  Lord,

And  raised  themselves  unsatisfied.

5  .  Send  to  us  bounty  manifold,  O  lndra,  worthy  of  our  wish,

For  power  supremo  is  only  thine.

6  0  lndra,  stimulate  thereto  us  emulously  fain  for  wealth,

And  glorious,  0  most  splendid  One.

7  Give,  lndra,  wide  and  lofty  fame,  wealthy  in  cattle  and  in

strength,

Lusting  our  life-time,  failing  not.

8  Grant  us  high  fame,  O  lndra,  grant  riches  bestowing  thousands,

those  ^

Fair  fruits  of  earth  borne  home  in  wains.

9  Praising  with  songs  tho  praise-worthy  who  comcth  to  our  aid,

wo  call

lndra,  tho  Treasure-lord  of  wealth.  y

10  To  lofty  lndra,  dwcllor  by  each  libation,  tho  pious  man
Sings  forth  aloud  a  strengthening  hymn.


10  U t  t« iuli  and  pruiiei  be  to  lndra  iuug  :  more  Madly,  'be  laud*,  woken
and  sung,  to  lndra  given  ultAu  boing  properly  the  laud  that  is  recited,  and
Komu  tho  hymn  of  praiao  that  ia  sung.

4  And  railed  Ihtmitlt'c*  uuwtitfed :  Hjofbdfa  not  oon  ton  tod,  that  ia,  with
p rayon  over  now.  Ludwig  obaorvoa  that  the  8&inavcda  ha*  preserved  tho
cor  root  reading  Ky'tfiAdfi,  '  with  ono  accord.’

8  Tiote  fair  fruit i  of  earth  brought  home  in  traiM.  '  The  original  of  this
hymn,  m  of  many  othora,  in  »o  concise  and  clliplical  as  to  bo  unintelligible
without  the  liberal  amplification  of  tho  Scholiast,  We  have  in  tho  text  simply
"  those  car-having  viand*,"  Id  ruthh.tr  iihuh.  meaning,  SAyapa  Bay*,  those
article*  of  food  which  are  conveyed  in  cars,  carta,  or  waggons,  from  tho  rite  of
their  production  ;  a*  rice,  barley,  and  other  kind*  of  grain.'  Wilaon.

The  meaning  of  ruthintr  ie  not  clear.


14  777 A’  1/YJtyS  OF  [HOOK  1.

4  Crusher  of  forte,  tho  young,  the  wise,  of  strength  unmeasured,

wus  he  born'

Sustuinev  of  each  sacred  rite,  Imlra,  tlie  Thunderer,  much-
extolled.

5  Lord  of  tho  thunder,  thou  didst  burst. the  cave  of  Vala  rich

iu'OOWH.

The  Gods  came  pressing  to  thy  side,  and  free  from  terror  aided
thee.

G  I,  Hero,  through  thy  bounties  am  come  to  the  flood  addressing
thee.

Song-lover,  here  tho  singers  stand  and  testify  to  thee  thereof.

7  The  wily  Sushna,  India !  thou  o’erthrewest  with  thy  wondrous

powers.

Tho  wise  beheld  this  deed  of  thine:  now  go  beyond  their
eulogies.

8  Our  songs  of  praise  havo  glorified  Indru  who  ruleth  by  his

might,

Whose  precious  gifts  in  thousands  come,  yea,  oven  more
abundantly.

HYMN  XIT.  Agiil.

Wk  choose  Agni  the  messenger,  the  herald,  master  of  all  wealth,

Well  skilled  in  this  our  sacrifice.

2  With  callings  ovor  they  invoke  Agni,  Agni,  l.ord  of  the  House,

Ohlution-bcarer,  much  beloved.

3  Bring  the  Gods  hither,  Agni,  born  for  him  who  strews  the  snored

gross :

Thou  art  our  herald,  meet  for  praise.

4  Cruthtr  of  forte :  destroyer  or  broker-down  of  tlio  oloud*  that  withhold
the  rain,  which  are  regarded  ns  tho  forts  or  stronghold*  of  Vfitra  and  tho
other  hostile  powers  of  the  air.

6  TKt  emit  of  Vala  ;  Vala  is  the  brother  of  V.ilro,  or  Vritra  himself  under
another  name,  who  stole  tho  oow*  of  the  God*  and  hid  them  in  a  cave,  that  is,
kept  the  light  and  water*  imprisoned  iu  dark  cloud*.

C  To  llujtood :  i  e.  to  Imlra,  tho  river  or  sea  of  bounty.

7  The  nilg  ••  9'ishna  ia  described  as  a  demon  slain  by  Jndra.

The  word  means  drier  up  :  MUtdadm  HOikitnuliet*,  cause  of  the  drying  up  of
beings,  the  excensivc  heat  and  drought  before  the  Haiti*,  which  India  put*  an
end  to.

Now  <jo  beyond  their  taiogies :  i.  e  do  deed*  worthy  of  still  higher  praise.
Or  it  may  mean,  make  their  eulogies  endure.

1  The  Hymn*  from  XII  to  XXIII  inclusive  are  ascribed  to  Modh&tithi,
son  of  Kanva.

TU  nesttnaer:  the  mediator  between  men  and  God*.  The  herald  :  devdndm
dhnftdram,  the  inviter  of  the  Gods,  is  Siyana’s  explanation.

3  Born :  newly  produced  by  attrition  for  the  man  who  has  prepared  and
spread  the  sacrificial  g rasa  os  a  seat  for  the  expected  deities.


HYMN  18.]


THE  RIO  VEDA


15

4  Wake  up  tho  willing  Gods,  since  thou,  Agni,  porfomicst

embassage :

Sit  on  the  sacred  grass  with  Gods.

5  0  Agni,  radiant  One,  to  whom  tho  holy  oil  is  poured,  burn  tip
Our  enomics  whom  fiends  protect.

6  By  Agni  Agni  is  inflamed,  Lord  of  tho  House,  aviso,  young,  who

boarn

Tho  gift:  tho  ladle  is  his  mouth.

7  Praiso  Agni  in  tho  sacrifice,  tho  Sago  whoso  ways  arc  over  true,
Tho  God  who  drive  til  griof  away.

8  God,  Agni,  be  his  Strang  dofenco  who,  lord  of  sacrificial  gifts,
Wowhippeth  thee  the  messenger.

9  Whoso  with  sacred  gift  would  fain  call  Agni  to  tho  fonst  of

Gods,

0  Purifier,  favour  him.

10  Such,  Agni,  Purifier,  bright,  bring  hither  to  our  sacrifice,

To  our  oblation  bring  tho  Gods.

1 1  So  lauded  by  our  newest,  song  of  praise  bring  opulence  to  us,
And  food,  with  heroes  for  our  sons.

12  0  Agni,  by  effulgent  flame,  by  all  invokings  of  the  Gods,

Show  pleasure  ill  this  laud  of  ours.

HYMN  XIII.  Agni.

Agni,  well-kindled,  bring  tho  Gods  for  him  who  offers  holy  gifts.
Worship  them,  Purifier,  Priest.

2  Son  of  Thyself,  present,  0  Sage,  our  sacrifice  to  the  Gods  to¬
day,

Sweot  to  tho  tasto,  that  they  may  feast

0  Hu  Agni  Agni  it  iofiamtd ;  Tho  fire  into  which  the  oblation  is  pourod  in
lighted  by  tho  application  of  other  lire.

Young :  a*  newly  born  each  time  tho  fire  is  produced.  The  Udle:  unci  for
pouring  the  sacrifioial  butter  into  tho  Arc.

8  Lord  of  tuerificiul  gift* :  the  wealthy  patron  or  inatitutor  of  tho  sacrifice.
0  0  Purficr:  pdvuht,  purifying,  in  in  Inter  Snnnkrit  a  common  word  for  fire.

Thin  in  one  of  tho  Apr!  or  propitiatory  liyninn,  consisting  of  invocationi  to  a
eericn  of  deified  object*,  and  said  to  be  introductory  to  the  animal  aocrifiee.
All  tho  deified  object*  addressed  in  thin  hymn  Are  said  by  SAyapa  to  bo  forma
\  of  Agni.

1  For  him  who  offert  holy  gift* :  for  the  inatitutor  of  tho  sacrifice.

2  Son  of  Thytef.  TunfinapiU,  eon  or  descendant  of  oneself,  is  a  frequently
recurring  name  of  Agni,  so  called  because  lire  is  sometimes  solf.generated,  ns
in  the  lightning,  or  produced  by  attrition,  and  not  necessarily  derived  from

'other  fire.  Other  fanciful  derivations  arc  given.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[ROOK  I.


3  Dear  Nur&suusa,  sweet  of  tongue,  the  giver  of  oblations,  1
Invoke  to  this  our  sacrifice.

4  Agni,  on  thy  most  easy  car,  glorified,  hither  bring  the  Gods :
Manu  appointed  thee  as  Priest.

5  Strew,  0  yo  wise,  the  sacred  grass  that  drips  with  oil,  in  ordor

due,  **

Whoro  the  Immortal  is  behold.

6  Thrown  open  be  the  Doom  Divine,  unfailing,  that  assist  the  rite,
For  sacrifice  this  day  and  now.

7  1  call  the  lovoly  Night  and  Dawn  to  scat  thorn  on  tho  holy  grass
At  this  our  solemn  sacrifice.

8  The  two  Invokers  I  invite,  tho  wisp,  divine,  and  sweet  of

tonguo,

To  cclobrato  this  our  sacrifioo.


lift,  Sarasvatl,  Maid,  throc  G;

'  Bo  seated,  peaceful,  on  lhognuw.


who  bring  delight,


10  TvashUr  I  cull,  tho  earliest  born,  tho  wearer  of  all  forms  ut

will:

May  ho  bo  our*  and  ours  alono.

1 1  God,  Sovran  of  tho  Wood,  pitwont  this  our  oblation  to  tho

Gods,

And  lot  tho  givor  bo  renowned.


3  Nurd§ahm :  1  Praiso  of  Men  ’  is  one  of  Agnl's  mystical  name*.

4  if  emu :  in  tho  man  par  excellence,  or  tho  representative  man  ami  father  of
tho  human  race,  regarded  m  the  first  institutor  of  saorillocw  and  religious  acre-
monies.

6  The  Immortal :  according  to  8Aya\i*  either  tho  clarified  butter  or'  Agni
tho  Ood.

6  The  Doore  Divine :  the  doors  of  tho  chamber  in  which  tho  oblation  in
ofi'ored.

Unfailing :  tho  aignification  of  atanchalah  in  tho  text  is  uncertain.  SAyaya
explains  tho  word  variously  in  various  places.

8  The  two  Invoker  I .  It  seems  _  uncertain  who  these  two  invokers  or  prioebs
(hotdrd)  are,  whether  Agni  aud  Aditya,  or  Agui  and  Varuna,  or  Vanina  and
Aditya.  See  M,  Mailer’s  A.  S.  Literature,  p.  481.

9  Ifd :  the  Goddess  of  sacral  speech  and  action.

Sara* rail :  see  I.  3.  10.

M'thl :  ‘tho  great'  (Goddess),  wid  to  bo  identical  with  BhAratl,  also  a
Goddess  of  speech.

10  Tvathfar,  is  the  Hcphaistoe,  or  Vulcan,  of  tho  Indian  pantheon,  tho  ideal
artist,  the  divine  artisan,  the  most  skilful  of  workmen,  versed  in  all  wonderful
and  admirable  contrivances.

11  Oml,  Sovran  of  the  Wood:  vatuspali,  lord  of  the  wood  ;  usually,  a  largo
tree  ;  hero  said  to  1«  an  Agni,— as  if  the  fuel  and  the  burning  of  it  were  iden¬
tified..  Or  tho  Sacrificial  Post  may  bo  intended,  which  is  enumerated  among
tho  Aprl  deities  or  deified  objects.


HYMN  14.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


17


12  With  SvAliil  pay  tho  sacrifice  to  Indra  in  the  offerer’s  house :
Thither  1  call  tho  Deities.

HYMN  XIV.  t  VlfvederM.

To  drink  the  Soma,  Agni,  come,  come  to  our  service  and  our
songs

With  all  these  Gods ;  and  worship  them.


2  Tho  KanvoH  have  invoked  thoo ;  thoy,  0  Singer,  sing  thoo
songs  of  praise :

Agni,  come  hither  with  tho  Gods ;


12  Svdhd  la  tlio  socrod  word  or  ozoUmation  (  Hail  I  Blessing  I )  used  in
pouring  tho  oblation  on  tho  fire.  According  to  Sflyana,  SvftliS  also  may  bo
identified  with  Agni.


2  The  Ranvai :  sons  or  descend  an  ti  of  Kanva,  men  of  the  same  family  as  tho
Beer  of  tho  hymn.

3  Indra,  Vdyu,  etc.  Tho  names  of  these  Gods  are  in  tho  accusative  case,
governed  by  'they  (the  Kanvaa)  have  invoked,’  or  ‘worship  them,’  understood.

Bj-Ouupati,  ‘alternating  with  Brahmanaapati  is  the  name  of  a  deity  in
whom  tho  action  of  tho  worshipper  upon  the  Gods  is  personified.  He  is
the  suppliant,  the  priest  who  intercedes  with  tho  Gods  for  men,  and  protects
them  against  the  wicked.  Hence  ho  appears  as  the  prototype  of  the  priests
and  tho  priestly  order,  and  is  also  designated  as  the  Purohita  of  the  divine
community.  The  essential  difference  between  the  original  idea  represented
in  this  God  and  those  expressed  in  most  of  the  other  and  older  deities  of  the
Voda  consists  in  tho  fact  that  tho  latter  aro  personifications  of  various  de¬
partments  of  naturo,  or  of  physical  forces,  while  tho  former  is  the  product  of
moral  ideas,  and  an  impersonation  of  the  power  of  devotion.’  Muir,  0.  S.
Text*,  V.  272.

PiUhan  is  a  God  who  protects  and  multiples  cattle  and  human  possessions
generally.  In  character  ho  is  a  solar  deity,  beholds  tho  ontiro  universe,  and  is
a  guide  on  roads  and  journeys.

Bhuga,  the  gracious  Lord  and  proteotor,  is  regarded  os  tho  beatowor  of
wealth.

Adilya*.  ‘Thoro  (in  the  highest  hoaven)  dwell  end  reign  those  Gods  who
bear  in  common  the  namo  of  Adltvas.  Wo  must,  however,  if  wo  would  dis¬
cover  thoir  earliest  character,  abandon  tho  oonooptions  which  in  a  later  ago,
and  even  tn  that  of  tho  heroio  poems,  were  entertained  regarding  these  doities.
According  to  this  conception  they  wore  twolvo  Sun-gods,  bearing  ovidont
rcforonco  to  tho  twolvo  months.  But  for  tho  most  anoient  period  wo  must
hold  fast  tho  primary  signification  of  their  name.  They  are  tho  inviolable,
imperishable,  eternal  bomgs.  Aditi,  eternity  or  tho  otornal,  is  tho  element
wbioh  sustains  thorn  and  is  sustained  by  them. ..Tho  eternal  nnd  inviolablo
element  in  wliicli  tho  Adityas  dwell,  and  which  forms  their  essenoo,  is  tho
celestial  light... Tho  Adityas,  tho  Gods  of  this  light,  do  not  therefore  by  anv
means  coincide  with  any  of  the  formB  in  which  light  is  manifested  in  tho  uni¬
verse.  They  are  neither  sun,  nor  moon,  nor  stars,  nor  dawn,  but  the  eternal
muitainevs  of  this  luminous  life,  which  exists,  as  St  were,  behind  all  these
phenomena.’  Roth,  quoted  by  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  56.

2


18  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  T.

4  For  you  these  juices  are  poured  forth  that  gladden  and  exhi¬

larate,

The  meath-drops  resting  in  the  cup.

5  The  sons  of  Kanva  fain  for  help  adore  thee,  having  strewn  the

grass,

With  offerings  and  all  things  prepared.

6  Let  the  swift  steeds  who  carry  thee,  thought-yoked  and  drop¬

ping  holy  oil,

Bring  the  Gods  to  the  Soma  draught.

7  Adored,  tho  atrengthenors  of  Law,  unite  them,  Agni,  with  thoir*

Dames :

Make  them  drink  mcath,  0  bright  of  tongue.

8  Let  them,  0  Agni,  who  deservo  worship  and  praise  drink  with

thy  tongue

Tho  mcath  in  solemn  sacrifice.

9  Away,  from  tho  Sun’s  realm  of  light,  the  wise  invoking  Priest

shall  bring

All  Gods  awaking  with  tho  dawn.

10  With  all  tho  Gods,  with  India,  with  VAyu,  and  Mitre’s  splen¬

dours,  drink,

Agni,  tho  ploosant  Soma  juice.

1 1  Ordainod  by  Manu  as  our  Priest,  thou  sittoafc,  Agni,  at  each  rito:
Hallow  thou  this  our  sacrifice.

12  Harness  tho  Rod  Mares  to  thy  car,  tho  Bays,  0  God,  tho  flam¬

ing  onos :

With  thoso  bring  hitherward  the  Gods.

HYMN  XV.  jlitu.

0  Indiu  drink  tho  Soma  juioe  with  Ritu  ;  lot  tho  cheering  drops
Sink  deep  withiu,  which  sottlo  there.


The  Marut  hoet :  tho  Marut*  are  the  Gods  of  tho  winds  and  storms,  tho
companion*  and  friend*  of  Indra.  They  oro  mid  in  tho  Veda  to  bo  the  sons  of
Rudrft  and  Prism,  tho  latter  being  explained  by  Sflynna  as  '  tho  many-colour¬
ed  earth/  but  regarded  by  Professor  Roth  as  a  personification  of  tho  speckled
clouds.

7  Unite  them  with  their  Damtt  s  p&MraUU  Jcridhi :  make  them  (come)  with
thoir  consort*.

9  The  wile  invoking  Print :  Agni,  who  calls  tho  Gods.

10  All  the  Godt :  or  Vijvcdovas ;  sco  I.  8.  7.

11  Jfanu  ;  sco  L  13.  4.

1  Situ :  meaning  generally  a  season,  a  sixth  part  of  the  Indian  year,  is  here
personified  and  add r eased  as  a  deity.


HYMN  15.]


THE  HIO  YE  DA.


19


2  Drink  from  the  Purifier’s  cup,  Maruts,  with  Ritu ;  sanctify
Tho  rite,  for  yo  give  precious  gifts.

3  0  Neshtar,  with  thy  Dame  accopt  our  sacrifice ;  with  Ritu  drink,
For  thou  art  ho  who  giveth  wealth.

4  Bring  tho  Gods,  Agni ;  in  the  throe  appointed  places  sot  them

down  :

Surround  them,  and  with  Ritu  drink.

5  Drink  Soma  after  the  Ritus,  from  tho  BrAh matin's  bounty :  un-

dissolvcd,

0  India,  is  thy  friendship’s  bond.

6  Mitrn,  Varuna,  yo  whoso  ways  are  firm — a  Powor  that  none

deceives — ,

With  Ritu  yo  have  reached  tho  rite.

7  The  Soma-pressors,  fain  for  wealth,  praise  the  Wealth-giver  in

the  rite,

In  sacrifices  praise  the  God.

8  May  the  Wealth-giver  grant  to  us  riches  that  shall  be  far

renowned  :

These  things  we  gain  among  the  Gods.

9  He  with  the  Ritus  fain  would  drink,  Wealth-giver,  from  the

Neshtar's  bowl.

Haste,  give  your  offering,  and  depart.

10  As  we  this  fourth  time,  Wealth-giver,  honour  thee  with  the
Ritus,  be

A  Giver  bountiful  to  us.


2  The  Purifier's  cup  :  tlio  sacrificial  vessel  of  tho  Potur,  or  Purifier,  who
pours  into  the  fire  tho  libation  for  tho  Maruts.

3  0  Neshtar  :  the  Neshtar  Li  one  of  the  chief  officiating  priests,  who  leads
forward  tlio  wife  of  tho  insti tutor  of  tho  sacrifice.  In  this  ulace  Neshtar  is
said  to  ho  another  name  for  tlio  God  Tvaslipir  from  his  having  on  somo  oo-
oasiou  assumed  tho  function  of  a  Neshfar  priest.

i  The  three  appointed  places :  by  tho  three  saoriflcial  fire*.

5  The  Jfrdhmana's  bounty.  Tho  BrAhntapa  hero  is  said  to  bo  tho  BrAhma*
pAclichhapst,  one  of  tlio  sixteen  priests  employed  in  sacrifices;  and  perhaps  liis
offloe  may  liavo  boon  to  hold  somo  ladlo  or  va*o  in  which  tlio  ofionng  is  pre¬
sented.

7  The  Soma-presscrs :  gr/Ihvahastdsali,  mon  having  stones  in  thoir  hands
with  which  to  bruise  tho  Soma  plant.  The  Wealth  giver  is  Agni.

In  the  rite,  In  sacrifices  :  '  In  tho  adhvara  and  in  tho  ytunat,  tho  first  said
to  bo  the  primary  or  essential  ceremony,  such  as  tho  AgnUhtoma  ;  tlio  sooond,
tho  modified  ceremonies,  such  as  tho  Ukthj  a  which  is  olnewhero  termed  an
offering  with  Soma  juice.’  Wilson.

10  At  we  this  fourth  time:  Agui,  as  DravipodAs  or  Wealth-giver,  has  now
been  celebrated  in  four  stanzas  iuntead  of  tho  usual  tricha  or  triad;  or  wo  may
translate  with  Ludwig,  '  Ah  we  in  fourth  place,'  Agni  being  fourth  in  tho  in¬
vocation  (Indra,  Maruts,  Tvaihtor,  Agni).


20  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  1.

11  Drink  ye  the  meath,  0  Asvins  bright  with  flames,  whoso  acts

are  pure,  who  with
•  Bitus  accept  the  sacrifice.

12  With  Bitu,  through  the  house-fire,  thou,  kind  Giver,  guidest

sacrifice :

Worship  the  Gods  for  the  pious  man.

HYMN  XVI.  Indra.

Let  thy  Bay  Steeds  bring  thee,  tho  Strong,  hither  to  drink  the
Soma  draught —

Those,  India,  who  aro  bright  as  suns.

2  Here  are  the  grains  bedewed  with  oil :  hither  let  tho  Bay

Coursore  bring
Indra  upon  his  easiest  car.

3  Indra  at  early  mom  wo  call,  Indra  in  course  of  sacrifice,

Indra  to  drink  tho  Soma  juice.

4  Como  hither,  with  thy  long-maned  Stocds,  0  Indra,  to  the

draught  wo  pour :

Wo  call  theo  when  tho  juico  is  shed.

5  Como  thou  to  this  our  song  of  praise,  to  tho  libation  poured

for  thoo :

Drink  of  it  like  a  stag  athirst.

6  Hore  aro  tho  drops  of  Soma  juico  oxprossod  on  sacred  grass  :

thoroof

Drink,  Indra,  to  increase  thy  might.  ,

7  Wolcomo  to  thee  be  this  our  hymn,  reaching  thy  heart,  most

excellent :

Then  drink  tho  Soma  juice  expressed.

8  To  ovory  draught  of  prossed-out  juico  Indra,  the  Vyitra-slayer,

comes,

To  drink  tho  Soma  for  delight.

9  Fulfil,  0  Satakratu,  all  our  wish  with  horses  and  with  kino  :
With  holy  thoughts  wo  sing  thy  praise.

12  Through  the  house-fire.  Tho  gflrhapatya  is  tho  sacral  firo  perpetually
maintained  by  tho  householder  ;  tho  firo  from  which  Bros  for  sacrificial  pur¬
poses  arc  lighted.

1  Bright  as  tuns:  tffrachahasah.  SAyana  understands  thin  to  refer  to  tho
priest*,  and  Wilson  renders  accordingly  :  may  (the  priests),  radiant  as  the  nun  .
(make  thoo  manifest).

2  Easiest  car  ;  sukhdtame  rathe :  that  is,  most  easily  moving,  swiftest,

3  India  at  early  morn  tee  call.  Although  not  more  particularly  named,  tho
specification  implies  the  morning,  mid-day,  and  evening  worship.

5  Like  a  stag  athirst like  a  gaum  (Bos  Gaums)  a  kind  of  buffalo.

.  '  Drink  like  a  thirsty  buffalo,’  would  perhaps  be  a  moro  strictly  accurate
rendering.


BYMN  18.]


21


THE  RIO  VEDA.

HYMN  XVII.  ludra-Vnruna.

I  crave  holp  from  tho  Imperial  Lords,  from  Indra-Varuyn  ;
may  they

Both  favour  ono  of  us  like  me.

2  Guardians  of  mon,  ye  over  como  with  roady  succour  at  the  call
Of  ovcry  singer  such  as  I.

3  Sate  you,  ocoording  to  your  wish,  0  Indru-Varunn,  with  wealth:
Fain  would  wo  have  you  nearest  us.

4  May  wo  ho  sharers  of  tho  powors,  sharers  of  tho  bonovolonco
Of  you  who  give  strength  bounteously.

5  Indra  and  Vanina,  among  givers  of  thousands,  mcot  for  praise,
Are  Powers  who  morit  highest  laud.

6  Through  thoir  protection  may  wo  gain  great  store  of  wealth,

and  heap  it  up  :

Enough,  and  still  to  spare,  be  ours.

7  O  Indra-Varuna,  on  you  for  wealth  in  many  a  form  I  call  :
Still  keep  ye  us  victorious.

8  0  Indra-Varuna,  through  our  songs  that  seek  to  win  you  to

ourselves,

Give  us  at  once  your  sheltering  help.

9  0  Indra-Varuna,  to  you  may  fair  praise  which  I  offer  come,
Joint  eulogy  which  ye  dignify.

HYMN  XVIII.  Brahmapospati.

0  Braiihanaspati,  make  him  who  presses  Soma  glorious,

Even  Kakshtv&n  Ausija.


1  Indra  tho  Hero  and  Varuna  tho  Kiug  are  addressed  conjointly  m
a  dual  deity,  Indrftvarupa.  Tho  moat  prominent  of  tho  other  dual  deities  nro
Agni-Soma,  Indra- Vflyu,  Indra- Agni,  Indva-Brihospati,  Indra-Soma,  Mitra-
Varupa,  Indra-l'ftahan,  Indra-Vishpu,  Dynun-Ppthivl  and  Soma-Rudro.

Rrahmanaipatl.  See  I.  14,  8.  Professor  Wilson  says  :  ‘Tho  Scholiast  fur¬
nishes  uh  with  no  account  of  tho  station  or  functions  of  this  divinity.  Tho
otymology  will  justify  Dr.  Roth's  definition  of  him  aa  tho  deity  of  sacred
prayor,  or  rather,  perhaps,  of  tho  text  of  tho  Voda  ;  but  whether  no  in  to  bo
considered  as  a  distinot  personification,  or  as  a  modified  form  of  one  of  those
already  recognised,  and  especially  of  Agni,  is  doubtful.  His  giving  wealth,
healing  disease,  ami  promoting  nourishment,  mo  properties  not  poculiar  to
him  ;  and  Ins  being  associated  with  Indra  and  Soma,  whilo  it  makes  him  dis¬
tinct  from  thorn,  leaves  him  Agni  as  his  prototype.  His  being,  in  an  especial
manner,  connected  with  prayer  appears  more  fully  in  a  subsequent  passago.
Hymn  XL.  Agni  is,  in  an  cepeoial  degree,  tho  deity  of  the  Brahman  ;  and,
according  to  somo  statements,  tho  Rigvoda  is  supposed  to  proceed  from  him  ;
a  notion,  howovor,  which  according  to  Medh&tithi,  tho  commentator  on  Menu,
was  suggested  by  ita  opening  with  the  hymn  to  Agni,  Agnin  ift.'

Kakihivdn,  called  Au?ija,  or  son  of  Usij,  was  a  renowned  Rislu  or  seer,  of
the  family  of  Pajra,  and  the  author  of  several  of  the  hymns  of  the  Rigvoda.


22


THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  I.


2  The  rich,  the  healer  of  disease,  who  giveth  wealth,  incrcasoth

store,

The  prompt, — may  he  be  with  ua  still.

3  Let  not  the  foeman’s  curse,  let  not  a  mortal’s  onslaught  fall  on

us :

Preserve  us,  Brahmanaspati.

4  Ne’er  is  the  mortal  hero  harmed  whom  Indra,  Brahmanaspati,
And  Soma  graciously  inspire.

5  Do,  thou,  0  Brahmanaspati,  and  Indra,  Soma,  Dakshiiul,
Preservo  that  mortal  from  distress.

6  To  the  Assembly’s  wondrous  Lord,  to  Indra’s  lovely  Friond  who

gives

Wisdom,  have  I  drawn  near  in  prayer.

7  He  without  whom  no  sacrifice,  e’en  of  the  wiso  man,  prospers  ;

ho

Stirs  up  tho  sorios  of  thoughts.

8  Ho  makes  tho  oblation  prosper,  ho  promotes  tho  course  of

sacriflco :

Our  voico  of  praiso  goes  to  tho  Gods.

9  I  have  scon  NarA?ansa,  him  most  resolute,  most  widoly  famed,
As  ’twero  tho  Household  Priost  of  heavon.


2  The  rich,  tht  htaltr  of  diuatt :  Brahmayaspati.

4  Soma :  tho  God  who  represents  and  animate  tho  juico  of  tho  Soma
plant.  Ho  was  in  formsr  time#  tho  Indian  Dionysus  or  Bacchus.  '  Tho
simple  minded  Aryan  pooplo,’  says  Professor  Whitney,  '  whoso  whole  religion
was  a  worship  of  tho  wondorful  powers  and  phenomena  of  nature,  had  no
sooner  pereoived  that  this  liquid  [Soma  juice]  hsd  powor  to  elevate  the
spirits,  and  produce  a  temporary  frensy,  undor  tho  influence  of  which  tho
Individual  was  prompted  to,  and  capable  of,  doeds  beyond  his  natural  powers,
than  they  found  in  it  something  divine :  it  was  to  theif  apprehension  a  God,
endowing  thoso  into  whom  it  entered  with  godliko  powers  ;  tho  plant  which

eded  it  became  to  them  the  king  of  plants  ;  tho  process  of  preparing  it
mo  a  holy  sacrifice.  The  high  antiquity  of  this  cuftus  is  attested  by  tho
references  to  it  found  occurring  m  tho  Poraian  Avesta.'  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Ttxlt,
V.  268.


6  DakiMnd  :  properly  tho  present  made  to  tho  priests  at  the  conclusion  of
a  sacrifice,  here  personified  m  a  Goddess.

6  The  Atwnhly's  nondr  out  Lord :  Sadasaapati,  the  master  or  protector  of
tho  assembly  of  priests,  is  here  a  title  of  Agni.

9  Houiehold  Priett :  tadmamakhatam ;  according  to  Sftyana,  '  radiant  aa
heaven,’  according  to  I.udwig,  *  ns  ono  who  fought  to  win  heaven’s  scat.*
Nardfunta  l»s»  already  occurred  as  a  name  of  Agni  (I.  13.  3.)  The  meaning
appears  to  bo  :  through  my  invocation  and  praise  I  have  reached  the  Gods,
and  with  tho  eye  of  the  spirit  have  looked  on  Agni  in  heaven.


HYMN  19.]


THE  RIGVEDA.


23


HYMN  XIX.  Agni.  Maruta.

To  this  fair  sacrifice  to  drink  the  milky  draught  thou  art  in¬
voked  :

0  Agni,  with  the  Maruta  come.

2  No  mortal  man,  no  God  exceeds  thy  mental  power,  0  Mighty

One :

0  Agni,  with  tho  Maruta  come  :

3  All  Gods  devoid  of  guile,  who  know  tho  mighty  rogion  of  mid¬

air  :

0  Agni,  with  those  Maruta  como.

4  Tho  terrible,  who  sing  tlioir  song,  not  to  bo  ovorcomo  by

might :

0  Agni,  with  those  Maruta  como.

5  Brilliant,  and  awful  in  their  form,  mighty,  dovourors  of  their

foes:

0  Agni,  with  those  Maruta  como.

6  Who  sit  as  Deities  in  heaven,  above  the  sky-vault’s  luminous

sphere :

O  Agni,  with  those  Maruts  come.

7  Who  scatter  clouds  about  the  sky,  away  over  the  billowy  sea  :
O  Agni,  with  those  Maruts  come.

8  Who  with  their  bright  beams  spread  them  forth  over  the

ocean  in  their  might :

O  Agni,  with  those  Maruts  come.

9  For  thee,  to  be  thine  early  draught,  I  pour  the  Soma-mingled

meath  :

0  Agni,  with  tho  Maruts  come.

HYMN  XX.  Jtibhus.

For  the' Celestial  Race  this  song  of  praise  which  gives  wealth
lavishly

Was  made  by  singers  with  their  lips.

2  Thoy  who  for  Iudra,  with  their  mind,  formed  horses  harnessed
by  a  word,

Attained  by  works  to  sacrifice.

1  For  the  C’eUiluil  Race  :  dndya  jdnmane,  tho  divine  clan*  or  race  of  tho
Ribhus,  tho  throe  Bonn  of  8udhanvan  who  is  said  to  havo  boon  a  descendant  of
Angiras.  They  wero  named  Bcverally  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  and  VAja  and  stylod
collectively  Ribhus  from  tho  narao  of  tho  oldest.  *  Through  tlioir  assiduous
performance  of  good  works  they  obtained  divinity  and  became  entitled  to
receive  praise  and  adoration.  Thoy  arc  supposed  to  dwell  in  the  solar  Bphero,
and  there  is  an  indistinot  identification  of  thorn  with  the  rays  of  tho  surv:  but,
whether  typical  or  not,  they  prove  tho  admission,  at  an  early  .date  of  tho  doc¬
trine  that  men  might  become  divinities.’  Wilson.


24  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

3  They  for  the  two  Nasatyas  wrought  a  light  car  moving  every

way  :

Thoy  formed  a  nectar-yielding  cow.

4  The  Ribhus  with  effectual  prayers,  honest,  with  constant

labour,  made

Their  Sire  an£  Mothor  young  again.

5  Together  camo  your  gladdoniug  drops  with  Indra  by  the

Maruta  girt,

With  the  Adityas,  with  the  Kings.

6  Tho  sacrificial  ladle,  wrought  newly  by  tho  God  Tvash Jar’s

hand —

Four  ladlos  have  ye  made  thereof.

7  Vouchsafe  us  wealth,  to  him  who  pours  thrice  seven  libations,

yoa,  to  each

Give  wealth,  ploased  with  our  eulogies.

8  As  ministering  Priests  thoy  held,  by  pious  acts  thoy  won

themselves,

A  share  in  sacrifice  with  Gods.


HYMN  XXI.  Indra-Agni.

Indra  and  Agni  I  invoke  ;  fain  are  we  for  their  song  of  praise :
Chief  Soma-drinkers  are  they  both.


8  The  two  Ndtatj/as :  the  Alvina.  See  I.  3.  3.  The  RibhuB  may  have
been  the  first  to  attempt  tho  bodily  representation  of  tho  horaea  of  Indra  and
tho  ohariot  of  tho  Asvina.

4  Sire  and  Mother:  Heaven  and  Earth,  whioh  they,  a»  doitice  of  tho
eeaaona,  refresh  and  restore  to  youth.

6  '  According  to  A?valftyana(  oe  quoted  by  SAyana,  tho  libations  offered

ttho  third  daily  (or  ovoning)  sacrifice  aro  preaented  to  Indra  along  with  the
ityaa,  together  with  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  and  Vftia,  with  Brihaanuti  and  the
Vifvaden*/  Wilton.

6  '  Tvauhlar,  in  the  Taurfipik  mythology,  ia  the  carponter  or  artiaan  of
the  Qoda:  »o  Styana  iiaya  of  him,  ho  ia  a  divinity  whoae  duty,  with  relation  to
the  Goda,  i«  carpentry . SAyana  also  call*  the  tyibhua  tho  dieoiploa  of  Tvaah-

6r...Tho  act  aacribod  to  thorn  in  tho  text,  of  making  one  ladlo  four,  haa,  pro-
bly,  rntlicr  reference  to  aomo  innovation  in  tho  objects  of  libation  than  to
tho  mere  multiplication  of  the  wooden  epoona  u*od  to  pour  out  tho  Soma  juice.
Tho  NULManjart  bajb  that  Agni,  coming  to  a  nacriflco  which  tho  Jtibhu*  ce¬
lebrated,  becamo  aa  one  of  them,  and,  therefore,  they  mado  tho  ladlo  fourfold,
that  each  might  liaro  hU  •hare/  Wilton.

7  Or  tho  '  thrice  aevon  ’  may  refor  to  rdtndni,  grant  thrice  aeven  rich  trea-
aurea.


1  Indra  and  Aani :  addrewed  conjointly  aa  a  dual  deity,  IndrAgni,  tliat  ia,
Indra-Agni.  See,  I,  17, 1.


THE  RIQYEDA.


IIYMN  22.]


25


2  Praise  ye,  0  men,  and  glorify  Indm-Agni  in  the  holy  rites  :
Sing  praise  to  them  in  sacred  songs.

3  Indra  and  Agni  we  invito,  the  Soma-drinkers,  for  the  fame
Of  Mitra,  to  tho  Sonia-draught.

4  Strong  Gods,  we  bid  them  come  to  this  libation  that  stands

ready  hero  :

Indra  and  Agni,  come  to  us.

5  Indra  and  Agni,  mighty  Lords  of  our  assembly,  crush  the

fiends :

Childless  bo  the  devouring  ones.

6  Watch  yc,  through  this  your  truthfulness,  there  in  the  placo

of  spacious  view  :

Indra  and  Agni,  send  us  bliss.

HYMN  XXII.  Afvina  and  Others.

Waken  tho  Asvin  Pair  who  yoke  their  car  at  early  morn :
may  they

Approach  to  drink  this  Soma  juico.

2  We  call  tho  Asvins  Twain,  tho  Gods  borne  in  a  noblo  car,  the

best

Of  oharioteors,  who  reach  tho  heavens.

3  Dropping  with  honey  is  your  whip,  Asvins,  and  full  of  plea¬

santness  :

Sprinkle  therewith  the  sacrifice.

4  As  yo  go  thither  in  your  cor,  not  far,  0  Asvins,  is  tho  homo
Of  him  who  offers  Soma  juico.

5  For  my  protection  I  invoko  tho  golden-handed  Savitar  :

He  knowoth,  as  a  God,  tho  placo.


8  For  the  f amt  of  Mitra :  tho  moaning  ia  not  clonr.  Mitra  appear*  to  bo
regArdod  ns  tho  guardian  of  tho  world.  SAyana  take*  Mitra  in  tho  sense  of
friond,  aud  refers  it  to  tho  institutor  of  tho  sacrifice.

5  Crush  thtfitnds :  tho  RAkahasas,  demons  who  go  about  at  night,  ensnar¬
ing  and  even  dovouring  human  beings,  disturbing  sacrifices  and  devout  men,
and  generally  hostile  to  tho  Aryan  ineo.

6  In  the  plact  of  spacious  vine :  SAvapa  explains  '  in  tho  station  whioh
preeminently  makes  known  the  experienco  of  results  (of  actions)  that  is  in
heaven  (Svarga).’  In  tho  placo  whore  what  is  hidden  will  bo  mado  known.


3  Your  whip  :  tho  madhuiafU  or  Honey-whip  of  tho  Afvins  is  perhaps  the
stimulating  morning  breeze.  Sco  Atharva-voda  IX.  1,  the  whole  of  which
hymn  is  a  glorification  of  this  wondrous  whip.

6  Savitar :  the  generator  or  vivifier,  is  a  name  of  tho  Sun,  in  the  Veda
sometimes  identified  with  and  sometimes  distinguished  from  Sftrya.


26  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  I.

6  That  ho  may  send  us  succour,  praise  the  Waters’  Offspring

Savitar :

Fain  arc  we  for  his  holy  ways.

7  Wo  call  on  him,  distributer  of  wondrous  bounty  and  of  wealth,
On  Savitar  who  looks  on  men.

8  Como  hither1",  friends,  and  seat  yourselves;  Savitar,  to  bo

praised  by  us,

Giving  good  gifts,  is  beautiful.

9  0  Agni,  hither  bring  to  us  tho  willing  Spouses  of  tho  Gods,
And  Tvaahtar,  to  tho  Soma  draught.

30  Most  youthful  Agni,  hither  bring  their  Spouses,  Hotri,  Bh&ratt,
Vardtrl,  Dhilhapft,  for  aid.

1 1  Spouses  of  Heroes,  Goddesses,  with  whole  wings  may  they  como

to  us

With  gioat  protection  and  with  aid.

12  Indrint,  Varunfini,  and  Agn&yi  hither  I  invite,

For  weal,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

13  May  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  Mighty  Pair,  bedew  for  us  our

sacrifice,

And  feed  us  full  with  nourishments.

34  Their  water  rich  with  fatness,  there  in  the  Gandharva’s  sted-
fast  place,

The  singers  taste  through  sacred  songs.


6  The  Waleri'  Offtpring  Savitar  :  son  or  offspring  of  tho  Waters,  apdm
nap  At,  is  an  opithet  more  frequently  applied  to  Agni.  SAyana  explains  it
otherwise  as  *  ono  who  docs  not  cherish  (na  pAlakam)  the  water,  but  dries  it
up  with  his  heat.'

10  Ilotrd  is  called  tho  wife  of  Agni,  or  the  personified  invocation  j  Bhdwtt
is  Holy  Speech  or  Prayer  ;  VartUri is  explained  as  ‘she  who  is  to  bo  choaon,
tho  excellent ;  ‘  and  JDhUhand  fa  said  to  bo  a  synonym  of  Vfllc  or  VAgdovI,
tho  Goddess  of  Speech.

•  11  With  w holt  wtng$t  literally,  with  undipped  wings;  that  is,  swift  as
birds  whoso  wings  have  not  boon  cut.

12  Indrdnt,  Varundnf,  and  Agndyt:  ore  respectively  the  consorts  of  Indra,
Varuria,  and  Agni.

14  Their  water  rich  in  falnest :  the  fertilising  rain  sent  by  Heaven  and
Earth.  The  meaning  appoars  to  bo  :  the  holy  singers  enjoy,  as  guerdon  for
thoir  hymns,  tho  kindly  rain  and  other  good  gifts  which  are  sent  down  from
the  regions  above  by  tho  great  parent*  Heaven  and  Earth.

The  (tandharva's  Unfa  el  place :  Though  in  later  time*  tho  Gandhnrvos  are
regarded  as  a  daw,  in  the  Rigvoda  more  than  ono  is  seldom  mentioned.  He
is  commonly  designated  as  ‘  tho  heavenly  Gandharva/  whose  habitation  is
tho  sky,  and  whose  especial  duty  fa  to  guard  the  heavenly  Soma,  which  tho
Gods  obtain  through  his  permission.


HYMN  22.  J  T1IE  MG  VEDA.  27

15  Thornless  be  thou,  0  Eiirth,  spread  wide  before  us  for  a  dwell¬

ing-place  :

Vouchsafe  us  shelter  broad  and  sure.

16  The  Gods  be  gracious  unto  us  even  from  the  place  whence

Viahpu  strodo

Through  the  seven  regions  of  the  earth  !

17  Through  all  this  world  strodo  Vishriu ;  thrice  his  foot  he

planted,  and  tho  whole
Was  gathered  in  his  footstep’s  dust.

18  Vishrui,  the  Guardian,  he  whom  none  dcccivcth,  made  three

stops  ;  thenceforth
Establishing  his  high  decrees.

19  Look  ye  on  Vishnu’s  works,  whereby  tho  Friend  of  Indra,

close-allied,

Hath  let  his  holy  ways  bo  seen.

20  Tho  princes  evormoro  behold  that  loftiost  place  whoro  Vishyu  is,
Laid  as  it  woro  an  oyo  in  heaven.

21  This,  Vishrm’s  station  most  sublimo,  tho  singors,  over  vigilant,
Lovors  of  holy  song,  light  up.


J  Vishnu:  Thin  God,  'tho  nil- pervading  or  encompassing,’  is  not  placed
in  tho  Voda  in  tho  foremost  rank  of  deities,  and,  though  froquontly  invoked
with  Indra,  Varupa,  tho  MaruU,  Kudra,  VAyu  and  tho  Aditvas,  his  superiority
to  them  is  novor  stated,  and  ho  is  oven  described  in  ono  placo  as  colobrating
tho  praise  of  Indra  and  deriving  his  power  from  that  God,  Tho  point  whioh
distinguishes  him  from  tho  other  Vodfo  deities  is  chiofly  his  striding  ovor  tho
heavens,  which  ho  is  said  to  do  in  three  paces,  oxplainod  os  denoting  tho  three¬
fold  manifestation  of  light  in  tho  form  of  firo, lightning  and  tho  sun,  or  as
designating  tho  throo  daily  stations  of  tho  sun,  in  his  rising,  culminating  and

Tho  meaning  of  tho  etensa  is  obscure :  Wilson,  after  8Ay»na,  translates :
'  May  tho  Gods  preserve  us  (from  that  portion)  of  tho  CArth  whonco  Vishnu,
(aided)  by  tho  seven  metres,  stopped,’  and  notes:  ‘According  to  the  Taitti-
rlyaa,  as  cited  by  tho  scholiast,  tho  Gods  with  Vishnu  at  their  hoad  subdued
the  invincible  earth,  using  the  seven  metres  of  tho  Veda  as  their  instruments.
SAvana  conceives  tho  text  to  allude  to  tho  Trivikrama  Avatdra,  in  which
Vishnu  traversed  tho  throo  worlds  in  throo  steps.  The  phraso  "  preserve  u«
from  tho  earth  "  implies  according  to  tho  commentary,  tho  hindorancc  of  tho
sin  of  those  inhabiting  tho  earth.'

17  The  whole  root  gathered  in  hit  footstep's  dust:  This  is  the  meaning  ac¬
cording  to  SAyana.  Vishnu  was  so  mighty  that  the  dust  raised  by  his  foot¬
step  enveloped  the  whole  world,  or  the  earth  was  formed  from  the  dust  of  bis
strides,

20  The  princes  .-  the  SOris,  the  wealthy  patrdns  of  sacrifice.

21  Light  up  :  glorify  with  their  praises.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  1,


23


HYMN  XXIII.  VAyu  and  Other*.

Stroko  are  the  Somas;  come  thou  nigh;  thoso  juices  have
been  mixt  with  milk  :

Drink,  VAyu,  the  presented  draughts.

2  Both  Doitios  who  touch  the  heaven,  Indmand  VAyu  wo  invoke.
To  drink  of  this  our  Soma  juice.

3  Tho  singors,  for.thoir  aid,  invoke  Indra  and  VAyu,  swift  as

mind,  .  ,

Tho  thousand-eyed,  tho  Lords  of  thought.

4  Mitra  and  Varuiju,  renowned  as  Gods  of  consecrated  might,

Wo  call  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

5  Those  who  by  Law  uphold  tho  Law,  Lords  of  tho  shining  light

of  Law,

Mitra  I  call,  and  Varuna.

6  Let  Varuna  bo  oxir  chief  defence,  let  Mitra  guard  us  with  all

aids :

Both  make  us  rich  exceedingly.

7  Indra,  by  Manita  girt,  we  call  to  drink  tho  Soma  juice :  may  he
Sate  him  in  union  with  his  troop.

S  Gods,  Marut  hosts  whom  India  leads,  distributers  of  Pushan’s
gifts,

Hcarkon  ye  all  unto  my  cry.

9  With  conquering  Indra  for  ally,  strike  Vritra  down,  ye  boun¬

teous  Gods  :

Lot  not  the  wicked  master  us.

10  We  call  the  Universal  Gods,  and  Maruts  to  the  Soma  draught,
For  passing  strong  aro  Pfisni’s  Sons.

1 1  Fierce  comos  tho  Maruja'  thundering  voice,  like  thatjof  con-

quorore,  when  yo  go
Forward  to  victory,  0  Mon.

12  Bom  of  the  laughing  lightning,  may  tho  Maruts  guard  us

ovorywhoro :

May  they  bo  graoious  unto  us.

Thi*  hymn  i«  oddrcMcd  to  VAyu,  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  tho  Vijve  Dovas,
PAahau,  tho  Water*,  Agui.

1  fjovdt  of  thought:  dht,  thought,  means  especially  in  the  Veda  holy
thought,  devotion,  prayer,  a  roligioua  rite,  a  nacrince.

8  PrfcAan  ia  tho  guardian  of  flock*  and  herd*  and  of  property  in  general.

10  Pfifnirndtarah :  Prieni’a  *on»,  those  who  have  for  their  mother  Pn$m,
the  many-coloured  earth  or  the  speckled  cloud  ;  tho  Mavuta.

11  0  Max ;  0  heroic  Maruts,


A


HYMN  23.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  29

13  Like  some  lost  animal,  drive  to  us,  bright  Pflahan,  him  who

bears  up  heaven,-
Besting  on  many-coloured  grass.

14  Pualian  tho  Bright  has  found  the  King,  concealed  and.. hidden

•  in  a  _c&vo,

Who  rests  on  grass  of  many  hues.

15  And  may  ho  duly  bring  to  mo  the  six  bound  closely,  through

•  these  drops,

As  one  who  ploughs  with  steers  brings  corn.

16  Along  their  paths  tho  Mothers  go,  Sisters  of  priestly  ministrants»
Mingling  thoir  sweetness  with  the  milk.

17  May  Waters  gatherod  near  tho  Sun,  and  those  whorowith  tho

Sun  is  joined,

Spood  forth  this  sacrifice  of  ours.

18  1  call  tho  Waters,  Goddesses,  whoroin  our  cattlo  quonoh  thoir

thirst ;

Oblations  to  tho  Streams  bo  givon.

19  Amrit  is  in  tho  Wators  ;  in  tho  Waters  thcro  is  hoaling  balm  :
Bo  swift,  ye  Gods,  to  givo  thorn  praise.

20  Within  the  Wators— Soma  thus  hath  told  me — dwell  all  balms

that  heal,

And  Agni,  ho  who  blesscth  all.  Tho  Wators  hold  all  medicines.

21  0  Wators,  teem  with  medicine  to  keep  my  body  safe  from  harm,
So  that  I  long  frny-«ec  the-Snn.

22  Whatever  sin  is  found  in  me,  whatever  evil  I  havo  wrought,

If  I  have  lied  or  falsoly  sworn,  Waters,  remove  it  far  from  mo.

23  Tho  Waters  I  this  day  havo  sought,  and  to  thoir  moisturo

have  wo  como  :

0  Agni,  rich  in  milk,  como  thou,  and  with  thy  splendour
cover  me.


13  Him  who  bears  up  heaven :  Soma,  the  juico  whioh  prompts  tho  world-
sustaining  doodB  of  the  Gods.

1 4  The  King :  Soma.

.  Concealed  and  hidden  in  a  cave  :  in  a  place  difficult  of  access  ;  tho  refer¬
ence  in  to  tho  flight  of  Agni.  See  III.  9.  4.

15  'The  six :  the  six  seasons,  spring,  summer,  the  rains,  autumn,  winter,  the
dews.  Through  these  drops :  May  this  libation  induce  him  to  bring,  etc.

16  The  Mothers:  the  Waters,  regarded  ns  the  close  allies  of  the  priests,  as
they  arc  mingled  with  the  ingredients  of  tho  Soma  libation.

lfl  Amrit :  nectar,  tho  drink  thatconfers  immortality  ;  tho  Groek  Ambrosia.
20  Soma  thus  /uith  told  vie  :  Soma  is  especially  lord  of  medicinal  plants.


a


30  •  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  1.

24  Fill  me  with  splendour,  Agui ;  give  offspring  and  length  of
days ;  the  Gods

Shall  know  mo  oven  as  I  am,  and  Agni,  with  tho  Rishis,  know.

HYMN  XXIV.  Vampa  and  Other..

Who  now  is'  he,  what  God  among  the  Immortals,  of  whoso
auspicious  name  wo  may  bethink  us  ?

Who  shall  to  mighty  Aditi  restore  us,  that  I  may  sco  my
Father  and  my  Mothor  1

2  Agni  tho  God  tho  first  among  tho  Immortals,— of  his  auspioi-

ous  name  let  us  bethink  us.

He  shall  to  mighty  Aditi  reatoro  us,  that  I  may  seo  my  Futlior
and  my  Mothor.

3  To  theo,  0  Savitar,  tho  Lord  of  precious  things,  who  holpest  us
Continually,  for  our  share  wo  come —

4  Wealth,  highly  lauded  ore  reproach  hath  fallen  on  it,  which  is

laid,

Free  from  all  hatred,  in  thy  hands.


24  Indra  with  the  Rishis :  Perhaps  the  seven  great  Rishis  are  intended,—
Mavtchi,  Atri,  Angiras,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  and  VasishUia.

*  This  hymn,  addressed  to  Varuna,  Prajapati,  Agni,  Savitar,  and  Bliaga,  ia
the  first  of  a  series  attributed  to  Suna^fepa,  the  son  of  Ajtgnrta.  The  legend
is  told  in  full  detail  in  the  Aitareua  Brdhmum.  A  king,  named  Harifchaudra,
worships  Varuna  in  order  to  obtain  anon,  promising  to  sacrifice  to  him  his
first-born.  A  son  ia  bom,  named  Rohita  ;  but  tho  king  delays  tho  sacrifice
until  Rohita  grow,  up,  when  his  father  communicate,  to  him  his  intended
fate.  Rohita  refuses  submission,  and  .pends  several  yours  in  the  forest  away
from  home.  There,  at  last,  ho  meets  with  Ajlgarta,  a  Rishi  in  great  distress,
and  porsuodea  him  to  part  with  his  second  son  ^unal^opa  to  bo  offered,  as  a
substitute,  to  Varupa.  ?un»l  fopa  is  about  to  be  sacrificed,  when,  by  the  ad¬
vice  of  Vifvftmitra,  one  of  tho  officiating  priests,  he  appeal,  to  the  Gods,  and
is  liberated.  See  Wilson,  Rigitda,  i.  p.  CO.,  Muir,  0,  S.  Texts,  i.  355,  407,
413,  and  M.  Mtlllcr,  A.  S.  Literature,  p,  408.

1  Mighty  Aditi:  Professor  MUllor  (Trans,  of  the  Rigttda,  1.  230)
says  that  rAdlti,  an  ancient  god  or  goddess,  is  in  reality  tho  oarliost  name
Invoutcd  to  express  tho  Infinite  ;  not  tho  Infinite  os  tho  result  of  a  long  pro-
coni  of  abstract  reasoning,  but  tho  visiblo  Infinite,  tho  endless  expanso  boyoud
tho  earth,  beyond  tho  clouds,  beyond  the  sky.*

'  These  word.  [Who  shall  to  mighty  Aditi  restore  u.  1 J  may  bo  underst<»od
as  spoken  by  some  one  in  danger  of  death.. .who  prayed  to  be  nermitted  agaiu
to  behold  tho  foco  of  nature. ..If  wo  should  understand  the  father  anil  mother
whom  the  suppliant  is  anxious  to  behold,  as  moauing  heaven  and  earth,  it
would  become  still  more  probable  that  Aditi  is  to  bo  understood  as  meaning
nature.’  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  v.  45.

Sftyapa  explains  Aditi  iu  the  text  as  Eart  h  ;  Roth,  M  freedom  or  security  ;
Beufey,  as  siulessness.


TUB  MOVED  A.


Ill


HYMN  2-i.  J


5  Through  thy  protection  may  wo  come  to  even  the  height  of

affluence

Which  Bhaga  hath  dealt  out  to  us.

6  Ne’er  have  those  birds  that  fly  through  air  attained  to  thy

high  dominion  or  thy  might  or  spirit ;

Nor  these  the  waters  that  flow  on  for  ever,  nor  hills,  abaters
of  the  wind’s  wild  fury.

7  Varuna,  King,  of  hallowed  might,  sustaincth  erect  the  Tree’s

stein  in  the  baseless  region.

Its  rays,  whoso  root  is  high  above,  stream  downward.  Deep
may  they  sink  within  us,  and  be  hidden.

8  King  Varuna  hath  made  a  spacious  pathway,  a  pathway  for

the  Sun  whoroin  to  travel.

Whore  no  way  was  ho  made  him  set  his  footstep,  and  warned
.  afar  whato’or  afflicts  the  spirit.

9  A  hundred  balms  are  thine,  0  King,  a  thousand;  deep  and

wido-rcuohing  also  be  thy  favours.

Far  from  us,  far  away  drive  thou  Destruction.  Put  from  us
o’on  the  sin  we  have  committed.

10  Whither  by  day  depart  tho  constellations  that  shine  at  night,

sot  high  in  Uoaven  above  us  1

Varuoa's  holy  laws  remain  unweakonod,  and  through  tho  night
tho  Moon  moves  on  in  splondour.

11  I  ask  this  of  thoo  with  my  prayer  adoring ;  thy  worshipper

cravos  this  with  his  oblation.

Yarupa,  stay  thou  hero  and  bo  not  angry ;  stoal  not  our  lifo
from  us,  0  thou  Wido-Rulor.

12  Nightly  and  daily  this  one  thing  they  toll  mo,  this  too  tho

thought  of  mine  own  heart  ropcatoth.

May  ho  to  whom  nrayod  fettered  Sunah?cpa,  may  ho  tho
Sovran  Varuya  release  us.


6  Which  Bhaga  hath  dealt  out  to  us  :  tho  riches  which  the  distributor  of
wealth,  Bhaga,  Fate  or  Fortune,'  has  allotted  to  us.

7  Vdnasya  slttpan  in  the  text  aj>pear»  to  moan  '  the  stem  of  the  tree,’  and
Sllyana’s  explanation  1  the  mass  or  pile  of  light’  seems  forced  and  unnatural
Tho  phrase  is  not  clear,  but  perhaps  the  anciout  myth  of  tho  world- tree,  the
source  of  life,  may  bo  alludod  to.

9  Nbrlti  is  Decay  or  Destruction  personihed,  tho  Goddces  of  death  and
corruption.  Sftyana  calls  her  pdpadetatd,  tho  dolty  of  sin.

10  Varuna’s  holy  laws :  Varuna  is  the  chief  of  the  lords  of  natural  order.
Hia  activity  displays  itself  preeminently  in  tho  control  of  the  most  regular
phenomena  of  nature.  See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigvcda,  p.  97  f.  Tho
connexion  appears  to  bo  :  Fear  not :  tho  laws  of  Varuna  are  inviolable,  and
the  constellations  will  duly  reappear.


84  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

21  Rcleaso  us  from  the  uppor  bond,  untie  the  bond  between,  and
loose

The  bonds  below,  that  I  may  live.

HYMN  XXVI.  Agni.

0  worthy  of  *  oblation,  Lord  of  prospering  powers,  assume  thy
robes,

And  offer  this  our  sacrifice.

2  Sit,  ovor  to  bo  chosen,  ns  our  Priest,  most  youthful,  through

our  hymns,

0  Agni,  through  our  heavenly  word.

3  For  hero  nFathor  for  his  son,  Kinsman  for  kinsman  worshipped),
And  Friend,  choice-worthy,  for  his  friend.

4  Here  lot  the  foe-destroyers  sit,  Vatutin,  Mitra,  Aryamnn,

Liko  men,  upon  our  snored  grass.

5  0  ancient  Herald,  bo  thou  glad  in  this  our  rite  and  fellowship:
Hcarkeu  thou  well  to  these  our  songs.

6  Whate’er  in  this  perpetual  courso  wc  sacrifice  to  God  aud

God,

That  gift  is  offered  up  in  thee.

7  May  he  be  our  dear  household  Lord,  Priest,  pleasant  and

choice-worthy :  may
We,  with  bright  fires,  be  dear  to  him.

8  The  Gods,  adored  with  brilliant  fires,  have  granted  precious

wealth  to  us :

So,  with  bright  fires,  wo  pray  to  thee.

9  And,  0  Immortal  One,  so  may  the  eulogies  of  mortal  men
Belong  to  us  and  thco  alike.

10  With  all  thy  fires,  0  Agni,  find  pleasure  in  this  our  sacrifice,
And  this  our  spooch,  0  Son  of  Strength.


21  Mean  from  eAi  upper  betid:  boo  1. 24. 16.

1  Auumethu  robet:  elotlio  thyself  in  thy  vorturo  of  flame*.

2  Mott  youthful:  ooutlnually  renewed  for  sacrifice,  either  from  tho  house-
hold  tiro  or  by  ropcnUxl  attrition.

a  Por  here  a  Father  for  hit  ton  :  Agni,  who  stands  In  tho  plaoo  of  father,
kiu> man,  and  friond  to  hl»  worshippor.

4  aryaman ;  tho  naino  of  an  Adliya  commonly  invokad  together  with
Varuoa  and  Mitra.  Ho  in  laid  to  preside  over  twilight.

6  Like  men:  or,  aooording  to  SAyapa,  as  they  sato  at  tho  sacrifice  of
Manus,  who  is  the  same  as  Menu.

10  Son  of  Strength:  tho  appellation  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  is  some¬
times  applied  to  Indra  also  as  a  specially  mighty  God.  The  expression,  ap¬
plied  to  Agni,  aludes  to  the  strength  employed  in  rubbing  together  the  two
piece*  of  wood  to  generate  fire.


HYMN  27.  J


THE  RIOVEDA.


35

HYMN  XXVII.  Agni.

With  worship  will  I  glorify  thoe,  Agni,  liko  a  long-tailed  steed,
Imperial  Lord  of  sacred  rites.

2  May  the  far-striding  Son  of  Strength,  bringor  of  great

folicity,  *

Who  pours  his  gifts  liko  rain,  bo  ours.

3  Lord  of  all  life,  from  near,  from  far,  do  thou,  0  Agni  overmore
Protect  us  from  tho  sinful  man.

4  0  Agni,  graciously  announce  this  our  oblation  to  tho  Gods,
And  this  our  nowoat  song  of  praise.

5  Give  us  a  sharo  of  strength  most  high,  a  share  of  strength

that  is  bolow,

A  sharo  of  strongth  that  is  botweon.

6  Thou  dealest  gifts,  resplendent  Ono ;  nigh,  as  with  waves  of
x  .Sindhu,  thou

S'vTfl  sl'rearacst  to  the  worshipper.

7  That  man  is  lord  of  endless  strength  whom  thou  protcctest  in

the  fight,

Agni,  or  urgest  to  the  fray.

8  Him,  whosoever  he  may  be,  no  man  may  vanquish,  mighty  One:
Nay,  very  glorious  power  is  his.

9  May  he  who  dwolls  with  all  mankind  bear  us  with  war-steeds

through  the  fight,

And  with  the  singers  win  the  spoil.

10  Help,  thou  who  knowest  lauds,  this  work,  this  eulogy  to

Rudra,  him

Adorablo  in  evory  house.

11  May  this  our  God,  great,  limitless,  smoke-bannered,  oxcol-

lontly  bright,

Urgo  us  to  strongth  and  holy  thought.


1  Like  a  long-tailed  Heed :  Agni,  or  Fire,  in  likened  to  a  homo,  probably,
on  account  of  his  impotuosity  :  and  hi*  long  Humes,  curled  and  drive))  by
tho  wind,  oro  comporod  to  tho  horse's  flowing  toil.  SAyana  explains  :  scat-
toring  our  foes  with  thy  Homos  as  a  homo  brushes  away  tho  flios  that
trouble  him.

6  Sindhu :  tho  Indus ;  or  tho  word  may  stand  for  any  rivor,  aud  tho
oxpreosion  mean,  with  groat  nbuudanoo.

9  With  the  lingen :  tho  priosts  who  sing  hymns  of  praiso  at  tho  sacrifice.

10  Thou  who  knowat  lauds;  (jardlodha)  seems  to  refor  to  the  ^ishi  or
poet  of  tho  hymn,  not  to  Agni.

Rudra ;  tho  Roarer,  or  Howlor,  is  horo  a  name  of  Agni,  on  account  of
the  loud  crackling  or  roaring  of  his  flames.  Or  tho  word  may  signify  red.
bright.  See  Pischel,  Vcdiaohe  Studien,  1.  pp.  55  sqq.


38


THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  I.


12  Liko  some  rich  Lord  of  men  may  he,  Agni,  the  banner  of

tho  Gods,

Refulgent,  hear  us  through  our  lauds.

13  Glory  to  Gods,  tho  mighty  and  tho  lessor,  glory  to  Gods  tho

younger  aud  tho  older !

Let  us,  if  wa  have  power,  pay  tho  Gods  worship :  no  bettor
prayor  thau  this,  yo  Gods,  acknowledge.

HYMN  XXVIII.  indra,  Eto.

Tiirre  where  tho  broad-based  stono  is  raised  on  high  to  press
tho  juices  out,

0  Indra,  drink  with  eager  thirst  tho  droppings  which  tho
mortar  sheds.

2  Where,  like  brood  hips,  to  hold  tho  juice,  the  platters  of  tho

proas  arc  laid,

0  Indra,  drink  with  eager  thirst  the  droppings  which  the
mortar  sheds.

3  There  where  the  woman  marks  and  learns  the  pestle’s  constant

rise  an<l  fall,

0  Indra,  drink  with  eager  thirst  the  droppings  which  tho
mortar  sheds.

4  Where,  as  with  reins  to  guide  a  horse,  they  bind  tho  churning-

staff  with  cords,

0  Indra,  drink  with  oagor  thirst  tho  droppings  which  the
mortar  sheds.


5  If  of  a  truth  in  every  house,  0  Mortar,  thou  art  sot  for
work,

Here  give  thou  forth  thy  clearest  sound,  loud  as  tho  drum  of

-rrm(]uoiorn.  *  **


12  The  banner  of  lAe  Gods  ;  who  liko  a  bauiier  brings  tho  Gods  together  ;  or
it  way  bo  rendered  •  tho  herald  of  tho  God*,'  he  who  notifies  to  thorn,  as
Sdyniia  explains  it.

13  These  distinctions  of  greater  and  leaser,  oldor  and  younger  Gods,,  or  as
wo  should  say,  angels,  are  nowhere  further  oxplaiuod.  ^unahsepa,  It  is  said,

Stho  advice  of  Agni,  worships  tho  Visvodevas  or  the  Universal  Gods.  Tho
fvedeyas,  as  a  soparato  troop  or  class  of  Gods,  aro  ton  in  number,  especially
worshipped  at  funeral  obsequies,  and  moroovor,  according  to  tho  laws  of  Manu,
entitled  to  daily  offerings.

This  hvmn— a  song  sung  during  tho  preparation  of  tho  Soma  juice— is  said
to  he  addressed  to  Indra,  and  to  the  pestle  and  mortar  aud  other  utensils
used  in  tho  work.

2  Platters :  two  shallow  plates,  ono  being  used  as  a  receiver  and  the  other
as  a  cover.

Thty  bind  the  churning-staff  with  cords :  tho  churning -stick  is  movod  by
a  rope  passod  round  ita  handle  and  round  a  post  used  as  a  pivot.

6  0  Mortar :  according  to  Sftyana  the  divinities  presiding  over  the  mortar
and  pestle,  and  not  the  implements  themselves,  arc  addressed.


C


HYMN  29.}  THE  RIG  VEDA.  37

6  6  Sovran  of  the  Forest,  as  the  wind  blows  soft  in  front  of

thee,

Mortar,  for  Indra  press  thou  forth  the  Soma  juice  that  he  may
drink.

7  Best  strength-givers,  ye  stretch  wide  jaws,  0  Sacrificial  Imple¬

ments,

Liko  two  bay  horses  champing  herbs.

8  Yo  Sovrans  of  the  Forest,  both  swift,  with  swift  pressers  proas

to-day

Swoct  Soma  juioo  for  Indm’s  drink.

9  Take  up  in  beakers  what  remains :  the  Soma  on  the  filter

pour,

And  ou  tho  ox-hide  sot  tho  dregs.

HYMN  XXIX.  Indra.

O  Soma-dri.vkbr,  ever  truo,  utterly  hopoless  though  we  bo,

Do  thou,  O  Indra,  givo  us  hopo  of  beauteous  horses  and  of  kino,
In  thousands,  0  most  woalthy  One.

2  0  Lord  of  Strongth,  whoso  jaws  aro  strong,  groat  deeds  are

thiuc,  tho  powerful :

Do  thou,  0  Indra,  givo  us  hope  of  boautcous  horses  and  of  kine,
In  thousands,  0  most  wealthy  One.

3  Lull  thou  asloop,  to  wako  no  moro,  the  pair  who  ou  oach

other  look :

Do  thou,  0  Indra,  givo  ns  hopo  of  bcautoous  horsos  and  of  kino,
In  thousands,  O  most  wealthy  Ono.

4  Hero,  lot  hostile  spirits  sloop,  and  every  gentler  genius  wake :
Do  thou,  0  Indra,  givo  us  hopo  of  bcautoous  homos  and  of  kino,
In  thousands,  0  most  wealthy  Ono.


G  0  Sovran  of  the  Porul :  (vanai/xiti)  n  largo  troo  ;  used  in  this  place,  by
metonymy,  for  the  mortar,  and  in  verse  8,  in  the  dual  number,  for  the  mortar
and  pestle.  •

7  Strength- givers :  explained  by  Sdyana  as  especially  givers  of  food.  Tho
two  platters  mentioned  abovo  are  probably  meant.  When  tho  upper  platter
is  raised  to  roocivo  tho  juice  of  the  Soma  stalks  the  aperture  between  tho  two
is  like  a  horse’s  mouth  when  he  chows  Bucculcnt  grass.

9'  This  verse  is  addressed  to  the  ministcriug  priest.  What  rttmina :  after
tho  libation.  The  filter  or  sieve  was  u&od  to  purify  tho  juice  before  it  was
poured  into  tho  receptacle.  Ox  hide :  laid  under  tho  mortar.

3  The  pair  who  on  each  other  look :  '  The  text  is  very  elliptical  and  obscure.
It  is,  literally  :  Put  to  sleep  the  two  reciprocally  looking :  let  them  sleep,  not
being  awakened.  The  Scholiast  calls  them  the  two  female  messengers  of
Yama  [tho  God  of  tho  Doad].‘  Wilson.


*  THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  7.

5  Destroy  this  ass,  0  Indra,  who  in  tones  discordant  brays  to  tliee  :
Do  thou,  0  Indra,  give  us  hope  of  beauteous  horses  and  of  kine,

y  In  thousands,  0  most  wealthy  One.

6  Far  distant  on  the  foreBt  fall  the  tempest  in  a  oircling  courso  !
Do  thou,  0  Indra,  give  us  hopo  of  boauteous  horses  and  of  kino,
In  thousands;  0  most  wealthy  Ono.

7  Slay  each  revilor,  and  destroy  him  who  in  secret  injures  us :
Do  thou,  0  Indra,  give  us  hope  of  boauteous  horses  and  of  kino
In  thousands,  0  most  wealthy  Ono.

HYMN  XXX.  Indra.

Wa  seeking  strength  with  Soma-drops  fill  full  your  Indra
like  a  woll,

Most  liberal,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,

2  Who  lets  a  hundred  of  the  pure,  a  thousand  of  the  milk-blent

draughts

Flow,  even  as  down  a  depth,  to  him ;

3  When  for  the  strong,  tho  rapturous  joy  he  in  this  manner

hath  made  room
Within  his  belly,  like  the  sea.

4  This  is  thine  own.  Thou  drawest  near,  as  turns  a  pigeon  to

his  mate :

Thou  carest  too  for  this  our  prayer.

5  0  Hero,  Lord  of  Bounties,  praised  in  hymns,  may  power  and

joyfulneea

Bo  his  who  sings  the  laud  to  thee.

6  Lord  of  a  Hundred  Powers,  stand  up  to  lend  us  succour  in

this  fight :

In  others  too  let  us  agree.

7  In  every  need,  in  every  fray  we  call  as  friends  to  succour  us
Indra  tho  mightiest  of  all.


6  Thu  an  t  our  adversary,  says  tho  Scholiast.  *  Therefore  is  he  called  mi
mu,  an  braying,  or  uttering  harsh  sounds  intolerable  to  hear.*

6  Par  dittant  on  the  forul :  may  tho  cydono  or  tompont  oxrend  It*  fury  on
•he  wood,  and  not  oome  nigh  us.  Tho  word  kundrinSchi,  which  I  hnvo  render¬
ed  in  aooordance  with  SAyaya,  moans  elsewhere  n  certain  kind  of  aiiimhl,  a
liwird  according  to  SAyana.  Thi»  possago  may  porliajn  mean,  *  may  tho  wind
fall  on  the  forest  with  tho  kunfrinflcM,  whatever  that  may  bo.

1  Lord  of  Hundred  Pawn :  ?atakratu.

.  3  The  itrong,  the  rapturoui  joy :  tho  exhilarating  Soma  juico.

4  Thu  it  thine  otm:  this  Soida  libation  is  for  thee  alono.
d  In  (hit  fight ;  the  hymn  ia  a  prayer  for  uid  in  a  coming  battle.


TUB  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  30.]


3#


8  If  he  will  hear  us  let  him  come  with  succour  of  a  thousand  kinds,
And  all  that  strengthens,  to  our  call.

0  I  call  him  mighty  to  resist,  the  Hero  of  our  ancient  home,
Thee  whom  my  siro  invoked  of  old.

10  We  pray  to  thee,  0  much-invoked,  rich  in  all  precious  gifts,

0  Friend,

Kind  God  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

1 1  0  Soma-drinkor,  Thunder-armed,  Friend  of  our  lovoly-fcatured

dames

And  of  our  Soma-drinking  frionds.

1 2  Thus,  Soma-drinkor,  may  it  bo :  thus,  Friend,  who  wioldest

thuudor,  act

To  aid  each  wish  as  we  dcsiro.


13  With  Indra  splendid  feasts  bo  ours,  rich  in  all  strengthening

things  wherewith,

Woalthy  in  food,  we  may  rojoice.

14  Like  thee,  thyself,  the  singers’  Friend,  thou  movest,  as  it  wore,

besought,

Bold  One,  the  axle  of  the  car,

1 5  That,  Satakratu,  thou  to  grace  and  please  thy  praisers,  as  it  were,
Stirrest  the  axle  with  thy  strength.

With  champing,  neighing,  loudly-snorting  horses  Indra  hath
ever  won  himself  great  treasures.

A_car  ofgold  hath  he  whose  deeds  are  wondrous  received  from
us,  anfriet  us  too  receive  it.

Como,  Asvins,  with  enduring  strength  wealthy  in  horses  and
in  kine,

And  gold,  0  ye  of  wondrous  deeds.


1G


17


0  The  Hero  of  our  ancient  home :  tho  tutolary  God  of  our  family.

11  Friend  of  our  lovely -featured  donut. ‘  the  meaning  of  fiprlntndm  in  tho
text  is  vary  doubtful.  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  paraphrases  :  (bestow  upon)
ua,  thy  friends,  (abundance  of  cow*)  with  projecting  jaw*,  llenfoy  take*  tho
word  to  moon  beautiful  women.  Ludwig  suggest*  holmotcd,  from  a  possible
form  fiprtyi,  agreeing  with  vtf'tta,  of  men,  understood.  •  Both  considers  tho
reading  to  bo  faulty,  and  suggests,  fiprintvan,  in  tho  vocativo  c»*o,  agreeing
with  Soma-drinker.

14  Tho  lines  in  this  and  tho  following  stoma  referring  to  tho  axlo  and  tho
chariot  or  wain  aro  somewhat  olwcuro  and  liavs  boon  variously  interpreted.
Ludwig’s  explanation,  which  I  follow,  appears  to  lie  the  simplest  aud  tho  host.
Tho  expression,  movcot,  or  stirrest,  tho  axlo,  which  is  tho  firmest  and  strongest
part  of  tho  car,  ia  intended  to  signify  Indra’s  great  strength  exorted  at  his
worshippers’  prayer.

16  The  hymn  really  ends  with  tho  prooediug  stanza.  The  ear  of  add  given
to  Iudra  is  the  hymn.  The  car  of  gold  prayed  for  is  abundant  wealth.


40  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

18  Your  chariot  yoked  for  both  alike,  immortal,  ye  of  mighty  acts,
Travels,  0  Asvius,  in  the  sea.

1 9  High  on  the  forehead  of  the  Bull  one  chariot  wheel  ye  ever  keep,
The  other  round  the  sky  revolves.

20  What  mortal,  0  immortal  Dawn,  cujoyeth  thee?  Where

lovest  thou  ?

To  whom,  0  radiant,  dost  thou  go  ?

2 1  For  we  have  had  thee  in  our  thoughts  whether  anear  or  far  away,
Red-hued  and  like  a  dappled  mare.

22  Hither,  0  Daughter  of  the  Sky,  come  thou  with  these  thy

strengthenings,

And  scud  thou  riches  down  to  us.

HYMN  XXXI.  Agni.

Thou,  Agni,  wast  the  earliest  Angiras,  a  Seer ;  thou  wast,  a
God  thyself,  the  Gods’  auspicious  Friend.

After  thy  holy  ordinance  the  Maruts,  sage,  active  through
wisdom,  with  their  glittering  spears,  were  born.

2  0  Agni,  thou,  the  best  and  earliest  Angiras,  fulfillest  as  a  Sage

the  holy  law  of  Gods,

Sprung  from  two  mothers,  wise,  through  all  existence  spread,
resting  in  many  a  place  for  sake  of  living  man.

3  To  Matarisvan  first  thou,  Agni,  wast  disclosed,  and  to  Yivas-

v&n  through  thy  noble  inward  power.

Heaven  and  Earth,  Vasu !  shook  at  the  choosing  of  the  Priest :
the  burthen  thou  didst  bear,  didst  worship  mighty  Gods.

18  The  tea :  the  ocean  of  air.

19  The  Bull:  apparently  the  Sim.  The  car  of  the  Asvins  stands  at  his
head  or  in  front  of  him,  and  the  Afvins  precede  him  in  his  course  round
heaven.  But  the  meaning  is  not  very  clear.

20  We  are  reminded  of  the  old  Grecian  myth  of  Eos  and  Tithonu*.  Ushas,
Dawn,  or  Morning,  is  the  daughter  of  personified  Heaven,  Dyaus,  or  Dyu.

This  hymn,  and  the  four  following,  are  ascribed  to  Hiranyastfipa,  son
of  Angiras.

1  Thou,  Agni,  roast  the  earliest  Angiras :  the  Angi roses  are  the  most  im¬
portant  priestly  family  mentioned  in  the  Veda.  See  I.  1.  6.

With  their  glittering  spears :  the  spears  of  the  Maruts  or  Storm-Gods  are
lightning  flashes.

2  The  holy  law  of  Gods :  sacrifice  to  the  Gods,  which  Agni  performs.

Sprung  front  two  mothers :  from  the  two  pieces  of  wood  used  to  produce  fire.

8  Mdlariftan:  the  name  of  a  divine  being  described  in  I.  60.1  as  cringing  the

hidden  Agni  to  Bhrigu,  and  identified  by  SAvaua  with  Vftyu  tho  God  of  wind.

Vinuvdn:  'the  brilliant;'  he  appears  to  be  the  God  of  daylight  and  the
morning  sun,  the  personification  of  all  manifestations  of  light.  Ho  is  said  to
bo  the  father  of  Yama,  and  tho  Gods  are  called  his  offspring.

Yasu :  (good)  often  used  as  a  name  or  epithet  of  Agni.  The  Vasus  as  a  class
of  Gods,  eight  in  number,  were  at  first  personifications  of  natural  phenomena.


r


TUB  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  31.]


41


4  Agni  thou  madest  heaven  to  thunder  for  mankind ;  thou,  yet

more  pious,  for  pious  Pm-firavils.

When  thou  art  rapidly  freed  from  thy  parents,  first  eastward
they  bear  thee  round,  and,  after,  to  the  west.

5  Thou,  Agni,  art  a  Bull  who  makes  our  store  increase,  to  be

invoked  by  him  who  lifts  the  ladle  up.  i
Well  knowing  the  oblation  with  the  hallowing  word,  uniting  all
who  live,  thou  lightenest  first  our  folk.

6  Agni,  thou  savest  in  the  synod  when  pursued  e’en  him,  far-

seeing  One  !  who  walks  in  evil  ways.

Thou,  when  the  heroes  fight  for  spoil  which  men  rush  round,
slayest  in  war  the  many  by  the  hands  of  few.

7  For  glory,  Agni,  day  by  day,  thou  liftest  up  the  mortal  man

to  highest  immortality, —

Even  thou  who  yearning  for  both  races  givest  them  great
bliss,  and  to  the  prince  grantest  abundant  food.

8  0  Agni,  highly  lauded,  make  our  singer  famous  that  he  may

win  us  store  of  riches  :

May  we  improve  the  rite  with  new  performance.  O  Earth  and
Heaven,  with  all  the  Gods,  protect  us.

9  0  blameless  Agni  lying  in  thy  Parents’  lap,  a  God  among  the

Gods,  be  watchful  for  our  good.

Formor  of  bodies,  be  the  singer’s  Providence  :  all  good  things
hast  thou  sown  for  him,  auspicious  Ono  !

10  Agni,  thou  art  our  Providence,  our  Father  thou :  we  are  thy
brethren  and  thou  art  our  spring  of  life.

In  thee,  rich  in  good  heroes,  guard  of  high  decrees,  meet  hund¬
red,  thousand  treasures,  0  infallible  !


4  Purtlravds :  non  of  Budha.  Ho  is  said  to  have  instituted  the  three  sacri¬
ficial  fires.  Agni,  to  reward  him,  sent  thunder  the  forerunner  of  rain.

Freed  from  thy  parents :  produced  and  separated  from  the  fire-sticks.

Eastward  they  bear  thee :  the  fire  is  first  applied  to  light  the  Ahavanlya  fire
and  then  the  Gikrhapatya.

5  A  Bull :  exceedingly  strong.

TfifA  the  hallowing  word :  the  exclamation  Vashat  (may  he  (Agni)  bear
it  (to  the  GodB),  used  at  the  moment  of  pouring  the  Bacriflcial  oil  or  clarified
butter  on  the  fire.

6  Agni,  thou  savest  in  the  synod :  the  riddtha,  synod  or  sacrificial  assembly,
seems  to  have  been  regarded  as  an  inviolable  asylum.

7  Both  races :  Gods  and  men.

The  prince :  the  Sflri,  the  noble  or  eminent  man  who  institutes  and  pays
the  charges  of  the  sacrifice.

9  Thy  Parents :  here  said  to  mean  Heaven  and  Earth.

Former  of  bodies ;  giver  of  children.


42  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOON  /.

11  Thee,  Agni,  have  the  Gods  made  the  first  living  One  for  living

man,  Lord  of  the  house  of  Nahusha.

Ha  they  made  the  teacher  of  the  sons  of  men,  what  time  a  Son
was  born  to  the  father  of  my  race.

12  Worthy  to  bo  revered,  0  Agni,  God,  preserve  our  wealthy

patrons  with  thy  succours,  and  ourselves.

Guard  of  our  seed  art  thou,  aiding  our  cows  to  bear,  inces¬
santly  protecting  in  thy  holy  way.

13  Agni,  thou  art  a  guard  close  to  the  pious  man;  kindled  art

thou,  four-eyed  !  for  him  who  is  unarmed.

With  fond  heart  thou  acceptest  e’en  the  poor  man’s  prayer,
when  he  hath  brought  his  gift  to  gain  security.

14  Thou,  Agni  gainest  for  the  loudly-praising  priest  the  highest

wealth,  tho  object  of  a  man’s  desire.  .

Thou  art  called  Father,  caring  even  for  tho  weak,  and,  wisest,
to  tho  simple  one  thou  tcachest  loro.

15  Agni,  tho  man  who  givoth  guerdon  to  tho  priests,  like  well-

sown  armour  thou  guardest  on  every  side.

He  who  with  grateful  food  shows  Uindnoss  in  his  house,  an
offerer  to  tho  living,  is  tho  type  of  heaven.

1C  Pardon,  we  pray,  this  sin  of  ours,  0  Agni, — tho  path  which
wo  havo  trodden,  widely  straying,

Dear  Friend  and  Father,  caring  for  tho  pious,  who  speodest
nigli  and  who  iuspircst  mortals.

17  As  orst  to  Manus,  to  YayAti,  Angirns,  so  Augirns  !  pure  Agni !

como  thou  to  our  hall.

Bring  hither  the  celostial  host  and  seat  them  hero  upon  the
snored  grass,  and  offer  what  thoy  lovo.

18  By  this  our  prayer  be  thou,  0  Agni,  strengthened,  prayer

made  by  us  after  our  power  and  knowledge.

Lead  thou  us,  therefore,  to  increasing  riches ;  endow  us  with
thy  strength-bestowing  favour.


1 1  Nahutha :  one  of  the  great  progenitors  of  tho  human  raco.

Jld:  the  personification  of  prayer,  and  tho  first  teacher  of  tho  rules  of
sacrifice.

What  time  a  Son  uat  lorn ;  this  Son  is  Agui  himself.

Hiranyastdpa,  tho  Rislii  of  the  hymn,  is  the  son  or  descendant  of  Angiraa,
who,  as  one  of  the  first  introducers  of  the  sacrificial  firo  and  the  rites  of
worship,  is  regarded  as  the  generator  or  father  of  Agni.  Tho  moaning  of  tho
verse  is  that  Agui  was  appointed  priest,  and  I|A  teachor  of  tho  rules  of  divine
worship  in  the  earliest  time  when  Agni  was  first  bom  on  earth  os  sacrificial  fire.

13  Pour-med:  illuminating  the  four  cardinal  points,  or  looking  in  all  directions.

16  An  offerer  to  the  living :  probably,  one  who  offers  food  and  hospitality
to  a  human  being,  the  nriyajiia,  worship  of  man,  of  Maim.  Or  it  may  mean,
as  Ludwig  Suggests,  o»o  who  offers  a  sacrifice  that  transports  the  sacrificcr
at  once,  living,  to  heaven.

16  Yaydti ;  a  celebrated  king,  one  of  tho  sons  of  Nahualm.


HYMN  32.]


43


THE  RIG  VEDA.

HYMN  XXXII.  Indra.

I  will  declare  the  manly  deeds  of  Indra,  the  first  that  he
achieved,  the  Thunder-wieldor.

He  slew  the  Dragon,  then  disclosed  the  waters,  and  cleft  the
channels  of  the  mountain  torrents.

2  He  slew  the  Dragon  lying  on  the  mountain  :  his  heavenly  bolt

of  thunder  Tvashtar  fashioned.

Lilco  lowing  kino  in  rapid  flow  descending  the  waters  glided
downward  to  the  ocean.

3  Impetuous  as  a  bull,  he  chose  the  Soma,  and  in  three  sacred

bo&kcra  drank  the  juices.

Maghavan  grasped  tho  thundor  for  his  weapon,  and  smote  to
death  this  firstborn  of  the  dragons.

4  When,  Indra,  thou  hadst  slain  tho  dragons’  firstborn,  and

ovorcomo  tho  charms  of  the  enohanters,

Then,  giving  life  to  Sun  and  Dawn  and  Heaven,  thou  foundcst
not  ono  foe  to  stand  against  thee.

5  Indra  with  his  own  great  and  deadly  thundor  smote  into  pieces

Vyitra,  worst  of  Vritras.

As  trunks  of  trocs,  what  time  tho  axo  hath  fellod  them,  low
on  tho  earth  so  lios  tho  prostrate  Dragon.

6  lie,  like  a  mad  weak  warrior,  challenged  Indra,  the  great

impetuous  many-slaying  Hero.

Ho,  brooking  not  tho  clashing  of  tho  weapons,  orushod— India's
foo— the  shattered  forts  in  falling.

7  Footless  and  handloss  still  he  challenged  Indra,  who  smote

him  with  his  bolt  between  the  shoulders.

Emasoulate  yet  claiming  manly  vigour,  thus  Vyitra  lay  with
scattered  limbs  dissovored.


1  1 2 3 4  In  this  Slid  subsequent  Sflktas  wo  kavo  nn  nmplo  elucidation  of  tho  ori¬
ginal  purport  of  the  legend  of  India's  slaying  Vritra,  converted  by  tho  PaurA-
nik  writers  into  a  litoral  contest  between  Indra  and  an  Asura,  or  chief  of  the
Asuras,  from  what  in  tho  Vedas  is  merely  an  allegorical  narrative  of  tho  pro¬
duction  of  rain.  Vjitra,  sometimes  also  namod  Am,  ia  nothing  more  than  the
accumulation  of  vapour,  condensed  or  figuratively  shut  up  in,  or  obstructed
by,  a  cloud.  Indra,  with  his  thunderbolt,  or  atmospheric  or  electrical  influ¬
ence,  divides  tho  aggrogated  mass,  and  vent  is  given  to  tho  rain  which  then
descends  upon  the  earth.’  Wilson.

2  The  Dragon :  Ahi,  literally  a  serpent.  Tvathtar  is  tho  artist  of  the  Gods.

3  Maghavan :  the  wealthy  and  liberal ;  Lord  Bountiful.

4  The  chart, -u  of  the  enchanters :  magical  or  supernatural  powers  ascribed
to  Vritra  and  his  allies.

In  three  sacred  beaiers :  trlkadruleshu  ;  according  to  Siyana,  on  tho  Trikad-
rukos,  the  first  three  days  of  the  Abkipl^va  ceremony,


44  THE  BYififS  OP  [ BOOK  /.

8  There  as  he  lies  like  a  bank-bursting  river,  the  waters  taking

courage  flow  above  him.

The  Dragon  lies  beneath  the  feet  of  torrents  which  Vritra
with  his  greatness  had  encompassed.

9  Then  humbled  was  the  strength  of  Vyitra’s  mother:  Indra

hath  cast  his  deadly  bolt  against  her.

The  mother  was  above,  the  son  was  under,  and  like  a  cow
beside  her  calf  lay  D&nu.

10  Rolled  in  the  midst  of  never-ceasing  currents  flowing  without

a  rest  for  ever  onward,

The  waters  bear  off  Vyitra’s  nameless  body  :  the  foe  of  Indra
sank  to  during  darkness.

1 1  Guarded  by  Ahi  stood  the  thralls  of  D&sas,  tho  waters  stayed

like  kine  held  by  the  robber.

But  he,  when  he  had  smitten  Vyitra,  opened  the  cave  where¬
in  the  floods  had  been  imprisoned.

12  A  horse’s  tail  wast  thou  when  he,  0  Indra,  smote  on  thy  bolt;

thou,  God  without  a  second,

Thou  hast  won  back  the  kine,  hast  won  the  Soma;  thou  hast
let  loose  to  flow  the  Seven  Rivers.

13  Nothing  availed  him  lightning,  nothing  thunder,  hailstorm  or

mist  which  he  bad  spread  around  him:

When  Indra  and  the  Dragon  strove  in  battle,  Maghavau  gained
tho  victory  for  ever.

14  Whom  sawest  thou  to  avenge  the  Dragon,  Indra,  that  fear

possessed  thy  heart  when  thou  hadst  slain  him;

That,  like  a  hawk  affrighted  through  the  regions,  thou  crossedst
nine-and-ninety  flowing  rivers  ?


9  Ddnu :  according  to  SAyana,  tho  mother  of  Vritra.

11  Thralls  of  Ddia»:  in  tho  power  of  Viitraand  his  allies.  DAsa  is  a

gmd  name  applied  in  the  Veda  to  certain  evil  beings  or  demons,  hostile  to
ra  and  to  men.  It  means,  also,  a  savage,  a  barbarian,  one  of  the  non-
an  inhabitants  of  India.

The  robber :  panl  (literally,  one  who  barters  and  traffics)  means  a  miser,  a
niggard  ;  an  impious  man  who  gives  little  or  nothing  to  the  Gods.  The  word
is  used  also  as  the  name  of  a  class  of  envious  demons  watching  over  treasures,
and  as  an  epithet  of  tho  fiends  who  steal  cows  and  hide  them  in  mountain
cavern*.

12  A  horse's  tail  was  thou:  destroying  thy  cnomiea  as  easily  as  ahorse
sweeps  away  flies  with  hia  tail.  Cf.  I.  27. 1.

The  Seven  Rivers :  according  to  Professor  Max  Muller,  the  Indus,  tho  five  rivers
of  tho  PanjAb  (VitastA,  Aaiknt,  Paruahnl,  Vipds,  Sutudr!)  and  tho  Sarasvatt.
Lassen  and  Ludwig  put  the  KubhA  in  the  place  of  the  last-named.

14  This  fight  of  Iudra  is  frequently  alluded  to.  It  is  said  that  ho  fled
thinking  that  he  had  committed  a  great  sin  in  killing  Vritra.

Tiine-and-nincty ;  used  indefinitely  for  a  great  number.


THE  RIOVEDA.


45


HYMN  33.]

15  Indra  is  King  of  all  that  moves  and  moves  not,  of  creatures
tame  and  horned,  the  Thunder-wielder.

Over  all  living  men  he  rules  as  Sovran,  containing  all  as
spokes  within  the.felly.

HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra.

Come,  fain  for  booty  let  us  seek  to  Indra  :  yet  more  shall  he
increase  his  care  that  guides  us.

Will  uot  tho  Indestructible  endow  us  with  perfect*  knowledge
of  this  wealth,  of  cattlol

2  I  fly  to  him  invisible  Wealth-givor  as  flies  tho  falcon  to  his

cherished  eyrie,

With  fairost  hymns  of  praise  adoring  Indra,  whom  those
who  laud  him  must  invoko  in  battlo.

3  Mid  all  his  host,  ho  bindoth  on  tho  quivor :  ho  drivoth  cattle

from  what  foo  he  ploasoth  :

Gathering  up  great  store  of  richos,  Indra,  bo  thou  no
trafficker  with  us,  most  mighty.

4  Thou  slowost  with  thy  bolt  tho^woalthv  Dnsyn.  alone,  yot

going  with  thy  helpers,  Indra  T  ’  ^

Far  from  tho  floor  of  heaven  in,  all  dirootions,  tho  ancient
riteless  ones  fled  to  destruction.

5  Fighting  wilfi  pious  'worshippers,  tho  ritoloss  turned  and

fled,  Indra  !  with  averted  faces,

Wlion  thou,  fierco  Lord  of  tho  Bay  Stoeds,  tho  Stayor,
blowest  from  oarth  and  hoavon  and  sky  tho  godless.

G  Thoy  mot  in  fight  tho  army  of  tho  blameloss:  thou  the
Navagvas  put  forth  all  thoir  power.

Thoy,  liko  omosculatos  with  men  contonding,  flod,  conscious,
by  stoop  paths  from  Indra,  scattered.


1  Fain  for  booty  :  gavyanlah,  literally  Booking  or  ongor  for  kino,  that  is,
booty  or  wealth  consisting  chiefly  of  cattle.

3  Be  thou  no  trafficker  with  ui :  Do  not  doal  illiberally  with  ub  liko  a
petty  trader  :  do  not  give  sparingly,  nor  demand  too  much  in  return.

4  Tho  wealthy  Ikuyu :  according  to  Sflyana,  ‘Vritrn  tho  robber,’  tho
withholder  of  tho  fertilizing  rain.  The  Daayus  arc  also  a  claim  of  demons,
cuomios  of  gods  and  men,  and  somctimen  tho  word  means  a  eavogo,  a
barbarian.

The  ancient  riteleti  onei :  the  followers  of  Vritra;  hero  apparently  identified
with  indigenous  races  who  had  not  adopted,  or  wero  hostilo  to,  tho  ritual  of  tho
Veda.

6  The  Stayer:  ho  who  stands  firm  in  battle.  Tho  word  in  the  text
slhdtar  appears  to  correspond  exactly  with  tho  Latin  Stator  (Jupiter  Stator).
Sec  Bcnfcy,  Orient  und  Occident,  1.  48.  t  .

6  The  Navugvat :  tho  name  of  a  mythological  family  often  associated  with
that  of  Augiraa,  and  described  as  sharing  in  Inclra’a  battles,  regulating  tho
worship  of  the  Gods,  etc.


46  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOKJ.

7  Whether  they  weep  or  laugh,  thou  hast  o’erthrown  them,

0  Indra,  on  the  sky’s  extvemest  limit.

The  Dasyu  thou  hast  burned  from  heaven,  and  welcomed
the  prayor  of  him  who  pours  the  juice  and  lauds  theo.

8  Adorned  with  their  .array  of  gold  and  jewels,  th'ey  o’er  tho

earth  a  cavering  veil  extended.

Although  they  hastened,  they  o’orcame  not  Indra:  their
/  spies  he  compassed  with  the  Sun  of  morning.
y  As  thovTehj oy est  heaven  and  earth,  0  Indra,  on  every  side
surrounded  with  thy  greatness,

So  thou  with  priests  hast  blown  away  the  Dasyu,  and  those
who  worship  not  with  those  who  worship.

10  They  who  pervaded  earth’s  extremest  limit  subdued  not

with  their  charms  the  Wealth-bestower  :

Indra,  tho  Bull,  made  his  ally  the  thunder,  and  with  its
light  milked  cows  from  out  tho  darkness.

11  The  waters  flowed  according  to  their  nature;  ho  mid  the

navigable  streams  waxed  mighty.

Then  Indra,  with  his  spirit  concentrated,  smote  him  for  ever
with  his  strongest  weapon.

12  Indra  broke  through  Iltbisa’s  strong  castles,  and  Sushna  with

his  horn  he  cut  to  pieces  :

Thou,  Maghavan,  for  all  his  might  and  swiftness,  slowest  thy
fighting  foeman  with  thy  thunder.

13  Fierce  on  his  enemies  fell  Indra's  weapon:  with  his  sharp

bull  he  rent  their  forts  in  pieces.

He  with  his  thunderbolt  dealt  blows  on  Vritra,  and  con¬
quered,  executing  all  his  purpose.

14.  Indra,  thou  holpest  Kutsa  whom  thou  lovcdst,  and  guardedst
brave  Dasadyu  when  he  battled.

The  dust  of  trampling  horses  rose  to  heaven,  and  Svitra’s  son
stood  up  again  for  conquest.

8  With  the  Sun  oj  morning :  1  We  revert  here  to  the  allegory.  The  fol¬
lowers  of  Vritra  arc  here  said  to  bo  the  shades  of  night  whioh  are  dispersed
by  the  rising  of  the  sun  :  according  to  the  Brilhrnana  "Verily  tho  sun,  when
he  rises  in  the  east,  drives  away  the  Rdkshasas."  ’  Wilson.

10  Milked  cowi  :  struck  the  cloud  with  his  lightning,  and  made  the  milky
streams  of  fertilizing  rain  flow  forth.

12  Iltbisa's  strong  c<tslles :  Iltbisn  is  said  by  SAyana  to  be  Vritra  ‘who  sleeps
in  caverns  of  the  earth.'  Probably  one  of  the  confederate  demons  is  intended.

Sit/hna  with  hit  horn :  the  demon  of  drought,  '  furnished.’  says  the
Scholiast,  ‘with  weapons  like  the  horns  of  bulls  and  buffaloes.’  The  meaning
of  *  homed  ’  or 1  with  his  horn  ’  is  simply  ‘  mighty,’  the  horn  being  used,  as  in
Hebrew  poetry,  as  the  emblem  of  strength.

13  JVirt  his  sharp  lull :  the  rushing  thunderbolt,

14  A’uWa.-  said  to  have  been  a  Itishi  or  seer,  founder  of  a  religious  family
or  school,  and  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  the  particular  friend  of  Indra.


TEE  RIQVED A.


47


EYMiV  84.]


15  Svitra’a  mild  stem1 2,  0  Maghavan  thou  holpest  in  combat  for
the  laud,  mid  Tugra’s  houses.

Long  stood  they  there  before  the  task  was  ended :  thou  wast
the  master  of  the  foemen’s  treasure.

HYMN  XXXIV.  As  vins.

.Ye  who  observe  this  day  be  with  us  even  thrice  :  far-stretch¬
ing  is  your  bounty,  Asvins,  and  your  course.

To  you,  as  to  a  cloak  in  winter,  we  cleave  close :  ye  are  to  be
drawn  uigh  unto  us  by  the  wise.

2  Three  are  the  fellies  in  your  honey-bearing  car,  that  travels

after  Soma’s  loved  one,  as  all  know.

Three  are  the  pillars  set  upon  it  for  support:  thrice  journey
ye  by  night,  0  Asvins,  thrice  by  day.

3  Thrice  in  the  self-same  day,  ye  Gods  who  banish  want,  sprinkle

ye  thrice  to-day  our  sacrifice  with  mcath ;

And  thrice  vouchsafe  us  store  of  food  with  plenteous  strength,
at  evening,  0  ye  Asvins,  and  at  break  of  day.

4  Thrice  come  ye  to  our  home,  thrice  to  the  righteous  folk,

thrice  triply  aid  the  man  who  well  deserves  your  help.
Thrice,  0  ye  Asvins,  bring  us  what  shall  make  us  glad ;
thrice  send  us  store  of  food  as  nevex*morc  to  fail.

'  5  Thrice,  O  ye  Asvins,  bring  to  us  abundant  wealth ;  thirce  in
the  Gods’  assembly,  thrice  assist  our  thoughts.

Thrice  grant  ye  us  prosperity,  thrice  grant  us  fame ;  for  the
Sun’s  daughter  hath  mounted  your  three-wheeled  car.

6  Thrice,  Asvins,  grant  to  us  the  hcavonly  medicines,  thrice

those  of  earth  and  thrice  those  that  the  waters  hold.

Favour  and  health  and  strength  bestow  upon  my  son ;  triple
protection,  Lords  of  Splondour,  grant  to  him.

7  Thrice  are  ye  to  be  worshipped  day  by  day  by  us ;  thrice,  0  ye

Asvins,  ye  travel  around  the  earth.

Car-borne  from  far  away,  0  ye  Nasatyas,  come,  like  vital  air  to
bodies,  come  ye  to  the  three.

Da>adyu,  is  also  said  to  have  been  a  Riahi,  but  nothing  is  known  of  him.
The  same  may  be  said  of  Svaitreya  or  Svitrya,  the  son  of  a  woman  named
SvitrS.  '

15  The  meaning  of  tugrydsu  in  the  text  is  not  clear.  SAyana  explains  it
by  ‘in  the  waters;’  Bcnfcy  translates  'among  Tugra’s  daughters,’  and  the
Petersburg  Lexicon  takes  it  to  mean  ‘among  the  families  of  the  Tugryans.’
Mild  steer :  strong  but  gentle  son.

1  Be  present  with  us  even  thrice :  that  is,  at  all  the  three  daily  sacrifices.

2  Soma :  is  here  the  Moon.  His  darling  is  Jyotsnft  or  Kaumudl,  Moonlight,
identified  with  SilryA,  the  light  borrowed  from  the  Sun.

5  For  the  Sun's  daughter:  Sfiryfl,  who  is  called  tho  consort  of  the  Asvins.
7  Ndsalyas:  a  common  appellation  of  the  Asyms.  See  I.  3.  3.

To  the  three:  to  the  three  daily  sacrifices.


4S  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I.

S  Thrice,  0  yc  Asvins,  with  the  Seven  Mother  Streams ;  three
arc  the  jars,  the  triple  offering  is  prepared.

Three  are  the  worlds,  and  moving  on  abovo  the  sky  ye  guard
the  firm-set  vault  of  heaven  through  days  and  nights.

9  Where  are  the  three  wheels  of  your  triple  chariot,  where  are
the  three  “eats  thereto  firmly  fastened  ?

When  will  ye  yoke  the  mighty  ass  that  draws  it,  to  bring  you
to  our  sacrifice,  Nasatyasi

10  NAsatyas,  come :  the  sacred  gift  is  offered  up ;  drink  the  sweet

juice  with  lips  that  know  the  sweetness  well.

Savitar  sends,  before  the  clawu  of  day,  your  car,  fraught  with
oil,  various-coloured,  to  our  sacrifice.

1 1  Como,  0  N:\satyas,  with  the  thrice-elevcn  Gods ;  come,  0  ye

Asvins,  to  the  drinking  of  the  meath.

Make  long  our  days  of  life,  and  wipe  out  all  our  sins :  ward  oil'
our  enemies ;  be  with  us  evermore.

1 2  Borne  in  your  triple  car,  0  Asvins,  bring  us  present  prosperity

with  noble  offspring.

I  cry  to  you  who  hear  me  for  protection  :  be  ye  our  helpers
where  men  win  the  booty.

HYMN  XXXV.  Sartor.

Aoni  I  first  invoke  for  pur  prosperity ;  I  call  on  Mitro,  Varuna,
to  aid  us  here.

I  call  on  Night  who  gives  rest  to  all  moving  life ;  I  call  on
Savitar  the  God  to  lend  us  help.

2  Throughout  the  dusky  firmament  advancing,  laying  to  rest

the  immortal  and  tho  mortal,

Borne  in  his  golden  chariot  he  cometh,  Savitar,  God  who  looks
on  every  creature.

3  The  God  moves  by  the  upward  path,  the  downward  ;  with  two

bright  Bays,  adorable,  he  journeys.

Savitar  comes,  the  God  from  the  far  distance,  and  chases  from
us  :U1  distress  and  sorrow.

8  The  Seven  Mother  Stream :  see  I.  32.  12.

Three  are  the  jars:  three  sort*  of  pitchers,  used  to  contain  and  pour  out  the
Sonia  juice  at  the  three  daily  sacrifices.

Three  worlds  :  earth,  middle  air,  and  heaven.

®  The  mighty  an :  according  to  the  Nighantu  ‘  two  asses  are  the  steels
of  the  Asvins.’

10  Savitar  :  implying  that  the  Asvins  are  to  be  worshipped  with  this  hymn
at  dawn.  Savitar  is  tho  Sun.

11  The  th-ic-eleven  Goods .-  ‘  This  is  authority  for  the  usual  Paurilnik  enumer¬
ation  of  thirty-three  deities,  avowedly  resting  on  Vaidik  texts.  ’The  list  is,
there,  made  up  of  the  eight  Vasus  :  eleven  Budras  :  twelve  Adityos,  Prajit-
pati,  and  Yasha  tkAra.1  Wilson.


HYMN  36.1


THE  RIO  VEDA.


49


4  His  chariot  decked  with  pearl,  of  various  colours,  lofty,  with

golden  pole,  the  God  hath  mounted,

The  many-rayed  One,  Savitar  the  holy,  bound,  bearing  power
and  might,  for  darksome  regions.

5  Drawing  the  gold-yokod  car  his  Bays,  white-footed,  have

manifested  light  to  all  the  peoples.

Held  in  tho  lap  of  Savitar,  divine  One,  all  men,  all  beings
have  their  place  for  over.

6  Three  heavens  thero  are  ;  two  Savitar’s,  adjacent :  in  Yama’s

world  is  one,  the  home  of  heroes.

As  on  a  liuch-pin,  firm,  rest  things  immortal :  he  who  hath
known  it,  let  him  here  declare  it.

7  He,  strong  of  wing,  hath  lightened  up  the  regions,  deep-quiver¬

ing  Asura,  the  gentle  Leader.

Where  now  is  S&rya,  where  is  one  to  tell  us  to  what  celestial
sphere  his  ray  hath  wandered  ?

8  Tho  earth’s  eight  points  his  brightness  hath  illumined,  three

desert  regions  and  the  Seven  Rivers.

God  Savitar  the  gold-eyed  hath  come  hither,  giving  choice
treasures  unto  him  who  worships.

9  The  golden-handed  Savitar,  far-seeing,  goes  on  his  way  be¬

tween  the  earth  and  heaven,

Drives  away  sickness,  bids  the  Sun  approach  us,  and  spreads
the  bright  sky  through  the  darksome  region.

10  May  he,  gold-handed  Asura,  kind  Leader,  come  hither  to  us
with  his  help  and  favour.

Driving  off  Kakslmsas  and  Y&tudh&nos,  the  God  is  present,
praised  in  hymns  at  evening.

.110  Savitar,  thine  ancient  dustless  pathways  are  well  established
in  the  air’s  mid-regiou  :

0  God,  come  by  those  paths  so  fair  to  travel,  preserve  thou
us  from  harm  this  day,  and  bless  us.

6  Ttco  Savitar*  * :  heaven  and  earth,  or  the  heaven  of  day  and  the  heaven  of
night.  As  on  a  /inch- pin  :  the  lineh-piu  is  the  emblem  of  stability,  retaining
ito  position  unchanged  by  the  revolution  of  the  wheels.  So  the  Gods  remain
unmoved,  unaffected  by  death  or  change,  unlike  the  mortals  who  depart  to
the  realm  of  Varna.  See  J.  lihui,  Dcr  Mythua  dcs  Yarna,  p.  115.

7  He,  strong  of  icing :  ( supuniuhj  an  epithet  or  a  name  of  the  Sun.  A)uva  :
the  immortal  and  divine  One.

9  Bids  the  Sun  approach  us :  Sly  an  a  says  ‘  approaches  the  Sun,’  and
observes  that  although  Savitar  and  the  Sun  are  the  same  as  regards  their
divinity,  yet  they  are  two  differoat  forms,  and  therefore  one  may  be  said  to
go  to  the  other.

10  Yiitudlutnas ;  a  claw  of  demons  or  evil  spirits,  much  like  Rdkshasos,
but  more  iwrticularly  practise]?  of  sorcery.

4


,  T1IE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

HYMN  XXXVI.  Agni.

With  words  sent  forth  in  holy  hymns,  Agni  we  supplicate,
the  Lord

Of  many  fimilies  who  duly  serve  the  Gods,  yea,  him  whom
others  also  praise.

2  Men  have  won  Agni,  him  who  makes  their  strength  abound  :

we,  with  oblations,  worship  thee.

Our  graoions-min  led  Helper  iu  our  deeds  of  might,  be  them,
0  Excellent,  this  day.

3  Thee  for  our  messenger  we  choose,  thee,  the  Omniscient,  for

our  Priest.

The  flames  of  thee  the  mighty  are  spread  wide  around  :  thy
splendour  reaches  to  the  sky.

4  The  Gods  enkindle  thee  their  ancient  messenger,  —  Varuna,

Mitra,  Aryaman.

That  mortal  man,  0  Agni,  gains  through  thee  all  wealth,  who
hath  poureJ  offerings  unto  thee.

5  Thou,  Agni,  art  a  cheering  Priest,  Lord  of  the  House,  men’s

messenger :

All  constant  high  decrees  established  by  the  Gods,  gathered
together,  meet  in  thee.

6  In  thee,  the  auspicious  One,  O  Agni,  youthfullest,  each  sacred

gift  is  offered  up':

This  day,  and  after,  gracious,  worship  thou  our  Gods,  that
wc  may  have  heroic  sons.

‘I  To  him  in  his  own  splendour  bright  draw  near  in  worship
the  devout.

Men  kindle  Agni  with  thoir  sacrificial  gifts,  victorious  o’er
the  enemies.

8  Vvitra  they  smote  and  slew,  and  made  the  c.irth  and  heaven
and  firmament  a  wide  abode.

The  glorious  Bull,  invoked,  hath  stood  at  Kanva’a  side :  loud
neighed  the  Steed  in  frays  for  kino.


This  Hymn  and  the  twelve  following  are  ascribed  to  Knnvn,  a  very  eolobmted
Rishi  who  is  called  the  son  of  Ghora  and  is  said  to  belong  to  the  family  of
Aogiras.

5  The  preservation  of  tho  whole  world  rc9te,  according  to  the  Vaidik  view,
•o  the  sacrifices  offered  by  men,  aa  these  givo  the  Goda  strength  aud  enable
them  to  perform  their  duties.

8  The  ffhricua  Bull :  the  mighty  Agni,  strung  aa  a  bull  and  impetuous
u  a  war  horse,  has  aided  bis  favourite  Kanva  in  battle.


TUB  R  IQ  VEDA.


UYMS  36.]


51


9  Seat  thee,  for  thou  art  mighty;  shine,  best  entertainer  of
the  Gods.

Worthy  of  sacred  food,  praised  Agni !  loose  the  smoke,  ruddy
and  beautiful  to  see.

10  Bearer  of  offerings,  whom,  best  sacrificing  Priest,  the  Gods  for

M aim’s  sake  ordained  ;

Whom  Kauva,  whom  Modhyitithi  made  the  source  of  wealth,
and  Vrishun  and  Upastuta.

11  Him,  Agni,  whom  Medhyatithi,  whom  ICanva  kindled  for  his

rite,

Him  these  our  songs  of  praise,  him,  Agni,  we  extol :  his  powers
shine  out  preeminent.

12  Make  our  wealth  perfect  thou,  0  Agni  Lord  divine:  for  thou

hast  kinship  with  the  Gods.

Thou  rulest  as  a  King  o’er  widcly-famous  strength  :  be  good
to  us  for  theu  art  great.

13  Stand  up  erect  to  lend  us  aid,  stand  up  like  Savitnr  the  God  :
Erect  as  strength-bestower  when  we  call  aloud,  with  unguents

and  with  priests,  on  thee.

14  Erect,  preserve  us  from  sore  trouble;  with  thy  flame  burn

thou  each  ravening  demon  dead.

Raise  thou  us  up  that  wo  may  walk  and  live:  so  thou  shnlb
fiud  our  worship  mid  the  Gods.

15  Preserve  us,  Agni,  from  the  fiend,  preserve  us  from  malicious

wrong.

Save  us  from  him  who  fain  would  injure  us  or  slay,  Most
Yopthful,  thou  with  lofty  light.

16  Smite  down  as  with  a  club,  thou  who  hast  fire  for  teeth,

smite  thou  the  wicked,  right  and  left.

Let  not  the  man  who  plots  against  us  iu  tho  night,  nor  any
foe  prevail  o’er  us.


10  Medhy&tilhi:  SAyana  takes  this  word  to  be  an  epithet  of  Kanva,  *  en¬
tertainer  of  guests  who  are  worthy  of  sacrificial  food.'  But  it  appears  to  be
the  name  of  a  Bishi  of  Kauva’s  family,  tho  Beer  of  twenty-eight  hymns  of
Books  VIII.  and  IX.

Vruhttn  and  Upaituta :  rendered  by  Wilson,  after  SAyana,  1  Indra  and
some  other  worshipper,'  arc  also  apparently  the  names  of  two  other  Kin  bis.

13  Stand  up  erect :  Agni,  a a  erect,  is  identified  by  SAynpa  with  the  ytipa  or
sacrificial  post  to  which  the  victims,  at  an  animal  sacrifice,  were  bound.
Accordingly  he  takes  aiijibhih  to  mean  ‘with  unguent*'  wherewith  tho  post
was  anointed.  This  word  may  however  refer  to  the  ornament*— another
signification  of  tho  word — worn  by  the  ministering  priests.

A  A.  -  S  i


52


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  /.


17  Agni  hath  given  heroic  might  to  Kanva,  and  felicity:

Agni  hath  helped  our  friends,  hath  helped  Mcdhyatithi,  hath

helped  UpastuUi  to  win.

18  We  call  on  Ugradeva,  Yadu,  Turvasa,  by  means  of  Agni,

•  from  afar ;

Agni,  bring  .NavavAstva  and  Brihadratha,  Turviti,  to  subdue
the  foe.

19  Manu  hath  stablishcd  thee  a  light,  Agni,  for  all  the  race

of  men :

Sprung  from  the  Law,  oil-fed,  for  Kanva  hast  thou  blazed,
thou  whom  the  people  reverence.

20  The  flames  of  Agni  full  of  splendour  and  of  might  arc  fearful,

not  to  be  approached.

Consume  for  ever  all  demons  and  sorcerers,  consume  thou
each  devouring  liend.

HYMN  XXXVII.  MarutA.

Si  so  forth,  0  Kanvas,  to  your  band  of  Maruts,  unassailable,
Sporting,  resplendent  on  their  car :

2  They  who,  self-luminous,  were  horn  together,  with  the  spotted

deer,

Spears,  swords,  and  glittering  ornaments.

3  One  hears,  as  though  'twere  close  at  baud,  the  cracking  of  the

whips  they  hold ;

They  gather  glory  on  their  way.

•  4  Now  sing  ye  forth  the  God-given  hymn  to  your  exultant

Marut  host,

The  Hercely -vigorous,  the  strong.

5  Praise  yc  the  Bull  among  the  cows ;  for  ’tis  the  Maruts’
sportive  band  :

It  strengthened  as  it  drank  the  rain.

17  Agni  hath  helped  our  friends  :  SAyana  takes  ntiirft  in  the  text  as  mitr/fni,
friends.  Benfcy  ami  Ludwig  consider  it  to  mean,  the  former  Mitra,  and  tho
latter  the  two  Mitras,  i.  e.  Mitra  and  Vanina;  and  they  translate  respectively
‘  Agni  and  Mitra  protected,’  and  ‘Agni,  as  Mitra  [and  Varuna]  hath  favoured.’

18  Turvasa  and  Yadu  are  frequently  mentioned  together  as  eponymi  of
tribes  of  those  names.  The  poet  appears  to  pray  for  the  return  of  NavavAstva,
whoever  he  may  have  been,  to  protect  the  home  attacked  by  the  Danyus  or
robbers,  and  perhaps  also  to  strengthen  his  prayer  by  au  appeal  to  the  spirits
of  departed  heroes.

•  20  Demons  and  sorcerers  :  Rdkshasas  and  evil  spirit*  who  practise  sorcery.

For  an  exhaustive  explanation  of  this  and  other  Hymn*  to  the  Maruts,
sec  M.  Muller's  Vcdic  Hymn*,  Part  1.  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXXII.)

•  5  The  Hall  among  the  couu :  the  band  of  Storm-Coda  preeminent  among
the  clouds  as  a  bull  is  among  cows.


JiYJtX  S3.]  THE  klQYEDA,  S3

C  Who  is  your  mightiest,  Heroes,  when,  0  shakers  of  the  earth
and  heaven,

Ye  shake  them  like  a  garment’s  hem  1

7  At  your  approach  man  holds  him  down  before  the  fury  of

your  wrath :  r

The  rugged-joiuted  mountain  yields.

8  They  at  whose  racings  forth  the  earth,  like  an  age-w'eakened

lord  of  men,

Trembles  in  terror  on  their  ways.

9  Strong  is  their  birth :  vigour  have  they  to  issue  from  their

Mother;  strength,

Yea,  even  twice  enough,  is  theirs.

10  And  these,  the  Sons,  the  Singers,  in  their  racings  have  enlarg¬

ed  the  bounds,

So  that  the  kine  must  walk  knee-deep.

11  Before  them,  on  the  ways  they  go,  they  drop  this  offspring
of  the  cloud,

Long,  broad,  and  inexhaustible.

12  0  Maruts,  as  your  strength  is  great,  so  have  ye  cast  men

down  on  earth,

So  have  ye  made  the  mountains  fall.

13  The  while  the  Maruts  pass  along,  they  talk  together  on  the

way :

Doth  any  hear  them  as  they  speak  1

14  Gome  quick  with  swift  steeds,  for  yc  have  worshippers  among

Kanva’s  sons :

May  you  rejoice  among  them  well.

15  All  is  prepared  for  your  delight.  We  arc  their  servants

evermore,

To  live  as  long  as  life  may  last

HYMN  XXXVIII.  Maruts.

Wiiat  now  ?  When  will  ye  take  us  by  both  hands,  as  a  dear
sire  his  son,

Gods,  for  whom  sacred  grass  is  clipped?.

C  That  ia,  where  all  are  no  mighty  it  would  be  superfluous  to  ask  who  ia
mightiest.

Like  a  garment's  hem  :  or,  according  to  S4yana,  '  like  a  tree's  high  top.’

10  The  Singers:  the  loud-voiced  Maruts.

The  Maruts  have  spread  themselves  over  the  sky  and  caused  ao  much  rain
to  fall  that  the  cows  in  the  pastures  are  up  to  their  knees  in  water.  But  see
T.udwig,  ITeber  die  neuesten  Arbciteu  auf  dem  Uebiete  der  ltg veda - f orach u ng.‘
l'rag.  1S95.  -  ••


54  TUE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

2  Now  whither?  To  what  goal  of  yours  go  ye  iu  heaven,  and

not  on  earth  ?

Where  do  your  cows  disport  themselves?

3  Where  are  your  newest  favours  shown?  Where,  Maruts,

your  prosperity  ?

Where  all  ycfur  high  felicities  ?

i  If,  0  ye  Maruts,  ye  the  Sons  whom  Prisni  bare,  wore  mortal,
and

Immortal  he  who  sings  your  praise,

5  Then  never  were  your  praisor  loathed  liko  a  wild  beast  in

pasture-laud,

Nor  should  he  go  on  Yama’s  path.

6  Let  not  destructive  plague  on  plague  hard  to  bo  conquered,

strike  us  down :

Let  each,  with  drought,  depart  from  us.

7  Truly,  they  the  fierco  and  mighty  Sons  of  Rudra  send  their

windless

Rain  e'en  on  the  desert  places.

8  Like  a  cow  the  lightning  lows  and  follows,  motherlike,  her

youngling,

When  their  rain-flood  hath  been  loosened.

9  When  they  inundate  the  earth  they  spread  forth  darkness

e'en  in  day-time,

With  the  water-laden  rain-cloud.

10  0  Maruts,  at  your  voice’s  souud  this  earthly  habitation

shakes,

And  each  man  reels  who  dwells  therein.

11  0  Maruts,  with  your  strong-hoofed  steeds,  unhindered  in

their  courses,  haste
Along  the  bright  embanked  streams.

12  Firm  be  the  fellies  of  your  wheels,  steady  your  horses  and

your  cars,

And  may  your  reins  be  fashioned  well.

2  Where  do  your  rot's  disport  thenutkts  1 .-  perhaps,  as  M.  Mliller  suggests
'  where  tarry  your  herds  V  vit.  the  clouds.  Why  do  you  remain  in  the  sky,
and  not  como  down  to  earth  ?  Or,  according  to  fcudwig  :  *  Where  do  tho  cows
feed  that  are  to  supply  milk  and  butter  for  sacri&ce  to  you  l  Where  is  the
place  in  which  sacritioe  is  to  be  oUcred  to  you  J '

5  ZUe  a  wild  beast:  or.  unwelcome  like  a  deer  in  the  home-pasture  or
meadow  reserved  for  tho  cows.

Yamu’sputh:  tho  path  that  leads  to  Yams  the  God  of  tho  Departed.

6  Destructive  plague  :  ulrrilifc;  sin.  M.  Muller.  Drought •  greed.  M.  Mliller.

7  Sous  of  Rudrti ;  or  ‘dear  to  Rudra,’  who  is  the  father  of  the  Maruts.
Windless  ruin :  steady  rain,  not  blown  away;  that  sinks  into  tho  ground;

the  wind  generally  ceasing  as  soon  as  heavy  rain  bogina  to  fall.

8  Tho  thunder  follows  the  lightning  as  a  cow  lowiug,  follows  her  oalf.


THE  RIQVBDA.


HYMN  89  ]


65


13  Invite  thou  hither  with  this  song,  for  praise,  Agni  the  Lord

of  Prayer,

Him  who  is  fair  as  Mitra  is.

14  Form  in  thy  mouth  tho  hymn  of  praise:  expand  thee  like  a
rainy  cloud  :

Sing  forth  tho  measured  eulogy.

15  Sing  glory  to  the  Mamt  host,  praiseworthy,  tuneful,  vigorous  :
Here  let  the  Strong  Ones  dwell  with  us.

HYMN  XXXIX.  Marut*.

When  thus,  like  flame,  from  far  away,  Maruts,  ye  cast  your
measure  forth,

To  whom  go  yo,  to  whom,  0  shakers  of  the  earth,  moved  by
whose  wisdom,  whose  design  ?

2  Strong  let  your  weapons  be  to  drive  away  your  foes,  firm  for

resistance  let  them  be.

Yea,  passing  glorious  must  be  your  warrior  might,  not  as  a
guileful  mortal’s  strength.

3  When  what  is  strong  ye  overthrow,  and  whirl  about  each

ponderous  thing,

Heroes,  your  course  is  through  the  forest  trees  of  earth,  and
through  the  fissures  of  the  rocks.

4  Consumers  of  your  foes,  no  enemy  of  yours  is  found  in  heaven

or  on  the  earth  :

Ye  Itudras,  may  the  strength,  held  in  this  bond,  be  yours,  to
bid  defiance  even  now.

5  They  make  the  mountains  rock  and  reel,  they  rend  the  forest-

kings  apart.

•Onward,  ye  Maruts,  drive,  like  creatures  drunk  with  wine,  ye
Gods  with  all  your  company.


13  Agni,  the  Lord  »f  Prayer  :  ‘  Agni  is  frequently  invoked  together  with
tho  Maruts,  nud  is  even  called  nurut-sakhil,  the  friend  of  the  Marat*,  viij.  92,
14.  It  Bcosns  better,  therefore,  to  refer  brdhmanas  pdt;pj  to  Agni,  than,  with
Silyana,  to  the  host  of  tho  Maruts.  Brdhmayaspdti  and  BfShaspdti  are  both
varieties  of  Agui,  tho  priest  and  purohita  of  tiodo  and  men,  and  as  such  he  is
invoked  together  with  the  Muruts  in  other  passages,  i.  40,  1.’  M.  MttUer.

14  ExjHind  thee  :  addressed  to  the  poet  of  the  hymn.

15  Tuneful:  so  in  I.  37.  10  ‘And  theso  the  Sons,  the  Singers.’  The  song
of  the  Maruts  is  the  music  or  singing  of  the  winds.

1  if uruts,  ye  coil  your  manure  forth:  1 * * 4  In  this  passage  we  must  take

measure,  not  in  the  abstract  sense,  but  os  a  measuring  lino,  which  is  cast
forward  to  mcasuro  tho  distance  of  ail  object,  an  image  perfectly  applicable  to
tho  Maruts,  who  seem  with  their  weapons  to  strike  the  troca  and  mountains

when  they  themselves  arc  still  far  off.’  M.  Muller.

4  field  in  chit  bond:  together  with  your  race.  M.  Muller.


r.c  TI1E  ITYMXS  OF  f HOOK  1.

6  Vo  to  your  chariot  have  yoked  the  spotted  deer :  a  red  deer,

as  n  leader,  draws.

Even  the  Earth  herself  listcued  as  j*c  came  near,  and  men
were  sorely  terrified.

7  0  Rudras,  quickly  wo  desire  your  succour  for  this  work  of

ours.  '

Come  to  us  with  your  aid  as  in  the  days  of  old,  so  uow  for
frightened  Kanva’s  sake.

8  Should  any  monstrous  foe,  0  Marnts,  sent  by  you  or  sent  by

mortals  threaten  us,

Tear  ye  him  from  us  with  your  power  and  with  your  might,
and  with  the  succours  that  are  yours.

9  For  ye,  the  worshipful  and  wise,  have  guarded  Kanva

perfectly.

0  Marnts,  come  to  us  with  full  protecting  help,  as  lightning
flashes  seek  the  rain.

10  Whole  strength  have  ye,  0  Bounteous  Ones;  perfoct,  earth
shakers,  is  your  might.

Maruts,  against  the  poet's  wrathful  enemy  send  yc  an  enemy
like  a  dart.

HYMN  XL.  BrihiuaiiMpsti.

0  Brahmasaspati,  stand  up  :  God-sewing  men,  wc  pray  to
thee.

May  they  who  give  good  gifts,  the  Maruts,  come  to  us.  Indru,
most  swift,  be  thou  with  them.

2  0  Son  of  Strength,  each  mortal  calls  to  thcc  for  aid  when

spoil  of  battle  waits  for  him.

0  Maruts,  may  this  man  who  loves  you  well  obtain  wealth  of
good  steeds  and  hero  might.

3  May  Brahmanaspati  draw  nigh,  may  Sunpita  the  Goddess

come,

And  Gods  bring  to  this  rite  which  gives  the  fivefold  gift  the
Hero,  lover  of  mankind.


9  A I  ib/hluing-JUaket  trek  the  rain:  ‘Lightning  precedes  the  rain,  and  may
therefore  be  represented  as  looking  about  for  the  rain.'  M.  Muller.

1  0  Erahmana*pati:  Agni  ia  sometime*  called  Bralunapaspati,  or  Lord  of
Prayer.  See  1.  38.  13.  *

3.  May  Sdnritd  the  Goddeu  come :  S:\nritA  (Pleasantness)  is,  according  to
S&yana,  the  Goddess  of  Speech  (VAgdevatA)  in  the  form  of  lovor  of  truth.

The  fivefold  gift ;  an  offering  of  grain,  gruel,  cui-dled  milk,  rice-cake,  and
curds.


the  may  Eh  a.


nr m.x  4i.]


fi  7


4  He  who  bestows  a  noble  guerdon  on  the  priest  wins  fame  that
never  shall  decay.

For  him  we  offer  sacred  hero-giving  food,  peerless  and  con¬
quering  easily.

0  Now  Brabmuuaspati  speaks  forth  aloud  the  solemn  hymn  of
praise,

Wherein  India  and  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  the  Gods,  have
made  their  dwelling-place.

6  May  we  in  holy  synods,  Gods!  recite  that  hymn,  peerless,  that

brings  felicity.  ,

If  you,  0  Heroes,  graciously  accept  this  word,  may  it  obtain
all  bliss  from  you.

7  Who  shall  approach  the  pious  ?  who  the  man  whose  sacred

grass  is  trimmed  1

The  offerer  with  his  folk  advances  more  and  more  :  he  fills  his
house  with  precious  things.

8  He  amplifies  his  lordly  might,  with  kings  he  slays :  e’en  mid

alarms  he  dwells  secure.

In  great  or  lessor  light  none  checks  him,  none  subdues, — the
wielder  of  the  thuudcrbolt.


HYMN  XLI.  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman.


Nf.’br  is  he  injured  whom  the  Gods  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,
The  excellently'  wise,  protect.

2  He  prospers  ever,  free  from  scathe,  whom  they,  as  with  full

hands,  enrich,

Whom  they  preserve  from  every  foe.

3  The  Kings  drive  far  away  from  him  his  troubles  and  his

cnomies,

And  lead  him  safely  o’er  distress.


4  Sacred  .  food :  VA  or  hid.  sacrificial  food,  or  a  libation,  especially  a  holy  liba¬
tion  coming  between  the  PrayAja  and  the  Amiyftja  the  fore-«iacrifice  and  the
after  saciitice;  the  preliminary  and  the  final  oDering.

5  Vow  BraktMiiyttpiifi  epents  forth  :  *  Professor  Roth  remarks  :  The  thunder
is  his  (Brahmauaspati’s)  voice.  The  voice  of  thunder,  again,  as  the  voice  of  the
superintendent  of  prayer,  is  by  a  beautiful  transference  brought  into  connec¬
tion  with  the  prayer  which,  spoken  on  earth,  finds,  as  it  wore,  its  echo  in  the
heights  of  heaven.’  Muir  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  279,  uo^e.

8  The  wielder  of  the  thunderlolt :  meaning,  Sdyana  says,  Brahmanoapati,
and  so  far  identifying  him  with  Indra.  Ludwig  refcrB  the  expression  to  the
pioua  sacrificer  who  is  said  to  be  armed,  as  it  were  with  Brahmanaapati’a
thunderbolt.

3  The  Kings  :  Varuna,  Mitra,  and  Aryaman,


u  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

4  Thornless,  Adityas,  i8  the  path,  easy  for  him  who  seeks  the

Law :

With  him  is  naught  to  auger  you.

5  What  sacrifice,  idityas,  ye  Heroes  guide  by  the  path  direct,—
May  that  come  nigh  unto  your  thought.

6  That  mortal,  ever  unsubdued,  gains  wealth  and  every  precious

thing,

And  children  also  of  his  own.

7  How,  my  friends,  shall  we  prepare  Aryaman’s  and  Mitra's

laud,

Glorious  food  of  Varuna  ?

S  I  point  not  out  to  you  a  man  who  strikes  the  pious,  or  reviles  :

Only  with  hymns  l  call  you  nigh.

9  Let  him  not  love  to  speak  ill  words ;  but  fear  tho  Ono  who
holds  all  four

Within  his  hand,  until  they  fall.

HYMN  XLIL  P-‘*W

Shorten*  our  ways,  0  Pushan,  move  aside  obstruction  in  tho
path  :

Go  close  before  us,  cloud-born  God.


i  A  lit  gat :  the  three  Gods  named  above,  with  others.  See  I.  14.  3.

9  Bulf&ir  the  Out  tcho  holds  the  four:  Wilson  remarks  :  ‘The  text  has
elt'itunif  ehkl  datLuniu&l  bibh’njld  d  >iul/uU->h,  he  may  fear  from  one  holding
four  until  tho  fall.  The  meaning  is  supplied  by  the  Scholiast  with  tho
assistance  of  Ydska,  ehiUuro’  bthdu  dhdmyutxh  ..Li uadi,  from  a  gambler  hold¬
ing  four  dice  ..That  is,  where  two  men  are  playing  together,  the  man  who
has  not  the  throw  of  the  dice  is  in  anxious  apprehension  lest  it  should  be
against  him.'  Homey  thinks  that '  the  holder  of  tho  four  (dice)’  is  God  who
holds  in  hi'  hands  and  decides  the  destinies  of  man.  Ludwig  maintains  that
there  is  no  reference  to  dice,  either  of  gambling  or  destiny,  and  that  ‘  the  four'
are  Varuna,  Mitra,  Bhaga,  and  Aryamau.  The  pious  man  when  he  possesses
these  four  as  friends  should  fear  to  let  them  go.*  BetgaigncfLa  Religion
V6dique,  HI.  158)  is  of  opinion  that  the  cords  or  nooses  of  Varuna,  with
which  he  catches  and  punishes  the  wicked,  are  intcudcd.


1  Shorten  our  wr»i ft,  0  Pfalum  •  Pfithan  is  usually  a  synonym  of  the  Sun;
that  is,  he  is  one  of  the  twelve  Adityaa.  According  to  the  tcuour  of  this
hymn,  he  is  tho  doity  presiding  especially  over  roads  and  joumeyings.

Cloud- bora  .-  with  reference,  perhaps,  to  the  close  connexion  between
nourishing  tho  earth,  which  is  one  of  l’oshan'a  especial  duties,  and  tho  cloud
tliat  gives  the  necessary  rain.  But  in  ltigveda  VIII.  ^.  15,  16,  Pushan  is
tailed  vimock-niK.  the  deliverer,  (from  sin,  according  to  SAyana),  and  perhaps
ohiueho  nafdt  may  mean  the  same  thing.  See  Muir  0.  8.  Texts,  V.  175,
where  the  whole  hymn  is  translated.


MB  RIG  VEDA.


B YAM  43  ]


51


2  Drive,  Pushan,  from  our  road  tho  wolf,  tho  wicked  inauspicious

wolf,

Who  lies  in  wait  to  injure  us.

3  Who  lurks  about  the  path  we  take,  tho  robber  with  a  guileful

heart :

Far  from  tho  road  chase  him  away.  '

4  Tx-ead  with  thy  foot  and  trample  out  tho  firebrand  of  the

wicked  one,

The  double-tongued,  whoe’er  he  bo.

6  Wise  Pushan,  Wonder-Worker,  we  claim  of  thee  now  the  aid
wherewith

Thou  fui-theredst  our  sires  of  old.

6  So,  Lord  of  all  prosperity,  best  wielder  of  the  golden  sword,
Make  riches  easy  to  be  won.

7  Past  all  pursuers  lead  us,  make  pleasant  our  path  and  fair

to  tread :

O  Pushan,  find  thou  power  for  this.

8  Lead  us  to  meadows  rich  in  grass :  send  on  our  way  no  early

heat:

0  Pushan,  find  thou  power  for  thi^

9  Be  gracious  to  us,  fill  us  full,  give,  feed  us,  and  invigorate :

0  Pfishan,  find  thou  power  for  this.

10  No  blame  have  wo  for  Pushan;  him  we  magnify  with  songs
of  praise :

Wo  seek  tho  Mighty  One  for  wealth.

HYMN  XLTII.  Rudra.

What  shall  we  sing  to  Rudra,  strong,  most  bounteous,  excel¬
lently  wise,

That  shall  be  dearest  to  his  heart  f

2  That  Aditi  m  >y  grant  the  grace  of  Rudra  to  our  folk,  our  kine,
Our  cattle  axxd  our  progeny ;

3  That  Mitra  and  that  Varuga,  that  Rudra  may  remember  us.
Yea,  all  the  Gods  with  one  accord.


2  The  icolf;  Swedish  and  Norwegian  vary,  which  signifies  not  only

wolf,  but  also  a  wicked  godless  man.


1  Rudra  appears  in  this  hymn  as  a  gentle  and  beneficent  deity,  presiding
especially  over  medioinalplants.

2  That  Aditi  mtty  fjmnt  the  tjrace :  Aditi  is  said  by  Silyana  to  mean  here
the  earth,  and  ia  accordingly  so  translated  by  Wilson.  Benfcy  explains  the
word  by  '  Sinleisness,’  and  Ludwig  takoa  it  as  a  ma30«lino  deity  moaning  Rudra
himself.


«0  TUP  HYMNS  OP  [HOOK  /.

4  To  Rudra  Lord  of  sacrifice,  of  hymns  and  balmy  medicines,

We  pray  for  joy  and  health  and  strength.

.5  He  shines  in  splendour  like  the  Sun,  refulgent  as  bright  gold
is  he,

The  good,  the  best  among  the  Gods.

6  May  he  grant  health  into  our  steeds,  well-being  to  our  rams  and

ewes,

To  men,  to  women,  and  to  kine.

7  0  Soma,  set  thou  upon  us  the  glory  of  a  hundred  men,

The  great  renown  of  mighty  chiefs.

5  Let  not  malignities,  nor  those  who  trouble  Soma,  hinder  US.
Indu,  give  us  a  share  of  strength.

9  Soma !  head,  central  point,  love  these ;  Soma !  know  those  as
serving  thee,

Children  of  thee  Imortal,  at  the  highest  placo  of  holy  law.

HYMN  XLIV.  Agni.

Tmmortat.  Jatavcdas,  thou  many-hued  fulgent  gift  of  Dawn,
Agni,  this  day  to  him  who  pays  oblations  bring  the  Gods  who
waken  with  the  morn.

2  For  thou  art  offering-bearer  and  loved  messenger,  the  chariot-

oer  of  sacrifice :

Accordant  with  the  Asvins  and  with  Dawn  grant  us  heroio
strength  and  lofty  fame.

3  As  messenger  we  choose  to-day  Agni  the  good  whom  many

love,

Smokc-banncrcd  spreader  of  the  light,  at  break  of  day  glory  of
sacrificial  rites.


8  May  he  grunt  health  :  here  Rudra  appears  as  juuupati,  Lord  and  guardian
of  cattlo.

8  Thou  who  trouble  Sonia:  probably  the  people  of  the  hills  who  iu  tor  fere
with  the  gathering  of  the.  Soma  plant  which  has  to  bo  sought  there.

Indu:  literally  ‘ drop  from  the  same  root  as  ludra,  the  Rainer  ;  a  namo
of  the  Moon  as  rain-giver,  and  of  Soma  which  is  identified  with  it.

9  At  the  hi/keet  place  of  holy  law :  at  the  place  where  sacrifice  is  duly  per¬
formed.  'The  whole  verse  is  difficult,  possibly  a  later  addition.'  Mas  Muller.

This  Hymn  and  the  sis  following  are  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Praskanva;
the  son  of  Kanva  who  is  the  seer  of  the  preceding  group.

1  Immortal  Jdtavedai :  JUtavedas  is  a  common  epithet  of  Agni,  the  moan¬
ing  of  which  is  explained  in  five  ways  ;  1.  ‘  knowing  all  created  beings  ;  2.  j»oa-
acssing  all  creatures  ;  ‘  8.  4  known  by  created  beings  ; '  4.  ‘possessing  riches  ;
5,  possessing  wisdom.’

2  The  A  friii:  see  I.  8.  1.' ‘

Lavn:  the  Goddess  Ushas  ;  Morning  personified.


B TAf.V  44.]


TIIE  RIG  VEDA.


61

4  Him  noblest  and  most  youthful,  richly-worshipped  guest,  dear

to  the  men  who  offer  gifts,

Him,  Agni  J atavedas,  1  beseech  at  dawn  that  he  may  bring
the  Gods  to  us.

5  Thee,  Agni,  will  I  glorify,  deathless  nourishcr  of  tho  world,
Immortal,  offering-bearer,  meet  for  sacred  foot],  preserver,  best

at  sacrifice.

6  Tell  good  things  to  thy  prniser,  0  most  youthful  God,  as  richly-

worshipped,  honey-tongued,

And,  granting  to  Praskanva  lengthened  days  of  life,  show
honour  to  the  Heavenly  Host.

7  For  the  men,  Agni,  kindle  thcc  as  all-possessor  and  as  Priest ;
So  Agni,  much-invoked,  bring  hither  with  all  speed  the  Gods,

the  excellently  wise,

8  At  dawn  of  day,  at  night,  Ushus  and  Savitar,  tho  Asvins,

Bhaga,  Agni’s  self :

Skilled  in  fair  rites,  with  Soma  poured,  the  Kanvas  light  thee,
the  oblation-wafting  God.

9  For,  Agni,  Lord  of  sacrifice  and  messenger  of  men  art  thou  :
Bring  thou  the  Gods  who  wake  at  dawn,  who  sec  the  light,  this

day  to  drink  the  Sorna  juice.

10  Thou  shonest  forth,  0  Agni,  after  former  dawns,  all  visible,  O

rich  in  light.

.Thou  art  our  help  in  battle-strife,  the  Friend  of  man,  the  great
High  Priest  in  sacrifice.

1 1  Like  Manu,  wo  will  sfcablish  thee,  Agni,  j>crformcr  of  the  rite,
Invoker,  ministering  Priest,  exceeding  wise,  the  swift  immortal

messenger.

12  When  as  the  Gods’  High  Priest,  by  many  loved,  thou  dost

their  mission  as  their  nearest  Friend,

Then,  liko  the  far-resounding  billows  of  the  flood,  thy  flames,  0
Agni,  roar  aloud.

1 3  Hear,  Agni,  who  hast  ears  to  hear,  witli  all  thy  train  of  escort  Gods;
Let  Mitra,  Aryaman,  seeking  botimes  our  rite,  scat  them  upon

the  sacred  grass.

14  Let  those  who  strengthen  Law,  who  bountifully  give,  the  firc-

tongued  Maruts,  hear  our  praise.

May  Law-supporting  Varuruv,  with  tho  Asvins  twain  and
C’shas,  drink  the  Soma  juice.

11  Like  Munu:  tho  representative  man  and  father  of  tho  human  race  and
the  first  insti  tutor  of  religious  ceremonies.

12  Of  the  food:  or  of  Sindhu;  the  word  meaning  cither  that  river  (the
Indus)  in  particular,  or  any  river  or  gathering  of  waters  in  general.

13  Let  Mitra,  Ari/timan:  and  Varuna,  understood.

.  14  The  fire-tongue  l  Maruts :  who  consume  tho  sacrifice  by  means  of  the
tongue- like  flames  of  Agni.  ,  .  •  • .


THE  11 Y SI  NS  OP


[BOOK  1.


«2


HYMN  XLV.  ,  Agni.

Wohship  the  Vaans,  Agni !  here,  the  Rudras,  the  Adityaa,  all
Who  spring  from  M.nu,  those  who  know  fair  rites,  who  pour
their  blessings  down.

2  Agni,  the  Gods  who  understand  give  car  unto  the  worshipper :
Lord  of  Red'Stecds,  who  lovest  song,  bring  thou  those  Thrcc-

and-Thirty  Gods.

3  0  J&tavcdas,  gx-eat  in  act,  hearken  thou  to  Prasknnva’s  call,

As  l’riyuinedlui  erst  was  heard,  Atri,  Virupa,  Angiras.

4  The  sons  of  Priyaruodha  skilled  in  lofty  praise  have  called  for

help

On  Agni  who  with  fulgent  flame  is  Ruler  of  all  holy  rites.

5  Hear  thou,  invoked  with  holy  oil,  bountiful  giver  of  rewards,
These  eulogies,  whereby  the  sous  of  Kanva  call  thee  to  thoir

aid.

6  0  Agni,  loved  by  many,  thou  of  fame  most  wondrous,  in  their

homes

Men  call  on  thee  whose  hair  is  flame,  to  be  the  bearer  of  their
gifts.

7  Thee,  Agni,  best  to  find  out  wealth,  most  widely  famous,  quick

to  hear,

Singers  have  atablishcd  in  their  rites  Herald  and  ministering
Priest.

8  Singers  with  Soma  pressed  have  made  thee,  Agni,  hasten  to

the  feast,

Great  light  to  mortal  worshipper,  what  time  they  bring  tbo
sacred  gift.

9  Good,  bounteous,  Son  of  Strength,  this  day  8cat  here  on  sacred

grass  the  Gods

Who  come  at  early  morn,  the  host  of  heaven,  to  drink  the
Soma  juice.

10  Briug  with  joint  invocations  thou,  0  Agni,  the  colcstial  host:
Here  stands  the  Soma,  bounteous  Gods :  drink  this  expressed
ere  yesterday.

1  Vutut,  Rudras,  AUtyus :  three  clauses  of  Gods  who  mnkc  up  almost  the
whole  number  of  the  thirty-three  deities  spoken  of  in  the  next  stauza.

Who  tpriny  from  Muhu:  Menu  appears  hero  as  Prajdpati,  the  progenitor
of  Gods  aa  well  a*  of  men.

2  Lord  of  Red  Steal* :  Agni,  whose  horses  arc  flames  of  fire.

The  Thtu-UHd. Thirty  God*:  see  I.  34.  11.

3  Priyamedha,  Atri,  and  Vir.';panrc  famous  Rising,  the  seers  of  many  hymns
of  the  Uigvedo.  Augiras  has  already  been  mentioned.  See  I.  1.  6,

9  Son  of  Strength  :  made  or  generated  by  strong  friction;  ‘kindled  through
agitation  to  a  flame.’

10  Ezprened  ere  yesterday :  prepared  two  day*  leforo  in  order  that  the  juioe
might  ferment  before  it  was  usod.


UYMH  46.  J


THE  RIG  VEDA.  63

HYMN  XLVI.  Asvins.

Now  Morning  with  her  earlist  light  shines  forth,  dear  Daughter
of  the  Sky :

High,  Asvins,  I  extol  your  praise,

2  Sons  of  the  Sea,  mighty  to  save,  discoverers  of  riches,  yo
Gods  with  deep  thought  who  find  out  wealth.  ,

3  Your  giant  coursers  hasten  on  over  the  region  all  in  flames,
Whon  your  car  flies  with  wing&d  steeds.

4  Ho,  liberal,  lover  of  the  flood,  Lord  of  the  House,  the  vigilant.
Chiefs  !  with  oblations  fcidi  you  full.

5  Yc  have  regard  unto  our  hymns,  Nasatyas,  thinking  of  our

words :

Drink  boldly  of  the  Soma  juice.

6  Vouchsafe  to  us,  0  Asvin  Pair,  such  strength  as,  with  attend¬

ant  light,

May  through  the  darkness  carry  us.

7  Come  in  the  ship  of  theso  our  hymns  to  bear  you  to  the  hither

shore :

0  Asvins,  harness  yc  tho  car.

8  The  heaven’s  wide  vessel  is  your  own  :  on  tho  flood’s  Bhoro

your  chariot  waits  ;  •

Drops,  with  the  hymn,  have  been  prepared.

9  Kanvas,  tho  drops  are  in  the  heaven;  the  wealth  is  at  the

Wald's’  place :

Where  will  yo  manifest  your  form  %

1  Horn in/i :  Ushaa  or  Dawn,  personified  M  a  Goddess.

AkvIiis  :  see  I.  3.1.

2  Som  of  the  Sett :  offspring  of  tho  celestial  ocean,  tho  atmosphere.

4  lit,  liberal,  hirer  of  the  flood :  evidently  Agni  and  not  the  Sun.  Agni's
connexion  with  water  is  frequently  alluded  to,  and  he  is  often  called  the  Lord
and  Guardian  of  the  house  or  family.

6  The  durknett r :  in  the  shape  of  poverty  or  want,  according  to  tbe  Scholiast.

7  The  poet  appeals  to  invite  the  AHvino  to  yoke  their  chariot  for  part  of
the  journey  and  come  to  meet  his  hymn  which  shall  bear  them  as  in  a  ship
through  the  sky.  The  middle  air  or  atmosphere  is  tho  sea  between  heaven
aud  earth,  and  tho  earth  is  the  hither  thorc.

8  Vine/:  (nr  it  ran),  a  vehicle  in  tho  shape  of  a  ship,  says  Sdyana.  You
have  already  tho  ship  of  our  sougs  to  bear  you  through  the  sky,  and  now  your
chariot  has  reached  the  earth  aud  the  place  where,  together  with  this  hymn,
the  Soma  juice  luw  been  prepared  fora  libation  to  you.

9  The  drops,  or  Soma  libation,  and  the  wealth  or  treasure,  and  the  sky  and
tho  place  of  rivers  appear  here  to  be  parallelisms,  both  paira  of  expressions
signifying  tho  same  thing.  The  oblation  is  said  to  have  already  reached  the
heaven  whore  the  Alvina  will  receive  it.  S&yaua'e  paraphrase  which  Wilson  has
followed,  seems  forced  and  unnatural.  •  Kanvas,  (ask  this  of  the  Asvins):
(How)  do  the  rays  (of  the  sun  proceed)  from  tho  sky  t :  (How)  doc*  tho  dawn
(rise)  in  the  region  of  the  waters  t '


«4  THE  EYUSS  OF  [BOOK  I.

10  Light  came  to  lighten  up  the  branch:  the  Sun  appeared  as  it

were  gold  :

And  with  its  tongue  shone  forth  the  dark.

1 1  The  path  of  sacrifice  was  made  to  travel  to  the  farther  goal :
The  road  of  heaven  was  manifest.

12  The  singer  of  their  praise  awaits  whatever  grace  the  Asvius

give,

Who  save  when  Soma  gladdens  them.

13  Ye  dwellers  with  Vivas vin  come,  auspicious,  as  to  Mauu  erst;
Come  to  the  Soma  aud  our  praise.

}4  0  circumambient  Asvius,  Dawn  follows  the  brightness  of  your
way :

Approve  with  beams  our  solemn  rites.

15  Drink  ye  of  our  libations,  grant  protection,  0  ye  Asvins  Twain,
With  aids  which  none  may  interrupt.

HYMN  XLVII.  Alvins.

Asvixs,  for  you  who  strengthen  Law  this  sweetest  Soma  hath
been  shed.

Drink  this  expressed  ere  yesterday  and  give  riches  to  him  who
offers  it.

2  Come,  0  ye  Asvins,  mounted  on  your  triple  car,  three-seated,

beautiful  of  form.

To  you  at  sacrifice  the  Kauvos  send  the  prayer :  graciously
listen  to  their  cull.

3  0  Asvius,  ye  who  strengthen  Law,  drink  ye  tins  sweetest  Soma

juice.

Horne  on  your  wealth-fraught  car  come  yc  this  day  to  hiui
who  offers,  ye  of  wondrous  deals.
i  Omniscient  Asvins,  on  the  thrice-heaped  grass  hedow  with  the
sweet  juice  the  sacrifice.

The  sons  of  Kanvo,  striving  heavenward,  cull  on  you  with
draughts  of  Soma  juice  out-poured.

5  0  Asvius,  with  those  aids  wherewith  ye  guarded  Kanva  care¬
fully,

Keep  us,  0  Lords  of  Splendour:  driuk  the  Soma  juice,  ye
strengtheners  of  holy  law.

10  Light  come  to  lighten  up  the  branch :  the  branch  is  probably  tho  sacrificial
fire.  Cf.  ‘The  other  fires  are  verily  thy  brandies’  (I.  6«.  1)‘  The  epithet
'  dark  ’  may  refer  to  the  darkening  of  the  fire  by  the  sunlight  or  by  the  smoke.

1 1  Sacrifice  ie  the  path  which  leads  the  Gods  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  the
way  th'Aiugh  heaven  it  made  visible  by  tho  sacrificial  tire  or  by  the  daylight.

13  Virtuvdn:  ‘the  Brilliant/  a  name  of  the  morning  heaven  personified
He  is  regarded  as  the  father  of  Yiuun,  Manu,  and  the  Asvius.  See  X.  17.  2,  uoto”


HYMN  48.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


65


G  0  Mighty  Ones,  ye  gave  Sudas  abundant  food,  brought  on
your  treasure-laden  car ;

So  now  vouchsafe  to  us  the  wealth  which  many  crave,  either
from  heaven  or  from  the  sea.

7  Nasatyas,  whether  ye  be  far  away  or  close  to  Turvasa,

Borne  on  your  lightly-rolling  chariot  come  &>  us,  together

with  the  sunbeams  come.

8  So  let  your  coursers,  ornaments  of  sacrifice,  bring  you  to  our

libations  here.

Bestowing  food  on  him  who  acts  and  gives  aright,  sit,  Chiefs,
upon  the  sacred  grass.

9  Come,  0  Nasatyas,  on  your  car  decked  with  a  sunbright  canopy,
Whereon  ye  ever  bring  wealth  to  the  worshipper,  to  drink  the

Soma’s  pleasant  juice.

10  With  lauds  and  songs  of  praise  we  call  them  down  to  us,  that
they,  most  rich,  may  succour  us  ;

For  ye  have  ever  in  the  Kanvus'  well-loved  house,  0  Asvins,
drunk  the  Soma  juice.

HYMN  XLVIir.  Dawn.

Dawn  on  us  with  prosperity,  0  Ushas,  Daughter  of  tho  Sky,
Dawn  with  great  glory,  Goddess,  Lady  of  the  Light,  dawn  thou
with  riches,  Bounteous  One.

2  Thoy,  bringing  steeds  and  kino,  boon  givers  of  all  wealth,  have

oft  sped  forth  to  lighten  us.

0  Ushas,  waken  up  for  me  the  sounds  of  joy  :  send  us  the  riches
of  the  great.

3  Ushas  hath  dawned,  and  now  shall  dawn,  the  Goddess,  driver

forth  of  care

Which,  as  she  comcth  nigh,  have  fixed  their  thought  on  her,
like  glory-seek ors  on  the  flood.


6  Sudds:  a  king,  tho  son  of  Pijivana.  Sec  VII.  IS.  5—25.

7  Xdwtyas :  Asvins.  See  I.  3.  3.

Tarnuu :  the  tribe  or  family  called  after  tho  chief  of  this  name,  frequently
mentioned  in  the  liigveda.  Sec  I.  3U.  IS.

10  Wi/k  lands:  ulihibhili,  answering,  according  to  SAyana,  to  what  in  the
Bnllimnna  is  called  S.istram  (to  be  recited  by  the  Hour)  while  the  Stoma
(stotrom)  song,  is  sung  by  the  S&ma-priest*.

1  Ushas :  Morning,  Dawn,  personified.

2  They  :  the  Dawns  of  preceding  days.

3  The  approach  of  Dawn  sets  cars  or  wains  in  motion  in  the  same  way  as  it
causes  ships  or  boats  that  have  anchored  during  tho  night  to  move  out  to  the
open  water.

5


66  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOH  I.

4  Here  Kanva,  chief  of  Kanva’s  race,  sings  forth  aloud  the  glo¬

ries  of  the  heroes’  names, —

The  princes  who,  0  Ushas,  as  thou  comcst  near,  direct  their
thoughts  to  liberal  gifts.

5  Like  a  good  matron  Ushas  comes  carefully  tending  everything  :
Rousing  all  life  she  stirs  all  creatures  that  have  feet,  and

makes  the  birds  of  air  fly  up.

6  She  sends  the  busy  forth,  each  man  to  his  pursuit :  delay  sho

knows  not  as  sho  springs.

0  rich  in  opulence,  after  thy  dawning  birds  that  have  flown
forth  no  longer  rest.

7  This  Dawn  hath  yoked  her  steeds  afar,  beyond  tho  rising  of

tho  Sun :

Borne  on  a  hundred  chariots  sho,  tho  auspicious  Dawn,  advan¬
ces  on  her  way  to  men.

8  To  moot  her  glanco  all  living  creatures  bond  them  down :

Excellent  One,  she  makes  tho  light.

Ushas,  tho  Daughter  of  the  Sky,  tho  opulont,  shinosfocs  and
enmities  away.

9  Shino  on  us  with  thy  radiant  light,  0  Ushas,  Daughter  of  the

Sky,

Briugiug  to  us  great  storo  of  high  felicity,  and  beaming  on  our
solemn  rites.

10  For  in  thee  is  each  living  crcnturo’s  breath  and  life,  when.

Excellent !  thou  dawnost  forth.

Borne  on  thy  lofty  ear,  0  Lody  of  tho  Light,  hear,  thou  of
wondrous  wealth,  our  call.

1 1  0  Ushas,  win  thyself  the  strength  which  among  men  is  won¬

derful.

Bring  thou  thereby  the  pious  unto  lioly  rites,  those  who  os
priests  sing  prniso  to  thee.

12  Bring  from  tho  firmament,  0  Ushas,  all  the  Gods,  that  they

may  drink  our  Soma  juice,

And,  being  what  thou  art,  vouchsafe  us  kine  and  steeds,
strength  meet  for  praise  and  hero  might.

13  May  Ushas  whoso  auspicious  rays  are  scon  rcsploudcut  round

nbout,

Grunt  us  groat  riches,  fair  in  form,  of  all  good  thiugs,  wealth
which  light  labour  may  attain.

14  Mighty  Ono,  whom  the  llishis  of  old  time  invoked  for  their

protection  and  their  help,

4  The  princes  arc  tho  wealthy  patron*  or  inatitutoia  of  sacrifice,  who  bear
all  expenses  and  remunerate  the  priests.


TIIE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  50.}


07


0  Ushas,  graciously  answer  our  songs  of  praise  with  bounty
and  with  brilliant  light.

.  15  Us  has,  as  thou  with  light  to-day  hast  opened  the  twin  doors
of  heaven,

So  grant  thou  us  a  dwelling  wide  and  free  from  foes.  0  God¬
dess,  give  us  food  with  kine.  *

1G  Bring  us  to  wealth  abundant,  sent  in  every  shape,  to  plentiful
refreshing  food,

To  all-subduing  splendour,  Uslias,  Mighty  One,  to  strength,  thou
rich  in  spoil  and  wealth.

HYMN  XLIX.  Dawn.

E’kn*  from  above  the  sky's  bright  realm  come,  Ushas,  by  aus¬
picious  ways :

Let  red  steeds  bear  thee  to  the  house  of  him  who  pours  the
Soma  juice.

2  The  chariot  which  thou  mountest,  fair  of  shape,  0  Ushas !

light  to  move, —

Therewith,  0  Daughter  of  the  Sky,  aid  meu  of  noble  fame  to¬
day.

3  Bright  Ushas,  when  thy  times  return,  all  quadrupeds  and

bipeds  stir,

And  round  about  flock  wingdd  birds  from  all  the  boundaries  of
heaven.

4  Thou  dawning  with  thy  beams  of  light  illumestall  the  radiant

realm.

Thee,  as  thou  art,  the  Kanvas,  fain  for  wealth,  have  called
with  sacred  songs.

HYMN  L.  S:’.rya.

His  bright  rays  bear  him  up  aloft,  the  God  who  knowetli  all
that  lives,

Sflrya,  that  all  may  look  on  him.

2  The  constellations  pass  away,  like  thieves,  together  with  their

beams,  ‘  '  *

Before  the  all-beholding  Sun.

3  His  herald  rays  aro  seen  afar  refulgent  o’er  the  world  of  men,
Like  flames  of  fire  that  burn  and  blaze.

4  Swift  and  all  beautiful  art  thou,  0  S&rya,  maker  of  the  light,
Illuming  all  the  radiant  realm.

1  Lei  red  steeds  bear  thee  :  the  Scholiast  explain*  aruryipsuvah  as  the  purplo
cows,  the  vehicles  of  morning,  that  is,  tLe  dark  red  clouds  that  accompany  the
dawn.

1  The  God  who  knoiceth  all  that  live :  jdtdredas/tm,  here  an  epithet  of. Si  rya
the  Sun-God.


63  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

5  Thou  goest  to  the  hosts  of  Gods,  thou  cornest  hither  to  mankind,
Hither  all  light  to  be  beheld.

6  With  that  same  eye  of  thine  wherewith  thou  lookest,  brilliant  •

Vamp  a,

Upon  the  busy  race  of  men,

7  Traversing  sfcy  and  wide  mid-air,  thou  metest  with  thy  beams

our  days,

Sun,  seeing  all  things  that  havo  birth.

8  Seven  Bay  Steeds  harnessed  to  thy  car  bear  thee,  0  thou  far-

seeing  One,

God,  Suryu,  with  the  radiant  hair.

0  Sdrya  hath  yoked  the  pure  bright  Seven,  the  daughters  of  the
car ;  with  those,

His  own  dear  team,  he  gooth  forth.

10  Looking  upon  the  loftier  light  above  tho  darkness  wo  have  come
To  SQrya,  God  among  the  Gods,  the  light  t  hat  is  most  excellent.

1 1  Rising  this  day,  0  rioh  in  friends,  ascending  to  tho  loftier

heaven,

Sflrya,  remove  my  heart’s  disease,  tnko  from  mo  this  my  yel¬
low  huo.

12  To  parrots  and  to  starlings  lot  us  give  away  my  yollowtioss,

Or  this  my  yollownoss  let  us  transfer  to  HaritAla  trees.

13  With  all  his  conquering  vigour  this  Adityahathgonoupon  high,
Giving  my  foe  into  mine  hand  :  lot  mo  not  bo  my  foeman’s  prey.


0  v<ir«n«:  the  wonl  is,  m  SAyapa  points  out,  used  here  os  an  appellative
(tho  enceiopnasor)  ami  applied  toSOrya.  SAyana  explain*  it  an  uaishfanirdraha.
avortor  of  evil.

0  SArga  hath  yoked  the  pure  bright  Seven  ■  the  seven  steed*  that  draw  his
oar,  and  which,  as  iutiiuatoly  oonnocted  therewith,  are  called  tho  daughter*  of
the  chariot,  Tho  number  seven  has  reference  to  tho  seven  days  of  the  week.

11  '  This  verse  ami  the  two  following  constitute  a  trlcfui  or  triplet,  the  re.
petition  of  which,  with  duo  formalities,  w  considered  to  bo  curative  of  disease  '
Wilson.

12  The  yellowness  here  spoken  of  is  probably  tho  colour  of  tho  Bkin  in
jaundice.  The  /ulridnira  of  tho  text  is  said  by  SAyaiia  to  mean  huriUUadrH-
wa,  n  haritAln  treo  ;  but  there  seem*  to  bo  no  tree  of  that  name  JJuriUIa
means,  usually,  yellow  orpime.it,  and  huridruva,  a  yellow  vegetable  powder.
Tile  word  kdrldrava  is  explained  in  the  Petersburg  Lexicon  usa  certain  yellow

To  parrots  aud  io  UarlfAgt  dmilarly.  among  the  Romans,  people  with  the
jaundice  were  called  icferici  according  to  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxx  II)  f mm  the
fanciful  notion  that  the  disease  was  cured  by  looking  at  the  icterus,  one  of  the
SS  of ‘S^tiSit  m,h°  or  8Urhu«  f*“uily.  Tho  bird  was  said  to  die


HYMN  61.1  '  THE  RIG  VEDA.  69

HYMN  LI.  lndra.

Make  glad  with  songs  that  Ram  whom  many  men  invoke,
worthy  of  songs  of  praise,  lndra,  the  sea  of  wealth  ;

Whoso  gracious  deeds  for  men  spread  like  the  heavens  abroad  :
sing  praise  to  him  the  Sage,  most  liberal  for  our  good.

2  As  aids  the  skilful  Ribhus  yearned  to  lndra  strong  to  save,

who  fills  mid-air,  encompassed  round  with  might,

Rushing  in  rapture ;  and  o’er  Satakratu  came  the  gladening
shout  that  urged  him  on  to  victory.

3  Thou  hast  disclosed  the  kine’s  stall  for  the  Angirases,  and

made  a  way  for  Atri  by  a  hundred  doors.

On  Vimada  thou  hast  bestowed  both  food  and  wealth,  making
thy  bolt  dance  in  the  sacrificer’s  fight.

4  Thou  hast  unclosed  the  prisons  of  the  waters ;  thou  hast  in

the  mountain  seized  the  treasure  rich  in  gifts.

When  thou  hadst  slain  with  might  the  dragon  Vritra,  thou
lndra,  didst  raise  the  Sun  in  heaven  for  all  to  see.


This  hymn  and  the  six  following  arc  attributed  to  the  Ilishi  Savva,  who  is
called  the  son  of  Angiras.

1  That  Ram:  that  famous  rani,  lndra.  See  I.  10.2.  Here  the  reference
is  to  a  fighting-ram  ;  or,  according  to  S&yana,  to  a  legend  which  says  that
lndra  came  in  the  form  of  a  ram  to  Medhitithi’s  sacrifice,  and  drank  the  Soma
juice.

2  The  tJcilful  Rib  hut ;  sec  I.  20.  L  Silyana  says  that  the  Maruta  are  here
intended,  who  encouraged  lndra  when  all  the  Gods  hod  deserted  him.

Rushing  in  rapture :  when  exhilarated  by  draughts  of  Soma.

‘  Here  again,’  says  Professor  Max  Miillcr,  ‘  the  difficulty  of  rendering  Vedic
thought  in  English,  or  any  other  modern  language,  becomes  apparent,  for  we
have  no  poetical  won!  to  express  a  high  state  of  mental  excitement  produced
by  drinking  the  intoxicating  juice  of  the  Soma  or  other  plants,  which  has  not
something  opprobrious  mixed  up  with  it,  while  in  aucicnt  times  that  state  of
excitement  was  celebrated  as  a  blessing  of  the  gods,  as  not  unworthy  of  the
gods  themselves,  nay,  as  a  state  in  which  both  the  warrior  and  the  poet
would  perform  their  highest  achievements.  The  German  Rausch  is  the  nearest
approach  to  the  Sanskrit  mada.’

In  this  version  mada  has  generally  been  rendered  by  rapture,  delight,
transport,  or  wild  joy.

ffutakrat* :  lndra.  See  I.  4.  8.

3  The  tine's  stall :  the  dark  cloud  that  holds  the  waters  imprisoned.

The  Angirases  :  au  ancient  priestly  family.  Sec  I.  1.  6.  Atri:  a  liislii  usually
enumerated  with  the  Angirases  among  tho  prajapatis  or  progenitors  of  men.
lndra  freed  him  from  captivity,  showing  him  a  hundred  ways  of  escape.
Vimada  was  also  a  lliahi  of  aucicnt  times.

4  The  mountain  :  tho  cloud.  The  treasure  is  the  fertilizing  rain.

Didst  raise  the  Sun :  according  to  Siyapa,  didst  free  the  Sun  which  had
been  hidden  by  Vritra.


THE  IlYMN a  6 /'


[hook  /.


/u


5  With  wondrous  might  thou  blowcst  enchanter  Bonds  away,

with  powers  celestial  those  who  called  on  thee  in  jest.

Thou,  hero-hearted,  hast  broken  down  Pipru’s  forts,  and  helped
Kiji?van  when  the  Dasyus  were  struok  dead.

6  Thou  savedst  Kutsa  when  Sushna  was  smitten  down ;  to  Ati-

thigva  gayest  Samba ra  for  a  prey.

E’en  mighty  Arbuda  thou  troddest  undor  foot:  thou  from  of
old  wftst  born  to  strike  the  Dasyus  dead.

7  All  power  and  might  is  closoly  gathored  up  in  thoo;  thy

bounteous  spirit  joys  in  drinking  Soma  juico.

Known  is  the  thundorbolt  that  lies  within  thine  arms :  rend
off  therewith  all  manly  prowess  of  our  foe.

8  Disoorn  thou  well  Aryas  and  Dasyus;  punishing  the  lawless

give  thorn  up  to  him  whoso  gross  is  strewn.

Bo  thou  the  sucrificer’s  strong  cncouragur :  all  those  thy  deeds
are  my  dolight  at  festivals.

9'  Irnlra  gives  up  the  lawloss  to  tho  pious  man,  destroying  by
tho  Strong  Cues  those  who  havo  no  strength.

Vamra  when  glorified  destroyed  tho  gathered  piles  of  tho  still
waxing  great  ono  who  would  reach  tho  hoavon.

10  Tho  might  whioh  U?anu  hath  formed  for  thoo  with  might
reads' in  its  groutness  and  with  strength  both  worlds  apart.

5  Thou  nho  tailed  on  thte  »»  jett :  litornlly,  called  on  Mice  or  offered  to  thoo
nboYO  or  over  tho  shoulder,  opparoutly  nn  ancient  proverbial  expression  op-

(•lied  to  thow  who  int-tood  of  sacrificing  to  tho  Gods  put  tho  intended  oblation
ato  thoir  own  mouths.

Plpru  i»  ono  of  tho  demons  of  tho  sir  ;  his  forlt  sre  tho  clouds  that  withhold
tho  min  ;  RljifvAn  is  a  pious  worshipper  oppressed  by  tho  Dasyus,  robbers  or
barbarians.

6  '  tho  Drier-up,'  is  tho  personification  of  tho  excessive  heat  before

tho  rains  ;  a  demon  of  drought.  and  Arbnda  are  similar  demons  of

tho  atmosphere.  dfifAiyeu  is  another  nanio  of  tho  liberal  prince  DivodAsa.

8  Tho  Aryas  are,  first,  tho  people  who  speak  tho  language  of  tho  Vcdn,
and  tho  Dasyus  are  tho  origiual  and  hostilo  peoples  of  India.  Lator,  tho
former  are  tho  true  aud  loyal  people,  faithful  to  ludra  and  the  Gods,  and  the
latter  arc  the  wickod  and  godless.

Whose  t/vass  is  strevm  :  tho  faithful  worshipper,  the  priest  who  has  trimmed
and  strewn  tho  sacred  grass  for  tho  Gods.

A  Vamru  :  tho  second  half  of  the  stnnxA  is  unintelligible.  Wilson  remarks :
'The  text  is  obscure, —  Vamro  ri  juijhdnu  sandihahf  Vamra  destroyed  the
collection.  Tho  Scholiast  says  that  a  llishi  named  Vamra  took  advantage  of
Imlra’s  absence  from  sacrifice,  to  carry  away  tho  accumulated  heap  of  offerings.’

10  Tho  Uishi  UsanA,  called  also  KAvya  or  Kavi'sson,  appears  in  tho  Veda
as  the  especial  friend  of  ludra.  In  I.  121,  12.  ho  is  said  to  lmvo  given
Indra  his  thunderbolt:  *  Tho  bolt  which  KAvya  UsanA  erst  gave  thee.'  Hero,

K'  the  might'  means  tho  conquering  thunderbolt,  although  in  other  places
brication  is  attributed  to  Trash  tar.

The  steals  of  VdU :  horses  of  the  Wind-God,  horses  swift  os  wind.


HYif.V  52.)


THE  RIO  VEDA.


71


0  Hero-souled,  the  steeds  of  Vita,  yoked  by  thought,  have
carried  thee  to  fame  while  thou  art  filled  with  power.

11  When  Indra  hath  rejoiced  with  K&vya  Usana,  he  mounts  his

steeds  who  swerve  wider  and  wider  yet.

The  Strong  hath  loosed  his  bolt  with  the  swift  rush  of  rain,
and  he  hath  rent  in  pieces  Sushna’s  firm-built  forts.

1 2  Thou  mountest  on  thy  car  amid  strong  Soma  draughts :  S4r-

yata  brought  thee  those  in  which  thou  hast  delight.

111(1111,  when  thou  art  pleased  with  men  whose  Soma  flows  thou
risest  to  unchallenged  glory  in  the  sky.

13  .To  old  Kaksh'van,  Soma-pressor,  skilled  in  song,  0  India,  thou

didst  give  the  youthful  Vrichaya.

Thou,  very  wise,  wast  Mend,  Vrishanasva’s  child :  those  deeds
of  thine  must  all  be  told  at  Soma  feasts.

14  The  good  man’s  refuge  in  his  need  is  Indra,  firm  as  a  door¬

post,  praised  among  the  Pajras.

Indra  alone  is  Lord  of  wealth,  tho  Giver,  lover  of  riches,  cha¬
riots,  kinc,  and  horses.

15  To  him  tho  Mighty  One,  the  self-resplendent,  verily  strong  and

great,  this  praise  is  uttered.

May  we  and  all  the  heroes,  with  tho  princes,  be,  in  this  fray,
0  Indra,  in  thy  keeping.

HYMN  LII.  Indra.

I  glorify  that  Ram  who  finds  the  light  of  heaven,  whose  hun¬
dred  nobly-nature-l  ones  go  forth  with  him.

With  hymns  may  I  turn  hither  Indra  to  mine  aid, — the  Car
which  like  a  strong  stood  hasteth  to  the  call.

11  When  Indra  hath  rejoiced  :  drunk  tlie  cxlulnratiug  Soma.

12  S  irgdta :  a  RAjarshi  or  royal  Rishi  of  the  family  of  Blirigu.
it  cony  hi  thee  those  :  draught*  of  Soma  juice.

Thou  risest  to  unchallenged  glory :  when  thou  hast  exhilarated  thyself  with
the  Soma  offered  by  thy  worshippers  thou  porfornuwt  thy  moat  glorious  deed*.

13  Kakthlcdn  :  a  Rishi,  son  of  Usij.  See  I.  18.  1.  VrichayA,  the  damsel  who
was  given  to  him,  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.

Mend  :  according  to  a  later  legend,  Indra  became,  himself,  the  daughter
of  King  Vmayasva.

14  Among  the  Pajras :  an  ancient  priestly  family,  said  to  be  identical  with
the  Angirascs.

15  In  this  frail :  the  hymn  appears  to  have  been  addressed  to  Indra  for  aid
in  a  coming  battle.

1  That  Ram :  that  famous  warrior.  See  I.  61.  2.

Whose  handred  nobly- natured  one t :  sec  verse  4.


72  TUB  JTTUNS  OF  [BOOK  /.

2  Like  as  a  mountain  on  firm  basis,  unremoved,  lie,  thousand¬

fold  protector,  waxed  in  mighty  strength,

When  Indra,  joying  in  the  droughts  of  Soma  juice,  forced  the
clouds,  slaying  Vritra  stayer  of  their  flow.

3  For  ho  stays  e’en  the  stayers,  spread  o’er  lad  on  cloud,  rooted

in  light,  strengthened  in  rapture  by  tho  wise.

Indra  with  thought,  with  skilled  activity,  I  call,  most  liberal
giver,  for  ho  sates  him  with  the  juice.

4  Whom  those  that  flow  in  heaven  on  sacred  grass,  his  own  as¬

sistants,  nobly-naturod,  fill  full  like  tho  soa, —

Beside  that  Indra  when  ho  smote  down  Vritra  stood  his  helpers,
straight  in  form,  mighty,  invincible.

5  To  him,  as  in  wild  joy  ho  fought  with  him  who  stayed  tho  rain,

his  holpors  sped  like  swift  streams  down  a  slope,

When  Indra,  thunder-armed,  mado  bold  by  Soma  draughts,
broko  Vala’s  foncosdown,  as  Trita  burst  his  way.

6  Splendour  oncompassod  thee,  forth  shone  thy  warrior  might :

tho  rain-obstructor  lay  in  mid-air’s  lowest  (loop,

What  time,  0  Indra,  thou  didst  cast  thy  thundor  down  upon
tho  jows  of  Vfitra  haul  to  bo  rcstruinod.

7  Tho  hymns  which  magnify  thoo,  Indro,  reach  to  thco  ovon  ns

water-brooks  flow  down  and  fill  tho  lake.

Tvash(ar  gavo  yot  more  forco  to  thine  appropriate  strength,
and  forged  thy  thunderbolt  of  overpoworing  might.

8  When,  Indra,  thou  whoso  power  is  linked  with  thy  Bay  Steeds

lmdst  smitten  Vritra,  causing  floods  to  flow  for  man,

Thou  holdst  in  thine  arms  tho  metal  thunderbolt,  and  sottest
in  tho  heaven  the  Sun  for  all  to  sco.


8  For  he  stays  e' en  the  stayers  :  tho  words  of  tho  text  sd  hi  dtari  dmrishu
wrnrl  (tdhnni,  aro  very  difficult.  SAyann's  paraphrase,  oduptod  by  Wilson,  is
loro  but  loom*  to  givo  tho  general  sense  of  tho  passage.  *  lie  who  is  victorious
over  his  enemies,  who  is  spread  through  tho  dewy  (firmament) '  ‘The  stayer
among  tho  stayer's,’  is  probably  tho  conqueror  who  checks  the  demons  who
olmtruct  the  rain,  and  ttdhuu,  tho  udder  (of  the  sky)  means  tho  rain-giving
clouds,  over  which  Indra,  os  Clod  of  tho  Armament,  is  extended  os  a  covering.

4  Hit  own  assistants :  the  inspiring  Soma  draught*.

5  Hit  helpers:  Iris  constant  allies,  tho  Maruta

As  Trita  burst  Ms  way  :  SAyana  refer*  to  n  legend  which  say*  that  Trita  fell
into  a  well,  and  tho  Asuras  honped  coverings  over  its  mouth ;  but  ho  broke
through  them  with  case.  So  Indra  broke  down  the  defences  of  tire  demon
Vala.  See  Wilson's  note  on  the  passage.

6  The  rain-obstructw  :  the  demon  Vi  itra.

7  Teashlnr :  the  Vulcan  or  Hephxstus  of  tho  Indian  Gods.

8  The  metal  thunderbolt :  raj  rant  dyasdm,  usually  translated  ‘  iron  thunder¬
bolt  '  j  but  we  do  not  know  for  certain  what  metal  uyat  (Latin  acs)  wan.


HYMN  53.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


73


9  In  fear  they  raised  the  lofty  self-resplendent  hymn,  praise-  .
giving  and  effectual,  leading  up  to  heaven,

When  Indra’s  helpers  fighting  for  the  good  of  men,  the  Maruts,
faithful  to  mankind,  joyed  in  the  light.

10  Then  Heaven  himself,  the  mighty,  at  that  Dragon’s  roar  reeled
back  in  terror  when,  Indra,  thy  thunderbolt’

In  the  wild  joy  of  Soma  had  struck  off  with  might  the  head
of  Vritra,  tyrant  of  the  earth  and  heaven.

110  Indra,  were  this  earth  extended  forth  tenfold,  and  men  who
dwell  therein  multiplied  day  by  day,

Still  here  thy  conquering  might,  Maghavan,  would  be  famed :
it  hath  waxed  vast  as  heaven  in  majesty  and  power.

12  Thou,  bold  of  heart,  in  thine  own  native  might,  for  help,  upon

the  limit  of  this  mid-air  and  of  heaven,

Hast  made  the  earth  to  be  the  pattern  of  thy  strength :  em¬
bracing  flood  and  light  thou  reachest  to  the  sky.

1 3  Thou  art  the  counterpart  of  earth,  the  Master  of  lofty  heaven

with  all  its  mighty  Heroes  :

Thou  hast  filled  all  the  region  with  thy  greatness :  yea,  of  a
truth  there  is  none  other  like  thee.

14  Whose  amplitude  the  heaven  and  earth  have  not  attained,

whoso  bounds  the  watere  of  mid-air  have  never  reached, —
Not,  when  in  joy  he  fights  the  stayer  of  the  rain :  thou,  and
none  else,  hast  made  all  things  in  order  due.

1 5  The  Maruts  sang  thy  praise  in  this  encounter,  and  in  thee  all

the  Deities  delighted,

What  time  thou,  Indra,  with  thy  spiky  weapon,  thy  deadly
bolt,  smotest  the  face  of  V  ritra.

HYMN  Lin.  Indra.

We  will  present  fair  praise  unto  the  Mighty  One,  our  hymns
to  Indra  in  Vivnsvau’s  dwelling-place  ;

For  he  hath  ne’er  found  wealth  in  those  who  seem  to  sleep :
those  who  give  wealth  to  men  accept  no  paltry  praise.


9  In  fear  then  wued :  that  is,  Indra's  worshippers  in  fear  of  Vritra.

11  If  the  earth  were  ten  times  as  large  and  populous  as  it  is,  thy  fame
would  extend  over  the  wholo  of  it.

14  The  waters  of  mid-air .-  the  aerial  ocean,  the  firmament.

He  fights  :  "aid  of  Indra.  We  should  expect  *  thou  tightest ;  ’  but  this  and
similar  sudden  changes  of  person  are  common  iu  the  Veda.

1  Yhandn’*  dwelt  in g  -place ;  the  scat  of  the  sacrificer,  the  representative
of  the  celestial  Yivaavfm.


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  I.


74

2  Giver  of  horses,  Indra,  giver,  thou,  of  kine,  giver  of  barley,

thou  art  Lord  and  guard  of  wealth  :

Man’s  helper  from  of  old,  not  disappointing  hope,  Friend  of
our  friends,  to  thee  as  such  we  sing  this  praise.

3  Indra,  most  splendid,  powerful,  rich  in  mighty  deeds,  this

treasure  *8pread  around  is  known  to  be  thine  own.

Gather  therefrom,  0  Conqueror,  and  bring  to  us :  fail  not  the
hopo  of  him  who  loves  and  sings  to  thee.

4  Well  pleased  with  those  bright  flames  and  with  those  Soma

drops,  take  thou  away  our  poverty  with  steeds  and  kino.
With  Indra  scattering  tho  Dasyu  through  these  drops,  freed
from  their  hate  may  wo  obtain  abundant  food.

5  Lot  us  obtain,  0  Indra,  plenteous  wealth  and  food,  with  strength

exceeding  glorious,  shining  to  tho  sky  :

May  wo  obtain  tho  Goddoss  Providonce,  tho  strength  of  heroes,
special  source  of  oattlo,  rich  in  steeds.

6  Those  our  libations,  strength-inspiring,  Soma  draughts,  glad¬

dened  thee  in  tho  fight  with  Vptra,  Hero  Lord,

What  timo  thou  slowest  for  tho  singor  with  trimmed  grass  ton
thousand  Vptms,  thou  rosistlcss  in  thy  might.

7  Thou  goost  on  from  light  to  fight  intrepidly,  destroying  castlo

after  castlo  horo  with  strength.

Thou,  Indra,  with  thy  friend  who  makes  tho  foo  bow  down,
slowest  from  fur  away  the  guileful  Namuohi.

8  Thou  hast  struck  down  in  death  Karan ja,  Parnayn,  in  Ati*

thigvo’s  very  glorious  going  forth.

Unyielding,  when  Kijisvan  compassed  them  with  siogo,  thou
hast  destroyed  the  hundred  forts  of  Vangfida.

9  With  all-outstripping  chariot-whocl,  0  Indra,  thou  far-famod,

hast  overthrown  tho  twice  ten  Kings  of  men,

With  sixty  thousand  nino-and-uinety  followers,  who  came  in
arms  to  fight  with  friendless  SuBravAa.

10  Thou  hast  protected  SusravAs  with  succour,  and  TfirvayAna
with  thine  aid,  0  Indra.


2  Those  who  seem  to  sleep :  Indra  derives  no  advantage  from  those  who  nro
remiss  in  their  religious  duties.

6  Ten  thousand  Vp'lrai :  countless  demons  like  Vritra.

7  With  Iky  friend :  the  thunderbolt.  Or  namyrt  may  mean  '  with  Nami’  as
thy  confederate.

Kumttchi :  ‘  non-looser  (of  the  heavenly  waters),’  Another  demon  of  drought.

8  Korun}",  Purtjaya,  and  Vant/pda  arc  Asurna  or  demons;  Atilhi'jxu  has
been  mentioned  before,  I.  61.  6,  and  Rijisvan  in  verse  5  of  the  same  hymn.

9  Sufravds,  ami  T&rwy&m  in  tho  next  verse,  are  said  to  be  kings .


HYMN  54.]  TIIE  RIQVEDA.  75

Thou  madest  Kutsa,  Atithigva,  Ayu,  subject  unto  this  King,
the  young,  the  mighty.

1 1  May  we  protected  by  the  Gods  hereafter  remain  thy  very  pros¬
perous  friends,  0  Indra.

Thee  we  extol,  enjoying  through  thy  favour  life  long  and  joy¬
ful  and  with  store  of  heroes.

HYMN  LIV.  indra.

Urge  us  not,  Maghavan,  to  this  distressful  fight,  for  none  may
comprehend  the  limit  of  thy  strength.

Thou  with  fierce  shout  hast  made  the  woods  and  rivers  roar :
did  not  men  run  in  crowds- together  in  their  fear?

2  Sing  hymns  of  praise  to  Sakra,  Lord  of  power  and  might ;  laud

thou  and  magnify  Indra  who  heareth  thee,

Who  with  his  daring  might,  a  Bull  exceeding  strong  in  strength,
maketh  him  master  of  the  heaven  and  earth.

3  Sing  forth  to  lofty  Dyaus  a  strength-bestowing  song,  the  Bold,

whose  resolute  mind  hath  independent  sway.

High  glory  hath  the  Asura,  compact  of  strength,  drawn  on  by
two  Bay  Steeds :  a  Bull,  a  Car  is  he.

4  The  ridges  of  the  lofty  heaven  thou  madest  shake;  thou,

daring,  of  thyself  smotest  through  Sambara,

When,  bold  with  gladdening  juice,  thou  warredst  with  thy  bolt,
sharp  and  two-edged,  against  the  banded  sorcerers.


10  Kutsa  has  boon  mentioned  (I.  33.  14.)  as  a  favourite  of  Indra,  but  is
here  represented,  together  with  Atithigva  and  Ayu,  as  cliastiscd  by  him.

This  King :  Susravila,  or  Turvny&na  ;  these  names  perhaps  denote  the  same
individual.

1  Urge  id  not,  Maghavan  :  the  verb,  urge,  which  is  not  in  the  text,  is
supplied  by  Sflyaya.  The  meaning  appears  to  bo,  Do  not,  0  Indra,  force  us
iuto  any  conflict  in  which  wo  may  have  thee  for  our  opponent.

2 "Sal-ra :  '  the  Mighty,’  a  name  of  India.

3  Sing  forth  to  loftg  Dyaus :  Heaven.  The  God  who  is  represented  in  the
Veda  as  the  consort  of  Earth  and  the  progenitor  of  the  Gods  is  called  Dyaus
or  Dyaushpitor,  names  identical  in  origin  with  Zeus,  or  Zeus  pater,  and
Jupiter,  or  Dicspitcr,  the  appellations  given  to  the  supreme  God  of  the  Greeks
and  Romans.  In  this  place  SAyana  identifies  Dyaus  with  Indra,  who  seems,
in  later  times,  to  have  succeeded  to  the  functions  assigned  to  the  former  God.
See  Muir,  Originul  Sanskrit  Texts,  v.  33.

The  Asum :  tho  divine  One,  Indra  as  the  Bnprcmc  Dyaus.

4  Sumbura:  a  demon.  Sec  I.  51.  6.

The  landed  sorcere vs  :  the  fiends  of  the  atmosphere  who  use  enchantments
or  supernatural  powers  in  their  conflicts  with  Indra.


76  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

5  When,  with  a  roar  that  fills  the  woods,  thou  forcest  down  on

the  wind’s  head  the  stores  which  Sushpa  kept  confined,

Who  shall  have  power  to  stay  thee  firm  and  eagcr-souled  from
doing  still  this  day  what  thou  of  old  hast  done  1

6  Thou  holpest  Narya,  Turvasa,  and  Yadu,  and  Vayya’s  son

Turviti,  Satakratu !

Thou  holpest  horse  and  car  in  final  battle ;  thou  brakest  down
tho  nine-and-ninety  castles.

7  A  hero-lord  is  he,  King  of  a  mighty  folk,  who  offers  free  oblations

and  promotes  the  Law,

Who  with  a  bounteous  guerdon  welcomes  hymns  of  praise :  for
him  flows  down  the  abundant  stream  below  the  sky.

8  His  power  is  matchless,  matchless  is  his  wisdom ;  chief,  tlirough

their  work,  be  some  who  drink  the  Soma,

Those,  Indra,  who  increase  the  lordly  power,  the  firm  heroic
strength  of  thee  the  Giver.

9  Therefore  for  thee  are  these  abundant  beakers,  Indra’s  drink,

stone-pressed  juices  held  in  ladles.

Quaff  them  and  satisfy  therewith  thy  longing;  then  fix  thy
mind  upon  bestowing  treasure.

10  There  darkness  stood,  the  vault  that  stayed  the  waters’  flow :

in  Vritra’s  hollow  side  the  rain-cloud  lay  concealed.

But  Indra  smote  the  rivers  which  the  obstructor  stayed,  flood
following  after  flood,  down  steep  declivities.

1 1  So  give  us,  Indra,  bliss-increasing  glory ;  give  us  great  sway

and  strength  that  conquers  people.

Preserve  our  wealthy  patrons,  save  our  princes ;  vouchsafe  us
wealth  and  food  with  noble  offspring.

HYMN  LV.  Indra.

Though  e’en  this  heaven’s  wide  space  and  earth  have  spread
them  out,  nor  heaven  nor  earth  may  be  in  greatness  Indru’s
match.

Awful  and  very  mighty,  causing  woe  to  men,  he  whets  his
thunderbolt  for  sharpness,  as  a  bull.


5  $iuAita :  a  demon  of  drought.

6  Tiou  holpest  j\ci rya  :  some  chief  or  Riohi  so  named  ;  or  tho  word  may  bo
an  adjective,  manly,  qualifying  Turvasa.

Tarcafu,  Yudu,  Turetti  hare  been  mentioned  before.  See  I.  36.  18.


1  a  bull :  a a  a  bull  sharpens  hi*  horns.

Causing  me  Co  men :  as  the  punisher  of  the  wicked.


HYMN  55.]


TUB  RIO  VEDA.


77


2  Like  as  the  watery  ocean,  so  doth  he  receive  the  rivers  spread

on  all  sides  in  their  ample  width.

He  bears  him  like  a  bull  to  drink  of  Soma  juice,  and  will,  as
Warrior  from  of  old,  be  praised  for  might.

3  Thou  swayest,  ludra,  all  kinds  of  great  manly  power,  so  as  to

bend,  as ’t  were,  even  that  famed  mountain  clown.

Foremost  among  the  Gods  is  he  through  hero  might,  set  in  the
van,  the  Strong  One,  for  each  arduous  deed.

4  He  only  in  the  wood  is  praised  by  worshippers,  when  he  shows

forth  to  men  his  own  fair  Iudra-power.

A  friendly  Bull  is  he,  a  Bull  to  bo  desired,  when  Maghavan
auspiciously  sends  forth  his  voice.

5  Yet  verily  the  Warrior  in  his  vigorous  strength  stirreth  up

with  his  might  great  battles  for-mankind  ;

And  men  havo  faith  in  Indra,  the  resplendent  One,  what  time
he  hurleth  down  his  bolt,  his  dart  of  death.

C  Though,  fain  for  glory,  and  with  strength  increased  on  earth,
ho  with  great  might  destroys  the  dwellings  made  with  art.
He  makes  the  lights  of  heaven  shine  forth  secure,  lie  bids,
exceeding  wise,  the  floods  flow  for  his  worshipper.

7  Drinker  of  Soma,  let  thy  heart  incline  to  give ;  bring  thy  Bays

hitherward,  0  thou  who  hcarcst  praise.

Those  charioteers  of  thine,  best  skilled  to  draw  the  rein,  the
rapid  sunbeams,  ludra,  lead  thou  not  astray.

8  Thou  bearcst  iu  both  hands  treasure  that  never  fails;  the

famed  One  in  his  body  holds  unvanquishod  might.

0  Indra,  in  thy  members  many  powers  abide,  like  wells
surrounded  by  the  ministering  priests,


4  A  friendly  Bull  is  he:  Maghavan,  the  mighty  Indra,  I*  here  represented
in  hi#  gracious  mood,  strung  yet  gentle.  But  vrlthd,  the  male,  the  bull,  the
strong,  may  also  mean  the  strong  Soma ;  wayAdrd  means  also  the  inch  in-
stitutor  of  a  sacrifice,  a  worshipper  ;  and  dhind  means  cow  os  well  as  voice.
Accordingly  Professor  Max  Muller  translates  the  passage  :  ‘  The  strong  Soma
is  pleasing,  the  strong  Soma  is  delicious,  when  the  sacrificer  safely  brings  the
cow,'  in  order  that  the  Sonia  may  be  mixed  with  milk.  Sec  Vcdic  Hymns,
Part  I.,  p.  148.

In  the  wood,  in  the  first 'line  of  the  verse  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the
forest  life  of  Brdhmans.

5  In  this  verso  Indra  is  represented  as  a  terrible  God,  and  iu  the  following
verso  as  sometimes  sending  afflictions  but  gem-ially  blessing  men  with  light
i.nd  with  kindly  rain.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  /.


78

HYMN  LYI.  India.

For  this  man’s  full  libations  held  in  ladles,  he  hath  roused
him,  eager,  as  a  horse  to  meet  the  marc.

He  stays  his  golden  car,  yoked  with  Bay  Horses,  swift,  and
drinks  the  Soma  juice  which  strengthens  for  great  deeds.

2  To  him  the»guidance-following  songs  of  praise  flow  full,  as  those

who  seek  gain  go  in  company  to  the  flood.

To  him  the  Lord  of  power,  the  holy  synod's  might*  as  to  a  hill,
with  speed,  ascend  the  loving  ones.

3  Victorious,  great  is  ho ;  in  manly  battle  shines,  unstained  with

dust,  his  might,  as  shines  a  mountain  peak ;

Wherewith  the  iron  one,  fierce  e’en  against  the  strong,  in
rapture,  fettered  wily  Sushna  fast  iu  bonds.

4  When  Strength  the  Goddess,  made  more  strong  for  help  by

thee,  waits  upon  Indra  as  the  Sun  attends  the  Dawn,

Then  lie  who  with  his  might  unflinching  kills  the  gloom  stirs
up  the  dust  aloft,  with  joy  and  triumphing.

5  When  thou  with  might,  upon  the  framework  of  the  heaven,

didst  fix,  across,  air’s  region  firmly,  unremoved,

Iu  the  light-winning  war,  Iudra,  in  rapturous  joy,  thou  smotest
Vritra  dead  and  broughtest  floods  of  min.

6  Thou  with  thy  might  didst  grasp  the  holder-up  of  heaven,  thou

who  art  mighty  also  in  the  seats  of  earth.

Thou,  gladdened  by  the  juice,  hast  set  the  waters  free,  and
broken  Vritra’s  stony  fences  through  and  through.

HYMN  LVir.  Indra.

To  him  most  liberal,  lofty  Lord  of  lofty  wealth,  verily  powerful
and  strong,  I  bring  my  hymn, —

Whose  checkless  bounty,  as  of  waters  down  a  slope,  is  spread
abroad  for  all  that  live,  to  give  them  strength.


1  This  man  :  the  iuhti  tutor  of  the  sacrifice.  He :  Indra.

2  The  flood :  ( tamudidj  any  large  gathering  of  waters  not  necessarily  the
sea  or  ocean.

The  holy  synod :  an  assembly  for  worship  of  the  Gods.

The  toeing  ones  :  the  songs  of  loving  praise.  I  find  the  stanza  unintelligible  ;
and  the  version  (based  chiefly  on  Grassmanu's)  which  I  offer  is  merely  a  tem¬
porary  makeshift.

3  The  iron  one :  the  thunderbolt,  made  of  dytu.  iron  or  other  metal,

4  By  thee :  by  Soma.

5  In  the  light-winning  war:  waged  with  the  demons  of  the  air  for  rain  and
the  light  which  follows  the  dispersion  of  the  clouds.

6  The  bearti'-up  of  kcattn :  perhaps  the  thunderbolt,  with  which  Indra
maintains  order.


UYMN  58. 1  THE  MOVED  A.  79,

2  Now  all  this  world,  for  worship,  shall  come  after  thee — the

offerer’s  libations  like  floods  to  the  depth,

When  the  well-loved  one  seems  to  rest  upon  the  hill,  tho
thunderbolt  of  Indra,  shatterer  wrought  of  gold.

3  To  him  the  terrible,  most  meet  for  lofty  praise,  like  bright

Dawn,  now  bring  gifts  with  reverence  in  this' rite,

Whose  being,  for  renown,  yea,  Indra-power  and  light,  have
been  created,  like  bay  steeds,  to  move  with  speed.

4  Thine,  Indra,  praised  by  many,  excellently  rich  !  are  we  who

trusting  in  thy  help  draw  near  to  thee.

Lover  of  praise,  none  else  but  thou  receives  our  laud  :  as  earth
loves  all  her  creatures,  love  thou  this  our  hymn.

5  Great  is  thy  power,  0  Indra,  we  are  thine.  Fulfil,  0

Maghavan,  the  wish  of  tins  thy  worshippei*.

After  thee  lofty  heaven  hath  measured  out  its  strength :  to
thee  and  to  thy  power  this  earth  hath  bowed  itself.

6  Thou,  who  hast  thunder  for  thy  weapon,  with  thy  bolt  hast

shattered  into  pieces  this  broad  massive  cloud.

Thou  hast  sent  down  the  obstructed  floods  that  they  may
flow  :  thou  hast,  thine  own  for  ever,  all  victorious  might

HYMN  LVIII.  Agni.

Ne’er  waxoth  faint  the  Immortal,  Son  of  Strength,  since  he,
tho  Herald,  hath  become  Vivasv&n’s  messenger.

On  paths  most  excellent  ho  measured  out  mid-air :  he  with
oblation  calls  to  service  of  the  Gods.

2  Never  decaying,  seizing  his  appropriate  food,  rapidly,  eagerly
through  the  dry  wood  ho  spreads.

His  back,  as  ho  is  sprinkled,  glistens  like  a  horse  :  loud  hath
he  roared  and  shouted  liko  the  heights  of  heaven.


'  2  Wkea  the  ^cell-loved  one :  when  the  lightning-laden  cloud  is  resting  on  the
mountain,  men  pray  to  Indm  in  order  tliat  he  may  discharge  his  colestial
artillery  and  bring  down  tho  rain.

5  A /ter  thee :  tho  heaven  lias  taken  thy  might  as  a  pattern  for  its  own
might.

This  Hymn  and  the  five  following  are  ascribed  to  Nodhas,  the  eon  of
Gotama.

1  Vicaavdn't  messenger :  Vivasviln  is  the  morning  heaven  and  the  personifica¬
tion  of  the  sacrificcr  of  the  Gods.

He  manured  out  mid-air :  this  act  is  ascribed  to  Indra  in  I.  56.  5.

2  As  he  it  sprinkled:  with  clarified  butter.


so


TEE  HYMNS  OF  {BOOK  I.


3  Set  high  in  place  o’er  all  that  Vasus,  Rudras  do,  immortal,

Lord  of  riches,  seated  as  High  Priest ;

Hastening  like  a  car  to  men,  to  those  who  live,  the  God
without  delay  gives  boons  to  be  desired.

4  Urged  by  the  wind  he  spreads  through  dry  wood  as  he  lists,

armed  with  his  tongues  for  sickles,  with  a  mighty  roar.

Black  is  thy  path,  Agni,  changeless,  with  glittering  waves  !
when  like  a  bull  thou  rushest  eager  to  the  trees.

5  With  teeth  of  flame,  wind-driven,  through  the  wood  lie  speeds,

triumphant  like  a  bull  among  the  herd  of  cows,

With  bright  strength  roaming  to  the  evorlasting  air  :  tilings
fixed,  things  moving  quake  before  him  as  he  flies.

6  The  Bhrigus  stablishcd  thee  among  mankind  for  men,  like  as

a  treasure,  beauteous,  easy  to  invoke ;

Thee,  Agni,  as  a  herald  and  choice-worthy  guest,  as  an  aus¬
picious  Friend  to  the  Celestial  Race.

7  Agni,  the  seven  tongues'  deftest  Sacri ficcr,  him  whom  the

priests  elect  at  solemn  worship,

The  Herald,  messenger  of  all  the  Vasus,  I  servo  with  dainty
food,  1  ask  fur  riches.

8  Grant,  Son  of  Strength,  thou  rich  in  friends,  a  refuge  without

a  flaw  this  day  to  us  thy  praisers.

0  Agni,  Son  of  Strength,  with  forts  of  iron  preserve  thou
from  distress  tho  man  who  lauds  thee.

9  Be  thou  a  refuge,  Bright  One,  to  the  singer,  a  shelter,  Boun¬

teous  Lord,  to  those  who  worship.

Preserve  tho  singer  from  distress,  0  Agni.  May  lie,  onriched
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early.


HYMN  L1X.


Agni.


The  other  fires  are,  verily,  thy  branches;  tho 'Immortals  all
rejoice  in  thee,  0  Agui.

Centre  art  thou,  Vaisv&nara,  of  tho  people,  sustaining  men  like
a  deep-founded  pillar.

3  Rudras,  Vasus  ;  two  classes  of  QckIb.  Sec  I.  34.  11.

4  The  description  of  Agni  in  this  verse  and  the  nest  applies,  not  to  the
sacrificial  fire,  but  to  the  fire  that  clears  the  jungle  as  the  new  settlers  advance
into  the  country.

6  The  Bkri/jus:  one  of  the  moat  eminent  priestly  families  of  more  ancient  times.
Friend  to  the  Celestial  Race:  as  bearing  to  die  Gods  tho  oblations  of  their

worshippers.

7  Agui,  the  seeen  tongues'  deftest  Sacr\jicer :  the  seven  tongues  appear  to  bo
the  tongue-like  flames  which  Agni  employs  to  consume  tho  oblations.

1  Thy  branches  :  merely  offshoots  of  theo.

,  Va/itduara  :  a  name  of  Agui ;  common  to,  dwelling  with,  and  benefiting  all
Arya  men.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  60.]


81


2  The  forehead  of  the  sky,  earth’s  centre,  Agni  became  the  mes¬

senger  of  earth  and  heaven.

Vaisvanara,  the  Deities  produced  thee,  a  God,  to  be  a  light
uuto  the  Ary  a.

3  As  in  the  Sun  firm  rays  are  set  for  ever,  treasures  are  in  Vais-

vAnara,  in  Agni.

Of  all  the  riches  in  the  hills,  the  waters,  the  herbs,  among
mankind,  thou  art  the  Sovran.

4  As  the  great  World-halves,  so  are  their  Son’s  praises;  skilled,

as  a  man,  to  act,  is  he  the  Herald.

Vaisvanara,  celestial,  truly  mighty,  most  manly  One,  hath
many  a  youthful  consort.

5  Even  the  lofty  heaven,  0  Jatavedas  Vaisvanara,  hath  not

attained  thy  greatness.

Thou  art  the  King  of  lauds  where  men  are  settled,  thou  hast
brought  comfort  to  the  Gods  in  battle.

6  Now  will  I  tell  the  greatness  of  the  Hero  whom  Puru’s  sons

follow  as  Vritra’s  slayer :

Agni  Vaisvanara  struck  down  the  Dasyu,  clave  Sambara
through  and  shattered  down  his  fences.

7  Vaisvanara,  dwelling  by  his  might  with  all  men,  far-shining,

holy  mid  the  BharadvAjas,

Is  lauded,  excellent,  with  hundred  praises  by  Purnnitha,  son
of  Satavani.

HYMN  LX.  Agni.

As  'twero  some  goodly  treasure  Matarisvan  brought,  as  a  gift,
the  glorious  Priest  to  Bhrigu,

Banner  of  sacrifice,  the  good  Protector,  child  of  two  births,  the
swiftly  moving  envoy.


4  Vast  as  heaven  and  earth,  which  constitute  the  world,  arc  the  praises
offored  to  Agni  their  sou.

Skilled,  as  a  man.  to  act :  duties  of  the  heavenly  Hotar,  invoking  priest,  or
herald,  being  regarded  as  similar  to  those  of  tho  earthly  functionary.

Man  a  a  youthful  contort :  the  flames.

6  Pdrn’a  sons :  men  in  general  ;  Pilru  being  regarded  as  their  progenitor.
Struck  down  the  Dusyn  :  the  demon  who  stayed  the  rain.  The  deeds  usually

ascribed  to  Iudra  are  here  attributed  to  Agui,  that  is.  Agui  is  identified  with

7  The  Bharadvdjcu  :  tho  descendants  of  the  Itishi  BharadvAja.

Purunttha  :  a  king  of  that  name,  says  SAyana  ;  probably  the  institutor  of  the

sacrifice.  The  name  does  not  occur  again,  aud  nothing  is  known  regarding  him.

1  M&tarisvan:  a  divine  or  semi-divine  being,  who  as  the  messenger  of
Vivaaviln  brings  down  from  heaven  Agni  who  had  hitherto  been  concealed.
The  explanation  of  MAtarisvau  as  Vftvu,  the  God  of  wind,  docs  not  appear  to
be  justified  by  lligveda  texts.  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  v.  204.

6


82  .  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  T.

2  Both  Gods  aud  mcu  obey  this  Ruler’s  order,  Gods  who  are

worshipped,  men  who  yearn  and  worship.

As  Priest  he  takes  his  seat  ere  break  of  morning,  House-Lord,
adorable  with  men,  Ordainer.

3  May  our  fair  praise,  heart-bom,  most  recent,  reach  him  whose

tongue,  (Ten  at  his  birth,  is  sweet  as  honey ;

Whom  mortal  priest*  men,  with  their  strong  endeavour,
supplied  with  dainty  viands,  have  created.

4  Good  to  mankind,  the  yearning  Purifier  hath  among  men  been

placed  as  Priest  choice-worthy.

May  Agni  he  our  Friend,  Lord  of  the  Household,  protector  of
the  richos  in  the  dwelling.

5  As  such  we  Gotamas  with  hymns  extol  thee,  0  Agni,  as  the

guardian  Lord  of  riches,

Decking  thee  like  a  horse,  .the  swift  prize-winner.  May  lie,
enriched  with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early.

HYMN  LXL  Indra.

Even  to  him,  swift,  strong,  aud  high-exalted,  I  bring  my  song
of  praise  as  dainty  viands,

My  thought  to  him  resistless,  praise-deserving,  prayers  offered
most  especially  to  Iudra.

2  Praise,  like  oblation,  I  present,  and  utter  aloud  my  song,  my

fair  hymn  to  the  Victor.

For  Iudra,  who  is  Lord  of  old,  the  singers  have  decked  their
lauds  with  heart  and  mind  and  spirit.

3  To  him  then  with  my  lips  mine  adoration,  winning  heaven's

light,  most  excellent,  I  offer,

To  magnify  with  songs  of  invocation  and  with  fair  hymns  the
Lord,  most  bounteous  Giver.

The  glorious  Priest :  Agni.  Bhrigu  :  tha  chief  of  the  ancient  priestly  family
who  bear  that  name.  Banner  of  sacrifice:  announcer  of  sacrifice  by  his
crackling  flames.  Child  of  two  births:  bom  of  heaven  and  earth  and  again
from  the  two  fire-sticks,  or  bom  from  the  fire-sticks  and  again  when  ho  is
consecrated.

Sioiftiy  moving  entoy  :  messenger  between  Gods  and  men.  See  1. 1.  1,  note.

3  Sweet  as  honey  :  with  tasting  the  sweet  libations.

Have  created :  by  rapid  agitation  of  the  fire-stick.

5  We  Gotamas :  descendants  of  Gotama,  men  of  the  family  to  which  the
Rishi  of  the  hymn  belongs.

Decking  thee :  trimining  thee,  to  make  thee  shine  as  men  groom  a  race-horae
in  the  morning.


THE  RIOVEDA.


HYMN  61.]

4  Even  for  him  I  frame  a  laud,  as  fashions  the  wriglit  a  chariot

for  the  man  who  needs  it, —

Praises  to  him  who  gladly  hears  our  praises,  a  hymn  well-form¬
ed,  all-moving,  to  wise  Iudra.

5  So  with  my  tongue  I  deck,  to  please  that  Iudra,  my  hymn,  as

'twere  a  horse,  through  love  of  glory,

To  reverence  the  Horo,  bounteous  Giver,  famed  far  and  wide,
destroyer  of  the  castles.

6  Even  for  him  hath  Tvashtar  forged  the  thunder,  most  deftly

wrought,  celestial,  for  the  battle,

Wherewith  he  reached  the  vital  parts  of  Vfitra,  striking — the
vast,  the  mighty — with  the  striker.

7  As  soon  as,  at  libations  of  his  mother,  great  Vishnu  had  drunk

up  the  draught,  he  plundered

The  dainty  cates,  the  cooked  mess ;  but  One  stronger  trans¬
fixed  the  wild  boar,  shooting  through  the  mountain.

8  To  him,  to  Iudra,  when  he  slew  the  Dragon,  the  Dames,  too,

Consorts  of  the  Gods,  w$vc  praises.

The  mighty  heaven  and  earth  hath  he  encompassed  :  thy  great¬
ness  heaven  and  earth,  combined,  exceed  not.

9  Yea,  of  a  truth,  his  ‘magnitude  surpassoth  the  magnitude  of

earth,  mid-air,  and  heaven.

Indra,  approved  by  all  men,  self-resplendent,  waxed  in  his  home,
loud-voiced  and  strong  for  battle.

10  Through  his  own  strength  Iudra  with  bolt  of  thunder  cut
piecc-meal  V ritra,  drier  up  of  waters.

He  let  tho  floods  go  free,  like  cows  imprisoned,  for  glory,  with
a  heart  inclined  to  bounty.


4  For  the  man  who  needs  it :  and  orders  it  to  be  made.  Tdtsindya  is  a  diffi¬
cult  word.  Wilson  renders  it,  after  Sftyana,  (that  the  driver)  may,  thence,
(obtain)  food.

5  The  cattles :  the  strongholds  of  the  atmospheric  demons  of  drought,  the
castles  of  rain-imprisoning  cloud.

6  The  strike)' :  the  thunderbolt  or  lightning.

7  Hit  mother  :  Indra's  mother  Aditi  who  gave  him  Soma  to  drink  as  soon
as  he  was  born.  See  III.  32.  9,  10  ;  48.  2,  8  ;  VII.  98.  8.  Dainty  cates:  tho
demon’s  store  of  rain.  One  stronger;  the  mightier  Indra.  The  wild  boar:
the  fierce  demon  V ritra.  Cf.  VIII.  66. 10.  The  mountain  :  the  massive  cloud  in
which  Vritra  was  enveloped.  For  my  corrected  version  of  this  stanza  I  am
indebted*  to  Prof.  A.  A.  Macdonell’s  article  on  Mythological  Studies  in  the
Rigvcda,  Royal  Asiatic  Society  Journal,  January,  18&5.

8  The  Dames,  the  Consorts  of  the  Gods :  according  to  Sftyana  these  are  the
personified  Oftyatr!  and  other  metres  of  the  Veda.  The  Celestial  Waters  are
probably  intended.


8-1


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  /.


1 1  The  rivers  played,  through  his  impetuous  splendour,  since  with

his  bolt  he  compassed  them  on  all  sides.

Using  his  might  and  favouring  him  who  worshipped,  he  made
a  fold,  victorious,  for  Turviti.

12  Vast,  with  thine  ample  power,  with  eager  movement,  against

this  Vi  it.-a  cast  thy  bolt  of  thunder.

Rend  thou  his  joints,  as  of  an  ox,  dissevered,  with  bolt  oblique,
that  floods  of  rain  may  follow.

13  Sing  with  new  lauds  his  exploits  wrought  aforetime,  the  deeds

of  him,  yea,  him  who  moveth  swiftly.

When,  hurling  forth  his  weapons  in  the  battle,  ho  with  impe¬
tuous  wrath  lays  low  tho  foomon.

14  When  he,  yea,  he,  comes  forth  the  firm-set  mountains,  and  tho

whole  heaven  and  eaith,  tremble  for  terror.

May  Nodluis,  ever  praising  the  protection  of  that  dear  Friend,
gain  quickly  strength  heroic.

15  Now  unto  him  of  these  things  hath  been  given  what  he  who

rules  alone  o’er  much,  elccteth.

Indra  hath  helped  Etasa,  Soma-presser,  contending  in  the  race
of  steeds  with  Sfirya.

16  Thus  to  thee,  Indra,  yoker  of  Bay  Coursers,  the  Gotamas  have

brought  their  prayers  to  please  thee.

Bestow  upon  them  thought,  decked  with  all  beauty.  May  he,
enriched  with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early.

HYMN  LXII.  Indra.

Like  Angiras  a  gladdening  laud  we  ponder  to  him  who  loveth
song,  exceeding  mighty.

Let  us  sing  glory  to  the  far-famed  Hero  who  must  be  praised
with  fair  hymns  by  the  singer.

2  Unto  tho  great  bring  ye  great  adoration,  a  chant  with  praise
to  him  exceeding  mighty,

Through  whom  our  sires,  Angirases,  singing  praises  and  know¬
ing  well  the  places,  found  the  cattle.

11  Turvtti:  SAyanasays  that  this  Rishi  had  been  immersed  in  water,  and
that  Indra  brought  him  to  dry  land.

11  Nodhai;  the  Rishi  or  seer  of  tho  hymn.

15  Praises  and  sacrifice  have  been  offered  to  Indra.  Ho  hinmclf  possesses
everything  else.  Such  praises  and  sacrifice  led  Indra  to  help  Etasa,  his  wor¬
shipper,  in  his  rivalry  of  Sdrya  and  hia  horses.  See  II.  19.  5,  note.

16  The  hymn  ends  with  the  refrain  that  concludes  also  Hymns  I.  58  and  60.

1  Like  Anginu :  after  the  manner  of  Angiras,  one  of  the  first  insti tutors  of
religious  ceremonies.

2  Pound  the  cuttle :  the  raiu-clouds,  or  tho  rays  of  light  which  follow  the
effusion  of  vain.


TUB  RIG  VEDA.


85


HYMN  62.]


3  When  Indra  and  the  Angirascs  desired  it,  Saramit  found  pro¬

vision  for  her  offspring.

Brihaspati  cleft  the  mountain,  found  the  cattle :  the  heroes
shouted  with  the  kinc  in  triumph.

4  Mid  shout,  loud  shout,  and  roar,  with  the  Navagvas,  seven

singers,  hast  thou,  heavenly,  rent  the  mountain  ;

Thou  with  the  speeders,  with  Dasagvas,  Indra,  Sakra !  hast
rent  with  thunder  flaming  Vala.

5  Praised  by  Angirascs,  thou,  foe-destroyer,  hast,  with  the  Dawn,

Sun,  rays,  dispelled  the  darkness.

Thou  Indra,  hast  spread  out  the  earth’s  high  ridges,  and  firm¬
ly  fixed  the  region  under  heaveu.

6  This  is  the  deed  most  worthy  of  all  honour,  the  fairest  marvel

of  the  Wonder-Worker,

That,  nigh  where  heaveu  bends  down,  he  made  four  rivers
flow  full  with  waves  that  carry  down  sweet  water.

7  Unwearied,  won  with  laudiug  hymns,  he  parted  of  old  the

ancient  Pair,  united  ever.

In  highest  sky,  like  Bhaga,  he  the  doer  of  marvels  set  both
Dames  aud  earth  and  heaven.

8  Still  boru  afresh,  young  Dames,  each  in  her  manner,  unlike

in  hue,  the  Pair  in  alternation

Round  heaven  and  earth  from  ancient  time  have  travelled,
Night  with  her  dark  limbs,  Dawn  with  limbs  of  splendour.

3  Saramd  found  provision  for  her  offspring  •  SaramA,  the  hound  of  Indra
and  mother  of  the  two  dogs  called  after  thoir  mother  SAramcyos  who  are  the
watchdog*  of  Ysma  the  God  of  the  Dead,  is  said  to  have  pursued  and
recovered  the  cows  stolen  by  the  Panis  ;  which  has  been  supposed  to  mean
that  SaramA  is  the  Dawn  who  recovers  the  rays  of  the  Sun  that  have  boon
carried  away  by  night.  The  legcud  says  that  SaramA  agreed  to  go  in  search  of
the  stolon  cattle  on  condition  that  the  milk  of  the  cows  should  be  given  to  her
young  ones.  Ludwig  is  of  opinion  that  the  word  *  offspring ’  in  the  text  refers
not  to  SaramA’s  young  ones,  but  to  the  descendants  of  the  Angirases.
Cf.  I.  72.  8.

Brihaspati  cleft  the  mountain :  Brihaspati  or  Brahamanaspati  is  the  Lord
of  prayer.  ‘  Tt  is,  therefore,’  as  Professor  Roth  observes,  ‘  brahma,  prayer,  with
which  the  God  breaks  open  the  hiding-place  of  the  enemy.  Prayer  pierces
through  to  the  object  of  its  desire,  and  attains  it.’

4  The  seven  singers  are  probably  the  Angirascs  themselves  ;  the  Navagvas
and  Dasagvas  are  also  the  Angirascs  or  their  priestly  allies.  They  are  called
speeders  as  hastily  following  the  track  of  the  stolen  cows.  Vala  is  the  fiend
who  keeps  the  cows  imprisoned.

6  Nigh  where  heaven  bends  down ;  flowing  away  to  the  distant  horiton.  The
four  rivers  are  not  specified  by  Sftyana,  who  merely  says  they  are  the  Ganges
and  others.

7  The  ancient  Pair :  Heaven  and  Earth.  Bhaga  is  here  the  Supreme  God.

Both  Dames :  Night  and  Morning.


ss  the  hymns  op  [book  i.

9  Rloh  in  good  actions,  skilled  in  operation,  the  Son  with  might
maintains  his  perfect  friendship.

Thou  in  the  raw  cows,  black  of  hue  or  ruddy,  storest  the  ripe
milk  glossy  white  in  colour.

10  Their  paths,  of  old  connected,  rest  uninjured ;  they  with

groat  might  preserve  the  immortal  statutes.

For  many  thousand  holy  works  the  Sisters  wait  on  the  haughty
Lord  like  wives  and  matrons.

11  Thoughts  ancient,  seeking  wealth,  with  adoration,  with  newest

lauds  have  sped  to  thee,  0  Mighty.

As  yearning  wives  cleave  to  their  yearning  husband,  so  cleave
our  hymns  to  thee,  0  Lord  most  potent.

12  Strong  God,  the  riches  which  thy  hands  have  holden  from

days  of  old  have  perished  not  nor  wasted.

Splendid  art  thou,  O  Indra,  wise,  unbending  :  strengthen  us
with  thy  might,  0  Lord  of  Power.

13  0  mighty  Indra,  Gotama’s  son  Nodhas  hath  fashioned  this

new  prayer  to  thee  Eternal,

Sure  leader,  yoker  of  the  Tawny  Coursers.  May  he,  enriched
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early.

HYMN  LXin.  •  Indra.

Tiiou  art  the  Mighty  One ;  when  born,  0  Indra,  with  power
thou  terrifiedst  earth  and  heaven ;

When,  in  their  fear  of  thee,  all  lira-set  mountains  and  mons¬
trous  creatures  shook  like  dust  before  thee.

2  When  thy  two  wandering  Bays  thou  dravest  hither,  thy  praiser
laid  within  thine  arms  the  thunder,

Wherewith,  0  Much-invoked,  in  will  resistless,  thou  smitest
focmen  down  and  many  a  castle.


9  The  Son  with  might :  S&yana  takes  shvas/i,  '  with  might,’  in  the  sense  of
the  genitive  sdiosuh,  and  explains  :  the  Sou  of  Might,  that  is  tho  exceedingly
strong  one.  But  this  seems  forced.  The  Son  is  Indra.

Thou  in  the  raw  com  :  the  oows  are  called  raw,  as  contrasted  with  tho  warm
milk  matured  or  cooked  in  their  udders.  The  colour  of  the  milk  is  also  con¬
trasted  with  that  of  the  oows,  as  in  tho  German  child's  ditty  quoted  by
Zimmer  :  '  0  sago  mir,  wio  geht  oa  xu,  gibt  woisso  Milch  die  rothe.Kuh.’

10  Their  paths :  the  courses  of  Night  and  Morning

The  Sisltrs  :  a  frequently  occurring  appellation  of  the  fingers  as  employed
in  acts  of  worship.  The  haughty  Eonl :  Indra.

2  Thy  praiser:  the  praises  of  tho  worshipper  strengthen  Indra,  and  urge
him  to  the  performance  of  glorious  exploit*.


HYMN  64.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  87

3  Faithful  art  thou,  these  thou  doliest,  Iudra;  thou  art  the

Ribhus’  Lord,  horoic,  victor.

Thou,  by  his  side,  for  young  and  glorious  Kutsa,  with  steed
and  car  in  battle  slewest  Sushno.

4  That,  as  a  friond,  thou  furthercdst,  0  Iudra,  when,  Thunderer,

strong  in  act,  thou  orushedst  Vyitra;  e
When,  Hero,  thou,  greafc-souled,  with  easy  conquest  didst  rend
the  D.asyus  in  their  distant  dwelling.

5  This  doest  thou,  and  art  not  harmed,  0  Indra,  e’en  in  the

anger  of  the  strongest  mortal.

Lay  thou  the  race-course  open  for  our  horses :  as  with  a  club,
slay,  Thunder-armed  !  our  foomen.

6  Hence  men  invoke  thee,  Indra,  in  the  tumult  of  battle,  in  the

light-bestowing  conflict.

This  aid  of  thine,  0  Godlike  One,  was  ever  to  be  implored  in
deeds  of  might  in  combat.

7  Warring  for  Purukutsa  thou,  0  Indra,  Thunder-armed!  brakest

down  the  seven  castles ;

Easily,  for  Sudfis,  like  grass  didst  rend  them,  and  out  of  need,
King,  broughtest  gain  to  Puru.

8  0  Indra,  God  who  movest  round  about  us,  feed  us  with  varied

food  plenteous  as  water —

Food  wherewithal,  0  Hero,  thou  bestowest  vigour  itself  to
flow  to  us  for  ever.

9  Prayers  have  been  made  by  Gotamas,  0  Indra,  addressed  to

thee,  with  laud  for  thy  Bay  Horses.

Bring  us  in  noble  shape  abundant  riches.  May  he,  enriched
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early.

HYMN  LXIV.  Maruts.

Bring  for  the  manly  host,  wise  and  majestical,  0  Nodhas,  for
the  Maruts  bring  thou  a  pure  gift.

I  deck  my  songs  as  one  deft-handed,  wise  iu  mind  prepares
the  water  that  hath  power  in  solemn  rites.

3  The  JtibhuA  Lord :  Chief  over  the  three  semi-divine  beings  who  by  their
good  works  raised  themselves  to  immortality  and  godhead.  See  I.  20/

Kutfi:  has  been  nteutioned  before  as  protected  by  Indra.  See  1. 33. 14;  51.  6.

4  Datyus :  hostile  demons,  or  porhaps  savage  tribe*.

7  Parakutxa:  a  favourite  of  Iudra  and  of  the  Aavins.  See  I.  112.  7  ;
174.  2  ;  IV.  42.  8,  note.  Sud<U  (Seo  I.  47.  6)  and  POra  are  kings  or  chiefs  of
claus.

8  Who  movat  round  about  n* :  pdrijmnn,  circumambient,  is  an  epithet
applied  to  the  Sun  also,  aud  to  the  chariot  of  the  Asvins.

9  WUU  laud  for  thy  Bay  Ilorsei :  this  is  clearly  tho  sense  of  the  words  as
they  stand.  Sftyana  explains  ‘with  reverence  to  thee  connected  with  thy
bay  horses.’

1  0  Nodhai :  the  ^lishi  or  seer  of  the  hymn  addresses  this  line  to  himself.


THE  IIYMHS  OP


[ BOOK  I.

2  They  spring  to  birth,  the  lofty  Ones,  the  Bulls  of  Heaven,

divine,  the  youths  of  Rudra,  free  from  spot  ancl  stain  ;

The  purifiers,  shining  brightly  even  as  suns,  awful  of  form
like  giants,  scattering  rain-drops  down.

3  Young  Iiudras,  demon-slayers,  never  growing  old,  they  have

waxed,  even  as  mountains,  irresistiblo.

They  make  all  beings  tremble  with  their  mighty  strength,
oven  the  very  strongest,  both  of  earth  and  heaven.

4  With  glittering  ornaments  they  deck  them  forth  for  show ;  for

beautj'  on  their  breasts  they  bind  their  chains  of  gold.

The  lances  on  their  shoulders  pound  to  pieces ;  they  were
bom  together,  of  themselves,  the  Men  of  Heaven.

5  Loud  roarers,  giving  strength,  devourers  of  the  foe,  they  make

the  winds,  they  make  the  lightnings  with  their  powers.

The  restless  shakers  drain  the  udders  of  the  sky,  and  ever
wandering  round  fill  the  earth  full  with  milk.

6  The  bounteous  Maruts  with  the  fatness-dropping  milk  fill  full

the  waters  which  avail  in  solemn  rites.

They  lead,  as  ’twerc,  the  Strong  Horse  forth,  that  it  may  rain  :
they  milk  the  thundering,  tho  never-failing  spring.

7  Mighty,  with  wondrous  power  and  marvellously  bright,  self¬

strong  like  mountains,  ye  glide  swiftly  on  your  way.

Like  the  wild  elephants  ye  eat  the  forests  up  when  ye  assume
your  strength  among  the  bright  red  flames.

8  Exceeding  wise  they  roar  like  lions  mightily,  they,  all-posses¬

sing,  are  beauteous  as  antelopes ;

Stirring  the  darkness  with  lances  and  spotted  deer,  combined
as  priests,  with  serpents’  fury  through  their  might

9  Heroes  who  march  in  companies,  befriending  man,  with  ser¬

pents’  ire  through  strength,  ye  greet  the  earth  and  heaven.
Upon  the  seats,  6  Maruts,  of  your  chariots,  upou  the  cars
stands  lightning  visible  as  light


2  The  Bit  Us  of  Iltaren  :  or  of  Dyu  or  Dyaus.

3  Young  Rudras :  the  Moruta,  or  Storm-Gods,  aro  tho  sons  of  Rudra.

Demon-slayers ;  slayers  of  the  clouds  that  give  no  min.

4  The  lances,  as  well  as  their  other  bright  ornaments,  are  the  lightning-
flashes.

5  The  udders  of  Che  iky  ;  the  full  clouds.  The  milk,  ib  the  sweet  fertiliz¬
ing  min.

6  The  Strong  Horse :  is  tho  min  cloud,  which  in  the  same  lino  is  called  a
spring  or  well.

8  Combined  as  priests :  tho  music  of  wind  and  storm  being  regarded  as  tho
Maruts’  song  of  praise.  But  the  meaning  of  the  words  thus  rendered  is  not
clear.  Sftyana,  Benfey,  and  Max  Miiller  give  other  interpretations.


HYMN  64.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


10  Lords  of  all  riches,  dwelling  in  the  home  of  wealth,  endowed

with  mighty  vigour,  singers  loud  of  voice,

Heroes,  of  powers  infinite,  armed  with  strong  men’s  rings,  the
archers,  they  have  laid  the  arrow  on  their  arms.

11  They  who  with  golden  follies  make  the  rain  increase  drive  for¬

ward  the  big  clouds  like  wanderers  on  the  way.

Self-moving,  brisk,  unwearied,  they  o’erthrow  the  firm ;  the
Maruts  with  bright  lances  make  all  things  to  reel-

12  The  progeny  of  Rudra  we  invoke  with  prayer,  the  brisk,  the

bright,  the  worshipful,  the  active  Ones.

To  tho  strong  band  of  Maruts  cleave  for  happiness,  the  chasers
of  the  sky,  impetuous,  vigorous.

13  Maruts,  the  man  whom  yc  have  guarded  with  your  help,  he

verily  in  strength  surpasseth  all  mankind.

Spoil  with  his  steeds  he  gaineth,  treasure  with  his  men ;  he
winneth  honourable  strength  and  prospereth.

14  0  Maruts,  to  tho  worshippers  give  glorious  strength  invincible

in  battle,  brilliant,  bringing  wealth,

Praiseworthy,  known  to  all  men.  May  we  foster  well,  during
a  hundred  winters,  son  and  progeny.

15  Will  ye  then,  0  yo  Maruts,  grant  us  riches,  durable,  rich  in

men,  defying  onslaught,

A  hundred,  thousandfold,  over  increasing?  May  he,  enriched
with  prayer,  come  soon  and  early.


10  Armed  with  strong  men’s  rings:  the  meaning  of  vrlshaklWulayah  is  un¬
certain  ;  but  tho  khddi  seems  to  have  been  a  ring  worn  on  the  arm  aucl  foot.
It  may  also  have  been  used  as  a  weapon,  as  the  sharp- edged  quoits  are  aged
by  tho  Sikhs.  Vrlshan  as  Professor  Max  Milller  observes,  *  conveys  the  mean,
ing  of  strong,  though  possibly  with  the  implied  idea  of  rain-producing,  ferti¬
lizing.'

12  The  worshipful:  the  meaning  of  mntnam  is  uncertain.  Wilson,  after
SAyana,  translates  it  by  '  water-shedding,'  vana  being  said  to  mean  water.
Ludwig  suggests  'dwelling in  the  woods,'  instead  of  '  lighting '  which  he  gives
in  his  translation.  *  Worshipful  ’  is  Professor  Max  Muller’s  suggestion,  and  I
adopt  it  for  tho  presont.

15  Enriched  with  prayer  :  either,  generally,  invoked  by  many  worshippers,
or  rich  through  tho  hymn  just  recited.  This  last  hemistich  is  the  usual  re¬
frain  of  the  hymns  ascribed  to  Nodhas.

I  have  generally  followed  Professor  Max  Muller  in  his  translation  of  this
hymn.  See  his  Vcdic  Hymns,  Part  I.


[BOOK  I.


00  THE  HYMNS  OP

HYMN  LXV.  Agui.

One-minded,  wise,  they  tracked  thee  like  a  thief  lurking  in
dark  cave  with  a  stolen  cow ;

Thee  claiming  worship,  bearing  it  to  Gods :  there  nigh  to  thco
sate  all  $e  Holy  Ones.

2  The  Gods  approached  the  ways  of  holy  Law ;  there  was  a

gathering  vast  as  heaven  itself.

The  waters  feed  with  praise  the  growing  Babe,  born  nobly  in
the  womb,  the  seat  of  Law.

3  Like  grateful  food,  like  some  wide  dwelling-place,  like  a  fruit¬

bearing  hill,  a  wholesome  stream  ;

Like  a  steed  urged  to  run  iu  swift  career,  rushing  like  Sindliu,
who  may  check  his  course  t

4  Kiu  as  a  brother  to  his  sister  floods,  he  eats  the  woods  as  a

King  eats  the  rich.

Wheu  through  the  forest,  urged  by  wind,  he  spreads,  verily
Agui  shears  the  hair  of  earth.

5  Like  a  swan  sitting  in  the  floods  he  pants ;  wisest  in  mind  mid

men  he  wakes  at  mom.

A  Sage  like  Soma,  sprung  from  Law,  lie  grew  like  some  young
creature,  mighty,  shining  far.

HYMN  LX VI.  Agni.

Like  the  Sun's  glance,  like  wealth  of  varied  sort,  like  breath
which  is  the  life,  like  one’s  own  son,

Liko  a  swift  bird,  a  cow  who  yields  her  milk,  pure  and  reful¬
gent  to  the  wood  ho  speeds.


This  and  the  eight  following  hymns  are  ascribed  to  the  Riahi  Pfc.r1.8ara,  son
of'SSkti  the  son  of  Vasiahtha.  They  are  generally  difficult,  and  not  seldom
unintelligible.

1  TUn  tracked  thee:  the  Gods  followed  Agni  who  had  fled  away,  carrying
with  him  the  sacrifice  a*  a  thiof  carries  off  a  oow.  The  dark  care  is  the  depth
of  the  waters  in  which  Agni  hid  himself.

2  The  nut  of  Laic :  the  place  of  sacrifice,  the  law  ordained  for  ever.

!J  Sindh1' :  the  Indus,  or  any  great  river.

■»  At  a  King  eaU  the  rich ;  supports  his  state  by  levying  contributions  from
the  wealthy.

The  hair  of  earth :  grass  and  shrubs,  which  forest-fires  destroy.

5  Uepante  :  after  his  rapid  flight  to  the  waters  in  which  he  hid  himself.

He  tea  Aw  at  morn  :  at  tho  time  of  the  early  morning  sacrifice.

A  Sage  like  Soma :  like  tho  deified  Soma.  1  As  Soma  creates  or  cause?  use¬
ful  plants  to  grow,  so  Agni  creates,  or  extracts  from  them,  their  nutritive
faculty.’— Wilson  (from  S&yana).


THE  MOVED  A.


91


HYMN  67.]

2  He  offers  safety  like  a  pleasant  home,  like  ripened  corn,  the

Conqueror  of  men.

'  Like  a  Seer  lauding,  famed  among  the  folk ;  like  a  steed
friendly  he  vouchsafes  us  power.

3  With  flame  insatiate,  like  eternal  might ;  caring  for  each  one

like  a  dame  at  home ;  1 2 3

Bright  when  he  shines  forth,  whitish  mid  the  folk,  like  a  car,
gold-decked,  thundering  to  the  fight.

4  He  strikes  with  terror  like  a  dart  shot  forth,  e’en  like  an

archer’s  arrow  tipped  with  flame  ;

Master  of  present  and  of  future  life,  the  maidens’  lover  and
the  matrons'  Lord.

5  To  him  lead  all  your  ways  :  may  we  attain  the  kindled  God

as  cows  their  homo  at  eve.

He  drives  the  flames  below  os  floods  their  swell :  the  rays  rise
up  to  the  fair  place  of  heaven.

HYMN  LXVII.  Agni.

Victorious  in  the  wood,  Friend  among  men,  *vcr  he  claims
obedience  as  a  King.

Gracious  like  peace,  blessing  like  mental  power,  Priest  was  he,
offe ring-bearer,  full  of  thought.

2  Ho,  bearing  in  his  hand  all  manly  might,  crouched  in  the

cavern,  struck  the  Gods  with  fear.

Men  filled  with  understanding  find  him  there,  when  they  have
snug  prayers  formed  within  their  heart.

3  He,  like  the  Unborn,  holds  the  broad  earth  up,  and  with  effec¬

tive  utterance  fixed  the  sky.

0  Agni,  guard  the  spots  which  cattle  love  :  thou,  life  of  all,
hasKgonc  from  lair  to  lair.


2  Like  a  steed  :  like  a  war-horso  who  helps  to  win  spoil  in  bottle.

4  The  mnulcns'  lover  :  tho  offering  to  Agni  being  an  essential  part  of  the
marriage-service.

The  matrons'  Lord :  children  bciug  especially  tho  gift  of  Agni,  in  whose
worship  the  wife  of  tho  sacrificer  bears  an  important  part.  I  u*ve  not  at.
tempted  to  imitate  the  rhythm  of  the  original,  and  have  oontonted  myself
with  preserving  the  same  number  of  syllables  iu  each  line.

1  Victorious  in  the  wood :  subduing  tho  fuel  and  burning  it  to  ashes.

2  Crouched  in  the  cavern  :  concealed  in  the  dark  depth  of  the  waters.  See
I.  65.  1.

3  The  Unborn :  the  Sun  ;  regarded  as  the  Supreme  God.

The  spots  which  cattle  love:  ns  thou  knowest  by  experience  how  ploasant  it
is  to  find  a  safe  place  of  refuge,  do  not  bum  up  the  places  where  the  cattle
find  refuge  aud  food.


92  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  /.

4  Whoso  hath  known  him  dwelling  in  his  lair,  and  hath  approach¬

ed  the  stream  of  holy  Law, —

They  who  release  him,  paying  sacred  rites, — truly  to  such
doth  he  announce  great  wealth.

5  He  who  grows  mightily  in  herbs,  withiu  each  fruitful  mother

and  eachTbabe  she  bears,

Wise,  life  of  all  men,  in  the  waters’  home, — for  him  have  sages
built  as  'twere  a  seat.

HYMN  LXV1II.  Agni.

Commingling,  restless,  he  ascends  the  sky,  unveiling  nights
and  all  that  stands  or  moves,

As  he  the  sole  God  is  preeminent  in  greatness  among  all  these
other  Gods.

2  All  men  are  joyful  in  thy  power,  0  God,  that  living  from  the

dry  wood  thou  art  born.

All  truly  share  thy  Godhead  while  they  keep,  in  their  accus¬
tomed  ways,  eternal  Law.

3  Strong  is  Rethought  of  Law,  the  Law’s  behest;  all  works

have  they  performed ;  he  quickens  all.

Whoso  will  bring  oblation,  gifts  to  thee,  to  him,  bethinking
thee,  vouchsafe  thou  wealth.

4  Seated  as  Priest  with  Manu’s  progeny,  of  all  these  treasures

he  alone  is  Lord.

Men  yearn  for  children  to  prolong  their  line,  and  are  not
disappointed  in  their  hope.

5  Eagerly  they  who  hear  his  word  fulfil  his  wish  as  sons  obey

their  sire’s  behest.

He,  rich  in  food,  unbars  his  wealth  like  doors :  he,  the  House-
Friend,  hath  decked  heaven's  vault  with  stars.


4  The  stream  of  holy  law :  or  as  Slyan*  explains,  the  supporter  of  tho
truth  or  of  sacrifice,  that  is,  Agni.

They  who  release  him :  free  him,  by  attrition,  from  tho  fire -sticks.

1  Commingling:  Agni,  devouring  and  fusing  together  with  his  flames
and  smoke  the  elements  of  the  oblations  which  he  bears  to  the  Gods.

3  1  can  make  nothing  of  the  first  hemistich.  Wilson,  after  SAyaiia,
paraphrases  :  ‘PraiBes  are  addressed  to  him  who  has  repaired  (to  the  solem¬
nity)  ;  oblations  are  offered  to  him  who  has  gone  (to  the  sacrifice);  in  him  is
all  sustenance ;  (and  to  him)  have  all  (devout  persona)  performed  (tho
customary)  rites.'

4  Manu's  progeny all  Aryan  men.

Men  yearn  for  children  :  men  have  children  at  their  desire,  as  tho  reward
of  their  faithful  worship  of  Agni.

He,  the  Eouse-Ptnend :  he,  Agni,  who  is  the  friend  and  guardian  of  every
house  in  his  character  of  the  household  fire,  as  the  Sun,  the  Creator,  the
Supreme  God,  made  the  heaven  and  adorned  it  with  stars.


HYMN  70.]


Tin  RIO  VEDA.  93

HYMN  LXIX.  Agiii.

Bright,  splendid,  like  Dawn’s  lover,  he  hath  filled  the  two
joined  worlds  os  with  the  light  of  heaven.

When  born,  with  might  thou  hast  encompassed  them :  Father
of  Gods,  and  yet  their  Son  wast  thou.

2  Agni,  tho  Sage,  the  humble,  who  discerns  like  tlie  cow’s  udder,

the  sweet  taste  of  food,

Liko  a  bliss-giver  to  bo  drawn  to  men,  sits  gracious  in  the
middle  of  the  house.

3  Born  in  the  dwelling  like  a  lovely  son,  ploascd,  like  a  strong

steed,  ho  bears  on  the  folk.

What  time  the  men  and  1,  with  heroes,  call,  nmy  Agni  then
gaiu  all  through  Godlike  powor.

4  None  breaks  theso  holy  laws  of  thine  when  thou  hast  grnnted

audience  to  these  chieftains  hero.

This  is  thy  boast,  thou  smotost  with  thy  poors,  and  joinod  with
horocs  dravost  oft”  disgraco.

5  Liko  tho  Dawn’s  lover,  spreading  light,  well-known  as  hued

liko  morn,  may  ho  remomber  me.

Thoy,  boaring  of  themsolvoH,  unbar  tho  doors  :  thoy  all  ascend
to  tho  fair  place  of  heavon.

HYMN  LXX.  Agni.

May  wo,  tho  pious,  win  much  food  by  prayor,  may  Agni  with
fair  light  pervade  each  act, —

Ho  tho  obsorvor  of  the  hoavonly  laws  of  Gods,  and  of  tho  raco
of  mortal  man.


1  Like  Dtncn'i  low :  both  tho  Sun  and  Agni  are  willed  tho  lovoin  of
Uahoit  or  Dawn.  Agni  U  ho  callod  from  hU  makiug  bin  appearanco  m
sacrificial  Arc  at  tho  earliest  break  of  dny.

Tht  two  joined  world* :  onrth  and  heaven  coupled  into  a  ainglo  dual
conception.

2  Like  the  cow'*  u<UUr:  Agni  discerns  and  select*  the  sweet  savours  of
oblations  in  the  «nmo  manner  as  tho  udder  of  a  cow  soloct*  and  assimilate*
tho  sweet  juices  of  grass  and  herbs  for  tho  production  of  milk.

3  Tho  moaning  of  tho  Bcoond  hemistich  is  not  cloar.  Wilson,  after  SAyapa,
renders  it :  '  Whatever  (diviuo)  beings  1  may,  along  with  other  men,  invoke
(to  the  coromony)  thou,  Agni,  assuinost  all  (their)  celestial  nature*.’

5  They,  beariny  of  themielra :  oithor,  his  rays  bearing  up  tbo  oblation  of
their  own  accord,  or  tho  steeds  who  freely  draw  tho  chariot  of  Dawn.

1  Pervade  each  act :  bo  present  and  regulate  all  our  act*  of  worship  ;  or  tho
meaning  may  bo  '  attain  each  gift,'  receive  every  oblation  that  wo  offer.


>1  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

2  He  who  is  germ  of  waters,  germ  of  woods,  germ  of  all  things

that  move  not  and  that  move, —

To  him  even  in  the  rock  and  in  the  house :  Immortal  One,  ho
cares  for  all  mankind.

3  Agin  is  Lord  of  riches  for  the  man  who  serves  him  readily

with  sacred  songs.

Protect  these  beings  thou  with  careful  thought,  knowing  the
races  both  of  Gods  and  men.

4  Whom  many  dawns  and  nights,  unlike,  make  strong,  whom,

bom  in  Law,  all  things  that  move  and  stand,—

He  hath  been  won,  Herald  who  sits  in  light,  making  effectual
all  our  holy  works.

5  Thou  settest  value  on  our  cows  and  woods :  all  shall  bring

tribute  to  us,  to  the  light

Men  have  served  thee  in  many  and  sundry  spots,  parting,  as
’twere,  an  aged  father’s  wealth.

C  Like  a  brave  archer,  like  one  skilled  and  bold,  a  fierce  avenger,
so  he  shines  in  fight

HXMN  LXXI.  Agni.

Loving  the  loving  One,  as  wives  their  husband,  the  sisters  of
one  home  have  urged  him  forward,

Bright-coloured,  even  as  the  cows  love  morning,  dark,  breaking
forth  to  view,  and  redly  beaming.

2  Our  sires  with  lauds  burst  e’en  the  firm-set  fortress,  yea,  the

Angirases,  with  roar,  the  mountain.

They  made  for  us  a  way  to  reach  high  heaven,  they  found
•  us  day,  light,  day’s  sign,  beams  of  morning

3  They  stablished  order,  made  his  service  fruitful ;  then  parting

them  among  the  longing  faithful,

Not  thirsting  after  aught,  they  come,  most  active,  while  with
sweet  food  the  race  of  Gods  they  strengthen.


2  To  him  even  in  the  rock :  I  can  make  nothing  out  of  this.  Wilson,  after
Sftya?*,  paraphrases :  '(They  offer  oblations)  on  tho  mouutain,  or  in  tlio
mansion,  to  that  Agni  ; '  but  this  cannot  be  the  moaning.  Ludwig  suggest*
an  alteration  of  the  text,  so  that  the  meaning  would  be,  ‘  even  within  the
stone  is  his  dwelling.’

5  ‘Agni,  confer  excellence  upon  our  valued  cattle  j  and  may  all  men  bring
us  acceptable  tribute.’— Wilson.  ^

1  The  loving  One. :  Agni.  The  litters  of  one  home:  the  fingers  that  servo
him  by  kindling  the  fire,  etc.  The  cowi the  clouds  brightened  by  the
approach  of  Lawn.

2  The  priestly  Angirases,  the  earliest  institutors  of  religious  worship,  caused

by  prayer  and  praise  the  mountain-like  cloud,  that  held  tho  rain  iuu.riaoucd
to  be  opened.  1 2 3

3  Hu  ici  tice ;  the  worship  of  Agni.


nr ain  7i.j


TIIF.  RIG  VEDA.


05


4  Since  Matarisvan,  far-diffused,  hath  stirred  him,  and  he  in
every  house  grown  bright  and  noble,

He,  Bhyigu-likc,  luith  gone  as  his  companion,  as  on  commission
to  a  greater  Sovran.

0  When  man  poured  juice  to  Heaven,  the  mighty  Father,  he
knew  aud  freed  himself  from  close  cmbracoment
The  archer  boldly  shot  at  him  his  arrow,  and  the  God  threw
his  splendour  on  his  Daughter.

6  Whoso  hath  flamos  for  thee  within  his  dwelling,  or  brings  the

worship  which  thou  lovest  daily,

Do  thou  of  double  might  increase  his  substance  :  may  he  whom
thou  incitcst  meet  with  riches.

7  All  sacrificial  viands  wait  on  Agni  as  the  Seven  mighty  Rivers

seek  the  ocean.

Not  by  our  brethren  was  our  food  discovered  :  find  with  the
Gods  care  for  us,  thou  who  knowest.

8  When  light  hath  filled  the  Lord  of  men  for  increase,  straight

from  the  heaven  descends  the  limpid  moisture.

Agni  hath  brought  to  light  an  1  filled  with  spirit  the  youthful
host  blaiholoss  and  well  providing.  .

9  He  who  like  thought  goes  swiftly  on  his  journey,  the  Sun,

alone  is  ever  Lord  of  riches.

The  Kings  with  fair  hands,  Varuya  and  Mitra,  protect  the
precious  nectar  in  our  cattle.

10  0  Agni,  break  not  our  ancestral  friendship,  Sage  as  thou  art,
endowed  with  deepest  knowledge.

Old  age,  like  gathering  cloud,  impairs  the  body  :  before  that
evil  be  come  nigh  protect  me.


4  Mdlarifvan :  tlie  divino  or  semi-divine  being  who  brought  Agni  to
tf  Bhrigu.

5  This  verec  is  very  obscure.  The  meaning  of  the  first  hemistich  seems  to
1*  that  when  oblations  were  offered  to  Dyaus  or  Heaven  Agni  shone  forth
freed  from  encompassing  night.  Who  the  archer  is,  whether  MiUarisvan  or
Agni.  is  uncertain,  nor  is  it  clear  at  whom  the  arrow  was  shot.  The
may  be  Dyaus,  and  hit  Daughter  may  be  Uoliaa  or  Dawn.

7  The  Seven  mighty  Rivers :  see  I.  32.  12.

Not  bg  our  brethren  :  wo  do  not  look  to  our  kinsmen  for  food,  but  depend
upon  Agni  and  the  other  Gods.

8  The  Lord  of  men :  according  to  Sftyana,  the  sacrificer.  Perhaps  Indra  i*
meant,  who  comes  attended  by  the  youthful  host  of  Maruta.


96  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

HYMN  LXXIL  Agni.

TnouGH  holding  many  gifts  for  men,  he  humbleth  the  higher
powers  of  each  wise  ordaiucr.

Agni  is  now  the  treasure-lord  of  treasures,  for  ever  grouting
all  immortal  bounties.

2  The  Gods  infallible  all  searching  found  not  him,  the  dear  Babe

who  still  is  round  about  us.

Worn  weary,  following  his  track,  devoted,  they  reached  the
lovely  highest  homo  of  Agni.

3  Because  with  holy  oil  the  pure  Ones,  Agni,  served  thee  the

very  pure  three  autumn  seasons,

Therefore  they  won  them  holy  names  for  worship,  and  nobly
born  they  dignified  their  bodies.

4  Making  them  known  to  spacious  earth  and  heaven,  the  holy

Ones  revealed  the  powers  of  ltudra.

The  mortal  baud,  discerning  in  the  distance,  found  Agni
standing  in  the  loftiest  station.

5  Nigh  they  approached,  one-minded,  with  their  spouses,  kneel¬

ing  to  him  adorable  paid  worship.

Friend  finding  in  his  own  friend’s  eye  protection,  they  made
their  own  the  bodies  which  they  chastened.  '


1  Wilson,  after  Sdyana,  translate*  :  ‘  Agni . appropriates  the  prayers  ad¬

dressed  to  the  eternal  creator.’  The  meaning  appears  to  be  that  although
Agni  bestows  many  good  gifts  on  men,  his  Haines  arc  at  times  terribly  des¬
tructive.

2  The  flight  of  Agni  and  his  pursuit  by  the  Gods  have  been  montioued
before  (I.  65.  1).  The  idea  here  is,  as  Ludwig  observes,  tliat  tlio  Gods  did  not
really  find  Agni— visible  thou  he  be  in  his  earthly  form— until  they  attained
to  the  true  philosophical  knowledge  of  the  Deity  as  he  is.

3  The  pure  One » .•  1 2 3 4  The  text  has  only  jiichayah,  the  pure  :  the  Scholiast
supplies  ifuruls,  for  whom,  it  is  said,  sovon  platters  are  placed  at  the  Agni*
ehayana  ceremony  :  and  they  are  severally  invoked  by  the  appellations  Idris,
Anyddris,  Tddris,  Pratidris,  Mitah,  Sainmitah,  and  others.  In  consequence  of
this  participation,  with  Agni,  of  sacrificial  offerings,  they  oxchangcd  their
perishable,  for  immortal,  bodies,  and  obtained  heaven.  The  Maruts  are,  there¬
fore,  like  the  Ribhus,  deified  mortals.’  Wilson.

Thru  auficuin  seasons  :  during  throe  years.  Ludwig  observes  that  the  period
of  three  years  in  connexion  with  religious  vows  or  ceremonies  is  mentioned
elsewhere  also.

4  The  powers  of  Rudra  :  ltudra  here  is  a  name  of  Agni.

The  morlal  band :  the  Maruts,  so  called  as  not  having  been  originally  im¬
mortal.


BYU: V  73.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


97


G  Soon  as  the  holy  beings  had  discovered  the  thrice-scvcn  mystic
things  contained  within  thee,

With,  these,  one-minded,  they  preserve  the  Amrit:  guard  thou
the  life  of  all  their  plants  and  -cattle.

7  Thou,  Agni,  knower  of  men’s  works,  hast  sent  us  good  food  in
constant  course  for  our  subsistence  :  •

Thou  deeply  skilled  in  paths  of  Gods  bccamest  an  envoy  never
wearied,  offering-bearer.

S  Knowing  the  Law,  the  seven  strong  floods  from  heaven,  full  of
good  thought,  discerned  the  doors  of  riches.

SaramA  found  the  cattle’s  firm-built  prison,  whereby  the  race  of
man  is  still  supported.

-  9  They  who  approached  all  noble  operations  making  a  path  that
leads  to  life  immortal,

To  be  the  Bird’s  support,  the  spacious  mother,  Aditi,  and  her
great  Sous  stood  in  power.

10  When  Gods  immortal  made  both  eyes  of  heaven,  they  gavo  to
him  the  gift  of  beauteous  glory.

Now  they  flow  forth  like  rivers  set  in  motion  :  they  knew  the
Red  Steeds  coming  down,  0  Agni.

HYMN  LXXIII.  Agni.

He  who  gives  food,  like  patrimonial  riches,  and  guides  aright
like  some  wise  man’s  instruction,

Loved  like  a  guest  who  lies  in  pleasant  lodging, — may  he,  as
Priest,  prosper  his  servant’s  dwelling.

2  He  who  like  Savitar  the  God,  true-minded,  protccteth  with  his

power  all  acts  of  vigour,

Truthful,  like  splendour,  glorified  by  many,  like  breath  joy-giv¬
ing, — all  must  strive  to  win  him.

3  He  who  on  earth  dwells  like  a  king  surrounded  by  faithful

fripnds,  like  a  God  all-sustaining,

Like  heroes  who  preside,  who  sit  in  safety :  like  as  a  blameless
damo  dear  to  her  husband.


6  The  thrice-tcven  mystic  things:  the  secret  or  mysterious  rite*  by  which
heaven  is  to  be  obtained;  offerings  of  various  kinds,  food,  clarified  butter,
Soma  juice  etc.,  arranged  in  three  classes  of  seven.  All  these  offerings  require
fire,  and  so  are  contained  in  Agni.

They  preserve  the  Amrit:  the  nectar  or  drink  of  the  Gods;  by  the  perfor¬
mance  of  these  sacrifices  they  secure  the  fall  of  rain  in  due  season,

S  Saramd  found  the  cuttle's  frm-Luilt  prison  :  sco  I.  62.  8.

9  To  bt  the  Bird's  support the  Bird  is  the  Sun.  Aditi  is  infinite  Nature,
and  her  great  Eons  are  the  Adityas.

10  Both  eyes  oj  heaven  :  the  Sun  and  Moon.  The  Red  Steeds  :  tho  Sun’s  rays.

7


98  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  I.

4  Thee,  such,  in  settlements  secure,  0  Agni,  our  men  serve  ever

kindled  in  each  dwelling

On  him  have  they  laid  splendour  in  abundance :  dear  to  all
men,  bearer  be  he  of  riches.

5  May  thy  rich  worshippers  win  food,  0  Agni,  and  princes  gain

long  life  who  bring  oblation.

May  we  get  booty  from  our  foe  iu. battle,  presenting  to  the
Gods  their  share  for  glory.

6  The  cows  of  holy  law,  scut  us  by  Heaven,  have  swelled  with

laden  udders,  loudly  lowing ;

Soliciting  his  favour,  from  a  distance  the  rivers  to  the  rock
have  flowed  together.

7  Agni,  with  thco,  soliciting  thy  favour,  the  holy  Ones  have

gained  glory  in  heaven.

They  made  the  Night  and  Dawn  of  different  colours,  and  set
the  black  and  purple  hues  together.

8  May  wo  and  those  who  worship  be  the  mortals  whom  thou,

0  Agni,  leadcst  on  to  riches.

Thou  hast  filled  earth  and  heaven  and  air’s  mid-region,  and
followost  the  whole  world  like  a  shadow.

9  Aided  by  thco,  0  Agui,  may  we  conquer  steeds  with  steeds,

men  with  men,  heroes  with  heroes,

Lords  of  the  wealth  transmitted  l>y  our  fathers  :  and  may  our
priuces  livo  a  hundred  winters.

10  May  these  our  hymns  of  praise,  Agui,  Ordainer,  be  pleasant
to  thee  in  thy  heart  and  spirit.

May  wc  have  power  to  hold  thy  steeds  of  riches,  laying  on
thee  the  God-sent  gift  of  glory.


0  The  coax  of  holy  /aw :  the  cows  whoso  milk  is  used  in  the  venous  sacrifices
offered  in  accordance  with  the  eternal  ordinance.

The  rivers :  the  water  used  in  sacrifice  which  flows  or  is  brought  to  the  rod;
or  stone  with  which  the  Soma  juice  is  expressed.

7  Through  Agni’a  favour  the  holy  Ones,  the  immortal  Gods,  receive  the
oblations  which  strengthen  them  for  the  performance  of  the  great  deeds  which
bring  them  glory.

S  Like  a  duidow  :  averting  distress,  as  the  shade  of  ft' great  rock  or  tree
wards  off  the  oppressive  heat  of  the  sun.

9  May  our  privets ;  may  the  wealthy  men  who  institute  our  sacrifices  livo
to  the  greatest  age  usually  allotted  to  man.

10  To  hold  thy  stetds  of  rirhti ;  to  retain  by  us  thy  horses  which  bring
wealth,  that  is,  continue  to  receive  and  keep  the  riches  which  thou  sendost.


HYMN  75.]


2


4


r»


o


s

9


2

3

4

y


09


HYMN  LX  XIV.

As  forth  to  sacrifice  we  go,  a  lxymn  to  Agni  let  us  say,
Who  hears  us  even  when  afar ;


Agni.


Who,  from  of  old,  in  carnage,  when  the  people  gathered,  hath
preserved  r

Ilis  household  for  the  worshipper.

And  let  men  say,  Agni  is  born,  e’en  he  who  slaycth  Vritra,  he

Who  winneth  wealth  in  every  fight.

Him  in  whose  house  an  envoy  thou  Invest  to  taste  his  offered
gifts,

And  strengthenest  his  sacrifice,

Him,  Angiras,  thou  Son  of  Strength,  all  men  call  happy  in  his
God,

His  offerings,  and  his  sacred  grass.

Hitherward  shalt  thou  bring  these  Gods  to  our  laudation  and
to  taste

Theso  offered  gifts,  fair-shining  One.

\Vhcn,  Agni,  on  thine  embassage  thou  goest  not  a  sound  is
heard  of  steed  or  straining  of  thy  car.

Aided  by  thee  uninjured,  strong,  one  after  other,  goes  he  forth  :

Agni,  the  offerer  forward  steps.

Aud  splendid  strength,  heroic,  high,  Agni,  thou  grantest  from
the  Gods,

Thou  God,  to  him  who  offers  gifts.


HYMN  LXXV.  Agni.

Accept  our  loudest-sounding  hymn,  food  most  delightful  to
the  Gods,

Pouring  our  offerings  in  thy  mouth.

Now,  Agni,  will  we  say  to  thee,  0  wisest  and  best  Angiras,
Our  precious,  much-availing  prayer.

Who,  Agni,  is  thy  kin,  of  men?  who  is  thy  worthy  worshipper?
On  whom  dependent  ?  who  art  thou  ?

The  kinsman,  Agni,  of  mankind,  their  well-beloved  Friend  art
thou,

A  Friend  whom  friends  may  supplicate.

Bring  to  us  Mitra,  Varujja,  bring  the  Gods  to  mighty  sacrifice.
Bring  them,  0  Agni,  to  thine  home.


This  Hymn  and  tho  nineteen  following  are  ascribed  to  the  Itishi  Gotama,
son  of  Rahugana.

8  TY/to  tlayclh  Yrl/ra  :  Agni  may  here  be  identified  with  Indra.

5  Anyirat :  a  name  of  Agni.  bee  Ll.G.


100


THE  HYMNS  OP

HYMN  LXXVI.


[BOOK  I.


Agni.


How  may  the  mind  draw  nigh  to  please  thee,  Agni  ?  What
hymn  of  praise  shall  bring  us  greatest  blessing?

Or  who  hath  gained  thy  power  by  sacrifices  ?  or  with  what
mind  shali  we  bring  thee  oblations  ?

2  Come  hither,  Agni ;  sit  thee  down  os  Hotar ;  be  thou  who
never  wast  deceived  our  leader.


Heaven  and  Earth,  the  all-pervading,  love  thee :  worship
e  Gods  to  win  for  us  their  favour.


3  Burn  thou  up  all  the  Rakshasas,  0  Agni ;  ward  thou  off  curses
from  our  sacrifices.


Bring  hither  with  his  Bays  the  Lord  of  Soma :  hero  is  glad
welcome  for  the  Bounteous  Giver.


4  Thou  Priest  with  lip  and  voico  that  bring  us  children  hast  been

invoked.  Here  with  the  Gods  be  seated.

Thine  is  the  task  of  Cleanser  and  Presenter :  wakcu  its,  Woalth-
bestower  and  Producer.

5  As  with  oblations  of  the  priestly  Manus  thou  worshippedsfc  the

Gods,  a  Sage  with  sages,

So  now,  0  truthfullest  Invoker,  Agni,  worship  thi3  day  with
joy-bestowing  ladle.

HYMN  LXXV1I.  Agni.


How  shall  wo  pay  oblation  unto  Agni  ?  What  hymn,  God-loved,
is  said  to  him  refulgent  ?

Who,  deathloss,  true  to  Law,  mid  men  a  herald,  bringeth  the
Gods  as  best  of  sacriticers  ?

2  Bring  him  with  reverence  hither,  most  propitious  in  sacrifices,
true  to  Law,  the  herald ;

For  Agni,  when  ho  socks  the  Gods  for  mortals,  knows  them  full
well  and  worships  them  in  spirit


3  The  Lord  of  Sonui :  Indra.

•1  Agni,  the  priest  or  bearer  of  oblations,  has  been  invoked  with  a  hymn
which  will  bring  tho  blessing  of  children.

The  Cleantcr  (Potar)  and  the  Presenter  or  Invoker  (Hotar)  are  two  of  the
Sixteen  officiating  priests.

5  J/nntia :  another  form  of  the  word  Manu,  Man,  the  great  forefather  of
men.

With  jcy-btttomng  ladle :  with  the  sacrificial  ladle  used  in  pouring  the  holy
oil  or  clarified  butter  into  the  fire,  an  offering  especially  pleasing  to  tho  Gods,


THE  ItlGVEDA.


101


ltniit  79.]

3  For  he  is  mental  power,  a  mao,  and  perfect ;  ho  is  the  bringcr,

friend-like,  of  the  wondrous.

The  pious  A  ryau  tribes  at  sacrifices  address  them  first  to  him
who  docth  marvels.

4  May  Agni,  foe-dcstroyor,  manliest  Hero,  accept  with  love  our

hymns  and  our  devotion.  *

So  may  the  liberal  lords  whose  strength  is  strongest,  urged
by  their  riches,  stir  our  thoughts  with  vigour.

5  Thus  Agni  .liltavedas,  true  to  Order,  hath  by  tho  priestly  Go-

tamas  been  lauded.

May  he  augment  in  them  splendour  and  vigour  :  observant,
as  he  lists,  he  gathers  increase.

HYMN  LXXVIII.  Agni.

O  JAtavedas,  keen  and  swift,  we  Gotamas  with  sacred  song
exalt  thee  for  thy  glories’  sake.

2  Thee,  as  thou  art,  desiring  wealth  Gotama  worships  with  his

song :

We  laud  thee  for  thy  glories’  sake.

3  As  such,  like  Angiras  we  call  on  thco  best  winner  of  the  spoil :
We  laud  the  for  thy  glories’  sake.

4  Thee,  best  of  Vritra-slaycrs,  theo  who  shakest  off  our  Dasyu

foes;

Wo  laud  thee  for  thy  glories’  sake.

5  A  pleasant  song  to  Agni  wo,  sons  of  Rahfigana,  have  sung  :

We  laud  thee  for  thy  glories’  sake.

HYMN  LX XIX.  Agni.

He  in  mid-air’s  expanse  hath  golden  tresses ;  a  raging  serpent,
like  the  rushing  tempest :

Purely  refulgent,  knowing  well  the  morning ;  like  honourable
dames,  true,  active  workers.

3  The  wondrous  ;  extraordinary  wealth.

4  Liberal  lords.-  wealthy  patrons  whoso  gifts  will  encourage  and  strengthen
tho  devotions  of  the  priests :

3  Like  Angirat:  after  the  manner  of  Angiras,  one  of  the  earliest  per¬
formers  of  sacrifice.

4  Lett  of  Vrtlra-tkrgtn :  here  again  Agni  is  identified  with  Indra.

1  Agni  is  here  spoken  of  in  his  three  forms,  the  golden-haired  Sun,  tho  ser¬
pentine  lightning,  and  the  household  fire  for  religious  purposes  and  ordinary
use.  Ho  is  said  to  know  the  morning  as  being  re-kindled  for  sacrifice  at  day¬
break,  and  is  compared  to  an  active  matron  op  account  of  hia  employment  fo
domestic  purposes.


102  TUB  MX S  OP  [BOOK  I-

2  Thy  well-winged  flashes  strengthen  in  their  manner,  when  the

black  Bull  hath  bellowed  round  about  us.

With  drops  that  bless  and  seem  to  smile  ho  cometli :  the  wa¬
ters  fall,  the  clouds  utter  their  thunder.

3  When  he  comes  streaming  with  the  milk  of  worship,  conduct¬

ing  by  directest  paths  of  Order,

Aryaman,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Parijmau  fill  the  hide  full  where  lies
the  nether  press-stone.

4  0  Agui,  thou  who  art  the  Lord  of  wealth  iu  kiue,  thou  Son

of  Strength,

Vouchsafe  to  us,  0  Jatavedas,  high  renown.

5  He,  Agui,  kiudled,  good  and  wise,  must  be  exalted  iu  our  song  :
Shine,  thou  of  many  forms,  shino  radiantly  on  us.

G  0  Agni,  shining  of  thyself  by  night  and  when  the  morning
breuks,

Burn,  thou  whose  teeth  are  sharp,  against  the  Rakslmsas.

7  Adorable  iu  all  our  rites,  favour  us,  Agui,  with  thine  aid,
When  the  great  hymu  is  chanted  forth.

S  Bring  to  us  ever-conquering  wealth,  wealth,  Agui,  worthy  of
our  choice,

In  all  our  frays  invincible.

9  Give  us,  0  Agni,  through  thy  grace  wealth  that  supportoth  all
our  life,

Thy  favour  so  that  we  may  live.

10  0  Gotarna,  desiring  bliss  present  thy  songs  composed  with

care

To  Agni  of  the  pointed  flames.

1 1  May  the  man  fall,  0  Agui,  who  near  or  afar  assaileth  us :

Do  thou  increase  and  prosper  us.

12  Keen  and  swift  Agni,  thousand-eyed,  chaseth  the  Rakshasas

afar:

He  siugeth,  herald  meet  for  lauds.


2  The  bluci  Bull  l, nth  btllotced :  the  dark  rain-clouds  have  thuudorod.

3  IFXe*  he  cornu  to  tho  Gods  with  the  milk  of  worthip,  the  rich  sacrificial
offering,  tho  Gods  scud  copious  rain.  Parijman,  tho  Wanderer,  the  circum¬
ambient,  is  in  this  place  the  stormy  Wind.  The  nether  preu-tlone  (which  rests
upon  an  ox-hide)  is  here  the  earth,  tho  heaven  being  tho  upper  stone.  Wilson,
following  Sdyaua,  translates  :  ‘pierce  through  the  (investing)  membrane  into
tho  womb  of  the  cloud.’


UTjfy  so.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


103

HYMN  LXXX.  Indra.

Tiius  in  the  Soma,  in  wild  joy  the  Brahman  hath  exalted
thee :

Thou,  mightiest,  thunder-armed,  hast  driven  by  force  the
Dragon  from  the  eartl),  lauding  thine  own  imperial  sway.

2  The  mighty  flowing  Soma-draught,  brought  by  the  Hawk,  hath

gladdened  thee,

That  in  thy  strength,  0  Thunderer,  thou  hast  struck  down
Vritra  from  the  floods,  lauding  thine  own  imperial  sway.

3  Go  forward,  meet  the  foe,  be  bold  ;  thy  bolt  of  thunder  is  not

checked.

Manliness,  India,  is  thy  might:  slay  Vritra,  make  the  waters
thiuo,  laudiug  thine  own  imperial  sway.

4  Thou  smotest  Vritra  from  the  earth,  smotest  him,  Indra,  from

the  sky.

Let  these  life-fostering  waters  flow  attended  by  the  Marut  host,
lauding  thiuo  own  imperial  sway.

5  The  wrathful  Indra  with  liis  bolt  of  thunder  rushing  on  the

foe,

Smote  fierce  on  trembling  Vritra’s  back,  and  loosed  the  waters  t
free  to  run,  lauding  his  own  imperial  sway.

G  With  hundred-jointed  thunderbolt  Indra  hath  struck  him  on
the  back,

And,  while  rejoicing  in  the  juice,  sceketh  prosperity  for  friends,
lauding  his  own  imperial  sway.

7  Indra,  unconqucred  might  is  thine,  Thunderer,  Caster  of  the

Stone ;

For  thou  with  thy  surpassing  power  smotest  to  death  the  guile¬
ful  beast,  lauding  thiuo  own  imperial  sway.

8  Far  over  ninety  spacious  floods  thy  thunderbolts  were  cast

abroad  :

Great,  Indra,  is  thy  hero  might,  and  strength  is  seated  in
thine  arms,  lauding  thine  own  imperial  sway.

9  Laud  him  a  thousand  all  at  once,  shout  twenty  forth  tho

hymn  of  praise.

Hundreds  have  sung  aloud  to  him,  to  Indra  hath  the  prayer
been  raised,  lauding  his  own  imperial  sway.

1  The  Dragon :  the  groat  serpent  Ahi,  ouo  of  the  demons  of  drought.

2  Brought  by  the  ID  nek :  tho  Soma  is  said  to  have  been  brought  from  heaven
by  a  hawk  or  falcon.  Cf.  L  93  6.

7  Tie  guileful  bout ;  the  demon  Vritra.

8  Ninety  tpucious  floods :  the  many  waters  obstructed  by  Vritra.


104  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

10  Indra  hath  smitten  clown  the  power  of  Vritra, — might  with

stronger  might.

This  was  his  manly  exploit,  he  slew  Vritra  and  let  looso  the
floods,  landing  his  own  imperial  sway.

11  Yea,  even  this  greut  Pair  of  Worlds  trembled  in  terror  at  thy

wrath,  '

When,  Indra,  Thunderer,  Marut-girt,  thou  slowest  Vritra  in
thy  strength,  lauding  thine  own  imperial  sway.

12  But  Vritra  scared  not  Indra  with  his  shaking  or  his  thunder

roar.

On  him  that  iron  thunderbolt  fell  fiercely  with  its  thousand
points,  lauding  his  own  imperial  sway.

13  When  with  the  thunder  thou  didst  make  thy  dart  and  Vritra

meet  in  war,

Thy  might,  0  Indra,  fain  to  slay  the  Dragon,  was  set  firm  in
heaven,  lauding  thine  own  imperial  sway.

14  When  at  thy  shout,  0  Thunder-armed,  each  thing  both  fixed

and  moving  shook,

E’en  Tvashtar  trembled  at  thy  wrath  and  quaked  with  fear
bocauso  of  thee,  lauding  thine  own  imperial  sway.

15  There  is  not,  in  our  knowledge,  one  who  passeth  Indra  in  his

strength :

In  him  the  Deities  have  stored  manliness,  insight,  power  and
might,  lauding  his  own  imperial  sway.

16  Still  as  of  old,  whatever  rite  Atharvan,  Manus  sire  of  all,
Dadhyach  performed,  their  prayer  and  praise  united  iu  that

Indra  meet,  lauding  his  own  imperial  sway.

HYMN  LXXXI.  Indra.

The  men  have  lifted  Indra  up,  the  Vritra-slayer,  to  joy  and
strength.:

Him,  verily,  we  invocatc  in  battles  whether  great  or  small :
be  he  oiu*  aid  in  deeds  of  might.

2  Thou,  Hero,  art  a  warrior,  thou  art  giver  of  abundant  spoil.
Strengthening  e’en  the  feeble,  thou  aidcst  the  sucrificer,  thou
givest  tho  oftcror  ample  wealth.


1C  Atharvan  in  tho  priest  who  first  obtained  fire  and  offered  Soma  and
prayers  to  the  Gods.  Dadhyach  is  his  sou.  Manus  or  Manu  is  the  progenitor
of  mankind.

Thorefmin,  '  lauding  hi*  own  imperial  sway,’  is  not  always  in  syntactical  con¬
nexion  with  the  verse  of  which  it  forms  the  conclusion.

1  The  men the  wiuistering  priests  who  exalt  and  strengthen  with  oblations.


HYMN  82.]  THE  MOVED  A.  105

3  When  war  and  battles  are  on  foot,  booty  is  laid  before  the  bold.
Yoke  thou  thy  wildly-rushiug  Bays.  Whom  wilt  thou  slay

and  whom  enrich  ?  Do  thou,  0  Indra,  make  us  rich.

4  Mighty  through  wisdom,  as  he  lists,  terrible,  he  hath  waxed

in  strength.

Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  strong-jawed,  sublime,  ho  i*h  joined  hands
for  glory’s  sake  hath  grasped  his  iron  thunderbolt.

5  He  filled  the  earthly  atmosphere  and  pressed  against  the  lights

in  heaven.

None  like  thee  ever  hath  been  bom,  none,  Indra,  will  be  bom
like  thee.  Thou  hast  waxed  might}'  over  all.

6  May  he  who  to  tho  offerer  gives  the  foeman’s  man-sustaining

food,

May  Indra  lend  his  aid  to  us.  Deal  forth— abundant  is  thy
wealth — that  in  thy  bounty  I  may  share.

7  He,  righteous-hearted,  at  each  time  of  rapture  gives  us  herds

of  kine.

Gather  in  both  thy  hands  for  us  treasures  of  many  hundred
sorts.  Sharpen  thou  us,  and  bring  us  wealth.

S  Refresh  thee,  Hero,  with  the  juice  outpoured  for  bounty  aud
for  strength.

We  know  thee  Lord  of  ample  store,  to  thee  have  sent  our
hearts’  desires  :  be  therefore  our  Protector  thou.

9  These  people,  Indra,  keep  for  thee  all  that  is  worthy  of  thy
choice.

Discover  thou,  as  Lord,  tho  wealth  of  men  who  offer  up  no
gifts  :  bring  thou  to  us  this  wealth  of  theirs.

HYMN  LXXXII.  Indra.

Graciously  listen  to  our  songs,  Mnghavan,  be  not  negligent.
As  thou  hast  made  us  full  of  joy  and  lettest  us  solicit  thee,
now,  Indra,  yoke  thy  two  Bay  Steeds.

2  Well  have  they  eaten  and  rejoiced  ;  the  friends  have  risen  and

passed  away.

The  sages  luminous  in  themselves  have  praised  thee  with  their
latest  hymn.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy  two  Bay  Steeds.

3  Maghavan,  we  will  reverence  thee  who  art  so  fair  to  look  upon.
Thus  praised,  according  to  our  wish  como  now  with  richly

laden  car.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy  two  Bay  Steeds.


9  The  people :  thy  worshippers  here.

1  Maghavan :  Indra,  the  rich  and  liberal.

2  Well  have  ( hey  eaten  :  they,  meaning  tho  worshippers.


106  TUB  HYir.VS  OP  [BOOK  I.

4  He  will  in  very  truth  ascend  the  powerful  car  that  finds  the

kine,

Who  thinks  upon  the  well-filled  bowl,  the  Tawny  Coursers*
harucsscr.  Now,  Indra,  yoke  thy  two  Bay  Steeds.

5  Let*  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,  thy  Steeds  be  harnessed  on  the

right  and  left.

Therewith  in  rapture  of  the  juice,  draw  near  to  thy  beloved
Spouse.  Now,  Indra,  yoko  thy  two  Bay  Steeds.

6  With  holy  prayer  I  yoke  thy  long-maned  pair  of  Bays :  come

hitherward ;  thou  holdcst  them  in  both  thy  hands.

The  BtiiTing  draughts  of  juice  outpoured  have  made  thee  glad  :
thou,  Thunderer,  host  rejoiced  with  Pushau.and  thy  Spouse.

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Indra.

Indra,  the  mortal  man  well  guarded  by  thine  aid  goes  fore¬
most  in  the  wealth  of  horses  and  of  kine.

With  amplest  wealth  thou  fillost  him,  as  rouud  about  the
waters  clearly  seen  afar  fill  Siudlui  full.

2  The  heavenly  Waters  come  not  nigh  tho  priestly  bowl :  they

but  look  down  and  see  how  far  mid-air  is  spread :

The  Deities  conduct  the  pious  man  to  them  :  like  suitors  they
delight  in  him  who  loveth  prayer.

3  Praiseworthy  blcssiug  hast  thou  laid  upon  tho  pair  who  with

uplifted  ladle  serve  thee,  man  aud  wife.

Unchecked  he  dwells  and  prospers  in  thy  Jaw :  thy  power
brings  blessing  to  the  sacrifice!'  pouring  gifts.

4  First  the  Angirases  won  themselves  vital  power,  whoso  fires

were  kindlod  through  good  deeds  and  sacrifice.

The  men  together  found  tho  Pani’s  hoarded  wealth,  the  cattle,
aud  tho  wealth  in  homes  aud  in  kine.

5  Atharvan  first  by  sacrifices  laid  tho  paths ;  then,  guardian  of
,  the  Law,  sprang  up  the  loving  Sun.

Us xi\X  Kavya  straightway  hither  drove  tho  kino.  Let  us  with
offerings  honour  Yarna's  deathless  birth.

5  Thy  Sjxntse"  Iudrdi.t.  See  L  22. 12.

3  Jfan  and  wife :  the  text  has  ouly  withmuX,  a  couple.  The  word  appa¬
rently  means  here  the  offerer  of  the  sacrifice  and  his  wife,  who  took  part  in
the  ceremony.  SAyapa  explain*  it  as  tho  grain  aud  the  butter  of  oblatiou.

4  The  Parti :  it  the  illiberal  demon  who  withholds  the  rain.

5  The  paths :  for  tho  rising  Sun  t"  travel.  Utand  Kdrya  is  the  name  of  a
eelebruted  ancient  Rishi.  .See  I.  51.  10.  Tfio  moaning  of  tiie  latter  half  of  the
second  verso  is  obscure.  Ludwig  renders  it  '  Seek  we  to  win  by  sacrifice  tho
immortality  which  has  sprung  from  Yama.’  Yarna  seems  Lore  to  represent
the  rising  Sun.  See  Ehni,  Dcr  Mythus  des  Yama,  p.  62.


HYMN  84.]


THE  RIOVBDA, '


107


6  When  sacred  grass  is  trimmed  to  aid  the  auspicious  work,  or
tho  hymn  makes  its  voice  of  praise  sound  to  the  sky.

Where  the  stone  rings  as  ’twerc  a  singer  skilled  in  laud,— Iudra
in  truth  delights  when  these  come  near  to  him.

HYMN  LXXXIV.  '  i^ra.

The  Soma  hath  been  pressed  for  thee,  0  Indra ;  mightiest,
bold  One,  come.

May  Indra-vigour  fill  thee  full,  as  the  Sun  fills  mid-air  with
rays.

2  His  pair  of  Tawny  Coursers  bring  Iudra  of  unresisted  might
Hither  to  Hishis’  songs  of  praise  and  sacrifice  performed  by

men.

3  Slayer  of  Vritra,  mount  thy  car ;  thy  Bay  Steeds  have  been

yoked  by  prayer.

May,  with  its  voice,  tho  pressing-stone  draw  thine  attention
hitherward.

4  This  poured  libation,  Indra,  drink,  immortal,  gladdcuing,  ex¬

cellent.

Streams  of  tho  bright  have  flowed  to  thee  here  at  the  seat  of
holy  Law.

5  Sing  glory  now  to  Indra,  say  to  him  your  solemn  eulogies.

Tho  drops  poured  forth  havo  made  him  glad  :  pay  rovercnco

to  his  might  supreme.

6  When,  India,  thou  dost  yoke  thy  Steeds,  there  is  no  better

charioteer :

None  hath  surpassed  thee  in  thy  might,  none  with  good  steeds
o’ertaken  thee.

7  Ho  who  alone  bestoweth  wealth  on  mortal  man  who  offercth

gifts,

Tho  ruler  of  resistless  power,  is  Iudra,  sure.

8  When  will  he  trample,  like  a  weed,  tho  man  who  hath  no  gift

for  him  ?

When,  verily,  will  Indra  hear  our  songs  of  praise1?

9  He  who  with  Soma  juice  prepared  amid  tho  many  honours

thee, —

Verily  Indra  gains  thereby  tremondous  might.


4  The  bvi'jht :  Soma  juice.  The  scat  of  holy  Law :  the  place  whore  sacrifice,
prdniued  by  ritd,  or  denial  Law,  is  performed,


103  THE  BTUItS  OP  [BOOK  t

10  The  juice  of  Soma  thus  diffused,  sweet  to  the  taste,  the  bright

cows  drink,

Who  for  the  sake  of  spleudour  close  to  mighty  Iudra’s  side
rejoice,  good  in  their  own  supremacy.

11  Craving  fyis  touch  the  dappled  kine  mingle  the  Soma  with

their  milk.

The  milch-kine  dear  to  Indra  send  forth  his  death-dealing
thunderbolt,  good  in  their  own  supremacy.

12  With  veneration,  passiugwise,  honouring  his  victorious  might,
They  follow  close  his  many  laws  to  win  them  due  preemi¬
nence,  good  in  their  own  supremacy.

13  With  bones  of  Dadhyach  for  his  arms,  Indra,  resistless  in

attack,

Struck  nine-and-ninety  Vritras  dead.

14  He,  searching  for  the  horse’s  head,  removed  among  the  moun¬

tains,  found

At  Saryanavau  what  he  sought.

15  Then  verily  they  recognized  the  essential  form  of  Tvashtar’s

Bull,

Here  in  the  mansion  of  the  Moon.

10  The  bright  cot a:  the  pure  and  glossy  milk  which  absorbs  or  drinks  tlia
Soma  juice  with  which  it  w  mixed,  and  which  is  close  to,  or  united  with,
Indra  when  offered  to  and  accepted  by  him  in  libation.

11  Send  forth :  the  cows,  that  is,  their  milk,  exalt  and  strengthen  Indra,
and  incite  him  to  battle  with  the  demons.  The  meaning  of  the  refrain  of  tins
triad  (verses  10,  11,  12)  is  not  very  clear.  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates
it :  ‘  abiding  (in  their  stalls)  expectant  of  his  sovereignty.’

13  Dadhyach,  or  in  a  later  form,  Dadulcha.  was  a  Rishi,  son  of  Athnrvan,
he  and  his  father  being  regarded  as  the  first  founder  of  sacrifice.  He  is  des¬
cribed  as  having  the  head  of  a  horse  given  to  him  by  the  Ajvins  which  was
afterwards  cut  off  by  Indra.  With  his  bones,  or,  as  the  legend  says,  the  bones
of  tins  horse's  head,  converted  into  a  thunderbolt,  Indra  slew  the  Vritras  or
demons  who  withheld  the  rain.  The  Vodic  legend,  which  was  modified  and
amplified  in  later  times,  appears  to  have  been  connected  in  its  origin  with  that
of  Dadhiknb*,  often  mentioned  in  the  Ve«la  and  described  as  a  kind  of  divine
horse,  probably  a  personification  of  the  morning  Sun  in  his  rapid  course.
Dadhyach  may  lie  the  old  Moon  whose  bones,  when  he  dies,  become  the  stars
with  which  Indra  slays  the  fiends  of  darkness.

14  Moon  tains:  the  morning  clouds.  S-irt/foiivdn said  to  be  a  lake  aud
district  in  Kurukshetra,  near. the  modern  Delhi

15  T»uhtari  Ball;  an  obscure  expression  for  the  Sun.  The  purport  of  the
verse  may  be  that  when,  after  the  rains,  the  bright  moonlight  nights  came,
men  recognized  the  fact  that  the  light  was  borrowed  from  the  Sun,  Wilson,
following  SAyana,  translates  the  verse  :  *  The  (solar  rays)  found,  ou  this  occa¬
sion  the  light  of  Twaahtri,  verily,  concealed  in  the  mansion  of  the  moving
moon.’  See  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda,  X^-ll.


HYMN  85.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


109


16  Who  yokes  to-day  unto  the  polo  of  Order  the  strong  and  pas¬

sionate  steers  of  checkless  spirit,

With  shaft-armod  mouths,  heart-piercing,  health-bestowing?
Long  shall  he  live  who  richly  pays  their  sorvieo.

17  Who  fleeth  forth  ?  who  suffereth  ?  who  fcarcth  ?  Who  knoweth

Indra  present,  Indra  near  us  ¥  •

"Who  sondeth  bonedictiou  on  his  offspring,  his  household,
wealth  and  person,  and  the  people  ?

18  Who  with  poured  oil  and  offering  honours  Agni,  with  ladle

worships  at  appointed  seasons  ?

To  whom  do  the  Gods  bring  oblation  quickly  ?  What  offerer,
God-favoured,  knows  him  throughly  ?

1 9  Thou  as  a  God,  0  Mightiest,  vorily  blcssost  mortal  man.

0  Maghavan,  there  is  no  comforter  but  thou :  Indra,  I  speak
my  words  to  thee.

20  Let  not  thy  bounteous  gifts,  let  not  thy  saving  help  fail  us,

•  good  Lord,  at  any  time  ;

And  measure  out  to  us,  thou  lover  of  mankind,  all  riches
hitherward  from  men.

HYMN  LXXXV.  jffarots.

They  who  arc  glancing  forth,  like  women,  on  their  way,  doers
of  mighty  deeds,  swift  racers,  Rudra’s  Sons,

The  Maruts  have  made  heaven  and  earth  increase  and  grow  :
in  sacrifices  they  delight,  the  strong  and  wild.

2  Grown  to  their  perfect  strength  greatness  have  they  attained  ;
the  Rudras  have  established  their  abode  in  heaven.

Singing  their  song  of  praise  and  generating  might,  they  have
put  glory  on,  the  Sons  whom  Prisni  hare.

16  The  strong  and  passionate  slccrt:  the  zealous  and  indefatigable  priests,
who  arc  yoked  to  tho  chnriot-polc  of  Order  or  employed  in  the  performance  of
sacrifice  ordained  by  eternal  Law.  The  words  of  the  priests  arc  the  arrows
with  which  their  mouths  arc  armed.

1 7  The  answer  to  these  questions  is,  the  priests,  who-reproaent  the  feelings
of  the  man  who  institutes  the  sacrifice.

IS  The  second  line  of  this  verse  is  rendered  by  Wilson,  following  SAyana :
‘To  whom  do  the  gods  quickly  bring  (the  wealth)  that  has  been  called  for  T  ’
This  would  be  intelligible  enough ;  but  hintu  (oblation)  can  hardly  bear  the
interpretation  thus  forced  upon  it,

1  Rudra't  Sont:  the  Maruts,  or  Storm-Gods,  are  the  eons  of  Itudra  and  of
Prisni,  the  earth  or  the  speckled  cloud.

2  The  Rudrat :  the  sons  of  Kudra.


110  •  THE  HYMNS  OP  [DOOR  /.

3  When,  Children  of  the  Cow,  they  shine  in  bright  attire,  and

on  their  fair  limbs  lay  their  golden  ornaments,

They  drive  away  each  adversary  from  their  path,  and,  follow¬
ing  their  traces,  fatness  fioweth  down,

4  When,  mighty  Warriors,  yo  who  glitter  with  your  spears,  o’er-

throwing  with  your  strength  e’en  what  is  ne’er  overthrown,
When,  0  ye  Maruts,  ye  the  host  that  sond  the  rain,  had  har¬
nessed  to  your  care  the  thought-fleet  spotted  deer.

C  When  ye  have  harnessed  to  your  cars  the  spotted  deer,  urging
the  thunderbolt,  0  Mu  ruts,  to  the  fray,

Forth  rush  the  torrents  of  the  dark-red  stormy  cloud,  and
moisten,  like  a  skin,  the  earth  with  water-floods.

6  Let  your  swift-gliding  coursors  bear  you  hitherward  with  their

fleet  pinions.  Come  yc  forward  with  your  arms.

Sit  on  the  grass;  a  wide  scat  hath  been  made  for  you :  delight
yourselves,  0  Maruts,  in  the  pleasant  food.

7  Strong  in  their  native  strength  to  greatness  have  they  grown,

stepped  to  the  firmament  and  made  their  dwelling  wide.
When  Vishnu  saved  the  Soma  bringing  wild  delight,  the  Maruts
sate  like  birds  on  their  dear  holy  grass.

8  In  sooth  like  heroes  fain  for  fight  they  rush  about,  like  com¬

batants  fame-seeking  have  they  striven  in  war.

Before  the  Maruts  every  creature  is  afraid  :  the  men  arc  like  to
Kings,  terrible  to  behold.

9  When  Tvashtar  deft  of  hand  had  turned  the  thunderbolt,

gildon,  with  thousand  edges,  fashioned  skilfully,

Indra  received  it  to  perform  heroic  deeds.  Vritra  he  slew,
and  forced  the  flood  of  water  forth.

10  They  with  their  vigorous  strength  pushed  the  well  up  on  high,
and  clove  the  cloud  in  twain  though  it  was  passing  strong.
The  Maruts,  bounteous  Givers,  sending  forth  their  voice,  in
the  wild  joy  of  Soma  wrought  their  glorious  deeds.

8  Children  of  l Ac  Co ir :  that  is,  of  Priam  or  the  clouil  under  that  type.
Pitnas  foieeth  down :  the  clouds  drop  fatness  ;  the  fertilizing  rain  descends.
4  The  glittering  spears  are  the  Hushes  of  lightning.  The  chariot  of  the
Maruts  is  said  to  be  drawn  by  spotted  deer  or  antelopes,
fi  Sit  on  the  grass:  on  the  Bacred  grans  trimmed  and  strewn  for  the  Gods.

7  When  Vithiut  saccd  the  Soma :  Vishnu  prepared  the  Sonin  and  brought  it  to
Indra,  and  the  Maruts,  Indra’o  companions,  sat  down  with  him  to  enjoy  it.

8  The  men:  the  Maruts.  Kings:  that «,  warrior*.

10  The  totU:  hero  the  cloud,  as  a  reservoir  of  water.


HYMX  86.]


THE  RIGYEDA.


Ill


1 1  They  drave  the  cloud  transverse  directed  hitherward,  and

poured  the  fountain  forth  for  thirsting  Gotama.

Shining  with  varied  light  they  come  to  him  with  help  :  they
with  their  might  fulfilled  the  longing  of  the  sage.

12  The  shelters  which  yo  have  for  him  who  lauds  you,  bestow

them  threefold  on  the  man  who  offers.  *

Exton  1  the  same  boons  unto  us,  yo  Maruts.  Give  us,  0  Hetoes,
wealth  with  noble  offspring.

HYMN  LXXXVI.  Maruts.

The  best  of  guardians  hath  that  inan  within  whose  dwelling-
place  ye  drink,

O  Maruts,  giants  of  the  sky.

2  Honoured  with  sacrifice  or  with  the  worship  of  the  sages'

hymns,  0  Maruts,  listen  to  the  call.

3  Yea,  the  strong  man  to  whom  ye  have  vouclisafcd  to  give  a

sage,  shall  move
Into  a  stable  rich  in  kiuc.

4  Upon  this  hero’s  sacred  grass  Soma  is  poured  in  daily  rites  :
Praise  and  delight  arc  sung  aloud.

5  Let  the  strong  Maruts  hear  him,  him  surpassing  all  men  :

strength  bo  his
That  roaches  even  to  the  Sun.

G  For,  through  the  swift  Gods’  loving  help,  in  many  an  autumn,
Maruts,  wo

Have  offered  up  our  sacrifice.

7  Fortunate  shall  that  mortal  be,  0  Maruts  most  adorable,
Whose  offerings  ye  bear  Away.

8  0  Heroes  truly  strong,  ye  know  the  toil  of  him  who  sings

your  praise,

Tho  heart's -desiro  of  him  who  loves.

9  0  ye  of  true  strength,  make  this  thing  manifest  by  your  great¬

ness  :  strike

The  demon  with  your  thunderbolt.

10  Conceal  the  horrid  darkness,  drive  far  from  ns  each  devour¬
ing  fiend.

Create  the  light  for  which  we  long.

11  Gotama :  the  Jtishi  to  whom  tho  hymn  was  revealed.

8  Shull  move  into  a  Halit  rich  in  kite :  shall  become  the  wealthy  possessor
of  many  cows.

8  0/  him  u'.Vo  loves :  of  the  suppliant  who  loves  and  prays  to  you.

30  Devouring  fiend :  ‘  Atrln,  which  stands  for  attrin,  is  one  of  the  many


112  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

HYMN  LXXXVIt.  Maruts.

Loud  Singers,  never  humbled,  active,  full  of  strength,  immov¬
able,  impetuous,  manliest,  best-beloved,

They  have  displayed  thorasclvcs  with  glittering  ornaments,  a
few  in  number  only,  like  the  heavens  with  stars.

2  When,  Maruts,  on  the  steeps  ye  pile  the  moving  cloud,  ye  are

like  birds  on  whatsoever  path  it  be.

Clouds  everywhere  shed  forth  the  rain  upon  your  cars.  Drop
fatucss,  honey-hued,  for  him  who  sings  your  praise.

3  Earth  at  their  racings  trembles  as  if  weak  and  worn,  when  on

their  ways  they  yoke  their  cam  for  victory.

They,  sportive,  loudly  roaring,  armed  with  glittering  spears,
shakers  of  all,  themselves  admire  their  mightiness.

4  Self-moving  is  that  youthful  band,  with  spotted  steeds ;  thus

it  hath  lordly  sway,  endued  with  power  and  might.
Truthful  art  thou,  and  blameless,  scarchor-out  of  sin  :  so  thou.
Strong  Host,  wilt  be  protector  of  this  prayer.

5  We  speak  by  our  descent  from  our  primeval  Sire;  our  tongue,

when  we  behold  the  Soma,  stirs  itself.

When,  shouting,  they  had  joined  Indra  in  toil  of  fight,  then
only  they  obtained  their  sacrificial  names.

6  Splendours  they  gained  for  glory,  they  who  wear  bright  rings ;

rays  they  obtained,  and  men  to  celebrate  their  praise.
Armed  with  their  swords,  impetuous  and  fearing  naught,  they
have  possessed  the  Maruts’  own  belov&d  home.


names  Assigned  to  the  powers  of  darkness  and  mischief.  It  is  derived  from
atra,  which  means,  tooth  or  jaw,  and  therefore  meant  originally  an  ogre  with
largo  tcetli  or  jaws,  a  devourer.’— Max  Muller.  Sco  Vedic  Hymns,  Part  I.
(Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXXII.)  for  a  translation  and  full  explanation  of
this  aud"  other  Hymns  to  the  Maruts.


1  A  fete  in  number  onhj :  '  refers  to  the  Maruts,  who  are  represented  as
gradually  rising  or  just  showing  themselves,  as  yet  only  a  few  iu  number,  like
the  first  stars  iu  tiro  sky.' — Max  Muller.

5  The  Soma  juico  inspires  us,  and  wc  are  guided  by  the  tradition  received
from  our  ancestors.

The  Maruts  obtained  divine  honours  only  as  a  reward  for  assisting  Indra
in  his  battle  with  the  demon  Vritra.

6  They  have  possessed  the  Maruts'  own  belovid  home:  'have  established
themselves  in  what  became  afterwards  known  as  their  own  abode,  their  own
place  among  the  gods  invoked  at  the  sacrifice.’— Max  Miillcr.


Z7FJ/.V  89.]


113


THE  RIGVEDA.

HYMN  LXXXVIII.  Maruts.

Come  hitlier,  Maruts,  on  your  lightning-lftdcn  cars,  sounding
with  -sweet  songs,  armed  with  lances,  winged  with  steeds.
Fly  unto  us  with  noblest  food,  like  birds,  0  ye  of  mighty  power.

2  With  their  red-hued  or,  haply,  tawny  courser#  which  speed

their  chariots  on,  they  come  for  glory.

Brilliant  like  gold  is  he  who  holds  the  thunder.  Earth  have
they  smitten  with  the  chariot’s  felly.

3  For  beauty  ye  have  swords  upon  your  bodies.  As  they  stir

woods  so  may  they  stir  our  spirits.

For  your  sake,  0  ye  Maruts  very  mighty  and  well-born,  have
they  sot  the  stone  in  motion.

4  The  days  went  round  you  and  came  back,  0  yearners,  back,

to  this  prayer  and  to  this  solemn  worship.

The  Gotamas  making  their  prayer  with  singing  have  pushed
the  well’s  lid  up  to  drink  the  water.

5  No  hymn  was  ever  known  like  this  aforetime  which  Gotama

sang  forth  for  you,  0  Maruts,

What  time  upon  your  golden  wheels  he  saw  you,  wild  boars
rushing  about  with  tusks  of  iron.

6  To  you  this  freshening  draught  of  Soma  rusheth,  0  Maruts,

like  the  voice  of  one  who  prayeth.

It  ru&heth  freely  from  our  hands  as  these  libations  wont  to
flow.

HYMN  LXXX1X.  Yisvcdovas.

May  powers  auspicious  como  to  us  from  every  side,  never  de¬
ceived,  unhindered,  and  victorious,

That  the  Gods  ever  may  be  with  us  for  our  gain,  our  guardians
'  day  by  day  unceasing  in  their  care.


2  He  who  holds  the  thunder :  the  holder  of  the  thunder  or  thundorbolt  is
Indra.

3  Have  they  set  the  stone  in  motion :  men  have  pressod  out  the  Soma  juice

and  offered  libationa  to  you.  *

4  And  to  this  solemn  worship :  ( vdrkdryfl 'm  cha  devfmj  ‘  The  most  likely  sup¬

position  is  that  v&rkftryft  was  the  name  given  to  some  famous  hymn,  some
pwan  or  song  of  triumph  belonging  to  the  Gotamas.  The  purport  of  the
whole  lino  then  would  be  that  many  days  have  gone  for  the  Maruts  as  well  as
for  the  famous  hymn  addressed  to  them,  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  Gotamas
have  long  been  devoted  to  the  Maruts  ...The  pushing  up  of  the  lid  of  the
well  for  to  drink,  raeana  that  they  obtained  rain  from  the  cloud,  which  is  here,
as  before,  represented  as  a  covered  well.’ — Max  Mtiller.  ,-

G  This  verse  is  very  obscure.  I  follow  M.  M.’a  translation  which  ‘  is  to  a
great  extent  conjectural.’


114  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

2  May  the  auspicious  favour  of  the  Gods  be  ours,  on  us  descend

the  bounty  of  the  righteous  Gods.

The  friendship  of  tho  Gods  have  we  devoutly  sought :  so  may
the  Gods  extend  our  lifo  that  we  may  live.

3  We  call  them  hither  with  a  hymn  of  olden  time,  Bhaga,  the

friendly*  Dakslia,  Mitra,  Aditi,

Amman,  Varuna,  Soma,  the  Asvins.  May  Sarasvatl,  auspici¬
ous,  grant  felicity.

.4  May  the  Wind  waft  to  us  that  pleasant  medicine,  may  Earth
our  Mother  give  it,  and  our  Father  Heaven,

And  the  joy -giving  stones  that  press  the  Soma’s  juice.  Asvins,
may  ye,  for  whom  our  spirits  long,  hear  this.

5  Him  we  invoke  for  aid  who  reigns  supreme,  the  Lord  of  all

that  stauds  or  moves,  inspirer  of  the  soul,

That  Pflshan  may  promote  the  increase  of  our  wealth,  our
keeper  and  our  guard  infallible  for  our  good.

6  Illustrious  far  and  wide,  may  India  prosper  us :  may  Pushan

prosper  us,  the  Master  of  all  wealth.

May  Tar  k  shy  a  with  uninjured  fellies  prosper  us :  Brihaspati
vouchsafe  to  us  prosperity.

7  The  Maruts,  Sons  of  Prisni,  borne  by  spotted  steeds,  moving

in  glory,  oft  visiting  holy  rites,

Sages  whose  tongue  is  Agni,  brilliant  as  the  Sun,— hither  let
all  the  Gods  for  our  protection  come.

8  Gods,  may  we  with  our  ears  listen  to  what  is  good,  and  with

our  eyes  see  what  is  good,  ye  Holy  Ones.

With  limbs  and  bodies  firm  may  we  extolling  you  attain  the
term  of  life  appointed  by  the  Gods.

9  A  hundred  autumns  stand  before  us,  0  ye  Gods,  within  wh&se

space  ye  bring  our  bodies  to  decay ;

Within  whose  space  our  sons  become  fathers  in  turn.  Break
ye  not  in  the  midst  our  course  of  fleeting  life.


3  Rhnga,  enumerated  by  TlUka  among  ilie  deities  of  the  highest  sphero,  Is
an  Aditya  regarded  in  the  Veda  as  bestowing  wealth  and  instituting  or  pre¬
siding  over  love  and  marriage  Dak-lot  is  a  creative  power  associated  with
Aditi,  and  therefore  sometimes  identified  with  PrajApati.

4  Oar  Pother  Heaven :  pitS  Dyads  =  Trarrjp  ZtUQ,  Jupiter.

6  TJrtihfn ;  usually  described  as  a  divine  horse,  and  probably  a  personifi-
eatiou  of  the  Sun.  Brihaspati:  Lord  of  Prayer.

7  Whote  longue  is  Agni:  who  receive  oblations  through  Agni  or  fire.

9  A  hundred  autumns :  regarded  as  the  natural  length  of  human  life.  Cf.
Iaaiah,  LXV.  20  '  There  shall  bo  no  more  thence  an  infant  of  days,  nor  an  old
man  that  hath  not  fillod  his  days  :  for  the  child  shall  die  an  hundred  yoa rt
old.'


fl  YAfiV  91 .]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  1 1 5

10  Aditi  is  the  heaven,  Aditi  is  mid-air,  Aditi  is  the  Mother  and
the  Sire  and  Son.

Aditi  is  all  Gods,  Aditi  five-classed  mon,  Aditi  all  that  hath
been  born  and  shall  be  born.

HYMN  XC.  Visvedcvtu.

Mat  Varuna  with  guidance  straight,  and  Mitra  ISad  us,  he  who
knows.

And  Aryaman  in  accord  with  God9.

2  For  they  are  dealers  forth  of  wealth,  and,  not  deluded,  with

their  might

Guard  evermore  the  holy  laws.

3  Shelter  may  they  vouchsafe  to  us,  Immortal  Gods  to  mortal  men,
Chasing  our  enemies  away.

4  May  they  mark  out  our  paths  to  bliss,  Indra,  the  Maruts,

Pushan,  and

Bhaga,  the  Gods  to  bo  adored.

5  Yea,  Pushan,  Vishnu,  ye  who  run  your  course,  enrioh  our

hymns  with  kiue ;

Bless  us  with  all  prosperity.

6  The  winds  waft  sweets,  the  rivers  pour  sweots  for  the  man  who

keeps  the  Law :

So  may  the  plants  be  sweet  for  us.

7  Sweet  be  the  night  and  sweet  the  dawns,  sweet  tho  terrestrial

atmosphere ;

Sweet  be  our  Father  Heaven  to  us.

8  May  the  tall  tree  be  full  of  sweets  for  us,  aud  full  of  sweats

the  Sun :

May  our  milch-kine  he  sweet  for  us.

9  Be  Mitra  gracious  unto  us,  and  Varuna  and  Aryaman  :

Indra,  Brihaspatl  be  kind,  and  Vishnu  of  tho  mighty  Btrido.

HYMN  -\CL  •  soma.

Thou,  Soma,  art  preeminent  for  wi6dom ;  along  the  etraighteat
path  thou  art  our  leader.

Our  wise  forefathers  by  thy  guidance,  Indu,  dealt  out  among
the  Gods  their  share  of  treasure.

10  Aditi.  the  Infinite,  infinite  Nature.

9  Vithnu  of  the  migh'ij  stride  :  a*  the  Sun,  etriding  over  or  traversing  the
tbroc  worid*.

1  Irnlu:  another  name  of  Sana,  Imre  identified  with  the  Mom  who  toachei
men  tlm  prn|n»r  aeuauua  at  which  to  wonhip  the  M-uue  or  deified  Father*.
Bee  I.  43.  8,  note.


116.  THE  IIYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

2  Thou  by  thine  insight  art  most  wise,  0  Soma,  strong  by  thino

energies  and  all-possessing ;

Mighty  art  thou  by  all  thy  powers  and  greatness,  by  glories
art  thou  glorious,  guide  of  mortals.

3  Thine  are  King  Varuna’s  eternal  statutes,  lofty  and  deep,  0

Soma,  is  thy  glory.

All-pure  art  thou  liko  Mitra  tko  bclovfcd,  adorable,  like
Aryaman,  0  Soma.

4  With  all  thy  glories  on  the  earth,  in  heaven,  on  mountains,  in

the  plants,  and  in  the  waters, —

With  all  of  these,  well-pleased  aud  not  in'  anger,  accept,  0
royal  Soma,  our  oblations.

5  Thou,  Soma,  art  the  Lord  of  heroes,  King,  yea,  Vptra-slaycr

thou  :

Thou  art  auspicious  energy.

6  And,  Soma,  let  it  bo  thy  wish  that  we  may  live  and  may  not

die :

Praise-loving  Lord  of  plants  art  thou.

7  To  him  who  keeps  the  law,  both  old  and  young,  thou  glvcst

happiness,

And  energy  that  he  may  live.

8  Guard  us,  King  Soma,  ou  all  sides  from  him  who  threatens  us  :

never  let

The  friend  of  one  like  thoc  be  harmed.

9  With  those  dolightful  aids  which  thou  hast,  Soma,  for  tho

worshipper, —

Even  with  those  protect  thou  us.

10  Accepting  this  our  sacrifice  and  this  our  praiso,  0  Soma,  come,
And  be  thou  nigh  to  prosper  us.

11  Well-skilled  iu  speech  we  magnify  thee,  Soma,  with  our

saored  songs :

Como  thou  to  us,  most  gracious  One.

12  Euriohcr,  hoalerof  disease,  wealth-finder,  prospering  our  store,
Be,  Soma,  a  good  Friend  to  us.

13  Soma,  be  happy  in  our  hoart,  as  miloh-kine  in  the  grassy

meads,

As  a  young  man  in  his  own  house.

14  0  Soma,  God,  tho  mortal  man  who  in  thy  friendship  hath

delight,

Him  doth  the  mighty  Sage  befriend.


3  Tkitit  are  King  Varuna'i  eternal  statutes :  thy  lawa  aro  tho  anino  &a
Varuna’s,  or  Varuna’a  lawa  have  their  origin  iu  thee.


HYMN  91.]


THE  El O  VEDA.


117


15  Save  us  from  slanderous  reproach,  keep  us,  0  Soma,  from
distress :

'  Be  unto  us  a  gracious  Friend.

1G  Soma,  wax  great.  From  ever y  side  may  vigorous  powers  unite
in  thee :

Be  in  the  gathering-place  of  strength.

17  Wax,  O  most  gladdening  Soma,  great  through  all  thy  rays  of
light,  and  be

A  Friend  of  most  illustrious  fame  to  prosper  us.

IS  In  thee  be  juicy  nutriments  united,  and  powers  and  mighty
foe-subduing  vigour,

Waxing  to  immortality,  0  Soma  :  win  highest  glories  for  thy¬
self  in  heaven.

19  Such  of  thy  glories  as  with  poured  oblations  men  honour,

may  they  all  invest  our  worship.

Wealth-giver,  furthcrer  with  troops  of  heroes,  sparing  the
brave,  come,  Soma,  to  our  houses.

20  To  him  who  worships  Soma  gives  the  milch-cow,  a  fleet  steed

and  a  man  of  active  knowledge,

Skilled  in  home  duties,  meet  for  holy  synod,  for  council  meet,
a  glory  to  his  father.

21  Invincible  in  fight,  saver  in  battles,  guard  of  our  camp,  winner

of  light  and  water,

Bora  amid  hymns,  well-housed,  exceeding  famous,  victor,  in
thee  will  we  rejoice,  0  Soma.

22  These  herbs,  these  milch-kine,  and  these  runniug  waters,  all

these,  0  Soma,  thou  hast  generated.

The  spacious  firmament  hast  thou  expanded,  and  with  the
light  thou  hast  dispelled  the  darkness.

23  Do  thou,  God  Soma,  with  thy  Godlike  spirit,  victorious,  win  for

us  a  share  of  riches.

Let  none  prevent  thee  :  thou  art  Lord  of  valour.  Provide  for
both  sides  in  the  fray  for  booty.


14  The  mighty  Sage :  Soma  himself.

16  He  in  the  gathering  place  of  strength:  be  thou  the  central  point  and
source  of  all  power.

17  Through  all  thy  rays  of  light :  through  all  thy  stalks,  according  to  Ludwig
who  takes  Soma  to  be  the  plant,  Wilson,  following  SAyapa,  translates :
*  Increase  with  all  twining  plants.’

22  These  milch-kine:  the  milk  which  is  to  be  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice.


11*


[BOOK  1.


THE  HYMNS  OP

HYMN  XCII.  Dawn.

These  Ditcm  Lave  raised  their  banner ;  in  the  eastern  half
of  the  mid-air  they  spread  abroad  their  shining  light.

Like  heroes  who  prepare  their  weapons  for  the  war,  onward
they  come  bright  red  in  hue,  the  Mother  Cows.

2  Readily  have  the  purple  beams  of  light  shot  up;  the  Red

Cows  h  tvo  they  harnessed,  easy  to  bo  yoked.

The  Dawns  have  brought  distinct  perception  as  hcfore :  red-
huod,  they  have  attained  their  fulgent  brilliancy.

3  They  sing  their  song  like  women  active  in  their  tasks,  along

their  common  path  hither  from  far  ftway,

■Bringing  refreshment  to  the  liberal  devotee,  yea,  all  things  to
the  worshipper  who  pours  the  juice,

4  She.  like  a  dancer,  puts  her  broidered  garments  on:  as  a  cow

yields  her  udder  so  sho  baros  her  breast.

Creating  light  ior  all  the  world  of  life,  the  Dawn  hath  laid
the  darkness  open  as  the  cows  their  stall.

5  Wo  have  beheld  the  brightness  of  her  shining;  it  spreads

and  drives  away  the  darksome  monster.

Liko  tints  that  deck  the  Post  at  sacrifices,  Heaven’s  Daughter
hath  attained  her  wondrous  splendour.

.6  We  havoo’erpast  the  limit  of  this  darkness;  Dawn  breaking
forth  again  brings  clear  perception.

She  like  a  flatterer  smiles  in  light  for  glory,  and  fair  of  faco
hath  wakened  to  rejoice  us.

7  The  Gotamas  have  praised  Heaven’s  radiant  Daughter,  tho
leader  of  the  charm  of  pleasant  voices.

Dawn,  thou  conferrest  on  us  strength  with  offspring  and  men,
conspicuous  with  kiue  and  horses.

1  These  Daunt:  '  Wo  Lave  the  term  Ushaivh,  in  the  plural,  intending,
according  to  the  Commentator,  tho  divinitiot  tint  preside  over  the  morning  :
but,  according  to  YA«k»,  the  plural  is  used  huuori  fiddly  only,  for  tho  singular
personification.’ — Wilson.

The  Mother  Coxes:  the  Dawns,  with  their  red  clouds,  who  have  just  given  birth
to  tin*  day.

2  The  Red  Cotes  :  the  red  clonda  of  morning.

3  Who  pours  the  juice :  pretse*  out  and  nffoi*  libations  of  Soma  juice.

4  Hath  laid  the  davlnett  open  :  the  meaniug,  lather  obscurely  expressed
with  a  harsh  zeugma  or  ellipsis,  is.  Dawn,  with  her  bright  clouds,  has  opened
and  emerged  from  the  darkness  which  surrounded  her,  in  tho  same  manner  aa
cows  Jeavo  tho  dark  pen  or  Btablo  in  which  thoy  have  been  shut  up,  as  soon  as
it  is  opened  in  tho  oarly  morning.

$  Lite  tints  that  dec ‘i  the  Post:  the  sacrificial  post  or  pillar,  to  which  tho
victims  were  tied,  was  anointed  by  tho  priests.

7  Pleasant  voices :  of  tho  aowly-awakoacd  birds,  other  animals,  and  human


HYMN  92.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


119

8  0  tliou  who  8hincst  forth  in  wondrous  glory,  urged  onward  by

thy  strength,  auspicious  Lady,

Dawn,  may  I  gain  that  wealth,  renowned  and  ample,  in  brave
sons,  troops  of  slaves,  far-famed  for  horses.

9  Bending  her  looks  on  all  the  world,  the  Goddess  .shines,  widely

spreading  with  her  bright  eye  westward.

Waking  to  motion  every  living  creature,  she  understands  the
voice  of  each  adorer.

10  Ancient  of  days,  again  again  bom  newly,  decking  her  beauty

with  the  self-same  raiment,

The  Goddess  wastes  away  the  life  of  mortals,  like  a  skilled
hunter  cutting  birds  in  pieces.

11  She  hath  appeared  discovering  heaven’s  borders:  to  the  far

distance  she  drives  off  her  Sister.

Diminishing  the  days  of  human  creatures,  the  Lady  shines
with  all  her  lover’s  spleudour.

12  The  bright,  the  blessfed  One  shines  forth  extending  her  rays

like  kine,  as  a  flood  rolls  his  waters.

Never  transgressing  the  divine  commandments,  she  is  beheld
visible  with  the  sunbeams.

13  0  Dawn  enriched  with  ample  wealth,  bestow  on  us  the  won¬

drous  gift

Wherewith  we  may  support  children  and  children’s  sons.

14  Thou  radiant  mover  of  sweet  sounds,  with  wealth  of  horses

and  of  kine

Shine  thou  on  us  this  day,  0  Dawn,  auspiciously.

15  0  D.iwn  enriched  with  holy  rites,  yoke  to  thy  car  thy  purple

steeds,

And  then  bring  thou  unto  us  all  felicities.

16  0  Asvins  wonderful  in  act,  do  ye  unanimous  direct
Your  chariot  to  our  home  wealthy  in  kine  and  gold.

17  Ye  who  brought  down  the  hymn  from  heaven,  a  light  that

giveth  light  to  man,

Do  ye,  0  Asvins,  bring  strength  hither  unto  us.


10  Lite  a  ikiUcd  hunt'.''  cutting  binU  in  pitcci :  ‘  Sftyana  takes  jr ttighni  for  a
'  fowler's  wife',  and  zyuh  for  ‘  birds.’  Benfcy  takes  tijuh  for  '  dice,’  and  ex¬
plains  the  clause  as  denoting  a  cunning  gambler  who  tampers  with  the  dice  by
shaving  them  down  .  Tho  phrase  ri/.< A  iva  fl  u.iuiii  occurs  again  in  R.  V.
II.  12.  5.  where  SAyana  takes  r  j,h  for  udrejaluh  ‘  a  vexcr.’  So  uncertain  aro
his  explanations.'— J.  Muir,  0.  E.  Text*,  V.  180.

1 1  Her  titter  :  Night,  Her  lover :  the  Sun.

12  if  net  tranegrtuing :  always  obedient  to  the  eternal  Law  or  divine  order
of  the  universe.


120  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOH  I.

18  Hither  may  they  who  wake  at  dawn  bring,  to  drink  Soma,
both  the  Gods,

Health-givers,  Wonder-Workers,  borne  on  paths  of  gold.

HYMN  XCIII.  Agni-Soma.

AoNl  and  Soma,  mighty  Pair,  graciously  hearken  to  my  call,
Accept  in  friendly  wise  my  hymn,  and  prosper  him  who  offers
gifts.

2  The  man  who  honours  you  to-day,  Agrii  and  Soma,  with

this  hymn,

Bestow  on' him  heroic  strength,  increase  of  kinc,  and  noble
steeds.

3  The  man  who  offers  holy  oil  and  burnt  oblations  unto  you,
Agni  and  Soma,  shall  enjoy  great  strength,  with  offspring,  all

his  life.

4  Agni  and  Soma,  famed  is  that  your  prowess  wherewith  yo

stole  the  kine,  his  food,  from  Pani.

Yo  caused  the  brood  of  Brisaya  to  perish ;  ye  found  the  light,
the  single  light  for  many.

5  Agni  and  Soma,  joined  in  operation  ye  have  set  up  the  shining

lights  in  heaven.

From  curse  and  from  reproach,  Agni  and  Soma,  ye  freed  the
rivers  that  were  bound  in  fetters.

6  One  of  you  Matarisvan  brought  from  heaven,  the  Falcon  rent

the  other  from  the  mountain.

Strengthened  by  holy  prayer  Agni  and  Soma  have  made  us
ample  room  for  sacrificing.


IS  Then  vho  toal-e  at  dawn  :  Recording  to  SAyana'thc  horses  of  the  Alvins.
The  expression  may  apply,  with  at  least  equal  propriety,  to  the  priests  who
rise  at  day-break  to  perform  the  morning  sacrifices.

1  Agni  and  Soma  :  or,  0  Agni-Soma,  the  two  Gods  forming  a  dual  deity
&gn  UAoiuau.

4  Ye  stole  the  line :  recovered  the  oows  (the  rain-clouds:  or  rays  of  light)
which  the  niggard  demon  had  carried  off  and  concealed.  Brisaya :  the  name

.of  a  demon  or  savage  enemy.

5  Prom  curse  anti  from  reproach :  according  to  SAynna,  ‘the  rivers  were
defiled  by  the  dead  body  of  Vritra,  which  had  fallen  into  them;  their  waters
were,  consequently,  unfit  to  bear  any  part  in  sacred  rites,  until  they  were
purified  by  Agni  and  Soma,  that  is,  by  oblations  to  fire  and  libations  of  Soma
juice.’— Wilson.

6  Mdtarifran,  or,  in  the  nominative  case,  KAtnrisvft,  brought  Agni  or  fire
from  heaven,  and  the  Falcon  brought  Soma  from  the  mountain  or  cloud,
that  is,  says  Sdyapa,  from  Svarga  on  the  top  of  Mount  Meru.


HYMN  94.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


121


7  Taste,  Agni,  Soma,  this  prepared  oblation;  accept  it.  Mighty
Ones,  au'd  let  it  please  you.

Vouchsafe  us  good  protection  and  kind  favour  :  grant  to  the
sacrificer  health  and  riches.

S  Whoso  with  oil  and  poured  oblation  honours,  with  God-devoted
hea»*t,  Agni  and  Soma, —

Protect  his  sacrifice,  preserve  him  from  distress,  grant  to  the
sacrificer  great  felicity.

9  Invoked  together,  mates  in  wealth,  Agni-Soma,  accept  our
hymns  :

Together  bo  among  the  Gods.

10  Agni  and  Soma,  unto  him  who  worships  you  with  holy  oil
Shine  forth  an  ample  i*ecompcnse.

1 1  Agni  aud  Soma,  be  ye  pleased  with  these  oblations  brought

to  you,

And  come,  together,  nigh  to  us.

12  Agni  and  Soma,  cherish  well  our  horses,  and  let  our  cows  be

fat  who  yield  oblations.

Grant  power  to  us  and  to  our  wealthy  patrons,  and  cause  our
holy  rites  to  be  successful.

HYMN  XCIV.  Agni.

For  Jatavcdas  worthy  of  our  praise  will  we  frame  with  our
mind  this  eulogy  as  'twerc  a  car.

For  good,  in  his  assembly,  is  this  care  of  ours.  Let  us  not,  in
thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

2  The  man  for  whom  thou  sacrificcst  prospereth,  dwellcth  with¬

out  a  foe,  gaineth  heroic  might.

He  waxeth  strong,  distress  never  approachcth  him.  Let  us
not,  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

3  May  we  have  power  to  kindle  thee.  Fulfil  our  thoughts.  In

thee  the  Gods  eat  the  presented  offering.

Bring  hither  the  A  dityas,  for  we  long  for  them.  Let  us  not
in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

*2  Who  yidd  oblations :  who  supply  milk  to  be  mixed  with  Soma  juico.
Our  t ccoUhy  patrons :  the  rich  householders  who  institute  the  sacrifices.

This  Hymn  and  the  four  following  are  attributed  to  the  Rishi  Kutsa,  the
aon  of  Angiras.

1  JAUtvedas :  Agni.  See  I.  44.  1.

As  'tree re  a  car :  a*  a  carpenter  constructs  a  car  or  wain.

In  hi*  assembly  :  among  those  who  havo  met  together  to  worship  him.  The
meaning  might  also  be:  good,  or  auspicious,  is  his  providence  or  loving  care  of  us
3  Bring  hither  the  Adilyas  :  the  Sons  of  Aditi ;  all  the  Gods,  according  to
Sftyana.


122  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /.

.4  We  will  bring  fuel  and  prepare  burnt  offerings,  reminding  thee
at  each  successive  festival.

Fulfil  our  thought  that  so  we  may  prolong  our  lives.  Let  us
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

5  His  ministers  move  forth,  the  guardians  of  the  folk,  protecting

quadruped  and  biped  with  their  rays.

Mighty  art  thou,  the  wondrous  herald  of  the  Dawn.  Let  us
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

6  Thou  art  Presenter  and  the  chief  Invoker,  thou  Director,

Purifier,  great  H  :gh  Priest  by  birth.

Knowing  all  priestly  work  thou  perfectcst  it.  Sage.  Let  us
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

7  Lovely  of  form  art  thou,  alike  on  every  side  ;  though  far,

thou  shinest  brightly  as  if  close  at  hand.

0  God,  thou  seest  through  even  the  dark  of  night.  Let  us
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

8  Gods,  foremost  be  his  car  who  pours  libations  out,  and  let  our

hymn  prevail  o'er  evil-hearted  men.

Attend  to  this  our  speech  and  make  it  prosper  well.  Let  us
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

9  Smite  with  thy  weapons  those  of  evil  speech  and  thought,

devouring  demons,  whether  near  or  far  away.

Then  to  the  singer  give  free  way  for  sacrifice.  Let  us  not  in
thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

10  When  to  thy  chariot  thou  hadst  yoked  two  red  steeds  and  two

ruddy  steeds,  wind-sped,  thy  roar  was  like  a  bull’s.

Thou  with  smoke-bannered  flame  attackest  forest  trees.  Let
us  not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

11  Then  at  thy  roar  the  very  birds  are  terrified,  when,  eating  up

the  grass,  thy  sparks  fiy  forth  abroad.

Then  is  it  easy  for  thee  and  thy  car  to  pass.  Let  us  not  in
thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.


5  JIU  HI inislcrt ;  his  beams  of  light.

6  1  Agni  is  here  identified  with  the  chief  of  the  sixteen  priest*  engaged  at
solemn  sacrifices.  He  is  AJtnary*,  usually  called  the  reciter  of  the  Yajtuh,
—  here  defined,  by  the  scholiast,  as  the  presenter  ..f  the  offerings  :  he  is  the
Hotri,  or  invoking  priest :  he  in  the  PrvfZttri,  or  the  Maiirliaruna,  «\ ho#-  duty
it  is  to  direct  the  other  prieata  what  to  do,  and  when  to  peri  or  m  their  func¬
tions  :  he  is  the  poCri,  or  prieet  so  termed,  sod  the  family  or  hereditary
pvrohita :  or  purohita  uiay  be  the  same  as  the  BraJmi  of  a  ceremony,— being,
to  men,  what  Brihatpali  is  to  the  gods.'—  Wiliva.


TEE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  95.)


128


12  He  hath  tho  power  to  soothe  Ultra  and  Varuna:  wonderful  is

the  Maruts’  wrath  when  they  descend.

Bo  gracious  :  let  their  hearts  he  turned  to  us  again.  Let  us
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

13  Thou  art  a  God,  thou  art  the  wondrous  Friend  of  Gods,  the

Vasu  of  the  Vasus,  fair  in  sacrifice.

Under  thine  own  most  wide  protection  may  we  dwell.  Let  u»
not  in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  harm.

14  This  is  thy  grace  that,  kindled  in  thine  own  abode,  invoked

with  Soma  thou  soundest  forth  most  benign.

Thou  givest  wealth  and  treasure  to  the  worshipper.  Let  us  not
in  thy  friendship,  Agni,  suffer  barm.

15  To  whom  thou,  Lord  of  goolly  riches,  grantest  freedom  from

every  sin  with  perfect  wholeness,

Whom  with  good  strength  thou  quickeuest,  with  children  aud
wealth — anay  we  be  they,  Eternal  Being.

16  Such,  Agni,  thou  who  knowest  all  good  fortune,  God,  leugthen

hero  the  days  of  our  existence.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  aud  Heaven.


HYMN  XCV.  Agni.

To  fair  goals  travel  Two  unlike  in  semblance :  each  in  succes¬
sion  nourishes  an  infant.

One  bears  a  Godlike  Babe  of  golden  colour :  bright  and  fair-
shiuing  is  ho  with  the  other.


12  He  hulk  thepoioer:  Agni  persuades  Mitra  and  Varuna  to  send  the  rain
aud  protects  m«u  from  the  fury  of  the  Storm- G<xU.

13  The  Vasu  of  the  Vasus  :  best  of  tho  class  of  Gods  called  Vasus  ;  or
*  tho  good  nraoiig  tho  good.’

16  'I'bo  socond  line  of  *  this  verse  terminates  the  following  hymns,  with  two
exception*,  an  far  as  the  hundred  and  first  SOlUa.  Mitra,  Vanina,  aud  Aditi
havo  been  before  noticed.  By  Sindhu  is  to  he  understood  the  divinity  presid¬
ing  over,  or  identified  wiili,  flowing  water  ;  and  it  may  m<«au  either  tho  sea
or  flowing  stream*  collectively,  or  the  liver  Indu*.  Prithivi  and  Div  ore  tho
praonifiovl  earth  and  heaven.  These  sro  requested  to  honour,  mesuiug,  to

preserve,  or  perpetuate,  whatever  blessing  h.is  been  aikcd  for  )  tat . *n?n»-

ahant’m)  ;  from  mak,  to  venerate  or  Worship.’ — Wilson.

1  Tho  Two  are  Day  and  Night,  and  the  infant  that  each  suckles  iu  turn  is
Agni,  as  the  Sun  by  day  and  Fire,  or  tho  Moon,  bv  night.


128  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

.4  That  M&tarisvan  rich  in  wealth  and  treasure,  light-winner,
finds  a  pathway  for  his  offspring,

Guard  of  our  folk,  Father  of  earth  and  heaven.  The  Gods
possessed  the  wealth-bestowiug  Agni.

6  Night  and  Dawn,  charging  each  the  other's  colour,  meeting
together  suckle  one  samo  Infant :

Golden  between  the  heaven  and  earth  ho  shincth.  The  Gods
possessed  the  wealth-bestowing  Agni.

6  Root  of  wealth,  g  ithering-place  of  treasures,  banner  of  sacri¬

fice,  who  grants  the  suppliant’s  wishes:

Preserving  him  as  their  own  life  immortal,  the  Gods  possessed
the  wealth-bestowing  Agni.

7  Now  and  of  old  the  home  of  wealth,  the  mansion  of  what  is

born  and  what  was  born  aforetime,

Guard  of  what  is  and  what  will  be  hereafter, — the  Gods  pos¬
sessed  the  wealth-bestowing  Agnf.

8  May  the  Wealth-Giver  grant  us  conquering  riches ;  may  tho

Wealth-Giver  grant  us  wealth  with  heroes.

May  the  Wealth-Giver  grant  us  food  with  offspring,  and
length  of  days  may  the  Wealth -Giver  send  us.

9  Fed  with  our  fuel,  purifying  Agni,  60  blaze  to  us  auspiciously

for  glory.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  XCVU.  Agni.

Chasing  with  light  our  sin  away,  0  Agni,  shine  thou  wealth
on  us.

May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.

2  For  goodly  fields,  for  pleas.mt  homes,  for  wealth  we  sacrifice

tothw.

May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.

3  Best  prafser  of  all  these  be  he ;  foremost,  our  chiefs  who

sacritice.

May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.


4  Mdtfiriyan :  usually  the  name  of  the  divine  being  who  brought  Agni
from  heaven  (see  I.  31.  8.),  said  by  SAyana  to  mean  in  this  place  Agni  himself.

5  One  name  Inf  nil :  Agui  (see  I.  95.  1.)  whom  they  nourish  with  the  obla-  *
tion  offered  by  men.

Goiden :  as  the  Sun.

3  May  ho,  that  is  Kutea,  tho  Bislii  of  the  hymn,  bo  preeminent  among
these  who  cclcbrato  thy  praises,  and  may  the  householders  who  haro  institut¬
ed  this  sacrifice  be  similarly  distinguished.


HYMN  99.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


127


4  So  that  thy  worshippers  and  we,  thine,  Agni,  in  our  sons  may

live.

May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.

5  As  ever-conquering  Agni’s  beams  of  splendour  go  to  every  side,
May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.

6  To  every  side  thy  face  is  turned,  thou  art  triumphant  every-
'  where.

May  his  light  chaso  our  sin  away.

7  0  thou  whose  face  looks  every  way,  bear  us  past  foes  as  in  a

ship.

May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.

8  As  in  a  ship,  convey  thou  ns  for  our  advantage  o’er  the  flood.
May  his  light  chase  our  sin  away.

HYMN  XCVIII.  Agn5.

Still  in  Vaisvanara’s  grace  may  we  continue :  yea,  he  is  King
supreme  o’er  all  things  living.

Sprung  henco  to  life  upon  this  All  he  looketh.  Yaisvanara
hath  rivalry  with  Surya.

2  Present  in  heaven,  inearth,  all-present  Agni,— all  plants  that

grow  on  ground  hath  he  pervaded.

May  Agni,  may  Vaisvinara  with  vigour,  present,  preserve  us
day  and  night  from  foemen.

3  Be  this  thy  truth,  Yaisvanara,  to  us-ward  :  let  wealth  in  rich

abundance  gather  round  us.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  XCIX.  Agni.

For  J:\tavedas  lotus  press  the  Soma:  may  he  consume  the
wealth  of  the  malignant.

May  Agni  carry  us  through  all  our  troubles,  through  grief  as
in  a  boat  across  the  river.


1  Vaittfivara,  ia  an  epithet  of  Agni  or  Fire  aa  preecnt  with,  common  to,  or
benefiting,  all  men.

Sprung  hence  to  life  :  produced  from  these  two  aranit  or  firc-aticka.


•  Thia  Hymn,  consisting  of  a  ainglo  atansa,  ia  ascribed  to  the  Hiahi  Kasyapa,
the  aon  of  Marlchi.


128  THE  HYHXS  OF  [ BOOK  I.

HYMN  C.  Indra.

Mat  he  who  hath  his  home  with  strength,  the  Mighty,  tho
King  suureme  of  earth  and  spacious  heaveu,

Lord  of  true  power,  to  be  invoked  in  battles, — may  Indra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

2  Whose  way  is  unattainable  like  Surya’s :  ho  in  each  fight  is

the  strong  Vritra-slayer,

Mightiest  with  liis  Friends  in  his  own  courses.  May  Indra,
girt  by  Morula,  be  our  succour.

3  Whose  paths  go  forth  in  their  great  might  resistless,  forth-

milking,  as  it  were,  heaven’s  genial  moisture.

With  manly  strength  triumphant,  foe-subduer, — may  Indra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

4  Among  Angirascs  he  was  the  chicfest,  a  Friend  with  friends,

mighty  amid  the  mighty.

Praiser  mid  praisers,  hououred  most  of  singers.  May  Indra,
girt  by  Manila,  be  our  succour,

5  Strong  with  the  Rudras  as  with  his  own  children,  in  manly

battle  conquering  his  focmen,

With  his  close  comrades  doing  deeds  of  glory, — may  Indra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

6  Humbler  of  pride,  exciter  of  the  conflict,  the  Lord  of  heroes,

God  invoked  of  many,

May  he  this  day  gain  with  our  men  the  sunlight.  May  Iudv&j
girt  by  Manila,  be  our  succour.

7  His  help  hath  made  him  cheerer  in  the  battle,  tho  folk  have

made  him  guardian  of  their  comfort.

Solo  Lord  is  he  of  every  holy  service.  May  Indra,  girt  by
Maruts,  be  our  succour.

This  Hymn  is  ascribed  to  the  regal  Kish  is  the  V&rshAgiras,  the  five  sons  of
the  RAjA  VrishAgir,  whoae  names  are  mentioned  in  the  seventeenth  otanza.  _

3  Whose  paths :  pdathdsaK.  paths,  is  explained  as  *  rays  ’  by  SAyana.  Indra
is  here  represented  as  Che  God  of  light  and  of  rain.

5  Rudras :  the  Maruts,  sons  of  Rudra  the  chief  Storm-God.  They  arc  the
close  comrades  or  faithful  companions  of  Indra,  who  regards  them  not  as  his
equals  but  as  his  children.

6  The  sunlight the  hymn  is  addressed  to  Indra  for  aid  in  an  approaching
battle.  SAyana  says  that  the  VArnhAgiras  pray  that  they  may  have  daylight
and  that  their  enemies  may  fight  in  the  dark.

7  Indra  is  regarded  as  their  helper  and  inspiriter  in  battle  and  their
protector  in  peace.  He  also  presides  over  all  sets  of  worship,  and  as  such
rewards  those  who  serve  him.


IIYMH  100.]


TIIB  RIO  VEDA.


129


8  To  him  the  Hero,  on  high  days  of  prowess,  heroes  for  help

and  booty  shall  betake  them.

Ho  hath  found  light  even  in  the  blinding  darkness.  May
Iudra,  girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

9  He  with  bis  left  hand  checketh  even  the  mighty,  and  with  his

right  hand  gathereth  up  the  booty.

Even  with  the  humble  he  acquireth  riches.  May  Indra,  girt
by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

10  With  hosts  on  foot  and  cars  he  winnetli  treasures  ;  well  is  ho

known  this  day  by  all  the  people.

With  manly  might  ho  conquereth  those  who  hate  him.  May
Indra,  girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

11  When  in  his  ways  with  kinsmen  or  with  strangers  he  speedeth

to  the  fight,  invoked  of  many,

For  gain  of  waters,  and  of  sons  and  grandsons,  may  Indra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

12  Awful  and  fierce,  fiend-slayer,  thunder-wiclder,  with  boundless

knowledge,  hymned  by  hundreds,  mighty,

In  strength  like  Soma,  guard  of  the  Five  Peoplos,  may  Iudra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

13  Winning  the  light,  hitherward  roars  his  thunder  like  the  terri¬

fic  mighty  voice  of  Heaven.

Rich  gifts  and  treasures  evermore  attend  him.  May  Indra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

14  Whose  home  eternal  through  his  strength  surrounds  him  on

every  sido,  his  laud,  the  earth  and  heaven,

May  he,  delighted  with  our  service,  save  us.  May  Iudra,  girt
by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.

15  The  limit  of  whose  power  not  Gods  by  Godhead,  nor  mortal

men  have  reached,  nor  yet  the  Waters.

Both  Earth  and  Heaven  in  vigour  he  surpasseth.  May  Indra,
girt  by  Maruts,  be  our  succour.


9  Even  the  hvmUe  :  not  the  atrong  only,  but  the  feeble  man  also  acquires
riches  with  his  help.

12  Guard  of  the  Five  Peoples :  of  the  five  classes  of  beings,  according  to  Sity-
ana,  that  ia,  Gods,  Gandharvas,  Apsarases,  Aauras  and  RAlcshasas.  Probably
the  five  Arya  tribes  are  intended.  See  I.  7.  9.

14  The  Earth  and  Heaven ,  his  dwelling-place,  are  his  everlasting  song  of
praise  because  they  have  been  established  and  regulated  by  him.  This  is
hud  wig’s  explanation  of  this  obscure  verse.


130  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  I.

16  The  red  and  tawny  mare,  blaze-marked,  high  standing,  celes¬

tial  who,  to  bring  Rijrasva  riches,

Drew  at  the  pole  the  chariot  yoked  with  stallions,  joyous,
among  the  hosts  of  meu  was  noted.

17  The  Vars^agiras  unto  thee,  0  Indra,  the  Mighty  One,  sing

forth  this  laud  to  please  thee,

Rijr&sva  with  his  fellows,  Ambarisha,  Suridhls,  Sahadeva,
Bhayamana.

IS  He,  much  invoked,  hath  slain  Dasyus  and  Simyus,  after  his
wont,  and  laid  them  low  with  arrows.

The  mighty  Thunderer  with  his  fair-complexioued  friends  won
the  land,  the  sunlight,  and  the  waters.

19  May  Indra  evermore  be  our  protector,  and  unimpcrilled  may
we  win  the  booty.

This  prayer  of  ours  may,  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HI  MN  Cl.  Indra.

Sixo,  with  oblation,  praise  to  him  who  maketh  glad,  who  with
Rijisvau  drove  the  dusky  brood  away.

Fain  for  help,  him  the  strong  whose  right  hand  wields  the  bolt,
him  girt  by  Maruts  we  invoke  to  be  our  Friend.

2  Indra,  who  with  triumphant  wrath  smote  Vyansa  down,  and

Sambara,  and  Pipru  the  unrighteous  one ;

Who  extirpated  Sushna  the  insatiate, —  him  girt  by  Maruts
we  invoke  to  bo  our  Friend.

3  He  whose  great  work  of  manly  might  is  heaven  and  earth,  and

Varuna  and  Surya  keep  his  holy  law  ;

Indra,  whose  law  the  rivers  follow  as  they  flow,— him  girt  by
Maruts  we  invoke  to  be  our  Friend.


16  The  epithets  in  this  stanza  are  taken  by  Lad  wig  as  names  of  the  six
horse#  with  which  Rijriava  drove  to  battle  and  conquered.  The  last  four
verses  of  the  hymn  appear  to  have  been  added  after  the  victory.

18  Datyus  and  Simyut:  men  of  indigenous  hostile  races.

His  fair-compltziontd  friends :  explained  by  Siyana  as  the  glittering  Maruts,
mean#  probably  the  Aryan  invaders  as  oppceed  to  the  dark-skinned  races  of
the  country.


This  Hymn  and  the  following  thirteen  are  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Kutsa.

1  Rijifvan :  a  king,  favoured  and  protected  by  Indra.  See  I.  51.  5  ;  53.  8.
The  dusky  brood :  the  dark  aborigines  who  opposed  the  Aryans.

2  Vyansa,  gunbara,  Pipru,  and  Sasina  are  names  of  fiends  of  drought.


HYMN  101.]  .  THE  RIO  VEDA.  131

4  He  who  is  Lord  and  Master  of  the  steeds  aud  kino,  honoured —

the  firm  and  sure — at  every  holy  act ;

Slayer  even  of  the  strong  who  pours  no  offering  out, —  him
girt  by  Maruts  we  invoke  to  be  our  Friend.

5  He  who  is  Lord  of  all  the  world  that  moves  and^breathes,  who

for  the  Bilhman  first  before  all  found  the  Cows ;

Indra  who  cast  the  Dasyus  down  beneath  1  is  feet, — him  girt
by  Maruts  we  invoko  to  be  our  Friend.

6  Whom  cowards  must  invoke  and  valiant  mon  of  war,  invoked

by  those  who  conquer  and  by  those  who  flee ;

Indra,  to  whom  all  beings  turn  their  constant  thought, — him
girt  by  Maruts  we  invoke  to  be  our  Friend.

7  Refulgent  in  the  Rudras’  region  he  proceeds,  and  with  the

Rudras  through  the  wide  space  speeds  the  Dame.

The  hymn  of  praise  extols  Indra  the  fur-rcuowned  :  him  girt
by  Maruts  we  invoke  to  be  our  Friend.

8  0  girt  by  Maruts,  whether  thou  delight  thee  in  loftiest  gather¬

ing-place  or  lowly  dwelling,

Come  thence  unto  our  rite,  true  boon-bestower :  through  love
of  thee  have  we  prepared  oblations.

9  We,  fain  for  thee,  strong  Indra,  have  pressed  Soma,  and,  0

thou  sought  with  prayer,  have  made  oblations.

Now  at  this  sacrifice,  with  all  thy  Maruts,  on  sacred  grass,  0
team-borne  God,  rejoice  thee.

10  Rejoice  thee  with  thine  own  Bay  Steeds,  0  Indra,  unclose  thy

jaws  and  lot  thy  lips  be  open*

Thou  with  the  fair  cheek,  lot  thy  Bay  Steeds  bring  thee  :  gra¬
cious  to  us,  be  pleased  with  our  oblation.

1 1  Guards  of  the  camp  whose  praisers  are  the  Maruts,  may  wo

through  Indra,  get  ourselves  the  booty.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.


5  Who  for  the  Drdhmnn  :  according  to  Sflyana,  who  recovered  for  tho
Angirases  the  cows  that  had  been  carried  off  by  the  Panin.  See  I.  32.  II.

7  The  Dame  -  Ludwig  suggests  that  Rodaal,  the  wife  of  Rudra,  is  intended,
aud  refers  to  the  Old-German  myth  of  tho  Wind’s- Bride.  J

11  Guards  of  the  cavip  :  may  we  who  are  the  guardians  of  the  camp  or
new  settlement,  praised  and  favoured  by  the  Maruts,  win  the  spoil.  The
words  marutstotrasya  vrijdnasya  arc  somewhat  obscure.


182  THE  HYifNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

HYMN  C1L  Indra.

To  thee  the  Mighty  One  I  bring  this  mighty  hymn,  for  thy
desire  hath  been  gratified  by  my  laud.

In  Indra,  yea  in  him  victorious  through  his  strength,  the  Gods
have  jojed  at  feast  and  when  the  Soma  flowed.

2  The  Seven  Rivers  bear  bis  glory  far  and  wide,  and  heaven  and
sky  and  earth  display  his  comely  form.

The  Sun  and  Moon  in  change  alternate  run  their  course,  that
we,  0  Indra,  may  behold  and  may  have  faith.

,  3  Maghavan,  grant  ns  that  same  car  to  bring  us  spoil,  thy  con¬
quering  car  in  which  we  joy  in  shook  of  fight.

Thou,  Indra,  whom  our  hearts  praise  highly  in  the  war,  grant
shelter,  Maghavan,  to  us  who  love  thee  well.

4  Encourage  thou  our  side  in  every  fight  :_may  we.  with  thee  for

our  ally,  conquer  the  foeman’s  host.

Indra;  bestow  on  us  jdy'ahdTSlicityT  break  down,  0  Maghavan,
the  vigour  of.  our  foes.

5  For  Ktfre  in  divers  ways  these  men  invoking  thee,  holder  of

treasures,  sing  thee  hymns  to  win  thine  aid.

Ascend  the  ear  that  thou  mayest  bring  spoil  to  us,  for,  Indra,
tby  fixt  mind  winneth  the  victory.

6  His  arms  win  kine,  his  power  is  boundless,  in  each  act  best,

with  a  hundred  helps,  waker  of  battle’s  din
Is  Indra :  none  may  rival  him  in  mighty  strength.  Hence,
eager  for  the  spoil,  tho  poople  call  on  him.

7  Thy  glory,  Maghavan,  exceeds  a  hundred,  yea,  more  than  a

hundred,  than  a  thousand  mid  the  folk.

The  great  bowl  hath  inspirited  thee  boundlessly :  so  mayst
thou  slay  the  Vritras,  breaker-down  of  forts  !

8  Of  thy  great  might  there  is  a  threefold  counterpart,  the  three

earths.  Lord  of  men  !  and  the  three  realms  of  light.

Above  this  whole  world,  Indra,  thou  hast  waxen  great :  with¬
out  a  foe  art  thou,  by  nature,  from  of  old.


2  The  Seem  Riven  •  the  chief  rim  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  earliest
Aryan  settlements.  See  I.  32.  12.

7  The  great  tosof  .•  the  vessel  containing  the  exhilarating  Soma  juice,  or
the  mighty  libation  itself.  The  forte  are  the  cloud-castles  of  the  demons  of
the  air  which  Indra  destroys  with  his  lightning :  ‘  the  clouds  whose  moving
turrets  make  the  bastions  of  the  storm.’— Shelley,  Witch  of  Atlas.

3  The  three  earths :  perhaps  the  earth,  the  atmosphere,  and  the  heaven.

The  three  realms  of  light:  or  according  to  Siyana.  the  three  fires  or  fire  in

three  forms,  as  the  sun  in  heaven,  the  lightning  in  mid-air,  and  terrestrial
fire  ou  carllu  See  also  L  105.  5.


HYMN  103.]


THE  MOVED  A.


133

9  We  invocate  thee  first  among  the  Deities  :  thou  hast  become  a
mighty  Conqueror  iu  fight.

May  Indra  fill  with  spirit  this  our  singer’s  heart,  and  make
our  car  impetuous,  foremost  in  attack.

10  Thou  hast  prevailed,  and  hast  not  kept  tho  booty  back,  in

trifling  battles  or  in  those  of  great  account.

We  make  thee  keen,  the  Mighty  One,  to  succour  us:  inspire
us,  Maghavan,  when  we  defy  the  foe.

11  May  Indra  evormore  be  our  Protector,  and  uuimpcrilled  may

we  win  the  booty.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Siudhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CIII.  Indra.

That  highest  Indra-powcr  of  thine  is  distant :  that  which  is
here  sages  possessed  aforetime.

This  one  is  on  the  earth,  iu  heaven  the  other,  and  botli  unite
as  flag  with  flag  in  battle.

2  He  spread  tho  wide  earth  out  and  firmly  fixed  it,  smote  with

his  thunderbolt  and  loosed  the  waters.

Maghavan  with  his  puissance  struck  down  Alii,  rent  Rauhina
to  death  and  slaughtered  Vyansa.

3  Armed  with  his  bolt  and  trusting  in  his  prowess  he  wandered

shattering  the  forts  of  Dasas.

Cast  thy  dart,  knowing,  Thunderer,  at  the  Dasyu ;  increase
the  Arya’s  might  and  glory,  Indra.

4  For  him  who  thus  hath  taught  these  human  races,  Maghavan,

bearing  a  fame-worthy  title,

Thunderer,  drawing  nigh  to  slay  the  Dasyus,  hath  given  him¬
self  the  name  of  Son  for  glory.

1  Thai  highest  Indra-powcr :  Benfey  explains  this  verse  am  mcanine  :  In¬
dra’*  might  is  in  a  certain  way  divided  :  one  part  of  it  is  possessed  by  the
sages  who  by  their  hymns,  sacrifices  and  libations  of  Soma  juice  give  him
complete  power  to  perform  his  great  deeds.  Sdyana  sayB  that  tho  Sun  and
fire  arc  equally  tho  lustre  of  Indra,  one  in  heaven  and  the  other  on  earth  ;
and  that  by  day  fire  is  combined  with  the  Sun,  and  by  night  the  Sun  iB  com¬
bined  with  fire.

2  Rauhirui,  said  to  bo  a  demon,  is,  like  the  other  fiends  of  drought,  a  dark
purple  cloud  that  withholds  the  rain.

3  Dfoas :  or  Dasyus,  the  non- Aryan  inhabitants  of  the  land.

Knowing :  distinguishing  the  Aryan  from  the  barbarian.

4  Tho  meaning  of  this  verao  appears  to  be,  as  Ludwig  says,  that  Indra,* in
preparing  to  slay  tho  Dasyus,  has  become^  as  it  wore,  a  son  to  the  pious  wor¬
shipper  who  has  proclaimed  his  great  deeds  to  men.


334  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  I.

5  Sec  this  abundant  wealth  that  he  possesses,  and  put  your  trust

in  Indra’s  hero  vigour.

He  found  the  cattle,  and  he  found  the  horses,  he  found  the
plants,  the  forests  and  the  waters.

6  To  him  the  truly  strong,  whose  deeds  are  many,  to  him  the

strong  Bull  let  us  pour  the  Soma.

The  Her-o,  watching  like  a  thief  in  ambush,  goes  parting  the
possessions  of  the  godless.

7  Well  didst  thou  do  that  hero  deed,  0  Tndra,  in  waking  with

thy  bolt  the  slumbering  Ahi.

In  thee,  delighted,  Dames  divine  rejoiced  them,  the  flying
Maruts  and  all  Gods  were  joyful,

8  As  thou  hast  smitten  Sushna,  Pipru,  Vritra  and  Kuyava,  and

Sambara’s  forts,  0  Iudra.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
aud  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CIV.  Indra.

Tiie  altar  hath  been  made  for  thee  to  rest  on :  come  like  a
panting  courser  and  be  seated.

Loosen  thy  flying  Steeds,  set  free  thy  Horses  who  boar  thee
swiftly  nigh  at  eve  and  morning.

2  These  men  have  come  to  Indra  for  assistance :  shall  he  not

quickly  come  upon  these  pathways  1

May  the  Gods  quell  the  fury  of  the  Dasa,  and  may  they  lead
our  folk  to  happy  fortune.

3  He  who  hath  only  wish  as  his  possession  casts  on  himself,  casts

foam  amid  the  waters.

7  Lama  divine :  the  Consorts  of  the  Gods.

8  Kuyava:  meaning,  probably,  ‘ causing  bad  harvests, '  is  the  name  of  an¬
other  of  the  demons  of  drought.

2  The  Ddta :  explained  by  SAyana  as  the  destroying  demon.  It  apparently
means  here  a  chief  of  non- Aryan  race  whom  the  supplianta  were  going  to
attack.

3  SAyana  explains  :  the  Aeurn,  or  demon,  Kuyavn,  who  knows  the  wealth
of  others  carries  it  away  of  himself,  and  being  present  in  the  water  he  carries
off  the  water  with  the  foam.  In  this  water  which  has  been  carried  away
Kuyava’s  two  wives  bathe.  Ben  fey  takes  the  foamy  water  to  mean  the  ferti¬
lising  rain.  Ludwig’s  explanation  is  :  While  the  poor  Arya  who  can  only  wish
for  the  wealth  which  he  does  not  possess  has  not  even  ordinary  water  to  wash
himself  in,  the  wives  of  the  enemy,  in  the  insolent  pride  of  their  riches,  bathe
in  milk.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


135


HYMN  104]

Both  wives  of  Kuvava  in  milk  have  bathed  them  :  may  they
bo  drowned  within  the  depth  of  Sipha.

4  This  hath  his  kinship  checked  who  lives  beside  us :  with  an¬

cient  streams  forth  speeds  and  rules  the  Hero,

Anjast,  Kulisi,  and  Virapatni,  delighting  him,  bear  milk  upon
their  waters.

5  Soon  as  this  Dasyu’s  traces  were  discovered,  as  she  who  knows

her  home,  he  sought  the  dwelling.

Now  think  thou  of  us,  Maghavau,  nor  cast  us  away,  as  doth  a
profligate  his  treasure.

6  Indra,  as  such,  give  us  a  share  of  sunlight,  of  waters,  sinless¬

ness,  and  reputation.

Do  thou  no  harm  to  our  yet  unborn  offspring :  our  trust  is  in
thy  mighty  Indra-power.

7  Now  we,  I  think,  in  thee  as  such  have  trusted :  lead  us  on,

Mighty  One,  to  ample  riches.

In  no  unready  house  give  us,  0  Indra  invoked  of  many,  food
and  drink  when  hungry.

8  Slay  us  not,  Indra ;  do  not  thou  forsake  us :  steal  not  away

the  joys  which  we  delight  in.

Rend  not  our  unborn  brood,  strong  Lord  of  Bounty  !  our
vessels  with  the  life  that  is  within  them.

9  Come  to  us ;  they  have  called  thee  Soma-lover :  here  is  the

pressed  juice.  Drink  thereof  for  rapture.

Widely-capacious,  pour  it  down  within  thee,  and,  invocated,
hear  us  like  a  Father.


Kuyava:  perhaps  a  name  given  by  the  Aryans  to  one  of  the  non- Aryan
chieftains.

Siphd,  is  said  by  Sly  an  a  to  be  the  name  of  a  river.

4  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  The  meaning  appears  to  be  that  the  friend¬
ship  of  Indra,  who  scuds  down  the  rain  as  before,  has  put  an  end  to  the  inso¬
lence  of  Kuyava.  See  Ludwig,  Ueber  die  neuesten  Arbeiten  auf  d^ru  Gebiete
der  Rgveda-forschung.

The  signification  of  the  three  rivers  in  the  second  line  is  obscure.  Bcnfey
considers  the  names  to  be  feminine  personifications  of  the  cloudB.

Virapatni,  ‘the  hero’s  wife,’  occurs,  as  Dr.  Hall  has  pointed  out,  in  VI.  49.
7,  os  an  epithet  of  Saraevatl  the  Goddess,  and  it  may  possibly  here  mean  the
river  Sarasvatl.

5  As  she  who  knows  her  dwelling :  as  a  cow  who  knows  her  stall.

7  In  no  unready  house:  that  is,  in  a  house  well  supplied  and  furnished.

8  The  joys  that  we  delight  in  .-  probably,  our  children.

Our  vessels :  our  wives  with  their  unborn  babes.  Slyana  gives  other  ex¬
planations  of  the  expression.


136


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  I.


HYMN  CV.  Visvedevas.

Within  the  waters  runs  the  Moon,  ho  with  the  beauteous
wings  in  heaven.

Ye  lightnings  with  your  golden  wheels,  men  find  not  your  abid¬
ing-place.  Mark  this  my  woo,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

2. Surely  men  crave  and  gain  their  wish.  Close  to  her  husband
clings  the  wife,

And,  in  embraces  intertwined,  both  give  and  take  the  bliss  of
love.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

3  0  never  may  that  light,  yo  Gods,  fall  from  its  station  in  tho

sky.

Ne’er  fail  us  one  like  Soma  sweet,  the  spring  of  our  felicity.
Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

4  I  ask  the  last  of  sacrifice.  As  envoy  he  shall  tell  it  forth.
Where  is  the  ancient  law  divine  1  Who  is  its  new  diffuser

now  ?  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

5  Ye  Gods  who  yonder  have  your  home  in  the  threo  lucid  realms

of  heaven,

What  count  ye  truth  and  what  untruth  1  Where  is  mine  an¬
cient  call  on  you  ?  Mark  this  my  woo,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

6  What  is  your  firm  support  of  Law  ?  What  Varuna’s  observant
•  eye?

How  may  we  pass  the  wicked  on  the  path  of  mighty  Arya-
man  ?  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

7  I  am  the  man  who  sang  of  old  full  many  a  laud  when  Soma

flowed.

Yet  torturing  cares  consume  mo  as  the  wolf  assails  the  thirsty
deer.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.


This  Hymn  is  ascribed  either  to  Trita  or  to  Kutsa.  It  is  addressed  to  tho
Visvedevas  on  behalf  of  Trita  who  had  been  imprisoned  in  a  well.  See  I.  52.  5.

1  Within  the  \ oaten :  in  the  ocean  of  air.  He  with  the  beauteous  wings :  tho
Sun.

Mark  this  my  woe :  the  text  has  only  v ilium  me  asya  roeforf,  '  know  of  this
of  me,  0  Heaven  and  Earth,’  which  means,  according  to  SAyana,  either  ‘  be
aware  of  this  my  affliction,’  or  ‘attend  to  this  my  hymn.’

4  I  ask  the  last :  tho  latest  or  youngest  of  the  Gods,  Agni,  as  being  contin¬
ually  reproduced.

5  The  three  lucid  realms  of  heaven  :  the  world  is  divided  into  earth,  sky,
and  heaven,  and  each  of  these,  ftgsiu,  is  sometime*  spoken  of  m  threefold.

6  The  path  of  mighty  Aryaman  :  probably  the  milky  way,  regarded  as  tho
path  to  heaven.— -Ludwig.  The  general  meaning  of  the  questions  in  this  and
the  two  preceding  verses  is  :  Is  there  no  longer  any  distinction  between  right
and  wrong  I  Is  there  no  moral  government  of  the  world  ?  If  there  be,  why  am
J,  a  faithful  worshipper,  allowed  to  suffer  this  undeserved  misery  ?


HYMN  105.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


137


8  Like  rival  wives  ou  every  side  enclosing  ribs  oppress  me  sore.

0  Satakratu,  biting  cares  devour  me,  singer  of  thy  praise,  as

rats  devour  tho  weaver’s  threads.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye
Earth  and  Heaven.

9  Where  those  seven  rays  are  shining,  theucc  my  house  and

family  extend.

This  Trita  Aptya  knoweth  well,  and  speaketh  out  for
brotherhood.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

10  May  those  five  Bulls  which  stand  on  high  full  in  the  midst

of  mighty  heavou,

Having  together  swiftly  borne  my  praises  to  the  Gods,  return.
Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

11  High  in  the  raid  ascent  of  heaven  those  Birds  of  beauteous

pinion  sit.

Back  from  his  path  they  drive  the  wolf  as  ho  would  cross  the
restless  floods.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

12  Firm  is  this  new-wronght  hymn  of  praise,  and  meet  to  be  told

forth,  0  Gods.

The  flowing  of  the  floods  is  Law,  Truth  is  the  Sun’s  extended
light.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

13  Worthy  of  laud,  0  Agni,  is  that  kinship  which  thou  hast

with  Gods.

Here  seat  tbee  like  a  man  :  most  wise,  bring  thou  the  Gods
for  sacrifice.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

8  Enduing  ribs  :  according  to  S&yana,  tho  walls  of  the  well  in  which  Trita
was  confined.  Weaver's  threads:  th o'  meaning  of  tifntt  thus  explained  by
S&yana  is  uncertain.  Ludwig  is  of  opinion  that  wooden  phallus-idols  are
intended.  The  line  recurs  in  X.  33.  3.

9  Those  seven  rags :  of  tho  Sun,  says  SAyann.  But  probably,  as  Ludwig
suggests,  the  rays  are  the  flames  of  Agni.  That  is,  Agni  with  liis  bright
beams,  or  the  worship  of  Agni,  ia  the  central  point  through  which  I  and
all  the  members  of  my  family  arc  connected  and  held  together.

Trita  Aptya  :  A  mythical  being  who  dwells  in  the  remotest  part  of  the
heaven*,  and  who  knows  the  celestial  origin  of  the  human  race.

10  Those  five  Dalit:  the  stars  of  some  constellation.  According  to  S&yana,
Indra,  Vanina,  Agni,  Aryam&u,  and  Savitar,  or  Fire,  Wind,  Sun,  Moon,  and
Lightning.  S&yana  explains  uks/utnah,  bulla  or  oxen,  aa  *  sheddera  of  benefits.’

11  Those  Birds  of  beauteous  pinion  :  the  stars.

The  wolf:  darkness  or  eclipse  of  the  Moon.

12  Law  (riu'im,)  eternal  order.  ‘The  meaning  of  tho  word  as  applied  to
the  natural  world  connects  itself  with  the  alternation  of  day  and  night,  tho
regular  passage  of  the  sun  through  tho  heavens,  or  the  unswerving  motion  of
the  rain  in  its  fall  from  heaven  and  of  tho  streams  along  their  courses.  This
last  application  of  the  word  may  have  determined  its  special  sense  of  ‘  water  ’
in  the  later  language.  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  p.  93,


133


TEE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  /.


14  Here  seated,  man-like  as  a  priest  shall  wisest  Agni  to  the  Gods
Speed  onward  our  oblations,  God  among  the  Gods,  intelligent.

Mark  this  my  woo,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

15  Varuna  makes  the  holy  prayer.  To  him  who  finds  tho  path

we  pray.

He  in  the  heart  reveals  his  thought.  Let  sacred  worship  rise
anew.  Mark  this  my  woo,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

16  That  pathway  of  the  Sun  iu  heaven,  made  to  be  highly

glorified,

Is  not  to  be  transgressed,  0  Gods.  0  mortals,  ye  behold  it
not.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  and  Heaven.

1 7  Trita,  when  buried  in  the  well,  calls  on  the  Gods  to  succour

him.

That  call  of  his  Brihaspati  heard  and  released  him  from
distress.  Mark  this  my  woe,  ye  Earth  aud  Heaven.

18  A  ruddy  wolf  behold  me  once,  as  I  was  faring  on  my  path.

He,  like  a  carpenter  whose  back  is  aching  crouched  and  slunk

away.  Mark  this  my  woe,  yc  Earth  aud  Heaven.

19  Through  this  our  song  may  we,  allied  with  Indra,  with  all  our

heroes  conquer  in  tho  battle.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindh  u,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CVI.  Visvcdevas.

Call  we  for  aid  on  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  and  Agni  aud  the
Marut  host  and  Aditi.

Even  as  a  chariot  from  a  difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,
rescue  us  from  all  distress.


16  Thai  pathway  of  the  Sun :  according  to  Benfcy,  tlio  way  of  truth,  right,
eternal  order,  na  in  verse  12.  According  to  Ludwig  the  path  of  the  Sun
between  the  tropics  is  meant.  Tho  Gods,  says  SAyana,  must  not  disregard
the  path  of  tho  Sun,  because  their  existence  depends  upon  him  as  regulator
of  the  seasons  at  which  sacrifices  are  offered  to  them.  Stall  less  may  men
disregard  it,  who  as  sinners  do  not  behold  or  understand  it  aright.

17  Bi-ihaspati ;  the  Lord  of  Prayer.

18  Like  a  carpenter ;  the  comparison  is  not  very  clear.  It  apparently  means
that  the  wolf  crept  away,  arching  his  back  or  contracting  liis  limbs,  like  a
carpenter  bending  over  his  work  till  his  hack  aches.  SAyana  suggests  also  an
alternative  and  totally  different  explanation  of  the  whole  passage,  by  inter¬
preting  vriia,  tho  wolf,  as  the  Moon,  aud  reading  mAtakrtt,  maker  of  mouths,
instead  of  n id  sukrlt,  me  once.  See  Ludwig,  Uber  die  ueuesteu  Arbeiteu  auf
dem  Gebiete  der  Uigveda-forachung.

1  Vaius :  originally  meaning  ‘  tho  good  ’  is  sometimes  used,  as  in  this  place
to  designate  Gods  in  general.

^  -


H  F.1/.V  1 07.]  THE  RIO  VEDA .  139

2  Come  ye  Adityas  for  our  full  prosperity,  in  conquests  of  the
foe,  ye  Gods,  bring  joy  to  us.

Even  as  a  chariot  from  a  difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Yasus,
rescue  us  from  all  distress.

.3  May  the  most  glorious  Fathers  aid  us,  and  the  two  Goddesses,
Mothers  of  the  Gods,  who  strengthen  Law.  *'

Even  as  a  chariot  from  a  difficult  raviue,  bountiful  Vasus,
rescue  us  from  all  distress.

4  To  mighty  Narasansa,  strengthening  his  might,  to  Pushan,

ruler  over  men,  we  pray  with  hymns.

Even  as  a  chariot  from  a  difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,
rescue  us  from  all  distress.

5  Brihaspati,  make  us  evermore  an  easy  path :  we  crave  what  boon

thou  hast  for  men  in  rest  and  stir.

Like  as  a  chariot  from  a  difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,  rescue
us  from  all  distress.

6  Sunk  in  the  pit  the  Ttishi  Kutsa  called,  to  aid,  Indra  the

Viitra-slayor,  Lord  of  power  and  might.

Even  as  a  chariot  from  a  difficult  ravine,  bountiful  Vasus,
rescue  us  from  all  distress.

7  May  Aditi  the  Goddess  guard  us  with  the  Gods :  may  the

protecting  God  keep  us  with  ceaseless  care.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CVII.  Visvedevas.

Thb  sacrifice  obtains  the  Gods’  acceptance :  be  graciously
inclined  to  us,  Adityas.

Hitherward  let  your  favour  be  directed,  and  be  our  best
deliverer  from  trouble.

2  By  praise-songs  of  Angirases  exalted,  may  the  Gods  come  to
us  with  their  protection.

May  Indra  with  his  powers,  Maruts  with  Maruts,  Aditi  with
Adityas  grant  us  shelter.


•  3  The  Pothers :  the  MaUfls  or  spirits  of  departed  ancestor*.

The  ttco  Qoddtttc*  :  Heaven  and  Earth.

4  Nardsnnea  :  a  mystical  name  of  Agni,  ‘the  Praise  of  Men.’

POshan:  the  God  who  nourishes  men  and  flocks  and  herds.

6  Sunk  in  the  pit:  perhaps  figuratively  for  ‘in  distress.’  Kutsa  is  the
Rishi  to  whom  the  hymn  is  ascribed.

2  Maruts  with  Maruts:  that  is,  all  tho  Maruts  together,  or  Maruts  with
their  winds  and  storm.


HO  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I

3  This  laud  of  oufs  may  Varuna  and  Indra,  Aryaman,  Agni,
Sa vitar  find  pleasant.

This  prayer  of  oure  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CVIII.  Indra- Agni.

On  that  most  woudrous  tsar  of  yours,  0  Indra  and  Agni,  which
looks  round  on  all  things  living,

Take  ye  your  stand  and  come  to  us  together,  and  drink  liba¬
tions  of  the  flowing  Soma,

2  As  vast  as  all  this  world  is  in  its  compass,  deep  as  it  is,  with

its  far-stretching  surface,

So  let  this  Soma  be,  Indra  and  Agni,  mado  for  your  drinking
till  your  soul  be  sated.

3  For  ye  have  won  a  blessbd  name  together :  yea,  with  one  aim

ye  strove,  0  Vritra-slayers.

So  Iudra-Agni,  seated  here  together,  pour  in,  ye  Mighty  Ones,
the  mighty  Soma.

4  Both  stand  adorned,  when  fires  are  duly  kindled,  spreading  the

sacred  grass,  with  lifted  ladles.

Drawn  by  strong  Soma  juioe  poured  forth  around  us,  come,
lndra-Agni,  and  display  your  favour.

5  The  brave  deeds  ye  have  done,  Indra  and  Agni,  the  forms  ye

have  displayed  and  mighty  exploits,

The  ancient  and  auspicious  bonds  of  friendship, — for  sake  of
these  drink  of  the  flowing  Soma.

6  As  first  I  said  when  choosing  you,  In  battle  we  must  contend

with  Asuras  for  this  Soma.

So  came  ye  unto  this  my  true  conviction,  and  drank  libations
of  the  flowing  Soma.

7  If  in  your  dwelling,  or  with  prince  or  Brahman,  ye,  lndra-Agni,

Holy  Ones,  rejoice  you,

Even  from  thence,  ye  mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and  drink
libations  of  the  flowing  Soma.

8  If  with  the  Yadus,  Turvasas,  ye  sojourn,  with  Druhyus,  Anus,

Pdrus,  lndra-Agni !

Even  from  thence,  ye  mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and  drink
libations  of  the  flowing  Soma.

4  ‘ V.'o  Iiavo,  merely,  in  the  text,  the  epithet*  in  the  dual  number:  the
commentator  supplies  tie  Adhuxiryu  and  hid  assistant  priest.’— Wilson.  Ben-
fey  refers  the  dual  epithets  to  Indra  and  Agni,  translating  them  severally  by
‘  honoured,’  '  for  whom  sacred  grass  has  been  strewn,’  ‘  towards  whom  the
ladles  have  been  uplifted.’

8  This  verse  contains  the  names  of  the  five  well-known  Aryan  tribes  or  fami¬
lies,  said  to  bo  descendants  of  the  five  similarly  named  sons  of  YayAti.  See  I.  7.  9.


THE  1IGVEDA.


HYMN  109.]


141


9  Whether,  0  Indra-Agni,  ye  be  dwelling  in  lowest  earth,  in  cen¬
tral,  or  in  highest,

Even  from  thence,  ye  mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and  drink
libations  of  the  flowing  Soma.

10  Whether,  0  Indra-Agni,  ye  be  dwelling  in  highest  earth,  in

central,  or  in  lowest,  s

Even  from  thence,  ye  mighty  Lords,  come  hither,  and  drink
libations  of  the  flowing  Soma.

11  Whethor  ye  be  in  heaven,  0  Indra-Agni,  on  earth,  on  moun¬

tains,  in  the  herbs,  or  waters,

Even  from  thence,  ye  mighty  Lords,  come  hithor,  and  drink
libations  of  the  flowing  Soma.

12  If,  when  the  Sun  to  the  mid-heaven  hath  mounted,  ye  take

delight  in  food,  0  Indra-Agni,

Even  from  thence,  ye  mighty  Lords,  come  hithor,  and  drink
libatious  of  the  flowing  Sonia.

13  Thus  haviug  drunk  your  fill  of  our  libation,  win  us  all  kinds

of  wealth,  Indra  and  Agni.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Vanina  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Adit}
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CIX.  Indra-Agni,

Longing  for  weal  I  looked  around,  in  spirit,  for  kinsmen,
Indra-Agni,  or  for  brothers.

No  providence  but  yours  alone  is  with  me :  so  have  I  wrought
for  you  this  hymn  for  succour.

2  For  I  have  heard  that  ye  give  wealth  more  freely  than  worth¬

less  son-in-law  or  spouse’s  brother.

So  offering  to  you  this  draught  of  Soma,  I  make  you  this  new
.  hymu,  Indra  and  Agni,

3  Let  us  not  break  the  cords :  with  this  petition  we  strive  to

gain  tlje  powers  of  our  forefathers.

9  In  lowest  earth,  in  central,  or  in  highest :  in  earth,  mid-air,  or  heaven,  the
word  earth  being  used  loosely  for  sphere  or  world.  Or  the  reference  may  be
to  the  fanciful  threefold  division  of  the  earth.

2  Than  worthless  son-in-law  or  spouse's  brother :  the  worthless  or  defective
son-in-law,  or  suitor,  who  has  not,  as  Y4aka  explains,  the  necessary  qualifica¬
tions,  is  obliged  to  win  the  consent  of  his  future  father-in-law  by  very  liberal
gifts.  The  maiden’s  brother  gives  her  rich  presents  out  of  natural  affection.

3  Let  us  not  break  the  cords :  let  us  not  break  or  irterrupt  the  long  Berios'
of  religious  rites  observed  by  our  ancestors  and  continued  to  our  time.  Or,
as  Sftyapa  explains,  let  us  not  cut  or  break  off  the  long  line  of  posterity,  but
ask  for  and  obtain  ‘  descendants  endowed  with  the  vigour  of  their  progeni¬
tors.'


1*2  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

For  rndra-Agni  the  strong  drops  are  joyful,  for  here  in  tho
bowl’s  lap  are  both  tho  press-stones.

4  For  you  the  bowl  divine,  Indra  and  Agni,  presses  tho  Soma

gladly  to  delight  you.

With  hands  auspicious  aud  fair  arms,  ye  Asvins,  haste,  sprinkle
it  with  Sweetness  in  the  waters.

5  You,  I  have  heard,  were  mightiest,  Indra-Agui,  when  Vritra

fell  and  when  the  spoil  was  parted.

Sit  at  this  sacrifice,  ye  ever  active,  on  the  strewn  grass,  and
with  the  juice  delight  you.

6  Surpassing  all  men  where  they  shout  for  battle,  ye  Twain  ex¬

ceed  the  earth  and  heaven  in  greatness.

Greater  are  ye  than  rivers  aud  than  mountains,  0  Indra-Agui,
and  all  things  beside  them.

7  Bring  wealth  aud  give  it,  ye  whose  anus  wield  thunder :  Indra

and  Agni,  with  your  powers  protect  us.

Now  of  a  truth  these  bo  the  very  sunbeams  wherewith  our
fathers  were  of  old  united.

8  Givp,  ye  who  shatter  forts,  whose  hands  wield  thunder :  Indra

and  Agni,  savo  us  in  our  battles.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  giant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Siudhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CX.  Itibhus.

The  holy  work  I  wrought  before  is  wrought  again  :  my  sweet¬
est  hymn  is  sung  to  celebrate  your  praise.

Here,  0  ye  Ribhus,  is  this  sea  for  all  the  Gods :  sate  you  with
Soma  offered  with  the  hallowing  word.

The  strong  drop* .-  the  exhilarating  Soma.

In  the  hold's  Lap :  close  to  tho  veisel  which  receive*  the  juice.  But  see
Ludwig,  Ucber  die  neueaten  Arbeitcn,  etc.  pp.  85 — S8.

4  Ye  Afvins:  hero  called  upon  to  perform  tho  duties  of  the  Adhvaryu  and
his  assistant  priest,  to  mix  the  sweetness,  or  Soma,  with  water  to  bo  offered
to  Indra  and  Agni.

7  These  be  the  very  sunbeams :  The  mcauing  of  the  line  may  be  tliat  the
worship  of  Indra  and  Agni  is  the  great  bond  which  has  kept  tho  Rishi’s
ancestors  united.  Wilson,  following  Sfty&na,  translates  :  ‘  May  those  rays  of
the  Sun,  by  which  our  forefathers  have  attained,  together,  a  heavenly  region,
shine  also  upon  us.’

'  1  This  sea  for  all  the  Gods:  this  vessel  containing  Soma  juice  for  all  the
Gods,  or  for  the  particular  class  of  Gods  called  Visvedcvfth  or  Visvodovas.

The  hallowing  word:  Svdhd  (A ve !  Hail  !) ;  an  exclamation  used  in  making
oblations  to  the  Gods.


HYMN  110.]


THE  R1GVEDA.


143

2  When,  seeking  your  enjoyment  onward  from  afar,  ye,  certain

of  my  kinsmen,  wandered  on  your  way,

Sons  of  Sudhanvan,  after  your  long  journeying,  ye  came  unto
the  home  of  liberal  Savitar.

3  Savitar  therefore  gave  you  immortality,  because  ye  came  pro¬

claiming  him  whom  naught  can  hide ;  '

And  this  the  drinking-chalice  of  tho  Asura,  which  till  that
time  was  one,  ye  made  to  be  fourfold.

4  When  they  had  served  with  zeal  at  sacrifice  as  priests,  thev,

mortal  os  they  were,  gained  immortality.

The  Ribhua,  children  of  Sudhanvan,  bl  ight  as  suns,  were  in  a
year’s  course  made  associate  with  prayers.

5  The  Ribhua  with  a  rod  measured,  as  ’twero  a  field,  the  single

sacrificial  chalico  wide  of  mouth.

Lauded  of  all  who  saw,  praying  for  what  is  best,  desiring  glo¬
rious  fame  among  Immortal  Gods.

6  As  oil  in  ladles,  we  through  knowledge  will  present  unto  the

Heroes  of  the  firmament  our  hymn, —

The  Ribhus  who  came  near  with  this  great  Father’s  speed,  and
rose  to  heaven’s  high  sphere  to  cat  the  strengthening  food.

7  Ribhu  to  us  is  Iudra  freshest  in  his  mighty  Ribhu  with  powers

and  wealth  is  giver  of  rich  gifts.

Gods,  through  your  favour  may  we  on  the  happy  day  quell
the  attacks  of  those  who  pour  no  offerings  forth.

8  Out  of  a  skin,  0  Ribhus,  once  ye  formed  a  cow,  and  brought  the

mother  close  unto  her  calf  again.

Sons  of  Sudhanvan,  Heroes,  with  surpassing  skill  yc  made
your  aged  Parents  youthful  as  before.

2  Seeking  your  enjoyment :  desirous  of  enioying  libations  of  Soma  juice.

My  kinsmen:  Sudhanvan,  father  of  tho  liibhus,  \vaa  a  descendant  of  Angi-

ras,  aa  was  also  Kutsa  tho  Rishi  of  the  hymn.

3  Him  whom  naught  can  hide :  or,  from  whom  nothing  can  be  hidden,  that
ia,  Savitar  as  the  Sun.

The  drinking-chalice  of  the  Asura :  tho  cup  tlint  had  been  made  by  the
Asura  or  immortal  God  Tvaahtar.  Sec  I.  20.  6.  This  chalice  appears  to  be  the
moon  which  contains  the  Amrit  or  nectar  of  the  Gods.  The  legend  seems  to
mean  that  Tvashtar  ns  God  of  the  year  created  it  uniformly  bright,  and  that
the  Ribhus,  as  Gods  of  the  seasons,  made  it  fourfold  or  diversified  with  four
phases.  See  Hillcbrandt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  I.  p.  515.

4  Associate  with  prayers :  '  connected  with  the  ceremonies  (appropriated  to
the  different  seasons)  of  the  year.'—Wilson.

5  Measured  :  in  order  to  divide  it  into  four,  as  is  said  in  verse  3.

6  This  great  FaUter :  Savitar  as  the  Sun,  the  source  of  all  life.  Strengthening
food :  Soma.

8  A  skin :  perhaps  the  dried-up  earth.  A  cow  :  the  earth  refreshed  by  the
.Rains.  The  mother :  the  earth.  Her  calf:  tho  autumn  Sun.  Parents:  Hea¬
ven  and  Earth.


144  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

9  Help  us  with  strength  where  spoil  is  won,  0  India :  joined
with  the  Ribhus  give  us  varied  bounty.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

^  HYMN  CXI.  RibhuB.

Working  with  skill  they  wrought  the  lightly  rolling  car :  they
wrought  the  Bays  who  bear  Indra  and  bring  great  gifts.

The  Ribhus  for  thoir  Parents  made  life  young  again ;  and  fa¬
shioned  for  the  calf  a  mother  by  its  side.

2  For  sacrifice  make  for  us  active  vital  power ;  for  skill  and  wis¬

dom  food  with  noble  progeny.

Grant  to  our  company  this  power  most  excellent,  that  with  a
family  all-heroic  we  may  dwell.

3  Do  ye,  0  Ribhus,  make  prosperity  for  us,  prosperity  for  car,

ye  Horoes,  and  for  steed.

Grant  us  prosperity  victorious  evermore,  conquering  foes  in
battle,  strangers  or  akin.

4  Indra,  the  Ribhus’  Lord,  I  invooate  for  aid,  the  Ribhus,  Vajas,

Maruts  to  the  Soma  draught.

Yanina,  Mitra,  both,  yea,  and  the  Asvins  Twain :  let  them
speed  us  to  wealth,  wisdom,  and  victory.

5  May  Rihhu  send  prosperity  for  battle,  may  Vilja  conquering

in  the'  fight  protect  us,

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

V  HYMN  CXII.  Aavins.

To  give  first  thought  to  them,  I  worship  Heavon  and  Earth,
and  Agni,  fair  bright  glow,  to  hasten  their  approach.

Come  hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids  wherewith
in  fight  ye  speed  the  war-cry  to  the  spoil.

2  Ample,  unfailing,  they  have  mounted  as  it  were  an  eloquent
car  that  ye  may  think  of  us  and  give.

Come  hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids  wherewith  ye
help  our  thoughts  to  further  holy  acts.

4  Vdjas :  that  is,  Vftja  and  his  two  brothers  Ribhu  and  Vibhvan,  more
usually  called  collectively  the  Ribhavah  or  Ribhus.  Similarly,  in  this  lino
the  Ribhus  arc  Ribhu  and  his  brothere,

1  To  give  first  thought  to  then :  Heaven  and  Earth  are  to  bo  the  first  objoota
of  invocation.  Agni,  with  his  signal  of  bright  fire,  is  alao  called  upon  to
hasten  the  approach  of  the  Asvins  to  the  sacrifice.

2  They:  our  offerings.  An  eloquent  car  :  the  chariot  of  our  hymns,


HYMN  112.]


TIIE  HOVE  DA.


145


3  Yoby.the  might  which  heavenly  nectar  givcth  you  are  in

supreme  dominion  Lords  of  all  these  folk.

Come  hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids  wherewith  ye,
Heroes,  made  the  barren  cow  give  milk.

4  The  aids  wherewith  the  Wanderer  through  his  offspring’s

might,  or  the  Two-Mothered  Son  shows  swiftest  mid  the
swift;

Wherewith  the  sapient  one  acquired  his  triple  lore, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

5  Wherewith  ye  raised  from  waters,  prisoned  and  fast  bound,

Rebha,  and  Vandana  to  look  upon  the  light ;

Wherewith  ye  succoured  Kai.iva  as  he  strove  to  win, — Come
hither  unto  us,  O  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

6  Wherewith  ye  rescued  Antaka  when  languishing  deep  in  tho

pit,  and  Uhujyu  with  unfailing  help,

And  comforted  Karkandhu,  Vayya,  in  their  woe, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

7  Wherewith  ye  gave  Suchauti  wealth  and  happy  home,  and

made  the  fiery  pit  friendly  for  Atri’s  sake ;

Wherewith  ye  guarded  Purukutsa,  Prisnigu, — Come  hithor
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.


3  Heavenly  nectar :  the  Soma.  The  barren  cow :  of  tho  Rislii  Sayu.

4  The  Wanderer:  according  to  Sftyana,  the  Wind.  Agni  is  called  his
offspring  an  having  boon  excited  into  fliune  by  tho  wind.  Or  MAtarisvau  may
be  intended  (see  I.  31.  3),  who  brought  Agni  from  heaven.

The  Ttco- Mothered  Son :  Agni  sprung  from  tire  two  fire-sticks.

The  sapient  one  :  said  to  bo  tl*  Riahi  Kakalilvdu.  HU  triple  lore  :  know¬
ledge  of  sacrificial  food,  oblatiuns  of  clarified  butter,  and  libations  of  Soma
•juice.  The  meaning  of  the  passage  is  uncertain.

5  Rebha  and  Vandana  arc  said  to  have  boon  thrown  into  wells  by  the  A  suras
or  demons,  Kanva  was  somewhat  similarly  treated.  ‘  In  these,  and  similar  in¬
stances  subsequently  noticed,’  says  Wilson,  *  wc  may  possibly  have  allusions  to
the  dangers  undergone  by  some  of  the  first  teachers  ox  Hinduism  among  the
people  whom  they  sought  to  civilize.’

6  Antaka :  said  to  have  been  a  RAjarshi  or  regal  Rishi.  Bhujyu  :  a  R4jar*hi,
Bon  of  Tugra,  rescued  when  in  danger  of  drowning.  Vayya:  see  II.  13.  12  ;
IV.  19.  6.

7  PurukUlsa .-  sec  I.  63.  7.  Of  Suehanti  and  Prifnigu  nothing  more  is
related.

Atri :  seo  I.  45.  3;  51.  3.  He  is  said  to  have  been  thrown  by  tho  Asuras  into
a  fiery  pit.


146  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

8  Mighty  Ones,  with  what  powers  ye  gave  Par&vrij  aid  what

time  ye  made  the  blind  and  lame  to  see  and  walk ;
Wherewith  ye  set  at  liberty  the  swallowed  quail, — Come  hither
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

9  Wherewith  ye  quickened  the  most  sweet  exhaustless  flood,  and

comforted  Vasishtha,  ye  who  ne’er  decay ;

And  to  Srutarya,  Kutsa,  Narya  gave  your  help,— Come  hither
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

10  Wherewith  ye  helped,  in  battle  of  a  thousand  spoils,  Vifpatt

seeking  booty,  powerless  to  move.

Wherewith  ye  guarded  friendly  Vasa,  Asva’sson, — Come  hither
unto  us,  6  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

1 1  Whereby  the  cloud,  ye  Bounteous  Givers,  shed  sweet  rain

fpr  Dirghnsravas,  for  the  merchant  Ausija,

Wherewith  ye  helped  Kakshiv&n,  singer  of  your  praise, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

12  Wherewith  ye  made  Rasa  swell  full  with  water-floods,  and

urged  to  victory  the  car  without  a  horse ;

Wherewith  Trisoka  drove  forth  his  recovered  cows, — Como
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

8  Pardvrij ;  according  to  Sftyana,  the  name  of  a  man.  Beufey  explains  the
word  as  the  setting  Sun  (sideways  departing),  called  blind  because  his  light  is
nearly  gone,  and  lame  because  lie  no  longer  travels.  The  sua/lofccd  quail  :
swallowed,  or  seined,  by  a  wolf.  The  quail  is  said  by  Yaska,  as  quoted  by
SAyana,  to  signify  the  Dawn  seized  and  swallowed  by  the  bright  Sun.  Benfey
tAkcs  it  to  mean  the  Sun  after  sotting.

3  As  the  earliest  bringera  of  light,  the  ABvine  may  be  said  to  quicken  and
animate  by  their  coming  the  streams  of  the  ocean  of  air.  We  aro  not  told
how  the  famous  Vasishtha  was  comforted;  and  Srutarya,  Kutsa,  and  Narya  arc
merely  said  by  SAyana  to  be  three  Rishis.  Kutsa  has  beeu  mentioned  before.
See  I.  33.  14  ;  51.  6  ;  63.  3.  *

10  Vispald:  a  lady  who  was  wounded  in  battle,  and  made  whole  by  the
Asvins.  See  1. 116.  15 ;  117.  11 ;  118.  8 ;  X.  39. 8.  Powlcss  to  wore :  pierced
through  with  a  lance,  according  to  Ludwig.  The  meaning  of  alharvyam  is  un¬
certain.  Vafa :  a  celebrated  Rishi,  the  seer  of  Hymn  V1IJ.  46.

11  Dirghajravai :  said  to  be  a  Rishi  who  traded  for  his  livelihood.  Ausija
is  a  patronymic  meaning  son  of  Usij.  Kalshirdn  is  also  said  to  have  been  a
son  of  Usij.  See  1. 18. 1.

12  Basd :  '  The  RasA,  known  to  the  Zoroastrians  as  the  Ranhl,  was  origin¬
ally  the  name  of  a  real  river,  but  when  the  Aryas  moved  away  from  it  into
the  PunjAb,  it  assumed  a  mythical  character,  and  became  a  kind  of  Okeanos,
surrounding  the  extreme  limits  of  the  earth.' — M.  Miiller,  Vatic  Hymns,
I.  323.  No  further  account  is  given  of  the  events  mentioned  in  this  verse.


TUB  R1QVEDA.


147


HYMN  112.]

1 3  Wherewith  ye  compass  round  the  Sun  when  far  away,  strength¬

ened  Mandhfttar  in  his  tasks  os  lord  of  lands,

And  to  sage  Bharadv&ja  gave  protecting  help, — Come  hither
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

1 4  Wherewith,  when  Sambara  was  slain,  ye  guarded  well  great

Atithigva,  DivodSsa,  Kasoju,  •

And  Trusadasyu  when  the  forte  were  shattered  down, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

15  Wherewith  ye  honoured  the  great  drinker  Vamra,  and  Upas-

tuta  and  Kali  when  he  gained  his  wife,

And  lent  to  Vyafiva  and  to  Prithi  favouring  help, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids,

1<5  Wherewith,  0  Heroes,  ye  vouchsafed  deliverance  to  Sayu
Atxi,  and  to  Manu  long  ago;

Wherewith  ye  shot  your  shafts  in  Syfimarasmi’s  cause, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

17  Wherewith  Patharva,  in  his  majesty  of  form,  shone  in  his
course  like  to  a  gathered  kindled  fire  ;

Wherewith  ye  helped  Sarytta  in  the  mighty  fray,— Come  hithor
uuto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

13  The  Asvins  .arc  said  to  compass  the  Sun  iu  order  to  save  him  from
eclipse.

Mandh&tar :  a  RAjarshi  or  regal  Rishi.  See  VIII.  39.  8.

Jltun  adixtja :  a  very  celebrated  Rishi,  said  to  he  the  son  of  Brihaspati.

14  $umb«ra  :  one  of  the  demons  of  drought  slain  by  Irnlra.  SAyana  takes
atithiyzum  and  Lufojum  ns  epithets  of  DivodAsa  the  king  who  was  aided  by
the  Asvins  :  4  the  hospitable  DivodAsa  as  lie  sought  the  water  (through  fenr  of
the  Asuras).’  Trasadasau :  a  priucc  renowned  for  his  victories  and  liberality,
and  for  the  favour  shown  him  by  the  Gods.  See  IV.  42.  9  ;  VIL  19.  3  ;  VllL
9.  21  ;  19.  36  ;  86.  7.

15  Vamra:  called  a  Rishi,  son  of  Vikhanas,  by  SAyana.  "Die  text  calls
him  vipipdiid,  drinking  much  and  variously,  which  the  Scholiast  explains,
drinking,  especially  earthly  moisture  or  dew.' — Wilson.  Benfoy  thinks  that
Iudra  is  intended  under  the  name  Vamra.

UpaatuUi :  taken  by  SAyana  a8  an  epithet  of  Vamra,  *  praised  by  all  around
him.’

Kali:  a  Rishi,  mentioned  again  in  X-  39,  8.  ’The  Asvins  may  have  restored
him  to  youth.

Vyafta :  taken  by  SAyana  as  an  epithet  of  Prithi, '  horseless,  or  who  had  lost
his  horse.’  Prithi  is  said  to  have  been  a  RAjarshi.

16  $*yu  :  ace  note  on  verse  3  of  this  Hymn;  see  also  I.  116.  22  ;  117.  20.
Atri  :  see  note  on  verse  7  ;  also  I.  116.  8.

Manu :  this  Manu  is  said  by  SAyana  to  have  been  a  RAjarshi  whom  the
Asvins  taught  to  sow  barley  and  other  grain.

Sytimar<ifmi :  said  to  have  been  a  Rishi,  seer  of  hymns  77, 78,  Book  X.

17  Pulharvd :  said  by  SAyana  to  have  been  a  RAjarshi.  Benfey  thinks  that
the  word  pat harvan,  is  a  dialectical  form  of  pabUrvan,  ‘having  winged  horses.'
Ludwig  considers  SAyana's  explanation  (which  1  lmvo  followed)  to  be  er¬
roneous  and  imjiosaiblc  He  thinks  that  Pajharu  was  the  name  of  eomo


THE  HYMNS  OF


143


[ BOOK  I.


18  Wherewith,  Angirases !  ye  triumphed  in  your  heart,  and

onward  went  to  liberate  the  flood  of  milk ;

Wherewith  ye  helped  the  hero  Manu  with  now  strength, —
Como  hither  uuto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

19  Wherewith  ye  brought  a  wife  for  Vimada  to  wed,  wherewith

ye  freely  gave  the  ruddy  cows  away  ;

Wherewith  ye  earned  home  Sudevi  to  Sudas, — Como  hither
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

20  Wherewith  ye  bring  great  bliss  to  him  who  offers  gifts,  where¬

with  ye  have  protected  Bhnjyu,  Adhrigu,

And  good  and  gracious  SubliaiA  and  llitastup, — Come  hither
uuto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

21  Whrcrewith  ye  served  Krisauu  where  the  shafts  were  shot,

and  helped  the  young  man’s  horse  to  swiftness  in  the  race ;
Wherewith  ye  bring  delicious  honey  to  the  bees, — Come  hither
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.


stronghold  which  the  AavinR  saved  from  burning,  either  through  the  instru¬
mentality  of  a  man  called  Jathara  or  by  meaua  of  the  rain-clouds.  He  ac¬
cordingly  renders  :  '  By  means  of  which,  at  Pa^harO,  through  the  power  of
Jathara  (violence  of  the  rain-clouds)  the  fire  did  uot  flame  up,  though
prepared  and  lighted  on  the  way.’  The  passage  ia  difficult,  and  the  interpreta¬
tions  put  upon  the  words  hy  SAyana  certainly  appear  to  be  forced,  but  on  the
whole  I  think  it  safer  to  follow  his  guidance.  I  may  observe  here  tliat  *  ua,‘
which  in  the  Veda  means  both  '  not’  and  *  like '  sometimes  makes  the  mean¬
ing  of  a  passage  uncertain.  lu  this  line  SAyana  takes  it  in  the  latter  sense,
and  Ludwig  in  the  former.

fyin/dla :  perhaps  the  same  as  SarvAti,  a  son  of  Manu  Vaivoavata.

18  Angiraset' :  the  text  has  Angiraa  only  in  the  singular  form,  which  may
stand,  as  Ludwig  remarks,  for  the  dual.  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates  :
‘  Angiras,  (praise  the  Asvins). '  SAyana  supposes  the  ltwhi  to  address  himself
by  this  title.  Ben  fey  joins  angiras  with  the  following  word,  making  angiro-
mdnasd,  ‘through  affection  for  the  Angirases.'

The  flood  of  milk:  tho  cows  shut  up  in  the  cave,  that  is,  the  rain-clouds
prevented  from  pouring  out  their  water.

Manu  :  see  verse  16,

19  Vitnnda:  a  Rishi,  whose  name  occur*  again  in  1. 116. 1  ;  117.  20  :  VITI.
9.  15  ;  X.  20.  10  ;  and  X.  23.  7.  Tho  wife  is  said  to  have  been  the  daughter
of  Purumitra.

The  ruddy  corn:  perhaps  the  red  rain-clouds.

Sudds  :  son  of  Pijivana.  See  I.  47.  7.

20  Bhnjyu:  see  note  on  verse  6.  Adhrigu,  taken  by  SAyana  as  a  proper  name,
is  said  to  have  been  a  sacriftcer  of  the  Gods.  RUaitup  is  called  a  ftwlii.
SAyana  takes  subhdrdn  as  an  adjective,  but  has  to  supply  iiham  food,  for  it
to  qualify.

2\  KrijUu:  the  Kcros\ni  of  the  Averts  ;  one  of  the  guardians  of  tho
celestial  Sonia.  See  IV.  27.  3.

The  young  man ;  whose  horse  was  aided,  was  Purukutaa.


HYMN  113.  J


THE  MOVED  A.


149


22  Wherewith  ye  speed  the  hero  as  he  fights  for  kino  in  hero

battle,  in  the  strife  for  land  and  sons,

Wherewith  ye  safely  guard  his  horses  and  his  car, — Come
hither  unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

23  Wherewith  ye,  Lords  of  Hundred  Powers,  helped  Kutsa,  son

of  Arjuni,  gave  Turviti  and  Dabhiti  strength  *

Favoured  Dhvasanti  and  lent  Purushanti  help, — Come  hither
unto  us,  0  Asvins,  with  those  aids.

24  Make  ye  our  speech  effectual,  0  ye  Asvins,  and  this  our  hymn,

ye  mighty  Wouder-Workers.

In  luckless  game  I  call  on  you  for  succour :  strengthen  us  also
on  the  field  of  battle.

25  With  undiminished  blessings,  0  ye  Asvins,  for  evermore  both

night  and  day  protect  us.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CXIIL  Dawn.

This  light  is  come,  amid  all  lights  the  fairest ;  bom  is  the  bril¬
liant,  far-extending  brightness.

Night,  sent  away  for  Savitax-’s  uprising,  hath  yielded  up  a  birth¬
place  for  the  Morning.

2  The  Fair,  the  Bright  is  come  with  her  white  offspring ;  to  her

the  Dark  One  hath  resigned  her  dwelling.

Akin,  immortal,  following  each  other,  changing  their  colours
both  the  heavens  move  onward.

3  Common,  unending  is  tho  Sisters’  pathway;  taught  by  the

Gods,  alternately  they  travel.

Fair-formed,  of  different  hues  and  yet  one-minded,  Night  and
Dawn  clash  not,  neither  do  they  tarry.

4  Bright  leader  of  glad  sounds,  our  eyes  behold  her ;  splendid

in  hue  she  hath  unclosed  tho  portals.  •

23  Kulta :  lias  been  mentioned  before  as  a  favourite  of  Indra.  See  I.
51.  6.  TurtUi:  see  I.  36.  13.  Dabhiti:  see  II.  13.  9  ;  15.  9  ;  IV.  30.  21  j
VI.  20.  13  j  26.  6.  Punuhanti :  a  liberal  priucc.  See  IX.  5.  8.  8.

•24  In  luckless  game :  a  metaphor  borrowed  from  dicing  ;  that  is,’  in  a  time
of  difficulty,  perhaps  tho  eve  of  a  desperate  battle.  S&yana,  following  a  dif¬
ferent  derivation  of  tho  word,  explains  it,  in  tho  absence  of  light,  or  in  the
last  watch  of  night,  when  the  Asvins  are  especially  to  be  worshipped.

1  Savitar:  the  Sun.

2  Her  while  offspring :  white  clouds  that  attend  her.  Or  the  word  in  the
text  may  be  rendered  ‘  bright  offspring,'  tho  Sun  whom  the  precedes.

Doth  the  hearens :  or  Day  and  Night.

4  Leader  of  glad  sounds :  awakener  of  ‘  the  charm  of  earliest  birds 1 2 * 4  and
the  joyful  voices  of  other  animals.


150  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  t,

She,  stirring  up  the  world,  hath  shown  us  riches :  Dawn  hath
awakened  every  living  creature.

5  Kich  Dawn,  she  sets  afoot  the  coilcd-up  sleeper,  one  for  enjoy¬
ment,  one  for  wealth'  or  worship,

Those  wborsaw  little  for  extended  vision.  All  living  creatures
hath  the  Dawn  awakened.

6  One  to  high  sway,  one  to  exalted  glory,  one  to  pursue  his  gain,
and  one  his  labour :

All  to  regard  their  different  vocations,  all  moving  creatures
hath  the  Dawn  awakened.

7  We  see  her  there,  the  Child  of  Heaven,  apparent,  the  young

Maid,  flushing  in  her  shining  raiment.

Thou  sovran  Lady  of  all  earthly  treasure,  flush  on  us  here,
auspicious  Dawn,  this  morning".

8  She,  first  of  endless  morns  to  come  hereafter,  follows  the  path

of  morns  that  have  departed.

Dawn,  at  her  rising,  urges  forth  the  living :  him  who  is  dead
she  wakes  not  from  his  slumber.

9  As  thou,  Dawn,  hast  caused  Agni  to  be  kindled,  and  with  the

Sun’s  eye  bast  revealed  creation.

•  And  hast  awakened  men  to  offer  worship,  thou  hast  performed,
for  Gods,  a  noble  service.

10  How  long  a  time,  and  they  shall  be  together, — Dawns  that

have  shone  aud  Dawns  to  shiue  hereafter?

She  yearns  for  former  Dawns  with  eager  longing,  and  goes  forth
gladly  shining  with  the  others.

11  Gone  are  the  men  who  in  the  days  before  us  looked  on  the

rising  of  the  earlier  Morning.

We,  we  the  living,  now  behold  her  brightness,  and  they  come
nigh  who  shall  hereafter  see  her.


5  Those  k 'ho  saw  little :  during  the  darkness  of  night.

6  This  verse  apparently  alludes  to  ft  division  into  four  castes  or  classes,  regal
asid  military,  priestly,  mercantile,  and  servile,  But  verses  4,  5,  <J  seem  to  be
separated  by  their  refrain  from  the  rest  of  the  hymn,  aud  may  perhaps  be  a
later  addition  to  it.

9  Caused  A pti  to  be  kindled :  daybreak  being  the  proper  time  for  lighting
tho  sacrificial  fires.

10  The  meauing  appears  to  be  :  How  long  have  we  to  live  I  When  will
all  our  future  Dawns  be  with  those  that  have  passed  away  t  Wilson,  follow¬
ing  SAyana,  translates  :  ‘  For  how  long  a  period  is  it  that  the  dawns  have
risen  1  For  how  long  a  period  will  they  rise  1  *

She  yearns :  the  Dawn  that  now  shines  as  the  first  of  Dawns  to  come  is
already  eager  to  join  those  that  have  post.


HYMN  113.]


THE  RIQYEDA.


151

12  Foe-cliaser,  bom  of  Law,  the  Law’s  protectress,  joy-giver,  water

of  all  pleasant  voices,

Auspicious,  bringing  food  for  Gods’  enjoyment,  shino  on  us
here,  most  bright,  0  Dawn,  this  morning.

13  From  days  eternal  hath  Dawn  shone,  the  Goddess,  and  shows

this  light  to-day,  endowed  with  riches.

So  will  she  shine  on  days  to  como ;  immortal  she  moves  on  in
her  own  strength,  undecaying.

14  In  the  sky’s  borders  hath  she  shoue  in  splendour:  the  Goddess

hath  thrown  off  the  veil  of  darkness.

Awakening  the  world  with  purple  horses,  on  her  well-harnessed
chariot  Dawn  approaches.

15  Bringing  all  life-sustaining  blessings  with  her,  showing  herself

she  sends  forth  brilliaut  lustre.

Last  of  the  countless  mornings  that  have  vanished,  first  of
bright  morns  to  come  hath  Dawn  arisen.

16  Arise!  the  breath,  the  life,  again  hath  reached  us:  darkness

hath  passed  away,  and  light  approacheth.

She  for  the  Sun  hath  left  a  path  to  travel :  we  have  arrived
where  men  prolong  existence.

17  Singing  the  praises  of  refulgent  Mornings  with  his  hymn’s  web

the  priest,  the  poet,  rises.

Shine  then  to-day,  rich  Maid,  on  him  who  lauds  thee,  shino
down  on  us  the  gift  of  life  and  offspring.

18  Dawns  giving  sons  all  heroes,  kine  and  horses,  shining  upon

the  man  who  brings  oblations,  —

These  let  the  Soma-prcsser  gain  when  ending  his  glad  songs
louder  than  the  voice  of  V&yu.

10  Mother  of  Gods,  Aditi’s  form  of  glory,  ensign  of  sacrifice,  shine
forth  exalted.

Rise  up,  bestowing  praise  on  our  dovotion  :  all-bounteous,  make
us  chief  among  the  people.

20  Whatever  splendid  wealth  the  Dawns  bring  with  them  to  bless
the  man  who  offers  praise  and  worship,

Even  that  may  Mitra,  Varuna  vouchsafe  us,  and  Aditi  and
Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

12  Evil  spirits  vanish  when  Dawn  appears.  She  comes  in  accordance  with
the  eternal  law  of  the  universe  which  she  observes  and  guards.  Her  coming
is  the  signal  for  men  to  offer  oblations  to  the  Gods,

1 6  Where  men  prolong  existence :  a  new  life  begins  at  the  return  of  day-light.

17  Hia  hymn’s  web :  the  words  which  he  weaves,  or  carefully  composes.

18  Louder  than  the  voice  of  Vdyu:  louder  even  than  the  roaring  of  the
wind.  Wilson  translates:  ‘At  the  conclusion  of  his  praises,  (enunciated),
like  the  wind,  (with  speed).’


152  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

HYMN  CXIY.  Rudra.

To  the  strong  Rudra  bring  wc  these  our  songs  of  praise,  to
him  the  Lord  of  Heroes,  with  the  braided  hair,

•That  it  be  well  with  all  our  cattle  and  our  men,  that  in  this
village  ill  be  healthy  and  well-fed.

2  Be  gracious  unto  us,  0  Rudra,  bring  us  joy ;  thee,  Lord  of

Heroes,  thee  with  reverence  will  we  serve.

Whatever  health  and  strength  our  father  Manu  won  by  sacrifice
may  we,  under  thy  guidance,  gain.

3  By  worship  of  the  Gods  may  we,  0  Bounteous  One,  0  Rudra,

gain  thy  grace.  Ruler  of  valiant  men.

Come  to  our  families,  bringing  them  bliss :  may  we,  whose
heroes  are  uninjured,  bring  thee  sacred  gifts.

4  Hither  wc  call  for  aid  the  wise,  the  wanderer,  impetuous  Rudra,

perfecter  of  sacrifice.

May  he  repel  from  us  the  anger  of  the  Gods :  verily -we  desire
his  favourable  grace.

5  Him  with  the  braided  hair  wc  call  with  reverence  down,  the

wild-boar  of  the  sky,  the  red,  the  dazzling  shape.

May  he,  his  hand  filled  full  of  sovran  medicines,  grant  us  pro¬
tection,  shelter,  and  a  home  secure.

6  To  him  the  Maruts’  Father  is  this  hymn  addressed,  to  streng¬

then  Rudra's  might,  a  song  n'.ore  sweet  than  sweet.

Grant  us.  Immortal  One,  the  food  which  mortals  eat:  bo
gracious  unto  me,  my  seed,  my  progeny.

7  0  Rudra,  barm  not  either  great  or  small  of  us,  harm  not  the

growing  boy,  harm  uot  the  full-grown  man.

Slay  not  a  sire  among  us,  slay  no  mother  here,  and  to  our
own  dear  bodies,  Rudra,  do  no  harm.

8  Harm  us  not,  Rudra,  in  our  seed  and  progeny,  harm  us  uot

in  the  living,  nor  in  cows  or  steeds.

Slay  uot  our  heroes  in  the  fury  of  thy  wrath.  Bringing
oblations  evermore  we  call  to  tbee.


1  Rudra  :  generally  explained  as  the  Roarer,  from  the  sound  of  stormy
winds,  the  God  of  tempests  and  father  of  the  Maruta.  He  is  called  Kapar-
din  as  wearing  hair  braided  and  knotted  like  a  cowry  shell  (kaparda).  Prof.
Piachel  (Vedische  Studicn,  I.  55.  sqq.)  derives  Rudra  (the  Red,  the  Brilliant)
from  a  lost  root  rud,  to  be  red.

2  Won  by  sacrifice  :  that  is,  as  an  institute?  of  earliest  sacrifice,  enabled  us
to  obtain  by  offerings  to  the  Gods.


BYMX  115.]


TUB  BIO  YE  DA.


153


9  Even  as  a  herdsman  I  have  brought  thee  hymns  of  praise  :
0  Father  of  the  Maruts,  give  us  happiness.

BlcasM  is  thy  most  favouring  benevolence,  so,  verily,  do  we
desire  thy  saving  help.

10  Far  be  thy  dart  that  killeth  men  or  cattle  :  thj;  bliss  be  with

us,  0  thou  Lord  of  Heroes.

Be  gracious  unto  us,  0  God,  and  bless  us,  and  then  vouchsafe
us  doubly-strong  protection.

11  We,  seeking  help,  have  spoken  and  adored  him  :  may  Rudra,

girt  by  Maruts,  hear  our  calling.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  Sindhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CXV.  sdryi.

The  brilliant  presence  of  the  Gods  hath  risen,  the  eye  of
Mitra,  Varuna  and  Agni.

The  soul  of  all  that  movetli  not  or  moveth,  the  Sun  hath
filled  the  air  aud  earth  and  heaven.

2  Like  as  a  young  man  followeth  a  maiden,  so  doth  the  Sun

the  Dawn,  refulgent  Goddess  :

Where  pious  men  extend  thoir  generations,  before  the
Auspicious  One  for  happy  fortune.

3  Auspicious  are  the  Sun’s  Bay-coloured  Horses,  bright,  chang¬

ing  hues,  meet  for  our  shouts  of  triumph.

Bearing  our  prayers,  the  sky’s  ridge  have  they  mounted,  and
in  a  moment  speed  round  earth  aud  heaven.

4  This  is  the  Godhead,  this  the  m:ght  of  Surya  :  he  hath

withdrawn  what  spread  o’er  work  unfinished.

When  ho  hath  loosed  his  Horses  from  their  station,  straight
over  all  Night  sproadoth  out  her  garment.


9  Been  as  a  herdsman :  ok  a  herdsman  prays  for  the  well-being  of  his
cattle,  no  the  poet  prays  for  the  prosperity  of  those  for  whom  ho  speaks.

2  The  exact  meaning  of  the  second  line  is  somewhat  uncertain.  As  I

liavo  rendered  it,  in  accordance  with  Ludwig,  it  reminds  one  of  Shelley’s,
•  Moo,  the  imperial  shape,  then  multiplied  His  generations  under  the  pavilion
Of  the  Suu’s  throne.’  Wil-on,  following  SAyana,  paraphrases,  ‘  At  which
season  pious  men  perform  (the  ceremonies  established  for)  ages.'  SAyaya
proposes  an  alternative  rendering  by  taking  yxig'lni  (generations,  ages,)  to
mean 2 *  4  yokes  for  ploughs'; 4  for,  at  this  season,  men  seckiug  to  propitiate  the
gods  by  the  profit  which  agriculture  yields,  equip  their  ploughs.’

4  lit  hnt>c  withdrawn  :  that  is,  says  Wilson,  4  the  cultivator  or  artisan
desists  from  his  labour,  although  unfinished,  upon  tho  sotting  of  the  sun’;
when  tho  sun  4  has  withdrawn  (into  himself)  the  diffused  (light  which  has
been  shed)  upon  the  unfinished  task.’


154  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  J.

5  In  the  sky’s  lap  the  Sun  this  form  assumeth  that  Varuna  and

Mitra  may  behold  it.

His  Bay  Steeds  well  maintain  bis  power  eternal,  at  one  time
bright  and  darksome  at  another.

6  This  day„0  Gods,  while  Surya  is  ascending,  deliver  us  from

trouble  and  dishonour.

This  prayer  of  ours  may  Varuna  grant,  and  Mitra,  and  Aditi
and  SinJhu,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  CXVL  Asvins.

I  trim  like  grass  my  song  for  the  Nasatyas,  and  send  their
lauds  forth  as  the  wind  drives  rain-clouds,

Who,  in  a  chariot  rapid  as  an  arrow,  brought  to  the  youthful
Vimada  a  consort,

2  Borne  on  by  rapid  steeds  of  mighty  pinion,  or  proudly  trust¬

ing  in  the  Gods’  incitements.

That  stallion  ass  of  yours  won,  0  Nasatyas,  that  thousand  in
the  race,  in  Yama's  contest.

3  Yea,  Alvins,  as  a  dead  man  leaves  his  riches,  Tugra  left  Bhuj-

yu  iii  the  cloud  of  waters.

Ye  brought  him  back  in  animated  vessels,  traversing  air,  un¬
wetted  by  the  billows.

4  Bhujyu  ye  bore  with  winged  things,  Nasatyas,  which  for  three

nights,  three  days  full  swiftly  travelled.

To  the  sea’s  farther  shore,  the  strand  of  ocean,  in  three  care,
hundred-footed,  with  six  horses.

5  Ye  wrought  that  hero  exploit  in  the  ocean  which  giveth  no

support,  or  hold,  or  station.

What  time  ye  carried  Bhujyu  to  his  dwelling,  borne  in  a  ship
with  hundred  oars,  0  Asvins.

5  Hit  poxer  eternal ,  as  maker  and  ruler  of  day  and  night.

Thin  Hymn  ami  the  five  following  are  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  KakshlvAn.

1  Grass :  the  sacred  grass  which  is  spread  on  the  altar.*

Ndialyat :  a  common  name  of  the  Asvins.  Soe  I.  3.  3.

Vimada  :  the  Asvins  assisted  Vimada,  who  wm  attacked  when  returning
home  with  his  newly-won  bride,  whom  they  carried  to  his  house  in  their  own
chariot.  Moet  of  the  deeds  ascribed  to  the  Asvins  in  this  hymn  have  been
mentioned  in  1. 112.

2  Stallion  cut ;  that  draws  the  car  of  the  Asvins.  See  I.  34.  9.

Yuma't  contest .-  apparently  the  race  instituted  by  the  Gods  when  Prajflpati
(here  represented  by  Tama)  gave  his  daughter  Suryt  in  marriage  to  King
Soma,  the  Moon,  as  related  in  Aitareya-Brthmana,  IV.  2.  See  Ehni.  Der  My-
thus  des  Tama,  p.  160.

8  Bhujyu:  see  I.  112.  6.

5  ‘  This,’  observes  Wilson,  ‘is  a  rather  unintelligible  aeoount  of  a  sea- voy¬
age,  although  the  words  of  the  text  do  not  admit  of  any  other  rendering.’


HYJtyiu.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


155


6  The  white  horse  which  of  old  ye  gave  Aghasva,  Asvins,  a  gift

to  be  his  wealth  for  ever, —

Still  to  bo  praised  is  that  your  glorious  present,  still  to  be
famed  is  the  brave  horse  of  Pedu.

7  0  Heroes,  ye  gave  wisdom  to  Kakshiv&n  who  .sprang  from

_  Pajra’s  line,  who  sang  your  praises.

Ye  poured  forth  from  the  hoof  of  your  strong  charger  a  hun¬
dred  jars  of  wine  as  from  a  strainer

8  Ye  warded  off  with  cold  the  fire’s  fierco  burning ;  food  very

•  rich  in  nourishment  ye  furnished.

Atri,  cast  downward  in  the  cavern,  Asvins,  ye  brought,  with
all  his  people,  forth  to  comfort.

9  Ye  lifted  up  the  well,  0  ye  NAsatyas,  and  set  the  base  on  high

to  open  downward.

Streams  flowed  for  folk  of  Gotama  who  thirsted,  like  rain  to
bring  forth  thousandfold  abundance.

10  Ye  from  the  old  Chyav&na,  0  N&satyas,  stripped,  as  ’twere

mail,  the  skin  upon  his  body,

Lengthened  his  life  when  all  had  left  him  helpless,  Dasras  !
and  made  him  lord  of  youthful  maidens.

1 1  Worthy  of  praise  and  worth  the  winning,  Heroes,  is  that  your

favouring  succour,  0  Nasatyas,

What  time  ye,  knowing  well  his  case,  delivered  Vandana  from
the  pit  like  hidden  treasure.

12  That  mighty  deed  of  yours,  for  gain,  0  Heroes,  as  thunder

heraldeth  the  rain,  I  publish,

When,  by  the  horse’s  head,  Atharvan’s  offspring  Dadhyaeh
made  known  to  you  the  Soma’s  sweetness.

6  Ajhdfva :  another  name  of  Pedu  ;  or  an  epithet  of  Pedu  ‘  having  bad  or
vicious  horses.’  Pedu  was  a  royal  Rialii  who  worshipped  the  Asvins  and  was
thus  rewarded.

7  KukthMn  :  a  famous  Rishi,  (see  1. 18.  1,)  a  descendant  of  the  Pajraa  or
Augirascs.  Strong  charger:  that  is,  the  rushing  rain-cloud,  from  which  the
Asvius  poured  down  copious  showers.  Cf.  the  Greek  myth  of  the  horse  Pegasus
and  the  fountain  Hippocreno.

8  Atri:  seel.  112.  7.

9  The  well :  that  ia  the  watery  cloud.  This  deed  is  ascribed  to  the  Maruta
in  I.  85.  11.

10  Dutras :  a  name  of  the  ARvina  ;  Wonder-Workers,  or  Mighty  Ones.

11  Vaudana  :  see  I.  112.  5.

12  by  the  horse/  head:  ‘Indra,  having  taught  the  sciences  called  Pravar-

etidyd  and  MudhnvidyA  to  Dadhyaeh,  threatened  that  ho  would  cut  off  his
1  if  ever  lie  taught  them  to  any  one  else.  The  Asvins  prevailed  upon  him
to  teach  them  the  prohibited  knowledge,  and,  to  evade  Indra’s  threat,  took  off
the  head  of  the  sage,  replacing  it  by  that  of  a  horse.’ — Wilson.  See  I.  8-i.  13.


156  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ROOK  7-

13  In  the  great  rite  the  wise  dame  called,  Nasatyas,  you,  Lords

of  many  treasures,  to  assist  her.

Yc  heard  the  weakling’s  wife,  as  ’twero  an  order,  and  gave  to
her  a  son  Hiranyahaata.

14  Ye  from  tye  wolfs  jaws,  as  ye  stood  together,  set  free  the  quail,

0  Heroes,  0  Nasatyas.

Yc,  Lords  of  many  treasures,  gave  the  poet  his  perfect  vision
as  he  mourned  his  trouble.

15  When  in  the  time  of  night,  in  Khela’s  battle,  a  leg  was  severed

like  a  wild  bird’s  piuion,

Straight  ye  gave  VispalA.  a  leg  of  iron  that  she  might  move
what  time  the  conflict  opened.

16  His  father  robbed  Rijrasva  of  his  eye-sight  who  for  the  shc-wolf

slew  a  hundred  wethers.

Ye  gave  him  eyes,  N&satyas,  Wonder-Workers,  Physicians,  that
he  saw  with  sight  uninjured.

17  The  Daughter  of  the  Sun  your  car  ascended,  6rst  reaching  as

it  were  the  goal  with  coursers.

All  Deities  within  their  hearts  assented,  and  ye,  Ndsatyas,  are
close  linked  with  glory.

•18  When  to  his  house  ye  came,  to  Divodasa,  hasting  to  Bharad-
vaja,  0  ye  Asvins,

The  car  that  came  with  you  brought  splendid  riches  :  a  por¬
poise  and  a  bull  were  yoked  together.

13  The  weakling's  wife .-  or  Vadhrimatt,  which  lias  that  meaning.

14  Set  free  ike  quail:  see  I.  112.  8.

15  Khela't  battle :  the  Commentator  says  that  Khcla  wu  a  HAjA,  whose
relative  ViapalA  lost  a  foot  in  battle  and  received  an  iron  leg  from  the  Asviaa
at  the  prayer  of  Agaatya,  Khela’a  family  priest.  See  I.  112.  10.

16  RijrdjM,  mentioned  in  I.  101. 17,  was  one  of  the  sons  of  VriahAgir.  Tho
she- wolf  for  whom'he  slaughtered  the  sheep  was  one  of  the  asses  of  the  Asvins
in  disguise,  aud  the  Asvins  consequently  restored  to  him  the  eye-sight  of  which
his  angry  father  had  deprived  him.

17  The  Daughter  of  the  Sun :  1  Stirya,  it  is  related,  was  desirous  of  giving
his  daughter  SGryA  to  Soma  ;  but  all  the  gods  desired  her  as  a  wife.  They
agreed  that  he  who  should  first  reach  tho  sun,  as  a  goal,  should  wed  the  dam¬
sel.  The  Asvins  were  victorious  ;  and  SGryA,  well  pleased  by  their  success,
rushed  immediately  into  their  chariot,’ — Wilson.  Sec  noto  on  verse  2  of  tfiia
hymn.

18  Dirvd&ta:  see  I.  112.  14.  His  family  priest  was  one  of  the  Bharail-
vAjas.  The  Asvins,  it  is  said,  yoked  the  porpoise  and  the  bull  together  as  a
proof  of  power.


11 YMN 117.]  THE  11G  VEDA .  157

19  Ye,  bringing  wealth  with  rule,  and  life  with  offspring,  life  rich

in  noble  heroes,  O  Nftsatyas,

Accordant  came  with  strength  to  Jahnu’s  children  who  offered
you  thrice  every  day  your  portion.

20  Ye  bore  away  at  night  by  easy  pathways  Jfchuslja  compassed

round  on  every  quarter.

And,  with  your  car  that  cleaves  the  foe  asunder,  Nasatyas
ne’er  decaying  !  rent  the  mountains.

21  One  morn  ye  strengthened  Vasa  for  the  battle,  to  gather  spoils

that  might  be  told  in  thousands.

With  Indra  joined  ye  drove  away  misfortunes,  yea,  foes  of
Prithusravas,  0  ye  Mighty.

22  From  the  deep  well  ye  raised  on  high  the  water,  so  that  Rich-

atka’s  son,  Sara,  should  drink  it ;

And  with  your  might,  to  help  the  weary  Sayu,  yo  made  the
barren  cow  yield  milk,  N&satyas.

23  To  Visvaka,  Nasatyas !  son  of  Krishna,  the  righteous  man

who  sought  your  aid  and  praised  you,

Yo  with  your  powers  restored,  like  some  lost  creature,  his  son
Vishn&pu  for  his  eyes  to  look  on.

24  Asvins,  ye  raised,  like  Soma  in  a  ladle,  Rebha,  who  for  ten

days  and  ten  nights,  fettered

Had  lain  in  cruel  bonds,  immersed  and  wounded,  suffering
sore  affliction,  iu  the  waters.

25  I  have  declared  your  wondrous  deeds,  0  Asvins :  may  this  be

mine,  and  many  kinc  and  heroes.

May  I,  enjoying  lengthened  life,  still  seeing,  enter  old  ago
as  ’twere  tho  house  I  live  in.

HYMN  CXVII.  Asvins.

Asvins,  your  ancient  priest  invites  you  hither  to  gladden  you
with  draughts  of  mcath,  of  Soma.

Our  gift  is  on  the  grass,  our  song  apportioned  :  with  food  and
strength  come  hither,  0  Nasatyas.


1 9  Jahnu't  children :  Jahnu  wag  a  Muharahi  or  great  Rishi.

21  Vasa :  see  I.  112.  10.  Pj-ithtisruvas  appears  to  bo  identical  with  Pri¬
thusravas  Kilnlta,  mentioned  in  VIII.  46.  21,  whose  family  priest  was  Va<a.

22  Sayu  .-  has  been  mentioned  in  I.  112.  16.  Of  Sara  in  this  verse  and  of
Visvaka,  Krishna,  and  YiahnUpu  in  the  next  we  are  only  told  that  they  were
Xlishia.

24  Rebha :  sec  I.  112.  5.

25  May  this  be  mine :  may  I  be  master  of  this  place  or  district,  a  substan¬
tive  of  some  such  signification  being  understood.


153  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /.

2  That  car  of  yours,  swifter  than  thought,  0  Asvins,  which

drawn  by  brave  steeds  cometh  to  the  people,

Whereon  ye  seek  the  dwelling  of  the  pious, — come  ye  thereon
to  our  abode,  0  Heroes.

3  Ye  freed  sage  Atri,  whom  the  Five  Tribes  honoured,  from  the

strait  pit,  ye  Heroes,  with  his  people,

Baffling  the  guiles  of  the  malignant  Dasyu,  repelling  them,  ye
Mighty,  iu  succession.

4  Rebha  the  sage,  yc  mighty  Heroes,  Asvins !  whom,  like  a

horse,  vile  men  had  sunk  in  water, —

Him,  wouuded,  with  your  wondrous  powers  ye  rescued  :  your
exploits  of  old  time  endure  for  ever.

5  Ye  brought  forth  Vandaua,  ye  Wonder-Workers,  for  triumph,

like  fair  gold  that  liath  been  buried,

Like  one  who  slumbered  in  destruction’s  bosom,  or  like  the
Sun  when  dwelling  in  the  darkness.

6  Kakshivan,  Pajra’s  son,  must  laud  that  exploit  of  yours,

N&satyas,  Heroes,  ye  who  wander !

When  from  the  hoof  of  your  strong  horse  ye  showered  a
hundred  jars  of  honey  for  the  people.

7  To  Krishrta’s  son,  to  Visvaka  who  praised  you,  0  Heroes,  ye

restored  his  sou  Vishinipu.

To  Ghosha,  living  in  her  father’s  dwelling,  stricken  in  years,
ye  gave  a  husband,  Asvins.

8  Rushati,  of  the  mighty  people,  Asvins,  ye  gave  to  Syava  of

the  liue  of  Kanva.

This  deed  of  yours,  ye  Strong  Ones,  should  be  published,  that
ye  gave  glory  to  the  son  of  Nrishad.

9  0  Asvins,  wearing  many  forms  at  pleasure,  on  Pedu  ye  bestow.

cd  a  fleet-foot  courser,

Strong,  winner  of  a  thousand  spoils,  resistless,  the  serpent-
slayer,  glorious,  triumphant.

3  Atri:  see  I.  1J6.  8.  The  Pixe  Tribit:  are  the  confederate  Aryan  families
named  in  the  note  to  I.  7.  9.

•i  Rebha  :  ace  1. 112.  5.  Like  a  hone :  sunk  deep  in  water  like  a  horse  wheu
lie  is  bathed  in  a  river.

5  Vundana:  see  I.  116.  11.

6  Kakthlvdn:  sec  1.  116.  7.  Strong  hone:  see  I.  116.  7.

7  Ghoshu:  KakshlvAn’s  daughter,  said  to  have  been  afflicted  with  loprosy
and  healed  by  the  Alvins,  who  found  her  a  husband.

8  $/,( fia :  a  llislii  whom  the  Alvina  cured  of  leprosy,  and  enabled  to  marry
ItviBhatl.  The  ton  of  Nrithud :  Kanva  or  his  descendant  ?y4va.

ft  Pedu:  see  1.  116.  6.  The  terpent  sUyer ;  see  IX.  83.  4,  aud  Hymns  of  the
Atharva-vcda,  X.  4.  47.


HYMN  117.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


159


10  These  glorious  things  are  yours,  ye  Bounteous  Givers;  prayer,

praise  in  both  worlds  are  your  habitation.

0  Asvins,  when  the  sons  of  Pajra  call  you,  send  strength  with
nourishment  to  him  who  knoweth.

11  Hymned  with  the  reverence  of  a  son,  0  Asvins,  ye  Swift  Ones

giving  booty  to  the  singer,

Glorified  by  Agastya  with  devotion,  established  Viapalflt  again,
NAsatyas.

12  Ye  Sons  of  Heaven,  ye  Mighty,  whither  went  ye,  sought  ye

for  his  fair  praise  the  home  of  Kavya,

When,  liko  a  pitcher  full  of  gold,  0  Asvins,  on  the  tenth  day
ye  lifted  up  the  buried  ?

1 3  Ye  with  the  aid  of  your  great  powers,  0  Asvins,  restored  to

youth  the  ancient  man  Chyavana.

The  Daughter  of  the  Sun  with  all  her  glory,  0  ye  NAsatyas,
chose  your  car  to  bear  her.

14  Ye,  ever-youthful  Ones,  again  remembered  Tugra,  according

to  your  ancient  manner : '

With  horses  brown  of  hue  that  flew  with  swift  wings  ye
brought  back  Bhujyu  from  the  sea  of  billows.

15  The  son  of  Tugra  had  iuvokod  you,  Asvins;  borne  on  he  went

uninjured  through  the  ocean.

Ye  with  your  chariot  swift  as  thought,  weli-liamessed,  carried
him  off,  0  Mighty  Ones,  to  safety.

1G  The  quail  hid  invocated  you,  0  Asvins,  when  from  the  wolfs
devouring  jaws  ye  freed  her.

With  conquering  car  ye  cleft  the  mountain’s  ridges :  the  off¬
spring  of  Visvach  ^e  killed  with  poison.

17  He  whom  for  furnishing  a  hundred  wethers  to  tho  she-wolf,
his  wicked  father  blinded, —

To  him,  Rijrasva,  gave  ye  eyes,  0  Asvins;  light  to  the  blind
ye  sent  for  perfect  vision.


11  A  gaatya:  tho  family  priest  of  Khcla.  Sec  I.  116.  15.

12  Kdvya :  Uaani,  son  of  Kavi.  See  I.  83.  6.  The  buried :  Rebha.  Tho
meaning  is,  4  why  did  yc  delay  so  long  the  rescue  of  Rebha  ?  ’

13  Chyavdna :  see  I.  116.  10.  The  Daughter  of  the  Sun  :  see  I.  1 16.  17.

14  Ye  brought  back  Bhujyu :  see  I.  116.  8.

16  The  quail:  see  I.  116.  14.  Vitvdch :  said  to  be  an  Asura  or  fiend.

17  Rijrdfva  :  see  I.  116.  16.


160  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I.

18  To  bring  the  blind  man  joy  thus  cried  the  she-wolf :  0  Asvius,

0  yo  Mighty  Ones,  0  Heroes,

For  me  Rijrilsva,  like  a  youthful  lover,  hath  cut  piecemeal  one
and  a  hundred  wethers.

19  Great  and  weal-giving  is  your  aid,  0  Asvius,  ye.  objects  of  all

thought,  made  whole  the  cripple.

Purandhi  also  for  this  cause  invoked  you,  and  ye,  0  Mighty,
came  to  her  with  succours.

20  Ye,  Wonder-Workers,  filled  with  milk  for  Sayu  the  milklcss

cow,  emaciated,  barren ;

Aud  by  your  powers  the  child  of  Purumitra  yo  brought  to
Virnada  to  be  his  consort.

21  Ploughing  and  sowing  barley,  0  ye  Asvins,  milking  out  food

for  men,  yc  Wonder-Workers,

Blasting  away  the  Dasyu  with  your  trumpet,  yo  gave  far-spread¬
ing  light  uuto  the  Arya.

22  Ye  brought  the  horse’s  head,  Asvins,  and  gave  it  uuto  Dadh-

yac!)  the  offspring  of  Atharvan.

True,  he  revealed  to  you,  0  Wonder-Workers,  sweet  Soma,
Tvash tar’s  secret,  as  your  girdle.

23  0  Sages,  evermore  I  crave  your  favour :  be  gracious  unto  all
'  my  prayers,  0  Asvins.

Grant  mo,  Nasatyas,  riches  in  abundance,  wealth  famous  and
accompanied  with  children.

24  With  liberal  bounty  to  the  weakling’s  consort  yc,  Heroes,  gave

a  son  Hiranyahasta ;

And  Sydva,  cut  into  three  several  pieces,  ye  brought  to  life
again,  0  bounteous  Asvius.

25  These  your  heroic  exploits,  0  ye  Asvins,  done  in  the  days  of

old,  have  men  related.

May  we,  addressing  prayer  to  you,  ye  Mighty,  speak  with
brave  sons  about  us  to  the  synod.


19  PurandJii:  or  as  Siiyana  explains,  ‘the  wise  maid,’  Ghoshd.

20  ?ayu:  see  I.  112.  16  ;  and  I.  116.  22.  Virnada :  soo  I.  112.  19.

22  Dadhyach:  sec  I.  116.  12.  At  your  girdle:  to  strengthen  and  support
you.

24  The  weakling's  contort :  see  I.  110.13.  §gdva:  cut  to  pieces  by  the
Asuras,  was  made  whole  by  the  Asvins.

23  The  tynod :  the  congregation  of  worshippers.


UYMX  118.]


THE  RIG  VET) A.  161

HYMN  CXVI1I.  Asvins.

Flying,  with  falcons,  may  your  chariot,  Asvins,  most  gracious,
bringing  friondly  help,  come  hither,—  ’

Your  chariot,  swifter  than  the  mind  of  mortal,  fleet  as  the
wind,  three-seated,-  0  ye  Mighty.  •

2  Come  to  us  with  your  chariot  triple  seated,  three-wheeled,  of

triple  form,  that  rolleth  lightly.

Fill  full  our  cows,  give  mottle  to  our  horses,  and  make  each
hero  son  grow  strong,  0  Asvins.

3  With  your  well-rolling  car,  descending  swiftly,  hear  this  the

press-stone’s  song,  ye  Wonder-Workers.

How  then  have  ancient  sages  said,  0  Asvins,  that  ye  most
swiftly  come  to  stay  affliotion  ?

4  0  Asvins,  let  your  falcons  bear  you  hither,  yoked  to  your

chariot,  swift,  with  flying  pinions,

Which,  ever  active,  like  the  airy  eagles,  carry  you,  0  N&satyas,
to  the  banquet.

5  The  youthful  Daughter  of  the  Sun,  delighting  in  you,  ascend¬

ed  there  your  chariot,  Heroes.

Borne  on  their  swift  wings  lot  your  beauteous  horses,  your
birds  of  ruddy  hue,  convey  you  near  us.

6  Ye  raised  up  Vandana,  strong  Wonder-Workers !  with  great

might,  and  with  power  ye  rescued  Rebha.

From  out  tho  sea  ye  saved  the  son  of  Tugra,  and  gave  his
youth  again  unto  Chyav&na.

7  To  Atri,  cast  down  to  tho  fire  that  scorched  him,  ye  gave,  O

Asvins,  strengthening  food  and  favour.

Accepting  his  fair  praises  with  approval,  ye  gave  his  eyes  again
to  blinded  Kanva.

8  For  ancient  Sayu  in  his  sore  affliction  ye  caused  his  cow  to

swell  with  milk,  0  Asvins.

The  quail  from  her  great  misery  ye  delivered,  and  a  new  leg
for  VispaU  provided.

9  A  white  horse,  Asvins,  ye  bestowed  on  Pedu,  a  serpent-slaving

steed  sent  down  by  Indra,

Loud-neighing,  conquering  the  foe,  high-mettled,  firm-limbed
and  vigorous,  winning  thousand  treasures.

10  Such  as  ye  are,  0  nobly  born,  0  Heroes,  we  in  our  trouble  call
on  you  for  succour.


6  Id  this  and  the  following  verges  most  of  the  wonderful  deeds  of  the
Asvins  mentioned  in  the  preceding  hjmu  are  briefly  referred  to.

11


TUB  HYMNS  OP


162


[BOOK  I.


Accepting  these  our  songs,  for  our  well-being  come  to  us  on
your  chariot  treasure-laden.

11  Come  unto  us  combined  in  love,  Nasatyas;  come  with  the  fresh
swift  vigour  of  the  falcon.

Bearing  oblations  I  invoke  you,  Asvins,  at  the  first  break  of
everlasting  morning.


HYMN  CXIX.  Asvins.

Hither,  that  I  may  live,  I  call  unto  the  feast  your  wondrous
car,  thought-swift,  borne  on  l*y  rapid  steeds,

With  thousand  banners,  hundred  treasures,  pouring  gifts,
promptly  obedient,  bestowing  ample  room.

2  Even  as  it  moveth  near  my  hymn  is  lifted  up,  and  all  the  re¬

gions  come  together  to  sing  praise.

I  sweeten  the  oblations;  now  the  helpers  come.  Orjini  hath,
0  Asvins,  mounted  on  your  car.  _ _ __ — _

3  When  striving  man  with  man  for  glory  they  have  mot,  brisk,

measureless,  eager  for  victory  in  fight,

Then  verily  your  car  is  seen  upon  the  slope  when  yc,  0  Asvins,
bring  some  choice  boon  to  tho  prince.

4  Ye  came  to  Bhujyu  while  he  struggled  in  tho  flood,  with  flying

birds,  self-yoked,  ye  bore  him  to  his  sires.

Ye  went  to  tho  fav-distaut  home,  0  Mighty  Ones ;  and  famed
is  your  great  aid  to  Divodilsa  given.

5  Asvins,  the  car  which  you  had  yoked  for  glorious  show  your

own  two  voices  urged  directed  to  its  goal.

Then  she  who  came  for  friendship,  Maid  of  noble  birth,  elected
you  as  Husbands,  you  to  be  her  Lords.

6  Rcbha  ye  saved  from  tyranny ;  for  Atri’s  sake  ye  quenched

with  cold  the  fiery  pit  that  compassed  him.

Yc  made  the  cow  of  Sayu  stream  refreshing  milk,  and  Van-
dana  was  holpen  to  extended  life.

_ • _ _

2  Orjdnt:  strength,  personified.  According  to  Sly  an  n,  Crj&ut  is  SiiryA
the  daughter  of  the  Sun.

3  Upon  tiu  Hope :  that  is,  of  tho  sky.

4  Bhujyu,  and  other  persons  and  incidents  roferred  to  in  this  hymn  have
been  mentioned  in  1. 116.

6  She  who  came  for  frieruhhip  :  SfiryA.  The  meaning  scorns  to  bo,  oa
Ludwig  rays,  that  she  camo  intending  to  avail  herself  of  the  services  of  tho
Asvins  as  bridesmon,  and  that  they  became  her  bridegrooms  instead.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


M3


HYMN  120.]

7  Doers  of  marvels,  skilful  workers,  ye  restored  Vandana,  like  a

car,  worn  out  with  length  of  days.

'  From  earth  ye  brought  the  sage  to  life  in  wondrous  mode:
be  your  great  deeds  doue  here  for  him  who  honours  you.

8  Yc  went  to  him  who  mourned  in  a  far  distant  place,  him  who

was  left  forlorn  by  treachery  of  his  sire.

Rich  with  the  light  of  heaven  was  then  the  help  ye  gave,  and
marvellous  your  succour  when  ye  stood  by  him.

9  To  you  in  praise  of  sweetness  sang  the  honey-bee  :  Ausija

calleth  you  in  Soma’s  rapturous  joy.

Ye  drew  unto  yourselves  the  spirit  of  Dadhyaeh,  and  then  the
horse’s  head  uttered  his  words  to  you.

10  A  horse  did  ye  provide  for  Pcdu,  excellent,  white,  Oye  Asvins,
conqueror  of  combatants,

Invincible  in  war  by  arrows,  seeking  heaven,  worthy  of  fame,
like  Iudra,  vanquisher  of  men.

HYMN  C XX.  Aivins.

Asvins,  what  praiso  may  win  your  grace  ?  Who  may  be  pleas¬
ing  to  you  both  ?

How  shall  the  ignorant  worship  you?

2  Here  let  the  ignorant  ask  the  means  of  you  who  know — for

nono  beside  you  kuoweth  aught —

Not  of  a  spiritless  mortal  man.

3  Such  as  yc  arc,  all-wise,  we  call  you.  Ye  wise,  declare  to  us

this  day  accepted  prayer.

Loving  you  well  your  servaut  lauds  you.

8  To  him  who  mourned :  Bhujyu.

9  The  honey-bee:  meaning  Ausija  or  the  eon  of  U?ij,  the  sage  KakshtvAn.

With  regard  to  the  legends  recounted  in  these  hymns  to  the  Asvins,  Mr,
Muir  remavks  (0.  S.  Texts,  V.  248) :  *  The  deliverances  of  Rcbha,  Vandana,
ParAvrii,  Bhujyu,  Chyavftna,  and  others  are  explained  by  Professor  Benfey
(following  Dr.  Kuhu  and  Professor  Miiller,)  as  referring  to  certain  physical
phenomena  with  which  the  Asvins  are  supposed  by  these  scholars  to  be  con¬
nected.  But  this  allegorical  method  of  interpretation  seems  unlikely  to  bo
correct,  as  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  phenomena  iu  question  should
have  been  alluded  to  under  such  a  variety  of  names  and  circumstances.  It
appears,  therefore,  to  bo  more  probable  that  the  risliis  merely  refer  to  certain
legouds  which  wore  popularly  current  of  interventions  of  the  Asvins  in  boholf
of  tho  persons  whwte  names  are  mentioned.’

Parts  of  this  Hymn  arc  difficult  and  olecure.  The  first  nine  stanzas  are
in  nino  different  metres.

2  Iu  lino  2  I  adopt  Ludwig’s  emendation  airntau  for  abrau  of  tho  text-


164  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  /•

4  Simply,  ye  Mighty  Ones,  I  ask  the  Gods  of  that  wondrous

oblation  hallowed  by  the  mystic  word.

Save  us  from  what  is  stronger,  fiercer  than  ourselves.

5  Forth  go  the  hymn  that  shone  in  Ghosha  Bhrigu’s  like,  the

song  wherewith  the  son  of  Pajra  worships  you,

Like  some  wise  minister.

6  Hear  ye  the  song  of  him  who  hastens  speedily.  0  Asvins,  I

am  he  who  sang  your  praise.

Hither,  ye  Lords  of  Splendour,  hither  turn  your  eyes.

7  For  ye  were  ever  nigh  to  deal  forth  ample  wealth,  to  give  the

wealth  that  ye  had  gathered  up.

As  such,  ye  Vasus,  guard  us  well,  and  keep  us  safely  from  the
wicked  wolf.

8  Give  us  not  up  to  any  man  who  hateth  us,  nor  let  our  milch-

cows  stray,  whose  udders  give  us  food,

Far  from  oxir  homes  without  their  calves.

9  May  they  who  love  you  gain  you  for  their  Friends.  Prepare  ye

us  for  opulence  with  strengthening  food,

Prepare  us  for  the  food  that  floweth  from  our  cows.

10  1  have  obtained  the  horseless  car  of  Asvins  rich  in  sacrifice,
And  I  am  well  content  therewith.

1 1  May  it  convey  me  evermore  :  may  the  light  chariot  pass  from

men

To  men  unto  the  Soma  draught.

1 2  It  holdeth  slumber  in  contempt,  and  the  rich  who  enjoyeth

not :

Both  vanish  quickly  and  are  lost.

HYMN  CXXI.  Indni.

When  will  men’s  guardians  hasting  hear  with  favour  the  song
of  Angiras’s  pious  children  ?

When  to  the  people  of  the  home  he  cometh,  he  strideth  to  the
sacrifice,  the  Holy.


4  HaUovxd  by  th(  mijsCic  word  :  by  the  exclamation  rdthal,  used  in  making
an  oblation  to  a  God  with  fire.  This  word  is  of  the  moat  essential  importance
in  sacrifice,  but  if  carelessly  and  inconsiderately  used  its  effects  are  deadly,
and  against  these  tho  Rishi*  prays  for  protection.

5  Ohoiha :  SAyana  saya  that  Suhastya,  the  son  of  GhoahA,  is  intended.

The  son  of  Pajra:  one  of  the  descendants  of  the  Angirases  ;  here,  accord¬
ing  to  SAyana,  the  Riahi  KakehlvAn.

In  this  Hymn,  as  in  the  preceding,  there  arc  several  very  obscure  passage*
which  can  only  conjecturally  be  translated  and  explained.’


HYMN  121.]


THE  BIOVBDA.


1«5

2  He  stablished  heaven  ;  he  poured  forth,  skilful  worker,  the

wealth  of  kine,  for  strength,  that  nurtures  heroes.

The  Mighty  One  his  self-born  host,  regarded,  the  horse’s  mate,
the  mother  of  the  heifer.

3  Lord  of  red  dawns,  he  came  victorious,  daily  to  the  Angirases’

former  invocation.

His  bolt  and  team  hath  he  prepared,  and  stablished  the  heaven
for  quadrupeds  and  men  two-footed.

4  In  joy  of  this  thou  didst  restore,  for  worship,  the  lowing  com¬

pany  of  hidden  cattle.

When  the  three-pointed  one  descends  with  onslaught  he  opens
wide  the  doom  that  cause  man  trouble.

5  Thine  is  that  milk  which  thy  swift-moving  Parents  brought

down,  a  strengthening  genial  gift  for  conquest ;

When  the  pure  treasure  unto  thee  they  offered,  the  milk  shed
from  the  cow  who  streameth  nectar.

6  There  is  he  bom.  May  the  Swift  give  us  rapture,  and  like  the

Sun  shine  forth  from  yonder  dawning,

Indu,  even  us  who  drank,  whose  toils  are  offerings,  poured
from  the  spoon,  with  praise,  upon  the  altar,


2  The  Mighty  One :  Indra  is  here  said  to  have  regarded  or  looked  on  the
host  born  from,  or  produced  by  him,  that  is,  perhaps,  the  heaven  and  the
earth  in  general.  Specially  has  he  regarded  the  animals  in  which  the  wealth
of  the  |>coplc  chiefly  consists,  among  which  the  marc  and  the  cow  naturally
hold  the  chief  place.  Ludwig  would  read  mdtavam  g&n\  instead  of  mdtdraw,
g6h.  Ho  thinks  that  the  mate  of  the  horse  (SQrva)  is  the  earth,  the  motherly
cow.  Sftyapa  says  that  Indra  in  sport  made  a  mare  bring  forth  a  calf,  and
Wilson  following  him  translates  :  ‘  he  made  the  female  of  the  horse  unnatur¬
ally  the  mother  of  the  cow.’

4  In  joy  of  this  :  in  the  rapture  arising  from  drinking  this  Soma  juice.

The  lowing  company  of  hidden  cattle :  the  rain-clouds  carried  off  and  kept

concealed  by  tho  Panie.

The  three-pointed  one :  apparently  the  thunderbolt,  SAyana  takes  it  to
mean  Indra  (elevated  as  a  triple  crest  in  the  three  worlds).  He  :  Indra.

5  Thy  swift-moving  Parents  :  Heaven  and  Earth.

6  The  Swift :  the  swiftly  flowing  and  efficacious  Indu  or  Soma.

Whose  toils  are  offerings :  whose  drops  of  sweat,  as  we  labour  in  our  sacred
duties,  count  as  oblations  to  the  Gods  whom  we  serve.

Prom  yonder  dawning ;  probably  an  indication  of  time  only.


36C  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  I.

7  When  the  wood-pile,  made  of  good  logs,  is  ready,  at  the  Sun’s

worship  to  bind  fast  the  Bullock,

Then  when  thou  shinest  forth  through  days  of  action  for  the
Car-borne,  the  Swift,  the  Cattle-seeker.

8  Eight  stc<ids  thou  bit) lightest  down  from  mighty  heaven,  when

lighting  for  the  well  that  giveth  splendour,

That  men  might  press  with  stones  the  gladdening  yellow,
strengthened  with  milk,  fermenting,  to  exalt  thee.

9  Thou  hurledst  forth  from  heaven  the  iron  missile,  brought  by

the  Skilful,  from  the  sling  of  leather,

When  thou,  0  Much-invoked,  assisting  Kutsa  with  endless
deadly  darts  didst  compass  Sushna.

10  Bolt-armed,  ere  darkness  overtook  the  sunlight,  thou  castest

at  the  veiling  cloud  thy  weapon,

Thou  rentest,  out  of  heaven,  though  firmly  knotted,  the  might
of  Sushna  that  was  thrown  around  him.

1 1  The  mighty  Heaven  and  Earth,  those  bright  expanses  that

have  no  wheels,  joyed,  Indra,  at  thiuo  exploit.

Vritra,  the  boar  who  lay  amid  the  waters,  to  sloop  thou  sentest
with  thy  mighty  thunder.

12  Mount  Indra,  lover  of  the  men  thou  guardcst,  the  woll-yokcd

horses  of  the  wind,  best  bearers.

The  bolt  which  Kilvya  Usanil  erst  gave  thee,  strong,  gladden¬
ing,  Vritra-slaying,  hath  he  fashioned.

1 3  The  strong  Bay  Horses  of  tlie  Sun  thou  stayedst :  this  Etasa

drew  not  the  wheel,  0  Indra.

Casting  them  forth  beyond  the  ninety  rivers  thou  dravest
down  into  the  pit  the  godless.


7  To  bind  fust  the  Bullock:  the  Bullock  is  tho  Sun  himself:  the  sacrifice  is
to  secure  the  blessings  of  sunlight,  SOyana  explain* :  the  priedt  is  competent
for  tho  attachment  of  the  auiinul  to  the  stake.

The  Cur-borne,  the  Swift,  the  Cattle-seeker :  apparently  appellations  of  Indra.

8  The  well  that  yiveth  splendour :  the  cloud  that  sheds  fertilizing  rain.

The  yellow :  Use  Soma  juice.

9  The  Skilful:  Tvaahtar.

A’dvya  Ufa ud:  see  I.  51.  10.

18  The  firat  hemistich  of  this  stanza  is  most  difficult,  and  I  do  not  seo  how
it  can  be  satisfactorily  translated  and  explained.  I  have  followed  Graaanimm
who  translates :  '  Du  liessest  rohn  der  Sonne  starke  Rosso,  nicht  zog  dor
Runner  mebr  ihr  Rad,  0  Iudra.’  If  this  be  the  mooning,  the  reference  may
be,  perhaps,  to  an  cclipso  of  the  sun.

Etafu  :  appear*  in  a  double  character,  first  as  a  ssorificer  who  offered  Soma
juice  to  Indra  and  was  aided  and  favoured  by  that  God  (I.  51.  15),  and  second-
ly,  Btau  u  the  name  of  the  horses  or  of  one  of  the  horaes,  or  of  tho  single


HYMN  122.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


167


14  Iudra,  preserve  thou  us  from  this  affliction ;  Thunder-armed,

save  us  from  the  misery  near  us.

Vouchsafe  us  affluence  in  chariots,  founded  on  horses,  for  our
food  and  fame  and  gladness.

15  Never  may  this  thy  loving-kindness  fail  us;  mighty  in  strength,

may  plenteous  food  surround  us.

Maghavan,  make  us  share  the  focman’s  cattle :  may  wo  be  thy
most  liberal  feast-companions.


HYMN  CXX1I.  Visvodevaa.

Say,  bringing  sacrifice  to  bounteous  Rudra,  This  juice  for
drink  to  you  whose  wrath  is  fleeting  !

With  Dyaus  the  As  urn's  Heroes  I  have  lauded  the  Marufcs  as
with  prayor  to  Earth  and  Heaven.

2  Stroug  to  exalt  the  early  invocation  are  Night  and  Dawn  who

show  with  varied  aspect.

The  Barren  clothes  her  in  wide-woven  raiment,  and  fair  Morn
shines  with  Surya’s  golden  splendour'.

3  Cheer  us  the  Ron  me  r  rouud,  who  strikes  at  morning,  the  Wind

delight  us,  pourcr  forth  of  waters  ’.

Sharpen  our  wits,  0  Parvata  and  Indra.  May  all  the  Gods
vouchsafe  to  us  this  favour.


lmnic,  of  SOrya  or  the  Sun,  especially,  it  seem*,  of  tlic  horse  who,  during  tho
night,  draws  back  the  chariot  of  the  Sun  from  the  west  to  the  east.  In  this
verse,  according  to  M.  Bergaigne,  Etasa  himself  or  hi*  substitute  (the  word
‘  nd  '  which  I  have  taken  to  mean  ‘  not’  being  understood  in  its  alternative
sense  of  ‘  iiko  or  as  ’)  is  represented  as  drawing  the  wheel  when  Indra  has
stayed  tho  course  of  the  Barite  or  Bay  Horses  of  the  Sun.  It  is  out-difficult,
says  M.  Bergoigne,  to  recoucilo  these  two  different  conceptions  of  tho  rdle  of
Etasa.  A  aicrificcr  especially  favoured  by  Iudra  tu.iy  represent  either  tho
sacrificial  fire  or  the  S  nua  juice  that  is  prepared,  consecrated,  and  offered  to
the  God,  nrnl  Soma,  in  the  Veda,  is  frequently  represented  aa  a  horse.  See
Bergaigno,  La  Itclujion  Vtdiquc,  Vol.  If.  330—333.

.  1  Tho  moaning  of  this  very  difficult  verse  appears  to  be,  that  the  offering  of
S-»ma  juice  is  presented  to  Kudra  and  to  his  sons  the  fierce  but  easily  appeased
Marut*  or  Storm-Gods,  whom  the  poet  lias  hiudcd  as  the  Heroes  of  Dyaus,  the
Immortal,  and  has  at  the  same  timo  supplicated  the  Deiticj  Heaven  and  Earth.
Wilson,  following  Sdyana,  paraphrase*  the  second  hemistich  :  *  I  praise  him
who  with  his  heroic  (followers)  as  (with  shafts)  from  a  quiver  expelled  (the
Aturat)  from  heaven  :  and  (I  praise)  the  Manits,  (who  abide)  between  heaven
and  earth.'

2  The  barren  ;  the  unfruitful  Night ;  in  which  no  work  is  done.

3  The  Roanicr  round  :  ‘tho  circumambient  divinity,'  the  Wind.

Who  itrike*  al  mornintj :  perhaps,  blows  away  all  evil  spirits  of  the  night.

Par  tala  :  tho  presiding  Genius  of  the  mountains  nud  ruler  of  the  clouds,
frequently  associated  with  Iudra.


1«3  THE  UYMSS  OF  [BOOK  I.

4  And  Ausija  shall  call  for  me  that  famous  Pair  who  oujoy  and

drink,  who  come  to  brighten.

Set  ye  the  Offspring  of  the  Floods  before  you ;  both  Mothers
of  the  Living  One  who  beameth.

5  For  you  stall  Ausija  call  him  who  thunders,  as,  to  win  Arju-

na’s  assent,  cried  Ghoehft.

I  will  invoke,  that  Pushan  may  be  bounteous  to  you,  the  rich
munificence  of  Agui.

6  Hear,  Mitra-Varuna,  these  mine  invocations,  hear  them  from

all  men  in  the  hall  of  worship.

Giver  of  famous  gifts,  kind  hearer,  Sindhu  who  gives  fair  fields,
listen  with  all  his  waters  !

7  Praised,  Mitra,  Varuna !  is  your  gift,  a  hundred  cows  to  tho

Pfikshayfimas  and  the  Pajra.

Presented  by  car-famous  Priyaratha,  supplying  nourishment,
they  came  directly.

8  Praised  is  the  gift  of  him  the  very  wealthy  :  may  we  enjoy  it,

men  with  hero  children :

His  who  hath  many  gifts  to  give  the  Pajras,  a  chief  who  makes
me  rich  in  cars  and  horses.

9  The  folk,  0  Mitra-Varuna,  who  hate  you,  who  sinfully  hating

pour  you  no  libations,

Lay  in  their  hearts,  themselves,  a  wasting  sickness,  whereas
the  righteous  gaineth  all  by  worship.

10  That  man,  most  puissant,  wondrously  urged  onward,  famed

among  heroes,  liberal  in  giving,

Moveth  a  warrior,  evermore  undaunted  in  all  oncounters  even
with  the  mighty.

11  Come  to  tho  man’s,  the  sacrificer’s  calling:  hear,  Kings  of

Immortality,  joy-givers  1

While  yc  who  speed  through  clouds  decree  your  bounty  large¬
ly,  for  fame,  to  him  the  chariot-rider.

4  Avf:ja :  the  son  of  Usij,  that  is,  Kakshtv&n  himself,  tho  Rishi  of  the  hymn.
That  famous  Pair :  the*A?vins.  The  Offspring  of  the  Flood :  Agni.

The  Living  One  toho  beameth :  or  praiseth.  Agni  appears  to  be  meant.

5  Him  who  thunders:  Indra.  Ghoshd,  in  I.  117.  5,  is  said  to  have  been  pro¬
vided  with  a  husband  by  the  A?vinn.  Arjitna,  in  this  verse,  may  pet  haps  have
been  the  husband’s  name.  Tho  meaning  of  the  passage  is  uncertain.  SAyan*
takes  d'juna  to  mean  white  skin,  or  leprosy,  from  which  GhoehA  prayed  to
bo  made  free.

6  Sindhu :  the  Indus  ;  the  Deity  presiding  over  waters.

7  Who  tho  Prihthaydmas,  or  drivers  of  swift  horses  arc,  is  uncertain.

The  Pajra:  the  JUshi  Kakshlvta  himself,  a  member  of  the  priestly  family
of  the  Pajras.

11  Kings  of  Immortality  :  Varuna  and  Mitra,


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  123.]


lflO


12  Vigour  will  we  bestow  on  that  adorer  whose  tenfold  draught

we  come  to  taste,  so  spake  thoy.

May  all  in  whom  x-est  splendour  and  great  riches  obtain  re¬
freshment  in  these  sacrifices.

13  We  will  rejoice  to  drink  the  tenfold  present  whoa  the  twice-

five  come  bearing  sacred  viands.

What  can  he  do  whose  steeds  and  reins  are  choicest  ?  These,
the  all-potent,  urge  brave  men  to  conquest.

14  The  sea  and  all  the  Deities  shall  give  us  him  with  the  golden

ear  and  neck  bejewelled.

Dawns,  hasting  to  the  praises  of  the  pious,  be  pleased  with
us,  both  offerers  and  singers.

15  Four  youthful  sons  of  Masara'ira  vex  me,  three,  of  tho  King,

the  conquering  Ayavasa.

Now  like  the  Sim,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra,  your  car  hath  shone,
ldhg-shaped  and  reined  with  splendour.

HYMN  CXXHl.  Dawn.

The  DakshiruVs  broad  chariot  hath  been  harnessed  :  this  car
the  Gods  Immortal  have  ascended.

Fain  to  bring  light  to  homes  of  men  the  noble  and  active  God¬
dess  hath  emerged  from  darkness.


'  12  Tenfold  druwjht :  Soma  juice  offered  in  ten  ladle3,  the  twux-five  of  tho

following  verse.

14  Him  with  the  golden  ear  :  perhaps  tho  Sun;  but  the  meaning  of  the
hemistich  is  uncertain.

15  There  ia  no  verb  in  the  first  hemistich,  and  I  follow  Siyapa  in  supplying
‘vex.’  But  aifonh  may  mean  ‘young  horses’  as  well  as  ‘youthful  sons,’  and
tlio  verb  to  be  supplied  may  be  '  carry,’  as  suggested  by  Grassmann.  The
whole  hymn,  as  Wilson  observes,  ‘  is  very  elliptical  and  obscure,’  and  much  of
it  is  at  present  unintelligible.


1  The  Dakihin  f*  brood  chariot :  the  DakshipA  itself,  that  is  the  honora¬
rium  or  feo  presented  by  the  institutor  of  a  sacrifice  to  the  priests  who  per¬
form  tho  ceremony.  The  meaning  of  the  first  hemistich  appeals  to  be  that  all
preparations  havo  been  made  for  tho  morning  sacrifice,  and  especially  that  the
fee  for  its  performance— a  most  essential  element — is  ready,  and  that  the  God
are  coming  to  the  rite.  The  word  ddl*hinJ</dh  is  considered  by  SSAyana  to  be
an  epithet  of  luhoilevatdydh,  understood,  that  is,  ‘  of  the  Goddess  Ushas  or
Dawn.’  Wilson  accordingly  translates,  ‘  the  8|>aciou8  chariot  of  the  graceful
(Diiku)  )  ’  Ludwig  reuders  the  word  by  ‘  friendly,’  and  Gravmann  by  ‘  wealth,’
both  scholars  applyiug  tho  epithet  to  Ushas  or  Dawn  who  is  not  mentioned
in  the  text  I  have  followed  M.  Bergaigne  who  says  :  ‘  The  interpretation  of
the  word  dakthind  in  the  sense  of  sacrificial  salary,  in  the  first  verse  of  our
hymn  as  also  in  the  fifth,  is,  not  only  pouib'e  but  the  on///  pouibte  one,  for  tho
reason  that  this  word  has  no  other  sense  in  tho  Rig- Veda  than  that  of  “salary,
recompense,”  given  either  by  tho  earthly  mug/uivun,  that  is  to  say  by  those


170  THE  II  YMNS  OF  [HOOK  /.

2  She  before  all  the  living  world  hath  wakened,  tho  Lofty  One

who  wins  and  gathers  treasure.

Revived  and  ever  young  on  high  she  glances.  Dawn  hath
come  first  unto  our  morning  worship.

3  If,  Dawn,  "thou  Goddess  nobly  born,  thou  dealest  fortune  this

day  to  all  the  race  of  mortals,

May  Savitar  the  God,  Friend  of  the  homestead,  declare  before
the  Sun  that  we  are  sinless.

4  Showing  her  wonted,  form  each  day  that  passeth,  spreading

the  light  sho  visitoth  each  dwelling.

Eager  for  conquest,  with  bright  sheen  she  comcth.  Her  por¬
tion  is  tho  best  of  goodly  treasures.

5  Sister  of  Varuna,  sister  of  Bhaga,  first  among  all  sing  forth,

0  joyous  Morning.

Weak  bo  tho  strength  of  him  who  workoth  evil :  may  Ite  sub¬
due  him  with  our  car^the  guerdon.

6  Let  our  glad  hymns  and  holy  thoughts  rise  upward,  for  tho

flames  brightly  burning  have  ascended.

The  far-rofulgont  Mornings  make  apparent  the  lovely  treasures
which  the  darkness  covered.

7  The  one  departoth  and  the  other  cometh  :  unlike  in  hue  day’s

halves  march  on  successive.

One  hides  the  gloom  of  the  surrounding  Parents.  Dawn  on
her  shining  chariot  is  resplendent

8  The  same  in  form  to-day,  the  samo  to-morrow,  they  still  keep

Varuna’s  eternal  statute.

who  pay  the  priest  for  performing  the  sacrifice,  or  by  the  heavenly  maghavan,
Indra,  who  in  his  turn  pays  for  tho  sacrifice  by  favours  of  every  kind  to  t  he
man  who'  causes  it  to  bo  offered.’  Soe  la  Religion  Vidique,  VoL  Ilf.  pp.  2$$,  IF.,
for  M.  Borgaiguc’s  translation  of,  and  polemical  commentary  on,  thin  hymn.

The  noble  and  active  Oodilcss :  Usliaa,  Aurora,  or  Dawn.  The  won!  (loddtxs
is  not  in  tho  text.

3  May  Savitar  ;  tho  all-seeing  deity  Savitar  who  presides  over,  but.  is  sonic-
t*“C«  distinguished  from,  the  Sun,  is  appealed  to  as  the  best  judge  of  tho  sup¬
pliant's  innocence.

5  Our  car  the  guerdon :  may  the  liberal  fee  given  for  tho  performance  of  tho
sacrifice  l>o  to  us  as  a  war-chariot  to  enable  us  to  overpower  those  who  would
injure  us.

7  Day's  halva :  day  and  night.  The  surrounding  Parents  are  the  all. en¬
compassing  Heaven  and  Earth :  tho  nightly  darkness  which  envelope  thorn
is  hidden  or  dispelled  by  the  day  *


THE  mo  VEDA.


J1YM. V  124.]


171


Blameless,  in  turn  they  traverse  thirty  regions,  and  dart  across
the  spirit  in  a  moment.

9  She  who  hath  knowledge  of  the  first  day’s  nature  is  bom  re¬
fulgent  white  from  out  the  darkness.*

The  Maiden  breaketli  not  the  law  of  Order,  day  l»y  day  coming
to  the  place  appointed.

10  In  pride  of  beauty  like  a  maid  thou  goest,  0  Goddess,  to  the

God  who  longs  to  win  thee,

And  smiling,  youthful,  as  thou  ahinost  brightly,  before  him
thou  discoverest  thy  bosom.

1 1  Fair  as  a  bride  embellished  by  her  mother  thou  showest  forth

thy  form  that  all  may  see  it.

Blessed  art  thou,  0  Dawn.  Shine  yet  more  widely.  No  othor
Dawns  have  reached  what  thou  attaineat.

1 2  Rich  in  kino,  horses,  and  all  goodly  treasures,  in  constant  oper¬

ation  with  tho  sunbeams,

The  Dawns  depart  and  come  again  assuming  their  wonted
forms  that  promise  happy  fortune.

13  Obedient  to  the  rein  of  Law  Eternal  give  us  each  thought

that  more  and  more  shall  bless  us.

Shine  thou  on  us  to-day,  Dawn,  swift  to  listen.  With  us  bo
riches  and  with  chiefs  who  worship.

HYMN  CXXIV.  Dawn.


Tnn  Dawn  refulgent  when  the  fire  is  kindled,  and  the  Sun
rising,  far  diffuse  their  brightness.

Savitar,  God,  hath  sent  us  forth  to  labour,  each  quadruped,
each  biped,  to  be  active.

2  Not  interrupting  heavenly  ordinances,  although  she  minisheth
human  generations,

The  last  of  endless  moms  that  have  departed,  tho  first  of
those  that  come,  Dawn  brightly  shincth.


8  They  traverse  thirty  r eyions  :  I  follow  M.  Borgaignc  in  understanding  tho
thirty  regions  or  spaces  to  be  an  indefinite  expression  for  the  whole  universe.
A  more  elaborate  attempt  at  explanation  will  be  found  in  Wilson’s  Translation
in  a  Note  from  Bentley’s  Hindu  Astronomy.  They  are  the  Dawns,  and  they
may  be  said  to  pass  across  or  through  the  spirit,  to  eulighteu  it.  The  second
hemistich  is  very  difficult  and  olxtcure,  and  can  be  translated  only  provisionally.

10  -The  (fod  Mho  loiyjs  to  win  thee :  tho  Sun,  the  lover  of  Dawn.

13  Chiefs  who  worship  :  the  wealthy  ill* ti tutors  of  sacrifices.


]  The  fire :  the  sacrificial  fire  lighted  for  tho  morning  rites.

2  She  minisheth :  by  marking  the  lapso  of  mau’s  allotted  time.  Cf.  I.  02. 10, 11 .


[BOOK  1.


172  TUE  HYMNS  OP

3  There  in  the  eastern  region  she,  Heaven’s  Daughter,  arrayed

in  garments  all  of  light,  appeareth.

Truly  she  followeth  the  path  of  Order,  nor  faileth,  knowing
well,  the  heavenly  quarters.

4  Near  is  she  seen,  as 't  were  the  Bright  One’s  bosom :  she  show-

eth  sweet  things  like  a  new  song-singer.

She  couicth  like  a  fly  awaking  sleepers,  of  all  returning  dames
most  true  and  constant.

5  There  in  the  east  half  of  the  watery  region  the  Mother  of

the  Cows  hath  shown  her  ensign.

Wider  and  wider  still  she  spreadeth  onward,  and  filleth  full
'  the  laps  of  both  her  Parents.

6  Sho,  verily,  exceeding  vast  to  look  on  debarreth  from  her  light

nor  kin  nor  stranger.

'  Proud  of  hor  spotless  form  she,  brightly  shining,  turneth  not
from  the  high  nor  from  the  humble.

7  She  seeketh  men  as  she  who  hath  no  brother,  mounting  her

car,  as 't  were  to  gather  riches.

Dawn,  like  a  loving  matron  for  her  husband,  smiling  and  well
attired,  unmasks  her  beauty.

8  The  Sister  quitteth,  for  the  elder  Sister,  her  place,  and  having

looked  on  her  departeth.

She  decks  her  beauty,  shining  forth  with  sunbeams,  like  wo-
meu  trooping  to  the  festal  meeting.

0  To  all  these  Sisters  who  cro  now  havo  vanished  a  later  one
each  day  in  course  succeedcth.

So,  like  the  past,  with  days  of  happy  fortune,  may  the  new
Dawns  shine  forth  on  us  with  riches.

10  Rouse  up,  0  Wealthy  One,  the  liberal  givers ;  let  niggard
traffickers  sleep  on  unwakened  :

Shine  richly,  Wealthy  One,  on  those  who  worship,  richly,  glad
Dawn  !  while  wasting,  on  the  singer.


4  Like  a  fly  :  adotatdu  na  ;  see  Gclducr,  Vcdische  Studicn,  II.  179.

5  The  vnltry  region :  the  misty  sky.  The  Cow s :  rays  of  light.

Both  her  Parents :  Heaven  aiul  Earth.

7  She  seeketh  men :  this  is  not  very  clear.  Perhaps  the  Sun,  her  lover  or
husband,  is  intended.

S  The  elder  Sister :  Day,  for  whom  Night  makes  room.

10  wasting :  as  in  verse  2.


HYMN  125.]


THE  RIQYEDA.


VS


11  This  young  Maid  from  the  east  hath  shone  upon  us;  she  har-

nesscth  her  team  of  bright  red  oxen.

She  will  beam  forth,  the  light  will  hasten  hither,  and  Agni
will  be  present  in  each  dwelling.

12  As  the  birds  fly  forth  from  their  resting-places,  #so  men  with

store  of  food  rise  at  thy  dawning.

Yea,  to  the  liberal  mortal  who  remaineth  at  home,  0  Goddess
Dawn,  much  good  thou  bringest.

13  Praised  through  my  prayer  be  ye  who  should  be  lauded.  Ye

have  increased  our  wealth,  ye  Dawns  who  love  us.

Goddesses,  may  we  win  by  your  good  favour  wealth  to  be  told
by  hundreds  and  by  thousands.

HYMN  CXXV.  Svanaya.

Comixo  at  early  morn  he  gives  his  treasure ;  the  prudent  one
receives  and  entertains  him.

Thereby  increasing  still  his  life  and  offspring,  he  comes  with
brave  sons  to  abundant  riches.

2  Rich  shall  he  be  in  gold  and  kine  and  horses.  Jndra  bestows

on  him  great  vital  power,

Who  stays  thee,  os  thou  comest,  with  his  treasure,  like  game
caught  in  the  net,  0  early  comer.

3  Longing,  I  came  this  morning  to  the  pious,  the  son  of  sacrifice,

with  car  wealth-laden.

Give  him  to  drink  juice  of  the  stalk  that  gladdens;  prosper
with  pleasant  hymns  the  Lord  of  Horoes.

4  Health-bringing  streams,  as  milch-cows,  flow  to  profit  him  who

hath  worshipped,  him  who  now  will  worship.

To  him  who  freely  gives  and  fills  on  all  sides  full  streams  of
fatness  flow  and  make  him  famous.

5  On  the  high  ridge  of  heaven  he  stands  exalted,  yea,  to  the

Gods  he  goes,  the  liberal  giver.

The  streams,  the  waters  flow  for  him  with  fatness :  to  him  this
guerdon  ever  yields  abundance.

12  With  store  of  food :  we  should  expect  ‘who  *ook  their  food,"  and  so
Sdyana  explains  pilubhSjah.  The  wealthy  may  be  meant  who  share  their
store  with  others  and  must  work  to  replenish  it.

This  hymn  is  a  dialogue  between  a  wandering  priest  *and  a  pious  and  liberal
prince.  For  the  explanatory  legend,  which  is  cited  by  Slyana,  sec  the  note
in  Wilson's  translation.

1  The  priest  (KakshlvAu)  speaks.  }Iit  Creature  :  the  wealth  that  will  follow
sacrifice.  The  prudent  one :  the  prince.

2  The  prince  (Svanaya)  speaks.

3  The  priest  speaks.  Him :  Indra.


174  TUB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  /.

6  For  those  who  give  rich  meeds  are  all  these  splendours,  for

those  who  give  rich  meeds  suns  shine  in  hoavou.

The  givers  of  rich  meeds  arc  made  immortal ;  the  givers  of
rich  fees  prolong  their  lifetime.

7  Lot  not  tlfe  liberal  sink  to  sin  and  sorrow,  never  decay  the

pious  chiefs  who  worship  !

Let  every  man  besides  be  their  protection,  and  let  affliction
full  upon  the  niggard.

HYMN  CXXVI.  Bhivayavya.

With  wisdom  I  present  these  lively  praises  of  Bhavya  dweller
on  the  bank  of  Siudhu ;

For  he,  unconquered  King,  desiring  glory,  hath  furnished  mo
a  thousand  sacrifices.

2  A  hundred  necklets  from  the  King,  beseeching,  a  hundred

gift-steeds  I  at  once  accepted  ;

Of  tho  lord’s  cows  a  thousand,  I  Kakshiv&n.  His  deathless
glory  hath  ho  spread  to  heaven.

3  Horses  of  dusky  colour  stood  beside  me,  ten  chariots,  Svanaya’a

gift,  with  marcs  to  draw  them.

Kine  numbering  sixty  thousand  followed  after.  Kakahivaii
gained  them  when  the  days  were  closing.

4  Forty  boy  horses  of  the  ten  cars’  master  before  a  thousand  load

the  long  procession.

Reeling  in  joy  KukshtvAn’s  sous  and  Pajra’s  have  groomed  the
coursers  decked  with  pearly  trappings.

5  An  earlier  gift  for  you  have  I  accepted,  eight  cows,  good  milk¬

ers,  and  three  harnessed  horses,

Pajras,  who  with  your  wains  with  your  great  kinsman,  like
troops  of  subjects,  have  been  fain  for  glory.

1  BMoya:  the  prince  S  van  ay  a  of  the  preceding  hytnu  is  here  again  eulo¬
gized  for  bis  munificence  undor  the  name  of  his  father  BhAva  or  BbAv&y&vya,
who  lived  ou  tho  bank  of  Siudhu  or  the  Indus.

3  With  wares  to  draw  them :  or,  with  damsels  or  fom&Ie  slaves.  Cf.  VL  27.  8.

4  Pajra :  tho  fouuder  of  tho  priestly  family  f  ora  which  KakshlvAu  was
descended.

The  sixth  stanza  of  the  hymn  is  ascribed  to  Svanaya,  and  tho  seventh  to  hia
wife  ltomssh  They  have  uo  apparent  connexion  with  what  precedes,  and  are
in  a  different  metro.  Thoy  seem  to  be  a  fragment  of  a  popular  song,  Seo  Ap-
poudix.


H7MN  127  .j


175


THE  RIG  VEDA.

HYMN  CXXTO.  Agiii.

Aoni  I  hold  as  herald,  the  munificent,  the  gracious,  Son  of
Strength,  who  kuowoth  all  that  live,  as  holy  Singer,  know¬
ing  all.

Lord  of  fair  rites,  a  God  with  form  eroded  turning  to  the  Gods,
Ho,  when  the  flame  hath  sprung  forth  from  the  holy  oil,  the
offered  fatness,  longeth  for  it  with  his  glow.

2  We,  sacrificing,  call  on  thee  best  worshipper,  the  eldest  of  Angi-

rases,  Singer,  with  hymns,  thee,  brilliant  One  !  with  singers’
hymns ;

Thee,  wandering  round  as ’t  were  the  sky,  who  art  the  invok¬
ing  Priest  of  men,

Whom,  Bull  with  hair  of  flame,  the  people  must  observe,  the
people  that  ho  speed  them  on.

3  He  with  his  shining  glory  blazing  far  and  wide,  he  verily  it  is

who  slayoth  demon  foes,  slayeth  tho  demons  like  an  axe  :

At  whose  close  touch  things  solid  shake,  and  what  is  stablo
yields  like  trees.

Subduing  all,  he  keeps  his  ground  and  flinches  not,  from  tho
skilled  archer  flinches  not.

4  To  him,  as  one  who  knows,  even  things  solid  yield :  through

fire-sticks  heated  hot  he  gives  his  gifts  to  aid.  Men  offer
Agni  gifts  for  aid.

.  He  deeply  piercing  many  a  thing  hews  it  like  wood  with  fer¬
vent  glow.

Even  hard  and  solid  food  he  crunches  with  his  might,  yoa,
hard  and  solid  food  with  might.


This  hymn,  and  tho  twelve  that  follow  it,  are  attributed  to  tho  RUlii  Paruch-
chhepa.  They  are  generally  very  obscure  and  frequently  unintelligible.  One
of  their  peculiarities  is  *  to  reiterate  a  leading  word  which  occurs  the  third  or
fourth  from  the  eud  of  the  first  line,  and  sometimes  also  of  the  third,  and  to
repoat  it  as  tho  last  word  of  the  line.  Thus  we  have  here  s&num  tuhuso  Jata-
vbdasau,  vipram  na  JAtavbdasa u  ;  this  is  little  else  than  a  kind  of  verbal
alliterative  jingle,  but  the  Scholiast  thiuks  it  necessary  to  assign  to  tho  repeated
word  a  distinct  signification.’ — Wilson.

2  Eldest  of  A  ngirases ;  see  I.  1.  6.

3  From  the  shilled  archer  flinches  not:  not  even  a  strong  man  armed  with
his  bow  can  turn  him  from  his  course.

4  Fire  itichs  :  tho  two  pieces  of  wood  which  aro  still  usod  to  produce  tho
sacrificial  fire.


176  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

5  Here  near  we  place  the  sacrificial  food  for  him  who  shines

forth  fairer  in  the  night  than  in  the  day,  with  life  then
stronger  than  by  day.

His  life  gives  sure  and  firm  defence  os  that  one  giveth  to  a
son.

The  during  fires  enjoy  things  given  and  things  not  given,  the
fluring  fires  enjoy  as  food.

6  He,  roaring  very  loudly  like  the  Maruts’  host,  in  fertile  cul¬

tivated  fields  adoraMe,  in  desert  spots  adorable,

Accepts  and  eats  our  offered  gifts,  ensign  of  sacrifice  by  desert ;
So  let  all,  joying,  love  his  path  when  ho  is  glad,  as  men  pur¬
sue  a  path  for  bliss.

7  Even  as  they  who  sang  forth  hymns,  addressed  to  heaven,  the

Bhrigus  with  their  prayer  and  praise  invited  him,  the
Bhpgus  rubbing,  offering  gifts.

For  radiant  Agni,  Lord  of  all  these  treasures,  is  exceeding
strong.

May  he,  the  wise,  accept  the  grateful  coverings,  the  wise  accept
the  coverings.

8  Thee  we  invoke,  the  Lord  of  all  our  settled  homes,  common

to  all,  the  household’s  guardian,  to  enjoy,  bearer  of  true
hymns,  to  enjoy.

Thee  we  invoke,  the  guest  of  men,  by  whose  mouth,  even  as
a  sire’s,

All  these  Immortals  come  to  gain  their  food  of  life,  oblations
come  to  Gods  as  food.

9  Thou,  Agni,  most  victorious  with  thy  conquering  strength,

most  Mighty  One,  art  born  for  service  of  the  Gods,  like
wealth  for  service  of  the  Gods.

Most  mighty  is  thine  ecstasy,  most  splendid  is  thy  mental
power.

Therefore  men  wait  upon  thee,  uudecaying  One,  like  vassals,
undecaving  One.

30  To  him  the  mighty,  conquering  with  victorious  strength,  to
Agni  walking  with  the  dawn,  who  sendeth  kine,  be  sung
your  laud,  to  Agni  sung ;

As  he  who  with  oblation  comes  calls  him  aloud  in  every  place.
Before  the  brands  of  fire  he  shouteth  singer-like,  the  herald,
kindler  of  the  brands.


fi  Things  given  and  thing s  not  given  :  both  sacrificial  offerings  and  the  gras*
brushwood  of  the  jungle.

7  The  Bhrigus:  descendants  of  Bhrigu,  the  earliest  cheriaher  of  Agni,  or
kindler  of  lire.  Rubbing  :  agitating  the  firc-sticks.  The  coverings  :  according
to  SAyana,  the  oblations  of  clarified  butter,  etc.


UYMN  128.]  THE  R1GYBDA.  177

1 1  Agui,  beheld  by  ua  in  nearest  neighbourhood,  accordant  with
the  Gods,  bring  us,  with  gracious  love,  great  riches  with  thy
gracious  love.

Give  us,  0  Mightiest,  what  is  great,  to  see  and  to  enjoy  the
earth.

As  one  of  awful  power,  stir  up  heroic  might  for  those  who
praise  thee,  Bounteous  Lord  !

HYMN  CXXVIII.  Agni.

By  Manu’s  law  was  born  this  Agni,  Priest  most  skilled,  bom
for  the  holy  work  of  those  who  yearn  therefor,  yea,  bom
for  his  own  holy  work.

All  ear  to  him  who  seeks  his  love,  and  wealth  to  him  who
strives  for  fame,

Priest  ne’er  deceived,  he  sits  in  I.'&’s  holy  place,  girt  round  in
Ila’s  holy  place.

2  We  call  that  perfecter  of  worship  by  the  path  of  sacrifice,  with

reverence  rich  in  offerings,  with  worship  rich  in  offerings.

Through  presentation  of  our  food  he  grows  not  old  in  this  his
form ;

The  God  whom  Matarisvan  brought  from  far  away,  for  Manu
brought  from  far  away.

3  In  ordered  course  forthwith  he  traverses  the  earth,  swift-swal¬

lowing,  bellowing  Steer,  bearing  the  genial  seed,  bearing
the  seed  and  bellowing.

Observaut  with  a  hundred  eyes  the  God  is  conqueror  in  the
wood :  .

Agni,  who  hath  his  scat  in  broad  plains  here  below,  and  in  the
high  lauds  far  away.

4  That  Agni,  wise  High-Priest,  in  every  house  takes  thought  for

sacrifice  and  holy  service,  yea,  takes  thought,  with  mental
power,  for  sacrifice.

Disposer,  he  with  mental  power  shows  all  thiijgs  unto  him  who
strives ;

Whence  he  was  born  a  guest  enriched  with  holy  oil,  born  as
Ordainer  and  as  Priest.


1  Jfd'i  holy  place  :  the  altar  ;  IdA  or  114  is  personified  Prayer  and  Wor¬
ship.

2  M4tar>$van  :  see  I.  81.  3.

12


178


TUP.  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  I.


5  When  through  his  power  and  in  his  strong  prevailing  flames
the  Maruts’  gladdening  boons  mingle  with  Agni’a  roar, boons
gladdening  for  the  active  One,

Then  he  accelerates  the  gift,  and,  by  the  greatness  of  his
wealth, ,

Shall  rescue  us  from  overwhelming  misery,  from  curse  and
overwhelming  woo.

C  Vast,  universal,  good,  he  was  made  messenger ;  the  speeder
with  his  right  hand  hath  not  loosed  his  hold,  through  love
of  fame  not  loosed  his  hold.

Ho  bears  oblations  to  the  Gods  for  whosoever  supplicates.

Agni  bestows  a  blessing  ou  each  pious  mau,  and  opens  wide
the  doors  for  him.

7  That  Agni  hath  been  set  most  kind  in  camp  of  men,  in  sacri¬

fice  like  a  Lord  victorious,  like  a  dear  Lord  in  sacred
rites.

His  arc  the  oblations  of  mankind  when  offered  up  at  Ijii’s
placo.

He  shall  preserve  us  from  Varnna’s  chastisement,  yea,  from
the  great  God’s  chastisement.

8  Agni  the  Priest  they  supplicate  to  grant  them  wealth  :  him,

dear,  most  thoughtful,  have  they  made  their  messenger,
him,  offering-bearer  have  they  made,

Beloved  of  all,  who  knoweth  all,  the  Priest,  the  Holy  One,
the  Sage —

Him,  Friend,  for  help,  the  Gods  when  they  are  fain  for  wealth,
him,  Friend,  with  hymns,  when  fain  for  wealth.

HYMN  CXXIX.  .  imirn.

The  car  which,  Indra,  thou,  for  service  of  the  Go  Is,  though  it
bo  far  away,  0  swift  One,  bringest  near,  which,  Blameless
One,  thou  bringost  near,

Placo  swiftly  nigh  us  for  our  help  :  be  it  thy  will  that  it  be
strong.

Blameless  and  active,  hear  this  speech  of  ordcrers,  this  speech
of  us  like  ordcrers.

2  Hear,  Indra,  thou  whom  men  in  evory  fight  must  call  to  show
thy  strength,  for  cry  of  battle  with  the  men,  with  men  of
war  for  victory.

He  who  with  heroes  wins  the  light,  who  with  the  singers  gains
the  prize,

Him  the  rich  seek  to  gain  even  as  a  swift  strong  steed,  even
as  a  courser  fleet  and  strong.


6  The  MuruW  gluiUltning  Loom :  storm  and  ruin.


HYMN  129.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


179

3  Thou,  Mighty,  pourest  forth  the  hide  that  holds  the  rain  ;  thou

keepest  far  away,  Hero,  the  wicked  man,  thou  shuttest  out
the  wicked  man.

Indra,  to  thee  I  sing,  to  Dyaus,  to  Rudra  glorious  in  himself,
To  Mitra,  Varuna  I  sing  a  far-famed  hymn,  tp  the  kind  God
a  far-famed  hymn.

4  We  wish  our  Indra  here  that  he  may  further  you,  the  Friend,

beloved  of  all,  the  very  strong  ally,  in  wars  the  very  strong
ally.

In  all  encounters  strengthen  thou  our  prayer  to  be  a  help
to  us.

No  enemy — whom  thou  smitest  down— subdue th  thee,  no
enemy,  whom  thou  smitest  down.

5  Bow  down  the  overweening  pride  of  every  foe  with  succour

like  to  kindling-wood  in  fiercest  flame,  with  mighty  succour,
Mighty  One.

Guide  us,  thou  Hero,  as  of  old,  so  art  thou  counted  blameless
still.

Thou  drivest,  as  a  Priest,  all  sins  of  man  away,  as  Priest,  in
person,  seeking  us.

6  This  may  I  utter  to  the  present  Soma-drop,  which,  meet  to  be

invoked,  with  power,  awakes  the  prayer,  awakes  the  demon¬
slaying  prayer.

May  he  himself  with  darts  of  death  drive  far  from  us  the
scorner’s  hate.

Far  let  him  flee  away  who  speakoth  wickedness,  and  vanish
like  a  mote  of  dust.

7  By  thoughtful  invocation  this  may  we  obtain,  obtain  great

wealth,  0  Wealthy  One,  with  hero  sons,  wealth  that  is
sweet  with  hero  sons.

Him  who  is  wroth  we  pacify  with  sacred  food  and  eulogies,
Indra  the  Holy  with  our  calls  inspired  and  true,  the  Holy  One
with  calls  inspired.

8  On,  for  your  good  and  ours,  come  India  with  the  aid  of  his

own  lordliness,  to  drive  the  wicked  hence,  to  rend  the  evil-
hearted  ones !

The  weapon  which  devouring  fiends  cast  at  us  shall  destroy
themselves.

Struck  down,  it  shall  not  reach  the  mark ;  hurled  forth,  the
fire-brand  shall  not  strike.

9  With  riches  in  abundance,  Indra,  come  to  us,  come  by  an

unobstructed  path,  como  by  a  path  from  demons  free.


180  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

Be  with  us  when  we  stray  afar,  be  with  us  when  our  home  i3
nigh.

Protect  us  with  thy  help  both  near  and  far  away  :  protect  us
ever  with  thy  help.

10  Thou  art  q,ur  own,  0  Indra,  with  victorious  wealth  :  let  might

accompany  thee,  the  Strong,  to  give  us  aid,  like  Mitra,  to
give  mighty  aid.

0  strongest  saviour,  helper  thou,  Immortal !  of  each  warrior’s
car.

Hurt  thou  another  and  not  us,  0  Thunder-armed,  one  who
would  hurt,  0  Thunderarmed  !

11  Save  us  from  injury,  thou  who  art  well  extolled:  ever  the

wardcr-off  art  thou  of  wicked  ones,  even  as  a  God,  of
wicked  ones ;

Thou  slayer  of  the  evil  fiend,  saviour  of  singer  such  as  I.
Good  Lord,  the  Father  made  thee  slayer  of  the  fiends,  made
thee,  good  Loi-d,  to  slay  the  fiends.

HYMN  CXXX.  Indra.

Come  to  us,  Indra,  from  afar,  conducting  us  even  as  a  lord  of
heroes  to  the  gatherings,  home,  like  a  King,  his  heroes’

•  loid.

We  come  with  gifts  of  pleasant  food,  with  juice  poured  forth,
invoking  thee,

As  sons  iuvite  a  sire,  that  thou  mayat  get  thee  strength,  thee,
bounteouaest,  to  got  thee  strength.

2  0  Indra,  drink  the  Soma  juice  pressed  out  with  stones,  poured

from  the  reservoir,  as  an  ox  drinks  the  spring,  a  very
thirsty  bull  the  spring.

For  the  sweet  draught  that  gladdens  thee,  for  mightiest  fresh¬
ening  of  thy  stength,

Let  thy  Bay  Horses  bring  thee  hither  as  the  Sun,  as  every  day
they  bring  the  Sun.

3  He  found  the  treasure  brought  from  heaven  that  lay  concealed,

close-hidden,  like  the  nestling  of  a  bird,  iu  rock,  enclosed  in
never-ending  rock.

Best  Angiras,  bolt-armed,  he  strove  to  win,  as  ’t  were,  the
8 tall  of  kine ;

So  Indra  hath  disclosed  the  food  concealed,  disclosed  the  doors,
the  food  that  lay  concealed.


11  The  Pother :  Jaoitft,  the  Latin  gcuitor  ;  the  Supreme  Gud,  the  Maker
and  Father  of  the  Universe.


THE  RJGVBDA.


1S1


&72iN  130.]

•4  Grasping  his  thunderbolt  with  both  hands,  Indra  made  its
edge  tnost  keen,  for  hurling,  like  a  carving-knife  for  Ahi’s
slaughter  made  it  keen.

Endued  with  majesty  aud  strength,  0  Indra,  and  with  lordly
might,

Thou  crashest  down  the  trees,  as  when  a  craftsman  fells,  craab-
est  them  down  as  with  an  axe.

5  Thou,  Indra,  without  effort  hast  let  loose  the  floods  to  run
their  free  course  down,  like  chariots,  to  the  sea,  like  chariots
showing  forth  their  strength.

.  They,  reaching  hence  away,  have  joined  their  strength  for  one
eternal  end,

Even  as  the  cows  who  poured  forth  every  thing  for  man,  yea,
poured  forth  all  things  for  mankind.

•  6  Eager  for  riches,  meu  have  formed  for  thee  this  song,  like  as
a  skilful  craftsman  fashioneth  a  car,  so  have  they  wrought
thee  to  their  bliss ;

Adorning  thee,  0  Singer,  like  a  generous  steed  for  deeds  of
might,

Yea,  like  a  steed  to  show  his  strength  and  win  the  prize,  that
he  may  bear  each  prize  away.

7  For  Puru  thou  hast  shattered,  Indra  1  ninety  forts,  for  Divo-

d&sa  thy  boon  servant  with  thy  bolt,  0  Dancer,  for  thy
worshipper.

For  Atithigva  he,  the  Strong,  brought  Sambara  from  the
mountain  down,

Distributing  the  mighty  treasures  with  his  strength,  parting
all  treasures  with  his  strength.

8  Indra  in  battles  holp  his  Aryan  worshipper,  he  who  hath  hun¬

dred  helps  at  hund  in  every  fray,  in  frays  that  win  the
light  of  heaven.

Plaguing  tho  lawless  he  gave  up  to  Manu’s  seed  the  dusky
skin;

Blazing,  't  were,  ho  burns  each  covetous  man  away,  he  burns
the  tyrannous  away.

3  He  found  the  treasure :  the  Soma.  The  food  concealed :  according  to  S&-
yana,  in  the  first  place  the  rain  enclosed  in  the  clouds,  and  in  tho  second  place
the  seeda  shut  up  iu  the  earth  which  await  tho  rain  to  make  them  germinate.

5  For  man  :  or  for  Manu,  tho  great  progenitor  of  the  human  race.

7  PHru :  the  name  of  a  prince  protected  by  Indra.  Diiod&ta :  called  also
Atithiyva.  See  L  92,  191.

Sambara :  a  demon  of  the  air  ;  or  perliaps  in  this  place  some  human  adver¬
sary  of  Atithigva.

Dancer:  thou  who  dancoat  in  battle  ;  dancer  of  the  war-dance.


1$2  T1IB  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  /.

9  Waxed  strong  in  might  at  dawn  he  tore  the  Sun’s  wheel  off.

.  Bright  red,  he  steals  away  their  speech,  the  Lord  of  Power,
their  speech  he  steals  away  from  them,

As  thou  with  eager  speed,  6  Sage,  hast  come  from  far  away
to  help,

As  winning  for  thine  own  all  happiness  of  men,  winning  all
happiness  each  day.

10  Lauded  with  our  new  hymns,  O  vigorous  in  deed,  save  us  with
strengthening  help,  thou  Slmtterer  of  the  Forts  !

Thou,  lndra,  praised  by  Divodasa’s  clansmen,  as  heaven  grows
great  with  days,  slmlt  wax  in  glory.

HYMN  CXXXI.  Indra.

To  lndra  Dyaus  the  A  sura  hath  bowed  him  down,  to  lndra
mighty  Garth  with  wide-extending  tracts,  to  win  the  light,
with  wide-spread  tracts.

All  Gods  of  one  acoord  have  set  lndra  in  front  preeminent.

For  lndra  all  libations  must  be  set  apart,  all  man’s  libations
set  apart.

2  In  all  libations  men  with  hero  spirit  urge  the  Universal  One,

each  seeking  several  light,  each  fain  to  win  the  light  apart.

Thee,  furthering  like  a  ship,  will  we  set  to  the  chariot-polo  of
strength,

As  men  who  win  with  sacrifices  Indra’s  thought,  men  who  win
lndra  with  their  lauds.

3  Couples  desirous  of  thine  aid  are  storming  thee,  pouring  their

presents  forth  to  win  a  stall  of  kine,  pouring  gifts,  lndra,
seeking  thee.

When  two  men  seeking  spoil  or  heaven  thou  bringest  face  to
face  in  war,

Thou  showest,  lndra,  then  the  bolt  thy  constant  friend,  the
Bull  that  ever  waits  on  thee.


9  He  tore  the  Suit's  icfteel  ojf:  according  to  SAyapa,  Bralimd  had  promised
the  Asuras  or  fiends  that  Indra’s  thunderbolt  should  never  destroy  them,
lndra,  accordingly,  cast  at  them  the  wheel  of  the  Suu'a  chariot  and  slew  them
therewith.

He  tleaii  their  speech :  Sdyana  thinks  that  the  meaning  is  that  lndra  depriv¬
ed  bis  enemies  of  life.

0  Sai je  :  O  lndra.

10  Bn  livoddta'i  clansmen :  by  me,  Paruchchhepa,  a  member  of  the  house
or  family  of  Divodta.

3  Couplet :  sacrificers  and  their  wives  who  are  associated  with  them  in  offer¬
ing  oblations.

The  Bull :  tho  fiercely  rushing  thunderbolt.


I1YMX  132.]


THE  ItlGVEDA.


183


4  This  thine  heroic  power  men  of  old  time  have  known,  where¬

with  thou  breakest  dowu,  Indra,  autumnal  forts,  break  cat
them  dowu  with  conquering  might.

Thou  hast  chastised,  0  Indra,  Lord  of  Strength,  the  man  who
worships  not,

And  made  thine  own  this  great  earth  and  these  water-floods,
with  joyous  heart  these  water-floods.

5  And  they  have  bruited  far  this  hero-might  when  thou,  O  Strong

One,  in  thy  joy  holpest  thy  auppliuuts,  who  sought  to  win
thee  for  their  Fricud.

Their  battle-cry  thou  madcst  sound  victorious  in  the  shocks  of
war.

One  sfcre  im  after  another  have  they  gained  from  thee,  eager
for  glory  have  they  gaiued.

6  Also  this  morn  may  he  be  well-inclined  to  ns,  mark  at  our  call

our  offerings  and  our  song  of  praise,  our  call  that  we  may
win  the  light.

As  thou,  0  Indra  Thunder-armed,  wilt,  as  the  Strong  One,  slay
the  foe,

Listen  thou  to  the  prayer  of  me  a  later  sage,  hear  thou  a
later  sage's  prayer.

7  0  Indra,  waxen  strong  and  well-inclined  to  us,  thou  very  mighty,

slay  the  man  that  is  our  foe,  slay  the  man,  Hero !  with  thy
bolt.

Slay  thou  the  man  who  injures  us :  hear  thou,  as  readiest  to
hear.

Far  be  malignity,  like  mischief  ou  the  march,  afar  be  all
malignity:

HYMN  CXXXII.  Indra.

Hri/ted,  Tndra  Maghavan,  by  thee  in  war  of  old,  may  we  sub¬
due  in  fight  the  men  who  strive  with  us,  conquer  the  men
who  war  with  us.


4  A  utxmnal  forts :  strongholds  OU  high  ground,  occupied  as  places  of  refuge
during  the  heavy  rains,  or  ‘  the  brilliant  bat  tied  len ted  cloud-cant  lea,  which
arc  wi  often  visible  in  the  Indian  sky  at  this  period  of  the  year.' — Muir,  0.  S.
Text*,  IL  379.

Men  of  old  lime:  I  have  followed  Silvan  a  here.  But  pUrdraA  probably
means  the  Purus,  one  of  the  five  great  Aryan  tribes  or  clans.

1  This  day  :  the  hymn  is  add rcascl  fo  Indra  just  before  an  expected  battle.

May  ux  diride  the  spoil :  divide  it  in  anticipation  ;  secure  it  by  our  sacrifice.


184  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOH  /.

This  day  that  now  is  close  at  hand  bless  him  who  pours  the
Soma  juice.

In  this-  our  sacrifice  may  we  divide  the  spoil,  showing  our
strength,  the  spoil  of  war.

2  In  war  which  wins  the  light,  at  the  f  roe-giver's  call,  at  due

oblatiofi  of  the  early-rising  one,  oblation  of  the  active  one,
Indra  slew,  even  as  we  know — whom  each  bowed  head  must
reverence.

May  all  thy  bounteous  gifts  be  gathered  up  for  us,  yea,  the
good  gifts  of  thee  the  Good.

3  This  food  glows  for  thee  as  of  old  at  sacrifice,  wherein  they

made  thee  chooser  of  the  place,  for  thou  choosest  the  place
of  sacrifice.

Speak  thou  and  make  it  known  to  us :  they  see  within  with
beams  of  light.

Indra,  indeed,  is  found  a  seeker  after  spoil,  spoil-seeker  for  his
own  allies.

4  So  now  must  thy  great  deed  be  lauded  as  of  old,  when  for  the

Angirases  thou  openedst  the  stall,  openedst,  giving  aid,  tho
stall.

In  the  same  manner  for  us  here  fight  thou  and  be  victorious.
To  him  who  pours  tho  juice  give  up  the  lawless  man,  the  law¬
less  who  is  wroth  with  us.

5  When  with  wise  plan  the  Horo  leads  the  people  forth,  they

conquer  in  the  ordered  battle,  seeking  farno,  press,  eager,  on¬
ward  seeking  fame.

To  him  in  time  of  need  they  sing  for  life  with  offspring  and
with  strength.

Their  hymns  with  Indra  find  a  welcome  place  of  rest :  the
hymns  go  forward  to  the  Gods.

6  Indra  and  Parvata,  our  champions  in  the  fight,  drive  ye  away

each  man  who  fain  would  war  with  us,  drive  him  far  from
us  with  the  bolt.

2  The  early-riling  and  actire  one  is  the  offerer  of  the  sacrifice.

3  They  made  thee  chooser  of  the  place :  the  meaning  appears  to  be  that  In-
dm  is  present  at  such  sacrifices  only  as  he  chooses  to  favour.

Speak  thou  and  make  it  knoten  :  Wilson,  following  Sityapa,  paraphrases :  Mo
thou  declare  that  (rite),  that  men  may  thence  behold  tho  intonueiliHi*  {firma¬
ment  bright)  with  the  rays  (of  the  sun).’  I  find  tho  passage  unintelligible.

4  The  man  reh»  pours  the  juice  is  the  worshipper  of  Indra,  and  the  laic  leu
man  is  the  non-Aryan  inhabitant  of  the  country,  the  natural  enemy  of  the
new  settlers.

6  Parvata :  the  presiding  Genius  of  mountains  and  clouds,  frequently
associated  with  Indra,  or,  according  to  S&yana,  another  form  of  that  God.
Cf.  1.  122.  3.


HYMiV  138.]  THE  RIOTED  A.  185

Welcome  to  him  concealed  afar  shall  be  the  lair  that  he  hath
found.

So  may  the  Render  rend  our  foes  on  every  side,  rend  them,  0
Hero,  everywhere.

HYMN  CXXXIII.  .  indra.

With  sacrifice  I  purge  both  earth  and  heaven :  I  burn  up
great  she-fiends  who  serve  not  Indra,

Where  throttled  by  thy  hand  the  foes  were  slaughtered,  and
in  the  pit  of  death  lay  pierced  and  mangled.

2  0  thou  who  castest  forth  the  stone,  crushing  the  sorceresses’

head  8,

Break  them  with  thy  wide-spreading  foot,  with  thy  wide-spre'ad-
ing  mighty  foot.

3  Do  thou,  0  Maghavan,  beat  off  these  sorceresses’  daring

strength.

Cast  them  within  the  narrow  pit,  within  the  deep  and  narrow
pit.

4  Of  whom  thou  hast  ere  now  destroyed  thrice-fifty  with  thy

fierce  attacks.

That  deed  they  count  a  glorious  deed,  though  small  to  thee,
a  glorious  deed.

D  0  Indra,  crush  and  bray  to  bits  the  fearful  fiery-weaponed
fiend :

Strike  every  demon  to  the  ground.

6  Tear  down  the  mighty  ones.  0  Indra,  hear  thou  us.  For

heaven  hath  glowed  like  earth  in  fear,  0  Thunder-armed,
as  dreading  fierce  heat,  Thunder-armed  !

Most  Mighty  mid  the  Mighty  Ones  thou  speedest  with  strong
bolts  of  death,

Not  slaying  men,  unconquered  Hero !  with  the  brave,  0  Hero,
with  the  thricc-seven  brave.

7  Tho  pourer  of  libations  gains  the  home  of  wealth,  pouring  his

gift  conciliates  hostilities,  yea,  the  hostilities  of  Gods.
Pouring,  he  strives,  unchecked  and  strong,  to  win  him  riches
thousandfold.

Indra  gives  lasting  weal  h  to  him  who  pours  forth  gifts,  yea,
wealth  ho  gives  that  long  shall  last


This  hymn  ia  a  prayer  for  the  destruction  of  witch**,  goblins,  and  evil  spi¬
rits  of  various  sorts.

2  Who  caxleft  forth  the  Hone :  liurlest  the  thunderbolt.

0  A 'ot  slaying  men :  that  is  destroying  evil  spirits  only.  The  thrice-seven
brave:  the  Maruta,  Indra’s  allies.  These  were  forty-nine  in  number,  and
thrice-seven  is  used  indefinitely  for  a  huger  multiple  of  seven.


[BOOK  I.


186  THE  UYMSS  OP

HYMN  CXXX1V.  VAyu.

Vayu,  let  fleet-foot  coursers  bring  thee  speedily  to  this  our
feast,  to  drink  flrst  of  the  juice  wo  pour,  to  the  first
draught  of  Soma  juice.

May  our4  glad  hymu,  discerning  well,  uplifted,  gratify  thy
tuind.

Como  with  thy  team-drawn  car,  0  Vayu,  to  the  gift,  come  to
the  sacriticer’s  gift.

2  May  the  joy-giving  drops,  0  Vayu,  gladden  thee,  effectual,

well  prepared,  directed  to  the  heavens,  strong,  blent  with
milk  and  seeking  heaven  ;

That  aids,  effectual  to  fulfil,  may  wait  upon  our  skilful  power.
Associate  teams  come  hitherward  to  grant  our  prayers:  they
shall  address  the  hymns  we  sing.

3  Two  red  steeds  Vayu  yokes,  Viyu  two  purple  steeds,  swift¬

footed,  to  the  chariot,  to  the  pole  to  draw,  most  able,  at  the
pole,  to  draw.

Wake  up  intelligence,  as  when  a  lover  wakes  his  sleeping  love.
Illumine  heaven  and  earth,  make  thou  the  Dawus  to  shine,
for  glory  make  the  Dawns  to  shine.

4  For  thee  the  radiant  Dawns  in  the  far-distunt  sky  broaden

their  lovely  garments  forth  in  wondrous  beams,  bright-
coloured  in  their  new-boni  beams.

For  tlicc  fhe  nectar-yielding  Cow  pours  all  rich  treasures  forth
as  milk.

The  Marut  host  hast  thou  engendered  from  the  womb,  the
Maruts  from  the  womb  of  heaven.

5  For  thco  the  pure  bright  quickly-flowing  Soma-drops,  strong  in

their  heightening  powor,  hasten  to  mix  themselves,  haste
to  the  water  to  be  mixed.

To  thee  the  weary  coward  prays  for  luck  that  he  may  speed
away.

Thou  by  thy  law  protcctcst  us  from  every  world,  yea,  from
the  world  of  highest  Gods.

6  Thou,  V^yu,  who  hast  none  before  thee,  first  of  all  hast  right

to  drink  these  offerings  of  Soma  juice,  hast  right  to  drink
the  juice  out-poured,


1  I'djra :  the  God  of  wind.

4  XttUtr-gitldiag  com :  Sabarduglnl;  yielding  amrit,  ambrosia,  nectar,  or
food  for  the  GwU.


JIYMN  135.]  THE  JIIG  VEDA.  187

Yea,  poured  by  all  invoking  tribes  who  free  themselves  from
taint  of  sin.

For  thee  all  cows  are  milled  to  yield  the  Soma-milk,  to  yield
the  butter  and  the  milk.

HYMN  CXXXV.  Vdyu,  Indm-Vdyu.

Strewn*  is  the  sacred  grass ;  come,  Vayu,  to  our  feast,  with
team  of  thousands,  come,  Loi-d  of  the  harnessed  team,  with
hundreds,  Lord  of  harnessed  steeds !

The  drops  divine  arc  lifted  up  for  thee,  the  God,  to  drink  them
first.

The  juices  rich  in  sweets  have  raised  them  for  thy  joy,  have
raised  themselves  to  give  thee  strength.

2  Purified  by  the  stones  the  Soma  flows  for  thee,  clothed  with

its  lovely  splendours,  to  the  reservoir,  flows  clad  iu  its  re¬
fulgent  light.

For  thee  the  Soma  is  poured  forth,  thy  portioned  share  mid
Gods  and  men.

Drive  thou  thy  horses,  Vayu,  come  to  us  with  love,  come  well-
inclined  and  loving  us.

3  Come  thou  with  hundreds,  come  with  thousands  in  thy  team

to  this  our  solcmu  rite,  to  tiistc  the  sacred  food,  Vayu,  to
taste  the  offerings.

This  is  thy  seasonable  share,  that  comes  corradiant  with  the
Sun.

Brought  by  attendant  priests  pure  juice  is  offered  up,  Vayu,
pure  juice  is  offered  up.

4  The  chariot  with  its  team  of  horses  bring  you  both,  to  guard

us  and  to  taste  the  well-appointed  food,  V&yu,  to  taste  the
offerings !

Drink  of  the  pleasant-flavoured  juice :  the  first  draught  is
assigned  to  you.

0  Vayu,  with  your  splendid  bounty  come  ye  both,  Indra,  with
bounty  come  ye  both.

D  May  our  songs  bring  yon  hither  to  our  solemn  rites :  these
drops  of  mighty  vigour  have  they  beautified,  like  a  swift
steed  of  mighty  strength.

Drink  of  them  well-inclined  to  us,  come  hitherward  to  be  our
help.

Drink,  Indra-V&yu,  of  these  juices  pressed  with  stones,
Strength-givers  !  till  they  gladden  you.


0  The  Soma- milk  :  tho  libation  consisting  of  Soma  juice  mixed  with  milk.


THE  HYMNS  OF


188


[BOOK  /.


6  These  Soma  juices  pressed  for  you  in  waters  here,  borne  by

attendant  priests,  are  offered  up  to  you :  bright,  V&yu,  are
they  offered  up.

Swift  through  the  strainer  have  they  flowed,  and  hero  are  shed
for  both  of  you,

Soma-drops,  fain  for  you,  over  the  wether’s  fleece,  Somas  over
the  wether’s  fleece.

7  0  Vilyu,  pass  thou  over  all  the  slumberers,  and  where  the  press-

stone  rings  enter  ye  both  that  house,  yea,  Indra,  go  ye  both
within.

The  joyous  Maiden  is  beheld,  the  butter  flows.  With  richly-  .
laden  team  come  to  our  solemn  rite,  yea,  Indra,  come  ye  to
the  rite.

8  Ride  hither  to  the  offering  of  the  pleasant  juice,  the  holy  Fig-

tree  which  victorious  priest  surround :  victorious  be  they
still  for  us.

At  once  the  cows  yield  milk,  the  barley-meal  is  dressed.  For
thee,

0  Vftyu,  never  shall  the  cows  grow  thin,  never  for  thee  shall
they  be  dry.

9  These  Bulls  of  thine,  0  V.lyu  with  the  arm  of  strength,  who

swiftly  fly  within  the  current  of  thy  stream,  the  Bulls  in¬
creasing  in  their  might,

Horseless,  yet  even  through  the  waste  swift-moving,  whom  no
shout  can  stay,

Hard  to  be  checked  are  they,  like  sunbeams,  in  their  course,
hard  to  be  checked  by  both  the  hands.

HYMN  CXXXVI.  Mitra- Vanina.

Bring  adoration  ample  and  most  excellent,  hymn,  offerings,  to
the  watchful  Twain,  the  bountiful,  your  sweetest  to  the
bounteous  Ones.

Sovrans  adored  with  streams  of  oil  and  praised  at  every  sacri¬
fice,

Their  high  imperial  might  may  nowhere  be  assailed,  ne’er  may
their  Godhead  bo  assailed.


6  The  Kttheris  Jleeee :  the  filter  or  strainer  made  of  wool,  used  in  purifying
the  Soma  juice.  Sec  I.  2.  1.

7  Where  the  pvess-ttone  rings :  where  men  arc  pressing  out  the  Soma  juice.
The  joyous  Maiden  :  probably  Ushns  or  Dawn.

8  The  holy  Fig-free :  the  vessel  for  bolding  the  Soma  juice,  made  of  the
wood  of  the  Aavattlia  or  Ficus  Keligiosa  ;  or,  as  Sdyana  explains  it  here,  tko
Soma  itself.

The  barley-meal :  forming  a  part  of  the  offering.

9  Bulls  :  blasts  of  wind.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


189


HYMN  136.]

2  For  the  broad  Sun  was  seen  a  path  more  widely  laid,  the  path

of  holy  law  hath  been  maintained  with  rays,  the  eye  with
Bhaga’s  rays  of  light.

Firm-set  in  heaven  is  Mitra’s  home,  and  Aryaman’s  and
Varuna’s.

*

Thence  they  give  forth  great  vital  strength  which  merits  praise,
high  power  of  Kfe  that  men  shall  praise.

3  With  Aditi  the  luminous,  the  celestial,  upholder  of  the  people,

come  ye  day  by  day,  ye  who  watch  ^sleepless,  day  by  day.
Resplendent  might  have  ye  obtained,  Adityas,  Lords  of  liberal
gifts.

Movers  of  men,  mid  both,  are  Mitra,  Varuna,  mover  of  men  is  .
Aryaman.

4  This  Soma  be  most  sweet  to  Mitra,  Varuna  :  he,  in  the  drink¬

ing-feasts,  shall  have  a  share  thereof,  sharing,  a  God,  among
the  Gods.

May  all  the  Gods  of  one  accord  accept  it  joyfully  to-day.
Therefore  do  ye,  0  Kings,  accomplish  what  we  ask,  ye  Righte¬
ous  Ones,  whate’er  we  usk.

5  Whoso  with  worship  serves  Mitra  and  Varuna,  him  guard  ye

carefully,  uninjured,  from  distress,  guard  from  distress  the
liberal  man.

Aryaman  guards  him  well  who  acts  uprightly  follow  ing  his  law,
Who  beautifies  their  service  with  his  lauds,  who  mukes  it  beauti¬
ful  with  songs  of  praise.

6  Worship  will  I  profess  to  lofty  Dyaus,  to  Heaven  and  Earth,

to  Mitra  and  to  bounteous  Varuna,  the  Bounteous,  the  Com¬
passionate.

Praise  Indra,  praise  thou  Agni,  praise  Bhaga  and  heavenly
Aryaman.

Long  may  we  live  and  have  attendant  progony,  have  progeny
with  Soma’s  help.


2  Bhaga'*  rays  of  light :  ‘the  ancient  god,  Bhaga,'  says  Mr.  Wallis.  ‘lias
become  in  the  liigveda  little  more  thau-a  source  l'rom  which  descriptions  of
the  functions  of  other  gods  are  obtained,  or  a  standard  of  comparison  by
which  thoir  greatness  is  enhanced.  His  name  has  survived  in  the  Slavonic
languages  as  a  general  name  for  god,  a  sense  winch  it  also  has  in  the  Avesta.
To  judgo  from  the  Rigveda,  Bhaga  would  seem  to  be  a  survival  from  an  ancient
Sun-worship.'  The  Cotmolxjy  of  the  Rigveda,  p.  11.  It  is  difficult  to  explain
every  expression  in  the  verse  ;  but  the  general  meaning  api-ears  to  be  that
the  heaven  has  been  lighted  by  the  Sun,  and  that  there  is  the  home  of  toe
Gods  who  thence  show  forth  the  powers  which  men  should  glorify.

8  Aditi  and  Adilya* :  see  I.  14.  3.

4  He :  Soma  himself,  meaning  perhaps  the  Moon.


100  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  I.

7  With  the  Gods’  help,  with  Indra  still  beside  us,  may  we  be
held  self-splendid  with  the  Mniuts.

May  Agui,  Mitra,  Varuna  give  us  shelter:  this  may  we  gain,
wc  and  our  wealthy  princes.

HYMN  CXXXVII.  Mitra- Varuna.

W iTn  stones  have  we  pressed  out :  0  come ;  these  gladdening
drops  are  blent  witli  milk,  these  Soma-drops  which  gladden
you.

Come  to  \i8,  Kings  who  reach  to  heaven,  approach  us,  coming
hitherward.

These  milky  drops  are  yours,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  bright  Soma
juices  blent  with  milk.

2  Here  are  the  dropping ;  come  ye  nigh ;  the  Soma-droppings

blent  with  curd,  juices  expressed  and  blent  with  curd.

Now  for  the  wakening  of  your  Dawn  together  with  the  Sun-
God’s  rays,

Juice  waits  for  Mitra  and  for  Varuna  to  drink,  fair  juice  for
drink,  for  sacrifice.

3  As  ’twere  a  radiant-coloured  cow,  they  milk  with  stones  the  stalk

for  you,  with  stones  they  milk  the  Soma-plant.

May  ye  come  nigh  us,  may  ye  turn  hither  to  drink  the  Soma
juice.

The  meu  pressed  out  this  juice,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  pressed
out  this  Soma  for  your  drink.

HYMN  CXXXVIII.  Pflfhan.

Strong  Pu  slum's  majesty  is  lauded  evermore,  the  glory  of  his
lordly  might  is  never  faint,  his  song  of  praise  is  never  faint.

Seeking  felicity  l  laud  him  nigh  to  help,  the  source  of  bliss,

Who,  Vigorous  One,  hath  drawn  to  him  the  hearts  of  all,  drawn
them,  the  Vigorous  One,  the  God.

2  Thee,  then,  0  Pushan,  like  a  swift  one  on  his  way,  I  urge  with
lauds  that  thou  mayst  make  the  focmen  flee,  drive,  camel¬
like,  our  foes  afar.

As  I,  a  man,  call  thee,  a  God,  giver  of  bliss,  to  be  my  Friend,

So  make  our  loudly-chanted  praises  glorious,  in  battles  make
them  glorious.


1  POshan :  we  r.  14.  3,  and  42.  1.

2  Camd-likc  :  Silyana  explains  :  *  as  a  camel  carries  away  his  load,  so  carry
away  our  enemies  from  the  battle.'  The  meaning  is  obscure.


UYMX  139.]


THE  TUG  VEDA.


191


3  Thou,  Pflshan,  in  whose  friendship  they  who  sine;  forth  praiso

enjoy  advantage,  even  in  wisdom,  through  thy  grace,  in
wisdom  even  they  are  advanced.

So,  after  this  most  recent  course,  we  come  to  thee  with  prayers
for  wealth.

Not  stirred  to  anger,  0  Wide-Ruler,  como  to  us, -come  thou  to
us  in  every  fight.

4  Not  stirred  to  anger,  come,  Froe-giver,  nigh  to  us,  to  take  this

gift  of  ours,  thou  who  hast  goats  for  steeds,  Goat-borne  !
their  gift  who  long  for  fame.

So,  Wonder-Worker!  may  wo  turn  thee  hither  with  effectual
lauds.

I  slight  thee  not,  0  Puelmn,  thou  Resplendent  One :  thy  friend¬
ship  may  not  be  despised.

HYMN  CXXXIX.  Visvedcvas.

Heard  be  our  prayer !  In  thought  I  honour  Agni  first :  now
straightway  wo  elect  this  heavenly  company,  ludraand  Vayu
we  elect.

For  when  our  latest  thought  is  raised  and  on  Vivasvin  centred
well,

Then  may  our  holy  songs  go  forward  on  their  way,  our  songs
as ’t  were  unto  the  Gods.

2  As  there  ye,  Mifcra,  Vanina,  above  the  true  have  taken  to
yourselves  the  untrue  with  your  mind,  with  wisdom’s  mental
energy,

So  in  the  scats  wherein  ye  dwell  have  wc  beheld  the  Golden
One,

Not  with  our  thoughts  or  spirit,  but  with  these  our  eyes,  yea,
with  the  eyes  that  Soma  gives.


4  Thon  vho  hast  goats  for  steeds :  Pushan’a  chariot,  like  ThOrr’s  in  the
Eddo,  in  said  to  be  drawn  by  a  team  of  goats.

1  Vivasvin:  the  radiant  celestial  Agni.

2  This  verse  is  exceedingly  difficult,  Ludwig’s  explanation,  if  I  have  under¬
stood  him  rightly,  is  to  the  following  effect :  The  Golden  One,  which  ia  in  the
home  of  Mitra  and  Varuna,  is  the  Sun  which  is  only  the  image  or  copy  of  the
transcendental  reality,  the  golden  shell  that  covers  the  face  of  the  satyani  or
verity.  This  apparent  Sun  Mitra  and  Varuna  have  taken  to  themselves  i«
addition  to  their  real  essence.  As  this  real  essence  is  perceived  not  with  the
eye*  of  the  body  but  by  tho  eyes  of  the  spirit  strengthened  by  the  elevating
Soma-draught,  so  on  the  other  hand  the  apparent  Sun  is  not  an  object  of


[BOOK  I.


192  TIIE  HYMNS  OP

3  Aavins,  the  pious  call  you  with  their  hymns  of  praise,  sound¬

ing  their  loud  song  forth  to  you,  these  living  men,  to  their
oblations,  living  men.

Ail  glories  and  all  nourishment,  Lords  of  all  wealth  !  depend
on  you.

The  fellies  of  your  golden  chariot  scatter  drops,  Mighty  Ones  !
of  your  golden  car.

4  Well  is  it  known,  0  Mighty  Ones :  ye  open  heaven ;  for  you

the  chariot-steeds  are  yoked  for  morning  rites,  unswerving
steeds  for  morning  rites.

We  set  you  on  the  chariot-seat,  ye  Mighty,  on  the  golden  car.
Yc  seek  mid-air  as  by  a  path  that  leads  aright,  as  by  a  path  •
that  leads  direct.

5  0  Rich  in  Strength,  through  your  great  power  vouchsafe  us

blessings  day  and  night.

The  offerings  which  we  bring  to  you  shall  never  fail,  gifts
brought  by  us  shall  never  fail.

6  These  Soma-drops,  strong  Indra!  drink  for  heroes,  poured,

pressed  out  by  pressing-stones,  are  welling  forth  for  thee,
for  thee  the  drops  are  welling  forth.

They  shall  make  glad  thy  heart  to  give,  to  give  wealth  great
and  wonderful.

Thou  who  acceptest  praise  come  glorified  by  hymns,  come  thou
to  us  benevolent.

7  Quickly,  0  Agni,  hear  us :  magnified  by  ns  thou  shalt  speak

for  us  to  the  Gods  adorable,  yea,  to  the  Kings  adorable  :

When,  0  ye  Deities,  ye  gave  that  Milch-cow  to  the  Angirases,
They  milked  her :  Aryaman,  joined  with  them,  did  the  work  :
he  knoweth  her  as  well  as  I.

8  Ne’er  may  these  manly  deeds  of  yours  for  us  grow  old,  never

may  your  bright  glories  fall  into  decay,  nevor  before  our
time  decay.

What  deed  of  yours,  new  every  age,  wondrous,  surpassing
mau,  rings  forth,

Whatever,  Maruts  !  may  be  difficult  to  gain,  grant  us,  whate’er
is  hard  to  gain.

spiritual  perception.  Consequently  the  poet  says :  *  With  our  bodily  eyes  we
have  seen  the  Sun,  but  enlightened  by  the  Soma  juice  we  have  recognized
it  as  being  only  an  image  of  you.’  The  untrue  ia  the  Sun  ;  fAe  true  is  the
transcendental  essence  of  the  God.

7  That  Milek-cow:  according  to  S&yana,  the  Cow  of  Plenty.  M.  Bergaigne
(La  Religion  Vddique,  L  135,  310)  thinks  that  prayer  is  meant,  ‘the  ancient
prayer  of  the  Fathers.'  The  meaning  of  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  ia  uncertain.


/7F3/.V  140.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


9  Dadbyach  of  old,  Angiras,  Priyamedha,  these,  aud  Karxva,  Atri,
Mauu  know  my  birth,  yea,  these  of  ancient  days  and  Manu
knew.

Their  long  line  stretcheth  to  the  Gods,  our  birth-connexions
are  with  them.

To  these,  for  their  high  station,  I  bow  down  with  song,  to  Indra,
Agni,*  bow  with  song.

10  Let  the  Invoker  bless  :  let  offerers  bring  choice  gifts;  Brihas-

pati  the  Friend  doth  sacrifice  with  Steex-s,  Steers  that  have
many  an  excellence.

Now  with  our  ears  we  catch  the  sound  of  the  press-stone  that
rings  afai'.

The  very  Strong  hath  gained  the  waters  by  himself,  the  Strong
gained  many  a  resting-place.

11  0  ye  Eleven  Gods  whose  homo  is  heaven,  0  ye  Eleven

who  make  earth  your  dwelling,

Ye  who  with  might,  Elevon,live  in  waters,  accept  this  sacrifice,
0  Gods,  with  pleasure.

HYMN  CXL.  Agni.

To  splendid  Agni  seated  by  the  altar,  loving  well  his  home,
I  bring  the  food  as  ’twere  his  place  of  birth.

I  clothe  the  Bright  One  with  my  hymn  as  with  a  robe,  him
with  the  car  of  light,  bi-ight-hued,  dispelling  gloom.


9  Dadhyach  of  old:  all  theso  ancient  sages  have  been  mentioned  in  former
hymns.  As  predecessors  of  Paruchchhcpa,  the  Bishi  of  this  hymn,  they  are
said  to  have  known  hia  ancestry.

10  Let  the  Invoker  blest:  let  the  Hotar,  or  invoking  priest  utter  the  Ydj'jd,
words  of  consecration  usod  at  sacrifice.

Erihaspati :  see  I.  14.  3.

H'jXA  Steers :  according  to  SAyana,  a  metaphorical  expression  for  strong
and  copious  libations  of  Soma  juice.

The  very  Strong :  the  Soma.  The  resting-places  are  the  different  recept¬
acles  into  which  the  juice  flows.

1 1  0  ye  Eleven  Gods  :  on  this  SAyann  remarks  :  ‘  Although,  according  to
the  text,  'There  are  only  three  gods’,  (Nirukta,  vii.  !»).  the  deities  who  repre¬
sent  the  earth,  etc.,  are  but  three,  still  through  their  greatness,  i.  e.  their
respective  varied  manifestations,  they  amount  to  thirty-three,  according
to  tho  saying,  ‘other  manifestations  of  Him  exist  in  different  places.’ —
J.  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  v.  10.


This  and  the  twenty-four  following  hymns  are  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Dirgha-
tomas,  the  son  of  Ucbathya.

1  The  food  as  ’<! cere  his  place  of  birth :  the  oblation  of  clarified  buttec
which  makes  tho  fire  spring  up  into  fresh  life.

13


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  I.


2  Child  of  a  double  birth  he  grasps  at  triple  food ;  iu  the  year’s

oourse  what  he  hath  swallowed  grows  anew.

He,  by  another’s  mouth  and  tongue  u  noble  Bull,  with  other,
as  an  elephant,  consumes  the  trees.

3  The  pairs  who  dwell  together,  moving  iu  the  dark,  bestir

themselves  :  both  parents  hasten  to  the  babe,
Impetuous-tong ued,  destroying,  springing  swiftly  forth,  one  to
be  watched  and  cherished,  streugtheuer  of  his  sire.

4  For  man,  thou  Friend  of  men,  these  steeds  of  thine  arc  yoked,

impatient,  lightly  running,  ploughing  blackened  lines,
Discordant-minded,  fleet,  gliding  with  easy  speed,  urged  onward
by  the  wiud  and  rapid  in  their  course.

5  Dispelling  on  their  way  the  horror  of  black  gloom,  making  a

glorious  show  these  flames  of  his  fly  forth,

When  o’er  the  spacious  tract  he  spreads  himself  abroad,  and
rushes  panting  on  with  thunder  and  with  roar.

6  Amid  brown  plants  he  stoops  os  if  adorning  them,  and  rushes

bellowing  like  a  bull  upon  his  wives.

Proving  his  nvght,  he  decks  the  glory  of  his  form,  and  shakes
his  horns  like  one  terrific,  hard  to  stay.

7  Now  covered,  now  displayed,  lie  grasps  as  one  who  knows,

having  his  resting-place  in  those  who  know  him  well.

A  second  time  they  wax  and  gather  Gi>dlikc  power,  and  blend¬
ing  both  together  change  their  Parents’  form.

8  The  maidens  with  long  tresses  hold  him  in  embrace ;  dead,

they  rise  up  again  to  meet  the  Living  One.

Releasing  them  from  ago  with  a  loud  roar  he  comes,  filling
them  with  now  spirit,  living,  unsubdued.


2  Child  of  a  double  birth :  born  first  from  the  fire-sticks  and  then  anew  by
consecration.

Triple  food :  clarified  butter,  fried  cakes,  Soma  juice.

By  another's  mouth ;  according  to  Silyapa,  *  he  receives  the  oblation  by
means  of  the  ladle  or"  the  ministering  priests,  and  in  another  form,  that  is
the  fire  that  burns  fores! s,  he  consumes  the  trees.’

3  The  pair  who  dwell  together ;  the  two  fire-sticks  from  which  Agni  is
produced  by  friction.  His  sire:  said  to  be  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice.

4  In  this  and  tho  four  following  stanzas  Agni  is  described  not  in  hia
sacrificial  form  but  ivt  the  fire  that  destroys  the  jungle  and  prepares  tho  way
for  now  settlement*.

6  As  adorning  them  :  with  the  glory  of  his  flame.

7  As  one  who  knows  :  because,  coming  from  heaven  with  tho  waters,  he
makes  the  plants  grow,  and  is  said  to  live  within  them.

Change  their  Parents'  form :  porhapB,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  the  plants  alter
the  appearance  of  the  earth,  and  Agni  or  fire  tliat  of  the  sky.

8  i  he  maidens  with  long  tresses :  the  eurliug  flames.


HYMN  Ml.]


THE  RIO  YE  DA.


195


9  Licking  the  mantle  of  the  Mother,  far  and  wide  he  wanders
over  fields  with  beasts  that  flee  apace.

Strengthening  all  that  walk,  licking  up  all  around,  a  blackened
path,  forsooth,  he  leaves  where’er  he  goes.

10  0  Agni,  shine  resplendent  with  our  wealthy  chiefs,  like  a

loud-snorting  bull,  aceustomoi  to  the  house.

Thou  casting  off  thine  infant  wrappings  blazest  forth  as
though  thou  hadst  put  on  a  coat  of  mail  for  war.

1 1  May  this  our  perfect  prayer  be  dearer  unto  thee  than  an

imperfect  prayer  although  it  please  thee  well.

With  the  pure  brilliancy  that  radiates  from  thy  form,  mayest
thou  grant  to  us  abuudant  store  of  wealth.

12  Grant  to  our  chariot,  to  our  house,  0  Agni,  a  boat  with  mov¬

ing  feet  and  constant  oarage,

One  that  mvy  further  well  our  wealthy  princes  and  all  the
folk,  and  be  our  certain  refuge.

13  Welcome  our  laud  with  thine  approval,  Agni.  May  earth  and

heaven  an  1  freely-flowing  rivers
Yield  us  long  life  and  food  and  corn  and  cattlo,  and  may  the
red  Dawns  choose  for  us  their  choicest.

HYMN  CXLI.  Agui.

.Yea,  verily,  the  fair  effulgence  of  the  God  for  glory  was
established,  siuco  ho  spraug  from  strength.

When  ho  iuclines  thereto  successful  is  the  hymn :  the  songs
of  sacrifice  have  brought  him  as  they  flow.

2  Wonderful,  rich  in  nourishment,  he  dwells  in  food;  next,  in
the  seveu  auspicious  Mothers  is  his  home.

Thirdly,  that  they  might  drain  the  treasures  of  the  Bull,  the
maidens  brought  forth  him  for  whom  the  ten  provide.

9  The  Mother :  tho  earth,  whose  vesture  of  grass  and  shrubs  he  licks  and
consumes.

Strengthening  all  that  walk:  giving  them  strength  and  speed  to  fly
before  him.

1 0  Thine  infant  wrappings :  the  waters  that  enveloped  the  ‘  Child  of  the  Floods.’

11  This  our  perfect  prayer :  see'Vodic  Hymns,  I.  225.

12  A  boat:  according  to  Sa.yai.iB,  the  sacrifice,  with  priests  for  oarB,  aud
GodB,  prayers  and  offerings,  for  feet.

1  From  strength  from  violent  agitation  of  the  fire-stick.

2  He  dioells  in  food  :  he  is  the  cause  of  the  production  of  men’s  food,  as
sender  of  rain  and  as  sacrificial  fire.

The  seven  auspicious  Mothers  :  according  to  Sdyana,  tho  rains  which  fertilize
the  seven  lokas  or  worlds.

The  Bull :  Agni.  The  maidens,  and  the  ten,  aro  the  fingers  which  produce
the  fire  by  attrition  and  teud  it  afterwards.


196  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOR  1.

3  What  time  from  oat  the  deep,  from  the  Steer’s  wondrous

form,  the  Chiefs  who  hAd  the  power  produced  him  with
their  strength ;

Wheu  Matarisvan  nibbed  forth  him  who  lay  concealed,  for
mixture  of  the  sweet  drink,  in  the  days  of  old.

4  When  from  the  Highest  Father  he  is  brought  to  us,  amid  the

plants  he  rises  hungry,  wondrously.

As  both  together  join  to  expedite  his  birth,  most  youthful  he
is  bom  resplendent  in  his  light.

5  Then  also  entered  he  the  Mothers,  and  in  them  pure  and

uninjured  he  increased  in  magnitude.

As  to  the  tirst  he  rose,  the  vigorous  from  of  old,  so  now  he
runs  among  the  younger  lowest  ones.

6  Therefore  they  choose  him  Herald  at  the  morning  rites,  press¬

ing  to  him  as  unto  Bhaga,  pouring  gifts,

When,  much-praised,  by  the  power  and  will  of  Gods,  he  goes
at  all  times  to  his  mortal  worshipper  to  drink.

7  What  time  the  Holy  One,  wind-urged,  hath  risen  up,  serpent¬

like  winding  through  the  dry  grass  unrestrained,

Dust  lies  upon  the  way  of  him  who  burneth  all,  black-wingcd
and  pure  of  birth  who  follows  sundry  paths.

8  Like  a  swift  chariot  made  by  men  who  know  their  art,  he

with  his  red  limbs  lifts  himself  aloft  to  heaven.

Thy  worshippers  become  by  burning  black  of  hue :  their
strength  flies  as  before  a  hero's  violence.

9  By  thee,  0  Agni,  Varuna  who  guards  the  Law,  Mitra  and

Aryaman,  the  Bounteous,  are  mado  strong ;

For,  as  the  felly  holds  the  spokes,  thou  with  thy  might
pervading  hast  been  born  encompassing  them  round.

10  Agni,  to  him  who  toils  and  pours  libations,  thou,  Most  Youth¬
ful  !  sendcst  wealth  and  all  the  host  of  Gods.

Thee,  therefore,  even  as  Bhaga,  will  we  set  anew,  young  Child
of  Strength,  most  wealthy  !  in  our  battle-song.


3  Agni  appears  hero  to  have  been  partly  produced  by  the  Chiefs,  the  Saris
or  Goda,  from  the  depth  of  the  atmosphere,  from  Parjanyn  the  rainy  cloud
symbolically  represented  as  a  bull,  and  partly  generated  by  Mdtariavan
(sco  I.  31.  3)  by  attrition,  and  brought  by  him  to  the  earth  to  receive
libations  of  Soma  juice.

4  The  Highest  Father :  Dyaus.  Both  together :  Heaven  and  Earth.

5  The  Mothers  ;  the  waters.  The  younger  l/ncest  ones:  the  plants  in  which
also  he  dwells.

6  Herald :  or,  Hotar.  Bhaga :  see  I.  136.  2.


THE  MOVED  A.


107


HYMN  142.]

1 1  Vouchsafe  us  riches  turned  to  worthy  ends,  good  luck  abiding

in  the  house,  and  strong  capacity.

Wealth  that  directs  both  worlds  as  they  were  guiding-reins,
and,  very  Wise,  the  Gods’  assent  in  sacrifice.

12  May  he,  the  Priest  resplendent*  joyful,  hear  xis,  he  with  the

radiant  car  and  rapid  horses.

May  Agni,  ever  wise,  with  best  directions  to  bliss  and  highest
happiness  conduct  us.

13  With  hymns  of  might  hath  Agni  now  been  lauded,  advanced

to  height  of  universal  kingship.

Now  may  these  wealthy  chiefs  and  we  together  spread  forth
as  spreads  the  Sun  above  the  rain-clouds.

HYMN  CXLII.  Aprle.

Kindled,  bring,  Agni,  Gods  to-day  for  him  who  lifts  the
ladle  up.

Spin  out  the  ancient  thread  for  him  who  sheds,  with  gifts,
the  Soma  juice.

2  Thou  dealest  forth,  Tanftnapat,  sweet  sacrifice  enriched

with  oil,

Brought  by  a  singer  such  as  I  who  offers  gifts  and  toils  for  thee.

3  He  wondrous,  sanctifying,  bright,  sprinkles  the  sacrifice  with

mead,

Thrice,  Nariisansa  from  the  heavens,  a  God  mid  Gods  adorable.

4  Agni,  besought,  bring  hitherward  Iudra  the  Friend,  the

Wonderful,

For  this  my  hymn  of  praise,  0  sweet  of  tongue,  is  chanted
forth  to  thee.

5  The  ladle-holders  strew  trimmed  grass  at  this  well-ordered

sacrifice ;

A  home  for  India  is  adorned,  wide,  fittest  to  receive  the  Gods.

6  Thrown  open  be  the  Doors  Divine,  unfailing,  that  assist

the  rite.

High,  purifying,  much-desired,  so  that  the  Gods  may  enter  in.

7  May  Night  and  Morning,  hymned  with  lauds,  united,  fair  to

look  upon.

Strong  Mothers  of  the  sacrifice,  seat  them  together  on  the
.  grass. _ _

1  The  ladle  :  the  sacrificial  ladle  containing  the  oblation.

Spin  out  the  ancient  thread:  perform  tho  sacrifice  ordained  of  old.

2  Tantinapdt :  Son  of  Thyself  ;  Agui.  See  l.  13.  2.

3  Kartitnnta  :  a  name  of  Agni.  See  I.  18.  2.

The  Doors  Divine ;  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice.  See  I.  13.  6.


193  .  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

8  May  the  two  Priests  Divine,  the  sage,  the  sweet-voiced  lovers

of  the  hymn,

Complete  this  sacrifice  of  ours,  effectual,  reaching  heaven
to-day.

9  Let  Hotra  pure,  set  among  Gods,  amid  the  Maruts  BhA.ratl,
IJa,  Sarasvati,  Mahi,  rest  on  the  grass,  adorable.

1 0  May  Tvashtar  send  us  genial  dew  abundant,  wondrous,  rich

in  gifts,

For  increase  and  for  growth  of  wealth,  Tvashtar  our  kinsman
and  our  Friend.

1 1  Vanaspati,  give  forth,  thyself,  and  call  the  Gods  to  sacrifice.
May  Agui,  God  intelligent,  'speed  our  oblation  to  the  Gods.

12  To  Vayu  joined  with  Pushan,  with  the  Maruts,  and  the  host

of  Gods,

To  Indra  who  inspires  the  hymn  cr y  Glory !  and  present
the  gift.

13  Come  hither  to  enjoy  the  gifts  prepared  with  cry  of  Glory  !

Come,

0  Indra,  hear  their  calling ;  they  invite  thee  to  the  sacrifice.

HYMN  CXLUr.  Agni.

To  Agni  I  present  a  newer  mightier  hymn,  I  bring  my  words
and  song  unto  the  Son  of  Strength,

Who,  Offspring  of  the  Waters,  beariug  precious  things  sits  on
the  earth,  in  season,  dear  Invoking  Priest.

2  Soon  as  he  sprang  to  birth  that  Agni  was  shown  forth  to

M&tarisvan  in  the  highest  firmament.

When  he  was  kindled,  through  his  power  and  majesty  his
fiery  splendour  made  the  heavens  and  earth  to  shine.

3  His  flames  that  wax  not  old,  beams  fair  to  look  upon  of  him

whose  face  is  lovely,  shino  with  beauteous  sheen.

The  rays  of  Agni,  him  whose  active  force  is  light,  through
the  nights  glimmer  sleepless,  ageless,  like  the  floods.


8  The  two  Priests  Divine:  see  I.  13.  8.

9  H otrd :  a  Goddeaa  of  sacrifice,  regarded  as  the  consort  of  Agui.

BMrati :  a  Goddess  of  sacred  speech.

Jfd,  Sarasmtt,  Mahi:  see  I.  13.  9.

11  Vanaspati:  the  sacrificial  post,  said  to  be  a  form  of  Agni.

12  Cry  Glory!:  SvAhfi  I  the  sacred  word  uttered  at  the  end  of  sacrificial
invocations.


2  Mittariii-an :  see  I.  31.  3.


HYMN  144.]


THE  BIG  VEDA.


199


4  Send  thou  with  hymns  that  Agni  to  his  own  abode,  who  rules,

one  Sovran  Lord  of  wealth,  like  Vanina,

•  Him,  All-possessor,  whom  the  Blirigus  with  their  might
brought  to  earth’s  central  point,  the  centre  of  the  world.

5  He  whom  no  force  can  stay,  even  as  tho  Mantis’  roar,  like

to  a  dart  sent  forth,  even  as  the  bolt  from  heaven,

Agni  with  sharpened  jaws  chews  up  and  cats  the  trees,  and
conquers  them  as  when  the  warrior  smites  his  foes.

6  And  will  not  Agni  find  enjoyment  in  our  praise,  will  not  the

Vasu  grant  our  wish  with  gifts  of  wealth  ?

Will  not  the  Inspirer  speed  our  prayers  to  gain  their  end?
Him  with  tho  radiant  glance  I  laud  with  this  my  song.

7  The  kindler  of  the  flame  wins  Agui  as  a  Friend,  promoter  of

the  Law,  whose  face  is  bright  with  oil.

Inflamed  and  keen,  refulgent  in  our  gatherings,  he  lifts  our
hymn  on  high  clad  in  his  radiant  hues.

8  Keep  us  incessantly  with  guards  that  cease  not,  Agni,  with

guards  auspicious,  very  mighty.

With  guards  that  never  slumber,  never  heedless,  never  be¬
guiled,  0  Helper,  keep  our  children.

HYMN  CXLIV.  Agni.

The  Priest  goes  fortli  to  sacrifice,  with  wondrous  power  send¬
ing  aloft  the  hymn  of  glorious  brilliancy.

He  moves  to  meet  the  ladles  turning  to  the  right,  which  are
tho  firfet  to  kiss  the  place  where  he  abides.

2  To  him  sang  forth  the  flowing  streams  of  Holy  Law,  encom¬

passed  in  the  home  and  birth-place  of  tho  God.

He,  when  he  dwelt  extended  iu  the  waters’  lap,  absorbed  those
Godlike  powers  for  which  he  is  adored.

3  Seeking  iu  course  altera  to  reach  the  selfsame  end,  the  two

copartners  strive  to  win  this  beauteous  form.

Like  Bliaga  must  he  be  duly  invoked  by  us,  as  he  who  drives
the  car  holds  fast  the  horse’s  reins.


4  Earth's  central  jwint :  the  altar.

6  The  Vasu :  the  God  Agni.

1  The  place  irhere  he  abides  :  Agni'*  dwelling-place;  flic  altar.

2  Of  Holy  Lato  :  flowing  in  accordance  with  the  order  of  tho  universe.

3  The.  Cm  copartners :  the  two  priest*,  Hotar  and  Adhvaryu,  according  to
S4yana.  Perhaps  Day  and  Night  are  iu  tended,  as  Ludwig  suggest*.


200  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  1

4  He  whom  the  two  copartners  with  observance  tend,  the  pair

who  dwell  together  in  the  same  abode,

By  night  as  in  the  day  the  grey  one  was  bom  young,  passing
untouched  by  old  through  many  an  age  of  man.

5  Him  the  ten  fingers,  the  devotions,  animate :  we  mortals  call

on  him  a  God  to  give  us  help.

He  speeds  over  the  sloping  surface  of  the  land :  new  deeds
hath  he  performed  with  those  who  gird  him  round.

6  For,  Agui,  like  a  herdsman,  thou  by  thine  own  might  rulest

o’er  all  that  is  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth ;

And  these  two  Mighty  Ones,  brig  lit,  golden,  closely  joined,
rolling  them  round  are  come  unto  thy  sacred  grass.

7  Agni,  accept  with  joy,  be  glad  in  this  our  prayer,  joy-giver,

self-sustained,  strong,  bom  of  Holy  Law  !

For  fair  to  see  art  thou  turning  to  every  side,  pleasant  to
look  on  as  a  dwelling  filled  with  food.

HYMN  CXLV.  Agni.

Ask  ye  of  him,  for  he  is  come,  he  knoweth  it ;  he,  full  of
wisdom,  is  implored,  is  now  implored.

With  him  are  admonitions  and  with  him  commands  :  he  is
the  Lord  of  Strength,  tho  Lord  of  Power  and  Might.

2  They  ask  of  him  :  not  all  learn  by  their  questioning  what  lie.

the  Sage,  hath  grasped,  as  'twere,  with  his  own  mind.
Forgetting  uot  tho  former  nor  the  later  word,  he  goctli  on,
not  careless,  in  his  mental  power.

3  To  him  these  ladles  go,  to  him  these  racing  mares :  he  only

will  give  ear  to  all  the  words  I  speak.

All-speeding,  victor,  perfecter  of  sacrifice,  the  Babe  with
flawless  holp  hath  mustered  vigorous  might.

4  Whato’er  he  meets  he  grasps  and  then  runs  farther  on,  and

straightway,  newly  bora,  creeps  forward  with  his  kin.

He  stirs  tho  wearied  man  to  pleasure  and  great  joy  what  time
the  longing  gifts  approach  him  as  he  comes.


4  TU  grey  one  .•  Agni.  Cf.  I.  164,  1.

5  Him  the  ten  fingers  :  gee  I.  141.  2.  Those  who  gird  him  round :  his  wor¬
shippers.

6  These  lioo  Mighty  Ones  :  Heaven  and  Earth.

3  These  racing  mares :  these  libations  that  quickly  reach  Agni.

The.  Bale  with  lawless  help :  tho  over-youthful  Agni  who  protects  his
worshippers.


BYMN  146.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  201

5  He  is  a  wild  thing  of  the  flood  and  forest :  he  hath  been  laid
upon  the  highest  surface.

He  hath  declared  the  lore  of  works  to  mortals,  Agni  the  Wise,
for  he  knows  Law,  the  Truthful.

•

HYMN  CXLVI.  Agni.

I  laud  the  seven-rayed,  the  triple-headed,  Agni  all-perfect  in
his  Parents'  bosom,

Sunk  in  the  lap  of  all  that  moves  and  moves  not,  him  who
hath  filled  all  luminous  realms  of  hoaven.

2  As  a  great  Steer  he  grew  to  these  his  Parents ;  sublime  he

stands,  untouched  by  eld,  far-reaching.

He  plants  his  footsteps  on  the  lofty  ridges  of  the  broad  earth  :
his  red  flames  lick  the  udder.

3  Coming  together  to  their  common  youngling  both  Cows,  fair-

shaped,  spread  forth  in  all  directions,

Measuring  out  the  paths  that  must  be  travelled,  entrusting
•  all  desires  to  him  the  Mighty.

4  The  prudent  sages  lead  him  to  his  dwelling,  guarding  with

varied  skill  the  Ever-Youthful.

Longing,  they  turned  their  eyes  unto  the  River :  to  these  the
Sun  of  men  was  manifested.

5  Born  noble  in  the  regions,  aim  of  all  mens’  eyes,  to  be  implored

for  life  by  great  and  small  alike,

Far  as  the  Wealthy  One  hath  spread  himself  abroad,  he  is
the  Sire  all-visible  of  this  progeny.


5  Upon  the  highest  surface:  the  meaning  is  not  clear,  but  the  reference
appeare  to  be  to  celestial  Agni  in  the  firmament  rather  than  to  the  sacrificial
fire  upon  the  altar.

1  '  The  three  heads  may  be  the  three  daily  sacrifices,  or  the  three  household
fires,  or  the  three  regions,  earth,  heaven  and  mid-air.  The  seven  rays  arc  the
seven  flames  of  fire.’— Wilson.

His  Parents'  bosom :  the  lap  of  Heaven  and  Earth.

2  The  udder :  the  clouds  of  the  sky.

3  Both  Coxes :  apparently  Heaven  and  Earth  ;  according  to  SAyana,  the
institutor  of  the  rite  and  the  priest,  or  the  sacrificcr  and  his  wife.

4  The  River  :  Agni,  whose  bounties  flow  liko  streams  of  water.

6  The  Wealthy  One  :  the  rich  aud  mighty  Agni.


[BOOK  /.


202  TUB  HYUXS  O'P

HYMN  CXLVir.  Agni.

How,  Agni,  have  the  radiant  ones,  aspiring,  endued  thee  with
the  vigour  of  the  living,

So  that,  on  both  sides  fostering  seed  aud  offspring,  the  Gods
may  jcry  in  Holy  Law’s  fulfilment?

2  Mark  this  my  spceoh,  Divine  One,  thou,  Most  Youthful !

offered  to  thee  by  him  who  gives  most  freely.

One  hates  thee,  and  another  sings  thy  praises :  I  thine  adorer
laud  thy  form,  0  Agni.

3  Thy  guardian  rays,  0  Agni,  when  they  saw  him,  preserved

blind  Maraateya  from  affliction.

Lord  of  all  riches,  he  preserved  the  pious  :  the  foes  who  fain
would  harm  them  did  no  mischief.

4  The  sinful  man  who  worships  not,  0  Agni,  who,  offering  not,

harms  us  with  double-dealing, —

Be  this  in  turn  to  him  a  heavy  sentence :  may  he  distress
himself  by  his  revilings.

5  Yea,  when  a  mortal  knowingly,  0  Victor,  injures  with  double

tongue  a  fellow-mortal,

From  him,  praised  Agni !  save  thou  him  that  lauds  thee :
bring  us  not  into  trouble  and  affliction.

HYMN  CXLVIII.  Agni.

What  Matarisvan,  piercing,  formed  by  friction,  Herald  of  all
the  Gods,  in  varied  figure,

Is  he  whom  they  have  set  mid  human  houses,  gay-hued  as
light  and  shining  forth  for  beauty.

2  They  shall  not  harm  the  man  who  brings  thee  praises  :  such

as  I  am,  Agni  my  help  approves  me.

All  acts  of  mine  shall  they  accopt  with  pleasure,  laudation
from  the  singer  who  presents  it.

3  Him  in  his  constant  seat  men  skilled  in  worship  have  taken

and  with  praises  have  established.

As,  harnessed  to  a  chariot,  fleet-foot  horses,  at  his  command
let  bearers  lead  him  forward.

1  The  radiant  ones  :  thy  bright  rays.

On  bath  side a :  both  in  men  ami  women  ;  or  (offspring)  of  both  sexes.

3  MdmtUga :  Dirghatamas,  the  Riahi  of  the  hymn,  son  of  MamatA,  the
wife  of  Uchathya.

1  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates  :  ‘The  wind,  penetrating  (amidst  the
fuel)  has  excited  (Agni)  the  invoker  (of  the  gods)  the  multiform,  the  minister
of  all  the  deities.'  But  then  jutt,  what  or  when,  is  left  untranslated,  and  the
explanation  of  MAtariavan  as  VAyu  or  wind  cannot  be  justified  by  any  Rigveda
text.


JIYMX  150.  J  THE  RIG  VEDA,  205

4  Wondrous,  full  many  a  thing  ho  chows  and  crunches :  ho

shinos  amid  the  wood  with  spreading  brightness.

Upon  his  glowing  flames  the  wind  blows  daily,  driving  them
like  the  keen  shaft  of  an  archer.

5  Him,  whom  while  yet  in  embryo  the  hostile,  both  skilled  and

fain  to  harm,  may  never  injure,

Men  blind  and  sightless  through  his  splendour  hurt  not :  his
never-failing  lovers  have  preserved  him.

HYMN  CXLIX.  Agni.

Hither  he  hastes  to  give,  Lord  of  great  riches,  King  of  the
mighty,  to  the  place  of  treasure.

The  pressing-stones  shall  serve  him  speeding  near  us.

2  As  Steer  of  men  so  Steer  of  earth  and  heaven  by  glory,  he

whose  streams  all  life  hath  drunken,

Who  hasting  forward  rests  upon  the  altar.

3  He  who  hath  lighted  up  the  joyous  castle,  wise  Courser  like

the  Steed  of  cloudy  heaven,

Bright  like  the  Sun,  with  hundredfold  existence.

4  He,  doubly  born,  hath  spread  in  his  effulgence  through  the

three  luminous  realms,  through  all  the  regions,

Best  sacrificing  Priest  where  waters  gather.

5  Priest  doubly  born,  he  through  his  love  of  glory  hath  in  his

keeping  all  things  worth  the  choosing.

The  man  who  brings  him  gifts  hath  noble  offspring.

HYMN  CL.  •  Agni.

Agni,  thy  faithful  servant  I  call  ujxm  thee  with  many  a  gift,
As  in  the  keeping  of  the  great  inciting  God  ;

2  Thou  who  ne’er  movest  thee  to  aid  the  indolent,  the  godless  man,
Him  who  though  wealthy  never  brings  an  offering.

3  Spleudid,  O  Singer,  is  that  man,  mightiest  of  the  great  in  heaven.
Agni,  may  wo  be  foremost,  wo  thy  worshippers.

1  The  place  of  treasure :  the  al Ur,  where  riches  are  obtained  by  sacrifice
and  prayer.

2  As  Steer  of  men  :  preeminent,  like  a  strong  bull,  among  men.

3  The  joyous  castle  :  or  the  castle  NArmini;  meaning,  probably,  the  proud
stronghold  or  some  demon.

4  Where  waters  gather  :  acoording  to  SAyana,  in  the  place  of  sacrifice  where
water  is  collected  for  ceremonial  purpose.  But  the  reference  is  probably  to
Agni’s  appearance  in  the  firmament,  the  waters  above  the  earth,  m  the  form
of  lightning.

5  Doubly  born :  from  the  fire-sticks  and  again  at  consecration.

3  That  man  .•  who  propitiates  thee  by  sacrifice  and  praise.

0  Singer :  aingor  of  hymns,  sage,  or  priest.  ■


204  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

HYMN  CLI.  Mitra  and  Varuna.

Heaven  and  earth  trembled  at  the  might  and  voice  of  him,
whom,  loved  and  Holy  One,  helper  of  all  mankind,

The  wise  who  longed  for  spoil  in  fight  for  kine  brought  forth
with  power,  a  Friend,  mid  waters,  at  the  sacrifice.

2  As  these,  like  friends,  have  done  this  work  for  you,  these

prompt  servants  of  Purumillia  Soma-offerer,

Give  mental  power  to  him  who  sings  the  sacred  song,  and
hearken,  Strong  Ones,  to  the  master  of  the  house.

3  The  folk  have  glorified  your  birth  from  Earth  and  Heaven,

to  be  extolled,  ye  Strong  Ones,  for  your  mighty  power.

Ye,  when  ye  bring  to  singer  and  the  rite,  enjoy  the  sacrifice
performed  with  holy  praise  and  strength.

4  The  people  prospers,  Asuras !  whom  ye  dearly  love :  ye,

Righteous  Ones,  proclaim  aloud  the  Holy  Law.

That  efficacious  power  that  comes  from  lofty  heaven,  ye  bind
unto  the  work,  as  to  the  pole  an  ox.

5  On  this  great  earth  ye  send  your  treasure  down  with  might :

unstained  by  dust,  the  crowding  kine  are  in  the  stalls.

Here  in  the  neighbourhood  they  cry  unto  the  Sun  at  morning
and  at  evening,  like  swift  birds  of  prey.

6  The  flames  with  curling  tresses  serve  your  sacrifice,  whereto

•ye  sing  the  song,  Mitra  and  Varuna.

Send  down  of  your  free  will,  prosper  our  holy  songs :  ye  are
sole  Masters  of  the  singer’s  hymn  of  praise.

7  Whoso  with  sacrifices  toiling  brings  you  gifts,  and  worships,

sage  and  priest,  fulfilling  your  desire, —

To  him  do  ye  draw  nigh  and  taste  his  sacrifice.  Come  well-
incliued  to  us  unto  our  songs  and  prayer.

8  With  sacrifices  and  with  milk  they  deck  you  first,  ye  Righteous

Ones,  as  if  through  stirrings  of  the  mind.

To  you  they  bring  their  hymns  with  their  collected  thought,
while  ye  with  earnest  soul  come  to  us  gloriously.


1  Of  Aim :  AgnL

2  As  these:  the  priests.  PurumUha ;  the  prince  who  offers  tho  sacrifice.
Strong  Ones:  ye  mighty  Gods,  Mitra  and  Varnna.

3  When  ye  bring :  him,  Agni,  to  the  sacrifice.

4  Asuras  :  immortal  Gods,  especially  the  ancient  deities.

That  tfScaciou*  power :  as  Wilson  observes,  the  meaning  is  not  very  obvious,
although  it  is  clear  that  the  adequacy  of  worship  or  sacrifice  to  effect  its  objects,
•r  realize  its  rewards,  is  intended.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


205


B7MN  152.]


9  Rich  strength  of  life  is  yours:  ye,  Heroes,  have  obtained
through  your  surpassing  powers  rich  far-extending  might.

Not  the  past  days  conjoined  with  nights,  not  rivers,  not  the
Pai.iis  have  attained  your  Godhead  and  your  wealth.

HYMN  CLIT.  *Mitra- Vanina.

The  robes  which  ye  put  on  abound  with  fatness  :  uninterrupted
courses  are  your  counsels.

All  falsehood,  Mitra-Varuna !  ye  conquer,  and  closely  cleave
unto  the  Law  Eternal.

2  This  might  of  theirs  hath  no  one  comprehended.  True  is  the

crushing  word  the  sage  hath  uttered,

The  fearful  four-edged  bolt  smites  down  the  three-edged,  and
those  who  hate  the  Gods  first  fall  and  perish.

3  The  Footless  Maid  prccedeth  footed  creatures.  Who  marketh,

Mitra-Varuna,  this  your  doing  ?

The  Babe  Unborn  supporteth  this  world’s  burthen,  fulfilleth
Law  and  overcomoth  falsehood.

4  We  look  on  him  the  darling  of  the  Maidens,  always  advancing,

never  falling  downward,

Wearing  inseparable,  wide-spread  raiment,  Mitra’sand  Varuna’s
delightful  glory.

5  Unbridled  Courser,  born  but  not  of  horses,  neighing  he  flieth

on  with  back  uplifted.

The  youthful  love  the  mystery  thought-surpassing,  praising  in
Mitra-Varuna,  its  glory.

9  The  Pan  is :  the  envious  demons  who  carry  away  and  conceal  tho  cows  or
rays  of  light.

1  The  robes  which  ye  put  on :  tho  oblations  of  clarified  butter  with  which
the  Gods  may  be  said  to  be  clothed.

Uninterrupted  courses  are  your  counsels:  your  designs  are  always  fully
carried  into  effect.  Or  the  meaning  may  be  as  Wilson,  following  Sftyana,
renders  it :  ‘your  natures  are  to  be  regarded  as  without  defect.’

2  The  fearful  four-edged  holt :  Ludwig  suggests  an  emendation  of  the  text
and  then  translates  :  '  thrice  strikes  the  edge  [of  Indra’s  thunderbolt],  four
times  the  fearful  edge.’  I  give  the  literal  English  of  the  words  as  they  stand,
tho  sense  being,  according  to  S&yan*,  that  he  who  has  more  arms  is  stronger
than  he  who  has  fewer,  the  arms  intended  being,  perhaps,  sacrifice  and  prayer.

8  The  Footless  Maid:  Dawn.  The  j Babe  Unborn:  the  Sun  before  his
appearance  in  heaven.

4  The  darling  of  the  Maide/rs  :  the  Sun,  the  lover  of  the  Dawns.

5  The  mystery  thought- surpassing  :  the  mystery  of  the  Sun’s  motion  excites
wonder,  and  Mitra  and  Vanina  are  praised  in  connexion  with  it.


206  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  T.

6  May  the  milch-kine  who  favour  Mamateya  prosper  in  this

world  him  who  loves  devotion.

May  he,  well  skilled  in  rites,  beg  food,  and  calling  Aditi  with
his  lips  give  us  assistance.

7  Gods,  Mitra-Varuna,  with  love  and  worship,  let  me  make  you

delight  in  this  oblation.

May  our  prayer  be  victorious  in  battles,  may  we  have  rain
from  heaven  to  make  us  prosper.

HYMN  CLIII.  Mitra- Vanina.

We  worship  with  our  reverence  and  oblations  you,  Mitra-
Varuna,  accordant,  mighty,

So  that  with  us,  yc  Twain  whose  backs  are  sprinkled  with  oil,
the  priests  with  oil  and  hymns  support  you.

2  Your  praise  is  like  a  mighty  power,  an  impulse  :  to  you,  Twain

Gods,  a  well-formed  hymn  is  offered,

As  the  priest  decks  you,  Strong  Ones,  in  assemblies,  and  the
princo  fain  to  worship  you  for  blessiDgs.

3  0  Mitra-Varuna,  Aditi  the  Milch-cow  streams  for  the  rite,  for

folk  who  bring  oblation,

When  in  the  assembly  he  who  worships  moves  you,  like  to  a
human  priest,  with  gifts  presented.

4  So  may  the  kine  and  heavenly  Waters  pour  you  sweet  drink

in  families  that  make  you  joyful.

Of  this  may  lie,  the  ancieut  House-Lord,  give  us.  Enjoy,
drink  of  the  milk  the  cow  provideth.


6  Md  matey  a :  the  Ron  of  Marantd,  Dlrghatamas  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.

Him  vsho  loves  derotion  :  apparently  Puruuil}ha  the  institutor  of  the
sacrifice,  mentioned  in  stanza  6  of  the  preceding  hymn.

May  he  bey  food :  the  food  that  remains  after  the  oblations  have  been
presented  and  consumed.

Aditi :  I  follow  Ludwig  in  taking  Aditi  in  the  usual  signification.  Sdyana
takes  it  as  meaning  1  a  perfect  ceremony'  which  is  to  be  completed,  and
Grassmann  as  famine,  dearth,  or  want,  which  is  to  be  averted.

The  hymn  is  full  of  difficulties,  and  cannot  at  present  be  satisfactorily
translated.

2  i The  prince :  the  wealthy  man  who  institutes  the  sacrifice.

3  Aditi,  the  Milch-cov :  aditi  regarded  as  the  source  of  rewards  for  tho

E;  or  Aditi  may  be  taken  aa  an  epithet,  '  the  exhaustless,’  qualifying
.-cow.

4  The  ancient  House-Lord :  Agni,  the  guardian  of  the  homestead.


nYMti  105.]


TUB  MQVEDA.

HYMN  CLIV.


207


Vishnu.


I  will  declare  the  -mighty  deeds  of  Vishnu,  of  him  who
measured  out  the  earthly  regions,

Who  propped  the  highest  place  of  congregation,  thrice  setting
dowu  his  footstep,  widely  striding.  "

2  For  this  his  mighty  deed  is  Vishnu  lauded,  like  some  wild

beast,  dread,  prowling,  mountain-roaming  ;

He  within  whose  three  wide-extended  paces  all  living  creatures
have  their  habitation.

3  Let  the  hymn  lift  itself  as  strength  to  Vishnu,  the  Bull  far-

striding,  dwelling  on  the  mountains,

Him  who  alone  with  triple  step  hath  measured  this  common
dwelling-place,  long,  far  extended.

4  Him  whose  three  places  that  are  filled  with  sweetness,  imperish¬

able,  joy  as  it  may  list  them,

Who  verily  alouc  upholds  the  threefold,  the  earth,  the  heaven,
and  all  living  creatures.

5  May  I  attain  to  that  his  well-loved  mansion  where  men  devoted

to  the  Gods  aro  happy.

For  there  springs,  close  akin  to  the  Wide-Stridcr,  the  well  of
meath  in  Vishnu's  highest  footstep.

6  Fain  would  we  go  unto  your  dwelling-places  where  there  arc

many-horned  and  nimble  oxen,

For  mightily,  there,  shiueth  dowu  upon  us  the  widely-striding
Bull's  sublimest  mansion.


HYMN  CLV.  Vishnu-Indra.

To  the  great  Hero,  him  who  sets  bis  mind  thereon,  and  Vishnu,
praise  aloud  in  song  your  draught  of  juice, —

G<xls  ne’er  beguiled,  who  borne  as 't  were  by  noble  steed,  have
stood  upon  the  lofty  ridges  of  the  hills.


1  The  highest  place  of  congregation  :  heaven,  where  the  Gods  are  assembled.
Thrice  setting  down  his  footstep  :  see  I.  22.  16.

2  For  this  his  might;/  deed  :  I  have  followed  S&yana  who  takes  the  active
verb  in  a  passive  signification.  Prof.  Peterson  translates  :  ‘  Vishnu  makes
loud  boast  of  this/  which  is  perhaps  a  more  accurate  rcuderiug.

5  Meath:  or  nectar,  or  honey  ;  meaning  celestial  Soma.

6  Your  dwelling-places  :  Vishnu’s  and  probably  Indra’s.

Many-homed  and  nimble  oxen :  the  stars  with  their  over-twinkling  rays.

Cf.  I.  105.  10  ;  VAlakhUya  7.  2.

1  To  the  great  Hero :  Indra.  Who  sets  his  mind  thereon :  who  loves  praiac.


208  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOR  I.

2  Your  Soma-drinker  keeps  afar  your  furious  rush,  ludra  and

Vishnu,  when  ye  come  with  all  your  might.

That  which  hath  been  directed  well  at  mortal  man,  bow-armed
Krisinu’s  arrow,  ye  turn  far  aside.

3  These  offerings  increase  his  mighty  manly  strength  :  he  brings

both  Parents  down  to  share  the  genial  flow.

He  lowers,  though  a  son,  the  Father’s  highest  name;  the  third
is  that  which  is  high  in  the  light  of  heaven.

4  We  laud  this  manly  power  of  him  the  Mighty  One,  preserver,

inoffensive,  bounteous  and  benign ;

His  who  strode,  widely  pacing,  with  three  steppings  forth  over
the  realms  of  earth  for  freedom  and  for  life.

5  A  mortal  man,  when  he  beholds  two  steps  of  him  who  looks

upon  the  light,  is  restless  with  amaze.

But  his  third  step  doth  no  one  venture  to  approach,  no,  nor
tho  feathered  birds  of  air  who  fly  with  wings.

6  He,  like  a  rounded  wheel,  hath  in  swift  motion  set  his  ninety

racing  steeds  together  with  the  four.

Developed,  vast  in  form,  with  those  who  sing  forth  praise,  a
youth,  no  more  a  child,  he  cometh  to  our  call.

HYMN  CL VI.  Vishnu.

Far-shining,  widely  famed,  going  thy  wonted  way,  fed  with
the  oil,  be  helpful,  Mitra-like,  to  us.

So,  Vishnu,  e’en  the  wise  must  swell  thy  song  of  praise,  and
lie  who  hath  oblations  pay  thee  solemn  rites.


2  Your  Soma-drinker :  you  gently  approach  your  devout  worshipper  and  do
him  no  harm.

Kritdnu  :  one  of  the  guardians  of  the  heavenly  Soma,  apparently  a  demon
of  drought  who  prevents  men  from  enjoying  the  ambrosial  rain.

8  Both  Parent! :  Heaven  and  Earth.  The  genial  flow :  the  sacrificial  offering,
the  libation  of  Soma  juice.

lit  lotoerf,  though  a  ton :  the  meaning  appears  to  bo  that  Vishnu  takes  rank
in  the  sacrifice  above  his  own  father  Dyaus,  and  that  Agni  has  the  third  place.

5  ‘  His  (Vishnu's)  path  on  earth  and  in  the  firmament  is  within  mortal
observation  ;  not  so  that  in  heaven.' — Wilson.  HU  third  step:  in  the  highest
heaven.  Cf.  I.  154.  5.

0  This  verse  is  not  very  intelligible.  Wilson  following  Sdyana,  gives  tho
following  explanation :  ‘  Vishnu  is  here  identified  with  Time,  comprising
ninety-four  periods :  the  year,  two  solstices,  fivo  seasons,  twelve  months,
twenty-four  half-mouths,  thirty  days,  eight  watches,  and  twelve  zodiacal  signs.'
Ludwig  translates  the  first  hemistich  :  ‘  aud  under  four  names  (of  the  four
seasons]  he,  like  a  round  wheel,  hath  set  in  motion  ninety  spokes.'  The  steeds,
or  spokes,  are  the  days  of  the  solar  year,  ninety  in  each  of  the  four  seasons.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYSfX  157.]


209


2  He  who  brings  gifts  to  him  the  Ancient  and  the  Last,  to

Vishnu  who  ordains,  together  with  bis  Spouse,

Who  tells  the  lofty  birth  of  him  the  Lofty  One,  shall  verily
surpass  in  glory  e’en  his  peer.

3  Him  have  ye  satisfied,  singers,  as  well  as  ye  know,  primeval

germ  of  Order  even  from  his  birth.

Ye,  knowing  e’en  his  name,  have  told  it  forth  :  may  we,  Vishjiu,
enjoy  the  grace  of  thee  the  Mighty  One.

4  The  Sovran  Varuna  and  both  the  Asvins  wait  on  this  the  will

of  him  who  guides  the  Marut  host-
Vishnu  hath  power  supreme  and  might  that  finds  the  day,
and  with  his  Friend'usbars  the  stable  of  the  kine.

5  Even  he  the  Heavenly  One  who  came  for  fellowship,  Vishnu

to  Indra,  godly  to  the  godlier,

Who,  Maker,  throned  in  three  worlds,  helps  the  Aryan  man,
and  gives  the  worshipper  his  share  of  Holy  Law.

HYMN  CL VII.  Asvins.

Aoni  is  wakened :  Surya  riseth  from  the  earth.  Mighty,  re¬
fulgent  Dawn  hath  shone  with  all  her  light.

The  Asvins  have  equipped  their  chariot  for  the  course.  God
Savitar  hath  moved  the  folk  in  sundry  ways.

2  When,  Asvins,  ye  equip,  your  very  mighty  car,  bedew,  ye

Twain,  our  power  with  honey  and  with  oil.

To  our  devotion  give  victorious  strength  in  war :  may  we  win
•  riches  in  the  heroes’  strife  for  spoil.

3  Nigh  to  us  come  the  Asvins’  lauded  three- wheeled  car,  the  car

laden  with  meath  and  drawn  by  fleet-foot  steeds,
Three-seated,  opulent,  bestowing  all  delight :  may  it  bring
weal  to  us,  to  cattle  and  to  men.

4  Bring  hither  nourishment  for  us,  ye  Asvins  Twain ;  sprinklo

us  with  your  whip  that  drops  with  honey-dew.


2  Together  with  his  Spouse :  surxa jjdnaye  ;  explained  by  S&yana  to  mean
‘self -born,’  and  by  Ludwig  ‘very  delightful.’

4  With  his  Friend  :  assists  his  friend  Indr*  in  releasing  the  rain  imprisoned
in  the  mountains  of  cloud,  or  the  rays  of  light  that  have  been  stolen.

5  His  share  of  Holy  Law :  his  share  of  the  blessings  which  follow  the  per¬
formance  of  sacrifice.

1  Savitar  :  the  Sun  as  the  great  cause  of  lifo.

3  Three-ichceled  ear:  sec  L  34.  5.

4  l’our  whip  :  see  Hymns  of  the  AtharTa-veda,  IX.  1,  which  is  a  glorifica¬
tion  of  the  Asvins’  Honey- Whip,  signifying,  perhaps,  the  early  stimulating
and  life-giving  breeze  which  accompanies  the  first  appearance  of  these  Lords
of  Light  and  Heralds  of  Dawn.


•  210  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOH  I.

Prolong  our  days  of  life,  wipe  out  our  trespasses ;  destroy  our
foes,  be  our  companions  and  our  Friends.

5  Yo  store  the  germ  of  life  in  female  creatures,  ye  lay  it  up
within  all  living  beings.

Ye  have-  sent  forth,  0  Asvins  passing  mighty,  the  fire,  the
sovrans  of  the  wood,  the  waters.

C  Leeches  are  ye  with  medicines  to  heal  us,  and  charioteers  are
ye  with  skill  in  driyiug.

Ye  Strong,  give  sway  to  him  who  brings  oblation  and  with  his
heart  pours  out  bis  gift  before  you.

HYMN  CLVIIL  A?vin8.

Ye  Vasus  Twain,  yo  Rudras  full  of  counsel,  grant  us,  Strong
Strengthened,  when  ye  stand  beside  us,

What  woalth  Auchathya  craves  of  you,  great  Helpers  when
ye  come  forward  with  no  niggard  succour.

2  Who  may  give  you  aught,  Vasus,  for  your  favour,  for  what,

at  the  Cow’s  place,  ye  grant  through  worship  1

Wake  for  us  understanding  full  of  riches,  come  with  a  heart
that  will  fulfil  our  longing.

3  As  erst  for  Tugra’s  son  your  car,  sea-crossing,  strong,  was

equipped  and  set  amid  the  waters,

So  may  I  gaiu  your  shelter  aud  protection  as  with  winged
course  a  here  seeks  his  army.

i  May  this  my  praiso  preserve  Uchathya’s  offspring :  let  not
these  Twain  who  fly  with  wings  exhaust  me.

■Let  not  the  wood  ten  times  up-piled  consume  me,  when  fixed
for  you  it  bites  the  ground  it  stands  on.

5  The  most  maternal  streams,  wherein  the  Dasas  cast  me
securely  bound,  have  not  devoured  me.

When  Traitana  would  cleave  my  head  asunder,  the  Dasa
wounded  his  own  breast  and  shoulders.

5  The  tovrane  of  the  wood:  the  tall  tree*  of  the  forest.

1  Ye  Vaius  Twain,  ye  Jtudras :  the  Asvins  are  addressed  as  identical  with
these  two  classes  of  Gods.  See  I.  31.  3.  and  34. 11.

Auchathya :  the  son  of  Uchathya,  Dtrglia tamos  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.

2  The  Cow  i  place :  according  to  SAyana,  the  altar;  the  Cow  being  the
the  earth.

3  Tugra't  ton  :•  see  I.  116.  3.

4  Uchathya' s  offering  :  the  poet  himself.  Thete  Twain  :  day  and  night.
From  this  and  the  following  verse  it  would  appear  that  iMrghatamas  had  been
subjected  to  the  ordeals  of  fire,  water,  and  single  combat  with  a  man  called
Traitana,  and  preserved  in  all  three  by  the  Asvins.  See  Ludwig,  Der  Rig-
veda,  IV.  p.  44.


ffTJfiY  160.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  211

6  Dirghatamas  the  son  of  Mamata  hath  come  to  length  of  days
in  the  tenth  age  of  human  kind.

He  is  the  Brahman  of  the  waters  as  they  strive  to  reach  their
end  and  aim :  their  charioteer  is  he.

HYMN  CLIX.  Heaven  and  Earth.

I  PRAISE  with  sacrifices  mighty  Heaven  and  Earth  at  festivals,
the  wise,  the  Strengthened  of  Law.

Who,  having  Gods  for  progeny,  conjoined  with  Gods,  through
•  wonder-working  wisdom  bring  forth  choicest  boons.

2  With  invocations,  on  the  gracious  Father’s  mind,  and  on  the

Mother’s  great  inherent  power  I  muse.

Prolific  Parents,  they  nave  made  the  world  of  life,  and  for
their  brood  all  round  wide  immortality.

3  These  Sons  of  yours  well  skilled  in  work,  of  wondrous  power,

brought  forth  to  life  the  two  great  Mothers  first  of  all.

To  keep  the  truth  of  all  that  stands  and  all  that  moves,  ye
guard  the  station  of  your  Son  who  knows  no  guile.

4  They  with  surpassing  skill,  most  wise,  have  measured  out  the

Twins  united  in  their  birth  and  in  their  home.

They,  the  refulgent  Sages,  weave  within  the  sky,  yea,  in  tho
depths  of  sea,  a  web  for  ever  new.

5  This  is  to-day  the  goodliest  gift  of  Savitar :  this  thought  we

have  when  now  the  God  is  furthering  us.

On  us  with  loving-kindness  Heaven  and  Earth  bestow  riches
and  various  wealth  and  treasure  hundredfold  !

HY  MN  CLX.  Heaven  and  Earth.

These,  Heaven  and  Earth,  bestow  prosperity  on  all,  sustainers
of  the  region.  Holy  Ones  and  wise,

Two  Bowls  of  noble  kind :  between  these  Goddesses  the  God,
the  fulgent  Sun,  travels  by  fixed  decree.


6  The  tenth  age :  perhaps  the  tenth  decade.  The  meaning  of  the  verse,
which  appears  to  be  a  later  addition,  is  obscure.

3  These  Sons  of  yours :  the  Ribhas,  who  restored  their  Parent*’  youth.
See  I.  20.  4.  The  Cm  great  Mothers  :  the  Parent*  of  all,  Heaven  and  Earth.

Your  Son  v ho  knows  no  guile  •  Surya,  or  the  Sun,  who  is  regarded  as  the
symbol  of  truth.  ‘  Solem  quis  dicere  falsum  Audeat  I  ’

4  The  Twins:  Heaven  and  Earth  In  the  depths  of  tea:  in  the  aerial
ocean  or  atmosphere.

1  Two  Bowls:  so  called  from  their  hemispherical  appearance.  But  see  Hillc-
brandt,  Vedinche  Mythologie,  I.  p.  177,  and  Ludwig,  Ueber  die  2i.  A.  auf  dew
G.  der  Rgveda-forschung,  p.  87.


212  THE  HYMNS  OP  •  [BOOK  /.

2  Widely-capacious  Pair,  mighty,  that  never  fail,  the  Father  and

the  Mother  keep  all  creatures  safe :

The  two  world-halves,  the  spirited,  the  beautiful,  because  the
Father  hath  clothed  them  in  goodly  forms.

3  Son  of  th*se  Parents,  he  the  Priest  with  power  to  cleanse,  Sage,

sanctities  the  worlds  with  his  surpassing  power.

Thereto  for  his  bright  milk  he  milked  through  all  the  days
the  party-coloured  Cow  and  the  prolifio  Bull.

4  Among  the  skilful  Gods  most  skilled  is  he,  who  made  the  two

world-halves  which  bring  prospex*ity  to  all ;

Who  with  great  wisdom  measured  both  the  regions  out,  and
stablished  them  with  pillars  that  shall  ne’er  decay.

5  Extolled  in  song,  0  Heaven  and  Earth,  bestow  on  us,  ye

mighty  Pair,  great  glory  aud  high  lordly  sway,

Whereby  we  may  extend  ourselves  ever  over’’ the  folk;  and
send  us  strength  that  shall  deserve  the  praise  of  men.

HYMN  CLXr.  Kibhua.

Why  hath  the  Best,  why  hath  the  Youngest  come  to  us?

Upon  what  embassy  comes  ho  1  What  have  we  said  ?

We  have  not  blamed  the  chalice  of  illustrious  birth.  We,
Brother  Agni,  praised  the  goodness  of  the  wood.

2  The  chalice  that  is  single  make  ye  into  four :  thus  have  the

Gods  commanded ;  therefore  am  I  come.

If,  0  Sudhanvau’s  Children,  ye  will  do  this  thing  ye  shall
participate  in  sacrifice  with  Gods.

3  What  to  the  envoy  Agni  in  reply  ye  3pako,  A  courser  must  bo

made,  a  ohariot  faahioued  here,

A  cow  must  be  created,  and  the  Twain  made  young.  When
we  have  done  these  things,  Brother,  we  turn  to  you.

‘  4  When  thus,  0  Kibhus,  ye'  had  done  ye  questioned  thus,
Whither  went  he  who  came  to  us  a  messenger?


2  The  Father :  Dyaus,  or  perhaps  Tvashtar.

3  Son  of  these  Parenli :  the  Sun,  the  of&pring  of  Heaven  and  Earth.
EorhU  bright  mite:  ho  has  drawn  the  dew  as  milk  from  his  mother  Earth,

and  obtained  his  light  from  Heaven  his  father.

4  Most  skilled  it  he :  S&yana  observes  that  having  magnified  Heaven  and
Earth  by  praising  their  son,  the  poet  now  magnifies  them  by  lauding  their
maker.  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  v.  80.

1  The  Ribhus  ask  Agni  why  he  come*  to  thorn.  The  chalice :  ace  L  20.  6.

•  3  A  courser  must  be  made,  etc. :  aei  I.  20.  2,  3,  i,  and  I.  110.  and  111.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


213


HYMN  161.]

Then  Tvashtar,  when  he  viewed  the  four  wrought  chalices,
concealed  himself  among  the  Consorts  of  the  Gods.

5  As  Tvashtar  thus  had  spoken.  Let  us  slay  these  men  who  have

reviled  the  chalice,  drinking-cup  of  Gods,

They  gave  themselves  new  names  when  Soma  juipe  was  shed,
and  under  these  new  names  the  Maiden  welcomed  them.

6  Indra  hath  yoked  his  Bays,  the  Asvins’  car  is  horsed,  Brihas-

pati  hath  brought  the  Cow  of  every  hue.

Ye  went  as  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  Vija  to  the  Gods,  and  skilled
in  war,  obtained  your  share  in  sacrifice.

7  Ye  by  your  wisdom  brought  a  cow  from  out  a  hide ;  unto  that

ancient  Pair  ye  gave  again  their  youth.

Out  of  a  horse,  Sudhanvan’s  Sons,  ye  formed  a  honse  :  a  cha¬
riot  ye  equipped,  and  went  unto  the  Gods.

8  Drink  ye  this  water,  were  the  words  ye  spake  to  them ;  or

drink  ye  this,  the  rinsing  of  the  Munja-grass.

If  ye  approve  not  even  this,  Sudhanvan’s  Sons,  then  at  the
third  libation  gladden  ye  yourselves.

9  Most  excellent  are  waters,  thus  said  one  of  you  ;  most  excel¬

lent  is  Agni,  thus  another  said.

Another  praised  to  many  a  one  the  lightning  cloud.  Then
did  ye  shape  the  cups,  speaking  the  words  of  truth.

10  One  downward  to  the  water  drives  the  crippled  cow,  another
trims  the  flesh  brought  on  the  carving-board.

One  carries  off  the  refuse  at  the  set  of  sun.  How  did  the  Pa¬
rents  aid  their  children  in  their  task  !


4  Then  Tvashtar :  represented  as  hiding  himself  for  shame  among  the  God¬
desses — probably  the  Celestial  Waters — when  he  saw  this  alteration  of  his  work,
ftnd  in  anger  proposing  to  slay  the  Ribhus  who  had  thus  disgraced  him.

5  New  names  :  probably  Ritua,  Seasons,  in  place  of  Ribhus.— Ludwig.  The
Maiden:  apparently  the  daughter  of  Trash  tar,  meaning,  perhaps,  as  Ludwig
suggests,  the  first  Dawn  of  the  year,  of  which  Trash lar  is  the  God.

6  The  Cow  of  every  hue :  the  fruitful  earth  restored  to  youth  by  the  Gods
of  the  Seasons.

8  The  rinsing  of  the  Munja-grass :  or  Soma  juice  which  lias  been  filtered
through  a  strainer  made  of  that  grass.  'The  two  first  alternatives  intimate
that  the  Ribhus  may  be  participant  of  the  libations  offered  at  dawn  or  at
noon  ;  the  third  applies  to  the  evening  sacrifice  ;  the  right  of  the  Ribhus  to
share  in  this  being  elsewhere  acknowledged.’ — Wilson.

9  The  meaning  of  these  sayings  in  this  place  is  not  clear.

10  The  restoration  to  youth  of  the  aged  Parents,  Heaven  and  Earth,  ap¬
pears  to  bo  symbolically  described  under  the  figure  of  a  sacrifice.

How  did  the  Parents  aid  I ;  weak  and  exhausted  with  age  they  were  unable
to  give  any  assistance.


214  THE  UYMN8  OP  '{BOOK  /.

1 1  On  the  high  places  ye  have  mado  the  grass  for  man,  and  water

in  the  valleys,  by  your  skill,  0  Men.

Ribhua,  ye  iterate  not  to-day  that  act  of  yours,  your  sleeping
iu  the  house  of  him  whom  naught  can  hide.

1 2  As,  compassing  them  round,  ye  glided  through  the  worlds,

where  had  the  venerable  Parents  their  abode  ?

Ye  laid  a  curse  on  him  who  raised  his  ann  at  you :  to  him
who  spake  aloud  to  you  ye  spake  again.

13  When  ye  hod  slept  your  fill,  ye  Ribhus,  thus  ye  asked,  0  thou

whom  naught  may  hide,  who  now  hath  wakened  ua  ?

The  goat  declared  the  hound  to  be  your  wakeuer.  That  day,
in  a  full  year,  ye  first  unclosed  your  eyes.

14  The  Maruts  move  in  heaven,  on  earth  this  Agni;  through  the

mid-firmament  the  Wind  approaches.

Yaruna  comes  in  the  sea’s  gathered  waters,  0  Sons  of  Strength,
desirous  of  your  presence.

HYMN  CLXIL  The  Horae.

Slight  us  not  Yaruna,  Aryaman,  or  Mitra,  Ribhukshan,
Indra,  Ayu,  or  the  Maruts,

When  we  declare  amid  the  congregation  the  virtues  of  the
strong  Steed,  God-descended.

2  What  time  they  bear  before  the  Courser,  covered  with  trap¬
pings  and  with  wealth,  the  grasped  oblation,


11  In  the  house  of  him  whom  naught  can  hide :  in  the  mansion  of  the  Sun,
to  whom  the  Kibhns  went  to  obtain  immortality.  In  this  and  the  remaining
stanza,  according  to  SAyana,  the  Kibhus  are  identified  with  the  rays  of  the
sun.

13  When  ye  had  slept :  in  the  mansion  of  the  Sun.

The  goat  declared  t!<e  hound  to  he  your  waiener:  the  meaning  is  obscure.
SAyana’a  rendering  is, '  the  Sun  replied  that  the  awakener  was  the  wind.’

That  day:  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  explains :  ‘you  hare  made  this  world
to-day  luminous,  after  tho  year  has  expired  ;  that  is,  the  rainy  season  being
past,  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  moon  are  again  visible.’

14  Sons  of  Strength :  ye  powerful  Kibhus.

1  Ribhuhshan :  a  name  of  Indra,  as  lord  of  the  Kibhus.

Ayu :  said  by  both  commentators,  SAyana  and  Mahtdhnra,  to  be  uRed  in
this  place  for  VAyu,  the  God  of  Wind.  Ayu  is  probably  Agni.

Amid  the  congregation :  at  sacrifice.

God-descended :  sprung  from  the  Gods,  or,  according  to  SAyana,  born  as  the
type  of  various  deities.

2  Grasped  oblation:  the  offering  that  is  to  be  made  for  the  horse,  and
which  has  been  taken  from  tho  remains  of  the  burnt-offering  made  the  night
before.


HYMN  1611


TSE  PJGVEDA.


215


The  dappled  goat  goeth  straightforward,  bleating,  to  the  place
doar  to  Indra  and  to  Pushan.

3  Dear  to  all  Gods,  this  goat,  the  share  of  Pushan,  is  first  led

forward  with  the  vigorous  Courser,

While  Tvashtar  sends  him  forward  with  the  Charger,  acceptable
for  sacrifice,  to  glory.

4  When  thrice  the  men  lead  round  the  Steed,  in  order,  who

goeth  to  the  Gods  as  meet  oblation,

The  goat  precedetli  him,  the  share  of  Pushan,  and  to  the  Gods
the  sacrifice  anoounceth.

5  Invoker,  ministering  priest,  atoner,  fire-kindler,  Soma-presser,

sage,  reciter.

With  this  well  ordered  sacrifice,  well  finished,  do  ye  fill  full
tho  chaunels  of  the  rivers.

6  The  hewers  of  the  post  and  those  who  carry  it,  and  those  who

carve  the  knob  to  deck  the  Horse's  stake ;

Those  who  prepare  the  cooking-vessels  for  the  Steed, — may
the  approving  help  of  these  promote  our  work.

7  Forth,  for  the  regions  of  the  Gods,  the  Charger  with  his

smooth  back  is  come ;  my  prayer  attends  him.

In  him  rejoice  the  singers  and  the  sages.  A  good  friend  have
we  won  for  the  Gods’  banquet.

8  May  the  fleet  Courser’s  halter  and  bis  heel-ropes,  the  head-stall

and  the  girths  and  cords  about  him.

And  tho  grass  put  within  his  mouth  to  bait  him, — among  the
Gods,  too,  let  all  these  be  with  thee.

9  What  part  of  the  Steed’s  flesh  the  fly  bath  eaten,  or  is  left

sticking  to  the  post  or  hatchet,

Or  to  the  slayer's  hands  and  nails  adhereth, — among  the  Gods,
too,  may  all  this  be  with  thee.

10  Food  undigested  steaming  from  his  belly,  and  any  odour  of
raw  flesh  remaining,

This  let  the  immolators  set  in  order  and  dress  the  sacrifice
with  perfect  cooking.


The  dappled  goat :  this  goat  it  to  be  tied  to  the  horse  at  the  sacrificial  poet.
P&shan  here  is  said  by  Sdyana  to  stand  for  Agui.

4  Who  goeth  to  the  God* :  the  object  of  the  sacrifice  is  to  fiend  the  horse  to
tho  Goda  that  lie  may  obtain  wealth  and  other  blessings  for  his  sacrifice  re.

5  Invoker,  etc  :  these  are  the  designations  of  eight  of  the  sixteen  pries ta  em¬
ployed  at  solemn  rites.  The  *age  ( tuviprdix ,  a  priest  of  profound  knowledge)
18  the  Bupcrintcndenj  of  the  whole  ceremony.

Fill  fill  the  channel* :  obtaiu  abundance  of  rain  ;  or  perhaps  offer  oblations
in  abundance.


216  THE  EYMVS  OP  [BOOK  1.

11  What  from  thy  body  which  with  fire  is  roasted,  when  thou  art

set  upon  the  spit,  distilletb, —

Let  not  that  lie  on  earth  or  grass  neglected,  but  to  the  long¬
ing  Gods  let  all  be  offered.

12  They  who  observing  that  the  Horse  is  ready  call  out  and  say,

The  smell  is  good ;  remove  it ;

And,  oraving  meat,  await  the  distribution, — may  their  approv¬
ing  help  promote  our  labour.

1-3  The  trial-fork  of  the  flesh-cooking  caldron,  the  vessels  out  of
which  the  broth  is  sprinkled,

The  warming-pots,  the  covers  of  the  dishes,  hooks,  carving-
boards, — all  these  attend  the  Charger.

14  The  starting-place,  his’  place  of  rest  and  rolling,  the  ropes

wherewith  the  Charger’s  feet  were  fastened,

The  water  that  he  drank,  the  food  he  tasted, — among  the
Gods,  too,  may  all  these  attend  thee.

15  Let  not  the  fire,  smoke-scented,  make  thee  crackle,  nor  glow¬

ing  caldron  smell  and  break  to  pieces.

Offered,  beloved,  approved,  and  consecrated, — such  Charger
do  the  Gods  accept  with  favour.

16  The  robe  they  spread  upon  the  Horse  to  clothe  him,  the  upper

covering  and  the  golden  trappings.

The  halters  which  restrain  the  Steed,  the  heel-ropes, — all  these,
as  grateful  to  the  Gods,  they  offer.

17  If  one,  when  seated,  with  excessive  urging  hath  with  his  heel

or  with  his  whip  distressed  thee,

All  these  thy  woes,  as  with  the  oblations’  ladle  at  sacrifices,
with  my  prayer  I  banish.

18  The  four-and-thirty  ribs  of  the  swift  Charger,  kiu  to  the  Gods,

the  slayer’s  hatchet  pierces.

Cut  yo  with  skill,  so  that  the  parts  be  flawless,  and  piece  by
piece  declaring  them  dissect  them.

19  Of  Tvash tar’s  Charger  there  is  ono  dissector, — this  is  tho

custom — two  there  are  who  guide  him.

Such  of  his  limbs  as  I  divide  in  order,  all  these,  amid  the
balls,  in  fire  I  offor.


18  Four-and-thirty :  ao  many  out  of  the  thirty-six.  As  the  Sacrificial
Horse  is  the  symbol  of  tho  heavens,  the  thirty-four  riba  represent  the  sun,
the  moou,  the  five  planets,  and  tho  twenty-seven  nakthatras  or  lunar  aa-
teriams.  See  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  186.  Piece  by  piece  declaring
them :  the  dissectors  are  to  name  the  several  parta  as  they  divide  thorn,  each
part  being  sacred  to  a  separate  divinity.

19  Amid  the  ball* :  the  meat  made  up  into  balls.


TUB  MOV  ED  A.


217


BYMN  163.]


20  Let  not  thy  dear  soul  bum  thee  as  thou  comest,  let  not  the

hatchet  linger  in  thy  body.

Let  not  a  greedy  clumsy  immolator,  missing  the  joints,
mangle  thy  limbs  uuduly.

21  No,  here  thou  diest  not,  thou  art  not  injured  :  Ify  easy  paths

unto  the  Gods  thou  goest.

Both  Bays,  both  spotted  mares  are  now  thy  fellows,  and  to
the  ass’s  pole  is  yoked  the  Charger.

22  May  this  Steed  bring  us  all-sustaining  riches,  wealth  in  good

kine,  good  horses,  manly  offspring.

Freedom  from  sin  may  Aditi  vouchsafe  us :  the  Steed  with
our  oblations  gain  us  lordship !


HYMN  CLXIII.  Tho  Horse.

What  time,  first  springing  into  life,  thou  neighedst,  proceed¬
ing  from  the  sea  or  upper  waters,

Limbs  of  the  deer  hadst  thou,  and  eagle  pinions.  0  Steed,
thy  birth  is  high  and  must  be  lauded.

2  This  Steed  which  Yama  gave  bath  Trita  harnessed,  and  him,

the  first  of  all,  hath  Indra  mounted.

His  bridle  the  Gandharva  grasped.  0  Vasus,  from  out  the
Sun  ye  fashioued  forth  the  Courser.

3  Yama  art  thou,  0  Horse ;  thou  art  Aditya ;  Trita  art  thou  by

secret  operation.

Thou  art  divided  thoroughly  from  Soma.  They  say  thou
hast  three  bonds  in  heaven  that  hold  thee.


20  Bum  thee :  make  thee  Mid.

21  Both  Bays :  thou  art  now  associated  in  heaven  with  the  two  bay  hones
of  Indra,  the  two  spotted  mares  of  the  Maruta,  and  the  as*  that  draws
the  •chariot  of  the  Asvins.

A  full  description  of  an  Asvamedha  or  Horse-sacrifice  in  later  times  may
be  found  in  the  RAmAyana,  Book  I.,  Cantos  10—13.

1  From  the  sea :  the  Sacrificial  Horae  is  here  identified  with  the  Sun  in  the
ocean  of  air.

2  Yama :  here  said  to  mean  Agnl,  as  a  solar  deity.  Trita  :  as  God  of  the
remote  birth-place  of  the  Sun.  See  I.  187,  note.

The  QandJiarva  :  ViscAvasu,  a  heavenly  being  who  dwells  in  the  region  of
the  air  and  guards  tho  celoatial  Soma.

3  Aditya :  the  Sun.

By  secret  operation :  by  the  mysterious  effect  of  tho  sacrifice.

(Soma ;  here,  perhaps,  the  Moon  ;  but  the  meaning  is  uncertain.


218  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  L

4  Three  bonds,  they  say,  thou  hast  iu  heaven  that  bind  thee,

three  in  the  waters,  three  within  the  ocean.

To  me  thou  scemest  Varuna,  0  Coux*ser,  there  where  they  say
is  thy  sublimest  birth-place.

5  Here,  Coarser,  are  the  places  where  they  groomed  thee,  here

are  the  traces  of  thy  hoofs  as  winner.

Here  have  I  seen  the  auspicious  reins  that  guide  thee,  which
those  who  guard  the  holy  Law  keep  safely.

6  Thyself  from  far  I  recognized  iu  spirit, — a  Bird  that  from

below  flew  through  the  heaven.

I  saw  thy  head  still  soaring,  striving  upward  by  paths  unsoiled
by  dust,  pleasant  to  travel.

7  Here  I  beheld  thy  form,  matchless  in  glory,  eager  to  win  thee

food  at  the  Cow’s  station.

"Whene’er  a  man  brings  thee  to  thine  enjoyment,  thou  swallow-
est  the  plants,  most  greedy  eater.

8  After  thee,  Courser,  come  the  car,  the  bridegroom,  the  kine

come  after,  and  the  chann  of  maidens.

Full  companies  have  followed  for  thy  friendship :  the  pattern
of  thy  vigour  Gods  have  copied.

9  Homs  made  of  gold  hath  he :  his  feet  arc  iron :  less  fleet  than

he,  though  swift  as  thought,  is  Iudra.

The  Gods  have  come  that  they  may  taste  the  oblation  of  him
who  mounted,  first  of  all,  the  Courser.

10  Symmetrical  in  flank,  with  rounded  haunches,  mettled  like
*  heroes,  the  Celestial  Coursers

Put  forth  their  strength,  like  swans  in  lengthened  order,  when
they,  the  Steeds,  have  reached  the  heavenly  causeway.


4  The  three  lends  in  heaven  are  said  by  SAyana  to  be  his  ‘  media  of  origin,
that  is  the  Vasus,  Aditya,  and  Heaven.’  By  the  waters,  it  is  said  that  tho
habitable  world  ia  intended,  aud  that  tho  three  lends  therein  are  tillage,  rain,
and  seed.  In  the  ocean,  that  is  the  firmament,  they  are  cloud,  lightning,  and
thunder.  Varuna:  on  account  of  the  three  bonds  (See  I.  24.  15).

6  In  this  aud  the  following  stanza  the  horse  is  regarded  as  identical  with
the  Sun  in  his  course  through  heaven,  and  ns  accepting  the  oblations  offered
by  the  worshipper.  The  Cow's  station :  the  chief  place  of  earth,  the  Cow,
is  the  altar,

7  Most  greedy  eater  :  regarded  aa  a  mere  earthly  horse.

9  Honu  made  of  gold:  according  to  SAyana,  the  word  horns  is  used  figur¬
atively  for  mane.  The  Sun’s  rays  are  probably  intended.

n 'ho  mounted,  first  of  all,  the  Courser:  Indra,  M  is  said  in  verse  2.

10  The  horses  of  the  Sun  are  said  to  bo  spoken  of.  The  exact  meaning  of
the  words  ia  uncertain.


HYMN  164.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


219


1 1  A  body  formed  for  flight  hast  thou,  0  Charger ;  swift  as  the

wind  in  motion  is  thy  spirit.

Thy  horns  are  spread  abroad  in  all  directions:  they  move
with’restless  beat  in  wildernesses.

12  The  strong  Steed  hath  come  forward  to  the  slaughter,  ponder¬

ing  with  a  mind  directed  God-ward.

The  goat  who  is  his  kin  is  led  before  him :  the  sages  and  the
singers  follow  after.

13  The  Steed  is  come  unto  the  noblest  mansion,  is  come  unto  his

Father  and  bis  Mother.

This  day  shall  he  approach  the  Gods,  most  welcome :  then  he
declares  good  gifts  to  him  who  offers.

HYMN  CLXIY.  Visvedcvaa.

Of  this  benignant  Priest,  with  eld  grey-coloured,  the  brother
midmost  of  the  three  is  lightning.

The  third  is  he  whose  back  with  oil  is  sprinkled.  Here  I
behold  the  Chief  with  seven  male  children.

2  Seven  to  the  one-whcelcd  chariot  yoke  the  Courser;  bearing

seven  names  the  single  Courser  draws  it.

Three-naved  the  wheel  is,  sound  and  undecaying,  whereon  are
resting  all  these  worlds  of  being.

3  The  seven  who  on  the  seven-wheeled  car  are  mounted  have

horses,  seven  in  tale,  who  draw  them  onward.

Seven  Sisters  utter  songs  of  praise  together,  in  whom  the
names  of  the  seven  Cows  are  treasured.

11  Thy  horns  :  meaning,  here,  perhaps  hoofs.

13  His  Father  and  his  Mother  :  Heaven  and  Earth.

Wilson  remarks:  'Although  more  mystical  than  the  preceding  hymn,
especially  in  regard  to  the  intimations  of  the  identity  of  the  horse  with  the
sun,  there  is  nothing  in  it  incompatible  with  tho  more  explicit  description  in
the  former  Siikta  of  the  actual  sacrifice  of  a  horse.'

1  The  priest  is  Aditya,  the  Sun.  His  next  brother  is  lightning,  another
form  of  fire,  and  the  third  brother  is  Affni  Gfrrhapatya,  the  western  sacred  fire
maintained  by  each  householder,  and  fed  with  oblations  of  clarified  butter.

The  seven  male  children  are  probably  the  priests.

2  Seven :  priests.  The  one-wheeled  chariot :  tho  Sun.  Seven  names :  perhaps
the  seven  solar  rays.  Three-naved :  with  reference,  probably,  to  the  three
seasons,  the  hot  weather,  the  rains,  and  the  cold  weather.  On  this  wheel  of
the  Sun  all  existing  things  depend.

8  The  seven  :  according  to  SAyana,  tho  seven  solar  rays,  or  tho  seven  divi¬
sions  of  the  year,  solstice,  season,  month,  fortnight,  day,  night,  hour.  Tho
seven  wheels  of  the  chariot  aud  the  seven  horses  may  also,  according  to  SA¬
yana,  be  the  solar  rays.

Seven  Sisters :  probably  the  seven  celestial  rivers,  which,  as  emblems  of  fer¬
tility  may  hear  the  name  of  cows.  SAyana  expluius  the  seven  Sisters  as  the


220  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  /.

4  Who  hath  beheld  him  aa  he  sprang  to  being,  seen  how  the

boneless  One  supports  the  bony  ?

Where  is  the  blood  of  earth,  the  life,  the  spirit?  Who  may  ap¬
proach  the  roan  who  knows,  to  ask  it  f

5  Unripe  irt  mind,  in  spirit  uudiscerning,  I  ask  of  these  the  Gods’

established  places ;

For  up  above  the  yearling  Calf  the  sages,  to  form  a  web,  their
own  seven  threads  have  woven.

6  I  ask,  unknowing,  those  who  know,  the  sages,  as  one  all  igno¬

rant  for  sake  of  knowledge,

What  was  that  One  who  in  the  Unborn’s  image  hath  stablished
and  fixed  firm  these  worlds'  six  regions.

7  Let  him  who  knoweth  presently  declare  it,  this  lovely  Bird’s

securely  founded  station.

Forth  from  his  head  the  Cows  draw  milk,  and,  wearing  his
vesture,  with  their  foot  have  drunk  the  water.

8  The  Mother  gave  the  Sire  his  share  of  Order :  with  thought,

at  first,  she  wedded  him  in  spirit.

She,  the  coy  Dame,  was  filled  with  dew  prolific  :  with  adoration
men  approached  to  praise  her.


solar  rays,  or  the  six  seasons  and  the  year,  or  the  six  pairs  of  months  with  the
intercalary  month,  and  the  seven  Cowa  as  the  seven  notes  of  music  aa  employed
in  chanting  the  praises  of  the  Sun.

4  How  the  boneleii  One  aupporta  the  bony :  or  in  more  conventional  and  less
literal  words,  how  the  unsubstantial  one  (feminine)  supports  that  (masculine)
which  ia  endowed  with  substance.

The  bondeaa  or  unsubstantial  is  Prakriti,  Nature,  tho  original  source  of  the
substantial,  that  is  the  material  and  visible  world.  According  to  Hillebrandt,
Vcdische  Mythologie,  I.  p.  338,  the  bonelett  One  is  the  Sun  and  the  bony  the
Moon.  See  M.  Muller,  India,  What  can  it  Teach  us  ?  pp.  245,  246.

5  The  yearling  Calf :  probably  the  Sun,  in  reference  to  his  yearly  course.
What  the  8 even  threada  are  is  uncertain.  SAyana  says  they  are  the  seven
forms  of  the  Soma  sacrifice,  or  the  seven  metres  of  the  Vedas.  Ludwig  thinks
that  the  general  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  :  I  (tho  poet)  content  myself  with
asking  for  information  about  tho  plaoes  or  traces  of  the  Gods  in  our  world  ;
but  the  sages  talk  about  things  which  are  beyond  my  power  of  comprehension.

6  In  tho  Unbom’a  image :  in  tho  form  of  Aja  or  tho  Unborn  Creator,  repre¬
sented  by  the  Sun.  Cf.  VIII.  41.  10.

7  Thia  lovdy  Bird's...atation :  the  place  of  the  Sun.

The  Cows  draw  milk :  ‘  The  solar  rays,  although  especial  agents  in  sending
down  rain,  nro  equally  active  in  its  re-absorption.’ — Wilson.

8  Tho  mother  Earth  gave  the  father  Heaven  his  share  in  the  great  work  of
coemical  production,

Hew  prolific :  the  fertilizing  rain.


BYif.V  164.]


TBS  RIO  VEDA.


221


9  Yoked  was  the  Mother  to  the  boon  Cow's  car-pole  :  in  the  dank
rows  of  cloud  the  Infant  rested.

Then  the  Calf  lowed,  and  looked  upon  the  Mother,  the  Cow  who
wears  all  shapes  in  three  directions.

10  Bearing  three  Mothers  and  three  Fathers,  single  he  stood

erect :  they  never  make  him  weary.

There  on  the  pitch  of  heaven  they  speak  together  in  speech
all-knowing  but  not  all-impelling.

11  Formed  with  twelve  spokes,  by  length  of  time  unweakened,

rolls  round  the  heaven  this  wheel  of  during  Order.

Herein  established,  joined  in  pairs  together,  seven  hundred
Sons  and  twenty  stand,  0  Agui.

12  They  call  him  in  the  farther  half  of  heaven  the  Sire  five-footed,

of  twelve  forms,  wealthy  in  watery  store.

These  others  say  that  he,  God  with  far-seeing  eyes,  is  mounted
on  the  lower  seven-wheeled,  six-spoked  car.

13  Upon  this  five-spoked  wheel  revolving  ever  all  living  creatures

rest  and  are  dependent.

Its  axle,  heavy-laden,  is  not  heated :  the  nave  from  ancient
time  remains  unbroken.

14  The  wheel  revolves,  un wasting,  with  its  felly  :  ten  draw  it,

yoked  to  the  far-stretching  car-pole.

The  Sun’s  eye  moves  encompassed  by  the  region :  on  him  depend¬
ent  rest  all  living  creatures.

9  Yoked  was  the  Mother :  Earth  undertook  the  functions  of  the  cow  who
supplies  milk  for  sacrifices.

The  Infant :  the  young  Sun.

The  Calf  latecd :  the  cloud  thundered.  In  three  directions :  heaven,  mid-air,
and  earth.

10  Three  Mothers  and  three  Fathers :  the  three  earths  and  the  three  heavens.
This  fanciful  threefold  division  has  occurred  bofore.  See  I.  105.  5.

They  speak :  the  Gods  converse  together  about  the  Sun,  says  Sdyana,  iu
speech  that  knows  all  but  does  not  extend  to  or  impress  nil.

11  The  wheel  formed  with  twelve  spokes  is  tho  year  with  its  twolvo  months-
The  seven  hundred  and  twonty  bous,  joined  in  pairs,  are  tho  days  and  nights
of  the  year,  throo  hundred  and  sixty  of  each.

12  Five-footed :  the  five  feet  are,  SAynna  says,  tho  five  seasons,  the  dewy
and  cold  seasons  being  counted  as  one.  The  twelve  forms  are  the  months  of
the  year.  The  sevou  wheels  of  the  car  arc  said  to  be  the  seven  solar  rays,  and
the  six  spokes  of  each  wheel  are  the  six  seasons.  I  find  the  stanza  unintelli-
gible.

13  The  five-spoked  wheel :  in  reference,  perhaps,  to  the  five  seasons,  as  in
verso  12.

14  Ten  draw  it :  probably  the  ten  regions  of  space.

The  region  :  the  firmament,  mid-air.


m


222  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  t.

15  Of  the  co-born  they  call  the  seventh  single-born ;  the  six  twin

pairs  are  called  Rishie,  Children  of  Gods. .

Their  good  gifts  sought  of  men  are  ranged  in  order  due,  and
various  in  their  form  move  for  the  Lord  who  guides.

16  They  tolTl  me  these  were  males,  though  truly  females :  he

who  hath  eyes  sees  this,  the  blind  discerns  not.

The  son  who  is  a  sage  hath  comprehended  :  who  knows  this
rightly  is  his  father’s  father.

17  Beneath  the  upper  realm,  above  this  lower,  bearing  her  calf

at  foot  the  Cow  hath  risen.

Whitherward,  to  what  place  hath  she  departed  ?  Where  calves
she  ?  Not  amid  this  herd  of  cattle.

18  Who,  that  the  father  of  this  Calf  disccmeth  beneath  the  upper

realm,  above  the  lower.

Showing  himself  a  sago,  may  here  declare  it?  Whence  hath
the  Godlike  spirit  had  its  rising  1

19  Those  that  come  hitherward  they  call  departing,  those  that

depart  they  call  directed  hither.

And  what  so  ye  have  made,  Indra  and  Soma,  steeds  bear  as
't  were  yoked  to  the  region’s  car-pole.

20  Two  Birds  with  fair  wings,  knit  with  bonds  of  friendship,  in

the  same  sheltering  tree  have  found  a  refuge.


15  The  co-bom :  the  six  pairs  of  months,  or  six  seasons  of  two  months  each.
The  tingle-born  is  the  thirteenth  and  intercalary  month.  SAyana  explains
rithayah,  Rishis,  in  this  stanza  os  gantdrah,  goers;  but  in  what  senseis  uncertain.

•16  They  told  me  these  t cere  males :  Wilson  observes  :  '  This  is  a  piece  of
grammatical  mysticism  ;  rafini,  a  ray  of  the  sun,  here  personified  as  a  female,
is  properly  a  noun  masculine.’  But  this  is  just  the  reverse  of  the  explanation
required.  The  meaning  is  obscure.

Graasmaim  suggests  that  the  meaning  is  that  Night  and  Morning,  both
feminine,  have  received  the  masculine  name  of  Day.

The  son  who  it  a  sage :  '  According  to  the  Scholiast,  the  Sun  is  to  be  consider¬
ed  as  the  father  of  the  rays  of  light,  which  again,  in  their  collective  capacity,
being  the  cause  of  rain,  are  the  fosterers  or  parents  of  the  earth  :  the  Sun  is
thoreforc  father  Of  the  father,  and  ho  who  knows  this  is  identical  with  the
Sun.’— Wilson,  The  meaning  of  tho  last  semi-hemistich  is  probably  that  an
intelligent  son  may  be  called  the  parent  of  an  ignorant  father,  as  being  his
superior  in  knowledge.

17  Ushas  or  Dawn  hath  risen  between  heaven  and  earth,  carrying  with  her
the  young  Sun  her  offspring.  This  herd  of  cattle :  the  visible  world.

18  Ushas  is  the  mother,  but  who  iB  able  to  say  who  the  father  of  the  Sun  is!

19  Tim  stanza  may  refer  to  the  planets  which  change  their  relative
position  as  they  revolve.  Indra  is  hero  the  Sun,  and  Soma  the  Moon,

20  SAyana  says  that  the  two  Birds  aro  tho  vital  and  the  Supreme  Spirit,

dwelling  in  one  body.  The  vital  spirit  enjoys  the  fruit  or  rewards  of  actions
while  the  Supreme  Spirit  is  merely  a  passive  spectator.  •


HYMN  164.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


223


One  of  the  twain  eats  the  sweet  Fig-tree’s  fruitage ;  the  other
eating  not  regardeth  only.

21  Where  those  fine  Birds  hymn  ceaselessly  their  portion  of  life

eternal,  and  the  sacred  synods,

There  is  the  Universe’s  mighty  Keeper,  who,  wise, 'hath  entered
into  me  the  simple.

22  The  tree  whereon  the  fine  Birds  eat  the  sweetness,  whore  they

all  rest  and  procreate  their  offspring, —

Upon  its  top  they  say  the  fig  is  luscious :  none  gaineth  it  who
knoweth  not  the  Father.

23  How  on  the  G&yatri  the  G&yatrl  was  based,  how  from  the

Trishtup  they  fashioned  the  Triahtup  forth,

How  on  the  Jagati  was  based  the  Jagati, — they  who  know
this  have  won  themselves  immortal  life.


24  With  Gayatri  he  measures  out  the  praiso-song,  SAma  with
praise-song,  triplet  with  the  Trishtup,

The  triplet  with  the  two  or  four-foot  measure,  and  with  the
syllable  they  form  seven  metres.

21  The  fine  Birds  here  are  perhaps  the  priests,  and  the  Keeper  of  the
Universe  may  be  Soma.

22  SAyana  explains  suparrffC,  well-winged,  in  this  and  the  preceding  stanza
aa  smooth -gliding  (ray6).  Their  offspring  is,  ho  Bays,  the  light,  and  the  Father
ie  the  cherishing  and  protecting  Sun.  All  explanations  of  these  three  stanza*
can  be  only  conjeotuval.  Ludwig  in  of  opinion  that  they  are  originally
unconnected  fragments  and  that  they  have  been  inserted  together  in  this
hymn  merely  because  the  word  sup>irnt  (used  apparently  in  various  scD&es)
has  a  prominent  plnc«  in  each  stanza.

Suparnft  (dual)  has  been  explained  by  different  scholars  as  two  species  of
souls  ;  day  and  night.  Sun  and  Moon  ;  (plural)  as  rays  of  light ;  stars  ;  metres,
spirits  of  the  dead  ;  priests  ;  and  the  tree  on  which  they  rest  aa  the  body  *,
the  orb  or  region  of  the  Sun  ;  the  sacrificial  post ;  the  world  ;  and  the
mythical  World-Tree.  A  generally  satisfactory  explanation  is  scarcely  to  be
hoped  for.

23  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  paraphrases  this  stanza  ns  follows  :  '  They
who  know  the  station  of  Agui  upon  the  earth  ;  the  station  of  VAyu  that  was
fabricated  from  the  firmament,  and  that  station  of  the  Sun  which  is  placed
in  heaven,  obtain  immortality.’  He  observes  that  the  purport  of  the
phraseology,  borrowed  from  the  several  metres  G&yatrl,  Trishtubh,  and
Jagati,  is  not  very  clear,  and  that  it  may  be  merely  an  obscure  and  mystic
reference  to  the  text  of  the  Veda,  a  knowledge  of  which  is  essential  to  final
Wicity.  The  meaning  seem*  to  be  that  those  who  are  thoroughly  acquainted
with  the  appropriate  rewards  which  follow  the  employment  of  each  of  the
sacred  metres  named  are  on  the  right  road  to  immortal  life.

24  Triplet :  the  word  in  the  text  vdtd  ia  said  to  mean  either  two  or  three
connected  stanzas.

Two  or  four-foot  measure :  consisting  of  two  or  four  pddat  or  semi-hemistichs.

And  u nth  the  syllable  :  they  form  the  Ecvcn  generic  metres  of  the  Veda  with
the  syllable,  which  is  the  chief  element  of  metre,  tho  GAyatit  consisting  of  eight
syllables,  tho  Trishtup  of  eleven,  and  the  Jagati  of  twelve.  See  Wilson’s  uote.


224  TBS  BY  MSS  OP  [BOOK  /.

25  With  JagfttS  the  flood  in  heaven  he  stablished,  and  saw  the

Sun  in  the  Ratliantara  Siman.

Gayatrl  hath,  they  say,  three  brands  for  kindling :  hence  it
excels  in  majesty  and  vigour.

26  I  invocata  the  milch-cow  good  for  milking,  so  that  the  milker,

deft  of  hand,  may  drain  her.

May  Savitar  give  goodliest  stimulation.  The  caldron  is  made
hot ;  I  will  proclaim  it.

27  She,  lady  of  all  treasure,  is  come  hither  yearning  in  spirit  for

her  calf  and  lowing.

May  this  cow  yield  her  milk  for  both  the  Asvins,  and  may
she  prosper  to  our  high  advantage.

28  The  cow  hath  lowed  after  her  blinking  youngling;  she  licks

his  forehead,  as  she  lows,  to  form  it.

His  mouth  she  fondly  calls  to  her  warm  udder,  and  suckles
him  with  milk  while  gently  lowing.

29  He  also  snorts,  by  whom  encompassed  round  the  Cow  lows  as

she  clings  unto  the  shedder  of  the  rain.

She  with  her  shrilling  cries  hath  humbled  mortal  man,  and,
turned  to  lightning,  hath  stripped  oft'  her  covering  robe.

30  That  which  hath  breath  and  speed  and  life  and  motion  lies

firmly  stablished  in  the  midst  of  houses.

Living,  by  offerings  to  the  Dead  he  movoth,  Immortal  One
the  brother  of  the  mortal.

31  I  saw  the  Herdsman,  him  who  never  stumbles,  approaching

by  his  pathways  and  departing.

He,  clothed  with  gathered  and  diffusive  splendour,  within  the
worlds  continually  travels.


25  He :  Brahmft,  according  to  Sllyana.

JtatJianlara .-  one  of  the  most  important  Sima -hymns  ;  Sdmavcda  II.  i.  i.
ll  =  IJigveda  VII.  32.  22,  23.

Thru  brands :  the  three  pddas,  divisions,  or  linos  of  the  verse  being
fancifully  likened  to  the  sticks  with  which  the  sacrificial  fire  is  kindled.

26  The  milch-cow  iu  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  may  be  the  cow
who  supplies  milk  for  the  sacrifice.  But  Slyana  says  that  the  cow  may  be  tho
rain-cloud,  the  milk  being  the  rain  and  the  milker  V4yu  the  God  of  Wind
who  causes  it  to  flow.  The  calf,  SAyana  says,  is  tho  world  longing  for  tho
rain  to  falL

29  He  also probably  Parjanya,  the  personified  Storm-Cloud.  Tbe  Cow
here  is  undoubtedly  a  cloud.

30  The  subject  of  the  first  hemistich  is  apparently^  Agni.  The  Moon,
sustained  by  sacrificial  offerings  to  the  Departed,  appears  to  be  the  subject  of
the  second.  But  sec  Hymns  of  the  Atharva-veda  IX.  20.  8.

31  The  Herdsman :  the  Sun,  the  guardian  of  the  world.


TTYMy  1640


THE  RIGVEDA.


225


32  He  who  hath  made  him  doth  not  comprehend  him  :  from  him

who  saw  him  surely  is  he  hidden.

He,  yet  enveloped  in  his  Mother’s  bosom,  source  of  much  life,
hath  sunk  into  destruction.

33  Dyaus  is  my  Father,  my  begetter:  kinship  is. here.  This

great  earth  is  my  kin  and  Mother.

Between  the  wide-spread  world-halves  is  the  birth-place :  the
Father  laid  tho  Daughter’s  germ  within  it.

34  I  ask  thee  of  the  earth’s  extremest  limit,  where  is  the  centre

of  the  world,  I  ask  thee.

I  ask  thee  of  tho  Stallion's  seed  prolific,  I  ask  of  highest
heaven  where  Speech  abideth.

35  This  altar  is  the  earth’s  extremest  limit;  this  sacrifice  of  ours

is  the  world’s  centre.

The  Stallion’s  seed  prolific  is  tho  Soma;  this  Brahman
h:ghcst  heaven  where  Speech  abideth.

36  Seven  germs  unripened  yet  are  heaven’s  prolific  seed :  their

functions  they  maintain  by  Vishnu’s  ordinance.

Endued  with  wisdom  through  intelligence  and  thought,  they
compass  us  about  present  ou  every  side.

37  What  thing  I  truly  am  I  know  not  clearly :  mysterious,

fettered  in  my  mind  I  wander.

When  the  first-born  of  holy  Law  approached  mo,  then  of
this  speech  I  first  obtain  a  portion.

38  Back,  forward  goes  he,  grasped  by  strength  inherent,  the  Im¬

mortal  bom  tho  brother  of  the  mortal.


32  Lightning,  the  immediate  causo  of  rain,  with  his  oouutless  offspring  the
fertilising  rain-drops,  appears  to  he  alluded  to.

33  World-kalvt* :  literally  bowls  or  vessels  into  which  the  Soma  is  poured,
a  figurative  expression  for  heaven  and  earth.  The  firmament  or  spaco  between
these  two  is,  as  tho  region  of  the  rain,  tho  wonib  of  all  beings.  The  Father
ia  Dyaus  and  the  daughter  is  Earth  whose  fertility  depends  upon  the  germ  of
rain  laid  in  the  firmament.

85  The  earth's  extremest  limit :  the  altar,  as  the  place  nearest  to  heaven,  the
place  where  the  Gods  visit  men.

The  Stallion  :  Dyaus,  or  Father  Heaven.

This  Brahmin :  The  priest  so  named  who  recites  the  texts  of  the  Veda.

36  This  stanza,  as  Ludwig  remarks,  is  one  of  tho  most  unintelligible  in  the
whole  Veda.  The  seven,  according  to  SAyana,  are  the  solar  rays,  and  Vishnu
is’said  to  be  the  Sun.

37  The  first-born  of  holy  law :  according  to  SAyana,  the  first-born  (peroap-
tions)  of  the  truth.  Soma  may  be  intended,  as  suggested  by  Bergaine,
Religion  V&lique,  I.  150,

3S  This  stanza  appoars  to  refer  to  tho  Sun  in  bis  doily  onurse  from  oast  to
west  and  his  nightly  return  to  the  east,  tho  former  visible  to  men  and  tho
latter  invisible.

They,  iu  this  case,  would  mean  the  Sun  by  day  and  tho  Sun  by  night.

15


226  TEE  HYUXE  OP  [BOOK  T.

Ceaseless  they  move  iu  opposite  directions :  men  mark  the
one  and  fail  to  mark  the  other.

39  Upon  what  syllable  of  holy  praise-song,  as  ’twero  tlieir

highest  heaven,  the  Gods  repose  them, —

’Who  knows  not  this,  what  will  he  do  with  praise-song  ?  But
they  who  know  it  well  sit  here  assembled.

40  Fortunate  mayst  thou  be  with  goodly  pasture,  and  may  we

also  be  exceeding  wealthy.

Feed  on  the  grass,  0  Cow,  at  every  season,  and  coming  hither¬
ward  drink  limpid  water.

41  Forming  the  water-floods,  the  buffalo  hath  lowed,  one-footed

or  two-footed  or  four-footed,  she,

Who  hath  become  eight-footed  or  hath  got  nine  feet,  the
thousand-syllabled  in  the  sublimest  heaven.

42  From  her  descend  in  streams  the  seas  of  water ;  thereby  the

world’s  four  regions  have  their  being.

Thence  flows  the  imperishable  flood,  aud  thence  the  universe
hath  life.

43  I  saw  from  far  away  the  smoke  of  fuel  with  spires  that  rose

on  high  o’er  that  beneath  it.

The  Mighty  Men  have  dressed  the  spotted  bullock.  These
were  the  customs  in  the  days  aforetime.

44  Three  with  long  tresses  show  iu  ordered  season.  One  of  them

shcarcth  when  the  year  is  ended.

One  with  his  powers  the  universe  regard eth :  of  one  the
sweep  is  seen,  but  not  his  figure.

45  Speech  hath  been  measured  out  in  four  divisions,  tho  Brfih-

maus  who  have  understanding  know  them.

39  The  syllable  is  the  Pranava,  the  mystical  sacred  syllable  Om.  This
syllable  i a  sot  forth  in  the  Upanishads  as  the  object  of  profound  religious
meditation,  and  the  highest  spiritual  efficacy  is  attributed  to  it.

40  This  stanza  is  addressed  to  the  cow  who  supplies  the  milk  for  libations.

41  The  buffalo  hath  loiced:  the  great  rain-cloud  has  thundered.  SAyana
explains  one-footed,  as  sounding  from  the  cloud  ;  tv>o- footed,  from  cloud  and
sky  ;  four-footed,  from  the  four  cardinal  points  ;  eight-footed,  from  the  four
points  and  the  four-intermediate  points  ;  nine-fooled,  from  these  points  and
the  zenith.  (Jauri,  the  buffalo,  ia,  according  to  S&yana,  Vdk,  Speech,  the  voice
of  heaven.

42  Prom  her :  from  the  buffalo,  or  cloud.  The  world's  four  regions  :  tho
whole  world.

43  The  smoke  of  fuel :  arising  from  lmrning  cow-dung.  The  Eighty  Men  :
the  Heroes,  the  Gods.  The  spotted  bullock :  the  Soma.  The  whole  may,
perhaps,  be  a  figurative  description  of  the  gathering  of  the  rain-clouds.

44  The  three  are  Agni  who  burns  up  the  vegetation,  tho  all-seeing  Sun.
aud  the  invisible  VAyu  or  Wind.


HYMN  164.]


TUB  RIG  Y ED  A.


227


Three  kept  in  close  concealment  cause  no  motion ;  of  speech,
men  speak  only  the  fourth  division.

4G  They  call  him  Indra,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Agni,  and  he  is  heavenly
nobly-winged  Garutman.

To  what  is  One,  sages  give  many  a  title :  thcy'call  it  Agni,
Yama,  Matarisvan.

47  Dark  the  descent:  the  birds  are  golden-coloured;  up  to  the

heaven  they  fly  robed  in  the  waters.

Again  descend  they  from  the  seat  of  Order,  and  all  the  earth
is  moistened  with  their  fatness.

48  Twelve  are  the  fellies,  and  the  wheel  is  single ;  three  are  tho

naves.  What  man  hath  understood  it  ?

Therein  are  set  together  spokes  three  hundred  and  sixty,
which  in  nowise  can  be  looseued.

49  That  breast  of  thiue  exhaustless,  spring  of  pleasure,  where¬

with  thou  feedest  all  things  that  are  choicest,

Wealth-giver,  treasure-finder,  free  .bestow er, — bring  that,  Sara-
svati,  that  we  may  drain  it.

50  By  means  of  sacrifice  the  Gods  accomplished  their  sacrifice :

these  wore  the  earliest  ordinances.

These  Mighty  Ones  attained  the  height  of  heaven,  there
where  the  Sfidhyas,  Gods  of  old,  are  dwelling.

51  Uniform,  with  the  passing  days,  this  water  mounts  and  falls

again.

The  tempest-clouds  give  life  to  earth,  and  6res  re-animate  the
heaven.


45  Three  kept  in  dote  concealment :  the  three  might  mean  the  threo  Vedas;
hut  this  interpretation  does  not  suit  the  rest  of  the  half-line.  The  fourth
division :  ordinary  lauguage.  See  Wilson  for  SAyana’a  elaborate  explanation
of  this  stanza,  and  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  II.  155.

46  Ganitmdn:  the  Celestial  Bird,  the  Suu.  All  these  names,  says  the
poet,  arc  uames  of  one  and  the  same  Divine  Being,  tho  One  Supreme  Spirit
under  various  manifestations.  .

47  Dark  the  descent :  the  rays  of  light  descend  into  the  darkness  of  the
earth  when  wrapped  in  night,  and  rise  again  to  heaven  with  the  moisture
which  they  have  absorbed  to  descend  again  in  the  form  of  fertilizing  rain.

•  48  The  single  wheel  is  the  year ;  the  twelve  spokes  are  the  months ;  the
three  naves  arc  the  three  seasons  of  four  months  each  ;  and  the  spokes  are
the  days  of  the  limi-solar  year.  The  stanza  is  out  of  place  here.

49  Sarasvati  :  sec  I.  3.  10.

50  The  Sldhyas:  said  by  YAska  to  be  ‘tlic  Gods  whose  dwelling-place  is
the  sky.’  They  are  named  among  the  minor  divinities  in  the  Amarakosha,
and,  as  Wilson  observes,  ‘it  would  seem  that  in  SAyana’s  day  the  purport  of
the  designation  had  become  uncertain.’

51  Fires  re-animate  the  heaven:  the  oblations  offered  in  sacrificial  fires
delight  and  strengthen  the  Gods.


223  .THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  7.

52  The  Bird  Celestial,  vast  with  noble  pinion,  the  lovely  germ  of
plants,  the  germ  of  waters,

Him  who  dclightcth  us  with  rain  in  season,  Sarasvan  I  invoke
that  he  may  help  us.

HYMN  CLXV.  Indra.  Marute.

With  what  bright  beauty  are  the  Maruts  jointly  invested,
peers  in  age,  who  dwell  together  1
From  what  place  have  they  come?  With  what  intention?
Sing  they  their  strength  through  love  of  wealth,  these
Heroes  ?

2  Whose  prayers  have  they,  the  Youthful  Ones,  accepted?  Who

to  his  sacrifice  hath  turned  the  Maruts?

Wo  will  delay  them  on  their  journey  sweeping — with  what
high  spirit ! — through  the  air  like  eagles.

3  Whence  comost  thou  alone,  thou  who  art  mighty,  Indra,  Lord

of  the  Brave?  What  is  thy  purpose?

Thou  greotest  us  when  meeting  us  the  Bright  Ones.  Lord  of
Bay  Steeds,  say  what  thou  hast  against  us.

4  Mine  are  dovotions,  hymns;  sweet  are  libations.  Strength

stirs,  and  hurled  forth  is  my  bolt  of  thunder.

They  call  for  me,  their  lauds  are  longing  for  me.  These  my
Bay  Steads  bear  me  to  these  oblations.

5  Therefore  together  with  our  strong  companions,  having  adorn¬

ed  our  bodies,  now  wc  harness

Our  spotted  deer  with  might,  for  thou,  0  Indru,  hast  learnt
and  understood  our  Godlike  nature.

6  Where  was  that  nature  thon  of  yours,  0  Maruts,  that  ye

charged  me  alone  to  slay  the  Dragon  ?

For  1  in  truth  am  fierce  and  strong  and  mighty.  I  bent
away  from  every  foeman’s  weapons.

52  Saratfdn :  or  Saras  vat,  ia  the  name  of  a  River-God  usually  assigned
ns  a  consort  to  Sar&svatt.  In  this  place  the  Sun  ia  meant,  ami  tdratvanlam
may  be  taken  as  a  mere  opithet,  ‘  rich  in  water  ’  which  he  absorbs.

Indra,  the  Maruts,  and  the  great  sage  Agastya  are  regarded  as  the  Rishis
of  this  hymn,  which  appear*  to  be,  ns  Wilson  observes,  a  vindication  of  4  the
separate,  or  at  least  preferential,  worship  of  Indra,  without  comprehending,
at  the  same  time,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  adoration  of  the  Maruts.'  The
hymn  is  translated  and  fully  explained  in  Prof.  Max  MUller’a  Vedic  Hymns,
Part  I.

1  Indra  speaks.

3  Here  the  Maruts  address  Indra  whom  they  meet  alone,  unattended  by
them  as  was  usual.

•1  Indra  replies.

5  The  Maruts  again  speak.

6  Indra  claims  for  himself  the  glory  of  the  victory  over  Viitro.


TIIE  RIO  VEDA.


229


HYMN  165.]


7  Yea,  much  hast  thou  achieved  with  us  for  comrades,  with

manly  valour  like  thine  own,  thou  Hero.

Much  may  we  too  achieve,  0  mightiest  Iudra,  with  our  great
power,  we  Maruts,  when  we  will  it.

8  Vritra  I  slew  by  mine  own  strength,  0  Maruts,  having  waxed

mighty  in  mine  indignation.

I  with  the  thunder  in  my  hand  created  for  man  these  lucid
softly  flowing  waters.

9  Nothing,  0  Maghav&n,  stands  firm  before  thee ;  among  the

Gods  not  one  is  found  thine  equal.

None  born  or  springing  into  life  comes  nigh  thee.  Do  what
thou  hast  to  do,  exceeding  mighty  !

10  Mine  only  be  transcendent  power,  whatever  I,  daring  in  my

spirit,  may  accomplish.

For  I  am  known  as  terrible,  0  Maruts  :  I,  Indra,  am  the  Lord
of  what  I  ruined.

11  Now,  0  ye  Maruts,  hath  your  praise  rejoiced  mo,  the  glorious

hymn  which  ye  have  mode  me,  Heroes  1
For  me,  for  Indra,  champion  strong  in  battle,  for  me,  your¬
selves,  as  lovers  for  a  lover.

12  Here,  truly,  they  send  forth  their  sheen  to  meet  me,  wearing

their  blameless  glory  and  their  vigour.

When  1  have  seen  yon,  Maruts,  in  gay  splendour,  ye  have
delighted  me,  so  now  delight  mo.

13  Who  here  hath  magnified  you,  0  ye  Maruts?  speed  fox-ward,

0  ye  lovei-s,  to  your  lovers.

Ye  Radiant  Ones,  assisting  their  devotions,  of  these  my  holy
rites  be  ye  regardful.

14  To  this  hath  Milnya’s  wisdom  brought  us,  so  as  to  aid,  as  aids

the  poet  him  who  worships.

Bring  hither  quick !  On  to  the  sage,  ye  Maruts  !  These
prayers  for  you  the  singer  hath  recited.

11  ‘  In  this  verse  Indra,  after  having  declined  with  no  uncertain  sound  the
friendship  of  the  Maruts,  repents  himself  of  his  unkindues*  towards  his  old
friends.  The  words  of  praise  which  they  addressed  to  him  in  verse  9,  in  spite
of  the  rebuff  which  they  had  received  from  Indra,  have  touched  bi«  heart,
and  wc  may  suppose  that,  after  this,  their  reconciliation  was  complete.’—
Max  Muller.

14  This  verse  is  exceedingly  difficult,  and  its  translation  at  present  can  bo
only  conjectural.

flfdnya,  apparently,  means  the  eon  of  MAna.

M&nddrya,  probably  the  name  of  the  poet,  but  explained  differently  by
BAyana  aud  Muhjdlw#,


230  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  l.

15  May  this  your  praise,  may  this  your  song,  0  Maruts,  sung
by  the  p6et,  Mina’s  son,  MdndArya,

Bring  offspring  for  ourselves  with  food  to  feed  us.  May  we
find  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance  !

HYMN  CLXVI.  Maruts.

Now  let  us  publish,  for  the  vigorous  company  the  herald  of
the  Strong  One,  their  primeval  might.

With  fire  upon  your  way,  0  Maruts  loud  of  voice,  with  battle,
Mighty  Ones,  achieve  your  deeds  of  strength.

2  Bringing  the  pleasant  meath  as  ’twere  their  own  dear  sou,

they  sport  in  sportive  wise  gay  at  their  gatherings.

Tho  Rudras  come  with  succour  to  the  worshipper;  self-strong
they  fail  not  him  who  offers  sacrifice.

3  To  whomsoever,  bringer  of  oblations,  they,  immortal  guard¬

ians,  have  given  plenteous  wealth,

For  him,  like  loving  friends,  the  Maruts  bringing  bliss  bedew
the  regions  round  with  milk  abundantly.

4  Ye  who  with  mighty  powers  have  stirred  the  regions  up,  your

coursers  have  sped  forth  directed  by  themselves.

All  creatures  of  the  earth,  all  dwellings  are  afraid,  for  bril¬
liant  is  your  coming  with  your  spears  advanced.

5  When  they  in  dazzling  rush  have  made  the  mountains  roar,

and  shaken  heaven's  high  back  in  their  heroic  strength,

Each  sovran  of  the  forest  fears  as  ye  drive  near,  and  the
shrubs  fly  before  you  swift  as  whirling  wheels.

6  Terrible  Maruts,  ye  with  ne’or-diminishod  host,  with  great

benevolence  fulfil  our  heart’s  desire.

Where’er  your  lightning  bites  armed  with  its  gory  teeth  it
crunches  up  the  cattle  like  a  well-aimed  dart.


15  1  borrow  tbree-fourths  of  this  verse  from  Prof.  M.  Miillcr.

This  hymn  nnd  the  twenty-five  following  ore  ascribed  to  the  ltiahi  Agn* tyn,
who  appears  in  tho  RdmAyaria  as  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  Rama.  He  is
one  oJ  those  indefinable  mythic  personages  who  are  found  in  the  ancient
traditions  of  many  nations,  and  in  whom  cosmogonical  or  astronomical
notions  are  generally  figured.  Thua  it  is  related  of  Agastya  that  the  Vin-
dhyan  mountains  prostrated  themselves  before  him  ;  and  yet  tho  same
Agastya  is  believed  to  bo  the  regent  of  the  star  Cauopua.

1  The  Strong  One ;  ludra,  who  is  preceded  by  the  Maruts.

2  The  Rudras :  the  Maruts,  sons  of  the  Strong-God  Rudra.

3  Milk:  fertilizing  rain.

5  At  ye  drive  near :  similar  abrupt  changes  of  person  are  common  in  the
Veda.


HYMN  1C6.]


THE  RIOTED  A.


231


7  Givers  of  during  gifts  whoso  bounties  never  fail,  free  from  ill-

will,  at  sacrifices  glorified,

They  sing  their  song  aloud  that  they  may  drink  sweet  juice  :
well  do  they  know  the  Hera's  first  heroic  deeds.

8  With  castles  hundredfold,  0  Maruts,  guard  yc  well  the  man

whom  ye  have  loved  from  ruin  and  from  sin, —

The  man  whom  yc  the  fierce,  tho  Mighty  Ones  who  roar,
) •reserve  from  calumny  by  cherishing  his  seed.

9  0  Maruts,  in  your  cars  are  all  things  that  are  good :  great

powers  are  set  as  'twero  in  rivalry  therein,
liiugs  are  upon  your  shoulders  when  yo  journey  forth  :  your
axle  turns  together  both  tho  chariot  wheels.

10  Held  iu  your  manly  arms  are  many  goodly  things,  gold  chains

are  on  your  chests,  and  glistering  ornaments.

Dccr-skins  are  on  their  shoulders,  on  their  fellies  knives:
they  spread  their  glory  out  as  birds  spread  out  their  wings.

11  Mighty  in  mightiness,  pervading,  passing  strong,  visible  from

afar  as  'twere  with  stars  of  heaven,

Lovely  with  pleasant  tongues,  sweot  singers  with  their  mouths,
the  Maruts,  joined  with  ludra,  shout  forth  all  around.

12  This  is  your  majesty,  ye  Maruts  nobly  born,  far  as  the  sway

of  Aditi  your  bounty  spreads.

Even  ludra  by  desertion  never  disannuls  the  boon  bestowed
by  you  upou  the  pious  man.

13  This  is  your  kinship,  Maruts,  that,  Immortals,  yc  were  oft  in

olden  time  regardful  of  our  call.

Having  vouchsafed  to  man  a  hearing  through  this  prayer,  by
wondrous  deeds  the  Heroes  have  displayed  their  might.

14  That,  0  ye  Maruts,  wc  may  long  time  flourish  through  your

abundant  riches,  0  swift  movers,

And  that  our  men  may  sproad  in  the  encampment,  let  mo
complete  the  rite  with  these  oblations.

15  May  this  your  laud,  may  this  your  song,  0  Maruts,  sung  by

the  poet,  MAna’s  son,  MandSrya,

Bring  offspring  for  ourselves  with  food  to  feed  us.  May  wo
fiud  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

10  On  their  fdlin  hiivtt :  their  war- chariots  have  sharp  Boythe-Iike  blades
attached  to  their  wheels,  or  sharp  edge*  to  their  fellies.

11  6’rcert  linger-t :  the  Manita’  song  in  tho  music  of  tho  winds.

12  The  ttony  of  Aditi:  '  Wliat  the  poet  says  is  simply  this,  that  the  bounty
of  the  Maruts  extends  as  far  ss  the  realm  of  Aditi,  S.  o.  is  endless,  or  extends
everywhere,  Aditi  being  iu  its  original  conception  the  deity  of  the  unbounded
world  beyond,  the  earliest  attempt  at  expressing  the  Infinite.’ — Max  M tiller.

This  also  is  one  of  tho  hymns  translated  and  fully  explained  by  l’rof.  Max
Mvlllcr  in  Krdic  Hymm,  Part  L


232


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  1.


HYMN  CLXVII.  Iudro.  Marutfi.

A  thousand  are  thy  helps  for  us,  0  Indra ;  a  thousand,  Lord
of  B.iys,  thy  choice  refreshments.

Wealth  of  a  thousand  sorts  hast  thou  to  cheer  us:  may  preci¬
ous  goods  come  nigh  to  ns  in  thousands.

2  May  the  most  sapient  Maruts,  with  protection,  with  best  boons

brought  from  lofty  heaven,  approach  us,

Now  when  their  team  of  the  most  noble  horses  speeds  even
on  the  sea’s  extremost  limit.

3  Close  to  them  clings  one  moving  in  seclusion,  like  a  man's  wife,

like  a  spear  oarried  rearward,

Well  grasped,  bright,  decked  with  gold ;  there  is  Vak  also,
like  to  a  courtly,  eloquent  dame,  among  them.

4  Far  off  the  brilliant,  never-weary  Maruts  cling  to  the  young

Maid  as  a  joint  possession.

The  fierce  Gods  drove  not  Rodasi  before  them,  but  wished  for
her  to  grow  their  friend  and  fellow.

5  When  chose  immortal  Rodasi  to  follow — she  with  loose  tresses

and  heroic  spirit  —

She  clomb  her  servant’s  chariot,  she  like  Sury&  with  cloud-like
motion  and  refulgent  aspect.

6  Upon  their  car  the  young  men  set  the  Maiden  wedded  to  glory,

mighty  in  assemblies,

Wheu  your  song,  Maruts,  rose,  and,  with  oblation,  the  Sorna-
pouror  sang  his  hymn  in  worship.

7  I  will  declare  the  greatuess  of  these  Maruts,  their  real  great¬

ness,  worthy  to  be  lauded,  •

How,  with  them,  she  though  firm,  strong-minded,  haughty,
travels  to  women  happy  in  their  fortune.

2  The  rat's  extvemest  limit :  the  skirts  of  the  sea  of  air,  the  firmament.

3  SAyana  says  that  the  lightning  is  spoken  of,  moving  in  the  clouds,  as  if  in
secret,  like  the  well-attired  wife  who  remains  in  the  women’s  apartment,  hut
sometimes  showing  itself,  like  the  hymn  or  prayer  recited  at  religious  ceremo¬
nies.  The  comparisons  are  scarcely  intelligible.  VAk  here  is  the  voice  of
Heaven,  the  thunder.  See  Max  M  filler,  Vedia  Hymns,  Part  I.

5  Rodasi :  usually  regarded  as  the  consort  of  Kudra,  said  by  SAyana  to
mean  here  the  lightuiug,  the  bride  of  the  Maruts.

S&ryd  :  the  daughter  of  the  Sun,  who  mounted  the  chariot  of  the  Asvins.
See  I.  116.  17.

7  She :  Rodasi.  In  the  scoond  hemistich  there  is  no  substantive,  only  ad¬
jectives  in  the  feminine  gender.  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  renders  the  last
half-line  by  ‘  supports  a  flourishing  progeny.’  Ludwig  thinks  that  Rodasi  ap¬
pears  as  E WttOvta  of  the  Greek  pantheon,  the  Goddess  who  presides  over
childbirth.


THE  HIG  VEDA.


HYMN  16S.]


233


S  Mitra  and  Yaruna  they  guard  from  censure:  Aryaman  too,
discovers  worthless  sinners.

Firm  things  are  overthrown  that  ne’er  were  shaken  :  he  pros¬
pers,  Maruts,  who  gives  choice  oblations.

9  None  of  us,  Maruts,  near  or  at  a  distance,  hath  Sver  reached
the  limit  of  your  vigour.

‘  They  in  courageous  might  still  waxing  boldly  have  compassed
round  their  foemeu  like  an  ocoan.

10  May  we  this  day  be  dearest  friends  of  Indra,  and  let  us  call  on

him  in  fight  to-morrow.

So  were  we  erst.  New  might  attend  us  daily  !  so  be  with  us
Ribhukshan  of  the  Heroes !

1 1  May  this  your  laud,  may  this  your  song,  0  Maruts,  sung  by

the  poet,  MAna’s  son,  M&ndArya,

Bring  offspring  for  ourselves  with  food  to  feed  us.  May  we
find  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXVIII.  Maruts.

Swift  gain  is  his  who  hath  you  near  at  every  rite  :  ye  welcome
every  song  of  him  who  serves  the  Gods.

So  may  I  turn  you  hither  with  fair  hymns  of  praise  to  give
great  succour  for  the  weal  of  both  the  worlds.

2  Surrounding,  as  it  were,  self-born,  self-powerful,  they  spring

to  life  the  shakers-down  of  food  and  light ;

Like  as  the  countless  undulations  of  the  Hoods,  worthy  of  praise
when  near,  like  bullocks  and  like  kine.

3  They  who,  like  Somas  with  their  well-grown  stalks  pressed  out,

imbibed  within  the  heart,  dwell  there  in  friendly  wise.

Upon  their  shoulders  rests  as  ’twere  a  warrior’s  spear,  and  in
their  hand  they  hold  a  dagger  and  a  ring.

10  The  hymn  appears  to  have  been  recited  on  the  eve  of  an  expected  battle.
RV/hukihun :  a  name  of  Indra,  as  lord  of  the  liiblius.

1  The  text  of  the  first  line  is  manifestly  corrupt,  and  translation  is  conjec¬
tural.  Sec  Max  Muller,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXXII,  p.  281.

2  The  skaL-crs-dovm :  violently  sending  down  the  rain  which  is  followed  by
sunlight  and  fertility.

B'Aen  near :  terrific  in  appearance  at  a  distance,  but  gentle  when  propitiated
with  worship.

3  The  first  homistich  is  obscure.  Perhaps  the  meauing  is  that  the  bene¬
ficial  effects  of  the  storm  are  lasting  like  the  inspiring  intluence  of  Soma  juice.

H'arrior’s  spear:  ‘Rambhiyt  I  now  take  with  Sdyana  in  the  sense  of  a
wife  cliugiug  to  the  shoulders  "of  her  husband,  though  wh&t  is  meant  is  the
spear,  or  somo  other  weapon,  slung  over  the  shoulders  :  see  1.  167.  3.’— M.
Muller,  Vcdic  Hymns,  I.  28?,


224


TEE  EVENS  OP


[BOOK  I-


4  Solf-yoked  they  have  descended  lightly  from  the  sky.  With

your  own  lash,  Immortals,  urge  yourselves  to  speed.
Unstained  by  dust  the  Maruts,  mighty  in  their  strength,  have
cast  down  e'en  firm  things,  armed  with  their  shining  spears.

5  Who  among  you,  0  Maruts  armed  with  lightning-spears,  moveth

you  by  himself,  as  with  the  tongue  his  jaws?

Ye  rush  from  heaven’s  floor  as  though  ye  sought  for  food,  bn
many  errands  like  the  Sun’s  diurnal  Steed.

6  Say  where,  then,  is  this  mighty  region's  farthest  bound,  where,

Maruts,  is  the  lowest  depth  that  ye  have  readied,

When  ye  cast  down  like  chaff  the  firmly  stablisbed  pile,  and
from  the  mountain  send  the  glittering  water-flood?

7  Your  winning  is  with  strength,  dazzling,  with  heavenly  light,

with  fruit  mature,  0  Maruts,  full  of  plenteousness.
Auspicious  is  your  gift  like  a  free  giver’s  meed,  victorious,
spreadiug  far,  as  of  immortal  Gods.

8  The  rivers  roar  before  your  chariot  fellies  when  they  are  utter¬

ing  the  voice  of  rain-clouds.  X

The  lightnings  laugh  upon  the  earth  beneath  them,  what  time
the  Maruts  scatter  forth  their  fatness.

9  Prisni  brought  forth,  to  fight  the  mighty  battle,  the  glittering

army  of  the  restless  Maruts.

Nurtured  together  they  begat  the  monster,  and  then  looked
round  them  for  the  food  that  strengthens.

10  May  this  your  laud,  may  this  vour  song,  0  Maruts,  sung  by
the  poet,  Manas  son,  Mind  ary  a,

Bring  offspring  for  ourselves  with  food  to  feed  us.  May  we
find  strentheuing  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXIX.  Indr*.

As,  Iudra,  from  great  treason  thou  protectcst,  yea,  from  great
treachery  these  who  approach  us,

So,  marking  well,  Controller  of  the  Maruts,  grant  us  their
blessings,  for  they  are  thy  dearest.


5  What,  asks  the  poet,  is  the  moving  principle  of  the  Maruts  *  Who  gives
them  their  first  impulse,  aa  a  mau  when  he  wishes  moves  his  tongue  and  jaws  ?
‘ Tht'  stanza,’  remarks  Wilson,  ‘is  exceedingly  elliptical  and  obscure  :  SAyaga’s
completion  of  the  text  is  entirely  conjectural.’

9  Prifni:  the  mother  of  the  Maruts.  See  1. 21.  3.  1  he  monster:  the  mass
of  dark  storm-clouds.


1  These  who  approach  us :  the  Maruts.


EYME  170.]


TEE  RIO  VEDA.


235


2  The  various  doings  of  all  mortal  people  by  thee  are  ordered,
in  thy  wisdom,  Indra.

The  host  of  Maruts  goeth  forth  exulting  to  win  the  light-
bestowing  spoil  of  battle.

SgThat  spear  of  thine  sat  firm  for  us,  0  Indra  :  the  Maruts  set
their  whole  dread  power  in  motion.

E’en  Agni  shines  resplendent  in  the  brushwood :  the  viands
hold  him  as  floods  hold  an  island.

4  Vouchsafe  us  now  that  opulence,  0  Indra,  as  guerdon  won  by

mightiest  donation.

May  hymns  that  please  thee  cause  the  breast  of  Vayu  to
swell  as  with  the  mead’s  refreshing  sweetness.

5  With  thee,  0  Indra,  are  most  bounteous  riches  that  further

every  one  who  lives  uprightly.

Now  may  these  Maruts  show  via  loviug-kindness,  Gods  who
of  old  were  ever  prompt  to  help  us.-

6  Bring  forth  the  Men  who  rain  down  boons,  0  Indra :  exert

thee  in  the  great  terrestrial  region ;

For  their  broad-chested  speckled  deer  are  standing  like  a
King's  armies  on  the  field  of  battle.

7  Heard  istfiTTroiir  of  “tlTe  'advancIng'SIaruts,  terrific,  glittering,

and  swiftly  moving,

Who  with  their  rush  o’erthrow  as  ’twere  a  sinner  the  mortal
who  would  fight  with  those  who  love  him.

8  Give  to  the  MSnas,  Indra  with  the  Maruts,  gifts  universal,

gifts  of  cattle  foremost.

Thou,  God,  art  praised  with  Gods  who  must  be  lauded.  May
we  find  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXX.  Indra.  Maruts.

Naught  is  to-day,  to-morrow  naught.  Who  comprehends  the
mystery  1

We  must  address  ourselves  unto  another’s  thought,  and.  lost
is  then  the  hope  w-e  formed.

2  The  Maruts  are  thy  brothers.  Why,  0  Indra,  wouldst  thou
take  our  lives  ?

Agree  with  them  in  friendly  wise,  and  do  not  slay  us  in  the  fight.

3  &U  firm  :  was  firmly  and  properly  hold  by  the  Warrior-God.

6  The  Men  :  the  Maruts.  Their  chariot  is  drawn  by  spotted  deer.

8  The  Mdnai .-  men  of  the  family  of  the  poet  MAua.

1  Lost  is  then  tfu  hope  we  formed  :  Indra  appears  to  have  appropriated  to
himself  the  sacrifice  intended  for  the  Maruts,  who  complain,  accordingly,  of
their  dependence  on  another's  will  and  of  their  disappointed  hopes.

2  This  is  spoken  by  Agastya,  who  offered  the  sacrifice.


236  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

3  Agastya,  brother,  why  dost  thou  ueglcct  us,  thou  who  art  our

friend  t

We  know  the  nature  of  thy  mind.  Verily  thou  wilt  give  us
naught.

4  Let  them  prepare  the  altar,  let  thorn  kindle  fire  in  front:

we  two

Here  will  spread  sacrifice  for  thee,  that  the  Immortal  may
observe.

5  Thou,  Lord  of  Wealth,  art  Master  of  all  treasures,  thou,  Lord

of  friends,  art  thy  friends’  best  supporter.

0  Iudraj  speak  thou  kindly  with  the  Maruts,  and  taste  obla-
.  tions  in  their  proper  season.

HYMN  CLXXI.  Maruts.

To  you  I  come  with  this  mine  adoration,  and  with  a  hymn  I
crave  the  Strong  Ones’  favour,

A  hymn  that  truly  makes  you  joyful,  Maruts.  Suppress  your
anger  and  unyoke  your  horses.

2  Maruts,  to  you  this  laud  with  prayer  and  worship,  formed  in

the  mind  and  heart,  ye  Gods,  is  offered.

Come  ye  to  us,  rejoicing  in  your  spirit,  for  ye  are  they  who
make  our  prayer  effective.

3  The  Maruts,  praised  by  us,  shall  show  us  favour;  Maghavan,

lauded,  shall  be  most  propitious.

Maruts,  may  all  our  days  that  are  to  follow  be  very  pleasant,
lovely  and  triun pliant.

4  I  fled  in  terrror  from  this  mighty  Indra,  my  body  trembling  in

alarm,  0  Maruts.

Oblations  meant  for  you  had  been  made  ready ;  these  have  we
set  aside :  for  this  forgive  us.

3  The  Maruts  complain  that  Agastya  does  not  support  their  claim.

4  Spoken  by  Agastya  to  Indra.  We :  Agui  aud  I.  The  Immortal :  Agni.

5  Agastya  continues  his  conciliatory  speech.


1  Unyoke  your  horiti :  stay  with  us  and  enjoy  the  sacrifice.  ‘  This  hymn,

yiin,‘  as  Wilson  remarks,  *  indicates  a  sort  of  trimming  between  the  worship
Indra  and  the  Maruts.’

3  Unablo  to  translate  the  seoond  hemistich  satisfactorily,  I  have  followed
Slyaua  who  takes  vdndni  03  ou  adjective,  lovely.  Oraasmann  translates  :
*  May  all  our  days  stand  upright  like  beautiful  trees,’  and  Ludwig  suggests
‘  battling  ?  spears  1  for  komjftC  virrfni.  '  May  our  trees  (our  lances)  tlirough
our  valour  stAnd  always  erect.’ — Max  Mllller.


4  Agastya  apologizes  for  having  allowed  Indra  to  enjoy  the  offerings  intend¬
ed  for  the  Maruts,


THE  IUGVEDA.


237


HYMN  173.]

5  By  whom  the  M:\nas  recognize  the  daysprings,  by  whose  strength

at  the  dawn  of  eudlcss  mornings,

Give  us,  thou  Mighty,  glory  with  the  Maruts,  fierce  with  the
fierce,  the  Strong  who  givost  triumph.

6  Do  thou,  0  Indra,  guard  the  conquering  Heroes,  Tmd  rid  thee

of  thy  wrath  against  the  Maruts,

With  them,  the  wise,  victorious  and  bestowing.  May  wo  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXII.  Marat*.

Wonderful  let  your  coming  be,  wondrous  with  help,  ye  Bount¬
eous  Ones,

Maruts,  who  gleam  as  serpents  gleam.

2  Far  bo  from  us,  0  Maruts,  ye  free  givers,  your  impetuous  shaft;
Far  from  us  be  the  stone  ye  hurl.

3  0  Bounteous  Givers,  touch  ye  not,  0  Maruts,  Trinaskanda’s

folk ;

Lift  ye  us  up  that  we  may  live.

HYMN  CLXXII r.  iudra.

The  praise-song  let  him  sing,  forth  bursting  bird-like :  sing  we
that  h3’mu  which  like  heavon’s  light  oxpaudoth,

That  the  milk-giving  cows  may,  unimpeded,  call  to  the  sacred
glass  the  Gods’  assembly.

2  Let  the  Bull  sing  with  Bulls  whoso  toil  is  worship,  with  a  loud
roar  like  some  wild  beast  that  hungers.

Praised  God  !  the  glad  priest  briugs  his  heart’s  devotion ;  the
holy  youth  presents  twofold  oblation.


5  By  w horn :  thou,  Indra,  by  whom.  etc.

1  ]Vho  gleam  us  serpents  gleam :  referring  to  tho  flashes  of  lightning  that
Accompany  the  Gods  of  storm .

2  The  stone :  the  thunderbolt.

3  Trirpiskand/is  folk :  Tfinaskanda  Appears  to  be  the  name  of  some  chief  not
elsewhere  mentioned.  Wilson,  following  S&yana,  translates : 1 2  protect  my  people
(although  1  be)  as  insignificant  as  grass.’

1  Let  him  sing :  let  tho  UdgAtar  priest  sing  the  SAman  or  metrical  hymn  of
praiso,  which  spreads  and  blesses  like  the  light  of  heaven.

2  The  Bull :  perhaps  tho  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  ;  or  Indra  himself  may
be  intended.  Sftyapa  offers  both  explanations.

The  Bulls :  the  officiating  priests.

Praised  God! :  addressed  to  Indra.  The  meaning  of  the  hemistich  is  obs¬
cure.  The  word  mithunH  (literally,  pairs)  which  I  have  rendered  in  accordance
with  Sfiyana  and  Wilson,  means  according  to  Grassuiann,  '  both  the  worlds,’  and
Recording  to  Ludwig,  ‘  the  couples  consisting  of  tho  sacrificcrs  and  tho  respec¬
tive  wives.'


38  THB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

3  May  the  Priest  come  circling  the  measured  stations,  and  with

him  bring  the  earth’s  autumnal  fruitage.

Let  the  Horse  neigh  led  near,  let  the  Steer  bellow :  let  the
Voice  go  between  both  worlds  as  herald.

4  To  him  twe  offer  welcomcst  oblations,  the  pious  bring  their

strength-inspiring  praises.

May  Indra,  wondrous  in  his  might,  accept  them,  car-borne  and
swift  to  move  like  the  Nasatyas.

5  Praise  thou  that  Indra  who  is  truly  mighty,  the  car-homo

Warrior,  Maghavan  the  Hero ;

Stronger  in  war  than  those  who  fight  against  him,  borne  by
strong  steeds,  who  kills  enclosing  darkness ;

6  Him  who  surpasses  heroes  in  his  greatness:  the  earth  and

heavens  suffice  not  for  his  girdles.

Indra  endues  the  earth  to  be  his  garment,  and,  God-like,  wears
the  heaven  as  ’twere  a  frontlet,

7  Thee,  Hero,  guardian  of  the  brave  in  battles,  who  roamest  in

the  van, — to  draw  thee  hither,

Indra,  the  hosts  agree  beside  the  Soma,  and  joy,  for  his  great
actions,  in  the  Chieftain.

8  Libations  in  the  sea  to  thee  are  pleasant,  when  thy  divine  Floods

come  to  choer  these  people.

To  thee  the  Cow  is  sum  of  all  tilings  grateful  when  with  the
wish  thou  seekest  men  and  princes.

9  So  may  we  in  this  One  he  well  befriended,  well  aided  as  it  were

through  praise  of  chieftains,

That  Indra  still  may  linger  at  our  worship,  as  one  led  swift  to
work,  to  hear  our  praises.

10  Like  men  in  rivalry  extolling  princes,  our  Friend  bo  Indra,

wieldor  of  the  thunder.

Like  true  friends  of  some  city’s  lord,  within  them  held  in  good
rule  with  sacrifice  they  help  him.


S  The  Priett  :  Agni,  who  ia  also  the  Horse  and  the  Steer.  Th*  measured
stations:  the  different  fire-altars.  Fruitage:  grain  for  the  oblation.  The  Voice:
thunder.

4  The  Ndiatyas :  the  Aavioi,  whose  chariot  ia  famed  for  swiftness.

8  In  the  tea :  reaching  thee  in  the  sea  of  air  ;  or  '  the  sea '  may  mean  the
largo  reservoir  of  Soma  juice.  The  wish:  granting  all  their  desires.

9  In  this  One :  this  one  true  friend  Indra.

10  The  stanza  ia  difficult.  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates:  ‘Emulous
in  commendation  like  (those  contending  for  the  favour)  of  men,  may  Indra,
the  wielder  of  the  thunderbolt,  be  equally  (a  friend)  to  us :  like  those  who,
desirous  of  hi*  friendship  (conciliate)  the  lord  of  a  city  (ruling)  with  good
government,  so  do  our  intermediate  (representatives)  propitiate  (Indra)  with
sacrifices.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  174.]


239


11  For  every  sacrifice  makes  Indra  stronger,  yea,  when  he  goes

around  angry  in  spirit ;

As  pleasure  at  the  ford  invites  the  thirsty,  as  the  loug  way
brings  him  who  gains  his  object.

12  Let  us  not  here  contend  with  Gods,  0  Indra,  for  here,  0  Mighty

One,  is  tkiuc  own  portion,

The  Great,  whose  Friends  the  bounteous  Maruts  honour,  as
with  a  stream,  his  song  who  pours  oblations.

13  Addressed  to  thee  is  this  our  praise,  0  Indra:  Lord  of  Bay

Steeds,  find  us  hereby  advancement.

So  mayst  thou  lead  us  on,  0  God,  to  comfort.  May  we  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXIV.  indra.

Thou  art  the  King  of  all  the  Gods,  0  Indra :  protect  the  men,
0  Asura,  preserve  ns.

Thou  Lord  of  Heroes,  Maghavan,  our  saver,  art  faithful,  very
rich,  the  victory-givor.

2  Indra,  thou  humblodst  tribes  that  sprit  e  with  insult  by  break¬

ing  down  seven  autumn  forts,  their  refuge.

Thou  stinedst,  Blameless  1  billowy  floods,  and  gavest  his  foe  a
prey  to  youthful  Purukutsa.

3  With  whom  thou  drivest  troops  whose  lords  arc  heroes,  and

br ingest  daylight  now,  much  worshipped  ludra.

With  them  guard  lion-like  wasting  active  Agni  to  dwell  in  our
tilled  fields  and  in  our  homestead.

4  They  through  the  greatness  of  thy  spear,  0  Indra,  shall,  to

thy  praise,  rest  in  ibis  earthly  station.

To  loose  the  floods,  to  seek,  for  kine,  the  battle,  his  Bays  he
mounted,  boldly  seized  the  booty.

5  Indra,  bear  Kutsa,  him  in  whom  thou  joyost :  the  dark-red

horses  of  tho  Wind  are  docile.


11  Indra  will  come  at  last  although  he  tarries  now.  We  must  wait  pa¬
tiently.  The  thiraty  traveller  cornea  to  the  stream  and  reaches  his  journey’s
end  at  last.

Wilson  observes  with  truth  that  ‘  this  hymn  is  in  general  elliptical  and  obs¬
cure.’  A  translator  has  to  endeavour  to  give  the  probable  meaning  of  tho
words  as  they  stand,  without  venturing  on  conjectural  completion  of  fancied
ellipses  and  the  insertion  of  words  at  pleasure  after  the  manner  of  Sftyana.

1  The  wen  :  the  priests.  Ut:  thy  worshippers.  Asura :  immortal  and  divine.

2  Autumn  forts :  probably  strongholds  on  high  ground,  occupied  in  the  rainy
reason.  PvruktUtu :  has  been  mentioned  before.  See  I.  63.  7.

3  With  whom  :  the  Maruts.

4  They :  the  enemy,  lie:  Indra.

5  Knt/a :  the  Uiohi  of  that  name.  Wilson  paraphrases  after  SAyana  :  '  Bear
(the  sage)  Kutoa  to  that  ceremony  (to  which)  thou  dcsirest  (to  convey  him).'


240  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOK  /.

Let  the  Sun  roll  his  chariot  wheel  auear  us,  and  let  the  Thund¬
erer  go  to  meet  the  foemen.

6  Thou  Indra,  Lord  of  Bays,  made  strong  by  impulso,  hast  slain

the  vexers  of  thy  friouds,  who  give  not
They  wlro  behold  the  Friend  beside  the  living  were  cast  aside
by  thee  as  they  rode  onward.

7  Iudra,  the  bard  sang  forth  in  inspiration :  thou  madest  earth  a

covering  for  the  DAsa.

Maghavan  made  the  threo  that  gloam  with  moisture,  and  to
his  home  brought  Kuyavach  to  slay  him.

8  Those  thine  old  deeds  now  bards  have  sung,  0  Indra.  Thou

conqueredst,  boundest  many  tribes  for  ever.

Like  castles  thou  hast  crushed  tho  godless  races,  and  bowed
the  godless  scorner’s  deadly  weapon.

9  A  Stormer  thou  hast  made  tho  stormy  wators  flow  down,  0  Indra,

like  the  running  rivers.

When  o’er  the  flood  thou  broughtest  them,  0  Hero,  thou  kept-
est  Turvasa  and  Yadu  safely.

10  Iudra,  mayst  thou  be  ours  in  all  occasions,  protector  of  the
men,  most  gentle-hearted,

Giving  us  victory  over  all  our  rivals.  May  wo  find  strengthen¬
ing  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXV.  indra.

Glad  thee :  thy  glory  hath  been  quaffed,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,
as  ’twere  the  bowl’s  enlivening  mead.

For  thee  the  Stroug  there  is  strong  drink,  mighty,  omnipotent
to  win.

2  Let  our  stroug  driuk,  most  excellent,  oxhilarating,  come  to

thee,

Victorious,  Iudra !  bringing  gain,  immortal,  conquering  in
fight.

3  Thou,  Hero,  winner  of  the  spoil,  urgost  to  speed  tho  car  of  man.
Burn,  like  a  vessel  with  the  flamo,  the  lawless  Dasyu,  Conqueror!

6  Who  give  not :  who  offor  no  oblations  ;  barbarians  who  do  not  worship  the
Gods  of  tho  Aryans.  The  Friend :  Indra.  Betide  the  living :  Ayu,  the  living,
may  perhaps  bo  a  proper  name  here.

7  The  three  that  gleuni  with  moisture :  what  the  three  are  is  not  clear.  Wil¬
son  translates  :  ‘  lias  made  the  three  (regions)  marvellous  by  his  gift*.'  Some
reference  to  three  mornings  appears  to  be  intended.  Kugavdch :  probably  tho
name  of  a  demon,  or  barbarian,

9  Turvafu  and  Yudu:  eponymi  of  Aryan  tribes.  See  I.  36.  8.

1  Thy  glory  hath  been  quaffed:  thou  hast  drunk  what  incites  thee  to  glori¬
ous  deeds,  uainely  the  Soma  juice  contained  in  the  bowl.


UYM27  176.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  241

4  Empowered  by  thine  own  might,  0  Sago,  thou  stalest  Surya's

chariot  wheel.

Thou  barest  Kutsa  with  tho  steeds  of  Wind  to  Sushna  as  his
death.

5  Most  mighty  is  thy  rapturous  joy,  most  splendid  is  thine

active  power,

Wherewith,  foe-slaying,  sending  bliss,  thou  art  supreme  in
gaining  steeds.

6  As  thou,  0  Indra,  to  tho  ancient  singers  wast  ever  joy,  as

water  to  the  thirsty,

So  unto  thee  I  sing  this  invocation.  May  we  find  strengthen¬
ing  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXVI.  Indra.

Cheer  thee  with  draughts  to  win  us  bliss :  Soma,  pierce  Indra
in  thy  strength.

Thou  stormest  trembling  in  thy  rage,  and  findest  not  a  foemau
nigh.

2  Make  our  songs  penetrate  to  him  who  is  the  Only  One  of  men  ;
For  whom  the  sacred  food  is  spread,  as  the  steer  ploughs  the

barley  in.

3  Within  whose  hands  deposited  all  the  Five  Peoples’  treasures

rest.

Mark  thou  the  man  who  injures  us  and  kill  him  like  the  heav¬
enly  bolt.

4  Slay  everyone  who  pours  no  gift,  who,  hoard  to  reach,  delights

thee  not.

Bestow  on  us  what  wealth  he  hath  :  this  even  the  worshipper
awaits.

5  Thou  holpest  him  the  doubly  strong  whose  hymns  were  sung

unceasingly.

When  indra  fought,  0  Soma,  thou  holpest  the  mighty  in  the
fray.

6  As  thou,  0  Indra,  to  the  ancient  singers  wast  over  joy,  like

water  to  the  thirsty,

So  unto  thee  I  sing  this  invocation.  May  we  find  strengthen¬
ing  food  ill  full  abundance.

4  Thou  stalest  SQrya's  chariot  wheel:  Iudm  is  said  to  have  taken  tho  wheel
of  tho  chariot  of  the  Sun  and  to  have  cast  it  like  a  quoit  against  the  demon  of
drought.

Kutsa  :  the  Riahi  mentioned  in  the  preceding  hymn.  Indra  defended  him
against  §iuhi.iaj  or  protected  mankind  from  drought.  See  I.  51.  6.

5  Most  might;/  is  thy  rapturous  joy :  Wilson  translates  :  ‘Thy  inebriety  ia

most  intense.’  Sco  I.  61.  2.  -

3  The  Five  Peoples'  treasures :  the  wealth  of  all  the  Aryan*.  See  L  7.  9.

16


TBS  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  /.


242

HYMN  CLXXVXI.  Indr#.

The  Bull  of  men,  who  cherishes  all  people,  Kin"  of  the  Races,
Indra,  called  of  many,

Fame-loving,  praised,  hither  to  mo  with  succour  turn  having
yoked.both  vigorous  Bay  Horses  !

2  Thy  mighty  Stallions,  yoked  by  prayer,  0  Indra,  thy  Coursers

to  thy  mighty  chariot  harnessed, —

Ascend  thou  these,  and  borne  by  them  come  hither :  with
Soma  juice  out-poured,  Indra,  we  call  thee.

3  Ascend  thy  mighty  car :  the  mighty  Soma  is  poured  for  thee,

and  sweets  are  sprinkled  rouud  us.

Come  down  to  us- ward,  Bull  of  human  races,  come,  having
harnessed  them,  with  strong  Bay  Horses.

4  Here  is  God-rcacliing  sacrifice,  here  the  victim;  here,  Indra,

are  the  prayers,  here  is  the  Soma.

Strewn  is  the  sacred  grass :  come  hither,  Sakra ;  seat  thee  and
drink :  unyoke  thy  two  Bay  Coursers.

5  Come  to  us,  Indra,  come  thou  highly  lauded  to  the  devotions

of  the  singer  Mana.

Singing,  may  we  find  early  through  thy  succour,  may  wc  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundanco.

HYMN  CLXXVIII.  v  in**.

If,  Indra,  thou  hast  given  that  gracious  hearing  wherewith
thou  holpest  those  who  sang  thy  praises,

Blast  not  the  wish  that  would  exalt  us  :  may  I  gain  all  from
thee,  and  pay  all  man’s  devotions.

2  Let  not  the  Sovran  Iudra  disappoint  us  in  what  shall  bring
both  Sisters  to  our  dwelling.

To  him  have  run  the  quickly  flowing  waters.  May  Indra
come  to  us  with  life  and  friendship.

S  Victorious  with  the  men,  Hero  in  battles,  Indra,  who  hears
the  singer’s  supplication.

Will  bring  his  car  nigh  to  the  man  who  offers,  if  he  himself
upholds  the  songs  that  praise  him.

1  The  Bull:  tlio  hero,  or  chief  distinguished  by  superior  strength.

2  _ 3  The  word  here  rendered  by  '  mighty '  (ertailaa)  is  commonly  applied

in  the  Veda  to  living  beings  aud  things  preeminent  for  strength,  and  the  Vedic
poets  delight  in  repealing  it  and  its  compounds  and  derivatives.  '  But  this  is
nothing  yet,'  observes  Prof.  Max  Muller,  ‘compared  to  other  passages,  when
the  poet  cannot  get  enough  of  vrishan  and  vmfaabhd.’  Cf.  II.  Id.  6;  V.  30.  S  ;
V.  40  2,  3  ;  VIII.  13.  31-33.

2  Both  Sitters :  Night  and  Morning.  The  quickly  /owing  waters  :  for  the
libations.  ,  . . .  ..  .  . .


TIIE  EIO  VEDA.


HYMN  1S0-J


243


4  Yen,  India,  with  the  men,  through  love  of  glory  consumes  the

sacred  food  which  friends  have  offered.

The  ever-strengthening  song  of  him  who  worships  is  sung  in
fight  amid  the  clash  of  voices.

5  Aided  by  thee,  0  Magliavan,  0  Indra,  may  we  subdue  our  foes

who  count  them  mighty.

Be  our  protector,  strengthen  and  increase  us.  May  we  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.


HYMN  CLXXX.  Aarin*.

LlOHTLY  your  coursers  travel  through  the  regions  when  round
the  sea  of  air  your  car  is  flying.

Your  golden  fellies  scatter  drops  of  moisture :  drinking  the
sweetness  ye  attend  the  Mornings.

2  Ye  as  ye  travel  overtake  the  Courser  who  flics  apart,  the

Fx-iend  of  man,  most  holy.

The  prayer  is  that  the  Sister  may  convey  you,  all  praised,
meath-drinkers  !  to  support  and  strengthen.

3  Ye  have  deposited,  matured  within  her,  in  the  raw  cow  the

first  milk  of  the  milch-cow,

Which  the  bright  offerer,  shining  like  a  serpent  mid  trees,
presents  to  you  whoso  form  is  perfect.

4  Ye  made  the  tierce  heat  to  be  full  of  sweetness  for  Atri  at  his

wish,  like  streaming  water.

Fire-offering  thence  is  yours,  0  Asvins,  Heroes  :  your  car- wheels
speed  to  us  like  springs  of  honey.

5  Like  Tugra’a  ancient  son  may  I,  yc  Mighty,  bring  you  to  give

your  gifts  with  milk-oblations.

Your  greatness  compasseth  Earth,  Heaven,  and  Waters:  decay¬
ed  for  you  is  sorrow’s  net,  ye  Holy.


For  Hymn  CLXXIX.  See  Appendix.

2  The  Courier  :  the  Sun.  The  Sister :  Ushas,  Dawn.

3  The  first  milk  :  ye  deposited  the  milk  within  the  Cosmic  Cow,  and  this  is
found  unaltered  in  tue  cows  of  earth.

The  bright  offerer :  I  follow  Roth  in  taking  this  to  be  the  fire,  creeping
through  the  fuel  as  a  snake  that  creeps  and  gleams  through  the  bushes.  But
the  hemistich  is  very  difficult  and  the  meaning  is  doubtful.  Wilson,  after
SAyana,  paraphrases  :  ‘  (as  vigilant  in  the  midst  of  the  ceremony)  as  a  thief
(in  the  midst)  of  a  thicket.’  Ludwig  says  that  hvdrd  means  neither  snake
nor  thief,  but  a  tub  or  wooden  vessel.

4  Atri  :  see  L  112.  7.

5  Tugra's  ancient  son-,  see  1. 117.  4.  Greatness:  I  adopt  Ludwig’s  conjec¬
ture  mdhixnd  for  mfihind.  •  .....


244  THE  BY  MBS  OP  [BOOK  /.

6  When,  Bounteous  Ones,  ye  drive  your  yoked  team  downward,
ye  send,  by  your  own  natures,  understanding.

Swift  as  the  wind  let  the  prince  please  and  feast  you  :  ho,  like
a  pious  man,  gains  strength  for  increase.

-  7  For  verify  we  truthful  singers  praise  you :  the  niggard  trafficker
is  here  excluded.

Now,  even  now  do  ye  0  blameless  Asvins,  ye  Mighty,  guard
the  man  whose  God  is  near  him.

8  You  of  a  truth  day  after  day,  0  Asvins,  that  he  might  win  the

very  plenteous  torrent,

Agastya,  famous  among  mortal  heroes,  roused  with  a  thousand
lauds  like  sounds  of  music.

9  When  with  tlio  glory  of  your  car  ye  travel,  when  ye  go  speed¬

ing  like  the  priest  of  mortals,

And  give  good  horses  to  the  sacrifices,  may  we,  Nasatyas !
gain  our  sharo  of  riches.

10  With  songs  of  praise  we  call  to-day,  0  Asvins,  that  your  new
chariot,  for  our  own  well-being,

That  circles  heaven  with  never-injured  fellies.  May  we  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXXI.  Asvins

What,  dearest  Pair,  is  this  in  strength  and  riches  that  ye  as
Priests  are  bringing  from  the  waters  1

This  sacrifice  is  your  glorification,  ye  who  protect  mankind  and
give  them  treasures.

:  2  May  your  pure  steeds,  rain-drinkers,  bring  you  hither,  swift  as
the  tempest,  your  celestial  coursers,

Rapid  as  thought,  with  fair  backs,  full  of  vigour,  resplendent  in
their  native  light,  0  Asvins.

3  Your  car  is  like  a  torrent  rushing  downward  :  may  it  come
nigh,  broad-seated,  for  our  welfare, —

Car  holy,  strong,  that  ever  would  be  foremost,  thought-swift,
which  ye,  for  whom  we  long,  have  mounted.


6  The  prince :  the  insti  tutor  of  the  sacrifice.

8  The  very  plenteous  torrent :  to  obtain  abundance  of  rain.  A  gaily  a :  the
Rishi  of  the  hymn.

•  9  Whan  you  assist  the  piouB  chiefs  in  battle,  and  they  win  the  spoil,  let  tho
priests  who  officiated  at  the  sacrifices  which  won  that  aid  receive  their  due  sharo
of  the  booty  as  their  reward.

1  Pro m  the  valtrs :  from  the  firmament.


!tUE  IilGYEDA.


A'  182]


245


4  Here  sprung  to  life,  they  both  have  sung  together,  with  bodies
free  from  stain,  with  sigDS  that  mark  them ;

One  of  you  Prince  of  Sacrifice,  the  Victor,  the  other  counts  as
Heaven’s  auspicious  offspring.

6  May  your  car-seat,  down-gliding,  golden-coloured,  according  to
your  wish,  approach  our  dwellings.

Men  shall  feed  full  the  bay  steeds  of  the  other,  and,  As v ins
they  with  roars  shall  stir  the  regions.

6  Forth  comes  your  strong  Bull  like  a  cloud  of  autumn,  sending
abundant  food  of  liquid  sweetness.

Let  them  feed  with  the  other’s  ways  and  vigour ;  the  upper
streams  have  come  and  do  us  service.

?  Your  constant  song  hath  been  sent  forth,  Disposers !  that  flows
threefold  in  mighty  strength,  0  Asvins.

Thus  lauded,  give  the  suppliant  protection  :  moving  or  resting
hear  mine  invocation.

8  This  song  of  bright  contents  for  you  is  swelling  in  the  men’s

hall  where  threefold  grass  is  ready.

Your  strong  rain-cloud,  yo  Mighty  Ones,  hath  swollen,  honour¬
ing  men  as  ’tworc  with  milk's  outpouring.

9  The  prudent  worshipper,  like  Pfishan,  Asvins !  praises  you  as

he  praises  Dawn  and  Agni,

When,  singing  with  devotion,  he  invokes  you.  May  we  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXXII.  Asvins.

Tnis  was  the  task.  Appear  promptly,  ye  prudent  Ones.  Here
is  the  chariot  drawn  by  strong  steeds :  bo  yo  glad.

Heart-stirring,  longed  for,  succourers  of  Vispal^,  here  are
Heaven’s  Sons  whoso  sway  blesses  the  pious  man.  -

6  Your  strong  Bull:  your  swift  chariot.  Wilson  remarks  :  ‘This  and  the
preceding  stanza  arc  not  vory  oxplicit  in  the  comparison  which  is  intiraAtcd
between- the  functions  of  the  two  Asvins,  for  the  use  of  anyasya,  of  the  other,
in  the  second  half  of  the  verae,  is  all  that  intimates  that  ekasya,  of  the  one,  is
understood  in  the  first  half.'

7  That  flows  threefold:  from  three  priests.

8  Threefold  grass  :  sacred  grass  arranged  to  form  throe  laycrB  or  seats.

9  As  he  praises  Dawn  and  Agni  :  that  is,  at  the  morning  sacrifice.

1  This  was  the  task :  this  sacrifice  is  the  work  at  which  you  have  to  preside.

Be  ye  glad  :  delight  yourselves  with  the  Soma  juice.

Succourers  of  Yispald  :  by  giving  her  an  iron  leg.  See  I.  116.  15.  Or  tho
word  in  the  text  may  mean,  &a  explained  by  SAyana,  ‘  rich  in  benevolence  to
mom’


246  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  I.

2  Longed  for,  most  Indra-liko,  mighty,  most  Marut-likc,  most

wonderful  in  deed,  car-borne,  best  charioteers,

Bring  your  full *  chariot  hither  heaped  with  liquid  sweet :
thereon,  ye  Asvins,  come  to  him  who  offers  gifts.

3  What  make  ye  there,  ye  Mighty?  Wherefore  linger  ye  with

folk  who,  offering  not,  arc  held  in  high  esteem  ?

Pass  over  them  ;  make  ye  the  niggard’s  life  decay  :  give  light
unto  the  singer  eloquent  in  praise.

4  Crunch  up  on  every  side  the  dogs  who  bark  at  us :  slay  ye

our  foes,  0  Asvins  ;  this  ye  understand.

Make  wealthy  every  word  of  him  who  praises  you :  accept
with  favour,  both  Nasatyas,  this  my  laud.

D  Ye  made  for  Tugra’s  son  amid  the  water-floods  that  animated
ship  with  wings  to  fly  withal,

Whereon  with  God-devoted  mind  ye  brought  him  forth,  and
fled  with  easy  flight  from  out  the  mighty  surge.

6  Four  ships  most  welcome  in  the  midst  of  ocean,  urged  by  the

Asvins,  save  the  sou  of  Tugra,

Him  who  was  cast  down  headlong  in  the  waters,  plunged  in
the  thick  inevitable  darkness.

7  What  tree  was  that  which  stood  fixed  in  surrounding  sea  to

which  tho  son  of  Tugra  supplicating  clung?

Like  twigs,  of  which  some  winged  creature  may  take  hold,  ye,
Asvins,  bore  him  off  safely  to  your  renown.

8  Welcome  to  you  be  this  the  hymn  of  praises  uttered  by

MSuos,  0  Nfisatyas,  Heroes,

From  this  our  gathering  where  we  offer  Soma.  May  we  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXXirr.  Asvins.

Make  ready  that  which  passes  thought  iu  swiftness,  that  hath
three  wheels  and  triple  seat,  ye  Mighty,

Whereon  ye  sock  the  dwelling  of  the  pious,  whereon,  three¬
fold,  ye  fly  like  birds  with  pinions.


5  Tugra' s  son:  nee  I.  116.  3,  4.

6  In  Uu  midst  of  ocean :  I  can  make  nothing  of  the  j&lhalast/a  of  the  text,
and  insert  those  words  as  substitute  for  translation.

7  _  Mai  tree  mu  that :  figuratively  of  the  Asvins  who  saved  him,  as,  in  ft
sudden  inundation,  a  tree  saves  the  man  who  climbs  it.  An  ingenious  inter-

Elation  of  the  legend  will  be  found  iu  M.  Bergaigne’s  La  Religion  Vidiqac,
10. 17.


1  The  tliree-wheclcd  chariot  of  the  Asvins  lias  been  mentioned  before.
Bee  I.  34.  1.


HYMN  184.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  247

2  Light  rolls  your  easy  chariot  faring  earth-ward,  what  time,  for

food,  ye,  full  of  wisdom,  mount  it.

May  this  song,  wondrous  fair,  attend  your  glory :  ye,  as  ye
travel,  wait  on  Dawn  Heaven's  Daughter.

3  Ascend  your  lightly  rolling  car,  approaching  the-  worshipper

who  turns  him  to  his  duties, —

Whereon  ye  come  unto  the  house  to  quicken  man  and  his
offspring,  0  Nasatyas,  Heroes.

4  Let  not  the  wolf,  let  not  the  she-wolf  harm  you.  Forsake  mo

not,  nor  pass  me  by  for  others.

Here  stands  your  share,  here  is  your  hymn,  ye  Mighty :  yours
arc  these  vessels,  full  of  pleasant  juices.

G  Gotama,  Purumijha,  Atri  bringing  oblations  all  invoke  you
for  protection.

Like  one  who  goes  straight  to  the  point  directed,  come,  ye
Nasatyas,  to  mine  invocation.

6  We  have  passed  o’er  the  limit  of  this  darkness :  our  praise
hath  been  bestowed  on  you,  0  Asvins.

Come  hitherward  by  paths  which  Gods  have  travelled.  May
we  find  strengthening  foed  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXXIY.  Asvins.

Let  us  invoke  you  both  this  day  and  after :  the  priest  is  here
with  lauds  when  morn  is  breaking  :

Nasatyas,  wheresoe’er  ye  be,  Heaven’s  Children,  for  him  who
is  more  liberal  than  the  godless.

2  With  us,  yc  Mighty,  let  yourselves  be  joyful,  glad  in  our

stream  of  Soma  slay  the  niggards.

Graciously  hear  my  hymns  and  invitations,  marking,  0  Heroes,
with  your  ears  my  longing.

3  Nasatyas,  Pushans,  ye  as  Gods  for  glory  arranged  and  set  in

order  Sfirya’s  bridal.

Your  giant  steeds  move  on,  sprung  from  the  waters,  like  an¬
cient  times  of  Varuna  the  Mighty.


4  Lei  not  the  tool/:  lot  no  enemy  prevent  your  coming.  Ludwig  thinks
that  thero  is  an  ironical  reference  to  the  wolf  from  whose  jaws  the  Asvins
rescued  the  quail.  Sec  I.  117. 16.

5  ( iotama ,  Purumilha,  Atri:  sages  favoured  by  the  Alvins.

8  PfUJiant :  ye  who  cherish  men  like  Pushan  himself.

Stir/jd ;  the  daughter  of  the  Sun  and  the  consort  of  the  Aijvius.  See  I.
116.  17.  Giant  sttc<ta:  cf.  I.  46.  3.  *

What  the  times  or  ages  of  Varuna  arc  is  uncertain.


243  THE  II Y MSS  OF  [BOOK  /.

4  Your  grace  be  with  us,  yo  who  love  sweet  juices :  further

the  hymn  sung  by  the  poet  Mana,

When  men  arc  joyful  in  your  glorious  actions,  to  win  heroic
strength,  ye  Bounteous  Givers.

5  This  prabe  was  made,  0  liberal  Lords,  0  Asvins,  for  you  with

fair  adornment  by  the  Manas.

Come  to  our  house  for  us  and  for  our  children,  rejoicing,  0
N&satyas,  in  Agastya.

G  Wo  have  passed  o’er  the  limit  of  this  darkness  :  our  praise
hath  been  bestowed  on  you,  0  Asvins.

Como  hitherward  by  paths  which  Gods  have  travelled.  May
we  find  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXXV.  Heaven  and  Earth.

Whether  of  these  is  elder,  whether  later?  How  were  they
bom  ?  Who  knoweth  it,  ye  sages  1
These  of  themselves  support  all  things  existing  :  as  on  a  car
the  Day  and  Night  roll  onward.

2  The  Twain  uphold,  though  motionless  and  footless,  a  wide¬

spread  offspring  having  feet  and  moving.

Like  your  own  son  upon  his  parents’  bosom,  protect  us,
Heaven  and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

3  I  call  for  Aditi’s  unrivalled  bounty,  perfect,  celestial,  deathless,

meet  for  worship.

Produce  this,  yo  Twain  Worlds,  for  him  who  lauds  you.
Protect  us,  Heaven  and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

4  May  we  be  close  to  both  the  Worlds  who  suffer  no  pain,

Parents  of  Gods,  who  aid  with  favour,

Both  mid  the  Gods,  with  Day  and  Night  alternate.  Protect
us,  Heaven  and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

5  Faring  together,  young,  with  meeting  limits,  Twin  Sisters

lyiug  in  their  Parents’  bosom,

Kissing  the  centre  of  the  world  together.  Protect  us,  Heaven
and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

C  Duly  I  call  the  two  wide  seats,  the  mighty,  the  general  Parents,
with  the  Gods'  protection.


3  Aditi"  t  gift:  nil  tho  blessings  of  infinite  Nature.  According  to  Sdyana,
Aditi  means  here  the  firmament,  in  which  case  her  gift  would  be  seasonable
rain  and  consequent  wealth.

4  Parents  of  Gods :  as  with  the  Greeks,  Heaven  and  Earth  are  regarded  as
tho  father  and  mother  of  the  Gods.

5  The  moaning  is  obscure.  Ludwig  suggests  Daksha  and  Aditi  as  tho
parents.  The  centre  of  the  world  means  usually  the  altar,

6  With  the  Gods’  protection :  to  come  to  us  with  the  favouring  help  of  the
Gods.  The  nectar ;  the  rain.


THE  RJGVEDA.


249


nr  ns  l  sc.]


Who,  beautiful  to  look  on,  make  the  nectar.  Protect  us,
HeaVon  and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

7  Wide,  vast,  and  manifold,  whose  bounds  are  distant, — these,

reverent,  I  address  at  this  our  worship.

The  blessfed  Pair,  victorious,  all-sustaiuiug.  Protect  us,  Heaven
and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

8  What  sin  we  have  at  any  time  committed  against  the  Gods,

our  friend,  our  house’s  chieftain,

Thereof  may  this  our  hymn  be  expiation.  Protect  us,  Heaven
and  Earth,  from  fearful  danger.

9  May  both  these  Friends  of  man,  who  bless,  preserve  me,  may

they  attend  me  with  their  help  and  favour.

Enrich  the  man  more  liberal  than  the  godless.  May  we,  yo
Gods,  be  strong  with  food  rejoicing.

10  Endowed  with  understanding,  I  have  uttered  this  truth,  for

all  to  hear,  to  Earth  and  Heaven.

Be  near  us,  keep  us  from  reproach  aud  trouble.  Father  and
Mother,  with  your  help  preserve  us.

1 1  Be  this  my  prayer  fulfilled,  0  Earth  and  Heaven,  wherewith,

Father  and  Mother,  I  address  you.

Nearest  of  Gods  be  ye  with  your  protection.  May  we  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

HYMN  CLXXXVI.  Visvedeva*.

Loved  of  all  men,  may  Savitar,  through  praises  offered  as
sacred  food,  come  to  our  synod,

That  you  too,  through  our  hymn,  ye  ever-youthful,  may  glad¬
den,  at  your  visit,  all  our  people.

2  To  us  may  all  the  Gods  come  trooped  together,  Aryaman,

.  Mitra,  Varuna  concordant.

That  all  may  be  promoters  of  our  welfare,  and  with  great
might  preserve  our  strength  from  slackness.

3  Agni  I  sing,  the  gue3t  you  love  most  dearly :  the  Conqueror

through  our  lauds  is  friendly-minded  :

That  he  may  be  our  Varuna  rich  in  glory,  and  send  food  like
a  prince  praised  by  the  godly.

4.  To  you  I  seek  with  reverence,  Night  and  Morning,  like  a  cow
good  to  milk,  with  hope  to  conquer,


1  Savitar :  the  Sun,  especial'}-  regarded  as  the  vivifier  and  generator.  Ye
ever  youthful :  Vuvedevas,  or  All -Gods.

3  Our  Varuna :  our  lord  and  protector.

4  Like  a  eov> :  the  singer  is  the  cow  and  bis  hymn  the  milk.

With  hope  to  conquer :  to  overcome  si as,  according  to  Sflyana.


250  '  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  I.

Preparing  on  a  common  day  the  praise-song  with  milk  of  vari¬
ous  hues  within  this  udder.

5  May  the  great  Dragon  of  the  Deep  rejoice  us :  as  one  who
nourishes  her  young  comes  Sindhu,

With  whem  we  will  incite  the  Child  of  Waters  whom  vigorous
coursers  swift  as  thought  bring  hither.

8  Moreover  Tvashtar  also  shall  approach  us,  one-minded  with
the  princes  at  his  visit.

Hither  shall  come  the  Vptra-slaycr  Indra,  Euler  of  men,  as
strongest  of  the  Heroes.

7  Him  too  our  hymns  delight,  that  yoke  swift  horses,  like

mother  cows  who  lick  their  tender  youngling.

To  him  our  songs  shall  yield  themselves  liko  spouses,  to  him
the  most  delightful  of  the  Heroes.

8  So  may  the  Maruts,  armed  with  mighty  weapons,  rest  here  on

heaven  and  earth  with  hearts  in  concord,

As  Gods  whose  cars  have  dappled  steeds  like  torrents,  destroy¬
ers  of  the  foe,  allies  of  Mitra.

9  They  hasten  on  to  happy  termination  their  ox*ders  when  they

are  made  known  by  glory.

As  on  a  fair  bright  day  the  arrow  flicth,  o’er  all  the  barren
soil  their  missiles  sparklo.

10  Incline  the  Asvins  to  show  grace,  and  Puslian,  for  power  and

might  have  they,  their  own  possession.

Friendly  are  Vishnu,  VAta,  and  Ribhukshan :  so  may  I  bring
the  Gods  to  make  us  happy.

11  This  is  my  reverent  thought  of  you,  yc  Holy  ;  may  it  inspire

you,  make  you  dwell  among  us,  —

Thought,  toiling  for  the  Gods  and  seeking  treasure.  May  wo
lind  strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.


A  common  day :  belonging  to  the  past  night  and  tho  present  morning.

Milk  of  various  hues  :  the  libations  of  milk  mixed  with  the  yellow  or  brown
Soma  juice.

This  udder :  apparently  a  figurative  expression  for  the  place  of  sacrifico
whence  the  milky  libations  flow.

5  Dragon  of  the  Deep :  Ahibudhnya,  a  divine  being  that  dwells  in,  and  pre¬
sides  over  the  firmament.  Sind/M :  the  Indus.

The  Child  of  Waters :  Agui.

6  Tvashtar;  the  heavenly  artist.  The  princes ;  iuatitutors  of  the  sacrifice.

7  That  yoke  swift  horses :  that  quickly  bring  the  Gods  to  the  sacrifice.

T/uir  tender  youngling ;  SAyana  takes  the  epithet  Uirunam  as  applying  to

Indra  ‘  the  ever-youthful.’

10  Ribhukshan:  a  name  of  Indra,  as  Lord  of  the  Kibhus.  See  1. 162..  1.


HYMN  1S7.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


251

HYMN  CLXXXVIL  Praise  of  Food.

Now  will  I  glorify  Food  that  upholds  great  strength,

By  whose  invigorating  power  Trita  rent  Vritra  limb  from  limb.

2  0  pleasant  Food,  0  Food  of  meath,  thee  have  we  chosen  for

our  own,  *

So  be  our  kind  protector  thou.

3  Come  hitherward  to  us,  0  Food,  auspicious  with  auspicious

help,

Health-bringing,  not  unkind,  a  dear  and  guileless  friend.

4  These  juices  which,  0  Food,  arc  thine  throughout  the  regions

are  diffused.

Like  winds  they  have  their  place  in  heaven.

5  These  gifts  of  thine,  0  Food,  0  Food  most  sweet  to  taste,
These  savours  of  thy  juices  work  like  creatures  that  have

mighty  necks.

6  In  thee,  O  Food,  is  set  the  spirit  of  great  Gods.

Under  thy  flag  brave  deeds  were  done  :  he  slew  the  Dragon
with  thy  help.

7  If  thou  be  gone  unto  the  splendour  of  the  clouds,

Even  from  thence,  0  Food  of  meath,  prepared  for  our  enjoy¬
ment,  come.

8  Whatever  morsel  we  consume  from  waters  or  from  plants  of

earth,  0  Soma,  wax  thou  fat  thereby.

9  What,  Soma,  we  enjoy  from  thee  in  milky  food  or  barley-brew,

VjLt&pi,  grow  thou  fat  thereby.

10  0  Vegetable,  Cake  of  meal,  be  wholesome,  firm,  and  strength¬
ening  :

V&t&pi,  grow  thou  fat  thereby.

110  Food,  from  thee  as  such  have  we  drawn  forth  with  lauds,
like  cows,  our  sacrificial  gifts,

From  thee  who  banquetest  with  Gods, 'from  thee  who  banquet-
est  with  us.


1  Trita :  a  mysterious  ancient  deity  frequently  mentioned  in  the  liigveda,
principally  in  connexion  with  Indra,  Viyu,  and  the  Marut*.  His  home  is  in
the  remotest  part  of  heaven,  and  he  is  called  Aptya,  the  Watery,  that  is,
sprung  from,  or  dwelling  in  the  sea  of  cloud  and  vapour.  By  Sdyana  ho  is
identified  sometimes  with  VAyu.  sometimes  with  Ipdr*  as  the  pervader  of  the
three  worlds,  and  sometimes  with  Agni  stationed  in  the  three  fire-receptacles,

2  The  Ood  addressed  is  the  Soma.

5  Like  creature *  that  have  nighty  neeht :  like'strong  bullocks.

6  The  spirit  of  great  Gods  ;  thou  indtest  ledra  and  the  Gods  to  perform
glorious  and  benevolent  acts.

9  Vdtdpi :  the  fermenting  Soma.  According  to  S&yana,  the  body.


MtE  J/YMXS  OP


[HOOK  /.


252


HYMN  CLXXXVIII.  Apris,

Winner  of  thousands,  kindled,  thou  shinest  a  God  with  Gods
to-day.

Bear  our  oblations,  envoy,  Sage.

2  Child  of  thyself !  the  sacrifice  is  for  the  righteous  blent  with

meath,

Presenting  viands  thousandfold.

3  Invoked  and  worthy  of  our  praise  bring  Gods  whose  due  is

sacrifice :

Thou,  Agni,  giveat  countless  gifts*

4  To  seat  a  thousand  Heroes  they  eastward  have  strewn  the

grass  with  might,

Whereon,  Adityas,  ye  shine  forth.

5  The  sovran  all-imperial  Doors,  wide,  good,  many  and  manifold,
Have  poured  their  streams  of  holy  oil.

6  With  gay  adornment,  fair  to  see,  .in  glorious  beauty  6hine

the^  forth :

Let  Night  and  Morning  rest  them  hero.

7  Let  these  two  Sages  first  of  all,  heralds  divine  and  eloquent,
Perform  for  us  this  sacrifice.

8  You  I  address,  Saras vati,  and  Bh&rati,  and  Ila,  all !

Urge  ye  us  on  to  glorious  fame.

9  Tvashtar  the  Lord  hath  made  all  forms  and  all  the  cattle  of

the  field  t

Cause  them  to  multiply  for  us.

10  Send  to  the  Gods,  Vanaspati,  thyself,  the  sacrificial  draught !
Let  Agni  make  the  oblations  sweet.

1 1  Agni,  precedcr  of  tho  Gods,  is  honoured  with  the  sacred  song  2
He  glows  at  offerings  blest  with  Hail  1

The  Aprta  are  the  various  forms  of  Agni,  according  to  Slyapa,  which  are
invoked  in  the  hymn.

1  Thou:  Agni.

2  Child  of  Thysdf:  Agui.  See  L  18.  2.

4  Adityas see  L  14.  8.

5  The  sovran  all-imperial  Poors :  of  tho  sacrificial  hall  through  which  Gods
enter.  They  are  types  of  tho  portals  of  the  East  through  which  light  comes
into  the  world.  See  Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda,  p.  19.

7  These  two  Sages:  heralds  or  invokers,  because  they  call  the  Gods.  See  I.
13.  8.

8  Sarasvatt  and  Bhdralt  and  lid  :  see  I.  13.  9.

10  Vanaspati:  see  I.  13.  11.

11  Blest  with  Bail  t;  see  I.  13.  12.


IIYMH  189.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


253


HYMN  CLXXXIX.  Agni.

By  goodly  paths  lead  us  to  riches,  Agni,  thou  God  who  know-
est  every  sacred  duty.

Remove  the  sin  that  makes  us  stray  and  wander :  most  ample
adoration  will  we  bring  thee.  *

2  Lead  us  anew  to  happiness,  0  Agni ;  lead  us  beyond  all  danger

and  affliction.

Be  unto  us  a  wide  broad  ample  castle  :  bless,  prosper  on  their  -
way  our  sous  and  offspring.

3  Far  from  us,  Agni,  put  thou  all  diseases :  let  them  strike

lands  that  havo  no  saving  Agni.

God,  make  our  home  again  to  bo  a  blessing,  with  all  the  Im¬
mortal  Deities,  0  Holy.

4  Preserve  us,  Agni,  with  perpotual  succour,  refulgent  in  the

dwelling  which  thou  lovost.

0  Conqueror,  most  youthful,  let  no  danger  touch  him  who
praises  thee  to-day  or  after.

5  Give  not  us  up  a  prey  to  sin,  0  Agni,  the  greedy  enemy  that

brings  us  trouble ;

Not  to  the  funged  that  bites,  not  to  the  toothless :  give  not
us  up,  thou  Conqueror,  to  the  spoiler.

6  Such  as  thou  art,  bom  after  Law,  0  Agni,  when  lauded  give

protection  to  our  bodies,

From  whosoever  would  reproach  or  injure :  for  thou,  God,
rescuest  from  all  oppression.

7  Thou,  well  discerning  both  these  classes,  comcst  to  men  at

early  morn,  0  holy  Agni.

Be  thou  obedient  unto  man  at  evening,  to  be  adorned,  as  keen,
by  eager  suitors.

8  To  him  have  we  addressed  our  pious  speeches,  I,  Mina’s  son,

to  him  victorious  Agni.

.  May  we  gain  countless  riches  with  the  sages.  May  wo  find
strengthening  food  in  full  abundance.

This  hymn,  as  Ludwig  observes,  appears  to  have  boon  composed  at  a  time  of
pestilence.

3  That  have  no  saving  Agni :  or,  which  do  not  maintain  the  sacred  fire  ;
whose  inhabitants  do  not  worship  Agni.

5  The  fagged :  venomous  serpents.  The  toothless  :  wild  animals  that  do
not  bite,  but  injure  with  their  horns,  eto.

7  Both  these  classes  :  worshippers  and  non-worshippers.

Be  thou  obedient :  bo  a  useful  servant  in  the  house.

As  keen :  akidk,  applied  to  Agni  in  all  tho  places  where  it  occurs  in  the
Kigveda,  appears  to  mean  hasty,  violent,  eager,  or  keen.  Ludwig  thinks  that
it  means  here  a  sacrificial  post,  and  Grassmann,  a  banner.  Wilson,  following
Sayano,  paraphrases  :  ‘  be  compliant  (with  his  wishes)  ;  like  an  inatitutor  of
the  rite,  (who  is  directed)  by  tho  desires  (of  tho  priests).’


[DOOR  I.


251  THE  HYMNS  OF

HYMN  CXC.  BriliMpati.

Glorify  thou  Bphaspati;  the  scatheless,  who  must  bo  praised
with  bymus,  sweet-tongued  and  mighty,

To  whom  as  leader  of  the  soug,  resplendent,  worthy  of  lauds,
*both  Ghds  and  mortals  listen.

2  On  him  wait  songs  according  to  the  season,  even  as  a  stream

of  pious  men  set  moving.

Brihaspati — for  ho  laid  ovit  the  expanses — was,  at  the  sacrifice,
vast  M&tarisvan.

3  The  praise,  the  verse  that  offers  adoration,  may  he  bring  forth,

as  the  Sun  sends  his  anus  out,

He  who  gives  daily  light  through  this  God’s  wisdom,  strong
as  a  dread  wild  beast,  and  inoffensive.

4  His  soug  of  praise  pervades  the  earth  and  heaven :  let  the

wise  worshipper  draw  it,  like  a  courser.

•  These  of  Brihaspati,  like  hunters’  arrows,  go  to  the  skies  that
change  their  hue  like  serpents.

5  Those,  God,  who  count  thee  as  a  worthless  bullock,  and,

wealthy  sinners,  live  on  thee  the  Bounteous, —

On  fools  like  these  no  blessing  thou  bestowest :  Brihaspati,
thou  punishest  the  spiteful.

6  Like  a  fair  path  is  he,  where  grass  is  pleasant,  though  hard

to  win,  a  Friend  beloved  most  dearly.

Those  who  unharmed  by  enemies  behold  us,  while  they  would
make  them  bare,  stood  closely  compassed.

1  Brihaspati :  Lord  of  Prayer.  See  I.  14.  3.

2  For  he  laid  out  the  exp-irua  :  spread  out  and  revealed  to  the  eyes  of  men
the  broad  regions  of  heaven  and  earth.  The  meaning  of  the  second  hemistich
is  uot  clear.  Wilson  paraphrases  ;  ‘  for  that  Brihaspati  is  the  manif eater  (of
all),  the  expansive  wind  that  (diffusing)  blwsiugs  has  been  produced  for  (the
diffusion  of)  water.'  There  seems  to  be  nothing  in  the  Rigveda  to  justify  the
identification  of  MAtarUvan  with  the  wind,  aud  only  in  the  later  language  has
nld  tbo  sense  of  water.  See  I.  31.  3.

3  He :  Brihaspati.  He  who  gives  daily  light :  the  regular  appearance  of
the  Sun  depends  upon  Brihaspati’*  wisdom.

Inoffensive :  araktkdsuh.  according  to  SAyana,  *  free  from  the  opposition  of
BAkshasas.’

4  These  of  Brihaspati :  these  sacred  songs,  compared  to  arrows.

That  change  their  hue  like  serpents  :  dhimdydn.  Sec  X.  3.  9.

6  This  stanza  U  unintelligible  to  me.  Wilson  renders  it :  ‘  Bo  a  (pleasant)
way  to  him  who  goes  well  and  makes  good  offerings,  like  the  affectionate  frioud
of  (a  ruler  who)  restrains  the  bad ;  aud  may  those  sinless  men  who  instruct
us,  although  yet  enveloped  (by  ignorance)  stand  extricated  from  tlicir  cover¬
ing’  ;  and  remarks  :  ‘  it  is  not  clear  how  those  who  are  enveloped  by  ignorance
should  bo  competent  to  teach :  another  explanation  is,  let  those  who  revile
us,  and  are  being  protected,  bo  deprived  of  that  protection.’


HYMN  191.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  255

7  Ho  to  whom  songs  of  praise  go  forth  like  torrents,  as  rivers

eddying  under  banks  flow  sea-ward —

Byihaspati  the  wise,  tho  eager,  closely  looks  upon  both,  the
waters  and  the  vessel.

8  So  hath  Brihaspati,  great,  strong  and  mighty,  the  God  exceed¬

ing  powerful,  been  brought  hither.

May  he  thus  lauded  give  us  kino  and  horses.  May  wo  ■  find
strengthening  food  iu  full  abundance.

HYMN  CXCI.  Water.  Grass.  Sun.

Venomous,  slightly  venomous,  or  venomous  aquatic  worm, —
Both  creatures,  stinging,  unobserved,  with  poison  have  infected
me.

2  Coming,  it  kills  the  unobserved ;  it  kills  them  as  it  goes  away.
It  kills  them  as  it  drives  them  off,  aud  bruising  bruises  them

to  death.

3  Sara  grass,  Darbha,  Kusara,  and  Sairya,  Munja,  Tirana,

Where  all  these  creatures  dwell  unscon,  with  poison  have  in¬
fected  me.

4  The  cows  had  settled  in  their  stalls,  tho  beasts  of  prey  had

sought  their  lairs,

Extinguished  wore  the  lights  of  men,  when  things  unseen  in¬
fected  me.

5  Or  these,  these  reptiles,  are  observed,  liko  lurking  thieves  at

evening  time,

Seers  of  all,  themselves  unseen  :  be  therefore  very  vigilant.


7  Tin’s  stanza  also  is  very  obscure.  Brihospati  is  said  to  look  upon  tho
waters  and  the  vessel,  that  is  the  river  to  be  crossed  and  the  boat  which  is  to
be  used,  meaning  perhaps  the  sacrifice  and  all  that  is  used  in  performing  it.
Ludwig  thinks  that  a  play  upon  tho  words  is  intonded,  Xpoh  meaning  both
water  and  a  religious  ceremony  and  ttirafy  both  ferry-boat  and  prompt  energy.

This  so-called  hymn  is  a  spell  or  charm  said  to  have  boon  recited  by  Agiwtya
wheu  he  suspected  that  he  had  been  poisoner!.  Its  silent  repetition 'ia  said  to
bo  an  effectual  antidote  against  ‘all  venom  in  reptiles,  insects,  scorpions,  roots,
and  artificial  poisons.’  I  generally  follow  SAyana  ;  but  his  explanations  aro
not  always  satisfactory,  aud  several  passages  must  be  left  in  thoir  original  obs¬
curity.

1  The  exact  ineauing  of  the  words  in  the  first  line  is  uncertain.

Both  erratum :  both  classes,  either  tho  venomous  and  the  slightly  venomous,
or  land-reptiles  and  water-snakes.

2  Coming,  it  kills  the  unobserved :  the  horb,  usod  as  an  antidote,  coming
to  the  man  who  has  boon  bitten  kills  the  vouomoua  creatures  who  secretly  at¬
tacked  him.

3  Sara  grots,  etc :  these  are  different  sorts  of  grass  in  which  snakes  and
other  venomous  reptiles  lurk.


256  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  I.

6  Heaven  is  your  Sire,  your  Mother  Earth,  Soma  your  Brother,

Aditi

Your  Sister:  seeing  all,  unseen,  keep  still  and  dwell  ye  hap-
PiJy-

7  Biters  of  shoulder  or  of  limb,  with  needle-stings,  most  veno¬

mous,  .  V

Unseen,  whatever  ye  may  be,  vanish  together  and  be  gone.

8  Slayer  of  things  unseen,  the  Sun,  beheld  of  all,  mounts,  east¬

ward,  up,

Consuming  all  that  are  not  seen,  and  evil  spirits  of  the  night.

9  There  hath  the  Sun-God  mounted  up,  who  scorches  much  and

everything,

Even  the  Aditya  from  the  hills,  all-seen,  destroying  things  un¬
seen.

10  I  haug  the  poison  in  the  Sun,  a  wine-skin  in  a  vintner’s  house,
He  will  not  die,  nor  shall  we  die:  his  path  is  far:  he  whom

Bay  Horses  bear  hath  turned  thee  to  sweet  meath.

11  This  little  bird,  so  very  small,  hath  swallowed  all  thy  poison  up.
She  will  not  die,  nor  shall  we  die :  his  path  is  far :  he  whom

Bay  Horses  bear  hath  turned  thee  to  sweet  meath.

12  The  three-times-seven  bright  sparks  of  fire  have  swallowed  up

the  poison's  strength.

They  will  not  die,  nor  shall  we  die :  his  path  is  far :  he  whom
Bay  Horses  bear  hath  turned  thee  to  sweet  meath.

13  Of  ninety  river’s  and  of  nine  with  power  to  stay  the  venom’s

course, —

The  names  of  all  I  have  secured :  his  path  is  far :  he  whom  Bay
Horses  bear  bath  turned  thee  to  sweet  meath.

6  Heaven,  or  Dyaus,  is  here  said  to  be  the  fathor  of  the  snakes.

Soma:  the  Moon.

10/  hang  the  poison  in  the  Sun :  ‘  I  deposit  the  poison  in  the  solar  orb,  like
a  leather  bottle  in  the  house  of  a  vender  of  spirits. ’—Wilson.  See  Wilson’s
note  in  which  he  says  that  by  the  Sun  or  as  SAyana  paraphrases  it,  the  orb  of
the  Sun,  ‘  ia  probably  to  be  understood  a  mystical  diagram,  or  figure  wholly
or  partly  typical  of  the  solar  orb:  the  Sun  being  considered  as  especially
instrumental  in  counteracting  the  operation  of  poison.’

He  will  not  die :  the  Suu  will  not  die  from  the  edicts  of  the  poison  thus  ap¬
plied,  and  we  also  who  have  been  bitten  shall  through  his  favour  recover.

11  This  Hide  bird:  according  to  SAyana,  the  bird  which  we  call  the  fran-
coiinc  partridge,  said  to  bo  a  ‘  remover  of  poison.’

12  Bright  sparks  of  fire:  either,  says  SAyana,  tho  seven  flames  of  fire  multi¬
plied,  or  the  twenty-oac  varieties  of  auother  kind  of  bird  unaffected  by  eating
poison.

13  Of  ninety  rivers  and  of  nine:  the  numbers  are  used  indefinitely  for  all
the  rivers  of  the  country.


HYMN  191.]  THE  RTGYEDA.  237

14  So  have  the  peahens  thrcc-timcs-scvcn,  so  have  the  maiden

Sisters  Seven

Carried  thy  venom :  far  away,  as  girls  bear  water  in  their
jars.

15  The  poison-insect  is  so  small;  I  crush  the  Croat ure  with  a

stone.

I  turn  the  poison  hence  away,  departed  unto  distant  lands.

16  Forth  issuing  from  the  mountain's  sido  the  poison-insect  spake

and  said :  *

The  scorpion’s  venom  hath  no  strength ;  Scorpion,  thy  venom
is  but  weak.


14  The  peahens  Ihrct-limcs-scvcn :  peafowls  are  regarded  as  the  great  enemies
of  snakes.  The  number  appears  to  be  merely  fanciful  and  borrowed  from
verso  12.

The  maiden  Sisters  Seven :  the  seven  chief  rivers  of  the  land.

13  As  kuihiimlha  means  poison-bag,  Jatshunlhaklh  in  the  text  is  taken  by
Ludwig  and  Grassmann  to  mean  venomous  insect,

Sityaoa  explains  it  as  the  natula,  uiiul  or  mungoosc  whose  hostility  to  the
.<imke  is  proverbial.  Wilsou  paraphrases :  ‘  May  the  insignificant  mungoose
warry  off  thy  venom,  (Poison) :  if  not,  I  will  crush  the  vile  (creature)  with  a

ftf.OQt/


17


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


HYMN  I.  *  AgnL

Thou,  Agni,  shining  in  thy  glory  through  the  days,  art  brought
to  life  from  out  the  waters,  from  the  stone :

From  out  the  forest  trees  and  herbs  that  grow  on  ground,
thou,  Sovran  Lord  of  men  art  generated  pure.

2  Thine  is  the  Herald’s  task  and  Cleanser’s  duly  timed;  Leador

art  thou,  and  Kindler  for  the  pious  man.

Thou  art  Director,  thou  the  ministering  Priest :  thou  art  the
Brahman,  Lord  and  Master  in  our  home.

3  Hero  of  Heroes,  Agni !  thou  art  Indra,  thou  art  Vishnu  of

the  Mighty  Stride,  adorable  :

Thou,  Brahmanaspati,  the  Brahman  finding  wealth :  thou,  0
Sustainer,  with  thy  wisdom  tendcst  us.

4  Agni,  thou  art  King  Yanina  whose  laws  stand  fast;  as  Mitra,

Wonder-Worker,  thou  must  be  implored.

Aryamau,  heroes'  Lord,  art  thou,  enriching  all,  and  liberal
Ansa  in  the  synod,  0  thou  God.


The  hymns  of  this  Boole,  with  the  few  exceptions  that  will  lxs  noted,  are  as¬
cribed  to  the  Ilishi  Gritaairuida.  As  Book  I.  is  called  the  Book  of  the  SaUr-
chins,  that  in  of  the  seers  of  a  hundred  or  large  indefinite  number  of  ItichM  or
vanes,  so  this  Book  is  commonly  called  the  GArtsamada  Mandala  or  Book  of
Giitsnuiada.

1  Through  the  dags:  for  the  days  of  sacrifice,  according  to  Sdyana.

The  t caters  :  from  the  waters  of  the  firmament,  os  lightning.

Prom  out  the  forest  trees:  in  the  frequently  occurring  conflagrations  causod
by  the  friction  of  dry  branches.  Agni  is  also  said  to  have  his  home  iu  plants,
perhaps  originally  on  account  of  a  phosphorescent  light  which  some  plants
emit.

2  Agni  concentrates  iu  himself  the  various  functions  of  different  classes  of
human  priests,  the  most  important  of  which  arc  mentioned  in  the  verse.  The
classification  of  the  priests  and  the  description  of  their  duties  aro  given  with
variations  by  different  authorities.  The  Hotar  or  Herald  invokes  tbo  Gods  ;
the  Potar,  Purifier,  or  Cleanser,  is  the  assistant  of  the  Brahman  or  praying
priest  who  remedies  any  defect  in  the  ritual  ;  the  Nealilar  or  Leader  leads  for¬
ward  the  wife  of  the  sacrificer  ;  the  Agufdh  or  Kindler  lights  the  sacrificial
fire  ;  the  PrasAstar  or  Director  is  the  assistant  of  the  Hotar  ;  aud  the  Adh-
varyu  or  ministering  priest  is  the  dcaoon  who  measures  the  ground,  builds  the
altar,  and  mokes  all  the  preparations  necessary  for  the  sacrifice.  The  duties  of
the  priests,  however,  varied  at  different  times  and  according  to  the  nature  of
the  ceremony  which  they  were  engaged  to  perform.

3  KuAnu  of  t he  Mighty  Stride :  see  I.  32.  16.

i  Ansa  ;  the  Distributer  ;  one  of  the  Adityas.


200


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  II.


•>  Thou  givest  strength,  as  Tvashtar,  to  the  worshipper  :  thou,
wielding  Mitra’s  power,  hast  kinship  with  the  Dames.

Thou,  urging  thy  fleet  corn-sere,  givest  noble  steeds :  a  host
of  heroes  art  thou  with  great  store  of  wealth.

6  Rudra  art  thou,  tho  Asura  of  mighty  heaven :  thou  art  the

Maruts*  host,  thou  art  the  Lord  of  food,

Thou  goest  with  red  winds:  bliss  hast  thou  in  thine  home.
As  Rushan  thou  thyself  protcctcst  worshippers.

7  Giver  of  wealth  art  thou  to  him  who  honours  thee ;  thou  art

God  S&vitar,  granter  of  precious  things.

As  Bhaga,  Lord  of  men  !  thou  rulest  over  wealth,  and  guard-
est  in  his  house  him  who  hath  served  thee  well.

8  To  thee,  the  people’s  Lord  within  the  house,  the  folk  press  for¬

ward  to  their  King  most  graciously  inclined.

Lord  of  tho  lovely  look,  all  things  belong  to  thee :  ten,  hun¬
dred,  yea,  a  thousand  are  outweighed  by  thee.

9  Agni,  men  seek  thee  as  a  Father  with  their  prayers,  win  thee,

bright-formed,  to  brotherhood  with  holy  act.

Thou  art  a  Son  to  him  who  duly  worships  thee,  aud  as  a  trusty
Friend  thou  guard est  from  attack.

10  A  Ribhu  art  thou,  Agni,  near  to  be  adored ;  thou  art  tho

Sovran  Lord  of  foodful  spoil  and  wealth.

Thou  shiueat  brightly  forth,  thou  buruest  to  bestow  :  pervad¬
ing  aacritice,  thou  lendest  us  thine  help.

11  Thou,  God,  art  Aditi  to  him  who  offers  gifts :  thou,  Hotru

Bh&rati,  art  strengthened  by  the  song.

Thou  art  tho  hundred-wintered  list  to  give  strength,  Lord  of
Wealth  !  Vritra-slayer  and  Sarasvati.

12  Thou,  Agni,  cherished  well,  art  highest  vital  power;  in  thy

delightful  hue  are  glories  visible.

Thou  art  the  lofty  might  that  furthers  each  design  :  thou  art
wealth  manifold,  diffused  on  every  side.

.13  Thee,  Agni,  have  tho  Adityas  taken  as  their  mouth;  the
Bright  Ones  have  made  thee,  0  Sago,  to  he  their  tongue.
They  who  love  offerings  cling  to  thee  at  solemn  rites  :  by  thco
tho  Gods  devour  the  duly  offered  food.

14  By  thee,  0  Agni,  all  the  Immortal  guileless  Gods  eat  with  thy
mouth  the  oblation  that  is  offered  them.


5  The  Dames :  tho  Consort*  of  the  Gods.

11  Holrd,  BMrali,  Ili  aro  personifications  of  parts  of  religious  worship.
The  epithet  ‘  hundred-wintered '  appears  to  refer  to  tho  natural  duration  of
human  life,  Sarasvati ;  see  I.  3.  10.


HYMH  2.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  231

By  thee  do  mortal  men  give  sweetness  to  their  drink.

Bright  art  thou  born,  the  embryo  of  the  plants  of  earth.

15  With  these  thou  art  united,  Agni ;  yea,  thou,  God  of  noble

birth,  suvpassest  them  in  majesty,

Which,  through  the  power  of  good,  here  spreads  abroad  from
thee,  diffused  through  both  the  worlds,  throughout  the  earth
and  heaven.

16  The  princely  worshippers  who  send  to  those  who  sing  thy

praise,  0  Agni,  guerdon  graced  with  kino  and  steeds, —
Lead  thou  both  these  and  us  forward  to  higher  bliss.  With
brave  men  in  the  assembly  may  we  speak  aloud.

HYMN  II.  Agni.

With  sacrifice  exalt  Agni  who  knows  all  life;  worship  him
with  oblation  and  the  song  of  pr  ose,

Well  kindled,  no  ly  fe  1,  heaven’s  Lord,  Celestial  Priest,  who
labours  at  the  p  ile  where  deeds  of  might  are  done.

2  At  night  and  morning,  Agni,  have  they  called  to  thee,  like

milch-kino  in  their  stills  lowing  to  meet  their  young.

As  messengor  of  heaven  thou  lightest  all  night  long  the  fami¬
lies  of  men,  then  Lord  of  precious  ioouh.

3  Him  have  the  Gods  established  at  the  re 'ion’s  base,  doer  of

wondrous  deeds,  Herald  of  heaven  and  earth  j
Like  a  most  famous  car,  Agui  the  purely  bright,  like  Mitra  to
be  glorified  among  the  folk.

4  Him  have  they  sot  in  his  own  dwelling,  in  the  vault,  like  the

Moon  waxing,  fulgent,  in  the  realm  of  air.

Bird  of  the  firmament,  observant  with  his  eyes,  guard  of  tho
place  as  ’twere,  looking  to  Go  Is  and  men.

5  May  he  as  Priest  encompass  all  the  sacrifice :  men  throng  to

him  with  offerings  and  with  hymns  of  praiso.

Raging  with  jaws  of  gold  among  tho  growing  plants,  like  heaven
with  all  the  stars,  he  quickens  earth  and  sky.


13  With  brace  men  :  attended  by  brave  sons,  who  will  support  and  streng¬
then  U8.

1  Who  laJtours  at  the  pole  :  who  take?  the  chief  part  in  the  performance  of
all- important  sacrifice  A  metaphor  from  oxen  drawing  a  car  or  wain.

2  Have  they  callctl :  the  priests.

3  At  the  ret) ion’ t  base:  at  the  altar,  according  to  Slyana.

4  The  word  hvdrt,  here  rendered  ‘in  the  vault/  ie  difficult.  SAyana  explain*
it  as  1 2 3 4  solitary.’  Roth  would  alter  the  text.

Guard  of  the  place :  of  the  most  eacrod  place,  the  altar.


m  THE  IIYMXS  OF  [BOOK  II.

G  Such  as  thou  art,  brilliantly  kindled  for  our  weal,  a  liberal
giver,  send  us  riches  in  thy  shine,

For  our  advantage,  Agni,  God,  bring  Heaven  and  Earth  hither
that  they  may  taste  oblation  brought  by  man.

7  Agni,  giva  us  great  wealth,  give  riches  thousandfold  :  unclose  to

us,  like  doors,  strength  that  shall  bring  renown.

Make  Heaven  and  Earth  propitious  through  the  power  of  prayer,
and  like  the  sky’s  bright  sheen  lot  mornings  beam  on  us.

8  Enkindled  night  by  night  at  every  morning’s  dawn,  may  he

shine  forth  with  red  llamo  like  the  roalm  of  light, —

Agni  adored  in  beauteous  rites  with  lauds  of  men,  fair  guest
of  living  man  and  King  of  all  our  folk.

9  Song  ohauted  by  us  men,  0  Agni,  Ancient  One,  has  swolled

unto  tho  doathloss  Gods  in  lofty  hoavon —

A  milch-cow  yielding  to  tho  singor  in  tho  rites  wealth  mani¬
fold,  in  hundreds,  evon  as  he  wills.

10  Agni,  may  we  show  forth  our  valour  with  tho  stood  or  with  tho

power  of  prayer  beyond  all  other  men ;

And  ovor  tho  Five  Raoos  let.our  glory  shmo  high  like  tho  realm
of  light  and  unsurpassable.

11  Such,  Conqueror  !  bo  to  us,  bo  worthy  of  our  praise,  thou  for

whom  princos  nobly  born  exert  thomsolvos;

Whoso  saorifioe  tho  strong  sook,  Agni,  whoa  it  shines  fornover*
failing  offspring  in  thine  own  ubodo.

12  Knowor  of  all  that  lives,  0  Agni,  may  wo  both,  singers  of  praise

and  ohiofs,  bo  iu  thy  kcoping  still.

Holp  us  to  wealth  oxcocding  good  and  glorious,  abundant,  rich
in  childron  and  their  progeny.

13  The  princely  worshippers  who  send  to  thoso  who  sing  thy

praise,  0  Agni,  guerdon,  graoed  with  kino  and  stoods,—

Lead  thou  both  these  and  us  forward  to  hi^hor  bliss.  With
brave  raon  in  tho  assombly  may  wo  speak  aloud.

HYMN  HI.  Apr!..

Agni  is  set  upon  the  earth  well  kindled ;  he  atandeth  in  tho
presence  of  all  beings.

Wise,  ancient,  God,  the  Priest  and  Purifier,  lot  Agni  sorve  tho
Gods  for  he  is  worthy.

8  Hay  he :  Agni.  t

9  A  milch-eoxo :  tho  hymn  of  praise  brings  riches  to  the  worshipper.

10  With  the  steed:  with  the  war- car  in  battle  as  well  as  with  prayer  in  sacrifices.
The  Fite  Faces :  the  five  great  Aryan  tribes.  See  I.  7.  #.

11  The  strong  the  wealthy  worshippers.

Ket'er -/ailing  offspring:  ouo  of  the  chief  rewards  of  the  worship  of  Agni.


jrnry  3.]  the  moved  a.  2.53

3  May  Narasansa  lighting  up  the  chambers,  bright  in  his  majesty
through  threefold  heaven,

.Steeping  the  gift  with  oil-diffusing  purpose,  bedew  the  Gods  at
chiofest  time  of  worship.

3  Adored  in  heart,  as  is  thy  right,  0  Agui,  serve  tl«  Gods  first

to-day  before  the  mortal.

Bring  thou  the  Marut  host.  Ye  men,  do  worship  to  Indra
seated  on  the  grass,  eternal.

4  0  Grass  divine,  increasing,  rich  in  heroes,  strewn  for  wealth’

sako,  well  laid  upon  this  altar, —

On  this  bedewed  with  oil  ait  ye,  0  Vasus,  sit  all  ye  Gods,  ye
Holy,  ye  Adityas.

t>  Wide  be  the  Doors,  the  Goddesses,  thrown  open,  easy  to  pass,
invoked,  through  adorations.

Lot  them  unfold,  expansive,  overlasting,  that  sonotify  tho  class
fumed,  rich  in  heroes.

6  Good  work  for  us,  tbe’glorious  Night  and  Morning,  like  female

w pavers,  waxen. from  Aforetime,

Yioldors  of  rich  milk,  interwouvo  in  conoert  tho  long-extended .  „
thread,  tho  wob  of  Worship.

7  Lot  tho  two  hoavonly  Heralds,  first,  most  wise,  most  fair,  pre¬

sent  oblation  duly  with  tho  sacred  vorso,

Worshipping  Gods,  at  ordered  seasons  decking  them  at  threo
high  places  at  tho  oontro  of  tho  earth.

8  Sarosvatt  who  perfeots  our  dovotion,  Ijfi  divine,  Bharat!  all-

surpassing, —


2  Nardfins-t:  '  tho  PraUo  of  Men,’  Agni.  The  chambers :  tho  receptacles  of
tho  offerings,  according  to  SAyapa.  At  ehieftst  time  of  worship:  when  the
oblation  of  olariflod  butter  is  cant  into  tho  Are.

3  Before  tin  mortal :  before  tho  mortal  priest,

4  0  Omit  divine:  tho  sacred  Kraus,  strewn  on  tho  floor  of  tho  hall  of  sacrifice
a  soat  for  tho  Gods,  U  one  of  tho  Aprls  or  doiflod  objeota  which  are  to  bo

propitiated  in  this  hyrnu.  All  thoao  are  regarded  as  forms  of  Agni.

5  The  Doors  ;  of  tho  hall  of  sacrifico.  Theso  appear  to  have  boon  regarded
ns  typos  of,  and  evon  fancifully  identified  with,  the  doors  of  the  cosmic  house,
the  portals  of  the  East.  through  which  the  morning  light  enters  into  the  world.
See  Cosinolog!/  of  the  R  'ujx  eda,  p.  19.

The  clast :  the  maghaeans,  the  eminent  and  wealthy  men  who  institute
sacrifices.

G  Yield ers  of  rich  milk :  cheerful  givers  of  rewards.

7  Two  heavenly  Itcrvidt :  invokers  or  priests.  According  to  SAyano,  the
personified  lire  of  earth  and  of  the  firmament.  See  I.  13.  8.

The  centre  of  the  earth :  tho  attar.  The  three  high  places:  of  the  three
fires.


THE  IIYMNS  OF


2G4


[HOOK  II.


Three  Goddesses,  with  power  inherent,  soated,  protect  this  holy
Grass,  our  flawless  refuge  !

9  Born  is  the  pious  hero  swift  of  hearing,  like  gold  in  huo,  well
formed,  aud  full  of  vigour.

May  TvJtehtnr  lengthen  out  our  line  and  kindred,  and  may
they  reach  tho  place  which  Gods  inhabit.

10  Vanaspati  shall  stand  anoor  and  start  us,  and  Agni  with  his

arts  prepare  oblation.

Lot  tho  skilled  heavonly  Immolator  forward  unto  tho  Gods  tho
offering  thrice  anointed.

11  Oil  has  been  mixt:  oil  is  his  habitation.  In  oil  he  rests:  oil  is
.  his  propor  province.

Como  as  thy  wont  is :  0  thou  Steer,  rejoice  thco ;  bear  off  tho
oblation  duly  consecrated.

HYMN  IV.  Agni.

Fon  you  I  call  tho  glorious  rofulgont  Agni,  tho  guest  of  mon,
rioh  in  oblations,

Whom  all  must  strivo  to  win  ovcu  as  a  lovor,  God  among  godly
pcoplo,  J&tnvcdns.

2  Bhjigus  who  sorvod  him  iu  tho  homo  of  waters  sot  him  of  old

in  ho\u»cs  of  tho  living.

Over  all  worlds  lot  Agni  bo  tho  Sovran,  tho  messongor  of  Gods
with  rapid  coursers.

3  Among  tho  tribes  of  men  tho  Gods  placed  Agni  as  a  dear  Friend

when  they  would  dwell  among  them.

•  Against  tho  louring  nights  may  he  shino  brightly,  and  show  tho
offerer  in  tho  house  his  vigour.

4  Swoot  is  his  growth  as  of  ono’s  own  possessions ;  his  look

when  rushing  fain  to  burn  is  lovely.

Ho  darts  his  tongue  forth,  like  a  harnessed  courser  who  shakes
his  flowing  tail,  among  tho  bushes.


8  Thru  Qoddetta:  presiding  over  different  departments  of  worship.

0  The  pvou*  herQ ;  a  aon  devotod  to  the  Owls

10  Vuiwpali :  tho  sacrificial  post,  or  Agni  in  that  form.  Seo  I.  13.  11.

The  heavenly  Immolator ;  Agni,  typically  so  called.

11  Oil:  the  clarified  butter  oblation.  Thou  S/eer .-  mighty  Agni.

Duly  eoneuruted:  offered  with  the  holy  word  SvAhft.  See  I.  18.  12.

This  hymn  and  the  three  that  follow  aro  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  SomAhuli
of  tho  auoient  priestly  family  of  Blirigu,  one  of  tho  first  institutors  of  sacritico.

1  Jdtavedas:  Agni,  who  knows  all  life.  Seo  I.  44.  1.

2  Who  served  him  in  the  home  of  waters .-  existing  in  tho  form  of  lightning
in  the  firmament  beforo  he  was  brought  down  to  earth.


rrTMN  5.]


tug  Rio  Veda.


265


5  Since  they  who  honour  me  have  praised  my  greatness, — he  gave,
as  ’twere,  his  hue  to  those  who  love  him.

Known  is  he  by  his  bright  delightful  splendour,  and  waxing
old  renews  his  youth  for  ever.

G  Liko  one  athirst,  he  lighteth  up  the  forests;  like  water  down
the  chariot  ways  he  roarcth.

On  his  black  path  ho  shines  in  burning  beauty,  marked  as  it
were  the  hoaven  that  smilos  through  vapour.

7  Around,  consuming  the  broad  earth,  ho  wanders,  free  roaming

liko  an  ox  without  a  hurdsmau,  —

Agni  refulgent,  burning  up  the  bushes,  with  blackened  lines,
as  though  tho  earth  he  seasoned.

8  I,  in  romembranco  of  thino  ancient  favour,  havo  sung  my  hymn

in  this  our  third  issombly.

0  Agni,  givo  us  wealth  with  storo  of  horoes  and  mighty
strongth  in  food  and  noblo  offspring.

9  May  tho  Giitsamadas,  sorv.ng  in  secret,  through  thoo,  0  Agni

ovorcomo  their  neighbour,

Rich  in  goo  I  horoos  and  subduing  foomon.  That  vital  powor
give  thou  to  ohiofiuilid.singers.

HYMN  V.  Agni.

Hbrai.d  and  toachor  was  ho  born,  a  guardian  for  our  patrons'
help,

Earner  by  rites  of  noblo  wealth.  That  Strong  Ono  may  wo
grasp  and  guide ;

2  In  whom,  Loader  of  sacrifice,  tho  so  von  reins,  far  oxtended,
meet;

Who  furthers,  man-liko,  eighth  in  place,  as  Cleanser,  all  tho
work  divine.

5  Since  they  who  honour  vie :  Agni  Appear*  to  bo  the  speaker  of  these  words.

7  At  though  the  firth  he  seasoned:  on  though,  by  burning  tho  woods  and
bushes,  ho  d rowed  and  prepared  tho  ground  for  tillago.

8  Third  aticmbly  :  at  the  third  of  tho  three  daily  sacrifices.

0  Serving  in  secret :  by  tho  peaceful  discharge  of  priestly  duties,  not  by
warfare  like  tho  chiofs  who  institute  tho  saorificc.

1  Our  patrons :  the  wealthy  institutora  of  the  sacrifice.  That  Strong  One :
Agni.

2  Leader :  Notar,  one  of  tho  sixteen  priests.

The  seven  reins :  tho  seven  priests  eugaged  in  tlieir  several  duties.

Cleanser  :  Potar,  ono  of  the  sixteen  priests.  See  II  1.  2.

3  The  first  hemistich,  as  it  stands,  is  unintelligible  to  mo.  Wilson,  after
Silyano,  paraphrases :  ‘  Whatever  (offerings  tho  priest)  presents,  whatever
prayers  he  recites.’


266  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  II.

3  When  swift  he  follows  this  behest,  bird-like  he  chants  the  holy

prayers.

He  holds  all  knowledge  in  his  grasp  even  as  the  felly  rounds
the  wheel.

4  Together  with  pure  mental  power,  pure,  as  Director,  was  he

born.

Skilled  iu  his  own  unchanging  laws  he  waxes  like  the  growing
boughs.

5  Clothiug  them  in  his  hues,  the  kiue  of  him  the  Leader  wait  on

him.

Is  ho  not  better  than  the  Three,  the  Sisters  who  have  come  to
us?

<5  When,  laden  with  the  holy  oil,  the  Sister  by  the  Mother  stands,
The  Priest  delights  iu  their  approach,  as  corn  at  coming  of  the
rain.

7  For  his  support  let  him  perform  as  ministrant  his  priestly  task  ;
Yea,  song  of  praise  and  sacrifice:  wc  have  bestowed,  let  us

obtain.

8  That  so  this  man,  well  skilled,  may  pay  worship  to  all  the

Holy  Ones,

And,  Agni,  this  our  sacrifice  which  we  have  hero  prepared,  to
thee.

HYMN  VI.  Agni.

Agni,  accept  this  flaming  brand,  this  waiting  with  ihy  prayer
ou  thee :

Hear  graoiously  these  songs  of  praise.

2  With  this  hymn  let  us  honour  thee,  seeker  of  horses,  Son  of
Strength,

With  this  fair  hymn,  thou  nobly  born.


4  Director :  ProMatar,  one  of  the  priests.  See  II.  1. 2.

5  The  stanza  is  obscure.  Ludwig  thinks  that  Agni  is  here  called  the  Leader
because  he  leads  the  sister  Dawns  to  the  sacrifice,  and  that  they  are  said  to  bo
three  in  number  to  correspond  with  the  number  of  the  cows.

6  The  Xiiltr:  Ushaa  or  Dawn.  The  Mother:  the  northern  altar,  represent¬
ing  Earth.

7  Let  him ;  Agni  ns  priest-.

8  This  man :  the  worshipper.

Thu  wiling  with  mg  prayer  on  thee :  this  '  beseeching  and  besieging  ’  as
Milton  says.  Or  t* patddam  taken  in  a  special  sense  may  mean  the  ceremony
called  Uposad  which  formed  part  of  the  Jyotishtoma,  a  very  important  Soma
ceremony.

2  Seeker  of  hones :  in  order  to  bestow  them  ou  the  worshipper.


HYMN  7.]  TUB  RIGVEDA.  267

3  As  such,  lover  of  song,  with  songs,  wealth-lover,  giver  of  our

wealth !

With  reverence  let  us  worship  thee.

4  Be  thou  for  us  a  liberal  Prince,  giver  and  Lord  of  precious

things.  *

Drive  those  who  hate  us  far  away.

5  Such  as  thou  art,  give  rain  from  heaven,  give  strength  which

no  man  may  resist :

Give  food  exceeding  plentiful.

6  To  him  who  lauds  thee,  craving  help,  most  youthful  envoy !

through  our  song,

Most  holy  Herald  !  come  thou  nigh.

7  Between  both  races,  Agni,  Sage,  well  skilled  thou  passest  to

and  fro,

As  envoy  friendly  to  mankind.

8  Befriend  us  thou  as  knowing  all.  Sage,  duly  worship  thou

the  Gods,

And  seat  thee  on  this  sacred  grass.

HYMN  VII.  Agni.

0  Vasu,  thou  most  youthful  God,  Bbarata,  Agni,  bring  us
wealth,

Excellent,  splendid,  much-desired.

2  Let  no  malignity  prevail  against  us,  either  God’s  or  man's  :
Save  us  from  this  and  enmity.

3  So  through  thy  fav.onr  raaywe  force  _througli_all  our  enemies

away,

As  'twere  through  streaming  water-floods.

4  Thou,  Purifier  Agni,  high  shiuest  forth,  bright,  adorable,
When  worshipped  with  the  sacred  oil.

5  Ours  art  thou,  Agni,  Bharata,  honoured  by  us  with  barren

cows,

With  bullocks  and  with  kiue  in  calf :

G  Wood-fed,  bedewed  with  sacred  oil,  ancient,  Invoker,  excellent,
The  Son  of  Strength,  the  Wonderful.

7  Both  race *  ;  Gods  and  men.  Well  shilled :  acquainted  with  both.

1  Vasu  :  one  of  the  class  of  Gods  so  named.  BMrala  :  Agni  is  so  called
according  to  Slyann,  cither  ob  having  been  produced  by  attrition  by  the  priests,
or  as  being  the  bearer  of  oblations.  The  meaning  is,  probably,  specially  con¬
nected  with  the  Bharatos  or  Warriors.’

5  WHh  kittc  in  calf :  ashl/tpadlb/tih  is  thus  explained  by  SAyana,  and  iB  used
in  the  language  of  the  ritual  for  animals  with  young.  Roth  and  Grassmann
understand  ‘  verses  ’  consisting  of  eight  feet,  divisions,  or  syllables.  According
to  Bcrgaignc,  these  cows  represent  prayers.


37/ A*  8YMNS  OP


[BOOK  //.


HYMN  VIII.  Agni.

Now  praise,  as  one  who  strives  for  strength,  the  harnessing  of
Agui’s  car,

The  liberal,  the  most  splendid  One ;

2  Who,  guiding  worshippers  aright,  withers,  untouched  by  ago,

the  foe :

When  worshipped  fair  to  look  upon ;

3  Who  for  his  glory  is  extolled  at  eve  and  morning  iu  our  homes,
Whose  statute  is  inviolate ;

4  Who  shines  refulgent  like  tho  Sun,  with  brilliance  and  with

licry  flame,

Decked  with  imperishable  sheen.

5  Him  Atri,  Agni,  have  our  songs  strengthened  according  to  his

sway :

All  glories  hath  he  made  his  own.

C  May  wc  with  Agni’s,  Iudra's  help,  with  Soma’s,  yea,  of  all  tho

Uninjured  dwell  together  still,  and  conquer  those  who  light
with  us.

HYMN  IX.  Agin.

Accustomed  to  tho  Herald’s  place,  the  Herald  hath  seated
him,  bright,  splendid,  passing  mighty,

Whose  foresight  keeps  the  Law  from  violation,  excellent,
pnre-tongued,  bringiug  thousands,  Agni.

•2  Envoy  art  thou,  protector  from. the  foeman ;  strong  God,  thou
lcadest  us  to  higher  blessings.

Refulgent,  bo  an  over-heedful  keeper,  Agni,  for  us  and  for
our  seed  aud  offspring.

3  May  wc  adore  thee  in  thy  loftiest  birth-place,  and,  with  our
praises,  in  thy  lower  station.

Tho  place  whence  thou  hast  issued  forth  I  worship :  to  thee
well  kindled  have  they  paid  oblations.


5  Him  Atri:  Agni  appears  here  to  bo  called  by  the  name  of  tho  ancient
*nge  Atri.  Or  dlrim  may  be  an  epithet  of  Agni,  signifying  the  devourer  of
tho  food  with  which  he  is  supplied,  aa  SAyana  explains  it.


I  The  Herald:  or  Hotar;  Agni,  the  Invoker  of  the  Gods.  The  name
come*,  with  more  emphasis,  at  the  end  of  tho  verso.  The  Law:  especially
sacrifice.

3  In  tfiy  loftiest  birth-place :  as  the  fire  of  the  Sun  in  heaven.  Thy  lower
elation :  the  firmament,  where  Agni  is  born  as  lightning.  The  place  whence
thou  hail  issued  forth :  tho  altar  where  the  sacrificial  fire  burns.


TIIB  RIG  VEDA.


269


1IYMN  10*3


Agni,  best  Priest,  pay  worship  with  oblation ;  quickly  com¬
mend  the  gift  to  be  presented  ;

For  thou  art  Lord  of  gathered  wealth  and  treasure :  of  the
bright  song  of  praise  thou  art  inventor.

The  twofold  opulence,  0  Wonder-Worker,  of  th<?c  new-born
each  day  never  decreases.

Enrich  with  food  the  man  who  lauds  thee,  Agni :  make  him
the  lord  of  wealth  with  noble  offspring.

May  he,  benevolent  with  this  fair  aspect,  best  sacrificer,  bring
the  Gods  to  bless  us.

Sure  guardian,  our  protector  from  the  foeman,  shine,  Agni,
with  thine  affluence  and  splendour.

HYMN  X.  Agni.

Agni,  first,  loudly  calling,  like  a  Father,  kindled  by  man  upon
the  scat  of  worship,

Clothed  in  his  glory,  deathless,  keen  of  insight,  must  bo
adorned  by  all,  the  Strong,  the  Famous.

May  Agni  the  resplendent  hear  my  calling,  through  all  my
songs,  Immortal,  keen  of  insight.

Dark  steeds  or  ruddy  draw  his  car,  or  carried  in  sundry  ways
he  makes  them  red  of  colour.


3  On  wood  supine  they  got  the  well-formed  Infant :  a  germ  in

vario us-fashioned  plants  was  Agni ;

And  in  the  night,  not  compassed  rouud  by  darkness,  he  dwells
exceeding  wise,  with  rays  of  splendour.

4  With  oil  and  sacred  gifts  I  sprinkle  Agni  who  makes  his  homo

iu  front  of  all  things  living,

Broad,  vast,  through  vital  power  o’er  all  expanded,  conspicu¬
ous,  strong  with  all  the  food  that  feeds  him.

5  I  pour  to  him  who  looks  iu  all  directions :  may  he  accept  it

with  a  friendly  spirit.

Agni  with  bridegroom’s  grace  and  lovely  colour  may  not  bo
touched  when  all  his  form  is  fury.


5  The  twofold  opulence :  ouricl»ing  Gods  with  sacrifice  and  men  with  earthly
blessings.

New-born  each  day ;  rekindled  at  the  morning  sacrifice.

1  Pint :  chief  of  the  Gods.  Loudly  calling :  roaring  as  fire,  or,  to  bo  in¬
voked  by  all,  according  to  Sdyuna.  Like  a  Pother  :  supporting  the  Gods  by
oonveyiug  oblations  to  them.

2  Canned  in  sundry  ways :  to  ono  fire-rcceptoclo  after  another.

3  On  wood  supine  :  the  lower  piece  of  wood  iu  which  fire  is  produced.

A  germ  :  latent  iu  plants,  with  reference  to  the  luminosity  of  some  plants.
See  II.  1.  1.


270  THE  HYMNS  OP  f BOOK  If.

6  By  choice  victorious,  recognize  thy  portion :  with  thee  for
envoy  may  we  speak  like  Manu.

Obtaining  wealth,  I  call  on  perfect  Agni  who  with  an  eloquent
tongue  dispenses  sweetness.

HYMN  XI.  Indr*

Hear  thou  my  call.  0  Indra ;  be  not  heedless  :  thine  may  wc
be  for  thee  to  give  us  treasures  ;

For  these  presented  viands,  seeking  riches,  increase  thy
strength  like  streams  of  water  flowing.

2  Floods  great  and  many,  compassed  by  the  Dragon,  thou  badest

swell  and  settest  free,  0  Hero.

Strengthened  by  songs  of  praise  thou  rentest  piecemeal  the
Dasa,  him  who  deemed  himself  immortal.

3  For,  Hero,  in  the  lauds  wherein  thou  joyedst,  in  hymns  of

praise,  0  Indra,  songs  of  Rudras,

These  streams  in  which  is  thy  delight  approach  thee,  even  as
the  brilliant  ones  draw  near  to  V&yit.

4  Wc  who  add  strength  to  thine  own  splendid  vigour,  laying

within  thine  arms  the  splendid  thunder —

With  us  mayst  thou,  0  Indra,  waxen  splendid,  with  Surya
overcome  the  D&sa  races.

5  Hero,  thou  slewest  in  thy  valour  Ahi  concealed  in  depths,

mysterious,  great  enchanter,

Dwelling  enveloped  deep  within  the  waters,  him  who  checked
heaven  and  stayed  the  floods  from  flowing.

6  Indra,  we  laud  thy  great  deeds  wrought  aforetime,  we  laud

thine  exploits  later  of  achievement;

We  laud  the  bolt  that  in  thine  arms  lies  eager;  we  laud-  thy
two  Bay  Steeds,  heralds  of  Sflrya.

6  By  choice :  according  to  SAyan*,  '  with  lustre.'  Recognize  thy  portion  :
acknowledge  the  sacrificial  offering  to  be  suitable.

Like  Manu :  with  the  wisdom  and  authority  of  Manu  who  was  instructed
directly  by  the  Gods.

2  Compassed  ly  l/u  Dragon :  obstructed  by  the  great  serpent  Ahi.

The  Ddsa :  the  savage  or  demon  Ahi.  See  I.  32.  11.

3  Songs  of  Rudras :  like  those  sung  by  the  Rudras  or  Maruts,  India’s
allies.

These  streams :  sacrificial  waters  or  libations.  Ydyu,  the  God  of  wind,  was
entitled  to  the  first  draught  of  the  Soina  juice.  See  verse  14  of  this  hymn.

4  Splendid :  the  word  subhra,  splendid,  occurs  in  all  three  places  in  the  text.

5  Concealed  in  depths  :  of  the  atmosphere.

6  Herald  of  S<rya :  announcing  the  coming  of  the  sunlight  after  the  heavy
rain  which  Indra  has  sent.


irrMN  ii.]


TUB  RIO  VEDA,


271


7  lndra,  thy  Bay  Steeds  showing  forth  their  vigour  have  sent  a

loud  cry  out  that  droppcth  fatness.

The  earth  hath  spread  herself  in  all  her  fulness  •,  the  cloud
that  was  about  to  move  hath  rested.

8  Down,  never  ceasing,  hath  the  rain-cloud  settled :  bellowing,

it  hath  wandered  with  the  Mothers.

Swolling  the  roar  in  the  far  distant  limits,  they  have  spread
.  wide  the  blast  sent  forth  by  lndra.

0  lndra  hath  hurled  down  the  magician  Vfitra  who  lay  beleaguer¬
ing  the  mighty  river.

Then  both  the  heaven  and  earth  trembled  in  terror  at  the
strong  Hero’s  thunder  when  he  bellowed.

10  Loud  roared  the  mighty  Hero’s  holt  of  thunder,  when  he,  the

Friend  of  man,  burnt  up  the  monster,

And,  having  drunk  his  fill  of  flowing  Soma,  baffled  the  guileful
D&nava's  devices.

1 1  Drink  thou,  0  Hero  lndra,  drink  the  Soma  ;  let  the  joy-giving

juices  make  thee  joyful.

They,  filling  both  thy  flanks,  shall  swell  thy  vigour.  The
juice  that  satisfies  hath  holpen  lndra.

12  Singers  have  we  become  with  thco,  0  lndra :  may  we  servo

duly  and  prepare  devotion.

Seeking  thy  help  we  meditate  thy  praises  :  may  we  at  once
enjoy  thy  gift  of  riches.

13  May  we  be  thine,  such  by  thy  help,  0  lndra,  as  swell  thy

vigour  while  they  seek  thy  favour.

Givo  us,  thou  God,  the  riches  that  we  long  for,  most  powerful,
with  store  of  noble  children.

14  Givo  us  a  friend,  give  us  an  habitation ;  lndra,  give  us  the  com¬

pany  of  Maruts,

And  those  whose  minds  accord  with  theirs,  the  Viyus,  who
drink  the  first  libation  of  the  Soma.

15  Let  those  enjoy  in  whom  thou  art  delighted.  lndra,  drink

Soma  for  thy  strength  and  gladness.

Thou  hast  exalted  us  to  heaven,  Preserver,  in  battles,  through
the  lofty  hymns  that  praise  thee.

7  The  loud  cry  that  drops  fatness :  is  tho  thunder  that  precedes  the  fertilis¬
ing  rain.  The  earth  hath  spread  herself:  to  receivo  the  rain.

8  The  Mothers :  the  original  water*  above  tho  firmament.

They :  Indra’s  attendants,  tho  Maruta  or  Storm-Gods.

9  The  mighty  river :  the  great  cloud  that  holds  the  rain.

10  The  guileful  Ddnava's  devices :  tho  magic  arta  of  the  demon  Vn'tro.

14  The  V tig  us:  the  plural  is  used  honorifically  for  the  singular.


272  TUB  HT MSS  OP  [ BOOK  U.

16  Great,  verily,  are  they,  0  thou  Protector,  who  by  their  songs

of  praise  have  uon  thy  bleasiug.

They  who  strew  sacred  grass  to  be  thy  dwelling,  holpen  by  thco
have  got  them  strength,  0  India.

17  Upon  the  great  Trikadruka  days,  Hero,  rejoicing  thee,  0  Indra,

drink  the  Soma.

Come  with  Bay  Steeds  to  driuk  of  our  libation,  shaking  tho
drops  from  out  thy  beard,  contented.

18  Hero,  assume  the  might  wherewith  thou  clavest  Yritra  piece¬

meal,  the  Dauaya  Aurnavibha.

Thou  hast  disclosed  the  light  to  light  the  Ary  a :  on  thy  left
hand,  0  Indra,  sank  the  Dasyu.

19  May  we  gain  wealth,  subduing  with  thy  succour  and  with

the  Arya,  all  our  foes,  the  Dasyus.

Our  gain  was  that  to  Trita  of  our  party  thou  gavest  up
Tvashtar's  son  Visvarupa.

20  He  cast  down  Arbuda  what  time  his  vigour  was  strengthened

by  libations  poured  by  Trita.

Indra  sent  forth  his  whirling  wheel  like  Surya,  and  aided  by
the  Angirascs  rent  Vala.

21  Now  let  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  Indra,  yield  in  return  a

boon  to  him  who  lauds  theo.

Give  to  thy  praisers :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  wo
speak,  with  brave  men,  in  tho  assembly.

.  HYMN  XII.  ■  India.

He  who,  just  born,  chief  God  of  lofty  spirit  by  power  and  might
became  the  Gods  ’  protector,

Before  whose  breath  through  greatness  of  his  valour  tho  two
worlds  trembled,  He,  0  men,  is  Indra.

17  Trikadruka  d<nji  ;  the  first  throo  day*  of  tho  Abhiplava  festival.

18  Aurnavdbhu:  son  of  Urpav&blia,  a  demon.  The  Datyu  .  the  barbarian,
the  origiuul  inhabitant  of  the  laud.  According  to  Sdyaya  the  demon  Viitra  u
meant.

19  It  ia  difficult  to  make  anything  intelligible  of  this  stanza.  Trita  is  said
by  Sftyana  to  be  a  Ain  hart  hi  or  great  Bi»hi,  and  Visvarupa  is  said  to  be  a
three-headed  monster  slain  by  Indra.  See  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XII.  104.

20  Arbuda ;  a  demon  of  the  atmosphere.  See  I.  51  6.

Sent  forth  hit  whirling  wheel :  Indra  is  said  to  have  used  a  wheel  of  tho
Sun's  chariot  as  a  miasilo.

Vala :  the  brother  of  Vritra  or  Vritra  himself.  Sec  I.  11.  5.

21  That  wealthy  Cow  of  thine :  meaning,  probably,  Ushae  or  Dawn,  who  brings
good  gifts  to  man.  Or  lit  ddteshind  inuyMni  may  bo  translated  ‘  that  liberal
meed  ’  of  thine,  that  is  the  rich  reward  which  Indra  bestows  upon  hia  worship¬
pers,  regarded  oa  the  counterpart  of  tho  daithind  or  honorarium  given  by  the
ujjtitutora  of  sacrifices  to  the  priests  who  perform  tho  ceremonies.


IIYMX  12.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  27*

2  He  who  fixed  fast  and  firm  the  earth  that  staggered,  and  set

at  rest  the  agitated  mountains,

Who  measured  out  the  air’s  wide  middle  region  and  gave  the  *
heaven  support,  He,  men,  is  Indra.

3  Who  slew  the  Dragon,  freed  the  Seven  Rivers,  an3  drove  the

kine  forth  from  the  cave  of  Vala,

Begat  the  fire  between  two  stones,  the  spoiler  in  warriors’  battle,
He,  0  men,  is  Indra.

4  By  whom  this  universe  was  made  to  tremble,  who  chased  away

the  humbled  brood  of  demons,

Who,  like  a  gambler  gathering  his  winnings,  seized  the  foe’s
riches,  He^O  men,  is  lucIrlC - — - : - - -

5  Of  whom,  the  Terriblo,  they  ask,  Where  is  He  f  or  verily  they

say  of  him,  He  is  not.

He  sweeps  away,  like  birds,  the  foe’s  possessions.  Have  faith
in  him,  for  He,  0  men,  is  Indra.

6  Stirrer  to  action  of  the  poor  and  lowly,  of  priest,  of  suppliant

who  sings  his  praises  ;

Who,  fair-faced,  favours  him  who  presses  Soma  with  stones
made  ready,  Ho,  0  men,  is  Indra.

7  He  under  whose  supremo  control  are  horses,  all  chariots,  andv

the  villages,  and  cattle ;

He  who  gave  belng'to'the  Sun  and  Morning,  who  leads  the
waters,  He,  O  men,  is  Indra.

8  To  whom  two  armies  cry  in  close  encounter,  both  enemies,  the

stronger  and  the  weaker ;

Whom  two  invoke  upon  one  chariot  mounted,  each  for  himself,
Ho,  O  yo  men,  is  Indra.

9  Without  whose  help  our  people  never  conquer;  whom,  battling,

thoy  invoke  to  give  them  succour ;

He  of  whom  all  this  world  is  but  the  copy,  who  shakes  things
moveless,  He,  0  men,  is  Indra.

10  He  who  hath  smitten,  ore  they  knew  their  danger,  with  his
hurled  weapon  many  grievous  sinuers ;

Who  pardons  not  his  boldness  who  provokes  him,  who  slays
the  Dasyu,  He,  0  men,  is  Indra.


3  Begat  the  fire  betaecn  tico  stones  e  generated  lightning  between  heaven  tad
earth.

5  like  birds  :  as  birds  are  captured  by  the  fon-lor.  According  to  others  '  like
stakes  of  gamblers,’  tho  meaning  of  vijnh  being  uncertain.  See  I.  92.  10,  note.

7  Who  leads  the  tculers :  brings  the  periodical  rain*.

8  Whom  two  invoke :  the  warrior  uud  the  charioteer.


274  TUB  HYMNS  OP  { BOOK  II

1 1  He  who  discovered  in  tire  fortieth  autumn  Sain  bora  ns  lie  dwelt

among  the  mountains ;

Who  slew  the  Dragon  putting  forth  his  vigour,  the  demon  lying
there,  He,  men,  is  India.

12  Who  with  seven  guiding  reins,  the  Bull,  the  Mighty,  set  free

the  Seven  great  Floods  to  flow  at  ploaauro ;

Who,  thunder-armed,  rout  Rmihina  in  pieeos  when  scaling
heavon,  He,  0  ye  mon,  is  India.

13  Even  the  Heaven  and  Earth  bow  down  before  him,  before  his

very  breath  the  mountains  tremble.

Known  ns  the  Soma-drinker,  armed  with  thunder,  who  wields
the  bolt,  He,  0  ye  men,  is  Indra.

14  Who  aids  with  favour  him  who  pours  the  Soma  and  him  who

brows  it,  sacrifice!-,  singer.

Whom  prayer  exalts,  and  pouring  forth  of  Soma,  and  this  our
gift,  Ho,  0  ye  men,  is  Indra.

15  Thou  verily  art  fierce  and  true  who  sendest  strength  to  the

man  who  brews  and  pom-3  libation.

So  may  we  evermore,  thy  friends,  0  Indra,  speak  loudly  to  the
synod  with  our  heroes.  ^

HYMN  XIII.  indr*.

The  Season  was  the  parent,  and  when  born  therefrom  it  entered
rapidly  the  floods  wherein  it  grows.

Thcnco  was  it  full  of  sap,  streaming  with  milky  juice:  the
milk  of  the  plant’s  stalk  is  chief  and  moot  for  lauds.

2  They  come  trooping  together  hearing  milk  to  him,  and  bring
him  sustenance  who  gives  support  to  all.

The  way  is  common  for  the  downward  streams  to  flow.  Thou
who  didst  these  things  first  art  worthy  of  our  lauds.


12  Sewn  guiding  reins :  or,  according  to  Ludwig,  seven  bright  ray*,  said  to
meau  seven  forms  of  Indra.  ftnuhiiyi :  the  name  of  a  demon  of  drought.

15  With  our  hoots :  with  our  brave  son*  around  us.

1  The  Season :  the  Rains,  the  most  important  of  the  seasons.  So  monsoon,
a  corruption  of  mausim,  any  season,  means  the  llaina  especially.  It ;  tho
Soma-plant

2  They  come :  probably  the  cows  whose  milk  is  to  bo  used  in  sacrifice.

The  way  it  common :  referring  to  the  water  used  in  the  Soma  ceromony.
Sdyaoa  explains  tho  stanza  differently,  and  Wilson  paraphrases  it  thus:  ‘Tlio
aggregated  (streams)  come,  bearing  everywhere  the  water,  and  conveying  it  as
sustenance  for  tho  asylum  of  all  rivers,  (the  ocean) :  the  same  path  is  assigned
to  all  the  descending  (current*)  to  follow  ;  and  as  ho  who  has  (assigned)  them
(their  course),  thou,  (ludra),  art  especially  to  be  praised.'


HYMN  13.]


THE  RIG  VEDA


275

3  Ono  priost  announces  what  the  insti tutor  gives  :  one,  altering

the  forms,  zealously  plies  his  task.

Tho  third  corrects  tho  imperfections  left  by  each.  Thou  who
didst  these  things  first  art  worthy  of  our  lauds.

4  Dealing  out  food  unto  their  people  there  they  sit^liko  wealth

to  him  who  comes,  more  than  the  back  can  boar.

Greedily  with  his  tooth  ho  eats  tho  master's  food.  Thou  who
didst  these  things  first  art  worthy  of  our  lands.

5  Thou  hast  oroatod  earth  to  look  upon  tho  sky :  thou,  slaying

Ahi,  Hottest  freo  the  rivers’  paths.

Thoo,  such,  a  God,  tho  Gods  have  <piiokonod  with  thoir  lauds,
ovon  as  a  stood  with  waters:  meet  for  praiso  art  thou.

6  Thou  givost  inoroaso,  thou  dealest  to  ns  our  food  :  thou  milkest

from  tho  moist  tho  dry,  tho  rich  in  sweets.

Thou  by  the  worshippur  layest  thy  prooious  store :  thou  art  solo
Lord  of  all.  Moot  for  our  praise  art  thou.

7  Thou  who  hast  spread  abroad  tho  atroams  by  stablishod  law,

and  in  tho  field  tho  plants  that  blossom  and  bear  scod  ;

Thou  who  hast  made  tho  matchless  lightnings  of  tho  sky, —
vast,  oompnasing  vast  realms,  moot  for  our  praise  art  thou.

8  Who  broughtost  NArmara  with  all  his  wealth,  for  sako  of  food,

to  slay  him  that  tho  floods  might  bo  destroyed,

Broughtost  tho  faco  unclouded  of  tho  strengthening  ono,  per¬
forming  much  ovon  now,  worthy  art  thou  of  praiso.

9  Thou  boundost  up  tho  D Asa’s  hundrod  frionds  and  ton,  whon,

at  one’s  hoaring,  thou  holpest  thy  worshippor.


3  According  to  SAynnn.  threo  priests  nro  hero  indicated,  tho  Hotur  who
announce*  tho  sacriflco,  tho  Adhvaryu  who  ap|x>rtions  tho  novcml  piece*  of  the
victim,  and  tho  Brahman  who  oorreot*  mistakes  and  remedies  dofocts  in  the  ritual.

Tho  first  four  stanzas  aro  full  of  difficulties  and  in  place*  absolutely  unin¬
telligible.  My  version  of  stanza  3,  which  generally  follows  Sftyana,  will  not
bear  critical  examination,  but  at  preeont  I  haro  uothing  bottor  to  proposo.

4  Then  they  tit :  occording  to  S.ynna,  ’the  householders  obido  in  thoir
homo*.’  To  him  who  comet ;  t)  a  guest.  Ilf  eati  the  mailer'i  food :  probably,
Agni  consumes  the  oblations  of  tho  householder.

6  Tho u  milhttl  from  Che  moiil :  produceet  the  dry  nutritious  grain  from
tho  moist  stalk.

8  This  stanza  is  unintelligible.  Mrn wra  :  said  to  be  a  fiend  -lain  by  Indra.

The  ilren/jtl,cni>ig  one:  according  to  SAyana,  Orjayantl  is  the  name  of  a  female

domon  or  Pit&chL  Graasmsnn  takes  it  to  mean  the  Sun.  Ludwig  thinks  it  is
the  namo  of  a  stronghold  used  os  a  store-house  of  provisions.

9  Tho  meaning  of  the  first  half-verse  is  uncertain,  the  text  being  evidently
corrupt.  I  adopt  Ludwig’s  emendation,  dX*asya,  in  place  of  tho  unintelligible
vd  yaiya.


276


THE  JIYMNS  OF  '  [BOOK  IT.


Thou  for  Dabhtti  boundest  Dasyus  not  with  cords;  tliou  wast
a  mighty  help.  Worthy  of  lauds  art  thou.

10  All  banks  of  rivers  yielded  to  his  manly  might ;  to  him  they

gave,  to  him,  the  Strong,  gave  up  their  wealth.

The  six  directions  hast  thou  fixed,  a  fivefold  view  :  thy  victories
reached  afar.  Worthy  of  lauds  art  thou.

11  Meet  for  high  praiso,  0  Hero,  is  thy  power,  that  with  thy

single  wisdom  thou  obtainest  wealth,

^xThe  life-support  of  conquering  Jatushthira.  Indra,  for  all
thy  deeds,  worthy  of  lauds  art  thou.

12  Thou  for  Turviti  heldest  still  the  flowing  floods,  the  river-

stream  for  Vayya  easily  to  pass,

Didst  raise  tho  outcast  from  the  depths,  and  gavest  fame  unto
the  halt  aud  blind.  Worthy  of  lauds  art  thou.

13  Prepare  thyself  to  grant  us  that  great  bounty,  0  Vasu,  for

abuudant  is  thy  treasure.

Snatch  up  the  wonderful,  0  Indra,  daily.  Loud  may  wo
.  speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XIV.  Indra.

Ministers,  bring  the  Soma  juice  for  Indra,  pour  forth  tho  ’
gladdening  liquor  with  tho  beakers.

To  drink  of  this  the  Hero  lougeth  ever;  offer  it  to  the  Bull,
for  this  he  willctb.

2  Ye  ministers,  to  him  who  with  the  lightning  smote,  like  a
tree,  the  rain-withholding  Vritra —

Bring  it  to  him,  him  who  is  fain  to  taste  it,  a  draught  of
this  which  Indra  here  deserveth.


Dabhiti :  a  Rishi,  named  in  I.  112.  23.  Not  icitA  cords :  in  a  prison  without
cords,  the  grave.

JO  AU  banks  of  rivers :  the  dams  that  prevented  the  rivers  of  the  clouds  from
flowing.  The  six  directions :  above,  below,  before,  behind,  right,  left.  The
fl refold  view :  inasmuch  as  we  cannot  see  what  is  below  the  ground.  SAyauo
explains  the  shad  visltllrah  as  heaven,  earth,  day,  night,  water,  and  plants,  and
the  pdilcha  saiulrtsah  as  the  five  races  of  men.  a

11  JdtHshthiri :  a  certain  man  of  that  name,  says  Silyapa;  perhaps  the
institutor  of  "the  sacriflce.

12  Turviti  and  Vauya  appear  to  have  been  enabled  to  ford  a  great  river  by
the  aid  of  Indra.  See  I.  61  11.  Turviti  was  the  son  of  Vayya.  See  I.  54.  6.

The.  outcast :  or  Par&vrij  as  a  proper  name.  See  I.  112.  8,  where  the
miracle  is  ascribed  to  tho  Arvins.

13  Snatch  tip  the  wonderful:  that  is,  gAin  quickly  wondrous  wealth.  Thia
appears  to  bo  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words  which  Wilson  paraphrases,
after  S&yana  :  ‘  mayest  tliou  bo  disposed  to  graut  us  exceeding  abuudance.'

1  Ministers ;  Adhvaryus,  or  priests,  whose  duty  was  to  make  the  prepara¬
tions  for  sacriflce.


HYMN  14.]  •  THE  RIO  VEDA.  *77

.  3  Ye  ministers,  to  him  who  smote  Dfibbtka,  who  drove  the  kin®
forth,  and  discovered  Vala,

-  Offer  this  draught,  like  Vita  in  the  region  :  clothe  him  with
Soma  even  as  steeds  with  trappings.

4  Him  who  did  Urapa  to  death,  Adhvaryus !  thoflgh  showing

arms  ninety-and-nine  in  number ;

Who  cast  down  headlong  Arbuda  and  slow  him, — speed  yo
that  Indra  to  our  offered  Soma.

5  Ye  ministers,  to  him  who  struck  down  Svasna,  and  did  to

to  death  Vyansa  and  greedy  Sushna,

And  Rudhikras  and  Namnchi  and  Pipru, — to  him,  to  Indra,
pour  ye  forth  libation.

G  Ye  ministers,  to  him  who,  as  with  thunder,  demolished
Sambara’s  hundred  ancient  castles  )

Who  cast  down  Varchin’s  sous,  a  hundred  thousand, — to  him,
to  Indra,  offer  ye  the  Soma.

7  Ye  ministers,  to  him  who  slew  a  hundred  thousand,  and  cast

them  down  upon  earth’s  bosom ;

Who  quelled  the  valiant  men  of  Atithigva,  Kutsa,  and  Ayu, —
bring  to  him  the  Soma,

8  Ministers,  men,  whatever  thing  yo  long  for  obtain  }-e  quickly

bringing  gifts  to  Indra.

Bring  to  the  Glorious  One  what  hands  have  cleansed ;  to
Indra  bring,  ye  pious  ones,  the  Soma.

9  Do  ye,  0  ministers,  obey  his  order:  that,  purified  in  wood,  in

wood  uplift  ye.

Well  pleased  he  longs  for  what  your  hands  have  tended  :  offer
the  gladdening  Soma  juice  to  Indra.

10  As  the  cow’s  udder  teems  with  milk,  Adhvaryus,  so  fill  with
Soma  Indra,  liberal  giver.

I  know  him :  I  am  sure  of  this,  the  Holy  knows  that  I  fain
would  give  to  him  more  largely.

3  Dribhtka  :  one  of  the  numerous  demons  slain  by  Indra.

Like  V fita  in  the  region :  bringing  rain,  ns  the  Wind-God  docs.

A  t  steeds  with  trappings the  meaning  of  jtih  is  uncertain.  Slyana  ex¬
plains  it,  '  as  an  old  man  (ia  covered)  with  garments.'

4  Urana:  another  demon.  Arbuda:  a  demon  mentioned  in  I.  51.  0.

5  Svafna,  Vyansa,  and  the  rest,  arc  demons,  some  of  whom  have  been
previously  mentioned.

6  Sambara :  a  fiend  mentioned  several  times  in  Book  I.  Varchin  :  a  demon
who  reviled  Indra,  and  was  alain  with  all  his  sons  and  followers.

7  The  valiant  not:  vtrttn ;  heroes.  SAyana  supplies  ‘assailants,*  as  Ati¬
thigva,  Kutsa,  and  Ayu  appear  in  Book  I.  as  favoured  by  Indra.  Here  their
battle  with  TQrvayAna  (I.  63.  10)  is  referred  to,

9  In  wood ;  in  the  wooden  receptacle.


278  THE  HYMNS  OF  [ BOOS  II.

11  Him,  ministers,  the  Lord  of  heavenly  treasure  and  all  terrest¬

rial  wealth  that  earth  possesses,

Him,  Indra,  till  with  Soma  as  a  gamer  is  filled  with  barley
full :  be  this  your  labour.

1 2  Prepare  “thyself  to  grant  us  that  great  booty,  0  Vasu,  for

abundant  is  thy  treasure.

Gather  up  wondrous  wealth,  0  Indra,  daily.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XV.  Indra.

Now,  verily,  will  I  declare  the  exploits,  mighty  and  true,  of
him  the  True  and  Mighty.

In  the  Trikadrukas  he  drauk  the  Soma  :  then  in  its  rapture
Indra  slew  the  Dragon.

2  High  heaven  in  unsupported  space  he  stablished  :  he  filled  the

two  worlds  and  the  air’s  mid-region.

Earth  he  upheld,  and  gave  it  wide  expansion.  These  things
did  Indra  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

3  From  front,  as  'twore  a  house,  he  ruled  and  measured ;  pierced

with  his  bolt  the  fountains  of  the  rivers,

And  made  them  flow  at  ease  by  paths  far-reaching.  These
things  did  Indra  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

4  Compassing  those  who  bore  away  Dabhiti,  in  kindled  fire  ho

burnt  up  all  their  weapons,

And  made  him  rich  with  kino  and  cars  and  horses.  These
things  did  Indra  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

5  The  mighty  roaring  flood  he  stayed  from  flowing,  and  carried

those  who  swam  not  safely  over.

They  having  crossed  the  stream  attained  to  riches.  These
things  did  India  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

G  With  mighty  power  he  made  the  stream  flow  upward,  crushed
with  his  thunderbolt  the  car  of  Ushas,

Rending  hor  slow  steeds  with  his  rapid  coursers.  These  things
did  Indra  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.


1  In  The  Tril-adrukas:  see  II.  11.  17.  In  its  rapture:  in  the  exhilaration

produced  by  drinking  the  fermented  juice.  See  I.  51.  2  and  note.

3  From  front,  as  '(were  a  house :  the  formation  nf  the  world  is  compared  to
the  building  of  a  house.  Wilson  renders  :  ‘(He  it  is)  who  has  measured  the
eastern  (quarters)  with  measures  like  a  chamber.1 * 3 * 5 6

•  4  VubKUi:  see  II.  13.  9.

5  Cl.  1.  13.  12.

6  The  ear  of  Uthat :  the  destruction  of  the  chariot  of  Ushas  or  Dawn  by
Indra  is  described  more  fully  in  IV.  30.  8.


HYMN  16.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  279

7  Knowing  the  place  wherein  the  maids  were  hiding,  the  outcast

showed  himself  and  stood  before  them.

The  cripplo  stood  erect,  the  blind  beheld  them.  These  things
did  ludra  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

8  Praised  by  the  Angirases  he  slaughtered  Vala,  and  burse  apart

the  bulwarks  of  the  mountain.

He  tore  away  their  .deftly-built  defences.  These  things  did
ludra  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

9  Thou,  with  sleep  whelming  Chumuri  and  Dhuni,  slowest  the

Dasyu,  keptest  safe  Dabhiti.

There  the  staff-bearer  found  the  golden  treasure.  These  things
did  India  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.

10  Now  let  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  ludra,  yield  in  return

a  boou  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

Give  to  thy  praisors :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  brave  men,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XVI.  Indra.

To  him,  your  own,  the  best  among  the  good,  1  bring  eulogy,
like  oblation  in  the  kindled  fire.

Wo  iuvocate  for  help  ludra  untouched  by  eld,  who  maketh
all  decay,  strengthened,  for  ever  young.

2  Without  whom  naught  exists,  ludra  tire  Lofty  One ;  in  whom

alone  all  powers  heroic  are  combined.

The  Soma  is  within  him,  in  his  frame  vast  strength,  the
thunder  in  bis  hand  and  wisdom  in  bis  head.

3  Not  by  both  worlds  is  thine  own  power  to  be  surpassed,  nor

may  thy  car  be  stayed  by  mountains  or  by  seas.

None  comcth  near,  0  ludra,  to  thy  thunderbolt,  when  with
swift  steeds  thou  flicst  over  many  a  league.

4  For  all  men  bring  their  will  to  him  the  Resolute,  to  him  the

Holy  One,  to  him  the  Strong  they  cleave.

Pay  worship  with  oblation,  stroug  and  passing  wise.  Drink
thou  the  Soma,  ludra,  through  the  mighty  blaze.


7  ParAvrij,  here  rendered  ‘  the  outcast,’  is  taken  by  S.Ayana  as  the  name  of
a  Hi. 'Ii  i  who  was  lame  and  blind.  When  some  girls  made  sport  of  him  he
prayed  to  ludra  and  was  made  sound.

9  Ciutnwi  and  Dhuni  :  Asuraa  or  demons.

The  tlatf-bfurcr  the  door-keeper,  or  chamberlain,  of  Dabhiti.  The  golden
treasure :  of  Chumuri  and  Dhuni.


1  Like  oblation :  praise  that  magnifies  and  strengthens  ludra  as  oblations  of
clarified  butter  cast  into  the  fire  increase  the  flame.


230  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IT.

5  The  vessel  of  the  strong  flows  forth,  the  flood  of  meath,  uuto
the  Strong  who  feeds  upon  the  strong,  for  drink.

Strong  are  the  two  Ad  h  vary  us,  strong  are  both  the  stones.
They  press  the  Soma  that  is  strong  for  him  the  Strong.

G  Strong  k  thy  thunderbolt,  yen,  and  thy  car  is  strong ;  strong
are  thy  Bay  Steeds  and  thy  weapons  powerful.

Thou,  ludra,  Bull,  art  Lord  of  the  strong  gladdening  drink  :
with  the  strong  Soma,  Indra,  satisfy  thyself.

7  I,  hold  by  prayer,  come  near  thee  in  thy  sacred  rites,  thee

like  a  saving  ship,  thee  shouting  in  the  war.

Verily  he  will  hear  and  mark  this  word  of  ours :  we  will  pour
Indra  forth  as  ’tworo  a  spring  of  wealth.

8  Turn  thee  unto  us  ere  calamity  come  nigh,  as  a  cow  full  of

pasture  turns  her  to  her  calf.

Lord  of  a  Hundred  Powers,  may  we  once  firmly  cling  to  thy
fair  favours  even  as  husbands  to  their  wives.

9  Now  let  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  Indra,  yield  in  return  a

boon  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

Give  to  thy  praise rs :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  we
speak,  v  ith  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XVII.  Indra.

Like  the  Angirases,  sing  this  ucw  song  forth  to  him,  for,  as
in  ancient  days,  his  mighty  powers  are  shown,

When  in  the  rapture  of  the  Soma  he  uudosed  with  strength
the  solid  firm-shut  stables  of  the  kine.

2  Let  him  be  even  that  God  who,  for  the  earliest  draught  mea¬

suring  out  his  power,  increased  his  majesty ;

Hero  who  fortified  his  body  in  the  wars,  and  through  his  great¬
ness  sot  the  heaven  upon  his  head.

3  Thou  didst  perform  thy  first  great  deed  of  hero  might  what  time

thou  showedst  power,  through  prayer,  before  this  folk.
Hurled  down  by  thee  the  car-borne  Lord  of  Tawny  Steeds,  the
cougrogated  swift  ones  fled  in  sundry  ways.


5  The  vtuel  of  the  ttron>/ :  the  reservoir  containing  the  strong  Soma.  In
reference  to  the  repetition  of  the  word  '  strong '  iu  this  and  tho  following
stan/a  see  1.  177.  2,  3.

Both  thettmxa :  for  pressing  out  the  Soma  juice.

1  Praise  Indra  after  the  manner  of  the  ancient  Angirases  with  a  new  song,
because  his  ancient  deeds  are  continually  renewed  for  our  advantage.

2  Fortified  hit  body :  protected  it  with  a  coat  of  mail.

3  The  congregated  swift  ones:  according  to  SSyana,  tho  Aauras  or  euemioj
Vf  the  Gods.  According  to  Roth  the  water*  of  the  heaven.


nrust  is.]


TEE  RIG  VEDA.


281


4  He  mode  himself  by  might  Lord  of  all  living  things,  and  strong

in  vital  power  waxed  great  above  them  all.

He,  borne  on  high,  o’erspread  with  light  the  heaven  and  earth,
and,  sewing  up  the  turbid  darkness,  closed  it  in.

5  He  with  his  might  made  firm  the  forward-bending  hills,  the

downward  rushing  of  the  waters  lie  ordained.

Fast  he  upheld  the  earth  that  nourishcth  all  life,  and  stayed
the  heaven  from  falling  by  his  wondrous  skill.

G  Fit  for  the  grasping  of  his  arras  is  what  the  Sire  hath  fabricated
from  all  kind  of  precious  wealth,

The  thunderbolt,  wherewith,  loud-roaring,  he  smote  down,  and
striking  him  to  death  laid  Krivi  on  the  earth.

7  As  she  who  in  her  parents’  house  is  growing  old,  I  pray  to  thee
•  as  Bhaga  from  the  seat  of  all.

Grant  knowledge,  mete  it  out  and  bring  it  to  us  here  :  give  ns
the  share  wherewith  thou.makest  people  glad.

8  May  we  invoke  thee  as  a  liberal  giver :  thou  givest  us,  0  Indra,

strength  and  labours.

Help  us  with  manifold  assistance,  Indra  :  Mighty  One,  Iudra,
make  us  yet  more  wealthy.

9  Now  may  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  Indra,  give  in  return

a  boon  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

Give  to  thy  praisers :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  wc  speak,
with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XVIII.  Indra.

The  rich  new  car  hath  been  equipped  at  morning;  four  yokes
it  hath,  three  whips,  seven  reins  to  guide  it :

Ten-sided,  friendly  to  mankind,  light-winner,  that  must  be  urged
to  speed  with  prayers  and  wishes.


4  Borne  on  high  :  or  perhaps  '  luminous, ’  as  Prof.  Max  Muller  renders  it.

5  jPorward-bendi'ig  :  ready  to  fall  until  Indra  fixed  them.

G  Krivi:  originally  ' a  leather  bag ’  and  metaphorically  ‘a  cloud,’  said  by
Sftyana  to  be  an  Asura  or  demon.

7  As  Bhaga  :  as  the  God  who  distributes  wealth,  and  also  presides  over  love
and  marriage.  Prom  the  scot  of  all :  from  the  hall  of  sacrifice  where  seats  of
aacred  grass  are  provided  for  all  the  Gods.

1  The  rich  new  car  is  the  morning  sacrifice  which  travels  to  the  Gods  and
obtains  wealth  for  the  worshipper.  The/our  yokes  are  the  four  pair  of  stones
for  pressing  out  the  Soma  juice ;  the  three  whips  arc  the  three  tones  of
prayer  ;  the  seven  reins  are  the  seven  metres.  The  meaning  of  dafdritryh,
‘  ten  aided,’  is  not  clear.  Sftyaua  explains  aritvdh  as  ‘  preservers  from  enemies,
i.  e.  sins,’  the  planete.  Grassmann  thinks  that  wheels  are  meant.


282  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  //.

2  This  is  prepared  for  him  the  first,  the  second,  and  the  third

time :  he  is  man’s  Priest  and  Herald.

Others  get  offspring  of  another  parent :  he  goeth,  as  a  noble
Bull,  with  others.

3  To  IndPa’s  car  the  Bay  Steeds  have  I  harnessed,  that  new

well-spoken  words  may  bring  him  hither.

Here  let  not  other  worshippers  detain  thee,  for  among  us  are
many  holy  singers.  «■

4  Indra,  come  hitherward  with  two  Bay  Coursers,  come  thou

with  four,  with  six  when  invocated.

Come  thou  with  eight,  with  ten,  to  drink  the  Soma.  Here  is
the  juice,  brave  Warrior :  do  not  scorn  it.

5  0  Indra,  come  thou  hither  having  harnessed  thy  car  with  twenty,

thirty,  forty  horses.

Come  thou  with  fifty  well  trained  coursers,  Indra,  sixty  or
seventy,  to  drink  the  Soma.

6  Come  to  us  hitherward,  0  Indra,  carried  by  eighty,  ninety,  or

an  hundred  horses.

This  Soma  juice  among  the  Sunahotras  hath  been  poured  out,
in  'love,  to  glad  thee,  Indra.

7  To  this  my  prayer,  0  Indra,  come  thou  hither :  bind  to  thy

car’s  pole  all  thy  two  Bay  Coursers.

Thou  art  to  be  invoked  in  many  places:  Hero,  rejoice  thyself
in  this  libation.

8  Ne’er  be  my  love  from  Indra  disunited :  still  may  his  liberal

Milch-cow  yield  us  treasure.

So  may  we  under  his  supreme  protection,  safe  in  his  arms,
succeed  in  each  forth-going.

9  Now  may  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  Indra,  give  in  return

a  boon  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

Give  to  thy  praisers :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

2  The  first,  the  second,  and  the  third  time  :  the  three  daily  sacrifices  are
referred  to.  He  is  mart's  Priest :  Agni  must  be  meant.

The  second  hemistich  is  obscure.  Wilson,  after  SAyana,  paraphrases  :

1  Other  (nriost *)  engender  the  embryo  of  a  different  (rite),  but  this  victorious
(sacrifice),  the  showerer  (of  benefits)  combines  with  other  (ceremonies).'

4  With  tioo  Bay  Coursers :  this  is  the  usual  number.  Tho  progressive
multiplication  in  this  and  the  following  stanzas  is  perhaps  intended  to  in¬
dicate  the  ever  increasing  rapidity  with  which  the  eager  worshipper  prays
Indra  to  approach.  The  Scholiast  says  that  by  their  supernatural  power  the
two  horses  of  Indra  multiply  themselves  indefinitely.

6  The  Sunahotras:  apparently  a  family  so  called;  etymologically  1  those  who
sacrifice  with  happy  result.’  According  to  Siyana,  sanihotrdh  means  certain
vessels  into  which  the  Soma  juice  was  poured.


HYMN  19.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.  263

HYMN  XIX.  Indra.

Draughts  of  this  sweet  juice  have  been  drunk  for  rapture,  of
the  wise  Soma-presser’s  offered  dainty,

Wherein,  grown  mighty  in  the  days  aforetime,  Indra^iath  found
delight,  and  men  who  worship.

2  Cheered  by  this  month  Indra,  whose  hand  wields  thunder,  rent

piecemeal  Ahi  who  barred  up  the  waters,

So  that  the  quickening  currents  of  the  rivers  flowed  forth  like
birds  unto  their  resting-places.

3  Indra,  this  Mighty  One,  the  Dragon’s  slayer,  sent  forth  the

flood  of  waters  to  the  ocean.

He  gave  the  Sun  his  life,  he  found  the  cattle,  and  with  the
night  the  works  of  days  completed.

4  To  him  who  worshippeth  hath  Indra  given  many  and  matchless

gifts.  He  slayeth  Vritra.

Straight  was  he  to  be  sought  with  supplications  by  men  who
struggled  to  obtain  the  sunlight.

5  To  him  who  poured  him  gifts  he  gave  up  Surya, — Indra,  the

God,  the  Mighty,  to  the  mortal ;

For  Etasa  with  worship  brought  him  riches  that  keep  distress
afar,  as  ’twere  his  portion.

6  Once  to  the  driver  of  his  chariot,  Kutsa,  he  gave  up  greedy

Sushna,  plague  of  harvest ;

And  fndra,  for  the  sake  of  Divodasa,  demolished  Sambara’s  nine-
and-nincty  castles.


1  Have  been  drunk :  by  Indra.

3  And  with  the  night :  perhaps,  by  giving  the  night  for  rest  enabled  men  to
perform  the  labours  of  the  day.  Or,  as  uklrnd  may  mean  'by  light,’  ‘effected
the  manifestation  of  the  days  by  light,’  as  Wilson  renders  it  after  Sftyana.

B  See  I.  81.  1 5.  Tho  legend  says  that  a  cortAin  King  who  wished  for  a  non
worshipped  Sftrya  who,  to  grant  his  prayer,  was  born  himself  as  the  King’s  boh.
Afterwards  when  some  dispute  arose  between’ this  King’s  s»n  who  was  named
.  Stlrya  and  the  Rishi  Etasa,  Indra  sided  with  the  latter.  In  I.  61. 15,  a  chariot
race  appears  to  be  referred  to,  and  I  have  translated  the  passage  accordingly,
following  SAyana  in  taking  Silrya  to  be  the  name  of  a  man.  If,  however,  as  is
very  possible,  Silrya  there  is  the  Sun-God  the  meaning  is  that  Indra,  in  ordor
to  favour  his  faithful  worshipper  Etasa.  compelled  Silrya  or  the  Sun  to  briug
back  his  ebaviot  and  horses  to  the  cast;  that  is  the  return  of  day  on  some  parti¬
cular  occasion  is  attributed  to  Indra’ m  intervention  on  behalf  of  his  favourite.
This  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  this  verse  also.  See.  also  I.  121.  13.

As  'twere  his  portion:  as  (a  father  gives)  his  portion  (to  a  son),  according
to  SAyana.

8  Katta  and  Divoddsa,  favourites  of  Indra,  and  Sushna  and  §ambara,  demons
of  drought,  have  occurred  frequently  in  Book  I.


284  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Jt.

7  So  have  we  brought  our  hymn  to  thee,  0  Indra,  strengthening

thee  and  fain  ourselves  for  glory.

May  we  with  best  endeavours  gain  this  friendship,  and  mayst
thou  bend  the  godless  scorner’s  weapons.

8  Thus  the  Gritsam  idas  for  thee,  0  Hero,  have  wrought  their

hymn  and  task  as  seeking  favour.

May  they  who  worship  thee  afresh,  0  Indra,  gain  food  and
strength,  bliss,  and  a  happy  dwelling.

9  Now  may  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  Indra,  give  in  return

a  boon  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

Give  to  thy  praisers :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XX.  Indra.

As  one  brings  forth  Ills  car  when  fain  for  combat,  so  bring  we

power  to  thee — regard  us,  Indra -

Well  skilled  in  song,  thoughtful  in  spirit,  seeking  great  bliss
from  one  like  thee  amid  the  Heroes.

2  Indra,  thou  art  our  own  with  thy  protection,  a  guardian  near

to  men  who  love  thee  truly.

Active  art  thou,  the  liberal  man's  defender,  his  who  draws
near  to  thee  with  right  devotion.

3  May  Indra,  called  with  solemn  invocations,  the  young,  the

Friend,  be  men’s  auspicious  keeper,

One  who  will  further  with  his  aid  the  singer,  the  toiler,  praiser,
dresser  of  oblations.

4  With  laud  and  song  let  me  extol  that  Indra  in  whom  of  old

men  prospered  and  were  mighty.

May  he,  implored,  fulfil  the  prayer  for  plenty  of  him  who
worships,  of  the  living  mortal.

5  He,  Indra  whom  the  Angirases’  praise  delighted,  strengthened

their  prayer  and  made  their  goings  prosper.

Stealin  g  away  the  mornings  with  the  sunlight,  he,  lauded,
crushed  even  Asna’s  ancient  powers.


1  Por  combat:  or,  perhaps,  for  the  race.

3  The  toiler  :  the  man  who  labours  in  the  discharge  of  religious  duties.

4  The  living  mortal:  the  present  worshipper,  as  distinguished  from  the  men
of  old.

5  Made  their  goings  prosper :  by  recovering  for  them  the  stolen  cows,  fre-
quentfy  mentioned  in  Bonk  I.  Aina,  ‘the  voracious,’  said  to  be  the  namo  of
a  dcaon,  one  of  the  many  foes  overthrown  by  Indra,


n  YMN  21.]


THE  MOVE  DA.


2S5

6  He  verily,  the  God,  the  glorious  Indra,  hath  raised  him  up  for

man,  best  Wonder-Worker.

He,  self-reliant,  mighty  and  triumphant,  brought  low  the  dear
head  of  the  wicked  Disa.

7  Indra  the  Vi  itra-slayer,  Fort-destroyer,  scattered  the' Disa  hosts

who  dwelt  in  darkness.

For  man  hath  he  created  earth  and  waters,  and  ever  helped  the
prayer  of  him  who  worships.

6  To  him  in  might  the  Gods  have  ever  yielded,  to  Indra  in  the
tumult  of  the  battle.

When  in  his  arms  they  .laid  the  bolt,  he  slaughtered  the  Dasyus
aud  cast  down  their  forts  oi  'iron.

9  Now  may  that  wealthy  Cow  of  thine,  0  Indra,  give  in  return  a
boon  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

Give  to  thy  praisers :  let  not  fortune  fail  us.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXI.  Indra.

To  him  the  Lord  of  all,  the  Lord  of  wealth,  of  light;  him  who
is  Lord  for  ever,  Lord  of  men  and  tilth,

Him  who  is  Lord  of  horses,  Lord  of  kine,  of  floods,  to  Indra,
to  the  Holy  bring  sweet  Soma  juice.

2  To  him  the  potent  One,  who  conquers  und  breaks  down,  the

Victor  never  vanquished  who  disposes  all,

The  mighty-voiced,  the  rider,  unassailable,  to  Indra  ever-
conquering  speak  your  reverent  prayer.

3  Still  Victor,  loved  by  mortals,  ruler  over  men,  o’erthrower,

warrior,  he  hath  waxen  as  he  would;

Host-gatherer,  triumphant,  ho. loured  mid  the  folk.  Indra’s
heroic  deeds  will  I  tell  forth  to  all.


6  Ddsa :  said  by  Sftyana  to  be  an  Aaura,  or  demon  of  that  name.  The  word
is  frequently  applied  to  the  foes  of  the  Aryan,  to  the  inaliguant  demons  of  the
air  an  well  as  to  tho  barbarous  aud  bontilo  inhabitants  of  the  laud,  and  it  is  uot
always  clear  whether  human  or  nuporhumau  enemies  are  intended.

The  dear  head  :  the  Dlsa's  own  head  ;  dear  =  4>!\ov  in  Homer.

7  The  Ddsa  hosts  who  dwelt  in  darkness  :  tho  words  thus  rendered  are  vari¬
ously  explained.  It  is  uncortain  whether  the  aborigines  of  tho  country  are
meant,  or  tho  demons  of  air  who  dwoll  in  the  dark  clouds.

8  The  Dasyus  :  the  Asuran  or  demons,  according  to  SAyana.

1  The  Lord :  literally,  conqueror  of  all,  of  wealth,  etc.

2  M iyhty -voiced  :  Sftyana  gives  two  explanations,  ‘  having  a  full  throat,’  or
‘praised  by  many.’  Eider :  borne  through  the  sky.


286  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  II.

4  The  strong  who  never  yields,  who  slew  the  furious  fiend,  the

deep,  the  vast,  of  wisdom  unattainable;

Who  speeds  the  good,  the  breaker-down,  the  firm,  the  vast, —
Indra  whose  rites  bring  joy  hath  made  the  light  of  Dawn.

5  By  sacrifice  the  yearning  sages  sending  forth  their  songs

found  furtherance  from  him  who  speeds  the  flood.

In  Indra  seeking  help  with  worship  and  with  hymn,  they
drew  him  to  themselves  and  won  them  kine  and  wealth.

6  Indra,  bestow  on  us  the  best  of  treasures,  the  spirit  of  ability

and  fortune ;

Iucreasc  of  riches,  safety  of  our  bodies,  charm  of  sweet  speech,
and  days  of  pleasant  weather.

HYMN  XXII.  Indra.

At  the  Trikadrnkas  the  Great  and  Strong  hath  drunk  drink
blent  with  meal.  With  Vishnu  hath  he  quaffed  the  poured
out  Soma  juice,  all  that  he  would.

That  hath  so  heightened  him  the  Great,  the  Wide,  to  do  his
mighty  work.

So  may  tho  God  attain  the  God,  true  Indu  Indra  who  is  true.

2  So  he  resplendent  in  the  battle  overcame  Krivi  by  might.  Ho

with  his  majesty  hath  filled  the  earth  and  heaven,  and  waxou
strong.

One  share  of  the  libation  hath  he  swallowed  down :  one  share
he  left.

So  may  tho  God  attend  the  God,  true  Indu  Indra  who  is  true.

3  Brought  forth  together  with  wisdom  and  mighty  power  thou

grewest  great ;  with  hero  deeds  subduing  the  malevolent,
most  swift  in  act ;

Giving  prosperity,  and  lovely  wealth  to  him  who  praiseth  thee.
So  may  the  God  attend  the  God,  true  Indu  Indra  who  Is  truo.

4  This,  Indra,  was  thy  hero  deed,  Dancer,  thy  first  and  aucieut

work,  worthy  to  be  told  forth  in  heaven,

What  time  thou  seutest  down  life  with  a  God’s  own  power,  free¬
ing  the  floods.

All  that  is  godless  may  he  conquer  with  his  might,  and,  Lord
of  Hundred  Powers,  find  for  us  strength  and  food.

4  The  furious  fiend :  Vritrn.

6  Abilitv:  to  perform  sacred  ceremonies,  according  to  SAyana.

1  TU  TUadruktu :  the  first  three  days  of  the  Abhiplava  ceremony.

Indu  :  a  drop,  especially  of  Soma  juice  ;  another  name  of  the  deified  Soma.

2  Krivi :  a  demon.  See  II.  J  7i  6.

4  Dancer :  active  in  battle,  dancer  of  the  wav-dancc.


hymn  23.]


287


THE  RIG  VEDA.

HYMN  XXIII.  Brahmanaspati.

We  call  thee,  Lord  and  Leader  of  tlio  heavenly  hosts,  the  wise
among -the  wise,  the  famousest  of  all,

The  King  supreme  of  prayers,  0  Brahmanaspati]:  hpar  us  with
help ;  sit  down  in  place  of  sacrifice.

2  Brihaspati,  God  immortal !  verily  the  Gods  have  gained  from

thee,  tho  wise,  a  share  in  holy  rites.

As  with  great  light  the  Sun  brings  forth  the  rays  of  morn,  so
thou  alone  art  Father  of  all  sacred  prayer.

3  When  thou  hast  chased  away  revilers  and  the  gloom,  thou

mountest  the  refulgent  car  of  sacrifice ;

The  awful  car,  Brihaspati,  that  quells  the  foe,  slays  demons,
cleaves  the  stall  of  kine,  and  finds  the  light.

4  Thou  leadest  with  good  guidance  and  preservest  men  ;  distress

o’ertakes  not  him  who  offers  gifts  to  thee.

Him  who  hates  prayer  thou  punishest,  Brihaspati,  quelling  his
wrath  :  herein  is  thy  great  mightiness.

5  No  sorrow,  no  distress  from  any  side,  no  foes,  no  creatures

double-tongued  have  overcome  the  man, —

Thou  drive8t  ail  seductive  fiends  away  from  him  whom,  careful
guard,  thou  keepest,  Brahmanaspati.

6  Thou  art  our  keeper,  wise,  preparer  of  our  paths  :  we,  for  thy

service,  sing  to  thee  with  hymns  of  praise.

Brihasjuvti,  whoever  lays  a  snare  for  us,  him  may  his  evil  fate,
precipitate,  destroy.

7  Him,  too,  who  threatens  us  without  offence  of  ours,  the  evil-

minded,  arrogant,  rapacious  man, —

Him  turn  thou  from  our  path  away,  Brihaspati :  give  us  fair
access  to  this  bauquet  of  the  Gods.

8  Thee  as  px-otector  of  our  bodies  we  invoke,  thee,  saviour,  as

the  comforter  who  loveth  us.

Strike,  0  Brihaspati,  the  Gods’  rovilers  down,  aud  let  not  the
uurighteous  come  to  highest  bliss.

1  Brahmanaspati ;  alternating  with  Brihnx]>ati)  the  Deity  in  whom  the  action
of  the  worshipper  upon  the  Gods  is  personified.  See  I.  14.  3.  A  comparative¬
ly  recent  God,  as  the  representative  of  the  hierarchy,  he  is  gradually  encroach¬
ing  on  tho  jurisdiction  of  Indra  the  Warrior  God  of  the  Kshatriyas,  claiming
his  achievements  aa  his  own  “and  assuming  his  attributes.  See  Weber,  Uber
den  Viljapoya,  Sitzuugsborichte  der  K.  P.  Academic  der  Wissensehaften,  1802,

3  Reriltrs  •  blaspheming  demons  of  darkness.  Cleaves  the  stall  of  kine:  opens
the  prison  where  the  cows  or  rays  of  light  have  been  shut  up.

7  This  banquet  of  the  Gods :  sacriOco  in  general,  and  especially  tho  saoriflee
which  is  performing.


288  THE  TIYMNS  OP  {KOOK  U.

9  Through  thee,  kind  prospevcr,  0  Brahmanaspati,  may  we  obtain
the  wealth  of  men  which  all  desire  :

And  all  our  enemies,  who  near  or  far  away  prevail  against  us,
crush,  and  leave  them  destitute.

10  With  thee  as  our  own  rich  and  liberal  ally  may  we,  Brihaspati,

gain  highest  power  of  life.

Let  not  the  guileful  wicked  man  be  lord  of  us :  still  may  we
prosper,  singing  goodly  hymns  of  praise.

1 1  Strong,  never  yielding,  hastening  to  the  battle-cry,  consumer

of  the  foe,  victorious  in  the  strife,

Thou  art  sin’s  true  avenger,  Brahmanaspati,  who  tamest  e’en
the  fierce,  the  wildly  passionate.

12  Whoso  with  mind  ungodly  seeks  to  do  us  harm,  who,  deeming

him  a  man  of  might  mid  lords,  would  slay, —

Let  not  his  deadly  blow  reach  us,  Brihaspati ;  may  we  humi¬
liate  the  strong  ill-doer’s  wrath.

13  The  mover  mid  the  spoil,  the  winner  of  all  wealth,  to  be  invoked

in  fight,  and  reverently  adored,

Brihaspati  hath  overthrown  like  cars  of  war  all  wicked  enemies
who  fain  would  injure  us.

14  Burn  up  the  demons  with  thy  fierccst^flaming  brand,  those  who

have  scorned  thee  in  thy  manifested  might.

Show  forth  that  power  that  shall  deserve  the  hymn  of  praise:
destroy  the  evil-speakers,  0  Brihaspati.

15  Brihaspati,  that  which  the  foe  deserves  not,  which  shines  among

the  folk  effectual,  splendid,

That,  Son  of  Law !  which  is  with  might  refulgent — that  trea¬
sure  wonderful  bestow  thou  on  us.

16  Give  us  not  up  to  those  who,  foes  in  ambuscade,  are  greedy

for  the  wealth  of  him  who  sits  at  ease,

Who  cherish  in  their  heart  abandonment  of  Gods.  Brihaspati,
no  further  rest  shall  they  obtain.

17  For  Tvashtar,  ho  who  knowB  each  sacred  song,  brought  thee

to  life,  preeminent  o’er  all  the  things  that  be.

Guilt-scourgcr,  guilt-avenger  is  Brihaspati,  who  slays  the  spoiler
and  upholds  the  mighty  Law.


15  Son  of  Law ;  who  li&st  thy  being  in  accordance  with  rild,  truth  or  eternal
Law  and  Order.

•  18  This  stanza  is  difficult,  and  the  translation  ia  conjectural.  Wilsou
observes  that  SAyann's  explanation  ia  not  very  intelligible.


THE  MOVE  DA.


BYSOT  24.]


289


18  The  mountain,  for  th}'  glory,  cleft  itself  apart  when,  Angirtts  !

thou  openedst  the  stall  of  kine.

Thou,  0  Brihaspati,  with  Indra  for  ally  didst  hurl  down  water¬
floods  which  gloom  had  compassed  round.

19  0  Brahmanaspati,  be  £hou  controller  of  this  our^hymn  and

prosper  thou  our  children.

All  that  the  Gods  regard  with  love  is  blessed.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.


HYMN  XX  [V.  Qrahmanaapati.

Be  pleased  with  this  our  offering,  thou  who  art  the  Lord ;  we
will  adore  thee  with  this  new  and  mighty  song.

As  this  thy  friend,  our  liberal  patron,  praises  thee,  do  thou,
Brihaspati,  fulfil  our  hearts’  desire.

2  He  who  with  might  bowed  down  the  things  that  should  be

bowed,  and  in  his  fury  rent  the  holds  of  Sambara ;

Who  overthrew  what  shook  uot,  Brahmanaspati,— he  made!
his  way  within  the  mountain  stored  with  wealth.

3  That  was  a  great  deed  for  the  Godlicst  of  the  Gods :  strong

things  were  loosened  and  the  firmly  fixed  gave  way.

He  drave  the  kine  forth  and  cleft  Vala  through  by  prayer,
dispelled  the  darkness  and  displayed  the  light  of  heaven.

4  The  well  with  mouth  of  stone  that  poured  a  flood  of  meath,

which  Brahmanaspati  hath  opened  with  his  might —

All  they  who  see  the  light  have  drunk  their  fill  thereat :  to¬
gether  they  have  made  the  watery  fount  flow  forth.

5  Ancient  will  be  those  creatures,  whatsoe’er  they  be ;  with

moons,  with  autumns,  doors  unclose  themselves  to  you.
Effortless  they  pass  on  to  perfect  this  and  that,  appointed  works
which  Brahmanaspati  ordained.


18  Anyirat  :  Brihaspati  is  here  called  by  the  name  of  the  ancient  patriarch
as  Agni  is  in  I.  1.’  6  According  to  the  Hh&gavula  PnrAqti  Brihaap*u  is  the
son  of  Angiras.

Thou . didst  hurl  down:  the  deed  usually  ascribed  to  Indra  is  here  attri¬

buted  to  Brihaspati  as  the  Lord  of  effectual  prayer.  See  I.  1 4.  3,  ami  02  3.

1  Thy  friend,  our  liberal  patron :  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice,  the  faithful
worshipper  of  the  God  and  the  rewarder  of  the  priests.

2  The  holds  of  Simbara  :  great  black  clouds  before  they  pour  their  rain.

The  mountain  stored  with  wealth :  the  cloud  full  of  precious  rain.

5  This  stauza  is  difficult.  Ludwig  takes  tfl  bh&vand,  •  those  creatures,’
whose  nature  ia  imperfectly  known,  to  bo  the  sun  and  moon,  the  pareuts  of
months  aud  years,  which  without  any  effort  on  their  part  bring  t«  pass  whatever
Brahmanaspati  decrees.

19


290  THE  HYMNS  OP  f BOOK  Tl.

6  They  who  with  much  endeavour  searching  round  obtained  the

Paris’  noblest  treasure  hidden  in  the  cave, —

Those  sSgeB,  having  markevl  the  falsehoods,  turned  them  back
whence  they  had  come,  and  sought  again  to  enter  in.

7  Tho  pious  one3  when  they  had  seen  the  falsehoods  turned  them

back,  the  sages  stood  again  upon  the  lofty  ways.

Cast  down  with  both  their  arms  upon  tho  rock  they  left  tho
kindled  fire,  and  said,  No  enemy  is  he.

8  With  his  swift  bow,  strung  truly,  Brahmanaspati  reaches  tho

mark  v^hate’er  it  be  that  he  desires.

Excellent  are  the  arrows  wherewithal  he  shoots,  keen-eyed  to
look  on  men  and  springing  from  his  ear.

9  He  brings  together  and  he  parts,  the  great  High  Priest;  extolled

is  he,  in  battle  Brahmanaspati.

When,  gracious,  for  the  hymn  he  brings  forth  food  and  wealth,
the  glowing  Sun  untroubled  sends  forth  fervent  heat.

10  First  and  preeminent,  excelling  all  besides  are  the  kind  gifts  of

liberal  Brihaspati.

.  These  are  the  boons  of  him  the  Strong  who  should  be  loved,
whereby  both  classes  and  the  people  have  delight.

11  Thou  who  in  every  way  supreme  in  earthly  power,  rejoicing,

by  thy  mighty  strength  hast  waxen  great, —

He  is  the  God  spread  forth  in  breadth  against  the  Gods :  he,
Brahmanaspati,  encompasseth  this  All.

12  From  you,  twain  Maghavans,  all  truth  proceedeth :  even  the

waters  break  not  your  commandment.

Come  to  us,  Brahmanaspati  and  Indra,  to  our  oblation  like  yoked
steeds  to  fodder.


•  6  The  Panis  are  the  robber-fiends  who  carry  off  and  hide  the  cows  or  raya
of  light.  Those  SO  net :  the  Angiraxes,  to  whom  the  stolen  cows  are  said  to
have  belonged.  Hating  marled  the  falsehoods :  having  seen  through  the
guiles  oT  the  fiends  who  sought  to  mislead  them.

7  They  left  the  kindled  fire :  tho  oowa,  or  waters  and  the  light  which  follows
their  effusion,  were  set  free  by  fire-oblations  of  which  the  Angirascs  are  regard¬
ed  as  the  earliest  insti tutors.  No  enemy :  that  is,  man’s  gicatent  friend.  Tho
etaii7A  is  obscure,  and  Sdyapa’s  explanation  is  unsatisfactory.

8  Springing  from  his  ear:  the  bow-string  being  drawn  to  the  right  ear.
The  word  may,  perhaps,  mean  also,  '  finding  their  home  in,  i.  e.  reaching  the
ears '  of  men,  and  might  be  translated  '  levollod  to  tho  ear.’

9  He  brings  together  and  he  parts :  brings  friends  together  in  worship,  and
disperses  enemies  in  battle.

10  Both  classes :  aocording  to  SAyana,  the  insti tutors  of  the  sacrifice  and  the
priest*,  or  Gods  and  men.

11  In  breadth  against  the  Oods :  in  his  mightiness  the  representative  of  all
the  Gods.

12  Even  the  tenters:  all  nature,  even  the  strong  and  rapid  water  floods.


BYM 26.]  THE  R1GV EDA.  261

13  The  sacrificial  flames  most  swiftly  hear  the  call :  the  priest  of

the  assembly  gaineth  wealth  for  hymns.

Hating  the  stern,  remitting  at  his  will  the  debt,  strong  in  the
shock  of  fight  is  Brahmanaspati.

14  The  wrath  of  Brahmanaspati  according  to  bis  will  had  full

effect  when  he  would  do  a  mighty  deed.

The  kiue  he  drave  forth  and  distributed  to  heaven,  even  as  a
copious  flood  with  strength  flows  sundry  ways.

15  0  Brahmanaspati,  may  we  be  evermore  masters  of  wealth  well-

guided,  full  of  vital  strength.

Heroes  on  hemes  send  abundantly  to  U3,  when.thou  omnipoten
through  prayer  seckeat  my  call.

16  0  Brahmanaspati,  be  thou  controller  of  this  our  hymn,  and

prosper  thou  our  children.

All  that  the  Gods  regard  with  love  is  blessed.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXV.  Brahmanaspati.

He  lighting  up  the  flame  shall  conquer  enemies :  strong  shall
he  be  who  offers  prayer  and  brings  his  gift.

He  with  his  seed  spreads  forth  beyond  another’s  seed,  whom¬
ever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for  his  friend.

2  With  heroes  he  shall  overcome  his  hero  foes,  and  spread  his
wealth  by  kinc :  wise  by  himself  is  he-
His  children  and  his  children’s  children  grow  in  strength,
whomever  Brahmanaspati  takes  for  his  friend.

3  He,  mighty  like  a  raving  river’s  billowy  flood,  as  a  bull  con¬

quers  oxen,  overcomes  with  strength.

Like  Agni's  biasing  rush  he  may  not  be  restrained,  whomever
Brahmanaspati  takes  for  his  friend.

4  For  him  the  floods  of  heaven  flow  never  failing  down :  first

with  the  heroes  he  goes  forth  to  war  for  kine.

He  slays  in  unabated  vigour  with  great  might,  whomever
Brahmanaspati  takes  for  his  friend.  •

5  All  roaring  rivers  pour  their  waters  down  for  him,  and  many

a  flawless  shelter  hath  been  granted  him.

Blest  with  the  happiness  of  Gods  he  prospers  well,  whomever
Brahmanaspati  takes  for  his  friend.

HYMN  XXVI.  Brahmanaspati.

The  righteous  singer  shall  o’ercome  his  enemies,  and  he  who
■  serves  the  Gods  subdue  the  godless  man.

«T  The  zealous  man  shall  vanquish  the  invincible,  the  worshipper
share  the  food  of  him  who  worships  not.


292  THE  UYJ/NS  OP  [HOOK  II.

2  Worship,  thou  hero;  chase  the  arrogant  afar:  put  on  aus¬

picious  courage  for  the  fight  with  foes.

Prep  ire  oblation  so  that  thou  rnayst  have  success:  we  crave
the  favouring  help  of  BrabmanaspatL

3  He  with*  his  folk,  his  house,  his  family,  his  sons,  gains  booty

for  himself,  and,  with  the  heroes,  wealth,

Who  with  oblation  and  a  true  believing  heart  serves  Brah-
raai.iHspati  the  Father  of  the  Gods.

4  Whoso  hath  honoured  him  with  offerings  rich  in  oil,  him

Binhmaimspati  leads  forward  on  his  way,

Saves  huu  from  sorrow,  frees  him  from  his  enemy,  and  is  his
wonderful  deliverer  from  woe.

HYMN  XXVII.  Adityn*.

The-e  hymns  that  drop  down  fatness,  with  the  ladle  I  ever
offer  to  the  Kings  Adityas.

May  Mitra,  Aryaman,  and  Bhaga  hear  us,  the  mighty  Varuna,
Dakshn,  and  Ansa.

2  With  ono  accord  may  Aryaman  and  Mitra  and  Varuna  this

day  aooept  this  praise-song —

Adityas  bright  and  pure  as  streams  of  water,  free  from  all
guile  and  falsehood,  blameless,  perfect.

3  Theso  Gods,  Adityas,  vast,  profound,  and  faithful,  with  many

eyes,  fain  to  deceive  the  wicked,

Looking  within  behold  the  good  and  evil :  near  to  the  Kings
is  even  the  thing  most  distant.

4  Upholding  that  which  moves  and  that  which  moves  not,

Adityas,  Gods,  proteotors  of  all  being,

Provident,  guarding  well  the  world  of  spirits,  time  to  eternal
j  Law,  the  debt-oxaotors.

2  Worship,  thou  hero  :  the  Kislii  addresses  the  exhortation  to  himself.

3  The  Father  of  the  Qods ;  SAyana  oxplains  pitanrm,  father,  by  pdluj/ildram,
protect- >r.

1  With  the  ladle :  that  is,  with  my  tongue  that  utters  praise*  as  the
sacrificial  ladlo  pours  out  tho  oblations  of  clarified  butter.

.  Adilyut :  sec  I.  14.  3.

Bhaga:  the  name  of  this  ancient  God  still  survives  iu  the  Slavonic
languages  as  a  general,  name  for  God.  He  is  frequently  invoked  together
with  Pflshan  and  tho  Adityas.  See  1.  14.  3.

Daktha:  active  energy,  spiritual  power  personified,  and  called  an  Adilya
or  son  of  Aditi.  SAyana  takes  tho  word  as  an  epithet  of  Ansa,  powerful.

A  im :  another  of  the  Adityas,  tho  Distributer.  Sec  II.  1.  4.

3  Looking  icithia :  into  the  hearts  of  men.

4  The  UeU  tzation  ;  the  punishers  of  sio.


BtitV  270  SrtiriP  niOVBDA.  293

5  May  I,  *  dityas,  share  in  this  your  favour  which,  Aryaman,

brings  profit  e’en  in  danger.

Under  your  guidance,  Varuua  and  Mitra,  round  troubles  may
I  pass,  like  rugged  places.

6  Smooth  is  your  path,  0  Aryaman  and  Mitra;  excellent  is  it,

Varuna,  and  thornless.

Thereon,  Adityas,  send  ua  down  your  blessing :  grant  us  a
shelter  hard  to  be  demolished.

7  Mother  of  Kings,  may  Aditi  transport  us,  by  fair  paths  Arya-

man,  beyond  all  hatred.

May  we  uninjured,  girt  by  many  heroes,  win  Yamim’s  and
Mitra’s  high  protection.

8  With  their  support  they  stay  three  earths,  three  heavens;

three  arc  their  functions  in  the  Gods’  assembly.

Mighty  through  Law,  Adityas,  is  your  greatness;  fair  is  it,
Aryaman,  Varuna,  and  Mitra.

9  Golden  and  splendid,  pure  like  streams  of  water,  they  hold

aloft  the  three  bright  heavenly  regions.

Ne’er  do  they  slumber,  never  close  their  eyelids,  faithful,  far-
ruling  for  the  righteous  mortal.

10  Thou  over  all,  0  Varuna,  art  Sovran,  be  they  Gods,  A  sura  !  or

be  they  mortals.

Grant  unto  us  to  see  a  hundred  autumns :  ours  be  the  blest
long  lives  of  our  forefathers.

11  Neither  the  right  nor  left  do  I  distinguish,  neither  the  east

nor  yet  the  west,  Adityas.

Simple  and  guided  by  your  wisdom,  Vasus !  may  I  attain  the
light  that  brings  uo  danger.

12  He  who  bears  gifts  unto  the  Kings,  true  Leaders,  he  whom

their  everlasting  blessings  prosper,

Moves  with  his  chariot  first  in  rank  and  wealthy,  munificent
and  lauded  in  assemblies.

13  Pure,  faithful,  very  strong,  with  heroes  round  him,  he  dwells

beside  the  waters  rich  with  pasture.  ■

None  slays,  from  near  at  hand  or  from  a  distance,  him  who  is
under  the  Adityas’  guidance.

7  Mother  of  Kings:  Aditi,  the  Infinite,  mother  of  the  Adityas.

8  Three  are  their  functions  :  perhaps  the  absorption,  retention,  and  effusion
of  rain.

10  A  sura :  a  divine  and  immortal  being;  apparently  a  higher  title  than
dtrdh,  Gods  or  Bright  Ones.

Ill  know  nothing  of  myself  and  cannot  attain  to  the  light  of  day,  or  the
light  of  true  knowledge,  without  your  assistance.


%


294  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  II.

14  Aditi,  Mitra,  Varuna,  forgive  us  however  wo  have  erred  and

sinned  against  you.

May  I  obtain  the  broad  light  free  from  poril :  0  Indra,  let
not  during  darkness  seize  us.

15  For  him*  the  Twain  united  pour  their  fulness,  the  rain  from

heaven :  he  thrives  most  highly  favoured.

He  goes  to  war  mastering  both  the  mansions :  to  him  both
portions  of  the  world  are  gracious.

16  Your  guiles,  ye  Holy  Ones,  to  quell  oppressors,  your  snares

spread  out  against  the  foe,  Adityas,

May  I  car-borne  pass  like  a  skilful  horseman  :  uninjured  may
.  we  dwell  in  spacious  shelter.

17  May  I  not  live,  0  Vanina,  to  witness  my  wealthy,  liberal,

dear  friend's  destitution.

King,  may  I  never  lack  well-ordered  riches.  Loud  may  we
•  speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXVIII.  Varuna.

Tins  laud  of  the  self-radiant  wise  Aditya  shall  be  supreme  o’er
all  that  is  in  greatness.

I  beg  renown  of  Varuna  the  Mighty,  the  God  exceeding  kind
to  him  who  worships.

2  Having  extolled  thee,  Varuna,  with  thoughtful  care  may  we

have  high  fortune  in  thy  service,

Singiug  thy  praises  like  the  fires  at  coming,  day  after  day,  of
.mornings  rich  in  cattle.

3  May  we  be  in  thy  keeping,  0  thou  Leader,  wide-ruling  Varuna,

.  Lord  of.  many  heroes.

0  Sons  of  Aditi,  for  ever  faithful,  pardon  us,  Gods,  admit  us
.  to  your  friendship.

4  He  made  them  flow,  the  Aditya,  the  Sustainer :  the  rivers  run
/  by  Vanina's  commandment.

14  During  darkness  ;  death,  night,  darkness  are  to  be  dreaded  :  daylight  is
comparatively  free  from  danger.

15  The  Twain-  united :  heaven  and  earth  which  together  makeup  the  world.
Both  the  mansions :  that  is,  he  retains  possession  of  his  own  dwelling  and

gains  posaesiion  of  that  of  his  enemy.

Both  portions  of  the  world :  heaven  and  earth.

17  May  I  never  see  my  wealthy  patron,  the  institutor  of  the  ceremony
reduced  to  poyerty.

1  This  laud ;  the  poet  magnifies  the  importance  of  the  worship  which  he
offers  to  the  Aditya  Varuna,  Ih'e  great  King  over  all,  the  God  of  natural,  peace¬
ful,  moral  order  as  contrasted  with  Indra  the  God  of  battles.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


I/YMV  29.]


295


These  feel  no  weariness,  nor  cease  from  flowing:  swift  have  they
flown  like  birds  in  air  around  us.

5  Loose  me  from  sin  as  from  a  bond  that  binds  me :  may  we

swell,  Varuna,  thy  spring  of  Order.

Let  not  my  thread,  while  1  weave  song,  be  severed,  nor  my
work’s  sum,  before  the  time,  be  shattered.

6  Far  from  me,  Varuna,  remove  all  danger :  accept  me  graciously,

thou  Holy  Sovran.

Cast  off,  like  cords  that  hold  a  calf,  my  troubles :  I  am  not
even  mine  eyelid’s  lord  without  thee.

7  Strike  us  not,  Varuna,  with  those  dread  weapons  which,  Asura,

at  thy  bidding  wound  the  sinner.

Let  us  not  pass  away  from  light  to  exile.  Scatter,  that  we  may
live,  the  men  who  hate  us.

8  0  mighty  Varuna,  now  and  hereafter,  even  as  of  old,  will  we

speak  forth  our  worship.

For  in  thyself,  invincible  God,  thy  statutes  ne’er  to  be  moved
are  fixed  as  on  a  mountain.

9  Move  far  from  me  what  sins  I  have  committed  :  let  me  not  suffer,

King,  for  guilt  of  others.

Full  many  a  morn  remains  to  dawn  upou  us :  in  these,  0
Varuna,  while  we  live  direct  us.

10  0  King,  whoever,  be  he  friend  or  kinsman,  hath  threatened

me  affrighted  in  my  slumber —

If  any  wolf  or  robber  fain  would  harm  us,  therefrom,  0  Vanina,
give  thou  us  protection.

11  May  I  not  live,  0  Varuna,  to  witness  my  wealthy,  liberal,  dear

friend’s  destitution.

King,  may  I  uever  lack  well-ordered  riches.  Loud  may  we  speak,
with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXIX.  Yisrcdcvas.

Upholders  of  the  Law,  ye  strong  Adityas,  remove  my  siu  like
her  who  bears  in  secret

You,  Varuna,  Mitra  and  all  Gods  who  listen,  I  call  to  help  me,
l  who  kuow  your  goodness.

2  Ye,  Gods,  are  providence  and  ye  are  power :  remove  ye  utterly
all  those  who  hate  us.


5  Srecll . thy  tpring  of  Order  •  observe  and  strengthen  thy  statutes  aiid

ordinances  from  which  life  and  all  bleating*  flow.

1  Like  her  rrho  heart  in  aeeret-  as  an  un wedded  mother  abandons  her  secretly
bora  child  in  some  distant  place.  •  .


THE  HYMNS  OP


296


[BOOK  //.


As  givers  of  good  things  deal  with  us  kindly:  this  day  be  graci¬
ous  to  us  and  hereafter.

3  What  service  may  we  do  you  with  our  future,  what  service,

Vusus,  with  our  ancient  friendship?

0  Aditif  and  Varupa  and  Mitra,  Indra  and  Maruts,  make  xis
well  and  happy.

4  Ye,  0  ye  Gods,  are  verily  our  kinsmen;  as  such  be  kind  to  me

who  now  implore  yon.

Let  not  your  car  come  slowly  to  our  worship:  of  kinsmen  such
as  you  ne’er  let  us  weary.

5  I  singly  have  sinned  many  a  sin  against  you,  and  ye  chastised

me  as  a  sire  the  gambler.

Far  be  your  nets,  far,  Gods,  be  mine  offences :  seize  me  not
like  a  bird  upon  her  offspring.

6  Turn  yourselves  hitherward  this  day,  ye  Holy,  that  fearing  in

my  heart  1  may  approach  you.

Protect  us,  God ;  let  not  the  wolf  destroy  us.  Save  us,  ye
Holy,  from  the  pit  and  falling.

7  May  I  not  live,  0  Varuna,  to  witness  my  wealthy,  liberal,  dear

friend’s  destitution.

King,  may  I  never  lack  well-ordered  riches.  Loud  may  wo
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXX.  Indra  and  Olliers.

The  streams  unceasing  flow  to  Indra,  slayer  of  A  hi,  Savitar,
God,  Law's  ful filler,

Day  after  day  goes  on  the  sheen  of  waters.  What  time  hath
past  since  they  were  first  set  flowing  ?

2  His  Mother — for  she  knew— spake  and  proclaimed  him  who

was  about  to  cast  his  bolt  at  Vritra.

Cutting  their  paths  according  to  his  pleasure  day  after  day
flow  to  their  goal  the  rivers.

3  Aloft  ho  stood  above  the  airy  region,  and  against  Vrifcra  shot

his  deadly  missile.

Enveloped  in  a  cloud  he  rushed  upon  him.  Indra  subdued
the  foe  with  sharpened  weapons.

6  A  a  (i  sire  the  pnuibler :  as  a  father  punishes  his  son  for  gambling.

Your  nets  ;  the  nooses  or  snares  which  yc  spread  for  the  wicked.

1  Saritar  •  the  Sun,  as  identical  with  Indra.  The  Scholiast  explains  the
word  here  as  the  instigator  or  impeller  of  all.

What  time  hath  paiiedt :  meaning  that  the  waters  are  eternal.

2  The  first  hemistich  is  obscure.  I  follow  Ludwig’s  conjectural  interpre¬
tation  (Der  Rigvcda,  V.  63),  who  reads  vidusht  for  tidushe,  and  refers  to  the
legend  related  in  IV.  18.  Hit  Mother  ;  Aditi,  the  mother  of  Indra.

3  Aloft  he  itood;  Inara.  Sec  I.  32.  Enveloped  in  a  cloud :  referring  to  Vritra.


THE  R IGV EDA.


297


HYMN  31.]

4  -‘Vs  with  a  bolt,  Brihaspati,  fiercely  flaming,  pierce  thou

Vrikndvaras’,  the  Asura’a,  heroes.

Even  its  iu  time  of  old  with  might  thou  slowest,  so  slay  even
now  our  enemy,  0  Indra.

5  Cast  down  from  heaven  on  high  thy  bolt  of  thuftder  where¬

with  in  joy  thou  smitest  dead  the  foeman.

For  gain  of  children  make  us  thine,  0  Indra,  of  many  child¬
ren’s  children  and  of  cattle.

6  Whomso  ye  love,  his  power  ye  aid  and  strengthen ;  ye  Twain

arc  the  rich  worshipper's  advancers.

Graciously  favour  us,  Indra  and  Soma;  give  us  firm  standing
in  this  time  of  danger.

7  Let  it  not  vex  me,  tire  me,  make  me  slothful,  and  never  let

us  say,  Press  not  the  Soma ;

For  him  who  cares  for  me,  gives  gifts,  supports  me,  who  comes
with  kino  to  me  who  pour  libations.

8  Sarasvati,  protect  us :  with  the  Maruts  allied  thou  boldly

conqucrcst  our  focmcn,

While  India  does  to  death  the  daring  chieftain  of  Sapdikua
exulting  in  his  prowess.

9  Him  who  waylays,  yea,  him  who  would  destroy  us, —  aim  at

him,  pierce  him  with  thy  sharpened  weapon.

Brihaspati,  with  arms  thou  slayest  foemen :  0  King,  give  ufP
the  spoiler  to  destruction.

10  Perform,  0  Hero,  with  our  valiant  heroes  the  deeds  heroic

which  thou  hast  to  finish.

Long  have  they  been  inflated  with  presumption :  slay  them,
and  bring  ns  hither  their  possessions.

1 1  I  craving  joy  address  with  hymn  and  homage  your  heavenly

host,  the  company  of  Maruts,

That  we  may  gain  wealth  with  full  store  of  heroes,  each  day
more  famous,  and  with  troops  of  children.

HYMN  XXXI.  Vijvedovas.

Help,  Vanina  and  Mitra,  0  ye  Twain  allied  with  Vasus,  Rudrns,
and  Adityas,  help  our  car,

That,  as  the  wild  birds  of  the  forest  from  their  home,  our  horses
may  fly  forth,  glad,  eager  for  renown.

4  Vrikttdvarut  :  supposed  by  Ludwig  to  be  the  King  of  the  Sandikas,  the
hymn  being  a  prayer  for  victory  in  an  Approaching  battle  with  him.  The
Antra  would  then  mean  King.

7  Comes  toilA  tine :  referring  to  Indra  who  reward*  liia  worshippers  with

gift*  of  cattle.  -

1  Help  our  ear :  in  the  chariot- race.  According  to  Prof.  Windiach, '  car  ’  in  a
figurative  expression  for  ‘hymn  of  praise.'  See  that  scholar'B  exhaustive  dis¬
cussion  of  this  hymn  in  FestgruM  an  Rudolf  von  Roth,  1898,  pp.  189 — 144,


298  TUP.  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  II.

2  Yea,  now  ye  Gods  of  one  accord  speed  on  our  car  what  time

among  the  folk  it  seeks  an  act  of  might ;

When,  hasting  through  tho  region  with  the  stamp  of  hoofs,
our  swift  steeds  trample  on  the  ridges  of  the  earth.

3  Or  may  our  Indra  here,  the  Friend  of  all  mankind,  coming  from

heaven,  most  wise,  girt  by  the  Marut  host,

Accompany,  with  aid  untroubled  by  a  foe,  our  car  to  mighty
gain,  to  win  the  meed  of  strength.

4  Or  may  this  Tvashtar,  God  who  rules  the  world  with  power,

one-minded  with  the  Goddesses  speed  forth  our  car ;

Ila  and  Bhaga  the  celestial,  Earth  and  Heaven,  Pushan,  Puran-
dhi,  and  the  Asvius,  ruling  Lords.

5  Or,  seen  alternate,  those  two  blessed  Goddesses,  Morning  and

Night  who  stir  all  living  things  to  act:

While  with  my  newest  song  I  praise  you  both,  0  Earth,  that
from  what  moves  not  ye  may  spread  forth  threefold  food.  •

6  Your  blessing  as  a  boon  for  suppliants  we  desire:  the  Dragon  of

the  Deep,  and  Aja-Ekapad,

Trite,  Ribhuk shan,  Savitav  shall  joy  in  us,  aud  the  Floods'
swift  Child  in  our  worship  and  our  prayer.

7  These  earnest  prayers  I  pray  to  you,  ye  Holy :  to  pay  you
*  honour,  living  men  have  formed  them,

Men  fain  to  win  the  prize  and  glory.  May  they  win,  as  a  car-
horse  might  the  goal,  your  notice.

HYMN  XXXII.  Various  Deities.

Graciously  further,  0  ye  Heaven  and  Earth,  this  speech  striv¬
ing  to  win  reward,  of  mo  your  worshipper.

First  rank  I  give  to  you,  Immortal,  high  extolled  !  I,  fain  to
win  me  wealth,  to  you  the  mighty  Pair.

2  Let  not  man’s  guile  annoy  us,  secret  or  by  day  :  give  not  us
up  a  prey  to  these  calamities.

Sever  not  thou  our  friendship  :  think  thereon  for  us.  This,
with  a  heart  that  longs  for  bliss,  we  seek  from  thee.

4  Pnrandhi :  meaning  the  bold,  or  the  intelligent,  may  be  either  an  epi¬
thet  of  PAnhan  or  the  name  of  a  separate  deity.

5  I  praise  you  both,  0  Birth :  i.  e.  0  Heaven  and  Earth  ;  the  pair  being
always  regarded  os  closely  connected,  the  mention  of  one  U  sufficient.

Prom  what  motet  not:  from  plants  a*  distinguished  from  animals.

6  The  Drawn  of  the  Deep:  Ahibudhnya,  who  dwells  in  the  depth  of  air.  See
I.  186.  5.  Aju- Bbrpdd :  ‘the  unborn  one-footed,’  the  Sun.  Sec  VI.  50.  14,
note.  Trita :  a  Vodic  (lod,  appearing  in  connexion  with  Indra.  The  Flood*'
tic {ft  Child :  Agni.  For  the  other  names  see  Index.

2  These  culumiliet :  some  pressing  troubles  or  imminent  dangers  not  further
Bptdifled.  From  thte :  probably  ludra.


HYMN  33.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


29»


3  Bring  hither  with  benignant  mind  the  willing  Cow  teeming

with  plenteous  milk,  full,  inexhaustible.

0  thou  invoked  by  many,  day  by  day  I  urge  thee  with  my
word,  a  charger  rapid  in  his  tread.

4  With  eillogy  I  call  on  Rakn  swift  to  hear :  may  she ‘auspicious,

hoar  us,  and  herself  observe.

With  never-breaking  needle  may  she  sow  her  work,  and  give
a  hero  son  most  wealthy,  meet  for  praise.

5  All  thy  kind  thoughts,  0  R\k&,  lovely  in  their  form,  wherewith

thou  gran  test  wealth  to  him  who  offers  gifts —

With  these  come  thou  to  us  this  day  bencvoleut,  0  BlcssM
One,  bestowing  food  of  thousand  sorts.

6  0  broad-tressed  Sinivali,  thou  who  art  the  Sister  of  the  Gods,
Accept  the  offered  sacrifice,  and,  Goddess,  grant  ub  progeny.

7  With  lovely  fingers,  lovely  arms,  prolific  Mother  of  many  sons —
Present  the  sacred  gifts  to  her,  to  Sinivali  Queen  of  men.

8  Her,  Sinivali,  her,  Guugu,  her,  liaka,  her,  Sarasvati,  Indranl

to  mine  aid  I  call,  and  Varunani  for  my  weal.

HYMN  XXXIII.  Rudra.

Father  of  Maruts,  let  thy  bliss  approach  us  :  exclude  us  not
from  looking  on  the  sunlight.

Gracious  to  our  fleet  courser  be  the  Hero:  may  we  transplant **
us,  Rudra,  in  our  children.

2  With  the  most  saving  medicines  which  thou  givest,  Rudra,  may

I  attain  a  hundred  winters.

Far  from  us  banish  enmity  and  hatred,  and  to  all  quarters
maladies  and  trouble.

3  Chief  of  all  born  art  thou  in  glory,  Rudra,  armed  with  the

thunder,  mightiest  of  the  mighty.

Transport  us  over  trouble  to  well-being:  repel  thou  from  us  all
assaults  of  mischief.

4  Let  us  not  anger  thee  with  worsihip,  Rudra,  ill  praise,  Strong

God  !  or  mingled  invocation.

4  RdkA :  the  Goddess  presiding  over  the  actual  day  of  full  moon,  and  appa¬
rently  associated  with  child-birth.

6  Sinivali  .*  a  similar  lunar  Goddess,  who  aids  the  birth  of  children.

8  OungA:  identified  by  SAyana  with  KuhO,  another  lunar  Goddess,  or  the
day  of  conjunction  when  the  moon  rises  invisible.  Indrdnt  and  Vamndnt  are
the  consorts  respectively  of  Indra  and  Varuna.

1  The  Hem ;  Rudra.  According  to  Ludwig :  Let  our  brave  son  be  mighty
with  the  charger.

4  With  worthip:  with  imperfect  worship.  Mingled  indication :  in  which
other  Gods  also,  who  have  no  claim  to  the  particular  oblation,  are  addressed.  •


300  THE  IIYVNS  OP  [ tlOOK  II.

Do  thou  with  strengthening  balms  incite  our  heroes  :  I  hear
thee  famed  as  best  of  all  physicians.

6  May  I  with  praise-songs  win  that  Rudra’s  favour  who  is  adored
with  gifts  and  invocations.

Ne’er  may  the  tawny  God,  fair-cheeked,  and  gracious,  swift-
hearing,  yield  us  to  this  evil  purpose.

6  The  Strong,  begirt  by  M  a  ruts,  hath  refreshed  me,  with  most

invigorating  food,  imploriug.

As  he  who  finds  a  shade  in  fervent  sunlight  may  I,  uninjured,
win  the  bliss  of  Rudra.

7  Where  is  that  gracious  hand  of  thine,  0  Rudra,  the  hand  that

giveth  health  aud  bringeth  comfort,

Remover  of  the  woe  that  Gods  have  sent  us  ?  0  Strong  One,
look  thou  on  mo  with  compassion.

8  To  him  the  strong,  great,  tawny,  fair-coroplexioned,  I  titter

forth  a  mighty  hymn  of  praises.

We  serve  the  brilliant  God  with  adorations,  we  glorify  tho
splendid  name  of  Rudra

9  With  firm  limbs,  multiform,  the  strong,  the  tawny  adorns  him¬

self  with  bright  gold  decorations :

The  strength  of  Godhead  ne’er  departs  from  Rudra,  him  who
is  Sovran  of  this  world,  the  mighty.

10  Worthy,  thou  earnest  thy  bow  and  arrows,  worthy,  thy  many-

hued  and  honoured  necklace.

Worthy,  thou  cuttest  here  each  fiend  to  pieces :  a  mightier
than  thou  there  is  not,  Rudra,

11  Praise  him  the  chariot-borne,  the  young,  the  famous,  fierco,

slaying  like  a  dread  beast  of  the  forest.

O  Rudra,  praised,  be  gracious  to  the  singer :  let  thy  hosts
spare  us  and  smite  down  another.

12  I  bond  to  thee  as  thou  approaches',  Rudra,  even  as  a  boy  be¬

fore  the  sire  who  greets  him.

I  praise  thee  Bounteous  Giver,  Lord  of  heroes  :  give  medicines
to  us  as  thou  art  lauded.

IS  Of  your  pure  medicines,  0  potent  Maruts,  those  that  are
wholesomest  and  health  bestowing,

Those  which  our  father  Manu  hath  selected,  I  crave  from
Rudra  for  our  gain  aud  welfare.

5  Yield  ut  to  this  evil  purpose :  give  us  up  to  the  malice  of  our  enemy.

6  The  Strong :  or  tho  Bull,  Rudra,  occotn|>amcd  by  his  sons  the  Maruts.

8  Pair-comp/ezioned :  the  white  complexion  of  J-liva.  the  later  representative
of  Rudra,  has,  therefore,  as  Wilson  observes,  its  origin  in  the  Uigveda.

13  Those  which  our  father  Manu  hath  lelected  :  Wilson  obterves  that  ‘this
&U  udes  to  the  vegetable  seeds  which  Manu,  according  to  the  MahdLhdtutax


THE  RIO  VEDA.


JIYMX  34.]


301


14  May  Rudra’s  missile  turn  aside  and  spare  us,  the  great  wrath

of  the  impetuous  One  avoid  us.

Turn,  Bounteous  God,  thy  strong  bow  from  our  princes,  and
he  thou  gracious  to  our  seed  and  offspring.

15  0  taxvnv  Bull,  thus  showing  forth  thy  nature,  as  neither  to

bo  wroth,  0  God,  nor  slay  us,

Hero,  Rudra,  listen  to  our  invocation.  Loud  may  wo  speak,
with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXXIV.  Maruts.

The  Maruts  of  resistless  might  who  love  the  rain,  resplendent,
terrible  like  wild  beasts  in  their  strength,

Glowing  like  flames  of  fire,  impetuous  in  career,  blowing  the
wandering  nun-cloud,  have  disclosed  the  kine.

2  They  gleam  with  armlets  as  the  heavens  are  decked  with  stars,

like  cloud-born  lightnings  shine  the  torrents  of  thoir  rain,
Since  the  strong  Rudra,  0  Maruts  with  brilliant  ehests,  sprang
into  life  for  you  in  Prisui's  radiant  lap.

3  They  drip  like  horses  in  the  racings  of  swift  steeds ;  with  the

stream’s  rapid  ears  they  hasten  on  their  way.

Maruts  with  helms  of  gold,  ye  who  make  all  things  shake,
come  with  your  spotted  deer,  ouc-inindcd,  to  our  food.

4  They  have  bestowed  on  Mitra  all  that  live,  to  feed,  they  who

for  evermore  cause  their  swift  drops  to  flow  :

Whose  steeds  are  spotted  deer,  whose  riches  never  fail,  like
horses  in  full  speed,  bound  to  the  polo  in  works

5  With  brightly-flaming  kine  whose  udders  swell  with  milk,

with  glittering  lances  on  your  unobstructed  paths,


was  directed  to  take  with  him  into  the  vessol  lu  which  he  was  preserved  at
the  time  of  the  deluge.’

14  Our  prince*  :  our  wealthy  patron*,  the  institutors  of  our  sacrifices.

1  Have  disclosed  (he  line :  ‘  give  vent  to  it*  (collected)  rain.’— Wilson.

2  PrinuCs  radiant  Utp :  Prism  the  mother  of  the  Maruts,  probably  •  Uic
speckled  cloud,’  is,  according  to  Sdyanu,  the  Earth  who  in  the  form  of  a
brindled  cow  was  impregnated  by  ltudra.

3  With  the  stream's  rapid  ears  :  ‘  The  waves  raised  by  tho  storm  may  !>«
regarded  tu  the  ears  with  which  the  stream  H-Ioiir  to  the  roaring  of  the
tempest. ’ — Ludwig.  Wilson,  after  SAyana,  parapbrnsos :  '  and  they  rush  along
with  swift  (hur-sos)  on  tho  skirts  of  the  sounding  (cloud).’

4  The  mcaniug  of  the  first  line  is  not  clear.  Wilson  renders  it :  ‘The
prompt-giving  Maruts  ever  confer  upon  the  (offerer  of  .sacrificial)  food,  os
upon  a  friend,  all  these  (world-supporting)  waters,’

Hound  to  (he  pole  in  irorls :  carrying  on  their  appointed  duties  as  horses
draw  the  chariot  to  whose  pole  they  are  harjicwcd.

5  IViCk  bright! y-fiaminy  line:  cloudB  that  emit  flashes  of  lightning  before
they  pour  down  their  stores  of  fertilizing  rain.


302  THE  H  7MHS  OP  [BOOK  it.

0  Maruts,  of  one  mind,  like  swans  who  seek  their  nests,  come
to  the  rapturous  enjoyment  of  the  meath.

6  To  these  our  prayers,  0  Maruts,  come  unanimous,  come  ye  to

our  libations  like  the  praise  of  men.  *

Make  it  swell  like  a  mare,  .in  udder  like  a  cow,  and  for  the
singer  grace  the  song  with  plenteous  strength.

7  Give  ns  a  steed,  0  Maruts,  migbty  in  the  car ;  prevailing  prayer

that  brings  remembrance  day  by  day ;

Food  to  your  praisers,  to  your  bard  in  deeds  of  might  give
winning  wisdom,  power  uninjured,  unsurpassed.

8  When  the  bright-chested  Maruts,  lavish  of  their  gifts,  bind  at

the  time  of  bliss  their  horses  to  the  cars,

Then,  as  the  milch-cow  feeds  her  calf  within  the  stalls,  they
pour  forth  food  for  all  oblation-bringing  men.

9  Save  us,  0  Maruts,  Vasus,  from  the  injurcr,  the  mortal  foe

who  makes  us  looked  upon  as  wolves.

With  chariot  all  aflame  compass  him  round  about :  0  Rudras,
cast  away  the  foeman's  deadly  bolt.

10  Well-known,  ye  MAruts,  is  that  wondrous  course  of  yours,  when

they  milked  Prisni’s  udder,  close  akin  to  her.

Or  when  to  shame  the  hard  who  lauded,  Rudra’s  Sons,  ye  tho
infallible  brought  Trita  to  decay.

11  We  call  you,  such,  great  Maruts,  following  wonted  ways,  to

the  oblation  paid  to  Vishnu  Speeder-on.

With  ladles  lifted  up,  with  prayer,  we  seek  of  them  preeminent,
golden-hued,  the  wealth  which  all  extol.


6  Lite  the  praise  of  men  :  which  attends  pious  worshippers.

Make  it  swell :  make  our  sacred  song  effectual,  metaphorically  full  of  inilk.
Prof.  M.  MUller  would  read  attSm  instead  of  dfcdm :  '  Fulfil  (our  prayer)  like
the  udder  of  a  barreu  cow.’

7  Bring*  rtmmbrunce :  makes  tho  Gods  remember  us.

10  Prisni  here  i-  the  firmament,  and  her  udder  is  the  cloud  from  which
the  Maruts  drew  the  rain.  There  is  a  very  abrupt  change  from  the  second
person  to  the  third,  from  '  ye  ’  to  ‘  they.’

1  can  make  nothing  of  the  second  hemistich.  Wilson  paraphr^ea  it : '  You
(destroyed)  the  revilcr  of  your  worshipper,  and  (came),  irresistible  sons  of
Rudra,  to  Trita  for  the  destruction  of  his  enemies.’  Trita  is  said  by  Sdyana  to
be  a  Uiehi.  Ludwig  in  his  note  on  the  passage  takes  Trita  to  be  a  name  of
the  Soma.

11  Vishnu  Speeder-on:  who  runs  his  rapid  course  round  heaven.  S&vana
explains  Vishnu  to  mean  ‘  the  diffusiva  and  desirable  Soma.’  Perhaj*,  as
Ludwig  thinks,  sacrifice  in  general  is  intended,  of  which  Vishnu  is  the  repre¬
sentative.


HYMN  35.]


THE  RIQVE DA.


12  They,  the  Dasagvas,  first  of  all  brought  sacrifice  :  they  at  the

break  of  mornings  shall  inspirit  us.

Dawn  with  her  purple  beams  uncovercth  the  nights,  with
great  light  glowing  like  a  billowy  sea  of  milk.

13  The  Rudras  havo  rejoiced  them  in  the  gathered  bands  at  seats

of  worship  as  in  purple  ornaments.

They  with  impetuous  vigour  sending  down  the  rain  have  taken
to  themselves  a  bright  and  lovely  hue.

1 4  Soliciting  their  high  protection  for  our  help,  with  this  our  adora¬

tion  wo  sing  praise  to  them,

Whom,  for  assistance,  like  the  five  terrestrial  priests,  Trita
hath  brought  to  aid  us  hither  on  his  car.

15  So  may  your  favouring  help  he  turned  to  us-ward,  your  kind¬

ness  like  a  lowing  cow  approach  us,

Wherewith  ye  bear  your  servant  over  trouble,  and  free  your
worshipper  from  scoff  and  scorning.

HYMN  XXXV.  Son  of  Waters.

Eaqkr  for  spoil  my  flow  of  speech  I  utter :  may  the  Floods’
Child  accept  my  songs  with  favour.

Will  not  the  rapid  Son  of  Waters  make  them  lovely,  for  lie  it
is  who  shall  enjoy  them  ?

2  To  him  let  us  address  the  song  well-fashioued,  forth  from  the

heart.  Shall  he  not  understand  it?

The  friendly  Son  of  Waters  by  the  greatness  of  Godhead
hath  produced  all  things  existing.

3  Some  floods  unite  themselves  and  others  join  them :  the

sounding  rivers  fill  one  common  storehouse.

Ou  every  side  the  bright  Floods  have  encompassed  the  bright
resplendent  Offspring  of  the  Waters.

4  The  never-8ullen  waters,  youthful  Maidens,  carefully  decking,

wait  on  him  the  youthful.

He  with  bright  rays  shines  forth  in  splendid  beauty,  unfed
with  wood,  in  waters,  oil-enveloped.


12  The  Zfoqigpag  :  the  Maruts  are  here  said  to  have  been  the  first  performers
of  sacrifice,  the  true  Dasagvaa.  The  priest*  so  called  belonged  originally  to  tho
race  or  school  of  Angiras.

14  Tho  second  hemistich  is  very  obscure.  SAyana’s  explanation  (see  Wilson;
is  altogether  unsatisfactory.

'  1  The  Floods'  Child  :  or  Son  of  the  Waters,  ApAmnapAt,  a  name  of  Agni  as
born  in  the  form  of  lightning  from  the  waters  of  the  aerial  ocean  or  firmament.
Make  them  lovely :  grace  them  with  acceptance.


304  TITI?  IIYMNS  OP  [POOH  IT.

5  To  him  three  Dames  are  offering  food  to  fee  l  him.  Goddesses

to  the  God  whom  none  may  injure.

Within  tho  waters  hath  he  pressed,  as  hollows,  and  drinks
their  milk  who  now  are  first  made  mothers.

6  Hero  was  the  horse’s  birth  ;  his  was  the  sunlight.  Save  thou

our  princes  from  the  oppressor’s  onslaught.

Him,  indestructible,  dwelling  at  a  distance  in  forts  unwrought
lies  and  ill  spirits  reach  not.

7  He,  in  whose  mansion  is  the  teeming  Milch-cow,  swells  the

Gods’  nectar  and  eats  noble  viands.

The  Son  of  Waters,  gathering  strength  in  waters,  shines  for  his
worshipper  to  g.vc  him  treasures.

8  He  who  iu  waters  with  his  own  pure  Godhead  shines  widely,

law-abiding,  everlasting —

The  other  worlds  are  verily  his  branches,  and  plants  are  bom
of  him  with  all  their  offspring.

9  The  Waters’  Son  hath  risen,  and  clothed  in  lightning  ascended

up  unto  the  curled  cloud’s  bosom  ;

And  bearing  with  them  his  supremest  glory  the  Youthful  Onos,
gold-coloured,  move  around  him.

10  Golden  iu  form  is  lie,  like  gold  to  look  on,  his  colour  is  like

gold,  the  Son  of  Waters.

When  he  is  seated  fresh  from  golden  birth-place  those  who
present  their  gold  give  food  to  feed  him.

1 1  This  the  fair  name  and  this  the  lovoly  aspect  of  him  the  Waters’

Son  increase  in  secret.

Whom  here  the  youthful  Maids  together  kindle,  his  food  is
sacred  oil  of  golden  colour.

12  Him,  nearest  Friend  of  many,  will  we  worship  with  sacrifice

and  reverence  and  oblation.

5  Thru  Dames :  IJA,  Sarasvati,  ami  liit&rati,  the  personifications  of  sacred
prayer  and  worship.  Within  the  toulers :  Agni  dwelt  within  the  waters  ns  their
unborn  babe.

6  Here  vxis  the  horse's  birth:  the  production  of  tho  rapid  lightning,  or  perhajviof
the  Sun ;  but  tho  meaning  ia  doubtful.  The  expression  may.  as  Ludwig  suggest*,
refer  to  the  creation  of  the  natural  horse  as  a  descendant  of  tho  original
heavenly  horse.  His  teas  the  sunlight :  Apilnmap&t's  or  Agui's.  In  forts  un •
wrought:  in  the  castles  of  the  clouds  as  opposed  to  thestono  strongholds  of  men.

9  The  Youthful  Ones :  the  rivers  or  waters  of  the  aerial  ocean.

ID  Golden  inform :  when  wearing  the  shape  of  lightning.  Those  i  oho  present,
their  (told  :  tho  i n it i tutors  of  sacrifice  who  reward  the  priest*.

11  In  secret:  AMmnai&t,  the  celestial  Agni,  increases  and  grows  strong  with¬
out  men  seeing  the  process.  The  terrestrial  Agni  is  kindled  and  tended  by  tho
*ist«r  fingers  and  fed  with  oil  or  clarified  butter.

12  Neural  Friend  of  many :  lowest  down,  and  so  nearest  to  nieu,  of  ali  tho
Gods.  Make  his  buck  to  shine:  with  butter  offered  in  sacrifice.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  36.]

I  make  his  back  to  shine,  with  chips  provide  him ;  I  offer  food,
and  with  my  songs  exalt  him.

13  The  Bull  bath  laid  his  own  life-germ  within  them.  He  sucks

them  as  an  infant,  and  they  kiss  him.

He,  Son  of  Waters,  of  unfading  colour,  hath  entered  here  as  in
another's  body.

14  While  here  he  dwelleth  in  sublimcst  station,  resplendent  with

the  rays  that  never  perish,

The  Waters,  bearing  oil  to  feed  their  offspring,  flow,  Youthful
Ones,  in  wanderings  about  him.

15  Agni,  I  gave  good  shelter  to  the  people,  and  to  the  princes

goodly  preparation.

Blessfei  is  all  that  Gods  regard  with  favour.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XXXVI.  Various  God*.

Water  and  milk  hath  he  endued,  sent  forth  to  thee  :  the  men
have  drained  him  with  the  filters  and  the  stones.

Drink,  Indra,  from  the  Hotar’s  bowl — first  right  is  thine—
Soma  hallowed  and  poured  with  Vashat  and  Svahd.

2  Busied  with  sacrifice,  with  spotted  deer  and  spears,  gleaming

upon  your  way  with  ornaments,  yea,  our  Frionds,

Sitting  on  sacred  grass,  ye  Sons  of  Bharata,  drink  Soma  from
the  Potar’s  bowl,  0  Men  of  heaven.

3  Come  unto  us,  ye  swift  to  listen  :  as  at  homo  upon  the  sacred

grass  sit  and  enjoy  yourselves.

And,  Tvashtar,  well-content  be  joyful  in  the  juice  with  Gods
and  Goddesses  in  gladsome  company.


13  Within  them:  within  the  water*.  The  Bull  :  apparently  Agni  himself.

At  in  another's  body :  that  ia,  fire  originally  celestial  as  Ap&rouapAt,  has  come
to  men  as  terrestrial  and  sacrificial  fire,  contained  in  the  wooden  drill  from
which  it  is  produced  by  friction.

1 6  As  the  result  of  my  hymns  to  Agni  our  poople  have  dwelt  safely,  and
our  wealthy  men  have  been  enabled  to  offer  well-conducted  sacrifices.


1  The  Soma  juice  haa  been  pressod  out  with  the  stones,  strained  through
the  filters,  and  then  mixod  with  water  and  milk  before  it  is  offered  to  Indra.
The  H-o tar  t  bowl :  the  sacred  vessel  held  by  the  Hotar  or  Hotji,  one  of  the
chief  officiating  priests.

Vashat  and  Sodkd,  meaning  respectively  *  may  he  (Agni)  bear  it  (to  the
Gods)’  and  Ave  !  or  Hail  !  are  words  of  consecration  and  blessing  used  when
oblations  are  offered.

2  Sons  of  Bharata :  the  Maruts,  sons  of  Rudra  the  Warrior.  Potar  :
etymologically,  Cleanser,  the  title  of  another  of  the  priests.

20


306  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  II.

4  Bring  the  Gods  hither,  Sage,  and  offer  sacrifice :  at  the  three

altars  seat  thee  willingly,  0  Priest.

Accept  for  thy  delight  the  proffered  Soma  meath :  drink  from
the  Kindler’s  bowl  and  fill  thee  with  thy  share.

5  This  is  the  strengthener  of  thy  body’s  manly  might :  strength,

victory  for  all  time  are  placed  within  thine  arms.

Pressed  for  thee,  Maghavan,  it  is  offered  unto  thee  :  drink  from
the  chalice  of  this  Brahman,  drink  thy  fill.

6  Accept  the  sacrifice ;  mark,  both  of  you,  my  call :  the  Priest

hath  seated  him  after  the  ancient  texts.

My  prayer  that  bids  them  come  goes  forth  to  both  the  Kings :
drink  ye  the  Soma  meath  from  the  Director’s  bowl.

HYMN  XXXVII.  Various  Gods.

Enjoy  thy  fill  of  meath  out  of  the  Hotair’s  cup  :  Adhvaryus,
he  desires  a  full  draught  poured  for  him.

Bring  it  him  :  seeking  this  he  gives.  Granter  of  Wealth,
drink  Soma  with  the  Ritus  from  the  Hotar's  cup.

2  He  whom  of  old  I  called  on,  him  I  call  on  now.  He  is  to  be

invoked ;  his  name  is  He  who  Gives.

Here  brought  by  priests  is  Soma  meath.  Granter  of  Wealth,
drink  Soma  with  the  Ritus  from  the  Potar’s  cup.

3  Fat  may  the  horses  be  wherewith  thou  speedest  on :  Lord  of

the  Wood,  unharming,  strengthen  thou  thyself.

Drawing  and  seizing.  Bold  One,  thou  who  gran  test  wealth,  drink
Soma  with  the  Ritus  from  the  Neshtar’s  cup.

4  From  Hotar’s  cup  and  Potar’s  he  hath  drunk  and  joyed  :  the

proffered  food  hath  pleased  him  from  the  Neshtar’s  bowl.

The  fourth  cup  undisturbed,  immortal,  let  him  drink  who  giveth
wealth,  the  cup  of  the  wealth-giving  God.

5  Yoke,  0  ye  Twain,  to-day  your  hero-bearing  car,  swift-moving

hitherward :  your  looeing-place  is  here.

Mix  the  oblations,  then  come  hither  with  the  meath,  and  drink
the  Soma,  ye  rich  in  abundant  strength.

4  Sage  :  Agni.  The  Kindlcr :  the  Agntdh,  the  priest  who  lights  the  fire.
The  thru  altars :  of  the  GArhapatya,  AhavanSya,  and  Dakshina  fires.

6  Both  the  Kings :  Mitra  and  Varuna.  The  Director :  PraBAatar,  another
priest,  first  assistant  of  the  Hotar.

1  Agni  is  addressed  as  DravinodAs  or  Wealth-giver.  Adhvaryus :  minister¬
ing  priests.  Tfu  Ritus :  the  Seasons  or  the  deities  presiding  over  the  Seasons.
See  1.  15.

3  *2*$  [ht  W°°i  •  ASni-  re8an*e<i  <*  the  King  of  plants.  The  Neshtar's
eup  .-the  Neshtar  a  the  priest  who  leads  forward  the  wife  of  the  sacrificer.  •
•.fi  0  ye  Twain ;  Asvins.


HYMN  38.]  .  THE  RIQVEDA.  397

6  Agni,  accept  the  fuel  and  our  offered  gift:  accept  the  prayer  of
man,  accept  our  eulogy.

Do  thou  with  all,  with  Ritu,  0  thou  Excellent,  fain,  make  the
great  Gods  all  fain  taste  the  gift  we  bring.

HYMN  XXXVIII.  *  SavitM,

Uprisen  is  Savitar,  this  God,  to  quicken,  Priest  who  neglects
not  this  most  constant  duty.

To  the  Gods,  verily,  he  gives  rich  treasure,  and  blesses  him
who  calls  them  to  the  banquet.

2  Having  gone  up  on  high,  the  God  broad-handed  spreads  his

arms  widely  forth  that  all  may  mark  him.

Even  the  waters  bend  them  to  his  service  :  even  this  wind  rests
in  the  circling  region.

3  Though  borne  by  swift  steeds  he  will  yet  unyoke  them  :  e’en

the  fleet  chariot  hath  he  stayed  from  going.

He  hath  chocked  e’en  their  haste  who  glide  like  serpents.
Night  closely  followed  Savitar’s  dominion.

4  What  was  spread  out  she  weaves  afresh,  re-weaving  :  the  skilful

leavos  his  labour  half-completed.

He  hath  arisen  from  rest,  and  parted  seasons :  Savitar  hath
approached,  God,  holy-minded.

5  Through  various  dwellings,  through  entire  existence,  spreads,

manifest,  the  household  light  of  Agni.

The  Mother  gives  her  Son  the  goodliest  portion,  and  Savitar
hath  sped  to  meet  his  summons.

6  With  all,  with  RUu  :  the  meaning  is,  apparently,  with  all  the  Ritua  ;  but
?itu  in  the  text  is  in  the  singular  number.

1  To  quieten :  the  meaning  of  Savitar,  as  a  name  of  the  Sun,  being  the  great
generator  or  vivifier.  Priest:  vdhnih;  or,  perhaps,  the  supporter,  or,  the  luminous.

3  Their  haste  who  glide  like  serpents :  the  speed  of  the  fleet-footed  horses
who  draw  the  chariot  of  the  Sun.

4  The  meaning  of  this  stanza  is  obscure.  I  have  given  what  appears  to  be
the  sense  of  the  words  aa  they  stand,  but  the  verse,  as  a  whole,  is  scarcely  in-  .
telligible.  Wilson,  following  Sftyana,  paraphrases  it  thus:  ' She  (Night ),  en¬
wraps  the  extended  (world)  like  (a  woman)  weaving  (a  garment) :  the  prudent
man  lays  aside  the  work  he  is  able  (to  execute)  in  the  midst  (of  hia  labour) :
but  all  spring  up  (from  repose)  when  the  divino,  unwearied  Sun,  who  has  divid¬
ed  the  seasons,  again  appears.’  Roth  takes  artinuUih,  which  I  have  rendered
by  holy-mindod,  as  a  sub  stantivc,  the  Genius  of  Devotion,  and  translates  :
‘Again  had  the  Weaver  (Aramati)  drawn  in  what  she  had  spun  out  (the  web
or  tissue  of  devotion  and  sacrifice),  the  devout  man  had  left  off  in  the  midst  of.
his  task  (at  the  approach  of  night);  then  Aramati  arises  anew  and  arranges  the
seasons :  the  divine  Savitar  is  present  (L  e.  morning  returns).’

'  5  The  Mother :  Ushas  or  Dawn  assigns  to  her  Son  Agni  the  Agnihotra  rite
which  is  performed  at  day-break,  and  Savitar,  or  the  rising  Sun,  is  present  at.
the  ceremony  after  the  lighting  of  the  sacrificial  fire.  Thus  Agni  is  honoured
by  deities  in  heaven  as  well  as  by  men  on  earth.


303  THB  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  II.

6  Ho  comes  again,  unfolded,  fain  for  conquest :  at  homo  was  he,

the  love  of  all  things  moving.

Each  man  hath  come  leaving  bis  evil  doings,  after  the  Godlike
Savitar’s  commandment,

7  The  wild  beasts  spread  through  desert  places  seeking  their

watery  share  which  thou  hast  set  in  waters.

The  woods  are  given  to  the  birds.  These  statutes  of  the  God
Savitar  none  disobeyetb.

8  With  utmost  speed,  in  restless  haste  at  sunset  Varuna  seeks

his  watery  habitation.

Then  seeks  each  bird  his  nest,  each  beast  his  lodging.  In  duo
place  Savitar  hath  set  each  creature.

9  Him  whose  high  law  uot  Varuna  nor  Indra,  not  Mitra,  Arya-

man,  nor  Rudra  breaketh,

Nor  evil-hearted  fiends,  here  for  my  welfare  him  I  invoke,
God  Savitar,  with  worship.

10  May  they  who  strengthen  bliss,  and  thought  and  wisdom,  and

the  Dames’  Lord  and  Narasansa  aid  us.

That  good  may  come  to  us  and  wealth  be  gathered,  may  we
be  Savitar  the  God’s  belovid.

11  So  come  to  us  our  hearts’  desire,  the  bounty  bestowed  by  thee,

from  heaven  and  earth  and  waters,

That  it  be  well  with  friends  and  those  who  praise  thee,  and,
Savitar,  with  the  loud-lauding  singer.

HYMN  XXXIX.  Aavinn.

Sing  liko  the  two  press-stones  for  this  same  purpose ;  come
like  two  misers  to  the  tree  of  treasure ;

Like  two  laud-singing  Brahmans  in  the  assembly,  liko  the
folk’s  envoys  called  in  many  places.

'  6  Hi  comet  again  :  Agni,  re-kindled  in  the  morning,  resumes  his  full  power.
He,  whom  all  living  beings  love,  was  present,  but  Intent,  during  the  night.

'  7  Savitar  provides  for  the  wild  beasts  of  tlio  deaert  nnd  for  the  birds  of  the  air.

8  Though  not  generally  regarded  in  the  Veda  as  the  Qod  of  the  ocean,
Varuna  ia  yet  frequently  connected  with  the  waters,  either  of  the  firmament
or  of  earth.

10  They  vho  strengthen  bliss  :  the  Gods  in  general.  The  Dames'  Lord:  the
guardian  of  the  consorts  of  the  Gods,  Tvashtar,  who  is  generally  represented
as  Rttcnding  or  attended  by  them.

•  Xardftnsa *  the  Praise  of  Men,’  a  name  of  Agni.

1  In  this  hymn  the  Aevins  are  compared  to  a  number  of  objects,  animate
and  inanimate,  in  many  of  which  the  only  point  of  resemblance  is  duality.

like  the  two  press -stones:  may  your  auspicious  brightness  as  you  approach
be  as  clear  as  tho  ringing  sound  of  the  presa-stonee,  and  may  similar  blessings
reward  the  worshippers.  *  '


THE  R1QYEDA.


HYMN  40.]


309


2  Moving  at  morning  like  two  car-borne  heroes,  like  to  a  pair  of

goats  ye  come  electing  ;  +

Like  two  fair  dames -embellishing  their  bodies,  like  a  wise  mar¬
ried  pair  among  the  people.

3  Like  to  a  pair  of  horns  come  first  to  us- ward,  like  to  a  pair  of

hoofs  with  rapid  motion ;

Como  like  two  Chakwas  in  the  grey  of  morning,  come  like  two
ohariot  wheels  at  dawn,  ye  Mighty.

4  Bear  us  across  the  rivers  like  two  vessels,  save  us  as  ye  were

yokes,  naves,  spokes,  and  fellies.

Be  like  two  dogs  that  injure  not  our  bodies ;  preserve  us,  like
two  crutches,  that  wo  fall  not.

5  Like  two  winds  agoing  not,  two  confluent  rivers,  come  with

quick  vision  like  two  eyes  before  us.

Come  like  two  hands  most  helpful  to  tho  body,  and  guide  us
like  two  feet  to  what  is  precious.

6  Even  as  two  lips  that  with  the  mouth  speak  honey,  even  as

two  breasts  that  nourish  our  existence,

Like  the  two  nostrils  that  protect  our  being,  be  to  us  as  our
ears  that  hear  distinctly.

7  Like  two  hands  give  ye  us  increasing  vigour ;  like  heavon  and

earth  constrain  tho  airy  regions.

Asvins,  those  hymns  that  struggle  to  approach  you,  sharpen  ye
like  an  axe  upon  a  whetstone.

8  These  prayers  of  ours  exalting  you,  0  Asvins,  have  the  Gjitsa-

madas,  for  a  laud,  made  ready.

Welcome  them,  0  ye  Heroes,  and  come ’hither.  Loud  may  wo
speak,  with  brave.men,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XL.  Soma  and  POshan.


Soma  and  Pflshan,  Parents  of  all  riches,  Parents  of  earth  and
Parents  of  high  heaven,

Like  t\co  miters  to  the  tree  of  treasure  :  a3  misers  come  to  dig  up  the  gold
they  have  buried  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,  eo  come  yo  to  the  libation  made  of  the
juice  of  tho  precious  Soma  plant.  The  folk’s  envoys:  the  messengers  whom  the  ins-
titutors  of  sacrifices  send  to  tho  priest*  when  they  wish  to.  secure  their  servioca

2  Ye  come  electing ;  to  choose  and  accept  the  offerings  made.

3  ChakioAs :  the  Chakravaka,  or  as  it  is  now  called  in  Hindi,  the  Chakwi,

iB  a  bird  frequently  mentioned  in  later  poetry  as  a  type  oi  love  and  constancy.
Tho  male  bird  and  his  mate  are  condemned  to  spend  their  nighta  on  opposite
banks  of  a  river,  and  are  allowed  to  moot  again  in  tho  early  morning.  The
English  namo  of  the  bird  is  Brahmany  duck.  Chakwi  is  properly  tho  male
bird,  and  Chakwi  the  female.  -

1  Soma :  addressed  in  tbia  hymn  is  the  God  who  represents  and  animates
the  juice  of  tho  Soma  plant.  See  I.  18.  4.

S  *1**42  *  8°lar  d0*ty  Wh°  pr0lCCt*  aad  multiPliM  caMo  and  other  property.


310  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  tt

You  Twaiu,  brought  forth  as  the  whole  world’s  protectors,  the
Gods  have  made  centre  of  life  eternal.

2  At.  birth  of  these  two  Gods  all  Gods  are  joyful :  they  have

caused  darkness,  which  we  hate,  to  vanish.

With  these,  with  Soma  and  with  Pushan,  Indra  generates  ripe
warm  milk  in  the  raw  milch-cows.

3  Soma  and  Pushan,  urge  your  chariot  hither,  the  seven-wheeled

car  that  measures  out  the  region,

That  stirs  not  all,  that  moves  to  every  quarter,  five-reined  and
harnessed  by  the  thought,  ye  Mighty.

4  One  in  the  heaven  on  high  hath  made  his  dwelling,  on  earth

and  in  the  firmament  the  other.

May  they  disclose  to  us  great  store  of  treasure,  much-longed-
for,  rich  in  food,  source  of  enjoyment.

5  One  of  you  Twain  is  Parent  of  all  creatures,  the  other  journeys

onward  all-beholding.

Soma  and  Pushan,  aid  my  thought  with  favour :  with  you  may
we  o’ercome  in  all  encounters.

6  May  Pushan  stir  our  thought,  the  all-impelling,  may  Soma

Lord  of  riches  grant  us  riches.

May  Aditi  the  perfect  Goddess  aid  us.  Loud  may  we  speak,
with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XLI.  Various  Deities.

0  Vayu,  come  to  us  with  all  the  thousand  chariots  that  are
thine,

'  •*  Team-borne,  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

2  Drawn  by  thy  team,  0  Viyu,  come ;  to  thee  is  offered  this,

•  •  the  pure.

Thou  visitest  the  presser’s  house.

3  Indra  and  Vayu,  drawn  by  teams,  ye  Heroes,  come  to-day  and

:  drink

Of  the  bright  juice  when  blent  with  milk.

2  Ripe  warm  milk :  gee  I.  62.  9.

3  That  itin  not  all :  that  moves  and  influences  the  highest  beings  only.

4  One  in  the  heaven  on  high :  Ptlshan,  as  a  celestial  God.  The  other:  Soma,
-who  dwell*  on  earth  in  plants,  and  in  the  firmament  as  the  Moon.

•  5  One  of  you  :  Soma.  With  allusion,  perhaps,  to  the  libations  of  Soma  juice
which  produce  the  min  upon  which  the  production  and  growth  of  all  creatures
depend.  All-beholding .-  as  a  solar  deity,  or  the  Sun.

1  Vdyu,  the  God  of  wind,  is  addressed  in  tho  first  two  stanzas.  In  those
'  that  follow  the  poet  invokes  Indra  and  Vftyu,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  the  Asrins,
Indra',  the  Visvedevos,  Saraavatl,  and  Heaven  and  Earth,  .

*


I/YMN  41.)  THE  MOVED  A.


311


4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15
-/l6


This  Soma  hath  been  shed  for  you,  Law-strengtheners,  Mitra-
Varuna !

Listen  ye  here  to  this  my  call.

Both  Kings  who  never  injure  aught  seat  thom'in  their  suprem-
"~eat  home,

The  thousand-pillared,  firmly-based.

Fed  with  oblation,  Sovran  Kings,  Adityas,  Lords  of  liberal  gifts,

They  wait  on  him  whose  life  is  true.

With  kine,  Nitsatyas,  and  with  steeds,  come,  Asvins,  Rudras,
to  the  house

That  will  protect  its  heroes  well ;

Such,  wealthy  Gods !  as  none  afar  nor  standing  nigh  to  us
may  harm,

Yea,  no  malicious  mortal  foe.

As  such,  0  longed-for  Asvins,  lead  us  on  to  wealth  of  varied
sort,

Wealth  that  shall  bring  us  room  and  rest.

Verily  Indra,  conquering  all,  driveth  e’en  mighty  fear  away,

For  firm  is  he  and  swift  to  act.

Indra  be  gracious  unto  us  :  sin  shall  not  roach  us  afterward,

And  good  shall  be  before  us  still.

From  all  the  regions  of  the  world  let  Indra  send  security,

The  foe-subduer,  swift  to  act.

0  all  ye  Gods,  come  hitherward  :  hear  this  mine  invocation,
seat

Yourselves  upon  this  sacred  grass.-

Among  the  Sunahotras  strong  for  you  is  this  6weet  gladdening
draught :

Drink  ye  of  this  delightsome  juice.

Ye  Maruts  led  by  Indra,  Gods  with  PCishan  for  your  bounte-
ousest,

Hear  all  of  you  this  call  of  mine.

Best  Mother,  best  of  Rivers,  best  of  Goddesses,  Sarasvatl,

We  are,  as  ’twero,  of  no  repute :  dear  Mother,  give  thou  us
renown.


14  Antony  the  $unaholrat :  the  family  of  which  \3riteamada,  the  Rishi  of  tho
hymn,  was  a  member.  Cf.  II.  18.  6,  note.

15  With  Pfithanfor  your  bounltousttl :  that  is,  among  whom  Pushan  is  the

most  liberal  giver  of  good  gifts  ;  or  the  meaning  may  be,  whose  benefactor  is
Pu6ban.  ,

18  SaratvaU :  see  I.  3.  10.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  II.


1 7  In  thee,  Sarasvatl,  divine,  all  generations  have  their  stay.

Be  glad  with  Sunabotra’a  sons :  0  Goddess  grant  us  progeny.
38  Enriched  with  sacrifice,  accept  Sarasvatl,  these  prayers  of  ours,
Thoughts  which  Gritsamadas  beloved  of  Gods  bring,  Holy  One,
to  thee.

19  Ye  who  bless  sacrifice,  go  forth,  for  verily  we  choose  you  both,
And  Agni  who  conveys  our  gifts.

20  This  our  effectual  sacrifice,  reaching  the  sky,  shall  Heaven  and

Earth

Present  unto  the  Gods  to-day.

21  In  both  your  laps,  ye  guileless  Ones,  the  Holy  Gods  shall  sit

them  down

To-day  to  drink  the  Soma  here.

HYMN  XLII.  Ktpinjali.

Telling  his  race  aloud  with  cries  repeated,  he  sends  his  voico
out  as  his  boat  a  steersman.

0  Bird,  be  ominous  of  happy  fortune:  from  no  side  may
calamity  befall  thee.

2  Let  not  the  falcon  kill  thee,  nor  the  eagle  :  lot  not  the  arrow¬

bearing  archer  reach  thee.

Still  crying  in  the  region  of  the  Fathers,  speak  here  auspicious,
bearing  joyful  tidings.

3  Bringing  good  tidings,  Bird  of  happy  omen,  call  thou  out  loudly

southward  of  our  dwellings,

So  that  no  thief,  no  sinner  may  oppress  us.  Loud  may  we
speak,  with  heroes,  in  assembly.

HYMN  XL1II.  Kapinjala.

Here  on  the  right  sing  forth  chanters  of  hymns  of  praise,  even
the  winged  birds  that  in  due  season  speak.


19  Ye  who  blest  sacrifice :  according  to  SAyana,  the  two  havirdhdnat  or
vehicles  on  which  the  Soma  and  other  offerings  are  put,  and  which  are  sup¬
posed  to  represent  Heaven  and  Earth,  are  addressed.  It  is  moro  likely,  a*
Ludwig  suggest*,  that  Agni  and  the  human  priest  are  intendod.  *  Wo  choose
you  both,  tbcc,  the  human  priest,  and  Agni  the  God.'

This  Hymn  is  said  to  be  addressed  to  Indra  in  tho  form  of  a  kapinjala,
the  bird  which  we  call  the  Francolino  partridge.

1  He :  the  kapinjala.

2  In  the  region  of  the  Pathert :  towards  the  quarter  where  the  Fathers
Pitaras,  or  spirit*  of  deceased  ancestors  dwell,  that  is,  tho  south,  the  cry  of
birds  from  that  quarter  being  regarded  as  auspicious.

This  Hymn  is  said  to  be  addressed,  liko  the  preceding,  to  Indra  in  tho  form
of  a  kapinjala  or  Francolino  partridge.


*13


BY  MS  43.]  THE  RIO  VEDA,

He,  like  a  Sama-chanter  utters  both  the  notes,  skilled  in  the
mode  of  Trishtup  and  of  G&yatri.

2  Thou  liko  the  chanter-priest  chantest  the  S&ma,  Bird  ;  thou

singest  at  libations  like  a  Brahman’s  son.  •

Even  as  a  vigorous  horse  when  he  comes  near  the  mare,  an-
.  nounce  to  us  good  fortune,  Bird,  on  every  side,  proclaim  in
all  directions  happy  luck,  0  Bird.

3  When  singing  here,  0  Bird,  announce  good  luck  to  us,  and

when  thou  sittest  still  think  on  us  with  kind  thoughts.
When  flying  off  thou  singest  thou  art  like  a  lute.

With  brave  sons  in  assembly  may  we  speak  aloud.


1  Sima  chanttr :  the  Udg&car,  one  of  the  four  chief  priests  whose  duty  ia
to  chant  the  hymns  of  the  Siiuaveda  Both  the  notu  ••  a  high  and  a  middle.
Trithtup  :  the  measure  conaiating  of  forty -four  syllables  in  a  verse  or  stanza  ;
four  PAdae  or  demi-hemistichs  of  eleven  syllables  each.  Odj/atrt :  the  measuro
consisting  of  twenty-four  syllables  in  a  stanza,  three  line-  of  eight  syllables
each,  or  one  line  of  sixteen  and  one  of  eight.

2  A  Prahman'i  ton  :  the  Brahmaputra,  or  Brahman-priest's  son,  is  said  to  be
the  same  as  the  BrdhmauAchchh&ns!,  one  of  the  sixteen  priests,  who  rocites
the  mantra  that  is  not  to  be  sung  or  chanted.


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


HYMN  I.  Agni.

Thou,  Agni,  who  wilt  have  the  strong,  hast  made  me  the  Soma’s
priest,  to  worship  in  assembly.

Thou  shinest  to  the  Gods,  I  set  the  press-stones.  I  toil ;  be
joyful  in  thyself,  0  Agni.

2  East  have  we  turned  the  rite  ;  may  the  hymn  aid  it.  With

wood  and  worship  shall  they  honour  Agni.

From  heaven  the  synods  of  the  wise  have  learnt  it:  e’en  for
the  quick  and  strong  they  seek  advancement.

3  The  Prudent,  he  whose  will  is  pure,  brought  welfare,  allied  by

birth  to  Heaven  and  Earth  in  kinship.

The  Gods  discovered  in  the  midst  of  waters  beautiful  Agni
with  the  Sisters’  labour.

4  Him,  Blessed  One,  the  Seven  strong  Floods  augmented,  him

white  at  birth  and  red  when  waxen  mighty.

As  mother  mares  run  to  their  new-born  youngling,  so  at  his
birth  the  Gods  wondered  at  Agni-


Thc  Hymns  of  Book  III.  are  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  VisvAmitra  or  to  mem¬
bers  of  bis  family.  VisvAmitra  holds  an  important  place  in  Indian  tradition,
according  to  which  he  was  born  a  Kshatriya,  but  by  the  virtue  of  his  intense
austerities  raised  himself  to  the  Brfthmau  caste.  The  rivalry  between  VifvAmitPa
and  the  ltishi  Vanish  tha  is  alluded  to  in  many  passages  of  the  Rigveda,  and,
it  is  thought  that  aa  caate  distinctions  had  not  at  that  time  become  fixed,  the
later  stories  on  the  subject  of  this  rivalry  may  have  roeted  on  a  Vedic  legend
which  says  that  King  SudAa,  having  cm  ployed  Vasishtha  as  his  domestic  priest,
allowed  on  various  occasions  VisvAmitra  also  to  officiate,  which  led  to  jealousies
and  quarrel  between  these  two  functionaries.  The  story  of  VisvAmitra  is  told
at  full  length  in  the  R&mdgana,  I.  51—55,  (Schlcgcl’s  edition,  and  Griffith’s
translation).

The  first  and  eleven  following  hymns  arc  ascribed  to  VisvAmitra  himself.

1  East  have  we  turned  the  rite :  towards  the  region  of  the  Gods  ;  ‘we  have
performed  a  successful  sacrifice.’’ — Wilson.

2  The  quick  and  strong  :  Agni,  according  to  SAyana.  Ludwig  suggests  that
1  the  quick,  or  clever’  may  mean  the  priest,  and  ‘  the  strong '  the  warrior,  the
Moghavan  or  iustitutor  of  the  sacrifice.

3  The  Prudent:  all-knowing  Agni,  son  of  Heaven  and  Earth.

With,  the  Sisters’  labour :  the  meaning  is  not  clear.  Ludwig  suggests  upati
instead  of  apdsi ;  ‘  in  tho  sisters’  bosom,’  in  the  depth  of  the  sister  rivers.


318  TEE  HYMN8  OP  [BOOK  III

5  Spreading  with  radiant  limbs  throughout  the  region,  purging

his  power  with  wise  purifications,

Robing  himself  in  light,  the  life  of  waters,  ho  spreads  abroad
his  high  and  perfect  glories.

6  He  sought  heaven’s  Mighty  Ones,  the  unconsuming,  the  un¬

impaired,  not  clothed  and  yet  not  naked.

Then  they,  ancient  and  young,  who  dwell  together,  Seven  sound¬
ing  Rivers,  as  one  germ  received  him.

7  His  piles,  assuming  every  form,  are  scattered  where  flow  sweet

waters,  at  the  spring  of  fatness ;

There  stood  the  milch-kine  with  full-laden  udders,  and  both
paired  Mighty  Mothers  of  the  Wondrous.

8  Carefully  cherished,  Son  of  Strength,  thou  shonest  assuming

lasting  and  refulgent  beauties.

Full  streams  of  fatness  and  sweet  juice  descended,  there  where
the  Mighty  One  grew  strong  by  wisdom.

9  From  birth  he  knew  even  his  Father’s  bosom,  he  set  his  voices

and  his  streams  in  motion  ;

Knew  him  who  moved  with  blessfed  Friends  in  secret,  with  the
young  Dames  of  heaven.  He  stayed  not  hidden.

10  He  nursed  the  Infant  of  the  Sire  and  Maker  :  alone  the  Babe

sucked  many  a  teeming  bosom.

Guard,  for  the  Bright  and  Strong,  the  fellow-spouses  friendly
to  men  and  bound  to  him  in  kinship.

11  The  Mighty  One  increased  in  space  unbounded;  full  many  a

glorious  flood  gave  strength  to  Agni.  •

Friend  of  the  house,  within  the  lap  of  Order  lay  Agni,  in  the
Sister  Rivers'  service.


0  Heaven’s  mighty  Oats  :  the  water*  above  the  firmament,  the  seven  rivers
of  tho  next  hemistich.  Eat  clothed  and  yet  not  naked  ;  having  only  the  lucid
waters  for  robes.

7  His  piles :  the  heaped  clouds.  Spring  of  fatness the  place  whence  the
fertilizing  rain  Hows.  Tie  milch -bine  also  are  the  laden  clouds,  and  the  paired
Mighty  Mothers  are  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  parents  of  the  Wondrous  Agni.

9  His  Father’s  bosom  :  his  father,  according  to  Siyana,  is  the  firmament  ;
but  as  the  firmament  it  not  represented  in  the  Veda  as  a  God,  Dyaus,  or  Tvash-
Ur,  is  probably  intended,  as  Ludwig  suggests.

The  blessid  Priends  must  be  the  Ribhus,  and  the  young  Dames  the  Gnis  or
consorts  of  the  Gods.  He  stayed  not  hidden :  refers  not  to  Agni  but  to  his
father,  Trashier.

10  He  :  the  father.  Many  a  smelling  boson  :  of  the  celestial  Waters.

The  Bright  and  Strong:  Agni.  The  ftllov- spouses  :  Heaven  and  Earth,  or
Night  and  HorniDg.

11  In  the  Sister  Binrs  service :  or  in  their  boeom,  if  upasi  may  bo  read  for
apdti.


BYMN  1.J  TBS  RJOVBDA.  317

12  As  keen  supporter  where  great  waters  gather,  light-shedder

whom  the  brood  rejoice  to  look  on ;

He  who  begat,  and  will  beget,  the  dawn-lights,  most  manly,
Child  of  Floods,  is  youthful  Agni.

13  Him,  varied  in  his  form,  the  lovely  Infant  of  floods  and  plants

the  blessed  wood  hath  gendered.

Gods  oven,  moved  in  spirit,  came  around  him,  and  served  him
at  his  birth,  the  Strong,  the  Wondrous.

14  Like  brilliant  lightnings,  mighty  luminaries  accompany  the

light-diffusing  Agni,

Waxen,  as  'twere  in  secret,  in  his  dwelling,  while  in  the
boundless  stall  they  milk  out  Amrit.

15  I  sacrificing  serve  thee  with  oblations  and  crave  with  longing

thy  good-will  aud  friendship.

Grant,  with  the  Gods,  thy  grace  to  him  who  lauds  thee,  pro¬
tect  us  with  thy  rays  that  guard  the  homestead.

16  May  we,  0  Agni,  thou  who  loudest  wisely,  thy  followers  and

masters  of  all  treasures,

Strong  in  the  glory  of  our  noble  offspring,  subdue  the  godless
when  they  seek  the  battle.

17  Ensign  of  Gods  hast  thou  become,  0  Agni,  joy-giver,  knower

of  all  secret  wisdom.

Friend  of  the  homestead,  thou  hast  lightened  mortals  :  car-
bjrne  thou  goest  to  the  Gods,  fulfilling.

18  Within  the  house  hath  sate  the  King  Immortal  of  mortals,

filling  full  their  sacred  synods.

Bedewed  with  holy  oil  he  shineth  widely,  Agni,  the  knower  of
all  secret  wisdom.

19  Come  unto  us  with  thine  auspicious  friendship,  come  speeding,

Mighty,  with  thy  mighty  succours.

Grant  us  abundant  wealth  that  saves  from  danger,  that  brings
a  good  repute,  a  glorious  portion.

20  To  thee  who  art  of  old  these  songs,  0  Agni,  have  I  declared,

the  ancient  and  the  later.

These  great  libations  to  the  Strong  are  offered  :  in  every  birth
is  J&tavedas  stablished.

12  The  brood:  par  excellence,  the  host  of  Maruts.

13  The  blati<l  wood:  one  of  the  fire-sticks  by  which  Agni  is  kindled.

14  The  boundless  tlall :  limitless  aerial  spaoc,  Amrit:  water,  according  to
S&yana.

17  Thou  gout  to  the  Q ode,  fulfilling :  completing  our  sacrifices  and  making
them  effectual.

20  Songi :  literally,  births  ;  that  is,  productions.  In  every  birth  ie  Jdtave-
dae  itabliihcd  :  Agni  who  knows  all  life  is  appointed  in  overy  generation  as
the  great  high  priest  who  mediates  betwoon  Gods  aud  men.


318  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  11 /.

21  Stablished  in  every  birth  is  Jatavedas,  kindled  perpetual  by

the  Visv’unitras.

May  we  rest  ever  in  the  loving-kindness,  iu  the  auspicious
grace  of  him  the  Holy.

22  This  sacrifice  of  ours  do  thou,  0  Mighty,  0  truly  Wise,  bear

to  the  Gods  rejoicing.

Grant  us  abundant  food,  thou  priestly  Herald,  vouchsafe  to
give  us  ample  wealth,  OAgni.

23  As  holy  food,  Agni,  to  thine  invoker  give  wealth  in  cattle,

lasting,  rich  in  marvels.

To  us  be  boro  a  son,  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be  this
thy  gracious  will  tp  us-ward.

HYMN  II.  Agni.

To  him,  Vaisv&nara,  who  strengthens  Holy  Law,  to  Agni  we
present  our  praise  like  oil  made  pure.

With  thoughtful  insight  human  priests  bring  him  anear,  our
Herald  from  of  old,  as  an  axe  forms  a  car.

2  He  made  the  heaven  and  earth  resplendent  by  his  birth  :  Child

of  two  Mothers  he  was  meet  to  be  implored,

Agni,  oblation-bearer,  gracious,  ever-young,  infallible,  rich  in
radiant  light,  the  guest  of  men.

3  Within  the  range  of  their  surpassing  power,  by  might,  the

Gods  created  Agni  with  inventive  thought.

I,  eager  to  win  strength,  address  him,  like  a  steed,  resplendent
with  his  brilliance,  with  his  ample  light.

4  Eager  to  gain,  we  crave  from  him  the  frieudly  God  strength

confident,  choice-worthy,  meet  to  be  extolled  :

The  Bhrigus’  bounty,  willing,  strong  with  sages’  lore,  even
Agni  shining  forth  with  light  that  comes  from  heaven.

5  For  happiness,  men,  having  trimmed  the  sacred  grass,  set

Agni  glorious  for  his  strength  before  them  here ;

Yea,  with  raised  ladles,  him  bright,  dear  to  all  the  Gods,
perfecting  aims  of  works,  Rudra  of  solemn  rites.


1  VaitvSnara :  Agni  who  belongs  to  all  men ;  the  God  of  all  Aryan
families

Our  praise :  literally  ‘  the  wish,’  explained  by  Siraca  as  itulim,  that  ia  the
praise  which  thou  wiahest  for  and  which  we  now  offer.*

2  Child  of  two  Mothers :  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  or  of  the  two  fire-sticks.

4  The  Bhrigus'  bounty Agni,  the  treasure  which  the  Bhrigus  received  -
from  Mit&risvan  and  bestowed  on  other  men.

1 5  Endra  :  here  a  synonym*  of  Agni.  See  I.  27.  IP.


hymn  rr.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


319

6  Around  thy  dwelling-place,  0  brightly-shining  Priest,  are  men

at  sacrifice  whose  sacred  grass  is  trimmed.

Wishing  to  do  thee  service,  Agni,  they  are  there,  desirous  of
thy  friendship :  grant  them  store  of  wealth.

7  He  hath  filled  heaven  and  earth  and  the  great  realm  of  light,

when  at  his  birth  the  skilful  held  him  in  their  hold.

He  like  a  horse  is  led  forth  to  the  sacrifice,  Sage,  graciously
inclined,  that  he  may  win  us  strength.

8  Honour  the  oblation-bearer,  him  who  knows  fair  rites,  serve

ye  the  Household  Friend  who  knows  all  things  that  be.

He  drives  the  chariot  of  the  lofty  ordinance:  Agni  most
active,  is  the  great  High  Priest  of  Gods.

9  They  who  are  free  from  death,  fain  for  him,  purified  three

splendours  of  the  mighty  Agni,  circling  all.

To  man,  for  his  enjoyment,  one  of  these  they  gave :  the  other
two  have  passed  into  the  sister  sphere.

10  Man’s  sacrificial  food  hath  sharpened  like  an  axe,  for  bright¬

ness,  him  the  Sage  of  men,  the  people’s  Lord.

Busied  with  sacred  rites  lie  mounts  and  he  descends.  He  hath
laid  down  his  vital  germ  within  these  worlds.

1 1  He  stirs  with  life  in  wombs  dissimilar  in  kind,  bom  as  a  Lion

or  a  loudly-bellowing  Bull :

Vaisvanara  immortal  with  wide-reaching  might,  bestowing
goods  and  wealth  on  him  who  offers  gifts.

12  Vaisvanara,  as  of  old,  mounted  the  cope  of  heaven,  heaven's

ridge,  well  greeted,  by  those  skilled  in  noble  songs.

He,  as  of  old,  producing  riches  for  the  folk,  still  watchful,  tra¬
verses  the  common  way  again.

13  For  new  prosperity  we  seek  to  Agni,  him  whose  course  is  splen¬
did,  gold-haired,  excellently  bright,

Whom  M&tarisvan  stablished,  dweller  in  the  heaven,  meet  for
high  praise  and  holy,  sage  and  true  to  Law.

7  He:  Agni.  The  skilful :  the  priests.

8  Be  drives  the  chariot :  he  is  the  loader  of  sacrifice  ordained  by  holy  law.

9  They  who  are  free  from  death  :  the  immortal  Gods.  Three  splendours  :
with  reference  to  his  appearance  as  the  Sun,  the  lightning,  and  domestic  fire,
the  last  of  which  is  given  to  man  as  his  own  special  possession.

10  Within  these,  worlds :  the  germ  of  fire  is  always  latent  in  the  fire-sticks
or  two  pieces  of  wood  which  are  employed  to  produce  the  fiatne.

11  Hoi'll  as  a  Lion:  destructive  and  voracious,  and  as  a  loudly-bellowing  Bull,
with  reference  to  his  strength  and  the  roar  of  his  flames.

12  The  common  j cay :  tho  path  of  the  Gods,  which  as  the  Sun  he  travels
over.


[BOOK  III.


320  TUB  HYMNS  OF

14  As  pure  and  swift  of  course,  beholder  of  the  light,  who  stands
in  heaven’s  bright  sphere  a  sign,  who  wakes  at  dawn,

Agni,  the  head  of  heaven,  whom  none  may  turn  aside — to  him
the  Powerful  with  mighty  prayer  we  seek.

T5  The  cheerful  Priest,  the  pure,  in  whom  no  guile  is  found,  Friend
of  the  House,  praise-worthy,  dear  to  all  mankind,

Fait-  to  behold  for  beauty  like  a  splendid  car, — Agni  the  Friend
of  men  we  ever  seek  for  wealth.

HYMN  III.  Agni.

To  him  who  shines  afar,  Vaisvanara,  shall  bards  give  precious
things  that  he  may  go  on  certain  paths :

For  Agni  the  Immortal  serves  the  Deities,  and  therefore  never
breaks  their  everlasting  laws.

-2  He,  wondrous  envoy,  goes  between  the  earth  aud  heaven,  firm-
seated  as  the  Herald,  great  High  Priest  of  men.

He  compa8seth  w'ith  rays  the  lofty  dwelling-place,  Agni,  sent
forward  by  the  Gods,  enriched  with  prayer.

3  Sages  shall  glorify  Agni  with  earnest  thoughts,  ensign  of  sacri¬

fice,  who  fills  the  synod  full ;

In  whom  the  singers  hare  stored  up  their  holy  acts :  to  him
the  worshipper  looks  for  joy  and  happiness.

4  The  Sire  of  sacrifice,  great  God  of  holy  bards,  Agni,  the  measure

and  the  symbol  of  the  priests,

Hath  entered  heaven  and  earth  that  show  in  varied  form  :  the
Sage  whom  many  love  rejoiceth  in  his  might.

5  Bright  Agni  with  the  bright  car,  Lord  of  green  domains,  Vaisva¬

nara  dweller  in  the  floods,  who  linds  the  light,

Pervading,  swift  and  wild,  encompassed  round  with  powers,
him  very  glorious  have  the  Gods  established  hero.

6  Agni,  together  with  the  Gods  and  Manu’s  folk  by  thought  ex¬

tending  sacrifice  in  varied  form,

Goes,  car-borne,  to  and  fro  with  those  who  orown  caoh  rite,  tho
fleet,  tho  Household  Friend,  who  turns  the  curse  aside.


14  Who  wales  at  daw n .-  when  re-kindled  for  tho  morning  sacrifice.

1  That  he  may  go  on  certain  paths ;  may  constantly  visit  men.

2  The  lofty  dwelliug place:  the  hall  or  chamber  in  which  sacrifice  is  celebrated.

5  Lord  of  green  domains  :  who  has  dominion  over  buahw  and  trees.

6  To  and  fro :  between  heaven  and  earth.  Those  who  crown  each  rite ;  the
Qods  who  make  sacrifice  effectual.


BYMV  4.1


TfTB  RIG  VEDA.


321


7  Sing,  Agni,  for  long  life  to  us  and  noble  sons :  teem  thou  with

plenty,  shine  upon  us  store  of  food.

Increase  the  groat  man’s  strength,  thou  ever-vigilant :  thou,
longing  for  the  Gods,  knowest  their  hymns  full  well.

8  The  Mighty  One.  Lord  of  tho  people  and  their  guest,  the

leader  of  their  thoughts,  devoted  Friend  of  priests,

Our  solemn  rites'  announcer,  Jatavedas,  men  with  worship
ever  praise,  with  urgings  for  their  weal.

9  Agni  the  God  resplendent,  giver  of  great  joy,  hath  on  his

lovely  car  compassed  the  lands  with  might.

Let  us  with  pure  laudations  in  his  house  approach  the  high
laws  of  tho  nourisher  of  multitudes.

10  I  celebrate  thy  glories,  0  Vaisv&uara,  wherewith  thou,  0  far¬

sighted  God,  hast  fouud  the  light.

Thou  filledst  at  thy  birth  both  worlds,  the  earth  and  heaven :
all  this,  0  Agni,  hast  ,thou  compassed  of  thyself.

11  By  his  great  skill  tho  Sage  alone  hath  brought  to  pass  a  great

deed,  mightier  thau  Vaisv&nara’s  wondrous  acts.

Agni  sprang  into  being,  magnifying  both  his  Parents,  Heaven
.and  Earth,  rich  in  prolific  seed.

HYMN  IV.  Aprls.

Be  friendly  with  each  kindled  log  of  fuel,  with  every  flash
bestow  the  boon  of  riches.

Bring  thou  the  Gods,  O  God,  unto  our  worship :  serve,  well-
inclined,  as  Friend  thy  friends,  0  Agui.

2  Agui  whom  daily  Varuna  and  Mitra  the  Gods  bring  thrice  a
day  to  this  our  worship,

Tanunapat,  enrich  with  meath  our  service  that  dwells  with
holy  oil,  that  offers  honour,

7  The  great  man's  strength :  the  strength  of  the  eminent  man  who  is  tho
institutor  of  the  sacrifice.

f)  Approach  the  high  lain :  perform  tho  sacrifices. — M.  Muller.

31  Tho  first  homistich  of  this  stanza  Is  somewhat  obscure.  Sdyapa’s
paraphrase  as  given  by  Wilson  is :  1  From  acts  that  are  acceptable  to
Vaisvftiiara  comes  great  (wealth)  ;  for  lie,  tho  sago  (Agni)  alone,  bestows  (the
reward)  of  zeal  in  (the  performance  of)  his  worship.’

The  Aprls  who  are  said  to  be  the  deities  of  this  hymn  are  the  divine  or
doifiod  1  icings  ami  objccte  to  which  the  propitiatory  versos  aro  addressed.
The  hymn,  us  Wilson  remarks,  ‘  is  more  complicated  and  obscure  than  any  of
the  preceding  addressed  to  the  Aprls,  except  SOkfa  III,  of  the  Second
Mandaia  [II.  3.].  to  which  it  hoars  tho  nearest  analogy  :  they  arc  both  perhaps
of  somewhat  later  date  than  the  others.’

2  Tan&napAi :  a  narno  of  Agni  ;  ‘  Child  of  Thyself,’  Sec  I.  12,  2.

?!


322  THE  Hl’MXS  OP  [BOOK  11  I

3  The  thought  that  bringeth  every  boon  proceedeth  to  worship

first  the  Priest  of  the  libation,

That  wo  may  greet  the  Strong  One  with  otfr  homage.  Urged,
may  he  bring  the  Gods,  best  Sacrificer.

4  On  high  your  way  to  sacrifice  was  made  ready ;  the  radiant

flames  went  upward  to  the  regions.

Full  in  the  midst  of  heaven  the  Priest  is  seated  :  strew  we
the  sacred  grass  where  Gods  may  rest  them.

5  Claiming  in  mind  the  seven  priests’  burnt-oblations,  inciting

all,  they  came  in  settled  oixler.

To  this  our  sacrifice  approach  the  many  who  show  in  hero
beauty  at  assemblies.

6  Night  and  Dawn,  lauded,  hither  come  together,  both  smiling,

different  are  their  forms  in  colour,

That  Yaruna  and  Mitra  may  accept  us,  and  Iudra,  girt  by
Maruts,  with  his  glories.

7  I  crave  the  grace  of  heaven’s  two  chief  Invokers :  the  seven

swift  steeds  joy  iu  their  wonted  maunor.

These  speak  of  truth,  praising  the  truth  eternal,  thinking  on
Order  as  the  guards  of  Order.

8  May  Bhirati  with  all  her  Sisters,  Ila  accordant  with  the  Gods,

with  mortals  Agni,

Savasvati  with  all  her  kindred  Rivers,  come  to  this  grass,  Three
Goddesses,  and  scat  them.

9  Well  pleased  with  us  do  thou  0  God,  0  Tvashfcar,  give  ready

issue  to  our  procreaut  vigour,

Whence  springs 'tho  hero,  powerful,  skilled  in  action,  lover  of
Gods,  adjuster  of  the  press-stones.

10  Send  to  the  Gods  tho  oblation,  Lord  of  Forests;  and  let  the
Immolator,  Agni,  dress  it.

He  as  the  truer  Priest  shall  offer  worship,  for  the  Gods’  genera¬
tions  well  he  knoweth.

•1  Your  t cay :  a  path  for  Agni  and  the  liurhis  or  sacred  grass,  the  God  and
the  deified  object  addressed  in  the  stanza.

In  the  midst  of  heaven  :  iu  the  centre  of  the  radiant  hall  of  sacrifice,  as
Sdyana  explains  it.

5  This  stanza  refers  to  the  deified  doors  of  the  hall  of  sacrifice,  and  to  the
deities  who  preside  over  them.

7  Heaven  s  tu «  chief  Invokers  .•  Agni  and  perhaps  Varunn.  See  I.  18.8.

The  seven  s\cift  steeds  :  seven  ministering  priests.

8  Bhdratt,  lid,  and  Sarasvatl  are  Goddesses  presiding  over  different  depart¬
ments  of  religious  worship.  See  I.  13.  9.  The  name  of  Agni  is  inserted  some¬
what  unconnectedly.

10  Lord  of  Forests :  Vanaspati,  a  largo  tree  ;  here  the  sacrificial  post  which
is  said  to  be  a  form  of  Agni.

Truer  Priest :  as  compared  with  human  priests.


B7MN  5  ]


THE  MOV  EDA.


323

11  Come  thou  to  us,  0  Agni,  duly  kindled,  together  with  the
-  potent  Gods  and  Indra.

On  this  our  grass  sit  Aditi,  happy  Mother,  and  let  our  Hail !
delight  the  Gods  Immortal.

HYMN  V.  '  Agni.

Aoki  who  shines  against  the  Dawns  is  wakened,  the  holy
Singer  who  precedes  the  sages.

With  far-spread  lustre,  kindled  by  the  pious,  the  Priest  hath
thrown  both  gates  of  darkness  open.

2  Agni  hath  waxen  mighty  by  laudations,  to  be  adored  with

hymns  of  those  who  praise  him.

Loving  tho  varied  shows  of  holy  Order  at  the  first  flush  of  dawn
ho  shines  as  envoy.

3  Amid  men’s  homes  hath  Agni  been  established,  fulfilling  with

tho  Law,  Friend,  gorm  of  wators.

Loved  and  adored,  tho  hoight  ho  hath  ascended,  the  Singor,
objeot  of  our  invocations.

•1  Agni  is  Mitrn  when  enkindled  duly,  Mitra  as  Priost,  Varuna,
Jktavodos ;

Mitra  os  activo  minister  and  House-Friend,  Mitra  of  flowing
rival’s  and  of  mountains.

6  Tho  Earth's,  tho  Bird's  dear  lofty  plaoe  ho  guardoth,  ho  guard-
cth  in  his  might  tho  course  of  Sflrya,

011111x10111  tho  Sovon-hoadod  in  tho  centre,  guardoth  sublimo  tho
Doitios’  onjoyment.

C  The  skilful  God  who  knows  all  forms  of  knowledge  mado  for
himself  a  fair  form,  meet  for  worship.

This  Agni  guards  with  care  that  novor  ceases  the  Soma’s  skin,
tho  Bird’s  place  rich  in  fatness.


II  Happy  Mother :  literally,  having  excellent  sons,  tho  Adityas.

1  Who  shines  against  the  Damns:  rekindled  for  tho  morning  sacrifices.

Who  precedes  the  sages:  ns  their  guide  and  teacher.  The  Priest:  Agni.

3  The  height:  the  place  called  tho  north  altar,  soya  SAyana.  Perhaps  tho
height  of  hcavon  may  be  intended.

4  Agni  is  here  identified  with  antra,  the  Sun,  and  both  these  Gods  ore
identified  with  Varuna.

5  The  dear  lofty  place  of  the  oarth  may  ho  tho  altar,  or  tho  eastern  point.
The  Bird  is  the  Sun  who  flies  through  heaven.  The  Seven  headed,  said  by
S&yapa  to  be  the  boat  of  Maruts,  is  moro  probably  tho  Sun  drawn  by  his  seven
horses.

6  The  Soma's  skin :  the  meaning  of  the  words  sasasya  ehdvna  is  not  clear.
An  envelope  or  a  covering,  which  in  some  mystical  way  is  supposed  to  conceal
the  Soma-plaut,  appear*  to  l»e  intended.  The  Bird’s  place :  the  station  of  the
Sun,  who  is  adored  with  oblations  of  clarified  butter.


324  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ROOK  III.

7  Agni  hath  entered  longingly  the  longing  shrine  rich  with  fat¬

ness,  giving  easy  access.

Resploudont,  pure,  sublime,  and  purifying,  again,  again  ho
renovates  his  Mothers.

8  Bom  suddenly,  by  plants  ho  grew  to  greatness,  when  tender

shoots  with  holy  oil  increased  him,

Like  waters  lovely  when  they  hasten  downward  :  may  Agni
in  his  Parents'  lap  protect  us.

9  Extollod,  the  Strong  shone  forth  with  kindled  fuel  to  the

earth’s  centro,  to  the  height  of  heaven.

May  Agni,  Friend,  adorable  Matarisvan,  as  onvoy  bring  the
Gods  unto  our  worship.

10  Best  of  all  luminaries  lofty  Agni  supported  with  his  flamo
the  height  of  heaven,

When,  far  from  Bhrigus,  Matarisvan  kindled  the  oblalion-
bearor  where  he  lay  in  secret.

J 1.  As  holy  food,  Agni,  to  thine  invoker  give  wealth  in  cattle,
lasting,  rich  in  marvels.

To  us  be  born  a  son  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be  this
thy  gracious  will  to  us-ward.

HYMN  VI.  Agni.

Urged  on  by  deep  devotion,  0  yc  singers,  bring,  pious  ones,
tho  God-approaching  ladle.

Borne  onward  to  tho  right  it  travels  eastward,  and,  filled  with
oil,  to  Agni  hoars  oblation,

2  Thou  at  thy  birth  didst  fill  both  oarth  and  heaven,  yea,  Most
Adorablo,  thou  didst  exceed  them.

Even  through  tho  hoayon’s  and  through  tho  earth’s  expanses
let  thy  swift  sevon-tougued  flames  roll  on,  0  Agni.


7  His  Motho't:  or  hi*  parents,  Heaven  and  Barth,  who  arc  strengthened
and  restored  to  tlioir  youth  by  sacrifice.

Tho  plants  aro  the  twigs  used  as  fuel,  and  the  tender  shoots  arc  tho  bunch
o S  grass  used  in  sprinkling  the  clarified  butter  prer  the  fire.

9  The  earth's  centre :  earth's  most  important  place,  the  altar.

In  the  sooond  hemistich  Agni  is  identified  with  Matarisvan  tho  divine  or
semi-divino  being  who  brought  him  from  heaven.

10  Par  from  Bhrigus :  the  words  in  tho  text  would  seem  to  mean  that
MAtarisvan  took  the  fire  from  tho  Bhrigus  ;  but,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  jxlri
perhaps  implies  separation.  SAyana  explains  Bhrigus  in  tins  place  by  rays
of  the  Sun.

‘  1  The  God-approaching  ladle  :  the  sacrificial  ladle  with  which  tho  oblation
of  clarified  butter  or  oil  is  offered  to  the  Gods.

Borne  onwanl  to  the  right :  or  to  the  south  of  the  fire-altar.  According  to
I <ud wig,  bearing  the  sacrificial  gift.


HYMN  6]  THE  It  10 VEDA;  825

3  Both  Heaven  and  Earth  and  Gods  who  should  be  worshipped

establish  thee  as  Priest  for  every  dwelling,

\VheueVcr  humau  families,  God-devOted,  bringing  oblations,
laud  thy  splendid  lustre,

4  Firm  iii  the  Gods’  homo  is  tile  Mighty  seated,  between  vast

Heaven  and  Earth,  the  well-belovM —

Those  CowS  who  yield,  unharmed,  their  nectar,  Spousos  of  tho
Far-Sttider,  over-young,  United.

6  Groat  are  the  deeds  of  thee,  the  Great,  0  Agni :  thou  by  thy
power  hast  spread  out  earth  and  heaven.

As  soon  as  thou  wast  born  thou  west  an  envoy,  thou,  Mighty
One,  wast  Leader  of  the  people.

6  Bind  to  the  polo  with  cords  of  holy  Order  thy  long-maned

ruddy  steeds  who  sprinkle  fatness.

Bring  hither,  0  thou  God,  all  Gods  together :  provide  thoin
noble  worship,  Jutavedas.

7  Even  from  tho  sky  thy  brilliant  lights  shone  hither :  still

hast  thou  beamed  through  many  a  radiant  morning,

That  tho  Gods  praisod  their  joyous  Herald’s  labour  eagerly
burning,  Agni,  in  tho  forests.

8  Tho  Gods  who  take  dolight  in  air's  wide  rogion,  or  thoso  tho

dwollors  in  heaven’s  roalm  of  brightness,

Or  those,  the  Holy,  prompt  to  hoar,  our  holpers,  who,  oar-
borne,  turn  thoir  horses  hithor,  Agni —

9  With  those,  borne  on  One  oar,  Agni,  upproaoh  us,  or  borne  on

mauy,  for  thy  stoods  are  able.

Bring,  with  thoir  Damos,  tho  Gods,  tho  Thrce-and-Thirty,
after  thy  Godlike  nature,  nud  bo  joyful.

10  He  is  tho  Priest  at  whose  l-epeatod  worship  oven  wido  Heaven

and  Earth  sing  out  for  increase.

They  fair  and  true  and  holy  coming  forward  stand  at  his
sacrifice  who  springs  from  Order.

11  As  holy  food,  Agni,  to  thine  invoker  givo  wealth  in  cattle,

lasting,  rioh  in  marvels.

To  us  bo  born  a  son  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be  this
thy  gracious  will  to  us-ward.


4  The  Mighty  :  Agui.  Thou  Com  :  Heaven  and  Earth  who  yield  all  bless¬
ing*,  here  called  also  the  spouses  of  VUhpu  the  God  of  tho  mighty  strido,
that  is,  the  Sun,  or  m  SAynna  says,  of  the  far-extending  Agui.

.  9  The  Thrte-and  Thirty :  see  I.  34.  11.


326  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  111

HYMN  VII.  Agni.

The  seven  tones  risen  from  tho  white-backed  viand  have
made  their  way  between  the  pair  of  Mothers.

Both  circumjacent  Parents  come  together :  to  yield  us  length
of  days  they  hasten  forward.

2  Tho  Male  who  dwells  in  heaven  hath  Mares  and  Milchkino :

he  came  to  Goddesses  who  bring  sweet  treasure.

To  time  safe  resting  in  the  seat  of  Order  the  Cow  alone  upon
her  way  procecdcth.

3  Wise  Master,  wealthy  findcr-out  of  riches,  ho  mounted  thoso

who  may  with  ease  be  guided.

Ho,  dark-backed,  manifold  with  varied  aspect*  hath  made
thorn  burst  forth  from  their  food  tho  brush-wood.

4  Strength-giving  streams  bear  hither  him  eternal,  fain  to  sup¬

port  tho  mighty  work  of  Tvashtar.

Ho,  flushing  in  his  homo  with  all  his  members,  hath  ontered
both  tho  worlds  as  they  wore  single.

5  They  know  the  red  Bull’s  blessing,  and  aro  joyful  uudor  tho

flamlng-ooloured  Lord’s  dominion :

Thoy  who  give  shino  from  heaven  with  fair  offulgonoo,  whoso
lofty  song  like  I|A  must  bo  honoured.


This  hymn  and  the  live  following  aro  ascribed  to  tho  ItUhi  Vifvftmitra.

1  The  seven  tones  ere  tho  hymn*  Bung  in  seven  touos,  or  inotroB.  The
while-backed  viand  fa  tho  Sown  mingled  with  milk,  and  the  pair  of  Mothers
or  Mother  and  Father  mu  Ho.vron  and  Earth  whoso  intermediate  space  tho
hymn*  havo  reached.  Tho  circumjacent  Parents  aro  Heaven  and  Earth.  Tho
construction  in  tho  flret  half  of  tho  stausa  is  difficult,  tho  maMoullno  form
yt  being  Apparently  used  for  tho  feminine.  Bftyopa  inserts  rofmaya^,  rays,
which  ho  makee  tho  subject  of  tho  first  sentence,  and  explains  dhdsi.  viand,
by  'tho  all-sustaining  Agni,'  and  sapid  sVTwfA,  seven  voices  or  tones,  by  'tho
flowing  rivers.'  The  hymn  is  full  of  difficulties  ;  '  an  intentionally  obscure
hymn/  says  Professor  Gmsmann,  '  whose  partially  oorrupt  text  cannot,  on
acoouot,  of  this  obscurity,  bo  satisfactorily  re-established.'

2  The  Male  who  dwells  in  heaven :  celestial  Agni.  Tho  Mares  and  Milch-
kine  aro  tho  Goddesses  of  the  air.  To  thee :  to  Agni.

The  Cow :  V&k  the  Goddess  of  Speech,  i.  e.  speech  itself,  prayer.

3  I  Vise  Muster:  Agni.  Those:  his  mares,  tho  rapidly  advancing  flames
that  bear  him  onward.  Dark-backed:  with  smoko.

4  Strength-giving  streams:  tho  waters  of  the  air  which  bring  down  tho
embryo  Agni  in  rain.  The  mighty  work  of  Tvashtar :  the  whole  creation,  or,
as  thoro  U  no  substantive  expressed,  the  son  of  Tvashtar,  the  Sun,  may  be
intended.  As  they  were  single :  hath  pervaded  and  illumined  heaven  and
earth  simultaneously,  as  though  thoy  wore  one  world.

$  The  red  Bull :  Agni,  They:  perhaps  tho  Gods.  Ifd :  Prayer  or  Praise,


HYMN  8.]  Til B  RIO  VEDA.  327

6  Yea,  by  tradition  from  tho  ancient  sages  they  brought  great

strength  from  the  two  mighty  Parents,

To  where  tho  singer’s  Bull,  tho  night’s  dispellor,  after  his
proper  law  hath  waxen  stronger.

7  Sevon  holy  singers  guard  with  five  Adhvaryus  the  Bird’s

beloved  firmly-settled  station.

Tho  willing  Bulls,  untouched  by  eld,  rejoice  them :  as  Gods
themselves  tho  ways  of  Gods  they  follow.

8  I  crave  tho  graco  of  heaven’s  two  chief  Invokers :  the  sevon
•  swift  stoeda  joy  in  their  wonted  manner.

Those  speak  of  truth,  nraising  tho  Truth  Eternal,  thinking
on  Order  as  the  guards  of  Order.

9  Tho  many  soek  the  groat  Steed  ns  a  stallion :  tho  roius  obey

tho  Lord  of  varied  colour.

0  hoavonly  Priest,  most  pleasant,  full  of  wisdom,  bring  tho
great  Gods  to  us,  and  Earth  and  Hoavon.

10  Rich  Lord,  tho  Mornings  have  gleamed  forth  in  splendour,

fair-rayed,  fair-spoakiug,  worshipped  with  all  viands,

Yoa,  with  tho  glory  of  tho  earth,  0  Agoi.  Forgive  us,  for
our  wool,  e’en  sin  committed.

1 1  As  holy  food,  Agni,  to  thiuo  invoker,  give  wealth  in  cattle,

lasting,  rich  iu  marvols.

To  us  bo  born  a  son,  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni,  bo  this
thy  gracious  [will  to  lit*  ward.

HYMN  VIH.  Sacrificial  Port.

God-serving  raon,  0  Sovran  of  tho  Forest,  with  hoavonly
mouth  at  saorifioo  anoint  tlico.

Grant  wealth  to  us  when  thou  art  standing  upright  us  when
reposing  on  this  Mother’s  bosom.

0  They :  tho  men  who  first  honoured  Agui  who  ia  called  the  tingtr'l  Bulb
tho  atrong  God  who  protects  his  worshipper.

7  Adhvaryus :  ministering  priests.  The  Bird:  tho  rapidly-flying  Agni.
The  wilting  Bulls :  tho  zealous  priests,  who  in  this  stanza  arc  boldly  called
Gods.  Cf.  ‘Is  it  uot  writtcu  in  your  law,  I  said,  Yo  aro  Gods?’  (St.  John,  x.  1 1).

8  If  seven's  tico  ehie/  Invokers:  or  Hotars;  according  to  SAyapa,  tho  celestial
and  tho  terrestrial  Agni.  This  stanza  is  repeated  from  III,  4.  7.

9  The  Many:  the  adjective  is  feminine  and  has  no  substantive  expressed.
Tho  Dawns  may  bo  iuteudod,  or  perhaps  libations.

11  This  concluding  stanza  is  tlio  burden  of  sovorul  hymns  of  this  Book,
and  there  is  considerable  variation  in  SAyau&’s  interpretation  of  it  in  the
different  places  in  which  it  oocurs.

1  0  Snoran  of  the  Poresl .-  the  tall  tree  (vanasputi)  out  of  which  ia  made
the  sacrificial  post  to  which  the  victim  is  tied.  The  post  when  consecrated
is  a  deified  object  and  is  regarded  as  a  form  of  Agni.

With  heavenly  mcath :  or  balm;  sacred  oil  or  clarified  butter.  For  a  full
account  of  tho  ceremony  of  anointing  the  Sacrificial  Post,  see  Haug’s  Aitarey.
BiAhiuapam,  Vol.  II.  pp.  74*78.


328


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  1/7.


2  Set  up  to  eastward  of  the  fire  enkindled,  accepting  prayer

that  wastes  not,  rich  in  heroes,

Driving  far  from  us  poverty  and  famine,  lift  thyself  up  to
bring  us  great  good  fortune.

3  Lord  o?  the  Forest,  raise  thyself  up  on  the  loftiest  spot  of

caith.

Give  splendour,  fixt  and  measured  well,  to  him  who  brings
the  sacrifice.

4  Well-robed,  enveloped,  he  is  come,  the  youthful :  springing  to

life  his  glory  waxeth  greater.

Contemplative  in  mind  and  God-adoring,  sages  of  high  in¬
telligence  upraise  him.

5  Sprung  up  he  rises  in  the  days’  fair  weather,  increasing  in

the  mcn-frequcnted  synod.

With  song  the  wise  and  skilful  consecrate  him :  his  voice  the
God-adoring  singer  utters.

6  Ye  whom  religious  men  have  firmly  planted;  thou  Forest-

Sovran  whom  the  axe  hath  fashioned, —

Let  those  the  Stakes  divine  which  here  are  standing  be  fain
to  grant  us  wealth  with  store  of  children.

7  0  men  who  lift  the  ladles  up,  these  hewn  aud  planted  in  the

ground,

Bringing  a  blessing  to  the  field,  shall  bear  our  precious  gift
to  Gods.

8  Adityas,  Rudras,  V'asus,  careful  leaders,  Earth,  Heaven,  and

Prithivi  aud  Air’s  mid-region,

Accordant  Deities,  shall  bless  our  worship  and  make  our
sacrifice’s  ensign  lofty.

9  Like  swans  that  flee  in  lengthened  line,  the  Pillars  have  come

to  us  arrayed  in  brilliant  colour.

They,  lifted  up  on  high,  by  sages,  eastward,  go  forth  as  Gods
to  the  Gods’  dwelling-places.

1 0  Those  Stakes  upon  the  earth  with  rings  that  deck  them  seem
to  the  eye  like  horns  of  horned  creatures ;

3  The  loftiest  spot  of  earth :  the  altar.

4  Well-robed,  enveloped :  with  a  cord  or  garland.

5  In  the  days'  fair  weather :  when  the  periodical  Rains  arc  over.

7  These  hewn  and  planted :  apparently  splinters  cut  from  the  tree.

8  Prithivi :  Earth  regarded  as  single,  aud  uot  os  oue  of  the  constantly
connected  pair  Heaven  and  Earth.

9  Pillars:  apparently  chips  or  splinters  (cf.  stanza  7)  which  fall  from  the
tree,  aa  it  is  cut  to  form  tho  Sooriiieial  Stake,  like  white  or  grey  birds  alight¬
ing  on  the  ground.


HYMN  0.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


329


Or,  as  upraised  by  priests  in  invocation,  let  them  assist  us  in
the  rush  to  battle.

11  Lord  of  the  Wood,  rise  with  a  hundred  branches:  with  thousand
branches  may  we  rise  to  greatness,  •

Thou  whom  this  hatchet,  with  an  edge  well  whetted  for  great
felicity,  hath  brought  before  us.

HYMN  IX.  Agni.

Wb  as  thy  friends  havo  chosen  thee,  mortals  a  God,  to  be  our
help,

The  Waters'  Child,  the  bless&d,  the  resplendent  One,  victorious
and  beyond  compare.

2  Since  thou  delighting  in  tho  woods  hast  gouo  unto  thy  mother

streams,

Not  to  bo  scorned,  Agni,  is  that  return  of  tliino  when  from
afar  thou  now  art  hero.

3  O’er  pungent  smoko  hust  thou  prevailed,  and  thus  art  thou

benevolent.

Some  go  boforo,  and  othors  round  about  theo  sit,  they  in  whoso
friendship  thou  hast  place.

4  Him  who  had  passed  beyond  his  foes,  bovond  continual  pursuits.
Him  tho  unorring  Ones,  obsorvant,  found  in  floods,  couchod  like

a  lion  in  his  lair.

5  Him  wandoring  at  his  own  free  wilj,  Agni  hero  hidden  from

our  view,

Him  MtltiiriSvan  brought  to  us  from  fur  away  produced  by  fric¬
tion,  from  tho  Gods.

6  0  Bearer  of  Oblations,  thus  mortals  rocoived  theo  from  tho

Gods,

Whilst  thou,  tho  Friond  of  man,  guardost  each  sacrifice  with
tliino  own  power,  Most  Youthful  One.

7  Amid  thy  wonders  this  is  good,  yea,  to  tho  simple  is  it  clonr,
When  gathered  round  about  thee,  Agui,  lie  the  herds  where

thou  art  kindled  in  the  mom.


2  Thai  return  of  thine:  thy  descent  from  tho  celestial  waters  in  which  thou
art  bora  as  lightning.

8  Some :  according  to  SAyana,  the  Adhvaryus  ;  others :  tho  SAma-prieste  who
ait  and  recite  the  prayers  and  hymns.

4  The  untiring  Ones :  tho  Gods,  who  followed  and  fouud  tho  fugitive  Agni.

5  Afdtarifvan :  tho  divine  or  semi-divino  being  who  brought  Agui  to  mon.
Sec  Index.

7  In  the  morn  :  before  the  cattle  arc  sent  out  to  graze.  The  herds,  accord¬
ing  to  tho  Scholiast,  include  men  as  well  as  quadrupeds.


330  THE  IIYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  III.

8  Offer  to  him  who  knows  fair  rites,  who  burns  with  purifying

glow,

Swift  envoy,  active,  ancient,  and  adorable :  serve  ye  the  God
attentively.

9  Three  times  a  hundred  Gods  and  thrice  a  thousand,  and  three

times  ten  and  nine  have  worshipped  Agni,

For  him  spread  sacred  grass,  with  oil  bedewed  him,  and
stablished  him  as  Priest  and  Sacriticer.

HYMN  X.  Agai.

Thee,  Agni,  God,  Imperial  Lord  of  all  mankind,  do  mortal
men

With  understanding  kindle  at  the  sacrifice.

2  They  laud  thee  in  their  solemn  rites,  Agni,  as  Minister  and

Priest.

Shiue  forth  in  thine  own  home  as  guardian  of  the  Law.

3  He,  verily,  who  honours  thee  with  fuel,  Knower  of  all  Life,

He,  Agni !  wins  heroic  might,  he  prospers  well.

4  Ensign  of  sacrifices,  he,  Agni,  with  Gods  is  come  to  us,

Decked  by  the  seven  priests,  to  him  who  briugeth  gifts.

5  To  Agui,  the  Invoking  Priest,  offer  your  best,  your  lofty

speech,

To  him  Ordainer-liko  who  brings  the  light  of  songs.

6  Let  these  our  hymns  make  Agni  grow,  whence,  meet  for  laud,  •

he  springs  to  life,  '

To  mighty  strength  and  great  possession,  fair  to  sec.

7  Best  Sacrificer,  bring  the  Gods,  0  Agni,  to  the  pious  man  :

A  joyful  Priest,  thy  splendour  drive  our  foes  afar !

8  As  such,  0  Purifier,  shine  on  us  heroic  glorious  might :

Be  nearest  Friend  to  those  who  laud  thee,  for  their  weal.

9  So,  wakeful,  versed  in  sacred  hymns,  the  holy  singers  kindle

thee,

Oblation-bearer,  deathless,  cherisher  of  strength.

HYMN  XI.  Agni.

Agni  is  Priest,  the  great  High  Priest  of  sacrifice,  most  swift
in  act :

He  knows  the  rite  in  constant  course.

9  In  the  Vaijvadeva  Nivid  or  Hymn  of  Invitation  to  the  VxsvedcvM,  the
number  of  the  Goda  is  said  to  bo  3  times  11,  then  33,  then  303,  thou  3003.
By  adding  together  33  +  303  +  3003  the  number  3839  ia  obtained.  See  Haug’a
Aitareya  ISrUmianam,  II.  p.  212,  note.

5  Who  brings  the  light  of  songs :  who  brightens  and  inspires  our  hymns.


BYMS  12.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  331

2  Oblation-bearer,  deathless,  well  inclined,  an  cagor  messenger,
Agni  comes  nigh  us  with  the  thought.

3  Ensign  of  sacrifice  from  of  old,  Agni  well  kuoweth  with  his

thought  •

To  prosper  this  man’s  aim  and  hope.

4  Agni,  illustrious  from  old  time,  the  Son  of  Strength  who

knows  all  life,

The  Gods  havo  made  to  bo  their  Priest.

5  Infallible  is  Agni,  ho  who  goes  before  the  tribes  of  men,

A  chariot  swift  and  over  now.

6  Strength  of  the  Gods  which  none  may  harm,  subduing  all  his

enemies,

Agni  is  mightiest  in  fame.

7  By  offering  sacred  food  to  him  the  mortal  worshippor  obtains
A  homo  from  him  whoso  light  makes  puro.

&  From  Agni,  by  our  hymns,  may  wo  gain  all  things  that  bring
happiness,

Singers  of  him  who  knows  all  life.

9  0  Agni,  in  our  deeds  of  might  may  wo  obtain  all  preoious
things :

Tho  Gods  aro  centred  all  in  thoo.

HYMN  XII.  Indra-Agni.

Moved,  Indra-Agni,  by  our  hymn,  como  to  tho  juice,  tho  pre¬
cious  dow :

Drink  yo  thoroof,  impollod  by  song.

2  0  Indra-Agni,  with  the  man  who  lauds  you  comes  tho  waken¬

ing  rite :

So  drink  yo  both  this  juico  outpoured.

3  Through  force  of  sacrifice  I  choose  Indra-Agni  who  love  the  wiso :
With  Soma  let  these  sate  them  here.

4  Indra  and  Agni  I  invoko,  joint-victors,  bounteous,  unsubdued,
Foo-slayors,  boat  to  win  tho  spoil.

5  Indra  and  Agni,  singers  skilled  in  melody  hymn  you,  bringing

lauds :

I  ohoose  you  for  the  sacred  food.

6  Indra  and  Agni,  yo  cast  down  tho  ninety  forts  which  DfWas  hold,
Together,  with  one  migIiTy-deu:t:


2  With  the  thought :  or,  through  our  prayer.

3  This  nan's :  who  institutes  the  sacrifice.

6  The  ninety  forts :  ninety  is  used  indefinitely  for  a  largo  number.  The
forts  are  the  strongholds  of  the  non -Aryan  inhabitants  of  the  country.


332  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  Ill.

7  To  Indra-Agni  reverent  thoughts  go  forward  from  the  holy

task

Along  the  path  of  sacred  Law.

8  0  Indra-Agni,  powers  are  yours,  and  dwellings  and  delightful

food :

Good  is  your  readiness  to  act.

9  'Indra  and  Agni,  in  your  deeds  of  might  ye  deck  heaven's

lucid  realms :

Famed  is  that  hero  strength  of  yourS,

HYMN  XIII.  Agni.

To  Agni,  to  this  God  of  yours  I  sing  aloud  with  utmost
power.

May  he  come  to  us  with  the  Gods,  and  sit,  best  Offerer,  on
the  grass.

2  The  Holy,  whose  are  earth  and  heaven,  and  succour  waits

upon  his  strength ;

Him  men  who  bring  oblations  laud,  and  they  who  wish  to
gain,  for  grace.

3  He  is  the  Sage  who  guides  these  men,  Leader  of  saored  rites

is  ho.

Him,  your  own  Agni,  serve  ye  well,  who  winneth  and  bestow-
eth  wealth.

4  So  may  the  gracious  Agni  grant  most  goodly  shelter  for  our

use;

Whence  in  the  heavens  or  in  the  floods  Ire  shall  pour  wealth
upon  our  lands.

5  The  singers  kindle  him,  the  Priest,  Agni  the  Lord  of  tribes

of  men,

Resplendent  and  without  a  peer  through  his  own  excellent
designs.

6  Help  us,  thou  Brahman,  best  of  ail  iuVokerS  of  the  Gods  in

song.

Beam,  Friend  of  Maruts,  bliss  on  us,  0  Agni,  a  most  liberal
God.

7  Yea,  grant  us  treasure  thousandfold  with  children  and  with

nourishment,

And,  Agni,  splendid  hero  strength,  exalted,  wasting  not  away.
7  The  hoi a  took :  sacrifice.

The  hymn  and  that  which  follows  are  ascribed  to  the  llishi  Rishabhn,  a  son
of  Visvilmitra.

6  Thou  Brahman .-  Agni  is  here  addressed  as  the  Brahman  or  praying
priest.


ffYM.V  15.1


THE  RIGYEDA.

HYMN  XIV.


333

Agni,


TnE  pleasant  Priest  is  come  into  the  synod,  true,  skilled  in
sacrifice,  most  wise,  Ordainer.

Agni,  the  Son  of  Strength,  whoso  oar  is  lightning,  whoso  hair
is  flame,  hath  shown  on  earth  his  lustre.

2  To  theo  I  offer  reverent  spocch  :  accept  it :  to  thee  who  mark*

cst  it,  victorious,  faithful  !

Bring,  thou  who  k newest,  those  who  know,  and  seat  theo  amid
the  sacred  gross,  for  help,  O  Holy.

3  The  Two  who  show  their  vigour,  Night  and  Morning,  by  the

wind’s  paths  shall  hasto  to  theo,  0  Agni.

When  men  adorn  tho  Anoicnt  with  oblations,  thoso  seek,  as  on
two  chariot-soata,  tho  dwolling.

4  To  theo,  strong  Agni !  Vanina  and  Mitra  and  all  tho  Maruta

sang  a  song  of  triumph,

What  timo  unto  tho  people’s  lands  thou  oamost,  spreading
thorn  as  tho  Sun  of  men,  with  lustre.

0  Approaching  with  raised  hands  and  adoration,  wo  havo  this
day  fulfilled  for  theo  thy  longing.

Worship  tho  Gods  with  most  dovqtcd  spirit,  a  Priost  with  no
unfriondly  thought,  0  Agni.

6  For,  Son  of  Strongth,  from  theo  oomo  many  succours,  and

powors  abundant  that  a  God  posscssos.

Agni,  to  us  with  spoooh  that  hath  no  falsehood  grant  riohos,
real,  to  bo  told  in  thousands,

7  Whatever,  God,  in  sacrifice  wo  mortals  havo  wrought  is  all  for

theo,  strong,  wise  of  purnoso  I

JJo  thou  tho  Friend  of  each  good  chariot's  master.  All  this
on  joy  thou  here,  immortal  Agni,

HYMN  XV.  Agni.

Rbspi.bkdrnt  with  thy  wide-extending  lustre,  dispel  tho  terrors
of  the  fiends  who  hate  us.

May  lofty  Agni  bo  my  guido  and  shelter,  tho  easily-invoked,
tho  good  Protector.

2  Be  thou  to  us,  while  no\y  the  morn  is  breaking,  bo  thou  a
guardian  when  the  Sun  hath  mounted.

2  Those  who  fototo :  tho  God*.

3  The  Ancient:  Agni.

4  Sprawling  fhcm ;  causing  Aryan  men  to  spread  as  tho  sun  spreads  his
ays.

5  Thy  longing :  for  oblations.

8  All  this:  all  our  sacrificial  offering*.


334  T1IE  HYNMS  OP  [ BOOK  III.

Accept,  as  men  accept  a  true-born  infant,  my  laud,  0  Agui
nobly  born  in  body.

3  Bull,  who  beholdest  men,  through  many  mornings,  among

the  $ark  ones  shine  forth  red,  0  Agni.

Lead  us,  good  Lord,  and  bear  us  over  trouble :  Help  us  who
long,  Most  Youthful  God,  to  riches.

4  Shine  forth,  a  Bull  invincible,  0  Agni,  winning  by  conquest

all  the  forts  and  treasures.

Thou  Jatavcdas  who  art  skilled  in  guiding,  the  chief  high  sav¬
ing  sacrifice’s  Leader.

5  Lighting  Gods  hither,  Agni,  wisest  Singer,  bring  thou  to  us

many  and  flawless  shelters.

Bring  vigour,  like  a  car  tliat  gathers  booty :  briug  us,  0  Agui,
beauteous  Earth  and  Heaven.

C  Swell,  0  thou  Bull  and  give  those  powers  an  impulse,  e’en
Earth  and  Heaven  who  yield  their  milk  in  plenty,

Shining,  0  God,  with  Gods  in  clear  effulgence.  Let  not  a
mortal’s  evil  will  obstruct  us.

7  Agni,  as  holy  food  to  thine  invoker,  give  wealth  in  cattle,  last¬
ing,  rich  in  marvels.

To  us  be  bom  a  son  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be  this
thy  gracious  will  to  us- ward.

HYMN  XVL  Agui.

This  Agni  is  the  Lord  of  great  felicity  and  hero  strength  ;

Lord  of  wealth  rich  in  children,  wealth  in  herds  of  kine;  Lord
of  the  battles  with  the  foe.

2  Wait,  Maruts,  Heroes,  upon  him  the  Prospercr  in  whom  is

bliss-iucreasing  wealth ;

Who  in  fights  ever  conquer  evil-hearted  mon,  who  overcome
the  enemy.

3  As  such,  O  Agni,  deal  us  wealth  and  hero  might,  0  Bounteous

One!

Most  lofty,  very  glorious,  rich  in  progeny,  free  from  disease
and  full  of  power.

4  He  who  made  all  that  lives,  who  passes  all  in  might,  who

orders  service  to  the  Gods,

He  woi'ks  among  the  Gods,  he  works  in  hero  strength,  yea,  also
in  the  praise  of  mon.

3  Among  the  dark  ontt :  in  the  darkness  of  the  nighte.

6  Their  milk ;  rain  and  all  fertilising  influence.

2  Who  :  referring  to  the  Maruts  ;  the  verba  being  in  the  third  person.

3  Moil  lofty,  etc :  these  epithets  qualify  wealth  and  hero  might.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  18.]


835


5  Give  us  not  up  to  indigence,  Agni,  nor  want  of  hero  sons,

Nor,  Son  of  Strength,  to  lack  of  cattle,  nor  to  blame.  Drive
thou  our  enemies  away.

G  Help  us  to  strength,  blest  Agni !  rich  in  progeny,  abundant,
in  our  sacrifice.  •  •

Flood  us  with  riches  yet  more  plenteous,  bringing  weal,  with
high  renown,  most  Glorious  One  !

HYMN  XVII.  Agni.

Duly  onkindlod  after  ancient  customs,  bringing  all  treasures,
lie  is  balmed  with  unguents, —

Flame-haired,  oil-clad,  the  purifying  Agni,  skilled  in  fair  rites,
to  bring  the  Gods  for  worship.

2  As  thou,  0  Agni,  skilful  J&tavcdos,  hast  sacrificed  as  Priest  of

Earth,  of  Heaven,

So  with  this  offoring  bring  the  Gods,  and  prosper  this  sacrifice
to  day  as  orst  for  Muuu.

3  Three  are  thy  timos  of  life,  0  J&tavedns,  and  tho  throo  morn¬

ings  are  thy  births,  0  Agni.

With  those,  well-knowing,  grant  tho  Gods’  kind  favour,  and
holp  in  stir  and  stress  tho  man  who  worships.

4  Agni  most  bright  and  fair  with  song  wo  honour,  yea,  tho  ador¬

able,  0  Jfttavedns.

Thoc,  envoy,  messenger,  oblation-bearor,  the  Gods  havo  mado
coutrc  of  life  otornal.

5  That  Priest  boforo  thoo,  yot  more  skilled  in  worship,  stablishod

of  old,  health-giver  by  his  nature, —

After  his  custom  offer,  thou  who  knowest,  and  lay  our  sacri¬
fice  where  Gods  may  taste  it.

HYMN  XVIII.  Agni.

Aoni,  bo  kind  to  us  when  we  approach  thee,  good  as  a  frioud
to  friond,  as  sire  and  mother.

Tho  races  of  mankind  arc  groat  oppressors  :  burn  up  malignity
that  strives  against  us.

2  Agni,  bum  up  tho  unfriendly  who  arc  near  us,  burn  thou  the
foeman’s  curse  who  pays  no  worship.

.3  Thru  art  thy  lima  of  life  :  tho  existence  of  Agni  upon  earth  in  Baid  to  be
threefold  as  dependent  on  the  supply  of  fuel,  clarified  butter,  and  Soma.  The
three  mornings :  Agni  is  re-bom  every  morning,  and  the  number  three  appears
to  bo  used  merely  for  the  Bake  of  accordance  with  the  three  times  of  life  pre¬
viously  rncutioned.

6  That  Priest  before  thee :  Agni’s  more  skilful  predecessor  is  probably  the
colostial  Agni,  the  high  priest  who  sacrifices  for  the  Gods.  The  terrestrial
Agui  is  to  take  him  for  his  model.


336  .  THE  IIYMN8  OP  [BOOK  TIT.

Bum,  Vasu,  thou  who  markest  well,  tho  foolish :  let  thine
eternal  nimble  beams  surround  thee.

3  With  fuel,  Agni,  and  with  oil,  desirous,  mine  offering  I  present;

for  strength  and  conquest,

With  prayer,  so  far  as  I  havo  power,  adoring— this  hymu
divine  to  gain  a  hundred  treasures.

4  Give  with  thy  glow,  thou  Son  of  Strength,  when  lauded,  great

vital  power  to  those  who  toil  to  serve  thee.

Give  richly,  Agni,  to  the  Vi^vanjitras  in  r$st  and  stir.  Oit  have
wo  decked  thy  body,

5  Give  us,  0  liberal  Lord,  great  store  of  riches,  for,  Agni,  such

art  thou  when  duly  kindled.

Thou  in  the  happy  singer’s  home  bestowest,  amply  with  arms
extended,  things  of  beauty.

HYMN  XIX.  “  Agni.

Aoni,  quick,  sage,  infallible,  all-knowing,  I  choose  to  be  our
Priest  at  this  oblation.

In  our  Gods’  service  he,  best  skilled,  shall  worship :  may  ho
obtain  us  boons  for  strength  and  riches.

2  Agni,  to  thee  I  lift  the  oil-fed  ladle,  bright,  with  an  offering,

bearing  our  oblation-

From  tho  right  hand,  choosing  the  Gods’  attendance,  he  with
rich  presents  liath  arranged  the  worship.

3  Of  keenest  spirit  is  tho  man  thou  aidest :  give  us  good  off¬

spring,  thou  who  givest  freely.

In  power  of  wealth  most  rich  in  men,  0  Agni,  of  thee,  the
Good,  may  we  sing  forth  fair  praises.

4  Men  as  they  worship  thee  the  God,  0  Agni,  have  set  on  tlieo

full  many  a  brilliant  aspect.

So  bring,  .Most  Youthful  One,  the  Gods’  assembly,  the
Heavenly  Host  which  thou  to-day  shalt  honour.

.5  When  Gods  anoint  thee  Priest  at  their  oblation,  and  seat  thee
for  thy  task  as  Sacrilicer,

0  Agni,  be  thou  hero  our  kind  defender,  and  to  ourselves
vouchsafe  the  gift  of  glory.

HYMN  XX.  Agni.

With  lauds  at  break  of  mom  the  priest  invoketb  Agni,  Dawn,
D.idhikrils,  and  both  the  Asvins.

4  Pull  jiic tny  a  IriUlant  atptcl :  bright  appearance,  or  splendid  presence.

I  Dadhih  /ti :  or  Dadhikrd,  is  a  mythical  being  described  os  a  kind  of
divine  horse,  and  probaWy  a  personification  of  the  morning  Sun.  He  is
invoked  in  the  morning  together  with  Agni,  Ushas,  and  the  Asvins.


BYM ,V  21.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  337

m

With  ono  consent  the  Gods  whose  light  is  splendid,  longing
to  taste  our  sacrifice,  shall  hear  us.

2  Three  aro  thy  powers,  0  Agni,  three  thy  stations,  three  are

thy  tongues,  yo»,  mauy,  Child  of  Order !  .

Throe  bodies  hast  thou  which  the  Gods  delight  in :  with
those  protect  our  hymns  with  care  unceasing.

3  0  Agni,  many  are  tho  names  thou  bearcat,  Immortal,  God,

Divine,  and  Jatavcdaa :

And  many  charms  of  charmers,  AU-Inspiror  !  have  they  laid  in
thee,  Lord  of  truo  attendants  !

4  Agni,  like  tihaga,  loads  the  godly  people,  ho  who  is  true  to

Law  and  guards  tho  seasons.

Ancient,  all-knowing,  ho  tho  Vfitm-slayor  shall  bear  tho  singer
safe  through  every  troublo.

5  I  cull  on  Snvitur  tho  God,  on  Morning,  Brihnspati,  and

DudhikrAs  and  Agni,

On  Varnya  and  Mitra,  on  tho  Asvins, -Bhaga,  tho  Vosus,
ltudras,  and  Adltyaa.

HYMN  XXI.  Agni.

Sitr  this  our  sacriftco  among  tho  Immortals :  bo  pleased  with
these  our  presents,  J&tuvodas.

0  1’i'ioet,  0  Agni,  sit  thoo  down  boforo  us,  and  first  on  joy  tho
drops  of  oil  and  fafnoss.

2  For  thee,  0  Purifier,  flow  the  drops  of  fatness,  rich  in  oil.
Aftor  thy  wont  vouchsafe  to  us  the  choicest  boon  that  Gods

may  feast.

3  Agni,  Most  Excellent !  for  thco  tho  Sago  are  drops  that  drip

with  oil.

Thou  art  enkindled  os  tho  best  of  Score.  Holp  thou  tho
sacrifice.

4  To  thco,  0  Agni,  mighty  and  resistless,  to  thco  stream  forth

tho  drops  of  oil  and  fatness.

With  groat  light  art  thou  oomo,  0  praised  by  poets  I  Accept
our  offering,  0  thou  Sage.


2  Thru  are  thy  //wm/or  throo  kinds  of  strengthening  food,  clarified
batter,  fuel,  and  soraa.  Thru  thy  SfaluiHi :  three  altars,  or  tho  three  worlds.
Three  nrc  Ihy  ton-met:  tho  three  tires,  GArhapatyn.  Aliavanfya,  and  Dakshina.
Three  bodies :  or  forms  as  IMvako,  PavamAim,  and  5uchi.

3  The  it  rimes  than  Vhy>(  :  or  tho  natures  thou  possesses  t.  Many  ehannt
or  supernatural  powers.


338  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK. Ilf.

5  Fatness  exceeding  rich,  extracted  from  the  midst, — this  as  our
gift  we  offer  thee.

Excellent  God,  the  drops  run  down  upon  thy  skin.  Deal
them. to  each  among  the  Gods.

HYMN  XXII.  Agni.

This  is  that  Agni  whence  the  longing  Indra  took  the  pressed
.Soma  deep  within  his  body.

Winner  of  spoils  in  thousands,  like  a  courser,  with  praise  art
thou  exalted,  J&tavodas.

2  That  light  of  thine  in  heaven  and  earth,  0  Agni,  in  plants,

0  Holy  One,  and  in  the  waters,

Wherewith  thou  hast  spread  wide  the  air’s  mid-region—
bright  is  that  splendour,  wavy,  man-beholding.

3  0  Agni,  to  tho  sea  of  heaven  thou  goest :  thou  hast  called

hither  Gods  beheld  in  spirit.

The  waters,  too,  come  hither,  those  up  yonder  iu  the  Sun’s
realm  of  lights  and  those  beneath  it.

4  Let  fires  that  dwell  in  mist,  combined  with  those  that  have

their  home  in  floods,

Guileless  accept  our  sacrifice,  great  viands  free  from  all  disease.

•  5  Agni,  as  holy  food  to  thine  Invoker  give  wealth  in  cattle,

lasting,  rich  in  mavvols.

To  ns  be  born  a  son  and  spreading  offspring.  Agni,  be  this
thy  gracious  will  to  us-ward.

HYMN  XXIIi.  Agni-

Rubbud  into  life,  well  stablished  in  the  dwelling,  Leader  of
sacrifice,  the  Sage,  the  Youthful,

Hero  in  the  wasting  fuel  Jatavedas,  eternal,  hath  assumed
immortal  being.

2  Both  Bharatas,  Devasravas,  Dcvavata,  have  strongly  nibbed

to  life  effectual  Agni.

0  Agni,  look  thou  forth  with  ample  riches  :  be,  every  day,

•  •  bearer  of  food  to  feed  us.

3  Him  nobly  born  of  old  the  fingers  ten  produced,  him  whom

his  Mothers  counted  dear.

5  Put  nut  exiling  rick,  extracted  from  the  midst :  this  hymn,  SAyana  nays,
ia  suitable  for  animal  sacrifices.  The  fatness  here  spoken  of  is,  as  Professor
Wilson  remarks,  the  same  that  is  described  in  Leviticus,  IV.  9,  as  '  the  fat
that  covereth  the  hi  wards,  and  all  the  fat  that  is  upon  the  inwards.’

1  Whence :  literally,  wherein  ;  that  ia  poured  out  on  whom  or  which.

.  2  B'*.h  BhAraUu :  sons  of  Bhanita,  tho  two  Ilishis  of  the  hymn.

3  HU  Mothers :  the  two  liie-sticka  from  which  Agui  springs  to  life.


HYMN  25.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


338


Praise  Devavita’s  Agni,  thou  Devasravas,  him  who  shall  be
the  people’s  Lord.

4  He  set  thee  in  the  earth’s  most  lovely  station,  in  I*.4’s  place,

in  days  of  fair  bright  weather.  4

On  man,  on  Apaya,  Agni !  on  the  rivers  Drishadvati,  Saras-
vatt,  shine  richly.

5  Agni,  as  holy  food  to  thine  invoker  give  wealth  in  cattle,

lasting,  rich  in  marvels.

To  us  be  born  a  son  and  spreading  offspring  Agni,  be  this
thy  gracious  will  to  us-ward

HYMN  XXIV.  Agni.

Aon' I,  subdue  opposing  bands,  and  drive  our  enemies  away.
Invincible,  slay  godless  foes:  give  splendour  to  the  wor-
‘  shipper.

2  Lit  with  libation,  Agni,  thou,  deathless,  who  callcst  Gods  to

.feast,

.  Accept  our  sacrifice  with  joy.

3  With  splendour,  Agni,  Son  of  Strength,  thou  who  art  wor¬

shipped,  wakeful  One,

Seat  thee  on  this  my  sacred  grass.

4  With  all  thy  fires,  with  all  the  Gods,  Agni,  exalt  the  songs

we  sing.

And  living  men  in  holy  rites.

5  Grant,  Agni,  to  the  worshipper  wealth  rich  in  heroes,  plen¬

teous  store :

Make  thou  us  rich  with  many  sons.

HYMN  XXV.  AgnL

Thou  art  the  sapient  Son  of  Dyaus,  0  Agni,  yea,  and  the
Child  of  Earth,  who  knowest  all  things.

Bring  the  Gods  specially,  thou  Sage,  for  worship.

2  Agni  the  wise  bestows  the  might  of  heroes,  grants  strengthen¬
ing  food,  preparing  it  for  nectar.

Thou  who  art  rich  in  food  bring  the  Gods  hither.


4  He :  the  worshipper.  Earth’ t  most  lovely  station :  according  to  SAyapa,
on  the  northern  altar.  lid's  place :  the  place  of  prayer  and  praise.

„  Drishadrati  and  Saraseatl  (see  Book  I.  8.  10.)  arc  well  known  streams  ;
Apayd,  which  i*  not  mentioned  elsewhere,  appears  to  have  been  a  little  stream
in  the  same  neighbourhood,  near  the  earlier  settlement*  of  the  Aryan  immi¬
grant*.


This  hymn  and  the  eight  following  arc  ascribed  to- the  rtishi  ViavAmitra.


540  $77*  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  III

3  Agni,.  infallible,  lights  Earth  and  Heaven,  immortal  Goddesses

gracious  to  all  men, —

,  Lord  through  his  strength,  splendid  through  adorations.

4  Come  to' the  sacrifice,  Agni  and  Indra:  come  to  the  offerer’s

house  who  hath  the  Soma,

Come,  friendly-minded,  Gods,  to  drink  the  Soma.

5  In  the  floods’  homo  art  thou  enkindled,  Agni,  0  Jatavedas,

Son  of  Strength,  eternal,

Exalting  with  thine  help  the  gathering-pluccs.

HYMN  XXVI.  Agni.

Revering  in  our  heart  Agni  Vaisvanara,  the  flndor  of  the  light,
whoso  promises  are  true,

•  The  liberal,  gladsome,  car-borne  G:xi,  we  Kusikas  invoke  him
with  dilation,  seeking  wealth  with  songs
2  That  Agni,  bright,  Vaisvanara,  we  invoke  for  help,  and
M&tarisvan  worthy  of  the  song  of  praise ;

Brihaspati  for  man’s  observance  of  the  Gods,  the  Singer
prompt  to  hoar,  the  swiftly-moving  guest.

S  Aac  after  age  Vaisvanara,  neighing  like  a  home,  is  kindled
with  the  women  by  the  Kusikas.

,  May.  Agni,  he  who  wakes  among  Immortal  Gods,  grant  us
heroic  strength  and  wealth  in  noble  steeds.

4  -Let  them  go  forth,  the  strong,  as  flames  of  fire  with  might.

Gathered  for  victory  they  have  yoked  their  spotted  deer.
Pourers  of  floods,  the  Maruts,  Masters  of  all  wealth,  they
who  can  ne’er  be  conquered,  make  the  mountains  shake.

5  The  Maruts,  Friends  of  men,  are  glorious  as  the  fire :  their

mighty  and  resplendent  succour  we  imploro.

1  ••  Those  storming  Sous  of  Rudra  clothed  in  robes  of  rain,
boon  givers  of  good  gifts,  roar  as  the  lions  roar.

6  We,  band  on  band  and  troop  following  troop,  entreat  with

fair  lauds  Agui’s  splendour  aud  the  Maruts’  might.


5  In  the  flood*'  home:  in  tho  firmament,  the  home  of  the  aerial  waters.

.  The  guthering-pfuett :  the  worlds  or  regions  inhabited  by  living  beings,
according  to  S&yaua.

.  1_  Vaifc4nara:  common  to,  dear  to,  or  dwelling  with,  all  Aryan  men.

.  KnfHxu :  mou  of  the  family  of  the  Itiahi  Kueika.

•  2  Mdlarifvan :  said  here  by  Siyapi  io  mean  Agni  as  God  of  the  lightning ;
but  tho  usual  seneo  of  tho  word  is  appropriate  enough.

8  With  the  women :  tho  fiugors,  elsewhere  called  the  damsels,  and  the
sisters,  which  agitate  the  fire-stick.

i’  Lttxfitn i  go  forth !  the  Maruts,  or  Storm-Gods.


TV//.1  MGTBDA.


HYMN  27.}


341


With  spotted  deer  for  steeds,  with  wealth  that  never  fails,
they,  wise  Ones,  come  to  sacrifice  at  our  gatherings.

7  Agni  am  I  who  know,  by  birth,  all  creatures.  Mine  eye  is

butter,  in  my  mouth  is  nectar  #

I  am  light  threefold,  measurer  of  the  region ;  exhaustless
heat  am  I,  named  burnt-oblation.

8  Bearing  in  mind  a  thought  with  light  accordant,  he  purified

the  Sun  with  three  refinings ;

By  his  own  nature  gained  the  highest  treasure,  and  looked
abroad  over  the  earth  and  heaven.

9  The  Spring  that  fails  not  with  a  hundred  streamlets,  Father

inspired  of  prayers  that  men  should  utter,

The  Sparkler,  joyous  in  his  Parents’  bosom, — him,  the  Truth-
speaker,  sate  ye,  Earth  and  Heaven.

HYMN  XXVII.  Agni.

In  ladle  dropping  oil  3-0 ur  foed  goes  in  oblation  up  to  heaven,
Goes  to  the  Gods  in  search  of  bliss.

2  Agni  I  laud,  the  Sagi  inspired,  crowner  of  sacrifice  through

song,

Who  listens  and  gives  bounteous  gifts.

3  0  Agni,  if  we  might  obtain  control  of  thee  the  potent  God,
Then  should  wo  overcome  our  foes.

4  Kindled  at  sacrifices  lie  is  Agni,  hallowcr,  meet  for  praise,
With  flame  for  hair:  to  him  wo  seek.

5  Immortal  Agni,  shining  far,  enrobed  with  oil,  well  worshipped,

bears

The  gifts  of  sacrifice  awny.

6  The  priests  with  ladles  lifted  up,  worshipping  here  with  holy

thought.

Have  brought  this  Agni  for  our  aid.


7  Hove  Agni  speaks  and  declares  his  universality  os  the  Soul  of  all.  Ho
knows  ull  living  creatures.  His  eye,  or  iu  liis  eye,  is  the  light  which  is  fed
with  offerings  of  sacred  oil.  The  atnrit,  nectar,  or  ambrosia,  which  is. the
re  ward  of  piety,  is  obtained  by  burnt-offerings  nr  through  iho  mouth  of.
Agui.  He  traverse*  or  measures  out  tiie  firmament,  and  as  light  be  shines  as
the  sun  in  heaven,  the  lightning  in  mid-air,  and  fire  on  earth.  Sec  notoon
the  passage  in  Wilson’s  Translation.

8  With  thru  refiiinpa:  according  to  SAyana,  with  his  three  purifying  forms
as  Agui,  VAyu,  and  Shrya,  or  lire,  wind,  aud  sun.  But  parltraih  may  moan
1  with  mental  divisions,'  aud  the  seuso  would  be  that  Agni  divided  light  into
throe,  sun,  lightning  and  fire.

9  Hu  Pur  enlt  bosom;  in  close  connexion  with  Heaven  and  Earth.


342  THE  HYMNS  OP  [DO OK  TIT.

7  Immortal,  Sacrificer,  God,  with  wondrous  power  he  leads  the

way,

Urging  the  great  assembly  on.

8  Strong,  '  be  is  set  on  deeds  of  strength.  In  sacrifices  led  in

front,

As  Singer  he  completes  the  rite.

9  Excellent,  he  was  made  by  thought.  The  Germ  of  beings  have

I  gained,

Yea,  and  the  Sire  of  active  strength.

10  Thee  hav6  1  stablished,  Excellent,  0  strengthened  by  the  sage’s

prayer !

Thee,  Agni,  longing,  nobly  bright.

11  Agni,  the  swift  and  active  One,  singers,  at  time  of  sacrifice,
Eagerly  kindle  with  their  food.

12  Agni  the  Sou  of  Strength  who  shines  up  to  the  heaven  in

solemn  rites,

The  wise  of  heart,  I  glorify.

13  Meet  to  be  lauded  and  adored,  showing  in  beauty  through  the

dark,

Agni,  the  Strong,  is  kindled  well.

14  Agni  is  kindled  as  a  bull,  like  a  horse  bearer  of  the  Gods :

Men  with  oblations  worship  him.

15  Thee  will  we  kindle  as  a  bull,  we  who  are  Bulls  ourselves,  0

Bull,

Thee,  Agni,  shining  mightily.

HYMN  XXVIII.  Agni.

Aon r  who  knowest  all,  accept  our  offering  and  the  cake  of
meal,

At  dawn’s  libation,  rich  in  prayer !

2  Agni,  the  sacrificial  cake  hath  been  prepared  and  dressed  for

thee :

Accept  it,  0  Most  Youthful  God.

3  Agni,  enjoy  the  cake  of  meal  and  our  oblation  three  days  old  :
Thou,  Son  of  Strength,  art  stablished  at  our  sacrifice.


9  He  was  made  by  thought :  by  holy  thought,  or  devotion.

15  We  tcho  are  Built  ourselves :  priests  are  frequently  called  bulls,  on  ac¬
count  of  their  great  power.  Cf.  III.  7.  7.

3  Our  oblation  thru  days  old :  the  Soma  juice  prepared  the  day  before  yes¬
terday  and  left  to  ferment.


BY  MS  29.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


343


4  Here  at  the  midday  sacrifice  enjoy  thou  the  sacrificial  cake,

wise,  Jita  vedas !

Agni,  the  sages  in  assemblies  never  rninish  the  portion  due  to
thee  the  Mighty.

5  0  Agni,  at  the  third  libation  take  with  joy  the  offered  cake  of

sacrifice,  thou,  Son  of  Strength.

Through  skill  in  song  bear  to  the  Gods  our  sacrifice,  watchful
and  fraught  with  riches,  to  Immortal  Gods.

6  0  waxing  Agni,  knower,  thou,  of  all,  accept  our  gifts,  the  cake,
And  that  prepared  ere  yesterday.

HYMN  XXIX.  Agni

Herb  is  the  gear  for  friction,  here  tinder  made  ready  for  the
spark.

Bring  thou  the  Matron :  we  will  rub  Agni  in  ancient  fashion
forth.

2  In  the  two  fire-sticks  J&tavedas  lieth,  even  as  the  well-set  germ

in  pregnant  women,

Agni  who  day  by  day  must  be  exalted  by  men  who  watch  and
worship  with  oblations.

3  Lay  this  with  care  on  that  which  lies  extended  :  straight  hath

she  borne  the  Steer  when  made  prolific.

With  his  red  pillar — radiant  is  his  splendour — in  our  skilled
task  is  born  the  Son  of  I]a.

4  In  Ift’s  place  we  set  thee  down,  upon  the  central  point  of  earth,
That,  Agni  Jata vedas,  thou  mayst  bear  our  offerings  to  the

Gods.

5  Rub  into  life,  ye  men,  the  Sage,  the  guileless,  Immortal,  very

wise  and  fair  to  look  on.

0  men,  bring  forth  the  most  propitious  Agni,  first  ensign  of
the  sacrifice  to  eastward.


1  Here  is  Hu  (/car  for  friction  :  the  word  udkim&nlhattam  moans  tho  upper
fire-stick  and  the  string  used  in  agitating  it.  The  tinder  is  a  tuft  of  dry
Kusa  grass  placed  so  as  to  catch  the  flame  produced  by  attrition.  The  Hutron  :
the  lower  piece  of  wood  in  which  the  spark  is  generated.  S&yana  explains
tho  word  viffxHalot,  feminine  of  vifputi,  lord  of  the  people,  as  protectress  of
men  by  menus  of  the  Moridces  which  arc  performed  with  tho  help  of  the  fire
which  she  produces.

3  Lay  this  with  care :  place  the  upper  fire-stick,  which  is  to  be  turned  rap¬
idly  round,  upon  the  lower  piece  of  wood  which  is  prepared  to  receive  it.  The
Son  of  lid  :  Agni.

4  In  Ill's  place:  on  the  northern  altar,  the  place  of  worship  aud  libation,
or  prayer  aud  praise.


THE  HYMNS  OP  [ROOK  IN.

6  When  with  their  arm*  they  mb  him  straight  he  shineth  forth

like  a  strong  courser,  red  in  colour,  in  the  wood.

Bright,  checkless,  as  it  were  upon  the  Asvins.’  path,  he  passeth
by  the  stones  and  bnrneth  up  the  grass.

7  Agni  shines  forth  when  bom,  observant,  mighty,  the  bountiful,

the  Singer  praised  by  sages ;

Whom,  as  adorable  and  knowing  all  things,  Gods  set  at  solemn
rites  as  offering-bearer.

8  Set  thee,  0  Priest,  in  thine  own  place,  observant :  lay  down

the  sacrifice  in  the  home  of  worship.

Thou,  deal*  to  Gods,  shalt  serve  them  with  oblation  :  Agni,  give
long  life  to  the  sacrifices

9  Raise  ye  a  mighty  smoke,  my  fellow-workers !  Ye  shall  attain

to  wealth  without  obstruction.

This  Agui  is  the  battle-winning  Hero  by  whom  the  Gods  have
•  overcome  the  Dasyus.

10  This  is  thine  ordered  place  of  birth  whence  sprung  to  life  thou

shonest  forth.

Knowing  this,  Agni,  sit  thee  down,  and  prosper  thou  the  songs
we  sing.

11  As  Germ  Celestial  ho  is  called  Tauunaplt,  and  Narileausa  bom

diffused  in  varied  shape.

Formed  in  his  Mother  he  is  Matnrisvan  ;  he  hath,  in  his  course,
become  the  rapid  flight  of  wind.

12  With  strong  attrition  rubbed  to  life,  laid  down  with  careful

hand,  a  Sage,

Agni,  make  sacril'ccs  good,  and  for  the  pious  bring  the  Gods.

13  Mortals  have  brought  to  life  the  God  Immortal,  the  Conqueror

with  mighty  jaws,  unfailing.

The  sisters  ten,  unwedded  and  united,  together  grasp  the
Babe,  the  new-born  Infant.

J  4  Served  by  the  seven  priests,  he  shono  forth  from  ancient  time,
when  in  his  Mother’s  bosom,  in  her  lap,  he  glowed.

Giving  delight  each  day  he  eloeeth  not  his  eye,  since  from
the  A  sura's  body  he  was  brought  to  life.

6  As  it  were  upon  the  /I flint'  pall :  with  the  speed  of  the  Asvins'  chariot,

8  In  thine  own  place  :  the  ceutro  of  the  north  altar.

11  As  Germ  Celestial:  or  child  of  tho  Asura  Dyaus,  that  is,  in  tho  form  of
lightning.  In  his  Mother :  According  to  Sdvana,  in  tie  maternal  atmosphere.
18  The  sisters  ten  :  the  fingers  used  in  producing  fire.

14  The  Aura's  Mr/ :  the  Asura  ia,  apparently,  Dyaua.  Professor  Wilson,
following  Sdyana,  translates,  '  from  the  interior  of  the  (spark-)  omitting  wood.’


HYMN  30. J


TJIE  RIOYBPA.


34  6


15  Even  as  tbe  Maruta'  onslaughts  who  attack  the  foe,  those

born  the  first  of  all  knew  the  full  power  of  prayer.

The  Kusikas  have  made  the  glorious  hymn  asceud,  and,  each
one  singly  in  his  home,  have  kindled  fire.

16  we,  0  Priest  observant,  have  elected  thee  this  day,  what
time  the  solemn  sacrifice  began,.

So  sorcly  hast  thou  worshipped,  surely  hast  thou  toiled  :  come
thou  unto  the  Soma,  wise  and  knowing  all.

HYMN  XXX.  Indra.

The  friends  who  offer  Soma  long  to  find  thee :  they  pour  forth
Soma  and  present  their  viands.

They  bear  unmoved  the  cursing  of  the  people,  for  all  our
wisdom  comes  from  thee,  0  Indra.

2  Not  far  for  thee  are  mid-air's  'loftiest  regions :  start  hither,

Lord  of  Bays,  with  thy  Bay  Horses.

Made  for  the  Firm  and  Strong  are  these  libations.  The
pressing-stones  arc  set  and  fire  is  kindled.

3  Fair  cheeks  hath  Indra,  Maghavan,  the  Victor,  Lord  of  a

great  host,  Stonnor,  strong  in  action.

What  ouce  thou  didst  in  might  when  mortals  vexed  thee, —
,  where  now,  0  Bull,  arc  those  thy  hero  exploits  ?

4  For,  overthrowing  what  hath  ne’er  been  shaken,  thou  goest
-  forth  alone  destroying  Vritras.

For  him  who  followeth  thy  Law  the  mountains  and  heaven
-•  and  earth  stand  as  if  firmly  stablished.

5  Yea,  Much-invoked  !  in  safety  through  thy  glories  alone  thou

spakest  truth  as  Vritm’s  slayer.

E’en  these  two  boundless  worlds  to  thee,  0  Indra,  what  time
thou  graspest  them,  are  but  a  handful.

6  Forth  with  thy  Bay  Steeds  down  the  steep,  0  Indra,  forth,

crushing  foemcn,  go  thy  bolt  of  thunder!

Slay  those  who  meet  thee,  ihose  who  flee,  who  follow  :  make
all  thy  promise  true  ;  bo  all  completed.

7  The  man  to  whom  thou  givest  as  Provider  enjoys  domestic

plenty  undivided.

Blest,  Indra,  is  thy  favour  dropping  fatness  :  thy  worship,
Much-invoked  !  brings  gifts  in  thousands.

8  Thou,  Indra,  Much-invoked!  didst  crush  to  pieces  Kunfa-u

haudless  fiend  who  dwelt  with  D3nu.


15  Thou  born  t>u  jivtC  of  all:  the  moat  ancient  Rishis  such  as  Kusika  and
his  sons.

8  Kundru:  too  name  of  a  demon.  Ddna:  mother  of  Viittra.  Sco  I.  32.  £>.


316  THE  II YU. VS  OF  [KOOK  lit

Thou  with  might,  Indra,  smotest  dead  the  scorner,  the
footless  Vritra  as  he  waxed  in  vigour.

9  Thou  hast  established  in  her  scat,  0  Indra,  the  level  earth,
vasf,  vigorous,  unbounded.

The  Bull  hath  propped  the  heaven  and  air’s  mid-region;  By
thee  sent  onward  let  the  floods  flow  hither.

10  He  who  withheld  the  kine,  in  silence  yielded  in  foar  before

thy  blow  0  Indra.

He  made  paths  easy  to  drive  forth  the  cattle.  Loud-breath¬
ing  praises  helped  the  Much-invoked  One.

11  Indra  alone  filled  full  the  earth  and  heaven,  the  Pair  who

meet  together,  rich  in  treasures.

Yea,  bring  thou  near  us/ro  n  the  air’s  mid-region  strength,
on  thy  car,  and  wholesome  food,  0  Hero.

12  Surya  transgresses  not  the  ordered  limits  set  daily  by  the

Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers.

When  to  the  goal  he  comes,  his  journey  ended,  his  Steeds  he
looses :  this  is  Indra’s  doing.

13  Men  gladly  in  the  course  of  night  would  look  on  the  broad

bright  front  of  the  refulgent  Morning  ;

And  all  acknowledge,  when  she  comes  in  glory,  the  manifold
and  goodly  works  of  Indra.

1 4  A  mighty  splendour  rests  upon  her  bosom  :  bearing  ripe  milk

the  Cow,  unripe,  advances.

All  sweetness  is  collected  in  the  Heifer,  swoetnoss  which
Indra  made  for  our  enjoyment.

ID  Barring  the  way,  they  come.  Be  firm,  0  Indra;  aid  friends
to  sacrifice  aud  him  who  singeth.

These  must  be  slain  by  thee,  malignant  mortals,  armed  with
ill  arts,  our  quiver-bearing  foemen.

16  A  cry  is  heard  from  enemies  most  near  us:  against  them
send  thy  fiercest-flaming  weapon.

Bend  them  from  under,  crush  them  and  subdue  them.  Slay,
Maghavan,  and  make  the  fiends  our  booty.

9  The  Ball :  the  mighty  Indra.

10  In  silence :  I  adopt  Prof.  M  Milllcr's  interpretation  (Vedic  Hymns,  I.  pp.
*227,  228)  of  the  difficult  word  aid tn'nih,  '  which  had  evidently  become
unintelligible  even  at  the  time  of  Ya*ka.‘

•12  Set  daily:  with  reference,  perhaps,  as  Professor  Ludwig  remarks,  -to
the  apparent  change  in  the  suu's  place  of  rising.

14  The  Coio,  and  the  Heifer:  beneficent  Usliaa  or  Morning.

16  They  come  :  those  who  revile  and  hinder  the  worship  of  Indra.


THE  RIG  YE  DA.


tlYMX  31.1


347


17  Root  up  the  race  of  lUkshasas,  0  Indra;  rend  it  in  front  and

crush  it  in  the  middle.

How  long  hast  thou  behaved  as  ono  who  wavers  ?  Cast  thy
hot  dart  at  him  who  hates  devotion  :  #

18  When  borne  by  strong  Steeds  for  our  weal,  0  Leader,  thou

seatest  thee  at  many  noble  viands,

May  we  be  winners  of  abundant  riches.  May  Indra  be  our
wealth  with  store  of  children.

19  Bestow  on  us  resplendent  wealth,  0  Indra;  let  us  enjoy  thine
■  overflow  of  bounty.

Wide  as  a  sea  our  longing  hath  expanded,  fulfil  it,  0  thou
Treasure- Lord  of  treasures.

20  With  kine  and  horses  satisfy  this  longing  ;  with  very  splendid

bounty  still  extend  it.

Seeking  the  light,  with  hymns  to  thee,  0  Indra,  the  Kusikas
have  brought  their  gift,  the  singers.

21  Lord  of  the  kine,  burst  the  kine’s  stable  open:  cows  shall  be

ours,  and  strength  that  wius  the  booty.

Hero,  whose  might  is  true,  thy  home  is  heaven :  to  us,  0
Maghavan,  grant  gifts  of  cattle.

22  Call  we  on  Mag:iavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  this

fight  where  spoil  is  gathered,

The  Strong  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches.

*  HYMN  XXXI.  Iiulra.

Wise,  teaching,  following  the  thought  of  Order,  the  souloss
gained  a  grandson  from  his  daughter.

Fain,  as  a  sire,  to  see  his  child  prolific,  he  sped  to  meet  her
with  an  eager  spirit.


1  I  am  unable  to  give  a  satisfactory  or  even  an  intelligible  version  or
explanation  of  the  first  two  stan/as  which  appear  to  attribute,  in  a  very
obscure  manner,  to  Agni  and  the  Gods  in  heaven  the  customs  or  laws  of
succession  to  property  among  men.  In  the  first  stanza  idAniA,  which  usually
means  an  oblation-bearer,  a  Bacrificer,  a  priest,  or  one  who  is  borne  along  as  a
God  in  a  celeetial  car,  is  said  by  SlVyana  to  mean  sonleas,  the  father  of  a
daughter  only,  because  he  transfers  his  property  through  his  married
daughter  into  another  family.  The  sonlcss  father,  according  to  SAyap*.
‘stipulates  that  his  daughter's  son,  his  grandson,  shall  be  his  son,  a  mode  of
affiliation  recongnized  by  law  ;  and,  relying  on  an  heir  thus  obtained,  and  one
who  can  perform  his  funeral  rites,  he  is  satisfied.'  This  may  be  intelligible,
but  what  it  has  to  do  with  Agni  or  with  the  rest  of  the  hymn  is  nat  clear.
Orassmann  takes  vdhnih  to  moan  the  upper  fire-stick,  and  the  daughter  to
mean  the  lower  piece  of  wood..


■348  TBS  HYMUS  OP  [BOOK  III.

2  The  Son  left  not  his  portion  to  the  brothel,  he  made  a  homo

to  hold  him  who  should  gain  it.

What  time  his  Parents  gave  the  Priest  his  being,  of  the  good
pair  one  acted,  one  promoted.

3  Agni  was  i>om  trembling  with  tongue  that  flickered,  so  that

the  Red’s  great  children  should  be  honoured.

Great  is  their  germ,  that  bom  of  them  is  mighty,  great  the
Bays’  Lord’s  approach  through  sacrifices.

4  Conquering  bands  upou  the  W;irrior  waited :  they  recognized

great  light  from  out  the  darkness.

The  conscious  Dawns  went  forth  to  meet  his  coming,  and  tho
solo  Master  of  the  kine  was  Indra.

5  The  sages  freed  them  from  their  firm-built  prison  :  the  seven

priests  drove  them  forward  with  their  spirit.

All  holy  Order’s  pathway  they  discovered :  he,  full  of  know¬
ledge,  shared  these  deeds  through  worship.

6  When  Sarama  had  found  the  mountain’s  fissure,  that  vast  and

ancient  place  she  plundered  throughly.

In  the  floods’  van  she  led  them  forth,  light-footed :  she  who
well  knew  came  first  unto  their  lowing.

7  Longing  for  friendship  came  the  noblest  6uiger :  the  hill  pour¬

ed  forth  its  treasure  for  the  pious.


2  Tie  Son  left  not  lit  portion  la  lie  brother:  Wilson,  following  S;\yani  tran-
«!ati*a:  ‘  (a  win)  bora  of  the  body  does  not  transfer  (paternal)  wealth  to  a
Bister.’  Ludwig  ta-cs  the  meaning  to  bo  :  the  bodily  soil  (of  Dyaus,  or  of  the
hoivonly  waters)  did  not  transmit  his  inhenUore  (that  is,  sacrifice)  to  a  bro¬
ther.  A  home :  tho  plants  which  receive  and  hold  Agni,  who  obtains  the  in¬
heritance  of  sacrifice.  Hit  Parents:  perhaps  the  fire  sticks,  one  of  which  by
agitation  produces  the  flame  in  the  otk-r.  The goo>l pair :  the  terrestrial  offerer
who  performs  the  -aerifies,  and  the  celestial  offerer  who  makes  it  effectual.
Sco  Bergaigne,  Us  Religion  VixHgtte,  L  *234.

Ludwig  allows  tliat  the  meaning  of  the  first  two  stanza'  is  problematical,  and
Wilson  fays  of  his  own  translation  :  ‘  these  two  verses,  if  rightly  interpreted,
are  wholly  unconnected  with  the  subject  of  the  SALta,  ami  com?  in  without
any  apparent  object :  they  are  very  obscure,  and  are  only  in  ado  somewhat  in¬
telligible  by  interpretations  whi  ch'aeem  to  be  arbitrary,  and  are  very  unusual,
although  uot  peculiar  to  Sdyaru,  his  explanathms  being  based  on  those  of  YAska.’

3  The  Red's  gre  it  cl  Hire*:  the  Uot  rays  of  the  glowing  fire.  That  lorn  of
them  :  India's  coming,  which  U  caused  by  the  kindling  of  sacrific.il  fire.

4  Conquering  built:  the  ovcr-victoriou3  MaruU.  The  IVarrior :  Indra,
-their  leader.  Muster  oj  the  hint :  reooverer  of  the  vanished  ra/a  of  light.

5  The  saga  and  the  seven  priests:  are  the  Angirasea.

.  8  SaramA  -  the  hound  of  Indra.  See  I.  62.  S.  In  the  foods'  van:  hasten¬
ing  out  of  the  icouutain  cavern  in  advance  of  the  liberated  waters.  Them:
the  cowa,  the  waters  and  the  raya  of  light
■  7  The  noblest  singer :  as  a  noun  of  multitude,  all  the  AngiraaCj.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  31  ]


349


•  The  Hero  with  young  followers  fought  and  conquered,  and
straightway  Angiras  was  singing  praises.

8  Peer  of  each  noblo  thing,  yea,  all- excelling,  all  creatures  doth

he  know,  he  slayeth  Sushna.  *

Our  Leader,  fain  fur  war,  singing  from  heaven,  as  Friend  he
saved  his  lovers  from  dishonour.

9  Thoy  sate  them  down  with  spirit  fain  for  booty,  making  with

hymns  a  way  to  life  eternal.

.  And  this  is  still  their  place  of  frequent  session,  whereby  they
sought  to  gain  the  months  through  Order.

10  Drawing  the  milk  of  ancient  seed  prolific,  thoy  joyed  as  they

beheld  their  own  possession.

Their  shout  of  triumph  heated  earth  and  heaven.  When  the
kiuc  showed,  they  bade  the  heroes  rouse  them.

11  Indra  dravc  forth  the  kine,  that  Vritra-slaycr,  while  hymns

of  praise  rose  up  and  gifts  were  offered.

For  him  the  Cow,  noble  and  far-extending,  poured  pleasant
juices,  bringing  oil  and  sweetness.

12  They  made  a  mansion  for  their  Father,  deftly  provided  him  a

great  and  glorious  dwelling ;

With  firm  support  parted  and  stayed  the  Parents,  and,  sitting,
fixoi  him  there  erected,  mighty.

13  What  time  tho  amplo  chalice  had  impelled  him,  swift  waxing,

vast,  to  pierce  the  earth  and  heaven, —

Him  in  whom  blameless  songs  are  all  united  :  all  powers  invin¬
cible  belong  to  Indra.

14  1  crave  thy'  powers,  I  crave  thy  mighty  friendship  :  full  many

a  team  goes  to  the  Y’ritra-slayer.

Groat  is  the  laud ,  we  seek  the  Prince’s  favour.  Be  thou,  0
Maghavan,  our  guard  and  keeper.

The  Jlero  :  Indra  with  hut  allies  tho  Marais.

'  9  Theft :  tho  Angirases,  who  had  been  eager  to  recover  the  cows.  To  gain
the  months  :  10  acquire  the  power  of  keeping  the  monthly  festivals.

10  Or,  4  They  joyed  to  sec  them,  as  their  own  possession,  yielding  the  milk
of  aucient  aoed  prolific.’  The  Angiraso*  rejoiced  a*  thoy  again  liehcld  the  rays
of  light,  shedding  what  originates  and  support*  all  life.  Sdyana’s  ruudering
of  this  difficult  stanza  is  thin  given  by  Wilson  :  ‘  Contemplating  their  own
(cattle)  giving  mdk  to  their  former  progeny  (tho  AngiruM)  were  delighted  ;
their  shouts  spread  through  heaven  and  earth  ;  they  replaced  the  recovered
kine  in  their  places,  and  stationed  guards  over  tho  cows.'

12  For  their  Putlur :  according  to  Silyana,  for  their  protector  Indra.  But
Agni  may  be  meant,  the  mansion  being  the  place  of  sacrifice.  The  Parents  :
Heaven  and  Earth,  parents  of  all  things.

IS  The  ample  chalice :  tho  bowl  of  .Soma  juice.  But,  according  to  Ludwig,
Shiih&itd  here  and  elsewhere,  means  earnest  wish,  longing

14  Pall  many  a  team  :  hymns  Bent  forth  like  teams  of  horses.


350  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK.  III.

15  lie,  having  found  great,  splendid,  rich  dominion,  sent  life  and

motion  to  his  friends  and  lovers.

Indra  who  shone  together  with  the  Heroes  begat  the  song,
the  iire,  and  Sun  and  Morning.

16  Vast,  the  House-Friend,  ho  set  the  waters  flowing,  all-lucid,

widely  spread,  that  move  together.

By  the  wise  cleansings  of  the  meath  made  holy,  through  days
and  nights  they  speed  the  swift  streams  onward.

17  To  thee  proceed  tho  dark,  the  treasure-holders,  both  of  them

sanctified  by  SAry&’s  bounty,

The  while  thy  lovely  storming  Friends,  0  Indra,  fail  to  attain
tho  measure  of  thy  greatness.

18  Be  Lord  of  joyous  songs,  0  Vjitra-slayer,  Bull  dear  to  all,  who

gives  the  power  of  living.

Como  unto  us  with  thine  auspicious  friendship,  hastening,
Mighty  One,  with  mighty  succours.

19  Like  Angiros  I  honour  him  with  worship,  and  renovate  old  song

for  him  tho  Anoicnt

Chono  thou  the  many  godless  evil  creatures,  and  give  us,  Magha-
van,  heaven's  light  to  help  us.

20  Far  forth  are  spread  the  purifying  waters  :  convoy  thou  us

across  thorn  unto  safoty!

Savo  us,  our  Charioteer,  from  harm,  0  Indra,  soon,  vory  soon,
make  us  win  spoil  of  cattle.

21  His  kino  thoir  Lord  hath  shown,  e'on  Vjitra’s  slayer :  through

tho  black  hosts  ho  passed  with  red  attendants.

Teaching  us  pleasant  things  by  holy  Order,  to  us  hath  ho
thrown  open  all  his  portals.

22  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspioious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  this  fight

whore  spoil  is  gathered,

The  Strong  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays  the
Vfitras,  wins  and  gathers  richos.


16  By  the  wise  cleansings :  or  according  to  S&yana,  tho  wine  purifiers,  that  is,
Agni,  V&yu,  snd  Surya,  who  act  as  purifier*  of  tho  libation  of  Soma  juico.

17  The  dark,  the  treasure-holders  :  or.  the  dark  one  and  the  treasure-holder  ;
Night  and  Day.  Storming  Friends :  tho  Maruto,

20  The  purifying  wafers :  tho  epithet  pdcaMh,  purifying,  ia  entirely  out  of
place  here.  Ludwig  suggests  plpaldh,  wicked,  which  would  be  more  suitable.

21  Kine :  rays  of  light.  Fed  attendants  ;  the  Manila.

'  Many  of  the  verse*  in  this  hymn,’  Prof.  Wilson  observes,  1  are  of  more
than  usual  obscurity.’  Prof.  Grassmann  places  the  hymn  in  his  Appendix.


HYMN  32  ]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  S5X

HYMN  XXXIL  indra.

Drink  thou  this  Soma,  Indra,  Lord  of  Soma;  drink  thou  the
draught  of  noonday  which  thou  Jovest.

Puffing  thy  checks,  impetuous,  liberal  Givor,  hereJooso  thy
two  Bay  Horses  and  rcjoico  thee.

2  QunfF  it  puro,  meal-blent,  inixt  with  milk,  0  Indra;  we  have

poured  forth  the  Soma  for  thy  rapturo.

Knit  with  the  prayor-fulfilling  band  of  Maruts,  yea,  with  the
liudras,  drink  till  thou  art  sated  ;

3  TIioho  who  gave  increase  to  thy  strongth  and  vigour,  the  Maruts

singing  forth  thy  might,  0  Indra.

Drink  thou,  0  fair  of  cheek,  whose  hand  wields  thunder,  with
Rudms  banded,  at  our  noon  libation.

4  They,  ovou  the  .Maruts  who  were  there,  oxcited  with  song  tho

meath-created  strongth  of  Indra.

By  thorn  impelled  to  act  lie  rooohod  tho  vitals  of  Vptra,  though
,  ho  doemod  that  nono  might  wound  him.

5  Pleased,  liko  a  man,  with  our  libation,  Indra,  drink,  for  endur-
„  ing  hero  might,  tho  Soma.

Lord  of  Bays,  movod  by  suoritioo  como  hither  :  thou  with  tho
Swift  Onos  stirrest  floods  and  waters.

6  Whon  thou  didst  looso  tho  stronms  to  run  like  racers  in  tho

swift  contest,  having  smitten  Vptra
With  flying  weapon  where  ho  lay,  0  Indra,  and,  godloss,  kept
tho  (toddcHsos  oncomiMissed.

7  With  rovoronoo  lot  us  worship  mighty  Indra,  groat  and  sub¬

lime,  eternal,  ovor-youthful,

Whose  greatness  tho  dear  world-halves  have  not  measured,  no,
nor  conceived  tho  might  of  him  tho  Holy.

8  Many  arc  Indm’s  nobly  wrought  achievements,  and  none  of  all

the  (Jod*  transgress  his  statutes.

Ho  bearoth  up  this  earth  and  heaven,  and,  door  of  marvels,  ho
begat  tho  Sun  and  Morning.

1  I’Mjfing  tJ.y  cheeks:  moaning,  apparently,  smacking  thy  lips  in  anticipation
of  the  Soma-draught.  SAyana  explains  it  as.  *  filling  their  (Indra  a  homes')
jaw*  with  fodder.’  Impetuous:  this  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  epithet
rijtf/iiit  ns  derived  from  the  root  r(j,  rather  than,  as  Sflynpa  explains  it,  'drinker
of  the  spiritless  residue  of  the  Sonia.'  Tho  latter  meaning,  however,  is  admis¬
sible,  and  is  supported  by  good  authority.

3  The  M units  singing  forth  thy  might ;  the  song  of  the  Maruts  is  the  rauBio
of  -The  winghd  storms,  chaunting  their  thunder-psalm.' — Shelley.

5  Like  a  mnn  :  or,  as  thou  west  pleased  with  tiro  libation  of  Manu.

The  Swift  Ones  :  the  Maruts.

•  «  The  Ooddmes :  the  heaven'y  waters.

7  The  dear  world-halves  :  heaven  and  earth.


352  THE  IfYAtXS  OP  [BOOK  Til.

9  Herein,  0  Guileless  One,  is  thy  true  greatness,  that  soon  as
horn  thou  drankcat  up  the  Soma.

Days  may  not  check  the  power  of  thee  the  Mighty,  nor  the
nights,  Indra,  nor  the  months,  nor  autumns.

10  As  soon  as  thou  wast  bom  in  highest  heaven  thou  drunkest

Soma  to  delight  thee,  Iudm  ;

And  when  thou  hudst  pervaded  earth  and  heaven  thou  wast
the  first  supporter  of  the  singer.

11  Thou,  puissant  God,  more  mighty,  slowost.  Ahi  showing  his

strength  whon  couched  around  the  watora.

The  heaven  itsolf  attained  not  to  thy  greatnoss  when  with  ono
hip  of  thino  the  earth  was  shadowed.

12  Sacrifice,  Indra,  made  thoe  wax  so  mighty,  the  doftr  oblation

with  the  flowing  Soma.

0  Worshipful,  with  worship  help  our  worship,  for  worship  helped
thy  bolt  when  slaying  Alii.

13  With  Kuori fire  amt  wish  have  I  brought  Indra ;  still  for  now

blowings  may  I  turn  him  hithor,

Him  magnirt'  d  by  ancient  songs  and  praises,  by  lauds  of  later
time  and  days  yet  recent.  -

14  I  have  brought  forth  a  song  whon  longing  soiaed  rao:  oro  tho

decisive  day  will  I  laud  Indra;

Then  navy  he  safely  hear  us  over  trouble,  ns  in  a  ship,  whon
both  sides  invouuto  him.

15  Full  is  IHs  clmlico:  Glory  !  Like  a  pourcr  I  liavo  filled  up  tho

vessel  for  his  drinking.

Presented  on  the  right,  dear  Soma  juicos  have  brought  us
Indm,  to  rojoioo  him,  hither.

10  Not  tho  deep-flowing  flood,  0  Much-invoked  One !  not  hills
that  compass  thee  about  rostrum  thee,

Sinco  horo  inoitod,  for  thy  friends,  O  Indm,  thou  brakost  e'en
the  firm-built  stall  of  cattle.

17  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  India,  best  Hero  in  tho  fight
where  spoil  is  gathored,

Tho  Stroug  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
the  Vritms,  wins  and  gathers  richos.

11  When  Htth  on*  hi/t  of  thine  Ike  *ndh  at*  •hado^td:  Prof.  Wilson,  fellow*
ing  SAya-ia,  tnui.*luu»  :  ‘  ns  tli  >u  romaiiuslst  omiounHiig  tlic  earth  by  one  of
(t)>y)  flaniRa.' ami  observes  Mwt  tho  meaning  is  not  very  ol-ar.  Hut  Mphi,t
incAD*  a  hin  ami  not  a  fUmo,  aiul  the  |wot  appoaro  to  mean  that  a  portiou  of
Jndra’s  body  shadowed  or  covered  tho  earth  wliil*  i  tho  rest  was  in  tho  heavens.
So,  in  Rook  X  119  11,  Indra  is  represented  ns  saying  whon  exhilarated  by
Soma :  divi  mr.  nn/fifr  /Mihlid  \lh6  nny,im  //rAftyuAaui.  ono  sido  of  mo  is  in
the  sky,  and  I  hnvi'  drawn  the  other  down.

14  Brt  the  decisive  day :  on  tho  ovc  of  au  important  battle.


HYMN  33.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  353

.  HYMN  XXXIII.  Indra.

Forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  mountains,  eager  as  two  swift
mares  with  loosened  rein  contending,

Like  two  bright  mother  cows  who  lick  their  youngling,
Vipis  and  Sutudri  speed  down  their  waters.

2  Impelled  by  Indra  whom  yo  pray  to  urge  you,  yo  move  as

'twero  on  chariots  to  the  ocean.

Flowing  together,  awolling  with  your  billows,  0  luoid  Streams,
each  of  you  seeks  the  other.

3  I  have  attained  the  most  maternal  River,  we  have  approached

Vipls,  tho  broad,  the  blossfcd.

Licking  as  ’tworo  their  calf  the  pair  of  Mothers  flow  onward
to  their  oommon  home  together.

4  Wo  two  who  riso  and  swell  with  billowy  waters  move  forward  ,

to  tho  homo  which  (Jods  have  made  us.

Our  flood  may  not  be  stayed  whon  urged  to  motion.  What
would  tho  singor,  calling  to  tho  Rivera  1

5  Lingor  a  littlo  at  my  friendly  bidding ;  rest,  Holy  Ones,  a

momont  in  your  journey.

With  hymn  sublime  soliciting  your  favour  Kufika’s  son  hath
callod  unto  tho  ltivor.

6  Indra  who  wields  the  thundor  dug  our  olmunols  :  ho  smoto

down  Vptra,  him  who  stayod  our  curronts.

Savitar,  Uod,  tho  lovely-handed,  lod  us,  and  at  his  Bonding
forth  we  flow  oxpandod.

The  hymn  is  a  dialogue  bo  tween  ViijvAmitra  and  tho  riven  Vipls  and  Qntu-
drl  who  aro  regard od  severally  as  tho  Itiihis  or  »oor«  of  tho  vontes  ascribed  to
them.  The  legend  citod  by  Siyaps  says  that  Visvftinitra,  the  PurohiU  or
family  priest  of  King  Sudds,  having  obtained  wealth  by  moans  of  his  office,
took  tho  whole  of  it  and  camo  to  tho  confluence  of  the  Vipft?  and  the  $utudrt.
Others  followed.  In  order  to  make  tho  river#  fordable  ho  lauded  them  with
the  first  three  verses  of  tho  hymn.  The  hymn  has  some  poetical  beauty,  and
is  interesting  as  a  rolio  of  the  traditions  of  the  Aryans  regarding  their  pro¬
gress  eastward  in  the  Land  of  tho  Five  Rivers.

1  Vip> If  ;  considered  to  bo  identical  with  tho  Hypliasis  of  Arrian,  is  the
modern  Bets  which  rises  in  tho  Himalaya  and  falls  ijito  the  Sutlej,  the
§  Uudrl  of  tho  text,  a  little  to  the  south-east  of  Amritsar.

4  The  rivers  speak  in  reply  to  VisvAmitra’s  address.

5  VisvAmitra  speaks  again.  At  my  friendly  bidding:  according  to  the
Scholiasts,  Yllska  and  Sdyana,  the  meaning  of  me  vdchatt  lomySya  is,  ‘to  my
speech  importing  the  Soma  ;  ’  that  is,  tho  object  of  my  address  is  that  I  may
cross  over  and  gather  the  Soma-plant.  Tho  word  tomyd,  consisting  of,  con-
n  ctcd  with,  or  inspired  by,  Soma,  appears  to  have  here  its  more  general
meaning  of  lovely,  pleasant,  or  friendly.  Kutika't  ton :  Visvdmitra.

6  Tho  rivers  speak.  Savitar  :  said  by  Sdyana  to  be  UBed  here  as  an  epithet
of  Indra,  ‘  the  impeller  of  the  whole  world.’


354  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  111.

7  That  hero  deed  of  Indra  must  bo  lauded  for.  over  that  he  rent

Alii  in  pieces.

Ho  smote  away  the  obstructors  with  his  thunder,  and  eager
for  thoir  course  forth  flowed  the  waters.

8  Nover  forget  this  word  of  thine,  0  singer,  which  future  gene¬

rations  shall  rofleho.

In  hymns,  0  bard,  show  us  thy  loving-kindness.  Humblo  us
not  mid  men.  To  thco  bo  honour !

9  List  quickly,  Sisters,  to  the  bard  who  cometh  to  you  from  far

away  with  car  aud  wagon.  •

Bow  lowly  down ;  bo  oasy  to  bo  traversed :  stay,  Rivera,  with
your  floods  bolow  our  axles.

10  Yoa,  wo  will  listen  to  thy  words,  0  singer.  With  wain  and

car  from  fur  away  thou  comust.

Low,  liko  a  nursing  mother,  will  I  bend  me,  and  yield  mo  os  a
maiden  to  her  lover.

1 1  Soon  as  tho  Bharatas  havo  fared  across  thee,  tho  warrior  baud,

urged  on  and  sped  by  Indra,

Tbou  lot  your  streams  flow  on  in  rapid  motion.  I  oravo  your
favour  who  deserve  our  worship.

12  Tho  warrior  host,  tho  Bharatas,  fared  ovor:  tho  singer  won  tho

favour  of  tho  Rivers.

Swell  with  your  billows,  hasting,  pouring  riches.  Fill  full  your
channels,  and  roll  swiftly  onward.

13  So  lot  your  wave  bear  up  tho  pins,  and  ye,  0  Waters,  spare  tho

thongs ;

And  novor  may  tho  pair  of  Bulls,  harmless  and  sinless,  was  to

away.

HYMN  XXXIV.  indra.

Fort-urnoer,  Lord  of  Wealth,  dispelling  foomon,  Indra  with
lightnings  hath  o’ercome  the  Diisa.


7  VisviUnitr*  speaks.

8  The  river*  speak.

8  VisvAmitra  speak*.

10  The  river*  speak.

11  VUvlmitnv  speaks.  The  Bharatas:  tho  family  of  VisvAmitrt.

13  This  verso,  in  a  different  metro,  is  manifestly  a  later  addition.  The  pins :
of  the  yokes.  The  pair  of  Bulls :  tho  two  strong  rushing  rivers.  Cf.
Horace's  lauri/ot'tnis  AuUdui.  Prof.  Wilson,  following  Siyaya,  gives  a  Borne-
what  different  version  of  the  stanza  :  '  Let  your  waves  (rivers)  so  flow  that
the  pin  of  the  yoke  may  be  above  (their)  waters :  leave  the  traces  full,  and
may  (the  two  streams)  exempt  from  misfortune  or  defect,  and  uncousured,
exhibit  no  (present)  increase.’  - 1

1  Port-renler  ;  breaker-down  of  the  cloud-castles  of  the  demons  who  with¬
hold  the  rain  as  well  as  of  the  strongholds  of  the  hostile  non-Aryan  tribes,


HYMN  34.]


THE  R IQ  VET)  A.


355


Impelled  by  prayer  and  waxen  great  in  body,  he  hath  filled
earth  and  heaven,  the  Bounteous  Giver.

2  I  stimulate  thy  zeal,  the  Strong,  the  Hero,  decking  my  song
of  praise  for  thee  Immortal.  *

0  Inara,  thou  art  equally  the  Leader  of  heavenly  hosts  and
human  generations.

8  Leading  his  band  Indra  encompassed  Vyitra;  weak  grew  the
wilv  leader  of  enchanters.

-  lie  who  burns  fierco  in  forests  slaughtered  Vyansa,  and  made
the  Milch-kino  of  the  nights  apparent.

4  Indra,  light-winner,  days’  Creator,  conquered,  victorious,  hos¬

tile  bands  with  those  who  loved  him.

For  man  tho  days'  bright  ensign  he  illumined,  and  found  the
light  for  his  great  joy  and  gladness.

5  Forward  to  fiercely  falling  blows  pressed  Indra,  herolike

doing. many  hero  exploits.

Tlieso  holy  songs  ho  taught  the  bnrd  who  praised  him,  and
widely  spread  thoso  Dawns’  resplendent  colour.

6  Thuv  laud  tho  mighty  acts  of  him  the  Mighty,  tho  many

glorious  doeds  performed  by  India.

Ho  in  his  strength,  with  all-surpassing  prowess,  through
wondrous  arts  crushed  the  malignant  Dosyus.

7  Lord  of  tho  bravo,  Indra  who  rules  tho  people  gave  freedom

to  tho  Gods  by  might  and  battlo.

Wife  singers  glorify  with  chanted  praises  these  his  achieve¬
ments  in  Vivosv.Ws  dwelling.

8  Excellent,  Conquoror,  tho  viotory-givur,  tho  winner  of  tho

light  and  Godliko  Waters,

He  who  hath  won  this  broad  earth  and  this  heaven, — in
Indra  thoy  rejoico  who  love  devotions.

9  Ho  gained  possession  of  tho  Sun  and  Horses,  Indra  obtained

the  Cow  who  feedoth  many.

Treasure  of  gold  ho  won ;  he  smote  the  Dasyus,  and  gave
protection  to  the  Aryan  colour.


3  He  who  burnt  fierce  in  foretU  ;  perliapa  tlio  thunderbolt.  Vynnia  :  the
name  of  ono  of  tho  demons  of  drought.  See  I.  101.  2,  and  108.  2.

Made  the  MUch-ldne  of  the  u  hjhtt  apparent:  according  to  Styapa,  ‘made
manifest  tho  (stolon)  cow*  (that  hod  bcon  hidden)  in  the  night ;  ’  that  i§,
recovered  tho  rays  of  light  ....  ,  '

7  In  Vivatv&na  dwelling :  in  the  sacrificial  chamber,  in  the  home  of  the
worshipper  who  represent*  Vivaavln,  tho  Radiant  God,  regarded  aa  tho
Celeatial  Sacrifices

9  The  Aryan  cotour:  or,  race  of  Avya*  ;  according  to  Sfyana,  the  nobleat
tribe  or  order,  meaning  tho  Pint  Uireo  classes  or  castes.


356  TBS  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  111.

10  He  took  the  plants  and  days  for  his  possession ;  he  gained  the

forest  trees  and  air's  mid-region.

Vala  ho  cleft,  and  chased  away  opponents :  thus  was  he  tamer
of  tbe  overweening.

11  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspioious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  the  fight

where  spoil  is  gathered,

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  givos  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
the  Vjitrue,  wins  and  gathers  treasures.

HYMN  XXXV.  Indra.

Mount  the  Bay  Homes  to  thy  ohariot  harnossed,  and  come  to
us  like  Vfcyu  with  his  coursers.

Thou,  hastening  to  us,  shalt  drink  the  Soma.  Hail,  Indra  !
Wo  have  poured  it  for  thy  rapture.

2  For  him,  the  God  who  is  invoked  by  many,  tho  two  swift  Bay

.Steeds  to  the  polo  I  harness,

That  thoy  in  (loot  courso  may  bring  Indra  hither,  o’en  to  this
sacrifice  arraugod  completely.

3  Bring  tho  strong  Steeds  who  drink  tho  warm  libation,  and,

Bull  of  Godliko  nature,  bo  thou  graoious.

Let  thy  Steeds  oat ;  sot  froc  thy  Tawny  Horses,  and  roasted
grain  liko  this  consume  thou  daily.

4  Those  who  are  yoked  by  prayor  with  prayor  I  harness,  flcofc

friendly  Bays  who  take  their  joy  togothor.

Mounting  thy  firm  and  easy  car,  0  Indra,  wise  and  all-know¬
ing  come  thou  to  tho  Soma.

5  No  other  worshippers  must  stay  bosido  thom  thy  Bays,  thy

vigorous  and  smooth-baoked  Coursers.

Pass  by  thorn  all  and  hasten  onward  hithor:  with  Soma
pressed  wo  will  proparo  to  feast  thco.

6  Thine  is  this  Soma  :  hasten  to  approach  it.  Drink  thou  there-

of,  benevolent,  and  ceaso  not.

Sit  on  tho  sacred  grass  at  this  our  worship,  and  take  these
.  .  drops  into  thy  belly,  Indra.

7  The  grass  is  strewn  for  thee,  pressed  is  the  Soma ;  the  grain

is  ready  for  tby  Bays  to  feed  on.

To  thoe  who  lovest  them,  the  very  mighty,  strong,  girt  by
Maruts,  are  these  gifts  presented.


2  /  harnat:  my  prayer  (Auroa  Indra  to  harness.

3  Who  drink  the  warm  libation:  or,  according  to  SAyann,  ‘  who  protect  us
from  our  enemies.’  Roasted  grain:  fried  barley,  according  to  SAyana.  Tho
grain  would  appear  to  be  intended  for  Indra'#  hums.  Sco  stanza  7.


fBB  RIG  VEDA.


HYMtt  36.]


357


8  This  the  sweet  draught,  with  cows,  the  men,  the  mountains,

the  waters,  Indra,  have  for  thee  made  ready.

Come,  drink  thereof,  Sublime  One,  friendly-minded,  foreseeing,
knowing  well  the  ways  thou  goest.

9  The  Maruts,  they  with  whom  thou  sharedst  Soma,  fndra,  who

made  thee  strong  aud  wore  thine  army, —

With  these  accordant,  eagerly  desirous  drink  thou  this  Soma
with  tho  tongue  of  Agni.

10  Drink,  Indra,  of  tho  juice  by  thine  own  nature,  or  by  tho

tongue  of  Agni,  0  thou  Holy.

Accept  tho  sacrilicial  gift,  0  Sakra,  from  tho  Adhvaryu’s  hand
or  from  tho  Hotar’s.

1 1  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  tho  fight

whore  spoil  is  gathered,

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
tho  Vfitras,  wins  and  gathers  riches.

HYMN  XXXVI.  Indra.

With  constant  succours,  fain  thyself  to  share  it,  make  this
oblation  whioh  wo  bring  effective.

Grown  great  through  strengthening  gifts  at  oaoh  libation,  ho
hath  bocomo  renowned  by  mighty  oxploits.

2  For  Indra  wero  tho  Somas  erst  dltoovored,  whereby  ho  grow

strong-join  tod,  vast,  and  skilful.

Indra,  tako  quickly  theso  prosonted  juices  :  drink  of  tho  strong,

.  that  which  the  strong  have  shaken.

3  Drink  and  wax  groat.  Thine  aro  tho  juices,  Indra,  both  Somas

of  old  time  and  theso  we  bring  thee.

Evon  us  thou  drunkest,  Indra,  earlier  Somas,  so  drink  to-day,
a  now  guest,  meet  for  praisos.

4  Great  and  impetuous,  mighty-voiced  in  battle,  surpassing

power  is  his,  and  strength  resistless.

Him  the  broad  earth  hath  never  comprohondod  when  Somas
cheored  tho  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers.

8  With  cotct :  that  is,  with  tho  milk  which  in  mixed  with  Soma.  The  sun  :
who  make  all  preparations  for  tho  sacrifice.  The  mouutaiui :  on  which  tho
Soma  grows  ;  or  perhaps  tho  pressing-stones  brought  from  tho  hill-side.  The
voters :  uBod  to  purify  tho  Soma.

10  By  (Mne  own  nature :  by  thine  own  strength,  or  effort ;  spontaneously.
Sakra  :  Mighty  One  ;  a  common  name  of  Indra.

2  Drink  of  the  strong :  that  ia,  of  the  strong  Soma  juice,  which  has  been
shaken,  i.  o.  violently  pressed  out,  by  the  strong  preBsing-stouea.

4  Mighty-voiced:  the  exact  moaning  of  virapfin  ia  uncertain.  Prof.  Wilson
renders  it,  after  Sdyana,  by  '  defier  of  foes,'


358  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  TII.

5  Mighty  and  strong  he  waxed  for  hero  exploit :  the  Bull  was

furnished  with  a  Sage’s  wisdom.

Jndra  is  our  kind  Lord;  his  steers  have  vigour;  his  cows  are
many  with  abundant  offspring.

6  As  floods  according  to  their  stream  flow  onward,  so  to  the  sea,

as  borne  on  cars,  the  waters.

Vaster  is  Indra  even  than  his  dwelling,  what  time  the  stalk
milked  out,  the  Soma,  Alls  him.

7  Kagor  to  minglo  with  the  sea,  tho  rivers  carry  the  well-pressed

Soma  juico  to  Indra.

They  drain  tho  stalk  out  with  thoir  arms,  quick-handod,  and
cloanse  it  with  a  stream  of  mead  and  filters.

8  Like  lakes  appear  his  flanks  filled  full  with  Soma :  yea,  he  con¬

tains  libations  in  abundanco.

When  Indra  had  consumed  the  first  sweet  viands,  he,  after
slaying  Vfitra,  claimed  tho  Soma.

9  Then  bring  thou  hither,  and  lot  nono  prevent  it :  wo  know

thee  well,  the  Lord  of  wealth  and  treasure.

That  splendid  gift  which  is  thino  own,  0  Indra,  vouchsafe  to
us,  Lord  of  tho  Tawny  Corn-sera.

10  0  Indra,  Maghavan,  impotuous  rnovor,  grant  us  abundant

wealth  that  brings  all  blossings.

Give  us  a  hundred  autumns  for  our  life-timo :  give  us,  0  fair-
choekcd  Indra,  store  of  heroes.

1 1  Call  we  on  Indra,  Maglmvan,  auspicious,  best  Hero  in  tho  fight

whore  spoil  is  gathered,

The  Strong,  who  listons,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
tho  Vj-itras,  wins  and  gathors  riches.

HYMN  XXXVII.  In, Ira.

0  Indra,  for  tho  strength  that  slays  Vritra  and  conquers  in
the  fight,

We  turn  thee  hithorward  to  us.


5  Ilit  com  :  I  follow  SAvnrin,  Koth,  Ludwiv,  and  Grassinann  in  giving  this
.meaning  to  ddkshinAh,  as  tho  meaning  ' guerdons,’  ‘donations,’  docs  not  suit
the  passage.

6  As  rivers  increase  the  size  of  the  ocean,  so  libations  of  Soma  juice  aug¬
ment  tho  greatness  of  Indr*  until  ho  is  too  vast  for  his  home  the  heaven  to
contain  him.

7  The  tea :  perhoi®  the  sacrificial  reservoir.  The  rivers  :  waters  used  in  the
Soma  ceremonies.

They  drain :  that  is,  the  officiating  priest*.

9  Bring  thou  hither :  bring  tho  wealth  for  which  we  pray.

10  A  hundred  auftmni;  see  I.  89.  9.


HYMN  3S.]


THE  RIO  YE  DA.


359


2  0  Indra,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,  may  those  who  praise  thee

hitherward

Direct  thy  spirit  and  thine  eye.

3  0  Indra,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,  with  all  our  songs  wo  in-

vocate  *

Thy  names  for  triumph  over  foes.

4  We  strive  for  glory  through  the  powers  immense  of  him  whom

many  praise,

Of  Indra  who  supports  mankind.

5  For  Vfitra’s  slaughter  I  address  Indra  whom  many  invocato,
To  win  us  booty  in  tho  wars.

6  In  battles  bo  victorious.  Wo  seek  thee,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers,
Indra,  that  Vfitra  may  bo  slain.

7  In  splondid  combats  of  the  hosts,  in  glories  whoro  tho  fight

is  won,

Indra,  bo  victor  over  foes.

8  Driuk  thou  the  Soma  for  our  help,  bright,  vigilant,  oxeooding

strong,

0  Indra,  Lord  of  Hundred  Powers.

9  0  Satakmtu,  powers  which  thou  mid  tho  Five  Races  host  dis¬

played—

These,  Indra,  do  I  claim  of  -  thee.

10  Indra,  groat  glory  host  thou  gained.  Win  splondid  fame  which

none  may  mar :

Wo  make  thy  might  porpotual.

11  Como  to  us  oithor  from  anoar,  or,  Sakra,  como  from  far  away.
Indra,  wherever  bo  thy  home,  como  to  us  thonco,  0  Thunder-

armed.

HYMN  XXXVIII.  Indra.

Hasting  like  some  strong  coursor  good  at  drawing,  a  thought
have  I  imagined  like  a  workman.

Pondering  what  is  dearest  and  most  noble,  I  long  to  see  the
sages  full  of  wisdom.


2  Those  ieho  praue  thee :  tho  insti  tutors  of  tho  snorifico.

8  Vigilant :  according  to  SAym.ia,  Soma  prevents  sleep.

9  ^atakratu:  Lord  of  a  hundred,  or  countless,  powers.

The  Five  Races :  Indra  is  the  special  protector  of  tho  five  Aryan  tribes.

This  hymn  is  ascribed  to  the  Ttishi  PrajApati,  of  tlio  family  of  VisvAmitra,
or  PrajApnti,  son  of  YAk,  or  both"  together,  or  VisvAmitra  himself.  Tho  deity
is  said  to  bo  Indra,  although  he  is  mentioned  only  in  the  concluding  vjrso.
The  hymn  is  intentionally  obscure,  and  in  port*  unintelligible.

1  Like  a  workman :  ns  a  carpenter  prepares  his  wood.

I  long  to  see  the  sages :  that  I  may  learn  from  them  what  I  wish  to  kuow.


360  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  JIT.

2  Ask  of  the  sages’ mighty  generations :  firm-minded  and  devout

they  framed  the  heaven.

These  are  thy  heart-sought  strengthening  directions,  and  they
have  come  to  be  the  sky’s  upholders.

3  Assuming  in  this  world  mysterious  natures,  they  decked  the

heaven  and  earth  for  high  dominion,

Measured  with  measures,  fixed  their  broad  expanses,  set  the
great  worlds  apart  hold  firm  for  safety.

4  Even  as  ho  mounted  up  they  all  adorned  him :  self-luminous  he

travels  clothed  in  splendour.

That  is  the  Bull's,  the  Asura’s  mighty  figure :  ho,  omniform,
hath  rcachod  the  otemal  waters.

5  First  tho  more  ancient  Bull  engendered  offspring :  thoso  are

his  many  draughts  that  lent  him  vigour.

From  days  of  old  ye  Kings,  two  Sons  of  Heaven,  by  hymns  of
sacrifice  have  won  dominion.

6  Throe  seats  yo  Sovrans,  in  the  holy  synod,  many,  yea,  all,  yo

honour  with  your  prcaonco.

There  saw  I,  going  thithor  in  the  spirit,  Gandharvus  in  their
OOune  with  wind-blown  tressos.

7  That  samo  companionship  of  her,  tho  Miloh-oow,  hero  with  tho

strong  Bull’s  divers  forms  thoy  stnblished.

Enduing  still  somo  now  celestial  figure,  tho  skilful  workors
Bhuped  a  form  around  him.

8  Lot  no  one  hero  debar  me  from  enjoying  the  golden  light  which

Savitar  diffuses.

Ho  covors  both  all-fostoving  worlds  with  praises  oven  as  a  wo¬
man  chcrishos  her  children.


3  For  high  dominion :  that  Indra  might  rulo  over  them.

4  Even  at  he  mounted  up:  that  is,  Indra  as  tho  Sun.

The  eternal  toateri :  or,  according  to  Prof.  Roth,  '  tho  forces  of  otcruity.’

6  The  more  ancient  Bull :  Indra  m  tho  Sun.

Two  Soni  of  Heaven :  or  of  Dyaus  ;  Varuna  and  perhaps  Mitra.

6  The  three  seati  arc  heaven,  the  firmament  or  mid-air,  and  thooarth.  Tho
poet  appears  to  mean,  by  the  worda  that  follow,  tliat  no  place  of  sacrifice  i«
duly  consecrated  unices  these  GodB  are  present.

The  Gandharvai,  according  to  the  Scholiast,  are  the  guardians  of  the  Soma.
Hero,  probably,  they  ore  merely  sunbeams.

7  The  Milch-coto  iB  Dawn,  and  the  itrong  Bull  is  apparently  Indra  as  tho
Sun.*  'ThiB  stanza,’  Professor  Wileon  remarks,  'is  singularly  obscure,  aud  is
very  imporfectly  explained  by  the  commentator*.’

8  This  atanza  also  is  hardly  intelligible.


THE  R IQ  VET) A.


BY  MX  39.1


36l


9  Fulfil,  ye  Twain,  his  work,  the  Great,  the  Ancient:  as  heavenly
blessing  keep  your  guard  around  us.

All  the  wise  Gods  behold  his  varied  actions  who  stands  erect*
whoso  voice  is  like  a  herdsman's.

10  Call  we  ou  Jndra,  Maglmvan,  auspicious,  best  Hero  in  thtf
fight  where  spoil  is  gathered,

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
tho  Vj-itras,  wins  and  gathers  riches.

HYMN  XXXIX.  In**,

To  Indra  from  the  heart  the  hymn  procecdeth,  to  hirn  the  Lord,
recited,  built  with  praises ;

The  wakening  song  sung  forth  in  holy  synod :  that  which  is
born  for  thoo,  0  Indra,  notico.

2  Born  from  tho  heaven  e'en  in  tho  days  aforetime,  wakening,

sung  aloud  in  holy  synod,

Auspioious,  clad  In  white  and  shining  raiment,  this  is  the
ancient  hymn  of  our  forefathers.

3  Tho  Mothor  of  tho  Twins  hath  borne  Twin  Children  :  my

tongue’s  tip  raised  itself  and  rested  silent.

Killing  tho  darkness  at  tho  light’s  foundation,  tho  Couple  nowly
born  attain  thoir  boauty.

4  Not  one  is  found  among  thorn,  nono  of  mortals,  to  blame  our

sires  who  fought  to  win  tho  cattle.

Their  strongthonor  was  Indra  tho  Majestic :  ho  spread  thoir
stalls  of  kino,  tho  Wonder-Worker.

5  Whore  as  a  Friend  with  friendly  men,  Navngvas,  with  heroofl,

on  his  knees  ho  sought  tho  cattlo.

Thore,  verily  with  ten  Dasagvas  Indra  found  the  Sun  lying
hidden  in  tho  darkness.

9  Ye  Twain:  apparently  Mi tra  and  Varuna.  The  Great,  the  Ancient:  Dyaus.
Whole  voice  it  like  a  herdsman's :  Professor  Wilson  render*  this,  ‘  blandly-
•peaking.’  Tho  meaning  appears  to  bo,  lining  his  voice  for  th«  protection  of
man,  like  a  herdsman  who  calls  out  to  his  cattle.

This  hymn  and  the  following  thirteen  are  ascribed  to  tbo  Rishi  VijvAmitra.

2  Clad  in  white  and  shining1  raiment :  clothod  with  energy  and  splendour.

3  The  Mother  oflhe  Twins:  according  to  S  Ay  an  a,  Ushas  or  Dawn.  Twin
Children:  the  Asrius.  My  tongue's  tip  raised  itself:  1  prepared  to  praise  the
Alvins,  hut  was  unequal  to  tho  task.

4  See  M.  Muller,  Chips,  IV.  29  (Edition  of  1895).

5  Navagvas :  a  mythological  family  often  associated  with  the  Angirases
and  described  as  sharing  in  Indra’a  battles.  See  I.  33.  6,  and  62.  4.

Dasagvat :  members  of,  or  priestly  allies  connected  with,  the  family  of
Angiras.  See  I.  62.  4.


302  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Ill.

6  Indra  found  meath  collected  in  the  milch-cow,  by  foot  and

hoof,  in  the  cow’s  place  of  pasture.

That  which  lay  secret,  hidden  in  the  waters,  he  held  in  his
right.hand,  the  rich  rewarder.

7  He  took  the  light,  discerning  it  from  darkness :  may  we  be  far

removed  from  all  misfortune.

These  songs,  0  Soma-drinker,  cheered  by  Soma,  Indra,  accept
from  thy  most  zealous  poet.

8  Lot  there  be  light  through  both  the  worlds  for  worship :  may

we  bo  far  from  overwhelming  ovil.

Groat  woo  comes  oven  from  the  hostile  mortal,  piled  up ;  but
good  at  rescue  are  the  Vasus.

9  Call  wo  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  boat  Hero  in  tho  fight

where  spoil  is  gathered,

Tho  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
tho  Vfitras,  wins  and  gathers  riches.

HYMN  XL.  Indra.

Tnnn,  Indra,  wo  invoke,  the  Bull,  what  timo  tho  Soma  is

express  od.

So  drink  thou  of  tho  savoury  juico.

2  Indra,  whom  many  laud,  accept  tho  strcngth-conforring  Soma

juico :

Quaff,  pour  down  drink  that  satisfies.

3  Indra,  with  all  tho  Gods  promote  our  woolth-bca towing

sacrifice,

Thou  highly-lauded  Loid  of  men.

4  Lord  of  tho  bravo,  to  thee  proceed  those  drops  of  Soma  juico

oxprossed,

Tho  bright  drops  to  thy  dwolling-placo.

5  Within  thy  holly,  Indra,  take  juice,  Soma  the  most  excellent :
Thine  arc  tho  drops  cclostial.

6  Drink  our  libation,  Lord  of  hymns :  with  streams  of  meath

thou  art  bedewed  :

Our  glory,  Indra,  is  thy  gift

7  To  Indra  go  the  treasures  of  the  worshipper,  which  never

fail :

He  drinks  the  Soma  and  is  strong.


6  Indra  found  meath :  Bweot  rain.  By  foot  and  lioof:  tracking  the  cows
by  their  foot-marks.  That  which  lay  secret :  the  rain  which  was  imprisoned
in  the  clouds.


J7YMN  42.]  THE  MOVED  A.  363

8  From  far  away,  from  near  at  hand,  0  Vritra-slayer,  come

to  us:

Accept  the  songs  wo  sing  to  thee.

9  When  from  the  spaco  between  the  near  and  fan  thou  art

invoked  by  us,

Thence,  Indra,  come  thou  hitherward.

HYMN  XLI.  Indra.

Invoked  to  drink  tho  Soma  juice,  come  with  thy  Bay  Steeds,
Thunder-armed  !

Come,  Indra,  hitherward  to  me.

2  Our  priest  is  seated,  true  to  time;  the  grass  is  regularly

strown ;

Tho  pro8sing-stones  woro  set  at  morn.

3  These  prayers,  0  thou  who  hoarcst  prayor,  aro  offered :  seat

theo  on  tho  grass.

Horo,  enjoy  the  offered  cako.

4  0  Vyitra- slayer,  bo  thou  pleased  with  thoso  libations,  with

those  hymns,

Song-loving  Indra,  with  our  lauds.

5  Our  hymns  oaross  tho  Lora  of  Strength,  vast,  drinkor  of  tho

Soma’s  juice,

Indra,  as  mother-cows  their  calf.

6  Dolight  thoo  with  tho  juice  wo  pour  for  thino  own  groat

munificence :

Yield  not  thy  singor  to  reproach.

7  Wo,  Indra,  dearly  loving  thoo,  bearing  oblation,  sing  thoo

hymns :

Thou,  Vasu,  dearly  lovest  us.

8  0  thou  to  whom  thy  Bays  are  dear,  looso  not  thy  Horses  far

from  us :

Hero  glad  theo,  Indra,  Lord  divine.

0  May  long-maned  Coursers,  dropping  oil,  bring  thee  on  swift
car  hitherward,

Indra,  to  seat  theo  on  the  grass.

HYMN  XLII.  Indra.

Come  to  tho  juice  that  we  have  pressed,  to  Soma,  Indra,  blent
with  milk  :

Come,  favouring  us,  thy  Bay-drawn  car!


!>  The  sp«ce  Utwcen  the  near  and  far  :  the  firmament  or  mid-air,  between
the  earth  and  the  distant  sky.


m  tHe  Hymns  of  [book  nt.

2  Come,  Indra,  to  this  gladdening  drink,  placed  on  the  grass,
pressed  out  with  stones :

Wilt  thou  not  drink  thy  till  thereof?

8  To  Indra  have  my  songs  of  praiso  gone  forth,  thus  rapidly
sent  hence,

To  turn  him  to  the  Soma-draught.

4  Hither  with  songs  of  praise  we  call  Ihdra  to  drink  the  Soma

juice !

Will  he  not  como  to  us  by  lauds  1

5  Indra,  theso  Somaa  are  expressed.  Tako  them  within  thy

belly,  Lord

Of  Hundred  Powors,  thou  Prince  of  Wealth/

6  Wo  know  thee  winner  of  the  spoil,  and  resolute  in  battlos,

Sage !

Therefore  thy  blessing  we  implore.

7  Borne  hither  by  thy  Stallions,  drink,  Indra,  this  juico  whioh

wo  have  pressod,

Mingled  with  barley  and  with  milk.

8  Indra,  for  thee,  in  thine  own  ploco,  I  urgo  the  Soma  for  thy

draught :

Deep  in  thy  heart  let  it  remain.

9  Wo  call  on  thee,  the  Ancient  One,  Indra,  to  drink  the  Soma

juico,

We  Kusikas-who  scok  thine  aid.

HYMN  XLIII.  Indra.

Mooktbd  upon  thy  chariot-seat  approach  us:  thine  is  the
Soma-draught  from  days  aforetime.

Looso  for  the  sacred  grass  thy  dear  companions.  Those  men
who  bring  oblation  call  thee  hithor.

2  Como  our  true  Friend,  passing  by  many  people;  come  with

thy  two  Bay  Steeds  to  our  devotions ;
l?or  these  our  hymns  are  calling  thee,  0  Indra,  hymns  formod
for  praise,  soliciting  thy  friendship.

3  Pleased,  with  thy  Bay  Steeds,  Indra,  God,  come  quickly  to

this  our  sacrifice  that  heightens  worship;

For  with  my  thoughts,  presenting  oil  to  feed  thee,  I  call
thee  to  the  feast  of  sweet  libations.


9  We  Kufibxt :  members  of  the  family  of  Ku«ika  who  was  tho  father  or
the  grandfather  of  ViavAmitra,  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.

1  Thy  dear  companion i :  thy  horses.


THE  RIGVEDA.


HYMN  44.]


365


4  Yea,  let  thy  two  Bay  Stallions  bear  thee  hither,  well  limbed

and  good  to  draw,  thy  dear  companions.

Pleased  with  the  corn-blent  offering  which  we  bring  thae,
may  Indra,  Friend,  hear  his  fricud’s  adoration.  9

5  Wilt  thou  not  make  me  guardian  of  the  people,  make  m  c,  im

pctuous  Maghayan,  their  ruler?

Make  me  a  Rishi  having  drunk  of  Soma  ?  Wilt  thou  not  give
mo  wealth  that  lasts  for  ever  ?

6  Yoked  to  thy  chariot,  let  thy  tall  Bays,  Indra,  companions  of

thy  banquet,  bear  thee  hither,

Who  from  of  old  press  to  heaven’s  farthest  limits,  the  Bull’s
impetuous  and  welbgroomed  Horses.

7  Drink  of  the  strong  pressed  out  by  strong  ones,  Indra,  that

which  the  Falcon  brought  thee  when  thou  lougedst ;

In  whose  wild  joy  thou  stirrest  up  the  people,  in  whose  wild
joy  thou  didst  unbar  the  cow-stalls.

8  Call  we  on  Indra,  Maghavan,  auspicious,  best  Hero  in  the  fight

where  spoil  is  gathered ;

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays  the
Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  inches,

HYMH  XLIV.  indra.

May  this  delightsome  Soma  be  expressed  for  thee  by  tawny
stones.

Joying  thereat,  0  Indra,  with  thy  Bay  Steeds  come:  ascend
thy  golden-coloured  car,

2  In  love  thou  madest  Usbas  glow,  in  love  thou  madest  Surya

shine.

Thou,  Indra,  knowing,  thinking,  Lord  of  Tawny  Steeds,  above
all  glories  waxest  great.

3  The  heaven  with  streams  of  golden  hue,  earth  with  hor  tints

of  green  and  gold —

The  golden  Pair  yield  Indra  plenteous  nourishment :  between
them  moves  the  golden  One.


7  The  strong ;  tho  Soma  juice.  The  strong  ones :  the  press-stones.

That  ichioh  the  Falcon  brought  thee :  the  Soma  is  said  to  have  been  brought
from  ho&voi)  by  a  falcon.  Sec  I.  80.  2,  and  93.  0.

Throughout  the  hymn  the  poot  rings  tho  change*  on  words  said  to  be  deriva¬
tives  of  the  root  hri  to  take,  as  huryaUl,  delightsome,  harydn,  loving,  hari,  bay
Or  tawny,  hdrit,  green,  yellow,  or  gold-coloured,

3  The  golden  One :  tho  Sun.


360  THE  HYMNS  OP  ( BOOK  111.

4  When  born  to  life  die  golden  Bull  illumines  all  the  realm  of

light.

He  takes  his  golden  weapon,  Lord  of  Tawny  Steeds,  the  golden
thunder  in  his  arms.

5  The  bright,  the  well-loved  thunderbolt,  girt  with  the  bright,

India  disclosed,

Disclosed  the  Soma  juice  pressed  out  by  tawny  stones,  with
tawny  steeds  drave  forth  the  kine.

HYMN  XLV.  iDdn.

Comb  hither,  Indra,  with  Bay  Steeds,  joyous,  with  tails  like
peacocks’  plumes.

Let  no  men  check  thy  course  as  fowlers  stay  the  bird  :  pass
o’er  them  as  o'er  desert  lands.

2  Ho  who  slew  Vritra,  burst  the  cloud,  brake  the  strongholds

aud  drave  the  floods,

Indra  who  mounts  his  chariot  at  his  Bay  Steeds’  ory,  shatters
e'en  things  that  stand  most  firm.

3  Like  pools  of  water  deep  and  full,  like  kine  thoti  cherishest

thy  might;

Liko  tho  milch-cows  that  go  well-guarded  to  the  mead,  like
water-brooks  that  reach  the  lake.

4  Bring  thou  us  wealth  with  power  to  strike,  our  share  'gainst

him  who  calls  it  his.

Shake,  Indra,  as  with  hooks,  the  tree  for  ripened  fruit,  for
wealth  to  satisfy  our  wish.

5  Indra,  self-ruling  Lord  art  thou,  good  Leader,  of  most  glorious

faiuc.

So,  waxen  in  thy  strength,  0  thou  whom  many  praise,  be  thou
most  swift  to  hear  our  call.

4  The  golden  Ball .-  Indra  as  the  Sun.

5  Qivl  with  the  bright .-  surrounded  by  flashes  of  light  With  tawny  steeds  :
or  by  menus  of  tho  tawny  pressing-stones,  »,  e.  inspirited  by  draughts  of  the
expressed  Soma  juice.

1  Toils  like  jmcock's  plumes:  trailing  clouds  with  fringes  of  purple  and  gold.

*3  Like  pools  of  t cater  .-  the  meaning  appears  to  be,  as  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  :
thy  mental  power  is  as  inexhaustible  as  tho  water  in  deep  springs,  as  safo  from
harm  as  carefully  guarded  cows  that  go  without  straying  to  their  pasture,  and
ever  full  like  streams  that  pour  water  into  a  lake.  Professor  Wilson,  follow¬
ing  Sftyana,  paraphrases  thus :  '  Thou  cherishest  the  cclcbrator  of  tho  pious  rite
as  (thou  fillest)  the  deep  seas  (with  water)  ;  or  us  a  careful  herdsman  (cherished)
the  cows  :  (thou  imbibest  tho  Soma)  as  cows  (obtain)  fodder,  and  tho  juices
flow  into  thee)  as  rivulets  flow  into  a  lake.’  Kratu,  which  I  have  rendered  by
‘might,’  moans  power,  either  mental  or  bodily,  and  sometimes  also,  especially
in  later  works,  a  sacrificial  ceremony.  S&yana  has  filled  up  supposed  ellipses-
in  the  most  arbitrary  way.


UYMN  47'.]


TUE  RIO  VEDA.  •  367

HYMN  XLYI.  *  •  Iadra

Op  thee,  the  Bull,  the  Warrior,  Sovran  Ruler,  joyous  and  fierco,
ancient  and  over  youthful,

The  nndecaying  One  who  wields  the  thunder,  renbwned  and
great,  great  arc  the  exploits,  Indra.

2  Great  art  thou,  Mighty  Lord,  through  manly  vigour,  O  fierce

One,  gathering  spoil,  subduing  others,

Thysolf  alone  the  universe's  Sovran :  so  send  forth  men  to
combat  and  to  rest  thorn.

3  He  hath  surpassed  all  measure  in  his  brightness,  yea,  and  tho

Gods,  for  none  may  be  his  equal.

Impetuous  Indra  in  his  might  oxcoedeth  wide  vast  mid-air  and
heaven  and  earth  together.

4  To  Indra,  even  as  rivers  to  tho  ocean,  flow  forth  from  days  of

old  the  Soma  juices ;

To  him  wido  doop  and  mighty  from  his  birth-time,  tho  well  of
holy  thoughts,  all-comprohonding.

6  The  Soma,  Indra,  which  tho  oarth  and  heavon  boar  for  theo  os
a  mothor  beam  hor  infant,

This  they  send  forth  to  tlioo,  this,  vigorous  Horo!  Adhvaryus
purify  for  thoo  to  drink  of.

HYMN  XLVII.  I»d™.

Diunk,  Indra,  Marut-girt,  as  Bull,  tho  Soma,  for  joy,  for  rap¬
ture  oven  as  thou  listost.

Pour  down  tho  flood  of  month  within  thy  bolly :  thou  from  of
old  art  King  of  Soma  juicoe.

2  Indra,  accordant,  with  tho  banded  Mamts,  drink  Soma,  Hero,

as  wise  Vptra-slayor.

Slay  thou  our  foomon,  drive  away  assailants  and  muko  us  safe
on  every  side  from  danger.

3  And,  drinker  at  duo  seasons,  drink  in  season,  Indra,  with  friend¬

ly  Gods,  our  pressod-out  Soma.

The  Muruts  following,  whom  thou  madost  sharers,  gave  thee
tho  victory,  and  thou  slowest  Vritra.

4  Drink  Soma,  Indra,  banded  with  tho  Maruta  who,  Maghavan,

strengthened  thee  at  Ahi’s  slaughter,

'Gainst  Sambara,  Lord  of  Bays!  in  winning  cattle,  and  now  re¬
joice  in  thee,  tho  holy  Singers.

3  Impetuous  :  or,  according  to  SHyana,  whom  Profcsaors  Wilson  and  Ludwig
follow,  ‘  drinker  of  the  spiritless  Soma  juice,’  '  er  den  nuch  die  aomatrester.

4  In  winning  cattle  :  in  recovering  the  stolen  kino,  the  vanished  rays  of  light,
or,  generally,  in  battle  with  the  demons  of  drought.


368  .  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  III.

5  The  Bull  whose  strength  hath  waxed,  whom  Maruts  follow,

free-giving  Indra,  the  celestial  Ituler,

Mighty,  all-conquering,  the  victory-giver,  him  lot  us  call  to
grant  us  new  protection.

HYMN  XLVIII.  India.

Soon  as  the  young  Bull  sprang  into  existence  he  longed  to
tasto  the  prossed-out  Soma’s  liquor.

Prink  thou  thy  till,  according  to  thy  longing,  first,  of  the
goodly  mixture  blent  with  Soma.

2  That  day  when  thou  wast  born  thou,  fain  to  taste  it,  drankest

the  plant’s  milk  which  tho  mountains  nourish.

That  milk  thy  Mother  first,  tho  Dame  who  baro  thco,  poured
for  thee  in  thy  mighty  Father’s  dwelling.

3  Desiring  food  ho  camo  unto  his  Mother,  and  on  her  bronst

beheld  tho  pungent  Soma.

Wise,  he  moved  on,  keeping  aloof  the  othors,  and  wrought
groat  exploits  in  his  variod  aspects.

4  Fierce,  quickly  conquering,  of  surpassing  vigour,  ho  framed

his  body  oven  ns  ho  listed.

E’on  from  his  birth-time  Iudra  oonquorod  Tvashtar,  boro  off
tho  Soma  and  in  boakors  drank  it.

C  Call  wo  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  boat  Hero  in  tho
fight  where  spoil  is  gathered  ;

Tho  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
the  Vfitaas,  wins  and  gathers  riches.

HYMN  XLIX.  Indra.

Curat  Indra  will  I  laud,  in  whom  all  peoplo  who  drink  tho
Soma  have  attained  thoir  longing  ;

Whom,  passing  wise,  Gods,  Heaven  and  Earth,  engendered,
formed  by  a  Master’s  hand,  to  crush  tho  V|itnui.

6  Thi>  stanza  recurs  in  VI.  19.  11.

1  Tht  young  Bull :  Indra.

2  Which  tht  mountains  nourfefc  .-  tho  Soma  plant  is  said  to  have  grown  ou
the  hill*.  Thy  Mother ;  Aditi.  Thy  mighty  Pother :  according  to  the  later  my¬
thology  Kasyajva  was  the  husband  of  Aditi  and  father  of  Indra  and  tho  other
deities,  and  BAyaya  say*  that  in  this  passage  Kasyapa  is  intended.  But  it
■wins  almost  certain  that  Tvashtar,  whom  Indra  conquered  at  his  birth,  is
here  referred  to  as  his  mighty  Father.  Soo  Bcrgaigue,  La  Religion  Vtdique,
III.  58  ff.

1  Ponied  by  a  Master'i  hand :  or  fashioned  by  Vibhvan  one  of  the  Ribhua.
According  to  SAyana,  appointed  by  BrnhmA  for  the  government  of  the  world.
The  Vritrai :  Viitra  and  similar  fiends,  or,  generally,  the  enemies  of  the  Gods
and  Aryan*.


BTMX  50.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  369

2  Whom,  most  heroic,  borne  by  Tawny  Coursers,  verily  none

subducth  in  the  battle ;

Who,  reaching  far,  most  vigorous,  hath  shortened  the  Dasvu’s
life  with  Warriors  bold  of  spirit.  .  -  .

3  Victor  in  fight,  swift  mover  like  a  war-horse,  pervading  both

worlds,  rainer  down  of  blessings,

To  be  invoked  in  war  like  Bhaga,  Father,  as  ’twcrc,  o &  hymns,
fair,  prompt  to  hear,  strength-giver.

4  Supporting  heaven,  the  high  back  of  the  region,  his  car  fs

Vayu  with  his  team  of  Vasus.

Illumining  the  nights,  the  Sun’s  creator,  like  Dhishana  he
deals  forth  strength  and  riches.

5  Call  we  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  Indra,  best  Hero  in  the  fight

where  spoil  is  gathered ;

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  treasure.

HYMN  L.  Indra.

Let  Indra  drink,  All-hail !  for  his  is  Soma, — the  mighty  Bull
come,  girt  by  Maruts,  hither.  *

Far-rcaching,  let  him  fill  him  with  these  viands,  and  let  oiyr
offering  sate  his  body's  longing.

2  I  yoke  thy  pair  of  trusty  Steeds  for  swiftness,  whose  faithful

service  from  of  old  thou  lovest.

Here,  fair  of  cheek  !  let  thy  Bay  Coursers  place  thee  :  drink
of  this  lovely  wcll-oftused  libation.

3  With  milk  they  made  Indra  their  good  Preserver,  lauding  for

help  and  rule  the  bounteous  rainer.

Impetuous  God,  when  thou  hast  drunk  the  Soma,  enraptured
send  us  cattle  in  abundance.


2  With  Warrlort  bold  of  spirit :  his  allies  the  Maruts.

4  HU  ear  it  Vdgn  the  construction  of  the  fin»t  hemistich  is  difficult
and  the  House  is  doubtful.  The  meaning  may  be,  as  Vftvu  the  God  of  wind
moves  like  a  chariot  on  high  drawn  by  the  coursers  of  the  air,  so  Indra
moves  accoin|>anied  by  the  Vivhuh  or  Maruts.

Like  DhUhand  :  the  Wish-Goddess,  a  deity  presiding  over  prosperity.  See
I.  90.  1,  note  ;  IV.  34.  1  ;  V.  41.  8.

1  All-hail ! :  I  take  todM  hare  as  an  exclamation  addressed  to  Tadra-
SAyana  explain*  the  word  by  sv'lhdkrilumimum  lomam,  (let  Indra  drink)  this.
Soina  offered  with  SvAhA.  .  .

3  WUh  milk:  with  libations  of  Soma  juice  mingled  with  milk.

24


370


TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  111.


4  With  kine  and  horses  satisfy  this  longing;  with  very  splendid

bounty  still  extend  it.

Seeking  the  light,  with  hymns  to  thee,  0  Indra,  the  ICusikas
have,  brought  their  gift,  the  singers.

5  Call  wc  on  Maghavan,  auspicious  India,  best  Hero  iu  the  fight

where  spoil  is  gathered  ;

The  Strong,  who  listens,  who  gives  aid  in  battles,  who  slays
the  Vritras,  wins  and  gathers  riches.

HYMN  LI.  Indra.

High  hymns  have  sounded  forth  the  praise  of  Maghavan,  sup¬
porter  of  mankind,  of  Indra  meet  for  lauds  ;

Him  who  hath  waxen  great,  invoked  with  beauteous  songs,
Immortal  One,  whose  praise  each  day  is  sung  aloud.

2  To  Indra  from  all  sides  go  forth  my  songs  of  praise,  the  Lord

of  Hundred  Powers,  strong,  Hero,  like  the  sea.

Swift,  winner  of  the  booty,  breaker-down  of  forts,  faithful  and
ever-glorions,  finder  of  the  light.

3  Where  battle’s  spoil  is  piled  the  singer  winneth  praise,  for

Indra  taketh  care  of  matchless  worshippers.

He  in  Vivasv&n’s  dwelling  findeth  his  delight :  praise  thou  the
ever-conquering  slayer  of  the  foe.

4  Tlicc,  valorous,  most  heroic  of  the  heroes,  shall  the  priests

glorify  with  songs  and  praises.

Full  of  all  wondrous  power  he  goes  to  conquest:  worship  is
his,  sole  Lord  from  days  aforetime.

.  5  Abundant  are  the  gifts  he  gives  to  mortals  :  for  him  the  earth
bears  a  rich  store  of  treasures.

The  heavens,  the  growing  plants,  the  living  waters,  the  forost
trees  preserve  their  wealth  for  Indra.

6  To  thee,  0  Indra,  Lord  of  Bays,  for  ever  are  offered  prayers

and  songs  :  accept  them  gladly.

As  Kinsman  think  thou  of  some  fresh  assistance ;  good  Friend,
give  strength  and  life  to  those  who  praise  thee.

7  Here,  Indra,  drink  thou  Soma  with  the  Maruts,  as  thou  didst

_  drink  the  juice  beside  Saryata.

Under  thy  guidance,  in  thy  keeping,  Hero,  the  singers  servo,
skilled  in  fair  sacrifices.

4  This  stanza  is  found  also  in  Hymn  XXX.  20  of  this  Book.


See


3  IU  5^**^**'*  •'  in  the  sacrificial  chamber  of  the  worshipper.


7  Shydta:  said  by  SAyana  to  have  been  a  Rljl  son  of  Saryftta  who  was
perhaps  the  same  as  SaryAti,  a  son  of  Manu  Voivasvata.  See  1.  51. 12  ;  112.  17


3*  5*5*


J1 YMN  52.]  THE  RIG  VEDA .


871


8  So  eagerly  desirous  dr  ink  the  Soma,  our  juice,  0  Indra,  with

thy  friends  the  Maruts,

Since  at  thy  birth  all  Deities  adorned  thee  for  the  great  fight,
0  thou  invoked  of  many.

9  He  was  your  comrade  in  your  zeal,  0  Maruts :  they,  rich  in

noble  gifts,  rejoiced  in  Indra.

With  them  together  let  tho  V^itra-slaycr  drink  in  his  home  the
worshipper's  libation.

10  So,  Lord  of  affluent  gifts,  this  juico  hath  been  expressed  for

thee  with  strength  :

Drink  of  it,  thou  who  lovest  song.

1 1  Incline  thy  body  to  this  juice  which  suits  thy  Godlike  nature

well :

May  it  cheer  thee  who  lovest  it.

12  Brave  Indra,  let  it  work  through  both  thy  flauks,  and  through

thy  head  by  prayer,

And  through  thine  arms,  to  prospoi*  us.

HYMN  LIL  Indra,


Indra,  accept  at  break  of  day  our  Soma  mist  with  roasted
coni.

With  groats,  with  cake,  with  eulogies.

2  Accept,  O  Indra,  and  enjoy  tho  well-dressed  sacrificial  cake:
Oblatious  are  poured  forth  to  thee.

3  Consume  our  sacrificial  cake,  accept  the  songs  of  praise  we  sing,
As  lie  who  woos  accepts  his  bride.

4  Famed  from  of  old,  accept  tho  cako  at  our  libation  poured  at

dawn,  *

For  great,  0  Indra,  is  thy  power.


5  Let  roasted  coni  of  our  midday  libation,  and  sacrificial  cako

here  please  thee,  Indra,

What  time  the  lauding  singer,  keen  of  purpose  and  eager  os  a
bull,  with  hymns  implores  thee.

G  At  tho  third  sacrifice,  0  thou  whom  many  praise,  give  glory
to  the  roasted  corn  and  holy  cake.

With  offered  viands  and  with  songs  may  we  assist  thee,  Sage,
whom  Vivja  and  the  Ribhus  wait  upon.

8  For  the  great  Jight :  the  battle  with  Vritra  and  the  demons  of  drought.

1  With  groats,  with  cake :  karambkinam  apdpdmntam  ;  harambha  is  c^amc*
ground  corn,  or  meal  mixed  with  curds,  a  kind  of  gruel :  aptlpd  is  a  cake
ade  of  flour.

Stanzas  1—4,  in  Gdyatrl  metre,  accompany  the  morning  offering;  stanza  5,
Truhtup,  the  offering  of  noon ;  and  6,  in  Jagat-i,  the  evening  libation.

6  Give  glory  honour  by  accepting.  Yd Ja  and  the  Ribkat:  the  three  Uibhua.


872  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  1)1.

7  Tlio  groats  liavo  wo  prepared  for  thee  with  Pushan,  corn  for

thee,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  with  thy  horses.

Hit  thou  the  mcal-cuke,  bunded  with  tho  Maruts,  wise  Hero,
Vritja-slayer,  drink  tho  Soma.

8  Bring  forth  tho  roasted  corn  to  moot  him  quickly,  cake  for

tho  bravest  Hero  mid  the  heroes.

Indra,  may  hymns  accordant  with  theo  daily  strengthen  thee,
Bold  One,  for  tho  draught  of  Soma.

HYMN  LI II.  Indra,  Parvata,  Etc.

O.v  a  high  car,  0  Parvata  and  Indra,  bring  ploasaut  viands,
with  bravo  hemes,  hither.

Knjoy  tho  gifts,  Gods,  at  our  sacrifices:  wax  strong  by  hymns,
rejoico  in  our  oblation.

2  Stay  still,  0  Maghuvan,  advnnco  no  further:  u  draught  of

woll-prosscd  Soma  will  I  give  thee.

With  sxreotost  song  I  gmsp,  0  Mighty  Indra,  thy  garment's
hem  as  a  ohild  grasps  his  father's.

3  Adhvaryu,  sing  wo  both;  sing  thou  in  answor:  make  wo  a

laud  acceptable  to  Indra.

Upon  this  Hooritioor’s  grass  bo  scatoi  •.  to  Indra  shall  our  eulogy
bo  uttered.

4  A  wife,  0  Mughavun,  is  homo  and  dxvolling  :  so  let  thy  Bay

Steeds  yokod  convoy  theo  hither.

Whonovor  wo  proas  out  for  theo  tho  Soma,  lot  Agni  as  our  Herald
spood  to  will  thoo.

5  Depart,  0  Maghavan ;  again  corno  hither:  both  there  and  hero

thy  goal  is,  Indra,  Brother,

Whoro  thy  tall  chariot  hath  a  placo  to  rest  in,  and  whore  thou
loosest  thy  loud-neighing  Courser.


7  Il'iM  Pdihan  :  bocAuso  kanmbhd,  groats  or  gruel,  in  tho  usual  offering  to
that  Oud.  Corn :  for  Indra'*  horses.


In  addition  to  Indra  and  hi*  frequent  associate  Parvata,  tho  Guniun  of  tho
mouutains  and  clouds,  the  Goddo.s  Vfik  or  Speech  (stanzas  1ft,  10),  and  the
several  parts  of  the  chariot  or  xvaiu  (17—20)  arc  regained  as  the  deities  or
obj<wta  vevorently  meutioued  or  addressed  in  this  hymn.

1  With  brave  heroei :  accompanied,  or  followoJ  by  horoic  sons.

3  A  library  it,  tiny  roe  both  :  tho  Hotar  calls  oa  tho  Adhvaryu  to  join  him  in
the  performance  of  the  ceremony.

4  -4  wtf* . «*  home  and  dxtUiwfi :  or,  perhaps,  'Wife,  Maghavan,  is  home,

bo  is  this  chamber  that  is,  ludra  is  to  vegani  the  sacrificial  chamber  a*  liia
home  for  the  present,  until  ho  returns  to  liis  contort  ami  his  other  home  iu
heaven.


'


It  YilK  53.  ]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  3  73

6  Thou  hast  drunk  Soma,  I mini,  turn  thee  homeward  ;  thy  joy

is  in  thy  homo,  thy  gracious  Consort ;

Where  thy  tall  chariot  hath  a  place  to  rest  in,  and  thy  strong
Courser  is  set  free  with  guerdon.  •

7  Bounteous  are  these,  Angirascs,  Virupas  :  the  Asura’s  Heroes

and  the  Sons  of  Heaven.

They,  giving  store  of  wealth  to  VisvAmitra,  prolong  his  life
through  countless  Soma-pressings.

8  Mnglmvan  wcareth  every  shape  at  pleasure,  effecting  magic

changes  in  his  body,

Holy  One,  drinker  out  of  season,  coming  thrice,  in  a  moment,
through  fit  prayers,  from  heaven.

9  The  mighty  sage,  God-born  and  God-incited,  who  looks  on  men,

restrained  the  billowy  river.

When  Visvamitra  was  SudAs’s  escort,  then  Indra  through  the
Kusikas  grew  friendly.

10  Like  swans,  prepare  a  song  of  praiso  with  pressing-stones,  glad

in  your  hymns  with  juice  poured  forth  in  sacrifice.

Ye  singers,  with  the  Gods,  sages  who  look  on  men,  ye  Kusikas,
drink  up  the  Soma's  savoury  meath.

11  Come  forward,  Kusikas,  and  be  attentive;  let  loose  Sudas’s

horse  to  win  him  riches.

East,  west,  and  north,  let  the  King  slay  the  foeman,  then  at
earth’s  choicest  place  porform  his  worship.

12  Praises  to  Indra  have  I  sung,  sustainer  of  this  earth  and  heaven.
This  prayer  of  Visvamitra  keeps  secure  the  race  of  Bharatas.


6  Thy  orations  Contort :  IndrAni.  Witt,  yntnlon  :  with  corn  and  water.

7  Professor  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  paraphrases  :  ‘Theso  sacrifice™  are
(Bkojat),  of  whom  tho  diversified  A nyinues  (are  the  priests):  and  the  heroic
sons  of  the  expellcr  (of  the  foes  of  the  Gods)  from  heaven,  bestowing  riches  upon
VisvAmitra  at  the  sacrifice  of  a  thousand  (victims),  prolong  his  life.’  Tho  Bhojas
(hounteou*  ones)  arc  add  to  be  the  Kshatriya  descendants  of  Sudds,  and  tho
diversified  Angirascs  Mcdhfttithi  and  the  rent  of  the  race  of  Angiras.  ‘  The  Asura,’
explained  by  SAyapa  as  the  expeller  of  the  foes  of  the  Gods  from  heaven,  is  said
to  be  Kudra,  and  his  sons  arc  the  Maruts.  The  Virflpaa  ore  connected  with
Angiras  in  X.  62.  5.,  and  a  Vivflpa  is  mentioned  in  I.  45.  3.  and  VIII.  64.  6.

8  Drinker  out  of  season:  drinking  the  celestial  Soma  whenever  he  wishes,
irrespectively  of  the  appointed  times  for  libations  on  earth.  Thrice :  to  tho
three  daily  libations.

9  The  mighty  sage:  Vi-vftmitra.  See  III.  33,  note.

1 1  In  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas  the  priest*  implore  the  aid  of  Indra
for  King  SudAs  who  is  going  forth  to  battle.

Earth's  choicest  place :  the  altar.  ...  ,,

12  The  race  of  Bharatas :  the  descendants  of  V  lavAmitra,  Bharata  being  the
eon  of  the  celebrated  SakuntalA  who  was  VUvAmitra’s  daughter  by  the  Apsa-

Scc  Vcdic  India  (Story  of  tho  Nations  scries),  pp.  319  ff.


THE  HYMNS  OF


874


[BOOK  III.


13  The  Visvamitras  have  suug  forth  this  prayer  to  Iudra  Thunder-

armed :

So  lot  him  make  us  prosperous.

14  Among* the  Kikataa  what  do  thy  cattle  ?  They  pour  uo  milky

draught,  they  heat  no  caldron.

Bring  thou  to  us  tho  wealth  of  Pramaganda;  give  up  to  us,  0
Maghavan,  tho  low-born.

15  Sasarpari,  the  gift  of  Jamadagnis,  hath  lowed  with  mighty

voice  dispelling  famine.

The  Daughter  of  the  Sun  hath  spread  our  glory  among  tho
Gods,  imperishable,  deathless.

16  Sasarpari  brought  glory  speodily  to  those,  over  the  generations

of  the  Fivefold  Race ;  .

Daughter  of  Paksha,  she  boBtows  now  vital  powov,  she  whom
tho  ancient  Jumadaguis  gavo  to  mo.


14  The  Klialai :  tho  non-Aryan  inhabitants  of  a  country  (probably  Ivo«uU
or  Oudh)  usually  identified  with  South  BihAr.  Tho  meaning  it  that  tho  cows
bestowed  by  Inara  are  unprofitable  wheu  in  tho  possession  of  men  who  do  not
worship  the  Aryan  Gods.  Pruniagunda :  tho  prince  of  the  K/knJas  ;  Accord¬
ing  to  SAyana  tho  word  means  1  the  son  of  the  usurer.’

15  Sasarpari,  tie  gift  of  JnmadagnU:  according  to  SAyana,  Sa*Ari>nil  (swiftly
moving,  or  gliding  everywhere),  is  a  nnme  or  au  epithet  of  VAk,  Vuico  or
Speech,  the  daughter  of  SArya  or  the  Sun.  Tho  following  is  Dr.  Muir's  trans¬
lation  of  SAyana'a  quotation  from  SliMlgurufisliya’*  Commentary  on  tho
AnukraraapikA,  as  given  with  an  addition  in  Weber'*  lutue/ie  Sludien:  'Regard-
ing  the  two  verses  boginning  "  Sasarpari^  ’’  those  acquointod  with  antiquity,
tell  a  story.  At  a  sacrifice  of  king  SnudAsa  tho  powor  and  speech  of  VipvA-
mitrn  were  completely  vanquished  by  f-lskti,  hod  0f  Vanishtha  ;  and  tho  son  of
Gddhi  (VisvAnntra)  being  so  overcome,  became  dejected.  The  Jamadagnis
drew  from  tho  abode  of  the  sun  a  voioo  called  “Snsarpuii  .’’  tho  daughter  of
Brahrnl,  or  of  the  sun,  and  gavo  her  to  him.  Then  that  Voice  somewhat  dis¬
pelled  the  disquiet  of  the  Jamadagnis  [or,  according  to  the  reading  of  tlio  lino
given  by  SAyapa,  *'  that  Voice,  being  intclligenoo,  dispollod  tlio  unintelligoneo
of  tho  Kufikas"].  Vijvamltra  then  incitod  tho  Kusikiw  with  tlio  words  n/>-
apreta  ‘approach’  (sec  verse  11).  And  being  gladdened  by  receiving  tlio
Voice,  ho  paid  homage  to  tho  Jnmodagni*  praising  them  with  tho  two  verseo
beginning  'Sasarpaiih  ’.—0.  S.  Texti,l,  343.  Prof  Ludwig  is  inclined  to  agree
with  Prof.  Roth  who  thinks  that  sawirparf  may  rneau  a  war-trumpet,  which
inspirits  tho  combatants  and  dispels  their  fear  of  the  enotny.  Prof.  Gnvwnuum
arguos  that  inimdya,  hath  lowed,  is  applicablo  only  to  a  oow  or  bull,  and  tliiuka
that  sasarpari  means  tho  mystic  oow  SabardugliA,  the  cow  who  lets  her  milk
Sow  abundantly,  I  am  inclined  to  prefer  the  explanation  of  tho  Indian  com¬
mentator.  although  It  cannot  be  regarded  ai  entirely  satisfactory.

The  Jamadagnit,  according  to  SAyana,  aro  Rishis  who  maintain  a  blazing  fire.

16  T/u  Fivefold  Race:  the  five  tribe*  of  Aryan  men  ;  aocording  to  SAyana,
the  four  castes,  and  barbarians  or  non-Aryans.

Daughter  of  Palcxha :  that  is,  of  the  Sun  who  cauaca  the  light  and  dark
periods  of  the  moon,  .  .


zrrj/.v  53.]


ME  RIO  VEDA,


375


17  Strong  bo  the  pair  of  oxen,  firm  the  axles,  let  not  the  pole  slip

nor  the  yoke  be  broken.

May  Iudra  keep  the  yoke-pins  from  decaying :  attend  us,  thou
whose  follies  are  uninjured.

18  0  Indra,  give  our  bodies  strength,  strength  to  the 'bulls  who

draw  the  wains.

Strength  to  our  seed  and  progeny  that  they  may  live,  for  thou
art  he  who  givcth  strength.

19  Enclose  thee  in  the  heart  of  Khayar  timber,  in  the  car  wrought

of  Sinsapi  put  firmness.

Show  thyself  strong,  0  Axle,  fixed  and  strengthened  :  throw  us
not  from  the  car  whereon  we  travel.

20  Let  not  this  sovran  of  the  wood  leave  us  forlorn  or  injure  us.
Safe  may  wo  be  until  we  reach  our  homes  and  rest  us  and  un¬
yoke.

21  With  various  aids  this  day  come  to  us,  Indra,  with  best  aids

speed  us,  Maghavan,  thou  Hero.

Let  him  who  hateth  us  fall  headlong  downward  :  him  whom
we  hate  let  vital  breath  abandon.

22  He  heats  his  very  axe,  and  then  cuts  a  mere  Semal  blossom  off.
0  Indra,  like  a  caldron  cracked  and  seething,  so  he  pours  out

foam.

17  la  this  and  the  three  following  stanzas  Visvdmitra  beinc  about  to  depart
from  King  Sudds ’8  sacrificial  hall  blesses,  or  invokes  good  luck  for,  the  several
parts  of  the  chariot  or  wain  on  which  he  is  going  to  travel.

Attend  ua :  the  chariot  is  here  addressed.

19  Khayar  timber :  the  hard  wood  of  the  Khadira,  or  Acacia  Catechu,  of
which  the  pin  of  the  axle  was  made.  §in{ iup<f :  Dalbergia  Sisu,  also  a  com¬
mon  timber- tree.

20  This  sovran  ofthevxtod:  the  timber  of  which  the  body  of  the  car  is  made.

21  Prof.  Roth  is  of  opinion  that  this  hymn  consists  of  fragments  composed
by  Visvdmitra  or  his  descendants  at  different  dates,  and  that  the  verses  (9—
13),  in  which  that  ltishi  represents  himself  and  the  Kusikas  as  being  the  priests
of  Sudds  are  earlier  than  the  concluding  verse*  (21 — 24),  which  consist  of  im¬
precations  directed  against  Vanish  tha.  These  last  verses,  he  remarks,  con  Sain
an  expression  of  wounded  pride,  and  threaten  vengeance  against  an  enemy,
who  had  come  into  possession  of  some  power  or  dignity  which  Visvdmitra  him¬
self  had  previously  enjoyed.  With  regard  to  the  relations  between  Visvd-
mitra  and  Vanish  tha  as  priests  of  Sudds,  see  Muir's  Otdginal  Sanskrit  Texts,  I.
pp.  371  ff

22  Professor  Wilson  remarks :  *  The  construction  is  elliptical :  the  ellipse  is
supplied  by  the  scholiast,  as  the  tree  is  cut  down  by  the  axe  so  may  the  enemy
be  cut  down  :  as  one  cute  off  without  difficulty  the  flower  of  the  Simhcda.  so
may  he  be  destroyed  :  as  the  cauldron  when  struck,  and  thence  leaking,  scat¬
ters  foam  or  breath  from  its  mouth,  so  may  that  hater,  struck  by  the  power
of  my  prayer,  vomit  foam  from  his  mouth.'  The  phrases  are  probably,  as
Ludwig  explains,  merely  proverbial  expressions  for  threats  full  of  sound  and
fury  followed  by  insingnificaut  results.

The  Semal  (Simbala)  is  the  Silk-cotton  tree.  ......


376  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  ///.

23  Men  notice  not  tbe  arrow,  0  yo  people ;  they  bring  the  red

beast  deeming  it  a  bullock.

A  sluggish  steed  men  run  not  with  the  courser,  nor  ever  lead
an  ags  before  a  charger.

24  These  men,  the  sons  of  Bharata,  0  Indra,  regard  not  severance

or  close  connexion.

They  urge  their  own  steed  as  it  were  another’s,  and  take  him,
swift  as  the  bow’s  string,  to  battle.

HYMN  LIV.  ViavedcTA*.

To  him  adorable,  mighty,  meet  for  synods,  this  strengthening
hymn,  unceasing,  havo  they  offered.

May  Agni  hear  us  with  his  homely  splendours,  hear  us,  Eter¬
nal  One,  with  hoavonly  lustre.

2  To  mighty  Heaven  and  Earth  I  sing  forth  loudly:  my  wish
goes  out  desirous  and  well  kuowing

Both,  at  whoso  laud  in  synods,  showing  favour,  tho  Gods  ro-
joico  thorn  with  tho  living  mortal.

28  Men  notice  not  the  arrow :  or,  According  to  SAyapa,  'men  hoed  not  tho
destroyer;  l  e.  tho  power  of  VifvAraitra  who  will  dootroy  hi*  enoinie*  is  not
known  to,  or  regarded  by,  hi*  opponent*.

They  bring  the  red  tout :  the  meaning  of  lodhdm  in  uncertain.  RAyana  ox-
plain*  it  os  lubdham,  desirous  (that  his  penance  might  not  bo  frustrated).
Prof.  Roth  suggests  that  lodh&n  means  red,  and  demote*  an  animal  of  somo
kind  contrasted  with  pafil  (a  tamo  or  sacrificial  animal,  a  bullock),  so  that  tho
clauso  would  havo  somowhat  tho  sarao  meaning  on  1 2  tlioy  look  on  tho  wolf  ns  if
it  wore  a  hare.’  Durga,  tho  commontator  on  tho  Nirukta,  say*  i  '  Tho  toxt  in
which  this  word  (lodhA)  occur*  is  a  vornc  expressing  hatred  of  Vasiahtha.  But
I  am  a  KApishthaln  of  tho  family  of  Vasiahtha ;  and  therefore  do  not  interpret
it.’  See  Muir’*  0.  S.  Texts,  I.  pp.  844,  372.

Deeming  it  a  bu'loelc:  according  to  SAyapa,  thinking  tho  sago,  VisvAmitrn,
who  kopt  silenoo  of  his  own  nocord  to  be  merely  stupid  liko  sorno  inferior  ani¬
mal.  In  tho  second  lino  tho  rivalry  of  Vasubtna  with  himnelf  appears  to  bo
ridiculed.

24  The  son  of  Bharata :  descendants  and  adherents  of  VifrAmitra.  Prof.
Wilson,  following  SAyapa,  paraphrases  tho  etaoxa :  ‘  These  son*  of  Bharata,
Indra,  understand  severance  (from  tho  VasUHthas),  not  association  (with
thorn) ;  they  urge  their  steeds  (against  them)  a-  against  a  constant  foe  ;  they
bear  a  stout  bow  (for  their  destruction)  iu  battle.’  The  word  dranam,  st  range,
foreign,  auother's,  gives  no  iutclligiblo  sense.  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  in  its  plnco
traranam,  an  over-ready  helper.  Dr.  Muir  suggests  that  the  word  may  mean
'as  if  to  a  distance.’  -

1  To  him :  Agni.  Meet  for  synod* .-  to  be  worshipped  in  sacrifioial  assem¬
blies.  May  Agni  hear  us:  both  as  terrestrial  fire  used  for  sacrifice  and
domestic  purposes  and  as  celestial  fire  in  the  form  of  the  Sun.  They :  the
priestly  singers.

2  Knowing  both :  recognizing  the  greatness  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  The  liv¬
ing  mortal:  weu  as  worshippers.


THE  RtGVEDA.


877


HYMX  54.]


3  0  Heaven  and  Earth,  may  your  great  law  be  faithful :  he  ye

our  leaders  for  our  high  advantage.

To  Heaven  and  Earth  I  otter  thin  my  homage,  with  food,  O
Agni,  as  I  pray  for  riches.  '

4  Yea,  holy  Heaven  and  Earth,  the  ancient  sages  whose  word

was  ever  true  had  power  to  find  you  ;

And  brave  men  in  the  fight  where  heroes  conquer,  0  Earth,
have  known  yon  well  and  paid  you  honour.

5  What  pathway  leadeth  to  the  Gods?  Who  knoweth  this  of  a

truth,  and  who  will  now  declare  it?

Seen  are  their  lowest  dwelling-places  only,  but  tlioy  are  in  re¬
mote  and  secret  regions.

6  The  Sago  who  looketh  on  mankind  hath  viewed  them  bedewed,

rejoicing  in  the  seat  of  Order.

They  make  a  home  as  for  a  bird,  though  parted,  with  one  same
will  finding  themselves  together.

7  Partners  though  parted,  with  far-distaut  limits,  on  one  firm

place  both  stand  for  ever  watchful,

And,  being  young  for  evermore,  as  sisters,  speak  to  each  other
names  that  are  united.

8  All  living  things  they  part  and  keep  asunder ;  though  bearing

up  the  mighty  Gods  they  reel  not.

One  All  is  Lord  of  what  is  fixed  and  moving,  that  walks,  that
flies,  this  multiform  creation.

9  Afar  the  Anciont  from  of  old  I  ponder,  our  kinship  with  our

mighty  Siro  and  Father, —

5  Seen  are  their  lowest  dxocUing -places :  the  constellations;  but  the  Gods

are  also  in  mysterious  ami  higher  realms  beyond,  and  who  knows  the  path
that  leads  thither  1

6  The  Sage  who  looketh  on  mankind:  the  all-seeing  and  omniscient  Sun.
Them :  Heaven  and  Earth.  Bedtxccd :  with  the  water  above  the  firmament
and  rain  respectively.  In  the  scat  of  Order :  in  the  place  which  the  eternal
Order  of  the  Universe  has  assigned  to  them.  They  make  a  home:  though
meeting  together,  they  leave  a  space,  like  a  bird's  ucst,  between  them.

7  Speak  to  each  other  names  that  are  united :  address  each  other  or  perhaps,
are  addressed,  by  dual  appellations,  such  as  urvt,  the  Two  Spacious  Ones,
dydvrtprithivi,  Heaven-Earth,  etc.

8  One  AU:  ‘We  find  mention  in  one  hymn  of  a  primordial  substance  or
unit  out  of  which  the  universe  was  developed  This  is  ‘  the  one  thing  ’  (tkam)
which  we  have  met  with  in  connection  with  Aja,  the  Unborn  (Book  I.  164,  6,
46,),  and  which  is  also  used  synonymously  with  the  universe  in  accordance
with  the  principle  which  is  the  key  to  much  of  the  later  mysticism  that  cause
and  effect  are  identical.  The  poet  endeavours,  in  a  strain  which  pn  ludes  the
philosophy  of  the  Upanishads,  to  picture  to  himself  the  first  state  of  the
world,  aud  the  first  signs  of  life  and  growth  in  it.’— Wallis,  Cosmology  of  the
Rigveda,  p.  58.


THE  HYMNS  OP


878


[ BOOK  III.


Singing  tho  praise  whereof  the  Gods  by  custom  stand  on  the
spacious  far-extended  pathway.

10  This  land,  0  Heaven  and  Earth,  to  you  I  utter:  let  the  kind-

hearted  hear,  whose  tongue  is  Agni,

Young,  Sovran  Rulers,  Varuna  and  Mitra,  the  wise  and  very
glorious  Adityas.

11  Tho  fair-tongued  Savitar,  tho  golden-handed,  comes  thrice  from

heaven  as  Lord  in  our  assembly.

Bear  to  the  Gods  this  song  of  praise,  and  send  us,  then,  Savi¬
tar,  complete  and  perfect  safety.

12  Deft  worker,  skilful-handod,  holpful,  holy,  may  Tvashtar,  God,

givo  us  theso  things  to  aid  us.

Take  your  delight,  ye  Kibhus  joined  with  Puehan :  ye  havo
prepared  the  rito  with  atones  adjusted.

13  Borno  on  their  flashing  car,  tho  spear-armed  Marnts,  tho  nim¬

ble  Youths  of  Heaven,  tho  Sons  of  Order,

Tho  Holy,  and  Sarasvutl,  shall  hoar  us :  yo  Mighty,  givo  us
wealth  with  noble  offspring.

14  To  Vishnu  rich  in  murvols,  songs  and  praises  shall  go  as  singors

on  tho  road  of  Bhaga, —

Tho  Chieftain  of  tho  Mighty  Stride,  whoso  Mothers,  tho  many
young  Dames,  never  disregard  him.

15  India,  who  rules  through  all  his  powors  heroic,  hath  with  his

majesty  filled  earth  and  hoavon.

Lord  of  bravo  hosts,  Fort-crusher,  Vyitro-slayor,  gather  thou
up  and  bring  us  stnro  of  cattle.

16  My  Sires  aro  the  Nftsatvas,  kind  to  kinsmen:  tho  Alvins’

kinship  is  a  glorious  title.

For  yo  aro  thoy  who  givo  us  Rtoro  of  riches :  yo  guard  your
gift  uucheatod  by  the  bounteous.


9  Stripin'/  tit  praise  whereof:  that  in,  with  reference  to  which  kinship  with
our  father  Dyaut  or  Heaven  the  Gods  themselves  bear  witness  to  its  exis¬
tence.

11  Comes  thrice:  at  the  three  daily  sacrifices.

12  These  things ;  for  which  wo  pray.  '

14  On  the  rood  of  lihaya:  or  on  tho  path  of  good  fortuno  or  felicity.

The  Chieftain  of  the  Mighty  Stride :  Vishnu  as  tho  Sun.  The  Mothers,
according  to  SAyai.ia,  are  the  regions  of  apace  which  generate  all  beings.  Sd-
jana  supplies  djhdm,  command,  after  y Asya,  whose,  and  Prof.  Wilson  renders
the  passage  accordingly,  ‘whose  commands  tho  many-blending  regions  of  space,
the  generators  (of  all  beings)  do  not  disobey.'

16  My  Sires  are  the  Ndeatyas :  the  Afvins  regard  me  with  fatherly  affection,
Ye :  the  Aavins.  Uncheatcd  by  the  bounteous :  never  deceived  by  liberal  men
ike  u's.  *  ’  '


TUB  RIG  VEDA.


379


HYMN  55.]

17  This  is,  yo  Wise,  your  great  and  glorious  title,  that  all  ye

Deities  abide  iu  India.

Friend,  Muoh-iuvoked !  art  thou  with  thy  dear  Ribhus :
fashion  ye  this  our  hymn  for  our  advantage.  ,

18  Aryaman,  Aditi  deserve  our  worship:  the  laws  of  Varuna  re¬

main  unbroken.

The  lot  of  childlessness  remove  ye  from  us,  and  let  our  course
be  rich  in  kine  and  offspring.

19  May  the  Gods’  envoy,  sent  to  many  a  quarter,  proclaim  us

siulcss  for  our  perfect  safety.

May  Earth  and  Heaven,  the  Sun,  the  Waters,  hear  us,  and
the  wide  firmament  aud  constellations.

20  Hear  us  the  mountains  which  distil  the  rain-drops,  and,  rest¬

ing  firm,  rejoice  iu  ^freshening  moisture.

May  Aditi  with  the  Adityas  hear  us,  aud  Maruts  grant  us
their  auspicious  shelter'.

21  Soft  be  our  path  for  ever,  well-provisioned :  with  pleasant

meath,  0  Gods,  the  herbs  besprinkle.

Safe  be  my  bliss,  O  Agni,  iu  thy  friendship :  may  I  attain
the  seat  of  foodful  riches.

22  Enjoy  the  offering :  beam  thou  strength  upon  us ;  combine

thou  for  our  good  all  kinds  of  glory.

Conquer  in  battle,  Agni,  all  those  focinen,  aud  light  us  every
day  with  loving-kindness.

HYMN  LV.  VisvedevM.

At  the  first  shining  of  the  earliest  Mornings,  in  the  Cow’s
home  was  born  the  Great  Eternal.

Now  shall  the  statutes  of  the  Gods  be  valid.  Great  is  the
Gods’  supreme  aud  sole  dominion.

17  Abide  in  Jndra :  not,  an  SAyana  explains,  in  the  sphere  or  world  of
Iu  ira.  The  meaning  is,  as  Professor  Ludwig  [Knots  out,  that  the  glory  of
tho  Gods  consists  in  their  recognition  ae  forming  a  part  of  the  true,  supreme
and  all-embracing  divine  principle,  in  which,  as  the  Absolute  God,  all  their
individual  attributes  arc  absorbs!  and  vanish.

Fashion  ye:  perhaps  merely,  give  a  favourable  issue  to.

19  The  Gods'  envoy:  Agni.

21  With  pleasant  meath :  with  refreshing  rain.

1  In  the  Cow's  home:  in  the  firmament  or  heavcD,  the  place  of  the
mystical  Cosmic  Cow.  The  Great  Eternal :  the  two  adjectives  arc  iu  the
neuter  gender  without  a  substantive.  S4yana  supplies  jyotih,  light,  in  the
form  of  the  Sun.  Great  is,  etc.  ‘Great' aud  incomparable  is  the  divine
nature  of  the  gods.' — Muir.


380  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  III.

2  Lot  not  the  Gods  here  injure  us,  0  Agni,  nor  Fathers  of  old

time  who  know  the  region,

Nor  the  sign  set  between  two  ancient  dwellings.  Great  is  the
Godai  supremo  uud  sole  dominion.

3  My  wishes  fly  abroad  to  many  places :  I  glance  back  to  the

ancient  sacrifices.  ..  .

Let  us  declare  the  truth  when  fire  is  kindled.  Great  is  the
Gods’  supremo  and  sole  dominion.

4  King  Universal,  borne  to  sundry  quarters,  extonded  through

tho  wood  he  lies  on  couches.

One  Mother  rests:  another  feeds  tho  Infant.  Great  is  tho
Gods’  supremo  and  sole  dominion.

5  Lodged  in  old  plants,  he  grows  again  in  younger,  swiftly  within

the  newly. boru  and  tender.

Though  they  aro  uniinpreguod,  ho  makes  them  fruitful.
Groat  is  tho  Gods'  supromo  and  solo  dominion.

6  Now  lying  far  away,  Child  of  two  Mothers,  ho  wanders  unres¬

trained,  tho  single  youngling.

Those  aro  tho  laws  of  Varuna  and  Mitro.  Groat  is  tho  Gods’
supreme  and  solo  dominion.

7  Child  of  two  Mothors,  Priest,  solo  Lord  in  synods,  he  still  pro-

codoa  whilo  resting  as  foundation.

Thoy  who  spoak  sweetly  bring  him  sweet  nddrosscs.  Great
is  tho  Gods’  supremo  and  solo  dominion.


2  Tho  moaning  of  tho  stonza  ia,  aa  l'rofcaaor  Ludwig  says  :  May  wo  bo
able  to  calculate  correctly  tho  tiuio  of  tho  Sun's  approach,  that  is,  tho
moment  of  hi»  rising,  when  wo  should  begin  our  sacred  ceremonies.  Lot  not
tho  Uoda  load  us  astray,  or  allow  us  to  orr,  in  this  matter ;  let  not  tho
Fathom,  or  spirits  of  iho  departed,  who  aro  acquainted  with  tho  rogion  in
which  the  Suu  first  appeal’s,  and  who  lmvo  transmitted  their  knowledge  to
their  descendants,  nor  tho  Sun  himself  (or,  perhaps,  Agni)  deceive  us.  Two

dwellings  ;  lioavon  and  ourth,  tho  homos  respectively  of  God*  aud

men.

3  I  (/lance  back:  so  Prof.  M.  M  Ullor  translates  tho  paasago.

4  King  Universal:  Agni,  the  God  of  all  Aryan  incu.  To  sundry  quarters:
to  various  altars,  for  sacrificial  purposes.

One  Mother:  the  earth.  Another;  the  heaveu.  Or,  as  Trof.  Ludwig
suggests,  the  lower  of  the  two  fire-sticks  remains  still  whilo  the  uppor  stick,
which  is  agitated,  gives  him  life  and  strength.

6  Agni  is  latent  in  all  plants,  and  from  those  that  aro  old  and  decoying  he
passes  into  the  young  and  tender  ones.

6  Par  away :  or,  in  the  west,  os  SOrya  or  tho  Sun  when  he  has  set.

Hi  wanders  :  when  he  has  risen  again.

7.  Priest :  Agni,  the  herald  who  calls  the  Gods,  tho  hotar  or  invoker.

As  foundation :  as  the  root  and  basis  of  every  religious  act.


BYUN  55.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


3S1

8  As  to  a  friendly  warrior  when  ho  battles,  each  thing  that

couios  anear  is  soon  to  meet  him.

Tue  hymn  eouimiugles  with  the  cow’s  oblation.  Great  is  the
Gods’  supreme  and  sole  dominion.  ,

9  Deep  within  these  the  hoary  envoy  picrceth ;  mighty,  he  gocth

to  the  realm  of  splendour,

And  looketh  on  us,  clad  in  wondrous  beauty.  Great  is  the
Gods’  supreme  and  sole  dominion.

10  Vishnu,  the  guardian,  keeps  the  loftiest  station,  upholding

dour,  immortal  dwelling-places.

Agni  knows  well  all  these  created  beings.  Great  is  the  Gods'
supreme  and  sole  dominion.

11  Yc,  variant  Pair,  have  made  yourselves  twin  beauties:  one  of

the  Twain  is  dark,  bright  shines  the  other;

And  yet  these  two,  the  dark,  the  red,  are  Sisters.  Grout  is
the  Gods’  supreme  and  sole  dominion.

12  Whore  the  two  Cows,  the  Mother  and  the  Daughter,  meet  and

give  suck  yielding  their  lordly  nectar,

I  praise  them  at  the  scat  of  law  eternal  Great  is  the  Gods’
supreme  and  solo  dominion.

1 3  Loud  hath  she  lowed,  licking  the  other’s  youngling.  On  what

world  hath  the  Milch-cow  laid  her  udder?

This  Ija  streameth  with  the  milk  of  Order.  Great  is  the  Gods’
supremo  and  sole  dominion.

14  Earth  wcarcth  beauties  manifold:  uplifted,  licking  her  Calf

of  eighteen  mouths,  she  staudeth.

6  Agni  in  here  represented  a*  a  chawpiou  who  draws  men  to  meet  him  ait
a  fricud.  The  hymn  cwunsnylcs:  penetrated,  as  it  were,  aud  accompanies  the
libation  of  milk  aud  ttutua  juico.

y  Within  thiae:  plants  in  general.  The  hoary  envoy:  Agui,  the  ancient
messouger  between  ijods  and  men.  To  the  realm  of  splendour  ;  to  heaven  a*
the  Sun.

10  Loftiest  station:  in  the  zenith.  Cf.  I.  154.  5,  6.

11  Ye,  variant  Pair:  Day  aud  Night.

\i  The  txeo  Cotes  :  Earth  aud  Heaven,  according  to  Sdyana  ;  more  pro¬
bably  Night  aud  Morning  are  intended.  The  seat  of  law  eternal :  the  altar,
ths  place  of  sacrifice  appointed  by  everlasting  law  or  rttd.

13  Loud  hath  she  lowed:  Heaven,  as  the  .  rain  pours  down.  The  other  s
yoawjliny,  o r  calf,  is  Agui.  On  what  world:  no  one  knows  where  the  rain
comes  horn.  This  lb\ :  a  name  of  the  earth ;  or  Jfd  way  mean,  with  the
freshening  draught  (of  rain).

14  Earth pddyd,  according  to  Styana,  has  this  moaning.  Uplifted .

she  staudeth:  apparently,  Heaven,  but  according  to  Utyftiia,  the  Earth
elevated  iu  the  form  of  the  northern  altar.

Her  calf  of  eighteen  months :  or  according  to  SAyana's  alternative  ex¬
planation,  ‘  her  calf  who  protects  the  throe  world*.’  The  calf  is  the  Sun.


382  THE  ITYM.WS  OP  [BOOK  ///.

Well-skilled  I  seek  the  seat  of  law  eternal.  Great  is  the  Gods'
supreme  and  sole  dominion.

’.5  Within  a  wondrous  place  the  Twain  are  treasured :  the  one  is
manifest,  the  other  hidden.

One  common  pathway  leads  in  two  directions.  Great  is  the
Gods’  supreme  and  sole  dominion.

16  last  the  milch-kino  that  have  no  calves  storm  downward,  yield¬

ing  rich  nectar,  streaming,  unexhausted,

These  who  are  over  now  and  fresh  and  youthful.  Great  is  the
Gods'  supreme  and  sole  dominion.

17  What  time  the  Hull  bellows  in  other  regions,  another  herd

receives  the  gonial  moisture ;

For  he  is  Bhaga,  King,  the  earth’s  Protoctor.  Great  is  tho
Gods'  supremo  and  solo  dominion.

18  Let  us  declare  the  Hero’s  woalth  in  horses,  0  all  ye  folk  :  of

this  tho  Gods  have  knowledge.

PiTtffrW-thfiy  hiny-or  by  liyes^nre  harnessed.  Great  is  tho
Gods’  supromo  and  solo  dominion."

19  Tvashtar  the  God,  tho  omniform  Creator,  begots  and  foods  man¬

kind  in  various  manner.

His,  vorily,  are  all  theso  living  creatures.  Great  is  tho  Gods’
supreme  and  sole  dominion.

20  The  two  great  meeting  Bowls  hath  ho  united  :  each  of  the

Pair  is  laden  with  his  treasnro.

Tho  Hero  is  renowned  for  gathering  riches.  Groat  is  tho
Gods’  supremo  and  sole  dominion.

21  You,  and  on  this  onr  earth  the  AU-Sustainer  dwells  like  a  King

with  noblo  friends  about  him.

In  his  protection  heroes  rest  in  safoty.  Great  is  the  Gods'
supremo  and  sole  dominion.

15  Wilkin  U  wondrous  place:  wh on  Morning  comes,  Night  in  concealed
in  some  mysterious  plan©  to  which  Morning  or  Day  also  retires  in  turn  whoa
Night  succeeds.  From  this  mysterious  prison  Morning  ami  Night  come  to
us  by  the  same  path,  one  departing  as  tho  other  approaches.

10  ?*A«  milch-hine  that  hare  no  ealrtt:  the  heavy  clouds  which  pnur  out
their  fertilising  rain  as  cows  yield  their  refreshing  uiilk,  but  which  are
unlike  cows  inasmuch  as  tl*ey  have  no  calves.

17  The  Bull:  Indra  as  Parjanya  the  God  of  the  rain  cloud.

Another  herd :  the  fertilizing  shower  falls  in  other  regions.

18  Tho  number  of  Indra's  horses  is  variously  state.].  Here  he  is  said  to
be  drawn  by  si*  horses,  tho  six  seasons  of  the  year,  or  by  five  at  a  time,  or
the  seasons  regarded  as  five  by  the  combination  of  henanta  and  liiira :  the
cold  aud  the  dewy  seasons.

20  The  two  great  meeting  Bowls :  the  heaven  ami  earth,  hemispherical  in
app«  arauce,  which  meet  at  the  horizon.  So  the  author  of  The  Witness  of  the
Sun  speaks  of  '  the  great  bowl  of  the  earth,  which  hollowed  to  the  horizon.*


THE  TUG  VEDA.


m


H  Y'MH  561.

22  Rich  in  their  gifts  for  thee  are  herbs  and  waters,  and  earth
briugs  all  her  wealth  for  thee,  0  Indra.

May  we  as  friends  of  thine  share  goodly  treasures.  Great  is
tlie  Gods’  supreme  and  sole  domiuiou.  >

HYMN  LVI.  Vl-vcdovaa.

Not  men  of  magic  skill,  not  men  of  wisdom  impair  the  Gods’
first  stedfast  ordinances.

Ne’er  may  the  earth  and  heaven  which  know  not  malice,  nor
'  the  fixed  hills,  be  bowed  by  sage  devices.

2  One,  moving  not  away,  supports  six  burthens :  the  Cows  pro¬

ceed  to  him  the  true,  the  Highest.

Near  stand  three  Mighty  Ones  who  travel  swiftly :  two  are
concealed  from  siglvt,  one  is  apparent.

3  The  Bull  who  wears  all  shapes,  the  triple-breasted,  three-ud-

dered,  with  a  brood  iu  many  places,

Ruleth  majestic  with  his  triple  aspect,  the  Bull,  the  Everlast¬
ing  Ones’  impregner.

4  When  nigh  them,  as  their  tracer  he  observed  them  :  he  called

aloud  the  dear  name  of  Adityas.

The  Goddesses,  the  Waters,  stayed-  to  meet  him  :  they  who
were  wandering  separate  cncloso.l  him.

5  Streams  !  the  wise  Gods  have  thrice  three  habitations.  Child

of  three  Mothers,  he  is  Lord  in  synods.

22  The  JU-Sastainer:  Indra.

1  Tho  statutes  of  tho  Gods  are  unalterable-;  they  stand  fixed  for  ever  like
the  benignant  heaven  and  earth  and  like  the  mountains  th.it  never  can  bo
moved.

2  The  meaning  of  the  stanza  is  uncertain.  According  to  SAywin,  the  one,
Movin'/  not  away,  is  the  stationary  year  which  sustain*  the  load  of  the  six
seasons,  and  the  Cows  are  the  solar  rays  which  pervade  the  year,  or  the  Sun
as  its  representative.  Professor  Ludwig.thinks  tliat  Tvashtar  may  be  intend¬
ed,  and  that  the  cows  maybe  the- consorts  of  the  Gods  who  are  generally
represented  as  beu-ing  him  company.  Three  Mighty  Ones:  according  to
S.tyaua,  heaven,  the  firmament,- aud  the  earth,  of  which  the  e.vth  is  fully
visible  and  the  first  two  are  only  seen  imperfeotly.  H'Ao  travel  swiftly  :  this
is  SAyana’s  explanation  of  dtyfik.  coursers  ;  but  the  meaning  is  not  clear.

3  The  Bull :  the  God  who  presides  over  the  year.  The  three  breasts  and
tbe  three  udders  are  probably  heaven,  the  firmament,  and-  the  earth.  Hit
triple  aspect :  the  six  seasons,  reduced'  by  combination  to  three,  the  hot  season,
the  rains,  and  the  cold  season.  The  Everlasting  Ones,  according  to  Sftyana,
arc  the  plants  :  but  the  three.  Mighty  Ones,  or  the  Waters,  may  be  intended.

■1  He :  probably,  as  Prof^sor  Ludwig  says,  Agni  as  Savitar,  the  God  pre¬
siding  over  the  year.  The  Adityas  liere  appear  to  be  the  months.

5  Thrice,  three  habitations :  each  of  the  three  worlds  having  three  subdivi¬
sions.  Child  of  three  Mothers :  Agni  os  Savitar  appears  to  be  meant,  the
three  mothers  being,  perhaps,  the  throe  seasons.  According  to  Siiyana,
trim  Hit  here  means  ‘  the  measurer  of  the  three- (worlds),’ the  Sun.  Ladies
of  the  Waters :  .  11A,  Sarasvati;.  and  BhAratL  Thrice  :  at  the  three  daily
eacrifices.


384  '  THE  II Y  31  NS  OP  [BOOK  Ill .

Three  arc  the  holy  Ladies  of  the  Waters,  thrice  hero  from
heaven  supremo  in  our  assembly.

6  Do  thou,  0  Savitar,  from  heaven  thrice  hither,  three  times  a

day*  scud  dowu  thy  blessings  daily.

Send  us,  0  Bhag  i,  triple  wealth  and  treasure ;  causo  the  two
worlds  to  prosper  us,  Preserver !

7  Savitar  thrice  from  heaven  pours  down  abundance,  and  the

fair-handed  Kings  Varuya,  Mitra;

And  spacious  Heaven  and  Earth,  yea,  and  the  Waters,  solicit
wealth  that  Savitar  may  send  us.

8  Thrco  arc  the  bright  realms,  best,  beyond  attainment,  and

threo,  tho  Asura’s  Heroes,  rule  as  Sovrans,

Holy  and  vigorous,  never  to  be  injurod.  Thrico  may  tho  Gods
from  heaven  attond  our  synod.

HYMN  LVII.  Visvedovas.

My  thought  with  fuio  discernment  hath  discovered  tho  Cow
who  wanders  free  without  a  hordsmun,

Her  who  bath  straightway  pourod  me  food  in  plonty :  India
and  Agui  therefore  are  her  praisors.

2  India  and  Puslnui,  deft  of  baud  and  mighty,  wcll-plonsod  hftvo

drained  the  heaven's  cxhaustlcss  udder.

As  iu  this  praise  the  Gods  have  all  delighted,  may  I  win  bles¬
sing  hero  from  you,  0  Vasus.

3  Fuiu  to  lend  vigour  to  tho  Bull,  tho  sistois  with  rovcrcncc  re¬

cognize  the  germ  within  him.

The  Cows  couio  lowing  hither  to  the  Youngling,  to  him  endued
with  groat  and  wondrous  beauties.

0  Came  the  law  world*  ••  I  follow  Prof.  Ludwig  in  taking  dhishane  as  an
accusative.

8  The  bright  realm*:  heaven,  divided  into  three.  The  Aiura'i  Heroes:
according  to  SAyapa,  Agni,  VAyu,  and  Surya.

Thin  hymn  and  tho  flvo  following  mg  attributed  to  tho  Rishi  VFfvimitra.

1  IfilAjfne  c/iscermweril :  tho  i>nrtioi|>lo  vivikxHn  in  tho  masculine  form  ap-
pear*  to  l>o  used  instead  of  tho  fcininino  form  with  manishS,  thought.  HA-
yayia  reads  vuiniiMm  in  tho  accusative  cm  and  following  himj'ProfoMor  Wil-
wo  translate*  :  *  May  tho  discriminating  Indra  approliond  my  glorification  (of
tho  Gods),  which  is  free  an  a  milch-cow  grazing  alone,  without  a  cowherd.’
The  Cow :  Ydb,  Voice  or  Speech,  the  voico  of  prayer  and  praise  which  the  poet
jtrocecds  to  appropriate  and  employ,  and  which  Indra  and  Agni  are  said  to
approve  Mid  praise  by  their  aocoptaucc.

2  As  in  this  praise:  thore  is  no  substantive  iu  the  text.  SAyana  supplies
redyAui,  altar.

3  The  Ball Agni.  The  sisters .-  the  fingers  which  produce  the  fire  by  fric¬

tion.  The  germ  icithin  him:  Agni’rf  fructifyiug  power.  The  Youngling:
Agni.  According  to  SAyana  the  Cotes  are  the  plants  which  spring  up  in  the
vegetable  world,  adorned  with  all  ita  various  products,  as  cows  go  eagerly  to
their  Calves.  '


THE  RIG  VEDA.


'  885


zrr.v.v  58.]

4  Fixing  with  thought,  at  sacrifice,  the  press-stones,  I  bid  the
.  well-formed  Heaven  and  Earth  como  hither ;

For  these  thy  flames,  which  give  men  boons  in  plenty,  rise  up
on  high,  the  beautiful,  the  holy.  ,

5  Agni,  thy  meath-swect  tongue  that  tastes  fair  viands,  which

among  Gods  is  called  the  far-extended, —

Therewith  make  all  the  Holy  Ones  be  seated  here  for  our  help,
and  feed  them  with  sweet  juices.

6  Let  thy  stream  give  us  drink,  0  God,  0  Agni,  wonderful  and

exhaustless  like  the  rain-clouds.

Thus  care  for  us,  0  Vasu  J&tavcdas,  show  us  thy  loving-kind¬
ness,  reaching  all  men.

HYMN  LVIIL  Asvins.

The  Ancient's  Milch-cow  yields  the  things  we  long  for :  the
Sou  of  Dakshtnd  travels  between  them.

She  with  the  splendid  chariot  brings  refulgence.  The  praise
of  Ushas  hath  awoke  the  Asvins.

2  They  bear  you  hither  by  well-ordered  statute :  our  sacred

offerings  rise  as  if  to  parents.

Destroy  in  us  the  counsel  of  the  niggard  :  come  hitherward,
for  we  have  shown  you  favour.

3  With  lightly-rolling  car  and  well-yoked  horses  hear  this,  the

press-stone’s  song,  ye  Wonder-Workers.

Have  not  the  sages  of  old  time,  ye  Asvins,  called  you  most
prompt  to  come  and  stay  misfortune?

4  Remember  us,  and  come  to  us,  for  ever  men,  as  their  wont  is,

invooate  the  Asvins.

Friends  as  it  were  have  offered  you  these  juices,  sweet,  blent
with  milk  at  the  first  break  of  morning.

5  Even  through  many  regions,  0  ye  Asvins — high  praise  is  yours

amODg  mankind,  ye  Mighty —

Come,  helpers,  on  the  paths  which  Gods  have  travelled :  here
your  libations  of  sweet  rneath  are  read}’.

4  Thu  ••  O  Agni-

6  JtUa  vedas  :  knowing  all  thing*  that  live  or  exist.

1  The  Ancient's  Milch-oow :  bounteous  Ushas  or  Dawn,  daughter  of  an¬
cient  Dynua  or  Heaven.  Daks  hind :  the  sacrificial  guerdon,  personified.
Her  son  i»  Agni,  the  Sun  who  travels  between  heaven  and  earth.

2  They :  our  offerings  of  prayor  and  praise.  Destroy  in  us :  remove  from
us  all  illiberal  thoughts,  and  let  us  be  bounteous  in  our  worship  of  the  (Joda.

5  Even  throuyh  many  regions  :  come  to  us  even  from  far  away,  although
many  other  worshippei-a  also  will  try  to  detain  you.

25


380  THE  Iirif.YS  OF  [BOOK  III.

6  Ancient  your  home,  auspicious  is  your  friendship :  Heroes,

your  wealth  is  with  the  house  of  Juhnu.

Forming  again  with  you  auspicious  friendship,  let  us  rejoico
with  draughts  of  meuth  together.

7  0  Asvins,  Very  Mighty  Ones,  with  Vilyu  and  with  his  steeds,

one-minded,  ever-youthful,

N&satyos,  joying  in  the  third  day's  Soma,  drink  it,  not  hostile,
Very  Bounteous  Givers.

8  Asvins,  to  you  arc  brought  abundant  viands  in  rivalry  with

sacred  songs,  unceasing.

Sprung  from  high  Law  your  car,  urged  on  by  press-slones,
goes  round  the  earth  and  heaven  in  one  briof  moment.

9  Agvins,  your  Soma  sheds  delicious  swcotness  :  drink  yc  thorcof

and  come  unto  our  dwelling.

Your  car,  assuming  many  n  shape,  most  often  goes  to  the
Soma-presser's  place  of  mooting,

HYMN  LIX.  Ultra.

Mitra,  when  speaking,  stirroth  men  to  labour:  Mitra  sustain-
cth  both  the  earth  and  hoavon.

Mitra  beholdeth  men  with  eyes  that  closo*  not.  To  Mitra
bring,  with  holy  oil,  oblation.

2  Foremost  be  ho  who  brings  thee  food,  0  Mitra,  who  strives  to

keep  thy  sacrod  Law,  Aditya.

He  whom  thou  holpost  no’er  is  slain  or  conquered,  on  him,
from  near  or  far,  falls  no  affliction.

3  Joying  in  sacrod  food  and  free  from  sickness,  with  knees  bent

lowly  on  tho  earth’s  broad  surface,

Following  closely  tho  Aditya’s  statuto,  may  wo  remain  in
Mitral  gracious  favour.

.  4  Auspicious  and  adorable,  this  Mitra  was  born  with  fair  dominion,
King,  Disposer.

May  wo  enjoy  the  graco  of  him  the  Holy,  yea,  rest  in  his  pro¬
pitious  loving-kindness.

5  The  groat  Aditya,  to  be  sorvod  with  worship,  who  stirroth

men,  is  gracious  to  tho  singor.

6  The  house  of  Jahnu :  the  family  of  tho  Kusikaa,  of  whom  Jahuu  was
the  ancestor.  '  Jahnu’s  children'  are  mentioned  as  having  been  favoured
worshippers  of  tho  Asvins  in  Book  I.  116.  19.

7  The  third  day's  Soma :  pressed  out  tho  day  bofore  yesterday,  and  in  tho
meantime  left  to  ferment.

X  Stirreth  men  lo  labour ;  Mitra  being  the  God  of  Day.  C f.  Vlf,  302.


THE  MOVE  DA.


J/rM.V  GO.]


887


To  Mitra,  him  most  highly  to  be  lauded,  offer  in  fire  oblation
that  he  loveth.

6  The  gainful  grace  of  Mitra,  God,  supporter  of  the  race  of  man,
Gives  splendour  of  most  glorious  fame.

7  Mitra  whose  glory  spreads  afar,  ho  who  iu  might  surpasses

heaven,

Surpasses  earth  in  his  renown.

8  All  the  Five  Races  have  repaired  to  Mitra,  ever  strong  to  aid,
For  he  sustaincth  all  the  Gods.

9  Mitra  to  Gods,  to  living  men,  to  him  who  strews  the  holy
_  grass,

(Jives  food  fulfilling  sacred  Law.

HYMN  LX.  nn, has.

Herr  is  your  ghostly  kinship,  hero,  O  Men :  they  came  desir¬
ous  to  these  holy  rites  with  store  of  wealth,

With  wondrous  arts,  whereby,  with  schemes  to  meet  each
need,

Ye  gained,  Sudhan van’s  Sons  !  your  share  in  sacrifice.

2  The  mighty  powers  wherewith  ye  formed  the  chalices,  the

thought  by  which  yc  drew  the  cow  from  out  the  hide,

The  intellect  wherewith  ye  wrought  the  two  Bay  Steeds,—
through  these,  0  Ribhus,  ye  attained  divinity.

3  Friendship  with  Iudra  have  the  Ribhus  fully  gained  :  grand¬

sons  of  Mann,  they  skilfully  urged  the  work.

Sudhanvan's  Children  won  them  everlasting  life,  serving  with
holy  rites,  pious  with  noble  acts.

4  In  company  with  Tndra  come  ye  to  the  juico,  then  gloriously

shall  your  wishes  be  fulfilled.

Not  to  be  paragoned,  ye  Priests,  aro  your  good  deeds,  nor
your  heroic  acts,  Ribhus,  Sudhanvan's  Sons.

5  0  Indrn,  with  the  Ribhus,  Mighty  Ones,  pour  down  the  Soma

juice  effused,  well-blent,  from  both  thy  hands.

Maghavan,  ui-ged  by  song,  in  the  drink-offerer’s  house  rejoico
thee  with  the  Heroes,  with  Sudhanvan’s  Sons.


8  AU  the  Five  Races:  all  Avyau  men.  I.

9  Gives  food  fulfilling  sacred  Law :  the  food  which  enables  men  to  offer  tho

appointed  sacrifices.  -

1  Here  is  your  ghostly  kinship :  here,  in  the  sacrificial  chamber  where  tho
deities  are  worshipped,  ye,  Ribhus,  originally  men,  aro  spiritually  connected
with  the  Gods  aa  partakers  of  sacrificial  offerings.  They :  the  ltibhus.  With
store  of  wealth  :  their  great  skill  ;  the  '  wondrous  arts '  of  the  following  .line.


388  THE  NY  MSS  OP  [BOOK  III.

6  With  Ribhu  near,  and  V&ja,  Indra,  hero  exult,  with  Sac  hi,

praised  of  many,  in  the  juice  wo  pour.

These  homes  wherein  we  dwell  have  turned  themselves  to  thee,
— devotions  to  the  Gods,  os  laws  of  men  ordain.

7  Come  with  tho  mighty  Ribhus,  Indra,  come  to  us,  strengthen¬

ing  with  tliy  help  the  siugor’s  holy  praise;

At  hundrod  eager  calls  come  to  the  living  man,  with  thousand
arts  attend  the  act  of  sacrifice.

HYMN  LXI.  U-hM.

•  0  Ushns,  strong  with  strength,  endowed  with  knowledge,
acoept  the  singer’s  praise,  0  wealthy  Lady.

Thou,  Goddess,  ancient,  young,  and  full  of  wisdom,  movest,
all-bounteous  !  as  the  Law  ordainoth.

2  Shine  forth,  0  Morning,  thou  auspioious  Goddess,  on  thy

bright  car  awaking  pleasant  voioes.

Lot  docile  horsos  of  far-reaching  splendour  oonvey  theo
hitherward,  the  goldon-colourod.

3  Thou,  Morning,  turning  thco  to  overy  creature,  standest  on

high  as  ensign  of  tho  Immortal,

To  one  same  goal  ovor  and  ovor  wending  :  now,  liko  a  whcol,
0  newly-born,  roll  hithor.

i  Lotting  hor  reins  drop  downward,  Morning  comoth,  tho
wealthy  Dame,  the  Lady  of  the  dwolllng  ;

Bringing  forth  light,  the  Wondorful,  tho  131o«6d  hath  sproad
her  from  the  bounds  of  earth  and  heaven.

B  Hither  invoke  the  radiant  Goddess  Morning,  and  bring  with
rovoronco  your  hymn  to  praise  hor.

She,  dropping  sweets,  hath  set  iu  heaven  her  brightness,  and,
fair  to  look  on,  hath  beamed  forth  her  splendour.

6  From  hoaven,  with  hymns,  the  Holy  One  was  wakened  :

brightly  to  both  worlds  came  tho  wealthy  Lady.

To  Morning,  Agni,  when  she  comes  refulgent,  thou  goont
forth  soliciting  fair  riohes.

7  On  Law’s  firm  base  the  speeder  of  the  Mornings,  ths  Bull,

hath  entered  mighty  earth  and  heaven.

Great  is  the  power  of  Varupa  and  Mitra,  which,  bright,  hath
spread  in  overy  place  its  splendour.

6  tyichi:  Might,  personified,  the  Consort  of  Indra.

7  The  living  man :  the  worshipper.

8  The  Immortal :  tho  Sun.

4  Letting  her  reini  drop :  perhaps,  sending  down  rays  of  light.

•7  The  Bull:  the  Sun,  who,  as  following  tho  Dawns,  may  be  said  to  urge
them  onward.


titol A*  82.]  TJTE  klGVEDA.  *  389

HYMN  LXII.  Inclra  and  Others.

Your  well-known  prompt  activities  aforetime  needed  no  im¬
pulse  from  your  faithful  servant.

Where,  Indra-Varuna,  is  now  that  glory  wherewith  ye
brought  support  to  those  who  loved  you?

2  This  man,  most  diligent,  seeking  after  riches,  incessantly

invokes  you  for  your  favour.

Accordant,  rndra-Varuna,  with  Maruts,  with  Heaven  and  Earth,
hear  ye  mine  invocation.

3  0  Indra-Varuna,  ours  be  this  treasure,  ours.be  wealth,  Maruts,

with  full  store  of  heroes.

May  the  Varutris  with  their  shelter  aid  us,  and  Bharat!  and
Hotrjl  with  the  Mornings.

4  Be  pleased  with  our  oblations,  thou  loved  of  all  Gods,  Bjihas-

pati :

Give  wealth  to  him  who  brings  thee  gifts.

5  At  sacrifices,  with  your  hymns  worship  the  pure  Brihaspati —
I  pray  for  power  which  none  may  bend —

6  The  Bull  of  men,  whom  none  deceive,  the  wearer  of  each

shape  at  will,

Brihaspati  Most  Excellent.

7  Divine,  resplendent  Pfishan,  this  our  newest  hymn  of  eulogy
By  us  is  chanted  forth  to  thee.

8  Accept  with  favour  this  my  song,  be  gracious  to  the  earnest

thought,

Even  as  a  bridegroom  to  his  bride.


The  hymn  consist*  of  six  trichas  or  triplets,  the  deities  of  wliioh  are
severally  (1)  Indra  and  Varuna,  (2)  Brihaspati,  (3)  Ptlshan,  (4)  Savitar,  (5)
Soma,  (8)  Mitra  and  Varuna.

1  This  stanza  is  difficult  on  account  of  the  uncertainty  of  the  meaning  of
Ihrimdyafr.  in  the  first  line  and  of  itnam  in  the  second.  Professor  Wilson
renders  it :  '  Iudra  and  Vanina,  may  these  people  who  are  relying  upon  you,
and  wandering  about  (in  alarm),  sustain  no  injury  from  a  youthful  (adver¬
sary)  ;  for  where  is  that  reputation  (you  enjoy)  on  account  tlint  you  bestow
sustenance  on  your  friends  1  ’  Professor  Ludwig's  translation  is  to  the  follow-
ing  effect :  '  These  that  are  counted  yours,  these  whirling  weapons,  were
made  uot  to  be  hurled  at  your  dependent.  Varuna,  Mitra,  where  is  this  your
glory,  wherewith  against  your  friends  ye  send  your  missile  1 '  My  version
follows  Professor  Roth's  interpretation  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon.

2  This  man  :  the  worshipper.

3  The  Var dirts :  guardian  Goddesses  ;  tho  Consorts  of  the  Gods,  accord¬
ing  to  the  Commentator.  Bhdralt  and  Jlolrd :  Goddesses  presiding  over
different  departments  of  religious  worship.

4  Brihaspati :  Lord  of  Prayer.


390  TIIE  RIO  VEDA.  [BOOK  111.

9  May  ho  who  sees  all  living  things,  sees  them  together  at  a
glance,—

May  he,  may  Pushan  be  our  help.

'  10  May  wp  attain  that  excellent  glory  of  Savitar  the  God  :

So  may  ho  stimulate  our  prayers.

|  1 1  With  understanding,  earnestly,  of  Savitar  the  God  we  crave
i  Our  portion  of  prosperity.

12  Men,  singers  worship  Savitar  the  God  with  hymn  and  holy

rites,

Urged  by  the  impulse  of  their  thoughts.

13  Soma  who  gives  success  goes  forth,  goes  to  the  gathering*

placo  of  Gods,

To  scat  him  at  tho  seat  of  Law.

14  To  us  and  to  our  cattlo  may  Soma  give  salutary  food,

To  bipod  and  to  quadruped.

15  May  Soma,  strengthening  our  power  of  life,  and  conquering

our  foes,

In  our  assembly  take  his  soat.

16  May  Mitra-Vamna,  sapiont  Pair,  bedow  our  pasturago  with

oil,

With  meatli  the  regions  of  tho  air.

17  Pur-ruling,  joyful  when  adored,  yc  reign  through  majesty  of

might,

With  pure  laws  everlastingly.

18  Lauded  by  Jnmadagni’s  song,  sit  in  tho  place  of  holy  Law  :
Drink  Sonia,  ye  who  strongtlion  Law.


]  0  This  stanza  is  thoJjAvitrl,  tho  OAyatri  par  excellence,  ‘  the  celebrated  verso
of  the  Vedas  which  forms  port  of  tho  doily  devotions  of  the  Brahmans,  and
was  first  made  known  to  English  rcadojs  by  Sir  W.  Jones’s  translation  of  a
paraphrastic  interpretation  ;  he  renders  it,  I*ct  us  adoro  tho  supremacy  of  that
divine  suh,  the  godhead,  who  illuminate*  all,  from  whom  all  proceed,  to  whom
all  must  return,  whom  wo  invoke  t*>  direot  our  understandings  aright  in  our
progress  towards  his  holy  seat.'— Wilson.  See  Riyvtda  SanhitA,  Vol.  III.  p.
1U.

13  The  gathering-place  of  Godi :  tho  sacrificial  chamber.  The  teal  of  Law :
the  place  where  sacrifice  ordained  by  eternal  Law  is  performed.

lt>  HVfA  oil :  with  clarified  butter,  with  fatness,  that  is,  with  fertilizing
rain.  With  menth :  or  with  honey,  that  is  with  sweet  refreshing  dew.

..  IS  Jamat/ugni,  may,  accunling  to  KAvana,  he  iu  this  placo  an  epithet  of
VLvAinitra,  and  mean  ‘by  whom  the  fire  has  been  kindled  ; 'or  Jamadagni
may  he  nuothcr  J.twlrf  nud  the  «ecr  of  the  hymn.


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


HYMN"  I.  Agni.

Thee,  Agni,  have  the  Gods,  ever  of  one  accord,  scut  hither
down,  a  God,  appointed  messenger,  yea,  with  their  wisdom
sent  thee  down.

The  Immortal,  0  thou  Holy  One,  mid  mortal  men,  the  God-
devoted  God,  the  wise,  have  they  brought  forth,  brought
forth  the  omnipresent  God-devoted  Sage.

2  As  such,  0  Agni,  bring  with  favour  to  the  Gods  thy  Brother

Varuna  who  loveth  sacrifice,  the  Chief  who  loveth  sacrifice,
True  to  the  Law,  the  Aditya  who  supporteth  men,  the  King,
supporter  of  mankind.

3  Do  thou,  0  Friend,  turn  hither  him  who  is  our  Friend,  swift

as  a  wheel,  like  two  car-steeds  in  rapid  course,  Wondrous  !
to  us  in  rapid  course.

O  Agni,  find  thou  grace  for  us  with  Varuna,  with  Maruts
who  illumine  all.

Bless  us,  thou  Radiant  One,  for  seed  and  progeny,  yea,  bless
us,  O  thou  Wondrous  God.

4  Do  thou  who  knowest  Varuna,  0  Agni,  put  far  away  from  us

the  God's  displeasure.

Best  Sacrificer,  brightest  One,  refulgent,  remove  thou  far
from  us  all  those  who  hate  us.

5  Be  thou,  0  Agni,  nearest  us  with  succour,  our  closest  Friend

while  now  this  Morn  is  breaking.

Reconcile  to  us  Varuna,  be  bounteous  :  enjoy  the  gracious
juice  ;  be  swift  to  hear  us.

6  Excellent  is  the  glance,  of  brightest  splendour,  which  the

auspicious  God  bestows  on  mortals, —

The  God’s  glance,  longed-for  even  as  the  butter,  pure,  heated,
of  the  cow,  the  milch-cow’s  bounty.

7  Three  are  those  births,  the  true,  the  most  exalted,  eagerly

longed-for,  of  the  God,  of  Agni.

He  came  invested  in  the  boundless  region,  pure,  radiant,
friendly,  mightily  resplendent.

This  hymn,  and  the  following  forty,  arc  ascribed  to  the  Riabi  Vftm&deva,
son  of  Gotama.  _  •  *

7  Thrtr  are  those  births  :  the  manifestations  of  Agni  in  heaven  as  the  Sun  ,
in  the  firmament  at*  lightning,  and  on  earth  as  eacrificial  ar.d  domestic  fire.


392  THE  HYMXS  OP  [BOOH  IV.

8  This  envoy  joyeth  in  all  seats  of  worship,  borne  on  his  golden

car,  sweet-tongued  Invoker :

Lovely  to  look  on,  with  red  steeds,  effulgent,  like  a  feast  rich
in  food,  joyous  for  ever.

9  Allied  by  worship,  let  him  give  man  knowledge :  by  an  ex¬

tended  cord  they  lead  him  onward.

Ho  stays,  effectual,  in  this  mortal’s  dwelling,  and  the  God
wins  a  share  in  his  possessions.

10  Let  Agni — for  ho  knows  tho  way — conduct  us  to  all  that  he

enjoys  of  God-sent  riches,

What  all  tho  Immortals  havo  prepared  with  wisdom,  Dyaus,
Sire,  Begettor,  raining  down  true  blessings.

1 1  In  houses  Brat  ho  sprang  into  existence,  at  great  heaven’s  base,

and  in  this  region’s  bosom  ;

Footloss  and  headless,  both  his  ends  concealing,  in  his  Bull’s
lair  drawing  himself  together.

12  Wondrouily  first  ho  rose  aloft,  defiant,  in  tho  Bull’s  lair,  tho

homo  of  holy  Ordor,

Longed-for,  young,  beautiful,  and  far- resplendent :  and  sovon
dear  frionds  sprang  up  unto  tho  Mighty.

13  Iloro  did  our  human  fathom  tako  thoir  places,  fain  to  fulfil

tho  snored  Law  of  worship.

Forth  dravo  thoy,  with  loud  call,  "Dawn’s  teeming  Miloh-kino.
hid  in  tho  mountain-stable,  in  tho  oavern.

14  Splendid  wore  they  when  thoy  hod  rent  the  mountain  :  others,

around,  shall  toll  forth  this  thoir  exploit.

Thoy  sang  thoir  song,  prepared  to  freo  tho  cattle  :  thoy  found'
the  light;  with  holy  hymns  thoy  worshipped.


8  Surtel-longutd  ;  with  tasting  the  oblations  ;  or,  perhaps,  pleasant-voiced.

9  By  an  extended  cord :  by  virtue  of  tho  endless  chain  or  series  at  regularly
performed  sacrifices.  Effectual ;  perfecting  tho  sacrifices,  or  fulfilling  all  tho
dosiros  of  tho  worshipper.

A  thare  in  hit  poaeuions :  beenuso  the  wealth  of  tho  worshipper  dopeuds
upon  tho  favour  of  Agui.

11  Pootlen  and  headiest:  without  distinguishable  head  or  feat.

Hit  Bull' i  lair :  apparently  tho  fuel  in  which  ho  grows  strong  ;  according
to  SAyapa,  1  in  tho  nest  of  tho  rain  cloud.’

12  The  home  of  holy  Order :  tho  altar,  tho  place  of  1a  w- appointed  sacrifice.
Seven  dear  friendt :  seven  minor  priests  ;  or  tiro  frequently  mentioned  seven
tongues  or  rays  of  fire.

13  Our  human  fathers :  the  Angirases.  Teeming  MUchMne:  tho  fays  of
light.

H  Splendid :  illumined  by  tho  recovered  ray*  of  light;


HYMN  1J


THE  JitG  VEDA.


893


15  Eager,  with  thought  intent  upon  the  booty,  the  men  with

their  celostial  speech  threw  open
Tho  solid  mountain  firm,  compact,  enclosing,  confining  Cows,
tho  stable  full  of  cattle.

1 6  The  Milch-cow’s  earliest  name  they  comprehended  :  they  found

the  Mother’s  thrice-seven  noblest  titles.

This  the  bands  knew,  and  sent  forth  acclamation  :  with  the
Bull’s  sheen  the  Red  One  was  apparent.

17  Tho  turbid  darkness  fled,  the  heaven  was  splendid:  up  rose

the  bright  beam  of  celestial  Morning.

SQrya  ascended  to  the  wide  expanses,  beholding  deeds  of  men
both  good  and  evil.

18  Then,  afterwards  they  looked  around,  awakened,  when  first

they  held  that  Heaven-allotted  treasure.

Now  all  the  Gods  abide  in  all  their  dwellings.  Varuna,  Mitra,
be  the  prayer  effective.

19  1  will  call  hither  brightly-beaming  Agni,  the  Herald,  all-sup¬

porting,  best  at  worship.

Ho  hath  disclosed,  like  the  milch-cows’  pure  udder,  the  Soma’s
juice  when  cleansed  and  poured  from  beakers.

20  The  freest  God  of  all  who  should  be  worshipped,  the  guest  who

is  received  in  all  men’s  houses,

Agni  who  hath  secured  tho  Gods’  high  favour,— may  he  be
gracious,  to  us,  J.xtavedas.

15  The  booty  :  tho  Cows,  the  rays  of  light.  Their  celestial  speech ;  prayer.

16  The  Milch-cow's:  here,  according  to  Sftyana,  Vale  or  Voice,  Speech,  or
especially  prayer.  It  is  uncertain  what  is  meant  by  the  Mother's  thricc-seven
noblest  (titles,  names,  forms,  or  some  similar  word  being  necessarily  under¬
stood).  Professor  Wilson,  following  Sftyana,  renders  the  passago  :  *  knowing
the  thrice-seven  excellent  (forms)  of  tho  maternal  (rhythm),’  that  is,  tho  twenty-
one  metres  of  tho  Vedas  ;  or,  he  adds,  tho  passage  may  refer  1  to  the  ancient
nomenclature  of  cattle,  as  uttered  by  tho  Angirases  as  Ehi,  surabhi,  guggulu,
gandhint,  etc.’

With  the  Bull's  sheen  :  with  the  splendour  of  the  Sun.  The  Red  One  :  Ushas
or  Dawn.

1 8  That  Heaven-allotted  treasure :  the  recovered  raya  of  light.

19  Sdyana's  explanation  of  tho  second  line  of  this  stanza  is  different,  and
Professor  Wilson,  following  him  translates  :  *  without  milking  the  pure  udder
(of  the  cow),  without  purified  food  of  the  Soma  offered  in  libation, '  implying,
according  to  tho  Scholiast,  ‘  that  no  offering  is  made  to  Agni  on  tho  occasion  ;
praise  alone  is  addressed  to  him.'  Nd,  in  tho  Veda,  it  may  be  remembered,
means  both  not  and  like,  and  in  some  passages  it  is  difficult  to  determine  m
which  of  its  senses  the  word  is  to  be  taken.


301  Till:  I/Y3/XS  OF  [HOOK  IV.

HYMN  It.  Agni.

The  Faithful  One,  Immortal  among  mortals,  a  God  among
the  Gods,  appointed  envoy,

Priest,  best  at  worship,  must  shine  forth  in  glory :  Agni  shall
be  raised  high  with  man’s  oblations.

2  Bom  for  us  here  this  day,  0  Son  of  Vigour,  between  both

races  of  born  beings,  Agni,

Thou  farest  as  an  envoy,  having  harnessed,  Sublime  One !
thy  strong-muscled  radiant  stallions.

3  I  laud  the  ruddy  steeds  who  pour  down  blessing,  dropping

oil,  fleetest  through  the  thought  of  Order.

Yoking  red  horses  to  and  fro  thou  goost  between  you  Deities
and  mortal  races.

4  Aryan) an,  Mitra,  Vanina,  and  Indm  with  Vishnu,  of  the

Gods,  Maruts  and  Asvins —

Those,  Agni,  with  good  car  and  stoeds,  bring  hithor,  most
bountiful,  to  folk  with  fair  oblations.

5  Agni,  be  this  our  sacrifice  eternal,  with  bravo  frionds,  rich  in

kino  and  sheop  and  horses,

Rich,  Asura !  in  sacred  food  and  children,  in  full  assembly,
wealth  broad-based  and  during.

C  Tho  man  who,  sweating,  brings  for  thee  tho  fuel,  and  makes
his  head  to  acho,  thy  faithful  servant, —

Agni,  to  him  bo  a  solf-strong  Protector:  guard  him  from  all
who  Book  to  do  him  mischiof.

7  Who  brings  thco  food,  though  thou  hast  food  in  plenty,  wel¬

comes  his  cheerful  guost  and  spoods  him  onward,

Who  kindles  thee  devoutly  in  his  dwolling,— to  him  be
wealth  seouro  and  freely  giving.

8  Whoso  sings  praise  to  thee  at  evo  or  morning,  and,  with

oblation,  doth  the  thing  thou  lovest, —

In  his  own  home,  evon  as  a  gold-girt  courser,  rcscuo  him  from
distress,  the  bounteous  giver.

9  Whoso  brings  gifts  to  thco  Immortal,  Agni,  and  doth  thee

service  with  uplifted  ladle, —

Let  him  not,  sorely  toiling,  loso  his  riches  j  let  not  the  sinner’s
wickedness  enclose  him.

2  ISttiotm  both  roots  of  bom  beings :  betwoon  Gods  and  men,  tho  Gods  also
being  called  jdt/lh  or  born,  as  sons  of  Heaven  and  Earth.

3  The  thought  of  Order:  tho  thought  of  Law-appointed  sacrifice.

You  /Jellies  :  the  Gods  of  whom  ihou,  Agni,  art  one.

0  Makes  his  head  to  ae\e:  with  the  load  of  wood  which  he  curries  on  it,

7  Freely  yisiny :  enabling  the  possessor  to  be  bountiful  in  turn.


HYMN  2.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


305


10  Whose  well-wrought  worship  thou  acccptcst,  Agni,  thou  God

a  mortal’s  gift,  thou  liberal  Giver, —

Dear  be  his  sacrifice  to  thee,  Most  Youthful !  and  may  we
strengthen  him  when  he  adores  thee.

11  May  he  who  knows  distinguish  sense  and  folly  of  mon,  like

straight'ftnd  crooked  backs  of  horses.

Lead  us,  0  God,  to  wealth  and  noble  offspring :  keep  penury
afar  and  grant  us  plenty.

12  This  Sage  the  Sages,  ne’er  deceived,  commanded,  sotting

him  down  in  dwellings  of  the  living.

Hence  mayst  thou,  friendly  God,  with  rapid  footsteps  behold
the  Gods,  wonderful,  fair  to  look  on.

13  Good  guidance  hast  thou  for  the  priest,  0  Agni,  who,

Youngest  God  !  with  out-poured  Soma  serves  thee.

Ruler  of  men,  thou  joyous  God,  bring  treasure  splendid  and
plentiful  to  aid  the  toiler.

H  Now  all  that  we,  thy  faithful  servants,  Agni,  have  done  with
feet,  with  hands,  and  with  our  bodies,

The  wise,  with  toil,  the  holy  rite  have  guided,  as  those  who
frame  a  car  with  mauual  cunning.

15  May  we,  seven  sages  first  in  rank,  engouder,  from  Dawn  the

Mother,  men  to  be  ordainers.

May  we,  Angirascs,  bo  sons  of  Heaven,  and,  radiant,  buret
the  wealth-containing  mountain.

16  As  in  the  days  of  old  our  anoiont  Fathers,  speeding  the  work

of  holy  worship,  Agni,

11  lit  tc ho  hno\ct  .•  the  wise  Agni.  Like  straight  and  crooked  back t:
afrdndm,  of  horses,  is  supplied  by  Sityana  ;  as  a  horso-kceper  or  groom
distinguishes  between  woll-shapod  and  ill-shaped  backs.  Keep  penury  afar :
1  follow  Professor  Roth  in  his  interpretation  of  d'Uim  and  ddxlim  in  this
passage.  Professor  Wilson,  following  Sftyana,  translates:  ‘be  bountiful  to  the
liberal  giver  ;  shun  him  who  gives  not.1  ‘  Give  us  this  life  on  earth,  keep  off
the  life  to  come.’ —  Max  M tiller.

12  Thil  Sage :  Agin.  The  On  get  :  the  other  Gods.  Commanded :  ordered
to  become  a  priestly  herald  or  invoker.  IKitA  rapid  fooUtept:  I  follow
SAyana  ;  but  the  correctness  of  his  explanation  is  doubtful.  According  to
Pisehcl,  padbhlK  here  means  ‘with  (thine)  eyes.’

15  ‘  Again,  through  the  identification  of  the  fathers  with  tho  light  they  are

brought  into  connection  with  the  metaphor  of  generation . The  fathers

are  united  with  the  Dawn,  and  desire  with  her  to  beget  male  children.  Jn  a
hymn  to  Soma  they  arc  mentioned  along  with  the  morning  Sun  as  having
plac&l  the  germ  in  the  earth  ;  and  tho  fruitfulnosa  of  heaven  and  earth,
which  give  birth  to  cods  and  men,  is  described  as  produced  by  tho  fathers..’ —
Wallis,  Conuologg  of  the  Jiigrcda,  p.  72.

Tin ■  multh-eonUtitiing  mountain  :  the  cloud  with  its  sure  of  rain,  or  tho
cave  in  which  tho  cows  or  rays  of  light  were  imprisoned.


THE  HYMNS  OP


306


[BOOK  TV,


Sought  pure  light  and  devotion,  singing  praises;  they  cleft
the  ground  and  made  red  Dawns  apparent.

17  Gods,  doing  holy  acts,  devout,  resplendent,  smelting  like  ore

thois  human  generations,

Enkindling  Agni  and  exalting  Indra,  they  came  encompassing
the  stall  of  cattle.

18  Strong  One!  he  marked  them — and  the  Gods  before  them —

like  herds  of  cattle  in  a  foodful  pasture.

Thorc  they  moaned  forth  their  strong  desire  for  mortals,  to
aid  tho  True,  the  nearest  One,  the  Living.

19  Wo  have  worked  for  thee,  wo  have  laboured  nobly — bright

Dawns  have  shed  their  light  upon  our  worship —

Adding  a  beauty  to  tho  perfect  Agni,  and  the  God’s  beauteous
oye  that  shines  for  over.

20  Agni,  Disposer,  wo  have  sung  those  praises  to  thoo  the  Wise :

do  thou  accopt  thorn  gladly.

Blazo  up  on  high  and  over  mako  us  richer.  Give  us  groat
wealth,  0  thou  whose  boons  are  many.


HYMN  III.  Agni.

Win,  to  assist  you,  Kudra,  Lord  of  worship,  Priest  of  both
worlds,  effectual  Sacrificor,

Agni,  invested  with  his  goldon  colours,  boforo  tho  thunder
strike  and  lay  you  sonseloss.

2  This  shrino  have  wo  mado  ready  for  thy  coming,  as  tho  fond

dame  attires  her  for  her  husband.

Porformor  of  good  work,  sit  down  boforo  us,  invested  whilo
these  dames  inclino  to  moot  thoo.

3  A  hymn,  0  Priest,  to  him  who  hears,  tho  gentle,  to  him  who

looks  on  men,  exceeding  gracious,

A  song  of  praise  sing  to  tho  God  Immortal,  whom  the  stono,
presser  of  tho  swoot  juice,  worships.


17  Gods :  tho  godlike  Augirapes.  Strutting  like  ore :  purifyiug  their  hum¬
anity,  at  oro  is  purified  by  smelting.

18  Strong  One:  0  mighty  Agni.  He  marked  them :  Indra  saw  tho  kino  of

tho  Augiro**,  tho  stolen  raya  of  light  The  True,  the  A 'cartel  One,  the  Living  :
Agni  appears  to  be  meant.  -

J  Rudra;  bore  meaning  Agni.  Before  the  thunder  strike :  before  death
overtakes  you.  Professor  Ludwig  refers  to  the  Atharvaveda,  XII.  2.  9,  where
Agni  Kravykd,  or  Agni  in  his  moat  terrifio  form,  is  spoken  of  as  the  God  of
Death  who  stupefies  men  with  his  thunderbolt

2  The  fames  :  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.  Sky  ana  (supplies  '  flames  or  .
tongs  of  praise,’ or*  ladles' may  be  the  word  understood.  Professor  Ludwig
supplies  vijah  or  prajdh  '  families  or  people,’  and  Professor  Grasmnanu
‘  libation*,’  *


HYMN  3.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


397


4  Even  as  true  knowcr  of  the  Law,  0  Agni,  to  this  our  solemn

rite  he  thou  attentive.

When  shall  thy  songs  of  festival  be  sung  thee  ?  When  is  thy
friendship  shown  within  our  dwelling  ?  *

5  Why  this  complaint  to  Varuna,  0  Agni?  And  why  to

Heaven  ?  for  what  is  our  transgression  ?

How  wilt  thou  speak  to  Earth  and  bounteous  Mitra  1  What
wilt  thou  say  to  Aryaman  and  Bhaga  ?

6  What,  when  thou  blazest  on  the  lesser  altars,  what  to  the

mighty  Wind  who  comes  to  bless  us,

True,  circumambient?  what  to  Earth,  0  Agni,  what  wilt
thou  say  to  man-destroying  Rudra  ?

7  How  to  great  Pushan  who  promotes  our  welfare, — to  honoured

Rudra  what,  who  gives  oblations  ?

What  sin  of  ours  to  the  far-striding  Vishnu,  what,  Agni,  wilt
thou  tell  the  Lofty  Arrow.

8  What  wilt  thou  tell  the  truthful  band  of  Maruts,  how  answer

the  great  Sun  when  thou  art  questioned  1
Before  the  Free,  before  the  Swift,  defend  us:  fulfil  heaven’s
work,  all-knowing  Jatavedas.

9  I  crave  the  cow’s  true  gift  arranged  by  Order :  though  raw,

she  hath  the  sweet  ripe  juice,  0  Agni.

Though  she  is  black  of  hue  with  milk  she  teemeth,  nutritious,
brightly  shinjng,  all-sustaining.

10  Agni  the  Bull,  the  manly,  hath  been  sprinkled  with  oil  upon
his  back,  by  Law  eternal.

Ho  who  gives  vital  power  goes  on  unswerving.  Pfisni  the
Bull  hath  milked  the  pure  white  udder.


5  Why  this  complaint :  why  dost  thou  accuse  ua  of  sin  ?

0  On  Git  lesser  altars  :  on  the  dhUhnydt,  side-altars,  or  heaps  of  earth  cover-
©d  with  sand  on  which  the  fire  is  placed.  Alan-dotroying :  the  destroyer  of
wicked  men,  says  the  Scholiast.  Rudra  i8  generally  represented  as  a  bene¬
volent  God.

7  The  Lofty  Arrow :  the  lightning.

8  How  ansieer  Gw  great  Sun  :  the  sense  of  stanzas  5—8  appears  to  be,  as
Professor  Ludwig  observes  :  thou  hast  no  grounds  for  complaining  of  us  to
any  one  Qf  the  Gods  :  be,  rather,  our  advocate  if  Surya  comce  forwaid  os  our
accuser.

Before  the  Free,  before  the  Swift :  the  Sun.

9  The  first. lino  is  difficult.  '  I  solicit  the  milk  of  the  cow  essential  for  the
sacrifice.* — Wilson.  Though  raw :  this  opposition  of  the  uncooked  cow  and
the  milk  cooked  or  ripened  in  her  udder  has  been  noticed  before.  See  I.  62.  9.

10  Prijni :  here  said  to  be  Surya  or  the  Sun,  who  draws  his  light  from  the
sky.  But  see  Bonfoy,  Vedica  und  Verwuxdtes,  rp.  7 1,  75.


39S  THE  HYMNS  OP  {BOOK  IV.

11  By  Law  the  Aiigirascs  cleft  the  rock  asunder,  ami  sang  their

hymns  together  with  the  cattle.

Bringing  great  bliss  the  men  encompassed  Morning :  light
warf  apparent  at  the  birth  of  Agni.

12  By  Law  the  Immortal  Goddesses  the  Waters,  with  meath-rich

waves,  0  Agni,  and  uninjured,

Like  a  strong  courser  lauded  in  his  running,  sped  to  flow
onward  swiftly  and  for  over.

13  Go  never  to  the  feast  of  one  who  harms  us,  the  treacherous

neighbour  or  unworthy  kinsman.

Punish  us  not  for  a  false  brother’s  .trespass.  Lot  us  not  feel
the  might  of  friend  or  focman.

14  0  Agni,  keep  us  xnfo  with  thy  protection,  loving  us,  honoured

God  !  and  evor  guarding.

Beat  thou  away,  destroy  severe  affliction  :  slay  e'en  the  demon
when  lie  waxes  mighty.

1 5  Through  these  our  songs  of  praise  he  gracious,  Agni ;  moved

by  our  prayers,  0  Hero,  touch  our  viands.

Accept,  0  Angirue,  these  our  dovotions,  and  let  the  praise
which  Gods  dcsiro  address  tlieo.

1G  To  thee  who  knowest,  Agni,  thou  Disposer,  all  these  wiso
secret  speeches  liavo  1  uttered,

Sung  to  thee,  Sage,  the  charming  words  of  wisdom,  to  tlioe,
O  Singer,  with  my  thoughts  and  praises.

HYMN  IV.  Agni.

Put  forth  like  a  wide-spreading  net  thy  vigour;  go  liko  a
mighty  King  with  his  attendants.

Thou,  following  thy  swift  not,  shooteBt  arrows :  transfix  the
fiends  with  darts  that  burn  most  fiercely.

2  Forth  go  in  rapid  flight  thy  whirling  weapons  :  follow  them

closely,  glowing  in  thy  fury.

Spread  with  thy  tongue  the  winged  flames,  0  Agni ;  unfet¬
tered,  cast  thy  firebrands  all  around  thee.

3  Send  thy  spies  forward,  fleetest  in  thy  motion ;  bo,  ne’er  de¬

ceived,  the  guardian  of  this  pcoplo
From  him  who,  near  or  far,  is  bent  on  evil,  and  let  no  trouble
sent  from  thee  o’orcomo  us.


This  hvmu  in  raid  by  Sltyana  to  be  addressed  to  Agni  as  slayer  of  the  RAk-
sh&sas,  that  is,  m  God  of  the  fire  with  which  the  immigrant  Aryans  burnt  tho
jungle,  drove  back  tho  hostile  aborigines,  and  cleared  the  ground  for  encamp¬
ment  or  permanent  settlement.

3  Thy  tpiet :  thy  first  flames,  sent  forward  as  if  to  reconnoitre.


tiYMX  4.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  399

4  Rise  up,  0  Agni,  spread  thee  out  before  us :  burn  down  our

foes,  thou  who  hast  sharpened  arrows.

Him,  blazing  Agui !  wKo  hath  worked  us  mischief,  consume
thou  utterly  like  dried-up  stubble.  *

5  Rise,  Agui,  drive  off  those  who  fight  against  us:  make  mani¬

fest  thine  own  celestial  vigour.

Slacken  the  strong  bows  of  the  demon-driven :  destroy  our
foemen  whether  kin  or  stranger.

G  Most  Youthful  God,  he  knoweth  well  thy  favour  who  gave  an
impulse  to  this  high  devotion.

All  fair  days  and  magnificence  of  riches  hast  thou  beamed
forth  upon  the  good  man’s  portals.

•  7  Blest,  Agui,  be  the  man,  the  liberal  giver,  who  with  his  lauds
and  regular  oblation

Is  fain  to  please  thee  for  his  life  and  dwelling.  May  all  his
days  l»e  bright :  be  this  his  longing.

8  I  praise  thy  gracious  favour :  sing  in  answer.  May  this  my

song  sing  like  a  loved  one  with  thee.

Lords  of  good  steeds  and  cars  may  wc  adorn  thcc,  and  day  by
day  vouchsafe  thou  ua  dominion.

9  Here  of  free  choice  let  each  one  serve  ihec  richly,  resplendent

day  by  day  at  eve  and  morning.

So  may  we  honour  thee,  content  and  joyous,  passing  beyond
the  glories  of  the  people.

10  Whoso  with  good  steeds  and  fine  gold,  0  Agni,  comes  nigh

thee  on  a  car  laden  with  treasure,

His  Friend  art  thou,  yea,  thou  art  his  Protector  whose  joy  it
is  to  entertain  thee  d\tly.

11  Through  words  and  kinship  I  destroy  the  mighty:  this  power

I  have  from  Gotamn  my  father.

Mark  thou  this  speech  of  ours,  0  thou  Most  Youthful,  Friend
of  the  House,  exceeding  wise,  Invoker.

12  Knowing  no  slumber,  speedy  and  propitious,  alert  and  ever

friendly,  most  unwearied,

May  thy  protecting  powers,  unerring  Agni,  taking  their  places
here,  combined,  preserve  us.


5  The  demon -driven  :  those  whom  evil  spirits  incite  to  attack  us.

8  Sing  in  answer ;  with  the  auspicious  Bound  of  thy  crackling  flames.

11  Through  words  and  kinship:  that  is,  through  my  close  alliance  with
Agni,  effected  by  the  prayers  with  which  my  fathers  and  I  have  worshipped
him.

The  mighty ;  the  lUkshasas  or  demons;  according  to  Sflyana.


THE  HYMNS  OF


400


[BOOK  TV'


13  Thy  gu^rtfian  rays,  0  Agni,  when  thoy  saw  him,  preserved
blind  Mftmateya  from  affliction.

Lprd  of  all  riches,  ho  preserved  the  pious :  the  foes  who  fain
would  barm  them  did  no  mischief.
li  &idpd  by  theo  with  tbee  may  we  be  wealthy,  may  we  gain
strength  with  thee  to  guide  us  onward.

Fulfil  the  words  of  both,  0  Ever  Truthful :  straightway  do
this,  thou  God  whom  power  emboldeus.  '  «r«

15  0  Agni,  with  this  fuel  will  we  serve  theo;  accept  the  laud  we
sing  to  thee  with  favour.

Destroy  tho  cursing  lUkshasaa :  preservo  us,  0  rich  iu  frionds,
from  guile  and  scorn  and  slander.

HYMN  V.  »  Agni.

How  shall  wo  give  with  ono  accord  oblation  to  Agni,  to
Y&iijv&nara  tho  Bounteous?

‘‘Great  light,  with  full  high  growth  hath  ho  uplifted,  and,  as
"  a  pillar  bears  tho  roof,  sustains  it.

2  Reproach  opt  him  who,  God  and  solf-roliaut,  vouchsafed  this

bounty  unto  mo  a  mortal, —

Death  less,  discomor,  wiso,  to  mo  the  simplo,  Vai^v&nura  most
manly,  youthful  Agni.

3  Sharp-pointod,  poworful,  Btrong,  of  boundless  vigour,  Agni

who  knows  tho  lofty  hymn,  kopt  socrot
As  tho  lost  milch-cow's  track,  tho  doubly  Mighty, — ho  hath
dcolarod  to  mo  this  hidden  knowledge.

4  May  ho  wjth  sharpened  tooth,  tho  Bounteous  Giver,  Agni,

consume  witli  flamo  mast  fiercely  glowing’

Those  who  rogard  not  Varurja’s  oommandmonta  and  tho  dear
stodfast  laws  of  sapient  Mitra.


IS  This  stanza  has  occurred  before,  I.  14 7.  3.  Mind  Mdnuxteya:  the  Rishi
D.’rghftUmM.  Lord  of  all  ricka :  Agni.

t*4  The  wirdi  of  both :  the  wishes  of  Go<l»  and  men.  84yana  given  a  difior-
ent  explanation,  end  Professor  Wilsou  translates  accordingly  :  4  destroy  both
(sorts  of  calumniator*. )'

‘  The  Riahi  Vdmadcva,  as  Professor  Roth  observes,  4  professes  to  make
known  a  mysterious  and  recondite  wisdom,  which  had  been  revealed  to  him
by  Agni,’  and  tho  language  of  the  hymn  is  correspondingly  difficult  and
obscure.

-  1  Vaifvinara:  common  God  of  all  Aryan  men.

2  Thi4  bounty :  the  gift  of  this  mysterious  knowledge.


HYi/y  5.)


THE  RIO  VEDA.


401

5  Like  youthful bmaiflJL  without  brothers,  straying,  liko  damns/-  /

w^o-lrate  thoir  lor4?,..0f  evil  conduct,  - - - -/

They  who  are'fuTl  of  sin,  untrue,  unfaithful,  they  have  engen¬
dered  this  abysmal  station.

6  To  mo,  weak,  iiuiocont,  thou,  luminous  Agni,  hast  boldly  given

as  'twere  a  heavy  burthen,

This  Prishtha  hymn,  profound  and  strong  and  mighty,  of
sovon  elements,  aud  with  oftored  daintios.

7  So  may  our  song  that  purifios,  through  wisdom  reaoh  in  a

moment  him  the  Universal,

Established  on  the  height,  on  oarth’s  best  station,  abovo  the
beauteous  grassy  skin  of  Pfifui.

8  Of  this  my  speech  what  shall  I  uttor  further?  Thoy  indicate

the  milk  stored  up  in  secrot

When  thoy  have  thrown  as  ’twere  the  cows’  stalls  opon.  Tho
Bird  protects  earth's  host  uud  well-loved  station.

9  This  is  the  Great  Ones’  mighty  apparition  which  from  of  pld

the  radiant  Cow  hath  followed.

This,  shining  brightly  in  the  place  of  Order,  swift,  hasting
on  in  secret,  she  discovered.

10  He  thou  who  shone  together  with  his  Parents  remembered
Prisui’s  fair  and  secret  treasure,

Which,  in  the  Mother  Cow’s  most  lofty  station,  the  Bull’s
.tongue,  of  the  flame  bent  forward,  tasted.


r.  This  abysmal  station:  that  in,  aaysS&yana.  naralast/Ulnam  or  hell.  The
wicked  we  the  cause  of  tho  existence  of  tho  place  of  punishment  prepared
for  thorn.

0  This  Prishtha  hymn :  Prishtha  is  tho  name  of  a  particular  arrangement
of  Sftnians  employed  at  tho  mid-day  oblation.

7  The  Universal :  VaisvAuara  Agni.  Established  on  the  height:  according
to  this  conjectural  translation,  which  follows  a  auggoation  of  Professor
Ludwig,  tho  reference  ia  to  Agni  plaood  on  tho  altar,  above  tho  aurfaoo  of  tho
earth  (Pflini).  Hut  tho  meaning  of  j&bdru  (on  the  height  1)  ia  unoortain.
Profeasor  Wilson  tranalatea :  '  whoso  awift-naconding  brilliant  (orb)  ia  ata-
tloncd  on  tho  oant  of  tho  earth,  to  mount,  liko  tho  sun,  abovo  tho  immoys.-
ablo  hoaven.’

8  This  stanza  appears  to  allude  to  tho  Angira»ce  rocovoring  the  lost  raya
of  light,  the  mill  stored  up  in  secret.  The  Bird :  tho  Sun  who  flica  Uirpugh
heavon.

0  The  Oreat  Ones'  mighty  apparition :  tho  eolar  orb  ;  the  Great  Ones  being
tho  Sun'i  raya.  The  radiant  Goto:  Uslias  or  Dawn  who  disoovora  tho  Sun  as
ho  travels  in  secret,  or  by  night,  from  woat  to  oast,  and  follow  a  him  till  ha  ia
about  to  rise.

10  He:  Agni.  Ills  Parents  :  Heaven  and  Earth.  PrSsni  is  tho  Cow  whoso
milk  is  used  in  tho  oblatiou  which  Agni,  tho  Bull,  devours.


THE  HYMNS  OP


402


[BOOR  IV.


1 1  With  reverence  I  declare  the  Law,  0  Agni ;  what  is,  comes

by  thiue  order,  J&tavedns.

Of  this,  whate’er  it  be,  thou  art  the  Sovran ;  yea,  all  the
wealth  that  is  in  earth  or  heaven.

12  What  is  our  wealth  therefrom,  and  what  our  treasure?  Tell

us,  0  JAtavedas,  for  thou  knowest,

What  is  our  best  course  in  this  secret  passage :  we,  unre¬
proached,  have  reached  a  placo  far  distant.

13  What  is  tho  limit,  what  the  rules,  the  guerdon?  Like  fleet-

foot  coursers  speed  wo  to  tho  contest.

When  will  the  Goddesses,  the  Immortal’s  Spouses,  tho  Dawns,
spread  over  us  tho  Sun-God’s  splendour?

14  Unsatisfied,  with  speeoh  devoid  of  vigour,  scanty  and  frivolous

and  inoonolusive,

Wherefore  do  they  address  thee  here,  0  Agni  ?  Let  thoso  who
havo  no  weapons  suffer  sorrow.

15* The' majesty  of  him  tho  Good,  tho  Mighty,  aflamo,  hath
shone  for  glory  in  tho  dwelling.

He,  olothod  in  light,  hath  shone  most  fair  to  look  on,  wealthy
in  boons,  as  a  homo  shinos  with  riches.

HYMN  VI.  A*m\

Priest  of  our  rite,  stand  up  erect,  0  Agni,  in  tho  Gods’  ser¬
vice  best  of  snorificors,

For  ovor  ovory  thought  thou  art  tho  Ruler :  thou  furthcrcst
e’en  the  wisdom  of  tho  pious.

2  Ho  was  sot  down  mid  mon  as  Priest  unerring,  Agni,  wise,

welcome  in  our  holy  synods.

Like  Savitar  ho  hath  lifted  up  his  splendour,  and  like  a
builder  raised  his  smoke  to  heaven.

3  Tho  glowing  ladle,  filled  with  oil,  is  lifted  :  choosing  Gods'

sorvico  to  the  right  he  oirclcs.

Eagor  he  rises  like  tho  new-wrought  pillar  which,  firmly  sot
and  fixed,  anoints  tho  victims.

'A  When  sacred  grass  is  strewn  and  Agni  kindled,  tho  Adhvaryu
rises-  to  his  task  rejoicing.

Agui  the  Priest,  like  one  who  tends  tho  cattle,  goes  three
times  round,  a3  from  of  old  ho  wills  it.

14  Thtte  who  have  no  weapons:  who  are  unprovided  with  the  necessary
dements  of  sacrifice,  and  therefore  unable  to  please  A#ni.

2  Lilt  a  luil/Ur :  as  the  builder  of  a  house  raises  a  pi  1  Tar.

3  To  the  right  he  circle t :  is  earn'd  round  to  the  altars.  Anoints  the
victim*:  smears  them  with  tho  clarified  butter  with  which  it  (the  sacrificial
post;  has  been  previously  anointed.


HYMN  7. 1  THE  RIOYEDA.  408

5  Agni  himself,  the  Priest,  with  measured  motion,  goe3  round,

with  sweet  speech,  cheerful,  true  to  Order.

His  fulgent  flames  run  forth  like  vigorous  horses :  all  crea¬
tures  are  affrighted  when  he  blazes.  '  •

6  Beautiful  and  auspicious  is  thine  aspect,  0  lovely  Agni,  ter¬

rible  when  spreading.

Thy  splendours  are  not  covered  by  the  darkness  :  detraction
leaves  no  stain  upon  thy  body.

7  Naught  hindered  his  production,  Bounteous  Giver:  his  Mother

and  his  Sire  were  freo  to  scud  him.

Then  as  a  Friend  benevolent,  refulgent,  Agni  shone  forth  in
human  habitations.

8  Ho,  Agni,  whom  the  twice-fivo  sisters,  dwelling  together,  in

tho  homes  of  men  engendered,

Bright  liko  a  spear’s  tooth,  wakoned  in  the  morning,  with
powerful  mouth  and  like  an  axe  well-sharpenol.

9  Those  thy  Bay  Coursors,  Agni,  dropping  fatness,  ruddy  and

vigorous,  speeding  straightly  forward,

And  rod  steeds,  wonderful,  of  mighty  muscle,  are  to  this
service  of  tho  Coda  invited  :

10  Those  brightly-shining  flames  of  thine,  0  Agni,  that  move  for

ever  restless,  all-subduing,

Liko  falcons  hasting  oagorly  to  tho  quarry,  roar  loudly  liko
tho  army  of  tho  Maruts.

11  To  thee,  0  flaming  God,  hath  prayer  been  offered..  Lot  the

priost  laud  thee :  give  to  him  who  worships.

Mon  have  established  Agni  as  Invoker,  fain  to  adore  the
glory  of  tho  living.

HYMN  VII.  Aguii

Here  by  ordainers  was  this  Ood  appointed  first  Invoker,  beat
at  worship,  to  be  praised  at  ritos  ;

Whom  Apnaviina  and  the  Bhfigus  caused  to  shine  bright-
coloured  in  the  wood,  spreading  from  home  to  home.


7  Hit  Mother  and  hit  Sire:  Earth  and  Heaven.  To  tend  him  ;  to  ho
messenger  between  men  ami  Gods.

8  The  twice-five  listen:  the  priest’s  finger*  which  produce  the  sacrificial  fire.

9  Bay  Couriers  :  harltah  ;  Harits ;  the  prototype  (the  word  being  feminine)

of  the  Greek  '  Chari tes.’  See  M.  Muller.  Chips  from  a  German  Workshop,
IV.  141  (new  edition).  .  '  *

11  The  glory  of  the  living:  Agni  as  Narlaausa,  the  Praise  or  Glory  of  Mod.  '

1  Here:  at  this  ceremony.  Orda  inert:  the  regulators  of  the  sacrifice.
Apnavdna  :  a  Kiahi  of  the  family  of  Bhrign.


404  THE  MYMNS  OF  \BVVK  IV.

2  When  shall  thy  glory  as  a  God,  Agui,  be  suddenly  shown

forth  ?

For  mortal  men  have  held  thee  fast,  adorable  in  all  their
homes,

3  Seeing  thee  faithful  to  the  Law,  most  sapient,  like  the  starry

heaven,

...  Illumining  with  cheerful  my  each  solemn  rite  in  every  house.

4  Vivasvdn's  envoy  living  men  have  taken  as  their  onsign,  swift,
The  rulor  ovorall  mankind,  moving  like  Bhrigu  in  oaoh  homo.

5  Him  the  intelligent  have  they  placed  duly  as  Invoking  Priest,
Wolcomo,  with  sanctifying  flame,  best  worshipper,  with  soven-

*  fold  might }

6  In  his  Etornal  Mothers,  in  the  wood,  coucealed  and  uuapproa-

ched ;

Kept  socrot  though  his  flames  are  bright,  Booking  on  all  sidos,
quickly  found.

7  That,  as  food  sproads  forth  in  this  oarthly  udder,  Gods  may

rojojce  thorn  in  the  homo  of  Order,

Groat  Agnl,  sorved  with  rovorenco  and  oblation,  flios  ovor  to
the  sacrifice,  the  Faithful.

8  Bird  of  each  rito,  skilled  in  an  envoy’s  duties,  knowing  both

worlds  and  that  which  lies  botwoon  them,

Thou  goost  from  of  old  a  willing  Homld,  knowing  full  woll
hoavon’s  Innonnost  rocessos.

9  Bright  God,  thv  path  is  black;  light  is  before  thee:  thy

moving  splendour  is  tho  chief  of  wonders.

When  sho,  yet  uuimprognato,  hath  oonceived  thoe,  oven  when
nowly  born  thou  art  an  envoy.

10  Vot  newly  born,  his  vigour  is  apparent  whon  tho  wind  blows
upon  his  fiery  splendour.

His  sharpened  tonguo  ho  layoth  on  tho  brushwood,  and  with
his  teeth  o’on  solid  food  oonsumeth.

4  Vit'iuvdn't  envoi/  :  Recording  to  SAyana,  tho  moMongor  of  tho  worshlppor.
Moving  like  Bhrigu  ;  or  shining  ;  Bhiigu  boiiig  originally  a  personification
of  lightning.

5  Sevenfold  might  :  Agni’s  seven  flamos,

6  Eternal  Mother/  :  tho  Celestial  Waters.  Seeking  on  all  tides  •'  roaming  at
will  in  tonruh  of  food.

7  In  this  earthly  u dder  :  hero  on  earth,  and  especially  at  tho  altar  from
which  oblations  como.  Oqly  when  tho  elements  of  sacrifice  aro  forthcoming
can  Agni  invito  and  bring  tho  God*.  The  home  of  Order :  the  plaoc  of  law-
ordained  sacrifice,

”8  ail'd  of  each  rite  :  attending  all  sacrifices.  Thai  which  lies  between  them;
the  firmament  or  mid-air  between  heaven  and  earth.

0  She,  get  unimpregnate  :  the  piece  of  wood  iu  which  fire  is  produced,  k


9]  ’  THE  RIO  VEDA.  -*06

11  When  he  hath  borne  off  food  with  swift  flame  swiftly,  strong
Agni  makes  himself  a  speedy  envoy,

Follows  the  rustling  of  the  wind,  consuming,  and  courser-like,
speeds,  drives  the  swift  horso  onward.  •

HYMN  VIII.  Agni.

Your  envoy  who  possesses  all,  Immortal,  bearer  of  your  gifts,
Best  worshipper,  I  woo  with  song.

2  Ho,  Mighty,  knows  the  gift  of  wealth,  he  knows  the  deop

recess  of  heaven :

He  shall  bring  hitherward  the  Gods.

3  Ho  knows,  a  God  himself,  to  guide  Gods  to  the  righteous  in

his  homo :

Ho  gives  o’on  treasures  that  wo  love.

4  Ho  is  the  Herald :  well-informed,  ho  doth  his  errand  to  and

fro,

Knowing  tho  doop  recess  of  heaven.

0  May  wo  bo  they  who  gratify  Agni  with  sacrifioial  gifts,

Who  chorish  and  onkindlo  him.

G  Illustrious  for  wealth  arc  they,  and  horo  deeds,  victorious,
Who  have  sorved  Agni  reverently.

7  So  unto  us,  dav  aftor  day,  may  riches  craved  by  many  como,
And  powor  and  might  spring  up  for  us.

8  That  holy  Singer  in  his  strength  shoots  forth  his  arrows

swifter  than

The  swift  shafts  of  tho  tribos  of  men.

HYMN  IX.  Agni.

Aotti,  show  favour  :  groat  art  thou  who  to  this  pious  man  art
come,

To  soat  thee  on  tho  sacred  grass.


1 1  When  he  hath  borne  off  food :  I  follow  Silyana,  but  am  not  satisfied  with
hia  explanation.  Coureer-lile :  Agni,  himself  a  courser,  drives  on  tho  wind  as
it  were  a  courser.  Professor  Ludwig  suggests  that  drvd  hero  may  mean  a
rider,  not  a  courser.  .  j

2  Knows  the  gift  of  wealth :  how  to  enrich  his  worshippers.

4  Doth  hU  errand  to  and  fro  :  bears  to  tho  Gods  tho  prayers,  praises,  and
oblations  of  their  worshippers,  and  brings  them  down  to  tho  sacrifice.

8  That  holy  Singer :  Agni  the  Priest.  The  stanza  is  difficult  Professor
Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates  :  ‘  May  the  wise  Agni  entirely  obviate
by  his  power  the  romovcablo  (ills)  of  men  tho  dcsceudant*  of  Manu.’  I  have
adopted  Professor  Ludwig’s  interpretation.


m  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

2  May  he  the  Immortal,  Helper,  hard  to  be  deceived  among

mankind,

Become  the  messenger  of  all.

3  Around  the  altar  is  he  led,  welcome  Chief  Priest  at  solemn

rites,

•  Or  as  the  Potar  sits  him  down.

4  Agni  in  fire  at  sacrifice,  and  in  tho  house  as  Lord  thereof,
And  as  a  Brahman  takes  his  seat.

6  Thou  comest  as  tho  guide  of  folk  who  colebrato  a  sacrifice,
And  to  oblations  brought  by  men.

6  Thou  servest  as  his  messonger  whoso  sacrifice  thou  lovest

well,

To  bear  tho  mortal’s  gifts  to  heaven.

7  Accopt  our  solemn  rite;  bo  pleased,  Angiras,  with  our

sacrifice :

Give  oar  and  listen  to  our  call.

8  May  tbino  inviolable  car,  wherowith  thou  g Hardest  thoso

who  give,

Como«car  to  us  from  every  side.

HYMN  X.  Agni.

Tins  day  with  pruisos,  Agni,  wo  bring  thee  that  which  thou
lovost.

Right  judgmont,  liko  a  horso,  with  our  dovotions.

2  Por  thou  hast  evor  been  tho  Car-drivor,  Agni,  of  noblo
Strength,  lofty  sacrifice,  and  rightful  judgmont.

3  Through  these  our  praises  como  thou  to  moot  us,  bright  as

tho  sunlight,

0  Agni,  well  disposed,  with  all  thino  aspects.

4  Now  may  wo  servo  tlioo  singing  those  lauds  this  day  to  thoo,

Agni.

Loud  as  tho  voico  of  Heaven  thy  blasts  aro  roaring.

0  Just  at  this  timo  of  tho  day  and  tho  night  thy  look  is  tho
sweetest :

It  shincth  near  us  oven  as  gold  for  glory.

6  Spotless  thy  body,  brilliant  ns  gold,  liko  clarified  butter :

This  gleams  liko  gold  on  thee,  0  Self-dependent

8  Chief  Print :  Hotar,  tho  promoter  of  tho  oblation.  The  Potar :  litomlly,
Cleanser  or  Puritier,  another  of  the  sixteen  priests  usually  employed.

4  1  road  uldgiul  as  proposed  by  Prof.  Max  MUllcr  and  Prof.  Ludwig  in  plaoo
of  tho  almost  impcssiblo  u(«f  'jnOh  of  the  text.  ^

2  Car -driver :  promoter.

6  Thit :  tby  splendour.


BYMN  12.]  ‘  THE  MOVED  A.  .  40f

7  All  hate  aud  mischief,  yea,  if  committed,  Agni,  thou  turnest,
Holy  One,  from  tho  man  who  rightly  worships.

8  Agni,  with  you  Gods,  prosperous  be  our  friendships  and  kin¬

ships.  .  •

Bo  this  our  bond  here  by  this  place,  thine  altar.

HYMN  XI.  Agni.

Thy  blessdd  mnjcst}’,  victorious  Agni,  shines  brightly  in  tho
neighbourhood  of  S6rya.

Splendid  to  see,  it  shows  even  at  night-time,  and  food  is  fair
to  look  on  in  thy  beauty.

2  Agni,  disclose  his  thought  for  him  who  singeth,  the  well,

Strong  God  !  while  thou  art  praised  with  fervour.

Vouchsafe  to  us  that  powerful  hymn,  0  Mighty,  which,  Ra¬
diant  One !  with  all  tho  Gods  thou  lovest.

3  From  thee,  0  Agni,  springs  pootio  wisdom,  from  thee  com o

thoughts  and  hymns  of  praise  that  prosper;

From  theo  Hows  wealth,  with  heroes  to  adorn  it,  to  tho  true¬
hearted  man  who  gives  oblation.

4  From  theo  tho  hero  springs  who  wins  tho  booty,  bringcr  of

help,  mighty,  of  real  courago.

From  theo  comes  wealth,  sent  by  the  Gods,  bliss-giving;
Agni,  from  thee  tho  floot  impetuous  chargor.

5  Immortal  Agni,  thoe  whose  voico  is  pleasant,  as  first  in  rank,
.•  as  God,  religious  mortals

Invito  with  hymns ;  thee  who  romovcst  hatrod,  Friend  of  tho
Homo,  tho  household’s  Lord,  unorring.

6  Far  from  us  thou  romovost  want  and  sorrow,  far  from  us  all

ill-will  when  thou  protectest.

,  Son  of  Strength,  Agni,  bloat  is  ho  at  ovening,  whom  thou  as
God  attendost  for  his  welfare.

HYMN  XII.  Agni.

Wnoso  enkindles  theo,  with  lifted  ladle,  and  thrico  this  day
offers  theo  food,  0  Agni,

May  ho  oxccl,  triumphant  through  thy  splendours,  wise
through  thy  mental  power,  0  J&tavcdus.


8  This  altar :  literally,  this  udder ;  that  U,  the  place  whence  oblations
proceed.

1  In  Ihf  neighbourhood  of  SOrya  :  by  day,  in  the  sunshine.

-  2  The  well :  the  source  of  sacred  song.  '  .

4  The  hero :  or  the  strong  horte.  •


408  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

2  Whoso  with  toil  an<l  trouble  brings  thee  fuel,  serving  the

majesty  of  mighty  Agui,

He,  kindling  thee  at  evening  and  at  morning,  prospers,  and
comes  to  wealth,  and  slays  his  foemen.

3  Agni  is  Master  of  sublimo  dominion,  Agni  is  Lord  of  strength
-  and  lofty  riches.

Straightway  the  self-reliant  God,  Most  Youthful,  gives  trea¬
sures  to  the  mortal  who  adores  him.

4  Mo3t  Youthful  God,  whatever  sin,  through  folly,  we  hero,  as

human  beings,  have  committed,

In  sight  of  Aditi  make  thou  us  sinless :  remit,  entirely,  Agni,
our  offences.

5  Even  in  the  presence  of  great  sin,  0  Agni,  free  us  from  prison

of  the  Gods  or  mortals.

Never  may  we  who  are  thy  friends  be  injured  :  grant  health
.  and  strength  unto  our  seed  and  offspring.

6  Even  as  ye  here,  Gods  Excellent  and  Holy,  have  loosed  the

cow  that  by  the  foot  was  tethered,

So  also  set  us  free  from  this  affliction :  long  let  our  life,  0
Agni,  be  extended.

HYMN  XIII.  Agni.

Aosi  hath  looked,  benevolently-minded,  on  the  wealth-giving
spring  of  radiant  Mornings.

Come,  Asvins,  to  the  dwelling  of  the  pious:  Surya  the  God  is
rising  with  his  splendour.

2  Savitar,  God,  hath  spread  on  high  his  lustre,  waving  his  flag
like  a  spoil-seeking  hero.

Their  stablished  way  go  Yanina  and  Mitra,  what  time  they
make  the  Sun  ascend  the  heaven.


4  Aditi :  apparently  the  great  omnipresont  Power  which  controls  tho
forcob  of  tho  universe,  and  from  which  no  sins  are  hidden.

5  Prison  of  Gods  or  mortals:  actual  imprisonment  by  men  and
oorrespouding  chastisement  by  tho  Gods.

.  6  The  coid  :  the  cow-buffalo,  tied  to  a  post,  representing  symbolically  the
man. who  is  in  the  bonds  of  sin.  Cf.  X.  126.  6.


2  Waving  his  fag :  according  to  SAyana,  *  scattering  the  dew.’  But  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  drapsd,  the  Zend  drafsha,  means  a  hanner  in  this  place.
SAyana  explains  satvd,  a  hero,  as  ‘a  bull,’  but  this  interpretation  cannot  be
accepted.

Their  staliiHud  way :  tho  courso  appointed  for  them  in  the  eternal  order  of
the  uui verse.


BY  MX  15.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


409


3  Him  whom  they  made  to  drive  away  the  darkness,  Lords  of

sure  mansions,  constant  to  their  object,

Him  who  beholds  tho  universe,  the  Sun-God,  seven  strong  and
youthful  Coursers  carry  onward.  •

4  Spreading  thy  web  with  mightiest  Steeds  thou  com est,  rending

apart,  thou  God,  the  black-hued  mantle.

Tho  rays  of  Sftrya  tremulously  shining  sink,  like  a  hide,  tho
darkness  in  the  waters.

5  How  is  it  that,  unbound  and  not  supported,  he  fulloth  not

although  dirocted  downward?

By  what  self-powor  moves  ho?  Who  hath  seen  it?  He  guards
tho  vault  of  heaven,  a  close-sot  pillar.

HYMN  XIV.  Agui.

Tub  God  hath  looked,  oven  Agni  J&tavcdas,  to  meet  tho
Dawns  refulgent  in  their  glories.

Como  on  your  chariot,  yo  who  travel  widoly,  come  to  this
sacrifice  of  ours,  NAsatyas.

2  Producing  light  for  all  tho  world  of  oroaturos,  God  Savitar

hath  raised  aloft  his  banner.

Making  his  prosonoo  known  by  sunbeams,  Sflrya  hath  fillod
tho  firmament  and  earth  and  heaven.

3  Bed  Dawn  is  como,  riding  with  brightness  onward,  distin¬

guished  by  her  beams,  gay-hued  and  mighty.

Dawn  on  her  nobly-harnessed  car,  tho  Goddoss,  awaking  moil
to  happiness,  approachoth.

4  May  those  most  powerful  stoods  and  ohariot  bring  you,  O

Asvins,  hither  at  tho  break  of  morning.

Hero  for  your  draught  of  mouth  aro  Soma  juices  :  at  this  our
sacrifice  rejoice,  yo  Mighty.

5  How  is  it  that,  unbound  and  unsupported,  he  falloth  not

although  directed  downward  ?

By  what  self-powor  movos  he?  Who  hath  seen  it?  Ho  guards
the  vault  of  heaven,  a  close-set  pillar?

HYMN  XV.  Agni.

Agni  the  Herald,  like  a  horse,  is  led  forth  at  our  solemn  rite,
God  among  Gods  adorable.

8  CourUYt:  haritah ;  Hants.  Cf.  IV.  6.  9.

Thi»  hymn  is  an  imitation  of  the  preceding.  Tho  last  stanza  in  adopted
word  for  word.

5  lie :  in  tho  text  ayam,  this,  that  is  SOryo,  tho  Sun,  mentioned  in  stftui*  2.

1  Is  led  forth :  implying  the  formal  bringing  of  firo  from  the  household
fire  to  light  llio  sacrificial  tire.


410  TBBinY UNSTOP  [HOOK  IV.

2  Three  times  unto  our  solemn  rite  comes  Agni  like  a  charioteer,

Bearing  the  viands  to  the  Gods.

3  Round  the  oblations  bath  be  paced,  Agni  the  Wise,  the  Lord

of  Strength,

Giving  the  offerer  precious  boons.

4  He  who  is  kindled  eastward  for  Srinjaya,  Devavilta’s  son,

Resplendent,  tamer  of  the  foe.

5  So  mighty  be  the  Agni  whom  the  mortal  hero  shall  command,

With  sharpened  teeth  and  bountiful.

6  Day  after  day  they  dress  him,  as  they  clean  a  horse  who  wins

the  prize,

Dress  the  red  Scion  of  the  Sky.

7  When  Sahadeva’s  priucely  son  with  two  bay  horses  thought

of  me,

Summoned  by  him  I  drew  not  back.

8  Aud  truly  those  two  noble  bays  I  straightway  took  when

offered  me,

From  Saliadeva’s  princely  son.

9  Long,  0  ye  Asvins,  may  ho  live,  your  care,  ye  Gods,  the

princely  son'

Of  Sahadova,  Somaka.

10  Cause  him  the  youthful  prince,  the  son  of  Sahadeva,  to  enjoy

Long  life,  0  Asvins,  0  ye  Gods.

HYMN  XVL  Indrfi.

Impetuous,  true,  let  Maghavan  come  hither,  and  let  his  Tawny

Cou reel's  speed  to  reach  us.

For  him  have  we  pressed  juice  exceeding  potent:  here,  prais¬
ed  with  song,  let  him  effect  his  visit.

2  Three  lints  :  with  reference  to  the  three  sacrifices.

'  4  Eastward :  on  the  ullaravedt  or  north  altar.  Srinjaya  :  a  certain  Soma*
wicrificer,  kasehU  sonaydji,  says  SAyana.  Professor  Wilson  observes:  *  We
have  several  princes  of  the  name  in  the  PurAnas,  but  none  distinguished  by
this  patronymic  :  the  Srinjayat  are  also  a  people  in  the  west  of  India.’

6  2 he  red  Scion  of  the  Sky  :  or,  Arusha,  the  Child  of  Heaven,  i.  o.  the  Sun.

7  Sahadeva' s  princely  son  :  Somaka,  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice,  son  of  a
JUji  named  Sahadeva-  With  tico  bay  horses  :  which  were  to  bo  the  priest’s
honorarium.

9  Your  care:  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text.  SAyapa  supplies  tay-pakah
satisfier,  i.  e.  worshipper.  Professor  Ludwig  regards  wtm  as  a  dativus  etbicus.

1  Impetuous  .•  according  to  SAyana,  yijtsht,  the  word  in  the  text,  means
accepter,  or  drinker,  of  the.  spiritless  Soma,  of  the  Soma  when  its  essence  or
strength  has  passed  away.  Professor  Ludwig  follows  SAyana.


THE  MOVE  DA.


HYMN  16.J


411


2  Unyoke,  as  at  thy  journey’s  end,  0  Hero,  to  gladden  thee  to¬

day  at  this  libation.  v

Like  UsanA,  the  priest  a  laud  shall  utter,  a  hymn  to  thee,  the
Lord  Divine,  who  markest.  *

3  When  the  Bull,  quaffing,  praises  our  libation,  as  a  sago  paying

holy  rites  in  secret,

Seven  singers  here  from  heaven  hath  ho  begotten,  who  e’en
by  day  havo  wrought  their  works  while  singing.

\  When  heaven’s  fair  light  by  hymns  was  made  apparent  (they
made  great  splendour  shine  at  break  of  morning),

He  with  his  succour,  best  of  Heroes,  scattered  the  blinding
darkness  so  that  men  saw  dearly.

5  Indra,  Impetuous  One,  hath  waxed  immensely :  ho  with  his

vastnoss  hath  filled  earth  and  hoavon.

E’en  boyond  this  his  majesty  extoudoth  who  hath  oxcoeded  all
tho  worlds  in  groatness.

6  St-'tra  who  knowoth  woll  all  human  actions  hath  with  his

eager  Friends  lot  loose  tho  waters.

Thoy  with  thoir  song*  deft  o’ou  tho  mount  tin  opon  and  will-
ingly  diadosod  tho  stall  of  cattlo.

7  Ho  smote  away  tho  floods’  obstruotor,  Vfitra ;  Earth,  oonsoious,

lent  her  aid  to  spood  thy  thundor.

Thou  sontest  forth  tho  wators  of  tho  oooan,  os  Lord  through
power  and  might,  0  daring  Horo.

8  When,  Much-invoked  1  tho  water’s  rock  thou  doftest,  SaramA

showod  horsolf  and  wont  boforo  thoo.

Hyrnnol  by  Angiiusos,  bursting  tho  oowstalls,  muoh  strength
thou  foundcst  for  us  as  our  loador.

9  Como,  Maghuvan,  Friond  of  Man,  to  aid  tho  singer  imploring

thee  in  battle  for  tho  sunlight.

.  Speed  him  with  help  in  his  inspired  invokings  :  down  sink  the
sorooror,  tho  prayorless  Daayu.


2  Like  Uqnud :  the  Rlahl  UsanA,  or  U$nnas,  called  also  KAvya  or  Kavi’s
son,  npiKwrs  in  tho  Veda  ns  the  especial  friend  of  Indra.  See  I.  51.  10  ;  33,
5  ;  117,  12.

3  The  BnU :  tho  mighty  Indra.  Seven  timers tho  meaning  of  this  lino
not  clear.  Professor  Wilson,  fallowing  SAyana,  translates  :  'and  this  gone-
rates  tho  seven  efficient  (rays)  from  heaven,  which,  being  glorified,  have  made
(manifest)  tho  object*  of  (human)  perception.’

4  Scattered,  etc :  or,  fashioned  blind  turbid  darkness  so  that  mou  saw
clearly.

6  $ikra:  Indra,  the  powerful.  His  eager  Friends  :  the  Marute.

*  8  Saranut :  tho  hound  of  Indra,  who  tracked  tho  stolen  cows.  See  I.
62.  3,  and  72.  8.


m  THE  HYUSS  OP  [ BOOK  IV.

10  Come  to  our  home  resolved  to  slay  the  Dasyu  :  Kutsa  longed

eagerly  to  win  thy  friendship.

Alike  in  form  ye  both  sate  in  his  dwelling :  the  faithful  Lady
was  in  doubt  between  you.

11  Thou  earnest,  fain  to  succour  him,  with  Kutsa,— a  goad  that

masters  both  the  Wind-Cod’s  horses,

.  That,  holding  the  brown  steeds  like  spoil  for  capture,  the  sago
may  on  the  final  day  be  present.

12  For  Kutsa,  with  thy  thousand,  thou  at  day-break  didst  hurl

down  greedy  Sushna,  foe  of  harvest.

Quickly  with  Kutsa’s  friend  destroy  the  Dasyus,  and  roll  the
chariot-wheel  of  Sfirya  near  us.

13  Thou  to  the  sou  of  Vidathin,  Rijisvan,  gavest  up  mighty  Mri-

gaya  and  Pipru.

Thou  smotest  down  the  swarthy  fifty  thousand,  and  rentest
forts  as  age  consumes  a  garment.

14  What  time  thou  settest  near  the  Sun  thy  body,  thy  form,

Immortal  One,  is  seen  expanding :

.  Thou  a.wild  elephant  with  might  invested,  liko  a  dread  lion
as  thou  wieldost  weapons.

15  Wishes  for  wealth  havo  gone  to  Iudra,  longing  for  him  in  war

for  light  and  at  libation,

Eager  for  glory,  labouring  with  praise-songs :  ho  is  liko  home,
like  sweet  and  fair  nutrition.

16  Call  we  for  you  that  Indra,  prompt  to  listen,  him  who  hath

done  so  much  for  men’s  advantage ;

Who,  Lord  of  onviod  bounty,  to  a  singer  like  mo  brings  quick¬
ly  booty  worth  tho  capture.


10  Kutta :  a  fUjarshi  or  royal  Riehi,  frequently  mentioned  ae  the  favoured
friend  of  Indra.

The  faithful  Lady :  even  Kuiaa’s  wife  oould  hardly  distinguish  one  from
the  other;  or,  aa  SAyapa  explain*.  Indra  took  Kutsa  to  hi*  own  home  whero
Sacht  his  oonsort  wm  uncertain  which  of  the  two  was  Indra.

11  The  sage:  Kutsa.  The  final  day  :  the  decisive  day  of  battle.

12  With  thy  thousand :  thy  many  follower*.  Poe  of  hottest:  orKuyava
may  be  the  name  of  another  fiend  or  barbarous  tuny.  See  I.  104.  8.
Kutta' t  friend:  tho  thunderbolt,  according  to  Slyana.  Roll  rAe  chatdot-wheel
of  SUrr/a  near  us :  bring  bock  the  daylight.

18  Rijifvan :  a  prince  mentioned  before  asprotectod  by  Indra.  See  I.  51.  5.
Mrigaya  and  Pipru :  demons  of  the  air.  The  iwftly  fifty  thousand  :  black
RAkshaaos,  fiends,  or  hestile  aborigines.

•  14  What  time  thou  setUet  near  the  Sun  ay  body  :  perhaps,  as  Professor
Ludwig  suggests,  a  poetical  explanation  of  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.

15  Eager  for  glory:  a  transition  from  1  wishes  ’  to  ‘wishers'  implied
therein.  Nutrition :  according  to  Sdyana,  like  I-ak«hmi  the  Goddess  of
prosperity.


THE  RIOTED  A.


HYMX  17.]


413


17  When  the  .sharp-pointed  arrow,  0  thou  Hero,  flicth  raid  any

conflict  of  the  people,

When,  Faithful  One,  the  dread  encounter  comoth,  thou  bo
thou  the  Protector  of  our  body.

18  Further  the  holy  thoughts  of  Vimadova;  bo  thou  a  guileless

Friend  in  fight  for  booty.

We  coma  to  thee  whose  providence  proteots  us :  wido  bo  thy
sway  for  over  for  thy  singer.

19  0  Indra,  with  these  men  who  lovo  thee  truly,  free  givers,

Magh avail,  in  every  battle,

May  wo  rejoioo  through  many  autumns,  quolling  our  foes,  as
days  subdue  tho  nights  with  splendour.

20  Now,  as  tho  Bhrigus  wrought  a  car,  for  Indra  tho  Strong,  tho

Mighty,  wo  our  prayer  have  fashioned,

That  he  may  ne’er  withdraw  from  us  his  friendship,  but  bo
our  bodies’  guard  and  strong  dofendor.

21  Now,  Indra  I  laudod,  glorified  with  praisos,  lot  powor  swoll

high  like  rivors  for  tho  singer.

For  th co  a  new  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays,  is  fashioned*  May  wo,
wvr-borno,  through  song  bo  viotors  ovor.

HYMN  XVII.  Indrm

Great  art  thoxj,  Indra;  yon,  tho  earth,  with  gladnoss,  and
hoaven  ooufess  to  thoo  tbine  high  dominion.

Thou  in  thy  vigour  having  slaughtered  Vptra  didst  froo  tho
floods  arrostod  by  tho  Dragon.

2  Hcavon  tromblod  at  tho  birth  of  thine  offtilgonco;  Earth  trem¬

bled  at  the  fern-  of  thy  displeasure.

Tho  stodfast  mountains  shook  in  agitation  :  tho  waters  flowed,
and  dosort  spots  wera  floodod.

3  Hurling  his  bolt  with  might  ho  cleft  the  mountain,  whilo,

putting  forth  his  strougth,  ho  showed  his  vigour.

Ho  slaughtered  Vfitra  with  his  bolt,  exulting,  and,  their  lord
slain,  forth  flowed  tho  waters  swiftly.

4  Thy  Futhor  Dyaus  esteemed  himself  a  hero :  most  noble  was

the  work  of  Indra’s  Maker,

His  who  hogat  tho  strong  bolt’s  Lord  who  roareth,  immovable
like  oarth  from  her  foundation,


19  Prte  given:  liberal  institute™  of  sacriflco,

20.4*  the  Bhrigus  :  Recording  to  SAyanns  splendid  carpenters;  but  tho
referonco  must  dc  to  the  celebrated  pneetly  family,  and  ‘car’  may  be  used
metaphorically  for  the  hymn  which  rapidly  reaches  the  Gods.

1  The  Dragon  :  A  hi,  the  serpent-demon  who  stays  the  rain  from  falling,

4  Esteemed  himself  a  hero  :  ua  being  tho  father  of  suoh  a  son.


*14  THE  BTMS’8  OP  [BOOK  IV.

5  He  who  alone  o’erthrows  the  world  of  creatures,  Indra  the

peoples’  King,  invoked  of  many —

Verily  all  rejoice  in  him,  extolling  the  boons  which  Maghavau
the  God  hath  sent  them.

6  All  So&a  juices  are  his  own  for  ever,  most  gladdening  draughts

are  ever  bis,  the  Mighty,

Thou  ever  wast  the  Treasure- Lord  of  treasures  :  Indra,  thou
lettest  all  folk  share  thy  bounty.

7  Moreover,  when  thou  first  wast  born,  0  Indra,  thou  struckest

terror  into  all  the  people.

Thou,  Maghavan,  rentest  with  thy  bolt  the  Dragon  who  lay
against  the  water-floods  of  heaven.

8  The  over-slaying,  bold  aud  furious  Indra,  the  bright  bolt’s

Lord,  infinite,  strong  and  mighty,

Who  slayeth  Vjitra  and  acquireth  booty,  giver  of  blessings,
Maghavan  the  bounteous :

9  Alone  renowned  as  Maghavan  in  battles,  he  frightenoth  away

assembled  armies.

*  He  bringoth  us  tho  booty  that  he  winneth :  may  we,  woll-

I  lovod,  continue  in  his  friendship.

10  Renowned  is  he  when  conquering  and  when  slaying:  'tis  ho
who  winneth  cattle  in  the  combat.

When  Indra  hardoncth  bis  indignation  all  that  is  fixed  and
all  that  moveth  fear  him.

I I  Indra  hath  wou  all  kinc,  all  gold,  all  horses, — Maghavan,  ho

who  breaketh  forts  in  pieces ;

Most  manly  with  these  men  of  his  who  help  him,  dealing  out
wealth  and  gathering  the  treasure.

12  What  is  tho  care  of  Indra  for  his  Mother,  what  cares  ho  for
tho  Father  who  begat  him  f

His  care  is  that  which  speeds  his  might  in  conflicts,  like  wind
borne  onward  by  the  clouds  that  thunder.

—  ■  -  ■  ■  —

5  Extolling:  I  follow  Professor  Wilson  in  taking  grinatAh  as  a  nominative
plural,  a  lightened  form  for  grinanttH L  Otherwise  it'  is  'difficult  to  moke
sense  out  of  the  second  line.

8  Indra :  in  this  stanza  is  in  the  accusative  case  without  a  subject  or  a
governing  verb.  SAvana  supplies  rayon  slotArch.  itvmeti,  ‘  wo  singorz  praieo.’

11  Who  breaktth  forts  in  pieces  :  m  it  seems  impossible  to  make  any  sonao
out  of  pflnih,  I  have  adopted  Profwsor  Oraasraann’a  conjecture,  which  Is
somowhat  reluctantly  accepted  by  Professor  Ludwig,  and  road  pUrbhld  ins¬
tead  of  the  word  in  the  text.  SAvana  supplies  f  ttrusmdk,  '  armies  of
enemiev’  Thtse  nun  :  who  sing  his  praises  and  so  increase  hi*  strength.

12  His  cure  is;  there  are  no  corresponding  words  in  the  text,  but  it  is
necessary  to  supply  something  of  the  kind.  The  meaning  is,  Indra  is  in¬
dependent  of,  and  care*  nothing  about,  his  parents,  but  he  does  care  for  his
dear  ally  the  thunderbolt.


THE  RIOT  EDI.


BY  BN  17.3


415


13  Maghayan  makes  the  settled  man  unsettled  :  he  scattere  dust

that  he  hath  swept  together.

Breaking  in  pieces  like  Heaven  armed  with  lightning;
Maghavan  shall  enrich  the  man  who  lauds  him.

14  He  urged  the  chariot-wheel  of  Surya  forward:  Etasa,  speed¬

ing  on  his  way,  he  rested.

Him  the  black  undulating  cloud  bedeweth,  in  this  mid-air’s
depth,  at  the  base  of  darkness,

15  As  in  the  night  the  sacrificing  priest.

16  Eager  for  booty,  craving  strength  and  horses,  we  singers  stir

Indra,  the  strong,  for  friendship,

Who  gives  the  wives  we  seek,  whose  succour  fails  not,  to
hasten,  like  a  pitcher  to  the  fountain.

17  Bo  thou  our  guardian,  show  thyself  our  kinsman,  watching

and  blessing  those  who  pour  the  Soma ;

As  Friend,  as  Sire,  most  fatherly  of  fathers,  giving  tho
suppliant  vital  strength  and  freedom.

18  Be  helping  Friend  of  those  who  seek  thy  friendship :  give

lifo,  when  lauded,  Indra,  to  the  singer.

For,  Indra,  wo  the  priosts  have  paid  thee  worship,  exalting
thee  with  theso  our  sacrifices.


19  Alone,  whon  Indra  Maghavan  is  lauded,  he  slayeth  many

ne’or-resistod  Vptras.

Him  in  whose  kooping  is  the  well-loved  singer  never  do  Gods
or  mortals  stay  or  hinder.

20  E’en  so  let  Maghavan,  the  loud-voiced  India,  give  us  truo

blessings,  focless.  men's  upholder.

Ki»<  of  all  creatures,  give  us  glory  amply,  exulted  glory  duo
to  him  who  lauds  thee.


21  Now,  Indra !  lauded,  glorified  with  praises,  let  power  swell
high  like  rivers  for  the  singer.  *

For  thee  a  new  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays !  is  fashioned.  May  we,
car-borne,  through  song  be  victors  ever.

13  Scatteri  d'Ut:  o\umb  commotion  and  keeps  the  world  in  a  state  of  unreel.

14  This  difficult  stoma  appear*  to  refer  to  an  oclipse  of  the  Sun.  Indra

wa*  urging  on  the  Sun'a  chariot  when  suddenly  he  rested  or  stopped  Etasa
the  horso  that  drew  it,  and  threw  him  hack  into  the  black  moist  cloud  of
the  darkness  of  night  See  1.  121.  13,  and  A.  Kuhn,  Mythologiacho  Studien,
1.  pp.  53-60.  .  .

15  The  tacrijUing  priest;  lets  the  fire  shine,  understood.  Sftyapa  explains,
‘  an  the  aacrificer  sprinkles  Soma  upon  the  invoking  priest  Agni,’  taking  h6td,
a  nominative  case,  a*  K6ldram,  an  accusative.  Professor  Graasmaun  thinks
that  the  single  Pdda  was  originallv  a  gloas  on  the  preceding  stanza.

Id  Who  givet  the  reive*  ice  i/tk :  perhape  referring,  as  Profoeeor  Ludwig
observes,  to  the  forcible  abduction  of  women  after  a  victory.


THE  HYUXS  OP


[BOOK  IV.


HYMN  XVIII.  Indra  and  Other*.

This  is  the  ancient  and  accepted  pathway  by  which  all  Gods
have  come  into  existence.

Hereby  could  one  be  born  though  waxen  mighty.  Let  him
not,  otherwise,  destroy  his  Mother.

2  Not  this  way  go  I  forth  :  hard  is  the  passage.  Forth  from

the  side  obliquely  will  I  issue.

Much  that  is  yet  undone  must  I  accomplish :  one  must  I
combat  and  the  other  question.

3  He  bent  his  eye  upon  the  dying  Mother :  My  word  I  now

withdraw.  That  way  I  follow.

In  TvaahUr’s  dwelling  Indra  drank  the  Soma,  a  hundred-
worth  of  juice  pressed  from  the  mortar.

4  What  strange  act  shall  he  do,  ho  whom  his  Mother  boro  for  a

thousand  months  and  many  autumns  1
No  peer  hath  he  among  those  born  already,  nor  among  those
who  shall  bo  born  hereafter.

fi  Deeming  him  a  reproach,  his  Mother  hid  him,  Indra,  endow¬
ed  with  all  heroic  valour.

Then  up  ho  sprang  himself,  assumed  his  vesture,  and  filled,
as  soon  as  born,  tho  earth  and  hoaven.

6  With  lively  motion  onward  flow  these  waters,  the  Holy  Ones,
shouting,  as  ’twere,  together.

Ask  thorn  to  toll  thee  what  the  floods  are  saying,  what  girdling
rock  tho  waters  burst  asunder.


,  tod  Vtraadera  art  Mid  to  bs  the  Iliahls  or  seem  m  well  as
tho  deities  of  the  hymn,  m  it  consists  of  conversation  in  which  all  bear  part.
The  hymn  appears  to  be  made  up  of  somewhat  incoherent  fragment*  and  the
Commentators  do  not  seem  to  hare  been  euooeesful  in  their  apportionment  of
the  stanzas  to  the  several  speakers.  See  Prof.  Pischel’s  Excursus  (Vedischo
Btudicn,  II.  pp.  <2—54),  and  Prof.  Ludwig’s  criticism  thcroon,  Uober  dio
neuwten  Arbeiten  auf  detn  flebieto  der  Rgreda-forschung,  pp.  142  eqq.

1  The  main  subjeot  Is  the  birth  and  infancy  of  Indra.  He  refuses  to  bo


1  The  main  subjeot  Is  the  birth  and  infancy  of  Indra.  Me  refuse*  to  oo
torn  in  the  usual  manner  and  insists  on  oonung  into  the  world  in  another
way  The  speaker— Vyanta  his  father,  Aditi  his  mother,  or  some  other—
dissuades  him,  eventually,  it  seems,  (stanza  3)  with  suoooss.  Tho  Common -
tab.rs  erroneously  take  the  stanza  as  referring  to  tho  birth  of  Vimadeva.

2  Indra,  m  yet  unborn,  Is  the  speaker.  Otu :  perhaps  Vritra.  The  other :
perhaps  Vishnu,  whom  he  addresses  in  stanza  11.

3  [ndra,  who  has  changed  his  mind,  speaks  the  seoond  half  of  the  first  line.

4  It  i*  not  clear  who  the  speaker  is.  Professor  Wilson  observes  t  ‘  Aditi
defends  her  son  upon  the  plea  that,  a*  his  period  of  gestation  was  marvellous,
his  actions  are  not  to  be  compare.!  with  those  of  any  others.’

6  Deeming  him  a  reproach  :  either  because  he  appeared  to  be  weak,  or
because,  as  Slyana  says,  he  was  born  in  a  chamber  in  privacy  unworthy  of  so

hat  '/irdtino  roe* :  an  allusion  to  the  prison  of  thick  cloud  from  which
Indra  freed  the  waters.


refuses  to  bo


BYMX  18.]  THE  RIOTED J.  .  '  i\7

7  Are  they  addressing  him  with  words  of  welcome?  Will  tho

floods  take  on  them  the  shame  of  Indra  ?

With  his  great  thunderbolt  my  Son  hath  slaughtered  Yfitra,
and  set  these  rivers  free  to  wander.  ,  ’

8  I  cast  thee  from  me,  mine, — thy  youthful  mother;  thee,  mine

own  offspring,  Kuahavi  hath'swallowed.  »

To  him,  mine  infant,  were  the  waters  gracious.  Indra,  my
Son,  rose  up  in  conquering  vigour.

9  Thou  art  mine  own,  0  Maghavan,  whom  Vyansa  struck  to

the  ground  and  smote  thy  jaws  in  pieces.

But,  smitten  through,  the  mastery  thou  wonnest,  and  with
thy  bolt  the  D4sa’a  head  thou  crushedst.

10  The  Heifer  hath  brought  forth  the  Strong,  the  Mighty,  the

unconquerable  Bull,  the  furious  Indra.

Tho  Mother  left  her  unlicked  Call  to  wander,  seeking,  himself,
the  path  that  he  would  follow.

1 1  Then  to  her  mighty  Child  the  Mother  turned  her,  saying,  My

son,  these  Deities  forsake  thee.

Then  Indra  said,  about  to  slaughter  Yfitra,  0  my  friend
Vishnu,  stride  full  boldly  forward.

1 2  Who  was  ho  then  who  made  thy  Mother  widow  1  Who  sought

to  8lay,thce  lying  still  or  moving?

What  God,  when  by  the  foot  thy  Sire  thou  tookoat  and  slowest,
was  at  hand  to  give  thee  comfort  ?  *


7  Word!  of  sctleont :  niridi,  sentence*  or  short  formularies  inserted  io  a
liturgy  and  containing  epithet*  or  short  invocations  of  ths  God*.

Tht  iA ami  of  Indra  ;  his  fancied  guilt  incurred  in  alaying  Vritra.  See  1.
82.  14.

8  Mint :  Sftyana  explains  mdmat  as  'axulting.'  Professor  Roth,  whom
Professor  Graasmann  and  tho  translators  of  the  Sitlrvrig  JAtdrr  follow,  ren¬
ders  it  by  now— now.  1  have  preferred  Profeeeor  Ludwig’s,  interpretation,
originally  duo  to  Bcnfej.  and  taken  the  word  as  another  form  of  w4«o.  The
word  is  important  as  expressing  Aditi’s  acknowledgment  of  Indra  aa.  her  son.
Riafund :  according  to  Skyapa,  a  Rkkshasl  or  female  demon  who  swallowed
Indra  at  bis  birth;  according  to  Ton  Roth,  the  name  of  a  river.

18  Tht  Htiftr :  Aditi,  the  young  mother  of  Indra.

11  Stridt  full  boldly  forward  :  that  is,  assist  me  in  my  battle  with  Vritra.

Profeeeor  Graramann  and  the  translators  of  the  Sitfatig  Ludtr  render  the
passage  differently.  *  O  Viechnu,  Freund,  geh  etwae  doch  xur  8eite,’  and,
'  Vishnu  tncin  Freund  geh  etwaa  aus  dsm  ^  ege;  that  is,  *  step  aside/  or  *  out
of  the  way/  apd  let  me  conquer  Vritra  without  thy  aid.  ...

12  This  appears  to  be  Viahpu’e  answer.  Why  dost  thou  ask  me  to  help
thee  now  I  Didst  thou  not  slay  thine  own  father  thy  father  who  sought  to
kill  thee  when  yet  unborn  and  when  coming  to  the  birth  »  Vy*nsa  appears
to  be  the  father  whom  Indra  slew  (stansa  9).  Skyana  merely  says  that  the
allusions  are  variously  explained  by  the  followers  of  the  TaitUrlya  school  of
the  Yajurveda.

27


418  '  TUB  HYMNS  OP  BOOK  IV .

13  In  deep  distress  I  cooked  a  dog’s  intestines.  Among  the  Gods
I  found  not  one  to  comfort.

My  consort  I  beheld  in  degradation.  The  Falcon  then  brought
me  the  pleasant  Soma.

HYMN  XIX.  Indra.

Theb,  verily,  0  Thunder-wielding  Indra,  all  the  Gods  hero,
the  Helpers  swift  to  listen,

And  both  the  worlds  olocted,  thee  the  Mighty,  High,  waxen
Btrong,  alone  to  slaughter  Vfitra.

2  The  Gods,  as  worn  with  eld,  relaxed  their  efforts:  thou,

India,  bom  of  truth,  wast  Sovran  Ruler.

Thou  slowest  Ahi  who  besieged  the  waters,  and  duggost  out
their  all-supporting  ohannols.

3  Tho  insatiate  one,  extended,  hard  to  waken,  who  slumbored  In

perpetual  sleep,  0  Indra, —

Tho  Dragon  stretched  against  tho  seven  prone  rivers,  whcro
no  joint  was,  thou  rentest  with  thy  thunder.

4  Indra  with  might  shook  earth  and  l>er  foundation  as  tho
-  wind  stirs  tho  water  with  its  fury.

Striving,  with  strongth  he  burst  the  firm  asunder,  and  toro
sway  tho  summits  of  tho  mountains.

5  Thov  ran  to  thoo  os  mothors  to  thoir  offspring :  tho  clouds,

like  ohariots,  hustenod  forth  togetbor.

Thou  didst  refresh  the  streams  and  forco  the  billows  :  thou,
Indra,  sottost  froo  obstructed  rivors.

6  Thou  for  tho  sake  of  Vayya  and  Turviti  didst  stay  tho  great
.  stream,  flowing,  all-sustaining ;

Yea,  at  their  prayor  didst  check  tho  rushing  river  and  make
the  floods  easy  to  cross,  0  Indra.


13  This  appears  to  bo  VAmadeva’a  excuse  for  haring  in  his  utmost  need
cooked  ami  oaten,  or  desired  to  eat,  impure  flesh.  'So  Mann  has,  VAmadeva
who  well  knew  right  and  wrong,  was  by  no  means  rendered  impure,  though
desirous,  when  onprcvsod  with  hunger,  of  eating  the  flesh  of  dogs  for  tho
preservation  of  his  life,  X.  106.’ — Wilson.  According  to  Ludwig,  Bergaigne,
and  Hillebrnndt,  tho  stanxa  is  spoken  by  Indra.  The  Falcon  :  alluding  to  the
way  in  which  the  Soma  was  first  brought  from  heaven.  SAyapa  explains  it
as  '  Indra  coming  swiftly  os  a  falcon.'

2  Relaxed  their  efforts  :  or  abdicated  thoir  functions  os  protectors  and  modo
over  to  Indra  tho  duty  of  slaying  the  oppressor  Vjitrn.

3  Where  no  joint  loo* that  would  have  facilitated  his  dismemberment.

6  The  cloud $  :  according  to  SAyana,  adrayuh,  mountains  or  clouds,  hero
moans  the  Moruts.

6  Vayya  and  Turrtti  :  Turviti  has  been  mentioned  frequently  in  Book  I.  as
having  been  protected  by  Indra,  and  Vayya  is  said  to  have  bceu  his  father
and  companion.  See  I.  64.  6;  II.  13.  12.


BYMS  20.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  419

7  He  let  the  young  Maids  skilled  in  Iaw,  unwedded,  like  foun¬

tains,  bubbling,  flow  forth  streaming  onward.

He  inundated  thirsty  plains  aud  deserts,  and  milked  the  dry
Cows  of  the  mighty  master.  •

8  Through  many  a  mom  and  many  a  lovely  autumn,  having

slain  Vritra,  he  set  free  the  rivers.

Iudra  hath  sot  at  liberty  to  wander  on  earth  the  streams
encompassed,  pressed  together.

9  Lor .1  of  Bay  Steeds,  thou  broughtest  from  the  ant-hill  the

unwodded  damsel’s  son  whom  ants  were  eating.

The  blind  saw  clearly,  as  he  grasped  the  serpent,  rose,  brake
the  jar :  his  joints  again  united.

10  To  the  wise  mao,  0  Sago  and  Sovran  Ruler,  the  man  who

knowoth  all  thine  ancient  exploits
Hath  told  those  deeds  of  might  as  thou  hast  wrought  them,
great  acts,  spontaneous,  and  to  man’s  advantage.

11  Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with  praises,  let  powers  swell

high,  like  rivers,  for  the  singer.

For  thee  a  new  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays !  is  fashioned.  May  wo,
oar-borne,  through  song  be  victors  ever.

HYMN  XX.  India.

From  near  or  far  away  may  mighty  Indra,  givor  of  succour,
oome  for  our  protection,

Lord  of  men,  armed  with  thunder,  with  the  Strongest,
slaying  his  foes  in  conflict,  in  the  battles.

2  May  Indra  come  to  us  with  Tawny  Coursers,  inclinod  to  us,  to

favour  and  enrich  us.

May  Mnghavan,  loud-voiced  and  wielding  thunder,  stand  by
us  at  this  sacrifice,  in  combat.

3  Thou,  honouring  this  our  sacrifice,  0  Indra,  shalt  give  us

strength  and  fill  us  full  of  courage.

To  win  the  booty,  Thunder-armed  1  like  hunters  may  wc  with
.  thee  subdue  in  fight  our  foemcn.

1  The  young  Maids  skilled  in  Law :  the  rivers  that  know  and  follow  the
law  of  their  being,  the  Order  of  the  universe.

He  milked  the  dry  Com  :  he  drew  rain  from  the  cloud*  which  had  hitherto
been  prevented  by  their  mighty  master  Vritra  from  yielding  their  stores.

9  SSyana  aaye  that  Agra  (unwedded}  was  a  woman  of  that  name,  whose  son
wo*  hidden  in  an  ant-hill,  whence  Indra  reecued  him,  restored  hi*  sight,  and
re-united  his  broken  joints.

Brake  the  jar :  broke  through  the  ant-hill  in  which  he  was  confined.  Pro-
fewor  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  son  of  the  unwedded  damsel  i*  the  lightning
which  burst  forth  from  the  parent  cloud.  The  passage  h  obscure.

1  With  the  Strongest :  the  most  powerful  Marut*.


•420  TUB  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

4  Loving  us  well,  benevolent,  close  beside  us,  drink,  Godliko
Indra,  of  the  well-pressed  Soma.

Drink  of  the  me^tb  we  offer,  and  delight  thee  with  food  that
cometh  from  the  mountain  ridges.

;  5  Him  who  is  sung  aloud  by  recent  sages,  like  a  ripe-fruited
tree,  a  soythe-armed  victor, —

I,  like  a  bridogroom  thinking  of  his  consort,  call  hither  Indra,
him  invoked  of  many ;

.  0  Him  who  in  native  strength  is  like  a  mountain,  the  lofty
Indra  born  of  old  for  conquest,

Terrilic  wieldor  of  the  ancient  thunder,  filled  full  with
splendour  as  a  jar  with  wutor.

7  Whom  from  of  old  there  is  not  ono  to  hinder,  none  to  ourtail

the  riches  of  his  bounty.

Pouring  forth  frooly,  0  thou  Strong  and  Mighty,  vouchsafe  ua
riohop,  God  invoked  of  many  !

8  Qf  wealth  and  homes  pt  o»on  thou  art  tho  rulor,  and  opener

of  tho  stAble  of  tho  oattlo.

Helper  of  mon,  winner  of  spoil  in  oombats,  thou  leadoBt  to  an
ample  heap  of  j-iohos.

9  By  what  groat  might  is  ho  ronowned  as  strongest,  wherewith

tho  Lofty  One  stirs  up  wild  battiest
Bo3t  soother  of  tho  worshipper's  groat  sorrow,  ho  givos  pos¬
sessions  to  tho  man  who  lauds  him.

I  V  ’*  *

10  Slay  us  not;  bring,  bestow  on  us  tho  amplo  gift  which  thou
bast  to  give  to  him  who  offora.

At  this  now  gift,  with  this  laud  sung  beforo  thee,  extolling
thoo,  we,  Indra,  will  deolare  it.


,  i  That  coneth  from  the  mountain  ridge, $ :  where  tho  Same  was  said  espeoi-
ally  to  grow.  Aocorcling  to  Sftyor>a’s  interpretation,  tho  translation  would
bo,  '  with  tho  food  brought  thoo  with  tho  hymn  of  noonday. L  Pfiehtha
moans  both  *  baok,  or  high  ridgo,’  and  ‘  a  hymn  employed  at  tho  midday
oblation,’  and  tho  moaning  of  tbo  adjootive  pruhthya  U  similarly  ambiguous.

5  A  tcythe-armed  victor :  tho  moaning  is  uncortaln.  Sftyana  explains  eriifuo^,
‘as*  armed  with  a  hook  or  sickle,’  ‘skilled  in  tho  uso  of  arms.’  Professor
Ludwig  translates,  ‘  wio  oin  fassondor  hakon,’  *  like  a  grasping  hook.’  Pro.
'fcKRor  Aufrooht  thinks  that  srtnyo  najttd  may  perhaps  moan,  ‘  like  a  winner
of  sickles  (as  a  prize).’  Professor  Grossmann  thinks  that  a  reaper,  outting
down  corn  with  his  sickle,  is  intended.

6  Wicldcr  of  the  ancient  thunder :  I  follow  Sftyapo,  but  am  not  satisfied
with  his  explanation.  Professor  Grassinann  follows  Bolleitten  in  reading
trajam,  cowpoo,  instead  of  tajravt,  thunderbolt,  and  this  is  the  reading  given
also  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexioon,  If  this  alteration  were  adopted  the
translation  would  be,  '  tho  fierce  disclosor  of  the  firm -built  cow-stall.’


TBE  RIO  VEDA.


nr\ iy  21.]


m


11  Now,  Indra !  lauded,  glorified  with  praises,  let  power  swell
high,  like  rivers,  for  the  singer.

A  new  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays!  for  thee  is  fashioned.  May  we,
car-borne,  through  song  be  victors  ever.  •

HYMN  XXI.  Indr*,

May  Indra  come  to  us  for  our  protection ;  here  be  the  Hero  *
praised,  our  feast-companion.

May  he  whose  powers  are  many,  waxen  lnighty,  cherish,  like
Dyaos,  his  own  supreme  dominion.

2  Here  magnify  his  great  heroic  exploits,  most  glorious  One,

enriching  men  with  bounties,

Whoso  will  is  like  a  Sovran  in  assembly,  who  rules  the
people,  Conqueror,  all-surpassing.

3  Hither  let  Indra  como  from  earth  or  heaven,  hither  with

speech  from  firmament  or  ocean  ;

With  MaruU,  from  the  realm  of  light  to  aid  us,  or  from  a
distance,  from  the  seat  of  Order.

4  That  Indra  will  we  laud  in  our  assemblies,  him  who  is  Lord

of  great  and  lasting  riches,

Victor  with  Viyu  where  the  herds  are  gathered,  who  loads
with  boldness  on  to  highor  fortune.

5  May  the  Priest,  Lord  of  many  blessings,  striving, — who

fixing  reverence  on  reverence,  giving
Vent  to  his  voice,  inciteth  men  to  worship — with  lauds  bring
Indra  hither  to  our  dwellings.

C  When  sitting  ponderiug  in  deep  devotion  in  Ausija’s  abodo
they  ply  the  press-stone,

May  he  whose  wrath  is  fierce,  the  mighty  bearer,  oome  as  the
houso-lord's  priest  within  our  chambers.

7  Surely  the  power  of  Bhirvara  the  mighty  for  ever  helpeth  to

support  the  singer ;

8  From  a  distance,  fro*  the  teat  of  Order:  perhaps,  from  the  farthest  limit  of
theordcrod  universe.  According  to  SS  japs  from  tike  region  of  cloud,  meghalokdt.

4  Where  the  herdt  art  gathered  :  in  places  wbere  cattle,  the  prise  of  victory,
abound.

5  The  Prieit :  apparently  Agni.  Fixing  revere  nee  on  reverence  :  urging  men
to  continual  adoration.

6  Aufija  is  generally  a  patronymic  of  the  Rishi  Kakshlvin  and  others.
According  to  SSyana  the  inititutorof  the  aacrific*  ia  meant.  The  stanra  is  obscure.

7  BMrvara  :  according  to  SSrana,  a  name  of  Indra  as  son  of  Bharrara,  the
supporter  of  the  world,  that  is,  PrajipatL  Professor  Orsasmann  thinks  that
Agui  is  meant,  and  Professor  Ludwig  considers  it  tolerably  clear  that  Bhirvara
is  identical  with  Ausija.  The  exact  meaning  of  the  stanxa  is  doubtful,  but  its
general  purport  appears  to  be  that  Bhlirara,  whether  he  be  Ausija.  or  Indra,
or  Agni,  has  a  store  of  wealth  or  power  to  protect  the  worshipper  and  assist
him  in  the  performance  of  his  religious  duties.


422  THE  HYMSS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

That  which  in  Aunja’t  abode  lies  hidden,  to  come  forth  for
delight  and  for  devotion.

8  When  he  unbare  the  spaces  of  the  mountains,  and  quickens

with  his  floods  the  water-torrents,

Ho  finds  in  lair  the  buffalo  and  wild-ox  when  the  wise  lead
•  him  on  to  vigorous  exploit.

9  Auspicious  are  thy  hands,  thine  arms  well-fashioned  which

proffer  bounty/ Iudra,  to  thy  praiser.

What  sloth  is  thisf  Why  dost  thou  not  rejoioo  thee  ?  Why
dost  thou  not  delight  thyself  with  giving!

10  So  India  is  the  truthful  Lord  of  treasure.  Freedom. ho  gave
to  man  by  slaying  Vyitra.

Much-lauded  !  help  us  with  thy  power  to  riches:  may  I  be
sharer  of  thy  Godliko  favour.

-  1 1  Now,  Indra  1  lauded,  glorified  with  praises,  lot  jfcwer  swell
high,  like  rivero,  for  the  singer.

For  thee  a  new  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays !  is  fashioned.  May  wo,
oare-borue,  through  song  be  victors  ever.

HYMN  XXII.  Indrs.

That  gift  of  ours  which  Indra  loves  and  woloomes,  even  that
ho  makes  for  us,  tho  Great  and  Strong  One.

Ho  who  comes  wielding  in  his  might  tho  thunder,  Maghavan,
gives  prayer,  praise,  aud  laud,  and  Soma.

2  Bull,  hnrier  of  tho  four-edged  rain-prod  uoor  with  both 'his
arms,  strong,  mighty,  most  heroic ;

Wearing  as  wool  Panuhrif  for  adornment,  whose  joiuts  for
sako  of  friendship  he  hath  covered.


8  WKtn  kt  uubart ;  when  Indra  lays  open  the  interior  of  the  mountain  of
clouds  within  which  the  rain  is  imprisoned.

Tkt  buffalo  and  *iid-oz  •  the  Gaura  (Boe  gaums)  and  the  Oavaya  (Bos
gavaous)  are  two  kinds  of  wilJ  cattle.  The  paurieyo  and  jorayo»ya  of  tho
test  must  be  taken  as  partitive  genitives  after  vidat,  he  finds.  '  The  purport
of  the  expression,  according  to  tho  scholiast,  is,  that  Indra  obtains  these  two
animals  tau  dnuu  po,a  labkaU,  either  for  himself  as  sacrificial  flesh,  or  for  his
worshippers,  some  of  whom,  at  least,  even  now.  would  not  object  to  eat  tho
flesh  of  the  wild  oxen.’— Wilson.


2  Rain-producer :  the  thunderbolt  or  lightning  which  is  supposed  to  oauso
rain  by  opening  the  cloud.

Panuhni :  one  of  the  rivers  of  the  Pan  jib,  called  in  later  times  TrAvatl,  the
modern  lttvL  Iudra  appears  to  be  represented  s#  clothing  himself  in  the
wool-like  waves,  or  fleecy  vapours,  of  the  river,  and  lovingly  covering  or  unit¬
ing  in  one  stream  her  several  joints,  limbs,  or  branches.  '  The  phraseology
here,’  Protestor  Wilson  remark-',  *  it  somewhat  olncure,  and  the  scholiast  does
not  materially  enlighten  us.'  .  - 1  -


HYM 4V22.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  '  423

3  God  who  of  all  the  Gods  was  bom  divincsf,  endowed  with

amplo  strength  and  mighty  powers,

And  bearing  in  his  arms  the  yearning  thunder,  with  violent
rush  caused  hoaven  and  earth  to  tremhlc.  .

4  Before  the  High  God,  at  his  birth,  heaven  trembled,  earth,

many  floods  and  all  the  px*ecipices.

The  Strong  One  bringeth  nigh  the  Bull’s  two  Parents :  loud
smg  the  winds,  like  men,  in  air’s  mid -region.

5  These  are  thy  great  deeds,  Indra,  thine,  the  Mighty,  deeds  to

bo  told  aloud  at  all  libations,

That  thou,  0  Hero,  bold  and  boldly  daring,  didst  with  thy
bolt,  by  strength,  destroy  the  Dragon.

6  True  aro  all  these  thy  deeds,  0  Most  Horoio.  The  Milch-kino

issued  from  the  streaming  udder.

In  foar  of  thee,  0  thou  of  manly  spirit,  tho  rivers  swiftly  set
thorasolves  in  motion.

7  With  joy,  0  Indra,  Lord  of  Tawny  Coursers,  tho  Sisters  thon,

thoao  Goddesses,  extolled  thoo,

Whon  thou  didst  givo  tho  prisoned  ones  thoir  freedom  to
wander  at  thoir  will  in  long  succession.

8  Pressed  is  tho  gladdening  stalk  as  ’twero  a  river :  so  lot  tho

rite,  tho  toiler’s  power,  attract  thoo
To  us-ward,  of  the  Bright  One,  as  tho  coursor  strains  his
oxcoodingly  strong  loathor  bridlo.

9  Evor  by  us  perform  thy  most  horoio,  thino  highost,  bost

victorious  doeds,  0  Victor.

For  us  make  Vfitras  easy  to  ho  conquored  :  destroy  tho
weapon  of  our  mortal  foeman.

10  Graciously  listen  to  our  prayer,  0  Indra,  and  strength  of
variod  sort  bostow  thou  on  us.

Send  to  us  all  intelligence  and  wisdom :  0  Maghavan,  be  ho
who  gives  us  cattle.


4  The  meaning  of  tho  socond  lino  to,  Indra  brings  near,  but  holds  apart,
tho  hoavon  and  tho  earth,  tho  parents  of  the  mighty  Sun.  and  the  winds  sing
In  tho  intermediate  space  which  has  thus  boon  providod  for  them.

6  Tkt  Milch-hint :  streams  of  fertilising  rain.  Tho  wider  is  the  cloud.

7  Tht  Sisters :  tho  river*.

8  Tho  construction  of  tho  middle  portion  of  the  stanza  is  very  difficult,

Tho  general  moaning  appears  to  be,  ‘  The  Soma  has  been  pressed  and  tho

iuicc  flows  copiously.  Lot  our  sacrifice  draw  thee  hither  with  all  tho  strength
of  a  hard- pulling  horse.’.  Who  ‘  the  Bright  One'  is  is  not  clear ;  probably  Agni
is  mcaut.  . .  -  .  •


124  '  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

11  Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with  praises,  let  wealth  swell
*  high  like  risers  to  the  singer.

For  thee  a  new  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays  !  is  fashioned.  May  we,
car-home,  through  song  be  victors  ever.

HYMN  XXIII.  India.

How,  what  priest’s  sacrifice  hath  he  made  mighty,  rejoicing
in  the  Soma  and  its  fountain  f

Delighting  in  the  juice,  eagerly  drinking,  the  Lofty  One  hath
waxed  for  splendid  riches.

2  What  hero  hath  been  made  his  feast- compan ion  t  Who  hath

been  partner  in  his  loving-kindness !

What  know  we  of  his  wondrous  acta !  How  often  comes  he  to
aid  and  speed  the  pious  toiler  t

3  How  heareth  Indra  offered  invocation  t  How,  hearing,  marketh

he  the  in  roker's  wishes  t

What  are  his  ancient  acta  of  bounty  t  Wherefore  call  they
him  Ono  who  filleth  full  the  singer  f

4  How  doth  the  priest  who  laboureth,  ever  longing,  wiu  for

himself  the  wealth  which  he  posse  sue  th  I
May  ho,  the  God,  mark  well  my  truthful  praises,  having
rccoived  the  homsgo  which  he  loveth.

5  How,  and  what  bond  of  friendship  with  a  mortal  hath  the

God  chosen  as  this  mom  is  breaking  t
How,  and  what  love  hath  he  for  those  who  lovo  him,  who
have  entwined  in  him  their  firm  affection  t

6  Is  then  thy  friendship  with  thy  friends  most  mighty  I  Thy

brotherhood  with  us, — when  may  we  tell  it  t
The  streams  of  milk  move,  as  most  wondrous  sunlight,  tho
beauty  of  the  Lovely  One  for  glory.


1  Mighty :  effectual.  Ill  fomtain :  more  literally,  udder ;  the  sacrifice,
the  source  from  which  the  Soma  flows  aa  milk  from  the  udder  of  the  cow.

For  tjAtndid  richei :  in  order  to  bee  tow  splendid  wealth  on  the  aacrificer,
according  to  Sly*?a.

2  What  kero,  etc :  no  one  is  allowed  to  share  the  offerings  made  to  Indra
or  to  know  his  benerolent  intention*.

6  The  itream  of  milk :  this  line  is  difficult.  Indra’s  cloee  oonnexion  with
tho  Sun  is  referred  to,  and  the  general  purport  may  be,  as  Professor  Ludwig
suggest*  :  When  thou  risast  up  a*  the  Sun.  then  we  declare  thy  brotherhood
with  us  ;  or  in  other  word*,  Indra'*  beauty  is  made  known  aa  the  light  of
the  Sun.  SAyana  explains  tdrgdk  as,  the  effort*,  f udiogdh),  otk.  of  the  mov¬
ing  ono  (Indra).


425


9


itymn  24]  r/rr  rig  ye  da  .

7  About  to  slay  the  Indra-less  destructive  spirit  he  sharpens

his  keen  arms  to  strike  her.

Whereby  the  Strong,  although  our  debts’  exactor,  drives  in
the  distant  mornings  that  wo  know  not.

8  Eternal  Law  hath  varied  food  that  strengthens ;  thought  of

eternal  Law  removes  transgressions.

°f  #etrn?!  .Law-  musing,  glowing,  hath
oped  tho  deaf  ears  of  the  living.

Firm-soated  are  eternal  Law’s  foundations ;  in  its  fair  form
are  many  splondid  beauties.

By  holy  Law  long  lasting  food  they  bring  us:  by  holy  Law
havo  cows  come  to  our  worship.  J

10  Fixing  eternal  Law  be,  loo,  upholds  it:  swift  moves  the  might

of  Law  and  wins  tho  booty.  6

To  Law  belong  the  vast  deep  Earth  and  Honvon :  Milch-kino
supreme,  to  Law  their  milk  they  ronder.

11  Now,  Iudra  I  lauded,  glorified  with  praisos,  let  powor  swoll

high  liko  nvors  to  tho  siugor.

For  thoo  a  now  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays,  is  fashioned.  May  wo,
car-borne,  through  song  be  victors  ever.

,  HYMN  XXIY.  indra.

What  worthy  praiso  will  bring  boforo  us  Indra,  tho  Son  of
Strength,  that  ho  may  grant  us  riohes  ;

For  ho  tho  Hero,  gives  tho  singer  troasuros :  ho  is  tho  Lord
who  sonds  us  gifts,  yo  people.

7  Spirit :  ill®  Diuh,  or  mlschlovous  fomalo  sprite  who  does  not  aok^T

lodgo  Indra.  Tho  purport  of  theseoond  lino  i«  i  Indra,  although  the  puni-her
of  our  sms,  docs  not  sudor  us  to  b«  destroyed  by  evil  spirits,  but  continuing
to  rUo  os  tho  Sun,  urgoe  on  a  eucoeuion  of  mornings  in  tho  light  of  which
tlie  demons  of  tho  night  disappear.  K  UIon

8  Eternal  Law;  hero,  SAyapa  says,  the  word  ritd  means  Aditya,  or  Indra.
or  sacrifice.  IU  meaning  vanee  slightly  in  this  and  tho  two  following  stanzas
but  the  original  idea  of  regularity,  conformity  to,  or  establishment  bv,  eterna
order  or  law,  is  found  throughout  In  tho  second  lino  eternal  zJ*  S?h.

X  l"Xh“P1p."  •  "*■  "  "“rlj

9  They  bring  ui .-  that  is,  tho  cows  which  have  come  to  our  uorihip,  to  bo
.presented  to  tho  priests  as  payment  of  their  eervicoe.

10  Pixvxg  eternal  Law:  the  esUblisher  of  the  law  is  also  its  upholder  or

Su  ‘ ' Th”

T0  Law  belong  -  or,  were  made  for  tho  sake  of  order  or  law-ordained
sacrifice.  Much-lnne  tupreme :  bounteous  heaven  and  earth,  which  cherish
and  support  saenfioo  or  eternal  order  in  general.

1  The  Son  of  Strength:  tho  Mighty  Quo,


426  TEEHYMXSOP  [BOOK  IV.

2  To  be  invoked  ani  hymned  in  6ght  with  Vritra,  that  well-

praised  Indra  gives  us  real  bounties.

That  Maghavan  brings  comfort  in  the  foray  to  the  religious
man.  who  pours  libations.

3  Him,  verily,  the  men  invoke  in  combat;  risking  their  lives

they  make  him  their  protector,

When  heroes,  foe  to  foe,  give  up  their  bodies,  fighting,  each
side,  for  children  and  their  offspring.

4  Strong  Ood  !  the  folk  at  need  put  forth  their  vigour,  striving

together  in  the  whirl  of  battle.

When  warrior  bands  encounter  one  another  some  in  tho
grapple  quit  themselves  like  Indra.

5  Hence  many  a  one  worships  the  might  of  Indra :  henoe  lot

tho  brew  succeed  the  meal-oblation.

Hence  let  tho  Soma  bauish  those  who  pour  not :  oven  honco
I  joy  to  pay  the  Strong  One  worship.

6  Indra  gives  comfort  to  tho  man  who  truly  presses,  for  him

who  longs  for  it,  the  Soma,

Not  disaffected,  with  devoted  spirit  this  man  ho  takes  to  bo
his  friend  in  battles.

7  Ho  who  this  day  for  Indra  presses  Soma,  prepares  tho  brow

and  fries  tho  graius  of  barley—

Loving  tho  hymns  of  that  devoted  servant,  to  him  may  Indra
give  heroic  vigour*

8  When  tho  impetuous  chief  hath  sought  the  conflict,  and  tho

lord  looked  upon  the  long-drawn  battle,

Tho  matron  calls  to  the  Strong  God  whom  prossers  of  Soma
have  encouraged  in  the  dwelling.

9  He  bid  a  small  price  for  a  thiug  of  value  :  I  was  content,

returning,  still  unpurchased.

Ho  heightened  not  his  insufficient  offer.  Simple  and  clover,
both  milk  out  the  udder.

5  Lit  the  bn*  tueeeed  the  meal-oblation:  or.  lot  the  offering  of  cooked  viande
follow  that  of  the  sacrificial  cake;  let  mried  offerings  be  made  in  rapid  suc¬
cession.  Let  the  Soma  banith :  let  those  who  pour  no  Soma- libations  to  Ind  ra
be  kept  at  a  distance  from  those  who  thus  worship  him.

8  When  the  chieftain  has  gone  oat  to  fight,  his  wife  calls  on  Indra  to
protect  him.  According  to  SSyana.  the  '  impetuoua  chief,’  *  the  lord,’  Is
Indra  whom  his  consort  recalls  to  drink  the  Soma  juice  which  has  been
prepared  for  him  by  men.

9  /w«  content :  spoken  by  Indr*.  Both  milk  out  the  udder ;  both  the
simple,  or  needy,  buyer  and  the  shrewd  seller  make  as  much  as  they  can  out
of  the  bargain  ;  that  is,  the  buying  and  selling  of  Indra,  meaning  the  settle¬
ment  of  the  fee  to  be  paid  to  the  priest  for  obtaining  Indra’*  favour  by  .sacrifice.
Professor  Grassmann  banishes  staaras  9  and  10  to  an  appendut,  as  not  origin¬
ally  belonging  to  the  hymn-


HYMN  25.]  TIIE  RIO  VEDA.  427

10  Who  for  ton  milch-kinc  purchaseth  from  me  this  Indra  who  is
•  mine  1

When  he  hath  slain  the  Vjitras  let  the  buyer  give  him  back
to  me.  .

11  Now,  Indra!  lauded,  glorified  with  praisos,  l§t  wealth  swell

high  like  rivers  for  the  singer.

For  thee  a  now  hymn,  Lord  of  Bays,  is  fashioned.  May  wo,
car-borne,  through  song  bo  victors  ever.

HYMN  XXV.  .  Indr*.

What  friend  of  man,  God-loving,  hath  delighted,  yearning
thcrofor,  this  day  in  Indra’s  friendship  1
Who  with  enkindled  flame  and  flowing  Soma  laudoth  him
for  his  groat  protecting  favour  1

2  Who  hath  with  prayer  bowed  to  the  Soma-lover  1  What

pious  man  endues  tho  beams  of  morning  ?

Who  seeks  bond,  friendship,  brotherhood  with  Indra  ?  Who
hath  recourse  unto  tho  Sago  for  succour  ?

3  Who  claims  to-day  tho  Doitios’  protection,  oaks  Aditi  for

light,  or  tho  Adltyos?

Of  whoso  pressed  stalk  of  Soma  drink  tho  Asvins,  Indra,  and
Agnj,  woll-inclinod  in  spirit?

4  To  him  shall  Agni  Bhirata  givo  shelter :  long  shall  he  look

upon  the  Sun  uprising,

Who  sayoth,  Lot  us  pross  tho  juice  for  Indra,  man's  Friond,
the  Hero  manliest  of  heroes.

C  Him  noithor  fow  mon  overcome,  nor  many  :  to  him  shall  Aditi
givo  spacious  shelter.

Dear  is  tho  pious,  tho  dovout,  to  Indra ;  dear  is  the  zealous,
dear  tho  Soma-bringor.

6  This  Hero  ourbs  the  mighty  for  tho  zealous :  tho  pressor’s
brow  Indra  possesses  sololy  :

No  brother,  kin,  or  friond  to  him  who  pours  not,  dcstroyor  of
tho  dumb  who  would  resist  him.


2  Endues  the  beams  of  morning  :  the  expression  means,  apparently,  *  betakes
himself  to  prayer  at  day-break.’  SAyana’s  interpretation  is,  'W  ho  cover*
that  is,  supports,  the  cows  given  by  Indra  I'  . :  •  •  '

4  Agni  tthdrata  ;  Agni  as  tho  ospeoial  God  of  the  Bharata  family  to  which
VAmadeva  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn  belonged.

6  Curbs  the  mighty :  the  moaning  of  orAsnihOt  is  somewhat  uncertain  1
•  prompt  discomfiter  of  foes.’—  SAyana.  '  Bridling,  leading,  driving  or  having
swift  horses.' — Prof.  Roth.  '  Conqueror  of  the  mighty.’ — Prof.  Ludwig.  Tho
dumb  :  tho  man  who  has  no  voice  to  praise  him,  -


423


THE  BY  MSS  OP


[ BOOK  IV.


7  Not  with  the  wealthy  churl  .ho  pours  no  Some  doth  Mm,

nSS^sflSSrSi  *»•«-  nshcd,  own  Friend

8  High^'r^0  lowest, ,0me°n  who  stand  between  them,  going,

'-“ar* 10  uttle_

these  .re  the  men  who  0.11  for  ..d  on  Indm.

HYMN  XXVI.  _  .

I  w.s-.foretime  M.nu,  I  —  Sdry. :  I  »m  the  mge  K.kshivtn,

KaM  thesoo of  Arjuni  I  nmster.  I  »  the  mpi.nt  Umni :

2  I  h.eve°be“w.d  the  »rth  upon  the  Ary.,  end  min  upon  the

I  JSdtaSE  loudly- rowing  w.tem,  .ndth.  God.  moved

isfSXtiwb  habiution,  when  helping  Divo-

4  BefotT  OUriTb.  mnk«i  thi.  Bird,  0  Mrute  ;  supreme  of

falcons  bo  this  fleet-winged  Falcon,  KwM,_ht

Because,  strong-pinioned,  with  no  car  to  boar  bun,  he  broug
to  Manu  the  God-loved  oblation.

5  When  the  Bird  brought  it,  hence  in  mpid  motion  sent  on  the

wide  path  fleet  as  thought  he  burned.

Swift  he  returned  with  sweetness  of  the  Soma,  and  hence  the
Falcon  hath  acquired  his  glory.

6  Bearing  the  stalk,  the  Falcon  speeding  onward,  Bird  bringing

from  afar  the  draught  that  gladdens, _

other  etwiraa  is  the  «  FiOcoo.  ^though  it  is  not  dear

»- -»«  epithet  of  DM**

"iHSS  u. ..  » ’*"u-  “w";  *“

iTjST ih  ^»«ng  iuic


TEE  RIG  VEDA.


RYMX  27.]

Friend  of  the  Gods,  brought,  grasping  fast,  the  Soma  which
he  had  taken  from  yon  loftiest  heaven.

7  The  Falcon  took  and  brought  the  Soma,  bearing  thousand
libations  with  him,  yea,  ten  thousand.  0

The 'Bold  One  left  Malignities  behind  him,  wise,  in  wild  joy  of
-Soma,  left  the  foolish.

HYMN  XXVII.  ThwFalcon.

T,  as  I  lay  within  the  womb,  considered  all  generations  of
these  Gods  in  order.

A  hundred  iron  fortresses  confined  me,  but  forth  Iflew  frith
rapid  speed  a  Falcon.

2  Not  at  his  own  free  pleasure  did  ho  boar  mo  :  ho  conquered

with  his  strength  and  manly  courage.

Straightway  the  Bold  One  left  the  fionda  behind  him  a»d
passed  the  winds  as  ho  grow  yet  more  mighty.

3  When  with  loud  cry  from  heavon  down  aped  the  Falcon,

thenco  hasting  like  the  wind  ho  boro  the  Bold  Ono.

Thon,  wildly  raging  in  his  mind,  the  archer  Kfifinu  aimed
and  loosod  tho  string  to  atriko  him.

4  Tho  Falcon  bore  him  from  heaven’s  lofty  summit  as  tho  swift

car  of  Indra’s  Friend  boro  Bhujyu.

Thou  downward  hither  fell  a  flying  feather  of  the  Bird
hasting  forward  in  his  journey.

5  And  now  lot  Maghavan  aooopt  tho  boakor,  white,  filled  with

milk,  filled  with  tho  shining  liouid ;

Tho  best  of  swoot  moath  which  tho  priests  have  offored  :  that
Indra  to  his  joy  may  drink,  tho  Hero,  that  ho  may  tako
and  drink  it  to  his  rapture.

7  Tht  Bold  One .-  Indra.

1  Tht  womb  :  of  the  rain  cloud.  A  hundred  for  treu  ft  :d  '  ^ambara's  hundred
ancient  castles'  (II.  14.«.)  Comidered:  or  reviewed,  in  hone  of  finding  a  deliverer.

The  speaker  ie  Agni,  that  is,  the  lightning  which  rends  tho  cloud  and  bring*
down  the  sweet  rain— tho  Hoot  Falcon  who  brines  Soma  from  heaven.  $ee
Prof.  Blooraflold,  Tho  Myth  of  Soma  and  the  Eaglo,  Festgruaa  an  ltudolf  von
Roth,  1893,  pp  149—165  Cl.  Hymns  of  tho  Atharva-veda,  VI.  48. 1.

2  Not  i it  hit  otcit  free  pleasure :  the  falcon's  mere  will  not  enough,  says
Soma  ;  ho  had  first  to  fight  and  conquer  my  keepers.

The  Bold  Out:  Indra.  See  stani*  7  of  the  preceding  hymn.

8  The  Bold  One :  moaning  Soma.  Tho  construction  of  the  first  lino  is
difficult.  Kpifdnu  :  ono  of  th"  guards  of  the  celestial  Soma.  Seo  I.  166  £

4  Tho  allusion  in  the  first  lino  U  to  the  rescue  of  Bhujyu,  by  the  Asvins  (seo
I.  112.  fl),  and  we  should  therefore  expect  in drdratofy,  ‘ at  Indre’s  two  friends,.'
instead  of  iudrdvato.  Feather :  parnan  ;  which  became  on  earth  tho  sacred
Paroa  or  Pal&ja  tree,  the  boautiful  Butoa  Frondoaa.

5 'The  metrical  form  and  the  ritual  application  indicate  the  comparatively
recent  addition  of  this  stansa  to  the  ancient  hymn.

The  hymn  has  been  discussed  by  Weber,  Vedische  Bcitrtfge,  pp.  4  ff.


m  tub  nmss  op  [book  ir.

6  When  -also  for  a  mortal  man,  Indra,  tbou  speddest  forth  the

Sun,

Aftd  holpest  Etaaa  with  might

7  What  t  Vritra-slayer,  art  not  thou,  Maghavan,  fiorcest  in  thy
•  wrath  1

So  ha«t  thou  quelled  the  demon  too.

8  And  this  heroic  deed  of  might  thou,  Indra,  also  bast  achieved,
'  That  thou  didst  smite  to  death  the  Dame,  Heaven’B  Daughter,

meditating  ill.

9  Thou,  Indra,  Mighty  One,  didst  crush  Ushas,  though  Daughter

of  the  Sky,

When  lifting  up  herself  in  pride.

10  Then  from  her  chariot  Ushas  fled,  affrighted,  from  her

ruined  car,

When  the  strong  God.had  shattered  it

11  So  there  this  oar  of  Ushas  lay,  brokon  to  pieces,  in  Vipls,

And  she  herself  fled  far  away.

12  Thou,  Indra,  didst  with  magic  power  resist  the  overflowing

stream

Who  spread  her  waters  o’er  the  land.

13  Valiantly  didst  thou  seise  and  take  the  store  which  Sushna

had  amassed,

When  thou  didst  crush  his  fortresses.

14  Thou,  Indra,  also  smotest  down  Kulitara’s  son  Sambara,

The  D&sa,  from  the  lofty  hill.

15  Of  DAsa  Varchin’s  thou  didst  slay  the  hundred  thousand  and

the  five,

(’rushed  like  the  fellies  of  a  car.


6  And  kolvtsl  Stvfa  :  that  ia.  tho  return  of  day  on  some  particular  ocoaaion
is  attributed  to  Indra's  intervention  on  behalf  of  hia  favourite.  See  Index.

7  The  demon  :  Vritra  the  aon  of  Denu.

8  The  destruction  by  Indra  of  the  chariot  of  Uahaa  or  Dawn  appears  to
mean  the  extinction  of  her  light  after  the  ruing  of  the  Sun.  So  in  II.  16.  0.
Indra  ia  said  to  have  •  crushed  with  his  thunderbolt  the  car  of  Uahaa,  rend¬
ing  her  alow  steeds  with  bis  rapid  Coursers.'  Ths  myth  is  alluded  to  in  other
passages  also.  See  X.  18*.  5.

1 1  In  Vipdf :  or  on  the  bank  of  that  river.

12  Tkt  over/owinff  ttream :  or,  possibly,  some  stream  called  Viblll,  the
exact  meaning  of  the  word  being  doubtful.

14  Kulilam'i  son  .•  this  is  SSyana'a  explanation  o!  farulitard*.

15  0/  Ddta  Vartkin't :  of  the  followers  of  the  demon  or  savage  Varchin,
See  II.  14.  0.  And  the  fit*:  the  poeition  of  pdtUka  in  the  stanxa  seems  to
indicate  that  it  is  taken  separately.  Sftyapa  prefixes  it  to  jattf,  making  tho
number  slain  a  thousand  and  five  hundred.

Crushed  Ukt  UuftlUtt  of  a  car:  ‘(surrounding;  him  like  the  fellies  (round
the  spokes  of  a  wheel).’— Wilson.


BYSHT  so.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  433

16  So  Indra,  Lord  of  Heroes,  Powers,  caused  the  on  wedded

damsel's  son,

The  castaway,  to  share  the  lauds.

17  So  sapient  Indra,  Lord  of  Might,  brought  Turvasa  and  Yadu,

those

Who  feared  the  flood,  in  safety  o’er.

18  Arna  and  Chitraratha,  both  Ary  as,  thou,  Indra,  slowest  swift,
On  yonder  side  of  Sarayu.

19  Thou,  Vritra  slayer,  didst  conduot  those  two  forlorn,  the

blind,  the  lame :

Nono  may  attain  this  bliss  of  thino.

20  For  Divodisa,  him  who  brought  oblations,  Indra  ovorthrow
A  hundred  fortresses  of  stone.

21  The  thirty  thousand  Dilsas  he  with  magio  power  and  weapons

sent

To  slumber,  for  Dabhiti’s  sako.

22  As  such,  0  Vfitra-slayer,  thou  art  goneral  Lord  of  kino  for  all,
Thou  Shakor  of  all  things  that  bo.

23  ludra,  whatever  dood  of  might  thou  hast  this  day  to  exeoute,
Nono  be  there  now  to  hinder  it.

24  0  Watchful  One,  may  Aryaman  tho  God  give  thoo  all  goodly

things.

May  Pushan,  Bhaga,  and  tho  God  Karfllatt  givo  all  things  fair.


The  untoedded  damsel’ i  ion :  tho  sou  of  Agrd,  according  to  Silyapa.  8e«
IV.  10.  0.

17  Turvafa  and  Yadu:  so  I.  174.  9  *  When  o’er  tho  flood  thou  broughteet
them,  O  Hero,  thou  keptost  Turvasa  and  Yadu  safely.’

Who  feared  Ike  flood :  literally, '  non- bathers'  (asndUtrd),  meaning  probably
unablo  to  swim.

18  Ant  a  and  Chitraratha ;  two  kings,  says  the  Scholiast,  'presuming  on
their  dignity  as  Aryaa  and  devoid  of  faith  in,  or  devotion  to,  Indra.'  Sarayu
hero  is  probably  some  rivor  in  the  Panjftb,  and  not  the  Sarayu  of  Oudh  the
modern  Sarjfl.  Turvafa  and  Yadu  may  perhaps  have  crossed  the  rivor,  and
under  the  protection  of  Indra  oouquered  two  Aryan  chiefs  whose  lands  lay
beyond  it.

19  The  blind,  the  lame:  see  II.  18.  12.  where  one  man  only,  tho  outcast,
or  Parivfij,  is  spoken  of  as  *  tho  halt  and  blind/

20  Divoddsa  :  see  Index.

21  DabhUi :  a  Ilishi  favoured  by  Indra  See  Index.

24  Kar&latl :  from  the  position  of  tho  word  in  the  aUnea  would  appear  to
bo  the  name  of  a  separate  God,  but  Slyana  (who  is  followed  by  Professors  Roth
and  Grassmann  os  well  as  Wilson)  takes  it  as  an  epithet  of  Piishan,  i.  e.  the
broken- toothed  or  toothless  God.  ‘According  to  the  Purduas,  Pflshan  had  his
teeth  knocked  out  by  Virabhadrda  followers  at  Daksha'B  sacrifice/— Wilson.
The  institutor  of  the  sacrifice  appears  to  be  addressed  in  this  verse  which  is
probably  a  later  addition  to  the  original  hymn.


THE  HYMNS  OP


444


[BOOK  1Y.


HYMN  XXXI.  !*“*«■»■

With  what  help  will  he  come  to  us,  wonderful,  ever-waxing
Friend,

With-what  most  mighty  company !

2  What  genuine  and  most  liberal  draught  will  spirit  thee  with

juice  to  burst

Opoo  e'en  strongly-guarded  wealth  ?

3  Do  thou  who  art  Protector  of  us  thy  friends  who  praise  thee
With  hundred  aids  approach  us.

4  Like  as  a  courser’s  circling  wheel,  so  turn  thee  hitherward

to  us,

Attracted  by  the  hymns  of  men.

5  Thou  scekest  as  it  were  thine  own  stations  with  swift  descent
'  of  powers:

I  sharo  thee  even  with  the  Sun.

6  What  tirao  thy  courage  and  his  whoels  together,  Indrn,  run

their  course

With  thee  and  with  the  Sun  aliko,

7  So  even,  Lord  of  Power  and  Might,  the  peoplo  call  thoo

Maghavau,

Givor,  who  pauses  not  to  think.

8  And  verily  to  him  who  toils  and  presses  Soma  juioo  for  thoo
Thou  quiokly  givost  amplo  wealth.

9  No,  not  a  hundred  hindcrors  can  chock  thy  gracious  bounty's

flow,

Nor  thy  great  deeds  when  thou  wilt  act.

10  May  thino  assistance  keep  us  safe,  thy  hundred  and  thy

thousand  aids :

May  all  thy  favours  strengthen  us.

1 1  Do  thou  elect  us  in  this  place  for  friendship  and  prosperity,

•  And  great  celestial  opulence.


2  Oerxuinc  a*d  most  literal :  producing  good  results  sad  causing  thee  to  bo
moet  bountiful.  Rronyly-yttardcd  weaJlK  :  to  bunt  open  the  treasure-house*
of  our  enemies  and  gire  ua  their  contents  ;  or  the  (illusion  may  bo  to  tho
waters  shut  up  in  the  clouds.

4  By  the  hymni:  literally,  ‘by  the  teams,’  a ijrfcOb't,  that  is,  strings  of
verses,  hymns,  or  praise*.

5  With  itrifl  descent  of  povert :  by  the  natural  and  spontaneous  outflow  of
divine  strength,  as  water  pours  down  a  precipice.

I thart  thee:  ‘I  glorify  thee  together  with  the  Sun.'— Wilson.

7  Mayhavan :  the  rich  and  munificent  One.


HYMN  82.]  •  THE  RIO  VEDA  .*•  ■  485

12  Favour  us,  Indra,  evermore  with  overflowing  store  of  wealth c
With  all  thy  succours  aid  thou  us.

13  With  new  protections,  Indra,  like  an  archer,  open  thou  for  us

The  stables  that  are  filled  with  kine.  .

14  Our  chariot,  Indra,  boldly  moves  endued  with  splendour,

ne’er  repulsed,

Winning  for  us  both  kine  and  steeds.  *

15  0  Surya,  mako  our  fame  to  be  most  oxcollent  among  the  Gods,

Most  lofty  as  tho  hoavon  on  high.

HYMN  XXXII.  Indra.

0  Tnou  who  slowest  Vritra,  come,  0  Indra,  hither  to  our  side,
Mighty  One  with  thy  mighty  aids.

2  Swift  and  impetuous  .art  thou,  wondrous  amid  tho  well-

dressed  folk  :

.  Thou  doest  marvels  for  our  help.

3  Even  with  tho  weak  thou  smitest  down  him  who  is  stronger,

with  thy  strength

Tho  mighty,  with  tho  Frionds  thou  hast.

4  0  Indra,  wo  are  oloso  to  thoo;  to  thoo  wo  sing  aloud  our  songs:
Help  and  defond  us,  even  us.

5  As  suoh,  0  Caster  of  tho  Stono,  como  with  thy  suocours

wondorful,

Dlmneloss,  and  irresistible.

C  May  wo  bo  frionds  of  one  liko  thoo,  0  Indra,  with  tho  woalth
of  kino,

Comrades  for  lively  cnorgy.

7  For  thou,  0  Indra,  art  alone  tho  Lord  of  strength  that  comos

from  kino :

So  grant  thou  us  abundant  food.

8  Thoy  turn  thoo  not  anothor  way,  when,  laudod,  Lover  of  tho

Song,

Thou  wilt  give  wealth  to  those  who  praiso.

9  Tho  Gotamas  have  sung  thoir  soug  of  praise  to  thco  that  thou

mayst  give,

Indra,  for  livoly  energy.


2  A  mid  the  vtll-dreurd  folk  :  tho  adjective  MtrinMu,  feminine  plural
in  tho  locative  case,  stands  without  a  substantive,  and  SAyana  supplies  prajdiu,
people  ;  well-dressed,  perhaps,  for  a  religious  ceremony,  or  possibly,  armsd  for
war.

5  Cotter  of  the  Stone:  wioldor  of  tho  thunderbolt.


486  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  IV.

10  We  will  declare  thy  hero  deeds,  what  Disa  forts  thou  brakest

down,

Attacking  them  in  rapturous  joy.

1 1  The  sages  sing  those  manly  deeds  which,  Indra,  Lover  of  the  Song,
Thou  wroughtest  when  the  Soma  flowed.

12  Indra,  the^Gotamaa  who  bring  thee  praisos  have  grown  strong

by  thee.

Give  them  renown  with  hero  sons.

13  For,  Indra,  verily  thou  art  the  general  treasure  even  of  all:
Thee,  therefore,  do  we  invocate.

14  Excellent  Indra,  turn  to  us :  glad  thee  among  us  with  the  juice
•  Of  Somas,  Soma-drinker  thou.

15  May  praise  from  us  who  think  on  thee,  0  Indra,  bring  tlioo

near  to  us.

Turn  thy  two  Bay  Steeds  hitherward.

16  Eat  of  our  sacrificial  cake:  rejoico  thee  in  the  songs  we  sing,
Even  as  a  lover  in  his  bridp.

1 7  To  Indra  for  a  thousand  steeds  well-trained  and  fleet  of  foot

we  pray,

And  hundred  jars  of  Soma  juice.

18  Wo  make  a  hundred  of  thy  kino,  yea,  and  a  thousand,  hasten

nigh :

So  let  thy  bounty  come  to  us.

19  We  have  obtained,  a  gift  from  tboc,  ten  water-ewers  wrought

of  gold :

Thou,  Vptra-slayer,  givest  much.

20  A  bounteous  Giver,  give  us  much,  bring  much  and  not  a

trifling  gift :

Much,  Indra,  wilt  thou  fain  bestow.

21  0  Vfitrn<layer,  thou  art  famed  in  many  a  place  as  bountiful :
Hero,  thy  bounty  let  us  share.

22  I  praise  thy  pair  of  Tawny  Steeds,  wise  Son  of  him  who

giveth  kine :

Terrify  not  the  cows  with  these.

10  /n  rapturous  joy :  in  exhilaration  produced  bj  the  Some  juice.

17  Jari :  a  kA4r1  ia  properly  ft  measure  of  grain,  and  by  metonymy  ft  vessel,
jar,  or  pitcher,  containing  that  quantity,  which  ia  said  to  be  equal  to  about
three  of  our  bushels.

22  Wise  Son  of  hiui  w&o  giretX  tint :  Indra  himself  is  the  special  giver  of
cattle,  and  this  attribute  of  bia  may  perhaps,  as  Profwsor  Ludwig  conjectures,
be  personified  in  an  imaginary  father  Ooahl,  the  winner  or  boa  tower  of  kine.
SAyana  would  force  on  napH,  eon,  the  meaning  na  pdlayilah,  *  thou  who  doat
not  cast  down'  (thy  worshippers).  With  tkae:  two  horaes  of  thine.  The
meaning  of  this  last  ?4da  is  uncertain.


THE  RIOVEDA.


BY  AW  33.1


437


23  Like  two  slight  images  of  girls,  unrobed,  upon  a  new-wrought

post,

So  shine  thy  Bay  Steeds  in  their  course.

24  For  mo  the  Bays  are  ready  when  I  start,  or  start  not,- with  the

dawn,  Innocuous  in  tho  ways  they  take.


HYMN  XXXIII.  '  Ribhus.

I  send  my  voice  as  herald  to  tho  Ribhus;  I  cravo  the  white  cow
for  the  overspreading.

Wind-sped,  the  Skilful  Ones  in  rapid  motion  have  in  an  instant
compassed  round  the  hoavon.

2  What  time  tho  Ribhus  had  with  care  and  marvels  don o  proper

service  to  assist  their  Parents,

They  won  the  friendship  of  tho  Gods ;  tho  Sagos  carried  away
tho  fruit  of  their  devotion.

3  May  they  who  modo  thoir  Parents,  who  woro  lying  like  posts

that  moulder,  young  again  for  ever, —

May  Vuja,  Vibhvan,  Ribhu,  joined  with  Indra,  protect  our
sacrifice,  tho  Soma-lovors.

4  As  for  a  }'oar  the  Ribhus  kept  tho  Milch-cow,  throughout  a

year  fashioned  and  formed  her  body,

Aud  through  a  yoar’s  spaco  still  sustained  her  brightness,
through  thoso  thoir  labours  they  were  raado  immortal.

G  Two  bcakore  lot  us  mako, — thus  said  tho  oldost.  Lot  us
mako  throo,— this  was  tho  youngor’s  sentence.

Four  beakers  let  us  make, — thus  spoke  tho  youngest.  Tvashtar
approved  this  rodo  of  yours,  0  Ribhus.

6  The  men  spako  truth  and  oven  so  they  acted :  this  Go'dliko
way  of  thoirs  the  Ribhus  followed.

And  Tvashtar,  when  he  looked  on  tho  four  beakers  resplend¬
ent  as  tho  day,  was  moved  with  envy.


23  Images  of  girls :  perhaps  as  caryatids,  but  the  passage  is  obscure.  Pro-
feasor  Wilson  translates  :  1  Like  two  puppets  on  an  arranged,  now,  snd
slonder  stage.'

24  According  to  S&yana,  Let  thy  inoffesive  bay  horses  give  mo  a  sufficiency
at  sacrifices  whethor  I  go  to  them  in  a  car  drawn  by  oxen  or  without  a  car  so
drawn,  that  U,  on  foot.

•  1  For  the  ottrspreading :  a  technical  expression  for  pouring  the  milk  into  or
over  tho  Soma  juice.  ‘For  the  dilution  (of  tho  Soma  libation).’ — Wilson.  For
tho  Ribhus,  see  Index.

5  Two  beakers  :  or  sacrificial  ladles.  See  I.  20.  6.


438  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IV,

7  When  for  twelve  days  the  Ribhus  joyed  reposing  as  guests  of

him  who  never  may  be  hidden.

They  made  fair  fertile  fields,  they  brought  the  rivers.  Plants
spread  o’er  deserts,  waters  filled  the  hollows.

8  May  they  who  formed  the  swift  car,  bearing  HeroeB,  and  the

Cow  omniform  and  all-impelling,

Even  may  they  form  wealth  for  us, — the  Ribhus,  dexterous-
handed,  deft  in  work  and  gracious.

9  So  in  their  work  the  Gods  had  satisfaction,  pondering  it  with

thought  and  mental  iusight.

The  Gods'  expert  artificer  was  Vija,  Indra's  Ribhukshan,
Varuna’s  was  Vibhvan.

10  They  who,  made  glad  with  sacrifice  and  praises,  wrought  the
two  Bays,  bis  docile  Steeds,  for  Indra, —

Ribhus,  as  those  who  wish  a  friend  to  prosper,  bestow  upon
us  gear  and  growth  of  riches.

•  11  This  day  have  they  sot  gladdening  drink  before  you.  Not

without  toil  are  Gods  inclined  to  friendship.

Therefore  do  ye  who  are  so  great,  0  Ribhus,  vouchsafe  us
treasures  at  this  third  libation.

HYMN  XXXIV.  Bibhus.

To  this  our  sacrifice  oome  Ribhu,  Vibhvan,  VAja,  and  Indra
with  the  gift  of  riches,

Becauso  this  day  hath  DhisbanA  the  Goddess  sot  drink  for
you :  the  gladdening  draughts  have  reached  you.


7  Him  who  never  nay  be  hidden  :  the  Sun  ;  Sari  tar.  *

.  8  The  twifl  car:  the  three- wheeled  chariot  which  bean  the  Atvin*.

The  Cow  omniform :  or  of  every  hue.  *  Indra  hath  yoked  hie  Have  the
Amos’  car  ia  horaed,  Bfihaspati  hath  brought  the  Cow  of  every  hue!5— I.
181.  8.  <»

1 1  At  thii  third  libation :  in  the  evening,  the  proper  time  for  drink-offerings
to  the  Ribhus.  °

The  myth  of  the  Ribhus  it  exceedingly  obecure.  They  are  regarded  as
sucient  sacrifice™  who  attained  immortality  at  the  reward  of  their  pious
labours.  The  parent*  whom  they  restored  to  youth  sppear  to  be  the  univer¬
sal  parents,  heaven  and  earth,  rejuvenated  each  morning  and  especially  in  the
.pr.ng  The  mdch-cow  (stanaa  4)  is  perhape  the  earth,  regarded  as  the  produb.
live  sou.  The  twelve  days  (stanza  i)  are  perhape,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  the


Bergaigne,  La  Religion  Vtdupu,  II.  403—418;  III.  51—55.


Dhiehani;  a  divinity  closely  connected  with  Soma  and  presiding  over
prosperity.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


34.]


188


•2  Knowing  your  birth  and  rich  in  gathered  treasure,  Ribhus,
rejoice  together  with  the  Ritus.

The  gladdening  draughts  and  wisdom  hare  approached  you  :
send  ye  us  riches  with  good  store  of  heroes
8  For  you  was  made  this  sacrifice,  0  Ribhus,  which  ye,  like
men,  won  for  yourselves  aforetime.

To  you  come  all  who  find  in  you  their  pleasure  :  ye  all  were
— oven  the  two  elder — Vijas.

4  Now  for  the  mortal  worshipper,  O  Heroes,  for  him  who  sorved

you,  was  the  gift  of  riches.

Drink,  VAjas,  Ribhus  !  unto  you  is  offered,  to  gladden  you,
the  third  and  groat  libation.

5  Comtf  to  us,  Heroes,  Vijaa  and  Ribhukshans,  glorified  for  the

sake  of  mighty  treasure.

These  draught*  approach  you  as  the  day  is  closiug,  ns  cows,
whoso  calves  arc  newly-born,  their  stable.

<5  Como  to  this  sacrifice  of  ours,  ye  Children  of  Strength,  in¬
voked  with  humble  adoration.

Drink  of  this  meath,  Wealth-givers,  joined  with  Indra  with
whom  ye  aro  in  full  accord,  ye  Prinoce.

7  Close  knit  with  Vamp*  drink  the  Soma,  Indra;  close-knit,
v  Hymn-lover !  with  the  Marut*  drink  it :

Close-knit  with  drinkers  first,  who  drink  in  season  ;  olose-knit
with  heavenly  Dames  who  give  us  treasures.

8  Rejoice  in  full  accord  with  the  Adityas,  in  concord  with  the

Parvatas,  0  Ribhus;

In  full  accord  with  Savitar,  Divine  One;  in  full  ocoord  with
floods  that  pour  forth  riches.


2  Knowing  your  birth :  knowing  how  you  have  attained  immortality  and
deification.  The  Ritue  :  the  aeaaona  personified  and  honoured  at  deities.  The
Ribhu*  aa  cosmic  power*  are  closely  connected  with  them.

8  Vdjat :  that  ia,  although  V4ja  is  strictly  the  name  of  the  youngeat  of  the
three  only,  you  are  all  entitled  to  that  appellation  which  means  active,  strong,
or  spirited.  Professor  Graasmann  translate*  :  '  ihr  alle  *eid  die  er*ten  hier,
O  Vadscha's ye  are  all  the  first  (entitled  to  precedence)  here,  O  Vftjaa  ;
but  the  word  aid  is  then  left  untranslated.

4  The  third  and  great  libation :  see  the  preceding  hymn,  sUnxa  11.

6  Ribhukthant :  Ribhukahan  ia  another  name  of  Ribhu,  the  eldest  of
the  three.

7  Drinker i  tint ;  those  who  claim  and  receive  the  libation  first ;  here,
apparently,  the  Ritus  or  Season*.

8  Parvatat :  Gods  presiding  over  mountains  and  clouds.


t BOOK  IV.


440  TEB  EYMN8  OF

9  Ribhus,  who  helped  their  Parents  and  the  Alvins,  who  formed
the  Milch-cow  aud  the  pair  of  horses.

Made  armour,  set  the  heaven  and  earth  asunder,— far-reach¬
ing  Zeroes,  they  have  made  good  offspring.

10  Ye  who  have  wealth  in  cattle  and  in  booty,  in  heroes,  in  rich

sustenance  and  treasure,

Such,  0  ye  Ribhus,  first  to  drink,  rejoicing,  give  unto  us  and
*  those  who  laud  our  present.

1 1  Ye  were  not  far :  we  have  not  left  you  thirsting,  blamele*  in

this  our  sacrifice,  0  Ribhus.

Rejoice  you  with  the  Maruts  and  with  Indra,  with  the  Kings,
Gods  !  that  ye  may  give  us  richos.

HYMN  XXXV.  •  R*bhu».

Come  hither,  0  ye  Sons  of  Strength,  ye  Ribhus ;  stay  not  afar,
y©  Children  of  Sudhanvan.

At  this  libation  is  your  gift  of  treasure.  Let  gladdening
draughts  approach  you  after  Indra’s.

.  2  Hither  is  come  the  Ribhus’  gift  of  riches ;  here  was  tho  drink¬
ing  of  the  well-pressed  Soma,

Since  by  dexterity  and  skill  as  craftsmen  ye  made  tho  singlo
chalico  to  be  fourfold.

3  Yo  mado  fourfold  the  chalice  that  was  single  :  ye  spako  theso

words  and  said,  0  Friend,  assist  us  ;

Then,  Vljaa !  gained  the  path  of  life  eternal,  doft-handed
.  Ribhus,  to  the  Gods’  assembly.

4  Out  of  what  substance  was  that  chalice  fashioned  which  yo

mado  fourfold  by  your  art  and  wisdom  1
Now  for  the  gladdening  draught  press  out  tho  liquor,  and
drink,  0  Ribhus,  of  the  meath  of  Soma.

5  Yo  with  your  cunning  mado  your  Parents  youthful;  the  oup,

for  Gods  to  drink,  ye  formed  with  cunning ;

With  cunning,  Ribhus,  rich  in  treasure,  fashioned  tho  two
swift  Tawuy  Steeds  who  carry  Indra.

9  Made  amour:  for  the  Gods.

10  non  «Ao  laud  our  prtient :  who  accompany  with  hymns,  and  so  recom¬
mend  to  tho  Gods,  our  oblation.

11  The  Kingt :  the  other  Gods,  or  the  Gods  in  general.

1  After  Indra' i :  libations  having  been  offered  to  Indra  at  dawn  and  at
noonday.  See  stanza  7.  ■  -.]■

3  0  Friend  :  Agni.

5  Cunning ;  power  sad  skill  ss  craftsmen  ;  fdehyi.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


BYMS  36.)


441


6  Wboso  pours  out  for  you,  when  days  are  closing,  the  sharp

libation  for  your  joy,  0  Yajas,

>  For  him,  0  mighty  Ribhus,  ye,  rejoicing,  have  fashioned
wealth  with  plenteous  store  of  heroes.  *

7  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  at  dawn  the  juice  thou  drankeBt:  thine,

only  thine,  is  the  noonday  libation.

Now  drink  thou  with  the  wealth-bestowing  Ribhus,  whom  for
their  skill  thou  madest  friends,  0  Indra.

8  Ye,  whom  your  artist  skill  bath  raised  to  Godhead,  havo  sat

you  down  above  in  heaven  like  falcons.

So  give  us  riches,  Children  of  Sudhanvan,  0  Sons  of  Strength  ;
ye  have  become  immortal.

9  The  third  libation,  that  bestoweth  treasure,  which  yo  have

won  by  skill,  ye  dexterous-handed, —

This  drink  hath  been  effused  for  you,  0  Ribhus :  drink  it  with
high  delight,  with  joy  like  Indra’s.


HYMN  XXXVL  ’  nibhu..

The  car  that  was  not  mode  for  horses  or  for  reins,  three-wheel¬
ed,  worthy  of  lauds,  rolls  round  the  firmament
That  is  tho  great  announcement  of  your  Deity,  that,  0  ye
Ribhus,  ye  sustain  the  earth  and  heaven.

2  Ye  Saplont  Ones  who  made  the  lightly-rolling  oar  out  of  your

mind,  by  thought,  the  car  that  never  errs,

You,  being  such,  to  drink  of  this  drink-offering,  you,  0  ye
Vijaa,  and  yo  Ribhus,  wo  invoke.  .

3  0  Vljas,  Ribhus,  reaching  far,  among  the  Gods  this  was  your

exaltation  gloriously  declared,

In  that  your  aged  Parents,  worn  with  length  of  days,  yo
*  wrought  again  to  youth  so  that  they  moved  at  will

4  Tho  chalice  that  was  single  ye  have  mado  fourfold,  and  by

your  wisdom  brought  the  Cow  forth  from  the  hide.

So  quickly,  mid  the  Gods,  ye  gained  immortal  life.  VAjas  and
'  Ribhus,  your  great  work  must  be  extolled.


6  Fathioned  wealth  :  mad*  or  fabricated  m  craftsmen.

1  The  car :  the  three- wheeled  chariot  of  the  Asrins,  Srawn  by  sues,  ».  e.  tho
grey  clouds  of  morning  twilight.

3  Ye  wrought  again  to  youth  :  forms  of  the  Terb  taluk,  to  form,  fabricate,
fashion,  as  a  carpenter  does  with  wood,  are  used  in  this  and  other  hymns  to
the  Hibhus,  the  artificers,  instead  of  words  signifying  restoring,  giving,  pro¬
ducing,  and  tho  like.


442


THE  HYMNS  OP


l  BOOK  IV.


5  Wealth  from  the  Ril>hus  is  most  glorious  in  renown,  that

which  the  Heroes,  famed  for  vigour,  have  produced.

In  synods  must  be  sung  the  car  which  Vibhvan  wrought:  that
whidh  ye  favour,  Gods !  is  famed  among  mankind.

6  Strong  is  the  steed,  the  man  a  sage  in  eloquence,  the  bowman

is  a  hero  hard  to  beat  in  fight,

Great  store  of  wealth  and  manly  power  hath  he  obtained
whom  VAja,  Vibhvan,  Ribhus  have  looked  kindly  on.

7  To  you  hath  been  assigned  the  fairest  ornament,  the  hymn  of

praise :  VAjas  and  Ribhus,  joy  therein ;

For  yo  have  lore  and  wisdom  and  poetic  skill :  as  such,  with
this  our  prayer  we  call  on  you  to  come.

8  According  to  the  wishes  of  our  hearts  may  ye,  who  have  full

knowledge  of  all  the  delights  of  men,

Fashion  for  us,  0  Ribhus,  power  and  splendid  wealth,  rich  in
high  courage,  excellent,  and  vital  strength.

9  Bestowing  on  us  here  riches  and  offspring,  here  fashion  fame

for  us  befitting  heroes.

Vouchsafe  us  wealth  of  splendid  sort,  0  Ribhus,  that  we  may
make  us  more  renowned  than  others.

HYMN  XXXVII.  Bibhu..

Come  to  our  sacrifice,  VAjas,  Ribhukshans,  Gods,  by  the  paths
which  Gods  are  wont  to  travel,

As  ye,  gay  Gods,  accent  in  splcudid  weathor  the  sacrifice
among  these  folk  of  Manus.

2  May  theso  rites  please  you  in  your  heart  and  spirit ;  may  tho

drops  clothed  in  oil  this  day  approach  you.

May  the  abundant  juices  tear  vou  onward  to  power  and
strength,  and,  when  imbibed,  delight  you.

3  Your  threefold  going  near  is  God-appointed,  so  praiso  is  given

you,  VAjas  and  Ribhukshans.

So,  Manus-like,  mid  younger  folk  I  offer,  to  you  who  are  aloft
in  heaven,  tho  Soma.


5  The  ear  which  Vibhvan  wrought:  or  the  sacrificial  cup  ;  the  text  b&a  only
vibhvaUuhtdh,  that  which  wa»  fabricated  by  Vibhvan,  or  as  SAyapa  says,  by
the  ^vibbua.  •

8  According  to  the  wishes  of  our  hearts :  or,  according  to  SAyapa,  on  account
of  the  praises  which  we  have  offered  to  you.  ...

1  In  splendid  weather  :  after  the  rains,  when  protracted  aacrificee  are  not
interrupted  by  atorma.  Then  folk  of  Manus  :  Aryan  men.

8  Threefold  going  near :  coining  to  the  altar  at  the  three  daily  sacrifice#.


BYMN  38. J


THE  RIGYEDA.


413

4  Strong,  with  fair  chains  of  gold  and  jaws  of  iron,  ye  have  a

splendid  car  and  well-fed  horses.

Ye  Sons  of  Strength,  ye  progeny  of  Indra,  to  you  the  best  is
offered  to  delight  you.

5  Ribhukshana!  him,  for  handy  wealth,  the  mightiest  comrade

in  the  fight,

Him,  Indra's  equal,  we  invoke,  most  bounteous  over,  rich  in
steeds.

G  The  mortal  man  whom,  Ribhus,  ye  and  Indra  favour  with  your
•  help,

Must  be  successful,  by  his  thoughts,  at  sacrifice  and  with  the
steed.

7  0  V&jas  and  Ribhukshans,  free  for  us  the  paths  to  sacrifioo,

Ye  Princes,  lauded,  that  we  may  press  forward  to  each  point

of  heaven.

8  0  V&jas  and  Ribhukshans,  ye  NAsatyas,  Indra,  bless  this  wealth,

And,  bofore  other  mens',  the  steed,  that  ample  riches  may

be  won.

HYMN  XXXVIII.  .  DadhikrAs.

From  you  two  came  the  gifts  in  days  aforetime  which  Trasa-
dasyu  granted  to  the  Purus.

Ye  gave  the  winner  of  our  Gelds  and  plough  lands,  and  the
strong  s miter  who  subdued  the  Dasyus.

6  Him:  Itibhu,  M  representing  hi*  brother*  also.

6  By  Mi  thought! :  referring  to  the  worahipper  who  by  hi*  devout  thought*
end  acta  will  obtain  success  in  sacrifice.  WirA  the  it  ted :  referring  to  the  war¬
rior  who  will  be  viotorioue  in  battle  with  his  war-chariot.

7  Prtu  o**ard  to  each  point  of  Aeatvs  that  is,  be  everywhere  viotorioue,
achieve,  what  wai  in  later  time*  the  objqpt  of  groat  king*’  higheet  ambition,
tho  digvijaya  or  conquest  of  lands  in  every  direction.

8  NtUatyai  •  Afvins.  TKt  tUtda :  either  the  war-horeee  in  general,  or,  a«
Profeeaor  Ludwig  euggeet*,  a  particular  horse  that  i*  to  be  sacrificed.

Dadhikrdi,  in  the  nominative  case,  or  DedhikrA  in  the  crude  form,  is  the
namo  of  a  mythical  being  often  mentioned  in  the  ttigvede  and  the  actual  sub¬
ject  of  this  hymn  and  three  others.  He  is  described  as  a  kind  of  divine  horse,
and  probably,  like  TArkshya,  is  a  personification  of  the  morning  sun  ;  some-
times  he  is  considered  as  a  creation  of  heaven  and  earth,  sometime*  of  Mitra-
Varupa,  and  is  invoked  in  the  morning  together  with  Agni,  Ushae,  and  the
Asvins.  The  name  is  probably  derived  from  dadhi,  thickened  milk,  and  Art,
to  scatter,  in  allusion  to  the  rising  sun  spreading  dew^d  hoar-frost  like  milk.
(fTa\vtiv  S'iyav  rjAtoc  OKtCq  traX tv.  Aeschylus).  See  St  P.  Lexicon,
or  M.  Williams’s  Dictionary.  Professor  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  hymn  is  a
fragment,  referring  not  to  the  mythical  being  but  to  an  actual  wor-horeo  bear¬
ing  His  name.

l.From  you  two:  Mitre  and  Varuna,  according  to  stanza  2  of  the  following
hymn  ;  Heaven  aud  Earth,  according  to  SAyat*.  Tnuadatyu:  this  king  has


[book  rv.


441  •  TUB  EYUXS  OP

2  And  ye  gave  mighty  Dadhikris,  the  giver  of  many  gifts,  who

visiteth  all  people,

...  Impetuous  hawk,  Bwift  and  of  varied  oolour,  like  a  brave  King
whom  each  true  man  must  honour.

3  Whom,  as  ’twere  down  a  precipice,  swift  rushing,  each  Pflru

praises  and  his  heart  rejoices,—

;  Springing  forth  like  a  hero  fain  for  battle,  whirling  the  car  and
flying  like  the  tempest.

4  Who  gainoth  precious  booty  in  the  combats,  and  moveth,

winning  spoil,  among  the  cattle ;

Shown  in  bright  colour,  looking  on  the  assemblies,  beyond  tho
churl,  to  worship  of  the  living.

5  Loudly  tho  folk  cry  after  him  in  battles,  as  ’twere  a  thief  who

steals  away  a  garment ;

Speeding  to  glory,  or  a  herd  of  cattle,  oven  as  a  hungry  falcon
swooping  downward.

6  And,  fain  to  oome  forth  first  amid  these  armies,  this  way  and

that  with  rows  of  cars  he  rushes.

Clay  like  a  bridesman,  making  him  a  garland,  tossing  the  dust,
ohamping  the  rein  that  holda  him.

7  And  that  strong  Steed,  victorious  and  faithful,  obedient  with

his  body  in  the  combat,

Speeding  straight  on  amid  the  swiftly  pressing,  casts  o’er  his
brows  tho  dust  he  tosses  upward.

8  And  at  his  thunder,  like  the  roar  of  heaven,  thoso  who  attack

tremble  and  are  affrighted ;

For  when  he  figbta  against  embattled  thousands,  dread  is  ho
in  his  striving ;  none  may  stay  him.

9  The  people  praise  tho  overpowering  swiftness  of  this  fleet  Steed

who  giveth  men  abundance.

Of  him  they  say  when  drawing  back  from  battle.  DadhikrAs
hath  sped  forward  with  his  thousands.

been  mentioned  before  (L  112.  14.)  as  a  favourite  of  the  A«rins.  Professor

Slwig  point*  out  that,  to  accord  with  what  ia  aaid  in  IV.  42.  8.,  the  reading
lid  be  Trasadasyum  ;  'ye  who  gave  Traaadaayu  to  the  POnis,’  the  verb
ft  standing  for  the  dual  nito.ethe.  The  POnu :  one  of  the  Aryan  tribes.
Wee  Index.

4  Beyond  the  churl .-pawing  by  the  niggard  who  offers  no  oblations,  and
looking  kindly  vn  the  ^Ptrifice  of  the  living  man  or  devout  worshipper.  The
Word  a ratim  apparently  =  drd*iei.

5  Speeding  :  referring  to  Dadhikrts  seeking  fame  and  booty.

6  Making  him  a  garland :  ol  the  chariots  that  surround  him.

7  Amid  the  vcifily  prosing  :  the  text  has  no  subs  ten  tire  :  tendiu,  hosts,  or
VpMu,  people,  may  be  understood.


*


HYMN  *>.]  THE  RIG  VS  DA.  446

10  Dadhikris  hath  o’erspread  the  Fivefold  People  with  vigour,  as
the  Sun  lightens  the  waters.

May  the  strong  Steed  who  winneth  hundreds,  thousands,  requite
with  sweetness  these  my  words  and  praises.  •


HYMN  XXXIX.  Dsdhikri*.

Now  give  we  praise  to  Dadhikris  the  rapid,  and  mention  in
our  laud  the  Earth  and  Heaven.

May  the  Dawns  flushing  move  me  to  exertion,  and  bear  me
safely  over  every  trouble.

2  I  praise  the  mighty  Steed  who  fills  my  spirit,  the  Stallion

•  Dadhikrivan  rich  in  bounties.

Whom,  swift  of  foot  and  shining  bright  as  Agni,  ye,  Varuna
and  Nlitra,  gave  to  Pfirus.

3  Him  who  hath  honoured,  when  the  flame  is  kindled  at  break

of  dawn,  the  Courser  Dadhikrivau,

Him,  of  one  mind  with  Varuna  and  Mitra  may  Aditi  make
free  from  all  transgression.

4  When  wo  remember  mighty  Dadhikrivan  our  food  and  strength,

then  the  blest  name  of  Maruta,

Varuna,  Mitra,  wo  invoke  for  welfare,  and  Agni,  and  the
thundor-wiclding  Indra.

0  Both  sides  invoke  him  as  they  call  on  Indra  whon  they  stir
forth  and  turn  to  sacrificing.

To  us  have  Varuna  aud  Mitra  granted  tho  Courser  Dadhikrks,
a  guide  for  mortals.

6  So  have  I  glorified  with  praise  strong  Dadhikr&van,  conquer¬
ing  Steed.

Sweet  may  he  make  our  mouths ;  may  he  prolong  the  days  we
have  to  live.

HYMN  XL.  DadhikrAvan.


Lrr  us  recite  the  praise  of  Dadhikraran  :  may  all  the  Morn:
ings  move  me  to  exertion  :

Praise  of  the  Lord  of  Waters,  Dawn,  and  Agni,  Bfihaspati
Son  of  Angiras,  and  Sfirya.

2  Dadhikrdtan :  a  lengthened,  interchangeable  form  of  Dadhikrls.

8  AdAti :  here  a  male  deitv,  probably  Agni.

6  When  they  itir  forth  and  turn  to  tacryficing :  when  men  who  are  going  out
on  a  foray,  or  to  battle,  offer  sacrifices  for  their  fuccee*.  Or  the  meaning  may
be,  both  thoee  who  go  out  to  battle  and  those  who  remain  at  home  and
sacrifice.

6  Suxet  may  he  make  our  mouths  :  purify  our  lipe  if  we  have  spoken  wick¬
ed  words.  -

•  1  The  Lord  :  literally,  the  conqueror,  that  is,  the  winner,  the  obtainer.


4«  THE  HYUyS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

2  Brave,  seeking  war  and  booty,  dwelling  with  the  good  and

with  the  swift,  may  he  hasten  the  food  of  Dawn.

May  he  the  true,  the  fleet,  tho  lover  of  the  oourae,  the  bird¬
like  Dadhikrilvan,  bring  food,  strength,  and  light.

3  His  pinion,  rapid  runner,  fans  him  on  his  way,  aa  of  a  bird

that  hastens  onward  to  its  aim,

•'  And,  as  it  were  a  falcon's  gliding  through  the  air,  strikes
Dad hikrfi van’s  side  aa  he  speeds  on  with  might.

4  Bound  by  tho  neck  and  by  the  flanks  and  by  tho  mouth,  tho

vigorous  Courser  lends  new  swiftness  to  his  speed.

Drawing  himself  together,  as  his  strength  allows,  DadhikrAs
springs  along  the  windings  of  the  paths.

5  The  Hansa  homed  in  light,  the  Vasu  in  mid-air,  the  priest

,  beside  the  altar,  in  the  house  the  guest,

Dwollor  in  noblest  place,  mid  men,  in  truth,  in  sky,  bom  of
flood,  kiuc,  truth,  mountain,  ho  is  holy  Law.

HYMN  XLI.  Indra-Varuna.

What  laud,  0  Indra-Varuna,  with  oblation,  hath  like  tho
Immortal  Priest  obtained  your  favour!

Hath  our  effectual  laud,  addrossed  with  homage,  touched  yon,
0  Indra-Varuna,  in  spirit!

2  Ho  who  with  dainty  food  hath  won  you,  Indra  and  Varuna,
Cods,  as  his  allies  to  friendship,

Slayoth  tho  Vptras  ami  his  foes  in  battlos,  aud  through  your
mighty  favours  is  made  famous.


2  /fatten  the  food  of  Da m  ;  •  accept  the  (sacrificial)  food  at  the  time  of
the  deeirable  dawn.' — Wilson.  Thu  line  is  difficult,  and  the  meaning  ie
somewhat  obscure.

4  Lendt  new  iwiflneu  to  hie  ipttd :  I  adopt  Siyapa'a  interpretation,
tvarakai  ganlum.  Prof  Kggeling  translate*  more  literally  'speedeth  after  the
whip*  (Satapatha-Bnihmapa,  V.  1.  6.  19).

5  In  this  stanza  Dadbiknt*  is  identified  with  the  eternal  Law  of  tho
universe  and  with  all  type#  or  forms  of  the  Supreme  Being.  He  is  the
Hansa,  the  Swan  of  heaven,  or  the  Sun,  the  Vasu  in  mid-air  or  tho  Wind,
Agni  aa  the  print  and  guest  of  men.  Aa  the  Sun  be  ia  born  from,  or  amid,
kine  or  ray*  of  light  and  springs  up  from  the  celestial  ocean  and  the  mountain*
of  cloud  behind  which  he  rise*.  See  Professor  Wilson’s  note  on  the  passage.
The  stanza  is  explained  alto  in  Satapatha  BrAbmana  Vf.  7. 8.  11  (Sacred  Books
of  the  East,  XLI.  p.  281).

The  hymn  is  addressed  to  Indra-Varuna,  that  is,  Indra  and  Varuna,  con¬
jointly.

1  The  Immortal  Print :  Agni.


BYUNii. J  THE  RIQVBDA.

.1  3  Indra  and  Varuna  are  most  liberal  givers  of  treasure  to  tbe
men  who  toil  to  serve  them,

When  they,  as  Friends  inclined  to  friendship,  honoured  with
dainty  food,  delight  in  flowing  Soma.  »

4  Indra  and  Varuna,  ye  hurl,  0  Mighty,  on  him  your  strongest

flashing  bolt  of  thunder

Who  treats  us  ill,  the  robber  and  oppressor :  measure  on  him
your  overwhelming  vigour.

5  0  Indrar Varuna,  bo  ye  tho  lovors  of  this  my  song,  as  steers

who  love  tho  milch-cow.

Milk  may  it  yield  us  as,  gono  forth  to  pasture,  tho  great  Cow
pouring  out  her  thousand  rivers.

6  For  fertilo  fiolds,  for  worthy  sons  and  grandsons,  for  tho  Sun's

beauty  and  for  steer-like  vigour,

May  Indra-Varuna  with  graoious  favours  work  marvels  for  us
in  tho  stress  of  battle.

7  For  you,  as  Princes,  for  your  anoiont  kindness,  good  comrades

of  tho  man  who  sooks  for  booty,  .

Wo  choose  to  us  for  tho  dear  bond  of  friendship,  most  liberal
Iloroos  bringing  bliss  liko  paronts.

8  Showing  thoir  strongth,  thoso  hymns  for  grace,  Froo-givors  !

have  gono  to  you,  devotod,  ns  to  battlo.

For  glory  havo  they  gono,  as  milk  to  Soma,  to  Indra-Varuna
my  thoughts  and  praises.

9  To  Indra  and  to  Varuija,  desirous  of  gaming  wealth  havo

thoso  my  thoughts  proccodod.

Thoy  havo  como  nigh  to  you  as  troasu re-lovers,  liko  mares,
fleotrfooted,  oagor  for  tho  glory.

10  May  wo  oursolvoa  bo  lords  of  during  riches,  of  ample  suste¬

nance  for  car  and  horses.

So  may  tho  Twain  who  work  with  nowost  succours  bring
yoked  teams  hitherward  to  us  and  richos.

11  Como  with  your  mighty  succours,  0  yo  Mighty;  come,  Indra-

Varuna,  to  us  in  battlo.

What  time  tho  floshiug  arrows  play  in  combat,  may  wo
through  you  be  winnors  in  tho  contest.

5  Milk  may  it  yield  ui :  bring  us  a  rich  reward.  The  great  Coto :  of  plenty.

6  For  the  Sun't  beauty  :  for  long  lifo  wherein  wc  may  continue  to  /ee  the
glory  of  the  sun.

8  For  glory :  to  glorify  you.

9  Eager  for  the  glory  :  of  winning  tho  prise  in  tho  chariot-race.

1 1  Tho  hymn  ia  a  prayer  for  aid  in  a  coming  battle.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  rv.


448

HYMN  XLII.  Indra-Varupa.

I  am  the  royal  Ruler,  mine  is  empire,  as  mine  who  sway  all
V  life  are  all  Immortals.

Varuna’s  will  the  Gods  obey  and  follow.  I  am  the  King  of
men’s  most  lofty  cover.

2  I  am  King  Varuna.  To  me  were  given  these  first  existing

high  celestial  powers.

Varuna’s  will  the  Gods  obey  and  follow.  I  am  the  King  of
men’s  most  lofty  cover.

3  I  Varuna  am  Indra :  in  their  greatness,  these  the  two  wide

deep  fairly-fashioned  regions,

These  the  two  world-halves  have  I,  even  as  Tvashtar  knowing
all  beings,  joined  and  held  together.

4  I  made  to  flow  the  moisture-shedding  waters,  and  set  the

heaven  firm  in  the  seat  of  Order.

By  Law  the  Son  of  Aditi,  Law  Observer,  hath  spread  abroad
the  world  in  threefold  measure.

5  Heroes  with  noble  horses,  fain  for  battle,  selected  warriors,

call  on  me  in  combat.

I  Indra  Maghavan,  excite  the  conflict ;  I  stir  the  dust,  Lord
of  surpassing  vigour.

6  All  this  I  did.  The  Gods'  own  conquering  powor  never  im-

pcdeth  me  whom  none  opposeth.

When  lauds  and  Soma  juice  have  made  mo  joyful,  both  the
unbounded  regions  are  affrighted.

7  All  beings  know  these  deeds  of  thine :  thou  tellest  this  unto

Varuna,  thou  groat  Disposor !

Thou  art  renowned  as  having  slain  the  Vptraa.  Thou  inadest
flow  tho  floods  that  were  obstructed.

8  Our  fathers  then  were  these,  the  Seven  Rishis,  what  time  the

son  of  Durgaha  was  captive.

Varuna  add  his  siperaeasor  Indr*  severally  urge  their  claims  to  superiority,
and  the  poet  decides  between  them.  CL  X.  124.

1  Varuna  is  the  speaker  of  the  first  four  stanzas.  Men's  most  lofty  cover  ;
the  highest  heaven.

8  Indra  :  all  that  Indra  represents,  Prince  and  King  of  all.

At  Tvathtar :  or,  as  their  great  artifioer.

4  h i  the  seat  of  Order :  in  the  place  appointed  by  Law  or  the  eternal  Order
of  the  universe.  The  Son  of  Adxti  :  I,  Vanina.

5  Indr*  is  the  s|«aker  of  this  and  of  the  following  stanza.

7  The  poet  speaks.

8  Our  fathers  then  were  these  :  ‘The  seven  Pith  it  were  the  protectors  of
this  our  (kingdom).’— Wilson.  The  meaning  is  obscure.  Profoesor  Graasmann"
banishes  stanzas  8,  9,  and  10  to  the  appendix  as  late  additions  to  the  hymn.
Sflyana  says  that  Punikutsa,  ton  of  lhirgaha,  being  in  captivity,  his  wife
propitiated  the  Seven  Rishis,  who  by  the  favour  of  Indra  and  Varuna  obtain-
ed  for  her  a  son  named  Trasadasyu.  For  her :  the  wife  of  Purukutsa.


HYMN  43.]  THE  MOVED  A.  4*9

For  her  they  gained  by  sacrifice  Traaadasyu,  a  dcmi-god,  like
India,  conquering  foemon.

9  The  spouse  of  Purukutsa  gave  oblations  to  you,  0  Indra-
Varuna,  with  homage.  -  <*

Then  unto  her  ye  gave  King  Trasadasyu,  the  demi-god,  the
slayor  of  the  foeman.

10  May  we,  possessing  much,  delight  in  riches,  Gods  in  oblations
and  the  kine  in  pasture ;

And  that  Milch-cow  who  shrinks  not  from  the  milking,  0
Indra-Varuna,  give  to  us  daily.

HYMN  XLIIf.  Asvins.

Who  will  hear,  who  of  those  who  merit  worship,  which  of  all
Gods  take  ploasuro  in  our  homage  ?

On  whose  heart  shall  wo  lay  this  laud  celestial,  rich  with  fair
offerings,  dearest  to  Immortals  ?

2  Who  will  bo  graoioui  1  Who  will  come  most  quiokly  of  all

the  Gods?  who  will  bring  bliss  most  largely t
What  car  do  thoy  call  swift  with  rapid  coursers!  That  which
'the  Daughter  of  the  Sun  elected.

3  So  many  days  do  yo  como  swiftly  hither,  as  India  to  givo  holp

in  stress  of  battlo.

Descended  from  the  «ljy,  divino,  strong-pinioned,  by  which  of
all  your  powors  are  yo  most  mighty  1

4  What  is  the  prayer  that  wo  should  bring  you,  Afvins,  whoreby

yo  oomo  to  us  when  ihvocated  1

Whether  of  you  confronts  o'on  great  betrayal?.  Lovers  of
swootnoss,  Dasras,  help  and  savo  us.

5  In  tho  wide  spaco  your  chariot  reaoheth  heaven,  what  timo  it

turueth  hither  from  tho  ocoan.

Sweets  from  your  sweet  shall  drop,  lovers  of  sweetness !  These
•  have  thoy  dressed  for  you  as  dainty  viands.

6  Lot  Sindhu  with  his  wave  bedew  your  homes :  in  fiery  glow

have  tho  rod  birds  como  hither.

Obsorvod  of  all  was  that  your  rapid  going,  whereby  yo  were
the  Lords  of  Sfirya’s  Daughter.

7  Whene’er  I  gratified  you  hero  together,  your  grace  was  given

us,  0  ye  rich  in  booty.

Protect,  yo  Twain,  the  singer  of  your  praises to  you,  Nisa-
tyas,  is  my  wish  directed.  *

10  That  Milch-cow :  wealth. -

2  The  Daughter  of  the  Sun:  SClryft,  bride  of  tho  Afvins.  See  I.  116.  17.

4  Datrat :  Workers  of  marvels,  mighty  ones,  a  common  appellation  of  tho
Asvins.

6  Birds :  flying  stoeds.  Cl.  IV.  46.  4.


450


THE  BY  MSS  OP


[BOOK  IV.


HYMN  XLIV.  Asvins.'

We  will  invoke  this  day  your  car,  far-spreading,  0  Asvins,
even  the  gathering  of  the  sunlight, —

Car  pfraised  in  hymns,  most  ample,  rich  in  treasure,  fitted  with
seats,  the  car  that  beareth  SiryA.

2  Asvins,  ye  gained  that  glory  by  your  Godhead,  ye  Sons  of

Heaven,  by  your  own  might  and  power.

Food  followotb  close  upon  your  bright  appearing  when  stately
horses  in  your  chariot  draw  you.

3  Who  bringeth  you  to-day  for  help  with  offered  oblation,  or

with  hymns  to  drink  the  juices?

Who,  for  the  sacrifice’s  ancient  lover,  turneth  you  hither,
Asvins,  offering  homage  ?

4  Borne  on  your  golden  car,  ye  omnipresent !  come  to  this  sacri¬

fice  of  ours,  N Asaty as.

Drink  of  the  pleasant  liquor  of  the  Soma :  give  riches  to  tho
people  who  adore  you.

5  Como  hithorward  to  us  from  earth,  from  heaven,  borne  on

your  golden  chariot  rolling  lightly.

Suffer  not  other  worshippers  to  stay  you :  here  aro  yo  bound
by  earlier  bonds  of  friendship.  .
f»  Now  for  us  both,  mete  out,  0  Wonder-Workers,  riches  oxcoed-
ing  groat  with  storo  of  heroes,

Because  tho  mou  have  sent  you  praise,  0  Asvins,  and  Aja-
mi|has  come  to  the  laudation.

7  Whene’er  I  gratified  you  here  togethor,  your  graco  was  given
us,  0  ye  rich  in  booty.

Protect,  yo  Twain,  the  singer  of  your  praises:  to  you,
Nkaatyaa,  is  my  wish  directed.

HYMN  XLV.  A, Vina

Yonder  goes  up  that  light:  your  chariot  is  yoked  that  travels
round  upon  tho  summit  of  this  heaven.

Within  this  car  are  stored  three  kindred  shares  of  food,  and
a  skin  filled  with  meath  is  rustling  as  the  fourth.


1  The  gathering  of  the  lunlight :  Professor  Wilson  translate*,  after  SAyaoa,
'the  associator  of  the  solar  ray,’  and  observes:  '  Sangatim  goh,  is 'only
explained,  goh  tangamayildram,  the  bringer  into  union,  or  associator,  of  Oo :
what  the  latter  is  intended  for  is  not  explained,  and  the  translation  is  purely
conjectural,  founded  upon  the  connection  of  thedfvfau  with  light  or  tho  sun.’
Professor  Graatmann  t  rant  la  tee:  ‘derrur  Mikb  eilt,'  'which  hastens  to  the  milk.'

6  Both  :  priests  and  patrons.  Ajamtliae  .-  men  of  the  IUahi's  family

Tho  Rithi  of  this  and  the  remaining  hymns  of  this  Book  is  VAmadeva.

i  Three  kindred  ehartt :  shares  of  similar  food,  for  both  At  Tint  and  Sury  A,
the  skin  of  meath  being  intended  for  earthly  beings.— Ludwig.


THE  MOV  EDA.


XTMN  46.]


«1


2  Forth  come  your  viands  rich  with  store  of  pleasant  mcath,

and  cars  and  horses  at  the  flushing  of  the  dawn,

Stripping  the  covering  from  the  surrounded  gloom,  and
spreading  through  mid-air  bright  radiance  like  the  Sun.

3  Drink  of  the  mcath  with  lips  accustomed  to  the  draught ;

harness  for  the  mcath’s  sake  the  chariot  that  ye  love.
Refresh  the  way  ye  go,  refresh  the  paths  with  meath :  hither,
0  A?vins,  bring  the  skin  that  holds  the  meath.

4  The  swans  yc  have  are  friendly,  rich  in  store  of  meath,  gold-

pinioned,  strong  to  draw,  awako  at  early  mom,

Swimming  the  flood,  exultant,  fain  for  draughts  that  cheer:
ye  come  like  flios  to  our  libations  of  the  meath.

6  Well  knowing  solemn  rites  and  rich  in  mcath,  the  Area  sing
to  the  morning  Alvins  at  the  break  of  day,

When  with  pure  hands  the  prudont  onorgotio  priest  hath
with  the  stones  pressed  out  the  Soma  rich  in  meath.

6  The  rays  advancing  nigh,  chasing  with  day  tho  gloom,  sproad

through  tho  flrnmmcut  bright  radiunco  like  tho  Sun ;

And  the  Sun  h  iruossing  his  horses  gooth  forth :  ye  through
your  Godlike  nature  lot  his  paths  bo  known.

7  Devout  in  thought  I  havo  declared,  0  Asvins,  your  chariot

with  good  steeds,  which  lasts  forever,

Whorowith  ye  travol  swiftly  through  tho  regions  to  tho
prompt  worshippor  who  brings  oblation.

HYMN  XL VI.  Vlyu.  Indra-VAyu.

Drink  tho  best  draught  of  Soma  juice,  0  Viyu,  at  our  holy
rites :

For  thou  art  he  who  drinketh  first.

2  Como,  team-drawn,  with  thy  hundred  helps,  with  Indra  seated

in  tho  car,

Viyu,  and  drink  your  fill  of  juice.

3  May  steeds  a  thousand  bring  you  both,  Indra  and  V&yu,

hitherward

To  drink  the  Soma,  to  the  feast

4  For  ye,  0  Indra-VAyu,  mount  the  golden-seated  car  that  aids
The  sacrifice,  that  roaches  heaven.


4  Steam  :  tho  Aevios'  chariot- Btecda.  *

6  The  rayt  advancing  nigh :  I  follow  the  interpretation  of  Silyana  who
auppliea  '  t.ho  rayB1  and  *  tho  gloom but  the  exact  moaning  of  tho  half-lino
i«  uncertain.

**  *  —  ■  ■■

2  Drink  your  Jill ;  the  verb  ia  in  the  dual  number,  Indra  being  included.


<62  THE  HTJf.YS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

5  On  far-refulgent  chariot  come  unto  the  man  who  offers  gifts  c
Come,  Indra-Viyu,  hitherward.

6  Here.  Indra- Vi  vu,  is  the  juice :  drink  it,  accordant  with  the

Gods,

Within  the  giver’s  dwelling-place.

7  Hither,  0  Indra-Viyu,  be  your  journey :  here  unyoke  your

steeds,

Here  for  your  draught  of  Soma  juice.

HYMN  XLVII.  VSyu.  Indra*  VAyu.

VAyu,  the  bright  is  offered  thee,  best  of  the  meath  at  holy  rites.
Come  thou  to  drink  the  Soma  juioe,  God,  longed-for,  on  thy
team-drawn  car.

2  0  Viyu,  thou  and  Indra  are  meet  drinkers  of  these  Soma-

dnughts,

For  unto  you  the  drops  proceed  as  waters  gathor  to  tho  valo.

3  0  Indra-Viyu,  mighty  Twain,  speeding  together,  Lords  of

Strength,

•  Come  to  our  succour  with  your  team,  that  yo  may  drink  tho
Soma  juice.

4  Tho  longed-for  teams  which  ye  possess,  0  Heroes,  for  tho

worshippor,

Turn  to  us,  Indra-Viyu,  ye  to  whom  tho  sacrfico  is  paid.

HYMN  XLVII I.  VAyu.

Tastk  offerings  never  tasted  yet,  as  bards  enjoy  tho  fooman'a
wealth.

0  V4yu,  on  refulgent  car  come  to  the  drinking  of  the  juice.

2  Removing  curses,  drawn  by  teams,  with  Indra  seated  by  thy  sido,
0  Viyu,  on  refulgent  car  come  to  the  drinking  of  tho  juioe.

3  The  two  dark  treasuries  of  wealth  that  wear  all  beauties  wait

on  thee.

0  Viyu,  on  refulgent  car  come  to  the  drinking  of  tho  juioe.

1  The  bright :  juioe,  understood.

1  At  horde  enjoy  the  forwent  teeaUh  :  ripe  nd  riyo  aryah  :  SAyana  explains
vipo  nd  m  ‘  like  a  king  who  makes  his  enemies  tremble,’  and  rtfyo  orydh  as
'bestow  wealth  upon  the  worshipper.’  Professor  Grassinaun  translates  :  !gleich
Kcisern  spricss  des  Frommen  Gut/  *  May  the  pious  man’s  wealth  sprout  liko
twigs  or  suckers.'  Vipo  (rtpah)  may  mean  either  inspired  singers,  bards,  or
twigs,  and  arth,  of  which  aryah  is  the  genitive,  means  both  an  enemy  and  a
pious  man,  a  worshipper.  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig's  interpretation.  The
•  bards'  are  the  inspired  singers  of  the  victorious  pa*  tv  who  share  the  booty
after  the  battle.

3  The  <u>o  dark  treasuries  of  yceallh :  heaven  and  earth,  not  yet  illuminated
by  the  sun.


TUB  RTG  VEDA.  45ft

4  May  nine-and-ninety  harnessed  steeds  who  yoke  them  at  thy

will  bring  thee,

-  O  V4yu,  on  refulgent  car  come  to  the  drinking  of  thejuioe.

5  Harness,  0  Vayu,  to  thy  car  a  hundred  well-fed  tawny

steeds,

Yea,  or  a  thousand  steeds,  and  let  thy  chariot  come  to  us
with  might.

HYMN  XLIX.  Indra-Brihaapati.

Dbar  is  this  offering  in  your  mouth,  0  Indra  and  Bfihaspati :
Famed  is  tho  laud,  the  gladdening  draught.

2  This  lovely  Soma  is  effused,  0  Indra  and  Bfikaspati,

For  you,  to  drink  it  and  rejoice.

3  As  Soma-drinkers  to  our  house  como,  Indra  and  Bfihaspati —

and  Indra — to  drink  Soma  juioe.

4  Vouchsafe  us  riohos  hundredfold,  0  Indra  and  Bfihaspati,
With  storo  of  horses,  thousandfold.

5  0  Indra  aud  Bfihaspati,  wo  call  you  whon  tho  mcath  is  shed,
‘  With  songs,  to  drink  tho  Soma  juioe.

6  Drink,  Indra  and  Bvihaspati,  tho  Soma  in  tho  giver’s  houso  :
Delight  yourselves  abiding  thoro.

HYMN  L.  BrihMpati.

Him  who  with  might  hath  proppod  earth’s  ends,  who  sittoth
in  throofold  soat,  Bfihaspati,  with  thundor,

Him  of  tho  pleasant  tonguo  have  anoiont  aogos,  doep-thiuking,
.  holy  singers,  sot  before  them.

2  Wild  in  their  oourso,  in  well-marked  wiso  rejoicing  wore  thoy,
Bfihaspati,  who  pressed  around  us.

Preserve,  Bfihaspati,  the  stall  uninjured,  this  company’s  raiu-
ing,  ovor-moving  birth-place.


8  And  Indra:  the  words  indrafeha  of  the  text  aro  manifestly  superfluous.

Indra  and  Brihospati  conjointly  aro  the  deities  of  stadias  10  rad'll,  which,
with  7,  8,  and  9,  aro  ovideutly  a  late  addition  to  the  original  hymn.

1  In  threefold  teat :  heaven,  mid-air,  aud  earth.  Set  before  them ;  lor  adora¬
tion  ;  or  given  them  tho  foremost  placo  in  sacrifice.

2  They... who  pressed  around  ut ;  apparently  tire  Maruti.  The  stall  :  like
1  the  boundless  stall’  of  III.  1.  14,  the  aerial  home  of  the  Maruta.

This  company’s :  the  text  lias  only  asya,  ‘of  this.’  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig
in.  his  interpretation  of  this  very  difficult  stouza,  and  supply  ganasya,  troop  or
company,  L  e.  of  tho  Maruta.  According  to  SAyapa,  Buhaspati  is  aeked  to
protect  the  worshipper  or  inatitutor  of  the  sacrifice.


3  Have  they  ml  doxn  prvt*b!y  the  M»ruU  are  intended,  and  not  home*
SAyana  nays.  WdU  eprinjiny  from  the  mountain :  merroira  of  Soma

ico,  pressed  out  by  the  a  toots,  have  been  prepared.

4  Sevenfold  mouth . tevtn  rayt :  as  identified  with  Agni.

6  ObUruclite :  or  retentive;  the  meaning  of  fkaliydm  ia  somewhat  un-
rtain  ;  probably,  reservoir,  L  f.  holder  and  withholder  of  the  rain.  The  loud-
mliny  band :  the  Manila.

10  Rainert  of  mature:  the  meaning  of  vriehanmztd  ia  uncertain  ;  ‘strong
excellent  as  bull*,'  according  to  Ludwig  and  Graasmann.  Perhaps  ‘strong


_  about  jiour  streams  of  sweetness.

A  Brihaspati,  when  first  he  had  his  being  from  mighty  splendour
in  supremest  heaven,

Strong,  with  bis  sevenfold  mouth,  with  noise  of  thunder,  with
his  seven  rajs,  blew  and  dispersed  the  darkness.

6  With  the  loud-shouting  band  who  sang  his  praises,  with
thunder,  he  destroyed  obstructive  Vala.

Bfihaspati  thundering  drove  forth  the  cattle,  the  lowing  cows
who  make,  oblations  ready.

6  Serve  we  with  sacrifices,  gifts,  and  homage  even  thus  the

Steer  of  all  the  Gods,  the  Father.

Brihaspati,  may  we  be  lords  of  riches,  with  noble  progeny  and
store  of  heroes.

7  Surely  that  Kiug  by  power  and  might  heroic  bath  mado  him

lord  of  all  his  foes’  possessions.

Who  cherishes  Brihaspati  well-tended,  adorns  and  worships
him  as  foremost  sharer.

8  In  his  own  house  he  dwells  in  peace  aud  comfort :  to  him  for

ever  holy  food  flows  richly.

To  him  the  people  with  free  will  pay  homago — tho  King  with
whom  the  Brahman  hath  precedence.

9  Ho,  uuoppoeed,  is  master  of  tho  riches  of  his  own  ‘subjects

and  of  hostile  people.

The  Gods  uphold  that  King  with  their  protection  who  helps
the  Brahman  when  he  seeks  his  favour.

10  Indra,  Brih  mpati,  miners  of  treasure,  rejoicing  at  this  sacrifice
drink  the  Soma.

Lot  the  abundant  drops  sink  deep  within  you  :  vouchsafe  us
riches  with  full  store  of  heroes.


U  TDB  HTSfXS  OF  [ BOOK  IT:

3  Rphaspati,  from  thy  remotest  distance  have  they  sat  down
who  love  tho  law  eternal.

mtain,  which


BYMN  51.)


TUB  RIO  VELA.


455

1 1  Brihaspati  and  Indra,  make  us  prosper :  may  this  be  your
benevolence  to  us-ward.

Assist  our  holy  thoughts,  wake  up  our  spirit :  weaken  the
•  hatred  of  our  too  and  rivals.  •

HYMN  LI.  Dawn,

Forth  from  the  darkness  in  the  region  eastward  this  most
abundant  splendid  light  hath  mounted.

Now  verily  the  far-refulgent  Mornings,  Daughters  of  Heaven,
bring  wolfare  to  the  people.

2  The  richly-coloured  Dawns  have  mounted  eastward,  like

pillars  planted  at  our  sacrifices,

And,  flushing  far,  splendid  and  purifying,  unbarred  the
portals  of  tho  fold  of  darkness.

3  Dispelling  gloom  this  day  tho  wealthy  Mornings  urge  liberal

givers  to  present  their  treasures.

In  tho  unlightened  depth  of  darkness  round  thorn  lot  niggard
traffickers  sleop  unawakened.

4  0  Goddesses,  is  this  your  car,  I  ask  you,  anoiont  this  day,  or

is  it  now,  ye  Mornings,

Wherewith,  rich  Dawns,  yo  scok  with  wealth  Navagva,
Dasagva  Angira,  tho  sovon-toned  singer  1

5  With  homos  harnessed  by  eternal  Order,  Goddossos,  swiftly

round  tho  worlds  yo  travol,

Arousing  from  their  rest,  0  Dawns,  tho  slooping,  and  all  that
lives,  man,  bird,  and  beast,  to  motion.

6  Whioh  among  these  is  oldest,  and  whore  is  she  through  whom

they  fixed  tho  Kibhus’  regulations  1
What  time  the  splendid  Dawns  go  forth  for  splendour,  they
•  arc  not  known  apart,  alike,  unwasting.

7  Blest  were  these  Dawns  of  old,  shining  with  succour,  true

with  the  truth  that  springs  from  holy  Order ;

With  whom  tho  toiling  worshippor,  by  praises,  hymning  and
lauding,  soon  attained  to  riches.


3  Niggard  traffickers  :  wealthy  churls  who  offer  no  sacrifice*.

4  Navagva,  Dafagva:  individual  member*  of  the  so-named  mythical  priestly
families  which  are  frequently  associated  with  the*  Angiraaea.  Angira:  a
member  of  tho  family  of  Angira*.  Seven-toned.^  literally,  ‘ seven-mouthed,’
using  in  hia  hymns  tho  seven  metre*  of  the  Veda,  or  ropoating  hymns  of
seven  kinds.

6  The  Ribhus'  regulations :  tho  seasons  of  tho  year,  tho  RibhUs  being
cosmic  powers  and  closely  connected  with  tho  Ritus.


THE  BY  HNS  OP


456


[book  /r.


8  Hithor  from  eastward  all  at  once  they  travel,  from  one  place

spreading  in  the  self-same  manner."

Awaking,  from  the  seat  of  holy  Order  the  Godlike  Dawns
come  nigh  like  troops  of  cattle.

9  Thus  they  go  forth  with  undimiuished  colours,  these  Morn¬

ings  similar,  in  self-same  fashion,

Concealing  the  gigautic  might  of  darkness  with  radiant  bodies
bright  and  pure  and  shining.

10  0  Goddesses,  0  Heaven’s  refulgent  Daughters,  bestow  upon

us  wealth  with  store  of  children.

As  from  our  pleasant  place  of  rest  we  rouse  us  may  wo  be
masters  of  horoic  vigour.

11  Well-skillod  in  lore  of  sacrifice,  ye  Daughters  of  Heaven,

refulgent  Dawns,  1  thus  address  you.

May  wo  be  glorious  among  the  people.  May  Heaven  vouchsafe
us  this,  and  Earth  the  Goddess.

HYMN  LTI.  Dawn.

'  This  Lady,  giver  of  delight,  after  her  Sister  shining  forth,
Daughter  of  Heaven,  hath  shown  herself.

2  Unfailing,  Mother  of  the  Kinc,  in  oolour  like  a  bright  rod  mnro,
The  Dawn  became  the  Alvins’  Friend.

3  Yea,  and  thou  art  tho  Asvins'  Frioud,  the  Mother  of  the  Kino

art  thou :

0  Dawn,  thou  rulest  over  wealth.

4  Thinking  of  thee,  0  Joyous  One,  as  her  whodriveth  hate  away,
We  woke  to  moot  thee  with  our  lauds.

5  Our  eyes  behold  thy  bless&l  rays  like  troops  of  cattle  loosed

to  feed.

Dawn  hath  filled  full  the  wide  expanse.

6  When  thou  hast  filled  it,  Fulgent  One !  thou  layest  bare  the

gloom  with  light.

After  thy  nature  aid  us,  Dawn.

7  Thou  ovorspreadest  heaven  with  rays,  the  dear  wide  region  of

mid-air

With  thy  bright  shining  lustre,  Dawn.


8  Like  troops  of  cattle  :  going  forth  to  paature  at  day-break.

1  After  her  Sister :  when  Night  ha*  departed-

3  TheJCine :  the  early  ray*  of  light,  or  fleecy  cloud*  of  morning.  Friend
of  the  Jfvins  :  as  being  worshipped  *t  the  *ame  time.

4  Driveth  halt  mcay ;  eapecialy  the  malignity  of  the  evil  »pirit*  of  the  night.


ffYMN  51.)


THE  MOVED  A.


457


•  HYMN  LIU.  Savitar.

Op  Savitar  the  God,  the  sapient  Asura,  we  crave  this  great
gift  which  is  worthy  of  our  choice,  ,

Wherewith  he  freely  grants  his  worshipper  defence.  This  with
his  rays  the  Great  God  hath  vouchsafed  to  us.

2  Sustainer  of  the  heaven,  Lord  of  the  whole  world’s  life,  the

Sage,  he  putteth  on  his  golden-coloured  mail.

Clear-sighted,  spreading  far,  filling  the  spacious  realm,  Savitar
hath  brought  forth  miss  that  deservoth  laud.

3  Ho  hath  filled  full  the  rogions  of  the  heaven  and  earth  :  the

God  for  his  own  strengthening  waketh  up  the  hymn.

Savitar  hath  stretched  out  his  arms  to  cherish  life,  producing
with  his  rays  and  lulling  all  that  moves.

4  Lighting  all  living  creaturos,  ne’er  to  be  docoivcd,  Savitar,

God,  protects  oach  holy  ordinance.

Ho  hath  stre tehed  out  his  arms  to  all  the  folk  of  earth,  and,
with  his  laws  observed,  rulos  his  own  mighty  courso.

5  Savitar  thrice  surrounding  with  his  mightiness  mid-air,  throo

regions,  and  the  triplo  sphero  of  light,

Sots  tho  three  hoavons  in  motion  and  the  throefold  oarth,  and
willingly  protects  us  with  his  triple  law.

6  Most  gracious  God,  who  brings  to  lifo  and  lulls  to  rest,  ho

who  controls  tho  world,  what  moves  not  and  what  movos,
May  he  vouchsafe  us  shelter, — Savitar  tho  God, — for  tranquil
life,  with  triplo  bar  against  distress.

7  With  the  year’s  seasons  hath  Savitar,  God,  como  nigh  :  may

he  prosper  our  homo,  give  food  and  noble  sons.

May  he  invigorate  us  through  tho  days  and  nights,  and  may
lie  send  us  opulonco  with  progeny.

HYMN  LIV.  '  •  Savitar.

Now  must  we  praiso  and  honour  Savitar  the  God :  at  this
timo  of  the  day  the  men  must  call  to  him,

Him  who  distributes  wealth  to  Manu’s  progeny,  that  ho  may
grant  us  hero  riches  most  excellent.

2  For  thou  at  first  producest  for  the  holy  Gods  tho  noblest  of
all  portions,  immortality :

Thereafter  as  a  gift  to  men,  0  Savitar,  thou  opencst  existence,
life  succeeding  life.

1  Savitar :  the  Sun  ne  the  great  vivificr,  generator,  and  producer.

8  Lulling  :  the  word  in  tho  text,  nivtftyan,  mean*  *  bringing  to  rest,’  SAyapa
explains  it  by  ‘  establishing  in  their  several  duties.’

6  Triple  hxo :  according  to  SAyana,  his  functions  aa  distributor  of  heat,  rain,
and  cold.  Three  heavent :  boo  I.  105.  5.


THE  BY  ays  OP


453


f. BOOK  IV.


3  If  we,  men  as  we  are,  have  sinned  against  the  Gods  through

want  of  thought,  in  weakness,  or  through  insolence,
Absolve  us  from  the  guilt  and  make  us  free  from  sin,
0  Savitar,  alike  among  both  Gods  and  men.

4  None  may  impede  that  power  of  Saritar  the  God  whereby  he

will  maintain  the  universal  world.

What  the  fair-fingered  God  brings  forth  on  earth's  expanse  or
in  the  height  of  heaven,  that  work  of  his  stands  sure.

8  To  lofty  hills  thou  sendest  those  whom  Indra  leads,  and
givest  fixed  abodes  with  houses  unto  these.

However  they  may  fly  and  draw  themselves  apart,  still,
Savitar,  they  stand  obeying  thy  behest.

6  May  the  libations  poured  to  thee  thrice  daily,  day  after  day,
0  Savitar,  bring  us  blessing.

May  Indra,  Heaven,  Earth,  Sindhu  with  the  Waters,  Aditi
with  Adityas,  give  us  shelter.

HYMN  LV.  Vi-vsdevM.

Wuo  of  you,  Yasus,  savetbt  who  protectethj  0  Hoaveu  and
Earth  and  Aditi,  preserve  us,

Yaroyo,  Mitra,  from  the  strouger  mortal.  Gods,  which  of  you
at  sacrifice  givoth  comfort  1

2  They  who  with  laud  oxtol  the  ancient  statutes,  when  thoy

shine  forth  infallible  dividers,

Havo  ordered  as  perpetual  Ordaiuers,  and  beamod  as  holy-
though  ted  Wonder-Workers.

3  Tho  Housewife  Goddess,  Aditi,  and  Sindhu,  the  Goddcas  Svasti

I  implore  for  friendship :

And  may  tho  unobstructed  Night  and  Morning  both,  day  and
night,  provide  for  our  protection.

4  Aryaman,  Varuiya  have  disclosed  tho  pathway,  Agni  as  Lord  of

Strength  the  road  to  welfare

Lauded  in  manly  mode  may  Indra-Yishnu  grant  us  their  power¬
ful  defence  and  -heltor.

5  To  lofty  kith:  '  Thou  elevates*  those,  of  whom  Indra  ia  chief,  above  the
>ut  cloud*  :  for  these,  (thy  worahippera),  thou  providwt  dwelling  (place*)
filled  with  habitation*. '—Wilson.  'The  difficulties  in  connection  with  thi*
venw  are  very  great,  and  perhaje  insuperable, '  say*  Professor  Pctcreon,  in
whose  Byrnufiom  Ou  Rigvtda  (Bombay  Sanskrit  Seriee,  No.  XXXVI.)  the
Sanskrit  (tudent  will  find  a  full  statement  of  these  difficulties  and  the  inter¬
pretation*  proposed  by  SAyana  and  by  European  scholar*,  not  one  of  which
i*  convincing.

2  They:  the  deitie*  of  light ;  * dividers '  a*  separating  day  from  night,  and
‘Ordain era '  aa  firing  and  regulating  the  year  and  the  seasons.

3  Housewife  Goddess :  as  being  the  mother  of  the  God*.  Svagti :  Prosperity.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  56.]


459


5  I  have  besought  the  favour  of  tho  Maruts,  of  Parvata,  of  Bhaga
God  who  rescues.

From  trouble  caused  by  man  the  Lord  preserve  us;  from  woo
sent  by  his  friend  let  Mitra  save  us.  •

G  Agree,  through  those  our  watery  oblations,  Goddesses,  Heaven
and  Earth,  with  Ahibudhnya.

As  if  to  win  tho  sea,  the  Gharma- heaters  have  opened,  as  thoy
OOmo  anear,  tho  rivors.

7  May  Goddess  Aditi  with  Gods  dofoud  us,  save  us  tho  saviour

God  with  cnro  unceasing.

Wo  daro  not  stint  tho  saorod  food  of  Mitra  and  Varuua  upon
tho  back  of  Agni.

8  Agni  is  Sovran  Lord  of  wealth,  Agni  of  groat  prosperity  :

May  ho  bestow  theso  gifts  on  us.

!>  Hither  to  us,  rich  pleasant  Dawn,  bring  many  things  to  bo
desired,

Thou  who  hast  ample  storo  of  wealth.

10  So  then  may  Bhaga,  Savitar,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,  Indra,
with  bounty  come  to  us.

HYMN  LVI.  Heaven  and  Earth.


May  mighty  Heaven  and  Earth,  most  meet  for  honour,  be
present  here  with  light  and  gleaming  splendours;

When,  tixing  them  apart,  vast,  most  extensive,  the  Steer  roars
loudly  in  far-reaching  courses.

2  Tho  Goddesses  with  Gods,  holy  with  holy,  tho  Two  stand  pour¬
ing  out  their  rain,  exhaustless :

Faithful  and  guileless,  having  Gods  for  children,  leaders  of
sacrifice  with  shining  splendours.

5  The  Lord:  Varupa.  Sent  by  hit  Friend ;  Varuna,  a a  tho  groat  chastiser  of
men.  Profeaaor  Roth,  whom  Professor  Gr&tsmaim  follow#,  take#  janydt  to
mean  oausod  by  strangers,  and  mitrlyd:  caused  by  frlonda.

<J  Thin  stanta  is  diftlcult  and  its  meaning  ia  obeouro.  Tho  words  dpyebhir
ithfaih,  'through  watery  oblation#, '  aro  rendered  by  Profeaaor  Groanmann,
'  nebet  deu  orwUnaohten  Waaaergdttsrn,'  ‘  togothor  with  tho  wishod-for
Water- God#.'  Ahibudhnya:  tho  Dragon  of  tho  Doop,  is  a  divine  boing  who
dwell#  in  tho  dopthn  of  tho  ocean  of  air.  Cf  I.  186.  6  ;  11.  31.  6.  At  yf  to
win  the  tea  :  a#  if  wishing  to  gain  tho  oooan  of  abundant  wealth.  The  Oharma .
heater t :  tho  priosts  who  prepare  tho  oblation  of  hot  milk  or  othor  hot
boverago  which  i#  offorod  especially  to  tho  Afvins.  Or  Gharma  may  mean  tho
oaldron  or  voaaol  in  which  tho  oblation  is  boiled.  Tho  moaning  scorn#  to  bo,
an  Professor  Ludwig  explain#  it,  that  tho  priest#,  sacrificing,  and  hymning
lead  down  towards  thoroselve*  tho  river#  of  tho  ocean  of  plenty.

7  The  taviour  QoJ :  Indra.  Upon  the  back  of  Agni :  poured  upon  tho  flames.


1  The  Steer:  according  to  SAyapa,  Parjanya  tho  God  of  rain-cloud*.

2  Pouring  out  their  ruin :  bestowing  good  gifts.


460


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  IV.


3  Sure  in  the  worlds  he  was  a  skilful  Craftsman, he  who  produced
these  Twain  the  Earth  and  Heaven.

Wise,  with  his  power  he  brought  both  realms  together,  spacious
and  Qeep,  well-fashioned,  unsupported.

4  0  Heaven  and  Earth,  with  one  accord  promoting,  with  high
protection  as  of  Queens,  our  welfare,

Far-reaching,  universal,  holy,  guard  us.  May  we,  car-borno,
through  song  be  victors  ever.

5  To  both  of  you,  0  Heaven  and  Earth,  we  bring  our  lofty  song
of  praise,

Pure  Ones  1  to  glorify  you  both.

6  Ye  sanctify  each  other’s  form,  by  your  own  proper  might
ye  rule,

And  from  of  old  observe  the  Law.

7  Furthering  and  fuelling,  ye,  0  Mighty,  perfect  Mitra’s  Law.
Ye  sit  around  our  sacrifice.

HYMNLVII.  Kahetrapati.  Etc.

Wk  through  tho  hIaatcHof_lhe  Field,  even  as  through  a
friend,  obtain  —

What  nourishoth  our  kine  and  steeds.  In  such  may  ho  bo
good  to  us.

2  As  tho  cow  yieldeth  milk,  pour  for  us  freely,  Lord  of  tho  Field,
the  wave  that  heareth  sweetness,

Distilling  meatb,  well-purified  liko  butter,  and  let  tho  Lords
of  holy  Law  be  gracious.

3  Sweot  bo  the  plants  for  us,  the  heavens,  tho  waters,  and  full
of  sweets  for  us  bo  air’s  mid-region.

May  tho  Field’s  Lord  for  us  be  full  of  sweetness,  and  may  we
follow  after  him  uninjured.

4  Happily  work  our  steers  and  men,  may  tho  plough  furrow

happily.

Happily  be  the  traces  bound ;  happily  may  he  ply  tho  goad.

'4  A  i  of  Quteru :  I  follow  with  Home  hesitation  Professor  Ludwig's  inter¬
pretation  of  patnh<iHbMr.  Professor  Wilson,  following  SSyana,  translates,

‘  with  our  spacious  dwellings,  inkabited  by  our  tciret.'

5  These  three  concluding  verses  form  in  reality  another  hymn.

In  this  hymn  various  agricultural  personifications  are  addressed,  the  deity
of  the  first  three  stanzas  being  called  Kshetrapati,  of  the  fourth  S-ina.  of
tho  fifth  and  eighth  Sun&slra,  of  the  rixth  and  seventh  Sit*.  *  It  is  said  in
the  Grihya  Sfltras  that  each  verse  is  to  be  silently  repeated,  with  an  oblation
to  fire,  at  the  commencement  of  ploughing  ’ — Wilson.

1  The  Mat  Ur  of  Du  Puld:  KiJutrapali,  the  popular  Genius  Loci,  said  to
mean  either  Rudra  or  Agni.


r


J0T.V.V  58.]  •  THE  RIQVBD A.  461

5  Suna  and  Sira,  welcome  ye  this  laud,  and  with  the  milk  which

ye  have  made  in  heaven
Bedew  ye  both  this  earth  of  ours.

6  Auspioious  Sltft,  come  thou  near :  we  venerate  and  worship  thee
That  thou  mayst  bless  and  prosper  us  and  bring  us  fruits

abundantly.

7  May  Indra  press  tho  furrow  down,  may  Pushan  guide  its

oourso  aright.

May  sho,  as  rich  in  milk,  bo  drained  for  us  through  each
succeeding  year.

8  Happily  lot  the  shares  turn  up  tho  ploughland,  happily  go  the

ploughors  with  the  oxon.

With  meath  and  milk  Parjanya  make  us  happy.  Grant  us
prosperity,  Suna  aud  Sira.

HYMN  LVIII.  Ohriu.

Forth  from  tho  ocean  sprang  the  wave  of  sweetness :  togother
with  the  stalk  it  turned  to  Amrit,

That  which  is  holy  oil’s  mysterious  titlo  :  but  tho  Gods’  tongue
is  truly  Amrit’s  ccutre.


5  Suna  and  Sira:  two  deities  or  deified  objects  who  bless  or  are  closely  con¬
nected  with  agriculture.  According  to  Ydska  Suna  (the  auspicious)  is  VAyu,
and  Sira  (plough)  is  Aditya  or  the  Sun  Professor  Roth  conjectures  that  tho
words  mean  here  ploughshare  and  plough.  Professor  Gras; maim  translates  ;

1 0  Pflug  und  Lenkor,’  ‘plough  and  ploughman.’.

6  SUd ;  the  Furrow  or  Husbandry  personified  and  addressed  as  a  deity  ;
in  after  time  tho  heroino  of  tho  RAmAyana.

7  Indra  :  as  the  God  who  sands  the  ueoessary  rain,  Indra  is  prayed  to  bless
tho  work  by  pressing  down  and  deepening  the  furrow.  ‘May  Indra  take  hold
of  Sitd‘ — Wllaon.  May  the,  ai  rich  in  milk  :  according  to  the  Scholiast,  at,
sho,  hero  moans  tho  sky.

Tho  hymn  Is  in  praise  of  GArita,  the  clarified  butter  or  oil  used  in  sacrifices,
but  a  ohoico  of  doitios  is  offorod  in  tho  Index— Agni  or  Sflrya,  Waters,  Cows,
or  OhfitA.  It  is,  as  Profosaor  Wilson  observes,  ‘  a  good  specimen  of  Vaidik
vaguonoss,  and  mystification,  and  of  tho  strait*  to  which  commonUtors  aro  pub
to  oxtraot  an  intelligible  moaning  from  tho  text,’

1  It  would  bo  fruitless,  as  Professor  Ludwig  romsrks,  to  repeat  all  tho
various  explanations  which  SAyana  gives  of  tho  first  lino  of  this  itansa  ;  they
only  show  tho  utter  uncertainty  of  tradition  in  reference  to  tho  passage.  For
instanoe,  tamutlrd,  ocean,  is  said  to  meau,  sacrificial  fire  ;  or  celestial  flro  ;  or
tho  firmament  ;  or  tho  udder  of  tho  cow  ;  and  drrnf,  wave,  may  accordingly
mean  reward  ;  or  rain  ;  or  butter.  Professor  Ludwig  thinbi  that  the  sense  of
the  stauaa  may  be  :  the  life-giving  essence  which  develops  itself  out  of  the
world-ocean  turns  into  Soma  in  tho  Moon,  hut  it  is  neither  of  theso  two,  but
the  tongue  of  the  Gods  (Agni  1)  from  whioh  the  Amrit  proceeds  and  to  which
it  returns.  But  sec  A.  Hillebraudt,  Vedische  Mythologie,  I.  321,  322.


462  TBS  BYMNS  OP  [BOOK  IV.

2  Let  us  declare  aloud  the  name  of  Ohptai  and  at  this  sacrifice
hold  it  up  with  homage.

So  le^thc  BrahmaU  hear  the  praise  wo  utter.  This  hath  the
four-horned  Buffalo  omitted.

•3  Four  aro  his  horns,  three  aro  the  feot  that  bear  him  j  his  heads
aro  two,  his  hands  arc  soven  in  number.

Bound  with  a  triple  bond  tho  Steer  roars  loudly  :  the  mighty
God  hath  outcrcd  in  to  mortals.

4  That  oil  in  triplo  shape  tho  Gods  discovered  laid  down  within
tho  Cow,  concealed  by  Papis.

Indra  produco.1  ouo  shape,  Sflrya  anothor :  by  their  own  powor
thoy  formed  tho  third  from  Vena.

6  From  inmost  reservoir  in  countloss  channels  flow  down  these
rivere  which  tho  foe  beholds  not.

I  look  upon  the  streams  of  oil  dosconding,  aud  lo !  tho  Golden
Iieed  is  thcro  among  them.

6  Like  rivers  our  libations  flow  together,  cleansing  themsclvos
in  iumoat  heart  and  spirit.


The  Brahman :  according  to  Mahldhsra,  the  ritvij  or  priest.  Probably
Agni  is  meant.  The  last  half-lino  of  the  etonra  is  trr&nelated,  after  SAynya,
by  Professor  Wilson:  ‘the  fair-complexioned  deity  perfects  this  rite,’ tho
epithet ‘four-horned  ’  being  transferred  to  ‘Brahman/  The  God  maybe
called  a  bufala  ( gaunt,  Bos  Gaurus)  ns  a  type  of  extraordinary  strength.  Maht¬
dhara  explains  gaurd  by  yajfta,  sacrifice,  having  four  horns,  that  is,  four  offi¬
ciating  priest*.

3  Four  are  his  harm :  the  four  horn*  of  Agni  as  identified  with  sacrifice  are
said  by  SAyona  to  be  the  four  Vedas,  and,  if  identified  with  Aditya,  the  four
cardinal  points  The  three  feet  are,  in  the  former  case,  the  three  daily  sacri¬
fices,  in  the  latter,  morning,  noon,  and  evening  The  two  heads  are,  in  the
former  case,  the  flrahmtudana  and  tho  Praeargya  ceremonies,  in  tho  latter,
day  and  flight  Similarly,  the  men  hands  are  explained,  alternatively,  as  the
seven  raotres  of  the  Veda  or  the  seven  rays  of  tho  Sun  j  and  the  triple  bond
as  the  Mantra,  Kalpu,  and  HrAKu\ur}n,  prayer,  ceremonial,  and  rationale,  of
the  Veda,  or  the  three  regions,  heaven,  firmament,  ami  earth.  The  Steer  is,
either  as  sacrifice  or  Aditya,  tho  pourcr  down  of  rowurda,  and  tho  loud  roar¬
ing  is  tho  sound  of  the  repetition  of  tho  texts  of  tho  Veda.  Mahldhara's
explanation  differs  from  that  of  SAyoyo.  Tho  four  horns  aro  priosU ;  or  nouns,
verbe,  prepositions,  and  particles  ;  tho  threo  feot  are  the  Vedas,  or  the  first,
second,  and  third  persons,  or  tho  past,  present,  and  future  tenses  ;  tho  two
heads  are  two  eaonfiocs,  or  the  agent  and  object ;  tho  seven  hands  aro  the
motres  or  the  coses  of  tho  noun  ;  aud  tho  three  bonda  are  the  three  daily
sacrifices,  or  tho  singular,  dual,  and  plural  numbers.  Sco  Wilson’s  note.

4  In  triple, shape:  as  milk,  cards,  and  butter,  acoording  to  Styopa.  Tho
meaning  seems  to  be  that  Indra,  SArya,  and  Vena  (who  is  probably  Agni),
restored  the  power  of  the  elements  of  sacrifice  respectively  in  heaven,  tho
firmament,  and  the  earth,  after  they  had  been  rendered  ineffectual  for  a  timo
by  the  malignant  Pome.

5  The  Ooldtn  Feed :  Celestial  Agni.


BYMti  58.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.

The  streams  of  holy  oil  poor  swiftly  downward  like  the  wild
beasts  that  fly  before  the  bowman.

7  As  rushing  down  the  rapids  of  a  river,  flow  swifter,  than  the
wind  the  vigorous  currents,

The  streams  of  oil  in  swelling  fluctuation  like  a  rod  coursor
bursting  through  the  fences.

K  Like  women  at  a  gathering  fair  to  look  on  and  gently  smiling,
they  incline  to  Agni.

The  streams  of  holy  oil  attain  tho  fuel,  and  Jitavedas  joyfully
receives  them.  *  J

y  maidens  deck  themselves  with  gay  adornment  to  join  tho
bridal  feast,  I  now  behold  them.

Where  Soma  flows  and  sacrifice  is  ready,  thither  the  streams
of  holy  oil  arc  running.

10  Send  to  our  eulogy  a  herd  of  cattle  :  bestow  upon  us  excellent

possessions.

Hear  to  the  Gods  the  sacrifice  we  offer :  the  streams  of  oil  flow
pure  and  full  of  sweetness.

1 1  The  universe  depends  upon  tby  power  and  might  within  the

sea,  within  the  heart,  within  all  life.

May  we  attain  that  sweetly-flavoured  wave  of  thine,  brought,
at  its  gathering,  o’er  the  snrfaee  of  the  floods.


10  Stnd  to  our  eulogy  a  herd  of  cattle :  tLia  i»  SSran.’e  interpretation.  The
(Jodn  are  addroued.  and  asked  to  reward  the  dugera.

V  nV  po*fT  :  AgniY  U  the  tea  :  in  the  aerial  ocean,  the  firmament,  in
which  Agni  u  present  a.  lightning.  Within  the  heart :  aa  VaisvJnia>a,  belong¬
ing  to  all  men.  Within  all  lift ;  at  the  vital  principle,  or  heat.  The
u  tho  butter  of  the  oblation.


BOOK  THE  FIFTH.


HYMN  I.  Agni

Aoni  is  wakened  by  the  people’s  fuel  to  moot  the  Dawn  who
comoth  like  a  milch-cow.

Liko  young  trees  shooting  up  on  high  their  branohos,  his  flamos
are  rising  to  tho  vault  of  houvon.

2  For  worship  of  tho  Gods  the  Priest  was  wakened  :  at  morning

gracious  Agni  hath  arisen.

Kindled,  his  radiant  might  is  made  apparent,  and  tho  groat
Deity  set  free  from  darknoss.

3  When  he  hath  stirred  the  lino  of  his  attendants,  with  tho  pure

milk  pure  Agni  is  anointed.

The  strength-bestowing  gift  is  then  mado  ready,  whioh  spread
in  front,  with  tongues,  erect,  he  drinkoth.

4  The  spirits  of  the  pious  turn  together  to  Agni,  as  the  oyes  of

all  to  Surya.

He,  when  both  Dawns  of  different  hues  have  borne  him,  springs
up  at  daybreak  as  a  strong  white  charger.

5  The  noble  One  was  born  at  days’  beginning,  laid  red  in  colour

mid  the  well-laid  fuel.

Yielding  in  every  house  his  seven  rich  treasures,  Agni  ia  seat¬
ed,  Priest  most  skilled  in  worship.

6  Agni  hath  sat  him  down,  a  I’neat  most  skilful,  on  a  sweet¬

smelling  plaoe,  his  Mother’s  bosom.

Young,  faithful,  sage,  preeminent  o’er  many,  kindled  among
the  folk  whom  ho  sustaineth.

7  This  Singer  excellent  at  sacrifices,  Agni  the  Priest,  they  glorify

with  homage.

Him  who  spread  out  both  worlds  by  Law  Eternal  they  balm
with  oil,  strong  Steed  who  never  faileth.


1  young  trees :  tho  moaning  of  yahvdh'  horo  i*  uncertain.  '  Liko  birds  (  f  )
flying  up  (or  liko  strong  mon  roaohing  up)  to  a  braooh'  (M.  MUller).

8  Tht  line  of  Aio  attendants  :  tho  row  of  ministering  priosts,  tho  pooplo  of
st.  1.  But  tho  exact  meaning  of  tho  words  of  tho  text  is  uncertain.  *

4  To  SQrya:  to  the  Sun.  Both  Dawns  :  Night  and  Morning.

.  6  Sevea  rich  treasures  :  wealth  of  various  sorts.

6  Bis  Mother's  boson :  tho  altar  raised  above  the  ground.

80


466  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Y.

8  He,  worshipful  House-Friend,  in  his  homo  is  worshipped,  our

own  auspioious  guest,  lauded  by  sages.

That  strength  the  Bull  with  thousand  horns  possesses.

In  might,  0  Agni,  thou  oxccllost  others.

9  Thou  quickly  passest  by  all  others,  Agni,  for  him  to  whom
■  *  thou  hast  appeared  moat  lovely,

Wondrously  fair,  adorable,  effulgent,  tho  guost  of  men,  the
darling  of  tho  poople.

10  To  thee,  Most  Youthful  God  !  to  thee,  0  Agni,  from  near  and

far  €ho  pooplo  bring  thoir  tribute.

..  Mark  well  the  prayer  of  him  who  boat  oxtols  thoo.  Great,
high,  auapioioua,  Agni,  is  thy  shelter.

11  Aaeond  to  day  thy  splendid  car,  0  Agni,  in  splendour,  with  tho

Holy  Ones  around  it.

Knowing  the  paths  by  mid-air’s  spacious  region  bring  hithor
Gods  to  feast  on  our  oblation.

12  To  him  adorable,  sage,  strong  and  mighty  we  have  sung  forth

our  song  of  praise  and  homage.

Gavishthira-hath  raised  with  prayer  to  Agni  this  laud  far-reach¬
ing,  like  gold  light  to  heaven.

HYMN  II.  Agni.

The  youthful' Mother  keeps  the  Boy  in  secret  pressed  to  her
•  close,  nor  yields  him  to  the  Father.

But,  when  he  lies  upon  the  arm,  the  people  see  his  unfading
oountenance  before  them.

2  What  child  is  this  thou  carriest  as  handmaid,  0  Youthful  One  ?

The  ConsortrQueon  hath  borne  him.

The  Babe  unborn  increased  through  many  autumns.  '  I  saw
him  born  what  time  his  Mother  bare  him.

3  I  saw  him  from  afar  gold-toothed,  bright-coloured,  hurling
.  his  weapons  from  his  habitation,

8  T/u  Bull  with  lAoutand  A ornt :  Agni  a*  tho  Sun  with  his  counties*  rays.

1  Tho  kindling  of  tho  aacrifloial  llro  is  figuratively  described.  Tho  lower
piece  of  wood  retains  tho  latent  spark  and  will  not  give  it  up  to  tho  yajamdna
or  worshipper  until  ho  has  generated  it  by  attrition.  When  tho  firo  has  boon
produced,  and  U  shown  liko  a  child  that  is  oarriod  on  tho  arm,  it*  brightness
U  opporont  to  all.  This  seems  to  bo  tho  moaning  of  tho  sUnza  ;  but  to  arrive
at  it  aralnati  must  bo  road  instead  of  thoaratail  of  tho  text ;  and  this  or  some
similar  alteration  is  requirod  by  the  metre  But  see  Ludwig's  Commentary.

2  The  meauing  is  obacure  Tho  handmaid  and  tho  Comort-Quetn  (mdhiiht)
are  perhaps  tho  two  fire-sticks.  Tho  fire  thus  produced  is  not  tho  genuine
Agni,  who  is  bom  as  lightning  from  the  cloud.

3  I  offered  sweet  libations  of  Soma  juice  to  Agni  when  I  beheld  him  in  the

form  of  lightning,  and  consequently  the  godless  who  do  not  acknowledge  Indra
are  uaablo  to  injure  me.  >  »


THE  MOVED  A.


HYMH  2.]


«J7


What  time  T  gave  him  Amrit  free  from  mixture.  How  can
the  Indraleas,  the  hyrnnleas  harm  met

4  I  aaw  him  moving  from  the  place  he  dwells  in,  even  with  a  -

herd,  brilliantly  shining.

Theso  seized  him  not :  ho  had  been  bom  already.  They  who
woro  grey  with  ago  again  grow  youthful.

5  Who  separate  my  young  bull  from  the  cattle,  they  whose  pro¬

tector  was  in  truth  no  stranger  ?

Lot  those  whose  hands  have  seized  upon  them  free  them.  May
ho,  observant,  drive  the  herd  to  us-wnrd.

6  Mid  mortal  men  the  godloss  have  soeretod  tho  King  of  all  who

livo,  home  of  the  people.

So  may  the  prayers  of  Atrigive  him  freedom.  Reproached  in
turn  be  thoso  who  now  reproach  him.

7  Thou  from  the  stake  didst  loose  e’en  Sunahsepa  bound. for  a

thousand  ;  for  he  prayed  with  fervour.

So,  Agni,  loose  from  us  the  bonds  that  bind  us,  when  thou  art
seated  here,  0  Priest  who  knowest.

8  Thou  hast  sped  from  mo,  Agni,  in  thine  anger :  this  the  protec¬

tor  of  Gods’  Laws  hath  told  me.

Indra  who  knoweth  bent  his  eye  upon  thee  :  by  him  instructed
^nrl  come,  0  Agni.

9  Agni  shines  far  and  wide  with  lofty  splendour,  and  by  his
/  greatness  makes  all  things  apparent.

fcfe  conquers  godless  and  malign  enchantment*,  and  sharpens
both  his  horns  to  gore  tho  Rakshos.

4  £v*n  ai  with  a  herd :  Agni  U  hero  represented  aa  tho  Sun  with  hia  hoot  of
raye  Thru  icixed  Mm  not :  tho  Dawno  could  not  detain  him  :  the  8un  waa
too  powerful.  But  the  moaning  of  *  theae,’  without  a  aubatantivo,  it
aomowhat  uncertain.  They  t oho  were  grey :  the  anoiont  flamea  of  tho  Sun  re-
cover  their  youth  oud  otvength.  Or  the  half-line  may  be  rendered :  The
Dawn*,  tho  youthful  Maiden*,  grow  docrepit  ’  Thla  ia  Profoaaor  Ludwig  a
interpretation,  and  it  haa  much  to  reoommond  it.

5  ThU  stanza  ia  axtramaly  obacure.  It  may  refer  to  aome  actual  occurrence
to  which  a  mythical  colouring  haa  been  addod.  '  What  cnomloa  have  despoiled
my  kingdom  f '  ia  SAyapa'a  explanation  of  tho  flret  half-lino.

d  Thla  stanza  appear*  to  refor  to  aome  contention  between  tho  doacondanta
of  Atri  and  aome  other  priestly  family,  perhaps  tho  Bhfigus,  aa  Profoaaor  Lud-

athinke,  regarding  the  worship  of  Agni.  Home  of  the  people :  Agni ;  •  th#
um  of  men.’ — Wilaon.

7  funahfepa:  eeo  I.  24.  Bound  for  a  thou  land. :  bought  for  a  thousand
cowa  in  order  that  ho  might  bo  bound  to  the  aaci  iflcial  poat.  8Ay*pa.  who  ia
followed  by  Profenaora  Wilaon,  Roth,  aud  Qraaatuann,  takea  tahdirddydpdd,
together,  '  from  a  thouaaud  » takea.'

k  9  Raktha*  :  a  collective  noun  signifying  the  whole  rac*  of  BAkahaaaa  ;
originally,  harm,  injury.


THE  HYMNS  OP


466


[BOOK  V.


10  Loud  in  the  heaven  above  be  Agni’s  roarings  with  keen-edged

weapons  to  destroy  the  demons.

Forty  burst  his  splendours  in  the  Soma’s  rapture.  The  godless
bands  press  rouud  but  cannot  stay  him.

11  As  a  skilled  craftsman  makes  a  car,  a  singer  I,  Mighty  One  !

this  hymn  for  thee  havo  fashioned.

If  thou,  0  Agni,  God,  accept  it  gladly,  may  wo  obtain  thereby
tho  heavenly  Waters.

12  May  he,  tho  stroug-nccked  Steer,  waxing  in  vigour,  gathor  tho

foeman’s  wealth  with  nono  to  chook  him.

.  Thus  to  this  Agni  havo  the  Immortals  spokon.  To  man  who
sproads  tho  grass  may  ho  grant  shelter,  grant  sholtor  to  tho
man  who  brings  oblation.-


HYMN  III.  Agni.

Thou  at  thy  birth  art  Varurut,  0  Agni ;  when  thou  art  kindled
,  thou  becomest  Mitra.

In  thee,  0  Son  of  Strength,  all  Gods  are  centred.  Indra  art
.  thou  to  man  who  brings  oblation.

2  Aryaman  art  thou  as  regarde th  maidens:  mysterious  is  thy

name,  0  Self-sustainer.

As  a  kind  friend  with  streams  of  milk  they  balm  thee  what
.  time  thou  makest  wife  and  lord  one-minded.

3  The  Marute  deck  their  beauty  for  thy  glory,  yea,  Rudra  !  for

thy  birth  fair,  brightly-coloured.

That  which  was  fixed  as  Vishnu’s  loftiest  station— therewith
the  secret  of  the  Cows  thou  guardost.

4  Gods  through  thy  glory,  God  who  art  so  lovely !  granting  abund¬

ant  gifts  gained  life  immortal.

.  As  their  own  Priest  havo  men  established  Agni ;  and  serve  him
fain  for  praiso  from  him  who  liveth.

1  Partttya :  regarded  as  tho  typo  of  royalty.  Mitra :  tho  friondly,  bene-
fioont  Qod.  Indra  :  tho  ohief  of  all  tho  Oods.

•2  Arynman:  in  oonntxion  with  marriage  i  aryatndn  moaning  also  a  com-

Kiun,  os|ieclally  h  friend  who  auk*  a  girl  in  marriage  for  another,  and  Agni
ag,  as  111'  Sun,  tho  regulator  of  tho  aoaaon  for  marriago,  and  Uacomiocrator
as  tho  sacrificial  fire.

3  Aurfra :  hero,  as  in  othor  places,  a  name  of  Agni.

ViaJvni'i  loftiest  station :  tho  height  of  tho  firmament,  which  supplies  milk  to
t.ho  colootial  Cows,  and,  as  mysteriously  oonnoctod  with  thorn,  to  tho  oows  of
oarth.  The  soo rot  of  the  Cow :  apparently,  thoir  udder— tho  cloud — is  meant
by  yiJAyaw  nSmu  ydndm, '  tho  cows’  secret  nsmo.’

_  4  Gained  life  immortal:  Agni  alone,  it  is  said,  wa*  originally  immortal,  and
the  other  (lod*  obtained  immortality  through  him.’

Prom  him  who  liveth :  Agni,  tho  special  representuut  of  vital  power.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


BTUJ9  8.1


4C0


0  There  is  no  priest  more  skilled  than  thou  in  worship ;  none
Self-austainer  !  passes  thee  in  wisdom.

The  man  within  whose  house  as  guest  thou  dwollcst,  0  God,
by  sacrifice  shall  oonquer  mortals.  m

6  Aided  by  thee,  0  Agui  may  we  conquer  through  our  oblation,

fain  for  wealth,  awakened  :

May  wo  in  battle,  in  the  days’  assemblies,  0  Son  of  Strength,
by  riches  conquer  mortals.

7  Ho  shell  bring  evil  on  the  evil-plotter  w  hoever  turns  against  us

sin  and  outrage.

Dostroy  this  calumny  of  him,  0  Agui,  whoovor  injures  us  with
doublo-doaling.

8  At  this  dawn's  flushing,  God  !  our  ancient  fathers  served  thee

with  offerings,  making  thee  their  envoy,

When,  Agni,  to  the  store  of  wealth  thou  goest,  a  God  onkindlod
with  good  things  by  mortals.

9  Save,  thou  who  knowost,  draw  thy  father  near  thee,  who  counts

as  thine  own  son,  0  Child  of  Power.

0  sapient  Agni,  when  wilt  thou  regard  us?  When,  skilled  in
holy  Law,  wilt  thou  direct  us?

10  Adoring  thee  ho  gives  thee  many  a  title,  when  thou.  Good

Lord  !  acceptest  this  as  Father.

And  doth  not  Agni,  glad  in  strength  of  Godhead,  gain  splendid
bliss  when  ho  hath  waxen  mighty  ?

11  Most  Youthful  Agni,  verily  thou  bearest  thy  praiser  safely

over  all  his  troubles.

Thieves  have  been  seen  by  us  and  open  foemen :  unknown
have  been  the  plottings  of  the  wicked.

12  To  thee  thoso  eulogies  have  been  directed :  or  to  tho  Vasu

hath  this  sin  been  spokon.  •*  .

But  this  our  Agni,  flaming  high,  shall  never  yield  us  to  calumny,
,  to  him  who  wrongs  us.

fl  In  the  dayi  eutembliet:  gathering*  on  day*  appointed  for  oaorifloe.  .

8  The  itore  of  wealth  :  wording  to  Sftjsps,  tho  placo  containing  tiro  riohea
of  sacrificial  offerings.

9  Thy  father  :  tho  anorifleor,  who  nupporte  Agni  with  oblation*,  And  in  hi*
turn  i*  loved  and  chorUhed  m  a  aon.

10  Aecepteit  thie :  tho  homage  of  tho  wonihippor,  When  he  hath  waxen
mighty  ;  or  boon  oxaltod  by  our  prauo.

11  Thieve*  hate  been  eeen :  although  we  havo  Been  thieve*  and  oncmic*  wo
have  boon  saved  by  Agni  from  suffering  injury  from  thoir  ovil  <le«ign*.

12  Hath  (hie  tin  been  spoken :  if  my  praise  b©  not  acceptable  to  Agni,  it  i*
an  offenoe  and  n  sin.  Or  the  moaning  may  bo,  thi*  ain  of  our  euomics  who
plot  against  us  ban  boon  declared  to  Agui.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  V.


470

HYMN  IV.  Agni.

0  Agni,  King  And  Lord  of  wealth  and  treasures,  in  thee  is  my
y  delight  at  sacrifices.

Through  thee  may  wo  obtain  the  strength  we  long  for,  and
<  overcome  the  fierce  attaoka  of  mortals.

2  Agni,  Eternal  Futhor,  ofloring-bearcr,  fair  to  behold,  far-reach¬

ing,  far- refulgent,

From  well-kept  household  fire  beam  food  to  food  us,  and  moa-
auro  out  to  u>  abundant  glory.

3  Tho  Sago  of  men,  the  Lord  of  human  races,  pure,  purifying

Agni,  balmod  with  buttor,

Him  tho  Omnisoient  as  your  Priest  yo  stablish  :  ho  wins  among
the  Gods  things  worth  the  choosing.

4  Agni,  enjoy,  of  one  accord  with  I’&,  striving  in  rivalry  with

beams  of  Sflrya,

i  Enjoy,  0  Jitavedas,  this  our  fuel,  and  bring  the  Gods  to  us
to  taste  oblations.

5  As  dear  House-Friend,  guest  welcome  in  the  dwelling,  to  this

our  sacrifice  come  thou  who  knowest.

And,  Agni,  having  scattered  all  assailant*,  bring  to  us  the
possessions  of  our  foemen.

6  Drive  thou  away  the  Dasyu  with  thy  weapon.  As,  gaining

vital  power  for  thine  own  body,

O  Son  of  Strength,  tho  Gods  thou  satisfiest,  so  in  fight  save
us,  most  heroic  Agni.

7  May  we,  0  Agni,  with  our  lauds  adore  thee,  and  with  our

gifts,  fair-beaming  Purifier !

Sond  to  us  wealth  containing  all  tilings  precious :  bestow  upon
us  every  sort  of  riches.

8  Son  of  Strength,  Agni,  dwellor  in  three  regions,  accept  our

sacrifice  and  our  oblation.

Among  the  Gods  may  wo  bo  countod  pious :  protect  us  with
a  triply-guarding  shelter.


4  Hi  :  prayer  and  prnino,  pomoniflod.  With  Uami  of  Sdryu  :  putting  forth
Ihy  powor  at  day-break  and  so  vying  with  the  aun.

8  At,  Quin !>iy  vital  potoer :  m  the  oblations  of  men  which  thou  carrieet  to
the  Uoda  increase  thine  own  strength  also.  .Hftynna  takes  the  aecond  half-lino
in  oonnexion  with  tho  flint :  'Drive  thou  away  tho  Dasyu  with  thy  weapon,
obtaining  vital  strength  fur  thino  own  body.'

8  Dive/ Ur  in  thrte  reyiont ;  heaven,  finmuncnt>  and  earth,  ns  tho  sun,  the
lightning,  nncl  terrestrial  lire.


THE  RIQVEDA.


IT  Y MS'  5.]


471


9  Over  all  woes  and  dangers,  JAtavedas,  bear  us  as  in  a  boat
across  a  river.

Praised  with  our  homage  even  as  Atri  praised  thee,  0  Agni,  be
the  guardian  of  our  bodies.  ,

10  As  I,  remembering  thee  with  grateful  spirit,  a  mortal,  call  with

aht  on  thee  Immortal,

safe  us  high  renown,  0  J&tavcdas,  and  may  I  be  immor¬
tal  by  my  children.

11  Tho  pious  man,  0  Jfttavodas  Agni,  to  whom  thou  grantcst
ample  room  and  pleasure,

Gainoth  abundant  woalth  with  sons  and  horses,  with  heroes
and  with  kino  for  his  well-being.


HYMN  V.


Apr!*.


To  Agni,  Jfttavedas,  to  tho  flame,  the  woll-enkindlod  God-,
Offer  thick  sacrificial  oil.


2  He,  Nar&sausa,  ne’er  beguiled,  inspiriteth  this  sacrifice :

For  sago  is  he,  with  sweets  in  hand.

3  Adored,  0  Agni,  hither  bring  Indra  tho  Wonderful,  the  Friend,
On  lightly-rolling  car  to  aid.

4  Spread  thyself  out,  thou  soft  as  wool !  The  holy  hymns  have

sung  to  thee.

Bring  gain  to  us,  0  beautiful !

5  Open  yourselves,  ye  Doors  Divine,  easy  of  access  for  our  aid  :
Fill,  more  and  more,  the  sacrifice.

6  Fair  strengthened  of  vital  power,  young  Mothers  of  eternal

Law,

Morning  and  Night  we  supplicate.

7  On  the  wind’s  flight  come,  glorifiod,  ye  two  celestial  Priests  of

man :

Como  ye  to  this  our  sacrifice.

8  I)A,  Sarasvatf,  Mahf,  throo  Goddesses  who  bring  us  weal,

Bo  seated  harmless  on  tho  grass.


0  Atri:  tho  famous  flUhl,  ancestor  of  Vaausrut*  tho  UUhi  or  *oor  of  thi*  hymn.

AprU  I*  tho  collective  namo  of  tho  Gods  and  doiflod  object*  addressed  in
the  hymn.  Soo  I.  13  ;  142  ;  188  ;  II  S  ;  III.  4.

4  77(ou  io/«  at  ittooi  /  :  the  Bar  hie  or  sacred  gra**,  on  which  tho  God*  lire
to  ait,  i*  addroaied.

5  Door t  Divine  :  of  the  sacrificial  hull,  tynoi  of  tho  portula  of  tho  East.  Soo
I.  188.  5.

6  Eternal  law :  law-ordained  sacrifice.

7  Two  celetlial  PrietU  ;  see  I.  13.  8.


m  THE  BY  St  NS  OP  [BOOK  V.

9  Rich  in  all  plenty,  Tvashtar,  come  auspicious  of  thine  own
accord :

Help  us  in  every  sacrifice.

10  Vanaapati,  wherever  thou  knowest  tho  Gods’  mysterious  names,
'  Send  our  oblations  thitherward.

11  To  Agni  and  to  Varuria,  Indra,  th'o  Mar  u  to,  and  the  Gods,
With  8vfth&  bo  oblation  brought.

HYMN  VI.  Agni,

I  value  Agni  that  good  Lord,  the  homo  to  which  tho  kino
return :

Whom  fleot-foot  coursers  seek  as  homo,  and  strong  enduring
stccdB  as  home.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

2  Tis  Agni  whom  we  laud  as  good,  to  whom  the  milch-kino

come  in  herds,

To  whom  tho  •  chargers  swift  of  foot*  to  whom  our  well-born
princes  como.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

3  Agni  the  God  of  all  mankind,  gives,  verily,  a  steed  to  man.
Agni  gives  precious  gear  for  wealth,  treasure  he  gives  when

he  is  pleased.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thj' .praise.  •

4  God,  Agni,  we  will  kindle  thee,  rich  in  thy  splendour,  fading

not,

So  that  this  glorious  fuel  may  send  forth  by  day  its  light  for
thee.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

5  To  thee  the  splendid,  Lord  of  flame,  bright,  wondrous,  Prince

of  men,  is  brought  '

Oblation  with  the  holy  verso,  0  Agni,  bearer  of  our  gifts.
Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

6  Theso  Agnis  in  tho  seats  of  fire  nourish  each  thing  most

excellent

They  give  delight,  they  sproad  abroad,  they  move  thomselvcs
continually.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

7  Agni,  theso  brilliant  flames  of  thine  wax  liko  strong  chargers

mightily,


10  Varuupali:  tho  Mcrtflclel  atako,  regarded  aa  a  form  of  Agni.

11  Svdhd ;  Hail !  Glory  I  ia  hero  an  Aprt,  aa  a  personification  of  Agni.  Sco  L
18.  12.

1  Strong  enduring  itetdi :  or  conatant  worahippera,  according  to  S&yapa :
and  thie  interpretation  ia  nupported  by  etauza  2,  which  ia  a  alightly-varicd
repetition  of  thin  stanza.

6  Thru  Agnit:  the  original  flameg  of  Agni  manifested  in  the  three  fire-
altara,  each  fire  being  regarded  as  an  independent  representative  of  Agni.


BTMN  7.]  TUB  RIG  VEDA.  i78

Who  with  the  t readings  of  their  hoofs  go  swiftly  to  the  stalls
of  kine.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praiso.

8  To  us  who  laud  thee,  Agni,  bring  fresh  food  and  safo  and  happy

homes.

May  we  who  have  sung  hymns  to  theo  have  theo  for  envoy
in  each  house.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

9  Thou,  brilliant  God,  within  thy  mouth  warmest  both  ladles

of  tho  oil.

So  fill  us  also,  in  our  hymns,  abundantly,  0  Lord  of  Strength.
Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praise.

10  Thus  Agni  have  wo  duly  sorvcd  with  sacrifices  and  with  hymns.
So  may  ho  give  us  what  wo  crave,  store  of  bravo  sons  and  flcot-
foot  steeds.  Bring  food  to  those  who  sing  thy  praiso.

HYMN  VJI.  Agni.

Opfkr  to  Agni,  0  my  friends,  your  seemly  food,  your  seemly
praiso;

,  To  him  8upreme8t  o’er  tho  folk,  tho  Son  of  Strength,  tho
mighty  Lord :

2  Him  in  whose  presence,  when  they  meet  in  full  assembly,  men

rejoice ;

Even  him  whom  worthy  ones  inflame,  and  living  creatures
bring  to  life-

3  Wheu  we  present  to  him  tho  food  and  sacrificial  gifts  of  men,
He  by  the  might  of  splendour  grasps  the  holy  Ordinance's  rein.

4  He  gives  a  signal  in  the  night  even  to  him  who  is  afar,

When  he,  tho  Bright,  unchanged  by  old,  consumes  the  sovrans

of  the  wood.

5  Ho  in  whoso  servioe  on  the  ways  thoy  offer  up  their  drops

of  swoat,

On  him  as  thoir  high  kin  havo  thoy  mounted,  as  ridges  on
•  tho  oarth.


7  To  the  italle  of  kine :  tho  flames  of  Agni  who  long*  for  oblations  of  milk
and  butt«r  urn  comporod  to  tho  horses  of  raider*  who  seieo  tho  cattlo  of  thoir
onomios.

Tho  llUhi  of  thin  and  of  tho  following  hymn  is  said  to  bo  Ioha  of  the  family
of  Atri.  But  this  nmuo  appears  to  havo  been  formed  from  tho  word  1 thitn
(food)  in  stanea  1,  or  wAd(»  in  stansa  10,  and  not  to  bo  tho  name  of  a  roal
person.

3  Graepi  the  holy  Ordinance  i  rein  :  assumes  tho  direotion  of  tho  sacrifice
as  invokor  of  tho  Gods  and  oonvoyor  of  mon's  oblations.

6  On  the  io aye :  in  tho  course  of  sacrifice.  Tho  toil  of  the  ministering  priests
is  often  regarded  as  thoir  offoring  to  the  Gods,  On  him ;  the  meaning  of  thia


474  THE  HYMHS  OF  [BOOK  V .

6  Whom,  sought  of  many,  mortal  man  hath  found  to  be  the

Stay  of  all;

He  who  gives  flavour  to  our  food,  tho  home  of  every  man  that
livesc

7  Even  as  a  herd  that  crops  tho  grass  ho  shears  tho  field  and

wilderness,

With  flashing  teeth  and  hoard  of  gold,  deft  with  his  unabat¬
ed  might.

8  For  him,  to  whom,  bright  as  an  axe  ho,  as  to  Atri,  hath  flashed

forth,

Hath  tho  woll-bearing  Mother  borne,  producing  when  her  time
is  como.

9  Agni  to  whom  tho  oil  is  shed  by  him  thou  lovcst  to  support,
Bestow  upon  theso  mortals  fame  and  splondour  and  intelli¬
gence.

10  Such  real  hath  he,  resistless  one  :  he  gained  tho  cattle  given

by  thee.

Agni,  may  Atri  overcome  the  Dasyus  who  bestow  no  gifts,
subdue  the  men  who  give  no  food.

HYMN  VIII.  Agni.

0  Agni  urged  to  strength,  the  men  of  old  who  loved  the  Law
enkindled  thee,  tho  Ancient,  for  their  aid,

Thee  very  bright,  and  holy,  nourisher  of  all,  most  excellent,
the  Friend  and  Master  of  the  home.

2  Thee,  Agni,  men  have  stablished  as  their  guest  of  old,  as

Mastov  of  the  household,  thee,  with  hair  of  flame ;
High-bannered,  multiform,  distributer  of  wealth,  kind  helper,
good  protector,  drier  of  tho  floods.

3  Tho  triboB  of  mon  praise  thee,  Agni,  who  knowest  wolf  burnt

offerings,  the  Discornor,  lavishost  of  wealth,


lino  ii  obecure.  Professor  Wilion,  following  RAyaria,  translates  s  '  and  (tho
drop#)  mount  upon  tho  fireiut  if  they  woroiU  own  Humorous  offspring  as  (boyo
rido)  upon  tho  back  (of  a  father!.'  Tho  moaning  may  bo  that  tho  drop*  mount

B>n  Agni, who  be«rs  tho  oblation*  to  heaven,  as  tho  back*  or  ridge*  (of  the’
la)  ratio  themiolvea  abovo  tho  ground.  My  version,  whioh  follows  Professor
Ludwig's  oiplanation,  is  only  conjectural.

8  This  stansa  also  is  obscure.  The  teell- bearing  Mother  is  tho  lower  fire-
stick  which  at  tho  proper  time  produces  tho  spark  for  tho  man  to  whom  Agni,
keen  and  bright  as  on  axo,  is  manifested  as  ho  was  to  tho  ancient  sage  Atri,
the  ancestor  of  tho  [Ushi  of  tho  hymn.

10  Tho  last  PA  la  is  difficult.  Professor  Wilson,  after  SAyana,  rendors  it:
‘may  Ishaovcroomo  (hostilo)  mon.’  But  iihilfr  is  evidently  ‘food,’  and  not  the
name  of  a  man.


BTMH  9.]


TUB  RIG  VEDA.


475


Dwelling  in  secret,  Blest  One !  visible  to  all,  loud-roaring,
skilled  in  worship,  glorified  with  oil.

4  Ever  to  thee,  0  Agni,  as  exceeding  strong  have  we  drawn
nigh  with  songs  and  reveronco  singing  hymns.  "

So  be  thou  pleased  with  us,  Angiras  !  as  a  God  enkindled  by
the  noblo  with  man’s  goodly  light.

5  Thou,  Agni !  multiform,  God  who  art  lauded  much  !  givest  in

ovory  houso  subsistence  as  of  old.

Thou  rulest  by  thy  might  o’er  food  of  many  a  sort :  that  light
of  thino  whon  blazing  may  not  bo  opposod.

6  Tho  Gods,  Most  Youthful  Agni,  havo  made  thee,  inflamed,  the

boaror  of  oblations  and  the  messongor.

Theo,  widely-reaching,  homed  in  sacred  oil,  invoked,  effulgont,
have  they  made  tho  Eyo  that  stirs  tho  thought,

7  Mon  seeking  joy  havo  lit  thee  worshipped  from  of  old,  0  Agni,

with  good  fuel  and  with  sacred  oil.

So  thou,  bedewed  and  waxing  mighty  by  the  plants,  spreadest
thyself  abroad  over  the  realms  of  earth.


HYMN  IX.  Agni.

Bearing  oblations  mortal  men,  0  Agni,  worship  thee  the  God.
I  deem  thce_J&tavedas  :  bear  our  offerings,  thou,  unceasingly.

2  In  the  man’s  home  who  offers  gifts,  where  grass  is  trimmed,

Agni  is  Priest,

To  whom  all  sacrifices  come  and  strengthenings  that  win
renown.

3  Whom,  as  an  infant  newly-born,  the  kindling-sticks  have

brought  to  lifo,

Sustainer  of  tho  tribes  of  men,  skilled  in  woll-ordored  sacrifice.

4  Yea,  very  hard  art  thou  to  grasp,  like  offspring  of  tho  wrig¬

gling  snakos,

Whon  thou  oonsumoBt  many  woods,  liko  an  ox,  Agni,  in  the
moad.


8  Dwelling  in  eeeret :  latent  in  tho  flro-stioks,  or  dwelling  in  mon'B  hearU.

4  The  noble  :  tho  patron  of  tho  sacrifico.

7  Deduced :  anoiutod  with  clai'illod  butter.  By  the  pUinli :  which  supply
fuel.


1  l  deem  thee  Jdtavedeu  :  I  hold  thee  to  bo  tho  knower  of  all  created  brings.
4  Like  an  ox;  as  an  ox  cats  up  the  grass.


476  TER  EVENS  OP  [BOOK  V.

-  5  Whose  flames,  when  thou  art  sending  forth  the  smoke,  com¬
pletely  reach  the  mark,

When  Trita  in  the  height  of  heaven,  like  as  a  smelter  fanneth
thee,ro’en  as  a  smelter  eharpeneth  thee.

6  0  Agni,  by  thy  succour  and  by  Mitra’s  friondly  furtherance,
May  wo,  averting  hate,  subduo  the  wickedness  of  mortal  men.

7  0  Agni,  to  our  heroes  bring  such  riches,  thou  victorious  God.
May  ho  protect  and  nourish  us,  and  help  In  gaining  strength :

be  thou  near  us  in  tight  for  our  success.

HYMN  X.  Agni.

Uni  no  us  most  mighty  splendour  thou,  Agni,  resistless  on
thy  way.

With  overflowing  storo  of  wealth  mark  out  for  us  a  path  to
strength.

2  Ours  art  thou,  wondrous  Agni,  by  wisdom  and  bounteousness

of  power.

Tho  might  of  Asuras  rests  on  thee,  like  Mitra  worshipful  in  act.

3  Agni,  increase  our  means  of  life,  increase  the  house  and  home

of  these,

The  men,  the  princes  who  have  won  great  riches  through  our
hymns  of  praise.

4  Bright  Agni,  they  who  deck  their  songs  for  thee  have  horses

as  their  meed.

The  men  are  mighty  in  their  might,  they  whose  high  laud,  as
that  of  heaven,  awakes  thee  of  its  own  accord.

6  0  Agni,  those  resplendent  flames  of  thine  go  valorously  forth,
Like  lightnings  flashing  round  us,  like  a  rattling  car  that
seoks  the  spoil.

6  Now,  Agni,  come  to  succour  us ;  let  priosts  draw  nigh  to  offer

gifts;

And  let  the  patrons  of  our  rites  subdue  all  regions  of  tho  earth.

7  Bring  to  us,  Agni,  Angiras,  lauded  of  old  and  lauded  now,
Invoker  I  wealth  to  quell  tho  strong,  that  singers  may  extol

thoe.  Bo  near  us  in  fight  for  our  suooeas.


6  Trita  :  here  perhaps  VAyu,  tho  Wind.  According  to  SAyaya,  Trita  hero
means  Agni  himself  diffused  in  the  thru  region*.

4  Awatet  thu  of  ile  own  accord:  tho  meaning  of  this  last  Ftda  is  doubtful.
Silyapn  disconnects  btdhati  tmatul  from  the  preoodiug  words,  and  supplies  tho
name  of  the  Kishi  Gaya  :  Gaya  of  his  own  accord  arouses  thee.

6  Subdue  all  regions  of  the  earth  •  an  allusion  to  the  digvijaga,  universal
conquest,  or  subjugation  of  all  neighbouring  princes.  SAyaya  explain#  £*4 \
alternatively  m  '  wishes  ’ ;  '  compass  all  their  desires.’


HYMN  12]


TEE  MOVED  A.


477


HYMN  XI.  Agni.

The  watchful  Guardian  of  the  people  hath  been  bom,  Agni,
the  very  strong,  for  fresh  prosperity.  ,

With  oil  upon  his  face,  with  high  hcaven-touohing  flamo,  ho
shineth  splendidly,  pure,  for  the  Bharatas.

2  Ensign  of  saorifioo,  the  oarliest  Housohold-Priost,  the  men  have

kindled  Agni  in  his  threefold  soat,

With  Indra  and  tho  Gods  togethor  on  the  grass  lot  tho  wise
Priest  sit  to  comploto  tho  sacrifice.

3  Pure,  unadornod,  from  thy  two  Mothers  art  thou  born  :  thou

earnest  from  Vivasv&n  os  a  oharming  Sago.

With  oil  thoy  strengthened  thco,  0  Agni,  worshipped  God :
thy  banner  was  tho  smoko  that  mounted  to  the  sky.

4  May  Agni  graoiously  como  to  our  sacrifice.  The  mon  boar

Agni  horo  and  there  in  every  houso.

He  hath  beoomo  an  envoy,  boaror  of  our  gifts :  eleoting  Agni,
men  choose  one  exceeding  wise.

5  For  thee,  0  Agni,  is  this  sweetest  prayer  of  mine :  dear  to

thy  spirit  be  this  produot  of  my  thought.

As  great  streams  fill  the  river  so  our  songs  of  praise  fill  thee,
and  make  thee  yet  more  mighty  in  thy  strength.

6  0  Agui,  tho  Angirases  discovered  thee  what  time  thou  layest

hidden,  fleeing  back  from  wood  to  wood.

Thou  by  attrition  art  produced  as  conquoriug  might,  and  men,
0  Angiras,  call  thee  the  Son  of  Streugth.


HYMN  XII.  Agni.

To  Agni,  lofty  Asura,  meet  for  worship,  Steer  of  eternal  Law,
my  prayer  I  oflor ;

I  bring  my  song  directed  to  the  Mighty  like  puro  oil  for  his
mouth  at  sacrifices.

2  Mark  tho  Law,  thou  who  knowost,  yea,  observo  it :  sond  forth
tho  full  streams  of  otornal  Ordor.

I  use  no  sorcory  with  might  or  falsehood  :  tho  saorod  Law  of
tho  Hod  Steer  I  follow.


1  For  lAe  Khar  ala* :  for  tho  sako  of  tho  priosta,  according  to  SAynpa  and
Mahldbaro.

2  Jh  hi*  threefold  tool :  the  three  fire-altars.

8  2"Ay  two  Mother t :  tho  fire-sticks.  Vivutvdn  :  the  sacriflcer,  according  to
S&yaua.  But  see  Indox.

4  Eerc  and  there :  or  in  different  places  ;  from  ono  altar  to  another.

0  Thou  la<je*t  hidden :  alluding  to  tho  legend  of  tho  flight  and  capture  of
Agni.  See  1.  65.  1.


478  TUB  BY&ftiS  OP  [BOOK  V.

3  How  hast  thou,  follower  of  the  Law  eternal,  become  the

knowcr  of  a  new  song,  Agui  ?

The  God,  tho  Guardian  of  the  seasons,  knows  me :  the  Lord
of  him  who  won  this  wealth  I  know  not.

4  Who,  Agni,  in  alliance  with  thy  foeman,  what  splendid  holp-

ors  won  for  them  their  riches  1

^  Agni,  who  guard  the  dwelling-place  of  falsehood?  Who  are
protectors  of  the  spoooh  of  liars  ?

5  Agni,  thoso  friends  of  thine  have  turned  thorn  from  theo  :

gracious  of  old,  thoy  have  hooomo  ungraoious.

Thoy  havodoceivod  themselves  by  their  own  speeches,  uttering
wickod  words  against  the  rightoous.

6  Ho  who  pays  sacrifice  to  theo  with  homage,  0  Agni,  koops  tho

Rod  Steer’s  Law  otomal ;

Wide  is  his  dwelling.  May  the  noble  offspring  of  Nahusha  who
wandered  forth  come  hither.

HYMN  XIII.  Agni.

With  songs  of  praise  we  call  on  thee,  we  kindle  thee  with  songs
of  praise,

Agni,  with  songs  of  praise,  for  help.

.  2  Eager  for  wealth,  we  meditate  Agni’s  effectual  praise  to-day,
Praise  of  the.  God  who  touches  heaven.

3  May  Agni,  Priest  among  mankind,  take  pleasure  in  our  songs

of  praise,

And  worship  the  Celestial  Folk.

4  Thou,  Agni,  art  spread  widely  forth,  Priest  dear  and  excellent ;

through  thee

Men  make  the  sacrifice  complete.

6  Singors  exalt  thee,  Agni,  well  lauded,  best  giver  of  our  strongth:
So  grant  thou  us  heroio  might.

6  Thou,  Agni,  as  tho  felly  rings  the  spokes,  encompassest  tho
Gods.

I  yearn  for  bounty  manifold.


8  Knomr  of  a  new  torn :  according  to  Professor  Ludwig,  tho  now  song  Is
one  in  which  for  tho  first  timo  wo  hare  boon  obligod  to  remind  thoo  of  thy
dutioi  as  tho  champion  of  otomal  Law,  whereat  formerly  wo  had  only  thanks
and  prayers  to  offer  theo.  The  Guardian  of  the  teaiom  :  thou,  Agni,  who,  as
tho  duo,  regulstest  tho  seasons,  knowett  mo  ;  but  I  know  nothiug  of  tho  God
who  has  bofrionded  my  wealthy  onomy.

4  Who  aro  the  Gods  who  liavo  enriched  tho  wickod  who  hato  both  thee  and
mo  f

6  Tho  moaning  of  the  second  line  is  obscure.  Profossor  Wilson,  following
Siyapa,  translated  :  '  snd  may  a  virtuous  successor  of  tho  man  who  diligently
worships  thee  come  in  his  place.'  I  adopt  Profossor  Ludwig's  rendering.


BYMN  15.]


THE  move  DA.

HYMN  XIV.  Aga!i

Enkindling  the  Immortal,  wake  Agni  witli  song  of  praise :  may
he  bear  our  oblations  to  the  Gods.  >  J

2  At  high  solemnities  mortal  men  glorify  him  the  Immortal,  best
At  sacrifice  among  mankind.

3  Tl  Gol  °  ^  bCftl  their  gift8  *°  ,,0aVen’  aJ1  8,orif>r  hi,n  A8»*.
With  ladle  that  distilleth  oil.

4  Agni  shone  bright  when  born,  with  light  killing  tho  Dnsvua

and  tho  dark  :

He  found  the  Kine,  tho  Floods,  tho  Sun.

6  Servo  Agni,  God  adorable,  tho  Sage  whose  back  is  bahned  with
oil :

Let  him  approach,  and  hoar  my  call.

G  They  havo  exalted  Agni,  God  of  all  mankind,  with  oil  and  hymns
Of  praise,  devout  and  eloquent.

HYMN  XV.  Agni>

To  him,  the  fav-renowned,  the  wise  Ordainer,  ancient  and  glori¬
ous,  a  song  I  offer.

Enthroned  in  oil,  the  Asura,  bliss-giver,  is  Agni,  firm  support
of  noble  riches.

2  By  holy  Law  they  kept  supporting  Order,  by  help  of  sacrifice,

in  loftiest  heaven*, —

They  who  attained  with  born  men  to  tho  unborn,  men  seated.
on  that  stay,  heaven's  firm  sustainer.  I

3  Averting  woe,  thoy  labour  hard  to  bring  him,  tho  ancient,

plenteous  food  as  powor  resistless.

May  ho,  born  newly,  conquer  his  assailants :  round  him  thoy
stand  as  round  an  angry  lion.

4  When,  liko  a  mother,  spreading  forth  to  nourish,  to  cherish

and  regard  oaoh  man  that  livetb, —

Consuming  all  tho  strength  that  thou  host  gotton,  thou  wander-
est  round,  thyself,  in  varied  fashion.


Tho  Rishi  of  Hymu  XV.  in  said  to  bo  Dharupa  of  tho  family  of  Atri,  but-
thin  mime  is  evidently  taken  from  tho  words  dharunah  (firm)  in  atone®  1,  and
dharunam  in  at*ns&  2.

2  They  v>\o  attained :  our  ancestor*,  or  tho  Fathers,  who  with,  or  by  tho
■ad  of,  the  priest®,  wore  raised  to  seat®  in  the  firmament.

4  Thou  vnnderetl  round:  seoking  fresh  wood  to  burn  in  order  to  restore  thy
exhausted  strength.


4«0


THE  BY  MSS  OF


[BOOK  V.


5  May  strength  preserve  the  compass  of  thy  vigour,  God  I  that

TiSrss'SC";1 2:-.  -

Mr*  to  great  wealth,  by  teaching.

HYMN  XVI.


Agni.


main  ...  •

tor  power  is  in  the  beam  of  light,  sing  praise  to  Agm,  to

wL^men  have  set  in  foremost  piece  like  Mitre  with  their

■£«««»

3  A»T«  upon  the  lend  end  love  of  him  tho  rich,  high-Beming

On°whom,  loud-roaring,  men  have  laid  great  strength  as  on  a

4  So"  Friend  of  these  with  liberal  gift  of  hero

Y^Zvon  and  Earth  have  not  surpassed  this  Youthful  One

5  0  Agni^quieUy^oome  to  us,  and,  glorified,  bring  precious

S„"t»d  these  our  princes  will  assemble  for  the  good  of  all.
Be  near  in  fight  to  prosper  us.

HYMN  XVII.  '  Agni.

God,  may  a  mortal  call  tho  Strong  hither,  with  solemn  rites,
A  Santll  Agni  to  protect  when  sacrifice  is  well  prepared

3  Near  him  thou  seemest  mightier  still  in  n.t.ve  glory,  sot  to

Apart*  yon  flamo-hued  vault  of  heaven,  lovely  beyond  tho


upon

thief,  oav  w*»  --v-  —  _ _

:  «■

caact  meaning  of  the  eocoud  line  U  -omewhat  unom  tain.

1  The  Strong :  Agni.

2  Scar  him:  SCrya.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  18.)


481


3  Yea,  this  is  by  the  light  of  him  whom  powerful  song  hath

bound  to  act,

Whose  beams  of  splendour  flash  on  high  aa  though  they  sprang
from  heavenly  seed.

4  Wealth  loads  the  Wonder-Worker’s  car  through  his,  the  very

wise  One's  power.

Then,  meet  to  be  invoked  among  all  tribes,  is  Agni  glorified.

5  Now,  too,  the  princes  shall  obtain  excellent  riches  by  our  lips.
Protect  us  for  our  welfare :  lend  thy  succour,  0  thou  Son  of

Strength.  Be  near  in  fight  to  prosper  us.


HYMN  XVIII.  Agni.

At  dawn  let  Agni,  much-beloved  gue3t  of  the  house,  be  glori¬
fied  ;

Immortal  who  delights  in  all  oblations  brought  by  mortal  men.

2  For  Dvita  who  receives  through  wealth  of  native  strength

maimed  offerings,

Thy  praiscr  even  gains  at  once  the  Soma-drops,  Immortal  Gods!

3  Nobles,  with  seng  I  call  that  car  of  yours  that  shines  with

lengthened  life,

For,  God  who  givest  steeds  !  that  car  hither  and  thither  goes
unharmed.


3  This  it  by  lEe  light  of  him :  this  SQryn,  or  tho  Sun,  shines  only  by  the
light  of  Agni.

4  When  the  wonder-working  Sun  brings  us  wealth,  the  merit  is  due  to  Agni
— Ludwig.  According  to  Sftyina,  the-meaniug  is,  os  given  by  Professor  Wilson:
‘  By  the  worship  of  him  who  is  pleasing  of  aspect  the  provident  (heap)  wealth
in  their  cars.’  The  absence  of  a  verb  makes  the  exact  meaning  uncertain.


The  hymn  i*  ascribed  to  a  Rishi  Dvita  of  the  family  of  Atri,  but  the  name
Becms  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Dvita  of  stauza  2.

2  The  meaning  of  this  stanza  is  obscure.  According  to  Siyana,  Dvita  is  tho
Rishi  of  the  hymn,  and  tho  first  line  is  rendered  by  Professor  Wilson  :  ‘  Be
(willing  to  make)  a  grant  of  thine  own  strength  to  Dwita,  the  bearer  of  the
pure  libation.’  But  mriktuvAhau  must  mean  the  bearer  or  receiver  of  a  maimed
or  imperfect  oblation,  and  Dvita  then  would  bo  the  mythical  personage  of  that
name  to  whom,  togother  with  Trite,  it  was  customary  to  wish  away  and  con¬
sign  any  threatened  calamity  or  unpleasantness  (To  Tritaaud  to  Dvita,  Dawn  1
bear  thou  away  the  evil  dream  — R.  V.  X.  47.  16).  In  the  present  case,  any
possible  imperfection  in  the  offering  made  to  Agni  is  previously  removed  by  a
libation  to  Dvita.  See  Profeasor  Ludwig’s  Commentary,  Part  I.  388.  M.  Ber*
gaigne  (Religion  Vddique,  II.  327)  gives  a  different  explanation.

3  Nobles:  wealthy  inatitutorB  of  the  sacrifice;  Magh&vans.  That  car  of
yours  ;  apparently  Agni,  who  carries  oblations  to  the  Cods.

31


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  V.


482

4  They  who  have  varied  ways  of  thought,  who  guard  the  lauds
within  their  lips,  ,  ,  ,

And  strew  the  grass  before  the  light,  have  decked  themselves
wittf  high  renown.

6  Immortal  Agni,  give  the  ohiofs,  heroes  who  institute  the  rito,

-  Horoes'  illustrious,  lofty  fame,  who  at  the  synod  mot  for  praise
presented  mo  with  fifty  atoeds.

HYMN  XIX.  Agni.

One  state  begets  another  state  :  husk  is  mado  visiblo  from  husk :
Within  his  Mother’s  side  ho  speaks.

2  Discerning,  havo  they  offered  gifts :  they  guard  tho  strength

that  nover  wastes.

To  a  Btrong  fort  havo  they  pressed  in.

3  Svaitroya’s  people,  all  his  men,  have  gloriously  increased  in
'  "  might.

A  gold  chain  Brihaduktha  wears,  as,  through  this  Soma,  seek¬
ing  spoil.

4  I  bring,  as  ’twere,  the  longed-for  milk,  tHe  dear  milk  of  the

Sister-Pair.

Like  to  a  caldron  filled  with  food  is  he,  unconquered,  con¬
quering  all.


4  Varied  t cays  of  thought:  manifold  modes  of  showing  their  devotion.
Ouard  the  lauds :  perpetuate  hymns  of  praise  by  frequent  repetition.  Before
the  light :  according  to  SAyana,  svdrnare  moans,  '  in  the  sacrifice  which  loads
man  to  hoaven.’  Professor  Grauinaun  renders  tho  word  by  ‘  Dcm  Olanzes-
herrn,’  '  for  tho  Lord  of  Light,'

1  We  know  only  outward  forms  and  circumstances,  and  tho  real  noturo  of
the  God  is  concealed  from  us.  The  God  spoak*  only  in  tho  bosom  of  his  mother.
—Ludwig.  SAyana  gives  a  totally  different  interpretation,  tho  word  vavrl
(husk  or  covering)  in  tho  first  stanza  being  taken  as  tho  name  of  the  Rishi  of
tho  hymn.

2  Discerning:  perhaps,  os  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests,  distinguishing  thy  ossenoo
from  thy  appearance.  The  stronafort.  whioh  tho  worshippers  have  entered  and
s«ttled  in  is,  perhaps,  thoir  religious  knowledge.

8  ^vaitreys’s  people  havo  oonquered,  and  their  priest  Brihaduktha  has  been
rewarded  for  his  services  with  a  chain  of  gold,  won  for  him  by  the  Soma-liba¬
tions  whioh  ho  has  offered.— Ludwig,  ^valtreya  (son  of  SJvitrA  Soe  I.  83.  14)
and  Brihaduktha  are,  apparently,  proper  names.  SAyapa  oxplains  the  former
os  Agni  or  lightning  '  abiding  in  the  white  firmament,’  and  tho  latter  as
*  aeafously  or  highly  praising.’

4  The  dear  milk  of  the  Sister-Pair ;  the  Soma  dear  to  Heaven  and  Earth,
■ph*  meaning  of  the  line  is  uncertain.


s


THE  RIQVEDA.


HYMN  21.]


m


5  Beam  of  light,  come  to  us  in  sportive  fashion,  finding  thyself
close  to  the  wind  that  fans  thee.

These  flames  of  his  are  wasting  flames,  like  arrows  keen-poiuted,
sharpened,  on  his  breast.


HYMN  XX.  Agni.

Agni,  best  winner  of  the  spoil,  cause  us  to  praise  before  the
Gods

As  our  associate  meet  for  lauds,  wealth  which  thou  verily
deemest  wealth.

2  Agni,  the  great  who  ward  not  off  the  anger  of  thy  power  and

might

Stir  up  the  wrath  and  hatred  due  to  one  who  holds  an  alien
creed.

3  Thee,  Agni,  would  we  choose  as  Priest,  the  perfecter  of  strength

and  skill ;

We  who  bring  sacred  food  invoke  with  song  thee  Chief  at
holy  rites.

4  Here  as  is  needful  for  thine  aid  we  toil,  0  Conqueror,  day

by  day,

For  wealth,  fo»  Law.  May  we  rejoice,  Most  Wise  One  !  at  the
feast,  with  kine,  rejoice,  with  heroes,  at  the  feast.


HYMN  XXI.  .  Agni.

We  stablish  thee  as  Manus  used,  as  Manus  used  we  kindle  thee.
Like  Manus,  for  the  pious  man,  Angiraa,  Agni,  worship  Gods.
2  For  well,  0  Agni,  art  thou  pleased  when  thou  art  kindled
mid  mankind.

Straight  go  the  ladles  unto  thee,  thou  high-born  God  whoso
food  is  oil.


5  This  stanza  is  very  difficult,  and,  like  much  of  the  rest  of  the  hymn,  can
be  only  conjecturally  translated.

The  Rishis  of  the  hymn  are  said  to  be  certain  members  of  the  family  of
Atri  called  Prayasvats,  that  is,  bringers  or  possessors  of  sacred  food,  a  word
which  oocurs  in  stanza  3.

2  Who  holdi  an  alien  axed:  who  follows  other  than  Vedic  observances..  •

4  For  Law:  to  maintain  the  holy  law,  and  especially  the  eternally-ordained
sacrifice.  With  kin* :  possessing  plenty  of  cattle.  With  heroet :  with  brave
sons  about  us.

The  hymn  is  ascribed  to  a  Rishi  Sasa,  this  name  being  taken  from  the  word
tatasya  in  the  last  Pilda  of  stanza  4.

1  Manut :  another  form  of  Maiiu.


484  THE  HYHMS  OP  [BOOK  V.

3  Thee  have  all  Gods  of  one  accord  established  as  their  mes¬

senger.

Serving  at  sacri6ces  men  adore  thee  as  a  God,  0  Sage.

4  Let  mortal  man  adore  your  God,  Agni,  with  worship  due  to

Gods.

Shine  forth  enkindled,  Radiant  One.  Sit  in  the  chamber  of
the  Law,  sit  in  tho  chamber  of  the  food.

HYMN  XXII.  Agni.

Like  Atri,  VisvosAman !  sing  to  him  of  purifying  light,

Who  must  bo  praised  in  holy  rites,  tho  Priest  most  wolcome
in  tho  houso.

2  Sot  J&tavedas  in  his  plaoo,  Agni  tho  God  and  Minister.

Let  sacrifico  proceod  to  day  duly,  oomprisiug  all  tho  Gods.

3  All  mortals  come  to  thee  for  aid,  the  God  of  most  obsorvant

mind.

Of  thine  excelling  favour  we  bethink  us  as  we  long  for  it

4  Mark  with  attention  this  our  speech,  0  Agni,  thou  victorious
■  •  ‘  One.

Thee,  Strong-jawed  !  as  the  homestead’s  Lord,  the  Atria  with
their  lauds  exalt,  the  Atris  beautify  witjj  songs.

HYMN  XXIII.  Agni.

Bv  thy  fair  splendour’s  mighty  power,  0  Agni,  bring  victori¬
ous  wealth,

Wealth  that  o’ercometh  all  mankind,  and,  near  us,  conquereth
in  fight.

.  2  Victorious  Agni,  bring  to  us  the  wealth  that  vanquished  in
war ;

For  thou  art  wonderful  and  true,  giver  of  strength  in  herds
of  kine.

3  For  all  tho  folk  with  one  accord,  whose  sacred  grass  is  trim¬

med  and  strewn,

Invite  thee  to  their  worship-halls,  as  a  dear  Priest,  for  choioest
wealth.

4  The  chamber  of  thi  law :  tho  saorifioial  chamber  or  hall.  Of  the  food  j
or,  u  Professor  Roth  explain!  it,  whoro  tho  saorod  grass  U  strown  ;  accord¬
ing  to  Sdyaga,  of  8a!*,  tho  eupposod  JUshi  of  tho  hymn.

Tho  $ishi  is  Vlsvasiman,  of  tho  family  of  Atri.

Tho  llishi  is  said  to  bo  Dyumna  Visvacharshani— both  those  namos  being
word*  occurring  in  tho  hymn.

1  By  thy  fair  epUndoert  mighty  power ;  tho  words  of  the  text  aro  dyums
naiya  prAulhS.  .


EYifN  25.]  TEE  ItIGVEDA.  485

4  For  he,  the  God  of  all  men,  hath  gotten  him  might  that  quel-
leth  foes.

0  Agni,  in  these  homes  shine  forth,  bright  God  !  for  our  pro¬
sperity,  shine,  Purifier  1  splendidly.

HYMN  XXIV.

0  Agni,  be  our  nearest  Friend,  be  thou  a  kind  deliverer  and  a
gracious  Friend.

2  Excellent  Agni,  come  thou  nigh  to  us,  and  give  us  wealth  most

splendidly  renowned.

3  So  hear  us,  listen  to  this  call  of  ours,  and  keep  us  far  from

every  sinful  man.

4  To  thee  then,  0  Most  Bright,  0  Radiant  God,  we  come  with

prayer  for  happiness  for  our  friends.

HYMN  XXV.  Ag»i.

I  will  sing  near,  for  grace,  your  God  Agni,  for  he  is  good  to
us.

Son  of  the  Brands,  may  he  give  gifts,  and,  righteous,  save  us
from  the  foe.

2  For  he  is  true,  whom  men  of  old  enkindled,  and  the  Gods

themselves,

The  Priest  with  the  delicious  tongue,  rich  with  the  light  of
glorious  beams.

3  With  wisdom  that  surpasseth  all,  with  gracious  will  most

excellent,

0  Agni,  worthy  of  our  choice,  shine  wealth  on  us  through
hymns  of  praise.

4  Agni  is  King,  for  he  extends  to  mortals  and  to  Gods  alike.
Agni  is  bearer  of  our  gifts.  Worship  ye  Agni  with  your

thoughts.

5  Agni  gives  to  the  worshipper  a  son,  the  best,  of  mightiest

fame,

Of  deep  devotion,  ne’er  subdued,  bringer  of  glory  to  his  sire.


4  The  God  of  all  men  :  vitvdcharthanih,  a  common  epithet  of  Agni.

The  legend  connected  with  this  hymn  is  discussed  by  Prof.  Max  MUller  in
Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  New  Series,  II.  441  f.  See  Lanman’s
Sanskrit  Reador,  p.  368.

The  Rishis  of  the  hymn  are  members  of  the  family  of  Atri  called  Vasuyua
(eeckers  of  ricbea).  Cf.  stanza  9.

1  1  will  ting  near :  I  will  invite'and  bring  near  with  my  song.

2  For  he  it  true .  the  faithful  re  warder  of  his  worshippers.


186  THE  HYMNS  OP  -  [ BOOK  V.

6  Agni  bestows  the  hero-lord  who  conquers  with  the  men  in

fight.

Agni  bestows  the  fleet-foot  steed,  tho  viotor  nevor  overcome.

7  The  mightiest  song  is  Agni’s :  shine  on  high,  thou  who  art

rich  in  light

Like  the  Chief  Consort  of  a  King,  richeB  and  strength  proceed
•  from  theo.

8  Resplendent  aro  thy  rays  of  light:  loud  is  thy  voice  liko

pressing-stonoB.

Yea,  of  itself  thy  thundor  goes  forth  liko  tho  roaring  of  tho
heavon.

9  Thus,  Booking  riches,  have  we  paid  homage  to  Agni  Conquoror.
Muy  ho,  most  wise,  as  with  a  ship,  carry  us  over  all  our  foes.

HYMN  XXVI.  Agt>f.

0  Agni,  Holy  and  Divine,  with  splendour  and  thy  pleasant
tongue

Bring  hither  and  adore  the  Gods.

2  We  pray  thee,  thou  who  droppest  oil,  bright-rayed  !  who  look-

est  on  the  Sun,

Bring  the  Gods  hither  to  the  feast.

3  We  have  enkindled  thee,  0  Sage,  bright  caller  of  tho  Gods  to

feast,

0  Agni,  great  in  sacrifice.

4  0  Agni,  come  with  all  the  Gods,  come  to  our  sacrificial  gift :
We  choose  thee  as  Invoking  Priest.

5  Bring,  Agni,  to  the  worshipper  who  pours  tho  juice,  heroio

strength  :

Sit  with  the  Gods  upon  the  grass.

6  Victor  of  thousands,  Agni,  thou,  onkindlod,  cherishest  the  laws,
Laud-worthy,  envoy  of  tho  Gods.

7  Sot  Agni  Jatavodas  down,  the  "bearer  of  our  sacred  gifts,

Most  Youthful,  God  and  Minister.


7  The  exact  meaning  of  tho  iUn»  ia  uncertain.  Profoaanr  Wilson,  follow-
ing  fJHyaya,  paraphrase*  the  flrat  line  :  ‘  That  (praiae)  which  boat  convey*
(our  veneration  i*  due)  to  Agni :  affluent  in  aplendour,  grant  u*,  (Agni),  great
(wealth).’

Likt  the  Chit/  Contort  of  a  King:  a*  tho  chief  queen  proceed*  from  her  homo
In  royal  atate.  Professor  Ludwig  traualatoa  moAuAfoa  by  '  iut  a  atrong  cow,'
but  give*  in  hi*  Commentary  tho  alternative  rendering  'aa  a  king’*  wife.’
Sftyana  make*  tndhithi  an  adjective  agreeing  with  ray  I  A,  and  aaya  that  ira,
}ike,  is  pleonaatic.  I  have  followed  Mahtdhara.

8  Loud  it  thy  voice  :  tho  meaning  of  thia  half-lino  i*  not  certain.


6  ChcrUhat  the  lata :  specially  religious  ordinances,  aftcriflcea.


HYMN  28.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


487


8  Duly  proceed  our  sacrifice,  comprising  all  the  Gods,  to-day  :
Strew  holy  grass  to  be  their  seat.

9  So  may  the  Maruts  sit  thereon,  the  Asvins,  Mitra,  Varuna  :
The  Gods  with  all  their  company.

HYMN  XXVII.  Agni.

The  Godlike  hero,  famousost  of  nobles,  hath  granted  me  two
oxen  with  a  wagon.

Trivrishan’s  son  Tryaruna  hath  distiguished  himself,  Vaisvi-
nara  Agni  !  with  ten  thousands.

2  Protect  Tryaruna,  as  thou  art  waxing  strong  and  art  highly

praised,  Vaisvanara  Agni !

Who  granteth  me  a  hundred  kine  and  twenty,  and  two  bay
horses,  good  at  draught,  and  harnessed.

3  So  Trasadasyu  served  thee,  God  Most  Youthful,  craving  thy

favour  for  the  ninth  time,  Agni ;

Tryaruna  who  with  attentive  spirit  acceptcth  many  a  song
from  me  the  mighty.

4  He  who  declares  his  wish  to  me,  to  Asvamedha,  to  the  Prince,
Pays  him  who  with  his  verse  seeks  gain,  gives  power  to  him

who  keeps  the  Law.

5  From  whom  a  hundred  oxen,  all  of  speckled  hue,  delight  my

heart,

The  gifts  of  Asvamedha,  like  thrice-mingled  draughts  of
Soma  juice.

6  To  Asvamedha  who  bestows  a  hundred  gifts  grant  hero  power,
0  Indra-Agni  !  lofty  rule  like  the  unwasting  Sun  in  heaven.

HYMN  XXVIII.  Agni.

Agni  inflamed  hath  sent  to  heaven  his  lustre  :  he  shines  forth
widely  turning  unto  Morning.

Eastward  the  ladle  goes  that  brings  all  blessing,  praising  the
.  .  Gods  with  homage  and  oblation.


The  Itishis  are  said  to  be  Tryaruna,  Trasadasyu,  and  Asvamedha;  or  Atri
alone.  The  me  tre  ia  Triah^up  in  stanzas  1,  2,  3,  and  Anush  tup  in  4,  5,  6;
and,  correspondingly,  the  hymn  is  made  up  of  two  Beparate  and  independent
eulogies  of  munificent  princes.

3  Trasadasyu :  Terror  of  Dasyus  ;  apparently,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  an  hon¬
orary  name  or  title  of  sovcral  princes.  Accepteth  :  rewards  with  gifts.

4  The  stanza  is  difficult.  Asvamedha  apparently  says  that  the  man  who
requests  him  to  institute  a  sacrifice  ia  by  eo  doing  the  enricher  of  the  priests,

5  Thrice-mingled :  mixed  with  milk,  curds,  and  parched  grain.


The  hymn  is  ascribed  to  a  supposed  VifvavAri,  a  lady  of  the  family  of  Atri.
.  1  The  ladle :  the  sacrificial  lftdle  with  which  the  oil  or  clarified  butter  is
taken  up  and  poured  out.  The  text  has  the  feminine  adjective  ghrti&chl  only.


<88  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V.

2  Enkindled,  thou  art  King  of  the  immortal  world  :  him  who

1  brings  offerings  thou  attendest  for  his  weal.

He  whom  thou  urgest  on  makes  all  possessions  his  :  he  sets
befofe  thee,  Agni,  gifts  that  guests  may  claim.

3  Show  thyself  strong  for  mighty  bliss,  0  Agni,  most  excellent

be  thino  effulgent  splendours.

Make  ea-<y  to  maintain  our  household  lordship,  and  overcome
tho  might  of  those  who  hato  us.

4  Thy  glory,  Agni,  I  adore,  kindlod,  exalted  in  thy  strength.

A  Steer  of  brilliant  splondour,  thou  art  lighted  woll  at  sacred
rites.

5  Agni,  invoked  and  kindled,  serve  the  Gods,  thou  skilled  in

sacrifice :

For  thou  art  bearer  of  our  gifts.

6  Invoko  and  worship  Agni  while  the  sacrifioial  rite  proceeds  :
For  offering-bearer  choose  yo  him.

HYMN  XXIX.  Agni.

Man’s  worship  of  the  Gods  hath  three  great  lustres,  and  three
celestial  lights  have  they  established.

The  Maruta  gifted  with  pure  strength  adore  thee,  for  thou,
0  Indra,  art  their  sapient  Rishi.

2  What  time  the  Maruta  sang  their  song  to  Indra,  joyous  when

ho  had  drunk  of  Soma  juices,

Ho  grasped  his  thunderbolt  to  slay  the  Dragon,  and  loosed,
that  they  might  flow,  the  youthful  Waters.

3  And,  0  ye  Brahmans,  Maruts,  so  may  Indra  drink  draughts  of

this  my  carefully  pressed  Soma  ;

For  this  oblation  found  for  man  the  cattle,  and  Indra,  having
quaffed  it,  slow  the  Dragon.


jnhO  being  underatood.  Thai  bring i  all  blueing :  Sly* pa  take*  vittdvA ret  to
be  tho  name  of  a  woman.  Praiiing  theOode:  aaid  figuratively  of  the  ladle
held  by  the  prieat  who  praise*.

8  Make  raiy  to  maintain .-  or,  to  follow  SAyapa  :  Perfect  the  well-knit  boud
of  wife  and  husband.


1  Three  great  luttru :  this  i*  SAyapa'a  explanation  of  the  try&vyamS  of
the  text  ProfoMor  Ludwig  auggeat*  that  human  relationship*,  auoh  a*
Maghatane  or  noblee,  prieat*,  and  vi/ai  or  the  pooplo,  may  be  intended.  The
three  celeitial  light! :  the  Sun,  tho  Wind,  the  Fire,  according  to  Sdyapa.
They :  tho  Marute,  aay*  S.Vyapa.  Riihi :  here  meaning  beholder,  according  to
SAyapa.

3  Brahmam :  prieat*.  Slyapa  explain*  the  word  a*  meaning  lofty  or
mighty  in  thi*  pwuage.


BTittf  29.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


489


4  Then  heaven  and  earth  he  sundered  and  supported  :  wrapped

even  in  these  he  struck  the  Beast  with  terror.

So  Jndra  forced  the  Engulfer  to  disgorgement,  and  ‘slew-the
D&uava  panting  against  him.  0

5  Thus  all  the  Gods,  0  Maghavan,  delivered  to  thee  of  thoir  free

will  the  draught  of  Soma ;

When  thou  for  Etasa  didst  cause  to  tarry  the  flying  marcs  of
Sfirya  racing  forward.

6  When  Maghavan  with  the  thunderbolt  demolished  bis  nine-

and-ninety  castles  all  together,

The  Maruts,  where  they  met,  glorified  Jndra :  ye  with  the
Trishtup  hymn  obstructed  heaven.

7  As  friend  to  aid  a  frieud,  Agni  dressed  quickly  three  hundred

•  buffaloes,  even  as  he  willed  it.

And  Indra,  from  man’s  gift,  for  Yritra’s  slaughter,  drank  off
at  once  three  lakes  of  pressed-out  Soma.

8  When  thou  three  hundred  buffaloes’  flesh  hadst  eaten,  and

drunk,  as  Maghavan,  three  lakes  of  Soma,

All  the  Gods  raised  as  ’twere  a  shout  of  triumph,  to  Indra
praise  because  he  slew  the  Dragon.

9  What  time  ye  came  with  strong  steeds  swiftly  speeding,  0

Usana  and  Indra,  to  the  dwelling,

Thou  earnest  thither  conquering  together  with  Kutsa  and  the
Gods  :  thou  slewest  Sushna.

10  One  car-wheel  of  the  Sun  thou  rolledst  forward,  and  one  thou

settest  free  to  move  for  Kutsa.

Thou  slewest  noseless  Dasyus  with  thy  weapon,  and  in  their
home  o'erthrewest  hostile  speakers.

11  The  lauds  of  Gauriviti  made  thee  mighty  :  to  Vidathin’s  $on,

as  prey,  thou  gavest  Pipru.

Rijisvan  drew  thee  into  friendship,  dressing  the  sacred  food,
and  thou  hast  drunk  his  Soma.


4  The  Beast :  the  demon  Vritra.  The  Engulf tr  :  Vritra,  who  hud  swallowed
the  celestial  waters.  The  D&nava  :  the  son  of  Danu,  Vritra-

6  For  Elofa :  see  II.  19.  5.  _

6  HU  nine-and-ninety  cattles :  the  aerial  castles  of  Sambara,  the  demon
of  drought.  Obstructed  heaven :  made  the  loud  hymn  strike  the  sky.

7  Three  lakes  :  large  ve**ijls  or  tube  are  probably  intended.

9  Ufand:  Indra  a  special  friend.  See  Index.  To  the  dwelling  :  of  Kutsa.

10  One  car -wheel :  an  eclipse  of  the  nun  appears  to  be  referred  to.  HoseUtt :
that  is,  the  flat-noaed  barbarians,  u-nOtah  ;  or  the  word  may  be,  as  SAyaoa
explains  it,  an-Hsah,  t.  e-  raouthlesn,  voiccleaa,  unintelligibly  epeaking.  See
Muir,  Original  Sanskrit  Texts,  II.  377.

11  OauvivUi :  the  Riahi  of  the  hymn.  Vidathin's  ton:  Rijiavan,  mentione
n  Book  I.  ae  a  favourite  ?f  Indra.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOR  V.


12  Navagvas  and  Dasagvas  with  libations  of  Soma  juico  sing

hymns  of  praise  to  Indra.

Labouring  at  their  task  the  men  laid  open  the  stall  of  Kino
thohgh  firmly  closed  and  fastened.

13  How  shall  I  servo  thee,  Maghavan,  though  knowing  full  woll

what  hero  deeds  thou  hast  accomplished  ?

And  the  fresh  deeds  which  thou  wilt  do,  Most  Mighty !  these,
too,  will  wo  tell  forth  in  sacred  synods.  ,

14  Rogistloss  from  of  old  through  horo  courage,  thou  host  dono

all  those  many  acta,  0  Indra.

What  thou  wilt  do  in  bravery,  Thundor-wioldor  !  none  is  thoro
who  may  hindor  this  thy  prowess.

15  Indra,  accept  the  prayers  which  now  are  offored,  accept  the

new  prayors,  Mightiest !  which  we  uttor.

Like  fair  and  well-mado  robes,  I,  soeking  riches,  as  a  deft
craftsman  makes  a  car,  have  wrought  them.

HYMN  XXX.  Indra.  .

Where  is  that  Hero  ?  Who  hath  looked  on  Indra  borne  on
light-rolling  car  by  Tawny  Coursers,

Who,  Thunderer,  seeks  with  wealth  the  Soma-presscr,  and  to
his  house  goes,  much-invoked,  to  aid  him  i
2  I  have  beheld  his  strong  and  secret  dwelling,  longing  have
sought  the  Founder’s  habitation.

I  asked  of  othei*s,  and  they  said  in  answer,  May  we,  awakened
men,  attain  to  Indra.

.  3  We  will  tell,  Indra,  when  we  pour  libation,  what  mighty  deeds
thou  hast  performed  to  ploaso  us.

Let  him  who  knows  not  learn,  who  knows  them  listen :  hither
rides  Maghavan  with  all  his  army.

4  Indra,  when  born,  thou  madest  firm  thy  spirit :  alone  thou

scekost  war  to  fight  with  many.

With  might  t.hou  clavost  o’on  tho  rock  asundor,  and  foundost
out  tho  stablo  of  the  Miloh-kine.

5  When  thou  wast  born  supremost  at  a  distanco,  bearing  a  name

ronownod  in  far-off  rogious,

Sinco  then  e’en  Gods  havo  been  afraid  of  Indra  :  ho  conquorcd
all  tho  floods  whioh  served  tho  D&sa.

12  Navayvai  and  Dafapvai :  priestly  familios  connected  or  identified  with

the  Angirane*.  -

2  I  have  beheld:  meaning,  porhaps,  I  have  tried  to  behold,  I  have  looked
for.  The  Pounder'i  habitation  :  the  dwolling-place  of  Indra  who  eatAblished
the  world.  .  .

5  Which  served  the  Delia :  which  were  subject  to  tho  demon  Vritra.


HYMN  30  ]  THE  RIGVEDA.  401

6  These  blissful  Manila  sing  their  psalm  to  praise  thee,  and  pour

to  thee  libation  of  the  Soma.

Indra  with  wondrous  powers  subdued  the  Dragon,  thp  guileful
lurker  who  beset  the  waters.

7  Thou,  Maghavan,  from  the  first  didst  scatter  foemen,  speeding,

while  joying  in  the  milk,  the  Giver.

There,  seeking  man’s  prosperity,  thou  torest  away  the  head
of  Namuchi  the  Dk sa.

8  Pounding  the  head  of  Namuchi  the  D&sa,  me,  too,  thou  madest

thine  associate,  Indra !  •  •

Yea,  and  the  rolling  stone  that  is  in  heaven  both  worlds,  as
on  a  car,  brought  to  the  Maruts.

9  Women  for  weapons  hath  the  Dasa  taken.  What  injury  can

his  feeble  armies  do  me  1

Well  he  distinguished  his  two  different  voices,  and  Indra  then
advanced  to  fight  the  Dasyu.

10  Divided  from  their  calves  the  Cows  went  lowiug  around,  on

every  side,  hither  and  thither.

.  These  Indra  re-united  with  his  helpers,  what  time  the  well-
pressed  Soma  made  him  joyful.

1 1  What  time  the  Somas  mixed  by  Babhru  cheered  him,  loud  the

Steer  bellowed  in  his  habitations.

So  Indra  drank  thereof,  the  Fort-destroyer,  and  gave  him
guerdon,  in  return,  of  milch-kine.


7  The  giver.-  the  offerer  of  oblations.  But  the  rncauing  of  dSnara  is  un¬
certain.  Professor  Ludwig  translates  it  by ‘the  splitting  (thunderbolt),’  and
Sityana  explains  it  as  ‘  the  assailant  of  the  Gods  (Vritra).’

Namuchi :  one  of  the  malignant  demons  of  the  atmosphere  who  withhold
'  the  rain.  .

8  The  rotting  ttonc :  perhaps  the  .thunderbolt ;  or  if  the  thunderbolt  ia
supposed  to  bo  the  speaker  of  this  stanza,  as  Profeasor  Ludwig  ia  inclined  to
think,  the  Sun  must  he  meant ;  that  is,  heaven  and  earth  brought  the  Sun  to
the  Marute  to  aid  Indra  in  his  fight  with  the  demon.

9  Indra  is  the  speaker  of  the  first  line.  Women:  perhaps  the  subject
waters.  His  two  different  voices  :  the  meaning  may  bo  that  Indra  heard  tho
voices  of  the  women  aa  well  as  the  voice  of  Namuchi,  and  so  knew  that  he
had  not  an  army  of  demon-warriors  to  fight  against.  Professor  Wilson,  follow-
ing  SAyarta,  translates  :  ‘  the  two  his  best  beloved,  (Indra)  confined  in  the  inner
apartments.  ’

10  With  hit  helpers :  with  the  aid  of  the  Maruts.

* .  11  Babhru:  the  ltishi  of  the  hymn,  who  appears  to  have  assisted  the
Busamas,  a  neighbouring  people,  in  a  successful  foray,  and  to  have  been
rewarded  with  a  large  portion  of  tho  booty.  Binanchaya  was  the  king  of  this
people.


492  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V.

12  This  good  deed  have  the  Ruf&OUU  done,  Agni  I  that  they  have

granted  mo  four  thousand  cattle.

We  ^ave  received  llinauchaya’s  wealth,  of  heroes  the  most
heroio,  which  was  freely  offered.

13  The  Rufamas,  0  Agni,  sent  mo  homeward  with  fair  adorn¬

ment  and  with  kino  in  thousands.

Tho  strong  libations  have  made  Indra  joyful,  when  night,
whoso  courao  was  onding,  changed  to  morning.

14  Night,  well-nigh  onded,  at  Riijanchaya's  coming,  King  of  tho

Rusumaa,  was  changed  to  morning.

Like  a  strong  courser,  fleot  of  foot,  urged  onward,  Babhru
hath  gained  four  thousand  as  his  guordon.

15  Wo  have  recoivod  four  thousand  head  of  cattle  presented  by

the  Rusamas,  0  Agni.

And  wo,  tho  singers,  have  received  the  caldron  of  motal  which
was  heated  for  Pravargya.

HYMN  XXX  I.  Indra.

Maghavan  Indra  turns  his  chariot  downward,  the  strength-
displaying  car  which  he  hath  mounted.

Even  as  a  herdsman  driveth  forth  his  cattle,  he  goeth,  first,
uninjured,  fain  for  treasure.

2  Haste  to  us,  Lord  of  Bays ;  be  not  ungracious  :  visit  us,  lover

of  gold-hued  oblation.

There  is  naught  else  better  than  thou  art,  Indra :  e’en  to  the
wifeless  hast  thou  given  spouses.

3  When  out  of  strength  arose  the  strength  that  conquers,  Indra

displayed  all  powers  that  he  possesses.

Forth  from  tho  cave  he  drove  the  milky  mothers,  and  with  the
light  laid  bare  investing  darkness.

4  Anus  have  wrought  a  ohariot  for  thy  Courser,  and  Tvaahtor,

Much-invoked  I  thy  bolt  that  glitters.

Tho  Brahmans  with  their  songs  exalting  Indra  increased  his
strength  that  ho  might  slaughter  Ahi.


•  16  Heated  for  Pravargya:  %  ceremony  introductory  to  tho  floma-sacrlfioe,
in  which  froih  milk  »u  poured  into  a  hosted  veesel  called  mahdvtra  or,  as  in
this  place,  ghamd.

1  Ever i  as  a  herdsman  driveth  forth  his  cattle:  so,  says  SAyana,  Iudra  drives
hia  onomioa  before  him.  Pain  for  treasure :  wiahing  to  obUin  the  riches  of  his
enemies.

2  Gold-hucd  oblation  :  consisting  of  yellow  Soma  juice.  Spouses :  carried
off  in  raids  favoured  by  tho  Warrior-God.

4  Anus:  probably  moaning  Bhrigus,  who  belonged  to  that  tribe.

The  Brahmans:  according  to  SAyana,  the  Angirases,  or  the  Maruta.


HYMN  81.]  THE  RIOVEDA.  493

5  When  heroes  sang  their  laud  to  thee  the  Hero,  Indra !  and

stones  and  Aditi  accordant,

Without  or  steed  or  chariot  were  the  follies  which,  sped  by
Indra,  rolled  upon  the  Dasyufc.  r

6  I  will  declare  thine  exploits  wrought  aforetime,  and,  Maghavan,

thy  deeds  of  late  achievement,

When,  Lord  of  Might,  thou  aunderedst  earth  and  heaven,  win¬
ning  for  man  the  moistly-gleamiug  waters.

7  This  is  thy  deed,  e’en  this,  Wonderful !  Singer  !•  that,  slaying

Ahi,  here  thy  strength  thou  showedst-,

Didst  check  and  stay  e’en  Sushna’s  wiles  and  magic,  and,  draw¬
ing  nigh,  didst  chase  away  the  Dasyus.

8  Thou,  Indra,  on  the  farther  bank  for  Yadu  and  Tuiraga  didst

stay  the  gushing  waters.

Ye  both  assailed  the  fierce  :  thou  barest  Kutsa:  when  Gods  and
Usanl  came  to  you  together.

9  Let  the  steeds  bring  you  both,  Indra  and  Kutsa,  borne  on  the

chariot  within  hearing-distance.

Ye  blew  him  from  the  waters,  from  his  dwelling,  and  chased
the  darkness  from  the  noble’s  spirit.

10  Even  this  sage  hath  come  looking  for  succour  even  to  Vata’s

docile  harnessed  horses.

Here  are  the  Maruts,  all  thy  dear  companions :  prayers  have
increased  thy  power  and  might,  0  Inara.

11  When  night  was  near  its  close  he  carried  forward  e’en  the  Sun’s

chariot  backward  in  its  running.

Etaaa  brought  his  wheel  and  firmly  stays  it :  setting  it  east¬
ward  he  shall  give  us  courage.


5  Stones  :  used  for  expressing  the  Soma  juice.  Without  or  steed  or  chariot  :
that  is,  the  worshippers  of  India  overcame  their  enemiea  by  prayer  and  the
favour  of  their  God.

8  Yadu  and  Turvafa :  see  Index.  Ye  both  :  Indra  and  Kutsa.  The  fierce  .
§ushna,  a  demon  of  drought  Thou  barest  Kutsa  :  to  his  home.

9  Ye  blew  hint  from  the  waters :  drave  Sushnafrom  the  atmosphere  in  which
he  dwelt,  and  thus  removed  the  grief  of  the  eminent  men  who  instituted  eacri-
ficea

10  Looking  for  succour :  S-.yana  takes  avasyuh  here  as  the  name  of  a  Rishi
the  seer  of  the  hymn.

11  The  return  of  the  lingering  morning  sun  appears  to  be  attributed,  on
some  particular  occasion,  to  the  special  intervention  of  Indra  on  his  favourite’s
behalf.  The  stanza  is  hardly  intelligible  as  it  stands.  SAyana  explains  Etasa

S’forEtasa’  The  verse  is  discus'cd  by  Prof.  Geldner  (Vedische  Studien,
I6‘2f),  and  his  explanation  is  criticised  by  Prof.  Ludwig  (Ueber  die  Ueucs-
ten  Arbeiten  Ac.  p.  171).


THE  HYMNS  OP  ;


[BOOK  V.


12  This  Indra,  0  ye  mon,  hath  come  to  8ee  you,  seeking  a  friend

who  hath  expressed  the  Soma.

Tho  creaking  stone  is  laid  upou  the  altar,  and  the  Adhvaryus
come  to  turn  it  quiokly*

13  Lot  mortals  who  were  happy  still  be  happy :  lot  thorn  not  como

to  sorrow,  0  Immortal.

.  Love  thou  tho  pious,  and  to  these  thy  people — with  whom  may
we  bo  numborod— givo  thou  vigour.

HYMN  XXXII  Indra.

The  woll  thou  clavest,  sottost  froo  tho  fountains,  and  gaveat
rest  to  floods  that  wero  obstructed.

Thou,  Indra,  laying  tho  groat  raountaiu  open,  slaying  tho
D&nava,  didst  loose  tho.  torronta.

2  Tho  fountain-depths  obstructed  in  thoir  seasons,  thou,  Thun-

doror  1  madest  flow,  tho  mountain’s  udder.

Strong  Indra,  thou  by  slaying  e’en  the  Dragon  that  lay  extend¬
ed  there  hast  shown  thy  vigour.

3  Indra  with  violouce  smote  down  the  weapon,  yea,  even  of  that

wild  and  mighty  creature.

Although  he  deemed  himself  alone  unequalled,  another  had  been
born  e’en  yet  more  potent.

4  Him,  whom  the  heavenly  food  of  these  delighted,  child  of  the

mist,  strong  waxing,  couched  in  darkness,

Him  the  bolt-hurling  Thunderer  with  his  lightning  smote  down
and  slew,  the  D&nava's  wrath- fire,  Sushna.

5  Though  he  might  ne’er  be  wounded  still  his  vitals  felt  that,

tho  God’s  bolt,  which  his  powers  supported,

When,  after  offored  draughts,  Strong  Lord,  thou  laidost  him,
fain  to  battlo,  in  the  pit  in  darkness.

6  Him  as  ho  lay  there  huge  in  length  extended,  still  waxing  in

tho  gloom  which  no  sun  lightened,

Him,  after  loud-voiced  threats,  tho  Horo  Indra,  rojoioing  in  tho
poured  libation,  slaughtered.

7  Whou  'gainst  tho  mighty  DAnava  his  weapon  Indra  uplifted,

Xwor  which  none  could  combat,

n  at  the  hurling  of  his  bolt  ho  smote  him,  he  made  him
lowor  than  all  living  creatures.


12  The  cunking  stone:  tho  uppor  press-stono.

1  The  well:  tho  rein -cloud.  The  fountains :  tho  sources  of  the  waters  of
the  firmament.  The  mountain :  tho  massive  cloud.

The  ZMnavo :  Vritra,  the  son  of  Dauu.

4  Of  these ;  of  living  creatures.


i


HYMN  33.)


r


TDE  RIO  VEDA.


495


8  The  fierce  God  seized  that  huge  and  restless  coder,  insatiate,

drinker  of  the  sweets,  recuirijrent,

And  with  his  mighty  weapon  in  his  dwelling  smote  down  the
footless  evil-speaking  ogre.

9  Who  may  arrest  his  strength  or  check  his  vigour  ?  Alone,  resist¬

less,  he  bears  off  all  riches.

Even  these  Twain,  these  Goddesses,  through  terror  of  Indra’s
might,  retire  from  his  dominion.

10  E’en  the  Celestial  Axe  bows  down  before  him,  and  the  Earth,
lover-like,  gives  way  to  Indra.

As  he  imparts  all  vigour  to  these  people,  straightway  the  folk
bend  them  to  him  the  Godlike.

Ill  hear  that  thou  wast  born  sole  Lord  of  heroes  of  the  Five  Races,
famed  among  the  people.  -

As  such  my  wishes  have  most  lately  grasped  him,  invoking
Indra  both  at  eve  and  morning.

12  So,  too,  I  hear  of  thee  as  in  due  season  urging  to  action  and  en¬
riching  singers.

What  have  thy  friends  received  from  thee,  the  Brahmans  who,
faithful,  rest  their  hopes  on  thee,  0  Indra?

HYMN  XXXIII.  Indr..

Great  praise  to  Indra,  great  and  strong  mid  heroes,  I  ponder
thus,  the  feeble  to  the  Mighty,

Who  with  his  band  shows  favour  to  this  people,  when  lauded,
in  the  fight  where  spoil  is  gathered .

2  So  made  attentive  by  our  hymns,  Steer!  Indra!  thou  fastenedst

the  girth  of  thy  Bay  Coursers,

Which,  Maghavan,  at  thy  will  thou  drivest  hither.  With  these
subdue  for  us  the  men  who  hate  us.

3  They  were  not  turned  to  us-ward,  lofty  Indra!  while  yet  through

lack  of  prayer  they  stood  unharnessed.

Ascend  this  chariot,  thou  whose  hand  wields  thunder,  and  draw
the  rein,  0  Lord  of  noble  horses.


9  These  Goddesses  :  Heaven  and  Earth.

10  E'en  the  Celestial  Axe ;  perhaps  the  thunderbolt,  which  u  one  of  the  mean¬
ings  assigned  to  svddhitih.  Sdvana  explains  the  word  in  this  passage  as  ‘  the
self-supported  heaven,’  and  Professor  Roth  thinks  that  a  tree  of  very  hard
wood,  called  Svadhiti,  is  intended,  as  wo  might  say,  even  the  oak  bonds  down
before  him.

11  Of  the  Five  Facet :  belonging  to  the  five  Aryan  tribes.  But  see  Muir,
Original  Sunsb-it  Texts,  Vol.  L  178.


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  V.


4  Thou,  because  many  laud!  are  thine,  0  Indra,  wast  active  war¬

ring  in  the  fields  for  cattje.

For  Silrya  in  his  own  abodo  thjUj  Hero,  formedst  in  fights  even
a  fi&sa’s  nature.

5  Thine  aro  we,  Indra ;  thine  are  these  people,  conscious  of

'  ’  might,  whose  cars  aro  set  in  motion.

Soino  hero  co mo  to  us,  0  Strong  as  Ahi  I  beauteous  in  war,  to
bo  invoked  liko  Bhaga.

6  Strength  much  to  be  dosired  is  in  thoo,  Indra :  the  Immortal

dances  forth  his  horo  exploits.

Suoh,  Lord  of  Treasure,  givo  us  splendid  riches.  I  praiso  the
Friend’s  gift,  his  whose  wealth  is  mighty.

7  Thus  favour  us,  0  Indra,  with  thy  succour ;  Hero,  protect
.  the  bards  who  sing  thy  praises.

Be  friendly  in  tho  fray  to  those  who  offer  the  skin  of  beauti-
ful  aud  well-pressed  Soma.

8  And  those  ten  steeds  which  Trasadasyu  gives  me,  the  gold-

rich  chief,  the  son  of  Purukutsa,

Resplendent  in  their  brightness  shall  convey  me.  Gairikshita
^  willed  it  and  so  came  I  hither.

0  And  these,  bestowed  as  saorificial  guerdon,  the  powerful  tawny
steeds  of  Marutaava ;

Aud  thousands  which  kind  Chya vatlna  gave  me,  abundantly
bestowed  for  my  adornment.

10  And  these  commended  horses,  bright  and  active,  by  Dhvanya
son  of  Lakshmana  presented,

-  Came  unto  me,  as  cows  into  the  Rishi  Samvarana’s  stall,  with
magnitude  of  riches.

HYMN  XXXIV.  Indra.


Boundless  and  wasting  not,  the  heavonly  food  of  Gods  goes  to
the  foeless  One,  doer  of  wondrous  deeds.

Press  out,  make  ready,  offer  gifts  with  special  seal  to  him
whom  many  laud,  apeopter  of  the  prayer.

4  The  second  half  of  the  iMiu  refer*  to  an  eclijwe  of  tho  eun.  Indra  ia  raid
to  have  formed  for  Sflrya  »n  An  o*n  abode,  that  ia,  in  the  oaatom  heaven,  tho
nature  of  a  DAaa,  i  «.  made  him  a  alave  or  dark.

6  Dantu  forth  hit  h#  o  txploiU :  battlo  being  regarded  an  a  war  dance,  aa  in
the  Old  German  poetry,  and  in  Homcr’a  fi(\rtahai  ‘'Apij«-—Ludwig.  ,

8  Son  of  Parukutta  :  Paurukutaya  and  Oairikshit*  are  both  patronymioe
of  Traiadaayu.

9  Thia  aUnia  ia  ob*oure.  Nothing  further  i*  known  of  MArutdava  or
OhyavatAna.

10  Dhvanya  and  hia  father  Lakahmana  are  also  unknown  to  fame.  These
three  concluding  Blancas  are  banished  to  the  appendix  by  Professor  G/aasmann
aa  being  a  later  addition  to  die  original  hyuin.


BYXN  84.]  *  THE  RIOVEDA.  497

2  He  who  filled  full  his  belly  with- the  Soma’s  juice,  Maghavan,

was  delighted  with  the  mearth’3  sweet  draught,

When  Usana,  that  he 'might  slay  the  monstrous  beast,  gave  •*
him  the  mighty  weapon 'With  a  thousand  points.  *

3  Illustrious  is  the  man  jvhoever  presseth  out  Soma  for  him  in

sunshine  or  in  cloud  and  rain.

The  mighty  Maghavan  who  is  the  sage’s  Friend  advanceth
more  and  more  his  beauteous  progeny.

4  The  Strong  God  doth  not  fleo  away  from  him  whose  sire,  whose

mother  or  whose  brother  ho  hath  done  to  death.  ,

He,  the  Aveuger,  seeketh  this  man’s  offered  gifts  :  this  God,
the  source  of  riches,  doth  not  flee  from  sin.

5  He  seeks  no  enterprise  with  five  or  ten  to  aid,  nor  stays  with

him  who  pours  no  juice  though  prospering  well.

The  Shaker  conquers  or  slays  in  this  way  or  that,  and  to  the
pious  gives  a  stable  full  of  kine.

6  Exceeding  strong  in  war  ho  stays  the  chariot  wheel,  and-,  hating

him  who  pours  not,  prospers  him  who  pours.

Indra  tho  terrible,  tamer  of  every  man,  as  Arya  leads  away
the  Dasa  at  his  will.

7  He  gathers  up  for  plunder  all  the  niggards’  gear  :  excellent

wealth  he  gives  to  him  who  offers  gifts.

Not  even  in  wide  stronghold  may  all  the  folk  stand  firm  who
have  provoked  to  anger  his  surpassing  might.

8  When  Indra  Maghavan  hath  marked  two  wealthy  men  fight¬

ing  for  beauteous  cows  with  all  their  followers,

He  who  stirs  all  things  takes  one  as  his  close  ally,  and,  Shaker,
with  his  Heroes,  sends  the  kine  to  him.


.  2  Ufcmd :  see  I.  51.  10.  The  monstrous  beast :  Vritra  or  Ahi ;  according  to
Sflyana,  a  demon  called  Mriga.

3  The  meaning  of  the  Bccond  half  of  this  stanza  is  somewhat  unoertain.
Professor  Wilson,  following  S&yana,  renders  it :  *  Sakra  disregards  the  man
who  is  proud  of  his  descendants  and  vain  of  his  person,  and  who,  though
wealthy,  is  a  friend  of  the  base.’  Professor  Grassmann,  following  Professor
Roth’s  interpretation  of  the  doubtful  words,  translates  similarly  :  ‘  Den  Prahlcr
stdsat  zunick  der  starke,  m&chtige  den  eitlen  Stutzer,  der  dem  Kargen  sich

St.’  Professor  Ludwig,  whom  I  here  follow  with  hesitation,  explains
a&hAh,  or  kavd  sakhd  (like  AgnA  vishnu,  Agndmarut,  NAbhAnedishtha,
etc.)  as,  friend  with  the  wise.

4  Sakra  or  the  Strong  God  does  not  fear  tho  vengeance  of  those  whose
nearest  relations  he  has  killed  for  neglect  of  his  worship.

Doth,  not  flee  from  sin :  perhaps,  as  Dr.  Muir  auggesta,  does  not  fear  to
puniBh  the  offender  against  him.

5  The  Shaker .*  ho  who  makes  his  enemies  tremble,  according  to  SAyana.

6  The  chariot  wheel :  of  his  enemies.

32


498  THE  n Y&NS  OP  [BOOS  V.

9  Agni !  I  laud  the  liberal  Agnivefi,  Satri  the  type  and  stand¬
ard  of  the  pious.

May  the  collected  waters  yield  him  plenty,  and  his  be  power¬
ful  %nd  bright  dominion.

HYMN  XXXV.  Indri.

Indr  a,  for  our  assistance  bring  that  most  offeotual  powor  of
thine,

"Which  oonquers  men  for  us,  and  wins  the  spoil,  invinoiblo  in
fight.

2  Indra,  whatever  aids  bo  thine,  four  bo  thoy,  or,  0  Hero,  throe,
Or  those  of  tho  Five  Tribes  of  men,  bring  quickly  all  that  help

to  us.

3  The  »id  most  oxcollont  of  theo  the  Mightiest  hitherward  wo

call,

For  thou  wast  born  with  hero  might,  conquering,  Indra,  with
tho  Strong.

4  Mighty  to  prosper  us  wast  thou  born,  and  mighty  is  the
sT  strength  thou  hast.

In  native  power  thy  soul  is  firm  :  thy  valour,  Indra,  slays  a*
host.

5  0  Satakratu,  Lord  of  Strength,  0  Indra,  Caster  of  tho  Stone,
With  all  thy  chariot's  force  assail  the  man  who  shows  himself

thy  foe.

6  For,  Mightiest  Vritra-slayer,  thee,  fierce,  foremost  among  many,

folk

Whose  sacred  grass  is  trimmed  invito  to  battle  where  tho
spoil  is  won.

7  Indra,  do  thou  protect  our  car  that  mingles  foremost  in  tho

fights,

That  boars  its  part  in  evory  fray,  invinoiblo  and  seeking  spoil.

8  Como  to  us,  Indra,  and  protect  our  oar  with  thino  intelligence.
Mav  wo,  0  Mightiest  Ono,  obtain  excellent  famo  at  break  of

day,  and  moditato  our  hymn  at  dawn.


0  Agnivrf  i :  son  of  Agnivosa,  fjJntj-i,  a  prince  or  chief  whoso  name  does  not
occur  again  in  tho  Iligvoda.


2  Pour  be  they:  according  to  SAyapa,  tho  favours  or  succours  given  to  the
four  caates  ;  three,  similarly  meaning  tho  succours  given  to  the  three  worlds,

3  With  the  Strong :  the  ifarute.


HYMH  37.  J


THE  ETC  VEDA.  499

HYMN  XXXVI.  Indr*.

May  Indra  come  to  us,  he  who  knows  rightly  to  give  forth
treasures  from  his  store  of  riches.  *

Even  as  a  thirsty  steer  who  roams  the  doscrts  may  he  drink
eagerly  the  milked-out  Soma.

2  Lord  of  Bay  Horses,  Hero,  may  the  Soma  rise  ~to  thy  cheeks

and  jaws  like  mountain-ridges.

May  we,  0  Kiug,  as  he  who  driveth  coursers,  all  joy  in  thee
with  hymns,  invoked  of  many  !

3  Invoked  of  many,  Caster  of  the  Stone  !  ray  heart  quakes  like

a  rolling  wheel  for  fear  of  penury.

Shall  not  Pur&vasu  the  singer  give  thee  praise,  0  ever-pros¬
pering  Maghavan,  mounted  on  thy  car  ?

4  Like  the  press-stone  is  this  thy  praiser,  Indra.  Loudly  he  lifts

his  voice  with  strong  endeavour. 1
With  thy  left  hand,  O  Maghavan,  give  us  riches:  with  thy
right,  Lord  of  Bays,  be  not  reluctant.

‘  5  May  the  strong  Heaven  make  thee  the  Strong  wax  stronger  :
Strong,  thou  art'bome  by  thy  two  strong  Bay  Horses.

So,  fair  of  cheek,  with  mighty  chariot,  mighty,  uphold  us,
strong-willed,  thunder-armed,  in  battle.

6  Maruta,  let  all  the  people  in  obeisance  bow  down  before  this
youthful  Srutaratha,

Who,  rich  in  steeds,  gave  me  two  dark  red  horses  together
with  three  hundred  head  of  cattle.

HYMN  XXXVII.  Indra.

Bedbwed  with  holy  oil  and  meetly  worshipped,  the  Swift  One
vies  with  Sfirya’s  beam  in  splendour.

For  him  may  mornings  dawn  without  cessation  who  saith,  Let
us  press  Soma  out  for  Indra.

2  With  kindled  fire  and  strewn  grass  let  him  worship,  and,
Soma-presser,  sing  with  stones  adjusted  :

And  let  the  priest  whose  press-stones  ring  forth  loudly,  go
down  with  his  oblation  to  the  river.


3  Purdvatu :  I,  the  Rishi ;  apparently  the  same  as  Prabhuvaau,  the  eccr  of
the  hymn.

1  The  Swift  One :  Agni.

2  To  the  river :  for  ablution  before  sacrificing.


500  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V.

3  This  wife  is  coming  near  who  loves  her  husband  who  carries

to  his  home  a  vigorous  consort.

Here  .may  his  car  seek  fame,  hero  loudly  thunder,  and  his
wheel  make  a  thousand  rovolutiorts.

4  No  troubles  vox  that  King  in  whoso  homo  Indra  drinks  the

sharp  Soma  juico  with  milk  commingled.

With  heroes  ho  drives  near,  ho  slays  tho  fooman :  Blest,  che¬
rishing  that  namo,  ho  guards  his  pcoplo.

5  May  ho  support  in  poaco  and  win  in  battlo  :  ho  maators  both

tho  hosts  that  moot  together.

Dear  shall  ho  bo  to  Sftvya,  doar  to  Agni,  who  with  pressed
Soma  offers  gifts  to  Indra.

HYMN  XXXVIir.  In, Ira.

W IDE,  Indra  Satakratu,  spreads  tho  bounty  of  thine  ample
grace :  .

So,  Lord  of  fair  dominion,  Friend  of  all  men,  give  us  splendid
wealth.

2  The  food  which,  Mightiest  Indra,  thou  possessest  worthy  of

renown

Is  bruited  as  most  widely  famed,  invincible,  0  Golden-hued  !

3  0  Dartor  of  the  Stone,  the  powers  which  readily  obey  thy

will, —

Divinities,  both  thou  and  they,  ye  rule,  to  guard  them,  earth
•  and  heaven.

4  And  from  whatever  power  of  thine,  0  Vritra-slaycr,  It  may  be,
‘Bring  thou  to  us  heroic  strength  :  thou  hast  a  man's  regard

for  us.

5  In  thy  protection,  with  theso  aids  of  thine,  0  Lord  of  Hundred

Powers,

.  Indra,  may  wo  bo  guarded  well,  Horo,  may  we  bo  guarded  well.

HYMN  XXXIX.  •  iu,im.

Sroin-DAUTINO  Indra,  Wondrous  Ono,  what  woalth  is  richly
givon  from  thee,

That  bounty,  Trcusurc-Findor  I  bring,  filling  both  thy  hands,
to  us. .


3  This  wife :  aooordiug  to  SAyapa,  tho  wife  of  Indra  who  accompanies .  him
to  tho  sacrifice.

4  Thefotman:  or  the  wicked  man,  or  his  enemy,  pApam  talrinam  rd.  -  Sftyana.
3  The  lowers :  according  to  Sly  an  a,  tho  strong  Maruta.


8*w  40.]  -Tub  rigvbda.  sol

2  Bring  what  tlxou-  deemest  worth  the  wish,  0  Indra,  that  which

is  in  heaven.

So  may  we  know  thee  as  thort  art,  boundless  in  thy  rdvfhificence.

3  Thy  lofty  spirit,  far-reno  wned  as  fain  to  give  and  prompt  to

win,—

With  this  thou  rendest  e’eu  the  firm,  Stone-Darter  !  so  to  gain
thee  strength.

4  Singers  with  mauy  songs  have  made  Indra  propitious  to  their

fame,

Him  who  is  King  of  human  kind,  most  liberal  of  your  wealthy
ones.

5  To  him,  to  Indra  must  b8  sung  the  poet’s  word,  the  hymn  of

praise.

To  him,  accepter  of  the  prayer,  the  Atria  raise  their  songs  on
high,  the  Atris  beautify  their  songs.

HYMN  XL.  Indra,  Sflrya.Atri.

Come  thou  to  what  the  stones  have  pressed,  drink  Soma,  0
thou  Soma’s  Lord,

Indra  best  Vritra-slayer  Strong  One,  with  the  Strong.

2  Strong  is  the  stone,  the  draught  is  strong,  strong  is  this  Soma

that  is  pressed,

Indra',  best  Vritra-slayer,  Strong  One  with  the  Strong.

3  As  strong  I  call  on  thee  the  Strong,  0  Thunder-armed,  with

various  aids,

Indra,  beat  Vrita-slayer,  Strong  One  with  the  Strong.  x

4  Impetuous,  Thunderer,  Strong,  quelling  the  mighty,  King,

potent,  Vritra-slayer,  Soma-drinker,

May  he  come  hithor  with  his  yoked  Bay  Horses  ;  may  Indra
gladden  him  at  the  noon  libation.

5  0  Sarya,  when  the  Asura’s  descendant,  Svarbh&nu,  pierced

thee  through  and  through  with  darkness,

All  creatures  lookod  like  oue  who  is  bewildered,  who  knoweth
not  the  place  where  he  is  standing.


The  hymn  is  not  homogeneous.  The  first  part  (1—4)  is  a  separate  invoca¬
tion  of  Indra,  and  the  subject  of  the  second  part  is  the  Sun's  eclipse  by
Svarbh&nu  and  release  by  Atri.

1  With  the  Strong :  together  with  the  Marute.

f>  SvarbMnv :  the  Asura  or  demon  who  causes  eclipses  of  the  sun  and
moon,  the  R4hu  of  later  times.  The  name  does  not  occur  again  in  the  Xtig-
veda.


502  .  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  V.

6  What  time  thou  smotest  down  Svarbhanu's  magic  that  spread

itself  beneath  the  sky,  0  Indra,

By  bis  fourth  sacred  prayer  Atri  discovered  Surya  concealed
in  gloom  that  stayod  his  function.

7  Lot  not  tho  oppressor  with  this  dread,  through  anger  swallow

me  up,  for  1  am  thine,  0  Atri.

Mitra  art  thou,  tho  sender  of  true  blessings  :  thou  and  King
Varuna  bo  both  my  holpere.

8  Tho  Brahman  Atri,  as  ho  sot  tho  press-stones,  serving  tho

Gods  with  praiso  and  adoration,

Established  in  tho  heaven  the  oye  of  Sflrya,  and  caused  Svar-
bh Ann's  magic  arts  to  vanish.

.  •  9  Tho  Atris  found  tho  Sun  again,  him  whom  SvarbhAnu  of  tho
•  brood

Of  Asuras  had  pierced  with  gloom.  This  nono  besides  had
power  to  do.

HYMN  XLL  VifvodevM.

Who,  Mitra-Varuna,  is  your  pious  servant  to  give  you  gifts
from  earth  or  mighty  heaven  1

Preserve  us  in  tho  seat  of  holy  Order,  and  give  the  offerer
power  that  winneth  cattle.

2  May  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aryaman,  and  Ayu,  Indra  Ribhukslian,

and  the  Maruta,  love  us,

And  they  who  of  one  mind  with  bounteous  Rudra  accept  tho
hymn  and  laud  with  adorations.

3  You  will  I  call  to  feed  the  car-horse,  Asvins,  with  tho  wind's

flight  swiftest  of  those  who  travel :


8  Ry  hit  fourth  taertd  prautr :  according  to  Sftyapa,  by  four  stanzas
(6-8)  of  this  hymn.  Probably,  as  Ludwig  suggests,  a  fourth  prayer  in
addition  to  the  usual  liturgy  of  throe  prayers  against  an  eclipse.  Prof.  Lon-
uian  discusses  and  translator  tho  latter  portion  of  tho  hymn  in  Kcetgruss  an
K.  von  Roth,  pp.  187  f.,  and  adduoes  an  interesting  Buddhist  parallel  from
tho  SaipyutU-Nikiya,  I.  ii.  1.

7  Sflrya  or  tho  Sun  is  the  speaker.  The  opttmtor  :  Srarbhinu.

9  Of  the  brood  of  Aturas  :  tho  word  dtunlft  in  this  hymn  means  belonging
to,  or  descendant  of,  Asuras,  domons  or  ovil  spirit*  Thu  uso  of  tho  word  is
unknown  in  the  earliest  portions  of  the  Rigvcdo.

2  Ayu :  hero  said  to’menn  Vftyu,  the  God  of  wind.  See  1. 162. 1.  The  coloitial
Agni  is  probably  intended.  JtibhvJcthan :  a  name  of  Indra,  as  Lord  of  tho
flibhus.

And  they  who :  tho  Slaruts  especially,  as  being  Rudra’s  sons.


THE  It  10  VEDA.


n YMU  41.]


503


Or  also  to  the  Asura  of  heaven,  Worshipful,  bring  a  hymn  as
’twere  libation.  „  *

4  The  heavenly  Victor,  he  whose  priest  is  Kanva,  Trita  with

Dyaus  accordant,  Vata,  Agni,

All-feeding  Pflshan,  Bhaga  sought  the  oblation,  as  they  whose  •
steods  are  fleetest  seek  the  contest.

5  Bring  ye  your  riches  forward  borne  on  horses  :  let  thought  bo

framed  for  help  and  gain  of  treasure.

Blest  be  the  priest  of  Ausija  through  courses,  the  courses
which  are  yours  the  fleet,’  0  Maruts.

6  Bring  hither  him  who  yokes  the  car,  your  Vftyu,  who  praises

with  his  songs,  the  God  and  Singer ; '

And,  praying  and  devout,  noble  and  prudent,  may  the  Gods’
Spouses  in  their  thoughts  retain  us.

7  I  speed  to  you  with  powers  that  should  be  honoured,  with

songs  distinguishing  Heaven’s  mighty  Daughters,

Morning  and  Night,  the  Two,  as  ’twere  all-knowing :  these
bring  the  sacrifice  unto  the  mortal.

8  You  I  extol,  the  nourishers  of  heroes,  bringing  you  gifts,

Vastoshpati  and  Tvasbtar—

Rich  Dhishan &  accords  through  our  obeisance — and  Trees  and
Plants,  for  the  swift  gain  of  riches.

9  Ours  be  the  Parvatas,  even  they,  for  offspring,  free-moving*

who  are  Heroes  like  the  Vasus.

May  holy  Aptya,  Friend  of  man,  exalted,  strengthen  our
word  for  ever  and  be  near  us.


3  The  Asura  of  heaven:  or  the  Lord  of  heaven.  According  to  S&yana
Asura  means  hero  either  the  destroyer  of  life,  Rudra,  or  the  giver  of  life,
Sflrya  or  VAyu.

4  The  heavenly  Victor :  Indra.  Trita j  acoording  to  SAyana  Trita  hero  is
not  the  name  of’  a  separate  deity  (Trita  Aptya),  but  an  epithet  of  V&yu. '  per¬
vading  the  three  regions  of  earth,  firmament,  and  heaven.’

5  The  priest  of  Autija  :  Atri,  the  miniatrant  priest  of  Kakahtv&n  the  son
of  Usij. — SAyana.

8  Vdsloshpati :  Lord  of  the  Hornet te ad,  Indra.

DAilJLnd :  a  Goddess  presiding  over  prosperity  and  gain  ;  according  to
SAyapa,  VAgdevatA,  the  Goddess  of  speech.  *

9  The  Parvatas :  the  genii  who  preside  over  mountains  and  clouds.  For
offspring :  that  they  may  give  us  children  and  children's  children.

Holy  Aptya :  Trita  Aptya,  a  divinity  or  mythical  boing  who  dwells  in  the
remotest  part  of  the  heavens.


THE  HYMNS  OP


B04


-  [BOOK  V.


10  Trita  praised  him,  germ  of  the  earthly  hero,  with  pure  songs

birg  the  Offspring  of  the  Waters.

Agdl  with  might  neighs  loudly  like  a  chargor:  ho  of  the
flaming  hair  destroys  tho  forests.

11  How  shall  wo  speak  to  tho  great  might  of  Rudrat  How

spook  to  Bhaga  who  takes  thought  for  riches  t
-  May  Plants,  the  Waters,  and  tho  Sky  prosorve  us,  and  Woods
and  Mountains  with  their  trees  for  tresses.

12  May  tho  swift  Wanderer,  Lord  of  refreshments,  list  to  our

songs,  who  snoods  through  oloudy  heaven :

And  may  tho  Waters,  bright  liko  castles,  hoar  us,  as  thoy  flow
•  onward  from  tho  cloven  mountain.

*  13  Wo  know  your  ways,  yo  Mighty  Ones:  receiving  choice  mood,
yo  Wonderful,  wo  will  proclaim  it.

Even  strong  birds  descend  not  to  the  mortal  who  strives  to
reach  them  with  swift  blow  and  weapons.

14  Celestial  and  terrestrial  generations,  and  Waters  will  I  sum¬

mon  to  the  feasting.

May  days  with  bright  dawns  cause  my  songs  to  prosper,  and
may  the  conquered  streams  increase  their  waters.

15  Duly  to  each  one  hath  my  laud  been  offered.  Strong  be  Va-

rQtri  with  her  powers  to  succour.


10  torn  of  the  earthly  hero  :  Agni,  the  Offspring  of  tho  Waters,  who  de¬
velops  into  the  strong  God,  or  Hero,  who  appears  on  earth  in  tho  form  of  ter¬
restrial  lire.

12  Swift  Wanderer:  VAyu,  God  of  the  oircumambiont  wind.

A$  they  flow  onward:  tho  text  has  pdri  erucho.  SAyana  explains  tr'tcho
(Indies)  by  taranoffld^,  inclined  or  accustomed  to  flow.  Professor  Ludwig
suggest*  j>aritnUo  (flowing  round  or  over)  an  the  original  reading.

Cloven  mountain :  aocording  to  8Ayapa,  the  increasing,  i.  e.  the  towering,
or  strolling,  mountain,  or  oloud.

18  This  stanza  is  exceedingly  difficult.  I  follow  Professor  I.udwfg  In  hfs
interpretation,  and  understand  tho  meaning  to  be  :  wo  know  what  your  ways
are,  and  wo  glorify  you  bocauso  you  reward  us  for  doing  so.  If  you  appoarod
</>  us  only  as  hostile  and  terrible  deities  wo  should  not  praiso  you  any  moro
than  birds  allow  thomselvoe  to  bo  lured  down  by  tho  man  who  shoots  at  thorn.
Professor  Wilson,  following  SAyana,  paraphrases  tho  stanza  :  '  Mighty  Maruta,
of  goodly  aspect,  quickly  liear  (tho  praises)  that  wo  who  repair  to  you  repost,
nfforing  acceptable  (oblations):  (tho  Maruta)  owning  hither,  well  disposed,
come  down  to  us  (destroying)  with  their  weapons  the  mortals  opposed  to  thorn,
(overcome)  by  agitation.*

1 4  The  conquered  itreami :  won  from  tho  hostile  barbarians.

•  IB  VartUri .-  one  of  a  class  of  guardian  Goddesses.  See  I.  22. 10.  and  III,
62,  8.


605


HYMN  42.]  •  THE  R 10  VEDA.

May  the  great  Mother  Rasa  here  befriend  us,  straight-handed,
with  the  princes,  striving  forward.

16  How  may  wo  serve  the  Liberal  Ones  with  worship,  the  Maruts

swift  of  course  in  invocation,  the  Maruts  far-renowned  iu
’  invocation  ?

Let  not  the  Dragon  of  the  Deep  annoy  us,  aud  gladly  may
he  welcome  onr  addresses,

17  Thus  thinking,  0  ye  Gods,  the  mortal  wins  you  Co  give  him  *

increase  of  his  herds  of  cattle :  the  mortal  wins  him,  O  ye
Gods,  your  favour.  ,

Here  he  wins  wholesomo  food  to  feed  this  body  :  as  for  mine
old  age,  Nirriti  consume  it !

1 8  0  Gods,  may  we  obtain  from  you  this  favour,  strengthening

food  through  the  Cow's  praise,  ye  Vasus.

May  she  who  gives  good  gifts,  the  gracious  Goddess,  come
speediug  nigh  to  us  for  our  well-being.

19  May  Hi,  Mother  of  the  herds  of  cattle,  and  Urvaai  with  all

the  streams  accept  us ;

May  Urvasi  in  lofty  heaven  accepting,  as  she  partakes  the
oblation  of  the  living,

20  Visit  us  while  she  shares  Orjavya’s  food.

HYMN  XLII.  .  Visvedevaa.

Now  may  our  sweetest  song  with  deep  devotion  reach  Yaruga,
Mitra,  Aditi,  and  Bhaga.

May  the  Five  Priests’  Lord,  dwelling  in  oblations,  bliss-giving
Asura,  hear,  whose  paths  are  open.


Jtagd ;  a  mythical  stream  which  flows  round  the  earth  and  the  atmosphere,
here  personified  as  a  benignant  Goddess  :  earth,  according  to  SAyapa.  See  I.
1 1 2.  12.  Straight-handed :  holding  out  her  hand  to  guide  and  help  us.

16  The  Dragon  of  the  Deep  :  Abibudhnya,  the  regent  of  the  depths  of  the
fmuaatfnt

17  Nirriti :  the  Goddess  of  destruction.  '  May  Nirriti  (he  thinks)  swallow
up  my  old  age  (not  me)’ — Ludwig.

19  1\ 4.-  here  meaning  Barth,  according  to  Sfiyana.  Urvaft:  apparently
Fervour  or  Enthusiasm  personified  as  a  divine  being.

20  Grjavya't  food :  the  viands  provided  by  Or javy a,  the  prince  or  patron
who  institutes  the  sacrifice.

The  hymn  is  generally  difficult  and  obscure  ;  and  parte  of  the  translation
are,  and  must  at  present  be,  conjectural.

1  The  Five  Pritttt '  Lord :  apparently  Varuna,  the  fire  priests  who  servo
him  being  five  Adityas.  According  to  Slyana  Vftyu  is  meant.


508  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

2  May  Aditi  welcome,  even  as  a  mother  her  dear  heart-gladden¬

ing  son,  my  song  that  lauds  her.

The  prayer  they  love,  bliss-giving,  God-appointed,  I  offer  unto
Varuna  and  Mitra.

3  Inspirit  him,  the  Sagest  of  the  Sages;  with  sacriflcial  oil  and

meath  bedew  him.

So  then  let  him,  God  Savitar,  provido  us  excellent,  ready,  and
resplendent  treasures.

4  With  willing  mind,  Indra,  vouchsafe  us  oattlo,  prosperity,  Lord

of  Bays  !  and  pious  patrons ;

And,  with  the  sacred  prayer  by  Gods  appointed,  givo  us  the
holy  Doities’  loving-kindness.

B  God  Bhaga,  Savitar  who  deals  forth  riches,  India,  and  they
who  conquer  Vjitra’s  treasures,

And  Vija  and  Ribhukshan  and  Puraudhi,  tho  Mighty  and  Im¬
mortal  Ones,  protect  us  1

6  Let  us  declare  his  deeds,  tho  undecaying  unrivalled  Victor

whom  the  Maruta  follow.

None  of  old  times,  0  Maghavan,  nor  later,  none  of  theso  days
hath  reached  thy  hero  prowess.

7  Praise  him  the  Chief  who  gives  the  boon  of  riches,  Brihaspati

distributer  of  treasures,

Who,  blessing  most  the  man  who  sings  and  praises,  comes  with
abundant  wealth  to  his  invoker.

8  Tended,  Bphaspati,  with  thy  protections,  the  princes  are  un¬

harmed  and  girt  by  heroes.

Wealth  that  brings  bliss  is  found  among  the  givers  of  horses
and  of  cattle  and  of  raiment.

9  Make  their  wealth  flee  who,  through  our  hymns  enjoying  their

riches,  yield  us  not  an  ample  guerdon.

Far  from  the  sun  keep  thoso  who  hate  devotion,  tho  godless,
prospering  in  their  vocation.

10  With  wheellos8  chariots  drive  down  him,  0  Maruta,  vho  at

tho  foasts  of  Gods  rogards  the  demons.

May  ho,  though  bathed  iu  sweat,  form  empty  wishes,  who
blames  his  sacrod  rite  who  toils  to  serve  you.

1 1  Praise  him  whoso  bow  is  strong  and  suro  his  arrow,  him  who

is  Lord  of  ©very  balm  that  hcalcth.


3  The  S/ujat  of  the  Saga :  Savitar,  perhaps  m  identified  with  Agni,

6  Ribhukthan  :  in  this  place  is  said  by  Sftyarm  to  mean  Uibhu,  and  Puran-
dhi  (the  intelligent)  to  mean  Vibhvan.

11  Praise  Mm:  Rudra.


HYMN  43.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


507


Worship  thou  Rudra  for  his  great  good  favour :  adore  the  Asura,
God,  with  salutations.

12  May  the  House-friends,  the  cunning-handed  Artists,0  may  the

Steer’s  Wives,  the  streams  carved  out  by  Vibhvan,

And  may  the  fair  Ones  honour  and  befriend  us,  Sarasvatf,
Brihaddiv&,  and  Ritka.

13  My  newest  song,  thought  that  now  springs  within  me,  I  offer

to  the  Great,  the  Sure  Protector,

Who  made  for  us  this  All,  in  fond  love  laying  each  varied  form
within  his  Daughter’s  bosom.

14  Now,  even  now,  may  thy  fair  praise,  0  Singer,  attain  Idaspati

who  roars  and  thunders,

Who,  rich  in  clouds  and  waters  with  his  lightning  speeds  forth
bedewing  both  the  earth  and  heaven.

1 5  May  this  my  laud  attain  the  troop  of  Maruts,  those  who  are

youths  in  act,  the  Sons  of  Rudra.

The  wish  calls  me  to  riches  and  well-being  :  praise  the  unwea¬
ried  Ones  whose  steeds  are  dappled.

16  May  this  my  laud  reach  earth  and  air’s  mid-region,  and  forest

trees  and  plants  to  win  me  riches.

May  every  Deity  be  swift  to  listen,  and  Mother  Earth  with  no
ill  thought  regard  me.

17  Gods,  may  we  dwoll  in  free  untroubled  bliss.  '

18  May  we  obtain  the  Asvins’  newest  favour,  and  gain  their  health-

bestowing  happy  guidance.

Bring  riches  hither  unto  us,  and  heroes,  and  all  felicity  and
joy,  Immortals !

HYMN  XLIII.  Visvedevas.

May  the  Milch-cows  who  hasten  to  their  objeot  come  harmless
unto  us  with  liquid  sweetness.

.  The  Singer,  lauding,  calls,  for  ample  riches,  the  Seven  Mighty
Ones  who  bring  enjoyment.

12  The  cunning -handed  Artist! :  the  Ribhus.  The  Steer's  Wive*:  the  spouses
of  the  mighty  Indra.  Carted  out  by  Vibhvan :  whose  channels  wore  formed
by  him  as  the  artificer  of  Yaruna.

Brihaddird  :  a  Goddess  frequently  associated  with  114,  Sarasvatl,  and  other*.
Sftyana  takes  the  word  in  this  place  as  an  epithet,  ‘  very  brilliant,’  of  Rdkd,
the  Goddess  who  presides  over  the  day  of  full  moon.

13  The  Great,  the  Sure  Protector Indra.  Hit  DaugtUtr :  Earth  Here,  as
Ludwig  observes,  we  have  the  germ  of  the  myth  of  Praj&pati  and  his  daughter.
Cf.  X.  61.

14  Idaspati:  the  Lord  of  the  libation  ;  here  Parjanya,  God  of  the  rain -

clouds.  —  ■  -

1  The  Milch- coict :  the  rivers.  The  Seven  Mighty  Ones ;  probably  the  Indus,
the  five  rivers  of  the  Pan  jib,  and  the  Sarasvatt,  or  the  Kubhi.  See  I.  82.  12.


608  rm  by  Mb's  op  •  [PooP  V,

2  With  revorenoo  and  fair  praise  will  I  bring  hither,  for  sake  of
strength,  oxhaustless  Earth  and  Heaven.

Fathv  aud  Mother,  Bweet  of  speech,  fair-handed,  may  they,
far-famed,  in  every  fight  protect  us.

8  Adhvaryiw,  make  the  sweet  libations  Wady,  and  bring  the
beautiful  bright  juice  to  VAyu.

God,  as  our  Priest,  bo  thou  the  first  to  drink  it :  we  give  the*
of  the  mead  to  raako  thoo  joyful.

4  Two  arms— tho  Soma's  dextorous  immolators — and  the  ton
fingors  sot  and  fix  tho  press-stone.

The  stalk  hath  poured,  fair  with  its  spreading  branches,  tho
mead's  bright  glittering  juioo  that  dwells  on  mountains,
fi  The  Soma  hath  boon  pressed  for  thee,  its  lovor,  to  give'  thoo
power  and  might  and  high  enjoyment.

Invoked,  turn  hither  in  thy  oav,  0  Iudra,  at  need,  thy  two  well-
trained  rend  dear  Bay  Horses.

6  Bring  by  God-traversed  paths,  accordant,  Agni,  the  great  Ara-

tnati,  Celestial  Lady,

Exalted,  worshipped  with  our  gifts  and  homage,  who  knoweth
holy  Law,  to  drink  sweot  Soma.

7  As  on  hi9  father’s  lap  the  son,  the  darling,  so  on  the  fire  is  set

the  snered  caldron,

Which  holy  singers  deck,  as-. if  extending  and  heating  that
which  holds  the  fatty  membrane.

8  Hither,  as  herald  to  invite  the  Asvins,  come  tho  great  lofty

song,  most  sweet  and  pleasant !

Como  in  one  car,  Joy-givers  !  to  tho  banquet,  like  tho  bolt  bind¬
ing  pole  and  nave,  como  hither.

9  I  have  declared  this  speooh  of  adoration  to  mightiest  Pdshan
.  and  victorious  VAyu,


4  /mmo&ifa-a  f  or  prepareri.

0  Aramatl:  tbo  Goddeaa  who  preside*  over  worship  and  active  pioty,  and
aUo  peraoniflea  tho  Karth  ;  tho  SpcnU-Arninitl,  or  Holy  Pioty,  and  Spirit  of
Earth,  of  the  Zoroaatriaus.

7  A»  if  founding:  perhaps,  atrotchiug  (over  tho  fire)  and  so  roasting,  aa

Prof.  Roth  explains.  lltating  that  which  hold*  the  fatly  memlran* :  '  roaatiug
a  marrow-yielding  animal.'— Wilron.  Tho  ret pH  ia  tbo  omontum  or  mombraue
enfolding  the  intestines  of  tho  victim,  apocially  offerod  to  Goda  in  tho  Vavi-
huti  norifice.  *

8  Joynhtri:  yc  banefleont  Aavina.  Like  the  holt:  'Aa  the  cart  cannot
move  if  the  axle  of  tho  wheel  ia  not  fastened  by  tho  pin  or  bolt,  no  the  offer¬
ing  of  the  Soma  is  without  efficacy  unless  tho  Af\wn  bo  present.’— Wilson,
from  Slyapa.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  43.)


500


Who  by  their  bounty  are  the  hymns’  inapirers,  and  of  them¬
selves  give  power  as  a  possession.

10  Invoked  by  us  briug  hither,  J&tavedas!  the  Maruts  ell’ under

their  names  and  figures.

Come  to  the  sacrifice  with  aid  all  Maruts,  all  to  the  songs  and
praises  of  the  singer !

11  From  high  heaven  may  Sarasvati  the  Holy  visit  our  sacrifice,

and  from  the  mountain.

Eager,  propitious,  may  the  balmy  Goddess  hear  our  effectual
speech,  our  invocation.

12  Set  in  his  seat  the  God  whose  back  is  dusky,  Brihaspati  the

lofty,  the  Disposer.

Him  let  us  worship,  set  within  the  dwelling,  the  red,  the
golden-hued,  the  all-resplendent.

13  May  the  Sustainer,  high  in  heaven,  come  hither,  the  Bounteous

One,  invoked,  with  all  his  favours,

Dweller  with  Dames  divine,  with  plants,  unwearied,  the  Steer
with  triple  horn,  the  life-bestower.

14  The  tuneful  eloquent  priest^  of  him  who  liveth  have  sought

the  Mother’s  bright  and  loftiest  station.

As  living  men,  with  offered  gifts  and  homage  they  deck  the
most  auspicious  Child  to  clothe  him.

15  Agni,  great  vital  power  is  thine,  the  mighty  :  pairs  waxing  old  .

in  their  devotion  seek  thee.

May  every  Deity  be  swift  to  listen,  and  Mother  Earth  with  no
ill  thought  regard  me.

16  Gods,  may  we  dwell  iu  free  untroubled  bliss.

17  May  wo  obtain  the  Asvina’  newest  favour,  and  gain  their

health-bestowing  happy  guidance.

Bring  riches  hither  unto  us,  and  heroes,  and  all  felicity  and
joy,  Immortals !

11  Balmy  :  literally,  filled  with,  or  sprinkling  ghritd,  oil,  fatness,  or  fertilis¬
ing  fluid.  ‘The  showerer  of  water/— Wilson.

12  Whose  back  is  dusky :  darkened  by  enveloping  smoke,  BrihnBpati  being  .
here  identified  with  Agni.

13  The  Sustainer  .-  or  the  very  strong  One,  Agni.  With  triple  horn  :  ac¬
cording  to  Sftyaua,  having  horns  or  flames  of  three  colours,  red,  white,  and
black  (with  smoke).

14  Eloquent :  the  meaning  of  r&spirftsah  is  uncertain.  SAynna  explains  it  by
‘  holders  of  sacrificial  ladles/  The  Mother  is  tho  earth,  and  her  loftiest  station
is  the  altar.  Of  him  who  liveth  ;  of  tho  living  man,  the  worshipper.  The  Child
is  Agni.

15  Pairs:  human  pairs  of  worshippers  ;  husbands  and  wives.  The  second
half  of  this  stanza  is  repeated  from  stanza  16  of  the  preceding  hymn.

16  This  line  and  the  following  stanza  are  identical  with  17  and- .18  of  tho
preceding  hymn.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[ BOOK  V.


510

HYMN  XLIV.  .  Viavedevaa.
As  in  the  first  old  times,  as  all  were  wont,  as  now,  he  draweth
forth  the  power  turned  hitherward  with  song,

The  Princedom  throned  on  holy  grass,  who  findeth  light,  swift,
conquering  in  the  plants  wherein  he  waxeth  strong.

2  Shining  to  him  who  leaves  heaven’s  regions  undisturbed,  which

to  his  sheen  who  is  beneath  show  fair  in  light,

Good  guardian  art  thou,  not  to  be  deceived,  Most  Wise  !  Far
from  deceits  thy  name  dwelleth  in  holy  Law.

3  Truth  waits  upon  oblation  present  and  to  come :  naught  checks

him  in  his  way,  this  victory-bringing  Priest :

The  Mighty  Child  who  glides  along  the  sacred  grass,  the  un¬
decaying  Youth  set  in  the  midst  of  plants.

4  These  come,  well-yoked,  to  you  for  furtherance  in  the  rite  :

down  come  the  twin-born  strengtheners  of  Law  for  him,
With  reins  easily  guided  aud  commanding  all.  In  the  deep
fall  the  hide  stealeth  away  tbeir  names.

5  Thou,  moving  bcauteously  in  visibly  pregnant  ones,  snatching

with  trees  the  branching  plant  that  grasps  the  juice,
Shincst,  true  Singer!  mid  the  upholders  of  the  voice.  Increase
thy  Consorts  thou,  lively  at  sacrifice.


1  He  draweth  forth:  the  Agntdh,  orpriest  who  kindles  the  sacrificial  fire,  draws,
or  literally  milks  out,  Agni  from  the  fire-slicks  by  attrition.  I  follow  Professor
Ludwig  in  taking  diktat  and  vdrdhase  as  third  persons  singular.  Professor
Gra&smann  banishes  to  his  Appendix  this  '  most  bombastic  and  intentionally
obscure  hymn,'  which  he  considers  to  be  a  later  interpolation.  The  Princedom:
the  Prince,  Agnv,  jyeshuttdiiin  the  abstract  beiDg  used  for  the  conorete.

2  Shining  to  Aim  :  apparently,  to  the  Sun  ;  but  the  meaning  is  uncertain.

Who  is  beneath  :  the  Sun  when  ho  is  setting,  or  perhaps  Agni.  Thou :  Indra.

3  Truth  waits  upon  oblation  J  the  hopes  and  wishes  of  the  sacrificor  are
realized.  It  seems  impossible  to  get  any  meaning  out  of  dtyam  (courser)  and
I  follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  reading  satyam  (truth  or  realization).  The  victory-
bringing  Priest,  the  Mighty  Child,  the  undecaying  Youth,  is  Agni.

4  That  come,  well-yoked :  probably  the  priests,  closely  associated  in  their
sacred  duties,  who  bring  the  waters  used  in  the  preparation  of  the  Soma  and
so  are  called  strengtheners  of  Law,  i.  e.  furtherers  of  tne  law-appointed  sacrifice
/or  Aim,  for  Agni  the  Chila  oT  the  Waters.

The  hide  stealeth  avay  their  nama :  according  to  SAyana,  Aditya  or  the  Sun
steals  (that  is,  absorbs)  the  waters  in  low  places  ;  or  Agni  appropriates  the
offerings  presented  to  him.  Professor  Ludwig  is  of  opnion  that  krivih
(literally,  leather  bottle  or  bag,  and  metaphorically  cloud,  astern,  or  well)  in
this  plsc o=samitdrah  in  its  twofold  signification  as  Soma  reservoir  and  sea.
The  meaning  then  would  bo  that  the  names  of  the  waters,  i.  e.  the  waters
themselves,  fall  into  the  reservoir  and  into  the  sea.  According  to  Sftyana  the
whole  stanza  refers  to  the  Sun,  the  well-yoked  being  his  1 2 3 4 5  well-combined  rays.’

5  This  stanza  is  addreaaed  to  Agni.  Visibly  pregnant  one* :  perhaps  the
waters.  With  true:  with  burning  fuel.  Thy  Contorts:  the  flames.


THE  RIG  YE  DA.


TIYMN  44.]


511


6  Like  as  he  is  beheld  such  is  he  said  to  be.  They  with  effectual

splendour  in  the  floods  hare  made
Earth  yield  us  room  enough  and  amply  wide  extent,  great
might  invincible,  with  store  of  hero  sons.

7  Sfirya  the  Sage,  as  if  un  wedded,  with  a  Spouse,  in  battle-loving

spirit  moveth  o’er  the  foes.

May  he,  self-excellent,  grant  us  a  sheltering  home,  a  house
that  wards  the  fierce  heat  off  on  every  side.

8  Thy  name,  sting  forth  by  Rishis  in  these  hymns  of  ours,

goes  to  the  loftier  One  with  this  swift  mover’s  light.

By  skill  he  wins  the  boon  whereon  his  heart  is  set :  he  who
bestirs  himself  shall  bring  the  thing  to  pass.

9  The  chief  and  best  of  these  abideth  in  the  sea,  nor  doth  libation

fail  wherein  it  is  prolonged.

The  heart  of  him  who  praiseth  trembleth  not  in  fear  there
where  the  hymn  is  found  connected  with  the  pure.

10  For  it  is  he:  with  thoughts  of  Kshatra,  Mauasa,  of  Yajata,

and  Sadhri,  and  Ev&vada,

With  Avatsfira’s  sweet  songs  will  we  strive  to  win  the  mightiest
strength  which  even  he  who  knows  should  gain.

11  The  Hawk  is  their  full  source,  girth-stretching  rapturous  drink

of  Visvavara,  of  May  in,  and  Yajata.

They  ever  seek  a  fresh  draught  so  that  they  may  come,  know
when  thy  time  to  halt  and  drink  thy  fill  is  near.

12  SadSprina  the  holy,  Tarya,  Srutavit,  and  Bahuvrikta,  joined

with  you,  have  slain  the  foes.

He  gains  his  wish  in  both  the  worlds  and  brightly  shines —
when  he  adores  the  host — with  well-advancing  steeds.

7  At  if  unvxdded:  Sflrya  the  Sun-God,  although  wedded  to  Ushaa  or  Dawn,
i»  courageous  as  an  unmarried  man  untroubled  by  care  for  wife  and  child  ;
may  he  give  us  assurance  of  security  as  he  himself  knows  how  delightful  that  is.

8  Thy  name :  the  name  of  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice.  The  loftier  One  :
Sflrya  Thu  mift  mover’s  light :  the  flames  of  Agni.  St  vho  bntirt  kinutf :
the  restless  Agni.

9  Of  these :  hymns  of  praise.  Abideth  in  the  tea:  is  closely  connected  with
the  vat  or  reservoir  of  Soma  According  to  SAyapa  the  moaning  is  that  the
best  of  the  hymns  proceed  to  the  ocean-like  Suu  ( tawutdravotparyavatdnabhdtavt
sdryamj.

10  For  it  it  he  :  ‘He  verily  (is  to  be  glorified).’ — Wilson.  Kshatra,  Manata,
etc.  are  said  to  be  the  names  of  Rishis  associated  with  AvatsAra  to  whom
especially  the  hymn  is  ascribed.

11  The  Hayck:  who  brought  the  Soma  from  heaven.  See  IV.  27.  Vittavdra,
hid  yin,  and  Yajata  are  said  to  be  Rishis.

12  Saddprina  and  the  others  mentioned  in  this  verse  are  also  Rishis.  He :
each  of  the  lyiahie,  The  host :  of  Gods.


THE  HYMNS  OP


BOOK  V.


512

13  The  worshipper’s  defender  is  Sutambhara,  producer  and  up-

lifter  of  all  holy  thoughts.

The  jnilch-co^  brought,  sweet-flavoured  milk  was  dealt  around.
Who  speaks  the  bidding  text  knows  this,  not  he  who  sleeps.

14  The  sacred  hymns  love  him  who  wakes  and  watches  :  to  him

who  watches  come  the  Sima  verses.

This  Soma  saith  unto  the  man  who  watches,  I  rest  and  have
my  dwelling  in  thy  friendship.

15  Agui  is  watchful,  and  the  Richas  love  him;  Agni  is  watchful,

Sima  verses  seek  him.

Agni  is  watchful,  to  him  saith  this  Soma,  I  rest  and  have  my
dwelling  in  thy  friendship.

HYMN  XLV.  Visvedevne.

Babd3  of  approaching  Dawn  who  know  the  heavens  are  oome
with  hymns  to  throw  the  mountain  open.

The  Sun  hath  risen  and  oped  the  stable  portals  :  the  doors  of
men,  too,  hath  the  God  thrown  open.

2  Sfirya  hath  spread  his  light  as  splendour :  hither  -came  the

Cows’  Mother,  conscious,  from  the  stable,

To  streams  that  flow  with  biting  waves  to  deserts ;  and  heaven'
is  stablished  like  a  firm-set  pillar.

3  This  laud  hath  won  the  burden  of  the  mountain.  To  aid  the

ancient  birth  of  mighty  waters

The  mountain  parted,  Heaven  performed  his  office.  The  wor¬
shippers  were  worn  with  constant  serving.

4  With  hymns  and  God-loved  words  will  I  invoke  you,  Indra

and  Agni,  to  obtain  your  favour,

For  verily  sages,  skilled  in  sacrificing,  worship  the  Maruts  and
with  lands  invite  them.


13  Sutam&Aeva :  said  to  be  the  name  of  e  Riehi.  The  word  means  the
bearer  of  the  juice  or  libation.  Professor  Ludwig  says  that  the  Hawk  (at.
11)  is  intended.

15  The  Rickae :  the  hymns  and  Terse*  of  the  Rigveda.

The  hymn  is  exceedingly  difficult  and  obscure,’  and  in  partfc  it  seems  to  be
hopelessly  unintelligible.  Professor  Wilson'*  paraphrase  and  Professor  Oraa-
amann's  translation  differ  very  widely  from  tl*e  version— founded  mainly  on
Professor  Ludwig’s  interpretation— which  I  offer  as  a  temporary  makeshift.

1  Bard* :  the  Angimses  who  sing  the  praises  of  Ushas  and  who  know  the
exact  time  when  morning  rites  are  to  be  oelebrated.  The  mountain :  the
cloud  in  which  the  stolen  Cow*,  or  ranished  rays  of  light,  have  been  concealed.

2  The  Cove’  Mother  :  Dawn  ;  the  parent  of  the  rays  of  light.

3  The  burden  of  the  mountain :  the  store  of  water  which  lie*  like  an  unborn
babe  in  the  besom  of  the  mountain-like  cloud.  Performed  hit  office ;  aided
the  production  of  the  rain.  The  vorihifptri the  Aagirases.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


UTAfX  45-3


513


5  This  day  approach  us :  may  our  thoughts  be  holy,  far  from  us
let  us  cast  away  misfortune.

Let  us  keep  those  who  hate  us  at  a  distance,  and  .haste  to
meet  the  man  who  sacrifices.


6  Come,  let  us  carry  out,  0  friends,  the  purpose  wherewith  the

Mother  threw  the  Cow’s  stall  open,

That  wherewith  Manu  conquered  Visisipra,  wherewith  the
wandering  merchant  gained  heaven’s  water.

7  Here,  urged  by  hands,  loudly  hath  rung  the  press-stone  where¬

with  Navagvas  through  ten  months  saug  praises.

Sarama  went  aright  and  found  the  cattle.  Angiras  gave  effect
to  all  their  labours.

8  When  at  the  dawning  of  this  mighty  Goddess,  Angirascs  all

saug  forth  with  the  cattle, —

Their  spring  is  in  the  loftiest  place  of  meeting, — Saram&
found  the  kine  by  Order’s  pathway.

9  Borne  by  his  Coursers  Seven  may  Surya  visit  the  field  that

spreadeth  wide  for  his  long  journey.

Down  on  the  Soma  swooped  the  rapid  Falcon.  Bright  was
the  young  Sage  moving  mid  his  cattle.

10  Surya  hath  mounted  to  the  shining  ocean  when  be  hath
yoked  his  fair-backed  Tawny  Horses.

The  wise  have  drawn  him  like  a  ship  through  water :  the
floods  obedient  have  descended  hither.


6  Wherewith  :  I  follow  Professor  Ora— naan  ia  taking  yS  as  instrumental —
J/djftt.  The  Mother  :  Dawn.

_  Vi  ifipra :  meaning,  perhaps,  jawless  or  chinless,  may,  Sdyana  says,  be
Vritra,  and  Manu  here  may  mean  Indra.  Manu  probably  represents  the  vic¬
torious  Aryan  invader  and  Visisipra  the  conquered  barbarian.

The  wandering  merchant :  Sdvana  says  that  this  refers  to  the  story  of  Kak-
shlvdn  to  whom  the  Asvins  seat  rain.  Seel.  112.  11.

7  Through  ten  months  :  referring  to  the  aacriSces  of  nine  and  ten  months’
duration  performed  by  the  Xavagvas  and  the  Datagvas,  priestly  families  fre¬
quently  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  Acgi rases.  These  name*  mean,  re¬
spectively,  nine-month  miiiistrant*  and  ten-month  ministranta,  and  ore  trans¬
lated  in  the  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon  by  Neuner  and  Zehaer,  Niners  and  Tenners. ,
Saramd  :  see  Index.  Angiras:  AgnL

8  Their  spring :  the  source  of  the  Cows,  that  is  the  Cows  themselves.
The  loftiest  place  of  meeting :  the  height  of  heaven.  The  half-line  is  ap¬
parently  parenthetical.

9  The  rapid  Palcon :  which  brought  the  Soma  from  heaven.  77 ie  young
Sage:  'ever  young  and  far-seeing.’  The  Sun  is  intended,  moving  in  the
midst  of  his  rays.

10  The  shining  ocean :  the  luminous  firmament.

33  •  .


514  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V.

1 1  I  lay  upon  the  Floods  your  hymn,  light-winning,  wherewith
Navagvaa  their  ten  months  completed.

1  Through  this  pur  hymn  may  we  have  Gods  to  guard  us  :

through  this  our  hymn  pass  safe  beyond  affliction.

X  -  HYMN  XLVI.  Viavedevas.

"Well  knowing  I  have  bound  me,  horse-like,  to  the  pole  :

I  carry  that  which  bears  us  on  and  gives  us  help.

I  seek  for  no  release,  no  turning  back  therefrom.  May  he  who
knows  the  way,  the  Leader,  guide  me  straight.

2  0  Agni,  Indra,  Varuna,  and  Mitra,  give,  0  ye  Gods,  and

Marut  host,  and  Vishnu.

May  both  Nasatyas,  Rudra,  heavenly  Matrons,  Pdshan,  Sara-
svati,  Bhaga,  accept  us.

3  Indra  and  Agni,  Mitra,  Varuna,  Aditi,  the  Waters,  Mountains,

Maruts,  Sky,  and  Earth  and  Heaven,

Vishnu  I  call,  Pushan,  and  Brahma naspati,  pnd  Bhaga,  Sansa,
Savitar  that  they  may  help.

4  May*  Vishnu  also  and  Vita  who  injures  none,  and  Soma  grant er

of  possessions  give  us  joy ;

And  may  the  Ribhus  and  the  Asvins,  Tvashtar  and  Vibhvan
remember  us  so  that  we  may  have  wealth.

5  So  may  the  band  of  Maruts  dwelling  in  the  sky,  the  holy,  come

to  us  to  sit  on  sacred  grass  ;

Brihaspati  and  Pushan  grant  us  sure  defence,  Varuna,  Mitra,
Aryaman  guard  and  shelter  us.

C  And  may  the  Mountains  famed  in  noble  eulogies,  and  the  fair-
gleaming  Rivers  keep  us  safe  from  harm.

•  May  Bhaga  the  Dispenser  come  with  power  and  grace,  and
far-pervading  Aditi  listen  to  my  call.

7  May  the  Gods’  Spouses  aid  us  of  their  own  free  will,  aid  us  to
offspring  and  the  winning  of  the  spoil.

Grant  us  protection,  0  ye  gracious  Goddesses,  ye  who  are  ou
the  earth  or  in  the  waters’  realm.


11  1  lay  upon  Ou  foods :  I  offer  to  the  Wet tn.  lightening:  which
gains  for  the  worshipper  the  light  of  heaven.

The  Consorts  of  the  Gods  are  the  deities  of  the  last  two  stanzas.

1  I :  The  ltiahi  Pratikshatra.  Tie  pole .-  a  metaphorical  expression  for
sacnficial  duties.  That  vhieh  bean  us  on .-  the  pole,  the  performance  of
sacrifice.  ‘I  support  that  traaaceodant  and  preservative  load.’— Wilson.  He
^yansT’*  tUvW,:  diT“e  “iner  guide  :  mdrgdMj&o‘  nlaryini  dtiaE—

3  $ansa prayer  or  wish,  .personified.  Or  fdktam  may  be  a  verbal  form,


THE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  47.]


515


S  May  the  Dames,  wives  of  Gods,  enjoy  our  presents,  Rat,  Asvint,
Agn&yi,  and  Indrini.

May  Rodast  and  Vsnmini  hear  us,  and  Goddesses  QDme  at  the
Matrons’  season.

HYMN  XLVII.  Visvedevas.

Urging  to  toil  and  making  proclamation,  seeking  Heaven’s
Daughter  comes  the  Mighty  Mother :

She  oomes,  the  youthful  Hymn,  unto  the  Fathers,  inviting  to
her  home  and  loudly  calling.

2  Swift  in  their  motion,  hasting  to  their  duty,  reaching  the  cent¬

ral  point  of  life  immortal,

On  every  side  about  the  earth  and  heaven  go  forth  the  spaci¬
ous  paths  without  a  limit.

3  Steer,  Sea,  Red  Bird  with  strong  wings,  he  hath  entered  the

dwelling-place  of  the  Primeval  Father.

A  gay-hued  Stone  set  in  the  midst  of  heaven,  he  hath  gone
forth  and  guards  mid-air’s  two  limits.

4  Four  bear  him  up  and  give  him  rest  and  quiet,  and  ten  invigor¬

ate  the  Babe  for  travel.

Ilia  kine  most  excellent,  of  threefold  nature,  pass  swiftly  round
the  boundaries  of  heaven.

5  Wondrous,  0  people,  is  the  mystic  knowledge  that  while  the

waters  stand  the  streams  are  flowing  :

That,  separate  from  his  Mother,  Twosupport  him,  closely-united,
twins,  here  made  apparent.

S  fid: :  the  name  of  a  Goddess,  or,  as  SAyana  takes  it,  bright,  qualifying
Afcivt,  the  Consort  of  the  A  arms.  Rodast:  the  Spouse  of  Rudra.  See  Index.

At  the  Af-Uront'  season;  at  the  jime  appointed  for  the  celestial  dames,

the  Consorts  of  the  Gods.  -

1  Heavens  Daughter  :  Ushas  or  Dawn.  The  Mighty  Mother :  perhaps,  as
Professor  Ludwig  suggests,  VAk  or  Speech  is  intended,  who  appears  in  the
second  line  as  the  Hymn  personi5ed.

2  The  central  point  of  life  immortal :  the  Sun.  The  paths :  the  long  Hues
of  light.

3  Sea :  as  the  great  attract*.-  and  receptacle  of  the  waters.

Be :  the  Sun.  The  Primeval  Pother .-  Dyaus,  or  Heaveu.

A  gay-hited  Stone:  Professor  Ludwig  would  read  prisni-rasmd,  1  with  variegat¬
ed  rays,"  instead  of  the  prifnir-dfmd  of  the  text  But  the  alteration  seems  to
be  unnecessary.

4  Pour:  according  to  Sdyana,  the  four  chief  priests.  Possibly  Vanina,
Mitra,  Aryaman,  Bhaga  are  intended — Ludwig.

Ten :  the  regions  of  space  ;  as  the  Sun  attracts  the  waters  from  all  sides.
Bis  kine :  his  rays.  Of  threefold  nature :  producing  heat,  cold  (by  their  ab¬
sence),  and  rain.

'6  The  marvel  is  that  the  waters  stand  still  in  the  sea  while  the  rivers  are
continually  flowing  into  it.  Cf.  Eclesiastes,  I.  7.  Separate  from  his  Mother  :
SQrya’s  Mother  i*  the  invisible  Aditi  ;  and  he  is  supported  by  Heaven  aud
Earth,  the  closely-counccted  pair  who  are  visible  in  this  world.  -Ludwig.


516


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  V.


6  For  him  they  lengthen  prayers  and  acts  of  worship :  the

Mothers  weave  garments  for  him  their  offspring.

Rejoicing,  for  the  Steer’s  impregning  contact,  his  Spouses  move
on  paths  of  heaven  to  meet  him.

7  Be  this  our  praise,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra ;  may  this  be  health

and  force  to  us,  0  Agni.

May  we  obtain  firm  ground  and  room  for  resting  :  Glory  to
Heaven,  the  lofty  habitation !

HYMN  XLVm.  '  Visvedevas.

What  may  we  meditate  for  the  beloved  Power,  mighty  in  na¬
tive  strength  and  glorious  in  itself,

•  Which  as  a  magic  energy  seeking  waters  spreads  even  to  the
immeasurable  middle  region’s  cloud  f
2  O’er  all  the  region  with  their  uniform  advance  these  have

Iead  out  the  lore  that  givoth  heroes  strength.

with  their  course  reversed,  the  others  pass  away  :  the
pious  lengthens  life  with  those  that  are  before.

3  With  pressing-stoned  and  with  the  bright  beams  of  the  day  ho
■  hurls  his  broadest  bolt  against  the  Guileful  One.

Even  he  whose  hundred  wander  in  his  own  abode,  driving  the
days  afar  and  bringing  them  again.

4  I,  to  enjoy  the  beauty  of  his  form,  behold  that  rapid  rush  of
his  as  ’twere  an  axe’s  edge,

What  time  he  gives  the  man  who  calls  on  him  in  fight  wealth
like  a  dwelling-house  filled  full  with  store  of  food.

5  Four-faced  and  nobly  clad,  Varuna,  urging  on  the  pious  to  his
task,  stirs  himself  with  the  tongue.

*  Naught  by  our  human  nature  do  we  know  of  him,  him  from
whom  Bhaga  Savitar  bestows  the  boon.

6  They :  worshippers-  The  Mother!  :  the  Dawns,  or  the  regions  of  space,
which  clothe  the  Sun  with  light.  Hit  Spouses .-  the  solar  rays.

7  Firm  ground  and  room  for  ruling :  '  stability  and  permanenco.’— Wilson.

1  B’AifA  as  a  magic  energy  :  or,  what  time  the  magic  energy,  that  is  V4k,
Voice  or  Speech.

2  These  :  Dawn*.  Before  :  yet  to  come.

3  •  With  pressing  stones :  in  alliance  with,  and  strengthened  by  them,  thati*.
the  libatione  which  they  aid.  He  :  Indra.  The  Guileful  One:  Vritra.  Even  he:
Indra  as  the  Sun.  Whose  hundred  :  S&yana  supplies,  rave.

4  Hit  form :  Agni’s.

5  Varuna :  accoording  to  Siyana,  varunah  here  is  an  adjective  =  tawo.
tvf rdl-ah,  darkneaa.repelling,  and  an  epithet  of  Agni.

WtM  the  tongue  :  causing  the  worshipper  to  apeak  of  him.

Naught  by  our  human  nature :  all  our  knowledge  of  the  God  comes  by  his
inspiration.

Bhaga :  according  to  Siyana,  bhigah  here  is  an  epithet  of  Savitar,  mighty
or  adorable.


tl  TitX  30  ]


TffE  RIG  VEDA.


517


HYMN  XLIX.  Visvedevas.

'This  day  I  bring  God  Savitar  to  meet  you,  and  Biiaga  who
allots  the  wealth  of  mortals.  •

You,  Asvins,  Heroes  rich  in  treasures,  daily  seeking  your  friend¬
ship  fain  would  I  turn  hither*

2  Knowing  full  well  the  Asura’s  time  of  coming,  worship  God

Savitar  with  hymns  and  praises.

Let  him  who  rightly  knoweth  speak  with  homage  to  him  who
dealeth  out  man’s  noblest  treasure.

3  Not  for  reward  doth  Pushan  send  his  blessings,  Bhaga,  or

Aditi :  his  garb  is  splendour.

May  Indra,  Vishnu,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Agni  produce  auspicious
days,  the  Wonder-Workers.

4  Sending  the  shelter  which  we  ask,  the  foeless  Savitar  and

the  Rivers  shall  approach  us.

When  I,  the  sacrifice’s  priest,  invite  them,  may  we  be  lords  of
wealth  and  rich  possessions.

5  They  who  devote  such  worship  to  the  Yasus,  singing  their

hymns  to  Varuna  and  Mitra,

Vouchsafe  them  ample  room,  far  off  be  danger.  Through
grace  of  Heaven  and  Earth  may  we  be  happy.

HYMN  L.  Visvedevas.

Let  every  mortal  man  elect  the  friendship  of  the  guiding  God.
Each  one  solicits  him  for  wealth  and  seeks  renown  to  prosper
him.

2  These,  leading  God,  are  thine,  and  these  here  ready  to  speak

alter  us.

As  such  may  we  attain  to  wealth  and  wait  with  services  on
thee.

3  So  further  honour  as  our  guests  the  Hero  Gods  and  then  the

Dames.

May  he  remove  and  keep  afar  our  foes  and  all  who  block  our
path.

2  The  Atura's  time  of  coming  :  the  approach  of  the  divine  Savitar.

3  Aditi :  according  to  Siyan n=ahhandaniyoh,  who  cannot  be  impaired.

Used  here  as  an  epithet  of  Agni,  understood,  as  are  also  '  nourishing,*

and  bhdgah,  ‘adorable.’  But  SAyana  gives  also  the  alternative  interpretation
of  the  words  as  three  deities.

The  Riahi  is  said  to  be  Svasti  (a  name  apparently  bdrrowed  from  svaatdye,
for  weal,  in  stanza  5).

1  The  guiding  God  :  Savitar.

2  Thete :  worshippers.

3  The  Dames  :  the  Consorts  of  the  Gods.  Hay  he  :  Savitar.


THE  BY  MSS  OP


518


%


{BOOK  r.


4  Where  fire  ia  set,  and  swiftly  runs  the  victim  dwelling  in  the

trough,

He  win$,  with  heroes  in  his  home,  friendly  to  man,  lik*  con¬
stant  streams.

5  May  these  thy  riches,  Leader  God  !  that  rule  the  car,  be  blest

to  us,

Yea,  blest  to  us  for  wealth  and  weal.  This  will  we  ponder
praising  strength,  this  ponder  as  we  praise  the  God.

HYMN  LI.  Viewer**.

With  all  assistants,  Agni,  come  hither  to  drink  the  Soma-
juice

With  Gods  unto  our  sacred  gifts.

2  Come  to  the  sacrifice,  0  ye  whose  ways  are  right,  whose  laws
:  are  true,

And  drink  the  draught  with  Agni ’s  tongue.

3  0  Singer,  with  the  singers,  0  Gracious,  with  those  who  move
A~  *-  at  dawn,

Come  to  the  Soma-draught  with  Gods.

4  To  Indraand  to  V^yu  dear,  this  Soma,  by  the  mortar  pressed,

Is  now  poured  forth  to  fill  the  jar.

5  Viyu,  come  hither  to  the  feast,  well-pleased  unto  our  sacred

gins:

Drink  of  the  Soma  juice  effused :  come  to  the  food.

6  Ye,  Indra,  Viyu,  well  deserve  to  drink  the  juices  pressed  by  us.
Gladly  accept  them,  spotless  Pair :  come  lb  the  food.  .

7  For  Indra  and  for  Viyu  pressed  are  Soma  juioes  blent  with

curd,

As  rivers  to  the  lowland  flow  :  come  to  the  food.

8  Associate  with  all  the  Gods,  come,  with  the  Asvins  and  with'  *

Dawn,

Agoi,  as  erst  with  Atri,  so  enjoy  the  juice.


4  This  Kina  is  obscure.  BrOnyak  jxtiiik,  the  victim  or  beast  connected
with,  or  dwelling  in,  the  dn*na,.tub  or  trough,  is  apparently  the  Soma.  The
meaning  may  be  that  the  man  who  causes  the  sacrificial  fire  to  be  kindled  and
libations  of  Soma  juice  to  be  prepared  i»  rewarded  with  brave  sons  and  general
prosperity.

1  With  all  assistants:  '  with  all  the  protecting  deities.'— Wilson.  -

2  0  ye:  other  Gods.

8  0  Singer  :  Agni.  IFitA  the  tingtrt:  with  the  human  priests.  Those  who
move  at  dawn the  God*  who  come  to  the  morning  sacrifice.

8  As  erst  with  Atri:  as  thou  wa*t  accustomed  to  enjoy  the  libation  offered
by  the  ancient  Atri,  the  progenitor  of  the  Kashi  of  the  bymn.


HYMN  62.]


THE  MOVED  A,


510


9  Associate  with  Varuna,  with  Mitra,  Soma,  Vishnu,  como,

Agni,  as  erst  with  Atri,  so  enjoy  the  juice.

10  Associate  with  Vasus,  with  Adityas,  Indra,  V&yu,  cyme,  Agni

as  erst  with  Atri,  so  enjoy  the  juice.

11  May  Bhaga  and  the  Asvins  grant  us  health  and  wealth,  and

Goddess  Aditi  and  he  whom  none  resist.

The  Asura  Pfishan  grant  us  all  prosperity,  and  Heaven  and
Earth  most  wise  vouchsafe  us  happiness.

12  Let  us  solicit  Viyu  for  prosperity,  and  Soma  who  is  Lord  of

all  the  world  for  weal ;

For  weal  Brihaspati  with  all  his  company.  May  the  Adityas
bring  us  health  and  happiness.

13  May  all  the  Gods,  may  Agni  the  beneficent,  God  of  all  men,

this  day  be  with  us  for  our  weal.

Help  us  the  Ribhus,  the  Divine  Ones,  for  our  good.  May  Ru-
dra  bless  and  keep  us  from  calamity.

14  Prosper  us,  Mitra,  Varuna.  0  wealthy  Pathya,  prosper  us.
Indra  and  Agni,  prosper  us;  prosper  us  thou,  0  Aditi.

15  Like  Sun  and  Moon  may  we  pursue  in  full  prosperity  our  path.
And  meet  with  one  who  gives  again,  who  knows  us  well  and

slays  us  not.

HYMN  LIL  .  Maruts.

.  Sing  boldly  forth,  Sy&vasva,  with  the  Maruts  who  are  loud  in
song,  ;  -

Who,  holy,  as  then*  wont  is,  joy  in  glory  that  is  free  from  guil6.
2  For  in  their  boldness  they  are  friends  of  firm  and  sure  heroio
strength.

They  in  their  course,  bold-spirited,  guard  all  men  of  their
own  accord.

'  ’8  Like  steers  in  rapid  motion  they  ad  vance  and  overtake  the
nights;

i-*'  And  thus  the  Maruts'  power  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth  we
■  celebrate.

11  Health  and  wealth:  tvaill ;  well-being,  prosperity.  I  have  slightly
varied  the  translation  of  the  word,  which  recurs  in  every  line  of  stanzas  11 — 14
and  in  the  first  line  of  15.  The  Antra:  tho  divine  and  immortal  being.  SA-
yana  explains  tho  word  as  ‘  tho  expel ler  of  enemies,  or  tho  giver  of  life  and
strength.'

12  With  all  hit  company:  with  all  tho  host  of  heaven.

14  Wealthy  Pathyd  :  4  the  rich  path,’  personifiod  as  a  deity  of  happiness
and  welfare.

15  Who  gives  again :  who  repays  the  kindness  we  have  shown  him  when  he
wos  our  guest.  These,  as  Professor  Ludwig  observes,  are  tho  wishes  of  a  man
who  ia  starting  on  a  journoy  to  a  distant  place.


[BOOK  V.


526  tub  muxs  op

4  With  boldness  to  your*  Maruts  let  us  offer  laud  and  sacrifice  ;
Who  all,  through  ages  of  mankind,  guard  mortal  man  from

injury.

5  Praiseworthy,  givers  of  good  gifts.  Heroes  with  full  and  per¬

fect  strength —

.  To  Maruts,  Holy  Ones  of  heaven,  will  I  extol  the  sacrifice.

6  The  lofty  Heroes  cast  their  spears  and  weapons  bright  with

gleaming  gold.

After  these  Maruts  followed  close,  like  laughiDg  lightning  from
the  sky,  a  splendour  of  its  own  accord.

7  They  who  waxed  mighty,  of  the  earth,  they  who  are  in  the

wide  mid-air,

Or  iu  the  rivers’  compass,  or  in  the  abode  of  ample  heaven.

8  Praise  thou  the  Maruts’  company,  the  valorous  and  truly

strong.

The  Heroes,  hasting,  by  themselves  have  yoked  their  deer  for
victory.

9  Fair-gleaming,  on  Paru3hni  they  have  clothed  themselves  in

robes  of  wool,

And  with  their  chariot  tires  they  cleave  the  rock  asunder  in
their  might.

10  Whether  as  wanderers  from  the  way  or  speeders  on  or  to  the

path,

Under  these  names  the  spreading  band  tend  well  the  sacrifice
for  me.

1 1  To  this  the  Heroes  well  attend,  well  do  their  teams  attend  to

this.

Visible  are  their  varied  forms.  Behold,  they  are  PArivatas.

12  Hymn-singing,  seeking  water,  they,  praising,  have  danced

about  the  spring.

What  are  they  unto  me  1  No  thieves,  but  helpers,  splendid  to
behold.


9  Panuhnt :  one  of  the  rivers  of  the  PanjAb,  now  called  the  R&ri.  Robct
of  wool :  the  fleecy  vapours  which  rise  from  the  waters.  See  IV.  22.  2.

11  Pdrdeatat:  a  tribe  who  dwelt  on  the  banks  of  tho  Parushn!  who  may
have  been  in  the  habit  of  making  sudden  incursions  into  the  country  through
which  the  Sindhu  or  Indus  flows.

12  Seeking  water  •  this  is  Slyapa’s  explanation  of  kulhanyiva^,  the  mean-

ing  of  which  is  uncertain.  The  ipr  'mg :  apparently,  the  cloud.  According  to
SAyapa  the  reference  is  to  the  water— or  the  well — which  was  miraculously
brought  to  the  thirsting  Got*ma  by  the  Maruta.  See  L  86.  11.  The  stanza
is  difficult  and  obecure.  *  '


tirMX  52.]  TUB  RIGVEDA.  521.

13  Sublime,  with  lightnings  for  their  spears,  Sages  and  Orderera

are  they.

Kishi,  adore  that  Marut  host,  and  make  them  happj-with  thy
song.

14  Rishi,  invite  the  Marut  band  with  offerings,  as  a  maid  her

friend.

From  heaven,  too,  Bold  Ones,  in  your  might  haste  hither  glo¬
rified  with  songs.

15  Thinking  of  these  now  let  him  come,  as  with  the  escort  of  the

Gods,

And  with  the  splendid  Princes,  famed  for  rapid  courses,'  to
the  gifts.

16  Princes,  who,  when  I  asked  their  kin,  named  Prism  as  their

Mother-cow,

And  the  impetuous  Rudra  they,  the  Mighty  Oues,  declared
their  Sire.

17  The  mighty  ones,  the  seven  times  seven,  have  singly  given

me  hundred  gifts.

1  have  obtained  on  Yamunft  famed  wealth  in  kine  and  wealth
in  steeds.


14-4#  a  maid  her  friend:  this  seems  to  be^the  meaning  of  mUrdm  ruf
yoshdnd,  which  SAyana  explains,  aa  a  friend  (or  as  Aditya,  the  Sun)  with  praise.

15  The  three  concluding  stanzaa  are  very  difficult,  and  attempt*  at  transla¬
tion  and  explanation  must  be  purely  conjectural.  The  following  is  the  subs¬
tance  of  Profeasor  Ludwig’s  note.  §ilkins  (mighty  ones]  in  stanza  17  are  ap¬
parently  a  clan  (yajamAn&h,  or  institutors  of  sacrifice)  whose  number  consisting
of  a  multiple  of  seven,  gave  occasion  to  their  comparison  to  the  Maruts,  and
an  easy  transition  to  the  ddnastuti  or  eulogy  of  their  liberality.  The  construc¬
tion  is  :  now  thinking  of  these  sncrificcrs  (or,  Marut*]  may  ho  (the  Rishi]  come
together,  as  with  the  escort  of  the  Gods  [invited  in  stanza  14],  in  company
with  (the  Maruts  or]  the  Sfiri*  to  the  sacrificial  offerings.

Stanza  16  is  to  be  understood  figuratively  as  eulogy  of  the  $Akins  who  are
here  directly  identified  with  the  Marat*.  The  priest  must  know  the  lineage
of  the  sacrinccrs,  because  in  certain  ceremonies  ho  must  proclaim  their  names,
and  here  S&kina  are  considered  to  have  inherited  their  liberality  from  Priam
as  their  mother  and  their  power  from  Rudra  as  their  father.

17  The  Mighty  Ones  :  or  the  SAkins,  as  Professor  Ludwig  explains.

The  seven  limes  seven  :  there  are  said  to  bo  seven  troops  of  the  Marut*,
each  consisting  of  seven.  The  Si  kins,  or  powerful  institutors  of  sacrifice,
appear  to  bo  intended  here  (see  preceding  note)  as  compared  to,  or  identified
with  the  Maruts.  On  Yamund :  on  the  banks  of  tho  river  now  known  as  the
Jumna.

This  and  all  Rigveda  hymns  addressed  to  the  Marut*  have  been  translated
and  thorougly  discussed  by  Professor  Max  Muller  ta  Vedio  Hymns,  Part  L
(Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  VoL  XXXII.)


522


TBE  HYMXS  OP


[BOOK  V.


HYMN  LIII.  Marute.

Who  knows  the  birth  of  these,  or  who  lived  in  the  Maruts’
favour  in  the  days  of  old
What  time  their  spotted  deer  were  yoked.!

2  Who,  when  they  stood  upon  their  cars,  hath  heard  them  tell

the  way  they  went!

Who  was  the  bounteous  man  to  whom  their  kindred  rains
flowed  down  with  food  of  sacrifice  !

3  To  me  they  told  it,  and  they  came  with  winged  steeds  radiant

to  the  draught,

.  Youths,  Heroes  free  from  spot  or  stain :  Behold  us  here  and
praise  thou  us ;

4  Who  shine  self-luminous  with  ornaments  and  swords,  with

breastplates,  armlets,  and  with  wreaths,

Aiiayed  on  chariots  and  with  bows.

5  0  swift  to  pour  your  bounties  down,  ye  Maruts,  with  delight

1  look  upon  your  cars,

Like  splendours  coming  through  the  rain.

6  Munificent  Heroes,  they  have  cast  heaven’s  treasury  down  for  ■

the  worshipper's  behoof :

They  set  the  storm-cloud  free  to  stream  through  both  the
worlds,  and  rainfloods  flow  o’er  desert  spots.

7  The  bursting  streams  in  billowy  flood  have  spread  abroad,  like

milch-kine,  o’er  the  firmament.

Like  swift  steeds  hasting  to  their  journey's  resting-place,  to
every  side  run  glittering  brooks.

5  Hither,  0  Maruts,  come  from  heaven,  from  mid-air,  or  from
near  at  hand  :

Tarry  not  far  away  from  us.

9  So  let  not  Rasi,  Krumu,  or  AnitabLa,  Kubba,  or  Sindhu  hold
you  back.

Let  not  the  watery  Sarayu  obstruct  your  way.  With  us  bo
all  the  bliss  ye  give.

10  That  brilliant  gathering  of  your  cars,  the  company  of  Maruts,
of  the  Youthful  Ones,

The  rain-showers,  speeding  on,  attend.

1  Of  Oute:  God. ;  the  Marut*.  "  "v

9  Baud  :  a  river,  probably  an  affluent  of  the  Sindhu  or  Indus,  a«  Anitabhd
also  seems  to  have  been.  Krumu :  a  tributary  of  the  Indus,  identified  bv
some  with  the  Kurum.  Kubhd  :  the  K6[-Mn,  or  Kabul  river  which  falls  into
the  Indus  near  Atlock.  Sarayu ;  probably  a  river  in  the  Fanjib  which  gave
>U>  name  to  the  Sarayu  or  Sarjfi  of  Oudh,


THE  RIQYEDA.


HYMX  51.]

1 1  With  eulogies  and  hymns  may  we  follow  your  army,  troop  by

troop,  and  band  by  band,

And  company  by  company.

12  To  what  oblation-giver,  sprung  of  noble  ancestry,  have  sped
The  Maruts  on  this  coarse  to-day  1

13  Vouchsafe  to  us  the  bounty,  that  which  wo  imploro,  through

which,  for  child  and  progeny,

Yc  givo  the  seed  of  corn  that  wasteth  not  away,  and  bliss
that  reacheth  to  all  lifo.

1 4  May  wo  in  safoty  pass  by  those  who  slander  us,  loaving  be¬

hind  disgrace  and  hate.

Maruts,  may  we  bo  thoro  when  yo,  at  dawn,  in  rest  and  toil,
rain  waters  down  and  balm.

15  Favoured  by  Gods  shall  bo  tho  man,  0  Heroes,  Maruts!  and

possessed  of  noble  sons,

Whom  yo  protect  Such  may  wo  bo.

1  6  Praise  tho  Froo-givors.  At  this  liberal  patron’s  rito  thoy  joy
like  cattle  in  tho  mead.

So  call  thou  unto  them  who  como  as  anciont  Frionds :  hymn
thoso  who  love  thee  with  a  song.

HYMN  LIV.  Maruts.

Trim  hymn  will  I  make  ready  for  tho  Marut  host  who  bright
in  nativo  splendour  cast  tho  mountains  down.

Sing  tho  groat  strongth  of  thoso  illustrious  in  ronown,  who
stay  tho  heat,  who  sacrifioo  on  hoighta  of  heaven.

2  0  Maruts,  rich  in  water,  strongthenere  of  lifo  are  your  strong

bonds  with  harnessed  stcods,  that  wandor  far.

Trita  roars  out  at  him  who  aims  tho  lightning-flash.  Tho
waters  sweeping  round  are  thundering  on  their  way.

3  They  gleam  with  lightning,  Heroes.  Casters  of  tho  Stone.  ^

wind-rapid  Maruts,  ovorthrowors  of  tho  hills,

Oft  through  dosiro  to  rain  ooming  with  storm  of  hail,  roaring
in  onset,  violont  and  exceeding  strong.


1  Who  taerifice  on  height/  of  heaven:  '  to  whom  soloran  rito?  aro  familiar  ;
by  whom  tho  sacrifice*  called  Pruhtha  are  mado.'— Wilson.  The  word  prith.
thd  is  ambiguous,  signifying  both  height  or  ridge  and  a  oertain  arrangement
'of  hymns  (see  IV.  20.  4).  So  also  gharmd  in  tho  sarao  half-Jino  signifies  both
heat  and  an  oblation  of  hot  milk  or  other  hoatod  boverago,  and  the  meaning
of  the  compound  gharmattitthe  is  accordingly  ambiguous.

2  Trita :  tho  Vodio  God  who  frequently  appears  in  connexion  with  tho

Marut*.  According  to  SAyana,  Trita  is  tho  cloud  or  company  of  Maruts  sta¬
tioned  in  three  places.  .  ;


m


The  tifn.vs  of


t  EOOK  V.


4  When,  mighty  Rudras,  through  the  nights  and  through  the

days,  when  through  the  sky  and  realms  of  air,  shakers  of  all,
When  over  the  broad  fields  ye  drive  along  like  ships,  e’en  to
strongholds  ye  oome,  Maruts,  but  are  not  harmed.

5  Maruts,  this  hero  strength  and  majesty  of  yours  hath,  like

the  Sun,  extended  o’er  a  lengthened  way,

When  in  your  course  like  deer  with  splendour  unsubdued  ye
bowed  the  hill  that  gives  imperishable  rain.

6  Bright  shone  your  host,  ye  Sages,  Maruta,  when  ye  smote  the

waving  tree  as  when  the  worm  consumeth  it.

Accordant,  as  the  eye  guides  him  who  walks,  have  ye  led  out'
devotion  onward  by  an  easy  path.

7  Never  is  he,  0  Maruts,  slain  or  overcome,  never  doth  he  decay,

ne’er  is  distressed  or  harmed  ;

His  treasures,  his  resources,  never  waste  away,  whom,  whether
he  be  prince  or  Rishi,  ye  direct.  .  *

8  With  harnessed  team  like  heroes  overcoming  troops,  the  friendly

Maruta,  laden  with  their  water-casks,

Let  the  spring  flow,  aod  when  impetuous  they  roar  they
inundate  the  earth  with  floods  of  pleasant  meath.

9  Free  for  the  Maruts  is  the  earth  with  sloping  ways,  free  for  tho

rushing  0ne3  is  heaven  with  steep  descents.

The  paths  of  air’s  mid-region  are  precipitous,  precipitous  the
mountains  with  their  running  streams.

10  When,  as  the  Sun  hath  risen  up,  ye  take  delight,  0  bounteous
radiant  Maruts,  Heroes  of  the  6ky,

Your  coursers  weary  not  when  speeding  on  their  way,  and
rapidly  ye  reach  the  end  of  this  your  path.

Lances  are  on  your  shoulders,  anklet3  on  your  feet,  gold  chains
'  are  on  your  breasts,  gems,  Maruts,  on  yduTCar.  .  '•<
LightningT“ag!ow  with  flame~&re  flashing  in  your  hands,  and
visors  wrought  of  gold  are  laid  upon  your  heads.

12  Maruts,  in  eager  stir  ye  shake  the  vault  of  heaven,  splondid

beyond  conception,  for  its  shining  fruit.

They  gathered  when  they  let  their  deeds  of  might  flash  forth.
The  Pious  Ones  send  forth  a  far-resounding  shout,  ?

13  Sage  Maruts,  may  we  be  the  drivers  of  the  car  of  riche3  full

of  life  that  have  been  given  by  you.

0  Maruts,  let  that  wealth  in  thousands  dwell  with  us  which
never  vanishes  like  Tishya  from  the  sky.

12  For  iU  shining  fruit :  the  bright  water.

13  The  driven  of  ike  car :  lhat  ia,  the  controllers.  May  we  by  our  prayers
and  sacrifices  bring  down  and  enjoy  the  riches  which  you  give.


f


HYMN*  55.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


525


14  Maruts,  ye  further  wealth  with  longed-for  heroes,  further  the

Rishi  skilled  in  chanted  verses.

Ye  give  the  Bharata  as  his  strength,  a  charger,  and  ye1  bestow
a  King  who  quickly  listens.

15  Of  you,  most  swift  to  succour !  I  solicit  wealth  wherewith  wo

may  spread  forth  mid  men  like  as  the  Sun.

Accept,  0  Maruts,  graoiously  this  hymn  of  mine  that  wc  may
live  a  hundred  winters  through  its  power.

HYMN  LV.  )fcruu.

With  gleaming  lances,  with  their  breasts  adorned  with  gold,
the  Maruts,  rushing  onward,  hold  high  power  of  life.

They  hasten  with  swift  steeds  easy  to  be  controlled.  Their
cars  moved  onward  as  they  wont  to  victory.

2  Yc,  oa  ye  wist,  have  gained  of  your  own  solvos  your  power:

high,  0  yo  Mighty  Ones,  and  wido  yo  shine  abroad.

They  with  their  strength  have  ovon  measured  out  tho  sky.
Their  cars  moved  onward  as  they  wont  to  viotory.

3  Strong,  born  togothor,  thoy  togethor  have  waxed  great:  tho

Horocs  moro  and  more  havo  grown  to  majosty.

Resplendent  as  tho  Sun’s  beams  in  their  light  are  thoy.  Thoir
cars  moved  onward  as  thoy  went  to  viotory.

4  Maruts,  your  mightiness  doservos  to  bo  adored,  sight  to  bo

longed  for  like  tho  shining  of  tho  Sun.

So  lead  us  with  your  aid  to  immortality.  Thoir  oars  moved
onward  as  thoy  wont  to  viotory.

5  0  Maruts,  from  tho  Ocoan  yo  uplift  tho  rain,  and  fraught  with

vaporous  rhoisturo  pour  tho  torrents  down.

Novor,  ye  Wonder-Workors,  aro  your  Milch-kino  dry.  Their
cars  raovod  onward  as  thoy  went  to  victory.

6  When  to  your  car-poles  yo  have  yoked  your  spotted  deor  to  bo

your  steeds,  and  put  your  golden  mantles  on,

0  Maruts,  yo  disperse  all  enemies  abroad.  Thoir  care  moved
onward  as  they  wont  to  victory.

Tishya :  an  osterism  regarded  as  shapod  like  au  arrow  and  containing  three
ntara.  According  to  SAyana  Tishya  hero  is  synonymous  with  Aditya.

14  The  Bharata:  a  warrior,  or  one  of  family  of  Bharata.  See  Index.  Ac¬
cording  to  SAyana,  SyAvAsva  ]jho  Rishi  of  the  hymn  is  intended  :  '  to  (inc)  tho.
minietrant  prieat/— Wilson.

Who  quickly  lieleni :  to  his  people’s  prayers.  SAyana  explains  frushtirndnlam
os  sukhatanlam,  happy  and  prosperous.

15  A  hundred  winters :  a  frequently  occurring  expression,  ‘  from  whioh  we

might  infer,’  says  Dr.  J.  Muir,  'that  the  Indians  still  retained  aorue  recollec¬
tion  of  their  having  at  ono  time  ocaupiod  a  oolder  country.’  See  Original  &m«
krU  Texts ,  II.  328.  -

i  Your  Milch- tine  :  the  raia -clouds.


TUB  BY  MSS  OP


[BOOK  V.


826

7  Neither  the  mountains  nor  the  rivers  keep  you  back :  whither

ye  have  resolved  thither  ye,  Maruts,  go.

-  Ye  compass  round  about  even  the  heaven  and  earth.  Their

cars  moved  onward  as  they  went  to  victory.

8  Whate’er  is  ancient,  Maruts,  what  of  recent  time,  whate’er  is

spoken,  Vasus,  what  is  chanted  forth,

-  They  who  take  cognizance  of  all  of  this  are  ye.  Their  cars

moved  onward  as  they  went  to  victory.

9  Be  gracious  unto  us,  ye  Maruts,  slay  us  not :  extend  ye  unto

us  shelter  of  many  a  sort.

Pay  due  regard  unto  our  friendship  and  our  praise.  Their
cars  moved  onward-as  they  went  to  victory.

10  0  Maruts,  lead  us  on  to  higher  fortune :  deliver  us,  when
lauded,  from  afflictions.

Accept,  ye  Holy  Ones,  the  gifts  we  bring  you.  May  we  be
masters  of  abundant  riches.

HYMN  LYI.  ;  Maruts.

.  Acsi,  that  valorous  company  adorned  with  ornaments  of  gold,
The  people  of  the  Maruts,  I  call  down  today  even  from  the
luminous  realm  of  heaven.  a

2  Even  as  thou  thinkest  in  thy  heart,  thither  my  wishes  also

tend.

Those  who  have  come  most  near  to  thine  invoking  calls,
streugtheu  them  fearful  to  behold.

3  Earth,  like  a  bounteous  lady,  liberal  of  her  gifts,  struck

down  and  shaken,  yet  exultant,  comes  to  us.

Impetuous  as  a  bear,  0  Maruts,  is  your  rush  terrible  as  a
dreadful  bull.

4  They  who  with  mighty  strength  o’erthrow  like  oxen  difficult

to  yoke,

Cause  e’eu  the  heavenly  stone  to  shake,  yea,  shake  the  rocky
mountain  as  they  race  along.

5  Rise -up!  even  now  with  lauds  I  call  the  very  numerous  com¬

pany,

Unequalled,  of  these  Maruts,  like  a  herd  of  lyue,  grown  up
together  in  their  strength.

2  Slrtnyikm  Ihm :  that  is,  the  M knits,  with  oblations.

3  The  exact  meaning  of  the  first  line  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Sdyaria  ex¬
plains  it :  '  As  the  earth— that  is  the  people  of  the  earth— having  a  powerful
masters,  when  oppressed  by  others,  has  recourse  to  him  her  own  master,  so
.  the  army  of  MaruU  cornea  exulting  to  ua.'  But  tuQJittkmal  1  (bounteous,  liberal,
bringing  forth  abundant  fruit)  cannot  mean  frmtalurSmiH,  having  a  power¬
ful  master.

Struck  dom ;  by  the  rain  seat  by  the  HaruU.


HYMN  57-1  '  THE  MOVED  A.  527

C  Bind  to  your  car  the  bright  red  marcs,  yoke  the  red  coursers
to  your  car.

Bind  to  the  pole,  to  draw,  the  fleet-foot  tawny  steeds,  the
best  at  drawing,  to  the  pole.

7  Yea,  and  this  loudly-neighing  bright  red  vigorous  horse  who

hath  been  stationed,  fair  to  see,

Let  him  not  cause  delay,  0  Maruts,  in  your  course,  urge  ye
him  onward  in  your  cars.

8  The  Maruts'  chariot,  ever  fain  to  gather  glory,  we  invoke,
Which  Rodasf  hath  mounted,  bringing  pleasant  gifts,  with

Maruts  in  her  company.

9  I  call  that  brilliant  hand  of  yours,  adorable,  rapid  on  the  car
Whereon  tho  bounteous  Dame,  auspicious,  nobly  born,  shows

glorious  with  the  Marut  host.’

HYMN  LVII.  Marut*.

Op  one  accord,  with  Indra,  0  yo  Rudras,  come  borno  on  your
golden  car  for  our  prosperity.

An  offering  from  us,  this  hymn  is  brought  to  you,  as,  unto  ono
who  thirsts  for  water,  hoavonly  springs.

2  Armed  with  your  daggors,  full  of  wisdom,  armed  with  spears,

armed  with  your  quivers,  armed  with  arrows,  with  good  bows,
Good  horses  and  good  cars  hove  ye,  0  Ppgni's  Sons:  yo,  Maruts,
with  good  weapons  go  to  victory.

3  From  hills  and  hoavon  ye  shake  wealth  for  tho  worshipper:  in

terror  at  your  coming  low  tho  woods  bow  down.

Yo  make  tho  earth  to  tremble,  Sons  of  Pfifnl,  when  forviotory
yo  have  yoked,  fiorco  Onos  1  your  spottod  deer.

4  Bright  with  tho  blasts  of  wind,  wrappod  in  thoir  robos  of  rain,

like  twins  of  noble  aspect  aud  of  lovoly  form,

Tho  Maruts,  spotless,  with  steeds  tawny-hued  and  red,  strong
in  their  mightiness  and  spreading  wide  liko  heaven.

0  Rich  in  adornment,  rich  in  drops,  munificent,  bright  in  thoir
aspoct,  yielding  bounties  that  endure,

Noble  by  birth,  adornod  with  gold  upon  their  breasts,  tho
Singers  of  tho  sky  have  won  immortal  fame.

7  Who  hath  bten  stationed  :  or  harnessed  to  tho  car.

8  Rodast :  the  Consort  of  Rudra  and  mother  of  tho  Marut*.

9  Tht  bounteous  Dame :  Rodasl.  Shows  glorious  :  or,  is  glorified.

1  0  ye  Rudras  :  or  Sons  of  Rudra.  For  our  prospen'ty  :  ‘  to  tho  accoasiblo
(sacrifice).’ — Wilson.  Heavenly  springs :  an  allusion,  says  S&yana,  to  tho  well,
that  is,  the  cloud  which  was  brought  by  the  Maruts  to  thirsty  Gotama.  See
I.  85.

4  Like  twins :  all  alike.

5  The  Singers  of  the  sky ;  chanter*  of  their  thuudcr-psalm.


[BOOK  V.


523  TBE  BY  UBS  OP

6  Borne  on  both  shoulders,  0  ye  Maruts,  are  your  spears :  within

your  anus  is  laid  your  energy  and  strength.

Bold  thoughts  are  in  your  heads,  your  weapons  in  your  cars,
all  glorious  majesty  is  moulded  on  your  forms.

7  Vouchsafe  to  us,  0  Maruts,  splendid  bounty  in  cattle  and  in

steeds,  in  cars  and  heroes.

Children  of  Rudra,  give  us  high  distinction :  may  I  enjoy  your
Godlike  help  and  favour.

8  Ho  !  Maruts,  Heroes,  skilled  in  Law,  immortal,  be  gracious  un¬

to  us,  ye  rich  in  treasures,

Ye  hearers  of  the  truth,  ye  sage  and  youthful,  grown  mighty,
dwelling  on  the  lofty  mountains.

HYMN  LVIII.  Maruts.

Now  do  T  glorify  their  mighty  cohort,  the  company  of  these  the
youthful  Maruts,

Who  ride  impetuous  on  with  rapid  horses,  and  radiant  in
themselves,  are  Lords  of  Amrit.

2  The  mighty  glittering  band,  arm-bound  with  bracelets,  givers

of  bliss,  unmeasured  in  their  greatness.

With  magical  powers,  bountiful,  ever-roaring, — these,  liberal
Heroes,  venerate  thou  singer.

3  This  day  may  all  your  water-b ringers,  Maruts,  they  who  impel

the  falling  rain,  approach  us.

This  fire,  0  Maruts,  hath  been  duly  kiudled ;  let  it  find  favour
with  you,  youthful  Sages.

4  Ye  raise  up  for  the  folk  an  active  ruler  whom,  Holy  Ones !  a

Master’s  hand  hath  fashioned.

Ye  send  the  fighter  hand  to  hand,  arm-mighty,  and  the  brave
hero,  Maruts !  with  good  horses.


6  Bold  thoughts :  SAyana  explains  nrim»f = vrimndxl  aa  golden  tiaras-  The
word  nrimna  in  one  or  another  of  its  cases  occurs  somo  thirty  times  iu  the
Jtigveda,  find  always  in  the  sense  of  manly  power,  valour,  or  valorous  dood.

8  Ye  term  of  the  truth  :  or,  fatuous  for  your  truth,  for  the  realization  of
your  promises.

1  Lords  of  Amrit  :  controllers  of  the  sweet  life-giving  rain.

2  Arm-bound  with  bracelets :  or,  rather,  ‘adorned  with  quoits  on  their
hands.'— M.  MUller.

4  Whom . a  Master's  hand  hath  fashioned:  according  to  Styana  vibhva-

tashtam  means  fabricated  or  modelled  by  Vibhvan,  the  *ecood  of  the  three
Kibhus  i.  e.  atjumtarOfaranter*  or  exceedingly  handsome.  The  fighter  hand
to  hand  :  the  man  who  lights  on  foot  is  your  gift  as  well  as  the  warrior  who  ia
borne  to  bottle  in  a  chariot.


BYMN  59.]  .  TUB  RIOVEDA.  529

5  They  spring  forth  more  and  more,  strong  in  their  glories,  like

days,  like  spokes  where  none  are  last  in  ordor.

Highest  and  mightiest  are  the  Sons  of  Pfisni.  Fiyn  to  their
own  intention  cling  the  Maruts.

6  When  ye  have  hastened  on  with  spotted  coursers,  0  Maruts,

on  your  cars  with  strong-wrought  follies,

The  waters  are  disturbed,  the  woods  are  shattered.  Let  Dyaus
the  Red  Steer  send  his  thunder  downward.

7  Even  Earth  hath  spread  horself  wide  at  their  coming,  and

they  as  husbands  have  with  power  impregned  her.

They  to  the  polo  have  yoked  the  winds  for  coursers :  their
sweat  have  they  made  rain,  these  Sons  of  Rudra.

8  Ho !  Maruts,  Horoos,  skilled  in  Law,  immortal,  bo  gracious

unto  us,  ye  rich  in  treasures,

Ye  hearers  of  the  truth,  ye  sago  and  youthful,  grown  mighty,
dwolling  on  the  lofty  mountains.

HYMN  LIX.  Marti U.

Your  spy  hath  called  to  you  to  give  prosperity.  I  sing  to  Heaven
and  Earth  and  offer  sacrifice.

Thoy  bathe  thoir  steeds  and  hasten  through  the  firmament :
thoy  spread  abroad  thoir  radianco  through  the  soa  of  oloud.

2  Earth  shakes  and  reels  in  terror  at  thoir  onward  rush,  like  a

full  ship  which,  quivoring,  lots  the  water  in.

Marked  on  thoir  ways  aro  thoy,  visible  from  afar :  tho  Horoos
press  botween  in  mighty  armamont.

3  As  tho  oxaltod  horn  of  bulls  for  splendid  might,  as  tho  Sun’s

oyo  set  in  tho  firuiamont’s  expanse,

Like  vigorous  horses  yo  aro  beauteous  to  bohold,  and  for  your
glory  show  like  bridegrooms,  0  ye  Men.

4  Who,  0  yo  Maruts,  may  attain  tho  mighty  lore  of  you  the

mighty,  who  may  reach  your  manly  deods  ?

Yo,  verily,  make  earth  tromblo  like  a  ray  of  light  what  timo
ye  bring  your  boons  to  give  prosperity.

5  Like  steeds  of  ruddy  colour,  scions  of  one  race,  ns  foremost

champions  they  have  battled  in  tho  van.

The  Horoos  havo  waxed  strong  like  well-grown  manly  youths :
with  floods  of  rain  thoy  make  the  Sun's  eye  fade  away.

6  Having  no  eldest  and  no  youngest  in  their  band,  no  middle¬

most,  preeminent  thoy  have  waxed  in  might,

1  Your  tpy :  Agni,  aa  the  lightning.  According  to  SHyana  spat  ia  for
sprathtA,  one  who  touche*  (tho  oblation),  tho  Hotar  or  presenting  priest.

2  Presi  between  :  rush  through  tho  air  between  heaven  and  earth.

34


530  THE  HYMNS  OP  '  [BOOK  V.

These  Sons  of  Prisni,  sprung  of  noble  ancestry :  come  hither¬
ward  to  us,  ye  bridegrooms  of  the  sky.

7  Like  birds  of  air  they  flew  with  might  in  lengthened  lines  from

heaven's  high  ridges  to  the  borders  of  the  sky.

The  steeds  who  carry  them,  as  Gods  and  mortals  know,  have
caused  the  waters  of  the  mountains  to  descend.

8  May  Dyaus,  the  Infinite,  roar  for  our  banquet :  may  Dawns

toil  for  us,  glittering  with  moisture.

Lauded  by  thee,  these  Maruts,  Sons  of  Rudra,  0  Rishi,  havo
sent  down  the  heavenly  treasure.

HYMN  LX.  Karat*.

I  laud  with  reverence  the  gracious  Agni :  here  may  he  sit  and
part  our  meed  among  us.

As  with  spoil-seeking  cars  I  bring  oblation  :  turned  rightward
I  will  swell  the  Marut's  praise-song.

2  The  Maruts,  yea,  the  Rudras,  who  have  mounted  their  famous

spotted  deer  and  cars  swift-moving, —

Before  you,  fierce  Ones !  woods  bow  down  in  terror :  Earth,
even  the  mountain,  trembles  at  your  coming.

3  Though  vast  and  tall,  the  mountain  is  affrighted,  the  height

of  heaven  is  shaken  at  your  roaring
When,  armed  with  lances,  ye  are  sporting,  Maruts,  and  rush
along  together  like  the  waters.

4  They,  like  young  suitors,  sons  of  wealthy  houses,  have  with

their  golden  natures  decked  their  bodies.

Strong  on  their  cars,  the  lordly  Ones,  for  glory,  have  set  their
splcndours  on  their  forms  for  ever.

5  None  being  eldest,  none  among  them  youngest,  as  brothers

they  have  grown  to  happy  fortune.

May  their  Sire  Rudra,  young  and  deft,  and  Prisni  pouring
much  milk,  bring  fair  days  to  the  Maruts.


7  Godt  and  mortals :  the  text  has  only  Adyc,  both  (sides  or  parties).  The
word  generally  means  Gods  and  men  ;  bat  perhaps,  as  Professor  Ludwig  sug¬
gests,  Heaven  and  Earth  may  be  intended  here.

8  Dyaus,  the  Infinite  :  CL  X.  63.  3.

1  Turned  rightvard :  making  reverential  salutation  by  circumambulation
from  left  to  right ;  the  Gaelic  deasiL

4  With  their  golden  natures,  with  some  hesitation  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig
in  taking  hiranyaih,  as  an  old  form  of  the  f»minine,  with  sradhdih.  Professor
Wilson,  following  Sdyana,  translates  :  *  with  golden  (ornaments)  and  purifying
waters.'

5  Pouring  much  miUc  :  Prisni,  the  mother  of  the  Maruts,  the  cloud  of  the
firmament,  being  represented  as  a  cow.

Bring  fair  days  to  the  Maruts :  perhaps  the  bright  weather  which  follows
the  Rains.  ‘  Grant  favourable  days  for  (the  sake  of)  the  Maruts.'— Wilson.


HYMN  61.]  TUB  RIGVBDA.  681

•  6  Whether,  0  blessed  Maruts,  ye  be  dwelling  in  highest,  mid¬

most,  or  in  lowest  heaven,

Thence,  0  ye  Rudras,  and  thou  also,  Agni,  notice  tho*sacrificial
food  we  offer.

7  0  Maruts,  Lords  of  all,  when  Agni  and  when  ye  drive  down¬

ward  from  sublimest  heaven  along  the  heights,

Shakers  of  all,  rejoicing,  slayers  of  the  foe,  give  richee  to  the

•  Soma-pressing  worshipper.

8  0  Agni,  with  the  Maruts  as  they  gleam  and  sing,  gathered  in

troop,  rejoicing  drink  the  Soma  juice  ;

With  those  the  living  ones  who  cleanse  and  further  all,  joined
with  thy  banner,  0  Vaifv&nura,  from  of  old.

HYMN  LXI.  Maruts.

0  hkrors  lordliest  of  all,  who  are  yo  that  have  singly  como
Forth  from  a  rogion  most  remote  1

2  Where  aro  your  horsos,  whero  tho  reins?  How  carno  yo?  how

had  yo  tho  power  ?

Rein  was  on  nose  and  sout  on  baok.

3  Tho  whip  is  laid  upon  tho  flank.  Tho  heroes  stretch  thoir

thighs  apart,

Liko  womon  whon  tho  babo  is  born.

4  Go  yo,  0  Heroes,  fur  away,  yo  bridegrooms  with  a  lovely

Spouse,

That  ye  may  warm  you  at  the  fir©.

3  May  sho  gain  cattle  for-Unr  meed,  hundreds  of  sheep  and

stoeds  and  kino,"

Who  throw  embracing  arms  around  tho  hero  whom  Sy&v&ava
praised.

6  Yea,  many  a  woman  is  more  firm  and  hotter  than  tho  man

who  turds  - - - - - - -

Away  from  Gods,  and  offers  not.

7  Sho  who  disconis  tho  weak  and  worn,  the  man  who  thirsts

'  and  is  m  want :  '  “

Sho  sets  hor  mind  upon  tho  Gods.

8  Joined  with  My  banner;  closely  connected  with  thy  ensign  or  banner  of
flame.

4  With  a  lovely  Spouse :  apparently  Rod  as!,  who  is  sometimes  regarded  os
tho  wife  of  the  whole  band  of  Maruts.

5  She :  according  to  S&yana,  tho  wife  of  Taranta  (stanza  10)  who  is ‘the*
hero  whom  Sy4vfl?va  praised’.’

6  More  firm ;  tho  word  thus  rendered,  fdsiyasl,  is  taken  by  Slyupa  to  be  tho
name  of  Tsranta’s  wife.


582  THE  BYJfSS  OP  [BOOK  V.

8  And  jet  fall  many  a  one,  unpraised,  mean  niggard,  is  entitled

man :

Only  Jn  weregild  is  he  such.

9  And  she,  the  young,  the  joyous-spirited,  divulged  the  path  to

Syava,  yea,  to  me.

Two  red  steeds  carried  me  to  Purumilha’s  side,  that  sage  of
far-extended  fame,

10  Him  who,  like  Vaidadasvi,  like  Taranto,  hath  bestowed  on  mo
A  hundred  cows  in  liberal  gift.

1 1  They  who  arc  borne  by  rapid  steeds,  drinking  the  meath  that

gives  delight.

They  have  attained  high  glories  here.

12  They  by  whose  splendour  both  the  worlds  are  over-spread  :

they  shiae  on  cars
As  tho  gold  gleams  above  in  heaven.

13  That  Marut  band  is  ever  young,  borne  on  bright  cars,  un¬

blamable,

Moviug  to  victory,  checked  by  none.

1 4  Who  knoweth,  verily,  of  these  where  the  All-shakers  take

delight,

Born,  spotless,  after  sacred  Law  1

15  Guides  are  ye,  lovers  of  the  song !  to  mortal  man  through  holy

hymn,

And  bearers  when  he  cries  for  help.

16  Do  ye,  destroyers  of  the  foe,  worshipful  and  exceeding  bright.
Send  down  the  treasures  that  we  crave.

17  0  Ormyi,  bear  thou  far  away  to  Dirbhya  this  my  hymn  of

praise,

Songs,  Goddess,  as  if  chariot-borne.

18  From  me  to  Rathaviti  say,  when  he  hath  pressed  the  Soma

juice,

The  wish  I  had  departeth  not.

19  This  wealthy  Rathaviti  dwells  among  the  people  rich  in  kine,
Among  the  mountains,  far  withdrawn.

8  Only  in  vtrcgild:  only  as  regards  the  fine  to  be  paid  for  manslaughter,
either  by  him  or  for  him,  can  he  be  accounted  a  man.  The  verse  is  obscure.
Sec  Yodic  Hymns  (Sacred  Books  of  the  Hast),  Part  L  p.  360,  and  Ludwig,
Ueber  die  neuesten  Arbeiten,  Ac.,  p.  40.

9  And  the:  Taraata’s  wife.  Sydva  =  ^jtvlsva,  the  Riehi  of  the  hymn.

10  Vuidadafvi :  Purumljha,  ten  of  Yidadasra.

11  This  stanza  is  apparently  the  beginning  of  a  separate  hymn,  in  honour
of  the  Maruts.

12  At  the  gold:  the  golden  Sun.

17  Gnnyd  :  Goddcaa  of  Night.  Ddrbhya:  Rathaviti,  son  of  Darbha.

18  The  with  1  had:  to  perform  a  sacricce  for  the  rich  and  liberal  Rathaviti. '


HYMN  02.]


THE  MOVED  A.


535


HYMN  LXII.  •  Mitra-Varuna.

By  your  high  Law  6rm  order  is  established  there  where  they
loose  for  travel  S  irya’s  horses.  #

Ten  hundred  stood  together :  there  I  looked  on  this  the  most
marvellous  Deities'  one  chief  glory.

2  This,  Mitra-Varuna,  is  your  spooial  greatnoss:  floods  that  stood

there  they  with  tho  days  attracted.

Ye  cause  to  flow  all  voices  of  tho  cow-pon  :  your  single  charint-
felly  hath  rolled  hither.

3  0  Mitra-Varuna,  yo  by  your  greatness,  both  Kings,  have  firmly

stablished  oarth  and  hoavon.

Ye  caused  tho  cows  to  stream,  tho  plants  to  flourish,  and,  scat¬
tering  swift  drops,  sont  down  tho  rain-flood.

4  Lot  your  well-hamossod  horses  boar  you  hither  :  hitherward

lot  thorn  como  with  reins  drawn  tightly.

A  covering  cloud  of  sacred  oil  attends  you,  and  your  streams
flow  to  us  from  days  aforotime.

B  To  mako  tho  lustre  wider  and  more  famous,  guarding  the
scored  grass  with  veneration,

Ye,  Mitra- Varupa,  firm,  strong,  awe-inspiring,  are  seated  on  a
throno  amid  oblations.

6  With  hands  that  shed  uo  blood,  guarding  tho  pious,  whom,

Vnruna,  ye  save  amid  oblations.

Yo  Twain,  togothor,  Kings  of  willing  spirit,  uphold  dominion
basod  on  thousand  pillars.

7  Adornod  with  gold,  its  columns  arc  of  iron  :  in  heavon  it  glit¬

ters  liko  a  whip  for  horsos ;


1  By  your  high  Iaiw  :  tho  eternal  order  of  tho  universe,  which  in  tho  rogion
of  tho  Sun  rogulates  tho  storting  and  tho  journeying  of  his  horsos.  depends
on,  or  is  identical  with,  tho  overlasting  statutes  of  Mitra  end  Varupa.  Ten
hundred :  rnys  of  tho  Sun.  One  chief  glory  :  tho  orb  of  tho  Sun,  tho  noblest
visible  form  of  Agui  and  other  Gods.

2  Floods  that  stood  there :  they,  that  is  tho  sunbeams,  havo  in  tho  course  of
days  milkod  out  or  attracted  to  themselvos  tho  waters  that  Btood  apart  from
tho  Sun.  Taitk&shtfr  (standing,  stationary)  has  no  substautivo  expressed,
and  the  moaning  of  tho  aooond  half  lino  is  consequently  soinowhat  uncertain.
All  voices  of  the  cow-pen:  tho  cow-pon  is  tho  vast  aerial  stall  which  holds
tho  rain-clouds,  tho  miloh-kine  of  tho  firmament.  Tho  voices  are  probably
tho  thundor  and  tho  roar  of  tho  rushing  rain.  Your  single  chariot  felly  :  the
circumference  or  folly  of  tho  wheel  being,  by  metonymy,  put  for  tho  ohariot.

4  A  covering  cloud  of  sacred  oil ;  of  ghrita,  butter,  t.  e.  fertilizing  rain.

5  On  a  throne  :  or  on  your  car.

6  Ye  save  amid  oblations  :  tho  sacrificial  hall  with  its  precincts  being  regard¬
ed  as  an  inviolable  asylum.

7  Adorned  with  gold :  the  chariot  of  Mitra  and  Varuna.  Lilt  a  whip  for
horses :  according  to  SAyana,  the  whip  is  the  lightning  and  the  horses  are  tho
flying  clouds.


hi  '  TUB  BY  MSS  OP  [BOOK  V,

Or  stabli'shod  on  a  field  deep-soiled  and  fruitful.  So  may  we
share  the  meath  that  loads  your  car-seat.

8  Ye  mount  your  car  gold-hued  at  break  of  morning,  and  iron-

pillared  when  the  Sun  is  setting,

And  from  that  place,  O  Varuna  and  Mitra,  behold  infinity  and
•  limitation.

9  Bountiful  guardians  of  the  world  !  the  shelter  that  is  impene¬

trable,  strongest,  flawless.

Aid  us  with  that,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra,  and  when  we  long  to
wiu  may  we  be  victors.

HYMN  LXiri.  Mitra-Varuna.

Guardians  of  Order,  ye  whose  Laws  are  ever  true,  in  the
sublimest  heaven  your  chariot  ye  ascend.

0  Mitra-Varuna  whomsoe’er  ye  favour,  here,  to  him  the  rain
with  sweetness  stream eth  down  from  heaven.

2  This  world's  imperial  Kings,  0  Mitra-Varuna,  ye  rule  in  holy
synod,  looking  on  the  light.

We  pray  for  rain,  your  boon,  and  immortality.  Through  heaven
and  over  earth  the  thunderers  take  their  way.

8  Imperial  Kings,  strong,  Heroes,  Lords  of  earth  and  heaven,
Mitra  and  Varuna,  ye  ever  active  Ones,

Ye  wait  on  thunder  with  the  many-tinted  clouds,  and  by  the
Asura's  magic  power  cause  Heaven  to  rain.

4  Your  magic,  Mitra-Varuna,  resteth  in  the  heaven.  The  Sun,
the  wondrous  weapon,  cometh  forth  as  light.

Ye  hide  him  in  the  sky  with  cloud  and  flood  of  rain,  and  water-
drops,  Parjanya  !  full  of  sweetness  flow.


Or  stab  fished :  the  meaning  of  this  third  P4d*  i*  not  clear.  Professor
Wilson,  following  Slyana,  translates :  ‘may  we  load  the  vehicle  with  the  liba¬
tion  in  an  auspicious  place,  or  in  the  sacrificial  hall,  (where  the  columns)  are
erected.'

8  Iron-pUlartd  :  the  chariot  which  shines  like  gold  in  the  light  of  the  rising
sun  looks  dim  and  dark  like  bronze  or  iron  at  sunset.

Infinity  and  limitation  :  dditim  ditin  da ;  according  to  Sflyana,  Aditi  or
the  Earth  as  an  indivisible  whole,  and  Diti  as  representing  the  divisible  people
and  living  creatures  inhabiting  it.  Aditi  appears  to  mean  infinite  Nature,  and
Diti  to  be  a  Goddess  connected  with  Aditi  without  any  distinct  conception,
and  merely  as  a  contrast  to  her.  The  two  words  may  perhaps  mean  the  eter¬
nal  and  the  nerlsbable,  yonder  boundless  space  and  the  bounded  space  near  us,
or  Sky  and  Earth,  or  Nature  by  day  and  Nature  by  night.  ‘  At  all  events,
as  Dr.  Muir  observes,  ‘  the  two  together  appear  to  be  put  by  the  poet  for  the
entire  aggregate  of  visible  nature.’  See  Original  Satuhrit  Texts,  V.  pp.  42,  43.

The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  rain.

2  The  thunderers  :  the  roaring  winds.

3  The  Asura’s  magic  potter :  the  Asura  or  divine  Being  here  is  either  Dyaus

or  Parjanya.  _  .  .


HYMN  640


THE  IlIGVEDA.


535


4  The  Maruta  yoke  their  easy  car  for  victory,  0  Mitra-Varuna,
as  a  hero  in  the  wars.

The  thunderers  roam  through  regions  varied  in  tfceir  hues.
Imperial  Kings,  bedow  us  with  the  milk  of  heavon.

6  Refreshing  is  your  voice,  0  Mitra-Varuna  :  Parjanya  eendeth

out  a  wondrous  mighty  voice.

With  magic  power  the  Maruts  clothe  them  with  the  clouds.
Ye  Two  cause  Heaven  to  rain,  the  red,  the  spotless  One.

7  Wise,  with  your  Law  and  through  the  Asura’s  magic  power

ye  guard  the  ordinances,  Mitra- Varuna.

Ye  by  eternal  Order  govern  all  the  world.  Yo  set  the  Sun  in
heaven  as  a  refulgent  car.

HYMN  LXIV.  Mltra-Varuva.

You,  foeman-slaying  Varupa  and  Mitra,  we  invoke  with  song,
Who,  as  with  poufold  of  your  arms,  onoompass  round  the  realm
of  light.

2  Stretch  out  your  arms  with  favouring  lovo  unto  this  man  who

singeth  hymns,

For  in  all  places  is  sung  forth  your  ovor-gracious  friendliness.

3  That  l  may  gain  a  refuge  now,  may  my  steps  bo  on  Mitra's

path.

Men  go  protected  in  the  ohargo  of  this  dear  Friend  who  harms
us  not.

4  Mitra  and  Vanina,  from  you  may  I,  by  song,  win  noblest

meed

That  shall  stir  envy  in  the  homes  of  wealthy  chiefs  and  those
who  praise.

ft  With  your  fair  splondours,  Varuna  and  Mitra,  to  our  gather¬
ing  come,

That  in  their  homes  the  wealthy  chiefs  and  they  who  are  your
friends  may  thrive.

6  With  those,  moreover,  among  whom  yo  hold  your  high  supre¬
macy,

Vouchsafe  us  room  that  we  may  win  strength  for  prosperity
and  wealth.


1  With  penfold  of  your  arm :  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  taking  vrojVT  an
an  instrumental  case.

3  May  my  ,ttpS  be :  may  I  walk  in  the  way  of  Mitra,  that  is,  may  I  keep
his  holy  law.

5  The  wealthy  chiefs :  the  insti tutors  of  sacrifice.  Your  friend*  :  we.  the
priests.

6  With  thott :  with  tho  Gods.


635  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V.

7  When  morning  flushes,  Holy  Ones !  in  the  Gods’  realm  where
white  Cows  shine,

Supporting  Archananas,  speed,  ye  Heroes,  with  yotir  active
feet  hither  to  my  pressed  Soma  juice.

HYMN  LXV.  Mitra- Varuna.

Full  wise  is  he  who  hath  discerned  :  let  him  speak  to  us  of
the  Gods, —

The  man  whose  praise-songs  Yaruna  the  beautiful,  or  Mitra,
loves.

2  For  they  are  Kings  of  noblest  might,  of  glorious  fame  most

widely  spread ;

Lords  of  the  brave,  who  strengthen  Law,  the  Holy  Ones  with
every  race.

3  Approaching  you  with  prayer  for  aid,  together  I  address  you

first.

We  who  have  good  steeds  call  on  you,  Most  Sage,  to  give  us
strength  besides.

4  E’en  out  of  misery  Mitra  gives  a  way  to  dwelling  at  our  ease,
For  he  who  worships  hath  the  grace  of  Mitra,  fighter  in  the

van.

5  In  Mitra's  shelter  that  extends  to  utmost  distance  may  wc

dwell.

Unmenaced,  guarded  by  thy  care,  ever  as  sons  of  Varuna.

6  Ye,  Mitra,  urge  thi3  people  on,  and  to  one  end  direct  their

ways.

Neglect  not  ye  the  wealthy  chiefs,  neglect  not  us  the  Rishis  :
be  our  guardians  when  ye  quaff  the  milk.

HYMN  LXVL  Mitra-Varuna,

0  8APIBNT  man,  call  the  Two  Gods,  the  very  wise,  who  slay
the  foe.

For  Yaruna,  whose  form  is  Law,  place  offerings  for  his  great
delight.

7  White  Cotes :  the  white  clouds  of  early  morning.  Archandnas :  the  Right
of  the  hymn.  With  your  active  fttt:  the  literal  translation  of  hastibhih  'pad-
hhih  would  be,  with  feet  prodded  with  hands  :  ‘  With  rapid  steeds  ’ — Wilson.
Seo  M.  Bloomfield,  Contributions  to  the  Interpretation  of  the  Veda,  Second
Series,  p.  35.

1  Of  the  Gods :  regarding  Mitra  and  Varuna.

5  As  sons  of  Varuna  :  or  perhaps,  as  Professor  Ludwig  suggest*,  with
Varuna  as  our  son,  that  is  with  kingly  descendants.

6  Ye,  Mitra  :  and  Varupa.

When  ye  quaff  the  snilk  ‘in  the  presenting  of  the  libation.’— Wilson.

1  0  Sapient  man  :  thou  who  knoweet  how  to  praise  the  Gods.

Whose  form  is  Lat> :  according  to  Siyana, '  whose  form  is  water.'


HYMN  67.]  THE  RIQVBDA.  537

2  For  they  have  won  unbroken  sway  in  full  perfootiou^pnwer

divine.

And,  like  high  lftwa-  *I 2 3‘o-w<**‘ld'of' man  hath  been  made  beauti¬
ful  aa  light.

3  Therefore  we  praise  you  that  your  cars  may  travel  far  in  front

of  ours —

You  who  accept  the  eulogy  of  Ratahavya  with  his  hymns.

4  And  ye  show  wisdom,  Wondrous  Gods  1  with  fulness  of  intelli¬

gence.

By  mon’s  discernment  aro  ye  marked,  0  yo  whose  might  is
purified.

5  This  is  tho  Law  sublime,  0  Earth  :  to  aid  the  Rishis'  toil  for

famo

Tho  Two,  wide-spreading,  are  prepared.  They  como  with
.ample  overflow.

C  Mitra,  yo  Gods  with  wandering  oyes,  would  that  tho  worship¬
pers  and  wo

Might  strive  to  roach  tho  roalm  yo  rulo,  most  spacious  and
protooted  woll.

HYMN  LXVTI.  Mitra- Varuns.

Yic  Gods,  Adityas,  Varuna,  Aryaman,  Mitra,  vorily
Havo  hero  obtained  supromcat  sway,  high,  holy,  sot  apart  for
you.

2  When,  Varupa  and  Mitra,  yo  sit  in  vour  golden  dwelling-place,
Yo  Twain,  supporters  of  mankind,  foc-slayors,  give  felicity.

3  All  those,  possessors  of  all  wealth,  Varuna,  Mitra,  Aryaman,
Follow  their  ways,  aa  if  with  foot,  and  guard  from  injury

mortal  man.


1  Like  high  laioi :  Professor  Ludwig  would  road  vratena  luatcad  of  vraUva,
that  ia,  through  holy  ordinance.

3  RAtaharya .-  the  Bishi  of  tho  hymn.  I  can  make  nothing  out  of  this
stanza,  and  I  follow  SAyapa  in  despair  of  finding  a  reasonable  interpretation.

4  This  stanza  also  is  difficult  and  obscure.

6  0  Earth:  Pfithivf,  or  Earth,  is  quite  out  of  place  here.  Professor  Ludwig
•uspeote  a  corruption  of  tho  text,  and  Professor  Grassmann  thinks  that  the
whole  stanza  lias  been  inserted  by  mistake.  The  two  wide-spreading  or  far-
reaching  Gods,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  are  said  to  be  ready  to  listen  to  the  Rishis*
prayers  and  so  to  incrcaso  their  renown.  Tho  copious  fall  of  rain  is  proof  that
their  prayers  havo  been  heard.

6  Ye  Oodt :  Mitra  and  Varupa,  Mitra  only  boing  named.

2  Your  golden  dwelling-place .-  the  delightful  place  of  sacrifice,  according  to
Siy&na.

3  Follow  their  v>ayi ;  their  royal  ordinances,  vratd,  that  is  natdni.


538  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  V.

4  For  .they  arc  true,  they  cleave  to  Law,  held  holy  among  every

race,

•  Good  leaders,  bounteous  in  their  gift*,  deliverers  even  from
distress.

5  Which  of  your  persons,  Vanina  or  Mitra,  merits  not  our  praise  ?
Therefore  our  thought  is  turned  to  you,  the  Atris'  thought  is

turned  to  you.

HYMN  LX VI II.  Mitra-Varupa.

Sr  so  forth  unto  your  Varuna  and  Mitra  with  a  song  inspired.
They,  Mighty  Lords,  are  lofty  Law :

2  Full  springs  of  fatness,  Sovran  Kings,  Mitra  and  Varuna,  the

Twain,

Gods  glorified  among  the  Gods.

3  So  help  ye  us  to  riches,  great  terrestrial  and  celestial  wealth  :
Vast  is  your  sway  among  the  Gods.

4  Carefully  tending  Law  with  Law  they  have  attained  their

vigorous  might.

The  Two  Gods  wax  devoid  of  guile.

5  With  rainy  skies  and  streaming  floods,  Lords  of  the  strength

that  bringeth  gifts,

A  lofty  seat  have  they  attained.

HYMN  LXIX.  Mitra- Varuna.

Three  spheres  of  light,  0  Vaauna,  three  heavens,  three
firmaments  ye  comprehend,  0  Mitra ;

Waxed  strong,  ye  keep  the  splendour  of  dominion,  guarding
the  Ordinance  that  lasts  for  ever.

2  Ye,  Varuna,  have  kine  who  yield  refreshment;  Mitra,  your
floods  pour  water  full  of  sweetness.

There  stand  the  Three  Steers,  splendid  in  their  brightness,
who  fill  the  three  world-bowls  with  genial  moisture.

1  They,  Mighty  Lords,  art  lofty  Law:  ‘(come)  mighty  deities,  to  the  great
sacrifice.' — Wilson.

2  Pull  springs  of  fatness  :  originators  of  streams  of  fertilizing  rain  ;  or
ghriCdyout  may  mean  here  aa  it  does  elsewhere,  dwelling  or  having  their  home
with  ghriU,  clarified  butter  or  oil  used  in  sacrifice.

5  Lords  of  the  strength  that  bringetk  gifts:  ‘  lords  of  sustenance,  suited  to
the  liberal  donors  (of  oblations)/— Wilson.

1  ThieefniamenU  :  according  to  Siyana,  three  realms  of  earth,  an  inter¬
pretation  which  is  more  in  accordance  with  the  second  half  of  stanza  2.

2  The  Three  Steers :  Agui  as  terrestrial  fire  on  earth,  V&yu  as  the  wind  in
the  firmament,  and  Sfirya  as  the  San  in  heaven.  World  bowls  :  Ludwig  explains
differently.  See  his  Ueber  die  neuesten  Arbeiten  auf  dem  Gebicte  der  lJgveda-
forschung,  p.  85.  Genial  moisture the  fertilizing  rain.


BYMN  72]  THE  RIOVEDA.  589

3  I  call  at  dawn  on  Aditi  the  Goddess,  I  call  at  noon  ai\d  when

the  Sun  is  setting.

I  pray,  O  Mitra- Varuna,  for  safety,  for  wealth  and  progeny,
in  rest  and  trouble.

4  Ye  who  uphold  the  region,  sphere  of  brightness,  ye  who

support  earth's  realm,  Divine  Ad; eyas,

The  Immortal  Gods,  O  V«r«.na  and  Mitra,  nevor  impair  your
everlasting  statutes.

HYMN  LXX.  Mitra-Varuna.

Eves  far  and  wide,  0  Varuna  and  Mitra,  doth  your  grace
extend.

May  I  obtain  your  kind  good-will.

2  From  you,  benignant  Gods,  may  we  gain  fully  food  for

sustenance.

Such,  0  ye  Rudraa,  may  wo  be.

3  Guard  us,  0  Rudras,  with  your  guards,  save  us,  yo  skilled  to

save,  may  we

Subduo  tho  Dasyus,  wo  oursolves.

4  Or  ne’er  may  we,  0  Wondrous  Strong,  enjoy  another’s

solomn  feast,

Oursolves,  our  sons,  or  progony.

HYMN  LXXI.  Mitra-Varupu.

0  Varuka  and  Mitra,  yo  who  slay  tho  foemon,  come  with
might

To  this  our  goodlv  sacrifice.

2  For,  Vurupn  and  Mitra,  ye  Sages  are  Rulers  over  all.  Fill

full  our  songs,  for  this  yo  can.

3  Como  to  tho  juico  that  wo  havo  pressed.  Varuna,  Mitra,

como  to  drink

This  Soma  of  tho  worshippor.

HYMN  LXXI I.  Mitra-Varupa.

To  Varupa  and  Mitra  wo  offer  with  songs,  as  Atri  did.  Sit
on  the  sacred  grass  to  drink  the  Soma  juico.


2  0  ye  Rudras :  0  Mitra  and  Varuna.

4  Or  ne’er  may  we:  I  adopt  Profosaor  Ludwig’s  explanation.  We  will
overcome  the  DaayuB  by  our  owu  Dower,  or  wo  will  never  again  participate  in
any  man's  solemn  festival  held  in  honour  of  the  Gods  :  a  self-lmprccatiou  in
case  of  failing  to  curry  out  thoir  purpose.

1  With  might :  Sllyana  explains  barhund  as  hanldrau  aatrdndm,  destroyers
of  cnomios.

2  PiU  full  our  songs :  let  them  overflow  with,  or  produce  abundantly,  the
reaulte  for  which  wc  pray.

1  As  Atri  did:  after  the  manner  of  Atri,  the  founder  of  our  family.


540


TUB  STUNS  OP  {BOOB  V.


2  By  Ordinance  and  Lax  ye  dwell  in  peace  secure,  bestirring  men.
Sit  on  the  sacred  grass  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

3  May  Vanina  and  Mitra,  for  our  help,  accept  the  sacrifice.

Sit  on  the  sacred  grass  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

~WMHUXIIL  Asvins.

Whbthss,  0  Asvins,  ye  this  day  Wfar  remote  or  near  at  hand,
In  many  spots  or  in  mid-air,  come  hither,  Lords -of  ample

2  These  here,  who  show  o’er  widest  spaoe,  bringing  full  many  a

wondrous  act,

Resistless,  lovingly  I  seek,  I  call  the  Mightiest  to  enjoy.

3  Another  beauteous  wheel  have  ye  fixed  there  to  decorate  your

car.

With  others  through  the  realms  ye  roam  in  might  unto  the
neighbouring  tribes.

4  That  deed  of  yours  that  is  extolled,  Yisvas!  hath  all  been  done

with  thia

Born  otherwise,  and  spotless,  ye  have  entered  kinship’s  bonds
with  ua

5  When  Suryi  mounted  on  your  car  that  rolls  for  ever  rapidly,
Birds  of  red  hue  were  round  about  and  burning  splendours

compassed  you.

6  Atri  bethinks  himself  of  you,  0  Heroes,  with  a  friendly  mind,
What  time,  Nasatyas,  with  his  mouth  he  stirs  the  spotless

flame  for  you.


1  In  many  spots the  purl I  in  the  text  is  thus  explained  by  Sflyana.

2  To  enjoy:  the  libation  offered  to  you.  According  to  Slyaiia ,bhuji  here
means  for  enjoyment,  or  for  protection.

3  Tktre :  the  third  wheel  of  their  chariot,  standing  by  itself  in  front,  is
especially  ornamental.  Witb  otheri .-  SSyana  explains  anyS  by  anyena  chat-
rena,  i.  e.  with  another,  or  the  other,  wheel ;  but  the  two  hind  wheels  mutt
be  intended,  or  anyS  must  be  in  agreement  with  yupl.  The  neigh  louring  tribes :
the  meaning  of  nSkushd  yugS  is  not  clear.  Professor  Ludwig  translates  the
words  by  ‘  ru  den  ee*ch!echtern  der  Kahuea,'  ‘  to  the  tribes  of  the  [people
called]  Nahuaha*.’  Professor  Wilson,  following  SSyana,  translates  the  stanza
differently  :  '  You  hare  arrested  one  luminous  wheel  of  (your)  car  for  illumin¬
ing  the  form  (of  the  sun),  whilst  with  the  other  you  traverse  the  sphere*  (to
regulate)  by  your  power  the  ages  of  mankind.*

4  Viftat !:  Sdyaria  explains  rind,  by  xydptau,  the  two  who  spread  through
or  pervade  :  ‘universal  (deities).*— Wueon.  With  this:  according  to  Sdyana,
with  this  Paura  (the  IJishi  of  the  hymn).  Or  'this*  may  mean,  as  Professor
Ludadg  thinks,  the  third  wheel  of  the  car,  in  which  mysterious  virtue  more
especially  resides.  Bom  otherwise :  of  divine  and  not  human  origin.

5  Siryi :  the  Daughter  of  the  Son.  See  L  116.  17.


HYMN  74.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  541

7  Strong  is  your  swiftly  moving  steed,  famed  bis  exertion  in  the

course

When  by  your  great  deeds,  Asvins,  Chiefs,  Atri  is  brought  to
us  again.

8  Lovers  of  sweetness,  Rudras,  she  who  streams  with  sweetness

waits  on  you.

When  ye  have  travelled  through  the  seas  men  bring  you  gifts
of  well-dressed  food.

9  Asvins,  with  truth  they  call  you  Twain  bestowers  of  fclioity ;
At  sacrifice  most  prompt  to  hear,  most  gracious  ye  at  sacrifice.

10  Moet  pleasing  to  the  Asvins  bo  these  prayers  which  magnify
their  might,

Which  wo  have  fashioned,  oven  as  cars  :  high  reverenco  have
we  spoken  forth.

HYMN  LXXIV.  Asvins.

Where  in  the  heavens  aro  yo  to-day,  Gods,  Asvins,  rich  in
constancy  1

Hoar  this,  yo  oxoollont  as  Stoers  :  Atri  invitoth  you  to  come.

2  Where  are  thoy  now?  Whore  aro  the  Twain,  the  famed,

Nflsatyas,  Gods  in  heaven?

Who  is  the  man  yo  strivo  to  roach  ?  Who  of  your  suppliants
is  with  you  ?

3  Whom  do  vo  visit,  whom  approach  ?  to  whom  direct  your

harnessed  car  ?

With  whose  devotions  aro  yo  pleased?  Wo  long  for  you  to
further  us.

4  Ye,  Strengthened,  for  Paura  stir  the  filler  swimming  in  tho

Hood,

Advancing  to  bo  captured  liko  a  lion  to  tho  ambuscade.


7  Atri  is  brought  to  ut  again  :  boo  I.  112.  7.

8  A’Ae  10A0  tlreawt  >oitA  Kiottlnm:  Vale,  Voico  or  Speech,  or  our  praise,
stutirusmaUritd.  '  Our  nutritious  (adoration).' — Wilsou.  The  teat:  of  air.


1  Rich  in  corn  fancy ;  faithful  friends  of  your  worshippers.  Excellent  at
Steert :  ‘  liberal  showorore  (of  bcnoUto).’  —Wilson.

2  Of  your  tuppliants :  this,  although  uot  entirely  satisfactory,  ecems  to  be
the  only  powiblo  explanation  of  uadtndn  in  this  placo.  Professor  Ludwig
remarks,  truly  enough,  that  if  ko  (quis  f)  could  be  taken  as =kd  (quae),  the
passage  would  present  no  difficulty.  The  meaning  would  then  be,  which  of  the
river*  (of  the  Panjftb)  rojoices  in  your  presence  1  Jiftyana  paraphrases  tho
passage  :  kah  stoff  vdin  yuuiyornadtndm  ituttudm  lur/ut  tahlyah  i ydl ;  *  what
praieer  may  bo  the  associate  of  tho  praises  of  you  twain  ? '

4  This  stansa  is  desperately  difficult.  Professor  Wilson  translates  in  accor¬
dance  with  SAyana'a  explanation  :  '  Paurat,  send  to  Paura  tho  rain-shedding


542  THE  HYStSS  OP  [ BOOK  V.

5  Ye  from  Cbyavana  worn  with  age  removed  his  skin  as  ’twere

a  robe.

So,  £hen  ye  made  him  young  again,  he  stirred  the  longing  of
a  dame.

6  Here  is  the  man  who  lauds  you  both  :  to  see  your  glory  are

we  here.

Now  hear  me,  come  with  saving  help,  ye  who  are  rich  in  store
of  wealth.

7  Who  among  many  mortal  men  this  day  hath  won  you  to  himself  1
What  bard,  accepters  of  the  bard?  Who,  rich  in  wealth  !  with

sacrifice  f

S  0  Asvins,  may  your  car  approach,  most  excellent  of  cars  for
speed.

Through  many  regions  may  our  praise  pass  onward  among
mortal  men.

9  May  our  laudation  of  you  Twain,  lovers  of  meath  !  be  sweet
to  you.

Fly  hitherward,  ye  wise  of  heart,  like  falcons  with  your  wing-
fed  steeds.

10  0  Asvins,  when  at  any  time  ye  listen  to  this  call  of  mine,

For  you  is  dainty  food  prepared:  they  mix  refreshing  food  for  you.

cloud  ;  drive  it  to  him  who  is  engage!  in  sacrifice,  *»  Chunters  chase)  a  lion  in  n
forest.’  Pro  feasor  Wilson  remarks  :  ‘  The  name  of  the  Rida  is  hero,  according
to  the  scholiast,  arbitrarily  applied,  first  to  the  A  twins,  because  they  arc  in
relation  with  Paura  as  the  author  of  the  Sulla  ■  and  although  the  text  gives
Paura  in  the  vocative  singular,  it  is  to  be  understood  in  the  dual  Paura,
therefore,  being  Ajtoins:  next  ie  implies  as  Paura m,  a  cloud,  from  its
being  solicited  by  the  Risks  for  the  fall  of  rain,  as  implied  by  the  last  term,
Paurdyo,  to  me  the  Rishi  so  called.'  Professor  Roth  is  of  opinion  that  Paura,
in  the  vocative  case,  means  the  Asvins,  as  fillers,  increasers,  or  atreugtheners  ;
and  tliat  pauram,  in  the  accusative  case,  means  the  Soma,  the  filler  or  satisfy¬
ing  juice  (cf.  II.  II.  11,  The  juice  that  satisfies  hath  holpen  Indre).  said  to  be
swimming  in  the  food,  i. «.  mixed  with  water.  The  second  half  of  the  stanza
would  then  probably  mean  that  the  Soma  flow*  on  in  order  to  be  taken  up  and
used  in  libations  as  a  lion  goes  to  the  place  where  men  lie  in  wait  to  capture
him  or  where  a  pitfall  has  been  prepared  to  entrap  him.  Still  there  remains
the  very  great  difficulty  of  Paura  in  the  singular  being  used  instead  of  the
dual  Paurau.  Professor  Ludwig  remarks  :  'Paura  :  S.  elad  asvinoh  sambodha-
nam  ;  but  it  ia  to  be  taken  direct  as  a  err  of  warning.  Paura  is  to  mean  the
Asvins,  Paura  is  to  mean  the  Riahi  of  the  hymn,  Paura  is  to  mean  the  cloud.
This  is  naturally  too  much.  The  word  udaprutam  (swimming  in  water)  shows
that  Paura  had  been  enticed  to  a  place  where  his  enemies  intended  to  drown
him.  He  had  gone  to  the  spot  as  unsuspiciously  as  a  lion  approaches  the
pitfall,  and  was  already  in  the  water  when  the  Asvins  called  out  to  him  and
stopped  him.  According  to  this  explanation  the  translation  would  bo  : '  For
Paura  ye  cried,  Paura  !  and  saved  him  when  swimming  in  the  flood,  Him  who
had  reached  the  ambush  as  a  bon  to  the  capture  goes.

5  Cfiyavina:  see  L  116.  10.

6  Rich  in  store  of  wealth :  •  affluent  in  food.’  -Wilson,  after  Siyana :  ‘  lords
of  swift  horses,'— Roth  ;  'possessors  of  excellent  mares,'— Ludwig.'


HYMN  75.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


543

HYMN  LXXV.  t  Asvins.

To  meet  your  treasure-bringing  car,  the  mighty  car  most  dear
to  us,  '

A$vins,  the  Rishi  is  prepared,  your  praiser,  with  his  song  of
praise.  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear  my  call.

2  Pass,  0  ye  Asvins,  pass  away  beyond  all  tribe9  of  selfish  men,
Wonderful,  with  your  golden  paths,  most  gracious,  b ringers

of  the  flood.  Lovors  of  sweetness,  hear  my  call.

3  Como  to  us,  O  yo  Asvin  Pair,  bringing  your  precious  treasures,

come

Ye  liudras,  on  your  paths  of  gold,  rejoicing,  rich  in  storo  of
wealth.  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear  my  call.

4  0  Strong  and  Good,  the  voice  of  him  who  lauds  you  well

cleaves  to  your  car.

And  that  groat  boast,  your  chariot-steed,  fair,  wonderful,  makos
dainty  food.  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear  mv  call.

5  Watchful  in  spirit,  horn  on  cars,  impetuous,  listing  to  his  cry,
Asvins,  with  wingisd  stcods  yo  spood  down  to  ChyavAnu  void

of  guile.  Lovors  of  swootnoss,  hoar  my  oall.

6  Hithor,  0  Horoos,  lot  your  steeds,  of  dappled  hue,  yoked  at

tho  thought,

Your  flying  steeds,  0  Alvins,  bring  you  hitherward,  with  bliss,
to  drink.  Lovors  of  swootnoss,  hear  my  call.

7  0  Asvins,  hithor  como  to  us ;  Nftsatyas,  bo  not  disinclined.
Through  longing  for  tho  pious  turn  out  of  tho  way  to  reach

our  homo.  Lovors  of  swootnoss,  hear  my  call.

8  Yo  Lords  of  Splondour,  free  from  guilo,  como,  sta  nd  at  this

our  sacrifice

Besido  tho  singer,  Agvins,  who  longs  for  your  graco  and  lauds
you  both.  Lovors  of  sweetness,  hoar  my  call.

9  Dawn  with  hor  whito  herd  hath  appeared,  and  in  duo  time

hath  fire  boon  placed.

Harnessed  is  your  immortal  car,  0  Wonder-Workers,  strong
and  kind.  Lovers  of  sweetness,  hear  my  call.

1  Love's  of  sic eetness :  drinkers  of  tho  sweet  Soma  juice:  aoeording  to  SAynna.
maatera  of  the  MndhuvidyA,  or  knowledge  of  aweetnesa,  that  is,  tho  knowledge
that  tenches  whore  tho  Soma  i«  to  be  found.  See  I.  84.  18.

2  Selfish  mm :  reading  ahamsantth.  for  ahatjk  sand.  See  Aufrccht,  Ik  V.  II.
XLII.  note.

3  Rich  in  store  of  wealth :  or,  Lords  of  rapid  ateeda.  See  note  on  stanza  6  of
the  preceding  hymn.

4  And  that  great  beast :  the  ohariot  of  tho  Aavins  is  sometimes  said  to  be
drawn  by  a  stallion  ass  (sec  L  84.  9  ;  116.  2  ;  162.  21),  tho  dun-coloured  animal
representing  the  grey  tint*  of  early  morning.

5  Chyavdna:  see  I.  116.  10.

*  8  Who  longs  for  your  grace :  Slyana  takes  avasyilm  here  to  be  a  proper
name,  Avaavu,  who  is  said  to  bo  the  Riahi  of  the  hymn.

9  In  due  time  :  for  the  morning  libation.


544


THE  HYMNS  OP


[BOOK  7.


HYMN  LXXVI.  Asvins.

Agki,  the  bright  face  of  the  Dawns,  is  shining ;  the  singers'
pitus  voices  have  ascended.

Borne  on  your  chariot,  Asvins,  turn  you  hither,  and  come
unto  our  full  and  rich  libation.

2  Most  frequent  guests,  they  scorn  not  what  is  ready:  even  now

the  Liuded  Asvins  are  beside  us.

With  promptest  aid  they  come  at  mom  and  evening,  the
worshipper’s  most  blessed  guards  from  trouble.

3  Yea,  come  at  milking-time,  at  early  morning,  at  noon  of  day

and  when  the  Sun  is  setting,

By  day,  by  night,  with  favour  most  auspicious.  Not  only
now  the  draught  hath  drawn  the  Asvins.

4  For  this  place,  Asvins,  was  of  old  your  dwelling,  these  were

your  houses,  this  your  habitation.

Come  to  us  from  high  heaven  and  from  the  mountain.  Come
from  the  waters  bringing  food  and  vigour.

5  May  we  obtain  the  Asvins’  newest  favour,  and  gain  their

health-bestowing  happy  guidance.

Bring  riches  hither  unto  us,  and  heroes,  and  all  felicity  and
joy,  Immortals !

HYMN  LXXVII.  Asvins.

First  worship  those  who  come  at  early  morning :  let  the
Twain  drink  before  the  giftless  niggard.

The  Asvins  claim  the  sacrifice  at  day-break  :  the  sages  yield¬
ing  the  first  share  extol  them.

2  Worship  at  dawn  and  instigate  the  Asvins :  nor  is  the  wor¬

shipper  at  eve  rejected.

Besides  ourselves  another  craves  and  worships :  each  first  iu
worship  is  moat  highly  favoured.

1  The  bright  fate;  making  his  first  appearance  at  early  morning.  Libation  :
ghanndm,  the  offering  of  hot  milk  or  other  heated  beverage.

3  ‘  The  Asvins  are  invited  to  come  at  different  times,  at  morning,  mid-day
and  sunset ;  and  in  VIII.  22.  14.  it  is  aimiUrly  said  that  they  are  invoked  in
the  evening  as  well  as  at  dawn.  It  need  not,  however,  surprise  us  that  they
should  be  invited  to  attend  the  different  ceremonies  of  the  worshippers,  and
therefore  conceived  to  appear  at  hours  diatinet  from  the  supposed  natural
periods  of  their  manifestation  ’- J.  Muir,  0.  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  239.

5  This  stanza  is  identical  with  V.  42. 18.

1  Before  the  gift/ess  niggard:  ‘before  the  greedy  withholders  (of  the  offer¬
ing).'— Wilson.

2  Nor  is  the  worshipper  at  eve  rejected:  literally,  a  thing  unaccepted  or
rejected.  Slyana  explains  differently  :  ‘  the  evening  is  not  for  the  gods;  it  is
unacceptable  to  them  ’—Wilson.  This  explanation,  though  supported  by  the
text  pOrvdhno  tai  deednlm,  the  forenoon  Terily  belongs  to  the  Gods,  is  not  in
accordance  with  the  use  of  Vedic  times.


HYMN  78.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


•546


3  Covered  with  gold,  meath-tinted,  dropping  fatnqss,  your

chariot  with  its  freight  of  food  comes  hither,

Swift  as  thought,  Asvins,  rapid  as  the  tempest,  wherewith  ye
travel  over  all  obstructions.

4  He  who  hath  served  most  often  the  Nasatyas,  and  gives  the

sweetest  food  at  distribution,

Furthers  with  his  own  holy  works  his  offspring,  and  ever
passes  those  whose  flames  ascend  not.

5  May  we  obtain  the  Asvins’  newest  favour,  and  gain  their

health-bestowing  happy  guidance.

Bring  riches  hither  unto  us,  and  heroes,  and  all  felicity  and
joy,  Immortals  !

HYMN  LXXVIII.  Asvins.

Ye  Asvins,  hither  come  to  us  :  Nisatyas,  be  not  disinclined.
Fly  hither  like  two  swans  unto  the  juice  wo  shod.

2  0  Asvins,  like  a  pair  of  doer,  liko  two  wild  cattle  to  the  mead :
Fly  hither  liko  two  swans  unto  the  juice  we  shed.

3  0  Afvins  rich  in  gifts,  uccopt  our  sacrifice  to  prospor  it :

Fly  hither  liko  two  swans  unto  the  juice  wo  shed.

4  As  Atri  when  descending  to  the  cavern  called  on  you  loudly

liko  a  wailing  woman,

Yo  camo  to  him,  0  Asvins,  with  the  freshest  and  most  auspici¬
ous  fleotness  of  a  falcon.

5  Tree,  part  asunder  liko  tho  side  of  hor  who  hringeth  forth  achild.
Yo  Asvins,  listou  to  my  call :  loose  Saptavadhri  from  his  bonds.

6  For  Saptavadhri,  for  tho  seer  affrighted  when  he  wept  and  wailed,
Yo,  Afvins,  with  your  magic  powers  rout  up  tho  tree  and  shat¬
tered  it.

7  Like  os  the  wind  on  every  side  ruffles  a  pool  of  lotuses,

So  stir  in  thee  the  babe  unborn,  so  may  tho  ton-month  babo
descend.

.  8  Like  as  the  wind,  like  as  tho  wood,  liko  as  tho  sea  is  set  astir,
So  also,  ton-month  babo,  descend  together  with  the  after-birth.
9  Tho  child  who  bath  for  ten  months’  timo  been  lying  in  bis
mother’s  side, —

May  he  come  forth  alive,  unharmed,  yea,  living  from  the  living
dame.

2  Wild  cattle:  Gauraa,  or  Bovea  Gnuri.

4  Tie  cavern  :  the  abyss  or  deop  pit  into  which  he  was  cast  by  Anurnft  or
evil  Bpirita.  See  I.  112.  7  ;  116.  8  ;  117.  8.

.  5  Tree,  part  amndfr :  Saptavadhri  appoars  to  have  got  hia  hand  or  foot
jammed  in  a  split  tree,  and  to  have  boon  extricated  when  he  called  on  tho
Asvins  to  aid  him.

9  '  This  and  the  two  stanzas  preceding  are  termed  by  SAyana  the  yaroAap-
rdvinyupa'itkad,  the  liturgy  of  child-birth.'— Wilson.

35


THE  HYMNS  OF


[BOOK  V.


543

•  e  *  ■  HYMN  LXXIX.  *  Dawn.

0  heavenly  Dawn,  awaken  us  to  ample  opulence  to-day

Even  as  thou  hast  wakened  us  with  Satyasravas,  Vayya’s  son,
high-born !  delightful  with  thy  steeds !

2  Daughter  of  Heaven,  thou  dawnedst  on  Sunitha  Suchadratha’s

son,  •

So  dawn  thou  on  one  mightier  still,  on  Satyasravas,  Vayya's
son,  high-born  1  delightful  with  thy  steeds !

3  So,  bringing  treasure,  dawn  to-day  on  us  thou  Daughter  of  the

Sky,

As  thou,  0  mightier  yet,  didst  shine  for  Satyasravas,  Vayya's

.  son,  high-born  !  delightful  with  thy  steeds !

4  Here  round  about  thee  are  the  priests  who  laud  thee.  Bright

One,  with  their  hymns,

.  And  men  with  gifts,  0  Bounteous  Dame,  splendid  with  wealth
and  offering  much,  high-born  !  delightful  with  thy  steeds  !

5  Whatever  these  thy  bands  perform  to  please  thee  or  win  them

wealth,

E’en  fain  they  gird  us  round  and  give  rich  gifts  which  ne’er
are  reft  away,  high-born  !  delightful  with  thy  steeds !

The  connexion  between  1—6,  and  7—9  ia  not  clesr.  By  jtfabf  nffdhandnd
(a  wailing  woman)  a  parturient  woman  may  perhaps.  Professor  Ludwig  thinks,
bo  iuteuded.  Atri,  an  he  descended  into  the  pi*,  invoked  the  Asvins  that
they  might  release  him  as  a  woman  releases  the  child  she  bears.  A  tree—
which  in  much  harder  and  firmer  than  a  woman's  body — unclosed  itself  wheu
Saptavadhri  invoked  the  Asvins.  So  shall  the  psu-turient  woman  bring  forth
her  child  through  the  help ’of  the  Asvins  and  at  Atri’s  intercession.  A  con¬
nexion  may  thus  be  established,  though  here  and  there  it  would  be  rather
forced.

1  Saiga  cravat :  the  Rishi  of  the  hymn.  Delightful  wkl  thy  sleedt :  pleas¬

ant  to  those  whom  thou  favourest  on  account  of  the  horses  which  thou  bestow-
wt.  The  word  asvat&nriU  is  variously  rendered,  e.  g  by  Professor  Wilsoh,
after  SAyana,  ‘praised  sincerely  for  (the  gift  of)  horse*  by  Prof.  Ludwig,

‘  an  ruasen  trefliches  b-sitxende/  *  having  an  excellent  possession  in  horses ;  ’
by  Prof.  Roth,  ‘  vom  jubel  der  Rossc  bcglciu-te,’  ‘  accompanied  by  the  joyous
neigh  of  horses and  by  Prof.  Grsasmann,  ‘ rcssereiche,’  ‘rich  in  horses.’

\  Men  %eil\  gif  it :  the  Maghavans,  or  wealthy  householders,  who  institute
the  sacrifice  and  provide  offerings  for  the  Gods  and  present*  for  the  officiating
priests.

5  That  iky  bandt:  the  congregation  of  worshippers.  Which  ne’er  are
reft  atcay:  or  which  arc  ncTcr  in  vain,  never  fail  to  obtain  their  due  reward
from  boaven  :  1 * * * 5  Sdyana,’  Professor  Wilson  remarks,  1 6eema  rather  dubious  as
to  the  proper  sense  of  several  of  these  words  : . the  sum  of  the  mean¬

ing,  agreeably  to  the  scholiast,  ia,  all  they  who,  offering  oblations,  worship  the
dawn,  receive  the  reward  for  the  benefit  of  us,  of  me,  that  is  the  author  of  the
hymn,  ye  tvun  haxir-dadatuk  tlaranti  te  tarre  aj>y<uHadarihum  phalaat


J/YM.V  86.]  '  THE  RIO V EVA.  547

6  Give  to  these  wealthy  patrons  fame,  0  affluent  Dawn,-  with

hero  sons,  *

To  these  our  princes  who  have  brought  rich  gifts  ne’er  to  bo
reft  away,  high-born  !  dolightful  with  thy  steeds  !

7  Bring  lofty  and  resplendent  fame,  0  thou  munificent  Dawn,

to  these

Our  wealthy  patrons  who  bestow  rioh  gifts  on  us  of  steeds  and
kino,  high-born  !  delightful  with  thy  steeds  1

8  Bring  us,  0  Daughter  of  the  Sky,  subsistence  in  our  herds  of  kine,
Together  with  the  sunbeams,  with  the  shine  of  puro  refulgent

flam  os,  high-born  !  dolightful  with  thy  steeds  !

9  0  Daughter  of  tho  Sky,  shine  forth ;  dolay  not  to  perform

thy  task.

Let  not  tho  Sun  with  forvont  heat  consume  thco  like  a  robber
foo,  high-born  !  delightful  with  thy  stocds  !

10  So  muoh,  and  moro  exceedingly,  0  Dawn,  it  suits  thco  to  bestow,
Thou  Radiant  Ono  who  ceascst  not  to  shine  for  those  who  sing
thy  ptuiso,  high-born  !  dolightful  with  thy  steeds  1

HYMN  LXXX.  Dawn.

Tiie  singers  wolcome  with  their  hymns  and  praises  the  Goddoss
Dawn  who  bringoth  in  tho  sunlight,

Sublime,  by  Law  truo  to  eternal  Ordor,  bright  on  her  path,  red-
tinted,  far-rofulgont.

2  She  eoracs  in  front,  fair,  rousing  up  tho  people,  making  tho

pathways  easy  to  bo  travelled.

High,  on  her  lofty  chariot,  all-impelling,  Dawn  givos  her  splon*
dour  at  the  days'  beginning.

3  She,  harnessing  hor  car  with  purple  oxen,  injuring  none,  hath

brought  perpetual  riches.

Opening  paths  to  happiness,  tho  Goddess  shines,  praised  by  all,
giver  of  every  blessing.

4  With  changing  tints  she  gleams  in  double  splendour  while

from  tho  eastward  she  displays  her  body.

She  travels  perfectly  the  path  of  Ordor,  nor  fails  to  reach,  as
one  who  knows,  tho  quarters.

5  As  conscious  that  her  limbs  are  bright  with  bathing,  sho

stands,  as  ’tworo,  erect  that  we  may  see  hor.


9  Delay  not  to  perform  thy  task :  '  delay  not  our  (sacred)  rite.’— Wilson.

2  In  frontal  the  Sun  ;  sdryasya  purastdt.— SAyana.

4  The  quarters :  the  regions  of  tho  sky  which  she  visit*  in  obedience  to
the  eternal  law  of  the  universo.

5  With  bathing :  in  the  dews  of  heaven.


MS  THE  HYUKS  OF  [BOOK  V.

Driving  away  malignity  and  darkness,  Dawn,  Child  of  Heaven,
hath  come  to  us  with  lustre.

6  The  Daughter  of  the  Sky,  like  some  chaste  womaD,  bends,
opposite  to  men,  her  forehead  downward.

The  Maid,  disclosing  boons  to  him  who  worships,  hath  brought
again  the  daylight  as  aforetime.

HYMN  LXXXI.  Savitar.

The  priests  of  him  the  lofty  Priest  well-skilled  in  hymns
harness  their  spirit,  yea,  harness  tbeir  holy  thoughts.

Ho  only  knowing  works  assigns  their  priestly  tasks.  Yea,
lofty  is  the  praise  of  Savitar  the  God.

2  The  Sapient  One  arrays  himself  in  every  form :  for  quadruped
and  biped  he  hath  brought  forth  good.

Excellent  Savitar  hath  looked  on  heaven’s  high  vault,  and
shinetk  after  the  outgoing  of  the  Dawn.

.  3  Eveu  he,  the  God  whose  going-forth  and  majesty  the  other
Deities  have  followed  with  their  might.

He  who  hath  measured  the  terrestrial  regions  out  by  his  great
power,  he  is  the  Courser  Savitar.

4  To  the  three  spheres  of  light  thou  goest,  Savitar,  and  with

the  rays  of  Sfirya  thou  combinest  thee.

Around,  on  both  sides  thou  encompassest  the  night :  yea,
thou,  0  God,  art  Mitra  through  thy  righteous  laws.

5  Over  all  generation  thou  art  Lord  alone :  Pushan  art  thou,

0  God,  in  all  thy  goings-forth.

Yea,  thou  hast  domination  over  all  this  world.  Sy&visva
hath  brought  praise  to  thee,  0  Savitar.

HYMN  LXXXII.  Savitar.

Wb crave  of  Savitar  the  God  this  treasure  much  to  be  enjoyed.

The  best,  :ill-yielding,  conquering  gift  of  Bhaga  we  would
gladly  win.

2  Savitar's  own  supremacy,  most  glorious  and  beloved  of  all.

No  one  diminisheth  in  aught

1  The  lofty  Priest :  Savitar.  Knoxirtg  xo'kt :  skilled  in  rules  which  regulate
religion*  function*,  or  peraape  nnderstamling  the  intentions  or  wishes  of  the
worshippers  :  ’  he  alone  knowing  their  functions  directs  the  priests.' — Wilson.

2  Arragt  himself  in  every  for:*:  makes  all  erterna!  objects  dearly  visible  at
sunrise.

3  The  Courser  Savitar  Sdyana  explains  Ucfzh  as  white,  bright,  shining.  It
als»  moans  a  horse,  especially  one  of  the  horses  of  the  Sun,  and  here  designates
the  Sun  himself  under  that  form.  See  SaUpatha-Brihmana,  VI.  3.  1.  18  :
Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XLI  p.  195.

4  According  to  Slyan*,  Savitar  is  especially  the  Sun  before  rising,  and
Sflrya  is  the  Sun  in  general.


ritE  RIO  VEDA.


11  VMS*  S3.]


640


3  For  Savitar  who  is  Bhaga  shall  send  riches  to  his  worshipper.  •
That  Wondrous  portion  we  implore.

4  Send  us  this  day,  Ood  Savitar,  prosperity  with  progeny.

Drive  thou  the  evil  dream  away.

6  Savitar,  God,  send  far  away  all  sorrows  and  calamities,

And  send  us  only  what  is  good.

6  Sinless  in  sight  of  Aditi  through  the  God  Savitar’s  influence,
May  we  obtain  all  lovoly  things.

7  We  with  our  hymns  this  day  elect  tho  general  God,  Lord  of

the  good,

Savitar  whoso  decrees  are  true.

8  He  who  for  ever  vigilant  precedes  these  Twain,  the  Day  and

Night,

Is  Savitar  tho  thoughtful  God.

0  Ho  who  gives  glory  unto  all  those  living  creatures  with  the  song,
And  brings  them  forth,  is  Savitar.

HYMN  LXXXIII.  Parjanya.

Smo  with  theso  songs  thy  wolcomo  to  tho  Mighty,  with  adora¬
tion  praise  and  call  Parjanya.

Tho  Bull,  loud  roaring,  swift  to  send  hia  bounty,  lays  in  the
plants  tho  soed  for  germination.

2  He  smitos  tho  trees  apart,  ho  slays  tho  domons :  all  life  fears

him  who  wiolds  tho  mighty  woapou.

From  him  oxcocding  strong  flees  o’on  tho  guiltloss,  when  thund¬
ering  Parjanya  smitos  the  wicked.

3  Shall  lend:  tui'ftli,  from  tho  root  iu  or  id,  from  which  Savitar  also  is  form¬
ed.  Tho  principal  significations  of  tho  root  aro  (l)  to  gouerato  or  bring  forth  ;
(2)  to  pour  forth  a  libation ;  and  (3)  to  Bond  or  impel.  Soo  Muir,  O.  S.
TezU,  V.  165.

4  Send  u t :  vlvlfi,  from  the  same  root :  Drive  thou  away  .•  part f  luva.

6  Send  far  away  :  paid  tuva.

0  Influence :  tavt,

7  The  general  Ood  :  vitvddevtm :  '  who  possesses  all  divine  attribute*,' —
Muir;  '(identical  with)  all  tho  gods,'— Wilson;  'den  nllgott,’  'tho  all-god,' —
Ludwig; 1  don  allgottlichon,'  ‘  tho  all-divine,' — Grannmann.  Whole  decreed  are
true  :  latyAiavam  :  '  who  possesses  truo  onorgy.'— Muir.

9  He  who  girtt  glory  :  ?  he  who  by  his  creative  power  produces  tho  objects

of  the  song  of  praise.’— Ludwig.  -

1  Parjanya :  God  of  thunderstorms  and  rain,  the  generator  and  nourishcr
of  plants  and  living  creatures  See  Muir.  0.  S.  TezU,  V.  140  IT.,  and,  especially,
M.  MUller,  India,  What  can  ifcToachus  1  pp.  180—194.

2  The  wicked :  dtuhkrllah,  evil-doers.  ‘  There  does  not  acorn  to  be  any
sufficient  reason  to  understand  evil-doers  here,  find,  in  verso  9,  of  tho  oloud
demons,  or  simply  of  the  malignant  clouds,  as  Siyapa  in  his  explanation  of
verso  9  does.  The  poet  may  naturally  have  supposed  that  it  was  exclusively
or  principally  the  wicked  who  were  struck  down  by  thunderbolt*.’— Muir,
0.  S.  TezU,  V.  141.


560  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  V.

3  Like  a  car-driver  whipping  ou  liis  horses,  he  makes  the  messen¬

gers  of  rain  spriug  forward

Far  off  "resounds  the  ^roaring  of  the  lion,  what  time  Parjanya
fills  "the  sky  with  rain-cloud.

4  Forth  burst  the  winds,  down  come  the  lightning-flashes :  the

plants  shoot  up,  the  realm  of  light  is  streaming.

Food  springs  abundant  for  all  living  creatures,  what  time
Parjanya  quickens  earth  with  moisture.

5  Thou  at  whose  bidding  earth  bows  low  before  thee,  at  whose

command  hoofed  cattle  fly  in  terror.

At  whose  behest  the  plants  assume  all  colours,  even  thou
Parjanya,  yield  us  great  protection.

6  Send  down  for  as  the  rain  of  heaven,  ye  Maruts,  and  let  the

Stallion’s  flood  descend  in  torrents.

Come  hither  with  this  thunder  while  thou  pourest  the  waters
down,  our  heavenly  Lord  and  Father.

7  Thuuder  and  roar :  the  germ  of  life  deposit.  Fly  round  us  on

thy  chariot  water-laden.

Thine  opeued  water-skin  draw  with  thee  downward,  and  let
the  hollows  and  the  heights  be  level.

8  Lift  tip  the  mighty  vessel,  pour  down  water,  and  let  the

liberated  streams  rush  forward.

Saturate  both  the  earth  and  heaven  with  fatness,  and  for  the
cows  let  there  be  drink  abundant.

9  When  thou,  with  thunder  and  with  roar,  Parjanya,  smitest

sinners  dowu,

This  universe  exults  thereat,  yea,  all  that  is  upon  the  earth.

10  Thou  hast  poured  down  the  rain-flood :  now  withhold  it
Thou  hast  made  desert  places  fit  for  travel.

Thou  hast  made  herbs  to  grow  for  our  enjoyment :  yea,  thou
hast  won  thee  praise  from  liviug  creatures.

HYMN  LXXXIV.  Prithivi.

Thou,  of  a  truth,  0  Prithivi,  bearest  *  the  tool  that  rends  the
hills :

Thou  rich  in  torrents,  who  with  might  quickenest  earth,  0
Mighty  One.


10  Thou  hail  won  thee  praiie :  or,  perhaps,  *  thou  hast  fulfilled  Use  longing

of  the  people.’  -

1  PrUkivt:  in  this  nlace  not  the  Goddess  Earth  or  earth  personified,  but  a  deity
of  the  middle  air  or  firmament.  *  DeWijA  Prithivi,'  says  Sfiyana,  '  l’rithivi
has  two  forms.’  The  tool  that  rend*  the  kill $ .-  tire  instrument  tlrat  strikes  and
psorces  the  mountain*  and  opens  the  water-springs,  the  thunderbolt  or  tho
power  that  produces  similar  results.


tint#  85.)  TUB  RIG  VEDA.  551

2  To  thee,  0  wattderer  at  will,  ring  out  the  lauds  with  beams

of  day,

Who  drivest,  like  a  neighing  steed,  the  swelling  ,cloud,  O
bright  of  hue.

3  Who  graspest  with  thy  might  on  earth  e’en  the  strong  sovrans

of  the  wood,

When  from  the  lightning  of  thy  cloud  the  rain-floods  of  the
heaven  descend.

HYMN  LXXXV.  Varupa.

Sing  forth  a  hymn  sublime  and  solemn,  grateful  to  glorious
Vanina,  imperial  Ruler,

Who  hath  struck  out,  like  one  who  slays  the  viotira,  oarth  as
a  skin  to  spread  in  front  of  Sdrya.

2  In  the  troe-tops  tho  air  ho  hath  extoudod,  put  milk  in  kino

and  vigorous  speed  in  horses,

Sot  intolloct  in  heurts,  fire  in  the  wutors,  Sflrya  in  hoavon  and
‘  Soma  on  tho  mountain.

3  Varupa  lots  tho  big  cask,  opening  downward,  flow  through  the

heaven  and  oarth  and  air’s  mid-region.

Thorowith  tho  universe's  Sovran  waters  oarth  as  tho  shower  of
rain  bedews  tho  barloy.

4  When  Vanina  is  fain  for  milk  ho  moistens  tho  sky,  tho  land,

and  oarth  to  her  foundation.

Then  straight  tho  mountains  olotho  thorn  in  tho  raiu-oloud  :
tho  Heroes,  putting  forth  thoir  vigour,  loose  thorn.


2  The  tioelling  cloud :  ptviim ;  tho  exact  moaning  of  tho  word  is  doubtful.
Professor  Ludwig  thinks  that  tho  lightniug  is  intonded.

1  Sing  forth :  prd . arehl.  Tho  JUshi  addressos  himself.  Or  arehd  may

bo  tho  first  person  singular,  I  aing.  Like  one  vho  tlayt  the  victim ;  *  not  tho
ordinary  Immolator,  but  tho  priest  who  spreads  out  tho  skin  of  tho  slaughtered
victim  to  reoeivo  it*  disjointed  members.’— Ludwig.

2  In  the  tree- tope :  vaneshu,  explained  by  SAyana  as  vrikthd greehu :  ‘in  the
clouds,'  according  to  tho  St.  Petersburg  Lexicon.  Soma  on  the  mountain  :
‘the  Soma  creopor,  Mnhldhara  observes,  grows  in  the  clefts  of  the  stones  of
mountains,  parvaliudm  puthniuandhishu  somamlhjd  utpadyamdnatwdt.' —
Wilson.

4  It  fain  for  milk :  wishes  for  libations  of  milk  ;  or  the  meaning  may  be,
when  he  wishes  to  draw  forth  the  milk,  the  fertilising  rain,  of  tho  clouds.
Earth  to  her  foundation  :  tho  text  has  only  prithixAm,  moaning  earth  in  it*
full  extent  (terra)  as  distinguished  from  bh(.mim,  the  land,  soil,  or  ground
(humus  or  solum'.  Or  prithirAm  may  perhaps  moan  the  firmament  here  as
HAyapa  explains  it.  See  note  on  Prithivi  in  the  preceding  hymn.  The  Heroes :
the  strong  Maruts.  Loots  them  :  loosen  the  roots  of  the  mountains  and  make
them  tremble.


55 1  TffS  HYS/XS  OF  .  [BOOK  7.

5  I  will  declare  this  mighty  deed  of  magic,  of  glorious  Varuna

the  Lord  Immortal,

Who  Standing  in  the  firmament  hath  meted  the  earth  out  with
the  Sun  as  with  a  measure.

6  Noue,  verily,  hath  ever  let  or  hindered  this  the  most  wise

God’s  mighty  deed  of  magic,

,  Whereby  with  all  their  flood,  the  lucid  rivers  fill  not  one  sea
wherein  they  pour  their  waters.

7  If  we  have  sinned  against  the  man  who  loves  us,  have  ever

wronged  a  brother,  friend,  or  comrade,

The  neighbour  ever  with  us,  or  a  stranger,  0  Varuna,  remove
from  us  the  trespass.

8  If  we,  as  gamesters  cheat  at  play,  have  cheated,  done  wrong

unwittingly  or  sinned  of  purpose,

Cast  all  these  sins  away  like  loosened  fetters,  and,  Varuya,  let
us  be  thine  own  beloved.

HYMN  LXXXYT.  Indra-Agni.

The  mortal  man  whom  ye,  the  Twain,  Indra  and  Agni,  help
in  fight,

Breaks  through  e’en  strongly-guarded  wealth  as  Trita  burst
his  way  through  reeds.

2  The  Twain  invincible  in  war,  worthy  to  be  renowned  in  frays,
Lords  of  the  Fivefold  People,  these,  Indra  and  Agni,  we

invoke.

3  Impetuous  is  their  strength,  and  keen  the  lightning  of  the

mighty  Pair,

Which  from  their  arms  speeds  with  the  car  to  Vritra’s  slayer
for  the  kine.

4  Indra  and  Agni,  we  invoke  you  both,  as  such,  to  send  your  cars  :
Lords  of  quick-coming  bounty,  ye  who  know,  chief  lovers  of

the  song.

5  These  who  give  increase  day  by  day,  Gods  without  guile  for

mortal  man,

Worthy  themselves,  I  honour  most,  Two  Gods  as  partners,
for  my  horse.

5  Deed  of  magic :  mdy&m  :  or  the  word  may  be  rendered  by  ‘  device '  or
‘■design.’  See  Wallis,  Coemolcgy  of  the  Rigxeda,  pp.  102,  103.

1  Through  reedt so  Professor  Roth  interprets  the  rSnih  of  the  text.  See
I.  52.  5.  According  to  Sdyana  the  meaning  is,  sa  Trita*  the  Ilishi  breaks

down  and  refutes  the  words  or  arguments  of  his  opjonents.

2  The  Fivefold  People :  the  five  Aryan  tribe*.

5  I  honour  moil :  pur6  dadhi  ;  I  set  in  front,  in  the  most  honourable  place.
For  my  hone :  that  I  may  win  the  chariot- race.  *  For  (the  sake  of  obtaining)
horses.’— Wilson.


HYMN  87.J  THE  RtOVgDA.  668

6  The  sti*ength-bes towing  offering  thus  to  Indra-Agni  hath  been
paid,  as  butter,  purified  by  atones.

Deal  to  our  princes  high  renown,  deal  wealth  to  tiiosc  who
sing  your  praise,  deal  food  to  those  who  sing  your  praise.

HYMN  LXXXVII.  .  Marut*

To  Vishnu,  to  the  Mighty  whom  the  Maruts  follow  let  your
hymns  born  in  song  go  forth,  Evuyftmarut ;

To  the  impetuous,  strong  band,  adorned  with  bracelets,  that
•  rushes  on  in  joy  and  ever  roars  for  vigour.

2  They  who  with  might  wore  manifest,  and  who  willingly  by

their  own  kuowledgo  told  it  forth,  EvayAmarut.

Maruts,  this  strength  of  yours  no  wisdom  comproliendeth  :
through  their  gifts’  greatness  they  are  moveless  as  the
mountains.

3  Who  by  the  psalm  they  sing  are  heard,  from  lofty  heaven,  the

strong,  the  brightly  shining  Onos,  EvayAmarut ;

In  whoso  abode  thoro  is  no  mightior  ono  to  movo  thorn,  whoso
lightnings  are  as  fires,  who  urgo  the  roaring  rivers.


6  A  t  butter :  SAyaya  explains  ghptdm,  sacrificial  oil  or  clarifiod  butter,  by
Soma  juioo  ;  but  pdtdm,  purified,  qualifies  Auvydm,  the  offering,  and  not
ghyUdm.  Tho  libation  of  Soma  juice  which  has  been  purified  by  the  operation
of  tho  press-stones,  strainer,  etc.,  has  boen  offered  like  clarified  butter  or
holy  oil.


Tho  hymn  is  ascrlbod  to  a  Jtishi  EvayAmarut,  a  nomo  which  is  ovidontly
borrowod  from  the  refrain.

1  Born  in  tong :  dovolojnng  thomsolvos  and  taking  form  in  song  :  vAchi
nithpannl: — S&yapa.  '  Voice-born.'— Wilson.  Or  girffl  may  hnv©  its  usual
meaning,  mountaiu-born,  with  reference  to  the  close  oonnoxiou  of  the  hymns
with  tho  pressing-stones  which  catne  from  tho  hills.  Evuydmaml :  Professor
Wilson,  following  SAyana,  translates.-  '  May  tho  voice-born  praises  of  EvnyA*,
marut  reach  you,  Vishpu,  attended  by  the  Maruts/  and  observes  that  '  the
name  of  tho  RUM,  Emydouirut,  remains  unaltered  in  it*  caso  termination,
whatever  may  be  its  syntactical  connection  with  tho  rest  of  the  sentence.’
This  is  manifestly  impossible,  and  the  word  is  certainly  not  a  proper  name.
EvayS,  in  I.  156.  1,  'going  thy  wonted  way/  is  an  epithet  of  Vishpu,  and
Professor  Roth  thinks  that  Emyflmarut  is  an  oxclnmation  moaning,  0  Vishyu
and  Mnruts !  or,  O  Maruts  who  speed  around  1  But  in  both  these  cases  it
would  be  necessary  to  change  tho  occcut,  both  in  this  hymn  aud  in  tho  Sfttnn-
veda  whore  stanza  1  occurs  again.  Professor  Grassmann  suggests,  1  speeding
(like  VishQU)  is  tho  Mnrut  host,'  or,  *  Tho  speeding  Vishpu  is  tho  true  Marut,
or  lord  of  the  Maruts/  as  the  probable  meaning  of  the  word.  1  find  Evayff-
marut  unintelligible,  and,  as  Professor  Ludwig  has  done,  leave  it  untranslated,
as  a  mere  sacrificial  exclamation.  See  Vedic  Hymns  (Sacred  Books  of  tho
East)  Part  1.  p.  365.


THE  RIG  VEDA.


BOOK  V.


554


4  He  of  the  Mighty  Stride  forth  strode,  Evayimarut,  out  of  the

spacious  dwelling-place,  their  home  in  common.

Whefj  he,  himself,  hath  yoked  his  emulous  strong  horses  on
heights,  he  cometh  forth,  joy-giving,  with  the  Heroes.

5  Like  your  tremendous  roar,  the  rainer  with  light  flashing,

strong,  speeding,  hath  made  all  tremble,  Evayamarut,
Wherewith  victorious  ye,  self-luminous,  press  onward,  with
strong  reins,  decked  with  gold,  impetuous  and  well-
weaponed.

6  Unbounded  is  your  greatness,  ye  of  mighty  power :  may  your

bright  vigour  be  our  aid,  Evayimarut ;

For  ye  are  visible  helpers  in  the  time  of  trouble  :  like  fires,
aglow  with  light,  save  us  from  shame  and  insult.

7  So  may  the  Rudras,  mighty  warriors,  Evayimarut,  with

splendid  brilliancy,  like  fires,  be  our  protectors;

They  whose  terrestrial  dwelling-place  is  wide-extended,  whom
none  suspect  of  sin,  whose  bands  have  lofty  courage.

8  Como  in  a  friendly  spirit,  come  to  us,  0  Maruts,  and  hear  his

call  who  praises  you,  Evayimarut.

Like  car-borne  men,  one-minded  with  the  mighty  Vishnu,
keep  enmity  far  from  us  with  your  deeds  of  wonder.

9  Come  to  our  sacrifice,  ye  Holy  Ones,  to  bless  it,  and,  free

from  demons,  hear  our  call,  Evayimarut,

Most  excellent,  like  mountains  in  the  air's  mid-region,  be
irresistible,  ye  Wise,  to  this  man's  hater.


4  lit  of  the  Highly  Stride:  Vishnu.  According  to  Sivana,  the  wide-spread¬
ing  (band  of  Maruts).  Their  fomt :  Vishnu's  and  India's.  With  the  Heroes  .-
with  the  Maruts.

8  In  the  tine  of  trouble  :  the  meaning  of  praritau  is  uncertain.  Professor
Wilson,  after  SAyana,  translates  • '  for  you  are  regulators  for  overseeing  (what
is  fit  for)  the  limits  of  the  sacrifice.'

9  This  man's  hater :  him  who  hates  the  inatitutor  of  the  sacrifice,  or  derides
and  reviles  the  holy  ceremony.


BOOK  THE  SIXTH.


HYMN  I.  Agni.

Thou,  first  inventor  of  this  prayer,  0  Agni,  Worker  of  Marvels,
hast  become  our  Herald.

Thou,  Bull,  hast  made  us  strength  which  none  may  conquer
strength  that  shall  ovorcomo  all  other  prowess.

2  As  Priest  thou  sattest  at  the  seat  of  worship,  furthering  us,
best  Offerer,  mcot  for  honour.

So  first  to  thee  have  pious  men  resorted,  turning  thy  mind  to
thoughts  of  ample  riches.

8  In  thee,  still  watching,  thoy  have  followed  riches,  who  gocst
with  much  wealth  as  with  an  army,

The  radiant  Agni,  lofty,  fair  to  look  on,  worshipped  with  mar¬
row,  ovormore  resplondont.

4  Thoy  who  approached  the  God’s  abode  with  homage,  oagor  for
glory,  won  them  perfect  glory :

Yea,  thoy  gained  even  sacrificial  titles,  and  found  dolight  in
thine  auspicious  aspect,

B  On  earth  the  people  magnify  thee  greatly,  thoo  their  celestial
and  terrestrial  richos.

Thou,  Helper,  must  bo  known  as  our  Preserver,  Fathor  and
Mother  of  mankind  for  over.

G  Dear  priest  among  mankind,  adorablo  Agni  hath  seated  him,
joy-givor,  skilled  in  worship.

Let  us  approach  thoo  shining  in  thy  dwelling,  kneeling  upon
our  knees,  with  adoration.

7  Longing  for  bliss,  pure-minded,  God-devoted,  Agni,  wo  seok
thee,  such,  meet  to  be  lauded.

Thou,  Agni,  loddest  forth  our  men  to  battle,  refulgont  with
the  heaven’s  exalted  splondour.

The  Rishi  of  the  hymn  it*  BharadvAja,  to  whom,  with  a  fow  exceptions,  ail
the  hymn.*  of  thin  Book  are  attributed.

1  Our  Htralel:  or  Invoking  Priest  who  oalls  the  Gods  to  the  sacrifioo.

3  Worshipped  witi*  marrow :  to  whom  especially  the  fat  covoring  of  the
inwards  of  the  victims  was  offered.

4  They  who  approached  the  God's  abode :  the  Itibhus,  Maruta,  or  Angirnses
may  be  meant.

5  Their  celestial  and  terrestrial  riohes :  rttyah  ubhiylsah;  literally,  riches  of
both  kinds.  According  to  SAyana,  consisting  in  cattle  and  in  possessions  ot  her
than  cattle.


653  TUB  ffTJiSS  OP  [BOOB  Vt.

8  Sage  of  mankind,  all  peoples’  Lord  and  Master,  the  Bull  of

men,  the  sender  down  of  blessings,

Still  pressing  on,  promoting,  purifying,  Agni  the  Holy  One,
the  Lord  of  riches.

9  Agni,  the  mortal  who  hath  toiled  and  worshipped,  brought

thee  oblations  with  his  kindled  fuel.

And  well  knows  sacrifice  with  adoration,  gains  every  joy  with
thee  to  guard  and  help  him.

10  Mightily  let  us  worship  thee  the  Mighty,  with  reverence,  Agni  I

fuel  and  oblations,

With  songs,  0  Son  of  Strength,  with  hymns,  with  altar :  so
may  we  strive  for  thine  auspicious  favour.

1 1  Thou  who  hast  covered  heaven  and  earth  with  splendour  and

with  thy  glories,  glorious  and  triumphant,

Continue  thou  to  shine  on  us,  0  Agni,  with  strength  abundant,
rich,  and  long-enduring.

12  Vpuchsafe  us  ever,  as  man  needs,  0  Vasil,  abundant  wealth  of

kine  for  sou  and  offspring.

Food  noble,  plenteous,  far  from  sin  and  evil,  be  with  us,  and
fair  fame  to  make  us  happy.

13  May  I  obtain  much  wealth  in  many  places  by  love  of  thee  and

through  thy  grace.  King  Agni ;

For  in  thee,  Bounteous  One,  in  thcc  the  Sovran,  Agui,  are
many  boons  for  him  who  serves  thee.

HYMN  H.  Agni.

Thou,  Agni,  even  as  Mitra,  hast  a  princely  glory  of  thine  own.
Thou,  active  Vasu,  makest  fame  increase  like  full  prosperity.

2  For,  verily,  men  pray  to  thee  with  sacrifices  and  with  songs.
To  thee  the  Friendly  Courser,  seen  of  all,  comes  speeding

through  the  air.

3  Of  one  accord  men  kindle  thee  Heaven’s  signal  of  the  sacrifice,
When,  craving  bliss,  this  race  of  man  invites  thee  to  the

solemn  rite.

4  Let  the  man  thrive  who  travails  sore,  in  prayer,  for  thee  the

Bountiful.


8  Sage  of  mankind,  etc  •  Sage,  Lord,  Bull,  etc.  are  in  the  accusative  case,  in
apposition  with  ‘thee’  in  stanza  7,  though  separated  by  an  intervening  half¬
stanza.

2  The  Priendly  Conner  :  the  Sun-

3  Or,  possibly,  as  suggested  by  Professor  Ludwig,  ‘  The  men  accordant  with
the  heaven  light  thee  the  sign  of  Bacrif.ce;'  that  is,  understanding  the  signs
in  heaven  and  so  knowing  the  proper  time  for  the  ceremony.


HYMN  3.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  557

He  with  the  help  of  lofty  Dyaus  comes  safe  through  straits
of  enmity.  f

5  The  mortal  who  with  fuel  lights  thy  flame  and  offers  unto

thee,

N  , Supports  a  house  with  many  a  branch,  Agni,  to  live  a  hund¬
red  years: - -

6  Thy  bright  smoke  lifts  itsolf  aloft,  and  far-extended  shines  in

'  heaven.

For,  Purifier!  like  the  Sun  thou  beamest  with  thy  radiant
glow.

7  For  in  mon’s  houses  thou  must  bo  glorified  as  a  well-loved

guest,

Gay  liko  an  oldor  in  a  fort,  claiming  protection  like  a  son.

8  Thou,  Agni,  liko  an  ablo  steed,  art  urged  by  wisdom  in  the

wood.

Thou  art  like  wind  ;  food,  homo  art  thou,  like  a  young  horso
that  runs  astray.

9  E’en  things  imporislublo,  thou,  O  Agni,  liko  a  grazing  ox,
Eatcst,  when  hosts,  Eternal  One!  of  thee  the  Mighty  rend

the  woods.

10  Agni,  thou  on  to  rest  as  Priest  tho  homo  of  mon  who  sacrifice.
Lord  of  tho  peoplo,  prospor  them.  Accept  tho  offering,

Angiras !

1 1  0  Agni,  God  with  Mitra’s  might,  call  hither  the  favour  of  tho

Gods  from  earth  and  heaven.

Bring  weal  from  heaven,  that  mon  may  dwell  socurely.  May
we  o’ercomo  the  foo’s  malign  oppressions,  may  wo  o’orcomo
them,  through  thy  help  o’ercomo  them.

HYMN  II L  Agni.

TnuB,  guardian  of  the  Law,  thy  faithful  servant  wins  amplo
light  and  dwolls  in  poace,  0  Agni,

Whom  thou,  as  Vavuija  in  accord  with  Mitra,  guardest,  0  God,
by  banishing  his  trouble.

2  He  hath  paid  sacrifices,  toiled  in  worship,  and  offered  gifts  to
wealth-increasing  Agni.

7  Oay  like  an  tide r  :  Agni  must  be  respected  and  oared  for  like  a  father  os
well  a-  protected  like  a  son.

8  In  the  wood  :  wherein  fire  is  produced  by  attrition.  The  oxaot  meaning
of  the stansa  is  somewhat  uncertain.  Like  wind:  moving  everywhere.

9  Katejt :  this  or  some  similar  verb  must  bo  suppliod.

1  As  Varuaa  in  accord  with  Ultra :  that  is,  Agni,  Varuna,  and  Mitra  as
one.— Ludwig.


THE  HYMNS  OP


553


[BOOK  VI.


Him  the  displeasure  of  the  famous  moves  not,  outrage  and
sc^ru  affect  not  such  a  mortal.

3  Bright  God,  whose  look  is  free  from  stain  like  Surya’s,  thou,

swift,  what  time  thou  earnestly  desirest.

Hast  gear  to  give  us.  Come  with  joy  at  evening,  where,
Child  of  Wood,  thou  mayest  also  tarry.

4  Fierce  is  his  gait  and  vast  his  wondrous  body :  he  champeth

like  a  horse  with  bit  and  bridle,

And,  darting  forth  his  tongue,  as  'twere  a  hatchet,  burning  the
woods,  smelteth  them  like  a  smelter.

5  Archer-like,  fain  to  shoot,  he  sets  his  arrow,  and  whets  his

splendour  like  the  edge  of  iron  :

The  messenger  of  night  with  brilliant  pathway,  like  a  tree-
roosting  bird  of  rapid  pinion.

6  In  beams  of  morn  he  clothes  him  like  the  singer,  and  bright

as  Mitra  with  his  splendour  crackles.

Red  in  the  night,  by  day  the  men’s  possession  :  red,  he  be¬
longs  to  men  by  day,  ImmortaL

7  Like  Heaven’s  when  scattering  beams  his  voice  was  uttered  :

among  the  plants  the  radiant  Hero  shouted,

Who  with  his  glow  in  rapid  course  came  hither  to  fill  both
worlds,  well-wedded  Dames,  with  treasure.

8  Who,  with  supporting  streams  and  rays  that  suit  him,  hath

flashed  like  lightning  with  his  native  vigour.

Like  the  deft  Maker  of  the  band  of  Maruts,  the  bright  im¬
petuous  One  hath  shone  refulgent.


.  3  I  gratefully  adopt  Professor  Pischel's  interpretation  of  this  very  difficult
stanza  which  I  had  regarded  as  hopelessly  obscure.  See  Vedische  Studiea,
I.  pp.  37 — 50.

4  With  bit  and  bridle  :  yamasdnA  d*7;  ‘  champing  fodder  with  his  mouth.’ —
Wilson.  As  'tKcre  a  hateket :  Agni,  sad  not  his  tongue,  is  likened  to  the
hatchet.

5  Of  iron  :  or  metal,  the  exact  meaning  of  tiyai  being  uncertain.

6  In  beams  of  mom :  the  light  of  early  morning  shines  on  the  fire  and  the
singer  alike  and  simultaneously.  Brigkt  as  Mitra:  ‘diffusing  friendly
light’— WiUon.  The  men's  possession :  I  take  nf<n  as  a  shortened  form  of
nrinam;  but  it  is  difficult  to  make  sense  of  the  half-stanza  Professor  Wilson,
following  SAyana,  translates  :  ‘(he  it  is)  who  is  luminous  by  night,  and  who
lights  men  (to  their  work)  by  day  ;  who  is  immortal  and  radiant :  who  lights
men  by  day’.  The  verb  is  supplied  by  Slyana.

J  Like  Heaven’s:  like  the  voice  of  Dyaua,  the  thumder.  Wdl-wsdded
Dames :  having  excellent  Lords,  perhaps  Indra  and  Agni.

8  The  deft  Maker  of  the  band  of  Mantis  ■  Dyaua  is  pro!«ably  intended.


HYMN  4.J


THE  RIG  VEDA.


lt.4

HYMN  IV.  '  '  ‘  Agni.

As  at  man’s  service  of  the  Gods,  Invoker,  tho/,  Son  of
Strength,  dost  sacrifice  and  worship,

So  bring  for  ns  to  day  all  Gods  together,  bring  willingly  the
.  willing  Gods,  O  Agni.

2  May  Agni,  radiant  Herald  of  the  morning,  meet  to  be  known,

accept  our  praise  with  favour.

Doftr  to  all  life,  mid  mortal  men  Immortal,,  our  gaest,  awake
at  dawn,  is  J&ta vedas.

3  Whose  might  tho  very  heavens  regard  with  wonder :  bright

as  the  Son  he  clothes  himsolf  with  lustre.

Ho  who  sends  forth,  Ktomal  Purifier,  hath  shattered  e'en  tho-
anoicnt  works  of  Asno.

4  Thou  art  a  Singer,  Son  ?  our  feast-companion  :  Agni  at  birth

prepared  his  food  and  pathway.

Therefore  vouchsafe  us  strength,  0  Strength-bcstower.  Win
liko  a  King  :  foes  troublo  not  thy  dwelling.

0  Evon  ho  who  oats  his  firm  hard  food  with  swiftness,  and  over¬
takes  tho  nights  ns  Vftyu  kingdoms.

May  we  o’orcomo  those  who  resist  thino  ordors,  like  a  steed
casting  down  tho  flying  foomon.

C  Liko  Sflrya  with  his  fulgent  rnys,  0  Agni,  thou  ovcrspreadcst
both  tho  worlds  with  splendour.

Dooked  with  bright  colour  ho  dispels  the  darkness,  like  Auaija,
with  cloar  flaino  swiftly  flying.

7  Wo  havo  elected  thee  as  most  delightful  for  thy  beams’  glow  :
hear  our  groat  laud,  0  Agni.

The  host  men  praise  thoe  as  the  peer  of  Indra  in  strength,  mid
Gods,  liko  Vfiyu  in  thy  bounty.


1  Invoker :  Jlotar,  hoiald  or  inviter  of  tho  Gods.

3  Afna  :  apparently  one  of  tho  domon*  of  drought.

4  Hit  food  and  ’pathway :  or  his  pathway  to  his  food  may  be  intended.

5  Hit  firm  hard  food  :  vArayam  onnam  ;  the  food  of  elephants,  i.  e.  trees,
according  to  Professor  Ludwig.  Professor  Wilson,  following  SftyAna,  translates

tho  first  half-line  :  1 * * * * 6  Ho  who  whets  his  (gloom)— dispersing  (radiance),  who  eata
the  (offered)  oblation.’  At  VAyu  kingdom!  :  rthhtrt  standing,  perhaps,  for  rSsh-
tryd  ( r/ti/itrydni ),  but  tho  exact  meaning  is  uncertain.  Perhaps,  an  Professor
Ludwig  suggests,  as  Vftyu  or  tire  wind  blows  uninterrupted  through  tho
whole  land,  so  Agni  is  kindled  at  night-fall  and  again  at  early  dawn  before
the  night  has  entirely  passed  away.

6  Like  A  usya :  perhaps  some  contemporary  priest,  who  is  regarded  ns
bringing  back  the  daylight  by  prayer  and  sacrifice.  *  Like  the  adored
(sun).’— Wilson.


560  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

8  Now,  Agni,  on  the  tranquil  paths  of  riches  come  to  us  for  our
wtfcl :  save  us  from  sorrow.

Grant  chiefs  and  bard  this  boon.  May  we  live  happy,  with  hero
children,  through  a  hundred  winters.

HYMN  V.  Agni.

I  isvocatb  your  Son  of  Strength,  the  Youthful,  with  hymns,
the  Youngest  God,  whose  speech  is  guileless ;

Sage  who  sands  wealth  comprising  every  treasure,  b ringer  of
many  boons,  devoid  of  malice.

2  At  eve  and  morn  thy  pious  servants  bring  thee  their  precious

gifts,  0  Priest  of  many  aspects,

On  whom,  the  Purifier,  all  things  living,  as  on  firm  ground
their  happiness  have  stablished.

3  Thou  from  of  old  hast  dwelt  among  these  people,  by  mental

power  the  eharioteer  of  blessings.

Hence  sendest  thou,  0  sapient  Jatavedas,  to  him  who  serves
thee  treasures  in  succession.

4  Agni,  whoever  secretly  attacks  us,  the  neighbour,  thou  with

Mitra’s  might !  who  harms  us.

Bum  him  with  thine  own  Steers  for  ever  youthful,  burning
with  burning  heat,  thou  fiercest  burner.

5  He  who  serves  thee  with  sacrifice  and  fuel, with  hymn,  0  Son

of  Strength,  and  chanted  praises,

Shines  out,  Immortal !  in  the  midst  of  mortals,  a  sage,  with
wealth,  with  splendour  and  with  glory.

6  Do  this,  0  Agni,  when  we  urge  thee,  quickly,  triumphant  in

thy  might  subdue  our  focmen.

When  thou  art  praised  with  words  and  decked  with  brightness,
accept  this  chanted  hymn,  the  singer’s  worship.

7  Help  us,  that  we  may  gain  this  wish,  0  Agni,  gain  riches,

Wealthy  One  !  with  store  of  heroes.

Desiring  strength  from  thee  may  we  be  strengthened,  and  win,
Eternal !  thine  eternal  glory.


8  Tranquil :  arriklbklk  ;  literally  untroubled  by  wolves,  or  enemies.  Grant
ehiefs  and  bard:  the  wealthy  men  who  institute  the  sacrifice  and  the  priest
who  sings.  Or  it  may  be  rendered,  '  Grant  the  chiefs’  bard,’  that  is,  the  priest
who  nags  for  his  wealthy  patrons.  A  kundrtd  teinUrs  :  see  V.  54.  15,  note.

2  Print  of  own y  asptett  :  purvanlka,  having  many  faces,  aspect*,  or  mani¬
festations.  According  to  Siyana,  having  many  flames  instead  of  face*.

A  Tkine  own  Sttert :  thy  strong  flames.  Burn  kin,  etc.  :  tdpd  tapishllta  tdpasd
tajxutdn.


BY itS  7.)


TBE  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  VI.  Agni.

He  who  seeks  furtherance  and  grace  to  help  him  goes  to  the
Son  of  Strength  with  newest  worship,

Calling  the  heavenly  Priest  to  share  the  banquet,  who  rends
the  wood,  bright,  with  his  blackened  pathway.

2  White-hucd  and  thundering  ho  dwells  in  splendour,  Most

Youthful,  with  the  loud-voiced  and  eternal —

Agni,  most  variform,  the  Purifier,  who  follows  crunching  many
ample  forests.

3  Incited  by  the  wind  thy  flames,  0  Agni,  move  onward,  Pure

One  !  pure,  in  all  directions.

Thy  most  destructive  heavenly  Navugvas  break  the  woods
down  and  devastate  them  boldly.

4  Thy  pure  white  horses  from  their  bonds  are  loosened :  O

Kudiant  Ono,  they  shear  tho  ground  beneath  them,

And  far  and  wide  shines  out  thy  flame,  and  flickers  rapidly
moving  over  oarth’s  high  ridges.

5  Forth  darts  tho  Bull’s  tongue  like  the  sharp  atone  weapon  dis¬

charged  by  him  who  fights  to  win  tho  cattle.

Agni’s  liovco  ilamo  is  like  a  horo’a  onset :  dread  and  rosisUoss
ho  destroys  tho  forosts.

6  Thou  with  tho  suulight  of  tho  groat  Impollor  hast  boldly  ovor-

spread  the  earth’s  expanses.

So  arivo  away  with  oonquoring  might  all  porils  :  fighting  our
foomen  burn  up  thoso  who  harm  us.

7  Wondrous !  of  wondrous  power !  givo  to  tho  singer  woalth

wondrous,  marked,  most  wonderful,  life-giving.

Wealth  bright,  O  Bright  Ono,  vast,  with  many  horoos,  givo
with  thy  bright  flamos  to  tho  man  who  lauds  thee.

HYMN  VII.  Agni.

Him,  messenger  of  earth  and  head  of  heaven,  Agni  Vaisv&uura,
born  in  holy  Ordor,

The  Sago,  tho  King,  tho  guost  of  men,  a  vessol  fit  for  thoir
mouths,  the  Gods  have  generated.


2  The  loud-voiced  and  eternal tho  Marut*.

8  Natagvas :  tho  flames  of  fire  being  regarded  n»  tJio  ministers  of  Agni,  who
is  the  boat  or  oldest  of  the  Angiraacs  of  whom  the  Navagvas  are  a  class.

4  Earth's  high  ridges:  a  dhi  sflau  pylfneh;  Prieni  here  being  tho  multiform  earth,

6  Who  fights  to  loin  the  cattle:  Iudra'who  wars  with  demons  of  drought  and
darknesa.

6  The  great  Impeller :  Sftrya,  the  vivifying  Sun.

7  Sd  chitra  ehitrdtn  chitdyantam  asmi  chitrakshatra  chitratamam  vasodh/tm  |
Chandrdm  raytm  puruvfram  byihdntam  clandra  chandrdbhir  grinalt  yuvasva.

1  A  vessel  fit  for  their  mouths :  through  whose  means  they  receive  men’s
offerings.

36


real  Impeller :  Sftrya,  the  vivifying  Sun.

itra  ehitrdtn  chitdyantam  atmi  chitrakshatra  chitratamam  vasodfuTm  |


m  TEE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOS  VI.

2  Him  have  they  praised,  mid-point  of  sacrifices,  great  cistern  of

libations,  seat  of  riches.

Vaimnara,  conveyer  of  oblations,  ensign  of  worship,  have  the
;  God3  engendered.

3  From  thee,  0  Agni,  springs  the  mighty  singer,  from  thee  come

heroes  who  subdue  the  foeman.

0  King,  Vaisv&nara,  bestow  thou  on  us  excellent  treasures
worthy  to  be  longed  for.

4  To  thee,  Immortal !  when  to  life  thou  springest,  all  the  Gods

sing  for  joy  as  to  their  infant.

They  by  thy  mental  powers  were  made  immortal,  Vaisvanara,

'  when  thou  shonest  from  thy  Parents.

5  Agni  Vaisvanara,  uo  one  hath  ever  resisted  thnse.thy  mighty

ordinances.

When  thou,  arising  from  thy  Parents’  bosom,  foundest  the
light  for  days’  appointed  courses.

6  The  summits  of  the  heaven  are  traversed  through  and  through

by  the  Immortal’s  light,  Vaisvinara’s  brilliancy.

All  creatures  in  existence  rest  upon  his  head.  The  Seven
swift-flowing  Streams  have  grown  like  branches  forth.

7  Vaisvanara,  who  measured  oat  the  realms  of  air,  Sage  very

wise  who  made  the  lucid  spheres  of  heaven,

The  Undeceivable  who  spread  out  all  the  worlds,  keeper  is  he
aud  guard  of  immortality.

HYMN  VIII.  Agni.

At  Jatavedas’  holy  gathering  I  will  tell  aloud  the  conquering
might  of  the  swift  red-hued  Steer.

A  pure  and  fresher  hymn  flows  to  Vaisvanara,  even  as  for  Agni
lovely  Soma  is  made  pure.

2  That  Agni,  when  in  loftiest  heaven  he  sprang  to  life,  Guardian

of  Holy  Laws,  kept  and  observed  them  well.

Exceeding  wise,  he  measured  out  the  firmament.  Vaisvanara
attained  to  heaven  by  mightiness.

3  Wonderful  Mitra  propped  the  heaven  and  earth  apart,  and

covered  and  concealed  the  darkness  with  bis  light.


2  Mid-point  of  sacrifice!  :  '  the  bond  of  sacrifices.’— Wilson.  Agni  or  fire  u
essential  in  all  sacrifices.

tJ  The  Seven  f-foteing  Stream :  the  five  rivers  of  the  Panjib,  the  Indus
and  the  Sriraarati  or  the  KubhA.  Have  grovn :  from  VaiavAnara  Agni.

7  Of  immortality :  according  to  SAvan*,  of  water  which  is  the  cause  of
immortality.  ‘  Of  ambrosial  (rain}.'— Wilson.


THE  RIQVBDA.


BY  MX  9.]


663


He  made  the  two  bowls  part  asunder  like  two  skins.  VaisvAnara
put  forth  all  his  oreative  power.  *

1  The  Mighty  seized  him  in  the  bosom  of  the  floods :  the  people

waited  on  the  King  who  should  be  praised.

As  envoy  of  Vivasvftn  Matariavan  brought  Agni  Vaisv&nara
hither  from  far  away.

5  In  every  age  bestow  upon  the  singers  wealth,  worthy  of  holy

synods,  glorious,  over  now.

King,  undecayiug,  as  it  were  with  sharpened  bolt,  smite
down  the  sinner  like  a  tree  with  lightning-flash.

6  Do  thou  bestow,  0  Agni,  on  our  wealthy  chiefs,  rulo,  with

good  heroes,  undeoaying,  bonding  not.

So  may  wo  win  for  us  strength,  0  VaisvAnara,  hundredfold,
thousandfold,  0  Agni,  by  thy  help.

7  0  thou  who  dwellest  in  threo  places,  Helper,  keop  with  effective

guards  our  princely  patrons.

Keep  our  band,  Agni,  who  have  brought  theo  prosents.  Long-
thon  their  lives,  Vai^v&nura,  when  lauded.

HYMN  IX.  Agni.

One  half  of  day  is  dark,  and  bright  tho  other  ;  both  atmos-
phorcs  move  on  by  sago  dovioes.

Agni  VaisvAnara,  whoa  born  as  Sovran,  hath  with  his  lustre
overcome  tho  darkness.

2  I  know  not  either  warp  or  woof,  I  know  not  tho  web  thoy
_ weavo  when  moving  to  the  contest.

3  The  <1  eo  ioicZ* ;  tho  heaven  and  earth,  called  dhithdift  or  bowU  from  their
hemispherical  oppearanoo.

4  The  Mighty :  tho  Gods  who  followed  and  found  tho  fugitive  Agni.  The

people :  or  tho  subjocta,  Of  Vivtutdn :  according  to  Sftyana,  from

Aditva  or  the  Sun.

7  Who  dwellett  in  three  placet:  in  heaven  as  tho  Sun,  in  tho  firmament  a*
lightning,  and  on  oarth  as  fire.  -

'  Tho  hymn  is  somewhat  obscure  ;  but  the  general  purport  appears  to  bo  j
Agni  is  tho  priests’  guide  and  teacher.  As  sunlight  diapola  tho  darkness  so
ho  enlightens  our  understandings.  I  know  nothing  of  tho  mysteries  of
sacrifice  ;  but  I  look  to  Agni  for  light,  and  prepare  the  ear  and  eye  of  my
mind  to  roceive  knowledge  and  inspiration  from  him.

•  1  Both  atmospheres :  tho  rajut  or  atmosphere  is  divided  into  two  parts,  one
half  belonging  to  the  sky  and  the  other  to  the  earth.  See  Wallis,  The
Cosmology  of  the  Rigveda.  pp.  115,  116

2  I  know  not  eUher  warp  or  woof:  'The  first  half  of  the  stanza.. .implies,
aocording  to  those  who  know  tradition,  sampraddyavidah,  says  Si y ana,  a
figurative  allusion  to  the  mysteries  of  sacrifice:  the  threads  of  the  warp,  lantu,
arc  the  motrea  of  the  Vedas,  those  of  the  woof,  ofu,  the  liturgic  prayers  and
ceremonial,  the  combination  of  which  two  is  the  cloth,  or  sacrifice  :  tho
atmuvidah,  or,  Vedantit,  understand  it  as  alluding  to  the  mysteries  of  creation,
the  threads  of  the  warp  being  the  subtile  elements,  those  of  the  woof  tho
gross,  and  their  combination  the  universe.’— Wilson.  Professor  Grassmann


564  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI.

Whose  son  shall  here  speak  words  that  must  be  spoken  without
•  assistance  from  the  Father  near  him  t

3  For  both  the  warp  and  woof  he  understandeth,  and  in  duo

time  shall  speak  what  should  be  spoken,

Who  knoweth  as  the  immortal  world’s  Protector,  descending,
seeing  with  no  aid  from  other.

4  He  is  the  Priest,  the  first  of  all :  behold  him.  Mid  mortal  men

he  is  the  light  immortal.

Here  was  he  born,  firm -seated  in  his  station,  Immortal,  over
waxing  in  his  body.

5  A  firm  light  hath  been  set  for  men  to  look  on :  among  all

things  that  fly  the  mind  is  swiftest.

All  Gods  of  one  accord,  with  one  intention,  move  unobstructed
to  a  single  purpose.

6  Mine  ears  unclose  to  hear,  mine  eye  to  see  him ;  the  light  that

harbours  in  my  spirit  broadens.

Far  roams  my  mind  whose  thoughts  are  in  the  distance.  What
shall  I  speak,  what  shall  I  now  imagine  f

7  All  the  Gods  bowed  them  down  in  fear  before  thee,  Agni,  when

thou  wast  dwelling  in  the  darkness.

Vaisvanara-be  gracious  to  assist  us,  may  the  Immortal  favour
us  and  help  us.

HYMN  X.  Agni.

Install  at  sacrifice,  while  the  rite  ad  ranees,  your  pleasant,
heavenly  Agni,  meet  for  praises.

With  hymns— for  he  illumines  us— install  him.  He,  Jatavedas,
makes  our  rites  successful.


and  the  translators  of  the  Siebaixxg  Litder  think  that  a  young  singer  is  pro'
.  paring  himself  for  a  contest  with  older  bards,  and,  being  distrustful  of  his
own  unaided  powers  to  find  material  for  bis  song,  expresses  his  reliance  upon
Agni,  and  seeks  inspiration  from  him.  To  At  contest :  the  sacrifice  is  here
intended  :  a  meeting  for  religious  worship  ;  tattyamane  drcayajant.—Shymta..

Whose  son :  Agni  ia  the  Father  whose  aid  every  one  requires,  however
excellent  his  own  human  father  may  be.

5  A  firm  light :  Agni  remains  in  his  place,  and  the  effectual  performance  of
the  sacrifice  depends  upon  the  activity  of  his  mind.

*  According  to  the  Vcdanii  view  of  the  text,  the  light  is  Brahma,  Eeated
spontaneously  in  the  heart  as  the  means  of  true  knowledge,  to  which  all  the
senses,  together  with  the  miud  and  consciousness,  refer,  as  to  the  one  cause  of
'  creation,  or  Param&tmd,  supreme  spirit.’— Wilson.  The  stanza  is  translated
by  Prof.  Wilson,  after  Siyana :  ‘  A  steady  light,  swifter  than  thought,
stationed  among  moving  beings  to  shew  (the  way)  to  happiness  :  all  tho  gods
being  of  one  mind  and  of  like  wisdom,  proceed  respectfully  to  the  presence  of
the  one  (ohief)  agent,  (VaUvdnar.)’.

1  Install :  establish  him  as  your  Psrokita  or  Chief  Priest  ;  or  set  him  in
front  as  the  Ahsvanlya  fire.


flYtitf  11.]  •  THE  RIOTED!.  $«5

2  Hear  this  laud,  Radiant  Priest  of  many  aspects,  0  Agni  with

the  fires  of  man  enkindled,  .

Laud  which  bards  send  forth  pure  as  sacred  butter /  strength
to  this  man,  as  'twerc  for  self-advantage.

3  Mid  mortal  men  that  singer  thrives  in  glory  who  offers  gifts

with  hymns  of  praise  to  Agni,

And  the  God,  woudrous  bright,  with  wondrous  succours  helps
him  to  win  a  stable  filled  with  cattle.

4  He,  at  his  birth,  whose  path  is  black  behind  him,  filled  heaven

and  earth  with  far  apparent  splendour :

And  he  himself  hath  been,  through  night’s  thick  darkness,
made  manifest  by  light,  the  Purifier.

6  With  thy  most  mighty  aid,  confer,  0  Agni,  wonderful  wealth
on  us  aud  on  our  princes,

Who  stand  preeminent,  surpassing  others  in  liberal  gifts,  in
fame,  and  hero  virtues.

6  Agni,  accept  this  sacrifice  with  gladness,  which,  seated  hero,

the  worshipper  presented).

Fair  hymns  hadst  thou  among  the  Bharadvljas,  and  holpest
them  to  gain  abundant  vigour.

7  Scatter  our  foes,  increase  our  store.  May  we  be  glad  a  hund¬

red  winters  with  brave  sons.

HYMX  XI.  Agni.

Eagerly  SAcrifico  thou,  most  skilful,  Agni !  Priest,  pressing
on  as  if  the  Maruts  sent  thoe.

To  our  oblation  bring  the  two  N&satyas,  Mitra  and  Varuga
and  Earth  and  Heaven.

2  Thou  art  oor  guileless,  most  delightful  Herald,  tho  God,  among
mankind,  of  holy  synods.

A  Priest  with  purifying  tongue,  0  Agni,  sacrifice  with  thy
mouth  to  thine  own  body.

2  Strength  to  thin  nun ;  the  hymn  ia  to  rive  strength  to  tho  wui’shippcr,
and  the  priests  are  to  sing  with  vigour  m  though  their  own  interests  were
Immediately  concerned  SAysne  takes  namatd  (out  of  self- internet)  u  e  pro¬
per  name,  ‘  As  MamatA  (formerly  offered  it).’— Wilson.

8  A  i table  Jilted  *Uh  cattle :  tbe  expression  includes  the  waters  of  heaven,
the  light  of  day,  and  booty  in  cattle-lifting  expeditions.

6  Bharadrdjat:  the  family  of  the  great  Rishi  to  whom  the  hymn  was  revealed.

7  A  hundred  tcinteri :  see  note  on  VI.  4.  8.

2  Of  holy  rynodt :  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  taking  r idathd  as  an  old

genitive  plural,  and  not  =  vidathe,  as  SAyane  does.  Sacnjlee . to  thive  ovn

body  :  or,  sacrifice . thy  proper  body  ;  or,  '  keep  thine  own  body  near  ua  to

be  worshipped.’


566  TUB  HYMtfS  OP  [BOOK  VI

3  For  even  the  blessfed  longing  that  is  in  thee  would  bring  the

Gods  down  to  the  singer’s  worship,

When -the  Angirasea’  sagest  Sage,  the  Poet,  sings  the  sweet
measure  at  the  solemn  service.

4  Bright  hath  he  beamed,  the  wise,  the  far-refulgent.  Worship

the  two  wide-spreading  Worlds,  0  Agni,

Whom  as  the  Living  One  rich  in  oblations  the  Five  Tribes,
bringing  gifts,  adorn  with  homage.

5  When  I  with  reverence  clip  the  grass  for  Agni,  when  the  trim¬

med  ladle,  full  of  oil,  is  lifted,

Firm  on  the  seat  of  earth  is  based  the  altar :  eye-like,  the
sacrifice  is  directed  Sun-ward.

6  Enrich  us,  0  thou  Priest  of  many  aspects,  with  the  Gods,  Agni,

with  thy  fires,  enkindled.

0  Son  of  Strength,  clad  in  the  robe  of  riches,  may  we  escape
from  woe  as  from  a  prison.


HYMN  XII.  Agni.

King  of  trimmed  grass,  Herald  within  the  dwelling,  may
Agni  worship  the  Impeller’s  World-halves.

He,  Son  of  Strength,  the  Holy,  from  a  distance  hath  spread
himself  abroad  with  light  like  Siirya.

2  In  thee,  most  wise,  shall  Dyaus,  for  full  perfection,  King !

Holy  One  !  pronounce  the  call  to  worship.

Found  in  three  places,  like  the  Speeder's  footstep,  come  to
present  men’s  riches  as  oblations  !

3  Whose  blaze  most  splendid,  sovran  in  the  forest,  shines  waxing

on  his  way  like  the  Impeller.

Ho  knows  himself,  like  as  a  guileless  smelter,  not  to  be  stayed
among  the  plants,  Immortal.

4  Our  friends  extol  him  like  a  steed  for  vigour,  even  Agni  in  the

dwelling,  J&tavedas.


1  The  Impeller's  World-halves  :  the  heaven  and  earth,  illumined  by,  and  so
belonging  to,  the  all-vivifying  Sun.

2  In  thee :  or  by  thee,  in  thy  lightning  form,  Dyaus  or  Heaven  shall
pronounce  the  ydjgd,  the  consecrating  text  used  at  sacrifices,  and  thus  invite
the  Gods  to  bo  present.  Found  in  three  places :  ia  heaven,  atmosphere,  and
earth,  and  in  the  corresponding  firc-recoptaclea  at  sacrifice.  The  Speeder's
footstep :  the  threefold  step  of  Vishnu  as  the  Sun,  traversing  the  three  worlds
of  earth,  air,  and  sky.

3  A  guileless  smelter :  he  knows  his  power  to  consume  what  he  attacks,
like  a  melter  of  metal  who  knows  wbat  he  can  do  and  does  not  deceive  himself.
According  to  Siyana,  diavUtf  here  means  runner,  ‘rushing  like  the  iuuoxiovis
(wind).'— Wilson.


THE  RIGVEDA.


567


HY.ViV  13.]


Tree  fed,  he  fights  with  power  as  doth  a  champion,  like  Dawn’s
Sire  to  be  praised  with  sacrifices.

5  Men  wonder  at  his  shining  glows  when,  paring  the  w^ods  with

ease,  o’er  the  broad  earth  he  goeth,

And,  like  a  rushing  flood,  loosed  quickly,  burneth,  swift  as  a
guilty  thief,  o’er  desert  places.

6  So  mighty  thou  protectest  us  from  slander,  O  Champion,  Agni  1

with  all  tires  enkindled.

Bring  opulence  and  drive  away  afflicton.  May  brave  sons  glad¬
den  us  through  a  hundred  winters.


HYMN  XIII.  Agni.

From  thee,  as  branches  from  a  tree,  0  Agni,  from  thee,  Auspici¬
ous  God  !  spring  all  our  blessings —  .

Wealth  swiftly,  strength  in  battle  with  our  foeraen,  the  ram
besought  of  heaven,  the  flow  of  waters.

2  Thou  art  our  Bhaga  to  send  wealth:  thou  dwcllest,  like

circumambient  air,  with  wondrous  splendour.

Friend  arttfiou  of  the  lofty  Law,  like  Mitra,  Controller,  Agni  !
God  !  of  many  a  blessing.

3  Agni !  the  horo  slays  with  might  his  foeman ;  the  singer  bears

away  the  Pain’s  booty —

Even  ho  whom  thou,  Sage,  born  in  Law,  incitest  by  wealth,
accordant  with  the  Child  of  Waters.

4  The  man  who,  Sou  of  Strength  !  with  sacrifices,  hymns,  lauds,

attracts  thy  fervour  to  tho  altar,

Enjoys  each  precious  thing,  0  God,  0  Agni,  gains  wealth  of
corn  and  is  the  lord  of  treasures.

5  Grant,  Son  of  Strongth,  to  men  for  their  subsistence  such

things  as  bring  high  fame  and  hero  childrou.

For  thou  with  might  givest  much  food  in  cattle  even  to  tho
wicked  wolf  when  he  is  hungry.

6  Eloquent,  Son  of  Strength,  Most  Mighty,  Agni,  vouchsafe  us

seed  and  offspring,  full  of  vigour.

May  I  by  all  my  songs  obtain  abundance.  May  bravo  sons
gladden  us  through  a  hundred  winters.


4  Dawn't  Sire:  Dyaua  or  Heaven,  the  Father  of  Uahaa  or  Dawn.

3  Hit  foeman  :  vritram  eignifying  any  enemy  :  Avarakam  falrum  —  Sdyann.
The  Child  of  U’alert :  here  said  to  mean  the  lightning,  born  of  the  watery
cloud.

5  To  the  wicked  wolf:  or,  perhape,  even  to  the  fee  Yrika.  Cl.  VII.  68.  8.


THE  HYAftfS  OF


[BOOK  VI.


HYMN  XIV.  Agni.

Whoso  to  Agni  hath  endeared  his  thought  and  service  by  his
hymns,

That  mortal  eats  before  the  rest,  and  finds  sufficiency  of  food.

2  Agni,  in  truth,  is  passing  wise,  most  skilled  in  ordering,  a  Seer.
At  sacrifices  Manus’  sons  glorify  Agni  as  their  Priest.

3  The  foomau's  wealth  in  many  a  place,  Agni,  is  emulous  to  help.
Men  fight  the  fiend,  and  seek  by  rites  to  overcome  the  riteless  foe.

4  Agni  bestows  the  hero  chief,  winner  of  waters,  firm  in  fray.
Soon  as  they  look  upon  his  might  his  enemies  tremblo  in  alarm.

5  For  with  his  wisdom  Agni,  God,  protects  the  mortal  from

reproach,

Whose  conquering  wealth  is  never  checked,  is  never  cheoked
in  deeds  of  might.

6  0  Agni,  God  with  Mitra’s  might  call  hither  the  favour  of  the

Gods  from  earth  and  heaven.

Bring  weal  from  heaven  that  men  may  dwell  securely.  May  we
o’orcome  the  foe’s  malign  oppressions,  may  wo  o’ercomo
them,  through  thy  help  o’eroome  them.

HYMN  XV.  Agni.

With  thin  my  song  I  strive  to  reach  this  guest  of  yours,  who
wakes  at  early  morn,  the  Lord  of  all  the  tribes.

Each  time  he  comes  from  heaven,  the  Pure  One  from  of  old  :
from  ancient  days  the  Child  eats  everlasting  food.

2  Whom,  well-disposed,  the  Bhrigus  stablished  as  a  Friend,

whom  men  must  glorify,  high-flaming  in  the  wood.

As  such,  most  friendly,  thou  art  every  day  extolled  in  lauds
by  Vitahavya,  0  thou  wondrous  God.

3  Be  thou  the  foeless  helper  of  the  skilful  man,  subduor  of  the

enemy  near  or  far  away.

Bestow*  a  wealthy  homo  on  men,  0  Son  of  Strength.  Give
Vitahavya  riches  spreading  far  and  wide,  give  Bharadv&ja
wide-spread  wealth.

4  Him,  your  refulgent  guest,  Agni  who  comes  from  heaven,  the

Herald  of  mankind,  well-skilled  in  sacred  rites,

1  That  mortal  eatt  before  the  reel:  ‘May  the  mortal. . quickly  fcecomo

distinguished  as  first  (amongst  men).' — Wileon.  *

2  Most  skilled  in  orderhuj  :  the  chief  regulator  of  religious  rites.

3  Emulous  to  help :  waiting  for  us  to  seize  and  uae.

1  The  Child:  bom  of  tire  Erc-sticks,  or  of  Heaven  and  Earth.  Everlasting
food:  the  Amrita  contained  in  the  sacrificial  offerings.

2  VUahavya :  eithor  the  name  of  the  llishi,  as  S&yana  takes  it,  or  an
epithet '  whose  oblations  are  enjoyed,’  qualifying  Bharadvdja  understood.  •


The  moved  a.


ttYMH  14.]  .


&69


Who,  like  a  holy  singer,  utters  heavenly  words,  oblation-beareV,
envoy,  God,  I  seek  with  hymns.  '  ■

5  Who  with  his  purifying,  eye-attracting  form  hath  shone' upon

the  earth  as  with  the  light  of  Daw-n  ;

Who  speeding  on,  as  in  the  fight  of  Et&sa,  cometh,  untouched
by  age,  as  one  athirst  in  heat.

6  Worship  ye  Agni,  Agni,  with  your  log  of  wood  ;  praise  your

belovM,  your  belovid  guest  with  songs.

Invite  ye  the  Immortal  hither  with  your  hymns.  A  God  among
the  Gods,  he  lovoth  what  is  choice,  loveth  our  service,  God
mid  Gods.

7  Agni  inflamed  with  fuel  in  my  song  I  sing,  pure,  Cleanser,

stedfast,  set  in  front  at  sacrifice.

Wise  JiUavedas  wo  implore  with  prayers  for  bliss,  the  Priest,
the  holy  Singer,  bounteous,  void  of  guile.

8  Mon,  Agni,  in  each  age  have  made  thee,  Deathless  One,  their

envoy,  offering-bearer,  guard  adorable.

With  reverence  Gods  and  mortals  have  established  thee,  the
over-watchful,  omnipresent  Household  Lord.

9  Thou,  Agni,  ordering  the  works  and  ways  of  both,  as  onvoy  of

tho  Gods  travorsest  both  the  worlds.

When  wo  lay  claim  to  thy  regard  and  gracious  care,  be  thou
to  us  a  thrice-protecting  friendly  guard.

10  Him  fair  of  face,  rapid,  and  fair  to  look  on,  him  very  wise  may

we  who  know  not  follow.

Lot  him  who  knows  all  rules  invite  for  worship,  Agni  announce
our  offering  to  the  Immortals.

11  Him,  Agni,  thou  dolivereat  and  savest  who  brings  his  prayer

to  thoo  the  Wise,  O  Hero,

Tho  end  of  sacrifice  or  its  inception  ;  yea,  thou  endowest  him
with  powor  and  riches.

12  Guard  us  from  him  who  would  assail  us,  Agni;  preserve  us,

O  thou  Victor,  from  dishonour.

Hero  let  tho  place  of  d.xrkooing  come  upon  theo  :  may  wealth
bo  ours,  desirable  in  thousands.


5  In  the  fight  of  Eta  fa:  when  he  contended  with  Stays.  See  II.  19.  5,
where  Indra  is  said  to  have  assisted  Etasa.

9  Of  both :  of  Gods  and  men.

11  The  second  half  of  the  stanza  is  not  clear.  Professor  Wilson  paraphra¬
ses  it  after  SHyana  :  '  thou  rewardest  with  strength  and  with  riches  him
(who  undertakes)  the  institution,  (who  effect*)  the  accomplishment,  of  tho

^crifice.

12  The  'place  of  darkening  :  this  passage  is  very  obscure.  Professor  Ludwig
thinks  that  the  time  of  battle  is  meant.  May  the  foes  who  attack  us  find


THE  HYMNS  OP


m


[ book  vr.


13  Agni,  the  Priost,  is  King,  Lord  of  the  homestead,  he,  J4t&vedas,

knows  all  generations.

Most  skilful  worshipper  mid  Gods  and  mortals,  may  he  begin
the  sacrifice,  the  Holy.

14  Whate’er  today  thou,  bright-flamed  Priest,  enjoyest  from  the

man '8  rite — for  thou  art  Sacrificcr —

Worship,  for  duly  dost  thou  spread  in  greatness:  bear  off  thine
offerings  of  to-day,  Most  Youthful.

15  Look  thou  upon  the  viand3  duly  laid  for  thee.  Fain  would  he

set  thee  here  to  worship  Heaven  and  Earth.

Help  us,  0  liberal  Agni,  in  the  strife  for  spoil,  so  that  we
may  o’ercome  all  things  that  trouble  us,  o’ercome,  o’ercome
them  with  thy  help.

16  Together  with  all  Gods,  0  fair-faced  Agni,  be  seated  first

upon  the  wool-lined  altar,

Nest-like,  bedowed  with  oil.  Bear  this  our  worship  to  Savitar
who  sacrifices  rightly.

17  Here  the  arranging  priests,  as  did  Atharvan,  rub  this  Agni

forth,

Whom,  not  bewildered,  as  he  moved  in  winding  ways,  they
brought  from  gloom.

18  For  the  Gods’  banquet  be  thou  bom,  for  full  perfection  and

for  weal.

Bring  the  Immortal  Gods  who  strengthen  holy  Law :  so  let  our
sacrifice  reach  the  Gods.

that  tliey  have  to  deal  with  thee  a*  our  ally.  Slyapfc  explains  pXthah  as  food
offered  in  sacrifice,  and  dhvasmamOt  as  dhvasladoiham .  freed  from  defects  ;

‘  May  the  food  reach  thoc  free  from  imperfection.'  Professor  Graasmann
translates:  ‘Eedringroit  dir  dein  rauchumhiill ter  Gang  vor;’  ‘Thy  smoke-
enveloped  course  press  forward  with  thee.’

13  Knows  all  generations :  vffvd  vedajdnimd  ;  etymology  of  Jiltavedaa. —
Ludwig.

14  The  man's  :  who  institutes  tho  sacrifice.

15  Fain  te ould  he .-  the  patron  of  the  sacrifice.

The  original  hymn  seems  to  end  with  this  stanza,  as  the  repetition,
o’ercome . o’ercome,  o’ercome,  tarc>na...tare»ia . larema  also  indicates.

16  Wool-lined  altar:  built  up  like  the  nest  of  a  bird  with  layers  of  wool,
in  which  wool  and  resins  for  incense  aro  placed.  See  AitAreya-Brfthmnna,
1.5  28  (Haug’s  translation  p.  62).  To  Savitar :  according  to  Sftyana,  Savitar
means  the  originator,  the  institutor  of  the  sacrifice,  and  the  dative  case  is
u-e<l  in  the  sense  of  the  genitive,  1  the  sacrifice  of  th$  institutor  of  the  rite.'

In  nnotlior  place  he  explains  savitr f  ydjumdndya  by  1  for  the  sake  of  the
benefit  of  the  sacrificing  institutor  of  the  ceremony.’

•  17  Athaivan :  the  priest  who  first  obtained  fire  and  offered  Soma  and  pray¬
ers  to  the  Gods.  As  he  moved  in  winding  wags:  when  he  fled  and  tried  to
hide  himself  from  the  Gods,


DYMN  16.]  THE  RIG  VEDA.  671

19  0  Agni,  Lord  and  Master  of  men’s  homesteads,  with  kindled
fuel  we  have  made  thee  mighty.

Let  not  our  household  gear  be  found  defective.  Sharpen  via
with  thy  penetrating  splendour.

HYMN  XVL  Agni.

Priest  of  all  sacrifices  hast  thou  been  appointed  by  the  Gods,
Agni,  amid  the  race  of  man.

2  So  w'ith  thy  joyous  tongues  for  us  sacrifice  nobly  in  this  rite.
Bring  thou  the  Gods  and  worship  them.

3  For  well,  0  God,  Disposer,  thou  knowest,  straight  on,  the  paths

and  ways,

Agni,  most  wise  in  sacrifice.

4  Thoe,  too,  hath  Bharata  of  old,  with  mighty  men,  implored

for  bliss,  ;

And  worshipped  thee  the  worshipfuL

5  Thou  givest  these  abundant  boons  to  Divodisa  pouring  forth,
To  Bhnradvija  offering  gifta.

6  Do  thou,  Immortal  Messenger,  bring  hither  the  Celestial  Folk,
Hearing  the  singer’s  oulogy.

7  Mortals  with  pious  thought  implore  thee,  Agni, God,  at  holy  rites.
To  come  unto  the  feast  of  Gods.

8  I  glorify  thine  aspect  and  the  might  of  thee  the  Bountiful.

All  those  who  love  shall  joy  in  thee,

9  Invoker  placed  by  Manus,  thou,  Agni,  art  near,  the  wisest

Priest :

Pay  worship  to  the  Tribes  of  Heaven.

10  Como,  Agni,  lauded,  to  the  feast;  come  to  the  offering  of  the

gifts

As  Priest  be  seated  on  tho  grass.

11  So,  Angiras,  we  make  thee  strong  with  fuel  and  with  holy  oil.
Blaze  high,  thou  youngest  of  the  Gods.

12  For  us  thou  winnest,  Agni, God,  heroic  strength  exceeding  great,

Far-spreading  and  . of  high  renown.  :

13  Agni,  Atharvan  brought  thee  forth,  by  rubbing,  from  the  lotus-

flower,

The  head  of  Visva,  of  the  Priest.

14  Thee,  Vritra’s  siayer,  breaker  down  of  castles,  hath  Atharvan’s

son,

Dadhyach  the  Rishi,  lighted  up.

4  Bharalti ;  according  to  Sdyana  the  King  of  that  name,  eon  of  DushyantA
and  SakuntalA.

13  The  lotutrfowtr :  apparently  a  figurative  expression  for  heaven.  Pijva  ;
Heaven,  personified.

14  Dadhyach :  see  I.  84.  18,  note.  •


*tBB  HYii&S  OP  [BOOK  Vt.

s  15  The  hero  Pithya  kindled  thee  the  Dasyus’  most  destructive
•  foe,

Winder  of  spoil  in  every  fight.

16  Come,  here,  0  Agui,  will  I  sing  veriiy  other  songs  to  thee,
And  with  these  drops  shalt  thou  grow  strong.

17  Where’er  thy  mind  applies  itself,  vigour  preeminent  hast

thou :

There  wilt  thou  gain  a  dwelling-place.

18  Not  for  a  moment  only  lasts  thy  bounty,  good  to  many  a  one  !
Our  service  therefore  shalt  thou  gain.

19  Agni,  the  Bh&rata,  hath  been  sought,  tho  Vritra-slayer,  marked

of  all,

Yea,  Divod&sa’s  Hero  Lord.

20  For  he  gaVe  riches  that  surpass  in  greatness  all  tho  things  of

earth,

Fighting  untroubled,  unsubdued.

21  Thou,  Agni,  as  in  days  of  old,  with  recent  glory,  gathered

light,

Hast  overspread  the  lofty  heaven.

22  Bring  to  your  Agni,  0  my  friends,  boldly  your  laud  and

sacrifice :

Give  the  Disposer  praise  and  song.

23  For  as  sagacious  Herald  he  hath  sat  through  every  age

of  man,

Oblation-bearing  messenger.

24  Bring  those  Two  Kings  whose  ways  aro  pure,  Adityas,  and

the  Marut  host.

Excellent  God  !  and  Heaven  and  Earth.

25  For  strong  and  active  mortal  man,  excellent,  Agni,  is  tho  look
Of  thee  Immortal,  Son  of  Strength  I

26  Rich  through  his  wisdom,  noblest  bo  the  giver  serving  theo

to-day :

The  man  hath  brought  his  hymn  of  praise.


15  Pdlhya;  probably  some  celebrated  Bacrificer.  Dr.  Garbo  (VaitAna-SQtra
II.  14)  translate*  pdthyd  vrUhd  in  this  text  by  ‘der  Hengst  auf  der  Strasao,
tho  Stallion  on  the  way.’

18  Not  for  a  moment  only  hst\  th<j  bounty :  Sly  ana  understands  this  differ¬
ently  :  ‘Lot  not  thy  full  (blaze)  be  d  is  treeing  to  the  eye.’— Wilson.

10  The  Bhdrata :  tho  especial  protector  of  the  Bharataa.  According  to
Slynpa  the  word  means  cither  'descended  from  the  priests  called  Bharatas,’
or  '  the  bearer  of  oblations.’

Those  Tm  Kings :  Mitra  and  Vanina,


H  YMH  1 6.  ]  THE  TUG  VEDA .


673


27  These,  Agni,  these  are  helped  by  thee,  who,  strong  and  active
all  their  lives,  ,

O'ercome  the  malice  of  the  foe,  fight  down  the  malice  of
the  foe.


28  May  Agni  with  his  pointed  blaze  oast  down  each  fierce  devour-

ing  fiend :

May  Agni  win  us  wealth  by  war.

29  0  active  Jatavedas,  bring  riches  with  store  of  hero  sons:

Slay  thou  the  demons,  0  Most  Wise.

30  Keep  us,  0  Jatavedas,  from  the  troubling  of  the  man  of  sin  :
Guard  us  thou  Sage  who  knowest  prayer.

31  Whatever  sinner,  Agni,  brings  oblations  to  procure  our  death,
Save  us  from  woe  that  he  would  work.

32  Drive  from  us  with  thy  tongue,  0  God,  the  man  who  doetb

evil  deeds,

The  mortal  who  would  strike  us  dead.


33  Give  shelter  reaching  far  and  wide  to  Bharadv&ja,  conquering

Lord !

Agni,  send  wealth  most  excellent.

34  May  Agni  slay  the  Vj-itras, — fain  for  riches,  through  the  lord

of  song,

Served  with  oblation,  kindled,  bright.


Sf»  His  Father’s  Father,  shining  in  his  Mother’s  everlasting  side,
Set  on  the  Beat  of  holy  Law.

36  0  active  JUtavedas,  bring  devotion  that  wins  progeny,  Agni,

that  it  may  shine  to  heaven,

37  0  Child  of  Strength,  to  thee  whose  look  is  lovely  we  with

dainty  food,  *

0  Agni,  have  poured  forth  our  songs.

38  To  thee  for  shelter  are  we  come,  as  to  the  shado  from  fervent

heat,

Agni,  who  glitterest  like  gold.

39  Mighty  as  one  who  slays  with  shafts,  or  like  a  bull  with  sharp¬

ened  horn,

Agni,  thou  brakest  down  the  forts.


35  Hia  Father's  Pother  :  1  here,  ns  before,  the  mother  of  Agni  is  the
the  father  is  heaven  :  Agni  is  said  to  be  the  father  or  fosterer  of  his
heaven  by  transmitting  to  it  the  flame  and  smoke  of  burn
Wilson.

87  Child  of  Strength  :  sohoskrita ;  literally,  made  or  prod
»,  c.  the  violent  agitation  of  the  fire-stick.


THE  HYMNS  OP


[ BOOR  VI.


40  Whom,  like  an  infant  newly  born,  devourer,  in  their  arma

th*sy  bear,

Men’s  Agni,  skilled  in  holy  ntca.

41  Bear  to  the  banquet  of  the  Gods  the  God  best  finder-out  of

wealth.

Let  him  bo  seated  in  his  place.

42  In  J&tavedas  kindle  ye  the  dear  guest  who  hath  now  appeared
In  a  soft  place,  the  homestead’s  Lord.

43  Harness,  0  Agni,  0  thou  God,  thy  steeds  which  are  most
r  excellent :

They  boar  thee  as  thy  spirit  wills.  •

44  Como  hither,  bring  tho  Gods  to  us  to  taste  the  sacrificial  feast,
To  drink  the  draught  of  Soma  juice.

45  0  Agni  of  the  Bharotas,  blaze  high  with  everlasting  might,
Sbtno  forth  and  gleam,  Eternal  One.

46  Tho  mortal  man  who  serves  the  God  with  banquet,  and,  bring-

,  ing  gifts  at  sacrifice,  lauds  Agni,

May  well  attract,  with  prayer  and  hands  uplifted,  tho  Priest
of  Heaven  and  Earth,  truo  Saorificor.

47  Agni,  wo  bring  thee,  with  our  hymn,  oblation  fashioned  in

•  the  heart.

Lot  these  bo  oxon  unto  thee,  lot  those  bo  bulls  and  kino  to
theo.

48  Tho  Gods  onkiudle  Agni,  best  slayer  of  Vptra,  first  in  rank,
Tho  Mighty  One  who  brings  us  wealth  and  orushes  down  tho

K&kshasAB.

HYMN  XVII.  Indra.

Drink  Soma,  Mighty  One,  for  which,  when  lauded,  thou  brak¬
es  t  through  the  cattle-stall,  0  Indra;  .

Thou  who,  0  Bold  Oue,  armed  with  thunder  smotest  Vyitra
with  might,  and  every  hostile  being.

2  Drink  it  thou  God  who  art  impetuous  victor,  Lord  of  our

hymns,  with  beauteous  jaws,  the  Horo,

Bender  of  kine-stalls,  car-borne,  thunder-wielding,  so  picrco
thy  way  to  wondrous  strength,  0  Indra.

3  Drink  as  of  old,  and  lot  tho  draught  delight  thee :  hear  thou

our  prayer  and  lot  our  songs  exalt  thee.

Make  the  Suu  visible,  make  food  abundant,  slaughter  the  foes,
pierce  through  and  free  the  cattle.


'dtaudat  kindle  ye:  the  meaning  is  said  to  be,  that  the  fire  of  burnt-
Ni?  bo  kindled  by  the  firo  produced  by  attrition.

who*  sacrifices  are  always  effectual.

:  lot  our  oblations  be  as  acceptable  to  thee  as  herds  of


nr  MX  17.J  THE  MOVE  DA,  S75

4  These  gladdening  drops,  0  Indra,  Self-sustainer,  quaffed  shall

augment  thee  in  thy  mighty  splendour.

Yea,  let  the  cheering  drops  delight  thee  greatly,  great,  perfect,
strong,  powerful,  all-subduing.

5  Gladdened  whereby,  bursting  the  firm  enclosures,  thou  gavest

splendour  to  the  Sun  and  Morning.

The  mighty  rock  that  compassed  in  the  cattle,  ne’er  moved,
thou  shookest  from  its  seat,  0  Indra.

6  Thou  with  thy  wisdom,  power,  and  works  of  wonder,  hast

stored  the  rips  milk  in  the  raw  cows’  udders,

Unbarred  the  firm  doors  for  the  kine  of  Morning,  and,  with
the  Angirases,  set  free  the  cattle.

7  Thou  hast  spread  out  wide  earth,  a>  mighty  marvel,  and,  high

thyself,  propped  lofty  heaven,  0  Indra.

Both  worlds,  whoso  Sons  are  Gods,  thou  hast  supported,
young,  Mothers  from  old  time  of  holy  Order.

8  Yea,  Indra,  all  the  Deities  installed  thee  their  one  strong

Champion  in  the  van  for  battle.

What  time  the  godless  was  the  Gods’  assailant,  Indra  they
chose  to  win  the  light  of  heaven.

9  Yea,  e’en  that  heaven  itself  of  old  bent  backward  before  thy

bolt,  in  terror  of  its  auger,

When  Indra,  life  of  every  living  creature,  smote  down  within
Ilia  lair  the  assailing  Dragon.

10  Yea,  Strong  One  !  Tvashtar  turned  for  thee,  the  Mighty,  the

bolt  with  thousand  spikes  and  hundred  edges,

Eager  and  prompt  at  will,  wherewith  thou  crushcdst  the  boast¬
ing  Dragon,  0  impetuous  Hero.

11  He  dressed  a  hundred  buffaloes,  0  Indra,  for  thee  whom  all

accordant  Maruts  strengthen.

He,  Pashan  Vishnu,  poured  forth  three  great  vessels  to  him,
the  juice  that  cheors,  that  slaughters  Vritra.


.  6  The  ripe  milk :  the  cows  are  called  raw  aa  contrasted  with  the  warm
milk  matured  in  their  udders.  See  1.  62.  9.  This  miracle  is  ascribed  to  the
Asvina  also.  Sec  1.  180.  8.

7  Whou  Sons  are  Gods :  Heaven  and  Earth  arc  frequently  called  the  parents
of  the  Gods.  So  in  Greek  mythology  the  Gods  sprang  from  the  union  of
Uranus  and  Gaia.  '  Cent  mythologies,’  M.  lUSville  remarks,  'sont  fond<Ses  aur
le  mariage  du  ciel  et  do  la  terre.’  See  Muir,  0.  S.  Texts,  V.  p.  24.

8  The  godless  ;  the  demon  Vritra.

11  He:  Agni.  See  V.  29.  7.  Three  great  vessels :  literally,  lakes.  See  V.
29.  7.  Thai  slaughters  K;»Cra ;  iuspirits  Indra  to  s’ ay  him.


B7«  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI.

12  Thou  settest  free  the  rushing  wave  of  waters,  the  floods’  great

swell  encompassed  aud  obstructed.

Along'  steep  slopes  their  course  thou  turnedat,  Indra,  directed
downward,  speeding  to  the  ocean.

13  So  may  our  new  prayer  bring  thee  to  protect  us,  thee  well-

armed  Hero  with  thy  bolt  of  thunder,

,Jndra,  who  mado  these  worlds,  tho  Strong,  the  Mighty,  who
never  growoth  old,  the  victory-giver.

14  So,  Indra,  form  us  brilliant  holy  singers  for  strength,  for

glory,  aud  for  food  and  riches.

Givo  BharadvAja  hero  patrons,  Indra !  Indra,  be  ours  upon  tho
day  of  trial.

15  With  this  may  wo  obtain,  strongth  God-appointed,  and  bravo

sons  gladden  us  through  a  hundred  winters.


HYMN  XVIir.  Indr..

Glorify  him  whoso  might  is  all-surpassing,  Indra  the  much-
invoked  who  fights  uninjured.

Magnify  with  theso  songs  tho  novor-vanquishod,  tho  Strong,
tho  Bull  of  men,  the  Mighty  Viotor.

2  Ho,  Champion,  Horo,  Warrior,  Lord  of  battles,  impotuous,

loudly  roaring,  great  dostroyor,

Who  whirls  tho  dust  on  high,  alone,  o’orthrowor,  hath  mado
all  raoos  of  mankind  his  subjects,

3  Thou,  thou  alono,  host  tamod  tho  Dasyus ;  singly  thou  hast

subdued  tho  people  for  tho  Arya.

Is  this,  or  is  it  not,  thine  hero  oxploit,  Indra  ?  Declare  it  at
tbo  proper  season.

4  For  true,  I  doom,  thy  strongth  is,  thino  tho  Mighty,  thine,  O

Most  Potent,  thino  the  Conquering  Victor;

Strong,  of  tho  strong,  Most  Mighty,  of  tho  mighty,  thino,
driver  of  tho  churl  to  aots  of  bounty.

5  Bo  this  our  ancient  bond  of  friendship  with  you  and  with
✓  Angirases  hero  who  speak  of  Vala.

/  Thou,  Wondrous,  Shaker  of  things  firm,  didst  smite  him  in  his
fresh  strongth,  and  force  his  doors  and  castles.

14  The  day  of  trial :  the  decisive  day  of  battlo.

J5  With  thii :  slutyd,  praise,  is  understood.

3  At  the  proper  season :  show  that  thou  hast  this  power  by  aiding  us  before
t  u  too  lato  and  when  our  enomies  have  conquered  us.

6  With  you :  with  Indra  and  his  allies,  the  Maruts,


THE  RIG  VEDA.


577


HYMN  18.]

6  With  holy  thoughts  must  he  be  called,  the  Mighty,  showing

his  power  in  the  great  fight  with  Vritra.

He  must  be  called  to  give  us  seed  aud  offspring,  the  Thunderer
must  be  moved  and  sped  to  battle.

7  He  in  his  might,  with  name  that  lives  for  ever,  hath  far  sur¬

passed  all  human  generations.

He,  most  heroic,  hath  his  home  with  splendour,  with  glory  and
with  riches  and  with  valour.

8  Stranger  to  guile,  who  ne’er  was  false  or  faithless,  bearing  a

name  that  may  be  well  remembered,

Indra  crushed  Churauri,  Dhuni,  Sambara,  Pipru,  and  Sushga,
that  their  castles  fell  in  ruin.

9  With  saving  might  that  must  be*praised  and  lauded,  Indra,

ascend  thy  car  to  smite  down  Vritra.

In  thy  right  hand  hold  fast  thy  bolt  of  thunder,  and  weaken,
Bounteous  Lord,  his  art  and  magic.

10  As  Agui,  as  the  dart  burns  the  dry  forest,  like  the  dread  shaft

burn  down  the  fiends,  0  Indra ;

Thou  who  with  high  deep-reaching  spear  hast  broken,  hast
covered  over  mischief  and  destroyed  it.

1 1  With  wealth,  by  thousand  paths  come  hither,  Agui,  paths  that

bring  ample  strength,  O  thou  Most  Splendid.

Come,  Son  of  Strength,  o’er  whom,  Invoked  of  many  !  the
godless  hath  no  power  to  keep  thee  distant.

12  From  heaven,  from  earth  is  bruited  forth  the  greatness  of  him

the  firm,  the  fiery,  the  resplendent.

No  foe  hath  he,  no  counterpart,  no  refuge  is  there  from  him
the  Couqueror  full  of  wisdon.

13  This  day  the  deed  that  thou  hast  done  is  famous,  when  thou,

for  him,  with  many^  thousand  others
Laidest  low  Kutsa,  Ayu,  Atithigva,  and  boldly  didst  deliver
Turvay&na.

14  In  thee,  O  God,  the  wisest  of  the  Sages,  all  Gods  were  joyful

when  thou  slewest  Ahi.


8  Ckumuri,  etc:  demons  of  drought.  See  Index.

10  The  exact  meaning  of  the  second  half-stanza  is  uncertain,  as  gambhirayd
and  rtihvQi/d,  deep  and  high,  have  no  substantive.

13  For  him :  for  Tarvay9.ni,  who  appears  to  have  been  an  especial  favour-
ite  of  Indra.  According  to  SAyana,  turvaydna,  '  quickly  going,’  is  an  epithet
of  DivodAsa.  Sdyapa  represent*  the  exploit  as  havnig  been  achiever!  for  Kutsa,
Ayu.  and  Atithigva,  but  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  text.  A
neu>  hymn  of  praise  for  some  new  favour  shown  to  us.

37


THE  HYMNS  OP


578


[BOOK  VI.


When,  lauded  for  thyself,  thou  gavest  freedom 'to  sore-afflicted
Heaven  and  to  the  people.

15  This  power  of  thino  both  heaven  and  earth  acknowledge,  the
deathless  Gods  acknowledge  it,  0  Indra.

.  Do  what  thou  ne’er  hast  done,  0  Mighty  Worker :  beget  a  new
hymn  at  thy  sacrifices.

HYMN  XIX.  Indra.

Great,  hero-liko  controlling  men  is  Indra,  unwasting  in  his
‘  powers,  doubled  in  vastnoss.

Ho,  turned  to  us,  hath  grown  to  hero  vigour :  broad,  wide,  he
'  hath  boon  decked  by  those  who  serve  him.

2  Tho  bowl  made  Indra  swift  to  gather  booty,  the  High,  tho

’  Lofty,  Youthful,  Uudecaying,

Him  who  hath  waxed  by  strength  whioh  none  may  conquor,
and  ovon  atonoe  grown  to  comploto  perfection.

3  Stretoh  out  those  hands  of  thino,  extend  to  us-ward  thy  wide

capacious  arms,  and  grant  us  glory.

Like  as  tho  household  hordsman  guards  tbo  outtle,  so  move
thou  round  about  us  in  tho  combat.

4  Now,  fain  for  strength,  lot  us  invite  your  Indra  hither,  who

lloth  hiddon  with  his  Heroes, —

Froo  from  all  blame,  without  roproaoh,  uninjured,  o’on  as
were  those  who  sang,  of  old,  his  praises.

5  With  stedfn8t  laws,  wenlth  givor,  strong  through  Soma,  ho

hath  much  fair  and  prooious  food  to  food  us.

In  him  unite  all  paths  that  load  to  richos,  like  rivors  that
comtuinglo  with  the  ocean.

6  Bring  unto  us  the  mightiest  might,  0  Hero,  strong  and  most

et  force,  thou  groat  Subduer  I

idid  vigorous  powers  of  men  vouchsafe  us,  Lord  of  Bay
Steeds,  that  thoy  may  make  us  joyful.

7  Bring  us,  grown  mighty  in  its  strength,  0  Indra,  thy  friendly  .
rapturous  joy  that  wins  the  battle,

Wherewith  by  thoo  assisted  and  triumphant,  wehiay  loud  theo
in  gaining  seed  and  offspring.


1  Controlling  men :  or,  satiafier  of  men.  *  Fulfiller  (of  the  desires)  of  mou.*
—Wilson.

2  The  hotel :  that  is,  the  libation  of  Soma  juice.  But  soe  Ludwig,  Uobcr
die  ncuostcn  Arbeiteu,  Ac.,  p.  87.

4  Who  lieth  hidden :  Sftyaru  explains  chattnam  M  talvllndm  chdtaiam
ndeakam  ;  1  the  destroyer  (of  enemies)'.— Wilson.


II YMN  20  ]


TUB  MOVE  DA.


579

8  Indra,  bestow  ou  us  the  power  heroic,  skilled  and  exceeding

strong,  that  wins  the  booty,

Whorcwith,  by  thine  assistance,  we  may  conquer  our  foes  in
battle,  be  they. kin  or  stranger.

9  Let  thine  heroic  strength  come  from  behind  us,  before  us,  from

above  us  or  below  us.

From  every  side  may  it  approach  us,  Indra.  Give  us  the  glory
of  the  realm  of  splendour.

10  With  most  heroic  aid  from  thee,  like  heroes,  Indra,  may  we

win  wealth  by  deeds  of  glory.

Thou,  King,  art  Lord  of  earthly,  heavenly  treasure:  vouchsafe
us  riches  vast,  sublime,  aud  lasting.

11  The  Bull,  whose  strength  hath  waxed,  whom  Maruts  follow,

free-giving  Indra,  the  Celestial  Ruler*,

Mighty,  all-conquering,  the  victory-giver,  him  let  us  call  to
grant  us  new  protection.

12  Give  up  the  people  who  are  high  and  haughty  to  these  men

and  to  me,  0  Thundor-wioldcr !

Therefore  upon  the  earth  do  we  invoke  thee,  where  heroes
win,  for  sons  and  kiue  and  waters.

13  Through  these  thy  friendships,  God  invoked  of  many  !  may  wo

bo  victors  ovor  every  foeman.

Slaying  both  kinds  of  foe,  may  we,  0  Hero,  be  happy,  helped
by  thee,  with  ample  riches.

HYMN  XX.  Indra.*

Give  ns  wealth,  Indra,  that  with  might,  as  heaven  o’ertops  the
earth,  o’ercomes  our  foes  in  battle,

Wealth  that  brings  thousands  and  that  wins  the  corn-lands,
wealth,  Son  of  Strength  !  that  vanquishes  the  foeman.

2  Even  as  the  power  of  Dvaus,  to  thee,  O  Indra,  all  Asura  sway

was  by  the  Gods  entrusted,

Whon  thou,  Impetuous  !  leagued  with  Vishnu,  slewest  Vritra
the  Dragon  who  enclosed  the  waters.  .

3  Indra,  Strong,  Victor,  Mightier  than  the  mighty,  addressed

with  prayer  and  perfect  in  his  splendour,

Lord  of  the  bolt  thatbreaketh  forts  in  pieces,  became  the  King
of  the  sweet  juice  of  Soma.

9  Prom  behind  us,  etc :  or,  from  the  wcat,  from  the  north,  from  the  south,
from  the  cast.

11  This  stanza  has  occurred  in  Ilf.  47.  5.

12  Where  heroes  win :  * Qrasdtau;  in  battle.

13  Both  kinds  of  Joe ;  kinsmen  and  strangers.  See  stanza  8.


580  THE  HYMSS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

4  There,  Indra,  while  the  light  was  won,  the  Panis  fled,  ’neath

a  hundred  blows,  for  wise  Dasoni,

And  greedy  Sushna's  magical  devices:  nor  left  he  any  of
their  food  remaining.

5  What  time  the  thunder  fell  and  Sushna  perished,  all  life’s

support  from  the  great  Druh  was  taken.

India  made  room  for  his  car-driver  Kutsa  who  snto  beside
him,  when  ho  gained  the  sunlight

6  As  the  Hawk  rent  for  him  the  stalk  that  gladdens,  he  wrenched

the  head  from  Namuchi  the  D&sa.

He  guarded  Nam\  Sayya’s  son,  in  slumber,  and  sated  him
with  food,  success,  and  riches.

7  Thou,  thundor-armed,  \yith  thy  great  might  hast  shattered

Pipru’s  strong  forts  who  know  the  wiles  of  serpents.

Thou  gavast  to  thy  worshipper  Rijisvan  imperishable  wealth,
0  Bounteous  Giver.

8  The  crafty  Vetasu,  the  swift  Dasoni,  and  Tugra  speedily  with

all  his  servants,

Hath  Indra,  gladdening  with  strong  assistance,  forced  near  as
’twere  to  glorify  the  Mother.

9  Resistless,  with  the  hosts  he  battles,  bearing  in  both  his  arms

the  Vritra-slaying  thunder.

He  mounts  his  Bays,  as  the  car-scat  an  archer :  yoked  at  ft
word  they  bear  the  lofty  Indra.

10  May  we,  0  Indra,  gain  by  thy  new -favour:  so  Purus  laud
thee,  with  their  sacrifices,

That  thou  hast  wrecked  seven  autumn  forts,  their  shelter,
slain  DAsa  tribes  and  aided  Purukutsa.


4  For  wise  Diitoni .-  Dasoni  would  appear  in  this  place  to  be  the  name  of
some  man  whom  Indra  protected.  S Ay an a  says  that  the  dative  case  u  put
for  the  ablative,  and  that  the  meaning  is,  ‘  from  tho  sage  who  offers  many
oblations,’  that  is,  from  Kutsa.  Ludwig  takes  Dasoni  here  to  be  tho  prie*t  of  t  he
Fanis: '  fled  or  fell  for  or  to  him  '  meaning  that  he  was  powerless  to  save  them.

5  Druh:  or,  oppressor.  Cf  IV.  28.  2.

6  The  Hawk :  which  brought  the  Soma  from  heaven.  See  I.  93.  6  :  IV.
27.  AW;  seo  X.  48.  9.

8  Vetasu,  Dasoni,  and  Tugra  appear  to  be  names  of  enemies  conquered  by
Indra.  But  lurift,  tStujim,  may  be  a  Propor  Name,  Tfttuji=Tuji  (VI.  26.  4),
and  Dasoni  (dtfotfim)  may  be  an  adjective,  ‘  having  Mu  arms  or  helpers.’  Cf.
X.  49.  4,  and  «oe  Ludwig,  Der  Rigveda,  III.  p.  156.  As  ’troere  to  </lorifv  the
Mother:  SAyana  takes  dydUindt/a as  the  name  of  a  rAjA,  and  according  to  his
interpretation  Indra  compelled  the  conquered  foes  to  approach  Dyotana  sub¬
missively  as  a  son  comes  before  a  mother.  The  Mother :  tho  great  Mother  Aditi.

10  Autumn  forts :  probably  strong  places  on  elevated  ground  occupied  by
the  DtUaa  or  original  inhabitant*  during  the  rains  and  autumn.  According  to
SAyana,  cities  or  strongholds  of  Sarat,  a  demon.


HYXN  21.]


TBS  RIQYRDA.


681


11  Favouring  UsanA  the  son  of  Kavi,  thou  wast  his  ancient

strengthener,  0  Indra.

Thou  gavost  NavavAstva  as  a  present,  to  the  great  father
gavest  back  his  grandson.

12  Thou,  roaring  Indra,  dravest  on  the  waters  that  made  a  roar¬

ing  sound  like  rushing  rivers,

Wh.it  time,  0  Hero,  o’er  the  sea  thou  bronghtost,  in  safety
broughtest  Turvaaa  and  Yadu.

13  This  Indra,  was  thy  work  in  war:  thou  senteat  Dhuni  and

Chumuri  to  sleep  and  slumber.

Dabhiti  lit  the  flame  for  thee,  and  worshipped  with  fuel,
hymns,  poured  Soma,  dressed  oblations.

HYMN  X%1.  Indra.  Visvedevas.

Thesis  the  most  constant  singer's  invocations  call  thee  who
art  to  be  invoked,  0  Hero ;

Hymns  oall  anew  the  clmriot-borno,  Etornal :  by  eloquonco
men  guin  abundant  riches.

2  I  praiso  that  Indra,  known  to  all  men,  honourod  with  songs,

oxtollcd  with  hymns  at  sacrifices,

Whoso  majesty,  rich  in  wondrous  arts,  surpassoth  the  magni¬
tude  of  earth,  and  hoavon  in  groatnoss.

3  Ho  hath  mado  pathways,  with  the  Sun  to  aid  him,  throughout

the  darknoss  that  extended  pathless.

Mortals  who  yearn  to  worship  ne’er  dishonour,  0  Mighty  God,
thy  Law  who  art  Immortal.

4  And  ho  who  did  tlioso  things,  whore  is  that  Indra?  among

what  tribes  f  what  pooplo  doth  he  visit  ?

What  sacrifice  contents  thy  mind  and  wishes  ?  What  priost
among  thorn  all?  what  hymn,  0  Indra?

5  Yea,  horo  were  they  who,  horn  of  old,  have  served  thee,  thy

frionds  of  undent  time,  thou  activo  Workor.

Bethink  thee  now  of  those.  Invoked  of  many!  the  midmost
and  the  recent,  and  the  youngest.


11  Navavdatia ;  an  Asura,  or  a  mysterious  being  who  perhaps  reproaont*
the  Sun,  released  from  captivity  or  eclipse  by  Indra  and  by  him  restored  to
Ilia  own  or  to  Iitdra’a  father— apparently  to  UsauH  or  Heaven.  Cf.  X.  49.  6  ;
Bergaigne,  II.  223  ;  Pischel  (Vcdischo  Studion,  II.  128)  ;  Ludwig,  Ueber  die
n.  Arbeiten  auf  dem  Qebiete  der  Rgveda-forschung,  160.

12  See  1. 174.  9.

18  Dhuni  avd  Chumuri :  Aauraa  or  demons,  Bent  to  sleep,  that  is  slain,  by
Indra.  'Thou,  with  sleep  whelming  Chumuri  and  Dhuni,  slewcst  the  Dasyu
keptost  safe  Dabhiti'  (II.  16.  9).  Cf.  VI.  18.  8.


.m  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOK  VI.

6  Inquiring  after  him,  thy  later  servants,  Iudra,  have  gained  thy

former  old  traditions.

Hero,  to  whom  the  prayer  is  brought,  we  praise  thee  as  great
for  that  wherein  we  kuow  thee  mighty.

7  The  demon’s  strength  is  gathered  fast  against  thee  :  great  as

that  strength  bath  grown,  go  forth  to  meet  it.

With  thine  own  ancient  friend  and  close  companion,  the
thunderbolt,  brave  Champion  !  drive  it  backward.

8  Hear,  too,  the  prayer  of  this  thy  present  beadsman,  0  Indra,

Hero,  cherishing  the  singer.

For  thou  wast  aye  our  fathers’  Friend  aforetime,  still  swift  to
listen  to  their  supplication.

9  Bring  to  our  help  tins  Jay,  for  our  protection,  Varupa,  Mitra,

Indra,  and  the  Maruts,

Pushan  and  Vishnu,  Agni  and  Purandhi,  Savitar  also,  and  the
Plants  and  Mountains.

10  The  singers  hero  exalt  with  hymns  and  praises  thee  who  art

very  Mighty  and  Most  Holy.

*  Hear,  when  invoked,  the  invoker’s  invocation.  Beside  thee
there  is  none  like  thee,  Immortal !

11  Now  to  my  words  come  quickly  thou  who  knowest,  0  Son  of

Strength,  with  all  who  claim  our  worship,

Who  visit  sacred  rites,  whose  tongue  is  Agni,  Gods  who  made
Manu  stronger  than  the  Dasyu.

12  On  good  and  evil  ways  be  thou  our  Leader,  thou  who  art

known  to  all  as  Path-preparer.

Bring  power  to  us,  0  Indra,  with  thy  Horses,  Steeds  that  are
best  to  draw,  broad-backed,  unwearied.

HYMN  XXII.  Indra.

With  these  my  hymns  I  glorify  that  Indra  who  is  alone  to  bo
invoked  by  mortals,

The  Lord,  tho  Mighty  One,  of  manly  vigour,  victorious,  Hero,
true,  and  full  of  wisdom.

2  Our  sires  of  old,  Navagvas,  sages  seveu,  while  urging  him  to
show  his  might,  extolled  him,

Dwelling  on  heights,  swift,  smiting  down  opponents,  guileless
in  word,  aud  in  his  thoughts  most  mighty.


9  PuraruVii :  '  tho  intelligent,’  or  ‘  tho  bold  ’  may  bo  either  an  epithet  of
Agni  or  the  name  of  a  separate  deity.

2  Navagvat ;  here,  apparently,  identified  with  the  Angirasee.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  22.]


683


•  3  We  seek  that  Indra  to  obtain  his  riches  that  bring  much  food,
and  men,  and  store  of  heroes.

Bring  us,  Lord  of  Bay  Steeds,  to  make  us  joyful,  celestial
wealth,  abundant,  undecaying.

4  Tell  thou  us  this,  if  at  thy  hand  aforetime  the  earlier  singers
have  obtained  good  fortune,

What  is  thy  share  and  portion,  Strong  Subduer,  Asura-slayor,
rich,  invoked  of  many  ?  .

B  Ho  who  for  car-borne  Indra,  armed  with  thundor,  hath  a  hymn,
craving,  decply-piorcing,  fluent,

:  Who  sends  a  song  effectual,  firmly-grasping,  and  strength-
bestowing,  ho  come*  near  the  mighty.

•'  6  Strong  of  thyself,  thou  by  this  arLhast  shattered,  with  thought-
swift  Parvata,  him  who  waxed  against  thee,

And,  Mightiest!  roaring!  boldly  ront  in  pieces  things  that  woro
firmly  fixod  and  novor  shaken.

7  Him  will  wo  fit  for  you  with  now  dovotion,  tho  strongest  An-

oiont  Ono,  in  anciont  maimer.

So  may  that  Indra,  boundless,  faithful  Loader,  conduct  us  o’or
all  plaoos  hard  to  travorso.

8  Thou  for  tho  pooplo  who  oppross  hast  kindlod  tho  oarthly

firmament  and  that  of  hoaven.

With  heat,  0  Bull,  on  ovory  side  consumo  them :  heat  earth
and  flood  for  him  who  hatos  dovotion.

9  Of  all  tho  Heavenly  Folk,  of  oarthly  creatures  thou  art  tho

King,  0  God  of  splendid  aspect.

In  thy  right  hand,  0  Indra,  grasp  tho  thundor:  Eternal  I
thou  dostroyest  all  enohantmonts.

10  Give  us  confirmed  prosperity,  0  Indra,  vast  and  oxliaustless
for  tho  foo’s  subduing.

Strengthen  therewith  the  Arya’s  hate  and  Dasa’s,  and  let  tho
arms  of  Nahuslms  bo  mighty.


4  What  is  thy  share  anil  portion  :  '  what  «k  tho  portion,  what  tho  offering
(due)  to  thee.’ — Wilson.  A  sura-slayer  ;  possibly,  tho  sraitor  and  oonqueror
of  tho  Asura  DyauB.

5  Comet  near  the  mighty :  '  encounters  (with  confidence)  tho  malevolent’ —
■Wilson.

6  Parvata:  tho  Genius  of  tho  mountains  and  cloudo,  frequently  associated
with  Indra.  According  to  Slyana  (ba/inparva>Ut  vajrena),  the  many-knotted
thunderbolt  is  intended.  Him  who  waxed  against  thee :  Vritra.

.  8  The  people  who  oppress :  the  ItAkshasui  and  other  enemies.

10  Nahushas:  see  VI.  40.  7,  note.  /


THE  HYMNS  OP


584


[BOOK  VI.


11  Come  with  thy  team  which  brings  all  blessings  hither,  Dis¬
poser,  much-invoked,  exceeding  holy.

•  Thou  whom  no  fiend,  no  God  can  stay  or  hinder,  come  swiftly
with  these  Steeds  in  my  direction.


HYMN  XXIII.  Indra.

Thou  art  attached  to  pressed-out  Soma,  Indra,  at  laud,  at
prayer,  and  when  the  hymn  is  chanted ;

Or  when  with  yoked  Bays,  Maglmvan,  thou  comest,  0  Indra,
bearing  in  thine  arms  the  thunder.

2  Or  when  on  that  decisive  day  thou  holpest  the  presser  of  the

juice  at  Vritra’s  slaughter  j

Or  when  thou,  while  the  strong  one  feared,  undaunted,  gavest
to  death,  Indra,  the  daring  Dasyus.

3  Let  Indra  drink  the  pressed-out  Soma,  Helper  and  mighty

Guide  of  him  who  sings  his  praises.

He  gives  the  hero  room  who  pours  oblations,  and  treasure
even  to  the  lowly  singer.

4  E’en  humble  rites  with  his  Bay  Steeds  he  visits :  ho  wields

the  bolt,  drinks  Soma,  gives  us  cattle.

He  makes  the  valiant  rich  in  store  of  heroes,  accepts  our
praise  and  hears  the  singer’s  calling.

5  What  he  hath  longed  for  we  have  brought  to  Indra,  who  from

the  days  of  old  hath  done  us  service.

While  Soma  flows  we  will  sing  hymns  and  laud  him,  so  that
our  prayer  may  strengthen  Indra’s  vigour.

6  Thou  hast  made  prayers  the  means  of  thine  exalting,  therefore

we  wait  on  thee  with  hymns,  0  Indra.

May  wo,  by  the  pressed  Soma,  Soma-drinker  !  bring  thee,  with
sacrifice,  blissful  sweet  refreshment.

7  Mark  well  our  sacrificial  cake,  delighted :  Indra,  drink  Soma

and  the  milk  commingled.

Here  on  the  sacrificcr’s  grass  bo  seated  :  give  ample  room- to
thy  devoted  servant.

8  0  Mighty  One,  be  joyful  as  thou  wiliest.  Let  these  our  sac¬

rifices  reach  and  find  thee ;

And  may  this  hymn  and  those  onr  invocations  turn  thee,
whom  many  men  invoke,  to  help  us.

9  Friends,  when  the  juices  flow,  replenish  duly  your  own,  your

bounteous  Indra  with  the  Soma.

Will  it  not  aid  him  to  support  us  ?  Indra  spares  him  who  sheds
the  juice  to  win  his  favour.


HYMN  24.]  THE  RIQVEDA.  586

10  While  Soma  flowed,  thus  Indra  hath  been  lauded,  Ruler  of
nobles,  mid  the  Bharadv&jas,

That  Indra  may  become  the  singer’s  patron  and  give  him
wealth  in  every  kind  of  treasure.

HYMN  XXIV.  indra.

Strong  rapturous  joy,  praise,  glory  are  with  Indra  :  impot-
uoiis  God,  ho  quaffs  the  juice  of  Soma :

That  Maghavan  whom  men  must  laud  with  singing,  Heaven-
dweller,  King  of  songs,  whoso  help  is  lasting.

2  Ho,  Friend  of  man,  most  wiso,  victorious  Hero,  hears,  with

far-reaching  aid,  tho  singer  call  him.

Excellent,  Praise  of  Men,  the  bard’s  Supporter,  Strong,  ho
gives  strength,  oxtollod  in  holy  synod.

3  The  lofty  axle  of  thy  wheels,  0  Horo,  is  not  surpassed  by

heavon  and  earth  in  greatness.

Liko  branches  of  a  treo,  Invoked  of  many  I  manifold  aids
spring  forth  from  theo,  0  Indra.

4  Strong  Lord,  thino  onorgios,  ondowod  with  vigour,  are  liko  tho

paths  of  kino  converging  homoward.

Like  bonds  of  oord,  Indra,  that  bind  tho  younglings,  no  bonds
are  they,  0  thou  of  boundloss  bounty.

5  One  act  to-day,  anothor  aot  to-morrow  :  oft  Indra  makes  what

is  not  yet  existent.

Horo  have  wo  Mitra,  Varupa,  and  Pfish&n  to  overcome  tho
foemau’a  domination.

6  By  song  and  sacrifice  men  brought  tho  wuters  from  theo,  as

from  a  mountain’s  ridgo,  0  Indra.

Urging  thy  might,  with  theso  fair  lauds  they  sock  theo,  O
thomo  of  song,  as  horses  rush  to  battle.

1  Strong  rapturous  joy :  produced  by  drinking  Soma-libation*.

2  Praise  of  Men  :  fAhio  nar&m,  a*  Agni  in  called  N*rtl*ansa.

4  Convening  honuward:  all  Indra'*  groat  deed*  indicate  their  divino
author  a*  tho  track*  made  by  grazing  cow*  may  bo  traced  back  to  tho  common
pen  from  which  they  have  come  forth.

Like  bonds :  tho  tie*  by  which  Indra'*  worahippors  aro  bound  to  him  aro
ties  of  love  and  not  fetter*  of  ulavory.  Thcro  is  a  play  on  tho  word  dff  man
in  the  toxt  which  derived  from  dA,  to  give,  moan*  gift  or  bounty,  and  derived
from  dd,  to  bind,  means,  cord,  rope,  bond,  or  fetter  :  valsftndm  nd  Canldx/ah
te  Indra  ddmanvantah  adamdnah  sudAman  (Pada  text).  Tho  word  vatia  also
meanB  a  youngling,  especially  a  calf,  and  a  dear  child,  a  darling,  *o  that
Iudra'a  favoured  worshipper*  are  al»o  intended.

5  litre :  that  iB,  in  Indra  wo  liave  a  champion  equal  to  the  three  God*
mentioued.


[BOOK  VI.


536  THE  HYMNS  OP

7  That  Indra  whom  nor  months  nor  autumn  seasons  wither  with

age,  nor  fleeting  days  enfeeble, —

Still  may  his  body  wax,  e’en  now  so  mighty,  glorified  by  the
lauds  and  hymns  that  praise  him.

8  Extolled,  he  bends  not  to  the  strong,  the  stedfast,  nor  to  the

bold  incited  by  the  Dasyu.

High  mountains  are  as  levol  plains  to  Indra :  even  in  the  deep
he  finds  firm  ground  to  rest  on.

'  0  Impetuous  Speeder  through  all  depth  and  distance,  give
strengthening  food,  thou  drinker  of  the  juices.

Stand  up  erect  to  help  us,  unreluctant,  what  time  the  gloom
of  night  brightens  to  morning.

10  Hasting  to  help,  come  hither  and  protect  him,  keep  him  from
harm  when  he  is  here,  0  Indra.

At  home,  abroad,  from  injury  preserve  him.  May  bravo  sons
gladden  us  through  a  hundred  winters.

HYMN  XXY.  Indra.

-•  With  thine  assistance,  0  thou  Mighty  Indra,  be  it  the  least,
the  midmost,  or  the  highest, —

Great  with  those  aids  aud  by  these  powers  support  us,  Strong
God !  iu  battle  that  subdues  our  foomcn.

2  With  these  discomfit  hosts  that  fight  against  us,  and  chock

the  opponent’s  wrath,  thyself  uninjured.

With  these  chase  all  our  foes  to  every  quarter :  subdue  the
tribes  of  Dasas  to  the  Arya.

3  Those  who  array  themselves  as  foes  to  smite  us,  0  Indra,  bo

they  kin  or  be  they  strangers, —

Striko  thou  their  manly  strength  that  it  bo  feeble,  and  drive
in  headlong  flight  our  foeracn  backward.

4  With  strength  of  limb  tho  hero  slays  the  hero,  when  bright  in

arms  they  range  them  for  the  combat.

When  two  opposing  hosts  contend  in  battle  for  seed  and  off¬
spring,  waters,  kine,  or  corn-lands.


10  Halting  to  help:  I  follow  Professor  Piackcl  (  Vtdische  Studien,  I.  p.  41).
in  his  explanation  of  ndydm  in  this  passage.  Protestor  Ludwig  translates
somewhat  similarly.  Slyana  (followed  by  Professor#  Wilson  and  Grasamann)
Likes  ndydm  in  the  signification  of  leader  ;  ‘  acoompany  the  leader.’  Professor
Roth  thinks  it  may  be  a  proper  name.  Him :  the  inatitutor  of  the  sacrifice.

Tho  poet  prays  for  victory  in  a  coming  battle.

-  1  By  thest  poioers :  on  account  of,  or  by  means  of,  tho  sacrificial  food  which
increases  thy  strength.


HYUN29.]  THE  RIG VEJ)A.  587

5  Yet  no  strong  man  hath  couquored  thee,  no  hero,  no  bravo,

no  warrior  trusting  in  his  valour.

Not  one  of  these  is  match  for  thoo,  0  Indra.  Thou  far  sur-
passest  all  these  living  creatures.

6  Ho  is  tho  Lord  of  both  these  armies’  valour  when  the  com¬

manders  call  them  to  tho  conflict :

When  with  their  ranks  oxpanded  thoy  are  fighting  with  a  great
foe  or  for  a  home  with  horoes.

7  And  when  thy  pcoplo  stir  themselves  for  battle,  bo  thou  their

saviour,  Indra,  and  protector,

And  theirs,  tho  manliest  of  our  friends,  tho  pious,  tho  chiefs
who  have  installed  us  priests,  0  Indra.  •

8  To  thoo  for  high  dominion  hath  fceon  givon,  for  ovormore,  for

slaughtering  tho  Vyitras,

All  lordly  power  and  might,  0  Holy  Indra,  givon  by  Gods  for
victory  in  battlo.

9  So  urge  our  hosts  togothor  in  tho  combats:  yiold  up  tho

godless  bands  that  fight  against  us.

Singing,  at  morn  may  wo  find  thoo  with  favour,  yoa,  Indra,
and  o'en  now,  wo  Bharadv4jas.

HYMN  XXVI.  Indr*.

0  Indra,  hear  us.  Raining  down  tho  Soma,  wo  oall  on  thoo
to  win  us  mighty  valour.

Givo  us  strong  succour  on  tho  day  of  trial,  when  tho  tribos
gathor  on  tho  field  of  battlo.

2  Tho  warrior,  son  of  warrior  siro,  invokes  thoo,  to  gain  groat

strength  that  may  bo  won  ns  booty  :

To  thoo,  tho  bravo  man’s  Lord,  tho  fiends’  subiuor,  ho  looks
-  when  fighting  hand  to  Laud  for  cattle.

3  Thou  didst  impel  tho  sage  to  win  tho  daylight,  didst  ruin

Suslina  for  tho  pious  Kuten.

Tho  invulnorablo  demon’s  head  thou  olavost  whon  thou  wouldst
win  the  praise  of  Atithigva.

4  Tho  lofty  battle-car  thou  broughtost  forward ;  thou  holpost

Da§.idyu  tho  strong  when  fighting.

6  He  it  the  Lord :  Indra  can  givo  valour  and  victory  to  oither  aide  iui  ho
choonoo.  Sftyana  explains  tho  first  half-stanza  differently :  1  Of  both  thoao
(disputants),  that  ono  acquires  wealth  whose  pries  ta  iuvoke  (Indra)  at  tho
sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

3  The  *tge:  bhdrgnvam  rithim: — SAyana  ;  tho  Rishi,  descendant  of  Bhfigu.

4  Vela*"  :  according  to  Silyana.  oithor  a  king  aided  by  him  or  a  demon  skin
by  him.  Cf.  VI.  20.  8.


THE  HYMNS  OP


IBOOK  YT.


668


Along  with  Vetasu  thou  slewest  Tugra,  and  madest  Tuji  strong,
who  praised  thee,  Indra.

5  Thou  madest  good  the  laud,  what  time  thou  rentcst  a  huudred

thousand  fighting  foes,  0  Hero,

Slewest  the  D&sa  Sambara  of  the  mountain,  and  with  strange
aids  didst  succour  Divodasa.

6  Made  glad  with  Soma-draughts  and  faith,  thou  scntest  Chumuri

to  his  sleep,  to  please  Dabhiti.

Thou,  kindly  giving  Raji  to  Pithinas,  slewest  with  might,  at
once,  the  sixty  thousand.

7  May  I  too,  with  the  liberal  chiefs,  0  Indra,  acquire  thy  bliss

supreme  and  domination,

Wheu,  Mightiest!  Hero-girt!  Nahusha  heroes  boast  them  in
thee,  the  triply-strong  *Defender.

8  So  may  we  be  thy  friends,  thy  best  belovfcd,  0  Indra,  at  this

holy  invocation.

Best  be  Pratardani,  illustrious  ruler,  in  slaying  foemen  and  in
gaining  riches.

HYMN  XXVII.  Indra.

What  deed  hath  Indra  done  in  the  wild  transport,  in  quaffing
or  in  friendship  with,  the  Soma  1
What  joys  have  men  of  ancient  times  or  recent  obtained  within
the  chamber  of  libation  ?

2  In  its  wild  joy  Indra  hath  proved  him  faithful,  faithful  in

quaffing,  faithful  in  its  friendship.

His  truth  is  the  delight  that  in  this  chamber  the  men  of  old
and  recent  times  have  tasted.

3  All  thy  vast  power,  0  Maghavan,  we  know  not,  know  not  th®

riches  of  thy  full  abundance.

No  one  hath  seen  that  might  of  thine,  productive  of  bounty
every  day  renewed,  0  Indra.

4  This  one  great  power  of  thine  our  eyes  have  witnessed,  where¬

with  thou  slowest  VarasiUha’s  children,

Tuji:  &  raja  of  that  mime,  nays  SAyana.

6  Baji:  a  maiden  of  that  name. — SAyana.  PIlMnat:  a  man  bo  called. — SAyana.
8  Pratardani :  son  of  a  prince  named  Pratardana.

The  other  names  have  occurred  before.  Sec  Index.

The  liberality  of  Abhy&vartin  ChAyamAna  in  said  to  be  the  deified  object  of
stanza  8.

1  *  According  to  Sdyana  the  Jlishi  here  expresses  his  impatience  at  the  delay
of  the  reward  of  his  praises :  in  the  next  verse  he  sings  hia  recantation.' —
Wilson.

•J  Varatikha :  a  certain  Asura  or  demon,  says  SAyana.  He  seems  to  have
been  the  leador  of  the  Vrichlvans.


THE  RIG  VEDA .


HYMN  28.]


589


When  by  the  force  of  thy  descending  thunder,  at  the  mere
sound,  their  boldest  was  demolished.

5  In  aid  of  AbhyAvartiu  CbayamfUia,  Indra  destroyed  the  seed  of

Varaaikha.

At  HariyGpiyA  he  smote  tho  vanguard  of  the  Vrich Ivans,  and
the  rear  fled  frighted.

6  Three  thousand,  mailed,  in  quest  of  famo,  together,  on  tho

Yavyavatl,  0  much-sought  Indra,

Vpchtvan’s  sons,  falling  beforo  the  arrow,  like  bursting  vessels
went  to  their  destruction.

7  He,  whoso  two  red  Steers,  seeking  goodly  pasture,  plying  their

tongues  movo  on  ’twixt  earth  and  houvon,

GavcTurvasa  toSj-injaya,  and,  to^id  him,  gave  tho  Vi'iohtvans
up  to  DaivavAta.

8  Two  wagon-teams,  with  damsols,  twenty  oxon,  O  Agni,

AbhyAvartiu  OltAyumAnn,

Tho  liboral  Sovran, 'givoth  mo.  This  guerdon  of  Pfithu’s  seed
is  hard  to  win  from  othors.


HYMN  XXVIII.  Cows.

Tint  Kino  havo  come  and  brought  good  fortune :  lot  thorn  rest
in  tho  oow-pon  and  bo  happy  near  us.

Horo  lot  them  stay  prolifio,  many-colourod,  and  yiold  through
many  morns  thoir  milk  for  Indra.

2  Indra  aids  him  who  offors  saorifico  and  gifts :  ho  takos  not
what  is  his,  and  gives  him  moro  thoroto.

Increasing  ovor  moro  and  over  moro  his  wealth,  ho  makes  tho
pious  dwell  within  unbroken  bounds.

5  Abh^eatiin  CMyamdua:  a  king,  apparently  tbo  loador  of  tho  PArthavM,
tho  cncmiea  of  Varaaikha  and  tho  Vrichlvans.

Hariydptyd :  (having  golden  nacrifioial  potto),  tlio  name  of  a  town,  or,  accord¬
ing  to  others,  of  a  rivor.

Vrich i vam  :  Vpchlvan  is  aaid  to  have  boon  tho  olilont  ton  of  Varafiklia,  and
to  havo  given  hit  naino  to  the  family  or  tribo.  The  name  doe*  not  ooour  again
in  the  Hymns.

6  YavyAvatt :  tho  namo  of  a  river,  according  to  SAy ana  identical  with  tho
HariyftplyA  of  stanza  5.

7  //« ;  In«lra.  Red  SUtn :  bright  horses,  according  to  SAyana.

Gave  lurvofa  to  Syinjaya:  gave  up  the  Turvasaa,  a  tribe  apparently  settlod
in  the  north-west  of  India,  to  their  neighbours  and  enemies  tho  Siinjayas.
Daivavdla  :  AbhyAvartiu  ChAyaniAua,  son  of  DovnvAta.

8  With  damsdt :  accompanied  with  slavo-girls  ;  or,  drawn  by  mares.  Cf.
I.  128  3.  Of  Pfilhu't  seed  :  or  ‘bcatowod  by  PArth&va-s'  that  is,  presented
by  AbhyAvartin,  one  of  the  descendants  of  l’rithu.


THE  IIYSfiVS  OF.


[BOOK  VI.


m

3  These  are  ne’er  lost.no  robber  ever  injures  them:  no  evil-

minded  foe  attempts  fc>  harass  them.

The  master  of  the  Kino  lives  many  a  year  with  these,  the  Cows
whereby  he  pours  his  gifts  and  serves  the  Gods.

4  The  charger  with  his  dusty  brow  o’ertakes  them  not,  and

never  to  the  shambles  do  they  take  their  way.

These  Cows,  the  cattle  of  the  pious  worshipper,  roam  over  wide¬
spread  pasture  where  no  danger  is.

5  To  me  the  Cows  seem  Bhaga,  they  seem  Indra,  they  seem  a

portion  of  the  first-poured  Soma.

These  present  Cows,  they,  0  ye  men,  are  Indra.  I  long  for
Indra  with  my  heart  and  spirit.

G  0  Cows,  ye  fatten  e’en  thj  worn  and  wasted,  and  make  the
unlovely  beautiful  to  look  on.

•  Prosper  my  house,  ye  with  auspicious  voices.  Your  power  is
1  glorified  in  our  assemblies.

7  Crop  goodly  pasturage  and  be  prolific :  drink  pure  sweet  water

at  good  drinking-places.

Never  be  thief  or  sinful  mau  your  master,  and  may  the  dart  of
v  Rudra  still  avoid  you.

8  Now  let  this  close  admixture  be  close  intermingled  with  these

Cows,

Mixt  with  the  Steer’s  prolific  flow,  and,  Indra,  with  thy  hero
might.

HYMN  XXIX.  Indra.

Your  men  have  followed  Indra  for  his  friendship,  and  for  his
loving-kindness  glorified  him.

For  he  bestows  great  wealth,  the  Thunder-wielder :  worship
him,  Great  and  Kind,  to  win  his  favour.

8  Are  ne'er  loit:  mi  td  nofnnti:  Sdyana  assigns  an  imperative  meaning  to
nasanti  and  the  other  verb*  in  the  indicative  mood  which  occur  in  this  and
the  following  stanzas  :  '  Lot  not  the  Cotes  be  lost :  let  no  thief,  etc.’— Wilson.

4  The  charger. ..  o'er  takes  them  not:  they  are  not,  or,  according  to  Sdyana,
let  them  not  be,  carried  08  in  predatory  inoureions.

5  The  worshipper  regards  the  Cows  as  the  deities,  Bhaga  and  Indra,  who
bring  him  happiness.  They  0  ye  men,  are  Indra  :  an  allusion,  apparently,  to
the  refrain  of  hymn  12  of  Book  II.,  He,  0  men,  is  Iudra.

7  May  the  dart  of  Rudra  still  avoid  you :  so,  I.  114.  10.  ‘  Far  be  thy  dart
that  killeth  meo  or  cattle,’  and  II.  33.  14.  ‘May  Kudra’a  missile  turn  aside
and  spare  us,  the  great  wrath  of  the  Impetuous  One  avoid  us.’

8  This  stanza  appears  to  refer  to  the  mingling  of  the  milk  (the  cows)  with
the  juice  of  the  strong  Soma  (the  steer),  which  when  offered  as  a  libation  to
Indra  will  increase  his  heroic  strength.  But  the  phraseology  is  somewhat
obscure.


HYMN  30.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  •  591

2  Him  to  whose  hand,  men  closely  cling,  and  drivers  stand  oji

his  golden  chariot  firmly  stationed.

With  his  firm  arms  he  holds  the  reins;  his  Horses,  the  Stal¬
lions,  aro  yoked  ready  for  the  journey.

3  Thy  devotees  embrace  thy  feet  for  glory.  Bold,  thunder-arm¬

ed,  rich,  through  thy  strength,  in  guerdon,

Robed  in  a  garment  fair  as  heaven  to  look  on,  thou  hast  dis-
’  played  thee  like  an  activo  dancer.

.4  That  Soma  when  effused  hath  host  consistence,  for  which  the
food  is  dressed  and  grain  is  mingled ;

By  which  tho  men  who  pray,  extolling  Indra,  chief  favourites
of  Gods,  recite  their  praises.

5  No  limit  of  thy  might  hath  boon  appointed,  which  by  its

greatness  suuderod  earth  and  heaven.

These  the  Prince  filleth  full  with  strong  ondoavour,  driving,
us  'tworo,  with  help  his  flocks  to  waters.

6  So  bo  tho  lofty  Indra  prompt  to  liston,  Holpor  unaided,  goldon-

visorod  Hero.

You,  so  may  ho,  shown  forth  in  might  unoquallcd,  smite  down
tho  many  Vptras  and  tho  Dasyus.

HYMN  XXX.  Jndm.

Indra  hath  waxed  yot  more  for  hero  prowess,  nlono,  Eternal,
ho  bestoweth  treasures.

Indra  transcondoth  both  tho  worlds  in  greatnoss :  one  half  of
him  equalloth  earth  and  heaven.

2  Yea,  mighty  I  ostoom  his  Godliko  nature:  nono  hindereth-
what  ho  hath  onco  determined.

Near  and  afar  ho  spread  and  sot  the  regions,  and  every  day
tho  Sun  bocamo  apparent.

5  The  Prince:  Iudrn  appears  to  bo  meant  Driving  ...hi*  Jtook* :  op.  I.  10.
2.  1  And  tho  Ram  hastens  with  his  troop,’  that  is,  Indra  comes  with  his
band  of  Maruta.  SAyapa  takes  tttrifr  in  its  more  usual  signification  of  wor¬
shipper  or  institutor  of  tho  sacrifice  ;  and  Professor  Wilson  translates  :  *  the
pious  worshipper,  hastening  (to  sacrifice),  and  oarncBtly  performing  worship,
gratifies  thee  with  tho  offering,  as  (tho  oowkoopor  satisfice)  the  herds  with
water.’

6  Helper  unaided :  this  seems  to  bo  tho  meaning  of  <U(  aniJtf,  with  help
that  needs  no  other  help.  S  Ay  an  a  explains  the  words,  '  by  coming  or  by  not
comiug,'  whether  he  bo  present  or  absent.

Qoldtn-vitorcd :  '  Azure-chinned.’ — Wilson.  '  With  yellow-oolourcd  jaws.’ —
Ludwig.  I  have  followed  Professor  Roth.

1  Indra  hath  grown  stronger  and  stronger  for  tho  performance  of  his  mighty  •
deeds.


92  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

3  E’eu  now  endures  thine  exploit  of  the  Rivers,  when,  Indra,

for  their  floods  thou  clavest  passage.

Like  men  who  sit  at  meat  the  mountains  settled  :  by  thee,
Most  Wise  !  the  regions  were  made  stedfast.

4  This  is  the  truth,  none  else  is  like  thee,  Indra,  no  God  supe¬

rior  to  thee,  no  mortal.

Thou  slowest  Ahi  who  besieged  the  waters,  and  lcttest  loose
the  streams  to  hurry  sea-ward.

5  Indra,  thou  brakest  up  the  floods  and  portals  on  all  sides,  and

the  firmness  of  the  mountain.

Thou  art  the  King  of  men,  of  all  that  liveth,  engendering  at
once  Sun,  Heaven,  and  Morning.

HYMN  XXXI.  Indra.

Sols  Lord  of  wealth  art  thou,  0  Lord  of  riches  :  thou  in  thino
hauds  hast  held  the  people,  Indra  !

Men  have  invoked  thee  with  contending  voices  for  seed  and
waters,  progeny  and  sunlight.

2  Through  fear  of  thee,  0  Indra,  all  the  regions  of  earth,  though

naught  may  move  them,  shake  and  tremble.

All  that  is  firm  is  frightened  at  thy  coming, — the  earth,  the
heaven,  the  mountain,  and  tho  forest.

3  With  Kutsa,  Indra!  thou  didst  conquer  Suslma,  voracious,

'  bane  of  crops,  in  fight  for  cattle.

In  the  close  fray  thou  rentest  him :  thou  stolest  tiro  Sun’s
wheel  and  didst  drive  away  misfortunes.


3  Like  men  who  Hi  at  meal :  or,  perhaps,  like  flies  who  settle  ou  food.  Sco
Geldner,  Vedische  Studien,  II.  180.

1  Men . with  contending  voices :  the  combatants  on  both  sides  invoko

Indra’s  aid  in  battle.

According  to  Prof.  Pischel,  Vcdischc  Studien,  t  84,  the  meaning  is  as
follows :

‘  Alone  wast  thou,  Lord  of  all  wealth  and  riches,  yet  hast  thou  made  tho
folk  submissive,  Indra,

When  with  uplifted  voice  the  tribes  invoked  thee  for  water,  sons,  posterity
and  sunlight’  .  ■

*  The  folk,’  kriihtfh  meaning  the  speaker’s  enemies,  and  *  the  tribes/
eharthanayo,  meaning  the  five  Aryan  tribes.

3  KaUa :  the  special  favourite  of  Indra.  Bane  of  crops :  or  Kuyavn  may
b<>  the  name  of  another  demon  of  drought  or  savago  enemy.  See  Index.
Thou  re»test  him :  literally,  '  bittest :’  ddsa,  according  to  Sdyana,  standing  for
ad'ivth.  Stoleit  the  Sun's  wheel :  see  I.  175.  4.

Misfortunes :  according  to  SAyann,  ‘disturbing  or  injurious  RAkshosas,  etc.’


HYMN  32.]


THE  RIGVEDA.


m


4  Thou  smotest  to  the  ground  the  hundred  castles,  impregnable,

of  Sambara  the  Dasyu,

When,  Strong,  with  might  thou  holpest  DivodiUa  who  poured
libations  out,  0  Soma-buyer,  and  madest  Bharadv&ja  rich
who  praised  thee.

5  As  such,  true  Hero,  for  great  joy  of  battle  mount  thy  terrific

car,  0  Brave  and  Manly.

Come  with  thine  help  to  mo,  thou  distant  Reamer,  and,  glori¬
ous  God,  sproad  among  men  my  glory.

HYMN  XXXII.  indro.

I  with  rav  lips  have  fashioned  for  this  Hero  words  nover
matched,  most  plentiful  and  auspicious,

For  him  the  Ancient,  Great,  Strong,  Energetic,  the  very
mighty  Wiolder  of  the  Thunder.

2  Amid  the  sages,  with  the  Sun  ho  brightened  tho  Parents :

glorifiod,  ho  burst  tho  mountaiu  ;

And,  roaring  with  tho  holy-thoughted  singors,  ho  loosed  tho
bond  that  hold  tho  beams  of  Morning.

3  Fumod  for  great  deeds,  with  priests  who  kneel  and  laud  him,

ho  still  hath  conquorod  in  tho  frays  for  cattle,

And  brokon  down  tho  forts,  tho  Fort-destroyor,  a  Friond  with
friends,  u  Sago  among  tho  sages.

4  Como  with  thy  girthod  mares,  with  abundant  vigour  and

plenteous  strength  to  him  who  sings  thy  praises.

Como  hither,  borno  by  mares  with  many  horocs,  Lover  of  song  !
Stoor  !  for  tho  people’s  welfare.


4  The  hutulred  outlet :  probably  tho  cutln  of  cloud  which  retain  tho
raiu.  So,  II.  19.  0,  ‘And  Indra,  for  tho  sako  of  DivodiUa,  demolished
^ambara’s  nine-aud-ninoty  castles.’

4  Soma-tuyer .’  purchaser  of  Soma-libations  with  tho  help  which  ho  gives  to
tho  worahippor.

2  He  brightened  the  Parent t :  illuminated  the  universal  parent*,  Hoavcn
and  Earth.  The  eagei :  tho  Angirases,  the  holy-thoughted  tingert  of  tho  uoxt
line.

4  With  thy  girthed  mare*!  tho  meaning  of  nUyflbhih,  a  feminine  plural
adjectivo  in  tho  instrumental  cane,  standing  without  a  substantive,  is
unoertain.  SAyana  explains  tbo  word  by  navydbhirnavatanlbhifr,  '  very  now
or  young,'  and  supplies  vadat4bhi)>,  '  maros '  Professor  Roth  thinks  that
ntvySbhth  may  bo  a  substantive  meaning  ‘with  garments,'  and  Professor
Grasamann  translates  '  mit  Gabon,’  *  with  gifts,’  that  is,  presents  carried  in  a
nivi  or  apron;  With  manyheroet:  puruvtrdbhih  again  is  an  adjective  with¬
out  a  substantive,  in  the  same  gender,  number,  and  case  as  ntvyftbhih.  Ac¬
cording  to  SAyana,  it  also  qualidcs  vadavdbhih,  •  with  mares,’  understood,
aud  means  '  having  many  coltfl.’


m  THE  RIO  VEDA.  [BOOK  VI.

5  Indra  with  rush  and  might,  sped  by  his  Coursers,  hath  swiftly
won  the  waters  from  the  southward.

Thus  set  at  liberty  the  rivers  daily  flow  to  their  goal,  incessant
and  exhaustless.

HYMN  XXXIII.  Indr*.

Give  us  the  rapture  that  is  mightiest,  Indra,  prompt  to  bestow
and  swift  to  aid,  0  Hero,

That  wins  with  brave  steeds  where  brave  steeds  encounter,
and  quells  the  Vritras  and  the  foes  in  battle.

2  For  with  loud  voice  the  tribes  invoke  thee,  Indra,  to  aid  them

in  the  battle-field  of  heroes.

Thou,  with  the  singers,  hast  pierced  through  the  Panis  :  the
charger  whom  thou  aidest  wins  the  booty.

3  Both  races,  Indra,  of  opposing  foemen,  0  Hero,  both  the  Arya

and  the  D&sa,

Hast  thou  struck  down  like  woods  with  well-shot  lightnings :
thou  rentest  them  iu  fight,  most  manly  Chieftain  !

4  Indra,  befriend  us  with  no  scanty  succour, prosper  and  aid  us.

Loved  of  all  that  liveth,

When,  fighting  for  the  sunlight,  we  invoke  thee,  0  Hero,  in
the  fray,  in  war’s  division.

5  Be  ours,  0  Indra,  now  and  for  the  future,  bo  graciously  in¬

clined  and  near  to  help  us.

Thus  may  we,  singing,  sheltered  by  the  Mighty,  win  many
cattle  on  the  day  of  trial.

HYMN  XXXIV.  Indra.

Full  many  songs  have  met  in  thee,  0  Indra,  and  many  a
noble  thought  from  thee  proceedcth.

Now  and  of  old  the  eulogies  of  sages,  their  holy  hymns  and
lauds,  have  yearned  for  Indra.

2  He,  praised  of  many,  bold,  invoked  of  many,  alone  is  glorified

at  sacrifices.

Like  a  car  harnessed  for  some  great  achievement,  Indra  must
be  the  cause  of  our  rejoioing.

3  They  make  their  way  to  Indra  and  exalt  him,  him  whom  no

prayers  and  no  laudations  trouble ;

5  From  the  southward  :  from  the  quarter  whenco  the  Rains  come.

1  Givt  us  the  rapture :  let  us  bo  benefited  by  the  transport  which  draughts
of  Soma  juice  produce  in  thee.

3  They  mate  their  Kay:  that  is,  prayers  and  laudations  reach  Indra  and
strengthen  him  They  do  not  vex  him  as  they  would  vox  a  man  who  would
ne  unable  to  fulfil  the  prayers  and  would  be  conscious  that  ho  did  not  deserve


HYMN  35.]


THE  RIOT  EDA.


605

For  when  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  singers  laud  him  who  loves
the  song  their  praise  delights  him.

4  As  brightness  mingles  with  the  Moon  in  heaven,  the  offered

Soma  yearns  to  mix  with  Indra.

Like  water  brought  to  men  in  desert  places,  our  gifts  at  sacri¬
fice  have  still  refreshed  him.

5  To  him  this  mighty  eulogy,  to  Indra  hath  this  our  laud  been

uttered  by  the  poeta,

That  in  the  great  encounter  with  the  foemcn,  Loved  of  all  life,
Indra  may  guurd  and  help  us.

HYMN  XXXV.  Indra.

Whes  shall  our  prayers  rest  in  thy  car  beside  thee?  Whon
dost  thou  givo  thesingor  food  for  thousands?

Whon  wilt  thou  clothe  this  poet’s  laud  with  plenty,  and  whou
wilt  thou  enrich  our  hymns  with  booty  ?

2  Whon  wilt  thoti  gathor  mon  with  mon,  0  India,  heroes  with

lioroos,  and  provail  in  combat?

Thou  shult  win  triply  kine  in  frays  for  cattle,  so,  Indra,  givo
thou  us  celestial  glory.

3  Yea,  whon  wilt  thou,  0  Indra,  thou  Most  Mighty,  mako  the

prayer  all-sustaining  for  tho  singer  ?

When  wilt  thou  yoke,  as  we  voko  songs,  thy  Morses,  and  come
to  offerings  that  bring  wealth  in  cattlo?

4  (Jrant  to  tho  singor  food  with  store  of  cattle,  splendid  with

horsos  and  tho  fame  of  riches.

Sond  food  to  swell  the  milch-cow  good  at  milking  :  bright  bo
it*  shine  among  tho  BharadvHjas.


4  A*  brightness  mingle/  with  the  Moon:  I  follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  his
interpretation  of  Urn  difficult  passage  ;  but  it*  exact  meaning  still  seems
doubtful.  '  Archd  is  the  nominative  singular.  Wo  have  hero  the  lator
JyotsnfV  or  Knumudl  a»  the  wife  or  feminino  power  of  the  Moon.  SQryft,  tho
daughter  of  tho  Sun,  t.  e.  the  Moon's  light  which  is  borrowed  from  the  Sun
is  an  earlier  conception.'— Ludwig.

6  By  the  poet/ :  by  thoec  who  sing  hymns  of  praise.  MaUbhih  =  aMribhi^
— Sftyana.  In  the  great  encounter  with  the  foemtn :  mahalt  vritratdrye :  in
tho  great  victory  over  Vjitra  ;  that  is,  generally,  in  battle  with  enemies  ;
sangrdme.— Siyapa.


1  Rett  in  thy  ear  betide  iheel:  when  shall  our  prayers  reach  thee  as  thou
atandest  on  thy  chariot  ?  The  poet  expresses  impatience  at  India's  inattention
to  his  petitions.


596  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

5  Lead  otherwise  this  present  foeman,  Sakra !  Hence  art  thou
praised  as  Hero,  foe-dcstroyer.

Him  who  gives  pure  gifts  may  I  praise  unceasing.  Sage,  quick¬
en  the  Angirasos  by  devotion.

HYMN  XXXVI.  Indra.

Tnt  raptures  ever  were  for  all  men’s  profit :  so  overmore  have
been  thine  earthly  riches.

Thou  still  hast  been  the  dealer-forth  of  vigour,  since  among
Gods  thou  hast  had  power  and  Godhead.

2  Men  have  obtained  his  strength  by  sacrificing,  and  ever  urged

him  on  to  hero  valour.

For  the  rein-seizing,  the  impetuous  Charger  they  furnished
power  even  for  Vptrar8  slaughter.

3  Associate  with  him,  as  teams  of  horses,  help,  manly  might,  and

vigour  follow  Indra.

As  livers  reach  the  soa,  so,  strong  with  praises,  our  holy
songs  reach  him  the  Comprehensive.

4  Lauded  by  us,  let  flow  the  spring,  0  Indra,  of  excellent  and

brightly-shining  riches.

For  thou  art  Lord  of  men,  without  au  equal :  of  all  the  world
thou  art  the  only  Sovran.

5  l  find  this  stanza,  hopelessly  obscure,  and  do  not  attempt  to  translate  it,
giving  instead  of  a  conjectural  translation  a  reproduction  of  the  substance  of
SAyana’e  absolutely  worthless  paraphrase.  Lead  otherwise:  according  to  Sftyana,
‘  consign  to  death,  to  a  course  difforent  from  that  of  living  beings.’ — Wilson .

The  Angirascs :  the  descendants  of  Angirases,  that  ia  the  BharadvAjas.
Professor  Ludwig  translates  :  *  Also  at  another  time  (I  wish)  hither  this
strong  (defence),  when  thou  as  a  hero,  Sakra,  singest  open  [aufsingatj  the
doors;  may  I  never  lose  the  cow  that  yields  bright  juice  ;  cause  thou  her  to
hasten  through  the  prayer  of  the  Angirasas.’  In  his  Commentary  Prof.
Ludwig  alters  '  lose  the  cow,  eto.’  into  ‘  lose  the  seed-pouring  (bull)  of  the
milch-oow.'  Professor  Aufrecht  would  read  vrijanam  instead  of  vrydnam
and  vrinUhe  instead  of  grinUhe,  and  Prof.  Graesmann  translate*  accordingly  :
•  Now  too,  as  formerly,  I  choose  for  myself  this  man,  when,  Strong  One,*  os
hero  thou  openest  the  doore.  Never  then  may  the  steer  whose  seed  streams
fail  me.  Quicken,  0  Sage,  the  singers  through  prayer.’

1  Thy  raptures :  produoed  by  drinking  the  Soma  juice.  Power  and  God¬
head  :  aturydm :  Aaura-hood,  the  nature  and  power  of  an  Aaura  or  High
God.  Some  give  a  different  meaning  to  dhdrayathdh :  ‘thou  maintainest
vigour  among  the  gods.’— Wilson.  *  Indra  is  said  to  give  divine  power  to  the
other  gods.’— Muir,  0.  S.  T.,  V.  92.

2  Hit  strength :  the  powerful  aid  of  Indra.  Charger :  Indra,  impetuous  aa
a  war- horse  who  takes  tho  bit  between  his  teeth.  SAyana  explains  syUma.
gribhe  :  as  '  seizor  of  enemies  who  are  in  uninterrupted  iines.’  ‘  They  offer
sacrifices  to  him  as  the  seizer  of  au  uninterrupted  series  of  foes,  their  assail,
ant,  their  subduer,  and  also  for  the  destruction  of  Vritra.' — Wilson,


THE  RIO  VET) A.


ntm  38  ]


597


5  Hear  what  thou  mayst  hear,  thou  who,  fain  for  worship,  as

heaven  girds  earth,  guardest  thy  servant’s  treasure ;

That  thou  mayst  bo  our  own,  joying  in  power,  fumed  through
thy  might  in  every  generation.

HYMN  XXXVII.  Indr*.

Let  thy  Bay  Horses,  yoked,  O  mighty  Indra,  bring  thy  car
hither  fraught  with  every  blessing.

For  thee,  the  Heavenly,  e’en  the  poor  invokoth,  may  we  this
day,  thy  f east-corn panions,  prosper.

2  Forth  to  the  vat  the  brown  drops  flow  for  service,  and  purified

proceed  directly  forward.

May  Indra  drink  of  this,  our  guest  aforetime,  Celestial  King
of  the  strong  draught  of  Soma.

3  Bringing  us  hitherward  all-potent  Indra  on  well-wheeled

chariot,  may  the  Steeds  who  bear  him
Convey  him  on  the  road  direct  to  glory,  and  ne’er  may  Vilyu’s
Amrit  coaso  and  fail  him.

4  Supreme,  ho  stirs  this  man  to  givo  the  guerdon,— Indra,  most

efficacious  of  the  princes, —

Wherewith,  0  Thunderer,  thou  romovest  sorrow,  and,  Bold
One  1  partoat  wealth  among  the  nobles.

6  India  is  ho  who  gives  enduring  vigour :  may  our  songs  magnify

tho  God  Most  Mighty.

Best  Vptra-slaycr  bo  tho  Horo  Indra :  these  things  ho  gives  as
Prince,  with  strong  endeavour.

HYMN  XXXVIIT.  Inrir*.

He  hath  drunk  henco,  Most  Marvollous,  and  carriod  away  our
groat  and  splendid  call  on  Indra.

Tho  Bounteous,  when  we  servo  tho  Gods,  acccptoth  song  yet
more  famous  and  tho  gifts  wo  bring  him.


1  Thee,  the  Jlearenly;  ir&rvdn  appears  to  apply  to  ltd,  thee,  Indra,  and  to
stead  for  itarvantam.  See  Pischel,  Volitche  Studien,  I.  198,  218.

3  To  glory :  '  to  tho  prise  of  battle.’— Graasmann.  *  To  our  rite.'— Wilson.

Vdgu’l  Amrit :  '  Vltyu  is  possessor  of  tho  Amrit  probably  os  being  Tvosh^r’a

eon-in-law.  VIII.  20.  21.’-  Ludwig.

4  Ihu  t nan:  the  inatitutor  of  the  sacrifice.  Wherewith ;  on  account  of
which  guerdon.  Tho  liberal  guerdon  given  by  the  nobles  who  defray  the  ex¬
penses  of  tho  sacrifice  cause*  Indra  in  hU  turn  to  be  gracious  and  liberal  of  his
gift*  to  them.

5  With  tlrong  endeavour;  exerting  his  power  on  behalf  of  his  worahipperB.

1  Uc  hath  drunk  hence :  Professor  Ludwig  thinks  that  the  first  line  must
refer  to  Agni,  who  receives  the  libation  hence,  that  is,  from  the  priest’s  cun,
and  conveys  to  Indra  the  invocation  addressed  to  him.  But  Indra  himself
may  bo  intended  in  the  first  line  as  well  as  in  the  second.


tQ3  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

2  The  speaker  filleth  with  a  cry  to  Indra  his  cars  who  cometh

nigh  e'en  from  a  distance.

May  this  my  call  bring  Indra  to  my  presence,  this  call  to  Gods
composed  in  sacred  verses.

3  Him  have  I  sung  with  my  best  song  and  praises,  Indra  of

ancient  birth  and  Everlasting.

For  prayer  and  songs  in  him  are  concentrated  :  let  laud  wax
mighty  when  addressed  to  Indra  :

4  Indra,  whom  sacrifice  shall  strengthen,  Soma,  and  song  and

hymn,  and  praises  and  devotion,

Whom  Dawns  shall  strengthen  when  the  night  departeth,  Indra
whom  days  shall  strengthen,  months,  and  autumns.

5  Him,  born  for  conquering  might  in  full  perfection,  and  waxen

strong  for  bouuty  and  for  glory,

Great,  Powerful,  will  we  to-day,  0  singer,  invite  to  aid  us  and
to  quell  our  foemen.

HYMN  XXXIX.  Indra.

Of  this  our  charming,  our  celestial  Soma,  eloquent,  wise,  Priest,
with  inspired  devotion,

Of  this  thy  close  attendant,  bast  thou  drunken.  God,  send
the  singer  food  with  milk  to  grace  it.

2  Craving  the  kine,  rushing  against  the  mountain,  led  on  by  Law,

with  holy-minded  comrades,

Ho  broke  the  never-broken  ridge  of  Vala.  With  words  of
might  India  subdued  the  Parris.

3  This  ludu  lighted  darksome  nights,  0  Indra,  throughout  the

years,  at  morning  and  at  evening.

Him  have  they  stablished  as  the  days’  bright  ensign.  He
made  the  Mornings  to  be  bom  in  splendour.

4  He  shone  and  caused  to  shine  the  worlds  that  shone  not.  By

Law  he  lighted  up  the  host  of  Mornings.

8  Let  laud  vox  mighty :  when  the  power  of  Indra  is  celebrated,  the  song
should  bo  lofty  as  the  dignity  of  the  subject  demand*.

6  To  quell  our  foemen:  or,  to  conquer  Vritras,  that  is,  Viitra  and  similar  fiends.

1  Our  cdutiul  Soma:  as  Professor  Wilson  observes,  ‘Several  of  the  epithets
iu  the  text  arc  unusual,  and  agreeably  to  European  notions,  very  inapplicable
to  a  beverage.’  The  Soma  is  called  eloquent  and  tew  as  giving  eloquence  and
wisdom,  and  prial  because  it  is  employed  in  offerings  to  the  Gods.

With  milk  to  gruct  it :  that  is,  of  which  inilk  and  butter  constitute  the  most
excellent  part.

2  Holy-minded  comrades :  the  Angirases.  Vala :  a  domon  who  stole  away
the  cows  of  the  Gods,  i.  e.  the  rays  of  light.  Sec  Index

8  This  Indu:  Indu  is  here  the  Moon,  which  is  identified  with  Soma.

The  dayi'  bright  tntign :  the  standard  by  which  time  is  measured.


HYMN  41.]  THE  RIGVEDA.  599

He  moves  with  Steeds  joked  by  eternal  Order,  contenting  men
with  nave  that  finds  tho  sunlight.

5  Now,  praised,  0  Ancient  King  !  fill  thou  the  singer  with  plente¬
ous  food  that  he  may  deal  forth  treasures.

Give  waters,  herbs  that  have  no  poison,  forests,  and  kino,  and
steeds,  and  men,  to  him  who  lauds  thee.

HYMN  XL.  Indr*.

Drink,  Indra;  juice  is  shed  to  make  thee  joyful:  loose  thy
Bay  Stecda  and  give  thy  friends  their  freedom.

Bogin  tho  song,  seated  in  our  assembly.  Give  strength  for
sacrifice  to  him  who  singeth.

2  Drink  thou  of  this  whereof  at  birth,  0  Indra,  thou  d rankest,

Mighty  One  !  for  power  and  rajJture.

The  men,  tho  pressing-stones,  tho  cows,  tho  waters  have  made
this  Soma  ready  for  thy  drinking.

3  Tho  firo  is  kindled,  Soma  pressod,  0  Indra  :  lot  thy  Bays,  best

to  draw,  oonvoy  thoo  hither.

With  mind  devoted,  Indra,  I  invoke  thee.  Como,  for  our  groat
prosperity  approach  us.

4  Indra,  como  hithor:  ovormoro  thou  earnest  through  our  great

strong  desire  to  drink  tho  Soma.

Liston  and  hoar  tho  prayors  which  now  we  ofTor,  and  lot  this
sacrifico  increaso  thy  vigour.

5  Mnyst  thou,  0  Indra,  on  tho  day  of  trial,  prosont  or  absent,

whorcsoo’or  thou  dwollcst,

Thence,  with  thy  team,  accordant  with  tho  Maruts,  Song-lover  1
guard  our  sacrifico,  to  help  us.

HYMN  XLI.  Indr*.

Comb  gracious  to  our  sacrifico,  0  Indra :  pressed  Soma-drops
are  purified  to  pleaso  thee.

As  cattlo  seek  their  homo,  so,  Thunder- wielder,  come,  Indra,
first  of  those  who  claim  our  worship.

2  With  that  well-formed  most  wide  extending  palate,  wherewith
thou  ever  drinkest  streams  of  sweetness,

Drink  thou  ;  the  Adhvaryu  standeth  up  before  theo  :  let  thy
spoil-winning  thunderbolt  attend  thee.

4  Nave :  used  by  synecdoche  for  ch«riot.

1  Thy  friends :  thy  dear  horse*.

1  Gracious:  more  literally,  '  without  anger.'  ‘ Unirosciblc.’— WiUoo,

2  The  Adhvaryu ;  the  ministering  priest.


600  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Yl.

3  This  drop,  steer-strong  and  omniform,  the  Soma,  hath  been

made  ready  for  the  Bull,  for  Indra.

Drink  this,  Lord  of  the  Bays,  thou  Strong  Supporter,  this
that  is  thine  of  old,  thy  food  for  ever.

4  Soma  when  pressed  excels  the  unpressed  Soma,  better,  for  one

who  knows,  to  give  him  pleasure.

Come  to  this  sacrifice  of  ours,  0  Victor :  replenish  all  thy
powers  with  this  libation.

5  We  call  on  thee,  0  Indra :  come  thou  hither :  sufficient  be  the

Soma  for  thy  body.

Rejoice  thee,  Satakratu  !  in  the  juices :  guard  us  in  wars,  guard
us  among  our  people.

HYMN  XLII.  Indra.

Briko  sacrificial  gifts  to  him,  Omniscient,  for  lie  longs  to  drink,
The  Wanderer  who  comes  with  spoed,  the  Hero  ever  in  the  van.

2  With  Soma  go  ye  nigh  to  him  chief  drinker  of  the  Soma’s

juice:

With  beakers  to  the  Impetuous  God,  to  Indra  with  the  drops
effused.

3  What  time,  with  Soma,  with  the  juice  effused,  ye  come  before

the  God,

Full  wise  he  knows  the  hope  of  each,  and,  Bold  One,  strikes
this  foe  and  that.

4  To  him,  Adhvaryu  1  yea,  to  him  give  offerings  of  the  juice

expressed.

Will  he  not  keep  us  safely  from  the  spiteful  curse  of  each
presumptuous  high-born  foe  ?

HYMN  XLIII.  Indra.

Ik  whose  wild  joy  thou  madest  once  Sambara  Divodftsa’s  prey,
This  Soma  is  pressed  out  for  thee,  0  Indra :  drink  !


3  Supporter :  fthdtar-- Stator  in  Jupiter  Stator,  one  who  causes  to  stay  or
stand,  rallier  of  men  in  battle.

4  Replenish  all  thy  poueri :  or, '  give  us  all  powers  in  full.’

5  Satakratu :  Lord  of  a  hundred,  i  e.  countless,  powers.

3  Strikes  this  foe  and  Mat ;  there  is  no  substantive  in  the  text-  Sly  ana
makes  tdm  lam  refer  to  kdmam,  hope  or  wish :  ‘  And  the  suppresser  (of  ene¬
mies)  assuredly  grants  it,  whatever  it  may  be.’  -Wilson.

1  Sambara :  a  demon  of  draught.  Dixoddsa:  called  also  Atithigva:  ‘Thou
savedst  Kutsa  when  Sushna  was  smitten  down  :  to  Atithigva  gavest  Sambara
for  a  prey.'— I.  51.  6.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  44.]


601


2  Whose  gladdening  draught,  shed  from  the  points,  thou  guard-

e8t  in  the  midst  and  end,

This  Soma  is  pressed  out  for  thee,  0  Indra  :  drink  !  %

3  In  whose  wild  joy  thou  settost  free  the  kino  held  fast  within

the  rock,

This  Soma  is  pressed  out  for  thee,  0  Indra  :  drink  I

4  This,  in  whose  juico  delighting  thou  gainest  the  might  of

Maghavan,

This  Soma  is  pressed  out  for  thee,  0  Indra  :  drink  !

HYMN  XLIV.  India.

That  which  is  wealthiest,  Wealthy  God  !  in  splendours  most
illustrious,

Soma  is  pressed :  thy  gladdening  draught,  Indra  !  libation's
Lord  !  is  this.

2  Effectual,  Most  Effootual  One !  thine,  as  bestowing  wealth  of

hymns,

Soma  is  pressed :  thy  gladdoning  draught,  Indra !  libation’s
Lord !  is  this.

3  Wherewith  thou  art  increased  in  strength,  and  oonquorest  with

thy  propor  aids,

Soma  is  pressed  :  thy  gladdoning  draught,  Indra  I  libntlon's
Lord  I  is  this.

4  Him  for  your  sako  I  glorify  as  Lord  of  Strength  who  wrong-

eth  none,

The  Hero  Indra,  conquering  all,  Most  Bounteous,  God  of  all
tho  tribes.

5  Those  Goddessos,  both  Heaven  and  Earth,  revere  tho  power

and  might  of  him,

Him  whom  our  songs  increase  in  strength,  tho  Lord  of  bounty
swift  to  como.

6  To  seat  your  Indra,  I  will  spread  abroad  with  power  this  song

of  praiso.

Tho  saving  succours  that  abido  in  him,  like  songs,  oxtend
and  grow.

2  From  the  pointi :  from  tho  sharp  end*  of  the  branolilets  of  tho  plant.
Soo  Hillcbrandt,  V.  Mythologio,  p.  232.  In  the  midit  and  end :  according
to  S&yana,  at  noon  and  at  tho  evening  libation.

4  0  airiest  the  might  of  Maghavan :  Indra  acquiree  his  power  from  libations
of  Soma  juice.

6  To  seat  your  Indra :  as  Indra’*  scat  ia  on  the  barhis  or  nacrod  grass  that
is  spread  on  the  floor  of  the  chamber  of  sacrifice,  so  the  hymn  also,  as  his
spiritual  seat,  is  supposed  to  have  the.power  of  inducing  him  to  come.


e 02  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

7  A  recent  Friend,  he  found  the  skilful  priest:  he  drank,  and

showed  forth  treasure  from  the  Gods.

He  conquered,  borne  by  strong  all-shaking  marcs,  and  was
with  far-spread  power  his  friends’  Protector.

8  In  course  of  Law  the  sapient  juice  was  quaffed :  the  Deities

to  glory  turned  their  mind.

Winning  through  hymns  a  lofty  title,  he,  the  Lovely,  made
his  beauteous  form  apparent.

9  Bestow  on  us  the  most  illustrious  strength :  ward  off  men’s

manifold  malignities.

Give  with  thy  might  abundant  vital  force,  and  aid  us  gra¬
ciously  in  gaining  riches.

10  We  turn  to  thee  as  Giwjr,  liberal  Indra.  Lord  of  the  Bay

Steeds,  be  not  thou  ungracious.

No  friend  among  mankind  have  we  to  look  to :  why  have  men
called  thee  him  who  spurs  the  niggard  ¥

1 1  Give  us  not  up,  Strong  Hero !  to  the  hungry :  unharmed  be

we  whom  thou,  so  rich,  befriendest.

Full  many  a  boon  hast  thou  for  men :  demolish  those  who
present  no  gifts  nor  pour  oblations.

12  As  Indra  thundering  impels  the  rain-clouds,  so  doth  he  send

us  store  of  kiue  and  horses.

Thou  art  of  old  the  Chcrisher  of  singers :  let  not  the  rich  who
bring  no  gifts  deceive  thee.

1 3  Adhvaryu,  hero,  briug  to  mighty  Indra— -for  he  is  King  there¬

of — the  picssed-out  juices ;

To  him  exalted  by  the  hymns  and  praises,  ancient  and  modern,
of  the  singing  Rishis.

14  In  the  wild  joy  of  this  hath  Indra,  knowing  full  many  a  form,

struck  down  resistless  Vritras.


7  He  found  the  skilful  priest:  ‘Indra  appreciates  him  who  is  skilled  (in
holy  rites).'— Wilson.  The  word  yathtdram,  socrificer,  is  supplied  by  SAyaya.

Borne  by  strong,  all-shaking  mares :  this  is  S4y turn's  first  explanation  of
staulSbhir  dhantdrtbhih,  two  feminine  plurals  in  the  instrumental  case,  wutavd-
bhifi,  '  with  mares,'  being  understood.  *  Brought  by  his  robust  agitators  (of
the  ear tli,  his  steeds).’— Wilson.  Or,  SAyaya  says,  although  the  words  are
feminine,  the  lfaruta  may  be  intended.  Other  conjectural  explanations  have
been  attempted,  but  they  arc  not  convincing.

10  Who  spurs  the  niggard :  urges  even  the  niggardly  to  bo  liberal.  See
Pischel,  Vcdiiche  Studien,  I.  p.  124.

12  The  Chtrisher  of  singers  :  or,  '  he  whom  the  singers  nourish,’  that  is,
strengthen  by  their  hymns.

14  Knowing  full  many  a  for m:  detecting  and  not  deceived  by  the  various
forms  assumed  by  the  demon  Vritra  and  his  crew.


HYMN  44.]


THE  IUOVEDA.


Proclaim  aloud  to  him  the  savoury  Soma  so  that  the  Hero,
strong  of  jaw,  may  drink  it.

15  May  Indra  drink  this  Soma  poured  to  please  him,  and  cheered

therewith  slay  Vritra  with  his  thunder.

Como  to  our  sacrifice  even  from  a  distance,  good  lover  of  our
songs,  the  bard’s  Supporter.

16  The  cup  whence  Indra  drinks  the  draught  is  present :  tho

Amrit  dear  to  Indra  hath  hcen  drunken,

That  it  may  cheer  the  God  to  gracious  favour,  and  keep  far
from  us  hatred  and  affliction.

17  Therewith  enraptured,  Hero,  slay  our  foomon,  tho  unfriendly,

Maghavan  !  bo  they  kin  or  strangers,

Thoso  who  still  aim  their  hostilo  darts  to  smite  us,  turn  them
to  flight,  0  Indra,  orush  and  kill  them.

18  0  Indra  Maghavan,  in  theso  our  battles  win  easy  paths  for

us  and  amplo  freedom.

That  wo  may  gain  waters  and  seed  and  offspring,  sot  thou  our
princes  on  thy  sido,  0  [ndra.

19  Lot  thy  Bay  Stallions,  harnessed,  bring  thee  hither,  Steeds

with  strong  chariot  and  strong  reins  to  hold  them,

Strong  Horses,  speeding  hithor,  bearing  thundor,  woll-harnoss-
ed,  for  tho  strong  exciting  potion.

20  Bosido  tho  vat,  Strong  God  !  stand  thy  strong  Horses,  shining

with  holy  oil,  like  waves  oxulting.

Indra,  thoy  bring  to  thoo,  tho  Strong  and  Mighty,  Soma  of
juices  shed  by  mighty  press-stones.

21  Thou  art  tho  Bull  of  earth,  tho  Bull  of  hoaven,  Bull  of  tho

rivers,  Bull  of  standing  waters.

For  thoo,  the  Strong,  0  Bull,  hath  Indu  swollon,  juico  pleasant,
swcot  to  drink,  for  thino  election.

22  This  God,  with  might,  when  first  ho  had  his  boing,  with  Indra

for  ally,  held  fast  tho  Pani.

This  Indu  stole  away  tho  warlike  weapons,  and  foiled  tho  arts
of  his  malignant  father.

15  The  bard't  Supporter :  or,  '  whom  singers  nourish,'  as  in  stansa  12-
19  In  this  and  tho  two  following  sUnras  wo  havo  tho  repetition,  so  dear  to
some  of  the  Vcdio  poo  to,  of  vrltha  in  composition,  Vflthun  and  vj-ithabha,  no
commonly  applied  in  the  hymus  to  living  beings  and  things  preeminent  for
strength.

22  This  Ood :  Indu  or  Soran,  the  Moon.  Of  hit  malignant  father ;  Tvashtar
appears  to  bo  meant.  S&yana’s  paraphrase  is  non-natural :  '  of  the  malignant
Becietcr  of  (the  stolen)  wealth,  (the  cattle).’— Wilson.  SAyana  makes  pit  ah,
as  dorived  from  /*f,  to  protect,  =p4Ui>jiluh,  'the  safe  keeper,’  and  icds,ya=Lnt.
8iu,  ‘of  his  property.’ This  safe  keeper,  sccrcter,  and  robber  would  be  tho
demon  Vala.


604  THE  fftffitS  OP  [BOOS  Vt.

23  The  Dawns  he  wedded  to  a  glorious  Consort,  and  set  within

the  Sun  the  light  that  lights  him.

Ho  found  in  heaven,  in  the  third  lucid  regions,  the  threefold
Amrit  in  its  close  concealment.

24  He  stayed  and  held  the  heaven  and  earth  asunder :  the  chariot

with  the  sevenfold  reins  he  harnessed.

This  Soma  set  with  power  within  the  milch-kine  a  spring
whose  ripe  contents  ten  fingers  empty.

HYMN  XLV.  Indr*.

That  Indra  is  our  youthful  Friend,  who  with  his  trusty
guidance  led

Turvasa,  Yadu  from  afar.

2  Even  to  the  dull  and  uninspircdlndragivesvital  power, andwins

Even  with  slow  steed  the  offered  prize.

3  Great  are  his  ways  of  guiding  us,  and  manifold  are  his  eulogies:

His  kind  protections  never  fail.

4  Friends,  sing  your  psalm  and  offer  praise  to  him  to  whom  the

prayer  is  brought :

For  our  great  Providence  is  he.

6  Thou,  Slaughterer  of  Vptra,  art  Guardian  and  Friend  of  one
and  two,

Yea,  of  a  man  like  one  of  us.

6  Beyond  men’s  hate  thou  leadest  us,  and  givest  cause  to  sing

thy  praise :

Good  Hero  art  thou  called  by  men.

7  I  call  with  hymns,  ns  ’twere  a  cow  to  milk,  the  Friend  who

merits  praise,

The  Brahman  who  accepts  the  prayer.

23  Glorious  Consort :  the  Sun.  In  the  third  lucid  regions :  perhaps,  as  Pro¬
fessor  Ludwig  suggest*,  in  the  spheres  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the  stars.
'  According  to  the  scholiast,  this  may  merely  mean  that  the  Soma  becomes
as  it  were  ambrosia  when  received  or  concealed  in  the  vessels  at  the  three
diurnal  ceremonies,  which  ambrosia  is  properly  deposited  with  the  gods  abid¬
ing  in  the  third  bright  sphere,  or  in  heaven.'— Wilson.

24  The  chariot :  of  the  Sun,  drawn  by  seven  horses.  Whose  ripe  contents
ten  fingers  empty  :  this  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  pakvan  dAt'iyan-
tram  litsam  of  the  tert,  literally,  ‘  the  ripe  spring  with  ten  engines.’  ‘  The
mature  deeply-organized  secretion.’ — Wilson.

1  Turraja,  Yadu :  the  names  of  these  two  eponymi  of  Aryan  tribes  aro
frequently  associated.  See  Index.  An  expedition  against  Divoddsa  appears
to  be  referred  to.

2  Bren  to  the  dull  and  uninspired :  he  favours  whom  he  will,  and  the  race
is  not  always  to  the  swift,

7  As  ’twere  a  cow  to  milk  :  like  the  cow  that  is  brought  to  give  the  milk
that  is  to  be  mingled  with  tho  Soma  libation.  The  Brahman:  Indra  regarded
as  a  Priest.


TEE  RIO  VEDA.


605


HYMN  45.]


8  Him  in  whoso  hands  they  say  ore  stored  all  treasures  from  the

days  of  old,

The  Hero,  conquering  in  the  fight.

9  Lord  of  Strength,  Caster  of  the  Stone,  destroy  the  firm  forts

built  by  men,

And  foil  their  arts,  unbending  God  !

10  Thee,  thee  as  suoh,  0  Lord  of  Power,  0  Indra,  Soma-drinker,

true,

Wo,  fain  for  glory,  have  invoked.

1 1  Such  as  thou  wast  of  old,  and  art  now  to  be  called  on  when

the  prizo

Lios  ready,  listen  to  our  call.

12  With  hymns  and  coursors  wo  will  gain,  Indra,  through  thee,

both  steeds  and  spoil
Most  glorious,  and  tho  proffored  prize.

13  Thou,  Indi  a,  Lover  of  tho  Song,  whom  men  must  stir  to  holp,

hast  been

Groat  in  tho  contest  for  tho  prizo.

14  Slayer  of  foes,  whatever  aid  of  thine  impart#  tho  swiftest

oourto.

With  that  impel  our  oar  to  speed.

15  As  skilfullest  of  thoso  who  drivo  tho  chariot,  with  our  art

and  aim,

0  Conquoror,  win  tho  proffered  prizo.

16  Praiso  him  who,  Matohlcss  and  Alone,  was  born  tho  Lord  of

living  men,

Most  aotivo,  with  heroic  soul.

17  Thou  who  hast  boon  tho  singers’  Friend,  a  Friend  auspicious

with  thino  aid,

As  suoh,  0  Indra,  favour  us.

18  Grasp  in  thine  arms  tho  thunderbolt,  0  Thunder-armed,  to

slay  the  fiends :

Mayst  thou  subdue  the  foemen’s  host.

19  1  dill  tho  ancient  Friend,  allied  with  wealth,  who  speeds  tho

lowly  man,

Him  to  whom  chiefly  prayer  is  brought.

20  For  he  alone  is  Lord  of  all  the  treasures  of  the  earth :  he  speeds
Hither,  chief  Lovor  of  the  Song.


11  When  the  prize  He,  read!,:  to  bo  given  to  the  victor  in  the  chariot  race,
tho  chief  object  of  tho  hymn  being  to  secure  victory  w  tho  approaching
contest  through  the  favour  of  the  God.


606  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI,

21  So  with  thy  yoked  teams  satisfy  our  wish  with  power  and

wealth  in  steeds

And  cattle,  boldly,  Lord  of  kiue !

22  Sing  this,  what  time  the  juice  is  pressed,  to  him  your  Hero,

Much-invoked,

To  please  him  as  a  mighty  Steer.

23  He,  Excellent,  withholdeth  not  his  gift  of  power  and  wealth

in  kine,

When  he  hath  listened  to  our  songs.

21  May  he  with  might  unclose  for  us  the  cow’s  stall,  wliosesoe’er
it.bo,

To  which  the  Dasyu-slayer  goes.

25  0  Indra  Satakratu,  these  our  songs  have  called  aloud  to  thee,
Like  mother  cows  to  meet  their  calves.

26  Hard  is  thy  love  to  win :  thou  art  a  Steer  to  him  who  longs

for  steers :

Be  to  one  craving  steeds  a  Steed.

27  Delight  thee  with  the  juice  we  pour  for  thine  own  great

munificence :

Yield  not  thy  singer  to  reproach.

2S  These  songs  with  every  draught  we  pour  come,  Lover  of  the
Song,  to  thee,

As  milch-kine  hasten  to  their  young  :

29  To  thee  most  oft  invoked,  amid  the  many  singers’  rivalry
Who  beg  with  all  their  might  for  wealth.

30  Nearest  and  most  attractive  may  our  laud,  O  Indra,  como

to  thee.

Urge  thou  us  on  to  ample  wealth.

31  Bribu  hath  set  himself  above  the  Panis,  o’er  their  highest  head,
Like  tho  wide  bush  on  Gang&’s  bank.

24  WhoMoe'cr  it  be  :  the  meaning  of  kuvUtaiya  here  is  somewhat  uncertain.
Silyana  explains  it  as,  of  Kuvitsa,  a  certain  person  who  does  much  harm.
The  meaning  appears  to  be,  may  Indra  open  for  ua  the  cow -stall  and  give  us
tho  cattle  of  any  Daayu  whom  he,  that  is,  we  under  his  guidance,  may  attack.

26  Thou  art  a  Steer:  t/avim  praddld,  ‘a  giver  of  cattle.’— SAvana.  A  Steed  ;
airapraduh,  a  giver  of  horeea.— SAyana.

27  This  stanza  is  repeated,  word  for  word,  from  III.  41.  6.

31  Bribu :  according  to  SAyana,  the  carpenter  or  artificer  of  the  Panis.

The  Panis  here  are,  in  accordance  with  the  original  meaning  of  the  words,
merchants  or  traders,  and  the  merchant  Bnbu  is  eulogized  for  his  piety  and
liberality,  qualities  which  were  not  the  usual  characteristics  of  the  class  to
which  he  belonged.  A  legend,  referred  to  by  SAyana,  and  recorded  in  the
Mina va  dharma-fislra  or  Law s  of  Manu,  10. 107,  relates  tbatBharadvAja,  when
distressed  by  hunger  in  a  lonely  forest,  accepted  many  cows  from  tho


THE  It  10  VEDA.


IIYAIN  46.]


607


32  He  whose  good  bounty,  thousandfold,  swift  as  the  rushing  of

the  wind,

Suddenly  offers  as  a  gift.

33  So  all  our  singers  ever  praise  the  pious  Bribu’s  noble  deed,
Chiof,  best  to  give  his  thousands,  best  to  give  a  thousand

liberal  gifts.


HYMN  XLVL  lndra.

That  we  may  win  us  wealth  and  power  wc  poets,  vorily,  call
on  theo :

In  war  men  call  on  theo,  lndra,  tho  horo’s  Lord,  in  the  steed's
race-course  call  on  thee.

2  As  suoh,  0  Wonderful,  whoso  hand  holds  thunder,  praised  as

mighty,  Caster  of  the  Stone  !  •

Pour  on  us  boldly,  lndra,  kino  and  chariotrsteeds,  ever  to  bo
tho  conqueror’s  strength.

3  Wo  call  upon  that  lndra,  who,  most  active,  ovor  slays  tho  foe:
Lord  of  tho  brave,  Most  Manly,  with  a  thousaud  powers,  bolp

thou  and  prosper  us  in  fight.

4  Richfshamn,  thou  forcest  men  as  with  a  bull,  with  anger,  in

tho  furious  fray.

Be  thou  our  llolpor  in  tho  mighty  battle  fought  for  sunlight,
water,  and  for  life.

5  0  lndra,  bring  us  namo  and  famo,  enriching,  mightiest,

excellent,

Wherewith,  0  Wondrous  God,  fair-visored,  thunder-armed,
thou  hast  filled  full  this  earth  and  heaven.


carpenter  Bribu  ;  tho  moral  being  that  men  of  inferior  coeto  and  low  omditiou
may  distinguish  themselves  by  tnoir  liberality.  See  Wilson's  Note,  Vol.  III.
p.  460.  The  wide  biuh  :  tho  belt  of  underwood.  Othors  would  road  urukakihah
m  ouo  word  instead  of  unf£  kakshufy,  and  explain  it  os  tho  namo  of  n  man,
•on  of  a  womau  called  Gnngft.

33  Chief:  iUri,  os  iueti  tutor  of  tho  sacrifice.  See,  on  atantan  31  —88,  Prof.
Weber’s  Kpischee  im  voditohen  Ritual  (Sitxungsberichte  dor  K.  P.  Akadomio
dor  Wissenschaften,  XXXVIII.  pp.  28sqq.),  and  M.  Mtiller,  Clifps  from  a  Ger¬
man  Workshop,  IV.  138  (now  edition).


3  With  a  thousand  powers :  sahasramushka,  literally,  mille  testiculo*  habeas.
The  reading  of  tho  SAmaveda,  sd/uuramanvo,  full  of  boundless  ardour,  in,  as
Professor  Ludwig  remarks,  much  more  SDsthotic.

4  RichUhama  :  or,  worthy  of  praise  !  But  tho  exact  meaning  of  the  epithet
is  somewhat  uncertain.

5  Fair -visor  ed ;  or,  fair  of  cheek.


60S  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.  '

6  We  call  on  thee,  0  K  ing,  Mighty  amid  the  Gods,  Ruler  of

men,  to  succour  us.  •

All  that  is  weak  in  us,  Excellent  God,  mako  firm  :  make  our
foes  easy  to  subdue.

7  All  strength  and  valour  that  is  found,  Indra,  in  tribes  of  Na-

hushas,  and  all  the  splendid  fame  that  the  Five  Tribes  enjoy,
Bring,  yea,  all  manly  powers  at  once.

8  Or,  Maghavan,  what  vigorous  strength  in  Triksbi  lay,  in  Dru-

hyus  or  in  Pdru’s  folk,

Fully  bestow  on  us,  that,  in  the  conquering  fray,  we  may
subdue  our  foes  in  fight.

9  0  Indra,  grant  a  happy  home,  a  triple  refuge  triply  strong.
Bestow  a  dwelling-place  on  the  rich  lords  and  me,  and  keep

thy  dart  afar  from  these.

10  They  who  with  minds  intent  on  spoil  subdue  the  foe,  boldly
attack  and  smite  him  down, —

From  these,  0  Indra  Maghavan  who  lovest  song,  be  closest
guardian  of  our  lives.

21  And  now,  0  Indra,  strengthen  us:  come  near  and  aid  us  in
t  the  fight,

What  time  the  feathered  shafts  are  flying  in  the  air,  tho
arrows  with  their  sharpened  points.

12  Give  u^  where  heroes  strain  their  bodies  in  the  fight,  the

shelter  that  our  fathers  loved.

To  us  and  to  our  sons  give  l'efuge  :  keep  afar  all  unobserved
hostility,

13  When,  Indra,  in  the  mighty  fray  thou  urgest  chargers  to  their

speed,

On  the  uneven  road  and  on  a  toilsome  path,  like  falcons,  eager
for  renown,

14  Speeding  like  rivers  rushing  down  a  steep  descent,  responsive

to  the  urging  call,

That  come  like  birds  attracted  to  the  bait,  held  in  by  reins  in
both  the  driver’s  hands.

7  Nahutkas :  people,  apparently  distinct  from  the  five  Aryan  tribes  par
excdUnet,  and  dwellers  on  or  near  the  Indue.  According  to  Sftyana,  human
beings  in  genera!  are  meant,  and  Professor  Roth  explains  the  word  as  men
generally,  but  with  the  special  sense  of  stranger,  or  neighbour.  See  Muir,
0.  S.  Texts,  I.  170, 180.

8  Trihhi :  a  king  so  named,  says  SAyana.  In  another  place  (VIII.  22.  7)
he  hat*  the  patronymic  TrAsndasvava,  son,  f-e.  peer  of,  Trasadasyu.  In  Druhyus
or  in  PHru’s  folk ;  literally,  ‘  in  Druhyu  or  in  PCiru,’  tho  names  of  the  eponymi
of  these  tribes  being  used  for  the  tribes  themselves.

12  To  us  and  to  our  sons  give  refuge:  the  Commentator  takes  achUtam
‘unobserved,’  with  chaidih,  and  explains  the  words  as  'armour  unknown  by
the  enemies.'


ttTMV  47.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


609

*  HYMN  XLVII.  Indra,  Etc.

Yea,  tliis  is  good  to  taste  and  full  of  sweetness,  verilj  it  is
strong  and  rich  in  flavour.

No  one  may  conquer  Indra  in  the  battlo  when  he  hath  drunken
of  the  draught  we  offor.

2  Tliis  sweet  juice  hero  had  mightiest  power  to  gladdon :  it  boldcn-

ed  Indra  when  he  slaughtered  Vritra,

When  he  defeated  Sambara’s  many  onslaughts,  and  battered
down  his  nine-and-umoty  ramparts.

3  This  stirreth  up  my  voice  when  I  havo  drunk  it:  this  hath

aroused  from  sleep  my  yearning  spirit.

This  Sago  hath  mcasurod  out  the  six  expanses  from  which  no
singlo  creature  is  excluded.  ,

4  This,  oven  this,  is  he  who  hath  created  the  breadth  of  earth,

the  lofty  height  of  hoaven.

Ho  formed  the  nectar  in  throo  headlong  rivors.  Soma  supports
tho  wide  mid-air  abovo  us.

5  Ho  found  tho  wavy  sea  of  brilliant  colours  in  forefront  of  tho

Dawns  who  dwoll  in  brightness.

This  Mighty  Ouo,  tho  Steer  begirt  by  Marnts,  hath  propped
the  hoavous  up  with  a  mighty  pillar.

6  Drink  Soma  boldly  from  tho  beakor,  Indrn,  in  war  for  trea¬

sures,  Horo,  Vptra-slayor  I

Fill  thyself  full  at  tho  mid-day  libation,  and  givo  us  woalth,
thou  Treasury  of  riches.

7  Look  out  for  us,  0  Indra,  as  our  Leudor,  and  guide  ns  on  to

gain  yet  goodlior  troasurc.

Excellent  Guardian,  boar  us  woll  through  peril,  and  lead  us  on
to  wealth  with  careful  guidanco.

8  Load  us  to  amplo  room,  0  thou  who  knowest,  to  happinoss,

security,  and  sunlight.

High,  Indra,  aro  tho  arms  of  thee  tho  Mighty  :  may  we  botaka
us  to  their  lofty  sholter.

9  Sot  us  on  widest  chariotrseat,  0  Indra,  with  two  steeds  best

to  draw,  0  Lord  of  H  uudreds  1

3  This  Sage  hath  measured  out :  tho  creative  act*  of  Indra  aro  ascribed  to
Soma  which* inspirit*  him  to  perform  them.  The  six  expavtet,  aro  tho  two
worlds,  hoavon  and  earth,  and  tho  three  subdivisions  of  each  ;  or,  according
to  the  Commentator,  hoavon,  earth,  day,  night,  water,  and  plant*.

4  In  three  headlong  rivers  :  perhaps  the  threo  uuknown  rivers  Anjwl,  KuliW,
and  Vlrapatnl,  of  1. 104.  4,  which  Benfey  considers  to  bo  personifications  of  tire
clouds  ;  out  the  meaning  of  the  half  dine  is  uncertain.  1  This  Soma  has  de¬
posited  the  ambrosia  in  it*  three  principal  (receptacles).’ — Wilson.  Soma  in
staireas  4  and  5  ia  probably  the  Moon-God.


TUB  HYMNS  OP


610


[boor  vi.


Bring  us  the  best  auiong  all  sorts  of  viands :  let  not  the  foe’s
wealth,  Maghavan,  subdue  us.

10  Be  gracious,  Indra,  let  my  days  be  lengthened  :  sharpen  my

thought  as  ’twere  a  blade  of  iron.

Approve  whatever  words  I  speak,  dependent  on  thee,  and  grant
me  thy  divine  protection.

11  Indra  the  Rescuer,  Indra  the  Helper,  Hero  who  listens  at  each

invocation,

Sakra  I  call,  Indra  invoked  of  many.  May  Indra  Maghavan
prosper  and  bless  us.

12  May  helpful  Indra  as  our  good  Protector,  Lord  of  all  treasures,

favour  us  with  succour,

Baffle  our  foes,  and  give'Us  rest  and  safety,  and  may  we  be
the  lords  of  hero  vigour.

13  May  we  enjoy  the  grace  of  him  the  Holy,  yea,  may  we  dwell

in  his  auspicious  favour.

May  helpful  Indra  as  our  good  Preserver  drive  from  us,  even
from  afar,  our  foemcn.

14  Like  rivers  rushing  down  a  slope,  0  Indra,  to  thee  haste  songs

and  prayers  and  linked  verses.

Thou  gatherest,  Thunderer!  like  wide-spread  bounty,  kine,
water,  drops,  and  manifold  libations.

15  Who  lauds  him,  satisfies  him,  pays  him  worship?  E’en  the

rich  noble  still  hath  found  him  mighty.

With  power,  as  when  one  moves  his  feet  alternate,  he  makes
the  last  precede,  the  foremost  follow.

16  Famed  is  the  Hero  as  each  strong  man's  tamer,  ever  advancing

one  and  then  another.

Kiug  of  both  worlds,  hating  tho  high  and  haughty,  Indra  pro¬
tects  the  men  who  are  his  people.

17  He  loves  no  more  the  men  he  loved  aforetime:  ho  turns  and

moves  away  allied  with  others.

Rejecting  those  who  disregard  his  worship,  Indra  victorious
lives  through  many  autumns.


9  Let  not  the  foe' 3  wealth,  Maghavan,  subdue  u»:  it  Mem*  accessary  to
follow  Professor  Ludwig  in  taking  riTyah  in  the  plural  as  the  subject  of  tlio
singular  verb  tdrtl.  Other  examples  of  such  au  irregularity  are  found  in
the  Veda.

13  This  stanza  is  apparently  the  conclusion  of  the  original  hymn  ;  anew
hymn  or  fragment  of  a  hymn  begins  with  the  following  stanza.— Ludwig.

15  IVifA  power  :  he  rules  the  fortunes  of  men  according  to  his  pleasure,
setting  up  one  aud  putting  down  another,  making  tho  first  last  and  the  last  first.


inwr.v  47  ]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


611


18  In  overy  figure  he  hath  been  the  model :  this  is  his  only  form

for  us  to  look  ou.

Iudra  moves  multiform  by  his  illusions ;  for  his  Bay  Steeds
are  yoked,  ten  times  a  hundred.

19  Here  Tvashtar,  yoking  to  the  car  the  Buy  Steeds,  hath  extended

sway.

Who  will  for  ever  stand  upon  the  foe  man’s  side,  even  when
our  princes  sit  ut  case  1

20  Gods,  wo  have  reached  a  country  void  of  pasture :  the  land,

though  spacious,  was  too  small  to  hold  us.

Bphaspati,  provide  in  war  for  cattle ;  find  a  path,  Indra,  for
this  faithful  singer.

Day  after  da.v  far  from  their  seat  Jie  drove  them,  alike,  from
place  to  place,  those  darks- -me  creatures.

The  Hero  slew  the  meanly-huckstering  Dilsas,  Varchin  and
Sambaru,  where  the  waters  gather.

Out  of  thy  bounty,  Indra,  hath  Prastoka  bestowed  ten  coffers
and  ten  mettled  horses.

We  have  received  in  turn  from  DivodiLsa  Sambara's  wealth,  the
gift  of  Atithigva.

Ten  horses  and  ten  treasure-chests,  ten  garments  as  au  added  gift,
Tliese  and  ten  lumps  of  gold  have  I  received  from  Divodisa’s
hand.

Ten  cars  with  extra  steed  to  each,  for  the  Atharvans  hundred
cows,

Hath  Asvatha  to  Payu  given.


21


22


23


24


18  ‘  Indra  present**  himself  os  <4  pm,  Vuhnu,  or  Rudm,  or  any  other  deity
who  is  the  actual  object  of  worship,  and  i*  really  the  deity  to  bo  adored  s  ho
is  identifiable  with  each.’  — Wilsou.

•  Tea  Haiti  a  hundred  :  '  His  chariots  and  horses  are  multiplied  according  to
the  forms  in  which  he  manifests  himself :  agreeably  to  the  VnUdntik  inter¬
pretation  of  the  stansa,  Iudra  is  here  identified  with  Paramo?  ware,  the  supreme
first  cause,  identical  with  creation.’ — Wilson.

19  Traihiar :  supposed  by  the  Commentator  to  be  Identified  with  India;
but  this  is  uuncce-sary.  The  sway  may  be  merely  the  authority  whioh
Tvashtar  exercise*  in  yoking  the  chariot- steeds  for  Indra.

Who  will  /or  ever  itaud  upon  l hi  formaa'i  lidt  t :  that  is,  Indra  will  not  al¬
ways  favour  our  enemies,  even  when,  as  is  now  the  oase,  our  nobles  are  not
engaged  in  war —Ludwig.

21  Indra  is  represented  u  having  put  to  flight  the  dark  aborigines  and  slain
the  niggardly  demons  or  savage*  Varchin  and  ^xmbara.  8oe  IV.  80.  14,  lfi.

22
who

24  For  rht  Atharvam .-  for  the  kishis  of  the  family  of  Atharvan,  says
Sftyapa.  Pdyv  r  the  brother  of  Oarga  the  lUshi  of  the  hymn,

This  stanza  consists  of  Inn  Pddas  only  instead  of  four.


Prailoha,  DitodAto,  and  AtUKigr*  are  names  of  one  and  the  same  prince,,
is  called  also  Asvatha,  and  SAmiaya  or  son  of  Siinjaya.


612  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

25  Thus  Srinjaya’s  son  honoured  the  Bhamdv&jas,  recipients  of

all  noble  gifts  and  bounty.

26  Lord  of  tbe  wood,  be  film  and  strong  in  body  :  be,  bearing  us,

a  brave  victorious  hero.

Show  forth  thy  strength,  compact  with  straps  of  leather,  and
>  let  thy  rider  win  all  spoils  of  battle.

27  Its  mighty  strength  was  borrowed  from  the  heaven  and  earth  :

its  conquering  force  was  brought  from  sovrans  of  the  wood.
Honour  with  holy  gifts  the  Car  like  Indra’s  bolt,  the  Car  bound
round  with  straps,  the  vigour  of  the  floods.

28  Thou  Bolt  of  Indra,  Vanguard  of  the  Maruts,  close  knit  to

Varuna  and  Child  of  Mitra, —

As  such,  accepting  gifts  which  here  we  offer,  receive,  0  Godlike
Chariot,  these  oblations.

29  Send  forth  thy  voice  aloud  through  earth  and  heaven,  and  let

the  world  in  all  its  breadth  regard  thee ;

0  Drum,  accordant  with  the  Gods  and  Indra,  drive  thou  afar,
yea,  very  far,  our  focmen.

5l0  Thunder  out  strength  and  fill  us  full  of  vigour  :  yea,  thunder
forth  and  drive  away  all  dangers.

Drive  hence,  0  War-drum,  drive  away  misfortune :  thou  art
the  Fist  of  Indra :  show  thy  firmness.

31  Drive  hither  those,  and  these  again  bring  hither:  the  War-
drum  speaks  aloud  as  battle’s  signal.

Our  heroes,  winged  with  horses,  come  together.  Lot  our  car-
warriors,  Indra,  be  triumphant.

HYMN  XLVIII.  Agni  and  Other*.

Sing  to  your  Agni  with  each  song,  at  every  sacrifice,  for
strength.

Come,  let  us  praise  tho  Wise  and  Everlasting  God,  even  as  a
well-belovM  Friend,


26  Loid  of  the  vood :  forest  tree,  that  is  tho  timber  of  which  the  car  is
inode.  Tin's  car  is  the  deified  object  of  this  and  the  two  following  stanzas.

29  0  Drum :  the  dundubhi  addressed  and  glorified  in  these  oonojuding
verses  was  a  sort  of  loud  kettle-drum,  liko  that  still  used.

21  iif‘T0  M  us  cows  of  t*10  enemy  and  send  our  own  cows  home  in  safe¬
ty.  Oah,  cows,  is  understood  with  amtth,  those,  and  these.


1  Come,  Ut  ui  ting ;  it  seems  neoeasary  to  take  the  singular  verb  with  the
plural  pronoun.

s


THE  RIG  VEDA.


BYhftf  48.]


61 S


.2  The  Son  of  Strength ;  for  is  he  not  our  graoious  Lord  ?  Let
us  serve  him  who  bears  our  gifts.

In  battle  may  he  be  our  help  and  strengthener,  yea,  bo  the
saviour  of  our  lives.

3  Agni,  thou  beamest  forth  with  light,  great  Hero,  never

changed  by  time.

Shining,  pure  Agni !  with  a  light  that  never  fades,  beam  with
thy  fair  beams  brilliantly.

4  Thou  worshippest  great  Gods :  bring  them  without  delay  by

wisdom  and  thy  wondrous  power.

O  Agni,  make  them  turn  hither  to  succour  us.  Give  strength,
and  win  it  for  thyself.

5  He  whom  floods,  stones,  and  trees  support,  the  offspring  of

eternal  Law ;

He  who  when  rubbed  with  force  is  brought  to  life  by  men  upon
the  lofty  height  of  earth  ;

6  He  who  hath  filled  both  worlds  full  with  his  brilliant  shine,

who  hastens  with  his  smoke  to  heaven  ;

He  made  himself  apparent  through  the  gloom  by  night,  the
Red  Bull  in  the  darksome  nights,  the  Red  Bull  in  the  dark¬
some  nights.

7  0  Agni,  with  thy  lofty  beams,  with  thy  pure  brilliancy,

0  God,

Kindled,  Most  Youthful  One  !  by  Bharadvaja’s  hand,  shine  on
us,  0  pure  God,  with  wealth,  shine.  Purifier !  splendidly.

8  Thou  art  the  Lord  of  house  and  home  of  all  the  tribes,  O

Agni,  of  all  tribes  of  men.

Guard  with  a  hundred  forts  thy  kindler  from  distress,  through
hundred  winters,  Youngest  God !  and  those  who  make  thy
singers  rich.

9  Wonderful,  with  thy  favouring  help,  send  us  thy  bounties,

•  gracious  Lord.

Thou  art  the  Charioteer,  Agni,  of  earthly  wealth :  find  rest
and  safety  for  our  seed.

10  With  guards  unfailing  never  negligent  speed  thou  our  child¬
ren  and  our  progeny.

Keep  far  from  us,  0  Agni,  all  celestial  wrath  aud  wickedness
of  godless  men.

2  Who  heart  our  gifts :  conveys  our  sacrificial  offerings  to  the  Gods.

5  Floods,  stones,  and  trees  :  the  water*  that  are  mixed  with  the  Soma  juice,
the  press-stones  which  crush  the  plant,  and  the  wood  which  produces  the  fire
by  attrition  or  feed*  it  as  fuel.  The  Ufty  height  of  earth  :  the  altar.


816  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

Thou,  Sage,  with  bright  path,  Lord  of  harnessed  horses,  impe¬
tuous,  promptly  honourest  the  prudent.

5  That  chariot  of  the  Asvins,  fair  to  look  on,  pleaseth  me  well,

yoked  with  a  thought,  refulgent,

Wherewith;  Nasatyas,  Chiefs,  ye  seek  our  dwelling,  to  give
new  strength  to  ns  and  to  our  children.

6  Bulls  of  the  Earth,  0  Vata  and  Parjanya,  stir  up  for  us  the

regions  of  the  water.

Hearers  of  truth,  ye,  Sages,  World-Supporters,  increase  his
living  wealth  whose  songs  delight  you.

7  So  may  Sarasvati,  the  Hero’s  Consort,  brisk  with  rare  life,  the

lightning’s  Child,  inspire  us,

And,  with  the  Dames  accordant,  give  the  singer  a  refuge  unas¬
sailable  and  flawless.  *

8  I  praise  with  cloquuence  him  who  guards  all  pathways.  He,

when  his  love  impelled  him,  went  to  Arka-
May  he  vouchsafe  us  gear  with  gold  to  grace  it:  may  Pishan
make  each  prayer  of  ours  effective.

9  May  Herald  Agni,  fulgent,  bring  for  worship  Tvashtar  adored,

in  homes  and  swift  to  listen,

Glorious,  first  to  share,  the  life-bestower,  the  ever  active  God,
fair-armed,  fair-handed.

10  Rudra  by  day,  Rudra  at  night  we  honour  with  these  our  songs,
the  Universe’s  Father.

Him  great  and  lofty,  blissful,  undecaying  let  us  call  specially
as  the  Sage  impels  us.


6  Built  of  the  Earth  :  or  of  Prfthivf  m  identified  with  Prisni.  Vdta  is
Another  name  of  Vlyu,  the  Wind-God;  and  Parjanya  ia  the  Rain-cloud
personified.  Hearers  of  truth :  the  Mamts  arc  thus  addressed,  as  making  true
or  realizing  the  prayers  of  men  to  which  they  listen.  I  follow  Slya^a’s  inter¬
pretation  of  the  second  half  of  the  stanza.

7  T.’u  Hero's  Consort :  vlrdp  Uni :  according  to  S&yana,  she  whoso  husband
is  the  hero  Praj/lpati,  or,  the  protectress  of  heroes.  The  River-God  Saras v An
or  Saras  vat  is  more  usually  considered  to  bo  the  consort  of  Saraavatl,  who
originally  a  River-Qoddesa,  appear*  in  this  place  in  her  later  and  present-day
character  of  the  Goddess  of  learning  and  eloquence.  Sec  note,  borrowed
from  Muir,  on  I.  3  10.  The  Dames:  Gluts,  or  Consorts  of  the  Gods.

3  Him  who  guards  all  pathways :  POshan,  the  special  protector  of  travellers
aud  guardian  of  roads  and  paths.  See  I.  42.  Arka :  the  Sun,  to  whom  PGsban
appears  to  have  gone  both  as  an  envoy  on  behalf  of  the  other  Gods  when  SQryA
was  to  be  given  in  marriage,  and  as  a  suitor  on  hia  own  account.  SilryA,  it  may
be  remembered,  chose  the  Aavins  to  bo  hor  husbands.  See  I.  116.  17.  1  follow
Professor  Pisohel  ( Vedisehe  Studien,  I.  pp.  1 — 52)  in  hia  interpretation  of  this
difficult  stanza.

10  The  Sage :  the  wise,  that  if,  wisdom-giving,  Soma.


HYMN  50.)  THE  RI6YEDA.  61?

11  Ye  who  are  youthful,  wise,  and  meet  for  worship,  come,

Maruts,  to  the  longing  of  the  singer.

Coming,  as  erst  to  Augiras,  0  Heroes,  ye  animate  and  quicken
e’en  the  desert.

12  Even  as  the  herdsman  driveth  home  his  cattle,  I  urge  my

songs  to  him  the  strong  swift  Hero
May  he,  the  glorious,  lay  upon  his  body  the  singer’s  hymns,
as  8 tars  bedeck  the  heaven.

13  He  who  for  man’s  behoof  in  his  affliction  thrice  measured  out

the  earthly  regions,  Vishnu —

When  one  so  great  as  thou  affordeth  shelter,  may  we  with
wealth  and  with  ourselves  be  happy.

14  Sweet  be  this  song  of  mine  to  Alybudhnya,  Parvata,  Savitar,

with  Floods  and  Lightnings ;

Sweet,  with  the  Plants,  to  Gods  who  seek  oblations.  May
liberal  Bhaga  speed  us  on  to  riches.

15  Give  riches  borne  on  cars,  with  many  heroes,  contenting  men,

the  guard  of  mighty  Order.

Give  us  a  lasting  home  that  we  may  battle  with  godless  bands
of  men  who  fight  against  us,  and  meet  with  tribes  to  whom
the  Gods  are  gracious.

HYMN  L.  Visvedevas.

I  call  with  prayers  on  Aditi  your  Goddess,  on  Agni,  Mitra,
Varuna  for  favour,

On  Aryaman  who  gives  unasked,  the  gracious,  on  Gods  who
save,  on  Savitar  and  Bhaga.

2  Visit,  to  prove  us  free  from  sin,  0  Surra,  Lord  of  great  might,
the  bright  Gods  sprung  from  Daksha,

Twice-bom  and  true,  observing  sacred  duties,  Holy  and  full  of
light,  whose  tongue  is  Agni.

11  At  trit  to  A  ngirat  :  angirasrdl ;  ‘  like  rays  (of  light).' — Wilaon;  *  like  the
Angirasas.’— Roth  ;  ‘like  messengers  of  the  Gods.’ — Gr-Bsmann

12  The  ttrong  vcift  Hero :  Vishnu  seems  to  he  intended,  and  not  the
company  of  Maruts  as  SAjana  explains  the  passago,  taking  virdyu  as  an
adjective = heroic  or  powerful.

14  Ahibudknya :  the  Dragon  of  the  Deep,  or  *  leviathan  of  the  Sea  of
Heaven,'  the  distant,  invisible  and  deified  being  who  presides  over  the
firmament.

15  The  guard  of  mighty  Order  :  the  wealth  that  enable*  men  to  institute
the  law-ordained  sacrifices.  To  \chom  tJ,e  Goat  are  gracious :  '  to  whom  tho
Gods  come  to  accept  libation*.’  I  follow  Siyana  in  thus  distinguishing  ffderlh
from  adcaih,  godless.

2  Visit,  to  prove  us  free  from  tin  :  visit  and  invite  the  Gods  to  come  and
bear  witness  to  our  innocence  before  the  all-seeing  Sun.  The  word  andgditvi


018  'XRX  HYMNS  OF  [ROOK  VI:

3  And,  0  ye  Heaven  and  Earth,  a  wide  dominion,  0  ye  most

blissful  Worlds,  our  lofty  shelter,

Give  ample  room  and  freedom  for  our  dwelling,  a  home,  ye
Hemispheres,  which  none  may  rival.

4  This  day  invited  may  the  Sons  of  Hudra,  resistless,  excellent,

stoop  down  to  meet  us ;

For,  when  beset  with  slight  or  sore  affliction,  we  ever  call  upon
the  Gods,  the  Maruti ;

5  To  whom  the  Goddess  Rodasi  clings  closely,  whom  Pushan

follows  bringing  ample  bounty.

What  time  ye  hear  our  call  and  come,  0  Maruts,  upon  your
separate  path  all  creatures  tremble.

6  With  a  now  hymn  extol,  £>  thou  who  singest,  the  Lover  of  the

Song,  the  Hero  Iudra-

May  he,  exalted,  hear  our  invocation,  and  grant  us  mighty
wealth  and  strength  when  lauded.

7  Give  full  protection,  Friends  of  man,  ye  Waters,  iu  peace  ancl

trouble,  to  our  sons  and  grandsons.

For  ye  are  our  most  motherly  physicians,  parents  of  all  that
standeth,  all  that  moveth.

8  May  Savitar  come  hither  and  approach  us,  the  God  who  rescues,

Holy,  golden-handed,

The  God  who,  bounteous  as  the  face  of  Morning,  discloses
precious  gifts  for  him  who  worships.

9  An  t  thou,  0  Son  of  Strength,  do  thou  turn  hither  the  Gods

to-day  to  this  our  holy  service.

May  I  for  evermore  enjoy  thy  bounty,  and,  Agni,  by  thy
grace  be  rich  iu  heroes.

10  Come  also  to  my  call,  0  ye  Nasatyas,  yea,  verily,  through  my
prayers,  ye  Holy  Sages.

As  from  great  darkness  yo  delivered  Atri,  protect  us,  Chiefs,
from  danger  in  the  conflict.


in  the  locative  case  (in  ainlessncss)  ia  used  with  a  dative  signification.  Sprung
from  Duhha :  Dakaha  ia  a  creative  Power  associated  with  A-liii,  and  therefore
sometimes  identified  with  Prajlpati.  SAyana  explains  d&ksfuipUrU  in  his
commentary  on  VII.  66.  2,  as  ‘  preserver*  or  lords  of  strength,'  and  the  com¬
pound  may  mean  Lord9  of  vigour,  or  fathers  of  strength  in  this  passage  also.
Ttaict  born  :  having  two  births  or  manifestations,  dwelling  in  heaven  and  ap¬
pearing  also  on  earth.  Wio$t  tongue  is  Agni:  who  consume  oblations  by  means
of  fire.

3  Ye  Hemtphtra .-  dhiihant ;  literally,  ‘  two  bowls,'  a  frequcntly-occurring
expression  for  heaven  and  earth.

5  Rodasi :  the  Consort  of  Kudra.


HYMN  51.]


THE  RIG  TED  A.


619

110  Gods,  bestow,  upon  us  riches,  splendid  with  strength  and
heroes,  bringing  food  in  plenty.

Be  gracious,  helpful  Gods  of  earth,  of  heaven,  born  of  the  Cow,
and  dwellers  in  the  waters.

12  May  Rudra  and  Saras  vat!,  accordant,  Vishnu  and  Vayu,  pour

down  gifts  and  bless  us ;

Ribliukshan,  Vftja,  and  divine  Vidhatar,  Parjanya,  V&ta  make
our  food  abundant.

13  May  this  God  Savitar,  thcLofd,  the  Offspring  of  Waters,  pour¬

ing  down  his  dew  be  gracious.

And,  with  the  Gods  and  Dames  accordant,  Tvashtar;  Dyaus
with  the  Gods  and  Ppthivi  with  oceans.

14  May  Aja-Ekapad  and  Ahibudhuya^aud  Earth  and  Ocean  hear

our  invocation ;

All  Gods  who  strengthen  Law,  invoked  and  lauded,  and  holy
texts  uttered  by  sages,  help  us.

15  So  with  my  thoughts  and  hymns  of  praise  the  children  of

Bharadvaja  sing  aloud  to  please  you.

The  Dames  invoked,  aud  the  resistless  Vasus,  and  all  ye  Holy
Ones  have  been  exalted.

.  HYMN  LI.  Visvedcvas.

That  mighty  eye  of  Varuna  and  Mitra,  infallible  and  dear,  is
moving  upward.

The  pure  and  lovely  face  of  holy  Order  hath  shone  like  gold  of
heaven  in  its  arising.


1 1  Born  of  the  Cota :  the  Manila,  sons  of  the  Cow  Prisni,  according  to  Sfiyana.
Tho  Goda  of  heaven  are  said  to  be  the  Adilyas,  those  of  earth  the  Vasus,  and
those  of  water,  that  is,  the  firmament,  the  Rudras.  Roth  explains  gdjdtdh  as
‘  born  of  tho  starry  heaven.'

12  This  and  the  four  following  stanzas  form  a  new  hymn,  or  are  a  recapitu¬
lation,  with  additions,  of  the  preceding  verses.  And  divine  Yidhdlar  :  or
*  the  divine  Disposer.’

14  Aja-Ekapdtl:  according  to  Roth,  probably  a  genius  of  the  storm,  ‘the
stormer  of  one  foot  *  See  II.  31.  6.  But  aja  may  signify  ‘  unborn'  rather  than
1  driver,’  and  the  Sun  may  he  intended,  in  accordance  with  the  explanation  of
the  Commentators.  Aja-EkapAd  is  called  in  X.  65.  13.  the  bearer  of  heaven,
‘  and  the  ascription  of  one  foot  to  the  Sun  might  be  due  to  his  appearance
alone  iu  tho  sky  as  opposed  to  the  Dawns  and  the  Asvina.’  See  Wallis,
Cosmology  of  the  Rigxeda,  p.  54.  M.  Bergaigno  say»  :  ‘  Aja-Ekap&d,  then  is
the  ‘  unborn  who  has  only  one  foot,’  that  is  to  say.  ‘  who  dwells  in  the  single
isolated  world,  the  place  of  mystery,’  in  opposition  to  the  god  who  manifest*
himself  in  divers  worlds,  to  Agni  or  Soma  in  their  various  visible  forms.’  See
La  Religion  Vtdique,  III.  pp.  20—25.

1  ft  Sftyana  interprets  the  first  line  somewhat  differently :  *  Thus  do  my  sous
the  BharadvAjas  worship  tho  Gods  with  sacied  ritea  and  hymns.’

1  Eye  of  Varuna  and  Mitra :  the  Sun.


e20  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Vt

2  The  Sage  who  knows  these  Gods’  three  ranks  and  orders,  and

all  their  generations  near  and  distant,

Beholding  good  and  evil  acts  of  mortals,  Sura  marks  well  the
doings  of  the  pious.

3  I  praise  you  Guards  of  mighty  Law  eternal,  Aditi,  Mitra,  Varuna,

the  noble,

-  Arvaman,  Bhaga,  all  whose  thoughts  are  faithful :  hither  I  call
the  Bright  who  share  in  common.

4  Lords  of  the  brave,  infallible,  foe-destroyers,  great  Kings,  be-

stowers  of  fair  homes  to  dwell  in,

Young,  Heroes,  ruling  heaven  with  strong  dominion,  Adilyas,
Aditi  I  seek  with  worship.

5  0  Heaven  our  Father,  E»rth  our  guileless  Mother,  0  Brother

Agni,  and  ye  Vasus,  bless  us.

Grant  us,  0  Aditi  and  ye  Adityas,  all  of  one  mind,  your  mani¬
fold  protection,

6  Give  us  not  up  to  any  evil  creature,  as  spoil  to  wolf  or  shc-

wolf,  0  ye  Holy.

For  ye  are  they  who  guide  aright  our  bodies,  ye  are  the  rulers
of  our  speech  and  vigour.

7  Let  us  not  suffer  for  the  sin  of  others,  nor  d  o  the  deed  which

ye,  0  Vasus,  punish.

Ye,  Universal  Gods  !  are  all-controllers  :  may  he  do  harm  unto
himself  who  hates  me.

8  Mighty  is  homage  :  I  adopt  and  use  it.  Homage  hath  held

in  place  the  earth  and  heaven.

Homage  to  Gods !  Homage  commands  and  rules  them.  1
banish  even  committed  sin  by  homage.

9  You  Furtherers  of  Law,  pure  in  your  spirit,  infallible,  dwel¬

lers  in  the  homo  of  Order,

To  you  all  Heroes  mighty  and  far-seeing  I  bow  mo  down,  0
Holy  Ones,  with  homage.

10  For  these  are  they  who  shine  with  noblest  splendour ;  through
all  our  troubles  these  conduct  us  safely —

2  Three  rant*  and  order s :  according  to  S&yana,  the  three  cognizable  worlds
or  stations  of  the  Clods,  the  earth  of  the  Vasus,  the  firmament  of  the  Rudras,
and  heaven  of  the  Adityas.  Sdra :  Surya  ;  the  Sun.

8  Who  share  in  common :  sadhany&h;  according  to  SAyana,  dhanasahitin,
'accompanied  by  wealth.*

7  Let  us  not  safer  for  the  sin  of  others  :  so,  VII.  86.  5.  '  Loose  us  from  sins
committed  by  our  fathers.’  Compare  also  Taittirfya-Brdhmnna,  III.  7.  12.  3.
cited  by  Muir,  0 .  S.  T.,  V.  66.  ‘  May  AgDi  free  me  from  the  sin  which  my
mother  or  my  father  committed  when  I  waa  a  babe  unborn.’


HYMN  52.]


THE  RIG  VEDA.


621


Varuna,  Mitra,  Agui,  mighty  Rulers,  true-minded,  faithful  to
the  hymn's  controllers.

1 1  May  they,  Earth,  Aditi,  Indra,  Bhaga,  Poshan  increase  our  laud,

increase  the  Fivefold  people.

Giving  good  help,  good  refuge,  goodly  guidance,  be  they  our
good  deliverers,  good  protectors.

12  Come  now,  0  Gods,  to  your  celestial  station:  the  Bhara-

dvijas’  priest  entreats  your  favour.

He,  sacrificing,  fain  for  wealth,  hath  honoured  the  Gods  with
those  who  sit  and  share  oblations.

1 3  Agni,  drive  thou  the  wicked  foe,  the  evil-hearted  thief  away,
Far,  far,  Lord  of  the  brave!  and  give  us  easy  paths.

14  Soma,  these  presaing-stones  have*ca!led  aloud  to  win  thee  for

our  Friend.

Destroy  the  greedy  Pani,  for  a  wolf  is  he.

15  Ye,  0  most  bountiful,  are  they  who,  led  by  Indra,  seek  the

sky.

Give  us  good  paths  for  travel :  guard  us  well  at  home.

16  Now  have  we  entered  on  the  road  that  leads  to  bliss,  without

a  foe,

The  road  whereon  a  man  escapes  all  enemies  and  gathers
wealth.

HYMN  LII.  Visvedcvaa.

This  I  allow  not  in  the  earth  or  heaven,  at  sacrifice  or  in
these  holy  duties.

May  the  huge  mountains  crush  him  down :  degraded  bo
Atiy&ja’s  sacrificing  patron.

10  The  hymn's  controllers '  those  who  are  prominent  in  (their)  praise.* —
Wilson.

11  The  Fivefold.  People:  pdteha  jdndk;  the  five  Aryan  tribes  ;  ‘the  five
orders  of  beings.’ — Wilson.

12  This  stanza  is  difficult,  and  I  do  not  thoroughly  understand  it.

14  Puni :  either  one  of  the  envious  demons  who  steal  away  the  light,  or  tho
avaricious  and  niggardly  trafficker  who  offers  no  sacrifices  to  the  Gods.

15  Ye,  0  Most  bountiful :  all  ye  Gods.

16  These  four  concluding  stanza*,  in  changed  metres,  are  a  prayer  for
protection  on  a  journey.  Professor  Grassmaan  banishes  them,  together  with
stanzas  11  and  12,  to  the  Appendix  as  being  in  his  opinion  later  additions  to
the  original  hymn.

1  According  to  SAyapa  Rijisvan  curses  a  rival  Rishi  Atiyija  :  but  the  name
Atiyija  (from  xxti  and  y aj)  seems  to  be  employed  expressly  to  signify  one  who
over-sacrifices,  that  ia,  sacrifice*  more  than  is  necessary  or  prescribed,  super-
fluity,  as  well  as  deficiency,  being  a  fault  that  causes  a  sacrifice  to  fail.  See
Ludwig,  IV.  220.


622-  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOK  VI.

2  Or  ho  who  holds  us  in  contempt,  0  Marufcs,  or  seeks  to  blame

the  prayer  that  we  are  making,

May  agonies  of  burning  be  his  portion.  May  the  sky  scorch
the  man  who  hates  devotion.

3  Why  then,  0  Soma,  do  they  call  thee  keeper  of  prayer?  why

then  our  guardiau  from  reproaches?

Why  then  beholdest  thou  how  men  revile  us?  Cast  thy  hot
dart  at  him  who  hates  devotion.

4  May  Mornings  as  they  spring  to  life  protect  me,  and  may  the

liivevs  as  they  swell  preserve  me.

My  guardians  be  the  firmly-seated  mountains :  the  Fathers,
when  I  call  on  Gods,  defend  me  !

5  Through  all  our  days  ma^  we  be  healthy-minded,  and  look  up¬

on  the  Sun  when  he  arises.

Grant  this  the  Treasure-Lord  of  treasures,  coming,  observant,
oftenest  of  Gods,  with  succour !

6  Most  near,  most  oft  comes  Indra  with  protection,  and  she,

Sarasvatl,  who  swells  with  rivers  :

Patjanya,  bringiug  health  with  herbs,  and  Agni,  well  lauded,
swift  to  listen,  like  a  father.

7  Hear  this  mine  invocation ;  come  hither,  0  Universal  Gods.

Be  seated  on  this  holy  grass.

8  To  him  who  comes  to  meet  you,  God9,  with  offerings  bathed

in  holy  oil —

Approach  ye,  one  and  all,  to  him.

9  All  Sons  of  Immortality  shall  listen  to  the  songs  we  sing,

And  be  exceed iug  good  to  us.

10  May  all  the  Gods  who  strengthen  Law,  with  Ritus,  listening

to  our  call,

Be  pleased  with  their  appropriate  draught.

11  May  Indra  with  the  Marut  host,  Tvashtar,  Mitra,  Aryaman,
Accept  the  laud  and  these  our  gifts.

12  0  Agni,  Priest,  as  rules  ordain,  offer  this  sacrifice  of  ours,
Remembering  the  Heavenly  Folk.


3  Soma :  the  Moou-God.

.  5  Treasure- Lord  of  treasures :  Agni,  from  whom,  or  through  whom,  all  blew-
jnga  come  to  the  pious.

9  Sons  of  Immortality:  according  to  the  Scholiast,  ‘sons  of  the  immortal  *
(Prajipati,  regarded  as  the  progenitor  of  Gods  and  men).

10  With  Ifitus ;  together  with  the  Seasons  personified  ;  or,  at  the  prescribed
seasons,  as  buy  an  a  explains.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


HYMN  63.]

13  Listen,  All-Gods,  to  this  mine  invocation,  ye  who  inhabit

heaven,  and  air’s  mid-regions,

All  ye,  O  Holy  Ones,  whose  tongue  is  Agni,  seated  upon  this
sacred  grass,  be  joyful.

14  May  the  All-Gods  who  claim  our  worship  hear  my  thought;

may  the  two  World-halves  hear  it,  and  the  Waters’  Child.
Let  me  not  utter  words  that  ye  may  disregard.  Closely  allied
with  you  may  wc  rejoice  in  bliss.

15  And  those  who,  Mighty,  with  the  wiles  of  serpents,  were  bora

on  earth,  in  heaven,  where  waters  gather —

May  they  vouchsafe  us  lifo  of  full  duration.  May  tho  Gods
kindly  give  us  nights  and  mornings.

16  At  this  my  call,  0  Agni  and  Parjanya,  help,  swift  to  hear,  my

thought  and  our  laudation.

One  generates  holy  food,  tho  other  offspring,  so  grant  us  food
enough  with  store  of  children.

1 7  When  holy  grass  is  strewn  and  fire  enkindled,  with  hymn  and

lowly  homage  I  invite  you.

All-Gods,  to  day  in  this  our  great  assembly  rejoice,  ye  Holy,
in  the  gifts  we  offer.

HYMN  LIII.  Piishan.

Lord  of  the  path,*0  Pushan,  we  have  yoked  and  bound  thee
to  our  liymu,

Even  as  a  car,  to  win  the  prize.

2  Bring  us  the  wealth  that  men  require,  a  manly  master  of  a

house,

Free-handed  with  the  liberal  meed.

3  Even  him  who  would  not  give,  do  thou,  0  glowing  Pushan,

urge  to  give,

And  make  the  niggard’s  soul  grow  soft.


.  13  All-Gods:  Vifve  decdh,  or  Universal  God*.

15  With,  the  wiUt  of  serpent*:  ahi mdt/dh  ;  according  to  S&yapa,  ‘  possessed!
of  the  wisdom  or  knowledge  that  kills.’  Cf.  I.  3.  9,  note.

16  The  other  offspring:  Parjanya,  the  personified  ltain-cloucl,  produce®  corn
and  food  offered  in  sacrifice,  and  Agni  promotes  the  procreation  of  children.


1  Lord  of  the  path  :  custodian  of  roads  and  guide  of  travellers.  To  vnn  the
prize :  or,  to  win  us  wealth  or  food.

2  Matter  of  a  house:  &  householder  who  will  institute  sacrifices  and  liber¬
ally  reward  the  officiating  priests.


m  TBS  BY  BBS  OP  [  BOOK  VI.

4  Clear  paths  that  we  may  win  the  prize  ;  scatter  our  enemies  afar.

Strong  God,  be  all  our  thoughts  fulfilled.

5  Penetrate  with  an  awl,  0  Sage,  the  hearts  of  avaricious  churls,

And  make  them  subject  to  our  will.

6  Thrust  with  thine  awl,  0  Pushan :  seek  that  which  the  nig¬

gard’s  heart  holds  dear,

Aud  make  him  subject  to  our  will.

7  Tear  up  and  rend  in  pieces,  Sage,  the  hearts  of  avaricious  churls,

And  make  them  subject  to  our  will.

8  Thou,  glowing  Pushan,  carriest  an  awl  that  urges  men  to

prayer ;

Therewith  do  thou  tear  up  and  rend  to  shreds  the  heart  of
every  one.  e

9  Thou  bearest,  glowing  Lord  1  a  goad  with  horny  point  that

guides  the  cows :

Thence  do  we  seek  thy  gift  of  bliss.

10  And  make  this  hymn  of  ours  produce  kine,  horses,  and  a  store
of  wealth

For  our  delight  and  use  as  men.

HYMN  LIV.  P Cuban.

0  PCtaiiAN,  bring  us  to  the  man  who  knows,  who  shall  direct
us  straight,

Aud  say  unto  us,  It  is  here.

2  May  we  go  forth  with  Pushan  who  shall  point  the  houses  out

to  08,

And  say  to  us,  These  same  are  they.

3  Unharmed  is  Pdshan’a  chariot  wheel ;  the  box  no'er  falleth  to

the  ground,

Nor  doth  the  loosened  felly  shake.

4  Win  the  prize :  or,  win  us  wealth,  or  food.

6  With  an  :  ‘  with  a  goad.’- Wilson.

9  With  horny  point :  tho  exact  meaning  of  gfopatd  ia  uncertain.  Others  ex¬
plain  it  as  'director  of  cattle;’  ‘  furnished  with  leathern  thongs  '  cow  tailed*

This  hymn  and  the  five  following  have  been  translated  by  Dr.  Muir,  Origi¬
nal  Sanskrit  Texts,  V.  176—180.  Professor  Peterson  also  givea  a  translation
of  Hymns  L.III— LV1I.  in  hi*  Bunns  front  the  Jtigveda  {Bombay  Sanskrit
Scrios  No.  XXXVI).  -

1  This  stanza,  S-lvana  says,  is  to  be  muttered  by  one  who  seeks  bis  lost
property.  The  wan  who  knoici .-  tho  wise  man  or  wizard-

2  These  same  are  they  :  th<we  are  tho  houses  in  which  tho  stolen  property  is
concealed.  .

3  The  box:  basket,  or  inner  part  of  the  car.  Professor  Wilson,  following
SAyana,  translates  :  'The  discus  of  Piishan  does  not  destroy  ;  its  sheath  is  not
discarded,  its  edge  harms  not  us.’  But  the  three  things  mentioned  are  evi¬
dently  part*  of  Pushan ‘a  chariot.


BYMN  55J  THE  RIG  VEDA.  625

4  Piishan  forgettetk  nob  tho  man  who  serveth  him  with  offered

gift:

That  man  is  first  to  gather  wealth.

5  May  Pushan  follow  near  our  kine;  may  Pushan  keep  our

horses  safe  :

May  Piishan  gather  gear  for  us.

6  Follow  the  kine  of  him  who  pours  libations  out  and  worships

thee ;

And  ours  who  sing  thco  songs  of  praise.

7  Let  none  bo  lost,  none  injured,  none  sink  in  a  pit  and  break

a  limb.

Return  with  these  all  safe  and  sound.

8  Pushan  who  listens  to  our  prayers,  tho  Strong  whose  wealth

is  never  lost,

The  Lord  of  riches,  we  implore.

9  Secure  in  thy  protecting  care,  0  Pfishau,  never  may  we  fail  :
We  hero  are  they  who  sing  thy  praise.

10  From  out  the  distance,  far  and  wide,  may  Pushan  stretch  his
right  hand  forth,

And  drive  our  lost  again  to  us.

HYMN  LV.  Pfl8hftn.

Sos  of  Deliverance,  come,  bright  God  !  Let  us  twain  go  to¬
gether  :  be  our  charioteer  of  sacrifice.

2  We  pray  for  wealth  to  thee  most  skilled  of  charioteers,  with

braided  hair,

Lord  of  great  riches,  and  our  Friend.

3  Bright  God  whose  steeds  are  go.its,  thou  art  a  stream  of  wealth,

a  treasure-heap,

The  Friend  of  every  pious  man.

7  With  these  :  cow*.

8  Wo  pray  to  Piishan  for  the  safety  of  our  property  because  he  U  the  Lord
of  wealth  ;  he  himself  loses  nothing  that  is  his,  and  he  always  listens  to  our.
prayers.

1  Son  of  Deliverance  :  that  is,  '  Deliverer,’  one  who  gives  men  ample  room
and  freedom.  SAyana  explains  vimucho  tiapdt  in  another  place  as  ‘offspring
of  the  cloud.'  Soo  L  42.  1.  Here,  he  says,  tho  meaning  is,  ‘  son  of  PrajApati,
who  at  the  creation  sends  forth  from  himself  all  creatures.'  Roth  explains
vunAch  a*  ‘unyoking  horses  at  the  end  of  a  journey.  Pushan  would  then  be
'  the  sou  of  return,’  the  God  who  brings  travellers  safely  home,  which  is  one
of  his  especial  functions.

2  With  braided  hair:  iapardinam  ;  an  epithet  of  Rudra  also..  Sec  I.  114.  1,  ■

3  Whose  steeds  are  gouts:  cf.  I.  188.  4.

40


628  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

4  Pushfin,  who  drivcth  goats  for  steeds,  the  Strong  and  Mighty,

who  is  called

His  Sister’s  lover,  will  we  laud.

5  His  Mother’s  suitor  I  address.  May  he  who  loves  his  Sister  hear,
Brother  of  Iudra,  and  my  Friend.

6  May  the  sure-footed  goats  come  nigh,  conveying  Pushan  on

his  car,

The  God  who  visitetli  mankiud.

HYMN  LVI.  Pushan.

Whoso  remembers  Pushan  as  eater  of  mingled  curd  and  meal
Need  think  no  more  upon  the  God.

2  And  he  is  best  of  charioteers.  Indra,  the  hero’s  Lord,  allied
With  him  as  Friend,  destroys  the  foes.

3  And  there  the  best  of  charioteers  hath  guided  through  the

speckled  cloud

The  golden  wheel  of  S.ira’s  car.

4  Whate’er  we  speak  this  day  to  thee,  Wise,  Wondrous  God

whom  many  praise,

Give  thou  fultilmcnt  of  our  thought.

5  Lead  on  this  company  of  ours,  thatlongs  for  kine,  to  win  the  spoil:
Thou,  Pflshan,  art  renowned  afar.

6  Prosperity  we  crave  from  thee,  afar  from  sin  and  near  to  wealth,
Tending  to  perfect  happiness  both  for  to-morrow  and  to-day.

4  Hit  Sillers  loeer :  according  to  SAyana,  P.’tshan’s  sister  is  Ushas  or  Dawn.

5  His  Mosher's  suitor :  Sftyaya  explains  mdttlr  dulhishum  as  rduth  patim,
lord  or  husband  of  Night,  Probably  SflryA  is  intended.  Sec  Bergaigno,  La
Religion  Vidique.  II.  428.  Compare  also  Rook  VI.  4S.  8.  Rrother  of  Indra  :
as  an  Aditya  or  son  of  Aditi.

6  Sure-footed :  tiiff imbh/fk :  this  word  does  not  occur  elsewhere  and  its
meaning  is  uncertain.  Wilson  renders  it  1 * 3  harnessed,'  and  other  explanations
have  been  proposed,  but  ns  Dr.  Muir  observes  :  *  All  seems  guess  work.’

1  Eater  of  mingled  curd  and  meal:  karambMt ;  harambhd  was  some  soft
food,  a  sort  of  gruel,  offered  especially  to  Pflshan.

I  have  followed  Professor  Ludwig  in  my  translation  of  this  difficult  passage,
the  meaning  seeming  to  be  that  in  setting  before  Pflshan  the  food  that  he  loves
the  woiylupper  has  done  all  that  is  necessary  to  secure  his  help.  Sltyana’s  expla¬
nation  is  much  the  same  if  ‘  a  God"  be  substituted  for  1  the  God  ’  in  line  2,  that
is,  Pflshan  nluno  is  sufficient :  the  worshipper  need  think  upon  no  other  God.

3  Pflshan  ceems  to  be  intended.  He  is  said  to  have  driven  the  Sun's  wheel

CrtuAi  gdti,  literally,  '  in  the  brindled  bull,'  meaning  apparently,  the  speck-
l  cloud,  or  train  of  variegated  clouds.  '  He,  the  impeller,  the  chief  of
charioteers  (Pflshan),  ever  urges  on  that  golden  wheel  (of  his  car)  for  the  radi¬
ant  sun.’ — Wilson.  Others  think  that  the  verse  refers  to  Indra'B  pressing
down  the  wheel  of  the  Sun  from  the  mountain  of  cloud  and  bringing  back  the
light.  See  Peterson,  Hymns  from  the  Rigxeda,  p.  171.


H  YMN  58.1


fl-27


THE  RIO  VEDA.

HYMN  LVII.  Indra  and  Pushan.

Indra  and  Pushan  will  we  call  for  friendship  and  prosperity
And  for  the  winning  of  the  spoil.

2  One  by  the  Soma  sits  to  drink  juice  which  the  mortar  hath

expressed  :

The  other  lougs  for  curd  and  meal.

3  Goats  arc  the  team  that  draws  the  one :  the  other  hath  Bay

Steeds  at  hand  ;

With  both  of  these  he  slays  the  fiends.

4  When  Indra,  wondrous  strong,  brought  down  the  streams,  the

mighty  water-floods,

Pushan  was  standing  by  h'S  side.

5  To  this,  to  Pushon’s  favouring  love,  and  Indra’s,  may  we  closely

cling,

As  to  a  tree’s  extended  bough.

6  As  one  who  drives  a  car  draws  in  his  reins,  may ‘we  draw

Pushan  near,

And  Indra,  for  our  great  success.

HYMN  LVIII.  P Aaliin.

Ltkf.  heaven  art  thou :  one  form  is  bright,  one  holy,  like  Day
and  Night  dissimilar  in  colour.

All  magic  powers  thou  aidest,  self-dependent !  Auspicious  be
thy  bounty  here,  0  Pushan.

2  Goat-borne,  the  guard  of  cattle,  he  whose  home  is  strength,

inspirer  of  the  hymn,  set  over  all  the  world ;

Brandishing  here  and  there  his  lightly-moving  goad,  beholding
every  creature,  Pushan,  God,  goes  forth.

3  0  PGshau,  with  thy  golden  ships  that  travel  across  the  ocean,

in  the  air’s  mid-region,

Thou  goest  on  an  embassy  to  Surya,  subdued  by  love,  desirous
of  the  glory.


3  The  fiends :  the  Vritra*,  the  demons  of  drought,  or  enemies  iu  geueral.

1  One  holy:  *  venerable.’ — Wilson.  This  is  apparently  a  euphemism  (or
‘dark.’  Ptiskan  is  here  regarded  as  the  Sun  present  by  day  and  even  in  his
absence  regulating  the  night  also.  According  to  Professor  Ludwig,  he  is  re¬
presented  os  the  summer  Sun  and  the  winter  Sun.  Thou  aidetl :  '  thou  cxer-
cisest,' — Muir.

8  Subdued  by  lore :  of  SuryA,  the  daughter  of  the  Sun.  See  VI.  49.  8.  Of
the  glory :  of  winning  9,.ry»  for  lilt  bride.


«28  THE  rtrMS8  OP  { BOOK  YT.

4  Near  kinsman  of  the  heaven  and  earth  ia  Pfishan,  liberal,  Lord
of  food,  of  wondrous  lustre,

Whom  strong  and  vigorous  and  swiftly-moving,  subdued  by
love,  the  Deities  gave  to  Sfiryft.

HYMN  LIX.  Iodra-AgnL

I  will  declare,  while  juices  flow,  the  manly  deeds  that  ye
have  done :

Your  Fathers,  enemies  of  Gods,  were  smitten  down,  and,  Indra-
Agni,  yc  survive

2  Thus,  ludra-Agni,  verily  your  greatness  merits  loftiest  praise.
Sprung  from  one  common  Father,  brothers,  twins  are  ye ;  your

Mother  is  in  every  place.

3  These  who  delight  iu  flowing  juice,  like  fellow  horses  at  their

food,

Indra  and  Agni,  Gods  armed  with  the  thunderbolt,  we  call  this
day  to  come  with  help.

4  Indra  and  Agni,  Friends  of  Law,  served  with  rich  gifts,  your

speech  is  kind

To  him  who  praises  you  while  these  libations  flow  :  that  man,
0  God»,  ye  ne’er  consume.

5  What  mortal  understands,  0  Gods,  Indra  and  Agni,  this

your  way  ?

One  of  you,  yoking  Steeds  that  move  to  every  side,  advances
in  your  common  car.

4  The  Deilia  gave  la  Stryi :  ‘  the  formula  of  the  verse  give*  the  idea
rather  of  a  birth  than  of  a  marriage.  But  Puehan  is  the  lover  of  his  mother,
VI.  55.  5  :  Stlryft  then  might  be  the  spouse  as  well  as  tho  mother  of  Pfishan.
She  is  doubtlessly  also  the  sister  with  whom  Pfishan  is  united,  VI.  55.  4.  5.’— -
Bcrgaigno,  L<i  Heligion  Vtdique,  II.  428.

1  Your  Faihert . were  smitten  down:  hatSso  vdmpiUiro:  the  meaning  is

obscure.  Sftyani  explains  pitfiro  as  A* urns  or  demons,  deriving  the  word  from
a  root  pi,  to  injure  :  '  The  Pitris  the  enemies  of  the  gods,  have  been  alain  by

E'— Wilson.  Prof  Grassmann  reads,  conjccturally,  ptyavo,'  *  scornere,’  ‘  ins-
of  the  unsuitable  pitaro.'  Gods  of  an  elder  generation,  the  fathers  of  Indra
and  Agni,  appear  to  be  intended,  and  the  words  as  they  stand  can  hardly  b«-ar
any  other  meaning.  HatSeo  then  would  mean,  'not  were  slain,’  but  were  x  truck
down,  degradod,  and  deprived  of  their  power,  like  tho  earlier  Hellenic  Gods.
Professor  Ludwig  suggests  other  possible  explanations.  Seo  also  Bcrgaigno,
La  Religion  Vldique,  III.  75,  and  Ehni,  Der  Mythus  dcs  Yama,  p.  80.

2  One  common  Father  :  Dyaus.  According  to  SAyana,  Prajitpati.

Four  Mother :  Aditi,  infinite  and  omnipresent;  according  to  SAyapa,
identified  with  tho  wide-extended  OArth.  But  see  Ehni,  Der  Mythus  des
Yama,  p.  79.

4  Ye  ne'er  ebnsiiiiu :  Prof.  Ludwig  suggests  tho  reading  6A« rltalkah,  '  threa¬
ten,'  instend  of  bhasdlah.

5  One  of  yon  :  Indra.  as  tho  Sun,  whom  horses  horn  arc  the  spreading
brains  of  light,  pursues  his  appointed  way  through  heaven.


if  YMN  69.  ]  THE  RIO  Y EDA .


629


6  First,  Indra-Agni,  hath  this  Maid  come  footless  unto  those

with  feet-

Stretching  her  head  and  speaking  loudly  with  her  tongue,  she
hath  gone  downward  thirty  steps.

7  E’en  now,  O  Indra-Agni,  men  hold  in  their  arms  and  stretch
I  their  bows.

.  Desert  us  not  in  this  great  fray,  in  battles  for  the  sake  of  kina.

8  The  foeman’8  sinful  enmities,  Indr  a  and  Agni,  vex  me  sore.
Drive  those  who  hate  me  far  away,  and  keep  them  distant

from  the  Sun.


9  Indra  and  Agni,  yours  are  all  the  treasures  of  the  heavens
and  earth.

Here  give  ye  us  the  opulence  that  .prospers  every  living  man.
10  0  Indra  Agni,  who  accept  the  laud,  and  hear  us  for  our  praise,
Come  near  us,  drawn  by  all  our  songs,  to  drink  of  this  our
Soma  juice.


HYMN  LX.  Indra-Agni.


He  slays  the  foe  and  wins  the  spoil  who  worships  Indra  and
Agni,  strong  and  mighty  Heroes,

Who  rule  as  Sovrans  over  ample  riches,  victorious,  showing
forth  their  power  in  conquest.

2  So  battle  now,  0  Indra  and  thou,  Agni,  for  cows  and  waters,

sunlight,  stolen  Mornings.

Team-borne,  thou  makest  kine  thine  own,  0  Agni,  thou,
Indra,  light,  Dawns,  regions,  wondrous  waters.

3  With  Vritra-slaying  might,  Indra  and  Agni,  come,  drawn  by

homage,  O  ye  Vptra-slayers.

Indra  and  Agni,  show  yourselves  among  us  with  your  supremo
and  unrestricted  bounties.


6  This  Maid:  the  text  has  only  the  feminine  pronoun  iydm  (baec) ;  Ushaa
or  Dawn  is  intended.  Footless  :  moving  unsupported  in  the  sky.  Cf.  I.  162.  8.
Stretching  her  hctul :  according  to  one  of  SAy ana’s  explanations,  *  having,
abandoned  the  head,  being  herself  headless,’  which  is  hardly  consistent  with
what  follows.  Thirty  slept:  the  thirty  divisions  of  the  Indian  day  and  night
through  which  Dawn  passes  before  she  reappears.  But  cf.  I.  123.  8.

7  The  hymn  is  a  prayer  for  aid  in  a  fray.

2  Stolen  Mornings ;  the  Dawns  aud  light  that  have  been  carried  away  and
concealed  by  the  PanU  or  demons  of  darkness.

3  Vritra-slaying  :  or,  generally,  ‘  fooman  slaying.’


630  THE  1IY51NS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

4  I  call  the  Twain  whoso  deeds  of  old  have  all  been  fumed  in

ancient  days :

0  lndra  Agni,  harm  us  not.

5  The  Strong,  the  scatterers  of  the  foe,  lndra  aud  Agni,  wo
•  invoke ;

May  they  be  kind  to  one  like  me.  j

6  They  slay  ovir  Ary  a  foes,  these  Lords  of  heroes,  slay  our  DAsa

foes :

And  drive  our  enemies  away.

7  lndra  and  Agni,  these  our  songs  of  praiso  havo  sounded’

forth  to  you  :

Ye  who  bring  blessings !  drink  the  juice.

8  Come,  Indra-Agni,  witlP  those  teams,  desired  of  many,  which

ye  have,

0  Horoes,  for  the  wershipper.

9  With  those  to  this  libation  poured,  ye  Heroes,  Indra-Agni,

come :

Come  ye  to  drink  the  Soma  juice.

10  Glorify  him  who  compasses  all  forests  with  his  glowing  flame,
And  loaves  them  blackened  with  his  tongue.

11  He  who  gains  India’s  bliss  with  fire  enkindled  fiuds  an  easy

way

Over  the  floods  to  happiness.

12  Give  us  fleet  coursers  to  convey  Thdra  and  Agni,  and  bestow
Abundant  strengthening  food  on  us,

13  lndra  and  Agni,  I  will  cull  you  hither  and  make  you  joyful

with  the  gifts  I  offer.

Ye  Twain  are  givers  both  of  food  and  riches :  to  win  mo
strength  and  vigour  I  invoke  you.

14  Come  unto  us  with  riches,  come  with  wealth  in  horses  and

in  kine.

India  and  Agni,  we  invoke  you  both,  the  Gods,  as  Friends  for
friendship,  bringing  bliss.

15  lndra  and  Agni,  hear  his  call  who  worships  with  libations

poured.

Como  and  enjoy  the  offerings,  drink  tho  sweetly-flavoured
Soma  juice.


10  Glorify :  add  reused  to  the  stotar  or  praise-singer.

11  Ocer  the  flood* :  the  danger*  and  trouble*  that  bar  hi*  way.

12  To  convey  Indrti  and  Ayni  :  to  bring  jrou,  lndra  and  Agui,  to  our  sacrifice.


hymn  si.]


esi


THE  RIG  VEDA.

HYMN  LXl.  Sor&svatt.

To  Vadhryasva  when  he  worshipped  her  with  gifts  she  gave
fierce  Divodasa,  canceller  of  debts.

Consumer  of  the  churlish  niggard,  one  and  all,  thine,  0
Sarasvati,  are  these  effectual  boons.

2  She  with  her  might,  like  one  who  digs  for  lotus-stems,  hath

burst  with  her  strong  waves  the  ridges  of  the  hills.  /

Let  us  invito  with  songs  and  holy  hymns  for  help  Sarasvati  who
slayeth  the  PAr&vatas.

3  Thou  castest  down,  Sarasvati,  those  who  scorned  the  Gods,

the  brood  of  every  Bri>aya  skilled  in  magic  arts.

Thou  hast  discovered  rivers  for  the  tribes  of  men,  and,  rich  in
wealth  !  made  poison  flow  awa^  from  them.

4  May  the  diviue  Sarasvati,  rich  in  her  wealth,  protect  us  well,
Furthering  all  our  thoughts  with  might ;

5  Whoso,  divine  Sarasvati,  invokes  thee  where  the  prize  is  set,
Like  Iudra  when  he  smites  the  foe.

6  Aid  us,  divine  Sarasvati,  thou  who  art  strong  in  wealth  and

Eowcr :

3  Pushan,  give  us  opulence.

7  Yea,  this  divine  Sarasvati,  terrible  with  her  golden  path,
Foe-slayer,  claims  our  eulogy.

8  Whoso  limitless  unbroken  flood,  swift-moviug  with  a  rapid
rush,

Comes  onward  with  tempestuous  roar.

9  She  hath  spread  us  beyond  all  foes, beyond  her  Sisters,  Holy  One,
As  Sfirya  spreadeth  out  the  days.


1  Vadhryasva :  a  celebrated  Rishi.  See  X.  69.  She :  Sarasvati,  the  Rivcr-
Goddcas.  Gave :  as  anon.  Cancel/  er  of  debts:  acquitting,  by  his  birth,  tho
debt  which  his  father  owed  to  Uia  progenitors,  the  religious  obligation  of
begetting  a  son  who  should  perform  tho  ceremonies  which  they  require.
Churlish  niggard :  who  offers  no  sacrifices.  Tho  meaning  of  avasdm  is  uncer¬
tain.  S&yana  explains  it  as  ‘gratifying  himself  only  ’  Professor  Ludwig
regards  it  as  compounded  of  a  +  v asd  =  thin  or  meagre.  These  effectual  boons :
the  gift  of  a  son.

2  She :  Sarasvati  a*  the  river.  The  description  given  in  the  text  can  hardly
apply  to  the  small  stream  generally  known  under  that  name;  and  from  this
and  other  passages  which  will  be  noticed  as  they  occur  it  seems  probable  that
Sarasvati  is  also  another  name  of  Sindhu  or  tho  Indus.  See  Zimmer,  AUin-
ditches  Leben,  pp.  6  ff.  PdiAvulat  :  see  V.  52.  II.

3  Every  Rrisaya  :  every  demon  like  Briaaya,  who  is  said  to  have  been  tho
father  of  Vritra.  See  I.  93.  -1.  Rich  in  wealth:  vljintoati :  according  to
SAyana,  '  giver  of  sustenance.’

9  Jler  Sisters :  the  other  rivers  of  the  Pan j Ah.


632  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

10  Yea,  she  most  dear  amid  dear  streams,  Seven-sistered,  graciously

inclined,

Sarasvatt  hath  earned  our  praise.

11  Guard  us  from  hate  Sarasvatt,  sho  who  hath  filled  the  realms

of  earth,

And  that  wide  tract,  the  firmament !

12  Seven-sistered,  sprung  from  threefold  source,  the  Five  Tribes’

prosperer,  she  must  be
Invoked  in  every  deed  of  might.

13  Marked  out  by  majesty  among  the  Mighty  Ones,  in  glory  swift¬

er  than  the  other  rapid  Streams,

Created  vast  for  victory  like  a  chariot,  Saras vati  must  be  ex¬
tolled  by  every  sage.  •

14  Guido  us,  Sarasvati,  to  glorious  treasure:  refuse  us  not  thy

milk,  nor  spurn  us  from  thee.

Gladly  accept  our  friendship  and  obedience :  let  us  not  go  from
1  thee  to  distant  countries.

HYMN  LXn.  Abvine.

I  laud  the  Heroes  Twain,  this  heaven’s  Controllers :  singing
with  songs  of  praise  I  call  the  Asvins,

Fain  in  a  moment,  when  the  morns  arc  breaking,  to  part  tho
earth’s  ends  and  the  spacious  regions.

•2  Moving  to  sacrifice  through  realms  of  lustre  they  light  the
radiance  of  the  car  that  bears  them.

Traversing  many  wide  unmeasured  spaces,  over  the  wastes  ye
pass,  and  fields,  and  waters.

3  Ye  to  that  bounteous  path  of  yours,  ye  mighty,  have  ever
borne  away  our  thoughts  with  horses,

Mind-swift  and  full  of  vigour,  that  tho  trouble  of  man  who
offers  gifts  might  cease  and  slumber.


12  Sprung  from  threefold  source:  'abiding  in  the  three  worlds,’  that  is,
pervading  heaven,  earth,  and  hell,  according  to  Sflyaua,  like  UangA  in  later
times.

3  To  part  the  earth's  ends :  as  heralds  of  light  to  define  the  limits  of  earth
and  sky  and  so  separate  one  from  the  other.

3  This  stanza  is  very  obscure.  Sflyana’s  paraphrase  is  inconsistent  with
the  plain  meaning  of  several  of  tho  words  of  tho  text.  '  Fierce  Aswins,  from
that  humble  mansion  to  which  (you  have  repaired),  you  have  ever  borne  with
your  desirablo  horses,  as  swift  as  thought,  tho  pious  worshipers  in  some
manner  (to  heaven) :  Let  the  injurer  of  the  liberal  man  (be  consigned  by
you)  to  (final)  repose.’—  Wilson.


HYMN  62.]


THE  RIQVBDA.


633

.  4  So  ye,  when  ye  have  yoked  your  chariot-horses,  come  to  the
hymn  of  the  most  recent  singer.

Our  true  and  ancient  Herald  Priest  shall  bring  you,  the  Youth¬
ful,  boaring  splendour,  food,  and  vigour.

5  With  newest  hymn  I  call  those  Wonder-Workers,  ancient  and

brilliant,  and  exceeding  mighty,

Bringers  of  bliss  to  him  who  lauds  and  praises,  bestowing
varied  bounties  on  the  singer.

6  So  ye,  with  birds,  out  of  the  sea  and  waters  bore  Bhujyu,  son

of  Tugra,  through  the  regions.

Speeding  with  wingM  steeds  through  dustless  spaces,  out  of
the  bosom  of  the  flood  they  bore  him.

7  Victors,  car-borne,  ye  rent  the  rofk  asunder;  Bulls,  heard  the

calling  of  the  eunuch’s  consort.

Bounteous,  ye  filled  the  cow  with  milk  for  Sayu :  thus,  swift
and  zealous  Ones,  ye  showed  your  favour.

8  Whate’er  from  olden  time,  Heaven,  E  «rth !  existeth,  great

object  of  the  wrath  of  Gods  and  mortals,

Make  that,  Aditvas,  Vasus,  sons  of  Rudra,  an  evil  brand  to
one  allied  with  demons.

9  May  he  who  knows,  as  Varuna  and  Mitra,  air’s  realm,  ap¬

pointing  both  the  Kings  in  season,

Against  the  secret  fiend  cast  forth  his  weapon,  against  the
lying  words  that  strangers  utter.

10  Come  to  our  home  with  friendly  wheels,  for  offspring;  oome

on  your  radiant  chariot  rich  in  heroes.

Strike  off,  ye  Twain,  tho  heads  of  our  assailants  who  with
man’s  treacherous  attack  approach  us.

11  Come  hitherward  to  us  with  teams  of  horses,  the  highest  and

tho  midmost  and  the  lowest.

Bountiful  Lords,  throw  open  to  the  singer  the  doors  e’en  of
the  firm-closed  stall  of  cattle.


6  Rhujyu  :  sec  I.  116.  8—5.

7  The  eunuch’s  contort :  Vadhrimatt.  See_LjU6r<I2~.  Sayu  :  see  I.  116.  22.

9  Mitra  and  Varuna  appear  here-oa- comprehended  in  a  third  God,  who
must  be  the  Asura  Dynus.  Ho/  domprisuig  tho  heaven  of  night  as  well  as  tho
heaven  of  day,  assigns  to  Mitra  and  Varuna  the  charge,  respectively  of  day
aud  night  See  Ludwig’s  Commentary.

10  For  offspring :  tdnaydya;  to  give  us  offspring.  The  second  line  of  the
stanza  might  bo  rendered  :  ‘  Turn  back,  ye  Twain,  the  heads,  with  secret  on¬
slaught,  even  of  those  who  seek  to  harm  tho  mortal.’

1 1  The  highest  and  the  midmost  or  the  lo/ce/t or,  os  Professor  Ludwig  trans¬
lates  :  ‘  the  earliest,  tho  midmost,  and  the  latest,’


THE  HYMNS  OF

HYMN  LXIII.


[BOOK  VT.
Asvins.


$34


Where  hath  the  hymn  with  reverence,  like  an  envoy,  found
both  fair  Gods  to-day,  invoked  of  many—

Hymn  that  hath  brought  the  two  Ntaatyas  hither?  To  this
man’s  thought  be  ye,  both  Gods,  most  friendly.

2  Come  readily  to  this  mine  invocation,  lauded  with  songs,  that

ye  may  drink  tbe  juices.

Compass  this  house  to  keep  it  from  the  foeman,  that  none
may  force  it,  either  near  or  distant.

3  Juice  iu  wide  room  hath  been  prepared  to  feast  you:  for  you

the  grass  is  strewn,  most  soft  to  tread  on.

With  lifted  hands  your  sorvant  hath  adored  you.  Yearning
for  you  the  press-stones  shed  the  liquid.

4  Agni  uplifts  him  at  your  sacrifices :  forth  goes  the  oblation

dropping  oil  and  glowing.

Up  stands  the  grateful-minded  priest,  elected,  appointed  to
invoke  the  two  Nasatyas.

5  Lords  of  great  wealth !  for  glory  Surya’s  Daughter  mounted

your  car  that  brings  a  hundred  succours.

Famed  for  your  magic  arts  were  ye,  magicians  S  amid  the  race
of  Gods,  ye  dancing  Heroes  !

6  Ye  Twain,  with  these  your  glories  fair  to  look  on,  brought,  to

win  victory,  rich  gifts  for  Surya.

After  you  flew  your  birds,  marvels  of  beauty :  dear  to  our
hearts !  the  song,  well  lauded,  reached  you.

7  May  your  winged  coursers,  best  to  draw,  N&satyas !  convey

you  to  the  object  of  your  wishes.

Swift  as  the  thought,  your  car  hath  been  sent  onward  to  food
of  many  a  sort  aud  dainty  viands.

8  Lords  of  great  wealth,  manifold  is  your  bounty :  yo  filled  our

cow  with  food  that  nover  faileth.

Lovers  of  sweetucss !  yours  are  praise  and  singers,  and  poured
libations  which  have  sought  your  favour.


2  Either  near  or  distant :  neighbour  or  stranger.

3  In  vide  room :  where  there  is  ample  space  for  the  sacrificial  ceremonies.

5  SHrya'i  Daughter :  see  I.  116.  17.  Dancing  Heroes:  ye  who  dance
through  the  air.  Cf.  VIII.  20.  22.  and  ‘  Day’s  harbinger  cornea  dancing  Irom
the  c*sfc'  (Milton— Song  Ou  Slay  Morning).

6  Rich  gifts  for  S&ryd  ;  who  chose  the  As  vim  to  be  her  huabuuda.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


IIYHN  64.]


635


0  Mine  were  two  mares  of  Puraya,  brown,  swift-footed ;  a  hun¬
dred  with  Sumidha,  food  with  Peruk.

Sanda  gave  ten  gold-decked  and  well-trained  horses,  tame  and
obedient  and  of  lofty  stature.

10  N&satyas  !  Purupanthls  offered  hundreds,  thousands  of  steeds

to  him  who  sang  your  praises,

Gave,  Heroes  !  to  the  singer  Bharadvaja.  Ye  Wonder-Workers,
let  the  fiends  be  slaughtered.

1 1  May  I  with  princes  share  your  bliss  in  freedom.

HYMN  LXIV.  Dawn.

The  radiant  Dawns  have  risen  up  for  glory,  in  their  white
splendour  like  the  waves  of  waters.

She  maketh  paths  all  easy,  fiyr  to  travel,  and,  rich,  hath
shown  herself  benign  and  friendly.

2  We  see  that  thou  art  good  :  far  shines  thy  lustre ;  thy  beams,

thy  splendours  have  flown  up  to  heaven.

Decking  thyself,  thou  makest  bare  thy  bosom,  shining  in
majesty,  thou  Goddess  Morning.

.3  Red  are  the  kino  and  luminous  th  it  bear  her  the  Blcssfcd  One
who  spreadeth  through  the  distance.

The  foes  she  chascth  like  a  valiant  archer,  like  a  swift  warrior
she  repelleth  darkness.

4  Thy  ways  are  easy  on  the  hills :  thou  passcst  Invincible  !
Self-luminous !  through  waters.

So  lofty  Goddon*  with  thine  ample  pathway,  Daughter  of
Heaven,  bring  wealth  u.  give  us  comfort.

9  This  and  the  following  stanza  eulogize  the  liberality  several  wealthy
institutors  of  sacrifice;  but  it  ib  difficult  to  make  out  what  we.othe  gifts
they  gave  as  the  vereea  are  filled  with  epithets  without  nouns.  Paoauf,
marcs,  suits  tho  dual  epithets  rijri,  and  I'aghit,  brown  and  swift  After  fntdm,
a  hundred.  Sfiyana  supplies  ydcah,  cows.  Instead  of  ‘  well-trained  ’  SftynnVs
rendering  is 1 * 3  4  handsome,’  and  he  supplies  «sv4n, '  horso*,’  or  rathdn,  4  chariots’
for  the  absent  noun.  4  Obedient,  gallant,  and  well-favoured  servants’  would
represent  his  rendering  of  the  last  half-line  of  the  stanza.  The  translations
given  by  Professors  Ludwig  and  Grassmxnn  differ  from  each  other  and  from
Silyanu’s  version.  As  Professor  Wihon  remarks  :  '  If  we  render  the  stanza
literally,  it  is  utterly  unintelligible :  the  greater  part  of  the  SAkta  is  very
obscure.’  Puraya,  Sumldha,  and  Pcruka  are  the  names  of  liberal  patrons.

10  PurujxmtMi :  another  of  thoso  generous  nobles.  In  this  caso  asrandm,
of  horses,  appoars  in  the  text*

1 1  Your  bliss :  the  felicity  which  the  Asvins  bestow.

1  Davms  :  the  plural  may  be  honorific,  or  may  signify  Dawu  and  her  rays

of  light.

3  IVambr :  borne  on  a  chariot.

4  Through  waters  :  of  the  firmament.


686  THE  HYMNS  OP  [ BOOR  VI.

5  Dawn,  bring  me  wealth :  untroubled,  with  thine  oxen  thou

bearest  riches  at  thy  will  and  pleasure ;

Thou  who,  a  Goddess,  Child  of  Heaven,  hast  shown  thee
lovely  through  bounty  when  we  called  thee  early.

6  As  the  birds  fly  forth  from  their  resting-places,  so  men  with

store  of  food  rise  at  thy  dawning.

Yea,  to  the  liberal  mortal  who  remaincth  at  home,  0  God¬
dess  Dawn, much  good  thou  bringest.

HYMN  LXV.  Dawn.

Shedding  her  light  on  human  habitations  this  Child  of  Heaven
hath  called  us  from  our  slumber ;

She  who  at  night-time  with  her  argent  lustre  hath  shown  her¬
self  e'en  through  the  shades  of  darkness.

2  All  this  with  red-rayed  steeds  have  they  divided :  the  Dawns

on  bright  cars  shine  in  wondrous  fashion.

They,  bringing  near  the  stately  rite’s  commencement,  drive
far  away  the  night’s  surrounding  shadows.

3  Dawns,  bringing  hither,  to  the  man  who  worships,  glory  and

power  and  might  and  food  and  vigour,

Opulent,  with  imperial  sway  like  heroes,  favour  your  servant
and  this  day  enrich  him.

4  Now  is  there  treasure  for  the  man  who  sorves  you,  now  for  the

hero,  Dawns  !  who  brings  oblation;

Now  for  the  singer  when  ho  sings  the  praise-song.  Even  to
one  like  me  ye  brought  aforetimg, — —

5  0  Dawn  who  standest  on  "mountain  ridges,  Angirascs  now

praise  thy-etafB  of  cattle.

\Pitlt'i»rayer  and  holy  hymn  they  burst  them  open :  the
heroes’  calling  on  the  Gods  was  fruitful.

6  This  stanza  occurs  in  a  hymn  to  Dawn  ascribed  to  the  Rishi  Kakshtv&n*

I.  1 24.  12.  With  ttore  of  food :  pitubMjah,  ‘  enjoying  or  sharing  food,’  ia
explained  by  Siyana  as  annaeyopdgakdh,  '  who  have  to  gain  their  sustenance.'
The  woalthy  may  be  meant,  who  share  their  store  with  others  and  must  work
to  replenish  it  The  liberal  mortal :  the  man  who  sacrifices  to  the  Gods.  To
bring  out  this  meaning  more  clearly  the  last  line  may  be  translated  :  *  To  him
who  stays  at  home  and  pours  oblations,  0  Goddess  Dawn,  thou  givest  ample
riches.’  -

1  At  night-time:  an  allusion,  perhaps,  to  the  ‘false  dawn’  before  the
appearance  of  the  real  dawn,  although  this  faint  glimmer  can  hardly  be  called
lustre.  Or  the  light  of  stars  may  be  intended,  as  belonging  to  Dawn  rather
than  to  Night.

2  All  thit . have  they  divided:  separated  light  from  darkness.  The

italely  rile  :  the  Agnihotra,  or  great  morning  sacrifice.

5  Angiratci  here  praite :  ‘What  we  are  doing  here  is  in  reality  only  a
repetition  of  what  the  Angirasas  did  in  ancient  times, ’—Ludwig.


HYMN  66. J


THE  MOVE  DA.


637

6  Shine  on  us  as  of  old,  thou  Child  of  Heaven,  on  him,  rich
Maid  !  who  serves  like  Bharadvaja.

Give  to  the  singer  wealth  with  noble  heroes,  and  upon  us  bestow
wide-spreading  glory.

HYMN  LXVI.  Manila.

E’en  to  the  wise  let  that  be  still  a  wonder  to  whioh  the  gene¬
ral  name  of  Cow  is  given.

The  one  hath  swelled  among  mankind  for  milking :  Prism
hath  drained  but  once  her  fair  bright  udder.

2  They  who  like  kindled  flames  of  fire  are  glowing,  the  Maruts,

twioe  and  thrice  have  waxen  mighty.

Golden  and  dustless  were  their  cars,  invested  with  their  great
strength  and  their  heroic  vigour.

3  They  who  are  Sous  of  the  rain-pouring  Rudra,  whom  the  long-

lasting  One  had  power  to  foster :

The  Mighty  Ones  whose  germ  great  Mother  Prisni  is  known
to  have  received  for  man’s  advantage.

4  They  shrink  not  from  the  birth ;  in  this  same  manner  still

resting  there  they  purge  away  reproachos.

When  they  have  streamed  forth,  brilliant,  at  their  pleasure,
with  their  own  splendour  they  bedew  their  bodies.

5  Even  those  who  bear  the  brave  bold  name  of  Maruts,  whom

not  the  active  quickly  wins  for  milking.

Even  the  liberal  wards  not  off  those  fierce  ones,  those  who  are
light  and  agile  in  their  greatness.


6  Dharadvlja :  the  great  ancestor  of  the  priestly  family  of  which  the  Riehi
of  the  hymn  was  a  member.


1  This  meaning  may  be  that  while  things  of  different  nature  arc  designate^

by  the  name  of  Cow,  all  that  i6  so  called  ha*  a  claim  to  our  wonder  and  ad¬
miration.  The  Cow  of  earth  yields  her  milk  frequently  and  in  abundance  :
Pri«ni,  the  Cow  of  the  firmament,  has  given  milk  but  once,  when  she  brought
forth  her  offspring,  the  Maruts.  4  Once  only  Prism'*  milk  was  shed  :  no  second,
after  this,  is  bom'  (YI.  48.  22).  Styapn’s  interpretation  iB  utterly  inconaiateut
with  fclio  plain  meaning  of  the  words  of  the  text

1  Tmct  and  thrice  :  perhaps  in  relation  to  earth  and  heaven,  and  to  earth,
firmament,  and  heaven,

4  Still  voting  there :  whilo  yet  unborn  they  freo  their  mother  from  the
reproach  of  barren  now,

5  Win  for  miVcing  :  persuades  to  grant  hi*  petition*.  The  version  of  the;
second  line  is  merely  conjectural  as  the  meaning  of  itann/Th  (explained  by
fidyap*  hk a itcuAfy.,  i-obbera)  ia  unknown.  1 * * 4 5  The  liberal  donor  pacifies  the  angry
Manila  who  aro  otherwise  in  their  might  tho  rosisllca*  plunderers  (of  their
wealth).'— Wilson.


THE  HYMXS  OF


[BOOK  Vt.


6  When,  strong  iu  strength  and  armed  with  potent  weapons,

thev  had  uuited  well-formed  earth  and  heaven,

Rodas'i  stood  among  these  furious  Heroes  like  splendour  shin¬
ing  with  her  native  brightness.

7  No  team  of  goats  shall  draw  your  car,  0  Maruts,  no  horse ;

no  charioteer  be  he  who  drives  it.

Halting  not,  reinless,  through  the  air  it  travels,  speeding
along  its  paths  through  earth  and  heaven.

8  None  may  obstruct,  none  overtake,  0  Maruts,  him  whom  ye

succour  in  the  strife  of  battle

For  sons  and  progeny,  for  kine  and  waters :  he  bursts  the  cow-
stall  on  the  day  of  trial.

9  Bring  a  bright  hymn  to  praise  the  band  of  Maruts,  the  Singers,

rapid,  strong  in  native  vigour,  .  .  .

Who  conquer  mighty  strength  with  strength  more  mighty,
earth  shakes  in  terror  at  their  wars,  0  Agni.

10  Bright  like  the  flashing  flames  of  sacrifices,  like  tongues  of  fire

impetuous  in  their  onset,

Chanting  their  psalm,  singing  aloud,  like  heroes,  splendid  from
birth,  invincible,  the  Maruts.

11  That  swelling  band  I  call  with  invocation,  the  brood  of  Rudra,

armed  with  glittering  lances.

Pure  hymns  are  meet  for  that  celestial  army :  like  floods  nnd
mouutains  have  the  Strong  Ones  battled.

HYMN  LXVII.  Mitra-Varu  na.

Now  Mitra-Varuna  shall  be  exalted  high  by  your  songs,  noblest
of  all  existing ;  „  ,

They  who,  ns  ’twere  with  reins  are  best  Controllers,  unequalled
with  their  arms  to  chock  the  people.


6  United :  by  obscuring  the  horizon  with  cloud  and  rain.

7  No  feeble  or  ordinary  team  must  convey  you  ;  no  common  charioteer
must  drive  your  chariot.

S  Burets  the  emo-stall :  carries  away  the  enemy’s  cattle.

10  Smging  aloud :  ‘  causing  their  opponents  to  tremble,’  according  to  Sftyapm,
who  derives  the  word  from  the  root  dh&,  to  shake.  Derived  from  divan,  to
sound,  dhStnaj/ah  means  singers,  musicians,  minstrels,  leaders  of  the  wild  music
of  the  wind  slid  storm  (stlirmer.— Ludwig).  See  Vtdhche  Sludicn,  I.  269.

11  Like  floods  and  mountains :  perhaps,  with  the  impetuosity  of  rushing
waters  and  the  firm  strength  of  mountains.  But  the  meaning  of  this  last
half-line,  as  of  many  other  passages  of  the  hymn,  is  very  obscure.

The  hymn  has  been  translated  and  thoroughly  discussed  by  Peter  von  Bra  dice
(Fettfironan  R.  von  Roth,  1893,  pp.  117—125).  Sec  also  Vcdic  Hymns,  I.
368—372  (Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  XXXII).


TBS  RIG  VEDA.


HYMN  61]

2  To  you  Two  Gods  is  this  my  thought  extended,  turned  to  the

sacred  grass  with  loving  homage.

Give  us,  0  Mitra-Varuna,  a  dwelling  safe  from  attack,  which
ye  shall  guard,  Boon-Givers  !

3  Come  hither,  Mitra-Varuna,  invited  with  eulogies  and  loving

adoration,

Ye  who  with  your  own  might,  os  Work-Controllers,  urge  even
men  who  quickly  hear  to  labour.

4  Whom,  of  pure  origiu,  like  two  strong  horses,  Aditi  bore  a9

babes  in  proper  season,

Whom,  Mighty  at  your  birth,  the  Mighty  Goddess  brought
forth  as  terrors  to  the  mortal  foeinau.

5  As  all  the  Gods  in  their  great  joyand  gladness  gave  you  with

one  accord  your  high  dominion,

As  ye  surround  both  worlds,  though  wide  and  spacious,  your
spies  are  ever  true  and  ne’er  bewildered.

6  So,  through  the  days  maintaining  princely  power,  ye  prop  the

height  as  ’twere  from  loftiest  heaven.

The  Star  of  all  the  Gods,  established,  filleth  the  heaven  and
earth  with  food  of  man  who  livoth.

7  Take  the  strong  drink,  to  quaff  till  ye  are  sated,  when  he  and

his  attendants  fill  the  chamber.

The  young  Maids  brook  not  that  none  seeks  to  win  them,  when,
Quickeners  of  all !  they  scatter  moisture.

8  So  with  your  tongue  come  ever,  when  your  envoy,  faithful

and  very  wise,  attends  our  worship.

Nourished  by  'holy  oil !  be  this  your  glory  :  annihilate  the
sacrificer’s  trouble.

9  When,  Mitra-Varuna,  they  strive  against  you  and  break  the

friendly  laws  ye  have  established,

They,  neither  Gods  nor  men  in  estimation,  like  Api’s  sons  have
godless  sacrifices.


5  Your  spies :  messengers  or  angels,  probably  the  rest  of  the  Adityaa.  See
I  25.  13.

6  The  h tight :  the  high  ridge  or  summit  of  heaven.  The  Star  of  all  the
Gods  :  representing  all  tho  Gods  :  the  Sun.  He  draws  up  the  waters  which
descend  to  fertilize  the  earth.

7  He :  the  worshipper  ;  or,  perhaps,  Soma.  The  chamber ;  of  sacrifioe.
The  Young  Maids:  the  water,  necessary  for  the  preparation  of  the  Soma  libation,
is  ready  and  impatiently  waiting  to  bo  used.

8  W ith  your  tongue  :  Agui,  by  whose  tongue  of  fire  they  consume  the  obla¬
tions  Your  envoy  :  Agui.

9  Like  Apts  sons  ;  ‘sons  of  the  Waters.' — Grassmann.  The  meaning  is  un¬
certain.  Godless  sacrifices :  unattended  by  Gods,  and  therefore  fruition.


640  THE  HYMNS  OF  [BOOH  VI.

10  When  siugers  in  their  song  uplift  their  voices,  some  ohant  the

Nivid  texts  with  steady  purposo.

Then  may  we  sing  you  lauds  that  shall  be  fruitful :  do  yo  not
rival  all  the  Gods  in  greatness  1

11  0  Mitra  Varuna,  may  your  large  bounty  come  to  us  hither,

near  to  this  our  dwelling,

When  the  k'uie  haste  to  us,  and  when  they  harness  the  fleet-
foot  mettled  stallion  for  the  battle.

HYMN  LX VIII.  Indra-VArur>a.

His  honouring  rite  whoso  grass  is  trimmed  is  offered  swiftly
to  you,  in  Manu’s  wise,  accordant,

The  rite  which  Indra-Varuna  shall  carry  this  day  to  high
success  and  glorious  issue.

2  For  at  Gods’  worship  they  arc  best  through  vigour  ;  they  have

become  the  strongest  of  the  Heroes;

With  mighty  strength,  most  liberal  of  the  Princes,  Chiefs  of
the  host,  by  Law  made  Vptra's  slayers.

3  Praise  those  Twain  Gods  for  powers  that  merit  worship,  Indra

and  Varuna,  for  bliss,  the  joyous.

One  with  his  might  and  thunderbolt  slays  Vritxa ;  the  other
as  a  Sage  stands  near  in  troublos.

4  Though  dames  and  men  have  waxen  strong  and  mighty,  and

all  the  Gods  self-praised  among  the  Heroes,

Ye,  Indra-Varuna,  have  in  might  surpassed  them,  and  thus
were  ye  spread  wide,  0  Earth  and  Heaven.

5  Righteous  is  he,  and  liberal  and  helpful  who,  Indra-Varuna,

brings  you  gifts  with  gladness.

That  bounteous  man  through  food  shall  conquer  foemen,  and
win  him  opulence  and  wealthy  people.

6  May  wealth  which  ye  bestow  in  food  and  treasure  on  him  who

brings  you  gifts  and  sacrifices,

Wealth,  Gods  !  which  breaks  the  curse  of  those  who  vex  us,
be,  Indra-Varuna,  e’en  our  own  possession.

10  Nivid  lata :  short  formularies  of  invocation  inserted  in  a  liturgy.

11  When  the  kine  fuiite  to  us :  when  the  cattle  of  the  men  whom  we  are
about  to  attack  are  ready  and  eager  to  be  carried  off.  Styopa's  interpretation
of  the  last  line  is  totally  different :  *  when  (your)  praises  are  uttered,  and  the
sacrificera  add  in  the  ceremony  the  Soma  that  inspires  straightforwardness
and  resolution,  and  is  the  aboworer  (of  benefits).’— Wilson.

•3  In  troubles : ' in  deeds  of  might’— Ludwig.  ‘With  snares,  or  nooses,'
according  to  Profo-sor  Oeldner,  VfdiscbcStudicn,  I.  142.

4  Self -praised :  on  account  of  thoir  own  decxls,  or  their  own  nature.


HYMN  69.]  THP.  RIG  VEDA.  64l

7  So  also,  Indra- Varuna,  may  our  princes  have  riches  swift  to
save,  with  Gods  to  guard  them —

They  whose  great  might  gives  victory  in  battles,  and  their
triumphant  glory  spreads  with  swiftness.

8  Indra  and  Varuna,  Gods  whom  we  are  lauding,  mingle  ya

wealth  with  our  heroic  glory.

May  we,  who  praise  the  strength  of  what  is  mighty,  pass
dangers,  as  with  boats  we  cross  the  waters.

9  Now  will  I  sing  a  dear  and  far-extending  hymn  to  Varunx

the  God,  sublime,  imperial  Lord,

Who,  mighty  Governor,  Eternal,  as  with  flame,  illumines  both
wide  worlds  with  majesty  and  power.

10  True  to  Law,  Indra- Varuna,  drillers  of  the  juice,  drink  this

pressed  Soma  which  shall  give  you  rapturous  joy.

•  Your  chariot  cometh  to  the  banquet  of  the  Gods,  to  sacrifice,
as  it  were  home,  that  ye  may  drink.

1 1  Indra  and  Varuna.  drink  your  fill,  ye  Heroes,  of  this  in¬

vigorating  sweetest  Sonin.

This  juice  is  shed  by  us  that  ye  may  quaff  it :  on  this  trim¬
med  grass  be  seated,  and  rejoice  you.

HYMN  LXIX.  Indra*  Vish  flu.

Indra  and  Vishnu,  at  my  task’s  completion  I  urge  you  on
with  food  and  sacred  service.

Accept  the  sacrifice  and  grant  us  riches,  leading  us  on  by
unobstructed  pathways.

2  Ye  who  inspire  all  hymns,  Indra  and  Vishnu,  ye  vessels  who

contain  the  Soma  juices,

May  hymns  of  praise  that  now  are  sung  address  you,  the  lauds
that  are  recited  by  the  singers.

3  Lords  of  joy-giving  draughts,  Indra  and  Vishnu,  come,  giving

gifts  of  treasure,  to  the  Soma.

With  brilliant  rays  of  hymns  let  chanted  praises,  repeated
with  the  lauds,  adorn  and  deck  you.


8  Of  what  it  mighty  :  apparently,  riche".

9  This  stanza,  in  honour  of  Varuna  alono,  appears  to  be  the  beginning  of
aoother  hymn.  Professor  Grassmann  banishes  stouzas  9  and  10  to  bis  Ap¬
pendix.

1  At  my  task'*  completion :  when  all  arrangements  for  the  sacrifice  have
been  made.

2.  Who  intpive :  -  literally,  'the  generators,'  janitfrd.  By  the  tingen ;  or,
‘  with  laudations.'

41


642  THE  HYMNS  OP  [BOOK  Y1.

.  4  May  your  foe-conquering  horses  bring  you  hither,  Indra  and
Vishnu,  sharers  of  the  banquet.

<.  Of  all  our  hymns  accept  the  invocations :  list  to  my  prayers
and  hear  the  songs  I  sing  you.

j6  This  your  deed,  Indra-Vishnu,  must  be  lauded :  widely  yo
strode  in  the  wild  joy  of  Soma.

;  Ye  mado  the  firmament  of  larger  compass,  and  made  the
regions  broad  for  our  existence.

.6  Strengthened  with  sacred  offerings,  Indra-Vishnu,  first  eaters,
served  with  worship  and  oblation,

Fed  with  the  holy  oil,  vouchsafe  us  riches :  ye  are  the  lake,
the  vat  that  holds  the  Soma.

;7  Drink  of  this  meath,  0  Jndra,  thou,  and  Vishnu  ;  drink  ye
your  fill  of  Soma,  Wonder-Workers.

The  sweet  exhilarating  juice  hath  reached  you.  Hear  ye  my
prayers,  give  ear  unto  my  calling.

•8  Ye  Twain  have  conquered,  ne’er  have  ye  been  conquered :
never  hath  either  of  the  Twain  been  vanquished.

•  Ye,  Indra-Vishnu,  when  ye  fought  the  battle,  produced  this
infinite  with  three  divisions.

HYMN  LXX.  Heaven  and  Earth.

-  Fillkd  full  of  fatness,  compassing  all  things  that  be,  wide,
spacious,  dropping  meath,  beautiful  in  their  form,

The  Heaven  and  tho  Earth  by  Varuna’s  decree,  unwasting,
rioh  in  germs,  stand  parted  each  from  each.

2  The  Everlasting  Pair,  with  full  streams,  rich  iu  milk,  iu  their

pure  rule  pour  fatness  for  the  pious  man.

Ye  who  are  Regents  of  this  world,  0  Earth  and  Heaven,  pour
into  us  the  genial  flow  that  prospers  men.

3  Whoso,  for  righteous  life,  pours  offerings  to  you,  0  Heaven

and  Earth,  ye  Hemispheres,  that  man  suceeds.


8  Piwfuccd  Chit  :  brought  into  existence  the  world  with  all  its  crea-

tuw,  the  three  divisions  being  heaven,  firmament,  and  earth.  See  Professor
» ilson  s  note  for  Sdyana’s  explanation  of  the  passage.

The  deities  are  DyiviprithivI,  that  is  Dyaus,  Heaven,  and  P|ithivl,  Earth,
combined  in  a  compound  dual.

JJW  “nt"»«'ng  ghrila,  ght,  clarified  butter,  fatneaa  in  goner*!,

especially  the  fertilizing  rain.

8  Yt  Hemisphere!  •  cMu/.ane  ;  two  bowls.  « Firm-set,'— Wilson.  Bu  Lav  :
»u  Uie  course  or  nature.


11YMS  71]


THE  MOV  EDA,


He  in  his  seed  is  born  again  and  spreads  by  Law  :  from  you
flow  things  diverse  in  form,  but  ruled  alike.

'4  Enclosed  in  fatness,  Heaven  and  Earth  arc  bright  therewith  :

they  mingle  with  the  fatness  which  they  still  increase.

•  Wide,  broad,  set  foremost  at  election  of  the  priest,  to  them
the  singers  pray  for  bliss  to  further  them.

5  May  Heaven  and  Earth  pour  down  the  balmy  rain  for  us,

balm-dropping,  yielding  balm,  with  balm  upon  your  path,
Bestowing  by  your  Godhead  sacrifice  and  wealth,  great  fame
and  strength  for  us  and  good  heroic  might.

6  May  Heaven  and  Earth  make  food  swell  plenteously  for  us,

all-knowing  Father,  Mother,  wondrous  in  their  works.
Pouring  out  bounties,  may,  in  union,  both  the  Worlds,  all-
beneficial,  send  ns  gain,  and  power,  and  wealth.

HYMN  LXXL  Savitir.


Full  of  effectual  wisdom  Savitar  the  God  hath  stretched  out
golden  arms  that  he  may  bring  forth  life.

Young  and  most  skilful,  while  he  holds  the  region  up,  thp
Warrior  sprinkles  fatness  over  both  his  hands.

2  May  we  enjoy  the  noblest  vivifying  force  of  Savitar  the  God,

that  he  may  give  us  wealth  :

For  thou  art  mighty  to  produce  and  lull  to  rest  the  world  of
life  that  moves  on  two  feet  and  on  four.

3  Protect  our  habitation,  Savitar,  this  day,  with  guardian  aids

around,  auspicious,  firm  and  true.

God  of  the  golden  tongue,  keep  us  for  newest  bliss :  let  not
the  evil-wisher  have  us  in  his  power.

4  This  Savitar  the  God,  the  golden-handed,  Friend  of  the  home,

hath  risen  to  meet  tho  twilight.  *

With  cheeks  of  brass,  with  pleasant  tongue,  the  Holy,  he  sends
the  worshipper  rich  gifts  in  plenty.


4  Set  foremost  at  election  of  the  priest  :  *  first  propitiated  at  the  sacrifice.’—
Wilson.

1  Savitar  :  the  Sun  as  tho  great  generator  or  vivifier.  Sprinkles  fatness :
Professor  Ludwig  thinks  that  this  may  be  somewhat  ironical.  '  The  god
sprinkles  lm  hands,  probably,  as  a  preparation  for  the  hard  work  which  he
is  about  to  perform  ;  but  there  is  an  underlying  thought  that  a  good  deal  of
the  fatness  [in  the  shape  of  fertilizing  rain]  also  falls  down  to  the  earth.'

4  To  meet  the  ticilighl :  ‘at  the  close  of  night.'—  Wilson.  Checks  of  foau :  .

Ayohanufi  ;  according  to  Sftyana,  '  golden-jawcd.’


THE  HYMNS  OP


644


[ BOOK  VI.


5  Like  a  Director,  Savitar  Lath  extended  his  golden  arms,  exceed¬

ing  fair  to  look  on.

He  hath  gone  up  the  heights  of  earth  and  heaven,  and  made
each  monster  fall  and  ceaso  from  troubling.

6  Fair  wealth,  0  Savitar,  to-day,  to-morrow,  fair  wealth  produce

for  us  each  day  that  passes.

May  we  through  this  our  song  be  happy  gainers,  God,  of  a
fair  and  spacious  habitation.

HYMN  LXXII.  Indra-Soma.

Great  is  this  might  of  yours,  Indra  and  Soma :  the  first  high
exploits  were  your  own  achivements.

Ye  found  the  Sun,  ye  found  the  light  of  heaven  :  ye  killed  all
darkness  and  the  God^  blasphemers.

2  Ye,  Indra-Soma,  gave  her  light  to  Morning,  and  led  the  Sun

on  high  with  all  his  splendour.

Ye  stayed  the  heaven  with  a  supporting  pillar,  and  spread
abroad,  apart,  the  Earth,  the  Mother.

3  Ye  slew  the  flood-obstructing  serpent  Vritra,  Indra  and  Soma:

Heaven  approved  your  exploit.

Ye  urged  to  speed  the  currents  of  the  rivers,  and  many  seas
have  ye  filled  full  with  waters.

•1  Ye  In  the  unripe  udders  of  the  milch-kine  have  set  the  ripo
milk,  Indra,  thou,  and  Soma.

’  Ye  have  held  fast  the  unimpeded  whiteness  within  these  many-
coloured  moving  creatures.

5  Verily  ye  bestow,  Indra  and  Soma,  wealth,  famed,  victorious,
passing  to  our  children.

Ye  have  invested  men,  ye  Mighty  Beings,  with  manly  strength
that  conquers  in  the  battle.

HYMN  LXXIII.  Brihaapati.

Served  with  oblations,  first-born,  mountain-render,  Angims’
son,  Brihaspati,  the  Holy,

With  twice-firm  path,  dwelling  in  light,  our  Father,  roars
loudly,  as  a  bull,  to  Earth  and  Heaven. _

5  A  Dinator;  a  priest  who  directs  others.  Or,  perhaps,  'an  Invoker,’  as
Professor  Ludwig  suggests.  Each  montUr:  every  terror  of  the  night,  SAyaim’a
interpretation  of  the  last  line  is  totally  different :  ‘  and,  moving  along,
delights  every  thing  that  is.’— Wilson.

4  Ye  in  the  unripe  widen  :  the  unnpo,  that  is  raw,  udders  are  contrasted
with  tho  warm  milk  that  is  cooked  or  matured  in  them.  See  I.  62.  9.  The
unimpeded  uhitencs,:  the  milk  which  is  not  prevented  from  flowing.  Tho
odour  of  the  milk  is  contrasted  with  the  colour  of  the  cows  that  produce  it.

1  Brihaipati ;  Lord  of  Prayer  ;  tho  Doily  in  whom  the  action  of  the  worship-


NYU K  75.]


THE  RIO  VEDA.


645


2  Brihaspati,  who  made  for  such  a  people  wide  room  and  verge

when  Gods  were  invocated,

Slaying  his  enemies,  breaks  dowu  their  castles,  quelling  his
foes  and  conquering  those  who  hate  him.

3  Brihaspati  in  war  hath  won  rich  treasures,  hath  won,  this  God,

the  great  stalls  filled  with  cattle.

Striving  to  win  waters  and  light,  resistless,  Brihaspati  with
lightning  smites  the  foenian.

HXMN  LXXIV.  Sonm-Rudra.

Hold  fast  your  Godlike  sway,  0  Soma-Rudra  :  let  these  our
sacrifices  quickly  reach  you.

Placing  in  every  house  your  seven  great  treasures,  bring  bless¬
ing  to  our  quadrupeds  and  bipeds.

2  Soma  and  Rudra,  chase  to  every  quarter  the  sickness  that

hath  visited  our  dwelling.

Drive  Nivriti  away  into  the  distance,  and  give  us  excellent
and  happy  glories.

3  Provide,  0  Soma-Rudra,  for  our  bodies  all  needful  medicines

to  heal  and  cure  us.

Set  free  and  draw  away  the  sin  committed  which  we  have
still  inherent  in  our  persons.

4  Armed  with  keen  shafts  and  weapons,  kind  and  loving,  be

gracious  unto  us,  Soma  and  Rudra.

Release  us  from  the  noose  of  Varuna;  keep  us  from  sorrow,  in
your  tender  loving-kindness.

HYMN  LXXV.  Weapons  of  War.

Thr  warrior’s  look  is  like  a  thunderous  rain-cloud’s,  when,  armed
with  mail,  he  seeks  the  lap  of  battle.

Be  thou  victorious  with  un wounded  body  :  so  let  the  thickness
of  thy  mail  protect  thee.  .

2  With  Bow  let  us  win  kine,  with  Bow  the  battle,  with  Bow  be
victors  in  our  hot  encounters.


per  upon  the  Gods  is  personified.  See  I.  14.  3.  Mountain-render:  ‘Brihaspati
deft  the  mountain’  ( I.  62.  8  ).  Dwelling  in  light :  or,  perhaps,  in  the  Sun.
The  meaning  of  prdgharmasdd  is  uncertain.

2  Such  a  people:  so  good  a  people.  When  Gods  were  invocated :  in  battle.

8  With  lightning :  or  with  Sunlight :  ‘  with  sacred  prayers.’ — Wilson.

1  Quadrupeds  and  bipeds:  or,  '  bless  all  of  us,  men  and  four-footed  creatures.

2  Nirriti :  the  Goddeaa  of  Death  and  Destruction.

4  The  noose  of  Varuna:  Vanina,  the  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  is  repre-
ented  as  armed  with  a  noose  or  lasso  for  the  capture  and  destruction  of
the  wicked.


646  THE  II Y MSS  OP  [BOOK  VI.

Tbe  Bow  brings  grief  and  sorrow  to  the  foemau  :  armed  with
the  Bow  may  we  subdue  all  regions.

3  Close  to  bis  ear,  as  fain  to  speak,  She  presses,  holding  her

well-loved  Friend  iu  her  embraces.

;  Strained  on  the  Bow,  She  whispers  like  a  woman — this  Bow¬
string  that  preserves  us  in  the  combat.

4  These,  meeting  like  a  woman  and  her  lover,  bear,  mother-like,

their  child  upon  their  boaom.

May  the  two  Bow-ends,  starting  swift  asunder,  scatter,  in  uni¬
son,  the  foes  who  hate  us.

5  With  many  a  son,  father  of  many  daughters,  He  clangs  and

clashes  as  he  goes  to  battle.

Slung  on  the  hack,  pouring  his  brood,  the  Quiver  vanquishes
all  opposing  bands  and  armies.

6  Upstanding  in  the  Car  the  skilful  Charioteer  guides  his  strong

Horses  ou  whithersoe'er  he  will.

See  and  admire  the  strength  of  those  controlling  Reins  which
from  behind  declare  the  will  of  him  who  drives.

7  Horses  whose  hoofs  rain  dust  are  neighing  loudly,  yoked  to

the  Chariots,  showing  forth  their  vigour.

With  their  forefeet  descending  on  the  foomcn,  they,  never
flinching,  trample  and  destroy  them.

8  Car-bearer  is  the  name  of  his  oblation,  whereon  are  laid  his

Weapons  and  his  Armour.

So  let  us  here,  each  day  that  passes,  honour  the  helpful  Car
with  hearts  exceeding  joyful.

9  In  sweet  association  lived  the  fathers  who  gave  us  life,  profound

and  strong  in  trouble,

Unwearied,  armed  with  shafts  and  wondrous  weapons,  free,
real  heroes,  conquerors  of  armies.


3  She :  tho  bowstring.  Her  wll-lond  friend :  the  arrow.  H’Aiapera  like  a
iceman  :  *  twangs  like  the  scream  of  a  woman.’ — Muir.  But  the  faint  Bound
made  by  the  string  white  it  in  being  drawn  to  tho  oar  is  intended.  Homer
likens  the  sound  to  the  voice  of  a  swallow.

4  That ;  the  two  ends  of  the  bow.  Like  a  woman  and  her  lover :  or,  *  draw¬
ing  close  like  two  women  to  their  lovers  ’  Their  child :  the  arrow.

5  With  many  a  ton  ;  the  quiver  is  called  the  father  of  sons  and  daughters,
it  is  said,  because  the  words  signifying  arrow  aro  both  masculine  aud  feminine.

8  Cat'-bearo- ;  mthavXhanam  .*  a  platform,  stand,  or  truck  on  which  the
chariot  is  placed  when  not  in  use.  The  word  seems  in  this  place  to  mean  also
the  oblation  offered  by  the  warrior  to  the  ideal  war-chariot  personified,  or  to
a  tutelary  deity  of  chariots,

9  There  is  no  verb  in  this  stanza,  and  the  only  substantive,  pilarah,  fathers,
la  explained  by  both  Commentators  as  p&layMrak,  guards,  defenders,  that  is,
apparently,  thaw  who  attend  the  chariot  of  the  chief.  Professor  Wilson,  fob


HYMN  75.]  THE  RIO  VEDA.  647

10  The  Brahmans,  and  the  Fathers  meet  for  Soma-draughts,  and,

graciously  inclined,  unequalled  Heaven  and  Earth.

Guard  us  from  evil,  Pflshan,  guard  us  strengthened  of  Law :
let  not  the  evil-wisher  master  us.

1 1  Her  tooth  a  deer,  dressed  in  an  eagle’s  feathers,  hound  with'

cow-hide,  launched  forth,  She  flieth  onward.

There  where  the  heroes  speed  hither  and  thither,  there  may
the  Arrows  shelter  and  protect  us.

12  Avoid,  us  thou  whose  flight  is  straight,  and  let  our  bodies  bo’

as  stone.

May  Soma  kindly  speak  to  us,  and  Aditi  protect  us  well.

13  lie  lays  his  blows  upon  their  backs,  he  deals  his  blows  upon

their  thighs.

Thou,  Whip,  who  urgest  horses,  drive  sagacious  horses  in  the
fray.

14  It  compasses  the  arm  with  serpent  windings,  fending  away  the

friction  of  the  bowstring :

So  may  the  Brace,  well-skilled  in  all  its  duties,  guard  manfully
the  man  from  every  quarter.

15  Now  to  the  Shaft  with  venom  smeared,  tipped  with  deer-horn,

with  iron  mouth,

Celestial,  of  Parjanya’s  seed,  be  this  great  adoration  paid.

16  Loosed  from  the  Bowstring  fly  away,  thou  Arrow,  sharpened

by  our  prayer.

Go  to  the  foemen,  strike  them  home,  and  let  not  one  be  left  alive.


owing  Sftyana,  translates  :  *  The  guards  (of  tho  chariot),  revelling  in  the
savoury  (spoil),  distributors  of  food,  protectors  in  calamity,  armed  with  spears,
resolute,  beautifully  arranged,  strong  in  arrows,  invincible,  of  heroic  valour,
robust,  and  conquerors  of  numerous  hosts.’

10  The  Brdhmaui  and  the  Fathers  :  or,  perhaps,  the  sacerdotal  Fathers.
The  stanza,  which  is  grammatically  difficult,  seems  out  of  place.

1 1  Her  tooth  a  deer :  the  point  of  the  arrow  is  made  of  a  piece  of  deer’s
horn  attached  to  the  shaft  with  leather  strings.  The  butt  of  the  arrow  is
feathered.

13  He  :  the  whip.

14  It :  the  brace  or  guard  worn  on  the  archer’s  left  arm,  fastened  on  with
leather  straps.

15  With  venom  smeared  :  by  the  Laws  of  Manu,  that  is,  the  ideal  Code  of
the  M&navaa,  Kshatriya*  were  forbidden  to  poison  their  arrows.  Arrows  ap¬
pear  to  have  been  of  two  kinds,  one,  the  older  and  less  effective,  tipped  with
deer-horn,  and  the  other  with  iron  mouth,  pointed  with  ayas,  bronze  or  iron.
Celestial,  of  Parjanya’s  seed :  made  of  the  toll  reeds  that  grow  in  the  -Rains
under  the  influence  of  Parjanya  the  God  of  the  rain-cloud.

16  Sharpened  by  our  prayer :  ‘  whetted  by  charm.’— Wilson.


THE  RIO  VEDA.


648


l ROOK  71.


17  There  where  the  flights  of  Arrows  fall  like  boys  whose  locks

are  yet  unshorn.

.  Even  there  may  Brahmanaspati,  and  Aditi  protect  us  well,
protect  us  well  through  all  our  days.

18  Thy  vital  parts  I  cover  with  thine  Armour:  with  immortality

King  Soma  clothe  thee.

Varuna  give  thee  what  is  more  than  ample,  and  in  thy  triumph
may  the  Gods  be  joyful.

19  Whoso  would  kill  us,  whether  he  be  a  strange  foe  or  one  of  us,
'•  May  all  the  Gods  discomfit  him.  My  nearest  closest  Mail  is

prayer.


;  17  Like  boy  s  w/iote  locks  arc  yet  unshorn ;  *  the  point  of  the  comparison  in
not.  very  obvious,  but  it  may  meilb  that  the  arrows  fall  where  they  list,  as
boys  before  they  are  left  with  the  lock  of  hair,  before  the  religious  tonsure,
play  about  wherever  they  like.’— Wilson.  Professor  Roth  separates  vifikhA
from  iumdrtt,  and  translates  :  ‘  Where  the  arrows  fly,  young  and  old  :  that  is,
feathered  and  un feathered.’

18  Thy  vital  ports :  the  t&rman,  or  coat  of  mail,  protected  the  shoulders,
back,  cheat,  and  lower  parts  of  the  body.  If  not  made  of  metal,  it  was
strengthened  and  adorned  with  metal  of  some  kind.  The  Indians  in  the
army  of  Xerxes  »re  said  by  Herodotus  to  have  worn  tlfiara  an 6  £6\u>v
ntnoitjuiva,  clothes  made  out  of  the  bark  of  trees  (VII.  65) ;  but  ho  pro¬
bably  meant  tho  common  soldiers  only,  and  not  the  chiefs.  For  a  full  des¬
cription  of  the  arms,  offensive  and  defensive,  used  in  Vedic  times,  see  Muir,
0.  S.  TetU,  V.  469  ;  AUindiiches  Lehen,  pp.  293—801  ;  or  Dutt’s  History  of
Civilisation  in  Ancient  India,  I.  p.  88.


APPENDIX  t
Page  174,  Hmx  CXXVI.

I  subjoin  a  Latin  version  of  the  two  stanzas  omitted  in  my
translation.  They  are  in  a  different  metre  from  the  rest  of  the
hymn,  have  no  apparent  connexion  with  what  precedes,  and  look
like  a  fragment  of  a  liberal  shepherd’s  love-song.  The  seventh
stanza  should,  it  seems,  precede  the  sixth  :

6  [Ille  loquitur].  Adhaerens,  “  arete  adhaerens,  ilia  quae
mustelae  similis  se  abdidit,  multum  humorem  effundens,  dat  mihi
complexuum  centum  gaudia.

7  [Ilia  loquitur].  Prope,  prope  accede;  molliter  me  tan ge.
Ne  putes  pilos  corporis  mei  paucos  esse :  tota  sum  villosa  sicut
Gandharidum  ovis.

Professor  Ludwig  thinks  that  YAduri  (multum  humorem,
j.  e.,  semen  genitale,  effundens)  may  bo  the  name  of  a  slave-girl.
Gandharidun  ovis :  a  ewe  of  the  Gandhiris.  The  country  of
Gandhara  is  placed  by  Lassen  to  the  west  of  the  Indus  and  to  the
South  of  the  Kophen  or  Kabul  river.  King  Darius  in  a  rock-
inscription  mentions  the  Ga(n)dAra  together  with  the  lli(n)dit
as  people  subject  to  him,  and  the  Gandarii,  together  with  the
Parthians,  Khorasmians,  Sogdians,  and  Dadikae,  are  said  by  Hero¬
dotus  to  have  formed  part  of  the  army  of  Xerxes.  The  name  of
the  country  is  preserved  in  the  modern  Kandahar.  See  Muir,
0.  S .  Texts,  ii.  342,  and  Zimmer,  Altindisches  Ltben,  p.  30.

Page  243,  Htvn  CLXXIX.

The  deified  object  of  this  omitted  hymn  is  said  to  be  Rati  or
Love,  and  its  Rishis  or  authors  are  Lopimudra,  Agastya,  and  a
disciple.  Loplmudra  is  represented  as  inviting  the  caresses  of
her  aged  husband  Agastya,  and  complaining  of  his  coldness  and
neglect.  Agastya  responds  in  stanza  3,  and  iu  the  second  half  of


C50


APPENDIX  L


stanza  4  the  disciple  or  the  poet  briefly  tells  the  result  of  the
dialogue.  Stanza  5  is  supposed  to  be  spoken  by  the  disciple  who
has  overheard  the  conversation,  but  its  connexion  with  the  rest  of
the  hymn  is  not  very  apparent.  In  stanza  6  *  toiling  with  strong  en¬
deavour’  is  a  paraphrase  and  not  a  translation  of  the  original  kha-
namdnah  ihanUraih  (Jigonibus  fodiens)  which  Sayana  explains  by
4  obtaining  the  desired  result  by  means  of  lauds  and  sacrifices.’

M.  Bergaigne  is  of  opinion  that  the  hymn  has  a  mystical
meaning,  Agastva  being  identifiable  with  the  celestial  Soma  whom
Lopimudra,  representing  fervent  Prayer,  succeeds  after  long  labour
in  drawing  down  from  his  secret  dwelling  place.  See  La  Religion

Vddique,  ii.  394  f.

1  ‘  Through  many  autumns  have  I  toiled  and  laboured,  at  night

arid  morn,  through  age-inducing  dawniugs.

Old  age  impairs  the  beauty  of  our  bodies.  Let  husbands  still
come  near  unto  their  spouses.

2  For  even  the  men  aforetime,  law-fulfillers,  who  with  the  Gods

declared  eternal  statutes, —

They  have  decided,  but  have  not  accomplished :  so  now  let
wives  come  near  unto  their  husbands.

3  Non  inutilis  est  labor  cui  Dii  favent :  nos  omnes  aemulos  et

Manilas  vincamus.

Superemus  in  hac  centum  artium  pugna  in  qua  duas  partes
oonvenientes  utrinque  commovemus.

4  Cupido  mo  copit  illius  tauri  [viri]  qui  me  despicit,  utrum  hinc

utrum  illinc  ab  aliqua  parte  nata  sit.

Lopamudra  taurum  [maritum  suumj  ad  sc  detrahit :  inaipiens
ilia  sapientem  anhelantem  absorbed

5  This  Soma  I  address  that  is  most  near  us,  that  which  hath

been  imbibed  within  the  spirit,

To  pardon  any  sins  we  have  committed.  Verily  mortal  man
is  full  of  longings.

6  Agastya  thus,  toiling  with  strong  endeavour,  wishing  for  child¬

ren,  progeny  and  power,

Cherished — a  sage  of  mighty  strength — both  classes,  and  with
the  Gods  obtained  his  prayer’s  fulfilment.

By  ‘  both  classes  ’  probably  priests  and  princes,  or  institutors
of  sacrifices,  arc  meant.  M.  Bergaigne  understands  the  expression  to
mean  the  two  forms  or  essences  of  Soma,  tho  celestial  and  the
terrestrial.


APPENDIX  II.

Metre.


Rhyme  is  not  used  in  the  Rigveda.  The  metres  are  regulated
*  by  the  number  of  syllables  in  the  stanza,  which  consists  generally
of  three  or  four  Padas,  measuros,  divisions,  or  quarter  verses,  with
a  distinctly  marked  interval  at  the  end  of  the  second  P&da,  and
so  forming  two  hemistichs  or  semi-stanzas  of  equal  or  unequal
j  length.  These  Padas  most  usually  contain  eight  or  eleven  or
twelve  syllables  each  ;  but  occasionally  they  consist  of  fewer  and
sometimes  of  more  than  these  numbers.  The  Padas  of  a  stanza'
are  generally  of  equal  length  and  of  more  or  less  corresponding,
prosodial  quantities ;  but  sometimes  two  or  more  kinds  of  metre
are  employed  in  one  stanza,  and  then  the  P&das  vary  in  quantity
and  length.  As  regards  quantity,  the  first  syllables  of  the  PSda
are  not  subject  to  very  strict  laws,  but  tho  last  four  are  more ’
regular,  their  measure  being  generally  iambic  in  Padas  of  eight
I  and  of  twelve  syllables  and  trochaic  in  those  of  eleven. .  In  the
printed  test  the  first  and  second  P&das  form  one  line,  and  the  third,,
.or  third  and  forth,  or  third,  fourth,  aud  fifth,  complete  the  distich
;or  stanza.  This  arrangement  I  have  followed  in  my  translation.

Subjoined,  in  alphabetical  arrangement,  are  tho  names,  with
brief  descriptions,  of  the  metres  used  in  the  Hymns  of  the  Rigveda,
The  Index  of  Hymns  will  show  the  metre  or  metres  employed  in
each  Hymn.

Abkisdrini:  a  species  of  Trishtup,  in  which  two  P&das  contain
twelve  instead  of  eleven  syllables,

Anushlup,  or  Anushtubh:  consisting  of  four  Padas  of  eight  syl¬
lables  each,  two  P&das  forming  a  line.  This  is  the  prevailing
form  of  metre  in  the  M&nava-dhaima-sAstra,  the  Mah&bh&rata,
the  ll&mayana,  and  the  Puranas.


APPENDIX  If.


CSS

AnusJitul'/arbhA :  a  metre  of  the  Ushnih  class;  the  first  P&da
containing  five  syllables,  and  the  three  following  Padas  eight
syllables  each.

AnusfUup  PipUikamadhyd :  a  species  of  Anush  tup  having  the  second
P&da  shorter  than  the  first  and  third  (8  syllables  +  4  +  8  +  8).

Ashti:  consisting  of  four  Padas  of  sixteen  syllables  each,  or  sixty-
four  syllables  in  the  stanza.

Asldrapankti :  consisting  of  two  Padas  of  eight  syllables  each,
followed  by  two  Padas  of  twelve  syllables  each.

A

Atidhriti  :  four  Padas  of  nineteen  syllables  each,  =  76  syllables.

Atljagati:  four  Padas  of  thirteen  syllables  each.

Atinichrit:  consisting  of  three  Padas  containing  rcpectively  seven,

•  six,  and  seven  syllables.

Attfalvart:  four  Padas  of  fifteen  syllables  each.

AlyatMi :  four  Padas  of  seventeen  syllables  each.

Erihati :  four  Padas  (8  +  8  +  12  +  8)  containing  36  syllables  in  the
stanza.

Chaturrinealikd  Dtripadd :  a  Dvipada  containing  24  syllables  in¬
stead  of  20.

Dhriti :  consisting  of  seventy-two  syllables  in  a  stanza.

Ttdpadd  Yirdj :  a  species  of  Gayatri  consisting  of  two  Padas  only
(12  +  8  or  10+10  syllables);  inadequately  represented  in  the
translation  by  two  decasyllabic  iambic  lines.

Ekapadd  Trishlup :  a  Trishtup  consisting  of  a  single  Pada  or
quarter  stanza.

Ekapadd  Virdj :  a  Viraj  consisting  of  a  single  Pada.

Odyalrt:  the  stanza  usually  consists  of  twenty-four  syllables,
variously  arranged,  but  generally  as  a  triplet  of  three  Padas
of  eight  syllables  each,  or  in  one  line  of  sixteen  syllables  and  a


METRE.


653


second  line  of  eight.  There  are  eleven  varieties  of  this  metro,
and  the  number  of  syllables  in  the  stanza  varies  accord  ingly
from  nineteen  to  thirty-three.

Jagali:  a  metre  consisting  of  forty-eight  syllables  arranged  ill
four  Padas  of  twelve  syllables  each,  two  Padas  forming  a  line  or
hemistich  which  in  the  translation  is  represented  by  a  double
Alexandrine.

Kakup  or  Kakubh :  a  metre  of  three  Padas  consisting  of  eight,
twelve,  and  eight  syllables  respectively.

Kakubh  Nyankueird :  consisting  of  three  Padas  of  9  +  12  +  4
syllables.

Kriti :  a  metre  of  four  Padas  of  tsventy  syllables  each.

3/ adhyejyotis :  a  metre  in  which  a  P&da  of  eight  syllables  stands
between  two  Padas  of  twelve.

Mah&brihati :  four  Padas  of  eight  syllablos  each,  followed  by  one
of  twelve.

MaMpadapa fikti :  a  two-lined  metre  of  thirty-one  syllables,  the
first  line  consisting  of  four  Pddas  of  five  syllables  eaoh,  and  the
second  being  a  Trishtup  of  the  usual  eleven  syllables.  See
Vedic  Hymns,  Part  I.  (S.  Books  of  the  East,  XXXII',  p.  xcviii.

Mahdpahkli :  a  metre  of  forty-eight  syllablos  (8  x  6  or  12  x  4).  .

Mahdsalobrihatt :  a  lengthened  form  of  Satobribatf.

Nashtarilpi :  a  variety  of  Anushtup.

Nyahkus&i-ini :  a  metre  of  four  Padas  of  S+12  +  8  +  8  syllables.

Pddanichrit :  a  variety  of  Gftyatri  in  whiob  one  syllable  is  want¬
ing  in  each  Pada  :  7  x  3  »  21  syllables.

Pudapatilti:  a  metre  consisting  of  five  Padas  of  fivo  syllables
each.

Puhkti :  a  metre  of  five  octosyllabic  P&das,  like  Anushtup  with
an  additional  Pada.


appendix  rr.


654

Panktyuttard :  a  metre  which  ends  with  a  Pafikti  of  5  +  5  sylla¬
bles.

PipiliJcomadhyd :  any  metre  the  middle  Pada  of  which  is  shorter
than  the  preceding  and  the  following.

Prdgdtka :  a  metre  in  Book  VIII.  consisting  of  strophes  combining
*  two  verses,  viz.  a  Brihati  or  Kakup  followed  by  a  Satobrihatf.

Prastdrapaiikli :  a  metre  of  forty  syllables :  12+12  +  8  +  8.

PratishlhA :  a  metre  of  four  Piidas  of  four  syllables  each ;  also  a
variety  of  the  Gayatrl  confuting  of  three  Piidas  of  eight,  seven,

-  and  six  syllables  respectively.

Purastddbrihatl :  a  variety  of  Brihati  with  twelve  syllables  in  the
first  Pilda.

Pura-ushnih :  a  metre  of  three  Padas,  containing  12  +  8  +  8  sylla¬
bles.

Salami :  a  metre  of  four  Padas  of  fourteen  syllables  each.

Satobrihatl :  a  metre  whose  even  Padas  contain  eight  syllables,
each,  and  the  uneven  twelve :  12  +  8+12  +  8-- 40.

Skandhogriva :  consisting  of  four  PMas  of  8  +  12  +  8  +  8  syllables.

Tanvtird :  consisting  of  three  Padas  of  1 1  +  1 1  +  6  syllables.

Trishtup  or  Trishlubh :  a  metre  of  four  Padas  of  eleven  syllables
each.

Uparisklddbrihatt :  consisting  of  four  Padas  of  12+8  +  8  +  8
syllables.

Uparishldjjyolii :  a  Trishtup  stanza  the  last  Pada  of  which  con-
'•  tains  only  eight  syllables.

Ordhvabnhatt :  a  variety  of  Bfihatl.

Urobrihatt :  a  variety  of  Brihati :  8+12  +  8  +  8  syllables.
UshniggarbM :  a  Gayntri  of  three  Padas  of  six,  seven,  and  eleven
syllables  respectively.


VETRir.


655

Ushnih  :  consisting  of  three  Padas  of  8  +  8  +  12  syllables.

Vardhamdnd :  a  species  of  Gayatri :  6  +  7  +  8=  21  syllables.

Viparitd :  a  metre  of  four  Padas  resembling  Vishtarapankti.

Virdfr&pd :  a  Trishtup  metre  of  four  Padas,  11+11  +  11+7  or
8  syllables.

Yirdj :  a  metre  of  four  Pidas  of  ten  syllables  each.

Yirdipdrvd :  a  variety  of  Trishtup.

Viratsthdnd:  a  variety  of  Trishtup.

Vishamapadd  :  metre  of  uneven  stanzas.

Vishtdrabrihati :  a  form  of  BrihatS  of  four  Padas  containing  8  +
10  +  10  +  8  =  36  syllables.

Visbldrapankti :  a  form  of  Pankti  consisting  of  four  Padas  of  8
+  12+12  +  8-40  syllables.

Yavamadhyd :  a  metre  having  a  longer  Pada  between  two  shorter


ones.


INDEX  OF  HYMNS.
BOOK  L


£  jRuhi.  Deity.  Metre.

1  Mad  hue h-

chhandls.  Agni.  GAyatri.

2  The  same.  VAyu.  Indra-Varuna.

Mitra-Varuna.  The  aame.

3  . .  Asvins.  Indra.  Viavedevas .

Saraavati.

4  .  Indra.  .

5  .  Indra.  .

6  .  Indra,  Marut3,  Indra  and  .

Maruts.

7  .  Indra.  .

8  .  The  aame.


9  .

10  .

11  Jetar  or  Jetd.

12  McdhAtithi.

13  The  same.

14  .

15  .


16


18  .

19  . .

20  .

21  .

?2  . .


23  McdhAtithi.


24  S^uuahaepa.

25  Tho  aame.

26  .


Agni.

Aprts.

Viavedovaa.

Ritas.  Indra.  Maruta.  Trash
tar.  Agni.  Mitra-Varuna.
Asvins.

Indra.

Indra-Varuna.

Brahmapaspati.  Indra  and
Soma.  Dakshipi.

Agni  and  Maruts.

Ribhua.

Indra-Agni.

Aavina  Savitar.  Agni.  In-
drdni,  Varun&nl,  and  Ag-
nAyi  Heaven  and  Earth.
Earth.  Vishnu.

VAyu.  Indra- VAyu.  Mitra-
Varuna.  Viaredevaa.  Pd-
ehan.  Waters.

Varuna.  Agni.  Savitar.

Varuna.

Agni.


Anushtup.
The  same.
GAyatri.
The  same.


Gdyatrl.  4,  5  PAdauicbrifc.
GAyatri.

The  aame.


•  •  ••*#*••«


GAyatri.  19  Pura-ushnih.  20
Anushtup.  21  Pratiahtha.
22-24  Anushtup.
Trishtup.  3-5  GAyatri.-
GAyatri.

The  same.


42


INDRX  OF  HTMN3.


65S


g,  Rithi.  Deity.  Metre.

27  Suntihsepa.  Indra.  Viavedevas.  GAyatrl.  13  Triahtup.

23  The  same  India.  Peatle  aud  Mortar.  Anuahtup.  7*9  G&yatrl.

29  .  Indra.  Pankti.

80  .  Indra.  Asvins.  Uahas.  GAyatrl.  11  PAdanichrit.  10

Triahtup.

31  HirapyastOpa.  Agni.  Jagatl.  8,  16,  18  Trishtup.

32  The  same,  Indra.  Triahtup.

33  .  The  same.  The  same.

34  .  Asvins.  Jagatl.  9  and  12  Triahtup.

35  .  Savitar.  Agni.  Mitra-Va-  Triahtup.  1  and  9  Jagatl.

runa.  Night.

86  Kanra.  Agni.  13-14&acrificial  Post.  Brihatl  and  Satobrihatl

alternately.

37  The  same.  Maruts.  GAyatrl.

38  .  Maruta.  The  same.

39  .  The  same.  Brihatl  and  Satobrihatl

alternately.

40  .  Brahmanaapati.  The  same.

41  . .  Varuna-Mitra-Aryaman.  GAyatrl.

Adityae.

42  .  Puahan.  The  same.

43  .  Rudra.  Mitra-Varuna.  Soma.  GAyatrl.  9  Anuahtup.


Brihatl  and  S  atobrihatS
alternately.

Anuahtup.

GAyatrl.

Brihatl  and  Satobrihatl
alternately.

The  same.

Anuahtup.

GAyatrl.  10-13  Anuahtup.
Jagatl.  14-15  Triahtup.
JiigatL  13  and  15  Triahtup.
Jagatl.  10  and  11  Triahtup,
Jagatl.  6,8,9,11  Triahtup.
Jagatl.

The  same.


Jagatl.  6-9  Triahtup,
Triahtup.

The  same.


44  Pmkanva.

Agni.

45  The  same.

Agni.

46  .

Asvins.

47  .

The  same.

48  .

Uahas.

49  .

The  same.

50  .

Surya

51  Savya.

Indra.

52  Tho  3ame.

The  same.

53  -

54  . .

55  . .  .

56


58  Nodhas.  -

Agni.

59  The  8amo.

Agni  VaiavAuara.

60  .

Agni.

61  .

Indra

62  .

Tho  same.

notx  or  hticm.


551


1,  XiM.

m

Deity.

Metre.

63  Nodhia.

Indra.

Triahtup.

64  The  aame

Manila.

Jagatl.  15  Triahtup.

65  Parlaara.

Agni.

Dripadi  Yirij.

66  The  same.

The  aame.

The  same.

67  .

63  .

69  .

70  .....


71  .  .  Trial)  tup.

72  .  .  The  same.

73  .  .  .

74  Gotama.  .  *  Giyatri.

75  The  name.  .  The  nme.

76  .  .  Triahtup.  •

77  .  .  •  The  same.

78  .  .  Gdyatrf.

79  .  .  1-3  Triahtup.  4-6  Dahpih.

7-12  Giyatri.

80  .........  Indra.  Pankti.

81  .  The  same.  The  aame.

82  .  .  Pankti.  6  JagatL

.83  .  .  Jagatt.

84  .  .  1-6  Anuahtup.  7-9  Uahnih.

10-12  Pankti  ;  18-15  Gl-
yatrL  16-18  Triahtup.  19
BrihatL  20  Satobnbatt.

85  Gotama.  Manila.  Jagatl.  5  and  12  Triahtup.

86  The  same.  The  aa nxe.  Giyatri.

87  .  .  Jagatl.

83  . .  .  1  and  6  Prastirapankti.  5

Viradrupd  2-4  Triahtup.

89  .  Viavederaa.  Jagatl.  6  Virltsthini.  8-10

Triehjup.

90  .  The  same.  Giyatri.  9  Anushtup.

91  .  Soma.  Triahtup.  5-16  Giyatri.  17

Uahnih.

92  .........  Ushas.  Asvlna.  Jagatl.  5-12  Triahtup.  18-'

18  Uahnih.

93  .  Atrni-Soma.  Anuahtup.  9-11  Giyatri.

4-7  and  12  Triahtup.  S
Triahtup  and  Jagatl.

91  Kutaa.  Agni.  Gods.  Mitra.  Yaruna,  JagatL  15  and  16  Triahtup.

Aditi.Sindhu.  Heaven  and
E-rth.

Agni


59  The  aame.


Triahtup.


I>DEX  OF  HTM>'3.


660


^  ,  Xiihi.  Deity.  Metre.

96  Kut**.  Agi li.  Trishtup.

97  The  »me  .  The  same.  G&yatrl.

98  .  .  Trishtup.

99  Kasyapa.  .  The  samo.

100  RijrAsva,  and  Indra.

others.

101  Kutsa.  The  same.  Jagatl.  8-12  Trishtup.

102  The  samo.  .  Jagatl.  11  Trishtup.

103  .  .  Trishtup.

104  . .  .  The  same.

105  The  same,  or  Viavedevas.  Pankti.  8  MahAbrihatl.  Ya.

Trita  Aptya.  •  vamadhyi.  10  Trishjup.

106  Kutsa.  The  same.  Jagatl  7  Trishjup.

107  The  same.  .  Tri«htup.

108  .  Indra- Agui,  The  same,

109  .  The  same.

•410  .  Ribhus.  Jags  til.  8  and  9  Trishtup.

111  . .  The  samo.  Jagatl.  5  Trishtup.

112  Kutsa.  Heaven  and  Earth.  Asvins.  Jagatl.  24  and  25  Trishtup,

Agni.

113  .  Ushas.  Ushas  and  Night.  Trishtup.

114  .  Rudra.  Jagatl.  10  and  11  Trishtup.

116  .  Sflrya.  Trishtup.

116  KakAtrAn.  Asvins.  The  same.

117  The  samo.  The  samo,  .

118  .  . .  .

119  .  .  Jagatl.

120  .  .  1,  10-12  GAyatrl.  2  Kakup.

8  KAvirAj.  4  Nashfarupl.
5  TanusirA.  6  Ushnih.  7
VishtArabiihatl.  8  Kriti.

9  VirAj.

121  .  Visvedevaa  or  Indra.  Trishtup.

122  .  Viavedevas  Trishtup.  5  and  6  VirAdrflpA,

123  .  Ushas.  Trishtup.

124  .  The  same.  .  Trishtup.

125  .  Svanaya.  Trishtup.  4,  5  Jagatl.

126  KakahlvAn,  Bhlvayavya.  RomasA.  Trishtup.  6  and  7  Anushtup,

BhAvayavya,

Romas  A.

127  Paruchchhep*.  Agni.  Atyaahti.  6  Atidhriti.

12S  The  same.  The  same.  Atyashti.

129  .  In**.  Indu.  ,  Atyaahti.  8,  9  Atisakvort.

11  Ashti.


WDM  or  ntUVB.


661


I  MM-

Deity.

Metre.

130  Paruchchhepa.

tndr*.

Atyashti.  10  Triahtup.

131  The  same

The  same.

Atyashti.

132  .

Indra.  Indr*  and  Parvata.

The  same.

133  ... .

Indr*.

Trishtup.  2-4  Anuahtup.  5
Gftyatrl,  6  Dhriti.  7  Aty¬
ashti.

184  .

Vftyu.

Atyashti.  6  Ashti.

135  .

Vftyu.  Vftyu  and  Indra.

Atyashti.  7,  8  Ashti.

136  .

Mitra  and  Varupa.

Atyashti.  7  Triahtup.

137  .

Mitra  and  Varuna.

Atiaakvnrt.

138 .

PQshan.

Atyashti.

139  .

Visvcdcvas.  Mitra  antfVaru-  Atyashti.  SBrihatl.  11  Triah-
na.  Asviua.  Indra.  Agni.  tup.

Maruts.  Indra  and  Agni.

Brihaspati.

140  Dtrghatemas.

Agni.

Jagatl.  10  Trishtup  or  Jaga¬
tl.  12,  18  Trishtup.

141  The  same.

The  same.

Jagatl.  12,  13  Trishtup.

142  .

Aprts.  Indra.  Agni.

Anuahtup.

143  .

Agni.

Jagatl.  8  Tmhtup.

144  .

The  same.

Jagatl.

145  .

Jagatl.  5  Trishtup.

146  .

TrUhtup.

147  .

The  same.

149  .

Virftj.

150  . .

.

Ushnih.

151  .

Mitra.  Mitra  and  Varuna.

Jagatl.

152  .

Mitra  and  Vsruna.

Trishtup.

153  .

The  aame.

The  same.

154  .

Vishnu.

155  .

Vishnu  and  Indra.  Vishnu.  Jagatl.

156  .

Vishnu.

The  aame.

157  .

Aavina.

Jagatl.  5,  6  Triahtup.

158  .

The  same.

Triahtup.  6  Anuahtup.

159  .

Heaven  and  Earth.

Jagatl.

160  .

The  same.

The  same.

161  .

IJibhus.

Jagatl.  14  Trishtup.

162  .

Eulogy  of  the  Horse.

Triahtup.  8,  6  Jagatl.

163  .

The  same.

Trishtup.

164  .

Visvedevas.  Vftk.  Waters.  Triahtup.  12, 15, 23, 29,  38,41
Soma.  Agni.  S'irya.  Vftyu.  Jagatl.  42  PrastArapankti.
Time.  Saraavatl.  Sddhyaa.  51  Anuahtup.

Sarasvftn  or  Surya.

KMX  OF  II TUN*.


662


E  jRuhi.

Deity,

Metre.

ft

165  Indra  Muruts.

Indra.

Trishtup.

Agastya.

166  Agastya.

Maruta.

Jagatl.  14,  15  Trishtup.

167  The  fame.

Indra  Maruts.

Triahtup.

168  .

Maruts.

Jagatl  8-10  Trishtup.

169  .

Indra.

Trishtup.  2  Virtj.

170  Indra- Agaetyn.

Indra.

1  Brihati.  2-4  Auushtup.

5  Trishtup.

171  Agastya.

Maruta.  Indra.

Trishtup.

172  The  same.

Maruta.

GAyatrl.

173  .

Indra.

Trishtup.

174  .

The  same  *

Trishtup.

175  .

Anush  tup.  1  Skandhogrlvi.
6  Trishtup.

Anushtup.  S.Trishtup.
Trishtup.

177

17«

179  LopimudrA  Ag-  Rati  (Pleasure).

Trishtup.  5  Brihftti.

ostya.  Pupil.

160  Agastya.

A?vius.

Trishtup.

181  The  same.

The  same.

The  same.

Jagatl.  6,  8  Trishtup.
Trishtup.

The  same.

188  .

1S4  .

Viavedevfts.

Praiec  uf  Food.

137  .

1  Anushtubgarbhd.  2,  4,

8, 10  GAyatrl.  3,  5,  6,  7
Anushtup  or  Brihati.

188  .

Aprtt.

GAyatrl.

189  .

Agni.

Tnshtup.

190  .

Bnliaapati.

The  same.

191  .

Water.  Grass.  Surya.

Anushtup.  10-12  MahApank
ti.  13  MahAbrihatl.

BOOK  IL

1  Gritsaraada.

Agni.

Jagatl.

2  The  same.

The  same.

The  same.

S  .

Apris.

Trishuip.  7  Jagatl.

4  SomAhuti.

Agni.

Trishtup.

6  The  same

6  .

The  same.

Anushjup.

GAyatr!.

The  same.

GAyatt  L  6  Anushtup,

7  .

8  Gjitaamada.

INDEX  or  HTMSS.


•63


Deity.

Metre.

63

9  Griteamada.

Agni.

Triahtup.

10  The  same.

The  same

The  same.

11  .

Indra.

VirAtsthanA  Triahtup.

•  21  Triahtup.

12  .

The  aarne.

Triahtup.

13  .

Jagatl.  13  Triahtup.

14  .

Triahtup.

15  .

The  same.

16  .

Jagatl.  9  Triahtup.

17  .  ...

Jagatl.  8,  9  Triahtup.

18  .

Triahtup.

19  .

The  came.

20  .

Triahtup.  3  VirAdrapl.

21  .

Jagatl.  6  Triahtup.

22  .

Ashli.  2,  3  Atiaakvarl.  4  Ati-
sakvar!  or  Aahti.

23  .

Brahmanaspati.  Brihaapati.  Jagatl.  15,  19  Triahtup.

24  .

Brahmanaspati.  Brahmanas-  Jagatl.  12,  16  Triahtup.
pati  and  Indra.

25  .

Brahmanaspati.

Jagatl.

26  .

The  same.

The  came.

27  Kurina.  Grit-

Adityas,

Triahtup.

samada  a  eon,
or  Gritanmada.

28  The  same.

Varuna.

The  same.

29  .

Vievedevas.

30  Gritaamada.

Indra.  Indra  and  Soma.  Sa-  Trishtup.  15  Jagatl,
rasvatl.  Brihaapati.  Maruta.

31  The  came.

Viavedevas.

Jagatl.  7  Trishtup.

32  .

Heaven  and  Earth.  Indra  or  Jagatl.  6-8  Anuehtup.
Tvaahtar.  RakA.  Stnivalt.

33  .

Rudra.

Triahtup.

34  .

Maruts.

Jagatl.  15  Triahtup.

35  .

ApamnapAt.

Triahtup.

36  .

Ritua.

Jagatl.

37  .

The  same.

The  name.

38  .

Savitar.

Triahtup.

39  .

Aevina.

Triahtup.

40  .

Soma  and  P.'iehan.  Aditi.

The  same.

41  .

Vdyu.  IndraandVAyu.Mitra  GAyatrl.  16,  17  Anuah|up,
and  Vnruna  Asvina.  Indra.  18  Brihatt.

Viavcdcva*.  Saraavatl.

42  .

The  Kapinjala.

Triahtup.  [Aahti.

43  .

The  same.

1-3  Jagatl.  2  Atisakrarl  or

ODK  OF  HTJCfS.


664

BOOK  III.


£  Riihi.  Deity.  Metre.

1  VisvAmitra.  Agni.  Trishtup.

2  The  same.  VaisrAnara.  *>  Jagatt.

3  . .  The  same.  The  same.

4  . •  Aprto.  Triahtup.

6  .  Agni.  The  same.

6  . .  The  same.  .

7  VisvAmitra,  Agni.  . .  ..

8  The  same.  YQpa.  Visvodevas.  Triahtup.  8,  7  Auuahlup.

9  _ .  Agni.  Brihati.  9  Trishtup.

10  .  Tho  same.  Ushpih.

11  .  .  *  GAyatrl.

12  .  •  Indra  and  Agni.  Tho  same.

13  Riahabha.  Agni.  Anushtup.

.14  The  same.  The  same.  Trishtup.

16  Utktla.  .  The  same.

16  The  same.  .  Brihati  and  Satobrihatt

17  Kata.  .  Trishtup.

18  The  same.  .  The  same.

19  GAthin.  .; .  .

20  The  same.  Visvedovas.  Agni.  .

21  .  Agni.  J,  4  Trishtup.  2,3  Anushtup.

5  VirAdriipA  Satobrihatt

22  .  The  samo.  Trishtup.  4  Anushtup.

23  Devasravas  and .  Trishtup.  3  Satobrihatt.

DevavAta.

24  VisvAmitra.  .  GAyatrl.  1  Anushtup.

25  The  same.  Agni.  Agni  and  Indra.  VirAj.

26  .  VaifvAnara.  Agni.  Maruts.  1-6  Jagatt.  7-9  Trishtup.

27  .  Agni.  •  GAyatrl.

28  .  The  same.  1, 2, 6  Gdyatrt.  3  Ushnih.

4  Trishtup.  5  Jagatt.

29  .  .  Trishtup.  1, 4, 10, 12  Anush¬

tup.  6,  11,  14,  15  Jagatt.

30  .  Indra.  Trishtup.

31  .  The  same.  The  samo.

32  .  .  .

33  VisvAmitra.  The  Tho  Rivers.  VisvAmitra.  Trishtup.  13  Anushtup.

Rivers.  Indra.

34  VisvAmitra.  Indra.  Trishtup.

35  The  same.  The  same.  The  samo.

36  .  .  .

.  . .  GAyatrl,  11  Anushtup.


nrrax  ov  hyuns.


665


J,  Deity.  Metre,

.

38  PrajApati.or  Indra.  Triahtup.

Viavftmitro.

39  VisvAmitra.  The  same.  |  •  The  wane.

40  The  same.  .  GAyatrl

41  .  . .  The  same.

42  .  .  . .

*3  .  Triahtup.

44  .  .  Brihatl

45  .  . .  The  same.

4®  .  .  Trishtup.

47  .  . .  The  earn®.

48  .  .  *  .

49  .  .  .

50  .  .  .

.  .  1-3  Jagatl.  4-9  Trinbtifrr.

10-12  GAyatrl.

52  .  .  1-4  GAyatrl.  5, 7, 8  Triahtup.

6  Jagatl.

53  . .  Indra,  Parvata,  Y&k.  Triahtup.  10,  16  Jagatl .  13

GAyatrl.  12,20,  22  Anush-
tup.  18  Brihatl.

54  PrajApati.  Yisvedevaa.  Triahtup.

55  The  aame.  The  same.  The  same.

56  .  .  .

67  VisvAmitra .  .

58  The  same.  Asvins.  .

59  .  Mitra.  Triahtup.  6-9  GAyatrl

60  .  Ribhus.  Indra.  Jagatl.

61  .  Uahaa  (Dawn).  Triahtup.

62  .  Indra  and  Varuna.  Brihas-  1-3  Trishtup.  4-18  GAyatrl.

Bti.  POshan.  Saritar.
ma.  Mitra  and  Varuna.


BOOK  IV.


1  VAmadeva.  Agni.  Varuna.  Trishtup.  1  Aahti.  2  Ati ja¬

gatl.  8  Dhriti.

2  The  same.  Agni.  Trishtup.

3  .  The  same.  The  same.

4  .........  Agni  RokahohA.  .

5  .  Agni  VaisvAnara.  . .

0  .  Agni.  .

7  .  The  same.  1  Jagatl.  2-6  Anushtup.  7-11

Trishtup.


WMX  or  HTMN3.


666


JfuM.

Dtity.

Mdrt.

£

8  VAroadeva.

Agni.

GAyatrt.

9  The  same.

The  same.

The  same.

10  .

- .

PAdapankti.  5  Mahftpada-
pankti.  8  Uahnih.

11  .

Trishtup.

12  .

The  same.

13  .

.

14  .

15  .

Agni.  Somaka.  Asvins.

GAyatrl.

16  .

Indra.

Trishtup.

17  .

The  same.  ,

Trishtup.  15  EkapadA  VirAj.

18  Indra.  Aditi.

Indra.  Aditi.  VAmadeva.

Trishtup.

VAmadeva.

19  VAmadeva.

Indra.

The  same.

20  The  same.

The  same.

21  .

22  .

23  .

24  .

Trishtup.  10  Anushtup.

25  .

Trishtup.

26  .

Indra  The  Falcon.

The  same.

27  .

The  Falcon.

Trishtup.  3  Sakvarl.

23  .

Indra  and  Soma.

Trishtup.

29  .

Indra.

The  same.

30  .

Indra  and  Ushas.

GAyatrl.  8,  24,  Anushtup.

31  .

Indra.

GAyatrl.  3  Pddamchrit.

32  .

Indra.  Indra’s  Horses.

GAyatrl.

38  .

Ribhus.

Trishtup.

34  .

The  same.

The  same.

35  ...  .  .

36  .

Jagatl.  9  Trishtup.

37  .

1-4  Tosh  {up.  5-8  Anushtup.

38  .

Heaven  and  Earth.  Dadhi-
krVs.

Trishtup.

39  .

Dadhikr&s.

Trishtup.  6  Anushtup.

40  .

DadhikrAs.  Sirya.

1  Trishtup.  2-5  Jagatl.

4i  .

Indra  and  Varupa.

Trishtup.

42  Trasadosyu.

Traaadasyu.  Indra  and
Varuna.

The  same.

43  Purumllha  and

Arvina.

Ajamijha.

44  The  same

The  same.

45  Vduudera.

Jagatl.  7  Trishtup.

INDEX  or  HT1IK8.


667


1

AuAt.

Deity.

Metre.

46  V&madeva.

Vdyu.  Indra  and  Vdvu.

Gdyatri.

47  The  same.

The  same.

Anushtup.

so  ...

Vdyu.

The  same.

49  ...

Indra  and  Brihaapati.

Gdyatrl.

50  ...

Brihnspati.  Indra  and
Brihaspati.

Trishlup.  10  Jagatl.

51  ...

Ushas  (Dawn).

Triahtup.

The  same.

Gdyatrl.

53  ...

Savitar.

JagatL

54  ...

The  same.

JagaU.  6  Trishtup.

55  ...

Visvedevas.

Trishtup.  8-10  Gdyatrl.

Heaven  and  Earth.

Trishtup.  5-7  Gdyatrl.

57  ...

Kshetrapati.  §una.  §uu&
and  Sira.  Sttl.

1,  4,  6,  7  Anushtup.  2,  3,  S
Trishtup.  5  Pura-ushnib.

58  ....

Agni,  or  Silrya,  or  Waters,
or  Cows,  or  Ghrita.

Trishtup.  11  JagaU.

BOOK  V.

1  Budha  aud  Ga-  Agni.

viahthir*.

2  KumilraorVrisa.  The  same.


3  VaausrutA.  Agni.  Maruta.  Rudra

and  Vishnu.

4  The  same.  Agni.

6  .  Apris.

6  .  Agni.

7  Isha.  The  same.

5  The  same.  .

9  Gaya.  .

10  The  same.  .


11  Sutambhara.

1 2  The  same.

IS  .

14  .

15  Dharuna.

16  Puru.

17  The  same.

18  Dvita.

19  Vavri.

20  Prayisvata.


Trishtup.

Triahtup.  12  Sakvarl.
Triahtup.

Tho  same.

Gdyatrl.

Pankti.

Auuahtup.  10  Pankti.
Jagatl.

Anushtup.  5,  7  Pankti.
Anushtup.  4,  7  Pankti.
Jagatl.

Trishtup.

G&yatrt.

Tho  same.

Triahtup.

Anushtup.  5  Pankti.
The  same.


1,  2  Gftyatrt.  3,  4  Anushtup.

5  ViiftdrQpft.

Anushtup.  4  Tankti.


INDEX  OP  HYWK3.


863

|  BUhi.  Deity.

21  Sasa.  Agni.

22  YisvasAmnn.  Tho  same.

23  Dyumna  Visva-  .

charshani,

24  GaupAysnaa  or  . .

LaupAyanaa.

25  VaaHyua.  .

26  The  Bamc.  Agni.  ViBvcdevaa.

27  Tryaruna  Trasa-  Agni.  Indra  and  Agni.

daayu,  and  Ah-
vamedha,  or
Atri.

28  VijvavArA.  Agni.

29  Gauriviti  Indra.  Indra  or  Csanft.

80  Babhru.  Indra.

81  Avaayu.  The  same.

32  GAtu.  . ».

83  Samvarana.  .

34  Tho  same.  .

35  Prabhrtvaau .

36  The  same,  .

37  Atri  Bhaurna .

38  The  same.  .


89  .  .

40  .  Indra.  Silrya.  Atri.

41  .  Viavedevaa,

42  .  Yijveddvaa.  Rudra.

43  .  Visvcdevaa.


44  Avateflra  and  The  same.

other*.

45  SadAprinn.  . .

46  Pratikshatra.  Visvedevan.  Conaorta  of

the  Gods.

47  Pratiratha.  Via vedevas.

48  PratibhAnu.  The  same.

49  Pratipr&bha .

50  Svasti.  .

51  The  same.  .


Metre.

AnuBhtup.  4  Pankti.
The  same.


DripadA  Virtj.

Anushtup.

GAyatrl.

Trishtup.  4-6  Anushtup.


1, 3  Trishtup.  2  Jagatl.  4
Anushtup.  5,  6  GAyatrL
Trishtup.

The  same.


Jagatl.  9  Trishtup.
Anushtup.  8  Pankti.
Trishtup.  3  Jagatl.
Trishtup.

Anushtup.

AnuBhwp.  5  Pankti.

1,  3  Ushnih.  4  Trishtup.
5-9  Anushtup.  6-8  Triah-
tup.

Trishtup.  J6,  17  Ati jagatl.

20  EkapadA  VirAj.
Trishtup.  1 7  EkapadA  VirAj.
Trishtup.  16  EkapadA  VirAj.
Trishtup.

Jugatl.  14, 15  Trishtup.
Trishtup.

Jagatl.  2,  8  Trishtup.

Jagatl.

Trishtup.

Anushtup.  5  Pankti.

1-4  GAyatrt  5-10  Ushnih.  11-
13  Jagatl  or  Trishtup.  14,
15  Anush  jup.


INDEX  or  HYMNS.


659


I,  Xiahi.  Deity,  Metre.

*3

62  SyAvtava.  Marut*.  Anush ^up.  6,  10,  17  Pankti.

53  The  same.  The  same.  3, 5,  10.  11,  16  Kakup.  2

Brihfttl.  3  Anushtup.  4
Pura-ushnih.  6,  7,'  9,  13,
•  14,  16  Satobfihat!.  8,  12
Gftyatrl.

64  .  . .  Jagat!.  14  Trishtup.

55  .  .  Jagafcl.  10  Triahtup.

56  .  .  Brihatl.  8,  7  Satobribatl.

57  .  .  .  Jagat! .  7, 8  Trishtup,

58  .  .  Trishtup.

59  .  . .  Jagntl.  8.  Trishtup.

60  . .  .  “  Triahtup.  7,  8  Jagat!.

61  . .  Maruta  and  othera.  GAyatrf.  5  Anushtup.  9

Satobrihati,

62  §rutavid.  Mitra  and  Varuna.  Trishtup.

63  Archanftnas.  The  same.  Jagat!.

64  The  same.  . .  Anushtup.  7  Pankti.  .

65  RAtahavya.  .  Anushtup.  6  Pankti,

66  The  same.  .  Anushtup.

67  Yajata.  . .  The  same.

68  The  same.  .  GAyatrl.

69  Uruohakri.  .  Trishtup.

70  The  same.  .  G&yatrl.

71  BAhuvrikta .  The  same.

72  The  samo.  ......  .  Ushnih.

73  Paura.  Asvins.  Anushtup.

74  The  same.  The  same.  The  same.

75  Avasyu.  .  P»nkti.

76  Atri  Bhnuma.  .  Trishtup.

77  The  same .  The  same.

78  Saptavadbri .  1-3  Ushnih.  4  Trishtup.  5-9

Anushtup.

79  Satyaaravas.  Ushas  (Dawn),  Pankti.

80  The  same.  The  same.  Triahtup.

81  SyArAsva.  Sftvitar.  Jagat!.

82  The  same.  The  samo,  GAyatrl.  1  Anushtup.

83  Atri  Bhauma.  Parjanya,  1,  5-8,  10  Trishtup.  2-4  Ja-

gall.  9  Anushtup.

84  ThC  same.  Prithivt.  Anushtup.

85  . ...  Varuua.  Trishtup.

86  .  Indra  and  Agni.  Anushtup.  6.  VirAtpursA,-

87  Evayimarut.  MaruU,  Atijagatt.


INDEX  OP  HTMNS.


670

I  Jtuhi.  Deity.

$

BOOK  vr.

1  BharadrAja.  Agni.

2  The  Mine.  The  same.


3  .  .

4  .  .

5  . .  .

6  . »l  . Ml

7  .  VaiavAnara  Agni.

8  .  The  ume.

9  .  .

10  .  Agni.

11  .  The  ume.  r

12  . .  .

13  .  .


A*  ........

15  Vttahavya,  or
BharadrAja.


Metre.


Triahtup.

Anuahtup.  11  Sakvarl.
Triahtup.

The  same.


Triahtup.  7  Dvipadi  Virtj.
Jagatl.  7  Triahtup.
Triahtup.

Tri-htup.  7  DtipadA  Virtj.
Triahtup.


Anuahtup.  6  Sakrart.

JagatL  3,  15  Sakvarl.  6  Ati-
aakvari.  10-14,16, 19Triah-
.  $up.  17  Anuahtup.  18  Bri-


16  The  same  .  GAyatri.  1,  6  VardhamAnA.

27,  47,  48  Anuahtup,  46

,X  Triahtup.

17  .  •  Indra.  Triahtup.  15  DvtpadA  Trish-

*up-

18  .  The  aame.  Triahtup.

19  .  .  The  aame.

20  .  .  Triahtup.  7  Virtj.

21  .........  Indra.  Viavederaa.  Tri'htup.

22  .  The  same.  The  aame.


25  .

26  .  .

27  . .

28  .

The  Cowa.

•29  .

Indra.

30  .

The  same.

81  Subotra.

32  The  aame.

33  Sunabotra.

34  The  aame.

Triahtup.  2-4  Jagatl,
Anuahtup.

Triahtup.

The  same.

Triahtup.  4  Sakvari.
Triahtup.

The  aame.


IHD8X  OF  HTMWS.


67J


§,  Rishi.

35  Nortu

Deity.

Metre.

Indra.

Trishtup.

36  The  same.

37  BharadvAja.

The  same.

Tire  same.

39  .

40  .

41  .  .

42  .

Anuahtup.  4  Brihatl.

Ushnih.

43  .

41  Samyu.

Triahtup.  1-6  Anushtup.  7-9

'  ir*j  or  Tmhtup.  8  Vintj.

45  The  same.

Indra.  Bjibu.

GAyatrl.  29  Atinichrit.  31
PAdanichrit.  33  Anushtup.

46  .

Iudra.

Brihatl  and  Satobrihatt  al-

teruately.

47  Oarga.

Soma.  Indra.  Brihaspati.

Triahtup.  19  Brihatl.  23  An-

Praatoka.  Chariot.  Drum,  ushtup.  34  GAyatrl.  25

48  Samyu.

Agni.  Maruts.  POshan.
Prism  and  others.

DvipadA.  27  Jagatl.

1,3,5,  9,  14,  19,  20  Brihatl.
2,  4, 10, 12, 17  Satobrihatt.
6,  8  MuhAs&tobrihatt.  7
Mxh&brihatL  11,16  Kakup.
13,  IS  Pura-ushnih.  51
Atijngatl.  21  YavnmadhyA.
mahAbrihall.22  Anushtup.

49  RijUvau.

Visvedevas.

Triahtup.  15  Sakvart.

50  The  same.

51  .

The  same.

Triahtup.

Triahtup.  13-15  Ushnih.  16
Anushtup.

52  .

Trishtup.  7-12  GAyatrl.  14

Jagatl.

53  BharadvAja.

POshan.

GAyatrl.  8  Anuahtup.

54  The  same.

The  same.

GAyatrl.

65  .

The  aame.

56  .

GAyatrl.  6  Anuahtup.

57  .

PQshan  and  Indra.

GAyatrl.

53  .

POshan.

Trishtup.  2  Jagatl.

69  .

60  .

Iodra  and  Agni.

The  same.

Brihatl.  7-10  Anuahtup.
GAyatrl.  1-3,  13  Triahtup.
14  Brihatl.  15  Anuahtup.

61  .

SaraavatJ.

GAyatrl.  1-3,  18  Jagatl.  1 14

Triahtup.  V

62  .

Asvins.

Triahtup.

63  .

•  'fhe  same.

Trishtup.  1  VirAj.  11  Eka-
padA  Trishtup.

072  XKHBX  OK  HTJIXS.

|  Ruhi.  Deity.  Metre.

*3

61  BhanidvAja.  Uahas  (Dawn).  Triebtup.

66  The  tame.  The  same.  The  same.

66  .  M«ruts.  — .

07  .  Mitra  and  Varuna.  .

68  .  Indra  and  Vanina.  Trislitup.  9,  10  Jagatl.

69  .  Indra  and  Vishnu.  Trislitup.

70  .  Heaven  and  Earth.  Jagatl.

71  . .  Savitar.  1 -8  Jagatl.  4-6  Trishtup.

72  .  Indra  and  Soma.  Tri*h|up.

78  . -  Tho  eame.

74  . .  Soma  and  Rudra.  .

75  PAvu.  Men,  Weapons;  and'Imple-  Trishtap.  6,  10  Jagatl.  12,

mcnt«  of  War.  Armour.  13,  lo,  16,  19  Anushtup.
Bow.  Bowstring.  Quiver.  17  Punkti.

Arrow.  Charioteer.  Hor.
tea.  Chariot.  Whip,  etc.  etc.


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.

Abhiplaya,  the  name  of  114,  217-219,  255,  294,  857,  376,  378-381,  383-

a  religio'us  ceremony,  886,425,461,510,521,  385,888,891-410,421,

43,  272,  286  note*.  625,  568,  626.  423,  427,  429, 430,  440,

Abhy&vartin  ChlyamAna,  Adityas,  Vanina,  Mitra,  443,  446,  458-460,  463-
the  name  of  a  king,  589.  Aryaman,  Bhnga,  Dak*  488,  492,  498-500,  602-

Aborigines, 184, 412n©<M;  sha,  Ansa,  and  oue  or  504,  506,  509-512,514,

see  DAsas,  Daayus,  Kl-  two  others,  17,  24,  27,  516-518,  526,529-531,

kaUis,  Simyus.  32.  33,  48,  58,  62,  97,  533,  538,  544,  552,  553,

Abaoiuto  God,  the,  379  121,  139,189,252,259,  555-574,577,612,613,

note.  260,  263,  292-294,  297,  615-618,  622,  623,  628-

Acknowlcdgmcntof  a  son,  311,  313, 32S,  337, 378,  630,  634.

334.  379,  383,  427,  439,  458,  Agni,  the  Soul  of  All,  841 ;

Adhrigu,  the  name  of  a  505,  519,  537,  539, 572,  Universal  King,  880 ;

Kiahi,  148.  619,  633.  Mother  and  Father,

Adhvara,  primary  essea-  Adoptionof sons,347 not*.  401,403,555,573;  Fa-
tial  sacrifice,  19  note.  Acschylua,  443 -note.  ther  and  Brotlier  of

Adhvaryu(a),  the  priest  Agastya,  a  great  Vedic  men,  41;  identified  with
and  priests  who  per-  Riahi,  228,  230,  235,  all  Gods,  259, 266,  468 ;
form  the  practical  work  236,  244, 248,  255,  649,  essential  in  all  Bacri-
of  the  sacrifice,  122,  650.  ficcs,  562 ;  his  namee,

140,  142, 199,  259, 275-  - the  family  priest  of  epithets,  aud  qualities,

277,  280,  306, 327,  357,  King  Khela,  156,  159.  1,  2,  15,  16,  35,  80,  SI,

402,494,  508,  600,602.  Aghftava,  a  name  or  epi-  344  ;  his  functions  as
Adili,  Infinity,  Infinite  thet  of  Pcdu,  a  royal  priest,  oblation-bearor,
Nature,  the  mother  of  Jiiahi  protected  by  the  and  mediator,  1 , 1 4, 15,
the  Gods,  30, 32, 59,  83,  Asvins,  155.  18,  35,  50,  51,  79,  80,

97,  114,115,121,123,  Agnflyl,  the  consort  of  122,178,267,330,336,
125,126,138,189,151,  Agni,  26,  515.  475  ;  conaecrator  of

189,  206,217,231,255,  Agni,  the  God  of  Fire  marriage,  468  ;  spin-
260,  292-294,  296,  310,  and  Light,  vi.,  1,2, 14-  tual  husband  of  maid-
323,  329,  367, 368,  372,  19,  21,  24,  26,  28-30,  ens,  91,  468;  Lord  of

379,  391 , 408, 416, 417,  34-36,  40-42,  48,  50-52,  matrons,  »  e.  giver  of

427,448,458,459,493,  54,  56,  60-63,  80-82,  children,  91,  92 ;  jun-

505,506.514,515,517,  90-102,  11  1,  120-127,  glc- clearing  fire,  79, 80,

519,  539,  549,  5S0, 617,  136-138,  140,  144, 145,  194, 264, 265, 398,399  ;

618,  620,  626,  628, 639,  150, 153, 168, 173, 175-  funeral  fire  (KmvyAd),

648.  178,190-204,203,  209,  396  ;  his  flight  from  hia

- a  masculine  deity,  212-215,217,223,226,  duties,  329,  477,  563,

445.  227,  235, 236,  239, 245,  570  ;  his  birth,  40,  41,

Aditya,  a  son  of  Aditi,  250,259-270,275,282,  81,  82,  145,  195,  196,

especially  Varuna  and  290,  298,  304-807.  312,  259,  318  ;  his  produc-

thc  Sun,  16,  32-34,68,  315-377,  329-344,  350,  lion  by  attrition,  14,

43


674


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  BTC.


195,  342,  330  ;  Iris  Agrfl,  tho  name  of  a  wo-  Ambarlsba,  the  name  of
double  birth,  81,  82,  man,  419,  433  note*.  a  man,  180.
j45, 194, 203;  his  three  Abarantya,  the  eastern  Ambrosia,  29,  341,  604.
bodies,  337  ;  three  ma-  sacrificial  fire,  41,  306,  Arnrit,  nectar,  the  drink
infestations,  891 ;  three  387,  464  notes.  of  Gods,  29,  97,  143,

splendours,  819 ;  threo  Ahi,  the  serpent  of  the  1S6,  317,  341,  461,  466,
horns,  509 ;  tbreebirth-  cloud,  demon  of  drought,  528,597,  603,  604.

places,  124;  three  6,  48,  44,  108,  138,  Amritsar,  853  note.
homes,  470,  563,  566  ;  134, 181,270, 275,  283,  Ancient,  tho, Dyaua,  Hoar-

three  receptacles  or  296,  852,  854,  367,  en,  395.

hearths,  472;  three  413,  430,  492,  493,  - Indra,  582.

atationa,  387  ;  three  496,  497,  577,  592.  Angirn,  a  member  of  the
forms,  101,  219,  819  ;  Ahibudhnya,  tho  dragon  family  of  Angiraa,  455.
various  forma,  15,252  ;  of  the  deep,  an  atmos-  Angiras,  a  semi-divine
three  powers,  337  ;  pherio  deity,  250,  298,  patriarchal  Rishi;  also

three  tongues,  337;  re-  459,  505,  817, 619.  a  name  of  Agni  and

gulator,  as  the  Sun,  of  AhimAyiUBlj,  versa  tile  or  Brihaspati,  1,  28,  80,
tbeseaaons, 124,468,478;  wise  ns  serpents,  4  note.  42,45,50,  62,69,84,
and  of  sacred  rites,  568.Ahura,  Ood,  Iranic  cqui-  99,  101.  321,  143,  143,
Agniehayaoa,  preparation  valent  of  Asura,  32  164,180,193,289,303,

of  tho  sacred  hearth,  note.  349,  350,  361,  373,

98  note.  Air,  personified,  323,  393,  406, 445, 475, 477,

Agntdh,  Kindler,  the  Aitareya-Brfthmana,  30,  483,  490,  513,  517,

priest  who  lights  tho  154,  327,  330,  570.  617,  644.

sacred  fire,  259,  306,  Aitchison,  Dr.,  2.  Angirases,  descendant*

510  notes.  Aja,  the  Unborn.  377  note,  of  Angiraa,  1,  40,  69,

Aguihotra,  oblation  to  Aja-EkapM,  the  Unborn-  71,  84, 85,  94, 106, 128,
Agni,  307,  636  notes.  Ono-footcd,  tho  Sun,  131,  139,  148, 155, 164,
Agnishtoma,  Praise  of  298,619.  105,  175,184,192,272,

Agni,  a  protracted  Soma  Ajnmllhns,  men  of  the  279,  280,284.290,348,
ceremony,  19  note.  family  of  the  Rishi  349,361,373,392,395,
Agni-Soma,  the  two  Gods  Ajamlllia,  450.  396,  393, 401,  411, 455,

as  a  dual  deity,  21  note.  Ajfgarta,  a  Jtishi,  father  477,  492, 512,  513, 555,
Agnivcsa,  tho  name  of  a  of  9uuaf)scpn,  30  note.  566,  575, 576, 593, 596,
prince,  408  note.  All-Gods,  623;  tee  Vis-  ^  598,  617,  636.

Agnivesi,  Satri  son  of  vedevas.  Angirases,  the  BharadvH-

Agnivesa,  498,  All-pervading,  Vishnu,  jas,  descendants  of  An-

Agriculturc,  460,  461;  27  note.  giras,  696.

plough,  ploughing,  29,  Altars),  4,  177,  199,  Animals,  tamo  and  wild,
460,  461;  ploughing  203,  225,  238,  263,  horse,  bull,  cow,  pat-

and  sowing,  160;  goad,  268,  328,  324,  839,  tim;  ram,  ewe,  60,  69,

460  ;  sicklo,  80,  420;  343,  344,  373,  381,  71;  goat,  191,  215,

gamer,  278;  barley  or  397,  401,  406,  407,  219,  309;  ass,  48,  156,

grain,  160;  furrow  per-  410,477,566,567,613.  217, 441; dog,  214,246,

sonified,  461.  Amaralcosha,  327.  309,  418;  lion,  88, 340,


firt)*X  OV  KAMSB,  ETC.


676

-  412,  479,  541,  542;  title  of  Agni  as  Light*  182-185,  140,  140, 153,

buffalo,  422;  gaura,  n!ng,  26,  308  305;  tee  160,181,183,209,240.

422,  462;  gavaya,  462;  Water*,  Child  of  the.  241, 262, 272,  285,  333,

antelope,  88;  deer,  54,  ApayA,  a  small  unidenti-  339,  840,  855,  374,  380,
136, 217;  spotted  deer,  fled  stream,  339.  887,  398. 428,  433,  495,

62,  69;  bear,  526;  wild  ApnavAna,  the  name  of  a  497,  513, 552, 576,  588,
boar,  83, 113, 152;  wild  Rishi,  408.  586,  692, 594,  604, 621,

OX,  422;  wolf,  186*138,  Aprl(s),  a  claas  of  pro*  630.

156,  160,  203;  mun*  pttiatory  hymn*  ad*  Arya,  colour,  i  e  raoe, 366.

gooso,  257;  scorpion,  dressed  to  Agni,  15, 16,  Aryaman,  oneof  the  Adi-

257  ;  serpent,  4,  264  ;  197,  252, 202, 263, 321,  tya*,  34,  50,  57,  58,  81.

eaglo,  181,  217,  812;  471,472.  102,  114-116,  136,  137,

falcon,  hawlt,  44,  161,  Apsaras,  a  colestial  nym-  140,  189,  192, 196,  214,
812, 403;  peafowl,  267,  ph,  378.  *  288,240,259,292,293,

866  ;  swan,  90,  218  ;  Apaarasos,  129.  808,  379, 394,  397,  433,

chakwA,  309;  pigeon,  Aptya,  dwelling  in  the  458,459,468,602,614,
88;  quail,  146,  166,  waters  (of  air),  Trita,  515,537,  614,617,622.
160;  kapinjala,  312;  137,251,  503.  Asiknt,  ono  of  tho  five

parrot,  68  i  oterling,  Aramatl,  the  Gon(ua  of  river*  of  tho  PanjAb,
68.  See  alto  under  it-  devotion,  307,  608.  44  note.

paraU  worde.  Arbuda,  a  demon  of  the  Asna,  the  name  of  a  do-

AnitabhA,  probably  an  air,  70,  272,  277.  mon,  884,  650.

aflluont  of  tho  Indua,  ArohanAna*,  n  plshi,  536.  A**,  figurative,  a  rival
622.  Archer,  89,  01,  91,  95,  worshipper,  83.

Anjeal,  apparently  an  175,203,638,636.  Asset  of  tho  Asrina,

unidentified  river,  136,  Arjuna,  a  mau’*  namo,  48,  166,217,  441.

609  note.  168.  Aaaerably,  congregation,

Ankloto,  524.  Arjunl,  the  father  of  aynod,  41,  206,  469.

Annaatuti, hymn  to  Food,  Kutae,  149,  428.  Assembly's  Lord,  Agui,

i.  e.  Soma,  251.  Arka,  tho  Sun,  616.  22.

A6sa,  the  distributer,  one  ArmloU,  522.  A*ura,  Lord  God,  82,  49,

of  the  Adityaa,  259,292.Armour,  33,  42,  195,  440,  75,  143,  167,  182,  239,

Antaka,  the  Ender,  Death,  646,  648  200,  293,  297,  344,  300.

144.  Arga,  a  prince  «hdn  by  878,  384,  457,  477,  479,  •

Ant-hill,  419.  ‘  Indra,  483.  503, 617, 519, 534,  635,

Anua,  a  Vedio  tribe,  dea-  Arrian,  viii.,  353.  679,  596,  633.

condanto  of  Anu,  10,  Arrow,  the  Lofty,  light-  -  demon  (lator  uae),

140,  492.  ning,  897.'  184,  169,  601.

AnuyAja,  an  after-aacri-  Arrows,  527,  608,  647.  Asura-slayor,  Indra,  583.

flee,  57  note.  -  poisoned,  647.  Asuras,  anclont  Gods,

AnyAdris,  the  invoking  Arusha,  the  Red,  the  Sun,  204,276.

name  of  one  of  the  Ma-  410  note.  -  demons  (later  use),

ruta,  96  note.  Arya(a),  Aryan,  v.,  vi.,  48,72,74,129.140,145,

ApAmnapAt,  offspring  Of  xvi.,  3,  10,  22,  70,80,  147,160,  182,231,  285,

the  Waters  (of  air),  a  81,  101,  125,  129,  130,  505,  645,  681.  .


676


INDBX  OP  NAMES,  BTC.


Asva,  father  of  the  Riahi  Athnrvans,  611.  Axo,  the  celestial,  Agni

Vasa,  146.  Atharva-vcda,  vi.,  25,  as  Lightning,  495.

AfraUyanfc,  24  now.  108,  209, 224, 396,  429.  AyoB,  metal,  iron,  72,  78.
Aav&medha,  Horso-sacri-  Atithigva,  a  name  of  Ayavaaa,  the  name  of  a
fiee,  217.  .  DivcdAsa,  70,  74,  75,  King,  169.

- the  name  of  a  prince,  147,181,277,428,577,  Ayu,  75,  125,  214,  240,

487.  537, 600, 611.  277, 502,  577.

Asvatha,  a  name  of  Divo-  Atiyija,  one  who  over-
d&sa,  611.  sacrifices,  621.  Babhbc,  the  name  of  a

Asvattha,  the  Holy  Fig  Atmospheres,  two,  563.  Rishi,  491.

Tree,  188  note.  Atri,  a  great  Riahi,  30,  Bacchus,  22.

Asrinl,  the  consort  of  62,  69,  145,  158,161,  Bahuvrikta,  a  Riahi,  511.

the  Asvins,  515.  162, 193,  243, 247,  268,  Barhis,  322, 47 1 , 801 ;

Asvins,  the  two  horse-  501-503„5:8,  519,  539-  Sacrod  Gnu*,
men,  Twin  Heralds  of  541,  545,546,  618.  Barley,  74,  426,  551.
Dawn,  3,  4,  20,  24,  25,  Atrin,  a  voracious  fiend,  Battle,  419, 420, 426,  444.

89,  40,  47,  48,  60,  61,  111,  112.  -  =  dance,  496.

63-65,  87,  108,  114,  Atria,  descendant  of  Bay  Horses,  Lord  of,  a
119, 120,  142, 144-164,  Atri,  484,  501,  538.  title  of  Indra,  pattm.

168,192,209,210,  213,  Attock,  the  river,  622  - steeds  of  Agni,  1 8 ;

217, 224, 232, 238,  243-  note.  of  Dyaus,  75  ;  of  Sari-

248, 250, 298, 306,  808,  Auchathya,  a  Rishi,  210.  tar,  49  ;  of  SOrya,  68.
309, 311, 836,  337,  344,  Aufidus,  354  note.  Bear,  526.

861,  378, 385, 386, 394,  Aufrecht,  Prof.  Th..  420,  Beds,  353  note.

408-410,  417,  429,  438,  596.  Beast,  the,  Vntra,  489,497.

440,  441,  414,  449-451,  AurnavAbha,  a  demon,  Benfey,  Prof.  Tb.,xii.  xiv.
456,  459,  487,  502, 507-  272.  xv ,  5,  8, 10,  30,  39,  45.

509,  513,  614,  517-519,  Aurora,  170  note.  47,  52,  58,  88,  119,  133-

540-546,  575, 616,  632-  Ausija,  the  Rishi  Kaksht-  135,  138,  !40,  146-148,
634.  vftn,  son  of  U?ij,  21,  163,  417,  609.

-  their  character,  4,  146, 1 63,  1«8,  421,  422,  Bentley,  171.

25,  47,  78  ;  their  mi-  503,  559.  Bergaigno,  Abel,  xiv.  58,

racles,  145-149,  154-  Autumn  forte,  183,  239,  167,169-171,192,  225,

163,  245,  246,  633;  580.  246,368,438,581,619,

their  chariot,  25,  540  ;  Autumns,  598,  610.  626,  628,  650.

their  steed  or  steeds,  Avasyu,  a  Rishi  accord-  Bhaga,  one  of  the  Adit-
48,  151,  217,  541-543 ;  ing  to  SAyana,  493,  yas,  God  of  Good  For-
their  whip,  25,  209;  543.  tune,  17, 30,  31,  58,  61,

their  favourite  num-  Avatsdra,  a  Rishi,  511.  85,  114,  115,  170,  189,

ber,  47,  48,  A  vesta,  22,  148, 189  notei.  196,199,260,281,292!

Asylum,  the  sacrificial  Awl,  Prtshan’s,  624.  298,  337,  369,  378,  382,

enclosure,  533.  Axe,  hatchet,  215,  217,  384,397,433,  450.  480.

Atharvan,  the  first  Fire-  318,  319,  329,  375,  496,503-506,514-517,’

priest,  104,  106,  104,  516,558.  519,549,567,590,617

155,  160,  570,  571.  - figurative,  175,  474.  621.


index  ov  names,  etc.


677


BhAgavata-PurAna,289.  Birds,  ue  Animals.  Brahmanaspsti,  Lord  of

BharadvAja(s),  a  great  -  «  stars,  137.  Prayer,  another  name

Jtiahi  and  hia  descend-  - =  flyinghoracs,449,  of  Brihaapati,  17,  21,

anta,  81,  147, 166,  556,  633.  22,  55.58, 114,115,259.

665, 668, 571,  578,  576,  Bird-catching,  296,  366,  287-292,  514,  648.

685,  587,  595, 506,  606,  614.  Brahmaniam,  viii.

612-614,610,621,635.  Bloomfield,  Prof.  M.,  429,  Brahmaputra,  a  Brah-
637.  536.  man-pricat'a  non,  313

Bharata,  Warrior  ;  tho  Boar,  tec  Wild  Boar.  not e.

name  of  a  king,  805,  -  =  Vfltra,  166.  Bruhmaudana.aceremon-

338, 373, 376,  427,  625,  Boat,  471 ;  ut  Ship.  ial  distribution  of  boll-

671.  -  —  sacrifice,  195.  cd  rice  to  Brahmans,

Bharataa,  267,  354,  373,  Btthtlingk  and  Roth,  ite  462  note.

477,  672,  574.  St.  Petersburg Lexicou.  BrahmAvartte,  a  sacred

BhArata,  a  titlo  of  Agni,  Bolleusen,  420.  region,  5  note.

267,  427,  672.  Boneless,  the,  Nature, 220.Brea*tplat«,  622.

BhAratas.sonsof  Bharata,  Bony,  the,  the  Visible  Bjibu,  a  liberal  merchant,
338.  World,  220.  606,  007.

BhAratt,  a  Goddoaa  of  Bornmltller,  Dr.  J.,  2.  Bride,  gifts  to  obtain  a,
Speoch,  16,26,198,262,  Bow,  045,  646.  141.

260,  263,  804,  322,  383,  Bowls,  two,  heaven  and  BfihaddivA,  a  Goddoaa  of

889.  earth,  211,  225,  382,  Spoech,  607.

Bhnrvam,  421.  663,  618.  Bfihadratha,  name  of  a

BhArvara,  421.  -  three,  lieaveu,  fir-  chiof,  52.

BhAvayavya,  a  liboral  mamont,  and  earth,  538  Bphaduktha,  unmo  of  a
princo,  174.  Bracelets,  528.  priest,  482.

BhAvya,  tho  same,  174  note.  Bradko,  Potor  von,  638.  Brihaapatl,  Lord  of  Pray-
BbayamAna,  tho  name  of  Brahma,  tho  Absolute,  or,  17,  24,  55,  85,  122,

a  man,  130.  664  note.  188, 189, 147, 198,  218.

BhojM,  descendants  of  BrahmA,  182,  224  ,  368,  254,  255,  287-290,  207,

King  SudAt,  373  note.  874.  837,  340,  389,  445,  453-

Bbpgu,  an  ancient  Itishi,  Brahman(s), priests),  103,  456,  606,  609,  514,  519,

1,40,  71,  81,  05,  164,  122,225,260,275,30 6,  611,  644,645.

176,  264,  403,  404.  318,  832,  406,  454,  462,  Bpsaya,  a  fiend  or  savago

Bhrlgus,  80,176,199, 264,  488,  492,  496,  602,  604,  onomy,  120,  031.

818,  324,  408,  413,  467,  647.  Budha,  tho  father  of  Pu-

492.  BrAhman(s),  2,  77,  131,  rflravas,  41  note.

Bhujyn,  a  proUgi  of  the  140,211,375.  Buffalo,  20 ;  -  Agni,

Asvins,  145,  148,  164,  BrAhraana,  theological  462;  =  cloud,  226.
169,  162,163,429,633.  exegesis,  vi.,  46,  462  Buffaloes,  three  hundred
BlhAr,  374  note.  notet.  dressed  for  and  eaten

Bird,  the,  the  Sun,  97,218, -  a  priest,  19.  by  Indra,  489.

227,228,323,401,614.  BrAhmanAchchhanst,  the  Building,  278,  400,  402.
-  Agni  as  the  Sun,  Brahman’s  assistant,  Bull  (the  Male,  the

261,  327.  19,  313  nolle.  Strong),  Indra,  75,  77,


WMX  OP  KAMU,  E7C.


673

134,  237,  242,  274, 276,  Camel,  190.  Chariot,  part*  of  a,  375.

280, 845, 346,  850, 356,  Canopus,  230.  - blessing  of  a,  375  ;

358,  360,  362,  366-369,  Car,  deified,  612,  646.  tee  Car.

382,  411,  417,  491, 495,  - used  in  battle,  375.  - ^sacrifice,  319.

576,579,583,603,606,  — withsbarp-edgedfel-  - -DakshiyA,  priest's

609.  lies,  231,  520.  fee,  169.

Bull,  Agni,  41,  50,  175, - hymn  or  sacrifice,  Chariot-polo  =  sacrificial

177,  194-196,  201,  203,  144,  281,  287.  tast,  109,  261,  325, 514.

264,  305,  319, 326, 327,  - golden, »  hymn,  ri-  Charite*,  403  note.

834,342.343,384,392,  ches,  39.  Childbirth,  liturgy  of,

397,  401 , 4  6  6,  4  63,  477, - priests’  guerdon,  1 70.  545  note.

488,  509,  555, 556,561,  - Agni,  481.  - Goddesses  associated

562,  613.  - Dyaus,  75.  with,  232,  299.

—  the  Sun,  40,  108,  - the  Sun,  535.  Children,  prayer  for;  ut

166,388,393,  423,515,  Car-pole = sacrificial  task.  Prayer.

109,  261,  375.  - the  gift  of  Agni,  44,

Carpenter,  33,  121,  138,  92,  202,  334,  435,  623.

139,  490.  - the  A  a  vine,  48,

- of  the  Gods,  Tvaeh-  033.

tar,  24.  - Dawn,  151.

—  Parjanya,  459,  616.  Caste,  unknown  in  ear- - Sar-svatl,  031.

-  Prisui,  897.  liest  Vedic  time,  10 - Sinlrdl.',  299.

-  Regent  of  the  Year,  note.  - Soma,  189.

383.  Caste*,  allusions  to  four,  Chitraratha,  an  Aryan

-  Marut  host,  52.  150,  374,  498.  kiDgalainbyIndr»,438.

-  thunderbolt,  182.  Castles,  cloud-forts  of  Chumuri,  a  demon,  279,

-  VAta,  616.  fiends,  83,  576,577;  577,581,  588.

-  rain-cloud,  102.  itc  Forts.  Churning-staff,  30.

-  Asvins’ chariot,  24  5.  Cattle,  rain-clouds  or  rays  ChyavAua,  a  proli'ji  of

- institutorof  eacri-  of  light,  84,  2S3,  390,  tho  Asvins,  155,  159,

flee,  237.  393,  411,  420,  454,  465,  161,  163,  343,  548.

Bulls,  the  Maruts,  88.  675.  ChyavatAna,  a  liberal

- Asvins,  683.  Cattle-raiding,  473,  563,  prince,  490.

—  priests,  109,  237,  593.  Cleanser,  one  of  the

827, 342.  Cattle-stealing,  90.  prieats,  100,  259,  265,

-  rivers,  354.  Cave  =  cloud  that  impri-  305, 400, 509;  we  Potar.

-  stars,  137.  sons  rain,  8, 14, 44, 892.  Colebrooke,  vii.

-  blasts  of  wind,  188.  Centre  of  earth  =  altar,  Consorts  of  the  Gods,  83,

-  blames  of  Agni,  560.  324.  134,213,260,503,514,

Bullock  -  Soma,  226.  ChakravAka,  ChakwA,  517,  016.

Butter, clarified,  tee Ghrita.  Cbakwl,  a  species  of  Constellations,  31,  67.

bird,  309.  Copartners,  Day  and

«  Calendar,  Vedic,  vii.  Chandragupta,  viil  Night,  199,  200.

Calf,  cloud,  221 ;  young  Ch ariol,  used  in  war,  10,  Cord,  series  of  sacrifices,
Sun,  222 ;  Sun,  331,  13.  141,  392.


516.

-  Dyaus,  75.

—  Vishnu,  207.

-  Rudra,  300,  801.

-  Brihasputi,  389.


INDEX  or  NAMES,  ETC.


679


Counter,  Agui,  203;  the  Cow*,  Day  end  Night, 381.  DaivavAta,  aon  of  Deva-

Sun,  204, 248,  848,  566.  - ripe  milk  in  raw,  86,  vfttn,  another  name  of

575,  644.  AbhyAvartin,  589.

- white  milk  in  black  Dakaha,  Creative  Power,

or  red,  86,  897,  644.  an  Aditya,  114,  292,
Cow-pen.  tho  aerial  atoll,  433,  617,  618.

the  firnjamout,  638.  Dakshipa, southern, name

Cowell,  Prof.  E.  B  ,  viii.,  of  one  of  the  sacrificial

xiii.  fires,  306,  387  notes.

299,  Creation  of  tho  worlds,  DakshipA,  Frieata’  houor-
aacribed  to  Agni,  91,j(  arlum,  22,  169,  272,

465,  662.  ' '  886  ;  see  Guerdon,  and

- -  —  India,  507.  Liberality  to  Priests.

- Indra  aqd  Soma,  Dame,  tho,  VAk  or  lioda-

609,  644.  al,  131.

- Soma,  609.  Damoa,  Consorts  of  Gods,

- tho  Unborn,  18,  88,  86,  134,  260,

the  Sun,  91.  808,816,825,439,609,

- Tvashfar,  124,  615,  617,  616,  610.

882.  DAnava,  ono  of  a  olaaa  of

— —  — —  Sageaor  Riahia,  demons,  271,  272,  489,

800.  404.

Croator,  Agui,  92.  Dauoor,  of  tho  war  dance,

-  Supremo  God,  180.  Indra, 181,286,  496,591.

- Trash  tar,  124,382.  - fomalo,  118.

Dancers,  Aavius,  634.'
Danu,  the  mothor  of  the
DAnavas,  482,  489,  494.
DAnu,  a  kind  of  demon.
44,  846.

Darbha,  a  spociea  of  graaa,
255.

- a  man’s  name, 6  32  note.

DArbliya,  son  of  Darbha,
632.

Darius,  649.

Dark,  aborigines,  611  ;

tee  Dusky,  etc.

Dd«a(s)  savage  foo(a),  do-
mon(s),  44,  183,  134,
210, 240,  270,275,  285,
851,354,417,430,  432,
433,436,490,401,  406,
497,580,  583,  586, 588,
594,  811,  630.


Cow,  the  Cosmic,  243, 379.

■ - Ushas,  Dawn,  222,

272,  346,  349,  860,
385,  401,  513.

4 - Earth,  210,212,  218,

"  218,  801,  437,  438,
440.

- Plenty,  192,

855,  447,  449.

- Prism,  110, 530,  619

637.

- Cloud,  224.

- VAk,  Speech,  325,

884,  393.

—hymn  of  praise,  262.

- poet,  249.

- boon  given  by  Indra,

272-285.

—buffalo  tied  as  repre-
sontont  of  a  penitent
sinner,  408.

Cows,  hymn  in  honour
of,  569,  590.


Ushas,  light  olouds,

67, 94, 118, 536.  DadiiIti,  a  Rlshi  protect-

—rays  of  light,  14,  85,  od  by  Indra,  149,  276-
118, 120, 131,  172,  287,  279,  433,  681,  588.

290,  348,883,392,393,  Dadhloha  «.  Dadhyach,
401,  411,  512,  513,  108  note.

575.  DadhikrA  -  Dadhikr&s,


- raln-olouds,  1 1 4, 316,

882,  419.

—of  the  MaruU,  54,

SOI,  626.

—floods  of  rain,  423.

—— sacrificial,  54,98,121,  DadhikrAvan  »  Dadhi-
384.  krAs,  445,  446

—  milk,  108,  357.  Dadhyach,  son  of  Athar-
^ - Heaven  and  Earth,  van,  104, 108,  155, 160,


336,  443  notes.
Dadhikrits,  a  peraoniflea-
tion  of  tho  morning
Sun,  108, 836,  337,443-

446.


201,  325,  831,  425.

- Air-Goddesses,  326.

- Waters,  468.

- - Rivers,  507.


168,  193,  571.

Dadikae,  649.

Daggers,  of  the  Maruta,

517.


1HDBX  OF  NAMES,  KTC.


Dasadyu,  the  nemo  of  a  Dead,  Departed,  God  of  DhishnyAs,  side- altar*,
Rishi,  46,  47,  587.  tho,  Yama,  87.  54,  85.  397  note.

Dasagvas,  a  priestly  foroi-  Death,  Agoi,  as  a  God  of,  Dhuni,  a  demon,  279,
ly,  85,  803,  361,  455,  396.  677,581.

490,  513.  Decay,  31.  Dhv&nya,  the  name  of  a

Dasoni,  a  man's  name,  580.Deer,  524.  545  ;  red,  56;  man,  496.

Do*ra(a),  Wonder-work-  Spotted  (the  steeds  of  Dhvasanti,  a  proUgi  of
er(8),Asvins14,155l449.  the  Maruts,  rain-clouds),  the  Aavins,  149.
Daayu(n),  dcmon(e),  56,  88,  110,  128,  225,  Diespiter,  75.
savage  foe(s),  15,  46,  301,522,  525,627.  Dice,  68,  149.

62,  70,  74,  81,  87,  101,  Deer-skins,  231.  Digvijaya,  conquest  in  all

180,  131, 133, 135, 158,  Deification,  of  the  Ribhus,  directions,  443,  476.

160. 240. 272,  273, 276,  23,  24,  143,  387  ;  437,  Dionysus,  22.

279,285,344,  356,369,  438,  444,  442  ;  of  the  Director,  PrasAstar,  122,

411,  412,  430,  443,  470,  Maruts,  96,  112.  806,  644.

474,479,487,489,491,  Delhi,  10S.  Dlrghasravaa,  the  name

493,  589, 572,  576,  581,  Deluge,  the,  301  vote.  of  a  Jlishi,  146.
582,584,586,591,593.  Demons  of  drought  or  Dlrghatamas,  a  celebrated

Daayu-slaycr,  the,  Indra,  darkness  ;  iu  Ahi,  Ar-  Rishi,.  193,  202,  210,
606.  buda,  AurnavAbha,  As-  211,  400.

.  Dawn,  vi.,  40,  43,  60,  63-  na,  Brisaya,  Chumuri,  Diseases,  jaundice,  68  ;
67,  78,  85, 93,  94,  118,  Dasoni.  Dhuni,  Dribht-  leprosy,  158, 168.

119,  149-151,  153,  169-  ka,  Illbisa,  Karauja,  Dispenser,  the,  Bhoga,
178, 188, 190,  209, 222,  KunAru,  KushavA,  Kri-  514.

243.245.247.266.272,  vi,  Kuyava,  Miiga,  Distributer,  tho,  Ansa,
278,  286, 303, 307, 336,  Mrigaya,  Namuchi,  259,  292.

861,  385,  892, 893, 305,  Pornaya,  Pipru.Rudhi-  Diti,  tho  antithesis  of
401, 409, 482,  445,  446,  krts,  9ambara,  Sushna,  Aditi,  634.

455,  456,  459,  465,  481,  SvarbhAnu,  Svasna,  Div,  Heaven,  123  note.
612, 513, 515, 518,  543,  Urana,  Vsla,  Vangrida,  DivodSaa,  a  liberal  princo,
546-543,567,  609,  626,  Varchin,  Vetasu,  Vis-  70,  147,  156,  162,  181,
629,  635, 636,  vAch,  Vyansa.  182,  283,  453,  571,  572,

Dawns,  9,  118,  150, 151,  Destruction,  31,  805.  577, 588, 593,  600,  611,

169, 171,  186,  195,266,  DevAh.  Bright  Brings,  631.

323,  348, 356, 388, 396,  Gods,  293nofc,  ifcGods.  Dogs,  809,  418.

402,  409,  445,  456,  485,  Devasravas,  a  Rishi,  338,  - figurative,  246.

467, 515, 530, 544, 598,  339.  Donations,  eulogies  of,

604,629.  DcvavAta,  a  Rishi,  338,  168,  174,  410,  496;  tee

- Consort  of  the,  the  839,  410,  589  note.  Liberality  to  Priests.

Sun,  604,  635,  636.  Dharuna,  said  to  be  a  Doors,  divine,  16,  197,

• - the  two,  night  and  Rishi’s  name,  479  note.  252,  263,  322,  471.

morning,  465.  DhishanA,  a  Soma  bowl ;  Dragon(s),cloud-serpent{a),

772.  Wish,  Wish-Goddeas,  a  drought-demon  (a),  43,

D»y  and  Night,  8,  128,  Goddess  of  prosperity, 26,  44,  69,  "3,  88,  103,

172,  210,  519,  627.  125,  319,  369,  438,503.  104,  228,  251,  270, 273,


I.HDEX  OP  HaMES,  ETC.


274,278,  283,413,  414,
488,  489,491,  494,  575.
579.

Dragon  of  the  Deep,  Ahi-
budhnya,  an  atmosphe¬
ric  deity,  250,  298,  459,
606,  617.

DravinodAs,  Wealth-
Qiver,  Agni,  19,  306
nolei.

Dfibhlka;  the  namo  of  a
demon,  277.

Dfiahadvatl,  Rocky,  the
namo  of  n  itroam,  5,
839.

Druh,  a  spirit  of  mis-
ohief,  au  oppressor,  425,

480.

Druhyus,  men  of  a  cer¬
tain  Vedio  tribe,  10,
140,  608.

Drum,  36,  612.

—  addressed  and  glori¬
fied,  612.

Dual  deities,  8,  21.
Durgo,  a  commentator,
'  876  note.

Durgnhn,  tho  father  of
Purukutaa,  448  note.
Dushyanta,  a  famous
King,  671  note.

Dusky,  dark,  brood,  skin
(hostile  natives),  180,
181.

Dutt,  R.  Ch.,  648.

Dvita,  the  name  of  a  God,

481.

Dy.tue,  Heaven,  40,  75,
88,  114,  167,  179,  182,
189,196,  208,212,  225,
255,  339,  844,  348,  860,
378,  385,  892,418,  421,
603,  515,  529,530,534,

558,566,567,  579,615,
619,  628,  633,  642.


Dyauahpitar,  Father  Hea¬
ven,  75,  114  note*.

DyauB-Prithivi,  Heaven-
Earth,  2 1  note.

DyAvAprithivl,  Heaven-
Earth;  377,  642  notei.

Dyotann,  eaid  to  bo  the
namo  of  a  king,  680  note.

Dyu  =  Dyaus,  40,  88,  615
note*.

Dyumna,  splendour,  said
to  be  a  Riahi’a  name,
484  note.

•

/Earth,  27,  66,  114,  123,
125-127,  129,  225-255,
266,  208,  828,  385,389,
377,  307,411.  413,456,
458,  495,  605, 607,509,
611,  614,629, 537,616,
619,  021.

—central  point  of,  tho
alter,  190.

- and  Heaven,  41, 107,

249  ;  tee  lloavon  and
Earth.

Kcolosiasto",  615.

Eclipse,  182,  412,  416,
4  JO,  431,489,001,502,
631,  592.

Edda,  192  note.

Eggcling,  Prof.  J.,  446.

EhlraAyAsah,  4  note*

Ehui,  Dr.  J.,40, 106,154,
628.

Eight  point*  of  oarth,  49.

Eight-footod,  Qaurl,  VAk,
2*6.

Eiloithyia,  232.

Elephant,  88,  559.

Eleven  Gods  of  heaven,
of  waters,  of  earth,  1 98.

Enohanter,  Ahi,  270.

Eugulfcr,  Vritra,  4S9.

Enthusiasm,  606.


Eos,  40.

Ephedra,  a  species  of
plant,  2  note.

- distachyn,  2  note.

Etasa,  a  favourito  of  In-
dra,  84,  166,  167,  283,
432,  489,  569.

- one  of  the  Sun’s  hor¬
ses,  415,  493,  548.

KvAvada,  a  Rishi,  511.

EvayAmarut,  a  sacrificial
exclamation,  553,  654.

Exorcism,  tee  luoantation.

Exposure  of  children,  295.

Eye,  the,  tho  Sun,  189.

- Agni,  476.

—of  Varupaand  Mitra,
the  Sun,  619.

Eyes  of  heaven,  Sun  and
Moou,  07.

Pair  ooupLixiOHKO,
Aryas,  130.

- Rudra,  300.

Faloon,  hawk,  44,  45,
162,  542,  545,  608,

- — .  Soma-briuger,

120,  365,418,428,  429,
611,  518.

Falsehood,  205,  478.

False  worshipper,  70  note.

Famine,  828,  874.

Far  stridor,  Vishnu,  826.

Fato,  31  note.

Father,  Heaven,  95,  114,
116,  196,  208,  211,
212,  226.

- Agni,  564.

—  Brihaspati,  454,  644.

— Parjanya,  550.

- the  Primeval,  615.

- Rudrs,  616.

- Savitar,  143.

- Sun,  223.

- Supreme  God,  130.


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  ETC.


Father  and  Mother,  Hea-  Forest  life  of  BrAhmans,  Garbe,  Dr.,  572.

ven  and  Earth,  211,  apparent  allusion  to,  77-Garga,  a  Vodic  Rishi,  611
212,  219, 613.  Forte,  cloud-castles,  46,  note.

Fathers,  Manes,  Ancea-  70,  74,  132,  183,  304,  GArhapatya,  householder's
tral  Spirits,  115,  159,  4S9,  573,  5S0.  western  eacred  fire,  20,

— of  aborigines,  133,  41,  219,  306,  337.

183,  6u5.  GArtsamada,  a  name  of

—  autumnal,  183,  239.  R.  V.  Book  II.,  259.

— of  iron,  80, 285,  429.  GarutmAn,  the  Celestial
Fortune,  31  note.  Bird,  the  Sun,  227.


159,

192,  312,380,395,479,
515,  622,  647.

—cause  of  the  fruitful*
new  of  heaven  and
earth,  395.


Fervour,  personified,  505  Four,  priests  or  Gods,  515.  Gaura,  a  wild  bull.  20,

note.  '  - castes,  374.  422,  462,  545,  notes.

Field,  Master  of  the,  the - chalices,  218,  437,  Gaurt,  a  wild  cow;  buffalo;


Genius  Loci,  460.  440,  441.

Fig-tree,  Holy,  188.  - dice,  58  note.

Filter  for  Soma  juice,  37,  - horns  of  Agni,  462.

188.  - Vedas,  462  note.

Fire,  187,  488  ;  tie  Agni.  Four-eyed,  Agni,  42.  note.

- production  of,  343.  Four-faced,  Varuna,  516.  Gaya,  a  Rishi,  478  note.


cloud,  226  note.

Gaurivtti,  a  Vodic  Ruhr,

489.

Gavaya,  a  wild  ox,  422


Fire-altars,  477.  Four-footed,  cloud,

Fire-drill,  34, 41, 82, 124,  Gaurl,  VAk,  222.

125,  175,  176,  343,  Fowler,  119.

466,  474,  477.  Friend,  Mitra,  535.

Five  Races,  Tribes,  etc.,  Fruit,  366,  524.

10, 115,  129,  158,  183,  Furrow,  personified,  461.
241,  262,  359,  374.  387,


GAyaW,  a  Vedio  metre  ;
a  specially  eacred  verso
in  that  metre,  88,  223,
224,  312,  390.

Gcldncr,  Prof.  K.,  xiv.,
172,  493,  592,  640.
Gharma,  libation  of  hot


445,  495,  498,  552,566,  Gadhi,  father  of  VisvA-  milk  ;  caldron  ;
608, 621,  632.  mitra,  874  note.  492,  523,  544.

— Rivers,  Land  of  the,  Gaia,  575  note.  Ghora,  father  of

Gairik8hita,apatronymio  Rishi  Kairva,  50.


459,


the


353.

- Adhvaryus,  827, 505


- Bulls,  827.

- HoUr-priosta,  303.

- Seasons,  221,  882.

Firefold  gift,  66.


of  Trasadasyu,  496.
Gambler,  58,  273,  296.


Gliosha,  said  to  be  son  of
Ohoshl,  164.


Gambling,  58,  149,  296,  QhoshA,  a  proUgie  of  the


552.

jheating  in,  552.


164.


Five-footod  Sire,  the  Year,  Ga(n)dlra,  Gandarll,
221-  GandliAra,  Gandhlris,

Floods,  waters  of  heaven,  modern  KandahAr  and
479,  614,  617.  its  people,  649  note.

Floods' Child,  Agni,  298,  Gandharva,  the,  a  Genius
303,  817.

Flower,  see  Lotus.

Food,  Soma,  251.

Footless  Maid,  Dawn,

205,  629.


Aavins,  158,  160,

168.

Ghrita^m),  clarified  but¬
ter,  3,  481,  462,  509,
53S,  642  notes.

- fatness,  fertilizing

rain,  533,  538  notes,
closely  oonnected  with  Onto,  consorts  of  tho
the  Sun,  26,  217.  God*.  316,  616  notes.

Gandharvas,  26. 119,860.  Goad.  624,  627,

GangA,  606,  632  note.  Go*t,  sacred  to  POshan,
Gauges,  vii.,  5, 85  notes.  215.


INDEX  Or  NAVIES,  ETC.


683


Goat-borne,  Pushan,  191,  Golden-handed,  Savitar,  HAridrava,  88  note.

625-627.  25,  49,  618  ;  Golden  Harischandra,  the  name

GpD,  One,  sec  Monotheism.  One,  the  Sun,  19,  865  ;  of  a  king,  30  note.
Goddess,  Goddeaaea,  16,  Golden  Bull,  the  Sun,  Haritdla, a  tree, according

22,  26,  29,  81,  65,  67,  866;  Golden  Pair,  Hca-  to  SAyapa,  63.

74,  78,  119,  139,  151,  veil  and  Earth,  8G5  ;  Harita,  horeesof  the  Sun,

163,  169-171,  178,  211,  golden  ornaments,  110,  167,  403,  409.

264,  840,  851,  398,  231,526  ; - oar,  39,  HarivAn,  Lord  of  Bay

402,  423,  455,  456,  78,102,517; - chain,  Steeds,  Indra,  4  note.

459,  495,504,505,  509,  482.  524  ; - mail, 83,  HarlyOplyA,  the  name  of

518-615,  539,  547,  601,  - Reed  (Agni).  462;  a  place,  689.

635,  639.  car,  169  ;— avrord,  59  ;  Hnryaava  m  HarivAn,  4

Ooda,  Devaa,  Bright  — vlaora,  624  ;— mail-  note.

Beings,  possiw.  ties,  525.  .  Haug,  Dr.  M.,  827,  830,

- origin  of,  62,  211,  GoldatOcker,  Prof.  Th ,  570.

248,  894,450.575.  xiii,  Havirdh&nas,  carta  for

- number  of,  48,  330.  Gotama,  a  celebrated  bringing  Soma,  312,

- nude  immortal  by  iflubi,  79,  82,  80,  99,  note.

Agni,  468  ;  by  Savitar,  101,  102,  111,  155,  Hawk, 44  ;  Soma-brlngor,
457.  247,  391,  399,  520,527.  103,  680  ;  ett  Falcon.

- Immortal,  39,  07,  GoUaiaa,  82, 84,  87,  101,  Heaven,  Dyau»,40,48,73,

253,319,  323,448,539.  113,  118,  435,436.  75,88,95,114,116,118,

-  — dwelling-plaooa  of,  GrOHSiuann,  Prof.  H.,  xiv.  123,  125-127,  218,  225,
377,  383,  537,  620,  623.  xr.,  cl  paum.  247,  256,  328, 336, 341,

- abido  in  Indra,  379.  0,ita*mada,  a  Vodio  360,378,378,385,395,

- mother  of,  Aditi,  Jtluhl,  259,  811.  397,410,415,482,  450,

458  ;  Uabaa,  161.  GfiUatnadiu,  265,  284,  455,  456,  458,  503,  512,

- Fathorof,  Agni,  98  ;  809,312.  614,516,684,648,  566,

Brahmapaspati,  292 ;  Guordon,  57,  170,  173.  667,678,681,015,  685.

Dyaua,  Heaven,  211,  386  ;  seo  Dnkshipl  637,  642-644.

248,  675.  Guont,  95,  519.  -  home  of  the  Blest,

- ootuoiU  of,  26,  83,  of  mon,  Agni,  97,  207,  616.

213,260,816,825,389.  177,  262,  318, 393,  440,  Hoaven-Earth,  a  dual

—greater  and  leaser, 36.  469,  481,  674.  doity,  377.

- elder  and  younger, SO.Gueate,  tho  Asvine,  209.  Heaven  and  Earth,  3,  24,

- King  of,  Indra,  239.  Gungtl,  a  lunar  Goddess,  20,  41,  100,  123,  124,

- akin  to  mon,  193,  299.  136-139,143,144,  166-

296,  370,  872,  878.  167,  170, 172,  189,  196,

- priest*.  327.  H MB,  braided,  162.  200,204,208,211,212,

Gold,  39,  60,  64,  79.  88,  Hall,  Dr.  F.  E.,  135.  219, 248, 249,  262,  274,

218,304,399,  443,  620,  Hands, uplifted  in  prayor,  294,298,312,815,  316,
625,  533.  833,  634.  321,  324-327,  334,  340,

—tho  Sun,  532.  - healing  by  touch  of,  319, 368,  376,  877, 379,

Gold-oyed,  Savitar,  49;  300.  384,385,389,304,401,

gold-girt,  horse,  304.  Haim,  Swan,  tho  Sun, 416.  403,123,425,438,  443,


63*  ISD8X  OP  NAUM,  EW.

4*4,  459,  460,  480.  4S2,  Horn,  emblem  of  Hundred  autumns,  ditto;
499,  508,  515,  5*17.  519/  strength,  46,  529.  114,  298,  358.

•  529,  505,  568, 570, 572,  Horae,  rain-cloud,  88.  - Powers,  Lord  of,

674,593,601,615,818.  - lightning  or  the  Sun,  Indra,  paism;  aoa

633, 642, 643, 647.  804.  §atakratu.

Heaven  and  Earth,  Father -  Aghi,  238.  Hundred-wintered,  114,

and  Mother,  508.  — —  halter,  headstall,  260.

Heifer,  Ushaa,  348 ;Aditi,  girths,  etc.,  216.  Hunting,  wild  beasts,
417.  — — head  of,  given  to  483;  birds,  312.

.  Hell,  401.  Dadhyach,  108  note.  Husband  and  wifo  a*-

Hemispheres,  618.  642.  - Sacrifice  of  tho,  214-  sociato  in  sacrifice,  106,

Hephaiftos,  16,  72.  219.  182,  609.

'  Herald,  Agni,  34,  36,  62,  Horace,  Indra's,  8,  20,  Husbandry,  personified,
70-81,94,100,190,202,  39,  86f  105,  107,  131,  461.

269,261,265,267,268,  180,  217,  282,  382,  Hyniu,  personified,  515.

318,319,372,  393,404,  451,452,  482,611.  Hypbasis,  the  modern

405,  409, 555,  565,  572,  - Agni’s,  268,  392, 394,  Beds,  353.

615.  403,  561,  574.

Herdsman,  the  Sun,  224  ; - the  Asvins’,  450,  451,  IcrsRior,  Icterus,  68  note.

>;>  Indra,  361.  633.  Ida,  libation;  Prayer,  67,

Hewdotus,  618.  - Dawn's,  388,  688.  1 17.

Heroes  =  Gods,  26, 252,  - the  Sun’s,  68,  218,  Idaapati,  a  name  of  Par-

- Maruts,  529,531,  461,533,604.  jsnya,  507<

651,  554,  578,  617.  - tho  Maruts',  252,  522,ldris,  the  sacrificial  title

-  Aarinn,  540.  623,  525,  527-529,  532.  of  one  of  the  Maruts,

Hillebrandt,  Prof.  A.,  - Mitra- Vanina's,  533.  96  note.

143,  211,  461,  601.  VAyu’s,  451-453.  114,  a  Goddeaa  of  Prayer,

Hiuidlaya,  353.  - in  battle,  645.  16,  42.  57,  177,  178,

Hi(u)du,  649  note.  Hotar,  thief  priest;  in-  IPS,  252,  260,  293,

Hindustan,  vii.,  viii.  roker;  1,  65,  81,  100,  304,  820,  339,  343,

Hippocrene,  155.  122,  193.  196,  199,  381,388,470,471,  505.

Hirapyalasta,  uamo  of  a  259,  268,  275,  305, 306,  IUbisa',  a  drought-demon,
man,  1 56,  160.  357,  372,  SS0,  406, 529.  46.

Hiranyastupa,  a  son  of  Hotara,  tho  two  Celestial,  Immolator,  the  celestial,

Angiras,  40,  42.  16,198,252,322,327,471.  264.

Holy  Grass,  323,  481  ;  HotrA,  Invocation  per- Immortal,  originally  only
tee  Grass,  and  Sacred  sonified,  26,  198,  260,  Agni,  and  the  other

Grass.  389,  Gods  by  him,  468.

Holy  Speech,  26.  Hundred  castles,  forts,  - men,  in  their  child-

Home,  oblation,  109  note.  277,429,433,593,613.  ren,  127,  471.

Homer,  496,  646.  - Years,  natural  life-  Immortality  of  man,  526.

Honey,  33,  82,  243.  time,  556.  - the  drink  of,  29;  tee

Honoy-whipof  the  Asvins, - winters,  ditto,  89,  Atari  t.

25,  209.  98,260,525,  560,565,  Impeller,  the  Sun,  561,

Horace,  354.  567,  570,  686,  613.  560.


judbx  or  HAVira,  xtc.


635

Incantation,  against  Chief  of  Gods,  182,  Indu,  Soma;  Moon;  60,

jaundico,  68;  against  239;  King  of  all  things,  1 15, 165,  286,  430,  520,

venomous  roptilcs,  etc ,  45,  415;  All-sustainer,  598,  603.

255,  256.  383;  identifiable  with  Indus,  vi.,  35.  44,  61,  90,

Indians,  originally  in-  other  Gods,  611;  tute-  128,168,174,250,430,

habitants  of  a  colder  lary -God  of  the  Ar-  507,522,562,608,681.

country,  525  note.  yans,  3,  9,  128,  129;  Infinite,  Aditi,  80,  115,

Indigence,  335.  God  of  Battles,  71,  231,293.

Indigenous  raoes,  tee  Ab-  419,  426,  tee  Battle;  - Dyaus,  530.

originea.  his  birth,  416;  his  Inspiration,  112,  355,

Irnlika,  Arrian’s,  viii.  mother,  296,  416,  417;  '400,  407,  616,  563,

Indra,  vi.,  3-5,  14, 17-21,  his  father,  Dyaus,  119,  564,  641.

23,  24,  26,  28,  34,  36-  413;  Tvashfcar,  868;  Invoker,  100,  122,  399;

89,  43-46,  61,  56,  57,  Vy«6sa,  416,  <117;  his  $te  Hotar.

60,  69-79,  81,  82-87,  Consort,  IndrAnl,  26,  Invokers,  the  two  osles-
95,99,  101,  108-110,  106,  878,  388;  his  tial,  16,  263, 322,  827;

112,113,115.  128-135,  greatness,  13,73,  83,  see  HoUrs.

187-140,  143,  144,147,  351,  411;  his  battles  IrAvatf,  the  river  RAvt,

165,  157,163-108,173,  with  domons  of  the  422  note.
178-185,187,191,193,  air,  14,  43,  44,  46,  69,  Iron,  or  bronss,  (Ayan),
197,207-200,  213-215,  70,  60,  103,  104;  his  78,  80  113,  218,443,

217,  218,  222,  227-220,  attributes  and  deeds,  633,534,658,610,647.
232-213,  246,  260,  251,  9,  272-274;  his  rivalry  Isaiah,  114.

259,  263,  268,  270-287,  with  Varuna,  448;  his  Jsha,  said  to  bo  a  Itishi’s
290,  204, 296, -298,  306,  relations  with  his  wor-  name,  473  note.

308,  310-313.  322,  323,  ahippors,  6,  7,  11,  12,

340,  845-379,  832-384,  45,  76,  77,  128,  129,  Jaoat!,  a  Vodio  motre,

387-389,  394,  410-441,  284,  285;  his  various  223,  224.

445,  440,  451-455,  458,  forms,  373;  hi-  Ivor nes,  Jahnu,  a  Great  Buhl,
469.  461.  462,  465,  466.  382  ;  his  flight,  44.  157,  386.

468,471.472,477,488,  Indra-Agni,  21,  24,  25,  JAhusha,  a  protigt of  the
603,  508-608,  610*61 2-  331,  332,  487,  652.  553,  Asvins,  157.

61 4,  617-619,  527,  552,  628,  629.  Jamodngni,  a  flislii,  390.

558, 558,  561, 5C9,  574-  Indrftgnt,  24,  140-142.  Jamadagnis,  374.

612,  618,  621,622,  626-  Indrrtnt.  26, 106.373,515.  JanitA- Latin  gonito(r),
631,  640-642,  644.  Indra. Brihiupnti,  -1, 433.  180  note.

• — -God  of  the  bluosky;  Indrn-Ptlshan,  21.  JAUvcdas,  Omniscient

Thunderer;  Caster  of  Indra-Soma,  614.  Agni,  60-62,  81,  101,

the  Stone;  Bounteous  Indra-Varuna,  21,  389,  102,121.127,264,817,

Lovd  (Magh-v-n);  The  446-449,  040,  641.  322,  323.  325. 334,  335,

Mighty  (Sakra);  Lord  IndrAvarunA,  21.  337, 338,  340,348, 385,

of  Hundred  Powers  Indra- VAyu,  3,  187,  451,  393,397.402.470,409,

(§atekratu);  Lord  of  452.  470,471,  475,484.486,

the  Brave;  Lord  of  Indra- Vishriu,  21,  458,  509,  559, 660. 564, 666,

Bay  Steeds, etc., pauim.  641,  642.  570,  573,574.


09*  tfcMx  of  namm,  etc*

Jathara,  a  word  of  doubt-  Karanja,  a  demon,  74.  King,  Soma,  29,  116.

ful  meaning,  143  note.  Karkandhu,  a  proUgt  of - Varupa,  91,  31,  32,

Jfttdahthira,  a  man’*  the  Asvins,  145.  294,  295.

name,  278.  KarfilAtt,  a  name  of  Kings.  Adityae,  24,  293.

Jaundice,  68.  Puahan,  433.  - A“rin8>  3.

jetar,  aliishi,  13  note.  Kasoju,  the  name  of  a - Gods,  440.

Jewels,  46.  prince,  147.  - Mitra  and  Varupa,

Jonea,  Sir  W.,  390.  Kasyapa,  a  famous  Uiahi,  95,  168,  189,  190,  1 92,
Joshua,  the  Book  of,  431 .  127,  366.  306, 311, 300,  384, 583-

Jumna,  tho  Yatnunft,  5,  Kaumudi,  Moonlight  per-  636,  538,  672,  633.

611  n ota.  *  aonified,  4 1,  695  note*.  - Varuna,  Mitra,  Arya-

Jupiter,  46,  75,  114,  Kausika,  God  of  Kusikas,  man,  67,

600.  Indra,  13.  - warrior*,  110.

JyotUhtoma,  a  Soma  Kavi,  father  of  OsanA,  Kftphfin,  Greek  name  of
.  ceremony,  266  note.  70,  169,  dll,  580.  the  Kabul  rirer,  vii.,

Jyotoua,  Moonlight  per-  Kftvya,  UsanA,  Kami’s  522,  649  notes.
aonified,  47,  595  nodes.  son,  70,  71,  106,  159,  Kosa'.a,  the  modern  Oudh,
166,  411.  374  note.

KAbcl,  viL,  622,  649.  KerosAni,  Iranic  form  of  Kratu,  act,  power,  6  note.

Kaogi,  Prof.  A.,  xiv.,  xv.  KrUftnu,  143.  - the  name  of  a  Great

K&kamblra,  a  branching  Khadi,  ring,  diHcua,  quoit,  Pviahi,  30  note.
tree,  symbolizing  father  89.  KrisAnu,  a  guardian  of

and  boub,  614.  Khadira,  Khayar,  a  «pe-  the  celestinl  Soma.148,

Kakahlviln,  a  Riahi,  21,  cles  of  tree,  375.  208,  429.

71.  145,  146,  154, 155,  Khela,  the  name  of  a  Krishna,  the  name  of  a
153,163,164.168.173,  King.  165.159.  fliahi,  157,  158.

174,  421,  428,  503,  513.  Khoraamiaus,  649.  Krivi,  a  cloud-demon,
Kali,  a  pishi,  147.  Ktkatas,  a  non-Aryan  231,236.

Kalpa,  the  ceremonial  of  people,  874.  Krumu,  n  tributary  of

the  Veda,  462  note.  Kindler,  Agntdh,  Fire-  the  Indus,  522.
Kandahar,  649.  lighter,  259, 306.  Kshatra.  the  name  of  a

Kantta,  patronymic  of  Kino,  ray*  of  light,  ftishff  611.

Pfithuaravos,  157  node.  streams  of  rain,  8,  13,  Kshatriya,  315,  647.
Kanva,  a  pishi,  14, 17, 18,  44,  69, 106.  120,  348-  Kshetmpati,  Lord  of  tho

50-53.56,  60,  64.66,  350,  355,  367,  430,  Field,  Genius  Loci,  460

145.158,161.193.503.  456,  479,  515,  533,  note.

Kapvas,  17,  52,  61,  63-  533,  575,  598,  635.  Kublifl.  the  KAbul  river,

65<  *7.  King,  taxer  of  the  rich,  90.  vii.,  44,  507, 522,  562.

Kapardin,  wearing  braid - Agni,  51,  127,  S17,  Kuhn,  Prof.  A,  163.

cd  hair,  152,  825  note.  380.  553,  561-563,566,  Kuhfl,alunarGoddcss,299.
Kapinjala,  a  species  of  635.  KulM,  an  unidentified

partridge,  312,  313. - Bribaspati,  297.  stream,  135,  C09  note.

KApishlhala,  a  patrony - Indra,  45,  87,  418,  Kulitara,  a  demon  or  »a-

mio  of  Durga,  376  579,  683,  502,  610.  vage,  said  to  be  tho

hot*'  .  - Mitra,  3S6.  father  of  §ambara,  432.


MMX  OF  NAMES,  8T0.  58 1

KunArn,  a  demon,  345,  28S,  292, 295, 296,  318,  MiODONttL,  Prof,  A.  A.,

Kurukshetra,  a  district  in  323.330,837,388,397.  83,

N.-W.  Indin,  108  note.  402.404,  419,  425,  446,  Mada,  delight,  rapturous

Kurum,  522  note.  448, 460.  465,  471,  478,  joy,  69  note.

Kuan  gras*,  4,  343;  ue  488,510.628,529,533,  MadhuohchbandAs,  a  Ve-
Sacred  Qrasa.  536, 538,  540,  547, 557,  die  Rishi,  1,  13,

Kush&vA,  name  of  n  fe-  5C7, 570, 598,  013, 619,  MadhuvidyA,  knowledge
male  Bend,  417.  642, 628,  640,  642,  643,  of  Soma,  155, 543  notes.

Kuaika(s),  a  famous  R!shi  647.  Maghovan,  Lord  of  Boud-

and  liis  descendant*,  Law,  Sacrifice,  40,  58,  60,  ty,  Iudra,  ptutim.

13,  310,  345,  347,  S53,  90.  92.  107,  268,  881,  Maghavana, wealthy  metf,

364,  370, 373, 37.4,  386.  882, 390,  897,  398,  425,  noble*,  instltators  of

Kutan,  n  favourite  of  468,  477.484,480,508,  sacrifice,  77,  263,  488,

Indrn,  46,  70,  75,  87,  510,  673,  698, ,002.  546.

121,126,130,  136,139,  Leader,  Noahjnr,  ono  of  Magio,  power  of  Gods,
143,140,160,239,241,  the  priests.  259,  265.  433,  552,  627,  634.

277,283,  412,  428,  431,  Loprosy,  158  note ,  - of  fiends,  43,  44,  46,

489,493,  577,  580,  687,  Leviticus,  338.  70,  75,  631.

592,600.  Liberality  to  priests,  Mai. AbhArata,  vii>\,  300.

Kuvitsa,  a  oortain  mall-  praises  of,  76, 168, 173,  Mabt,  Groat  Goddess,  as-
oious  man,  aocording  174,410,  482,487,492,  sociated  with  I1A  and

to  SAyana,  606  note.  496,  499,632,607,  035.  Sarnavatl,  16,  198,  471.

Kuyava,  liar  vest- Spoflor,  Lifo,  natural  duration  of,  Mahldharn,  xi.,  214,  229,
a  demon.  134, 185,  412,  ue  Hundred  Winters.  462,477,486,  651.

592  note.  - duration  of,  fixed  by  Maiden,  the,  Dawn,  218.

KuyftvAch,  ft  domon  or  the  Gods,  114.  -  Rodest,  282.

savage  240.  Lightning,  ft  fora  of  Maidens,  fingers,  195, 804.

Agni,  101,  124,  137,  -  Dawns,  205.

Ladt  or  TUi  Light,  66,  219,  264,  288.  -  Waters,  303.  •

68.  - the  bride  of  the  -  River#,  419.

Lak*hmana,  the  uamo  of  Maruts,  232  note.  MaitrAvarupa,  ono  of  the
a  man,  496.  •  Lightnings,  personified,  priwta,  122  note.

Lftkshmt,  412  note.  6ll  Male,  the,  Agni.  326.

Lunoesof  thoMaruta.524,  Linch-pin,  emblem  of  MamatA,  wife  of  Uchath-
625,638;  tee  Spears.  stability,  49.  ya,  202‘,  211,  5 65.

Lanraan,  Prof.  O.,  486,  Lion,  88,  340,  412,  479,  MAmatoya,  Dtrghatftmas,
502.  S4l,  6 42.  son  of  MamatA,  202,

Lassen,  Prof.  Ch-.,  viii.,  —the,  Agni,  124,  819.  400.

44,  649.  - Paijanya,  55 0.  Man,  service  of,  42.

Law,  Coemic  and  Moral  Loplmudrft,  Agastya’s  MAna,  a  Rishi,  229,  335,
(riUf),  2,  3,  28,  52  61,  wife,  649,  660.  242,  248,  253.

64,90,  92,97, 100,  106,  Lotus(es),  645,  571.  MAnas,  men  of  Mana's

115, 119,136,  137, 151,  - stems,  631.  family,  235,  237,  246,

171,199-202.204,205,  Ludwig,  Prof.  A.,  xiv.,  248.
209,211,225,253,268,  xv./ef  jxmim.  Manana,  a  Risbi,  611.


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC.


MaydaU,  division,  Book  260,263.270,271,290-  Mend,  daughter  of  King
of  the  R.  V.,  vi,  269.  303,  305,  311.  317, 322,  Yriahaiiaava,  71.

Manddrya,  a  Vedic  bard,  323, 832-334,  340,  345,  -  an  Apsaras,  mother

230.  231,  233,  234.  348-351,  356, 357,  408,  of  8  \kuntalA,  873  note.

Maodhdtar.  a  royal  $i«bi,  411,  418,419,421,  428,  Meru,  ft  sacred  mountain,
117.  439. 440, 458,  454,  459,  120  note.

Manes,  115, 1 39 ;«« Fathers.  468, 172,487-489,  491-  Metal,  72,  78  ;  tee  Iron.
Manning,  Mrs.,  xv.  498,  499,  501-507,  509,  Metres,  223,  563.

Manslaughter,  fine  for,  612,  514,  519-532,  550, - of  the  Rigveda,  223  ;

543  note.  553-555,  558, 561,  565,  tee  Appendix.

Mantra,  vi,  462.  572.  575, 576, 579, 582,  Milch-cow,  milch-kino  ;

Mauu,  man ;  the  father  691, 599, 602, 509,  612,  tee  Cow,  Cows,  Kine.

of  mankind,  16,  18,  84,  614-619,  622,  637,  638.  -  =  hymn,  262.

42,  51,52,  61,  62,  64,  Marute,  originally  storms,  Milk,  passim.

92,  100, 125,  147,  148,  deified,  8,  96,  112. - -  rain,  88,  230,551

152,  177,  181,193,  270,  -  Music  of  the,  53,  note.

300, 320.  370,  337, 405,  55,  8S,  109,  112.  - a  hymn,  249.

418,  428,  457, 183, 513,  MArutlsva,  the  name  of  a - -  water,  632.

582,  640.  prince,  496.  Milky  Way.  136  note.

— —  Institute*  of,  5,  21,  MasarsAra,  a  man's  name,  Milton,  266,  634.

36,606,  647.  •  169.  Mita^,  sacred  name  of

Manus=Manu,84,42,100,  Mfltarisvan,  a  mystic  one  of  the  Maruta,  96
104,442,483,568,  571.  being,  40,  81,  05,  120,  note.

Minya.  son  of  Mina,  229.  126,  145, 177, 190, 198,  Mitra,  a  Light-God,  3,

Mare,  Ushaa  compared  to  202,227,254,318,319,  17-19,  25,  23-32,  34,

a,  40.  456.  329,340,  844,  563.  48,  50,  52,  55,  57-59,

Mares.  Indra's  593,  602.  Matrons,  Hoaven  and  61.95,  99,  102,  114-

- rivers  compared  to,  Earth,  615.  116,123,125-127,138,

853.  Measure,  measuring  line,  144,  153. 154, 168, 169,

- -hymns,  447.  55.  179,180,189-191,  196,

- libations,  200.  Meath  =•  rain,  524.  204,208,214,227,233,

- -  Waters  or  Air-God-Mcdbfttithi,  a  Vedic  Rishi,  249, 258,  259,  261, 292-

desses,  326.  14,  21,  69,  373.  ’  297,301,306,808,321.

Msrichi,  a  Great  iRishi,  Medhyititbi,  a  Rishi,  51,  323,337,360,361,378,

30,127.  52.  380,336-389,393,394.

Maruta,  Storm -Gods,  7,  Mediator,  Agni,  1,  123,  397.400,408,443,445.

8,  12, 17-19,  23,  24, 27,  192,  391,  393, 397.  458-460,  468, 480,  487,

28,  4n,  52-56,  61,  G9,  -  Rudra,  152.  502,505,  506,514-517,

73,  87-89,  95,  96,  103,  Medicine,  29,60, 114,  152,  519,538-540,548,55 6-
109-115,  123,  128-131,  210,  645.  558,  560,  562, 565,  567,

134, 138,  139, 144, 152,  -  heavenly,  47.  568, 572, 582. 585, 612,

153, 155, 167, 176,  178,  Megaatbenes,  viii.  615,617,619,622,  633.

185,  186.190.  192.198,  Men,  deification  of,  23,  Mitra- Varuna,  3,  21, 168,
199, 209.214.il 7,  228-  3S7.  188,  204,  205,  311,390,

237’,  239, 246, 250, 251,  -  akin  to  Gods,  225.  502,  533,  539,  638  640.


IXDBX  OP  NAMES,  ETC.  689

Monogamy,  indications  Mouthless,  barbarians,  Navavtstva,  52,  581.

of,  136,  172,  896.  489.  Neotar,  29,  186,  609.  .

Monotheism,  227,  877.  Mriga,  the  Beast,  a  de-  Nosh  tar, ono  of  tho  priests,
Month,  intercalary,  33,  mon,  497.  19,'  259,  306.

222.  Mrignya,  a  demon  of  air,  N6vc,  Fdlix  (Essay  on  tlio

Months  «  monthly  fosti-  412.  Ribhus),  438.

vals,  349.  Muir,  Dr.  J.,  ix.,  xii.,  xiii,,  Nighaylu,  a  Ve<lic  gloss-’

Moon,  81,  83,  47,  108,  xv.,  el  patsim.  ary,  48.

123. 133, 136.131,  154,  Mailer,  Prof.  F.  Max,  ix,  Night,  48,  85,  119,  172,
189,  217, 222, 234, 255,  xi.,  xiv.,  xv.,  el ptutitn.  298,  307,  456,  471,532,
261,  310,  461, 595,  598,  M ungoose,  257  note.  626.

603,609,  622.  Munja-graas,  218.  - and  Day,  350.

Moonlight,  personified,  - and  Dawn,  16,  98,

47,  675  not*.  Nahusha,  Man,*^,  478.  126,  167,  822.

Moons,  twolve,  83.  Nuhushns,  men,  neigh-  - and  Morning,  86, 197,

Morning,  40,  63,  65,  187,  bouring  people,  640  222,242,249,252,263,

170.  273,  298,  337,  note,  583,  688,  608.  298,  816, 833,382,  458,

346,  850,  351,  388,393,  Naml.a  friend  and  proUgi  405,  471.

471,  675,  593,  035,644.  of  Indra,  74,  580.  Nine-footed,  Gaurf,  Vdk,
Mornings,  151, 170,  213,  Namuchi,  a  demon  6,  226.

327,  379,  408,  445,455,  75,  277,  401,  580.  Niuers,  ninefold,  tho  Na-

456,  508,622.  NarakasthUnam,  hell, 401  vagvaa,  518  note.

Mortar,  36, 87,  627.  note.  Ninety  floods,  rivers,

Mothor,  Earth,  211,  220,  Nartsansa,  Praise  of  Men,  103.

C44.  •  Agul,  10,  22,  139,  197, - forts,  181,  831.

- Aditi,  580.  263,  308,  344,  403,471, - stoeds-days,  208.

- Dawn,  305,  618.  585.  Ninety-nine  arms,  27 7.

- the  Mighty,  VAV,515.NArmars,  a  fiend,  275. - forts,  76,  283,  428,

- Pfifni,  637.  NArminl,  porhaps  tho  489,  COO.

_ IUsA,  605.  name  of  a  fort,  203. - rivers,  44,  255.

Mothers,  Heaven  and  Nary*,  a  chief  or  flUbi, - Vflyu’s  horses,  453.

Earth,  316,  818,  824.  76.  116.  - Vfitras,  demons,

- Waters,  29,  48,  196,  NAaatyas,thcA$vins,4,24,  108.

271.  47,  48,  63,  65,  154-162,  Nirriti,  Destruction,  31,

_ Rivers,  48,  353.  238,  244, 246-248,  811,  64,  BOB,  645.

_ Dawns,  516.  378,  886,  409,  443,  449,  Nirukta,  Yftska’s  Com-

_ regions  of  spaco, 378.  450,614,  640,548,545,  mcnUry  on  tho  Ni-

Moun tain  » cloud,  9,  69,  665,616,  618,634,635.  ghantus,  xi„  3,  5.  193

83,  93,94,108,  892-394,  Nature,  Aditi,  30,  32, 97,  376.

411,  418,698,  598.  115,  534.  N ish (Idas,  aboriginal  tri-

_ home  of  tho  Soma - Prakriti,220.  bos,  10  nole.

plant,  2,  12.  60.  - Diti,  634.  Nlti-Manjari,  a  treatise

Mountains,  Gods  preiud-  Navagvas,  a  mythical  on  ethic*,  24  noU.
ing  over,  439.  •  race,  45,  85,  361,  455,  Nivid(a),  liturgical  invo-

- personified,  51 4, 582.  490,513,514,661,552.  cations,  330,  417,  640,

44


690


1XDXX  or  KA MM,  ETC.


Nodhas,  a  Vedic  Rishi,  823, 325, 349, 892,  394,  Parijman,  the  Roarner
79,  84,  86,  87,  89.  404.  round,  India,  the  Sun,

Nooee  of  Varupa,  68,  645.  Ornaments,  of  the  Maruts,  87,  102.

Non-  Aryans,  44,  381.  83.  Parjanya,  God  of  tho  rain-

.Noseleea,  Daayua,  barba- - of  prieata,  51.  cloud,  196,  224,  382,

riana,  489.  Oudh,  374,  433, 522  notet.  461,  507,  534,  585,  540,

Ntiynjfia,  serviceof  man,  Oxen=atars,  207.  550,616,  622,  623,  647.

42  note.  Oxhide,  laid  under  the  Parna,  the  PalAsa  tree,  129.

Nrishad,  the  father  of  Soma  mortar,  37.  Parpaya,  a  demon,  74.

.  Kao-vo,  158.  Parrot*,  jaundice  traua-

Paib,  the  ancient,  Hea-  ferred  to,  68.

Ocias,  *77,  95,  246,  353,  ven  and  Earth,  122.  Pinhavaa,  descendant*

S67,  461,  525,  619.  P*jra(a),  a  Rishi  and  his  of  Prithu,  589  note,
——of  ail-,  23,  513>  627.  family,  tL  71, 155, 153,  Parthiana,  649.

Oceana,  619.  159,  164,  168,  174.  Paruchchhepa,  a  Vedio

Offspring  of  the  Flood,  Paksha,  the  Sun,  374.  Rishi,  175,  182,  193.
Agni,  168  ;  sec  Water*,  Paldas,  a  tree,  ButeaFron-  Parushnt,  the  modern
Sou  of  tho.  doaa,  429.  Rftvl,  44,  422,  520.

Oke&nos,  146.  Pani(s),  demona  of  dark-  Parrata,  Geniua  of  moun-

Old  age,  157.  uesa.  44,  85,  108,  120,  tain  and  cloud,  167, 184,

O'dcnbcrg,  Dr.  H-,  xxv.  181, 165,  204,  290,  462,  872,  459,  583, 617.

Ok,  226.  567,  580,  594,  593, 603,  Parvatao,  439,  503.

Qmen,  312,  313.  606,  621,  629.  Pasupati,  Lord  of  Cattle,

Omnific,  Indra,  11.  Panjftb,  vii.,  44,  146,  422,  Rudra,  00  note.
Omniscient,  Gods,  221.  430,  433,  507,  520,  522,  P.^har.l,  147,  148  note*.

- Agni,  50,  470.  562,631.  PatbarvA,  said  to  be  a

- Asvins,  64.  Pantheism,  115.  man’s  name,  147.

- Indra,  000.  PdpadevatA,  Goddeaa  of  Pdtbya,  the  name  of  n

- the  Sun,  377.  Sin,  81  note.  eacrificer  ?  572.

- Varuna,  32,  83.  ParamAtmA,  Supremo  PatliyA,  a  Goddess  of

0x11,220.  Spirit,  Self,  or  Soul,  wealth,  wife  of  PA*ban,

Ono  All,  377.  423,  584  notes.  519.

One  Supreme  Boing,227.  ParamcBvara,  the  Supro-  Paura,  perhaps  the  name
One-footed, buflalo,  cloud,  me  Lord,  God,  611  note,  of  a  Rishi,  540,  542.

226.  Pardaara,  a  Vedic  Ruin,  Paurukutaya,  son  of  Pu-

Ordeals,  by  fire,  water,  90.’  rukutsn,  496  note.

combat,  210.  PArdvatas,  a  hostile  tribe,  PAvaka,  Purifier,  pure.

Order,  Cosmic  and  Moral,  520,  681.  bright,  Agni,  1 5, 337.

31,  302,  171,  172,  227,  ParAvrij,  an  outcast,  146,  PavnmAna,  a  namo  of
295, 816,  327, 347, 381,  163,'  279,  433.  Agni,  837  note.

397, 401, 103, 408, 421,  Parents,  the,  Hoavcn  and  Pdyu,  a  Rishi,  611.

448,  455,466,479,513,  Earth,  208,  211,  213,  Pearl,  49,  174.

534, 535, 547,  575, 599,  214,  349,  593.  Pedu,  a  proUgi  of  the

•  017,  619.  -  of  all,  the  Watere,  Asvins,  155,  158,  161-

• — sacrifice,  109,  322,  613.  163.


TVDKS  OS  NAMES,  ETC.


Pegasus,  155  tiols.  Pole,  sacrificial  task,  201,  Pravargya  v  i  d  y  A ,  the

Penury,  395,  499.  514;  see  Car-pole,  Cba-  science  of  the  above,

— *  deprecated  for  others,  riot-pole’.  \65  note.

294-206.  Polygamy,  indications  of,  PrnyAja,  a  preliminary


Peruk(a),  a  liberal  prince,  86,  94.  offering,  57.

035.  - -  troubles  of,  137.  PrayEsrata,  sacrod  food

Pestle,  for  pounding  the  Porpoise,  150.  bringers,  the  title  of

Soma  plant,  30,  37.  Polar,  the  Cleanser,  one  certain  Rishis,  483  note.
Peterson,  Prof.  P.,  xivj  of  the  priests,  19,  122,  Prayer,  personified.  26,
207,  458,  024,  620.  259,  265. 305, 306,  400.  42  :  sec  HotrA,  IJA.

Physician,  Rudra,  300.  Poverty,  74,  328.  - Lord  of,  Bphaspati,

- Varupo,  31.  PrabhQvasu,  a  Vedic  50,85,114,254,  287,

Physicians,  Asvins,  140,  Riahi,  499.  389,  044.


150,  210.  Praise  of  Men,  JltiriUanaa, - —  Agui,  50.

- MavuU,  300.  Agni,  10,  203.  308,  403. - power  of,  85,  94.

- Waters,  29.  — — - Indra,  585. - the  best  armour, 048.

Fijivsua,  the  n»mo  of  Prajlpati,  Lord  of  Crca-  ——for  aid  in  battlo,  10,

a  prince,  06,  148.  lure,  80,  48,  02,  154,  38, 71, 98,  128-130. 132,

Pillars,  splinter,  from  the  421,438,607,  018,  028  133,183,184,297,  407.

■acrlflolal  stake,  328.  notes.  - for  general  .  safety,

Pipru,  a  demon  of  air,  -a  Rishi,  850.  7,  27,  49,  189,  190.

•  6,  70,  130,277,  412,  PrajApatis,  tho  progoni-  —for  long  life,  IS,  30,
418,  577,  580.  tor*  of  mon,  09  note.  31,  48,  114,  110,  157.,

PiAAcbt,  a  female  floud,  Prrtkfiti, Nature, 220  note.  180,  210.

275  note.  •  Prainaganda,  a  prince  of  — —for  children,  15,  4  8,

Piachol,  Prof.  R.,  152,  the  Klkay*,  874.  151,299,  518.

410,558,681,686,592,  P.snava,  tho  snored  ayl- - for  health,  wealth,

697,  002,  010.  lablo  On,  220  note.  and  liappiuess,  47,  51,

Pitaras,  812;  see  Fathors.  Fraudster,  Director- priest,  69,  00, 119,  121,  120,

Pithlnas,  a  man's  (name,  122,  259,  260,  806  notes.  162,  253,  299,  300,

588.  Praskanvs,  a  Vedic  Risbi,  884, 335,  et  passim.

Plants,  personified,  5S2,  60-62,  - for  rain,  534,  £36,643.

,017.  Pras^oka.  a  nnmo  of  Di-  —  for  a  safe  and  spaci-

— — King  of,  Agni,  300.  vodltsa,  611.  ous  home,  043,  644.

-—Lord  of,  Soma  the  Pratardana.  a  prince,  588.  —for  freedom  from
Moon,  29,  110.  Prfttardani,  son  of  Pra*  sickness,  645.

— —  luminosity  of,  173,  tordana,  583.  —for  Divine  merer


- for  a  safe  acd  spaci¬
ous  home,  043,  644.
—for  freedom  from
sickness,  045.

—for  Divine  merer


174,  209.  Pratidjis,  sacrificial  title  and  pardon  of  sin,  81,

—  medicinal,  Lord  of,  of  one  of  tho  Maruts,  32,  42,  295,  408,  65  2.

59,  60.  06  note.  - -for  sinlessness,  135.

Pleasantness,  personified,  Pratikshatra,  a  Vedic  - for  victory  in  a

56-  Risbi,  514  note.  ehariot  race,  297.

Pliny,  68.  Pravargya,  an  introdue - for  the  destruction

Poison,  poisonous  reptiles,  tory.  Soma  ceremony,  of  fiends,  etc.,  51,  52,
charm  against,  255-267.  462,  492.  .111,  185.


692


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  BTC.


<


Priests,  names  and  duties  490  ;  boat-building,  Pfiahan,  a  Sun-God,  giver

of,  259  note.  154,  226  ;  leather-  of  prosperity,  and  guide

- the  two  divine,  198,  working.  1 10, 258,  450;  of  traveller*,  17, 28, 29,

.471.  physic,  29, 31,  146,156;  58,59,  106,  114,  115,

- called  Gods,  327.  rope-making,  216,  276;  1 39, 168, 190, 1  91,  198,

- the  Asvina,  244.  emelUog.837,476, 558;  216, 215,  247,250,  2C0,

— — feo  of,  169;  m  vintner,  256;  weaving,  292,298,  309-811.372,

Dafeahiiii.  563;  workingof  iron,#«  378,  384, 389.  390, 397,

——special  gifts  to  ;  see  Axe,  Dagger,  Spear, oto.  483,  461.503,  508,  514,

Liberality  to  Priests.  Proapority,  pcrsoaiGed,  517,519.518,585,614-
PrikabayUmaa,  a  Proper  160,  298,  508.  616.618,621,  623,  828,

Same,  168.  Providence,  41,  74,  604.  631, 647.

Pr:shtha,akindcf  Stotra  Pur&na,  433.  P-ishin-Viiihiiu,  575.

or  laud,  401,523  » ole.  Purandhi,  toe  Intelligent  P  unhang =Aevina,  247.
Priaoi,  mother  of  the  or  Spirited,  3  60,  298,

Maruts,  18,  28,  54,  503, 532.  Qaait,  Dawn;  the  aet-

109,  110,  114,  234,  Puraya,  a  liberal  prince,  ting  Sun,  146,  156,
SOI,  397,  401,  521.  635.  159,161,  247.

527,  529,  530,  637.  Purifier,  Poter,  Cleanser,  Quarterly  Review,  on  the
——Barth,  561,  614-  19,  259.  Soma  plant,  2.

616,  619,  Purohita,  family  or  tribal  Queen,  the  ohiof,  486.

P.ianigu,  a prot 6/4 of  tho  priest,  1,  17,  122,  564.  Questionings  regarding
Asvins,  1 15.  Pdru(s),  the  eponymus  Gods,  Nature,  Man,  31,

prisniiafttarah,  Pnaui’s  and  men  of  a  great  220,  222,  225,  243,  296,
sons,  the  MaruU,  l8note.  Vedic  tribe,  10,81,  87,  377,409.

Prison,  408.  140,  181, 183,  443-445,  Quivers,  527,  646.

Pricin',  a  royal  Riabi,  147.  580,  608.  Quoits,  missiles  and  orna-

Pfithivl,  Broad  Earth,  Purukutsa,  a  favourite  meats  of  the  Maruts,
123,228,537,616,619,  of  Indra  and  the  As-  89,  528.

642  ;  tit  Earth.  vins,  87,  145,  148,  239,

- a  Goddess  of  the  448,  449,  496,  580.  Raob-Cocrsh,  87.

firmament,  550,  551  Puruml]ha(a),  a  prince  Racing,  iee  Chariot-race.
note.  or  RUM  and  his  poo-  JUhu,  the  post-  Vedic  Dc-

Prithu,  an  ancient  King,  pie,  204,  247,  502.  mon  of  eolipse,  501  note,

539  note.  Purumitra,  a  RUhi,  149,  Rahflgaua,  a  Riahi,  99,  *

Prithusravas,  a  prince,  160.  101.

157.  Purunltha,  a  prince.  81.  Rains,  the,  323,  594  note.

Priyamedha,  a  famous  Purupunthla,  a  liberal  Rljarshi,  royal  rage,  71
Rishi,  62,  193.  prince,  635.  note.

Piiyaratha,  a  prince,  168.  Purflravls,  an  ancient  Raji,  the  nanje  of  a  girl  f
Professions,  trades,  and  king,  41.  583.

crafts,  indications  of,  Puruahanti,  a  liberal  R&k4,  Goddess  of  Full
‘  agriculture,  460,  461  ;  prince,  149.  Moon,  299,  507.

carpentry,  83,  121,  Puruva?u,  a  Vedic  IJia^i.  Rakahaa,  the  race  of  R4k-  *

188,  181,  359,  468,  499.  -•  -  ahs***,  467.  -


rv MX  OF  NAVES,  BTC.


693

ftlbshasas,  nocturnal  Ribhukahan.  chief  of  Ritus,  Seasons,  person!-
demons,  1,25,46,4  9,  the  Ribhus,  Inclra,  214,  fied,  19,20.  213,  306,

62,  100,  102,  129,  347,  233.250,  293,  489,502.  43!),  455,  622.

393,  400,  412,  074, 5S3.  - Ribhu  aa  eldeBt  of  R'tvij,  a  sacrificor  in  due

RAkahast,  a  fomalo  do-  tho  throe,  <38, 506.6l9.  aeaaon,  a  priest,  1
mon,  417  note.  Itibhukshansa  Ribhus,  note.

Ram,  Indra  as  lover  of  439,442,443.  Rivors,  personified,  322,

battlo,  12,  69,  71.  Richos,  saorod  verses  for  514,  517,  622.

RAma,  230  not*.  recitation,  v„  512.  -  the  Seven,  44,  132.

R&mAyana,  viii.,  2l7,  230,Uichatlca,  a  Riahi,  157.  R  >amer,  the,  Wind,  167.

315.  Riohtshamft,  a  titlo  of  -  Indra,  593.

RsnhA,  Zoroaatriana*  Indra,  607.  Roarer,  tho,  Agnl,  36.

name  of  Ras4,  140.  Riding  on  horseback,  216,  Robber,  547  :  tee  Thief.
Ran4,  a  somi-inythioal  217,531,  #  R  .ok-cloud,  416,  601.

rivor,  146,  505,  522.  Rigvcda,  v  ,  vi.,  vii.,  lx  ,  Rodast,  Lightuing  per-
RAbaLight-QoddoM.llS.  xlU.,  xv.,  512.  sonifled  aa  the  wife  of

lUtahavya,  a  Rishi,  537.  RijUhin,  351  note.  Rudra  or  of  the  Marute,

Ralhavltl,  a  prlnoo,  532  Rijiavan.  a  prot4ff4  of  131,232,515,527,531,
Kathantara,  an  iinpor-  Indra,  70,  74.  130,  412,  618,630.

tant  SAman,  224.  489,  580,  621.  Robito,  son  of  KingHarif

Rati,  sexual  enjoymont,  Rijrtova,  a  royal  Riahi,  chandra,  30  note.

649.  130,  156,  150,  160.  Roxna*A,  wlfo  of  King

R»t-,  137.  Ripanohayo,  king  of  Svuuaya,  174  note.

Rauhiua,  a  cloud-demon,  tho  Hupamaa,  491,  492,  Roth,  von,  Prof.  R.,  ix.

133,  274.  Rings,  or  quoit*,  112,  xlv.,  8,5, 17, 18,21. 80.

KAvf.njodornnaraooftho  231,233.  57,  85,  243.201,207,

rivorParush.il,  122,  520.Rishabha,  aRi.hi,  ton  of  417,  461,484,405,497,
Robba,  oproUgi  of  tho  VI9vAmitra,  332.  508,  542,546,662,638,

Asvins,  146,  157-159,  Risbi,  Seer  of  a  hymn,  691,  593,617,619,648.
161-168.  an  inspirod  bard,  vi.,  Rudra,  the  roaring  or

Red  Bird,  the  Sun,  515.  21,  108,  et  peutim.  flashing  Tempost-God,

- Bull,  Agni,  818.  Rishis,  vi.,  viL,  xili.,  80,  father  of  the  Maruts  ;

- Steer,  Dyaus,  629.  60,107,222,611,602.  sometimes  s  g-otU

Revelation,  400  no<e.  - childlike  simplicity  bealor  and  beneficent

ROville,  M.,  876.  of  questions  and  pra-  deity,  18, 27, 64,  69.60,

Rihhu.23, 24, 144,213, 260,  yers  of,  409.  80, 88, M,  109,128,  MI,

888, 487,  43 ),  4 13,  606.  - the  Sovon,  30,  443.  162,  153, 167,  179, 230,

Ribhus,  three  deities  of  Rita,  Right,  the  Truo,  232,  200,  299-302,  305,
mid-air,  of  whom  Ri-  Cosmic  Ordor,  Moral  308,340,873,897,460,
bhu  is  the  eldost  bro-  Law,  2,  8,  107,  137,  468,602-604,506,607,

thor,  8.  23,  24,  69,  87.  288,  425 ;  see  Law,  Order.  516,  521,  527  630,  690.

96,  142-144,  211-214,  Ritastup,  a  Riahi,  148.  616,  618,619,633,638.

223, 260, 368,  371,  379,  Ritu,  a  season  of  tho  year,  645.

887,  388,  437-443,  456,  sometimes  personified,  —  a  name  of  Agni,  85,
507, 514, 5 19,  52S,  555.  18-20,  307.  818,  396.


INDEX  OF  NAMES,  BTC,


69i

Rudras,  sons  of  Rudra,  Sacrificer,  73, 77.  78, 80,95.Sakra,  Mighty  One.Indra,

the  Maruta,  48,  55,  56,  - Celestial,  TinirAo,  12,  75,  85,  242,  867,

62,  8S,  109,  128,  131,  79,  855.  359,  411, 497,  596,610.

210,  230,  270/297, 302,  Sacrificer's  wife,  associat-  Sakti,  a  Rishi,  90,  374.
803,328,  837,351,524,  ed  iu  the  performance  §akuntalA,  daughter  of
527,  554,  619,  625.  of  sacred  rites,  106,  ViavAinitra,  373,  571

- the  Aarfns,  210, 541.  182,  509.  not*.

-  Mitt*  and  Varuna,  Sacrificial  names,  titles,  SAma,  SAman,  song,  chan-

539.  8,  112,  555.  ted  hymn,  224,  287,

Rimmas,  the  name  of  a  -  aaaembly,  41.  .  313,  401,  412.

people,  491,  492.  - hall,  2,  322.  SAma-priesta,  65  ;  SAma-

Rmhatt,  wife  of  the  Rishi  -  fire»,  20,  41,  42,  64.  chanter,  313.

SyAva,  158.  - victim,  goes  straight  SAmaveda,  v.,  11,  224,

to  heaveifc  215,  217.  S13,  607  note*.

SabardcohA, nectar-yield - victims,  402.  Sambara,  a  demon  of

ing,  the  Cow  milked  fer - post  or  stake,  16,  drought,  6,  70,  75,  81,

■acrifioial  libations,  186.  32,51,  118,225.264,  130,147,  274,277,283,

§aohl,  Power,  personified  327,  323,  402,  456.  289, 367,  428, 429,  432,

as  Todra’s  wife, 888, 412. - offerings,  milk,  121,  577,  5S8,  593,  600,

Sacred  Book* of  the  East,  165,  206,  et  passim;  609,  611.

446,  532,  548.  ghrita  (clarified  butter)  Sauunitah,  one  of  the

Sacred  grass,  42,  72,  107,  5, 187  ;  gharma  (heated  Maruta,  96  note.

110,  484,  584,  623.  milk),  459;  Soma  juice,  Samudra,  sea,  gathering

Sacrifice,  first  iustitotors  6,  18,  20,  25,  37,  62,  or  receptacle  of  waters,

of;  tee  Augiras,  Athar-  107,  140,  et  passim  ;  78.

van,  Bbriga,  Dadbyach,  Soma  juioeaud  milk, 7,  Samvarana,  a  Rishi,  496.
3fanu.  28,  38,  108,  190,  250,  Samyu,  a  Riahi,  614.

— —  importance  of,  50.  et  passim  ;  Roma  juice  SAnda,  a  prinoe,  635.

• -  makes  priest*  and  with-  grain,  groats,  Sandikas,  a  family  or

sacrificors  immortal,  meal,  cake*,  etc.  188,  ohm,  297.

41,  175.  342.371,  487;  man  30;  SanhitA,  Collection  of

-  morning  and  even-  horee,  214-219;  bul-  Vedichymns,  v.,  vi ,  vii.

ing,  408.  locks,  267 ;  barren  cows, Sanaa,  Prayer  or  Wish,

- morning,  noon,  and  267 ;  cowa  in  calf,  267.  personified,  514.

evoaing,  20,  47,  265,  -  vessels  and  iaiplo-  Sanskrit,  ix-xii.

373,  407,  410.  '  meats,  215.  Saptavadhri,  name  of  a

- nine  and  ten  months’,  Saddpriua,  a  Rishi,  511:  -man,  549,  346.

513,  514.  Sadasaspati,  Lord  of  the  Sint,  aRUhi,  157.

-  of  first-born  son.  Assembly,  Agni,  22.  SaramA,  Indra's  hound

30  note.  Sadhri,  a  Riahi,  611.  and  messenger,  per*

- -  =  chariot,  319.  Sidhyas,  a  class  of  deities,  hape  the  Dawn,  85,

- ship,  63,  195.  227.  97,  348,  4 1 1,  513.

- -  =  thunderbolt, 10,57.  Sabadova,aprince,  130,410  Slrameyas,Stram4’8  sons,

- -  woven  cloth,  563  §lkins,  Mighty  Ones,  Yanu'a  watch-dogs,  85

note,  :  Noblea,  521.  -  ..  note.  ,  .


fcfDKC  OF  X4MES,  ETC.


<595

SarasvAn,  Sarasvat,  namo  §atnpatha-Br  A  h  m  a  n  a ,  Sea,  of  air,  cloud,  32,40,
of  a  River-God,  616  446,648.  63,217,282,243,  463,

note;  applied  to  the  Satarchins,  epithotof the  629,  641.

Suu,  228.  Seers  of  Book  I.  of  tho  - Sons  of  tho,  tbe

Saraavatl,  a  river;  a  Rigveda,  269  note.  Aevine,  63.

River- Goddess ;  God-  ?.xUvaoi,  a  prince,  81 ,  Seaaon,the,thoRain*,274.
deaa  of  eloquence  and  ^atri,  a  prince,  son  of  Seav>na,the,  29,  221,  222,
•acred  poetry,  vii.  6,  Agniveja,  498.  382  note*.

16,  44,  114,  135,  198,  Satyoaravas,  n  Kiahi,  540  - poraonifled,306,439.

227,  252,  260,  263,  SaudlUa,  a  princo,  374.  Seleucua,  viii.

297,  304,  311,  312,  Savitar,  the  Sun  as  ge-  Semal,  Silk-cotton  tree,
322,  339,  878,  883,  aerator,  vivifier,  nud  875.

480,  471,  607,  609,  stimulator,  25,  26,  30,  Sorpenta,  wisdom  of,  as-

514,  662,  616,  619,  48,  49,  51,  fll?97,  124,  cribed  to  Gods,  623.

622.  631,  632.  137, 140,  143, 149, 170,  Service  of  roan,  42.

?arat,  according  to  84-  171,209,2)1,224,240,  Seven,  oaatloa,  87.

ya?a  a  demon,  680  260,296,298,807,308,  - cebstiaWtmras,97,

note.  837, 353, 860, 378, 383,  219  note.

Sarayu,  the  8arj<l,  483,  384,389,390,  402,408,  - cows,  219.

522.  409,  438,439,457-469,  -  day*  of  tho  wock,

Sarjl,  a  river  in  Oudh,  606,514,516,617,648,  68  note.

433,  622.  649, 570, 682,617.  018, - dlvUioMo!  tho  year,

fiftrnjaya,  non  of  Sfinja-  619,  643,  044.  219  note.

ya.  All  note.  SAvitri,  the  OAyatrl  par - flames  of  Agni,  187,

garyanAvAn,  a  lake  and  excellence,  a  vorso  of  201,  892,  404,  464.

district,  108.  oapeoial  aanotity  ad- - foits  of  the  abori-

9  .ryAU,  a  l.tishi,  147,  370.  dreed  to  Savitar, 390.  gines,  239.

giryAta,  son  of  guryAta,  Savya,  a  gishi,  seer  of - gorms, solar  rays,  235.

71,  870.  Hymns  51-67  of  Book - horses,  219.

S.iryAti,  probably  tho  L,  60.  - horsos  of  tiro  Sun,

same  os  garyAta,  148,  SAyana,  SAyavftohArya,  68,  823,  409,  813,  604.
370.  the  great  Commcnta-  — —  metros  of  the  Veda,

,  Saaa,  a  gishi;  or  food,  or  tor  of  the  Rigveda,  27,  326,465,  462.

socrod  grass,  483,  484.  ix.  xi.  xiii.  xiv.  xv.  xvL,  -  Mothers,  195.

Sasarparl  (the  meaning  et  pauitn.  -  mouths  of  Brihos-

ia  uncertain)  874.  Sayu,  a  gishi,  proty*  of  pati,  464.

gaslyast,  wife  of  Taranto,  the  Asvins,  145,  147, - priests,  219,  266,

531  note.  167,  160-102,  633.  322,  844,  848,  392.

Simtram,  recited  laud  or  Sayya,  the  father  of - reins  (priesta),  265.

invocation,  65  note.  Nam!,  680.  - region8oftheearth,27.

S  ttakratu,  Lord  of  Hun-  Scorpion,  267.  - —  Risliis,  30,  448.

d red  Powers,  Indra,  6,  Sea,  82,  38,  72.  — .  Rivera,  v.,  44,  48,

7,  12,  20,  88,  39,  76,  - tho  Sun,  516.  *  49,  95,  182,  219,  267,  “

137,  359,  498,  500,  - of  wealth  and  boun-  273,  315,  316,  430,  607,

600,  606.  -  *  ty,  Indra,  14*69.  •  ~  662.


DVDBX  OF  NAHB8,  ETC.


698

Seven  sages,  395,  582.  Sin,  thedeityof,  Nirpti,  Six-Bpoked  car,  the  year

-  Singer*,  85.  112.  with  six  seasons,  221.

- Sisters,  219,  257,632. - searchora-out  of,  Sky,  personified,  40,  63,

- sunbeams,  137,219,  Marute,  112.  65-67,  482,  514,  547,

225,  462.  - punisher  of,  Arya-  548,

-  times  seven,  the,  man,  233 ;  BrahmapM-  Smelter,  478,  553,  583.

Maruts,  521.  pati,  233 ;  Varuna,  173 ;  Sogdians,  619.

- tones,  828,  455.  Agni,  563.  Soma,  the  Moon -God,  21,

— —  treasures,  645.  Sindhu,  the  Indus,  35,  22,  29,  47,  60,  9),

Scvon-headed,  the,  the  61,00,106,123,  125,  114-117,  120,121,151,

Sun,  823.  127,  168,  174,  250,  419,  156.217,222.255,268,

Seven-rayed,  Agni,  201.  458,  520,  522,  631.  809,  350, 389,  390,  430,

- reined  car,  of  the  SinWail,  a  lunar  Goddess,  512,511,519,603,609,

Sun,  604.  299.  622.644,645,  618.

Seven-wheeled  car,  the.  Sinless,  ifo,  549,  617.  Soma, the  plant,  2,12,  16,

-  219,  221.  Sinleasneas,  30,  617,  618.  60,  863.

Shadgurusishya,  374.  Simip4,Siau,Si880o  wood,  - deified  juice  of,  vi.,

Shelley,  132,  153,  351.  375.  viii.,  et  paisim.

Ship,  32,  65, 127,  I83,854,8iph4,  a  river,  135.  - growu on  mountains,

486,  513,  524,  529, 627.  Stra,  Plough,  Agricul-  363,  420,  608,  551.

- -  hymn,  sacrifice,  tural  deity,  481.  - preparation  of,  2,

63,  195.  Sister,  the.  Dawn,  243,  19,  36,  37.

Sickle's),  80,  420.  266.  drunk  by  BrAhmana,  2^

Siebenzig  Lieder  dea  Rig-  Sisters,  Heaven  and - produces  inspiration,

veda  (Geldner  and  Kao-  Earth,  877,  482.  112.

gi),  xiv.,  417.  - the  Dawns,  1 72. - eloquence  and  wis-

Sikhs,  89.  - Day  and  Night,  881.  dom,  598.

gimbals,  the  Silk-Cotton - Night  aud  Dawn, - rapture,  6,  22,  69,

'  tree,  875.  149,  172  242.  71,  78,  78,  110,  413.

Simyus,  a  race  of  hostile - of  priests,  the  waters, - Lord  of,  Indra,  100,

’  natives,  130.  29.  351,  601.

Sin,  a  burden,  295.  - river*,  315,  854,  423, Soma-drinker,  a  title  of

- the  bonds  of,  82,  34,  631.  Indra,  6,  7,  12,  37,  274.

295,  408,  467,  552. - Sngers,  86,  94,  844,  862,  368,  436,  584,  605.

- prayer  for  pardon  334,  403.  Somlhutl,  a  Rishi,  264.

or  removal  of,  29,  31,  Sltd,  Furrow  personified,  Soauka,  a  prince,  eon  of
32,  42,  48,  51, 128, 127,  460,  481.  Sahadeva,  410.

210,  217,  249,  253, 294-  Sira,  the  Auspicious  Ono,Soma-Rudra,  21,  645.

295,  311,  827,  408, 458,  viii.,  800  note.  Son,  begetting  of,  a  debt

487,552,615.  Six,  the,  seasons,  29,  222,  to  Fathers,  631.

- imputed,  prayer  for  382,  383,  Son  of  Strength,  Agni,

freedom  from.  295,  893.  - regions,  220.  34,  85,  56,  62,  267  ;

—  —  punishment  of,  178,  - directions,  276.  tu  Strength,  Son  of.

213,288,292.295,296, - expanses,  609.  Sous,  720,  days  and

08,  126,  653.  —burthens,  333.  nights,  221,


JSDEX  OF  KAUE8,  ETC.


697

Sorcerers,  Sorcery,  49,  Stator,  Jupitor,  45,  600  Sun,  Sun-God,  vi,.  7,  8,
52,  75,  477.  notes.  40  43,  47,  48,  58,  78,

Sorceresses,  185.  Stayer,  the,  Indra,  45.  85,91-93,  93, 106,103,

Spear,  Ind.a's  577.  Steed,  Agni,  50,  93,203,  111,  119,  123, 124,126,

Spear#  of  theMaruts,  40,  327.  132,133, 136,  138, 147,

52,  10,  112,  620;  see  Steeds,  priests,  322,327.  149,163,161,  162,  166,

Lance#.  - Red,  flame#  of  Agni,  170-172,  190,  205,211,

Speech,  Goddess  of,  5,  97.  212,214,  217-219,221,

26,  66,  123,  225,  503,  Steer,  see  Bull.  224-226,  228,  234,240,

615,  541  ;  set  VAk.  Steer-,  strong  Soma  li-  243.245,247,254,265.

- fourth  division  of,  bations,  193.  208, 278,288, 298, 323>

ordinary  langungo,  Stoma,  hymn  of  praise,  325,833,350,351,360,
227.  11.  374,879,380,885,397,

Speeder,  the,  Vishnu,  Stone,  the  heavenly,  the  409.410,424,425,435,
as  the  Sun,  666.  Sun,  491,  520.  438;  419,  451,  457,  401,

Spent*- Armaiti  (of.  Ara-  Strength,  a  Goddess,  78.  479,  481.488,  502,  510,

mati),  508  note.  - Son  of,  Agni,  34,  612,613,516,629,534,

Spies  of  Varupa,  83.  85,  56,  62,  79,  80,  633,640,561,563,67.1.

—of  Agni,  898.  102,  125,  175,  195,  604,615.627,639,644.

Spirit,  thoSuprorao,  222.  198,  207,  310,  833, - judgo  of  innoceuce,

Spokes,  twelve,  the  836,  330,  830,  839,  170.

month.,  227.  840,  842,  848,  407, - and  Moon,  8, 07,223,

- 800,  tho  days  of  tho  425,  408  *70.  473,477,  519

year,  227.  481,  550,  559,  500,  9  ton,  the  Luok  of  agri-

Spousoa  of  Gods,  2C  ;  see  600,  667,  672,  673,  oulturo,  400,  461.

Dames,  Consort*.  577,  013,  015,  618.  9unahotra(s),  tho  chief

Spread  of  Aryan  popula-  - Indra,  379,  383.  and  mombors  of  a  fatal-

tion,  631.  - Sons  of,  tho  ly,  283, 811,  812.

Srinjaya,  tho  narao  of  a  RibliUM,  214,  410,  441,  9.tua\jsopa,  a  youth  about
prince,  410,  689,  012.  443.  to  be  sacrificed,  saved

Sj-injayas,  a  people  in  Subharil,  tho  name  of  a  by  prayor,  30,  32,  86,
N.-W.  India,  410  note.  woman,  148.  467.

9rutaratha,  a  princo,499.  $  ichadmthn,  a  prince,  Sunltba,  a  man's  name,
Srutarya,  a  Riahi,  146.  546,  546.

^rutavit,  a  Rishi,  511.  9  lohi,  Radiance,  a  form  90nritA,  Pleasantuess,

St.  John,  827.  of  Agni,  837.  Glsduoss,  personified,

St  Petersburg  Lexicon,  SudAs,  King  of  the  Tfit-  66.

ix.,  xiii.,  et/yissim.  sus,  83,  87,  148,  315,  Suparna,  Strong-winged,
Stall,  aerial  homo  of  the  353,  378,  875.  Fair-winged,  an  eagle,

Marute,  453.  Sudhanvan,  father  of  the  the  Sun,  49  note.

Stallion,  the  rain-cloud,  ^ibhus,  23,  143,  212,  SuparpA,  (dual),  perhaps
550,  651.  213,  337,  440,  441.  Sun  and  M-on,  223  note

Star  of  the  Gods,  the  Suhnstya,  son  of  GhoshA,  Supporter,  Indra,  600.

Sun,  039.  164  note.  Supreme  God,  2,  91,  92,

St-ara,  92,  108,  112.  Sumidha,  a  prince,  625.  180,  440  noRi.


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  ETC.


698


Supreme  Spirit,  Soul,  or  Svadhiti, axe, perhaps  the  Taranta,  a  liberal  prince.
Self,  222,  428  notes.  thunderbolt,  495  note.  151,152.

Sftra,  the  Suu,  620,  626.  SvAhA,  a  sacrificial  cxcla-  Tirkshya,  a  mythical
SuridhAs,  a  regal  Rishi,  mation,  Ave  1  Hail !  being,  probably  a  form

180.  Blessing  1,17,  142,198,  of  the  Sun,  114,  443.

SCkri,  inatitutor  of  sacri-  204,  805,  869,  472.  Tarya,  a  Rishi,  511.
fice,  prince,  chief,  27,  Svaitreya,  son  of  Svitrft,  Tempest-Gods,  8  ;  set
41,  431,  521.  47,  482.  Marute.

SQri*.  Gods,  196;  Maruts,  Svanaya,  a  pious  prince,  Ten,  the,  the  fingers,  195.

521.  173,  174.  - waters,  fingers,  314.

Sflrya,  the  Sun-God,  25,  SvarbhAuu,  the  demon  of - daughters  of  Tvaeh-

49,  67,  68,  84,  87,  124,  eclipse,  501,  502.  tar,  fingers,  124.

127,128,130,  153,  154,  Svarga,  heaven,  25,  120  - regions,  22!,  515.

156,165,167,  209,211,  notes.  .  - Sftrya's  horsea,  221.

211, 270. 272, 283,  323,  Svaaaa,  a  demon,  277.  - months’  sacrifice,  613.

841, 846,  350, 865, 374,  Svasti,  Prosperity,  458.  - indefinitely  for  many,

380,  384,  393,  397, 407 - said  to  be  a  Rishi’s  361,  427.

409,412,415,428,430,  namo,  517.  - usual  number  of

436,445,449,462,465,  §ritr4,  the  namo  of  a  things  presented,  174,
470,480,481,489,496,  woman,  47,  482.  496,611,  685.

499-503,  511-513,  515,  Sritriya,  eon  of  SvitiA,  —months  of  human
583,  538,  548,551,558,  47  note.  gestation,  545.

559,581,566,569,617,  Swanls)  90,  213,  416,  Tenfold  draught,  169.

<27,  631,  6S4.  451,  545.  Tenth  age,  or  decade  of

Sflryft.Sonlight, daughter  Swords,  or  daggers,  52.  life,  211.
of  tho  Sun-God,  47,  Sylva,  a  Rishi,  158,  160,  Thief,  thieves,  67,90,134,
154, 156,  162,  232, 247,  532.  444,  4^9,  430,  621.

419.450,510,616,623,  SvAvAava,  a  Rishi,  519,  Third  lucid  regions,  604.
6ji-  525,  531,  532,  548.  Thirty  regions,  171.

§ushna,  Parcher,  a  de-  Synod,  sacrificial  assem-  - steps,  divisions  of

mon  of  drought,  6,14,  b!y,  41,  57,  78,  160,  day  and  night,  629.

46,  70,  71,  76,  78,  130  565  ;  ut  assembly.  Thirty-three  Gods,  48,

184,166,241,277,283,  - inviolability  of,  41  62,  193 ,325,

349,412,  432,489,493,  note.  ThOrr,  191.

494, 577, 580, 587, 592,  SyOmarasmi,  a  Rishi,  147.  Three,  Agni,  Sirya,  VAyu,
600.  226.

SusravAs,  a  prince,  74,75.Tadbis,  tho  sacrificial  - Gods,  193  note

Sustainer,  the,  Agni,  509.  name  of  one  of  the  - favourite  number  of

-  Yaruna,  294.  Maruta,  96  note,  the  Asvins,  47  48

Sutembhara,  aRisbi,512.  Taittirlyas,  followers  of  - alters,  306  477

Sutlej,  one  of  the  Five  tho  Taittiriya  school  - birth-places  of  Agni,  •

Rsvers  of  the  PunjAb,  of  the  Yajurvoda,  27.  124  8

TanflnapAt,  Son  of  Him - form,  of  Agni,  101,  •

«olf,  a  title  of  Agni,  319,  341,  391.

15,  197,  321,  344.  —lights,  468.'  .  .


?uriidrt,  the  Sutlej.  41,
353.  ••


IJfDKX  OP  5 AMES,  ETC.


Three,  lustres,  488.

- forms  of  light  (Agni),

27,  101,  457.

- feet  of  Agni,  462.

- divisions,  heaven,

firmament,  earth,  642.

- daily  sacrifices,  201,

873,  378,  383,  442,  458.

- Steers,  Agni.Sfirya,

VAyu,  538.

- Sisters,  Dawns,  266.

- sacrificial  fires,  19,  41

201.

- horns  of  Agni,  5U9.

- Mornings,  335.

- Goddeuos,  322.

— — steps  or  strides  of
Vishpu,  27,  207,  208,
566.  617.

—  -  Ladies  of  waters,
383,  834.

- ear ths,  132, 141,  221,

293,  457,  538,  609.

- heavens,  49, 22 1,298,

609.

- firmaments,  49,  221,

293.

- castes.  350.

- pillars,  atakos  for

human  victim,  32.

- ranks  or  orders  of

Gods.  020.

- realms  of  oarth,  638.

- regions,  201,  467.

- spheres  of  light,  548.

- stations  of  the  Sun,

27.

- worlds,  7,  48,  383,

498,  566,  682.

- world-bowls,  533.

- sacred  beakers,  43;

tee  Trikadrukas.

- Dawns,  266.

- naves  =  seasons,  227 .


Thrce-and-Thirty,  the,  Traaadasyu,  Tenor  of
825;  see  Thirty- three  Daayus,  a  princo,  147,
Gods.  443,  444,  448,  449,

Three-wheeled  car,  of  487,  496,  608  note.

Asvins,  209,  246,  441.  Tricha  (triplet),  19,  68.
Threefold, the, earth, hea-  Trikadrukas,  three  Soma
ven, living oreatures, 207.  vessels;  or  the  first

- Amrit,  604.  threo  days  of  the  Abhi-

Three  thousand,  three  plava  ceremony,  43,
hundred,  and  thirty-  272,  278,  286.
nine  Gods,  330.  Trikshi,  a  prince,  son,  i.e.


peer,  ofTrasadaHyu,608.
Tripaskondo,  a  prince,  237.
Triple-headed,  Agni,  201.
Thirty-three  Trlsbtup,  ouo  of  tho
chief  Vodic  motroa,


.Thrice,  in  connexion
with  Asvins,  47,  48.
Thrice-elevcn  Gads,  48,
193;  see
Gods.


Thrice -sevon  bravo  (Mft-  228
ruts)  185.

—  uamoH  or  forma
tho  oow,  393.


312,  489.

Trisoka,  a  protigt  of  tho
of  Asvins,  146.

TriU.  an  old  Vcdio  God,


- libations, or  treasures,

24.

- mystio  things,  97.

—  —  poahons,  257.

Thriae-mingled  Bourn  li¬
bation,  487.

Thundorbolt  ■>  sacrifioo,
10,  57.

— --Iudra’s  friond,  13,
74,  682.

-—of  gold,  79,  110.

- of  ayat  (iron  or

bronze),  78,  105.

Time,  208  note.

Tisbya,  an  asterism,  524,
625.

Tithonus,  40  note.


217,  261,298,303,  476,
481,  503,  604,  513.

- a  Rlshi,  72,  136,

138,  272,  302,  652.

Tilvikrama  AvatAra,  27
note.

Trivfishsn,  a  flishi,  487.

Truths: natural  law,  187.

Tryarupa,  a  ^tlslu,  487.

Tugra,  father  of  Bhujyu,
47,  145,  164,  169,  101,
210,243,  246,580,  688,
633.

- s  domon,  or  savage

enemy,  conquered  by
Indro,  580,  588.

Tugryans,  families  des¬
cended  from  Tugra,  47.


Tools,  awl,  624  ;  axe,

215,  216,  318,  319;  Tuji,  580  note,  588.
knife,  181;  needle,  299;  Tumblers,  12  now.
sickle,  80,  420.  Turvasa(a),  the  epony-

Towns,  oloud-castlos  of  mus  of  one  of  the  Five
drought  fiends,  14.  Tribes,  and  his  people,
TraiUna,  name  of  a  DAm,  10,  52, 65,  76,  140,240,
210.  .  433,403,581,589,  604.


1KDEX  OT  HAMM,  RT 0.


TOO

TOrMTlna,  a  king  aided  Udder = sacrifice,  424.  Ushas,b*r  chariot  shatter’

by  Iudra,  74,  75,  277, - -  source  of  profit,  423.  ed  by  Indra,  278,432.

677.  Ugradera,  a  chief,  52.  U»ij,  a  RUhi,  21,  71,

Turvtti,  a  prince.  52,  76,  Uktha,  a  recited  laud,  2,  146,  163,  163,  503.

84,  149,  276,  318.  11,  65  notes,

Tutuji,  a  Proper  Name,  Ukthya,  an  offering  with  YadhbimatI,  a  pvoUglc
680  note.  Soma,  19  note.  of  the  Amns,  156.

Twain,  Day  and  Night, 6 49. Unborn,  the,  the  Sun  aa  Vadhryaava,  a  celebrated
Twain,  the,  Heaven  and  Supreme  God,  91,  877.  ?ishi,  631.

Earth,  294.  - Babe,  the,  the  Sun  YAgdevatA,  Goddess  of

Tmhyw,  the  Artificer  before  rising,  205.  Speech,  56,  603  notet.

of  the  Cede,  16,  19,24.  Univmal  Gods,  28,  36,  YAgdevl,  the  same,  26;»ote,
26,  43,  70,  72,  83,  104,  622 ;  tee  Visvederas.  Vahnilj,  priest ;  or  lum>-

108,  110,  124,143,160,  Upamsh*ds,  theological  noue,  807  note.
166,198,212,213,216,  treatises,  8?7.  Vaidadasvi  a  prince,  632,

260,  252,260, 264, 272,  Upasad.a  Soma  ceremony, Vaisvadeva  Sirid,  invo-
288,  298,  305,  808,322,  266.  eation  of  the  All-Gods,

868,  878,  832,883,  410,  Upaatuta,  a  Rishi,  51,  830.

437,  448,  472,493.  503,  52,  147.  VaiavAmitra,  descendant

514,576,597,603,611,  Uraoa.edemonoMrought,  of  VisvAmitra,  1  note.
816,  619,  622.  0,  277.  VaisvAnara,  Dear  to  All

Twolre  d»ys,  488.  Uranus,  575  note.  Men,  Agni,  80,  81,127,

- moon*  (months),  33.  CrjAnl,  Strength  perso-  318-321,  340,  400,  401,

- forms  (months),  221.  nified,  162.  403,  487,  561-564.

-—spokes  (months),  221.  Orjavya,  a  prince,  505.  Vait4na-Sutra,:572  note.

- Adilyas,  Sou-Gods,  Orjaysntl,  she  w h o  Vaifaavata,  son  of  Vivas-

17,  58.  strengthens,  275.  vAn,  143,  870.

Twice- ten  kings,  74.  tinny  A,  Night,  532.  VAja,  one  of  the  Rilhus,
Twins,  tbe,  Heaven  and  CrmvAbha,  a  demon,272  28,  24,  144,  213,  871,
211.  note,  388,437-439,442-506,

Two  Sage*,  celestial  Urukakshs,  the  name  of  619.
pH8**,  252.  a  man,  607  note.  VAjas,  VAja  and  his  bro-

- Heralds,  Divine  Ho-  UrvasI,  an  Apsaras  or  thers,  tbe  three  Ribhus,

tar-priests,  203.  celestial  nymph,  505.  144,  439.

Two-footed,  Gauil,  VAk,  UsanA,  a  Rishi  favoured  VAk  or  VAch,  Voice,  the
226.  by  Jndra,  70,  71,  106,  Word,  Speech  personi-

159,  166,  411.428,489,  fiod,  5,  26,  125,  232,

Uchathta,  a  Rishi,  193,  493,497,  681.  359,  872.  374,  384,

202,210.  Ushss,  Eos,  Aurora,  303,515,616,541.

UdgAUr,  a  priest  who  Dawn,  40,  60,  61,  63,  Vela,  cave,  imprisoning

chant*  SAma-bymns,  65-07,  93,  169,  188,  cloud,  personified  as  a

237,  318.  222,  243,  272,  278,307,  drought-demon,  14,72,

Udder =alUr,  404,  407.  336,361,  385,  888^93,  85,  273,  278,  277,  279,

- -  cloud,  88,  201,  401,  432,443,  512,515,  289,  356,454,  576,598-

423,  463.  567,  626,  029.  603.


INDEX  OP  NAMES,  BTO.


/or


VAmadeva,  a  Ijtishi,  391,  685.  612,  614,  615,617,  VaaQyus,  a  Rishi  family,

413,  416,418.  427,450.  619,633,  640,641,645,  485.

Vamra,  said  to  bea  Rishi,  618.  VAta,  Wind,  the  Wind-

70,  147.  Varuua,  chiof  of  the  God,  70,  71,  250,  493,

Vanaspati,  Sovran  of  the  Lords  of  Natural  and  563,  514,  616,  619.

Wood,  a  tall  tree,  the  Moral  Order,  81,  33,  VfttApi,  the  fermenting
sacrificial  stake,  16,  68,  136.  Soma,  261.

198,  262,  264,  822, - King  of  heaven  and  Vavri  (covering),  a  Rishi

827,  472.  earth,  83.  acoording  to  SAyapa,

- the  mortar  for  pound-  -^—Punisher  of  the  482.

lag  tho  Soma  plant,  wioked,  178.  VAyu,  Wind,  tho  Wind-

and  in  the  dual,  mor-  - pardons  tho  sins  of  God,  2,  3,  17,  18,  27,

tar  and  pestlo,  37.  ponlteuts,  32,  34,  295  28,40,  81,  151,  154,

Vandana,  a  pro(4g4  of  the  652.  A  186-188,191,  198,214,

A  twins,  146,  155,  168,  - sends  rain,  651.  223,  224,  226,  235,251

101-163.  - his  rivalry  with  In-  270,  810,  341,850,366,

Vangrida,  a  demon,  74.  dra,  448.  369,  384,  338,  421,

VapAhutl,  narno  of  a  Varu.Anl,  Vanina's  Con-  451-463,  461,  476,502,
spooial  sacrifice,  608  sort*  26,  515.  603,  508,  618,519,  638,

not*.  Varfitvl,  a  tutelary  God-  659,  597,  615,  618,  619.

Vnrafikha,  a  demon  or  dess,  26,  504.  VAyus,  honorifio  plural

savage  onomy,  688, 589.  VarOtrls,  889.  for  VAyu,  271,

Varohin,  a  domon  or  VaM,  a  IjLUhl,  146,  167.  Vayya,  father  or  comrade
savsge,  277,  432,  611.  Vaslia^,  a  sacrificial  oxcla-  of  Turvlti,  78,  145,
VArshAgirae,  sons  of  King  mation,  41,  164,  305.  276,  418,  546.

VjishAgir,  128,  130.  VashajkAra,  tho  cry  Va-  Veda,  r.  ix.  xi.  xii.  xlv.
Varu pa, tho  Encom passer,  sha^  deifiod,  48  noU.  Vodoa,  throe,  462  note.

God  of  the  starry  hea-  Vasishths,  a  famous  - four,  r.  vl.  462  note.

von,  3.  16,10,  21,26-28,  Rishi,  soorof  BookVII.  VcdAnti(s),  568,  564.
30-84,  48,  50,  51,57-59,  of  tho  R.  V.,  30,  90,  Vedi,  altar,  4  noU  ;  M
61,  68,95,  99,102,  114-  148,  815,  374,  376.  Altar.

116,  123,125,  126,130,  VAstoshpati,  Lord  of  the  Vodio  India,  878  note.
136-138,  144,  153,164,  Homoetead,  Indra,503.  Vedisoho  Stud.en,  172,
163-170,  178,  179,189-  Vasu,  good,  kind,  Good  592,  697,  602,816,638.
191,  196,  199,  204,200,  Lord,  40,123,  199,267,  640.

214,  218,227,  233,247,  276,  278,  336, 363,385,  Vena,  probably  Agui,  462.

249,  259,292,  297,306,  446,  469,  336.  Venomous roptilea,  charm

308,321-823,  333,  337,  Vasus,  a  close  of  Gods,  against,  255,  256.

360,  361,  378-3S0.388,  40,  48,  62,  80,  123,  Votosu,  a  fiend  or  sav-

391,394,  397,  400,408,  138,  139,  164,  210,217,  ago,  580,  587,  588.

438,  438,  439,  443,445,  218,  263,  293,297.302,  VibAll,  a  brook?  433.

448,  458,459.468,472.  328,  837,  362, 369,384,  Vibhvan,  one  of  the
487,  502,  605-507,514-  384,458,603,505,617,  Ribhus,  23,  24,  144,
617,  519,633-540,651,  619,  526,619,  633.  213,868,437,  438,442,

552,  557,  585,572,582,  VaauBruU,  a  Rishi,  471.  506,  507,  514,  528.


?02


ISDBX  Of  BTd.


Vidndasvi,  father  of  Visva,  Heaven  per&oni-
PurumllliA,  532  note,  fied,  571.


Sun  ;  a  sacrificcr,  4(J,
64,  73,  79,  81,  191,-

Vidatba,  sacrificial  as-  Visvlch,  an  Asura  or  355. 870,  404,  477,562.

.  sembly,  41  note.  fiend,  159.  Voice,  see  Vdk,  Speech.

Vidathin,  father  of  Rijia-  Viavacharsham,  Dear  to  -  -  thunder,  238.

•van.  412,  489.  ’  ’  all  men,  Agni,  485.  VrichayA,  a  damsel  given

VidhAtar,  the  Disposer,  - a  Rishi,  484.  to  KakshlvAu  by  the

619.  Visvaka,  a  Riahi,  157,  Aavina,  71.

Vikhanas,  a  Rishi,  147  i53.  Vrichlvan(s),  chief  and

note.  ViavAmitra,  a  famous  people  of  a  tribe,  689.

Vimado,  an  ancient  Rishi,  ijiahi,  1. 13,  30,  815,  Vrika,  Wolf,  robber,  59.

.69,  148,  154,  160.  332,  339,  353,  354,359,  Vxikadvaras,  the  name

Vindhyan  Mountains,  361,  364,  373,  375,  of  a  king,  297.

230  note.  376,  364,  390.  Vrishabha,  bull,  manly,

Vintner,  255.  Viavfhnitras,  318,  336,  strong,  242  note.

VipAs,  the  river  Beds,  874.  Vrisblgir,  a  royal  Rishi,

44,  853,  432.  Visvarflpa,  a  thrcc-hoad-  128,  156.

Virabhadra,  the  destroyer  ed  monster  skin  by  Vriahan,  •  male,  strong,
of  Dakaha’s  sacrifice,  Indra,  272.  bull,  hero,  chief,  242

•  ;  488  note.  Visvaa,  a  class  of  Gods,  note.

Vtrapetnl,  the  Hero's  Wife,  4,540.  - a  Riahi,  51.

perhaps  the  river  Saras-  Visvasdman,  a  Rishi,  484.  Vrishaoasva,  a  king,  71.
vatf,  185,  609,616  notes.  Visvavira,  a  Riahi,  511.  Viitra,  Vritras,  the  chief
Vjrfipa(a),a  Rishi  and  his  VimvArl,  a  woman  said  cloud-demon  and  fiends
descendants,  62,  373.  to  be  the  seer  of  hymn
ViahnApO,  a  Riahi's  son  V.  28.
restored  to  his  father  VisvAvasu,  chief  of  tho
by  the  Asvins,  157,  Oandharras,  217  note.

158.  Visvedevas,  Visvcdevd^,

Vishnu,  Perrader,  or  Visvc  DevAb,  All- Gods,

Universal  Gods,  a  class
of  deities,  4,  24,  28,

36,  IIS,  115,136,142,

167,  191,  219,249,29 7,

330,  376,  379,  383,

384,  458,  502, 507,510,

5' 2,  514,  518,  531,

615,  617,  619,  621.

Vltahavya,  a  Rishi,


Active  Worker,  a  per¬
sonification  of  the  Sun,
27,  83,  110,  115,  207-
.  209,  226,  260,259,286,
302,  325,  378,581,394,
897,  416,  417,  463,514,
517,  519,  55 3,  554,566,
575,  579,  582,  614,617,
619,  841,  612.


Vitastfl,  Greek  Bydaspcs,
modern  Jchlam  or  Jhe-


of  drought,  6,  14,  28,
43-46;  50,  69,  72-74,
76,  78,  83,  84,  87,  99‘,
103,  1 04,  107,  108,110,
112,  120,  132,  134,142,-
166,228,  229,251,271,-
272,  276  283,  286, 296,
345,  347,  350,  851,853,
355,  358,  359,  866-368,
411,  413-415,  4 17-41 9',
422,  423,  426;  427,  435,
446,  448,  489-491,  494,
497,508,513,  516,578,
574,  575,  577,  579,  583,
584,  587,  594-596,  598,
602,  604,  609,  615,627,
631,  640-644.


-  =  Indra,  207.

Visisipra,  probably

barbarian,  513.  lun,  a  river  of  the  Vritra’s  mother,  44.

VispalA,  a  proUgfe  of  the  P.njAb,  44.  Vritra-alayer,  a  title  of

A?viiu,  46,  156,  159,  VivasvAn,  Brilliant,  a  Indra, 20, 104.107, 128,
16*>  21°*  nMQC  0{  the  morning  139,  250,  285,  340,350,


ISDEX  OP  KAMES,  etc.  703

363,  367,  871.  872,378,  Watore.Sonof  the,Agni,20,Wish-Goddcss,Dhudmvll,
481-483,  436,  498,  600,  124,  198.  260,  303-805,  369.

.  601,  597,  609.  329,  504,  510, 567, 623.  Witches,  135  ;  ste  Sorce-

Vritrn-sUyor,  Agni,  81, - SaviUr,  26,  019.  reuses.

101,  200,  337,571,572,  Wealth-giver,  Agni,  19,  Wittrd,  624  not*.

574.  100,  126,  300.  Wolf,  50,  138,  156,  1 50,

— —  —  Soma,  the  Moon- - ludra,  45,  46.  247  567  ;  she-wolf,

God,  110.  Woavors,  weaving,  web,  159,  160,  247,  021.

Vritra-slayers,  Indra-  263,807.  Wolves —  enemios,  500.

Agni,  140,  629.  Web  — hymn,  151.  Women,  praised,  531;

- Indra-Varurui,  040. - -worship,  303.  abduction  of,  415,  492;

Vulcan,  10,  72  nolet.  Weber,  Prof.  A.,  vii.  xiv.  priro  of  war,  416;  at-

Vyanaa,  a  demon  of  xv.  287,  607.  tend  festivals,  172,463;

drought,  130,  133,275,  Weregild,  532.  c  take  part  in  sacrifice,

355.  Wheol-tho  year,  227.  96,  100,  182.

- Indra’s  fatlwr,  410,  Whip,  of  tho  Aavins,  25, - -  fingers,  tre  Mal-

417  noUt.  209.  dent,  Sisters.

Vyajva,  a  proUgi  of  tho - of  the  Maruta,  52.  Woo<ls,  personified,  504,

Aavins.  - deified,  047.  Wool,  242,  520.

--lightning  compared  Words,  play  upon,  vyishan
Wallis,  H.  W.,xiv.  2,  31,  to  a,  538.  strong,  242,  280,  357,

137, 189,  253,  652,  619.  Whitney,  Prof.  W.  D.,  22.  499,  601,  003  ;  dAraan,

Wanderer,  the,  Wind,  Wiokod,  place  of  punish-  bond,  bounty,  585.

102,  145,  604.  ment  of  tho,  401.  World-halves,  heaven  and

- Indra  at  tho  Sun,  9,  Wide-stridor,  tho,  Vishnu  earth,  81,  500.

600.  as  the  Sun,  207,  878.  Worlds,  pair  of,  104 .

War,  vroapons  of,  bow,  Wife,  careful  awl  aotivo, - three,  7,  48,  888,

arrow,  chariot,  armour,  91,  1Q1  ;  bonovolont,  498,  600,632.

eto.,  645  ;  spear,  lanoo,  631 ;  docks  herself  for  World-tree,  31,  223  no!«.

40,  88,  110,  112,  113,  her  husband.  890;  take#

282,  235  ;  sword,  62,  part  in  aaorifloo,  90,  Xerxes,  048  note.

112,  118  ;  dagger, 627;  106,  182.

olub,  51,  87;  sling,  100.  Williams,  Sir  M.  M.,  xiv.,  YaDC(s),  chfof  and  mem-
Warrior,  the  (Bharata),  443.  bora  of  s  great  Aryan*

Rudro,  305.  Wilson,  Prof.  H.H.,  viil.  tribo,  10.  52,  76,  140,

- SaviUr,  043.  xi.  xiv.  xv.  et  pauim.  240,  433,  493,  681,  604.

Warp  and  woof,  563,564.  Wind,  personified,  114,  YajatnAna,  institutor  of
Waters,  personified,  28,  145,167,214,220,412;  sacrifioo,  worshipper,

29.  83,  106,  124,  129,  tee  VAU,  VAyu.  wealthy  householder,

213,  305,  879,  383,384,  WindVBrido,  131  note.  12  noU,

398,  404,  458,  514,618.  Windiach,  Prof.,  297.  YajaU.  a  Rishi,  511.

- healing  power  of  the,  Wine  (surA),  155.  Yajno*,  aacrificial  cere-

29.  Wine-skin,  255.  monies,  19.

- removers  of  sin,  29.  Winters,  hundred,  tee  Yajurveda,  tho  Veda  of

- physicians,  618.  Hundred  Winters.  sacrificialtexU,  v.,417.


»


704  '  XNIJEX  OF  FAMES,  *TO.

Yaj  us,  sacrificial  lext,dia-  Yaoiuud,  the  Ataftovva  YavyAretl,  the,  naipp;5£
tinguiehed  from  recited  of  Ptolemy,  the  Jomanes  a  river,  5S9.  •

hymn  and  chant,  123.  of  Pliny,  tho  modern  Yaydti,  an,  ancient  pa-
Yljyd,  aacrificial  verao  Jumua,  521.  triarch,  42,  140^

uttered  when  the  ob-  Y4»k»,  author  of  the  '  .

lation  ia  offered,  1.93,  Nirukta,  3,  5,  58,  II 4,  Zend,  xii.

566  note*.  1J8,  141,  146,  227,346,  Zeue,  75,  114.  -

y*m»,  King  of  the  Dc-  348,  353,  461.  Zimmer,  Prof.  ,H.,  86

parted,  eon  of  Vivaavin,  YitudLliiAe.  sorcerers,  681,  648.  ,-t  *

37,40,  49,  54,  64,  85,  ficude,  49.  JZoroastriiins,  1 46/ 508.

J06,  154,  217,  4  ,


*»*•  *

.  19

•  29

•  44

•  47

•  56

•  58

•  40

•  44

•  70

»  71

•  72


•  74

•  85

•  '  90

•  101
*  •••
.  121

•  125

•  186

-  147
»  148

•  157

•  158

-  174

•  176

■  ...

■  188

i

•  206
•  210

*  230

-  281

•  234

>  245


CORRIGENDA  ET  ADDENDA.

line  4  from  below,  after  Vrittra  insert  &  comma

•  2  from  below,  read  resist  for  reeis,

■  1  of  noto  7,  reed  ffrStahaitdiah  for  grOKxahaitdiah

•  4  dele  tbo  full  atop  'after  invoke

»  8  from  below,  read  flight  for  fight

»  1  of  stanza  6,  read  thrice  for  thirce

•  1  of  stanza  10,  inert  a  hyphen  after  earth
»  8  of  note*,  read  bibhtydd  for  libhiydd

•  'S  of  etonza  9,  read  Immortal  for  Imortal
»  1  of  notes,  read  came  for  come

»  3  of  noto  0,  read  collection*  for  collection
»  8  of  etanza  18,  read  VrSsbansfvn's  for  Vrirfbanasva's
»  4  of  note  18,  read  V{i»hanaava/er  Vfisanasva

•  4  of  etanza  5,  eubelitute  aV>  Tiita  cleaveth  Vala’e  fence  a.  cleft

him  through.

»  5  from  below,  add  But  Trita  appears  to  be  ludra'e  aeeociate
Agni.  See  Mucdonell,  Journal  R.  A.  Seoiety,  July,  1893.

•  4  of  notes,  read  Nam  1/or  Naini.

a  7,8,  nbititute  Thou  hast,  with  apeedera,  with  Datagraa,  fodra,
tyakra,  with  thunder  rent  obstructive  Vala.

•  2  of  notes,  read  Vssish\ha/er  Vafish^ha

•  19,  read  thee  for  tho

a  2  from  below,  read  tor  for  to
a  8  from  below,  inert  a  full  stop  after  us

•  16,  read  Mitra/or  Mijra.

a  2  of  notes,  add  But  ace  Mncdonell,  Journal  of  the  R.  A.

Society,  Jnly,  1898,  pp.  422  note  2,  and  400.
a  18,  insert  a  comma  after  ?ayu

a  7,  tvletitute  brought  the  host  of  kind  Gods  for  carried  home
Sudovl

•  4  of  stanza  23  and  5  from  below,  read  Vishpilpfl  for  Vishn  Apu

•  2  of  stanza  7,  make  tho  samo  correction  ;  and  correct  the

Index  accordingly.

a  2  of  note*,  read  Bh&Tya  for  BbAra
»  2  of  etanza  10,  read  Waking  for  walking

a  1  of  notes,  after  graee  insert  aDd

•  15,  read  priests  for  prieet

•  1  of  note,  read  vether'i  for  urtAm’a

a  3  and  4  from  below,  read  Aditi  for  sditi  and  sditi/er  Adlti
a  6  of  notes,  dele  the

a  4  from  below,  read  Strong  God  for  Strong- God

•  8  of  notes,  read  is  for  in

•  2  of  stansa  10,  read  MAna’s/or  MAnss
s  7,  alter  Aavins  insert  a  comma


708  CORRIOfHDA  BT  ADDENDA.  '  -j

Page  257  line  3,  afur  venom  dele  the  colon

•  260  »  1  of  stanza  11,  after  Hotra  insert  a  comma

■  284  »  4  from  below,  pul  tho  lino  of  division - under  6  of  notes

•  285  »  1  of  stanza  9,  after  Agni  insert  a  comma  .  (■,

•  ...  *  9  of  notes,  dde  first  line  of  nolo  2  si  *

»  287  »  25,  read  a  way  for  away  ;  -  •'>

»  272  ■  2  of  stanza  19  after  Daayua  insert  a  full  stop  ,

•  ...  »  2  of  notes  read  Ornavlbha  for  UrnavAbha  <?«

•  ...  •  7  of  notes,  add  Prof.  Macdonell's  interpretation  of  th*  stanza

has  much  to  recommend  it:  ‘That  wo,  overcoming.  *11  our
foes  by  thy  aids,  (and)  tho  barbarian  by  Aryan  prowess,
might  prosper,  therefore  for  our  benefit  thou  didst  deliver
over  Vi^varQpa,  the  son  of  Tvastr,  to  the  Trita  of  (thy)
friendship’  le.  U  thy  ally  the  God  Trita.  See  Journal  of
the  R.  A.  Society,  July,  1893,  pp.  432,  483.

»  291  »  11,  read  omnipotent  for  omnipoten

•  209  •  12  from  below,  read  worship  for  wornhip

■  302  •  3,  4  of  atanza  10,  rca^  0  infallible,  for  the,  infallible  ?

■  305  *  3  of  stanza  3,  read  Tmh^ar  for  Tvashtar

•  807  ■  4  of  notes,  rend  viVnih  for  v&hnih

•  327  •  2  from  below,  read  Aitareya  for  Aitarey.  :  .

»  345  ■  2  of  stanza  4,  read  Vritras  for  Vritras

•  347  »  5  from  below,  read  recognized  for  rccongnized

■  852  •  1  of  stanza  17,  read  this  for  tho.  M»ke  tho  same  correction

in  other  places  where  this  concluding  stanza  recurs.

■  315  »  5,  insert  a  hyphen  a/lcr  im

i  383  ■  5  from  below,  insert  the  sign  of  parenthesis  after  fodder,

•  378  »  last  of  notes,  read  like  for  ike

•  399  »  3  of  stanza  2,  read  wingbd  for  winged

•  419  »  1  of  stanza  11,  read  power  for  powers

•  432  »  6  from  below,  after  Varchin  substitute  a  full  stop  for  the

comma

.  433  .  3  of  stanza  24,  read  K*r.\]at!  for  Karfilatl

•  ...  »  1  of  note  24,  read  Kartyati  for  KarOlatl

•  433  »  4  from  below,  read  Ndve  for  Ndve

•  442  #2  of  notes  read  vibheatashtdh  for  vibkcaUuhtdh  *

•  443  »  7  of  notea,  after  milk  dele  the  full  stop

•  476  .  2  of  noto,  add  Seo  Maodonell,  R.  A.  S.  Journal,  July,  1893,  ’

p.  446

■  489  *  2  from  below,  read  mentioned  for  mentione

•  ...  •  last  of  notes,  read  in  for  a

•  492  ■  2  of  stanza  4,  insert  a  full  atop  after. glitters.

•  530  ■  6  from  below,  insert  full  after  filling

■  523  •  3  of  note,  insert  the  after  of


CORRIGENDA  ET  ADDENDA.


Page  526

•  534

•  542

•  543
.  546

•  550

■  552

>  555
>  •  571

R  •••

.  576
l  *  581

-  5P6

■  588

■  593

-  597

-  608

•  615

■  622

>  629

•  635

•  655


707

line  4  of  note,  read  master  for  master*

-  13,  insert  a  comma  after  Mitra-Varuna

■  5  of  notea,  insert  a  comma  after  dual

•  9,  insert  a  comma  after  come

•  1  of  stanza  5,  insert  to  after  or

■  2,  insert  a  full  atop  after  forward

»  5  of  notes,  add  See  Macdonoll,  R.  A.  S.  Journal.  July  1893,
p.  426.

■  3,  insert  a  comma  after  conquer

•  1  of  stanza  7  substitute  a  comma  for  the  full  atop  after  rites

■  2  of  stanza  10,  insert  a  full  atop  after  gifta

•  2  from  below,  read  it  for  t

•  2  from  below,  insert  a  comma  after  Daayu

■  1  of  notea,  dele  the  full  slop  after  41)

•  1  of  stanza  1,  »m«r«  a  comma  qfler  quaffing

•  7  from  below,  put  a  full  stop  after  '  mares  ’

•  7,  substitute  a  colon  for  tho  oomraa  after  invoketh

•  4  of  stanza  12,  substitute  a  full  atop  for  the  comma  after

hostility

•  3  of  stanza  22,  dele  tho  comma  after  onco
»  1  of  stanza  11,  after  host  insert  with

•  3  of  stanza  2,  substitute  a  semicolon  for  tho  comma  after  Agni
s  7  from  below,  read  df rdndm  for  OfMtufm

•  8,  read  VUhjArapa&kti  for  Vish|Arapanktl

•  4  from  below,  read  Vishldrapahkti  for  VisKlirapankti

•  4  from  below,  read  Paftktl  for  Paukti


Printed  Je  publisfted  by  k.  j.  lazaros  &  CO.,  at  the  Medical  JIM  Press,  Benares,


Call  No.  Ail n/-^'


Author —  /?•  T.fr-'&urfi'/A.


Boirowor  No.  |  Dow  of  Imuc  |  Data  of  Rotura  |

-A  book  that,  is  shut  is  but  a  block"

^E°L°C%

&  GOVT.  OF  INDIA

&  Department  of  Archaeology

£  NEW  DELHI.

k)  »4

r  \


Please  help  us  to  keep  the  book
clean  and  moving.

76117


HYMNS OB' THE RIGVEDA

translated with a popular commentary


BY

RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH, M.A..C.I.E.

FORMER PRINCIPAL OF THE BENARES COLLEGE, AND LATE DIRECTOR
PUBLIC INSTRUCTION N.-W. P. AND OUDH.


1

Second Edition.

COMPLETE IN TWO VOLUMES.


VOL. II.



BENARES:

PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY E. J. LAZARUS AND CO.

1897.

All rights rest



LIBRARY


CONTENTS.

Pagt.

Hymns, Translation and Commentary : —

Book VII. ... ... ... ... 1

„ VIII ... 103

VAlakhilya ... ... ... ... 259

Book IX. ... ... ... ... 269

» x * ••• ... ... 383

Appendix.— H ymns lxi., cvi., clxh.-olxiil, clxxxiv. ... 611

index of Hymns ... ... ... ... 015

General Index of Hymns ... ... ... 633

Index of Names, Etc. ... ... ... 637

Corrigenda et Addenda ... ... ... 671


the hymns of the rigveda.

BOOK THE SEVENTH.

HYMN I. Agni.

The men from fire-sticks, with their hands’ swift movement,
have, i« deep, thought, engendered glorious Agni,

Far-seen, with pointed flame, Lord of the homestead.

? l'he Vasus set that Agni in the dwelling, fair to behold, for
help from every quarter :

Who, in the home for ever, must be honoured.

) Shine thou before us, Agni, well-enkindled, with flame, Most
Youthful God, that never fadeth.

To thee come all our sacrificial viands.

1 Among all fires these fires have shone most brightly, splendid
with light, begirt by noble heroes,

Where men of lofty birth sit down together.

5 Victorious Agni, grant us wealth with wisdom, wealth with
brave sons, famous and independent,

Which not a foe who deals in magic conquers. ^

To whom, the Strong, at morn and eve comes, -maid-like, the
ladle dropping oil, with its oblation :

Wealth-seeking comes to him his own devotion.

Burn up all malice with those flames, 0 Agni, wherewith of
old thou burntest up Jarfttha,

And drive away in silence pain and sickness.

With him who lighteth up thy splendour, Agni, excellent,

, pure, refulgent, Purifier,

Be present, and with us through these our praises.

Agni, the patriarchal men, the mortals who have in many
i places spread thy lustre, —

Be gracious to us here for their sake also.

.11 the hymns of this Book are ascribed to the Itishi Vaaishtha, with whom
sons are associated as the seels of parts of two Lymns.

i In deep thought : ‘ with their fingers/ according to SAyana, this meaning
ll >g been attributed without any philological grounds to the word dfdhiti*
from its use in this and similar passages.
fits own devotion ; the worship which belongs especially to him.
w'&tha ; a RAksh isa or demon with a loud harsh voice. — SAyana,



2 THE HYMNS OF [BOOj

10 Let these men, heroes in the fight with foemen, prevail aj '

all godless arts of magic, —

These who approve the noble song I sing thee.

11 Let us not sit in want of men, 0 Agni, without descenj ;

heroless, about thee :

But, 0 House-Friend, in houses full of children.

12 By sacrifice which the Steeds’ Lord ever visits, there m

our dwelling rich in seed and offspring,

Increasing still with lineal successors.

13 Guard us, 0 Agni, from the hated demon, guard us j

malice of the churlish sinner :

Allied with thee may I subdue assailants.

14 May this same fire of mine surpass all others, this fire )

offspring, vigorous and firm-handed, i

Wins, on a thousand paths, what ne’er shall perish. !

15 This is that Agni, saviour from the foeman, who guarcn

kindler of the flame from sorrow :

Heroes of noble lineage serve and tend him.

16 This is that Agni, served in many places, whom the ricll i

who brings oblation kindles,

And round him goes the priest at sacrifices.

17 Agni, may we with riches in possession bring thee cont^

offerings in abundance,

Using^both means to draw thee to our worship.

18 Agni, bear thou, Eternal, these most welcome oblation

the Deities’ assembly :

Let them enjoy our very fragrant presents.

19 Give us not up, Agni, to want of heroes, to wretched clod

to need, to destitution.

Yield us not, Holy One, to fiend or hunger; injure us i) )t
home or in the forest. !

20 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agii:

God, pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles.

Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye Gc
protect us evermore with blessings.

21 Thou Agni, swift to hear, art fair of aspect : beam forth

Son of Strength, in full effulgence.

Let me not want, with thee, a^son for ever : let not a mw
hero ever fail us.

12 The Steeds' Lord : Agni, whose swift flames are called horses.

17 Both means : prayer and praise.

21 Far 'ever ; ntiyt; perpetual ; who shall live for ever in his pop



THE RlGVEDA.


8


\lttf 2.J

: Condemn ua not to indigence, 0 Agni, beside these flaming
fires which Gods have kindled ;

Nor, even after fault, let thy displeasure, thine as a God, 0
Son of Strength, overtake us-

0 Agni, fair of face, the wealthy mortal who to the Im-
mortal offers his oblation

Hath him who wins him treasure by his Godhead, to whom
the prince, in need, goes supplicating.
k Knowing our chief felicity, 0 Agni, bring hither ample
riches to our nobles,

Wherewith we may enjoy ourselves, 0 Victor, with undimini-
shed life and hero children.

6 Give strength and power to these my prayers, 0 Agni ; 0 God,
pour blessings on our chiefs and nobles.

Grant that both we and they may share thy bounty. Ye
Gods, protect us evermore with blessings.

HYMN II. Aprts.

Gladly accept, this day, our fuel, Agni : send up thy sacred
smoke and shi^e sublimely.

Touch the c^estial summits with thy columns, and overspread
thee »*ith the rays of Surya.

2 Wifch sacrifice to these we men will honour the majesty of

holy Naraeansa —

To these the pure, most wise, the thought-inspirers, Gods who
enjoy bet^h sorts of our oblations.

3 We will'&fctol at sacrifice for ever, as men may do, Agni whom

Manu Kindled,

Your very skilful Asura, meet for worship, envoy between
both worlds, the truthful speaker,
r Bearing the sacred grass, the men who serve him strew it
with reverence, on their knees, by Agni.

Calling him to the spotted grass, oil-sprinkled, adorn him, ye
Ad h vary us, with oblation.

22 Which Qods have kindled : lighted by the ministering priests.

23 Hath him : possesses, or ©njoye the favour of, Agni. * That deity (Agni)
fours the presenter of (sacrificial) wealth.’ — Wilson,

24 Knoicing our chief felicity : understanding what we want to make us
PPy. that is, riches.

Hie Aprfs are the divine or deified beings and objects to which the propi-
tory verses are addressed. For other Anri hymns see I. 13 ; 188 ; II. 8 : III.

L v - 5 ; IX. 5 ; X. 70 ; HO.

[ Hwdmnsa: * the Praise of Men’ ; Agni. Both tortt of our oblation$ :

P r U2a °f Sfyitot pH or clarified butter, and libations of Soma juice.



4 ' JFHF HYMNS OF [BOOK }

5 With holy thoughts the pious have thrown open Doors fain

chariots in the Gods’ assembly.

Like two full mother cows who liok their youngling, like ma
ens for the gathering, they adorn them.

6 And let the two exalte^ Heavenly Ladies, Morning and Nig

like a cow good at milking,

Come, inuch-invoked, and on our grass be seated, wealtl
deserving worship, for our welfare.

7 You, Bards and Singers at men’s sacrifices, both filled wi

wisdom, I incline to worship.

Send up our offerings when we call upon you, and so amoi
the Gods obtain us treasures.


8 May Bharati with all her Sisters, IJa accordant with the Gc

with mortals Agni,

Sarasvati with all her kindred Rivers, come to this gra
Three Goddesses, and seat them.

9 Well pleased with us do thou, O God, 0 TvashUr, give rea

issue to our procreant vigour,

Whence springs the hero, powerful, trilled in action, lo\
of Gods, adjuster of the press-stones.

10 Send to the Gods the oblation, Lord of Forests, and let t
Immolator, Agni, dress it.

He as the truer Priest shall offer worship, for the Gods’ m
rations well he knowoth.

J1 Come thou to us, 0 Agni, duly kindled, together with
potent Gods and Indra.

On this our grass sit Aditi, happy Mother, and let our H i
delight the Gods Immortal.

HYMN III. A\

Associate with fires, make your God Agni envoy at sacrif
best skilled in worship,

Established firm among mankind, the Holy, flame-crowi
and fed with oil, the Purifier.


5 Doors: the deified doors of the hall of sacrifice wheie the Gods assem
Fain for chariot * . welcoming the approach of the cars in wliioh the prii
coino to the ce> mony, The latter half of the stanza is obscure : ‘ (the laq
placed to the east are plying the fire with ghi at sacrifices, as the moi
q®ws liok the calf, or as riyers (water the fields).’— Wilson. ^

6 Like a cow: the dual dhend, two cows, instead of dhenuh, woi \ as 1}


wig suggests, seem to us to be preferable.

7 Bards and Singers: the h6t4>4, or ‘two Invokers’ of J. 13. 8;
Agni and Varuna, pr Varuna and Aditya.

8 Stanzas 8-^11 are identical with stanzas 8— 11 of Book III. 4.


perl


1 Associate: sajdsMK being a shortened form of sajfahasah, the no aim*
plural. Sftyana explains it as an accusative singular, qualifying Agni,



lai i IULt Y JLU A.


r N 3.]


5


,ike a steed neighing eager for the pasture, when he hath
stepped forth from the great enclosure :

’hen the wind following blows upon his splendour, and,
straight, the path is black which thou hast travelled.

[from thee a Bull but newly born, 0 Agni, the kindled ever-
, lasting flames rise upward.

i.]oft to heaven thy ruddy smoke ascendeth : Agni, thou
speedest to th<j Gods as envoy.

Thou whose fresh lustre o’er the earth advanceth when greed-
ily with thy jaws thy food thou eatest.
jike a host hurried onward comes thy lasso : fierce, with thy
tongue thou piercest, as ’twere barley.

The men have decked him both at eve and morning, Most
Youthful Agni, as they tend a courser.

They kindle him, a gitest within his dwelling : bright shines
the splendour of the worshipped Hero.

0 fair of face, beautiful is thine aspect when, very near at
hand, like gold thou gleamest.

Like Heaven’s thundering roar thy might approaches, and
like the wondrous Sun thy light thou showest.

That we may worship, with your Hail to Agni ! with sacrificial
cakes and fat oblations,

Guard us, - 0 Agni, with those boundless glories as with a
hundred fortresses of iron.

Thine are resistless songs for him who offers, and hero-giving
hymns wherewith thou savest ;

With these, 0 Son of Strength, 0 Jatavcdas, guard us, pre-
serve these princes and the singers.

When forth he cometh, like an axe new-sharpened, pure in
his form, resplendent in his body,

Sprung, sought with eager longing, from his Parents, for the
Gods’ worship, Sage and Purifier :

Shine this felicity on us, 0 Agni : may we attain to perfect
understanding.

A.11 happiness be theirs who sing and praise* thee. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.


— -

2 From the great enclosvn't ; ‘ from the vast enclosing (forest)/ — Wilson,
-hers understand It as the enclosure in which the horse is confiued.

4 Ckoupiercett as 'twere baiiey : the comparison is somewhat compressed :
e meaning is, thon penetratest and fellest the trees of the forest with thy
as men cut down barley with a reaping-hook,

& From his Parents; the two fire-sticks*



TUB HYMNS OP


[BOOK 1


HYMN IY. A

Bring forth your gifts to his refulgent splendour, your hy
as purest offering to Agni,

To him who goes as messenger with knowledge between
sons of men and Gods in heaven.

2 Wise must this Agni he, though young and tender, since

was born, Most Youthful, of his Mother ;

He who with bright teeth seizeth fast the forests, and e?
his food, though plenteous, in a moment.

3 Before his presence must we all assemble, this God's wh(

men have seized in his white splendour.

This Agni who hath brooked that men should seize him ha
shone for man with glow insufferable.

4 Far-seeing hath this Agni been established, deathless m

mortals, wise among the foolish.

Here, 0 victorious God, forbear to harm us : may we for evi
share thy gracious favour.

5 He who hath occupied his God- made dwelling, Agni, in wisdoi

hath surpassed Immortals.

A Babe unborn, the plants and trees support him, and th
earth bearetb him the All-snstainer.

6 Agni is Lord of Amrit in abundance, Lord of the gift of wealt

and hero valour,

Victorious God, let us not sit about thee like men devoid c
strength, beauty, and worship.

7 The foeman’s treasure may be won with labour : may we tx

masters of our own possessions. ,

Agni, no son is he who springs from others : lengthen not ovu
the pathways of the foolish. 1

8 Unwelcome for adoption is the stranger, one to be thought o

as another's offspring,

Though grown familiar by continual presence. May our strong
hero come, freshly triumphant. 1


3 Musi we all assemble : I follow Ludwig in his interpretation of sariw&di
as we are forsaken, ami our protector is far away («t, 6, 7, 8), we must crow
to the God of Fire for defence.

6 In the second line I have borrowed from Prof. Max Miiller, Vcdic Hymni
I. p. 80.

7 Let us remain in undisturbed possession of our own property, and let m
have sons of our own begetting and not the adopted children of others.

8 Men do not look with pleasure and affection on adopted sons ; but we aft
longing to see our absent protector return to us. — Ludwig. Others espial
the last half- verse differently : ‘ therefore let there come to us (a son) new-btM
possessed of food, victorious over foes.’— -Wilson.



TBE MOVED A.


bv 5.1


T


Juard us from him who would assail us, Agni ; preserve us
0 thou Victor, from dishonour.

Jere let the place of darkening come upon thee : may wealth
be ours, desirable, in thousands,
jhine this felicity on us, 0 Agni : may we attain to perfeot
understanding.

\11 happiness be theirs who sing and praise thee. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN V. Agni.

IBring forth your song of praise to mighty Agni, the speedy
messenger of earth and heaven,

Vaisvanara, who, with those who wake, hath waxen great in
the lap of all the Gods Immortal.

Sought in the heavens, on earth isJAgni stablished, leader of
rivers, Bull of standing waters.

Vaisvanara, when he hath grown in glory, shines on the tribes
of men with light and treasure.

For fear of thee forth fled the dark-hued races, scattered
abroad, deserting their possessions,

When, glowing, 0 Vaisvanara, for Puru, thou, Agni, didst
light up and rend their castles.

Agni Vaisvanara, both Earth and Heaven submit them to
thy threefold jurisdiction.

Refulgent in thine undecaying lustre thou hast invested both
tho worlds with splendour.

Agni, the tawny horses, loudly neighing, our resonant hymns
that drop with oil, attend thee;

Lord of the tribes, our Charioteer of riches, Ensign of days,
Vaisvanara of mornings.

This stanza is a repetition of VI. 15, 12, where see note.

1 Repeated from stanza 10 of the preceding hymn.


ie hymn is addressed to Agui as Vaisvanara, the God who is present with,
benefits, all Aryan men.

With those who wake: tended by the priests. According to SAyana ‘as*
ted with the wakened Gods.’

Bull of standing 'maters : the meaning of stiy India is uncertain. Perhaps,
pudwig suggests, plants and bushes are intended which Agni like a bull
jels with the ground.

1 The dark-hued races : according to von Roth, the spirits of darkness. For
ru : or, for man.

i Threefold jurisdiction : in heaven, mid-air, and earth.

> The tawny horses : the hymns that hasten to Agni like eager horses,
dwig translates the harltah of the text by ‘gold -yellow,’ qualifying ‘hymns;’
it is, hymns with libationB of yellow Soma juice.



a THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vll,

6 In thee, 0 bright ns Mitra, Vasus seated the might of Asuras,

for they loved thy spirit.

Thou dravest Dasyus from their homo, 0 Agni, and brought
est forth broad light to light the Arya.

7 Bom in the loftiest heaven thou in a moment readiest, like

wind, the place where Gods inhabit.

Thou, favouring thine offspring, roaredst loudly when giving
life to creatures, Jatavedas.

B Send us that strength, Vai^vanara, send it, Agni, that
strength, 0 J&tavedas, full of splendour,

Wherewith, all-bounteous God, thou pourest riches, as fame
wide-spreading, on the man who offers.

9 Agni, bestow upon our chiefs and nobles that famous power,
that wealth which fecdeth many.

Accordant with the Vasus and the Rudras, Agni, Vaisvanara,
give us sure protection.

HYMN VI. Agni. 1

Praise of the Asura, high imperial Ruler, the Manly One in
whom the folk shall triumph — •

I laud his deeds who is as strong as Indra, and lauding celebrate
the Fort-destroyer.

2 Sage, Sign, Food, Light, — they bring him from the mountain,

the blessed Sovran of the earth and heaven.

I decorate with songs the mighty actions which Agni, Fort-
destroyer, did aforetime.

3 The foolish, faithless, rudely-speaking niggards, without belie!

or sacrifice or worship, —

Far, far away hath Agni chased those Dasyus, and, in thd
east, hath turned the godless westward.

4 Him who brought eastward, manliest with his prowess, tfa

Maids rejoicing in the western darkness,

That Agni I extol, the Lord of riches, unyielding tamer o
assailing foemen.

5 Him who brake down the tvalls with deadly weapons, an<

gave the Mornings to a noble Husband,

6 Thou drave&t: cf. I. 117. 21.

1 Fort-destroyer : demoli.sher of the cloud-castles of the demons of drought
9r of the strongholds of the non- Ary an tribes.

2 From, the mountain : fram the cloud, as lightning.

3 Westward : into the darkness of night.

4 Who brought eastward : brought back the vanished lights of dawn.

5 To a noble Husband : the Sun, or Agni himself. The tribes of Nahut: or,
according to von Roth, neighbouring people.



THE RIO VEDA.


Mft 7.)


y


Young Agni, who with conquering strength subduing the
tribes of Nahus made them bring their tribute.

Jn whose protection all men rest by nature, desiring to enjoy
his gracious fatour—

Agni Vaisvanara in his Parents’ bosotri hath found the choic-
est seat in earth and heaven.

Vaisv&nara the God, at the sun’s setting, hath taken to
himself deep-hidden treasures,:

Agni hath taken them from earth and heaven, from the sea
under and the sea above us.


HYMN YII. Agni.

I send forth even your God, victorious Agni, like a Strong
courser, with mine adoration.

Herald of sacrifice be he who knoweth : he hath reached Gods,
himself, with measured motion.

By paths that are thine own come hither, Agni, joyous, delight-
ing in tho Gods’ alliance,

Making the heights of earth roar with thy fury, burning with
eager teeth the woods and forests.

The grass is strewn ; the sacrifice advances : adored as Priest,
Agni is made propitious,

Invoking both All-boon-bestowing Mothers of whom, Most
Youthful ! thou wast born to help us.

Forthwith the men, the best of these for wisdom, have made
him leader in the solemn worship.

As Lord in homes of men is Agni stablished, the Holy One,
the joyous, sweetly speaking.

He hath come, chosen bearer, and is seated in man’s home,
Brahman, Agni, the Supporter,

He whom both Heaven and Earth exalt and strengthen,
whom, Giver of all boons, the Hotar worships.

Those have passed all in glory, who, thq manly, have wrought
with skill the hymn of adoration ;


f Agni becomes the representative of the Sun, and in his absence gives
lit and other blessings to man. The sea above us : the ocean of air.

I Like a strong courser : glorified with my praises, like a horse that has
m groomed and adorned. Or. perhaps, merely, rapid as a horse. W ith
isured motion ; or, a speedy runner. S&yana explains the word mitadruh
this place as ‘consumer of trees/ but in IV. 6. £> as parimitagatih, ‘with
ftsured motion/

* ..Mothers ; Heaven and Earth.



10 TBS HYMNS OP [POOR V

Who, listening, have . advanced the people’s welfare, and s
their thoughts on this my holy statute.

J 7 We, the Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 Son
Strength, the Lord of wealth and treasure.

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye Got
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN VIII. Ag

The King whose face is decked with oil is kindled with homa
offered by his faithful servant.

The men, the priests adore him with oblations. Agni ha
shone forth when the dawn is breaking.

2 Yea, he hath been acknowledged as most mighty, the joyo

Priest of men, the youthful Agni.

He, spreading o’er the earth, made light around him, ai
grew among the plants with blackened follies.

3 How dost thou decorate our hymn, 0 Agni ? What pow

dost thou exert when thou art lauded ?

When, Bounteous God, may we be lords of riches, winners
precious wealth which none may conquer?

^ 4 Far famed is this the Bharata’s own Agni : he shineth lil
the Sun with lofty splendour.

He who hath vanquished Puru in the battle, the heaven
guest hath glowed in full refulgence.

5 Full many oblations are in thee collected : with all thii

aspects thou hast waxen gracious.

Thou art already famed as praised and lauded, yet still,
nobly born, increase thy body.

6 Be this my song, that winneth countless treasure, engender*

with redoubled force for Agni,

That, splendid, chasing sickness, slaying demons, it ms
delight our friend and bless the singers.

7 We, tho Vasishthas, now implore thee, Agni, 0 Son i

Strength, the Lord of wealth and riches.

Thou hast brought food to singers and to nobles. Ye God
preserve us evermoro with blessings.

6 Who set their thoughts on this my holy statute : that is, apparently, w!
duly observe the law which requires us to worship Agni. ‘ Who are glorilie
of this truthful (deity).’— Wilson.

2 With blackened fellies : leaving black tracks behind him: * dark-pathed.’-
Wilson.

4 The Bharata : Vasishtha, the purohita of the Bharatas. PHru ; tl
Pftrus, (one of the Five Aryan Tribes) who opposed the Bharatas.

6 Countless treasure : literally, hundreds, thousands. Our friend: ti
institutor of the sacrifice.



MN 10 .]


THE RIG VEDA.


11


HYMN IX. Agni.

Roused from their bosom is the Dawns’ beloved, the joyous
Priest, most sapient, Purifier.

He gives a signal both to Gods and mortals, to Gods oblations,
riches to the pious.

Most wise is he who, forcing doors of Papis, brought the
bright Sun to us who feedeth many.

The cheerful Priest, men’s Friend and home-companion,
through still night’s darkness he is made apparent.

Wise, ne’er deceived, uncircumscribed, refulgent, our gracious
gue^t, a Friend with good attendants,

Shines forth with wondrous light before the Mornings : the
young plants hath he entered, Child of Waters.

Seeking our gatherings, he, your Jata vedas, hath shone ador-
able through human ages,

Who gleams refulgent with his lovely lustre : the kine have
waked to meet him when enkindled.

Go on thy message to the Gods, and fail not, 0 Agni, with
their band who pray and worship.

Bring all the Gods that they may give us riches, Sarasvati,
the Maruts, As v ins, Waters.

Vasishtha, when enkindling thee, 0 Agni, hath slain Jarutha.
Give us wealth in plenty.

Sing praiso in choral song, 0 Jatavedas. Ye Gods, preserve
us overmore with blessings.

hymn X. Agni.

He hath sent forth, bright, radiant, and refulgent, like the
Dawn’s Lover, his far-spreading lustre.

Pure in his splendour shines the golden Hero : our longing
thoughts hath he aroused and wakened.

He, like the Sun, hath shone while Morn is breaking, and
priests who weave the sacrifice sing praises,

Agni, the God, who knows their generations and visits Gods*
most bounteous, rapid envoy.


ie y Dawns' beloved : Agni, as lighted up at day-break. A signal : of
hee, which men are to offt-r and n 0 ds are to receive.

Jardtha : see VII. 1.7, where the destruction of Jarfttha ia ascribed to
1 himself. Jarutha, said by S&yana to have been a RAkshasa or demon,
probably an enemy who was slain in a battle at which Vasishtha was
Jnt as purohita.— Ludwig.

Like the Dawn's Lover : the Sun. See I. 69. 1.

And priests ; I adopt Sdyana’s interpretation of this half-line.



12 THE HYMNS OF t BOOK Vl\

3 Oar songs and holy hymns go forth to Agni, seeking the Got

and asking him for riches,

Him fair to see, of goodly aspect, mighty, men’s messengei
who carries their oblations.

4 Joined with the Vasus, Agni, bring thou indrsi, bring hithei

mighty Rudra with the Rudras,

Aditi good to all men with Adityas, Brihaspati All-bounteou^
with the Sihgersj

5 Men eagerly implore at sacrifices Agni, Most Youthful GoJ

the joyous Herald. j

For he is Lord and Ruler over riches, and for Gods’ worshi|
an unwearied envoy.

HYMN XL Agn

Great art thou, Agni, sacrifice’s Herald t not without thee at
deathless Gods made joyful.

Come hither with all Deities about thee : here take thy sea
the first, as Priest, 0 Agni.

2 Men with oblations evermore entreat thee, the swift, to undei

take an envoy’s duty.

He on whose sacred grass w ith Gods thou sittest, to hip
0 Agni, are the days propitious.

3 Three times a day in thee are shown the treasures sent fc

the mortal who presents oblation.

Bring the Gods hither like a man, 0 Agni : be thou our envo;
guarding us from curses.

4 Lord of the lofty sacrifice is Agni, Agni is Lord of every gi:

presented.

The Vasus were contented with his wisdom, so the Gods mad
him their oblation-bearer.

5 0 Agni, bring the Gods to taste our presents : with Indi

leading, here let them be joyful. J

Convey this sacrifice to Gods in heaven. Ye Gods, presen
us evermore with blessings, 1


4 Singers : or Rikvans, deities who attend and sing the praises of soi
God : ‘ the adorable (Angirasas).’— Wilson.


3 Three times a day : at the morning, the noon, and the evening Hbatio
Or the meaning may be, in the three fire-receptacles. Like a man : actii
like a human priest. The Commentators explain manushvdt by ‘ as (at l
•acrifice) of Maiiu/



THE RIG VEDA.


U


fMN 14 .]

HYMN XII. Agni.

We with great reverence have approached The Youngest who
hath shone forth well-kindled in his dwelling,

With wondrous light between wide earth and heaven, well*
worshipped, looking forth in all directions.

Through his great might o’ercoming all misfortunes, praised
in the bouse is Agni J&tavedas.

May he protect us from disgrace and trouble, both us who
laud him and our noble patrons.

0 Agni, thou art Varuna and Mitra : Vasishthas with their
holy hymns exalt thee.

With thee be most abundant gain of treasure. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XIII, Agni.

Biiing song and hymn to Agni, Asura-slayer, enlightener of

; all and thoughkbestower.

I Like an oblation on the grass, to please him, I bring this to

j Vaisvanara, hymn-inspjrer.

| Thou with thy flame, 0 Agni, brightly glowing, hast at thy
birth filled full the earth and heaven.

Thou with thy might, Vaisvanara Jatavcdas, settest the Gods
free from the curse that bound them.

Agni, when born, thou lookedst on all creatures, like a brisk
herdsman moving round his cattle.

The path to prayer, Vaisvanara, thou foundest. Ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings,

HYMN XIV. Agni,

With reverence and with offered gifts serve we the God whose
flame is bright •.

Let us bring Jatavedas fuel, and adore Agni when we invoke
the Gods.

Agni, may we perform thy rites with fuel, and honour thee,
0 Holy One, with praises :

Honour theo, Priest of sacrifice ! with butter, thee, God of
blessed light ! with our oblation.


The Youngest : Agni, most youthful of the Gods, as being continually
xluced.

The curse that bound them : the Gods seem to have been suV)ject to the
nities of old age until lndra, or, as is here said, Agni, freed them, $ee
9 , 2 .



14


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK r/j


3 Como, Agni, with the Gods to our invoking, come, pleased,!
offerings sanctified with Vashat.

May we be h'is who pays thee, God, due honour. Ye God
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XV. A g ,

Offer oblations in his mouth, the bounteous God's whom \


must serve,

His who is nearest lun to us r

2 Who for the Fivefold People's sake hath seated him in evci

home,

Wise, Youthful, Master of the house.

3 On all sides may that Agni guard our household folk ar


property ;

May he deliver us from woe.

4 I have begotten this new hymn for Agni, Falcon of the sky
Will he not give us of his wealth 1

5 Whose glories when he glows in front of sacrifice are ft

to see,

Like wealth of one with hero sons.

6 May he enjoy this hallowed gift, Agni accept our songs, wl

bears

Oblations, best of worshippers.

7 Lord of the I iouse, whom men must seek, we set thee dow

0 Worshipped One !

Bright, rich in heroes, Agni 1 God t

8 Shine forth at night and mom : through thee with fires a

we provided well.

Thou, rich in heroes, art our Friend.

9 The men come near thee for their gain, the singes with tin

songs of praise r

Speech, thousandfold, comes near to th pc.

10 Bright, Purifier, meet for praise, Immortal with refuse

glow,

Agni drives R&kshasas away.

11 As such, bring us abundant wealth, young Child of Streng

for this thou canst :

May Bhaga give us what is choice.


3 Sanctified with, Va,hat: Vashat (may he hear it to the Gode) ^
exclamation used at the moment of pouring the sacrificial oil or dan


butter on the fire.


9 Speech : dhskard, the imperishable ; here speech in th© shape of pn
and prayer.



iy 16 ]


THE RIG VEDA .


'hou, Agni, gives fc hero fame: Bhaga and Savitar the God
nd Diti give us what is good. r

^gm, preserve us from distress : consume our enemies, 0 God,
Eternal, with thy hottest flames.

Lnd, irresistible, be thou a mighty iron fort to ur
^ ith hundred walls for man’s defence ’

ST'" “ d

nfallible ! by day and night.

HYMN XVI.

'srsr h ~ 1 “ u a. sonZ

J"X J ' “ ,,el * i,h ”*»« immortal

Uis two red horses, all-supportincr let him mV T
well-worshipped, urge them fast . ’ ^ ' et ll " m >

hen hath the sacrifice good pravers owl i

^ heavenly gift of wealth to men. en< ^ an< *

' mounted up'"" 1 the B ° Untifu1 ’ the Muc, -invokod, hath

and t0l,ch the sky :

h the God/ilitW te the feast™ ^ '** messen S cr - Bring
tcril^ 1 ’ art th ° h0mestead ’ 3 Lord, our Herald at the

-ii^X-OYthe a gl th0 Cl0anSer aUdaS ^

1 ^o n grttetht e air ifiCer ’ ° M ° St Wise ’ '<* thou art he

th! — 1 «» rite, all who

Agni who art worshipped well dear let- •
wealthy patrons who are governors ^ mT K* t0the °’
Affts, their stalls of kine. ® f men ’ who P art , a*

““y tavT^;

regular, wto Diti. &e Ve&J$j£i p'm*’ wbo C0B «dered the

t raid : Rntn* • . .

om cl ati D « Pr i es t s mv l^"f a.. : »tb«r


u



THE HYMNS OF


M

8


9


10


11


12


2

3

4

5

6
7


[BOOH }


They in whose home, her hand bearing the sacred oil, IJ& s
down well-satisfied—

Guard them, Victorious God, from slander and from har
give us a refuge famed afar.

Do thou, a Priest with pleasant tongue, most wise, and Vf
near to us,

Agni, bring riches hither to our liberal chiefs, and speed I
offering of our gifts.

They who bestow as bounty plenteous wealth of steeds, moi
by desire of great renown —

Do thou with saving help preserve them from distress, M
Youthful ! with a hundred forts. ,

The God who gives your wealth demands a full libation poir
to him.

Pour ye it forth, then fill the vessel full again : then doth i
God pay heed to you.

Him have the Gods appointed Priest of sacrifice, oblatii
bearer, passing wise.

Agni gives wealth and valour to the worshipper, to folk ^
offer up their gifts.


HYMN XVII. *

Agni, be kindled well with proper fuel, and let the grass
scattered wide about thee.

Let the impatient Portals be thrown open *. bring thou
Gods impatient to come hither.

Taste, Agni : serve the Gods with our oblation. Offer g
sacrifices, J atavedas J

Let J&tavedas pay fair sacrifices, worship and gratify
Gods Immortal.

Wise God, win for us things that are all-goodly, and let
prayers we pray to-day be fruitful.

Thee, even thee, the Son of Strength, 0 Agni, those (
have made the bearer of oblations.

To thee the God may we perform our worship ; do tl
besought, grant us abundant riches.


8 l\d : the Goddess who is regarded as the sacrificial food or oblation
sonified : annardpd havirlakshand devt. — S&yana.

2 The impatient Portals : the doors of the sacrificial chamber which |
to bear their part in the holy ceremony.

6 Those Gods : the famous Gods,



THE RIGVEHA k


17


tN 1 *}

I HYMN XVIII. Indr*.

iLh is with thee, 0 Indra, all the treasures which erst our

fathers won who sang thy praises.

Vith thee are milch-kine good to milk, and horses ; best win-
ner thou of riches for the pious.

’or like a King among his wives thou dwellest : with glories,
as a Sage, surround and help us.
fake us, thy servants, strong for wealth, and honour our
songs with kine and steeds and decoration.

[ere these our holy hymns with joy and gladness in pious
emulation have approached thee.

litherward com^ thy path that leads to riches : may we find
shelter in thy favour, Indra.

asishtha hath poured forth his prayers, desiring to milk thee
like a cow in goodly pasture.

II those my people call thee Lord of cattle : may Indra come
unto the prayer we offer.

r hat though the floods spread widely, Indra made them
shallow and easy for Sudas to traverse.

, worthy of our praises, caused the Simyu, foe of our hymn,
to curse the rivers’ fury.

iger for spoil was Turvasa Purodfts, fain to win wealth, like
fishes urged by hunger.

he Bhrigus and the Druhyus quickly listened : friend rescued
friend mid the two distant peoples.


hymn glorifies Indra as the protector of Sudds, the King of the Tritsus,
•aises the liberality of that prince. See Vedic India (Story of the*
a Series), pp. 319— 832. *


mshtha: the Rishi of the hymn, and the chief priest who had
•anted the warlike expedition of Sudds. To milk thee : to obtain
through thy favour by means of my hymn, as men milk the cow at
3 tor the milk which is required for libations.

e poet begins to recount the events of Sudds’s victorious expedition,
ire not always intelligible partly on account of the obscure phraseology
ed, and partly on account of our ignorance of details which are vaguely
' a this 8tanza Sudds, king or chief of the Tritsu tribe, has, with
ot Indra, crossed a deep river (the Parushnt which is now called the
ind put the Simyus to flight, some of the fugitives being drowned in
1 , he ? lr »yu8 are mentioned together with the Dasyus, in I 1 °0
hostile barb irians slain by India. The second half of the stanza is
J ’ tne meaning of two of the words being uncertain,
rva$a , Purodls : Turvasa appears here as one of the enemies of Sudds.
L. W1 /rn muc ^ filiation, Ludwig in taking Purodds as au appellative of
t i ul 'W» w k° preceding (at solemn ‘rites) ’—Wilson. 77i«
and the Druhpm: here, apparently, allies of Turvasa. Fnhet;
fg to others, Matsyas, a people.



18 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Fj|

i

7 Together came the Pakthas, the Bhal&nas, the Alinas, ^

Sivas, the Vishanins.

Yet to the Tritsus came the Arya’s Comrade, through, love
spoil and heroes’ war, to lead them.

8 Fools, in their folly fain to waste her waters, they parted i

exhaustible Parushni.

Lord of the Earth, he with his might repressed them : still L
the herd and the affrighted herdsman.

9 As to their goal they sped to their destruction : they soug

Parushni ; e’en the swift returned not.

Indra abandoned, to Sudas the manly, the swiftly flying fo<
unmanly babblers.

10 They went like kine unherded from the pasture, each clit

in g to a friend as chance directed.

They who drive spotted steeds, sent down by Prisni, ga
ear, the Warriors and the harnessed horses.

11 The King who scattered one-and-twenty people of h

Vaikarna tribes through lust of glory —

As the skilled priest clips grass within the chamber, so h
the Hero Indra wrought their downfall.


7 The Pakthas , and the rest mentioned in the first line of the i
appear to have been non-Aryan tribes opposed to the Tritsus. Accord
the Scholiast these names are the denominations of various minisl
religious lites. and following this interpretation Wilson translates the <
as follows : * Those who dress the oblation, those who pronounce ausp
words, those who abstain from penance, those who bear horns (in their h
those who bestow happiness (on the,world by sacrifice), glorify that
who recovered the cattle^ of the Arya from the plunderers, who sic
enemies in battle.’ The Arya 8 Comrade : Indra, the ally of Tritsu a
the non-Aryan confederacy.

8 The confederates, who were on the right or farther bank of the Pari
intending to attack Sudfts and the Tritsus, appear to have attempted to
the river fordable by diguing channels and so diverting the water, wh
se^ma, rushed back into its natural bed and drowned the men who were
ing the stream. The second line of the stanza is obscure and the trans
is conjectural. Wilson translates : * but he by his greatness pervade
earth, Kavi, the son of Chayam&na, like a falling victim, sleeps (in de
The herd and the herdsman are, of course, the hostile band and its leader

10 They went : the fugitives who escaped drowning. They who drive q
steeds : the Maruts, sent down by their mother Prisni to aid Sudfts.

11 People: or. houses, i. e. families. Both Vaikarna tribes: perhaps
allies of the Druhyus ; but the meaning of vaikarndyoh is uncertain.
Zimmer, AUindisches Leben, p. 103. Ludwig thinks that the reference
a mythic battle at some place called Vaikarnau between Indra (the I
and the Maruts (the one-and-twenty people). Clips grass : with one cle#



THE RIO VEDA.


19


(N 18 .]

Thou, thunder-armed, o’erwhelmedst in the waters famed

| ancient Kavasha and then the Druhyu.

pthers here claiming friendship to their friendship, devoted

: unto thee, in thee were joyful.

Indra at once with conquering might demolished all their
strong places and their seven castles.

The goods of Anu’s son he gave to Tritsu. May we in sacrifice
conquer scornful Pfiru.

The Anavas and Druhyus, seeking booty, have slept, the sixty
hundred, yea, six thousand,

And six-and-sixty heroes. For the pious were all these mighty
exploits done by Indra.

These Tritsus under Indra’s careful guidance came speeding
like loosed waters rushing downward.

The foenfen, measuring exceeding closely, abandoned to Sudas
all their provisions.

The hero’s side who drank the dressed oblation, Indra’s denier,
far o’er earth he scattered.

[ndra brought down the fierce destroyer’s fury. He gave
them various roads, the path’s Controller. * *

f E>en with the weak he wrought this matchless exploit : e’en
, with a goat he did to death a lion.

|He pared the pillar’s angles with a needle. Thus to Sudas
f Indra gave all provisions.


2 Kavasha ; perhaps the priest of one of the two Vaikarna tribes which
iner is inclined to identify with the Kuru-Krivis. See A Hindis ekes Leben.
11. Others here: ‘for they, Indra. who are devoted to thee and glorify
i 3 preferring thy friendship, enjoy it.’ -Wilson. The exact meaning is


1 To Tritsu : to Sud&s, the King of the Tritsus.

mei \ ° f the Anutribe< The sixty hundred: ‘Theenu-
y -°^ SC u re ? e *P re8Sed > shashtih said shat sahasi'd shashtir adhi
n 81xt y hu . ndr , ed *. six thousands, sixty, with six more : SAyana
rstands by jatdni, thousands, sakasrdntiyarthafr Wilson. ‘Sixty-

t Z J* w^ d h red 8iX ; L .t dWig «¥*■*" ^at should be read

&!%&, pp m-m. number 66S6 ' See Ben %-

teki “8 great care of their good.

’ *^, e par V tke hostile leader, the non-Aryan, who
toted to \?m W deTOU red the oblations that should have been

, He gave them various roads : made them fly in all direo-


f£stowe a r. ff0<W ' i®pos.ible deeds mentioned as illustration, of Indra’.



THE HYMNS OF


80


[book n


18 To thee have all thine enemies submitted : e’en the fierq

Bheda hast thou made thy subject.

Cast down thy sharpened thunderbolt, 0 Indra, on him wh
harms the men who sing thy praises.

19 Yamun& and the Tritsus aided Indra. There he stripped

Bheda bare of all his treasures.

The Ajas and £he Sigrus and the Yakshus brought in to hin
as tribute heads of horses.

20 Not to be soorned, but like Dawns past and recent, 0 Indr^

are thy favours and thy riches.

Devaka, Manyam&na’s son, thou slewest, and smotest Sambars
from the lofty mountain.

21 They who, from home, have gladdened thee, thy servant*

Parasara, Vasishtha, Satay&tu,

Will not forget thy friendship, liberal Giver. So shall th<
days dawn prosperous for the princes.

22 Priest-like, with praiso, I move around the altar, earning

Paijavana’s reward, 0 Agni,

Two hundred cotfs from DevavSn’s descendant, two chariots
from Sudas with mares to draw them.

23 Gift of Paijavana, four horses bear me in foremost place

trained steeds with pearl to deck them.

SudiU’s brown steeds, firmly-stepping, carry me and my soi
for progeny and glory.

24 Him whose fame spreads between wide earth and heaven, who

as dispenser, gives each chief his portion,

Seven flowing Rivers glorify like Indra. He slew Yudhyaj
madhi in close encounter.


18 Bheda : an enemy of Sudls, or an unbeliever, says Sdyana.

19 Yamund : the Jumna. But it is not easy to see how the espeditio:
reached so far. The Ajas, Sigrus, and Yakshus were perhaps subject to Bheda
but nothing is known regarding them. Heads of horses : which had beei
killed in battle.

20 Like Dawns : renewed every day. Devaka : not mentioned elsewhed
According to Grassmann dAvakam mdnyamdudm. refers to Sambara, 1 thinks
himself a God.*

21 Pardsara is said by one authority to have been the son, and by another th
grandson o'f the llishi Vasishtha. Sataydtu is said to be Sakti, Vasishtha’ssoi

22 Here begins the ddnastuti or praise of the prince’s liberality.' Paifl
vma : Sud&s, descendant of Pijavana. Devavdn’s descendant : Sud&s, Devi
vftn being either the same as Divod&sa, the father of Sudfcs or one of ii
forefathers.

24 Seven flowing Rivers glorify : the seven chief rivers of the Panja
glorify him as they glorify Indra. Or, they (men) praise him as the sevfl
rivers praise Indra. 1 The seven rivers bear his glory far and wide* (L 102-2i
Yudhydmidhi ; not mentioned elsewhere.



19.] THE MOVED A. 21

Attend on him, 0 ye heroic Maruts as on Sud&s’s father
t)ivod&sa.

further Paijavana*s desire with favour. Guard faithfully
his lasting firm dominion.

HYMN XIX. lndra.

He like a bull with sharpened horns, terrific, singly excites
and agitates all the people :

Thou givest him who largely pours libations his goods who
pours not, for his oWn possession.

Thou, verily, lndra, gavest help to Kutsa, willingly giving
ear to him in battle,

When, aiding Arjuneya, thou subduedst to him both Kuyava
and the D&sa Sushna.

) Bold One, thou with all thine aids hast boldly holpen Sud&s
whose offerings were accepted,

?dru in winning land and slaying foemen, and Trasadasyu
Son of Purukutsa.

it' the Gods’ banquet, hero-souled ! with Heroes, Lord of Bay
Steeds, thou slowest many foemen.

Phou sentest in swift death to sleep the Dasyu, both Chumuri
and Dhuni, for Dabhiti.

'hese were thy mighty powers that, Thunder-wielder, thou
swiftly crushedst nine-and-ninety castles :

'hon capturedst the hundredth in thine onslaught; thou
slewest Namuchi, thou slewest Vpitra.

Id are the blessings, lndra, which thou gavest Sudas the
worshipper who brought oblations.

r thee, the Strong, I yoke thy strong Bay Horses : may our
prayers reach thee and win strength, Most Mighty !

ive us not up, Lord of Bay Horses, Victor, in this thine own
assembly, to the wicked.

eliver us with true and faithful succours : dear may we be
to thee among the princes.

\farnt9 / here, perhaps, the Maghavans or wealthy nobles are intended
and in the same relation to Sud4s as the Maruts to lndra.


M Godof bafctlea - Thou - Mra. This abrupt
irom the third person to the second is not unusual in the Veda.

juneya; Kutsa, descendant of Arjuna. See L 112. 23. Kuyava: see


r Chumuri, Dhuni, and Dabhiti , see Vol. I. Index
oTto de “ on J of d r ou & ht ’ See L 53. 7. In thine onslaught;

c? of abX’~Wilson dW ® lmg : ‘ thou hast the hundredth

d&s: the Kin at of Jthe Tritana n.. ~ a : u



22 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V

8 May we men, Maghavan, the friends thou lovest, near thee

joyful under thy protection.

Fain to fulfil the wish of Atithigva humble the pride of Tu
vasa and Yadva.

9 Swiftly, in truth, 0 Maghavan, about thee men skilled

hymning sing their songs and praises.

Elect us also into their assembly who by their calls on t\
despoiled the niggards.

10 Thine are these lauds, 0 manliest of heroes, lauds whi

revert to us and give us riches.

Favour these, Indra, when they fight with foemen, as Friei
and Hero and the heroes’ Helper.

1 1 Now, lauded for thine aid, Heroic Indra, sped by our pray

wax mighty in thy body.

Apportion to us strength and habitations. Ye Gods, protect i
evermore with blessings.

HYMN XX. 1

Strong, Godly-natured, born for hero exploit, man’s Fri
he doth whatever deed he willeth.

Saving us e’en from great transgression, Indra, the Yout
visiteth man’s home with favour.

2 Waxing in greatness Indra slayeth Vritra : the Hero wit!

aid hath helped the singer.

He gave Sudils wide room and space, and often hath gra
wealth to him who brought oblations.

3 Soldier unchecked, war-rousing, battling Hero, unconqu

from of old, victorious ever,

Indra the very strong hath scattered armies ; yea, he 1
slain each foe who fought against him.

4 Thou with thy greatness hast filled full, 0 Indra, even

the worlds with might, 0 thou Most Mighty.

Lord of Bays, Indra, brandishing his thunder, is gratified
Soma at the banquet.

5 A Bull begat the Bull for joy of battle, and a strong Me

brought forth him the manly.

8 Atithigva: probably a descendant of SudAs who must hare lived
before the composition of this hymn, as the favour bestowed upon hi
Indra is spoken of as old in stanza 6. Yddva : or Yadu’s son.

9 Elect ns a/so: that is, let us share the blessings which thou withho
from the illiberal churls who offer no oblations and givest to those who
upon thee and worship thee.

5 A Bull begat the Bull : * A vigorous (god) begot a vigorous (son)>' 5
The father of Indra is Kasyapa, according to SAyapa ; but probably Py*
intended. A itrong Mother : Aditi.



MN 5 1. J in.njn'iwvauA. 23

He who is Chief of men, their armies’ Leader, is a strong Hero,
i bold, and fain for booty.

jThe people falter not, nor suffer sorrow, who win themselves
j this God’s terrific spirit.

He who with sacrifices worships Indra is lord of wealth, law-
\ born and law’s protector.

[Whene’er the elder fain would help the younger, the greater
cometh to the lesser’s present.

|3hall the Immortal sit aloof inactive 1 0 Wondrous Indra,
bring us wondrous riches.

Thy dear folk, Indra, who present oblations, are, in chief
place, thy friends, 0 Thunder-wielder.

(day we be best content in this thy favour, sheltered by One
who slays not, but preserves us.

To thee the mighty hymn hath clamoured loudly, and,
Maghavan, the eloquent hath besought thee.

Desire of wealth hath come upon thy singer : help us then,
j Sakra, to our share of riches.

Place us by food which thou hast given, 0 Indra, us and the
i wealthy patrons who command us.

Let thy groat power bring good to him who lauds thee. Ye
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XXL Indra.

Messed is the juice divine with milk commingled : thereto
hath Indra ever been accustomed.

Ve wake thee, Lord of Bays, with sacrifices : mark this our
laud in the wild joy of Soma.

>n to the rite they move, the grass they scatter, these Soma-
drinkers eloquent in synod.

lither, for men to grasp, are brought the press-stones, far-thun-
dering, famous, strong, that wait on heroes.

mo-born : born in accordance with the law.

’he relations between Gods and men resemble those between elders and
*s, superiors and inferiors among men. The inferior comes to his superior
iome offering in his hand and is assisted by him in return. So Indra
I accept our oblations, and rew ird us with wealth.

he eloquent: stdmtih, ; according to Ludwig, the Greek
(TTopa, mouth), mouthy, talkative, and, in a good sense, fluent, eloquent,
loramentators explain the word as ‘praiser.*


Ve wake thee : or, we think of thee, serve thee.



24 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH f

3 Indra, thou settest free the many waters that were encompa&sc

Hero, by the Dragon.

Down rolled, as if on chariots borne, the rivers : through fe
of thee all things created tremble.

4 Skilled in all manly deeds the God terrifio hath with 1

weapons mastered these opponents*

Indra in rapturous joy shook down their castles i he sle
them in his might, the Thunder-wielder.

5 No evil spirits have impelled us, Indra, nor fiends, 0 Mightie

God, with their devices.

Let our true God subdue the hostile rabble : let not the lei
approach our holy worship.

6 Thou in thy strength surpassest Earth and Heaven: tl

regions comprehend not all thy greatness.

With thine own power and might thou slowest Vritra: no f
hath found the end of thee in battle.

7 Even the earlier Deities submitted their powers to thy suprer

divine dominion.

Indra wins wealth and deals it out to others : men in the str
for booty call on Indra.

8 The humble hath invoked thee for protection, thee, Lord

great felicity, 0 Indra.

Thou with a hundred aids hast been our Helper : one who brin
gifts like thee hath his defender.

9 May we, 0 Indra, be thy frionds for ever, eagerly, Conquerc

yielding greater homage.

May, through thy grace, the strength of us who battle qul
in the shock the onset of the foeman.

10 Place us by food which thou hast given, 0 Indra, us and
wealthy patrons who command us.

Let thy great power bring good to him who lauds thee.
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XXII. In,

Drink Soma, Lord of Bays, and let it cheer thee : Indra, i
stone, like a well guided courser,

Directed by the presser’s arms hath pressed it.

4 These opponents : according to S&yana, the demons of the air. The t
has no noun for ‘ these.’

5 The lewd : those who do not follow Vedio observances, according
Y&ska. For a full discussion of the meaning of si^nddevdh see Muir, 0-
Texts , IV. 40<f— 411.

8 One who brings gifts like thee: Sftyana interprets differently: ‘be<
defender against every overpowering (assailant) like to thee.’ — Wilson,



THE RIGVEDA.


V 23 .]


2 $


i let the draught of joy, thy dear companion, by 'which, 0

Lord of Hays, thou slayest foemen,

slight thee, Indra, Lord of princely treasures*

irk olosely, MaghaVan, the words I utter, this eulogy

recited by Vasishtha :

ccept the prayers I offer at thy banquet.

jar thou the call of the juice-drinking press-stone : hear thou

the Brahman’s hymn who sings and lauds thee.

ke to thine inmost self these adorations,

mow and ne’er forgot the hymns and praises of thee, the

Conqueror, and thy strength immortal.

iy name I ever utter, Self-Refulgent !

nong mankind many are thy libations, and many a time the
pious sage invokes thee.

Maghavan, be not long distant from us.

I these libations are for thee, 0 Hero : to thee I offer these

my prayers that strengthen.

er, in every place, must men invoke thee.

ver do men attain, 0 Wonder-Worker, thy greatness, Mighty

One, who must be lauded,

r, Indra, thine heroic power and bounty.

long all Rishis, Indra, old and recent, who have engender-
;d hymns as sacred singers,

on with us be thine auspicious friendships. Ye Gods,
reserve us evermore with blessings.


HYMN XXIII. Indra.


^yers have been offered up through love of glory : Yasishtha,
lonour Indra in the battle.

who with might extends through all existence hears words
diich I, his faithful servant, utter.

ry was raised which reached the Gods, 0 Indra, a cry to
hem to send us strength in combat.

ie among men knows his own life’s duration : bear us in
afety over these our troubles.


! Bays, the booty-seeking car I harness : my prayers have
oached him who accepts th.m gladly.


tu ?. r688 ? 8 0ut the i uioe of the plant, and eo may be
rlin rr\ \ ^ Scholiast inserts mama , of me : ‘ Hear the invocation of

dmg) stone (of me) repeatedly drinking (the &mia).’—Wilyn.

of thu d “



26


i U tj


Indra, when he had slain resistless foemen, forced w
might the two world-halves asunder.

4 Like barren cows, moreover, swelled the waters : the s

sought thy holy rite, 0 Indra.

Come unto us as with his team comes Viiyu : thou, th
our solemn hymns bestowest booty.

5 So may these gladdening draughts rejoice thee, Indr

Mighty, very bounteous to the singer.

Alone among the Gods thou pitiest mortals : 0 Hero,
thee glad at this libation.

6 Thus the Vasishthas glorify with praises Indra the Poi

whose arm wields thunder.

Praised, may he guard our wealth in kine and hero
Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYNM XXIV”.

A home is made for thee to dwell in, Indra : 0 Much-in 1
go thither with the heroes.

That thou, to prosper us, mayst be our Helper, vouchg
wealth, rejoice with draughts of Soma.

2 Indra, thy wish, twice-strong, is comprehended : prei

the Soma, poured are pleasant juices.

This hymn of praise, from loosened tongue, made p
draws Indra to itself with loud invoking.

3 Come, thou Impetuous God, from earth or heaven come

holy grass to drink the Soma.

Hither to me let thy Bay Horses bring thee to listen 1
hymns and make thee joyful.

4 Come unto us with all thine aids, accordant, Lord c

Steeds, accepting our devotions,

Fair-h el meted, o’ercoming with the mighty, and lendi
the strength of bulls, 0 Indra.

5 As to the chariot pole a vigorous courser, this laud is br

to the great strong Upholder.

This hymn solicits wealth of thee : in heaven, as ’twere
t' e sky, set thou our glory.

6 With precious things. 0 Indra, thus content us: may wei

to thine exalted favour.

Send our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Pie
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

4 Barren cows : which are fatter than others.

%

1 A home : in the sacrificial chamber. Heroes : or. men ; the prieata.l
4 Fair- hd meted : or fair-cheeked, or handsome chinned. I



HYMN XXV. Iadra.

HEN with thy mighty help, 0 potent Indra, the armies rush
together in their fury,

hen from the strong man’s arm the lightning flieth , let not
thy mind go forth to side with others.

[ndra, where the ground is hard to traverse, smite down
our foes, the mortals who assail us.

lep far from us the curse of the reviler : bring us accumulat-
ed store of treasures.

d of the fair helm, give Sudas a hundred succours, a
thousand blessings, and thy bounty.

rike down the weapon of our mortal foeman : bestow upon
us splendid fame and riches.

yait the power of one like thee, 0 Indra, gifts of a Helper
Buch as thou art, Hero.

rong, Mighty God, dwell with me now and ever : Lord of
Bay Horses, do not thou desert us.

^re are the Kutsas supplicating Indra for might, the Lord
bf Bays for God-sent conquest.

Ike our foes ever easy to be vanquished : may we, victorious,
win the spoil, 0 Hero.

ith precious things, 0 Indra, thus content us : may we
attain to thine exalted favour.

nd our chiefs plenteous food with hero children. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXVI. Mra.

ha unpressed ne’er gladdened liberal Indra, no juices
pressed without a prayer have pleased him.
generate a laud that shall delight him, new and heroic,
so that he may hear us.

every laud the Soma gladdens Indra : pressed juices please
lim as each psalm is chanted,

lat time the priests with one united effort call him to aid,
is sons invoke their father.

ese deeds he did; let him achieve new exploits, such as the
priests declare at their libations.

>attle has begun, and the singer prays to Indra for aid.
e lightning : the swift and flashing arrow. Others : the enemy.
ids : according to SAyana, ‘ the liberal donor (of oblations).’— Wilson.
zutxas ; apparently the priests of the hostile party.

na impressed: cp VI. 41. 4, Soma when (properly) presseS excels the
ed (<>r ill-pressed > Soma. Not only must the juice bo duly expressed,
lust be expressed and offered with prayer.



*8 tHti HYMNS OF [bOdti tnJ

Indra hath taken and possessed all castles, like as one c<
mon husband doth his spouses*

4 Even thus have they declared him. Famed is Indra as 0

queror, sole distributer of treasures ;

Whose many succours come in close succession. May d
delightful benefits attend us.

5 Thus, to bring help to men, Vasishtha laudeth Indra,

peoples’ Hero, at libation.

Bestow upon us strength and Wealth in thousands. Prese
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXVII* 1*

Men call on Indra in the armed encounter that he may mi
the hymns they sing decisive.

Hero, rejoicing in thy might, in combat give us a portion
the stall of cattle*

2 Grant, Indra Maghavan, invoked of many, to these my frier

the strength which thou possessest.

Thou, Maghavan, hast rent strong places open : unclose
us, Wise God, thy hidden bounty.

3 King of the living world, of men, is Indra, of all in vari

form that earth containeth.

Thence to the worshipper he giveth riches : may he enrich
also when we laud him.

4 Maghavan Indra, when we all invoke him, bountiful ei

sendeth strength to aid us :

Whose perfect guerdon, never failing, bringeth wealth tot
men, to friends the thing they covet.

5 Quick, Indra, give us room and Way to riches, and let

bring thy mind to grant us treasures,

That we may win us cars and steeds and cattle. Preser
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXVIII. ™

Come to our prayers, 0 Indra, thou who knowest : let tl
Bay Steeds be yoked and guided hither.

Though mortal men on every side invoke thee, still give thi
ear to us, 0 All-impeller.


3 All cattle « ; all the strongholds of the demons of drought, the cloudy
ties in whieh the rain is imprisoned.

1 Give tit a portion , etc : aid us to capture and carry off the cattle of
enemy.



TEE JRIQVE&A.


W 29 .}


%


thy greatness reaoheth to our invocation, the sages’ prayei
[ whioh, Potent God. thou guardest.

^Vhat time thy hand, 0 Mighty, holds the thunder, awful ir

. strength thou hast become resistless.

k^hat time thou drewest both world-halves together, lik<

f heroes led by thee who call each other —

k r thou wast borp for strength and high dominion — ther

[ e’en the active overthrew the sluggish.

[onour us in these present days, 0 Indra, for hostile men ar<
making expiation.

lur sin that sinless Yaruna discovered, the Wondrous-Wis<
hath long ago forgiven.

Je will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that be maj
grant us gifts of ample riches,

est favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve ui
I evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.


HYMN XXIX. Indra

His Soma hath been pressed for thee, 0 Indra : come hither
Lord of Bays, for this thou lovest.

rink of this fair, this well effused libation : Maghavan, givi
us wealth when we implore thee.

>me to us quickly with thy Bay Steeds, Hero, come to ou
prayer, accepting our devotion.

ljoy thyself aright at this libation, and listen thou unto th<
prayers we offer,

hat satisfaction do our hymns afford thee ? When, Magha
van? Now let us do thee service.

fmns, only hymns, with love for thee, I weave thee : ther
hear, 0 Indra, these mine invocations,


\y greatness reacheth to our invocation : thou hast the power to conn
ball if thou wilt.

rewest both woi'ld-halves together : settest heaven and earth opposite to
hnr, like armies arrayed for battle. E'en the active : the meaning of
If-line is doubtful, and chit, even, seems to be out of place. Wilson

I es, after Stiyana : ‘ whence the presenter of offerings overcomes him
irs them not.’ According to Professor Grassmann, ‘ the active’ is Indra,
ie inactive * is the sluggish demon. Ludwig suggests an alteration of

1 making expiation : or, possibly, set themselves in order, that is,
id prepare themselves for battle. The Wondrous-Wise : mdyt; Varuna,


ohttydo thee tervice : nUtndm / 1 no time like the present.’— Ludwig.



SO THE HYMNS OF [BOOR }

4 They, verily, were also human beings whom thou wast

to hear, those earlier sages.

Hence I, 0 Indra Maghavan, invoke thee : thou art our {
vidence, even as a Father.

5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that he ^

grant us gifts of ample riches,

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preserve
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings. *

HYMN XXX.

With power and strength, 0 Mighty God, approach us
the augmenter, Indra, of these riches ;

Strong Thunderer, Lord of men, for potent valour, for m
exploit and for high dominion.

2 Thee, worth invoking, in the din of battle, heroos invoke

fray for life and sunlight. 76177
Among all people thou art foremost fighter : give up
enemies to easy slaughter.

3 When fair bright days shall dawn on us, 0 Indra, and t

shalt bring thy banner near in battle,

Agni the Asura shall sit as Herald, calling Gods hithei
our great good fortune.

4 Tidne are we, Indra, thine, both these who praise thee i

those who give rich gifts, 0 God and Hero.

Grant to our princes excellent protection : may they wax
and still be strong and happy.

5 We will address this liberal Lord, this Indra, that hei

grant us gifts of ample riches,

Best favourer of the singer’s prayer and praises. Preservi
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXXI.

Sing ye a song, to make him glad, to Indra, Lord of T
Steeds,

The Soma-drinker, 0 my friends.

2 To him the Bounteous say the laud, and let us glorify, as

May do, the Giver of true gifts.

3 0 Indra, Lord of boundless might, for us thou winnest stre

and kine,

Thou winnest gold for us, Good Lord.


1 Far potent valour : that w, to give us potent valour.

2 Foremoet fighter : caster of the spear, warrior, according to vonlj

but the meaning of etnyah is somewhat uncertain. * 1



w 82.] THE RIG VEDA.

etithful to thee we loudly sing, heroic Indra, songs to thee :
[ark, 0 Good Lord, this act of ours.

ive us not up to man’s reproach, to foeman’s hateful calumny :
1 thee alone is all my strength.

hou art mine ample coat of mail, my Champion, Vritra-slayer,
thou :

Jith thee for Friend I brave the foe.

ea, great art thou whose conquering might two independent
[ Powers confess,

fhe Heaven, 0 Indra, and the Earth.

o let the voice surround thee, which attends the Maruts on
their way,

eaching thee with the rays of light.

Bt the ascending drops attain to thee, the Wondrous God, in
heaven :

Let all the folk bow down to thee.

tiring to the Wise, the Great, who waxeth mighty, your offer-
ings, and make ready your devotion :

Po many clans he goeth, man’s Controller.

Tor Indra, the sublime, the far-pervading, have singers gener-
ated prayer and praises :

The sages never violate his statutes.

The choirs have stablished Indra King for ever, for victory,
him whose anger is resistless :

Lud, for the Bays’ Lord, strengthened those he loveth.


HYMN XXXII.


Indra.


^et none, no, not thy worshippers, delay thee far away from us.

Sven from far away come thou unto our feast, or listen if al-
ready here.

•'or here, like flies on honey, these who pray to thee sit by the
juice that they have poured.

Vealth-craving singers have on Indra set their hope, as men
set foot upon a car.


'independent : svadhftvart ; ‘abounding in food,’ — Wilson.

Vhe voice: ‘the praises of thine adorers.’— Wilson.

Strengthened : ‘ bar hay 4 : for abarhayan, as is clear from what pre-
) —■ Ludwig. SAyana takes barhayd as the imperative : 4 urge thy kinsmen,
nipper, to glorify) the lord of bay steeds.’ — Wilson.


K indebted to Max M tiller's translation of this hymn in his Ancient
Literature for many of the renderings which I have adopted.



3,2 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH pJ

3 Longing for wealth I call on him, the Thunderer with

strong right hand,

As a son calleth on his sire,

4 These Soma juices, mixed with curd, have been expressed:

Indra here,

Come with thy Bay Steeds, Thunder-wielder, to our home,
drink them till they make thee glad.

5 May he whose ear is open hear us. He is aBked for wealt

will he despise our prayer ?

Him who bestows at once a hundred thousand gifts none sh
restrain when he would give.

6 The hero never checked by men hath gained his streng

through Indra, he

Who presses out and pours his deep libations forth, 0 Vi'it
slayer, unto thee.

7 When thou dost drive the fighting men together be, th

Mighty One, the mighty’s shield.

May we divide the wealth of him whom thou hast slain ; brii
us, Unreachable, his goods.

8 For Indra, Soma-drinker, armed with thunder, press the Sou

juice.

Make ready your dressed meats ; cause him to favour us. T1
Giver blesses him who gives.

9 Grudge not, ye Soma-pourers ; stir you, pay the rites, I

wealth, to the great Conqueror.

Only the active conquers, dwolls in peace, and thrives : not I
the niggard are the Gods.

10 No one hath overturned orstayed the carof him who freely gii
The man whom Indra and the Marut host defend comes to|

stable full of kine.

11 Indra, that man when fighting shall obtain the spoil, whc

strong defender thou wilt be.

Be thou the gracious helper, Hero ! of our cars, be thou t
helper of our men.

12 His portion is exceeding great like a victorious soldier’s spoi
Him who is Indra, Lord of Bays, no foes subdue. He gii

the Soma-pourer strength.

3 With the strong right hand : or, giver of good gifts.

7 The mighty's shield : 1 the shield of the mighty (Vasishthas).’ — M. 1
‘a protection of the Maghavans/ i. e. the institutors of the sacrifice.— Ludi

8 The Oiver blesses him who gives : Indra rewards the liberal worshipper.

10 Comet to a stable full of kine : carries off rich booty.



TIIE RWVEDA.


W 32;]


ft?


Make for the Poly Gods a hymn that is not mean, but well-
arranged and fair of form.

Even many snares and bonds subdue not him who dwells with
Indra through his sacrifice.

[ndra, what mortal will attack the man who hath his wealth
in thee ?

The strong will win the spoil on the decisive day through faith
in thee, 0 Maghavan.

[n battles with the foe urge on our mighty ones who give thfc
treasures dear to thee,

ind may we with our princes, Lord of Tawny Steeds ! pass
through all peril, led by thee.

Thine, Indra, is the lowest wealth, thou cherishest the mid-
most wealth,

Thou ever rulest all the highest : in the fray for cattle none
resisteth thoe.

Thou art renowned as giving wealth to every one in all the
battles that are fought.

graving protection, all these people of the earth, 0 Much-
invoked, implore thy name.

[f I, 0 Indra, were the Lord of riches ample as thine own,

: should support the singer, God who givest wealth ! and not
abandon him to woe.

Sach day would I enrich the man who sang my praise, in
whatsoever place he were.

*o kinship is there better, Maghavan, than thine : a father
even is no more.

W’ith Plenty for his true ally the active man will gain the
spoil.

four Indra, Much-invoked, I bend with song, as bends a
wright his wheel of solid wood.

i mortal wins no riches by unworthy praise: wealth comes
not to the niggard churl.

^iglit is the task to give, 0 Maghavan, to one like me on the

I decisive day.

! ike kine unmilked we call aloud, Hero, to thee, and sin*
thy praise,

ooker on heavenly light, Lord of this moving world, Lord.
Indra, of what moveth not.


Plenty ; or, Spirit, Boldness.



84 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR fj

23 None other like to thee, of earth or of the heavens, hath be«

or ever will be horn.

Desiring horses, Indra Maghavan 1 and kine, as men of mig[
we call on thee.

24 Bring, Indra, the Victorious Ones; bring, elder thou, tl

younger host.

For, Maghavan, thou art rich in treasures from of old, an
must be called in every fight.

25 Drive thou away our enemies, 0 Maghavan : make riches eaj

to be won. I

Be thou our good Protector in the strife for spoil : Cherish
of our friends be thou.

26 0 Indra, give us wisdom as a sire gives wisdom to his sons.
Guide us, 0 Much-invoked, in this our way : may we still lii

and look upon the light.

27 Grant that no mighty foes, unknown, malevolent, unhallow

tread us to the ground.

With thine assistance, Hero, may we pass through all t‘
waters that are rushing down.

HYMN XXXIII. Vaaisht

These who wear hair-knots on the right, the movers of hi
thought, white-robed, have won me over.

I warned the men, when from the grass I raised me, Not frt
afar can my Vasishthas help you.

2 With Soma they brought Indra from a distance, over Vaisam
from the strong libation.

Indra preferred Vasishthas to the Soma pressed by the sod
Vayata, Pasadyumna.

24 Bring , Indra, the Victorious Ones : these would be the Marats. ‘ E
Indra, bring that (wealth to me) being the junior/— Wilson. ‘ Bring all
to those who are good, 0 Indra, be they old or young/— M. Muller.

The hymn is a glorification of Vasishtha and his family, the latter
relating his birth and the earlier verses referring to his connexion with 1
Sudis.

1 Hair-knots : kaparda ia the chuda or single lock of hflir left on the 1
at tonsure, which, according to the Scholiast, it was characteristic of
Vasishthas to wear on the right of the crown of the head. White-rol
white-coloured, according to S&yana. Me : Vasishtha, who is the speake
stanzas 1—6. * Von Roth (under the word av) regards Indra as the spea
May it not be Sud&s ? ’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 319, 320, where stanzas 1-
are translated. From the grass : the sacred grass laid on the floor of the si
ficial chamber.

2 Vaifanta : probably the name of a river. Pdfadyumna : another king'
was sacrificing to Indra at the same time as Sud&s.



THU HtGTEDA*


33.]


SB


So, verily, with these he crossed the river, in company with
these he slaughtered Bheda.

So in the fight with the Ten Kings, Vasishthas l did Indra
help Sudas through your devotions.

I gladly, men ! with prayer prayed by our fathers have fixed
your axle : ye shall not be injured :

Since, when ye sang aloud the Sakvari verses, Vasishthas ! ye
invigorated Indra.

Like thirsty men they looked to heaven, in battle with the
Ten Kings, surrounded and imploring.

Then Indra heard Vasishtha as he praised him, and gave the
Tritsus ample room and freedom.

like sticks and staves wherewith they drive the cattle, strip-
ped bare, the Bharatas were found defenceless :

Vasishtha then became their chief and leader; then widely
were the Tritsus’ clans extended.

Three fertilize the worlds with genial moisture : three noble
Creatures cast a light before them.

Three that give warmth to all attend the Morning. All these

| have they discovered, these Vasishthas.

lake the Sun’s growing glory is their splendour, and like the
sea’s is their un fathomed greatness,

'heir course is like the wind’s. Your laud, Vasishthas, can
never be attained by any other.

'hey with perceptions of the heart in secret resort to that
which spreads a thousand branches.

'he Apsaras brought hither the Vasishthas wearing the vesture
spun for them by Yama.


P* river : Yamuna. See VII. 18. 19. Ten Kings : of the confederate
who opposed Sudds. See VII. 18.

ukvart verses : hymns of praise in the Sakvarf metre (14 x 4).

rUsus .- the tribe of which Sudds was King. Bharatas ; apparently the

as the Tritsus. rr J


idra is the speaker of the rest of the hymn. ‘ In explanation of this
\ quotes a passage from the Sdtydyana Brahman* ; (1) Agni produces a
img fluid on the eaith, Vdyu in the air, the Sun in the sky. (2) The
• are the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas. The Sun is

ight. (3) Agni, Vdyu, and the Sun each attend the Dawn ’—Muir,


whtch spreads * thousand branches: according to Ludwig’s Trans-
xne Sun-God is meant ; according to his later view, the reference is to
ystic tree sustained by Varuna in the baseless region (I. 24 7).
’f . the 'body. The stanza is very obscure, and Sftyana’s explana-

mch overrides grammar, is not satisfactory; • By the wisdom seated in
rt the Vasishthas traverse the hidden thousand-branched world, and
turasas sit down, wearing the vesture spread out bv Yama.’— WiUn*.



$8 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

10 A form of lustre springing from the lightning wa*t thou, w

Varuna and Mitra saw thee.

Thy one and only birth was then, Vasishtha, when from
stock Agastya brought thoe hither.

11 Born of their love for Urvas*, Vasishtha, thou, priest, art

of Varuna and Mitra ;

And as a fallen drop, in heavenly fervour, all the Gods
thee on a lotus-blossom.

12 He, thinker, knower both of earth and heaven, endowed v

many a gift, bestowing thousands,

Destined to wear the vesture spun by Yama, sprang from
Apsaras to life, Vasishtha.

13 Born at the sacrifice, urged by adorations, both with a ©

mon flow bedewed the pitcher.

Then from the midst thereof there rose up Mana, and the
they say was born the sage Vasishtha.

14 He brings the bearer of the laud and Saman : first shall

speak bringing the stone for pressing.

With grateful hearts in reverence approach him : to you
Pratridas, Vasishtha cometh.

HYMN XXXIV. Visvedc

May our divine and brilliant hymn go forth, like a si
chariot wrought and fashioned well.

2 The waters listen as they flow along : they know the origii
heaven and eaith.


10 Vasishtha, appears here as an embodiment of lightning, light, or
and to have been brought down to men by Agastya who was born in the s;
way as Vasishtha.

1 1 Urvasl : the most celebrated of the Apsarases or nymphs of heave"
a lotus-blossom : or, according to others, * in the sacred pitcher,’ or wat
used in sacrifice. ‘ In the lake.’— Wilson.

For a full account of this production of Vasishtha, the curious rea
referred to Muir, 0. S. Texts, I. 821. See M. Muller, Chips, IV. 108, 1 05
Hillebrandt, Varuna und Mitra , 148, 149.

12 The Apsaras : Urvasi.

13 Mdna : said to be another name of Agastya.

14 The hearei' of the laud and Siman : the pressing-stone, which was w
during the lecitation of Bacred verses. Pratridas : a name used he
designate the Tiitsus.

This difficult and obscure hymn has been translated and thoroughl
cussed by Geldner ( Vedische Stvdien , II pp. 129—155, criticized by
Ludwig, Uther die neuesten Arbeiten auf dem Oebiete der Ryvedaforst
pp. 163-167).

2 ‘ An allusion, perhaps, to the subsequently received cosmogony:
$tanu, that water was the first of created things.’— Wilson.



t&E RtO VEDA.


■V 3*.}

ea, the broad waters swell their flood for him : of him strong
heroes think amid their foes.

st ye for him the coursers to the pole : like Indra Thunderer
is the Golden-armed.

rouse you, like the days, to sacrifice : speed gladly like a
traveller on the way.

o swift to battles, to the sacrifice : set up a flag, a hero for
the folk.

p from his strength hath risen as ’twere a light : it beara
the load as earth bears living things.

gni, no demon I invoke the Gods : by law completing it, t
form a hymn*

losely about you lay your heavenly song, and send your
voice to where the Gods abide*

aruna, Mighty, with a thousand eyes, beholds the paths
wherein these rivers r un.

e, King of kings, the glory of the floods, o*er all that liveth
hath resistless sway.

ay he assist us among all the tribes, and make the envier*s
praise devoid of light.

ay the foes’ threatening arrow pass us by : may he put far
from us our bodies’ sin.

yni, oblation-eater, through our prayers aid us : to him our
dearest laud is brought, t

jcordant with the Gods choose for our Friend the Waters*
Child : may he be good to us.

ith lauds I sing the Dragon born of floods : he sits beneath
the streams in middle air.

B’er may the Dragon of the Deep harm us : ne’er fail this
faithful servant’s sacrifice.

) these our heroes may they grant renown : may pious men
march boldly on to wealth.

fading great hosts, with fierce attacks of these, they burn
;their foes as the Sun burns the earth.

h

V him : Indra.

\e Golden armed : Savitar.

mro : a sort of personification of the sacrifice. * An expiatory sacrifice
good of) mankind.’— Wilson.

me Dr&gon born of floods : Ahibudhnya, or the Dragon of the Deep of
[owing stanza ; the regent of the sea of air.
they : the Gods.

v ; Gods, or Maruta, according to the Scholiast.



W THE HYMNS OP [BOOK

20 What time our wives draw near to us, may he, deft-han

Tv ashlar, give us hero sons.

21 May Tvashtar find our hymn acceptable, and may Arair

seeking wealth, be ours.

22 May they who lavish gifts bestow those treasures : i

Rodasi and Varunant listen.

May he, with the Varutrls, be our refuge, may bount
Tvashtar give us store of riches.

23 So may rich Mountains and the liberal Waters, so may

Herbs that grow on ground, and Heaven,

And Earth accordant with the Forest-Sovrans, and both
World-halves round about protect us.

24 To this may both the wide Worlds lend approval, and Vai

in heaven, whose Friend is Indra.

May all the Maruts give consent, the Victors, that we i
hold great wealth in firm possession.

25 May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Agni, Waters, Herbs, T

accept the praise we offer.

May we find refuge in the Maruts’ bosom. Protect us c
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXXV. Viaved

Befriend us with their aids Indra and Agni, Indra
Varuna who receive oblations !

Indra and Soma give health, strength and comfort, Ii
and Pushan be our help in battle.

2 Auspicious Friends to us be Bhaga, Sansa, auspicious

Purandhi and all Riches ;

The blessing of the true and well-conducted, and Aryama
many forms apparent.

3 Kind unto us be Maker and Sustainer, and the far-reaci

Pair with Godlike natures.

Auspicious unto us be Earth and Heaven, the Mountain,
the Gods’ fair invocations.


21 Aramati : the Genius of Devotion and active piety.

22 VarUtrts : protecting Goddesses.

23 Forest -Sovrans : tall timber trees.

1 Befriend us : »dm no bhavatdm . The indeclinable word fdm, signil
happy, auspicious, pleasant, sweet, kind, agreeable, etc., etc., is uaed wit
without the verb bhil, in the first thirteen stanzas. 1 have varied the ex
sion here and there.

2 Sansa: Prayer or Wish personified. Or it may be NarAsmsa, *
Purandhi: Plenty, or Spirit, Boldness personified,

3 Far-reaching Pair ; Heaven and Earth.



rtf 35.] the MG VEDA. 39

favour us Agni with his face of splendour, and Varuna and
Mitra and the Asvins.

i’avour us noble actions of the pious, impetuous VAta blow on
us with favour.

My invoked, may Heaven and Earth be friendly, and Air's
mid-region good for us to look on.

’o us may Herbs and Forest-Trees be gracious, gracious the
, Lord Victorious of the region.

pe the God Indra with the Vasus friendly, and, with Adityas,

\ Varuna who blesseth,

jtind, with the Rudras, be the Healer Rudra, and, with the
| Dames, may Tvashtar kindly listen.

Jlest unto us be Soma, and devotions, blest be the Sacrifice,

■ the Stones for pressing.

Meat be the fixing of the sacred Pillars, blest be the tender
Grass, and blest the Altar.

fay the far-seeing Sun rise up to bless us : be the four
Quarters of the sky auspicious,
auspicious bo the firmly-seated Mountains, auspicious be the
Rivers and the Waters.

[ay Aditi through holy works be gracious, and may the
Maruts, loud in song, be friendly.

[ay Vishnu give felicity, and Pushan, the Air that cherisheth
our life, and Vayu.

rasper us Savitar, the God who rescues, and let the radiant
[ Mornings be propitious.

Auspicious to all creatures be Parjanya, auspicious be the
i held s benign Protector.

ilay all the fellowship of Gods befriend us, Sarasvatl, with
Holy Thoughts, be gracious.

sriendly be they, the Liberal Ones who seek us, yea, those
I w “° dwell in heaven, on earth, in waters.

(ay the great Lords of Truth protect and aid us : blest to us
; be our horses and our cattle.

^ind be the pious skilful-handed Ribhus, kind be the Fathers
! a t our invocations.

(ay Aja-Ekapad, the God, be gracious, gracious the Dragon
^ofthe^Deep, and Ocean. *

Lord Victorious : Indra. ~~

the field's benign Protector: Agni, or Rudra. See IV. 57. 1 ,
ija-hkapdd : the Sun. See VI. 50. 14, and footnote.
i rajm the Dee P ; Ahibudhnya, regent of the depth* of the firms-



40 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK |

Gracious be he, the swelling Child of Waters, gracious
Pfisni who hath Gods to guard her.

14 So may the Rudras, Vasus, and Adityas accept the newhy

which we now ure making.

May all the Holy Ones of earth and heaven, and the Co
offspring hear our invocation.

15 They who of Holy Gods are very holy, Immortal, know

Law, whom man must worship, —

May these to-day give us broad paths to travel. Preserve
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXXVI. ViBvede

Let the prayer issue from the seat of Order, for Surya w
his beams hath loosed the cattle.

With lofty ridges earth is far extended, and Agni’s flame h
lit the spacious surface.

2 0 Asuras, 0 Varuiaa and Mitra, this hymn to you, like fo

anew I offer.

One of you is a strong unerring Leader, and Mitra, speaki
stirreth men to labour.

3 The movements of the gliding wind come hither : like co

the springs are filled to overflowing.

Born in the station e’en of lofty heaven the Bull hath lou
bellow r ed in this region.

4 May I bring hither with my song. O Indra, wise Aryan

who yokes thy dear Bay Horses,


14 Cow's offspring : the Maruts. According to von Roth those who are l
and live in radiant heaven.

15 Broad paths to travel : perhaps, generally, an easy road to prosperity

1 The seat of Order : ‘the hall of the sacrifice.’ — Wilson. The cattle:
of light.

2 ‘ One of you (Varuna) is the lord and unassailable guide, and he wb
called Mitra, ( i . e the friend) calls men to activity. Here so much at leas
declared (and the same thing is expressed in nearly the same words in ni
places), that the light of day, which awakens life, and brings joy and acti
into the world, is the narrower sphere of Mitra’s power ; though, howo
Varima is not relegated to the night alone, for he continues to be the 1
and the first.’ — Von Roth, quoted by Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. 70. The mear
of indh translated by * lord ’ in this extract, is, in the Veda, rather ‘ stro
'energetic,* and is so given in the St. Petersburg Lexicon, the meaning * b
belonging to later literature. The second half of the second line is repea
with a variation, from III. 59. 1.

3 The springs : the fountains of rain ; the clouds. The Bull : Parjai
God of the raiu-cloud. This region : literally, this udder ; the firmameu



TffE MOVE DA.


it


V 37.]

oraoious, with thy noble oar, 0 Hero, him who defeats the
wrath of the malicious.

i their own place of sacrifice adorers worship to gain long
life and win his friendship.

G hath poured food on men when they have praised him ;
be this, the dearest reverence, paid to Rudra,
jming together, glorious, loudly roaring-— Sarasvati, Mother
of Floods, the seventh —

ith copious milk, with fair streams, strongly flowing, full
swelling with the volume of their water ;
id may the mighty Maruts, too, rejoicing, aid our devotion
and protect our offspring.

it not swift-moving Akshara neglect us : they have increas-
ed our own appropriate riches.

ring yo the great Aramati before you, and Pushan as the
Hero of the synod,

laga Who looks upon this hymn with favour, and, as ovfr
strength, the bountiful Purandhi.

ay this our song of praise reach you, 0 Maruts, and Vishnu
guardian of the future infant.

ay they vouchsafe the singer strength for offspring. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXXVII. Viavedevas.

ct your best-bearing car that must be lauded, ne'er injured,
bring you Vajas and Ribhukshans.

11 you, fair-helmeted ! with mighty Soma, thrice-mixed, at
our libations, to delight you.


u-aciouft : epithet of horses; but the meaning of dhdyft is uncertain,
ing to Sftyana, it means ‘holding/ ‘vigorous/ according to Ludwig,
ig forth rain according to Grassmann, ‘ thirsty.’

's friendship : Rudra’s.

>e seventh : with the six other celebrated rivers. See I. 32. 12.

; V&k, or Voice ; ‘ the imperishable goddess of speech.’ — Wilson.

ramati the personification of religious worship, or active piety. See
#.21. According to Sftyana, ardmatim here is an epithet of maAfm,
ever-resting Earth.’ For the various meanings assigned by S&yana to
)rd in the various places in whi \i it occurs, see Muir, 0. S. Texts ,

fhnu ; cf. X. 184. 1.

jas and Ribhukskann : that is, Ribhukshan or Ribhu, Vibhvan, and
unmonly called the Ribhus from the name of the first of the three.
meted: ‘ handsome-chinned/ — Wilson: ‘ Strong* jawed/ — Ludwig.
toixed; with milk, curds, and meal.



4* THE HYMNS OF [BOOR

2 Ye who behold the light of heaven, Ribhukshaus, give our

patrons unmolested riches.

Drink, heavenly-natured, at our sacrifices, and give us be
ies for the hymns we sing you,

3 For thou, 0 Bounteous One, art used to giving, at par

treasure whether small or ample.

Filled full are both thine arms with great possessions :
goodness keeps thee not from granting riches.

4 Indr a, high-famed, as Vaja and Ribhukshan, thougoestw

ing, singing to the dwelling.

Lord of Bay Steeds, this day may we Vasishthas offer
prayers to thee and bring oblations.

5 Thou winnest swift advancement for thy servant, thre

hymns, Lord of Bay Steeds, which thou hast favoured.
For thee with friendly succour have we battled, and wher
Indra, wilt thou grant us riches ?

6 To us thy priests a home, as ’twere, thou givest : when, In

wilt thou recognize our praises ?

May thy strong Steed, through our ancestral worship, b
food and wealth with heroes to our dwelling.

7 Though Nirriti the Goddess reigneth round him, Autui

with food in plenty come to Indra.

With three close Friends to length of days he cometh,
whom men let not rest at home in quiet.

8 Promise us gifts, 0 Savitar : may riches come unto u

Parvata’s full bounty.

May the Celestial Guardian still attend us. Preserve us e
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XXXVIII. sat

On high hath Savitar, this God, extended the golden lui
which he spreads around him.

Now, now must Bhaga be invoked by mortals, Lord of gi
riches who distributes treasures.


3 Bounteous One : Maghavan ; Indra.

4 Woi'kiny : 1 the fulfiller { of wishes ).’— Wilson. The first line is some?
obscure.

7 Nirriti : the Goddess of Death and Destruction, who has no power!
Indra. Three close Friends : the Ribhus, who represent the year, the an!
course of Indra bb the Sun. S^ymm's explanation is different: ‘Indra,!
upholder of the three regions, whom the divine Nirriti acknowledges as ni
whom abundant years pass over, whom mortals detain from his own ah
approaches to ( recruit ) his decaying strength.’ — Wilson ; who observes : ‘
explanation is not very clear.’

8 ParvakC s full bounty ; the Genius of mountain and cloud.



V 39-]


THE RIG VEDA.


43


se up, 0 Savitar whose hands are golden, and hear this man
while sacrifice is offered,

>reading afar thy broad and wide effulgence, and bringing
mortal men the food that feeds them.

>t Savitar the God be hymned with praises, to whom the
Yasus, even, all sing glory.

ireet be our lauds to him whose due is worship : may he with
all protection guard our princes.

rcn he whom Aditi the Goddess praises, rejoicing in God
Savitar’s incitement :

rcn he whose praise the high imperial Rulers, Varuna, Mitra,
Aryaman, sing in concert.

ley who come emulous to our oblation, dispensing bounty,
from the earth and heaven,

ly they and Ahibudhnya hear our calling : guard us Yarfitri
with the Ekadhenus.

lis may the Lord of Life, entreated, grant us, — the wealth
which Savitar the God possesses.

le mighty calls on Bhaga for protection, on Bhaga calls the
weak to give him riches.

ess us the Vajins when we call, while slowly they move,
strong Singers, to the Gods’ assembly,
ushing the wolf, the serpent, and the demons, may they
completely banish all affliction.

jep-skilled in Law eternal, deathless, Singers, 0 Y&jins, help
us in each fray for booty.

•ink of this meath, be satisfied, be joyful : then go on paths
which Gods are wont to travel.

HYMN XXXIX. Viavedevas.

3ni, erect, hath shown enriching favour : the flame goes for-
ward to the Gods' assembly.

ke car-borne men the stones their path have chosen : let the
priest, quickened, celebrate our worship.


ie Vasus: the Gods in general, according to SAyana.

irUtrl : * the protectress (the goddess of speech).’ — Wilson Ekadhenus :

iters are probably meant : ‘excelh nt cattle.’ — Wilson.

jyin* : a class of divinities so named, according to SAyana ; but, accord*

Wahid hara, horses, i . e. the teams which draw the chariots of the Gods.

v • or the robber. The serpent : or the assassin. The demons : the

[«a8. See Satapntha- Brdhmatyt, V. 1.5. 21 — 24, (S. Books of the East,

a) for a different version of stanzas 6 and 7«


le stones : the prewing- stones have begun their course.



44 fltE BYMtiS OF [BOOK

2 Soft to the tread, their sacred grass is scattered : these go

Kings amid the band around them,

At the folk’s early Call on Night and Morning, — Vayu,
Pushan with his team, to bless us.

3 Here on their path the noble Gods proceeded : in the y

firmament the Beauteous decked them.

Bend your way hither, ye who travel widely : hear this
envoy who hath gone to meet you.

4 For they are holy aids at sacrifices : all Gods approach

place of congregation.

Bring these, desirous, to our worship, Agni, swift the N
tyas, Bhaga, and Purandhi.

5 Agni, to these men’s hymns, from earth, from heaven, br

Mitra, Vanina, Indra, and Agni,

And Aryaman, and Aditi, and Vishnu. Saras vati be joy
and the Maruts.

6 Even as the holy wish, the gift is offered : may he, unsa

come when men desire him.

Give never-failing ever-conquering riches : with Gods for
allies may we be victors.

7 Now have both Worlds been praised by the Vasishthas,

holy Mitra, Varuna, and Agni.

May they, bright Deities, make our song suprcmest. Pres(
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XL. Viaverli

Be gathered all the audience of the synod : let us begin tl
praise whose course is rapid.

Whate’er God Savitar this day produces, may we be wi
the Wealthy One distributes.

2 This, dealt from heaven, may both the Worlds vouchsafe

and Varuna, Tndra, Aryaman, and Mitra.

May Goddess Aditi assign us riches, Vayu and Bhaga m
them ours for ever.

3 Strong be the man and full of power, 0 Maruts, whom

borne on by spotted coursers, favour.


2 These go like Kings ; according to S&yana, * may the two lords of pec
(Vftyu and P&shati) .. appear now.’

3 Our envoy : Agni.

6 Agni : in his own form as a celestial God, not in that of terrestrial &
6 lie, umated : Agni.

1 Their praise : praise of the Gods.

2 Dealt from heaven : or. distributed hv Tlvii nr Dr*iin.



THE MOVE DA.


45


V 41.]


im, too, Sarasvati and Agni further, and there is none to rob
him of his riches.

hi& Varuna is guide of Law, he, Mitra, and Aryaman, the
Kings, our work have finished.

dvine and foeless Aditi quickly listens. May these deliver
us unharmed from trouble.

j ith offerings I propitiate the branches of this swift-moving
God, the bounteous Vishnu.

[ence Rudra gained his Rudra-strength : 0 Aflvins, ye sought
the house that hath celestial viands.

le not thou angry here, 0 glowing Pushan, for what Varutri
and the Bounteous gave us.

ay the swift-moving Gods protect and bless us, and Vata send
us rain, who wanders round us.

ow have both worlds been praised by the Vasishthas, and holy
Mitra, Varuna, and Agni.

[ay they, bright Deities, make our song supremest. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLI. Bhaga.

lgni at dawn, and Indra we invoke at dawn, and Varuna and
Mitra, and the Asvins twain :

Ihaga at dawn, Pushan, and Brahmanaspati, Soma at dawn,
Rudra we will invoke at dawn.

Vo will invoke strong, early-conquering Bhaga, the Son of
Aditi, the great supporter :

hulking of whom, the poor, yea, even the mighty, even the
King himself says, Give me Bhaga.
haga our guide, Bhaga whose gifts are faithful, favour this
song, and give us wealth, 0 Bhaga.

Ihaga, augment our store of kine and horses, Bhaga, may we
be rich in men and heroes.


)ur work : tho sacrifice.

| ; c branches: ‘ yayah , brandies : all other deities are, as it were, branches
iniiy anye deyak , Sakha iva bhavanti : as by a text cited by the scholiast,

- is all divinities, Vishnu h sarvd divatd iti srnteh.' — Wilson. This,
l remarks, gives no satisfactory interpretation; but I am unable to
iy thing better at present. Gras nann alters vayfth into vaydma : * we
ir offerings approach the banquet of this swift-moving God, the boun-
v ish, u ; i. e. come to offer him sacrificial food.*

hymn is addressed chiefly to Bhaga the bountiful, whose name, slightly
ted, survives in the Slavonic languages as a general name for God ; but
s mentioned in stanza 1 , and Ushas, Dawn or Morning, are also regard-
ne deities of the verses in which their names occur.

>ve me Bhaga : or riches.



44 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK \

4 So may felicity be ours at present, and when the day approach

and at noontide ;

And may we still, 0 Bounteous One, at sun»t be happy im
Deities’ loving-kindness.

5 May Bhaga verily be bliss-bestower, and through him, G<x

may happiness attend us.

As such, 0 Bhaga, all with might invoke thee ; as such
thou our Champion here, 0 Bhaga.

6 To this our worship may all Dawns incline them, and com?

the pure place like Dadhikr&van.

As strong steeds' draw a chariot may they bring us hithert
Bhaga who discovers treasure.

7 May blessed Mornings dawn on us for over, with wealth

kine, of horses, and of heroes,

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLII. Visvede

Lbt Brahmans and Angirases come forward, and let the r
of cloudy heaven surround us.

Loud low the Milch-kine swimming in the waters : set be
stones that grace our holy service.

2 Fair, Agni, is thy long-known path to travel : yoke for

juice thy bay, thy ruddy horses,

Or red steeds, Hero-bearing, for the chamber. Seated, 1 1
the Deities’ generations.

3 They glorify your sacrifice with worship, yet the glad Pii

near them is left unequalled.

Bring the Gods hither, thou of many aspects : turn hit!
ward Aramati the Holy.


6 The pure place : the chamber of sacrifice. Like Dadhikrdvan : swift
Dadhikr&vau, the famous horse, the type and model of racers. {See IV. 3S
40. 1—3.

1 Angirases : llishis so named, according to Sftyana. The Milch-kine:
clouds in the watery firmament, with allusion also to the milk and water mi
with 'the Soma juice. The stones : the press-stones. SAyana’s explanatio
differentXjuay the pious couple, (the Yajamdna and his wife) coujoii
appreciate th#4^auty of the sacrifice.'— Wilson.

2 Thy bay , thyfwddy horses : or the Hai its and the Rohits. Red steedi
AruBhas. Hero-bearing: carrying the Hero Agni. For the chamber:
sacrificial hall ; ‘in thy stable.’— M. Muller.

3 The human priests cannot equal Agni iu efficiency. Aramati : theCta
of Devotion. See VII. 3d. 8.



jy 43.] THE RIQ VEDA. 47

that time the Guest hath made himself apparent, at ease
reclining in the rich man's dwelling,

gni, well-pleased, well-placed within the chamber gives to a
house like this wealth worth the choosing.

ccept this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni ; glorify it with Indra
and the Maruts.

ere on our grass let Night And Dawn be seated : bring long-
ing Varuna and Mitra hither.

hus hath Vasishtha praised victorious Agni, .yearning for
wealth that giveth all subsistence.

ay he bestow on us food, strength, and riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLIII. Visvedevas.

[NG out the pious at your sacrifices to move with adorations
Earth and Heaven —

he Holy Singers, whose unmatched devotions, like a tree’s
branches, part in all directions.

Bt sacrifice proceed like some fleet courser : with one accord
lift ye on high the ladles.

;rew sacred grass meet for the solemn service : bright flames
that love the Gods have mounted upward.

ike babes in arms reposing on their mother, let the Gods sit
upon the grass’s summit.

it general tire make bright the flame of worship : scorn us
not, Agni, in the Gods’ assembly.

adly the Gods have let themselves be honoured, milking
the copious streams of holy Order.

ae highest might to-day is yours, the Vasus’ : come ye, as
many as ye are, one-minded.

k Agni, send us wealth among the people : may we be
closely knit to thee, 0 Victor,

f harmed, and rich, and taking joy together. Preserve us
wermore, ye Gods, with blessings.


t Guest : Agni.

jh general fire : or, according to S&yana, < Let the full ladle balm the
worship.’ The exact meaning is uncertain as both Bubject and object
tctives without substantives.

the copious streams : enjoying tUo libations of law -ordained sacri-
fWho are the bestowers of water, the shedders of showers/ — Wilson.



B THE HYMNS OF IBOOK

IIYMN XL1V. Da <lhii

I CALL on Dadhikras, the first, to give you aid, the Asv
Bhaga, Dawn, and Agni kindled well,

India, and Vishnu, P.ishan, Brahmanaspati, Adityas, He;
and Earth, the Waters, and the Light.

2 When, rising, to the sacrifice we hasten, awaking Dadhi

with adoiations,

Seating on sacred grass the Goddess I]a, let us invoke
-sage swift-hearing Asvins.

3 While I am thus arousing Dadhikravan I speak to A

Earth, and Dawn, and Surya,

The red, the brown of Varuna ever mindful : may they i
off from us all grief and trouble.

4 Foremost is Dadhikravan, vigorous courser; in forefro

the cars, his way he knoweth,

Closely allied with Surya and with Morning, Adityas,
Angirases, and Vasus.

5 May Dadhikras prepare the way we travel that we may

along the path of Order.

May Agni hear us, and the Heavenly Army: hear us all Mi
Ones whom none deceiveth.

HYMN XLV. Si

May the God Savitar, rich in goodly treasures, filling
region, borne by steeds, come hither,

In his hand holding much that makes men happy, lulli
slumber and arousing oreatures.

2 Golden, sublime, and easy in their motion, his arms e:
unto the bounds of heaven.


1 Dadhikrds : see. IV. 38. 1.

3 Dadhikr&can : a lengthened form of Dadhikras. See IV. 39. 2, a
The red , the biown: apparently the horse of Varuna, that is. the Sun,
tended. Ever mindful : * who is mindful of his adorers.’ — Wilson. The
ng of the word mahsekatth, or mAhschatdh, is uncertain. Von Roth
that a colour, dun or yellow, is meant. Ludwig would explain it as ‘ki
snares or nooses.’ Grasstnann translates it by, ‘dcs Mondversclieu
‘ who scares away the Moon.’

4 In forefront of the cars : according to S&yana, the chariots of the
are intended. But, as Pischel observes ( Vcdische Studien t I. 124), E
rdvan, the famous racediorse, was for ‘the gentlemen of the turf ’ i"
Trasadasyu’s time what the matchless English horse Eclipse was in
days. It seems probable that DahhikrAvan may have been originally
most distinguished racer, glorified and deified by the exaggerated prJ
the bards of a people who were passionately fond of chariot- racing.



THE RIQVEDA.


49


y 46 ]

ow shall that mightiness of his be lauded : even Sftra yields
to him in active vigour.

;ay this Cod Savitar, the Strong and Mighty, the Lord of
precious wealth, vouchsafe us treasures,
iiy he, advancing his far-spreading lustre, bestow on us the
food that feedeth mortals.

hese songs praise Savitar whose tongue is pleasant, praise
him whose arms arc full, whose hands are lovely,
igh vital strength, and manifold, may he grant us. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLVI. Rudra.

o Rudra bring these songs, whose bow is firm and strong, the
self dependent God with swiftly-flying shafts, °

he Wise, the Conqueror whom none may overcome, armed
with sharp-pointed weapons : may he hear our call.

e through his lordship thinks on beings of the earth, on
heavenly beings through his high imperial sway,
mie willingly to our doors that gladly welcome thee, and heal
all sickness, Rudra, in our families.

ay thy bright arrow which, shot down by thee from heaven,
flieth upon the earth, pass us uninjured by. 5

aou. very gracious God, hast thousand medicines : inflict no
evil on our sons or progeny.

ay us not, nor abandon us, 0 Rudra : let not thy noose, v hen
thou art angry, seize ns.

ve us trimmed grass and fame among the living. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.


'm : the Sun as distinguished from, or a different form of, Savitar who

by Sayaua to be the Sun befoie his rising.


yractoug God: svapivdta. ‘This word is not explained in the
L text o f Sayana, although in the “ Varietas LeetioniV’ appended to
face, Prof. Muller notes that in one MS , B. 4, svapivdta is rendered
prana, he by whom life (or breath) is conquered.” In the Nirukta
| is explained by svapta-vac/iana, “thou whose words are very suitable
tentative. Muir, O. S. Texts, IV. 314, where an exhaustive note on
[d will be found. Wilson renders svapivdta by ‘ wind-appeaser,’ and
[ aun b y vielbegehrter,’ ‘ much-desired.’

P>e u« trimmed grass : let us share in sacrifice. Fame among the living:
Petersburg Lexicon takes jtvasnhst to mean rule over the living.
|take the word as qualifying barhUki , trimmed grass, i. e. sacrifice, and

fee L p ta 4 ]£ prai8ed am0D « “ e “-' * dong)



THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK


' 50


HYMN XLVII. \v a

May we obtain this day from you, 0 Waters, that wavi
pure refreshment, which the pious
Made erst the special beverage of Indra, bright, stainless, i
in sweets and dropping fatness.

2 May the Floods’ Offspring, he whose course is rapid, prol

that wave most rich in sweets, 0 Waters,

That shall make Indra and the Vasus joyful. This may
gain from you to-day, we pious.

3 All-purifying, joying in their nature, to paths of Gods;

Goddesses move onward.

They never violate the laws of Indra. Present the oil-i
offering to the Rivers.

4 Whom Surya with his bright beams hath attracted, and I

dug the path for them to travel,

May these Streams give us ample room and freedom,
serve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XLVIII. Ri

Ye liberal Heroes, Yajas and Ribhukshans, come and de
you with our flowing Soma.

May your strength, Vibhus, as ye come to meet us, turn hii
ward your car that brings men profit.

2 May we as Ribhu with your Ribhus conquer strength with

strength, as Vibhus with the Vibhus.

May Vaja aid us in the light for booty, and helped by Ii
may we quell the foeman.

3 For they rule many tribes with high dominion, and com

all their foes in close encounter.

May Indra, Vibhvan, Vaja, and Ribhukslian destroy by t
the wicked foeman’s valour.

4 Now, Deit.es, give us ample room and freedom : be all of]

one-minded, our protection.

So let the Vasus grant us strength and vigour. Presen
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

1 Wave of pure refreshment: ‘sweet essence of the earth ; ’ Urmi u
here to imply the Soma juice produc* cl from the earth. Wilson. ^

3 All- purifying : stidpavitrdh ; literally, with a hundred, that is, coun
means of purification. The Goddesses : the divine W.tters.

1 Vdjas and Ribhukshans : ye three, Ribhu, Vibhvan, and Vftja.

2 The meaning is, may we be as powerful as Ribhu, as mighty as tb

pany of the Vibhus (another name of the Ribhus). SAyaua explains n
great, and vibhvah as powerful. In the fight for booty : rffjasltuu ; a f
the word and name vftja, ...

4 The Vasus : according to SAyana, vdsavah here is an epithet or /P
understood ; ‘ the exalted (Ribhus).’— Wilson.



N 50.]


THE RIG VEDA.


51 •

| HYMN XLIX. Waters.

pRTH from the middle of the flood the Waters — their chief
jthe Sea — flow cleansing 1 , never sleeping.

Ira, the Bull, the Thunderer, dug their channels : here let
; those Waters, Goddesses, protect me.

Waters which come from heaven, or those that wander dug
from the earth, or flowing free by nature, &

right, purifying, speeding to the Ocean, here let those
Waters, Goddesses, protect me.

hose amid whom goes Varuna the Sovran, he who discri-
minates men’s truth and falsehood —

[stilling meath, the bright, the purifying, here let those
Waters, Goddesses, protect me.

»ey from whom Varuna the King, and Soma, and all the
Deities drink strength and vigour,

ley into whom Vaisvanara Agui entered, here let those
Waters, Goddesses, protect me.


HYMN L. Various Deities.

:Mitra- Varuna, guard and protect me here: let not that
come to me which nests within and swells.

Irive afar the scorpion hateful to the sight : let not the
winding worm touch me and wound my foot.

uption that appears upon the twofold joints, and that
which overspreads the ancles and the knees,
ij the refulgent Agni banish far away: let not the winding
worm touch me and wound my foot.

e poison that is formed upon the Sulmali, that which is
ound in stretms, that which the plants produce,
l this may all the Gods banish and drive away : let not the
winding worm touch me aud wound my foot.


} Jood : the ocean of air, the firmament.

LWm ar p! 1 | M f itra an A, Va , ru ’ a - (2) A « oi ’ (’) V 'V« Devlb, (i) Praise

in or Hi J? h a ^. n ? a .° f thell y m " to be repeated a as an antidote to
►n or disease which it specifies.

f «AicA nest, within and, swells : ‘the insidious and spreading (poison)-

' .„Y f a?a 8U ? ph ? 9 the substantive visham. The scorpion : ajakd-
ie exact meaning is uncertain.

onWhicl! u ^ the . a T 9 an , d Ie « 3 ' SAy»na’s interpretation is different:
generated in the manifold knots (of trees). * — Wilson.

the silk-cotton tree. AU the Gods, or, the All-Gods or



4 The steep declivities, the valleys, and the heights, the
nels full of water, and the waterless —

May those who swell with water, gracious Goddesses,
afflict us with the Sipada disease, may all the river*
us free from Simidd.

HYMN LI. i

Through the Adityas' most auspicious shelter, througl
most recent succour may we conquer.

May they, the Mighty, giving ear, establish this sacri:
make us free and sinless.

2 Let Aditi rejoice and the Adityas, Varuna, Mitra, Arj

most righteous.

May they, the Guardians of the world, protect us, f
show favour, drink this day our Soma.

3 All Universal Deities, the Maruts, all the Adityas, y(

all the Riblius,

Indra, and Agni, and the Asvins, lauded. Preserve us
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LII.

May we be free from every bond, Adityas! a castle amon
and men, ye Vasus.

Winning, may we win Varuna and Mitra, and, being, i
be, 0 Earth and Heaven.

2 May Varuna and Mitra grant this blessing, our Gua

shelter to our seed and offspring.

Let ns not suffer for another’s trespass, nor do the thii
ye, 0 Vasus, punish.

3 The ever-prompt Angirases, imploring riches from Savi

God, obtained them.

So may our Father who is great and holy, and all tin
accordant, grant this favour.

HYMN LIII. Heaven an-

As priest with solemn rites and adorations I worship ]
and Earth, the High and Holy.

To them, great Parents of the Gods, have sages of i
time, singing, assigned precedence.

4 2'he jjfi pada disease : ‘perhaps the Vaidikform of Slipada, the
Wilson. Simidd : apparently a female demon, or a disease at

to her malevolence. „ „ , , f , ..

3 Universal Deities : vi§ve devfh ; the All-Gods. Lauded : the sei
incomplete, the substantives in the nominative case having no verb.

1 Being : really and truly being, rich, powerful, and distinguished.
3 Our Father: Varuna, the father of Vasish^ha j or Savitar, or 1
may be intended.



THE RIO VEDA.


53


' 55.]

jth newest hymns set in the seat of Order, those the Two
parents, born before all others,

jne, Heaven and Earth, with the Celestial People, hither to
[is, for strong is your protection.

bt, Heaven and Earth, ye hold in your possession full many
jt treasure for the liberal giver.

t nt us that wealth which comes in free abundance. Preserve
s evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

| HYMN LTV, VAstoshpati.

Knowledge us, 0 Guardian of the Homestead : bring no
lisease, and give us happy entrance.

Ute’er we ask of thee, be pleased to grant it, and prosper
Ihou our quadrupeds and bipeds.

Rector of the Home, be our promoter : increase our wealth
|n kine and steeds, 0 Indu.

jy we be ever-youthful in thy friendship : be pleased in us
is in his sons a father.

kugh thy dear fellowship that bringeth welfare, may we be
Victors, Guardian of the Dwelling !

itect our happiness in rest and labour. Preserve us
Ivcrmorc, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LV. V4»toshpati.

fTOSHPATi, who killest all disease and wearest every form,

San auspicious Friend to us.

len, 0 bright Sou of Sarama, thou showest, tawny-lmed !
hy teeth,

5y gleam like lances’ points within thy mouth when thou
rouldst bite: go thou to sleep.

am Vs Son, retrace thy way : bark at the robber and the
hief.

Indra’s singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou seek to tcr-
ify us 1 Go to sleep.

the libeml giver : or, for Sudds.

hpati is the Genius or tutelary God of the house. In this hymn
l reused also as Indu, another name of Soma the Moon-God.

hpati is the deity of the first stanzi, and Tndra of the rest,
ictre is Gdyatii in stanza 1, Uparishtddbiihati (8x3 f- 1 2) in 2-4,
shtup in 5-8, and the hymn appears to be made up of three corres-
pieces unconnected by their subjects.

SaramA : Saramd. the hound of Indra, is mother of the two
J h ® brindled watch-dogs of Yama, God of the Dead. Thia stanza
avo following appear to be addressed by the spirits of Indra’s worship-
urn of the dogs who would prevent their entering the home of the



54 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

4 Be on thy guard against the boar, and let the boar bewai

thee.

At fndra’s singers barkest thou ? Why dost thou seel
terrify us ? Go to sleep.

5 Sleep mother, let the father sleep, sleep dog and master oi

house.

Let all the kinsmen sleep, sleep all the people who are r<
about.

6 The man who sits, the man who walks, and whosoever ]

on us,

Of these we closely shut the eyes, even as we closely shut
house.

7 The Bull who hath a thousand horns, who rises up from

the sea, —

By him the Strong and Mighty One we lull and maki
people sleep.

8 The women sleeping in the court, lying without, or stret

on beds,

The matrons with their odorous sweets— these, one am
we lull to sleep.

HYMN l/VJ. ^ M

Wiio are these radiant men in serried rank, Rudra's v
heroes borne by ncble steeds 1

2 Verily no one knoweth whence they sprang : they, and

only, know each other’s birth.

3 They strew each other with their blasts, these Hawks:

strove together, roaring like the wind.

5 This and the three following Btanzas form a lull.iby or sleep-song,
bably sung as a charm by a lover on a secret visit to his love. ^

7 The Bull who hath a thousand homs : the Son, wh'-we setting bnuj
time of rest and sleep ; or j>eihaps the starry heaven is intended

8 With their odoiws sweets : wearing garlands of fragiant flowers mi:
occasions, according to Sayana : ‘decoiatcd with holiday perfumes. \
According to a legend mentioned by Sayana, Vasishtha having fasted fo
days was entering the house of Vanina in hope of food, when the wat
set upon him and was put to sleep by the repetition of the last four
which are to be recited on simikir occasions by thieves and house-bi<
See Wilson’s note. The hymn has been discussed by Aufrecht, h
Studien , IV. 337f, and by Lanman, Sanskrit Header, p. 370.

3 They strew each other with their blasts : the meaning of
uncertain. ‘ They go together by their own pure paths.’ -Wilson
plucked each other with their beaks i?)— M. Muller. ‘They bestrei
other with light.’— Grassmimn. ‘They scatter dust over each other
besoms.’— Roth. I follow Professor Ludwig. The meaning appears to i
the Hawks or rapid Maruts are so crowded in their onward sweep in*
in front feel the quick breath of those who follow. Similarly (VIIl.j
the crowded Maruts are likened to cattle who lick each other’s heads or i



THE RIO VEDA.


r MJ


S6


gage was he who knew these mysteries, what in her udder
mighty Prisni bore.

, er victorious, through the Maruts, be this band of Heroes,
nursing manly strength,

)st bright in splen lour, fleetest on their way, close-knit to
glory, strong with varied power.

a, mighty is your power and firm your strength : so,
potent, with the Maruts, bo the band,
kht is your spirit, wrathful are your minds : your bold
iroop’s minstrel is like one inspired.

er avert your blazing shaft from us, and let not your dis-
pleasure reach us here.

ur dear names, conquering Maruts, we invoke, calling aloud
dll ve are satislied.


jll-armed, impetuous in their haste, they deck themselves,
fclieir forms, with ornaments of gold.

re, Maruts pure yourselves, are your oblations : to you, the
pure, pure sacrifice I offer.

Law they came to truth, the Law’s observers, bright by
;heir birth, and pure, and sanctifying,
nr rings, 0 Maruts, rest upon your shoulders, and chains
>f gold are twined upon your bosoms.

laming with drops of rain, like lightning-flashes, after your
vont ye whirl about your weapons.

.do in the depth of air spread forth your glories, far, most
adorable, ye bear your titles.

ruts, accept this th msandfolcl allotment of household
lacrifice and household treasure.


Mar its, ye regard the praise recited here at this mighty
finger’s invocation,

uchsafe us quickly wealth with noble heroes, wealth which
no man who hateth us may injure.


wt in her udder: according to S&yani, what beings (Maruts, etc.)
P;Lni bore at her udder or in the firmament.

V[ troop's minstrel : the leader <f the Maruts’ thunder-psalm. Like
V j / wubartiwi, like a Muni or inspired saint ‘ The sounds produced
inakmg of the trees are like the varied intonations of a leciter of praises,
las explanation.’ — Wdson. La n man translates differently: Clear is
ustling. Your hearts are wrathful as the wild onward-rush of a doughty

\ V° ur titles : you make yourselves known. ‘You send down
pers) that beat down (the dust).’— Wilson. Nfimdni, names, according
?a, means waters, because they bend down the dust, pdnsHti namayantit



THE IIYMNS OF


56


[BOOK J


16 The Maruts, fleet as coursers, while they deck them],

youths spectators of a festal meeting,

Linger, like beauteous colts, about the dwelling, like friskj
calves, these who pour down the water.

17 So may the Maruts help us and be gracious, bringing f,

room to lovely Earth and Heaven.

Far be your bolt that slaycth men and cattle. Ye Vas:
turn yourselves to us with blessings.

18 The priest, when seated, loudly calls you, Maruts, praising

song your universal bounty.

He, Bulls ! who hath so much in his possession, free f t
duplicity, with hymns invokes you.

19 These Maruts bring the swift man to a stand-still, j

strength with mightier strength they break and humble
These guard the singer from the man who hates him and
their sore displeasure on the wicked.

20 These Maruts rouse even the poor and needy : the Vasusl

him as an active champion.

Drive to a distance, 0 ye Bulls, the darkness : give us i
store of children and descendants.

21 Never, 0 Maruts, may we lose your bounty, nor, enr-to

Lords ! be hindmost when ye deal it.

Give us a share in that delightful treasure, the genii
wealth that, Bulls ! is your possession.

22 What time the men in fury rush together for running strei:

for pastures, and for houses,

Then, 0 ye Maruts, ye who spring from Rudra, be our pro
tors in the strife with foemen.

23 Full many a deed ye did for our forefathers worthy of In

which, even of old, they sang you.

The strong man, with the Maruts, wins in battle, the char,
with the Maruts, gains the booty.

24 Ours, 0 ye Maruts, be the vigorous Hero, the Lord Divine

men, the strong Sustaincr,

With whom to fair lands we may cross the waters, and di
in our own home with you beside us.

25 May Indra, Mitra, Varuna and Agni, Waters, and Plants, 1

Trees accept our praises.

May we find shelter in the Maruts’ bosom. Preserve us e
more, yo Gods, with blessings.

j 24 The Lord Divine: literally, the Asura. We may cross the watert
Maruts are besought to favour an expedition for the acquisition of
tie men t a on the further side of a river.



V 58.J


THE RIQVEDA.


57


HYMN LYIT. Maruts.

Ea, through the power of your sweet juice, ye Holy ! the
SMarut host is glad at sacrifices.

|iey cause even spacious heaven and earth to tremble, they
[make the spring flow when they come, the Mighty,
he Maruts watch the man who sings their praises, promoters
of the thought of him who worships.

>at you on sacred grass in our assembly, this day, with
friendly minds, to share the banquet.

o others gleam so brightly as these Maruts with their own
forms, their golden gauds, their weapons.

'ith all adornments, decking earth and heaven, they heighten,
for bright show, their common splendour,
ir from us be your blazing dart, 0 Maruts, when we,
through human frailty, sin against you.
it us not be exposed to that, ye Holy ! May your most lov-
ing favour still attend us.

ly even what we have done delight the Maruts, the blame-
less Ones, the bright, the purifying.

irther us, 0 ye Holy, with your kindness : advance us
mightily that we may prosper.

id may the Maruts, praised by all their titles, Heroes, enjoy
the taste of our oblations.

vc us of Amrit for the sake of offspring : awake the excel-
lent fair stores of riches.

ther, ye Maruts, praised, with all your succours, with all
felicity come to our princes,

ho, of themselves, a hundredfold increase us Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LVIII. Maruts.

s' o to the troop that pours down rain in common, the
Mighty Compaiiy of celestial nature.


: acc ° r di n g to S&yana, the Maruts are addressed. The Marut
ima MTrutam : the Marut name, t e those who are called Maruts.

hymn, and all the hymns to the Maruts have been translated and
in Max Muller a Vedic Hymns, l. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol.

us of Amrit : the secret essence which pervades the world and nour*
sustains all must naturally also be the element that promotes re-
on. Budwig. Von Both explains the passage differently: ‘Add us to
r« r! . People of eternity, i, e. to the blessed.’ * Vouchsafe our
g uie. — Grasstnann. ‘Bestow water upon our progeny.’— Wilson.



58


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK VII

They make the world-halves tremble with their greatness :
from depths of earth and sky they reach to heaven.

2 Yea, your birth, Maruts, was with wild commotion, ye who

move swiftly, fierce in wrath, terrific.

Ye all-surpassing in your might and vigour, each looker on the
light fears at your coming.

3 Give ample vital power unto our'princes : lot our fair praises

gratify the Maruts.

As the way travelled helpeth people onward, so further us
with your delightful succours.

4 Your favoured singer counts his wealth by hundreds : the

strong steed whom ye favour wins a thousand.

The Sovran whom ye aid destroys the foeman. May this
your gift, ye Shakers, be distinguished.

5 I call, as such, the Sons of bounteous lludra : will not the

Maruts turn again to us-ward ?

What secret sin or open stirs their anger, that we implore the
Swift Ones to forgive us.

6 This eulogy of the Bounteous hath been spoken : accept, ye

Maruts, this our hymn of praises.

Ye Bulls, keep those who hate us at a distance. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LIX. Maruts.

Whomso ye rescue here and there, whomso ye guide, 0 Deities,
To him give shelter, Agni, Mitra, Varuna, ye Maruts, and
thou Aryaman.

2 Through your kind favour, Gods, on some auspicious day, the

worshipper subdues his foes.

That man increases home and strengthening ample food who
brings you offerings as ye list.

3 Vasishtha will not overlook the lowliest one among you all.

0 Maruts, of our Soma juice effused to-day drink all of you
with eager haste.

4 Your succour in the battle injures not the man to whom ye,

Heroes, grant your gifts.

1 From depth 8 of earth and sky : nlrriti here is said to be synonymous with
hh&mi , earth, and avansi, the unsupported, with antariksha , firmament. But
nlrriti, Death, Destruction, as identified with bh&mi, may be the Prithivi of
the atmosphere (see V. 84.), which must originally have been considered to be
the place of departed spirits.

2 Each looker on the light: vhtvah svardrxk: according to S&yana, every tree.

4 Injures not : a litotes for, is of the greatest advantage to.



THE RIO VEDA.


59


| HYMN 59 . j

May your most recent favour turn to us again. Come quickly,
ye who fain would drink.

5 Come hitherward to drink the juice, 0 ye whose bounties give

you joy.

These offerings are for you, these, Maruts, I present. Go not
to any place but this.

6 Sit on our sncred grass, be graciously inclined to give the

wealth for which we long,

To take delight, ye Maruts, Friends of all, with Sv&ha, in
sweet Soma juice.

7 Decking the beauty of their forms in secret the Swans with

purple backs have flown down hither.

Arouud me all the Company hath settled, like joyous Heroes
glad in our libation.

8 Maruts, the man whose wrath is hard to master, he who would

slay us ere we think, 0 Vasus,

May he be tangled in the toils of mischief ; smite ye him
down with your most flaming weapon.

9 0 Maruts, ye consuming Gods, enjoy this offering brought for

you,

To help us, ye who slay the foe.

10 Sharers of household sacrifice, come, Maruts, stay not far away,
That ye may help us, Bounteous Ones.

11 Here, Self-strong Maruts, yea, even here, ye Sages with your

sunbright skins !

I dedicate your sacrifice.

12 Tryambaka we worship, sweet augmenter of prosperity.

As from its stem the cucumber, so may I be released from
death, not reft of immortality.


5 Whose bounties give yon joy : or follow each other closely, and are ever
fre.-h and ready.

6 Svdhd : an exclamation, like Ave ! or Hail ! used in making oblations to
the Gods.

7 With purple backs : nflaprishthlh : cf. Horace’s * purpurei olores.*

8 Mischief : or one of the malicious spirits called Diuhs.

12 Tryambaka : a name of Rudra. diceet : according to SAyana, sugdndhim,
Bweet-smelling, means here, * whose fame is fra$p»nfc.’ ‘ The verse occurs in the
htjur-Veda, 6 30, and is, in some instances, differently interpreted ; TVyaw
is tei med netrntvayopetam Jiudram, the triocular Rudra: sugundhim ,
divyagandhopeiam, of celestial fragrance : the urvdruka is said to mean the
hind hit [fruit of the jujube- tree], which, when ripe, falls of itself fiom its
stalk. — Wilson.



eo THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VII.

HYMN LX. Mitra-Varuna.

When thou, 0 Sun, this day, arising sinless, shalt speak the
truth to Vanina and Mitra,

0 Aditi, may all the Deities love us, and thou, 0 Aryaman,
while we arc singing.

2 Looking on man, 0 Vanina and Mitra, this Sun ascendeth up

by both the pathways,

Guardian of all things fixt, of all that moveth, beholding
good and evil acts of mortals.

3 He from their home hath yoked the Seven gold Coursers who,

dropping oil and fatness, carry Surya.

Yours, Varuryi and Mitra, he surveycth the worlds and living
creatures like a herdsman.

4 Your coursers rich in store of sweets have mounted : to the

bright ocean Surya hath ascended,

For whom the Adityas make his pathway ready, Aryaman,
Mitra, Varuna, accordant.

5 For these, even Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra, are the chas-

tisers of all guile and falsehood.

These, Aditi’s Sons, infallible and mighty, have waxen in the
home of Law Eternal.

6 These, Mitra, Varuna, whom none deeeiveth, with great power

quicken even the fool to wisdom,

And, wakening, moreover, thoughtful insight, lead it by easy
paths o’er grief and trouble.

7 They ever vigilant, with eyes that close not, caring for heaven

and earth, lead on the thoughtless.

Even in the river’s bed there is a shallow : across this broad
expanse may they conduct us.

8 When Aditi and Varuna and Mitra, like guardians, give Sudas

their friendly shelter,

Granting him sons and lineal succession, let us not, bold ones !
move the Gods to anger.


The hymn is addressed chiefly to Mitra and Varuna, but S .rya or the Sun
is the deity of the first stanza.

1 Sinless: Sdyana makes dnrfydh ^andyasah : ‘ declare the truth... that wc
are void of sin.’— Wilson. But this seems forced, and the implied meaning <>£
the poet is clear enough if the word is taken in its u.sual signification.

2 Both the pathicays : near the earth and high in the firmament.

6 Mitra , Varuna: and Aryaman, understood : the verbs are in the plural.

8 Bold ones : the warning is addressed to the people of Sudds, who has been

ntnnlinna/! !n 1 n <V KvmrU


1IYMN 61.1


THE RIG VEDA.


61


9 May he with offerings purify the altar from any stainB of
Varuna’s reviler.

Aryaman save us from all those who hate us : give room and
freedom to Sudas, ye Mighty.

10 Hid from our eyes is their resplendent meeting: by their

mysterious might they hold dominion.

Heroes ! we cry trembling in fear before you, even in the great-
ness of your power have mercy.

11 He who wins favour for his prayer by worship, that he may

gain him strength and highest riches,

That good man’s mind the Mighty Ones will follow : they have
brought comfort to Ins spacious dwelling.

12 This priestly task, Gods ! Varuna and Mitra ! hath been per-

formed for you at sacrifices.

Convey ’us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, ye
Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXI. Mitra-Varuna.

0 Varuna and Mitra, Surya spreading the beauteous light of
you Twain Gods arisoth.

He who hoholdeth all existing creatures observeth well the zeal
that is in mortals.

2 The holy sage, renowned afar, directeth his hymns to yon, 0

Varuna and Mitra,—

He whose devotions, sapient Gods, ye favour so that ye fill, as
’twere, with power his autumns.

3 From the wide earth, 0 Varuna and Mitra, from the great

lofty heaveu, ye, Bounteous Givers,

Have in the fields and houses set your warders who visit every
spot and watch unceasing.

4 I praise the strength of Varuna and Mitra : that strength, by

mightiness, keeps both worlds asunder.

Heroless pass the months of the ungodly : he who loves sacri-
fice makes his home enduring.


9 May he : Agni may be intended. Varuna' s revile)' : those who speak evil
of princes like Suchts, Vuruna being the king’s prototype — Ludwig.

10 Their resplendent mutiny : that of Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman.

11 Have bronyht comfort to his spacious dwelling: ‘ bestow a spacious man-
si 011 for a dwelling upon him.’— Wilson.



<52 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIl

5 Steers, all infallible are these your people in whom no wondrou

thing is seen, no worship.

Guile follows close tho men who are untruthful : no secrets
may be hidden from your know ledge.

6 I will exalt your sacrifice with homage : as priest, I, Mitra

VaruLci, invoke you.

May these new hymns and prayers that I have fashionec
delight you to the profit of the singer.

7 This priestly task, Gods ! Varuna and Mitra ! hath been per

formed for you at sacrifices.

Convey us safely over every peril. Preserve us evermore, yi
Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LX II. Mitra- Varuna

Scry a hath sent aloft his beams of splendour , o’er all th
tribes of men in countless places.

Together with the heaven he shines apparent, formed by hi:
Makers well with power ami wisdom.

2 So hast thou mounted up before us, Surya, through these ou

praises, with fleet dappled horses.

Declare us free from all oflence to Mitra, and Varuna, anc
Aryarnan, and Agni.

3 May holy Agni, Varuna, and Mitra send down their riches

upon us in thousands.

May they, the Bright Ones, make our praise-song perfect, and
when we laud them, grant us all our wishes.

4 0 undivided Heaven and Earth, preserve us, us, Lofty Ones

your nobly-born descendants.

Let. us not anger V.iruna, nor Vayu, nor him, the dearest
Friend of mortals, Mitra.

5 Stretch forth your arms and let our lives be lengthened

with fatness dew the pastures of our cattle.

Ye Youthful, make us famed among the people : hear, Mitn
Varuna, these mine invocations.

5 This stanza is difficult. Sfty ana’s interpretation as given by Wilson is
‘ Unperplexed, all-pervading showerers (of benefits), these piaises are for you,
in which nothing surprising, no adoration (woithy of you), is beheld: tho iir
sincere commendations of men serve as offences : eulogies of you, although
offered in secret are not unappreciated.’ The version of the Seventy Hyvnisit
somewhat ns follows : ‘ All your avenging spirits, 0 ye Mighty, follow unerr
iugly the sinner’s traces. They have no «dgn that men may mark, no figure
Naught is so secret that ye fail to know it.’ This latter involves a slight
alteration of the text. I prefer Ludwig’s interpretation, although it is n°'
absolutely convincing.

A 7V» th* m *fUtt ft f the t Inn • baa


Veiiitrh* StiLtlipn I. 43.



THE RIQVEDA.


.68


rjYMN 64 ]

6 Now Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room,
for us and for our children.

May we find paths all fair and good to travel. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXI1I. Mitra-Varuna.

Common to all mankind, auspicious Surya, ho who beholdeth all,
is mounting upward ;

The God, the eye of Yaruna and Mitra, who rolled up dark-
ness like a piece of leather.

2 Surya’s great ensign, restless as the billow, that urgeth men

to action, is advancing ;

Onward he still would roll the wheel well-rounded, which
Etasa, harnessed to the car-pole, movcth.

3 Refulgent from the bosom of the Mornings, he in whom singers

take delight asccndeth.

This Savitar, God, is my chief joy and pleasure, who breaketh
not the universal statute.

4 Golden, far-seeing, from the heaven he riseth : far is his goal,

he hasteth on resplendent.

Men, verily, inspirited by Surya speed to their aims and do
the work assigned them.

5 Where the Immortals have prepared his pathway he flieth

through the region like a falcon.

With homage and oblations will we serve you, 0 Mitra-Yaruna,
when the Sun hath risen.

6 Now Mitra, Yaruna, Aryaman vouchsafe us freedom and room,

for us and for our children.

May wo fin 1 paths all fair and goo 1 to travel. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LX I Y. Mitra-Varuna.

Ye Twain who rule, in heaven and earth, the region, clothed
be your clouds in robes of oil and fatness.

May the imperial Varnni, and Mitra, and high-born Aryaman
accept our presents.

- Kings, guards of mighty everlasting Order, come hitherward,
ye Princes, Lords of Rivers.

Send us from heaven, 0 Varuna and Mitra, rain and sweet
food, ye who pour down your bounties.

2 Elam : or, the bright or dappled steed ; one of the horses of the Sun.

3 Breaketh not : faithfully observes and supports.



64


the hymns of


[BOOK VII,


, May ft. to. Cod, and V«w - “ bj “»

- <***. “■ «

j It 2S r iu • 1,lr “’ ,,h °

»T. , 3i'S3? ! w“ 1I .\Iitra i y. King.. ».k. tU

» —< **

*££&£$!**, “ k * tl ">" sht “ d ,pirit ' p "”"'
11 a evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.


HYMN LXV. Mitra Vuruiu,

With hymns I call you, when the Sun hath risen, Mitra, and
Varuna whose though! s are holy,

Whose Power Divine, supreme and everlasting, comes with good
heed at each mans supplication.

2 For they are Asuras of Go Is, the friendly : make, both of you,

our lands exceeding fruitful,

May we obtain you, \aruna and Mitra, wheicvcr Heaven and
Earth and days may bless us.

3 Bonds of the sinner, they bear many nooses ; the wicked mortal

hardly may escape them.

Varuna-Mitra, may your path of Order bear us o’er trouble as
a boat o’er waters.

4 Como, taste our offering, Varuna and Mitra : bedew our pasture

with sweet food and fatness.

Pour down in plenty here upon the people the choicest of your
fair celestial water.


3 Th Q second half of the stanza is obscure. The meaning appeals tube
that even our foes, the godless who oiler no sacrifices, shall envy the pro*
peri tv which we enjoy through the liberality of Sudds, and shall wish to fo
low our example, to sacrifice to the Gods and to enjoy their protection and
the blessings which they send.

4 This cxr: this care fully* formed hymn which goes, like a chariot, to the
Gods.

5 To Vdyu : who receives the first draught of Soma juice at the morning

62 16. See von Bradke, Dyaus Asura, 8 5,

1 Power Divine: asuryhm : Asurahood. Whose : refers to Mitra and Varuna.

2 Antras of Goils : the high or ruling Gods of all the deities.

3 Bonds : binders. Many nooses : * Your guiles, ye Holy Ones, to quell op 1
pressor*, your snares spread out against the foe, Adityas’ (II. 27. 16).



THE RIO VEDA.


YM&

. To you this laud, 0 Varuna and Mitra, is offered, like bright

Soma juice to Vayu. . .

Favour our songs of praise, wake thought and spirit. Preserve
us evermore, yo Gods, with blessings.


HYMN LXVI. Mitra- Varuna.

Let our strong hymn of praise go forth, the laud of Mitra-

Varuna, .

With homage to that high-born Pair ;

1 2 The Two exceeding wise, the Sons of Dakslia, whom the Gods
ordai’-ed

For lordship, excellently great.

3 Such, Guardians of our homes and us, 0 Mitra- Varuna, fulfil
The thoughts of those who sing your praise.

4 So when the Suu hath risen to-day, may sinless Mitra, Arya-
man,

Bhaga, and Savitar send us forth.

5 May this our home be guarded well : forward, ye Bounteous,
on the way,

Who bear us safely o’er distress.

0 And those Self-reigning, Aditi, whose statute is inviolate,

The Kings who lule a vast domain.

7 Soon as the Sun h ith risen, to you, to Mitra-Varuna, I sing,
And Aryaman who slays the foe.

8 With wealth of gold may this my song bring unmolested
power and might,

And, Brahmans, gain the sacrifice.

9 May we bo thine, God Varuna, and with our princes, Mitra,
thine :

Food and Heaven’s light will we obtain.

p Many are they who strengthen Law, Sun-eyed, with Agni for
their tongue,


2 Sons of Dakslia • see VI. 50. 2. For lordship : literally for Asurahood.

4 Sinless: S&yana heie, as in VII 60. 1. takes andf/dh ns = andgamh, bo
tkat, according to his interpretation, the translation would be : may Savitar,
Mitra, Aryaman, and Bhaga send us sinless forth.

6 Aditi is out of place here, as there is no copulative in the text : whose
mother is Aditi, seems to be intended.

8 And , Brahmans , gain the sacrifice : the exact meaning is uncertain : ‘May
t (be effective), Bages, for the fulfilment of (the objects of) the sacrifice.’ —
r> llson.


5



M


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK VII.


They who direct the three great gatherings with their
thoughts, yea, all things with surpassing might.

1! They who have stablished year and month and then the day,
night, sacrifice and holy vers«,

Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, the Kings, have won dominion which
none else may gain.

12 So at tba rising of the Sun we think of you wit yittm

Evenas ' Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman deserve: ye are the chariot-

eei*s of Law. . .

13 True to Law, born in Law, the strengthened of Law, terrible,

haters of the false,

In their felicity which gives the best defence may we men and
our princes dwell.

14 Uprises, on the slope of heaven, that marvel that attracts the

sight, . .

As swift celestial Etasa bears it away, prepared for every eye

to sec.

15 Lord of each single head, of fixt and moving things, equally

through the whole expanse,

The Seven sister Bays bear Surya on h.s car, to bring m
wealth and happiness.

16 A hundred autumns may we see that bright .ye, o or am

ed, arise :

A hundred autumns may we live.

17 Infallible through your wisdom, come hither, resplendent

Varuna,

And Mitra, to the Soma draught.

18 Come as the laws of Heaven ordain, Varuna, Mitra, void a

Pilssnear and drink the Soma juice.

19 Come, Mitra, Varuna, accept Heroes, our sacrificial gift :
Drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law.

•*"“¥*£• , T , he *'**** “ ” 0t d *
Ludwig U of opinion that the three castes are intended.

The meaning of stanzas 10 and 11 is that although there be many
Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman' are supreme.

IS Sister Bays : the Harits. See IV. 6. 9; 13. 3.



ryjfN «7J


THE MOVED A. 67

HYMN LXVII. Asrins.

I with a holy heart that brings oblation will sing forth praise
to me£t your car, ye Princes,

Which, Much-desired ! hath wakened as your envoy. I call
you hither as a son his parents.

2 Brightly hath Agni shone by us enkindled : the limits even

of darkness wore apparent.

Eastward is seen the Banner of the Morning, the Banner born
to give Heaven’s Daughter glory.

3 With hymns the deft priest is about you, Asvins, the eloquent

priest attends you now, N&satyas.

Come by the paths that ye are wont to travel, on car that
finds the light, laden with treasure.

4 When, suppliant for your help, Lovers of Sweetness ! I seek-

ing wealth call you to our libation,

Hither Ward let your vigorous horses bear you : drink ye with
us the well-pressed Soma juices.

5 Bring forward, Asvins, Gods, to its fulfilment my never-weari-

ed prayer that asks for riches.

Vouchsafe us all high spirit in the combat, and with your
powers, 0 Lords of Power, assist us.

(> Favour us in these prayers of ours, 0 Asv-ins. May we have
genial vigour, ne’er to fail us.

So may we, strong in children and descendants, go, wealthy,
to the banquet that awaits you.

J Lovers of Sweetness, we have brought this treasure to you as
’twere an envoy sent for friendship.

Come unto us with spirits free from anger, in homes of men
enjoying our oblation.

\ With one, the same, intention, ye swift movers, o’er the Serven
Rivets hath your chariot travelled.

Yoked by the Gods, your strong steeds rtevet Weary White
speeding forward at the pole they bear you.

Exhaust! ess be your bounty to our princes who with their
wealth incite the gift of riches,

Who further friendship with their noble natures, combining
wealth in kino with wealth ; n hdrses.


T Much-desired: ‘adorable/ — Wilson.

f Incite the gift of riches : move the Gods to give riches in return.
friendship ; or, st kinsman, meaning, apparently, the priest



68 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlt,

10 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation: come, Afivins,
to the home where food aboundeth.

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LX VIII. As vim,

Come, radiant As vins, with your noble horses: accept your
servant’s hymns, ye Wonder-Workers :

Enjoy oblations which we bring to greet you.

2 The gladdening juices stand prepared before you : come quick*

Iy and partake of mine oblation.

Pass by the calling of our foe and hear us.

3 Your chariot with a hundred aids, 0 Asvins, beareth you swift

as thought across the regions,

Speeding to us, 0 ye whose wealth is Surya.

4 What time this stone of yours, the Gods’ adorer, upraised,

sounds forth for you as Soma-presscr,

Let the priest bring you, Fair Ones, through oblations.

5 The nourishment ye have is, truly, wondrous : ye gave there-

of a quickening store to Atri,

Who, being dear to you, receives your favour.

6 That gift, which all may gain, ye gave Chyavana, when he

grew old, who offered you oblations,

When ye bestowed on him enduring beauty.

7 What time his wicked friends abandoned Bhujyu, 0 Asvins,

in the middle of the ocean,

Your horse delivered him, your faithful servant.


3 Whose wealth is SHn,<U having KAryft for your possession or -trenail*
Surya, the daughter of the Sun. is the consort of the Asvms. See 1. 116. 1/,

4 The Gods' adorer: ilevay/th: literally, turning or going to the Gods, in

asmuch as it is employed in prepat ing the Soma juice. Ihe priest: here,
perhaps, the pressing stone. (

5 A auickeninq store : the moaning of mdhithvantam , which does not occu
elsewhere, is uncertain. According to Sdyana it means a pit or cavern . J
liberated Atri from the cavern, or, literally, ye separated the cavern from AW
For the legend, see I. 116. 12.

6 Which all may gain: which you Asvins are ready to grant to ©verf
worshipper who needs it. For the story of Ghyavdna seel. 116. 10,

13; 118.6. ,

7 Bhujyu : see Vol. I , Index. Your horse : tliis meaning is suggested
von Roth for the uncertain word arM, which generally appears to«£
hostile or illiberal ' ut may perhaps stand in this passage for arva, a
wora signifying hor e. sfe I. Ilf 14 With horses b. own of hue that fl*
with »wit't wings ye Lwu^lit back Bhujyu from the sea of billows, bee

VII. Off. 7.



hymn 60.] Tffit MQVBDA. 6ft

S Ye lent your aid to Vfika when exhausted, and listened when
invoked to Sayu’s calling.

Ye made the cow pour forth her milk like water, and, Asvins,
strengthened with your strength the barren.

9 With his fair hymns this singer, too, extols you, waking with
glad thoughts at the break of morning.

May the cow nourish him with milk to feed him. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN IAIX, # Asvins.

M\y vour gold chiriot, drawn by vigorous horses, come to us,
blocking up the earth and heaven,

Bright with its fellies while its way drops fatness, food-laden,
rich in coursers, man’s protector.

2 Let it approach, yoked by the will, three-seate 1, extending far

and wide o’er fivefold beings,

Whereon ye visit God-adoring races, bending your course
whither ye will, 0 Asvins.

3 Renowned, with noble horses, come ye hither : drink, Wond-

rous Pair, the cup that h >lds sweet juices.

Your car whereon your Spouse is wont to travel marks with
its track the farthest ends of heaven.

4 When night was turning to the grey of morning the Maiden,

Surya’s Daughter, chose your splendour
When with your power and might yc aid the pious he comes
through heat to life by your assistance,
o 0 Chariot-borne, this car of yours invested with rays of light
comes harnessed to our dwelling.

Herewith, 0 Asvins, while the dawn is breaking, to this our
sacrifice bring peace and blessing,
f) Like the wild cattle thirsty for the lightning, Heroes, come
nigh this day to our libations.

Mon call on you with hymns in many places, but let not other
worshippers detain you.

8 Vrika : liter.illy wolf, or robber. Some man so named seems to be meant.
&'.»/« : see I. 118 8; VI 13. 5.

9 Thu singer: the Rishi Vasishtha. The cow : that is brought to supply
the milk required for libations.

2 Fivefold beings: ‘ sarvaprdnhwh* all living beings, says S&yana.

3 Your Spouse : SuryA, daughter of the Sun.

4 Chose your splendour : seel. 116. 17.

6 Thirsty for the lightning : which immediately precedes, or accompanies,
the raiu they long for.



70 THE HYMNS OF {BOOR Vlf,

1 Bhujyu, abandoned in the midst of ocean, ye raised from out

the water with your horses,

Uninjured, winged, flagging not, undaunted, with deeds of
wonder saving him, 0 Asvins,

8 Now hear, 0 Youthful Twain, mine invocation : come, Asvins,
to the home where food aboundeth.

Vouchsafe us wealth, do honour to our nobles. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXX. Asvins.

Rich in all blessings, Asvins, come ye hither : this plane on
earth is called your own possession,

Like a strong horse with a fair back it standeth, whereon, as
in a lap, ye seat you firmly.

2 This most delightful eulogy awaits you : in the man's house

drink-offering hath been heated,

Which bringeth you over the seas and rivers, yoking as 'twere
two well-matched- shining horses.

3 Whatever dwellings ye possess, 0 Asvins, in fields of men or

in the streams of heaven,

Resting upon the summit of the mountain, or bringing food
to him who gives oblation,

4 Delight yourselves, ye Gods, in plants and waters when Rishia

give them and ye find they suit you.

Enriching us with treasures in abundance ye have looked back
to former generations.

5 Asvins, though ye have heard them oft aforetime, regard the

many prayers which Rishis offer.

Come to the man even as his heart desireth : may we enjoy
your most delightful favour.

6 Come to the sacrifice offered yon, Nasatyas, with men, obla-

tions, and prayer duly uttered.

Come to Vasishtha as his heart desireth, for unto you these
holy hymns are chanted.

7 Horses : not in the text, but supplied by S&yanaand obviously understood.
See preceding hymn, 7, note.

1 This place : the altar.

2 Drink-offering : gharn^a : the libation of hot milk ; or, the caldron in which
it is prepared.

4 Ye have looked back to former generations: S&yapa explains yugStni diffe-
rently : ‘ (favour us) as you have favoured former couples [». e. sacrifices W
their wives].’— Wilson.

Tin man : the institutor of the sacrifice.



TBB R1QVEDA .


11


jyyfW

7 This is the thought, this is -the song, 0 Aevins ; accept this
hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour,
ftiay these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you.
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXI. Asvins.

Thb Night retireth from the Dawn her Sister; the Dark one
yieldeth to the Red her pathway.

Let us invoke you rich in steeds and cattle : by day and night
keep far from us the arrow,

2 Bearing rich treasure in your car, 0 Asvins, come to the

mortal who presents oblation.

Keep at a distance penury and sickness ; Lovers of Sweetness,
day and night preserve us.

3 May your strong horses, seeking bliss, bring hither your

chariot at the earliest flush of morning.

With coursers yoked by Law drive hither, Asvins, your car
. whose reins are light, laden with treasure.

4 The chariot, Princes, that conveys you, moving at daylight,

triple-seated, fraught with riches,

Even with this come unto us, Nasatyas, that laden with all
food it may approach us.

5 Ye freed Chyavaua from old age and weakness : ye brought

the courser fleet of foot to Pedu.

Ye rescued Atri from distress and darkness, and loosed for
Jahusha the bonds that bound him.

3 This is the thought, this is the song, O Asvins : accept this
hymn of ours, ye Steers, with favour.

May these our prayers addressed to you come nigh you.
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXI1. Asvins.

Gome, 0 Nasatyas, on your car resplendent, rich in abundant
wealth of kine and horses.

As harnessed steeds, all our laudations follow you whose forms
shine with most delightful beauty.

2 Come with the Gods associate, come ye hither to us, N&satyas,

with your car accordant.

Twixt you and us there is ancestral friendship and common
kin : remember and regard it.

1 The Red : the Sun. The arrow : of disease and death.

3 Seeking bliss : for men.

^ For Chyavdna, Pedu, Atri, and Jdhnsha , see Vol. I. Index. There-ap-
arance, heralded by the Alvins or Gods of Twilight, of the departed Sun
pears to be symbolized in all these legends.



72 Tffti ItYMtfS OF [BOOK F/|

3 Awakened are the songs that praise the Asvins, the kindred

prayers and the Celestial Mornings.

Inviting those we long for, Earth and Heaven, the singer
calleth these Nasatyas hither.

4 What time the Dawns break forth in light, 0 Asvins, to you

the poets otter their devotions.

God Savitar hath sent aloft his splendour, and fires sing praises
with the kindled fuel.

5 Come from the west, come from the east, Nasatyas, come, As-

vins, from below and from above us.

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve
us evermoro, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXIII. Asvina

We have o’erpassed the limit of this darkness while, worship.

ping the Gods, we sang their praises.

The song invoketh both Immortal Asvins, far-reaching, born
of old, great Wonder-Workers.

2 And, 0 Nasatyas, man’s dear Priest is seated, who brings to

sacrifice and offers worship.

Be near and taste the pleasant juice, 0 Asvins : with food,

I call you to the sacrifices.

3 We choosing you, have let our worship follow its course : ye

Steers, accept this hymn with favour.

Obeying you as your appointed servant, Yasishtha singing
hath with lauds aroused you.

4 And these Two Priests come nigh unto our people, united,

demon-slayers, mighty-handed.

The juices that exhilarate are mingled. Injure us not, but
come with happy fortune.

5 Come from the west, come from the east, NAsatyas, come, As-

vins, from below and from above us.

Bring wealth from all sides for the Fivefold People. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXX1V. Asvins. i

Tfiese morning sacrifices call you. Asvins, at the break of day. I
For help have I invoked you rich in power and might : for, !
house by house, ye visit all.


5 The Fivefold People : the five Aryan tribes. See I. 7. 9.

1 The first half-line has occurred before in I. 92. 6, and 183. 0.

2 Man's dear Priest : Agni.

4 These Two Priests : the Alvins. t>cm on •slayers : slayers of RAksh&siw
evil spirits of the night which disappear at the coming of the heralds of day-



ME RtGVEDA.


7S


\YMtt 75.]

| 0 Heroes, ye bestow wonderful nourishment : send it to him
whose songs are sweet,

Accordant, both of you, drive your car down to us, and drink
the savoury Soma juice.

) Approach ye and be near to us: drink, 0 ye Asvins, of the
meath.

t Draw forth the milk, ye Mighty, rich in genuine wealth : in-
jme us not, and come to us.

i The horses that convey you in their rapid flight down to the
worshipper’s abode,

With these your speedy coursers, Heroes, Asvins, come, ye
Gods, come well-inclined to us.

5 Yea, verily, our princes seek the Asvins in pursuit of food.

These shall give lasting glory to our liberal lords, and, both
Nasatyas, shelter us.

5 Those who have led the way, like cars, offending none, those

who are guardians of the men —

Also through their own might the heroes have grown strong,
and dwell in safe and happy homes.

HYMN LXXV. Dawn.

Born in the heavens the Dawn hath flushed, and showing her
majesty is come as Law ordaineth.

. She hath uncovered fiends and hateful darkness ; best of

i Angirases, hath waked the pathways.

? Bouse us this day to high and happy fortune : to great felicity,
0 Dawn, promote us.

j Vouchsafe us manifold and splendid riches, famed among mor-
tals, man-befriending Goddess !

3 Sec, lovely Morning’s everlasting splendours, bright with their
varied colours, have approached us.

Filling the region of mid-air, producing the rites of holy wor-
ship, they have mounted.

* She yokes her chariot far away, and swiftly visits the lands
"'here the Five Tribes are settled,

Looking upon the works and ways of mortals, Daughter of
Heaven, the world’s Imperia 1 Lady.

3 Draw forth the milk : milk the sweet rain from the firmament.

b II ho have led the way, like cars : wealthy nobles or princes, ‘the heroes’ of

‘e second line.

^ * endowed with the noblest characteristics of the holy

6 lanes, Waked the “pathways l litrhted thorn for men to use.



74 THE HYMNS OF IBOOK F/ }

C She who is rich in spoil, the Spouse of Surya, wondrousfy
opulent, rules all wealth and treasures.

Consumer of our youth, the seers extol her : lauded by priests
rich Dawn shines out refulgent.

6 Apparent are the steeds of varied colour, the red steeds car-

rying resplendent Morning.

On her all-lovely car she comes, the Fair One, and brings rich
treasure for her faithful servant

7 True with the True and Mighty with the Mighty, with Gods

a Goddess, Holy with the Holy,

She brake strong fences down and gave the cattle : the kina
were lowing as they greeted Morning.

8 0 Dawn, now give us wealth in kine and heroes, and hors*

fraught with manifold enjoyment.

Protect our sacred grass from man’s reproaches. Preserve
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXVI. Dan

Savitar God of all men hath sent upward his light, design!
for all mankind, immortal.

Through the Gods’ power that Eye was first created. Daw
hath made all the universe apparent.

2 I see the paths which Gods are wont to travel, innocuous patl

made ready by the Vasus.

Eastward the flag of Dawn hath been uplifted ; she hath com
hither o’er the tops of houses.

3 Great is, in truth, the number of the Mornings which wei

aforetime at the Sun’s uprising,

Since thou, 0 Dawn, hast been beheld repairing as to thy lovi
as one no more to leave him.

4 They were the Gods’ companions at the banquet, the aneieii

sages true to Law Eternal.

The Fathers found the light that lay in darkness, and will
effectual words begat the Morning.


7 flave the rattle : restored the rays of light that had beeu imprisoned k
the demons of darkness.

3 As to thy love: to the Sun, who is sometimes called the lover and sonw
times the husband of Ushas or Dawn.

4 The Fathers : the ancestors of the ljUahis in the spirit- world are associate
with the Gods as companions, friends, and assistants. See M. Muller, hw
What can it Teach us f pp. 223, 224.



THE HIGVEDA .


75


YMN 77.]

Meeting together in the same enclosure, they strive not, of one
mind, one with another.

They never break the Gods’ eternal statutes, and injure none,
in rivalry with Vasus.

Extolling thee, Blest Goddess, the Vasish^has, awake at early
morn, with lauds implore thee.

Leader of kine and Queen of all that strengthens, shine, come
as first to us, O high-born Morning.

She bringeth bounty and sweet charm of voices. The flush-
ing Dawn is sung by the Vasishthas,

: Giving us riches famed to distant places. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXVIT. Dawn.

She hath shone brightly like a youthful woman, stirring to
motion every living creature.

Agni hath come to feed on mortals’ fuel. She hath made
light and chased away the darkness.

5 Turned to this All, far-spreading, she hath risen and shone in
brightness with white robes about her.

She hath beamed forth lovely with golden colours, Mother of
kine, Guide of the days she bringeth.

i Bearing the Gods’ owu Eye, auspicious Lady, leading her
Courser white and fair to look on,

Distinguished by her beams Dawn shines apparent, come
forth to all the world with wondrous treasure.

Draw nigh with wealth and dawn away the foeman : prepare
for us wide pasture free from danger.

Drive away those who hate us, bring us riches : pour bounty,
opulent Lady, on the singer.

Send thy most excellent beams to shine and light us, giving
us lengthened days, 0 Dawn, 0 Goddess,

Granting us food, thou who hast, all things precious, and
bounty rich in chariots, kine, and horses.

0 Ushas, nobly -born, Daughter of Heaven, whom the Vasish-
thas with their hymns make mighty,

Bestow thou on us vast and glorious riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

5 In the same enclosure : the vast aerial hall in which the Gods assemble.

f , Ag . nt C0T »* to feed on mortals’ fuel ; * Agni is to be kindled for the

od of men.’— Wilson.

r Kine: rays of light.

P The Qode ’ own Eye, and Dawn’B white Courser are the Sun.



76 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V /

HYMN LXXVIII. Da*

We have beheld her earliest lights approaching : her man
glories part, on high, asunder.

On car sublime, refulgent, wending hither, 0 Ushas, bring tli
wealth that makes us happy.

2 The fire well-kindled sings aloud to greet her, and with thoi

hymns the priests are chanting welcome.

Ushas approaches in her splendour, driving all evil darkne^
far away, the Goddess.

3 Apparent eastward are those lights of Morning, sending on

lustre, as they rise, around them.

She hath brought forth Sun, sacrifice, and Agni, and far awai
hath fled detested darkness.

4 Rich Daughter of the Sky, we all behold her, yea, all men

look on Dawn as she is breaking.

Her car that moves self-harnessed hath she mounted, the car
drawn onward by her well-yoked horses.

5 Inspired with loving thoughts this day to greet thee, we and

our wealthy nobles have awakened.

Show yourselves fruitful, Dawns, as ye are rising. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXfX.

Rousing the lands where men’s Five Tribes are settled, Dawn
hath disclosed the pathways of the people.

Site hath sent out her sheen with beauteous oxen. The Son
with light hath opened earth and heaven.

2 They paint their bright rays on the sky’s far limits : the

Dawns come on like tribes arrayed for battle.

Thy cattle, closely shutting up the darkness, asSavitar spreadij
his arms, give forth their lustre.

3 Wealthy, most like to Indra, Dawn hath risen, and brought

forth lauds that shall promote our welfare.

Daughter of Heaven, a Goddess, she distributes, best of Anp
ra3es, treasures to the pious.


1 Five Tribes: of Aryans Pathways: pathy'A here has apparent y
same meaning as in VII. 75. 1. But according to the Pada text and ; ■
it is an adjective agreeing with UsMh (Dawn), and nignifying beneficial.

2 They : the Dawns. For battle : supplied by S&yaua.

3 Best of Angirases : see VII. 75. 1. j



THE RIO VEDA.


77


MN 81.]

Bestow on us, 0 Dawn, that ample bounty which thou didst
send to those who sang thy praises ;

Thou whom with bellowings of a bull they quickened : thou
didst unbar the firm-set mountain’s portals.

Impelling every God to grant his bounty, sending to us the
charm of pleasant voices,

Vouchsafe us thoughts, for profit, as thou breakest. Preserve
us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LX XX. Dawn.

The priests, Vasishthas, are the first awakened to welcome
Ushas with their songs and praises,

Who makes surrounding regions part asunder, and shows ap-
parent all existing creatures.

(living fresh life when she hath hid the darkness, this Dawn
hath wakened there with new-born lustre.

Youthful and unrestrained she cometh forward : she hath
turned thoughts to Sun and fire and worship.

May blessed Mornings shine on us for ever, with wealth of
kino, of horses, and of heroes,

Streaming with all abundance, pouring fatness. Preserve us
evermore, yo Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXXI. Dawn.

Advancing, sending forth her rays, the Daughter of the Sky

is seen.

Uncovering, that we may see, the mighty gloom, the friendly
Lady makes the light.

Ihe Suu ascending, the refulgent Star, pours down his beams
together with the Dawn.

0 Dawn, at thine arising, and the Sun's, may we attain the
share allotted us. *

Promptly we woke to welcome thee, 0 Ushas, Daughter of
the Sky, •

Thee, Bounteous One, who bringest all we long to have, and to
the offerer health and wealth.


k 1H \ IV, a r *v * rof - Wilson : ‘ thou whom (thy worship-

riMj welcomed with clamour (loud as th> bellowing) of a bull.’


1 ^ u> second line is translated by Prof.
iHj welcomed with clamour (loud as tto

/ art ah : the doors of the mountain or cloud in which the cows or rays of

L L U f ha3 iB im phcation entreated to open these doors

r 01 Llle singer of the hymn.


^'>^?Sun/:ndA K ni r «:Vli r '78 Wi 3 h S4ya?tt ’ h * th

3 This stanza is repeated from VII. 41. 7.



n THIS HYMNS OP [BOOK V/}

4 Thou, dawning, workest fain to light the great world, yea,

heaven, Goddess ! that it* may be Been.

We yearn to be thine own, Dealer of Wealth : may we be to
this Mother like her sons.

5 Bring us that wondrous bounty, Dawn, that shall be famed

most far away.

What, Child of Heaven, thou hast of nourishment for man,
bestow thou on us to enjoy.

6 Give to our princes opulence and immortal fame, and strength

in herds of kiue to us.

May she who prompts the wealthy, Lady of sweet strains, may
Uslias dawn our foes away.


HYMN LXXXIL Indra-Varuna,

Grant us your strong protection, Indra-Varuna, our people,
and our family, for sacrifice.

May we subdue in fight our evil-hearted foes, him who attach
the man stedfast in lengthened rites.

2 0 Indra-Varuna, mighty and very rich ! One of you is called

Monarch and One Autocrat.

All Gods in the most lofty region of the air have, 0 ye Steers,
combined all power and might in you.

3 Ye with your strength have pierced the fountains of the floods:

the Sun have ye brought forward as the Lord in heaven.
Cheered by this magic draught ye, Indra-Varuna, made the dry
places stream, made songs of piaise flow forth.

4 In battles and in frays wo ministering priests, kneeling upon

our knees for furtherance of our weal,

Invoke you, only you, the Lords of twofold wealth, you prompt
to hear, we bards, 0 Indra-Varuna.

5 0 Indra-Varuna, as ye created all these creatures of the world

by your surpassing might, , ,

In peace and quiet Mitra waits on Varuna, the Other, aw 11 ,
with the Maruts seeks renown.


« Lady of sweet strains: sdnrMmdi: according to SHyana, ‘speaker »f
truth.’ ‘ Possessing all that is excellent.’— Ludwig.

2 One of you ; Varuna is called samrUj or universal ruler (thoroughly »
splendent, according to Styana), and ludra svarS}, independent ruler,
according to S&yana, self-resplendent.

4 Twofold wealth : celestial and terrestrial.

5 Waite on Varuna: and so acknowledges his supremacy
ludra.


The Otter :


i



THE RIQVEDA.


79


WN 83 .)

That Varuna’s high worth may shine preeminent, these Twain
have measured each his proper power and might.

The One subdueth the destructive enemy; the Other with a
few furthereth many a man.

No’ trouble, no misfortune, Indra-Varuna, no woe from any
side assails the mortal man

Whoso sacrifice, 0 Gods, ye visit and enjoy : ne'er doth the
crafty guile of mortal injure him.

With your divine protection, Heroes, come to us : mine invo-
cation hear, if ye be pleased therewith.

Bestow ye upon us, 0 Indra-Varuna, your friendship and your
kinship and your favouring grace.

In battle after battle, Indra-Varuna, be ye our Champions, ye
who are the peoples’ strength,

When both opposing bands invoke you for the fight, and men
that they may gain offspring and progeny.

May Iudra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us glory
and great shelter spreading far.

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar’s song
of praise, the God who strengthens Law.

HYMN LXXXIII. Indra- Vanina.

Looking to you and your allianco, 0 ye Men, armed with
Irroad axes they went forward, fain for spoil.

ife smote and slew his Dasaand his Aryan enemies, and helped
Sudfts' with favour, Indra-Varuna.

Where heroes come together with their banners raised, in the
encounter wire re is naught for us to love,

Where all things that behold the light are terrified, there did
ye comfort us, 0 Indra-Varuna.

The boundaries of earth were seen all dark with do»st :

^ 0 Indra-Varuna, the shout went up to heaven.

I he enmities of the people compassed me about. Ye heard
m y calling and ye came to me with help.

The One : Varuna.


*7 ** praised by the Vasishthas, the family priests 1 of Sud As,

° the Tiitsus, for having given him the’victory over the ten confederate
*■ bee VII. 33. 3.

; or Heroes; India and Varuna. Armed Dith broad axes:
inir iq l ^ f ^ cT des.’— Wilson. Ludwig maintains thut the former
Pn tii perte , ct y impossible, and argues that prithupth favah muAfc metfn
1 f‘thu 8 and the ParSufc.’

? f nr io l° ve: Prof. Grassmann, whom Prof. Peterson
8 ’ explains differently : f whdre all thAt U dear is at stake.’



80 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F]j

4 With your resistless weapons, Indra-Varuna, ye conquer^

Bheda and ye gave Sudas your aid.

Ye heard the prayers of these amid the cries of war: effectual
was the service of the Tritsus’ priest.

5 0 Indra-Varuna, the wickedness of foes and mine assailants’

hatred sorely trouble me.

Ye Twain are Lords of riches both of earth and heaven: jo
grant to us your aid on the decisive day.

6 The men of both the hosts invoked you in the fight, Indr»

and Varuna, that they might win the wealth,

What time ye helped Sudas, with all the Tritsu folk, when the
Ten Kings had pressed him down in their attack.

7 Ten Kings who worshipped not, 0 Indra-Varuna, confederate,

in war prevailed not o’er Sudas.

True was the boast of heroes sitting at the feast : bo at their
invocations Gods were on their side.

8 0 Indra-Varuna, ye gave Sudas your aid when the Ten Kingi

in battle compassed him about,

There where the white robed Tritsus with their braided hair,
skilled in song worshipped you with homage and with hymn,

9 One of you Twain destroys the Vritras in the fight, the Other

evermore maintains his holy Laws.

We call on you, ye Mighty, with our hymns of praise. Vouch*
safe us your protection, Indra-Varuna.

10 May India, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman vouchsafe us gloij
and great shelter spreading far.

We think of the beneficent light of Aditi, and Savitar’s song
of praise, the God who strengthens Law.

HYMN LXXXIV. Indra-Varuin

Kings, Indra-Varuna, I would turn you hither to this our
sacrifice with gifts and homage.

Held in both arms the ladle, dropping fatness, goes of itscii
to you whose forms are varied.

2 Dyaus quickens and promotes your high dominion who biM
with bonds not wrought of rope or cordage.

Far from us still be Varuna’s displeasure : may Iudra gi?e»
spacious room to dwell in.

4 Bheda : see VII. 18, 19. ,

6 both of earth and heaven : or, perhaps, belonging to both Bides.

8 W ith their braided hair ; see VII 33. I-

10 This stanza is repeated from the preceding hymn.

2 Dyaut: of. VI. 62. 9. Not wrought of rope: moral and figuratiM,*
material*



THE RJOVEDA.


81


1 1YMN 85 .]

L Make ye our sacrifice fair amid the assemblies : make ye our
' prayers approved among our princes.

May God-sent riches come for our possession : further ye us
with your delightful succours.

[ 0 Indra-Varuna, vouchsafe us riches with store of treasure,
food, and every blessing;

For the Aditya, banisher of falsehood, the Hero, dealetU
wealth in boundless plenty.

5 May this my song reach Varuna and Tndra, and, strongly

urging, win me sons aud offspring.

I To the Gods' banquet may we go with riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXXV. Indra-Varuna.

Foil you I deck a harmless hymn, presenting the Soma juice
to Varuna and Indra —

A hymn that shines like heavenly Dawn with fatness. May
they be near us on the march and guard us.

I Here where the arrow's fall amid the banners both hosts invoke
the Gods in emulation.

0 indra- Varuna, smite back those our foemen, yea, smite them
with your shaft to every quarter.

) Self-lucid in their seats, e'en heavenly Waters endowed with
Godhead Varuna and Indra.

One of these holds the folk distinct and sundered, the Other
smites and slays resistless foemen.

I Wise be the priest and skilled in Law Eternal, who with his
sacred gifts and adoration

Brings you to aid us with your might, Adityas: let him have
viands to promote his welfare.

6 May this my song reach Varuna and Indra, and, strongly
i urging, win me sons and offspring.

To the Gods' banquet may wo go with riches. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

4 The Aditya: Varuna.

1 On the march : the Rishi prays for ai ' in an expected battle.

3 With Godhead : libations of Soma juice, with which water is mingled,
pport the (tods in their several stations : somcndpyrtyitrt hi devatdh sve w
Mne’vatishthante. — Sftyana. Distinct and sundered: differently treated, re-
irded or punished in accordance with their deserts. ‘The other sustains
e ^parate creatures.' — Muir. ‘The one protects the tribes which are scat-
red abioad.’-— Grassmann.

4 Mae be the priest: or, wise mufifc the priest be, skilled, etc. He: the
(stitutor of sacrifice. Viands : sacrificed food to be offered to the Gods.



£2 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Vll

HYMN LXXXVI. Varur*.

Wise, verily, are creatures through his greatness who stayed
even spacious heaven ami earth asunder ;

Who urged the high and mighty sky to motion, the Star of
old, and spread the earth before him.

2 With mine own heart I commune on the question how Varuna

and I may be united.

What gift of mine will he accept unangcred ? When may I
calmly look and find him gracious?

3 Fain to know this my sin I question others : I seek the wise,

0 Varuna, and ask them.

This one same answer even the sages gave me, Surely thi,
Varuna is angry with thee.

4 What, Varun-i, hath been my chief transgression, that thou

wouldst slay the fiieud who sings thy praises ?

Tell me, Unconquerable Lord, and quickly sinless will I ap-
proach thee with mine homage.

5 Free us from sins committed by our fathers, from those where-

in we have ourselves offended.

0 King, loose, like a thief who feeds the cattle, as from the
cord a calf, set free Vasishtha.

6 Not our own will betrayed us, but seduction, thoughtlessness,

Varuna ! wine, dice, or anger.

The old is near to lead astray the younger: even sleep removeth
not all evil-doing.

7 Slavelike may I do service to the Bounteous, serve, free from

sin, the God inclined to anger.

This gentle Lord gives wisdom to the simple : the wiser God
leads on the wi>e to riches.

8 0 Lord, 0 Varuna, may this laudation come close to thee and

lie within thy spirit.

May it be well with us in rest and labour. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.


1 The Star • the Sun.

5 Like a thief who feeds the cattle : who has performed penance for his theft,

and, at the completion of the service, offered fodder to the stolen animal : ‘who

has feasted on stolen cattle.’— M, Muller. But see Pischel, Vedische Studien,

I. p. 106.

6 Seduction : or, as Slyana explains, * the settled course of fate.’

The old is near : ‘ The stronger perveits the weaker.’ — Muir. 1 * * * * 6 There w®
senior [God] in the proximity of the junior [man].’— Wilson.



mftf 87.]


THE MOVE DA.


83


HYMN LXXXVII. Varuna.

Varuna cut a pathway out for Surya, and led the watery floods
of rivers onward

The Marcs, as in a race, speed on in order. Ho made great
channels for the days to follow.

2 The wind, thy breath, hath sounded through the region like

a wild beast that seeks his food in pastures.

Within these two, exalted Earth and Heaven, 0 Varuna, are
all the forms thou lovest.

3 Varuna’s spies, sent forth upon their errand, survey the two

world-halves well formed and fashioned.

Wise are they, holy, skilled in sacrifices, the furtherers of the
praise-songs of the prudent.

4 To me who understand hath Varuna spoken, the names borne

by the Cow are three times seven.

The sapient Cod, knowing the place’s secret, shall speak as
’twere to teach the race that cometh.

5 On him three heavens rot and are supported, and the three

earths are there in sixfold order.

The wise King Yanina hath made in heaven that Golden Swing
to cover it with glory.

6 Like Varuna from heaven he sinks in Sindhu, like a white-

shining spark, a strong wild creature.

Killing in depths and meting out the region, great savincr
power hath lie, this world’s Controller. °

1 The Mares: the swift iher.s. The half-line is difficult. ‘ Hasten in g~(to
s h'»rse let lno e rushes to (a Hock of) mares, he divided the great

ght* from the days ’—Wilson. ‘ Like a troop (of horses) let loose, following
1H lie lias made great, channels for the days ’—Muir.

3 lanrna s spies ‘ the other Adityas, or perhaps the Fathers,

4 The Cow: according to Siyana, V,U or Speech in the form of a cow

lV,n K twenty-one metres attached to her breast, throat, and head, or holding

e n imes of twenty-one kinds of sacrifice. Aditi may be intended, or Piisni

ith the thrioe-seven Maruts. ' '

lh, s' t pi at Cod: ‘ The wise god. though he knows them, has not revealed

c mysteries of (her) place, which he desires to grant to a future generation.’

mr. According to Sayan a. nd in this line is not negative.

•» For the three heavens and three em ths sec Vol. J , Index. In sixfo'd order

1 ups inferring to the heavens and earths, or else the three earths arbitrarily
. ' The three earths with their ix seasons ’—Wilson. That Golden

U TI- the Sun.

He: th* Sun. Sindhu: or the sea. Haling in depths: referring to

min, i whose dominion, following the setting sun, reaches to the depths of

v no ” ? nt Hie region : or, who measured out the firmament.

inin 1 * 3 4 * * * * * * * * * * * * * 1 8 ! nter P'' etat i°n °f this stanza is different: ‘(Radiant) as the sun,
a placed the ocean (in its bed), white as a drop (of water), vigorous as

, Wn object of profound praise, distributor of water, the powerful
■porter beyond sin, the ruler of this existing (world).’ — Wiison,



84 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK Vll,

7 Before this Varuna may we be sinless — him who shows mercy
even to the sinnor —

While we are keeping Aditi’s ordinances. Preserve us ever^
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXXVIII, Varuna,

Present to Vanina thine hymn, Vasishtha, bright, most de>
lightful to the Bounteous Giver,

Who bringeth on to us the Bull, the lofty, the Holy, laden
with a thousand treasures.

2 And now, as I am come before his presence, I take the face of

Varuna for Agni’s.

So might he bring — Lord also of the darkness — the light in
heaven that I may see its beauty !

3 When Varuna and I embark together and urge our boat into

the midst of ocean,

We, when we ride o’er ridges of the waters, will swing within
that swing and there be happy.

4 Varuna placed Vasishtha in the vessel, and doftly with his

might made him a Uishi.

When days shone bright the Sage made him a singer, while
the heavens bioadened and the Dawns were lengthened.

5 What hath become of those our ancient friendships, when

without enmity we walked together ?

I, Vanina, thou glorious Lord, have entered thy lofty home,
thine house with thousand portals.

6 If lie. thy true ally, hath sinned against thee, still, Varuna,

he is the Mend thou lovedst.

Let us not, Living One, as sinners, know thee : give shelter,
as a Sage, to him who lauds thee,


7 Aditi's ordinances • according to Suyana, Aditi here means ‘the Mighty/
that is, Varuna.

1 The Bull: the Suu,

2 For AynVs: that is, it appears to mo to be flaming with anger,

3 ‘ The kernel of the hymn lies in verses 3 to 0. The singer believes that
Lt* has been forsaken by his helper Varuna ; with anguish ho romembers hi*
communion with the God in former times. In a vision he sees himself tr-ms-
kited into Varuna’s realm, he goes sailing with the God, is called to be

or holy singer to tho God, and is in his palace with him, Now, Varuna
withdrawn his favour, yet let him have mercy on his singer, and not pun^ 1 2 3
him so grievously for his sin. The hymn perhaps originally closed with verso
6.’ — Prof, von ltoth’s note in the Siebcutiy Lieder , translated by P r °*'
Peteiv-pa. But see Hillebrandt, Varuna und Mitra , pp. 25, 20.



jmW 90.] THJS RIQVEDA. «5

7 While we abide in these fixed habitations, and from the lap of
Aditi win favour ,

May Varuna untie the bond that binds us. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN LXXXlN. Varura.

Let me not yet, King Vanina, enter into the house of clay :
Have meicy, spare me, Mighty Lord.

2 When, Thunderer ! I move along tremulous like a wind-blown

skin

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord*

3 0 Bright and Powerful God, through want of strength I erred

and went astray :

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord.

{ Thirst found thy worshipper though he stood in the midst of
water-floods :

Have mercy, spare me, Mighty Lord*

5 0 Vanina, whatever the offence may he which we as men com-
mit against the heavenly host,

When through our want of thought we violate thy laws,
punish us not, 0 God, for that iniquity.

HYMN XG. V&yu,

To you pure juices, rich in meath, are offered by priests through
longing for the Pair of Heroes.

Drive, Vayu, bring thine harnessed horses hither : drink the
pressed Soma till it make thee joyful.


7 Aditi: here said to mean earth*

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir 0 . S. Text s, V. 67, Prof. M.
biller, Ane. Sand’. Lit., 540, the authors of Sicbenzig Lieder , p. 12, and Prof,
‘eterson, JFymm from the Rigveda , p. 287.

1 The house of clay : the grave. Cf. Atharva-veda, V. 30. 14.

2 Thunderer: adrivah , Carter of the Stone, a common epithet of Indra,
'<ifc not suitable to Varuna. Tremulous: Sfty.uia adds mitycna r, with cold;
n, l Prof. Wilsou observes that ‘the V urima-p<Ha , a kind of dropsy, seems to
)c »eferred to.’ Cf. Atharva-vcda, IV. 16 7.

4 Thirst: avarice. Jn the midst of water foods : when surrounded by
ihimdant wealth. According to the Commentator, the allusion is to Vasish-
iha’s sea- voyage ; or perhaps the perpetual thirst of dropsy may be intended.

The last three stanzas are addressed to Indra and Vftyu as a dual Deity.

2 The Pair of Heroes : Ihdra and \ Avu.



56 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vli

2 Whoso to thee, the Mighty, brings oblation, pure Soma unt(

thee, pure-drinking Vayu,

That man thou makcst famous among mortals : to him strong
sons are born in quick succession.

3 The Clod whom both these worlds brought forth for riches,

whom heavenly Dhishana for our w ealth appointeth,

His team of harnessed horses waits on Vayu, and, foremost, on
the radiant Treasure-bearer.

4 The spotless Dawns with fair bright days have broken ; they

found the spacious light when they were shining.

Eagerly they disclosed the stall of cattle : floods streamed for
them as in the days aforetime.

5 These with their truthful spirit, shining brightly, move on

provided with their natural insight.

Viands attend the car that beareth Heroes, your car, ye Sovran
Pair, India ami Vayu.

C May these who give us heavenly light, these rulers, with gifts
of kine and horses, gold and treasures,

These pimces, through full life, lndra and Vayu! oercome
in battle with their steeds and heroes.

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 lndra- \ ;iyu.
with our fair laudations,

Exerting all our power call you to aid us. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XCI. VAyn.

Were not, in sooth, the Gods aforetime blameless, whose
pleasure was increased by adoration !

Fur Vayu and fur man in bis affliction they caused the Morning
to arise with SQrya.

3 The God : apparently, lndra Dhishand : a Ooddess of prosperity and
gain. The radiant Treasure bearer' : perhaps Sonia.

4 They found: the Angirases. ‘They are not named in the text, but
S&yaiu refers the whole to them ; by their praise of \6yu the dawn bi ohe,
the stolen cattle weie rescued, and the obstructed rain set at liberiy. -
Wilson.

5 These: the institutors of sacrifice.

6 These riders, these princes, are the wealthy nobles who defray the expenses
and reward the priests.

lndra is associated with Vdyu in almost every stanza.

1 For Vdyu: I translate the vdydre of the text, but it is evident
dydve, for Ayu, or the living one, should be read in its stead.



THE RIOVEDA.


87


HYMN 92.3

2 Guardians infallible, eager as envoys, preserve us safe through

many months and autumns.

. Addressed to you, our fair praise, ludra-Vayu, implores your
favour *and renewed well-being.

3 Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he seeketh men with rich

food whose treasures are abundant.

They have arranged them of one mind with Vayu : the men
have wrought all noble operations.

4 So far as native power and strength permit you, so far as men

behold whose eyes have vision,

‘ 0 ye pure-driukers, drink with us pure Soma: sit on this
sacred grass, Indra and Vayu.

5 Driving down teams that bear the lovely Heroes, hitherward,

IndiM-Vayu, come together.

To you this prime of savoury juice is offered : here loose your
horses and be friendly-minded.

C Your hundred and your thousand teams, 0 Indra and Vayu,
all-muniticent, which attend \ou,

With these most gracious-minded come ye hither, and drihk,
0 Heioes, of the meath we offer.

7 Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasishthas, 0 Indra-Vayu*
with our fair laudations,

Exerting all our power, call you to aid us. Preserve us
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XCII. ' vayu.

0 Vayu, drinker of the pure, bo near us : a thousand teams
are thine, All-bounteous Giver.

To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, whose first
draught, God, thou takest as thy portion.

2 Prompt at the holy rites forth came the presser with Soma-

dr.iiiglits for India and for Vavu,

Vlieu minUtemig priests with strong devotion bring to you
Twain the first taste of the Soma.

3 Hie teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers, within his
home, 0 Vayu, to direct him,

1 herewith send wealth to us with full enjoyment, a hero son

a ud gifts of kine and horses.


3 He seekrth: VAyu. The meaning of the stanza is obscure.
5 The Lovely Heroes : Indra and VAyu.

1 Drinker of th * i — a



83 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vtj.

4 Near to the Gods and making Iudra joyful, devout and offer.

ing precious gifts to Vayu,

Allied with princes, smiting down the hostile, may we with
heroes conquer foes in battle.

5 With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to

our sacrifice and solemn worship.

Come, Vayu, make thee glad at this libation. Preserve m
evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN XCIII. India -A**

Slaters of enemies, Indra aud Agni, accept this day our new.
born pure laudation.

Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly
strength to him who craves it.

2 For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, growing toge-

ther, waxing in your vigour.

Lords of the pasture filled with ample riches, bestow upon u,
strength both fresh and lasting.

*3 Yea when the strong have entered our assembly, and singer,
seeking with their hymns your favour,

They are like steeds who come into the race-course, thw
men who call aloud oil Indra-Agui.

4 The singer, seeking with his hymns your favour, bogs splen-

did riches of their first possessor.

Further us with new bounties, Indra-Agni, armed with strong
thunder, slayers of the foeman.

5 When two gieat hosts, arrayed against each other, meet

clothed with brightness, in the fierce encounter
Stand ye beside the godly, smite the godless; and still assist
the men who press the Soma.

G To this our Soma-pressing, Indra-Agni, come ye prepared to
show your loving-kindness,

For not at any time have ye despised us. So may I draff
you with all strengthenings hither.

7 So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou Mitra,
Varuna, and Indra. __

4 Allied: the priests are the allies and moral supporters of the prince
in war.

5 In hundreds and in thousands : cf. I. 135. 3.

3 The strong : the nobles who institute sacrifices.

4 Their first possessor : each God who is invoked.

5 Great hosts: 'hosts’ must be supplied. The feminine dual adjective
have no substantive in the text.



THE RIOVEDA.


89


{YEN 94 .)


Forgive whatever sin we have committed : may Aryaman and
Aditi remove it*


8 While we accelerate these our sacrifices, may we win strength
from both of you, 0 Agni :

fle’er may the Maruts, India, Vishnu slight us. Preserve ns
evermore, ye Gods, with blesssngs.

HYMN XCIV. Indra-Agni.

As rain from out the cloud, for you, Iudra and Agni, from
my soul " °

This noblest praise hath been produced.

2 Do ye, 0 Indra-Agni, hear the singer’s call.' accept his songs.
Ye llulers, grant his heart’s desire.

3 Give us not up to poverty, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni, nor
To slander and reproach of men.

4 To Indra and to Agni we bring reverence, high and holy hymn,
And, craving help, soft words with prayer.

5 For all these holy singers here implore these Twain to succour

them,

And priests that they may win them strength.

G Eager to laud you, we with songs invoke you, bearingsacred food*
Fain for success in sacrifice.

7 Indra and Agni, com^ to us with favour, ye who conquer men :
Let not the wicked master us*


8 At no time let the injurious blow of hostile mortal fall on us :
0 Indra-Agni, shelter us.

9 Whatever wealth we crave of you, in gold, in cattle, or in

steeds,

That, Indra-Agni, let us gain ;

0 When heroes prompt in worship call Iudra and Agni, Lords

of steeds,

Beside the Soma juico effused.

1 Call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the

mermen, those

Whotako delight in hymns of praise,
lural ryamaa aml Aditi : Mitra and others being understood, as the verb is
8 0 Agni : that is, Indra and Agni.

° f \ 8 co P ioU3 ‘ m flow, and Is doubly bene*

Ul: uuitimnnnh . 0 ? "“‘I brill S m £ blessings to the worshipper. From i ny

ig pas,s,n, 0 of * ®*P lftlne( I hy the Commentator here and in the correspond-
11 c u n } -A t e SAmaveda by stotuh, praiser or worshipper.

Mdsatah A'_? f h_ Lu , dwif; , in r ? aaiu S aviv&tato, instead of



90 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V/}

12 Slay ye the wicked man whose thought is evil, of the demon
kind.

Slay him who stays the waters, slay the Serpent with yo^
deadly dart.

HYMN XCY. Sarasvati,

This stream Sarnsvati with fostering current comes forth, our
sure defence, our fort of iron.

As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty anj
might all other waters.

2 Pure in her course from mountains to the ocean, alone of

streams Sarasvati hath listened.

Thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures, she
poured for Nahusha her milk and fatness.

3 Friendly to man he grew among the women, a strong young

Steer amid the Holy Ladies.

He gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and decks
their bodies for success in battle.

4 May this Sarasvati be pleased and listen at this our sacrifice,

auspicious Lady,

When we with reverence, on our knees, implore her close knit
* to wealth, most kind to those she loveth.

5 These offerings have ye made with adoration : say this, Saras-

vati. and accept our praises;

And, placing us under thy dear protection, may wo approach
thee, as a tree, for shelter.

6 For thee, 0 Blest Sarasvati, Vasishtha hath here unbarred the

doors of sacied Order.

Wax, Bright One, and give strength to him who lauds thee.
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

12 Him who stays the waters: udmlhim : according to SAyana, like aa
udmlhih. water-holder or pitcher. The Serpent : A bhoydm, ‘ the coder,’ explained
differently by SAyana, as ‘one who enjoys good things taken fiom tin
worshippers.’

1 Sarasvati : Sindhu or Indus appears to be intended under this nun*
See VI. 61. 2, and Vulic Hymns, I. p. 60.

2 Ndhusha : according to the legend, a King who prayed to Sarasvati * j
gave him butter and milk sufficient for the thousand-year sacrifice vv ia'
was about to perform. The Nahushas, the people living on the banks o
river, are probably intended.

3 He grew: Saras vAn, the consort of Sarasvati.

5 These offerings : this half-line is very obscure. Prof. Ludwig think® ^
these words may be supposed to be spoken by Sarasvati to her worslnj’PL
but he is not satisfied of the correctness of his conjecture. 1 2 3 Presen ns
thee S , these oblations with reverence (nmy we receive from thee ftfnue
' — Wils-m.



YMN 97.]


THE RIG VEDA.


91


HYMN XCVI. SauBTHtl.

I sing a lofty song, for she is mightiest, most divine of Streams.
Saras vati will J exalt with hymns and lauds, and, 0 Vasishtha,
Heaven and Earth.

2 When in the fulness of their strength the Purus dwell, Beau-
teous One, on thy two grassv banks,

Favour us thou who hast the Maruts for thy friends •: stir up
the bounty of our chiefs.

^ So may Sarasvati auspicious send good luck; she, rich in spoil,
i is never niggardly in thought,

When praised in Jainadagni's way and lauded as Vasishtha
lauds.

i We call upon Saras van, as unmarried men who long for wives,
As liberal men who yearn for sons.

5 Be thou our kind protector, 0 Sarasvati, with those waves of
thine

Laden with sweets and dropping oil.

5 May we enjoy Sarasvan’s breast, all-beautiful, that swells with
streams,

May we gam food and progeny.

HYMN XCVII. Brihaspati.

Where Heaven and Earth combine in men’s assembly, and

1 those who love the Gods delight in worship,

Where the libations are effused for Indi a, may he come first
to drink and make him stronger.

2 We crave the heavenly grace of Gods to guard us — so may

Brihaspati, 0 friends, exalt us —

That he, the Bounteous God, may find us sinless, who giveth
from a distance like a father.

1 Heaven and Earth : heaven as the home of the Goddess, and earth where
e nows as a river.

’."V "" Aryan tiibe settled on both banks of the Sarasvati or
i i l ” Index ' Gra ™U banks : this, as von Roth has .suggested,

° n of '^nihasl but the expression is difficult. See

1 ebrandt, Vcdische Mythologie , p 254.

■ Jui)ut <-l«yni : u celebrated ancient liishi.


Ji * , t >e tle , lfc y ?, f stanza 3 > Illdia and Brnhmanaspati are the deities of
ilmnuk H uT B P has P atl of ]0 » ft “<l die lest of the hymn is addressed to
id 0 f p' B r lh{ wpati and Brahmanaspati are one and the same God, the
1 irk L 14. 3.

sacvZ Uwve * an < i f '“»•<* combine : where Gods and men meet at the piaoe
(lay hwV.«.!»?' u 6 hlm 3t " JI “J er Sft.'ana explains niyafcka differently :
? Like r (hor8ei> approach).’— Wilson 1

ilier wliu 10 t n >er ’ ^bough f«r aw»y he gives us what we ask like a
« near at nantl — T.nriuri»



92 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vi

3 That Brahmanaspati, most High and Gracious, I glorify wj t

offerings and with homage.

May the great song of praise, divine, reach Indra who its tj
King of prayer the Gods’ creation.

4 May that Brihaspati who brings all blessings, most dear]

loved, be seated by our altar.

Heroes and wealth we crave ; may he bestow them, and
us safe beyond the men who vex us.

5 To us these Deathless Ones, erst born, have granted this lan

of ours which gives the Immortal pleasure.

Let us invoke Brihaspati, the foeless, the clear-voiced God, tli
Holy One of households.

6 Him, this Brihaspati, his red-hued horses, drawing togothe

full of strength, bring hither.

Rohed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the Lord i
Might whose friendship gives a dwelling.

7 For he is pure, with hundred wings, refulgent, with sword <

gold, impetuous, winning sunlight.

Sublime Brdiaspati, easy of access, grantefch his friends ino
bountiful refreshment.

8 Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the Deity’s Parents, hat

made Brihaspati increase in grandeur.

Glorify him, 0 friends, who merits glory : may ho give pray
fair way and easy passage.

0 This, Brahmannspati, is your laudation : prayer hath bei
made to thunder-wielding India.

Favour our songs, wake up our thought and spirit ; destri
the godless and our foemen’s malice.

10 Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou,
Brihaspati, and thoit, 0 Indra.

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds }" :
Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings*


3 The God*' creation : devakfdasya i inspired, or, literally, made, b} T *

5 Our hymns of praise which arc acceptable to the immortal
been given to us by the everlasting deities themselves. SAyana s c.\p
is different : ‘ may the first-born immortals (by liis command) bestow }
the food that is necessary for existence.’— Wilson.

6 Whole friendship gives a dwelling : I adopt the interpretation g ;v
Professor Cowell in his note on the passage in Wilson’s translation.

7 With hundred wings : ‘ borne by numerous con veyanoes.*— Wils^ 11 '

8 In grandeur t or, by their might.

1 n Mean • nr. nmr.



*MN 99,] THE RIQVEDA , 93

HYMN XCVIII, indra.

Priests, offer to the Lord of all the people the milked-out
stalk of iSoraa, radiant-coloured.

No wild-bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who ever
seeks him who hath pressed tlie Soma.

Thou dost desifo to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant
food which thou hast had aforetime,

0 Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma
set before thee.


Tli on, newiy-born, for strength didst drink the Soma ; the
Mother told thee of thy future greatness.

0 Indra, thou hast filled mid-air’s wide region, and ° r iven the

Gods by battle room and freedom, ° ' 0

When thou hast urged the arrogant to combat, proud in their
strength of arm, we will subdue them.

Or, Indra, when thou tightest girt by heroes, we in the glori-
ous fray with thoe will conquer.

1 will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent aots
which Maghavan hath accomplished.

When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma be-
came his own entire possession.

Tlmie is this world of flocks and herds around thee, which

^ with the eye of Surya thou beholdest.

Thou, Indra, art alone the Lord of cattlo : may we enjoy the
treasure which thou givest,

Ye Twain are Lords of wealth iu earth and heaven, thou, O
bnhnspati, and thou, 0 India.

Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you.
1 reserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.


1 . , HYMN XOIX. VLhnu.

-li.N come not nigh thy majesty who groweat beyond all bound
and measure with thy body.

! h f two re « iolls ot ' Hie earth, 0 Vishim, we know ; thou,
God, knowest the highest also. ’


ruddy, here explained by the Com-


tiidmnt-colourcd : arumm , iod,

' 0,1 dr»c/iuntdnam, shining.

4/t::CuT ; r IV * l8 ' Am «*» *** ***

u already, nor among those who shall be born hereafter.

kvvor Siure ^J 10 oarth aud the firmament. ‘The
’>». whiter be 1 U -It ° f J our P^^eptiou ; the thiid belongs to
lolo, Ji/ Of the 'Vln the fc k' rd " f hia amending strides.’ -Wallis,



U THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vjj

2 None who is born or being born, God Vishnu, hath reached

the utmost limit of thy grandeur.

The vast high vault of heaven hast thou supported, aud fixed
earth’s eastern pinnacle securely.

3 Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kine, with fertile

pastures, fain to do men service.

Both these worlds, Vishnu, hast thou stayed asunder, ^
firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it. j

4 Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating

Sftrya, Dawn, and Agni.

0 Heroes, ye have conquered in your battles even the, bull,
jawed Dasa’s wiles and magic.

5 Ye have destroyed, thou, Indra, and thou, Vishnu, SambarA

nme-and ninety fenced castles.

Ye Twain smote down a hundred times a thousand resistless
heroes of the royal Varchin.

G This is the lofty hvmn of praise, exalting the Lords of Mighty
Stride, the strong and lofty.

1 laud you in the solemn synods, Vishnu : pour ye food on us
in our camps, 0 Indra.

7 0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vaslut ! Let this mine offer
ing, Sipivislita, please thee.

May these my .songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us ever-
more, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN C. VMinii.

Ne’er doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, bringeth im,
gift to the far-striding Vishnu.

He who adoreth him^vith all his spirit winneth himself so
great a benefactor.

2 Thou, Vishnu, con>tnnt in thy courses, gavest good-will to all
men, and a hymn that lasteth,

That thou nvghtst move us to abundant comfort of very
splendid wealth with store of horses.


3 The first line appears to be Vishpu’s blessing on heaven aud earth
be parted and supported them,

4 Bull-jawed : or Vriuhnsipra may be the name of the DfUa.

. r > Royal Varchin ■ see II. 14. 6. . I

7 Vafthal : the exclamation used on making an oblation. Sipivishta ■ a n *
of Vnhnu of uncertain etymology and meaning ‘ Invested with rays ot Jig >i
according to S&yana. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. 87, 88, note.

2 A hymn that lasteth : continually recurriug occasion to praise thee.



THE MOVED A.


95


n(N 101 .]

Three times strode forth this God in all his grandeur over this
earth bright with a hundred splendours.

Foremost be Vishnu, stronger than the strongest : for glorious
is his mime who lives for ever.

Over this earth with mighty step strode Vishnu, ready to
<rj \ e it for a home to Mann.

In him the humble people trust for safety .* he, nobly born,
hath made them spacious dwellings.

Today I laud this name, 0 Sipivishta, I, skilled in rules, the
name of thee the Noble.

Yea, I the poor and weak praise thee the Mighty who dwellest
in the realm beyond this region.

What was there to be blamed in thee, 0 Vishnu, when thou
deelaredst, I am Sipivishta!

Hide not this form from us, nor keep it secret, since thou didst
vear ayother shape in battle.

0 Vishnu, unto thee my lips cry Vushat ! Let this mine offer-
ing, Sipivishta, please thee.

j May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us
I evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYV1N CL Parjanya.

Srrc\k' forth three words, the words which light precedeth,
winch milk this udder that produceth nectar.

Quickly made manifest, the Bull hath bellowed, engendering
the germ of plants, the Infant.

Giver of growth to piant.s, the God who ruleth over the waters
and all moving creatures,

Vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge, and threefold light
to succour and befriend us.

^~T!us earth: meaning, says the Commentator, earth, firmament, and heaven.
'This stanza is unintelligible The Commentator on the corresponding
|f ige of the Samaveda says: ‘Vishnu formerly abandoning hB own form,
assuming another artificial shape, succoured Vasislitha in battle, ltecog-
ng the god, the Hishi addresses him with the verse ’ Sipivishta is said to
t word of equivocal meaning, ‘ebthed with rays of light,’ and ‘denuded.’
'h'lns note, and 0 S. Texts , IV. S' 7 88, vote The passage looks like
of the later incarnations of the Cod which occur in the Srtapatha -
»» ( <na and the Purdnas.

'Ihiec beards : or texts of the three Vedas. Which Vujht precedeth : int-ro-
* j y , , K , cred syllable Om. More probably Parjanya is addressed, the
woids being his voice, the thunder (V. 63. 6), heard in heaven, air, an<l
hWw ple i e( v led . b > T the , lightning-flash. See Beigaigne, Qnaravte IJymves
V*'. udder: drawdown the sweet rain from the cloud.

Parjanya. The Infant: Agni in the form of lightning.

to et 'fold ll fjht with TP fQi’flnno +1.^. . 1 . -



96 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK p//

3 Now he is sterile, now begetteth offspring, even as he willetli

doth he change his figure.

The Father’s genial flow bedews the Mother; therewith the
Sire, therewith the son is nourished.

4 In him all living creatures have their being, and the three

heavens with triply flowing waters.

Three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed thei
sweet streams around him with a murmur.

5 May this my song to Sovran Lord Parjauya come near unt

his heart and give him pleasure.

May we obtain the showers that bring enjoyment, and God
protected plants with goodly fruitage.

G Ho is the Bull of all, and their impregner ; he holds the lif
of nil things fixed and moving.

May this rite save me till my hundredth autumn. Preseni
us evermoie, ye Gods, with blessings.

HYMN Cl I. Parjanvi

Sing forth and laud Parjauya, Son of Heaven, who sends tin
gift of rain :

May he provide our pasturage.

2 Parjauya is the God who forms in feme, in mares, in plants

of earth,

And womankind, the germ of life.

3 Offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice.
May he for ever give us food.

HYMN Cl II. Fro,

They who lay quiet for a year, the Brahmans who fulfil their vows,
The Frogs lm\e lifted up their voice, the voice Parjauya luth
inspired.

3 He is sterile : sends no rain, like a barren cow that gives no milk

The Fathers genial jl<nn : ‘The father is the sky, earth the mother, uhore
ceives the rain fiom the foimei, which, piotlueing the means of offering lib*
tions and oblations, returns again to the parent heaven, as well as sup>poits lia
otb>p»iug— all living creatutes.’ — Wilson.

4 Three reservoirs: according to bay ana, clouds in the east, west, and north

6 The Bull of all : the plants, understood.

3 Into his mouth : that is, Agni, who is the mouth by which the other Godi
consume the otfeiings that are made to them.

The hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0. S Texts , V. 436, and by ^
fessor F. Max Muller in his Ancient Sanskrit Literature , pp. 494f, ^
remarks: ‘The hymn... .which is called a panegyiic of the frogs, is
a satire on the priests ; and it is curious to observe that the same
Bhould have been ohosen by the Vedic satirist to represent the priests, wOT
by the earliest satirist of Greece, was selected as the representative of fj
Homeric heroes.’ But see Oldenberg, Die Religion des Veda , p. 70. 7®
hymn evidently belongs to a late period of Yedic poetry,



THE RIOVEDA .


|rjfy 103.]


97


i What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the pool's bed
the floods of heaven descended, *

The music of the Frogs comes forth in concert like the cows'
lowing with their calves beside them.


When at the coming of the Rains the water has poured upon
them as they yearned and thirsted, e

One seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of
pleasure as a son his father.

Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while they are
revelling in the flow of waters,

When the Frog moistened bv the rain springs forward, and
Green and Spotty both combine their voices.


When one of these repeats the other's language, as he who
learns the lesson of the teacher,

Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse
with eloquence on the waters.


Due is Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat the other, one Frog is Green
and one of them is Spotty. °

They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, talking,
modulate the voice diversely. ‘

Ls Brahmans, sitting round the brimful vessel, talk at the
Soma-rite of Atiratra,

Jo, Frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all
the year, the first of Rain-time.

ihese Brahmans with the Soma juice, performing their year-
long rite, have lifted up their voices;

And these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, come forth
and show themselves, aud none are hidden.

They keep the twelvemonth’s God-appointed order, and never
do the men neglect the season.


oHkhaUi ^ ea8ure 4 ukhkhalikritya, : uttering the involve exclama*
You) every limb : this abrupt change of person is -*ot unfrequent in the


Atir&tra : a cerfemony accompanied by tlire- nocturnal recitations.

ntC * ‘ SA W a makes it ref- f ^ Oavdm ayanam, a sacrificial

,]]’ . lc jjc°ramences and ends with atirdtra , and lasts a whole year.’

ble oi f k 8011 ’ 8 Translation, sweating with their kettles : ‘ There is a
ite Jr 6 W ,° rd yharminah. having or bearing the vessel, or performiu
m . j med ; or » sufficing from gharma, lieat, or the hot season
b fort Km mne are Ki(i * n : Titkyd nd H chit : some take nd here as‘ like
’ M ]VT a i erS ° US * Wh ° hftVG been hiddea ' , ~ Muir - ‘ Bop out like her-

hi? ”!l n \ t,ie priestlike frogs. These who were heated kettles: the frogs



Soon as the Rain- time in the year returneth, these who were
heated kettles gain their freedom.

10 Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat have granted riches, and Green and
Spotty have vouchsafed us treasure.

The Frogs who give ns cows in hundreds lengtheu our lives
iu this most fertilizing season.

HYMN CIV. Indra-Son

Indra and Some, burn, destroy the demon foe, send downwar
0 ye Bulls, those who add gloom to gloom.

Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up : chase the
away from us, pierce the voracious ones.

2 Indra and Soma, let sin round tho wicked boil like as a caldrt

set amid the flames of fire.

Against the foe of prayer, devourer of raw flesh, the vile fiei
fierce of eye, keep ye perpetual hate.

3 Indra and Soma, plunge tho wicked iu the depth, yea, cn

them into darkness that hath no support,

So that not one of them may ever thence return : so raayyo
wrathful might prevail and conquer them.

4 Iudra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on t

wicked fiend from heaven and from the earth.

Yea, forge out of the mountains your celestial dart wlierowi
ye bum to death the waxiug demon lace.


10 Have granted riches : as the earliest proclaimed of the advent of I
ltaina which revive and fertilize the earth.

‘ It is possibly an echo of this production that we find in a description
autumn in the Harivamsa, V 8803, where the poet compares tho noise m.
by a frog, after his rest of sixteen half months, along with his wives, to
recitation of the Rig-veda by a Brfihm.m surrounded by his pupils . ,
this verse Un* late M. Langlois somewhat, naively remarks as follows : Di
nos mueurs r^n n ’ og.ilerait 1’ impel Imence d’ uue cmnparaison dans la<jut
uno grenouille so^t assimilde a un respectable eccldsiastique. Les Indie
a ce qu il parait., in voyaient dans telle espcce de rappiochement huci
teinte d’ impiete.’— Mw r , U. 6’. Texts, V. 433. But see Bergaigne, La Rdi<j
Vedique , I. 202.

The hymn consists chiefly of n»orecat-ions directed ngainst demons i
evil spirits, R&kahasas and Yafcudhdna^ The deities are various.

1 The demon foe . rdkshuh ■ the fiends, demons, goblins, S 11

about at night, disturbing sacrifices and <u V out men, ensnaring amU
devouring human beings, and geneially hostde u the human race.

2 The vile Jicnd : kimldme: explained by tho Commentator as one'
goes about saying, Kvnidintm or What now ? A quidnunc, a vile
treacherous spy and informer. The word is used as the name of
evil spirits.



r ' ‘

f) Indra and Soma, cast ye downward out of Leaven your deadly
darts cf stone burning with fiery flame,

Eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones within the
depth, and let them sink without a sound.

6 Iudra aud Soma, let this hymn control you both, even as the

girth encompasses two vigorous steeds —

The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you : do ye, as
Lords of men, animate these my prayers.

7 In your impetuous manner think ye both thereon : destroy

these evil beings, slay the treacherous fiends.

Indra and Soma, lot the wicked have no bliss who evermore
assails us with malignity.

8 Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when I pursue my

way with guileless spirit,

May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra, like water which
tho hollowed hand compresses.

9 Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, and with their

evil natures harm the righteous,

May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the lap of
Nirriti consign them.

0 The fiend, 0 Agni, who designs to injure the essence of our

food, kiue, steeds, or bodies,

May he, the adversary, thief, and robber, sink to destruction,
both himself and offspring

1 May he be swept away, himself and children : may all the

three earths press him down beneath them.

May his fair glory, 0 \ e Gods, be blighted, who in the day or
night would fain destroy us.

2 The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and false :

their words oppose each other.

Of these two that which is the true and honest, Soma protects,
and brings the false to nothing.

3 Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who fairly

claims the Warrior’s title.

He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly : both lie en-
tangled in the noose of Indra.

5 Without a sound: so suddenly that they have ®ot time to cry out.

9 To the serpent: or to death by serpents’ bites. Nirriti : Death and
estruction.

J3 Tkc W um’or’s title: the rank of a ivsAatriya or prince of the military

‘der.

Tlie first eleven stanzas ‘are considered to be a malediction upon the
wthasuS' by the Rishi. To account for the change of tone [in 12 — 16],
yana gives an unusual version of the legend told in the Mahabhdrata of



100 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK v n

14 As if I worshipped deities ot falsehood, or thought vain

thoughts about the Gods, 0 Agni.

Why art thou angry with us, Jatavedas i Destruction fall on
those who lie against thee !

15 So may 1 die this day if I have harassed any man’s life or if

I be a demon.

Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together who with fal 8 e
tongue hath called me Yatudhana.

16 May Indra slay him with a mighty weapon, and let the vilest

of all creatures perish,

The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me a demon
though devoid of demon nature.

17 She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her

body in her guile and malice,

May she fall downward into endless caverns. May press-stones
with loud ring destroy the demons.

18 Spread out, ye Maruts, search among the people : seize ye and

grind the Rakshasas to pieces,

Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, or sully
and pollute our holy worship.

19 Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, 0 Indra : sharpen

it, Maghavan, made keen by Soma.

Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite down the
demons with thy rocky weapon.

20 They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would

they harm indomitable Indra.

Sakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked : now ht him
cast his bolt at fiendish wizards.

21 Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil oblations

of the Gods’ invokeis :

Yea, Sakra, like an axe that splits the timber, attacks and
smashes them like earthen vessels.

king Kalmcuthapada being transformed to a Rdkshata, and devouring the 100
eons of Vaaishtha : here it is said that a Jtakshasa , having > devoured tue

FUhi't sons, assumed his shape, and said to him, “ I am Vasishtha, t mu &
the Ruleshasa ; ' to which Vasishtha replied by repeating this verse
12], declaratory discriminating between truth and falsehood. Wi^

‘ The verses may, as Professor Max Muller supposes, have arisen outo
Vasishtha’s contest with Tigv&mitra [see III. 53. 21, note], and it may a
been the latter peieonage wh* brought those charges of heresy, and of nj' u ‘
ous and demoniacal character agdnst his rival ’—Muir, 0. S, Text*, I. ’
15 Ydtudhdna : explained by Styana as =» Rftkshasa. The YAfcudhnuap
bably was rather the goblin or sorcer%r while the KAkshasa was the vio
and voracious ogre. , inlI

17 Here the malediction on evil spirits in general is resumed ana cou
ed to the end of the hymn. She too : the M Jcshast, or she fiend.



THE RIG VEDA.


101


l\ r MN 104.]

9 Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, destroy him in
the form of dog or cuckoo.

Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture : as with a stone,
0 Indra, crush the demon.

3 Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us: may Dawn

drive off the couples of Kimidins.

Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble : from grief
that comes from heaven mid-air preserve us.

4 Slay the male demon, Indra ! slay the female, joying and

triumphing in arts of magic.

Let the fools’ gods with bent necks fall and perish, and see no
more the Sun when he arises.

5 Look each one hither, look around : Indra and Soma, watch

ye well.

Cast forth your weapon at the fiends; against the sorcerers
hurl your bolt.


23 Kimidins: or vile spirits. See note on stanza 2.

24 Fools' gods : mftradevdh : explained by S&yana f\H~mdranah'tddh t 1 those
pho make killing their sport.’ According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon,
wmda'&h-miUadcvdh, a species of demons or goblins.


BOOK THE EIGHTH.


HYMN I. Indra.

Glorify naught besides, 0 friends; so shall no sorrow trouble
yon.

Praise only mighty Indra when the juice is shed, and say your
lauds repeatedly :

l Even him, eternal, like a bull who rushes down, men's Con-
queror, bounteous like a cow ;

Him who is cause of both, of enmity and peace, to both sides
most munificent.

) Although these men in sundry ways invoke thee to obtain
thine aid,

Be this our prayer, addressed, O ^ndra, unto thee, thine exal-
tation every day.

I Those skilled in so>'6> 0 Mnghavan, among these men o’er-
como with -05"* tllc focman’s songs.

Conm knng us strength in many a varied form most

near that it may succour us.

i 0 Caster of the Stone, I would not sell thee for a mighty price,

Not for a thousand, Thunderer! nor ten thousand, nor a
hundred, Lord of countless wealth !

1 0 Indra, thou art more to me than sire or niggard brother is.

Thou and my mother, 0 Good Lord, appear alike, to give me

wealth abundantly.

Where art thou ? Whither art thou gone ? For many a
place attracts thy mind.

Haste, Warrior, Fort-destroyer, Lord of battle’s din, haste,
holy songs have sounded forth.

Sing out the psalm to him who breaks down castles for his
faithful friend,

Verses to bring the Thunderer to destroy the forts and sit oil
K-inva’s sacred grass.

2 Bounteous like a cow : the adjeet ; 'c is not in the text, but must be sup-
p'd order to make the comparison intelligible. See Vcdische Btudien, I.
3. To both sides: to the singers and the iustitutors of sacrifice.

*> A hundred: meaning ‘infinite,’ according to the Commentator.

8 For hi* faithful friend : Ludwig takes V&v&tar to be the name of a king
io has been deserted by Indra and consequently defeated in battle. Kdnvu't
wd ijrass : trimmed and prepared by Medh&tithi and Medbyfttithi, each of
^om ia a son of Kanva.



104 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F///

9 The Horses wliich are thine in tens, in hundreds, yea, i Q
thousands thine,

Even those vigorous Steeds, fleet-footed in the course,
those come quickly near to us.

10 This day I call Sabardugh& who animates the holy song,
Indra the richly-yielding Milch-cow who provides unfailin®

food in ample stream.

11 When Sura wounded Etasa, with Vata's rolling wingM car
Indra bore Kutsa Arjuneya off, and mocked Gandharva t’

unconquered One.

12 He without ligature, before making incision in the neck,
Closed up the wouud ngain, most wealthy Maghavan, wl

maketh whole the injured part.

13 May we ho never cast aside, and strangers, as it were, to the
We, Thunder-wit>vjj n <r f n dra, count ourselves as trees reject

and unfit to burn.

14 0 Vritra-slayer, we were though 8 i 0w an a unready for the fra
Yet once in thy great bounty may have delight, 0 Her

after praising thee.

15 If he will listen to my laud, then may our Somud,. 0 p 8 ^

flow

Rapidly through the strainer gladden Indra, drops due to tl
Tugryas’ Strengthener.

16 Come now unto the common laud of thee and of thy faithft

friend.

So may our wealthy nobles' praise give joy to thee. Fai
would I sing thine eulogy.

17 Press out the Soma withjthe stones, and in the waters wash

clean.


10 Sabardughd ; the general name of cows which supply the milk require
for sacrificial purposes. See VI. 48. 11, note. Here Indra himself is intends
as is shown in the following line.

11 Sdra: Surya, the Sun-God. Wounded: ‘harassed.’* -Wilson. Etasv
protige of Indra. See Vol. I , Index. VdU t: the Wind-God. Kutsa : see Vol.I
Index. Gandharva : the Sun. The meaning of the stanza is Bomewhat obscuu

12 Closed up the wound again : healed Etasa who had been wounded bj
Surya.

13 Count ourselves as trees : or, 'count us not as trees,’ the meaning of m
'not ’ and * like ’ being ambiguous.

15 Due to the Tugryas ’ Strengthener : that belong to Indra the protector ol
the chiefs of the race of Tugra, who appear to have been the patrons of tw
Rishis of Kanva’s family.

10 Faithful friend : see stanza 8.



THE Rl 0 VEDA.


105


IYMN 1.]

The men investing it with raiment made of milk shall milk it
forth from out the stems.

8 Whether thou come from earth or from the lustre of the lofty

heaven,

Wax stronger in thy body through my song of praise : fill full
all creatures, 0 Most Wise.

9 For Indra press the Soma out, most gladdening and most

excellent.

May Sakra make it swell sent forth with every prayer and ask-
ingj as it were, for strength.

[) Let me not, still beseeching thee with earnest song at Soma
rites,

Anger thee like some wild beast. Who would not beseech
him who hath power to grant his prayer 1

1 The draught made swift with rapturous joy, effectual with its
mighty strength,

All-conquering, distilling transport, let him drink : for he in
ectstasy gives us gifts.

\ Where bliss is not, may he, All-praised, God whom the pious
glorify,

Bestow great wealth upon tho mortal worshipper who sheds
the juice and praises him.

3 Come, India, and rejoice thyself, 0 God, in manifold affluence.

Thou fillest like a lake thy vast capacious bulk with Soma
and with draughts besides.

1 A thousand and a hundred Steeds are harnessed to thy golden
car.

So may the long-maned Bays, yoked by devotion, bring Indra
to drink the Soma juice.

0 \okcd to thy chariot wrought of gold, may thy two Bays
with peacock tails,

Convey theo hither, Steeds with their white backs, to quaff
sweet juice that makes us eloquent.


17 From out the sterna : see VedUehe Sttudien, I. 133, 178. Slyana explains
V! n , \ n .° differently : « (for by so doim*) the leaders (of the rain, the

w m sky with c,ou<,8) “ wit, ‘ a vesture of the hide of tho

w, milk forth (the water) for the rivers.’-Wilson.

tlis^text*™ pibatu, : supplied by the Scholiast ; there being no verb

ivlre e ^ *** ** no f ! * n defeat and trouble. But the meaning of

* ,, lt ' e * rUlU ' ‘ A tthe sacrifice,’ is SAyana’s explanation. Von Roth sug.
23 , tr " aS,,Te chaQlber .’ I «dopt Ludwig’s interpretation.

’ ,th dra ' l 9>M besides : with tby fellow-topers (the Maruts).’— Wilson.



THE HYMNS OF


106


[BOOK Vli


26 So drink, thou Lover of the Song, as the first drinker, of thj,

juice.

This the outpouring of the savoury sap prepared is good and
meet to gladden thee.

27 He who alone by wondrous deed is Mighty, Strong by hoh

works,

May lie come, fair of cheek ; may he not stay afar, but cook
and turn not from our call.

28 Sushna's quick moving castle thou hast crushed to pieces wit!

thy bolts.

Thou, Indra, from of old, hast followed after light, since ws
have had thee to invoke. *

20 My praises when the Sun hath risen, my praises at the time
of noon,

My praises at the coming of the gloom of night, 0 Vasu, have
gone forth to thee.

30 Prahe, yea, praise him. Of princes these are the most liberal

of their gifts,

These, Paiamajya, Ninditasva, Prapathi, most bounteous, 0
Medliy.itithi.

31 When to the car, by faph, I yoked the horses longing for the

way —

For skilled is Yadu’s sou in dealing precious wealth, he who
is rich m herds of kinc.

32 May he who gave me two brown steeds together with their

cloths of gold,

May he, A^anga’s son Svanadratha, obtaiu all joy and high
felicities

26 As the first d> in far : ‘ According to the .^clioliast, purvapdh me'ins
who, having armed first in the race, drank the Soma before the other
The allusion is to the principal yraha libation, called A indrardyara, "'ucii
Indra and 1 'ayu share together.’ - WiUoti

28 Castle: of el >ud. Followed after li/ht : to find and bung it brick.

30 Praise him : India Paiamajyd, Nindit&sva, and Pmpatld appear to
the names of tbe chiefs who at e praised for their liberality. Sayana im’®*
As.mga the speaker : ‘ Praise me, for we are the most liberal giveM : (p wls
me .is one) who bears the best aim a ( paramajyd), follows the right pat n{p
pathl), and oiitstiips a hois* in speed ( ninditdsra ).’

31 The horses : presented by the prince. The sentence is incomplete, i
Scholiast supplies at the end of the line taddnha evummim atuhi, then P _
me thus Yadu’i non : Asanga, descendant of the ancient epoiiymoin
Yadu. See Vol. I , Index. Rich in herds of l ine : pasuh which

in apportion with yldrah, is hardly intelligible here. Siyana exp
pawned a, having blasts or cattle, or as a derivative of pa j, to M, ’ e ’ e3e e j.
ing one who sees what is subtile, sdkshmatya drashtd. Neither o ^
plantations has anything but Sayana’s name to recommend it, but lap
former as a makeshift.



TIIE EIO VEDA.


W -


MN 2 ]

playoga's son Asanga, by ten thousand, 0 Agni, hath surpass-
ed the rest in giving.

For me ten bright-hued oxen have come forward like lotus-
stalks from out a lake upstanding.

What timo her husband’s perfect restoration to his lost
strength and manhood was apparent,

His consort Sasvati with joy addressed him, Now art thou
well, my lord, and shalt be happy.

HYMN II. Indra -

IIeue is the Soma juice expressed; 0 Vasu, drink till thou art
full :

Undaunted God, we give it thee.

Washed by the men, pressed out with stones, strained through
the filter made of wool,

’Tis like a courser bathed in streams.

This juice have wo made sweet for thee like barley, blending
it with milk.

Indra, I call thee to our feast.

Beloved of all, Indra alone drinks up the flowing Soma juice
Among the Gods and mortal men.

The Friend, whom not the brilliant-hued, the badly-mixt or
bitter draught

Repels, the far extending God;

While other men than we with milk chase him as hunters
chase a deer,

And with their kine inveigle him.

3 Ten bright hiv'd o ten : miming ten thousand, according to S-tyatu-
14 Asmga. the King who->e liberality, with that of his sou (32), and perhaps
igi.iii'lvms (30), has been eulogized in the four preceding stanzas, ^had, the
bid says, been changed to a worn m by the imprecation of the Gods and
pwaids restored to his manhood in consequence of his repentance and the
'cession of Medhfitithi and Medhy&tithi whom he richly rewarded. In this
7 . i S iRvati congratulates him on his restoration. Professors Ludwig and
vsmaun have translated the stanza more literally.

0 .* or, Good Lord. * Giver of dwellings,’ according to S&yana.

Strained through the filter made of wool : more literally, 1 cleansed by the
wool of the sheep,’ the material of . hich the sieve, strainer, or filter used
clearing and purifying the Soma juice was made,

Like barky : or, like the sacrificial cake made of barley-meal.

Alone drinks up : he alone is to receive the entire libation, which other
b only share among them.

brilliant-hued: without sufficient mixture with milk to thicken it and
nge its colour. The meaning of this and the following stanza is : Indra
fers our 1 ibations, imperfectly prepared as they may be, to the milk-offering*
k which other meu endeavour to attract him.



108 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK V}},

7 For him, for Indra, for the God, be pressed three draughty

Some juice

In the Juice drinker’s own abode.

8 Three reservoirs exude their drops, filled are three beakers to

the brim,

All for one offering to the God.

9 Pure art thou, set in many a place, and blended in the mjJ

with milk

And curd, to cheer the Hero best.

10 Here, Indra, are thy Soma-draughts pressed out byus,tl
strong, the pure :

They crave admixture of the milk.

110 Indra, pour in milk, prepare the cake, aud mix the Som
draught :

I hear them say that thou art rich.

12 Quaffed juices fight within the breast. The drunken praii

not by their wine,

The naked praise uot when it rains.

13 Rich be the praiser of one rich, munificent and famed like thee
High rank be his, 0 Lord of Bays.

14 Foe of the man who adds no milk, he heeds not any cbaute

hymn

Or holy psalm that may be sung.

15 Give us not, Indra, as a prey unto the scornful or the proud
Help, Mighty One, with power and might.

1G This, even this, 0 Indra, we implore : as thy devoted friends
The Kanvas praise thee with their hymns.


8 Three reservoirs: or troughs used in the preparation of the Soma-libaiioui
They are called severally, dronakalasn , pdtabkrit , and ddkavanlya.

9 In the midst : 1 in the middle (of the day ? ).' — Hillebrandt.

12 This stanza breaks the connexion between stanzas 11 and 13, andisii
itself almost unintelligible. Wilsou paraphrases, after Sityana : ‘ The |v>taW
(of Soma) coutend in thy interior (for thine exhilaration) like the cbnn
caused by wine : thy worshippers praise thee (filled full of Soma) like
udder (of a cow with milk).’ SAyana’s explanation of ncignflh, naked
as worshippers, stotdmh, * who do not desert the verses of the Veda, 1 > s ot)
ously impossible, u'dhah, udder, frequently means the rainy sky, an( j ^ ' u ‘
have this meaning here ; so that the sense of the passage may possibly
Ludwig suggests, that neither great wealth nor abject poverty tends to ■ ®
a man devout. The rich man when he drinks his wine at home and the
clad wretch exposed to the drenching rain are equally regardless of the 1

13 Rich be the praiser of the rich : this appears to be the contiuuation
* thou art rich ’ of stanza 11.

14 Indra will not accept worship without oblation.



TUN 2.] THE RIOVEDA. 109

Naught else, 0 Thunderer, have I praised in the skilled singer’s
eulogy :

On thy laud only have I thought.

The Gods seek him who presses out the Soma; they desire
not sleep :

They punish sloth unweariedly.

Come hither swift with gifts of wealth— be not thou an^rv
with us — like ° J

A great man with a youthful bride.

Let him not, wrathful with us, spend the evening far from
us to-day,

Like some unpleasant son-in-law.

For well we know this Hero’s love, most liberal of the boons
he- gives,

His plans whom the three worlds display.

Pour forth the gift which Kanvas bring, for none more glorious
do we know ®

Than the Strong Lord with countless aids.

0 prosser, offer Soma first to Indra, Hero, Sakra, him

The Friend of man, that he may drink;

Who, in untroubled ways, is best provider, for his worshippers

Of strength in horses and in kine. ’

Pressers, for him blend Soma juice, each draught most excel-
lent, for him

The Brave, the Hero, for his joy.

fho Vritra-slayer drinks the juice. May he who gives a hun-
dred aids

Approach, nor stay afar from us.

Hay the strong Bay Steeds, yoked by prayer, bring hither
unto ns our Friend,

Lover of Song, renowned by songs.

iwcot are tire Soma juices, come! Blent are the Soma juices,
come !

Rishi-like, mighty, fair of cheek, come hither quickly to the
feast.


■f man ; . th ® ® xact meaning of maMn, great, is not certain. SAyana

. I 1 9 u V<MradhiJcah, eminent on account of liis good qualities. ‘ Be

as tul, like the ardent husbaud of a new bride.’ — Wilson. ‘ Like a rich
newly married,' — Grassm&nn.


Like some unpleasant son-in-law : who sees that his company is unwel-
consequently stays at home. *

Firntto Indra: see VIII. 1. 20. Saha : India, the Mighty One.



THE HYMNS OP


no


[BOOK Vli


29 And lauds which strengthen thee for great bounty and valoni

and exalt

India who doeth glorious deeds,

30 And songs to thee who lovest song, and all those Ly^

addressed to thee—

These evermore confirm thy might.

31 Thus he, sole doer of great deeds whose hand holds thunder

gives us strength, '

He who hath never been subdued.

- 32 Vritra he slays with his right hand, even Indra, great v 1 ’ 1
mighty power,

And much-invoked in many a place.

33 He upon whom all men depend, all regions, all achievements
Takes pleasure in our wealthy chiefs.

31 All this hath he accomplished, yea, Indra, most gloriou
renowned,

Who gives our wealthy princes strength.

35 Who drives his chariot seeking spoil, even from afar, to h

he loves :

For swift is he to bring meu wealth.

36 The Sage who, winning spoil with steeds, slays Vritra, He

with the men,

His servant’s faithful succourer.


37 0 Priyamedhas, worship with collected mind this Indra who
The Soma hath full well inspired.

38 Ye Kanvas, sing the Mighty One, Lord of the Brave, wl

loves renown,

All-present, glorified by song.

39 Strong Friend, who, with no trace of feet, restores the cattl

to the men

Who rest their wish and hope on him.

40 Shaped as a Ram, Stone-hurler ! once thou earnest hither tf

the son

Of Kanva, wise Medhyatithi.


34 All this hath he accomplished: the slaughter of Vritra and other gr^
deeds ; or, he made all these eieatures.

36 The Sage Indra With the men : accompanied by the Maruts.

37 Priyamedhas : membete of the family of one of the RishU.

39 With no trace of fed: without tracking the lost cattle (the rays oi iig^
by their footsteps.

40 Shaped as a Ram: sea I. 51. 1. The legend ia told iu the
Brdhmana , 1.1.



THE RIG VEDA.


Ill


tMN 3.]

Vibhiudu, thou bust helped this nmu, giviug him thousands
four times ten,

And afterward eight thousand more.

And these twain pouring sti earns of milk, creative, daughters
of delight,

For wedlock sake I glorify.

HYMN TIL Indra.

Dkink, Indra, of the savoury juice, and cheer thee with our
milky draught.

Be, for our weal, our Friend and sharer of the feast, and let
thy wisdom guard ns well.

: in thy kind grace and favour may we still be strong : expose
us not to foe’s attack.

With manifold assistance guard and succour us, and bring U3
to felicity. ***

1 May these my songs of praise exalt thee, Lord, who hast
abundant wealth.

Men skilled m holy hymns, pure, with the hues of fire, have
sung^hem with their lauds to thee.

[ He, with his might enhanced by lvishis thousandfold, hath
like an ocean spread himself.

His majesty is praised as true at solemn rites, his power where
holy singers rule.

> India for worship of the Gods, Indra while sacrifice proceeds,
Indra, as worshippers in battle-shock, we call, India that we
may win the spoil.

3 With might hath Indra spread out heaven and earth, with
power hath Indra lighted up the Sun.

In Indra are all creatures closely held; in him meet the
distilling Soma-drops.

1 Men with their lauds are urging thee, Indra, to drink the
Soma first.

The Kibhus in accord have lifted up their voice, and Rudras
sung thee as the first.

41 Vibhindu: the prince, the institutor of the sacrifice.

42 The stanza is obscure, the ineanin^ of mUt, a feminine dual which S&ynna

tplaina by nirmdtryau , maker's or creators, *. e. heaven and earth, being un-
p'tain. Sdyana’s paraphrase of the stanza is : ‘ I glorify these two (heaven and
h'th), the auginentet'8 of water, the originators (of beings), the benefactors of
Mi worshipper, cm account of their generation (of the wealth so giveu to me).*
r Wilson

1 3 the hues of jive: or, radiant as Agni.

1 ^ Ribhus : as deities connected with the seasons which are regulated by
e Suu whom Indra has caused to shine.



112 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/// (

8 Indra increased bis manly strength at sacrifice, in the wi ty

rapture of this juice.

And living men to-day, even as of old, sing forth their praia^
to his majesty.

9 I crave of thee that hero strength, that thou mayst firs)

regard this prayer,

Wherewith thou holpest Bhrigu and the Yatis and Iraskanvi
when the prize was staked.

10 Wherewith thou sentest mighty waters to the sea, that, Indra

is thy manly strength.

For ever unattainable is this power of him to whom the world
have cried aloud.

11 Help us, 0 Indra, when we pray to thee for wealth and her

might. _ . . .

First help thou on to strength the man who strives to wit
and aid our laud, 0 Ancient One.

12 Help for us, Indra, as thou holpest Paura once, this ir.au'

devotions bent on gain.

Help, as thou gavest Rusama and Syavaka and Svarnaiaan
Kripa aid.

13 What newest of imploring prayers shall, then, the zealou

mortal sing 1

For have not they who laud his might, and Indra* power wo
for themselves the light of heaven ?

14 When shall they keep the Law and praise thee mid the Gods

Who counts as Hishi and as sage ?

When ever wilt thou, India Maghavan, come nigh to presser
or to praiser’s call ?

15 These songs of ours exceeding sweet, these hymns of piw

asceud to thee, . .

Like ever-conquering chariots that display their stieng
gain wealth, and give unfailing aid.

16 The Bhrigus are like Suns, like Kanvas, and have gained *

that their thoughts were bent upon.

The living men of Priyamedha’s race have sung exalting u 1
with their lauds. __

9 Bhrigu : see Vol. I., Index. Yatis : an ancient race of ascetics conned
with the Bhrigus, aud, according to one legend, said to have taken part in
creation of the world. Praskanva : a Uishi, son of Kanva, the seer of 8011
hymns of Book I.

10 The worlds : all men, or all living creatures.

12 Paura : the son of King Punt. Rusama , S'/dvalm, Svarnara, and ^
appear to have beeu princes especially favoured by India. Of. stanza % ot
following hvrnu.



THE RIOVEDA.


113


yMX 4 .]

L j3est slayer of the Vritras, yoke thy Bay Steeds, Indra, from

f afar.

; Come with the High Ones hither, Maghavan, to us, Mighty, to
drink the Soma juice.

$ For these, the bards and singers, have cried out to thee with
prayer, to gain the sacrifice.

As such, 0 Maghavan, Indra, who lovest song, even as a lover
hear my call.

) Thou from the lofty plains above, 0 Indra, hurledst Vritra
down.

Thou dravest forth the kine of guileful Mrigaya and Arbuda
from the mountain’s hold.

j Bright were the flaming fires, the Sun gave forth his shine,

| and Soma, Indra’s juice, shone clear.

I Indra, thou blewest the great Dragon from the air : men must
regard that valorous deed.

[ The fairest courser of them all, who ruuneth on as ’twere to

I heaven.

Which Indra and the Maruts gave, and Pakasthaman Kaura-
yan,

To me hath'Pakaathaman given, a ruddy horse, good at the
pole,

Filling his girth and rousing wealth ;

Compared with whom no other ten strong coursers, harnessed
to the pole,

Bear Tugrya to his dwelling place.

Raiment is body, food is life, and healing ointment giveth
strength.

As the free-handed giver of the ruddy steed, I have named
Pakasthaman fourth.

HYMN IV. Indra.

Though, Indra, thou art called by men eastward and westward,
north and south,

Thou chiefly art with Anava and Turvasa, brave Champion !
urged by men to come.

7 High Ones: the Maruts.

8 To gain the sacrifice : to ensure it proper performance and the blessings

ch flow from it.

9 Mrigaya: see IV. 16. 13. Arbuda: see Vol. I. f Index.

0 The great Dragon : or Serpent, Ahi,

il Kauraydn : Kauray&na, the Bon of KuruyAna. P&kasth&man, whose

nility is praised in stanzas 21 — 24, is not mentioned elsewhere.

& Tugrya: Bhujyu, son of Tugra. See Vol. I., Index.

A . .

Anava : descendant of the eponymous Anu. Turvasa : see Vol. I., Index ■



114 THE HYMNS OF [BOOH Vj n

2 Or, Indra, when with Rama, Rusama, Sy&vaka, and Kr',p a

thou rejoices t thee,

Still do the Kanvas, bringing praises, with their prayeri
0 Indra, draw thee hither : come.

3 Even as the wild-bull, when he thirsts, goes to the desert’i

watery pool,

Come hither quickly both at morning and at eve, and with the
Kanvas drink thy fill.

► 4 May the drops gladden thee, rich Indra, and obtain bounty

for him who pours the juice.

Soma pressed in the mortar didst thou take and drink, and
hence bast won surpassing might.

5 With mightier strength he conquered strength, with energy

be crushed their wrath.

0 Indra, Strong in youth, all those who sought the fray bent
and bowed down to thee like trees.

6 He who wins promise of thine aid goes girt as with a thou-

sand mighty men of war.

He makes his son preeminent in hero might : he serves with
reverential prayer.

7 With thee, the Mighty, for our Friend, we will not fear or feel

fatigue.

May we see Turvasa and Yadu : thy great deed, 0 Hero, must
be glorified.

8 On his left hip the Hero hath reclined himself : the proffered

feast offends him not.

The milk is blended with the honey of the bee : quickly come
hither, haste, and driuk.

9 India, thy friend is fair of form and rich in horses, cars, and kine,
He evermore hath food accompanied by wealth, and radian

joins the company.

10 Come like a thirsty antelope to the drinking-place: drink
Soma to thy heart’s desire.

Raiuing it down, 0 Maghavan, day after day, thou gainest thy
surpassing might.


2 Rusama , Sydvaka , and Kripa have been mentioned in stanza 12 of the
preceding hymn. Ruma was another of India’s favourites.

3 The wild-bull: or Gaura (Bos Gaums), a kind of buffalo.

7 May we tee Turvata and Yadu : enjoying happiness through thy favour.-
84yana. .

9 Thy friend : the man whom thou favoureat. Joint the company • 1

assembly of his equals. ^

10 Raining it down : pouring down the transformed Soma in the shape »

rain. See Vedische Studien , I. 88. i



THE RIGVEDA.


f MS 4.]


115


! priest, let the Soma juice flow forth, for Indra longs to drink
thereof.

He even now hath yoked his vigorous Bay Steeds : the Vritra-
slayer hath come near.


The man with whom thou fillest thee with Soma deems him-
self a pious worshipper.

This thine appropriate food is here poured out for thee : come,
hasten forward, drink of it.


Press out the Soma juice, ye priests, for Indra borne upon his
car.

The pressing-stones speak loud of Indra, while they shed the
juice which, offered, honours him.

To the brown juice may his dear vigorous Bay Steeds bring
Indra, to our holy task.

Hither let thy Car-steeds who seek the saciifice bring thee to
our drink-offerings.

Puslian, the Lord of ample wealth, for firm alliance we elect.

May he with wisdom, Sakra ! Looser! Much-invoked! aid us
to riches and to seed .


Sharpen us like a razor in the barber's hands; scud riches
thou who set test free.

Easy to find with thee are treasures of the Davui for mortal
man whom thou dost speed.

Pudiau, I long to win thy love, I long to praise thee, Radiant
God.

Excellent Lord, tis strange to me, no wish have I to sing the
psalm that Pajra sings. 3

Mykiue, 0 Radiant God, seek pasture wheic they will, my
during wealth, Immortal One.

Be our protector, Pushan ! be, most liberal Lord, propitious to
our gathering strength.

Rich was the gift Kurunga gave, a hundred steeds at morning
rites. e

Arnoug the gifts of Turvasas we thought of him, the opulent,
the splendid King.

What by his morning songs Kanva, the powerful, hath, with
the I riyamedhasi gaiued —


may here be a name of Indra. Looser: of the chariot-horse*
“ u comesfc t0 orifices ; or, according to Silyana, liberator (from sin).

v ot ? e ? f Pajras, a celebrated priestly family, with whom the

vas appear to have beeu on hostile terms.

Kurungct, : this prince’s name does not occur again,



116 THE HYMNS OF L BOOK Vijj

The herds of sixty thousand pure and spotless kine, have I
the Rishi, driven away.

21 The very trees were joyful at my coming : kine they obtained
in plenty, steeds in plenty.

HYMN V. A^j

When, even as she were present here, red Dawn hath shone
from far away,

She spreadeth light on every side.

2 Like Heroes on your will-yoked car far-shining, Wonder.

Workers ! ye

Attend, 0 Asvins, on the Dawn.

3 Bv you, 0 Lords of ample wealth, our songs of praise \ m

been observed :

As envoy have I brought the prayer.

4 Kanvas must praise the Asvins dear to many, making many

glad,

Most rich, that they may succour us.

5 Most liberal, best at winning strength, inciters, Lords ol

splendour who

Visit the worshipper’s abode.

6 So for devout Sudeva dew with fatness his unfailing mead,
And make it rich for sacrifice.

7 Hitherward running speedily with horses, as with rapid hawks,
Come, Asvins, to our song of praise :

8 Wherewith the three wide distances, and all the lights that

are in heaven

Ye traverse, and three times of night.

9 0 Finders of the Day, that wo may win us food of kine and

wealth,

* Open the paths for us to tread.

10 0 Asvins, bring us wealth in kine, in noble heroes, and in cars:
Bring us the strength that hordes give.

11 Ye Lords of splendour, glorified, ye Wonder-Workers borne on

paths

Of gold, drink sweets with Soma juice.

‘20 Pure and spotlm : I follow SAyana’s interrelation of nirmajdm, but *
correctness is at least doubtful Von Roth suggests ‘ to the watering-p^
as the meaning of the word, and Ludwig ‘ so that none remained belimu.

3 Lords of ample wealth : ‘affluent in sacrifices.’-- Wilson. See VJ4- ■
A 9 envoy: as the messenger of the patron of the sacrifice.

8 Times of night : ydmas, night-watches of three hours each.

11 Sweets: or meath, mddhu; here, perhaps, the milk.— Ludwig.



mN 5 .] TH^RIGVEDA. 117

; To us, ye Lords of ample wealth, and to our wealthy chiefs

extend

Wide shelter, ne’er to be assailed.

I Come quickly downward to the prayer of people whom ye
favour most :

Approach not unto other folk.

. Ye Asvins whom our minds perceive, drink of this lovely
gladdening draught,

The meuth which we present to you.

\ Bring riches hither unto us in hundreds and in thousands,
source

Of plenteous food, sustaining all.

I Verily sages call on you, ye Heroes, in full many a place.

Moved by the priests, 0 Asvins, come,
r Men who have trimmed tho sacred grass, bringing oblations
and prepared,

0 Asvins, are invoking you.

3 May this our hymn of praise to-day, most powerful to bring
you, be,

0 Asvins, nearest to your hearts.

D The skin filled full of savoury meath, laid in the pathway of
| your car —

| 0 Asvins, drink ye both therefrom.

0 For this, ye Lords of ample wealth, bring blessing for our herd,

: our kine,

Our progeny, and plenteous food.

1 Ye too unclose to us like doors the strengthening waters of the
| sky,

| And rivers, ye who find the day. #

£ When did the sou of Tugra serve you, Men 1 Abandoned in
the sea,

That with winged steeds your car might fly.

Ye, 0 Nasatyas, ministered to Kanva with repeated aid,
When cast into the heated pit.


6 By the priests : vdghddbhih : according to S&yana, * with horses.’

9 The Asvins appear to be invited to halt and drink the libations prepared
them by their worshippers, and not, as Sdyana explains, to drink from the
in suspended in their own car. — Ludwig.

22 The son of Tugra: Bhujyu, whose rescue by the Asvins has frequently
en related and referred to. The meaning is, I do not honour you only when
&ni in distress, as others whom you have aided have done.

23 Ministered to Kanva: see I, 1 1 2 . 5, and 118. 7 .



118 TUB IIYMIfS OF [BOOK P//j

24 Come near with. those most recent aids of yours which

eulogy,

When I invoke you, Wealthy Gods.

25 As ye protected Kanva erst, Priyatnedha and Upastuta,
Atii, Smjara, Asvins Twain !

26 And Ansu in decisive fight, Agastya in the fray for kine,
And, in his battles, Sobhari.

27 For so much bliss, or even more, 0 Asvins, Wealthy God*

than this,

We pray while singing hymns to you.

28 Ascend your car with golden seat, 0 Asvins, and with rein

of gold,

That reaches even to the sky.

29 Golden is its supporting shaft, the axle also is of gold,
And both the wheels are made of gold.

30 Thereon, ye Lords of ample wealth, come to us even from afai
Come ye to this mine eulogy.

31 From far away ye come to us, Asvins, enjoying plenteous foe
Of Dasas, 0 Immortal Ones.

32 With splendour, riches, and renown, 0 Asvins, hither con

to us,

Nasatyas, shining brilliantly.

33 May dappled horses, steeds who fly with pinions, bring yc

hitherward

To people skilled in sacrifice.

34 The wheel delayeth not that car of yours accompanied 1

song,

That eometh with a store of food.

J5 Horne on that chariot wrought of gold, with coursers ve
fleet of foot,

Come, 0 Nfisatyas, swift as thought.


24 Wealthy 6 och: the meaning of vriskanvasH is uncertain : ‘ rich in show

is Sfiya’a’s explanation, and ‘excellent as nteers ’ Prof. Ludwigs. I
von ltoth, but his interpretation is conjectural. ,

2 5 Kanva, Priyamedha . Upastuta and Atri have been mentioned in B (>0
Sftyaoa takes sinj&ram to Ik* an epithet of Atri, ‘ repeating praises.’

2d Ansu: a worshipper so named. — Sdyana. Af/astya: appears in I- ‘ '
where he is said to have been the family-priest of Khela. The grea .
Agastya is the seer of Hymns 1Gb — 191 of Book I. See also VII.
Sobhari: a Rishi, the seer of Hymns 19- 22 of this Book.

31 Plenteous food of Ddmn: the meaning appears to be that ey en .

in the ea*t the Dfisas or non-Aryan inhabitants sacrifice to the Asvins.

explains the stanza differently : ‘ Immortal Asvins, destroyers of the ci
the D&aas, ye bring to us food from afar.’— Wilson,



THE RIG VEDA.


119


lYMV 6 ]

5 0 Wealthy Gods, ye taste aud find the brisk and watchful wild
beast good.

Associate wealth with food for us.

7 As such, O Asvins, fiud for me my share of new-presented

gifts,

As Kasu, Chedi’s son, gave me a hundred head of buffaloes,
and ten thousand kine.

8 He who hath given me for mine own ten Kings like gold to

look upon.

At Chaidya’s feet are all the people round about, all those
who think upon the shield,

9 No mau, not any, goes upon the path on which the Chedis

walk.

No other prince, no folk is held more liberal of gifts than they.

HYMN VI. Indra.

Indra, great in his power and might, and like Parjanya rich
in rain,

Is magnified by Vatsa’s lauds.

2 When the priests, strengthening the Son of Holy Law, present

their gifts,

Singers with Order’s hymn of praise.

3 Since Kanvas with their lauds have made Indra complete the

sacrifice,

Words are their own appropriate arms.

4 Before his hot displeasure all the peoples, all the men, bow

down,

As livers bow them to the sea.

5 This power of his shone brightly forth when Indra brought

together, like

A skin, the worlds of heaven and earth.


36 According to SAyana the watchful xcild beast is therthe Soma which must
5 chased or sought after by the Gods. Ludwig would read svapatho, with 4
ansitive and causal meaning, instead of svddatho , i e , ye when ye appear
i the morning send to sleep the wild beasts that have been awake all night,
he st.mza is obscure.

37 Buffaloes : or camels,

33 This stanza appears to be spoken by Kasu who is called Chaidya or son
c Chedi. Who think upon the shield : who are practised in wearing armour
t leather, according to SAyana.

3 arc their own appropriate arms: ‘thev declare all weapons

eedlc8s.’-Wilaon.



120


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Vm

6 The fiercely-moving Vritra’s head he severed with his thunder-

bolt,

His mighty hundred-knotted bolt.

7 Here are — we sing them loudly forth — our thoughts among

the best of songs,

Even lightnings like the blaze of fire.

8 When hidden thoughts, spontaneously advancing, glow, and

with the stream
Of sacrifice the Kanvas shine.

9 Iudra, may we obtain that wealth in horses and in herds of

cows,

And prayer that may be noticed first.

.0 I from my Father have received deep knowledge of the Holy
Law :

I was born like unto the Sun.

.1 After the lore of ancieut time I make, like Kanva, beauteous
songs,

And Indra' s self gains strength thereby.

2 Whatever Rishis have not praised thee, Indra, or have lauded

thee,

By me exalted wax thou strong.

3 When his wrath thundered, when he rent Vritra to pieces,

limb by limb,

He sent the waters to the sea.

14 Against the Dasyu Sushna thou, Indra, didst hurl thy during
bolt :

Thou, Dread One, hast a hero's fame.

^5 Neither the heavens nor firmaments nor regions of the earth
contain

Indra, the Thunderer with his might.

.6 0 Indra him who lay at length staying thy copious waters
thou,

In his own footsteps, smotest down.

L7 Thou hiddest deep in darkness him, 0 Indra, who had set his
grasp

On spacious heaven and earth conjoined.


10 From my Father : ‘from Indra, the true protector,’ according to
12 Have not praised thee : have not praised thee yet, that is, will praise
;hee hereafter.— Ludwig.

16 In his own footsteps : or, in the (waters) at his feet. ‘Into the rushing
itreams.’ — Wilson.

17 Conjoined ; like two bowls turned towards each other.



TEE RIGVEDA.


121


YMN 6.]

) Indra, whatever Yatis and Bhrigus have offered praise to thee,

Liston, thou Mighty, to my call.

) Indra, these spotted cows yield thee their butter and the
milky draught,

Aiders, thereby, of sacrifice ;

I Which, teeming, have received thee as a life-germ, Indra, with
their mouth,

Like Surya who sustaineth all.

0 Lord of Might, with hymns of praise the Kanvas have
increased thy power,

The drops poured forth have strengthened thee.

! Under thy guidance, Indra, mid thy praises, Lord of Thunder,
shall

The sacrifice be suoo performed.

, Indra, disclose much food for us, like a stronghold with store
of kine:

Give progeny and heroic strength.

: And, Indra, grant us all that wealth of fleet steeds which
shone bright of old

Among the tribes of Nahushas.

i Hither thou seemest to attract heaven’s fold which shines be-
fore our eyes,

When, Indra, thou art kind to us.

! Yea, when thou puttest forth thy power, Indra, thou governest
the folk,

Mighty, unlimited in strength.

The tribes who briug oblations call to thee, to thee to give
them help,

With drops to thee who spreadest far.

> There where the mountains downward slope, there by the
meeting of the streams

The Sage was manifest with song.

1 Thence, marking, from his lofty place downward he looks
upon the sea,

And thence with rapid stir he moves.

yo * P *°. U8 Ra £ e 8 -’ — Wilson. Angirnses, according to Sftyana.

the stanza is unintelligible to me. Sayanasays that ; thee’ means Indra

Ae shape of the grass which his fertilizing energy causes to grow, and by

ll ] g 011 which the cows multiply. This energy of Indra’ a is all-supporting

n, ^ ee Wilson’s note. Ludwig proposes an alteration of the text.

28 Tit • or, perhaps, the neighbouring tribes.

t * e ■< rc; Indra. ‘Sftyana’s conclusion of the purport of the verse is,

,l~*ht to sacrifice in those places where Indra is said to be manifest-

29 2 he sea; the reservoir of Some juice.



THE HYMNS OF


122


[BOOK Vjj


30 Then, verily, they see the light refulgent of primeval seed,
Kindled on yonder side of heaven.

31 Indra, the Kanvas all exalt thy wisdom and thy maul

power,

And, Mightiest! thine heroic strength.

32 Accept this eulogy of mine, Indra, and guard me carefully;
Strengthen my thought and prosper it.

33 For thee, 0 Mighty, Thunder-armed, we singers through dev

tion have

Fashioned the hymn that we may live.

34 To Indra have the Kanvas sung, like waters speeding don

a slope :

The song is fain to go to him.

35 As rivers swell the ocean, so our hymns of praise make Indr

strong,

Eternal, of resistless wrath.

36 Come with thy lovely Bay Steeds, come to us from regions h

away :

0 Indra, drink this Soma juice.

37 Best slayer of the Vritras, men whose sacred grass is read

trimmed

Invoke thee for the gain of spoil.

38 The heavens and earth come after thee as the wheel follow

Etasa :

To thee flow Soma-drops effused.

31 Rejoice, 0 Indra, in the light, rejoice in Saryan-lvan, be
Glad in the sacri fleer’s hymn.

40 Grown strong in heaven, the Thunder-armed hath bellowet

Vritra slayer, Bull,

Chief drinker of the Soma juice.

41 Thou art a Rishi born of old, sole Ruler over all by might :
Thou, Indra, guardest well our wealth.

42 May thy Bay Steeds with beauteous backs, a hundred, brin

thee to the feast,

Bring thee to these our Soma-draughts.

43 The Kanvas with their hymns of praise have magnified th

ancient thought

That swells with streams of meath and oil.

30 The light : the Sun which is lighted up beyond the range of menssigli

38 As the wheel follows Etasa; as the chariot of the Sun follows the

that draws it. c t jj

39 Saryanlvdn said to be a lake and district in Kurukshetra. & ee
14, note.



THE RIOVEDA.


123


|r)H/.V 7.1

14 Mid mightiest Gods let mortal man choose Indra at the

sacrifice,

Indra, whoe’er would win, for help.

5 Thy steeds, by Priyamedhas praised, shall bring thee, God
whom all invoke,

Hither to drink the Soma juice.

16 A hundred thousand have I gained from ParBu, from
Tirindira,

And presents of the Yadavas,

[7 Ten thousand head of kiue, and steeds throe times a hundred
they bestowed
On Pujra for the SS,ma-song.

8 Knluilia hath reached up to heaven, bestowing buffaloes yoked
in fours,

And matched in fame the Y&davas.


HYMN VI f.


Marat*.


O Marots, when the sage hath poured the Trishtup forth as
food for you,


Ye shine amid the mountain-clouds.


2 When, Bright Ones, fain to show your might ye have deter-

mined on your course,

The mountain-clouds have bent them down.

3 Loud roaring with the wiuds the Sons of Prisni have upraised

themselves :


They have poured out the streaming food.

4 The Harms spread the mist abroad and make the mountains

rock and reel,

When with the winds they go their way;

5 What time the rivers and the hills before your coming bowed

them down,

So to sustain your mighty force.


Puryi, from Tirindira: 1 f i om Tirindira the son of Parsu .
w V?di a 2n h p^ m ? Ure ! ™ n,an (cf * Tiridates * Perpa )- See Weber’s EpUchcs
(SitZUD8sberifhte derK - P ' Akadeuue der

r Mams: or Yadus, descendants of the hero Yadu.

*< Pajra: see VIII. 4. 17.

48 Kakuha ■' or ’ the lo % °ne. meaning Tirindira. Buffalo*, or camels.

toL r J4rinfluL‘Sd iD8 ri 0 . 0ne of Sfl W*' 8 three interpretations, the
metre. g at th9 midda >’ hbation accompanied by hymns in the Trishtup



124 * THE HYMNS OF [BOOK V //,

6 We call on you for aid by night, on you for succour in the daj
Oil you while sacrifice proceeds.

7 These, verily, wondrous, red of hue, speed on their course

with a roar

Over the ridges of the sky.

8 With might they drop the loosened rein so that the Sun ma

run his course,

And spread themselves with beams of light.

9 Accept, ye Maruts, this my song, accept ye this mine hyw

of praise,

Accept, Ribhukshans, this my call.

10 The dappled Cows have poured three lakes, meath for tin
Thunder- wielding God,

From the great cask, the watery cloud.

110 Maruts, quickly come to us when, louging for felicity,

We call you hither from the sky.

12 For, Rudras and Ribhukshans, ye, Most Bountiful, are in th

house,

Wise when the gladdening draught is drunk.

13 0 Maruts, send us down from heaven riches distilling raptur

ousjoy,

With plenteous food, sustaining all.

14 When, Bright Ones, hither from the hills ye have resolved t

take your way,

Ye revel in the drops effused.

15 Man should solicit with his lauds happiuess which belongs!

them,

So great a band invincible.

1G They who like fiery sparks with showers of rain blow throng
the heaven and earth,

Milking the spring that never fails.

17 With chariots and tumultuous roar, with tempests and witl

hymns of praise
The Sons of Prism hurry forth.

18 For wealth, we think of that whereby ye aided Yadu, Turvas
And Kanva who obtained the spoil.


8 They drop the loosened rein : they speed forward to propare the way ^
the Sun.

0 Ribhukshans : Mighty Ones, according to Sftyana.

10 The dappled Cows: the ^Maruts, Three lakes: three large Soma
tflcles, the JJronakalasa, the Adhavaniya } and the Pdtabhrit. The meaning
the Maruts have poured down abundant water from the rain-cloud,



THE MOVED A.


125


r MN 7.]

Mav these our viands Bounteous Ones ! that flow in streams
like holy oil,

With Kanva’s hymns, increase your might.

Where, Bounteous Lords for whom the grass is trimmed, are
ye rejoicing now ?

Wlmt Brahman is adoring you %

Is it not there where yo of old, supplied with sacred grass,
for lauds

Inspired the strong in sacrifice I

They brought together both the worlds, the mighty waters,
aud the Sun,

And, joint by joint, the thunderbolt.

They sundered Vritra limb from limb and split the gloomy
mountain-clouds,

Performing an heroic deed.

They reinforced the power and strength of Trita as he fought,
and helped

Indra in battle with the foe.

i They deck themselves for glory, bright, celestial, lightning in
their hands,

And helms of gold upon their heads,
i When eagerly ye from far away came to the cavern of the Bull,
He bellowed in his fear like Heaven.
r Borne by your golden footed steeds, 0 Gods, come hither to
receive

The sacrifice we offer you.

5 When the red leader draws along their spotted deer yoked to
the car.

The Bright Ones come, and shed the rain.

) Sushoma, Saryanav.in, and Arjika full of homes, have they,
These Heroes, sought with downward car.

19 With Kdnva's hymns: hymns of the Rishi Punnrvalsa, a descendant of
iinva

21 The strong in sacrifice : the Maghavans , wealthy worshippers.

24 Trita : a Vedic deity, perhaps Agni in his third form, geneially associated
ith Indra, Vftyu, and the Maruts. See. Vol. I., Index. In battle with the
>c: or, to overcome Vritra.

26 The cavern of the Bull: perhaps, the hollow of the rain-cloud; ‘the
pening of the rainy (firmament).’ — Wilson.

28 Leader ; or side-horse.

29 Saryawdvdn : A has occurred before (see I. 84. 14, and VIII 6. 89) as the
&uie of a lake. Arjika is said by S&yana to be the name of a district, and
e takes sushdma (containing excellent Soma) to be an adjective qualifying it.
tc Zimmer, Altindisches Zeben, p. 1 9.



THE HYMNS OF


126


[BOOR VUi


30 When, Maruts, will ye come to him, the singer who invokes

you thus,

With favours to your suppliant ?

31 What now 1 where have ye still a friend since ye left Indra all

alone ?

Who countoth on your friendship now?

32 The Kanvas sing forth Agni’s praise together with our

Maruts 5 who

Wield thunder and wear swords of gold.

33 Hither for new felicity may I attract the Impetuous Ones,
The Heroes with their wondrous strength.

34 Before them sink the very hills deeming themselves abysses;

yea,

Even the mountains bend them down.

35 Steeds flying on their tortuous path through mid-air carrj

them, aud give

The man who lauds them strength and life.

36 Agni was born the first of all, like Surya lovely with his light;
With lustre these have spread abroad.


HYMN VIII. Asvim,

With all the succours that are yours, 0 Asvins, hither come
to us :

Wonderful, borne on paths of gold, drink ye the meath with
Soma juice.

2 Como now, ye Asvins, on your car decked with a sun-bright

canopy,

Bountiful, with your golden forms, Sages with depth of
intellect.

3 Come hither from the Nahushas, come, drawn by pure hymns,

from mid-air.

0 Asvins, drink the savoury juice shed in the Kanvas’
sacrifice.


31 Left Indra all alone ? ; This is merely a rhetorical question meaning, )' fl
never did desert him. The Maruts aloue stood by him when he fought with
Vritra.

36 With lustre these have spread abroad : * then they (the Maruts) stood
round in their radiance ’ 3 4 The Scholiast intimates that this verBe refers to

the ceremony called Agnimdruta , when Agni is first worshipped, theu tw
Maruts .’ — Wilson.

3 From the Nahushas : or, according to others, from the neighbouring ^

people.



THE RIG VEDA.


127


MN 8 .]

Come to us hither from the heavens, come from mid-air, well-
loved by us :

Here Kanva’s son hath pressed for you the pleasant meath of
Soma juice.

Come, Asvins, to give ear to us, to drink the Soma, Asvins,
come.

Hail, Strengthened of the praise-song S speed onward, ye
Heroes, with your thoughts.

As, Heroes, in the olden time the Rishis called you to their
aid,

So now, 0 Asvins, come to us, come near to this mine eulogy.

Even from the luminous sphere of heaven come to us, ye who
find the light,

Carers for Yatsa, through our prayers and lauds, 0 ye who
hear our call.

Do others more than we adore the Asvins with their hymns
of praise?

The Tiishi Vatsa, Kanva’s son, hath magnified you with his
songs.

The holy singer with his hymns hath called you, Asvins, hither-
ward ;

Best Vritra-slayers, free from stain, as such bring us felicity.

What time, ye Lords of ample wealth, the Lady mounted on
your car,

Then, 0 ye Asvins, ye attained all wishes that your hearts
desired.

Come thence, O Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand
ornaments :

Vatsa the sage, the sago’s son, hath sung a song of sweets to
you.

Oheerers of many, rich in goods, discoverers of opulence,

The Asvins, Riders through the sky, have welcomed this my
song of praise.

0 Asvins, grant us all rich gifts wherewith no man may
interfere.

Mako us observe the stated times : give us not over to reproach.

: Whether, Nasatyas, ye be nigh, or whether ye be far away,

Come thence, 0 Asvins, on your car that hath a thousand
ornaments.


7 Carers for Vatsa: ye who favour and provide for Vatsa, the IUahi of
yum VI. of thia Book.

10 The Lady ; SdryA, Daughter of the Sun. See. I. 116. 17.



12 *


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Yin


15 Vatsa the Rishi with his songs, Nasatyas, hath exalted you;
Grant him rich food distilling oil, graced with a thousand

ornaments.

16 Bestow on him, 0 Asvins, food that strengthens, and thal

drops with oil,

On him who praises you for bliss, and, Lords of bounty, pray*
for wealth.

17 Como to us, ye who slay the foe, Lords of rich treasure, t<

this hymn.

0 Heroes, give us high renown and these good things of eart!
for help.

1 8 The Priyamedhas have invoked you with all succours tha

are yours,

You, Asvins, Lords of solemn rites, with calls entreating yoi
to come.

19 Come to us, Asvins, ye who bring felicity, auspicious Ones,
To Vatsa who with prayer and hymn, lovers of song, liatl

honoured you.

20 x\id us, 0 Heroes, for those hymns for which ye hclpe-

Gosarya erst, .

Gave Vasa, Dasavraja aid, and Kanva and Medhatithi ;

21 And favoured Trasadasyu, ye Heroes, in .spoil-deciding fray :
For these, 0 Asvins, graciously assist us in acquiring strengtl

22 0 Asvins, may pure hymns of ours, and songs and praise

honour vou :

Best slayers everywhere of foes, as such we fondly year
for you.

23 Three places of the Asvins, erst concealed, are made apparent


now. .

Both Sages, with the flight of Law come hither
who live.

HYMN IX.


unto those
A'dM-


To help and favour Vatsa now, 0 Asvins, come ye hitherward.
Bestow on him a dwelling spacious and secure, ant CC P


malignities away. __

20 Gofirya : said by SAyana to bo a name of Siyu. Sea I. HO, 22.
and Dasacraja are known only as proUyis of the Asvins.

21 Trasadasyu: see Vol. I., Index. . • Aavins'

23 Three places: according to S&yana, the three wheels of e A

chariot are intended. The three places can only be heaven, Brina
earth, hidden during the darkness of night and made visible by tt


of the Asvins and Dawn.

1 Vatsa: apparently another name of Saaakarua,
descendant of Kanva, the ltishi of the hymn,


called also Klava or



THE RIG VEDA.


129


MS 9-]


All manliness that is in heaven, with the Five Tribes, or in
mid-air,

Bestow, ye Asvins, upon us.

Remember Kanva first of all among the singers, Asvins, who

Have thought upon your wondrous deeds.

Asvins, for you with song of praise this hot oblation is effused,

This your sweet Soma juice, ye Lords of ample wealth, through
which ye think upon the foe.

Whatever ye have done in floods, in the tree, Wonder-Wor-
kers, and in growing plants,

Therewith, 0 Asvins, succour me.

What force, Nasatyas, ye exert, whatever, Gods, ye tend and
heal,

This your own Vatsa gains not by his hymns alone : ye visit
him who offers gifts.

Now hath the Rishi splendidly thought out the Asvins 5
hymn of praise.

Let the Atharvan pour the warm oblation forth, and Soma
very rich in sweets.

Ye Asvins, now ascend your car that lightly rolls upon its
way.

May these my praises make you speed hitherward like a cloud
of heaven.

When, 0 Nasatyas, we this day make you speed hither with
our hymns,

Or, Asvins, with our songs of praise, remember Kanva
specially.

As erst Kaksbivati and the Rishi Vyasva, as erst Dirghatamas
invoked your presence,

Or, in the sacrificial chambers, Vainya Prithi, so be ye mind-
ful of us here, 0 Asvins.


Thuiujkt upon : or touched upon, handled.

Think upon the foe : plan the destruction of the demon of darkness.

1 Whatever ye hare done: Professor Wilson paraphrases after Sftjana:
eserve me with that (healing vit^ue) deposited b} you in the wateis, in
tives, in the herbs.’

The A tkavvan ; the priest who has special charge of the fire and the Soma,
illow Ludwig in taking a tharrani as a nominative and not as a locative as
^vnadoes: 4 he will spi inkle the sweet-flavoured Soma and the gharma
Ltiou) ou the Atharvan fire.’ — Wilson.

10 hahshivlu: seel. 18. 1. Vyasvi : see I 112 15. Dirghatamas : see Vol,
ludex. Vui.iya; son of Vena. P>itM: the first anointed king.



180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIII.

11 Come as home-guardians, saving us from foemen, guarding

our living creatures and our bodies,

Come to the house to give us seed and offspring,

12 Whether with India yc be faring, Asvins, or resting in oiie*

dwelling-place with Vayu,

In concord with the Kibhus or A dityas, or standing still in
Vishnu’s striding-places.

13 When I, 0 Asvins, call on you to-day that I may gather

strength,

Or as all-conquering might in war, bo that the Alvins’ noblest
grace.

14 Now come, ye Asvins, hitherward: here are oblations set

for you ;

These Soma-draughts to aid Yadu and Turvasa, these offered
you mid Kanva’s sons.

15 Whatever healing balm is yours, Nasatyas, near or far away,
Therewith, great Sages, grant a home to Vatsa and to Vimada.

16 Together with the Goddess, with the Asvins’ Speech have

awoke.

Thou, Goddess, hast disclosed the hymn, and holy gift fron
mortal men.

17 Awake the Asvins, Goddess Dawn ! Up Mighty Lady of swee

strains !

Rise, straightway, priest of sacrifice ! High glory to th<
gladdening draught !

18 Thou, Dawn, approaching with thy light shinest togethei

with the Sun,

And to this man-protecting home the chariot of the Asvins comes

19 When yellow stalks give forth the juice, as cows from udders

pour their milk,

And voices sound the song of praise, the Asvins’ worshippers
show first.

20 Forward for glory and for strength, protection that shall

couquer men,

And power and skill, most sapient Ones !

11 Out living creatures : our dependents and our cattle.

12 Vishnu's striding pf accs : from which he made hi« three great strides
through earth, firmament, and heaven.

18 That: the granting of my request.

15 And to Vimada : as ye did to Vimada. — Sflyana. See Vol. I., Index.

16 The Goddess : Dawn. The A » mns' Speech : V&k or Speech who glorifies
the Asvins ; i. e. the hymn that praises them.

19 Yellow stalks : of Soma plants.

20 Forward for glory : advance and come to give us glory, etc.



When, Asvins, worthy of our lauds, ye seat you in the father’s
house.

With wisdom or the bliss ye bring.

HYMN X. Asvins.

Whether ye travel far away or dwell in yonder light of
heaven,

Or in a mansion that is built above the sea, come thence, ye
Asvins, hitherward.

2 Or if for Manu ye prepared the sacrifice, remember also Kanva’s

son.

I call Brihaspati, Indra, Vishnu, all the Gods, the Asvins borne
by rapid steeds.

3 Those Asvins I invoke who work marvels, brought hither

to receive,

With whom our friendship is most famed, and kinship passing
that of Gods.

4 On whom the solemn rites depend, whose worshippers rise

without the Sun :

These who foreknow the holy work of sacrifice, and by their
Godhead drink the sweets of Soma juice.

5 Whether ye, Lords of ample wealth, now linger in the east

or west,

With Druhyu, or with Anu, Yadu, Turvsa, I call you hither ;
come to me.

6 Lords of great riches, whether through the firmament ye fly

or speed through heaven and earth,

Or with your Godlike natures stand upon your cars, come
thence, 0 Asvins, hitherward.

HYMN XI. Agui.

Thou, Agni, God mid mortal men, art guard of sacred rites,
thou art

To be adored at sacrifice.

21 In the father's house : in the sacrificial hall of the father of the family,
the wealthy householder who institutes the sacrifice. This stanza is a conti-
nuation of 19, although the connexion is interrupted by the intervening stanza.


1 Above the sea : above the ocea^ of air.

3 To receive : our oblations.

4 Without the sun : S'tyana explains astire differently, connecting in with
pm instead of sfira : ‘ of whom there are worshippers in a place where there

is no worship.’— Wilson.

5 Druhyu and the other names staud for the tribes called after these
ancient chieftains. See Vol. I., Index.

iIZ!Z ma “ translated in Mvx Muller’s History of * Ancient Sanskt'U



132


THE HYMNS OF


f BOOK VIJI


2 0 Mighty Agni, thou must be glorified at our festivals,
Bearing our offerings to the Gods.

3 0 Jatavedas Agni, fight and drive our foes afar fiom us,

Them and their godless enmities.

4 Thou, Jatavedas, scekest not the worship of a hostile man,
However nigh it be to thee.

5 We sages, mortals as we are, a lore the mighty name of thee,
Immortal Jatavedas’ name.

6 Sages, wo call the Sage to help, mortals, we call the God to aid :
We call on Agni with our songs.

7 May Yatsa draw thy mind away even from thy loftiest dwel-

ling-place,

Agni, with song that yearns for thee.

8 Thou art the same in many a place : mid all the people thou

art Lord.

In fray and fight we call on thee.

9 When we are seeking strength we call Agni to help us in

the strife,

The giver of rich gifts in war.

10 Ancient, adorable at sacrifices, Priest from of old, meet for our
praise, thou sittest.

Fill full and satisfy thy body, Agni, and win us happiness by
offering worship.

HYMN XII. Indra.

Joy, Mightiest Indra, known and marked, sprung most from
Soma-draughts, wherewith

Thou smitest down the greedy fiend, for that we long.

2 Wherewith thou holpest Adhrigu, the great Dasagva, and

the God

Who stirs the sunlight, and the sea, for that we long.

3 Wherewith thou dravest forth like cars Sindhu and all the

mighty floods

To go the way ordained by Law, for that we long.

2 Bearing our offering* to tie Gorts: liteially, ‘the charioteer of solemn rites.’

1 Joy: mddah : the rapturous exhilaration produced in Indra by d linking
the S«>ma juice. For that we Lout/; the short refrain or burden which
generally concludes each stanza of each triplet of this hymn is sometimes
rather loosely attached and cannot always be clearly brought out in the proper
place in translation.

2 Adhrigu : according to S Ay ana a Rishi so named. See I 1 1 2. 20. Dasagva :
one of the priestly family connected with, or identical with, the Angirases,

* the accomplisher of the ten (months’ rib).’ -Wilson. Ludwig thinks that^
Dagagva here may m< an the Sun The sea : of dir.



THE RIGVEDA.


133


hymn 12.3


4 Accept this laud for aid, made pure like oil, thou Caster of

the Stone,

Whereby even in a moment thou hast waxen great.

5 Be pleased, Song-lover, with this song : it flows abundant

like the sea.

Indra, with all thy succours thou hast waxen great.

6 The God who from afar hath sent gifts to maintain our

friendship’s bond,

Thou, spreading them like rain from heaven, hast waxen great.

7 The beams that mark him have grown strong, the thunder

rests between bis arms,

When, like the Sun, he hath increased both Heaven and Earth.

8 When, Mighty Lord of Heroes, thou did.st eat a thousand

buffaloes,

Then grew and waxed exceeding great thine Indra-power.

9 Indra consumeth with the rays of Surya the malicious man:
Like Agni conquering the woods, he hath grown strong.

10 This newest thought of ours that suits the time approaches

unto thee :

Serving, beloved in many a place, it metes and marks.

11 The pious germ of sacrifice directly purifies the soul.

By Indra’s lauds it waxes great, it metes and marks.

12 Indra who wins the friend hath spread himself to drink the

Sorna-draught :

Like worshipper’s dilating praise ; it metes and marks.

13 He whom the sages, living men, have gladdened, offering up

their hymns,

Hath swelled like oil of sacrifice in Agni’s mouth.


8 Didst cat a thousand buffaloes: the buffaloes probably represent the clouds
which the Sun dissipates or consumes. — Ludwig. ‘When thou hast slain
thousands of mighty foes.’ — Wilson.

10 It metes and marks: defines and discriminates Indra’s good qualities.—

»S;ty. in a.

H the germ of sacrifice is probably the wish that prompts the offering.

My. ma explains differently : ‘ 7 . e devout praiser of the adorable (India)
pun is in due succession the offering (of the Soma) ; with sacred hymns he
magnifies (the might of Indra; he voiily proclaims the measure (of his merits).*
t diluting praise : I follow Sftyana ; but the stanza is unin-

‘ tgi jle to me. ‘Indra, the benefactor of his friend (the worshipper), has

at ged himself to drink the Soma, in like manner as the pious praise dilates
fnrJ )10C auns the measure of hia merits.’ — Wilson. The meaning of ivtaf
accort * in S to Siyava) is unceitAin. Von Roth thinks that the two
in sapJitw 8 are meaut i aQ d other explain it as the sword, knife, or axe used



THE HYMNS OF


134


[BOOK Yin


14 Aditi also hath brought forth a hymn for Indra, Sovran Lord:
The work of sacrifice for help is glorified.

1 5 The ministering priests have sungtheir songs for aid and eulogy;
God, thy Bays turn not from the rite which Law ordains.

16 If, Indra, thou drink Soma by Vishnu’s or Trita Aptya's side>
Or with the Maruts take delight in flowing drops ;

17 Or, Sakra, if thou gladden thee afar or in the sea of air,
Rejoice thee in this juice of ours, in flowing drops.

18 Or, Lord of Heroes, if thou aid the worshipper who sheds the

juice,

Or him whose laud delights thee, and his flowing drops.

19 To magnify the God, the God, Indra, yea, Indra for your help,
And promptly end the sacrifice — this have they gained.

20 With worship, him whom men adore, with Soma, him who

drinks it most,

Indra with lauds have they increased — this have they gained.

21 His leadings are with power and might and his instructions

manifold :

He gives the worshipper all wealth : this have they gained.

22 For slaying Vritra have the Gods set Indra in the foremost

place.

Indra the choral bands have sung, for vigorous strength.

23 We to the Mighty with our might, with lauds to him who

hears our call,

With holy hymns have sung aloud, for vigorous strength.

24 Not earth, nor heaven, nor firmaments contain the Thunder-

wielding God :

They shake before his violent rush and vigorous strength.

25 What time the Gods, 0 Indra, set thee foremost in the furious

fight,

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on.

26 When Vritra, stayer of the floods, thou slewest, Thunderer

with might,

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on.

27 When Vishnu, through thine energy, strode wide those three

great steps of his,

Then thy two beautiful Bay Steeds carried thee on.

28 When thy two beautiful Bay Steeds grew great and greater

day by day,

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.

16 Trita Aptya : see VIII. 7. 24, note. Here he appears as the preparer d

fnr Indra.



TIIE RIO VEDA.


1S5


ffYMN 13.]

jO When, Indra, all theMarut folk humbly submitted them to thee,
Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee.
jO When yonder Sun, that brilliant light, thou settest in the
heaven above,

Even then all creatures that had life bowed down to thee,
jl To thee, 0 Indra, with this thought the sage lifts up this eulogy,
Akin and loading as on foot to sacrifice.

J2 When in thine own dear dwelling all gathered have Lifted up
the voice

Milk-streams at worship’s central spot, for sacrifice,

)3 As Priest, 0 Indra, give us wealth in brave men and good
steeds and kinc

That we may first remember thee for sacrifice.

HYMN XIII. I Ddrtt .

Indra, when Soma juices flow, makes his mind pure and meet
for lauds.

Ho gains the power that brings success, for great is he.

2 In heaven’s first region, in the seat of Gods, is he who brings

success,

Most glorious, prompt to save, who wins the water-floods.

3 Him, to win strength, have I invoked, even Indra mighty for

the fray.

Be thou most near to us for bliss, a Friend to aid.

4 Indra, Songdover, here for thee the worshippers libation flows
Rejoicing in this sacred grass thou shinest forth.

5 Even now, 0 Indra, give us that which, pressing juice, wo

crave of thee.

Bring us wealth manifold which finds the light of heaven,
fi What time the zealous worshipper hath boldly sung his songs
to thee,

Like branches of a tree up-grows what they desire.

7 Generate songs even as of old, give ear unto the singer’s call :
Thou for the pious hast grown great at each carouse.

31 The second line is difficult. Wilson, following S4ya*ja, paraphrases the
Btauza : ‘ The wise (worshipper), India, offers thee this gratifying sincere
pra^LMe along with pious rites at the sacrifice, as (a man places) a kinsinau in
(a prominent) position.’

32 M ilk- stream* : the sweetly -flowing hymns.

Wilson remarks : ‘ This is probably an ancient hymn, both by it* repetitions
nd combination of simplicity and obscurity.’



139


THE BY MSS OF [BOOK T///


8 Sweet strains that glorify^him play like waters speeding down

a slope, . . TI

Yea, him who in this song is called the Lord of Heaven ;

9 Yea, who alone is called i he Lord, the single Ruler of the folk,
By worshippers seeking aid : may he joy in the draught.

10 Praise him, the Glorious, skilled in song, Lord of the two

victorious Bays :

They seek the worshipper's abode who bows in prayer.

11 Put forth thy strength: with dappled Steeds come, thou o!

mighty intellect,

With swift Steeds to the sacrifice, for ’tie thy joy.

12 Grant wealth to those who praise thee, Lord of Heroes,

Mightiest fndra : give
Our princes everlasting fame and opulence.

13 I call thee when the Sun is risen, I call thee at the noon of day;
With thy car-horses, Indra, come well-pleased to us.

14 Speed forward hither, come to us, rejoice thee in the milky

draught : . „ . .

Spin out the threal of ancient time, as well is known.

13 If, Sakra, Vritra-slayer, thou he far away or near to us,

Or in the sea, thou art the guard of Soma juice.

16 Let songs we sing and Soma-drops expressed by us make

Indra strong : .

The tribes who bring oblations find defight in him.

17 Him sages longing for bis aid, with offerings brought in eager

haste,

Him, even as branches, all mankind have made to grow.

18 At theTrikadrnkas the Coils span sacrifice that stirred the mud:
May onr songs strengthen him who still hath strengthened

19 When, true to duty, at due times the worshipper offers lands


to thee,

They call him Purifier, Pure, and Wonderful.


TI Spin out the thread of ancient times : * extend the ancient Bncrifiee.

^Thedue peiformanoe of sacrifice is regaided as an unbroken thieatl reaching
th'ongh a Hiiocesvdon of Ilinhia f'om ancient to modern times.

15 lathcsea: in the firmament, or ocenti i of air.

17 AV mankind: HlmM But.ee M. Muller \ (die Hymns I. 6W-

18 At the TAkfulruhis : arroiding to Silyana these are the first t!

of the Ahhiplava ceremony. Aeeoidmg to Rome modern i bcIm> » rH
probably tliree peculiar Soma-vessels, or an oblation consisting of .

ing« of Soma. Span sacrifice : see above note on 14. That stirred

that urged others to follow the example.

19 Him : a change of per-on, India being meant.



THE RIG VEDA.


1&7


YMN 13]

) That mind of Rudra, fresh and strong, moves conscious in the
ancient ways,

With reference whereto the wise have ordered this,
jf thou elect to be my Friend drink of this sacrificial juice,

By help whereof we may subdue all enemies.

) () In Ira, Lover of the song, when shall thy praiser be most blest?

When wilt thou grant us wealth in herds of kine and steeds?

\ And thy two highly-lauded Bays, strong stallions, draw thy
car who art

Untouched by age, most gladdening car for which we pray.

I With ancient offerings we implore the Young and Strong
whom many praise.

He from of old hath sat upon dear sacred grass.

) Wax mighty, thou whom many laud for aids which Risliis
have extolled.

Pour down for us abundant food and guard us well.

3 0 fndra, Caster of the Stone, thou helpest him who praises thee:

From sacrifice l send to thee a mind yoked hymn
J Here, yoking for the Soma draught these Horses, sharers of
tl y feast,

Thy Bay Steeds, Indra, fraught with wealth, consent to come.

R Attendants on thy glory, lgt the Rudras roar assent to thee,
And all the Marut companies come to the feast.

9 These his victorious followers hold in the heavens the place
they love,

Leagued in the heart of sacrifice, as well we know.

0 That we may long behold the light, what time the ordered

rite proceeds,

He duly measures, as he views, the sacrifice.

1 0 Indra, strong is this thy car, and strong are these Bay

Steeds of thine :

0 Satakratu, thou art strong, strong is our call.

| 20 Have ordered thin : son" of praise, or Imly ceremony. — Ludwig,
i 26 Mind-yoked : m ule ready by the poet’s mind, as a chariot — to which the
J’tnu is frequently compared — is equipped for a journey.

28 The Rudras : the sons of Rudra, the Maruts.

^9 The heart, literally navel, tha; is the central point, of sacrifice, is the
icoptvcle on which oblations are placed, or the uttaravedl or north altar.

31 Strong ; irlshd * as h.>s been noticed before (see I. 177 2. 3 ) some of

|f! ' r ° ( h c poets delight in the repetition of this word and derivatives from the
loetdot SHyana explains vrishi : ns ‘ showerer of benefits,’ nnd Ludwig
fin* ate* it by ‘ itierkijiftig,* strong as a bull. The original meaning of the
01 is mule, masculine, and, hence, stroug,



138 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

32 Strong is the press-stone, strong thy joy, strong is the flowii

Soma juice:

Strong is the rite thou furtherest, strong is our call.

33 As strong I call on thee the Strong, 0 Thunderer with th

thousand aids :

For thou hast won the hymn of praise. Strong is our call,

HYMN XI V. Indn

Ip I, 0 Indra, were, like thee, the single Sovran of all wealth
My worshipper should bo rich in kino.

2 I should be fain, 0 Lord of Power, to strengthen and enricl

the sage,

Were I the Lord of herds of kine.

3 To worshippers who press the juice thy goodness, Indra, iaa

cow

Yielding in plenty kine and steeds.

4 None is there, Indra, God or man, to hinder thy munificence
The wealth which, lauded, thou wilt give.

5 The sacrifice made Indra strong when ho unrolled the earth,

and made

Himself a diadem in heaven.

6 Thine aid we claim, 0 Indra, thine who after thou hast waxeu

great

Hast won all treasures for thine own.

7 In Soma’s ecstasy Indra spread the firmament and realms of

light,

When he cleft Vala limb from limb.

8 Showing the hidden he dravo forth the cows for the Angirases,
And Vala he east hoadlong down.

9 By Indra were the luminous realms of heaven established

and secured,

Firm and immovable from their place.

10 Indra, thy laud moves quickly like a joyous wave of water

floods :

Bright shine the drops that gladden thee.

11 For thou, 0 Indra, art the God whom hymns and praises

magnify :

Thou blessest those who worship thee.

12 Let the two long-maned Bay Steeds bring Indra to drink the

Soma juice,

The Bountiful to our sacrifice.



THE RIGVEDA.


139


With waters* foam thou torest off, Indra, the head of Namuchi,
Subduing all contending hosts.

The Dasyus, when they fain would climb by magic arts and
mount to heaven,

Thou, Indra, castest down to earth.

\ As Soma-drinker conquering all, thou scatteredst to every side
Their settlement who poured no gifts.

HYMN XV. Indra.

Sing forth to him whom many men invoke, to him whom
many laud :

Invite tue powerful Indra with your songs of praise.

I Whose lofty might — for doubly strong is he — supports the
heavens and earth,

And hills and plains and floods and light with manly power.

\ Such, Praised by many ! thou art King : alone thou smitest
Vritras dead,

To gain, 0 Indra, spoils of war and high renown.

1 We sing this strong and wild delight of thine which conquers
in the fray,

Which, Caster of the Stone ! gives room and ^hincs like gold.

5 Wherewith thou also foundest lights for Ayu and for Manu*s

sake :

Now joying in this sacred grass thou beamest forth.

6 This day too singers of the hymn praise, as of old, this might

of thine :

Win thou the waters day by day, thralls of the strong.

7 That lofty Indra-powcr of thine, thy strength and thine
] intelligence,

I Thy thunderbolt for which we long, the wish makes keen.

P 0 Indra, Heaven and Earth augment thy manly power and
thy renown :

The waters and the mountains stir and urge thee on.

9 Vishnu the lofty ruling Power, Varuna, Mitra sing thy praise :
In thee the Maruts’ company have great delight.

13 With waters' foam: with a thunderbolt in the form of foam, according
> a later legend. See Lanmau, Sanskrit Reader , p. 375, who takes Namuchi
) be a waterspout in a lake, and ‘ with foam ’ to mean ‘ accompanied by foam.‘

4 Wild'deliyht Soma juice, the cause of thy raptuie.

» 4 5 / ur Ayu and for Manu's sake : that is for man. Ayu was the son of
i muiavaa and Urvaat.

^ Thralls of the sU'ong : controlled and imprisoned by Vritra.

The with : our wishes expressed in prayer and praise.



140 THE I1YMSS OF [BOOK T//|

10 0 Indra, thou wast born the Lord of men, most liberal of tin

gifts :

Excellent deeds for evermore are all thine own.

11 Ever, alone, 0 highly- praised, thou sendest Vritras to tlicii

rest :

None else than Indra executes the mighty deed.

12 Though here and there, in varied hymns, India, men call on

thee for aid,

Still with our heroes fight and win the light of heaven.

13 Already have all forms of him entered our spacious dwelling.

place :

For victory stir thou Indra, up, the Lord of Might.

HYMN XVT. Iuifai

Praise Indra whom our songs must laud, sole Sovran ol
mankind, the Chief
Most liberal who controllcth men.

2 In whom the hymns of praise delight, and all the glory-givin|

songs,

Like the floods’ longing for the sea.

3 Him I invite with eulogy, best King, effective in the fight,
Strong for the gain of mighty spoil.

4 Whose perfect ecstasies are wide, profound, victorious, am

give

Joy in the field where heroes win.

5 Him, when the spoils of war are staked, men call to be thei

advocate :

They who have Indra win the day.

6 Men honour him with stirring songs, and magnify with solcni

rites :

Indra is he who giveth ease.

7 Indra is Priest and Hishi, he is much invoked by many mer
And mighty by his mighty powers.

8 Meet to be lauded and invoked, true Hero with his deeds <

might,

Victorious even when alone.


13 All forms of him: the various qualities of Indra have been yeMmite •
Stir thou: the Ilinhi addresses himself. Loui of Might: S'tchipatvn ■
later literature, lord or husband of Sachl or his might personified and icgar
as his consort.

7 Priest: brnhmtt , meaning, according to S&yana, greater than all
45 7, ‘The Brahman who accepts the praje*,' that is, Indra regi'R^
priest, Rishi : according to Sayat.a, ‘ the beholder of all the Aryan iw*



THE RIG VEDA.


141


iy 17.3

The men, the people magnify that Indra with their Sama songs,
tV i th hymns and sacred eulogies :

iim who advances them to wealth, sends light to lead them
in the war,

\nd quells their foemcn in the fray.

Way he, the saviour much-invoked, may Indra bear us in a
ship

Safely beyond all enemies.

Vs such, 0 indra. honour us with gifts of booty, further us,
Vnd lead us to felicity.

HYMN XVII. i„< Jra .

?ome, we have pressed the juice fur thee ; 0 Indra, drink
this Soma here :

$it thou on this my sacred grass.

3 Indra, let thy long maned Bays, yoked by prayer, bring
thee hitherward :

live car and listen to our prayers.

Ye Soma-bearing Brahmans call thee Soma-drinker with thy
friend,

Ye, Indra, bringing Soma juice.

3omo unto us who bring the juice, come unto this our eulogy,
hxir visored ! drink thou of the juice.

1 pour it down within thee, so through all thy members let it
spread :

lake with thy tongue the pleasant drink.

jweet to thy body let it bo, delicious be the savoury juice :

hveet be the Soma to thine heart.

dke women, let this Soma draught, invested with its robe,
approach,

) active Indra, close to thee.

rnlra, transported with the juice, vast in his bulk, strong in

his neck

bid stout arms, smites the Vritras down.

^dra, go thou forward, thou who rulest over all by might :
h°u Vritra-slayer slay the fiends.

he thy grasping-hook wherewith thou givest ample wealth
to him

^ ho sheds the juice and worships thee.

\u‘! •' Iudra’s companion, th© thunderbolt. ‘With suitable

WiU,n.

flilk that € '‘ \ <lre ^ G(l white garments and moving slowly. Its robe:



THE HYMNS OF


142


[BOOR yjjj


1 1 Here, Indra, is thy Soma-draught, made pure upon the sacred

grass :

Run hither, come and drink thereof.

12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well ! this juice is shed

for thy delight :

Thou art invoked, Akhandala !

13 To Kundapayya, grandson’s son, grandson of Sringavrish ' to

thee,** *

To him have I addressed my thought.

14 Strong pillar thou, Lord of the home ! armour of Soma-offerers
The drop of Soma breaketh all the strongholds down, an

Indra is the Kish is’ Friend.

15 Holy Pridakusanu, winner of the spoil, one eminent o’er man]

men,

Lead on the wild horse Indra with his vigorous grasp forwart
to drink the Soma juice.


HYMN XVIII. Adityu

Now let the mortal offer prayer to win the unexampled grace
Of these Adityas and their aid to cherish life.


12 Famed for thy radiance, worshipped well: the words thus rendered,
stitch igo aud sttchipUjana , have not been satisfactorily explained by the Com-
mentator, and their meaning is still uncertain. According to Siiyaiin, tk
former may mean ‘thou whose cattle are strong,’ or ‘thou whose radiand
is renowned,’ and the latter ‘thou of renowned adoration ’ or ‘whose hymn,
are renowned * 8ee Wilson’s note. Thou urt invoked, Akhandalal : or, ‘Thou,
0 Destroyer, art invoked.’ This appellation of Indra does not occur agaiu is
the Rigveda, 8ee Muir, 0 S. 'Texts, IV. 190.

13 Kvndaplyya and Sringavrish appear hero to be names of men. Accord
ing to S&yana, knndaptityya is the name of a particular Soma ceremony, and
the offspring of Sringavrish is Indra himself. ‘(Indra), who wad: the off
spring of Sringavrish, of whom the kundapdyya rite was the protector, (the
sages) have fixed (of old) their minds upon this ceremony.’ See Wilson*
note who observes that ‘ tho construction is loose, aud the exphuiationnk
very satisfactory.’

14 Lord of the home : apparently the householder who institutes the satfi
fice is addressed, he vdstoshpate grihapate. — tt&yana. The Riskin'
munindm sakhd , the friend of the Munis, sages, saintly men or ascetics; of n*
Rishis, according to S&yana.

15 Priddkusdnu : I follow Ludwig in taking this to be the name of the
insti tutor of the sacrifice. According to Sftyana who explains it as 'lif^
up the head or back like a serpent,’ or * to be propitiated, as a serpent is,
gems, charms, medicaments, etc.,’ it is an epithet of Indra ; and the le*®*
forward of Indra in the second line is the worshipper, understood. 11^
mania banishes the last three stanzas to his Appendix as not originally for®*
ing part of the hymn.

1 Adityat: see I. 14, 3.



THE RIO VEDA.


143


rj/zv 18.1


for not an enemy molests the paths which these Adityas tread :
Infallible guards, they strengthen us in happiness,
tfow soon may Bhaga, Savitar, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman
Give us the shelter widely spread which we implore.

With Gods come thou whose fostering care none checks, O
Goddess Aditi :

Come, dear to many, with the Lords who guard us well.

For well these Sons of Aditi know to keep enmities aloof :
Unrivalled, giving ample room, they save from woe.

Aditi guard our herd by day, Aditi, free from guile, by night,
Aditi, ever strengthening, save us from grief !

And in the day our hymn is this : May Aditi come nigh to help,
With loving-kindness bring us weal and chase our foes.

And may the Asvins, the divine Pair of Physicians, send us
health :

May they remove iniquity and chase our foes.

May Agni bless us with his fires, and Surya warm us
pleasantly :

May the pure Wind breathe sweet on us, and chase our foes,
i Drive ye disease and strife away, drive yo away malignity :
Adityas, keep us ever far from sore distress.


Remove from us the arrow, keep famine, Adityas ! far away :

Keep enmities afar from us, Lords of all wealth !

! Now, 0 Adityas, grant to us the shelter that lets man go free,

Yea, even the sinner from his sin, ye Bounteous Gods !

► Whatever mortal with the power of demons fain would
injure us,

May he, impetuous, suffer harm by his own deeds.

1 May sin o’ertake our human foe, the man who speaketh evil
things,

Him who would cause our misery, whose heart is false.

) Gods, ye are with the simple ones, ye know each mortal
your hearts :

Ye, Vasus, well discriminate the false and true.

} Kain would we have the sheltering aid of mountains and
water-floods :

Keep far from us iniquity, O Heaven and Earth.

? So with auspicious sheltering aid do yo, 0 Vasus, carry us

Beyond all trouble and distress, borne in your ship.


in


of


4 With the Lords : sHrihhth ; that is, the Gods.

With the power of demons : ‘ from his diabolical nature.’— Wilson.



THE ffYMXS OF


144


[BOOK Via


18 Adityas, ye Most Mighty Ones, grant to our children and

their seed

Extended term of life that they may live long days.

19 Sacrifice, 0 Adityas, is your inward monitor : be kind,

For in the bond of kindred we are bound to you.

20 The Maruts’ high protecting aid, the Asvins, and the God

who saves,

Mitra and Varuin for weal we supplicate.

21 Grant us a home with triple guard, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna!
Unthreatened, Maruta ! meet for praise, and tilled with men.

22 And as we human beings, 0 Adityas, are akin to death, *
Graciously lengthen ye our lives that wo may live.

HYMN XIX.

Sing praise to him, the Lord of Light. The Gods have made
the God to be their messenger,

And sent oblation to the Gods.

2 A:ni, the Bounteous Giver, bright with varied flames, laud

thou, 0 singer Sobhari —

Him who controls this sacred food with Soma blent, who hath
first claim to sacrifice.

3 Thee have we chosen skilfullest in sacrifice, Immortal Priest

among the Gods,’

Wise finisher of this holy rite :

4 The Son of Strength, the blesskl, brightly-shining One, Agni

whose light is excellent.

M ty he by sacrifice win us in heaven the grace of Mitra,
Varuna, and the Floods.

5 The mortal who hath ministered to Agui with oblation, fuel

r.tual lore,

And reverence, skilled in sacrifice,


19 Your inward monitor : or neir remembrancer, not suffering you to reu
until you have rewarded men for their devotions. Ludwig gays that tin
Juf/th of the text is leally hi Uah For sacrifice, Adityas, is your neaiesi
dwelling pi tee

20 Tin (rod who saves: Imlra, who is especially the tutelary Oml of A'vaiw

21 With triple fjnanl. or, triply defending or defended According h
SAjaoa, protecting from heat, cold, and wot ; or three-stoi eyed.

22 Akin to death: born subject to death.

1 The Gods: in the first line are, according to S&y.uia, the priests, i. ^
who praise : dim/anti stuvantiti devd ritvijo ; but the word may be taken u
its ordinary signification.

5 Ritual lore : ridena here can hardly mean, as SAyana explains it, ty
studying the Vedo’ It may perhaps mean ‘ by knowledge of the l jro P, crU ^
of the saccd formulas.’ or hh M Muller says, ‘by the bundle of gras* ub
in sacrifice. See Anc. S. Literature . p. 28, note, and p. 205.



THE RIO VEDA.


UB


TJLV 19.]

$ Verily swift to run are his fleet-footed steeds, and most re-
splendent fame is his.

No trouble caused by Gods or wrought by mortal man from
any side o’ertaketh him.

f May we by thine own fires be well supplied with fire, 0 Son
of Strength, 0 Lord of Might :

Thou as our Friend hast worthy men.

} Agni, who praises like a guest of friendly mind, is as a car
f that brings us gear.

| Also in thee is found perfect security : thou art the Sovran
Lord of wealth.

) That man, moreover, merits praise who brings, auspicious
Agni, sacrificial gifts :

May he win riches by his thoughts.

0 He for whose sacrifice thou standest up erect is prosperous

and rules o’er men.

He wins with coursers and with singers skilled in song : with
heroes he obtains the prize.

1 He in whoso dwelling Agni is chief ornament, and, all-desired,

loves his laud well,

And zealously tends his offerings —

2 His, or the lauding sage’s word, his, Son of Strength ! who is

most prompt with sacred gifts,

Set thou beneath the Gods, Vasu, above mankind, the speech
of the intelligent.

3 He who with sacrificial gifts or homage bringeth very skilful

Agni nigh,

I Or him who flashes fast with song,

|4 The mortal who with blazing fuel, as his laws command,
adores the Perfect God,

Blest with his thoughts in splendour shall exceed all men, as
though he overpassed the floods.

& Give us the splendour, Agni, which may overcome each
greedy fiend in our abode,

The wrath of evil-hearted folk.


7 Hast worthy men: in us thy woi shippers.

10 With coursers and with singers : is successful in chariot-races and is
1 aided by the Gods for his sacrifices.

beneath the Gods and above mankind, is rud to mean * spread
ough all the sky.’ The meaning of this and the preceding stanza is some-

obscurely expressed.

^Uibie, P clmpleto!'’ <e; eiplained by S4y ™ a as akhandaniycm,



THE HYMNS OF


H6


[BOOK VUi


16 That, wherewith Mitra, Vanina, and Aryaman, the Asvinj

Bhaga give us light, ’ '

That may we, by thy power finding best furtherance, worship
0 Indra, helped by thee. "

17 0 Agni, most devout are they, the sages who have set thee

Sage exceeding wise,

0 God, for men to look upon :

18 Who have arranged thine altar. Blessed God, at morn, brought

thine oblation, pressed the juice.

They by their deeds of strength have won them mighty]
wealth, who have set all their hope in thee.

19 May Agni worshipped bring us bliss, may the gift, Bles

One, and sacrifice bring bliss :

Yea, may our praises bring us bliss.

20 Show forth the mind that brings success in war with fien

wherewith thou conquerest in tight.

Bring down the many firm hopes of our enemies, and let
vanquish with thine aid.

21 I praise with song the Friend of man, whom Gods sent do

to be herald and messenger,

Best worshipper, bearer of our gifts.

22 Thou unto sharp-toothed Agni, Young and Radiant G(

proelaimest with thy song the feast —

Agni, who for our sweet strains moulds heroic strength wh
sacred oil is offered him,

23 While, served with sacrificial oil, now upward and now do«

ward Agni moves his sword,

As doth the Asura his robe.


24 The God, the Friend of man, who bears our gifts to heave

the God with his sweet-smelling mouth,

Distributes, skilled in sacrifice, his precious things, Invokii
Priest, Immortal God.

25 Son of Strength, Agni, if thou wert the mortal, bright

Mitra ! worshipped with our gifts !

And I were the Immortal God,


16 That : radiance or splendour.

20 Bring down the many fim hopes : there is no substantive in the tel
and hopes, resolves, thoughts or something similar must be supplied.

21 The Fiiend of man : or mdnurhitam may mean ‘him who was establisl
cd by Manus.’

23 His sword: the flashing flame. The Asura ; the Sun, according 1
SAy*$a. Kobe : outward form.



THE RIG VEDA.


147


YMN 19.]


; I would not give thee up, Vasu, to calumny or misery, O
Bounteous One.

My worshipper should feel no hunger or distress, nor, Agni,
should he live in sin.

[ Like a son cherished in his father’s house, let our oblation
rise unto the Gods.

\ With thine immediate aid may I, excellent Agni, ever gain
my wish,

A mortal with a God to help.

} 0 Agni. by thy wisdom, by thy bounties, by thy leading may
I gather wealth.

Excellent Agni, thou art called my Providence : delight thou
to be liberal.

) Agni, he conquers by thine aid that brings him store of noble
heroes and great strength,

Whose bond of friendship is thy choice.

. Thy spark is black and crackling, kindled in due time

0 Bounteous, it is taken up.

Thou art the dear Friend of the mighty Mornings: thou
shinest in glimmerings of the night.

\ We Sobharis have come to him, for succour, who is good to help
with thousand powers,

The Sovran, Trasadasyu’s Friend.

) 0 Agni, thou on whom all other fires depend, as branches on
the parent stem,

I make the treasures of the folk, like songs, mine own, while

1 exalt thy sovran might.

1 The mortal vyhom, Adityas, ye, Guileless, lead to the farther bank

Of all the princes, Bounteous Ones ! —

) Whoe’er he be, Man-ruling Kings ! the Regent of the race of
men —

May we, 0 Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, like him be further*
ers of your law.

5 ^ fifty female slaves hath Trasadasyu given me, Puru*

kutsa’s son, v

Most liberal, kind, lord of the brave.


33 ^ neglect of the Gods in consequence of poverty,

[an other men * eC ° *2 Rppear " t0 be : <l praise A gni better

"f they were f ° r reWWd *

generaUndwi • ixwtttf means usually a bride, a wife, a woman

Aquerert im here " an dm a >ds or female slaves, the wives or daughters of
ler feuialft *ffi pea r ** rnean t- According to von Roth, marts or

female draught-animals are intended.



THAI UXM.JS8 Uf


140


ilSUUK VIII


37 And Syava too for me led forth a strong steed at Suvastu’s
ford :

A herd of three times seventy kine, good lord of gifts, he gave
to me.

HYMN XX. Marute.

Let none, Swift Travellers ! check you : come hither, like.

spirited, stay not far away,

Ye benders even of what is firm.

2 Maruts, Ribhukshans, Rudras, come ye with your cars strong

fellied and exceeding bright.

Come, ye for whom we long, with food, to sacrifice, come ye
with love to Sobhari.

3 For well we know the vigorous might of Rudra’s Sons, the

Maruts, who are passing strong,

Swift Vishnu’s band, who send the rain.

4 Islands are bursting forth and misery is stayed : the heaven

and earth are joined in one.

Decked with bright rings, ye spread the broad expanses out,
when ye, Self-luminous, stirred yourselves.

5 Even things immovable shake and reel, the mountains and the

forest trees at your approach,

And the earth trembles as ye come.

6 To lend free course, 0 Maruts, to your furious rush, heaven

high and higher still gives way,

Where they, the Heroes mighty with their arms, display their
gleaming ornaments on their forms.

7 After their Godlike nature they, the bull-like Heroes, dazzling

and impetuous, wear
Great splendour as they show erect.

37 Suvfotu is in all probability the So.istos of Arrian (Suwad or Swat) near
the Kdphfin or Kabul river. Kine: there is no substantive in the text. The
stanza, which has no comment in the printed edition, is very obscure and can
be only conjecturally translated. See Ludwig’s Translation and Commentary
I. 427, and IV. 380.


4 S&yana seems to explain this verse, ‘ The islands fall asunder, Me fir^
(trees) experience distress ; they (the winds) distress heaven and earth ,
waters hurry onward, 0 bright weaponed, self-shining ones, when y° ,l J$ l
them.*— E. B. C/s note in Wilson’s Translation. The stanza is airncu •
l have followed, generally, Ludwig’s version. Islands: the higher unw
merged grounds. Misery : caused by the preceding hot and dry wea , '
Are joined in one: as the heavy rain obscures the horizon. Bright i
worn on the arms or the ankles or carried by the Maruts ou their shou
See I. 166. 9. . c . , r(ci:

7 Bull-like: the exact meaning of vrlshapsavah is uncertain, o/ww
ahrutapsavah is conjecturally translated. ^



THE RIG VEDA.


VYMN 20 .]


140


8 The pivot of the Sobharis’ chariot within the golden box is

balmed with milk.

May they the Well-born, Mighty, kindred of the Cow, aid us
to food and to delight.

9 Bring, ye who sprinkle balmy drops, oblations to your vigorous

Marut company,

To those whose leader is the Bull.

[0 Come hither, 0 ye Maruts, on your strong-horsed car, solid in
look, with solid naves.

Lightly like winged falcons, 0 ye Heroes, come, come to enjoy
our offerings.

[1 Their decoration is the same: their ornaments of gold are
bright upon their arms ;

Their lances glitter splendidly.

2 They toil not to defend their bodies from attack, strong He-
roes with their mighty arms.

Strong are your bows and strong the weapons in your cars,
and glory sits on every face.

[3 Whose name extendeth like a sea, aloue, resplendent, so that
all have joy in it,

And life-power like ancestral might.

[4 Pay honour to these Maruts and sing praise to them, for of
the wheel-spokes of the car

Of these loud roarers none is last : this is their power, this
moves them to give mighty gifts.

15 Blest by your favouring help was he, 0 Maruts, at the earlier
flushings of the morn,

And even now shall he be blest.

.6 The strong man to whose sacrifice, 0 Heroes, ye approach
that ye may taste thereof,

With glories and with war that wiuneth spoil shall gain great
bliss, ye Shakers of the world.

t7 Even as Rudra's Sons, the brood of the Creator Dyaus, the
Asura, desire,

0 You thful Ones, so shall it be :

8 Box: the interior of the chariot. With milk: with fertilizing rain sent
the Maruts. The Cow : Piisni.

9 1 e icha sprinkle balmy drops : nests who offer libations. Whose leader
* „ Bull •' whom Indra leads. Or, it may be, whose chariot is drawn by
3ull8, as in the following stanza.

U 1°°^ : or bull-like, or strong look.

4 None is last : no part of their chariot wheel is behind the rest in speed.
u« moves them to give mighty gifts : or, this (characteristic belongs to them)
f^ough greatness of their gifts.

He; your worshipper.



150 TBS BYMNS OF [BOOK Vlli

18 And these the bounteous, worthy of the Maruts who move

onward pouring down the rain —

Even for their sake, 0 Youthful Ones, with kindest heart take
us to you to be your own.

19 0 Sobhari, with newest song sing out unto the youthful puri-

fying Bulls,

Even as a plougher to his steers.

20 Who, like a celebrated boxer, overcome the challengers in every

fight :

They who, like shining bulls, are most illustrious-honour
those Maruts with thy song.

21 Allied by common ancestry, ye Maruts, even the Cows, alike

in energy,

Lick, all by turns, each other’s head.

22 Even mortal man, ye Dancers breast-adorned with gold, attains

to brotherhood with yon.

Mark ye and notice us, 0 Maruts ; evermore your friendship
is secured to us.

23 0 Maruts, rich in noble gifts, bring us a portion of the Maruts’

medicine,

Ye Coursers who are Friends to us.

24 Haters of those who serve you not, bliss-bringers, bring us

bliss with those auspicious aids ,

Wherewith ye are victorious and guard Sindhu well, and suc-
cour Krivi in his need.

25 Maruts, who rest on fair trimmed grass, what balm soever

Sindhu or Asikni hath,

Or mountains or the seas contain,

26 Ye carry on your bodies, ye who see it all : so bless us gracious j

therewith. . , . ,

Cast, Maruts, to the ground our sick man s malady : rep

the dislocated limb.


18 The bounteous : the liberal institutors of sacrifice.

19 Purifying bulls: the strong Maruts who send the Bweet rain.

21 Allied by common ancestry: as the offspring ; of Bp?™- * ^

Maruts. Lick....eack other's head : as they crowd together in i their c
According to SAyana, ‘ the cows severally lick up the quarters o )

22 Ye Dancers : ye who dance through the air.

24 Krivi : the eponymus of a warrior tribe in the ben

combined with, or identical with the p anchAlas. SAy^a ’^Wilson,
to mean a well : ‘ with which you provided a well (f or Uotama;. ir>

25 Asikni : the Aoesines of Quintus Curtins, the Vedie name of the tw

bhAzA, the modern ChenAb. » » i fmrae * — Wils° n

26 Redact the dislocated limb : ' re-e»tabh»h bis enfeebled fr*me-



jYMN 21 .]


THE RIG VEDA


151


HYMN XXI. Indra.

We call on ^ e0, ^ Matchless One ! We seeking help, posses-
sing nothing firm ourselves,

Call on thee wonderful in fight :

2 On thee for aid in sacrifice. This youth of ours, the hold,

the mighty, hath gone forth.

We therefore, we thy friends, Indra, have chosen thee, free-
giver, as our Guardian God.

3 Come hither, for the drops are here, 0 Lord of corn-lands,

Lord of horses, Lord of kine :

Drink thou the Soma, Soma’s Lord !

4 For we the kinless singers have drawn hither thee, 0 Indra,

who hast numerous kin.

With all the forms thou hast, come thou of bull-like strength,
come near to drink the Soma juice.

5 Sitting like birds beside thy meath, mingled with milk, that

gladdeneth and exalte th thee,

Indra, to thee we sing aloud.

6 We speak to thee with this our reverential prayer. Why

art thou pondering yet awhile ?

Here are our wishes ; thou art liberal, Lord of Bays : we and
our hymns are present here.

7 For not in recent times alone, 0 Indra, Thunder-armed, have

we obtained thine aid.

Of old we knew thy plenteous wealth.

8 Hero, we knew thy friendship and thy rich rewards: these,

Thunderer, now we crave of thee.

0 Vasil, for all wealth that cometh of the kine, sharpen our
powers, fair-visored God.

G Him who of old hath brought to us this and that blessing,
him I magnify for you,

Even Indra, 0 my friends, for help :

10 Borne by Bay Steeds, the Lord of heroes, ruling men, for it
is he who takes delight.

i May Maghavan bestow on us his worshippers hundreds of
cattle and of steeds.

1 Hero, may we, with thee for Friend, withstand the man who

pants against us in his wrath,

In fight with people rich in kine.

2 May we be victors in the singer’s battle-song, and meet the

wicked, Much-invoked !


2 ThU youth of ours : the noble who has instituted the sacrifice.



152 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VJij

With heroes smite the foeman and show forth our strength.
0 Indra, further thou our thoughts.

13 0 Indra, from all ancient time rivalless ever and compani.

onless art thou :

Thou seekest comradeship in war.

14 Thou findest not the wealthy man to be thy friend: those

scorn thee who are flown with wine.

What time thou thunderest and gatherest, then thou, even as
a Father, art invoked.

15 0 Indra, let us not, like fools who waste their lives at home,

with friendship such as thine
Sit idly by the poured-out juice.

1G Giver of kine, may we not miss thy gracious gifts : lot ua not
rob thee of thine own.

Strip even the strong places of the foe, and bring : thy gifts
can never be made vain.

17 Indra or blest Sarasvati alone bostows such wealth, treasure

so great, or thou,

0 Chitra, on the worshipper.

18 Chitra is King, and only kinglings are the rest who dwell

beside Sarasvati.

He, like Parjanya with his rain, hath spread himself with
thousand, yea, with myriad gifts.

HYMN XXII. Asvin*.

Hitherward have I called today, for succour, that moat
wondrous car

Which ye ascended, Asvins, yc whose paths are red, swift to
give ear, for Surya’s sake.

2 Car ever young, much longed-for, easily invoked, soon guided,
first in deeds of might.

Which waits and serves, 0 Sobhari, with benevolence, without
a rival or a foe.

13 Thou seefeest comradeship in war: befrieudest thy worshippers when
they need thine assistance in battle.

14 Gatherest: the clouds. - M Muller.

17 Chitra: the name of this king d<>es not occur elsewhere in the Ttigv r eda.

18 Kiivj : rtij'l Kinyliwjs : rdjablfh. Parjanya: God of the rain cloud,
regarded as the type of liberal beneficence.

1 Ye whose paths are red : rudravartard : this epithet of the Asvins h
variously explained ; ‘ having a path which causes weeping in battle,

‘ whose paths are praised,’ — Sly ana ; ‘advancing on the path to battle'*
Wilson; ‘ proceeding on terrible roads.’ — Muir; ‘going on Kudra’s
Ludwig; ‘on your light path.’— Grassmann ; ‘going on a reddish P ath v
Pischel. See Vedisehe Studien , I., pp. 15 and 55 — 60. For SHvyd i i<iUi ^
choot the Asvins as her husbands. See 1. 110. 17*



THE R IQ VEDA.


153


^yMN 22 .]

[3 These Asvins with our homage, these Two Omnipresent
Deities

Hitherward will we bring for kind help, these who seek the
dwelling of the worshipper.

4 One of your chariot wheels is moving swiftly round, one

speeds for you its onward course.

Like a milch-cow, 0 Lords of splendour, and with haste let
your benevolence come to us.

5 That chariot of yours which hath a triple seat and reins of

gold,

The famous car that traverseth the heaven and earth, thereon
Nasatyas, Asvins, come.

5 Ye with your plough, when favouring Manu with your help,
ploughed the first harvest in the sky.

As such will we exalt you, Lords of splendour, now, 0 Asvins,
with our prayer and praise.

7 Come to us, Lords of ample wealth, by paths of everlasting Law,
Whereby to high dominion ye with mighty strength raised

Trikshi, Trasadasyu’s son.

8 This Soma pressed with stones is yours, ye Heroes, Lords of

plenteous wealth.

Approach to drink the Soma, come, drink in the worshipper's
abode.

9 0 Asvins, mount the chariot, mount the golden seat, ye who

aro Lords of plenteous wealth,

And bring to us abundant food.

0 The aids wherewith ye helped Paktha and Adhrigu, and

Babhru severed from his friends, —

With those, 0 Asvins, come hither with speed and soon, and
heal whatever is diseased.

1 When we continually invoke the Asvins, the resistless, at this

time of day,

We lovers of the song, with songs,


* The movements of the two wheels are not very intelligibly described. See
•tO. 19, and V. 73 3 Like a milch-cow: a common type of liberality.

6 Plowjhed the first harvest: fu si ploughed the ground and sowed and

toped: that ia, taught, by example, men to do so. Cp. I. 117. 21 : 4 Ploughing
?* s . ow ' n K barley, 0 ye Asvins, milking out food for men, ye wonder-workers,
poi/th w ^h y°ur trumpet, ye have bestowed wide light

7 Tnhhi : see VI 46. 8.

IQ Adf/trt, AdhriyU) and Babhru are said to have been kings.



THE HYMNS OF


154


[BOOK Viti


12 Through these, ye Mighty Ones, come hither to my call which

brings all blessings, wears all forms, —

Through wuich, All-present Heroes, lavishest of food y e
strengthened Krivi, come through these.

13 I speak to both of these as such, these Asvins whom I rever-

ence at this time of day :

With homage we entreat them both.

14 Ye who are Lords of splendour, ye whose paths are red, &t

eve, at morn, at sacrifice,

Give us not utterly as prey to mortal foe, ye Rudras, Lords
of ample wealth.

15 For bliss I call the blissful car, at morn the inseparable Asvins

with their car
I call, like Sobhari our sire.

16 Rapid as thought, and strong, and speeding to the joy, bring-

ing your swiftly-coming help,

Be to us a protection even from far away, Lords of great wealth,
with many aids.

17 Come, Wonder-Workers, to our home, our home, 0 Asvins,

rich in cattle, steeds, and gold,

Chief drinkers of the Soma’s juice !

18 Choice-worthy strength, heroic, firm and excellent, uninjured

by the Rakshas foe,

At this your coming nigh, ye Lords of ample wealth and all
good things, may we obtain.


HYMN XXIII. Agni,

Worship thou Jata vedas, pray to him who willingly accepts,
Whose smoke wanders at will, and none may grasp his flame.

2 Thou, all men’s friend, Visvamanas, exaltest Agni with thy

song,

The Giver, and his flames with which no cars contend.

3 Whose resolute assault, to win vigour and food, deserves oui

praise, —


12 Krivi: see VIII. 20. 24.

14 Ye Rudras : ye red-hued or bright Goda.

17 Rick in cattle : proleptic ; which your coming will make rich.

The Rishi is Visvamanas the son of Vyasva.

1 Wko williayly accepts : p vat ivy dm : according to S Ay ana, * disposed to

encounter enemies ' ,

2 The second line is difficult, as the adjective vishpardhasah stands withou
a substantive and may be either the accusative plural or the genitive singular ■
4 who is the giver <»f chariots to the unenvious (worshipper).’ — Wibon.

3 Assault : on the oblations whioh the fire consumes.



THE RIO FED A.


155


YMF 23 *1

Through whose discovering power the priest obtaineth

wealth.

Up springs the imperishable flame, the flame of the Reful-
gent One

Most bright, with glowing jaws and glory in his train.

; Skilled in fair sacrifice, extolled, arise in Godlike loveliness,
Shining with lofty splendour, with effulgent light.

; Called straight to our oblations, come, 0 Agni, through our
eulogies,

As thou hast been our envoy bearing up our gifts,
r i ca ll your Agni, from of old Invoking Priest of living men :

Him with this song I laud and magnify for you.

\ Whom, wondrous wise, they animate with solemn rites and
his fair form,

Kind as a friend to men who keep the holy Law.

) Him, true to Law, who perfecteth the sacrifice, Law-loving
ones !

Ye with your song have gratified in the place of prayer.

) May all our sacrifices go to him the truest Angiras,

Who is among mankind the most illustrious Priest.

L Imperishable Agni, thine are all these high enkindled lights,
Like horses and like stallions showing forth their strength.

I So give us, Lord of Power and Might, riches combined with
hero strength,

And guard us with our sons and grandsons in our frays.

3 Soon as the eager Lord of men is friendly unto Manu’s race,
Agni averteth from us all the demon host.
i 0 Hero Agni, Lord of men, on hearing this new laud of mine,
Burn down the Rakshasas, enchanters, with thy flame.

B No mortal foe can e’er prevail by arts of magic over him
Who serveth Agni well with sacrificial gifts.

3 Vyasva the sage, who sought the Bull, hath won thee, finder
of good things :

As such may we enkindle thee for ample wealth,
f Usana KA,vya stablished thee, 0 Agni, as Invoking Priest :
Thee, Jatavedas, Sacrificing Priest for man.


9 Lawloving ones: ‘pious worshippers.’ — Wilson. Have Ratified: or

U8t gratify.

18 Who sought the Bull : the strong Agui. According to SAyapa, ' the
lowerer (of rain).’

H Uifand Kdvya : see Yol. I., Index.



156


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK V h

18 All Deities of one accord appointed thee their messenger:
Thou, God, through hearing, hadst first claim to sacrifice.

19 Him may the mortal hero make his own immortal messenge

Far-spreading, Purifier, him whose path is black. c

20 With lifted ladles let us call him splendid with his brilli ai]

flame,

Men’s ancient Agni, wasting not, adorable.

21 The man who pays the worship due to him with sacrificial gift
Obtains both plenteous nourishment and hero fame.

22 To Jatavedas Agni, chief in sacrifices, first of all
With homage goes the ladle rich with sacred gifts.

23 Even as Vyasva did, may we with these most high and libera

hymns

Pay worship unto Agni of the splendid flame.

24 Now sing, as Sthuiayfipa sang, with lauds to him who spread

eth far,

To Agni of the home, 0 Rishi, Vyasva’s son.

25 As welcome guest of human kind, as offspring of the fores!

kings,

The sages worship ancient Agni for his aid.

26 For men’s oblations brought to him who is the mighty Lord

of all,

Sit, Agni, mid our homage, on the sacred grass.

27 Grant us abundant treasures, grant the opulence which many

crave,

With store of heroes, progeny, and high renown.

28 Agni, Most Youthful of the Gods, send evermore the gift of

wealth

Unto Varosushaman and to all his folk.

29 A mighty Conqueror art thou. 0 Agni, so disclose to us
Food in our herds of kine and gain of ample wealth.

30 Thou, Agni, art a glorious God : bring hither Mitra, Varunn,

Imperial Sovrans, holy-minded, true to Law. ,

18 Through hearing : and, by causing the Gods to hear, men’s prayers.

24 Sthtiray&pa : said by HAyana to be the name of a Rishi.

25 Forest kings : tall trees, or trees in general.

28 Varosush/lman : I follow the St. Petersburg Lexicon in joining ? a,<>
iushJXmtie and taking the whole as one word and the name of a chief. Luawtf
translates somewhat as follows : 1 Agni, send quickly to the folk who kbo
the goodly SAnian well, the gift of wealth, for ever, Youngest God ! to *
But in a later volume of his work (III. p. 162) he comes to the conclj 81
that SushAraan is a proper name, aftd that va.ro (which may, he thinks, w
interjection) must not be combined with it,



THE RIG VET) A.


157


fXX 24.]

HYMN XXIV\ Indra.

Companions, let us learn a prayer to Indra whom the thunder

arms,

To glorify your bold and most heroic Friend.

) p or thou by slaying Vritra art the Vritra-slayer, famed for
rflight.

Thou, Hero, in rich gifts surpassest wealthy chiefs.

\ As such, when glorified, bring us riches of very wondrous
; fame,

j s e t in Jie highest rank, Wealth-giver, Lord of Bays !
jf Yea, Indra, thou disclosest that preeminent dear wealth of
men :

Boldly, 0 Bold One, glorified, bring it to us.
i The workers of destruction stay neither thy right hand nor
thy left :

Nor hosts that press about thee, Lord of Bays, in fight,
j) 0 Thunder-armed, I come with songs to thee as to a stall
with kine :

Fulfil the wish and thought of him who sings thy praise.

Chief Vritra-slayer, through the hymn of Visvamanas think
of all,

All that concemeth us, Excellent, Mighty Guide.

i May we, 0 Vritra-slayer, 0 Hero, find this thy newest boon,
Longed-for, and excellent, thou who art much invoked !

> 0 Indra, Dancer, Much-invoked ! as thy great power is un-
surpassed,

So he thy bounty to the worshipper unchecked.

) Most Mighty, most heroic One, for mighty bounty fill thee full.
Though strong, strengthen thyself to win wealth, Maghavan 1

1 0 Thunderer, never have our prayers gone forth to any God

but thee :

So help us, Maghavan, with thine assistance now.

2 For, Dancer, verily I find none else for bounty, saving thee,

| For splendid wealth and power, thou Lover of the Song.

B For Indra pour ye out the drops ; meath blent with Soma let
him drink :

With bounty and with majesty will he further us.

twicer : of the dance of war. According to S&yana, 1 dancer, or who
dance, i. e. agitator, exciter, from Indra’a faculty of internal impulse
PwlbeingB.*- Wilson.



158 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR F//;

14 1 spake to the Bay Coursers’ Lord, to him who gives ability; '
Now hear the son of Asva as he praises thee.

15 Never was any Hero born before thee mightier than thou;
None certainly like thee in goodness and in wealth.

16 0 ministering priest, pour out of the sweet juice what glad.

dens most : •

So is the Hero praised who ever prospers us.

17 Indra, whom Tawny Coursers bear, praise such as thine,

preeminent,

None by his power or by his goodness hath attained.

18 We, seeking glory, have invoked this Master of all power and

might

Who must be glorified by constant sacrifice.

19 Come, sing we praise to Indra, friends, the Hero who deserves

the laud,

Him who with none to aid o’ercomes all tribes of men.

20 To him who wins the kine, who keeps no cattle back, Celes-

tial God,

Speak wondrous speech more sweet than butter and than
meath.

21 Whose hero powers are measureless, whose bounty ne’er may

be surpassed,

Whose liberality, like light, is over all.

22 As Vyasva did, praise Indra, praise the Strong unfluctuating

Guide,

Who gives the foe’s possessions to the worshipper.

23 Now, son of Vyasva, praise thou him who to the tenth time

still is new,

The very Wise, whom living men must glorify.

24 Thou knowest, Indra, Thunder-armed, how to avoid destructive

powers,

As one secure from pitfalls each returning day.


14 Son of Asva: i. e. of Vyasva, the Rishi \ Lvamanas.

20 Who keeps no cattle back : either literally who aids his worshipped J
win cattle in their raids and gives them all the booty ; or, who send? ™ r k
the kine or rays of light that he has recovered from the powers ot damn
According to SHyana, ‘ who rejects no praise.’

23 Who to the tenth time still is new : continually renews Hia UberA . llt L h(

us. This seems to be the meaning of the da^amdm ndvam (tenth new) o
text. S&yana explains differently : * who is the tenth (of the pervading
principles), the adorable.' . i

24 Destructive powers : the plural of Nirriti, Death or Destruction,
adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of the second line.



THE RIO VEDA.


159


jyMN 25.]

5 0 Indra, bring that aid wherewith of old, Most Wondrous !

thou didst slay

His foes for active Kutsa : send it down to us.

6 So now we seek thee fresh in might, Most Wonderful in act !

for gain :

F<y thou art he who conquers all our foes for us.

17 Who will set free from ruinous woe, or Arya on the Seven

Streams :

0 valiant Hero, bend the Dasa’s weapon down.

18 As to Varosushaman thou broughtest great riches, for their

gain,

To Vyasva’s sons, Blest Lady, rich in ample wealth !

[9 Let Narya’s sacrificial meed reach Vyasva’s Soma-bearing sons :

In hundreds and in thousands be the great reward.

10 If one should ask thee, Where is he who sacrificed ? Whither
I lookest thou 1

Like Vala he hath passed away and dwellcth now on Gomati.

HYMN XXV. Mitra-Varuna.

1 WORSHIP you who guard this All, Gods holiest among the
Gods,

You, faithful to the Law, whose power is sanctified.

2 So, too, like charioteers are they, Mitra and sapient Varuna,
Sons high-born from of old, whose holy laws stand fast.

3 These Twain, possessors of all wealth, most glorious, for

supremest sway

Aditi, Mighty Mother, true to Law, brought forth.

27 Arya on the Seven Streams: from any Aryan enemy in the land of the
even Rivers, probably the Indus, the five rivers of the Panjftb, and the
'ubha.

2S V arosush&man : see VIII. 23. 28. Blest Lady: Ushas or Dawn is

id rested.

29 X dry as saci'ijicial meed : Ndrya appears to be the name of the institutor
f the sacrifice.

: 30 Ludwig observes : * This stanza clearly refers to the greatness of the
6ward given by Nary a, and its meaning is : here are so many cows (presented
J Nihya) that one might think that, in cousequence of the sacrifice, Vala had
jven up his cows [which he had str den from the Gods, and hidden In a cave],
pd taken his departure.’ Ushas says also, * my cows are quite superfluous
r re T > and I will drive them away to some other place.’ The stanza is addressed
|> huhaa, ami the second line is the answer she is to give to the question
ntained in the first. Gomati : some affluent of the Indus, which in later
Jjes lent its name to the Gomati, or Gumti, which flows through Oudh and
Us l »to the Ganges.

2 Chwioteen : furtherera of eternal Law. See VII. 12.



160 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F///,

4 Great Vanina and Mitra, Gods, Asuras and imperial Lords,
True to Eternal Law proclaim the high decree.

5 The offspring of a lofty Power, Daksha’s Two Sons exceeding

strong, 0

Who, Lords of flowing rain, dwell in the place of food.

6 Ye who have gathered up your gifts, celestial and terrestrial

food,

Let your rain come to us fraught with the mist of heaven.

7 The Twain, who from the lofty sky seem to look down on

herds below,

Holy, imperial Lords, are set to be revered.

8 They, true to Law, exceeding strong, havo sat them down

for sovran rule : J

Princes whose laws stand fast, they have obtained their sway.

9 Pathfinders even better than the eye, with unobstructed sight,
Even when they close their lids, observant, they perceive. ^

10 So may the Goddess Aditi, may the Nasatyas guard us well,
The Maruts guard us well, endowed with mighty strength.

11 Do ye, 0 Bounteous Gods, protect our dwelling-place by day

and night :

With you for our defenders may we go unharmed.

12 May we, unharmed, serve bountiful Vishnu, the God whe

slayeth none :

Self-moving Sindhu hear and be the first to mark.

13 This sure protection we elect, desirable and reaching far,
Which Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman afford.

14 And may the Sindhu of the floods, the Maruts, and the Asvic

Pair,

Boon Indra, and boon Vishnu have one mind with us.

15 Because these warring Heroes stay the enmity of every foe,

As the fierce water-flood repels the furious ones.

16 Here this one God, the Lord of men, looks forth exceeding ftf

and wide :

And wc, for your advantage, keep his holy laws.

17 We keep the old accustomed laws, the statutes of supremacy)
The long-known laws of Mitra and of Varuna.


5 Daksha’t Two Som : or 8on8 of power or energy, according to SAya?*
Daksha as a creative power, is frequently associated with Aditi. Pl act
food ; heaven from which the food-producing rain comes.

12 Sindhu: the Indus. According to Sdy ana, Vishpu who onuses we&l*
to flow to his woi shippers.



TBS RIO VEDA.


ryMN 26 .]


161


g \{q who hath measured with his ray the boundaries, of heaven
and earth,

And with his majesty hath filled the two worlds full,

9 Surya hath spread his light aloft up to the region of the sky,
Like Agni all aflame when gifts are offered him.

9 With him who sits afar 4he word is lord of food that comes
from kine,

Controller of the gift of unempoisoned food.

1 So unto Surya, Heaven, and Earth at morning and at eve 1
■ speak.

Bringing enjoyments ever rise thou up for us.

2 From Ukshanyayana a bay, from Harayjina a white steed,

And from Sushaman we obtained a harnessed car.

3 These two shall bring me further gain of troops of tawny-

coloured steeds,

The carriers shall they be of active men of war.

{ And the two sages have I gained who hold the reins and bear
the whip,

And the two great strong coursers, with my newest song.

HYMN XXVI. Aewins.

I call your chariot to receive united praise mid princely
men,

Strong Gods who pour down wealth, of never vanquished
might 1

2 Ye to Varosushaman come, Nslsatyas, for this glorious rite,
With your protecting aid, Strong Gods, who pour down wealth.


20 Varuna has only to command and men have milk and wholesome food,
lyana explains differently : * Raise your voice in the spacious hall of sacrifice
)him who is lord over food derived from cattle ’ — Wilson.

21 Thou: Silrya, that is, according to S&ya’.ia, Mitra and Varuna in Sfirya’s

tape.

22 Sushdman : here without Varo, the prefix or interjection or whatever it
lay be. See VIII. 23 28.

23 These two horses.

24 Two wyes : vlprd : the meaning is uncertain. According to SAyapa the

oid is an epithet of ‘coursers’: ‘ Hagacious.’--Wilson. Ludwig thinks that
je grooms (probably enslaved enemies) are ironically called sages, or as he
■anslates, BrAhmans. Dr. Muir translates the stanza differently: ‘I have
itabratod at the same time with a new hymn, these two sages and mighty
►nnces], strong, swift, and carrying whips.’ But this rendering has little to
Commend it. -

1 Princely men : the Sdm or institutors of the sacrifice.

^ Vu'osuskdman see VIII. 23. 26. Who pour down wealth : vrishanvatd ;
e IV. 60 10, note. ...

f II



$t tee HYMNS OF [BOOR Vllj

3 So with oblations wo invoke you, rich in ample wealth, to-day,
When night hath passed, 0 ye who send us plenteous food.

4 0 Asvins, Heroes, let your car, famed, best to travel, come to us,
And’ for his glory, mark your zealous servant’s lauds.

5 Asvins, who send us precious gifts, even when offended, thinl

of him : _

For ye, 0 Rudras, lead us safe beyond our foes.

6 For, Wonder-Workers, with fleet steeds ye fly complete!

round this All, , , , ,

Stirring our thoughts, ye Lords of splendour, honey-hued.

7 With all-sustaining opulence, Asvins, come hitherward to us,
Ye rich and noble Heroes, ne’er to be o’erthrown.

8 To welcome this mine offering, 0 yelndralike N&satyas, con
As Gods of best accord this day with other Gods.

9 For we, like Yyasva, lifting up our voice like oxen, call onyoi

With all your loving kindness, Sages, come to us.

10 0 Rishi, laud the Asvins well. Will they not listen to thy cai
Wiil they not burn the Panis who are nearer them f
110 Heroes, listen to the son of Vyasva, and regard me here,
Yaruna, Mitra, Aryaman, of one accord.

12 Gods whom we yearn for, of your gifts, of what ye bring

us, bestow

By princes’ hands on me, ye Mighty, day day.

1 3 Him whom your sacrifices clothe, even as a woman with her ro
The Asvins help to glory honouring him well.

14 Whoso regards your care of men as succour widest in its rea
About his dwelling go, ye Asvins, loving us.

15 Come to us ye who pour down wealth, come to the h(

which men must guard :

Like shafts, ye are made meet for sacrifice by song.

16 Most fetching of all calls, the laud, as envoy, Heroes, ca

to you :

Be it your own, 0 Asvin Pair.

17 Be ye in yonder sea of heaven, or joying in the home of
Listen to me, Immortal Ones.


5 Rudrat : bright Gods. . .

6 Honey-hued : madhuvM'nd : ‘ of fascinating complexion. 1 * ,

15 Like thaft* : as arrows are sharpened for their work, so

prepared for the sacrifice by the Rishi’s hymn. The word. ^ ^
plained by SAyana as two arrows, is difficult, and other readi gs
lions liave been suggested.



THE RIO VEDA.


fYMN 27.J


T63


g This river with his lucid flow attracts you, more than all the
streams, —

Even Sindhu with his path of gold.

9 0 Asvins, with that glorious fame come hither, through our
brilliant song,

Come ye whose ways are marked with light.

>0 Harness the steeds who draw the car, 0 Vasu, bring the well-
fed pair.

0 V&yu, drink thou of our meath : come untcY our drink-
offerings.

|1 Wonderful V&yu, Lord of Right, thou who art Tvashtar’s son-
in-law,

Thy saving succour we elect.

To Tvashtar’s son-in-law we pray for wealth whereof he hath
control :

For glory we seek V&yu, men with juice effused.

3 From heaven, auspicious Vayu, come ; drive hither with thy

noble steeds :

Come on thy mighty car with wide-extending seat.

4 We call thee to the homes of men, thee wealthiest in noble

food,

And liberal as a press-stone with a horse’s back.

5 So, glad and joyful in thine heart, do thou, God, VAyu, first

of all *

Vouchsafe us water, strength, and thought.


HYMN XXVII. Visvedevas.

Chief Priest is Agni at the laud, as stones and grass at sacri-
fice :

With song I seek the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, Gods for help
much to be desired.


18 With his lucid flow : svetayftvart : taken by Sflyana as the name of a river.
21 Tcashtar’s son-in-law : the Commentators give no satisfactory explanation,
ranyft, Tvashtar’s daughter, was the wife of YivasvAn, who cannot be ideuti-
A with V&yu. See Hillebrandt, Vtdische Mytholoyie , I. p. 521.

24 The second line is difficult. The presB-Btone which produces the Soma
ice which makes the Gods bountiful is regarded as a type of liberality ;
may be called 6 fvapfishtham, liteially, horse-backed, because it bears it*
*1 of Soma stalks like a horse. ' Sharp-backed 4 with 9harp ridges’, as
ggested by Pischel, givse a better meaning.


1 Chief Priest : according to SAyana, pur6hito^. here is taken in it* primary
we of ‘ placed in front,’ that is, set by the priests on the uttaravedt yr
Kthern altar or fire-receptacle. The laud : ukthd : a kind of religious service
®»uting of the recitation of certain eulogistic verses.



164 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Fty

2 I sing to oattle and to Earth, to trees, to Dawns, to Night, to

plants. *

0 all ye Vasus, ye possessors of all wealth, be ye the further,
ers of our thoughts.

3 Forth go^ with Agni, to the Gods our sacrifice of ancient use
To the Adityas, Vanina whose Law stands fast, and the alt

lightening Marut troop.

4 Lords of all wealth, may they be strengtheners of man, de-

stroyers of his enemies.

Lords of all wealth, do ye, with guards which none may harm,
preserve our dwelling free from foes.

5 Come to us with one mind to-day, come to us all with one

accord,

Maruts with holy song, and, Goddess Aditi, Mighty One, to our
house and home.

6 Send us delightful things, ye Maruts, on your Bteeds : come

ye, 0 Mitra, to our gifts.

Let Indra, Varuna, and the Adityas sit, swift Heroes, on our
sacred grass.

7 We who have trimmed the grass for you, and set the banquet

in array,

And pressed the Soma, call you, Varupa, like men, with sacri-
ficial fires aflame.

8 0 Maruts, Vishnu, Asvins, Piishan, haste away with minds

turned hitherward to me.

Let the Strong Indra, famed as Vritra’s slayer, come first witl
the winners of the spoil.

0 Ye Guileless Gods, bestow on ns a refuge strong on every side
A sure protection, Vasus, unassailable from near at hand o
from afar.

10 Kinship have I with you, and close alliance, 0 ye Gods, di

stroyers of our foes.

Call us to our prosperity of former days, and soon to new felicit

1 1 For now have I sent forth to you, that I may win a fair rewan
Lords of all wealth, with homage, this my song of praise lil

a milch-cow that faileth not.

2 I sing to : or I glorify, in order that I may win or propitiate them-

6 Come ye, 0 Mitm : Varuna and Aryaman being understood.

7 Like men : manushvdt : or after the manner of Manus.

11 Like a milch-cow that faileth not : the meaning of dnydm here is sop
what uncertain. S&yana explaius it by adriehtaptirvdm, unprecedented) *
Graasmann by * a stream that never dries up.’ I have adopted hudm
interpretation.



TUB RIO VEDA,


105


0 Excellent Savitar hath mounted up on high for you. ye sure

and careful Guides. . J

Bipeds and quadrupeds, with several hopes and aims, and
birds have settled to their tasks.

] Singing their praise with Godlike thought let us invoke each
God for grace,

Each God to bring you help, each God to strengthen you.

4 For of one spirit are the Gods with mortal man, co-sharers all
of gracious gifts.

! May they increase our strength hereafter and to-day, provid-

1 ing ease and ample room.

I laud you, 0 ye Guileless Gods, here where we meet to render
praise.

None, Varuna and Mitra, harms the mortal man who honours
and obeys your laws.

He makes his house endure, he gathers plenteous food who
pays obedience to your will.

Born in his sons anew he spreads as Law commands, and pros-
pers every way unharmed.

E’en without war he gathers wealth, and goes his way on
pleasant paths,

Whom Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman protect, sharing the gift,
of one accord.


E’en on the plain for him ye make a sloping path, an easy
way where road is none :

And far away from him the ineffectual shaft must vanish,
shot at him in vain.


If ye appoint the rite to-day, kind Rulers, when the Sun as-
cends,

Lords of all wealth, at sunset or at waking-time, or be it at
the noon of day,

• Or, Asuras, when ye have sheltered the worshipper who goes
to sacrifice, at eve,

May we, 0 Vasus„ye possessors of all wealth, come then into
the midst of you.

If ye to-day at sunrise, or at noon, or in the gloom of eve,

Lords of all riches, give fair treasure to the man, the wise
man who hath sacrificed,

Then we, imperial Rulers, claim of you this boon, your wide
protection, as a son.

May we, Adityas, offering holy gifts, obtain that which Shall
bring us greater bliss.



166


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Vli

HYMN XXVIII. Visvedevfo,

The Thirty Gods and Three besides, whose seat hath been the
sacred grass,

From time of old have found and gained.

2 Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman, Agnis, with Consorts, sending boons
To whom our Vashat S is addressed :

Z These are our guardians in the west, and northward here, and
in the south,

And on the east, with all the tribe.

4 Even as the Gods desire so verily shall it be. None minishetl

this power of theirs,

No demon, and no mortal man.

5 The Seven carry seven speais ; seven are the splendours the;

possess,

And seven the glories they assume.

HYMN XXIX. Visvedev*

One is a youth brown, active, manifold : he decks the goldei
one with ornament.

2 Another, luminous, occupies the place of sacrifice, Sage, amonj

the Gods.

3 One brandishes in his hand an iron knife, firm, in his seal

amid the Deities.

4 Another holds the thunderbolt, wherewith he slays the Vritras,

resting in his band.


1 Thirty Gods and Three : Bee I. 139. 11.

2 Agnis : Agni in his various forma and under different names. With Con-
sorts : with the Gn/ts, Celestial Dames, wives of the Gods. Vashat I • the ex-
clamation made when the oblation is offered.

4 No demon and no mortal man : or no mortal who presents no offeringi
to the Gods.

5 The Seven : the Marute, seven, or seven times nine, or seven times seven
in number. S&yana mentions the legend of their birth, which will be found
in the Mmdyana , Book I., Cantos 46, 47. The me^ping is merely that the
Maruts carry lances, that is, their lightnings, and are splendidly adorned.
See I. 37. The connexion of this stanza with the preceding is not obvious.

1 One : Soma. * The yellow Soma juice is itself an ornament to the gold**
the finger (Atharvaveda, XVIII. 3. 18, hiranyaplv&l?) of the priest.'- hud' Wjj
According to others, Soma as the Moon is intended, who * decorates (him * 8 1
with golden ornaments.’— Wilson.

2 Another , luminous : Agni.

3 One bt'andishe* : Tvashpir, as the Artificer of the Gods.

4 Another holds the thunderbolt : Indra.



THE RIO VEDA .


fYMN 31.]


137


5 Another bears a pointed weapon : bright is he, and strong,

with healing medicines.

6 Another, thief-like, watches well the ways, and knows the

places where the treasures lie.

7 Another with his mighty stride hath made his three steps

thither where the Gods rejoice.

8 Two with one Dame ride on with winged steeds, and journey

forth like travellers on their way.

9 Two, highest, in the heavens have set their seat, worshipped

with holy oil, Imperial Kings.

[0 Some, singing lauds, conceived the Sama hymn, great hymn
whereby they caused the Sun to shine.

HYMN XXX. Visvedevas.

Not one of you, ye Gods, is small, none of you is a feeble
child :

All of you, verily, are great.

2 Thus be ye lauded, ye destroyers of the foe, ye Threc-and-

Thirty Deities,

The Gods of man, the Holy Ones.

3 As such defend and succour us, with benedictions speak to us :
Lead us not from our fathers’ and from Manu’s path into the

distance far away.

4 Ye Deities who stay with us, and all ye Gods of all mankind,
(live us your wide protection, give shelter for cattle and for

steed.

HYMN XXXI. Various Deities.

That Brahman pleases Indra well, who worships, sacrifices, pours
Libation, and prepares the meal.

5 Another : Rudra, See I. 43. 4.

6 Another : Pushan. See T. 42.

S 'Another with hi» mighty stride : Vishnu. Thither: to his station in tha
height of heaven.

8 Two with one Dame : the Asvins with S'iryl. See I. 116. 17.

9 Two , highest : Mitra aud Varuna.

10 Som, tinging laud* : the Augira^es, or, according to S4yana, the Atria.

, ^ Three and- Thirty Deitiet : see i. 139. 11. The Qod* of man: or, God
|Whom Manu worshipped, which inteipretation is supported by stanza 3.

1 IK/to stay with ut : or are present at this sacrifice.

1 Brahman : here any pious worshipper. not one of the regular professional
?r'c«tB, hut the institutor of sacrifice who during the ceremony may be re-
^Nied as their chief. Prepares the meal: pasupurod ^dikam pachati : S4yau*;
Coo “ the cake which is an essential part of the animal sacrifice, etc.’



l«a THE HYMNS OF [BOOK y In

2 Sakra protects from woe the man who gives him sacrifi c i a j

cake

And offers Soma blent with milk.

3 His chariot shall be glorious, sped by Gods, and mighty ^

he be,

Subduing all hostilities.

4 Each day that passes, in his house flows his libation, rich in

milk,

Exhaustless, bringing progeny.

5 0 Gods, with constant draught of milk, husband and \yif e

with one accord

Press out and wash the Soma juice.

6 They gain sufficient food : they come united to the sacred grass,
And never do they fail in strength.

7 Never do they deny or seek to hide the favour of the Gods:
They win high glory for themselves.

8 With sons and daughters by their side they reach their full

extent of life,

Both decked with ornaments of gold.

9 Serving the Immortal One with gifts of sacrificial meal and

wealth,

They satisfy the claims of love and pay due honour to the Gods,

10 We claim protection from the Hills, wo claim protection oi

the Floods,

Of him who stands by Vishnu's side.

1 1 May Pushan come, and Bhaga, Lord of wealth, All-bounteous,

for our weal :

Broad be the path that leads to bliss :

12 Aramati, and, free from foes, Visva with spirit of a God,

And the Adityas' peerless might.

13 Seeing that Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna are guarding us,

The paths of Law are fair to tread.


9 The Immortal One : amritdya : Agni, or the Immortal (boat), that is, th
Gods in general. According to Mfty-ina, ‘ that they may obtain immortalit;
(in their sous and descendants).’ They satisfy: this pdda is consumed b;
some, on metrical and other gi omuls, to be an interpolation. According
Pisehel ( Vedischt Studiev, I p. 178), the half-line refeis to the beating^
preparation of the rough stalks of the Soma plant,

10 0/ him uho stands by Vishnu's side : of Vishnu and hia associate Indn
— Ludwig.

12 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion. Vuva: Dyaua ?— Ludwig-
ttu> worshippers/ according to SAyana,



TEE RIO VEDA.


YMN 82.)


m


. l glorify with song, for wealth, Agni the God, the fir$t
of you.

We honour as a well-loved Friend the God who prospereth
our fields.

As in all frays the hero, so swift moves his car whom Gods

attend.

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

Ne’er are ye injured, worshipper, presser of juice, or pious man.
The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

None in his action equals him, none holds him far or keeps
him off.

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

Such strength of heroes shall be his, such mastery of fleet-
foot steeds.

The man who, sacrificing, strives to win the heart of Deities
will conquer those who worship not.

HYMN XX XII. Indr*.

Kanvas, tell forth with song the deeds of Indra, the Im-
petuous,

Wrought in the Soma’s wild delight.

Strong God, ho slew Anarsani, Sribinda, Pipru, and the fiend
Ahisuva, and loosed the floods.

Thou broughtest down the dwelling-place, the height of lofty
Arbuda.

That exploit, Indra, must be famed.

Bold, to your famous Soma I call the fair-visored God for aid,
Down like a torrent from the hill.

Rejoicing in the Soma-draughts, Hero, burst open, like a fort,
[The stall of horses and of kine.

[ If my libation gladdens, if thou takest pleasure in my laud,
Come with thy Godhead from afar.

1 H/to pi'ogpereth our fields: kshetvas&dhasani : Sivana explains kshetra
modern Hindi khet t a field), as sacrifice : ‘ the bountiful perfecter of the
ince. — Wilson.


Jj e topetnous : rijishinah : ‘the drinker of the stale Soma.’ — Wilson.
lAt D&sh, or savage. All the names are names of demons of

K t, of whom Pipru has been mentioned frequently in preceding Books.
i^ a: see I 51. 6 ; II. 11. 20; 14. 4.

d ’J.\y^° rrcnt f rom th* hill : ‘as (a traveller invokes) the water [from a,



170


THE HYMNS OP


[BOOR tty

7 0 Indra, Lover of the Song, the singere of thy praise are w e .
0 Soma-drinker, quicken us.

8 And, taking thy delight with us, bring us still undiminshed

food :

Great is thy wealth, 0 Maghavan.

9 Make thou us rich in herds of kine, in steeds, in gold : 1#

us exert

Our strength in sacrificial gifts.

10 Let us call him to aid whose hands stretch far, to whom high

laud is due, '

Who worketh well to succour us.

11 He, Satakratu, even in fight acts as a Vritra-slayer still :

He gives his worshippers much wealth.

12 May he, this Sakra, strengthen us, Boon God who satisfy

our needs,

Indra, with all his saving helps.

13 To him, the mighty stream of wealth, the Soma-preBoer 1

rescuing Friend,

To Indra sing your song of praise ;

14 Who bringeth what is great and firm, who winneth glory i

his wars,

Lord of vast wealth through power and might.

15 There liveth none to check or stay his energies and graciot

deeds :

None who can say, He giveth not.

16 No debt is due by Brahmans now, by active men who pro

the juice :

Well hath each Soma-draught been paid.

17 Sing ye to him who must be praised, say lauds to him wl

must be praised,

Bring prayer to him who must be praised.

18 May he, unchecked, strong, meet for praise, bring hundre<

thousands forth to light,

Indra who aids the worshipper.

19 Go with thy Godlike nature forth, go where the folk*

calling thee :

Drink, Indra, of the drops we pour. ^

11 Batakratu : Lord of a Hundred Power*.

12 §akru: the Mighty. _ ,

16 The Brahmans or worshippers have, by offeting libations, disco

their obligations to the Gods, and the Gods have repaid them, or will
repay them for their offerings.

18 Hundred s, thousands; counties* treasure* for u* to enjoy.



THE RIQVBDA.


m


rtfX 33.]

prink milky draughts which are thine own, this too which
was with Tugrya once,

This is it, Indra, that is thine.

pass him who pours libations out in angry mood or after sin :
Here drink the juice we offer thee.

Over the three great distances, past the Five Peoples go thy way,
0 India, noticing our voice.

Send forth thy ray like Sfirya : let my songs attract thee
hitherward

Like waters gathering to the vale.

Now to the Hero fair of cheek, Adhvaryu, pour the Soma forth :
Bring of the juice that he may drink :

Who cleft the water-cloud iu twain, loosed rivers for their
downward flow,

And set the ripe milk in the kine.

He, meet for praise, slew Vritra, slew Ahfsuva, ftrnav&bha’s son,
And pierced through Arbuda with frost.

To him your matchless Mighty One, unconquerable Conqueror,
Sing forth the prayer which Gods have given :

Indra, who in the wild delight of Soma juice considers ' e
All holy Laws among the Gods.

Hither let these thy Bays who share thy banquet, Steeds with
golden manes,

Convey thee to the feast prepared.

Hither, 0 thou whom many laud, the Bays whom Priyamedha
praised

Shall bring thee to the Soma-draught.

HYMN XXXIII. Indra.

We compass thee like waters, we whose grass is trimmed and
Soma pressed.

Here where the filter pours its stream, thy worshippers round
thee, 0 Vritra-slayer, sit.

20 Which teas mth Tugrya: like that which thy favourite Bhujyu (see Vol.
Index) formerly offered thee.

22 The three great distances : the space in front of thee, behind thee, and
thy side. Noticing our voice : hearing and attending to our invocation*.
>me to us who are thy true worshippers, and pass by others who worship
ee m the hope of being avenged upon their enemies or of obtaining pardon
[■ some sin.

rnavdbha's son : Au rna v:\bha : a demon of drought. 8eeII.ll. 18.
Jrott : making the piercing cold of winter his weapon.

^ ter •* or woollen strainer through which the Soma juice is run to



m the H7MNS OP [BOOK W//J

2 Men, Va8u ! by the Soma, with lauds call thee to the for®.

most place : , . . , ^ T ,

When comest thou athirst unto the juice as home, O Indra,

like a bellowing bull ?

3 Boldly, Bold Hero, bring us spoil in thousands for the Kanvag’

O aetiv’e Maghavan, with eager prayer wo crave the yellow,
hued with store of kine.

4 Medhvatithi, to Indra sing, drink of the juice to make thee glad,
Close-knit to his Bay Steeds, bolt-armed, beside the juice i,

he : his chariot is of gold. .

5 He who is praised as strong of hand both right and left, mo®

wise and bold : , , ,

Indra who, rich in hundreds, gathers thousands up, honoured
as breaker-down of forts.

6 The bold of heart whom none provokes, who stands in bearded
Much-lauded, very glorious, overthrowing foes, strong Helper

7 \Vho°knowa what vital power he wins, drinking beside thi

Thl° is "he “to-cheeked God who, joying in the draught
breaks down the castles in his strength.

8 As a wild elephant rushes on, this way and that way, mtt

None'may 1 compel thee, yet come hither to the draught : thoi

9 When he, theMighty, jiier o’erthrown, stedfast, made read

When ‘indS Maghavan lists to his praiser’s call, he will no

stand aloof, but come. i m n0 «

10 Yea, verily, thou art a Bull, with a bulls rush, who

may stay :


o a, home: as familiar to thee a» thine own home. ...

3 The i/dlowhucd : there is no substantive, hut gold “““ ® (in (liii

6 In bearded confidence: a conjectural paraphrase^ J Lu ,i wl

beard) is said by S&yana to mean lu re in combats, that w, perh»p > ^ |

suggests, among ranks of men bristling with apears- But t ^ ^ for „

the meaning of the word which .» probably So> the E«

fierce look of a wamor who challenges the foe. h\i i g. » d * vol0

ThOrr when about to meet a foe, is said to have raised b s beam
See Grimm, Teutonic Mythology, I. 177 (hnglieh

8 Mad with heat : that is, matt, oi as phonetically! >P*<V " f 1 cb , e „,
10 Thou art a Bull: vrithd : or strong and “»8>»ty. As i repetiB'
before (VIII. 13. 31, note), some of the Vedic poeU delight in
oi this word and it* derivatives.



THE RIGVEDA.


yMN 38.]


178


Thou, Mighty One, art celebrated as a Bull, famed as a Bull
both near and far.

Thy reins are very bulls in strength, bull8 , strength is in thy
golden whip.

Thy car, 0 Maghavan, thy Bays are strong as bulls : thou,
Satakratu, art a Bull.

! Let the strong presser press for thee. Bring hither, thou
straight-rushing Bull.

The mighty makes the mighty run in flowing streams for thee
whom thy Bay Horses bear.

; Come, thou most potent Indra, come to drink the savoury
Soma juice.

Maghavan, very wise, will quickly come to hear the songs, the
prayer, the hymns of praise.

When thou hast mounted on thy car let thy yoked Bay Steeds
carry thee

Past other mens’ libations, Lord of Hundred Powers, thee,
Vritra-slayer, thee our Friend.

i 0 thou Most Lofty One, accept our laud as nearest to tbine
heart.

May our libations be most sweet to make thee glad, 0 Soma-
drinker, Heavenly Lord.

' Neither in thy decree nor mine, but in another’s he delights, —

The man who brought us unto this.

Indra himself hath said, The mind of woman brooks not dis-
cipline,

Her intellect hath little weight.

I His pair of horses, rushing on in their wild transport, draw
his car :

High-lifted is the stallion’s yoke.

1 Cast down thine eyes and look not up. More closely set thy
feet. Let none

See what thy garment veils, for thou, a Brahman, hast become
a dame.


l^^oWen ; the lightning, vuth which Indra lashes the clouds, his

jjj Tht nighty makes the mighty run : the priest makes the Soma juice flow.

inexin 6 la lVT 0tftuz ‘ ia of the hyrnu are not very intelligible, nor is their
BDot “ k lth the P rec ©ding verses obvious. Stanzas 16 and 18 appear to
Indra f V Woman al *d 17 by a man. Stanza 19 is said to be addressed
?recatir n r AI !? a 80U °* Playoga who had been changed to a woman by the
of the Gods, and who was afterward* restored to manhood*



174


THE HYMNS OP


[&00K yuij

HYMN XXXIV. Is

Come hither, Indra, with thy Bays, come thou to Kmi V4 »,
eulogy.

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day ! h avj
gone to heaven.

2 May the stone draw thee as it speaks, the Soma-stone with

ringing voice.

Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, etc.

3 The stones’ rim shakes the Soma here like a wolf worrying!

sheep.

Ye, etc.


4 The Kanvas call thee hitherward for succour and to win tin

spoil.

Ye, etc.

5 I set for thee, as for the Strong, the first draught of the juici

shed.


6 Come with abundant blessings, come with perfect care to au

cour us.

7 Come, Lord of lofty thought, who hast infinite wealth ai

countless aids.

8 Adorable mid Gods, the Priest good to mankind shall brii

thee near.

9 As wings the falcon, so thy Bays rushing in joy shall cai

thee.

10 Come from the enemy to us, to Svahfi, ! and the Soma-draug

11 Come hither with thine ear inclined to hear, take pleasure

our lauds.

12 Lord of well-nourished Horses, come with well-fed Steeds al

in hue.

13 Come hither from the mountains, come from regions of

sea of air.


The R’mhi is Nip&tithi of the family of Kanva, but stanzas 16-18
ascribed in the Index to the thousand Vaaurochishas who are said to *
been a division of the family of Angiras.

1 The exact meaning of the second line, which is the burden of the
fifteen stanzas, is obscure. Ye probably means Indra’s horses, and Oodb
by day t ( divdvaso) Indra himself ; that is, ye, horses, and thou, Indra,
gone to heaven. The Scholiast offers two different explanations, in one
boldly altering two words of the text. See Wilson’s Translation, note.

8 The Priest good to mankind : or, the Invoking Priest, Invoker or H
established by Manu, namely Agni.

10 Svdhi : an exclamation used in sacrifice ; Ave ! or Hail !


THE RIQVEDA.


YMN 35.]


175


. Disclose to ua, 0 Hero, wealth in thousands both of kine and
steeds

i Bring riches hitherward to us in hundreds, thousands, myriads.
Ye by command of yonder Dyaus, God bright by day 1 have
gone to heaven.

; The thousand steeds, the mightiest troop, which we and Indra
have received
From Vasurochis as a gift,

[ The brown that match the wind in speed, and bright bay
coursers fleet of foot,
hike Suns, resplendent are they all.

) Mid the PAr&vata's rich gifts, swift steeds whose wheels run
rapidly,

I seemed to stand amid a wood.

HYMN XXXY. A,™*.

With Agm and with Indra, Vishnu, Varuna, with the Adityas,
Rudras, Vasus, closely leagued ;

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
drink the Soma juice.

I With all the Holy Thoughts, all being, Mighty Ones ! in close
alliance with the Mountains, Heaven, and Earth ;

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
drink the Soma juice.

With all the Deities, three times eleven, here, in close alliance
with the Maruts, Bhrigus, Floods ;

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
drink the Soma juice.

Accept the sacrifice, attend to this my call : come nigh, 0 ye
Twain Gods, to all libations here.

Accordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
bring us strengthening food.

Accept our praise-song as a youth accepts a maid. Come nigh,
0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvins,
bring us strengthening food.

6 Vasurochis : vdsurochiahah ia probably the ablative singular, and not the
i native plural, of the name of the inatitutor of the sacrifice. Wilson,
r T! n § V trane l a tea : ‘ We, the thousand Vasurochishas, and Indra
8 'T/Td * 1611 vigorous herds of horses, —

p e is Vasurochis. The P&rAvatas are probably the jr apvrjral

®nry, who were settled northwards of Arachosia — Ludwig.

de^ \Vi Uo 1 1 ^ tW ° youtlui * youths are delighted (by the voices



THE HYMNS OP


170


[BOOK ri n


6, Accept the songs we sing, accept the solemn rite. Come nj ff i
0 ye Twain Gods, to all libations here.'

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Aby^
bring us strengthening food.

7 Ye fly as starlings fly unto the forest trees; like buffaloes y
seek the Soma we have shed.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, com
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home.


8 Ye fly like swans, like those who travel on their way; jjj

buffaloes ye seek the Soma we have shed.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, con
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home.

9 Ye fly to our oblation like a pair of hawks; like buffaloes i

seek the Soma we have shed.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, cor
thrice, 0 Asvins, to our home.

10 Come hitherward and drink and satisfy yourselves, best

upon us progeny and affluence.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, 0 Asvi
grant us vigorous strength.

1 1 Conquer your foes, protect us, praise your worshippers ; best

upon us progeny and affluence.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya aud with Dawn, 0 Asvi
grant us vigorous strength.

12 Slay enemies, animate men whom ye befriend; bestow iv

us progeny and affluence.

Aocordant, of one mind with Sftrya and with Dawn, 0 Asv
grant us vigorous strength.

13 With Mitra, Vanina, Dharma, and the Maruts in your c

pany approach unto your praiser’s call.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya aud with Dawn, and \
the Adityas, Asvins ! come.

14 With Vishnu and the Angirases attending you, and with

Maruts come unto your praiser’s call.

Accordant, of one mind with Sirya and with Dawn, and '
the Adityas, Asvins ! come.

15 With Ribhus and with Vajas, 0 ye Mighty Ones, leagued

the Maruts come ye to your praiser’s call.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn,

, with the Adityas, Asvins ! come.

8 Ye come eagerly to the Soma as thirsty hantas (swans, geese, or 0
goes) travellers, and buffaloes hasten to the water.

13 Dharma : Right, J ustice, Law, Virtue or Duty perfqmfied.



THE RIO VEDA.


177


35 .]

Give spirit to our prayer and animate our thoughts ; slay ye
the Rakshasas and drive away disease.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink.

Strengthen the Ruling Power, strengthen the men of war ;
slay ye the RaLkshasas and drive away disease.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the pres-
ser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink.

Give strength unto the milch-kine, give the people strength,
slny ye the Rakshasas and drive away disease.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, the
presser’s Soma, Asvins ! drink.

As ye heard Atri’s earliest eulogy, so hear Syavasva, Soma-
presser, ye who reel in joy.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old.

i Further like running streams Syavasva’s eulogies who presses
out the Soma, ye who reel in joy.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old.

[ Seize, as ye grasp the reins, Syavasva’s solemn rites who pres-
ses out the Soma, ye who reel in joy.

Accordant, of one mind with Surya and with Dawn, drink
juice, 0 Asvins, three days old.

I Drive down your chariot hitherward : drink ye the Soma's
savoury juice.

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper.

I When sacrifice which tells our reverence hath begun, Heroes !
to drink the gushing juice,

Approach, yc Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper.

Sate you with consecrated drink, with juice effused, ye Deities.

Approach, ye Asvins, come to us : I call you, eager for your
aid. Grant treasures to the worshipper.

17 The Ruling Power : kshatrdm • hence Kshatriya, a man of the princely

military order.

jl3 The people: visas : hence Vai§ya , a man of the mercantile class or order.

;! 9 diri’*.- as he waa the progenitor of the Rishi of the Hymn. See Vol. I.,

Hex.

pi Solemn rites : that is, the oblations presented thereat.

Consecrated drink: libations offered with the sacrificial exclamation

l&hft ! Ave ! or Hail !



178


THE HYMNS OF
HYMN XXXVI.


[BOOK Vjij


Indn,


Thou helpost him whoso grass is trimmed, who sheds the
juice, 0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.

The share which they have tixed for thee, thou, Indra, Victor
o’er all hosts and space, begirt with Maruts, Lord of Heroes
winner of the floods.


2 Maghavan, help thy worshipper : let him help thee. 0

kratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.

The share which they have fixed for thee, etc.

3 Thou aidest Gods with food, and that with might aids thee

0 Satakratu, drink Soma to make thee glad.

4 Creator of the heaven, creator of the earth, 0 Satakratu

drink Soma to make tlicc glad.

f> Father of cattle, father of all steeds art thou. 0 Satakratu
drink Soma to make thee glad.

6 Stone-hurler, glorify the Atria* hymn of praise. 0 Satakratu

drink Soma to make thee glad.

7 Hear thou SvfivAsva while he pours to thee, as erst tho

heartiest At ri when he wrought his holy rites.

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce figl
with heroes, strengthening his prayers.


HYMN' XXXVII. Indj

This prayer, and those who shed the juice, in wars nil
Vritra thou holpest, Indra, Lord of Strength, with all tl
succoms.

0 Vritra-slaycr, from libation poured at noon, drink oft!
Soma juice, thou blameless Thunderer.

2 Thou mighty Conqueror of hostile armaments, 0 Indra, Lor
of Strength, with all thy saving help.


1 Which they have fixed : which all the Gods have assigned. This balf-ver
is the refrain of stanzas 1—6. And space, begirt : or, and wide space, girt. 3
flood* : the waters of heaven, the rain.

2 Lei him kelp thee: according to Sftyana, ‘protect thyself (by drinki
the Soma).’ ‘ The mutual relation between the God and his worshipper
expressed, and the translation ‘ help thyself ’ is ridiculous.’ — Ludwig.

3 Food : sacrificial food. That : food, especially in the shape of Soma.

7 Trasadasyu : an especial favourite of Indra and the Asvins, celebra'

for his victories and liberality. See Index.


1 0 Vfitraslayer, etc: this half-verse is repeated as a refrain in the
following stanzas.



THE BIQVEDA .


tfWt 38.]


170


3 Sole Ruler, thou art Sovran of this world of life, 0 Indra,

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help. * *

4 Thou only sunderest these two consistent worlds, 0 Indra,

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help.

5 Thou art the Lord supreme o’er rest and energy, 0 Indra,

Lord of Strength, with all thy saving help .

6 Thou helpest one to power, and one thou hast not helped, 0

Indra, Lord of Strength, with all thy saving aid.

7 Hear thou SyaLvasva while he sings to thee, as erst thou

heardest Atri when he wrought his holy rites.

Indra, thou only gavest Trasadasyu aid in the fierce fight
with heroes, strengthening his powers.


HYMN XXXVIII. Indra-Agni.

Ye Twain are Priests of sacrifice, winners in war and holy
works :

Indra and Agni, mark this well.

2 Yc bounteous riders on the car, ye Vritra-slayers unsubdued :
Indra and Agni, mark this well.

2 The men with pressing-stones have pressed this meath of
yours which gives delight :

Indra and Agni, mark this well.

4 Accept our sacrifice for weal, sharers of praise ! the Soma

shed :

Indra atad Agni, Heroes, come.

5 Be pleased with tb^e libations which attract you to our

sacred gifts :

Indra and Ag»b Heroes, come.

6 Accept tWs eulogy of mine whose model is the Gayatri: Indra

and Agni, Heroes, come.

^ Consistent worlds: there is no substantive in the text, and lolcau (worlds}
supplied by S&yana. v l

) Rest and energy : or pence and war. ‘ Prosperity and gains.’— .Wilson.

1 To power : ksatrdfya : the rule exercised by princes.

[ k e j?eated from the preceding Lmn with the alteration of two words

» ^nging, instead of sunvatdh, , pouring (libations), and kshatrdni
meely) powers instead of brdhnxdyi, prayers, ‘as if,’ observe# Dr. Muir,

>e former ( brahmdni ,) contained a reference to the functions of the priest,

1 the latter to those of the prince.’ — 0. S. Texts, I. 263.

1 Mar '1c this well : * hear (the praise) of this (thy worshipper).’ — Wilson.

B ; touted : according to SAyana, ‘ destroyers (of foes)/

" ”’ ioae nodd is the Gdyatri; composed in GAyatrl metre.



180 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK p ;//

7 Come with the early-faring Gods, ye who are Lords of genuine

wealth :

Indra-Agni, to the Soma-draught !

8 Hear ye the call of Atris, hear Syavasva as he sheds th<

juice *.

Indra-Agni to the Soma-draught !

9 Thus have I called you to our aid as sagos called on you 0

old:

Indra-Agni to the Soma draught !

10 Indra’s and Agni’s grace I claim, Sarasvati’s associates
To whom this psalm of praise is sung.

HYMN XXXIX. AgD

The glorious Agni have I praised, and worshipped with th
sacred food.

, May Agni deck the Gods for us. Between both gatherin'
places he goes on his embassy, the Sage. May all the othei
die away.

2 Agni, burn down the word within their bodies through or

newest speech,

All hatreds of the godless, all the wicked man’s malignitie
Away let the destroyers go. May all the others die away.

3 Agni, I offer hymns to thee, like holy oil within thy mouth.
Acknowledge them among the Gods, for thou art the rnoi

excellent, the worshipper’s blissful messenger. Let all tl
others die away.

4 Agni bestows all vital power even as ea*L man supplicates.
He brings the Vasus strengthening gifts, a*id grants deligh

in rest and stir, for every calling on the God*. Let all tl
others die away.

5 Agni hath made himself renowned by wonderful victories a(
He is the Priest of all the tribes, chosen with sacrificial mod

He urges Deities to receive. Let ail the others die away.

7 Earlyfanng Gods : * But Thou wast up at break of day.'— George Herbe
t0 SarasvatU associates : according to Sdyana, * to whom praise belongs.

1 Deck the Gods for us : * brighten the gods with the oblations at <
sacrifice.’ — Wilson. Both gathering -places : heaven and earth. All the o
anyake same : meaning, acoording to S&yapa, ail our enemies.

2 All hatred of the godless : ardttr ardvndm muBt be read instead of «

rardvndm.— Ludwig. .

6 With sacrificial meeds : ddkshindbhih : his dakshinds or honoraria as
are the oblations which he receives as a God.



THE RIOVEDA.


181


jfifiV 40.]

6 Agni knows ^ at s P rin g 8 from Gods, he knows the mystery

of men*

Giver of wealth is Agni, he uncloses both the doors to us when
worshipped with our newest gift. Let all the others die
away.

7 A^ni inhabiteth with Gods and men who offer sacrifice.

He cherisheth with great delight much wisdom, as all things
that be, God among Gods adorable. May all the others die
away.

8 Agni who liveth in all streams, Lord of the Sevenfold Race of

men,

Him dweller in three homes we seek, best slayer of the Dasyus
for Mandhatar, first in sacrifice. Let all the other’s die away.

9 Agni the Wise inhabiteth three gathering-places, triply formed.
Decked as our envoy let the Sage bring hither and conciliate

the Thrice Eleven Deities. Let all the others die away.

0 Our Agni, thou art first among the Gods, and first mid living
men.

Thou only rulest over wealth. Round about thee, as natural
dams, circumfluous the waters run. Let all the others die
away.

HYMN XL. Indra-Agni.

Indra and Agni, surely ye as Conquerors will give us wealth,
Whereby in tight we may o’ercome that which is strong and
firmly fixed, as Agni burns the woods with wind. Let all
the others die away.

2 We set no snares to tangle you; Indra we worship and adore,
Hero of heroes mightiest.

Once may he come unto us with his Steed, come unto us to
win us strength, and to complete the sacrifice.

6 That springs from Gods: tho past and the present, while the mystei'y of
Ken is the future. — Ludwig. Both the doors: of wealth, or, perhaps of
L ‘aven also.

8 Lord of ike Sevenfold Race of men : perhaps meaning, God of all men,
;e Vaisvftnara ; or the reference may be t<> the seven priests : ‘ Who is minis-
red to by seven priests.’ — Wilson. ‘Acting as seven priests.’ — M. Muller.
andMtar : said to bo the same at M&ndh&tar, boo of Yuvan&sva, and Rislii
X. 134.

9 Three gathering -places : heaven, firmament, and earth.

10 Round about thee, the waters run : Cf. ‘Him, pure, resplendent,

ffspring of the Waters, the waters pure have on all sides encompassed’
I. 35. 3). L

1 Let all the others die away : this refrain recurs in all stanzas of the hymn
[ce pt the final.

^ Once: kad&chit : expressive o * impatience.— Ludwig.



182 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK Vlij

3 For, famous Indra-Agni, ye are dwellers in the midst of fray a
Sages in wisdom, ye are knit to him who seeketh you a j

friends. Heroes, bestow on him his wish. * !

4 Nabhaka-like, with sacred song Indra’s and Agni’s praise I si ne
Theirs to whom all this world belongs, this heaven and this

mighty earth which bear rich treasure in their lap.

5 To Indra and to Agni send your prayers, as was Nabhaka’a

wont, —

Who oped with sideway opening the sea with its foundations
seven — Indra all powerful in his might.

6 Tear thou asunder, as of old, like tangles of a creeping plant
Demolish thou the Dasa’s might. May we with Indra’s help

divide the treasure he hath gathered up.

7 What time with this same song these men call Indra-Agni

sundry ways,

May we with our own heroes quell those who provoke us to the
fight, and conquer those who strive with us,

8 The Two refulgent with their beams riso and come downward

from the sky.

By Indra’s and by Agni’s best, flowing away, the rivers run
which they released from their restraint.

9 0 Indra, many are thine aids, many thy ways of guiding ns,
Lord of the Bay Steeds, Hinva’s Son. To a Good Hero come

our prayers, which soon shall havo accomplishment.

10 Inspire him with your holy hymns, the Hero bright and

glorious,

Him who with might demolisheth even the brood of Sushna,
and winneth for us the heavenly streams.

11 Inspire him worshipped with fair rites, the glorious Hero

truly brave.

He brake in pieces Sushna’s brood who still expected not the
stroke, and won for us the heavenly streams. Let all the
others die away.

4 Nabhdka-like : Nabh&ka may have been the father of NAbh&ka the Kishi
of the hymn.

8 Who oped : ‘ who overspread (with their lustre).’ — Wilson. The Commen-
tator does not explain the passage.

7 This same song : a hymn like our own, for victory in battle.

8 The Two refulgent with their beams : apparently the Sun and Moon. Ac-
cording to SAyana, Indra and Agni are intended.

9 Hinva's Son : Hinva (the driver, impeller, instigator of actions), a father
invented for Indra by the poet. To a Good Hero : to Indra. ‘ The meaning 0
the verse, even with the help of the scholiast, is far from intelligible.’— WiUou-



THE RTGVEDA.


183


yyfy 41 .]

> Tims have we sung anew to Indra-Agni, as sang our sires,
Angirases, and Mandhatar.

Guard us with triple shelter and preserve us : may we be
masters of a store of riches.

HYMN XLI. Vamna.

To make this Varuna come forth, sing thou a song unto the
band of Maruts wiser than thyself, —

This Varuna who guardeth well the thoughts of men like
herds of kine.

Let all the others die away.

! Him altogether praise I with the song and hymns our fathers
sang, and with Nabhaka’s eulogies, —

Him dwelling at the rivers’ source, surrounded by his Sisters
Seven.

; The nights he hath encompassed, and stablished the morns
with magic art : visible over all is he.

His dear Ones, following his Law, have prospered the Three
Dawns for him.

1 He, visible o’er all the earth, stablished the quarters of the
sky :

He measured out the eastern place, that is the fold of Varuna :
like a strong herdsman is the God.

5 He who supports the worlds of life, he who well knows the
hidden names mysterious of the morning beams,

He cherishes much wisdom, Sage, as heaven brings forth each
varied form.

i In whom all wisdom centres, as the nave is set within the
wheel.

Haste ye to honour Trita, as kine haste to gather in the fold,
even as they muster steeds to yoke.


1 To make this Varuna come forth : SAyana explains prabhfliaye as an adjec-
Vf- prakr'ushtadhanAi/a : * to that opulent Varuna.' — Wilson. IViscr : more

in singing. The thoughts : holy thoughts and devotions. The refrain,
^all, etc., recurs at the end of e\e y stanza.

2 A ihhdka's : that is, mine own Sisters Seven : the five rivers of thePanj;ib,
le f utlus, and perhaps the KubhA. See 1 32, note.

? d ea r Ones : apparently the nights, which give place to the mornings.

Dawns : according to SAyana, morning, noon, and evening
* The fold : or, perhaps, the course, meaning the place from which he starts.
® Trita: Varuna, here, apparently, identified with this ancient God who
spresentH the expanse of heaven. According to SAyaua, (Varuna) ‘who abides
1 the three world*’



184 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK p//

7 He wraps these regions as a robe ; he contemplates the tribe

of Gods and all the works of mortal men.

Before the homo of Varuna all the Gods follow his decree.

8 He is an Ocean far-removed, yet through the heaven to hi

ascends the worship which these realms possess.

With his bright foot he overthrew their magic, and went t
to heaven.

9 Ruler, whose bright far-seeing rays, pervading all three earth

have filled the three superior realms of heaven.

Firm is the seat of Varuna : over the Seven he rules as Kin
10 Who, after his decree, o’erspread the Dark Ones with a rol
of light;

AVho measured out the ancient seat, who pillared both tl
worlds apart as the Unborn supported heaven. Let all tl
others die away.


HYMN XLII. Varu

Lord of all wealth, the Asura propped the heavens, and irn
sured out the broad earth's wide expanses.

He, King supreme, approached all living creatures. All the
are Varima’s holy, ope rat ions.

2 So humbly worship Varuna the Mighty ; revere the wi
Guard of the World Immortal.

May he vouchsafe ns triply-barred protection. 0 Earth a
Heaven, within your lap preserve us.

7 This stanza is very obscure, and my rendering is conjectural. Thect
mentary is defective, aud von Both and Ludwig think that the correctness
one word in the text is doubtful. According to the slight alteration suggi
ed by the latter scholar, ‘ under the lead ’ would stand instead of ‘ before 1
home.'

8 The first line of this stanza also is difficult. Wilson, following S3ya
translates : ‘ He is the hidden ocean ; swift he mounts (the heaven) as (
8U n) the sky ; when he has placed the sacrifice in those (regions of the tin
ment).’ Ludwig's interpretation, which I follow, requires tirdh to be ri
instead of turdh (swift). Their magic : the magical arts of the fiends of darto

9 Firm: bo Hesiod (Theog. V. 127) calls Ouranoe = Varuna the «
a(T(pa AtC, the firm seat of the Gods. See M. Muller, Chips a ^ ern
Workshop, IV. xx (new edition). The Seven : rivers, understood.

30 The Dark Ones: the nights, which Varuna turns into days. M
Chips, IV. xxii. The Unhorn : the primeval, everlasting, uncreated v
Being. According to SAyana, the Sun.

1 The Asura : the High God, Varuna. * The wise spirit.’— M. Mull^

2 Of the World Immortal ; amritasya : according to SAyana, of » mn



THE R1QVEDA.


185


\rMN 43.]

) Sharpen this song of him who strives his utmost, sharpen
God Vanina, his strength and insight ; ’

May we ascend the ship that bears us safely, whereby we may
pass over all misfortune. J

[ Asvins, with songs the singer stones have made you hasten
hitherward,

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away,

) As the sage Atri with his hymns, 0 Asvins, called you eagerly,

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away.

) So have I called you to our aid, even as the wise have called
of old,

Nasatyas, to the Soma-draught. Let all the others die away.

HYMN XLIII. Agni>

These songs of mine go forth as lauds of Agni, the disposing Sage,

Whose worshipper is ne’er o’ert brown.

I Wise Agni Jatavedas, I beget a song of praise for thee.

Who willingly receivest it.

3 Thy sharpened flames, 0 Agni, like the gleams of light that
glitter through,

Devour the forests with their teeth.

i Gold-coloured, bannered with the smoke, urged by the wind,
aloft to heaven

Rise, lightly borne, the flames of fire.

5 These lightly kindled fiery flames are all around made visible,

Even as the gleamings of the Dawns.

6 As Jatavedas speeds along, the dust is black beneath his feet,

When Agni spreads upon the earth.

1 Making the plants his nourishment, Agni devours and w T earies
not,

! Seeking the tender shrubs again.

k Bending him down with all his tongues, he flickers with his
fiery glow :

Splendid is Agni in the woods.

Agni, thine home is in the floods : into the plants thou
forcest way,

And as their Child art born anew\

1 Worshipped with offerings shines thy flame, 0 Agni, from
the sacred oil,

^With kisses on the ladle’s mouth.

5 Th* ship : a metaphorical expression for hymn and sacrifice. Cf. I. 46. 7 ;

; IX. 89. Q • Y aa a . i n . i m o . ins q



186 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vn j

1 1 Let us serve Agni with our hymns, Disposer, fed on ox aiJ(

cow,

Who bears the Soma on Mb back.

12 Yea, thee, 0 Agni, do we seek with homage and with f Ue

Priest

Whose wisdom is most excellent.

13 0 worshipped with oblations, pure Agni, we call on thee i

erst

Did Bhrigu, Manus, Angiras.

14 For thou, 0 Agni, by the fire, Sage by the Sage, Good by tl

Good,

Friend by the Friend, art lighted up.

15 So wealth in thousands, food with store of heroes give thou i

the sage,

0 Agni, to the worshipper.

16 0 Agni, Brother, made by strength, Lord of red steeds ai

brilliant sway,

Take pleasure in this laud of mine.

17 My praises, Agni, go to thee, as the cow's seek the stall

meet

The lowing calf that longs for milk.

18 Agni, best Angiras, to thee all people who have pleasant horn
Apart, have turned as to their wish.

19 The sages skilled in holy song and thinkers with their thougl

have urged

Agni to share the sacred feast.

20 So, Agni, unto thee the Priest, Invoker, strong in forays, pr
Those who spin out the sacrifice.

21 In many a place, the same in look art thou, a Prince o’er

the tribes :

In battles we invoke thine aid.


11 Fed on ox and cow : ‘the eater of the ox, the eater of the marrow.
Wilson. Who bears the Soma on his back: »<mapruhth&ya : ‘ on whose b
the libation is poured.' — Wilson.

14 S&yana refers to the Aitareya Erdhmana, I. 16, ‘which describes)
the fire produced by friction from the two aranis [fire-sticks] is thrown i
the Ahavamya fire, in the Atithyeshti ceremony. “ In the verse twain hf
[For thou, 0 Agni] etc., the one ripra (a sage) means one Agni, the other r*
the other Agni ; the one san (being, existing) means the one, the other
(in satd) the other Agni.’ (Haug’s tratis.).' — Note by E. B. C. in ^ liS(
Translation. Sdn and $at& may also mean ‘ good.’

16 Made by strength : produced by violent agitation of the fire-stick*



THE MOVED A.


TMN 44.J


187


5 Pray thou to Agni, pray to him who blazes served with sacred
oil :

Let him give ear to this our call.

I We call on thee as such, as one who hears, as Jatavedas, one,

Agni ! who beats away our foes. 1

; I pray to Agni, King of men, the Wonderful, the President

Of holy Laws : may he give ear.

I Him like a bridegroom, him who stirs all people, like a noble
horse,

Like a fleet steed, we instigate.

i Slaying things deadly, burning up foes, Rakshasas, on every
side,

Shine, Agni, with thy sharpened flame.

Thou whom the people kindle even as Manus did, best Angiras !

0 Agni, mark thou this my speech.

| 0 Agni, made by strength ! be thou bom in the heavens or
born in floods,

Vs such wo call on thee with songs.

Tea, all the people, all the folk who have good dwellings,
each apart,

lend food for thee to eat thereof.


) Agni, so may wo, devout, gazed at by men, throughout our
days

^ss lightly over all distress.

Ve venerate with cheerful hearts the cheerful Agni, dear to all,
burning, with purifying flame.

»o thou, 0 Agni rich in light, beaming like Surya with thy rays
ioldly demolishest the gloom.

Vepray to thee for this thy gift, Victor! the gift that faileth
not,

) Agni, choioest wealth from thee.


HYMN XLIV. Agni.

5 ay service unto Agni with your fuel, rouse your Guest with
oil :

in him present your offerings.

^gni, do thou accept my laud, be magnified by this my song :
welcome my sweetly-spoken words.

/tning ^ eaveni : 68 ® un - In floods: in the waters of the firmament
t* ai men •’ objects of their admiration. ‘ Beholding men.’ — Wilson.

▼ \&Q10nK PofilnaVv i Wf T avi nnn



188 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR pj

3 Agni, envoy, I place in front ; the oblation-bearer I address
Here let him seat the Deities.

4 Agni, the lofty flames of thee enkindled have gone up on hi
Thy bright flames, thou Refulgent One.

5 Beloved ! let my ladles full of sacred oil come near to thee
Agni, accept our offerings.

6 I worship Agni — may he hear ! — the oheerful, the InVol

Priest

Of varied splendour, rich in light.

7 Ancient Invoker, meet for praise, beloved Agni, wise and strc
The visitant of solemn rites.

8 Agni, best Angiras, accept straightway IheBe offerings, and gi
The seasonable sacrifice.

9 Excellent God, with brilliant flames, enkindled bring t

hitherward,

Knowing the way, the Heavenly Host.

10 Him, Sage and Herald, void of guile, ensign of sacrifices, liin
Smoke-bannered, rich in light, wo seek.

1 1 0 Agni, be our Guardian thou, God, against those who injure
Destroy our foes, thou Son of Strength.

12 Making his body beautiful, Agni the Sage hath waxen by
The singer and his ancient hymn.

13 1 invocate the Child of Strength, Agni with purifying flai
At this well-ordered sacrifice.

14 So Agni, rich iu many friends, with fiery splendour,

thyself

With Gods upon our sacred grass.

15 The mortal man who serves the God Agni within his

abode,

For him he causes wealth to shine.

16 Agni is head and height of heaven, the Master of the e

is he :

He quickcneth the waters’ seed.

17 Upward, 0 Agni, rise thy flames, pure and resplendent,

ing high,

Thy lustres, fair effulgences.

14 Rich in many friends : 'thou who hast Mitra’s splendour/— Ludwi;

15 For him he causes wealth to shine : or, *To him he shines forth opul
* To him he gives riches.'— Wilson.

16 The waters' seed ; as lightning, he impregnate* the wate rs of tbs i



THE RIGVEDA .


(N 45.]


139


?or, Agni, thou as Lord of Light rulest o'er choicest gifts:
may I,

"»hy singer, find defence in thee.

) Agni, they who understand stir thee to action with their
thoughts :

5o let our songs enhance thy might.

Ye ever claim the friendship of Agni, the singing messenger,
)f Godlike nature, void of guile.

Vgni who bears most holy sway, the holy Singer, holy Sage,
Jhines holy when we worship him,

fea, let my meditations, let my songs exalt thee evermore :
Think, Agni, of our friendly bond.

f I were thou and thou wert I, 0 Agni, every prayer of
thine

Jhould have its due fulfilment here.

'or Excellent and Lord of wealth art thou, 0 Agni, rich in
light :

day we enjoy thy favouring grace.

Vgni, to thee whoso laws stand fast our resonant songs of
praise speed forth
Vs rivers hasten to the sea.

Vgni, the Youthful Lord of men, who stirreth much and
eateth all,

The Sage, I glorify with hymns.

To Agni let us haste with lauds, the Guide of sacrificial rites,
Vrmcd with sharp teeth, the Mighty One.

Lnd let this man, good Agni, bo with thee the singer of thy
praise :

Be gracious, Holy One, to him.

For thou art sharer of our feast, wise, ever watchful as a
Sage :

Vgni, thou shinest in the sky.

3 Agni, Sage, before our foes, before misfortunes fall on us,
Excellent Lord, prolong our lives.

HYMN XLV. Indrn.


Hitherward! they who light the flame and straightway trim
the sacred grass,

Whose Friend is Tndra ever young.

> Sateth all : consumes the entire oblation.— SAyana. But the meaning
robably general.

This mm : the Rishi or singer himself.
i the kIu • »\v ^



190 THE HYMNS OP [POOR y/

2 High is their fuel, great their laud, wide is their splinter f r ,

the stake,

Whose Friend is Indra ever young.

3 Uuquelled in fight the heroleads his army with the warriorchi
Whose Friend is Indra ever young.

4 The new-born Vritra-slayer asked his Mothor, as he sei

his shaft,

Who are the fierce? Who are renowned?

D Savasi answered, He who seeks thine enmity will battle lil
A stately elephant on a hill.

6 And hear, 0 Maghavan ; to him who craves of thee t

gran test all :

Whate’er thou makest firm is firm.

7 What time the Warrior Indra goes to battle, borne by a

steeds,

Best of all charioteers is he.

8 ltepcl, 0 Thunder-armed, in all directions all attacks on u
And be our own most glorious God.

9 May Indra set our car in front, in foremost place to win the s
He whom the wicked injure not.

10 Thine enmity may we escape, and, Sakra, for thy bounty,
In kinc, may we come near to thee ;

11 Softly approaching, Thunder armed ! wealthy by hundi

rich in steeds,

Unrivalled, ready with our gifts.

12 For thine exalted excellence gives to thy worshippers each
Hundreds and thousands of thy boons.

13 Indra, we know thee breaker-down even of strong f

winner of spoil,

As one who conquers wealth for us.

14 Though thou art highest, Sage and Bold ! let the drops c

thee when we come
To thee as to a trafficker.

2 Splinter: the first shaving, splinter, or strip of wood, cut from the
or sacrificial post, and used in the sacrifice.

4 Aa soon as he was born Indra showed his warlike disposition, and
what worthy opponents he should have.

5 Savasi, or, the Strong Dame ; his mother Adit-i. A stately
follow S&yana who explains apsah m darjaniyo gajah, a beautiful elei
although in other place* the word seems to mean beauty (I. 124 7),
head (V. 80, 6), The allusion is to the size and strength of Vfitra, Indr*
lure antagonist.

14 As to a trafficker: as to one who knows the value of our worsnij
•blations and will give us something in return.



YMX 40.J


TUE KlUVEDA,


191


Bring unto us the treasure of the opulent man who, loth to
give,

Hath slighted thee for gain of wealth.

Indra, these friends of ours, supplied with Soma, wait and
look to thee,

As men with fodder to the herd.

And thee who art not deaf, whose ears are quick to listen for
our aid, 1

We call to us from far away.

When thou hast listened, make our call one which thou never
wilt forget,

And be our very nearest Friend.

When even now, when we have been in trouble we l» 4V «
thought of thee, ’ 0

0 Indra, give us gifts of kine.

0 Lord of Strength, we rest on thee, as old men rest upon a
staff : r

Wc long to have thee dwell with us.

To Indra sing a song of praise, Hero of mighty valour him

\\ hum no one challenges to war. ’


Hem, the Soma being shed, I pour the juice for thee to drink-
bate thee and finish thy carouse.


Let not the fools, or those who mock, beguile thee when they
seek thine aid : J


I hove not the enemies of pra\ er.

i lc A 11,0,11 with 11011 milky draught cheer thee to great
i munificence: b


brink as the wild-bull di inks the lake.

IV awsy 1 111 ° Ur asscmblius " hat dcctls > new and ancient, far
TllC Vritra-slayer hath achieved.

In battle of a thousand arms Indra drank Kadru’s Soma juice:
ieie lie displayed his manly might.

Tnie undeniable strength he found in Yadu and in Turvasa
"^conquered through the saeriticc. ' ’

1 J enc "““ of prayer : according to S&yana those who hate Brihmans.
f ‘J'- mid-bull : the gaura.

E^tlfc 8 om'-V W " ; . K : <lra t er ® 18 »PP» re ntly the name of a Rishi or
», a g J ,r,C - T 1 * 6 St - Petersburg Lexicon takes it to

r » hadru or Soma* vessel.

furvasa aud^ Y«^ naf ^^ w * aocording to Sdyapa, is the name of the enemy
f uiadu: he overcame Ahnav&vva in battle.’ — Wilson.



28 Him have I magnified, our Lord in common, Guardian of

folk, m

Discloser of great wealth in kine ;

29 Ribhukshan, not to be restrained, who strengthened TugraV

son in lauds, I

Indra beside the flowing juice ;

30 Who for Trisoka clave the hill that formed a wide receptacli
So that the cows might issue forth.

31 Whate’er thy plan or purpose bo, whate’er, in transport, thoi

wouldst do,

Do it not, Indra, but be kind.

32 But little hath been heard of done upon the earth by oa

like thee :

Let thine heart, Indra, turn to us.

33 Thine then shall be this high renown, thine shall these loftj

praises be,

When, Indra, thou art kind to us.

34 Not for one trespass, not for two, 0 Hero, slay us, nor fa

three,

Nor yet for many trespasses, I

35 I fear one powerful like thee, tho crusher-down of enemies,
Mighty, repelling all attacks.

36 0 wealthy God, ne’er may I live to see my friend or son

need :

Hitherward let thy heart be turned.

37 What friend, 0 people, unprovoked, hath ever said unto

friend,

He turns and leaves us in distress?

38 Hero, insatiate enjoy this Soma juice so near to thee,

Even as a hunter rushing down.

20 Rihhuhhan : Indra, Lord of tho Ilibhus. Tugra’s ton: Bhujyu. A
cording to Sftyana, tuyryavrklham means * augmenter of water.'

30 The hill is the massive rain-cloud, and the cows are streams of water.

31 Do it not : ‘ Sftyana understands this, “ do it not, for thou hast done
for us, — only make us happy.” Could it be that the worshipper had a feeiu
of nemesis 1 or would he monopolize all ? ' — Note by E. B. C. in WiW
Translation.

32 ‘ In the following venes (32—3(5) the poet seems to express disappo^
ment at the inadequate manifestation of Indra’s power, while he at the w
time entreats his grace and forgiveness.'— 0. 8. Texit, V. p, 1U.

37 This stanza is Indra’s answer to the poet's complaint. The
seems to be : no friend without good cause calls bis friend a traitor . ■
then have I done, or left undone, that thou shouldet say that I have t
thee ? See Ludwig's Commentary on the very difficult jahS kdK or;«



THE RIGVEDA.


b/w 46.]


393


| Hither I draw those Bays of thine yoked by our hymn, with
splendid car,

That thou mayst give unto the priests,
i Drive all our enemies away, smite down the foes who press

around,

And bring the wealth for which we long :

0 Jndra, that which is concealed in strong firm place precipi-
tous :

Bring us the wealth for which we long :


Great riches which the world of men shall recognize as sent
by thee :

Bring us tho wealth for which we long.


HYMN XL VI.


Indra.


We, Indra, Lord of ample wealth, our Guide, depend on one
like thee,

Thou driver of the Tawny Steeds.

For, Hurler of tho Bolt, we know thee true, the giver of our
food,

We know thee giver of our wealth.

) thou whose majesty tho bards celebrate with their sontrs
thou Lord b ‘ '

)f hundred powers and hundred aids.

-dr guidance hath the mortal man whom Aryaman, the Marut

host,

Vnd Mitra, void of guile, protect.


Lne, steeds, and hero strength he gains, and prospers, by the
Adityas sped,

^ver in wealth which all desire.


We pray to Indra for his gift, to him tho Fearless and the
Strong,

We pray to him the Lord of wealth.


verily combined in him arc all the fearless powers of aid.
im, rich in wealth, let swift Steeds bring to us, his Bays, to
Soma juice for his carouse :


fea, that most excellent carouse, Indra, which slays most ene-
mies,

With Heroes wins tho light of heaven, and is invincible in war :


PiscLl r PI i Car T to <, 1,0 ?°mposed of two or more originally separate hymns
e (see in* 6 l8c J ie .^ U( ^* en i L PP- 7 — 9). There are seventeen varieties of
e only °/ *ty mna )- The hymn is difficult and obscure in parts,
pZl c °BJ<*tural translations can be given. ^ 1

atd: or, sucoourere ; the Maruts may be intended.



THE HYMNS OF


194


[BOOR r/jj


9 Which merits fame, all-bountiful 1 and, unsubdued, hath vic-
tory in deeds of might.

So come to our libations, Strongest 1 Excellent ! May we oV
tain a stall of kine.

10 Responding to our wish for cows, for steeds, and chariots,^

of old,

Be gracious, Greatest of the Great !

1 1 For, Hero, nowhere can I find the bounds of thy munificence,
Still do thou favour us, 0 Bolt-armed Maghavan : with strength

hast thou rewarded hymns.

12 High, glorifier of his friend, he knows all generations, k

whom many praise.

All races of mankind with ladles lifted up invoke that Might]
Indra’s aid.

13 Be he our Champion and ITotector in great deeds, rich in al

wealth, the Vritra-slayer, Maghavan.

11 In the wild raptures of the juice sing to your Hero with higl
laud, to him the Wise,

To Indra, glorious in his name, the Mighty One, even as th
hymn allow eth it.

15 Thou givest wealth to me myself, thou givcst treasure, Ei

cellent ! and the strong steed,

0 Much-invoked, in deeds of might, yea, even now.

16 Him, Sovran Ruler of all precious things, who even hat

power o’er this fair form of his,

As now it takcth shape, and afterward,

17 We praise, so that the Mighty One may speed to you, Pouk

of bounties, Traveller, prepared to go.

Thou favourest the Maruts known to all, by song and sacnnci
With song and praise I sing to thee.

18 We in the sacrifice perform their will whose voice is life

high, ..

The worship of those Thundering Ones who o’er the ridges i
these mountains fly in troops.

13 This stanza may have been the conclusion of one of the original hy® 1

14 A s the hymn ailoweth it : in due accordance with the metre.

16 S&yana explains the latter part of the first line and the following j*
of the second as, ‘ who overcome* this obstructor (the enemy) m /je v(
war.’ I follow Ludwig’s interpretation who refers to III. 5%. o, w
weareth every shape at pleasure, effecting magic changes in hia ’
VI. 47. II, ‘ Indra moves multiform by his illusions/

18 Their will : the pleasure of the Maruts.



the may eda .


195


Olndra, Mightiest, bring us that which crushes men of evil minds,

Wealth suited to our needs, 0 Stirrer of the thought, best
wealth, 0 thou who stirrest thought.

0 Winder, noble winner, strong, wondrous, moat splendid,

excellent,

Sole Lord of victory, bring all-overpowering wealth, joy-giving,
chief in deeds of might.

Now let the godless man approach who hath received reward
so <*reat

As Vasa Asvya, when this light of morning dawned, received
from Prithusravas, from Kanita’s son.

Steeds sixty thousand and ten thousand kinc, and twenty
hundred camels I obtained ;

Ten hundred brown in hue, and other ten red in three spots:
in all, ten thousand kino.

Ten browns that make my wealth increase, fleet steeds whose
tails are long and fair,

Turn with swift whirl my chariot wheel ;

The gifts which Prithusravas gave, KanitVs son munificent.

He gave a chariot wrought of gold : the prince was passing
bountiful, and won himself most lofty fame.

Come thou to this great rite of ours, Vayu ! to give us vigor-
ous light.

We have served thee that thou mightest give much to us, yea,
mightest quickly give great wealth.

Who with thrice seven times seventy horses comes to us,
invested with the rays of morn,

Through these our Soma-draughts and those who press, to
give, drinker of pure bright Soma juice.

Who hath inclined this glorious one, bounteous himself, to
give me gifts,

Borne oil firm chariot with the prosperous Nahusha, wise, to
a man yet more devout.


) 0 winner: of wealth to be given to thy worshippers. * 0 bountiful,
t bountiful.’— Wilson.

[ V a WAi}vya: the Rishi of the hymn. Seel, 112. 10. Prithusravas:
1 116. 21.

\ h ten thousand hint : the exact meaning is not very clear. The last
18 rendered differently in Wilson’s Translation : * a thousand brown
? 8, J“ an d ten times ten thousand cows with three red patches.'

I n V ft PP ar ©ntly VAyu, but, according to SAyapa, Prithusravas.

chariot : literally, on a car made of the wood of the Aradu tres
Manthes Indies). But SAyana makes two proper names of the words,
f Aradva and Aksha.’



THE II Y MSS OF


[BOOR r/fl!


196

28 Sole Lord in beauty meet for praise, 0 Vayu, dropping fatness

Hurried' along by steeds, by camels, and by hounds, spread,
forth thy train : even this it is.

29 So M a prize dear to the strong, the sixty thousand have I gained,
Bulls that resemble vigorous steeds.

30 To me come oxen like a herd, yea, unto mo the oxen come.
And in the grazing herd he made a hundred camels bleat forme,
And twenty hundred mid the white.

32 A hundred has the sage received, Dasa Balbutha s and Tarot

The h so’are f thy people, Vayu, who rejoice with Indra for the,
guard, rcjoico with Gods for guards. . , , , ,

33 And now to Vasa Asvya here this stately woman is led font,
Adorned with ornaments of gold.

HYMN XLVII. Adityi

Great help yo give the worshipper, Varutia.Mitra, Mighty Ouei
No sorrow ever readies him whom ye, Ad.tyas, keep romharn
Youm are incomparable aids, and good the succour they affon

2 O Gods Adityas, well ye know the way to keep all woesafa
As the 'birds spread their sheltering wings, spread your proto

tion over us.

3 As the birds spread their sheltering wings let your protect™
We mean all shelter and defence, ye who have all things fi

4 ToThomloevcr they, Most Wise, have given a home a,
O’eTthe whole riches of this man they , tho Adityas, have coutn

6 For verily men sink and faint through oss

,»», O Cod., .b»r,

have approached. — — *

' 28 The tlttdt, camel., an 7h^d> are apparently the fantastic form, of 1
clouds that tty before Vftyu or the wind.

w l o{ iha ^ uewd ^

1 Yourt art, tic: the rsfrsin recurs in every verse of the hymn.



THE RIQtEDA .


jjr^v 47.] TI *E RIG? EDA. W

\ On him shall no fierce anger fall, no sore distress shall visit
him,

To whom, Adityas, ye have lent your shelter that extendeth
far.


] Resting in you, 0 Gods, we are like men who fight in coats of
mail.

Ye guard us from each great offence, ye guard us from each
lighter fault.

) May Aditi defend us, may Aditi guard and shelter us,

Mother of wealthy Mitra and of Aryaman and Varuna.

) The shelter, Gods, that is secure, auspicious, free from malady,
A sure protection, triply strong, oven that do ye extend to us.

I Look down on us, Adityas, as a guide exploring from the
bank.

Lead us to pleasant ways as men lead horses to an easy ford.


2 111 be it for the demons’ friend to find us or come near to us.

! But for the milch-cow be it well, and for the man who strives
for fame.


j} Eacli evil deed made manifest, and that which is concealed,

1 0 Gods,

The whole thereof remove from us to Trita Aptya far away.

[ Daughter of Heaven, the dream that bodes evil to us or to
our kine,

Remove, 0 Lady of the Light, to Trita Aptya far away,
i Even if, 0 Child of Heaven, it make a garland or a chain of
gold,

The whole bad dream, whate’er it be, to Trita Aptya we
consign.

I To him whose food and work is this, who comes to take his
share therein,

1 To Trita, and to Dvita, Dawn ! bear thou the evil dream away.


13 To Trita Aptya far away : Trita Aptya is a divinity dwelling in the re-
vest part of the heavens to whom it was customary to wish away and
asign any threatened calamity or unpleasantness. As S&yana regards Trita
>tya as the lliahi of the hymn, he !s compelled to force a different interpre-
tio u on the first half of the second line : ‘ (let it not be found) in Trit*
>tya, keep it far from us.’ — Wilson.

14 Daughter of Heaven : Ushas or Dawn.

15 ‘ The sense would then be ‘ even though parts of it be pleasant, we put
B whole of the evil dream away.” — Macdonell, Journal of R. A. S., July,

P- 461.

him: to Trita whose business it is to receive these consignments.

Dvita: a similar being, sometimes associated with Trita, SeeV. 18. 2,



193


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/jj


17 As we collect the utmost debt, even the eighth and sixteen^

part, %

So unto Aptya we transfer together all the evil dream.

18 Now have we conquered and obtained, and from our trespas

ses are free. 1 2 3 * *

Shine thou away the evil dream, 0 Dawn, whereof we art
afraid. Yours are incomparable aids, and good the succour
they afford.


2


HYMN XLVIII.


Soma,


Wisely have I enjoyed the savoury viand, religious-thoughted,
best to find out treasure,

The food to which all Deities and mortals, calling it meath,
gather themselves together.

Thou shalt be Aditi as thou hast entered within, appeaser of
celestial auger.

Indu, enjoying Indra’s friendship, bring us — as a swift steed
the car — forward to riches.


3 We have drunk Soma and become immortal ; wo have attained

the light, the Gods discovered.

Now what may foeman’s malice do to harm us? What, 0 Im-
mortal, mortal man’s deception ?

4 Absorbed into the heart, be swoet, 0 Indu, as a kind father to

his son, 0 Soma,

As a wise Friend to friend : do thou, wide-rulor, 0 Soma,
lengthen out our days for living.

5 These glorious drops that give me freedom have I drunk]

Closely they knit my joints as straps secure a car.

Let them protect my foot from slipping on the way : yea,
the drops I drink preserve me from disease.

6 Make me shine bright like fire produced by friction: give us

clearer sight and make us better.

For in carouse I think of thee, 0 Soma, Shall I, as a rich na
attain to oomfort ?

7 May we enjoy with an enlivened spirit the juioe thou givei

like ancestral riches.

0 Soma, King, prolong thou our existence as Surya makes t
shining days grow longer.


1 Meath : mddhu ; or, sweet.

2 Within ; within my heart. Indu : Soma.

3 We have drunk Soma : *ee Muir, 0. S. Texts, III. 264, 266. ^

6 From slipping on the wag : 1 may they keep us from a 1°° 8

worship. ’—Wilson.



THE RIGVEDA.


199


'MN 49*1

King Soma, favour us and make us prosper : we are thy de-
votees ; of this be mindful.

Spirit and power are fresh in us, 0 Indu : give us not up unto
our foeman’s pleasure.

For thou hast settled in each joint, 0 Soma, aim of men’s eyes
and guardian of our bodies.

When we offend against thine holy statutes, as a kind Friend,
God, best of all, bo gracious.

May I be with the Friend whose heart is tender, who, Lord of
Bays ! when quaffed will never harm me —

This Soma now deposited within me. For this, I pray for longer
life to Indra.

Our maladies have lost their strength and vanished : they feared,
and passed away into the darkness.

Soma hath risen in us, exceeding mighty, and we are come
where men prolong existence.

Fathers, that Indu which our hearts have drunken, Immortal
in himself, hath entered mortals.

So let us serve this Soma with oblation, and rest securely iu his
grace and favour.

Associate with the Fathers thou, 0 Soma, hast spread thyself
abroad through earth and heaven.

So with oblation let us servo thee, Indu, and so let us become
the lords of riches,

Give us your blessing, 0 ye Gods, preservers. Never may sleep
or idle talk control us.

But evermore may we, as friends of Soma, speak to the synod
with brave sons around us.

On all sides, Soma, thou art our life-giver : aim of all eyes,
light-finder, come within us.

Indu, of one accord with thy protections both from behind and
from before preserve us.

HYMN XLIX. Agni.

Aoxr, come hither with thy fires ; we choose thee as Invoking
I Priest.

| Let the extended ladle fi'.l of oil balm thee, best Priest, to
[sit on sacred grass.

9 Ann of men's eyes: or, beholder of men.

^ immortal in himself: see note on I. 18. 4.

Soma: here the Moon-God, who is intimately connected with the Pitris
fatuera. See Hymns of the Atharvaveda, XVIII. 4. 72.

* place at the end of this Book the eleven hymns, called the VAlakhilya,
are usually inserted after Hymn XLVIII. These hymns are not



200


THE EYMNS OF


[BOOS


nn


2 For unto thee, 0 Angiras, 0 Son of Strength, move ladles '
the sacrifice. !a


To Agni, Child of Force, whose locks drop oil, we seek f 0
most in sacrificial rites. ! '


3 Agni, thou art Disposer, Sage, Herald, bright 1 God! j

worshipful,

Best offerer, cheerful, to be praised in holy rites, pure Loi
by singers with their hymns.

4 Most Youthful and Eternal, bring the longing Gods to i

the guileless, for the feast.

Come, Vasu, to the banquet that is well-prepared : rejo
thee, gracious, with our songs.

5 Famed art thou, Agni, far and wide, Preserver, righteous, a

a Sago.

The holy singers, 0 refulgent kindled God ! arrangers, call
thee to come.


6 Shine, Most Resplendent ! blaze, send bliss unto the folk, a

to thy worshipper : Great art thou.

So may my princes, with good fires, subduing foes, rest in t
keeping of the Gods.

7 0 Agni, as thou burnest down to earth even high-grot

underwood,

So, bright as Mitra is, burn him who injures us, him who pic
ill against thy friend.

8 Give us not as a prey to mortal enemy, nor to the wickc

friend of fiends.

With conquering guards, auspicious, unassailable, protect u
0 Most Youthful God.

9 Protect us, Agni, through the first, protect us through tl

second hymu,

Protect us through three hymns, 0 Lord of Power and Migh
through four hymns, Vasu, guard thou us.


reckoned in the division of the Uigved* into Mandalas (Books) and Amivaki
(Chapters), and Sftyana does n<>t notice them in his Commentary. See J*'
eon's Translation, V. p. 96, note by Cowell. See also Max Muller’s
Hymn* I. (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XXXII.), pp. xlvi — xlviii.

Eleven must be added to the number of this hymn and of all that ioi°
in this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Max Mnller
edition of the text.

2 Whose locks drop oil : ‘butter-haired. ’—Wilson.

5 The arrangers : of the ritual of sacrifice.

6 Princes : wealthy patrons. According to Sftyana, the Rishi’s own s

and others may be intended. , „

9 The numbers probably have reference to the four quarters of the s ;•
Ludwig. j



THE RIQVEDA .


201


'ryjfiV 49.]

0 Preserve us from each fiend who brings the Gods no gift,

preserve thou us in deeds of strength :

For we possess in thee the nearest Friend of all, for service
of the Gods and weal.

1 0 Holy Agni, give us wealth renowned with men and strength-

ening life.

Bestow on us, O Helper, that which many crave, more glorious
still by righteousness ;

2 Wherewith we may o’ercome our rivals in the war, o’erpower-

ing the foe’s designs.

So wax thou by our food, 0 Excellent in strength. Quicken
our thoughts that find out wealth.

3 Agni is even as a bull who whets and brandishes his horns.
Well-sharpened are his jaws which may not be withstood : the

Child of Strength hath powerful teeth.

4 Not to be stayed, 0 Bull, 0 Agni, are thy teeth w’hen thou

art spreading far and wide.

Make our oblations duly offered up, O Priest, and give us
store of precious things.

5 Thou Host in the wood : from both thy Mothers mortals kindle

thee.

Un wcaricdly thou bearcst up the offerer’s gifts, then shinest
bright among the Gods.

6 And so the seven priests, 0 Agni, worship thee, Free-giver,

Everlasting One.

Thou cleavest through the rock with heat and fervent glow.
Agni, rise up above the men.

7 For you let us whose grass is trimmed call Agni, Agni, rest-
j less God.

Let us whose food is offered call to all the tribes Agni the
Invoking Priest of men.

8 Agni, with noble psalm that tells his wish ho dwells, thinking
, ou thee who g Hardest him.

Speedily bring us strength of many varied sorts to be most
near to succour us.

9 Agni, Praise-singer! Lord o' men, God ! burner-up of Rakshasas,
Mighty art thou, the ever-present Household-Lord, Home-

h'kmd and Guardian from the sky.

j2 H herewith : referring to the wealth which Agni is asked to give.

In the wood: in the pieces of wood used for the production of Agni.
wren prints : minor Hotar priests, such as the MaitrAvaruna and others.
lV Xi ' explained by S&yana as mtgham , the cloud.

18 dW : or, ‘the irresistible/ — Wilson.

dwellt : that is, the pious inatitutor of sacrifice,



02 THE HYMNS OF f / j ,

l0 Let no fiend oome among us, 0 thou rich in light, no spell o(
those who deal in spells.

To distant pastures drive faint hunger: far away, 0 Agni,
chase the demons’ friends.

HYMN L. Ind*

Both boons,— may Indra, hitherward turned, listen to this

And^ghtiest^Maghavan with thought inclined to ua com,
near to drink the boma juice.

2 For him, strong, independent Ruler, Heaven and Earth liavs

fashioned forth for power and might.

Thou seatest thee as first among thy peers in place, forth,

soul longs for Soma juice.

3 Fill thyself full, 0 Lord of wealth, 0 Indra, with the juice n

wfkuow thee, Lord of Bay Steeds ! victor in the fight, van
quisliiug e’en the invincible.

4 Changeless in truth, 0 Maghavan Indra, let it be as thou ii

wisdom wiliest it. . . , . • i n ti

May we, 0 fair of check, win booty with thine aid, 0 lliun

derer,’ swiftly seeking it.

5 Indra, with all thy saving helps give us assistance, Lord o

For after thee we follow even as glorious bliss, thee, Her(
finder-out of wealth.

6 Increaser of our steeds and multiplying kine, a golden well,-

For no one may impair the gifts laid up in thee. Bring m
whatever thing 1 ask.

1 For thou,— come to the worshipper !— wilt find great wea
to make us rich. ,

Fill thyself full, 0 Maghavan, for gam of kine, full,
for the gain of steeds.

8 Thou as thy gift bestowest many hundred herds, yea, mal1
thousands dost thou give.

With singers’ hymns have we brought the Fort-render
singing to Indra for his grace.

20 SpM 7f thm who deal in tfdU: ydliryitumSxKUAm : -torment oft'
evil spirits.’— Wilson.

1 Both hoont : Indra is asked to hear the prayer and to drink the So»»'



the riqved a.


203


~YMy

I Whether thesimple or the sage, Indra, have offered praise to thee,
He, Satakratu ! by his love hath gladdened thee, ambitious !
ever pressing on !

) If he the Strong of arm, the breaker-down of forts, the great
Destroyer, hear my call,

We, seeking riches cry to Indra, Lord of wealth, to Satakratu
with our lauds.

We couut not then as sinners, nor as niggardly or foolish men,
When with the Soma juice which we have shed we make Indra,
the Mighty Ono, our F riend.

! Him have we yoked in fight, the powerful Conqueror, debt-
claimer, not to be deceived.

Best charioteer, the Victor marks each fault, ho knows the
strong to whom ho will come near.

\ Indra, give us security from that whereof we are afraid.

Help us, 0 Maghavan, let thy Buccour givo us this : drive
away foes and enemies.

[ For thou, 0 liberal Lord of bounty, strengthenest his ample
home who worships thee.

So Indra, Maghavan, thou Lover of the Song, we with pressed
Soma call on thee.

5 Indra is Vritra-slayer, guard, our best defender from the foe.
May ho preserve our last and middlemost, and keep watch

from behind us and before.

6 Defend us from behind, below, above, in front, on all sides,

Indra, shield us well.

| Keep far away from us the terror seat from heaven : keep

[ impious weapons far away.

^ Protect us, Iudra, each to-day, each morrow, and each follow-
ing day.

Oar singors, through all days, shalt thou, Lord of the brave,
keep safely both by day and night.

1 A crushing Warrior, passing rich is Maghavan, endowed with
all heroic might.

Thine arms, 0 Satakratu, are exceeding strong, arms which
have grasped the thunderbolt.

1M/ 8 ^ tl ^ e ov sage: * the unskilled or the skilled.’ — Wilson.

- Marks each fault; the meaning of bhrimdm is uncertain : aocording to
^ Vl g it h 4 his supporter or feeder,’ that i«, the worshipper who presents
ihiT 1 5?, cr ^°* a l f°°d- Sftyana takes it with vdjinam ; * the strong racer.’ —
15 0 '1 * tron y the rich au d powerful worshipper.
v U1 ™ an< ^ m McUmort ; putram, son, being understood, aocording to
i«‘V» ; 16 e *pression probably means ‘ all of us.’

e teri 'or tent from htavtn ; ‘ supernatural alarm.’— Wilson.



204


THE HYMNS OP
HYMN LI.


[BOOK Vli


2


il 1 ill. Xl JU1. T ,

Indr

Offer ye up as praise to him that wherein Indra takes deligh
The Soma-bringers magnify Indra’s great energy with hyiaj
Good are the gifts that Indra gives.

Sole among chiefs, companionless, impetuous, and peerless ft
Hath waxen great o’er many folk, yea, over all things bom
in might.


3 Lord of swift bounty, he will win e’en with a steed of worth

less sort. J

This, Indra, must be told of thee who wilt perform heroic deeds,

4 Come to us hither : let us pay devotions that enhance tb

might,

For which, Most Potent ! thou wouldst fain bless the man
here who strives for fame.


5 For thou, 0 Indra, makest yet more bold the spirit of the bold
Who with strong Soma serveth thee, still ready with hia

reverent prayers.

6 Worthy of son g, he looketh down as a man looketh into wells.
Pleased with the Soma-bringer’s skill he maketli him his mate!

and friend. 1 2 * * * 6


7 In strength and wisdom all the Gods, Indra, have yielded m

thee.

Be thou the Guard of all, 0 thou whom many praise.

8 Praised, Indra, is this might of thine, best for the service

the Gods,

That thou with power dost slay Vritra, 0 Lord of Strength.

9 He makes the races of mankind like synods of the Beauteo

One.

Indra knows this his manifest deed, and is renowned.

10 Thy might, 0 Indra, at its birth, thee also, and thy ment
power,

In thy care, Maghavan rich in kine ! they havo incrcas*
exceedingly.


1 Good are, etc : the refrain is repeated in each verse.

2 Chiefs: nrlbhih: men, meaning Gods, according to S&jana. Folk: a

tribes.

Z He mil win e'en with a steed of worthless sort : 1 He...... wishes to bestoi

blessings (upon us) with his unurged courser.' — WilBon.

6 He looketh down : kindly on us as a thirsty man looks eagerly into&w

9 Like synods of the Beauteous One : like assemblies that meet to hoflfl
him ; but the meaning is obscure.

10 They ; thy worshippers.



THE RIOTED A.


205


yjtfr 52.]

[ 0 VYitra-slayer, thou and I will both combine for winning
spoil.

Even malignity will consent, 0 Bolt-armed Hero, unto us.

) Let us extol this Indra as truthful and never as untrue.

Dire is his death who pours no gifts : great light hath he who
oilers them. Good are the gifts that Indra gives.

HYMN LII. Indra.

\Vnu powers of Mighty Ones hath he, Ancient, Beloved, been

equipped,

Through whom the Father Manu made prayers efficacious
with tho Gods.

2 Him, Maker of the sky, lot stones wet with the Soma ne’er

forsake,

Nor hymns and prayer that must be said.

3 Indra who knew full well disclosed the kine to tho Angirases.
This his great deed must be extolled.

4 Indra, promoter of tho song, the sage's Strengthener as of old,
Shall come to - bless and succour us at presentation of this

laud.

5 Now after their desire's intent the pious singers with the cry
Of Hail ! have sung loud hymns to thee, Indra, to gain a stall

of kine.

6 With Indra rest all deods of might, deeds done and yet to be

performed,

Whom singers know devoid of guile.

7 When the Five Tribes with all their men to Indra have sent

out their voice,

And when the priest hath strewn much grass, this is the Friend's
[ own dwelling-place,

‘8 This praise is verily thine own : thou hast performed these
manly deeds,

And sped the wheel upon its way.

11 Malignity: or the malignant man. ‘ The niggard.’— Wilson.

12 Dire is his death : or, great is his destruction.

1 This difficult verse is variously interpreted both by Indian commentators
ttd by European scholars. I follow partly Aufrecht’s translation as given by
r. Muir, and partly Ludwig’s Commentary. See 0. S. Texts , I. pp. 163 164,

[Hwig’s Rigveda, Y. pp. 107—168 ; and Wilson’s Translation, V. p. 107.
he Ancient, Belov&d appears to be Soma and not Indra.

7 The Friend's : Indra’s, The second line is very obscure. See Bergaigne,
vi., and Vedic Hymns, I., p. 226. I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation.

8 The wheel: the Sun.



THB HYMNS OF


200


[BOOK r//


9 At the o’erflowing of this Steer, boldly he strode for life, a n
took

Soma as cattle take their corn.

10 Receiving this and craving help, we, who with you are Dak«l ia

8ons,

Would fain exalt the Maruts’ Lord.

11 Yea, Hero, with the singers we sing to the duly-coming Band
Allied with thee may we prevail.

12 With us are raining Rudras, clouds accordant in call to battle

at the death of Yritra,

The strong assigned to him who sings and praises. May God
with Indra at their head protect us.


HYMN LI II.


Indra


May our hymns give thee great delight. Display thy bounty,
Thunderer.

Drive off the enemies of prayer.

2 Crush with thy foot the niggard churls who bring no gifts,

Mighty art thou ;

There is not one to equal thee.

3 Thou art the Lord of Soma pressed, Soma impressed is also

thine.

Thou art the Sovran of the folk.


4 Come, go thou forth, dwelling in heaven and listening to the

prayers of men :

Thou tillest both the heavens and earth.

5 Even that hill with rocky heights, with hundreds, thousands,

held within,

Thou for thy worshippers brakest through.

6 We call on thee both night and day to taste the flowing Soma

juice :

Do thou fulfil our hearts’ desire.


‘J This Steer: Soma; that is, when abundant libations had been offered,
lie : Indra.

10 Dukthat sons: of the same origin with you. 1 Lords of food/ according
to Sftvana.

11 Duly-coming Band : of Maruts, led by Indra

12 The strong : perhaps the thunderbolt with which Indra aids the wor-

shipper. — - —

3 Unprtssed : in its natural state in the stalks of the plaut. Or, a* LuiMl
suggests, the Soma which Indra drinks in heaven may be meant. See > .
20 . 1 .

5 That hiU: the cloud with its countless treasures of rain.

0 Night: just before dawn.



THB RIG VEDA.


20 /


YMN 54.]


Where is that ever-youthful Steer, strong-necked and never
yet bent down ?

What Brahman ministers to him 1

To whose libation doth the Steer, betake him with delight
therein ? 6

Who takes delight in Indra now?

Whom, Vritra-slayer, have thy gifts and hero powers accom-
panied ?

Who is thy dearest in the land ?

For thee among mankind, among the Purus is this Soma shed.

Hasten thou hither : drink thereof.

This, growing by Sushoma and by Saryanav^n, dear to thee,

In Arjikiya, cheers thee best.

Hasten thou hitherward, and drink this for munificence to-day

Delightful for thine eager draught. * ?


HYMN LIV.


India.


riiouon, Indra, thou art called by men from east and west
from north and south,

Jomc hither quickly with fleet steeds ;


:f ill the effluenoo of heaven, rich in its light, thou takest joy
Jr in the sea in Soma juice. J *

With songs I call thee, Great and Wide, even as a cow to
profit us,

ndra, to drink the Soma-draught.

lithor, 0 Indra, let thy Bays bear up and bring upon thy car
■hy glory, God ! and majesty.

hou, Indra, wouldst bo sung and praised as great, strong
^ lordly in thy deeds : °

'Ome hither, drink our Soma juice.

Ve who have shed the Soma and prepared the feast are call-
ing thee

o sit on this our sacred grass.


Among the PHrus : among men, or among Kings named POrup.— SAyana.
Sushoynd: apparently a river which cannot now be identified. Arjtktya :
uT ntr y or district. SuryanAvdn is said to be a lake m the district
tnetra. See Vol. I., Index. For conjectures regarding SushomA and
see Zimmer, Altindmhez Leben , pp. 12, 13. Cf. VIII. 7. 29.


e ffl' ienc<! of heaven : or the place in heaven from which the Amrit
n S€a • of air ; the firmament.
a : as the most useful of animals.



208 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK F/j

7 As, Indra, thou art evermore the common Lord of all alife
Aa such we invocate thee now.

8 The men with stones have milked for thee this nectar of tl

Soma juice :

Indra, be pleased with it, and drink.

9 Neglect all pious men with skill in sacrod song : come hithe

ward

With speed, and give us high renown.

10 Gods, may the mighty rest unharmed, the King who gives

spotted kino,

Kine decked with golden ornaments.

11 Beside a thousand spotted kine I have reoeived a gift of golf]
Pure, brilliant, and exceeding great.

12 Durgaha’s grandsons, giving me a thousand kine, munificent
Have won renown among the Gods.


HYMN LV.


Indri


Loud singing at the sacred rite where Soma flows we priest?
invoke

With haste, that he may help, as the bard’s Cherisher, Indrs
who findeth wealth for you.

2 Whom with fair helm, in rapture of the juice, the firm resist

less slayers hinder not :

Giver of glorious wealth to him who sing his praise, honouring
him who toils and pours :

3 Sakra, who like a curry-comb for horses or a golden goad,
Indra, the Vritra-slaycr, urges eagerly the opening of the

stall of kiue :


9 All pious men : all other worshippers.

10 The King : who iustituted the sacrifice. According to Sftyana, Indra «
meant ; but this is impossible.

12 Durgaha' s grandsons : SAynna explains durgdkasya by duhkham 5^®
mdnasya me, of me plunged in grief, and ndpUuh (nepotes) as avakshi^h
unprotected : ‘ Unprotected as I am, and plunged in sorrow (roy depew cn
by the favour of the gods obtain food, and are blessed with abundance
thousand cattle.' See Wilson’s Translation, and Cowell’s note.

1 We priests invoice : the construction is difficult. I follow Ludwig, and td*
hutd, an infinitivo, as equivalent to the first person plural.

3 Carry-comb for horses : the purifier of his worshippers and wdl-skill ‘
horses, according to SAyana. Golden goad: wonderful aud golden^
according to Sflyapa. The meaning of ktjah, as well as of mriksrMh 13 un
tain, but both seem to signify instruments connected with horses.



THE RIO VEDA.


209


pJf.V 55.]

[ Who for the worshipper scatters forth ample wealth, even
! though buried, piled in heaps :

May ludra, Lord of Bay Steeds, fair-helmed Thunderer, act
at his pleasure, as he lists.

i Hero whom many praise, what thou hast longed for, even of
old, from men.

All that we offer unto thee, 0 Indra, now, sacrifice, laud, effect-
ual speech.

5 To Soma, Much-invoked, Bolt-armed ! for thy carouse, Celestial,
Soma-drinker ! come.

Thou to the man who prays and pours the juice hast been
beat giver of delightful wealth.

r Here, verily, yesterday we Jet the Thunder- xviclder drink his fill.
So in like manner offer him the juice to-day. Now range you
by the Glorious One.

i Even the wolf, the savage beast that rends the sheep, follows
the path of his decrees.

So graciously accepting, ludra, this our praise, with wondrous
thought come forth to us.

i What manly deed of vigour now remains that Indra hath
not done 1

Who hath not heard his glorious title and his fame, the Vritra-
slaycr from his birth ?

How great his power resistless ! how invincible the Vritra-
slayer’s matchless might !

ludra excels all usurers who see the day, excels all traffickers
in strength.

0 Indra, Vritra slayer, we, thy very constant worshippers,

Bring prayers ne’er heard before to thee, 0 Much-invoked, 0
Ih under-armed, to be thy meed.

0 thou of mighty acts, the aids that are in thee call forward
many an eager hope.

Past the drink-offerings, Vasu, even of the good, hear my
call, Strongest God, and come.

; Eerily, Indra, wo aro thuio, we worshippers depend on thee,
lor there is none but only thou to show us grace, 0 Maghavan.
thou much invoked.

j •' w gold, precious stones, etc.

The wolf; according to S&yana, the robber. The reason of mentioning
in this place is not obvious.

l i ^ ie d a y : who live. According to Sftyana, who look upon the

a their present life, but will be sunk in darkness after death.



210 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/#,|

14 From this onr misery and famine set us free, from this dire

curse deliver us.

Succour us with thine help and with thy wondrous thought
Most Mighty, finder of the way,

15 Now let your Soma juice be poured : be not afraid, 0 Kali's sons.
This darkening sorrow goes away; yea, of itself it vanishes.

HYMN LYI. ^ Adityii,

Now pray we to these Kshatriyas, to the Adityas for their aid,
These who are gracious to assist.

2 May Mitra bear us o’er distress, and Yanina and Aryanian,
Yea, the Adityas, as they know.

3 For wonderful and meet for praise is these Adityas’ saving help
To him who offers and prepares.

4 The mighty aid of you, the Great, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman,
We claim to be our sure defence.

5 Guard us, Adityas, still alive, before the deadly weapon strike:
Are ye not they who hear our call ?

6 What sheltering defence ye have for him who toils in pouring

gifts,

Graciously bless ye its therewith.

7 Adityas, Gods, from sorrow there is freedom, for the sinless,

wealth,

0 ye in whom no fault is seen.

8 Let not this fetter bind us fast : may he release us for success ;
For strong is Iudra and renowned.

9 0 Gods who fain would lend your aid, destroy not us as yt

destroy

Your enemies who go astray.

10 Aud thee too, 0 Great Aditi, thee also, Goddess, I address,
Thee very gracious to assist.

11 Save us in depth and shallow from the foe, thou Mother oi

Strong Sons :

Let no oue of our seed be harmed.

12 Far-spread 1 wide-ruling! grant that we, unharmed by envy

may expand :

Grant that our progeny may live.

14 From this our misery : the hymn was ‘ seen ’ and employed in a time c
dearth and famine. Finder of the way : to prosperity.

15 Kali's sons : Kali is the Rishi or seer of the hymn.

I Kshatriyas ; royal princes.

II Of Strong >SQn« ; tbs



TEE MOVE DA.


7MS 57.]


211


I Those who, the Priuoes of the folk, in native glory, ne *er
deceived,

Maintain their statutes, void of guile —

14 As such, from mouth of ravening wolves, 0 ye Adityas,

rescue us,

Like a bound thief, 0 Aditi.

15 Adityas, let this arrow, yea, let this malignity depart
From us or e’er it strike us dead.

16 For, Bountiful Adityas, we have evermore enjoyed your help,
Both now and in the days of old.

17 To every one, 0 ye Most Wise, who turneth even from sin to

you,

Ye Gods vouchsafe that lie may live.

18 May this new mercy profit us, which, ye Adityas, frees like one
Bound from his bonds, 0 Aditi.

19 0 ye Adityas, this your might is not to be despised by us :

So be ye graciously inclined.

20 Lot not Vivasvau’s weapon nor the shaft, Adityas, wrought

with skill,

Destroy us ere old age be nigh.

21 On every side dispel all siu, Aditya3, all hostility,

Indigence, and combined attack.


HYMN LVII.


Indra,


Even as a car to give us aid, we draw thee hither for our bliss,
Strong in thy deeds, cheeking assault, Lord, Mightiest Indra,
of the brave !


2 Great in thy power and wisdom, Strong, with thought that

comprehendeth all !

Thou hast filled full with majesty.

3 Thou very Mighty One, whose hands by virtue of thy greatness

grasp

The golden bolt that breaks its way.

^ Your Lord of might that ne’er hath bent, that ruleth over all
mankind,

I call, that he, as he is wont, may aid the chariots and the
men.


H Who turneth even from sin : who cornea to you for forgiveness.

^0 Vhmv&ris weapon : the deadly bolt of the Sun, or perhaps, metaphor-
C! %> of the sacrifices *

21 Combined attack : * the closely drawn net.’— Wilson.

* ThwWjftUa j»U:



212 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR Vijj

5 Whom, ever farthering, in frays that win the light, in both

the hosts

Men call to succour and to help.

6 Indra, the Strong, the measureless, worthy of praise, Most

Bountiful,

Sole Ruler even over wealth.

7 Him, for his ample bounty, him, this Indra do I urge to

drink,

Who, as his praise was sung of old, the Dancer, is the Lord
of men.

8 Thou Mighty One, whose friendship none of mortals ever hath

obtained :

None will attain unto thy might.

9 Aided by thee, with thee allied, in frays for water and for sun,
Bolt-armed ! may we win ample spoil.

10 So seek we thee with sacrifice and songs, chief Lover of the

Song,

As, in our battles, Indra, thou to Purumflyya gavest help.

11 0 Thunderer, thou whose friendship and whose onward

guidance both are sweet,

Thy sacrifice must be prepared.

12 To us, ourselves, give ample room, give for our dwelling ample

room :

Give ample room to us to live.

13 We count the banquet of the Gods a spaoious pathway for

the men,

And for the cattle, and the car.

14 Six men, yea, two and two, made glad with Soma juice, come

near to me

With offerings pleasant to the taste.

15 Two brown-hued steeds, Indrotu’a gift, two bays from Rikslut’s

son were mine,

From Asvatnedha’s son two red.

7 The Lancer : in the dance of war.

10 Purumdyya: according to SAyana, ‘ me (the Rishi) the possessor of
much wisdom.’

13 Sacrifice to the Gods procures freedom and security for us and all
belong to us.

15 ‘These princes with their respective fathers are the six of V. 14. The
sons of Riksha and AwameUhu had originally commenced the sacrifice, but
Jndrota and his father Atithigva came to see it and added tbeir gifts. The
boub alone are mentioned : the son is the father’s second self, pitri-putrayor
abheddt.’—CoweW* note in Wilson’s Translation.



THE RIG VEDA.


213


qYMN 58.]

[6 From Atithigva good car-steeds, from Arksha rein-obeying
steeds,

From Asvamedha beauteous ones.

17 Indrota, Atithigva’s son, gave me six horses matched with

mares :

And Putakratu gave besides.

18 Marked above all, amid the brown, is the red mare Vrishanvati,
Obedient to the rein and whip.

19 0 bound to me by deeds of might, not even the man who loves

to blame

Hath found a single fault in you.

HYMN LVIII. Indra.

I send you forth the song of praise for Indu, hero-gladdener.
With hymn and plenty he invites you to complete the sacrifice.

2 Thou wishest for thy kine a bull, for those who long for his

approach,

For those who turn away from him, lord of thy cows whom
none may kill.

3 The dappled kino who stream with milk prepare his draught

of Soma juice :

Clans in the birth-place of the Cods, in the three luminous
realms of heaven.

4 Praise, even as he is known, with song Indra the guardian of

the kine,

The Son of Truth, Lord of the brave.

li> ArJcska: the son of Riksha. Asvamedha : the son of Asvamedha.

17 Pfttakratu: son of Asvamedha.

18 Vrishanvati: according to von Roth, ‘perhaps, that may be found
among stallions.’

19 0 bound to me : this stanza is addressed to the princes who instituted
the sacrifice and gave the rewards which have been mentioned.

1 The son// of praise ; trishtubham : used in a general sense for any hymn
of praise. Indu: Soma. According to S.tyana, Indra is meant.
j The stanza is difficult. I °dopt Pischel’s explanation of nadam and

vditthrtni,

3 Clans: v;sah : possibly the cows arc meant. Eggcling translates : ‘At

, ls birth the well-like milking, speckled ones mix the Soma (draught), the
c mis of th e gods in the three spheres of the heavens’ (Sacred Books of the
XLI. p. 307 ). Piachel observes : ‘The connexion of the first three

aiizas i is probably this : Soma shall be celebrated by you in your song of
^ if ln - or ^ er t'hat he may liberally reward you. What thou wishest for
p I a bull for the cows, in order that they may be propagated and
the 1 * 3 * * 6 * n( * ra w * fc b m ^k to be mixed with his Soma juice, while they serve

race of Gods in all the three realms of heaven.'— Vedische Studien , I.



214


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK VIII,


5 Hither his Bay Steeds have been sent, red Steeds are on the
sacred grass
Where we in concert sing our songs.

C For Indra Thunder-armed the kine have yielded mingled milk
and meath,

What time he found them in the vault.

7 When I and Indra mount on high up to the Bright One’s place

and home, . _ -n . ,

We, having drunk of meath, will roach his seat whose Fnends

are three times seven.

8 Sing, sing ye forth your songs of praise, ye Priyamedhas, sing

Yea^let young children sing their lauds : as a strong castle
praise ye him.

9 Now loudly let the viol sound, the lute send out its voice with

Shrilfbe’the music of the string. To Indra is the hymn up-
reused*

10 When hither speed the dappled cows, unflinching, easy to be
SeiTe' 1 quickly, as it bursts away, the Soma juice for ludra’s

11 Indra hath drunk, Agni hath drunk : all Deities have drunk

Here'varuna shall have his home, to whom the floods have
sung aloud as mother-kine unto their calves.

12 Thou, Varuna, to whom belong Seven Rivers, art a glorious

The°waters flow into thy throat as ’twere a pipe with ample
mouth. ,

13 He who hath made the fleet steeds spring, well-harnessoa,

the worshipper,

” 6 In the vault: ‘ in the oavity of the Soma- vessel.’— von ltoth ; ‘on the horizon
— Ludwig; 4 near at hand.’— S&y ana. , , r ,

7 The Bright One's place: the Btation of the Sun ■ ^ 1 ° folio™ Ludwig

three times seven: Indra who is the friend of the MaruU. I folio n ^
in combining the trih saptd sakhyuh of the text liitci one co p u w

Stlyana’s explanation is different : ‘ let us be united in the twe y
of the (universal) friend,’— See note in Wilson’s Translation.

9 The viol: girgarah : ‘a kind of musloal instrument , sa y a J ao d
GodhX, originally the leather guard worn by bowmen on the lett .

pihgt (said to mean bowstring) are also, apparently, names of musioa
ments. , , . v seven

12 Vanina’s throat, or palate, is said to mean the sea, into which



jYMN 59.] THE MG VEDA. 215

He, the swift Guide, is that fair form that loosed the horses
near at hand.

4 Indra, the very Mighty, holds his enemies in utter scorn.

He, far away, and yet a child, cleft the cloud smitten by his
voice.

[5 He, yet a boy exceeding small, mounted his newly-fashioned
car.

He for his Mother and his Sire cooked the wild mighty buffalo.

16 Lord of the home, fair-helmeted, ascend thy chariot wrought

of gold.

We will attend the Heavenly One, the thousand-footed, red of
hue, matchless, who blesses where he goes.

17 With reverence they come hitherward to him as to a Sovran

Lord,

That they may bring him near for this man’s good success, to
prosper and bestow his gifts.

18 The Priyamedhas have observed the offering of the men of old,
Of ancient custom, while they strewed the sacred grass, and

spread their sacrificial food.

HYMN LIX. Indra.

He who, as Sovran Lord of men, moves with his chariots un-
restrained,

The Vritra-slayer, vanquisher of fighting hosts, preeminent,
is praised with song.

2 Honour that Indra, Puruhanman ! for his aid, in whose sus-

taining hand of old

The splendid bolt of thunder was deposited, as the great Sun
was set in heaven.

3 No one by deed attains to him who works and strengthens

evermore :

No, not by sacrifice, to Iudra praised of all, resistless, daring,
bold in might


15 If is Mother and his Sire : Earth and Heaven. The buffalo is the dark
rain-cloud which Iudra pierces with his lightning, or peihaps the demon \ala
is intended.

16 The Heavenly One: the Sun, which is Indra’ s chariot Thousand -footed :
bright with countless rays of light.

17 This man's: whoinstitutes the sacrifice.


2 Puruhanman : the Rishi of the hymn addresses himself. Sustaining :
° r vidkartari may (with Ludwig) be taken as a nominative with v&jrah t the
bolt of thunder as a austainer (of Order).



216 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Via

4 The potent Conqueror, invincible in war, him at whose birth

the Mighty Ones,

The Kine who spread afar, sent their loud voices out, heavens,
earths sent their loud voices out.

5 0 Indra, if a hundred heavens and if a hundred earths were

thine—

No, not a thousand Suns could match thee at thy birth, nut
both the worlds, 0 Thunderer.

6 Thou, Hero, hast performed thy hero deeds with might, yea,

all with strength, 0 Strongest One.

Maghavan, help us to a stable full of kine, 0 Thunderer, with
wondrous aids.

7 Let not a godless mortal gain this food, 0 thou whose life is

long !

But one who yokes the bright-hued steeds, the Etasas, even
Indra yoker of the Bays.

8 Urge ye the Conqueror to give, your Indra greatly to be

praised,

To be invoked in shallow waters and in depths, to be invoked
in deeds of might.

9 0 Vasu, 0 thou Hero, raise us up to ample opulence.

Raise us to gain of mighty wealth, O Maghavan, 0 Indra, to
sublime renown.

10 Indra, thou justifiest us, and trarnplest down thy slanderers.
Guard thyself, valiant Hero, in thy vital parts: strike down

the Dasa with thy blows.

11 The man who brings no sacrifice, inhuman, godless, infidel,
Him let his friend the mountain cast to rapid death, the

mountain cast the Dasyu down.

12 0 Mightiest Indra, loving us, gather thou up, as grains of corn
Within thine hand, of these their kine, to give away, yea,

gather twice as loving us.

13 0 my companions, wish for power. How may we perfect Saras

praise,

The liberal princely patron, never to be harmed ?


4 The Kine : the heavens and the earths.

7 Etasas: the horses of the Sun

10 In thy vital parts: liteially, between thy thighs. * Shelter us between
thy thighs ’ — Wilson.

11 His friend - in which he hopes to find refuge: according to SA-yana,
Parvata (mountain) is a Uishi, the friend of Indra.

12 Their kine: the property of the hostile aboi iginea.

13 Sara’s praise : Sara must be the institutor of the sacrifice: according
to Sftyanu he is ludra, ‘the destroyer,’



THE niOVEDA.


217


0MN 60 .]

14 By many a sage whose grass is trimmed thou art continually

praised,

That thou, 0 Sara, hast bestowed here one and here another
calf.

15 The noble, Suradeva’s son, hath brought a calf, led by the ear,

to three of us,

As a chief brings a goat to milk.

HYMN LX. Agni.

0 Agni, with thy mighty woalth guard us from all malignity,
Yea, from all hate of mortal man.

2 For over thee, 0 Friend from birth, the wrath of man hath

no control :

Nay, Guardian of the earth art thou.

3 As such, with all the Gods, 0 Son of Strength, auspicious in

thy flame,

Give us wealth bringing all things good.

4 Maliguities stay not from wealth the mortal man whom, Agrfi,

thou

Protectest while he offers gifts.

5 Sage Agni, he whom thou dost urge, in worship of the G^ds,

to wealth,

With thine assistance winneth kine.

G Riches with many heroes thou hast for the man who offers gifts :
Lead thou us on to higher bliss.

7 Save us, 0 J&tavcdas, nor abandon us to him who sins,

Unto the evil-bearted man.

8 0 A grtii, let no godless man avert thy bounty as a God :

Over all treasures thou art Lord.

9 So, Son of Streugth, thou aides t us to what is great and

excellent,

Those, Vasii ! Friend 1 who sing thy praise.

10 Let our songs come aneav to him beauteous and bright with

piercing flame,

Our offeiings, with our homage, to the Lord of wealth, to
him whom many praise, for help :

14 Here one. and here another : tlhim-eknm : meming many.

1 § Silradeva's son : Sara. Mitya ua explains s ntradevt/ah aa cows won in
attle. ‘May Maghavan, taking them l>y (ho e.tr*, lead the cows with their

calvog from our three (destructive enemies), as the owner leads a goat to
drink ’—Wilson.

2 Guardian of the earth : kshfip&odn : 4 Lord of the night.’— S&yana.
Winneth hint : literally, is a goer among cows : ' walks (lord) among

cr owds of cattle,’— Wilson,



218 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vljj>

11 To Agui Jatavedas, to the Son of Strength, that he may give

ns precious gifts,

Immortal, from of old Priest among mortal men, the most
delightful in the house :

12 Agni, made yours by sacrifice, Agui, while holy rites advance;
Agni, the first in songs, first with the warrior steed ; Agni to

win the land for us.

13 May Agni who is Lord of wealth vouchsafe us food for friend-

ship sake.

Agni we ever seek for seed and progeny, the Vasu who
protects our lives.

14 Solicit withyourchants, for help, Agni theGod with piercing flame,
For riches famous Agni, Purumijha and ye men ! Agni to

light our dwelling well.

15 Agni we land that he may keep our foes afar, Agni to givo ua

health and strength.

Let him as Guardian be invoked in all the tribe3, the lighter-
up of glowing brands.

HYMN LXI.

Prepare oblation : let him come ; and let the minister serve again
*Who knows the ordering thereof.

2 Rejoicing in his friendship, lot the priest be seated over man,
Beside the shoot of active power.

3 Him, glowing bright beyond all thought, they seek among tin

race of man ;

With him for tongue they seize the food.

4 He hath inflamed the twofold plain : life-giving, he hat

climbed the wood,

And with his tongue hath struck the rock.

12 With the warrior steed : grvati : the fierce and rapid fire that clears tl
jungle for the advance of the Aryan settlers.

14 To light our dwelling well : I follow Ludwigs explanation, bayai
takes vtdltaye as a proper name : ‘ a house for (me) Suditi. Wilson.

15 The lighter-up of glowing brands : vasturrisMnttm : according to ttayai
1 the giver of homes to us Rishis.’

The language of the hymn is intentionally obscure, and much of i
translation (in which 1 generally follow Ludwig) must be regar e
conjectural.

1 Let him come: Agni. The minister: or, the Adhvaryu.

2 The shoot : Agui, according to S&yana : the stalks of the Sotna-p
according to von lloth.

3 They seek: that is, the Gods. , , ..

4 The twofold plain : the expanses of earth and heaven. Climbed the w
a forest conflagration is referred to.



THE RIQVEDA.


UYMN 61.J


21 D


5 Wandering here the radiant Calf finds none to fetter him, and

seeks

The Mother to declare his praise.

6 And now that great and mighty team, the team of horses that

are his,

And traces of his car, are seen.

7 The seven milk a single cow ; the two set other five to work,
On the stream’s loud-resounding bank.

8 Entreated by Yivasvan’s ten, Indra cast down the water-jar
With threefold hammer from the sky.

9 Three times the newly-kindled flame proceeds around the

sacrifice :

The priests anoint it with the meath.

0 With reverence they drain the fount that circles with its

wheel above,

Exhaustless, with the mouth below.

1 The pressing-stones are set at work : the meath is poured into

the tank,

At the out-shedding of the fount.

2 Ye cows, protect the fount : the two Mighty Ones bless the

sacrifice.

The handles twain are wrought of gold.

3 Pour on the juice the ornament which reachos both the heaven

and earth :

Supply the liquid to the Bull.


5 The radiant Calf: Agni in the form of lightning Here: in the sky
bove us. The Mother : the cloud, w r hich will praise him with a thunder-psalm.

7 The seven : officiating priests, or assistants. See IT. 1. 2 A single cow :
be text has only 6kdm (unam). Sftyana supplies, cow, which he explains as the
hurma, pitcher or caldron used for heating milk, etc., in the Pravargya cere-
mony. Loud-resounding hank : with reference to the saciificial exclamations,
ittered by the officiating priests. The two : the Adhvaryu and the Pratipras-
biitar, his Assistant, direct the five others in the performance of the ceremony.

8 Entreated by Vivasvdns ten: according to Sty-ana, the ten a fingers of the
Worshipper. Ten pi iests are probably meaut. Indra : Agni or Aditya may be
neant.— Sdyana. The xoater-jar • the rainy cloud. Hummer : meaning, pro-
>ably, the zigzag lightning. S&yana explains it by rasmind, with his ray.

10 The fount : avatam : the gharma or ma hdvtra, the contents of which are
>oured into the fire. Its wheel: apparently, the circular lim on which it
iBually stands and which is now inverted that all the liquid may flow out.
^coiding to Hillebraudt ( Vedische Mythologie , I. 325) the fount is the Moon.

12 The two Mighty Ones : Heaven and Earth. But as the meaning of
'apsudi is unknown, the sentenoe oan be only conjeoturally translated : ‘ (The
wo kinds of milk) in the sacrifice are plentiful and fruit-giving.’ — Wilson.

13 The ornament ; the milk whieh is mingled with the Soma. To the Bull:
Agni,



220 TEE HYMNS OF [BOOK F/jj

14 These know their own abiding-placo : like calves beside the

mother cows

They meet together with their kin.

15 Devouring in their greedy jaws, they make sustaining food

in heaven,

To Indra, Agni light and prayer.

16 The Pious Ono milked out rich food, sustenance dealt in por-

tions seven,

Together with the Sun’s seven rays.

17 1 took some Soma when the Sun rose up, 0 Mitra, Varuna.
That is the sick man’s medicine.

18 From where oblations must be laid, which is the Well-beloved's

home,

He with his tongue hath compassed heaven.

HYMN LXII. Asvins.

House ye for him who keeps the Law, yoke your steeds,
Asvins, to your car :

Let your protecting help be near.

2 Come, Asvins, with your car more swift than is the twinkling
■ of an eye :

Let your protecting help be near.

3 Asvins, ye overlaid with cold the fiery pit for Atri’s sake :

Let your protecting help be near.

4 Where are ye? whither are ye gone? whither, like falcons,

have ye flown ?

Let your protecting help be near.

5 If ye at any time this day are listening to this my call,

Let your protecting help be near.

6 The Asvins, first to hear our prayer, for closest kinship I

appjoach :

Let your protecting help be near.

7 For At ri ye, 0 Asvins, made a dwelling-place to shield him well.
Let your protecting help be near.


14 These, know: the cows know, and come to, the place where they are to
be milked foi sacnficial purposes as well as they know their own stable.

15 Devour in y : peihaps the flames ; but the stanza is obscure.

16 The Pious One : Agni. Dealt in portions sevm : one for each priest.

18 This Well-beloved's home: ‘the place which I, the eager offerer, choose.
— Wilson. Mary atd , ‘ the well-belov&d,’ is perhaps the Soma.


1 Who keeps the Law : which enjoins sacrifice. The Riski means himself.
3 For Atri's take ; see 1. 116. 8.



THE RIG VEDA.


221


f/yj/iV 62.]

8 Ye warded off the fervent heat for Atri when he sweetly spake :
Let your protecting help be near.

9 Erst Saptavadhri by his prayer obtained the trenchant edge

of fire ;

Let your protecting help be near.

0 Come hither, 0 ye Lords of wealth, and listen to this call of

mine :

Let your protecting help be near.

1 What is this praise told forth of you as Elders in the ancient

way 1

Let your protecting help be near.

,2 One common brotherhood is yours, Asvins, your kindred is the
same :

Let your pr ) tecting help be near.

:3 This is your chariot, Asvins, which speeds through the regions,
earth and heaven : /

Let your protecting aid bo near.

14 Approach ye hitherward to us with thousands both of steeds
and kine :

Let your protecting help be near.

[5 Pass us not by, remember us with thousands both of kine
and steeds ;

Let your protecting help be near.

1G The purple tinted Dawn hath risen, and true to Law hath made
the light :

Let your protecting help be near.

17 He looked upon the Asvins, as an axe-armed man upon a tree :

Let your protecting help be near.

IB By the black band encompassed round, break it down, bold
one, like a fort.

Let your protecting help be near.

9 Saptavadhri • see V. 78. 6. His release seems to have beeu effected by
employing fire. But see Myriantheus, Die A^rins, pp. 88, 90.

H ‘ Why is this (repeated invocation) addiessed to you as if you were
decrepit like old men ? ’ — Wilson.

12 One common brotherhood ; as twin children of the consort of VivasvAn,
the Sun.

17 The meaning is obscure. ‘ Asvins, the splendidly-brilliant (sun cleaves
the daikness) as the woodman with his axe a tree.’— Wilson. ‘ He [the demon]
looked at the Asvins.’— Grassmaun.

18 The first line is said by S.iyana to be addressed to Saptavadhri. It
to express self-encouragement before an attack upon a Dftsa enemy.

ut 8ee Myriantheus, Die Alvins, p. 90.



222


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Vlli


HYMN LXIII. Agl>i

Exerting all our strength with thoughts of power we glorify
in speech

Agni your dear familiar Friend, the darling Guest in every
home.

2 Whom, served with sacrificial oil like Mitra, men presenting gifts
Eulogize with their songs of praise;

3 Much-lauded Jatavedas, him who bears oblations up to heaven

Prepared in service of the Gods.

4 To noblest Agni, Friend of man, best Vritra-slayer, are we come,
Him m whose presence Riksha’s son, mighty Srutarvan, waxes

great ;

5 To deathless Jatavedas, meet for praise, adored with sacred oil,
Visible through the gloom of night ;

6 Even Agni whom these priestly men worship with sacrificial

gifts,

With lifted ladles offering them.

7 0 Agni, this our newest hymn hath been addressed from us to

thee,

0 cheerful Guest, well-born, most wise, worker of wonders,
ne’er deceived.

8 Agni, may it be dear to thee, most grateful, and exceeding

sweet :

Grow mightier, eulogized therewith.

9 Splendid with splendours may it be, and in the battle with

the foe

Add loftier glory to thy fame.

10 Steed, cow, a lord of heroes, bright like Indra, who shall fil

the car,

Whose high renown ye celebrate, and people praise each glo-
rious deed.

11 Thou whom Gopavana made glad with song, 0 Agni Angiras,
Hear this my call, thou Holy One.

12 Thou whom the priestly folk implore to aid the gathering o

the spoil,

Such be thou in the fight with foes.

1 I follow Ludwig in his interpretation of this stanza, the construction c
which is difficult.

2 Like Mitra : or as a friend ; or like the Sun. — S&yana. .

10 Steed , cow : there is no verb to govern these accusatives. Perhaps, »

it, that is, the hymn, give, may be understood. Sftyana explains gdm, c°'>
by gantdram , goer. ‘ (Worship) ye men, the bright (Agni) who goes like
horse and fills our chariots (with spoil),’ — Wilson.



THE RIGVEDA.


223


YMN 64.]

) I, called to him who reels with joy, Srutarvan, Riksha’s son,
shall stroke

The heads of four presented steeds, like the long wool of fleecy
rams.

[ Four coursers with a splendid car, Savistha’s horses, fleet of foot,
Shall bring me to the sacred feast, as flying steeds brought
Tugra’s son.

5 The very truth do I declare to theo, Parushni, mighty flood.
Waters ! no man is there who gives more horses than Savish-
tha gives.

HYMN LXIY. Agni.

Yoke, Agni, as a charioteer, thy steeds who best invite the Gods :
As ancient Herald seat thyself.

2 And, God, as skilfullest of all, call for us hitherward the Gods :
Give all our wishes sure effect.

3 For thou, Most Youthful, Sou of Strength, thou to whom

sacrifice is paid,

Art holy, faithful to the Law.

4 This Agni, Lord of wealth aud spoil hundredfold, thousand-

fold, m head

And chief of riches and a Sage.

3 As craftsmen bend the felly, so bend at our general call : come
nigh,

Angiras, to the sacrifice.

6 Now, 0 Virupa, rouse for him, Strong God who shines at early

morn,

Fair praise with voice that ceases not.

7 With missile of this Agni, his who looks afar, will we lay low
The thief in combat for the kine.

8 Let not the Companies of Gods fail us, like Dawns that float

away,

Like cows who leavo the niggardly.


H Tugra’s son: Bhujyu. See Vol. I., Index.

1£> Parushnt : now the Itftvi, the river on whose bank Srutarvan offerod
his sacrifice. '

1 Ancient Herald : or, chief Invoker.

6 Vinlpa: the Rishi of the hymn who addresses himself. Who shines at
early morn ; or, aspiring heavenward.

7 The thief: the hymn is a prayer for aid in an expedition for the recovery

stolen cattle.

8 Like Dawns that float away : Mike cows that bathe them in the stream/
according to the explanation given in the St. Petersburg Lexicon. Like cows
who leave the niggardly : ‘ the kine abandon not a little (calf).’— Wilson.



224


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK VIII

9 Let not the sinful tyranny of any fiercely-hating foe
Smite us, as billows smite a ship.

10 0 Agni, God, the people sing reverent praise to thee for

strength :

With terrors trouble thou the foe.

11 Wilt thou not, Agni, lend us aid in winning cattle, winning

weal tb ?

Maker of room, make room for us.

12 In this great battle cast us not aside as one who bears a load :
Snatch up the wealth and win it all.

13 0 Agni, let this plague pursue and fright another and not us:
Make our impetuous strength more strong.

14 The reverent or unwearied man whose holy labour he accepts,
Him Agni favours with success.

15 Abandoning the foeman’s host pass hither to this company:
Assist the men with whom I stand.

16 As we have known thy gracious help, as of a Father, long agi,
So now we pray to thee for bliss.

HYMN LXV. Indni.*

Not to forsake me, I invoke this Indra girt by Maruts, Lord
Of magic power who rules with might.

2 This Indra with his Marut Friends clarC into pieces Vritra’s

head

With hundred knotted thunderbolt.

3 Indra, with Marut Friends, grown strong, hath rent asunder

Vritra, and

Released the waters of the sea.

4 This is that Indra who, begirt by Maruts, won the light of

heaven

That lie might drink the Soma juice.

5 Mighty, impetuous, begirt by Maruts, him who loudly roars,
Indra we invocate with songs.

6 Indra begirt by Maruts we invoke after the ancient plan,

That he may drink tho Soma juice.

7 0 liberal Indra, Marut-girt, much-lauded Satakratu, drink
The Soma at this sacrifice.

8 To thee, 0 Indra, Marut-girt, these Soma juices, Thunderer!
Are offered from the heart with lauds.


3 Of the sea : of the firmament or ocean of air.



0MX 66 .] THE RIGVEDA . 225

9 Drink, Iudra, with thy Marat Friends, pressed Soma at the
morning rites,

Whetting thy thunderbolt with strength*

[0 Arising in thy might, thy jaws thou ahookest, Indra, having
quaffed

The Soma which the mortar pressed.

11 Indra, both worlds complained to thee when uttering thy

feat ful roar,

What time thou smotest Dasyus dead.

12 From Indra have I measured out a song eight-footed with nine

parts,

Delicate, faithful to the Law.

HYMN LXYI. Indra.

Scarcely was Satakratu born when of his Mother he inquired,
Who are the mighty 1 Who are famed I

2 Then Savasi declared to him Aurnavabha, Ahisuva :

Son, these be they thou must o'erthrow.

3 The Vritra-slayer smote them all as spokes are hammered in-

to naves :

The Dasyu-killer waxed in might.

4 Then Indra at a single draught drank tho contents of thirty

pails,

Pails that were filled with Soma juice.

5 Indra in groundless realms of space pierced the Gandharva

through, that he

Might make the Brahmans’ strength increase.

11 Complained to thee: in terror. When uttering thy fearful roar: the
meaning of fcraLshamdnuin, rendered thud conjeoturally, id uncertain.

12 Eight-footed with nine parts : tho hymn consists of triplets, each of

which contaius nine P&das, parts or half-lines, of eight feet or syllables each.
That is, the metre is octosyllabic (8 x 3), and the triplet contains three stanzas
in that metre, or nine octosyllabic Pddas. Erom Indra : originating in him
as its subject or inspires Faithful to the Law: closely connected with
sacrifice. _ .

1 Cp. VIII. 45. 4.

2 Savast: or, the Mighty One, Indra’ s Mother. Aurnavdbha: or Drnavdbha'a
son. See V III. 32. 26. These: and other fiends, as U, these, is plural.

4 Pails: or bowls ; literally, lakes. The memingof the word kdnukflt in
this stanza is uncertain. It appears to be an adjective qualifying sardnsi
pails or lakes. See note in Wilson’s Translation.

5 The Gandharva : a heavenly being who dwells in the region of tbe air
and guards the celestial Soma, that is, the rain. See I. 22. 14, and 163. 2.
According to S&yana, the Gaudhitrva is the rain-cloud itself, which Indra shat-

and so released the fertilizing water.

15



22<1 TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK V7/j

6 Down from the mountains Indra shot hither his woli-directci

shaft :

He gained the ready brew of lice.

7 One only is that shaft of thine, with thousand feathers, hund

red barbs,

Which, Indra, thou hast made thy friend.

8 Strong ai the Uibhus at thy birth, therewith to those who

praise thee, men

And women, bring thou food to eat.

9 By thee these exploits were achieved, tho mightiest deeda,

abundantly :

Firm in thy heart thou settest them.

10 All these things Vishnu brought, the Lord of ample stride

whom thou hadst sent —

A hundred buHalois, a brew of riee and milk ; and Indr,*
slow the ravening boar.

1 1 Most deadly is thy how, successful, fashioned well ; good uj

thin 3 a 1 2 row, decked with gold.

Warlike and well equipped thine arms are, which increase
sweetness for him who drinks tho sv\cot.

HYMN LX VII.

Bkixg us a thousand, Indra, as our guerdon for the Soma
juice :

Hundieds of kine, 0 Hero, bring.

2 Bring cattle, bring us ornament, bring us embellishment and
steeds,

Give us, besides, two rings of gold.


6 The st.m/a is dnularlv ex pi lined by S.iynua. Indra smote the rain from
the cloud**, and obtained food for men.

7 One only : Indra alone is the wielder of the thunderbolt.

10 All these things : the buffaloes or dark clouds, and the lice and milk or
fertilizing lain. Slew: the veibis supplied by SA) ana. The ravening born .
Viitra. (If. I. 61 7. wheie the deed is siinilaily related. See Prof. A. A.
donell, Journal R. A. Society , 1895, p. 186,

11 Which increase sweetness for him who drinks the sweet : this is Ludwig*
interpretation of two very difficult words which mean according to Wiwn*
Translation, ‘ destructively overthrowing, desti uctively piercing;’ according
to the St. Petersburg Lexicon, ‘ like two bees delighting in sweetness
according to Grassmann, ‘ sweetness loves thy two lips.’

1 A thousand: cows, understood.

2 Two rings: the meaning of mand here is somewhat uncertain. Se<* M, 13
Muller, India, Wluit can it 'Teach us ? pp 125. 120 ; Weber, Episches im Vt* 1 *
chen Ritual, p. 30 ; and Zimuier, Altindnches Lcben, pp. 50, 51,



THE RIG VEDA.


HYMN 68 .]


3 And, Bold One, bring in ample store rich jewels to adorn the ear,
For thou, Good Lord, art far renowned.

4 None other is there for the priest, Hero ! but thou, to give

him gifts,

To win much spoil and prosper him.

5 Indra can never be brought low, Sakra can never be subdued:
He heareth and beholdeth all.

6 He spicth out the wrath of man, lie who can never be deceived :
Ere blame can come he marketh it.

7 Ho hath his stomach full of might, the Vritra-slayer, Conqueror,
The Soma-drinkcr, ordering all.

8 In thee all treasures arc combined, Soma ! all blessed things

in thee,

Uninjured, easy to bestow.

9 To thee speeds forth my hope that craves the gift of corn, and

kino and gold,

Yea, craving horses, speeds to thee.

10 Indrn, through hope in thee alone even this sickle do I grasp.
Fill my hand, Maghavan, with all that it can hold of barley
cut or gathered up.

HYMN LXVIII. Soma.


Tins here is Soma, ne’er restrained, active, all-conquering,
bursting forth,

Rislu and Sage by sapience.

2 All that is bare he covers o’er, all that is sick he medicines:
The blind man sees, the cripple walks.

3 Thou, Soma, givest wide defence against the hate of alieu men,
Hatreds that waste and weaken us.


i Thou by thine insight and thy skill, Impetuous One, from
heaven and eaith
Drivest the sinner’s enmity.

^ When to their task they come with zeal, may they obtain the
Giver’s grace,

And satisfy his wish wht thirsts.


$ Xoyna: here said to mean India himself.

. ^ ‘ It would appear as if the field were u barren one and the poet fcought
f n>m Indra a harvest which he had not sown.’— Wilson.


■ * bursting forth : according to Sitya^a, causing (fruit) to spring forth.

< ri O ne • fijUhiu : according to S&yapa, ‘ possessed of tho remain*

" g r ^ 8 Soma juice offered in the third 8uvuna.*

[ , : the priests. The Giver'* : bountiful Indra'*. Mia wish ,* Indra'i

on gmg for Soma-libations.



238 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vll

6 So may he find what erst was lost, so may he speed the pious

man,

And lengthen his remaining life.

7 Gracious, displaying tender love, unconquered, gentle in thy

thoughts,

Be sweet, 0 Soma, to our heart.

8 0 Soma, terrify us not; strike us not with alarm, 0 King :
Wouud not our heart with dazzling flame.

9 When in my dwelling-place I see the wicked enemies of Gods,
King, chase their hatred far away, thou Bouuteous One,

dispel our foes.

HYMN LX IX. Indra.

0 Satakratu, truly I have made none else my Comforter.
Indra, be gracious unto us.

2 Thou who hast ever aided us kindly of old to win the spoil,

As such, 0 Indra, favour us.

3 What now ] As prompter of the poor thou helpost him who

sheds the juice.

Wilt thou not, Indra, strengthen us]

4 0 Indra, help our chariot on, yea, Thunderer, though it log

behind ;

Give this my car the foremost place.

5 Ho there ! why sittest thou at ease ] Make thou my chariot

to be first :

And bring the fame of victory near.

6 Assist our car that seeks the prize. What can be easier for

thee ?

So make thou us victorious.

7 Indra, be firm : a fort art thou. To thine appointed place

proceeds

Tho auspicious hymn in season due.

8 Let not our portion be disgrace. Broad is the course, the prize

is set,

The barriers are opened wide.

9 This thing we wish, that thou mayst take thy fourth, thy
sacrificial lftune.

So art thou held to be our Lord.

9 The wicked enemies : or, the enmities ; that is, when I see that the Goda

fcre" displeased with me.

4 The hymn is a prayer for success in a ooming chariot race.

- 7 To thine appointed place : 1 to thee the repeller (of enemies).’ — Wil«<> n -
9 Thyfgurthy thy sacrificial name : the other three, according to SAyapa, are
the couetellation-name, the secret name, and the revealed name.



THE RIO VEDA.


m


!YMX 71.]

0 Ekadyu hath exalted you, Immortals : both Goddesses and
Gods hath he delighted.

Bestow upon him bounty meet for praises. May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN LXX. Indra.

Indra, God of the mighty arm, gather for us with thy right
hand

Manifold and nutritious spoil.

2 We know thee mighty in thy deeds, of mighty bounty, mighty

wealth,

Mighty in measure, prompt to aid.

3 Hero, when thou art fain to give, neither may Gods nor

mortal men

Restrain thee like a fearful Bull.

4 Come, let us glorify Indra, Lord supreme of wealth, Self-

ruling King :

In bounty may he harm us not.

5 Let prelude sound and following chant : so let him hear the

Sam an sung,

And with his bounty answer us.

6 0 Indra, with thy right hand bring, and with thy left remem-

ber us:

Let us not lose our share of wealth.

7 Come nigh, 0 Bold One, boldly bring hither the riches of

the churl

Who givelh least of all the folk.

8 Indra, the booty which thou hast with holy singers to receive,
Even that booty wiu with us.

9 Indra, thy swiftly-coming spoil, the booty which rejoices all,
Souuds quick in concert with our hopes.

HYMN LXXI. Indra.

Hastb forward to us from afar, or, Vritra slayer, from anear,
To meet the offering of the meath.

10 The Gods in general are.the deities of this stanza. Ekadyd is the seer of
the hymn. He, enriched with prayer : India, exulted by our hymn.

5 Let prelude sound : prd stoshad npagdsiskat : let the prastotar and the «d*
gfttar, two of the officiating priests at the chanting of a S&man, discharge their
functions : the former singing the prelude and the latter the accompaniment.

8 Win with us : make us thy allies.

9 Sounds in concert with our hopes : answers to our expectation. Perhaps
M Ludwig thinks, the word * sounds ’ refers to the herd of cattle which pro-
bably constituted the spoil that is spoken of.



230 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK 17//,

2 Strong are the Soma-draughts ; come nigh : the juices fill thee

with delight :

Drink boldly even as thou art wont.

3 Joy, Indra, in the strengthening food : let it content thy wish

and thought,

And be delightful to thine heart.

4 Come to us thou who hast no foo : we call thee down tohymus

of praiso,

In heaven’s sublirnest realm of light.

5 This Soma here expressed with stones and dressed with milk

for thy carouse,

Indra, is offered up to thee.

6 Graciously, Indra, hear my call. Come and obtain the draught,

and sate

Thyself with juices blent with milk.

7 The Soma, Indra, which is shed in chalices and vats for thee,
Drink thou, fur thou art Lord thereof.

8 The Soma seen within the vats, as in the flood the Moon i 3 seen,
Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof.

9 Tnat which the Hawk brought in his claw, inviolate, through

the air to thee,

Drink thou, for thou art Lord thereof.

HYMN LXXII. Visvedem.

Wb ohoose unto ourselves that high protection of the Mighty Gods
That it may help and succour us.

2 May they be ever our allies, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman,
Far-seeing Gods who prosper us.

3 Ye furtherers of holy Law, transport us safe o’er many woes,
As over water-floods in ships.

4 Dear wealth bo Aryaman to us, Varuna dear wealth meet for

praise :

Dear wealth we choose unto ourselves.

5 For Sovrans of dear wealth are ye, Adityas, not of sinner’s

wealth,

Ye sapient Gods who slay the foe.

6 We in our homes, ye Bounteous Ones, and while we journey

on the road,

Invoke you, Gods, to prosper us.

8 The Moon: in allusion to the double meaning of Suma, the plant and its
juice, and the Moon.

9 The Hawk : see I. 60. 2, and 03 6.



yj/JV 74. J


THE KIGVEDA.


231


1 Regard us, Indra, Vishnu, here, ye Asvins and the Maruthost,
Us who are kith and kin to you.

5 Ye Bounteous Ones, from time of old we here set forth our
brotherhood,

Our kinship in the Mother’s womb.

) Then come with Indra for your chief, at early day, ye Boun-
teous Gods:

Yea, I address you now for this.

HYMN LXXIII. Agnt

Agni, your dearest Guest, I laud, him who is loving as a friend,
Who brings us riches like a car.

2 Whom as a far-foreseeing Sage the Gods have, from the olden

time,

Established among mortal men.

3 Do thou, Most Youthful God, protect the men who offer, hear

their songs,

And of thyself preserve their seed.
i What is the praise wherewith, 0 God, Angiras, Agni, Son of
Strength,

Wo, after thine own wish and thought,

5 May serve thee, 0 tliou Child of Power, and with what sacri-
fice’s plan 1

What prayer shall I now speak to thee?

C Our God. make all of us to dwell in happy habitations, and
Reward our songs with spoil and wealth.

7 Lord of the house, what plenty fills the songs which thou ins-

pi rest now,

Thou whose hymn helps to win the kine?

8 Him Wise and Strong they glorify, the foremost Champion in

the fray,

And mighty in his dwelling-place.

9 Agni, he dwells in rest and peace who smites and no one smites

again :

With hero sons he prospers well.

HYMN LXXIV. As vine.

To this mine invocation, 0 ye Asvius, ye Nasatyas, come,
lo drink the savoury Soma juice.

8 In the Mother's womb : as common children of Aditi the General Mother

°f all living beings

3 And of tk if self preserve their .ccrf : or, and guard our offspring and oui selves.
^ He: the faithful worshipper.



332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlll,

2 This laud of mine, ye Asvins Twain, and this mine invitation

hear,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

3 Here Krishna is invoking you, 0 Asvins, Lords of ample wealth,
To drink the savoury Soma juice.

4 List, Heroes, to the singer’s call, the call of Krishna lauding

yon,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

5 Chiefs, to the sage who sings your praise grant an inviolable

home,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

6 Come to the worshipper’s abode, Asvins, who here is lauding

you,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

7 Yoke to the firmly jointed car the ass which draws you, Lords

of wealth,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

8 Come hither, Asvins, on your car of triple form with triple seat,
To drink the savoury Soma juice.

9 O Asvins, O Nasatyas, now accept with favouiing grace my

songs,

To drink the savoury Soma juice.

HYMN LXXY. Asvins.

Ye Twain are wondrous strong, well-skilled in arts that heal,
both bringers of delight, ye both won Dakslm’s praise.
Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not
off our friendship, come and set me free.

2 How shall he praise you now who is distraught in mind? Ye
Twain give wisdom for the gain of what is good.

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not
off onr friendship, come and set me free.

6 To drink : bo that ye may drink.

7 The aw: cf. I. 34. 9 ; 116. 2 ; and 162 21.

8 Of triple form with triple seat : see I. 34. 2, 9.

The Rishi is Visvaka son of Krishna.

1 Daksha’ 8 praise : on the occasion mentioned in I. 116. 2 ; or when the
Asvins won SuryA, for their bride, 1. 116. 17. To save his life: according to
Sftyana, ‘for the sa!<e of his Bon ’ Come and set me free: ‘flying loose (your
reins and gallop hither).’ — Wilson. ‘ Unyoke your horses,’ — Grassmann.

2 Distraught in mind : referring either to Visvaka himself, or the man for
whom he invokes the Asvins’ aid. According to S&yana, YimanAh (distraught
in mind) hero is the name of a Rishi.



THE RIG VEDA.


YMN 76.]


) Already have ye Twain, possessors of great wealth, prospered
Vishnapu thus for gain of what is good.

Visvaka calls on you as such to save his life. Break ye not
off our friendship, come and set me free.

[ And that Impetuous Hero, winner of the spoil, though he is
far away, we call to succour us,

Whose gracious favour, like a father's, is most sweet. Break
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free.

\ About the holy Law toils Savitar the God : the horn of holy
Law hath he spread far and wide.

The holy Law hath quelled even mighty men of war.* Break
ye not off our friendship, come and set me free.

HYMN LXXVI. Asvins,

Splendid, 0 Asvins, is your praise. Como, fountain-like, to
pour the stream.

Of the sweet juice effused— dear is it, Chiefs, in heaven— drink
like two wild bulls at a pool.

2 Drink the libation rich in sweets, 0 Asvins Twain : sit, Heroes,

on the sacred grass.

Do ye with joyful heart in the abode of man preserve his life
by means of wealth.

3 The Priyamedhas bid you come with all th e succou rs that are yours.
Come to his house whose holy grass is trimmed, to dear sacri-
fice at the morning rites.

1 Drink ye the Soma rich in meath, ye Asvins Twain : sit gladly

on the sacred grass.

So, waxen mighty, to oui eulogy from heaven come ye as wild-
bulls to the pool.

5 Come to us, Oye Asvins, now with steeds of many a varied hue,
Ye Lords of splendour, wondrous, borne on paths of gold,

drink Soma, ye who strengthen Law.

6 For we the priestly singers, fain to hymn your praise, invoke

you for the gain of strength.

So, wondrous, fair, and famed for great deeds come to us,
through our hymn, Asvins, wheu ye hear.

3 Vishn4p{i : the Ilishi’s son or grandson.

4 That Impetuous Hero: Indra. ‘These two verses,’ says Grassmann, ‘are
l * eri from another hymn. Verse 5 is addressed to Savitar, aud verse 4, as

R Ppears, to Indra. The refrain, which is altogether unsuitable here, has
Sea ft dded in order to connect the verses with the preceding hymn.'

2 The libation : gharm&m : the heated milk or borage, or the vessel

it is heated.

9 Priymtdhat ; Priyamedha and his family,



*34 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VIH,

HYMN LXXVII. Indra,

As cows low to their calves in stalls, so with our songs we
glorify

This Indra, even your Wondrous God who checks attack, who
joys in the delicious juice.

2 Celestial, bounteous Giver, girt about with might, rich, moan*

tain-like, m precious things,

Him swift we seek for foodful booty rich in kine, brought
hundredfold and thousandfold.

3 Indra, the strong and lofty hills are powerless to bar thy way.
None stay that, act of thine when thou wouldst fain give

wealth to one like me who sings thy piaise.

4 A Warrior thou by strength, wisdom, and wondrous deed, in

might excellcst all that is.

Hither may this our hymn attract thee to our help, the hymn
which Gotamas have made.

5 For in thy might thou stretchest out beyond the boundaries

of heaven.

The earthly region, Indra, comprehends thee not. After thy
Godhead hast thou waxed.

6 When, Maghavan, thon honourest the worshipper, no one is

there to stay thy wealth.

Most liberal Giver thou, do thou inspire our song of praise,
that we may win the spoil.

HYMN LXXVIII. Indra.

To Indra sing the lofty hymn, Maruts ! that slays the Vritras best)
Whereby the Holy Ones created fur the God the light divine
that ever wakes.

2 Indra who quells the curse blew curses far away, and then in

splendour came to us.

Indra, refulgent with thy Marut host ! the Gods strove eagerly
to win thy l »ve.

3 Sing to your lofty Indra, sing, Maruts, a holy hymn of piaise.
Let Sati.kratu, Vritra-slaycr, kill the foe with hundred-knotted

thunderbolt.

1 As cows: the cows who are milked for saciifieial purposes, whose cahss
are shut up during the ceremony . .

6 The earthly reyion : the rajas region, middle air, or fiimament is freque n
ly divided into two, one half belonging to the earth and the other to the 6 7
See Wallis, Cosmology of the Jtigveda, pp. 114, 115.

I Maruts: here meaning the singers of the hymn of praise. * Pi lest*. '
Wilson. The light divine : the Sun, which the Visvedevas generated or ci eu
for Indra.



THE RIO VEDA.


235


#n/A' 79.]

4 Aim and fetch boldly forth, 0 thou whose heart is bold : great

glory will be thine thereby.

In rapid torrent let the mother waters spread. Slay Vritra, win
the light of heaven.

5 When thou, unequalled Maghavan, wast born to smite the

Vritras dead,

Thou spreadest out the spacious earth and didst support and
prop the heaveus.

6 Then was the sacrifice produced for thee, the laud, and song

of joy,

Thou in thy might surpassest all, all that now is and yet
shall be.

7 Raw kine thou filledst with ripe milk. Thou madest Surya

rise to heaven.

Heat him as milk is heated with pure Sama hymns, great joy
to him who loves the song.

HYMN LXXIX. indra.

May Indra, who in every fight must be invoked, be near to us.
May the most mighty Yritra-slayer, meet for praise, come t«
libations and to hymns.

2 Thou art the best of all in sending bounteous gifts, true art

thou, lordly in thine act.

We claim alliance with the very Glorious One, yea, with the
Mighty Son of Strength.

3 Prayers unsurpassed are offered up to thee tho Lover of the

Song.

Indra, Lord of Bay Steeds, accept these fitting hymns, hymns
which we have thought out for thee.

4 For thou, 0 Maghavan, art truthful, ne’er subdued, and

bringest many a Yritra low.

As such, 0 Mightiest Lord, Wielder of Thunder, send wealth
hither to the worshipper.


7 Rt m kine : cf I. 62 9 ; 180 3 ; II. 40. 2 ; IV 3 9; VI. 72. 4 ; 17. 6 ; 44.

; VIII. 32. 25. Thou madest Sd~ya rise to heaven : Silyana relates a legend that
when the Panin had carried off the cows of the Angirases and placed them in a
mountain enveloped in darkness, Indra, at the pmyer of tho R'shis, set the
in heaven in order that ho might see and recover their cattle. Hmt him
a * milk is heated : this Hue is difficult. * (Priests) excite (Indra) with your
pr^ibea as men heat the Oharma with SdwaJi-hymns ' — Wilson. Gharma
Ulean8 either the hot milk or other bevei age offered in the Pravargya cere*
ttiony , or the vessel in which it is heated Great joy to him who lores the song:
ju perhaps the meaning is, the Bribat-S&man (one of the most impoit&ut Sama
Tunis, the first and second veues of R. V. VI 46), is dear to him who loves
Song. •

3 Fitting hymns : ydjand : see Wilson's Translation and note.



ttlR HYMNS OP


23*


[BOOR Vlii


6 0 Indra, thou art far-renowued, impetuous, 0 Lord of Strength,
Alone thou slayost with the guardian of mankind resistless
iiever*conquered foes,

6 As such we seek thee now, 0 Asura, thee most wise, craving
thy bounty as our share. *

Thy sheltering defence is like a mighty cloak. So may thy
glories reach to us.

HYMN LXXX. I ndrai

Down to the stream a maiden came, and found the Soma by
the way.

Bearing it to her home she said, For Indra will I press thee
out, for Sakra will I press thee out

2 Thou roaming yonder, little man, beholding every house ic

turn,

Drink thou this Soma pressed with teeth, accompanied \v ith
grain and curds, with cake of meal and song of praise.

3 Fain would we learn to know thee well, nor yet cart wo attair

to thee.

Still slowly and in gradual drops, 0 Indu, unto Indra flow.

4 Will he not help and work for usl Will he not make ui

wealthier ?

Shall we not, hostile to our lord, unite ourselves to Indra now

5 0 Indra, cause to sprout again three places, these which

declare, —

My father’s head, his cultured field, and this the part belo\
my waist.

6 Make all of these grow crops of hair, yon cultivated field o

ours,

My body, and my father’s head.

7 Cleansing Apala, Indra ! thrice, thou gavest sunlike skin t

her,

Drawn, Satakratu ! through the hole of car, of wagon, and c
yoke,

5 The guardian of mankind : Indra/ s thunderbolt with which he slays th

demons of drought

The Ilishi is Ap&lA of the family of Atii.

1 A maiden : Ap&IA

2 Little man : vtrakah : according to SAyaua, hero. Indra ifl intended
perhaps a3 Surya the Sun-God.

3 Indu : Soma.

4 He : Indra. Hostile to our lord : ApAH, it is said, was afflicted with
cutaneous disease and was consequently repudiated by her husband,

7 Sunlike : bright and clear. ‘ SAyapa aaya that Indra dragged her throng
the wide hole of hia chariot, the narrower hole of the cart and the small jj°
of the yoke# and ihewwt off throe akiM, The first skin became a hedged



0MN 81.] THE RIO VEDA . *87

HYMN LXXXI. Indra.

Invite ye Indra with a song to drink your draught of Soma
juice,

AU-conquering Satakratu, most munificent of all who live.

2 Lauded by many, much-invoked, leader of song, reuowned

of old :

His name is Indra, tell it forth.

3 Indra the Dancer be to us the giver of abundant strength :

May he, the mighty, bring it near.

4 Indra whose jaws are strong hath drunk of worshipping

Sudaksha’s draught,

The Soma juice with barley mixt.

5 Call Indra loudly with your songs of praise to drink the Soma

juice,

For this is what augments his strength.

6 When fie hath drunk its gladdening drops the God with

vigour of a God

Hath far surpassed all things that are.

7 Thou speedest down to succour us this ever-oonquering God

of yours,

Him who is drawn to all our songs;

8 The Warrior not to be restrained, the Soma-drinker ne’er

o’erthrown,

The Chieftain of resistless might.

9 0 Indra, send us riches, thou Omniscient, worthy of our

praise :

Help us in the decisive fray.

the second au alligator, the third a chameleon. I suppose, with Prof. Aufrecht,
that the hole or space of the chariot and ca?t represents the opening between
the four wheels ; the hole of the yoke seems to me to mean the opening
through which the animal’s head passed, corresponding to Homer’s ^evyXrj,
II. 19. 406.’— Cowell.

For the legend from the SUy&yana Bi&hmana, founded on the hints con-
tained in this hymn and repeated by S&yana in his Commentary, see also
Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V.

Prof. Aufrecht has published the text and commentary of this hymn in
Indische Studien, IV. p. 1 sqq. See M. Muller’s Rig-veda SamhiiA, Vol. III.,
2ud edition, p. 33 sqq.

3 The Dancer : active in battle, dancer of the war dance. Near : ahhijnri :
or > up to our kneeB.

* Sudaksha'e draught : offered by a Rishi of that name.

; 7 According to S&yapa this stanza is addressed by the Yajamdna or sacri-

j “ c er to the Stotar or praising priest, i&d he giveB an imperative sense to the
f indicative, thou speedest down : ‘ Bring hither.’ — Wilson.



238


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Vlll

10 Even thence, 0 Indra, come to us with food that gives a

hundred powers,

With food that gives a thousand powers.

11 We sought the wisdom of the wise. Sakra, Kine-giver,

Thunder-armed !

May we with steeds o’ercome in fight.

12 We make thee, S itakratu, find enjoyment in the songs we sing,
Like cuttle in the pasture lands.

13 For, Satakratu, Thunder-armed, all that we craved, as men

are wmit,

All that we hoped, have we attained.

14 Those, Son of Strength, are come to thee who cherish wishes

in their hearts :

0 Indra, none cxeelleth thee.

15 So, Hero, guard us with thy care, with thy most liberal

providence,

Speedy, and terrible to foes.

1G 0 Satakratu Indra, now rejoice with that carouse of thine
Which is most splendid of them all;

17 Even, Indra, that carouse which slays the Vritras best, most

widely famed,

Best giver of thy power and might.

18 For that which is thy gift we know, true Soma-driuker,

Thunder-armed,

Mighty One, amid all the folk.

19 For Indra, Lover of Carouse, loud be our songs about the

juice :

Let poets sing the song of praise.

20 We summon Indra to the draught, in whom all glories rest,

in whom

The seven communities rejoice.

21 At the Tnkadrukas the Gods span sacrifice that stirs the

mind :

Let our songs aid and prosper it.

10 Even thence: from where thou art ; from heaven.

11 Of the wise: Indra. Kine-giver : godare : perhaps, ‘burster open of
the cow-stall ‘ cleaver of mountains.’— Wilson

12 Like cattle: as the cowherd refreshes his cattle — Sftyana.

18 Thy gift : the wealth which thou givest. Amid all the folk : among ah
the worshippers who offer thee Soma. — S&yana.

20 Seven communities : sapta sansadah : probably = all the folk, in stanza
18; ‘the seven associated priests.’ — Wilson.

21 At the Trikadrukat: see VIII. 13. 18, and note.



HYMN 82.] THE MIG VEDA. 230

22 Let the drops pass within thee as the rivers flow into the sea :

0 Indra, naught excelleth thee*

23 Thou, wakeful Hero, by thy might hast taken food of Soma

juice,

Which, Indra, is within thee now.

24 0 Indra, Vritra-slayer, let Soma be ready for thy maw,

The drops be ready for thy forms.

25 Now Srutakaksha sings his song that cattle and the steed may

come,

That Iudra’s very self may come.

2G Here, Indra, thou art ready by our Soma juices shed for thee,
Sakra, at hand that thou mayst give.

27 Even from far away our songs reach thee, 0 Caster of the

Stone :

Miy we come very close to thee.

28 For so thou art the hero’s Fiiend, a Hero, too, art thou, and

stiong :

So may thine heart be won to us.

29 So hath the offering, wealthiest Lord, been paid by all the

worshippers :

So dwell thou, Indra, even with me.

3i) He not thou like a slothful priest, 0 Lord of spoil and wealth :
rejoice

In tho pressed Soma blent with milk.

31 11 Lidra, let not ill designs surround us in the sunbeams light : -
This may we gain with thee for Friend.

32 With thee to help us, Indra, let us answer all our enemies :

For thou art ours and we are thine.

33 Indra, the poets and thy friends, faithful to thee, shall loudly sing
Thy praises as they follow thee.

HYMN LXXXII. Indra.

tiuRYA, thou mountest up to meet the Hero famous for hia
wealth,

Who hurls the bolt and works for man :

2 Him who with might of both his arms brake nine-and-ninety
castles down,

Slew Vritra and smote Ahi dead.

24 Thy forms: thy various bodies or splendours. — S&yana.

-5 Srutakakska : the Rishi of the hymn.

Priest : brahmfl : Brahman or praying priest.

. M l n the sunbeams' light: as Indra stands in the closest relationship to
the Sun. ,

2 Nine-and-ninety castles ; cloud-castles of the demou Sambara.



S40 THE HYMNS OF [. BOOK Vlij t

3 This Indra is our gracious Friend. He sends us in a full

broad stream

Riches in horses, kine, and corn.

4 Whatever, Vritra-slayer ! thou, Surya, hast risen upon to-day,
That, Indra, all is in thy power.

5 When, Mighty One, Lord of the brave, thou thinkest thus

I shall not die,

That thought of thine is true indeed.

6 Thou, Indra, goest unto all Soma libations shed for thee,
Both far away and near at hand.

7 We make this Indra very strong tostrike the mighty Vritra dead:
A vigorous Hero shall he be.

8 Indra was made for giving, set, most mighty, o’er the joyous

draught,

Bright, meet for Soma, famed in song.

9 By song as ’twere, the powerful bolt which none may parry

was prepared :

Lofty, invincible he grew.

10 Indra, Song-lover, lauded, make oven in the wilds fairways for us,
Whenever, Maghavan, thou wilt.

11 Thou whose commandment and behest of sovran sway none

disregards,

Neither audacious man nor God.

12 And both these Goddesses, Earth, Heaven, Lord of the beau-

teous helm ! revere
Thy might which no one may resist.

13 Thou in the black cows and the red and in the cows with spot-

ted skin

This white milk hast deposited.

14 When in their terror all the Gods shrank from the Dragon’s

furious might,

Fear of the monster fell on them.

15 Then he was my Defender, then, Invincible, whose foe is not
The Vritra-slayer showed his might.

16 Him your best Viitra-slayer, him the famous Champion ol

mankind

I urge to great munificence,

8 Was made : waa created by Pr.ij&pati. — Silyana.

12 Lord of the beauteous helm : or, ‘deity of the haudsome jaw.’ — Wilson.

13 In the black cows : cf I. 62. 9.

14 The Dragon s furious might : the fierce attack of the demon Ahi. Q
the monster : or, of the wild beast, Ahi.

16 Champion: 1 joined to sardham, as suggested in the St Petersburg Lexicon



THE RIG VEDA.


241


UYMN 82 J

;7 To comc » Milch-landed ! Many-named ! with this same thought
that longs for milk,

Whene’er tho Soma juice is shed.

8 Much- honoured by libations, may the Vritra-slayer wake for us :
May Sakra listen to our prayers.

9 0 Hero, with what aid dost thou delight us, with what suc-

cour bring

Riches to those who worship thee?

!0 With whose libation joys the Strong, the Hero with his team
who quells

The foe, to drink the Soma juice?

21 Rejoicing in thy spirit bring thousandfold opulence to us :
Enrich thy votary with gifts.

22 These juices with their wedded wives How to enjoyment lov-

ingly :

To waters speeds the restless one.

23 Presented strengthening gifts have sent Iiulra away at sacri-

fice,

With might, unto the cleansing hath.

21 These two who share his feast, 13 ly Steeds with golden manes,
shall bring him to
The banquet that is laid for him.

23 For thee, 0 Lord of Light, are shed these Soma-drops, and
grass is strewn :

Bring Indra to his worshippers.

26 Miy Indra give thee skill and lights of heaven, wealth to bis

votary

And priests who praiso him : laud ye him.

27 0 Satukratu, wondrous strength and all our lauds I bring to

thee :

Be gracious to thy worshippers.


17 To come: that is, that thou, Indra, maysfc come. This abrupt change
1 is not uncommon in the Veda.

lNi^ e w A e< M C( l wives: of the joma juices are said to be the two waters
^ im oasatloan/ak and ekadhaudh, used in the Soma ceremonies. To enjoy -
, to be drunk by Indra. To waters speeds the restless one : or, with Gra«s-
aim, ^ iho lover of the waters speeds ’ The exact meaning of nrchumpnndK
to ? am ’ ^A fi ka deriving it from chain, to eat, and Mahidhara fioin chup,
Scholl °u movd aluwl y* The meaning of the .sentence is, according to the
to ^ le ^ lme t, ^ 1 ° colK 'ludmg purificatory ceremony which is

throw 110 * en ors an< f emissions in the principal sacrifice, the stale Soma is
11 ln ^° waters. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation,
iu wh T[ lc dazing bath : tho avabhritha, here, apparently, the bath or vessel
01 Bie ^°nm plants were riused and purified.



242 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK F///,

28 Bring to us all things excellent, 0 Satakratu, food and Btrengtk;
For, Indra, thou art kind to us.

29 0 Satakratu, bring to us all blessings, all felicity :

For, Indra, thou art kind to us.

30 Bearing the Soma juice we call, best Vritra-slayer, unto thee;
For, Indra, thou art kind to us.

31 Come, Lord of rapturous joys, to our libation with thy Buy

Steeds, come

To our libation with thy Steeds.

32 Known as best Yritia-slajer erst, as Indra Satakratu, come
With Bay Steeds to the juice we shed.

33 0 Vritra-slayer, thou art lie who drinks these drops of Soma ;

come

With Bay Steeds to the juice we shod.

34 May Indra give, to aid us, wealth handy that rules the Skilful

Ones :

Yea, may the Strong give potent wealth.

HYMN LXXX1II. Maruts.

The Cow, the famous Mother of the wealthy Maruts, poura
her milk :

Both horses of the cars are yoked, —

2 Sho in whose bosom all the Cods, and Sun and Moon for men

to see,

Maintain their everlasting Laws.

3 This all the pious sing to us, and sacred poets evermore :

The Maruts to the Soma-draught !

4 Here is the Soma ready pressed : of this the Maruts drink, of

this

Self-luminous the Asvins drink.


34 Hand)/: ribhu.ni. That rules the Skilful Ova: ribhukshanam. The
Strong : v&jt These words are u.-cd as plays upon the names of the Ribhus
or as Grassmann says, the veise may have been taken from a hymn addressed
to the Ribhus. ‘ May Indra bring to us the bounteous ltibhu Ribhukdiana
to partake of our sacrificial viands ; may he, the mighty, biiug the mighty
(Vaja) — Wilson. Cowe'l remarks : ‘ ltibhuk*ha;a was the eldest and Vrfja
the youngest of the three brothers. The llibhua have a share in the evening
libation between Prajftpati, and Savitri, see Ait. iiirihm. iii. 30. This verse
is addressed to the Ribhus in the evening libation on the ninth day of the
Dwddasdha ceremony (t6. v. 21).’

1 The Cow : Prisni.

2 In whose bosom: *ia whose presence.’— Wilson.

The Maruts: are to be invoked, understood.



THE R1QVEDA .


IYMN 84.1


243


5 Of this, moreover, purified, set in three places, procreant,
Drink Vanina, Mitra, Aryamnn.

C And Indra, like the Herald Priest, desirous of the milky juice,
At early morn will quaff thereof.

7 When have the Princes gleamed and shone through waters as

through troops of foes?

When hasten they whose might is pure?

8 Whatf favour do I claim this day of you great Deities, you

who arc

Wundrously splendid in yourselves?

0 I call, to drink the Soma, those Maruts who spread all realms

of earth

And luminous regions of the sky.

10 You, even such, pure in your might, you, 0 yo Maruts, I in-

voke

From heaven to drink this Soma juice.

11 The Maruts, those who have sustained and propped the

heavens and earth apart,

I call to drink this Soma juice.

12 That vigorous baud of Maruts that abidetli in the mountains, I
Invoke to drink this Soma juice.

HYMN LXXXIV. India.

Song-lover ! like a charioteer come songs to thee when Soma
flows.

0 Indra, they have called to thee as mother-kine uuto their
calves.

2 Bright juices hitherward have sped thee, Iudra, Lover of the

Song,

Drink, Indra, of this flowing sap : in every house *tia set for tbeo.

3 Drink Soma to inspirit thee, juice, Indra, which the Falcon

brought :

For thou art King and Sovran Lord of all the families of men.

1 0 Indra, hear TiraschPs call, the call of him who serveth theo.
Satisfy him with wealth of kiue and valiant otispring : Great

art thou.

5 Set in three places : first in a trough ; thou in a stiaiuing-cloth ; then in
* thiid trough or vessel called PdUbhrit. Procreant: granting progeny to
the worshipper.

6 The Herald Priest : Agni.

1 Like a charioteer : straight and swift to their object.

3 Which the Falcon brought: see 1. 80. 2, and 93. 6.



2 44 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK VUl.

5 For he, 0 Indra, hath produced for thee the newest gladden-

ing song,

A hymn that springs from careful thought, ancient, and full
of sacred truth. ^

6 That Indra will we laud whom songs and hymns of praise have

magnified.

Striving to win, wo celebrate his many deeds of hero might.

7 Como now and let uh glorify pure Indra with pure Sama hymn.
Let the pure milky draught delight him strengthened by pme

songs of praise.

8 0 Indra, come thou puro to us, with pure assistance, pure thy-

self.

Pure, send thou riches down to us, and, meet for Soma, pure,
be glad.

9 0 Indra, pure, vouchsafe us wealth, and, pure, onrich the

worshipper.

Pure, thou dost striko the Vrilras dead, and strivest, pure,
to win tbo spod.

HYMN LXXXV. Indra

For him the Mornings made their courses longer, and Night;

with pleasant voices spake to Indra.

For him the Floods stood still, the Seven Mothers, Stream
easy for the heroes to pass over.

2 The Darter penetrated, though in trouble, thrice-sovcn clos(

pressed ridges of the mountains.

Neither might God nor mortal man accomplish what the Stron
Hero wrought in full-grown vigour.

3 The mightiest force is Indra’s bolt of iron when firmly graspc

in both the arms of Indra.

Ilis head and mouth have powers that pass all others, and a
his people hasten near to listen.

5 Newest ancient ‘ recent in form and exprestsiou, but ancient

substance. See Muir, 0. S. Texts, III. 238, 239.

7 Pure fmlra with pure S4ina hi/ inns : according to Sftyana, ‘ Indra. purifi
with pure Sama-hymns,’ from the pollution he had incurred by killing t
Biahman Viitra. See Wilson's Translation, note,

1 The heroes: perhaps Turvasa and Yadu— Ludwig.

2 The Darter of the thundeiholt ; Indra. Though in trouble . because
bad none to aid him. What the thrice-seven close-pressed ridges of themoi tutu
aie, is uncertain See Wilson’s Translation, note. Lndwig thinks that 1 2 3
battle of the Sun with the demons of winter may be meant.

3 To listen : to the commands which issue from his mouth.



HUm\ oo.j


L tit i iCiCr VtiVA. }


•J45

4 I count thee as the Holiest of the Holy, the caster-down of

what hath ne’er been shaken.

I count thee as the Banner of the heroes, I count thee as the
Chief of all men living.

5 What timo, 0 Indra, in thine arms thou tookest thy wildly

rushing bolt to slay the Dragon,

• The mountains roared, the cattle loudly bellowed, the Brah-
mans with their hymns drew nigh to Indra.

G Let us praise him who made these worlds and creatures, all
things that after him sprang into being.

May we win Mitra with our songs, and Indra, and wait upon
our Lord with adoration.

< Flying in terror from the snort of Vritra, all Deities who were
thy friends forsook thee.

So, Indra, be thy friendship with the Maruts : in all these
battles thou shalt be the victor.

8 Thrico-sixty Maruts, waxing strong, were with thee, like piles

of beaming light, worthy of worship.

We come to thee : grant us a happy portion. Let us adore
thy might with this oblation.

9 A sharpened weapon is the host of Maruts. Who, Indra, dares

withstand thy bolt of thunder ?

Weaponless are the Asuras, the godless : scatter them with
thy wheel, Impetuous Hero.

10 To him the Strong and Mighty, most auspicious, send up the

beauteous hymn for sake of cattle.

Lay on his body many songs for Indra invoked with song, for
will not he regard them?

11 To him, tho Mighty, who accepts laudation, send forth thy

thought as by a boat o’er rivers,

Stir with thy hymn the body of the Famous and Dearest One,
for will not he regard it?

12 Servo him with gifts of thine which Indra welcomes : praise

with fair praise, invite him with thine homage.


Wildly rushing • this is M Muller'* translation of madachyulam. It
, be rendered also ‘sped in tliy rapturous joy.’ * ltauschbeschloumgten.’ —
The Dragon : Alii.

7 With the Maruts : as they alone stood by him in the conflict.

• thrice- sixty ; or sixty-three, according to Sftynria, nine companies consist-
o ot seven each. See Cowell’s note in Wilson's Tianslation Like piles of
; 1 like cows gathered together.’ — Wilson ; ‘ like morning stars.*
wsmann. I have followed Ludwig.

With thy wheel : or discus, a sharp-edged quoit usea as a weapon o war.



THE HYMNS OF


246


[BOOK Via


Draw near, 0 singer, and refrain from outcry. Make thy voice
heard, for will not ho regard it ?

13 The Black Drop sank In Ansumati’s bosom, advancing with

ten thousand round about it.

Indra with might longed for it as it panted : the hero-hearted
laid aside his weapons.

14 1 saw tho Drop in the far distance moving, on the slope bank

of Ansumati’s river.

Like a black cloud that sank into tho water. Heroes, I send
you forth. Go, fight in battle.

15 And then the Drop in Ansimviti’s bosom, splendid with light,

assumed its proper body ;

And Indra, with Brihaspati to aid him, conquered the godless
tribes that came against him.

16 Then, at thy birth, thou wast tho foeman, Indra, of those tho

seven who ne’er had met a rival.

The hidden Pair, the Heaven and Karth, thou foundost, and
to the mighty worlds thou gavest pleasure.

17 So, Thunder-armed ! thou with thy bolt of thunder didst

boldly smite that power which none might equal ;

With weapons broughtost low the might of Sushna, and, Indra,
foundest by thy strength tho cattle.

18 Then wast thou, Chieftain of all living mortals, tho very

mighty slayer of the Vritras.

Then didst thou sot the obstructed rivers flowing, and win
tho floods that were enthralled by Dasas.

19 Most wiso is he, rejoicing in libations, splendid as day, resist

loss in his anger.

He only doth great deeds, the only Horo, sole Vritra-slayei
he, with none beside him.


12 Draw near , 0 singer, and ref rain from outcry ; * 0 priest, adorn thysel
grieve not (for poverty).’ — Wilson.

13 The Black Drop : tho darkened Moon. Ansumatt: a mystical river q
the air into which the Moon dips to recover its vanished light. Ten thousand
probably, demons of darkness ; the numerals are without a substantive. At «
panted : . while striving against its assailants. Laid aside his weapons : afte
conquering the demons and restoring the darkened Moon.

14 Indra addresses the Maruts.

SAyana explains stanzas 13—15 differently, in accordance with a legein
which was probably suggested by this passage. He takes drapsdh krishndl
black drop, to mea*i ‘ the swift moving Krishnah,’ an Asura or demon wh
with teu thousand of his kind had occupied the banks of tho river Ansumat
which, he says, is the Yamuu& or Jumna, and was there defeated by InJu
Brihaspati, and the Maruts. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation.

16 The seven; Krishna, Vritra, Namuchi, Sambara, and others*— S&y a 9*'



THE RIO VEDA.


247


BYMX 86 .]

20 Indra is Vritra’s slayer, man’s sustainer : ho must be called;

with fair praise let us call him.

Maghavan is our Helper, our Protector, giver of spoil and
wealth to make us famous.

21 This Indra, Vritra-slayer, this Ribhukshan, even at hiB birth,

was meet for invocation.

Doer of many deeds for man’s advantage, liko Soma quaffed,
for friends we must invoke him.

HYMN LXXXVI.

0 Indra, Lord of Light, what joys thou broughtest from the
Asuras,

Prosper therewith, 0 Maghavan, him who lauds that deed,
and those whose grass is trimmed for thee.

2 The unwasting share of steeds and kine which, Indra, thou

hast fast secured,

Grant to the worshipper who presses Soma and gives guerdon,
not unto the churl.

3 The ritclcss, godless man who sleeps, 0 Indra, his unbroken

sleep, —

May ho by following his own devices die. Hide from him
wealth that nourishes.

4 Whether, 0 Sakra, thou be far, or, Vritra-slayer, near at hand,
Thence by heaven-reaching songs he who hath pressed the

juice invites thee with thy long-maned Steeds.

5 Whether thou art in heaven’s bright sphere, or in the basin of

the sea ;

Whether, chief Vritra-slayer, in some place on earth, or in the
firmament, approach.

G Thou Soma-driuker, Lord of Strength, besido our flowing
Soma juice

Delight us with thy bounty rich in pleasantness, 0 Indra, with
abundant wealth.

7 0 Indra, turn us not away : be the companion of onr feast.
For thou art our protection, yea, thou art our kin : 0 Indra,

turn us not away.

8 Sit down with us,0 Indra, sit beside the juice to drink the meath.
Show forth great favour to the singer, Maghavan ; Indra, with

us, beside the juice.


21 Ribhukshan ; or, Lord of Ribhus. •

1 Joys : riches.— S4y ana. From the A suras : from the powerful JMkahasas.

2 (Jives guerdon : liberally rewards the priests.



243 TIIE HYMNS OF [BOOK Vlii

9 0 Caster of the Stone, nor Gods nor mortals have attained to
thee.

Thou in thy might surpassest all that hath been made : the
Gods have not attained to thee.

10 Of one accord they made and formed for kingship India, the

Hero who in all encounters overcomcth,

Most eminent for power, destroyer in the conflict, iierce and
exceeding strong, stalwart and full of vigour.

11 Bards joined in song to India so that he might drink the

Soma juice,

The Lord of Light, that he whose laws stand fast might aid
with power and with the help he gives.

12 The holy sages form a ring, looking and singing to the Ilam
Inciters, full of vigour, not to be deceived, are with the chant

ers, nigh to hear.

13 Loudly I call that Indra, Maghavan the Mighty, who cvermor

possesses power, ever resistless.

Holy, most liberal, may he lead us on to riches, and, Tlumdei
armed, make all our pathways pleasant for us.

14 Thou knowest well, 0 Sakra, thou Most Potent, with th

strength, Indra, to destroy these castles.

Before thee, Thunder-armed! all beings tremble : the heaven
and earth before thee shake with terror.

15 May thy truth, Indra, Wondrous Hero! be my guard : bca

me o’er much woe, Thunderer ' ns over floods.

When, Indra, wilt thou honour us with opulence, all-nourisl
ing and much-to-be-desired, 0 King?

HYMN LXXXVIL imir.

To Indra sing a Satna hymn, a lofty song to Lofty Sage,

To him who guards the Law, inspired, and fain for praise.

2 Thou, Indra, art the Conqueror : thou gavest splendour t

the Sun.

Maker of all things, thou art Mighty and All-God.

3 Radiant with light thou wentest to the sky, the luminoi

realm of heaven.

The Deities, Indra, strove to win thee for their Friend.

4 Come unto ns, O Indra, dent*, stdl conquering, unconccnlabl
Vast as a mountain spread on all sides, Lord of Heaven.

12 The Ram: Tqdni. See I. 51. 1, and VI LI 2. 40. Inciters: apparent!
the Gods themselves.

2 AH -God: visraderah: * the lord of all the gods,’ — Wilson.

4 Unconceatable ; as the Sun-God.



THE RIG VEDA.


249


0MX 88 .]

§ 0 truthful Soma-drinker, thou art mightier than both the
worlds.

Thou strengthened him who pours libation, Lord of Heaven.

6 For thou art he, 0 Lidra, who stormeth all castles of the foe,
Slayer of Dasyus, man’s Supporter, Lord of Heaven.

7 Now have we, Indra, Friend of Song, sent our great wishes

forth to time,

Coming like floods that follow floods.

8 As rivers swell the ocean, so, Hero, our prayers increase thy might,
Though of thyself, O Thunderer, waxing day by day.

9 With holy song they bind to tho broad wide-yoked car the Bay

Steeds of the rapid God,

Bearers of Indra, yoked by word.

10 0 Indra, bring great strength to us, bring valour, Satakratu,

thou most active, bring
A hero conqueiing in war.

11 For, gracious Satakratu, thou Last ever been a Mother and a

Sire to us,

So now for bliss we pray to thee.

12 To thee, Strong, Much-invoked, who showest forth thy strength,

0 Satakratu, do I speak :

So grant thou us heroic strength.

HYMN LX XX VII I. Indra.

0 thundereii, zealous worshippers gave thee drink this time
yesteiday.

So, Indra, listen here to those who bring the laud : come near
unto our dwelling-place.

2 Lord of B iy Steeds, fair-helmed, rejoice thee : this wo crave.

Here the disposers wait oil thee.

Thy loftiest, glories claim our lauds beside the juice, 0 Indra,
Lover of the Song.

3 Turning, as ’twerc, to meet the Sun, enjoy from Indra all good

tilings.

When lie who will be born is born with power we look to trea-
sures as our heiitage.

7 Com iiuj hie. floods : m crowds But the half-line is very obscure. ‘As
men going by water (splash their friends) with handfuls.’ — Wilson.

10 ^4 hero : an heroic son.

2 TCt spacers : tho priests who order religious ceremonies.

1 r T‘ s stanza is difficult and obscure. Mahtdhara’s explanation is : ‘The
gathering (rays) proceeding to the sun distribute all Indra’s treasures (to
u ing bemgs, sc. as rain, corn, etc.) ; may we too by our power leave those
tenures as an inheritance to him who has been or will be born.’ See Cowell's
note 111 Wilson’s Translation ,



250 THE 117 M NS OF [BOOK V ] //

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties injure none

good are the gifts which Indra grants.

He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns hi
mind to giving boons.

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands.
Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the curse, tho

victor of the vanquisher.

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might, ,

to their calf two mother-cows.

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands shrink ai
faint, Indra, at thy wiuth,

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and nouo m

shoot at him,

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’s uuvf
quished Stiengthener ;

8 Arranger of things uuarraugcd, e’en Satakratu, sourco

might,

Indra, the Friend of all, for succour we invoke, Guardiai
treasure, sending wealth.

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra.

I move before thee here present in person, and all tho Dei
follow behind me.

When, Indra, thou securest mo my portion, with mo t
shalt perforin heroic actions.

2 Tho food of mcath in foremost place I give thee, thy S

shall be pressed, thy share appointed.

Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade : !
shall we two smite dead full many a foeman.

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a trut

hymn if he in truth cxisteth.

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath be
him ? Whom then shall we honour 1


6 As to their calf : or the translation may be, as sire and mother to
child.

7 Tugrya is Bhujyu, the son of Tugra. Seo Vol. I , Index.

8 Arranger of things unnrranged : ‘ tho consecrator of others but b
consecrated by none.’ — Wilson.

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni.

2 Indra answers.

3 Addressed to tho priests. One and another : nima : but accord
SAyaua, Noma is the name of tho llishi. ‘Noma Bays, “verily there
Indra.” ’ — Wilson.



THE RIO VEDA,


YMN 89.]


m


1 Here am I, look upon mo here, 0 singer. All that cxistcth I
surpass in greatness.

The Holy Law’s commandments make me mighty. Rending
with strength I rend the worlds asunder.

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached me as I sate
lone upon the dear sky’s summit,

Then spake niy spirit to the heart within me, My friends have
cried unto me with their children.

> All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-fcasts, wrought,
Indra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice,

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought
from far away to Sarabha, the Rishi’s kin.

Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept
you back.

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Vritra’s vital
parti

] On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he
pressed :

The Falcon wont to heaven and brought the Soma to the
Thunderer.

) Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round
about,

Aud in continuous onward flow tho floods their tribute bring
to it.

) When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vak,
Queen of Gods, tho Gladdencr, was seated,

Tho heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now
whither hath her noblest portion vanished 1


4 Indra speaks this and the following stanza.

5 The Law's levers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According
1 Hillebrandt (F. Mytholoyic , I. 354), the Maruts ; sUumantuK meaning nob
Vlt h their children,’ but ‘ with the Infant (Soma).’

6 The priest addresses Indra. S trabha : a ltishi of that name.— Sfty ana.
ho original hymn appears to end with this stanza.

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’s battle witli Vritra.

® ^ C: the Falcon. The iron fort : the stronghold or cloud in which tho
or ambrosial rain was iraprisoued. Cf. IV. 27. 2
® ^ n ^ ,e ocean : as produced naturally in tho sea of air.

^ This and the following stanza have no apparent connexion with what
recedes. Vdk: or V&ch, vox, voice, or Speech personified. Her unintcl-
B 1 le words are the thunder. Her noblest portion ; according to S&yana, the
» which follows thunder. Or the thunder itself may be intended. So©
.J 8 n °fo in Wilson’s Translation* IF«m seated : at tho sacrifice offered



250 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOK Via

4 Praise him who sends us wealth, whose bounties injure none

good are the gifts which Indra grants.

He is not wroth with one who satisfies his wish : he turns hi
mind to giving boons.

5 Thou in thy battles, Indra, art subduer of all hostile bands.
Father art thou, all-conquering, cancelling the cuise, the

victor of the vanquisher.

6 The Earth and Heaven clung close to thy victorious might,

to their calf two mother-cows.

When thou attackest Vritra all the hostile bands shrink a>
faint, Indra, at thy wrath.

7 Bring to your aid the Eternal One, who shoots and nouo no

shoot at him,

Inciter, swift, victorious, best of Charioteers, Tugrya’a unv
quished Stieugthcuor ;

8 Arranger of things unarranged, o’ou Satakratu, source

might,

Indra, the Friend of nil, for succour we invoke, Guardiai
treasure, sending wealth.

HYMN LXXXIX. Indra.

I move before thee here present in person, and all the Dei
follow behind me.

When, Indra, thou securest me my portion, with mo t
shalt perform heroic actions.

2 The food of mcath in foremost place I give thee, thy S

shall be pressed, thy share appointed.

Thou on my right shalt be my friend and comrade : !
shall wc two smite dead full many a foeman.

3 Striving for strength bring forth a laud to Indra, a trut

hymn if he in truth existeth.

One and another say, There is no Indra. Who hath be
him ? Whom then shall we honour ?


6 As to their calf: or the translation may be, as sire and mother to
child.

7 Tugvya is Bhujyu, the son of Tugra. Seo Vol. I , Index.

8 Arranger of things unarranged : ‘ the consecrator of others but h
consecrated by none.’ — Wilson.

1 This stanza is spoken by Agni.

2 Indra answers.

3 Addressed to the priests. One and another : n6ma : but accord
SAyaua, Neuu is the name of the Rishi. * Noma says, “ verily there
Indra.” ’ — Wilson.



THE RIO FED A,


ryjfV 80.]


$51


i Hero am I, look Upon me here, 0 singer. All that existeth I
surpass in greatness.

The Holy Law’s commandments make mo mighty. Rending
with strength I rend the worlds asunder.

5 When the Law’s lovers mounted and approached mo as I sate
lone upon the dear sky’s summit,

Then spake my spirit to the heart within me, My friends have
cried unto me with their children.

3 All these thy deeds must be declared at Soma-feasts, wrought,
Indra, Bounteous Lord, for him who sheds the juice,

When thou didst open wealth heaped up by many, brought
from far away to Sarabba, the Rishi’s kin.

1 Now run ye forth your several ways : he is not here who kept
you back.

For hath not Indra sunk his bolt deep down in Yritra’s vital
part ?

3 On-rushing with the speed of thought within the iron fort he
pressed :

The Falcon wont to heaven and brought the Soma to the
Thunderer.

9 Deep in the ocean lies the bolt with waters compassed round
about,

Aud in continuous onward flow the floods their tribute bring
to it.

0 When, uttering words which no one comprehended, Vak,
Queen of Gods, the Gladdencr, was seated,

The heaven’s four regions drew forth drink and vigour : now
whither hath her noblest portion vanished?


4 Indra speaks this and the following stanza.

| 5 Tke Law’s lovers : the priests who in sacrifice ascend to Indra. According
Hillebrandt (F. Mytholoyic, I. 354), the Maruts ; meaning not

vdh their children,’ but ‘with the Infant (Soma).’

6 Tlio priest addresses Indra. Sirabha: a Rishi of that name. — SAyana,
10 on gm,d hymn appears to end .vith this stanza.

7 Addressed to the waters of heaven after Indra’s battle with Yritra.

® ‘ the Falcon. The iron fort : the stronghold or cloud in which the

ama or ambrosial rain was imprisoned. Cf. IV. 27. 2
9 In the ocean : as produced naturally in the sea of air.
h) This and the follow ing stanza have no apparent connexion with what
ecedoa, Vdk; or V^ch, vox, voice, or Speooh personified. Her unintel-
B 1 J o words are the thunder. Her noblest portion : according to S&yana, the
iiw V,,* 1 f° flows thunder. Or the thunder itself may be intruded. See
^ 1 a note in Wilson’s Translation, Waa seated : at the sacrifice offered



252


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK VUi

11 The Deities generated Vak the Goddess, and animals of every

figure speak her.

May she, the Gladdencr, yielding food and vigour, the Milch-
cow Vak, approach us meetly lauded.

12 Step forth with wider st ride, my comrade Vishnu; make room

Dyaiis, for the leaping of the lightning.

Let us slay Vritra, let us free the rivers : let them flow loosed
at the command of India.

HYMN XC. Various.

Yea, specially that mortal man hath toiled for service of the
Gods,

Who quickly hath brought near Mitra and Vanina to share
his sacrificial gifts.

2 Supreme in sovran power, far-sighted, Chiefs and Kings, most

swift to hear fiom far away,

Both, wondrously, set them in motion as with arms, in com
pany with Suryids beams.

3 The rapid messenger who runs before you, Mitra-Varuna, w'itl

iron head, swift to the draught,

4 He whom no man may question, none may summon back, \vh<

stands not still for colloquy, —

From hostile clash with him keep ye us safe this day; kcoj
us in safety with your arms.

5 To Aryaman and Mitra sing a reverent song, 0 pious one,

A pleasant hymn that shall protect to Varuna : sing forth
laud unto the Kings.

G The true, Red Treasure they have sent, ono only Soil born (
the Three.

They, the Immortal Ones, never deceived, survey the familic
of mortal men.

7 My songs are lifted up, and acts most splendid are to be pei
formed.

Come hither, ye Nasatyas, with accordant mind, to meet an
to enjoy my gifts.

11 Speak her : ai ticuktely-speakiug men and lower animals all derive the
voices from her.

12 This stanza, which is out of place here, is spoken by Indra when he
about to attack Yiitra. See IV. 18 11

3 The rapid messenger : the lightning, as one of the forms of Agni.

6 The true, Red Treasure : the Sun. The Three: heaven, mid-air, and ead



THE RIO FED A.


253


YMX 90.]

t Lords of great woalth, when we invoke your bounty which no
demon checks,

Both of you, furthering our eastward-offered praise, come, Chiefs
whom Jamadagni lauds !

) Come, Vayu, drawn by fair hymns, to our sacrifice that reaches
heaven.

Poured on the middle of the straining-cloth, and cooked, this
bright drink hath been offered thee.

) He comes by stniightest paths, as ministering Priest, to taste
the sacrificial gifts.

Then, Lord of harnessed teams ! drink of the twofold draught,
bright Soma mingled with the milk.

1 Verily, Stirya, thou art great; truly, Aditya, thou art great.

As thou art groat indeed, thy greatness is admired : yea, verily,

thou, God, art great.

2 Yea, Surya, thou art great in fame : thou evermore, 0 God,

art great.

Thou by thy greatness art tho Gods’ High Priest, divine, far-
spread unconquerable light.

3 She yonder, bending lowly down, clothed in red hues and rich

in rays,

Is seen, advancing as it were with various tints, amid the ten
suiTouudiug arms.

[ Past and gone are three mortal generations: the fourth and
last into the Sun hath entered.

He mid tho worlds his lofty place hath taken. Into green
plants is gone the Purifying.

15 The Rudi-as’ Mother, Daughter of tho Vasus, centre of nectar,
tho Adityas’ Sister —

To folk who understand will I proclaim it — injure not Aditi,
the Cow, the sinless.

13 She yonder: Ushas or Dawn. The ten surrounding arms: the ten
regions of the woild.

14 Three mortal generations : a '■cording to tho legend, Prajrtpati produced
in succession three kinds of eicaturcs who all died. The fourth generation
Ihod and enjoyed the light and warmth of the Sun. See Cowell a note in
Wilson's Translation, or Satapatha- Bui/unana, If. 5. 1. 1 — 4. Into green plants:
kiy.iua explains haritah as tho quarters of the sky, and pdvamdnoh (the Puri-
ty 11 ^) as ViVyu or tho Wind. Urassmann takes pdramdnah to be the Soma,
an, i harUuh to be tho horses of the Sun I have followed Ludwig’s inter-
pretation ; but I find the stanza almost unintelligible.

lo Centre of nectar: or, of ami it. or immortality, or tho world of the
Immortal Gods. The Cow; the earthly cow, as the type of Aditi or universal
must not be offended. The stanza is spoken by the priest who has
Reived the cow as his reward.



m


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Fin


16 Weak-minded men have as a cow adopted me who came hithei
from the Gods, a Goddess,

Who, skilled in eloquence, her voice uplifteth, who standetb
near at hand with all devotions.


HYMN XGI.


Agni


Lord of the house, Sage, ever young, high powor of life, C
Agni, God,

Thou givest to thy worshipper.

2 So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, Lord o
spreading light,

Agni, bring hitherward the Gods.


3 For, Evcr-Youthful One, with thee, best Furtherer, as our ally
We overcome, to win the spoil.

4 As Aurva Bhrigu used, as Apnav \na used, I call the pure
Agni who clothes him with the sea.


5 I call the Sage who sounds like wind, the Might that lik

Parjanya roars,

Agni who clothes him with the sea.

6 As Savitar’s productive Power, as him who sends down bliss, I cal
Agni who clothes him with the sea.


7 Hither, for powerful kinship, I call Agni, him who prospers you
Most frequent at our solemn rites ;

8 That through this famed One’s power, he may stand by u

even as Tvashtar comes
Unto the forms that must be shaped.

9 This Agni is the Lord supreme above all glories mid the Gods
May he come nigh to us with strength.

10 Here praise ye him the most renowned of all the ministerinj
Priests,

Agni, the Chief at sacrifice ;


11 Piercing, with purifying flump, enkindled in our homes, mos
high,

Swiftest to hear from far away.


16 Weak-minded men : ‘ Men are too feeble in their intellect to coinprehen
me in my true form and my real nature : they can only understand my wort
iu the shape of a cow.’ — See Ludwig, R. V., IV. 245, 246.

The concluding stanza is spoken by Aditi as a cow.

4 Aurva Bhrigu: or, perhaps, Aurva and Bhrigu. The ancient Kid
Aurva is said to have been the grandson of Bhrigu. Apnavdna : anothe
ancient Itishi, mentioned in connexion with the Bhrigus and the eaihes
worship of Agni, in Book IV. 7. 1.



THE RIO VEDA .


255


jyMN 91.)

2 Sage, laud the Mighty One who wins the spoil of \ietory like

a steed,

And, Mitra-like, unites the folk.

3 Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation-bearer’s sister

hymns

Have come to thee before the wind,
f The waters find their place in him, for whom tfie threefold
sacred grass

Is spread unbound, unlimited.

5 The station of the Bounteous God hath, through his aid which

none impair,

A pleasant aspect like the Sun.

6 Blazing with splendour, Agni, God, through pious gifts of

sacred oil,

Bring thou the Gods and worship them.

7 The Gods as mothers brought thco forth, the Immortal Sage,

0 Angiras,

The bearer of our gifts to heaven.

8 Wise Agni, Gods established thee, the Seer, noblest messenger,
As bearer of our sacred gifts.

9 No cow have I to call mine own, no axe at hand wherewith

to work,

Yet what is here I bring to thee.

0 0 Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for thee,

Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God.

1 That which the white-ant eats away, that over which the

emmet crawls —

Way all of this be oil to thee.

2 When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend

the song :

I with the priests have kindled him.

12 Sayc: the piiest is addiessed.

13 Before the wind: or, in front of the wind, with which the flame is
■unieJ.

H * The waters rest in Agni, wl > abides rb lightning in the fhmament.’ —
tote in Wilson’s Translation which I have followed closely in this st»nza.

15 Or, a comma being substituted for the full stop at the end of the preced-
atan/ ^» aud padam (station) taken as in apposition to padam (place) in 14 ;
18 Nation of the bounteous : he hath, through his aid which none impair,
L pleabunt aspect like the Sun.’

" AsPiayoga, the Rislii of the hymn, has no cow and no axe to eut wood,
^ u ;kt‘d in this and the two following stanzas to dwpeuse with the custom-
VWu* of milk, and to accept such wood as the worshipper can pick up.

« With his heart • a devout spirit will compensate the want of milk and
ifoperly prepared fuel.



256


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK Via


HYMN XCIL Agni

That noblest Furtherer hath appeared, to whom men brim
their holy works.

Our songs of praise have rison aloft to Agni who was born t
give the Ary a strength.

2 Agni of Divodasa turned, as 'twerc in majesty, to the Cods.
Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took his statio

in the height of heaven.

3 Him before whom the people shrink when ho performs h

glorious deeds,

Him who wins thousands at the worship of the Gods, himscl
that Agni, serve with songs.

4 The mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulence, 0 Vas

he who brings thee gifts.

Ho, Agni, wins himself a hero singing lauds, yea, one who fee
a thousand men.

5 He with the steed wins spoil even in the fenced fort, andgai

imperishable fame.

In thee, 0 Lord of wealth, continually we lay all precio
offerings to the Gods.

G To him who dealeth out all wealth, who is tho cheerful Frit
of men,

To him, like the first, vessels filled with savoury juice, to Aj.
go the songs of praise.

7 Votaries, lichly-gifted, deck him with their songs, even as t

steed who draws the ear.

On both, Strong Lord of men ! on child and grandson pt
the bounties which our nobles give.

8 Sing forth to him, the Holy, most munificent, sublime w

his refulgent glow,

To Agni, ye Upastutas.

9 Worshipped with gifts, enkindled, splendid, Maghavan sli

win himself heroic fame.

And will not his most newly shown benevolence come to
with abundant strength 1


2 Of Divod/Jsa : whom Divoddsa especially worshipped aud claimed as
tutelary God. The stanza is obscuie, and my translation founded on
Roth’s interpretation of prd vi vdvrite , which has been accepted by Cowell, n
be regarded as conjectural. See Wilson’s Tianslation and note.

4 A hero: a biaveson.

7 The second line is obscure. * Graceful lord of men, grant wealth tons
n children and grandchildren.’ — Wilson.

8 Upa*tuta»: singers so named after the Rishi Upastuta. See I. 36. 1



-jYMX y *-J


THE KU tV EVA.


257


0 Priest, pressor of tbo juice ! praise now the dearest Guest of

all our friends,

Agui, the driver of the cars.

1 Who, finder-out of treasures open and concealed, briugeth them

hither, Holy One;

Whose waves, as in a cataract, are hard to pass, when he,
through song, would win him strength.

2 Let not the noblo Guest, Agni, be wroth with us: by many a

man his praise is sung,

Good Herald, skilled in sacrifice.

3 0 Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in any way

with lauds to thee.

Even the lowly, skilled in rites, with offered gifts, secketh thee
for the envoy’s task.

4 Friend of the Maruts, Agni, come with Rudras to the Soma-

draught,

To Subhari’s fair song of praise, and be thou joyfuTin the light.


10 Prictt, prester of the juice: dsdva: slotah — S&yana. * Singer of hymns.'
-Wilson.

11 Whose wares: billowy floods of flame rushing on like waters falling down
piecipice. ‘ Whose (flames), as he hastens to wage the battle by means of our
acred rite, are hard to be passed through as waves rushing down a decli-
ily.’— Wilson. See also Piscliel, Ved ische Sludicn, I. p. 184. Through tony :
lfipirited and strengthened by our hymns.

13 For the envoy's task: to bear his oblations to the Gods.



17


VlLAKHILYA.


(Book VIII. Hymns 49—59. M . Muller)


HYMN I. Indra.

To you will I sing Indra’s praise who gives good gifts as well
we know ;

The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers
with wealth thousandfold.

As with a hundred hosts, he rushes boldly on, and for the
offerer slays his foes.

As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts
who feedeth many a one.

The drops effused, the gladdening draughts, 0 Indra, Lover of
the Song,

As waters seek the lake where they are wont to rest, fill thee,
for bounty, Thunderer.

: Tho matchless draught that strengthens and gives eloquence,
the sweetest of the meath drink thou,

That in thy joy thou mayst scatter thy gifts o’er us, plente-
ously, even as tho dust.

> Come quickly to our laud, urged on by Soma-pressers like a

horse —

Laud, Godlike Indra, which milch-kine make sweet for thee :
with Kanva’s sons are gifts for thee.

> With homage have we sought thee as a Hero, strong, pre-

eminent, with unfailing wealth.

0 Thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its stream, so,
Indra, flow our songs to thee.

i ff now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth,
Come thence, high-tboughted ! to our sacrifice with the Swift,
come, Mighty with the Mighty Ones.

See Book VIII., Hymn XLIX., note. Professor Cowell’s version of these
even hymns will be fouud in Appendix I. of Wilson’s Translation, Vol. V.
, aru . ,U( hhted to him for some improvements on the version which I had
'eviously prepaied.

4 n ? hmihvd hosts: ‘like a weapon with a -hundred edges.’—Cowell.
hh ^ '^ V€$ eloquence : vivdkshanam : from rack ; ‘ swelling,’ f i om vaksk —
le aQ d Cowell. Pleuteously , even as the dust : the meaning of

ienA+i 18 °h scu re. The St. Petersburg Lexicon takes dhrishad = driskad }

7 vi v ^iH 8 toue : ‘just as the mill-stone pours out meal,’— Cowell.

IC & ud the Mighty Ones, are Indra’s horses.



260 THE HYMNS OF [VALAKHlln

8 The active, fleet-foot, tawny Coursers that are thine are swifi

to victory, like the Wind,

Wherewith thou goest round to visit Manus' seed, wherewitl
all heaven is visible.

9 Indra, from thee so great we crave prosperity in wealth of
As, Maghavan, thou favouredst Medhyatithi, and, in the fight

Nipatithi.

10 As, Maghavan, to Kanva, Trasadasyu, and to Paktha an
Dasavraja ;

As, Indra, to Gosarya and Rijisvan thou vouchsafedst wealt
iu kine and gold.

HYMN II. Inflr

Sakra I praise, to win his aid, far-famed, exceeding bountifn
Who gives, as 5 * 7 1 wore in thousands, precious wealth to hi
who sheds the juice and worships him.

2 Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this Indra

mighty arms in war.

He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with spring
when juices poured have gladdened him.

3 What time the flowing Sonia drops have gladdened with tlu

taste the Friend,

Like water, gracious Lord ! weromy libations made, like mile
kino to the worshipper.

4 To him the peerless, who is calling you to givo you aid, for

flow the drops of pleasant meath.

The Soma-drops which call on thee, 0 gracious Lord, ha
brought thee to our hymns of praise.

5 He rushes hurrying like a steed to Soma that adorns our ri
Which hymns make sweet to thee, lover of pleasant food. T

call to Paura thou dost love.

6 Praise the strong, grasping Hero, winner of the spoil, ruli

supreme o’er mighty wealth.

Like a full spring, 0 Thunderer, from thy storo hast th
poured on the worshipper evermore.

9 Medhydtitki : a Rishi whose name has frequently occurred. NipdUt
mentioned only here and V&lakhilya Hymn III.

10 Trasadasyu : see. Vol. I., Index. Paktha: a favourite of the Afv
See VIII. 22 10. Dasavraja : see VIII. 8.20. Gosarya : see VIII. 8.
Rljisvan : see Vol. I., Index.

5 The call to Paura : the invitation to Paura’ s house. According to

Roth paurd means the filler, the satisfiur : * thou approvest the summon

the satisfying beverage.’ — Cowell, See V, 74. 4,



■ , YMN 3.] the RIO VELA . 261

- Now whether thou he far away, or in the heavens, or on the
earth,

0 Indra, mighty-thoughted, harnessing thy Bays, come Lofty
with the Lofty Ones.

[ The Bays who draw thy chariot, Steeds who injuro none, sur-
pass the wind’s impetuous strength —

With whom thou silencest the enemy of man, with whom thou
goest round the sky.

i 0 gracious Hero, may wo learn anew to know thee as thou art :
As in decisive fight thou holpest Etasa, or Vasa ’gainst
Dasavraja,

i As, Maghavan, to Kanva at the sacred feast, to Dirghanitha
thine home-friend,

As to Gosarya thou, Stone-darter, gavest wealth, give mo a gold-
bright stall of kine.

HYMN IIL Indra.

As with Manu Samvarani, Indra, thou drankest Soma juice,
And, Maghavan, with Nlpatithi, Medhyatithi, with Pushtigu
and Srushtigu, —

I The son of Prishadvana was Praskanva’s host, who lay decre-
pit and forlorn.

Aided by theo the Bislii Dasyave-vrika strovo to obtain thou-
sands of kino.

1 Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks not hymns
of praise,

llim who observes and knows, inspirer of the sage, him who
seems eager to enjoy.

t He unto whom they sang the seven-headed hymn, three-
parted, in the loftiest place,

He sent his thunder down on all these living things, and so
displayed heroic might.

7 This stanza is almost a lepetition of stanza 7 of Hymn I.

9 Etasa: see I. 61. 15. Pas a : mentioned as a favourite of the Asvins in
■ to. 1\ Lctsavraja : said in* stau/a 10 of Hymn I. to have been helped by
dra.

10 Lirghanttha : Ludwig takes this word to be an adjective qualifying
'dhc udhvarty * at the saciifieial feast of long duration. 1 A gold-bright stall

km : according to Ludwig, a stall graced with bay steeds, would be a
ttcr translation.

1 Sfimvarani: son of the VcdicRiHhi Samvarana. See V. 33. 10. At the
d of tho stanza, ‘ so drink with us/ is to be understood.

“ Eyrlorn ; rejected aud cast ou j by his kindred. Lasyavc-vfika ; literally,
ol f-to-the* Dasy u, that is, Destroyer of fiends or barbarians.

The seven -headed ; sung by seven heavenly singers.



262 THE HYMNS OF [ YlLAKHlLY \

5 We invocate that Tndra who bestoweth precious things on u«
Now do wo know his newest favour; may we gaiu a stable tha

is full of kine.

6 He whom thou aidest, gracious Lord, to give again, obtain

great wealth to nourish him.

We with our Soma ready, Lover of the Song ! call, Inch
Maghavan, on thee.

7 Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra; ne’er dost thou desert tl

worshipper :

But now, 0 Maghavan, thy bounty as a God is poured fori
ever more and more.

8 He who hath overtaken Krivi with his might, and silent

Sushna with death-bolts, —

When he supported yonder heaven and spread it out, then fir
the son of earth was born.

9 Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Aryas, Dasas here l

long.

Directly unto thee, the pious Rusama Paviru, is that weal!
brought nigh.

10 In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song distilli
oil and rich in sweets.

Riches have spread among us and heroic strength, with us fl
flowing Soma-drops.

HYMN IY. Rd

A s, Sakra, thou with Manu called Vivasvan drankest Somajui
As, Indra, thou djdst love the hymn by Trita’s side, so d<
thou joy with Ayu now.

2 As thou with Matarisvan, Medhya, Prishadhra, hast cheer

thee, Indra, with pressed juice,

Drunk Soma with Rijunas, Syumarasmi, by Dasonya’s, Dai
sipra’s side.

3 ’Tis he who made the lauds his own and boldly drank t

Soma juice,


8 The son of earth : man. r

9 Rusama Paviru : the Rusamas are mentioned in Y. 80. 13—15.
name of Paviru does not occur again.

1 Vivasvdn : or Vivas vat, was the father of Manu who is generally cal
Vaivasvata. Ayu : the Itishi of the hymn, or the eacrificer.

2 Mdtarisvan: the Rishi of Hymn VI. of the Vftlakhilya, Medhya:
Hishi of Hymns V. IX. and X. Pfishadhra : the Rishi of Hymn VIU*
marasmi : mentioned, as a favourite of the Asvins, in I. 112. 16. The na
of Rijunas, Dasonya, and Dasasipra do not occur again in the Rigveda.



THE RIO VEDA .


He to whom Vishnu came striding his three wide steps, as
Mitra’s statutes ordered it.

4 In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great deed, 0

Satakratu, Mighty One !

Seeking renown we call thee as the milkers call the cow who
yields abundant milk.

5 He is our Sire who gives to us, Great, Mighty, ruling as he wills.
Unsought, may he the Strong, Itich, Lord of ample wealth,

give us of horses and of kine.

6 He to whom thou, Good Lord, givest that he may give increas-

es wealth that nourishes.

Eiger for wealth we call on Indra, Lord of wealth, on Sata-
kratu with our lauds.

7 Never art thou neglectful: thou guardest both races with thy

care.

The call on Indra, fourth Aditya ! is thine own. Amrit is
stablished in the heavens.

8 The offerer whom thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, liberal

Maghavan, favourcst, —

As at the call of Kanva so, 0 gracious Lord, hear thou our
songs and eulogy.

9 Sung is the song of ancient time : to Indra have yc said the

prayer.

They have sung many a Brihati of sacrifice, poured forth the
worshipper’s many thoughts.

10 Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, and both
the worlds, yea, and the Sun.

Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the draughts
of Soma have made Indra glad.

HYMN V. Indra,

As highest of the Maghavans, preeminent among the Bulls,
Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, Lord of wealth, we
seek thee, Indra Maghavan.

2 Thou who subduedst Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva, waxing daily in
thy might,

5 Ruling at he wills : ‘he who acts as the sovereign.’ — Cowell.

7 Roth races : Gods and men. Fourth Aditya: Varui.m, Mitra, and Arya-
man being the other three. A mrit ■ ‘ ambrosia.’ — Cowell.

8 As thou hearest, must be supplied at the beginning of the Btauza.

9 Brihati : verse iu the Brihati metre.

1 Highest ■ or, nearest The Bulls : strong heroes,

2 Ayu, Kutsa, Atithigva : see I. 53. 10.



264 THE HYMNS OF [vlLAKBILn

As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, tie
Satakratu, Lord of Bays.

3 The pressing-stones shall pour for us the essence of the m.\at

of all,

Drops that have been pressed out afar among the folk, an
those that have been pressed near us.

4 Repel all enmities and keep them far away : let all wi

treasure for their own.

Even among Sishtas are the stalks that make thee gku
where thou with Soma satest thee,

5 Come, India, very near to us with aids of firmly-based resolve
Come, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious help, goo

Kinsman, witli good kinsmen, come !

6 Bless thou with progeny the chief of men, the lord of heroe

victor in the fray.

Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds and kcc
their spirits ever pure and bright.

7 May we be such in battle as are surest to obtain thy grace :
With holy offerings and invocations of the Gods, we mean

that we may win the spoil.

8 Thine, Lord of Bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the spoi

Still with thy help I seek the fight.

So, at the raiders’ head, I, craving steeds and kiue, unit
myself with thee olone.

HYMN VI. Mi

Indiia, the poets with their hymns extol this hero might <
thine :

They strengthened, loud in song, thy power that droppeth oi
With hymns the Pauras came to thee.

2 Through piety they came to Indra for his aid, they whos
libations give thee joy.

As thou with Krisaand Samvarta hast rejoiced, so, Indra, l
thou glad with us.

4 Sishtas: apparently a tube of no great importance. Stalks: of tl
Soma-plant.

8 At the raiders' head : at the head of tho band who are going forth to seii
the cattle of their enemies. Von ltoth thinks that matUidm should be read i
stead of mathinflm, and Grassmann translates accordingly, ‘in Aufang mein*
Bitten,’ i 2 at the beginning of my prayers.’

1 Pauras : * the offerers.’ — Cowell. See V&lakhilya, II. 5.

2 Krisa : the Uishi of Hymn VII. of the Vftlakhilya. Samvarta:
mentioned elsewhere.



THE RIO VEDA.


265


■YMN 7.]

j Agreeing in your spirit, all ye Deities, come nigh to us.

Vasus and Ruclras shall come near to give us aid, and Mavuts
listen to our call.

[ May Pushan, Vishnu, and Sarasvati befriend, and the Seven
Streams, this call of mine :

May Waters, Wind, the Mountains, and the Forest-Lord, and
Earth give ear unto my cry.

> Indrr, with thine own bounteous gift, most liberal of tho

Mighty Ones,

Be our boon benefactor, Vritra-slayer, be our feast-companion
for our weal.

> Leader of heroes, Lord of battle, lead thou us to combat, thou

Most Sapient One.

High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts and enter-
tainment of the Gods.

Our hopes rest on the Faithful One : in Indra is the people's life.
0 Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid : make
plenteous food stream forth for us.

5 Thee would wo worship, Indra, with our songs of praise : 0
Satakratu, bo thou outs.

Pour down upon Praskanva bounty vast and iirm, exuberant,
that shall never fail.

HYMN VI T. Praskatrva’s Gift.

Great, verily, is Indra’s might. I have beheld, and hither
comes

Thy bounty, Dasyave-vyika !

! A hundred oxen white of hue are shining like the stars iii
heaven,

So tall, they seem to prop tho sky.

1 Bamboos a hundred, hundred dogs, a hundred skins of beasts
well- tanned,

A hundred tufts of Balbaja, four hundred rcd-liued mares
arc mine.

4 The Forest Lord; vanaspati : the tall timber tree, frequently meaning the
o-iticial Post.

5 Lcncf actor ; or Bhaga, the God who distributes wealth.

1 1 Great is Indra’s power, and the gifts which I have received from thee, 0
^tioyer of the Dasyus, can be compared only to his bounty.’ Dasyaye-
iKa, here, is the name, not of the Kishi, but of a hero who in allitncc with
e Ilanvas has been victorious in his attack on the hostile batbaiians. bee
‘fts-Vol. III. p. 181. . . .

rkilbaj a .■ a kind of coarse grass (Eleusine Indica), used in religious cere*
ou ios, and for other purposes when plaited.



233 THE HYMNS OF [VALAKHliy

4 Blest by the Gods, K&uv&yanas ! be ye who spread throui

life on life :

Like horses have ye stridden forth.

5 Then men extolled the team of seven : not yet full-grown, i

fame is great.

The dark mares rushed along the paths, so that no eye cou
follow them.

HYMN VIII. Praskanva’s G:

Thy bounty, Dasyavc-vrika, exhaustless hath displayed itacl
Its fulness is as broad as heaven.

2 Ten thousand Dasyave-vrika, the son of Putakrata, hath
From his own wealth bestowed on me.

3 A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of fleecy shee
A hundred slaves, and wreaths besides.

4 There also was a marc led forth, picked out for Putakrat&’s sal
Not of the horses of the herd.

5 Observant Agni hath appeared, oblation-bearer with his car,
Agni with his resplendent flame hath shone on high as shin

the Sun, hath shone like Siirya in the heavens.

HYMN IX. A avi

Endowed, 0 Gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quick
with your chariot, 0 yc Holy.

Come with your mighty powers, 0 ye Nasatyas ; come hithi
drink ye this the third libation.

2 The truthful Deities, the Three-and-Thirty, saw you approa
before the Ever-Trutliful.


4 Kdnvdyanas : descendants of Kanva.

5 The team of seven: ‘ siebengespannes.’ — Grass maun ; ‘seven-yok
team.’ — Cowell. But the exact meaning here of sdptdsya is uncertain. V
Roth thinks that it is probably a pioper name. Ludwig takes it in the sei
of a bond of friendship or alliance. The dark mares : there is no substanti
and ‘mares’ is conjecturally supplied. According to Ludwig, the dark ho
of the Dasyus conquered by Dasyave-vrika are intended, and the whole stai
would be more correctly translated :

‘Then no more thought they of the great renown of the collective bond.

The dark tribes rushed along the paths so that no eye could reach to thei
See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol. V. p. 552.

2 The son of Pdtakratd : or, more probably, called Pautakrata after I
father Pdtakratu — Ludwig.

3 Slaves: digit n : conquered barbarians.

4 Picked out: or, adorned. Pdtakratd : the wife of Pdtakr&tu.

1 Ndsatyas: * truthful ones.’ — Cowell. See Vol I., Index.

2 The Three-and-Thirty : or, Turice-Eleven. See I. 34. 11. The Ed
Truthful : the Sun, whose approach is heralded by the Aavins.



THE MOVED A,


267


VYMN 11J

Accepting this our worship and libation, 0 Asvins bright with
fire, drink ye the Soma.

3 Asvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder, — the Bull of

heaven and earth and air’s mid region ;

Yea, and your thousand promises in battle, — to all of these
come near and drink beside us.

4 Hero is your portion laid for you, ye Holy: come to these

songs of ours, 0 ye Nasatyas.

Drink among us the Soma full of sweetness, and with your
powers assist the man who worships.

HYMN X. Visvedevas.

He whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice,
of one accord, bring hither,

Who was appointed as a learned Brahman, — what is the sacri-
fice's knowledge of him 1

2 Kindled in many a spot, still One is Agni; Surya is One

though high o’er all he shineth.

Illumining this All, still One is Ushas. That which is One
hath into All developed.

3 The chariot bright and radiant, treasure-laden, three-wheeled,

with easy seat, and lightly rolling,

Which She of Wondrous Wealth was born to harness, — this
car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth.

HYMN XI. Iudra-Varuna.

In offerings poured to you, 0 Iudra-Varuna, these shares of
yours btream forth to glorify your state.

Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye assist the
worshipper who sheds the juice.

2 The waters and the plants, 0 Indra-Varuna, had efficacious

vigour, and attained to might :

3 The Dull : the Sun, whom, as his heralds and revealers, they may be said
to have created. Thousand promises : ‘ a characteristic periphrasis for the
Maghavans, or wealthy nobles.’— Ludwig.

1 TWhymn appears to consist of unconnected fragments, and the purport
of this stauza is not obvious.

3 She of Wondrous Weatlh : Ushas or Dawn. ITcwf horn to harness : or, as
Prof. Cowell translates : ‘At whose yoking the Dawn was bom.’ The chariot
°f the Asvins precedes that of the Dawn.

2 The waters and the plants : used in sacrifice ; the Soma-plants and the
'vater employed in preparing the juice for libation. The meaning of the
stanza seems to be : although you are far away in the most distant firmament,
0Ul ’ libations have had power to attract you. Regard us only : the godless
mai * is uuworthv of vour consideration even as an enemy*



208 THE RIG VEDA . [ VALA KIIIL Y A

Ye who have gone beyond the path of middle air, — no godlcs
man is worthy to be called your foe.

3 True is yonr Krisa’s word, Indra and Yanina : The seven Lob

voices pour a wave of meath.

For their sake, Lords of splendour ! aid tho pious man who
unbewildered, keeps you ever in his thoughts.

4 Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their stream

are the Seven Sisters in the scat of sacrifice.

These, dropping oil, are yours, O Indra-Varuna : with thes^
enrich with gifts and help the worshipper.

5 To our great happiness have we ascribed to these Two Brigh

Ones truthfulness, great strength, and majesty.

0 Lords of splendour, aid us through tho Three-times-Sevcn
as we pour holy oil, 0 Indra-Varuna.

6 What ye in time of old, Indra and Varuna, gave Risliis — rc

velation, thought, and power of song,

And places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice, — thcs<
through my spirit’s fervid glow have I beheld.

7 0 Indra- Varuna, grant to the worshippers cheerfulness voii

of pride, and wealth to nourish them.

Vouchsafe us food, prosperity, and progeny, and lengthen oir
our days that we may see long life.

3 The seven holt/ voices : tho voices of the seven priests or sacred bards
Se e IX. 103. 3. A wave of meath: ‘a stream of honey.’ — Cowell.

4 The Seven Sisters : 1 sister-streams of the Soma.’ — Cowell.

5 The Thrcc-times-Sevcn : perhaps the Maruts, thrice-seven being used in
definitely for a laiger number consisting of troops of seven. See I. 133. 6.

0 Revelation: srutdm: that which was heard (fiotn the beginning); saerei
knowledge. ‘Fame.’ — Cowell. Places: perhaps, ah Ludwig suggests, home
in the world to come, which the wise Uishis have prepared for themselves bj
pei foi ruing sacrifice here below. Through my spirit's fervid glow : tdpasu
according to Grassmann and Cowell, this trfpas means ‘ the holy austerities
of the Uishis, aud not the sacred fervour of the seer of the hymn. 1 have
followed Ludwig.



BOOK THE NINTH.


HYMN I. Soma Pavamftua.

In sweetest and most gladdening stream flow pure, 0 Soma,
on thy way,

Pressed out for Indra, for his drink.

2 Fiend-qucllcr, Friend of all men, he hath with the wood at-

tained unto

• Ilis place, his iron-fashioned home.

3 Be thou best Vritra-slaycr, best grantor of bliss, most liberal :
Promote our wealthy princes’ gifts.

4 Flow onward with thy juico unto the banquet of the Mighty

Gods :

Flow hither for our strength and fame.

5 0 Iwlu, we draw nigh to thee, with this one object day by day :
To thee alone our prayers arc said.

6 By means of this eternal fleece may Surya’s Daughter purify
Thy Soma that is foaming forth.

7 Ten sister maids of slender form seize him within the press

and hold

Him firmly on the final day.

8 The virgins send him forth : they blow the skin musician-

like, and fuso

The triple foe-repelling month.


Nearly all the hymns of this Book are addressed to the deified Soma juice,
or to Soma, or Indu, the Moon, who as containing the celestial nectar, the drink
of the Gods, is identified with the Soma- plant and it* exhilarating juice. As
the Moon-God pours down his ambrosial rain through the sieve of heaven, lie is
addressed and worshipped as Pavam:\na (Self-Purifying), represented by the
^'tna juice as it undergoes purification by flowing through the wool which
h used as a filter or strainer. See Muir, 0 S. Texts, V. 258 sqq , llillebrandt,
Vfdmche Mythology, I. 385 sqq., and Max M filler, Chips, XV. 353 — 367. But cf,
Oldojiheig, Religion dcs Veda, 599 — 612.

1 Plow pure : pdvasva: ‘ purify thyself.’- -Ludwig.

2 With the wood: some wooden vessel or implement, perhaps the sruva or
dipping-spoon. I von- fashioned home: receptacle that lias been liammerod or
formed with a tool of dyas, iron or other metal. It is not clear what vessel is
intended.


6 Sdrya's Daughter : SiaddhA or Faith. Sec S itapatha-Brdhnana, XII. 7.

3 Ip

. 1 Ten titter maids: the priest’s fingers. The final day : on which the Soma

8 Virgins: the unwedded ores: the fingers. Musician-likc ■ or, as men
1 "w a bagpipe ; but the meaning of hdkurdm and the second half- line is not
* ^ 4 They seize it glittering like a water-skin.’— Wilson.



270 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK n

9 Inviolable milch-kine round about him blend, for Indra’s drint

The fresh young Soma with their milk.

10 In the wild raptures of this draught, Indra slays all th

Vritras : he,

The Hero, pours his wealth on us.

HYMN II. Soma Pavamftni

Soma, flow on, inviting Gods, speed to the purifying cloth :
Pass into Indra, as a Bull.

2 As mighty food speed hitherward, Indu, as a most splendi

Steer : #

Sit in thy place as one with strength.

3 The well-loved meath was made to flow, the stream of tb

creative juice :

The Sage drew waters to himself.

4 The mighty waters, yea, the floods accompany thee Mighty Oik
When thou wilt clothe thee with the mdk.

5 The lake is brightened in the floods. Soma, our Friend

heaven’s prop and stay,

Falls on the purifying cloth.

6 The tawny Bull hath bellowed, fair as mighty Mitra to behold
He shines together with the Sun.

7 Songs, Indu, active in their might aro beautified for the(

wherewith

Thou deckest thee for our delight.

8 To thee who givest ample room we pray, to win the joyou

draught :

Great are the praises due to thee.

9 Indu, as Indra’s Friend, on us pour with a stream of sweet

ness, like

Parjanya sender of the rain.

10 Winner of kine, Indu, art thou, winner of heroes, steeds, aii(
strength :

Primeval Soul of sacrifice.


3 The Sage - the Soma. Waters: with which the stalks of the plantar
sprinkled.

5 The lake • the Somn juice.

6 The tawny Bull : 1 the golden- hued showerer of blessings.’ — Wilson. Tb
strong greenish -yellow Soma juice. Hath bellowed: an exaggerated expressioi
for the sound made by the juice as it drops, but in keeping with its represent
ation as a bull.

9 Like Parjanya: eniiching and blessing us as the rain-cloud fertilizes tb
ground.



tfMX 4.]


TEE RIO VEDA.


271


HYMN II I. Soma Pavamltna.

Hebe present this Immortal God flies, like a bird upon her
wings, .

To settle in tho vats of wood.

2 This God, made ready with the hymn, runs swiftly through

the winding ways, v * °

Inviolable as he flows.

3 This God while flowing is adorned, like a bay steed for war

by men '

Devout and skilled in holy songs.

1 lie, like a warrior going forth with heroes, as he flows along
Is fain to win all precious boons. 57

5 This God, as he is flowing on, speeds like a car and gives his gifts :
He lets his voice be heard of all.

G Praised by the sacred bards, this God dives into waters, and
bestows

Rich gifts upon the worshipper.

7 Away he rushes with his stream, across the regions, into

heaven,

And roars as he is flowing on.

8 While flowing, meet for sacrifice, he hath gone up to heaven

across

The regions, irresistible.

9 After the way of ancient time, this God, pressed out for

Deities,

Flows tawny to the straining-cloth.

10 This Lord of many Holy Laws, even at his birth engendering
strength,

Effused, flows onward in a stream.

HYMN IV. Soma Pavam&na,

0 Soma flowing on thy way, win thou and conquer high re-
nown ;

And make us better than we are.

1 The vats of wood : dr&ndni : large wooden vessels, tubs or troughs, which
receive the Soma juice.

, p 2 winding ways : of the wool which forms the strainer —Ludwig.
Pushes against the enemies/ — Wilson.

, pi ves into waters : called vasativaryah , with which the stalks of the Soma*
Plant are sprinkled.

Pressed out for Deities : -the Soma juioe being identified with the Amrit
nectar, the drink of the Godb, contained in the Moon,

r * Better than we are ; or, happier than we are.



z/z


iaJCi many o vr


L tfUUK /:


2 Win thou the light, win heavenly light, and, Soma, all fd

cities ;

And make us better than we are.

3 Win skilful strength and mental power. 0 Soma, drive awa

our foes ;

And make us better than we are.

4 Ye purifiers, purify Soma for Indra, for his drink :

Make thou us better than we are.

5 Give us our portion in the Sun through thine own ment;

power and aids ;

And make us better than we arc.

6 Through thine own mental power and aid long may wc loc

upon the Sun ;

Make thou us better than wc are.

7 Wcll-weaponed Soma, pour to us a stream of riches doubl

great ;

And make us better than we arc.

8 As one victorious, unsubdued in battle pour forth wealth to u
And make us better than we are.

9 By worship, Pavamana ! men have strengthened thee to pro

the Law :

Make thou us better than we are.

10 0 Indu, bring us wealtli in steeds, manifold, quickening a
life ;

And make us better than we are.

HYMN Y. April

Enktndled, Pavamana, Lord, sends forth his light on every sid
In friendly show, the bellowing Bull.

2 He, Pavamana, Self-produced, speeds onward sharpening hi

horns :

He glitters through the firmament.

3 Brilliant like wealth, adorable, with splendour Pavamaiu

shines,

Mightily with the streams of meath.


4 Purifiers: priests whose business is to purify the juice. Make thou: (
Soma.

9 To prop the Luw : vtdharmani : ‘ for their own upholding.* — Wilson.

10 Quickening all Life : visvftyum: explained by SAyana as ^ sarvagdinincim

‘all-reaching.’ — Wilson.

In this Apr! hymn atributes of Agni are transferred to Soma PavamAna.

1 Enkindled : sdmiddhuh : properly applicable to Agni. The bcllowi^l
Pull : ‘ the showerer of blessings, uttering a loud sound.’ — Wilson.

2 Self produced : Tan And put ; properly a name of Agni ; here, the Moon.



THE RIG VEDA.


273


VfMN 6.]

4 The tawny Pavam&na, who strews from of old the grass with

| might,

Is worshipped, God amid the Gods.

5 The golden, the Celestial Doors are lifted with their frames

on high,

By Pavamana glorified.

6 With passion Pavamana longs for the great lofty Pair, well-

formed,

Like beauteous maidens, Night and Dawn.

1 7 Both Gods who look on men I call, Celestial Heralds : Indra’s
Self

Is Pavamina, yea, the Pull.

8 This, Pa v am ana’s sacrifice, shall the three beauteous Goddes-

ses,

Sarasvat' and Bharati and Ila, Mighty One, attend.

9 1 summon Tvashtar hither, our protector, champion, earliest-

born,

Indu is Indra, tawny Steer; Pavamina is Prajapati.

0 0 Pavamina, with the meath in streams anoint Vanaspati,

The ever-green, the golden-hued, refulgent, with a thousand

boughs.

1 Come to the consecrating rite of Pavamana, all ye Gods, —
Vayu, Surya, Brihaspati, Indra, and Agni, in accord.

HYMN VI. Soma PavamAna.

Soma, flow on with pleasant stream, a Bull devoted to the Gods,
Our Friend, unto the woollen sieve.

2 Pour hitherward, as Iudra’s Self, Indu, that gladdening

stream of thine,

And send us coursers full of strength.

3 Flow to the filter hitherward, pouring that ancient gladden-

ing juice,

Streaming forth power and high renown.

I Hither the sparkling drops have flowed, like waters down a
steep descent :

They have reached Indra purified.

The Celestial Doors : the doors of the hall of sacrifice are here identified
itli the portals of the east through which light comes into the world. See
1 . 3 . 5 .

7 Celestial Heralds : seel. 13. 8. Indra 1 s Self: indrah here is explained
F SAyana a %=diptaji ; 1 radiant.’ — Wilson.

10 Vanaspati : the sacrificial stake.

11 The consecrating rite: svlXhdkritim, : oblation accompanied with the
Iterance of the sacred formula SvAhA.



274 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

5 Whom, having passed the filter, ten dames cleanse, as ’tw

a vigorous steed,

While he disports him in the wood, —

6 The steer-strong juice with milk pour forth, for feast a

service of the Gods,

To him who bears away the draught.

*1 Effused, the God flows ouward with his stream to Indra
the God,

So that his milk may strengthen him.

8 Soul of the sacrifice, the juice effused flows quickly on :
keeps

His ancient wisdom of a Sage.

0 So pouring forth, as Indra’s Friend, strong drink, best Gin
dener ! for the feast,

Thou, even in secret, storest hymns.

H\MN VII. Soma PavamiV

Forth on their way the glorious drops have flowed for mai
tenance of Haw,

Knowing this sacrifice’s course.

2 Down in the mighty waters sinks the stream of meath, mo

excellent,

Oblation best of all in worth.

3 About the holy place, the Steer true, guileless, noblest, ha

sent forth

Continuous voices in the wood.

4 When, clothed in manly strength, the Sage flows in celcsti

wisdom round,

The Strong would win the light of heaven.

5 When purified, he sits as King above the hosts, amonghisfol
What time the sages bring him nigh.


*> Whom: relative to juice in the following stanza. Ten dames : the fingei
The wood • the vat or trough.

H To him who hears away the draught : to Indra. Others take lhardya
mean ‘ for Ntrength or prowess in battle.’

9 Even in secret ■ wisdom lies hidden in the Soma, and cannot be ieco
nized until one drinks the juice. — Ludwig.

2 The mighty waters : the holy waters called vasatiraryah.

3 In the wood: according to Siyaua, vane kiQYQ — udake, in the water. T1
stanza is very difficult, and I am unable to offer a satisfactory translation.

4 The Strong ; Indra. * Then the mighty (Indra) in heaven is eager
repair to the oblation ’ — Wilson.

5 Above the hosts, among his folk : or, as preferred by Prof. Ludwig in h
Commentary, above the contending tribes or people (iv'foA).



275


\YMN 8.] THE RIO VEDA.

6 Dear, golden-coloured, in the fleece he sinks, and settles in

the wood :

The Singer shows his zeal in hymns.

7 He goes to Indra, Vayu, to the Asvins, as his custom is,

With gladdening juice which gives them joy.

$ The streams of pleasant Soma flow to Bhaga, Mitra-Varuna, —
Well-knowing through his mighty powers.

9 Gain for us, 0 ye Heaven and Earth, riches of meath to win
us wealth :

Gain for us treasures and renown.

HYMN VIII. Soma Pavam&na.

Obeying Indra’s dear desire these Soma juices have flowed
forth,

Increasing his heroic might.

2 Laid in the bowl, pure-flowing on to Vayu and the Asvins,

may .

These give us great heroic strength.

3 Soma, as thou art purified, incite to bounty Indra’s heart,

To sit in place of sacrifice.

4 The ten swift fingers deck thee forth, seven ministers impel

thee on :

The sages have rejoiced in thee.

5 When through the filter thou art poured, we clothe thee with

a robe of milk

To be a gladdening draught for Gods.

6 When purified within the jars, Soma, bright red and golden*

hued,

Hath clothed him with a robe of milk.

7 Flow on to us and make us rich. Drive all our enemies away.
0 Indu, flow into thy Friend.

8 Send down the rain from heaven, a stream of opulence from

earth. Give us,

0 Soma, victory in war.

9 May we obtain thee, Indra’s drink, who viewest men and

findest light,

Gain thee, and progeny and food.

8 Well-knowing , through his mighty powers • that is, the streams that,
trough the power of Soma, know the way they should go. 4 The worshippers
lowing its (virtues are rewarded) with happiness.’ — Wilson.

7 Flow on to us and make us rich : or, 4 Flow to us wealthy worshippers.’
' l y Friend : Indra. Cf. IX. 2. 1.



276 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK.

HYMN IX. SomaPavaa*

The Sage of Heaven whoso heart is wise, when laid betwc
both hands and pressed,

Sends us delightful powers of life.

2 On, onward to a glorious home; dear to the people void

guilo,

With excellent enjoyment, flow.

3 He, the bright Son, when born illumed his Parents who h

sprung to life,

Great Son great Strengtheners of Law.

4 Urged by the seven devotions he hath stirred the guile!

rivers which

Have magnified the Single Eye.

5 These helped to might the Youthful One, high over all, inv

cible,

Even Indu, Indra ! in thy law.

6 The Immortal Courser, good to draw, looks down upon t

Seven : the fount
Hath satisfied the Goddesses.

7 Aid us in holy rites, 0 Man : 0 Pavamina, drive away
Dark shades that must be met in fight.

8 Make the paths ready for a hymn newer and newer evermoi
Make the lights shine as erst they shone.

9 Give, Pavamana, high renown, give kine and steeds and h(

sons :

Win for us wisdom, win the light.

IlYMN X. Soma Pavama

Like cars that thunder on their way, like coursers eager
renown,

Have Soma-drops flowed forth for wealth.

2 Foith have they rushed from holding hands, like cbari<
that are urged to speed,

Like joyful songs of smgitig-men.


1 The Sage of Heaven the Soma. Both hands : naptybh : literally, <
granddaughters. Accoiding to Say ana, two boards used in pressing the So
aie intended. See Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation.

3 His Parents : mdtard ; literally, his two mothers ; Heaven and Earth.

4 Seven devotions: practised in the preparation of the Soma. SAysnata
tapta with nadyAh : 4 gladdens the seven guileless rivers.’ — Wilson. Sir
Eye : Soma, the Moon.

6 Courser: the flowing Soma. The Seven : rivers. The fount: ‘Full, a
well, he has satisfied the divine streams.’ — Wilson.

7 0 Man : manly Soma.



hymn n.] the move da . 277

3 The Somaa deck themselves with milk, as Kings are graced

with eulogies,

And, with seven priests, the sacrifice.

4 Pressed for the gladdening draught, the drops flow forth abund-

antly with song,

The Soma juices in a stream.

5 Winning Vivas van’s glory and producing Morning’s light, the

Suns

Pass through the openings of the cloth.

G The singing-men of ancient time open the doors of sacred
songs, —

Men, for the mighty to accept.

7 Combined in close society sit the seven priests, the brother-

hood,

Filling the station of the One.

8 He gives us kinship with the Gods, and with the Sun unites

our eye:

The Sage’s offspring hath appeared.

9 The Sun with his dear eye beholds that quarter of the heav-

ens which priests

Have placed within the sacred cell.

HYMN XI. Soma Pavam&na.

Sing forth to Indu, 0 ye men, to him who now is purified,
Fain to pay worship to the Gods.


5 The Suns : so called as being creators of the light : * the sun-bright

juices.’ — Wilson. Vitasvdn : the morning Sun.

6 Men, for the mighty to accept: ‘men, offerers of Soma,’ according to
S&ya’ia.

7 The seven priests • the adhraryus who bring the water with which the
stalks of the Soma-plants are spiinkled. The One : Souia. — S.iyana.

8 He gives us kinship with the Hods: 1 follow Prof. PiscluTB interpretation
of this difficult passage. 1 Soma unites our navel with the navel of the Gods,
our eye with the Sun, that is, he bungs us into union with the Gods in
heaven ’ — Vcdische Studien, I , p. 69 ‘I take into my navel the navel of the
sacrifice [the Soma]. ’—Wilson. ‘ Ho [Soma] as kinsman has brought us a
kinsman [Surya].’ — Ludwig. The Sages offspring : a periphrasis for the Sage
himself, that is, Soma. — Ludwig.

t 9 This stanza is very obscure. I have adopted Benfey’s explanation who

here, follows an occasional interpretation of div or dyuloka, given by the
Scholiast, which identifies it with the dronakalasa or large Soma-trough. He
fakes it as meaning that the Sun looks towaids the place where the Soma lies

while it is pressed SAyana seems to interpret this verse as meaning that

lrulra views the Soma with affection even after it has been drunk by the
pnesta [fixed in the heart].’-— Cowell, in Wilson’s Translation.



278 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

2 Togother with thy pleasant juice the Atharvans have c<

mingled milk,

Divine, devoted to the God.

3 Bring, by thy flowing, weal to kine, weal to the people, y

to steeds,

Weal, O thou King, to growing plants.

4 Sing a praise-song to Soma brown of hue, of independent mig
The Red, who reaches up to heaven.

5 Purify Soma when effused with stones which hands ma

rapidly,

And pour the sweet milk in the meath.

6 With humble homage draw ye nigh ; blend the libation w

the curds :

To Indra offer Indu up.

7 Soma, foe-queller, chief o’er men, doing the will of Go<

pour forth

Prosperity upon our kine.

8 Heart-knower, Sovran of the heart, thou art effused, 0 Soma, t!
Indra may drink thee and rejoice.

0 0 Soma Pavam ina, give us riches and heroic strength, —
Indu ! with Indra for ally.

HYMN XII. Soma Pavamli

To Indra have the Soma-drops, exceeding rich in sweets, b,e
poured,

Shod in the seat of sacrifice.

2 As mother kine low to thoir calves, to Indra have the sag

called,

Called him to drink the Soma juice.

3 In the stream’s wave wise Soma dwells, distilling rapture,

his seat,

Resting upon a wild-cow's hide.

4 Far-sighted Soma, Sage and Seer, is worshipped in the centr

point

Of heaven, the straining-cloth of wool.

2 The Atharvans : the priests, who perform the duties of the Adhvaryus.

3 King : the usual designation of Soma iu the Br&hmana.

4 The Red : kaddehidurunavarndya : ‘sometimes red -coloured/ — S&yana

3 In the stream's wave : in the water with which the stalks are spriukk
Upon a wild-cow's hide: this, which is Beufey’s explanation of gaurt, seei
to be borne out by g6r ddhi tvachi, upon the ox-hide, of IX. 101. 1
S&yana’s interpretation is different .* * to a chant in the middle tone/ — Wusu

4 Of heaven : divah> ; eee IX. 10. 9, and note.



THE MOVED A.


279


13.]

5 In close embraces Indu bolds Soma when poured within the
jars,

, And on the purifying sieve.

|(j Indu sends forth a voice on high to regions of the sea of air,
Shaking the vase that drops with meath.

7 The Tree whose praises never fail yields heavenly milk among
our hymns,

Urgiug men’s generations on.

, 8 The Wise One, with the Sage’s stream, the Soma urged to

1 speed, flows on

To the dear places of the sky.

9 0 Ihivamana, bring us wealth bright with a thousand splen-
dours, yea,

0 Indu, give us ready help.

HYMN XIII. Soma Pa vain An a.

Passed through the fleece in thousand streams the Soma,
purified, flows on
To Indra’s, Vayu’s special place.

2 Sing forth, ye men who long for help, to Pavamann, to the Sage,
Effused to entertain the Gods.

3 The Soma-drops with thousand powers are purified for victory,
Hymned to become the feast of Gods.

4 Yea, as thou flowest bring great store of food that we may

win the spoil :

Indu, bring splendid manly might.

5 May they in flowing give us wealth in thousands, and heroic

power, —

These Godlike Soma-drops effused.

5 Indu h olds Soma: ‘the deity seems to he thus opp >sed to the mete
plaqt ’ — CoweH’B note Ludwig slights that, Indu here in »y he the Moon,
is the tune of important liturgicJ core monies depends upon the. Moon’s
phases So also Hillebrandt, V. M I., p. 316.

6 To regions of the sea of air : or samndrasya lu re may mean, of the sea
t>r water into which the Soma juice falls Shading • or, perhaps, stiirmg
(with joy) The vase : kdsam: t e dronakahsa the largo wooden vessel for
holding the juice. According to Sayana, who>c interpretation I have followed
m the first line kdsam here means the cloud.

7 The Tice: Soma. Men's generations: sacrificial seasons, according to

%ana

1 Indra’s , Venn's special place • the vessels especially prepared to hold
libations intended for Indra and V&yu.

3 For victory: v&jas&taye : ‘for the attainment of food.’ — Wilson. So
Sayana in stanzas 3 and 4 ; but in 6 the word is explained by sauynlmdya,
b> battle, in the first clause where he inserts it after hiydnSfh , urged, and by
MnaldbMya, for the attainment of food, in the second clause.



280 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR }

6 Like coursers by their drivers urged, they were poured fori

for victory,

Swift through the woollen straining-cloth.

7 Noisily flow the Soma-drops, like milch-kine lowing to tin

calves:

They have run forth from both the hands.

8 As Gladdener whom Indra loves, 0 Pavamana, with a roar
Drive all our enemies away.

9 O Pavamanas, driving off the godless, looking on the light,
Sit in the place of sacrifice.

HYMN XIY. Soma Pavamfl

Reposing on the river’s wave the Sage hath widely flow
around,

Bearing the hymn which many love.

2 When the Five kindred Companies, active in duty, with t

song

Establish him, the Powerful,

3 Then in his juice whose strength is great, have all the Go

rejoiced themselves,

When he hath clothed him in the milk.

4 Freeing himself he flows away, leaving his body's severed linV
And meets his own Companion here.

5 He by the daughters of the priest, like a fair youth, hath he

adorned,

Making the milk, as 7 1 were, his robe.

6 O'er the fine fingers, through desire of milk, in winding com

he goes,

And utters voice which he hath found.

7 The nimble fingers have approached, adorning him the Lo

of Strength :

They grasp the vigorous Courser's hack.

8 IFitA a roar : making a loud noise in dropping.

1 On the river's wave : in the vasativaH waters, which are used tosprin
the stalks Bearing the hi/mn : Prof. Geldner explains this as moaning, ‘ Fc
ing aw.iy th- j much coveted prize,’ Soma being regarded as a courser or ra
horse Seo Vcdisclte Studien, I., p. 120

2 Fire kindred Companies : refei ring, probably, to some saci ifice institul
in common by re preset datives of the five Aryan tribes.

4 IHs own Coinprinimi : Indra. He meets : this { sanrjato bhavati) is S&yan
explanation of samjighnate ; but it is not easy to sco how the word can b
this signification.

5 Daughters : or granddaughters ; the fingers.

0 Which hf hath found : ‘ which the worshipper recognizes.’ — Wilson,



THE MG VEDA.


281


UYMN 16.]

8 Comprising all the treasures that are in the heavens and on
the earth,

Come, Soma, as our faithful Friend.

' HYMN XV. Soma Pavamftna,

Through the fine fingers, with the song, this Hero comes with
rapid cars,

Going to Indra’s special place.

2 In holy thought he ponders much for the great worship of

the Gods,

Where the Immortals have their seat.

3 Like a good horse is he led out, when on the path that shines

with light

The mettled steeds exert their strength.

4 Ho brandishes his horns on high, and whets them, Bull who

leads the herd,

Doing with might heroic deeds.

5 He moves, a vigorous Steed, adorned with beauteous rays of

shining gold,

Becoming Sovran of the streams.

6 He, over places rough to pass, bringing rich treasures closely

packed,

Descends into the reservoirs.

7 Men beautify him in the vats, him worthy to be beautified,
Him who brings forth abundant food.

8 Him, even him, the fingers ten and the seven songs make

beautiful,

Well-weaponed, best of gladdeners.

HYMN XVI. Soma Pavamiina.

The pressers from the Soma-press send forth thy juice for
rapturous joy :

The speckled sap runs like a flood.


1 Indyus special place: 1 Imlra’s sibode ’ — WiLon. In Hymn XIII, 1,
nshkritam is explained by S&yr la as the vessel prcpaied and set apart

3 Like a good horse : the text has only hitah which may mean either good
)r placed ‘ Placed (in the cart) he is brought.’ — Wilson.

4 Ifurvs : cf. IX 5. 2.

5 Rags of shining gold : as the Moon.

6 Places rough to pass : the wool of the strainer SAyana gives a totally
liflerent explanation of this Stanza, See Wilson’s Translation. I have follow-
ed Pi of. Ludwig.

8 Seven songs : the songs of the seven priests.

Soma press : onydh, ablative dual of ont, signifying apparently
or a vessel, consisting of two pieces, used in the preparation


23*4 THE II I MIStS VI \BVVH

2 With strength we follow through the sieve him who brii

might and wins the kine,

Enrobed in water with his juice.

3 Pour on the sieve the Soma, ne’er subdued in waters, waterl^
And make it pure for Indra's drink.

4 Moved by the purifier’s thought, the Soma flows into the siev
By wisdom it hath gained its home.

5 With humble homage, Indra, have the Soma-drops flowed foi

to thee,

Contending for the glorious prize.

6 Purified in his fleecy garb, attaining every beauty, he
Stands, hero-like, amid the kine.

7 Swelling, as ’twere, to heights of heaven, the stream of t

creative juice

Falls lightly on the cleansing sieve.

8 Thus, Soma, purifying him who knoweth song mid living mi
Thou wanderest through the cloth of wool.

HYMN XVII. Soma PavamA

Like rivers down a steep descent, slaying the Vritras, f
of zeal,

The rapid Soma-streams have flowed.

2 The drops of Soma juice effused fall like the rain upon t

earth :

To Indra flow the Soma-streams.

3 With swelling wave the gladdening drink, the Soma, flo

into the sieve,

Loving the Gods and slaying fiends.

4 It hastens to the pitchers, poured upon the sieve it wa:

stron g

At sacrifices through the lauds.

5 Soma, thou shinest mounting heaven as ’twere above l’g'i

triple realm,

And moving seem’st to speed the Sun.

of the Soma juice. The woid is said to be employed to denote, in eta pin
Cally, heaven and eaith. ‘ They who express thee, the juice of heaven n
earth.’ — Wilson.

3 Waterless : dnaptum, which S&vana explains by andplam , not reach
or overtaken, by enemies. The meaning is not clear.

4 Its home: in the huge wooden vessel called dronakalaact.

5 Contending for the qlorious prize : like race- horses. ‘ Giving thee vig*.
for the gieat conflict.’ — Wilson.


5 Addressed to Soma as the Moon.



THE RIQVEDA


253


19.]

him, the head of sacrifice, singers and bards have sung
-heir songs, °

Rtering what he loves to see.

The men, the sages with their hymns, eager for help, deck thco
r strong steed,

Deck thee for service of the Gods.

3 Flow onward to the stream of meath : rest efficacious in
thy home,

Fair, to be drunk at sacrifice.

HYMN XVIII. Soma Pavamfina.

Thou, Soma, dweller on the hills, effused, hast flowed into
the sieve :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

2 Thou art a sacred Bard, a Sage ; the meath is offspring of

thy sap :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

3 All Deities of one accord have come that they may drink

of thee :

All -bounteous art thou in carouse.

4 He who containeth in his hands all treasures much to be

desired :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

5 Who milketh out this mighty Pair, the Earth and Heaven,

like mother kine :

All-bounteous art thou in carouso.

6 Who in a moment mightily floweth around these two world-

halves :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.

7 The Strong One, being purified, hath in the pitchers cried

aloud :

All-bounteous art thou in carouse.


HYMN XIX. Soma Pavamftna.

D Soma, being purified bring us the wondrous treasure, meet
^°r lauds, that is in earth and heaven.


The head of sacrifice : the most important element of the ceremony,
ecorrtjng to Sdyana, at the head, that is, on the last and most important day
off Vision of the Soma juice. Offering what he loves to ste : ‘ eutejtainmg
auction for him the all-beholding,' ’—Wilson

meath J or honey. In thy home : in the dronakala^a.

'■ on the hills : ‘ pressed between the stones.’ — Wilson.


284 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

2 For ye Twain, Indra, Soma, are Lords of the light, Lord

the kine :

Great Rulers, prosper ye our songs.

3 The tawny Steer, while cleansed among the living, bello’v

on the grass,

Hath sunk and settled in his homo.

4 Over the Steer’s productive flow the sacred songs w

resonant,

The mothers of the darling Son.

5 Hath he not, purified, impregned the kine who long to n

their Lord,

The kine who yield the shining milk ?

6 Bring near us those who stand aloof : strike fear into

enemies :

O Pavamana, find us wealth.

7 Soma, bring down the focman’s might, his vigorous stren

and vital power,

Whether he be afar or near.

HYMN XX. SomaPavan

Forth through the straining-cloth the Sage flows to
banquet of the Gods,

Subduing all our enemies.

2 For he, as Pavamana, sends thousandfold treasure in

shape

Of cattle to the singing-men.

3 Thou graspest all things with thy mind, and purifiest t

with thoughts :

As such, 0 Soma, find us fame.

4 Pour lofty glory on us, send sure riches to our liberal lore
Bring food to those who sing thy praise.

5 As thou art cleansed, 0 Wondrous Steed, 0 Soma, thou 1

entered, like

A pious King, into the songs.

6 He, Soma, like a courser in the floods invincible, made cle
With hands, is resting in the jars.

4 Hymns are sung over the Soma-stream, and are called mothers of
precious juice because it is prepared while they are sung

5 The kine: the vasatlvaii waters which long to mingle with the Soma.

5 Steed : vahne : * bearer (of our offerings) ’ — Wilson.

6 Like a courser : * the bearer (of oblations)’. — Wilson*



THE RIG VEDA.


285


r 22.]

bporting, like a liberal chief, thon goest, Soma, to the sieve,
sliding the laud a Hero’s strength.

_ ° HYMN XXI. Soma Pavam&na.

r

To Indra flow these running drops, these Somas frolicsome in

mood,

Exhilarating, finding light ;

2 Driving off foes, bestowing room upon the presser, willingly
Bringing their praiser vital force.

3 Lightly disporting them, the drops flow to one common reservoir,
And fall into the river’s wave.

4 These Pavamanas have obtained all blessings much to be desired,
Like coursers harnessed to a ear.

5 With view to us, 0 Soma-drops, bestow his manifold desire
On him who yet hath given us naught.

6 Bring us our wish with this design, as a wright brings his new-

wrought wheel :

Flow pure and shining with the stream.

1 These drops have cried with resonant voice : liko swift steeds

they have run the course,

And roused the good man’s hymn to life.

HYMN XXII. Soma Pavamftna.

These rapid Soma-streams have stirred themselves to motion
like strong steeds,

Like cars, like armies hurried forth.

2 Swift as wide winds they lightly move, like rain-storms of

Parjanya, like

The flickering flames of burning fire.

3 These Soma juices, blent with curds, purified, skilled in sa-

cred hymns,

Have gained by song their hearts’ desire.

I Immortal, cleansed, theso drops, siuce first they flowed, have
never wearied, fain

To reach the region and their paths.

7 Chief : S&yana explains maichak by ddnam , gift.


5 This stanza is obscure, and Sdyana’s commentary is imperfect, It seems
that the Soma-drops are prayed to enrich the msti tutor of the sacrifice who
has not as yet rewarded the priests
7 Run the course : reached the droryxkalasa.


^ song : vip% : by knowledge, according to S&yana. * The St. Petersb.
plains vip as the twigs (of. vepres) whioh form the bottom of the
Heupport the filteriug-cloth,’— Cowell, in Wilson s Translation.



2S (5 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX

f> Advancing they have travelled o’er the ridges of the earth
and heaven,

And this the highest realm of all.

6 Over the heights have they attained the highest thread tAat

is spun out,

And this which must be deemed most high.

7 Thou, Soma, boldest wealth in kine which thou hast seized

from niggard churls :

Thou calledst forth the outspun thread.

HYMN XXrri. Soma Pavamftna.

Swift Soma drops have been effused in stream of meath, the
gladdening drink,

For sacred lore of every kind.

2 Hither to newer resting-place the ancient Living Ones are

come.

They made the Sun that he might shine.

3 O Pavamana, bring to us the unsacrificing foeman’s wealth,
And give us food with progeny.

4 The living Somas being cleansed diffuse exhilarating drink,
Turned to the vat which drips with meath.

C> Soma flows on intelligent, possessing sap and mighty strength,
Brave Hero who repels the curse.

6 For Indra, Soma ! thou art cleansed, a feast-companion for

the Gods :

Indu, thou fain wilt win us strength.

7 When he had drunken draughts of this, Indra smote down

resistless foes :

Yea, smote them, and shall smite them still.

HYMN XXI V. Soma PavsmAna.

Hitherward have the Somas streamed, the drops while they
are purified :

When blent, in waters they are rinsed.

6 Or, ‘ Streams rushing down have filled the threads, moat excellent, spread
out beneath ’ ; that ia, the threads of the straining-cloth. See note in Wilson.
According to S&yana ‘the thiead’ is sacrifice; and ‘this which must be
deemed most high ’ may be, as Ludwig suggests, the place of sacrifice which
is also to be held holy. Wilson translates the second line : — ‘ this rite ia
gloufied thereby ’

7 From niggard churls : or from the Panis. Thou calledst out the outspun
thread: ‘ thou hast called aloud at the outspread sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

2 Hewer- resting-place : a newly- prepared place of sacrifice. The
Living Ones : the Soma-drups.



MN 25 3


THE RIG VEDA.


237


The milk hath run to meet them like floods rushing down a
precipice :

They come to Indra, being cleansed.

3 0 Soma Pavamana, thou art flowing to be Indra’s drink :

The men have seized and lead thee forth.

4 Victorious, to be hailed with joy, 0 Soma, flow, delighting

men,

To him who ruleth o’er mankind.

5 Thou, Indu, when, effused by stones, thou runnest to the

filter, art

Heady for Indra’s higli decree.

6 Flow on, host Vyitra-slayer ; flow meet to be hailed with joyful

lauds,

Pure, purifying, wonderful.

7 Pure, purifying is he called the Soma of the ineath effused,
Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods.

HYMN XXV. Soma PavamAna.

Gheen-hued ! as one who giveth strength flow on for Gods to
drink, a draught
r*>r Vayu and the Marut host.

2 0 Pav»mana, sent by song, roaring about thy dwelling-place,
Pass into Vayu as Law bids.

3 The Steer shine^with the Deities, dear Sage in his appointed

home,

Foe-slayer, most beloved by Gods.

4 Taking each beauteous form, he goes, desirable, while purified,
Thither where the Immortals sit.

5 To Indra Soma flows, the Ked, engendering song, exceeding

wise,

The visitor of living men.

4 To him who ruleth o’er mankind : to Indra.

5 Ready for Imtra’s high decree : Wilson, following SAyana, translates :
‘an ample portion for Indra’s belly.' See Bergaignc, La Religion Vedique,
Hk 210 ft’, for the meaning of dhetman in the Kigveda.

2 Into Vdyu: into the vessel appropriated to VAyu — SAyana.

1 0 The Red • arashdh. : here explained by SAyana a n — drockamdnah, shining
)r ra( kant The visitor of living men : dyushdk . the meaning of this word

8 uncertain The St. Petersburg Lexicon explains it as, conjointly with
V 11 ; vv ‘tli human co-operation. Ludwig in his translation renders it by
SjV ‘l* 1 ’ 1 kbenden besucht/ who visits the living man ; but in his Comment-

that it may mean, during the whole of life. ‘Constantly.’'-



288


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK IX.


6 Flow, best exhilarator, Sage, flow to the filter in a stream
To seat thee in the place of song.

HYMN XXVI. Soma


The sages with the fingers’ art have dressed and decked that
vigorous Steed
Upon the lap of Aditi.

2 The kino have called aloud to him cxhaustless with, a thou-

sand streams,

To Indu who supporteth heaven.

3 Him, nourisher of many, Sage, creative Pavamana, they
Have sent, by wisdom, to the sky.

4 Him, dweller with Vivasv.tn, they with use of both arms have

sent forth,

The Lord of Speech infallible.

5 Him, green, beloved, many-eyed, the Sisters with the pressing-

stones

Send down to ridges of the sieve.

6 0 Pavamana, Indu, priests hurry thee on to Indra, thee
Who aidest song and cheerest him.

HYMN XXVII. Soma PavamAna.

This Sage, exalted by our lauds, flows to the purifying cloth,
Scattering foes as lie is cleansed.

2 As giving power and winning light, for Indra and for Vayu he
Is poured upon the filtering-cloth.

3 The men conduct him, Soma, Steer, Omniscient, and the Head

of Heaven,

Effused into the vats of wood.


~ R nf mna . arkdsya : archaniyaai/endntsya , of the adorable Indra, accord-
J toWni. Arka has two meanings in the Rigveda (1) song or hymn <t
praise and (2) light or splendour. See Piscliel, Vedischc Studien, X. pp.


1 Aditi: the earth. . _

2 The Vine : who supply the milk that is mixed with the Soma juice.

a v^unnuU ■ meaning here the sacrificer. Of both arms : bhutijoh ; accor •

mg to s"y^a = «.thearmsof the body. The St. Petersburg Lex.«
explains the word as meaning a sort of vice or implement for holding w
while it is being cut. Lord of speech : makmg men eloquent.

6 Many-eyJ: * far-beholding.’-Wilson. The Sister,: the fingers of the
officiating piiest.


3 Omniscient: or, all-possessing. Vat. of wood: vine.hu: according to
Benfey, into the streams of water.



THE RIG VEDA.


280


pLV 29.]

Longing for kine, longing for gold hath Indu Pavama.ua lowed,
Still Conqueror, never overcome.

5 This Pavamana, gladdening draught, drops on the filtering-

cloth, and then

Mounts up with Surya to the sky.

6 To Indra in the firmament this mighty tawny Steer hath flowed,
This Indu, being purified.

HYMN XXVIII. Soma Pavamilna.

Urged by the men, this vigorous Steed, Lord of the mind,
Omniscient,

Runs to the woollen straining-cloth.

2 Within the filter hath he flowed, this Soma for the Cods

effused,

Entering all their essences.

3 He shines in beauty there, this God Immortal in his dwelling-

place,

Foe-slayer, dearest to the Gods.

4 Directed by the Sisters ten, bellowing on his way this Steer
Runs onward to the wooden vats.

f) This Pavamana, swift and strong, Omniscient, gave splendour
to

The Sun and all his forms of light.

6 This Soma, being purified, flows mighty and infallible,

Slayer of sinners, dear to Gods.

HYMN XXIX. Soma Pavamdna.

Forward with mighty force have flowed the currents of this
Steer effused,

Of him who sets him by the Gods.

2 The singers praise him with their song, and learned priests

adorn the Steed,

Brought forth as light that merits laud.

3 These things thou winnest lightly while purified, Soma, Lord

of wealth :

Fill full the sea that claims our praise.

4 Longing for kine: who supply milk to mix with the Soma juice. Gold ■
worn on the finger of the priest who presses out the juice. Lowed . made
a noiRe m dropping.

5 Mounts up : as the Moon.

1 Who sets him, by the Qods : or, who decorates the Gods. ‘Who seeks to
Mirpass the gods/- Wilson.

iese things : for which we pray. The sea : the Soma-vat or reservoir.



290


THE HYMNS OP


[HOOK I.


4 Winning nil precious tilings at once, flow on, O Soma, wii

thy stream :

Drive to one placo our enemies.

5 Preserve us from the godless, from ill-omened voice of oi

and all,

That so we may be freed from blame.

6 () Tndu, as thou flowest on bring us the wealth of earth ai

heaven,

And splendid vigour, in thy stream.


1 1 \ M N XXX. Soma Pavawftn

Streams of this Potent One have flowed easily to the strai
ing-cloth :

While he is cleansed he lifts his voice.

2 Indu, by pressers urged to speed, bellowing out while bcautifie
Sends forth a very mighty sound.

3 Pour on us, Soma, with thy stream man-conquering migl

which many crave,

Accompanied with hero sons.

1 Hither hath Pavamana flowed, Soma flowed hither in a streat
To settle in the vats of wood.

5 To waters with the stones they drive thee tawny-hued, mo;

rich in sweets,

O Indu, to be Indra’s drink.

6 For Indra, for the Thunderer press the Soma very rich in sw eet
Lovely, inspiriting, for strength.

HYMN XXXI. Soma Pavam&n

The Soma drops, benevolent, come forth as they are purifie
Bestowing wealth which all may see.

2 0 Inin, high o’er heaven and earth be thou, increaser of oi

might :

The Master of all strength be thou.

3 The winds are gracious in their love to thet), the rivers flo

to thee :

Soma, they multiply thy power.


5 Ill-omened voice . srantXt, explained l>y Sityana as = sabdttnninddrilpdt^oM
or word iu the form of blame; the raging fury of the demon or the godle
man, according to Grassmann.

2 A very mighty sound : or, a sound which Indra loves.

1 Wealth which all may see : 1 intellectual wealth.’— Wilson.

3 The winds, cf. ‘ V&yu is Soma's guardian God ’ (X. 85. 5).



IfYtfy 32.] THE RIGVEDA. 291

4 Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite

in thee :

Be in the gathoring-place of strength.

5 For thee, brown-huod ! the kine have poured imperishable oil

and milk

Aloft on the sublimest height.

G Friendship, 0 Indu, wo desire with thee who bearest noble
arms,

With thee, 0 Lord of all that is.

HYMN XXXII. Soma Pavam&na.

The rapture-shedding Soma-drops, effused in our assembly,
have

Flowed forth to glorify our prince.

2 Then Trita’s Maidens onward urge the Tawny-coloured with

the stones,

Indu for Indra, for his drink.

3 Now like a swan he maketh all the company sing each his

hymn :

He, like a steed, is bathed in milk.

4 0 Soma, viewing heaven and earth, thou runnest like a dart-

ing deer :

Set in the place of sacrifice.

5 The cows have sung with joy to him, even as a woman to her

love :

He came as to a settled race.

6 Bestow illustrious fame on us, both on our liberal lords and me,
Glory, intelligence, and wealth.

i Tliis stanza has occurred before See I. 91. 16. Be in the gathering place
of strength • be the cential point and source of all power.

5 The kine : of the clouds, the waters. Oil and milk : sweet and fertilizing
ram. Or the cows who supply milk for the libation may be intended, in
which ease ‘ the sublimest ’ would be the place of sacrifice.

1 Our prince : the noble wlm institutes the sacrifice.

2 Tritas Maidens : the fingers of the priest. See IX. 38. 2.

3 Like a swan: as a sentinel hansa (swan, wild-goose, or flamingo) at the
appi oach of danger sounds a note of alarm which is answered by all the
rest. — Ludwig.

4 Darting: Sftyana takes taktah with ‘thou,’ Soma, and explains it by
ffdvyaih payaldihhirmisritah san , being mixed with milk, curds, etc. Else-
where S&yana explains it by ‘ swift.’

5 Cows : praises, according to Sly ana. As to a settled race: as a horse is
brought to run a race that has been arranged. ' As a hero hastens to the
welcome contest.’ — Wilson.



292 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR a

HYMN XXXIII. Soma Pavamftna

Like waves of waters, skilled in song the juices of the Some
speed

Onward, as buffaloes to woods.

2 With stream of sacrifice the brown bright drops have flowee

with strength in store
Of kine into the wooden vats.

3 To Indra, Vayu, Yaruna, to Vishnu, and the Maruts, flow
The drops of !Soma juice effused.

4 Three several words are uttered : kine are lowing, cows who

give their milk :

The Tawuy-hued goes bellowing on.

5 The young and sacred mothers of the holy rite have uttered

praise :

They decorate the Child of Heaven.

6 From every side, 0 Soma, for our profit, pour thou forth

four seas

Filled full of riches thousandfold.

HYMN XXXIV. Soma Pavam&na,

The drop of Soma juice effused flows onward with this stream
impelled,

Pending strong places, with its might.

2 Poured forth, to Indra, Varuna, to Vayu and the Marut host,
To Vishnu, flows the Soma juice.

3 With stonos they press the Soma forth, the Strong conducted

by the strong :

They milk the liquor out with »vkill.

4 ’Tis he whom Trita must refine, ’tis he who shall make Indra

glad :

The Tawny One is decked with tints.


4 Three several words : according to Sftyana, trividhd stutih , praise of three
kinds, from the three Vedas. ‘ The puests utter the three sacred texts.’—
Wilson. Probably three tiiplets chanted during the ceiemony. See Beigaigue,
I. 288 .

5 Mothers of the holy rite : apparently, the cows who supply milk for
libations. The Child of Heaven : the Soma, which, according to a text quoted
by Sftyana, 4 was in the third heaven from hence/

fl Four seas : imaginary seas, to correspond with the four quarters of heaven.

1 Strong places : the strongholds of enemies, the fiends who withhold the
fain.

4 Trita : the preparer of the Celestial Soma.



THE MIO VEDA.


288


UYMK 36.]

5 Him do the Sons of Pi'isui milk, the dwelling-place of sacrifice,
Oblation lovely and most dear.

6 To him in one united stream these songs flow on straight

forward : he,

Loud-voiced, hath made the milch-kine low.

HYMN XXXV. Soma Pavamdna.

Pour forth on us abundant wealth, 0 Pavam&na, with thy
stream,

Wherewith thou mayest find us light.

2 0 Indu, swayer of the sea, shaker of all things, flow thou on,
Bearer of wealth to us with might.

3 With thee for Hero, Valiant One ! may we subdue our ene-

mies :

Let what is precious flow to us.

4 Indu arouses strength, the Sage who strives for victory,

winning power,

Discovering holy works and means.

5 Mover of speech, we robe him with our songs as he is purified,
Soma, the Guardian of the folk ;

G On whose way, Loid of Holy Law, most rich, as he is purified,
The people all have set their hearts.

HYMN XXXVI. Soma Pavam&na.


Forth from the mortar is the juice sent, like a car-horse, to
the sieve :

The Steed steps forward to the goal.

2 Thus, Soma, watchful, bearing well, cheering the Gods, flow
past the sieve,

Turned to the vat that drops with mcath.


• r > The dwell in g-^dace of sacrifice : the Soma-plant contains within itself the
chief element of sacrifice, and the pieparation of the juice is only the devel-
opment of its nature. — Ludwig.


2 The sea : the reservoir of Soma juice.

4 Discovering holy works and means : * acquainted with sacred rites and
arms.’ — Wilson.

6 On whose way : on whose statutes or decrees.


1 To the goal : Mrshman : apparently, a line or furrow drawn across the
end of the race-course. In I. 116 17, S&yana explains Mrshman as a piece
of wood serving as a goal, but in this place he takes it to mean, ‘ the God-
attracting battle-field called a sacrifice,’ devdndmdkarshanavati yajndkhye sang •
r o‘m ® ee P° we H ,s n ote ir. Wilson’s Translation.

^ The vat ; the dronakalafa.



294 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

3 Excellent Pavam&na, make the lights shine brightly out

for us :

Speed us to mental power and skill.

4 He, beautified by pious men, and coming from their hands

adorned,

Flows through the fleecy straining-cloth.

5 May Soma pour all treasures of the heavens, the earth, the

firmament

Upon the liberal worshipper.

6 Thou mountest to the height of heaven, 0 Soma, seeking

steeds and kine,

And seeking heroes, Lord of Strength !

HYMN XXXVIT. Soma Pavamtaa.

Soma, the Steer, effused for draught, flows to the purifying sieve,
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods

2 Far-sighted, tawny-coloured, he flows to the siove, intelligent,
Bellowing, to his place of rest.

3 This vigorous Pavamana runs forth to the luminous realm of

heaven,

Fiend-slayer, through the fleecy sieve.

4 This Pavamana up above Trita’s high ridge hath made the Sun,
Together with the Sisters, shine.

5 This Vritra-slaying Steer, effused, Soma, room-giver, ne’ei

deceived,

Hath gone, as ’twerc, to win the spoil.

G Urged onward by the sage, the God speeds forward to the
casks of wood,

Indu to Indra willingly.

HYMN XXXVIII. Soma Pavamana

THrs Steer, this Chariot, rushes through the woollen filter
as he goes

To war that wins a thousand spoils.


1 For draught : pttdye : ‘ for the drinking (of the gods).’ — Wilson.

2 Intelligent: or, endowed with strength.

4 Trita! s high ridge : according to S&ya’ia, ‘ the high place (of the sacrifice
of Trita' the ilishi. But the heavenly home of Trita, the celestial preparer o
the Soma for Indra, is intended. 1'he Sisters: the Dawns.

6 Willingly: mahhdnd : ‘ pleuteoualy.' — Ludwig. ‘ In his might.’— Cowell

1 To war that wins a thousand spoils : more literally, to thousandfold booty



THE RIO VEDA.


295


gYIMf 39.]

2 The Dames of Trita with the stones onward impel this

Tawny One,

Indu to Jndra for his drink.

3 Ten active fingers carefully adorn him here ; they make him

bright

And beauteous for the gladdening draught.

4 He like a falcon settles down amid the families of men,
Speeding like lover to his love.

5 This young exhilarating juice looks downward from its place

in heaven,

This Soma-drop that pierced the sieve.

6 Poured for the draught, this tawny juice flows forth, intel-

ligent, crying out,

Unto the well-belovi;d place.

HYMN XXXIX. Soma Pavain&ua.

Flow on, 0 thou of lofty thought, flow swift in thy beloved
form,

Saying, I go where dwell the Cods.

2 Preparing what is unprepared, and bringing store of food

to man,

Make thou the rain descend from heaven.

3 With might, bestowing power, the juice enters the purifying

sieve,

Far-seeing, sending forth its light.

1 This is it which in rapid course hath with the river’s wave

flowed down

From heaven upon the straining-cloth.

5 Inviting him from far away, aud oven from near at hand, the
juice

For Indra is poured forth as meath.

C In union they have sung the hymn : with stones they urge the
Tawny One.

Sit in the place of sacrifice.

2 The. Dam €9 of Trita: as Tiitais the celestial purifier of the Sonia, the
fingers of the earthly purifiers aie called hie dames, or his maidens us hi

IX. 32. 2.

5 From its place in heaven : or divtih may be the genitive ease, taken with
the Child of Heaven, as in IX. *33. 5.

® The well-beloved place: the dronakalasa or vat in which it rests.

2 Preparing what is unprepared : ‘ consecrating the uuconsecrated worship-
per or place/ ia S&yana’s explanation,
fi bit : 0 Gods.— Siyana,



296 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX.

HYMN XL. Soma Pavam&u a .

The Very Active hath assailed, while purified, all enemies :
They deck the Sage with holy songs.

2 The Red hath mounted to his place ; to Indra goes the mighty

juice : J

He settles in his firm abode.

3 0 Indu, Soma, send us now great opulence from every side

Pour on us treasures thousandfold. 1 * 3 *

4 0 Soma Pavamana, bring, Indu, all splendours hitherward*.
Find for us food in boundless store.

5 As thou art cleansed, bring hero strength and riches to thy

worshipper,

And prosper thou the singer’s hymns.

C 0 Indu, Soma, being cleansed, bring hither riches doubly-
piled,

Wealth, mighty Indu, meet for lauds.

HYMN XLI. Soma PavamAna.

Active and bright have they come forth, impetuous in speed
bke bulls,

Driving the black skin far away.

2 Quelling the ntcless Dasyu, may we think upon the bridge of

bliss,

Leaving the bridge of woe behind,

3 The mighty Pavamana’s io*ir is heard as ’twere the rush of rain :
Lightnings are flashing to the sky.

4 Pour out on us abundant food, when thou art pressed, 0 Indu,

wealth

In kine and gold and steeds and spoil.

5 Flow on thy way, Most Active, thou : fill full the mighty heav-

ens and earth,

As Dawn, as Surya with his beams.


2 The Red: Soma. II is place: t he dronaka fasti, or reservoir. His firm
ibode : heaven.

6 Doubly -piled . dvib&rhusam : according to S&yana, ‘ from both worlds,
leaven and earth ‘ ^ ^

1 They: the Soma juices. The black skin : meaning, apparently, both tbe

lack pall or covering of night and the lUkshasas or dark-skinned Dasyus or
mstile aborigines.

3 The cleansing of the terrestiial Soma is identified with the purification

>f the celestial uectar accompanied by rain and lightning. See Hillebrandt,
V. M, 343, 3(52, .



HYMN 43.] Tilt' R10YEDA. 197

g On every side, 0 Soma, flow round us with thy protecting

stream,

As Rasa flows around the world.

HYMN XLII. Soma Pavam&na.

Engendering the Sun in floods, engendering heaven’s lights,
greeu-hued,

Robed in the waters and the milk,

2 According to primeval plan this Soma, with his stream, effused
Flows purely on, a God for Gods.

3 For him victorious, waxen great, the juices with a thousand

powers

Ate purified for winning spoil.

4 Shedding (he ancient fluid he is poured into the cleansing sieve :
He, thundering, hath produced the Gods.

5 Soma, while purifying, sends hither all things to be desired,
He sends the Gods who stiengthen Law.

C Soma, effused, pour on us wealth in kine, in heroes, steeds,
and spoil,

Send us abundant store of food.

HYMN XLII I. Soma Pavam&na.

We will enrobe with sacred song the Lovely One who, ns a
Steed,

Is decked with milk for rapturous joy.

2 All songs of ours desiring grace adorn him in the ancient way,
Indu for Indra, for his drink.

3 Soma flows on when purified, belov6d and adorned with songs,
Songs of the sage Medhyatithi.

4 0 Soma Pavamana, find exceeding glorious wealth for us,
Wealth, Indu, fraught with boundless might..

5 Like courser racing to the prize Indu, the lover of the Gods,
Hoars, as he passes, in the sieve.

6 R'Utd : a mythical stream that flows round the atwospheie and the earth.
See V. 41. 15, and X. 108. 1.

1 In floods : in the waters on high ; in the firmament.

4 ILiik produced the Gods: yatrasomo ’bhishihjate Ultra devd niyatamprldur-
vhavanti ; where Soma is effused, there the gods constantly appear. — !Sft)ana.

1 ds a steed : is bathed in w'^ter. For rapturous joy : 1 for the exhilaration
^ of the gods) ^-Wilson.

* Medhydtithi : the Rishi of the hymn,

6 daciny to the prize; vdjasrit ; ‘rushing into battle.’ — Wilson.



208 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

6 Flow on thy way to win us strength, to speed the sage who
praises thee :

Soma, bestow heioic power.

HYMN XLIY. Soma Pavamflna.

Indu, to us for this great rite, bearing ns ’twere thy wave to
Gods,

Unwearied, thou art flowing forth.

2 Pleased with the hymn, impelled by prayer, Soma is hurried

far away,

The Wise One in the Singer’s stream.

3 Watchful among the Gods, this juice advances to the cleans-

ing sieve :

Soma, most active, travels on.

4 Flow onward, seeking strength for us, embellishing the sacri-

fice :

The priest with trimmed grass calleth thee.

5 May Soma, ever bringing power to Bhaga and to Vayu, Sage
And Hero, lead us to the Gods.

C So, to increase our wealth to-day, Tnspirer, best of Furthered,
Win for us strength and high renown.

HYMN XLY. Soma Pavamflna.

Flow, thou who viowest men, to give delight, to entertain the
Gods,

Indu, to Indra for his drink.

2 Stream to thine embassy for us : thou hastencst, for Indra, tc
The Gods, 0 better than our friends.

3 We balm thee, red of hue, with milk to fit thee for the rap

turous joy :

Unbar for us the doors of wealth.


6 Heroic power : ‘excellent male offspring.’ — Wilson.


1 For this great rite: ‘to give us abundant wealth.’ — Wilson. Unwearied
ay ft sy ah : according to Sftvana, this is the name of the Kishi : ‘ AyA-sy
(goeth) towards the gods (in sacrifice).’ — Wilson.


2 Thou hastenest : S:\yana gives a different explanation of this part of tb
stanza : ‘thou (who) art drunk for Indra, (pour) on the gods wealth for ( ll
their) friends.’ — Wilson. I have adopted Ludwig’s interpretation.

3 We balm thee , red of hue: or, ‘Yea, we adorn thee, red.’ For the ra j
turous joy : madly a : ‘for the purpose of exhilaration.’— Wilson,



HYMN 40.] TUB RIOVEDA. 299

4 He through the sieve hath passed, as comes a courser to the

pole, to run :

Indu belongs unto the Gods.

5 All friends have lauded him as he sports in the wood, beyond

the fleece :

Singers have chanted Indu’s praise.

6 Flow, Indu, with that stream wherein steeped thou announc-

ost to the man

Who worships thee heroic strength.

HYMN XLVI. Soma Pavam&na.

Like able coursers they have been sent forth to be the feast
of Gods,

Joying in mountains, flowing on

2 To Vayu flow the Soma-streams, the drops of juice made

beautiful

Like a bride dowered by her sire.

3 Pressed in the mortar, these, the drops of juice, the Somas

rich in food,

Give strength to Indra with their work.

4 Deft-handed men, run hither, seize the brilliant juices blent

with meal,

And cook with milk the gladdening draught.

5 Thus, Soma, Conqueror of wealth ! flow, finding furtherance

for us,

Giver of ample opulence.

6 This Pavamana, meet to be adorned, the fingers ten adorn,
The draught that shall make Indra glad.


4 To the pole : the meaning of dhuram here is not clear, and the compari-
son is not obvious. ‘As a horse in going passes the shaft (of the chariot).’ —
Wil«on ‘As a horse (presses) through the yoke,’ — Grassmanu. Ludwig
suggests * hedge ’ or ‘ barrier ’ as the probable meaning of the word in this
place .

5 fn the wood, beyond theflete ■ when he has passed through the woollen
strainer and fallen into the wooden trough or vat. Singers: ndvtth: shouts

joy, according to the St. Petersburg Lexicon.

1 They have been sent forth : asrigran (effusi sunt) is applicable both to the
effused Soma-drops and to hoi sea loosed or started for a race. Joying in
mountains : coming from plants grown on hills.

fren ^ 0w, ^’ ec ^ % her sire ; meaning, perhaps, possessed of property inherited

4 I) eft-handed : suhastyah, cannot be satisfactorily accounted for. Suhastyd ,
* dual, may have been the original reading. See Ludwig’s Commentary, Vol.
Jj V P 347, 348.



800 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

HYMN XLVII. Soma PavamAna.

Great as he was, Soma hath gained strength by this high
solemnity :

Joyous he riseth like a bull.

2 His task is done : his crushings of the Dasyus are made

manifest :

He sternly reckoneth their debts.

3 Soon as his song of praise is born, the Soma, Indra’s juice,

becomes

A thousand- winning thunderbolt.

4 Seer and Sustainer, he himself dcsireth riches for the sage
When he embellisheth his songs.

5 Fain would they both win riches as in races of the steeds. In wai
Thou art upon the conquerors’ side.

HYMN XLVITI. Soma Pavatoftna

With sacrifice we seek to thee kind Cherisher of manly might
In mansions of the lofty heavens ;

2 Gladdening, crusher of the bold, ruling with very mighty sway,
Destroyer of a hundred forts.

3 Hence, Sapient One ! the Falcon, strong of wing, unwearied

brought thee down,

Lord over riches, from the sky.

4 That each may see the light, the Bird brought us the guarc

of Law, the Friend
Of all, the speeder through the air.

5 And now, sent forth, it hath attained to mighty power anc

majesty,

Most active, ready to assist.

1 Riseth : or, roareth. Sabdam karoti — SAyapa.

2 He sternly reckoneth their debts : ‘ rcbolute lie acquits the debts (of tli
wot shipper) ’ — Wilson.

3 A thousand-winning thunderbolt : all-powerful to slay the wicked and t
reward worshipped.

4 Sustainer ■ I follow Ludwig in taking vidhartdri as a nominative singulai
Hut see Cowell’s note in Wilson’s Translation.

5 They both * Soma and the sage or singer — Ludwig. SAyana interpret
the stanza differently : — ‘ Thou desirest to give wealth to those who conque
in combat as (men offer fodder) to horses in battle.’ — Wilson.

1 Kind Cherisher of manly might : 1 2 3 4 auspicious bearing wealth.* — Wilson.

2 Hundred fort* : cf. IY 20. 3.

3 The Falcon : see IV. 26 and 27. .

4 The Friend of all : or, the common possession. The speeder through tl
air ; rajasttiram ; * the showerer of water.' — Wilson,



BY MN 50.]


THE RIGVEDA.


301


HYMN XLIX. Soma PavamUna.

Pour down the rain upon us, pour a wave of waters from the

sky,

And plenteous store of wholesome food.

2 Flow onward with that stream of thine, whereby the cows

have come to us,

The kine of strangers to our home.

3 Chief Friend of Gods in sacred rites, pour on us fatness with

thy stream,

Pour down on us a flood of rain.

4 To give us vigour, with thy stream run through the fleecy

straining cloth :

For verily the Gods will hear.

5 Onward hath Pavnmana flowed and beaten off the Rakshasas,
Flashing out splendour as of old.

HYMN L. Soma Pavam&na.

Loud as a river’s roaring wave thy powers have lifted up
themselves :

Urge on thine arrow’s sharpened point.

2 At thine effusion upward rise three voices full of joy, when thou
Flo west upon the fleecy ridge.

3 On to the fleece they urge with stones the tawny well-beloved

One,

Even Pavamana, dropping meath.

4 Flow with thy current to the sieve, 0 Sage most powerful to

cheer,

To seat thee in the place of song.

5 Flow, Most Exhilarating ! flow anointed with the milk for

halm,

Indu, for Tndra, for his drink.


4 The Gods will hear : the sound that thou makes t in flowing — S&yana,

5 Flashing out splendour as of old . or, ‘ Making lights shine as erst they

shone ’

1 Urge on thine arrow's sharpened point : vdrtdsya chad ay d pa vim : apparent-
ly a bold metaphorical expression for ‘make a noise like that of a discharged
arrow.’ ‘ Emit thy sound like that of a (rushing) arrow ’ —Wilson. Or
winds ij a may mean of (thy) reed, pipe, flute, oi other musical instrument, and
htyana explains pavim by sabdam. Benfey accoidinglv (Sftmaveda, II. 5. 1.
5. 1.) renders the passage : ‘ Erhebe deiner Flote Schall.’ ' Lift up the music
°f thy flute.’ According to Hillebrandt, V. M , I. p. 43, the reed or arrow
weans the sharp-pointed stalk of the Soma-plant.

2 Three voices full of joy : or, three several joyful words. See IX. 33. 4.
I he fleecy ridge : * the summit of the fleece.’ — Wilson.

4 In the place of song : see IX. 25, 6. * On Indra’s lap.’— Wilson.



302 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

HYMN LI. Soma Pavam&na,

Adiivaryu, on the filter pour the Soma juice expressed with
stones,

And make it pure for Indra’s drink.

2 Pour out for Indra, Thunder-armed, the milk of heaven, the

Soma’s juice,

Most excellent, most rich in sweets.

3 These Gods and all the Marut host, Indu ! enjoy this juice o

thine,

This Pavamana’s flowing meath.

4 For, Soma, thou hast been effused, strengthening for the wilt

carouse,

O Steer, the singer, for our help.

5 Flow with thy stream, Far-sighted One, effused, into the cleans

ing sieve :

Flow on to give us strength and fame.

HYMN LI I. Soma PavRmftm

Wealth-winner, dwelling in the sky, bringing us vigour wit'
the juice,

Flow to the filter when effused.

2 So, in thine ancient ways, may lie, beloved, with a thousand

streams

Run o’er the fleecy straining-cloth.

3 Him who is like a caldron shake : 0 Indu, shake thy gift to u
Shake it, aimed Warrior ! with thine arms.

4 Indu, invoked with many a prayer, bring down the vigour o

these men,

Of him who threatens us with war.

5 Indu, Wealth giver, with thine help pour out for us a hundred

yea,

A thousand of thy pure bright streams.


4 For the ivild carouse : ‘ for speedy exhilaration.’ — Wilson.

2 May he : the juice, regarded as distinct from Soma who is addressed.

3 Him who is Wee a caldron - beat or bruise the Soma that is full of j| 1,c
as a caldron is of water. With thine arms : or, with the blows (of the pressing
stones) The meaning of the second and third ‘shake’ seems to be ‘sen
rapidly.’ ‘ (Soma), send (us) him who is like a pot ; Indu, send us now wealth
swift-flowing (Soma), send it with blows (of the stones).’ — Wilson. Professc
Grassmann says that by ‘ him who is like a caldron’ the wealthy enemy
intended, whose possessions are to be poured out upon the pious worshipped



HYMN 55.]


THE III GV ED A.


303


HYMN LI II. Soma Pavam&na.

0 thou with stones for arms, thy powers, crushing the fiends,
have raised themselves :

Chase thou the foes who compass us.

2 Thou conquerest thus with might when car meets car, and

when the prize is staked :

With fearless heart will I sing praise.

3 No one with evil thought assails this Pavamana’s holy laws :
Crush huu who fain would fight with thee

4 For Indra to the streams they drive the tawny rapture-drop-

ping Steed,

I nd u the bringer of delight.

HYMN LTV. Soma Pavamdna.

After his ancient splendour, they, the bold, have drawn the
bright milk from

The Sage who wins a thousand gifts.

2 In aspect he is like the Sun ; he runneth forward to the lakes,
Seven currents flowing through the sky.

3 He, shining in his splendour, stands high over all things that

exist —

Soma, a God as Surya is.

4 Tliou, Indu, m thy brilliancy, ponrest on us, as Iudra’s Friend,
Wealth from the kino to feast the Gods.

HYMN LV. Soma Pavam&na.

Four on us with thy juice all kinds of corn, each sort of nourish-
ment,

And, Soma, all felicities.

- As thine, 0 Indu, is the praise, and thine what springeth from
the juice,

Seat thee on the dear sacred grass.

} With stones for arms : adriruh . generally an appellative of Indra, the
^linger or caster of the stone : thunderbolt; hero, acemding to Sayana,=
'J r <ivnvan soma , 0 Soma, possessor of, that is, expressed by, the stones.

2 11 ken car meets car : in battle. 1 Vhen the prize is staked : in the chariot-
rave ; or the reference may be also to battle.

4 To the streams ; the vasativuri waters.

1 They, the hold : the Soma-pressers. The Sage : or Rishi ; Soma.

2 The lakes : of air. Seven currents : corresponding to the seven earthly
rivers. ‘ He unites with the seven down-descending rivers of heaven.
Wilson .

4 From the kine : consisting of milk, curds, etc.



304 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX

3 And, finding for us kine and steeds, 0 Soma, with thy jui Ce

flow on

Through days that fly most rapidly.

4 As one who conquers, ne’er subdued, attacks and slays the

enemy,

Thus, Vanquisher of thousands ! flow.

HYMN LVI. Soma Pavam&na

Swift to the purifying sieve flows Soma as exalted Law,
Slaying the fiends, loving the Gods.

2 When Soma pours the strengthening food a hundred ever

active streams

To lndra’s friendship win their way.

3 Ten Dames have sung to welcome thee, even as a maide

greets her love :

0 Soma, thou art decked to win.

4 Flow hitherward, 0 Indu, sweet to Tndra and to Vishnu : guar
The men, the singers, from distress.

HYMN LVJI. Soma Pavamftn

Thy streams that never fail or waste flow forth like shouci
of rain from heaven,

To bring a thousand stores of strength.

2 He flows beholding on his way all well-beloved sacred lore,
Green-tinted, brandishing his arms.

3 He, when the people deck him like a docile king of elephant
Sits as a falcon in the wood.

4 So bring thou hitherward to us, Indu, while thou art purifie
All treasures both of heaven and earth.

HYMN LVIII. SomaPavamfti

SwrFT runs this giver of delight, even the stream of flowii
juice :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

4 Vanquisher of thousands : or, thou who winnest thousands, i. e. countie

spoils or treasures.

3 Ten Dames : the fingers, whose sound is heard in the operation of pressi

the Soma juice.

3 Like a docile king of elephants : von Roth, in the St. Petersbu'
Lexicon, suggests ibhe for ibhuh, * like a pious king among his retinue ; ’ b
no alteration is necessary, ibhah and r&jd being taken together in the ser
of elephant-king or stately and noble elephant. See Vedische Stvdien, l-
XV. Sits as a falcon in the wood : in the wood, as referring to the Sot
meaning the wooden trough or vat. * Sits on the waters like a hawk.’ — Wih

1 SwifU t drat : * rescuing (his worshippers from sin).'— Wilson.



BTMN 60.] THE RIG VEDA. 805

2 The Morning knows all precious things, the Goddess knows her

grace to man :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

3 We have accepted thousands from Dhvasra’s and Purushanti ; s

hands :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

4 From whom we have accepted thus thousands and three times

ten besides :

Swift runs this giver of delight.

HYMN LIX. Soma PavamAna.

Flow onward, Soma, winning kine, and steeds, and all that
gives delight :

Bring hither wealth with progeny.

2 Flow onward from the waters, flow, inviolable, from the plants :
Flow onward from the pressing-boards.

3 Soma, as Pavamana, pass over all trouble and distress :

Sit on the sacred grass, a Sage.

4 Thou, Pavamana, foundest light; thou at thy birth becamest

great :

0 Indu, thou art over all.

HYMN LX. Soma PavamAna.

Sing forth and laud with sacred song most active Pavamana,
laud

Indu who sees with thousand eyes.

2 Thee who hast thousand eyes to see, bearer of thousand bur-
thens, they

Have filtered through the fleecy cloth.


3 Dhvusra and Purushanti were ‘ two kings who conferred great wealth on
Taranta and PurumUha, two rishis of the family of Vidadasva. See p.
XXX.III. of Max- Muller’s Rig-veda, Vol. V.’— Cowell’s note in Wilson’s
Translation.

4 Thus thousand * and thre times ten : SAynna, taking tdnd (thus, in this
manner) to mean ‘garments,’ mistaking triiisdtam, thirty, for tiisatam , three
hundred, and neglecting the cha (and), interprets ‘ three hundred thousand
garments.’ ‘ Thuty robes and thousands ’ — E. B Cowell. Urasbmann places
this hymn in his Appendix as a composition of fragments and out of place
where it stands in the text.

* The waters: the vnsatfvari waters The pressing -boards : dhishdndbhyah :
according to S&yaria, yr&v&bh'jah, the piessing-stones.

1 With sacred song ; gdyatrina : * with a Gdyatri hymn.’ — Wilson.

2 Bearer of thousand burthens : or, bringer of thousand bounties.



306 TEE BYMNS OF [BOOK IX

3 # He, Pavamana, hath streamed through the fleece: he runs
into the jars,

Finding his way to Indra’s heart.

4 That Indra may be bounteous, flow, most active Soma, for our
weal :

Bring genial seed with progeny.

HA MN LX I. Soma PavamAna.

Flow onward, Indu, with this food for him who in thy wild
delight

Battered the nine-and-ninety down,

2 Smote swiftly forts, and Sambara, then Yadu and that Turvasa
For pious Divodasa’s sake.

3 Finder of horses, pour on us horses and wealth in kine and

gold,

And, Indu, food in boundless store.

4 We seek to win thy friendly love, even Pavamana's flowin'

o'er

The limit of the cleansing sieve.

5 With those same waves which in their stream o'erflow th

purifying sieve,

Soma, be gracious unto us.

6 0 Soma, being purified, bring us from all sides, — for the

canst, —

Riches and food with hero sons.

7 Him here, the Child whom streams have borne, the ten awi

fingers beautify :

With the Adityas is he seen.

8 With Indra and with V&yu he, effused, flows onward with t’

beams

Of Surya to the cleansing sieve.

9 Flow rich in sweets and lovely for our Bhaga, Vayu, Pusha

flow

For Mitra and for Varuna.

10 High is thy juice’s birth : though set in heaven, on earth
hath obtained

Strong sheltering power and great renown.


1 The nine-and-ninety : * ninety -nine (cities of the foe).’— Wilson.

3 In boundless store : literally, in thousands.

7 Whom streams have borne : sindhumdtccram : * whose parents are
rivers,’ — Wilson. B<>rn as the Moon in the ocean of air. With the Adti
tis he seen : that is, he is counted as one of the Adityas.



THE MOV EM.


ttyUR 61 .]


m


11 Striving to win, with him we gain all wealth from the ungodly

man,

Yea, all the glories of mankind.

12 Finder of room and freedom, flow for Indra whom we must

adore,

For Varuna and the Marut host.

[3 The Gods have come to Indu well-descended, beautified with
milk,

The active crusher of the foe.

14 Even as mother cows their calf, so let our praise-songs strength-

en him,

Yea, him who winncth Indra’s heart.

15 Soma, pour blessings on our kine, pour forth the food that

streams with milk :

Increase the sea that merits laud.

16 From heaven hath Pavamana made, as ’twere, the marvellous

thunder, and

The lofty light of all mankind.

17 The gladdening and auspicious juice of thee, of Pavamana,

King !

Flows o’er the woollen straining-cloth.

18 Thy juice, 0 Pavamana, sends its rays abroad like splendid

skill,

Like lustre, all heaven’s light, to see.

,9 Flow onward with that juice of thine most excellent, that
brings delight,

.Slaying the wicked, dear to Gods.

10 Killing the foeman and his hate, and winning booty evfery

i d;i y>

Gainer art thou of steeds and kine.

!1 Rcd-hued, be blended with the milk that seems to yield its
^ lovely breast,

l'alcon-like resting in thine home.


13 Wdl-deicended : literally, well-born or well-produced; ‘(who is) com*
' letel y geneiated.’— Wilson.


15 fhe sea : samudr&m: according to S&yana, water generally.

J ® 4 The purified [Soma] has generated the great light which is common to
V n( h like the wonderful thundering of the sky.’— Muir, 0. S. Texts, (
■ i . The great light common to all men, or vaifvdnardm or the lofty'
mankind, is Agui Vaisvftnara.

0 The foeman and hit Kate: ‘the hostile Yritra.’ — Wilson.



MS THE HYMNS OF [BOOK lx

22 Flow onward thou who strengthenedst Indra to slaughte

Vritra who

Compassed and stayed the mighty floods.

23 Soma who rainest gifts, may we win riches with our her

sons :

Strengthen, as thou art cleansed, our hymns.

24 Aided by thee, and through thy grace, may we be slayei

when we war :

Watch, Soma, at our solemn rites.

25 Chasing our foemen, driving off the godless, Soma floweth o
Going to Indra’s special place.

26 0 Pavamana, hither bring great riches, and destroy our foe
0 Indu, grant heroic fame.

27 A hundred obstacles have ne’er checked thee when fain

give thy boons,

When, being cleansed, thou combatest.

28 Indu, flow on, a mighty juice; glorify us among the folk :
Drive all our enemies away.

29 Indu, in this thy friendship most lofty and glorious may wt
Subdue all those who war with us.

30 Those awful weapons that thou hast, sharpened at point

strike men down — -
Guard us therewith from every foe.

HYMN LXII. Soma Pavamf

These rapid Soma-drops have been poured through the pi
fyiug sieve

To bring us all felicities.

2 Dispelling manifold mishap, giving the courser’s progeny,

Yea, and the warrior steed, success.


26 The godless: drdvnah: those who present no sacrificid offerings;
with holders (of wealth).’ — Wilson, Special place: that is, the vessel
•part for his libations.

26 Heroic fame : or, fame with brave sons.

27 Obstacles: or enemies, according to S&yana. Thou combatest: ma

lyase: according to Styana. ‘ when thou wi.shes't to give us wealth.’
meanings “fight," “strive,” etc., aie foreign to S&ya.a, being derived
• comparison of macto, etc,’ — Editor’s note in Wilson’s T

lation.


'30. Weapons : the Moon being the warrior who overcomes the darkn<
ght. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 340. Cf. ‘The moon .... advances HI
at warrior through a fleeing army.’— S. T. Coleridge.



THE R1QVEDA.


809


XYMN 62.]

3 Bringing prosperity to kine, they make perpetual IlsL flow
To us for noble eulogy.

4 Strong, mountain-born, the stalk hath been pressed in the

streams for rapturous joy :

Iiawk-like he settles in his home.

5 Fair is tho God-loved juice; the plant is washed in waters,

pressed by men :

Tho milch-kine sweeten it with milk.

6 As drivers deck a courser, so have they adorned the meath’s

juice for

Ambrosia, for tho festival.

7 Thou, Indu, with thy streams that drop sweet juices, which

were poured for help,

Hast settled in the cleansing sieve.

8 So flow thou onward through the fleece, for Indra flow, to be

his drink,

Finding thine home in vats of wood.

9 As giving room and freedom, as most sweet, pour butter forth

an l milk,

0 Indu, for the Angirases.

0 Most active and benevolent, this Pavamana, sent to us
For lofty friendship, meditates.

1 Quellerof curses, mighty, with strong sway, this Pavamina

shall

Bring treasures to the worshipper.

.2 Pour thou upon us thousandfold possessions, both of kine and
steeds,

Exceeding glorious, much-desired.

13 Wandering far, with wise designs, the juice here present is
effused.

Made beautiful by living men.


3 III : here, according to SAyana, meaning ‘ food.’ ‘ Labetrank/ refreshing
draught. — Grasbmann.


^ The stalk : the Soma-plant, which is said to have grown on tho mountain#.
6 In waters : the vasalivarl waters.

\ ® ^ or ambrosia: amritdya: ‘for the sake of immortality.’ — Wilson,

L ^ For the Angirases : or, from the Angirases. The Jamadagnis were not
joembers of that family. -Ludwig.

10 Meditates: He known (to all).’ -Wilson.

r ^ a>lder *ng far : urugdydfr: according to SAyana, much-lauded, or praised



810 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK t

14 For Indra flows the gladdening drink, the me&surer of W

region, Sage,

With countless wealth and endless help.

15 Born on the mountain, lauded here, Indu for Indra is set dow
As in her sheltering nest a bird.

1 6 Pressed by the men, as ’twere to war hath Soma Pavam&

sped,

To rest with might within the vats.

17 That he may move, they yoke him to the three-backed trip

seated car

By the Seven Rishis’ holy songs.

18 Drive ye that Tawny Courser, 0 ye pressers, on his way to w
Swift Steed w T ho carries off the spoil.

19 Pouring all glories hither, he, effused and entering the jar
Stands like a hero mid the kine.

20 Indu, the living men milk out thy juice to make the raptur

draught :

Gods for the Gods milk out the meath.

21 Pour for the Gods into the sieve our Soma very rich in swe
Him whom the Gods most gladly hear.

22 Into his stream who gladdens best these Soma juices 1

been poured,

Lauded with songs for lofty fame.

23 Thou flowest to enjoy the milk, and bringost valour, b

cleansed :

Winning tho spoil flow hitherward.

24 And, hymned by Jamadagnis, let all nourishment that

supply,

And geueral praises, flow to us.

25 Soma, as leader of the song flow onward with thy wonc

aids,

For holy lore of every kind.


14 The measurer of the region : who measured out and made the firma

15 Born on the mountain : or, perhaps, as S£\ ana takes it, ‘ made mi
by song ’

17 By the Seven Rishis’ holy songs : or ‘ Of Rishis, with seven holy s
the car being the sacrifice, the three backs or ridges being the thre<
libations, the thiee seats being the three Vedas.

19 Mid the kine : among the enemy’s cattle, for whose possessioi
fighting. So, says SHyana, Soma stands among the sacrifices.

20 The living men : the worshippers, according to S&yapa ; but perb
Ludwig suggests, his t totdruh should be sotdrah, presaers, Qods ; dtvi 1
priests.



TEE RIGTEDA.


nntx 63 .]


&ii


2G r>0 thou as leader of the song, stirring the waters of the sea,
Flow onward, thou who mo vest all.

27 0 Soma, 0 thou Sage, these worlds stand ready to attest thy

might :

For thy behoof the rivers flow.

28 Like showers of rain that fall from heaven thy streams per-

petually flow

To the bright fleece spread under them.

29 For potent Indra purify Indu effectual and strong,

Enjoyment-giver, Mighty Lord.

30 Soma, true, Pavatnana, Sage, is seated in the cleansing sieve,
Giving his praiser hero strength.

HYMN LX 1 1 1. Soma Pavam&na.

Pour hitherward, 0 Soma, wealth in thousands and heroic
strength,

And keep renown secure for us.

2 rimu mikest food andvigmr swell for Indra, best of glad'

deners !

Within the cups thou seatest thee.

3 For Indra and for Vishnu poured, Soma hath flowed into

the jar :

May Vayu find it rich in sweets.

4 These Somas swift and brown of hue, in stream of solemn

sacrifice

Have flowed through twisted obstacles,

5 Performing every noble work, active, augmenting Indra’s

strength,

Driving away the godless ones.

Brown Soma-drops, effused, that seek Indra, to their appro*

^ priate place

I low through the region hitherward.

1 low onward with that stream of thine wherewith thou gavest
S irya light, &

Drging on waters good to men.

8 Pav amana, high o’er man yoked the Sun’s courser Etasa
travel through the realm of air.

28 Waters of the sea: of the sea of air, the firmament.

ma<le^ fth*. °^ tac ! es ; the twigs of which the frame of the filter was

the Rikshasa* • i 8urf<lCe of tlie Wuo1 of the strainer. ‘Are let loose upon

g j • ™ GoOD,

11 his and the following stanza Soma ia identified with the Sun.



81 1 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK IX,

9 And those ten Coursers, tawny-hued, ho harnessed that the
Sun might come :

Indu, he said, is Indra’s self.

10 Hence, singers, pour the gladdening juice to V&yu and to
Indra, pour

The drops upon the fleecy cloth.

110 Soma Pavamana, find wealth for us not to be assailed,
Wealth which the focnaan may not win.

12 Send riches hither with thy stream in thousan Is, both ol

steeds and kino,

Send spoil of war and high renown.

13 Soma the Cod. expressed with stones, like Surya, floweth or

his way,

Pouring the juice within the jar.

14 These brilliant drops have poured for us, in stream of solemr

sacrifice,

Worshipful laws and strength in kine.

15 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Somas, blent witl

curdled milk,

Effused for Indra Thunder-nrmed.

16 Soma, do thou most rich in sweets, a gladdening drink moa

dear to Gods,

Flow to the sieve to bring us tvealth.

17 For Indra, living men adorn the Tawny Courser in the streams
Indu, the giver of delight.

18 Pour for us, Soma, wealth in gold, in horses and heroic sons,
Bring hither strength in herds of kine.

19 For Indra pour ye on the fleece him very sweet to taste, wh

longs

For battle as it were in war.

20 The singers, seeking help, adorn the Sage who must be deckc

with songs :

Loud bellowing the Steer comes on.

21 The singers with their thoughts and hymns have, in the streai

of sacrifice,

Caused Soma, active Steer, to roar.


9 Couriers: or Harita. Cf. IV. 6. 9 and 13. 3.

10 Hence ; from this vessel.

14 Worshipful laics : the meaning of dhXmdnyftryd is not clear. ‘ (Flowir
towards the dwellings of respectable (worshippers).’— Wilson. ‘ Veneral
might.’— Ludwig.



\YUN 64«J THE RIQVEDA. 813

2 God, working with mankind, flow on ; to Indra go thy gladden-

ing juice 1

To Vayu mount as Law commands-

3 0 Soma Pavamana, thou poureat out wealth that brings re*

nown

Enter the lake, as one we love.

1 Soma, thou flowest chasing foes and bringing wisdom and de-

light :

Drive off the folk who love not Gods.

5 The Pavamanas have been poured, the brilliant drops of Soma

juice,

For holy loro of every kind.

6 The Pavamanas have been shed, the beautiful swift Soma-

drops,

Driving all enemies afar.

7 From heaven, from out the firmament, hath Pavamana been

effused

Upon the summit of the earth.

8 0 Soma, Indu, very wise, drive, being purified, with thy stream
All foes, all lUkshasas away.

9 Driving the Rakshasas afar, 0 Soma, bellowing, pour for us
Most excellent and splendid strength.

0 Soma, do thou secure for us the treasures of the earth and
heaven,

Indu 1 all boons to be desired.

HYMN LXIV. Soma PavamAna.

Soma, thou art a splendid Steer, a Steer, 0 God, with steerlike
sway :

Thou as a Steer ordainest laws.

2 Steer-strong thy might is as a steer’s, steer strong thy wood,

steer-like thy drink :

A Steer indeed, 0 Steer, art thou.

3 Thou, Indu, as a vigorous horse, hast neighed together steed*

and kine :

Unbar for us the doors to wealth.


23 The lake : the dronakala^a, vat or reservoir.
27 The summit of the earth : the raised altar.


1 Steer SAyana, as usual, explains vrUhi by varshakah * Sprinkler.'— Wilson.
Weighed togethei' : collected, through the efficacy of the sound thou
*** in di opping through the filter, and enriched us with, steeds and kin*.



314 THE HYMNS OP [kook

4 Out of desire of cows and steeds and heroes potent Soma-dr
Brilliant and swift, have been effused.

5 They purified in both the hands, made beautiful by holy i
Flow onward to the fleecy cloth.

6 These Soma juices shall pour forth all treasures for the

shipper

From heaven and earth and firmament.

7 The streams of Pavamana, thine, Finder of all, have 1

effused,

Even as Surya’s rays of light.

8 Making the light that shines from heaven thou flowestc

every form :

Soma, thou swellest like a sea.

9 Urged on thou sendest out thy voice, 0 Pavamana; thou

moved,

Like the God Surya, to the sieve.

10 Indu, Enlightener, Friend, hath been purified by the si

hymns :

So starts the charioteer his steed —

11 Thy God-delighting wave which hath flowed to the purif

sieve,

Alighting in the home of Law.

12 Flow to our sieve, a gladdening draught that hath most ii

course with Gods,

Indu, to Indra for his drink.

13 Flow onward with a stream for food, made beautiful by saj

men :

Indu with sheen approach the milk.

14 While thou art cleansed, Song-Lover, bring comfort

vigour to the folk,

Poured, Tawny One ! on milk and curds,
lo Purified for the feast of Gods, go thou to Indra’s special ph
Resplendent, guided by the strong

16 Accelerated by the hymn, the rapid drops of Soma juice
Have flowed, urged onwatd, to the lake.

17 Easily have the living dtops, made beautiful, approa*

the lake,

Yea, to the place of sacrifice.

8 To every form : to bring us blessings in every shape.

9 To the sieve : vidhavmani : ‘ in observance of the law,’ according t
Bergaigne. See La Religion Ved ique, III 218, note.

1# The lake : samudrdm : according to Sftyana, the sea of air, the firmai
The dronakalofa, vat or reservoir, is probably intended.



ffYMN 64.] THE RIO VEDA, 315

18 Com pass about, our faithful Friend, all our possess'ons with

thy might :

Guard, hero like, our sheltering home.

19 Loud neighs the Courser Etasa, with singers, harnessed for

the place,

Guided for travel to the lake.

20 What time the Swift One resteth in the golden place of sacrifice,
He leaves the foolish far away.

21 The friends have sung in unison, the prudent wish to sacrifice :
Down sink the unintelligent.

22 For Indra girt by Maruts, flow, thou Indu, very rich in sweets,
To sit in place of sacrifice.

23 Controlling priests and sages skilled in holy song adorn thee

well :

The living make thee beautiful.

24 Aryaman, Mitra, Varuna drink Pavamana’s juice, yea, thine:
0 Sage, the Maruts drink thereof.

25 0 Soma, Indu, thou while thou art purified urgest onward

speech

Thousandfold, with the lore of hymns.

26 Yea, Soma, Indu, while thou art purified do thou bring to us
Speech thousandfold that longs for war.

27 0 Indu, Much-invoked, while thou art purifying, as the Friend
Of these men enter thou the lake.

28 Bright are these Somas blent with milk, with light that flashes

brilliantly

And form that utters loud acclaim.

29 Led by his drivers, and sent forth, the Strong Steed hath come

nigh for spoil,

Like warriors when they stand arrayed.

30 Specially, Soma, coming as a Sage from heaven to prosper us,
Flow like tho Sun for us to see.


19 The Courser Etasa : here meaning Soma. Vdhnih (from vah, Lat. veh o)
is properly a horse of burden, or draught-horse.

21 The friends : the piiests ; or perhaps the Maruts. Down sink: narakc,
into hell, says Sfcyana.

26 That longs for war : makhasyucam : ‘ desiring wealth.’ — Wilson. See
IX. 61. 27, note.

28 Form : krip$ .* stream, according to S&yana.

80 Specially ; yidhak : said by Y&ska to be the Vedic form of pritkak, and
to be used in the seuse of prospering. See Wilson’s Translation, Editor’s note.

T t( ihak may mean, lightly, easily, without eflbrt.



516 TUB HYMNS OF [BOOR /j

HYMN LXV. Soma Pavamin

The glittering maids send Sura forth, the glorious sisters, clos
allied^

Send Indu fortl», their mighty Lord.

2 Pervade, 0 Pavamana, all our treasures with repeated light,
God, coming hither from the Gods.

3 Pour on us, Pavamana, rain, as service and fair praise f<

Gods :

Pour all to be our nourishment.

4 Thou art a Steer by lustre : we, 0 Pavamana, faithfully
Call upon thee the Splendid One.

5 Do thou, rejoicing, nobly armed ! pour upon us heroic strengtl
O Indu, come thou hitherward.

6 When thou art cleansed with both the hands and dipped

waters, with the woo l
Thou corniest to the gathering-place.

7 Sing forth your songs, as Yyasva sang, to Soma Pavamana,
The Mighty One with thousand eyes;

8 Whose coloured sap they drive with stones, the yellow meat

distilling juice,

Indu for Indra, for his drink.

9 We seek to gain the friendly love of thee that Strong ai

Mighty One,

Of thee the winner of all wealth.

10 Flow onward with thy stream, a Steer, inspiriting the Maru

Lord,

Winning all riches by thy might.

11 I send thee forth to battle from the press, 0 PuvamlU

Strong,

Sustainer, looker on the light.

12 Acknowledged by this song of mine, flow, taw»y-colour<

with thy stieam :

Incite to battle thine ally.

13 0 Indu, visible to nil pour out for us abundant food :

Somn, be thou our prospered

1 The glittering maids: the fingers, perhaps with reference to the g
rings worn by the pi ieats when they press the Soma. SHm : here said
mean Soma ; ‘ the invigorating ’ — Wilson. The glorious sisters : the fiugei
3 As service • as the cause of worship.

6 With the wood: ‘(taken up) with the wooden vessel.’- -Wilson. Cf.

1. 2.

7 Vyafva: a Risbi frequently mentioned in Book VIII.

12 Thine ally: India.



THE RIOVEDA.


317


HYMN 65.]

14 The pitchers, Indu, with thy streams have sung aloud in

vigorous might :

Enter them, and let Indra d) ink.

15 0 thou whose potent gladdening juice they milk out with the

stones, flow on,

Destroyer of our enemies.

16 King Pavamana is implored with holy songs, on man’s behalf,
To travel through the fiimameut.

17 Bring us, 0 Indu, hundredfold increase of kine, and noble

steeds,

The gift of fortune for our help.

18 Pressed for the banquet of the Gods, 0 Soma, bring us might,

and speed,

Like beauty for a brilliant show.

19 Soma, flow on exceeding bright with loud roar to the wooden

vats,

Falcon-like resting in thine homo.

20 Soma the Water-winner flows to Indra, Y.iyu, Varuna,

To Vishnn and the Mavut host.

21 Soma, bestowing food upon our progeny, from every side
Pour on us riches thousandfold !

22 The Soma juices which have been expressed afar or near at

hand,

Or there on Saryanavan’s bank,

23 Those prossed among Arjikas, pressed among the active, in

men’s homes,

Or pressed among the Races Five-

24 May these celestial drops, expressed, pour forth upon us, as

they flow,

Rain from the heavens and hero strength.

25 Urged forward o’er the ox-hide flows the Lovely One of

tawny hne,

Lauded by Jamad.igni’s song.

26 Like horses urged to speed, the drops, bright, stirring vital

power, when blent

With milk, are beautified in streams.

22 Sxryandvdn’s bank : this lake is said to be on the borders of the Kuru-
kihetra country.

apparently a non- Aryan people in the North-West. See VIII.

25 O’er the ox-hide : the leather sheet that received the droppings of the
boma.



318 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK 1

27 So they who toil with juices send thee forward for the Goc

repast :

So with this splendour flow thou on.

28 VVe choose to-day that chariot-steed of thine, the Strong, th

brings us bliss,

The Guardian, the desire of all,

29 The Excellent, the Gladdener, the Sage with heart that n

derstands,

The Guardian, the de-ire of all ;

30 Who for ourselves, 0 thou Most Wise, is wealth and U

intelligence,

The Guardi, tn, the desire of all.

HYMN LXVI. Soma Pavanri

For holy lore of every sort, flow onward thou whom all men loi
A Friend to be besought by fiiends.

2 O’er all thou rulest with these Two which, Soma Pavamac

stand,

Turned, as thy stations, hitherward. .

3 Wise Soma Pavanvma, thou encompassest on every side
Thy stations as the seasons come.

4 Flow onward, generating food, for precious boons of every kir
A Fiiend for fiiends, to be our help.

5 Upon the lofty ridge of heaven thy bright rays with tli

essences,

Soma, spread purifying power.

6 0 Soma, these Seven Rivers flow, as being thine, to g:

command :

The streams of milk run forth to thee.

7 Flow onward, Soma in a stream, effused to gladden Indra’s hea
bringing imperishable fame.

8 Driving thee in Vivasvan’s course, the Seven Sisters w

their hymns

Made melody round thee the Sage.

23 The guardian: pflntam • according to Piscliel, ‘den schwelleud
* the swelling one.’ Sec his exhaustive excursus on the word in Vedu
Studien , I. pp. 191—194.

The Rishis are the hundred Vaikhnnasas, said to have been a race of sail
hermits sprung fiom the nails of Prnj&pati.

2 With these Tm : probably a double asterism. See Rillebrandt, V.
p. 446 ; and Gaidicke, Der Accusativ im Veda , p 199.

8 The stream of Soma is likened to the course of Vivasvftn or the Sun.
The Seven Sisters are probably the Seven Rivers of stanea 6. Accordiui
S4)ana ‘ the seven kindred (priests)’ aie intended.



TJfy 66 J TBE RIG VEDA. 31$

9 The virgins deck thee o’er fresh streams to drive thee to the
sieve when thou ,

A singer, bathest in the wood.

) The streams of Pavamana, thine, Sage, Mighty One, have
poured them forth
Like coursers eager for renown.

1 They have been poured upon the fleece towards the meath-

distilling vat :

The holy songs have sounded forth.

2 Like milch-kinc coming home, the drops of Soma juice have

reached the lake,

Have reached the place of sacrifice.

3 0 Indu, to our great delight the running waters flow to us,
When thou wilt robe thyself in milk.

f In this thy friendship, and with thee to help us, fain to
sacrifice,

Indu, we crave thy friendly love.

5 Flow on, 0 Soma, for the great Viewer of men, for gain of kine
Enter thou into Indra’s throat.

5 Lest ait thou, Soma, of the great, Strongest of strong ones,
Indu : thou

As Wunior ever hast prevailed.

7 Mightier even than the strong, more valiant even than the
bravo,

More liberal than the bountiful,

£ Soma, as Sura, bring us food, win offspring of our bodies : wo
Elect thee fur our friendship, we elect thee for companionship.
3 Agni, thou pourest life; send down upon us food and vigorous
strength :

Drive thou misfortune far away.

'0 Agni is Pavamana, Sage, Chief Priest of all the Races Five :

To him whose wealth is great we pray.

I Skilled in thy task, 0 Agni, pour splendour with hero strength
on us,

Granting me wealth that nourishes.
v ^' lni •’ the fingei s.

.. ^ C the dronakalagd or reservoir.

' Eor gain of kinc : gdvishiaye : according to Sftyana, * for the seeker of
is. ° f the Angirases.*

aid wig ^ ra: 8ee 65. 1. ‘ Who art a hero.’— Wilson. * From the Sun.' —

t !! : duchchhtinfim : frequently personified as an evil power ;

u *R«hhasat:— Wilson.



920


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK


22 Beyond his enemies away to sweet praise Pavam&na Aowb

Like S{irya visible to all. '

23 Adorned by living men, set forth for entertainment, rich

food,

Far-sighted Indu is a Steed.

24 He, Pavamana, hath produced the lofty Law, the brilli

light,

Destroying darkness black of hue.


25 From tawny Pavamana, the Destroyer, radiant streams h

sprung,

# Quick streams from him whose gleams are swift.

26 Best rider of the chariot, praised with fairest praise

beauteous ones,

Gold-gleaming with the Marut host,

27 May Pavamana, best to win the booty, penetrate with rayi
Giving the singer hero strength.

28 Over the fleecy sieve hath flowed the drop effused : to b

comes

Indu while he is purified.

29 This Soma, through the pressing-stones, is Bporting on th<

hide, and

Summoning Fndra to the draught.

30 0 Pavamana, bless us, so that we may live, with that bri

milk

Of thine which hath been brought from heaven.


HYMN LXVII. Soma and Ot

Thou, Soma, hast a running stream, joyous, most strong
sacrifice :

Flow bounteously bestowing wealth.

2 Effused as chccrer of the men, flowing best gladdener, thou
A Prince to India with thy juice.

3 Poured forth by pressiug-stones, do thou with loud roar i

us in a stream

Most excellent illustrious might.


23 Is a Steed: ‘ one who continually goes to the Gods/ is SAyapa’s exj
tion of dtyah, horse or courser.

25 The Destroyer • of darkness. Cf. IX. 61. 30.

27 Penetrate • the whole world. — SAyana.

29 On the ox-hide : see IX. 65. 25.

2 A Prince : t&Hh : a rich and liberal patron.



THE RIO VELA.


321


{TMN 67 ]


4 Indu, urged forward, floweth through the fleecy cloth : the

Tawny One

With his loud roar hath brought us strength.

5 Indn, thou flowest through the fleece, bringing felicities and

fame,

And, Soma, spoil and wealth in kine.

6 Hither, 0 Indu, bring us wealth in steeds and cattle hundred-

fold :

Bring wealth, 0 Soma, thousandfold.

7 In purifying, through the sieve the rapid drops of Soma juice
Come nigh to Indra in their course.

8 For Indra floweth excellent Indu, the noblest Soma juice,
The Living for the Living One.

9 The glittering maids send Sura forth : they with their song

have sung aloud
To Pavamana dropping mcath.

0 May Pushan, drawn by goats, be our protector, and on all his
paths

Bestow on us our share of maids.


1 This Soma flows like gladdening oil for him who wears the

braided locks :

He shall give us our share of maids.

2 This Soma juico, 0 glowing God, flows like pure oil, eftused

for thee :

Ho shall give us our share of maids.


3 Flow onward, Soma, in thy stream, begetter of the sages’
speech :

; Wealth-giver among Gods art thou.

J The Falcon dips within the jars : he wraps him in his robe
• and goes

Loud roaring to tho vats of wood.

1 Soma, thy juico hath been effused and poured into the
pitcher : like

A rapid hawk it rushes on.

1 ^or Indra flow most rich in sweets, 0 Soma, bringing him
delight.


10 maids send SUra forth: repeated from IX. 65. 1.

11 i • are ma idt : desirable and appioved wives. — S&yana.

I o °L ' Llm who wears the braided lochs : kanardlne : see I. 11*4. 1, and VII.

Here Pashan is intended.

4 Wkmng (fod : PiUhan.

Le ^ c on : the falcon-like Soma,

21



322 THE HYMNS OF [B0 0K

17 They were sent forth to feast the Gods, like chariots tl

display their strength.

18 Brilliant, best givers of delight, these juices have sent V2

forth.

19 Bruised by the press-stones and extolled, Soma, though

to the sieve, °

Giving the worshipper hero strength.

20 This juice bruised by the pressing-stones and lauded pa;

through the sieve,

Slayer of demons, through the fleece.

21 0 Pavamana, drive away the danger, whether near at h
Or far remote, that finds me here.

22 This day may Pavamana cleanse us with his purifying po
Most active purifying Priest.

23 0 Agni, with the cleansing light diffused through all thy f

glow,

Purify thou this prayer of ours.

24 Cleanse us with thine own cleansing power, 0 Agni, th

bright with flame,

And by libations poured to thee.

25 Savitar, God, by both of these, libation, purifying pc
Purify me on every side.

26 Cleanse us, God Savitar, with Three, 0 Soma, with subli

forms,

Agni, with forms of power and might.

27 May the Gods' company make me clean, and Vasus mak

pure by song.

Purify me, ye General Gods ; 0 Jata vedas, make me pur

28 Fill thyself full of juice, flow forth, 0 Soma, thou with al

stalks,

The best oblation to the Gods.

29 We with our homage have approached the Friend who

our wondering praise,

Young, strengthener of the solemn rite.


18 Have sent Vdyn forth: have drawn him down from heaven. *
forth for V&yu.’ — Wilson.

26 The Three sublimest forms are said to be Agni, VAyu, and S fi;
Fire, Wind, and Sun.

27 The Gods’ company : the yajamdnas or sacrificers, or the troop oi
Indra and others.— SAyaua. General Gods ; visve devdh ; or, all ye Gto



THE RIG VEDA.


323


jYMX 68 .]

0 Lost is Alayya’s axe, 0 Soma, God : do thou send it back hither

in thy flow

Even, Soma, God, if ’twero a mole.

1 The man who reads the essence stored by saints, the Pavam&nr

hymns,

Tastes food completely purified, made sweet by Matarisvan’s
touch.

2 Whoever reads the essence stored by saints, the P&vamant

hymns,

Sarasvati draws forth for him water and butter, milk and
meath.

HYMN LXVIII. Soma PavamAna.

The drops of Soma juice like cows who yield their milk have
flowed forth, rich in meath, unto the Shining One,

And, seated on the grass, raising their voice, assumed the milk,
the covering robe wherewith the udders stream.

2 He bellows with a roar around the highest twigs : the Tawny

One is sweetened as he breaks them up.

Then, passing through the sievo into the ample room, the God
throws off the dregs according to his wish.

3 The gladdening drink that measured out the meeting Twins

fills full with milk the Eternal Ever-waxing Pair.

: Bringing to light the Two great Regions limitless, moving
| above them he gained sheen that never fades.

[30 This stanza is well-nigh unintelligible! Alayya may, as is suggested
the St Petersburg Lexicon, be a name of Indra, and the lost axe may be
e thunderbolt which the poet thinks has long lain idle, and which Soma
prayed to replace in the hands of the Thunderer, even though it were
irthless and mischievous like a mole. SAyana’s interpretation is different : —
lay the battle-axe of the foe destroy the foe alone : flow to us, bright Soma ;
ay) the villain only, bright Soma.’— Wilson.

31 .By mints : by the Rishis to whom they were revealed. Prfvamdni
W?i8 ; the hymns in this Book dedicated to the purification of the Soma
ice. By Mdtarisvan's touch: * SAyana says Matarisvan means Vdyu because
breathes in the atmosphere antarikshe swasiti : the food is sweetened and
irified by the purifying wind and the man eats it.’ — Wilson. MAtarisvan
•obably represents Agni.

1 The Shining One : devdm : the radiant Indra. The second line is obscure,
pcording to SAyapa, usriydji here means ‘ cows’ and not milk : — ‘the lowing
ie sitting on the barhis grass hold in their udders the pure (juice) welling
'• —Wilson.

^ The highest twigs: of the Soma-plant, which as being the tenderest and
■ciest are crushed first. —Ludwig. ‘ He with a noise reechoes the principal
> * 8e P a rating the growing herbs, the green-tinted (Soma) sweetens
-m.-WHson.

1 ne Meeting Twins ; Soma is called the Creator and Preserver of heaven
* earth.


mu a ijujxo vu


IMVK )


4 Wandering through the Parents, strengthening the flooc

the Sage make$ his place swell with liis own native mig]
The stalk is mi^cd with grain : he comes led by the m
together with the sisters, and preserves the Head.

5 With energetic intellect the Sage is born, deposited as gei

of Law, far from the Twins.

They being young at first showed visibly distinct the Creati
that is half-concealcd and half-exposed.

6 The sages knew the form of him the Gladdener, what ti

the Falcon brought the plant from far away.

Him who assures success they beautitied in streams, the st
who yearned therefor, mighty and meet for praise.

7 Together with the Hishis, with their prayers and hymns

women deck thee, Soma, friendly when effused.

Led by the men, with invocations of the Gods, through
fleece, thou hast given us strength to win the spoil.

8 Songs resonant with praise have celebrated him, Soma, Frie

springing forth, with his fair company.

Even him who, rich in meath, with undulating stre
Winnner of Wealth, Immortal, sends his voice from hea^

9 He sends it into all the region forth from heaven. So

while he is filtered, settles in the jars.

With milk and waters is he decked when pressed with sto
Indu, when purified, shall find sweet rest and room.

10 Even thus poured forth flow on thy way, 0 Soma, vouchsa
us most manifold lively vigour.

Wo will invoke benevolent Earth and Heaven. Give us
Gods, riches with noble heroes.

HYMN LXIX. Soma Pavan

Laid like an arrow on the bow the hymn hath been lo
like a young calf to the udder of its dam.

4 The Parents : heaven and earth. The floods : the waters of the f
meut. Grain : especially barley. Makes his place swell : enriches bis
station, the uttaravedi or northward altar. The sisters : the fingers.^
Head: apparently Sftrya. * S;\yana’s explanation of shah, viz.,
hhutajatam (the withered world ?),* needs explaining more than the or
itself.’ — Wilson.

5 The Sage: the Sun. Far from the Twins : rising in a distant i
beyond heaven and earth, The Creature that is half- concealed and
exposed : the meaning appears to be, as Ludwig says, that heaven and
while they were yet unseparated, produced the Moon : the Sun came
being only when they had been separated through Soma’s energetic ager

7 Ten women : the fingers.

1 Hath been loosed , dec. : * is let loose to (Indra) the fosterer as a calf i
udder of it? mother,’ * S&yana takes Hdhani [to the udder] twice oyo



jytfN 69-1 Tm MQySbA, 325

As one who cometh first with full stream she is milked : thus
Soma is impelled to this man’s holy rites.

2 The thought is deeply fixed ; the savoury j uice is shed ; the

tonguo with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth ;

And Pavamfma, like the shout of combatants, the drop rich
in sweet juice, is flowing through the fleece.

3 He flows about the sheep-skin, longing for a bride : he loosens

Aditi’s Daughters for the worshipper.

The sacred drink hath come, gold-tinted, well-restrained : like
a strong Bull he shines, whetting his manly might.

4 The Bull is bellowing ; the Cows are coming nigh : the God-

desses approach the God’s own resting-place.

Onward hath Soma passed through the sheep's fair bright
fleece, and hath, as ’twero, endued a garment newly washed.

5 The golden-hued, Immortal, newly bathed, puts on a brightly-

sinning vesture that is never harmed.

He made the ridge of heaven to be his radiant robe, the
sprinkling of the bowls from moisture of the sky.

6 Even as the beams of Surya, urging men to speed, that cheer and

send to sleep, together rush they forth,

These swift outpourings in long course of holy rites : no
form save only Indra shows itself so pure.

7 As down the steep slope of a river to the vale, drawn from

tho Steer the swift strong draughts have found a way.


ays it is used of Indra because he is the noui idler of everything.’ — Wilson,
is one uho cometh first : according to S&yana, as a cow coining before her
la h yields her milk, (so Indra, coming before his worship] ers pours various
>lessings upon them). First : dgre : at the head; at the beginning of the
digious ceremony.


2 The tongue with joyous sound is stirring in the mouth : probably the
wiest's tongue influenced by the exhilarating Soma juice. ‘ The Soma stream,
fitting pleasant juice is diiven into (Indra’s) mouth.' — Wilson.

3 Longing for a bride : seeking tho waters with which he is to be united.
dtti s Daughters : probably, tho plants, whose buds Soma as the Moon opens

fertilizes with his uectareous beams. ‘ The daughters of Infinity [Aditi]
re P r °hably the quarters of the sky.’ — Ludwig.

4 The Bull Soma. According to S&yana, the Cows are the propitiatory
jmns of praise, which are called also Goddesses or divine.

5 Brightly shining vesture : the milk with which the Soma juice is mixed,
yana explains the second half of the stanza differently, taking chamvbh ,
111 +v> r ^ ea ^ ers * u to which the Soma juice is poured, as meaning metaphor i-

1 y the two great receptacles of all living beings, or heaven and earth, and
hn° ^ C11 ]8 Aditya who is not mentioned in the text : — ‘ he has created ( Aditya)
tirl *)> 18 on the back of the sky for the destruction (of sin) and purification,
48 created) Aditya’s brilliauce, the cover of the two worlds.’— Wilson.



326 TEE HYMNS OP [BOOK ,

Well be it with the men and cattle in our home. May powe
0 Soma, may the people stay with us.

8 Pour out upon us wealth in goods, in gold, in steeds, in cat

and in corn, and great heroic strength.

Ye, Soma, are my Fathers, lifted up on high as heads
heaven and makers of the strength of life.

9 These Pavamanas here, these drops of Soma, to Indra hi

sped forth like cars to booty.

Effused, they pass the cleansing fleece, while, gold-hued, tl
cast their covering off to pour tho rain down.

10 0 Indu, flow thou on for lofty Indra, flow blameless, vi
gracious, foe-destroyer.

Bring splendid treasures to the man who lauds thee
Heaven and Earth, with all the Gods protect us.

HYMN LXX. Soma Pavami

Tiie three times seven Milch-kino in the eastern heaven h
for this Soma poured the genuine milky draught.

Four other beauteous Creatures hath he made for his ad
ment, when he waxed in strength through holy rites.

2 Longing for lovely Amrit, by his wisdom he divided, (

apart from other, earth and heaven.

He gladly wrapped himself in the most lucid floods, w
through their glory they found the God’s resting-place.

3 May those his brilliant rays be ever free from death, inviol

for both classes of created things, —

Rays wherewith powers of men and Gods are purified,
even for this have sagos welcomed him as King.

4 He, while he is adorned by the ten skilful ones, that he tc

the Midmost Mothers may create,

7 Vftj4h and krishtdyah, powers and people, are explained by S&yai
‘ food ’ and * offspring.’

8 Ye, Soma : * Soma is treated as plural by attraction ; or, as SAyana
it the plurality of the pitris is applied to Soma.’— Wilson. Probably
and Stars are intended. See Hillebrandt, V, M., I. p. 398.

10 With all the Gods: devaih : ‘ subhagairdhanaih with auspicious rich
SAyana. *

1 The three times seven Milch -Jcine are, according to SAyana, the t
months, the five seasons, the three worlds, and Aditya or the Sun. Pro!
as Ludwig says, the seven celestial rivers, multiplied by three to corre
with the threefold division of the heavens, are intended. These suppj;
genuine draught, in contrast to the four other beauteous creatures, the V
vari and the three EkadhanA waters, which are terrestrial and factitious,
to adorn or purify Soma.

8 Both classes : animate and inanimate. Or Gods and men.

i The ten skilful ones : the fingers. The Midmost Mothers : the



THE MOVED A.


327


tTMS 70.]

While ho is watching o’er the lovely Amrit’s ways, looks on
both races as Beholder of mankind.

5 He, while he is adorned to stream forth mighty strength,

rejoices in his place between the earth and heaven.

The Steer dispels the evil-hearted with his might, aiming at
offerings as an archer at the game.

6 Beholding, as it were, Two Mother Cows, the Steer goes roar-

ing on his way even as the Maruts roar.

Knowing Eternal Law, the earliest light of heaven, he, pas-
sing wise, was chosen out to tell it forth.

7 The fearful Bull is bellowing with violent might, far-sighted,

sharpening his yellow-coloured horns.

Soma assumes his seat in the well-fashioned place : the cowhide
and the sheepskiu are his ornament.

8 Bright, making pure his body free from spot and stain, on

the sheep’s back the Golden-coloured hath flowed down.
Acceptable to Mitra, Vfiyu, Varuna, be is prepared as three-
fold meath by skilful men.

9 Flow on for the Gods’ banquet, Soma, as a Steer, and enter

Indra’s heart, the Soma’s reservoir.

Bear us beyond misfortune ere we be oppressed : the man who
knows the laud directs the man who asks.

10 Urged like a car-stecd, flow to strength, 0 Soma: Iudu, flow
onward to the throat of Indra.

Skilled, bear us past, as in a boat o’er water : as battling
Hero save us from the foeman.


that hang between heaven and earth, in which, perhaps, Soma aids in produc-
ing the rain. But the meaning is uncertain. Sdyana explains pramt by
man pramdtum, ‘ to measure out, or create, the worlds.’ Doth races: Gods
and men.


6 As U were, Two Mother Cows : Heaven and Earth. Sityana explains the
cond PAda of the second line differently: — ‘the intelligent (Pavamina)
wse man to be the offerer of his praise.’ — Wilson.

8 Threefold : according to Sflyana, mixed with the Vasattvarl water, curds,
nd milk. Probably, poured into three separate vessels, one for each of the
t&ree deities mentioned.


i q. ^ man who knows the land : who i« acquainted with the roads or ways.

yana completes the simile : “ as by telling him he protects (helps) him, so
0 w ho knowest the roads of the sacrifice protect us by telling us the
^general ’ — Wilson. But, of course, the application is intended to


10 Bear us past : carry us over all difficulties and dangers. From the foe
1X1(111 : the reviling (of the foe).’— -Wilson.



HYMN LXXI. SomaPavamftns

The guerdon is bestowed : the Mighty takes his seat, and, evei
watchful, guards from fiend and evil sprite.

Gold-hucd, ho makes the cloud his diadem, the milk bi 3 carpe
in both worlds, and prayer his robe of state.

2 Strong, bellowing, he goes, like one who slays the folk; he let

this hue of Asuras flow off from him,

Throws off his covering, seeks his father’s meeting-place, an
thus makes for himself the bright robe ho assumes.

3 Onward he flows, from both the hands, pressed out wit

stones : excited by the prayer, the water makes him wild
He frolics and draws near, completes his work witli song, am
bathes in streams to satisfy the w T orshipper.

4 They pour out meath around the Master of the house, Celestia

Strengthener of the mountain that gives might ;

In whom, through his great powers, oblation-eating cows ii
their uplifted udder mix their choicest milk.

5 They, the ten sisters, on the lap of Aditi, have sent him for

ward like a car from both the arms.

He wanders and comes near the Cow’s mysterious place, ove
the place which his inventions have produced.

6 Like as a falcon to his home, so speeds the God to his ow

golden wisely-fashioned place to rest.


1 The guerdon : the honorarium given to the priests, consisting original
of a cow. The Mighty : Soma. His carpet : upustirc : that which is sprew
scattered, orspiinkied. Cp. IX. 69. 5, where upasturanam is translated 1>
1 sprinkling.’

2 Hue of Asuras: or, celestial hiightness ; ‘ Himmelsglanz.’ — Grassmanr

* He puts forth that daum-slaying tint of liis’. — Wilson. Seeks his father
•meeting place : goes to meet the yajamdna or sacrifieer According to Sayana

* the food (jritith), that is, the Soma, goes to the prepared reservoir.’

3 The water makes him wild: vrishdyate nabhasd : nabhas in the Soma
hymns is used to signify either the rain-water in which, or the cloud frou
which, the Soma flows to the earth. Here it means the water with whiol
the Soma-plant is spiinklcd. See Vedische Studien , I. p 135. According t
Ludwig : ‘ he act 3 like a bull in the sea of cloud.’ To satisfy the worshipper
I adopt Ludwig’s suggestion and take ydjate as a dative of the participle
Wilson translates, after Sdyana : — ‘he is honoured at the (god)— protecte
(sacrifice) ’

4 The Master of the house : according to Sayana, the conqueror of the for
of the enemy. See IX. 78 3. The mountain that gives miyht : the clout
In the second half of this stanza I adopt SAyana’s interpretation as a maki
shift, although it seems impossible that mdrdhan , ‘ head,’ should here mca
‘uplifted.’ Ludwig takes tidhani, ‘ udder,’ in the sense of ‘behalter,’ or r(
ceptacle into which the Soma flows.

5 On the lap of Aditi: on the earth, ‘near to the ground.’ — Wilsoi
The Cow's mysterious place : or, distant place, is the udder of heaven, tb
cloud.



THE RIO VEDA.


829


WMN 72.]

With song they urge the darling to the sacred grass : the
Holy One goes like ft courser to the Gods.

7 From far away, from heaven, the red-hued noted Sage, Steer

of the tuple height, hath sung unto the kine.

With thousand guidings he, leading this way and that, shines,
as a singer, splendidly through many a morn.

8 His covering assumes a radiant hue; where’er he comes into

Mie fight he drives the foo afar.

The Winner of the Floods, with food he seeks the host of
heaven, ho comes to praises glorified with milk.

9 Like a bull roaming round the herds he bellows : he hath

assumed the brilliancy of Surya.

Down to the earth hath looked the heavenly Falcon : Soma
with wisdom views all living creatures.

HYMN LXX1I. Soma Pavam&na.

They cleanso the Gold-hued : like a red Steed is he yoked, and
Soma in the jar is mingled with the milk.

He sendeth out his voice, and many loving friends of him the
highly-lauded hasten with their songs.

2 The many sages utter words in unison, while into Indra,’ s

throat they pour the Soma juice,

When, with the ten that dwell together closely joined, the
men whose hands are skilful cleanse the lovely meath.

3 He goes upon his way, unresting, to the cows, over the roaring

sound which Surya’s Daughter loves.

The Falcon brought it to him for his own delight: now with
the twofold kindred sisters is his home.

4 Washed by the men, stone-pressed, dear on the holy grass,

faithful to seasons, Lord of cattle from of old,

Most liberal, completing sacrifice for men, 0 Indra, pure bright
Soina, Indu, flows for thee.


7 0/ the triple heirjkt : working in heaven, firmament, and earth. — Ludwig
aee IX. 75. 3.

9 The heavenly Falcon : divyu a suparnah: ‘celestial, flying gracefully.’ —
Vils°n. Soma, says Sftyana, is said to go gracefully, * becauso it is carried
by Gdyatrl in the shape of a hawk.’

2 Indra’ s : throat : literally, belly ; the dronaJcalasa or reservoir. The
,cn ' the fingers.

2 The cows: the milk and curds. The roaring sound of the effused Soma
s said to be dear to Sfirya’s Daughter, Ushas or Dawn, because it is chiefly
th art f ln ^ ie ear] y m °rning. The Falcon : I adopt Ludwig’s interpretation of

Q strange word vinamgrisdh as no other meaning seems suitable here.

sa y a ” a » the word means praiser, or worshipper. The twofold
r ed sisters ; the fingers of both hauds.



5 0 Indra, urged by arms of men and poured in streams, Soma

flows on for thee after his Godlike kind.

Plans thou fulfillcst, gatherest thoughts for sacrifice : in the
bowls sits the Gold-hued like a roosting bird.

6 Sages well-skilled in work, intelligent, drain out the stalk that

roars, the Sage, the Everlasting One.

The milk, the hymns unite them with him in the place of
sacrifice, his seat who is produced anew.

7 Earth’s central point, sustainer of the mighty heavens, distil-

led into the streams, into the waters’ wave,

As Indra’s thunderbolt, Steer with far-spreading wealth, Soma
is flowing on to make the heart rejoice.

8 Over the earthly region flow thou on thy way, helping the

praiser and the pourer, thou Most Wise.

Let us not lack rich treasure reaching to our home, aud may
we clothe ourselves in manifold bright wealth.

9 Hither, 0 Indu, unto us a hundred gifts of steeds, a thousand

gifts of cattle and of gold,

Measure thou forth, yea, splendid ample strengthening food;
do thou, 0 Pavamana, heed this laud of ours.

HYMN LXXIII. Soma Tavamilna.

They from the spouting drop have sounded at the rim : naves
speed together to the place of sacrifice.

That Asura hath formed, to seize, three lofty heights. The
ships of truth have borne the pious man across.

2 The strong Steers, gathering, have duly stirred themselves,

and over the stream’s wave the friends sent forth the song.
Engendering the hymn, with flowing streams of meath, Indra s
dear body have they caused to wax in strength.

3 With sanctifying gear they sit around the song : their ancient

Father guards their holy work from harm.


7 The heart: of Indra. As Indra's thunderbolt: cp. IX. 77. 1.

1 They : the pressing stones, from whose rim or edge the Soma-drops fall
noisily. Naves : by synecdoche wheels, again by the same figure, chariots,
and then by metaphor the swiftly-running Soma-drops. That Asura: the
divine Soma. To seize : to be held and used. Three lofty heights : the three
elevated worlds. The ships of truth: or, of the truthful (Soma). According
to Sftyana, the four vessels which hold the Aditya, Agrayana, Uktkya, an
Dhruva libations.

2 The strong Steers : the priests.

3 Their ancient Father: Soma; or, perhaps, Agni. Varuna.' 'Soma
all-envelopper.' — Wilson. Him: Soma. In sustaining Hoods : in the Vasa
vart waters.- SAyana,



THE RIO VEDA.


331


UYUN 74.]

Varuna hath o’erspreacl the mighty sea of air. Sages had
power to hold him in sustaining floods.

4 Sweet-tongued, exhaustless, they have sent their voices down

together, in heaven’s vault that pours a thousand streams.
His wildly-restless warders never close an eye : in every plac»
are found the bonds that bind man fast.

5 O’er Sire and Mother they have roared in unison, bright with

the verse <Jf praise, burning up riteless men,

Blowing away with supernatural might from earth and from
the heavens the swarthy skin which Indra hates.

6 Those which, as guides of song and counsellors of speed, were

manifested from their ancient dwelling place, —

From these the eyeless and the deaf have turned aside : the
wicked travel not the pathway of the Law.

7 What time the filter with a thousand streams is stretched,

the thoughtful sages purify their song therein.
Bright-coloured aro their spies, vigorous, void of guile, excel-
lent, fair to see, beholders of mankind.

8 Guardian of Law, most wise, he may not be deceived : three

Purifiers hath he set within his heart.

With wisdom he beholds all creatures that exist : he drives into
the pit the hated riteless ones.

9 The thread of sacrifice spun in the cleansing sieve, on Varuna’s

tongue-tip, by supernatural might, —

This, by their striving, have the prudent ones attained : ho
who hath uot this power shall sink into the pit.

HYMN LXXIV. Soma Pavamdna*

Born like a youngling he hath clamoured in the wood, when
he, the Red, the Strong, would win the light of heaven.

4 They: the beams that radiate from Soma ; somarasmayah : Soma-rays. —
Siyana.

5 Sire and Mother : the general parents, Heaven and Earth. The swarthy
skin • ‘ the black -skinned ( Rakshasas ).' — Wilson.

6 Time: rays. I follow S&yana's interpretation. The first line is very
obscure.

7 The filter : the tip of their tongue. Cf . stanza 9, and hymn 7 5. 2. See Ber-
gaigne, La Religion Vddiquc, I. 283, Bright coloured : rudrttsah : sons of
Rudra, according to S&yana. But see Vedische Studien , I. pp. 55, 56.

.8 Of Law : of law-ordained sacrifice. The three Purifiers whom Soma sets
within his heart and combines in his own being are Agni, V&yu, Surya, the
P'^yiHg powers of fire, wind, and sun.

» On Varuna’s tongue-tip: the Yasatlvarl waters in which Soma dwells
(vasati) stand on the tip of Varuna’s tongue. — S&yana. He who hath not this
power; ‘he who is incompetent for the rite. 1 — Wilson.

1 In the wood: in the wooden vat. According to S&vana, ‘in the water.'



332 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

He comes with heavenly seed that makos the water swell : him
for wide-spreading shelter we implore with prayer.

2 A far-extended pillar that supports the sky, the Soma-stalk,

filled full, moves itself every way.

He shall bring both these great worlds while tho rite proceeds:
the Sago holds these who move together and all food.

3 Wide space hath he who follows Aditi’s right path, and mighty

well-made food, meath blent with Soma juice ;

He who from hence commands the rain, Steer of the kino,
Leader of floods, who helps us hence, who claims our laud.

4 Butter and milk are drawn from animated cloud; thence

Amrit is produced, centre of sacrifice.

Him tho Most Bounteous Ones, ever-united, lovo ; him as our
Friend the Men who make all swell rain down.

5 The Soma-stalk bath roared, following with the wave : lie

swells with sap for man the skin which Gods enjoy.

Upon the lap of Aditi he lays the germ, by means wherof we
gain children and progeny.

6 In tho third region which distils a thousand streams, may the

Exhaustless Ones descend with procreant power.

The kindred Four have been sent downward from tho heav-
ens : dropping with oil they bring Amrit and sacred gifts.

7 Soma assumes white colour when he strives to gain : the

bounteous Asura knows full many a precious boon.

Down the steep slope, through song, he comes to sacrifice,
and he will burst the water-holding cask of heaven,

2 He shall briny both these yreat worlds : Bhall bring Heaven and Earth to
the sacrifice.

3 He who follows Aditi’ 8 right path: the regularly moving moon. Sayana
takes ddit(h with gdvydtih : ‘ the way to eaith is broad.’ — Wilson. Somewhat
similarly lidlebrandt, V. M., I. 360.

4 The Most Bounteous Ones, the Men who make all swell , are, probably, the
Maruts who fertilize the earth, and send Soma down in the rain. S&yana’a
explanation is different : — ‘ the assembled liberal givers [the yajamdnas or
aacrificers] delight him : (the Soma juices) the leaders, the protectors shower
down the accumulated (water) ’ — Wilson. For the meaning of pdravah, those
who swell, or cause to swell, * protectors’ according to SAyana, see Vedische
Studien , / p. 85.

5 For man : for the sacrificer. The skin : his own body. — S&yana. Upon
the lap of Aditi : of the earth, according to Sayana. The meaning is that
Soma is the source of all Nature’s productive power.

6 In the th ird region : dwelling in heaven. The Exhaustless Ones : these
are the kindred Four of the following line, meaning, according to S&yap&> f° ,ir
rays or digits of Soma. It is most probable that tho four Goddesses Sinivilh
Kuhil or Gungfi, R4k&, and Anumati are meant. Cp. II. 32. 6, 7.’— ;Ludwig-

7 Strives to gain : seeks to enjoy heaven. — S&yana. The water-holding cm :
the water- laden cloud.



THE RIO VEDA.


333


3YMN 75.]


8 Yea, to the shining milk-anointed beaker, as to his goal, hath

stepped the conquering Courser.

Pious-soulcd men have sent their gifts of cattle unto Kak-
shivan of the hundred winters.

9 Soma, thy juice when thou art blended with the streams,

flows, Pavamana, through the long wool of the sheep.

So, cleansed by sages, 0 best giver of delight, grow sweet for
Indra, Pavamana ! for his drink.

HYMN LXXV. Soma Pavamana.

Graciously-minded he is flowing on his way to wiu dear
names o’er which the Youthful One grows great.

The Mighty and Far-seing One hath mounted now the mighty
Surya’s car which moves to every side.

2 The Speaker, unassailable Master of this hymn, the Tongue of
saciifice pours forth the pleasant meath.

Within the lustrous region of the heavens the Son makes the
third secret name of Mother and of Sire.

\ Sending forth flashes he hath bellowed to the jars, led by the
men into the golden reservoir.

The milky streams of sacrifice have sung to him : he of the
triple height shines brightly through the morns.

4 Pressed by the stones, with hymns, and graciously inclined,

illuminating both the Parents, Heaven and Earth,

He Hows in ordered season onward through the fleece, a cur-
rent of sweet juice still swelling day by day.

5 Flow onward, Soma, flow to bring prosperity : cleansed by the

men, invest thee with the milky draught.

What gladdening drinks thou hast, foaming, exceeding strong,
even with these incite Indra to give us wealth.


8 The conquering Courser : the swiftly-flowing Soma, A al'shtvdn : the
tishi of the hymn.

1 O'er which: that is the Youthful Ono, the fresh and strong Soma,
ixceedg iu greatness even the high titles which he wins by his gracious deeds.

2 Speaker ; Master; Tongue of sacrifice: Soma, the giver of eloquence.
The Son : Soma. Of Mother and of Sire : of his parents, Heaven and Earth.
^Vhat the third secret name , that is, probably, a name in addition to those of
deaven and Earth, and comprising both deities, may be, does not appear.
% ana’s explanation is different ' 1 the son (the sacrifice^ assumes a third
name unknown to his parents ; ' that is, Wilson adds, * a name not given at
kkth ..He [Sdyana] cites Baudhftyana, who gives Somaydjin [Somayfiga sacri*
freer) as an iustance of a third name.’

3 The milky streams : cf. 1. 144. 2. Of the triple height: dwelling in three
nigh places, heaven, the firmament or the mountain-top, and the place of sac-
nfree. Cf. IX. 71, 7,



334


[BOOK IX.


THE HYMNS OP

HYMN LXXYI. Soma PavamAna.

On flows the potent juico, sustainer of the heavens, the strength
of Gods, whom men must hail with shouts of joy.

The Gold-hued, started like a courser by brave men, impe-
tuously winneth splendour in the streams.

2 He takes his weapons, like a hero, in his hands, fain to win

light, car-borne, in forays for the kine.

Indu, while stimulating Indra’s might, is urged forward and
balmed by sages skilful in their task.

3 Soma, as thou art purified with flowing wave, exhibiting thy

strength enter thou Indra’s throat.

Make both worlds stream for us, as lightning doth the clouds :
mete out exhaustless powers for ns, as ’twere through song.

4 Onward he flows, the King of all that sees the light : the

Rishis’ Lord hath raised the song of sacrifice ;

Even he who is adorned with Surya’s arrowy beam, Father of
hymns, whose wisdom is beyond our reach.

5 Like as a bull to herds, thou flowest to the pail, bellowing as

a steer upon the waters’ lap.

So, best of Oheerers, thou for Indra flowest on that we, with
thy protection, may o’ercome in fi^bt.

HYMN LXXVII. Soma Pavamana.

More beauteous than the beautiful, as Indra’s bolt, this Soma,
rich in sweets, hath clamoured in the vat.

Dropping with oil, abundant, streams of sacrifice flow unto him
like milch-kine, lowing, with their milk.

2 On flows that Ancient One whom, hitherward, from heaven,

sped through the region of the air, the Falcon snatched.
He, quiveriug with alarm and terrified in heart before bow-
armed Krisauu, holdeth fast the sweet.

3 May those first freshest drops of Soma juice effused flow oil

their way to bring us mighty strength in kine.

Beauteous as serpents, worthy to be looked upon, they whom
each sacred gift and all our prayers have pleased.

3 As ’twere through song : ‘now with the rite, i. e. at the very time the
rite is being performed.’ —'Wilson.

2 The Falcon : see I. 93. 5. He : Soma, according to SAyana, but more
probably the falcon. Kritdnu ; the archer who guards the celestial Soma.
Seel. 112.21.

3 Serpents : the meaning of ahydh is uncertain here. SAyana explains it
by striyah, women ' 1 pleasing to look upon like beautiful well-adorned
(women).’— Wilson.



THE MOVED A.


335


BYMN 78 .]

4 May that much-lauded Indu, with a heart iuclined to us, well-

knowing, fight against oul* enemies.

He who hath brought the germ beside the Strong One's seat
moves onward to the widely-opened stall of kine.

5 The active potent juice of heaven is flowing on, great Varuna

whom the fro ward man can ne'er deceive.

Mitra, the Holy, hath been pressed for troubled times, neigh-
ing like an impatient horse amid the herd.

HYMN LXXVIir. Soma Pavam&na.

Raising his voice the King hath flowed upon his way : invest-
ed with the waters he would win the kme.

The fleece retains his solid parts as though impure, and bright
and cleansed he seeks the special place of Gods.

2 Thou, Soma, art effused for Indra by the men, balmed in the

wood as wave, Sage, Viewer of mankind.

Full many are the paths whereon thou mayest go : a thousand
bay steeds hast thou resting in the bowls.

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea, sitting within, have

flowed to Soma wise of heart.

They urge the Master of the house upon his way, and to the
Eternal Pavamana pray for bliss.

4 Soma flows on for us as winner of the kine, winner of thousands,

cars, water, and light, and gold ;

Ho whom the Gods have made a gladdening draught to drink,
the drop most sweet to taste, weal-bringing, red of hue.

4 He who hath brought the germ : here the sacrificer and not Soma is
meant.— Ludwig. The Strong One : Agni.

5 In this stanza Soma is compared to, or mystically identified with, Varuna
and Mitra. S&yana leaves Varuna unexplained, but interprets Mitra by
mveshdm mitrabhiUah, ‘ (Soma) the ftiend of all.’

1 Thejlecce: literally, the sheep ; the filter made of wool. Solid parts:
tanvd : the fragments of stalk which will not pass through the strainer.
According to Sftyana, ‘ with its own covering,’ — ‘ the sheep with its fleece.’ —
Wilson. The special place of Gods : the vessels which hold the libations
assigned to various Qods.

2 Balmed in the wood : according to SAyana, ‘art driven into the water.’
Eay steeds : swiftly-running tawny drops,

3 Apsarases who dwell in waters of the sea : * nymphs of the firmament.’ —
Wilson. The mymphs are identified with their element, and represent the
water with which the Soma juice is mixed. The Master of the house: Aar-
*iya>sya sakshdnim : Soma. In IX. 71. 4 , Sdyana explaius these words as

overpowerer, or stormer of the foit of the enemy,’ and in this place as ‘the
sprinkler of the hall of sacrifice.’ Sakshani, from the root sah, means over-
powerer, and from the root mh t connected with, especially as master wad
possessor.



330 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK

5 Soma, as Pavamana thou, our faithful Friend, making for U8
these real treasures, flowest on.

Slay thou the enemy both near and far away : grant iis secur-
ity and ample pasturage.

HYMN LXXIX. * Soma PavamSna,
Spontaneous let our drops of Soma juice flow on, pressed, go].

den-hucd, among the Gods of lofty heaven.

Perish among us they who give no gifts of food ! perish the
godless ! May our prayers obtain success.

2 Forward to us the drops, distilling meath, shall flow, like riches

for whose sake we urge tho horses on.

Beyond the crafty hindering of all mortal men may we conti-
nually bear precious wealth away.

3 Yea, vetily, foe of hate shown to himself is he, yea, verily, des-

troyer too of other hate.

As thirst subducth in the desert, conquer thou, 0 Soma Pava-
mana, men of evil thoughts.

4 Near kin to tlicc is he, raised loftiest in the heavens : upon the

earth’s high ridge thy scions have grown forth.

The press-stones chew and crunch thee on the ox’s hide : sages
have milked thee with their hands into the streams.

5 So do they hurry on thy strong and beauteous juice, 0 Indu,

as the first ingredient of the draught.

Bring low, thou Pavamana, every single foe, and be thy might
shown forth as sweet and gladdening drink.

HYMN LXXX. Soma Pavamana.

On flows the stream of Soma who beholds mankind : by ever-
lasting Law ho calls the Gods from heaven.

He lightens with the roaring of Brihaspati : the lakes have not
contained the pourings of the juice.


1 They who give no gifts of food : I can find no satisfactory explanation of
tiketh ardtiyah, so I give Sayana’s interpretation as a makeshift. ‘ May they
be destroyed who are the withholders of food from us.’ — Wilson.

2 Urge the horses on: Sdyana explains drvatah , horses, by ‘ strong enemy.
‘By whoso aid we encounter the powerful (enemy).’ — Wilson.

3 * Soma knows how to defend not only himself, but us also,’ — Ludwig.
Destroyer : literally, the wolf.

4 He: ‘the Moon.’ — Ludwig. ‘Thy best juice dwells in the navel of

heaven, that which receives (the oblation).’ — Wilson. On the ox's hide-
* Although men of the present time pour out the Soma upon the skin of *
black antelope and not on a cowhide or oxhide, still it is measured out fo f
sale on an oxhide.’— Sdyana. _ t .

1 The roaring of Brihaspati : that is, says Sdyana, the voice or praise of
the worshipper. Agni may be intended, as Ludwig suggests. The lakes : or
seas ( samudrttsah ) f probably the Soma-reservoirs. Sdyana takes na a 9 fl
particle of comparison ‘the libations cover (the earth) like rivers.’ —



THE RIG VEDA.


337


0MN 81.]

2 Thou, powerful Soma, thou to whom the cows have lowed, as-

eendest, bright with sheen, thine iron-fashioned home.

Thou, lengthening our princes’ life and high renown, fiowest for
India as his mighty gladdening drink.

3 Best giver of delight, he flows to Indra’s throat, robing him-

self in might, Auspicious One, for fame.

He spreads himself abroad to meet all things that be : the
vigorous Tawny Steed flows sporting on his way.

4 The men, the ten swift fingers, milk thee out for Gods, even

thee most rich in meath, with thousand flowing streams.
Soma who winnest thousands, driven by the men, expressed
with stones, bring, as thou fiowest, all the Gods.

5 Deft-handed men with stones, the ten swift fingers, drain thee

into waters, thee, the Steer enriched witli sweets.

Thou, Soma, gladdening Indra and the Heavenly Host, fiowest
as Pavamana like a river’s wave.

HYMN LX XXL Soma PavamAna.

Onward to Tndra’s throat move, beauteously adorned, the
waves of Soma a* lie purifies himself,

When they, brought forward with tho lovely curd of kine,
effused, have cheered the Hero to bestow his gifts.

I 2 Hither hath Soma flowed unto the beakers, like a chariot-
horse, a stallion swift upon his way.

Thus, knowing both the generations, he obtains the rights and
dues of Gods from yonder and from hence.

1 While thou art cleansed, 0 Soma, scatter wealth on us ;
Indu, bestow great bounty as a liberal Prince.

Giver of life, with wisdom help to opulence ; strew not our
home possessions far away from us.

1 Hither let Pushan Pavamana come to us, Varuna, Mitra,
bountiful, of one accord,

The Maruts, Asvins, Vayn, and Brihaspati, Savitar, Tvashtar,
ti actable Sarasvati.


2 Ivon-fashioned home : see IX. 1. 2.

2 Both the generations : of Gods and men. S&yana takes ubhdyasya jdn -

with devfltndn i: — ‘and knowing both races of gods — those who come
J (the sacrifice) from the other world and those who (come) from this world.’
"Wllsou.

3 Udp to opnknee : according to S&yana, ‘help Vasu (the Rishi of the
ymn) to prosperity.’

‘f'vuctuble •' suyumd: easily led (by prayer). According to Sdyana = stm-

beautiful in form.

22



838 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /£

5 Both Heaven and Earth, the all-invigorating Pair, Vidhatar
Aditi, and Aryaman the God,

Bhaga who blesses men, the spacious Firmament, — let all the
Gods in Pavamana take delight.

HYMN LXXXII. soma Pavamftn,.

Even as a King hath Soma, red and tawny Bull, been presbed;
the Wondrous One hath bellowed to the kine.

While purified he passes through the filtering fleece to seat
him hawk-like on the place that drops with oil.

2 To glory goest thou, Sage with disposing skill, like a groomed

steed thou rushest forward to the prize.

0 Soma, be thou gracious, driving off distress : thou goest,
clothed in l utter, to a robe of state.

3 Parjanya is the Father of the Mighty Bird : on mountains,

in earth’s centre hath be made his home.

The waters too have flowed, the Sisters, to the kine : he meets
the pressing-stones at the beloved rite.

4 Thou givest pleasure as a wife delights her lord. Listen, 0

Child of Pajra, for to thee I speak.

Amid the holy songs go on that we may live : in time of
trouble, Soma, watch thou free from blame.

5 As to the men of old thou earnest, Indu y unharmed, to

strengthen, winning hundreds, thousands,

So now for new felicity flow onward : the waters follow as thy
law ordaineth.

HYMN LXXXIII. Soma Pavamtna

Spread is thy cleansing filter, Brahmanaspati : as Prince,
thou entered its limbs from every side.

5 All-invigorating: visvaminvt: ‘ all -invading.’ — S&yana. YidMtar . the
Disposer, regarded as a separate deity, as Dh&tar is the Maker, Ordainer, or
Establishes

1 ^ a King: ‘ magnificent as a king/ — Wilson. That drops with oil •
S&yana here explains ghritdvantam l>y udakuvantum, watery.

2 To a robe of stale : mrnijam : ‘ to the cleansing (vessel).’ — Wilson..

3 Parjanya: the God of the rain-cloud and wateia of the air in which the
mighty Bird, the Moon, is born. In earth’ a centre : at the altar, in the
oblation.

4 Pujrd : according to S&y an a, the earth. The St. Petersburg Lexicon

explains the word as meaning the moist fre»h Soma-plant of which Soma, the
juice, is the child. Pei haps, as Ludwig suggests, PajrA may be the name of
the sacrificer's wife, ,

1 Brahmauaspatl’s filter appears to be the heavenly filter through whicj 1
the rain descends to earth. See Bergaigne, La Religion Vtdique, I. 79 , 20 .
The raw : uncooked oblation. Which bear : 1 bearing (the sacrifice).’— W” 800 ’
This : according to Sftyana, to this filter. Ludwig thinks that Agni or Surf
is meant by * tat.'



THE RIGVEDA,


330


HYMN 84.]


The raw, whose mass hath not been heated, gains not this :
they only which are dressed, which bear, attain to it.

2 High in the seat of heaven is spread the Scorcher’s sieve : its

threads are standing separate, glittering with light.

The Swift Ones favour him who purifieth this : with cons-
ciousness they stand upon the height of heaven.

3 The foremost spotted Steer hath made the Mornings shine,

md yearning after strength sustains all things that be.

By his high wisdom have the Mighty Sages wrought: the
Fathers who behold mankind laid down the germ.

4 Gandharva verily protects his dwelling-place ; Wondrous, he

guards the generations of the Gods.

Lord of the snare, he takes the foeman with the snare : those
who are most devout have gained a share of meath.

5 Rich in oblations ! robed in cloud, thou compassest oblation,

sacrifice, the mighty scat of Gods.

King, on thy chariot-sieve thou goest up to war, and with a
thousand weapons winnest lofty fame.

HYMN LXXXIV. Soma PavamAna.


Flow, cheering Gods, most active, winner of the flood, for
ludra, and for Vayu, and for Varuna.

Bestow on us to-day wide room with happiness, and in thine
ample dwelling laud the Host of Heaven.

! He who hath come anear to creatures that have life, Immortal
Soma flows onward to all of them.

Effecting, for our aid, both union and release, Indu, like
Surya, follows closely after Dawn.

2 The Scorcher's sieve: ‘ The filter of the foe-scorching (Soma).’ — Wilson,
ic Swift Ones: ‘his swift-flowing (juices) protect the purifier (the worship-
er) ’—Wilson.

3 The Mighty Sages : those who possess supernatural wisdom ; the Gods.

Fathers ; ‘The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, which give birth to gods

id men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the
• 72. SeeX. 64. 14.

4 Gavdkarva : here, the Sun. Ilis: Soma’s.

5 Robed in cloud: ndbhah : meaning, water from the clouds. With a thou -
wd weapons : more literally, having a thousand, that is, countless, sharp
wits. ‘Thousand-rayed.’ — Ludwig.


1 In thine ample dwelling ; ‘on the spacious sacrificial ground.’ — S&yana.

2 The second line is obscure. Wilson translates, after Sdyana : — ‘Indu,
mding and loosing, accompanies the sacrifice (for its protection) as the sun
le dawn that is, binding or connecting the sacrifice with the gods and loos-

or separating it from the Asuras or evil spirits. But this explanation is
satisfactory. Ludwig suggests that ‘union’ refers to Soma’s binding^ to-
p ther heaven and earth, Gods and men, and for the meaning of ‘release ’ he
‘ fer » to IX. 68. 5.



340 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX.

3 He who is poured with milk, he who within the plants hastes

bringing treasure for the happiness of Gods,

He, poured forth in a stream flows with the lightning’s flash,
Soma who gladdens Indra and the Host of Heaven.

4 Winner of thousands, he, this Soma, flows along, raising a

vigorous voice that wakens with the dawn.

Indu with winds drives on the ocean of the air, he sinks
within the jars, he rests in Iudra’s heart.

5 The kine with milk dress him who makes the milk increase,

Soma, amid the songs, who finds the light of heaven.
Winner of wealth, the effectual juice is flowing on, Singer
and Sage by wisdom, dear as heaven itself.

HYMN LXXXV. Soma Pavamftna.

Flow on to Indra, Soma, carefully effused : let sickness stay
afar together with the fiends.

Let not the double-tongued delight them with thy juice : here
be thy flowing drops laden with opulence.

2 0 Pavamana, urge us forward in the fight : thou art the

vigour of the Gods, the well loved drink.

Smite thou our enemies who raise the shout of joy : India,
drink Soma juice, and drive away our foes.

3 Unharmed, best Cheerer, thou, 0 Indu, flowest on: thou,

even thou thyself, art Indra’s noblest food.

Full many a wise man lifts to thee tho song of praise, and
hails thee with a kiss as Sovran of this worl 1.

4 Wondrous, with hundred streams, hymned in a thousand songs,

Indu pours out for Indra his delightful meath.

Winning ms laud and waters, flow thou hitherward : Rainer
of bounties, Soma, make broad way for us.

5 Rou'ing within the beaker thou art balmed with milk: thou

• passest through the fleecy filter all at once.

Carefully cleansed and decked like a prize- winning steed, 0
Soma, thou hast flowed down within Indra’s throat.

6 Flow onward sweet of flavour for the Heavenly Race, for

Indra sweet, whose name is easily invoked :

Flow sweet for Mitra, Varuna. and V&yu, rioh in meath,** 1 *
violable for Brihaspati.

7 Ten rapid fingers deck the Courser in the jar : with hyi» I1!)

the holy singers send their voices forth.

The filtering juices hasten to their eulogy, the drops that
gladden find their way to Iudra’s heart.



THE MOVED A.


341


HYMN 86 ,]

8 While tlioii art purified pour on us hero strength, great, far-

extended shelter, spacious pasturage.

Let no oppression master tins our holy work : may we, 0
Indu, gain all opulence through thee.

9 The Steer who sees afar hath risen above the sky : the Sage

hath caused the lights of heaven to give their shine.

The Kiug is passing through the filter with a roar : they drain
the milk of heaven from him who looks on men.

10 High in the vault of heaven, unceasing, honey-tongued, the

Loving Ones drain out the mountain-haunting Steer, —

The drop that hath grown great in waters, in the lake, meath-
rich, in the stream’s wave and in the cleansing sieve.

11 The Loving Ones besought with many voices the Eagle who

had flown away to heaven.

Hymns kiss the Youngling worthy of laudation, resting on
earth, the Bird of golden colour.

12 High to heaven's vault hath the Gandharva risen, beholding

all his varied forms and figures.

His ray hath shone abroad with gleaming splendour : pure,
lie hath lighted both the worlds, the Parents.

HYMN LXXXYI. Soma Pavam&na.

Thy gladdening draughts, 0 Pavamana, urged by song flow
swiftly of themselves like sons of fleet-foot mares.

The drops of Soma juice, those eagles of the heavens, most
cheering, rich in meuth, rest in the reservoir.

2 As rapid chariot-steeds, so turned in several ways have thine
exhilarating juices darted forth,

Soma-drops rich in meath, waves, to the Thunder-armed, to
Iudra, like milch-kme who seek their calf with milk.

5 Like a steed urged to battle, finder of the light, speed on-
ward to the cloud-horn reservoir of heaven,

A Steer that o’er the woolly surface seeks the sieve, Soma
while purified for II Ira’s nourishment.


9 The Steer icho sees afar : wise Soma, the Moon.

Pt ^ ov ^ n( J ® ne8 ■' wntfh. : the Gods or, specially, the Maruts. Accord-
S o oayan.t, great Rishis, called Venae. The mountain-haunting Steer : Soma,
st 8, en 0Ver the mountain heights. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 389.
p ^ a in this stanza is the Eagle, the Youngling or infant, and the Bird

12 2 ’he Gandharva: here Soma, the Moon. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 429.
^Jtyeed onward : hasten to pour down the rain from the cloud.



342


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK IX.

4 Fleet as swift steeds, thy drops, divine, thought-swift, have

been, 0 Pavamana, poured with milk into the vat.

The Kishis have poured in continuous Soma-drops, ordainera
who adorn thee, Friend whom Rishis love.

5 0 thou who seest all things, Sovran as thou art and passing

strong, thy rays encompass all abodes.

Pervading with thy natural powers thou flowest on, and as
the whole world’s Lord, O Soma, thou art King.

6 The beams of Pavamana, sent from earth and heaven, hig

ensigns who is ever stedfast, travel round.

When on the sieve the Golden-hued is cleansed, he rests
within the vats as ono who seats him in his place.

7 Served with fair rites he flows, ensign of sacrifice : Soma

advances to the special place of Gods.

Ho speeds with thousand currents to the reservoir, and passes
through the filter bellowing as a bull.

8 The Sovran dips him in the sea and in the streams, and set

in rivers with the waters’ wave moves on.

High heaven’s Sustainer at the central point of earth, raisod
on the fleecy surface Pavamana stands.

9 He on whose high decree the heavens and earth depend hath

roared and thundered like the summit of the sky.

Soma flows on obtaining Indra’s friendly love, and, as they
purify him, settles in the jars.

10 He, light of sacrifice, distils delicious meath, most wealthy,

Father and begetter of the Gods.

He, gladdening, best of Chcerers, juice that Indra loves, enrich-
es with mysterious tieasure earth and heaven.

11 The vigorous and far-seeing one, the Lord of heaven, flows,

shouting to the beaker, with his thousand streams.
Coloured like gold he rests in seats where Mitra dwells, the
Steer made beautiful by rivers and by sheep.

12 In forefront of the rivers Pavamana speeds, in forefront of

the hymn, foremost among the kine.

4 Friend whom Rishis love : rishishdna : the word does not occur elsewheifii
and its precise meaning is unceitain. ‘ 0 mAi-enjoyed.’ — Wilsou. ‘ Thou who
playest the part of a Rishi.’ — Ludwig.

8 The sea and the streams are the firmament and its waters. Soma, who
is at the same time the God in heaven and the earthly beverage, is saiu
combine with the solar rays in the clouds, and thus to cause the rain to
descend. See HiUebrandt, V, I. 215. Central point of earth : the p’ a( *
of sacrifice.

11 By rivers and by sheep : by the purifying waters and the wool
strainer.



BYMN 86.] 27 78 R1GVBDX. 343

He shares the mighty booty in the van of war : the well-armed
Steer is purified by worshippers.

13 This heedful Pavam&na, like a bird sent forth, hath with his
wave flowed onward to the fleecy sieve.

0 Indra, through thy wisdom, by thy thought, 0 Sige, Soma
flows bright and pure between the earth and heaven.

U He, clad in mail that reaches heaven, the Holy One, filling
the firmament, stationed amid the woilds,

Knowing the lealm of light, hath come to us in rain: he sum-
mons to himself his own primeval Sire.

15 He who was first of all to pcnetiate his form bestowed upon
his race wide shelter and defence.

From that high station which he hath in loftiest heaven he
comes victorious to all encounters here.

LG Indu hath started forth for lndra’s special place, and slights
not as a Friend the promise of his Fiiend.

Soma speeds onward like a youth to youthful maids, and gains
the beaker by a course of hundred paths.

17 Your songs, exhilarating, tuneful, uttering praise, are come into

the places where the people meet.

Worshippers have exilted Soma with their hymns, and milcli-
kiue have come near to meet him with their milk.

18 0 Soma, Indu, while they cleanse thee, pour on ns accumu-

lated, plentiful, nutritious food,

Which, ceaseless, tin ice a day shall yield us hero power en-
riched with store of nourishment, and strength, and tneath.

19 Far-seeing Soma flows, the Steer, the Lord of hymns, the

Furtherer of day, of morning, and of heaven.

Mixt with the stieams he ciuscd the beakers to resound, and
with the singers’ aid they entered Indra’s heart.

20 On, with the prudent singers, flows the ancient Sage and guided

by the men hath roared about the vats.

Producing Trita’s name, maybe pour forth the meath, that
Vayuaud that India may become his Friends.

H HU own primeval Sire : or, the ancient Father of this (All). Indra is
meant.

He: Sonia His form: India's. IIU race : Indra and the Gods.

16 Slights not as a Fiiend the promise of his Friend : ‘the friend leaves
n °t the stomach of hi? friend.’ — Wilson S&yana derives sarhgiram from
P'Ottyrt, to shallow, instead of from samjrl , to assent. Hundred paths :
the interstices of th . wool.
ot\ a day : at the three appointed sacrifices.

| Producing Trita't name : literally, begetting, that is, making (jandyan)
1 ihe of Trita ; meaning probably, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, reminding



THE HYMNS OF


344


[BOOK IX.


21 He, being purified, hath made the Mornings shine : this, even

this is he who gave the rivers room.

He made the Three Times Seven pour out the milky flow:
Soma, the Cheerer, yields whatever the heart finds sweet.

22 Flow onward, Soma, in thine own celestial forms, flow, Indu,

poured within the beaker and the sieve.

Sinking into the throat of Indra with a roar, led by the men
thou madcst Surya mount to heaven.

23 Pressed out with stones thou flowest onward to the sieve, 0

Indu, entering the depths of India’s throat.

Far-sighted Soma, now thou lookest on mankind : thou didst
unbar the cow-stall for the Angirases.

24 In thee, 0 Soma, while thou purifiedst thee, high-thoughted

sages, seeking favour, have rejoiced.

Down from the heavens the Falcon brought thee hitherward,
even thee, O Indu, thee whom all our hymns adorn.

25 Seven Milch-kine glorify the T i wny-coloured One while with

his wave in wool he purifies himself.

The living men, the mighty, have impelled the Sage into the
waters’ lap, the place of sacrifice.

26 Indu, attaining puritv, plunges through the foe, making his

ways all easy for the pious man.

Making the kine his mantle, he, the lovely Sage, runs like a
sporting courser ornvaid through the fleece.

27 The ceaseless watery fountains with their hundred streams

sing, as they hasten near, to him the Golden-hucd.

Him, clad in robes of milk, swift fingers beautify on the third
height and in the luminous realm of heaven.

28 These are thy generations of celestial seed : thou art the

Sovran Lord of all the world of life.

This universe, 0 Pavarnana, owns thy sway; thou, Indu, art
the first establisher of Law.


us of Trita, with whom he is closely connected. 1 Generating the water of
the threefold (Indra) ’ — Wilson

21 The Three Times Seven : the seven celestial rivers, corresponding to the
rivers of earth, multiplied by three to accord with the threefold division or
the heavens. According to Sftyana, cows are meant.

23 Thou didst unbar the cow stall : didst recover the cattle stolen by th®
Panis, that is the rays of light that the fiends of darkness had carried on *
the great deed of Indra being ascribed to Soma bis inspirer.

25 Seven Milch-kine: the celestial rivers.

26 Making the kine his mantle : he who is afterwards covered or rniugl^
with milk.



THE RIG VEDA.


345


HYMN 86 .]

29 Thou art the sea, 0 Sage who bringest all to light : under

thy Law are these five regions of the world.

Thou readiest out beyond the earth, beyond the heavens :
thine are the lights, 0 Pavamana, thine the Sun.

30 Thou in the filter, Soma Pavamana, art purified to support

the region for the Gods.

The chief, the longing ones have sought to hold thee fast,
and all these living creatures have been turned to thee.

31 Onward the Singer travels o’er the fleecy sieve : the Tawny

Steer hath bellowed in the wooden vats.

Ilymns have been sung aloud in resonant harmony, and holy
songs kiss him, the Child who claims our praise.

32 He hath assumed the rays of Sun a for his robe, spinning, as

he knows how, the triply-twisted thread.

He, guiding to the newest rules of Holy Law, comes as the
Women’s Consort to the special place.

33 On flows the King of rivers and the Lord of heaven : he

follows with a shout the paths of Holy Law.

The Golden-hucd is ponied foith with his hundred streams,
Wealth-bringer, lifting up his voice while purified.

34 Fain to he cleansed, thou, Pavamana, ponrest out, like wond-

rous Sura, through the fleece, an ample sea.

Purified with the hands, pressed by the men with stones, thou
speedest on to mighty booty-bunging war.

35 Thou, Pavamana, sendest food and power in streams: thou

sit test, in the beakers as a hawk on trees,

For Indra poured as cheering juice to make him glad, as near-
est and far-seeing bearer-up of heaven.

36 The Sisters Seven, the Mothers, stand around the Babe, the

noble, new-horn Infant, skilled in holy song,

Gandharva of the floods, divine, beholding men, Soma, that he
may reign as King of all the world.


29 Thou art the sea: Soma and the sea being alike producers of rain.
A( jhh: stars.

SO The region: mid-air; the firmament. The chief, the longing ones: the
the Maruts.

32 Spinning., the triply-twisted thread • beating his part in morning, noon-
and evening saciifice. The Women's Con sot t : Loid and husband of the
1 ater8 °f heaven. The special place : ‘ the consecrated (vessel).’ — Wilson.

3f Like wondrous SHra : adorable like the Sun.

^ The Sitters Seven : the great rivers which may provide water for Soma-
Oandharva : frequently identified with the Sun, heie meaus Soma,



THE BYMNS OP


846


[BOOK i


37 As Sovran Lord thereof thou passest through these worlds,

Indu, harnessing thy tawny well-winged Mares.

May they pour forth for thee milk and oil rich in sweets ;
Soma, let t lie folk abide in thy decree.

38 0 Soma, thou beholdest men from every side : 0 Pavaman

Steer, thou w. inderest through these.

Pour out upon us wealth in treasure and in gold : may v
have strength to live among the things that be.

30 Winner of gold and goods and cattle flow thou on, set as ir
pregner, Indu, mid the worlds of life.

Rich in brave men art thou, Soma, who winnest all : these ho!
singers wait upon thee with the song.

40 The wave of flowing mcath hath wakened up desires : tli

Steer enrobed in milk plumres into the streams.

Borne on his chariot-sieve the King hath risen to war, au
with a thousand rays hath won him high renown.

41 Dear to all life, he sends triumphant praises forth, abundant

bringing offspring, each succeeding day.

From Indra crave for us, Indu, when thou art quaffed, the bice
sing that gives children, wealth that harbours steeds.

42 When days begin, the strong juice, lovely, golden-hued, i
recognized by wisdom more and more each day,

He, stirring both the Rices, goes between the two, the bcare
of the word of men and word of Gods.

43 They balm him, balm him over, balm him thoroughly, cares
the mighty strength and balm it with the mcath.


37 Tawny . Marcs: haritah ; Haiits Cf IV. 6. 0 ; 13. 3 ; VII 66. 15
IX. 63. 9.

38 Through these : there is no substantive. SAyana supplies apah, waters.

40 Desires : the meaning of vandnrfh is not certain ; ‘voices (of praise)
Wilson With a thousand rays : sahisrabhrisht/h : literally, having a thousand
edges or sharp points. Cp. IX. 83. 5

41 The blessing: this seems to be very nearly the meaning of brdhma here,
But the word may as usual le rendeied by prayer, or devotion. ‘Solicit
Indra (to give) us food productive of progeny.’— -Wilson.

42 When days begin : according to SAyana, early in the morning. Thfl
commencement of the year is inoie probably intended The second half of
the stanza is obscurely expressed. It appears to mean that Soma acts as a
mediator between heaven and earth, urging men to offer, and the Gods
receive, worship, bearing up to heaven the hymns and praises of huoift n
worshippers and biinging back to tbein the assurance that their petifci‘ ,n ®
will be granted. SAyana’s explanation is different: ‘approaching the
men (the praiser and the worshipper or secular and sacred people) he l ,R8P ®
in the midst (of heaven and earth, bestowing), upon the upholder (of .
rite) both human and divine (riches).’ — Wilson. I follow Ludwig who w
dhartdri os nominative singular.



THE R1QVEDA.


347


nr mn 87 1

They seize the flying Steer at the stream’s breathing-place :
cleansing with gold they grasp the Animal herein.

{{ Sins? forth to Pavamana skilled in holy song : the juice is
flowing onward like a mighty stream.

He glideth like a serpent from his ancient skin, and like a
playful horse the Tawny Steer hath run.

45 Dweller in floods, King, foremost, ho displays his might, set

among living things as measurer of days.

Distilling oil he flows, fair, billowy, golden-hued, borne on a
car of light, sharing one home with wealth.

46 Loosed is the heavens’ support, the uplifted cheering juice :

the triply-mingled draught flows round into the worlds.

The holy hymns caress the stalk that claims our praise, when
singers have approached his beauteous robe with song.

47 Thy streams that flow forth rapidly collected run over the

tine fleece of the sheep as thou art cleansed.

When, Indu, thou art balrned with milk within the bowl,
thou sinkest in the jars, 0 Soma, when expressed.

48 Winner of power, flow, Soma, worthy of our laud : run on-

ward to the fleece as well-beloved meath.

Destroy, 0 Indu, all voracious Rakshasas. With brave sons
in the assembly let our speech be bold.

HYMN LXXXVII. Soma Pavamana.

Run onward to the reservoir and seat thee : cleansed by the
men speed forward to the battle.

Making thee beauteous like an able courser, forth to the
sacred grass with reins they lead thee.

2 Indu, the well-armed God, is flowing onward, who quells the

curse and guards from treacherous onslaught,

Father, begetter of the Gods, most skilful, the buttress of
the heavens and earth’s supporter.

3 Rishi and Sage, the Champion of the people, deft and sagaci-

ous, Usana in wisdom,

43 At the stream! s breathing -place : whore the stream seems to stay still
a moment to recover breath. Cleansing with gold : with gold-ringed
ingers. The Animal: Soma.

45 -4s measurer of days : Soma being identified with the Moon.

46 Triply. mingled : or, poured into three vessels, the dronakalasn, ddhava-
'fya> and pHtabhrit. Robe : the integuments which cover the juice : that is

exterior of the stalk and shoots.

3 l^and in wisdom: as wise as the celebrated Usanft. S&yana explains
Afferent! y, regarding Usanft as the discoverer : ‘ Usanas—ha verily by Ins



348 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR /;

He bath discovered even their hidden nature, the Cows’ coi
cealed and most mysterious title.

4 This thine own Soma lich in meath, 0 Indra, Steer for tl

Steer, hath flowed into the filter.

The strong Frce-gi\er, winning hundreds, thousands, hat
reached the holy grass that never fails him.

5 These Somas are for wealth of countless cattle, renown ther

for. and mighty strength immortal.

These have been sent forth, purified by strainers, like stee(
who rush to battle fain for glory.

6 He, while he cleanses him, invoked of many, hath flowed i

give t fie people all enjoyment.

Thou whom the Falcon brought, bring dainty viands, best
thyself and send us wealth and booty.

7 This Soma, pressed into the cleansing filter, hath run i

’twere a host let loose, the Courser;

Like a strong bull who whets his horns keen-pointed, like
brave wan ior in the fray for cattle.

8 He issued forth from out the loftiest mountain, and four

kine hidden somewhere in a stable.

Soma’s stream clears itself for thee, 0 Indra, like lightnin
thundering through the clouds of heaven,

9 Cleansing thyself, and home along with Indra, Soma, thou goes

round the herd of cattle.

May thy praise help us, Mighty One, prompt Giver, to tli
full ample food which thou bestowest.

HYMN LXXXVIII. Soma Pavamto

For thee this Soma is effused, 0 India: diink of this juice
for thee the stream is flowing —

Soma, which thou thyself hast made and chosen, even Iudi
for thy special drink to cheer thee.


poetic gift discovered the secret milk of those cows which was hidden an
concealed ’ — Wilson. By title or name of the Cows, water appears to 1)
intended

4 Steer for the Steer : or, Strong for the Strong.

5 Mighty strength immortal: ‘ample food and ambrosia.’ — Wilson.

8 From oat the loftiest mountain : S&yana makes antdrddreh depend up 0
Jctichit, somewhere : ‘ This Soma stream has come from on high and b
detected the cattle which were in a stall i hidden) somewhere within tb
mountain.’ — Wilson. Grussmann translates : ‘Er ist entsprungen aus den
hochsten Pressstein.’ * lie hath sprung forth from the most lofty preas-stone.

9 The hei'd of cattle : Soma accompanies Indra in his expedition to recove
the stolen cattle. —SAyana. Or the cattle or cows may be the milk with wM
Soma is mixed.



THE RIG VEDA.


349


UYM$ 89 .]

2 Like a capacious car hath it been harnessed, the Mighty, to

acquire abundant treasures.

Then in the sacrifice they celebrated all triumphs won by
Nah us in the battle.

3 Like Vayu with his team, moving at pleasure, most gracious

when invoked like both Nasatyas,

Thou art thyself like the Wealth-Giver, Soma! who grants
a'l boons, like song-inspiring Pashau.

4 Like Indra who hath done great deeds, thou, Soma, art slayer

of the Vritras, Fort-drstrovcr.

Like Pedu’s horse who killed the brood of serpents, thus thou,
0 Soma, slayest every Dasyu.

5 Like Agni loosed amid the forest, fiercely he winneth splen-

dour in the running waters.

Like one who fights, the roaring of the mighty, thus Soma
Pavamana sends his current.

G These Somas pissing thiough the fleecy filter, like rain de-
scending from the clouds of heaven,

Have been effused and poured into the beakers, swiftly like
rivers running lowly seaward.

,7 Flow onward like the potent band of Maruts, like that
1 Celestial Host whom none revileth.

Quickly be gracious unto us like waters, like sacrifice victo-
rious, thousand-fashioned.

Thine are King Vanina’s eternal statutes, lofty and deep, 0
Soma, is thy glory.

All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, like Arya-
nian, 0 Soma.

HYMN LXXXIX. Soma Pavamftna.

This Chariot-horse hath moved along the pathways, and Pava-
n ia n a flowed like rain from heaven.

' I can make nothing out of the second line of this stanza. The version
l cli I give as a temporary makeshift is founded on Ludwig’s remarks in
Commentary on the passage, Vol. V. p. 308, of his Riyvcda. Wilson,
owing &\yana, translates : — ‘ After this ( i . e. after the harnessing of the
>gon —Note ) miy all the races of men expecting our (attack) go to the
mble battle.’ ‘ Now let the races of all men, rising up like trees, come
r to him in order to obtain success,’ would, according to Grassmann, be
irt “ r the meaning.

■ Pedu’s horse: given to him by the Asvins. See I. 116 . 6 ; 117 . 9 ; 118 .
119.10.

Like sacrifice : according to S<iyana, yctjndh, sacrifice, means here, worthy
aenfice (thou art) of a thousand shapes, adorable like (Indra) the
J0 'm battle ’-Wilson,
his stanza is found also in Book I. 91 . 3.



350 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK IX,

With us hath Soma with a thousand currents sunk in the wood,
upon his Mother’s bosom.

2 King, he hath clothed him in the robe of rivers, mounted the

stiaightest-going ship of Order.

Sped by the Hawk the drop hath waxed in waters: the father
drains it, drains the Father’s offspring.

3 They come to him, red, tawny, Lord of Heaven, the watchful

Guardian of the meath, the Lion.

First, Hero in the fight, he seeks the cattle, and with his eye
the Steer is our protector.

4 They harness to the broad-wheeled car the mighty Courser

whose back bears meath, unwearied, awful.

The twins, tho sisters brighten him, and strengthen — these
children of one dame — the vigorous Racer,

5 Four pouring out the holy oil attend him, sitting together

in the same container.

To him they flow, when purified, with homage, and still,
from every side, are fiist about him.

G He is the buttress of the heavens, supporter of earth, and in
his hand are all the people.

Be the team’s Lord a well to thee the singer : cleansed is the
sweet plant’s stalk for deed of glory.

7 Fighting, uninjured come where Gods arc feasted ; Soma, as
Vritra-slayer flow for Indra.

Vouchsafe us ample riches very splendid : may we be masters
of heroic vigour.

HYMN XC. Soma PavamAna.

Urged ou, the Father of the Earth and Heaven hath gone
foith like a car to gather booty,

Going to India, sharpening his weapons, and in his hand
containing every treasure.

2 The father drains it : 1 The scholiast finds it difficult to make sense of
this: piUi (palako lokah) he supposes to mean the Adhvaryu, who extracts
the juice of the Soma which is born from the heaven as from a father ;or th 0
first milker may be the yajamdna and the second the Adhvaryu; or duht
may be repeated out of respect.’ — Wilson.

4 Sisters .. . children of one dame: the priest’s fingers.

5 Four: the quarters of the sky. Container : the firmament.

6 The team's Lord: Soma as resembling VAyu. Cp IX. 88. 3. Sifya n ®
explains differently : ‘ may ( Soma ) the fountain (of desires) be possessed °
horses for thee (his) adorer.’ — Wilson.

1 Father : janitd : generator, of earth hy sending rain, and of heaven
obtaining oblations for the godB,— SAyana.



THE RIO VEDA.


351


HYMN 91.]

2 To him the tones of sacred song have sounded, Steer of the

triple height, the Life-bestower.

Dwelling in wood as Varuna in rivers, lavishing treasure he
distributes blessings.

3 Gieat Conqueror, warrior-girt, Lord of all heroes, flow on

thy way as he who winneth riches ;

With sharpened arms, with swift bow, never vanquished in
battle, vanquishing in fight the foemen.

4 Giving security, Lord of wide dominion, send us both earth

and heaven with all their fulness.

Striving to win the Dawns, the light, the waters, and cattle,
call to us abundant vigour.

5 0 Soma, gladden Varuna and Mitra ; cheer, Indu Pavamana !

India, Vishnu.

Cheer thou the Gods, the Company of Maruts : Indu, cheer
mighty Indra to rejoicing.

6 Thus like a wise and potent King flow onward, destroying

with thy vigour all misfortunes.

For our well-spoken hymn give life, 0 Indu. Do ye preserve
us evermore with blessings.

HYMN XCI. Soma Pavamfttia.

As for a chariot-race, the skilful Speaker, Chief, Sage, In-
ventor, hath, with song, been started.

The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the Car-horse
to the resting-places.

1 The drop of Soma, pressed by wise Nahushyas, becomes the

banquet of the Heavenly People —

Indu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal,
with the sheep and cows and waters.

3 Steer roaring unto Steer, this Pavamana, this juice runs to

the white milk of the milch-cow.

Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful Singer, like
Sura by his fair and open pathways.

2 Of the triple height: see IX. 71. 7.

4 VaR to «« ; send us with thy shout or roar.

6 The liymu ends with the usual concluding half-line of the hymns ascribed
^ the Vasishthas.

,1 The skilful Speaker : Soma who makes us eloquent. The resting-places :
hdandni : the seat*, the reservoirs in which he settles.

2 Nahushyas : probably a neighbouring people. See YI. 46. 7, and note on

hhuahaa which has the same meaning. . ,

3 Sdra : Stirya. the Sun. Fair and open : adhvatmdWh : ‘ imperishable. —
ulson.



852 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK ij |

4 Break down the strong seats even of the demons : cleansing

thee, Indu, robe thyself in vigour.

Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, those who
are near and those who yet are distant.

5 Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new hymn,

thou Giver of all bounties.

Those which are high and hard for foes to conquer may we
gain from thee, Active ! Food-bestower !

6 So purifying thee vouchsafe us waters, heaven's light, and cows,

offspring and many children.

Give us health, ample land, and lights, 0 Soma, and grant us
long to look upon the sunshine.

HYMN XCII. Soma Pavam&m.

The gold-hued juice, poured out upon the filter, is started like
a car sent forth to conquer.

He hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed him, and
hath rejoiced the Gods with entertainments.

2 He who beholdeth man hath reached the filter: bearing his

name, the Sage hath sought his dwelling.

The Rishis came to him, seven holy singers, when in the bowls
he settled as Invoker.

3 Shared by all Gods, most wise, propitious, Soma goes, while

they cleanse him, to his constant station.

Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom : to the Five Tribes
the Sage attains with labour.

4 In thy mysterious place, 0 Pavamana Soma, are all the Gods,

the Thrice-Eleven.

Ten on the fleecy height, themselves, self-prompted, and seven
fresh riyers, brighten and adorn thee.

5 Now let this be the truth of Pavamana, there where all singers

gather them together,

That he hath given us room and made the daylight, hath holpen
Manu and lepellcd the Dasyu.


5 Those : portions of thee, according to S.iyatia

6 In the second half of the stanza, instead of taking urii, wide, aiopl e >
with ksJUtram, field, land. S&yana joins it, ws—urUni, with jydtthshi, lights

* make our laud prosper, diffuse the luminaries widely (in the firmament).’'
Wilson.

2 The Rishis : according to S&yana, Bharadvdja, Kasyapa, Gotarna, Ah’i
Visv,\mitra, Jamadagni, Vasishtha.

3 The Five Tribes : the five Aryan tribes. According to Sftyana, ‘ the fi ye
classes of beings,' i e. } four castes and the Nish&das.

4 The Thrice-Eleven : see I. 139. 11. Ten: the fingers.

5 Manu: as the representative of the Aryan race.



TEE RIO VEDA.


353


rMN 94.]

j As the priest seeks the station rich in cattle, like a true King
who goes to great assemblies,

Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him, and,
like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled.

HYMN XCIII. Soma Pavam&na.

Ten sisters, pouring out the rain together, swift-moving think-
ers of the sage, adorn him.

Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of Sftrya and reached
the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.

2 Even as a youngling crying to his mothers, the bounteous
Steer hath flowed along to waters.

As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens on to the chosen
meeting-place, the beaker.

5 Yea, swollen is the udder of the milch-cow : thither in streams
goes very sapient Indu.

The kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, the
Head and Chief with milk within the vessels.

1 With all the Gods, 0 Indu Pavatuana, while thou art roaring
send us wealth in horses.

Hither upon her car come willing Plenty, inclined to us, to
give us other treasures.

) Now unto us mete riches, while they cleanse thee, all-glorions,
swelling wealth, with store of heroes.

Long he his life who worships thee, 0 Indu. May he, enriched
with prayer, come soon and early.

HYMN XCIV. Soma Pavara&na.

When beauties strive for him as for a charger, then strive
the songR like soldiers for the sunlight.

Acting the Sage, he flows enrobed in waters and song as
’twere a stall that kine may prosper.


6 The station rich in cattle : ‘ the hall where the victim is stationed ’ —
r ilson. To great assemblies : or, to war and battle. The wood : the wooden
it or reservoir.

\ Ten sisters: the finders wl eh press out the juice of the Soma -plant.
hinlcers: or thoughts, devotions. According to S&yara, fingers. Child of
S&yana explains jffh, offspring, by j'lytih wives, i e., the quarters of
^heaven, called SUrya’s wives because they are made manifest by his ra^s.

3 The Head and Chief ■ ‘the elevated Soma ’ — Wilson.

4 Send us ; more literally, open or disclose to us

* The hymn ends with the half-line which i« the special conclusion of the
> wns asci ibed to Nodhaa. See Book l. 58, 60 — 64.

1 The meaning is apparently : when the beautifying 'waters hasten emu-
r ,s v. b> cleanse Soma as though he wei'e a horse, the voices of singing
01 shippers vie with each other like the shouts of men who aie fighting for



THE HYMNS OF [BOOK /* ’

2 The worlds expand to him who from aforetime fouud light to

spread the law of life eternal.

The swelling songs, like kine' within the stable, in deep
devotion call aloud on Indu.

3 When the Sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a cur

visiting all worlds, the Hero,

Becoming fame, mid Gods, unto the mortal, wealth to the
skilled, worth praise mid the Ever-present,

4 For glory born he hath come foith to glory : he giveth life

and glory to the singers.

They, clothed in glory, have become immortal. He, measured
in his course, makes frays successful.

5 Stream to us food and vigour, kine and horses : give us broad

lights and fill the Gods with rapture.

All these are easy things for thee to master : thou, Pavamuna
Soma, quellest foemcn.

HYMN XCV. Soma Pavamftna,

Loud neighs the Tawny Steed when started, settling deep in
the wooden vessel while they cleanse him.

Led by the men he takes the milk for raiment : then shall he,
through his powers, engender praise-songs.

2 As one who rows drives on his boat, he, Gold-hued, sends

forth his voice, loosed on the path of Order.

As God, the secret names of Gods he utters, to be declared on
sacred grass more widely.

3 Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymns

are pressing nigh to Soma.

To him they come with lowly adoration, and, longing, enter
him who longs to meet them.

4 They drain the stalk, the Steer who dwells on mountains,

even as a Bull who decks him on the upland.


light and life. Soma flows on in his wisdom, blent with the waters, and
surrounded with hymns into the midst of which he enters as into a stable
full of kine in order to make them iucrease and multiply.

3 The stanza is somewhat obscure. Worth praise: or, adorable. The Ever-
present • the Gods who come to help men Wilson, following SAya.a, trans-
lates the second line : 1 2 then desirous of bestowing upon mortals the weftM
that abides with the gods, he (is) to be glorified in the many places of sacrifice
for the preservation of the riches he has given ’

5 All these: all the R&kshasas, according to SAyana.

1 Deep in the wooden vessel: literally *in the belly of the wood.'

2 He utters : reveals to the priest who is to declare them at sacrifice.



THE XIQVEDA.


355


HMN 96 .]

Hymns follow and attend him as he bellows : Trita bears
Varuna aloft in ocean.

5 Sending thy voice out as Director, loosen the Invoker’s thought,
0 Indu, as they cleanse thee.

■While thou and Indra rule for our advantage, may we be
masters of heroic vigour.

HYMN XCYI. Soma Pavam&na.

In forefront of the cars forth goes the Hero, the Leader, win-
ning spoil : his host rejoices.

Soma endues his robes of lasting colours, and blesses, for his
friends, their calls on Indra.

2 Men decked with gold adorn his golden tendiil, incessantly
with steed-impelling homage.

The Friend of fudra mounts his car: well-knowing, he comes
thereon to meet the prayer we offer.

\ 0 God, for service of the Gods flow onward, for food sublime,
as Indra’s diiuk, 0 Soma.

Making the floods, bedewing earth and heaven, come from the
vast, comfort us while we cleanse thee.
t Flow for prosperity and constant vigour, flow on for happi-
ness and high perfection.

This is the wish of all these friends assembled : this is my
wish, 0 Soma Pavamana.

Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward, the Father of the
earth, Father of heaven ;

Father of Agui, Surya’s generator, the Father who begat Indra
and Vishnu.

Brahman of Gods, the Leader of the poets, Rishi of sages,
Bull of savage creatures,

Falcon amid the vultures, Axe of forests, over the cleansing
sieve goes Soma singing.


Trita : the preparer of the celestial Soma. Varuna : here meaning
>a; ‘the defeater of enemir .' — Wilson. In ocean: in the firmament.

4s Director : upavakttva : upavaktft here appears to meau Adhvaryu :
M dhvaryuh . — S&yana. Loosen the Invoker's thought : aid the Hotar or
Aing piiest to give free utterance to his thought or hymn.

Of lasting colours : rabhasflni: ‘hastily made.’— Wilson. ‘Brilliant.’—
ssmann.

Steed- impelling : urging him on, as a whip urges on a horse.

Prom the vast ; from the wide firmameut. There is no substantive in
text.

brahman of Gods : thou art Brihaspati, the Lord of Prayer, among the
°r, chief among the priests. Axe ; the handle of the axe being



356 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR ft

7 He, Soma Pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the wave of

voice, our songs and praises

Beholding these infoi ior powers in cattle, he rests among them
as a Steer well- knowing.

8 As Gladdcner, Warrior never harmed in battle, with thousand

genial streams, pour strength and vigour.

As thoughtful Pavamana, urge 0 Indu, speeding the kine,
the plant’s wave on to Indra.

9 Dear, grateful to the Gods, on to the beaker moves Somn,

sweet to Indra, to delight him.

With hundred powers, with thousand currents, Indu, like
a strong car-horse, goes to the assembly.

10 Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained with the

stone, decking himself in waters,

Warding off curses, King of all existence, ho shall find way
for prayer the while they cleanse him.

11 For our sago fathers. Soma Pavamana, of old performed, by

thee, their sacred duties.

Fighting unvanquhhed, open the enclosures : enrich us with
huge gifts of steeds and heroes.

12 As thou didst flow for Mann Life-bestowing, Foe-quoller,

Comforter, rich in oblations,

Even thus flow onward now con fei ring riches : combine with
Indra, and bting foith thy weapons.

13 Flow onward, Soma, rich in sweets and holy, enrobed in

waters on the fleecy summit.

Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering and most
gladdening drink for Indra.

14 Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty at the

Gods’ banquet, pour the rain of heaven,

While thou with rivers roarest in the beaker, and blent with
milk prolongest our existence.

15 Purified with our holy hymns, this Soma o’ertakes maligni-

ties like some strong charger,

naturally made of the strongest wood — M. Muller. Ludwig thinks tint
lightning may be intended. According to the St. Petersburg Lexicon,
svadhitih here means a tree with very h.»rd wood. See V. 32 10.

7 The second line i« obscure. Wilson translates: ‘ the showerer (of bene-
fits) beholding the hidden (treasure) presides over these irresistible power*)
knowing about the cattle.’

9 Goes to the assembly * ‘ proceeds like a strong horse to battle ’ — Wilson.
11 The enclosures: the obstructions which keep the rain from falling.

13 Full of fatness: ghritdvdnti : according to SAyana, ' water- holding*



jjYMH 96. J THE R1GVEDA. 357

Like fresh milk poured by Aditi, like passage in ample room,
or like a docile car-horse.

16 Cleansed by the prossers, armed with noble weapons, stream

to us the fair secret name thou beared.

Pour booty, like a horse, for love of glory : God, Soma, send
us kine, and send us Vayu.

17 They deck him at his birth, the lovely Infant, the Maruts

with their troop adorn the Car-horse.

By songs a Poet and a Sage by wisdom, Soma goes singing
through the cleansing filter.

18 Light-winner, Rishi-minded, Rishi-maker, hymned in a thou-

sand hymns, Leader of sages,

A Steer who strives to gain his third form, Soma is, like
Yiraj, resplendent as a Singer.

19 Hawk seated in the bowls, Bird wide-extended, the Banner

seeking kine and wielding weapons,

Following close the sea, the wave of waters, the great Bull
tells his fourth form and declares it.

20 Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing

to the gain of riches,

A steer to herds, so, flowing to the pitcher, he with a roar
hath passed into the beakers.

21 Flow on with might as Pavamaua, Indu : flow loudly roaring

through the fleecy filter.

Enter the beakers sporting, as they cleanse thee, and let thy
gladdening juice make Indra joyful.

22 His streams have been efl'uscd in all their fulness, and he

hath entered, balined with milk, the goblets.

Singing his psalm, well-skilled in song, a Chanter, he comes
| as ’twere to his friend’s sister roaring.

123 Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana ! Indu, besung, as
lover to his darling.

As a bird flies and settles in the forest, thus Soma settles,
purified, in goblets.

15 By Aditi: regarded as the Cosmic Cow.
h> Vdyu: the breath of life, life. — Say ana.
f 1^ JiiH third form : the fortn that he wears in heaven ; 1 the third region
keav^n).’— Wilson. Virdj ; splendid or most illustrious Indra. — Silyana.

19 The banner : drapsuh • usually meaning, a drop, or a spark. See IV. 13. 2.
fourth form ; the Moon. According to S&yana, the region of the Moon
' s 8a ^ to be above that o* the Sun. . p

.p * twere to his friend's sister: SAyana explains jdmitn, sister, by jdyam,

I : ‘ like (a libertine) to the wife of a friend.’ — Wilson. The meaning is
Probably no more than ‘as lover to his darling’ in the following atansaa.



358 TBh BTMiVS OP [POOP

24 With full stream and abundant milk, 0 Soma, thy beams
come, like a woman, as they cleanse thee.

He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hath
roared within the goblet of the pious.

HYMN XCVII. Soma Pavamilna.

Made pure by this man’s urgent zeal and impulse, the God
hath to the Gods his juice imparted.

He goes, effused and singing, to the filter, like priest to mea-
sured seats supplied with cattle.

2 Robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty Sage

pronouncing invocations,

Roll onward to the beakers as they cleanse thee, far-seeing at
the feast of Gods, and watchful.

3 Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a Prince among

us, nobler than the noble.

Roar out as thou art purified, run forward. Do ye preserve
us evermore with blessings.

4 Let us sing praises to tho Gods : sing loudly, send ye the

Soma forth for mighty riches.

Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter, and let our
pious one rest in the pitcher.

5 Winning tho friendship of the Deities, Indu flows in a thou-

sand streams to make them joyful.

Praised by the men after the ancient statute, he hath como
nigh, for our great bliss, to India.

6 Flow, Gold-hucd, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer : let thy

juice go to Indra to support him.

Come nigh, together with the Gods, for bounty. Do ye pre-
serve us evermore with blessings.

7 The God declares the Deities’ generations, like Usand, pro-

claiming lofty wisdom.

With brilliant kin, far-ruling, sanctifying, the Boar advances,
singing, to tho places.

1 Urgent zeal and impulse: hemdnd, by impulse (from the root hi) is sai( l
by SAyana to mean ‘ by gold,’ that is, by the gold-adorned hand of the priest,
Measured seats supplied with cattle : ‘the halls prepared (for sacrifice) con-
taining victims.’ — Wilson. Singing : the sound of the flowing juice is com-
pared to the priest’s recitation of Bacred tests. ,

7 The Ood .- Soma, who has been called the Father of the Gods. Ly
U$and : the souud of the flowing and dropping Sonia juice is likened to tue
song of the famous sage and sacred poet. The Boar : strong, swift Som a -
Singing: making a sound with the descending drops of juice. SAyana explain
diflerently : — ‘ making a noise (as) a wild boar (makes a noise) with its foot- ~
Wilson, Thfc places ; the filters.



THE RIOVEDA.


359


ffY^y 97.]

8 The Swans, the Vrishaganas fiom anear us have brought their

restless spirit to onr dwelling.

Friends come to Pavam&na meet for praises, and sound in con-
cert their resistless music.

9 He follows the Wide-strider’s rapid movement : cows low, as

’twere, to him who sports at pleasure.

He with the sharpened horns brings forth abundance : the
Silvery shines by night, by day the Golden.

10 Strong Indu, bathed in milk, flows on for India, Soma ex-

citing strength, to make him joyful,
lie quells malignities and slays the demons, the King of mighty
power who brings us comfort.

11 Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press-stones,

mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy filter —

Indu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens,
for the God’s enjoyment.

12 As he is purified he pours out treasures, a God bedewing Gods

with bis own juices.

Indu hath, wearing qualities by seasons, on the raised fleece
engaged the ten swift fingers.

3 The Red Bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing the
heavens and earth to roar and thunder.

Well is he hoard like Indra’s shout in battle : letting this voice
be known he hastens hither.

A Swelling with milk, abounding in sweet flavours, urging the
meath-rich plant thou goest ouwnid.

Raising a shout thou flowest as they cleanse thee, when thou,
0 Soma, art effused for India.

.5 Su flow thou on inspiriting, for rapture, aiming death-shafts
at him who stays the waters.

Flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager
for the kine, 0 Soma.


8 The Swans * the singers, descendants of the Rishi Vrishagana.

9 The Wide- strider' s rapid movement: the swift course of the Sun. Com
w as 'twere : Sayana explains gXvah cows, by anye gantdrah . other goers.

no ns negative, and derives minuite from md. to moa^uie, instead of
•roro md, to bleat or low : — ‘ other goers cannot overtake him (though he is)
noving easily.’— Wilson. He with, the sharpened horns : Soma as the Moon.
Tc silvery light by night and the golden-coloured juice by day.

12 Wearing qualities by seasons: ‘clothed in pleasaut radiance according to
he season.’ — Wilson.

15 Him who stays the waters ; Vritra,



860 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK II

16 Pleased with us, Indu, send us as thou flowest good easy paths

in ample space and comforts.

Dispelling, as ’twere with a club, misfortunes, run o’er the
height, run o’er the fleecy summit.

17 Pour on us rain celestial, quickly streaming, refreshing, fraught

with health and ready bounty.

Flow, Indu, send these Winds thy lower kinsmen, setting them
free like locks of hair unbraided.

18 Part, like a knotted tangle, while they cleanse thee, 0 Soma,

righteous and unrighteous conduct.

Neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come like a youth,
0 God, a hou>e-posi>e»sor.

19 For the Gods’ service, for delight, 0 Indu, run o’er the height,

run o’er the fleecy summit.

With thousand streams, inviolate, sweet scented, flow on for
gain of strength that conquers heroes.

20 Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyoked, like

coursers started in the contest,

These brilliant drops of Soma juice run forward. Do ye, 0
Deities, come nigh to drink them.

21 So for our banquet of the Gods, 0 Indu, pour down the rain

of heaven mto the vessels.

May Soma grant us liches sought with longing, mighty, ei
ceeding strong, with store of heroes.

22 What time the loving spirit’s word had formed him Chief o

all food, by statute of the Highest,

Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the chosen, well
loved Mastei in the beaker.

23 The Sage, Celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours as he flow

the Genuine for the Truthful.

The King shall be effectual strength’s upholder : he by the te
bright reins is mostly guided.

24 He who beholds mankind, made pure with filters, the Kin

supreme of Deities and mortals,

From days of obi is Treasure-Lord of riches: he, Indu, cher
shes fair w r ell-kept Order.


17 Winds: cf. ‘ V&yu ia Soma’s guardian God’ (X. 85. 5).

22 Sftyana’s explanation of the first line is extremely laboured :
the piahe of the zealous worshipper sanctifies him as that of a noisy
in front (praises) a distinguished (prince) for the support (he affords).’—

23 Tke Genuine for the Truthful ; ritivn ritHya : the Soma juice for h^ 1
The ten bright reins ; or rays, i. e., the fingers. The half -line is difficult.



TIIE RIQVEDA.


361


YMN 97.]

5 Haste, like a Bteed, to victory for glory, to Indra’s and to
Vayu’s entertainment.

Give us food ample, thousandfold : be, Soma, the finder-out
of riches when they cleanse thee.

3 Effused by us let God-delighting Somas bring as they flow a
home with noble heroes —

Rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the worship^
pers of heaven, the best of Cheerers.

1 So, God, for service of the Gods flow onward, flow, drink of
Gods, for ample food, 0 Soma.

For we go forth to war against the mighty : make heaven and
earth well stablished by thy cleansing.

3 Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, swifter
than thought is, like an awful lion.

By paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send thou us
happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee

) Sprung from the Gods, a hundred streams, a thousand, have
been effused : sages prepare and purge them.

Bring us from heaven the means of winning, lndu; thou art
forerunner of abundant riches.

) The streams of days were poure l as’twere from heaven : the
wise King doth not treat his friend unkindly.

Like a son following his father’s wishes, grant to this family
success and safety.

I Now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweetness,
when, purified, thou goest through the filter.

The race of kine is thy gift, Pavanuna : when born thou
madest Surya rich with brightness.

1 Bright, bellowing along the path of Order, thou shinest as the
form of life eternal.

Thou flowest on as gladdening drink for Indra, sending thy
voice out with the hymns of sages.

1 Pouring out streams at the Gods’ feast with seivice, thou,

^ Soma, lookest down, i heavenly Eagle.

Enter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a roar ap-
proach the ray of Surya.

I lhrce are the voices that the Courser utters: he speaks the
thought of prayer, the law of Order.

SO rite streams of days : the libations of Soma juice which we offered eve»y
a son : the Soma juice is regarded us the son of the yajamdna or

34 ‘n W ^° causes 't to be prepared.

Me Courser is Soma, and the three voices (vychah) or words which he

er « urc according to S&yaua praises or sacred texts in the form of the thiee



362 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR

To the Cow’s Master come the Cows inquiring: the hymns
with eager longing come to Soma.

35 To Soma come the Cows, the Milch-kine longing, to Soma

sages with their hymns inquiring.

Soma, effused, is purified and blended : our hymns and Trish-
tup songs unite in Soma.

36 Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while thou art puri-

fied How for our welfare.

Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring : make the voice swell
and generate abundance.

37 Singer of true songs, evcr-watchful, Soma hath settled in the

ladles when they cleanse him.

Him the Ad h vary us, paired and eager, follow, leaders of sacri-
fice and skilful-hauded.

38 Cleansed near the Sun as ’twere, he as Creator hath filled full

heaven and earth, and hath disclosed them.

He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield
the precious meed as to a victor.

39 He, being cleansed, the Strengthener and Increaser, Soma the

Bounteous, helped us with his lustre,

Wherewith our sires of old who knew the footstops found
light and stole the cattle from the mountain.

40 In the first vault of heaven loud roared the Ocean, King of

all being, generating creatures.

Steer, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, Soma, the Drop
effused, hath waxen mighty.

41 Soma the Steer, in that as Child of Waters he chose the Gods,

performed that great achievement.

He, Pavamina, granted strength to Indra; he, Indu, gene-
rated light in Surya.

42 Make Vayu glad, for furtherance and bounty : cheer Vanina

and Mitra, as they cleanse thee.

Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Maruts : make Heaven
aud Earth rejoice, 0 God, 0 Soma.

43 Flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked, driving away

our enemies aud sickness,

Blending thv milk with milk which cows afford us. We are
thy friends, thou art the Friend of Indra.


Vedas. The three tones, low, middle, and high, are probably intended. Oi
vdhmh (the courser) may mean the bearer of the oblation, yajawlna, **
Sdyana explains.

40 In the first vault ; that is in the highest firmament. The Ocean : Som*



THE RIGVEDA.


363


jfJflT 07.]

4 pour us a fount of meath, a spring of treasure ; send us a

hero son and happy fortune.

Be sweet to Indra when they cleanse thee, Indu, and pour
down riches on us from the ocean.

5 Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, hath flowed

in stream as a flood speeding downward.

Cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling : Indu hath
flowed with milk and with the waters.

6 Strong, wiso, for thee who longest for his coming, this Soma

here flows to the bowls, 0 Indra.

He, chariot-borne, sun-bright, and truly potent, was poured
forth like the longing of the pious.

1 He, purified with ancient vital vigour, pervading all his
Daughter’s forms and figures,

Finding his threefold refuge in the waters, goes singing, as a
priest, to the assemblies.

] Now, chn riot-borne, flow unto us, God Soma, as thou art
purified flow to the saucers,

Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as Savitar the
God is, truthful-minded.

J To feast him, flow mid song and hymn, to V&yu, flow purified
to Vanina and Mitra.

Flow to the song-inspiring car-borne Hero, to mighty Indra,
him who wields the thunder.


• Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send,
purified, milch-kine, abundant yielders.

God Soma, send us chariot -drawing horses that they may
bring us treasures bright and golden.

I Send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us, when thou
art cleansed, what earth containeth,
l So that thereby we may acquire possessions and Rishihood in
Jamadagni’s manner.

Pour forth this wealth with this purification : flow onward to
the yellow lake, 0 Indu.

Here, too, the Ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, shall give
a son to him who cometh quickly.


his^ 8 P l } u 9^ tr ' 8 forms and figures : Soma pervades, and imparts a share
s nutritious power to, the grass, herbs, and shrubs which are the vaiied
^ assumed by Earth his daughter,

in Jamadagni's manner ; ‘make qur saprsd prayer (sweet) &3
g 2 a 7 ni -’-W il80n . ' r f N

I e ow •' the meaning of mdnfc&aM is uncertain. See VII. 44. 3, note



364 THE HYMNS OF [ROOK Ji

53 Flow on for us with thi© purification to the famed ford of thee

whose due is gloiy.

May the Foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, like a tree’s
ripe fruit, sixty thousnnd treasures,

54 Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake

and Prisana, wrought in battle.

He sent our enemies to sleep and slew them, and turned away
the foolish and unfriendly.

55 Thou comest unto three extended filters, and hastencst

through each one as they cleanse thee.

Thou ait the giver of the gift, a Bliaga, a Maghavan for
liberal lords, 0 Indu.

56 This Soma here, the Wise, the All-obtainer, flows on his way

as King of all existence.

Driving the drops at our assemblies, Indu completely traverses
the fleecy filter.

57 The Great Inviolate are kissing Indu, and singing in his place

like eager sages.

The wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, and balm
his form with essence of the waters.

58 Soma, may we, with thee as Pavaniana, pile up together all

our spoil in battle.

This boon vouchsafe us Varuna and Mitra, and Aditi and
Sindliu, Earth and Heaven !

HYMN XCVIII. Soma PavarnHus

Stream on us riches that are sought by many, best at wining
strength,

Riches, 0 Indu, thousandfold, glorious, conquering the great.


53 To the fumed ford: possibly, as Ludwig suggests, the aid of Somai
ciaved at some ford of a neighbouring river, famous on account of a battl
that has been fought there, and destined to be the scene of an approachinj
conflict.

64 The first line is conjecturally tianslated after Ludwig, who take
pvhdna to be the name of a place. Sily ana’s elaborate explanation is d'l
feient: — ‘These two gieat acts, the raining (of arrows) and the humiliatic
(of foes), are the givers of happiness ; tin y aie deadly either in a tight o
boiseback or in a hand-to-hand fight’ — Wilson. Here SAyana explatf
vndnschatvt (at the blue or yellow lake by ‘in battle with horses,’ an
prisane (at Piisana ?) by ‘in close, or hand-to-hand encounter.’ Two victoro
appear to be refened to, and that is about all that can be said.

66 The three extended filters are Baid to be fire, wind, and sun, in additio
to the one artificial filter of wool.

57 The Great Inviolate : the Qods. Kissing : or sipping.

53 All our spoil in battle : yet t<» be won in the approaching fight wlier«
we look to Soma for help and victory.



THE RIGVEDA.


365


rrjriv 98 ]

2 Effused, he hath, as on a cur, invested him in fleecy mail :
Onwaid hath Indu flowed in streams, impelled, surrounded by

the wood.

3 Effused, this Indu hath flowed on, distilling rapture, to the

fleece :

He goes erect, as seeking kine, in stream, with light, to sacrifice.

4 For thou thyself, 0 Indu, God, to every mortal worshipper
Attractest nches thousandfold, made manifest in hundted

forms.

5 Good Vritra -slayer, may we be still nearest to this wealth of

thine

Which many crave, nearest to food and happiness, Resistless
One !

6 Whom, bright with native splendour, crushed between the

pair of pressing-stones —

The wavy Friend whom Indra loves — the twiee-five sisters
dip and bathe,

7 Hun with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved

of all,

Who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the Deities.

B Through longing for this sap of yours yo drink what brings
ability,

Even him who, dear as heaven’s own light, gives to our princes
high renown.

Indu at holy rites produced you, Heaven and Earth, the
Friends of men,

Hill-haunting God the Goddesses. They bruised him where
the roar was loud.

For Vritra-slaying Indra, thou, Soma, art poured that he may
drink,

Poured for tho guerdon-giving man, poured for the God who
sitteth there.

These ancient Somas, at the break of day, have flowed into
the sieve,

Snorting away at early morn these foolish evil-hearted ones.


, My the wood : the wooden vat or trough.

P ‘.c eking Line: desirouH of the milk which is to be mixed with his juice.

I ®tanz«i is difficult S Ay ana explains it differently ‘ Divine heaven
^ earth the progeny of Manu, the Soma juice is generated at your sacrifices,
’’ hiding in the grinding stones ; (the priests) bruise him at the loud-
ceremony.’— Wilson. Hill-haunting: cf. IX. 85. 10.

man : for the good of the institutor of the

1 Snorting away : driving away with the bubbling sound they make.



366 THE HYMNS OF [BOOR jj

12 Friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this Most He
splendent One,

Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him whosi
home is very strength.

HYMN XCIX. Soma Pa™**

They for the Bold and Lovely One ply manly vigour like a bow
Joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the
Lord Divine.

2 And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward into strength-

ening food,

What time the sacrificer’s thoughts speed on his way the
Golden-hucd. i

3 We cleanse this gladdening drink of his, the juice which Indra

chiefly drinks, —

That which kine took into their mouths, of old, and princes
take it now.

4 To him, while purifying, they have raised the ancient psalm

of praise :

And sacred songs which bear the names of Gods have suppli-
cated him.

5 They purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve.

Him they instruct as messenger to bear the sage’s morning

prayer.

6 Soma, best Cheerer, takes his seat, the while they cleanse him

in the bowls.

He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, the Lord of Song.

12 Who hath the smell of strength : vlljagandhyam : ‘fragrant and invigo-
rating.' — Wilson. ‘ Forming or having a wagon-load of goods or spoil.’— S.^P.
Lexicon. Him whose home is strength: vttja past yam : ‘food and dwellings.’—
Wilson. ‘ Him who ha8 a house full of goods.’ — S. P. Lexicon.

1 They: the priests. Ply manly vigour like a bow: ‘stretch the bow of
manhood.’ — Wilson. They exert all their manly strength, or as Bcnfey,
suggests, attack and storm the God with prayer and sacrifice, ‘ beseeching ona
besieging ’ as Milton say b. The Lord Divine : the Asura (Zend, Ahuia), here
meaning Soma.

2 By night : kshap/t : * at the end of the night.’ — Wilson. Ludwig tran-
slates kshapft by * der fiirBt,’ ‘ the prince.’

3 Which kine took into their mouths : in the form of the juices of gra* 1 2 3 4 * 6 * 8
from which the milky portion of the libation is evolved.

4 S&yana’s explanation of the second line of this stanza, is different

the fingers exercising their pressure are able (to prepare the oblation) f° r 1
gods.’ — Wilson. w

6 He as it were impregns the coio : meaning, perhaps, as Ludwig. eugg e ® ’

that the milk becomes efficacious as a libation only when it is mixed w

Soma juice.



THE RIOVEDA .


367


STIW 100.]

7 He is effused and beautified, a God for Gods, by skilful men.
lie penetrates tho mighty floods collecting all he knows therein.

8 Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to the clean-

ing sieve.

Thou, yielding Iudra highest joy, takest thy seat within the
bowls.


HYMN C. Soma Pavam&na.

TnE Guilcloss Ones are singing praise to Indra’s well belovM
Fiiend,

As, in the morning of its life, the mothers lick the new horn
calf.

2 0 Indu^while they cleanse thee, bring, 0 Soma, doubly-waxing

Thou in the worshipper’s abode causest all treasures to in-
increase.

3 Set free the song which mind hath yoked, even as thunder

frees the rain :

All treasures of the earth and heaven, 0 Soma, thou dost
multiply.

4 Thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some victorious

warrior’s steed,

Hastening onward through the fleece like a swift horse who
wins the prize.

5 Flow on, Sage Soma, with tby stream to give us mental power

and strength,

Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for Varuna.

6 Flow to the filter with thy stream, effused, best winner, thou,

of spoil,

0 Soma, as most rich in sweets for Indra, Vishnu, and the
Gods.

? The mothers, void of guiles, caress thee, Golden-coloured, in
the sieve,

I As cows, 0 Pavamana, lick the new-born calf, as Law com-
mands.


J Collecting a if fa k nowg tfa re f n : the meaning of this half-line is not clear :
he is recognized amongst these (people) as the giver (of riches)/

J OuUelcss Ones : the vamtivart waters.

II commandi : vtdharnani : see Bergaigne, La Religion Vtdiqne,

^wuiann* 10 * 6 ^ ^ 8acr ^ oe * , ~^ Wilson. ‘ In the realm of heaven/ —



368 THE HYMNS OF [HOOK /*

8 Thou, Pavamana, movest on with wondrous rays to great re-

nown.

Striving within the votary’s house thou drivest all the glooms
away.

9 Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above

the earth.

Thou, Pavamana, hast assumed thy coat of mail in majesty.

HVMN Cl. Soma Pavam&na,

For first possession of your juice, for the exhilarating drink, j
Drive ye away the dog, my friends, drive ye the long-tongued !
dog away.

2 He who with purifying stream, effused, comes flowing hither-

ward,

Indu, is like an able steed.

3 The men with all-pervading song send unassailable Soma forth,
By pressing-stones, to sacrifice.

4 The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is des-

tined, flow,

Effused, the source of Indra’s joy : may your strong juices
reach the Gods.

5 Indu flows on for Indra’s sake : thus have the Deities declared.
The Lord of Speech exerts himself, Ruler of all, because of

might.

6 Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams the ocean

flows,

Even Soma, Lord of opulence, the Friend of Indra, day to
day.

7 As Pushan, Fortune, Bhaga, comes this Soma while they mak

him pure.

He, Lord of all the multitude, hath looked upon the eart
and heaven.

8 The dear cows lowed in joyful mood together to the gladd?

ing drink.

The drops as they were purified, the Soma juices, made the
paths.

9 0 Pavamana, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy to

famed.

Which the Five Tribes have over them, whereby we may #
opulence.

6 The coat of mail: drdpim ; aee IX. 86. 14.

1 Drive ye away : prevent dogs or R&kshasas from drinking the Soffit J 11



THE R1QVEDA .


369


UYMN 102 J

10 For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of our

weal,

Effused as friends, without a spot, benevolent, finders of the
light.

11 Effused by means of pressing-stones, upon the ox-hide visible,
They, treasure-tinders, have announced food unto us from

every side.

12 These Soma juices, skilled in song, purified, blent with milk

and curd,

When moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely Suns.

13 Let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpour-

ing juice :

As Bhrigu’s sons chased Makha, so drive ye the greedy hound
away.

14 The Friend hath wrapped him in his robe, as in his parents’

arms, a son.

He went, as lover to a dame, to take his station suitor-like.

15 That Hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both

worlds apart,

Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, priest-
like, in his place.

to Soma upon the ox’s skin through the sheep’s wool flows purified.

I Bellowing out, the Tawny Steer goes on to indra’s special
place.

HYMN Cl I. Soma PavamUna.

Tub Child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan
of sacrifice,

Surpasses all things that are dear, yea, from of old.

)j ^ ie place, near the two pressing-stones of Trita, hath he
occupied,

Secret and dear through seven lights of sacrifice.

igveda^' Hppareutl ^» a (icalon whose name does not occur again in the

lii Pedal pl " ce: ‘Prepaid station.’— Wilson. The vessel containing the
nation appropriated to Indra.

he streams : literally ‘ the great,* ‘waters’ being understood.

>. 457. I 8/? de I > . ted 10 Pro . f ‘ Macdo »ell (Journal of the R. A S., July, 1893,
ffi cult L or 10 t'Nmslatiou aud explanation of this and the following very
leparfta »i ftnzas * . place: faraway in heaven where Trita presses and
K, 0 f 16 celestial Soma for Indra. He : Soma. Bear : to Soma. Seven
toll whipK C Q e ’ P r °L a hly the seven rays or tongues of the sacrificial fire
Pfifices w closely connected. 4 Through the seven ordinance* of



370


THE HYMNS OF


[ZOOK IX,


3 Urge to three courses, on tho heights of Trita, riches in a

stream :

He who is passing wise measures his courses out.

4 Even at his birth the Mothers Seven taught him, for glory,

like a sage,

So that he, firm and sure, hath set his mind on wealth.

5 Under his sway, of one accord, are all the guileless Deities:
Warriors to be envied, they, when they are pleased.

6 The Babe whom they who strengthen Law have generated,

fair to see,

Much longed for at the sacrifice, most liberal Sage, —

7 To him, united, of themselves, conic the young Parents of the

rite,

When they adorn him, duly weaving sacrifice.

8 With wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the stall of

heaven,

Speeding at solemn rite the plan of Holy Law.


HYMN CTII. Soma ravamftua.

To Soma who is purified as ordering Piiest the song is raised:
Bring meed, as ’twere, to one who makes thee glad with hymns.

2 Blended with milk and curds he flows on through the

wool of the sheep.

The Gold-hued, purified, makes him throe seats for rest.

3 Ou through tho long wool of the sheep to the meath-droppui|

vat he flows :

The ltishis’ sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him.

4 Shared by all Gods, Infallible, the Leader of our holy hymn
Golden-hued Soma, being cleansed, hath reached the bowls.


3 s Tli<> n»am justification of my interpretation/ nays Prof. Macdouell,
that l supply no extraneous wool with ‘tifoi,’ but, explain it by the thu
hue. The meaning of my translation is : ‘ Do thou, Soma, on the heights
Trita, direct the fertilizing streams which produce wealth into the ebanfl;
of Trita, for thou knovvest these chanuels, having measured them out wi
thy sti earns/ Three courses: or chanuels, of Tiita. He who is passing mi
Soma His : Trita’s.

4 The Mothers Seven : the Seven Rivers.

f> Warriors to be envied : the meaning of tho line is uncertain.

6 They who strengthen law : according to S&yana, the vasativari waters^

7 The young Parents of the rite : ever-young, fresh and strong Heaven

Earth.

2 Three seats for rest : three reservoirs in which he may settle. Tbe<*
nakalata, the ddhavantya, and the pdtabhrit. ,

' 3 The Rtshis ’ sevenfold quire: ‘ the seven metres of the Rmis. —



THE RIO VEDA.


371


1YMN 105.]

5 After thy Godlike qualities, associate with Indra, go,

As a Priest purified by priests, Immortal One.

6 Like a car-horse who shows his strength, a God effused for

Deities,

Tlie penetrating Pavamana flows along.

HYMN CIV. Soma PavamUna.

Sit down, 0 friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself :
Deck him for glory, like a child, with holy rites.

2 Unite him bringing household wealth, even as a calf, with

mother kino,

Him who hath double strength, the God-delighting juice.

3 Purify him who gives us power, that he, most Blessed One,

maybe

A banquet for the Troop, Mitra, and Varuna.

4 Voices have sung aloud to thee as finder-out of wealth for us :
We clothe the hue thou nearest with a robe of milk.

5 Thou, Indu, art the food of Gods, 0 Sovran of all gladdening

drinks :

As Friend for friend, be thou best finder of success.

6 Drive utterly away from us each demon, each voracious fiend,
The godless and the false : keep sorrow 7 far away.

HYMN CV. Soma PavamAna.

Sing ye aloud, 0 friends, to him who makes him pure for glad-
dening drink :

r lhey shall make sweet the Child with sacrifice and laud.

2 Like as a calf with mother cows, so Indu is urged forth and sent,
Glorified by our hymns, the God-delighting juice.

3 Effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the Troop,
He who hath been eft used, most i ich in meath, for Gods.

I Flow to us, Indu, passing strong, effused, with wealth of kine
and steeds :

I will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue.

5 Lord of the tawny, Indu, thou who art the Gods’ most special
food,

As Friend to friend, for splendour be thoq good to men.

« AAer thy Qodlike qualities : according to SAyana, ‘ to the hosts of the gods.'
enetrating ; vydnasih : ‘spreading widely iuto the vessels.’ — Wilson.

* ; ' Associate him the support of the mansion with the mater-

o J?) aa ca ^ (with the mother).’— Wilson
< Troop : the banded Maruta.

5 of the tamy; hartndm : SAyana supplies paidntfm, cattle.



8 ? 2 THE HYMXS OF [ BOOK a.

6 Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each voracious
foe :

0 Indu, overcome and drive the false afar.

HYMNCVI. Soma Pitvanifon

To Indra, to theMighty Steer, may these gold-coloured juices go
Drops rapidly produced, that find the light of heaven. 8 ’

2 Effused, this juice victorious flows for Indra, for his maintc-

nance.

Soma bethinks him of the Conqueror, as he knows.

3 May India in his raptures gain from him tho grasp that gath-

ers spoil,

And, winning waters, wield the steer-strong thunderbolt.

4 Flow vigilant for Indra, thou Soma, yea, Indu, run thou on :
Bring hither splendid strength that finds the light of heaven.

5 Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra’s sake the mighty juice,
Path-maker thou, far seeing, with a thousand ways.

6 Best finder of prosperity for us, most rich in sweets for Gods,
Proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths.

7 0 Indu, with thy streams, in might, flow for the banquet of

the Gods :

Rich in meath, Soma, in our beaker take thy place.

8 Thy drops that swim in water have exalted Indra to delight-
The Gods have drunk thee up for immortality.

9 Stream opulence to ns, ye drops of Soma, pressed and purified,
Pouring down rain from heaven in Hoods, and finding light.

10 Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool

of the sheep,

Shouting while purified before the voice of song,

11 With songs they send the Mighty forth, sporting in wood,

above the fleece :

Our psalms have glorified him of the triple height.

12 Into the jars hath he been loosed, like an impetuous steed

for war,

And lifting up his voice, while filtered, glided on.

13 Gold-hued and lovely in his course, through tangles of the

wool he flows,

And pours heroic fame upon the worshippers.


Tbe hymn is a sort of rifaccimento of Hymn 104.

2 For hit maintenance : bhdrdya: or. for battle. The Conqueror: Indra.
11 Him of the triple height .- tripruhthdm : the three heights are probaW
the firmament, the mountain, and the altar. ‘ Abiding in three recoptade*
—Wilson.



THE RIG VEDA.


373


HYMN 107.]

14 Flow thus, a faithful votary : the streams of meath have
been effused.

Thou eomest to the filter, singing, from each side.


HYMN CVII. Soma PavamAna>


Hence sprinkle forth the juice effused, Soma, the best of
sacred gifts,

Who, friend of m« n > hath run amid the water-streams.

He hath preyed Soma out with stones.

2 Now, being purified, flow hither through the fleece inviolate

and most adoious.

We gladden thee in waters when thou art effused, blending
thee dtill with juice and milk.

3 Pressed out for all to see, delighting Gods, Indu, Far-sighted

0 * 0 , is mental power.

4 finalising thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest in a watery

robe : J

Giver of wealth, thou sittest in the place of Law, 0 God, a
fountain made of gold.

5 Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath, he hath sat in

the ancient gathering-place.

Washed by the men, the Strong, Far-seeing One streams forth
nutritious food that all desire.

6 0 Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the

sheep’s long wool,

Thou hast become a Singer most like Angiras : thou madest
Surya mount to heaven.

7 Bountiful, best of furtherers, Soma floweth on, Rishi and

Singer, keen of sight.

Thou hast become a S <ge most welcome to the Gods : thou
madest Surya mount to heaven.

8 Pressed out by pressers, Soma goes over the fleecy backs of

sheep, J

boes, even as with a mare, in tawny-coloured stream, goes
m exhilarating stream.

9 Down to the water Soma, rich in kino, hath flowed with cows,

with cows that have been milked.


1 Se : the priest.

5 ^ aCt ^ aW P* ace Law-ordained sacrifice.

? 6 udder for dear meath : extracting the sweet and

us 3 uice from the stalk and tendrils of the Soma plant.



374 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK IX,

They have approached the mixing- vessels as a sea : the cheerer
streams for the carouse,

10 Effused by stones, 0 Soma, and urged through the long wool

of the sheep,

Thou, entering the saucers as a man the fort, gold-hued hast
settled in the wood.

11 He beautifies himself through the shea's long fine wool, like

an impetuous steed in war,

Even Soma Pavamana who shall be the y>y of sages and of
holy bards.

12 0 Soma, — for the feast of Gods, river-liko he hath swelled

with surge,

With the stalk’s juice, exhilarating, resting not, into the vat
that drops with meath.

13 Like a dear son who must bo decked, the Lovely hath

clad him in a shining robe.

Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into *, e
rivers from their hands.

14 The living drops of Soma juice pour, as they flow, the glad-

dening drink,

Intelligent drops above the basin of the sea, exhilarating,
finding light.

15 May Pavamana, King and God, speed with his wave over the

sea the lofty rite : _ .

May he by Mitra’s and by Varuna’s decree flow furthering the

lofty rite.

1G Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose borne is
in the sea —

17 Soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for I ndra with his

Marut host : , m

He hastens o'er the fleece with all his thousand streams: mei
make him bright and beautiful.

18 Purified in the howl and gendering the hymn, wise Soma joy*

among the Gods. , , . ..

Robed in the flood, the Mighty One hath clad himself w
milk and settled in the vats.


9 They have approached the mixing-vessels like a sea: samvdraydni, ^
tamvri, to cover, enclose, surround, must, apparently, mean the vessel ^
contain the juices and not the juices themselves as Sftyana explains .

enjoyable juices go (to the pitcher as waters) to the ocean. —Wilson. .

12 0 Soma he, is a sort of periphrasis for Soma in the nominftbve

14 Of the sea : of the firmament, or sea ot air.



THE RIG VEDA .


375


BYXN 108.]

19 0 Soma, Indu, every day thy friendship hath been my delight.
Many fiends follow me ; help me, thou Tawny-hued ; pass on

beyond these barriers.

20 Close to thy bosom am I, Soma, day and night, 0 Tawny-hued,

for friendship sake.

Surya himself refulgent with his glow have we o’ertaken in his
course like birds.

>1 Deft-handed ! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea.
Thou, Pavamanu, makcst riches flow to us, yellow, abundant,
much-desired.

12 Making thee pure and bright in the sheep’s long wool, thou

hast bellowed, steer-like, in the wood.

Thou flowcsfc, Soma Pavamana, balmcd with milk unto the
special place of Gods.

13 Flow on to win us strength, flow on to lofty lore of every kind.
Thou, Soma, as Exhilarator wast the first to spread the sea

abroad for Gods,

H Flow to the realm of earth, flow to the realm of heaven, 0
Soma, in thy righteous ways.

Fair art thou whom the sages, 0 Far-sccing One, urge onward
with their songs and hymns.

25 Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the ravamanas in a stream,
Girt by the Mai uts, gladdening, Steeds with Inra’s strength,
for wisdom and for dainty food.

!6 Urged onward by the pressers, clad in watery robes, Indu is
speeding to the vat.

He gendering light, hath made the glad Cows low, the while
lie takes them as his garb of state.

HYMN CYIIf. Soma Pavam&na.

For Indra, flow thou Soma on, us gladdening jnice most •
sweet, intelligent,

Great, cheering, dwelling most in heaven.

2 Thou, of whom having drunk the Steer acts like a steer :
drinking of this that finds the light,

19 Many fiends ■ the text has only purftni, many, in the neuter plural,
ayaoa supplies rakshdhsi R&kshasas or fiends. Pass on beyond these barriers :
overcome those who surround me.’ — Wilson.

^0 C lose to thy bosom am l : ‘I (delight) in thy presence.’ — Wilson.

'G/urf the sea: antarikshe kalasc vd , in the firmament or in the beaker,
Sftyana

^ The Pavamdnas : * thy purified juices.’ — Wilson.

^ Th e Steer acts like a steer : vrishabhd vrtshdydte: ‘the showerer Indra is
v, ^ ora ^d.’— -Wilson. Etasa : one of the horses of the Sun; or a horse in
neral a horse coxnee to the battle.’— SAyana.



376 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK H

He, Excellently Wise, is come to strengthening food, to spoil
and wealth like Etasa.

3 For, verily, Pavamana, thou hast, splendidest, called all the

generations of
The Gods to immortality.

4 By whom Dadhyach Navagva opens fastened doors, by whom

the sages gained their wish,

By whom they won the fame of lovely Amrita in the felicity of
Gods.

5 Effused, he flo'weth in a stream, best rapture-giver, in the long

■wool of the sheep,

Sporting, as ’twere the waters' wave.

6 He who from out the rocky cavern took with might the red-

refulgent watery Cows, —

Thou masterest the stable full of kine and steeds : burst it,
brave Lord, like one in mail.

7 Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laud- worthy, speeding

through the region and the flood,

Who swims in water, roars in wood ;

8 Increaser of the water, Steer with thousand streams, dear to

the race of Deities ;

Who born iu Law hath waxen mighty by the Law, King, God,
and lofty Ordinance.

9 Make splendid glory shine on us, thou Lord of strengthening

food, God, as the Friend of Gods :

Unclose the fount of middle air.

10 Roll onward to the bowls, 0 Mighty One, effused, as Prince

supporter of the tribes.

Pour on us r.tiu from heaven, send us the waters 7 flow : incite
our thoughts to win the spoil.

11 They have drained him the Steer of heaven, him with ft

thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,

Him who brings all thing excellent.

12 The Mighty One was born Immortal, giving life, lightening

darkness with his shine. ,

Well-praised by sages he hath by his wondrous power assume
the Threefold as his robe.

4 Dadhyach Navagva : Padhyach was the son of Atharvan the pviest wbo
first obtained fire and offered Sonia and pi ayer to the Gods Here he w c
a Navagva and consequently one of the Angirases. See both names m •
I„ Index. Won the fame of lovely Amrita : * obtained the sustenance oi
delicious (ambrosial) water.’ — Wilson.

12 The Threefold: the morning, noon, and evening libation.



THE RIGVEHA.


377


UYHN 109.]

13 Effused is he who brings good things, who brings us bounteous

gifts and sweet refreshing food,

Soma who brings us quiet homes :

14 He whom our Indra and the Marut host shall drink, Bhaga

shnll drink with Aryaman, °

By whom we bring to us Mitra and Varuna and Indra for our
great defence.

15 Soma, for Indra’s drink do thou, led by the men, well-weapon-

ed and most gladdening,

Flow on with greatest store of sweets.

16 Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra’s heart, as rivers pass into

the sea,

Acceptable to Mitra, Vayu, Varuna, the noblest Pillar of the
heavens.


HYMN CIX. Soma Pavamlna.

Pleasant to Indra’s, Mitra’s, Piishan’s Bhaga’s taste, speed
onward, Soma, with thy flowing stream.

2 Let Indra drink, 0 Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, and all

Deities for strength.

3 So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the vast, im-

mortal dwelling-place.

4 Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as Father of the Gods,

to every form.

o How on, 0 Soma, radiant for the Gods and Heaven and Earth,
and bless our progeny.

6 Thou, bright Juice, art Sustainer of the sky : flow, mighty, in

accordance with true Law.

7 Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream through the

great fleece as in the olden time.

8 Born, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the Light-finder

make all blessings flow\


m’ °f this stanza is G&yatri YavamadhyA. that is G&yatri having

firat ? 1 c ® barley-corn, thick in the middle and tapering at both ends :
na of eight syllables, then one of twelve, and lastly another of eight,


The Rishis
&ons of * A


's iis are the Agnayo DhishnyAh, sacrifical Agnis or
■ ara the Supreme Deity of post-Yedic times.


Fires, said to be

5 pacioua°abod^— \vflso^ m0ria " -place : ‘flow for immortality and

e nteiT° of? f° rm * to * orms °r essences of the Gods into which he

to every power, to aid us in every way.



378 THE HYMNS OF {BOOK ft,

9 Indu, while cleansed, keeping the people safe, shall give us
all possessions for our own.

10 Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong courser

bathed, to win the prize.

11 The pressers purify this juice of thine, tho Soma, for delight,

and lofty fame.

1 2 They deck the Gold-hucd Tnfant, newly-born, even Soma,

Indu, in the sieve for Gods.

13 Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, Sage for good

fortune in the waters’ lap.

14 He hears the beauteous name of Indra, that wherewith he

overcame all demon foes.

15 All Deities are wont to drink of him, pressed by the men and

blent with milk and curds.

16 He hath flowed forth with thousand streams effused, flowed

through the filter and the sheep’s long wool.

17 With endless genial flow the Strong hath run, purified hy the

waters, blent with milk.

18 Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go forth, 0

Soma, into India’s throat.

19 The mighty Soma with a thousand streams is poured to Indra

through the cleansing sieve.

20 Indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for Indra, for the

Steer, for his delight.

21 Lightly, for sheen, they cleanse thee for the Gods, gold-colour-

ed, wearing water as thy robe.

22 Indu to [ndra streams, yea, downward streams, Strong, flow-

ing to the floods, and mingling there.

HYMN CX. Soma Pavam&nft.

O’erpowering Vritras, forward run to win great strength :
Thou speedest to subdue like one exacting debts.

2 In thee, effused, 0 Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great su-

premacy in tight:

Thou, Pavamana, enterest into mighty deeds.

3 0 Pavamana, thou didst generate the Sun, and spread the m

ture out with power,

Hasting to us with plenty vivified with m ilk.

14 He bears: according to Sftyana, the translation of the first h»l
would be : Indra’ s fair body he supports, wherewith, etc.

3 With plenty vivified with milk ; ‘with abundant wisdom that p roC
cattle (for thy worshippers)/— Wilson, _



q?MN 111.] THE RtGVEDA.


379


4 Thon didst produce him, Deathless God ! mid mortal men

for maintenance of Law and lovely Amrita :

Thou evermore hast moved making stiength flow to us.

5 All round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as 'twere

a never-failing well for men to drink,

Borne on thy way in fragments from the pressor's arms.

6 Tk 3 n, beautifully radiant, certain Heavenly Ones, have sung

to him their kinship as they looked thereon,

And Savitar the God opens as 'twere a stall.

7 Soma, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the

hymn to thee for mighty strength and for renown :

So, Hero, urge us onward to heroic power.

8 They have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky

the old primeval milk of heaven that claims the laud :

They lifted up their voico to Indra at his birth.

9 As long as thou, 0 Pavamana, art above this earth and heaven

and all existence in thy might,

Thou standest like a Bull the chief amid the herd.

10 In the sheep's wool hath Soma Pavamana flowed, while they

cleanse him, like a playful infant,

Indu with hundred powers and hundred currents.

11 Holy and sweet, while purified, this Tndu flows on, a wave of

pleasant taste, to Indra, —

Strength- wiuncr, Treasure-finder, Life-bes tower.

1^ S

* Ou flow thou on, subduing our assailants, chasing the demons
w n 1 to encountered,

Weii-arin-xd. and conquering our foes, 0 Soma.


HYMN CXI. Soma Pavamana.

Wirii this his goi^ n splendour purifying him, he with his
own allies subdues an enemies, as Sura with his own allies.
eaii 8 ing himself with stit* m of juice he shines forth yellow-
med and red, when with the ^raisers he encompasses all
^ forms, with praisers having seven mouths.


6 famVFfp 1 * : pieCea of the cru8hed 8talk and sh( >ots of the Soma- plant.
Vasiiruohaa ? ra diant: vasnvitchah : according to SAyana, a proper name,

^ away the


AU enemies : the fieuds of darkness.


allies ;


,^ e ® un with his attendant beams of light. All foi'ms :

brand t * 1 a 1 lunar mansion* nnonivlinor to fiAimne A


As Silva with his own


i lf n ’’ aP ^he lunar mansions, according to SAyana. According to
irases a S r 8U ™x St \ ft j ^ eau ^* With the praisevs : rikvahhih : perha


A,1 girases


Hille-
perhaps the


• are intended. Havina seven mouths • that, is, one mouth each, the



3S0 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK H

2 That treasure of the Panis thou discoveredst ; thou with thy

mothers deckest thee in thine abode, with songs of worship
in thine home.

As ’twere from far, the hymn is heard, where holy songs
resound in joy. He with the ruddy-hued, threefold hatl
won life-power, he, glittering, hath won life-power.

3 He udvcs intelligent, directed to the East. The very beau

teous car rivals the beams of light, the beautiful celestia
car.

Hymns, lauding manly valour, came, inciting Indi a to success
that ye may be unconquered, both thy bolt and thou, botl
be uncouquered in the war.

HYMN CXII. Soma Pavamftna


We all hive various thoughts and plans, and diverse are the
ways of men.

The Brahmin seeks the worshipper, wright seeks the cracked,
and leech the maimed. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake,


2 The smith with ripe and seasoned plants, with feathers of tli

birds of air,

With stones, and with enkindled flames, seeks him who hatl
a store of gold. Flow, Indu, flow for India’s sake.

3 A bard am I, my dad’s a leech, mammy lays corn upon th

stones.

Striving for wealth, with varied plans, we follow our desire
like kine. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.


2 Treasure of the Panis : the rays of light carried off and con £P ‘ oZ au!
demons of darkness. Th>/ Mothers: apparently the Dawns. Ac . co /u e f ext a ndi
the vasal) vari waters. Threefold: there is no substantive J* ’

is uncertain what tridhatuhhih refers to. S&yana refe*- , n mau ,
waters, and explains it by ‘ the supporters .of the

thinks that the beverages, consisting of three Aa * ken of as tire

Soma juice are intended. Probably the sometimes spoken of ss tw

(cf. VIII. 41. 3), are meant. ,

1 3 The very beauteous car : of Son's- Beams of light ; sunbeams.


The hymn app-ars to be an old popular song transformed into an a^dre
to Soma by aching to each stanza a ref™,,, whmh has no con ,
the subject of the song But see Vedische Studien t . p.
translated in Muir’s 0 S. Texts , V. 424. b , , ea( ]

1 The Brahman: ‘This verse distinctly proves that the pnes o

formed a profession ’ — Muir, 0. S. Texts , I. 252 # With tto#

2 Plants : meaning here reeds which were made into - gton*

and with, enkindled fames : according to SHyana, with ‘ ® nI b e ab

form the heads of the arrows Who hath a store of gold . and win

to pay well for the arrows which the artisan makes

3 My dad: tatdh : a familiar expression, corresponding to noni», “



THE RIQVEDA.


381


YMN 113.]

. The horse would draw an easy car, gay hosts attract the laugh
and jest.

The male desires his mate’s approach, the frog is eager for the
flood. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

HYMN CXIII. Soma Pavam&na.

Let Vritra-slaying Indra drink Soma by Saryana van’s side,
Storing up vigour in his heart, prepared to do heroic deeds.
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

> Lord of the Quarters, flow thou on, boon Soma, from Arjika land,
Effused with ardour and with faith, and the true hymn of
sacrifice. Plow, Indu, flow for Indra’ s sake.

I Hither hath Surya’s Daughter brought the wild Steer whom
Parjanya nursed.

Gandharvas have seized hold of him, and in the Soma laid
the juice. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

1 Splendid by Law ! declaring Law, truth-speaking, truthful in
thy works,

Enouncing faith, King Soma ! thou, 0 Soma, whom thy maker
docks. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

5 Together flow the meeting streams of him the Great and truly

Strong.

The juices of the juicy meet. Made pure by prayer, 0 Golden-
lined, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

6 0 Pavamana, where the priest, as he recites the rhythmic

prayer,

Lords it o’er Soma with the stone, with Soma bringing forth
delight, flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

* 0 Pavamana, place me in that deathless, undecaying world
^herein the light of heaven is set, and everlasting lustre shines.
F ]u v, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

I® Make me^amortal in that realm where dwells the King, Vivas-
van’s Son,

Where is the secret shrine of heaven, where are those waters
young and fresh. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

1 Saryandvdn : a lake in the Kurukshetra district.

2 Of the Quarters : of the four regions of the sky. Arjika land: accord-
8 on Sa W country of the Rijlkas. Cf VIII. 7. 29.

, it w ^ om P^janya nursed : the mighty Soma-plant whose
been Petered by the God of the rainy cloud. Sfirya's Daughter:
« or *" a lth. Cf. IX. 1.6. Qandharvas: guardians of the heavenly
See Vol. I., Index. *

ma ^ er •' the Soma-presser, or the institutor of the sacrifioe 1 2 the
W er (°f the rite)/— Wilson.

°] j Yama, the ruler of departed spirits, son of Vivasv&n. See



332


THE MOVE DA,


Wok i

9 Makemeimmort ilin that realm where they move evenas they lj s
In the third sphere of inmost heaven where lucid worlds a;
full of light. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

] 0 Make me immortal in that realm of eager wish and strong desir
The region of the radiant Moon, where food and full deligl
are found. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake,
ll Make me immortal in that realm where happiness and trai
sports, where

Joys and felicities combine, and longing wishes are fulfill#
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

HYMN CX1V. Soma Pavamdm

The man who walketh as the Laws of Indu Pavam&na bid, —
Men call him rich in children, him, 0 Soma, who hath met th;
thought. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

2 Kasyapa, Rishi, lifting up thy voice with hymn-composers’ lauds
Pay reverence to King Soma born the Sovran Ruler of thi

plants. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

3 Seven regions have their several Suns ; the ministering priests

are ^even ;

Seven are the Aditya Deities, — with these, 0 Soma, guard thou
us. Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

4 Guard us with this oblation which, King Soma, hath been

dressed for thee.

Let not malignity conquer us, let nothing evil do us bam
Flow, Indu, flow for Indra’s sake.

9 Where they move even as they list : ‘where action is unrestiaiued.’— Muir.
‘ Wlieie the sun wanders at will.’ — Wilson.

10 0/ the radiant Moon : the adjective bmdhndsya, of the ruddy or IrilliM
stands without a substantive. ‘Sun’ is supplied by S&yaua. ‘Dean'**
tralenden.’ — Ludwig. See Hillebrandt, Vedische Mythologic, I., 390.

As regards the joys of the departed, referred to iu stanzas 7 — 12._r ro Jf ,
von Roth observes (Jouru. Amer. Orient, Soc. iii. 343, quoted ^y P 1 ’ 1 l ' 1
0. 8. Texts, V. 307) ‘ The place where these glorified ones are h ve 13 . v 7
In order to show that not merely an outer court of the divine dwellings
set apart for them, the highest heaven, the midst or innermost part of heav
is expressly spoken of ns their seat. This is tbefr place of rest ; an
divine splendour is not disfigured by any specification of particular eau ^
or enjoyments, such as those with which other religions have been wo
adorn the mansions of the blest .. . There they are happy : the language
to describe their condition is the. same with which is denoted the moB e
felicity.’

2 Kasyapa: the peer of the hymn addresses himself. > , y |# ti

3 Seven regions : the regions of the sky, the four quarters with mterw ^

points. They arc sometimes said to be five, Bix, or seven in num •
more frequently eight. Aditya Deities: Varuua, Mitra, Airyatnan,
Daksha, Ansa, and perhaps Dh&tar. Other enumerations i are j,

their number is sometimes said to be eight See M. Muller, VtnM y

p. 252f (Sacred Books of the East, XXXI I).


II io ii hath the Mighty risen before the dawning, and come to
us with light from out the darkness.

Fair-shapcn Agni with white-shining splendour hath filled at
birth all human habitations.

2 Thou, being bom, art Child of Earth and Heaven, parted

among the plants in beauty, Agni !

The glooms of night thou, Brilliant Babe, subduest, and art
come forth, loud roaiiug, from thy Mothers.

3 Here, being manifested, lofty Vishnu, full wise, protects his

own supremest station.

When they have offered in his mouth their sweet milk, to
him with one accord they sieg forth piaises.

4 Thence bearing food the Mothers come to meet thee, with

food for thee who givest food its increase.

These in their altered form again thou meetest. Thou art
Invoking Priest in homes of mortals.

5 Priest of the holy rite, with car that glitters, refulgent Ban-

ner of each act of worship,

Shaimg in every God through might and glory, even Agni
Guest of men I summon hither.

6 So Agni stands on earth's most central station, invested in

wcJl-decorated garments.

horn, red of hue, where men pour out libations, 0 King, as
great High Priest bring the Gods hither.

^ 0\cr the earth and over heaven, 0 Agni, thou, Son, hast over
spread above thy Parents.

0lU0 > Yonthfullest ! to hose who long to meet thee, and
hither bring the Gods, 0 Mighty Victor.

1 The Mighty: Agni. ~ “ ~

g ^ on 9 the plants : according to S&yana, in the fire-sticks.

"Shippers * ^ * orm °* Ag n i who is his manifestation on earth. They :

n ; the plants wh'ch nourish life. In their altered, form: a»

5 l^ Wh ! ch ** fire > consumes.

Gods ^ * W ’ ^ ecause as the bearer of men’s oblations supports all



384


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK,


HYMN IT. Ag

Gladden the yearning Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful : brii
them, 0 Lord of Seasons, knowing seasons,

With all the Priests Celestial, 0 Agni. Best worshipper a
thou of all Invokers.

2 Thine is the Herald’s, thine the Cleanser’s offioe, thinker a

thou, wealth-giver, true to Order.

Let us with Svahi offer up oblations, and Agni, worthy Go
pay the Cods worship.

3 To the Cods’ pathway have we travelled, ready to execu

what work we may accomplish.

Let Agni, for he knows, complete the worship. He is tl
' Priest : let him fix rites and seasons.

4 When we most ignorant neglect the statutes of you, 0 Deiti

with whom is knowledge,

Wise Agni shall correct our faults and failings, skilled i
assign each Cod his fitting season.

5 When, weak in mind, of feeble understanding, mortals bethin

them not of sacrificing,

Then shall the prudent and discerning Agni worship the God:
best worshipper, in season.

6 Because the Father hath produced time, Leader of all ou

solemn rites, their brilliant Banner:

So win by worship pleasant homes abounding in heroes, an
rich food to nourish all men.

7 Thou whom the Heaven and Earth, thou whom the Water'

and Tvashtar, maker of fair things, created,

Well knowing, all along the Fathers’ pathway, shine vritl
resplendent light, enkindled, Agni.

HYMN II I. Agni

0 King, the potent and terrific envoy, kindled for strength, a
manifest in beauty.

He shines, all-knowing, with his lofty splendour : chasing
black Night he comes with white rayed Morning.

1 Seasons: the proper times of worship. Priests Celestial : Agni being tht

Hotar, the Asvins the Adlivaryus, Tvashtar the Agnldh, and Mitrft
Upavaktar. AsvalAyana, as cited by SAyana, gives a different enumeiatw
See Wilson, note. _ , ..

2 The Herald is the Hotar or invoking priest : the Cleanser is the * j|
Purifier, the assistant of the Brahman. Svdhd : an exclamation = Ave ! or

3 The Gods' pathway : ‘ the path that leads to the gods ’ — Wilson.

<J The father : PrajApati ; or the insfcitutor of the sacrifice. — SAyapa.

7 The Fathers' pathway : the way that leadg to the home of the Man

Ancestral Spirits. _ nr . fh m-

1 0 Kitty : Ludwig takes vdjan here as the nominative case, wn ^
rayed Morning: I follow Ludwig in taking rusatlm as inatrunisuw
rusatvdm.



THE RIG VEDA.


385


jYMN L]


2 Having o’ercome the glimmering Black with beauty, and

bringing forth the Diime, the Great Sire’s Daughter,

Holding aloft the radiant light of JSurya, as messenger of heav
en lie shines with treasures.

3 Attendant on the Blessed Dame the BlessM hath come : the

Lover follovveth his Sister.

Agni, far-spreading with conspicuous lustre, hath compassed
Night with whitely-shming garments.

4 His goings-forth kindle as ’twere high voices, the goings of the

auspicious Friend of Agni.

The rays, the bright beams of the strong-jawed, mighty,
adorable Steer are visible as he cometh.

5 Whose radiant splendours flow, like sounds, about us, his who

is lofty, brilliant, and effulgent,

Who reaches heaven with best and brightest lustres, sportive
and piercing even to the summit.

6 His powers whoso chariot fellies gleam and glitter have loudly

ro.ired wlulo, as with teams, he hasted,
lie, the most Godlike, far-extending envoy, shines with flames
ancient, resonant, whitely-shining.

I So bring us ample wealth : seat thee as envoy of the two
youthful Matrons, Earth and Heaven.

Let Agni rapid with his rapid horses, impetuous with impe-
tuous Steeds, come hither.


IIYMN IV.


Agni.


To thee will I send praise and bring oblation, as thou hast
merited lauds when we invoked thee.

A fountain m the desert art thou, Agni, 0 Ancient King, to
man who fain would worship.

2 Thou unto whom resort the gathered people, as the kine seek

the warm stall, 0 Most Youthful,

Thou art the messenger of Gods and mortals, and goest glori-
ous with thy light between them.

3 Making thee grow as ’twere some noble Infant, thy Mother

nurtures thee with sw. et affection.

Over the desert slopes thou passes t longing, and seekest, like
s omo beast set free, thy fodder.

2 Glimmering Black : dark night, faintly lighted by stars. The Great Sire »
yr Dawn, daughter of Dyaua or Heaven,
i £, ^ ter ' Agni who appears together with Dawn,
i ■ j e i'ue is almost unintelligible. ‘The blazing flames of that mighty
bs’ndo nut (deter) his adorers.’- Wilson.


1 To


Man :


to Pfiru.



ooo m/s hi mm 8 \jf L &O0R }

4 Foolish arc we, 0 Wise and free from error : verily, Agni, th 0

dost know thy grandeur.

There lies the form : he moves, and licks, and swallows, ant
as llouse-Lord, kisses the Youthful Maiden.

5 He rises ever fresh in ancient fuel : smoke-bannered, gray, \

makes the wood his dwelling.

No swimmer, Steer, he presses through the waters, and to h
place accordant mortals bear him.

6 Like thieves who risk their lives and haunt the forest, tl

twain with their ten girdles have secured him.

This is a new hymn meant for thee, 0 Agin : yoke as it wei
thy car with parts that glitter.

7 Homage and prayer are thine, O Jatavedas, and this my son

shall evermore exalt thee.

Agni, piotect our children and descendants, and guard wit
ever-wdtehful care our bodies.

HYMN V. Agn

His only is the Sea, holder of treasures: born many a tun
he views the hearts within us.

He hides him in the secret couple’s bosom. The Bird dwell
in the middle of the fountain.

2 Inhabiting one dwelling-place in common, strong Stallions ant

the Mares have come together.

The sages guard the seat of Holy Order, and keep the highea
names concealed within them.

3 The Holy Pair, of wondrous power, have coupled : they formec

the Infant, they who bred produced him,

The central point of all that moves and moves not, the whili
they wove the Sage’s thread with insight.

4 The form ; the Ahavanfya fire. The Youthful Maiden : according tc
Silyana, either the mixed oblation, oi the young earth as compared with hK
witheicd plants.

(5 The twain : the two arms, with their grasping fingers which pi oduce to
by agitation of the fire-stick.

1 He : Agni as the Sun. The secret couple's bosom, : the meaning is uncer
tain. The fire-sticks in which Agni is latent may be intended. ‘He wait*
on the cloud in the neighbourhood of the hidden (firmament).’ — Wilson. 1"
Bird: the Sun. The fountain : the source of light in the east.

2 Strong Stallions ■ pei haps the flames of the Sun. Mares : waters of ®

firmament. The highest names : of Agni, such as JfHavedas and VaisvAnafl
Concealed within them • in their secret hearts, for worship. .

3 The Holy Pair: Heaven and Earth. The Infant : Agni. The while W
wove: viyanta h in the text is unintelligible, and I follow Wallis h J . reft fj
vayantt in its stead. The Sage's thread; the series of sacrifices to which AJ®
is entitled.



TBE ElQVEDA.


S8T

4 Fof tracks of Order and refreshing viands attend from ancient

times the goodly Infant.

Wearing him as a mantle, Earth and Heaven grow strong by
food of pleasant drink and fatness.

5 lie, calling loudly to the Seven red Sisters, hath, skilled in

sweet drink, brought them to be looked on.

Ho, born of old, in middle air hath halted, and sought and
found the covering robe of Pushan.

6 Seven are the pathways which the wise have fashioned ; to

one of these may come the troubled mortal.

He standeth in the dwelling of the Highest, a Pillar, on sure
ground where paths are parted.

7 Not Being, Being in the highest heaven, in Aditi’s bosom and

in Daksha’s birthplace,

Is Agni, our first-born of Holy Order, the Milch-cow and the
Bull in life’s beginning.

HYMN VI. Agni.

This is that Agni, he by whose protection, favour, and help
the singer is successful \

Who with the noblest flames of glowing fuel comes forth en-
compassed with far-spreading lustre.


5 The Seven red Sisters : the seven tongues or flames of Agni, called kdlt,
rdli, etc.— Sfiyana. And found the covering robe of Pdshan : and hath
appeared in the form of Pushan or the Sun.

6 Pathways : long lines of light. The Wise ; the Fathers. The troubled
V'tal: the man who is longing for daybreak may approach the pathway of
[ht Wallis translates the second line differently : — ‘ The support of life in
e home of the highest, at the divergence of the ways, standeth on sure
ouud ’ I/e : apparently Agni as the Sun, to whom the troubled or sinful
*n comes for light or forgiveness. Pillar: support and stay of the uni-
!r8e j like the Skambha of Atharva-veda, X. 7. Where paths are parted:
here ends the dark road which the Sun travels by night, and the bright
Mi of his daily course begins.

7 Not Being, Being: nonexistent, existent. ( asachcha sachcha, ‘both
evolved and evolved,’ identifying Agni with the first cause and first effect,

. a reference to such. texts as Asad evarn ulam agra dsit ‘the non existent
ist^nt (or unevolved) was verily before this (creation) ' — Wilson, from
tyapa Aditi = Svvafiig } Daksha = lvlpytl(l' Heie Agni is lopiesented as
rajapati who as a yet undeveloped embryo is at the same time both male
'finale. — Ludwig. Or Daksha may be the Sun and Aditi the Earth. ‘In
c Agui is identified with all things. These latter hymns to Agni are veiy
;* CU!e i, : the notions are mystical; many of the terms are unusual, or are
filBoii » Hn< * construction is singularly elliptical and loose.’ —

This Hymn has been wholly translated, with comments, by Wallis. Sed
0im ology of the Rigveda , pp. 48 — 50.



3S8


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X.


2 Agni, the Holy One, the everlasting, who shines far beaming

with celestial splendours ;

He who hath come unto his friends with friendship, like a
fleet steed who never trips or stumbles.

3 He who is Lord of all divine oblation, shared by all living

men at break of morning,

Agni to whom our offerings are devoted, in whom rests he
whose car, through might, is scatheless.

4 Increasing by his strength, while lauds content him, with

easy flight unto the Gods he travels.

Agni the cheerful Priest, best Sacriticer, balms with his tongue
the Gods with whom he mingles.

5 With songs and adorations bring ye hither Agni who stirs

himself at dawn like Indra,

Whom sages laud with hymns as Jataved.is of those who wield
the sacrificial ladle.

6 In whom all goodly treasures meet together, even as steeds

and riders for the booty.

Inclining hither bring us help, 0 Agni, even assistance most
desired by Indra.

7 Yea, at thy birth, when thou hadst sat in glory, thou, Agni,

wast the aim of invocations.

The God. came near, obedient to thy summons, and thus at-
tained their rank as chief Protectors.

HYMN VII. Agni,


O Agni, shared by all men living bring us good luck for
sacrifice from earth and heaven.

With us be thine intelligence, Wonder-Worker! Protect us,
God, with thy far-reaching blessings.

2 These hymns brought forth for thee, O Agni, land thee f»r
bounteous gifts, with cattle and with horses.


3 The exact meaning "of the second line is uncertain and in whow (tl>«
sacriticer), whose sacrifice is undisturbed by his foes, throws his choice

tl °5 A tdawT: with Grassmann I take uarXm here to be a locative. sa . VH, ’ a


5 At dawn : witn urassmann x «•*■*«* ~ — A^^wto

explains it as bhogdndm utsrdiinam, the bestowe. of enjoyments. According
Ludwig’s interpretation, the translation of the first line would be s Witji
and adorations bring ye hither the Lord of mommy shine, the qinveniifc

6 Riders : sdpttvantah: the word properly means possessed of hoi > or
is applicable todiivers as well as riders. For the booty : to win the sj >
to guard it from others.

1 Thine intelligence : the meaning of praketaih heus is n ot clear.
translates it by * indications (of favour) ’ ; Ludwig by wishes ,
mann by ‘light.’



THE RIG VEDA.


389


HYHS 8 .]

Good Lord, when man from thee hath gained enjoyment, by
hymns, 0 nobly-born, hath he obtained it.

3 Agni I deem my Kinsman and my Father, count him my

Brother and my Friend for ever.

I honour as the face of lofty Agni in heaven the bright and
holy light of Stirya.

4 effectual, Agni, are our prayers for profit. He whom, at home,

thou, Priest for ever, guardest

Is rich in food, drawn by red steeds, and holy : by day and
night to him shall all be pleasant.

5 Men with their arms have generated Agni, helpful as some kind

friend, adorned with splendours,

And stal dished as Invoker mid the people the ancient Priest,
the sacrifice’s lover.

6 Worship, thyself, 0 God, the Gods in heaven : what, void of

knowledge, shall the fool avail thee ?

As thou, 0 God, hast worshipped Gods by seasons, so, nobly-
born ! to thine own self pay worship.

7 Agni, be thou our Guardian and Protector : bestow upon us

life and vital vigour.

Accept, 0 Mighty One, the gifts we offer, and with unceasing
care protect our bodies.

HYMN Yin. Agni.

Agni advances with his lofty banner : the Bull is bellowing to
the earth and heavens.

He hath attained the sky’s supremest limits : the Steer hath
waxen in the lap of waters.

2 The Bull, the youngling with the hump, hath frolicked, the
strong and never-ceasing Calf hath bellowed.

Bringing our offerings to the Gods’ assembly, he moves as
Chief in his own dwelling places.


® The second line is remarkable as a direct declaration of the relationship
and Siirya. — Ludwig.

? Ee thou our Guardian and Protector : aritd, says S&yana, is a protector
)ln °bvious dangers and gopit a preserver from perils that are unseen,

} Advances : through the firmament. His lofty banner: the lightning.
a<er » ' <>f the firmament.

2 ^ever-ceasing : asremA f ; according to S&yana, ‘ undecaying.’ * Glorious.’-—



890


THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR *


3 Him who hath grasped his Parents’ head, they stablished at
sacrifice as a wave of heavenly lustre.

In his swift flight the red Dawns borne by horses refresh their
bodies in the home of Order.


4 For, Vasu, thou precedost every Morning, and still hast been
the Twins’ illuminator.

For sacrifice, seven places thou retainest while for thine own
self thou engendercst Mitra.


5 Thou art the Eye and Guard of mighty Order, and Varuna

when to sacrifice thou comest.

Thou art the Waters’ Child, 0 Jatavedas, envoy of him whose
offering thou acceptest.

6 Thou art the Leader of the rite and region, to which with thine

auspicious teamB thou tendest.

Thy light-bestowing head to heaven thou liftest, making thy
tongue the oblation-bearer, Agni.

7 Through his wise insight Trita in the cavern, seeking as ever

the Chief Sire’s intention,

Carefully tended in his Parents’ bosom, calling the weapons
kin, goes forth to combat.

8 Well-skilled to use the weapons of his Father, Aptya, urged

on by Indra, fought tho battle.

Then Trita slew the foe seven-rayed, three-headed, and freed
the cattle of the Son of Tvashtar.


3 His Parents' hccul : the head or forehead of Heaven and Earth, or of the ‘w
fire-sticks. The red Dawns ■ or the flames, according to Sdyana. There is
substantive in the text. The home of Order • probably tho bun, : if : the Da*
are spoken of ; and the place of law-ordained sacrifice according to Stya?»

explanation. ulum{nator . fighter-up of day and night, that ib, of the erf
of night, or very early morning. But see H.llebrandt, Vavu^ «** **'
p 116. Seven places: seven altars for the sacrificial fire. Mitr .

5 Varuna: King and Governor. , firmament.

6 And region: thou knowest, and canst show the way through, t ^

7 In the cavern: in the secret depth of the firmament (

Chief Sire’s intention : wishing to carry out the design Ind ™ h P_Wil»o»-
Dyaus or Dyu. His Parents: ‘the parental heaven andeart^ w
Calling the weapons kin : calling the weapons, » e. t 'e loolte which
duced from tho sky, akin, simply means claiming them ** °, _f tr jsui).-

father Dyu as they are in the next stanza spoken of as paternal (p y
Macdonell, J. R- A. S., July, 1893, p. 428 ^

8 Of his Father: belonging to the Chief Sire of stanza 7. 0 r

■necial enemy of Trita is Trisiraa the son of Tvashtar, called . . by

tL Multiform. The cattle of the Son of Tvashtar : the cows impr

him, the showers obstructed by the fiend. see Mu ir.

For the legends founded on the last three stanzas * h ®. J. I 1
0. S. Texts, V. PP. 229 -233. See also Bergaigne, La Rehgwn vw x



THE RIO VEDA.


891


HYMS 10 ]

9 Lord of the brave, Tndra cleft him in pieces who sought to
gain much strength and deemed him mighty.

He smote his throe heads from his body, seizing the cattle of
the omniform Son of Tvashtar.

HYMN IX. Waters.

Yu, Waters, are beneficent: so help ye us to energy
That we may look on great delight.

2 (live us a portion of the sap, the most auspicious that ye have,
bike mothers in their longing love.

3 To you we gladly come for him to whose abode ye send us on ;
And, Waters, give us procreant strength.

4 The Waters be to us for drink, Goddesses for our aid and bliss :
Let them stream to us health and strength.

5 I beg the Floods to give us balm, these Queens who rule o’er

precious things,

And have supreme control of men.

6 Within the Waters — Soma thus hath told me — dwell all balms

that heal,

And Agni, ho who blcsseth all.

7 0 Waters, teem with medicine to keep my body safe from harm,
So that 1 long may see the Sun.

8 Whatever sin is found in me, whatever evil I have wrought,

If I have lied or falsely sworn, Waters, remove it far from me.

9 The Waters 1 this day have sought, and to their moisture

have we come :

0 Agni, rich in milk, come thou, and with thy splendour cover me.

HYMN X. Varna. Yam!.

Fain would I win my friend to kindly friendship. So may the
S.igc, come through the air’s wide ocean,

Remembering the earth and days to follow, obtain a son, the
issue of his father. «

1 Great delight : according to the scholiast, meaning perfect knowledge of
Brahma. See Wilson’s note.

3 The meaning of the stanza is obscure. It appears to have been recited
by the priest at the consecration of a new house.

'the first three stanzas are to be repeated by Br&hmans at their morning
ablutions. See Colebrooke’s Essays, Essay I. On the Rcliyious Ceremonies of
Me Hindus. See also Lainuan, Sanskrit Raider, p. 370
6 Stauzas 6—9 aie repeated from Book I. 23. 20—23.

Ya,nia and Yarnt, son and daughter of VivasvAn, are the Ilishis as well as
tho deities of the hynm which is a dialogue between them.

^ma and Yami are, says von Roth, ‘as their names denote, twin brother
a Q<l sister, and are the first human pair, the originators of the race. As the



392 TUE HYMNS OF [BOOK z

2 Thy friend loves not the friendship which considers her who i 8

near in kindred as a stranger.

Sons of the mighty Asura, the Heroes, supporters of the
heavens, see far around them.

3 Yea, this the Immortals seek of thee with longing, progeny of

the sole existing moitnl.

Then let thy soul and mine be knit together, and as a loving
husband take thy consort.

4 Shall we do now what we ne’er did aforetime ? we who spake

righteously now talk impurely ?

Gandharva in the floods, the Dame of Waters - such is our
bond, such our most lofty kinship.

5 Even in the womb God T.aditar, Vivificr, shaping all forms,

Greater, made us consorts.

None violates his holy ordinances : that we are his the heavens
and earth acknowledge.

G Who knows that earliest day whereof thou speak est HVlio
hath beheld it 1 Who can here declare it 1

Hebrew conception closely connected the parents of mankind by making the
woman formed fiom a poition of the body of the man, so by the Indian
tradition they are placed in the relationship of twins. This thought is laid
by the hymn in question in the mouth of Yarn! herstdf, when she is made to
say : ‘ Even in the womb the Creator made us for husband and wife.’ ’ Profes-
sor Muller, on the other hand, says (Lectures on the Science of Language,
second series, p 510) : ‘ There is a curious dialogue between her (Yami) and
her brother, where she (the night) implores her brother (the day) to make her
bis wife, and where he declines her offer, ‘because,’ as he says, ‘they have
called it a sin that a brother should marry his sister.” Again, p. 521, ‘There
is not a single word in the Veda pointing to Yama and Yaml as the first couple
of mortals, the Indian Adam and Eve . .. If Yamahad been the first created
of men, surely the Vedic poets, in speaking of him, could not have passed tins
over in silence.’ See, however, the passage from the Atbarva-veda, XVIII.
3, 13, to be quoted further on. [Reverence ye with an oblation Yauia, the Min
of Vivasvat, the assembler of men, who was the fust of men that died,
the first that depaited to this (celestial) world].’ Muir, 0.8. Texts, V . p.
288. Yama as the fir-*t man may peihaps be, as Prof. Max Muller holds, i

Inter phase of leligion.s thought.’

1 Yaml speaks The Sage: red/dh : Yama. whom she wishes to give her a

son. Come: SAvana explains the masculine participle jaganvitn by the femi-
nine gatavatl, that is, I, Yarn! who have come. The earth : which, otherwise,
will remain without human inhabitants. »

2 Yama replies. .4 strait per : of a different family, and so a lawful wife- ^ 0
of the mighty Asura : the spies or sentinels spoken of in stanza 8.

3 Yaml speaks. .

4 Yama replies. Gandharva: VivaavAn or the Sun. In the floods: in _
waters of the firmament. The Dame of Waters: fWnnyu. ‘ His aqueous •
— Muir. Such in our hand : these are our parents. But see Ludwig, tcoe
nenesten Arheiten, u. 9. w, p. 107.

5 Vat tit HnMilcti.



JIYMN 10]. THE MOVED A. S93

Great is the Law of Varuna and Mitra. What, wanton t wilt
thou say to men to tempt them 1

7 I, Yami. am possessed by love of Yama, that I may rest on the

same couch beside him.

I as a wife would yield me to my husband. Like car-wheels
let us speed to meet each other.

8 They stand not still, they never close their eyelids, those

sentinels of Gods who wander round us.

Not me— go quickly, wanton, with another, and hasten like a
chariot wheel to meet him.

9 May Surya 3 eye with days and nights endow him, and ever

may his light spread out before him.

In heaven and earth the kindred Pair commingle. On Yami
lie the unbrotherly act of Yama.

10 Sure there will come succeeding times when brothers and

sisters will do acts unmeet for kinsfolk.

Not me, 0 fair one, — seek another husband, and make thine
arm a pillow for thy consort.

11 Is he a brother when no lord is left her 1 Is she a sister when

Destruction cometh ?

Forced by my love these many words I utter. Come near,
and hold me in thy close embraces.

12 I will not fold mine arms about thy body : they call it sin

when one comes near his sister.

Not me, — prepare thy pleasures with another: thy brother
seeks not this from thee, 0 fair one.


6 Yama replies. To tempt them : the meaning of itchyd is uncertain. The
5 P. Lexicon explains it by ‘deceitfully.’ ‘ Falsely.’— Grassmann. ‘What
wye^t thou, who punishest men with hell ? ’ — Wilson.

7 Same couch : see Benfey, Vedica und Verwandtcs , pp 39 — 42, for a difter-
! ut explanation of samdnt f y6nan.

8 Yuma replies. Sentinels of Gods: recording angels who watch men’s

ictums.

9 Yami speaks The meaning seems to be : if there be any guilt let me
e it upon myself, and let not Yama’s life be shortened by way of punish*

went. The kindred Pair : Day and Night.

10 Yama replies. ‘ Make thine arm a pillow.'— Wilson.

U Yami speaks. De&tmction : Nirriti ; the utter extinction of the human
niff + The meaning is, a true brother will not let his sifter lack a husband,
ft true sister will not let her brother lack a wife.’ — Wibou’s Translation,
Star's note.

12 Yama replies.



394 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X,

13 Alas ! thou art indeed a weakling, Yama ; we find in thee u 0

trace of heart or spirit.

As round the tree the woodbine clings, another will cling
about thee girt as with a girdle. 0

14 Embrace another, Yami ; let another, even as the woodbine

rings the tree, enfold thee

Win thou his heart and let him win thy fancy, and he shall
form with thee a blest alliance.


HYMN XL


Agni,


Tiie Bull hath yielded for the Bull the milk of heaven : the
Son of Adi ti can never be deceived.

According to his wisdom Varuna knoweth all : may he, the
Holy, hallow times for sacritice.

2 Gandharvi spake : may she, the Lady of the flood, amid the
river’s roaring leave my heart untouched.

May Aditi accomplish all that we desire, and may our eldest
Brother tell us this as Chief.


3 Yea, even this blessed Morning, rich in store of food, splendid,
with heavenly lustre, hath shone out for man,

Since they, as was the wish of yearning Gods, brought forth
that yearning Agni for the assembly as the Priest.


13 Yarn! speaks. |

SAy ana's interpretation of this difficult hymn differs in many places from
that which I have adopted, and Wilson's Translation should be consulted for
the views of the gre.it Indian Commentate and the Pandits of his tiin<\ The
hymn has been tiamlitmated, translated, and annotated by Dr Muir, 0 8.
Texts, V. 288 — 291. It has also been translated by the authors of the Sic
benzig Liedcr t and fully di-eusscd by Di J Ehni in Der Vcdische Aiytliusdet
Yama. fcsee also llillebrandt, Vcdische Mythologie , I. p. 495.

The subject of the hymn is the origin and institution of sacrifice, first j
established by Agni under the authority of Varuna, who must be regarded as j
the deity of the first otanza.

1 The Bull: the mighty Soma. For the Bull: for mighty Varuna. The

mill: of heaven : the divine Soma juice, to be used at sacrifice. The Son of
Aditi • Varuna. According to his wisdom : yathd dhiyet : the two words tnken
together as an adverbial phrase. According to S-lyana, it is Agni who nnlk 9
the streams of prosperity from heaven for the worshipper. I have generally
followed Piscbel’s interpretation of the first five stanzas ( Vedische Sludien , l.
pp 188, 189). .

2 Gandharvi : said to be the daughter of Surabhi (one of the daughters')
Daks ha), and the mother of the race of horses. Here she appears to be j 111
Apsaras or water-nymph, haunting the banks of rivers and practising ti®
seductive arts of a siren. The meaning seems to be, let no disturbing 1 ^
ence unsettle my devout thoughts. Our eldest Brother : Varuna, legatdeo
the founder of society united by common religious observances.

3 The poet regards the coming of the dawn as a proof that the sacrin ce
successful. Since they: the piies ts.



THE RIGVEDA.


gYMN 12 .]


395


4 And the fleet Falcon brought for sacrifice from afar this flow-

ing Drop most excellent and keen of sight,

Then when the Aryan tribes chose as Invoking Priest Agni
the Wondor- Worker, and the hymn rose up.

5 Still art thou kind to him who feeds thee as with grass, and,

skilled in sacrifice, offers thee holy gifts.

When thou, having received the sage’s strengthening food
with lauds, after long toil, comest with many more.

6 Urge thou thy Parents, as a lover, to delight: the Lovely

One desires and craves it from his heart.

The priest calls out, the sacrificer shows his skill, the Asura
tries his strength, and with the hymn is stirred.

7 Far-famed is he, the mortal man, 0 Agni, thou Son of Strength,

who hath obtained thy favour.

He, gathering power, borne onward by his horses, makes his
days lovely in his might and splendour.

8 When, Holy Agni, the divine assembly, the sacred synod mid

the Gods, is gathered,

And when thou, Godlike One, dealest forth treasures, vouch-
safe us, too, our portion of the riches.

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid

car, the car of Amrit.

Bring Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither : stay
with us here, nor from the Gods he distant.


HYMN XU. Agni.

Hkaven and Earth, first by everlasting Order, speakers of
truth, are near enough to hear us,

When the God, urging men to worship, sitteth as Priest, as-
suming all his vital vigour.


rJ P U8 ft ow i n 9 Drop : the Soma, brought from heaven by the Falcon. See
iv. 26 ail( j 27.

nr,^ ou ’ As with grass : ‘ as pasture satisfies (the herds).’ — Wilson.

! ^ man y more : bringing many other Gods to the sacrifice.

6 /Is a lover : woos his mistress. Agni is called upon to entreat his parents,
an ^ reproduce him perpetually. The Lovely One: Agni.

in A Y°V malchah ; see Vcdic Hymns , I. p. 47. The original hymn appears
^e«d with this difficult stanza.

dishMr^ii ^ rav j iniim ; taken by S Ay ana with amrUasya and explained by
the ! ng i , drink of Gods.’ Nor from the Gods be distant : ‘ let none of
16 gods be absent.’— Wilson.

to IWof- m( J 8 ^ exft l fce d as well as most ancient. The God: Agni. As Priest ;
Uotar, mvoker, or herald.



896 THE HYMtfS OF [BOOR *

2 As God comprising Gods by Law Eternal, bear, aB the Chief

who knoweth, our oblation,

Smoke-bannered with the fuel, radiant, joyous, better to praise
and worship, Priest for ever.

3 When the cow’s nectar wins the God completely, men here

below are heaven’s and earth’s sustainers.

All the Gods came to this thy heavenly Yajus, which from the
motley Pair milked oil and water.

4 I praise your work thatj^e may make me prosper : hear, Heaven

and Earth, Twain Worlds that drop with fatness.

While days and nights go to the world of spirits, here let the
Parents with sweet meath refresh us.

5 Hath the King seized us 1 How have we offended against h.s

holy ordinance ? Who knoweth 1

For even Mitra mid the Gods is angry : there are both song
and strength for those who come not.

6 ’Tis hard to understand the Immortal’s nature, where she who

is akin becomes a stranger.

Guard ceaselessly, great Agni, him who ponders Yama’s name,
easy to be comprehended.

7 They in the synod where the Gods rejoice them, where they

are seated in Vivasvan’s dwelling,

Have given the Moon his beams, the Sun his splendour • the
Two unweariedly maintain their brightness.

2 Btttcr to praise: more skilled than men in praising the Gods.

3 This stanza is very obscure. The meaning seems to be that, by poof's-
ing the am rib, ambrosia, or nectar contained in the milk of the sacrificial coff
and iu the Soma juice which wins and captivates Agni, men are enabled to
offer acceptable sacrifices to the Gods, and thus to support the heavens aud
earth. Heavenly Yajus: divine sacrificial prayer or formula. But ihvyfimhj
its position in the verse seems rather to belong to ghritdm, butter or sacri*
ficial oil. The motley Pair : ini: many-coloured heaven and earth.

* When the self-aggregated ambrosia of the divine Agni is generated from
his radiance, then the pioducts from it sustain both heaven and earth, a
the worshippers glorify this thy oblation, the celestial nutritious water wnic
thy white radiance milks forth.’ — Wilson. According to S&yana, t he pro< m <
from it are the plants and trees which spring from the amrit or rain v-nic
rewards the oblations of men, and the vlsve devflh of the text a,e
Mtotdrak. all the worshippers. Some meaning is appaient in this paraphras ,
but it cannot be extracted from the words of the text.

5 The Kim,: Varuna. For even Mitra: we must have committed som

sin. for even Mitra, the Friend, the gracious God, is wroth with us.
strengthening sacrificial viands. For those who come not: for the Gods
will not yet come to receive our worship and oblations. , 1

6 This stanza is apparently a later addition. The latter half of the tns j

is taken from X. 10. 2, but its application here is not obvious. Heaven!

7 In VivasvAn's dwelling : ‘ on the altar of the sacrificer.’ — Wilson. «
or the realm of the Sun is iuteuded.



tfif I


g The counsel which the Gods meet to consider, their secret
pl.m, — of that we have no knowledge.

There let God Savitar, Aditi, and Mitra proclaim to Varuna
that we are sinless.

9 Hear us, 0 Agni, in your common dwelling : harness thy rapid
car, the car of Ami it.

Biing Heaven and Earth, the Deities’ Parents, hither: stay
with us here, nor from the Gods be distant.

HYMN XIII. HavhdhW

I yoke with prayer your ancient inspiration : may the laud
rise as on the prince’s pathway.

All Sons of Immortality shall hear it, all the possessors of ce-
lestial natures.

2 When speeding ye came nigh us like twin sisters, religious-

hearted votaries brought you forward.

Take your place, ye who know your proper station : be near,
be very near unto our Soma.

3 Five paces have I risen from Eaith: I follow her who hath

four feet with devout obsei vance
This by the Sacied Syllable have I measured: I purify in the
central place of Order.

4 He, for Gods’ sake, chose death to be his portion. Ho chose

not, for men’s good, a life eternal.

They sacrificed Brihaspati the Rishi. Yama delivered up his
own dear body.

‘Tuc deities are the two Sakutas, small carts or ban ows used at sacrifices
) carry the materials especially the •Som-plant, heuee called HavirU/uiaas,
lation-bearers.’ — W l Ison

1 The prince is.the noble who institutes the sacriGce. 4 Like the path of
e worshipper ' — Wilson.

3 Tins stanza is most obscure. Wilson, following Stlyana, translates: ‘I
ake the five st ages of the sacrifice a&cend ; I take four steps by pious
i&orvances ; with the sacred syllable I perfect this (adoraiion) ; I purify
he Soma.) on the navel of the saetifiee.’ The filestores ate, according to
L'ana. the five elements of the saorifice, grain, Soma, the kine, the Purod&sa
ke,aud the clarified butter. The / ir steps ate the metres must commonly used
The words as they stand in the text do not appear to be susceptible of any
■tistactary explanation.

4 tfe. Yania See X. 14. 1. For Gods sake : his death being the type of
lo sacrifices which support and delight the Gods. For rnen’s yood : See X.

■ 3—14 for the results of the sacrifice of Purusha, with whom Yama may be
°Qbned. Ttieoj : the Gods This Pada is unintelligible as it stands.

of brili ispdt ini yujilim akrinmto nshim , Prof. Ludwig would read
'WasccUan y tjhani atanuta rishih, the Rishi pet formed the Vaivasvata,
uiieral sacufice (Uebcr die neucsten , u. 8. w , p. 110). I have mainly
°wed Elini, Der Vedische Mythus des Yuma, pp. 1450 — 162, but the exact
ani1 ^ of the stanza is still doubtful to me.



wcrg


5 The Seven flow to the Youth on whom the Maruts wait : the
Sons unto the Father brought the sacrifice.

Both these are his, as his they are the Lords of both : both
toil ; belonging unto both thoy prosper well.

HYMN XIV. Yam,

Honour the King with thine oblations, Yama, Vivasvan’s Son,
who gathers men together,

Who travelled to the lofty heights above us, who searches out
and shows the path to many.

2 Yama first found for us a place to dwell in : this pasture never

can be taken from us.

Men horn on earth tread their own paths that lead them
whither our ancient Fathers have departed.

3 Matali prospers there with Kavyas, Yama with Angiras’ sons,

Brihaspati with Rikvans :

Exniters of the Gods, by Gods exalted, some joy in praise and
some in our oblation.

4 Como, seat thee on this bed of giass, 0 Yama, in company

with Angirases and Fathers.

Let texts recited by the sages bring thee: O King, let this
oblation make thee joyful.

5 Come, Yama, with the Angirases the Holy, rejoice thee here

with children of Virupa.

To sit on sacred grass at this our worship, I call Vivasvan, too,
thy Father hither.

5 The Seven : rivers. According to Sdyana, metres. The Youth : Indra.
The Sons : theMaiuts. The Father: Iudra. Both these: havirdhdnns . Of
both : Gods and men. Unto both : to Gods uud men, or to Heaven and Earth.

The hymn is a funeral address, partly to Yama the God of the Dead and
partly to the Soul of the departed whose body is being consumed on the pi «•

1 Yama • the deified Loid of the Dead : originally the first who died aiid
so showed the souls of his successors the way to the home of the departe
See X. 12. Lofty heights : of heaven, the abode of the Bleat.

3 Mdtatt : a divine being, identified by the Commentators with Indra whose
charioteer was Mil tali. Kavyas : a class of Manes, the spirits of a P loU .
race of ancient time. Angiras sons : the Angirases, the typical first sacr
ficers. See Vol. I., Index. Rikvans: or singers, a class of spirits or dei 1
who attend and sing the praises of Brihaspati. See VII. 1 0. 4. Some joy ^
praise : the Gods delight in Svahit, the sacrificial exclamation, worship
praise. Some in our oblation : the Manes delight in SvadhA, the sweet

or oblation which is presented to them. j

4 Angirases and Fathers : or, perhaps, Angirases our Fathers.

5 Children of Virdpa: Vairupas, a sub-division of the Angiiases.



0MN 14.] THE RIQVEDA. 8 M

(j Oar Fathers are Angirases, Navagvas, Atharvans, Bhrigus who
deserve the Soma.

May these, the Holy, look on us with faVotir, may we enjoy
their gracious loving-kindness.

7 (Jo forth, go forth upon the ancient pathways whereon our

sires of old have gone before us.

There shalt thou look'on both the Kings enjoying their sacred
food, God Varuna and Yama.

8 Meet Yama, meet the Fathers, meet the merit of free or or-

dered acts, in highest heaven.

Leave sin and evil, soek auew thy dwelling, and bright with
glory wear another body.

9 Go hence, depart ye, fly in all directions : this place for him

the Fathers have provided.

Yama bestows on him a place to rest in adorned with days
and beams of light and waters.

10 Rim and outspeed the two dogs, Sarama's offspring, brindled,

four-eyed, upon thy happy pathway.

Draw nigh then to the gracious-minded Fathers where they
rejoice in company with Yama.

11 And those two dogs of thine, Yama, the watchers, four-eyed,

who look on men and guard the pathway, —

Entrust this man, 0 King, to their protection, and with pros-
perity and health endow him.

12 Dark-lined, insatiate, with distended nostrils, Yama’s two en-

voys roam among the people ;

May they restore to ns a fair existence here and to-day, that
we may see the sunlight.

'13 To Yama pour the Soma, bring to Yama consecrated gifts:

To Yama sacrifice prepared and heralded by Agni goes.

1 Offer to Yama holy gifts enriched with butter, and draw near:
So mav he grant that we may live long days of life among
the Gods.


6 Ntivayvas, Atharvans, Bhriyus • priestly families of ancient times.

7 This and tho following st’mza are addressed to the spirit of the dead
lan whose funeral rites are being celebrated

8 h ree or ordered acts: voluntary good works and prescribed sacrifices,
|hose merit is stored up in heaven to be enjoyed on arrival by the spirits of

* pious who have performed them.

: According to Sdyapa, this stanza is addressed to the Pis&chas and other
in' n^ 6 7 8 *hat haunt the place of cremation.

, ^ The spirit of the departed is addressed. The two dogs : offspring of
the hound of lndra. See Vol. I., Index.

The three following stanzas are addressed to the priests.



THE HYMNS OF


400


l BOOK l


15 Offer to Yuma, to the King, oblation very rich in meath :
Bow down before the Kish is of the ancient times, who made

this path in days of old.

16 Into the six Expanses flies the Great One in Trikadrukas.
The Gayatri, the Tushtup, all metres in Yuma are contained,

HYMN XV. Fathers.


May they ascend, the lowest, highest, midmost, the Fathers
who deserve a sh ire of Soma.

May they who have attained the life of spirits, gentle and
righteous, aid us when we call them.

2 Now let us pay this homage to the Fathers, to those who

passed of old and those who followed,

Those who have rested in the eaithly region, and those who
dwell among the Mighty Races.

3 I have attained the gracious-minded Fathers, I have gained

son and progeny from Vishnu.

They who enjoy pressed juices with oblation, seated on sacied
grass, come oftenest hither.

4 Fathers who sit on sacred grass, come, help us : these offer-

ings have we made for you ; accept them.

So come to us with most auspicious favour, and give us health
and strength without a trouble.

5 May they, the Fathers, worthy of the Soma, invited to their

favourite oblations

Laid on the sacred grass, come nigh and listen : may they e
gracious unto us and bless us.


16 The meaning appears to be that the Great Unit, Yams as All-God, bro'd
ena and fill* the universe after plentiful libations of Soma juice in he
Kadruka days, or first three days of the Abhipltva festival, bee .mi. >
pp 154—157. For different explanations, see Bergai^ne, I. 178, 11. 1- .

This hvrnn with the exception of the last stanza, has been translated,
annotated” by Muir, 0. S. tU V pp 291 -295, by the author, of th,
Siebenzi'j Lieder, and by Prof. Peterson, llymne from the Rojieda.


1 Atcend ■ rise to higher rank ; obtain the best oblation, according to

LoJJ , the Fathers are classified accord, ng to then

of merit acquired on earth. e V rrr 77 j,

2 The earthly region : the firmament nearest to the earth. See V in-

The Mighty Races: of the' Gods. (#


the bathers uy — . tj

Zm ia an unintelligible express, on m this connexion.

Alharvaveda, XVUI. 1. *5, note



mix is.]


the rigveda.


401


6 Bowing your bended knees and seated southward, accept this
sacrifice of ours with favour. r

Punish us not for any sin, 0 Fathers, which we through
human frailty have committed.

i Lapped in the bosom of the purple Mornings, give riches to
the man who brings oblations.

Giant to your sons a portion of that treasure, and, present
give them energy, ye Fathers. ?

5 Our ancient Fathers who deserve the Soma, who came, most
noble, to our Soma-banquet, —

With these let Yama, yearning with the yearning, rejoicing
eat our offerings at his pleasure. " ^ c>

) Come to us, Agni, with the gracious Fathers who dwell in
glowing light, the very Kavyas,

Who thirsted mid the Gods, who hasten hither, oblation-
winners, theme of singers’ praises.

) Como, Agni, come with countless ancient Fathers, dwellers in
light, primeval, God-adorers,

Eaters and drinkers of oblations, truthful, who travel with
the Deities and Indra.


Fathers whom Agni’s flames have tasted, come ye ni^h • ve
kindly leaders, take ye each your proper place. ° ’ 0

Eat sacrificial food presented on the grass : grant riches with
a multitude of hero sons.


Thou, Agni Jata vedas, when entreated, didst bear the offer-
ings which thou madest fragrant,

And give them to the Fathers who did eat them with Svadha.
Eat, thou God, the gifts we bring thee.

Thou, Jatavedas, knowest well the number of Fathers who are
here and who are absent,

Of Fathers whom we know and whom wo know not : accent
the sacrifice well-prepaied with portious.


th i T ar P le Mornings : ‘Seated in the proximity
ramant flames (of the altar).’— Wilson.

: see X. 14. 3. '

8 fl arn €8 have tasted : whose bodies have been burnt. A class

2 nr a ed Aguishvattas, according to S&yana.

tted portion^ '* sacri ® c ^ exclamation Svadhft, or, with their

3 T* portion, : or, with Svadhis.

is



402 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK £

14 They who, consumed by fire or not cremated, joy in their
offering in the midst of heaven, —

Grant them, 0 Sovran Lord, the world of spirits and then
own body, as thy pleasure wills it.


HYMN XYI.


Agni


Burn him not up, nor quite consume him, Agni : let not hii
body or his skin be scattered.

0 Jatavedas, when thou hast matured him, then send him or
his way unto the Fathers.


2 When thou hast made him ready, Jatavedas, then do thor
give him over to the Fathers.

When he attains unto the life that waits him, he shall becorar
the Deities’ controller.


3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit ; go, as thj

merit is, to earth or heaven.

Go, if it be thy lot, unto the waters ; go, make thine horai
in plants with all thy members.

4 Thy portion is the goat : with heat consume him ; let thy

fierce flame, thy glowing splendour, burn him.

With thine auspicious forms, 0 Jatavedas, bear this man t(
the region of the pious.

5 Again, 0 Agni, to the Fathers send him who, offered iu thee

goes with our oblations.

Wearing new life let him increase his offspring : let bin
rejoin a body, J&tavedas.


14 The world of spirits : asunUim : a difficult word whose meaning issom
what uncertain. Sftyana joins it with tanvilm, and explains the two words b;
‘ the body that leads to life/ ‘ that body that is endowed with breath,
Wilson. See X. 12. 4.

This hymn has been partially transliterated, translated, and annotated bj
Muir, 0. S. Texts, Y. pp. 295—297.

Stanzas 1 — 6 are to be repeated while the body of the departed is beiaj
partially consumed on the funeral pile.

2 The life that waits him: asunitim: see X. 15, 14. Controller: by winnin|
their favour.

3 The Sun receive thine eye, the Wind thy spirit : let like return to lik*
See Muir’s note, 0. S. Texts , V. 298.

4 Agni is addressed. The goat : that was slaughtered and laid limb by li® 1
on the corpse.

5 Let him increase his offspring : when he becomes one of the Fatkenjj
whom is ascribed the fruitfulness of heaven and earth, the parents of Gjjj
and men. See X. 64. 14. Let him rejoin: or, let life rejoin his body-
nominative is not expressed.



THE RIO VEDA.


403


VYMN 16.]

6 What wound soe’er the dark bird bath inflicted, the emmet,

or the serpent, or the jackal,

May Agni who devoureth all things heal it, and Soma who
hath passed into the Brahmans.

7 Shield thee with flesh against the flames of Agni, encompass

thee about with fat and marrow,

So will the Bold One, eager to attack thee with fierce glow
fail to girdle and consume thee.

8 Forbear, 0 Agni, to upset this ladle : the Gods and they who

merit Soma love it.

This ladle, this which serves the Gods to drink from, in this
the Immortal Deities rejoice them.

9 I send afar flesh-eating Agni, bearing off stains may he depart

to Yama’s subjects.

But let this other Jatavedas carry oblation to the Gods for
he is skilful. '


0 I choose as God for Father-worship Agni, flesh-eater, who

hath past within your dwelling, ’

While looking on this other J&tavedas. Let him light flames
in the supreme assembly.

1 With offerings meet let Agni bring the Fathers who support

the Law.

Let him announce oblations paid to Fathers and to Deities.

2 Eight gladly would we set thee down, right gladly make thee

burn and glow.

Gladly bring yearning Fathers nigh to eat the food of sacrifice.

3 Cool, Agni, and again refresh the spot which thou hast

scorched and burnt.

Here let the water-lily grow, and tender grass and leafy herb.
I 0 full of coolness, thou cool Plant, full of fresh moisture,
freshening Herb,

Come hither with the female frog: fill with delight this Agni
here.


• r f ie ?? r P 8e ia addressed. Flt*\ : the caul and other parts of a slaughtered
mai which covered the corpse to prevent too quick and complete cremation.
P staim6 ° f Sin ° r impurity whi °k ma y have attached to the departed*

11 typically offer sacrifice in the assembly of the Gods.

offpnV 7 * meet ** literally, bearing Kavyas or Kavya-worship, that
19 m/ n ^ 8 to tke ^ av ^> sages, or Fathers.

\i wV £, gni; . the firo -

! ciydmbu: *° me kind of ^uatio plant. Tender graft;
H F'lf ,a varie . fc y grass (Panicum Dactylon).

rehaswJ*** dai 9^’ meaning, euphemistically, extinguish. ‘After the
usuined the corpse, water is poured upon it to extinguish it. Then



404


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOKl

HYMN XVII. Various Deiti*.

Tvashtar prepares the bridal of his Daughter : all the world
hears the tidings and assembles.

But Yama’s Mother, Spouse of great Vivasv&n, vanished as
she was carried to her dwelling.

2 From mortal men they hid the Immortal Lady, made one like

her and gave her to Vivasvan.

Saranyu brought to him the Asvin brothers, and then deserted
both twinned pairs of children.

3 Guard of the world, whose cattle ne’er are injured, may Pd-

shan bear thee hence, for lie hath knowledge.

May he consign thee to these Fathers’ keeping, and to the
gracious Gods let Agni give thee.

4 May Ayu, giver of all life, protect thee, and bear thee forward

on the distant pathway.

Thither let Savitar the God transport theo, where dwell the
pious who have passed before thee.

5 Pushan knows all these realms : may ho conduct us by ways

that are most free from fear and danger.

Giver of blessings, glowing, all-heroic, may he, the wise ami
watchful, go before us.


furthermore certain water-plants are put there In addition to these a frog-
here a female, elsewhere a male— is put upon the place where the fire ha?
burned. These, as representatives of life in the waters, are symbolically
supposed both to prevent and extinguish fire ' (M. Bloomfield, Contributions

to the Interpretation of the Veda , Second Series, Baltimore : 1800).

Dr. Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts, V. pp. 297 — 299, should be consulted
with regard to this funeral hymn addiossed to Agni, and much additional
information on the subject may be obtained from the essays, there referred
to, by von Roth and Max Muller.

1 The first two stanzas are difficult, and appear to have no connexion with

the rest of the hymn. Tvashtar : a God often regarded, as here, as an agent
in natural phenomena. Ilis Daughter • Saranyft, the stormy cloud ; or, F r
haps, the dawn. Vivasvdn: representing the bright heavens, or the Sun.
Yuma's Mother : Saranyft, who afterwards gave birth to Yama and Yami.
See X. 10, note. Vanished: or was stolen away. Carried : as a bride, in pre-
cession. , ,

2 They : the Gods. The Immortal Lady : Saranyfi. Brought to him :

another form bore to Vivasv&n. Both twinned pairs : Yama and Yainl and tie
Asvins. For the legend which has been formed out of these obscure hints, see
Wilson’s Translation, and Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. 228. _ ,

3 Here the funeral hymn begins, with an address to the spirit of the

parted. Pilshan : as a Sun-God and the heavenly Herdsman who knows
path through the heavens and is therefore a good conductor of the spin
the departed. , ,

4 iyu : according to SAyana, Vdyu is intended, the letter * v ’ being eh e
Or the meaning may be, life of full vitality.



THE RIOt ED A.


405


VYMX 17.]

6 Puahan was born to move on distant pathways, on the road far

from earth and far from heaven.

To both most wonted places of assembly he travels and returns
with perfect knowledge.

7 The pious call Saras vati, they worship Sarasvati while sacri-

fice proceedeth.

The pious called Sarasyati aforetime. Sarasvati send bliss to
him who giveth.

8 Sarasvati, who earnest with the Fathers, with them rejoicing

thee in our oblations,

Seated upon this sacred grass be joyful, and give us strength-
ening food that brings no sickness.

0 Thou, called on as Sarasvati by Fathers who come right for-
ward to our solemn service,

Give food and wealth to present sacrifices, a portion, worth
a thousand, of refreshment.

0 The Mother Floods shall make us bright and shining, cleans-

ers of holy oil, with oil shall cleanse us :

For, Goddesses, they bear off all defilement : I rise up from
them purified and brightened.

1 Through days of earliest date the Drop descended on this

place and on that which was before it.

I offer up, throughout the seven oblations, the Drop which
still to one same place is moving.

2 The Drop that falls, thy stalk which ar* lS have shaken, which

from the bosom of the press hath Allen,

Or from the Adhvaryu’s purifying filter, I offer thee with heart
and cry of Vashat I

3 That fallen Drop of thino the stalk which from tho ladle fell

away,

This present God TVhaspati shall pour it forth to make us rich.

4 The plants of -arth are rich in milk, and rich in milk is this

my spee^n;

And r^h in milk the essence of the Waters : make me pure
therewith.


7 hratvatf: see I. 8. 10.

8t,anza is not very intelligible. The Drop is apparently the Soma ;
* ® x P laiua alternatively, by Aditya or the Sun. See Satapatha *
4 * F 20 (Sacred Books of the East, XLI. 368).
ic ^ Milk; full of sap, vigour, vital and vivifying power.



406 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l

HYMN XVIII. Various Deities,

Go hence, 0 Death, pursue thy special pathway apart from
that which Gods are wont to travel.

To thee I say it who hast eyes and hearest : Touch not our
offspring, injure not our heroes.

2 As ye have come effacing Mrityu’s footstep, to further times

prolonging your existence,

May ye he rich in children and possessions, cleansed, purified,
and meet for sacrificing.

3 Divided from the dead are these, the living : now be our

calling on the Gods successful.

We have gone forth for dancing and for laughter, to further
times prolonging our existence.

4 Here I erect this rampart for the living ; let none of these,

none other, reach this limit.

May they survive a hundred lengthened autumns, and may
they bury Death beneath this mountain.

5 As the days follow days in close succession, as with the sea-

sons duly come the seasons,

As each successor fails not his foregoer, so form the lives of
these, 0 great Ordainer

5 Live your full lives and find old ago delightful, all of you
striving one behind the other.

May Tvashtar, maker of fair things, be gracious and lengthen
out the days your existence.


1 Death: Mrityu, the God of 'J e ath ; distinct from Yama the judge and
ruler of the departed. Our offspring. p ra jflm : meaning here, says SAyana,
female offspring, duhitridauhitrdtmika j u t h e f orm G f daughters and their
daughters. Our heroes: sons and their so^,.__s&y a na.

2 Addressed to the kinsmen of the decease , £ facing Mrityu'*

a wisp or clog was fastened to the foot of the corp.*, which represented M.rityu
or Death, in order to prevent the premature return vf Death to carry ott
living. See A. V., V. 19. 12. Cleansed : from sins of a«o rmer life. Pww*'
from sins of the present life.

3 Dancing and laughter : the enjoyments of ordinary life */ter the «*

ment of our duties to the dead. ,

4 This rampart: of stone, or earth, raised by the Adhvaryu as * hue

demarcation between the dead and the living, and limiting, as ^

jurisdiction of Death until the natural time for his approach. This

the mound or bank. . . Ordafo**

5 So form the live* : let them pass away in due order of Bemwty.

Dhdtar : the name of a divine being who is the creator, arrang , j

and manager of all things. .. . . rneV first.

6 One behind the other : the oldest reaching the end of their jou i



THE RIGVEDA,


407


qYUy 13 *]

7 Let these unwidowed dames with noble husbands adorn them-
\ selves with fragrant balm and unguent.

Decked with fair jewels, tearless, free from sorrow, first let the
dames go up to where he lieth.

8 Eise, come unto the world of life, 0 woman : come, he is life-

less by whose side thou liest.

Wifehood with this thy husband was thy portion, who took thy
hand and wooed thee as a lover.

9 From his dead hand I take the bow he carried, that it may be

our power aud might and glory.

There art thou, there; and here with noble heroes may we
overcome all hosts that fight against us.

10 Betake thoc to the lap of Earth the Mother, of Earth far-spread-

ing, very kind and gracious.

Young Dame, wool-soft unto the guerdon-giver, may she pre-
serve thee from Destruction’s boso«u-

11 Heave thyself, Earth, nor press thee downward heavily; afford

him easy access, gently ten-* ln g him.

Cover him, as a mother wraps her skirt about her child, 0 Earth.

12 Now let the heaving ea-’^h be free from motion : yea, let a thou-

sand clods remain above him.

Be they to him a Aome distilling fatness, here lot them ever be
his place of refuge.

13 I stay the oarth from thee, while over thee I place this piece

of ea^h. May I be free from injury.

Here *et the Fathers keep this pillar firm for thee, and there
let Yama make thee an abiding-place.

14 .Sven as an arrow’s feathers, they have set me on a fitting day.
/ The fit word have I caught and held as 'twere a courser with

the rein.


7 First : agve ; to begin with ; i. e. before the ceremonies begin. See M.
duller, Chips, IV. 35 — 39 (edition of 1895). On the whole stanza, see Dr. F.
Sail, Jou riia i of H A S., Vol. III. Part I., p. 185f.

o ‘This verse is to be spoken by the husband’s brother, etc , to the wife of
he dead man, and he is to /lake her leave her husband’s body. See the
tswalayana Grihya Sittras, IV. 2.’ — Editor’s note, in Wilson’s Translation.

9 This stanza is applicable only when the deceased was a Ksliatriya or man
►i the princely aud military order.

19 Addressed to the body. Guerdon-giver : the liberal rewarder of the
meats. Destruction's bosom : or the lap of Nirriti.

& I stay the earth: * I keep off the earth above thee with thy lid.’ * This
J addressed to the urn containing the bones and ashes, which is buried after
' e c ? r pse has been burnt.’— Wilson. PiUar : perhaps a beam laid over the
emams.

H This stanza, which seems to be a later addition, is not noticed in SAyana’s
' mQie ntary > and the meaning of the second line is not very clear. I have



408


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOR x t


HYMN XIX. Waters or Co* 9l

Turn, go not farther on your way ; visit us, 0 ye Wealth
Ones.

Agni and Soma, ye who bring riches again, Becure us weoith.
2 Make these return to us again, bring them beside us once
again.

May Indra give them back to us, and Agni drive them hither-
ward.


3 Let them return to us again : under this herdsman let them

feed.

Do thou, 0 Agni, keep them here, and let the wealth we
have remain.

4 I call upon their herdsman, him who knoweth well their coming

Their parting and their home-return, and watcheth their
approach and rest.

5 Yea, let the herdsman, to*, return, who marketh well their

driving-forth ;

Marketh their wandering away, their turning back and com-
ing home.

6 Home-leader, lead them home to us; Indra, restore to us our

kine :

We will rejoice in them alive.


followed Prof. Whitney’s rendering (Lanman, p. 386). The verse, says
Lanman, ‘ seems to express the poet’s satisfaction at having mae<» a good
hymn at the right time and place, and with as good skill as a skilfm horse-
man has.’

The hymn has been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder.
Zimmer’s Altmdisches Lcben, pp. 400—407, Mr. Rnmesh Chunder Dutt’i
Civilization in Ancient India , pp. 108, and 278, 279, Lanman’s Sanskrit
Reader , pp. 382- 386, and Zdnaide Ragozin’s Vedic India, pp. 351—353.
The essays of von Roth and Max Muller have already been referred to.


The hymn is a prayer for the return of strayed cows, to whom the first
line is addressed.

1 Ye who bring riches again : punarvasd : ( ye who clothe (your worship*
pers) again.’ — Wilson. See Hillebrandt, V. M., I. 460.

2 These : cows, or waters. — Slyana. Make return is the imperative ^ingulat
and S&yana says that the seer of the hymn addresses himself. The address
is to Indra.

4 Sdyana explains this stanza somewhat differently : — ‘ I. invoke the
knowledge of the place, of their going, of their coming, of their departure*
of their wandering, of their returning : (I invoke) him who is their keeper
— Wilson. This is a more strictly literal rendering of the abstract nouns
the text.



THE RIQVEDA .


409


fffMN 20 .]

7 I offer you on every side butter and milk and strengthening food.
May all the Holy Deities pour down on us a flood of wealth.

8 0 thou Home-leader, lead them home, restore them thou who

bringest home. '

Four are the quarters of the earth ; from these bring back to
us our kine.

HYMN XX. Agni.

Send unto us a good and happy mind.

2 I worship Agni, Youthf idlest of Gods, resistless, Friend of laws;
Under whose guard and heavenly light the Spotted seek the
Mother’s breast :


3 Whom with their mouth they magnify, bannered with flame

and homed in light.

He glitters with his row of teeth.

4 Kind, Furtherer of men, he comes, w r hen he hath reached the

ends of heaven,

Sage, giving splendour to the clouds.

5 To taste man’s offerings, ho, the Strong, hath risen erect at

sacrifice :

Fixing his dwelling he proceeds.

6 Here are oblation, worship, rest : rapidly comes his furtherance.
To sword-armed Agni come the Gods.

7 With service for clxief bliss 1 seek the Lord of Sacrifice, Agni.

whom b

They call the Living, Son of Cloud.

8 Blest evermore be all the men who come from us, who magnify
^gm with sacrificial gifts.

9 Ihe path he treads is black and white and red, and striped,

and brown, crimson, and glorious.

His sire begat him bright with hues of gold.

8 Thus with his thoughts, 0 Son of Strength, 0 Agni, hath
Vimada, accordant with the Immortals,

Ottered thee hymns, soliciting thy favour. Thou hast brought
a 5 * ooc b strength, a prosperous dwelling.


2 'pi r, 1_ ' — — _________

)pear ^ er f 110 noun - The variegated oblations, as Say ana says,

•mameut T 1 . nfce ^ de d J.and the Mother s breast maybe the clouds 'of the

3 Homed dlfficult .’ and translation must be tentative.

ra y er / acomvi; ± t *7 e . mean ‘ n g °f kripanflam is uncertain. ‘Pitying

5 He vvocerj n ^- t0 Ludwig. ‘ Sustainer of pious works.’— Wilson.

6 ^o n Ln *j 18 Carn f d ? rom .°ne fire receptacle or altar to another.

The men Jh '* arm ? d witdl hw sword or knife of pieiciug flame.

9 The mth w ’ Bona an d grandsons of the worshippers.

10 VlLL according to Sdyana, his chariot.

m . the Rishi of the hymn.



410


THE HYMNS OP


[BOOR x,


HYMN XXI. Agni

With offerings of our own we choose thee, Agni, as Invokiug
Priest,

For sacrifice with trimmed grass, — at your glad carouse-
piercing and brightly shining. Thou art waxing great.

2 The wealthy ones adorn thee, they who bring us horses as

their gift :

The sprinkling ladle, Agni, — at your glad carouse— and glow-
ing offering taste thee. Thou art waxing great.

3 The holy statutes rest by thee, as ’twere with ladles that o’er

flow.

Black and white-gleaming colours,— at your glad carouse-all
glories thou assumest. Thou art waxing great.

4 0 Agni, what thou deemest wealth, Victorious and Immortal

One !

Bring thou to give us vigour,— at your glad carouse— splendid
at sacrifices. Thou art waxing groat.

5 Skilled in all lore is Agni, he whom erst Atharvan brought to

He was VivasvaiVs envoy, at your glad carouse— the well-loved
friend of Yama. Thou art waxing great.

6 At sacrifices they adore thee, Agni, when the rite proceeds.
All fair and lovely treasures — at your glad carouse— thou

givest him who offers. Thou art waxing great.

7 Men, Agni, have established thee as welcome Priest at holy

rites,

Thee whose face shines with butter,— at your glad carouse-
bright, with eyes most observant. Thou art waxing g rea

8 Wide and aloft thou spreadest thee, 0 Agni, with thy brilliant


flame. , , _ f }, n u

A Bull art thou when bellowing,— at your glad carouse—
dost impregn the Sisters. Thou art waxiug gr eat. _

1 At your glad carouse: apparently a Soma-drinking ref ^1 #
the Vievedevas or All-Gods. Thou art waxing great ; a 8 “““ r nll „„iu
burden addiessed to Agni. See Wilson's Translation, note. Grassms
both refrains, which he considers to be later interpolations.

2 Taste thee: feel the power of the fire. wor8 hip th*

3 The first line is difficult ‘ The estabhshers (of . klin g ( s hower4
with their ladles (filled with the oblation), like (earth ) P ,•

—Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation. Those who woreh p 8

ing to his Law are regarded as his own statutes incarnate. O btaio ^

5 Atharvan: the priest who is said to have been the gacrificer-

and offer Soma and prayers. Viyasvdn the Soma-pnest, o th^ fruit iuL
8 Toe Sisters ; the plants, which Agw, descending m rai ,



HYMN 22 .]


TEE RTOVEDA.


411


HYMN XXII. Indra.

Where is famed Indra heard of? With what folk is he renown-
ed to-day as Mitra is, —

Who in the home of Rishis and in secret is extolled with song?

2 Even here is Indra famed, and among us this day the glorious

Thunderer is praised,

He who like Mitra mid the folk hath won complete and full
renown.

3 He who is Sovran Lord of great and perfect strength, exerter

of heroic might,

Who bears the fearless thuuder as a father bears his darling
son.

4 Harnessing to thy car, as God, two blustering Steeds of the

Wind-God, 0 Thunderer,

That speed along the shining path, thou making ways art
glorified.

5 Even to these dark Steeds of Wind thou of thyself hast come

to ride,

Of which no driver may be found, none, be he God or mortal
man.

6 When ye approach, men ask you, thoe and Usan& : Why come

ye to our dwelling-place?

Why are ye come to mortal man from distant realms of earth
and heaven ?

7 0 Indra, thou shalt speak us fair : our holy prayer is offered

up.

We pray to thee for help as thou didst strike the monster
Sushna dead.

8 Around us is the Dasyu, riteless, void of sense, inhuman,

keeping alien laws.

Baffle, thou Slayer of the foe, the weapon which this Dasa
wields.

9 Hero with Heroes, thou art ours : yea, strong are they whom

thou dost help.

In many a place are thy full gifts, and men, like vassals, sing
thy praise.

1 In secret : in the forest, according to SAyana.

' 18 a ^°d °* hght, making paths through the pathless

i or Usanas K&vya, who has been frequently mentioned as

7w friend and of Indra ‘

Eeroet ; the attendant Maruts.



412


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK i

10 Urge thou these heroes on to slay the enemy, brave Thunder

er ! in the fight with swords,

Even when hid among the tribes of Sages numerous as stars

11 Swift come those gifts of thine whose hand is prompt to rent

and burn, 0 Hero Thunder-armed :

As thou with thy Companions didst destroy the whole o
Sushna’s brood.

12 Let not thine excellent assistance come to us, 0 Hero Indra

profitless.

May we, may we enjoy the bliss of these thy favours, Thun
derer !

13 May those soft impulses of thine, 0 Indra, be fruitful am

innocent to us.

May we know these whose treasures are like those of milch
kine, Thunderer !

14 That Earth, through power of knowing things that maybf

known, handless and footless yet might thrive,

Thou slewest, turning to the right, Sushna for every living
man.

15 Drink, drink the Soma, Hero Indra; be not withheld as thou

art good, 0 Treasure-giver.

Preserve the singers and our liberal princes, and make us
wealthy with abundant riches.

HYMN XXIII. Indra

Indra, whose right hand wields the bolt, we worship, drivel
of Bay Steeds seeking sundered courses.

Shaking his beard with might he hath arisen, casting hif
weapons forth and dealing bounties.

2 The treasure which his Bay Steeds found at sacrifice, this
wealth made opulent Indra slayer of the foe.

10 The enemy : or Vritra. Hid among ike tribes of Sages : dwelling atn° D j

the wise Gods and invisible to men. Numerous as stars : the meaning
ualcshatrasavasdm is uncertain. . , . .

11 Whose hand is prompt to rend and burn • I follow Ludwig s in er P
tion, but the meaning which he gives to dkshdni is doubtful.

13 Soft impulses of thine : * our (praises) reaching thee.’ — Wilson. ,

14 For every living man: visvdyave : according to S&yana, for t c ,. g .
Visv&yu, a king, the son of Urvasl, the Apsaras or nymph of heaven
came the wife of Purftravas. Turning to the right: circumambulating j .
with the right hand towards him for good luck ; performing the Gae

1 Seeking sundered courses : vlvratdndm : unruly, and pulling

each other, or wandering. According to S&yana, having many functio forest'

2 At saci'ijice : S&yana explains vdne by ‘ at sacrifice, or, in t y^
The exact meaning of the word here is not certain. Of the foe : or, o



YMX 24.] THE RIGVEDA. m

Bibhu, Ribhukshan, V&ja,— he is Lord of Might. The
very name I utterly destroy.

; When, with the Princes, Maghavan, famed of old, comes nigh
the thunderbolt of gold, and the Controller’s car 6

Which his two Tawny Coursers draw, then Indra is the
Sovran Lord of power whose glory spreads afar.

With him too is this rain of his that comes like herds : Indra
throws drops of moisture on his yellow beard.

When the sweet juice is shed he seeks the pleasant place, and
stirs the worshipper as wind disturbs the wood.

We laud and praise his several deed3of valour who, fatherlike,
with power hath made us stronger ; *

Who with his voice slew many thousand wicked ones who
spake in varied manners with contemptuous cries.

Indra, the Vimadas have formed for thee a laud, copious
unparalleled, for thee Most Bountiful.

We know the good we gain from him the Mighty One when we
attract him as a herdsman calls the kine.

Ne’er may this bond of friendship be dissevered, the Rishi
Vhnada’s and thine, 0 Indra.

We know thou carest for us as a brother : with us, 0 God, be
thine auspicious friendship.

HYMN XXIV. Indra. Asvins.

0 Indra, drink this Soma, pressed out in the mortar, full of
sweets.

Send down to us great riches, — at your glad carouse — in thou-
sands, 0 Most Wealthy. Thou art waxing great.

To thee with sacrifices, with oblations, and with lauds we come.
I'' 1 of ali strength and power, grant— at your glad carouse—
the best choice-worthy treasure. Thou art waxing great.

Thou who art Lord of precious boons, inciter even of the churl,

ouardiau 0 f singers, Indra, -at your glad carouse— save us
rorn woe ail( d hatred. Thou art waxing great.

m"’ Vd J a ■ Indru, combining the three Ribhus in his own


With the Princes : with the Maruts.

;h moutur ' J ■’ P^haps the rain which he pours upon the lightning

“beroLac°n-fi Ggard ^ ** h 2". b ^d.-Ludwig. The pleasant place, the
‘ ' ntioe - The worshipper : or, according to SAyana, his own body.


t*xt\


‘as no word to express the object here.
e stauza^ 0 ^ ur ^ en or r ®f ra l Q of Hymn XXI. is employed in the first


Of 8 ^gers :


worshippers ; * eulogists.’— Wilson.



414


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X


4 Strong, Lords of Magic power, ye Twain churned the united

worlds apart,

When ye, implored by Viinada, Nasatyas, forced apart the pair

5 When the united pair were rent asunder all the Gods com

plained.

The Gods to the N&satyas cried, Bring these together onci


6


again.

Sweet be my going forth, and rich in sweets be my approacl
to home.

So, through your Deity, both Gods, enrich us with all plea
santness.


HYMN XXV. • Some


Send us a good and happy mind, send energy and mental power
Then — at your glad carouse — let men joy in thy love, Swec
Juice ! as kine in pasture. Thou art waxing great.


2 In all thy forms, 0 Soma, rest thy powers that influence th

heart.

So also these my longings— at your glad carouse— sprea<
themselves seeking riches. Thou art waxing great.

3 Even if, O Soma, I neglect thy laws through my simplicity,
Be gracious— at your glad carouse — as sire to son. Preserv

us even from slaughter. Thou art waxing great.

4 Our songs in concert go to thee as streams of water to th

wells. , ,

Soma, that we may live, grant— at your glad carouse fui
powers of mind, like beakers. Thou art waxing great.

5 0 Soma, through thy might who art skilful and strong, thes

longing men, .

These sages, have thrown open— at your glad carouse- to
stall of kine and horses. Thou art waxing great.

6 Our herds thou guardest, Soma, and the moving world sprea

far and wide. , , ■

Thou fittest them for living,— at your glad carouse-loo* ,
upon all beings. Thou art waxing great.


4 Churned ...apart : or perhaps, produced by churning < °r violent agj^ 01 * * 4 5
SAyana explains diffeiently ‘ you have ckurued forth (the nre;.


1 The first half line of this stanza has occurred before as the „

X. 20. The double burden or refrain is again employed, wita

connexion with the rest of the stanza.

4 Like beaker t : filled full, like chalices of Soma juice. h e by &

5 The longing men : the priests. Have thrown open, etc. : av >
sacrifices, opened the way to wealth.



THE RIG VEDA.


415


1YJ0 26 .]

7 On all sides, Soma, be to us a Guardian ne’er to be deceived.

1 King, drive away our foemen-— at your glad carouse let not
the wicked rule us. Thou art waxing great.

; J 3 C watchful, Soma, passing wise, to give U 3 store of vital

strength.

More skilled than man to guide us, — at your glad carouse —
save us from harm and sorrow. Thou art waxing great.

3 Chief slayer of our foemen, thou, Indu, art Indra’s gracious
Friend,

When warriors invoke him — at your glad carouse— in fight,
to win them offspring. Thou art waxing great.

) Victorious is this gladdening drink : to Indra dear it grows in
strength.

This — at your glad carouse — enhanced the mighty hymn of the
great sage Kakshivan. Thou art waxing great.

1 This to the sage who offers gifts brings power that comes from

wealth in kine.

This, better than the seven, hath — at your glad carouse — fur-
thered the blind, the cripple. Thou art waxing great.

HYMN XXVI. Pashan.

Forward upon their way proceed the ready teams, the lovely
songs.

Further them glorious P&shan with yoked chariot, and the
Mighty Twain !

2 With sacred hymns let this man here, this singer, win the

i God to whom

j Belong this majesty and might. He hath observed our eulogies.

Pushan the Strong hath knowledge of sweet praises even as
Indu hath.

He dews our corn with moisture, he bedews the pasture of
our kine.

^ We will bethink ourselves of thee, 0 Pushan, 0 thou God,
as One,


Adex^V^ ’* a f^ amou s Ptishi, th.© seer of some hymns of Book I. See

kplai^!vff^ an B€v 1 n: . more effectually than the seven priests. SAyana
L ( 7 . n ?, 1 ,® ren % : — ‘ it gives wealth to the seven (priests). — Wilson. The
L F e Dirghatamas, according to SAyana. The cripple: ParAvrij.

^ both names in Vol. I., Index. *


[ccordimf ' or dered series of ogr words. The Mighty Twain : the As vine,
r, the tw.> ^ 7 a - a > da*r& = daffantya^, of goodly aspect, applied to Pftshan ;
f tW0 P^formers of the rite;the Yajamdna IndU* wife.



416 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

Who brings fulfilment of our hymns, and stirs the singer and
the snge. iU

5 Joint-sharer of each sacrifice, the driver of the chariot steeds

The Rishi who is good to man, the singer’s Friend and faith-
ful Guard.

6 One who is Lord of Sucha, Lord of Sucha caring for herself;
Weaving the raiment of the sheep and making raiment bean-

tiful.

7 The mighty Lord of spoil and wealth, Strong Friend of all

prosperity ;

He with light movement shakes his beard, lovely and ne’er to
be deceived.

8 0 Pushan, may those goats of thine turn hitherward thy

chariot-pole.

Friend of all suppliants art thou, born in old time, and firm
and sure.

9 May the majestic Pushan speed our chariot with his power

and might.

May he increase our store of wealth and listen to this call of
Ours.


HYMN XXVII. Iudra

This, singer, is my firm determination, to aid the worshipper
who pours the Soma.

I slay the man who brings no milk-oblation, unrighteous,
powerful, the truth’s perverter.

2 Then will I, when I lead my friends to battle against the
radiant persons of the godless,

Prepare for thee at home a vigorous bullock, and pour for
thee the fifteenfold strong juices.


6 Sucha and SucM : names of a man and woman. — Ludwig. According M
Sayana and Wilson, ‘ the pure (he-goat) and the pure (she-goat).’ , Weaving
the raiment : * making woollen cloths such as the woollen filter, etc.'— Wilson.
And making raiment beautiful : or, he hath made vesture pure and brig in
that is, says Silyana, he hath purified all aiound with his heat and light.

7 Friend : the augmenter. Shakes his beard : when he drinks the

* 8 Those goats : Pilahan’s chariot is said to be drawn by a team of g° at0,
Cf. I. 38. 4.

1 Indra addresses the Rishi. Powerful : dbhum : perhaps, possessed of tb

means that would enable him to offer sacrifices. ^

2 The Rishi replies. Fifteenfold strong juices : according to ’ th

juices of the Soma-plant whose leaves grow during the light half of the
and die away during the dark half.



THE RIQVEDA.


417


tfMH 27 .]

3 I know not him who sayeth and declareth that he hath slain

the godless in the battle.

Soon as they see the furious combat raging, men speak forth
praises of my vigorous horses.

4 While yet my deeds of might were unrecorded, all passed for

Maghavans though I existed.

The potent one who dwelt in peace I conquered, grasped by
the foot and slew him on the mountain.

5 None hinder me in mine heroic exploits, no, not the moun-

tains when I will and purpose.

Even the deaf will tremble at my roaring, and every day will
dust be agitated.

6 To see the Indraless oblation-drinkers, mean offerers, o’ertaken

by destruction !

Then shall the fellies of my car pass over those who have
blamed my joyous Friend and scorned him.

7 Thou wast, thou grewest to full vital vigour : an earlier saw,

a later one shall see thee.

Two canopies, as ’twere, are round about him who reacheth to
the limit of this region.

3 The freed kino eat the barley of the pious. I saw them as

they wandered with the herdsman.

Tiie calling of the pious rang around them. What portion
will these kine afford their owner ?

) When we who eat the grass of men are gathered I am with
barley-eaters in the corn-land.

There shall the captor yoke the yokeless bullock, and he who
hath been yoked seek one to loose him.

. l?^ ra 8 P ea, k B > rebuking the Rishi and asciibing all victories to himself.

4 The potent one: the powerful fiend Sambara, for instance.
b Bust: of battle, stirred up by India.

o see: ddrsan • according to S&yana, I, Indra, see. Obi ation -drinkers :
o nemselves consume the offerings that should be presented to Indra.
an offerers, bdhukshdda h : literally, arm-cutters. Accoiding to von Roth,
simomoue worshippeis who offer the forelegs, or inferior parts of the
ilsnn r nima1, ‘Who cut (the worshippers) to pieces with their hands.' —
roiia V ; Vishnu.— Ludwig. Or the meaning may be, your

<1 rm tr ’ l u dra himself, the friend of his worshippers.
jftr< 1 8 P ea ks. An earlier saw: the meaning of the half-line is not

■lie ^ 8 t * oes ^ av ® aIread y f e l fc fc hy power, and otbeis yet shall feel it
i * nc * ra veriI y destroys (his foe), the other does not d«*troy

5 Indr ]■ Tw° canopies : heaven and earth. Him: Indra.

off er h^ 6 ** 8 ’ f eari Hgi apparently, that the worshipper will h*ve no milk

) Opl

L 18 ®°. comment on this obscure verse, and WU^on leaves a blank
! Editor of Wilson's Translation, Vol. \L Ludwig says that

27



418 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK I

10. There wilt thou hold as true my spoken purpose, to bring
together quadrupeds and bipeds.

I will divide, without a fight, his riches who warreth here
agaiust the Bull, with women.

11 When a man’s daughter hath been ever eyeless, who, knowing,

will be wroth with her for blindness?

Which of the two will loose on him his anger — the man \^c
leads her home or he who woos her?

12 How many a maid is pleasing to the suitor who fain would

many for her splendid riches?

If the girl be both good and fair of feature, she finds, herself,
a friend among the people.

13 His feet have grasped : he eats the man who meets him

Around his head lie sets the head for shelter.

Sitting anear and right above he smites us, and follows eaitli
that lies spread out beneath him.

14 High, leafless, shadowlcss, and swift is Heaven : the Mother

stands, the Youngling, loosed, is feeding.

Loud hath she lowed, licking Another’s offspring. In what
woild hath the Cow laid down her udder?


Indra declares that he lias brought mou and cattle together and made the
latter subject to the foitnor, to be yoked and to remain yoked when and u
long as their masters please According to this interpretation, the first half
of the stanza might be rendered : ‘ Grass-eating beasts with men have I con
nected, and those who eat grain in the wide spicad corn-land.’

10 Against the Bull: agaiust me, the mighty Indra. ^With, women, with
weak allies.

11 ‘Hitherto,’ says Prof. Ludwig, ‘ it is possible to establish a connexion
and interdependence of the separate strophes ; with sttophe 11 the difficulty
begins.’ On him • on the father. Who woos her: seeks her in maruagefor
his fiiend or employer.

12 Herself: svaydm chit : by her own woi th, independently of her dowry.

13 His feet have grasped : Indra, as the Sun, has seized and drawn up the
water of the riveis with the rays which are his feet. Eats the man who Mil
him: peihaps, merely, scorches the man who exposes himself to his burning
rays. According to S&yana, ‘ feeds upon, i. e. takes into his orb, the water
that approaches him.’ Another explanation is, that the pious after death go
to the Sun and become sunbeams.-- Ludwig. He sets the head for shelter :«*
takes the height of heaven as a covering. Anear and right above : in his meri-
dian height. Follows earth : descends to the horizon and sets beyond it.

14 LeajlesSy shadowless : heaven being compared to a tree that overshadow
the earth. According to S&y ana, drvd here is the ever-moving Sun.
Mother : Ushas or Dawn. According to S&yana, mdt<X here means ‘ the hm 1
(of the world).’ The Youngling : or Calf ; Agni who feeds on the °' ,la 1
Sfo : Heaven, or the atmospheric Prithivi, roaring as the rain come* J .
Anothei'' * offspring : Iudra as Aditya or the Sun, the offspring of Adi
what world , etc . ; that is, who knows where the rain cornea from 1

the Sky. The second half-stanza has occurred before. See III. 55. 1 ■ j



THE RIO VEDA.


HYMN 27.]


419


15 Seven heroes from the nether part ascended, and from the

upper part came eight together.

Nine from behind came armed with winnowing-baskets : ten
from the front pressed o’er the rock’s high ridges.

16 One of the ten, the tawny, shared in common, they send to

execute their final purpose.

The Mother carries on her breast the Infant of noble form
and soothes it while it knows not.

17 The Heroes dressed with fire the fatted wether : the dice were

thrown by way of sport and gaming.

Two reach the plain amid the heavenly waters, hallowing and
with means of purifying.

18 Crying aloud they ran in all directions : One half of them will

cook, and not the other.

To me hath Savitar, this God, declared it : lie will perform,
whose food is wood and butter.

19 I saw a troop advancing from the distance, moved, not by

wheels but their own Godlike nature.

The Kiiondly One seeks human generations, destroying, still
new, bands of evil beings.

20 These my two Bulls, even Pramara's, are harnessed : drive

them not far ; here let them often linger.

The waters even shall aid him to his object, and the all-cleans-
ing Sun who is above us.


15 Seven heroes : according to SAyana, Visv&mitra and other Rishis, sons of
Prajftpati. Eight : the VAlakhilyas, a numerous race of divine pygmies. Nine:
the Bln igus. Ten . Angirases. Or, alternatively, seven Maruts, on Indra’s
right, eight on Jus left, nine behind him, and ten in fiont. These explanations
hy Sdyana cannot be accepted ; but it is hard to say what is meant. Ludwig
thinks Mat the various classes of letters of the alphabet arc intended. His iu-
genicns explanation will be found in the Pieface to his fourth volume of the
B.gvcda, pp. xxxiii.— xxxv.

16 The tawny: kapildm • according to Sftyana, the famous Ilishi Kapila,
,, ^ un ? ’ — Grassmann. The Mother : Night 1 — Grassmaun. The Infant :
the young Sun, if the Mother is Night.

1 7 7 lie fatted wether : perhap , the swollen rain-cloud The dice * the stars.

Ti ^ UU an< * ^ oon * These are Ludwig’s suggestions.

I hey; according to SAy ana, the Angirases. Perhaps the contentious
Agn*i w k° m Agni the veritable priest is contrasted. — Ludwig. Be :

st * r8, The Friendly One: Indra as the Sun. Evil beings:
Sun *^shasa« an< * spirits of darkness that vanish at the coming of the

best ' 8 t’ ee d« according to SAyana. Pramara's : belonging to me, the
^ ^ er or . Death. But the whole stanza is obscure. All-cleansing: so
fckint a u X ^ ain8 mar ^> which von Roth interprets by * obscuration.' Ludwig

8 that the Moon, ‘ the obscurer of the Sun’ is meant.



THE HYMNS OF


420


[BOOK i


21 This is the thunderbolt which often whirleth down from the

lofty misty realm of Surya.

Beyond this realm there is another glory : so through old ag e
they pass and feel no sok-ow.

22 Bound fast to every tree the cow is lowing, and thence the man-

consuming birds are flying,

Then all this world, though pressing juice for Indra and
strengthening the Rishi, is affrighted.

23 In the Gods’ mansion stood the first-created, and from their

separation came the later.

Three warm the Earth while holding stores of water, and Two
of these convey the murmuring moisture.

24 This is thy life : and do thou mark and know it. As such, hide

not thyself in time of battle.

He manifests the light and hides the vapour : his foot is never
free from robes that veil it.

HYMN XXVIII. Indra. Vasukra,

Now all my other friends are here assembled: my Sire-in-Uw
alone hath not come hither.

So might he eat the grain and drink the Soma, and, satisfied,
return unto his dwelling.


21 This is the thunderbolt : the meaning, probably is, ‘thin dahhinA or
honorarium given to the priests is a veritable thunderbolt.’ — Ludwig. Bat, as
Wilson observes, the stanza may be ‘ intended to express the usual themy of
rain ; the moisture of the earth being drawn up into the solar region as vapour,
and thence descending as rain by the action of the Thunderbolt and the wind’

22 According to S Ay ana, tree here means ‘ bow,* cw. means * bowstung,'
and man-consuming birds ‘deadly arrows.’ The general meaning is that
sacrifices to Indra and liberal gifts to priests will not free men from the fear
of death.

23 The first-created : the ^clouds. The later: the waters of the rain.

Three: Parjanya, Vftyu. and Aditya or the Sun. Holding stores of wiler:
antiptth : ‘Sowing in succession.’ — Wilson. ‘ Following the water.’ — Ludwig.
‘ Rich in water.’ — Grassmann Two : Vftyu and Aditya. .....

24 According to Siiyana, Indra is addressed. The following is Wilsons
translation of Sdyana’s paraphrase of the stanza : — ‘ That thy (divine nature
identified with the sun) is the cause of life : and know such (solar form) o
his (to be worthy of adoration) at the sacrifice ; conceal nothing : that motion
of him the aU-cle&nsing (sun) makes manifest the universe ; it absorbs j
moisture ; it is nevei discontinued ’ The robes that veil the foot, or rays, o
the Sun are the waters into which they are supposed to vaniso.

The hymn is enigmatical and difficult in the highest degree, and neit
S4yana nor later scholars have succeeded in making it intelligible throug o

The Rishi is Vasukra son of Indra, and the hymn is mainly ft
between the Father and the son. Vasukra’s wife is the seer as well as
speaker of stanza 1. . ^

1 This stanza is spoken by Vasukra’s wife in ignorance, says tM » e
that her Father-in-law Indra is present in disguise.



THE RIO VEDA.


421


n r MN 28.]

2 Load belloweth the Bull whose horns are sharpened : upon

the height above earth’s breadth he standeth.

That man I guard and save in all his troubles who fills my
flanks when he hath shed the Soma.

3 Men with the stone press out for thee, 0 Indra, strong, glad-

dening Soma, and thereof thou driukest.

Bulls they dress for thee, and of these thou eatest when,
Maghavan, with food thou art invited.

4 Resolve for me, 0 singer, this my riddle : The rivers send their

swelling water backward :

The fox steals up to the approaching lion : the jackal drives
the wild-boar from the brushwood.

5 How shall I solve this riddle, I, the simple, declare the

thought of thee the Wise and Mighty 1
Tell us, well knowing, as befits the season ; Whitherward is
thy prosperous car advancing?

6 Thus do they magnify me, me the mighty : higher than e^en

high heaven is my car-pole.

I all at once demolish many thousands : my Sire begot me with
no foe to match me.

7 Yea, and the Gods have known me also, Indra, as mighty, fierce

and strong in every exploit.

Exulting with the bolt I slaughtered Vritra, and for the offerer
oped with might the cow-stall.

8 The Deities approached, they carried axes \ splitting the wood

they came with their attendants.

They laid good timber in the fire-receivers, and burnt the grass
up where they found it growing,

9 The hare hath swallowed up the opposing razor : I sundered

with a clod the distant mountain.

The great will I make subject to the little : the calf shall wax
in strength and eat the bullock.

2 Indra speaks. The Dull : tit mighty India.

3 Vasukra speaks.

Indra must be the speaker, although S&yana gives the stanza to Vasukra.
ra declares his power to alter the course of nature. See Wilson’s Trans-
l J°n, note by the Editor.

5 vasukra speaks.

ndra speaks. My Sire: or, the general Father Praj&pati.— SAyana.

8 T) 1 * I 0, s P R &ks, and tella what he has done with Indra’s help.

;- GUre 8tttnza probably an account of the Gods’ fin>t sacrifice. See
aclea , eillsc he Studien, I. pp. 1/8 — 180. According to Sftyana, it refers to
ferenc' Vl ?®' °I .°l° u ^ 8 9 » an d the filling of the rivers. Ludwig sees in it a

9 Of 2 3 * 5 6 * S, 0 beginning of agriculture. Their attendant t: the Maruts.

w ‘th stanza 4.



422


THE HYMNS OP


[fiOOtfj

10 There hath the strong-winged eagle left his talon, as a snared

lion leaves the trap that caught him. a

Even the wild steer in his thirst is captured : the leather
still holds his foot entangled. P


11 So may the leather strap their foot entangle who fatten on

viands of the Brahman.

They all devour the bulls set free to wander, while they them,
selves destroy their bodies’ vigour. * J

12 They were well occupied with holy duties who sped in person

with their lauds to Soma.

Speaking like man, mete to us wealth and booty : i n heaven
thou hast the name and fame of Hero.


2


HYMN XXIX.


hidra,


As sits the young bird on the tree rejoicing, ye, swift Pair
have been roused by clear laudation,

Whose Herald-Priest through many days is Indra, earth’s Guar-
dian, Friend of men, the beat of Heroes.


May we, when this Dawn and the next dance hither, be thy
best servants, most heroic Hero !

Let the victorious cu* with triple splendour bring hitherward
the hundred chiefs with Kutsa.


3 What was the gladdening draught that pleased thee, Indra I

Speed through our doors to songs, for thou art mighty.
Why comest thou to me, what gift attracts thee? Fain would
I bring thee food most meet to offer.

4 Indra, what fame hath one like thee mid heroes? With what

plan wilt thou act? Why hast thou sought us?

As a true Friend, Wide-Strider ! to sustain us, since food
absorbs the thought of each among us.


10 The application of this stanza is not apparent. SAyana’s explanation of
this and the following veiae is entirely different from that of most recent
scholars.

1 The meaning of the stanza h obscure, and the text of the first half-lin®

is unintelligible. I follow the reading which SAyana gives in his Com-
mentary, vdyo instead vd y6, * As (the bird) who deposits its young (in »w

nest) in the tree (is) eagerly looking around.’ — Wilson Sioift Paw ' Asvina*

2 Dance hither : or, come dancing. Cp Milton’s ‘Now the bright morning

star, day’s harbinger, Comes dancing from the east.’ Triple splendor ■
perhaps with reference to Agni, V.iyu, and S Cry a. — Ludwig. Hundred
the Maruta may be intended, ‘hundred’ being used indefinitely. Am* ■
Indra’s favourite companion. < . ^

4 Indra is reminded that the protection of his worshippers is hw 8 P**V
glory. Wide-Strider ! : as identified with the Sun ; ‘widely renowned, an
ing to SAyana. Pood : the hymn appears to have been * seen ’ or reveaie
time of dearth or famine. ’—Ludwig,



THE RIQVEDA .


423


YMS 30.]

5 Speed happily those, as SArya ends his journey, who meet his

wish as bridegrooms meet their spouses ;

Hen who present, 0 Indra strong by nature, with food the many
sangs that tell thy praises.

6 Thine are two measures, Indra, wide, well-meted, heaven for

thy majesty, earth for thy wisdom.

Here for thy choice are Somas mixed with butter : may the
sweet meath be pleasant for thy drinking.

7 They have poured out a bowl to him, to Indra, full of sweet

juice, for faithful is his bounty.

O’er earth’s expanse hath he grown great by wisdom, the
Friend of man, and by heroic exploits.

8 India hath conquered in his wars, the Mighty : men strive in

multitudes to win his friendship.

Ascend thy chariot as it were m battle, which thou slut It
drive to us with gracious favour.

HYMN XXX. Waters.

As ’twerc with swift exertion of the spirit, let the priest speed
to the celestial Waters,

The gloiious food of Varuna and Mitra. To him who spreaded
far this laud I offer.

2 Adhvaryus, be ye ready with oblations, find come long-

ing to the longing Waters,

Down on which looks the purple-tinted Hag 1 "* Dour ye that
flowing wave this day, deft-handed.

3 Go to the reservoir, 0 ye Adhv.iryu*” worship the W aters

Child with your oblations.

A consecrated wave he now wi l ’g ive y ou > 80 P ress for him the
Soma rich in sweetness.


5 Meet his wish : satisfy b : ‘> Indra’s, longing for Soma-libations.

6 Thiae are two mcaaur* : Thy maj**uty or gieatuess is vast and lofty as
heaven, and thy wisdor 13 wide as earth ; or. 4 with confusion of the measure
and the thing measv ot V thou h -at measured out the heaven by thy greatness
and the earth by * i y wisdom. See Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda , p. 18.

The subj^t is the ceremony of fetching the sacred waters required for the
prquratioi of the Soma juice.

1 T> him who spreadeth far ; Indra, according to Sftyana.

9 Tht Purple-tinted Eagle: Soma, the Moon.

3 2o the reservoir: to fetch the holy Waters. The Waters' Child usually

S'n, as the lightning that springs from the clouds or waters of the firraa-
T.t?® ^ Deity who produces the rain, the Moon. See Hillebrandt,
* I. 3/4.



424


THE HYMNS OF [BOO^i


4 He who shines bright in floods, unfed with fuel, whom sage*

worship at their sacrifices :

Give waters rich in sweets, Child of the Waters, even those
which gave heroic might to Indra:

5 Those in which Soma joys and is delighted, as a young man

with fair and pleasant damsels.

Go thou unto those Waters, 0 Adhvaryu, and purify with herha
what thou infusest.


6 So maidens bow before the youthful gallant who conies with

love to them who yearn to meet him.

In heart accordant and in wish one-minded are the Adhvarytig
and the heavenly Waters.

7 He who made room for you when fast imprisoned, who freed

you from the mighty imprecation, —

Even to that Indra send the meuth-rich current, the wave that
gratifies the Gods, 0 Waters.

8 Send forth to him the meath-rich wave, 0 Rivers, which is

your offspring and a well of sweetness,

Oil-balmed, to be implored at sacrifices. Ye wealthy Waters,
hear mine invocation.


3 Send forth the rapture-giving wave. 0 Rivers, which Indra
drinks, which sets the Twain in motion ;

The 'veil that springeth from the clouds, desirous, that
wandt>. 0 th triple-formed, distilling transport.

10 These winch. ,, Streams which with their double current, like

cattle-raiders, the l 0W er pastures, — —

Waters which dwell ^gether, thrive together, Queens, Mothers
of the world, these, ^ s hi, honour.

11 Send forth our sacrifice >; t h j,oly worship, send forth the

hymn and prayer for gain ‘''-riches.

For need of sacrifice disclose the M dder. Give gracious hear-
ing to our call, 0 Wateis.


4 In floods: of the aerial ocean. Op II 35. 4.

5 With herbs • probably Darbha or Ku*a grass.

C The Waters bow to Soma as maidens to their lovers.

9 The Twain : ubh6: probably, Heaven and Eartli . Sity-na explains dif-
ferently : — ‘which sends us both (kinds of fruit) that is, ‘ thee, u it, whether
reward or punishment, of the present life, and of a former life — 1 *Vilson,#nd
Editor’s note. Desirous ■ eager to mix with the Soma, according

but the meaning of auslndm is uncertain. Ludwig and Hillebrandb um^la
it by * des Usanas,’ belonging to Usanas or UsanV Triple-forme .
with two admixtures.— Grassmnnn.

10 Double current : meaning, probably, the two kinds of watc
respectively Ekadhand and Vasatlvarl.

11 Ditcbte the udder ; let your streams flow.



THE RIO VEDA.


JYMN 81.]


425


2 For, wealthy Waters, ye control all treasures : ye brine

auspicious intellect and Amrit. 6

Ye are the Queens of independent riches. Sarasvati give full
life to the singer !

3 When I behold the Waters coming hither, carrying with them

milk and meath and batter,

Bearing the well-pressed Soma juice to India, they harmonize
in spirit with Adhvaryus.

|4 Rich, they are come with wealth for living beings. 0 friends,
Adhvaryus, seat them in their places.

Seat them on holy grass, ye Soma-bringers, in harmony with
the Offspring of the Waters. J

5 Now to this grass are come the longing Waters : the Pious
Ones are seated at our w’orship.

Adhvaryus, press the Soma juice for India: so will the service
of the Gods be easy.


HYMN XXXI. Visvedevaa.

May benediction of the Gods approach us, holy, to aid us with
all rapid succours.

Therewith may we be happily befriended, and pass triumphant
over all our troubles.

i A man should think on wealth and strive to win it by adora-
tion on the path of Order,

Counsel himself with his own mental insight, and grasp still
nobler vigour with his spirit.

The hymn i 3 formed, poured are the allotted portions : as to
a ford friends come unto the Wondrous.

, have obtained the power of case and comfort, we have
Decome acquainted with Immortals.

Tleased b e the Eternal Lord who loves the household with this
man whom God Savitar created.

? hnga Ary a man grace him with cattle; may he appear
to him, and be, delightful. F

'theism . I ] a . Wna, dwclljng-placo be this assembly, where in
light men rich in food have gathered,


2 faamtt: as chief and wisest of the Water- Goddesses.

,rais innhe I *“ , J ation; that is > Lu(lwi g suggests, ‘ May the power

The Wondmu. d . the 8anie t,me the Gods themselves come to us/
The EterZ, Vn P^haps. Soma.

lnsti tiitor of f '' .f” 1. According to SAyana, PrajApati. This man :
18 him. Bhaaa a aacn " ce ' Savitar has given him life and now let Agni
y • Aiyaman as Bhaga who distributes wealth.



426


THE HYMNS OF


IBOOK \

Striving to share the praises of this singer. To us com
strengthening and effectual riches !

6 This Bull’s most gracious far-extended favour existed first

all in full abundance.

By his support they are maintained in common who m ty
A sura's mansion dwell together.

7 What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, froi

which they fashioned forth the Earth and Heaven ?

These Twain stand fast and wax not old for ever: these hat
sung praise to many a day and morning.

8 Not only here is this : more is beyond us. He is the Bui

the Heaven’s and Earth’s supporter.

With power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the Ba
Coursers bear him on as Surya.

9 He passes o’er the broad earth like a Stega : he penetrates th

world as Wind the mist-cloud.

He, balmcd with oil, near Vanina and Mitra, like Agni in th
wood, hath shot forth splendour.

10 When suddenly calved the cow that erst was barren, she

self-protected, ended all her troubles.

Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cas
up the Sami, that which men were seeking.

11 To Nrishad’s son they gave the name of Kanva, and lie th

brown hued courser won the treasure.

For him dark-coloured streamed the shining udder: non
made it swell for him. Thus Order willec^it.

6 This B ill : Agni as the Sun The Asura is Dyaus.

8 Not only here the first half-line is obscure. ‘ Not such (is their power)
there is another greater than they’ — Wila<>n. ‘There is no other thm|
besides like unto him ’ — Wallis, A filter : puvltrain: which purifies the raji
of light which stream through it.

9 A Stega. said to be a certain biting or stinging insect. According

S.iyana, ‘ the aggregation of rays, the Sun.’ Ludwig conjectures that *pb u K
share ’ may be the meaning. . „ :

10 This stanza is very obscure. ‘The cow which was barren is the *
tree, which brings forth the Aiionttha , and from the wood of these tw» 1 ^
are made the arani, the two pieces of wood which are rubbed toget ® r ^
produce the sacred fire — the upper and harder piece is the Stmi (the
Surna), and the low^r and soft is the Aswattha (the Ficus religion). —

‘ The verses [7 —10] deal with the formation of the three main com poo ^
of the universe, heaven, earth, and the sun. Of the first two the po ' .

little to tell us and passes on at once to the third. The sun is ^
with the bull, Agui of the sacrifice, and the earth with the lower ^
stick anointed with ghee, which is licked up [‘devours* instead ^ ^
up’ ] as soon as fire is struck.’ —Wallis, Co»inology of the Rigveda, pp ^ \ |ieJ

11 This stanza appears to have no counexiou with the hymn, » n ' ^

plicable as it stands here. See I. 117. 8, where the eon of Nrish a
turned as a favourite of the Asvins.



Yuly 32 ] THE RIO HE DA. i2J

HYMN XXXII. I ndra ,

Forth speed the Pair to bring the meditating God, benevolent
with boons sent in return for boons.

May Indra graciously accept both gifts from us, when he hath
knowledge of the flowing Soma juice.

: Thou wanderest far, 0 Indra, through the spheres of light and
realms of earth, the region, thou whom many praise ■

j Let those who often bring thee to their solemn rites conquer
the noisy babblers who present no gifts.

3 More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, when the
son duly careth for his parents’ line.

Tho wife attracts the husban 1 : with a about of joy the man’s
auspicious marriage is performed aright. * “

} This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, where
like milch-cows, the kine order the marriage train; ?

Where the Herd’s Mother counts as first and best of all, and
round her are the seven-toned people of the choir.

5 The Pious One hath reached your place before the rest : One

only moves victorious with the Rudras’ band.

To these your helpers pour out meath, Immortal Gods, with
whom your song of praise hath power to win their gifts.

6 He who maintains the Laws of Gods informed me that thou

wast tying hidden in the waters.

Indra who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. By him
instructed am I come, 0 Agni.

' a3 j 3 * he wa y of him who knows it: taught by

the skilful gmde he travels onward.


Iud - a - My ^Version of the Brat line follows the
•tifferent < i nr Z, ud 'Y 1 8 * n his Commentary. S.tyana’s interpretation
io, s |L W ) eJelm • hl3 . llor8es to the service of the

rdise. expectant (of his arrival).’ — Wilson. Both gifts : oblation and

ht * Parents’ line: by marrying and becoming a father ; or aa
is ^u*th proclaimed according to custom in


nw purema line:

lya £ a explains, by having his

iOrd ! n * tituted him
Wording to sTvana .the meaning of this half-line is uncertain.

is Stuti o? Praise 18 ^ c . om P an y °f sacrifices and priests, its

toons, or tho Hot-ir nr?’ se % en tone( f, or sevenfold, are the metres, or the
other of the Mirtitf Jm’ JIe, ' d s Mother is more probably Prisui, the
,(lra > upon this' Wl u° le s ^ uzai » translated by Wilson Shine,

>P r °ach) as milch lrint^ Ch - an ? b< J 1 ’ .° f sacrlfice> when our praises desire (thy
^Pper precedes^ C /J' kln «( de8 3 r e) their stalls ; since the praise of me the wor-
r th » seven of , the coin P au y> a °d this person accompanied

5 The Pioxii n a ^ ln |> Prints is the offerer of praise.*

6 ^ c * Perhans^Vam s P°f 3iid worshipper of Gods, One only : Indra.

Peiuaps Soma, Thou : Agni. Cp. I, 23. 20.



423 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK *

This is, in truth, the blessing of instruction : he finds the path
that leads directly forward.

8 Even now he breathed : these days hath he remembered. Con-

cealed, he sucked the bosom of his Mother.

Yet in his youth old nge hath come upon him : he hath grown
gracious, good, and free from anger.

9 0 Kalasa, all these blessings will wo bring them, 0 Kuruara-

vana, who give rich presents.

May he, 0 wealthy princes, and this Soma which I am bearir
in my heart, reward you.

HYMN XXXIII. Various Deitii

The urgings of the people have impelled me, and by the nea
est way I bring you PiUhnn.

The Universal Gods have brought me safely. The cry wi
heard, Behold, Duhsasu cometh !

2 The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like riv

wives.

Indigence, nakedness, exhaustion press me sore : my mind
fluttering like a bird’s.

3 As rats eat weavers’ threads, cares are consuming me, tl

singer, Satakratu, me.

Have mercy on us once, 0 Indra, Bounteous Lord : be thou
Father unto us.

4 I the priests’ Kishi chose as prince most liberal Kurusravani

The son of Trasadasyu’s son, m


8 Even now he breathed : began to show signs of life. The connexion be
ween stanzas 1 — 4 and 5 — 8 is not apparent. Sucked the bosom of his Mothe\
enjoyed oblations, in the shape of Soma juice, etc., produced by the eaitb.

9 The meaning of Kalasa, literally ‘ pitcher* or ‘beaker,' here is uncertai
‘(Indra), the possessor of the pitchers.’ — Wilson. Ludwig suggests kaldsn
as the right reading : — ‘ We will perform these holy ceremonies in the
minutest details.’ Kurvsravuna : accoiding to S&yana, ‘ hearer of the praif
of priests ; ’ but probably the name of a prince, as in the following hymn.


1 Dvhsdsit: literally, ‘the malevolent.’ Perhaps, as Ludwig suggests,
hostile prince whose victory over Kurusravana has caused the distress mei
tioned in the following stanza.

2 The first line is taken from I. 105. 8.

3 This first line is taken from I. 105. 5 Weavers' threads: threads steep®

In water, according to Sdyana. Once : ‘after having so often given us up
misery.'— Ludwig. ‘ , ,

4 The Priests' Rishi : higher in rank than the other priests. Chose ^
chose to keep him as my master iu order to go out to battle with Hi®- —
man, Sansh'it Reader , p. 386.



THE RIO VEDA.


429


YMN 34.1

Whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me straight on-
ward : I will laud
The giver of a thousand meeds,

The sire of Upamasravas, even him whose words were passing
sweet,

As a fair field is to its lord.

Mrrk, Upamasravas, his son, mark, grandson of Mitratithi :

I am thy father’s eulogist.

If I controlled Immortal Gods, yea, even were I Lord of men,
My liberal prince were living still.

None lives, even had he hundred lives, beyond the statute of
the Gods :

So am I parted from my friend.

HYMN XXXI V. Dice, Etc.

Sprung from tall trees on windy heights, these rollers trans-
port me as they turn upon the table.

Dearer to me the die that never slumbers than the deep
draught of Mujavan’s own Soma.

She never vexed me nor was angry with me, but to my friends
and me was ever gracious.

For the die’s sake, whoso single point is final, mine own devot-
ed wife l alienated.

My wife holds me aloof, her mother hates me : the wretched
man finds none to give him comfort.

As of a costly horse grown old and feeble, I find not any profit
of the gamester.

Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath covet-
ed, that rapid courser :

This and tho three following stanzas are said to be consolatory verses
'eased by the Rishi Kavasha to Upamasravas oil the death of his father

r&tithi.

Were I Lord of men; as one of the Gods. My liberal prince : Mitr&tithi.
Beyond the statute of the Gods .' beyond the time fixed for the duration

his life.

his h7mn has been placed by Grassmann in his Appendix as a composite
uction consisting of incoherent fragments. See Lauman, Sanskrit Reader,
386 , 389 .

, later, Vibhltaka,
times. Rollers :
which the finest

8 * n yh point is final : the speaker has apparently lost all by throw*


' jj? nn 9from tall trees : the nuts of the Vibhtdaka, or
ftl er fV na ^ a Bellerica) were used as dice in early
7 rolling dioe. MtLjavin: said to be a mountain on



430 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK J

Of him speak father, mother, brothers saying, We know hin
not : bind him and take him with you.

5 When I resolve to play with these no longer, my friend

depart from me and leave me lonely.

When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have rattled, lit
a fond girl I seek the place of meeting.

6 The gamester seeks the gambling-house, and wonders, hi

body all afire, Shall I be lucky ?

Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his gain
against his adversary.

7 Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, deceiv

iug and tormenting, causing grievous woe.

They give frail gifts and then destroy the man who wins
thickly anointed with the player’s fairest good.

8 Merrily sports their troop, the three-and- fifty, like Savita

the God whose ways are faithful.

They bend not even to the mighty’s anger : the King himsel
pays homage and reveres them.

9 Downward they roll, and then spring quickly upward, and

handless, force the man with hands to servo them.

Cast on the board, like lumps of magic charcoal, though cull
themselves they burn the heart to ashes.

10 The gambler’s wife is left forlorn nnd wretched : the mothfl

mourns the son who wanders homeless. j

In constant fear, in debt, and seeking riches, he goes bl
night unto the home of others. •

11 Sad is the gambler when he sees a matron, another’s wife, ai

his well-ordered dwelling.

He yokes the brown steeds in the early morning, and whi
the fire is cold sinks down an outcast.


4 Bind him : he has staked his personal freedom, and lost ; and hia peoi
renounce him

7 Driving hooks : used by mahouts or elephant-drivers. The last half line
the stanza is difficult : — ‘ they appear to the gambler covered with honey.’

8 Three and-jifty : or, perhaps, thrice five in number. It would »PP®

from SAyana’s Commentary that fifty-three was the usual number of dice e
ployed ; and yet this seems hardly probable. Ludwig suggests ‘three tin
five’ as the meaning heie of tripancMpih. and Prof. Weber w° u *“L
tripafichatiuh instead of tripafichdsah(Ueber den RdjasHya, p. 72). LikeSavi ,
‘[disposing men's destinies] like the god S.’ — Muir. I

10 Riches : wealth gained by robbery, according to SAyapa. J

11 Yokes the brown steeds: begins throwing the nut-dice. When the /J

cold: * by the time when the file goes out he has stink into a e 8 1
wretch,’ — Muir. f



THE RIO VEDA.


431


fifiV 35.]

To the great captain of your mighty army, who hath become
the host’s imperial leader,

To him I show my ten extended fingers ; I speak the truth.
No wealth am I withholding.

[ play not with dice : no, cultivate thy corn-land. Enjoy the
gain, and deem that wealth sufficient.

There are thy cattle, there thy wife, 0 gambler. So this good
Savitar himself hath told me.

[ Make me your friend : show us some little mercy. Assail us
not with your teriific fierceness.

Appeased be your malignity and anger, and let the brown
dice snare some other captive.

HYMN XXXV. Visvedevas.

Thkse fires associate with Indra are awake, bringing their
light when first the Dawn begins to shine.

May Heaven and Earth, great Pair, observe our holy work.
We claim for us this day the favour of the Gods.

2 Yea, for ourselves we claim the grace of Heaven and Earth,

of Saryanavan, of the Hills and Mother Streams.

For innocence we pray to Surya and to Dawn. So may the
flowing Soma bring us bliss to-day.

3 May the great Twain, the Mothers, Heaven and Earth, this

day preserve us free from sin for peace and happiness.

May Morning sending forth her light drive sm afar. We pray
to kindled Agni for felicity.

May this first Dawn bring us the host of gracious Gods :

rich, may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth.

The wrath of the malignant may we keep afar. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

> Dawns, who come forward witli the bright beams of the Sun,
and at your earliest flushing bring to us the light,

12 The great captain : the highest-numbered of all the dice. Ten fingers :
8 W that I have nothing left.

b This stanza is a farewell address to the Dice. Some other : our enemy. —

iyana.

The hymn or lay has been transliterated, translated in prose, and freely
produced in rhymed octosyllabic verse, by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts, V.

It has also been translated by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder.
J Indra: as a God of the morning light.

r Of Saryaniivdrif of the Mills : according to S&yana, ‘ of the mountains of
pyanftv&n/ a lake in the distri* t of Kurukshetra. I follow Ludwig in
[i ln £ ' both pdrvatdn and sargafUlmtah as genitives.

L I° ur ‘ according to the text * their/ the verb iu the first line being in

,e “*ird person.



432 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l

Shine yo on us to-day auspicious, for renown. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

6 Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, and let

our fires mount upward with a lofty blaze.

The Asvin Pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. We
pray to kindled Agni for felicity.

7 Send us tc-day a portion choice and excellent, 0 Savitar, for

thou art he who dealeth wealth.

I cry to DhishanA, Mother of opulence. We pray to kindled
Agni for felicity.

8 Further me this declaring of Eternal Law, the Law of Gods,

as we mortals acknowledge it !

The Sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

9 This day we pray with innoeonce in strewing grass, adjusting

pressing-stones, and perfecting the hymn.

Thou in the Adityas’ keeping movest restlessly. We pray to
kindled Agni for felicity.

10 To our groat holy grass I bid the Gods at morn to banquet,

and will seat them as the seven priests,—

Varuna, Indra, Mitra, Bhaga for our gain. We pray to kindl-
ed Agni for felicity.

11 Come hither, 0 Adityas, for our perfect weal : accordant help

our sacrifice that we may thrive. #

Pushan, Brihaspati, Bhaga, both Asvins, and enkindled Agni
we implore for happiness.

12 Adityas, Gods, vouchsafe that this our home may be praise

worthy, prosperous, our heroes’ sure defence,

For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We pray t(
kindled Agni for felicity.

13 This day may all the Maruts, all be near us with aid : maj

all our fires be well enkindled.

May all Gods come to us with gracious favour. May spoil an
wealth be ours, and all possessions.

7 Dhishand : a Goddess who presides over prosperity ; according to Hill

braudt, the Earth. _ ^ In

8 Further me: ‘May that glorification of the gods which men repe

connexion with the rite preserve me.’— Wilson.

9 Movest restlessly : perforinest thy duties, according to SAya?*- S
pidly burning the fuel appears to be intended.



THE EIQ VEDA.


433


rtfN 36.]

He whom ye aid, 0 Deities, in battle, whom ye protect and
rescue from affliction,

Who fears no danger at your milk-libation, — such may we be
to feast the Gods, ye Mighty.

HYMN XXXVI. Visvedevas.

There are the Dawn and Night, the grand and beauteous
I’air, Earth, Heaven, and Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman.

Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, and the Floods, Adityas,
Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Sky.

May Dyaus and Prithiv 1 , wise, true to Holy Law, keep us in
safety from distress and injury.

Let not malignant Nirriti rule over us. We crave to-day this
gracious favour of the Gods.

Mother of Mitra and of opulent Varuna, may Aditi preserve
us safe from all distress.

May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe. We crave
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

May ringing press-stones keep the Rakshasas afar, ill dream,
and Nirriti, and each voracious fiend.

May the Adityas and the Maruts shelter us. We crave this
gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

I Full flow libations ; on our grass let Indra sit; Brihaspati the

singer laud with Sama hymns !

Wise be our hearts’ imaginings that wo may live. We crave
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

> Ye Asvius, make our sacrifice ascend to heaven, and animate
the rite that it may send us bliss,

Offered with holy oil, with forward-speeding rein. We crave
the gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

r Hither I call the band of Maruts, swift to hear, great, purify-
ing, bringing bliss, to be our Friends.

May we increase our wealth to glorify our name. We crave
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

' bring the Stay of Life, who makes the waters swell, swift-
hearing, Friend of Gods, who waits on sacrifice.

14 Who fears no danger ; who feels assured that his worship ot the Gods

II Protect him.

I ^ Waters : of the firmamer*.

g Vywis and Pfithivi : Heaven and Earth. Nirriti : Death or Destruction.
males the waters swell : apflm ptrum : * protector of the waters.’ —
’Drinker of the waters.’— Ludwig. Soma is meant. See IX. 76. 4.
28



434


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK


May we control that Power, Soma whose rays are bright. ]
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

9 Alive ourselves, with living sons, devoid of guilt, may we*
this with winners by fair means to win.

Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every aide. We era
this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

10 Hear us, O ye who claim the worship of mankind, and gi

us, 0 j r e Gods, the gift for which we pray, 1 * 3

Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with wealth. ] ]
crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods.

11 We crave the gracious favour of the Gods to-day, great favo

of great Gods, sublime and free from foes,

That we may gain rich treasure sprung from hero sons. 11
crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

12 In great enkindled Agni’s keeping, and, for bliss, free froma

sin before Mitra and Vanina,

May we share Savitar’s best animating help. Wo crave thi
gracious favour of the Gods to-day.

13 All ye, the Gods whom Savitar the Father of truth, and Va

run a and Mitra govern,

Give ns prosperity with hero children, and opulence in kirn
and various treasure.

14 Savitar, Savitar from east and westward, Savitar, Savitai

from north and southward,

Savitar send us perfect health and comfort, Savitar let ow
days of life be lengthened ! * ~

HYMN XXXVII. Sury«

Do homage unto Vanina’s and Mitra’s Eye : offer this solemi
worship to the Mighty God,

Who seeth far away, the Ensign, born of Gods. Sing praia
unto Sftrya, to the Son of Dyaus.

2 May this my truthful speech guard me on every side, wbf

ever heaven and earth and days are spread abroad.

All else that is in motion finds a place of rest : the wate
ever flow and ever mounts the Sun.

3 No godless man from time remotest draws thee down wbf

thou art driving forth with winged dappled Steeds.

One lustre waits upon thee moving to the east, and, Sfirya, the
arisest with a different light.

1 Vanina's and Mitra' s Eye: Surya or the Sun. ‘The eye of Hitt

Varuna and Agni.’— I. 115. 1.

3 Dappled Steeds : ‘ with Eta*as.’ — Ludwig. Oneluttre: by night.

115. 5 ; and AitareyQ'Brdhinuna , III, 4. 44. ‘One ancient radiance



<YIUX 37 .]


TUB BIG VEDA .


435


0 saryft, with the light whereby thou seatterest gloom, and
with thy ray impellest every moving thing,

Keep far from us all feeble, worthless sacrifice, and drive awav
disease and every evil dream. J


5 Sent forth thou guardest well the Universe’s law and in thv
wonted way ariscst free from wrath. ’ J

When Sfirya, we address our prayers to thee to-day, may the
Gods favour this our purpose and desire. J


5 This invocation, these our words may Heaven and Earth and
Indra and the Waters and the Maruts hear. 1 * * * S * * ^

Ne’er may we suffer want in presence of the Sun, and, living
happy lives, may we attain old age. b

r Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with store
of children, free from sickness and from sin,

Long-living, may we look, 0 Surya, upon thee uprising day by
day, thou great as Mitra is 1 J


8 Sfirya, may we live long and look upon thee still, thee, 0 Far-

seeing One, bringing the glorious light,

The radiant God, the spring of joy to every eye, as thou art
mounting up o’er the high shining flood.

9 Thou by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth, and by

thy beams again returns unto its rest,

0 Surya with the golden hair, ascend for us day after day,
still bringing purer innocence.

10 ^ ss 1,8 with shine, bless us with perfect daylight, bless us

with cold, with feivent heat and lustre.

Bestow on us, 0 Surya, varied riches, to bless us in our home
and when wo travel.

1 to our living creatures of both kinds vouchsafe protection,
both to bipeds and to quadrupeds,

That they may drink and eat invigorating food. So grant us
health aud stiength and perfect innocence.

' ^ b y sor ue grievous sin we have provoked the Gods, 0 Deities,
with the tongue or thoughtlessness of heart,

that guilt, 0 Vasus, lay upon the Evil One, on him who ever
leads us into deep distress.

' %S« 8 p 17 riSest anot her.’— Wilson. See Wallis, Cosmology of

! % wonted way : wadkX anu : ‘ after the swadhd offerings. —Wilson.

12 00c * ; or floor of heaven.

dwig^ ^ V ^ : here probably a kind of Diabolus or Devil.-—



436


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOR i


HYMN XXXVIII. x

0 Indra, in this battle great and glorious, in this loud din c
war help us to victory,

Where in the strife for kine among bold ring-decked me
arrows fly all around and heroes are subdued.

2 At homo disclose to us opulence rich in food, streaming wit-

milk, 0 Indra, meet to be renowned.

Sakra, may we be thine, the friendly Conqueror’s : even as w
desire, 0 Vasu, so do thou.

3 The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be Dim c

be Arya, who would war with us, —

Easy to conquer be for thee, with us, these foes : with thee ma
we subdue them in the clash of fight.

4 Him who must bo invoked by many and by few, who standetl

nigh with comfort in the war of men,

India, famed Hero, winner in the doadly strife, let us biiq
hitherward to-day to favour us.

5 For, Indra, I have heard thee called Self-capturer, One, Steer

who never yields, who urges even the churl.

Release thyself from Kutsa and come hither. How shallow
like thee sit still bound that be may not move?

HYMN XXXIX. Asvins

Aa ’twere the name of father, easy to invoke, we all assembler
here invoke this Car of yours,

Asvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient (far which he whe
worships must invoke at eve and dawn.

2 Awake all pleasant strains and let the hymns flow forth : raisf
up abundant fulnoss : this is our desire.

Asvins, bestow on us a glorious heritage, and give our princeH
treasure fair as Soma is.

1 Ring-decked : adorned with armlets, or quoits as weapons.

5 Self-ca/pturer : it is difficult to assign a reasonable and appropriate mean
ing to fvavrijam. Sftyana explains it by svayam eva chhettdram, 1 one who cut)
himself;’ ‘ self mutilator.’ — Wilson. According to the St. Petersburg t®* 1 '
coo, the meaning is ‘one who appropriates or takes to himself;’ according tj
Ludwig ‘ the self- rescuer,’ and according to Geklner ‘ one who suffers hiu^
to be captured.’ The poet calls on Indra to tear himself away from his f& voU .
ite Kutsa in order to aid his worshippers in the coming fight. ‘ A legen
here somewhat obscurely related, that KuUa and Lufa having aummone ^
dra at the same time to their respective sacrifices, he went first to Atdja

then detained him, having fastened him with a hundred leather t M

This verse is addressed to Indra by Lma t exhorting him to free hinwe 1
Wilson.

The Rishi is Ghoshft, daughter of Kakshlv&n.



THE kIGVEDA.


437


l $YMN 39.]

3 Yc are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, and helpers

of the slow although he linger last.

Men call you too, Nasatyas, healers of the blind, the thin and
feeble, and the man with broken bones.

4 Ye made Chyavann, weak and worn with length of days,

young again, like a car, that he had power to move.

Ye lifted up the sou of Tugra from the floods. At our liba-
tions must all these your acts be praised.

5 We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic ;

yea, ye were Physicians bringing health.

You, you who must be lauded, will we bring for aid, so that
this foe of ours, 0 Asvins, may believe.

6 Listen to me, 0 Asvins ; I have cried to you. Give me your

aid as sire and mother aid their son.

Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. Save me,
before it be too late, from this my curse.

7 Ye, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the comely

maid of Purumitra as a bride.

Ye came unto the calling of the weakling’s dame, and granted
noble offspring to the happy wife.

8 Ye gave again the vigour of his youthful life to the sage Kali

when old age was coming nigh.

Ye rescued Vandana and raised him from the pit, and in a
moment gave Vispala power to move.

9 Ye, Asvins Twain, endowed with manly strength, brought

forth Rebha when hidden in the cave and well-nigh dead,
Freed Saptavadhri, and for Atri caused the pit heated with
fire to be a pleasant resting-place.

10 On Pedu ye bestowed, Asvins, a courser white, mighty with

nine-and-uiuety varied gifts of strength,

A horse to be renowned, who bore his friend at speed, joy-giv-
ing, Bhaga-like to be invoked of men.


3 Of her who groweth old at home : referring to Ghoshft herself. See I. 17. 7.
Healers of the blind ; see I. 112. 8.

4 Chyavdna : see I. 118. 10, and 117. 13. Son of Tugra: Bhujyu. See
Vol* 1., Index.

3 My curse : leprosy, which prevented her marriage.

7 Vimada .* see I. 117. 20. Th <; weakling's dame : see I. 117. 24.

8 For Kali, Vandana, and Vispald in this stanza, and Rebha , Atri , and

iu 9 and 10, see Yol. I., Index. For Saptavadhn (stanza 9) see V. 78. 6.



438 THE HYMtiS OP [BOOK l

11 From no side, ye Two Kings whom none may check or stav

doth grief, distress, or danger come upon the man
Whom, Asvins swift to hear, borne on your glowing path, y,
with your Consort make the foremost in the race.

12 Come on that Chariot which the Ribhus wrought for you

the Chariot, Asvins, that is speedier than thought,

At harnessing whereof Heaven’s Daughter springs to birth
and from Vivasvan come auspicious Night and Day.

13 Come, Conquerors of the sundered mountain, to our home

Asvins who made the cow stream milk for Sayu’s sake,

Ye who delivered even from the wolf’s deep throat and sei
again at liberty the swallowed quail.

14 We have prepared this laud for you, 0 Asvins, and, like thi

Bhrigus, as a car have framed it,

Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brough
it as a son, our stay for ever.

HYMN XL. Asviua

Your radiant Chariot — whither goes it on its way ? — who decks
it for you, Heroes, for its happy course,

Starting at daybreak, visiting each morning every house, borne
hitherward through prayer unto the sacrifice?

2 Where are ye, Asvins, in the evening, where at mom ? Where

is your halting-place, where rest ye for the night?

Who brings you homeward, as the widow bedward draws hei
husband’s brother, as the bride attracts the^room?

3 Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald’s voice, and, mcel

for worship, go each morning to the house.

Whom do ye ever bring to ruin ? Unto whose libations come
ye, Heroes, like two Sons of Kings?


11 Whom, none may check or stay : adite — adinau. — S&yana. Your Consort:
SuryA. The foremost in the race : that is, generally, preeminent.

12 Heaven's Daughter : Ushas or Dawn. Vivasvdn: the morning Sun.

18 Conquerors of the sundered mountain: probably with reference to the

deliverance of Jjfliusha, — Ludwig. See I. 110. 20. The swallowed quail :

I. 112. 8 The quail is probably Dawn delivered from the jaws of the wolf
Night by the twin Light-Gods.

14 Our stay for ever : who will perpetuate our family ; ‘ the eternal per*
former of rites.’ — Wilson.

2 As the widow : in certain circumstances a widow was bound to marry her
deceased husband’s brother. See Manu ( MdnavadharmoffistraJ, IX. 69. < •
The law of the Jews was the Bnme. See Deuteronomy, xxv. 6.

8 A* with a herald's voice ; Hpayd is thus explained by Sftya^a. The hQVi *
of the sacrifioer.



THE RIGVEDA.


439


1YMN 40.]


4 Even as hunters follow two wild elephants, we with oblations

call you down at morn and eve.

To folk who pay you offerings at appointed times, Chiefs, Lords
of splendour, ye bring food to strengthen them.

5 To you, 0 Asvins, came the daughter of a King, Ghosha, and

said, 0 Heroes, this I beg of you :

Be near me in the day, be near me in the night: help me to
gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds.

6 0 Asvins, ye are wise : as Kutsa comes to men, bring your car

nigh the folk of him who sings your praise.

The bee, 0 Asvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the
maid carries it purified in her hand.

7 To Bhujyu and to Vasa ye came near with help, 0 Asvins, to

Sinjara and to Usana.

Your worshipper secures your friendship for himself. Through
your protection I desire felicity.

Krisa and Suyu ye protect, ye Asvins Twain : ye Two assist
the widow and the worshipper;

And ye throw open, Asvins, unto those who win the cattle-stall
that thunders with its sc\ enfold mouth.

) The Woman hath brought forth, the Infant hath appeared,
the plants of wondrous beauty stiaightway have sprung up.
To him the rivers run as down a deep descent, and ho this
day becomes their master and their lord.

) They mourn the living, cry aloud, at sacrifice: the men have
set their thoughts upon a distant cast.

A lovely thing for fathers who have gathered here, — a joy to
husbands, — are the wives their arms shall clasp.


5 The second half of the second line is difficult : ' be able (to grant favour)

) the son of my brother, who has horses and a chariot. Wilson.

6 As Kutsa comes to men • borne on India’s chariot. Bears yow honey .
ps honey when the Asvins have ushered in the day. As the maid : Dr.
luirand Prof. Qrassmaun explain this half-line ditfeiently, ‘as a maid, or a
foman, resorts to her rendezvous (with her lover).’

7 Vasa: see I 112. 10 Sinjdt .„ : see VIII. 5. 25. VftnA • see Vol. I., Index.

8 Krisa: a Rishi favoured by Indra ; or. as Sdyana explains the word hare,
:he feeble man in general. Styn: lias been mentioned frequently. Me
'dttle-stall : the rain-cloud whose watei s are the cows.

9 The Woman ; perhaps the water of the cloud. The Infant : the lightuing.
Io him : the sacriftcer may perhaps be intended.

,10 They mourn the living : perhaps, show their sorrow for the widower at
Ike fuueral of his wife. See Lanmau {Sanlkrit Reader, p 38 J ) ., fl0 “ ^ “
have bon owed. Set their thoughts upon a distant cast :< of the
&n&ring.net : apparently a periphrasis for, bav* taken thought for the distan
Lture and children to live after them.



440 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK i

1 1 Of this we have no knowledge. Tell it forth to us, how the

youth rests within the chambers of the bride.

Fain would we reach the dwelliug of the vigorous Steer whc
loves the kine, 0 Asvins : this is our desire.

12 Your favouring grace hath come, ye Lords of ample wealth

Asvins, our longings are stored up within your hearts.

Ye, Lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard : mai
we as welcome friends reach Aryaman’s abode.

13 Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give hero sou

and riches to the eloquent.

Make a ford, Lords of splendour, where men well may drink
remove the spiteful tree-stump standing in the path.

14 0 Asvins, Wonder-Workers, Lords of lustre, where and witl

what folk do ye delight yourselves to-day?

Who hath detaiued them with him? Whither are they gone
Unto what sage’s or what worshipper’s abode?

HYMN XLI. Asvinf

That general Car of yours, invoked by many a man, thai
comes to our libations, three-wheeled, meet for lauds,

That circumambient Car, worthy of sacrifice, we call with oui
pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn.

2 Ye, O Nasatyas, mount that early-harnessed Car, that travel

early, laden with its freight of balm,

Wherewith ye, Heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even the pool
man’s worship where the priest attends.

3 If to the deft Adhvaryu with the meath in hand, or to the

Kindler firm in strength, the household frieud,

Or to the sage’s poured libations ye approach, come thence, 0
Asvins, now to drink the offered meath.


11 Gliosliit appears to speak of herself in the plural number. She plainlj
expresses her wishes for marriage.

12 Aryaman' $ abode : Aryaman is here used in the original sense of tb
word, bosom-friend and companion, especially the friend who asks a womai
in marriage for another.

Prof. Grassmatm places stanzas 10—14 in his Appendix as being obscun
and in his opinion forming no part of the original hymn.


1 Three-wheeled,: see I. 34. 9.

3 The Kindler : the Aguidh, the priest who kindles the sacrificial fire.



BTMX 42]


THE MOVED A.


441


HYMN XLII. Indra.

Even as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud to him
with meet adornment.

Quell with your voice the wicked’s voice, 0 sages. Singer,
make Indra rest beside the Sonia.

2 Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking : 0 Singer,

wnke up Indra as a lover.

Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel
filled brimful with treasure.

3 Why, Maghavan, do they call thee Bounteous Giver 1 Quicken

me : thou, I hear, art he who quickens.

Sakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us luck that
finds great wealth, 0 Indra.

4 Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people,

Indra, in the fray invoke thee.

Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade : with him
who pours no juice he seeks not friendship.

5 Whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong Somas as

much quickly-coming treasure,

For him ho overthrows in early morning his swift well-weapon-
ed foes, and slays the tyrant.

6 He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath

joined to ours his wishes, —

Before him even afar the foe must tremble : low before him
must bow all human glories.

7 With thy fierce bolt, 0 God invoked of many, drive to a

distance from afar the foeman.

0 Indra, give us wealth in com and cattle, and make thy
singer’s prayer gain strength and riches.

8 Indra, the swallower of strong libations rich in the boons

they bring, the potent Somas,

He, Maghavan, will not restrict his bounty : he brings much
wealth unto the Soma-presser.

9 Yea, by superior play he wins advantage, when he, a gambler,

piles his gains in season.

Colestial-iiatured, he o’erwhelms w r ith riches the devotee who
keeps not back his treasure.

1 weed's voice : ‘ the praises of your adversaries.' — Wilson.

4 The Her o: Indra.

j n ’ wucA quickly -coming treamre : representing the wealth which the oEfer-
| ot the libations is expected to produce.

nto whom we offer praites : or, iu whom we have placed our hope.
y H am he, a gambltr : cp. X. 43. 5.



442


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK %


10 0 Much-invoked, may we subclue all famine and evil want
with store of grain and cattle.

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions
by our own exertion.


1 1 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and
from below, from sinners !

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.


HYMN XLIII. Indra.

In perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the
light of heaven have sum* forth Indra’s praise.

As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they
compass Magh.ivan about that he may help.

2 Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have set my

hopes on thee, 0 Much-invoked !

Sit, Wonderful 1 as King upon the sacred grass, and let thy
drinking-placo be by the Soma juice.

3 From indigence and hunger Indra turns away : Maghavan

hath dominion over precious wealth.

These the Seven Rivers flowing on their downward path in-
crease the vital vigour of the potent Steer.

4 As on the fair-leafed tiee rest birds, to Indra flow the gladden-

ing Soma juices that the bowls contain.

Their face that glows wi(h splendour through their mighty
power hath found the shine of heaven fo%man, the Arps’
light.

5 As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so Maghavan,

sweeping all together, gained the Sun.

This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none,
Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time.

6 Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men : the Steer

took notice of the people’s songs of praise.

The man in whose libations Sakra hath delight by means of
potent Somas vanquisheth bis foes.

10 With prince* : with men eminent for their wealth : rdjabhir-dhandnd
mlfvaraih. — SAyana.


8 Turns away : SAyana makes vukuvrit transitive : — ‘ May Indra be tb«
remover of thirst and haugt-r.’ — Wilson. , ^

5 Gained the Sun: conquers him by taking away hie moisture, that
water that he has absorbed.— SAyana.



gYMN 44.] THE R10VEDA . 443

7 When Soma streams together unto Indra flow like waters to

the river, rivulets to the lake,

In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the rain swells
the corn by moisture sent from heaven.

8 He rushes through the region like a furious Hull, he who hath

made these floods the dames of worthy lords.

This Maghavan hath found light for the man who biings ob-
, lation, sheds the juice, and promptly pours his gifts.

9 Let the keen axe come forth together with the light : here be,

as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice.

Let the Red God shine bright with his refulgent ray, and lot
the Lord of heroes glow like heaven’s clear sheen.

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with

store of grain and cattle.

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions
by our own exertion.

11 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and

from below, from sinners.

May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

HYMN XLIV. Indra.

May Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by Holy Law
is strong and active,

The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great steer-
like power that hath no limit.

2 Firm-seated is thy car, thy Steeds are docile ; thy hand, 0

King, holds, firmly grasped, the thunder.

On thy fair path, 0 Lord of men, come quickly : we will in-
crease thy powers when thou hast drunken.

3 Let strong and mighty Steeds who bear this Mighty Indra, the

Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder,

Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the Steer of conquer-
[ ing might, of real vigour.

td! f ames °f unrthy lords: that is, subjected them to the Aryans,

9 eas tht >y had been the thralls of D^as. See I. 32. 11.

tod nh n aXe: w ^° * 8 f re fl uenfc ly likened to an axe. See I. 127. 3,

(ndra’ • 'u' * The Red Ood: aruehah : according to SAyana, ‘the radiant
prefers * 8 P r °bably intended, or perhaps ‘ the red bolt' as M. Milller

10 two concluding stanzas are identical in Hymns 52, 53, 54.



444 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK \

4 So like a Bull thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trougl

the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat.

Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself : be for ou
profit as the Master of the wise.

5 May precious treasures come to us, — so will I pray. Come t

the votaiy’s gift offered with beauteous laud.

Thou art the Loid, as such sit on this holy grass : thy vessel
are inviolate as Law commands,

6 Far went our earliest invocations of the Gods, and won u

glories that can never be surpassed.

They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice, sink down i:
desolation, trembling with alarm.

7 So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses, difficul

to harness, have been yoked.

Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by whom ful
many a work that brings reward is done.

8 He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook

Dyaus thundered forth and made the air’s mid-region quake
He stays apart the two confronting bowls ; he sings lauds ii
the potent Soma’s joy when he hath drunk.

9 I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine, wherewith thou

Maghavan, shalt break the strikers with the hoof.

At this libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake th
juice, partake the worship, Maghavan.

10 0 Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil wan

with store of grain and cattle.

May we allied, as first in rank, with princes offtain possession
by our own exertion.

1 1 Brihaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, an(

from below, from sinners.

May Indra from the front and from the centre, as Friend t
friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

4 The Lord: pat im: the Soma. Collect them in tkytelf: ‘take us hit
thj self.’— Wilson. Of the wise: kenipflnam is thus explained by the CommeD
tators, but the meaning seems doubtful. Ludwig thinks that ‘the maste
of the oars,' that is, the steersman, is intended.

6 In desolation : trmd' = tpr)/iOi. — Ludwig. Trembling in alarm : or, tlo er
of ill deeds, according to YAska’s interpretation of kipayah,

7 Whoie horses, difficult to harness, have been yoked: whose ill- manage
attempts to perform acceptable sacrifice have failed. In advance: hew* 1
death, according to SAyana.

8 He : Indra. As they shook : cp. II. 12. 2. Two confronting bowls: bea?ei

and earth. # ■.

9 Goad: the hymn of praise which urges Indra to action. The striker/ w*
the hoof: a class of Y&tudhAnas or demons. See X. 87. 12.



HYMN 45.] THE RIQVELA. 445

HYMN XLV. Agni.

First Agni sprang to life from out of Heaven : the second
time from us came Jata vedas.

Thirdly the Manly-souled was iu the waters. The pious lauds
and kindles him the Eternal.

2 Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know

thy forms in many a place divided.

We know what name supremo thou hast in secret : we know
the source from which thou hast proceeded.

3 The Manly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, man’s Viewer

lit thee in the breast of heaven.

There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Steers
increased thee in the waters’ bosom.

4 Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders : he licked

the ground, about the plants he flickered.

At once, when born, he looked around enkindled, and lightened
heaven and earth within with splendour.

5 The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts

and guardian of the Soma,

Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront
of the Dawns he shines enkindled.

6 Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, be sprang to life

and filled the earth and heavens.

Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when the Five
Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni.

7 So among mortals was Immortal Agni stablished as holy

wise and willing envoy.

He waves the red smoko that he lifts above him, striving to
reach the heavens with radiant lustre.


1 From out of Heaven : or, from Dyaus or Heaven his father; in the shape
of the Sun. From us : produced by men in the shape of sacrificial and do-
mestic fire. In the waters ; of the firmament, in the shape of lightning, the
third form of Agni.

2 In secret : unknown to those who know not the Veda. — S&yana.

3 The Manly-souled ; or, the Friend of men; Varuna, according to S&yana,
and PrajApati, according to Mahidhara. Perhaps Dyaus (cp. stanza 8) may

^ lutended.— Ludwig. Grassmann thinks that Indra, the kindler of the
1'ghtning, is meant. The Steers : or, the Mighty Ones; the Maruts.

. 1 2 3 * * 6 The hrm rock : ‘the solid cloud.’— Wilson. Some extraordinary conflagra-
tion of jungle may perhaps be referred to. The Five Ti'ibes : pdftcha jandh :
literally, the five men, meaning, according to S&yana, men in general, and,
according to Mahtdhara, the institutor of the sacrifice and the four chief

priests.



446 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

8 Like gold to look on, far he Bhone refulgent, beaming itnper-

ishable life for glory,

Agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific Father
Dyaus begat him.

9 Whoso this day, O God whoso flames are lovely, prepares a

cake, 0 Agni, mixt with butter,

Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss bestowed
by Gods, 0 thou Most Youthful.

10 Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every song of

praise sung forth enrich him.

Dear let him be to Sfirya, dear to Agni, preeminent with sou
and children’s children.

11 While, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship they win

themselves all treasures worth the wishing.

Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclos-
ed the stable filled with cattle.

12 Agni, the Friend of men, the Soma’s keeper, Vaisvanara,

hath been lauded by the liishis.

We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven : ye Deities,
give us wealth with hero children.

HYMN XLVL Agni.

Stabushed for thee, to lend thee vital forces, Giver of wealth,
Guard of his servant’s body.

The Great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, Abider with
men, is seated in the lap of waters. •

2 Worshipping, seeking him with adoration like some lost crea-

ture followed by its footprints,

Wise Bhrigus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and
found him lurking where the floods are gathered.

3 On the Cow’s forehead, with laborious searching, Trita, the

offspring of Vibhuvas, found him.

Born in our houses, Youthful, joy-bestower, he now becomes
the central point of brightness.

12 Soma s keeper : as identified with the Muon, the great receptacle of the
celestial Soma, the nectar or ambrosia of the Gods. See Hillebrandt, V. M I-
330 — 336 .

1 For thee : the Rishi addresses himself. Who knows the clouds: f r °m
which he (Agni) comes in the form of Lightning. Of waters : of the firm*'
ment.

2 Wise Bhrigus : frequently mentioned as specially connected with the
worship of Agni. Cf II 4. 2. Pursued him : seel. 65. 1.

3 On the Cow' s forehead : ‘on the head of the cloud.’ Trita : Agni in ntf
third form as lightuing. The abstract personified form of the celestial Ag® 1



THE R1QVEDA.


447


01ifH 46.]


4 Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe

Priest among mankind, oblation-bearer,

Leader of rites and Purifier, envoy of men, as sacrifice that
still advances.

5 The foolish brought the ne’er-bewildered forward, great, Victor,

Song-inspirer, Fort-destroyer.

Leading the Youth gold-bearded, like a courser gleaming with
wealth, they turned their hymn to profit.

6 Holding his station firmly in the houses, Trita sat down within

his home surrounded.

Thence, as Law bids, departs the Tribes’ Companion, having
collected men with no compulsion.

7 His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses

move, whose smoke is shining,

White, waxing in their strength, for ever stirring, and sitting
in the wood ; like winds are Somus.

8 The tongue of Agni bears away the praise-song, and, through

Ids care for Earth, her operations.

Hun, bright and radiant, living men have stablished as their
blithe Priest, the Chief of Sacnficers.

9 That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, the

Waters, Tvashtar, and, with might, the Bhrigus,

Him Matarisvan and the Gods have fashioned holy for man
aud first to be entreated.


is hei e represented as endeavouring to find the lurking fire in the sky. —
Maedonell. Offspring of Vibhuvas: or, connected with Vibhuvasu, the very
wealthy, Soma.

4 da sacrifice, that still advances : ‘ids das sieh vorwarts bewegende opfer.'
—Ludwig Accoid ng to Siy.ina, ‘the object of sacrifice, him who goes forward
[h’"tn one tire receptacle to another] ’

5 The foolish liuman priests, weak and foolish in comparison with the wise
Agni. Gleaming with wealth: the meaning of dhanai chain is uncertain. The
St. Petersburg Lexicon offers dhanarjam, * striving to win the prize/ as pro-
bably the light reading.

6 On stanza* 3 and 6 see Maedonell (J. K. A. S M July, 1893, pp. 450 — 452),
w ho tianslates the second half of 6 .as follows : From hence the house-friend
( >f settlers collecting (them) goto among men by distiibutiou, not by (means
"f) bonds ; i e., carried from place, not freshly produced by cord and drill

7 That make the houses move : this seems to be what the words danictm
w'ltrd should mean, though how flames can be thus qualified is not clear.
'The lcscueib from the humiliated (spirits of ill).’ — Wilson. * Protectors of
the bouses.' — Mahidhara. Like winds are Somaa : as winds fan flame, so
Soma libations increase the might of Agni. Accoiding to S.lyana, the flames
a ' e ‘ like the fast-flowing juices of the Soma .' — Wilson. I follow Ludwig’s
explanation, but the meaning ^f the passage is doubtful.

® operations : holy works performed by men

9 Mdtarifvan : a divine or semi-divine being who brought Agni from
he *ven. See I. 31 3, and 60. 1.



448 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

10 Agni, whom Gods have made oblation-bearer, and much-desk,
ing men regard as holy,

Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then
shall glorious men in troops adore thee.

HYMN XLVII. Inclra Vaikuntha.

Thy right hand have we grasped in ours, 0 Indra, longiu»
for treasure, Treasure-Lord of treasures ! 0

Because we know thee, Hero, Lord of cattle : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches

2 Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, sprung

from four seas, the prop and stay of treasures,

Fraught with great bounties, meet for praise and glory ■
vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.

3 Wealth, with good Brahmans, Indra! God-attended, high,

wide, and deep, and based on broad foundations,

Strong, with famed Rishis, conquering our foernen : vouch
safe us mighty and resplendent riches.

4 Victorious, winning strength, with hero sages, confirmed in

power, most useful, wealth-attracting,

True, Indra ! crushing forts and slaying Dasyus : vouchsafe
us mighty and resplendent riches.

5 Wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses, strength hundred-

fold and thousandfold, 0 Indra,

With manly sages, happy troops, light- winning: vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches. #

6 To Saptagu the sage, the holy-minded, to him, Brihaspati, the

song approaches,

Angiras’ Son who must be met with homage : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

7 My lauds, like envoys, craving loving-kindness, go forth to

Iudra with their strong entreaty,

Moving his heart and uttered by my spirit : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

Vaikuntha is said to mean son of Yikunthft, an Asufl or female demon who
was allowed by Indra to become his second mother.

2 Wealth: S&yana gives another interpretation : — ‘ (We know thee to be)
well armed/ etc. — Wilson. Sprung from four seas : regarded as the store-
houses of jewels, ‘ (Renowned throughout) the four oceans,’— [applied to
Indra] Wilson.

6 Brihaspati: according to the Scholiast meaning Saptagu, ‘the lord
much (praise) ’ — Wilson. According to others, the God Brihaspati calj«^
Saptagu as being drawn by seven oxen : ‘ der fahrt mit sieben Bindero
Grassmann. 4.ngiras' Son: meaning apparently Brihaspati as especially l yVea
and honoured by Angiras and his descendants. See VI. 78. 1.



TEE RIQVEDA,


449


0MX 48.]

8 Grant us the boon for which I pray, 0 Indra, a spacious home
unmatched among the people.

To this may Heaven and Earth accord approval : vouchsafe us
mighty and resplendent riches.

HYMN XLVIII. Indra Vaikuntha.

I was the first possessor of all precious gear : the wealth of
every man I win and gather up.

On me as on a Father living creatures call : I deal enjoyment
to the man who offers gifts.

2 I, Indra, am Atharvan’s stay and firm support : I brought forth

kiue to Trita from the Dragon’s grasp.

I stripped the Dasyus of their manly might, and gave the
cattle-stalls toMatarisvan and Dadhyach.

3 For me hath Tvashtar forged the iron thunderbolt : in me the

Gods have centred intellectual power.

My sheen is like the Sun’s insufferably bright : mon honour
me as Lord for past and future deeds.

4 I won myself these herds of cattle, steeds and a me, and gold

in ample store, with my destructive bo[ i ;

I give full many a thousand to th p •'Shipper, what time the
Somas and the lauds have *' aae me ^ a( *-

5 Indra am I : none e'"- wins m y weillth from me : never at

any time <*;r * a thrall to death.

the Soma, ask riches from me alone : ye, Purus, in
my friendship shall not suffer harm.

6 These, breathing loud in fury, two and two, who caused Indra

to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray,

The challengers, I struck with deadly weapon down : firm
stand what words the God speaks to his worshippers.


$ Unmatched : dsamam: ‘not held in common.’— Wilson.

Itidra, Vaikuntha is the Hishi of this hymn, which is a self-laudatorv reulv
to Saptagu in Hymn XLVII. y p y

Atharvan is the name of the priest who first obtained fire and offered
^oma and prayers to the Gods. See I. 80. 10, and 83, B. The Dragon is an-
of •/ > * °F ^ fffra. ‘ I generated the waters above the cloud for the sake
‘M^taris' ~~’^ r ^ 80n Mtttarifvan and Dadhyach: or, according to Sdyana,


Alatarisvan’s son Dadhyach.’

* Hru * : ‘O men.’— Wilson.


6 T) v — vv uHon.

riar i n ; . who these were i3 uncertain. Two a**' tw0 •; probably the war-
latin W t 011 chariot and the chariot<^ r *~ Ludwig. The literal tians-
SDeivV Wf c last half-line of the stanza pri ,e ars to be ‘ the non-worshipper
vorfi g f 1 "? 1 wor da to worshippers ; ^namasynh, he who has no other to re-
brolr 1106 ’ t ing Indra » whose proviso of victory to his worshippers is never
o*en. —bud wig.

29



450 THE HYMNS OF [BOOKl

7 This One by stronger might I conquered Bingly ; yea, also two;

shall three prevail against mel
Like many sheaves upon the floor I thrash them. How can
my foes, the Indraless, revile me ?

8 Against the Gungus I made Atithigva strong, and kept him'

mid the folk like Vritra- conquering strength,

When I won glory in the great foe-slaying fight, in battle
where Karanja fell, and Parnaya.

9 With food for mine enjoyment Sapya Nairn came: he joined

me as a friend of old in search of kine.

As I bestowed on him an arrow for the fight I made him
worthy of the song and hymn of praise.

10 One of the two hath Soma, seen within it; the Herdsman with

the bone shows forth the other. j

He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were sharpened, stood
fettered in the demon’s ample region.

11 I, as a Q 0 d, ne’er violate the statutes of Gods, of Vasus, Ru-

driyas, Aav^ H g

These Gods have me f or auS pi c ious vigour, unconquer-

ed and invincible for ^ . or#

HYMN Xi^v Indra Vaikuntha,

I have enriched the singer with surpassing — dth ; I have al-
lowed the holy hymn to strengthen me.

I, furtherer of him who offers sacrifice, have conquered in each
fight the men who worship not. *


7 This One • or, this one thing, that is, ‘ the primordial substance or unit
out of which the universe was developed.’- Wallis, Cosmology of the Riovrf*

V ’s Against the Omgus : or, to aid the Gang"*. »

these people were is uncertain. A tithigva : Divodasa son of Atith g , J

tag to slyana. See Vol. I., Index. Karanja ..and Parnaya: apparent
tree-demons : see I. 53. 8. %

9 Sdpya; a family name of Indra’s friend Nam!, who in VI* • 18

Sayya’s son. , , ,

10 One of the two : the Moon. The Herdsman : Indra. With the ^
of Dadhyach. See I. 84. 13. The other: Vritra. He: Vnfcnj. £ db th0
Indra. The demow , awp [ e region • mid-air, which was then domm ^ A ion
Druh or malignant spuv. drought. I follow Prof. Ludwig s int P

of this obscure stanza whiOt i 8 evidently an interpolation motivea y
mention of Dadhyach in stanza Q For a somewhat different mterpr ^

eee Hillebraudt, V. M., I. 337.

11 Rudriyas: the Maruts, sons of Rua,* t


Indra Vaikuntha is the Riahi also.



THE RIO VEDA.


451


lYMX 49.]


2 The People of the heavens, the waters, and the earth have

stablished me among the Gods with India’s nnme.

I took unto myself the two swift vigorous Bays that speed on
divers paths, and the fierce bolt for strength.

3 With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi’s sake ; I guarded

Katsa well with these my saving helps.

Ao Sushna’s slayer I brandished the dart of death : I gave not
up the Aryan name to Dasyu foes.

4 Smadibha, Tugra, and the Vetasus I gave as prey to Kutsa,

father-like, to succour him.

I was a worthy King to rule the worshipper, when I gave Tuji
dear inviolable gifts.


1 I gave up Mrigaya to Srutarvan as his prey because he ever
followed me and kept my laws.

For Ayu’s sake I caused Vesa to bend and bow, and into Sa-
vya’s hand delivered Padgribhi.

i I, I crushed Navavastva of the lofty can the Dasa, as the
Vritra-slayer kills the fiends ;

When straightway on the region’s farthest edge I brought the
God who makes the lights to broaden and increase.

’ I travel round about borne onward in my might by the -Met.
footed dappled Horses of the Sun.

When man’s libation calls me to the robe of state P

the powerful Dasyu with my blows-


Kavi : the father of


3 Atka: mentioned again in H*-“ 09 »« Bo^

India's friend Usand. ... ... 1 'ugra, ‘ with all his followers/

4 Smadibha : or, ^Ataliumd Tuara are -<>eiitioned as having been con-

See VI. 20. 8, wher, ^ 4 where t* jir nauie8 occur together with
quered by Ind^’ ana V * ’

that of Tiv-' ... . IV. 16. 13, and^VIII. 3. 19. Smtarvan :

5 . rW a:adernonof theair.^ - n VUI 63 Ayu . sometimes spoken

- prince whose liberality is p ftnc j other times as conquered by him. See
of as a King favoui ed by Inj^ nofc ag ai n . Savya : the Rishi of Hymns
index. The nameof ^ Bome ^ einoQ or savage enemy who is not

oi — 67 of Book I. PocH*

mentioned again. &nd VI . 20 . 11. Of the lofty ear: or Bri-

« Navavdstva • “ -»w a y av ft»tva. The lights : the stars, or perhaps light
Xensr a r m would be Dyau, or Varuna, and in

latUr case 9Qrya or the Sun. Ludwig.

7 The rote of state : apparently the milk wh.ch is the royal mantle where-
with Soma is invested.



462


THE HYMNS UJ?


IEVVK X,


8 Stronger am I than Nahus, I who slew the seven : I glorified

with might Yadu and Turvasa. ^ I

I brought another low, with strength I bent his strength : \
let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power.

9 Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth, I took the

Seven Rivers as mine own domain.

I, gifted with great wisdom, spread the floods abroad : by war
I found for man the way to high success.

10 I set within these cows the white milk which no God, not even

Tvashtar’s self, had there deposited, —

Much-longed-for, in the breasts, the udders of the kine, the
savoury sweets of meath, the milk and Soma juice.

11 Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, sped Gods

and men with mighty operation.

The pious glorify all these thine exploits, Lord of Bay Cours-
es, Strong, and Self-resplendent.


HYMN L. Indra Vaikunth*.

I laud your Mighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is
shared by all it\en, who created all ;

Indra, whoso conquering strength is powerful in war, whose
fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth revere.

2 He with his friend is active, lauded, good to man, Indra who

*>ust be glorified by one like me.

Hero,T j0r a 0 f the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with
Vritra or f ov waters, or for spoil. *

3 Who are tVn men whom thou wilt further, Indra, who strive

to win thy «; gs allied witK riches ?

Who urged thee i rwar d to exert thy power divine, to valour
in the war for wau rg on their fieiCr, ?


8 Stronger ant I than Nahus : s j l0 ndhushtarah ; '-Orally, more Nairn

than Nahua ; I out-NahuB Nahus, a *{ n g w ho contended wu, indra ; ‘ I aD
nearer than the neighbour,’ according to Roth whom Grassy^ u follow
• T the especial bond of bonds. — Wilsoi. X folloW Ludwig’s inters +a tioi
J Who »Uw the >even: the seven perhaps, a. the chief of the demons a.
+i»nvftd bv Indra. Ludwig takes saptaha to sr. ean ‘seven times .
SSZ times Stronger than Nahus.’ Another: A is uncertain

: until they became worthy antagonists. 1 have demolished nine

ftQ 10 n X Milk and Soma juice : sweet ambrosial rain; the fas* being the teem* 1

clouds^ ^ Bianza Indra aa RUhi addresses himself asthedefty of the by®

2 His friend: hia constant companion, tho thunderbolt. .

s Mfad W ith riches: the happiness which Indra sends being K
return for costly sacrificial offerings,



453


HYMN 51.] mE r 1G V]? $A,

4 Thou, Indra, through holy prayer art mighty, worthy of

sacrifice at all libations.

In every fight thou castest herot-ii on the ground : thou art the
noblest song, 0 Lord of all the folk.

5 Help now, as Highest, those who toil at sacrifice : well do the

people know thy great protecting might.

Thou shalt be Everlasting, Giver of success : yea, on all these
libations thou bestowest strength.

6 All these libations thou makest effectual, of which thou art

thyself supporter, Son of Power.

Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, sacrifice, holy
text, prayer, and exalted speech.

7 They who with flowing Soma pray to thee, 0 Sage, to pour oil

them thy gifts of opulence and wealth,

May they come forward, through their spirit, on the path of
bliss, in the wild joy of Soma juice effused.

HYMN LI. Agni. Gods.

Large was that covering, and firm of texture, folded wherein
thou enteredst the waters.

One Deity alone, 0 Jatavedas Agni, saw all thy forms in sun-
dry places.

2 What God hath seen me 7 Who of all their number clearly be-

held my forms in many places?

Where lie, then, all the sacred logs of Agni that lead him God-
ward, Varuna and Mitra 7

3 In many places, Agni J&tavedas, we sought thee hidden in the

plants and waters.

Then Yama marked thee, God of wondrous splendour! effulgent
from thy tenfold secret dwelling.

4 Song : mdntrah : subject of thy worshippers’ songs of praise.

6 Vessel : pfttram ; * protection.’— Wilson.

The legend says that Agni, fearing to share the fate of his three elder
brothers who had perished in the service of the Gods, fled away and hid
himself in the waters. The Gods discovered him and persuaded him to
return to his sacred duties.

( Stanzas 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 are spoken by the Gods, and 2, 4 , 6, 8 by Agni.

| He must have been very well wrapped up, the Gods ironically say, or the
ter would have extinguished him.— Ludwig. Forma: literally, ‘bodies/

^ Sacred logs : pieces of Sam! and Asvattha wood, from whioh alone the
uncial fi re j 8 produced. Others explain samtdhah by * flames/

* oy Unfold secret dwelling: according to S&yana, ‘the three worlds,—
^ v en, mid-air, earth ; three divinities, Agni, VUyu, Aditya ; the Waters,
r 8bru hs, the trees, and the bodies of living beings.’ — Wilson. The mean-
> appears to be, as Ludwig conjectures, that Yama knew that Agni wOuld
P ear again from the fire-sticks worked by the fingers of both hands.



454 THE HYMNS OP [BOOS X.

4 I fled in fear from sacrificial worship Varuna, lest the Godj

should thus engage me.

Thus were my forms laid do**-** in many places. This, as my
goal, I Agni saw before me.

5 Come ; man is pious and would fain do worship ; he waits pre-

pared : in gloom thou, Agni, dwellest.

Make pathways leading God-ward clear and easy, and bear ob-
lations with a kindly spirit.

6 This goal mine elder brothers erst selected, as he who drives a

car the way to travel.

So, Varuna, I fled afar through terror, as flies the wild-bull
from an archer’s bowstring.

7 We give thee life un wasting, Jatavedas, so that, employed,

thou never shalt be injured.

So, nobly born ! shalt thou with kindly spirit bear to the Gods
their share of men’s oblations.

8 Grant me the first oblations and the latter, entire, my force-

ful share of holy presents,

Tlio soul of plants, the fatness of the waters, and let there be
long life, ye Gods, to Agni.

9 Thine be the first oblations and the latter, entire, thy forceful

shares of holy presents.

Let all this sacrifice be thine, 0 Agni, and let the world’s four
regions bow before thee.

♦

HYMN LII. ° 0(k

Instruct me, all ye Gods, how I, elected your Priest, must
seat me here, and how address you.

Instruct me how to deal to each his portion, and by what path
to bring you man’s oblation.

2 I sit as Priest most skilled in sacrificing : the Maruts and all
Deities impel me.

Asvins, each day yours is the Adhvaryus* duty : Brahman and
wood are here : ’tis yours to offer.

8 The fir it oblation a and the latter: or the PrayUjas and the Anuytljaa, th
former being texts and oblations forming part of the introductory ce ' cn ' ,
at a Soma sacrifice, and the latter the secondary or final offerings. MW
share: the potent concentrated portion. The fatness: ghritam: yhh c R
butter.

1 Agni* having been elected Oblation -bearer, asks the Gods to instru<
him in hia duties.



ffjlll 53.] THE RIO VEDA. 455

3 Who is this Priest. t io he the Priest of Yamal On whom is

thrust this God-appointed honour]

He springs to life each month, each day that passes; so Gods
have made him their oblation-bearer.

4 The Gods have made me bearer of oblations, who slipped away

and passed through many troubles.

Wise Agni shall ordain for us the worship, whether five-wayed,
threefold, or seven-threaded.

5 So will t )ou strength and life for ever, 0 Gods, that I

may give you room and freedom.

To Indra’s arms would I consign the thunder; in all these
battles shall he then be victor.

6 The Deities, three thousand and three hundred and thirty-

nine, have served and honoured Agni,

Strewn sacred grass, anointed him with butter, and seated
him as Priest, the Gods’ Invoker.

HYMN LIII. Agni Sauchika. Gods.

Hr hath arrived, he whom wo sought with longing, who skil-
led in sacrifice well knows its courses.

Let him discharge his sacrificial duties : let him sit down as
Friend who was before us.

2 Best Priest, he hath been w r on by being seated, for he hath
looked on the well-ordered viands.

Come, let us worship Gods who must be worshipped, and
pouring oil, laud those who should be lauded.


3 The first line is spoken by some God who doubts Agni’s competence. Is
he the Priest of Yama ? : can he convey offerings to the Blest in the realms of
tbe God of the departed ? In the second half of the first line I follow L«d-

but the meauing is uncertain. The second line is the answer of soother
Owl. Each month , each day ; the PitriyajAa , or sacrifice to the -'&thets, is
offered monthly, and the Agnihotra , or oblation to Agni and Gods, daily,
these comprehend all dther periodical rites.

4 The first line is spoken by Agni. Slipped away * jee the preceding hymn,
the second line is what the Goc 1 2 » said. Five-wan ; consisting of five courses
or Parts, seeX. 124. 1. Threefold: consisting the three dail y Soma-libations,
860 X. 124 l. Seven-threaded: perform- 1 by scven priests. See X. 124. 1.

Stanza 5 is spoken by Agni. St“ jZa ® Is the poet’s conclusion.

For an explanation of the number of the Gods (33 + 303 + 3003) Bee The
Hymns of the Athdrva-ved '*> x - 7. 13, note.

I ° Q Hymns 51 — 53 *ee Macdonell, J. R. A. S., January, 1894, pp. 11—22.



fl\SS\0N If


1 The Gods speak. Courses : or portions.

2 % being seated : * by his seat (at the altar).’— Wilson,



THE HYMNS OP


m


[BOOR x,


3 Now hath he made the feast of Gods effective : now have we

found the secret tongue of worship.

Now hath he come, sweet, robed iu vital vigour, and made our
calling on the Gods effective.

4 This prelude of my speech I now will utter, whereby we Gods

may quell our Asura foemen.

Eaters of strengthening food who merit worship, 0 ye Five
Tribes, bo ploaood. mir>a oblation.

5 May the Five Tribes be pleased with mine omaim.., Qn <i the

Cow’s Sons and all who merit worship.

From earthly trouble may the earth protect us, and air’s mid
realm from woe that comes from heaven.

6 Spinning the thread, follow the region’s splendid light : guard

thou the pathways well which wisdom hath prepared.
Weave ye the knotless labour of the bards who sing : be Manu
thou, and bring the Heavenly People forth.

7 Lovers ef Soma, bind the chariot traces fast : set ye the reins

iu order and embellish them.

Bring hitherward the car with seats where eight may sit,
whereon the Gods have brought the treasure that we love.

8 Here flows Asmanvatl ; hold fast each other, keep yourselves

up, and pass, my friends, the river.

There let us leave the Powers that brought no profit, and
cross the flood to Powers that are auspicious.

9 Tvashfcar, most deft of workmen, knew each magic art, bring-

ing most blessed bowls that hold the drin^ of Gods.

His axe, wrought of good metal, he is sharpening now, where-
with the radiant Brahmanaspati will cut. _____

3 Tongue of worship • Agni, by whose fiery tongues the Gods drink libations,

4 Agni speaks. Asura foemen : the Asuras in the later hymns of the Veda

are evil ^oirits in perpetual hostility with the Gods, not to be confounded v.i
the great ecu atia i Asuras, the chiefs of the Gods, nor with the K&kshasas, (le-
mons or ogres, ,.v. 0 disturb the saciifices of men. ,

5 The Five Tribe., according to some, says Yftska, 4 the Gandharvas, gods.

Fathers, Asuras, and h^ s j la8ag » g ee Muir, O. S. Texts, I. 177. But the nv
Aryan tribes may be intend. The Cow's Sons: the Maruts, children ox
Piisni. Yon lioth explains as ^ orn j n the starry heaven.’ See vn.

35. 14.

fi The Gods speak. The region's splena-.j fyM . the Sun. Weave ye : fla® 6 ®
of Agni. Assist the singer in his holy taan an d let there be no difficultie
in his way. . _j.

7 This stanza appears to begin a new hymn, made 0 f fragments. Accor

ing to Sftynna it is spoken by the Gods to one another. ,

8 A smanvatt : or, the stony stream, S ee The Hymns of the Atharva-w >

XII 2* 26

9 Will cut : perhaps, will cut and destroy demons ; but the meaning 1
uncertain.



yyiMY 54.] THE RIQVEDA. 4 BY

0 Now, 0 ye Sapient Ones, make ye the axes sharp wherewith
ye fashion bowls to hold the Amrita.

Knowing the secret places make ye ready that whereby the
Gods have gotten immortality.

H Ye with a secret tongue and dark intention laid the maiden
deep within, the calf within the mouth.

They evermore are near us with their gracious help : successful
is the song that strives for victory.

HYMN LIV. Indra.

I sing thy fame that, Maghavan, through thy greatness the
I'AovArw and earth invoked thee in th^ir
Thou, aiding Gods, didst quell the power of Dasas, what time
thou holpest many a race, 0 Indra.

2 When thou wast roaming, waxen strong in body, telling thy

might, Indra, among the people,

All that men called thy battles was illusion : no foe hast thou
to-day, nor erst hast found one.

3 Who are the Bishis, then, who comprehended before our time

the bounds of all thy greatness ?

For from thy body thou hast generated at the same time the
Mother and the Father.

4 Thou, Mighty Steer, hast four supremest natures, Asura

natures that may ne’er be injured.

All these, 0 Maghavan, thou surely knowest, wherewith thou
hast performed thy great achievements.

5 Thou hast all treasures in thy sole possession, treasures made

manifest and treasures hidden.


10 0 ye Sapient Ones : ye llibhus. That : perhaps Amrita or celestial Soma
]uice. Cf. 1. 20. 6; 110. 3.

. 11 The first line is obscure. ‘(The Maruta) placed a female in the envelop,
ing hide (of a dead cow), and a calf in the mouth (of a dead cow).’ — Wilson.
According to this interpretation the miracle ascribed to them would somewhat
resemble that mentioned in I. 110. 8. See Bergaigue, La Religion V6dique t
!• 27. The first half of these jnd line is hard to construe. Wilson para-
P uases i the line : — ‘daily the generous (fraternity of the Ribhus) offers suita-
le praises (to the gods), granting victory over our foes.’ Prof. Geldner takes
tiw Jpinst the Pada text, as a locative, and renders the last half-line to
e following effect ‘ ‘May he (the Bacrificer), when he wishes to win, gaiu
the victory in the race/

con c l ues ^' 011 is rhetorical. The great Pish is of the olden time could not
m? re ' lenc i thy greatness, much less can we comprehend it.

| e Mother and the Father : Earth and Heaven, parents of all. See M.

1 u 4 ller > India, What can it Teach us f, p. 1(51.

sura: diviue, with a vague sense of supreme grandeur.



458


THE HYMNS OP


6


[POOR x.


Defer not thou, 0 Maghavan, my longing : thou art Direct™
Indra, thou art Giver. *


To him who set the light in things of splendour, and with all
sweetness blent essential sweetness,

To Indra hath this welcome hymn that strengthens been
uttered by the votary Brihaduktha.


HYMN LY. Indra.

Far is that secret name by which, in terror, the worlds invoked
thee and thou gavest vigour.

The earth and heaven thou settest near each other, and, Ma-
ghavan, madest bright thy Brother’s Children.

2 Great is that secroo mime c*uvi f... >,«iv U atug, wuureDy thou
madest all that is and shall be.

The Five Tribes whom he loveth well have entered the light
he loveth that was made aforetime.


3 He filled the heavens and earth and all between them, Gods

five times sevenfold in their proper seasons.

With four-and-thirty lights he looks around him, lights of one
colour though their ways are divers.

4 As first among the lights, 0 Dawn, thou shonest, whereby thou

broughtest forth the Stay of Increase,

Great art thou, matchless is thine Asura nature, who, high
above, art kin to those beneath thee.

5 The old hath waked the young Moon from his slumber who

runs his circling course with many round him.

6 Who set the light : the first essential light.


1 Far is that secret name : thou art not present with us now. In tenor :
terrified by Vritra. Thy Brother's Children: according to SAyana, Indru’s
brother is Parjanya, the God of the rain-cloud, and his children are the gath-
ered waters. Varuna and his stars are probably intended. — Ludwig.

3 Gods five times sevenfold: ‘It cannot be doubted that the original Gods
were the constellations.’— Ludwig. According to SAyana, the five orders of
beings Rnd the classes of seven ; that is, Gods, men, Fathers and RAkshasas,
and the Beven troops of Maruta, the seveu rays of the Sun, the seven souses,
etc. The four-and-thirty lights : are probably the sun, moon, and five plauets,
and the twenty-seven lunar asterisms or mansions of the moon. According
to SAyana, the four and thirty are eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, twelve Adityas,
PrajApati, VashatkAra, and VirAj.

4 The Stay of Increase: that which is the foundation and support of all sub-

sistence; according to SAyana, the Sun. Art kin to those beneath thee: art
allied and connected with men as provider of their food. The second line w
difficult, and is differently interpreted by otherB. . .

5 SAyana explains this stanza differently, making Indra, identified wit
Time, the subject. I follow Ludwig’s interpretation (Commentary, II. P-
which seems to be nearer to the sense of the words, aud is simpler and wor
rational. With many round him : stars of the asterisms through which he p* 980 *



THE RIGVEDA.


450


tftfN 56*]

Behold the Gods’ high wisdom in its greatness : he who died
yesterday to-day is living.

6 Strong is the Red Bird in his strength, great Hero, who from

of old hath had no nest to dwell in.

That which he knows is truth and never idle : he wins and
gives the wealth desired of many.

7 Through these the Thunderer gained strong manly vigour,

through whom he waxed in power to smite down Vritra, —
Who through the might of Indra’s operation came forth as
Gods in course of Law and Order.

8 All-strong, performing works with his companion, AU-marking,

rapid Victor, Curse-averter,

The Hero, waxing, after draughts of Soma, blew far from heav-
en the Dasyus with his weapon.

HYMN LVI. Visvedevas.

Here is one light for thee, another yonder : enter the third and
be therewith united.

Uniting with a body be thou welcome, dear to the Gods in their
sublimest birth-place.

2 Bearing thy body, Vajin, may thy body afford us blessing and

thyself protection.

Unswerving, stablish as it were in heaven thine own light as
the mighty Gods’ supporter.

3 Strong Steed art thou : go to the yearning Maidens with vigour,

happily go to heaven and praises :

6 The Red Bird : the Sun, with whom Indra is identified.

7 Through these: probably the stars are iuteutbd, ‘(Accompanied) by
these Maruts.'— Wilson.

8 His companion : the thunderbolt.

‘The mystical union of the Fathers with the rays of light is the funda-
mental idea underlying the abstruse allusions * of this funeral hymn. ‘ The
poet bids the deceased man unite himself with the beams of the heavenly
light ; he takes occasion to celebrate the power and greatness of the Fathers,
to wham the spirit of the depan ed is journeying ; and ends with a statement
of the success of the journey for which he has prayed.’ See Wallis, Cos •
oology of the Rigveda, pp. 72, 73.

1 One light: the earthly, fire of the funeral pile. Another: in the firma-
® e ut. The third : the light in the highest region above the firmament. A

•' a new body after cremation. Their sublimest birth-place • the Sun.

2 Vdjin : apparently the name of the deceased, the son of Brihaduktha
uie Rishi of the hymn. The word means originally * strong, strong Bteed

j 48 in stanza 3.

1 . ° The yearning Maidens : perhaps the Dawns ; but the meaning of suvenih
18 uncertain. To heaven and praises : ' to the (land of) praise, and to the
•V— Wallis.



* 0 U Tills MXMJMS UJf l BOOK X

Fly happily to the Gods with easy passage, according to the
first and faithful statutes.

4 Part of their grandeur have the Fathers also gained : the

Gods have seated mental power in them as Gods.

They have embraced within themselves all energies, which
issuing forth, again into their bodies pass.

5 They strode through all the region with victorious might, es-

tablishing the old immeasurable laws.

They compassed in their bodies all existing things, and stream-
ed forth offspring in many successive forms.

6 In two ways have the sons established in his place the Aaura

who finds the light; by the third act,

As fathers, they have set their heritage on earth, their off-
spring, as a thread continuously spun out.

7 As in a ship through billows, so through regions of air, with

blessiugs, through all toils and troubles

Hath Brihaduktha brought his seed with glory, and placed it
here and in the realms beyond us.

HYMN LVH. Viavedevas.

Let us not, Indra, leave the path, the Soma-presser’s sacrifice:

Let no malignity dwell with us.

2 May we obtain, completely wrought, the thread spun out to
reach the Gods,

That perfectcth the sacrifice. ^

4 Of their grandeur : ff the greatness of the Gods.

5 Establishing the old immeasurable laws : or, in accordance with the more
generally received interpretation of dfuXmdni here, ‘measuring aucient
stations never measured out.*

6 In two ways : in heaven and on earth. The sons : explained by Sfiyana
as the Augirases, sons of Aditya. The Fathers in general appear to be in-
tended. The A sura: Agi.i. The third act: or third sacred duty, that of
continuing their family ; religious Btudy and sacrifice being the first ana
second. — Silyana.

7 Placed it here and in the realm beyond us : established his offspring in
heavenly regions as well as here upon earth.

Mr Wallis, from whuse translation I .have borrowed, remarks: — ‘The in-
terpretation of one or two expressions is uncertain ; the general sense iff
clear. The rays of light are hero the bodies of the fathers, which emanate
from the sun, assume the forms of all things on the earth and of the later
sacrificers, the descendants of the fathers, and again return to their birtn*
place in the sky from which they had extended themselves.’ — Cosmology
the Rigveda , pp. 74, 75.

For 1 Prof. Max M tiller’s translation of Hymns 57 — 60, with the legend fmindj
ed upon them, and ample elucidative matter, se£ Journal R. A. S., VoL II-
II., 1866, pp. 426—465,



THE RIOVEDA .


461


UMH 58.]


3 ’i T e call the spirit hither with the Soma of our parted sirea,

Yea, the Fathers’ holy hymns.

4 Thy spnvv come to thee again for wisdom, energy, and life,

That thou murjgt long behold the sun !

5 01 athers, may thv Heavenly Folk give ns our spirit once again,
That we may be with ^ ose w ho live.

6 0 Soma, with the spirit stm within us, blest with progeny,

May we be busied in thy law.

HYMN LVII1. Manas or Spirit.

Tiiy spirit, that went far away to Yama, to Yivasvan’s Son,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

2 Thy spirit, that went far away, that passed away to earth and

heaven,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

3 Thy spirit, that went faraway, away to the four-cornered earth,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

4 Thy spirit, that went far away to the four quarters of the world,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

5 Thy spirit, that went far away, away unto the billowy soa,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

6 Thy spirit, that went far away to beams of lights

flow,

We cause lu uoim? tu oii^ oiiau tnou mayst live aud so-

journ here.

7 Thy spirit-, that went far away, went to the waters and the

plants,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

8 Thy spirit, that went far away, that visited the Sun and Dawn,
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live and so-
journ here.

3 The spirit : of the deceased whose obsequies are performed. Of our sires :
!rVn*4na; explained as meaning, suited to man; that is to deified men,
e Fathers or Spirits of the Blest.

death 6 ^ mn * a ftn a ddress to recall the fleeting spirit of a man at the point of
7 w «teri .plant! of. X, 16, S.



THE HYMNS OF


462


[BOOK 1


9 Thy spirit, that went far away, away to lofty mountain A0I ghts
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst A ' ve and sc
journ here.

10 Thy spirit, that went far away into tb~ A11 that llves aai

We cause to some to thee again <;na ^ thou ma y s ^ ^ ve an ^ s<
journ iiere.

1 1 Thy spirit, that went faraway to distant realms beyond our kei
We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live ■and s<

journ here.

12 Thy spirit, that went far away to all that is and is to be,

We cause to come to thee again that thou mayst live an

sojourn here.

LIX. Nirriti and Other


His life hath been renewed and carried forward as two mei
car-borne, by the skilful driver. .

One falls, then seeks the goal with quickened vigour. Le
Nirriti depart to distant places.

2 Here is the psalm for wealth, and food, in plenty : let us c

many deeds to bring ns glory. .

All these our doings shall delight the singer. Let Nnri
depart to distant places.

3 May we o’ercome our foes with acts of valour, as heaven

over earth, hills over lowlands. .

All these our deeds the singer hath considered. Let JNiifi
aepait to diwtuut places.

4 Give us not u P r *. QJT +n O Soma • still let us lo(

upon the Sun arising.

Let our old age with passing days be kindly. Let Nirri
depart to distant places.


5 0 Asuntti, keep the soul within us, and make the days '
have to live yet longer.

Grant that we still may look upon the sunlight : strength
thy body with the oil we bring thee.


1 HU life : the life of Subandhu one of the Rishis of the hymn. Accor
ing to S&yana the first line is a prayer : — ‘ May the life of Subandhu^
augmented so as to be more lasting and newer.’ — Wilson. Subandhu
mentioned in the text. Two men : the warrior and the charioteer. UwJ .
S&yana explains differently : — ‘he who falls (from life) increases (his;
to live.’ — Wilson. Nirriti : the Goddess of death and destruction. a

6 Asn,nUi : apparently the personification of a deity presiding <J ver to ^
It may be a name for Yama, or it may mean ‘ guide to life, or way
See Muir, 0 S, Texts , V. 297, and Bergaigne, La Religion Vcdtque, i.



THE RIQVEDA .


463


ffYAfN 1 60.]

6 Give us our sight again, O Asuniti, give us again our breath

and our enjoyment.

Long may we look upon the Sun uprising : 0 Anumati,

. favour thou and bless us.

7 May Earth restore to us our vital spirit, may- Heaven the

Goddess and mid-air restore it.

May Soma give us once again our body, and Pushan show
the Path of peace and comfort.

8 May both Worlds bless Subandhu, young Mothers of ever-

lasting Law.

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee. **

9 Health-giving medicines descend sent down from heaven in

twos and threes,

Or wandering singly on the earth. May Heaven and Earth
uproot and sweep iniquity and shame away : nor sin nor
sorrow trouble thee.

10 Drive forward thou the wagon-ox, 0 Indra, which brought

UsiuaianPs wagon hither.

May Heaven and Earth uproot and sweep iniquity and shame
away : nor sin nor sorrow trouble thee.

HYxMN LX. Asam&ti and Others.

Bringing our homage we have come to one maguificent in
look.

Glorified of the mighty Gods ;

Q T'* Asamati, spring of gifts, lord of the brave, a radiant car,
The conqueror of Bhajeratha ; _

„ , I - x nTDTrr-w nn winch the Gods regard

the sacrifices and prayers of the pious. ‘Gracious (goddess).’— -Wilson.

8 Iniquity and shame : rdpas, according to Williams’s Dictionary means,
defect, fault, sin ; hurt, iujuiy. In Ris Commentaiy on I. .69. 4, Sftyana
paraphrases rdpdnsi, the plural of the word, by bddhakdni rdkshasddhii, dis-
tuibing K&kshasas, etc.

9 In twos and threes : according to Srlyana, in the persons of the two
Asvins and of the three Godder^es lift, Sarasvat!, and Bh&ratl.

10 Uftnardnl must mean the wife of Usfnara, chief of the Ustnaras who
® re mentioned in later times as living iu Madhyadesa or the Midland country.
The meaning of the line is not obvious.

Stanzas 8, 9, 10, which Prof. Grassmann places in his Appendix, are of a
different character from that of the preceding part of the hymn, and seem
! he a separate song or fragment of a song.

^ Asamdti ; according to S&yana, the name of a King. But the won! is
J 10re probably an adjective, as m stanza 5, qualifying rdtham, car, and sigui-
yi n g unequalled. Bhajeratha : it is unceitaiu whether this is the name of a
P r mce or of a country.



464 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l

3 Who, when the spear hath armed his hand, or even weaponless

o’erthrows

Men strong as buffaloes in fight ;

4 Him in whose service flourishes Ikshvaku, rich and dazzling.

bright

As the Five Tribes that are in heaven.

5 Iudra, support the princely power of Rathaproshthas matched

by none,

Even as the Sun for all to see.

6 Thou for Agastya’s sister’s sons yokest thy pair of ruddy

steeds.

Thou troddest niggards under foot, all those, 0 King, who
brought no gifts.

7 This is the mother, this the sire, this one hath come to bo

thy life.

What brings thee forth is even this. Now come, Subandhu,
get thee forth.

8 As with the leather thong they bind the chariot yoke to hold

it fast,

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life and not for
death, held it for thy security.

9 Even as this earth, the mighty earth, holds fast the monarehs

of the wood,

So have I held thy spirit fast, held it for life^and not for death,
held it for thy security. __


4 YfJtftim Agamati, according to Sftyana.

Rigveda. The Five Tribes : the deities repfarrtetrftS cojbuu

iiig to the five tribes on earth, in the same manner as the seven rivers of the
laud of the Aryans have their counterparts in heaven. See Muir, 0 S. Texts,
I. p. 177 Sftyana explains differently : — ‘(so that) the five orders of men
(are as happy) as if they were in heaven.’— Wilson.

5 Batftaproshlhas : the family of the prince, AsamAti or another, whose praises
the poet celebrates.

6 Agastya's sister's sons : Bandhu and his brothers, the Rishis of the hymn.
Stanzas 1 — 6 have no apparent connexion with the six stanzas that follow.

7 This: Agni, according to Sdyana. The speaker probably raean3 him-
self. — Ludwig. Subandhu seems to have been in a trance and apparen y
dead. * It is supposed that the brothers of Subandhu have addressed t e
supplications to Agni, to restore him to life, and that he has come acco
ingly, being, as it were, his parent and begetter. Another interpre ■
explains the terms literally as, Subandhu, your father, mother, an »
have come to mourn your decease ’ — Wilson.

8 So ftavc I held : 1 so has Agni placed/ according to SAyana.



THE RIO VEDA.


465


flYMN 61.]

10 Subaudhu’s spirit I have brought from Yama, from Vivas-
vaii's Son,

Brought it for life and not for death, yea, brought it for
security.

H The wind blows downward from on high, downward the Sun-
God sends his heat,

Downward the milch-cow pours her milk : so downward go thy
pain and grief.

12 Felicitous is this mine hand, yet more felicitous is this.

This hand contains all healing balms, aud this makes wholo
with gentle touch.

HYMN LX I. Visvedevaa.

Thk welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with
might this prayer to win the Asvins,

When the most liberal God, for Paktha, rescued his parents,
and assailed tho seven Ilotars.

2 Chyavana, purposing deceptive presents, with all ingredients,
made the altar ready.

Most sweet-voiced Turvayana poured oblations like floods of
widely fertilizing water.


11 Thy pain and grief: * thy sitt ’ —

12 More felicitous is this ■ my other ’‘and, probably the right. With gentle
touch, with light friotiou, layiug-on ** hands, or hypnotizing passes.


This Hymn, as Ludwig obse ,vres > belongs to the most difficult, one might
almost say most hopeless, p<* tions of the Rigveda. It is made up of several
parts which are in no inte^’K’ble connexion with one another.

1 According to the v>^ w taken by Pischel who has most carefully studied
and elaborately discu^d the first three stanzas ( Vedische Studien, I. pp. 71 —
77), they contain i* brief the ancient story of Turvayftna, the young King
<>f the Pakthas. « 11( 1 Chyav&na. Chyav&nu, a favourite of the Asvins who
had restored Ik 01 to youth (l. 116. 10, and 117. 13), intended to sacrifice to
them, hoping with their aid to conquer TOrvay&na and his parents. But
Iudra stay* the sacrifice, drives the priests away, and enables Turvay4na who
had poured rich libations to him jo gain the victory over his opponent.

The welcome speaker : TQrvayAua, whose words were welcome to the Gods.
To y/n the Asvins : raUdram: not ‘ addressed to Rudra,’ but to the AsVtns
^ are called raiidrau in stanza 15, and, elsewhere, rudrd and rudrdvartant,
m mst liberal God : Indra. Paktha : King of the Pakthas (see Vll. 18. 7),
that in, apparently, T&rvayftna, who has been mentioned in I. 53. 10, and VI.
j8- 13, as especially aided by Indra. Stven Ilotars: tho usual number of
hotar priests employed at important sacrifices.

2 Deceptive presents : his intended sacrifice was displeasing to Indra, whom,
possibly, Chyav&na falsely pretended that he was about to worship. With
«« ingredients : required for the preparation of the Soma juice. Poured
dtomt: to Indra.

30



466 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK l

3 To his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and welcomed

eagerly the prayers he offered.

With arrows in his hand the Very Mighty forced from him all
obedience of a servant.

4 I call on you the Sons of Dyans, the Asvins, that a dark cow

to rny red kine be added.

Enjoy my sacrifice, come to my viands, contented, not deceiv-
ing expectation.

10 Uttering praise to suit the rite Navagvas came speedily to

win the damsel's friendship.

They who approached the twice-strong stable's keeper, meed-
less, would milk the rocks that naught had shaken.

11 Swift was new friendship with the maid : they quickly accept-

ed it as genuine seed and bounty.

Milk which the cow Sabardugha had yielded was the bright
heritage which to thee they offered.

12 When afterwards they woke and missed the cattle, the speaker

thus in joyful mood addressed them :

Matchless are singers through the Vasu’s nature ; he bringeth
them all food and all possessions.

13 His followers then who dwelt in sundry places came and desired

to slay the son of Ntishad.

Resistless foe, he found tht hidden treasure of Sushna multi-
plied m numerous offspring.

3 To his oblations: to the offerings of Chy* v .lna. Ye 7 Asvins. The Very
Mighty : Indra, who threatened Chyavdna, madp him his obedient
servant.

4 The Rishi now prays to the Asvins on lus own tecount, and a*ks for a
dark-coloured cow as a reward. Sttyana, whom lipfessors Ludwig and
Grassm.mn follow, explains the second half of the hist lim mor e poetically

• When the dark night retires before the purple oxen (of tuj chaiiot of the
dawn).’ — Wilson. * When the black sits among the red cows , that is, while
it is still dark, but the grey of morning is beginning to appear.’— Ludwig

5 I pa^s over stanzas 5 — 9, which contain an ancient legend, p’obably the
germ of the later story of Brahmft or Pnjftpati and his daughter, toncernmg
two deities or powers of natuie, male and female. See Appendix.

10 Navagvas: ‘ the A ngirasas.' — Wilson. The damsel's : S&y ana say? that
Prfeni may be meant. Perhaps Saramd is intended The twice-strong sttWi
keeper : the Pani or Panis who kept the stolen cows or vanished rays of light
concealed. Meedless • as the Panis refused to give up the cows. Would nut
the rocks : would force from the rocky prison the meed or honorarium which
they deserved in the shape of the cows.

11 Sabardughd: ‘nectar-yielding;’ the general name of cows milked at
sacrifices. Which to thee they offered : which the Angirases offered to Indra.

12 The Vasu is India.

13 The son of Nrishad: Ndrshada, usually a patronymic of Knflva,

Vu. in this nlac.e the name of a ceibiin rlAnmn foe : Iudr®>



THE RIGVEDA.


467


0MN 61.]

[4 Thou, called Effulgence, in whose threefold dwelling, as in the
light of heaven, the Gods are sitting,

Thou who art called Agni or Jatavedas, Priest, hear us, guile-
less Priest of holy worship.

15 And, Indra, bringr, that I may laud and servo them, those
Two resplendent glorious Nasatyas,

Blithe, bounteous, man-like, to the sacrifices honoured among
our men with offered viands.

1G This King is praised and honoured as Ordainer ; himself the
bridge, the Sage speeds o’er the waters.

He hath stirred up Kakshivan, stirred up Agni, as the steed’s
swift wheel drives the felly onward.

17 Vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the cow who

ne’er hath calved, Sabardhu,

When I encompass Varuna and Mitra with lauds, and Arya
man in safest shelter.

18 Their kin, the Prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman, turning

his thought to thee thus speaks in kindness :

This is our highest bond : I am his offspring. How many
others came ere I succeeded 7

19 Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in : these are my

Gods ; I in full strength am present.

Twice-born am I, the first-born Son of Order : the Cow milked
this when first she had her being.


14 Here begins another part of tho hymn. Agni is addressed. Effulgence :
identified with the Sun. Threefold dwelling : earth, firmament, and heaven.

15 Man like: as men reward one who institutes a saciifice for their benefit.

16 This King: Sflrya, the Sun-God. ‘This royal Soma.’ — Wilson. Him-
itlf the bridge: the long beams of light foun the bridge by which Surya
passes over the waters of the firmament or sea of air Kakshtvdn . the cele-
brated Kishi. See Vo). I , Index.

17 Vaitarana : ‘(Agni), the conveyer (of all).’ -Wilson. Agni is so called,
probably, as sacrificer for a prince Vitarana. Doubly kinsman : closely allied
to heaven and earth. Sabardhu : the Cow whose milk is used in sacrifice ;
also called Sabaiduglifl, as in starza 11. According to Ludwig, the New Year
which has not yet distributed its treasures is meant.

18 Their kin : akin to Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman. The Prince : sdri :
Shrya, the Sun God. Thy nearest kinsman: Sfirya. I adopt Ludwig’s inter-
polation of nflbhdntdishthah, which appeals unintelligible as the name of the
Jon of Manu who was deprived of his inheritance by his father according to
P Yajur-vcda, and by his brothers according to the A itareya- Brdhmana.
fiut seo Weber, Episches im V. Ritual, pp. 40f. This : Dyaus. How many
whers: many Savitars (suns that introduce the new year) have been before
“fc— Ludwig.

I** These are my Gods: ‘these are my resplendent (rays).’— Wilson. Pro-

b'y the priests are intended. —Ludwig. The Cow: Aditi. Milked this:

hked foi th this universe,’— Wilson. Agni is the speaker of this stanza.



469 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X I

20 So mid these tribes he rests, the friendly envoy, borne on two

paths, refulgent, Lord of fuel.

When, like a lino, the Babe springs up erectly, his Mother
straight hath borne him strong to bless us.

21 Then went the milch-kine forth to plea«Pi the damsel, and for

the good of every man that liveth.

Hear us, O wealthy Lord; begin our worship. Thou j )a ^
grown mighty through Asvaghn&’s virtues.

22 And tako thou notice of us also, Indra, for ample riches, King

whose arm wields thunder ! b

Protect our wealthy nobles, guard our princes unmenaced near
thee, Lord of Tawny Coursers.

23 When he goes forth, ye Pair of Kings, for booty, speeding to

war and praise to please the singer, —

I was the dearest sage of those about him, — let him lead those
away and bring them safely.

24 Now for this noble man’s support and comfort, singing with

easy voice we thus implore thee :

Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser : and may I be his
priest to win him glory.

25 If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win your friend-

ship made the laud accepted,

That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for every one to
whom the songs are suited. ^

26 Glorified thus, with holy hymns and homage : — Of noble race,

with Waters, God-attended—

May he enrich us for our prayers and praises : now can the cow
be milked ; the path is open.


20 He Agni. Two paths ; from earth to heaven and from heaven to earth,

21 The reference iu the first line is, apparently, to the imprisoned cows and
Sararrift (see stanza 10); but all explanations of the allusions in this hymn are
moie or less conjectural. Ludwig thinks that the reference may be to the act-
ual milking of the sacrificial cows at the ceremony which this hymn accompa-
nied. Wilson translates : — ‘ The words of a desirable praise. of,a certain tian
quil person (N&bhluedishtha), attain the prototype (Indra)’ Aqvaghna: pro-
bably the patronymic of Vitarana.— Ludwig. See note on Vaitarana iu stanza

17.

23 He : Asvaghna Vitarana. Ye Pair of Kings : Mitra and Varuna.

26 Glorified, thus: that is, May Varuna glorified with song beginning,
noble race, etc., ’ enrich us. Now can the cow be milked : it is now time
the morning Agnihotram. — Ludwig.

Prof. Grajwmann has banished this almost unintelligible hymn to hisApf e “



THE RIG VEDA.


yLtfiV 62.]


466


27 Be to us, then, ye Gods who merit worship, be ye of one accord
our strong protection,

Who went on various ways and brought us vigour, ye who are
undeceivable explorers.

HYMN LXII. ^ Visvedevas, Etc.

Ye who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, have won
you Indra’s friendship and eternal life,

Even to you be happiness, Angirases. Welcome the son of
Manu, ye who are most wise.

2 The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, have in the

year’s course cleft Vala by Eternal Law :

A lengthened life be yours, 0 ye Angirases. Welcome the
son of Manu, ye who are most wise.

3 Ye raised the Sun to heaven by everlasting Law, and spread

broad earth, the Mother, out on every side.

Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Angirases. Welcome the
son of Manu, ye who are most wise.

4 This kinsman in your dwelling-place speaks pleasant words :

give ear to this, ye Rishis, children of the Gods.

High Hrahrnan dignity be yours, Angirases. Welcome the
son of Manu, ye who are most wise.

5 Distinguished bv their varied form, these Rishis have been

deeply moved.

These ar» the sons of Angiras : from Agni have they sprung
to life.

6 Distinguished by their varied form, they sprang from Agni,

from the sky.

Navagva and Dasagva, noblest Angiras, he givcth bounty
with the Gods.

7 With Indra for associate the priests have cleared the stable

full of steeds and kine,

Diving to me a thousand with their eight-marked ears, they
gained renown among the Gods.

1 The ton of Manu: N&bhflnedishtha Mtbuva. See X. 61. 18 note.

2 JZ’/ic Fathers; the Angirases. Vala: the demon who stole the cows of
lie GUIs. 6

. l l? ^'lasting Law: ‘ by means of your sacrifice.’ — Wilson.

1 This kinsman : or, this NftbhA, that is, Nabhauedishtha.

UutUnguished by their varied form : or, Virfipas. See III. 53. 7.
n the sky: or, from Dynus Noblest Angiras: Agni himself, accord -

>r\ h * va ” a * R® i fl a l 80 called Navagva and Dasagva as these piiestiy names
belong to or are closely connected with the Angirases.
ton*. right-marked ears : having marks branded on their ears ; or per*
r P', with slit ears. Cf. Hymns of the Athana-vcda, YI. 141. 2.



470


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK X.

8 May this man’s sons be multiplied ; like springing corn niav

Manu grow, ^

Who gives at once in bounteous gift a thousand kiue a
hundred steeds.

9 No one attains to him, as though am in would grasp the

heights of heaven. *

Savarnya’s sacrificial meed hath broadened like an ample flood.

10 Yadu and Turva, too, have given two Dasas, well disposed, to

serve,

Together with great store of kine.

1 1 Blest be the hamlet’s chief, most liberal Manu, and may hi s

bounty rival that of Sui ya.

May the Gods let Savarni’s life be lengthened, with whom,
unwearied, we have lived and prospered.

HYMN LX III. Visvedevas,

May they who would assume kinship from far away, Vivasvan’s
generations, dearly loved of men,

Even the Gods who sit upon the sacred grass of Nahusha’s
son Yayati, bless and comfovt us.

2 For worthy of obeisance, Gods, are all your names, worthy of

adoration and of sacrifice.

Ye who were born from waters, and from Aditi, and from the
earth, do ye here listen to my call.

3 I will rejoice in these Adityas for my weal, lor whom the Mo-

ther pours forth water rich in balm,

And Dyaus the Infinite, firm as a rock, sweet milk, — Gods act-
ive, strong through lauds, whose might the Bull upholds.

8 Manu : here apparently the name of SAvarui the prince whose munificence
is the subject of stanzas 8 — 11. A thousand kine, a hundred steeds : * kine’^ is
conjecturally supplied. ‘A thousand and a hundred horses.’ — Wilson. ‘A
thousand times a hundred horses. ’ — Ludwig.

9 Sdvarnya here means SAvarni.

10 Turva: equivalent to Turvasa ; a prince of the clan called after the
eponymus Turva. Ddsas : enslaved natives.

1 Kinship ; relationship with us, and the duties of protection and aid which
relationship implies. Cf. I. 109. 7, note. V ivasvdn’s generations : SAyairieuP'
plies a verb, and explains differently : — ‘(support) the generations of (Manu
the son of) Yivasvat.’ — Wilson. Yaydti: see I. 81. 17, and 108. 8, note. ^

2 From toaters : the aerial waters, or intermediate region of air. Addi: w
Roth understands Aditi here to mean ‘ infinity,’ the boundlessness
heaven as opposed to the limitation of earth. See Muir, O. S. Texts, V.
SAyana’s explanation is similar.

3 The Mother: Earth. Dyaus: Heaven. Tht Bull: the Sun, .
explains vrishabharftn as ‘ bringers of rain,’



THE RIO VEDA.


471


63.]


a Looking on men, ne’er slumbering, they by their deserts at-
tained as Gods to lofty immortality.

Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents’ powers, they
robe them, for our welfare, in the height of heaven.

5 Great Kings who bless us, who have come to sacrifice, who,

ne’er assailed, have set their mansion in the sky, — a
T hese I invite with adoration and with hymns, mighty Adityas,
Aditi, for happiness.

6 Who offereth to you the laud that ye accept, 0 ye All-Gods of

Manu, many as ye are ?

Who, Mighty Ones, will prepare for you the sacrifice to bear
us over trouble to felicity )

7 Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled fire, offered

the first oblation with his heart and soul,

Vouchsafe us, ye Adityas, shelter free from fear, and make us
good and easy paths to happiness.

8 Wise Deities, who have dominion o’er the world, ye thinkers

over all that moves not and that moves,

Save us from uncommitted and committed sin, preserve us
from all sin to-day for happiness.

9 In battles we invoke Iudra still swift to hear, and all the holy

Host of Heaven who banish grief,

Agni, Mitra, and Varuna that we may gain, Dyaus, Bhaga,
Maruts, Prithivi for happiness :

10 Mightily-caving Earth, incomparable Heaven, the good guide

Aditi who gives secure defence.

The well-oared heavenly Ship that lets no waters in, free from
defect, will we ascend for happiness.

H Bless us, all Holy Ones, that we may have your help, guard
and protect us from malignant injury.

With fruitful invocation may we call on you, Gods, who give
ear to us for grace, for happiness.

12 Keep all disease afar and sordid sacrifice, keep off the wicked

man’s malicious enmity.

Keep far away from us all hatred, 0 ye Gods, and give us
ample shelter for our happiness.

13 Untouched by any evil, every mortal thrives, and, following

the Law, spreads in his progeny,

Whom ye witli your good guidance, 0 Adityas, lead safely
through all his pain and grief to happiness.

f With serpents' powers : ‘of unsurpassable wisdom.’ — Wilson.

^ heavenly Ship according to Slyana, a metaphorical expression for



472 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK *

14 That which ye guard and grace in battle, O ye Gods, y e M a .

ruts, where the prize is wealth, where heroes win,

That conquering Car, 0 India, that sets forth at dawn, that
never breaks, may we ascend for happiness.

15 Vouchsafe us blessing in our paths and desert tracts, blessing

in waters and in battle for the light ;

Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth, and
blessing, 0 ye Maruts, for the gain of wealth.

16 The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who comes to wbal

is good by distant pathway, —

May she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with ui
under the Gods’ protection.

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you,

0 Aditi and all Adityas.

Men are made rich by those who are Immortal : the Heavenlj
Folk have been extolled by Gaya.

HYMN LX IV. Viavedevai

What God, of those who hear, is be whose well-praised name wi
may record in this our sacrifice ; and how 1
Who will be gracious? who of many give us bliss ? Who ou
of all the Host will come to lend us aid?

2 The will and thoughts within my breast exevt their power

they yearn with love, and fly to all the regions round.
None other Comforter is found save only these : my longing
and my hopes are fixt upon the Gods. *

3 To Narasansa and to Pushan I sing forth, to unconcealabl

Agni kindled by the Gods;

To Sun and Moon, two Moons, to Yama in the heavens, to Trit
Vata, Dawn, Night, and the Asvins Twain.

4 How is the Sage extolled whom the loud singers praise

What voice, what hymn is used to laud Brihaspati ?

May Aja-Ekaprtd with Rikvans swift to hear, and Ahi of tl
Deep listen into our call.

14 For happiness : svastrfye, for happiness or welfare, recurs at the end
all the stanzas from 3 to 14 inclusive.

16 Svasti : PathyA Svasti, According to the Index; the Goddess of prosperi
and happiness.

17 The son of Plati : Gaya, the Itishi of the hymn.

3 Unconcealahle Agni : or, to the unconcealable (Savitar) and Agni- f
Moons: New Moon and Full Moon.

4 Aja-tikapdd: see VI. 50. 14. Rikvans • singers; minor deities v
attend and sing the praises of some superior God. A hi of the Deep : the gr
Diagon of the depths of the aerial oceau ; Ahibudhuya. See Yol. I-i



BYXN 64.] THE RIO VEDA . 473

5 Aditi, to the birth of Daksha and the vow thou summonest the

Kings Mitra and Vanina.

With course unchecked, with many chariots Aryaman comes
with the seven priests to tribes of varied sort.

6 May all those vigorous Coursers listen to our cry, hearers of

invocation, speeding on their way ;

Winners of thousands where the priestly meed is won, who
gather of themselves great wealth in every race.

7 Bring ye Purandhi, bring Vayu who yokes his steeds, for

friendship bring ye Pushan with your songs of praise :

They with one mind, one thought attend the sacrifice, urged
by the favouring aid of Savitar the God.

8 The thrico-seven wandering Rivers, yea, the mighty floods,

the forest trees, the mountains, Agni to our aid,

Krisinu, Tishya, archers to our gathering-place, and Rudra
strong amid the Rudras, we invoke.

9 Let the great Streams come hither with their mighty help,

Sindlm, Sarasvati, and Sarayu with waves.

Ye Goddess Floods, ye Mothers, animating all, promise us
water rich in fatness and m balm.

10 And let BrihaddivA, the Mother, hear our call, and Tvashtar,

Father, with the Goddesses and Dames.

Ribhukshan, Vaja, Bhnga, and Rathaspati, and the sweet
speech of him who labours guard us well !

11 Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the blest

favour of the Maruts, Rudra’s Sons.

May we be famed among the folk for wealth in kine, and ever
come to you, ye Gods, with sacred food.


5 Dahlia : meaning here the Sun, according to S&yana. Ludwig thinks
hat the sacrificer, regarded as Daksha or PrajApati, and said to be born again
hrougli completion of his vow, is intended. In the second line also Aryaman
i considered by SAyana to be the Sun: — ‘Ataman, whose course is not
urnetl, the giver of delight to many, having seven ministering (lays) proceeds
a hi.s multiform births.’ — Wilson.

6 Coursers ; the horses which bring the Gods to men’s sacrifices.

7 Purandhi: Plenty personified as a deity. Or purandhim may be an ad*
Active ‘ the spirited, or liberal, Pushan ’

[ 8 Thrice- seven : the seven rivers of the land of the Aryans having their coun*
Pats in heaven and in the firmament. Krishna: the archer who guaids
e heavenly Soma. Tishya: an asterism regarded ns being in the form of
a,Tow > and so here identified with KrisAnu.

10 Brihaddivd: a Goddess associated with I1A, Sarasvati, and others.
1>ne the consorts of the Gods. Rathaspati: the God who presides over
'*nots of war. Sptech : or prayer. Who labours: at the sacnfice.



474 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X.

12 The thought which ye, 0 Maruts, Indra, find ye Gods have

given to me, and ye Mitra and Varuna, —

Cause this to grow and swell like a milch-cow with milk. Will
ye not bear away my songs upon your car?

13 0 Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again to mind

this our relationship ?

When next we meet together at the central point, even there
shall Aditi confirm our brotheihood.

14 The Mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty Goddesses

worthy of sacrifice, come with the race of Gods.

These Two with their support uphold both Gods and men, and
with the Fathers pour the copious genial stream.

15 This invocation wins all good that we desire: Brihaspati, highly-

praised Aramati, are here,

Even where the stone that presses meath rings loudly out,
and where the sages make their voices heard with hymns.

16 Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers’ duties, desiring

riches, yearning after treasure,

Gaya, the priestly singer, with his praises and hymns content-
ed the Celestial People.

17 Thus hath the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you,

0 Aditi and all Adityas.

Men are made rich by those who arc Immortal : the Heavenly
Folk have been extolled by Gaya. ^

IlYMN LXV. Visvedevas.

May Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuna consent, Aryaman, V&yu, Tush-
an, and Sarasvati,

Adityas, Maruts, Vishnu, Soma, lofty Sky, Rudra, and Aditi,
and Brahmanaspati.

2 India and Agni, Hero-lords when Vritra fell, dwelling together,

speeding emulously on,

And Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, have
with their power filled full the mighty firmament.

3 Skilled in the Law I lift the hymn of praise to these, Law-

strengtheners, unassailed, and great in majesty.

13 At the central point : the place of sacrifice.

14 With the Father s : 1 The fruitfulness of heaven and earth, ^fhich &j' e
birth to gods and men, is described as produced by the fathers.’ See «
Cosmology of the Rigvcda, p. 72.

15 Aramati: the Genius of Devotion.

17 The concluding stanza of Hymu 63 is repeated here.


THE MOVED A.


475


BYliti 65.]

These in their wondrous bounty send the watery sea : may
they as kindly Friends send gifts to make us great.

4 They with their might have stayed Heaven, Earth, and Prithi-

vi, the Lord of Light, the firmament, the lustrous spheres.
Even as fleet-foot steeds who make their masters glad, the
princely Gods are praised, most bountiful to man.

5 Bring gifts to Mitra and to Vanina who, Lords of all, in spirit

never fail the worshipper,

Whose statute shines on high through everlasting Law, whose
places of sure refuge are the heavens and earth.

6 The cow who yielding milk goes her appointed way hither to

us as leader of our holy rites,

Speaking aloud to Varuna and the worshipper, shall with
oblation serve Vivasvan and the Gods.

7 The Gods whose tongue is Agni dwell in heaven, and sit, aid-

ers of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law.

They propped up heaven and then brought waters with their
might, got sacrifice and in a body made it fair.

8 Born in the oldest time, the Parents dwelling round are shar-

ers of one mansion in the home of Law.

Bound by their common vow Dyaus, Prithivi stream forth the
moisture rich in oil to Varuna the Steer.

9 Parjanya, Vata, mighty, senders of the rain, Indra and Vayu,

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman :

We call on Aditi, A lityas, and the Gods, those who are on
the earth, in waters, and in heaven.

10 Tvashtar and Vayu, those who count as Ribhus, both celestial

Hotar-priests, and Dawn for happiness,

Winners of wealth, we call, and wise Brihaspati, destroyer of
our foes, and Soma Indra’ s Friend.

11 They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, the

forest trees, the earth, the waters, and the hills.


3 The watery tea : the clouds aud rain.

4 Prithivi : meaniug here the region of raid-air.

^ Maces of sure refuge: SAyaua explains nddhasi differently upon whom
e ^ Wo solicitous worlds remain dependent.’

6 The cow : who is milked at sacrifice. According to S4yana, thunder may
)e nieant, and by ‘milk’ strength may be intended.

1 In a body : that is, personified. Of. X. 66. 9, note.

8 The Parents : Heaven and Earth.

19 Celestial Hotar-priests: see I. 13. 8.



476


THE HYMNS OF


t BOOK x.

These very bounteous Gods made the Sun mount to heaven
and spread the righteous laws of Aryas o’er the land.

12 0 Asvins, ye delivered Bhujyu from distress, ye animated

Syava, Vadhrimati’s son.

To Vimada ye brought his consort KamadyG, and gave his
lost Vishnapd back to Visvaka.

13 Thunder, the lightning’s daughter, Aja-Ekapad, heaven’s bear-

er, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea :

Hear all the Gods my words, Sarasvati give ear together with
Purandhi and with Holy Thoughts.

14 With Holy Thoughts and with Purandhi may all Gods, know-

ing the Law immortal, Manu’s Holy Ones,

Boon-givers, favourers, finders of light, and Heaven, with gra-
cious love accept my songs, my prayer, my hymn.

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high

above all other beings.

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN LXYI. Yisvedem

I call the Gods of lofty glory for our weal, the makers of the
light, well-skilled in sacrifice ;

Those who have waxen mightily, Masters of all wealth, Im-
mortal, strengthening Law, the Gods whom Indra leads.

2 For the strong band of Maruts will we frame ajiymn: the chiefs

shall bring forth sacrifice for Indra’s troop,

Who, sent by Indra and advised by Varuna, have gotten for
themselves a share of Surya’s light.

3 May Indra with the Yasus keep our dwelling safe, and Aditi

with Adityas lend us sure defence.

May the God Rudra with the Rudras favour us, and Tvashtar
with the Dames further us to success.

4 Aditi, Heaven and Earth, the great eternal Law, Indra, Vishnu,

the Maruts, A and the lofty Sky.

We call upon Adityas, on the Gods, for help, on Vasus, Rudras,
Savitar of wondrous deeds.


12 These deeds of the Asvins are told in I. 16 and 17.

13 Aja-Ekapdd : see VI. 50, 14. Holy Thoughts: Devotions personified.

14 Mann's Holy Ones : deities whom Manu worshipped.

15 Vasishtha: that is, a descendant of the great Rishi Vasishtha.

4 The names in the first line are in the nominative case and without a verb ;
‘ are invoked/ may be understood.



THE R1QVEDA.


ill


JIYMH 66 .]

5 With Holy Thoughts Sarasv&n, firm-lawed Varuna, great V&yu,

Pushan, Vishnu, and the Asvins Twain,

Lords of all wealth, Immortal, furtherers of prayer, grant us
a triply-guarding refuge from distress.

6 Strong be the sacrifice, strong be the Holy Ones, strong the

preparers of oblation, strong the Gods.

Mighty be Heaven and Earth, true to eternal Law, strong be
Parjanya, strong bo they who laud the Strong.

7 To wm us strength I glorify the Mighty Twain, Agni and

Soma, Mighty Ones whom many laud.

May these vouchsafe us shelter with a triple guard, these
whom the strong have served in worship of the Gods.

8 Potent, with firm-fixt laws, arranging sacrifice, visiting solemn

rites in splendour of the day,

Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from falsehood,
poured the waters out when Vritra died.

9 The Holy Ones engendered, for their several laws, the heavens

and earth, the waters, and the plants and trees.

They filled the firmament with heavenly light for help : the
Clods embodied Wish and made it beautiful.

10 May they who bear up heaven, the Riblms deft of hand, and

Vata and Parjanya of the thundering Bull,

The waters and the plants, promote the songs we sing: come
Bhaga, Rati, and the Vajins to my call.

11 Sindhu, the soa, the region, and the firmament, the thunder,

and the ocean, Aja-Ek.ipad,

The Dragon of the Deep, shall listen to my words, and all
the Deities and Princes shall give ear.

12 May we be yours, we men, to entertain the Gods : further

our sacrifice and give it full success.

Adityas, Rndras, Vasus, givers of good gifts, quicken the holy
hymns which wo are singing now.

t ^ Strong: vrishan repeated in the way loved by some of the Vcdic poets ;
showerer of benefits,’ according to SAyana. The Gods : meaning, says S&yana,
ll >e priests.

: , 9 Jjflm : courses of action. Embodied Wish : gave a body to the wishes and
j wpes of worshippers, and personified them in the same manner as sacrifice is
ai! to have been embodied and beautified in X. 65. 7.

tj? an d ^ ar J an y a °fthe thundering Bull : meaning the wind and storm
\ attend the thundorous lain-cloud. Rdti : divine Favour or Bounty.
tjm ; a bl^s of divinities according to S&yana. See VII, 88. 7.

Ekapid : see VI. 50. 14. Dragon of the Deep: Ahibudhnya. See



478 • THE IIYMN3 OF [BOOK l

13 1 follow with success upon the path of Law the two celestial

Hotars, Priests of oldest time.

We pray to him who dwelleth near, Guard of the Field, to all
Immortal Gods who never are remiss.

14 Vasishtha’s sons have raised their voices, like their sire, Ilishi-

like praying to the Gods for happiness.

Like f»iendly-minded kinsmen, come at our desire, 0 Gods, and
shake down treasures on us from above.

15 Immortal Gods have I, Vasishtha, lauded, Gods set on high

above all other beings.

May they this day grant us wide space and freedom : ye Gods,
preserve us evermore with blessings.

HYMN LXVIL Brihaspati.

This holy hymn, sublime and seven-headed, sprung from eter-
nal Law, our sire discovered.

Ayasya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth hymn
as he sang his laud to Indra.

2 Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyausthe

A sura, those heroes,

Angirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice’s
holy statute.

3 Giit by his friends who cried with swan-like voices, bursting

the stony barrieis of the prison ,

Brihaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, Aid uttered praise
and song when he had found them.

4 Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave the kine

that stood in bonds of falsehood.

Brihaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, drave forth the
bright cows : three he made apparent.


13 Two celestial Hotars: Agni and Aditya, according to Silyana. Guard o)
the Field: probably Indra.

15 Repeated from the preceding hymn.


1 Seven headed : having seven divisions. Accompanied by seven bands o!
the Maruts, or having seven metres, according to S&yara. Our sire : Angna«
Fourth : or, extending to all four sides, mighty.

3 The cattle : the lost cows of the Angirases, representing metaphorical
the rays of light which had been stolen by the fiends of darkness. See I. #2.

4 Apart from one , away from two : the meaning is uncertain. Perhaps, &
a distance from the earth, down from heaven and the firmament. FalseM 0
the wickedness of the treacherous Pams. Three : heaven, firmament,
earth.



THE RIGVEDA.


470


UrMX 07 .]

5 When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he cut off three

from him who held the waters.

Brihaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, the
dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning.

6 As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through,

the guardian of the cattle.

Seoking the milk-draught with sweat-shining comrades he stole
the Pani’s kine and left him weeping.

7 He with bright faithful Friends, winners of booty, hath rent

the milker of the cows asunder.

Brihaspati with wild boars strong and mighty, sweating with
heat, hath gained a rich possession.

8 They, longing for the kine, with faithful spiiit incited with

their hymns the Lord of cattle.

Brihaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked,
averting shame from one another.

9 In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who

roareth like a lion,

May we, in every fight where heroes conquer, rejoice in strong
Brihaspati the Victor.

10 When he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven

and its most lofty mansions,

Men praised Brihaspati the Mighty, bringing the light within
their mouths from sundry places.

11 Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour : aid in your wont-

ed manner even the humble.

Let all our foes be turned an l driven backward. Hear this,
0 Heaven and Earth, ye All-producers.

12 Indra with mighty strength hath cleft asunder the head of

Arbuda the watery monster,

i Slain Ahi, and sot free the Seven Rivers. 0 Heaven and Earth,
with all the Gods, protect us.

5 Western castle : this is obscure. Ludwig suggests that rf pdchlm may mean
inutile * or ‘ detested.’ Three: heaven, firmament, and earth. Him who held
« waters: the demon Vala, who kept the rain, as well as the cows or rays of
?ht, imprisoned. The cow - the cattle ; the beams of light.

*1 Comrades : his faithful friends tho Maruts. Wild boars: the strong fierce
Lruts ; according to Sdyana, ‘ bearers of excellent water.’

8 The Lord of cattle : Brihaspati, so called because he had released them.

10 The lUfht : that is, the hj mns of praise which will bring them the light
help, The stanza is difficult

H The watery monster • the fiend who dominated the ocean of air. Ahi :
,r >the Dragon, Vritra or his brother.



480 THE IIYMNS OF [BOOR %

HYMN LXVIII. Biihwpau.

Like birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, like the
loud voices of the thundering rain-cloud,

Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to
Brihaspati our hymns have sounded.

2 The Son of Angiras, meeting the cattle, as Bhaga, brought in

Arvaman among us.

As Friend of men ho decks the wife and husband : as for the
race, Brihaspati, nerve our coursers.

3 Brihaspati. having won them from the mountains, strewed

down, like barley out of winnowing-baskets,

The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, desired of
all, of blameless form, well-coloured.

4 As the Sun dews with mcath the seat of Order, and casts a

flaming meteor down from heaven,

So from the rock Brihaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the
earth’s skin as it were with water.

5 Forth from mid-air with light he drave the darkness, as the

gale blows a lily from the river.

Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Brihaspati ga-
thered to himself the cattle.

€ Brihaspati, when he witli fiery lightnings cleft through the
weapon of reviling Vala,

Consumed him as tongues eat what teeth have compassed: he
threw the prisons of the red cows open.

7 That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave
Brihaspati discovered,

And dravo, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like a
bird’s young after the eggs’ disclosure.

2 The Son of Angiras : Brihaspati, especially worshipped and cherished b;
Angiras. Aryaman : the institution of marriage, represented by Aryaman
one meaning of the name being groomsman or matchmaker.

3 Out of winnowing-baskets : sthivibhyah : the exact meaning of the word
is somewhat uncertain, but it is evidently a measure, basket, or iustrumea
connected with corn. Sthivimdntah , ‘ armed with sthivis ,’ occurs in X.
and is said by Sflyana to mean ‘occupants of stations.’ Wilson render
sthivibhyah in this place by ‘ from the granaries.’ The cows bestowed >
Biihaspati* are countless as grains of barley on the threshing-floor or wtnno
ing- place.

4 Cleft the earth's skin : or surface, with the hoofs of many cattle.

5 A lily : $pdla : according to S&yana the same as (jlaivala, the Vftllwner

Octandra, a common aquatic plant. # . • y *13

6 Weapon : I adopt S&yana’a explanation of jasum , although in a. •
the same word means ‘ exhaustion.’



THE RIO VEDA.


481


TVV M.1

g He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who
eyes a fish in scanty water.

Brihaspati, oleaving through with varied clamour, brought it
forth like a bowl from out the timber.

9 He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning : with
lucid rays he forced apart the darkness.

As from a joint, Brihaspati took the marrow of Vala as he
gloried in his cattle.

0 As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the

cows Brihaspati had taken.

He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, whereby the
Sun and Moon ascend alternate.

1 Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers have deco-

rated heaven with constellations.

They set the light in day, in night the darkness. Brihaspati
cleft the rock and found the cattle.

i This homage have we offered to the Cloud-God who thunders
out to many in succession.

May this Brihaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and
horses, men, and heroes.


HYMN LX IX. Agni.

Auspicious is the aspect of Vadhryasva’a fire ; good is its
guidance, pleasant are its visitings.

When first the people of Sumitra kindle it, with butter pour-
ed thereon it crackles and shines bright.

2 Butter is that which makes V idhryasva’s fire grow strong :
the butter is its food, the butter m ikes it fat.

It spreads abroad when butter h ith been offered it, and balm-
ed with streams of butter shines forth like the Sun.


5 Sweetness: the sweet milk ; that is, the cows who pioduced it.

Like a bo ml : which already exists potentially in the wood from which it is
educed by cutting.

* Wilson, following S4yana, paraphrases the second line ‘ he seized (the
Me from the rock) of Vala surrounded by the kine as (one extracts) mar-

* from a bone.’

B The Fathers : 1 The connection of the fathers with the light, of which
7 are both the embodiments and the guardians, is alone sufficient to ex-
mo their action in placing the stars iu the sky.’ — Wallis, Cosmology of the
a r g ’ P* Or, as Ludwig remarks, the Fathers themselves may he the


12 To many : *oows ' is, apparently, understood. Slyaua supplies rtcAai
v 0 recitsa in order many (sacred stanzas).’ — Wilson.


itt V l dfi, 'y a i va has been mentioned, in VI. 61. 1, as a worshipper of Saras-
■ here he appears as a special worshipper of Agni. •

31



482 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X,

3 Still newest is this face of thine, 0 Agni, which Mauu and Su-

mitra have enkindled.

So richly shine, accept our songs with favour, so give us strength,
ening food, so send us glory.

4 Accept this offering, A^ni, whom aforetime Vadhryasva hath

entreated and enkindled.

Guard well our homes and people, gnard our bodies, protect
thy gift to us which thou hast granted.

5 Be splendid, guard us, Kinsman of Vadhryasva : let not the

eumity of men o’ercome thee.

Like the bold heroChyavana, I Sumitra tell forth the title of
Vadhryasva’s Kinsman.

6 All treasures hast thou won, of plains and mountains, and

quelled the Dasas’ and the Aryas’ hatred.

Like the bold hero Chyavana, O Agni, mayst thou subdue the
men who long for battle.

7 Deft Agni hath a lengthened thread, tall oxen, a thousand

heifers, numberless devices.

Decked by the men, splendid among the splendid, shine
brightly forth amid devout Smnitras.

8 Thine is the teeming cow, 0 Jatavedas, who pours at once her

ceaseless flow, Sabardhuk.

Thou art lit up by men enriched with guerdon, 0 Agni, by
the pious-souled Sumitias.

9 Even Immortal Gods, 0 Jafatvedas, Vadhiyasva's Kinsman,

have declared thy grandeur.

When human tribes drew near with supplication thou conquer
edst with men whom thou hadst strengthened.

10 Like as a father hears his son, 0 Agni, Vadhryasva bare the<

in his lap and served thee.

Thou, Youngest God, having enjoyed his fuel, didst vanquisl
those of old though they were mighty.

11 Vadhryasva’s Agni evermore hath vanquished his foes will

heroes who had pressed the Soma.

Lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, subduing
as our help, e’en mighty foemeu.

3 Sumitra : sou of Vadhryasva and RLhi of the hymn. , f f

6 Chyavana: a son of Bhiigu. Or tlie word may mean * conquerirg»

SAyana interprets it. Vadhryasva' t Kinsman : as having been espeoa
worshipped and cheiished by that Bishi. See stanza 10.1 ..

7 A lengthened thread : continual facrifices, from ancient to present 1
Devices: ways of attaining his object. Or fatdnUha may baV L;
hundred or many musical modes or sacred song* ; ' or ‘ praised by '

» the leader of hundreds (of burnt offerings).’ — Wilsba.



THE RIQVEDA,


481


rryzv 70.]

2 This Agni of Vadhryasva, Vritra-slayer, lit from of old, must
be invoked with homage.

As such aBsail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether the foes be
strangers or be kinsmen.

HYMN LXX. Xprt*.

Enjoy, 0 Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled ladle wheie
we pour libation.

Rise up for worship of the Gods, wise Agni, on the earth's
height, while days are bright with beauty.

2 May he who goes before the Gods come hither with steeds

whose shapes are varied, Nurasansa.

May he, most Godlike, speed our offered viands with homage
God-ward on the path of Order.

3 Men with oblations laud most constant Agni, and pray him to

perform an envoy’s duty.

With lightly-rolling car and best draught-horses, bring the
Gods hither and sit dowui as Hotar.

4 May the delight of Gods spread out transversely : may it be

with us long in length and fragrant.

0 Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou the wil-
ling Gods whose Chief is Indra.

5 Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven, or spring apart

to suit the wide earth’s measure.

Yearning, ye Doors, with those sublime in greatness, seize
eagerly the heavenly Car that cometh.

6 Here in this shrine may Dawn and Night, the Daughters of

Heaven, the skilful Goddesses, be seated.

In your wide lap, auspicious, willing Ladies, mtfy the Gods seat
them with a willing spirit.

7 Up stands the stone, high burns the fire enkindled : Aditi’s lap

contains the Friendly Natures.

Ye Two Chief Priests who serve at this our worship, may ye,
more skilled, win for us rich possessions.

Other Apr! hymns may be compared ; I. 13, 142, and 188 ; II. 3 ; IH. 4 ;
Vi 6 ; VII. 2, aud IX. 5. The usual deities and deified objects, with the ex*
Option of Tanllnap&t, are invoked.

a m* ^°^ ar •’ * M ministrant priest.’ — Wilson.

■ T&e delight of Ood» : the sacred grass.

® The heavenly Car : which brings the Gods. *

7 Tfoitone: with which the Soma juice is expressed. Aditi't lap: the
wrface of the earth. The Friendly Nature t: the Gods. According to
7^,‘the acceptable sacrificial vessels.* Tuo Chief Priertt: pvrdhftau :
Pwxap* Agni and Aditya. More ikilUd : than human priests.



484


THE HYMNS OP


[hook X,


8 On our wide grasps, Three Goddesses be seated : for you have

we prepaid and made it pleasant.

May I1&, she whose foot drops oil, the Goddess, taste, man-like
sacrifice and well-set presents. ’

9 Since thou, God Tvashtar, hast made beauty perfect, since

thou hast been the Augirases’ Companion,

Willing, most wealthy, Giver of possessions, grant us the Gods’
assembly, thou who knowest.

10 Well knowing, binding with thy cord, bring hither, Lord of

the Wood, the Deities’ assembly.

The God prepare and season our oblations : may Heaven and
Earth be gracious to my calling.

11 Agni, bring hither Varuna to help us, Indra from heaven,

from air’s mid-realm the M a ruts.

On sacred grass all Holy Ones be seated, and let the Immortal
Gods rejoice in Svaha.


HYMN LXXI. JMnara,

When men, Brihaspati, giving names to objects, sent out V&k's
first and earliest utterances,

All that was excellent and spotless, treasured within them, was
disclosed through their affection.

2 Where, like men cleansing corn-flour in a cribble, the wise in
spirit have created language,

Friends see and recognize the marks of friendship : their speech
retains the blessed sign imprinted.


8 Three Goddesses : 114, Sarasvati, and BhAratt. Taste • the verb is pluul
meaning, may 114 and the others taste. Man-like: as at the sacrifice of Manu
according to Siyana.

9 Grant us the Gods' assembly : the Commentators explain pflthas some
'times as ‘ place,’ sometimes as ‘ food ’ or ‘air ’ or 1 water.’ Here Wilson, follow
ing SAyana, translates : — ‘ offer the food of the gods (to them).’

10 Binding with thy cord : it is not clear what is to be bound, or ra»g^
in order. According to SAyana, the pftthns, which he explains ns an nan i
devdndm, food of the Gods, is to be fastened with a rope. Lord of the Wood,
vanaspati : the yOtpa or Sacrificial Post.

11 Svdhd : that is, in the sacrificial offerings presented with the exclamafcior
SvAhA, Ave, or Hail.

JfiAnam or Knowledge, the subject of this very difficult hymn, is
SAyana to mean Paramabrahm «jfiAn un, knowledge of the higher truths o
Religion, which teaches man lus own nature and how he may be reunited
the Supreme Spirit. . ,

1 Vdk : Voice or Speech, the Sacred Word. Here specially the voice
the hymn regarded as the means of communication between men end 1
Set Vedic India (Story of the. Nations Seiies), pp 269 — 27b



THE MOVED A,


485


ttSlS 7t]

3 With sacrifice the trace of Vak they followed, and found her

harbouring within the Rishis.

They brought her, dealt her forth in many places : seven
singers make her tones resound in concert.

4 One man hath ne’er seen Vak, and yet he seeth : one man

hath hearing but hath never heaid her.

But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well-
dressed woman to her husband.

5 One man they call a laggard, dull in friendship: they never

urge him on to deeds of valour.

He wanders on in profitless illusion : the Voice he heard yields
neither fruit nor blossom.

6 No part in Vak hath he who hath abandoned his own dear

friend who knows the truth of friendship.

Even if he hears her still in vain he listens : naught knows
i he of the path of righteous action.

7 Unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends endowed

alike with eyes and hearing.

Some look like tanks that leach the mouth or shoulder, others
like pools of water fit to bathe in.

8 When friendly Brahmans sacrifice together with mental im-

pulse which the heart hath fashioned,

They leave one far behind through their attainments, and some
who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere.

9 Those meu who step not back and move not forward, nor

Brahmans nor preparers of libations,

Having attained to Vak in sinful fashion spin out their thread
in ignorance like spinsters.

10 All friends are joyful in the friend who cometh in triumph,

having conquered in assembly.

He is their blame-averter, food-provider : prepared is he and
fit for deed of vigour.

3 Harbouring within the Rishi* : they discovered, in the course of sacrifice,

that the inspiied Rishis nloue understood Speech as required for religious

purposes, /n many places : among the Hotar-priests. Seven singers : * the

® even n °i 3 * * * * 8 y (birds) meet together.’ — Wilson : referring, says S&yaya, to the

»eveu metres, the G&yatri, etc.

8 Some who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere : ( others walk about
jjsting to be brahmans'— Muir,

Step not back and move not forward : take no active part in religious
«««* * Those who do not walk (with the Brdhmans) in this lower
toxfk-° r (with the gods) in the upper world,’ is Wilson’s paraphrase of the
Such • lC ^ * k Rve rendered literally. Like spinsters: ‘(like) female weaver*.
^ sense which Prof. Aufrecht thinks may, with probability, be
iwa to *irls, a word which occurs only here.’— Muir.



486 THE HYMNS OP [ BOOK X

11 One plies his constant task reciting verses: one sings the holy
psalm in Sakvari measures.

One more, the Brahman, tells the lore of being, and one lays
down the rules of sacrificing.


HYMN LXXII. The God®.

Lbt us with tuneful skill proclaim these generations of the Gods
That one may see them when these hymus are chanted in a
future age.

2 These Brahmanaspati produced with blast and smelting, like

a smith.

Existence, in an earlier age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang,

3 Existence, in the earliest age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang,
Thereafter were the regions born. This sprang from the Pro-
ductive Power.


4 Earth sprang from the Productive Power ; the regions from

the earth were born.

Daksha was born of Aditi, and Aditi was Daksha’s Child.

5 For Aditi, 0 Daksha, she who is thy Daughter, was bronghl

forth.

After her were the blessed Gods born Bharers of immortal life,

6 When ye, 0 Gods, in yonder deep close-clasping one anothei

stood,

11 Reciting verses : repeating richas or verses of thejligveda. This if» tin
duty of the Hotar. The holy psalm : the Gftyatra or Smraan. The Udg&ta
or Chanter, one of the four chief priests is intended. The lore of being •' thi
knowledge of all that exists. Lays down the rules : 1 prescribes the order,

Muir. * Measures the materials.'— Wilson. This is the duty of the Adh

▼arvu another of the chief priests. The hymn has been transliterate!
and translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts, I. pp. 254 -256. It has also beei
metrically rendered by the authors of the Siebenzig Lieder des Rtgveaa, wn
have endeavoured, by transposing some of the stanzas, to bring them in
closer connexion. According to SAyana, the subject of the who e hymn J
1 the eulogy of tho understanding of the Veda as essential to divme knowledge

2 These : all beings. Like a smith : as a blacksmith blows up his fire an'

The regions: ‘the quarters (of the horizon).’— Wilson. This:
earth. Productive Power : the meaning of uttdnapadah is uncertain. ™
renders it by ‘the begetter (the sky)’; Wilson by ‘ the upwaH-growwg WJ ^

4 And Aditi was Daksha' s Child: ‘Yaska remarks, .....How can th^t
possible ? They may have had the same origin ; or, according to the nw
the gods, they may have been born from each other,— have derived tne
teuce from one another.’- 0. 5. Texts, IV. 13. Aditi ia Infinity or the Infinite
and Daksha is Force or Power personified. See Vedic Hymns, L. p _ ,’ gtor

6 4 The two verses 6 and 7 are interesting as containing an mdepena
of the origin of the world : the gods are said to have kicked up 4S
the atoms which formed the earth.’— Wallis, Cosmology of the Riyvcda, p



THE R10VEH1 .


487


73 .]

Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening cloud of dust
arose.

7 When, 0 ye Gods, like Yatis, ye caused all existing things to

grow,

Then ye brought S&rya forward who was lying hidden in
the sea.

8 Eight are the Sons of Aditi who from her body sprang to life.
With seven she went to meet the Gods : she cast Martanda

far away.

9 So with her Seven Sons Aditi went forth to meet the earlier

age-

She brought Martanda thitherward to spring to life and die
again!

HYMN LXXI1I. Indra.

Tnou wast born mighty for victorious valour, exalting, strong-
est, full of pride and conrigo.

There, even there, the Maruts strengthened Indra when his
most rapid Mother stirred the Hero.

2 There with fiend’s ways e’en Prismi was seated : with much

laudation they exalted Indra.

As if encompassed hy the Mighty-footed, from darkness, near
at hand, forth came the Children.

3 High are thy feet when on thy way thou gocst : the strength

thou foundest here hath lent thee vigour.

Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou boldest. O Indra, mayst
thou turn the Asvins hither.


7 Yatis : devotees.

8 Eight are the Sons: according to the Commentator, Mitra, Varurm, Dh&tar,
Iryanun, Ansa, Bluga, Vivasv&n, and Adilya {the Sun). Mdrtlndn: Surya,
'he Sun. His exposure probably refers to his sweeping through the sky, —
judwig. But see Bergaigne, La Religion Vddique, III. 107.


1 Mother: Aditi. Stirred Hero: gave him free motion ns soon as lie was
joru, or incited him to action by telling him of his future opponent See VIII

l5 - 5, and 66. 2.

, 2 This stanza is unintelligible to mo PrUant ■ meaning perh p* Vn?tn m
■ jiKlwig conjectures. The On ughty- footed . Indra. The ChtUit en * tin i i
aruta. Wilson translates, aft^r Siya.ia : — 1 Tlie m.iriial roopofluir- he
“Jurer encamped around Indra (accompanied) by the swift-moving i^Alarute) :

. e T ^tuiated him with abundant piaise; like (cattle) penned up within a great
, > the embryonic (waters) issued from the ( V vitro.) who had arrived in the
rm of darkness.’

iacf w a e : M travelling through the heavens. Hyena* : tdluvriUtn :



438


TUF HYMNS OF


[BOOK X,

4 Speeding at once to sacrifice thou comest : fur friendshin

thou art bringing both N&satyas. ^

Thou hitdst a thousand treasures in possession. The Asvins
0 thou Hero, gave thee riches. ‘ 1

5 Glad, for the race that rests on holy Order, with friends whc

hasten to their gonl, hath Indra
With these his rnngic powers assailed the Dasyu : he cast
away the gloomy mists, the darkness.

6 Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as Indra strik

ing down the car of Ushas.

With thy beloved lofty Friends thou earnest, and with th<
assurance of thine heart thou slowest.


7 War-loving Namuchi thou smotest, robbing the T)&sa of hit

magic for the Rishi.

For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, paths lead
ing as it were directly God-ward.

8 These names of thine thou hast fulfilled completely : as Lord

thou boldest in thine arm, 0 Indra.

In thee, through thy great might, the Gods are joyful : thi
roots of trees hast thou directed upward.

9 May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit

that lies in depth of waters.

Thou from the udder which o’er earth is fastened hast pourec
the milk into the kine and herbage.

10 When others call him offspring of the Courier, my meaning i
that Mighty Power produced him.

He came from Manyu and remained in houses : whence h
hath sprung is known to Indra only.


6 Two of like name : or, of similar nature; gloomy mists and darkness, Th

ear of Ushas ; see IV. 30. 8—11. The assurance of thy heart: thy trusts
thunderbolt.

8 Thou hast fulfilled : hast acted in full accordance with the names tho
bedrest, such as Vritra-slayer, Sakra, etc. Thou boldest: the thuuderb 1
The roots of trees ■ the clouds are often compared to trees. Th ® ™ in ,
fruit, and when they pour it down their roots are supposed to be um
ward.

9 Quoit : chaJcrdm : meaning the thunderbolt. The udder : the

10 The Courser: meaning Heaven. Manyu : wrath, P aBB1 J D ,°?^5
personified, My meaning is : the speaker declares that h ^ 6 * 8 9 10 ™ ls ™ ve 8prliu
common mytl ol<»gical explanations. He considers the God to

from a transcendental Power.— Ludwig. obgcu ,

Grassmanu banishes this hymn to his Appendix as being g« ncraI y f V v ve
and in parts absolutely unintcliigiole. I ha\e, for the most pa >
Ludwig’s interpretation.



Tm RlGVEDA.


nru A r 74.]


489


11 Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, Rishis, im-
ploring, have come nigh to Indra :

Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision : deliver us as men
whom snares entangle.


HYMN LXXIV. In(lra<

I \m prepared to laud with song or worship the Noble Ones
who are in earth and heaven,

Or Coursers who have triumphed in the contest, or those who,
famed, have won the prize with glory.

2 Their call, the call of Gods, went up to heaven : they kissed

the ground with glory-seeking spirit,

There where the Gods look on for happy fortune, and like
the kindly heavens bestow their bounties.

3 This is the song of those Immortal Beings who long for trea-

sures in their full perfection.

May these, completing prayers and sacrifices, bestow upon us
wealth where naught is wanting.

4 Those living men extolled thy deed, 0 Indra, those who would

fain burst through the stall of cattle,

Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose Sons
are many and her streams past number.

5 Sachivan, win to your assistance Indra who never bends, who

overcomes his focmen,

Ribhukshan, Maghavan, the hymn’s upholder, who, rich in
food, beais man’s kind friend, the thunder.

6 Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, India hath

earned his name of Yntra-slayer.

Ho hath appeared, the mighty Lord of Conquest. What we
would have him do let him accomplish.


The Rubjeot of the hymn is a coming horse-race, and the Rishi invokes in
ivour of the Yaj.tmftna, the Vasus, racers who have won the prize in former
imes, and the men who owned diem. Indra also is appealed to for help.
)ee VedUchc Studien , I. p. 129.

2 The call of Gods : the Gods are imagined as present and interested in the
,^ e * ^kty kissed the ground : the horses lightly touched the earth as they


^ Those living men: the Angirases. Her who hare hut once: Heaven, accord*
8 ■o bAyaua ; Earth, according toGiassmann. Prisni, the mother of the
ruts ^ wust be meant. — Ludwig. See VI. 48. 22. ’ '

8'tthtmn; apparently a man’s name. 4 Celebrator of holy rites.’ — Wilson.

wtl ° won of old : the YajnmAua. lie hath appeared : the poet ima*
glUe « bidra himself to be present.



490


[BOOK J


THE HYMNS OP

HYMN LXXV. The River,

Thk singer, 0 ye Waters, in Vivasv&n’s place, shall tell you
grandeur forth that is beyond compare.

The Rivera have come forward triply, seven and seven. Sindhi
in might surpasses all the streams that flow.

2 Varuria cut the channels for thy forward course, 0 Sindhu,

when thou rannest on to win the race.

Thou speedest o’er precipitous ridges of the earth, when thoi
art Lord and Leader of these moving floods.

3 His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth : he puts foitl

endless vigour with a flash of light.

Like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the cloud, so Sin
dhu rushes on bellowing like a bull.

4 Like mothers to their calves, like milch-kine with their milk

so, Sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers run.

Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army’s wings what tinu
thou comest in the van of these swift streams.

6 Favour ye this my laud, 0 Gang i, Yamun&, 0 Sutudrl, Paru
shin, and Sarasvati : A

With Asikni, Vitasta, 0 Marudviidha, 0 Arjikiyjk with Su
shorn. i hear my call.

6 First with Trishtama thou art eager to flow forth, with Rasa,
and Susartu, and with Svetya here,

With Kubh& ; and with these, Sindhu! ar^l Mehatnu, thou
seekest in thy course Krumu and Gomat?.

1 0 ye Waters : apparently the Rivera are addressed as representing all the
divine Waters. Vivasvdns place : where the singers stand when th«y sing
hymns. 7’riply , seven and seven : twenty-one rivers ; two other sets of seven
each being added to the seven chief rivers of the Panj&b. SAyapa explains
differently: — ‘ they flowed by sevens through the three (worlds),’— Wilson.
1 Each set of seven [streams] has followed a threefold course.’ — Muir. By
seven and seven iu three courses.’ — M. Muller.

5 The poet addresses first the most distant rivers. Oangd : the Ganges is

mentioned, indirectly, in only one other verse of the Rigveda, and even A qf’
the word is said by some to be the name of a woman. See VI 45 >

Yamund: the Jumna. S ttudri : the Sutlej or Satlaj. Parushnl : the K * ■
Sarasvati: see VI. 61. 2. Asikni: the ancient Acesines : the Vedic name
the ChandrabhAgA, the present ChenAb. Vitastd: probably the Jhelum,
Hydaspes of the ^Greeks. Marudvridhd : meaning, increased by the Mai u •
not identified. Arjtktyd and Sushomd are said by YAska to be the Vip •»
the Sindhu ; but this is not possible, and it is uncertain what river
meant.

6 Kubhd, Krumu , and Oomati have been mentioned in previous Boo ^
The other streams whose names oocur in this stanza are probably unl ' n P ,
affluents of the Indus. All that is known regarding the rivers naeni 10
stanzas 5 and 6 may be found in Zimmer’s AltinUischet Leben , pp-



THE JUG VEDA.


m


hymn 7«.]

7 Flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, she moves

along her ample volumes through the realms,

Most active of the active, Sindhu unrestrained, like to a dap-
pled mare, beautiful, fair to see.

8 Rich in good steeds is Siudhu, rioh in cars and robes, rich in

gold, nobly-fashioned, rich in ample wealth.

B^st Silam&vati and young Ornavati invest themselves with
raiment rich in store of sweets.

9 Sindhu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by steeds,

and with that car shall she win booty in this fight.

So have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, of
independent glory, roaring as it runs.

HYMN LXXVL Press-stones.

I grasp at you when power and strength begin to dawn :

bedew ye, Indra and the Maruts, Heaven and Earth,

That Day and Night, in every hall of sacrifice, may wait on us
and bless us when they first spring forth.

2 Press the libation out, m >st excellent of all : the Pressing-

stone is grasped like a hand-guided steed.

So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and the fleet
courser’s might that speeds to ample wealth.

3 Juice that this Stone pours out removes defect of ours, as in

old time it brought prosperity to man.

1 In her mightiness : in the preceding stanzas Sindhu appears to be a River-
God, but in this and following verses the epithets are feminine.

8 Stlamdvatt and ftrn tvati appear to be names of rivers. According to
S&yana, the words are epithets of Siudhu and mean respectively ‘ abounding
hSllanui plants,’ said to be used for cordage, and ‘rich in wool.’ The
meaning of the second half of the second line is uncertain : — ‘ wears [as only
one river is supposed to be the subject] honey-growing (flowers).’ — Wilson.

9 In this fight: the hymn may, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, be a prayer
for aid in a battle that is to be fought on the banks of the Sindhu or Indus.
The hymn has been transliterated and translated by Dr. J Muir, 0. S. Texts ,
V - 343—345, and a version of st. uzas 1 — 8 is given by Prof. Zimmer, Altindis-
. Itben, p. 4. A complete translation, with full explanatory notes, is given

10 Max Mailer’s India , What can it Teach us pp. 164—168.

1 1 grasp at you: 'I propitiate you ’ — Wilson. Power and strength: the
orn *] 1 8 beams which bring new vigour. Day and Night : or, ‘ both day-halves.*
^ J 0 man •' or > 10 Manu. Tvasktar’s milk-blent juice : the Soma juice brewed
y ivashtar for the year, which represents the life-sustaining power of Nature.
diff U B^ht with the hue of steeds : tawny-coloured. SAyaua interprets

^erently ‘when the son of Twashtri, hidden by the (stoleu) cows, and
T v !T n S the of a horse, (was to be 'slain).’— Wilson. Trisiras the son of

r r was regarded as an euemy of the Clods. Indra slew him and took
P°^esB, on of the Soma>



492 THE HYMNS OF [SO OK X,

At sacrifices they established holy rites on Tvash tar’s milk,
blent juice bright with the hue of steeds.

4 Drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us: keep

Nirriti afar and banish penury.

Pour 1 iches forth for us with troops of hero sons, and bear ye
up, 0 Stones, the song that visits Gods,

5 To you who are more mighty than the heavens themselves,

who, finishing your task with more than Vihhvan’s speed,
More rapidly than Vayu seize the Soma juice, better than
Agni give us food, to you I sing.

6 Stirred be the glorious Stones: let it press out the juice, the

Stone with heavenly song that reaches up to heaven,
There where the men diaw fortji the rneath for which they
long, sending their voice around in rivalry of speed.

7 The Stones press out the Soma, swift as car-borne men, and,

eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap thereof.

To fill the beaker, they exhaust the udder’s store, as the men
purify oblations with their lips.

8 Yc, present men, have been most skilful in your work, even

ye, 0 Stones who pressed Soma for lndra’s drink.

May all ye have of fair go to the Heavenly Race, and all your
treasure to the earthly worshipper.

HYMN LXXVII. Manila.

As with their voice fiom cloud they sprinkle (Measure so are the
wise man’s liberal sacrifices.

I praise their Company that merits worship as the good Maruts’
priest to pay them honour.


4 Nirriti: the Goddess of Death and Destruction.

5 Vibhvan: one of the three Ribhus. Vdyu: or, the wind.

6 The men : meaning the press-stones. Cf. stanza 8.

7 The udder's store : the juice contained in the milky Soma- plant. With
their lips : with the praises that they utter.

8 Worshipper : SAyana explains sunvaM by ynjamdnaya, to the Yajamina
or sacrifioer. The more literal translation would be ‘ to the presser,’ the nian
who pi esses out or effuses the Soma juice.


1 This stanza is obscure. According to SAyana. vijdntishafy (the wise men «)
is formed from jan, to generate, and not from jhd, to know : — ‘ they are tn«
generators (of the world) like sacrifices abounding in libations.’ — Wil*o D > * t
pood Maruts ’ priest : either the band of the Maruts themselves regarded m*
Brahman, or a human priest specially skilled in propitiating them, Pr 0 *' '
Muller translates differently. Uymnt t I. p. 412,



THE RIG VEDA.


493


HYMN 77.]

2 The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through

many nights, — this noble band of Maruts.

Like stags the Sons of Dyaus have striven onward, the Sons
of Aditi grown strong like pillars.

3 They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own

mass, as from the cloud spreads Surya ;

Like mighty Heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly gallants
who destroy the wicked.

4 When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the earth is

loosened, as it were, and shaken.

This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : come all united,
fraught, as ’twere, with viands.

5 Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, luminous with

your beams, with splendour as at dawn ;

Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked mon, like hover-
ing birds urged forward, scattering rain around.

6 When ye come forth, 0 Maruts, from the distance, from the

great treasury of rich possessions,

Knowing, 0 Vasus, boons that should be granted, even from
afar drive back the men who hate us.

7 He who, engaged in the rite’s final duty, brings, as a man,

oblation to the Maruts,

Wins him life’s wealthy fulness, blest with heroes : he shall
be present, too, where Gods drink Soma.

8 For these are helps adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune

by their name Adityas.

Speeding on cars let them protect our praises, delighting iu
our sacrifice and worship.


2 This noble band of Maruts : Prof. Ludwig suggests that svrmlrutam
means hero a festival held in honour of the Maruts at the end of the periodi-
cal rains, and that, after many nights, the Maruts adorn themselves for this.
Pillars . I follow Ludwig ; but I be meaning of ah' ft h is uncertain. Geldner
taken it to mean ‘ horses,' a parallelism to stags, or autelopes. S&yana ma es
mi, like, negative, and explains akrfth by dfcramana$d<1h : — the swif -goiug
sons of Aditi do not increase in glory,’ — Wilson.

4 This your all-feeding sacrifice approaches : ‘ this manifold sacrifice cornea
towards you.’ — Wilson.

7 In the rite's final duty : Sftyana explains udrlchi yajHe by yajrle
\ sampUrne sati . when the sacrifice has its praise peifected, when t
j jacufice ie complete. As a man: according to Ludwig, ‘ no ,on £ er * . • *

1 ^at U, not in hie human character but having b ^™ e _ dm “ e A £the
the Gods drink Soma: he, a God himself, Bhall be admitted to the
Gods’ —


society.



404


THE HYMNS OF


C book X,


HYMN LXXVIII. Marnt,.

Yb by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, skilful,
inviting Gods w ith sacrifices ;

Fair to behold, like Kings, with bright adornment, like spot-
less gallants, leaders of the people :

2 Like fire with flashing flame, breast-bound with chains of gold,

like tempest-blasts, self-moving, svs ift to lend your aid;

As best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, likeSomas, good
to guard the man who follows Law.

3 Shakers of all, like gales of wind they travel, like tongues ol

burning fires in their effulgence.

Mighty are they as Warriors clad in armour, and, like the
Fathers’ piayeis, Most Bounteous Givers.

4 Like spokes of car-wheels in one nave united, ever victorioui

like heavenly Heroes,

Shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors, they raise
their voice and chant their psalm as singers.

5 They who are fleet to travel like the noblest steeds, long tc

obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers,

Like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods, like
omniform Angirases with S&nia-hymns.

6 Bom from the stream, like preBS-stones are the Princes, foi

ever like the stones that crush in pieces ;

Sons of a beauteous Dame, like playful children, like a grea
host upon the march with splendour. 6-

7 Like ra\s of Dawn, the visitors of sacrifice, they shine witl

ornaments as eager to be bright.

Like rivers hasting on, glittering with their spears, from fa
away they measure out the distances.

8 Gods, send us happiness and make us wealthy, letting us sine

ers prosper, 0 y e Maruts.

Bethink you of our praise and of our friendship: ye from of ol
have riches to vouchsafe us.


HYMN LXXIX. ^

I have behold the might of this Great Being, Immortal in th
midst of tribes of mortals.

His jaws now opeu and now shut together : much they ae
insatiately chewing. * ^

4 Shedding their precious halm : pouring out the fertilizing rain as liberal

M young wooers give presents. . Ahl . the Indt

6 Born from the stream : from the sea of air, or from Bin ’

7 They measure out the distances: ‘have traversed league*.

‘They measure many miles/ — M. Miiller.



TUB RIG VEDA.


495


ffYjftf 80.]

2 His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden : unsated with

his tongue he eats tlie fuel.

With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses, for him
they quickly bring his food together.

3 Seeking, as ’twere, his Mother’s secret bosom, he, like a child,

creeps on through wide spread bushes.

One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing
deep within the earth’s recesses.

4 Tins holy Law I tell you, Karth and Heaven : the Infant at

his birth devours his Parents.

No knowledge of the God have I, a mortal. Yea, Agni know-
eth best, for he hath wisdom.

5 This man who quickly gives him food, who offers his gifts of

oil and butter and supports him, —

Him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on : thou showest
him thy face from all sides, Agni.

6 Agni, hast thou committed sin or treason among the Godst In

ignorance I ask thee.

Playing, not playimr, hegold-hued and toothless, hath cut his
food up as the knife a victim.

7 He, born in wood hath yoked his horses rushing in all direc-

tions, held with reins that glitter.

The well-born friend hath carved his food with Vasus: in all
his limbs he hath increased and prospered.

HYMN LXXX. Agni.

Aqni bestows the fleet prize-winning courser; Agni, the hero
famed and firm in duty.

Agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven, and fills the
fruitful dame who teems with heroes.


2 His eye s : according to S&yana, the eyes of Agni are the distant Sun and
Moon, aud his head is hidden in mens’ stomachs, in the shape of the heat
which enables them to digest their food. His food : the sticks for fuel, which
&re bound up into fagots.

3 This stanza is very obscure. Agni, born from the wood of the fire-sticks,
weins, as he creeps through the brushwood that he is burning, to seek
Entrance again into his mother’s side. He then fmdB an old dry tree or log,

diich had been deeply rooted in the earth, and feeds ou it as on food that
li *8 been specially prepared for him.

4 His Parents > the two fire-sticks from which he has been produoed.

6 Hast thou committed sin t : Art thou as voracious and destructive in
ie <wtn as th<»u art on earth ? Playing , not playing : playing about the fuel,
U 5 Earnestly intent on devouiing his food. * Sporting (here), not sporting
‘ 7 *' '“Wilson. A victim : p dm : ox or cow.

* Jhe well-born Pnend : Agni. In all his limbs : parvabhih : * with logs of
Wood , — . \v ilsota . 2 3 4 * 6



2 Blest be the wood that feeds the active Agni : within the two

great worlds hath Agni entered. * j

Agni impels a single man to battle, and with him rends in
pieces many a foeman.

3 Agni rejoiced the ear of him who praised him, and from the

waters burnt away Jarutha.

Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavern, and made Nrimedha rich
with troops of children.

4 Agni hath granted woaUh that decks the hero, and sent the

sage who wins a thousand cattle.

Agni hath made oblations rise to heaven : to every place are
Agni’s laws extended.

5 With songs of praise the Rishis call on Agni ; on Agni, heroes

worsted in the foray.

Birds flying in the region call on Agni : around a thousand
cattle Agni wanders.

6 Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who have spruit

from Naims’ line adore him.

Stablished in holy oil is Agni’s pasture, on the Gandharva
path of Law and Order.

7 The Ribhus fabricated prayer for Agni, and we with mighty

hymns h;ive called on Agni.

Agni, Mist Youthful God, protect the singer : win us by wor-
ship, Agni, great possessions.

HYMN LX XX I. Viavakarman

He who site down as Ilotar-priest, the H*shi, our Father,
offering up all things existing. —

He, seeking through his wish a great possession, came among
men on earth as archetypal.

3 Jar&tha : see VII 1. 7, and 9 6. Atri: his deliverance is ascribed tr
the Aavins in I 112 7, Ud 8, 117. 3 and 118. 7.

5 Around a thousand cattle : in the fires lighted to keep off wild beast*
and demon* of darkness.

6 Gandharva path : sublime ; that which the G-mdharvas in heaven
to travel.

7 The Ribhus : or Rishis skilful as the Ribhus.

Visvakarman, the Omnific, is represented in this hymn as the univero
Father and Generator, the Creator of all things and Architect of the woilds

1 Ali things existing : regarded as being contained in the offerings pre^entei
by Viavakarman. Through hi* wish: through his desire to create. Arche ^
pal : the meaning of prothnmachhdd is uncertain. In Wilson's Tr’ansm'^^ 1
‘inventor’ is a misprint for ‘investor,’ that is, ‘first investing Agni with
worlds,’ accoiding to SAyana s explanation. ‘First appearing.’— bud' »

‘ The first worshipper.’— -Wallis.



THE BIG VEDA.


497


0} (N 81 -1

2 What was the place whereon he took his station ? What was

it that supported him? How was it?

Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, with
mighty power disclosed the heavens.

3 He who hath eyes on all sides round about him, a mouth on

all sides, arms and feet on all sides,

He, the Sole God, producing earth and heaven, weldeth them,
with his arms as wings, together.

4 What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which

they fashioned out the earth and heaven ?

Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit whereon he stood
when he established all things.

5 Thine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid-

most here, 0 Visvakarman,

Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, 0 Bless 6 d, and come thy-
self, exalted, to our worship.

6 Bring thou thyself, exalted with oblation, 0 Visvakarman,

Earth and Heaven to worship.

Let other men around us live in folly : here let us have a rich
! and liberal patron.

7 Let us invoke to day, to aid our labour, the Lord of Speech,

the thought-swift Visvakarman.

May he hear kindly all our invocations who gives all bliss for
aid, whose works are righteous.

3 Weldeth them: cp. IV. 2. 17, and X. 72. 2. With his arms as wings :
lanniug the flame in which the matter is smelted. Ludwig thinks that
whirlwinds, produced by the action of hands, feet, and wings, are intended.

4 The first half-line occurs also in X. 31. 7. They: the makers of the
world directed by Paramesvara — Sfiyana.

5 Or the first half -line may be rendered ‘ Thy sacrificial forms, the
highest, lowest ’ Come thyself , exalted, to our worship: 1 exhilarated, thyself
offer up thyself.’— Muir. ‘ Do thou sacrifice to thyself delighting thyself.’ -
Wallis. ‘According to Mahidhara the moaning is that man is incompetent
to worship the creator, that is, in his forms, and it must be done by
himself; -Wilson. I have adopted Prof. Ludwig’s explanation of the last clause.

6 Briny to worship : or, sacrifice to Heaven and Earth.

7 Oar labour: the arduous work of sacrificing. ‘In our conflict ’—Muir.
The hymn has been translated by Dr. J. Muir, 0 S. Texts , IV. pp. 6, 7, by
Mr. Wallis, Cosmology of the Rigveda, pp. 81—83, and, partly, by Prof. F.
Max Muller in his Hibbert Lectu, es , p. 293f.

See also Mme. Zdnaide Ragozin, Vedic India, pp. 263, 416.



m


THE HYMXS OF


IBOOK X


HYMN LXXXII. Vi ? vabrman

The Father of the eye, the Wise in spirit, created both the^
worlds submerged in fatness.

Then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened, the heaven
aud the earth wete far extended.

2 Mighty in mind and power is Visv.ikarman, Maker, Disposer

and most lofty Presence.

Their offerings joy in rich juico where they value One, onl;
One, beyond the Seven Rishis.

3 Father who mide us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth all race

and all things existing,

Even he alone, the Deities’ name-giver,— him other being
seek for information.

4 To him in sacrifice they offered treasures, — Rishis of old, n

numerous troops, as singers,

AY ho, in the distant, near, and lower region, made ready al
these things that have existence.

5 That which is earlier than this earth and heaven, before thi

Asuras and Go Is had being, —

AY hat was the germ primeval which the waters received when
all the Gods were seen together'?

6 The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein tin

Gods were gathered all together.

It rested set upon the Unbirn’s navel, that One wherein abut
all things existing.

7 Ye will not find him who produced these creatures: anothc

thing hath risen up among )oa.

En wrapt in rnKty cloud, with lips that stammer, hymi
chanters wander and are discontented.


1 The Father of the eye : Visvakarinau, who made the light which enabh

the eve to see. Sagged U fames,: Sftyans explain, ghplam here b
‘watei ‘engendered the water, (and theu) these two (heaven and eartb
floating (on the waters).’— Wilson. , , . , . i e

2 Mod lofty Presence: literally, the h.ghoat apparition ; the highest nn»6

or object of spiritual contemplation. Their offering, : the offering, , or I
l,a[M the wishes, of the Fathers, semi-person, fled. The ^

constellation Ursa Major, the seven stare of which are the ‘ tb

Atri Aneiras Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, and VaBishtha. The meaning is

’enjoy tho. fulfilment of all their desire* beyond
starry heavens where the One Being, the great Creator, dwe a. ge>(

3 For information : to learn who is the bupieme God , or

ral functions are. . Upavenlv. tb

4 Distant, near . and loioer region : meaning, apparently, the heaie j»

earthly, and the intermediate atmosphere vi« ft karman. S«

6 The Unborn, Aia, seems here to be identified with Vifeva


P*itc India , pp. 423, 424.

7 Another thing : meaning, according to the Commentator,


Visvakarma



f tHX 83.]


THE RIQVEDA.
HYMN LXXXIII.


499


Manyu.


gK who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt, breeds
for himself forthwith all cotiqueiing energy.

Irya and D&sa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the
Conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped.


2 Manyu was Indra, yea, the God was Manyu, Manyu was
Hotar, Varuna, J&ta vedas.

Tie tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accordant with
thy fervour, Manyu, guard us.


3 Come hither, Manyu, mightier than the mighty ; chase, with
thy feivour for ally, our foemen.

Slayer of foes, of Vritra, and of Dasyu, bring thou to us all
kinds of wealth and treasure.


4 For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, queller of

the foe, and self-existent,

Shared by all men, victorious, subduer : vouchsafe to us
supeiior strength m buttles.

5 I have departed, still without a portion, wise God ! according

to thy will, the Mighty.

I, feeble man, was wioth with thee, 0 Manyu : I am myself;
come thou to give me vigour.

6 Come hither, I am all thine own ; advancing turn thou to

me, Victorious, All-suppoiter !


a a different entity from you wlio are sentient beings, who have individual
xmsciousness, and so foith*— See Editor’s note in WiKou’s transition.
Siyaua ‘gives the geueial sense of the la«t clause [of the stanza] as “You
ire merely anxious fur enjoytneut in this world and in the next, therefore
(Ton kuow nothing of Vifnakarman.” taking ukthuslsah as implying singing
hymns with a view to gaming felicity in a future state Malildhara has a
similar explanation : “you who ate engaged in the enjoyments of this world
or the next, being subject to false knowledge or ignorance, Lave no knowledge
of the Truth.” ’—Wilson.

With legal d to this and the preceding hymn Mr. Wallis observes that
they make no attempt to explain in what way the process of saciifice could
bj regarded as an act of creation. We are told little more thau that Visva*.
kirman was a primeval sacrifice)' and al&o a creator ; we huve no hint how to
combine the two ideas into a harmonious unity. See Cosmology of the Rigveda,
pp. 83, 84, and Muir, 0. S Texts, IV. 7, 8, where the hymn is tianslated aud
some of ita difficulties are discussed. Prof Ludwig’s Commentary is especi-
a v full and valuable, and should be consulted by all students of the Veda.

\ ’* ^nger, Passion, personified.

Wif/i thy fervour : tdpasd : tdpas means * heat/ 4 burning,’ and, secondly,
rigorous abstraction. •

, & Without a portion: without a share in thy favours. I am myself : I *m
'jpwhat I am ; a weak mortal, for whose infirmity allowance should be made,
eiQ g (incorporated with) my body, approach me.’— Wilsou.


500


THE HYMNS OF


Wok x,

Come to me, Manyu, Wielder of the Thunder : bethink thee oj
thy friend, and slay the Dasyus.

7 Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station : so shall w<
slay a multitude of foemen.

The best of meath I offer to suppoit thee : may we be first t<
. drink thereof in quiet.

HYMN LXXXIY. Ma nyi

Borne on with thee, 0 Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brav
men, impetuous, bursting forward,

March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointei
arrows, sharpening their weapons.

2 Flashing like fire, be thou, 0 conquering Manyu, invoked, (

Victor, as our aimy’a leader.

Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions : show fort
thy vigour, scatter those who hate us.

3 0 Manyu, overcome thou our assailant : on ! breaking, slaj

ing, crushing down the foemen.

They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour : Might]
Solo born ! thou makest them thy subjects.

4 Alone of many thou art worshipped, Manyu : sharpen th

spirit of each clan for battle.

With thee to aid, 0 thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift th
glorious shout for conquest.

5 Unyielding, bringing victory like Indra, 6 Manyu, be tho

here our Sovran Ruler.

To thy dear name, 0 Victor, wo sing praises : we know tl
spriug from which thou art come hither.

6 Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highe

conquering might is thine, Subduer !

Be friendly to us in thy spirit, Manyu, 0 Much-invoked, i
shock of mighty battle.

7 For spoil let Varuna and Manyu give us the wealth of bo!

sides gathered and collected ;

And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed wi
terror, slink away defeated.

1 Like flames of fire inform: agnirUpdh- Homer’s Si flag nvpog alifoptvoi
3 Sole born : ‘ 0 thou who art without companion — Wilson.

5 The spring : the source. _„: 7ur0

7 For spoil : the preservation of their own property and tne b
their enemies’ goods being regarded as a double conquest, ur
ubhdyam may mean wealth of both kinds, horses and cows. orifices

This hymn and the preceding are to be lepeated, S&yaya says, atsa
ensure the destruction of enemies.



S YMN 85.] the MQVEDA. 501

HYMN LXXXV. Sfiryft’s Bridal.

Truth is the base that bears the earth ; by S&rya are the heav-
ens sustained.

By Law the Adityas stand secure, and Soma holds his place in
heaven.

2 By Joma are the Adityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth.
Thus Soma in tho midst of all these constellations hath his place.

3 One thinks, when they have brayed the plant, that he hath

drunk the Soma’s juice ;

Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma no one ever tastes.

4 Soma, secured by sheltering rules, guarded by hymns inBrihati,
Tbou standost listening to the stones : none tastes of thee who

dwells on earth.

5 When they begin to drink thee, then, 0 God, thou swellest out

again.

Vayu is Soma’s guardian God. The Moon is that which shapes
tho years.

6 Raibhi was her dear bridal friend, and Narasansi led her home.
Lovely was Sftrya’s robe : she came to that which G&tha, had

adorned.

7 Thought was the pillow of her couch, sight was the unguent

for her eyes :

Her treasury was earth and heaven when Surya went unto
her Lord.


The main sublet of this composite hymn, which is one of the latest in the
tigveda, is the ceremony of marriage in general and more especially the wed*
mg of StiryA, the Daughter of the Sun, another form of Dawn, who is re-
dded as the typical bride.

1 Truth : or reality ; sdlyam, used interchangeably with rltam , the Law
nd Order of the universe.

2 By Soma ; by the power of the deified Soma whoso influence pervades,
[uickens, and supports all existence. In the second line Soma is the Moon,

pei haps there is an allusion to the other sense also of the word. These
'ontfellatiom : the nakshatras or lunar mansions. ‘In the centre of these
itara.’ — Muir.

3 Know as Soma : know to be the Moon, regarded as the food of Gods only.
* By hymns in Brihatt ; that is by hymns in that metre. But the meaning
bhhataih is uncertain. According to SAyana, the BArhatas are the seven

Suaidians of the Soma, SvAna, BhrAja, AnghA ri, aud otheis.

5 They: the Gods. Thee: the ambrosia contained in thee, which the
bods drink during the waning of the Moou. 0 Qod : Soma, the Moom
^ Soma is the deity of tho preceding five stanzas. SuryA’s Bridal i6 the
subject of 6—17. Raibhi, Ndrdfansi, aud Qdthd are ritual verse, eulogistic
an d non*Vedic song personified.

. ' Treasury • hdfafx : meaning, probably, trousseau or bridal outfit. Accoru-
in S th$ or body of the chariot is intended.



502 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOK X,

8 Hymns were the cross bars of the pole, Kurira-metre decked

the car :

The bridesmen were the Asvin Pair : Agni was leader of the
train.

9 Soma was he who wooed the maid : the groomsmen were both

Asvins, when

The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing SftryA on her Lord

10 Her spirit was the bridal car ; the covering thereof wai

heaven :

Bright were both Stceis that drew it, when S&rya approaches
her husband’s home.

11 Tfry Steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse auc

Sama hymn :

All ear were thy two chariot wheels : thy path was tremuloui
in the sky.

12 Clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels; wind was the ash

fastened there.

Surya, proceeding to her Lord, mounted a spirit-fashioned car

13 The bridal pomp of Surya, which Savitar started, movee

along.

In Mag ha days are oxen slain, in Arjunis they wed the bride

14 When on your three-wheeled chariot, 0 Asvins, ye came a

wooers unto Surya’s bridal,

Then all the Gods agreed to your proposal: F&shan as So 1
elected you as Fathers.

15 0 ye Two Lords of lustre, then when ye to Surya’s wooing came
Where was one chariot-wheel of yours? Where stood ye fo

the Sire’s command ?

8 Decked her car : formed its canopy. But the meaning of opotrih here i
uncertain. 1 Kurira metre was the thong of the whip’ — Wilson. Th
bridesmen : in I. 119. 7 and elsewheie the Asvins are said to be the husband
of S&ryft. Here they are represented as the frieuds who had asked her i
marriage for Soma.

11 All ear : the text has srdtram, an ear, which SAyana says, means srotri
two ears. ‘The two wheels were thy e;irs ' — Wilson

13 In Maghd days : or in stricter accordance with the text, ‘ In AghA days
when the Moon is iu the lunar mansion MaghA See Jacobi, Festgruss an 1
von Roth, p. 69, and Weber, Vedische Btitrdge, p 32 f. Slain : only o
especially festive occasions, weddings for instance ‘Are whipped along -
Wilson. In Arjunts : two asterisms or lunar mansions, more commonly calie
Phalgunis. They wed the bride • she is escorted to her husband’s home.

14 As wooers: on behalf of Soma. Pdshan : here meaning Savitar.

and Fathers: intended to express close relationship and Savitar ’s obhgft 10
to the Asvins who had arranged the marriage. # , .

15 For the Sire's command : to receive Savitar* s invitation to take patt i
the bridal procession. According to SAyana, ‘ to offer your gift.’



THE RIQVEDA.


503


*f|%V 85.]

6 The Brahmans, by their seasons, know, 0 Sury&, those two

wheels of thine :

One, kept concealed, those only who are skilled in highest
truths have learned.

7 To Surya and the Deities, to Mitra and to Varnna,

Who know aright the thing that i^, this adoration have I paid.

$ By their own power these Twain in close succession move ;

They go as playing children round the sacrifice.

One of the Pair beholdeth all existing things ; the other
ordereth seasons and is born again.

[9 He, born afresh, is new and new for ever: ensign of days be
goes before the Mornings.

Coming, he orders for the Gods their portion. The Moon pro*
longs the days of our existence.

M Mount this, all-shaped, gold hued, with stiong wheels, fash-
ioned of Kinauka and S.tlmali, light-rolling,

Bound for the world of life immortal, Surya : make for thy lord
a happy bridal journey.

21 Riso up from hence : this m ddcn hath a husband. I laud

Visvavasu with hymns and homage.

Seek in her father’s homo another fair one, and find the
portion from of old assigned thee.

22 Rise up from hence, Visvavasu : with reverence we worship thee.
Seek thou another willing maid, and with her husband leave

the bride.

23 Straight in direction be the pa‘hs, and thornless, whereon

our fellows travel to the wooing.

Let Aryamati and Bhaga lead us : perfect, 0 Gods, the union
of the wife and husband.


13 The two wheels are probably heaven and earth, and the thiid, one lept
cwcealed, is the mysterious invbible world beyond them.

18 In this stanza and the following one, which arc but loosely connected
; with the rest of the hymn, Surya represents the Sun, and Soma is the j>Iaon.

| 20 Stanzas 20—33 contain a collection of formula repeated when the bride
mounts her chariot, while she is tiavelling to her husband s house, when she
Arrives there, and on the following nv-rniug. Thit, - eh. tr ot. Kintula • the
*or»d of the Butea frondosa. Stimuli : the dlk cotton tree ; Salmaha mala-
b trica. SHryd: the girl is addressed by the name of S try.1, the typical
bride.

21 Vwfousu: one of the Gandharvas, the protector of viigina. He is told
to leave the bride who no lougm needs his care, and to transfer his guardian-
to some marriageable maiden who has not yet found a husband. Fair
0ne: vyhktdm : ‘decorated with ornaments.’ - Wilson
P To the wooing : to the- father, to whom the intei e ders are to apply for
111 daughter’s hand on behalf of their friend, according t<> £ Ay ana.



504 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X

2i Now from the noose of Varuna I free thee, wherewith Mo*
Blessed Savitar hath bound thee.

Iu Law’s seat, to the world of virtuous action, I give thee tit
uninjured with thy consort.

25 Hence, and not thence, I send thee free. I make thee softh

fettered there,

That, Bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her fortuue anc
her sons.

26 Let Pushan take thy hand and hence conduct thee ; may th<

two Asvins on their car transport thee.

Go to the house to he the household’s mistress and speak as
lady to thy gatheied people.

27 Happy be thou and prosper with thy children here: be vigi

lant to rule thy household in this home.

Closely unite thy body with this man, thy lord. So shall ye
full of years, address your company.

28 Her hue is blue and red : the fiend who clingeth close is

driven off.

Well thrive the kinsmen of this brido : the husband is bound
fast in bonds.

29 Give thou the woollen robe away : deal treasure to the Brah

man priests.

This female fiend hath got her feet, and as a wife attend?
her lord. *

30 Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this wicked fiend,
What time the husband wraps about his limbs the g'armenl

of his wife.


24 The noose of Varuna : the girdle with which the bride is girded aftei
she has been bathed, combed, and dressed for the marriage ceremony Se<
Prof Max Muller’s Rigveda - San hit *1, Vol. VI, Preface, p 14. Or, as Lanmar
suggests, the noose may mean the tie by which a girl is bound to her fathei
till mairiage. Law's seat . the place of saciifice, the altar.

Stanzas 24 —26 and 32, 33 are spoken just before the biide’s depaiturt
from her father’s house.

25 Hence and not thence : from thy father’s house and not from thy
husband’s.

27 Be vigilant to mile thy household: this is S&yana’s explanation. &
watchful over the domestic hie.’ — Wilson. The verse is addressed to if
bride, and to the newly- wedded pair on arrival at the bridegtoom’s house.

28 Her hue : the colour of Kiity.1, Magic personified, a female deity &
fiend.

29 The woollen robe : ‘ the garment soiled by the body.’ — Wilson. Atfen J
her lord: the magic, or evil spell, returns to its oiigiua tor. —Ludwig.



TUB RIQVBDA.


805


n'.i/.v 85-1

SI Consumptions, from her people, which follow the hide's re-
splendent train, —

These let the Holy Gods again bear to the place from which
they came.

J2 Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wed-
ded pair.

By pleasant ways let them escape the danger, and let foes
depart.

Signs of good fortune mark the bride : come all of you and
look at her.

Wish her prosperity, and then return unto your homes again.

J4 Pungent is this, and bitter this, filled, as it were, with arrow-
barbs, Empoisoned and not fit for use.

The Brahman who knows Suiya well deserves the garment of
the bride.

15 The fiinge, the cloth that decks her head, and then the triply

parted robe, —

Behold the hues which Surya wears : these doth the Brahman
purify.

16 I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou mayst

reach old age with me thy husband.

Bods, Anaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have given thee to
be my household’s mistress.

17 0 Pushnn, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the

sharer of my pleasures ;

Hor who shall twine her loving arms about me, and welcome all
my love aud mine embraces.

38 For thee, with bridal train, they, first, escorted Suiya to her
home.

Bive to the husband in return, Agni, the wife with progeny.


her people : ‘ a most remarkable and direct assumption of “here-
of as a lurking danger/ — Mmc. Zduaide ltagoziii, Vedic India, p. 371.

?, er j la l >s spoken, on the way, to the spectators of the procession.

Biklal US Lode’s garment. Sdnjd: meaning here the song of SftryA’a

Prof wV neaning ^^ 8aiiavi i risosanam , and adhivikdrtanam is uncertain.
*kirt ’ P * 6,0,1 ron< ^ era these words by ‘ border-cloth/ ‘ head-cloth,’ and ‘divided
r ; ‘ 1() ^ Weber and the St. Petersburg Lexicon explain the passage as refer-

fortl °f le .P re P ara tion of the carcass of the animal that has l et-n slaughtered
'Tkel According to this view the first line might be rendered

, Bering, the cutting up, the severing of limb and joint’ ; and for
36 r r . ,0llnH ' In, fibt be substituted,
m ° ^ l '^ e 8 rooin addt esses the bride.
lfe •’ Agni. 1'hey : the Gaudhaiv&s, accoiding to SAyana.



50(5 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK x

3S Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and with
ample life.

Long-lived be he who is her lord ; a hundred autumns let hm
live.

40 Soma obtained her first of all ; next the Gandharva was hei

lord.

Agni was thy third husband : now one born of woman is thi
fourth.

41 Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave :
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this nr

spouse.

42 Be ye not parted ; dwell ye here ; reach the full time of huraai

life.

With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing in you
own abode.

43 So may Prajapati bring children forth to us; may Aryama

adorn us till old age come nigh.

Not inauspicious enter thou thy husband’s house : bring bless
ing to our bipeds and our quadrupeds.

44 Not evil-eyed, no slayer of thy husband, bring weal to cattli

radiant, gentle hearted ;

Loving the Gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing t
our quadrupeds and bipeds.

45 0 Bounteous India, make this bride blest Hi her sons and fo

t unate. . ,

Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband the elevent


man.

46 Over thy husband’s father and thy husband’s mother bear fu

sway. .

Over the sister of thy lord, over his brothers rule supreme.

47 So may the Universal Gods, so may the Wateis join our heart
May Matarisvan, Dhatar, and Dcshtri together bind us cios


40 As the typical brute Si.rjft was first mairied to “^""rgi™

originally belong* to him, then to the Gandliat va, as g Ultirr iage cei
then to Agni as the sacred fire .ound winch she walks m the uiair b
inony, and fourthly to her human husband — Orassmann. b,«

48 The formula! contained in stanzas 42-47 a.e '«P“ te< ™ e mth 6
gn>om has returned with hi* biide to his home, and . exhorted a

The wedded pair aie addressed first, and then the . j f

blessed. Stanza 47 is spoken by the bridegroom for his wife and ^ (

47 DethtA: Instructress, a female deity, not mentioned ,,

lligveda. 'According to SAyana, ddtrt phuldadm ,ara,vatt » mea

bountiful (Saraswati).’— Wilson. . , ,i,- Hindis, derived b

For a full account of the marriage ceremonies of the



ri'j/y


THE ft IQ VEDA,


507


HYMN LXXXVI.


Indra.


Men have abstained from pouring juice : they count not Indra
as a God

Where at the votary's store my friend Vrishakapi hath drunk
his fill. Supreme is Indra over all.

2 Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrishakapi hath wrought;
Yet nowhere else thou tindest place wherein to drink the Soma

juice. Supreme is Indra over all.

3 What hath he done to injure thoe, this tawny beast Vrishakapi,
With whom thou art so nngiy now ? What is the votary’s food-
ful store? Supreme is Indra over all.

4 Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him and bite

him in the ear,

0 Indra, that Vrishakapi whom thou protectest as a fiiend.
Supreme is Indra over all.


5 Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly wrought,

that were my joy.

In pieces will I rend his head ; the sinner’s portion shall be
woe. Supreme iB Indra over all.

6 No Dame hath ampler charms than I, or greater wealth of

love’s delights.

None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her loid’s em-
brace. Supreme is Indra over all.


be ritual of Brahmans who use the SAina-veda, see Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous
wap, No. Ill , and Weber and Haas, Ivdigcke Studien, V. pp, 177 ft*. See
Iso Hymns of the Atharva-vcda, Book XIV., and Dr. J. Ehni’s paper, Zeits-
wft der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Qescllschaft, XXXIII. pp. 166 ft' I
iave relied mainly on Ludwig’s Commentary. Pi of. Grassmauu has banished
he hymn to his Appendix.

1 SAyana ascribes this stanza to Indra ; otheis make Indian! the speaker.
pshAkapi is said to have monopolized the offeiings that should have been
resented to Indra. Vrishd.capi— literally ‘ the stiong ape,’ or ‘ the male ape’
-appears to be a sort of intermediate being between a demigod and a demon ;
M it is not easy to determine his nature S Ay ana calls him the son of Indra.

. 16 said to be the setting sun, and the sun who diaws up vapour and
n igatea with mist. According to M. Bergaigue, La Religion Vtdique, II. 270,
6 *js a mythical saerifleer.

»dWtnf blames Indra for his apathy.

riat' ^ B P ea ^ 8, What is the votary's food fnl store i ; why should his appto*

4 I a ^. e wors hipp®v , s offerings make thee so angry ?

5 V,? is the speaker of this stanza and of the two, or three, that follow,
fliu th^’ ‘‘ a P e > Bn abbreviation of VrishAkapi. Hath maned the heuu-
Vui m ^ 8 ! , RCCOI 'ding to S&ya a, bath sp-dled the oblations piepared foi me
1 Ind !°! fclli PP erR « But it seejns more probable that VrisbAkapi lias assault-
g j ? ' an d inflicted injuries on her person.

ibi t l • 8 P cak 8 with pride of her voluptuous charms which incited VribhA-
1)1 amoiouB assault.



508


THE HYMXS OP


l&OOR x,

7 Mother whose love is quickly won, I say what verily will bo,
My breast, 0 Mother, and my head and both my hips seen

quivering. Supreme is Indra over all.

8 Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad hair-plait

add ample hips,

Why, 0 thou Hero’s wife, art thou angry with our Vrishakapi
Supreme is Indra over all.

9 This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of hero’s love
Yet Heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts’ Friend and Indra’

Queen. Supreme is Indra over all.

10 From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice
Mother of Heroes, Indra’s Queen, the rite’s ordainer is extolled

Supreme is Indra over all.

11 So have I heard Indrant called most fortunate among these Dames

For never shall her Consoit die in future time through lengt
of days. Supreme is Indra over all.

12 Never, Inchani, have I joyed without my friend Vribhakapi,
Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth t

the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all.

13 Wealthy Vpshakap&yi, blest with sons and consorts of thy son. 5
Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effecteth much

Supreme is Indra overall.

14 Fifteen in number, then, for mo a score of bullocks they prepare
And I devour the fat thereof : they fill my nelly full with foot

Supreme is Indra over all.

15 Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing amid the herds
Sweet to thine heart, 0 Indra, is the brow which she 'vh<

tends thee pours. Supremo is Indra over all.

7 This stanza is ascribed by SAyana to VrisbAkapi. It is hardly intelligible
but, as Ludwig says, it seems to be spoken by IndiAni, expressing her in ign
tion at VrishAknpi’s audacity which makes all her body quiver with rage.

8 Iudra speaks. , . . i

9 Indr Ant speaks this and the following stanza. Bereft of hero 8 love.

has no brave husband to protect her. _ . ^

10 The matron goes to feast: IndrAnt means that VrisbAkapi assau e ^
when she was on her way to a festival', which women were accustoine o •
tend ; and that her rank as Indra’s consort did not preserve her from ms

11 Indra speaks this and the following stanza. p Me r

13 Spoken by Vrishftkapi to his wife V i iwhAkapA) i who is said to r P
the dawn, or, by others, the gloaming which follows the setting snn vri

14 Indra speaks. Fifteen: sacrificers ; probably YrishAkapi an

and their sons and daughters-in-law. SAyana explains differently .
worshippers dress for me fifteen (and) twenty bulls. —Wilson. • te8

15 IndrAnt speaks, endeavouring to attract him to her own liba

of the offerings of VrishAkapi. . j^ntEngli* 1

I pass over stanzas 10 and 17, which I cannot translate into ae ^



THE MOVED A.


509


HYMN 86.]

18 0 Indra this Vyish&kapi bath found a slain wild animal,
Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load

of wood. Supreme is Indra over all.

19 Distinguishing the Dasa and the Arya, viewing all, I go.

I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary*® Soma juice.
Supreme is Indra over all.

20 The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in

length they spread !

Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, Vrishakapi.
Supreme is Indra over all.

21 Turn thee again Vrishakapi ; we twain will bring thee happiness.
Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path winch leads

to sleep. Supreme is India over all.

22 When, Indra and Vrishakapi, ye travelled upward to your home,
Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the beast

that troubles man ? Supreme is Indra over all.

23 Daughter of Mann, Parsu bare a score of children at a birth.
Her portion verily was bliss although her burtheu caused her

grief.


18 I nd r A .i speaks, but her speech is difficult to understand. Wild ani-
mal: vou Roth conjectures ‘wild ass’ as the meaning of parasvantam
here Dresser: or slaughter-bench. ‘A fiie-pl.ice (to cook it).’ -Wilson.
Indrani seems to speak depreciatingly of a sacuiice otfeied by Vtishftkapi as
consisting of an unsuitable victim, prepared with instruments and means
which chance has thrown in his way. Ludwig thinks that Vnsli&kapi may
represent the Moon whose spots are fancifully cousideied to be the objects
mentioned by Indrdnl.

19 I look : with favour. The simple votary is the worshipper who offers his
libation in a sincere spirit of devotion. The stanza and the two following
a,e spoken by Indra.

20 Viishdkapi appears to meditate flight into distant deserts to escape
from the wrathful Indrdnt. Indra dissuades him, and promises to reconcile
Indr.lnS to him.

22 The two concluding stanzas seem to be spoken by Indr&ni. Stanza 22 is
obscure, and stanza 23 has no disc verable connexion with the lost of the hymn.

23 Daughter of Manu : that is, of the progenitor of men. Nothing more
js known of Parsu, which means a rib Much of this hymn appears to be
^explicable. M.‘ Bergaigne thinks that Vrishakapi, India’s f-riend, represents
feoma - and Infant the wife of Indra represents Prayer. ‘ This bizarre mj th
would symbolize the frequently expressed idea that Indra loves neither the
^cred beverage without prayer nor prayer without the sacred beverage. He
p lshes therefore his union with Prayer to be accompanied by the union of

' a ' er w kh Soma, and he neglects sacrifice as long as this union of the two
1 ^‘al elements of worship remains unaccomplished/ — See La Religion
pVe, II 270,271. *

‘ ( j f ' Geldner gives a different interpretation of the hymn, whieh he has

f, V lte ^ an fl exhaustively discussed in Vrdincke Studicn, II. pp. 22-4-.

80 Oldenberg, Religion da Veda , 172—174.



510


THE HYMNS OF


[book x


I1.YMN LXXXVII. Agai

I balm with oil the mighty Rakshas-slayer j to the n l0s
famous Friend I come for shelter.

Enkindled, sharpened hy our rites, may Agni protect us h
the day and night from evd.

2 0 Jatavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flam

attack the demons.

Seize with thy tongue the foolish gods* adorers : rend, pu
within thy mouth the raw-flesh eaters.

3 Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who has

both, enkindled and destroying.

Roam also in the nir, 0 King, around us, and with th.y jaw
assail the wicked spirits.

4 Bending thy shafts through sacritices, Agni^whetting the

points with song as if with whetstones,

Pierce to the heart therewith the Yatudhanas, and break the
arms uplifted to attack thee.

5 Pierce through the Yatudhana’s skin, 0 Agni ; let the destro

ing dart with lire consume him.

Rend his joints, Jatavedas, let the eater of flesh, flesh-seekin
track his mangled body.

6 Where now thou seest Agni J&tavedas, one of these demo:

standing still or roaming,

Or flying on those paths in air's mid-regiotf, sharpen the shs
and as an archer pierce him.

7 Tear from the evil spirit, Jatavedas, what he hath seized a

with his spears hath captured.

Blazing before him strike him down, 0 Agni ; let spott
camon-eating kites devour him.

8 Here tell this forth, 0 Agni : whesoever is, he himself, or act<

as, a demon,

Him giasp, 0 thou Most Youthful, with thy fuel : to the Mi
seer’s eye give him as booty.

9 With keen glance guard the sacrifice, 0 Agni : thou Sa

conduct it onward to the Vasus.

Let not the fiends, 0 Man-beholder, harm thee burning agai
the Rak'-hasas to slay them.

'I The demons : Y&tudh&naa, explained by S&yana as = R&k e ha8a*. See
104.15 Foolish gods' adorers: mitradevdn: according to S4y«P a > a e r
class of evil spiiits called Mflnulevaa because they make destruction t ieir
5 The eater of flesh : the wolf or other carnivorous animal.

8 The Man-seer here is either Agni himself or Sfbya the Sun.

9 To the Yams . to the Gods to whom the oblations are made, o 7 •



Tin: RIO VEDA.


511


n'M .v 87 ]

0 Look on the fieuil mid men, as Man-beholder: rend thou his

three extremities in pieces.

Demolish with thy flume his ribs, 0 Agni; the Y&tudiiana’s
root destroy thou triply.

1 Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who with his

falsehood injures Holy Order.

Loud roaring with thy flame, 0 Jatavedas, crush him and
cast him down before the singer.

[2 Lend thou the worshipper that eye, 0 Agni, wherewith thou
lookest on the hoof-armed demon.

With light celestial in Atharvan’s manner burn up the fool
who ruins truth with falsehood.

3 Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, what heated
word the worshippers have spoken,

Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit, — pierce to the
heart therewith the Yatudhanas.

I With fervent heat exterminate the demons ; destroy the fiends

with burning flame, 0 Agni.

Destroy with file the foolish gods’ adorers; blaze and destroy
the insatiable monsters.

5 May Cods destroy this day the evil-doer: may each hot curse
of his return and blast him.

Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva's net enclose
the Yatudhana.

16 The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, with flesh
of horses and of human bodies,

Who steals the nnloh-cow’s milk away, 0 Agni, — tear off the
heads of such with fiery fury.

7 The cow gives milk each year, 0 Man-regarder : let not the
Yatudhana ever taste it.

If one would glut him with the biestings, Agni, pierce with
! thy flame his vitals as he meets thee.

vasubhyaK here by vastinimarthdya : — ‘ to (the acquisition of) riches.’ —
ilson.

tO His three extremities : his three heads, according to S&yana. * Kopf
k ‘. kchultern,’ head and shoulders. — Grassmann. Root : meaning hie feet.

■ used vaguely, to correspond with the three upper extremities.
°/T ^ ie f°°t of the Ydtndhan a.’— Wilson.

II iwf-M'mcd : striking with the hoof. According to S&yapa, ‘having
_ hoofs.’ In Atharvan’s manner : like Atharvau, the ancient priest

^ ave been the first who obtained fire,
sin ^ r ’ married pair ; perhaps the sacrificer and his wife. The
( ^.P r ays that every hasty word that nuy have been uttered by pious people
nia . v be used aa a weapon to wound the Y&tudhAaa.

IJlCl 3 net : thr* nnnaa nf oll.narvftdint? Affni.



512


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK j


18 Let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle; may Aditi cas

oft’ the evil-doers.

May the God Savitar give them np to ruin, and bo their sliar
of plants and herbs denied them.

19 A<mi, from days of old thon slayest demons: never sha

°Rfikshasas in fight o’ercome thee.

Burn np the foolish one*, the flesh-devourers : let none of tliei
escape thine heavenly arrow.

20 Guard us, 0 Agni, from above and under, protect us froi

behind us and before us ; .

And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, glowii
with fervent heat, consume the sinner.

21 From rear, from front, from under, from above us, 0 Kinj

protect us as a Sage with wisdom. .

Guard to old age thy friend, 0 Friend, Eternal : 0 Agm,
Immortal, guard us mortals.

22 We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sag
Of hero lineage, day by day, destroyer of our treacherous foe

23 Burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood

Rakehasas, , ...

0 Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with lances armed with pom


of flame. A

24 Burn thou the paired Kimidins, burn, Agni, the Yatudhanapai
I sharpen thee, Infallible, with hymns. <7 Sage, be vigihui

25 Shoot forth, 0 Agni, with thy flame : demolish them on every sii
Break thou the Yatudhina’s strength, the vigour of the IU


shasa. Ac

IIYMN LXXXVUI. Af

Dear, ageless sacrificial driuk is offered in light-discovcni

heaven-pervading Agni. f

The Gods spread forth through his Celestial Nature,
might bear the world up and sustain it.

2 The world was swallowed and concealed in darkness . c
was born, and light became apparent. .

The Deities, the broad earth, and tho heavens, a P
and waters gloried in his friendship. -

18 The poison of the cattle : if they /l. ink '(which is k

According to S&yana, let them drink the poison f use d for extci

in the house), meaning pei haps some poisonous oiutmen

application only. , , , . . • Se e VII. 104. % not

24 Kimidins : treacherous and malevolent spirits. »

1 Sacrificial drink : ‘ swelling oblation/ according to Prof. r,8che1 ' ^



THE RIO VEDA.


YMN 88 -]


513


Inspired by Gods who claim our adoration, I now will laud
Eternal Lofty Agui,

Him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre, this heaven,
and both the worlds, and air’s mid-region.

: Earliest Priest whom all the Gods accepted, and chose him,
ami anointed him with butter,

He sivifty made all things that fly, stand, travel, all that hath
motion, Agni J&tavedas.

, Because thou, Agni, Jata vedas, stoodest at the world’s head
with thy refulgent splendour,

We sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises : thou
filledst heaven and earth, God meet for worship.

i Head of the world is Agni in the night-time ; then, as the
Sun, at morn spriugs up and rises.

Then to his task goes the prompt Priest foreknowing the
wondrous power of Gods who must be honoured.

' Lovely is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath shone forth,
seated in the heavens, refulgent.

With resouant hymns all Gods who guard our bodies have
offered up oblation in this Agni.

1 First the Gods brought the hymnal into being; then they
engendered Agni, then oblation.

He was their sacrifice that guards our bodies : him the heav-
ens kuow, the earth, the waters know him.

I He, Agni, whom the Gods have generated, in whom they
offered up all worlds and creatures,

He with his bright glow heated earth and heaven, urging him-
self right onward in his grandeur.

) Then by the laud the Gods engendered Agni in heaven, who
fills both worlds through strength and vigour.

They made him to appear in threefold essence : he ripens
plants of every form and nature.

Mfe sent thee forth : the Rishi glorifies the power of the priests who
Ue their messenger to the Gods.

® ^?ni, who is the Moon by night, at dawn becomes Siirya or the Sun-God
io when he sets again becomes Agni.

* in Wor Ms and creatures : proleptically : meaning that the oblation
-I’ea by the gods was destined to produce the universe. — Ludwig. Accord-
L n ' y a ? a ;— ‘ in whom all beings have offered oblations but it is clear
10 f oblationf » of the Gods are intended.

* tren & 1 th and vigour: qiJctbhih: ‘by his functions Wilson,
^rretiri/ Ce '* ° r * n t ^ iree conditions, or places, as the Sun, lightning,

33



514


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOR]

1 1 What time the Gods, whose due is worship, set him as Stay-

Son of Aditi, in heaven, ^

When the Pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, all create
that existed looked upon them.

12 For all the world of life the Gods made Agni Vaisvanara

be the days’ bright Banner, —

Him who hath spread abroad the radiant Mornings, and, coi
mg with his light, unveils the darkness.

13 The wise and holy Deities engendered Agni Vaisvanara who

age ne’er touches,

The Ancient Star that wanders on for ever, lofty and stroi
Lord of the Living Being.

14 We call upon the Sage with holy verses, Agni Vnisvauara t

ever-beaming,

Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatness
is a God below, a God above us.

15 I have heard mention of two several pathways, ways of i

Fathers and of Gods and mortals.

On those two paths each moving creature travels, each thi
between the Father and the Mother.

16 These two united paths bear him who journeys born from

head and pondered with the spirit.

He stands directed to all things existing, hasting, unrest
in his fiery splendour.

17 Which of us twain knows where they ^oeak together, up

and lower of the two rite-leaders ?

Our friends have helped to gather our assembly. They cf
to sacrifice; who will announce it?

18 How many are the Fires and Suns in number ? What is

number of the Dawns and Wateis?

Not jestingly I speak to you, 0 Fathers. Sages, I ask
this for information.


11 The Pair : tho Sun and Moon. Accruing to SAyana, Ushas and Sil

13 Lord of the Living Being: the meaning of yaleshdsya ia uncer
S&yana explains it by pdjyasya devasya, of the adorable Qod. ‘The obsi
of what ia fum.' — Ludwig. ‘Tho lord of meteors.' — Grassmaun. ‘Sui
lant du Yaksha.’— Bcrgaigue.

14 Below: on earth.

15 Two several pathways : the way to the other world and the way ha

the earth. The Father and the Mother : heaven and earth. *

1G Him who journeys : Agni. From, the head : of the world. From Ac
the he~td or chief of all exintence, according to S&yana. ,

Il Us twain ; Agni and the Rishi. Upper and lower : according to
the upper tire is VAyu aud the lower is terrestrial Agni. Who ww
it * : Agni alone will make the sacrifice known to the Gods.



WE RIO VEDA.


515


VtMir 39.1

19 As great as is the fair-winged Morning's presence to him who
dwells beside us, Matarisvan !

Is what the Brahman does when he approaches to sacrifice
and sits below the Hotar.

HYMN LXXXIX. India.

I wmn extol the most heroic Indra who with his might forced
earth aud sky asunder ;

Who hath filled all with width as man's Upholder, surpassing
floods and rivers in his greatness. 55

2 Sirya is he : throughout the wide expanses shall Indra turn

him, swift as car-wheels, hither,

Like a stream resting not but ever active : he hath destroyed,
with light, the black-hued darkness.

3 To him I sing a holy prayer, incessant, new, matchless, common

to the earth and heaven,

Who marks, as they were backs, all living creatures : ne'er
doth he fail a friend, the noble Indra.

4 I will send forth my somrs in flow unceasing, like water from

the ocean’s depth, to Indra

Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth
and heaven as with an axle.

5 Rousing with droughts, the Shaker, rushing onward, im-

petuous, very strong, armed as with arrows
Is Soma; forest trees and all the bushes deceive not Indra
with their offered likened*


1? Morning's presence : the light of Dawn which spreads over heaven and
eaith. Him who dwells bes^e us the Yajamftna, or iustitutor of the
satin fice —Ludwig Belo°o the Hotar below the legular Hotar-priest.
%ana explains this st» ,iza differently ‘ As long, M.ttamvan, as the swiftly-
moving (uights) co»0«* the face of the dawn, (so long) the Brahman, the
Nifeuor sitting down (to perform the work) of the llotri , approaching the
sacrifice supports (the ceremony).' — Wilson.

1 With width: with his own extended magnitude. ‘With radiance.
Wilson

2 Sthya is he: Indra is identified with the Sun whose course he directs.
Wording to S4yana, s&ryah here •= suviryah, heroic.

3 Incessant: or unerring* that is, in strict accordance with the rules of
he ritual. As they were backs : as if they were horses or oxen, the length
nid tihape of whose backs must be carefully considered in forming a judgment

'Wr worth.

5 Pi of. Wilson observes 'This verse is obscure, partly because the words
1* u . DU8 nal, partly because there is a confusion between Indra and Soma.'
biTir n0t fodra : he will not accept any substitutes : he will have nothing
I 1 2 3 * 5 genuine Soma-plant and its juice.



516 THE nYMNS OF [HOOK X.

6 Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, the earth,

the heavens, the firmament, the mountains, —

When heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm
and breaks the strong in pieces.

7 As an axe fells the tree so he slew Vritra, brake down tin

strongholds and dug out the rivers.

He cleft the mountain like a new-made pitcher. Indra brouglr
forth the kine with his Companions.

8 Wise art thou, Punisher of guilt, 0 Indra The sword lops

limbs, thou smitest down the sinner,

The men who injure, as it were a comrade, the lofty Law of Ya
runa and Mitra.

9 Men who lead evil lives, who break agreements, and injun

Varuna, Aryaman, and Mitra, —

Against these foes, O Mighty Indra, sharpen, as furious death
thy Bull of fiery colour.

10 Indra is Sovran Lord of Earth and Heaven, Indra is Lord o

waters and of mountains.

Indra is Lord of prosperers and sages : Indra must be invoke(
in rest and effort.

11 Vaster than days and nights, Giver of increase, vaster tha

firmament and flood of ocean,

Vaster than bounds of earth and wind’s^extension, vasto
than rivers and our lands is Tndra.

12 Forward, as herald of refulgent Morning, let thine insatiat

arrow fly, 0 Indra,

And pierce, as ’twere a stone launched forth from heaven, wit
hottest blaze the men who love deception.

13 Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed, the talltrei

followed and the plants and herbage.

Yearning with love both Worlds approached, the Watois wai
ed on Indra when he first had being.

7 His Companions : the Maruts, who assisted him in performing his exploil

8 Punisher of guilt : here Indra is said to discharge the duties whic
more ancient hymns are ascribed to Agni and to Mitra and Varuna. ^

0 Thy Bull: thy thunderbolt. ‘The heavy strong red weapon. -J
Muller. .

10 In rest and effort : ‘for the acquirement and preservation of w
Wilson. * , ij

18 The moons: or, the months. Waited on Indra: as the ropresen
of the Sun, the originator of all life.— Ludwig.



THE niGVEDA,


517


HYMN 90.]


14 Where was the vengeful dart when thou, 0 Indra, clavest the

demon ever bent on outrage ?

When fiends lay there upon the ground extended like cattle in
the place of immolation ?

15 Those who are set in enmity against us, the Ogapas, 0 Indra,

waxen mighty,—

Let blinding darkness follow those our foemen, while these
shall have bright shining nights to light them.

16 May plentiful libations of the people, and singing Rishis’ holy

prayers rejoice thee.

Hearing with love this common invocation, come unto us, pass
by all those who praise thee.

17 0 Indra, thus may we be made partakers of thy new favours

that shall bring us profit.

Singing with love, may we the Visvamitras win daylight even
now through thee, 0 Iudra.

18 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in the fight

where spoil is gathered,

The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays
j the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.


HYMN XC. Parasha.


A thousand heads hath Purusha, a thousand eyes, a thousand
feet.

On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.

2 This Purusha is all that yet hath been and all that is to be ;
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still by food.


H Fiends ,* mitrakruvafa : the exact meaning of the word is uncertain.
Prof. Ludwig takes it as a geuitive case : ‘ What time they lay there on the
earth extended like oxen in a demou’s place of slaughter.’

15 Oganas : probably the name of some hostile clan. According to SAyana,
enemies assembled in numbers. These • us and our friends here,

16 All those who praise thee : all other worshippers.

18 This is the concluding stu.iza of several hymns of the VisvAmitras.
66 HI. 30. 22 ; 31. 22 ; 32. 17 j 34. 11 ; 35. 11 ; 36. 11.


Pitruska, embodied spirit, or Man personified and regarded as the soul
jr source of the universe, the personal and life-giving principle in

animated beings, is said to have a thousand, that is, innumerable, heads,
W, and feet, as being one with all created life. A space ten fingers wide :

of the heart of man, wherein the soul was supposed to reside.
JW aa the Universal Soul he pervades the universe, as the Individual
he is enclosed in a space of narrow dimensions. See Hymns of the
l f^-veda, XIX. 6. I, note,

Ntna ® econ d line is explained in various ways. The meaning of the words
kj e i 0 : he is lord of immortality or the immortal world of the Gods,

f u grows greater by food, that is, by the sacrificial offerings of men.



518


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK j


3 So mighty is his greatness ; yea, greater than this is Puruslu
All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths eternal hf

in heaven.

4 With three-fourths Purusha went up : ono-fourth of him agai

was here.

Thence he strodo out to every side over what eats not and wht


eats.

5 From him Viraj was born ; again Purusha from Viraj was bon
As soon as he was born he spread eastward and westward o’i

the earth.

6 When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Purusha as the

offering,

Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn ; summer w
the wood.

7 They balmed as victim on the grass Pnrushaborn in earliest tim
With him the Deities and all Sadhyas and Rishis sacrificed.


According to Sfryana : he is the lord or distributer of immortality becau
he becomes the visible world in order that living beings may obtain the frui
of their actions and gam moks/ui or final liberation from their bonds, he
also the lord of immortality ; for he mounts beyond (lus own conditio
r r. food (of living beings).’ —Wilson. Oolebrooke translates the line:
^e^i^thatf whichgrowsby^ nourishment, and he is the dist.ibuter of immo
talitv’ Di- Muir renders it by lie is also the lord of immortality, Bin
by food he expands 1 According to the paraphrase in the Dhigavata-P iml<
the meaning of the last clause is: ‘since he ha*b tranaceuded moi'
» Prof Ludwisr’s version is: ‘auch uber die unsterbhchb
Bebietend [da er.] was durch speise [ist,] weit uberragt,’ ruling also ov
fmmortaHty, [since he] far transcends what [exists] through food i ' but m
Commentary a somewhat different explanation is given. Ruling
mortality, he was all that grows by food. —1 eterson.

3 Eternal life: amrUam: immoitality, or the immortal Qoda.

me°.U oTgooVlnd ^evU^io^s^ suchas aod^men, »»d lowe^animsM

those who are incapable thereof, such as mountains and rivers
conscious, achetanam, or unconscious, creation. ^ Kansas 3 a

5 From him : or, from that, the onc-f.ni. th mentioned . m ^ fo
4. VirAjy or, in the nominative form, Virftt, is said to h ®L ® h ’ or presid
of the mundane egg, from Adi- Purusha, the primeval P ’ ima t e s as

TnXs passage V. pp. 369, 370; a^Wallis.CoJvioyy •

ing to Siyana. Summer : grtshmd does not ocour in any
Spring : vasantd occurs in only one other R. V. ; a «1

7 On the grass : on the sacred grass used in sacrifices.
oi celestial beings, probably ancient divine sacrifices,



THE RIO VEDA.


519


iWtf 90.]

8 From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat wasgither-

ed up.

He formed the creatures of the air, and animals both wild and
tame.

9 From that great general sacrifice Richas and Sama-hymns

were born :

Therefrom were spells and charms produced; the Taj us had
its birth from it.

0 From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of

teeth :

From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were
born.

1 When they divided Purusha how many portions did they make ?
What do they call his mouth, his arms ? What do they call his

thighs and feet ?

2 The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rajanya

made.

His thighs became the Vaisya, from his feet the Sfrdra was
produced.

3 The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the

Sun had birth ;

Iudra and Agui from his mouth were born, and Vayu from
his breath.

1 Forth from his navel came mid-air ; the sky was fashioned
from his head ;

Earth from his feet, and from bi<* ear the regions. Thus they
formed the worlds.


8 The dripping fat ; * the mixture of curds and butter.* Wilson. He :
r, it ; the sacrificed victim Purusha, or the sacred clarified butter. The ere a
tow of the air: 1 those animals over whom VAvu piesides.’ — Wilson.

9 Spells and charms : probably those of the latei collection of the Atharva-
e( la. The Yajus. the Yajur-veda.

12 Rijanyn: the second or Kshatriya caste, the regal and military class.
hisi/a • the husbandman ; lie whose business is agriculture and trade. SiHra :
he labourer. The BrAhmau is called the mouth of Purusha, as having the
special privilege, as a ptiest, of addressing the Gods in prayer. The anus of
urusha became the RAjanya, the prince and soldier who wields the sword
l 'd spear. His thighs, the strongst parts of his body, became the agricul-
u'lst and tradesman, the chief support of society ; and his feet, the emblems
>»* vigour and activity, became the S idra or labouring man on whose toil and
, u U3tr y a h ultimately rests. This is the only passage in the Rigveda which
""iTr? te8 * our C) wte8.

: the creation myth 6f the world-giant Yrnir or Hymir in old Northern

f? e f The hills are his bones, the vault of the sky his skull, the sea his
00( *j aud the clouds his brains. — Corpus Poeticum Borea\e , Vol. II. P- 468.



520


THE HYMNS OF


[bOOK}


15 Seven fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers o! fuel w ei

prepared,

When the Gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their victin
Purusha.

16 Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim: these were the earliei

holy ordinances.

The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there whei
the Sadhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.


HYMN XCI. Ag.

Brisk, nt the place of Ila, hymned by men who wake, oi
own familiar Friend is kindled in the house;

Hotar of all oblation, worthy of our choice, Lord, beaming
trusty friend to one who loveth him.

2 He, excellent in glory, guest in every house, finds like aswif

winged bird a home in every tree.

Benevolent to men, he scorns no living man: Friend to th
tribes of men he dwells with every tribe.

3 Most sage with insight, passing skilful with thy powers at

thou, O Agni, wise with wisdom, knowing all.

As Vasii, thou alone art Lord of all good things, of all th
treasures that the heavens and earth produce.

4 Foreknowing well, 0 Agni, thou in I]a’s place hast occopie

thy regular station balmed with oil.

Marked are thy comings like the coming* of the Dawns, tl
rays of him who ahineth spotless as the Sun.


15 Fencing-sticks : guards, or pieoes of wood laid round the sacrificial f
to enclose it. Sftyana explains paridhdiyih as the seven metres, or as six slialk
trenches dug round the fire, and an imaginary one round the Sun. Mahidha
says that the seven oceans may be intended.

This pantheistic hymn, which is generally called the Purushasfikta, is
comparatively recent origin, and appeats to be an attempt to harmonize t

two ideas of sacrifice aud creation. For further information regarding it, s

Muir, 0 S. Texts, I. pp 6 — 11, and Y. 368—377, Prof. Max Muller, Ancu
Sanskrit Literature, pp. 570f, and Dr. Scherman, Philosophische Hymnen a
der Rig-und Atharva-veda-Sunhitd f pp. 11-23. The hymn has also been trai
lated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays , pp, 167, 168; by Wains, ^
mology of the JRigveda, pp. 87, 88; and by Peterson, Hymns from the Kvf M
pp. 289, 290; also by liurnouf, Bhdgavata Purdna , Preface to Vol. 1., auu
Weber, Indische Studicn, IX. p. 5. Qrassmann’s Translation m his Appem
to Vol. II., and Ludwig’s Translation aud Commentary should be cousu
See also Hymns of the Atfuirva-veda , XIX. 6, which is ft re proa u
this hymn with transpositions and variations.


1 The place of lid: the shrine where clarified butter is poured upon

fire. Our own familiar Friend: Agni, the Friend of the house. .

2 Swift-winged bird: or, bird of prey. ‘ Hunter/ according to Luaw *

3 Vasu ■ the word meaning abo good and treasure.



521


i/n/iV 91.]


THE RIG VEDA.


5 Thy glories are, as lfehtnings from the rainy cloud, marked,

mauy-hued, like heralds of the Dawns’ approach,

When, loosed to winder over plants and forest trees, thou
cnimmest by thyself thy food into thy mouth.

6 Him, duly comingas their germ, have plants received: this

Agni have maternal Waters brought to life.

So in like manne* do the forest trees and plants bear him
within them aid produce him evermore.

7 When, sped and urged by wind, thou spreadest thee abroad,

swift piercingthrough thy food according to thy will,

Thy never-ceasng blazes, longing to consume, like men on
chariots, Agii, strive on every side.

8 A <>' ni, the Hotir-priest who fills the assembly full, Waker of

"knowledge, Hiief Controller of the thought, —

Him, yea, noie other than thyself, doth man elect at sacri-
ficial offeriigs great and small alike.

9 Hero, Agni, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee

as thcT P’iest in sacred gatherings,

When men with strewn dipt grass and sacrificial gifts offer
thee entertainment, piously inclined.

10 Thine is tlie Herald’s task and Cleanser’s duly timed; Leader

art thou, and Kindler for the pious man.

Thou art Director, thou the ministering Priest : thou art the
1 Brahman, Lord and Master in our homo.

When mortal man presents to thee Immortal God, Agni, his
fuel or his sacrificial gift,

Then thou art his Adhvaryu, Hotar, messsenger, callest the
Gods and orderest the sacrifice.

From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him, these
holy words, these Richas, songs and eulogies,

Eager for wealth, to Jatavedas fain for wealth : when they
have waxen strong they please their Strengthened


6 is produced in the form of lightning by the waters of the firma-
B11 t, O! the cloud and descends with the rain into plants and >
e wood of which he ia brought forth by attrition,

^ and small : with Soma or without it.

9 The o


fr : wn-n oorna or wii/uwiiu ,w.

Grangers ; priests who order and conduct the sacrificial ceremonies.
t 1 } Agni discharges the duties of the seven chief priest*, officiating as

Potav a ».iu r»-« e A Q far> Adhvarvu. and Biahuiau. been.


scharges the dutiw of the seven ctnet priest*. ,,

„ Nesh^ar, Agntdh, Pras&star, Adhvaryu, and Biahuiau. bee u.

inhere this stanza originally occurs.

the Gods: ‘Bavest the formula.’ — Ludwig.


-- -■•-V urn*., ‘sayest the fwwulw.
^ Richat : veiBes of praise,



522 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X.

13 This newest eulogy will I speak forth to him, the Ancient One

who loves it. May he heat* our vohe.

May it come near his heart and maki it stir with love, as a
fond well-dressed matron clings abort her lord.

14 He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and barren cows, and rami

wheu duly set apart, are offered up, —

To Agni, Soma-sprinkled, drinker of swed; juice, Disposer, witl
my heart I bnug a fair hymn forth.

15 Into thy mouth is poured the offering, Agui, as Soma int

cup, oil into ladle.

Vouchsafe us wealth, strength-winning, blest with heroe
wealth lofty, praised by men, and full ofsplendour.

HYMN XCII. VisveJeva

I praise your Charioteer of sacrifice, the Lo*d of men, Pne
of the tribes, refulgent, Guest of night.

Blazing amid dry plants, snatching amid the gieen, the Stronj
the Holy Herald hath attained to heaven.

2 Him, Agui, Gods and men have male their chiff support, w\

drinks the fatness and completes the sacrifice
With kisses they caress the Grandson of the Red, like t
swift ray of light, the Household Priest of Dt-wn.

3 Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard’s ways: his brand

evermore are sent forth to consume.

When his terrific flames have reached the I nrnortals’ wor
then men remember and extol the Heavenly Folk.

4 For then the net of Law, Dyaus, and the wide expanse, Ear

Worship, and Devotion meet, for highest praise,

Varuna, Indra, Mitra were of one accord, and Savitar i
Bhaga, Lords of holy might.

5 Onward, with ever-roaming liudra, speed the floods: ovei i

mati the Mighty have they run.

With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, 1
bellowing, bedews all things that are within.

2 Completes the sacrifice: or, fills the assembly full. Grandson of the
* son of the brilliant V\y a.’ -Wilson. Sprung from his own red gl^.
being kindled fiom another.

3 Men remember : because then their prayers are granted.

5 Aramati : the earth. — SAyana. Armaiti, of the Avesta,
personified as well as Devotion or Piety, Parijman: ‘the circumambie
— Wilson.

6 The Asura ; Dyaus himself.



THE RIQ VEDA .


623


nYMS 92 .]

6 Straightway the Rudras, Maruts visiting all men, Falcons of

Dyaus, home-dwellers with the Asura, —

Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and the swift-
moving Indra with swift-moving Gods.

7 With Indra have they found enjoyment, they who toil, in the

light’s beauty, in the veiy Strong One’s strength ;

The singers who in men’s assemblies forged for him, according
to his due, his friend the thunderbolt.

8 Even the Sun’s Bay Coursers hath he held in check : each oue

fears Imjra as the mightiest of all.

Unhindered, from the air’s vault thunders day by day the loud
triumphant breathing of the fearful Bull.

9 With humble adoration show this day your song of praise to

mighty Rudra, Ruler of the brave :

With whom, the Eager Ones, going their ordered course, he
comes from heaven Self-bright, auspicious, strong to guard.

10 For these have spread abroad the fame of human kind, the

Bull Brihaspati and Soma’s brotherhood.

Atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure : through skill the
Bhrigus were esteemed of all as Gods.

11 For those, the Earth and Heaven with their abundant seed,

four-bodied NaiAsansa, Yairia, Aditi,

God Tvashtar Wealth-bestower, the Ribhukshanas, Rodasi
Maruts, Vishnu, claim and merit praise.

12 And may he too give ear, the Sage, from far away, the Dragon

of the Deep, to this our yearning call.

Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and
with your thought, 0 Earth and Sky, observe this well,
f 3 Dear to all Gods, may Pushan guard the ways we go, the
' Waters’ Child and Vayu help us to success.

Sing lauds for your great bliss to Wind, the breath of all : ye
Asvins prompt to hear, hear this upon your way.

7 Worshippers are rewarded in heaven for the hymns and prayers with
!ch they have strengthened aud armed Indra for his great deeds.

9 whom : the Maruts.

^Soma's brotherhood: all Gods who are entitled to drink Soma juice.
a sure : gave them assurance of obtaining what they asked.

If Pour-bodied Nardsansa : Agni provided with four fires, or complete in
18 parfcH. Ribhukshanas .•* Ribhus. Rodasi : consort of the Maruts.

12 The &ra gon of the Deep : Ahibudhnya, regent of the sea of air.

® ^'* e Waters' Child : Asrni. born as lightniug from the clouds.



524


THE HYMNS OF


Wok i

14 With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as Lor

over these fearless tribes, the Self-resplendent One.

We praise Night’s youthful Lord benevolent to men, the foelee
One, the free, with all celestial Dames.

15 By reason of his birth here Angiras first sang: the pressing

stones upraised beheld the sacrifice —

The stones through which the Sage became exceeding vast, an
the sharp axe obtains in fight the beauteous place.

HYMN XCI1I. Vi.vedeva

Mighty are ye, and far-extended, Heaven and Earth : bot
Worlds are evermore to us like two young Dames.

Guard us thereby from stronger foe ; guard us hereby to giv
us strength.

2 In each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth the God:
He who, most widely known and famed for happiness, invitet
them.


3 Ye who are Rulers overall, great is your sovran power as God
Ye all possess all majesty : all must be served in sacrifice.

4 These are the joyous Kings of Immortality, Parijman, Mitn

Aryaman, and Vanina.

What else is Rudra, praised of men ? the Maruts, Bhag;
Pdshana?

5 Come also to our dwelling, Lords of amp^s wealth, comrno

partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon,

When the great Dragon of the Deep hath settled down upo
their floors.

6 And let the Asvins, Lords of splendour, set us free, —bot

Gods, and, with their Laws, Mitra and Varuna.

Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to ample opulenc

14 The Self- resplendent One: Agni. Night's youthful Lord: the Moo

Celestial Dames : the lunar asterisma. .

15 The Sage: Indra, according to SAyapa. Sharp axe; the tbunderoo,
The meaning of this stanza is obscure.


1 Thereby... . hereby : literally * by those . ‘by these.’ SAyapa snppl
pAlanaih , protections, iu loth cases. The former may refer to the Maghava
and the* latter to the people in general. , . V4v

4 Immortality : or, the immoi tal world. Parijman : Roamer round ’ . *

What else : that is, Rudra is also one of these Kings. PAshana : a lengt
form of the usual Piishan. . ... * r A tr t

5 Waters : libations of Soma juice. SAyana explains

‘by night.’ It is, as Prof. Ludwig has pointed out, a shorten firiu

nakshtam, ‘come ye.’ Upon their floors : ‘in their company 1U
mental (clouds).’— Wilson. The meaning is obscure.

6 He : the sacri&cer whom these Gods protect,



THE RIG VEDA.


525


YA1N 93.]

j Yea, let the Asvins Twain he gracious unto us, even Rudras,
and all Gods, Bhaga, Rathaspati ;

Pan j man, Ribhu, V&ja, 0 Lords of all wealth Ribhukshanas.

5 Prompt is Ribhukshan, prompt the worshipper’s strong dnnk :
may thy fleet Bay Steeds, thine who speedest on, approach.

Not man’s but God’s is sacrifice whose psalm is unassailable.

9 o God Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us a place among
wealthy princes.

With his Car-steeds at once hath our Indra guided the reins
and the car of these men.

0 To these men present here, 0 Heaven and Earth, to us grant

lofty fame extending over all mankind.

Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with wealth for
victory.

[1 This speaker, Indra— for thou art our Friend — wherever he
may he, guard thou, Victor ! for help, ever for help :

Thy wisdom, Vasu ! prosper him.

|2 So have they strengthened this mine hymn which seems to

1 tike its bright path to the Sun, and reconciles the men :

Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced.

Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and
bright with gold,

Lightly, with pierciug ends, as ’twere two ranks of heroes
ranged for fight.

This to Duhsima Prithavana have I sung, to Vena, Rama, to
the nobles, and the King.

They yoked five hundred, and their love of us was famed
upon their way.

> Besides, they showed us seven-and-seventy horses here.

T&nva at once displayed his gift, Parthya at once displayed
his gift, and straightway Mayava showed his.

7 Rathaspati: the guardian of war-chariots. Cf. X. 64. 10. Ribhukshanas:

•ibhus.

I KMiukshan : ‘ the mighty (Indra).’— Wilson.

* his Car-steeds : with ua priests, who draw the chariot of sacrifice.

So have they strengthened : « May (the priests) strengthen.’— Wilson.

t yoke: as the yoke keeps a pair of horses together so the hymn addressed

>vol' recol iciles worshippers and fills them with like feelmgs of

u ; of the axle, \ hich pa^ through the naves.

" Ppithavdna , Vena , and Rdma were Maghavans or wealthy

t'ltorsof sacrifices. TotheJCing: dsure : to the Asura, lord or chief.

.• horseB or chariots. .

Worses : there is no substantive in the text. SAyaya supplies gavam,



52$


THE HYMNS OP


[BOOK l


HYMN XCIV\ Preston*

Let these speak loudly forth ; let us speak out aloud : to t\
loud speaking Pressing-stones address the speech ;

When, rich with Soma juico, Stones of the mountain, y
united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise.

2 They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men : tin

cry aloud to us with their green-tinted mouths,

While, pious Stones, they ply their task with piety, and, evi
before the Hotar, taste the offered food.

3 Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meatl

they make a humming sound over the meat prepared.

As they devour the branch of the Red-coloured Tree, the<
the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered bellowings.

4 They cry aloud, with strong exhilarating drink, calling i

Indra now, for they have found the meath.

Bold, with the sisters they have danced, embraced by thei
making the earth reecho with their ringing sound.

5 The Eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven; in t

skys^vault the dark impetuous ones have danced.

Then downward to the nether stone’s fixt place they sin
and, splendid ns the Sun, effuse their copious stream.

6 Like strong ones drawing, they have put forth all tb

strength : the Bulls, hat ne*scd together, bear the ehariot-pol
When they have bellowed, panting, swallowing their fo<
the sound of their loud snorting is like that of steeds.

7 To these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth, to tin

who have ten yoke-strups and ten binding thongs,

To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye praise,
these who bear ten car-poles, ten when they are yoked.

cows. These horses, or cows, were presented to the priests. Tnnva,Vdrt )
and Mdyava are patronymics which do not occur again in the Rigveda.

Ludwig thinks that a quanel had arisen between the Maghavans on
(stanza 14) and the Visas or people (stanza 9), »nd that the priests, w o
reconciled the two parties, were piescuted with the chanots which
prepared for battle. See stanza 13, in which, accoiding to this explan.
nd should be lendered by ‘and not’ instead of ‘as ’twere. The y >
is difficult and in parts almost unintelligible, is placed by Grassmann

* Hotar: 1 (Agni) the invoker (of the gods).’— Wilson. Or the human Ho
priest may be intended.

V 3 Red-coloured Tree: the Soma-plant. WeU-pavtured : the m
stibharrd is obscure. See Hillebrandt, V, I. 18.

4 The sisters : the fingers.

5 The Eagles : the rapidly moving celestial press-stones,

7 Ten workers ; the fingers of both bands.



THE 110 VEDA.


527


HYMN 95 ]

8 These Stones with ten concuctors, rapid in their course, with

lovely revolution travel nund and round.

They have been first to driik the flowing Soma juice, first to
enjoy the milky fluid of tin stalk.

9 These Soma-eaters kiss Indrds Bay-coloured Steeds : draining

the stalk they sit upon theox’s hide.

1 idra, when he hath drunk Sona meath drawn by them, waxes
in strength, is famed, is mighty as a Bull.

10 Strong is your stalk ; ye, verib, never shall be harmed : yc

have refreshment, ye are eve- satisfied.

Fair aie ye, as it were, througl splendour of his wealth, his
in whose sacrifice, 0 Stones, y? find delight.

11 Bored deep, but not pierced though with holes, are ye ; 0

Stones, not loosened, never wciry, and exempt from death,
Eternal, undiseased, moving in smdry ways, unthirst mg, full
of fatness, void of all desire.

12 Your fathers, verily, stand fiim from age to age : they, loving

rest, arc not dissevered from their scat.

Untouched by time, ne’er lacking greeu pl.mts and green
| tiees, they with their voice hav* caused the heavens and
earth to hear.

13 This, this the Stones proclaim, wha\ time they are disjoined,

and when with 1 inging sounds they nove and di ink the balm.
Like tillers of the ground when thej are sowing seed, they
mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minsh it.

14 They have raised high their voice for juice, for sacrifice, strik-

ing the Mother Earth as though thc\ danced thereon.

So loose thou too his thought who hath eifused the !*ap, and
let the Stones which we arc honouring be disjoined.

HYMN XCV. Uiv.Bi. Pururavas.

Ho theie, mv consort! Stay, thou fierce-souled lady, and let
us reason for a while together.

Such thoughts as the e of ours, while yot unspoken in days
gone by have never brought 11 s comfort.

® The ox's hide: spreul underneath to c.iuh and hold tue droppings.

12 lour fathers: the mountains from width aou came.

14 Striking the Mother Euith ‘ Eaith ’ is not in the text ‘they made a
p 01 ^ hke (children) at play, eti iking their mother.’ — Wilson. I have followed
Iot Ludwig’s explanation.

Hie hymn is a dialogue between Pururavas and Urvasi, and they are
i ® evt ‘ rall y the Itishis of the stanzas which they speak. The dialogue, wic 1
f, "irietim e8 almost unintelligible, contains the germs of a legend which is
elal(Ki in the §atapatka-E)&}mana t reappears in the MuhMMa and



628 THE HYRtfs OP [BOOR j

2 What am I now to do with t/iis thy saying 1 I have gone

from thee like the first of Mornings.

Purdravas, return thou to thy dwelling : I, like the wind, am
difficult to capture.

3 Like a shaft sent for gloryfrom the quiver, or swift steed

winning cattle, winning hundreds,

The lightning seemed to flfsh, as cowards planned it. The
minstrels bleated like a l<mb in trouble.

4 Giving her husband’s father life and riches, from the near

dwelling, when her love,' craved her,

She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accept-
ing day and night her jbrd’s embraces.

5 Thrice in the day didst thou embrace thy consort, though

coldly she received thy fond caresses.

To thy desires, Purfiravis, I yielded: so wast thou king, 0
hero, of my body.

C The maids Sujurni, Snni, Sumne-api, Charanyu, Granthini,
and Hradechakshus,'—

These like red kine have hastened forth, the bright ones, and
like milch-cows hav« lowed in emulation.


Purdnas, and forms the plot d the well-known drama, Vih'amorvast, or The
Hero and the Nymph. According to this legend, Urvari, an Apsaras or
Nymph of heaven, has been panished to earth where she consents to live
with King PurCiravas on coujhtion that ho takes care of her two pet rams,
and that she never sees him unclothed. She lives witH Pururavas for four
years, when the Gandbarvaf or heavenly minstrels resolve to bring her hack.
They steal one of the ram? by night. Purflravas springs from his bed ; the
Gandharvas send on him a flash of magic lightning, and Urvasi Rees her
husband naked. One of the conditions of the continuance of their union u
broken, and the nymph instantly vanishes. Purdravas meets her afterwards
and in vain implores her to return. At last she relents, and in clue time a
eon is born to them. These are the main outlines of a somewhat variously
told story.

1 Pururavas speak*, when he has met Urvasi again after her sudden
departure.

2 Urvasi replies. ,

3 Purflravas spetks, reminding her of the circumstances in which she
vanished. ‘Yea,’ he says, ‘thou wentest from me with the speed of anarrw
or a racer. The cowardly Gandharvas deluded us. They bleated like a lam
to make us think that one of thy pets was in pain or danger, and then, by a
flash of factitious lightning, made me visible to thee in my nakedness.

4 Life and riches ; meaning, perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests,
future grandson. The near dwelling : her father-in-law’s house, where s
spent much of her time. Her lover : her husband Purflravas.

This stanza and the next are spoken by Urvsi. # s

6 This stanza is ascribed by SAyana to Purflravas, who mentions the na ^
of the Apsarases who were the companions of Urvadl after her flight. ^
are compared to red kine, meaning, perhaps, bright flashes of lightning
lowed by the lowing or bellowing of the thunder.


WMN 95. J THE RIG VEDA.


529


7 While he was born the Dames sate down together, the Rivers
with free kindness gave him nurture* ?

And then, Purfiravas, the Gods increased thee for mighty
battle, to destroy the Dasyus. 6 3


8 When I, n mortal, wooed to mine embraces these heavenly
lymphs who laid as-'de their raiment, J

Like a scared snake they fled from ine in terror, like chariot
horses when the (ar has touched them.

i When, loving these Immortal Ones, the mortal hath converse
with the nymphs as they allow him.

Like swan’s they show the beauty of their bodies, like horses
m their play they bite and nibble.


0 She who flushed brilliant as the failing lightning brought me

delicious pieseuts fmm the waters.

Now from tie flood be bom a strung young hero ! May Urvasi
probing l£r life for ever ! ’ *

1 Thy birth hath made me drink from earthly miloh-kine : this

power, Pururavas, hast thou vouchsafed me.

I knew, And, warned thee, on that day. Thou wouldst not
hear jAe. What sayest thou, when naught avails thee ?

2 When Ml the son be born and seek his father? Mourner-like,

will ho weep when brst he knows him?

Who, shall divide the accordant wife and husband, while fire
lsshining with thy consort’s parents?


1 Ui» y usi speaks, reminding Purtiiavas of the favour shown him at his birth,
y tbycelestial Dames who were present, the Rivers Who nursed him. and
ie(/odsw hoga v e him strength. Another explanation is that in the first
alymthe stanza Urvaal speaks, by anticipation, of the, son whom she will
wt 0 Puriiravas.

> Purfiravas complains of the shyness of the nymphs mentioned in stanza 6,
h Taif 80C * e ^ h.id sought to console himself. A mortal : meaning that
I® iac * keen :i God their behaviour would have been different. Raiment :
g U, |l ex plained by Sfiyana as wu kiyam rtipam, their own proper form,
rvasl replies, Tlie Apsarases, she says, as a rule only coquet with mor-
As they allow him : kratuhhir nd ; see Geldner, V. 8., I. 276. Like
m, .y a ? a explains nd here differently : —‘they (becoming) ducks do not
19 p r bodies. ’--Wilson.

k w?a<e, rLlra ^ a8 B P e , a ^ 8, Drvast, he says, did not treat him so coldly. From
e Wa ? ,; °* fbe firmament. ’ From the flood: from Urvast who comes from
hurl /•' re £' oa8 above. SAyana explains apdh differently : — ‘a sou able m
\\ y nen dly to man has been boon/ — Wilson.

fitter | 1 * * * V ip 8 P ea ks. According to SAyapa, whom Wilson, Grassmann, and
e nbomV° W ’ translation of the first half-line would be : — ‘Thou hast
ien \ , S lVe the earth protection.’ Warned thee on that dan : told, tb^,
^menf ' ^ to w Rh thee what would happen if the conditions of

u .. ^ere not. ..Um.j



530 THE HYMNS OF [Bm ,

13 I will console him when his tears are falling: he shall

weep and cry for care that blesses ° h

That which is thine, between us, will I send thee. G 0 j, 0n
again, thou fool ; thou hast not won me. °

14 Thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever, to seek, wilho

return, the faithcst distance.

Then let his bed be in Destrnct : on » bosom, am] there!
fierce rapacious wolves devour him.

15 Nay, do not die, Pururavas, nor vanish : «t not the evil-omen

wolves devour thee.

With women there can be no lasting friendship : hearts
hyenas are the hearts of women.

16 When amid men in altered shape I sojouried, and thron

four autumns spent the nights among then,

I tasted once a day a drop of butter ; and evej now with tli
am 1 contented.

17 1, her best love, call Urvasi to meet me, her win fills air ai

measures out the region.

Let the gift brought by piety approach thee. Wn thou
me again : my heait is troubled.

18 Thus speak these hods to thee, 0 son of la: As (oath ha

verily got thee for his subject,

Thy sons shall serve the Gods with thqjj' oblation, aid tli
moreover, shalt rejoice in S.arga


when he knows my story, know.-, how his father has been deserted. Wide
it brining: so long as the father-in law’ and mother-in-law who sancUomd
union live and maintain their household fire.

13 Urvasi answers. That which is thine, between vt: our child, our i
nion treasure.

14 Pururavas threatens to destroy himself.

36 UrvasI speaks this and the next hLmiz»

16 A- drop of butter : oue of the conditions on which the contimianc
their union depended was that she should e.it nothing but a small qua)
of ghritu or clarified butter daily. See stanza 11.

17 Pur. ravos speaks. Her best love : v muhlhoh here is evidently, ^8
Scholiast siiys, an ejpithet and not a name, meaning ‘most excellent,
precious/ Fills air : representing the morning mi-t, or the first Ah*
light, that spreads over the heavens before the rising of the sun.

18 There is an hiatus between this stanza and 17, au entire break ot
tinuity. The fragment is ascribed t.» UrvasI, who consoles Fururava
te’ling him of the promise of the deities that after his death bis sons
offer sacrifice to the Gods, and lie himself shall he blest in heaven.
lid: Purfiravas, called Aila or son of I|& who was the daughter of

Some of the stanzas should be transposed, and their order should ot,
5, 4 . 6, 16, 6. 7, 8. 9, 1!. 12 13, 14 15, 10. -Ludwig. .

Of this very difficult hvmn there is a complete translation, witn

- i -it- .f 1 am ml*



fffjf.v 96.]


THE MOVED A.


531


HYMN XOV[.


Indra.


i , , iuura.

Is the g' eat ■y nod w,l > I laud thy two Bay Steeds • 1 orize
the sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior-God ' 1

His who pours lovely oil as ’twere with yellow drops Let
my songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints ’

2 Ye who in concert sing .into the gold-hued place, like Bav

Steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat, *

For Indra laud ye strength allied with Tawny Steeds laud
him whom cows content as ’twere with yellow drops. ’

3 His is that. thunderbolt, of iron, goldcn-hued, gold-coloured

very dear, and yellow in his arms ; ’

Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage In
indra are set fast all forms of golden line. b t

4 As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden thunder-

bolt spread out as in a race.

That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A thousand
flames had he who bore the tawiy-hued.


5 Thou, thou, when praised by mer who sacrificed of old, hadst
pleasure in their lauds, 0 IrnVa golden-haired.

All that befits thy song of prabe thou welcomest, the perfect
pleasant gift, 0 Golden-hue* from birth.


6 These two dear Bays biing bther Indra on his car, Thunder-
armed, joyous, meet for hud, to drink Ins fill.

Many libations flow for bin who loveth them ■ to Indra have
the gold-hued Soma juices run.


r much assistance), by Prof. (»eldner, Vedwhe Studien, I pp 243—295.
lie myth has beeu discussed by von Roth, Illustrations of the Nirnkta , and*
wwhe Studies, l . 196; by Prof Max Muller, Oxford Essays (Chips, IV.
p) I by T r > f- Adalbert Knhn, Dir Hmibhmft des Feuers, pp. 85 ff; and
AM^ 8S ° rS Boltzmann and Oldenberg in more recent days. Professor
Muller considers the stoiy to be ‘one of the myths of the Vedas which
ipre8Bee the coi relation of the dawn and the sun.’ According to Dr. Gold-
U q ia the morning mist which vanishes away as soon as Purtiravas

U , n displays himself. See Chambers's Encyclopedia, 1st edition , under

ur uhavas.

Throughout the hymn the poet rings the changes on words said to be
dr/h* 8 ^' e r0ut Ar*, to ta ke, as haryatd, delightsome, harydn, loving,
Va bay or taw °y> hdrit, gieen, yellow, or gold -coloured Cp. Ill 44.

are conjectuiaUy explained by the Commentate. and are
of various renderings.

2 ^ ‘ or fatness, fertilizing rain,
g ‘ ^Bked for aaeriftciil purposes.

•udwig W?n ^ ra 9 e: P er kap8 with reference to the effect of anger on the face..—



THE HYMNS OP


582


WOK X


7 The gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish : tht

yellow drops have urged the swift Bays to the Strong.

He who speeds on with Bay Steeds even as he lists hath satis
fled his longing for the golden drops.

8 At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in might, th

Iron One with yellow beard and yellow hair.

He, Lord of Tawny Coursers, Lord of fleet-foot Mares, wi 1
bear his Bay Steeds safely over all distress.

9 His yellow-coloured jaws, like Indies, move apart, what timi

for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted stir,

When, while the howl stands there, he grooms his Tawn
Steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, the sweet jui<

* that he loves.

10 Yea, to the Dear One’s seat in homes of heaven and earth tl

Bay Steeds’ Lord hath whinnied like a horse for food.
Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, and th
Belovfed One hath gtmed high power of life.

11 Thou, comprehending w'th thy might the earth and heavei

acceptest the dear hynn for ever new and new.

0 Asnra, disclose thou ard make visible the Cow’s belovi
home to the bright goldei Sun.

12 0 Indra, let the eager wishes the folk tying thee, delightf

golden-visored, on thy car,

That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, th
mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered meath.

13 Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest; and th

especially is this libation.

Gladden thee, Indra, with the meath-rich Soma: pour it dc
ever, Mighty One ! within thee.


7 To the Strong : to Indra ; that they may be harnessed and come to
sacrifice.

8 The Iron One: * iron*hearted Indra.’— Wilson.

9 For ttrength : for strengthening food. The yellow-tinted : his yellow ,

10 The Dear One muBt be the Soma, found both in heaven and earth
homes of Gods and men. According to SAyana, Indra himself is meant.
Belovld One : Indra, whose vital vigour is increased by Soma-draughts.

11 T><e Covti beMd home : the Cow may be the Sun whose home i
universe which Indra will allow Surya to illumine.

12 Sacrifite : according to S4yapa, the sacrificial Soma juice which i«
aed and prepared by the fingers of the priest.



HYMN 97.]


TUB RIO FED A.


533


HYMN XCVII. Praise of Herbs.

Herbs that sprang up in time of old, three ages earlier than
the Gods, —

Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the hundred
powers and seven.

2 Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are

your growths.

Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from
disease. * 4

3 Be glad and joyful in the Plants, both blossoming and bearing

fruit,

Plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in
the race.

4 Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the

Goddesses :

Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self,
0 man.

5 The Holy Fig tree is your home, your mansion is the Parna tree :
Winners of cattle shall ye be it ye regain for me this man.

6 He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd

of men, —

Physician is that sage’s name, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease.

1 Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishment, in strength-
ening power, —

All these have I provided here, that this man may be whole again.

8 The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like cattle
from the stall, —

Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital
breath, 0 man.

$ Reliever is your mother’s name, and hence Restorers are ye
called.

1 Rivera are ye with wings that fly : keep far vshutever brings
i disease.

I® J^vsr all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold.
Plants have driven fiom the frame whatever malady was
there.


\J kree *9** earlier than the Gods : ‘for the gods before the three ages.'—
See Satapalka Brdhmajpi, VII. 2. 4. 26 ( S . B. E„ XLI. p. 339).

5 nil’ n av ' an d ffwmenl: as my fee for curing you.

utea V tree ; Aevattha, or Ficus Religiose. Parna tree : the Pal&ea,

l 1 i r °ad08a SfLOnfiniol vnacolfl nrA mnrta nf the wood of ttl686 treCfl



5S4 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X

11 When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold these herb

within my hand,

The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life.

12 He through whose frame, 0 Plants, ye creep member b

member, joint by joint, —

From him yednve away disease like somestrongarbiter of strif

13 Flv, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and kingfkhe
Fly with the wind’s impetuous speed, vanish together wit

the storm.

14 Help every one the other, lend assistance each of you to cacl
All of you be accordant, give furtherance to this speech of nnn

15 Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, and tl;

blossomless,

Urged onward by Byihaspati, release us from our pain and grie

16 Release me from the emse’s plague and woe that comes fro

Varuna ;

Free me from Yama’s fetter, fromsinand offence against the Got

17 What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew cart!

ward, thus they spake :

No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth wepervad

18 Of all the many Plants whose King is Soma, Plants of hundr

forms,

Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompt to the wish, swe
to the heart.

19 0 all ye various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o ers pro

the earth,

Urged onward by Byihaspati, combine your virtue in this l la

20 Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man

whom I dig :

And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours.

21 All Plants that hear this speech, and those that have dep?

ed far away, ,

Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon
Herb.

12 Like some strong arbiter of strife: ‘like a mighty (prince) »tati

the midst of his Lost.’— Wibon. . b j,

13 With the bine jay and kingfisher : with the speed of .

Together with the storm : according to S4yana, ‘ perish along wi ^ (

15 Urged onward : Brihaspati, says S&yana, is the deity who prew
mantras or spells and charms. . a ^ ou j

19 This Plant : the medicinal herb which I, the physician, am
make use of.



gYMI* 38 ] THE RW VEDA. a3i

22 With Soma as their Sovran Lord the Plants hold colloquy
and say : ^ J

0 King, we save from death the man whose cure a Brahman
undertakes.

«3 Most excellent of all art thou, 0 Plant : thy vassals are the trees.
Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to in-
jure us.

HYMN XCVIII. The Gods.

Comb, he thou Mitra, Varuna, or Pushan, come, 0 Brihasp&ti,
to mine oblation :

With Maruts, Vasus, or Adityas, make thou Parjanya pour
for Santanu his rain-drops.

2 The God, intelligent, the speedy envoy whom thou hast sent

hath come to me, Devapi :

Address thyself to me and turn thee hither ; within thy Ups
will I put brilliant language.

3 Within my mouth, Brihaspati, deposit speech lucid, vigorous,

and fiee from weakness,

Thereby to win for Santanu the rain-fall. The meath-nch
drop from heaven hath passed within it.

4 Let the sweet drops descend on us, 0 Indra : give us enough

to lade a thousand wagons.

Sit to thy Hotar task ; pay worship duly, and serve the God'*,
Devdpi, with oblation.

5 Knowing the Gods' good-will, Devapi, Rishi, the son of Rish-

tiaheua, sate as Hotur.

He hath brought down from heaven’s most lofty summit the
ocean of the lain, celestial waters.


‘This StikU is remarkable as representing one of two brothers, both of the
Kshatiiya caste, becoming the Pu.ohita , or farnilv pnest, and Jlotri or sacrific-
H Priest, of the other who is the ltdjA’— Wilson.

1 Devlpi addresses Brihaspati, who is identifiable with Mitt a, Varuna,
ushaa and otheig, in his special character of Purohita, or family Priest, «>f
■ eOods, and as the prototype of all human Purohitas. With Maiutt:
l e ^ ler fhou be attended by Maruts, Vasus, or, Adiryas. For Sxntanu: the
br ^her of DevApi.

)u ®r i haspati replies. Brilliant language * a * brilliant hymn.’ — Muir.

3 Devftpi speaks, praying Brihaspati, as Lord of Speech (cp X 71. 1.), to
Jhun with eloquence that he may address the G >«1 r efleetually. The
U f ' nc ^ drop : the sweet eloquence for which he has pr ued.

r * wtei drop* : of rain. This stanza is spoken by Santanu.

•> A linn : . i



53$ THE HYMHS OF [BOOK]

6 Gathered together in that highest ocean, the waters stood, fc

deities obstructed.

They hurried down set free by Arshtishena, in gaping cleft
urged onward by Devapi.

7 When as chief priest for Santanu, Devapi, chosen for Hotai

duty, prayed beseeching,

Graciously pleased Brihaspati vouchsafed him a voice tin
reached the Gods and won the waters.

8 0 Agni whom Devapi Arshtishena, the mortal man, hal

kindled in his glory,

Joying in him with all the Gods together, urge on the send
of the rain. Parjunya.

9 All ancient Rishis with their songs approached thee, eve

thee, 0 Much-invoked,* at sacrifices.

We have provided wagon-loads in thousands : come to tl
solemn rite, Lord of Red Horses.

10 The wagm-loads, the nine-and-ninety thousand, these lm

been offered un to thee, 0 Agni.

Hero, with these increase thy many bodies, and, stimulate
send us rain from heaven.

11 Give thou these ninety thousand loads, 0 Agni, to Indra,

the Bull, to be his portion.

Knowing the paths which Deities duly tiavel, set mid tl
Gods in heaven Aulana also.

12 0 Ajni, drive afar our foes, our troubles ; chase malady aw

and wick' d demons.

From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, send down on
a mighty flood of waters.


Q Ai shtishenn ’ pationytmc, son of Rishnshcna ; DevApi.

7 Chief priest <>r family or household p’iest ; PurohitA
9 Wagon-loads: an exfci acid' nary quantity of fuel for the sacrifice, as
occasion was one of the gieate*t iinpoitance

1 1 A uldnn : Sin l ami, as a descendant, of TTla, nppenrs to l>e meant. Acer
ing to some scholars, auHnhn means oMati<m or sacrificial offering,
fact of D 3 v. 1 ni being reputed as the author of this hymn, and as tie p< >1*0
and hotri of his brother *eei»s to have led the legendary writers to in
the story of his becoming a Bifthman. which (as mentioned y
Weber, Indische Studies, i p. 203) is lecorded in the * al y a ;p r \‘L iuci
Mahftbharat 1 , verses 2281 ff, where he is said tp have attained this dr ^
at a certain place of pilgrimage called Piithadaka ; where ‘■"I „
VisvSmitra also were received into the higher caste. -Muir, v. ^
270 ff. For the legend on which the hymn is said to be base > H
SAyana from the Nirukta, see Wilson’s Translation.



rrtfy 99.]


THE RIG VEDA.


537


HYMN XCIX.


ludra.


What Splendid One, Loud-voiced, Far-striding, dost thou well
knowing, urge us to exalt with praises?

What give we him ? When his might dawned, he fashioned
the Vritra-slaymg bolt, and sent us waters.


2 He sroo- to end his work with lightning flashes : wide is the
seat his Asura glory gives him.

With his Companions, not without his Brother, he quells this
Saptatha’s magic devices.


! On most auspicious path he goes to battle; he toiled to win
heaven’s light, full fain to gam it;

He seized the hundred-gated cattle’s treasure by craft, un-
checked, and slew the lustful demons.


[ Fighting for kine, the prize of war, and roaming among the
heid he biings the young streams hither,

Where, footles, joined, without a car to bear them, with jar3
i\)i .steeds, they pour their flood like butter.

i Bold, unsolicited for wealth, with Itudras he came, the Blame-
less, having left his dwelling,

Caiue, seized the food of Yamra and his consoit, and left the
couple weeping and unsheltered.

• Lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who i oared aloud,
fcix-eved and triple-headed.

Tuta, mado stronger by the might ho lent him, struck down
flie boar with shaft whose point was iron.

He raised himself on high and shot his at row against the guileful
and oppressive foeman.

•String, glorious, manliest, for us he shattered the forts of
Naims when lie slew the D.isyus.

| Hie question m the first line is a ihetorical figure, the meaning being,
t'liihd is he (Indra) whon thou (the Yaj uniiu ?) urgent us to exalt !

, ^'/i vewehim? what can we give linn in M'tuin for what he ha* done

une^ 9 )W ' 0(7n?0,M •’ the Maruts II s Brother Vi-hnn, Who S> tpbttha was
ceii-am. The word m. ans Septimus, tiie seventh, and probably some
3 “y demon is intended.

II demons ; the exact meaning of s’s la.levAii is uncertain. See

5 6 and note.

^1'ents) 1 no ^hig intelligible of the second line ‘I think of the two
iod hrt . ii j mra » w ^° rtre free f ,om fever Having obtained (the enemy’s)
1 i . jJ'iJ jg ^loud whilst stealing it.’ — Wilson. Vamra is mentioned in I.

+ dwelling: or, with Ludwig, The Lord and Giver. The

f 1 «i „Ha8ft Visvardpa. son of Tvashtar. See X. 8. 8. The boar ; Yritra.


1 1J. Ld JJL 1 ill j>0 l/r


1^00^


8 He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath found

us the way to dwell in safety.

When the Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed with
iron claws he slays the Dasyus.

9 He with his potent Friends gave up the mighty, gave Susl

up to Kutsa for affliction.

He led the lauded Kavi, he delivered Atka as prey to him i
to his heroes.

10 He, with his Gods who love mankind, the Wondrous, giv

like Varuna who works with magic,

Was known, yet young, as guardian of the seasons; and
quelled Aiaru, four-footed demon.

11 Through lands of him hath Ausija Rijisvan burst, with

Mighty's aid, the stall ^f Pipru.

When the >amt pressed the juice and shone as singer, he sei
the forts and with Ins craft subdued them.

12 S.\ swiftly Asma, for exaltation, hath the great Vamrakacc

nigh to indra.

Ho will, when supplic <ted, bring hnn blessing : he hath brouj
ail, food, strength, a happy dwelling.

HYMN C. ViBvedc

Be, like thyself, O Indra, strong for our delight : here laud
aid us, Maghavan, di inker of the juice#

Savitar with the Gods protect us : hear ye Twain. We ask
freedom and complete felicity.


8 The H av'k the fierce and swift Indra.

9 A Atci • according to SAyuna, Usanl KAvya or son of Kavi is intern
Alia: see X 49. 8

10 If is G\t<h : theMirnt* Aram 1 follow Sly arn. Cf. Satapatha -Bi
mana , I. 2 4. 17 (8. B. R XII. 57) According to Prof Ludwig’s conject-
explanation the translation would be: — ‘he measured out the year 111
divisions ’

11 A»sijtt • son of U«ij. But as this patronymic does not properly be
to Bijiflvan, the word here may perhaps mean, * vehement,’ ‘eagerly e8l, °
Pipru : one of the demons of drought.

12 Asuvu • 0 divine and mighty Indra. For exaltation: of 1)1

Vamraka: a lengtln-ued form of Vauira, the Rishi of the hymn,
clause of the standi is borrowed from X. 20. 10. .

This hymn, which is obscure and in some places unintelligible, in P
Prof. Gra^smaim in Ids Appendix Dr Muir has translated stan
O. 6*. Texts, IV. pp. 408, 409 (2nd edition).

1 Ye Twain : Indra and Savitar. Freedom * aditim. Pj^*,
translates diffciently : “ We implore Aditi for health and weal i.



THE R1GVEDA .


0MS 100 .]


539


2 Bring swift, for offering, the share that suits the time, to the

pure-drinkcr Vayu, roaring as he goes,

To him who hath approached the draught of shining milk.
We ask for freedom and complete felicity. ~

3 May Savitar the God send us full life, to cacli who sacrifices,

lives aiight and pours the juice;
r l hat we with simple hearts may wait upon the Gods. We ask
for freedom and complete felicity.

1 May [mini evermore be gracious unto us, and may King Soma
meditate our happiness,

Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity.

5 Tndra hath given the body with its song and strength : Brihas-

pati, thou art the lengthener of life.

The sacrifice is Manu, Providence, our Sire. We ask for
freedom and complete felicity.

6 Indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed: the singer in

the house is Agni, prudent Sage.

He is the sacrifice in synod, fair, most near. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity.

7 Not often have we sinned against \ou secretly, nor, Vasus,

have we openly provoked the Gods.

Notone of us, ye Gods, hath worn an alien shape. We ask
for freedom and complete felicity.

8 May Savitar remove from us our malady, and may the Moun-

tains liecp it far away from where
The pre$s-st>ne as it sheds the meath lings loudly forth. We
ask for freedom and complete felicity.

9 Ye Vasua, let the stone, the pressor, stand erect: avert all

enmities and keep them far remote.

Our guard to bo adored is Savitar this God. We ask for free-
dom and complete felicity.

10 Eat strength and fatness in the pasture, kine, who are balmed

at the reservoir and at the seat of Law.
ho let your body be our body’s medicine. We ask for freedom
an( f complete felicity.

5 ^ re ^ ^ er: drinker of pure Soma juice,
whi h • 8UC) '$ ce u Manu : we o ve our existence ami preservation to sacrifiqe,
c is to us another Manu, the fathor of Aryan men.

1 . le sacrifice in synod : ‘ jyorthy of sacrifice at the altar.’ — YVilhOii.

10 S , en 8 ^ a P e > sorcerers are accustomed to do.

Plain# ^ at tfle reservoir: anointed befoie being milked. SAvana ex-
'tani,,-. ? e ffoshlhe , ‘in the cow-stall.’ Ltt your body : may the milk, thy



540 TIIE HYMNS OP [BOOK ;

1 1 The singer fills the spirit : all mens’ love hath he. Indra taki

kindly care of those who pour the juice.

For his libation is the heavenly udder full. We ask for fre
dom and complete felicity.

12 Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, triumphant; thy hosts sa

from decay and are resistless.

The pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to possi
the best of all the cattle.

HYMN Cl. Visvedei

Wake with one mind, my friends, and kindle Agni, ye w
are many and who dwell together.

Agni and Dadhikras and Dawn the Goddess, you, Gods w
Indra, I call down to help us.

2 Make pleasant hymns, spin out your songs and praises: bi

ye a ship equipped with oars for transport.

Prepare the implements, make all things ready, and let
sacrifice, my friends, go forward.

3 Lay on the yokes, and fasten well the traces: formed is

furi ow, sow the seed within it..

Through song may we find heating fraught with plenty : i
to the ripened grain approach the sickle.

4 Wise, through desire of bliss from Gods, the skilful l

the traces fast, *

And lay the yokes on either side.

Arrange the buckets in their place: securely fasten on
straps.

We will pour forth the well that hath a copious stream,
flowing well that never fails.

* may the body of the cow offered in Baciifice be the expiation for the b<
the saci ificer, enabling him to attain sivurya. Or may the milk be tl
rective «>f the Soma ’--Wilson.

11 The. heaienltj udder .* the clouds of the firmament

12 Save from demy : thin i-s Piof. Ludwig’s inteipictotion of the o
word jaiuniptffh, winch me.iii', necoiding to SAyana, replenishing the
of thy worshippers The last line is explained differently by SAyana.—
fore) Duvasyu hastens in front of ihe \ictim cow, (leading it) with a 8
c<»rd.’ — WiLon. According to the same authority i he meauing of tie
of stanzas 1 — 11 is : — ‘ We long for the universal Aditi.’

*1 Dadhikr&s : probably a personification of the Morning Sun. *■

20 1 ; IV. 38. 2 ; 40. 5 note.

2 Ship: sacrifice, repiesented under this figure. . ,

3 In this and the follow ing stanzas sacrifice is figuratively *P°

* ploughing, sowing and reaping. See Satapatha-Br^limuna, > It*

n TC XLI. 320).



TBE RIQVEDA.


stun 101 .]


m


$ I pour the water from the well with pails prepared and goodly
straps,

Unfailing, fall, with plenteous stream.

7 Refresh the horses, win tho prize before you : equip a chariot

fraught with happy fortune.

Pour forth the well with stone wheel, wooden buckets, the
drink of heroes, with the trough for armour.

8 Prepare the cow-stall, for there drink your heroes : stitch ye

the coats of armour, wide and many.

Make iron forts, secure fiom all assailants : let not your pit-
cher leak : stay it securely.

9 Hither, for help, I turn the holy heavenly mind of you the

Holy Gods, that longs for sacrifice.

May it pour milk for us, even as a stately cow who, having
sought the pasture, yields a thousand streams.

10 Pour golden juice within the wooden vessel ; with stone-made

axes fashion ye and form it.

Embrace and compass it with tenfold giidle, and to both
chariot-poles attach the car-horse.

11 Between both poles the car-horse goes pressed closely, as in

his dwelling moves the doubly-wedded.

Lay in the wood the Sovran of the Forest, and sink the well
although yo do not dig it.

10 Indra is he, 0 men, who gives us happiness : sport, urge the
giver of delight to win us strength.

Bring quickly down, 0 priests, hither to give us aid, to drink
the Soma, Indra Son of Nishtigrt.


f The sacrifice is a chariot ; and the ritual is a race. The well : the stream
Soma juice. Stone wheel : with allusion to the pi ess-stones.

8 The cow-stall : figuratively, for the place where the Swna is pressed.
fits of armour; the filters for straining the juice. Iron forts: the
guards obtained by sacrificing.

& Milk: abundant blessing.

with allusion to the press stones. Tenfold girdle : the fingers
both hands. Both chariot- poles : the arms. The car-horse: the upper
*>*8tone ; or the pestle.

J 1 The doubly- wedded : the man who has two wives. The comparison is
fear. The Sowan of the F<rrcst : the Soma plant. Sin* the well : ‘store
1 juice.'— Wilson.

J? J follow Siyana in hid interpretation of the first line. Von Roth,
L & * n d Gra8smann explain it differently. Nishtigrt : meaning according
M th*’ W ^° 8wa H° w 8 U P her rival wife Nisbti, i. e, Diti,’ is said to be


542 TO# HYMNS OF [HOOK X


HYMN HU. India


For thee may Indra, boldly speed the car that works on eithei
side.

Favour us, Much-invoked ! in this most glorious fight ag.unsi
the raiders of our wealth.

2 Loose in the wind the woman’s robe was streaming what tiim

she won a car-load worth a thousand.

The charioteer in fight was Mudgalani : she, India’s dart, heap
ed up the prize of battle.

3 0 Indra, cast thy bolt among assailants who would slaughte

us :

The weapon both of Dasa and of Arya foe keep far away, (
Maghavan.

4 The bull in joy had drunk a lake of water. His shattering

horn encountered an opponent.

Swiftly, in vigorous strength, eager for glory, he stretched In
forefeet, fain to win and triumph.

5 They came anear the bull ; they made him thunder, made him

pour rain down ere the fight was ended. *

And MudgaU thereby won in the contest well-pastured kirn
m hundreds and in thousands.

6 In hope of victory that bull was harnessed : Kesi the drive

urged him on with shouting. *

As lie ran swiftly with the car behind him his lifted heels presi
ed close on Mudgalani.


The deified subject of the hymn is said to be, alternatively, Drughana (Mac
Club or Hammer. See stanza 9). The Rislii is Mudgala
According to the legend quoted by Sftyuna, all Mudgala’.

Helen except an old ox which he barneyed to hi. wagon and wnt in punu
of the Jobbers He threw his club or mace before him, which showed him
*ay to the thieves, and thus recovered his property.

1 For thee : 0 Mudgala. That workt on either tide : mitlMAtam : accon
ing to Siyana = aeahtljam, ‘ that has uo companion. The meaning

t *2 > tiudgaWit . Mudgala’. wife. Indra' s dart : sped swiftly on her way 1
I ndra.

3 This stanza seems to be an interpolation.

4 The bull . apparently one of the buffaloes which drew the cario

gal Ant's chief opponent Had drunk : just before the fig ? hei

Led an : meaning, perhaps, that fee ng uneaa.T he tung h^ ^

aod struck the ground with his horns. He cleft the tnou P
against the enemy.' — Wilson. . • according

* 6 In hope of victory : kaU>’dave : the meanmg ^ tlut the farth

SAyana, ‘ for the destruction of the enemy. Ludwig think



//r.v.v n/2 j


THE MOVE I) A


M 3


■ Deftly for Mm lu* stretched the car-pole forward, guided the
bull thereto and firmly yoked bun. 6

Iudra vouchsafed the lo-d of cows his favour : with mighty
steps tlie buffalo ran onward. ° 7


8 Touched by the go id the shagjry beist went nobly, bound to

the pole by the yoke's thong of leather.

Performing deeds of might for many people, he, looking on the
cows, gamed strengrh and vigour. °

9 Hire look upon this mace, this bull’s companion, now lying

midway on the field of bitt’e. J

Therewith hath Mndgala m ordered contest won for cattle fur
himself, a hundred thousand


:0 Far is the evil : who hath here beheld it* Hither they bi in*
the bull whom they are yoking. * °

To this they gi ve not either food°or water Reaching beyond
the pole it gives direct ions.

I Like one forsaken, she hath found a husband, and teemed as
if her breast were full and flowing.

With swiftly-racmg chariot m ly we conquer, and rich and
blessed be our gains in battle.

i Thou, Iudra, art the mark whereon the eyes of all life rest,
when thou,

A Bull who drivest with thy bull, wilt win the race together
with thy weakling friend.


7 Mud^ala a better fortune is now reined j F or him fur bin own buffalo.

!e: Hudgala. Car-pole • I full ow Ludwig's conjecture , but it is uncertain
f " at P'Wt °f the chariot the pvadhl wis , * the periphery of the wheel,’ aceurd-
w» the St. Petersbmg Lexicon; ‘the fiarnc of the waggon ’--Wilson.

• 8 explanation is not very ch’ar, but he oecins to think that the linchpin

'intended. Non* of these three explanations seems suitable here. Tne lord
Uoin • the bull buffalo.

mace; drxujhandm • according to Slyina, the club which MudgaU had
! mc(1 w ith him on his expedition, and which, together with the ox that drew
118 car had enabled him to recover hie cattle, /.y/717 midway after the vic-
^f 18, had thrown down tna tmve upon the field of bbtile.- Ludwig
' find tliie stanza unintelligiule l'erhup* the second line contains the
S® r ui of that part of the legend which mentions the club throw u m front of
jciariot to point out the way that the robber h id taken.
nlktAii* 01 ‘- : P'lrirrUcUv a: ‘Apparently Mudgalftnt was a pari-

ttiad** a hghtly esteemed in comparison with the favourite wife] who
lirii) 6 aine, . , ^ M i° r her sterility by driving her husband’s chariot to battle and
him buck victorious, with the booty which she had helped him to
°f 'he child 1 on that she bid not borne him ’—Ludwig.

1 , My bull : tby fierce and strong thunderbolt With thy weakling

tlWnr. ^e mortal man whom thou protected, and who is weak and



*44


TEE HYMNS OF


[ BOOK }


HYMN CIII. Indr ,

Swift, rapidly striking, like a bull who sharpens his horn
terrific, Stirling up tho people,

With eyes that close not, bellowing, Sole Hero, Indra subdue
at once a hundred armies.

2 W 7 ith him loud-roaring, ever watchful, Victor, bold, hard 1

overthrow’, Rouser ot‘ battle,

Indra the Strong, whose hand bears arrows, conquer, i
warriors, now, now vanquish in the combat.

3 He rules with those who carry shafts and quivers, Indra wl

with his band brings hosts together,

Foe conquering, strong of arm, the Soma-drinker, with mighi
bow, shooting with well-laid arrows.

4 Brihaspati, fly with thy chariot hither, slayer of demon

driving off our focmen.

Be thou protector of our cars, destroyer, victor in battl
breaker-up of armies.

5 Conspicuous by thy strength, firm, foremost fighter, might

and fierce, victorious, all-subduing,

The Son of Conquest, passing men and heroes, kino-winne
mount thy conquering car, 0 Indra.

6 Cleaver of stalls, kiuc winner, armed with^hunder, who que

an army and with might destroys it, —

Follow him, brothers! quit yourselves like heroes, and lii
this Indra show your zeal and coinage.

7 Piercing the cow-stalls with surpassing vigour, Indra, t

pitiless Hero, wild with atiiier,

Victor in fight, unshaken and resistless, — may he protect o
armies in our battles.

8 Indra guide these : Brihaspati precede them, the guerdc

and the sacrifice, and Soma ;

And let the banded Maruts march in forefront of heaver
hosts that conquer and demolish.

satisfactorily. I have followed in some stanzas tho interpretations of I
authors of Vedixche Studien, I. pp. 124 and 138. But see the later tranBlat
and exhaustive dir'cu^sion by Prof. Geldner in Part II. pp. 1—22, and Pi
Ludwig’s remarks theieon ia Ueber die neuesten Arbeiten uuf dm Qebitle\

Fgveda-forsch u n g.

The hymn is a prayer for aid and victory in battle.

8 Guide thete : be the leader of our troops. The guerdon: ddktkind:
reward of the nriesLs who oerfoim tho saciiftce offered before battle.



THE RIO VEDA.


UYXV 104 .]


545


9 Ours be the potent host of mighty Indra, King Varuna, and

Maruts, and Adityas.

Uplifted is the shout of Gods who conquer high-minded Gods
who cause the worlds to tremble.

10 Bristle thou up, 0 Maghavan, our weapons : excite the spirits

->f my warring heroes.

Urge on the strong steeds’ might, 0 Vritra-slayer, and let the
din of conquering cars go upward.

11 May Indra aid us when our flags are gathered : victorious be

the arrows of our army.

May our brave men of war prevail in battle. Ye Gods, protect
us in the shout of onset.

12 Bewildering the senses of our foemcn, seize thou their bodies

and depart, 0 Apva.

Attack them, set their hearts on fire and burn them : so let
our foes abide in utter darkness.

13 Advance, 0 heroes, win the day. M;iy India be your sure

defence.

Exceeding mighty be your arms, that none may wound or in-
jure you.

HYMN CIV. Indra.


Soma hath flowed for thee, Invoked of many ! Speed to our
sacrifice with both thy Coursers.

To thee have streamed the songs of mighty singers, imploring
Indra, drink of our libation

2 Drink of the juice which men have washed in waters, and fill

thee full, 0 Lord of Tawny Horses.

0 Indra, hearer of the laud, with Soma which stonos have
mixed for thee enhance thy rapture.

3 To make thee start, a strong true draught I offer to thee, the

Bull, 0 thou whom Bay Steeds carry.

Here take delight, 0 Indra, in our voices while thou art
hymned with power and all our spirit.

4 0 Mighty Indra, through thine aid, thy prowess, obtaining

life, zealous, and skilled in Order,

}} When our flags are gathered: ‘apparently comparable with the signis
C0, ktu of the Romans.— Ludwig.

12 4pvd ; according to S&yana, a female deity who preside* over sin:
cording to M'thtdhara, fiickn&s, or fear. Apparently Apvi waa a sort of
l J»or dysentery, likely to attack Boldiers in the field. And depart : or, p<vs

U, X^° not attack ui



,546


tu& nxuiva vr


1 * 00 * ,


Men in the house who share the Bacred banquet stand aingi n
praise that brings them store of children.

5 Through thy directions, Lord of Tawny Coursers, thine wti

art firm, splendid, and blest, the people
Obtain most liberal aid for their salvation, and praise the
Indra, through thine excellencies.

6 Lord of the Bays, come with thy two Bay Horses, come

our prayers, to drink the juice of Soma.

To thee comes sacrifice which thou acceptest : thou, skilh
in holy rites, art he who giveth.

7 Him of a thousand powers, subduing foeioen, Maghavan pra

cd with hymns and pleased with Soma, —

Even him our songs approach, resistless Indra : the adoratio:
of the singer laud him.

8 The way to bliss for Gods and man thou foundest, Inch

seven lovely floods, divine, untroubled,

Wherewith thou, rending forts, didst move the ocean, ai
nine-and-ninety flowing streams of water.

9 Thou from the curse didst free the mighty Waters, and:

their only God didst watch and guard them.

0 Indra, cherish evermore thy body with those which th(
hast won in quelling Vritra.

10 Heroic power and noble praise is Indra: ^rea, the song w<

ships him invoked of nouny.

Vritra he quelled, and g we men room and freedom : Saki
victorious, hath conquered armies.

11 Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best Hero in tl

fight where spoil is gathered,

The Strong, who listens, who gives aid in battles, who sla
the Vritras, wins and gathers riches.

HYMN CV. I*


When, Vasu, wilt thou love the laud? Now let the chani
bring the stream.

The juice is ready to ferment. __

8 Didst move the ocean : didst bring the sea of rain from heaven.

9 Those: waters. W+rag

11 This is the concluding verse of several hymns of the Visvamwr

B °l°Va«it: Indra. Let the channel bring the stream .* to the Somajj
which has stood long enough for fermentation —Ludwig. The P™*®
is very obscure, and Sayana gives a totally different explanation*
will he, (like) a dam, obstruct and let loose the long* protracted h
the sake of wind-driven (lain). Wilson.



THE RIOVEDA.


547.


jlYMN 105.]

2 He whose two Bay Steeds harnessed well, swerving, pursue

the Bird’s tail-plumes,

With flowing manes, like heaven and earth, he is the Lord
with power to give.

3 Bereft of skill is Indra, if, like some out-wearied man he fears
The sinner, when the Mighty hath prepared himself for victory.

4 Indra with these drives round, until he meets with one to wor-

ship him :

Indra is Master of the pair who snort and swerve upon their way.

5 Borne onward by the long-maned Steeds who stretch them-

selves as ’twere for food,

The God who wears the he^m defends them with his jaws.

6 The Mighty sang with Lofty Ones : the Hero fashioned with

his strength,

Like skilful Matarisvan with his power and might,

7 The bolt, vhich pierced at once the vitals of the Dasyu easy

to be slain,

With jaw uninjured like the wondrous firmament.

8 Grird off our 9ins : with song will we conquer the men who

sing no hymns :

Not easily art thou pleased with prayerless sacrifice.

9 When threefold flame burns high for thee, to rest on poles of

sacrifice,

Thou with the living joyest in the self-bright Ship.

2 The Bird : the allusion seems to be to a race between the horses of Indra
and those of Sfirya or the Sun who is the Bird of the heavens.— -Ludwig. Like
heaven and earth : the meaning of rajf is unknown. SAyana explains the word
by ‘heaven and earth,’ or ' sun and moon ; ’ but these are mere guesses. Prof.
Ludwig thinks that two animals of some kind (‘ rajitiere,’ ‘ raj i -beasts’) are
meant. In YI . 26 6, Raji is said by Sftyana to be the name of a maiden.

3 The timers : Vritra, the chief of sinners, according to Sftyana. Or pffpaje
may be a verb, and the stanza maj be rendered : — ‘ Without them Indra holds
bin still, like a man weary and alarmed, Vf hen he hath made himself ready
jbr noble deed.’ — See Pischel, Vedische Studien } I. p. 198.

4 Is Master : literally ‘ hero.’ The meaning apparently is that when Indra
meets with a worshipper he stops his horses and attends the sacrifice.

5 Who wears the helm: fiprinivdn ; 1 possessing mighty jaws.’— Wilson. With
his jaws : with his roar, the thunder.

$ Lofty Ones: the Maruta. , . , . A , * ....

7 The stanza is obscure. I follow Prof Ludwig’s interpretation of Atrf-
^ hirim/in , which mean, according to Sftyana, * gold-bearded ’ and ‘ lord of
horses.’ *

J J l^nd off: remove them by whetting. * Comminute,’— Wilson.

~~ Threefold fhrpo naored fires. The living: the sacnficer.



548


TEE HYMNS OP


[BOOR i


1 0 Thy glory waa the speckled cup, thy glory was the flawless scoon
Wherewith thou pourest into thy receptacle.

1 1 As hundreds, 0 Immortal God, have sung to thee, so hat!

Sumitra, yea, Durmitra praised thee here,

What time thou holpest Kutsa’s son, when Dasyus fell, ye;
holpest Kutsa’s darling when the Dasyus died.


o


3


HYMN CYI.


Asvin


This very thing ye Twain hold as your object : ye weave you
songs as skilful men weave garments.

That ye may come united have I waked you : ye spread on
food like days of lovely weather.

Like two plough-bulls ye move along in traces, and seek lik
eager guests your bidder’s banquet.

Ye are like glorious envoys mid the people : like bulls, ai
proach the place where ye are watered. * 1

Like the two pinions of a bird, connected, like two choice an
mals, ye have sought our worship.

Bright as the fire the votary hath kindled, ye sacrifice i
many a spot as roamers.


4 Ye are our kinsmen, like two sons, two fathers, strong, i
your splendour and like kings for conquest ;

Like rays for our enjoyment, Lords to feed us, ye, like quii
hearers, have obeyed our calling. *

9 Like giants, ye will find firm ground to stand on in dept!
like feet for one who fords a shallow.

Like ears ye will attend to him who orders : ye Two enj
our wondrous work as sharers.


Like toiling bees ye bring to us your honey, as bees into t
hide that opens downward.


10 Cup : upastchant: a ladle or cup used for sprinkling. Thy receptac
drinking-yessel, or perhaps Agni, that is, the fire, may be intended.

11 Svmitra and Durmitra are alternative names of the llishi of the hyr
Kutsa's son: Durmitra himself, according to Sllyana.

The metres in some places are Home what irregular, the meanings of bo
words are uncertain, and the hymn generally is obscure. Prof. Grassim
has placed the hymn in his Appendix.

4 Like rays for our enjoyment : Mike brooms to sweep with,’ according
Prof. Ludwig.

I do not attempt the hopeless task of translating stansas 5, 6, 7, 8
which nearly every word is a difficult riddle. See Appendix.

10 The hide that opens downward : the honey*comb is compared to a
akin inverted. I cannot translate intelligibly the second line ‘like 1
labourers you are dripping with perspiratiou, like a tired cow eating a*
herbage, you attend (the sacrifice!/ — Wil«nn



THE RJQVEDA.


549


BYMS 107.]

11 May we increase the laud and gain us vigour: come to our
80 ng, ye whom one chariot carries.

Filled be our kine with ripened meath like "glory : Bhutansa
hath fulfilled the Asvins’ longing.


HYMN CVII. Dakshiul


Thbsb men’s great bounty hath been manifested, and the
whole world of life set free from darkness.

Great light hath come, vouchsafed ns by the Fathers: ap-
parent is the spacious path of Guerdon.

2 High up in heaven abide the Guerdon-givers : they who give

steeds dwell with the Sun for ever.

They who give gold are blest with life eternal : they who give
robes prolong their lives, 0 Soma.

3 Not from the niggards— for they give not freely— comes Meed

at sacrifice, Gods’ satisfaction :

Yea, many men with hands stretched out with Guerdon
present their gifts because they dread dishonour.

4 These who observe mankind regard oblation as streamy Vayu

and light-finding Arka.

They satisfy and give their gifts in synod, and pour in streams
the seven-mothered Guerdon.

b He who brings Guerdon comes as first invited : chief of the
hamlet conics the Guerdon-hearer.

Him I account the ruler of the people who was the first to
introduce the Guerdon.

6 They call him llishi, Brahman, Sima-chanter, reciter of the
laud, leader of worship.

The brightly-shining God’s three forms he knoweth who first
bestowed the sacrificial Guerdon.


The hymn eulogitee Dakshint, the largess, guerdon, or ''^^'“ZTere'
'1 by the inatitutors of the sacrifices to the priests who p ,, xj j
Mies. The yajamina, who give this guerdon liberally are alternatively

he deified subjects of the hymu .

1 Tutu men : the wealthy inatitutors of the sacrifice. Fatter • : who are
the embodiments and guardiaus of the light.

4 These toko obterve mankind . the Maghavans or weaH^Jio ^

ftot consider the coet of sacrifice, but regard it as an Wind-God

to show their liberality? and to gain the avourofVJyuthe ms

*ho brings counties, showers of rain, and Arka or the Sun ww g.

SaiMwrtW; originating in, and accompanying, seven ««“•

*«e;or. t- *« ’ 1



560 THE HYMNS OP [BOOR l

7 Guerdon bestows the horse, bestows the bullock, Guerdoi

bestows, moreover, gold that glisters.

Guerdon gives food which is our life and spirit. He who i
wise takes Guerdon for his armour.

8 The liberal die not, never are they ruined : the liberal sufFe

neither harm nor trouble.

The light of heaven, the universe about us, — all this dot]
sacrificial Guerdon give them.

9 First have the liberal gained a fragrant dwelling, and go

themselves a bride in fair apparel.

The liberal have obtained their draught of liquor, and cod
quered those who, unprovoked, assailed them.

10 They deck the fleet steed for the bounteous giver: the mai<

adorns herself and waits to meet him.

His home is like a lake with lotus-blossoms, like the Gods
palaces adorned and splendid.

11 Steeds good at draught convey the liberal giver, and light! 1

rolling moves the car of Guerdon.

Assist, ye Gods, tho liberal man in battles : the liberal give
conquers foes in combat.

HYMN CVIII. SaramA. Pani,

What wish of Sarama hath brought her#hither ? The patl
leads far away to distant places.

What charge hast thou for us ? Where turns thy journey ? Ho\
hast thou made thy way o’er Rasa’s waters.

2 I come appointed messenger of Indra, seeking your ampl
stores of wealth, 0 Panis.

This hath preserved me from the fear of crossing : thus hav
I made my way o’er RasA’s waters.

9 Draught of liquor: antahptyam stirdydh: ‘deep potations of wine.’— Wilsor

10 The maid adorns hei sdf ; ‘ he obtains a brilliant damsel for his portioi
— Muir.

11 Car of Guerdon: ct I. 123. 1.

The hymn ig a colloquy between SaramA, the messenger of the Gods or c
Indra (see I. 62. 3, note ; 72. 8 ; III. 31. 6; V. 45. 8), and the Panis or enviou
demons who have carried off the cows or rays of light which Indra wiBhes t
recover. SaramA and the Panis are alternately subject and Riahi.

1 The Papis address SaramA who has found her way to the rocky strong
hold i» whioh the stolen cows are imprisoned. The Panis speak the uneve
stanzas* with the exception of stanza 11, and SaramA the even. “
this place a mythical stream that flows round the atmosphere and the ear
See V. 41. 16. In I. 112. 12, and V. 63. 9, Ras& appear® to be a river of tn
Paniftb. nrobablv an affluent of the Indus. Sea Zimmer. Altinduehes l*



THE R1QVEDA.


551


$YMX 108 .]


3 What is that Indra like, what is his aspect whose envoy, Sarama,
from afar thou comest 1

Let him approach, and we will show him friendship : he shall
be made the herdsman of our cattle.


4 I know him safe from harm : but he can punish who sent me

hither from afar as envoy.

Him rivers flowing with deep waters hide not. Low will ye lie,
0 Panis, slain by Indra.

5 These are the kine which, Sarama, thou seekest, flying, 0 Blest

One, to the ends of heaven.

Who will loose these for thee without a battle 1 Yen, and sliai p-
pointed are our warlike weapons,
ti Even if your wicked bodies, 0 ye Panis, were arrow-proof, your
words are weak for wounding ;

And were the path to you as yet unmastered, Brihaspati in
neither case will spare you.

7 Paved with the rock is this our treasure-chamber ; filled full

of precious things, of kine, and horses.

These Panis who are watchful keepers guard it. In vain hast
thou approached this lonely station.

8 Ilishis will come inspirited with Soma, Angirases unwearied,

and Navagvas.

This stall of cattle will they part among them : then will the
Panis wish these words unspoken.

9 Even thus, 0 Sarama, hast thou come hither, forced by celest-

ial might to make the journey.

Turn thee not back, for thou shalt be our sister : 0 Blest One,
we will give thee of the cattle.

10 Brotherhood, sisterhood, I know not either: the dread Angi-

rases and Indra know them.

They seemed to long for kine when I departed. Hence, into
distance, be ye gone, 0 Panis.

H Hence, far away, ye Panis! Let the cattle lowing come forth
as holy Law commandeth,

Kine which Brihaspati, and Soma, Rishis, sages, and pressing-
stones have found when hidden.


6 Weak for wounding : 1 not in the place of armies,’— Wilson. Brihaspati .-
48 M*’ 8 companion and ally in battle. .

8 Navaga; members of a mythological family, forming a division the
Angiraaea or closely connected with them. With Am words unspoken ; more
7 all L reject them from th«ir mouths ; retract their threats,
p f^ n . 0tc ; allied by such ties of kinship.


SAvana assiens it



552 Tllh HYMNS OF [BOOK

HYMN CIX. Vwedev

These first, the boundless Sea, and Matarisvan, fierce-glowi
Fire, the Strong, the Bliss-bestower,

And heavenly Floods, first-born hy holy Order, exclaiir
against the outrage on a Brahman.

2 King Soma first of all, without reluctance, made restitution

the Brahman’s consort.

Mitra and Varuna were the inviters : Agni as Hotar took 1
hand and led her.

3 The man, her pledge, must by her hand be taken when tl]

have cried, She is a Brahman’s consort
She stayed not for a herald to conduct her : thus is the kii
dom of a ruler guarded.

4 Thus spake of her those Gods of old, Seven Rishis who si

thorn down to their austere devotion :

Dire is a Brahman’s wife led home by others : in the Bupre
est heaven she plants confusion.

5 The Brahmach&ri goes engaged in duty: he is a member

the Gods’ own body.

Through him Brihaspati obtained his consort, as the Gc
gained the ladle brought by Soma. ^

6 So then the Gods restored her, so men gave the woman ba

again.

The Kings who kept their promises restored the Brahmai
wedded wife.

7 Having restored the Brahman’s wife, and freed them, withGui

aid, from sin,

, They shared the fulness of the earth, and won themseb
extended sway.

The hymn haa been translated by th rt author* of Sltbwzig Lieder den It
i-da. See also Mme. ZiSnalde It.igozin, Vcdic India , p. 256.

1 Outrage on a Brahman : ‘ BrahmA’s sin,’ according to SAyana.

5 Rrah mac h 4 rt : a religious student. For his glorification, see Hymn*
the Atharva veda. XI. 5 ' The ladle : juhvAm : Prof Ludwig takes it to b<
} roper name : — * Juhd. 0 Gods, conducted home by Sotna.’

The wife of a Brahman appears to have been taken to his home by a
triya, and then restored A legend quoted by SAyana says that Junu or
t*ie wife of Brihaspati who is identifiod with Brahmft, had been deser
her hush'nd. The Gods then consulted together rs to the means of expi
his sin. and restored her to him. See Wilson's Translation. ^

fru- ktrmn ta an almrut uni n tallied hie fragment 4Ud of OODQpatatively



553


\ ff ygN 110.] THE E 10 VEDA.

HYMN CX. Aprta.

| Thou in the house of man this day enkindled worshippest

1 GodB as God, 0 Jatavedas.

Observant, bright as Mitra, bring them hither : thou art a
sapient and foreknowing envoy.

2 Tanflnap&t, fair-tongued, with sweet meath balming the paths

and ways of Order, make them pleasant.

Convey our sacrifice to heaven, exalting with holy thoughts
our hymns of praise and worship.

3 Invoked, deserving prayer and adoration, 0 Agni, come ac-

cordant with the Vasus.

Thou art, 0 Youthful Lord, the Gods’ Invoker, so, best of
Sacrifices, bring them quickly.

4 By rule the Sacred Grass is scattered eastward, a robe to

clothe this earth when dawns are breaking.

Widely it spreads around and far-extended, fair for the Gods
and bringing peace and freedom.

5 Let the expansive Doors be widely opened, like wives who

deck their beauty for their husbands.

Lofty, celestial, all-impelling Portals, admit the Gods and
give them easy entrance.

\ Pouring sweet dews let holy Night and Morning, each close
to each, be seated at their station, —

Lofty, celestial Dames with gold to deck them, assuming all
their fair and radiant beauty.

i Come the two first celestial sweet-voiced Hotars, arranging
sacrifice for man to worship,

As singers who inspire us in assemblies, showing the eastward
light with their direction.

R Let Bharati come quickly to our worship, and I]a showing like
a human being.

•So let Saras vati and both her fellows, deft Goddesses, on this
fair grass bo seated.

9 Hotar more skilled in sacrifice, bring hither with speed to-day
God Tvashtar, thou who knowest,

Even hun who formed these two, the Earth and Heaven, the
Parents, with their forms, and every creature.

^®® preceding hymns addressed to the Bame deities and deifiod objects .

1 8 1 142, 188 ; II. 8 ; III. 4 ; V. 5 ; VII. 2 ; and IX. 5.

, 1 J 4tavtda$ aud Tan&nnnAt are names of A*ni The Door t of the sacrificial



554


THE HYMNS OP


[BOOK .


10 Send to our offerings which thyself thou balmest the Cot
panies of Gods in ordered season. Ui

Agni, Vanaspati the Immolator sweeten our offered gift WI *
meath and butter. * 11


11 Agni, as soon as he was born, made ready the sacrifice an
was the Gods’ preceder. ’

May the Gods eat our offering consecrated according to thi
true Priest’s voice and guidance.


HYMN CXI. Imlt .

Bring forth your sacred song ye prudent singers, even as at
the thoughts of human beings.

Let us draw Indra with true deeds anear us : he loves ou
songs, the Hero, and is potent.

2 The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship : to tli

kme came the Bull, the Heifer’s Offspring.

With mighty bellowing hath he arisen, and hath pervadci
even the spacious regions.

3 Indra knows, verily, how to hear our singing, for he, victori

ous, made a path for Sfirya.

Ho made the Cow, and he became the Sovran of Heaven
primeval, matchless, and unshaken. *

4 Praised by Angirases, Indra demolished with might the work

of the great watery monster.

Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his trutl
supported earth’s foundation.

5 The counterpart of heaven and earth is Indra : he knowetl

all libations, slayeth Sushna.

The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended, and, best o
pillars, stayed it with a pillar.

6 The Vritra-slayer with his bolt felled Vritra: the magic of

the godless, waxen mighty,

Here hast thou, Bold Assailant, boldly conquered. Yea, thei
thine arms, 0 Maghvan, were potent.


2 The hint: who are milked for sacrificial purposes. The Bull : Indra. Th
Heifer' t Offering : cp. IV. 18. 10 : ‘ The Heifer bath brought forth the strong
the mighty, the unconquerable Bull, the furious Indra ’ The Heifer is Aditi.

3 He made the Cow : the words mfruton gdh, the cow, ‘ the female oi

the bull.’ — Huir; * Des Stieres Weib,’ — Grasamann, — are difficult. * r0
Ludwig suggests that the earth may be intended.



THE RIGVEDA.


555


HYMN 112 .]

] When the Dawns come attendant upon S&rya their rays dis-
cover wealth of divers colours.

The Star of heaven is seen as ’twere approaching : none
knoweth aught of it as it departeth.

8 Far have they gone, the first of all these waters, the waters
that flowed forth when Indra sent them.

Where is their spring, and where is their foundation 1 Where
now, ye Waters, is your inmost centre ]

Q Thou didst free rivers swallowed by the Dragon ; and rapidly
they set themselves in motion,

Those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom.
Excited now to speed they run unresting.

10 Yearning together they have sped to Smdhu : the Fort-des-
troyer, praised, of old, hath loved them.

Indra, may thy terrestrial treasures reach us, and our full
songs of joy approach thy dwelling.

HYMN CXII Indra.

Drink of the juice, 0 Indra, at thy pleasure, for thy first
draught is early morn’s libation.

Rejoice, that thou mayst slay our foes, 0 Hero, and we with
lauds will tell thy mighty exploits.

2 Thou hast a car more swift than thought, 0 Indra ; thereon

come hither, come to drink the Soma.

Let thy Bay Steeds, thy Stallions, hasten hither, with whom
thou comest nigh and art delighted.

3 Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splend-

our of the Sun adorn it.

0 Indra, turn thee hitherward invited by us thy friends ; be
seated and be joyful.

4 0 thou whose grandeur in thy festive transports not even these

two great worlds have comprehended.

Come, Indra, with thy dear Bay Horses harnessed, come to our
dwelling and the food thou lovest.

0 Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma whereof
thou, Indra, ever drinking,

Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, which prompts
the mighty flow of thine abundance.

Star of heaven; the Sun. Departeth: on its nightly journey from
to e&at



556


THE HYMNS OF


{BOOK


6 Found from of old is this thy cup, 0 Indra : 0 Satakrat

drink therefrom the Soma.

Filled is the beaker with the moath that gladdens, the beak
which all Deities delight in.

7 From many a side with proffered entertainment the folk a

calling thee, 0 Mighty Indra.

These our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meatl
drink thereof and find them pleasant.

8 I will declare thy deeds of old, 0 Indra, the mighty acts whic

thou hast first accomplished.

In genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that tl
Brahman easily found the cattle.

9 Lord of the hosts, amid our bands be seated : they call thi

greatest Sage among the sages.

Nothing is done, even far away, without thee : great, wondrou
Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee.

10 Aim of our eyes be thou, for we implore thee, 0 Maghavai
Friend of friends and Lord of treasures.

Fight, Warrior strong in truth, fight thou the battle: given
our share of undivided riches.

HYMN CXIII. Indr


The Heavens and the Earth accordant with all Gods encou
aged graciously that vigorous might of his.

When he came showing forth his majesty and power, he (Iran
of Sonia juice and waxed exceeding strong.

2 This majesty of his Vishnu extols and lauds, making the stal

that gives the meath flow forth with might.

When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him had
ten Vritra he deserved the choice of Gods.

3 When, bearing warlike weapons, fain to win thee praise, t o

mettest Vritra, yea, the Dragon, for the fight* ,

Then all the Maruts who were gathered with thee tne
tolled, 0 Mighty One, thy poweiful majesty.

4 Soon as ho sprang to life he forced asunder hosts : forwar

Hero looked to manly deed and war. ,

He cleft the rock, he let concurrent streams flow ton ■ .
with his skilful art stablished the heavens wi

5 Indra hath evermore possessed surpassing P^ er * e

far from each other, heaven and earth apart. . y avU
He hurled impetuous down his iron thunderbolt, J j

fla’s and Mitra’s worshipper.

8 The Brahman : according to SAvana. BrahmA who is identic



THE RIO VEDA .


BYW 1H *J


557


« Th « n t0 the powers of Indra, to his wrath, his the fierce

Stormer, loud of voice, they came with speed •

What time the Potent One rent Vritra with his Strength, who
held the waters back, whom darkness compassed round.

1 Even in the first of those heroic acts which they who strove
together came with might to execute,

Deep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won bv victor*
the right of being first invoked. ' ^


8 Then all the Gods extolled, with eloquence inspired by draughts

of Soma juice, thy deeds of manly might. & 7 8 9

As Agni eats the dry food with his teeth, he ate Vritra the

Dragon, maimed by Imira’s deadly dart.

9 Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, made

with singers, with the skilful and the eloquent.

Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Churnuri, lists to Dabhlti
for his faithful spirit’s sake.


10 Give riches manifold with noble horses, to be remembered
while my songs address thee.

May we by easy paths pass all our troubles : find us this day
a ford wide and exteusive.


HYMN CXIV. Visvedeva,

Two perfect springs of heat pervade the Threefold, and come
for their delight is Matarisvan.

Craving the milk of heaven the Gods are present : well do
they know the praise-song and the Saman.

2 The priests heard far away, as they are ordered, serve the
three Nirfitis, for well they know them.

Sages have traced the cause that first produced them, dwelling
in distant and mysterious chambers.

6 They came : it is uncertain * aether the Gods, or the Maruts, or thr waters
the understood subject.

7 Deep darkness fell upon the slain: ‘ Vritra being slain, the thick darkness
wm destroyed.’— Wilson.

8 Ut ate: Indra utterly destroyed him. Sftyarm explains in a more matter*
<>Mact way : people devoured Vritra, that is, the food produced by the waters

o n Wer ? 00 l° n £ er obstructed by him.

9 Dhuni and Chumuri were demons and enemies of Indra’s friend Dabhtti.

S# ? Ml., Index.

, 1 Springs of heat : gharmA : Agni and Sftrya. The Threefold : the universe,
8 y« firmament, and earth. tyldtari$van : VAyu, according to SAyana. ‘ Thu*
5 }, Vo here the well-known triad, Agni, Vftyu, Stirya.’— Ludwig.

Three Nirpitis : according to S&yapa, heaven, mid-air, and earth, or the
aeities that control them. Prof. Ludwig thinks that the Dawns are meant,



553


THE HYMNS OF


[book


3 The Youthful One, well-shaped, with four locks braided bm

ened with oil, puts on the ordinances. *

Two Birds of mighty power are seated near her, there wl
the Deities receive their portion.

4 One of these Birds hath passed into the sea of air : thence

looks round and views this universal world.

With simple heart I have beheld him from anear : his Mol
kisses him and he returns her kiss.


5 Him with fair wings though only One in nature, wise sin 1
shape, with songs, in many figures.

While they at sacrifices fix the metres, they measure
twelve chalices of Soma.

*

fi While they arrange the four and six-and-thirty, and (
order, up to twelve, the measures,

Having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful sages send* the
forward with the Rich and Saman.


7 The Chariot’s majesties are fourteen others : seven sages ]
it onward with their voices.

Who will declare to us the ford Apnana, the path whei
they drink first draughts of Soma?

S The fifteen lauds are in a thousand places: that is as vas
heaven and earth in measure. 4

A thousand spots contain the mighty tnousand. Yak spi
eth forth as far as Prayer extendeth.


3 The Youthful One • the altar, represented as a woman. With four
braided quadrangular, according to Sftyana. Puts on the ordinandi
dressed or arranged in the manner prescribed for sacrifice. Two B
probably A"ni and Soma. According to Sftyana, the husband and his
or the Yftjamfina and the Brahman.

4 One : Agni as the Sun. His mother • perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig
Dawn.

*> Thirty-six fjrahas , chalices, or saucers for Soma juioe or other libs
are to be used at the Agnishtoma, and four in addition at the Atyagniel
sacrifice. The meysures • the proper metres for particular rites or pw
the service. The, Car : the sacrifice. Rich : the holy verse that is re
Siman : the psalm that is sung or chanted.

7 Majesties : the abstract used for the concrete, the mighty ones, pro
the priests. The ford Apndna : the passage leading to the place of sac
They : the Gods.

8 That : meaning the fifteen lauds regarded as a whole. Tht *
thousand : the meaning is uncertain : ‘ the thousand great (functions!
a thousand places.’ — Wilson. This mefcns, according to S&yanib tna
function of the body has its appropriate object. Dr. Muir transJ

‘ t’u.m a thousand times fifteen ukthas A thousand times

a— Y 71 an



THE RIGVEDA.


ok/v


(0 115 .]

i What sage hath learned the metres’ application? Who hath
gained VAk, the spirit’s aim and object?

Which ministering priest is called eighth Hero ? Who then
hath tracked the two Bay Steeds of Indra?

I Yoked to his chariot-pole there stood the Coursers : they only
travel round earth’s farthest limits. J J

These, when their driver in his home is settled, receive the
allotted meed of their exertion.

HYMN CXV. Agni.

Verily wondrous is the tender Youngling’s growth who never
draweth nigh to drink his Mothers’ milk.

As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his
great errand, suddenly grew strong.

! Then Agni was his name, most active to bestow, gathering up
the trees with his consuming tooth ; b

Skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, im-
petuous as a bull that snort eth in the mead.

1 Pr.iise him, your God who, bird-like, rests upon a tree, scatter-
ing drops of juice and pouring forth his flood,

Speaking aloud with flame as with his lips a priest, and broad-
ening his paths like one of high command.

1 Thou Everlasting, whom, far-striding fain to burn, the winds,
uninterrupted, never overcome,

They have approached, as warriors eager for the fight, heroic
r rita, guiding him to gain his wish.

') This Agni is the best of Kanvas, Kanvas’ Friend, Conqueror
of the foe whether afar or near.

May Agni guard the singers, guard the princes well : may
Agni grant to us our princes’ gracious help.

® thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself the lord of
Jatavedas, mig htiest of all,

^ Eighth Hero : Agni is meant, as presiding over the seven ritvijas or
^mistering priests. * "

. 1 Mother* are the two fire-sticks, the lower of which, in which the spark
produced, being the who hath no udder.

Fnta : according to S&yana, him who is stationed in the three fire-
eceptaclea, that is, Agni

o K p vas: a well-known family with which Upastuta was connected,
f ' , ln 8 to S&yana, worshippers in general are meant : — ‘the most earnest
the friend of those who praise him ’—Wilson.
tj^rya (* who hast fair ancestors.’ — Wilson) seems to be an epithet of
To h AS Pressed by himself. S&yana applies it to Agni. The con-
* hin 0Ur \ the stapes is difficult, and the translation of the first half, which
rtJj P? h f u dwig, is somewhat conjectural. Thirtty land : Agni by his



560 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK

Who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land, most powerf
prepared to aid us in the wilds. .

7 Thus noble Agni with princes and mortal men is lauded

cellent for conquering strength with chiefs,

Men who are well-disposod as friends and true to Law, e\
as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind.

8 0 Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upastuta’s m

potent voico reveres thee.

Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, and lengt
out the days of our existence.

9 Thus, Agni, have the sons of Vrishtihavya, the hiatus,

Upastutas invoked thee.

Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. V
Vashat ! have they come, with hands uplifted, with t
uplifted hands and cries of Glory !

HYMN CXVI. h

Drink Soma juice for mighty power and vigour, drink, Strc
est One, that thou mayst smito down Vritru.

Drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches : drink thou
fill of meath and pour it down, 0 fndra.

2 Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what !

choosest of the flowing Soma.

Giver of weal, be joyful in thy spirit, tAd turn thee hit
ward to bless and prosper.

3 Let heavenly Soma gladden thee, 0 Indra, let that efft

among mankind delight thee.

Rejoice in that whereby thougavest freedom, and that wher
thou conquerest thy foemen.

4 Let Indra come, impetuous, doubly mighty, to the po’

juice, the Bull, with two Bay Coursers.

With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, gl ut 1
more thy bolt, 0 Foe-destroyer.

5 Dash down, outflaming their sharp flaming weapons, the 6ti

holds of the men urged on by demons.

I give thee, Mighty One, great strength and conquest
meet thy foes and rend them in the battle.

Prof. Grassmann observes : * Das Lied enthalt, namentlich in Vers
manches Dunkle, godasa bier die Auslegung zwuifelhaft bleibt.

1 Pour it down : Shower down (blessings).’— Wilson. oat e

3 Qnvest freedom : by slaying Vritra : or, riches, according translate
i. Pne.rUntrouer : a rittahft „• according to the 8t. Petersburg/times a t

- * - *** ’«* y 71 and



TUB niOVBDA.


561


J-W-V 117.]


Extend afar the votary’s fame and glory, as the firm archer's
strength drives off the foeman.

Ranged on our side, grown strong in might that conquers,
never defeated, still increase thy b*»dy.

To thee have we presented this oblation : accept it, Sovran
Ruler, free from anger.

Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened : eat, Indra,
drink of that which stirs to meet thee.

Eat, Indra, these oblations which approach thee: be pleased
with food made ready and with Soma.

With entertainment we receive thee friendly : effectual he
the sacrificer’s wishes.

I send sweet speech to Indra and to Agni : with hymns I
speed it like a boat through waters.

Even thus, the Gods seem moving lound about me, the foun-
tains and bestowers of our riches.

HYMN CXVll. Liberality.

The Gods have not ordained hunger to be our death : even to
the well-fed man comes death in vaned shape.

The riches of the liberal never waste away, while he who will
not give finds none to comfort him.

The man with food in store who, when the needy comes in
miserable case begging for bread t.o eat,

Hardens his heart against him— even when of old he did hint
sorvico — finds not one to comfort him.


Bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him
in want of food and feeble.

Success attends him in the shout of battle. lie makes a friend
of him in future troubles.


No friend is he who to his friend and comrade who comes im-
ploring food, will offer nothing.

Let him depart — no home is that to rest in — , and rather seek
a stranger to support him.

Let the rich satisfy the poor implorer, and bend his eye upon
a longer pathway.

the firm archet't strength: the construction is obscure ‘ (stretch
% strength like strong bows against our enemies.’ — Wilson.


eu,0 8 ?i5e8 Liberality or Bounty in the shape of gifts of wealth

k our death : men must not attempt to justify their refusal of food
S“ u ]‘^y by saying that the Gods send hunger as & punishment for sm ^



Niches come now to one, now to another, and like the wheels
of cars are ever rolling.

The foolish man wins food with fruitless labour: that food-
1 speak the truth — shall be his ruin.

He feeds no trusty friend, no man to love him. All guilt 1
he who eats with no partaker.

The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us, an
with its feet cuts through the path it follows.

Better the speaking than the silent Brahman : the liberal frien
outvalues him who gives not.

He with one foot hath far outran the biped, and the two-foot e
catches the threc-footed.

Four-footed creatures come when bipeds call them, and xtan
aud look where five are met together.

The hands are both alike : their Inbour differs. The yield <
lister mileh-kine is unequal

T v ins even differ in their strength and vigour : two, even km:
men, differ in their bounty.

HYMN CXVIII. Agi

Aunt, refulgent among men thou slayest the devouring fitm

Bright Ruler in thine own abode.

> Thou springest up when woi shipped well : the drops of butt
aie thy joy

When ladles are brought near to thee.

:$ Honoured with gifts he shines afar, Agni adorable with son

Tike dripping ladle balms his face.


6 Shull be hit rvLn: with reference to stanza I.

7 Active exertion is necessary for success. The speakinff Brahman '
liest who duly discharges the task of recitation for which he is eug g
A Brahman expounding (the Veda).’— Wilson.

8 The victory is not always theirs who appear t© be more richly

ban others. He vrith one foot ; tkapdd . the Sun appears to be m«
Uo where called Aja-Ekapftd. See VI 50. 1 4. The biped is man. Jhe tn
bated is the old man who walks with a staff’ and is overtaken by one
|.»es not require such assistance Four-footed creatures : dogs. _ Fm: *&
nen together ; the dogs being at first uncertain whether their ““Tl
ktn0D cr them or not. Pahktth, sets of five, is apparently used with rei
o the one, two, three, and four in the preceding competed words,
xpl.iin nahktfh by ‘steps’ or ‘traces.’ ^

I have adopted the explanation given by the authors of the

9^ All men should be liberal ; but we must not expect all to be equ
The hymn has been translated' by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Texts , V. no. 431



THE RIO VEDA.


fflfN 119.]


563


4 Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, is balmed

with oil, ~ '

Refulgent in his wealth of light.

5 Praised by our hymns thou kindlestthee, Oblation-bearer for

the Gods : 5

As such do mortals call on thee.

6 To that Immortal Agni pay worship with oil, ye mortal men —

Lord of the house, whom none deceive. ’

7 0 Agni, burn the IUkshasas with thine unconquerable flame ■
Shine guardian of Eternal Law.

* So, Agni, with thy glowing face hum fierce against the female
fiends,

Shining among Urukshayas.

(I Urukshayas have kindled thee, Oblation-bearer, thee, with
hymns.

Best Worshipper among mankind.


HYMN CX1X. Indra.

I HIS, even this was my resolve, to win a cow, to win a steed :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

'I Like violent gusts of wind the draughts thai I have drunk
have lifted me :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

3 The draughts I drank have borne me ap, as fleet-foot horses
draw a car :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

* hymn hath reached me, lik- a cow who lows to meet her
darling calf :

Have I not drunk of Soma /trice?

a wright bends a chaKot-seat so round my heart I bend the
hymn :

Wave l not drunk of *i>oma juice ?

^ Not as a mote within the eye count the Five Tribes of men
with me :

^Have I not dr«nk of Soma juice ?

8 Urukshay as • members of the Riahi’s family.

i°&8 *- 8 ^ ra himself in£he form of Lava. He describes his sensa-

ota r drinking Soma juice. But Bee Bergaigne, 1. 151, who considers it
\ m 6 .iterance of an exhilarated mortal.

°ov): to strengthen and inspirit himself for battle, and so to
6 S&van h° r 8es for his worshippers.

explains diffi»tAnHv •— .^THa fivo pastes have nnt eluded the plane®



THE HYMNS OF


564


fBOOI X


U The heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to one
half of me :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ? !

8 I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens aud all thi^

spacious earth :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

9 Aha ! this spacious earth will I deposit either here or there :
Have I not drunk of Soma juice ?

10 In one short moment will I smite the earth in fury here or

there :

Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

11 One of my flanks is in the sky ; I let the other trail below :
Havo I not drunk of Soma juice ?

12 I, greatest of the Mighty Ones, am lifted to the firmament:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

13 1 seek the worshipper’s abode ; oblation-bearer to the Gods :

Have I not drunk ot Soma juice? j

HYMN CXX. hidr&i


In all tht worlds That was the Best and Highest whence sprang
the Migf.ty Gods, of splendid valour.

As soon as bu»*n he overcomes his foemen, he in whom all wlu
lend him ail are joyful. ^

2 Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, he as a fix

strikes fear into Fae Dasa,

Eager to wm the breaking and the breathless. All sang th]
praise at banquet anu oblation.

3 All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these

twice or thrice, are thine u^istunts.


11 Cp. III. 32. 11. ,

13 This stanza is difficult. The word <7>i‘Ad is unintelligible, ana grmani
as Prof. Ludwig suggests, should, perhaps, bo *ead instead. Oblation-bearer
Indra, in his excitement, fancies that he is Agn\ p r of. Grasstnann, who wit
Dr. Muir, considers grih6 to mean servant or minuter, places the stanea *
his Appendix as a fragment fiom a hymu to Agni.

The hymn has been tianslited by Dr. Muir. 0 8 T^xts, V. p. 9L by
authors of the Siebeuzig Lieder, aud by Prof. Peterson, Hymns from the mp
(Bombay Sanskrit Series).

1 Th.it: meaning, according to SAyana, Brahma the original cause of

**2 %*gertoiam: Prof. Ludwig makes sasni an infinitive.
the correct reading. See Grasnmann, Wtirterbuch sum Rxgwta*

4m and the breathless : the animate and the inanimate world. -- ^ u ioei

8 Mental vigour: knitum: ‘ adoration.’ — Wilson. Tmu: ^

m. — . .Mitt MfaMinna nAfk&nu thn three daily UoW



THE RIGVE DA.


565


f 0 120 *1


Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness : win
quickly with our meaththat meath in battle.

I Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, at every ban-
quet are the sages joyful.

\yph mightier power, Bold God, extend thy firmness -. let not
malignant Yatudhanas harm thee.
i proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold
great wealth the prize of combat.

I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen
with my prayer thy vital vigour.

Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, most energetic,
Aptya of the Aptyns :

He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many
who were deemed his equals.

Tuou in that hous'e which thy protection guardeth bestowest
wealth, the higher and the lower.

Thou stablishest the two much-wandering Mothers, and bring-
est many deeds to their completion.

j Brihaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats these holy
prayers, this strength to India,
lie rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and all the
do »rs of light hath he thrown open.

Thus hath Brihaddiva, tVie great Atharvan, spoken to Indra
as himself in person.

The spotless Sisters, they who are his Mothers, with power
exalt him and impel him onward.


meter than the sweet : thine own celestial Soma. SAyana explains the
mza differently ‘To thee all (worshippers) offer adoration, whether those
ipitiators be two or three. Combine that which is sweeter than the sweet

tb sweetness, unite that honey with honey.’— Wilson. The

sording to SAyana. are the sacrifi *3r and his wife and child, and the second
If of the stanza contaius a reference to the propagation of children.

I % a : the name of a class of deities, of which Trite Aptya is the chief .
tat accessible of the accessible.’-Wilson. The first line is without a verb .
wise him, may be understood. D&nus : a class of demons.

1 Tkehigherandtkelower: heavenly and earthly. Mothers: Heaven and Earth.
foremost of lujkt-mnners : according to SAyana, ‘chief of Xujja*
m of heaven, or servant of Aditya, the Sun, Indra. /

Region of light.

Atharvan ; ‘the peat prieet’-Orassmaun. At Mmdftte
“kSe* himself with the Ood whom he worships. The epotUu ^

“ « U. Mother, : according to Sftyans, tbs sisternvers which abide mth.
**r earth. Von Roth adopts the reading of A£am-veda V.U™»
of the mdtarttWtfr of Hw text Heaven and Bsrth »PP««



566 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X,

HYMN CXXI. Ka

In the beginning rose Hiranyagarbha, born Only Lord of all
created beings.

He fixed and holdeth up this earth and heaven. What God
shall we adore with our oblation ?


2 Giver of vital breath, of power and vigour, he whose command
ments all the Gods acknowledge :

The Lord of death, whose ‘shade is life immortal. What Goo
shall we adore with our oblation ?


3 Who by his grandeur hath become Sole Ruler of all the

moving world that breathes and slumbers ;

He who is Lord of men and Lord of cattle. What God sliul
we adore with our oblation ?

4 His, through his might, are these snow-covered mountains

and men call sea and Rasa his possession :

His arms are these, his are these heavenly regions. What Got
shall we adore with our oblation 1

5 By him the heavens are strong and earth is stedfast, by hi ii

light’s realm and sky-vault are supported :

By him the regions in mid-air wore measured. What Gmi
shall we adore with our oblation ?


C To him, supported by his help, two arrffioa embattled loot
while trembling in their spirit, , „

When over them the risen Sun is shining. What God shall w


adore with our oblation ?

7 What time the mighty waters came, containing the univcisi
germ, producing Agni, _ w , .

Thence sprang the Gods' one spirit into being,
shall we adore with our oblation 1


Ka, kah, (quis) meaning Who ? that is. the Unknown God, . tion 0 f tl
aa a name to Praj&pau, and to other Gods, from a forced l P ‘
interrogative pronoun which occurs in the refrain of each v ,. ^

1 Hiranyagarbha: literally ‘the gold-germ ; * source o 8° er . c
the Sun-god ‘ as the great power of the universe, from wb.ch all J* ^ „
and existences, divine aud earthly, are derived, a c ^“ ce P t u e crea tor
nearest approach to the later mystical conception ofBrahm , ^ ot her

the world.’— Wallis. What Qod : kdsmai derfya: cui de°? Acoorai g ^ ^
* Worship we Ka the God with our oblation.’ According ( ’

ing is ‘ What other God than Praj&pati shall we worship ^

P 3 Breathes and slumbers : that is of Gods aud men. Of men an
literally, 4 of quadruped and biped.’ rf v 108 . !•

4 Sea: air. Ilasd: the mythical river of the firmament. * iu t

7 Thence : from the coming of the waters. One spirit : * . >



567


jl%Y 122.] THE RIQVEDl.

8 He in his might surveyed the floods containing productive
force and generating Worship.

He is the God of gods, and none beside him. What God shall
we adore with our oblat-iou ?

g Ne’er may he harm us who is earth’s Begetter, nor he whose
laws are sure, the heavens’ Creator,

He who brought forth the great and lucid waters. What God
shall we adore with our oblation?

[0 Prajapati! thou only comprehendest all these created things,
and none beside thee.

Grant us our hearts’ desire when we invoke thee : may we
have store of riches in possession.

HYMN CXXIL AwiI .

I praisb the God of wondrous might like Indra, the lovely
pleasant Guest whom all must welcome.

May Agni, Priest and Master of the household, give hero
strength and all-sustaining riches.

2 0 Agni, graciously accept this song of mine, thou jmssi n-

wise who knowest every oidmance.

Enwrapped in holy oil further the course of prayer: the Gods
bestow according to thy holy law.

3 Immortal, wandering round the seven stations, give, a liberal

Giver, to the pious worshipper,

Wealth, Agni, with brave sons and ready for his use : welcome
the man who comes with fuel unto thee.

4 The seven who bring oblations worship thee, the Strong, the

first, the Great Chief Priest, Ensign of sacrifice,

The oil-anointed Bull, Agni who hears, who sends as God full
hero strength to him who freely gives.

8 Generating Worship: ‘giving biith to sacrifice.’— Wilson.

10 Prajdpati : Lord of life, creatures or creation. Savitav the Sun God
18 so called in 1Y. 53. 2, and Soma Pav.imdna iu IX. 5. 9. Prajdpati w^s&fter-
wa ^ the name of a separate God, the bestower of progeny and caitle. and
iometiuaes invoked as the Creator

Tta hymn has been translated by Dr. Muir, 0 S . Texts , IV., pp. 16, 17 ;
p rof. Max Muller, A . 8. Lit., p. 569, and Vedic Hymn*, Part I. (Sacred
°f the East. XXXII) p. 1.- by Mr. Wallis, Comolagy of the Riywl«,
L v ’ *\ v Prof- Peterson, Hymns from theRigivda . and by Dr. L Scherm-n,
1 QMphischt Hymnen Am Rig -and Atharva- vedu-Sankitd, p. 24.

ini Indra : vdsnm na : like the Vasu, or chief Vasu. ‘ Like the sun —
o^ n ' Riches: or viands.

i rr» €H Motions: regions of the universe, according to Sftyana.
fcAlAe seven •



BC8 THE HYMNS OF [EOOK }

5 First, messenger art thou, meet for election : drink thou th
iil! invited to the Amiit.

The Maiuta in the vot&rv’s bou86 adorned thoe; ^ ith laud
the Bhrigus gave thee light and glory.

t'> M .Iking the teeming Cow for all-sustaining food, 0 Wise One
for the worship-loving worshipper,

Toon, Agm, dropping oil, thrice lighting works of Law, show
est thy wisdom circling home and sacrifice.

7 They who at flushing of this dawn appointed thee their mee

senger. these men have paid thee reverence.

(h'ds strengthened thee for work that must be glorified, Agm
while they made butter pure for sacrifice.

8 Arrangers in our synods, Agni, while they sang, Vasishtha’i

sons have called thee down, the Potent One.

Maintain the growth of wealth with men who sacrifice. Y(
Guds, preserve us. with your biosing.? eveimore.

HYMN CXXIII. Ven»

Sbk, Vena, born in light, hath driven hither, on chariot of the
air, the Calve* of Pri ni.

Singers with hymns caress him as an infant there where th(
waters and the sunlight mingle.

2 Vena draws up his wave from out the oisan : mist-born, the

fair one’s hack is made apparent.

Brightly he shone aloft on Order’s summit: the hosts Bang
glory to their common birthplace.

3 Full many, lowing to their joint-possession, dwelling togethei

stood the Darling’s Mothers.

Ascending to the lofty height of Order, the bands of singer*
sip the tueiU of Amrit.

7 Uadi : here meaning piiesta 1 Verily there are two kinds of god9j for,
indeed, the gods are the gods, and the BrAlimmia who have studied and teach
holy lore are the human gods’ {8 itapatha- llrdhmana, II. 2 2. 6 ; S. B. K,

XII. 802). *

Vena, ‘the loving Sun ’ of I. 83. 5, Kdvta or 4 the beloved,' is said by the
Scholiast in this place to be rrvidkyazthiino devaK ‘the God of the middle

region.* He is, apparently, the Sun as he rises in the mist and dew of tue

morning.

1 Prifni, the Speckled Cow, is the variegated cloud, and her Calve* are the

masses of mist which the Sun dispel*. ,

2 Ocean : the sea of air. On Order's summit : 1 on the summit of J
course.* — Wallis. Order , here and in the following stanaa, is Kosmos,
ordered or law- regulated universe. Common birthplace: the sky.

3 Joint-possession : the child which they have produced in coaMM®*
Darling's Mothers : the Dawns, or the Waters, or the songs.



THE RIOVEDA.


569


flWV 123 .]

4 Knowing his form, the sa^es yearned to'meet him : they have

come nigh to hear the wild Bull’s bellow.

Performing sacrifice they reached the river : for the Gandbarva
found the immortal waters.

5 The Apsaraa, the Lady, sweetly smiling, supports her Lover

in aublimest heaven.

Id his Friend’s dwelling as a Friend he wanders: he, Vena,
rests him on his golden pinion.

6 They gaze on thee with longing in their spirit, as on a strong-

winged bird that mounteth sky-ward ;

On thee with winizs of gold, Vanina’s envoy, the Bird that
hasteneth to the home of Yama.

T Erect, to heaven hath the Gandlmrva mounted, pointing at
us Ids many-coloured weapons ;

Clad in sweet raiment beautiful to look on, for he, as light,
produceth forms that please us.

8 When as a spark he cometh near the ocean, still looking with
a vulture’s eye to heaven,

His lustre, joying in its own bright splendour, maketh dear
glories in the lowest region.


4 The wild Hull's bellow: the sound mile by the dropping Soma juice,

% Gandhantu : Vena, the rising Sun.

5 The Apsaras: the celesti.il nymph who symbolizes the waters of heaven.

'fc Lover: Vena, the Gandhaiva, Surya ‘Ourhjmn illustrates the two
enses in which the sun is bioueht into connection with t.lio waters , nrs , na
minting with his beams the watery masses of the skv, and secondly m tne
wiinilatiou of hn light to the waters, a* soma ot ambrosia, whence the deptns
I light become the aerial ocean. This association is stereotyped in e un *° n
i the Gandh irvus and the Apsarases.’— Wallis. H* 3 Friend s dwe mg. e
fusion of his father Heaven.

8 Varuna'8 envoy : the setting sun Cf VII 87 5 Yama . Cf. X. 1
7 dad in sweet raiment : surabhi, sweet, may. as Mr Wallis conjecture, be
phy on the word gundhtiy occurring in the nome Gandhaiva.

J‘l 8 merely recapitulate, as Ludwig observes, the deeds o y\i . » ,

h e light of living men and then as the illuminator of the regions below
»rtli

The hymn is one of the obsourest in the whole Higveda. M a htdhara
» by ckandra, the Moon. Wilton : • Thegeneral pu po>t of tb.
I* 1 " "tales it [Venal equivalent to the tlmnd>r-doud Von Both, J™®”
follows, identifies Vena Gandhsrv* with the Rainbow. According
nd-wig Vena is the Moon and the Gandbarva is the Sun. • g, «
aad explained the hymn in hiB Cosmoiooi/o/ tAe • [P' dwj _.j

£ . d «*rent interpretation see Hiliebreodt, V. if ., I « “ X

fe “n lhere, ' n *<* «««“« *«•■> *• * > P - 109f) ' 8

11 88— an



570


TUB HYMNS OP


[kook


HYMN CXXIV. Agui, Kt

Comb to this sacrifice of ours, 0 Agni, threefold, with sevc
threads and five divisions.

Be our oblation-bearer and preceder: thou hast lain loi
enough in during darkness,

2 I come a God foreseeing from the godless to immortality \

secret pathways,

While I, ungracious one, desert the gracious, leave mine ow
friends and seek the kin of strangers.

3 I, looking to the guest of other lineage, have founded many

rule of Law and Order.

I bid farewell to the Great God, the Father, aud, for neglec
obtain my share of worship.

4 I tarried many a year within this altar : I leave the Fathe:

for my choice is Indra.

Away pass Agni, Varuna, and Soma. Rule ever changes : tli
I come to favour.

5 These Asuras have lost their powers of magic. But thou, '

Varuna, if thou dost love me,

0 King, discerning truth and right from falsehood, come an
be Lord and Ruler of my kingdom.

6 Here is the light of heaven, here all is ^ovely ; here there

radiance, here is air’s wide region.

Let us two slaughter Vritia. Forth, 0 Soma ! Thou art obi.
tiou : we therewith will serve thee.

1 Indra speaks. Threefold : performed with three daily libations ; or con
prising the pdkayajfla , the haviryajila, and the somayajfla, the simple dome
tic oblation, the oblation of claiified butter, etc., und the offering of Son
juice. With seven threads : conducted by the seven chief priests. With in
divisions: with five oblations, or regulated by the YajamAna and four of ti
chief priests, according to SAyana. The exact meaning is uncertain

2 A^ni speaks. He has left Varuna, originally the Supieme Deity, ww

power was waning, aud associated hitnself with Indra who has superset f 1
that God. From the godless : fiorn Varuna who iu the decline of his sup
macy has neglected Agni and sacrifice. SAyana interprets the first m® ^
ferently : — ‘ From being no divinity I issue a divinity from the cave * , 0]
solicitation (of the gods), aud being manifest I attain immortality. -
Seek the kin of strangers : come to be born and domesticated m a ne\ I
with Indra. , y rtrljn ,

3 Of other lineage : of the other branch ; terrestrial fire. Father. ■

4 Within this altar: or, close to this Varuna. This: the supr

Indra. Onme uwd I

5 Indra speaks. These Asuras: Agni, Varuna, and Soma. ~

Lord: Indra offers Varuna spiritual and moral sovereignty as <> p

for Ins loss of general supremacy. Q VriW

8 Let us two: the exhortation is addressed by Indra to ?° ‘f virus!
. xr «nemv in tb« ab^ew


Jin a kiuvh;da\


571


1 The Sage hath fixed his form by wiadoh in the heavens • Va-
runa with no violence let the waters (low
Like women-folk, the floods that bring rosperity have caught
his hue and colour as they gleamed nd shone.

3 These wait upon his loftiest power am vigour: he dwells in
these who triumph in their Godhead]

And they, like people who elect their Viler, have in abhor-
rence turned away from Vritra.

) They call him Swan, the abhorrent flood’ Companion, moving
in friendship with celestial Waters. I
The poets in their thought have looked In Indra swiftly ap-
proaching when Anushtup calls him.

HYMN CXXY. Vtik.

I travel with the Rudras and the Vasul with the Adityas
and All-Gods I wander. 1

I hold aloft both Varuna and Mitra, Indrl and Agni, and the
Pair of Asvins.

I I cherisji and sustain high-swelling Soma, ;nd Tvashtar 1 sup-
port, Pushan, and Bliaga. ' *

I load with wealth the zealous sacrificer vfyo pours the juice
aud offers his oblationi?

3 I am the Queen, the gatherer-up of treasureSjmost thoughtful, -
first of those who merit worship.*

Thus Gods have stablished me in many pbces with many
homes to enter aud abide in.

1 Through mo alone all eat the food that feeds them, — each
man who sees, breathes, hears the word outspoken.

They know it not, but yet they dwell beside me. Hear, one
and all, the truth as I declare it.


\ The Sage: perhaps Soma, in answer to Indra's appeal ; Mitra, according
a S&yana.

5 %!*. power : the supreme might of Indra.

Inis stanza appears to have been added on account of the occurrence of

6 btbkatsftndm (abhorrentium) which seems to connect it with the

[receding stanza where btbhatsilvah (abhorrentes) occurs. Swan: kahsa •
J[ lrya Sun-God is sometimes so called. Cf. IV. 40. 5 Swiftly approach-
9 when Anushtup calls him : ‘or the ceaselessly moving Indra, who is worthy
^• Prai9ed ’ with ^4 nushtabh. ' — Wilson. Or, ‘dancing the Anushtup,

mg to Prof. Max Mtiller’s interpretation. .

VmL,' S? T lgne haa translated and explained this hymn. See La Rclxjum
)et2’v Lp P- U5 -l<9- See also Book IV. 42, for hints of the rivalry
" eim v »nma and Indra.


/alto 3 P«f<* personified, the Word, the first creation and representative
ihfiinJ’i RDd t ^ e means of communication between men aud Gods. neie



572


THE HYMNS OP


[BOOK X

5 I, verily, myself announce and utter the word that Gods ant

men alike shall welcome.

1 make the man Itove exceeding mighty, make him a sage, s
Rishi, and' a Brhman.

6 I bend the bow foi Uudra that his arrow may strike and slaj

the hater of deotion.

I rouse and order cattle for the people, and I have penetrate
Earth and Hvaeti.

7 On the world’s simmit I bring forth the Father: my home if

in the waters, h the ocean.

Thence I extend j’er all existing creatures, and touch ever
yonder heavenwith toy forehead.

8 I breathe a strong breath like the wind and tempest, the whili

I hold togethc all existence.

Beyond this wid« earth and beyond the heavens I have becomi
so mighty in ny grandeur.

HYMN CXXVI. Visvedevai

No peril, no severe di^tres^, ye Gods, affects the mortal man

Whom Aryamm and Mitra lead, and Varu^a, of one accord
beyond his fees.

2 This very tiling do we desire, Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman,

Whereby ye giard the mortal man from s<yje distress, and lea

him safe beyond his foes. .

3 These are, ea«h one, our present helps, Varuna, Mitra, Arya

man,

Best leaders, best deliverers to lead us on and bear us sai
beyond our foes. _____

7 The Father ■ Heaven or Sky, produced from VAk identified with Para
tnA&niA, the supreme and univeisal Soul. ..

The hymn has been translated by Colebrooke, Miscellaneous Essays, 1* «
by the authois of the Sitbenziy Lieder ; by Prof. Peterson, Hymn* from
Rigvtda (Bombay Sxnskiit Senes); and by Prof. Whitney, Notes to to
bi ooke’s Essay on the Vedas, p. 113. # . ,

Mr. Wallis observes: ‘Vac, ‘Speech* is celebrated alone in two wnoi
hymns, X 71. and X. 125., of which the former shows that the pnW
application of the name was to the voice of the hymn, the means o w
munication between heaven and earth at the sacrifice. The t

illustrates tli« constant assimilati-m of the varied phenomena of na
the eaciifice; all that has a voice in nature, the thunder of tbesto ^
reawaking of life at dawn, with songs of rejoicing over the new ri L BWk ti
world, are embodied in this Vac in the same way as it is said of n
that he embraces all things that are. It is thus another expression
idea of the unity of the world, which we have seen crowning t j y C
speculations of all the more abstract hymna of the collection, u ^
the Rigveda, p. 85. See also Weber, V4o und \6yo C, MU At SI «««•>

U.. Mull... TU* DkUrwnkv. 144—4*7.



THE MOVED A.


573


0ME 127.]

4 Ye compass round and guard each mai, Varuna, Mitra, Arya-

mau :

In your dear keeping may we be, ye vho are excellent as
guides beyond our foes.

5 iUityas are beyond all foes,— Varuna, Vitra, Aryaman :

Strong Rudra with the Marut host, inda, Agni let us call for

weal beyond our foes.

6 These lead us safely over all, Varuna, Mtra, Aryaman,

These who are Kings of living men, ov-r all troubles far away

beyond our foes.

1 May they give bliss to aid us well, Vauna, Mitra, Aryaman :
May the Adityas, when we pray, grait us wide shelter and

defence beyond our foes.

8 As in this place, 0 Holy Ones, ye Vasts freed even the Gatiri
when her feet were fettered,

So free us now from trouble and affliclou : and let our life be
lengthened still, 0 Agni.

HYMN CXXVII. Night.

With all her eyes the Goddess Night looks forth approaching
many a spot :

She hath put all her glories oo.

2 Immortal* she hat.lt filled the waste the Goddess hath filled
j height and depth :

She conquers darkness with her ligb.

3 The Goddess as she comes hath set -he Dawn her Sister in her

place :

' And then the darkness vanishes.

1 So favour us this night, 0 thou wh*se pathways we have visited
As birds their uest upon the tree
5 The villagers have sought their homes, and all that walks
and all that flies,

Even the falcons fain for prey.

® ^ ee P off the she- wolf and the waif ; 0 Ormya, keep the thief
away :

Easy be thou for us to pass.


the wild-cow, the* female of the Gaura or Bos Gaunit. The
^ *aid to have delivered her from Visvavneu the Gaadharva,

) the expanded (firmament).’— Wttaen.

Al/r n«4 t - -


574 THE HYMNS OP [BOOK

7 Clearly, bath shecone nigh to me who decks the dark wii

richest hues :

0 Morning, caned it like debts.

8 These have I brought to thee like kine. 0 Night, thou Chi

of Heaven, nec^t
Tins laud as for aconqueror.

HYMN CXXVIII. Visvedev;

Let me win glory, Agni, in our battles : enkindling thee, ni;
we support our belies.

May the four regiois bend and bow before me : with thee f
guardian may \v» win in combat.

2 May all the Gods b on my side in battle, the Maruts led 1

ludra, Vishnu, .gni.

Mine be the middh air’s extended region, and may the wii
blow favouring tlese my wishes.

3 May the Gods gram me riches; may the blessing and imoc

tion of the Gods issist me.

h oremost in fight bethe divine Invokers : may we, unwounde
have brave heroesround us.

4 For me let them preent all mine oblatioi^, and let my mine

intention be accurrphshed. #

May I be guiltless of ,he least transgression : and, all ye Goc
do ye combine to Hess us.

5 Ye six divine Expansei, grant us freedom: here, all ye Goc

acquit yourselves lilie heroes.

Let us not lose our chidren or our bodies : let us not bene;
the foe, King Soma !

6 Baffling the wrath of oir opponents, Agni, guard us as o

infallible Protector.

Let these thy foes turn hack and seek their bouses, and 1
their thought who w T atdi at home be ruined.


8 These: verses.

1 The four regions : the King who is praying for assistance is about to u
Her take a Digvijaya , the subjugation of all neighbouring countries in
directions.

8 Divine Invokers : the Hotar-priests of the Gods. SAyana explains A
Terentiy : — ‘ may my invokers of the gods be the first to propitiate them,
Wilson.

5 Six divine Expanset : the four cardinal points and upper and lower spacer
or, according to S4yan». Heaven. Earth TW NtVht w»t*r 1 Plnnta^



THE MOVED A.


675


y1%V 129]

7 Lord of the world, Creator of creators : the saviour God who

overcomes the foeman.

May Gods, Brihaspati, both Asvins shelter from ill this sacri-
fice and sacrificer.

8 Foodful, and much-invoked, at this our calling may the great

Bull vouchsafe us wide protection.

Lord of Bay Coursers, India, bless our children : harm us not,
give us not as prey to others.

9 Let those who are our foemen stay afar from us : with Indra

and with Agm we will drive them off.

Vagus, Adityas, Rudras have exalted me, made me far-reach-
ing, mighty, thinker, sovran lord.

HYMN CXXIX. Creation.


Then was not non-existent nor existent : there was no realm
ot air, no sky beyond it.

What covered in, and where? and what gave shelter ? Was
water there, unfathomed depth of water ?

2 Death was not, then, nor was there aught immortal : no sign
vas there, the days and night’s divider.

That One Thing, breathless, breathed by its own nature : apart
frtm it was nothing whatsoever.

•j Darkness there was : at first concealed in darkness this All
was indiscriminated chaos.

All that existed then was void and formless : by the great
powet of Warmth was born that Unit.

1 Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire, the primal
seed and germ of Spirit.

Sages who searched with their heart’s thought discovered the
existent’s kinship in tiie non-existent.


- After Creator of creators Sftyana supplies tarn devamstaumi, ‘that Cod l
pAisr ’ Indra or S.ivitar i» intended.

Th* great Buff : Indra, , , . „

1 Then : in the beginning. Non-existent : dsat : that does not yet actually
but which has in itself the latent potentiality of existence There whs
unapparent condition,’ says an Indian Commentator, which, from
: he absence ot distinctness, was not an ‘ entity,’ while from its being the
of the world’s product" on, it was not a ‘ non entity,
i “ T,l "t One Thing : the single primordial substance, the unit out of winch
F lle umverue «*“» j-— i -j r S and 46.


i


s was developed. Op. I. 164* 6 and 46.

L? .- pmf. Wilson, following Siyana, translates tdpamh by ‘austen-

| "leaning the cntempl.tion of the things that were to be cr e at e d.

" U Snence l, Religion*, pp. 207ff, has shown how mAw
^ ^ *>y the Arjraj as the prineiple explaining movement, life, and tliougl t.



576


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK'S


5 Transversely was their severing line extended: what wa

above it then, and what below it ?

There were begetters, there were mighty forces, free action hen
and energy up yonder.

6 Who verily knows and who can here declare it, whence it wai

born and whence comes this creation ?

The Gods are later than this world’s production. Whoknowi
then whence it first came into being ?

7 He, the first origin of this creation, whether be formed it all o:

did not form it,

Whose eye controls this world in highest heaven, he verify
knows it, or perhaps he knows not.

HYMN CXXX. Creation


The sacrifice drawn out with threads on every side, stretchec
by a hundred sacred ministers and one, —

This do these Fathers weave who hitherward are come: the)
sit beside the warp and cry, Weave forth, weave back.

2 The Man extends it and the Man unbinds it : even to this

vault of heaven hath he out^pun it.

These pegs are fastened to the seat of worship : they mad<
the Sama-hym ns their weaving shuttles.

3 What were the rule, the order and the fcodeH What wen

the wooden fender and the butter?

What were the hymn, the cn ant, the recitation, when to tm
God all Deities paid worship ? .


5 Line: a line drawn by the ancient lthhia to make a ^vwion
upper world and the lower, and to bring duality out p at hera

theFathera may be meant. Free action: the hi v ^ 8 . An io
The stanza is obscure, and its connexion with stanza 4 is not
tervening stanza may, perhaps, have been lost „ . Rssavs, I P! 1

The hymn has b *eu translated by Cal ® b ™ oke ’ ore 0 f the Siebcn

33, 34 ; by Dr. Muir, 0. 5. Texts , V 355, 357 ; by the autho » of ^ ^
zig Litder, and by Mr. Wallis Cosmology of the w ^ fcney in th-

of the many Commentators on this hymn are Professor gjhennsn

Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. xi. p- c ' x ’ * .337 *__Walln

Philoaophische Hyninen au* der K.g-und i Atharva-vedaSamh tft, i 559 _. 563 .

See Prof. Max Miilier, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 1>P-

AS the subject of the hymn is creation typified and
terious primeval aacrihce (cp. X. 90), Prajftpati the Ct

U> be th? deity. The R-shi is Yajtta (Simrifice) Prajftpati h crtfttioI

1 The sacrifice: su.gdtmako yajhah ; the s* cnfice whw i * >” umber Fatkeri
— SAyana. A hundred and one : meaning an indenmtely larg
SAyana explains pitdryfr here Uy glMjtjroMtor*, the<h£* p j ^ tif **<*!

I The Man : the first Man or Male ; Purusha, Adipurusha, rny t-
ing toSAyana. ^ ^


-*UV. mA round the •acrific»LSi



TEE RIG VEDA,


577


4 Closely was G&yatr! conjoined with Agni, and closely Savitar

combined with Ushnih.

Brilliant with Ukthas, Soma joined Anushtup: Brihaspatis
voice by Bvihati was aided.

5 Vid] adhered to Varuna and Mitra : here Trisbtup day by day

was Indra’a portion.

Jagati entered all the Gods together : so by this knowledge men
were raised to Rishjs.


$ So by this knowledge men were raised to Rishis, when ancient
sacrifice sprang up, our Fathers.

With the nund’s eye I think that I behold them who first per-
formed this saciificial worship.


7 They who were versed in ritual and metre, in hymns and rules,
were the Seven Godlike Rishis

Viewing the path of those of old, the sages have taken up the
reins like chariot-drivers.

HYMN CXXXr. Indr*.

Drive all our enemies away, 0 lndra, the western, mighty
Conqueror, and the eastern.

Hero, drive otF our northern foes and southern, that we in thy
wide shelter may be joyful.

2 What then ? As men whose fields are full of barley reap the

ripe corn removing it in order,

So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who went not
to prepare the grass for worship.

3 Men come not with oue horse at sacred seasons ; thus they

obtain no honour in assemblies.

Sage 3 desiring herds of kine and horses strengthen the mighty
lndra for his friendship.


UlriUiant with Ukthas: 'gladdening (us) through hymns (ukt/un).'--
Muir. Brikaspati’t voice: because tije duty was to speak as Priest. Accor
hg to the Aitareya.Dr4hm.ana, Ul. 13, Pr.ij*pati ‘allotted to the deities
their (different) parts in the sacrifice and metres ’ r ,

' 5 flay by day: was Indra’s portion of the mid-day (oblation). Wilson.

* I behold them: or, according to Prof. Ludwig’s interpretation these
uh the eyos of mind, I think, beheld them ’ ~

1 ‘Tun Sevan Hishis here ere not the Angirases, but Bharadvija, Kasyapo,
Atri, Vasiehtha, VUvSmitra, and Jamadagni. Jte knowleclge ..
Ritual is derived frJm the divine priests ; the sages or^shiahavefollowl
in sacrificing, and moderu priests are only imitators of those wlm

]Swt^Z..aas sa>V*«S'’'

Nty p rof< Whitney, Notes to Golebrooke’s bmy on the Vedas , p. U4.


D


JJ ^ horse : it seem* to have been considered * nd .

stable for a wealthy man to come to the sacrifice m a one-horse car ,
meaning../ u



578


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK l

4 Ye, Asvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts of grata

ful Soma juice,

Aud aided India in his work with Namuchi of Asura birth

5 As parents aid a son, both Asvins, Indra, aided thee with thei

wondrous powers and wisdom.

When tliou, with might, hadst drunk the draught that glad
dens, Sarasvati, 0 Maghavan, refreshed thee.

6 Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance : may he, possessing

all, be kind and gracious.

May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and may we bi
the lords of hero vigour.

7 May we enjoy his favour, his the Holy : may we enjoy hn

blesshd loving-kmdness.

May this rich Indra, as our good Protector, drive off and keej
ijfar all those who hate us.

HYMN CXXXII. Mitra. Varur

May Dyaus the Lord of lauded wealth, and Earth stand l
the man who offers sacrifice,

And may the Asvins, both the Gods, strengthen the worshi
per with bliss.

t As such we honour you, Mitra and Vayjna, with hasty zea
most blest, you who sustain the folk.

So may we, through your frienship for the worshipper, subdu
the fiends.

3 And when we seek to win your love and friendship, we wh

have precious wealth in our possession,

Or when the worshipper augments his riches* let not his ties
sures be shut up.

4 That other, Asura ! too was bom of Heaven : thou art, 0 Vs

runa, the King of all men.

The chariot’s Lord was well content, forbearing to anger Deatl
by sin so great.


4 Hillebrandt, 7 if., 1. 146, and Eggeling, Sacred' Bookt of the Eiut.n
135, interpret differently. The myth referred to in the following s twl “]
not been preserved. See Weber, father den Rdjasdya, pp. 95, 10-1.

4 That other: Mitra. The chariot' n Lord: literally, ‘ h8a< ’ °,P!'A cl “pS
The meaning is uncertain. I find the rest of the hymn unintelUf? 1 • ^
I.udwig conjectures that two brothers, Nriraedhas and Sumedhas, t
tended for sovereignty, and that the adherents of one had wished to p:
other brother to death, but had not carried out their purpose* .

- * — tit* firmin', and the brothers ere reconciled.



THE RIG VEDA.


m


ffJfiV 1*3 1

5 This sin bath Sakapfita here committed. Heroes who fled to
° their dear friend he slayeth,

When the Steed bringeth down your grace and favour in
bodies dear and worshipful

(j Your Mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water even as
earth is purified from heaven.

Show love and kindness here below : wash her in rays of
heavenly light.

1 Ye Twain have seated you as Lords of Wealth, as one who
mounts a car to him who sits upon the pole, upon the wood.
These our disheartenod tribes Nrimedhas saved from woe,
Sumedhas saved from woe.

HYMN CXXXIII. Indra.

Sing strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in the fore-
most place.

Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war,
be thou our great encourager. Let the weak bowstrings
break upon the bows of feeble enemies.

2 Thou didst destroy the Dragon : thou sentest the rivers down

to earth.

Foeless, 0 Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendest well each
choicest thing. Therefore we draw us close to thee. Let
the weak bowstrings, etc.

3 Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy’s designs.

Thy bolt thou castest at the foe, 0 Indra, who would smite us
dead : thy liberal bounty gives us wealth,
jt The robber people round about, Indra, who watch and aim at
' us,—

Trample them down beneath thy foot ; a conquering scatterer
art thou.

Whoso assails us, Indra, be the man a stranger or akin,
king down, thyself, his strength although it be as vast as are
the heavens.

Close to thy friendship do we cliug, 0 Indra, and depend on
thee. *

Lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of holy Law.

I Tke Steed : the Sun.— Ludwig. Tour grace : Mitra’s and Yanina’s.

Mother Aditi: p^rbapa the mother of the two brothers is intended.-

% J***mk bowitrirun • IiTZm* « -** 1 **•



580 TBE HYMNS OF [BOOK :

7 Do thou bestow upon us her, 0 Indra, who yields according t
the singer’s longing,

That the great Cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring
thousand streams, give milk to feed us.

HYMN CXXXIV. Indr,

As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, 0 Indra, both the eartl
and heaven,

So as the Mighty One. great King of all the mighty world o
men, the Goddess Mother brought thee forth, the Bleask
Mother gave thee life.

2 Relax that mortal’s stubborn strength whose heart is bent oi

wickedness.

Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and ainj
at us. The Goddess Mother brought thee forth, etc.

3 Shake down, 0 Slayer of the foe, those great all-splendid energiei
With all thy powers, 0 Sakra, all thiue helps, 0 Indra, ahak

them down ; 1

4 As thou, 0 Satakratu, thou, 0 Indra, shakest all things dov
As wealth for him who sheds the juice, with thine assiatan

thousandfold.

5 Around, on every side like drops of sweatflet lightning-flash

fall.

Let all malevolence pass away from us like threads of Dur
grass.

6 Thou bearest in thine hand a lance like a long hook, gre

Counsellor !

As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the branch,
Maghavan.

7 Never, 0 Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate : i

walk as holy texts command.

Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, bene'
your arms.


7 The great Caw : probably the Earth.

1 Tkt Qoddest Mother : Aditi, The retrain is repeated in all the »tw
except the \a»t.

8 Bnergiet : influence* in the shape of rain and sunlight
4 §atakratu ; or, Lord of Hundred Powers.

8 D&rtd grate : Paniouro Daotylon ; a species of bent grass whose fils®
stretch horizontally away from the stem.


HYMN CXXXV. Tama.

In the Tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama drinketh
with the Gods,

The Father, Master of the house, tendeth with love our an-
cient Sires.

I looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old,

On him who treads that evil path, and then I yearned for
this again.

Thou mountest, though thou dost not see, 0 Child, the new
and wheel-less car

Which thou hast fashioned mentally, one-poled but turning
every way*

The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the
Sages, Child !

This hath the Saman followed close, hence, laid together on a ship.

Who was the father of the child ? Who made the chariot roll
away?

Who will this day declare to us how the funereal gift was made 1

When the funereal gift was placed, straightway the point of
flame appeared.

A depth extended in the front : a passage out was made behind

Here is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the
Home of Gods :

Here minstrels blow the flute for him : here he is glorified
with songs.


The Tree : where the spirits of the pious dead rest after their labours.
i Father: Yama.

' The spirit of the dead child speaks. 1 yearned for this : to return to
> world of life.

i Yama speaks. Fashioned mentally : figuratively prepared by being burnt
the funeral pile.

)Ship: meaning, apparently, the funeral pile. The funereal gift: the
a ?ing of anudiyi is uncertain ‘ Restitution/— Wilson. ‘Surrender* or
ilivery/ according to Prof. Zimmer. Stansas 5 — 7 are spoken by the poet.

5 4 depth : the meaning is obscure. Postage out : probably for the removal
the ashes.

The subject of the hymn appears to be the funeral ceremony of a boy
*2*'*«. said by some to be the name of a man). According to the legend
** by S&yapa a youth named Nachiketaa was sent by his father to the
of Yama who treated him kindly and allowed ,him to return to this
j • 'The hymn is made throughout applicable to Aditya as well as to
i if possible, a still greater degree of obscurity. It seems to have
fotK o ***** of the discussion in the Taittirfya BrAhmana (III. 12. 8) and
diii * Upanishad. respecting what becomes of the soul after death, m
between Nachiketat and Yama.’-Wilaon,


m THE HYMNS OP [BOOR jj

HYMN CXXXVI. Kesind

Hb with tbe long loose looks supports Agni, and moisture
heaven, and earth :

He is all sky to look upon : he with long hair is called thii
light.

2 The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments soiled o

yellow hue.

They, following the wind's swift course go where the Gods
have gone before.

3 Transported with our Munihood we have pressed on into th<

winds :

You therefore, mortal men, behold our natural bodies an»]
no more.

4 The Muni, made associate in the holy work of every God,
Looking upon all varied forms flies through the region of the ail

5 The Steed of Vata, Yayu’s friend, the Muni, by the Godi

impelled,

In both the oceans hath his home, in eastern and in western sea

6 Treading the path of sylvan beasts, Gandharvas, and Ap

sarases,

He with long locks, who knows the wish, is a sweet moa
delightful friend. ^

7 Vayu hath churned for him : for him he poundeth thin^

most hard to bend,

When he with loOg loose locks hath drunk, with Rudra, wat(
from the cup.


The Resins, Iceflnah , wearers of long loose hair, are Agni, V&yu, and Sfirj
Each stanza has for its Rishi one of the seven sons of VAtarasana. See lnct<

° £ ?/^ n with the long loote loch : probably the ascetic, the Mum or Yoj
According to S4yana, the radiant Sun. Moisture : visham, usually m
‘poison’ is so explained in this place. , ...

*2 Munis: ascetics inspired or in a state of ecstasy. Girdled vnth the
exposed without girdles to the wind. According to Sftyana, sons oi
rasana, or Wiud-Girdled. t j

5 In both the oceans : everywhere in the firmament from its eastern

Wt ^Tbe hymn^hows the conception that by a life of sanctity
attain to the fellowship of the deities of the atr the V»yns, th. , (

Apsarasas, and the Gandharvas ; and, furnished like them with won
powers, can travel along with them on their course •• •I^ti^Trf b fe austa
the long-haired, that is to say, the Mum, who during the tame of "Lb. •>
tiea doe# not akave his hair, upholda fire, moisture, heaven, an ^ Iy w
resembles the World of light, ideas whiab the later htorature »1 ^rgj ^
tains.’— Von Roth, quoted by Dr. Muir, 0. S. Tcxti, IV. 310, the by

&nd translated on nase 318. _



0 138.]


THE MOVED A, 583

HYMN CXXXVII. VisvedevM.

Yb Gods, raise up once more the man whom y« have humbled
and brought low.

0 Gods, restore to life again the' man who hath committed sin.
Two several winds are blowing here, from Sindhu/ fioui a

distant land.

May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow disease away.
Hither, 0 Wind, blow healing balm, blow all disease away,
thou Wind ;

For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods.

1 am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee real and keep
thee safe.

Ibringthee blessed strength, l drive thy weakening malady away.
Here let the Gods deliver him, the Maruts’ band deliver him .
AH things that be deliver him that he be freed from his disease.
The Waters have their healing power, the Waters drive disease
away.

The Waters have a balm for all: let them make medicine for thee.
The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our ten-
fold branching hands,

With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle
touch,

HYMN CXXXVIII. Judra.

Allied with thee in friendship, Indra, these thy piiests, re-
membering Holy Law, rent Vritra limb from limb,

When they bestowed the Dawns aud let the waters flow, and
wheu thou didst chastise dragous at Kntsa’s call.

Thou seuteat forth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou
dravest forth the kiue, thou d rankest pleasant meath.

Thou gavest increase through this Tree’s surpassing might.
The Sun shone by the hymn that sprang from Holy Law.

^ach stanza ia ascribed to one of the seven great Rishis. See Index of
mas. The hymn ia a charm to restore a sick man to health. Cf. Hymns of
Atkarva-veda, IV. 13.

WAo hath committed tin: aicknesa and death being regaided as the conse-
eQ ce of Bin.

2 Sindhu: or, ooean.

1 The Wind speaka. Weakening malady : yakshna may he sickness in gene-
i°r the name of a large class of diseases, probably of a consumptive nature.
. The stanza ia importaut as showing that the Indians employed touches
hyiog.on of hands to relieve suffering or to restore health. Cp. X. 60. 12.

[Tty prieifc . the Angiraaes. But see Vedic Hymn s, I. p. 44. Didst

2 this clause is very difficult. I adopt Prof. GrassmamTs interpretation.
Aii Tret's surpassing miakt : the power of the juice of the Soma plaut.



5&4


THE HYMNS OF [BOOK £


3 In the mid-way of heaven the Sun unyoked his oar : the Arya
found a match to meet his Disa foe.

Ay.^oeiate with RijiBvan Indra overthrew the solid forts of
Piprii, conjuring Asura. •


4 He boldly cast down forts which none had e’er assailed: un

weaned ho destroyed the godless treasure-stores.

Like Sun and Moon he took the stronghold’s wealth away, and
praised in song, demolished foes with fhshing dart.

5 Aimed witli resistless weopons, with vast power to cleave, the

Vritra-slayer whets Ins darts and deals forth wounds.
Blight Ushas was afraid of Indra’s slaughtering bolt : she weni
upon her wav and left her chariot there.

6 These are thy famous exploits, only thine, when thou alone

hast left the other reft of sacrifice.

Thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the Moons : the
Father bears the feliv portioned out by tbee.

HYMN CXXXIX. Sami

Savitab, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright with the
sunbeams, his eternal lustre;

He in whose energy wise Pushau marchos, surveying all exist
ence like a herdsman.

2 Beholding men he sits amid the heavens, filling the two world

halves and air’s wide region.

He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between th
eastern and the western limit.

3 He, root of wealth, the gatherer-up of treasures, looks witl

his might on every form and figure.

Savitar, like a God whose Law is constant, stands in theb&tti
for the spoil like India.

4 Waters from sacnfico came to the Gandharva Visv&vasu,

Soma, when they s-»w him.

Indra, approaching quickly, marked their going, and looka
around upon the Sun’s enclosures. _

3 Unyoled his car : the alluri »n is perhaps, u> an eclipse, or a detent
of th« Sun to euaMn the Aryan < to complete the overthrow of their enem
Rijuvan: & pious worshipper befriended by Indra. Pipt'u: a demon
drought. See Vol. I., Index. _ v ** *

5 Bright Uskas wan afraid: see II. 15. 6, IV. 30. 8 — 11, and X. 73. • #

6 The other: thy foe, the demon or RAksh-iea. The Father : *7 j
Heaven. The felly ’portioned out by thee : the course of the Moon

the asterisms, which thou hast art anged.


2 Pasture* : there is no substantive in the text. Sfcyan* supplies * q uW>tel
of space Ludwig * ladles and Grassmann ‘ pastures.’ rt nm Aia*

4 Waters: used in the preparation of the Soma juice.
regarded as the custodian of the celestial Soma* Tht * endow

*1— * — WtluAn



TJf.V 140 J


rzri? RIG VEDA.


585


5 This son^r Visvavasu ahull sing us, meter of air’s mid-realm,

celestial Gandharva,

That we may know aright both truth and falsehood : may he
inspire our thoughts and help our piaises.

6 In the floods’ track he found the booty-seeker: the rocky

cow-pen’s doors he threw wide open.

These, the Gandharva told him, flowed with Amrit. Indra
knew well the puissance of the dragons.

HYMN CXL. Agni.

Agni, life-power and fame ore thine : thy fires blaze mightily,
thou rich in wealth of beams !

Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with
strength, the food that merits laud.

2 With brilliant, purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest

up thyself in light.

Thou, visiting both thy Mothers, aidest them as Son : thou
joinest close the earth and heaven.

3 0 Jitavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice thyself, gracious, in our

fair hymns and songs.

In thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food,
born nobly and of wondrous help.

4 Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth

to us, Immortal God.

Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon : thou leadest
us to conquering power.

5 To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great richeB

under his control,

Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest
him wealth that conquers all.

6 The men have set before !hem for their welfare Agni, strong,

visible to all, the Holy.

Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men’s
generations magnify with praise-songs.


5 bfwiiKwtt : the celestial Gandharva, here the Suu-God. Ht : Visvftvaeu.
Pfo booty^seeker : Indi a who sought to win the waters. Of the dragon # * the
^pent-demons who obstructed die floods of heaven. The last three ptanses
| r ® very difficult and obscure. See Hillebrandt, V. M. t I. pp. 436, 487, and
Lu( bdR, Ueberdie neweten A, * #. w., p. 101.


Thy Mother t : Heaven and Earth. Join ext clote : or, fillest full.

J To him : to the inetitutor of the sacrifice.

the exposition of the hymn in tapatha BrdhtM ija, VII, 8, 1, -34



m


THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK X


HYMN CXLI. ViBvedevas

Turn hither, Agni, speak to us : come to us with a gracious
mind. #

Enrich us, Master of the house : thou art the Giver of our
wealth.

3 Let Aryaman vouchsafe us wealth, and Bhaga, and Brihaspati,
Let the Gods give their gifts, and let Sunrita, Goddess, grant
us wealth.

3 We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs and

hymns,

Adityas, Vishnu, Surya, and the Brahman Priest Brihaspati.

4 Indra, Vayu, Brihaspati, Gods swift to listen, we invoke,

That in the synod all the folk may be benevolent to us.

5 Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Brihaspati,
Vata, Vishnu, Sarasvati and the Strong Courser Savitar.

6 Do thou, 0 Agni, with thy fires strengthen our prayer and

sacrifice :

Urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our service of the
Gods.

HYMN CXLI I. Agm

With thee, 0 Agni, was this singer of th| laud : he hath no!

other kinship, O thou Son of Strength.

Thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard. Keep the
destructive lightning far away from us.

2 Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, Agni; ai

Comrade thou win nest all living things.

Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious : they of them
selves advance like one who guards the herd.

3 And thou, 0 Agni, thou of Godlike nature, sparest the stones,

while eating up the brushwood.

Then are thy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. Let us not
stir to wrath thy mighty arrow.

4 O’er hills, through vales devouring as thou goest,, thou partes*

like an army fain for booty.

As when a barber shaves a beard, thou shavest earth when
the wind blows on thy flame and fans it.

$ Apparent are his lines as he approaches : the course is singly
hut the cars are many,


2 S&nritA : Pleasantness ; Gladness, personified. Of. I. 40. 3.

3 Sparest the stones : see ( Pischel, Veditche 8tudien, I, p. 180. Cp. Ill- ^ \



VN 143.]


THE RIO FED A.


587


When, Agni, thou, making thine arms resplendent, advancest
o’er the land spread out beneath thee.

How let thy strength, thy burning flames fly upward, thine
energies, 0 Agni, as thou toilest.

Gape widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour: let all the
Vasus sit this day beside thee.

This is the waters’ reservoir, the great abode of gathered streams.
Take thou another path th^n this, and as thou listest walk
thereon.

On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durva grass
spring up.

Let there be lakes with lotus blooms. These are the mansions
of the flood.

HYMN CXLIII. Asvin*.

Yk made that Atri, worn with eld, free as a horse to win the goal.
When ye restored to youth and strength Kakshivan like a car
renewed,

Ye freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him newly-born
to earth.

Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which Gods unsoiled by
dust had bound.

Heroes who showed most wondrous power to Atri, strive to
win fair songs ;

For then, 0 Heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise shall
cease no more.

This claims your notice, Bounteous Gods 1 — oblation, Asvins !
and our love,

That ye, 0 Heroes, in the fight may briug us safe to ample room.
Ye Twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region’s end,
Nasatyas, with your wiugM steeds caine nigh, and gave him
strength to win.

Come with your joys', most liberal Gods, Lords of all treasures,
bringing weal.

Like fresh full waters to a well, so, Heroes, come and be with us.

5 Stanzas 7 and 8 seem to belong to some other hymn, being a prayer to Agni
»the may spare the speaker’s houie where, he says, there is nothing to invite
e devouring God. See ffymns of the Atharva-veda, VI. 106.

1 Atri: see 1. 112. 7. KahiKlvdn: the Scholiast says that this Rishi was
finally dull of understanding and that the Aavins endowed him with know-
^ Prof. Ludwig takes kakshKvantam to be an adjective agreeing with
: ‘ Again ye made him youthful like a chariot that is braced with bauds.
jjfttt/yw : see Vol. I., Index.



THE HYMNS OF


[BOOK X


M8


HYMN CXLIV. Indra

This deathless Indu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality
Belongs to thee, the Orderer.

2 Here, by ns, for the worshipper, is the wise bolt that workj

with skill.

It brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man brings th<
effectual strong drink.

3 Impetuous Ahisuva, a bull among these cows of his,

Looked down upon the restless Hawk. V

4 That the strong-pinioned Bird hath brought, Child of the

Falcon, from afar,

What moves upon a hundred wheels along the female Dragon’s
path.

5 Which, fair, unrobbed, the Falcon brought thee in his foot,

the red-hued dwelling of the juice ;

Through this came vital power which lengthens out our days,
and kinship through its help awoke.

6 So Indra is by Indu’s power: e’en among Gods will it repel

great treachery.

Wisdom, Most Sapient One, brings force that lengthens life.
May wisdom bring the juice to us.

HYMN CXLV. 4 SapatnlbAdhanamj

From out the earth I dig this plant, an herb of most effectua’
power,

Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husban
for oneself.


1 Indu : Soma. The Orderer ; disposer and arranger of the universe.

2 Bolt: the VashatkAra, or sacrificial exclamation, is to the priests whi
the thunderbolt is to Indra.

3 I find this and the following stanza unintelligible, Ahtfuva in oth<
places is the name of a demon ; but the meaning here is uncertain. Gw*
there is no substaative to dud srdsu, 1 these his own,’ in the feminine gender

4 What mopes upon a hundred wheels: fatdehakran : ‘the bestower <
many boons.'— Wilson.

5 Dwelling of the juice: the Soma- plant, which the Falcon brought froi
heaven. See IV. 26 and 27.

6 It : or he ; Indu or the Soma juice. # . <

Prof. Grassmatm places this hymn in his Appendix as being in hie op®*

made up of fragments. He consider* Ahisuva (stanza 3) to be ‘the arc
KrisAnu,’ of IV 27. 3 and other places, who guards the celestial Som*,*o<J> ,
stead of 4 cows ’ he understands ‘ wives.’

The hymn is a spell to rid a jealous wife of a more favoured
Rishi is IndrAnt, the Consort of Indra.

1 Thit plant : said to be the PAtA, probably identioal with P4|hA 1 Jr.

H ,rn a.Tw4l fnli l 'I a nlim V\i n fw nlunf nnatoaiino MWAiia m OTOPW"*'



S7MN 146.]


THE RIO VEDA.


2 Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious

plant,

Blow thou the rival wife away, and make my husband only mine.

3 Stronger am I, 0 Stronger One, yea, mightier than the mightier;
And she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames.

4 Her very name I utter not : she takes no pleasure in this man.
Far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away.

5 I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also art victorious :

As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellow-wife.

6 I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a

stronger spell.

As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirit speed to me,
hasten like water on its way.

HYMN CXLVI. Aranyftnt.

Goddess of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight.
How is it that thou seekest not the village? Art thou uot afraid?

2 What time the grasshopper replies and swells the shrill cicala’s

voice,

Seeming to sound with tinkling bells, the Lady of the Wood exults ,

3 And, yonder, cattle seem to graze, what seems a dwelling-place

appears:

Or else at eve the Lady of the Forest seems to free the wains.

4 Here one is calling to his cow, another there hath felled a tree :
At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath

screamed.

5 The Goddess never slays, unless some murderous enemy ap-

proach.

Maneatsof savoury fruit and then takes, even us he wills, his rest.
® Thy spirit ; the husband'd.


The deity, Aranyftnt, is the tutelary Goddess of the forest and wilderness.

. Oftotohopper..,.., cicala ; the chichchikd is said to be a little creature that
chichi: and the vrithiravd is said to be a sort of cricket. Others take
wm to be birds of some unascertained kind.

ZCuttlc teem to grate : deer feeding in the glades. What teems a dwelling
***: 4 natural bower of branches and creepers,

®°nndi are heard as of a cowmau calling bis cattle, or of a woodman at
| JrV We must imagine the thousund strange sounds and delusions which
t J® ncol npsss the solitary listener of an evening in the darkening forest.’—
5 fogozin, Vedio India (Story of the Nations), p. 272.

be tf qa’ 0 * 11 enm y ** text has only anydfr. ‘ another,’ by which, accord-

K to aftyana, a tiger or robber is meant. Prof. Ludwig suggests that the
should be kanyah, 1 one who is destined to be killed.’ The hymn has
Muir, 0. 8 , Texts, V. p. 423 ; and by the authors >f



590


THE HYMNS OF


l BOOK X


6 Now have I praised the Forest Queen, sweet-scented, redolenl
of balm,

The Mother of all sylvan things, who tills not but hath store*
of food.

HYMN CXLVII. Indra


I trust in thy first wrathful deed, 0 Indra, when thou slewes
Vritra aud didst work to profit man ;

What time the two world-halves fell short of thee in might
and the earth trembled at thy force, 0 Thunder-armed.

2 Thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer Vritrs

0 Blameless One, with heart that longed for fame.

Heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey, thee in al
sacrifices worthy of renown.

3 God Much-invoked, take pleasure in these princes here, wh(

thine exalters, Maghavati, have come to wealth.

In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the Strong fc
sons and progeny and riches undisturbed.

4 That man shall find delight in well-protected wealth who*

care provides for him the quick-sought joyous draught.
Bringing oblations, strengthened, Maghavan, by thee, he swif
ly wins the spoil with heroes in the fight.

5 Now for our band, 0 Maghavan, when jauded, make amplej

room with might, and grant us riches.

Magician thou, our Varuna and Mitra, deal food to us, 0
Wondrous, as Dispenser.

HYMN CXLVIII. lndr *


2


3


When we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, and
when, Most Valorous ! we have won the booty.

Bring us prosperity, as each desires it : under thine own pro-
tection may we conquer.

Sublime from birth, mayst thou 0 Indra, Hero, with Sfirya


overcome the Dasa races. .

As by a fountain’s side, we bring the Soma that lay concealed,
close-hidden in the waters.

Answer the votary’s hymns, for these thou knowest, craving
the Rishis’ prayer, thyself a Singer. j

May we be they who take delight in Somas : these witn s
food for thee, 0 Chariot-rider.


3 Princes : the SQria, the wealthy insti tutors of the sacrifice., The Stion$
thee, the mighty Indra.

3 These with sweet food : * these (praises are offered) with sacrificial viandf
— Wilson. _



HYMN 149.] THE RIG VEDA. m

4 These holy prayers, 0 Indra, have I sung thee : grant to the

men the strength of men, thou Hero.

Be of one mind with those in whom thou joyest : keep thou*
the singers safe and their companions.

5 Listen to Prithi s call, heroic Indra, and be thou lauded by

the hymns of V enya,

Him who hath sung thee to thine oil-rich dwelling, whose rob
ling songs have sped thee like a torrent.

HYMN CXLIX. Savitar.

Savitar fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and made heaven
stedfast where no prop supported.

Savitar milked, as 'twere a restless courser, air, sea bound fast
to what no foot had trodden.

2 Well knoweth Savitar, 0 Child of Waters, where ocean, firmly
, fixt, overflowed its limit.

Thence sprang the world, from that uprose the region : thence
heaven spread out and the wide earth expanded.

3 Then, with a full crowd of Immortal Beings, this other realm

came later, high and holy.

First, verily, Savitar’s strong-pinioned Eagle was born : and
he obeys his law for ever.

As warriors to their steeds, kine to their village, as fond milk-
giving cows approach their youngling,

As man to wife, let Savitar come downward to us, heaven's
bearer, Loid of every blessing.

Like the Angirasa Hiranyastilpa, I call thee, Savitar, to this
achievement :

So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch for thee
as for the stalk of Soma.


Companion » : or, dependent®.

PrithVt call : the invocation of Prithu, the Risbi of the hymn, according
toyaoa. Prof. Ludwig suggests that Prithu’s wife is intended. Venya:
^1, son of Vena.

To what no foot had trodden . at&rte : * to the indestructible (ether).’ —
l>on,

Btyk • identified by SAyanaVith TArkshya, brother of Garuda, who brought
s oma from the Moon at Savitar’s command.

A'lgiroia : a descendant of the Angirases. Achievement: vSje: food,
3 [ ( ling to SAyaua, i. e. oblation. Lauding ; drehan : or, I, Arehan, honour-

than al— *



59a


TUB HYMNS OP


[BOOK J


HYMN Cl. Agn

Thou, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kindled for th
Gods.

With the Adityas, Rudras, Vasus, come to us: to show us f
vour come to us.

2 Come hither and accept with joy this sacrifice and hymn of our

0 kindled God, we mortals are invoking thee, calling oil the
to show us grace.

3 I laud thee Jatavedas, thee Lord of all blessings, with my son]
Agni, bring hitherward the Gods whose Laws we love, wh<> t

Laws we love, to show ua grace.

4 Agni the God was made the great High-Priest of Gods, Rishi

have kindlod Agni, men of mortal mould.

Agni I invoeate for winning ample wealth, kindly disposed ft
winning wealth.

5 Atri and Bharadv&ja and Gavishthira, Kanva and Trasadaayi

in our fight he helped.

On Agni calls Vasishtha, even the household priest, the hous
hold priest to win his grace.

HYMN CLI. Fait

By Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith ^ oblation offered u
We celebrate with praises Faith upon the height of happmes

2 Bless thou the man who gives, 0 Faith ; Faith, bless the mi

who fain would give.

Bless thou the liberal worshippers : bless thou the word th
I have said.

3 Even as the Deities maintained Fuith in the mighty Asuras
So make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal Wl

shippers.

4 Guarded by V&yu, Gods and men who sacrifice draw near

Faith.

Man winneth Faith by yearnings of the heart, and opulen
by Faith. _

1 Though kindled : although thou art already burning fresh fire is added
thee. To ehow ut favour : mrdik/tya ; this play upon the Eishi's name

is repeated in each stansa.

The Risbi is Sraddhft (Faith) of the family of K&ma (Love). ( ,

1 Upon the height of happinees : ‘(who la seated) ou Bbaga* ft
Wilson. .

3 A*ura»: the primeval Aryan Gods, Dyaua, Varuna, and some ot,I \ '
were venerated by Indra and other Indo- Aryan deities of a later areaw

4 Guarded by Vdyu : the meaning is nob clear.



0\LV 154.]


THE RIG V FA) A.


5D3


5 Faith in the early morning. Faith at noond »y will we invocate,
Faith at the setting of the Sim. 0 Faith, endow us with belief.

HYMN CL 1 1. Indra.

A mighty Governor art thou, Wondrous, Destroyer of the foe,
Whose frien l is never done to death, and nev er, never overcome.

2 Lord of the dan, who brings us bliss, Strong, Warrior, Slayer

of the fiend,

May Indra, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who gives uspeace.

3 Drive Bikshas.is and foes away, break l lmu in pieces Vritra’s jaws:
0 Vritra-sUying Indra, quelf the foeman’s wrath who threat-
ens us.

4 0 Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge ns :
Send down to nether darkness him who serks to do us injury.

5 Baffle the foeman’s plan, ward off Ins weapon who would con-

quer H8.

Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his murdering
dart afar.

HYMN CLIIl. Indra.

Swaying about, the Active Ones came nigh to Indra at his birth,
And shared his great heroic might.

2 Based upon strength and victory and power, 0 Indra is thy birth ;
Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed.

Thou art the Vritra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread the firma-
ment :

Thou hast with might upheld the heavens.

Thou, Indra, bearest m thine arms the lightning that accords
with thee,

Whetting thy thunderbolt with might.

Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in thy might :
Thou hast pervaded every place.

HYMN CUV. New Life.

For some is Soma purified, some sit by sacrificial oil :

To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to those let
him depart.

Tht Active Ones : the Water-Goddeases may be meant. The Consorts of
according to SAynna.

iAou, Mighty One : or, ‘0 Bull, thou art a Bull indeed.’ ‘Thou, 0 hero,
l »deed a hero’.-MaX MUller *

ty/Uning; or, prai*«-soug, hymn. Sltyana explains arkam hereby
91 ‘ % laudable or adorable thunderbolt.

talthhiof this funeral hymn is Yatnl, sister of Yama.

- 0 Mo*# him liepart : let the spirit of the dead go to the realm of the



594


THE HYMNS OF


{BOOK


2 Invincible through Fervour, those whom Fervour hath ad

vanned to heaven,

Who showed great Fervour in their lives, — even to those le
him depart.

3 The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away
Or who give guerdon thousandfold, — even to those let bin

depart.

4 Yea, the first followers of Law, Law’s pureandholy strengthened
The Fathers, Yama ! Fervour-moved, — even to those let bin

depart.

5 Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who protec

the Sun, , .

The Rishis, Yama l Fervour-moved, — even to those let hir

depart. _ T .

HYMN CLV. Vl '™ !

Arayi, one-eyed limping hag, fly, ever-screeching, to the hill
We frighten thee away with these, the heroes ot Sinmbitha.

2 Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of each gem

fh, sharp-homed Brahmanaapati and drive Arayi far away.

3 Yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the river

SeSt’Thou thing with hideous jaws, tnd go thou far awa

4 When, foul with secret stain and spot, ye hastened onward I

Ah Indra’s enemies were slain ami passed away like frot
and foam. — -

to the Fathers who receive offerings of Soma juice am) clarM b.
uLth • according to SAyana, honey, which is offered to the ot ,

IZZr^pas: literally, warmth, heat; religion, fervour, ascetic*

* ** v ' p '

by Prof. Zimmer, Altindinhe 8 Ltbtn , p. 41o.

The subject or object of the hymn ie the
i »l .according to SAyana’. explanation of. oddnve; $ tb , bym»

ed with DAnus, DAnavas, or demons. ?(nm6«tA<». tb A

2 Skarp-horntd : aimed with piercing rays of and S" 1
4 The meaning of this stanza » eot clear. MarydtraUMMK 9
J/ t Zh are difficult word, that do not occur agau>. _



THE RIO VEDA.


595


lYMN 157.]

5 These men have led about the cow, have duly carried Agni
round, *

And raised their glory to the God3. Who will attack them
with success ?

HYMN CLYI. Agni.

Let songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race,
And we will win each prize through him.

2 Agni, the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves with help

from thee, —

That send us for the gain of wealth.

3 0 Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine:

| Oil thou the socket, turn the wheel.

jiOAgni, thou hast made the Sun, Eternal Star, to mount the

sky,

Bestowing light on living men.

5 Thou, Agni, art the people’s light, best, dearest, seated in
thy shrine :

Watch for the singer, give him life.

j HYMN CLVII. Viavedevas.

We will, with Indra and all Gods to aid us, bring these exist-
ing worlds into subjection.

2 Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspring, let Indra form to-

gether with Adityas.

3 With the Adityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra be

Protector of our bodies.

As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered the
Asuras, keeping safe their Godlike nature,

Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked
about them on their vigorous Godhead.


5 Then men : the text had only inti, ‘ these.’ According to SAyana, the
?vedevas are meant, who have brought back the stolen cattle. But the
[er *nce is probably to the sacrifice which the priests are performing.


The dart ; ‘ that army/— Wilson.

3 Turn the wheel : I adopt the reading of the SAmaveda, pavim, instead of
J ' lm - According to the text, the rendering would be : * Balm heaven and
^thePani hence. *

I first three verses of this hymn were recited at the Asyamedha or Horse-

Fmee.

ih u ya?a € *pl»»ns the second half of the stanza differently ‘ then (men)
e <* around them the swift descending rain/ — Wilson.



59$


[BOOK }


THE HYMNS OF

HYMN CLVItl. SQry;

MAYSurya guard us out of heaven, and Vata from the firmamenl
And Agni from terrestrial spots.

2 Thou Savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations, be tho

pleased :

From falling lightning keep us safe.

3 May Savitar the God, and may Parvata also give us sight :
May the Creator give us sight.

4 Give sight unto our eye, give thou our bodies sight that the'

may see :

May we survey, discern this world.

5 Thus, Surya, may we look on thee, on thee most lovely to behold
See clearly with the eyes of men.

HYMN CLIX. Sachf Pauloml

Yon Sun hath mounted up, and this my happy fate hath
mounted high.

I knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband for mine own.

2 I am the banner and the head, a mighty arbitress am I :

I am victorious, and my LorcT shall be submissive to my will.

3 My Sons are slayers of the foe, my Daughter is a ruling Queen :
I am victorious : o’er my Lord my song of^riumph is supreme.

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and

most high, —

This have I offered, 0 ye Gods, and rid me of each rival wife.

5 Destroyer of the rival wife, Sole Spouse, victorious, conqueror,
The others’ glory have I seized as 'twere the wealth of weaker

Dames.

6 I have subdued as conqueror these rivals, these my fellow-wives,
That I may hold imperial sway over this Hero and the folk.

HYMN CLX. Indra.

Taste this strong draught enriched with offered viands : with;

all thy chariot here unyoke thy Coursers.

Let not those other sacrificers stay thee, Indra : these juice
shed for thee are ready. '

1 Out of heaven : ‘ from (foes dwelling in) Leaven.’ — Wilson.

3 The Creator : Dh&tar.

Sachl Pauloml, called also IndrAnl, the Consort of Indra, is also the
of the hymn. ' Literally, this is a song of exultation by §*chi over her
wives ; but faehi means also an " act,” “ exploit,” and this hymn is metyph 011 :
cally the praise of Indra’i glorious acts.’ — Wilson.


THE RIO VEDA.


BY MX 161 ]


597


2 Thine is the juice effused, thine are the juices yet to be pressed :

our resonant songs invite thee. *

0 Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who
knowest all and drink the Soma.

3 Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him with yearn-

ing heart and spirit, —

Never doth Indra give away his cattle : for him he makes the
lovely Soma famous.

j He looks with loving favour on the mortal who, like a vich
man, pours for him the Soma.

Maghavan in his bended arm supports him : lie slays, unasked,
the men who hate devotion.

5 We call on thee to come to us, desirous of goods and spoil, of
cattle, and of horses.

For thy new love and favour are w r e present : let us invoke
thee, Indra, as our welfare.


HYMN CLXI. Indra .

Fob life I set thee free by this oblation from the unknown
decline and from Consumption ;

Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from
her, 0 Indra, thou and Agni.

2 Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought very

near to death already,

Out of Destruction’s lap again I bring him, save him for life
to last a hundred autumns.

3 With hundred-eyed oblation, himdred-autumned, bringing a

hundred lives, have I restored him,

That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe to the
farther shore of all misfortune.

* Live, waxing in thy strength, a hundred autumns, live through
a hundred springs, a hundred winters.

Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Brihaspati, Savi-
or yield him for a hundred !


4 fir. Qaedicke [Aceusativ im Veda , p. 127) translates P&das 1—3 of the
[Muza differently : der wird von ihm erspaht, der, obvobl reich, ihm keinen
otaa presat, den holt der machtige heraus aus dem Winkel (Versteck).

According to the Index the subject of the hymn is the cure of the disease
V^jayakshma (Consumption or Atrophy).

‘eh ^ noww : some insidious disease, differing from ItAjayakBhma.

lii* 8 ’ Pr °L zimm « r suggests, hypertrophy and atrophy are the two

^tended. See AUindisches Leben, p. 377. The grasping demon;
y from grah f to seize ; a female spirit who seizes men and kills them.

I * « hundred ; years, understood.



598 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK ;

5 So have I found and rescued thee : thou haBt returned *it
youth renewed.

Whole in thy members ! I have found thy sight and all th
life for thee.

HYMN CLXIV. Dream-chart

Avaunt, thou Master of the mind ! Depart, and vanish far awai
Look on Destruction far from hence. The live man’s mind
manifold.

2 A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they obtain.
Bliss with Vaivasvata they see. The live man’s mind seek

many a place.

3 If by address, by blame, by imprecation we have committe

sin, awake or sleeping,

All hateful acts of ours, all evil doings may Agni bear away t
distant places.

4 When, Indra, Brahmanaspati, our deeds are wrongful an<j

unjust, .

May provident Angirasa prevent our foes from troubling

5 We have prevailed this day and wou : we are made free f

sin and guilt.

Ill thoughts, that visit us awake or sleeping, seize the i
we hate, yea, seize the man who Kateth us.

HYMN CLXV. * Visved

Gods, whatsoe’er the Dove came hither seeking, sent to ui
the envoy of Destruction,

For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. Wei
it with our quadrupeds and bipeds.

2 Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harm
bird, ye Gods, within our dwelling.

May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may
Missile borne on wings avoid us.

For Hymns CLXII., CLXIII., and CLXXXIV. see Appendix.

1 Matter of the mind : the spirit of evil dreams is addressed. M
tion : the Goddess Nirriti. Manifold : * attentive to various objects,
soon diverted from any regard to evil dreams.’ — Wilson.

2 Vaivasvata : Yams, the son of VivasvAn, who presides over evil area
S&yan*.

4 Angirasa : according to Siyana, Varuna, the wise God who is espjW
connected with his worshippers the Angiraaes, may be intended. U. H
of the Atharva-veda, VI. 45. 8. — — , - *u

1 A dove, regarded as an ill-omened bird and the messenger of
flown into the house. Similarly, in North* Lincolnshire, * If *
sitting on a tree, or comes into the house, or from bein^f wild suaa j
comes tame, it is a sign of death .’ — Notes and Queries, viii. p. ooA.

2 Missile borne on wings : the ill-omened bird.



JTHS 16«.] THE RIO VEDA. m

3 Let not the Arrow that hath wings distract us: beside the
fire-place, on the hearth it settles.

May it bring welfare to o ur men and cattle: here let the
Dove, ye Gods, forbear to harm us.

i The screeching of the owl is ineffective; and when beside the
tire the Dove hath settled,

To him who sent it hither as an envoy, to him be reverence
paid, to Death, to Yama.

1 5 Diive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses i rejoicing

I bring ye hither food and cattle,

Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Let the swift
bird fly forth aud leave us vigour.

HYMN CLXVI/ SapatnanA sanam.

Make me a bull among my peers, make me my rivals’ con-
queror :

Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord of kine.

! I am ray rivals’ slayer, like Indra unwounded and unhurt,

And all these enemies of mine are vanquished and beneath
my feet.

I Here, verily, I bind you fast, as the two bow-ends with the string.

Press down these men, 0 Lord of Speech, that they may
humbly speak to me.

Hither I came as conqueror with mighty all-effecting power,

Aud 1 have mastered all your thought, your synod, aud your
holy work.

> May I be highest, having gained your strength in war, your
skill in peace : my feet have trodden on your heads.

Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the
water croak, as frogs from out the water croak.

HYMN CLXYII. Indra.

This pleasant meath, 0 iudra, is effused for thee : thou art
the ruling Lord of beaker and of juice.

Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons : thou, having
glowed with Fervour, wonnest heavenly light.

with it&yamAndh, understood

object is the Destruction of Rivals.

^is are VievAmifcra and Jamadagni. Stanzas 1—3 are spoken by the

“JK and 4 by Indra.

' o / lvia 9 9^ed with Fervour ; * performing arduous penance.’ — Wilson.

4 Divine Favour personified.

e prut : the wealth won for you.


With holy vertet : SAyana takes richfL
^ued) by our hymn (0 Gods).



600 THE HYMX. S' OF [BOOK X.

2 Let us call S ikra to libations here effused,- winner of light who

joveth in the patent juice.

Mark well tins sacrifice of ours end come to us : we pray to
Maghavan the Vanquisher of hosts.

3 By royal Soma’s and by Varuna’s decree, under Brihaspati’s

:i nd An utna 1 1 ’s guard,

Tins day by thine authority, 0 Maghavan, Maker, Disposer
thou ! have I enjoyed the jars.

' 4 I, t >o, urged on, have had my portion, in the howl, and as first
Prince I drew forth this my hymn of praise,

When with the prize I came unto the flowing juice, 0 Visva-
initra, Jamadagui, to your home.

HYMN CLXV11I. Vdyu.

0 the Wind’s chariot, 0 its power and glory ! Crashing it goes:
and hath a voice of thunder. i

It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and as itmovci
the dust of earth is scattered.

2 Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come to him as
dames to an assembly.

Borne on his car with those for his attendants, the Godspeeds
forth, the universe's Monarch. ^

3. 'fr.* veiling on the paths of air’s mid-region, no singlcday doff

. lie take rest or slumber.

Holy and earliest-born, Friend of the waters, where did he
spring and fiom what region came he?

4 Germ of the world, the Deities’ vital spirit, this God moves evei
as his will inclines him.

His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let us adore
this Wind with our oblation.

HYMN CT.XTX. Com

May the wiml Mow upon our Cows with healing: may
eat herbage full of vigorous juices.

May they drink waters rich in life and fatness: to food that
moves on feet he gracious, Rudra.

2 Like-coloured, varions-hued, or single-coloured, whose name*
through sacrifice are known to Agni,

2 'They : the Waters Prof. Max Muller interprets differently. See to*
translation, Vedic Hymns, I. 449.

1 Pood that moves on feet : the wandering milch*cow8. But see Bergw'P^
III. 159. ^



tiie Riarr.hA.


601


fl\'M V 17M

Whom the Vngirases produced by Fervour,— vouchsafe to
these, Parjauya, great protection.

3 Those who have offered to the Gods their bodies, whose varied
forms are all well known to Soma, —

Those grant us in our cattle-pen, 0 Indra, with their full streams
of milk and plenteous offspring.

1 Prajapati, bestowing these upon me, one minded with all Gods

and with the Fathers,

H.ith to our cow-pen brought auspicious cattle : so may we own
the oflkpiiug they will bear us.

HYMN CLXX. Surya.

May the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled meath,
giving the sacrifice’s lord uninjuied life;

He who, wiud-nrged, in person guards our offspring well, hath
nourished them with food and shines o’er many a laud.

2 Radiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning strength,

Truth based upon the statute that supports the heavens,
lie rose, a light, that kills Vritras and enemies, best slayer
of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes.

3 This light, the best of lights, supreme, all-conquering, winner

of riches, is exalted with high laud.

All-lighting, radiant, mighty as the Sun to see, he spreadeth
wide unfailing victory and strength.

4 Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast attained

heaven’s lustrous realm.

By thee were brought together all existing things, possessor
of all Godhead, All-effecting God.

HYMN CLXXI. Indra.

For Ita’s sake who pressed the juice, thou, Indra, didst protect
his car,

And hear the Soma-giver’s call.

|2 Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving
combatant,

And sought the Soma-pourer’s home.

"" " JL — —

4 PTajdpati hath brought : ' may Prajfipati bring/ according to Sftyana

[2 '%« ,• here meaning ‘body.’ Combatant: mabhdipa: according to the
P" 1 cited by SAyana. Sacrifice personified, whose head, as he attempted to
BffiLi! 1 human form from the Gods, was cut off by Indra. See 'Wilton.



602 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

3 Venya, that mortal man, hast thou, for Astrabudhna the

devout,

0 Indra, many a time set free.

4 Bring, Indra, to the east again that San who now is in the

west,

Even against the will of Gods.

HYMN CLXXII. D awn

With all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with ful]
udders follow on thy path.

2 Come with kind thoughts, most liberal, rousing the warrior's

hymn of praise, with bounteous ones.

3 As noumhers we tie the thread, aud, liberal with our bounty

offer sacrifice.

4 Dawn drives away her Sister’s gloom, and, through her ex

cellence, makes her retrace her path.

HYMN CLXXIII. The King

Bk with us ; I have chosen thee : stand stedfast and im-
movable.

Let all the people wish for thee : let not thy kingship fall away.

2 Be even here; fall not away ; be like a mountain unremoved.
Stand stedfast here like Indra’s self, and Hold the kingship in

thy grasp.

3 This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by strong obla-

tion’s power.

May Soma speak a benison, and Brahmanaspati, on him.

4 Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also are these

hills.

Stedfast is all this living world, and stedfast is this King of men.

5 Stedfast, may Varuna the Kins:, stedfast, the God Brihaspati'
Stedfast, may Indra, Btedfast, too, may Agui keep thy sted

fast reign.

3 Venya: Baid to be Prithu, the son of Vena. See X. 148. 5. Attrabudhna
the name of a man not mentioned elsewhere, the son of Astrabudhna* "tt
free : Cp. L 24. 15.

2 Mott liberal : Sfirya appears to be meant. Routing the loamor’i h**

of praite: jdraydn>mkhaK : the meaning is uncertain : — • briuging 1
sacrifice to completion,’ according to S&yana. mo

3 At nonrithert : because sacrifice brings the food that nourishes Uf©- 1 i
thread: of sacrifice.

4 Her Sitter's gloom : the darkness of Night. j


The subject is the benediction of a newly*elected king.



THE RIOVEDA.


603


IYMN 176.]


6 On constant Soma let us think with constant sacrificial gift.

And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee
alone.

HYMN CLXXIV, The King.

With offering for success in fight whence Indra was victorious.
With this, 0 Brahmanaspati, let us attain to royal sway.

2 Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities,
Withstand the man who menaces, withstand the man who

angers us.

3 Soma and Savitar the God have made thee a victorious King :
All elements have aided thee, to make thee general conqueror.

4 Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and

most high, —

This have I offered, Gods ! and hence now, verily, am rivalless.

5 Slajer of rivals, rivalless, victorious, with royal sway,

Over these beings may I rule, may I be Sovran of the folk.

HYMN CLXXV. Press*, stones.

May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you according to the
Law :

Be harnessed to the shafts, and press.

: Stones, drive calamity away, drive ye away malevolence :

Make ye the Cows our medicine.

] Of one accord the upper Stones, giving the Bull his bull-like
strength,

Look down with pride on those below.

4 May Savitar the God, 0 Stones, stir you as ‘Law commands
for him

Who sacrifices, pouring juice.

HYMN CLXXVI. Agni.

With hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Ribhus

mighty deeds . ^

Who, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as twere a mo-
ther cow.

1 With offering for success : ‘ By the a Mvarta oblatioo.’-Wilson.

< Cp. X. 169. 4.

1 TktkafU: or chariot- pofes ; here meaning the guiding arms of the

* 1 %e Corns ,* or, the rays of morning, at whoee approach robbers
tolls fly,

^ The Bull : Soma.



604 THE HYMNS OF [ BOOR X

2 Bring: forth the God with song divine, bring Jatavedas hither

ward,

To bear our gifts at once to heaven.

3 He here, a God-devoted Priest, led forward comes to sncrifice.
Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himself

the way. i

4 ThisAgni rescuesfromdistre8s,as ’twere from the Immortal Race,
A God yet mightier than strength, a God who hath been made

for life.

HYMN CLXXVII. MAyAbheda.

The sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the Bird!

adorned with all an Asura’s magic might. j

Sages observe him in the ocean’s inmost depth : the wise disJ
posers seek the station of his rays.

2 The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit : erst the Gan

dharva in the womb pronounced it :

And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant
heavenly-bright invention.

3 I saw the Herdsman, him who never resteth, approaching anc

departing on his pathways.

He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, within tin
worlds continually travels. *

HYMN CLXXVIII. Tlrkshyi

This very mighty one whom Gods commission, the Conquero
of cars, ever triumphant,

Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tarkshy
for our weal will we call hither.

3 Like a car: perhaps, as Prof. Ludwig suggests, like ft chariot which, a

the driver is concealed from sight by the canopy, Beema to find its way with
out a guide. .

4 As 'twere from the Immortal Race : ‘ as (well as) from peril caused by to
immortals Wilson. Stanzas 2—4 are recited at the Agni-pranayana, to
ceremony of cauying the sacrificial fire to the altar used for animal ai
Soma sacrifices. See Haug’s Aitareya Brdhmanarn , II. 60, 61.

The subject is MAyAbheda, ‘the discernment of Mdy&, or illusion (t!
cause of material oreatiou).’ — Wilson. , .

1 The Bird : the Sun, In the ocean's inmost depth: in tne solar ^
according to SAyana. Wise disposes : * ordainera (of solar worship). *-

2 Speech : or song ; the morning song of the Sun-Bird. _ TheGan
the breath of life, according to SAyana. The ray of the Sun is probabl ly

3 This stanza has occurred before. See 1. 164. 31. The Herdsman:

Resteth : or, stumbleth ; literally, sinks or falls down.

1 Tdrkshya : a personification of the Sun, usually described w a ^
horse, Cp. I. 89. 6. —



THE RIO VEDA.


605


0MS 180.]

2 As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we asceud
him as a ship for safety.

Liko the two wide worlds, broad, deep, far-extended, may we
be safe both when he comes and leaves you.

He who with might the Five Lands hath pervaded, like Surya
with his lustre, and the waters, —

His strength wins hundreds, thousands ; none avert it, as the
young maid repelleth not her lover.

HYMN CLXXIX. Indra.

Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra’s seasonable share.

If it be ready, offer it ; unready, ye have been remiss.

1 Oblation is prepared : come to us, Indra; the Sun hath travel-

led over half his journey.

Friends with their stores are sitting round thee waiting liko
lords of clans for the tribe’s wandering chieftain.

) Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy ; well-dressed, I
fancy, is this recent present.

Drink, Indra, of the curd of noon’s libation with favour,
Thunderer, thou whose deeds are mighty.

HYMN CLXXX. Indra.

0 much-invoked, thou hast subdued thy foemen : thy might is
loftiest ; here display thy bounty.

In thy right hand, 0 Indra, bring us treasures : thou art the
Lord of rivers filled with riches.

2 Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast

approached us from the farthest distance.

Whetting thy bolt and thy sharp blade, 0 Indra, crush thou
the foe and scatter those who hate us.

3 Thou, mighty Indra, spraugest into being as strength for

lovely lordship o’er the people.

Thou droveat off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the
Gods thou gavest room and freedom.

.• I adopt, with a modification, Professor Pisohel’s interpretation
2 difficult words yavatim n& tdrydm. See Vedische Studien , I. p. 106.

is twice cooked; first matured in the cow's udder and then
rein ° n ' the hymn was employed in the Dadhigharma

i|k on y when Soma jnio* was offered mixt with curd or *<our inspissated
bL. Cf * VIII. 2. 9, and IX 11. 6. See Hillobrandt, F. .V, I. 221.



60 S


THE HYMNS OP [BOOK X.

HYMN CLXXXI. Viavedevas.

Vasishtha mastered the Rathantava, took it from radiant
Dh&tar, Savitar, and Vishnu,

Oblation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by the names of
Saprathas and Prathas.

2 These sages found what lay remote and hidden, the sacrifice’s

loftiest secret essence.

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Agm, Bharad-
vaja brought the Brihat.

3 They found with mental eyes the earliest Yajus, a pathway to

the Gods, that had descended.

From radiant Dhatar, Savitar, and Vishnu, from Sfirya did
these sages bring the Gharma.


HYMN CLXXXII.


Brihaspati.


Brthaspati lead us safely over troubles, and turn his evil
thought against the sinner \

Repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacri
ticer peace and comfort !

2 May Na.asansa aid us at Prayfija : blest, be our Anuyaja a'

invokings. .

May he repel the curse, and chase ill-feeling, and give th
sacrificer peace and comfort.

3 May he whose head is flaming burn the demons, haters <

prayer, so that the arrow slay them.

May he repel the curse and chase ill-feeling, and give the sacr
ficer peace and comfort. _

ts : rzsSTv*- »*

warm libation of milk or other beverage. ,,

«*• ►’

2 Narinanta : Agni. PrayAja: part of the introductory ceremony »'

Soma sacrifice. Aauydj.: a aecondar, or finalsacnficm

3 He whole head, i« flaming: taparmdrdhan . Bnhaapati

Lightning. ^



a Xitx 187.J


THE RIO VEDA.


SOT


HYMN CLXXXIII. The Sacrifice, Ete.

1 saw the© meditating in thv spirit what sprang from Fervour
and hath thence developed.

Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread in thine off-
spring, thou who cravest children.

2 I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying that in due

time thy body might be fruitful.

Come as a youthful woman, rise to meet me : spread in thine
offspring, thou who cravest children.

3 In plants and herbs, in all existent beings I have deposited the

germ of increase.

All progeny on earth have I engendered, and sons in women
who will be hereafter.

HYMN CLXXXV. Aditi

Great, unassailable must be the heavenly favour of Three Gods,
Vanina, Mitra, Aryaman.

2 O’er these, neither at home nor yet abroad on pathways* that

are strange,

The evil-minded foe hath power :

3 Nor over him, the man on whom the Sons of Aditi bestow
Eternal light that he may live.

HYMN CLXXXVI. Vftyu.

Filling our hearts with health and joy, may Vata breathe his
balm on us :

May he prolong our days of life.

2 Thou art our Father, Vata. yea, thou art a Brother and a friend:
So give us strength that we may live.

1 1 The store of Amrit laid away yonder, 0 Vata, in thine home, —
Give us thereof that we may live.

HYMN CLXXXVII. Agni.

To Agni send I forth my song, to him the Bull of all the folk :
So may he bear us past our foes.

lie deities are the Sacrificer, bis Wife, and the Hotar-priest.

According to SAyaua, the wife is the speaker of the first stanza, 'the
atnftna or sacrificer of the second, and the Hotar-priest of the third.
I' v ig considers Agni to be the speaker of the whole hymn. Whai sprang
Jj &n>our ; the results of ardent devotion or tdpas.

The Hotar-priest regards himself as the procreator of all living beings
°ugh the efficacy of the sacrifices which he performs : matsddhyena ydgcna
m yotpatteraham iarvajanaheturbhavdmi.—i&jbn&.

Ijk fl • chief and lord, as the indispensable household fire.



608 THE HYMNS OF [BOOK X.

2 Who from the distance far away shines brilliantly across the

wastes :

So may he bear us past our foes.

3 The Bull with brightly-gleaming flame who utterly consumes

the fiends :

So may he bear us p*st our foes.

4 Who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with

his view :

So may he bear us past our foes.

5 Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region of the air
So may he bear us past our foes.

HYMN CLXXXVIII. Agni

Now send ye Jativedas forth, send hitherward the vigorou
Steed

To seat him on our sacred grass.

2 I raise the lofty eulogy of Jatavedas, raining boons,

With sages for his hero band.

3 With flames of Jatavedas which carry oblatiou to the Gods,
May he promote our sacrifice.

HYMN CLXXXIX. * Surya.

This spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the Mothei in
the east,

Advancing to his Father heaven.

2 Expiring when he draws his breath, she moves along the lucid

spheres :

The Bull shines out through all the sky.

3 Song is bestowed upon the Bird : it rules stlpreme through

thirty realms

Throughout the days at break of morn. I


2 Across the wattes : as the fire that burns the jungle and prepares tb«j
ground for cultivation.

5 In farthest region of the air : or beyond the firmament, as the Sun.

The deity is alternatively SArpar&jfi!, the Serpent-Queen, Kadru, wlio
also the Riehi of the hymn.

1 This spotted Bull : the Sun. The Mother : Vann . f[t{

3 The Bird: the Sun. Hi* morning song, representing prayer, i« ® u P r *j g,

through all the divisions of the world, the nuiabei thirty being used m
witely. Of, I. 123. 8. *

1 Fran Fervour : from the tapas. devotional ardour or asceticism of
according to SAyana But the meaning heie may be ‘ from warmth

220, ® !in 'l nnU ¥ht>n/i* • ft-/. it, tiiaf f>v«ntt« a* warmftl.



i fl)XV 191.) 27/£ RIG VEDA. 609

HYMN CXC. Creation.

From Fervour kindled to its height Eternal Law and Truth
were born :

Thence was the Night produced, and thence the billowy flood
of sea arose. J


! From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was afterwards
produced,

Odainer of the days and nights, Lord over all who close the
eye.

! Dhatar, the great Creator, then formed in due order Sun and
Moon.

He formed in order Heaven and Earth, the regions of the air
and light. ’


HYMN CXCI. Agn ,

Thou, mighty Agin, gatherest up all that is precious for thv
friend. J

Bring us all treasures as thou art enkindled in libation’s place.

! Assemble, speak together : let your minds be all of one accord,
As ancient Gods unanimous sit down to their appointed share!

I The place is common, common the assembly, common the
mind, so be their thought united.

A common purpose do I lay before you, and worship with
your general oblation.


l One and the same be your resolve, and be your minds of one
accord.

United be the thoughts of all that all may happily agree.


The dteity or subject of stanzas 2 - 4 is SailijMuam, Agreement or Unani-
>ty in assembly. *

3 Common the assembly : this sdmiti appears to have been a general assem-
y of the people on some import * it occasion, such as the election of a Kintr
'■ Uynm of ike Atkarva-veda , VI. 64. K '


APPENDIX.


Page 466, Hymn LXI.

I subjoin a Latin version of stanzas 5 — 8, and borrow Wilson’s
translation of stanza 9.

5 Membrum suum virile, quod protentum fuerat, mas ille re-

traxit. Itursus illud quod in juvenem filiam sublatum fuerat,
non aggressurus, ad se retrahit.

6 Quum jam in medio congressu, semiperfecto opere, amorem in

puellam pater impleverat, ambo discedentes seminispaulum
in terrae superficie in sacrorum sede effusum emiserunt.
juum pater suam filiam adiverat, cum esi, congressus suum
semen supra terram effudit. Turn Dii benigni precem
(brahma) progenuerunt, et Vastosbpatim, legum sacrarum
custodem, formaverunt.

lie tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit ; tunc discedens
pusillanimis hue profectus est. Quasi dextro pede claudus
processit, “ inutiles fueruut illi mei complexus,” ita locutus.
The fire, burning the people, does not approach quickly (by
day): the naked ( Rdkshasas approach) not Agniby night;
the giver of fuel, and the giver of food, he, the upholder
( of the rite), is born, overcoming enemies by his might.’


lie whole passage is difficult and obscure, and stanza 9 is unintelligible,
h regard to the myth of Prajfipati and his daughter, Prof. Max Muller
i When Kumftrila is hard pressed by his opponents about the unmoral-
i of his gods, he answers with all the freedom of a comparative my-
logist : “ It is fabled that Prajftpati, the Lord of Creation, did violence to
daughter. But what does it mean ? Praj&pati, the Lord of Creation, is
wne of the sun, and he is called so, because he protects all creatures,
'daughter Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he was in love
Her, this only means that, at Bunrise, the sun runs after the dawD, the
"a being at the same time called the daughter of the sun, because she
when he approaches History of Anc. Sara. Literature, pp. 529, 530.
e Muir, 0. S. Texts, IV. pp. 46, 47, where stanzas 4—7 are translated.

7 1 T Mtothpatim: VAstoshpati, the guardian of the houBe ; ‘ the ]ord of the
art h (of sacrifice).’— Wilson. The word may be in apposition with brVma,
tyer.

tokte fn flATTJtnft RAkuhasas who consume like fire.



612


APPENDIX.


Page 548, Hymn CVI.

I borrow Wilson’s translation of the omitted stanzas.

5 ‘You are like two pleasantly moving well-fed (hills) like Mitrn

and Varuna, the two bestowers of felicity, veracious, p 0 *
sessors of infinite wealth, happy, like two horses plump with
fodder, abiding in the firmament, like two rams (are you) tc
be nourished with sacrificial food, to be cherished (with
oblations).

6 ‘ You are like two mad elephants bending their forequarten

and smiting the foe, like the two sons of Nitosa destroying
(foes), and cherishing (friends) ; you are bright as two water
born (jewels), do you, who are victorious, (render) my decay
ing mortal body free from decay.

7 ‘ Fierce (Aswins), like two powerful (heroes), you enable this

moving, perishable mortal (frame) to cross over to the ob-
jects (of its destination) as over water; extremely strong
like the Ribhus, your chariot attained its destination swift
as the wind, it pervaded (everywhere), it dispensed riches.

8 ‘ With your bellies full of the Soma, like two saucepans, preserv-

ers of wealth, destroyers of enemies, (you are) armed with
hatchets, moving like two flying (birds^with forms like the
moon, attaining success through the mind, like two laudable
beings, (you are) approaching (the sacrifice).’

Page 598, Hymn CLXTI.

May Agni, yielding to our prayer, the Rakshas-slayer, drive
away .

The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring wombj

2 Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of thy fleshj
The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe au

womb.

3 That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, roovw

embryo, . . , •

That which will kill the babe at birth,— oven this will we am


far away.

4 That which divides thy legs that it may lie between the
ried pair, ... ter

That penetrates and licks thy side, — tTen this will


minate. __ . — -

Th* subject is the Prevention of Abortion. The Rishi is Kakshobft (S J,

of RAkshaaas), son of BrahmA. . . .» -rtirits wM

Stanzas 1, 2 are directed against diseases, and S— 6 against evil' P ^
attack women who are about to become mothers. __



APPENDIX.


613


5 What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, or of lord,
And would destroy thy progeny,-- even this will we exterminate.

6 That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and

lies down by thee,

And will destroy thy progeny,— even this will we exterminate.
Page 698, Hymn CLXIII.

From both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both thine ears
and from thy chin,

Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive thy malady
away.

2 From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones

and from the spine,

From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy malady away.

3 From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, from the

heart,

From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy malady away.

4 From thighs, from kuee-caps, and from heels, and from the

forepart of the feet,

From hips, from stomach, and from groin, I drive thy malady
away.

5 From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, and from

thy nails,

From all thyself from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.

6 From every member, every hair, disease that comes in everyjoint,
From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.

Page 607, Hymn CLXXXIV.

May Vishnu form and mould the womb, may Tvashtar duly
shape the forms,

Praj&pati infuse the stream, and Dhatar lay the germ for thee.

2 0 Sinfvalt, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvati :

May the Twain Gods bestow the germ, the Asvins crowned
with lotuses.

3 That which the Asvins Twain rub forth with the attrition-

sticks of gold, —

That germ of thine we invocate, that in the tenth month thou
may st bear.

The deity or subject is th^ cure of Yakshma or phthisis or consumption.

2 Sinivdlt ; a lunar Goddess, who aids the birth of children. Cp. II. 32. 6.
verses 1 and 2 are incorporated in Atharva*veda, V. 25, which is a charm
10 accompany the GarbhAdWna ceremony to ensure or facilitate and bless
Option.


INDEX OF HYMNS.
BOOK VII.


s Rishi. Deity . Metre.

1 Vasishtba Mai- Agni. Vir&j. 19-25 Trishtup.

trAvaruni.

2 The same Aprls. Trishtup.

3 Agni. The same.

4 The same.

5 Vaisv&nara Agni.

6 The same.

7 Agni.

8 The same.


9

10
11
12


13 VaisvAnara Agni.

U Agni. 1 Brihati. 2, 3 Trishtup.

15 The same. GAyatri.

16 Brihati and Satobrihatl

alternately.

17 DvipadA Trishtup.

18 Indra. Munificence of Trishtup.

SudAs (22-25).

19 Indra. The same.

*9 ' The same.

11

12 Viriij. 9 Trishtup.

: Trishtup.

1 The same.


S

7

8

!»



IndrA,

The tame.


Trishtup.

GAyatrl 10-12 VirAj.



616


INDEX OF HYMNS.


s

Riski.

Deity.

Metre.

32

Vasishtha. Sakti Indra.

Vasishtha.

Brihatl and Satobrihatt
alternately. 3 DvipadJt
Virftj.

33

V.tsishtha. His
sons (10-14).

Vasishtha’s sons.
Vasishtha (10-14).

Trishtup.

34

Vasiahtha.

Visvedevas. Ahi. Ahi-
budhnya.

DvipadA 22-25 Trishtup,

35 The same.

Visvedevas.

Trishtup.

36

37


The same.

The Bame.

38


Savitar. Savitar or

Bhaga. Vdjins (7-8).


39

40


VisvedevaB.

The same.


41


Various (1). Bhaga. Ushas.

Trishtup. 1 Jagatl.

42


Visvedevas.

Trishtup.

43


The same.

The same.

44


Various (1). Dadhikr&s.

Trishtup. 1 Jagatl.

4i*


Savitar.

Trishtup.

46


Iiudra.

Jajjpti. 4 Trishtup.

47


Waters.

Trishtup.

48


Ribhus. Ribhus or
Visvedevas.

The same.

49


Waters.


50


Mitra and Varuna. Agni Jagatl. 4 Atijagati or
Visvedevas. Praise of UiverB. Sakvart.

51


Aditya3.

Trishtup.

52


The same.

The same.

53


Heaven and Earth.


54


V&stoshpatL


55


Vistoshpati. Indra.

1 Gftyatrf. 2-4 Upamhf>
brihatl. 5-8 Anuehtup.

56


Maruts.

1-11 DvipadA VirAj. 12-‘
Trishtup.

57


The same.

Trishtup.

58



The same.

59


Maruts. Rudra (12).

I, 8, 6 Brihatt. 2, l 6 s »'
briliktl. 7, 8Tr»htui) 9-i
Gftyatrl. 12 AnusUtup.

60


SCtrya Mitra and Varuna.

Trishtup.

61


Mitra and Varuna.

The same.

62 .


SOrya. Mitra and Varupa*


63


The tame.


II t/mn.


INDEX OP HYMNS.


617


Rishi.

64 Vasishtha.

65 The same.

66


68

69

70

71


73

74

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

Isu


S ..

1 ...

)

1 ...
>2 .
•3 ...
>4 ...
to ...
to



Deity .


Metre.


Mitra and Vanina.
The same.

Mitra and Varuna.
Adityas. Sdrya.

Abvius.

The same.


Trishtup.

The same.

G&yatrt. 10-15 Brihati and
Satobrihat! alternately.
16 Pura-ushnih.
Trishtup. ;

VirAj. 8, 9 Trishtup.
Trishtup.

The same.


Brihati and Satobrliatt

alternately.

Ushas or Dawn. Trishtup.

The same. The same.


Indra and Varuna.
The same.


Varuna.
The Bame.


Vi\yu. Indra and V&yu.
The same.


Indra and Agni.
The same.

Saraavatt. Saraavftn.
The sam£


Brihati and Satobiihatt
alternately.

Jagatl.

The same.

Trishtup.

The same.


G&yatit, 5 Jagatt.
Trishtup.

The same.


G&yatii. 12 Auuslitup.
Trishtup.

1 Brihati. 2 Satobrihati. 3
PtastArapankti 4-6G4ytrt.
Trishtup.


Indra. Brihaspati. Indra
andBrahraanaspati. Indra
and Bfihaapati.

Tnriyo onri RHhasnati. The same.



618


INDEX OP HYMNS.


Deity. Metre.

Vishnu. Indra and Vishnu. Trishtup.

Vishnu. The same.

Parjanya.

The same. 1,3 GAyatri. 2 PAdanichrit.

Frogs. Trishtup. 1 Anushtup.

Indra and Soma. Indra. Trishtup. 1-6, 18, 21, 23

Soma Agni. The Gods. Jagati. 7 Jagati or Tritfh
Press-stones. Maruts. tup. 25 Anushtup.
VasiBhtha’s Prayer. Earth
and Firmament.


BOOK VIII.

1 PrajAtha K&nva Indra. Asanga’s Munifi- Brihati. 2, 4 Satobrihatl.


(1,2), MedbAti- cence. Asanga.
thi and Medh-
yAtithi (3-29),

Asinga (30-33),

33, 34 Trishtup.

Saarati (34).

2 MedtAtithi and Indra. Vibhindhu’s

GAyatri. 28 Anushtup.

Priyamedha.

Munificence.

4

MedhAtithi

(41-42).

3 MedhyAtithi.

Indra. PAkasthAman's
Munificence.

Brihati and Satobrihatl
alternately. 21 Anushtup.
22,23 GAyatri. 24 Brihati.

4 Devatithi.

Indra. Indra or POshan.
Kurunga’s Munificence.

Brihati and Satobrihatl al-
ternately. 21 Pura-ushnih.

5 BrahmAtithi.

Asvins. Kasu’s Munificence. GAyatri. 37, 38 Brihati. 35
Anushtup. GAyatri.

6 Vatsa.

Indra. Tirindira’s
Munificence.

GAyatri.

7 Punarvatsa,

Maruts.

The same.

8 Sadhvansa.

Asvins.

Anushtup.

9 Sasakarna.

The same.

1, 4, #, U, 16, Brihati. 2,
3, 20, 21, Giyatrl. 5
kup. 7,9,13,16.19. Ana-
shtup. 10 Trishtup. B
VirAj. 12 Jagati.

10 PragAtha.


1,5 Brihati. 2 Madhyejyotu-

3 Anushtup. 4 Astara-
pankti. 6 Satobfibatl.

11 Vatsa.

Agni.

GAyatri. 1 PratishthA. 2Vtf
dhamAnA. 10 Trishtup.

12 Parvata.

Indra.

Ushnih.

13 NArada.

The same.

The same.


S Risk*.
$

99 Vasishtha.

100 The same.

101

102

103

104



Hymn .


INDEX OF HYMNS.


619


Riihi.


Deity.


Metre.


14 Goshfiktin and

Asvasfiktin.

15 The same.

16 Irimbithi.

17 The same.

18

19 Sobhari.


20 The same.

21

22


Visvamanas.
The same.


Indra.
The same.


Adityas. Asvins. Agni.

Sfirya, Vdta or Wind.
Agni. Adityas. Trasa-
dasyu's Munificence.


Maruts.

Indra. Chitra’s Munificence,
Asvins.


Agni.

Indra. A Prince’s
Munificence.


Gdyat

Ushih.

Gdy<ri.

Gdyd. 14 Brihati.

1 Satobrihati.

Ush:h.

1-26^8-33 Kakup and Sato-
bhati alternately. 27
Dipadd Virdj. 34 Ushnih.
3Satobrihati. 36 Kakup.
3<Pankti.

Kakp and Satobrihati
ahrnately.

The ame.

1-7 kihati and Satobrihati
alternately. 8 Anushtup.
9, D, 13-18 Kakup and
Satobrihati alternately.il
Kakip. 12 Madhyejyotis.
Ushnih

Ushnih.30 Anushtup.


Mitra and Varuna.

Visvedevas.
Asvins. Vdyu.

Manu VaivM- Visvedevas.
vata.

The same. The same.

Manu, or Kas-
yapa.

Manu.


The same.

Medhdtithi.

Medhydtithi.


The Yajamftna and his
Wife. Their Benediction.
Indra.

The same.


Tje looi Vmu-
r °chishas.

?y4v(Uva.


Ushnih. 23 Ushniggarbhd.

Ushnih. 16,19, 21, 25 Gdya-
tri, 20 Anushtup.

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately.

Gdyatri. 4 Pura-ushnih.

Dvipadd Virdj.

1 Gdyatri. 2 Pura-ushnih.
3 Brihati. 4 Anushtup.

Gdyatri. 9, 14 Anushtup. 10
Pddanichpt. 15-18 Pankti.

Gdyatri.

Brihati. 36-18 Gdyatri. 19
Anushtup.

Anushtup. 16-18 Gdyatri.


Asvins.


UparishtAjjyotis. 22-24
Pankti. 23 Mah&brihatt.



620


INDEX OF HYMNS.


§ Rlshi.

> 2 * *

k!

36 SyAvAsva.

37 ..

38

39 NAbhAka.

40 The same.


Indra.

The same,
ndra and Agni.
Lgni.

udra and Agni.


42 ArchanAnaa, or aruna, Alvins.
NAbhAka.


Sakvarl. 7 MahApankti.
MahApankti. 1 Atijagiti.
GAyatri.

MahApankti.

MahApankti. 2 Sakvari.

12 Trishtup.
MahApankti.

1-3 TriBh$up. 4-6 Anushtu


43 Viriipa.

44 The -same.

45 Trisoka.

46 Vasa Asvya.


,gni. GAyatri.

lie same The Bame.

,gni and Indra. Indra

ndra. Munificence of 1 PAdani$hrit. 2-4, 6, 10


Prithuaravas.


47 Trita Aptya.

48 PragAtha.
49* Bharga.


51 PragAtha.

52 The same.


53

54

55 Kali.


Adityas. Adityas and
Ushas.

Soma.

Agni.

Indra.

The same.

Indra. The Gods.

Indra.

The same.


23, 29, 33, GAyatri. !
Kakup. 7,11,19,25,2;
Brihatt. 8AnuBhtup. 9
26, 28 Satobrihatl. 12 Vi
paritA. 13 Chaturvinfla
tikA DvipadA. 14 Pipili-
bamadhyA Brjjhati. 15 Ki
kip NyankusirA. 16 VirA
17 Jagati. 18 Uparishtto
brihati. 20 Vishamapjid
21, 22, 24, 32 Pankti. i
DvipadA VirAj. 31 U«h?i
MahApankti.


Trishtup. 5 Jagatt.
Brihatt and Satobrihatl
alternately.

The same.

Pankti. 7, 9 Brihati.
Giyatrt. 1, 4, 5, 7 AnusM 0 !

12 Trishtup.

GAyatri.

The same.

Brihatt and Satobrihatl
'alternately. 15 Anushti
GAyatri.

GAystri. 1 , 4 , 7 , 10 Anush?


66 MatayaorMAnya.Adityaa. GAyatri.

57 Priyamedha. Indra. Munificence of GAyatri. M, 7,1° nus *
two Princes. * _____

* Eleven must be added to the numbers of this and ft

this Book to make them correspond with the numbers in Prof.
editions of the text. See note p. 267 .


INDEX or HTMNB.

. i 621

| Ruki.

Deity.

Metre.

58 The same.

Indra. Visvedevas. Varung Anushtup. 2 Ushnih. 4-6
Gdyatri. 11, 16*Paukti.
17, 18 Brihati.

59 Puruhanman.

Indra.

Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately. 7*12 Brihati.
13 Ushnih. 14 Anush tup.
15 Pura-ushnih.

60 Sadi fci and Puru

- Agni.
r

Gdyatri. 10-15 Brihati and

mil ha, or ei the:

Satobrihati alternately.

of them.

61 H&ryata.

The same.

Gdyatit.

62 Gopavana, or

Asvins.

The same.

Saptavadhri,

63 Gopavana.

Agni-Srutarvan’s

Munificence.

Gdyatri. 1, 4, 7, 10, 13-15
Anushtup.

64 VirCipa.

Agni.

Gdyatri.

! 66 Kurusuti.

Indra.

The same.

66 The same.

The same.

Gldyatrl. 10 Brihati. 11
Satobrihati.

57


Gdyatri. 10 Brihati.

58 Kritnu.

Soma.

Gdyatri. 9 Anushtup

59 Ekadyfi.

Indra. The Gods.

Gdyatri. 10 Trishtup.

73 Kusidin.

Indra.

Gdyatri.

(1 The same.

The same.

Tie same.

n

Visvedevas.



73 Uflanft K&vya.

Agni.


74 Krishna.

Asvins.


75 Visvaka.

The same.

Jagatt

76 Dyumnlka or
Priyamedha


Brihati and Satobrihati
alternately.

or Krishna.

77 Nodhas.

Tndra.

The same.

78 Nrimedha and
Purumedha.

The same.

1, 3, 7 Brihati. 2, 4 Satobri-
hati. 5, 6 Anushtup.

79 The same.


Pragdtha.

*> Ap4U.


Anushtup. 1, 2 Pankti.

81 Srutakaksha, or ... rr

Gdyatri. 1 Anushtup.

Bukaksha.

82 Sukaksha.

Indra. Indra and Ribhus.

Gdyatri.

Vindu. or P4t»- M*rutg. •

The same.

dakaha.

1 3* Tiraschl.

Indra.

Anushtup.

i 85 DyutAna, or
[ Tiraschl.

Indra. Maruts. Indra
and Buhasp&tl.

Trishtup. 4 Virdj.



622


INDEX OF HYMNS.


I ^

tej

86 Rebha.


87 Nrfmedha.

88 The same.

89 Nema. Indra

(45).

90 Jamadagni.


91 Prayoga, or
Agni BArhas-
patya, or Agni
Grihapati, or
Yavishtha.


Indra. Brihati. 10, 13 Atijagatl. 11

12 UparishtAdbrihati. 1
Trishtup. 1*6 Jagati.

The san. Ushnih. 7, 10, 11 Kakup. 9

12 Para-ushnih.

PragAtha.

Indra. Vc. Trishtup. 6 Jagati. 7-9

Anushtup.

Mitra an<Varuna. Adi- 1, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13 Brihati. 2, <
tyas. Alins. V&yu. Surya. 6, 8, 10, 12 Satobrihati.
Ushas. ‘avamAna. Cow. Gayatri. 14-16 Trishtu]
Agni. GAyatri.


Agni. Agni \nd Maruts.


vAlakhil^a HYMNS.*

1 Praskanva. Indra Brihati and Satobrihati

al^rnately.

2 Pushtigu. The same. The same.

3 Srushtigu.

4 Ayu.

5 Medhya.

6 MAtarievan, Indra. Visvedevas.

7 Krisa Praekanva’e Munificence. GAyatrt. 3-5 Anushtup.

8 Prishadra. The Bame. Agni and Sfirya. QAyatri. 5 Pankti.

9 Medhya. Asvins. Trishtup.

10 The same. Visvedevas. The Priests . The same.

11 Suparna. Indra and Varuna. Jagati.


BOOK IX.

1 Madhuchchhan* Soma PavamAna. GAyatri.

das.

2 MedhAtith^ The same. The same.

3 $unahsepa.

4 Hirnnyaatfipa

5 Asita,orDevala. Apris. GAyatrl. 8-11 Anushtup.

6 The same. Soma PavamAna. Gayatri.

7-24 The same. The same.

* These eleven hymns are numbered 49—59 in Prof.
editions of the text.



IWDEX OF HYMNS.


623


• Ddl V- Metre.

'ii

^ Jrilhachyuta. Soma PavamAua. GAyatrl.

9^ IdhmavAha

Nrimedha.

? ,8 Priyamedha.

h9 Nrimedha.

30 Vindu.

31 Gotama.

32 SydvAsva.

33 Trita Aptya

34 The same.

35 Prabhfivasu

, 36 The same.

3/ Rahtigana.

38 The same.

39 Brihanmati,

40 The same.

41 MedhyAtithi

'2 The same.

6

4 AyAsya.

The same.

it *

47 Ravi.

48 The same.

49 •

50 Uchathya.

*1 The same.

i2

'8-60 AvatsAra

1 Amahiyu.

^ Jamadagni. 1

3 Nidhruvi.

1 *%apa.

J Bhrigu or

Jamadagni,

VaikhAnasas. Soma PavamAna. Agni. GAyatrt. 18 Anushtup.
BharadvAja. PavamAna Soma. Pavam&na GAyatrl. 16-18 DvipadA GA-
^wyapa. Gota- PAshan. Agni. Savitar. All- yatrl. 27, 31, 32 Anuah-
m *Atri.VisvA- Gods. Praise of Students, tup. 30 Pura-ushnih.
nntra. Jama-
Jagnl Vaaish-
l.U. Pavitra.



Hymn .


624


INDEX OF HYMNS.


RUM. Deity.


Metre .


68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80
81
82

83

84

85

86


V&teaprt. Soma Pavamtaa.

Hiranyaatftpa. The same.

Renu

Rishabha.

Harimanta.

Pavitra.

Kakshiv&u.

Kavi.

The same.


Vasu.

The same.


Pavitra.

Praj&pati.

V ena.

The Akrwhta . ■
M5ahas. The
Sikata Ni\&va-
ris. The Pi is ’/ 1
Ajas. Atri.
Gritsamada.


87 UsiiA.

88 The same.

89

90 Vasishtha.

91 Kasyapa.

92 The same.

93 Nodhas.

94 Kanva.

95 Praskanva.

96 Pratardana.

97 Vasishtha. In-

drapramati.

Manyu. Upa-
raanyu. Vy4-
ghrapftd. Sakti
Karnaarnt.

Mri]ika. Vasu*
kra. Partora.
KuUa.


Jagati. 10 Trishtup.
Jagatl. 9, 10 Trishtup.
Jagati. 10 Trishtup.
jagatl. 9 Trishtup.
Jagatl.

The same.

Jagatl. 8 Trishtup
Jagati. (

The same.


Jagatl. 5 Trishtup.

The same.

Jagati.

The same.

Jagatl. 11, 12 Trishtup.
Jagati.

It


Trishtup.
The same.



INDEX OF HYMNS.


625


^ Rishi. Deity.

98 Ambarteha and Soma PavamAna.
Rijisvan.

9S TheRebhasdnus. The same.

00 The same.

01 Andhigu. YayA-

ti. Nahusha.

Manu. PrajApati.

02 Trita Aptya

03 Dvita Aptya

04 Parvata and

NArada, or the

SikhandinK

(Apsaras).

105 Parvata and

NArada.

,Ut> Agni. Chakahus

Manu.

0? Seven Riahis

■OS Gauriviti. Sak-

ti. Oru. Uijis-
I van. Ordhva-
sadman. Kii-
tayasl Rinau-
chaya.

9 Agnia of Sacr>-

fice.

0 Tryaruna and

Trasadaayu.

1 AnAnata.

12 Sisu.

12 Kasyapa.

U The same.


re.

Anushtup, 11 Brihatt.

Anushtup. 1 Brihatl.
Anushtup.

Anushtup. 2, 5 GAyatrl.


Uahnih.
The same.


PrAgAtha. 3, 16 DvipadA Vi-
rAj. 8, 10 Brihati.

1*12 Kakup and Satobrihat!
alternately. 13 GAyatrl
YavainadhyA. 14,16 Sato-
bnhati. lo Kakup.


DvipadA VirAj.

1-3 Anushtup Pipihkam&dh-
yA. 4-9 Ordhvabrihnti.
10-12 Viraj.

Atyashti.

Pankti.

The same. t


BOOK X.

1 Trita Aptya. Agni. Trishtup.

^ The same. The Bftzne. The same



26


index ok hymns.


§ Risk?

Deity.

Metre.

9 Trisirasor Sin-

Waters.

GAyatrl. 5 VardhamA_.

dliudvipa.


PratUhtUA. 8,9 Anuehtup

10 Yaren. Yami.

Yama. Yarn!.

Trishtup.

11 H.i%ird liana

Agni.

Jagati. 7-9 Trishtup.

A up.



12 The same

'fiie Hatno

Ti ishtup.

13 Vivasvan.

The Two CarK

Trishtup. 5 Jagati.

14 Yamu

Yanm. The PciticH men-

Trhhtup. 13, 14. 16 Anush


turned The Fatheis. The
Hound*. Minn of Sarnnui.

tup. 15 Brihatl.

15 Si'ikha.

The Fathers.

Trishtup. 11 J.igati

16 Damana

Agni

Trishtup. 11-14 Anush tup

17 De\a»r.ivas.

Saranvu P mhan. Sarasvati. Trishtup 14 Anuahtup LJ


Waters. Soma.

Anush tup or PuraatAd
blihati.

18 Sankus-uka.

Mritvu Dhatar. Tvnshtar.

Trhhtup. 1 1 PrasUrapankti,

The Pitnmedha. Praj.ipati

i 13 Jagati. 14. Annshtup

19 M.ithita.Bhrigu, Waters, oi Cows. Agni

Anush tup. 6 GAyatii,

or Chvavnna.

and Soma.


20 VimadaorYa-

Agm.

G&vftri. 1 EkapadA Vir4j.

suhrit.

2 Anush tup. 9 Vir&j. 10
Trishtup.


21 The same.

Tiic same.

Astarapankti.

22 .

Indra.

PurastAdbrihati, 5,7,9 Auu


shtup. 15 Trishtup.

21

The same

Jng.it t. 1, 7 Trishtup. 5



Abhis&rini.

24

Indra. Asvins.

AstArapankti. 4-6 Anush tu

25

Soma.

A-tArapankti.

26

Pushan.

Amiehtup, 1, 4 Uehnih.

27 Vanukra

Indra.

Trishtup.

2 S Ya^nkra’H^kYife Imlrn. Vasukra.

The same.

Indra. Vamkra.


29 Va>ukr ».

Indra.


30 K-nrab'irt.

Waters, or Child of Waters

31 The .same.

Visvedevas.


32

Indra.

1-5 Jagati. 6*9 Trishtup-

33

Vi»vedevftR. Indra. Kuril-

1 Trishtup. 2 Brihatl. 3 5


uravana. Upamasravus.

brihatl. 4-9 GAyatr .

34 Ka vasln, or

Dice. Agriculture.

Trishtup. 7 Jagati.

Aksha.


35 Lusa.

Vifvedevaa.

Jagati. 13, 14 Trishtup-

36 The same.

The same.

The same.

37 AbhitapA.

Suiya.

t ii -t n T • 1 ( in wM



INDSX OF UTMNS.


627


1

Rishi.

Deity.

Metre.

38

Indra Mushka*
via.

Indra.

Jagati.

39

Ghosh A.

Asvina.

Jagati. 14 Trishtup.

40

The aame.

The same.

Jagatt.

41

Suhaatya.


The same.

42

Krishna.

Indra.

Trishtup.

43

The same.

The same.

Jagatt. 10, 11 Trishtup.

44

45

Vatsapri.

Agni.

Jagatt. 1*3, 10, 11 Trishtup.
Trishtup.

45

The bame.

The same.

The same.

47

Saptagu.

Indra Vaikuntha.


48

Indra Vaikun-
tha.

The same.

Jagatt. 7, 10, 11 Trishtup.

49

The same.


Jagati. 2, 11 Trishtup,

50


.

1, 2, 6, 7 Jagati. 3, 4 Abhi*
sArini. 5 Trishtup.

51

Agni Sauchfka.

Agni. Gods.

Trishtup.

52

The same.

Gods.

The same.

53

Agni Sauchika.
Gods.

Agni. Gods.

Trishtup. 6, 7, 9-11 Jagati.

54

Brihaduktha.

Indra.

Trishtup.

55

The same.

The same.

The same.

56


Viavedevas.

Trishtup. 4, 6 Jagatt,

57

Bandhu, Sruta*
bandhu, Vi-
prabandhu.

The Bame.

GAyatrl.


58

The same.

Tim Spit it.

Anushtup.

59


Nirriti. Soma. Asuniti. The Trishtup. 8 Pankti. 9 Ma-



Deities mentioned. Heav-
en and rarth. Indra.

hApankti. 1 OPankty uttarA

60

The GaupAya-

AsamiUi. Indra. Subandhu’s Anushtup. 1-5 GAyatri. 8’


nas amt their
Mother.

Recall to Life. The Hands.

9 Pankti.


^ NAbbAuedishtha.Visvedevaa. Trishtup.

82 The aame. Yisvedevaa, or Augirases, 1-4 Jagati. 5,8,9 Anush
Viavedevas. S&varni’a tup. 6 Brihatt. 7 Sato-
Liberality. brihatt. 10 GAyatrt. 11

Trishtup.

63 0*7*. VisTed»ya». Patliy# Svaati. Jagat!. 16, 17 Trishtup. 15

Trishtup or Jagati.

^ The same. Viavedevas. Jagatt. 12, 16, 17 Trishtup,

f° ^ukarna. The same. Jagatt. 15 Trishtup.

J The same. The aame.


— BrihaiPftti.


Trishtup.



Hymn.


623


index of hymns-


68 AyAsya.

69 Sumitra.

70 The same.

71 Brihaspati.

72 Brihaspati, or

Aditi.

73 GaurivTti.

74 The same.

75 Sindhukshit.

76 Jaratkarna.

77 Syumarasmi.

78 The same.

79 Agni, or Sapt

80 Agni.

81 Visvakarman

82 The same.

83 Manyu.

84 The same.

85 SuryA.


Brihaspati.

Agni.

Aprls.

JZttnam.

Gods.

Indra.

The same.

The Rivers

The Press-stones

Marut.s.

The same.


Agni.

The same.

Visvakarman.
be same. The same,

tlanvu Manyu. Tnshtup. 1 Jagat!

7 Th „ 1 STiiahtup. 4-7 Jagait

rh0 r me ' ^ B, nlal. Gods. An.htup, 1 4 ]M1 23

Son.’* and Ark. ThrMoon. 24, 26 36 37. 44 Tr,
Benedictions. S.irya. ^

Indra. IndrAnt. lndra. IndrA.l VribhAkapi. Pankti.


Tiishtup.

Trishtup. 1,2 Jagati.
Trishtup.

Trishtup. 9 Jagaii.
Anush tup.

Tiishtup.

The same.

.1 agati.

The same
Trishtup 5 .1 agatt.

1, 3, 4, 8 Trishtup 2
Jagati

Tiishtup.

The same.


VrishAkapi.
87 PAyu.

gg MurdhanvAn.

89 Kenn.

90 HArAyana.

91 Aruna.

92 §AryAta.

93 TAnva.


94 Arbuda.

95 Purftravaa.

Urvasl.

96 Barn, or

garvahari.

97 Bbishaj.

98 DavApi.


Agui Rakshohl.

Surya and VaisvAnara.
Indra and Soma.
PuruBha.

Agni

Visvedevas
The same


The Press-stones.
Urvafi. Pururavas.

Indra’s Horses.

Medicinal Herbs.
Gods.

Indra.


Trishtup. 22,25 Amiebtu
Trishtup.

The same.

Anushtup. 13 Trifhtup.
Jagati. 15 Trishtup.
Jagati.

PraetArapankti. 2.3,13 Ai

shtup. 9 Pankti. 11 Ny
ku^rini. 15 PurasUdl
hail. ’

Jagati. 5. 7, 14 Trishtup
Trishtup.

Jagati. 12, 13 TribhWP

Anush^up.

Trishtup.

The same.



INDEX OF HYMNS.


629


Rishi.


Deity.


Metre.


100 Duvasyu.
lljl Hudlu.


M udgala.
Apratiiatha.

A ah taka.
Durmitra or
Sumitra.
BhutAnra.


ViswdevaB.

Visvedevas, or Priests.

Tndi a, or the Mace,
lndra. Bnhaspati. Apwi.

M aruts.
lndra.

The same.

Alvins.


Divya, or Dak- Guerdou.
shir. A.

SaramA. Panis. SaramA Pams


H'8

1(9 Juhfl. Visvedevas.

Jamadagui or Apiis.

Rama.

A^htrAdanshtra. lndra.
Nahhabprabhe- The same,
dana.

Sataprabhedana

14 Sadhri or Ghar- Visvedevas.
ma.

Ppastuta. Agni.


110


13


15


1 °


Agniyuta or
Aguiyupa.
Bhikshu.
Lrukshuya
Lava.

Brihaddiva.

Hiranyagarbha.

Phitrainaha.

Vena.

Agni. Agni, Va-
runa, and Soma
Vdk.

Rulmalabarhi-
•J'a, or Anho-
much.

Kusika or Ratri

Vihavya.
Pra j4pati Para*
meshthin.

Yajha.


lndra.

Libei ality.

Agni RakshohA.
lndra as Lava,
lndra.

Ka.

Agni.

Vena.

Agni. lndra.
VAk.

Visvedevas.


Night.*

Visvedevas.

Creation.

The same.


Jagati. 12 Trishtup.
Tnshtup. 4, 6 GAyatri.

5 Brihatl 9. 12 Jagati.
Trishtup, 1, 3, 12 Brihatt.
Trishtup. 13 Anushtup.

Trishtup.

Ushnih. 2, 7 Pipilikamadh*
V;l. 11 Tiishtup
Tnshtup,

TrUhtup. 4 Jagati.
Trishtup.

Trishtup. 6, 7 Anufhtup,
Trishtup.

The same.


Jagati. 10 Trishtup.
Trishtup 4 Jagati.

Jagati. 8 Trishtup.

Sakvari.

Tnshtup.

Trishtup 1, 2 Jagatt.
UAyatii.

The same.

Trishtup.

The same.

Jagati. 1, 5 Trishtup.
Trishtup.

Trishtup. 7 Jagati.

Trishtup. 2 Jagati.
UparishtAdbrihati.

8 Trishtup.

GAyatri.

Trishtup. 9 Jagati.
Trishtup.

Trishtup. 1 Jagatt.



630


INDEX OF HYMNS.


I

Riahi. Deity.

Metre.

131

Suktrti. Indira. Asvins.

Triahtup. 4 Anushtup.

132

Sakaputa. Heaven and Earth, Asvins.

Mitra and Varu'ja.

1 Nyankusdrini. 2, 6 Prag
tdrapankti. 3-5 Virddru
pA. 7 Mahdsatobrihat!.

133

Sudds. Indra.

1-3 Sakvari. 4-6 Mahdpank
ti. 7 Triahtup.

134

Mandhdtar. The same.

Godhd.

Mahdpankti. 7 Pankti.

135

Kumdra. Yama.

Anushtup.

136

Seven Munis : The Kevins.

Juti. Vdtajdti.

ViprajQti. Vri-
shinaka. Etasa.
ltisyasringa.

The same.

137

The Seven Visvedevaa.

Risbis.

Anushtup.

138

Anga. Indra.

Jagati.

139

Visvdvasu. Sfirya. Visvdvasu.

Triahtup.

140

Agni Pavaka. Agui.

1 Vishtdrapankti. 2-4 Sa-
tobrihati. 5 Uparisbtdj-
jyotis. 6 Tritshtup.

141

Agni Tlpasa. Visvedevas.

AnuAtup.

142

Jaritar. Drona. Agni.

Sdriarikva.

Stambamitra.

Triahtup. 1, 2 Jagatt. 7, 8
Anushtup.

143

Atri. Alvins.

Anushtup.

144

Supar’a, Ordh- Iudra.
vakriaana.

1, 3, 4 Gdyatri. 2 Brihati.
5 Satobrihati. 6 Viahtdra-
pankti.

145

Indrdnt. Removal of Rival.

Anushtup. 6 Pankti.

U6

Devamuni. Aranydni.

Anushtup.

147

Suvedas. Indra.

Jagatf. 5 Trishtup.

148

Prithu Vainya. The same.

Trishtup.

149

Archan. Savitar.

The same.

150

Mrillka. Agni,

1-3 Brihatt. 4 Uparisht.1
jyotia or Jagati,. 5 Up
riahtdjjyotis.

151

Sraddhl Sraddhd (Faith).

Anushtup.

152

SAaa. Indra,

The same.

153

Indra’* Mothers. The same.

Gdyatri.

154

Yamt. New Life.

Anushtup.

155

Sirimbitha. Averting of Misfortune.

Brahman&ipati. ViBve-
devag.

The »auoe.

156

Ketu. Agni.

Gdyatri.



INDEX OF HYMNS.


7 Bhuvaua, or Visvedevas.

Sadhana.

8 Chakshua. Sftrya.

9 Sachf Paulomi. Saclii Pauloint

0 Purana. Indra.

1 Yakshm.urisana. Removal of Phthisic

2 Rakuhoha. Against Mihcamage

J Vivriha. Removal of Phthisis.

4 Piadieta*. Dissipation ot Bad Dreams

5 Kapota. Visvedevas.

t) Rishuhha. Removal of Rivals

7 ViavAmitr.i and India.

Jam.idagut.

8 Anils. V.ivu.


Anils. Y.iyu.

Sahara. Cows.

Vibhiiij. Surya.

Ita. Indra.

Samvarta. Ushas
Dhrnva. The King

Abhivarfa. The »>ame.

Oidh vagi .Ivan. Tiie Pieas-shmes.

Siinu. Hibhuit. Agn\

Pstanga. M iyabheda.

Arishtauemi. T.iik»hya.

Sibi. Pratarda- India,

na. VdsuLmuias.

Jay a. The same.

Piacha. Sapia- Visvedevai.
ilia, (ihanua.

Tapunu irdliau. Brihaspati.

PrujdvAu The SaentKvr. Hu Wife

The Hotai.

Tvaaht ir or Benediction of the Kanin }o


Tvaaht ir or
Vishnu.

Sutyadhriti. Aditi.

Ula. * Vayu.

Vatsa. Agni.

Hyena. Agni Jitavedas.

bdipaidjfti. Silipardjhi, or S.uya.

AgUamarshana. (J teat ion.

Samvanana. Agni. Unanimity.


Dvipidi Tihhtup.

Gsyati i.

\nushtup.

Tiishtup.

Tiiditup. j Anushtup.

A mi'll tup.

I lie f-ame.

12 , 1 Anush tup. I? Tudi
tup 5 IViukti.

Tn-hiup.

Auu dii up. 5 Malidpankti.


Tiishtup.

The same.

Jagati. 4 Astarapanku.
G.iy.itii.

Iivip.uhi Viraj.

Anush tup.

The same.
it t}atn.

Anushtup 2 Gfiyatii.
i Jagati 2 . J 7 h wlitujt,
Tiishtup.

1 Annshtup. 2, J Tiithtup.

Ti ithtup.

The uame.


Anushtup.

Gay alt 5.
The same.


Aniwhtup.

Anushtup. 3 Tiishtup.


GENERAL INDEX OF HYMNS.

AU'ORDINU TO DEITIES AND SUBJECTS.*


X 27.
*7.


I) KIT IKS OF DUVN.


COSMIC DEITIES.

Ribhm. 1.20.110.111 HI. 60. IV


lap. Dawn. Morning — l 48.49. 92
13 128 124 III. 61. IV. 51. 52 V.

9 80. VI. 64.65. VIJ. 75-81. X 172
■ Alvins. —I. 84 46. 47 112. 116-
20. 157 158. 180-184. II 39. Ill 58
V 43-45. V 73-77 VI. 62. 63 VI 1.
17-74. VIII. 5 8-10 22. 26. 35 62.
'4 76 V&lakhilya Hymns, at the
wPof VIII 9 X 39-41. 106 143.
dhikiivan, Dadlnkr.ia - IV. 38 40.
HI 44

m as a Clod of Morning.— IV. 13 14

YA HUN A AND SUN-GODS
nnin. — I. 21 25. II. 28. V. 85 VII
36. 89 VIII 41.42.
tr« - HI. 59 VII. 41.
runa, Mitra, Aryaman -I. 41
itra and Vanina. — 1.136 137 151-
153. V. 62-72. VI. 67. VI l 60-66
VIII. 25. X. 132. 185.
lityas - U. 27. VII. 51. 52. VI II
IS. 47. 56.

irya.-l. 50 116. X. 37. 158.
witar.-I.35. II. 38. IV. 53.54 V 81.
vl VI. 71. VII 38 45 X 139. 149.
(khan -I 42. 138. VI. 53-56 58.
X 26.

"•linn -I 154 156. VII 99 luO.
w.nkannan. — X 81. 82.

X. 1 23.

’iklir/Lj.— X. 170.

'bkshyn.-.-X. 178.

^ r I.arAjfiU or Stirya X 189


33-37 VII. 48

Heaven and Earth.- -I 159 160. 185
IV 56 VI 70. VII. 53.

Pntlml -V. 84.

Saras vat i VI. 61. VII 95-96

Wateis— VII. 17. 49. X. 9 Waters
or Cows. -X. 19

Son of Waters. Ap&mnapsU -II 35

Soma —I 91. VIII. 48. 68 X. 25

COLLECTIVE AND MISCELLA-
NEOUS DEITIES.

Visvedevas, All Gods — 1.14.89 90
106. 107 122. 139. 186. II. 29. 31
III 54-57 IV. »5o. V. 41-51. VI.
49 52 VII 34 36. 37. 39. 40. 42.
43. VIII 27-30. 72. X. 31. 35 36
63-66. 92 93 100.

Asvm« Savitar, Agni. Heaven and
E nth. Vishnu I 22

Vitvu, India. MitVa, Vanina. Visve-
devas P.^han, Wateis. Agni.— 1.23.

Heaven and Earth, Indra, Tvashtar,
fvilkft, Sinivali — II. 32

Indra, Vftvu. Mitra. Varuna, Asvin*,
Visvedevas, Sarasv.it.t, Dvans, Pii-
thivi -II 41.

Imlra. Varuna, Buhaspati. PiisImd,
Sivitar Soma Miua. Vanina —III.
62

Mitra, Varuna Adit } as, Aavins, V:\yu,
Siirva, PavimAna, the Cow. — X III.
90.


I follow tlie classification Hiid Hirangemenl adopted hy Professor Lud«
iu !ii« Tianelntion The names of many of the deities are repeated in
Sections in accordance with the subjects of the hymns addressed to
. Plr ^ For instance, the great deeds of Imlra are i elated in hymns placed lu
e ^ORUiogomcftl and Mythical Section.



,NI {JATAVEDAS and
VAISVANARA).

I. 1. 12. 26. 27. 31. 36. 44. 45. 58-60.
65-70. 94*99. 127. 128. 140. 141.
143-150. 189. II. 1. 2. 4-10. III. 1-
3. 5-7. 9-11. 13-28. IV. 1-12. 15.
V. 1-4.6-11. 13-28. VI. 1-16. 48.
VII. 1. 3. 4-17. VIII. 11. 19. 23.
39, 43. 44. 49. 60. 61. 64. 64. 73.
91. 92. X. 1-8. 11. 12. 20. 21. 45.
46. 79. 80 87. 88. 91. 115. 118. 122.
140. 142. 150. 156. 176. 187. 188.


INDRA (SATAKRATU, SAKRA,
MANYU.)

I 4-11. 16. 30. 54-57. 61-63. 80-84.
100-104. 121. 129 133. 135. 169.
173-178. II 11-22. 30. III. 30-32.
34-52. IV. 16. 17. 19. 25. 29. 31.
32. 46 V. 29-39. VI. 17-26. 28-47.
VII 19-32 VIII 1-4. 6, 12-17. 21.
24 32-34. 36. 37. 45. 46. 50-55. 57.
59 65 67. 69. 71. 77-79. 81. 82.84-

88. VALkhilyft, 1-6. X 22-24. 29.
32. 42-44. 47 50. 54. 55. 73. 74.

89. 96. 104 105. 112. 113. 116. 120.
131. 133. 134. 138. 144. 147. 148.
152 153. 160. 171 179. 180. Manyu.
X. 83 84


GODS OF STORM, WIND,
AND RAIN.

Maruts — I. 37-39. 64. 85-88. 166-168.
171 II 34. V. 52-60. 87. VI. 66. VII.
56-59. VIII. 7. *20. 83. X. 77. 78.
Rudra. — I. 43. 114. II. 33. VII. 46.
VAyu. — 1. 2. 134. IV. 47. 48. VII.

90-92. X. 168. 186.

Parjanya.— V. 83. VII. 101. 102.

LORD OF PRAYER.
Br&hinanasp&ti or Brihaspati. — I. 18.
40 190. II. 23-26. IV. 50. VI. 73.
VII. 97. 98. X- 182.

Indra and Brahmanaspati.— IV. 49.


DUAL DEITIES.
Indra-Varuna.— I. 17. IV. 41. VI. 68.

VII. 82. 84. 85. V&Iakhilya, 11.
Iudra-Pushan. — VI. 57.
lndra-Vishnu. — VI. 69. •

Indra- Agni — I. 21. 108. 109. III. ] 2.
V. 86. VI. 59. 60. VII. 93. 94. VIII.
88. 40.

Agni-Maruts.— I. 19.

Iudra-Soma — VI. 72. VII. 104.
Agni-Soina. — I. 93.

Soma-Rudm.- VI. 74.

Soina-Pushan. — II. 40.


LITURGICAL HYMNS. PRAYERS
CHARMS.


Visvedevas — X. 114. Sacred Metres-
— X. 130. Praise of the Angina
ses. — X. 62. The Sacrificer and hii
Wife. — VIII. 31. The Sacrificer,
Wife, and Hotar. — X. 183 Faith, i
X. 151. Visvedevas. — X. 157. Staid
of the Doad^-X. 154. DaksM
(Priests’ Guerdon). — X. 107. Ilitvi-
jas (Priests).— Vdlakhilya. 10. X

101. Apris. — I 13. 142. 188. II. 3
III. 4. V. 5. VII. 2. IX. 5- X. 70
110. Production of Sacrificial 1’ ire
—III. 29. Sacrificial Stake.— Ill
8. Pestle and Mortar. -1. 28. Pre*
stones. — X. 76. 94. 175. Havirdld
mis.— X. 13. Ritus (Seasons).-!


36. 37. Soma PavamAna — IX. !-■
1-114. Praise of the Horse-
162. 163. Waters, or Son of Waten
-X. 30. Saranyft, Sar *

iratl, Waters, Soma.— X. 17. Sur)
BridaL-X. 85 VAstoshpati (G«»>
iian of the House).— VII. « •

tshetrapati (Lord of < *

rod S1U (Furrow).— IV. 67- )

af Food. I. 187.

less of the Forest).— X . 1 - ,

—X. 127. Averting Misfort** J
X. 165. Benediction of the Lm



general index of hyhnb.


X 187. Against Miscarriage.—
162. Asvins. — V. 78. Maruts.—
172. Soma Pavamdna. — IX. 114.
isvedevas. — X. 137. Cows. — X.
59. Water, Grass, Surya.-- I. 191.
idra —VIII. 80. Mitra, Varuna,
gni, Visvedevas, Praise of Rivers.
-VII. 50. Visvedevas. — X. 126.
harm against Phthisis.— X. 161.
53. Charm against Evil Dreams.—
164. Indra. — I. 29. The Bird
f Good Omen.— II. 42. 43. The
irdof 111 Omen. — X. 165. Charm
gainst a rival Wife. — X. 145. SachS
aulomi —X. 159. Visvedevas.—
128. 141. Removal of a Rival —
166 Benediction of the King.—
i. 173. 174. Unanimity.— X. 191.
aine, the Fathers, the Dogs. — X.
4. The Fathers.— X. 15. Agni —
L 16. Mrityu, Dhdtar, TvashUr,
he Pitrimedha, Praj&pati.— X. 18.
/isvedevas — X. 56. Pavamdua
loma. — IX. 14. 6414.

YMNS RELATING TO COSMO-
10NY, MYTHS, HISTORY, AND
CIVILIZATION
cation of the World. — X. 129 190.
I'reatiou by Sacrifice of Purusha —
X. 90. Ka.— X. 121. The Gods.

X 52 72. ViavedevaB. — I. 105 164
181. Miyftbheda.— X. 177. Agni,
Smya, Waters, the Cow, Ghrita —
IV. 58. Rivalry of Indra and
Varuna.— IV. 42. X. 124. India’s
Birth.— IV. 18. Indra. Praise of
die Falcon. — IV. 26. Praise of the
falcon — IV. 27. Indra and Soma.
"IV. 28. Indra and Usha*.— IV.


30. Indra.— I. 32. 33. 51. 53. X 27.
48. 49. 67.68.99. 102.111.119.167.
Indra. Vaaukra. — X. 28. Indra.
Maruts. Agastya. — X. 165. 170
Maruts.— V. 61. Indra. Vdk — VIIL
89. Agni. The Gods.— X. 51. Agni
Sauchika. The Gods.— X. 53. Indra.
Surya. Atii. — V. 40. Vrishdkapi.
Indrdnt. Indra. — X. 86. Urvasi.
Pururavaa — X 95. Saramd. Pams.
—X 108. Visvedevas.— X. 57. Re-
call of the Spirit. — X 58. Nirriti.
Soma. Asuniti. Earth. Heaven and
Earth.— X. 59. Asanviti. Iudra-
Subandhu’s Recall to Life. The
Hands — X. 60. Vak Ambhrini. — X.
125. J&anacu— X 71. Yama. — X.
135 Praise of the Rivers. — X 75.
Vasishtha and the RiverB.— III. 33.
Indra and Parvata, Indra, Vak Sa-
sarpaii. Praise of the Chariot. —
III. 53. India, Chdyatndnu’s Muni-
ficence. — V. 27. Indra. Sudds’*
Munificence. — VII. 18 Vasishlha’s
Sons. Vasishtha. — VII. 33. Indra
and Varuna. — V 1 1. 83 Dadhikrdv an.
— IV. 38. Agni.— V, 12. Savanaya’s
Munificence. — I. 125. Bhdvayavya
and Romasd.— 1 126. Lopdmudrd

and Agastya. — 1. 179 Asvins.— V 1 1 1 .
75 Agui.-X 69. The Gods.— X.
98. Visvedevas. Kurusravana’s Mu
nificence — X.33. Praskanva’s Muni-
ficence.— Vdlakhily a. 7. 8. Kesins.
—X. 136. Visvedevas.— X. 109.
The Frogs.— VII. 103. Weapons of
War.— VI. 75. Indra.— X. 38. 103.
Soma Pavamdna.- -IX 112. Medi-
cinal Herbs.— X. 97. The Dice. -
X. 34. Liberality.— X 117.


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.

hiflwa, a certain So- 486, 487, 493,512, 514, 182, 185-189, 199 202

lift ceremony, 136, 400 523, 5 18, 5 10, 5 11, 55 1, 217-220, 222-224 23?'

“ ,tes 579,607. 250,254-257, 266,267,’

hiv.u ta, a hymn or of Aditi = Agm, 145. 272,273,309 319 322,

firing for success, 603 = the Earth, 288. 323,331, 349, 355,’ 383-

^c. = the Cosmic Cow, 391,394,395,397,401-

ortum, charm against, 357. 401,408 410,419 422

>1 2, 613. Adit} a, son of Aditi, es- 423-427,432, 434,415-

c-enes, Latin name of pccially Varuna and 448, 453 456, 460 464

he Asiknt, the river the Sun, 4, 81, 219,253, 4‘>7-t69 471-4 7.5 477

Hhen&b, 150, 490 note 263, 326,330, 405, 418, 478, 481-4, si, 192, 491-

mn and Eve, the In- 453, 460, 478, 483,487, 496,502,505,506,510-

hxn, 392 note. 514,565,581. 514,519-522,530,539,

lhavaniya, one of the Adityas Gods, seven or 510, 549, 552-554, 557,

three large Soma re- eight in number, 12, 559, 560-564, 566-568,

1 epUcles, 108,124,347, 35,39,40,48, 52,60, 570,571,573,574, 577,

370 notes. 6 1, 81 83. 130, 142-144, 582, 585-587, 592 595-

Ihrigu, a Rishi o t a 147, 164. 165, 168, 1 75, 598, 600, 602-604, 606-

prince, 132, 153. 3 76, 193, 196,197,210, 609, 611, 612

ihvaryu(s) priest, 211, 230, 253, 306, 382, Agm, Lord of Heaven
priests who perform 432,431,450,458,470- and Lai th, 8 ; Lord of

the practical work of 472, 474-177. 487,501, Light, 144, 189 , idem

sacrifice, 3, 97, 171, 535. 545, 571, 573, 575, titled with the Sun,

219,277,278,302,350. 586, 592, 595. 9, 187, 386, 426, 467,'

355, 362, 384, 405,406, the eight names of, 513, 51 1; the Moon at,

111,423-425,440,454, 487. night. 513. identified

4*6,521. Adoption of children, 6. with Varuna, 390; with

fii-Purusha, the Prime- Agastye a great Vedic Varuna and Mi tra, 13 ;

V *1 Presiding Male or Risht, 36, 118, 464. created by the G<>ds,

Embodied Spirit, 518, Agh.l days, when the 513,514, Son of Dyaus,
376 notes. moon is m the eonstel- 415, 4 16 ; son of Dawn,

Infinity, Infinite lation Magh.-l, 502. 558 ; of Earth, 385 ;

Nature, the Mother of Agni, God of Fiic and of Heaven and Earth,
the Gods, 4, 12, 15, 22, Light, 1 10, 20, 30, 9, 3S3. 390, 395, 447,

30, 43-45, 52, 60, 05, 35, 37-40, 43-48, 51. 585 ; of Heaven and

:ri ' 80 > 83-85, 89, 131, 52, 56, 58, 61, 65, 72, Earth, Waters, Tvash-

l43 > 160, 164, 190, 197, 7?, 76, 84, 88, 89, 94, tar, Brigus, 447 ; com-

198 > 210, 253, 254, 288, 96,99.100,125, 126, prising other Gods,

3l5 > 328, 332, 338, 357, 131 133,143 147, 154- 396 ; produced bv at-

337, 894, 397,418, 156, 161, 163, 164, 166, tuition, 1, 201, 386,

*■ 467 > 470-470, 483, 168, 109, 174, 175, 179- 389, 195, 559 ; man’s



638


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


father & brother, 389; Agni’ a religious cere- Ajas, a non- Aryan tribe

head and height of mony, 558. 20.

heaven, 188; born from AgnishvAttaa, a class of Akhandala, Destroyer, a
the mouth of Purusha, Manes, 401 note. name of Indra, 142.

519; spiritual husband Agrayana, a certain Soma Aksha, said to be a man’s
of maidens, 506 ; con- libation, 330 note. name, 195 note.

secrator of marriage, Agriculture, 519 ; thebe- AksharA, Speech, V4k
506 ; giver of children ginning of, 421 note ; 14,41.

495 ; invoked in battle, ploughing, 150, 1 53, Al&yya, perhaps a name
132, 222, 224, 482, 496 ; 548, 563 ; sowing, 527 ; of Indra, 323.

jungle-clearing fire, reaping, 152, 577;sickle, All-God, Indra, 248;
218,586,608; slayer 227; threshing, 450; Yama 400 note.

of fiends, 510-512; winnowing, 419, 480; All-Gods, 51, 52, 410, 5/1

punisher of sin, 3 ; barley, grain, 480,577. See Visvedeyas.
ripener of plants, 513; Ahavanlya, one of the Amrit, Amrita, nectar
his installation # as three sacrificial fires, ambrosia, rain, milk,

Priest of Gods, 454, 186, 386 notes. 6, 57, 207, 253, 263,

455; his flight from Ahi, the Dragon or Ser- 271,326,327,332,376,
his duties, 446,453, pent-demon who with- 379,395,425,457,568,

454; Piiest, Meseen- holds the rain, 113, 585,607.

ger, oblation -bearer, 239, 240, 245, 449, 472, Anava, Anavas, descen-

146, 447, 483; bis 479, 555. d^its of the epony-

divine functions, 146, Ahibudhnya, the Dragon mous chief Anu.

512; his three births, of the Deep, regent of Aucestral spirits, 74. Sr

445 ; three forms, 513, of the sea of air, 37, Fathers.

549 ; three homes, 467; 39,43,472,477,523. AnghAii, one of the guar

three powers, 445; AhtBuva, a demon of the diansof Soma, 501 note
three stations, 445. air, 169, 171, 225, 588. Angiras, a semi-diviu«
4gn!dh, kindler, priest Ahnav&yy a, said to be a patriarchal Bishi ; als<
who kindles, the sa- man’s name, 191 note. a name of Agni, 135,

crificial fire, 384, 440, Ahura, Zend form of 174 , 186-188,200,222,
521. Asura, High God, 366 2 23, 231,255,373, 398,

ignihotra, daily oblation note. 448, 469, 478, 480, 498,

to Agni and Gods, 455 Aija, Pururavas son of 524.
note. 111. 530 note. Angiras«s, descendants

ignimftruta, a ceremony Aindrav&yava, a libation of Angiras, 46, 48, 52,
in which Agni is wor* to Indra and V&yu, 73, 76, 86, 121, 138,

shipped first and then 106 note. 167, 176, 183, 205, 235

the Maruts, 126 note. Aitareya-Br&hmana, 186. 309, 344, 376, 379, 898,

gni pranayana, ceremo- 242, 484, 467, 577, 604. 399, 419, 460, 466, 469

ny of carrying fire to Aja, the Unborn, the 478, 484, 489, 494, 5
the altar, 604 note. Birthless, 498. 554, 583, 591, 598, 0 •

gnis, Agni in various Aja Ekap&d, the Unborn Angirasa, a descen
forms, 166, 337. Oue-footed, the Sud, of , or belongi ng to>^,

• • . — iW«a a £_ nn * l lM



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


639


mate, tame and wild, crifice, 558. Arjtkas, name of a people,

orse, bull, cow, passim; ApnnvAna, an ancient , 317.
oat, 19, 321,402, 418 ; Rishi, 254. Arjikiya, »= Arjika, 207,

ss, 232, 286 ; dog, 53, Apif, Aprts, a class of 490.

14, 101, 265, 368 ; lion propitiatory hymns, 3, Arjuna, a man’s name, 21.

.9, 361, 421, 422,479; 272, 483, 553. Arjuneya, Kutsa descen

‘lephant, 172, 190,304; Apsaras, a celestial dant of Arjuna r 21,
mffalo, 119, 1*23, 176, nymph, 394, 528, 589. 104.

292 ; Gaul'S, 114, 191, the, the chief, Ur- Arjunis, two lunar man

573 ; antelope, 114 ; vast, 35, 38, 412. sions, 50*2.

deer, 107, 291 ; ape, Apsarases, 335, 528, 529, Arks, the Sun, 549.

r>07 ; wild-boar, 226, 582: Aiksha, patronymic, son

421, 479 ; wolf, 174, names of six, 528. of RiUha, 213.

‘209,211,281,530,573; Aptya, Aptyas, dwelling Armaiti, in the Areata— 4
jackal, 4*21 ; hyena, in water, a class of earth, 522 note.

487; fox, 421 ; serpent, deities, 134, 197, 198, Aimour. 31. 119, 197,

99, 471 ; emmet, 403 ; 39<», 565. 343, 365, 368, 376, 494,

vulture, 101, 355, 569 ; Apvd, colic personified, 541.

owl, 100, 101; swan, 545. Arrian, 148.

176, 291 ; dove, 593, Arodiosia, 175 note. Arrow, the stroke of dis-

599 ; cuckoo, 101 ; Ara<Ju, a kind of tree, ease or death. 71, 143.

starling, 176; king-fish- 195. the thunderbolt,

er, 534 ; blue jay, 634. Aradva,said to bea man’s 226.
tiisa, one of the Adityas, name, 195 note. Arshtishena, son of Rish-

7,82, 487 note*. Aramati, the Goddess of tishena, 536.

Ausu, a protect of the Devotion, 38, 41, 46, Artificer of Gods ; see
Anvius, 118. 68, 474, 522. Tvaditar.

Ansimiatf, a mystical =* Karth, 522. Arushah, the Red, Agni

river of air, 246, 483. Aranis, fire-sticks, 186, or the thunderbolt,
i Anu, the eponymits of 426 notes. 443 note.

an Aryau tribe, 19, Arany Ant. Goddess of the Arushas, Agui’s horses,
113, 131. ‘ Wood, 589, 599. ^ 48 note.

l oumati, Divine Favour Ararn, name of a fiend, Arya, Aiyan, Aryas, 8,
Personified, 699, 600 ; 538. 18, 72, 70, 91, 144, 153,

* Lunar Goddess, 332. AiAyi, a witch or she- 159,256,262,352,395,
to'wbtup, a Vedic and fiend, 594. 436, 442, 451, 464, 473,

dttsical metre, 53,571, Arbuda, name of a de- 475,482,499,509,539,
5 '7. mou, 113, 169,171,479, 584,592.

*nuy4ja, after-sacrifioe, 554. Ary aman, one of the chief

final sacrifice, 608. Ardihn, said to be a Ri* Adityas, 38, 40, 43-45,
kpAlfc, a girl healed by ahi’s name, 591 note. 52, 58, 60-63, 65; 66 ,

hdra, 236. Architect of the worlds, 78, 80, 89, 143, 146,

^ 507. 497 ^ 147, 160.162,164-366,

JMna, the passage lead- Arjtka,a district in N.-W* 168, 193, 197, 210, 230,

, ... .A. A1Q oeo O RQ Q1 ^ 338,



640


index of names, etc.


349,377,382. 425, 433, AsvaUyana. a famous
440, 407 , 473,474. 4S0, writer on ritual, 384,

487, 503, 505, 506, 516, 407 notes.

523 5° 4 572.573,586, Asvamedha, Horse-sacri-
« 06 : “ ’ ' fice, 595 «o<e.

Aaamkti, said to be the AmameOha, a man .
name of a king, 468, name, 21b, .IS.

46-1 now. Asvamedha, aon of Asva-

Asanea, the name of a medha, ‘214.

chieftain, 106,107,173. Asva.tha, a aaevnd tree
Asikni, the liver Cheuib, 426, 4 j .,


150, 490.

Asmanvatl, Stony, the
name of a stream, 456
Ass, the steed of the As-
vins, 232.

Asses, presented to
priests, *266.

Asterism(s), 318, 458,

473, 5*24 notes.
Aatrabudhna, a man 8
name, 602 note.
Aatrabudhna, sou of As-
trabudhna, 602
Asunlti, Spirit- world ;
deity of funeiala, 402,
462, 463.

Asura, High God, 3, 8, 30,
56, 146, 149, 184, 236,
330, 306,392,395, 426,
457, 460, 478, 522, 523,
532. 537,538,578,601.

lord, king, 525 note.

Aauras, 5, 8, 4»8, 670.
592.

Asura, a demon, 246, 456,
578, 584

AsUras, 40, 61,160, 245


Asvins, the Horsemen,
Twin heralds of Dawn,
11, 39, 15, 48, 52, 67-
73, 116-119, 126-131,
143 111. U6, 152-154,
166-164, 167, 175 177,
195, 220, 221, 231-233,
242, *261 , ‘266, 2*>7. 275,

337,349,384,404.413,

415, 422, 426, 432, 436-
410.454,463, 405, 466,
472, 176, 477,496,502,
501,523-525,548, 549,

; 571,575,578,587,613.

their Consoi t, 69,

438 , their character,
487 ; their miracles,
220, *221, 437-439 ;

physicians, 129, 143

232, 137 ; first teachers
of agricultme, 153 ;
their chariot, 67-69,
71, 118, 152, 153,220,
232, 267, 436, 438, 440,
502.

Asvya, a family name,
195, 196.


»th~ .

A 8 ura »l»y«r, Agm, 13. 1». "" 1

A»uri, » female fiend, 418 ^ m

k tii,hi 158 A tharva- veda, The Hymns

Asva, a ol tbe>86> 166, 199, 387,

Aavaghna, the pair y ^ tQ() ^ 46t- 4C9^
mic of a prince, 468.


507,519,520, 552,565,
583, 587, 594. 598, 609,
613.

Atir&tra, a certain Soma
ceremony, 97.

Atitlugu, said to be a
man’s name, 450 note.
Atithigva, a name of Di-
vod&sa. 22, 212, 213,
263, 450.

Atithyeshti, a certain re-
ligious cetemony, 196
note.

Atka, a man’s name, 451,
538.

Atmospheres, three, 498.
Atri, an ancient Hislii,
68, 71, 118, 177-179,
2 20, 221,3 52,437,496,
498, 577, 587, 592.
Atris, 167,178,180.
At^trgnibhtoma, a religi-
ous ceiemony, the
cond part of the Jyo
tibhtonia, 558 note.
Aufrecht, Prof. Th., 54
205, 237, 485.
AnlAna, son of Ula, 53b
AurnavAbha, son of Ui
navabha, a demon <
drought, 171, 225.
Aurva, an ancient lhsli
254.

Auaija, Kakshlvftn son -

Usij, 538.

Automat, Vanina, 78.
Autumn, 518.
Autumns, 42, 61.

Avabhritha, a bath
cleansing Soma p a

241.

Axe, 5, 79, 100, 5221, 3.

456, 467, 541-

Agoi, 44 3 ;

. i javVv



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


641


AyAsya, a Rishi's name, Name, 463.

278 note , 478. Bhal&nas, a non- Aryan

Ayu, a Proper Name ; tribe, 18.
man ; living being, 86 , Bharadv&ja, a great Rishi,
139, 262, 203, 404, 451. 352, 577, 592, 606*

Bharata, Warrior ; a name,
Babb, the, Agni, 468. See 10.

Infant. Bharatas, 10, 35.

Babhru, a king or a Rishi, Bh&rati, a Goddess of
153. Speech, 4, 273, 463,

Balbaja, a kind of coarse 484, 553.

grass, 265. Bheda,a non- Aryan king,

Balbdtha, a non- Aryan 20 , 80.

chief 190. BhrAja, a guard of Soma,

Bandhu, a Rishi, 464. 501 note.

Barber, 115, 586. Bhrigu, an ancient Rishi,

B 4 rbatas, guards of Soma, 112, 186, 254, 482.

501 note. Bhrigus, 17, 112, 121, 175,

Barhis, altar or seat of 254, 369, 399, 419, 438,
sacred grass, 323 note. 446, 447, 523, 568.
Barley, 5, 107, 227, 237, Bhujyu, a prottgt of the
4 ^ 577 . Asvins, 68 , 70, 113,

Battle, 436, 465. 117, 171, 192, 223, 250

Beard, 171, 530; of Indra, 437, 439, 476, 587.

412, 413, 532. Bhutinsa, a Rishi, 549.

Bee, 439, 548. Bird, Soma, 341. 357

B <nfey, Prof., 19, 277, the, the Sun, 386, 459,
278, 288, 301, 366, 393. 547, 557 , 569, 604, 608 ;

Bergaigne, Prof. A., 95, the Moon, 338.

98. 205, 287, 292, 314, Birds, Agni and Soma. 358.

331, 338, 367, 390, 400, & -■ Animals.

457,462, 487 , 507 , 509, Black Drop, the darken-
514, 563, 571, 600. . ed Moon, 246.

iBhaga, an Aditya, God of Black skin, aborigines, 296
| Good Fortune, 14, 15, Bloomfield, Prof. M„ 404.

; 38,41-46, 48, 05, 143, Boar, 54, 220, 537 ; -
[ 146, 265, 275, 298,306, Soma, 358.

338, 364,368,377,382, Boat, 64, 84, 245, 327,
425, 432, 471, 473, 477, 384, 561. See Ship-

480, 487, 503, 505,622, Body, parts of the, 613.
524, 525, 571, 586. Boldness, personified, 38.
^gmta-Pur4ua, 520. Bowls, the two, heaven
a Proper and earth, 444.


Bradke, P. von, 64.

Brahma, 391, 564 notes.

Brahma, 466, 552, 556,
566 notes.

Brahmaoh&ri, a religious
student, 552.

Brahman, 9, 25, 125, 140,
167, 173, 207, 239,355,
380, 384, 422, 454,469,
486, 492,505,515, 521,
549,552,556,558, 562,
572, 586.

Brahmans, 46, 65, 170,
225, 245, 448, 485,
501, 503

BiAiman, 98, 244, 267,
519, 535, 536.

Brahmans, 96, 97, 191,
391, 403, 485.

Brahmanaspati, Lord of
Prayer, 45, 48, 91, 92,
163, 338, 456, 474,
486, 594, 598, 602,603.

Bridal, of Suryil, 501.502.

ceremonies, 503-506.

Bride, benediction on a,
506.

Bridge, 296.

Brihaddiva, a Rishi, 565.

Brihaddivd, a Goddess
connected with 111 and
Sarasvat!, 473.

Brihadratha, name of a

. chief, 45 1 .

Brihaduktha, a Rishi,
458-460.

Brihaspati = Brahmanas-
pati, 12, 91-93, 131,
246, 273, 336, 337,340,
355, 397, 398, 405,
432, 433, 442-444, 472,
474, 475, 478*481,523,
534-536, 539, 544, 551,



042


INDEX OP NAMES, BTC.


552, 575, 577, 586, 597, Varuna, 62 ; strong he* Children, prayer for ,
600, 602, 606. roes, 263. see Prayer.

Brihaspati = the Cloud* Burial of ashes of the the gift of Agni, 2 r

God, 481. dead, 407. 406 ; of the Asvina,

Brihat, great, important Burnouf, Prof. E. 520, 67 ; of the Maruts, 56 r

SI man, 606. 575. of Tvashtar, 38.

Brihat- SAman, 235. Chitra, a liberal princ

Brihatt, a Vedic metre, Calf, Agni, 219,389, 418. 152.

263,501,577. Camels, 119, 123, 195, Chumuri, a fiend or sav-

Buffalo = Cloud, 215. 196. age, 21, 557.

Buffaloes, 119, 123, 176, Car - hymn or sacrifice, Chyavana, a bou of Bhri
292. 64,310,558. gu, 482.

= Clouds, 133, 226. Carpenter, 223, 380, 525, Chyavlna, a prottgi of

Bull, strohg, mighty one, 563. the Aavins, 68, 71, 437,

hero, Agni, 5, 7, 155, Cask = cloud, 332. 465, 466.

219, 385-387, 389, 410, Castes, the four, 519. Circumambulation. 412
507, 607, 608. Castles, 19,21,23,28,94, Clay, house of = grave, 85

Indra, 22, 51, 122, 106, 249. Cleanser, Potar, one of

149, 172, 173, 207, 348, Cattle — rays of light, 40, the priests, 15,384,521.
372,375,378,418,421, 74, 76, 86, 110, 240, Clouds « trees, 488.

4:36, 441, 443, 450, 523, 361, 478, 556. Colebrooke,391, 507,518,

536, 543, 545, 554, 560, Cattle -raiders, 264. ^20, 672, 576, 577.

575, 593. Cattle -stealing, 223. Coleridge, 308.

Parjanya, 40, 95, 96. Centre of earth, the altar, Consorts of the Gods,

Rain-cloud, 125,477. 342. 116,593.

Brihaspati, 523. Chaidya,souof Chedi,119. Constellations, 501.

vSoma, 206, 270, 272- Chambers’s Encyclopee- Consumption, 505, 597,

274, 281, 284, 288, 289, dia, 531. 613.

294,302,312,313,316, ChandrabhAgl, the river Corpus, Poetieum Bore
325, 327, 329, 330, 332, ChenAb, 490 note. ale, 519.

337-339, 341, 343,346- Chanter, Udgltar, one of Courser, the Sun, He*
348, 350, 353-355, 357, the priests, 486 note. ven, 75, 488, 586.
359.362,369,376,394, Charanyu, name of an - — Soma,276,340,350,


603.

the Sun, 58, 84, 267,

470, 008.

- — Dyaus, 22.

Varuna, 394, 475.

the thunderbolt, 5 1 6.

Bulls, MaAta, 56,58,150,
445; Press-stones, 5 26 ;
Asvins, 71, 72; Indra-
Soma, 98 ; Indra-
Varuna, 78 ; Mitra-


Apearaa, 528.

Chariot = sacrifice, 558,

Chariot-race, 228, 303,
351, 360.

Chayamlna, said to be a
man’s name, 18 note.

Chedi, the name of a
prince, 119.

Chedis, a tribe, 119.

Chenlb, a river of the
Pan jib, 150, 490 n otes.


361.

Coursers of the Gods, 473
Cow, the Cosmic, 357 ;
type of Aditi or Na-
ture, 253 ; Aditi, 83,
467 ; Pfifnl, 40, 83,
149, 242,. 456, 568;
Earth, 654, 680; hear
to, 828, «8i tl,e

Sunt 582;V4k, Spew*-

ao OCO • nnfc



643


INDBX OP NAMES, ETC.


ffended, 253; type 362 ; Maruts, 125, 243. Ddnajituti, eulogy of a
tf munificence, 207 ; Creation myth, Scandi* prince’s liberality, 20 ;
he priest’s guerdon, navian, 510 ; creation «€ Liberality to priests!
28; « cloud, 446. connected with sacri- Dancer (in war), Indra,

re, subject of hymns, fice, 513, 576. ]57 ) 212, 237.

08, 000 ; as Heaven A Creator, the, Soma, 362; Dancers, the Maruts, 150.
larth, 327; Waters of Visvakarnian, 497,498; Dancing, 406, 422, 486
eaven, 348 ; rays of Dyaus, 149; Prajdpati, 487,526,527.
g ht, 376, .480, 650, 566, 567, 576 ; Tvash- Ddnus, a class of fiends,

51, 603 ; the Maruts, tor, 392 ; Dhdtar, 596, 565, 594.

24, 150 ; streams of 609. Darbha grass, 424 note.

iin, 192; hymns, 325; of Creators, Indra Dark One, the, Night, 71.

siw, ripe milk set in, or Savitor, 575. Dark races, 7.

71, 235 ;|black] and Cuckoo, 101. Ddsa, hostile native, sa-

,hite, white milk set Cucumber, 59. vage, demon, 21, 79,94,

i, 240. 159, 169, 182, 196,216,'

pell, Prof. E. B., 92, DabhIti, a prottgi of In- 221,411,413,436,451,
7,148, 186,192,200, dra, 21, 557. 488, 499, 537, 564,

208, 212, 237, 241, Dadhigharma, an offering 584,590.
42,245,246,249,251, of warm inspissated Ddsae,* 118, 147, 246,
53, 256, 269, 260,263, milk, 605 note. 262, 457, 470, 482.

64, 206-268, 276, 279, Dadhikrds, a famous ra- Dasagva, one of an anci-
:85, 293, 294, 300, 305. cer or war-horse ; a ent priestly family,

ation, 375, 376, 591, personification of the 132,469.
i09. Sun, 48. 540. Dasasipra, a Proper Name,

-origin unknown, 576. Dadhikrdvan = Dadhi- 262.

- various accounts of, krds, 46, 48. DaBavraja, a Proper Name,


wcribed to Indra, 111, Dadhyach, a son of 128, 260, 261.
138,178,235,245,262, Atharvan, 376, 449, Dasonya, a man’s name,
263, 458 ; to Visva- 450. 262.

tarman, 497, 498 ; Daksba, Creative Power, Dasyave-vrika, Wolf -to-

Agni, 513; Varupa, Strength, 65, 160, 206, the-Dasyu, name of a

183, 184; Hiranya* 232, 382, 887, 394, man, 261, 265, 266.


gvrbhft, 566 ; Brahma* 473, 486.
naspati, 486 ; the Un* Dakshind, priests’ guer-
b orn, the Sun, 184 ; don, 180, 544, 549.
the Asvins, 414 ; Tvash* Dame, wife of a God, 50 7 .

t»r, 553, 392 ; Gods Pfwni, 494.

filing the cosmic duet ——the, Dawn, 385.

dancing, 480, 487 ; Dame* of Trifca ; tee
i°°da in general, 475. Trita's dames.


W » the sacrifioe of —ten, the fingers of
?uru »ha, 519 ; Indra- the priest, 304.

78 ; Vi*pu, Dames, Celestial, lunar
Serna, Mteriims, 524.


Dasyu(s), savage foe(s),
demon(s), 8, 21, 120,
139,153,181,210,225,
249, 201,265,266, 296,
300, 352,411,448, 451,
459, 488, 499, 500, 529,
537,538, 547,548, 601.

Dasyu-dayer, the, Indra,
225.

Dawn, 11, 35, 45, 48, 71,
73*78,81,94,101,115,
116, 130, 159, 175*177,



644


1HDBX OF NAMIB, fTC.


197, 198, 221, 253, 267, Destructive powers, 158. Disposer, the, 186 49 c

296, 329, 839, 385, 422, Deuteronomy, 438. 600. '

431, 438, 458, 472, 475, Devaka, afiend or savage, Disposers, priests, 249
494,501,515,522,540, 20 . Diti, the antithesis 0

558, 578, 602, 608. Devftpi, a Kshatriya who Aditi, 15, 641,

Dawn and Night, 433, acted as Hotar, 535,536 Divoddsa, a liberal prince
483. Devavdn, father or an- 20, 21, 256, 306, 450.

Dawns, 11,20, 46, 72, 76, cestor of Sudds, 20. Dog, 101,368, 562; house
84, 86 , 164, 185, 223, Devil, 435. dog, 54 ; boar-hound

294, 351, 380, 390, Devotion, 168 ; Genius 64 ; hound of Imi ra
425,431,445.459,514, of, 38, 46, 168, 474, 53 ; figurative, 100.

520, 521, 555, 557. 522 ; blessiugs of, 168, Dogs, of Yama, 53 , 399 ,

husband of the, 169, 205. - — given to priests,265

Agni or the Sun, 8 . Devout spirit makes hum- Doors, divine, of sacrif
Day and Night, 393, 491. ble offering acceptable, cial enclosure, 4, 1(

Deasil, the Gaelic, 412. 255. 273, 483, 557. *

Death, 42, 58, 99, 158, Dharma, duty personi- Dove, 598, 599.

406, 419, 462, 492, fied, 173. Dragon, the, great cloud

578, 599. Dh&tar, Maker, Creator, serpent, 24, 113, 24(

the punishment of 338, 382, 406, 487, 245, 449, 479, 555,55)

sin, 583. 506, 606, 609, 613. 579.

return to earthly Dhishani, a Goddess of 4 female, 68 8 . ]

life after, 581. prosperity, 86 , 432. — — of the Deep, regeij

Deer, 107, 294. Dhishnydh ( Agnayah ), of air-sea, 37, 39, 47 ]

spotted, of the Ma- sacrificial Fires, 377. 477, 523, 524.

ruts, 125. Dhuni, a demon, 21, 557. Dragons, serpent-demon:

Demons, forms assumed Dhruva, a special Soma 583, 585.
by, 100, 101. libation, 330 note. Dream, evil, 197, 19

imprecation on, 98- Dhvasra, the name of a 445, 598.

101. king, 305. Dronakalasa,a large Sot

Demon-slayers, the As- Diabolua, 435 note, reservoir, 108,124,2!

vine, 72. Dice, 429- 43 1 ; the stars ? 279, 282, 286, 293, 2

Departed, home and bliss 419. 313,314,319,329,3

of the, 381, 382, 498, Digvijaya, conquest of 870 notes.

594. neighbouring count- Drop, the Moon, 2 >

King of the, 381 ; riee, 574 note. Soma, 405.

tee Yama. Director, one of the Drub(s), spirit(s) of r

Deehtrl, Instructress, a priests, 355, 521. chief, 59, 450.

Goddess, 506. Disease, the Spirit of, 534. Drtfhyu(s)eponymus

Desire, 576 ; tee Kdma. Diseases, colic, 545 ; con- men of a Vedic ti


Destroyer, the, Indr a,
114; Death, 419 notet.
Destruction, 42, 58, 99,
158,393, 407,462, 492,
***0 7 BUS.


sumption, 683, 597, 37-19, 131,

613 ; dropsy, 85 ; ph* Duljsdsu, the name
thuds, 613 ; SimidA, prince, 428.

52 ; Sipada, 52. DulisOtia, nsttie of »
Dispenser, Ittdre, -^tlltiflT flffljjfljg



ttfpBX OP NAMES, ETC.


645


lurg&ha, a chief, 208. Eggeling, Dr. J. , 2 13,578. Falcons, the Marute, 523.
Durmitra, a ^tiahi, 548, Ehni, Dr. J., 394, 397, Falsehood, punishers of,
pdrvfi grass, 580, fi87« 400,507. 60, 66, 81, 99.

)utt, R. Ch., 408. Eight sons of Aditi, 487. False-swearing, prayer

)uty, Right, Law, Virtue, Eight-footed metre, 225. for removal of sin of,
personified, 170. EkadhanAb, waters in 391.

)vita, Second, perhaps Soma ceremonies, 241, Famine, 143, 210, 442.
a form of Agni, 197. 326, 424 notes. Father, the, Heaven, 96,


mda§4ha, a twelve- Ekadhenus, sacrificial
day sacrifice, 242 note. waters, 43.
raus, Heaven, the an- Ekadyu, the name of a
cient Aryan God— the Rishi, 229.

Greek Zeua, 44,80,149, Elephant, 172, 190, 304,
168,174,175,385,390, 612.

426,433, 444,445,451, Eros, KAma, Desire, 575
466,467, 469-471, 475, note.

478, 479, 493, 522, 523, Etasa, the horse of the
578, 584, 592. Sun ; a man’s name,

yu=Dyaus, 44, 390 63, 66, 104, 122, 261,

notes. 311, 315, 375, 376.

Etasaa, 216, 434.

AGL8, 101, 422- Evil-eyed, 506.

|— the Moon, 423; Existence, sprung from
Soma, 341 361; Savi- non-existence, 486.
Vs^TArkshy*, 591. Expanses, the Bix, 400,
;les, Celestial press- 574.
tones, 526 ; Soma- Eye, of the dead goes to
the Sun, 402 ; of Va-


irops, 341.

••ornaments, 227.
rth, 38, 48, 164, 265,
563, 383,385,387,407,
126,433,447, 463, 470,


rug* and Mitra, the
Sun, 63, 484 ; of the
Gods, 75; of Order,
Agni, 890.


514, 572, 584; Indra,
343 ; Visvakarman, 496 ;
Yama, 581 ; Manu,2Q5.

Father, Agni, 450 ; In-
dra, 250 ; Prajftpati,
384 ; Soma or Agni,
330 ; Tvashtar, 473 ;
VAyu, 607 ; the Yaja-
mAna, 384.

Father and Mother, Heav-
en and Earth, 331, 333,
457.

Fathers, Manes, Spirits Qf
the Departed, 39, 74,
83, 199, 339, 384,

387, 398-405, 407, 458-
461,469, 474, 481,494,
498, 514, 549, 576, 577,
581, 594, 601.

— = Moon and stars ?
326 ; stars? 481.

three classes of,

dwelling in heaven,
firmament, lower fir-
mament, 408 ; created
light, 74 ; produce the
fruitfulness of hegven
and earth, 474 ; their
home, 581.


171,495,522,578,580. Eye, the, the Sun; the
- son of, m*n, 262. single, the Moon, 276.
p sprung from Puru-

fha’s feet, 519, Faith, 269> 381, 592,

kand Heaven, 38, 693.

- 52, 66, 72, 88, 181, F»lcon («), 63, 149, 174, Fencing or enclosing
5, 240, 8150, 8*4, 864, M0, 205, 304, 307, stick, round the racri

5, 488, 448, 4#7, 513. 809,317, 388, 493,678. ficial fire, 620, 678.

Iw, 216, Falcon, Agni, 14 ; Soms, Fervour, religious an-

P«e, of Sun, 581 321, 389, 365. aterity, penance, 694,

*i 172 note. — bringer of the Soma, 699, 601,, 606, 60S.

■ the Mundane, 618 243, 251, 800, 821 Kell Lord or Protectee

*4 834,844,848,396,588. of the, 89, 478.



64$


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC.


Fiends, prayer for des- Forest-Trees, 39. GangA, the river Gang?

truction of, 98*101 ; Forests, Lord of, Van as- 490.
forms assumed by, 100. pati, the sacrificial Ganges, 159, 490.

See RAkshasas, YAtu- stake, 4. GarbhAdhAna, a cerenj

‘ihfiaas. Fort-destroyer, Agni, 8, to facilitate and blto

Fig-tree, the Holy, sec 447 ; Iudra, 103, 172, conception, 613 note.

Asvattha. 190,202,203,263,555; Garuda, the name of a

Filter, for Soma juice, Soma, 300, 349. mythical bird, 591 note.

107, 171,269,275,278, Forte* cloud castles of GAthA, non-Yedic song,
280, 285, 287, 289, fiends, 584 ; of abori- 501.
302,331,335,338,340, gines, 256; of iron, Gaura, BosGavaeus, 114
342, 348, 362, 426. 251, 540. 191, 573.

Fire, 322, 552. Fortune, 368. Gaurt, 278, 572.

Fire-sticks, 5, 180, 390, Fo ur, the, Lunar God dea- Gaviahthira, a Rishi, 592
426. see, 332. Gaya, a man’s name, 472,

Firmament, personified, Beauteous creatures, 474.

,338 ; two divisions of 326 ; quarters of the GAyatra, a hymn, 305,
the, 234 note. sky, 292 ; seas, 292, 480.

Fish, 481. 448. GAyatri, a Vedic metre,

Five races, tribes, 10, 14, Fox, 421. 53, 179, 305. 400, 577.

72, 73, 76, 129, 171, Friend, the, Mitra, 390 Geldner, Prof. K., 36,
205, 280, 317, 319, 352, note. 2*0, 436, 457, 509, 529,

368, 445, 450, 458, 563; Friendship, 485 ; Rishi’s 531, 544.
tribes of heaven, 464 ; with Varuna, 84. Gharrna, a warm libation,

rivers, floods, 159, Frog, an emblem of cool- 70, 97, 219, 238, 235,

183 ; courses or divi- ness, 403. 606.

sions of sacrifice, 570 ; Froga, 90-98, 599. GhoshA, a woman's name,

companies, 280 ; ele- Fruit, 580, 588. 436, 439.

mentsof sacrifice, 397 Funeral hymns, 398-407, Ghrita(ra), clarified but*
note ; lands or settle- 459-461, 581, 593,594. ter, 3, 694.

ments, 605 ; regions Funerals, deity of, 462 GnAa, Consorts of Gods,
of the world, 845. note. 166.

Fivefold beings, 69 ; Funereal gift, 581. Goal, 293,
people, 72. Goat (s), 19, 821; atfu-

Flesh-eater, Agni, 403. Gaidicke, Prof., 318, 597. nerals, 402; team of

Floods, rivers, 168, 175, Gambler, 429-431, 441, Pdshan, 321, 416.

405, 433, 473, 552 ; 442. God, One Supreme, 498.

waters of the air, 187. Gambling house, 430. — — of Gods, 567 ; the

Floods' (waters' of air) Gamester, 430. Unknown, 560.

offspring, Agni, 50. Gandharva, 104,225,339, Goddess, 43, 74-76. 78
Force, personified, 486. 841, 345, 892, 496, 506, 91, 189, 148, 252, 253.

Fonsst-Lord, 205 ; Forest* 569, 573, 584, 585, 604. 305, 468, 540, 573, 580

Sovran, 88; Sovran of Gandharos, 381, 456, 586,588.

the Forest, Soma, 541 ; 498, 595, 528, 582. Goddesses, 88, 48, 50,

Forest-Queen, 589,590. Gandharvt, 394. 229^



wm cs» urns, ttc.


«7


565,W\,W5,«a,«4 ) ot S&ntor, «; Quest ot men, kgm, 5,
555, M3. 0tttve\sVmB,U6,U6; 10, 11, 41, l&l, 2io

iGoddesses, Three, 4, 484. reinB ol the Asvins, 257,383,520.
l^ods, passim ; hymn to, 153 ; Hero, Agni, 11 ; Gumti, a river, 159 note.
486 ; all invoked, 470- ornaments of the Ma- Gungfi, a lunar Goddess
478 ; primeval Aryan, ruts, 57 ; sword of Bri- 332.

592 ; number, 167,455; haspati, 92 ; thunder- Gungus, a non-Aryan
origin, 52, 92, 395, 397, bolt, 211, 531. people, 450.

470, 486 ; immortal, Goldstiicker, Prof. Th.,

4, 7, 12, 63, 92, 472, 531. Haas, Prof., 507.

476-478,482, 486,522; Gomati, the name of a Hair, braided, 34, 80, 321.
born immortal, 486 ; river, 159, 490. Hall, Dr, F., 407.

made immortal by Good Works, 399. Hammer = lightning, 21 9.


Agni, 13 ; by Soma, Gopavana, a Rishi, 222. Hands, joined in marri-
372,376,457; by their Gosarya, a protege of the age, 407, 505.

merits, 471 ; produced Asvins, 128, 260, 261. healing by touch of.

after the world, 576 ; Gotama, an ancient Rishi, 465, 583.
earlier, 24 ; General, 352, 579. Hansa, the Sun, 571 note.

322; of heaven, waters, Grfthi, Grasper, a deadly Haray&na, a chief, 161.
earth, 39, 475 ; omni- female fiend, 597 note. Hants, horses of Agni,
potent, 166 ; reward GraDthini, the name of 46 ; of the Sun, 66,
the pious, 165 ; punish an Apsaras, 528. 253,312; of Sonia, 346.

sin, 516 ; punish the Grass, Sacred, 3, 16, 18, Harivahsa, 98.
undevout, 32, 109, 169, 34, 39, 44, 47, 57, 74, Havirdhdnas, Soma carts.

464; Priests of the, 117, 125, 137, 139, 142, 397, 398 notes.

384; Queen of the, 251. 191, 205, 215, 233, 247, Haviryajiia, oblation of

ods = priests, 3, 31 0,568. 273,303,305,348,430, clarified butter, 570


old, 5, 30, 65, 166, 168,
170,172,196,197,208, I
226,296,312,330,346,
380,449,525,531,549,
550, 553; chariot
wrought of or decked
with, 69, 118, 195 ; on
priest’s finger, 166,289,
316, 347, 355, 358;
gold-bearded, Agni,
117 ; gold coursers of
toe Sun, 60 ; gold
talma of Maruts, 125;
gold sword* of Maruts,
126.

tolen, Savitar, 68; arms
Qf Savitar,87,48; hair
435 1 hands


483,553.

Grasamaun, Prof., 20, 29,
41, 45, 48, 49, 54, 57,
66,79,81.107,142,152,
226,232, 233,241,242,
245, 253,264, 266, 268,
290,299,302,305, 309,
328,348,349,355,380,
388, 393,410,419, 420,
424,429,439,440,445,

; 448,452, 463,489,511,

514,520,529,538,541,
560,564,565,569,583.

, Great One, the, Yama,
400.

■ Grimm, Jacob, 172,
r Guerdon, priests’ fee,247,
i 323, 544, 549.


note.

Haug, Prof. M., 186,604.
Hawk, 176, 230, 345,350,
588. See Falcon.

Indra, 538 ; Soma,

357.

Hawks, the Maruts, 54.
Healer, Rudra, 39, 49 :

Vdstoshpati, 53.
Heaven, a Goddess, 463.

Dyaus, 5, 33, 66,

67,73,78,96, 125,197,
433, 438, 445,470,471
, 476, 483, 514, 569,

572, 578.

— home of the Blest,
, 381,382,399, 402,404,

498 .



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


64tr

Heaven and Earth, 9,
31, 38, 39, 48, 62, 53,
62, 64, 91,92,133,139,
143, 161, 175,219,246,
275, 326,331*333, 338,
362, 365, 370, 377, 334,
386, 390, 395,424,431,
433, 435, 447, 449,452,
463,474,477, 479,484,
491,524,525,556,565,
585, 609.

separated by the

Aavins, 414; by Indra
179,515, 556, 593 ; by
Savitar, 591 ; by Va-
runa, 82, 184; by Vish-
nu, 94.

Heaven's Daughter, Ushaa.
Datorn, 67, 73, 75, 76,
197, 433.

Heaven’s Child, Soma,
292, 295; Night, 574.

Heifer, the, Aditi, 554.

Hell, 315 note.

Herald, Hotar, Invoker,
Agni. 15, 30, 174, 384,
395, 521, 522, tt patsim.

Heralds.two celestial, 273.

Herbert, George, 180.

Herbs, 38, 39, 533-535.

Herd, the, the Maruts,
427.

Herdsman, the, Indra,
450; the Sun, 604.

Hesiod, 184.

Hillebrandt, Prof. A., 36,
84.91, 108, 163, 219,
251,269, 279,296,301,
30M18, 326,332, 341,
342,379,382, 390, 394,
406; 423, 424, 450, 526,
569, 578, 585, 605.

Hill*, 168, 431.

Hinva. Benefactor, a title
of Indra, 182.


Hiranyagarbha, Gold*
germ, Sun-God, 566.

Hiranyastupa, a Rishi,
591.

Holtzmann, Prof., 531.

Holy Ladies, the Rivers,
90.

Homer, 500.

Homestead, Guardian of
the, 53.

Hoof -armed demons, 511.

Horace, 59.

Horse Sacrifice, 595.

Horses — flames of Agni,
2 ; = hymns, 7 ; of the
Alvins, 69, 70,73, 116;
of Brihaspati, 92 ; of

, Dawn, 74, 76 ? of the
Sun, 216,312, 451,523.

Hotar, 9, 201, 355, 384;
395, 465, 483, 485,486,
499, 515, 620, 526,535,
552, 607.

Hotars, the Celestial, 4,
475, 478, 483, 553,574.

Hound, 507.

Hounds = clouds, 196.

Household Lord, Agni,
201 ;— Priest, Agni, 522.

Hradechakshus, the name
of an Apsar&s, 528.

Humble offering, 255.

Hundred autumns, na-
tural duration of hu-
man life, 66, 96, 406,
506, 597 ; springs, dit-
to, 597 ; winters, ditto,
333, 597.

Hundred Chiefs, the
Maruts?, 422.

Hundred Powers, Lord
of, 170, 173 ; tee $ata-
kratu.

Hunger, deprecated, 2,

202 .


Hunter, 192.

Hunting, deer, 107 ; ele
phants, 489; boar, 507;
wild bull, 454.

Husband and wife, hap-
piness of the pious, 168.

Husbandman, 519 ; ue
Vaisya.

Hydaspes, Greek name
of the Jhelum, 490.

Hyena, 487.

Hymir, Scandinavian
World-giant, 519.

Hymn = car, 64 ; gene-
rated or begotten by
the bard, 10, 13, 25 ;
new, 18, 27, 40, 62,
133, 150, 155, 222,244,
261, 296, 352, 386;
made, formed, fashion-
ed, 33, 37,40, 120,122;
fought with skill, 9 ;
thought out, 129, 235,
244.

Hymns = milk-streams,
135."

Hypnotism, 583 note.

IkshvAko, the name of
a prince, 464.

Ill, a Goddess of Prayer,
4, 16, 48,273,309 463,
484, 520, 553.

I1A?b place, where butter is
poured on the Are, 520.

Immolator, the, Agni, 4,
554.

Immortality, afterdeft* 5,
69, 168, 253 ; in one'*
children, 168 ; pray*
for, W; the gift ° f
Some, 872 ; Lord of.
Puruoha, 817 ! Sioij
of, 824; the world o'
the Oode, _2»-



Incantation, against an
ill-omened bird, 598 ;
against miscarriage,
612.613; against phthi-
sis, 61 3; against poison,
51 ; against a rival
wife, 588.

Indigence, 3, 438.

Indigenous races, see D4-
saa, Dasyus, Dark races,
nrfra, 4, 8, 12, 17-35,
37-40, 44, 47, 48, 50-
54, 56, 76, 78, 80, 81,
85-89, 91-94, 98-101,
103-115, 119-123, 125,
126, 130,132-142,140,
151,152, 157-160, 104,
167-175, 178-180, 189-
196, 198, 199, 202-209,
211-216, 219, 220, 224,
231, 234-252, 259,265,
209, 270, 273-275, 278,
279,281,282, 286, 287,
292,296,297-299, 301-
308, 310-316,318-321,
323,325, 327, 329,* 330,
333-335, 387, 339, 340,
342-346, 348, 350, 351,
355-363, 365 369, 371,
372,374, 375, 377-382,
388,390, 391,398, 408,
<11-413, 418, 417, 420,
<23, 425, 427.431-488,
441 444, 4 48-453, 457,
453,460, 463, 464-467,
469,471,474, 476,478,
<19,483, 484, 487, 489,
491,408,600,501,604,
607-500, 516-617, 688 ,
527,531, 632,636,637-
547,550,664-667,660,
561,563-666,670, 671,
! 573-680, 883-586, 6»8,
590,581, 698-607, 599,
LAWS, 608-


INDEX OP NAMES, BTC. 649

Indra, his parents, Heaven Indra-Agni, 88, 89, 178-
and Earth, 202. 215 ; 180 ; Indra-Soma, 98 ;

his father, 22; his mo- Indra- Varuna, 78-81,
ther, 22, 190, 225, 487, 267, 268 ; Indra- Vdyu,

580 ; born from Puru- 85-89.
sha’s month, 519 ; his Indr&ni, Indra’s Consort,
wife, 507-509 ; his 507-509, 588, 596.
greatness, 120, 134, Indrota,aprince,212,213.
234,249,417,423,449, Indu, drop, = Soma, 198,
515, 516, 554, 590 ; his 199, 213, 236, and
battles with demons, Book IX. passim.

120, 134,138, 171,516, Indus, the river, 90,159,
517 ; Lord of Heaven, 160, 183,491,494,550.
248, 554 ; Chief of Infant, the, Agni as

Gods, 134, 204 ; Ma- lightning, 95, 439;

ker of all things, 452, Agni, 386, 387, 468,
458 ; identified with 495 ; the young Sun,
Sun, 133, 240,419,422. 419.

426, 451, 515, 510 ; Infinity, 470, 486.
supersedes Varuna, Inspiration, 92, 231, 397.
570; punisher of sin, Inspirer(B', 3, 13, 261,
516 ; Warrior God, 298, 349, 354, 447.

21, 22, 34, 103, 141, Instructress, the, Deshtri,
190,202,203,216,237, 506.

250, 265, 417, 441, 531, Invoker, 355, 395.

544 ; tutelary God of Invokers, Hotar=t, the two
Aryans, 18, 144, 190; Celestial, 4, 574.
his attributes and I«on, or other metal, 5,
deeds, 120, 449-452 ; 15, 90, 244, 251, 269,

his love of Soma, 122, 337, 449, 510, 531, 532,

202 ; hie rapture after 537, 540.
drinllng, 132, 133, lavara, Lord, Supreme

139, 171, 563, 564 ; Deity of post-Vedic
aided by the Maruts, time, 877 note.

120, 245 ; priest, 140 ; Ita, a Rinhi, 601.
his chariot, 172, 413,

* 423 ; his horses, see Jackal, 421.

Horses ; his existence Jacobi, Dr. H., 602.
doubted, 250. Jagatl, a Vedic metre,

^and Agni, 38, 88, 89; 577

—and POehan, 38 ; J&husha, a protigi of the

and Soma, 88, 98, Asms, 71.

99, 101, 284 ; and Jamadagni, a famous

Varuna, 88 ; — and ancient Hishi, 91, 253,
Viyu, 106. 317, 352, 577, 599, 600-



INDEX OF NAMES, BTC.


$50

Jamadagnis, 309, 310, 363.

Jarfitha, name of a fiend
or Ravage, 1, 11, 496.

JAtavedas, the Omnis-
cient, Agni, 5, 8, 11,
18, 16, 100, 132, 154-
156,185,187, 217,218,
222,322, 386, 388, ,390,
401-403, 445,453, 454,
467,482, 499,510,513,
521, 553, 559, 585, 592,
604, 608.

Jhelum, the river, 490 note

JftAnam, knowledge, 484.

J uhd, a sacrificial ladle ;
possibly aProperName,
552 note.

Jumna, the modern name
of the river YamunA,
20, 246, 490.

Ka, Who?, the God Pra-
jApati, 566 note.

K5bul, the river, 148
note.

Kadrft, apparently a Ri-
shi, 191 ; Queen of Ser-
pents, 608 note.

Kadruka days, days of the
Abhiplava festival, 400.

KakshlvAn, an ancient
sage, 129, 333, 415,
486, 467, 687.

Kakuha, the name of a
prince, 123,

Kalasa, of uncertain
meaning, 428.

Kali, a Rishi, 210, 437,

KAli, name of a flame of
Agni, 387 note.

KalmAshapAda, name of
a King, 100 note.

K&ma, Lore, Desire, 575
note; said to be a Ri*

*W'« name. 592.


Kamadyd, the wife of Kine, rays of light, 74,


Vimada, 476
Kanita, the name of a
chief, 195.

Kanva, an ancient Rishi,
103,110,112,117,118,
120,124,127,128,130,


75, 208, 348, 376, 516,
583 ; heavens A earths,
216; waters, 449; milk,
284, 344, 359, S65 ;
rain-clouds, 291, 452 ;
sacrificial waters, 371.


131,174,259,261,263, King, benediction of a,


266, 426, 466, 592.

Kanvas, 108-110, 112,

114-116, 119-122, 126,
169, 172,174, 265,559.

j.K&nva, a descendant of
Kanva, 103, 115, 125,
128, 129.

KAnvAy anas, descendants
of Kanva, 266.

Kapardiu, wearing braid-
ed hair, 321 note.

Kapi, an ape, 607 note.


602,603 ; Indra,3l,

140,229,243,248,442,
443,464,468,580; —
Agui, 10, 187, 383-

385,445,510,512;

Soma, 198, 199, 228,

Book IX. passim ;

the Sun, 467 ; — Va-
runa, 37, 51, 82, 83, 184,

396, 545, 602 ; Ya-

ma, 381, 398-400 ;

of Kings, Varuna, 37.


Kapila, a famous Rishi, Kings, the, Vanina, Arya


419.

KarAli, name of a flame
of Agui, 387 nofe.
Karanja, a demon, 450.
Kasu, a prince, 119.
Kasyapa, a famous Rishi,
22, 352, 382, 577.
KathA Upanishad, 681.


mpi, Mitra, 45, 66;-

the Ten, 36, 79, 80;

Varuna, and Mitra, 68-
65, 167,252, 468,473;

Varuna, Mitra,

Aryamau, 147, 573 ;
the Asvins, 488.

Kinsuka, a tree, 503.


KaurayAna, patronymic K6phAn, Greek name of
of a prince, 113. the Kabul river, 148.

Kavasha, the name of a Kratu, one of the Seven
priest, 19, 429. Rid»«, ***-

Kavi,tbe father of Usa- Kripa, a prince, 112,1 ■
nA, 18, 451, 538. Krisa, aKUhi,264,268,439.

Kavis, 403 note. Krirtnu, a guardian of

Kavyas, a class of Manes, the Celestial Soma,

398,401,403. 473, 588.

Resins, long- haired, Agni Krishna, a Rishi, 232 , a
VAyu, Sfirya, 582. demon, 246.

Khela, a king, 118 note. KrityA, Magic person^ *
Kimldini, mischievous 505 note.

fiends, 98, 101, 512. Krivi, the eponymus
Kindler,Agnldh, lighter of » warlike tnbe, ’

sacrificial f "



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


651


Krumu, the name of a
river, 490.

Ksbatram, the Ruling
power, the military
and princely order,
177 note.

j Kshatriya, 99, 177, 407,
519,552.

Kshatriyas,

Brihman
note.

— Adityas, 210.

(ubhA, a river, 159, 183,
490.

Kuhn, Prof. A., 531.

KuhO, a luuar Goddess,
332.

Kumdra, said to be a
Proper Name, 581 note.
Kumdrila, a celebrated
philosopher, 011 note.
iundap&yya, a Proper
Name, 142.

Kuraylna, a Proper Name,
113 note.

Kurlra, a kind of metre,
502.


73 ; Lady of the world Life, duration of human,
—73 ; Lady of sweet see Hundred Autumns;
strains— 78, 130; Lady appointed by Gods, 429.
of the Wood, Aranyd- Light, 48.


ni, 589

Lakes, Soma receptacles
124.

Lances, 149, 166.
raised to Langlois, Prof., 98.
rank, 536 Language, 484.

Lanman, Prof. C. R.,
54, 55, 139, 391, 408,
428, 429, 439, 504.
Law, Moral and Cosmic,


Lightning, 252 ; Vasishtha
an embodiment of, 36.

Lion, 19, 361, 421, 422,
479 ; trap for, 422 ;
Soma, 350.

Lord of Heaven, Indra,
248, 219; of Light,
Indra, 241, 247, 248.

Lotus, 36, 107, 550, 587,
613.


43, 45, 55, 60, 65, 66, Ludwig, Prof. A , Der
71, 73, 74, 79-81, 112, Rigveda, 5 Vols., and


119,120,128,132.134, Ueber die neuesten

155,156,159,160,165, Arbeiten im Gebiete

108, 220, 221, 230, 233, der Rgveda-forschung,

248, 274 276, 293, 297, passim.

300, 304, 313, 320, 324, Lusa, a favourite of Indra,
3 7,344.345,370, 377, 436 note.

379, 381, 396, 403, 432, Lying, prayer for remov-
433, 445,447. 459, 469, al of sin of, 391.
474-478,494, 496, 522,

551, 500,563, 579, 583, Macdonbll, Prof. A. A.,
609. 197,226,369,370,392,

|Kuru-krivi«, the name of , sacrifice, 155, 225, 447, 455.

a tribe, 19 note. 251,314,331,345,373, Madhyadesa, Midland

[Kimikshetra, a district 504, 539, 568, 570, 594, country, 463 note.
in N.-W. India, 122, 603.

207, 317, 381 notes. Leader, Neahtar, one of
Kurungi, a prince, 115. the priests, 521
turusrava ia, a prince. Leather, 63.

Kutua, a favourite of Leech, physician, 380 ; .

Indra, 21, 104, 159,283, see Physician. Maghavans, nobles, ins

436, 439, 451, Liberal Ones, Hods, 80. titutore of i eMnfice.21,

638, 548, 583. Liberality, 56 1 ; to priests, 32, l2o, 267, 524, 526,


M&ghd, a lunar mansion,
502.

Maghavan, Lord of Boun-
ty, a title of Indra,
passim.


Ntsas, 27.

Nava, a demon
bought, 21.


of


20,106,107,111,113, 549.

ltf, 119,123, 147, 148, Magic, personified, 504
159 * 181, 175, 195.196, note ; of Gods, 183,224,


the Holy, Rivers,

90,

ths Light. Dawn,


208, 212, 213, 223,265,
266 , 305, 429 , 470,5-5;
heavenly end earthly
rewards of, 549, 550,


436;590, 604; of fiends,
1, 2, 93, 94, 101, 139,
184, 202, 554,534 ; of
men, 155,



652


INDEX OF NAUBft, ETC.


MahAbhSrata, 99, 527, Mann, Man, father of 450, 456-458, 471-474,
536. mankind, 3, 12, 181, 476,479, 484,487,491-

MahA\ Ira, a sacrificial cal- 139, 153, 155, 167, 174, 494,500,508,516, 523,

dron, 219 note. 205, 261, 262, 352, 356, 524, 535, 537, 538, 544,

Mabldhara, a celebrated 471, 476, 482, 484, 509, 545, 547, 556, 557, 568,

Commentator on the 530, 539. 573, 574, 583, 595.

VAjasaneyi-SanhitA,43, Laws of, 36, 438. as healers, 150 ;

241,249,445,447,497, the father of NA- their number, 245 note.

499, 518, 520, 545,569. bhineduihtha, 456,467, MAtali, the charioteer of
Maiden, the, StiryA, 69 ; 469, 470. Indra, 398 note.

earth or the oblation, Manus =■ Manu, 146, 164, MAtalt, said to be Indra,
386. 186, 187, 260. 398.

Maidens, the Dawns, 459. Manyamlna, a Proper MAtari$van, VAyu, or Ag-
Maids, the Dawns, 8 ; Name, 20. ni, or the bringer of

fingers of the priest, Manyu, Passiou personi- Agni from heaven, 323,
316. fied, 488-500. 447, 449, 506, 515, 547,

Maker, 38. Mares, swift rivers, 83 ; 552, 557 ; the name of

Makba, apparently a de* waters of the firma- a Rishi, 262.

mon, 369. ment, 386. Match-makerB, 418, 502,

Male, the presiding, 518 Marichi, one of the Seven 503 notes,
note ; the first, 576 Rishis, 498. Matrons, Heaven and

note. Marriage and marriage Ea^h, 385.

Man, the first, 676 ;per- ceremonies, 501-506. Matsyas, fishes ; said to
sonified, the Soul of — presiding deities of, be the name of a tribe,
the univeiBe, 517 note ; 505, 506. 17.

son of Heaven and MArtAnda, a name of the MAyA, Illusion, the cause
Earth, 62; akin to Sun, 487. of material creation,

Gods, 71, 131, 144, MarudvridhA, name or 604 note.

364, 186, 206,231,247, epithet of a river, 490. MAyAbheda, Discernment
264, 470, 474, 548, Marutg, Storm-Gods, 11, of MAyA or Illusion,
607. 18, 21, 31, 32, 34, 37- 604.

MAna, said to be a name 41, 44, 47, 52, 54-59, MAyava, the name of a

<>t Agastya, 36. 78, 89. 91,100, 110, liberal noble, 525, 526.

ManA,two chains or rings?, 113, 123-126, 134, 185, MedhAtithi, a Rishi, 10?

226 note. 137,139,144,148-150, 107,128.

Manas, Spirit, 461. 160, 163, 164, 166, 175, Medhya, a Rishi, 262.

MAnava, son of Manu, 176, 178, 183, 193, 194, MedhyAtithi,aRishi,10f
469 note. 206, 214, 224, 225, 231, 106, 107, 110, 172, 260

MandhAtar, MAndhAtar, 234, 242, 243, 245, 246, 261, 297.

names of a Rishi, 181, 265, 268, 287, 292, 302, Medicine, Soma, 220 ; o

188. ’ 307, 315-317, 320, 382, the Maruts, 150, 583

Manes, 398, 401; see Fa- 387, 341, 345, 349, 351, of Rudra, 49, 167 i : «

there, 357,362,371,374,375, the Water., 891, 58

Maneion. of the Moon, 377,398,411,419,421, of Wind, 683.

AM nnu. 427, 432, 483, 435, 445, Mehatnu, ‘ jilli



INDEX OF NAMES, Vtt.


653


Merit, rewarded in hea- Monotheism, 498. and cloud, Genius

ven, 399. Moon, Moon-God, 166, of, 42.

Metal, see Gold, Iron. 199, 219, 230, 246,269, Mountains, 38, 39, 175,
Metres, 558, 559 ; allot- 271,272, 279, 281, 2s2, 265, 433, 539.

ted to various Gods, 289, 306, 308, 3$4, 325, Mrigaya, a fiend or hos-

577. 332,336,338, 341,345, tile savage, 113, 451.

Milch cow, Indra, 104; 347,357, 359,382,419, Mnlika, the name of a

thetypeof beueficence, 423,450,458,501,503, Riahi, 592.

153 ; Agni, 387. 519,523, 560,584,591. Mrityu, Death, 406.

Milch kine, clouds, 46 ; the food of Gods, Mudgala, a Hishi, 542,

rivers, 326, 344. 501 note ; sprung from 543.

Milk, rain, 149, 291,452; Purusha’s mind, 519. Mudgal&ni, Mudgala’s
sap, vigour, 105 ; of Moon and stars, 326. wife, 542, 543.
heaven, Soma juice, Moons, two, New and Muir, Dr. J.. 22, 34, 36,
394, 557 ; white in Full, 472. 40, 41, 49, 81-83, 85,

coloured cows, 452. = months, 516. 94 98,100, 142, 152,

Milton, 366, 422. Morning, personified, 35, 161, 179, 192, 198,205,

Jliti a, 8, 13, 36, 38-40, 45, 48, 67, 73-76, 86, 244, 269, 307, 380,

43-45. 47, 52, 60-66, 305, 384, 394, 431, 382, 390, 392, 394,

78 80, 88, 89, 139,143, 515, 580 ; see Dawn. 400,403, 430, 439,462,

144, 146,147,156,159 and Night, 4. 464, 470, 485,486, 490,

162, 164-168, 176, 188, Mornings, 11, 39, 46, 491,497,499,501,518,

193,196,197,200,2:0, 63, 72, 74, 77, 147, 520, 535, 536,538,550,

220,222,230,243,245, 244, 339, 344, 401, 558, 562, 564,567,576,

352,255,257,263,270, 432, 502. 577,582, 589, 594, 611.

306,315,335,337,340, Mother, Aditi, 4, 93, Mfijavau, a mountain fam-
342,349,351,362-364, 159, 231 ; Dawn, 78, ed for Soma plants, 429.

i 367,371,374,377,382, 418, 608 ; Earth, 96, Muller, Prof. F. Max, 6,

384,390,393,396,397, 407, 469, 514, 527; 15, 31, 32, 34, 36,

411,423,426, 432-435, of Floods, Sarasvati, 46, 49, 54, 57, 74, 82,

453,467,468,471, 473- 41 ; of kine (rays of 85, 90, 96, 97, 100,

475,487,503,516, 522- light), Dawn, 75. 131,136,144, 152, 181,

524,535,552,553, 556, Mothers, Rivers, 24 4, 184,200,226,226,237,

571-573,578, 590,607, 345, 370, 405, 431, 245, 259, 269,305,355,

612. 473; the Waters, 235, 382, 392, 404, 407,408,

Mitra-Varuna, 51, 6065, 425 ; Heaveu A Earth, 443, 457, 460, 490-492,

159, 252, 275. 431, 463, 474, 565 ; 494, 497,504, 516,520,

MitrAtithi, the name of Plante, 383, 533 ; of 531,538, 567, 571, 572,

* prince, 429. Law (Heaven A Earth), 576, 593, 600.

Moksha, final liberation, -T53; of Agni (Dawns), Mundane Egg, the, 518
Ovation, 518 note. 380. note.

i Mole, 323. midmost, clouds ? Muni, Munis, inspired

Wch, Indra, 78. 326. aaint(sj, 55, 142, 582.

Monogamy, indications Mountain, 38 cloud, Mfiradevaa, mpious,men
8, 77,123,125,328,362. or demoae 101,510.



654


INDEX OF NAMES, BTC.


Music, 214, >269, 581 ; 252, 266,267,349,414, Nodhas, a Rishi, 853 note..

of the Maruts, 55. 437, 440, 447, 448,587. Noose (for catching sin-

Myiiantheus, Prof., 221. Nature, 263 note. ners), of Agni, 6li • 0 f

Navogva, member of a Rudra, 49; of Varnna,
Na BHA = N&bb4uedifih* mythical priestly 604 ; of ViBva, 511

tha, 469. family, 376, 469. Nooses of Indra-Varuna,

Nabh8ka, a llishi, 182. Navav&stva, the name of 80 ; of Mitra and Va-
N&bh&ka, the son of Na- a chief, 451. r una, 64.

bh&ka, 182, 183. Nectar, 253, 269, 271. North altar, 137, 163

N&bh&nedishtha, son of Nema, said to be a Jti- notes .

Manu, 467, 468. shi, 250 note. Notes and Queries, 598.

Nachiketas, a Proper Neeh tar, one of the priests, Nrimedha, a prottg6 of
Name, 581 note. 521 note. Agni, 496.

Nahus, aPioper Name, New Year, 467 note. Nrimedhas, a man’a
8, 9, 349, 452, 496, 537. Night, 1 64, 384, 385, name, 578, 579.
Nahusha, a Proper Name, 419, 438, 472, 573, 574, Nrishad, aProper Name,
195, 470. 602, 609. 426, 466.

N4husha, said to be the — and dawn or morn-
name of a king, 90. ing, 44, 47, 273, 553. Ocean, 39, 51, 70, 84,
Nahuahas, a people, 90, — and day, 438. 111,122,184,249,569,

* 121, 126, 351. — Lord of, the Moon, 583, 591.

Nahushyas, ape<»ple,351. 524. Af air, 251, 855, 391,

Nakahatras, lunar man* Nights, 244. 477,536,568,572,604.

aions, 501 note. Nine, the Bhrigus? 419. Varu^ia, 184 ;Soma,

Names, four, of a deity, Ninety, indefinite for 362.

22 h many, 536. Oceans, seven, 520 note.

Naml, a friend of Indra, Ninety-nine, ditto, Oganas, men of some
450 # rivers, 546; castles, hostile tribe, 517.

Namucbi, a demon of 21, 94, 239, 306 ; Old age, 406, 462.

drought, 21, 139, 246, fiends, 452 ; loads Oldeuberg, Prof. H., 96,

488, 578. of fuel, 536. 269, 509, 531.

Narieansa, a title of Nlpltithi, a Rishi, 174, Om, 95.

Agni, 3, 4, 72, 483, 260, 261. Omen, bird of ill, 598,

523, 606. Nirriti, Goddess of des- 599.

NaiAf ansi, eulogistic song, traction, 42, 58, 99, Omnific, Vimkarnian,
501. 158, 393, 407, 433, 496 note.

Nkrshada, said to be the 462, 492, 598. Omniscient, Soma, 288,

name of a fiend, 466 Nirritis, destructive 289.
note. pow ere, 557. On*, 498 ; One All, 267; j

N4rya, a liberal prince, Nirukta, 49. One Supreme, 498. j

159. Nishti, said to be Diti, 0»e*horae car, 577 ; One - ,

Nksatyas, a name of the 541 note. footed, the Sun > tee

Aavins, 44, 67, 70-73, Niahtigrl, Indra'i mother, Aja*ekapAd.

117, 118, 127*130, 153, 541. Op!, i mplement tot y^



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


655


Ordainer, the, DhAtar, PAkayajfta, simple domes- Parna, the PalAsa tree,

406 • the Sun, 467, tic oblation, 57<> note . Butea Frondosa, 533.

Order, Cosmic and Mo- Paktha, a king, 153,260, Parnaya,atree-demon,450.
ral, 48, 63, 64, 384, 465. . Parsu, Rib, daughter of

386, 390, 395, 459, Pakthas, 18, 465. Manu, 509,

467* 478, 480, 488, PalAsa, a tree, Butea name of a chief, 123,

496,552. SeeLaw. Frondosa, 533 note. Parsus, 79.

sacrifice, 40, 47, 90, PanchAlas, a tribe in the PArthya, a liberal chief,

119, 350, 354, 360, PanjAb, 150 note. 525,526.

361 387, 390, 397, Pani, a demon of dark- Farushnt, the river RAvi,

425, 511, 545, 553, uess, 466, 479, 595. 17, 18, 223, 490.

570. &c Law. Panis, 11, 162, 235, 286, Parvata, the Genius of

Kosmoa, the Uni- 344, 380, 466, 478, Mountain and Cloud,

verse, 568. 550, 551, 556. 42, 596.

Orderer, disposer of the PanjAb, 20, 150, 159, PAsadyumna, a king, 34
Universe, Indra, 588, 490, 550 notes. PAtA, PAthA, a medicinal

Ornameuts, of the Ma- Pantheism, 517-520. plant, 588 note,
ruts, 148-150, 494 ; of Paramabrahmaj&Anam, Paulomi, IndrAnl, 59 .
women, 196 ; of men, knowledge of the hi- Paura, son of King Puru,

208, 226 ; of cows, gher truths of religion, 112,260.

208 4 8 4 note Pauras, 264.

inranos = Varuna, 184 Paramajyi, a liberal chief, Pautakratu, son ofPuU-
, ' krati or POtakratu,

note. iU0 *

)wl, 100, 101; owlet, 101. ParamAtmA, the supreme 266 note.

k hide, 278, 317, 320, soul or self, 572 note. PavamAna, 269, 273;

336, 369. Paramesvara, the sup- Agm, 2 ^° 7i0 ^ ’

reme God, 497 note. ‘272, and Book IX. pas-

PadqribH!, a demon or ParAsara, a Hishi, 20. * tm Pushau, 33
| savage, 451. PArAvata (n\ name of a PavamAuas Soma juices

i&v&na, patronymic of distant tribe, 175 or ro P 8 ’

1 -SL-

r, the,Karth and Hea- 415 note. „

m, 38, 283, 386, 396; Parents, the, Heaven of Soma. •

Bay and Night, 393 ; and Earth, 62, 63, 62, Paviru, chief
Niglit and Dawn, 273, 92, 824, 841, 396, J s0 , 481.

433; Sun and Moon, 475, 553. Pe » rl - , o{ the

514. Parijman, the Reamer Pedu. a

>ir4, a woman's name ? round, Indra as the Aarms, , ’

333. gun, 522;Viyu, Wind, Penury, prayer against,

'i™. a Proper Name, 5*4, 625. 71, 492.

115,123. Parjanya, God of the Peterson Prof. P. 79,

N™, a priestly family, Rain-cloud, 39, 95, 96, *4, 85, , .

115 119, 152, 254,270,285, 564,567, 572.

‘WUnum, a liberal 338, 381, 458,475,477. Phelgunte, » double ta-
^ fins. 536. 601. narmanaion, 502nofs.



656


INDEX OP NAUES, ETC.


Phthisis, 613 note. Potar, Cleanser, one of
Physician, 380, 533 ; his the priests, 15, 384,
fee, 533. 421 -

Physicians, Waters, 143, Poverty, deprecated, 2,

437. 89 ’ 192 -


the blessings of, Praise of Men, Narisanaa,
a title of Agai, 3.

father or an- Prajilpati, Lord of Crea-
tion or Creatures, 52,


Piety,

165, 522 ; see Devotion.
Pijavana,

cestor of KingSudfts,20.
Pillar of the Universe
Agni, 387.

Pillars, sacrificial, 39.


240, 242, 253, 273,
318, 387, 419, 421,
425, 445, 458, 466,
473, 506, 566, 567,
576, 611, 613.

Destroyer,


Pipru, a demon <
ught, 538, 584.

Pisichas, demons, 399 Pramara,


note . ucau1 ’

Pischel, Prof. R , 25, 48, Prapathi, a liberal chief,

82, 15*2, 163, 168, 193, 106.

213, 257, 277, 288, Pias&star, one of the

318', 394, 421, 465, chief priests, 521 note.

512, 547, 586, 605. Praskanva, a Rishi, 112,

Pitaras, Pitns, 199 ; tee 261, 265, 266.

Fathers. Prastotar, one of the


Pitriyajfta, sacrifice to priests, 229 note.

the Fathers, 455 note. Prathas, extending, the
Planets, 458 note. aarne of an oblation,

Plants, 56 ; descended 606.

from heaven, 534 ; me- Pratiprasth4tar, the de-
diciuai, 533-535; po signatiou of one of the

* isonous, 51; king of, assistant priests, 219

Soma, 382, 534, 535. note.

Plati, a Rishi, 472, 474. Pratridas, a name of the
Playoga, the father of Tritsus, 36.

King Asanga, 107, 173. Pravargya, an introduc-
Pleasantness, personified, tory Soma ceremony,

586. 219

Plenty, personified, 33, Prayfija, fore-offering, 606.

38, 353, 473. Prayer, peraonified, 38,

Plough, 153, 563. , 558 ; Lord of, 91, 92 ;

Poiaon, charm against, 51. made, inspired, by Gods,

Poisonous reptiles, charm 92 ; lor health, wealth

acainat, 5. and happineaa, 3, 53,

Polygamy, 17, 28, 428, 73, 75, 143, 340, 361,

112 541. 688, 689 ; 391, 481, 432 471.


homes, 231, 431; for
long life, 59, 66,

75, 96,144, 189, 198,
199, 211, 268, 272,
352, 406, 435, 462,
607 ; for safety, 37,
79, 89, 110, 117, 154-
160, 164, 165, 196,

197, 200, 210, 341,
361, 471; for goodness,

198, 271, 272 ; for in-
nocence, 143, 431,435,
471, 574 ; for mercy,
85, 192 ; for purification,
322, 391; for forgive-
ness of sins, 37, 58,
82, 84, 85, 89, 199 ,
for freedom from sin,
431, 435, 471, 598,
for immortal life m


heaven, 381, 382,399;
fir wisdom, 1, 5, 34,
198, 291, 367, 378,
414, 434 ; for fanip,

27, 80, 156, 276, 284,
291, 302, 308, 311,
312, 432, 434, 462
525 ; for wives, 321
for children, 1, 2, 6,


, 87, 91, 92, 121
176, 268, 306
3 52, 361, 391
>67 ; for aid i>
24, 27, 30, 56
93, HI. 140
151, 190- 20l <
>4, 364, 364,436
>90; for victor;
•ace, 228, 6®
othes, 863 ; W

is, 64 , n. *

1«°, 275, *
316, 317,

372, 376, 53



INDEX OF NAMES, ETO.


657


turage, 341, 352 ; for 58, 433, 471, 475. Purohita, a family or
eloquence, 535; against Prithu, a Rishi, 591,602. tribal priest, 10, 11,
penury and sickness, Pritlius, 79. 163, 535.

71, H3, 210, 432,471; Prithusravas, a liberal — of Gods, Briha&pati,

for freedom from evil prince, 195, 196. 535.

dreams, 445, for re- Priyamedha, a famous Puru, a King, 112.

,uval of the sin of Kishi, 112, 118, 171, Puru, the eponymus of
ing aud false swear- 233. a Vedic tribe, 7, 10,

ig, 391 ; for the de- Priyamedhas, 110, 115, 19, 21, 385.

ruction of fiends, 90, 123, 128, 215,233,489. Purus, 10, 91, 449.

5-101, 352. Productive Power, 486. Puruhanman, a Rishi,

?oga, a poor Rishi, Professions, crafts, trades, 215.

»5 note. indications of, agricul- Purukutsa, a prince, 21,

s-atones, 43, 46,491, ture, 150, 153, 157, 147.

'2, 526, 527, 603. 519, 563 ; barber, 115, Purumdyya, a Rishi, 212.

&kus4nu, a Proper 586; bard, 380; boat* Purumilha, a Rishi, 218,

arne, 142. builder, 230, 327 ; 305.

ithood, a profession, caq>enter, wright, 285, Purumitra, a Rishi, 437.

0 note. 380 ; currier, 63, 265; Purfiravas, au ancient

>t’s daughters, fingers, rope-making, 80; phy- King, 139, 412, 527-

0. sician. 380, 523; smelt- 531.

sts, modern, imita- er, 486, 497 ; smith, Purus, men of a Vedic

ps of divine, 577. 380, 486 ; trafficker, tribe, 207.

of the Gods, 483; merchant, 190, 209 ; Purusha, Embodied Spirit,
Hotars, Celestial. usurer, 209; weaver, Man, 397, 517-520,
called Gods, 3, 144, 416. 576.

0, 568. Protecting Goddesses, Purushanti, a liberal

liberality to, see 38 ; see Varfi tils. prince, 305.

berality to Priests. Protectress, the, 43 ; sec Pushan, a Sun-God, 39,
i&dhra, a Rishi, 262. Varfitri. 41, 44, 45, 48, 115,

indv&na, a Proper Providence, 30, 147, 539. 164, 167, 168, 265,

Line, 261. Ptolemy 175. 306, 321, 337, 349,

na, the name of a Pulaha, one of the Seven 368, 377, 387, 404,

tec? 364. Itishis, 498 note. 405, 415, 416, 428,

ai = Prisni, 487. Pulastya, ditto, 498 note. 432, 463, 472-474,

>i, mother of the Punarvatsa, a Rishi, 125. 502, 504, 523, 535,

ruts, 18, 40, 55,83, Purftnas, 95, 528. 571, 534.

\ 124, 149, 150,242, Purandhi, Plenty or Bold- Pushana= Pfishan, 524.
M27, 456, 466, 487, ness personified, 38, Pushtigu.a Proper Name,

&, 568. 41 n 44, 473, 476, 505. 261.

Mina, the name of Purifying, the, 253. Putabhrit, a Soma reser-
i°ble, 525. Purod&s, a Proper Name? voir, 108, 124, 243,

the first anoint- 17.

129, 591. Puroddsa, Bacrificiulcake, POtakratd, a Proper Name,
ill) Earth. Mid-air. 397 note. 266*.



658


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


PQtakratu, a Proper 201,247, 296,301,313, Ribhus, three deities of
Name, 218, 266. 331,347,868,375,419, mid-air, 39, 41, 50, 52

433,456,458,463, 510, 111, 130, 176,192,226’

QUAiD = Dawn, 438. 512, 563, 593. 242,247,413, 438, 457 ’

Quarters of the sky, 39. RAhshasi, a female fiend, 475, 477, 492,496,523,
Queen, the, VAk, 571 ; 100. 603, 612.

of Gods, VAk, 251. Ham, the Warrior Indra, Rich, richas, sacred
Queens, the Waters, 391, 110,248. verse(s) for recitation,

424, 425. RAma, the name of a 586, 519, 521, 558.

Questionings regarding noble, 525. Riches personified, 38 ;

Nature, Gods, and RAmAyana, 166. like chariot- wheels,

Man, 497, 514, 555, R&sA, a semi-mythical 562.

600. river, 297, 490,550, 566. ltijika?, name of a people,]

Quintus Curtius, 150. Rathantara, an import- 381 note.

Quoit, 245, 436, 488. ant SAman, 606. Rijisvau, a protigi of

Rathaprosht.has, men of Indra, 200, 538, 584.
Race, 291, 300, 480, 489. a regal family, 464. Rijunas, a man's name,

Kace-course, 88. Rathaspati, God of war- 262.

Racers, 46, 282 note. chariots, 473, 525. Riksha, a prince, 212,

Ragozin, Mme. Z., 408, RAti, Divine Favour or 213, 222, 223.
497,505,552,589,606; Bounty, 477. Rikvana, divine singers,

see Vedic India. RAvI, a river in the Tan- 398, 472.

Raibhi, ritual verse, 501. jAb, 17, 223, 490 notes. Rishi, 84, 112, 572;

Rain, 89 ; produced by Razor, 115, 421. Indra, 122, 140.

the Moon, 423, 424 Rebha, a proUgt of the Rishis, 70, 74, 111, 120,
notes ; Lords of, 160 ; Asvina, 437. 127, 218, 235, 268, 323,

prayer for, 63, 64, 160, Red, the, the Sun, 76; 352, 469,385,518,594:

275. Red Bird, the Sun, 459 ; old and recent, 25 ; aiv

Rains, the, 97, 98, 148. Red Treasure, the, the cient, 400, 577 ; raisec
RAjanya, a Kshatriya, Sun, 252. to their rank by know

519. Regal Class, the, 519; ledge, 577 ; childlik*

Rajas, the firmament, see Kshatriya.-?. questions of, 514

234. Resuscitation of Subau- childlike address to !

RAjayakshma, Conaump- dhu, 401-465. God, 33, 138 , 146, 147

tion, 597. Revelation, 268. 189 ; the Seven, 498

Raji, a word of unknown Ribhu, the eldest of the 552, 677, 588.

meaning, 547. Ribhus, 41, 242, 413, Rishtishena, a prince

RAkA, a lunar Goddess, 525. 635, 530.

332. Ribhukshan — Ribhu ; a Rivers, 4, 39, 490, 529

Rakshas, the demon race, title of Indra ; 41, 42, the Seven, 20, 4l,

154. 50, 192, 247, 413, 473, 214 ; twenty-one, 49(1

RAkshasa, a nocturnal 489, 525. Lords of, 63. j

fiend, 1, 11, 100. Ribhukshans, Ribhuk- Robber, 53, 99; m TW

RAkehaws, 14, 43, 72, ’ sh&naa = Ribhus, 41, 42, Kodatl, the Consort
98,100, 155, 177 137, 60, 124, 148, 523, 525. the Maruts, 38, W



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


659


Rohitas, the horses of 43, 57, 213, 405, 567,
Agni, 46 note. 578, 585.

Roth, Prof, von, 8, 34, Sacred Grass, see Grass,
40, 48, 54, 57, 68, 84, Sacred.

91, 105, 116, 118, 147, Sacred syllable, 397.
184,214,218,256,259, Sacrifice, 219, 540, 541 ;


109, 115,134,136,168,
170, 190, 227,236,238,
239, 241,247, 248,262,
441, 442,546, 580,600.
Sakti, a son of Vasishtha,
’ 20 .


260, 264, 266,304,382,
391,392,404, 408, 452,
456, 470,509,531, 541,
565, 569, 582.

Rudra, the Tempest-
God, 12, 39, 41, 46,
49,54,56.58, 137,149,
167,331,450,473,474,

522-525, 572, 573, 582,
600.

Rudras, sons of Rudra,
the Maruts, 8, 12, 35,
39, 40, 124, 137, 148,
206,253,265, 427, 458,
473,476, 477,525,537,
571,575,582,592; the
Asvins, 154, 162.
Rudriyas = Rudras, 450.
Ruma, a favourite of
Indra, 114.

Rusama, a prince, 112,
114, 262.

Rusamas, a people, 262.


personified, 576, 601 Sakvarl, a Vedic metre,
no/e$;asan actofcrea- 35, 486.
tion, 499,513,520,576; Salmali, the silk-cotton
morning and evening, tree, 51, 503.

14, 15; morning, noon, Salt, not mentioned,
and evening, 165, 345, S&ma, S&man, song, chant
376; priest of, Agni, ed hymn, 36, 123, 141,


156, 167, 229, 235, 244,
248, 433, 486, 494, 502,
519, 557, 558,576, 581,
606.


13,16 ; herald of, Agni,

’passim ; a web, woven,

11, 268, 370, 575;
a thread, spun, 136,

186, 238, 345, 456, 482, SAma-chanter, one of the
602 ; a ship, 444, 540, priests, 486, 549.

547 ; a chariot, 525, Sdmaveda, 594, 595, 60
540; ploughing, sow- note s.
ing, reaping, 540 ; with Sambara, a demon or
the heart, 255 ; head savage, 20, 94, 239,
of, Soma, 283 ; the 246, 306.

Gods’ first, 421 ; three- Sami, a tree, Acacia Su-
fold, 455, 570 ; seven- ma, 426, 453.
threaded, 455, 570 ; SamjMuam, Agreement,
with five divisions, 570; 609.

unpleasing without Samvarana, a Rishi, 261.
prayer, 547 ; sordid, SAmvarani, son of Samva-
prayer against, 471. rana, 261.

Sacriiicer, the, 607 ; tee Samvarta, a man’s name,
Yajam&na.

the first, Atharvan, ?ausa, Prayer, Wish, per-

523 ; wife of, associat- sonified, 38.
ed in worship, 168, Santanu, a prince, 535,

415,607. 636t ^ . ,

Sadhyaa, a class of Gods, Saprathaa, Far-eitend-
. 518, 520. ing, tb. -me of au

B'S'),.", ’VS.-- >» *-

tir • jiST- 4^ • “ •* *'

of Indra, 22, 100, 105, haspati, 443,


Sxbakdhu, name of the
cow milked at sacrifice,
467.

Snbardhuk, ditto, 482.
SabardughA, ditto, 104,
466, 467.

Sacbi, power, Indra’s
Consort, 140, 596.
?Hchigo, of uncertain



660


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


Saptavadhri, a protegi of Sauchika, a title of Agui, Serpents, 99, 471.

the Asvins, 221, 437. 455. Seven, the, the Maruta,

Sara, the name of a man, Sdvarni, a liberal prince, 166.

216, 217. 470. Seven, Adityas, 382 ;

Sarabha, the name of a Sdvarnya = Sdvarni, 470. castles, 19 ; cowunu-

ltishi, 251. Savasi, the Mighty Dame, nities, 238; fiends,

Saramd, Indra’s messen- Aditi, 190, 225. 246; ftamea of Agui,

ger, 53, 399, 466, 468, Savishtha, a liberal prince, 370, 387 ; glories, 166,
550, 551. 223. Guards of Soma, 5ui ;

Sararaeyas, Yama’s watch Savitar, the Sun as Im- heavenly singers, 261 ;
dogs, sous of Saramd, peller, Vivifier, 15, 37, heroes, 419 ; horses of
53 note. 39, 42-44, 48, 49, 52, the Sun, 60, 66; hotars

Saranyu, the mother of 63, 65, 74, 76, 79, 80, 427; 465; lights of

Yama, 163, 404. 143, 165, 233,254,322, sacrifice, 370 ; metres,

Sarasvdn, the Consort of 337,368,379, 397,404, 370, 427, 478, 520

Sarasvati, 90, 477. 419, 425,430-432, 434, notes; mothers (rivers),

Sarasvati, River an d God- 467, 472, 473, 476, 244, 345, 370 ; obla

dess, 4, 11, 39, 41, 44, 502, 505, 512,522,525, tions, 405 ; oceans,

45,90, 91,152, 180, 538,539,567,575,584, 520 note; priests, 181,

265, 273, 323,337,405, 586, 591, 597, 603,606. 201, 219, 238,268,275,

425,463,473,474,476, Savitri = Savitar, 242 note. 27J, 281, 310, 352,

484,490,553,575,586, Sdyana, Achdrya, the great 37(f 882, 415, 432,

613. Commentator, passim. 455,471, 473, 559,567,

Sarayu, a river, 473. Sayu, a proUge of the 570 ; regions; 382,567,
Sdrpaidjfli, Kadrd, Ser- Asvins, 69, 438, 439. ridges of mountains,

pent-Queen, 608. Schermao, Dr. 520, 567, 211 ; Rishis 498, 552 ;

Saryandvdn, a lake and 576. see Rishis, Seven ; ri-

district, 122, 125,207, Scorpion ?, 5 i . vers, 20, 41, 67, 159,

317,381,431. Sea, 9,35, 51, 117,119,120, 183, 184, 214, 265,

Sasakarna, a $ishi, 128. 149, 239, 307, 345, 303, 318, 344, 345,

Sasvati/the wife of 386, 476, 4 7 7,552,566, , 352, 370, 4 4 2, 452,

Asanga, 107. 582; of air, 9, 131, 132, 479; 546; rivers of

Satakratu, Lord of a 134, 136, 162, 207, air, 303 ; singers, 485,

Hundred Powers, I ndra, 224, 247, 254, 279, sisters, 183, 268, 318,

137, 170,173,178,203, 307, 311, 331, 374, 345, 387 ; sons of Adi

224,225,228,234,236- 375, 487, 494, 609; a ti, 487; spea/s of the

238,241,242,249,250, Soma reservoir, 121, Maruts, 166; splen ■

263, 284, 423, 556, 580. 289, 293; water into dours, 166; statious,

Satapatha-Brdhmana,43, which the S<>ma juice 567 ; Sun’s rays, 220,

* 95, 253, 269, 405,527, falls, 279 ; cloud and 458 ; threads of sacri-

533, 538, 540, 568,585. rain, 475. fice, 570; tones, 427 ,

Sataydtu=Sakti,Vasish- Seas, four, 292, 448. troops of Maruts, 458,
tha’sson, 20. Serpent, the, 90, 113; 478.

Sdtydyana Brdhmana,35, assassin, 43 ; Serpent- Sevenfold Race of mb,
Queen, 608. 101 — ■



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


661


Seven-beaded, hymn,261; to Brahman rank, 536 154,257.

sacrifice, 478. note. Sobharis, 147, 149.

Seventy Hymns, the, 62 ; Singers, Rikvans, 12. Sole bom, Manyu, 500.

sec Siebenzig Lieder. Siniv&ll, a lunar Goddess, Sole God, 497.

Shadvinsa Br&hinana,110. 332,613. Soma, the God, 38, 45,

Ship, 143, 224, 230,330, Sinjflra, a proUg6 of the 53,98-101, 166, 269,
359, 605 ; hymn, 185; Asvins, 118, 439. 325, 391, 414, 415,474,

sacrifice, 185,350, 444, Sipada, a kind of disease, 52. 477, 501, 515, 534,535,


471, 540, 547, = funeral Sipivishta, a title of Vishnu, 539, 570, 571, 574,577,
pile, 581. 94, 95. 586, 600-603; the plant,

Sickle, 227, 540. Sirimbitha, a ltishi, 594. habitat of, 283, 309,

Sickness, 71; sec Disease. Slshtas, an unimportant 310, 354, preparation

iebenzig Lieder des Rig- tribe, 264 of, 107, 270,309; rap-

veda (Geldner and SisnSt = RAkshasas, etc., tare produced by, 169,

Kaegi), 7, 62, 84, 85, 419 note. 194, 198; powers of,

394, 400, 408, 431, Sisnadevdh, lewd savages, 193, 198, 199; elo-
486, 552, 562, 572, 24, 537 notes. quence produced by,

576,589. Sisters, fingers, 283,289, 259,288,293,315,321,


iigrus, a non- Aryan tribe 316, 324, 323, 329, 350,

20. 351, 353, 365, 526 ;

silam&vati, name or epi- rivers, 345; plants, 410;

thet of a river, 491. Heaven and Earth, 565;
Siraidii, a kind of disease, Dawns, 294 ; flames of
52. Agni, 387.

Simyus, a savage tribe, Sivas,anon-Ary an tribe,

* 11 ' 18 ’

Sin, the bonds of, 82,85, Six Expanses, 400, 574.
210, 211 ; prayer for Skambha, Pillar of the
removal or forgiveness Universe, 38/ note,
of, 82, 89, 210, 211, Sky, personified, 76,77,
431 ; of others, prayer 433, 474, 476 ; sprung
for freedom from, 52, from Puruslia’s head,
82; punisher of, 64,82, 519.

362, 493. 516 ; punish* Slaves, 147, 266.
ment of, 583; sinless, Sleep song, 54.

60, 62, 65, 82, 210; Smadibha, a Proper Name,
dinner, 576. 451.

Siodhu, the Indus, river, Smelting of metals, 4S6,
^ 83, 90, 132, 150, 497.

160,163, 364, 473,477, Smith, 380,486,497.

490, 494, 555, 583, Snowy Mountains, 566.
chief of rivers, 490; Soastos, Arrian’s name
feminine, 491. ^pf SuvAstu, 148.

Sindhudvlpa, the name ofehari, a Vedic Rishi,
MkjlfltlltTT' -- ; - J 118,144,148.160, 152


325, 333, 351 356,308;
Pavam&na (in course
of purification), 269-
382, 567 ; deified, 198,
199, 227, 269, 271,273,
374, 376, 501 ; celes-
tial, 134, 206, 207,292,
296, 369, 381, 560 ;
Guard of,Krisdnu,473;
guards of, 501 ; Father
of Gods, 342, 347, 355,
377 ; Father of Heaven
and Earth, 350, 355 ;
identified with the Sun,
311 ; with the Moon,

306, 601; omnisqent,
288, 289 ; producer of
the Gods, 297 ; maker
of the firmament, 310;
giver of rain, 295, 301;
8 la yer of sinners, 289,
300 ; healer of the sick
and giver of sight, 227.
Somayajha, an offering
of Soma juice, 570 note.
Son of Strength, ««
Strength, Son of.



662


INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


Sorcererfa), sorcery, 100, Stallions, flames of the Sumne-iipl, the name of
101. Sun, 386. an Apsaras, 528.

Soul, Individual, 517no*e ; Star, the Sun, 77, 82, 555,Sun, Sun-God, 8, 9,35,39,
Universal, 517, 572 notes, 595 ; the ancient, Agni 60, 68, 74, 77, 78, 82,

Soul of the Universe, as the Sun, 514. 111,113,124,133,146,

Man, Embodied Spirit, Starlings, 176. 221, 234, 239,244, 270,

517 note. Steed, the, the Sun, 579. 286, 289, 297,311, 322,

Speech, 130, 251, 484, Steeds’ Lord, Agui, 2. 339,378, 386,387,390,

485, 458, 571, 604 ; Steer, Steers, see Bull, 392,405,418-420,431,
Lord of, Bfihaspati, Bulls. 434,451,458,465,467,

535 note ; Soma, 288, Stega, a word of uncertain 473,487,501,502,514,
368; Viavakarman, 497. meaning, 426 519, 520,525, 547, 554,

Spies of Varuna, 83; of Stotar, a praising priest, 562,565.566, 569,571,
the Gods, 392, 393. 237. 584,585,601,604,608,

Spinsters, 485. Streams, 50, 431, 472 ; sprung from Purushi's

Spirit, Boldness, personi- see Rivera. eye, 519; the daughter

fled, 38. Strength, Son of, Agni, of, Sur)&, 501 ; protec*

the Supreme, 484 2, 3, 5, 10, 14, 15, 188, tors of, 594.

note ;— sprung from 200, 201, 217, 218, 223, Sun and Moon, 182, 242,
Desire or Love, 575 ; 231,395, 409, 445, 585, 419, 472, 481, 495,503,

the Embodied, Purusha, 586; Indra, 235, 238. 5*4, 523, 524, 584,609,

517 ; the presiding, Stuti, Praise, 427 note. the eyes of Agni, 495

518 ; human, goes to Subandhu, a Rishi, 462- note.

the wind at death. 402 ; 465. Suuritd, Pleasantness, 586.

recall of the departed, Sueha, Suchd, Proper Supttrya, epithet of a
461,462. Names, 416. Rishi, 559.

Spirits, the world of, 402. Sudaksha, a Rishi, 237. Supporter, Indra, 249.
Spring, 518, 597. Sudds, King of the Trit- Supieme Deity, original-

SraddhA, Faith, 528. au», 17-22, 27, 34, 35, ly Varuna, 570;— God,

Srent, the name of an 53, 60,61,64,79, 80. 377 note Soul, 572.

Apsaras, 528. Sudeva, a Proper Name, Sflra, the Sun, 49, 104,

Sribinda, a demon of 116. 316, 319, 821,345,351,

drought, 169. Sudlti, said to be a Pro- 379.

Srinjavrish, a Proper per Name, 218. Surabhi, the daughter of

Name, 142. S,.dra, a man of the Daksha, 394.

Srutakakaba, a Vedic fourth class, 519. S tirade va, a prince, 21 7.

Rishi, 239. Sujflrnl, the name of an Surgery, 104.

Srutarvan, a prince, 222, Apsaras, 528. Sir is, princes, institu tors

223, 451, SumUrutam, the band of of sacrifice, 161, 590.

St. Petersburg Lexicon, Maruts, 493. Surya, the Sun, 3, ^

40, 49, 101, 156, 187, Sumedhas, a ProperName, 48, 50, 60*63, 66, OS
191, 223,226, 240, 259, 578 , 579. 74, 83, 86, 93, 94, 10'

285, 287,288, 299, 323, Sumitra, a Rishi, 482, 5$ 121, 126,148, 152,

338, 856, 366, 393,436, Sumitraa, 482, 171, 175*177, 187, 19



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


663


253, 266, 267, 269,278, SvAna, the name of a Ten, the, the fingers, 329;
289, 290, 303, 306,311, guard of Soma, 501 arm b = regions, 253 ;
312,314,320, 322,325, note. confederate kings, 35,

329, 331, 333, 334,339, Svanadratha, a prince, 106, 79, 80; dames, women,
344, 345, 351, 353.355, Svarga, heaven, 530. the fingers, 274, 304,
361, 362, 373, 375,381, Svarnara, a prince, 112, 324, 326; fingers’ space,

389, 393, 420, 422,423, Svasti, Prosperity, 472. the region of the heart,

426, 431, 434, 435,446, SvetyA, a river, 490. 617; horses of the Sun,

451, 467, 470,476, 487, Swan, 176, 291 ; the Sun, 312 ; priests, 219 ;

493,501, 510,514.515, .571. regious, 253 ; Bisters,

547, 554, 555, 557,569, Swans, bards, 359 ; the the fingers, 269 ; 289;
571, 682, 586, 590,596, Maruts, 59. Angirases, 419.

601, 605, 606, 608 ; Swarthy skin, the abori- Tenfold dwelling of Agni,
High Priest of Gods, gines, 331. 453.

253. Swat, 148 note. Thief, thieves, 53, 82, 99,

urya’s Daughter, Faith, Swing, boat, 84; golden, 223, 386, 505.

381. the Sun, 83. Thiity-four lights, 458.

\ryA,Sunlight,Daughter Sword, or knife, of Agni, Thirty-three Gods, 166,
of Surya, 68, 69, 127, flame, 400. 167, 175, 181, 265,352.

152, 167, 232,438,501- SyAva, a protigt of the Thirty-Bix chalices for
505; the typical bride, Asvins, 476. Soma libations, 558.

501-505. SyAvaka, a favourite of Thousand, branches, of

urya’s Bridal, 501-503. ' Iudra, 112, 114. the Sun-God or the

usartu, a river, 490. SyAvAsva,a Proper Name, World-Tree, 35; eyes

neliAman, the name of 177-180. of Varuna, 37.

a prince, 156, 161. Syumarastni, a favourite ThOrr, 172 note.
ishna, a demon of of the Asvins, 262. Thread of sacrifice, 136,

drought, 21, 106, 120, 286, 345, 482, 485,482,

182, 246, 262, 41 1, 412, Taittir! y a Brahman a, 485, 576, 602.

451, 406, 538, 554. 581. Three, the, heaven, air,

aslioma, a district fam- Tanfina pAt, Son of Him- earth, 252 ; Viiyu,

ed for Soma, 125. self, Agui, 272, 483, 553. Parjanya, Aditya, 420;

udiomA, a river, 207, TAnva, a liberal noble, attendants on Dawn,

490. 525, 526. 35 ; backs or ridges,

Stainer, 38, 56. Tapas, Austerity, Fervour, 310 ; beakers, 108, 136;

aitlej, 493 note. Penance, 499, 594, 607. daily libations, 12, 376,

utudrl, the Sutlej, 490. Tapurmdrdhin, Flame- 570 ; Dawns, 183, dis-

'uvlstu, the name of a headed, Brihaspati or tauces,l 16,171; earths,

district, 148. Agni, 606! 83, 99, 184; fertilizing

Wad, 148. Tfranta, a liberal prince, deities, 35; filters, 364;

iv adhA, oblation to 305. receptacles, 12, 559 ;

Manes, 398, 401. TArkshy a, a personification friends of Indra, 42;

5vl H Ave 1 HaU l 59, of the Sun, 591, 604. gatherings, 66; gather-
177,273, 884. 898, Taruksha, a non-A^an ing* places, 181; gene-

chief. 190. rations, 263; Goddei*



664


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


ses, 4 ; Gods, 607 ; Time, 458 note. Tritsu, SudAs, king of

heights, 380 ; holy Times (watches) of night, Tritsus.
words, 292, 301 ; lumi- 116, Tritsus, a tribe, 17-21, 3Z

nous realms of heaven, Tiraschi, a Rudd, 243. 36, 79, 80,

213, 282 ; noble crea- Tirindira, a liberal prince, Troop, the, the Maruts,
tures, 35 ; places of the 123. 371 ; a, stars, 419.

Asviua, 128 ; plaees of Tishya, an asterism, 473. Truth, the Law of the
Soma, 243 ; Purifiers, Trafficker, 190, 209. Universe, 501, 601,

331; reservoirs, 96, 108, Trap, for lions, 422 ; for 609; Lords of, the
370 ; sacrificial fires, wild bulls, 422. Gods, 39.

547 ;8eats, 310; spheres Trasadasyu, Terror of Tryambaka, a name of
of light, 282 ; steps of Dasyus, the name of a Rudra, 59.

Vishnu, 93, 95, 130, prince, 21, 128,147, 153, Tugra, a prince, 104, 113,
134, 167, 263; sublim- 178, 179, 260, 428, 592. 117, 192, 223, 250, 437,

eet forms, 322 ; times Tree, the Soma plant, 451.

(watches) of night, 583 ; the home of the Tugrya, Bhujyu son of
116 ; tones, 362 ; Ve- Blest, 581. Tugra, 113, 171, 250.

das, 310 note; voices, Trees, 38,56; clouds, 488. Tugryas, 104.

361 ; wheels of SOryA's Trikadrukus, three Soma Tuji, a prince aided by
car, 503; Worlds, 109, vessels, or first three Indra, 451.

478. days of the Abhiplava Turva4= Turvasa,

Threefold, the, the Uni- ceremony, 136, 238, Turvasa, thi eponymus

verse, 557; the three 400. of a Vedic tribe, 17, 22,

daily sacrifices, 376 ; — Trikshi, a prince, 153, 113, 114, 124, 130,131 ;

light, 95; grass (in Triocular, Rudra 59 note. 191, 306, 452.

three layers), 255 ; Tuple, height, 329, 333, Turvasas, 115,
wealth, 33. 351, 372; splendour, TOrvayAna, a King aided

Three-footed, old man 422. by Indra, 465.

with staff, 562. TrishtAmd, a river, 490. Tvashtar, the Divine Ar-

Thrice, in connexion Triahtup, one of the chief tificer, 4, 38, 39, 163,
with the Asvins, 176. Vedic metres, 123, 362, 166, 254, 273, 337, 384,

Thrice-Eleven, Gods, 400, 577. 390-392, 404, 406, 447,

352; tee Thirty-three Trisiras, Three-headed, 449, 452, 456, 473, 475,

Goite. son of Tvashtar, 390, 476,484,491,492,523,

Thrice-seven, Maruts, 83, 491 notes. 537, 553, 571, 613; giver

214, 268; metres, 83; Trisoka,apro%^of Indra, of children, 38.
rivers, 326, 344, 473, 490; 192. Twain, the, HeaveD and

sorts of sacrifice, 83. Trita, a Vedic deity, 125, Earth, 424.
Thunderbolt, of iron, 244, 184, 183, 197, 262,292, Twins, the, Heaven and

449, 531 ; of gold, 211, 294, 295, 343, 355,369, Earth, 823, 324 ; day

413, 531 ; = sacrifice, 37u, 390, 446, 447,449, and night, 390.

211 ; 5ss priest’s fee, 472, 537, 559, 585.

420 ; m the sacrificial Trita’s maidens, dames, Uddir, the Soma plant,
exclamation, 588 ; the priest’s fingers, 492 ; the heavenly, So-

- ■- «"> onl OQ* mu ftTfti rtU



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


665


Odgfttar, the Chanter of Ushas, Dawn, 45, 74-77, 41, 42, 50, 242, 413,

SAmans, 1 29, 486. 159, 197, 253, 267, 329, 473, 525.

UkshanyAyana, a Proper 385,438,488,514,584, VAjas, VAja and hia bro-
Naine, 161. 611; see Dawn; her thers, the Rtbhua, 41,

Hktha, a hymn of praise, chariot shattered by 50, 176.

163, 577. Indra, 488, 584 Vajina, a class of divine

Ukthya, the name of a Ushnih, a Vedic metre, beings, 43, 477.

Soma libation, 330 note. 577. Vak, Speech, the Word

Fla, a Proper Name, 536 Usij , mother of Kakshi- personified, 41, 83,130,
jiote. vAn, 538 note 250-252, 484, 485, 552,

Unborn, Birthless, the, Uainara, Usinaras, names 558,559,571.
the Sun, 184; Visva- of a chief and his peo* Vala, the imprisoning
karman, 498. pie, 463 note. cloud, a demon of

Unit, the, whence the uni- UsinarAni,wifeof Usinara, drought, 138, 159,469,
verse was evolved, 575. 463. 479,481.

Universal Gods, 52, see Usurers, 209. Villakhilya, the title of

Visvedevas. eleven hymns of Book

Upamasravas, a prince, VadhrimatI, a woman VIII, 199, 259-268.

429. aided by the Asvins, VAlakhilyas, a race of

U parish tAdbrihati, a Ve- 476. pygmies, 419 note.

die metre, 53 note. Vadhryasva, a famous Vamra, a Rislii, 537,538.
Upaatuta, a Ilislii, 118, Rishi, 481-483. Vamraka = Vamra, 538.

560. Vaikarna, the name of a Vanaspati, the Sacrificial

Upastutas, singers, wor- tribe, 18, 19. Post, 265, 273, 553,554.

shippers, 256. Vaikhftuasas, a race of Vandana, a protfye of the

Upavaktar (upavaktA), hermits, 318. Asvins, 437.

Director, one of the Vaikuntha, a title of V archin, a non- Aryan
priests, 355, 384 notes. Indra, 448-450, 452. prince regarded as a

frrmyft, a name of Night, Vainya, son of Vena, 129. fieud, 94.

573. Vairftpas, a prievStly f.uni- VarosushAman, a Proper

OrnavAbha, a demon of ly, °93 note. Name, 156, 159, 161.

drought, 171, 225 notes. Vaisanta, probably the Varuna, the Encompasser,
OrnAvatl, Fleecy, name name of a river, 34. God of the Starry

or epithet of a river, VaisvAnara, Dea* to All Heaven, 4, 13, 29*35-

491. Meu, Agui, 7-9, 13, 51, 40, 43-45, 47, 48, 51,

Ursa Major, 493. 181,307,386,446,514. 52,54,56, 58, 60-66,

Urukshay as, members of Vaisya, a man of the 78-85, 88, 139, 143,

i & Rishi’s family, 563. agricultural and mer- 144, 146, 147, 156,

I Urvast, a celebrated Ap- (jautile class, 177, 519. 159-162,164-168,175,

R aras,36, 139, 412,527- Vaitarana, a title of Agui, 176, 183-185, 196, 197,
531. 467. * 210, 214, 220, 230, 243

JsftnA KAvya, a Riahi, Vftivasvata, Yaraa, son 252, 263, 292, 306, 307,

8onof Kavi and friend of VivasvAn, 261, 397, 315, 817, 327, 331,335,

of Indra, 155 , 847 , 358 , 598 . 337,839, 840, 849, 351,

fcm in I I in * oa tn:. DiU.ii S6K 862-384. 867. 371,



INDEX OP NAMES, ETC.


666


374, 377, 382, 393, 394,
423, 426, 432-434, 445,
451,453,454, 458,467,
468, 471, 473-477, 484,
437, 490, 499, 500, 503,
504, 516, 522, 524,534,
535, 538,545, 552,556,
569-573, 577, 590, 592,
598,600, 602, 607,612;
the Supreme Deity,
570; discoverer of sin,
29 ; discriminator of
truth and falsehood,


100,352, 476. 478, 498,
568,577,592,606; the
embodiment of light-
ning, 36 ; the birth of,
36.

Vasishthas, 10, 13, 26,
34, 35, 42, 44, 45, 75,
77, 79, 86, 357, 478.

VAstoshpati, the Genius
of Home, 53, 611 note .

Vasu, Good Lord, 106,
107,145,147, 151, 163,
172, 200, 209,217, 218,


195, 196, 203, 273,275,
279, 287, 288, 290,292,
298, 299, 306, 311*313,
317, 322, 323,327,331,
337,339, 340,343,349,
350, 357, 360-363,377,
404, 420, 422, 453,473-
475, 477, 492, 501,514
519, 522, 523, 539,557
582, 586, 592, 600,607
sprung from Purusha’
navel, 519 ; Tvashtar’t
son-in-law, 163.


51 ; forgiver of sin, 29, 256, 257, 390, 436, 466, VAyus, 582 note.

83, 84; type of royalty, 520, 525, 546. Veda, 144 note ; the bum

61 ; ruler of the depths Vasus, a class of Gods, of grass used as sacrific

of the sea, 83 ; identi- 1, 8, 12, 35, 39, 40, 43, 144 note.

fied with Soma, 355 ; 47, 48, 50, 52, 56, 59, Vedas, three, 95 note.

brother of man, 394 ; 74, 75, 143, 164, 165, Vedic Hymns (Part I),

founder of society, 394 1 75, 180, 253, 265, 322, 90, 136, 205, 395, 480,

note ; superseded by 435,450,458,476,477, 492,^67, 683 ; see Mill

Indra, 570. ’ 493, 510, 535, 539, 553, ler, Prof. Max.

VarunAni, Consort of 571, 573 , 575 , 581 , 592. Vedic India (Mme. Z
Varuna, 38. Vasukra, a son of Indra, Ragozin), 17, 408, 484,

Varuna-p&sa, dropsy, 85 420,421. 497, 498, 522,589,606

note. Vasurochis, a Proper Vedische Studien (Geld


Varfitri, Protectress, a
Goddess, 43, 45.

Varfitrls, 38.

Vasativari waters, used
in preparing Soma, 241 ,
274, 230,284, 303,309,
326, 327, 331,370,380,
rtf note*.

Vashat, a sacrificial ex-
clamation, 14, 94, 166,
405, 460.

VashatkAra, the exclama-
tion deified, 458, 488

nolei,

Vasishtha, a famous Ri*
ahi, seer of Book VII.,
1,10,11,17, 20,25,28,
34, 36, 47,52,54,58,69,


Name, 175.

Vasurochisas, 174, 175.
Vasuruch, Vasuruchas,
said to be Proper
Names, 379 note.

VAta, the Wind-God, 39,
45, 104. 472, 475, 477,
582, 586, 596, 607.


ner and Pischel), 36
48, 62, 82, 103, 105
114, 152,168. 193,213
257, 277, 280, 283
304, 318, 323,332,380
421,465, 489, 531, 54^
547, 586, 605.

Vena, the loving Sun


VAtarasaual Wind-girdled, 568, 669 ; aProperNam
the name of a hermit, 129, 625, 591, 602.
582 note. Venas, the Gods, or tin

VaUa, a Vedic Rishi,119, Maruts, 341, 345.

127-1 30, 1 32. Venya, son of Vena* 59

VfivAtar, said to be a 602.

King, 103 note. Vesa, a demon or savage,

Vavata. a prince, 34. 451.

VAyu, the Wind-God,26, Vetasu, Vetasus, fWP*
35, 39, 44, 62, 64, 85- Names, . ^

1A4I 1<2K ISO. lftfl. VihhldaksJjmAttiiM



index ok names, etc.


667


ec whose nuts were Vishnu, Pervader,


jdd as dice, 429 note.
hindu, a prince, 111.
litis, a uatne of the
,ibhus, 50.

luivas, father of Trita,
46.

huvasu, the very
eal thy, perhaps Soma,
47 note.

bit van, one of the
tihhus, 41, 50, 492.
ladasva, a Rishi, 305

i ote.

llidtar, the Disposer,
38.


Active Worker ; a per-
sonification of the Sun,
39, 41, 44. 45, 48, 89,
93-95, 130, 131, 134,
139, 148, 160, 164,167,


52, 163, 166, 167, 230,
234, 267,410, 425,431,
433, 459, 460, 465, 468,
470, 472, 476, 522, 524
538, 540, 552. 557, 574
583, 586, 595, 593,606.


168, 175, 176, 226,231, Vitarana, the name of
252, 263, 265, 292,304, priuce, 467, m notes.
311, 317,351,355,367, Vitastd, a river, prohab-
383, 400, 474, 476,477, ly the Jhelum, 490.
523, 537, 556, 574,586, Vivasvln, the Sun; a sa
606, 613; Guardian of crificer, 163,211,219.


221, 262, 277,288,318,
381, 391, 392,398,404,
410, 438, 461,465,475,
437, 490, 598.


the unborn babe, 41 ;
three strides of, 93,

167, 263 ; Vishnu’s
baud, the Maruts, 148.
iivramorvast, the title Vispalii, a woman warrior Voice, Speech, Sacred
tft x celebrated drama, aided by the Asvins, Word, 434, 485 ; see

;28 note. 437. VAk.

.kunthft, an Aaurt, In- Visva, Dyaus, 168; Agni, Vrika, wolf, probably a
Ira’s second mother, 511. man’s name, 69.

U8 note. Visvddevah, All-God, 248 Vrishck, strong, male, Bulb

Itge, 589, 591. note. 137, 172, 313 notes.

m^da, a proteyc of the Visvaka,a Rishi, 232,233, Viisbagana, VrUhag&nas,
.bvins, 130, 409, 413, 476. a Rishi and ln» family,

114, 437, 476. Viavakarman, Omnific, the 359.

imadas, 413. Creator of the Uni verse, Vrish&kapiyi, the wife of

inunlb, said to be a 496-499. Vrishakapi, 508.

jRishi, 432. Visvamanas, a Rishi, 154, Vrishakapi, Strong Ape,

is, a river, the Beds, 157, 158. a being between a denri-

iO note. ' Visv&raitr-, 100, 352,419, god and a demon, 507-

ij,a divine being, 357, 536, 577, 599, 600. 509.

*8, 519; a metre, 577. VisvAmitraa. 517. Vrishau, stroug, play on,

5ms, priest's fingers, Visvarupa, Omuiform,son or repetition of'jhe
'19 ; see Maids. of Tvashtar, 390, 537. word, 477.

"jpa, a Rishi, 223, 898.Visvdvasu, the chief Gan- Vrishanvati, the name of
■upas, 469 note. dharva, 503, 573,584, a mare, 213.

M, the people, as dis- 585. Vrishaaipra, Bull- jawed,

^nct from the priestly Visvdyu, said to be the a savage, 94.

M princely classes, name of Umars son, Vrishtihavya,a Rishi, 560.

526 nofes. 412 note. Vritra, Encloser, the chief

^dninuj a non- Aryan Visvedevas, All -Gods, cloud-demon, 21, 22,

18. Universal Gods; a class 24, 110, 113, 120, 125,

a Proper Name, of deities, 36, 38, 40, 126, 134, 139, 157, 164

n AS 11 Ifl 17 SK 171i 178. 190. 204.206,



668


INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


224, 226,235,239,240, Waters, 11.38,39, 43,48, 1 14, 191, 233, 422

245-247, 250-252, 307, 50, 51, 56, 81,265, 384, 454 ; trap for, 422 ; =

308, 359, 412, 421,449, 391, 405, 423, 433,435, Soma juice, 569.

450, 452, 459, 474, 477, 417, 490,506, 514, 516, Williams, Prof. Sir M ,465

479, 516, 537, 546,554- 521, 546, 571, 583, 600; Wilson, Prof. H.H ,pa$M

557,560, 570, 571 , 583, Mothers, Queens, 424, Wind, 143, 265, 322,523,

590, 593 ; said to have 426; their healing 583, 600 see Vd,yu,V; v t!

been a Br&hman, 244 ]>ower, 391 ; removers Wind-girdled, 582 m tt.
note. <>f sin, 391 ; 405; cere- Wine, 108, 550.

Vritras, fiends, enemies, mouy of fetching the Winter, 481 ; demons o ;

*80.113,122, 139-141, sacrificial, 423; Dame 241 note.

166, 234, 235, 238, of, Saranyu, 392 ; Son Winters, hundred, »

244,246, 270, 282,349, of the, 11, 37, 40, 50, Hundred winters.

37, S, 517, 546, 601. 181, 362, 390. 523,591. Wish, personified, 38,4 ?J

A ntra- slayer (s) ; Indra, Watery monster, Arbu- Wizard, 100.

31,32,104, 109,113, da, 554. Wolf, wolves, 174,209,

115, 122, 136, 141,157, Wealth, lowest, midmost, 211, 261, 530, 573.

164,170,171,173,178, highest, of earth, air, Wolf- robber. 43, 209
190, 191, 194, 203,205, heaven, 33. -Night, 438.

207, 209, 215,225,227, Weaver’s web, 485. Women, censured, 173

229,234,235, 239-242, Weaving, 416, 576. 5J0, prize of war, 196

246, 247, 265,365,3.81, Weber, Prof. A., 123,190, attend festivals, 508,

451, 458, 489, 499,545, 226, 430, 467, 502,505, 600 ; take part in sa

584, 593; Agni, 222, 507,520,536,572,578. orifice, 168, 415, 553

482; Soma, 269, 287, Webster, W.F., 393, 407, 607.

2^4, 350, 365; Manyu, 421, 424, 499. Wood, Lord of the, tin

499; Asvius, 127 ; In* Wheel, the Sun, 206. Sacrificial Post, 481

dra-Agni, 179. Whip, Indra' a golden, see Vanaspati.

Vyasra, a Rishi, 12S, lightning, 173. Lady of the, Arany

154-156,158,159,162, Whitney, Prof. W. D., ftnl, 589.

31G. 408, 572, 576, 677. Word, the Sacred, 484

Widow, 407; re-marriage Vfik, 571 note .
Wallis, H. W , 93, 234, of, 438. Words, play upon, 541

386, 387, 423, 428, Wife, her position in the Worship, personified, 52
435,450,459,460,474 household, 504, 506; Wright, 380; «« C-i
431, 486, 496, 497,499, chosen for her goodness peuter, Smith,
518.520, 566*569,572, and beauty, 418; pa-

576. tient and gentle, 506; Yadavas, descendants


Warmth, creative, 575, adorns herself for her Yadu.

809. husband, 553 ; takes Yadu, the eponymus '

Warrior oKshatriya, 99. partin sacrifice, 164, a Vedic tribe, 22, ’

Warriors, the Marut*,18. 415, 658 , 607. 114, 123, 124, M

Watches of night, 3 16. Wild ass, 509 boar, 191, 306, 452, 4
Water, first of created 421 ; —boars, the Ma- Yadus, 123.


-•*- 4 70*— bull. 93. Y



INDEX OF NAMES, ETC.


669


ivnuiia, sacrifieer, 461,462, 465, 472,523, Year, the, 609.

litiiseholder, 237, 322, 534, 569, 5S1, 593,594, Ymir, a mythic Scandi-

’,28, 362, 415, 489, 492, 598, 599 ; his dogs, 53, navian World-giant,

>15, 549. 558, 607; 399. 519.

iif, wife, 415. Yitmas, night-watches of Yogi, a devotee, 582 note,

jim (Sacrifice), said to about three hours each, Young, youthfulleat, Agtii
bp a Rishi’s name, 576. 116 note. 1, 5, 6, 9, 10, 12, 13,’

ijiii’veda, the Veda of Y.irni, Yama’s sister, 391- 16, 156, 223, 255, 384,

Mcrificial texts and for- 394, 104, 593. 385, 409, 446, 482,496,

nnikis 59, 467, 519,606 Yamunil, the river now 510,553.

[ihin sacrificial text and called Jumua, 20, 35, Youthful One, the altar,
'■iiiuula, 396, 519,606. 216,490. 558.

->ha, meaning uncer- Y,i*ka, an ancient Com- Y udhy&madhi, a Proper
un, 51 1 note. mentator, 24, 241,315, Name, 20,

slima, consumptive 441, 456, 486, 490. Yupa, 190, 484 , m Sa -

583 note, 613. Yati% an ancient race of crificial Post.
liliU', a non* Ary an hermit-,,112,121, 487. Yuvanasva, a Rishi, 131

Jibe, 20. YatudLauas, sorcerers, note.

:n, King of the Dead, demons, 93, 100, 414,

o, 36, 53, 381, 391- 510-512, 565. Zimmer, Prof. 11 , 18, 19,

'91. 396*401, 403,404, Y.iyati, an aneieut patri* 125, 207, 226, 408,490,
|6, -K, 110,453, 455, arch, 470. 491, 550, 581, 594, 597.


CORRIGENDA.


VOL. I. (Additional).

Page 239 line 7 read honours (i. e. song honours) for honour
» 370 * 9 from below read Here, Indra, girt by Maruts, drink thou

Soma, for Here, Indra, drink thou Soma with the Maruts,
■ 684 » 17 from below of middle column read Hotar, chief priest for

Hotar, thief priest

VOL. II.

ge 3 line 2 from below read 2 for 1

48 - 2 read HYMN for HYMN

72 » 8 from below read a comma after you for the broken stop

76 • 5 from below read pathya for patky'd

89 « 6 read blessings for blesssngs

97 • 7 from below read performing for performin

i 105 • 18 read ecstasy for ectstasy

• 114 » 2 of verse 9 read radiant for radian

» 121 » 3 of verse 22 read soon for suoo

« 131 " 3 of verse 5 read Turvasa for Turvna

« 135 ■ 1 of verse 4 insert a full stop after flows

» 245 » last of notes read of for o

» 256 ■ 2 from below read in for n

*• 302 • 16 from below read us. for us

» 303 n 2 of note 1 read i comma for the broken stop after here

» 327 s 2 from below insert a hyphen after foe

. 328 ■ 3 of note 1 read sprinkled for sprinkled

• 333 t 3 of notes insert a comma after is

• 369 • last of uotea read sacrifice for sacrifices

" 375 * 2 of verse 25 read Indra’s for Iura's

" 377 t 4 of notes read sacrificial for sacrifical

1 - 402 i 1 of notes insert a hyphen after some

403 ■ 9 of notes re$d aquatic for acquatie

406 » 4 of verse 5 insert a full stop after Ordainer

467 • 3 of verse 17 insert a hyphen after Arya

468 r 1 of note 23 read Asvaghna for ABvagbna

469 ■ last of notes read The Hymns for Hymns

- 1 insert a comma after Goddesses


AQ i



672


CORRIGENDA.


Page 490 line 7 from below read Vipfa for Vip&u
m 508 ■ 5 read and for add

« 520 • 0 read The Hymns for Hymns

» ...» 9 from below read Purdna for Purdna

a 538 i* 1 of verse 12 insert a coming after swiftly

H 545 * 8 insert a comma after conquer

» 543 «* last but one of text prefix the numeral 10

■ 549 • 1 of verse 4 read VUyu for V&yu

« 550 • 4 of verse 1 read waters ? for waters.

» 552 » 4 of verse 1 The Hymns for Hymns

it 557 • 1 of notes read the for thr

* 5S3 ■» 2 of notes read The Hymns for Hymns

0 587 * 3 of notes make the same correction

■ 597 • 2 of notes read obwobl for obvohl

* 598 • 2 of note load The Hymns for Hymns

0 602 • 2 of veise 5 insert a hyphen after sted

* 609 » last of uotU'> lead The Hymns for Uynm*


<«» IdA'i'iW
