ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

%

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 4

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 7-9

Jan. 30-Feb. 19, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official courl file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which>the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts/exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

1


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:


No. of

Case No.

United States v.

Popular Name

Defendants

1

Karl Brandt et al.

Medical Case

23

2

Erhard Milch

Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)

1

3

Josef Altetoetter
et al.

Justice Case

16

4

Oswald Pohl et al.

Pohl Case (SS)

18

5

Friedrich Flick
et al.

Flick Case
(Industrialist)

6

6

Carl Krauoh et al.

I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)

24

7

Vilhelm List et al.

Hostage Case

12

8

Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

X

9

Otto Ohlendorf
et al.

Einsatzgruppen

Case (SS)

24

10

Al fried Krupp
et al.

Krupp Case
(Industrialist)

12

11

Ernat von
Veizeaecker et al.

Ministries Case

21

12

Vilhelm von Leeb
et al.

High Command Case

14


Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases steraned mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


2


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and-skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater:' to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
Camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskoomissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Conmissidner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blome: Deputy [of the) Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeinc
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrcr (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef dcs Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrcr in the SS and Chef dcs
Pcrsoenlichen Stabcs dcs Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Gcnzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


4


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Kaldemar Hoven: Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Kaffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Kaffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Wchr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces). *

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research) ^
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Conmissioner for
Health and Sanitation.


Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Freyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtoedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Gcneralarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.


Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute ,
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded .
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charge^ .
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants '
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Keltz). Death sentences were imposed oh
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,

Hand loser, Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Oberheuser, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-11756. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.

These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reichegesetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


NATIONAL. ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


of the nedical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


Exhibit No. Doc. No. Exhibit No. Doc. No.


301

NO-1314

%

410

NO-158

307

NO-120


441

NO-1730

309

NO-131


443

NO-890

310

NO-132


451

NO-732

357

1696 PS


462

NO-1424

362

628 PS


507

NO-365

368

NO-817


546

NO-3347

403

616 PS


No certificate is attached to several

exhibits, including

exhibits 433,

435-439, 462,

559,

and 561.

Following exhibit 570


is n tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Reiahageoetzblatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros-
__ ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case arc closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, Til19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminate
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Trials of War Criminate Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Law No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory reaarks and arranged
the records for aicrofilning in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 4
Target 1

Volune 7

Jan. 30-Feb. 5, 1947


I


OFFICIAL RECORD

%

UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 7


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


30 January - 5 February 1947 pp. 2207-2553A


ftn

30 January -IWWG-l-l-Grosa -
Court Bo. 1


Official transcript cf the Jerrican Military
Tribu'd in the oattor of he United States
of Jewries, / gainst Karl Brcndt, et al,
def -ndants, sitting •A, Numborg, Germany,
on 30 Jan* ry 1917, 0930, Justice 3cala
presiding.


THE 5£A. SKAL: Persona in the Courtfooc will please find their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Hilitary Tribunal I.

Military Tribunal I is now in session. God save thu United States of
At.'. rice and this honorable Tribunal.

There will be order in tho Court.

THE PRESIDENT: Ur. Marshal, will you ascertain that tho defendants
nro all present in Court. x

THE MARSHAL: May it please your Honor, tho defendant Oborheuser is
absent today In oontinurtion of the illness for which sho has been absent
several days. The defendant Karl Brandt is also absont, hrving been
excused by this Tribunal yesterday corning.

THF. PRESIDENT: The Socrotary-Oonr ral will no to for tho record tho
presonco of all the dofondants save the doftsnant Cborhousor, absent on
account of sickness in accordance with the doctor's certificate »hlch I
have, and the defendant Karl Birndt, having been excused by this Tribunal,
and tho defendant Brandt's counsol. Tho secrotary-Genoral will file thio
certificate in the absonco of tho defendant Oberheusor.

Counsel for defense cay proceed with their arguconts.

DR. PRIT2 FLDMIW (Attorney for Mrugcwsky): Hr. President: Tho de¬
fendant !!rugowsky is chcrgod in the first place under Count X of the
indietcont with a cocnon design or a conspiracy.

I shall prevo in respect to this Count that the provisions of Con¬
trol Council Law 3o, 10 concerning amspirccy cn which the Indictment is
bnsod on t£^p^nt ^/‘no^npply to th^ case which is hero under review.
As a prfc*(onary measure I shall further prove thrt the actual condi-
ltions \$£ a conapirrcy arc nco-nxistent.

Under Count 2 of the Indictment, -%r Crises, Jlmgcwsky is charged

V'-v • 7/


With Hi


2207


30 January! ! 0 *>»l-2-Groaa
Court J*o. 1


Sea water


anileaide


teriiis;ticn cxncrimur.ts and


riment


Hels, furthermore, chargod under Count 3. Section 11 c l the Ir>
With Crises against Humanity on account of the s«ao experiments.


LCtnon*


In connection with


The experiments with


Ccint II, 6A of the Indictment
Count II, 6C of the Indictment
Count II, 6D of the Indictment


Count II, 6H of tho Indictment


The Prosocuticn in presenting their uvidonco submitted nothing to show
that tho defendant Urugowaky had any part in these experimenta. The Prosu-
cution did not submit one document nor called one witness to prevo his part¬
icipation in tho said experiments. Tho Indictment ia entirely unsubstant-
inted in those respects. It hrs merely been esaortod that tho defendant
Urugowaky, togothor with other defendants, ia guilty of a special responsi¬
bility and participation in thoso experiments.


ivS regards tho
Sterilization experiments


Ccunt 2, 61 of tho Indictment


Tho Prosocution have merely produced, in crd«.r to charge the defendant
Krucowsky, an affidavit of tho co-defendant Rudolf Brandt, dated 19 October
19A6, Document Ko. ULO, Prcsocuticn Exhibit lid. This reads as follows at


tho cndi


"Blum^nreuther Poppcndick and itrugowsky probably also knew about this.'
This is a mere rasusption on the part of Brandt which is given without


-223B-


30 Jsnar.ry-M-DJG-l-J-Grcss
Court 5c. 1


•rj wore detailed support end without ruference to actuel data and does not
therefore constitute a proof of Jrugcwsky's participation in the stcrlizatioi
experiments.


pass thes_:

The Prosecution have neither presented nor given any other proof for
Ifrugowsky's participation in sterlization experiments or even only for his
knowledge of such experiments.

The Iwiictjjcnt against Mrugowsky is therefore inadequate in the points
which I have Just aantionod and I move that


lust nentlonod. Count II, 6a, C, D, H & I of the Indictaont. And also in


regard to III, 11 of tho Indictment.

The defendant ilrugowsky is further charged ir. connection with


Free ting cxperlcvnta, Count II, 6B of tho Indictaont
Sulf&nilan ida .jfperinents. Count II, 6E of the Indictment


l»Ki


us experiments. Count II, 6J of the Indictment


Experiments with poison . Count II, 6K of the Indictmunt
Exs-.-rlacnts with lnc-ndlnry boaba. Count II, 6L of thu Indictaont*
»&th War Crlr.es and on account of tho srau experiments undor Count III,


11 of the Indictaont with Crimes Against Humanity.

On thoso Counts, I shall coll tho defendant Urugowsky and other wit-


nossoo to tho witness stand. I shell refer to the evidence given by wit¬
nesses interrogc* .-d by the Prosecution and by co-defendants as wall aa to
the evidence of the co-iofer.dar.ts given in the witness stand, 1 shall submit


documents and refer to documents submitted by tho Prosecution and co-defen¬
dants.


PACE FOUR

I shall prove that the so-called Ding diary wes piucod together subse¬
quently and thus is a fake which hea no value as evidence whatsoever. I
shall prove that the so-callod work report drawn up by Ding for 19A3, which
the Prosecution have submitted, is a draft ifr-lch has no valuo ns evidence.

I shall dc «U this ir. order to prove that th<- defendant Ilrugcwsky under


-2209-


30 January-li-OJG-l-L-Grcss

Court Ho. 1


the counts of the Indie teen t was not a principal in, ar. accessory .to, did
not order, abet nor took a consenting pert in, and that he was not connocted
with the performance of aedieal exp.riatnta mentioned above without tho sub¬
jects' consent and that he ccanitted neither aurders nor brutalities nor
cruelties, tortures, atrocities and other inhuaane acts.


%


- 2210 -


30 Jan -^l-JP-2-i-^ njrx a - sw

Court Ho. 1

Ab regards the freezing experirants I shall prove thr t the defendant
Krugowsky had no pert in these exp< riaents at all. The Prosecution have
submitted no conclusive evidence of his participation in these experi¬
ments.

As regards the sulfanilanido experiments, I shall prove that the
defendant Urugowaky was not in any way involved in these experiments. The
Proeecution have not claimed that h« took part in tho p«-rfor!»nce of
the experiments, and I shall provu that ho had no association whatsoever
with the sulfanilamide experiments. A

As regards the spotted typhus experiments, the Prosecution have
not claimed that Mrugowsky was involved in the experiments vat Katz—
weiler.

As regards the»ttd typhus experiments at Buchenwald Concentration
Camp, the Prosecution have presented comp-ehensive evidence. They havo
_ repeatedly claimed that Urugowaky took part in these experiments and Umt
he is responsible for them together with others.

I shall prove that Urugowaky objected when his superior, Grawitz,
for the first time referred to the intention to have spotted typhus
experiments possibly perforrrd on inmates of a eoncentration camp.

I shall prove that tho experiments cn concentration camp inmates
wore ordered against Urugowaky's opposition by Hlrraler and Grawitz.

V .rugowsky did not became activoly involved in these experiments, but Dr.
Ding was directly instructed by Grawitz to perform the experiments.

The Prosecution have not claimed that Hrugowsky took an activo part
oven in one singlo spotted typhus experiment.

I shall prove that during the whole period during rtiich spotted
typhus experiments worn carried out, he was at Buchenwald only twice and
not in connection with those experiments but for other reasons.

I shall further prove that the spotted typhus experiments which
General Taylor himself calls on page 115 of the German record of 9
December 1946, "The nest important but fatal spotted typhus research"


were no crime at all


2211


30 Jan 47-H-JB-2-2-fcayi*s- sw
Court So. 1

On the contrary, they constituted a research work which had to be carried
out uni os a furth-.r hundreds of thousands of non, whose lives could be
saved only with the help of these experiments, were to die of spotted
typhus.

I should prove that the so-called checks introduced in the spotted

t: phus serial experiments were unavoidable if the e«id was to be

%

achieved to obtain quickly a clear idea of the effectiveness of the
various vacoinM and drugs. But I shall above all prove through the
ovid* nee given by witnesses of the jrosocution that the nuabo* of doe.tha
givon in the documents furnished by Ding and presented by the Prosocution
is wrong. x

As rogards the experiments with poison, the Prosocution mentioned
three cases in presenting their evidence:

In th# first case which ma carried out upon the initiative of
the SS- Tribunal at Buchenwald, it is not quite clear whether the
Prosecution intends to charge Prugowsky in the sano way as tho others.

I shall prove in this case that he was not lnvolvod. One of the
two other cases i» tho killing of six pooplo by poison, mentioned by
Dr. Ding in his diary ss "Aspecial experiasnt performed on six persons
by order of Vrugowsky and of tho Reich Criminal Polico Office."

I shall prove in this case that the I 'rosocution havo failed to
give proof that ^rugowsky ordorod this killing or that ho oven know
about it.

As regards the experiments with poison there remains tho killing
of three people at Sacheenhauscn Concentration Camp, on which Hrugow-
sky reports in his letter to the Reich Criminal Police Office, dato
12 D-cectocr 19A4, Document No. 201. I shall prove that this was not an
experiment to ascertain how ouch time it takes to kill a man in the
indicated manner - that is what the Prosecution assert - but an execut¬
ion which had been caused by the Reich Criminal Police Office.

As regard the incendinary beeb experiments I shall prove that they
were performed by Ding, not by order of Mrugowsky, but by order of
other agencies.


2212


30 Jan P-2-3^aynt«- sw

Court Ho. *1


and that krugjwaky was not involved in these experiments at all and
r/roly received a subsequent report when the experiments ahd been

concluded.


In eidition to the experiments specifically mentioned in the
Indictment, the Prosocution have presented further evidonco concerning
a numb r of further experiments which it includes in tho Indictment.

I shall prove also in respect to these experiments that l.'rugowsky was
not in any way concerned with thee.

The erilence which I have mentioned, in connection with war crimes,
will also show that Irugowaky has in no way committed crimen against
humanity.

k’rugowsky does not deny his c«bership in the SS, which was

declared a criminal organlzrtion by the Interortional Military Tribunal..

I shall prove, however, that in many questions, scee of which were of

decisive importance, he was in open opposition to the SS.

In conclusion I repeat ay motion to declare the Indictment against

I'rugowsky inadequate insofar as it is concerned with.

High altitude experiments
1 'alarla experiments
Sea-fater Experiments
Experiments with epidemic jaundice.

Sterilization experiments

concerning exp n rim«fits under Count II 6 • s well i.s Count III 11 of


the Indictment.


2213


30 Jan. -U-2-U-PXP- Haynes
Court Ko. 1


Dr. 3oehe (Defense Counsel for Defendant Poppendick):

Ur. President, seobers of the Tribunal:

The defendant Poppendick is cer.tioned in the Indictment as
Oterfuehrer in the SS (Senior Colonel) end chief of the Personal Staff of
the Reich Physician SS and Police, erri,like all other defendants, he is
indicted under Counts 1, 2, and 3, ns well as under Count A cs a .aember of
the SS alter 1939.

He is charted with special responsibility in the high altitude and
freezing experiments, in the mclaria ard sulfanilinido experiments, as well
as in soa-watcr experiments one. experiments in respect to epidemic Jaundice
and poison, and finally in respoct to sterilization cxvJ ir^.-ndiary bomb
experiments.

In presenting their evidenco over o period of about four weeks, the
Prosecution have sutcittod far acre than four hundred docuaonta, of which
only six contain Poppendick's naac in one fora or another.

The Prosecution have called twenty-four witnesses bo tho stand and
h vo interrogated thorn in groat dotail. Only one witness know Poppendick's
naoo. No further cvidonco concerning tho defendant Poppendick was subnittod
by the Prosecuticn.

Ir. opening tho defense of tho defondant Poppondick, it is necessary to
correct tho designation which has so far been used by tho Prosocution in
respect to Poppondick whon they called him tho chief of tho Personal Staff
of the Roich Physician SS trd Police and to replace it with tho more
correct name "Chief of the Porsonal Secretariat with tho Reich Physician
SS and Police."

a

Thi3 is to pro vent at tho outset misunderstandings in respoct to. the
position held by the defendant Popoendick.

It will now oe tho task of tho defense counsol of the defendant
Poppondick to define Poppendick's position with the Roich Physician SS end
Police as well as his activity in the medical service of the SS before
and after its reorganization in 1913 and furthermore, critically to consider
his association with cortain experiments with which ho is charged by tho
Prosecution. Although the Prosecution heve in no cose furnished even


-??U-


30 Jan. -44-2-2A-PKP- Haynes
Court Ko. 1

approximately conclusive proofs that the defendant Poppendick actually
■as the deputy or the assistant of thu Belch Physician SS and Police and
had, at such, knowledge of til secrit machinations, the Defense will clear
up Poppjndick's activity cs chief of tho Personal SocretatUt, bo it
only in the interest of finding tho objective truth.

The Defense will then doa^ in detail with the experiments .with
which tho defendant Poppundick is associated one way or another *.nd in
connection with which h« is represented cs having a special responsibility.

Tho five oasential documents which are to be above all the sutfjoct of
a more detailed examination end of counter evidence ar«:

1. Cortain entries made in Sicvora' diary of 19U, PS-^546,

Prosecution Exhibit 123.

2. Ding's Acridi/w* Publication, no. 582, Prosecution Exhibit 286,
which is stamped "No objection free tho point of view of the modicel service
by order (sigrv*:) Poppendick."

3. The letter addressud by tho Reich Physician SS and Police to Dr.

Ding concerning the research |ono by Dr. Vaom.t I!o. 1300, Prosecution
Exhibit 259, bearing thu signature, "By ordur Poppendick."

U. Balachcwsky's affidavit No. UBU r Prosecution Exhibit 291, about
the ominous supervisory committee in which Poppendick, who is promoted
Gruppenfuchrur by tho author, is allugcd to havo beon a musbur.

5. Rascher's ollogod sfnutos on a conversation between Raschor,

Grawitz, Poppendick, Concerning thu freezing oeoo sheet, No. 320,

Prosecution Exhibit 103.

Th« witnesses whoa the defense of tho defendant Poppondisk will call
■ill make their statements „ss4ntiaUy in the form of affidavits. Tho
Dofonse plan to call only a few of them to the witness stand. Thu witnesses
■ill testify on the personality of tho defend-nt Poppendick, on his position
in thu Race and Settlement H-ad Office, cart with tho Reich Physician SS
and Police, as well as on bos association with curtain experiments with
■filch he is charged.

As regards the experiments cade by thu Danish physician. Dr. Vaornut,


-2215-


30 Jan. L7 -M-2-3A-PIC?- Haynes
Court Ho. 1

r.s well as Dr. Din?'a Acridine research and tbeincondiary boob experiments,
Che Defense Mill submit expert opinions from medical experts.

Although no information has been recuivod un to Cato as to the
whereabouts of the witnesses requested by the Defense, it is hoped that at
iv".st 3:00 of tho re quo stud witnesses con bo hoard on the questions under
review. %

Tho Dofonso at any rat* have dono all in tboir power to have tho
necessary witnesses nvailabl*. Should, however, apart from tho submission
if a few affidavits and other documents, this whole croup of question be
ultinatcly dcr.lt with only by the defendant himself as a witness in his
own cause or by questioning of his co-defondants, this should not place the
Defense at a disadvantage on the grounds th't the evidential value of such
atatoaents which are aado undor oath is considered very small.

It is certainly possiblo, particularly in this trial, for tho ?

-Prosecution to check the credibility of the defendants in respect


-2216-


Court Jo. 1

30 Jen 47-H-2¥i-£at-Krrrow


to their evidence toy confronting thsa end thus U esiist in correctly ecore-
ciftic* tho evidence value of their statements.

The vvric of tho defense in this trial is c.nsideri toly core difficult
thrn thr.t of tho dufense in the trial c^elcst Hermann Ooering and othore.

In the foruor proceeding at S^crntoerg the charges cade against tho defendant
vero laid down in spwolal trial toriefa and the whole evidence of tho orosc-
cution in resoect tc tho individual defendants w B e presented in one case
rfter the other. Although Article 4 of Decree Suntoer 7 concerning the oro-
cenure fnd coupvtc-nce -f certain military tritoinrls issued toy the Military
Oovorn.snt of Ggmeny specifically provides Uat tho indictment should give
defense the charges si-.ply, clearly, ind in rifficient detail, the indict-
cont in this Case Juntosr 1 against lari Brandt and ethers, and tho whole
presentation of evidence toy the prosecution, h»vo refrained f roc specifying
in greater dctcil the charges against every individual defendant.

Ce the contnry, ir. this trial the crosocuti-r. has presented their evi-
dsnes strictly according to tho sutojocts dealt with rnd have not dcflnod in
gr enter detail what the charge* against the individual defendants are. Tho.v
have considered In each e»So the individual experiments and tho ovidcncc
presented in connection with theu cs n whole rnd hrvo only occasionally con*
onted upon certain documents concornln; tho dcfondnnts individually.

Tho defense thvrwf.re is confronted in this c/se with a certulnly not
vory e-sy task critically to appreciate tho individual charges against the
defendants, which h vc -nly teen very lovsely or very aporoxi.’J-tely defined.

This it Pirtlculcrly striking in the case of the defendant rpcondick.
Bis superior, h^ich rhyslclan Dr. Ornvitx, having died, roppcndick is nw
to do wfcr-t ho never did during; Ornwitx's lifetine; he is to take his place


htre.

g-ppeadiek, who v- s never authorised to take Orrwiti'e place and who
htd never received ethor covers free his chief, finds binself here in the
defendants' dock and is to tc rendered responsible for Dr. Grr”itx's deeds.


That et least is whrt the defense supposes they can infer free tho presen¬


tation -f evidence toy the cr jsccuti-n.


2217


Coart So. 1

30 Jen 47-M-C-2-ir>.-Karr -w

In view of the evidence so far given, It vill not he difficult fer the
defcr.ee to refute the indictment against repnendick or. all ccunte oe unfoun¬
ded, If the renueeted defense witnesses ere cade available and con he heard
at iuurnhorg.

HR. VilSGiiSIR (Counsellor the defendant Slovcrs): Kr. rresldent,

Tour Fos-rs:

Cc 1 July 1925 the society "Das Ahnenerbe" vns founded and entered on
the registry of associations at the district court in Berlin. Aifi and pur¬
sue of the "Ahnenerbe" wart to conduct research into the language, culture,
history, and geography of the Indo-Luropcan peoplte. That ic to say, an
institution dovoted purely to research in the literal arts. Koinrlch Hionlar
Mid the top position in this socloty; his title was ^resident and Chatreen.
Under hin the position of curctor and scientific director was held fr or.: 1921
to 1937 by the crofcssor of the rrc-Hietory of Ideas, Dr. Hernann Virth,
Berlin, and frer. 1937 on by rrofceeor Dr. Vclter Vuost of Munich. Under th.
ic, in turn, vrs the Central Secretary or, at he was cellod fron 1937 on,
the Reich "uslnose Hacagcr. This position v. s hold by Wolfram Slovurs.

Frwn 1942 on the society "Das Ahnonorbe" - which until then, although it
bed tv.cn under Hixilor'e protection, had teen outside the hierarchy of the
loDAr or the SS - became un offico under the haln Offico "rersor.nl Staff of
the Rolchsfuchrtr SS". rrofossor Vueet was given the title "Office Chief",
vrlie Sievv-rs' title of Reich Business Manager reoalnod unchanged. His ac¬
tivity was and continued to be of a ourely adolnlstrativ® nature.

Slev.rs was neither in a positi n to give research assignments, nor war
ho rble to interfere in rny way in the scientific part of the croerinonte.
The clarification of this ooint soons to oe to urgently noceoscry, in order
n.t t- leave uncontested the coaplutoly deviating opinion of defense counsel
f-r the defendant Schroecer, asserting that Dr. Eaagen stood in relationship
-f subordination to the defendant Sievers.

iven before 19*2 the then Oberrrtt of the Luftwaffe, Dr. Beecher, had
.tnaged to prv-oote his particularly ambit loos research alas with H tinnier,
nothing would have boen aore suitable than for Dr. Sescher's ostensible re-


- 2218 -


Court SO. 1

30 Ju 47-K-3-2-XSt-Eerrov


search work, which hod nothing to do with the literal crt6, than to be in¬
corporated Into the -edlcel service of the SS. Instead, Eiirder incoroor-
eted Bcschor's enterprises Into the •Ahnenerbs*. Because Dr. Rnschor't work
vts In a suite unreltted field, Slevers cade an attenpt to have Office Chit:
fcuest Induce HLtaler to withdraw his order. The intention of Belch Bucincsi
Krn>gar Slevers was of no avail due to the passivity of Office Chiof Vucst.
la spite -f the apparent hopelessness of the case, Slevers or. hie owr. Inltir
tive, nporoached Etc..lor In an attoept to get rid of the undesirable addIt 1
to the Ahnonerte. Ho was unsuccessful.

This was the beginning of e devcloyeent, the tragic fclUuur of which
Slevers could not suspoct, rnich loss foresee. In the sane year Elnolor
created the Institute f-r Military Scientific Research of the Vaffen SS and
Bailee. This Institute C-aprisod research projects in which Hlnrlcr vne
ccrsonr.lly Interested, almost all of thoa were war-connected; at first they
were In oart carried out on behalf of anc. with th« a.sslstrr.co of the Luft¬
waffe. There wns no unlforu scientific direction. HL.nlor issued instruc¬
tions to the hoods of the Individual sections, s.ven of which later car:o
Into existenco. The Luftwuffo or the Reich Research Council also Issued
orders to Individual Institutes. The heeds of thoso Institutes nude scien¬
tific rep.rts to Hlsnler -r to the Luftwnffo or the Reich Roscrreh Council.
The Institute vis financed exclusively free funds of the Veffon SS or the
Vehraacht but n-t fr-c funds of the Ahnor.erbc. Hlnnler asslgnod the odnini-
itrttlvo duties to the Roich Business Manager of the Ahncncrbc, the defen¬
dant Slevers.

This w.ric br-ught Siovors in contact with things which lay exclusively
In tho utdlcrl field, doctors carried out cxptrloents of various kinds.
Slevers, as a loyman, had to procure :ujtoriale, arrange for laboratories,
pay antcys, conduct tho correspondence, end perforu other such ndninistre-
tive duties.

The prosecution has alleged that Stovers realized the crlr.inality of
all the experiments, at least must have realised it. Through the nature
of his w-rlc, it is alleged, he was guilty of ccplicity In part of the


-2219-


Court lo. 1

30 Jan 47-M-3-4-9(-£arr,r

crimes vhich are here charged. It vill be my task to shot* and to prove to
the Tribunal: first, to what extent the allegation* of the oroeecutlon are
Incorrect: second, to vhat extent the activity revealed by the document*
vhich hi vo been submitted ves due to Slever'a ovn lntltlativc; and third,
when end in vhich experiment* Slaver* realised or must hi ve realised that
they were Irreconcilable vlth the rules of vurfare and the principle* of
humanity.

I shall cuito openly present the projects which Siever* realised were
Illegal and erlclnal. Thu* ve heve oone to the ouestlcn: If Slovers rea¬
lised that certain experiment* were orInInal, then why did ho not l:icedlatcl
give up hi* position as Reich easiness .uineger of the Ahnenorbo and his work
in the Institute for Military Scientific Roseaxch. Why did he not oppose
Hi"ffll©r's ln*ar.o and criminal orders? Vhy did he do nothin/; to prevent
people*t suffering ohyslcol ham, often -f the noat severe kind, or oven
losing their lives in experiments?

This second pert of ay defense will bring ae into the field of aotivitj
,t n vary considerable group of the German rvclstir.ee movement which during
the war undertone to -verthrow Hitler's Reich by violence.

The prosecution has examined a number of foreign witnesses before this

Tribunal, who had beer. arrested as members of n resistance group in tholr

own country end sent to German concentration camps. They were there placed

In the category of persons condemned to death. Today these dotoralnod end

uncompromising fighters for freedou In their homelands ore celebrated ae

heroes. Today no ono asks whether theso brave tnd ferrlcse fighters conalt-

ted deeds vhich, objectively considered, were irreconcilable with tho rules

of warfare or with the lows of buurnity. They are not called to account

before a tribunal, and vhy not? Because everything that they did In the

struggle against tho enaoy power was done out of ardent love for their

* %

homeland, for their fatherland. Thus everything vhich they did Is stripped
jI Illegality end legalised.


£ 220 -


.. J-JX. -/ -4f-d-l-P£r- Ku .porstoir.

Court No. 1

In Germany, too there existed, from 1933 on, a constantly increasing
resist'nc- movt-sont a.ainst National Socialism, the grave-digger of the
Gcrsrn Raich. Sine- all the powerful resources of the st-to and Party wore
ruthlessly employed -tr.inst everyone who opposed the National Socialist
re glee, the stru ^lc c"-inst this n^ime wes subject to its own lews. Uor.

■ho wore willin-; to toko the utmost risks hid to penetrate the positions of
thair political opponents in order, under various foms of cam-uflagu, to
uni-mine these positions .am in painfully detailed work to make th- prep¬
arations require- for on ' raed uprising against n superior eneny.^Ono of
th.su men was Kolfrna Silvers, whom a tragic fat* has mado a defendant in
this trial, Mien Silvers, in the trial of Gowring and others, proclaimed
hia membership in a resistance movement. Court and Prosecution were extremely
skeptical of this assertion. Then, wrs at that time no occasion to exmd.no
hia st’t-sents. But in the pr-sent trial Siuvcts oust bo r.iven tho oppor¬
tunity, ir. his own defon*-, to prove that as early as 1931 a croup which was
strongly o^poa-d to National Socialism deliberately sent hia into the NSDAP In
>rder to jot a- auch insight os possible into this Party. From 1933 an he
w-irko., on behalf of tile resistance iroup, taw; rd cuning into contact with
tho highest P rty authorities. This goal w^s achieved when, in 1935, ho
succeeded in bocomin. Business llirva^or of the Ahnwnerbo. Thus, ho had
penetrated to the entoura.-o of the Keichsfu.hror SS and tho Police, Himnlor,
who united in his hands all instrum-nts of powo: within tho state. There
be n a period of great tension then. SieVers bad to avoid carufully any¬
thing that might have brought him under suspicion of being opposed to tho
National S-cialist re_imo. If he wanted to .achieve his goal, ho had to
-ttcin to the circle of Hinder'a confid nts.

Ir. 19^.2, Siovers was confronted with fateful decision, wn-n, through
Kixilcr's order, ho come in contact with the wretched human experiments.
Should ho, xiwn ho r-cogniz.d in this case or that the ille^lity of the
-xperinor.ts which Kinder ordered, rufuse to continue to perform his duties
in any fora? Kith his friends from tho resistance coveawnt, ho deliberated
whnt was to be done, '.ould tho human vxperic-nts bo stopped, if hia oppo¬
sition was express-. more or less clearly? Sever. hould the resistance


-i-ul-


30 J-ru 47 -1S-4-2-PKP- XuppersUin
Court Ko. 1

aovacjnt ".gainst the fctiooal Socialist regime, in the determined prepara¬
tion of an overthrow by violence, lose in Sieves one of its cost important
exponents? los. Therefore the ■—clsion was th t Sievors had to run.-.in at
his oo8*. In consistent execution of those instructions Sievers therefore had
to raster the duties whicS were assigned to him - the execution of which node
enormous doonrvds on his spiritual resistance in such a way th't thore could be
no suspicion of a hostile attitude. There thus arose for Sievers the undeniable
necessity of performing what administrative dutios fell to his lot by virtue
of his position, even in his contact with the human experiments.

Through witnesses nnl affidavits, including a numbor of members of
foreign r-siatrnco movoeonts whose Uv,s Sievers saved, I shall prove to the
Trlbunr.1 1) that tho resist.nee mov^a-nt to which Sievers belonge . was of
c-nsidor-blc import-now, 2) th't Sievers as an exponent of this movomont was
of great impertanco in the Rulehafuohrung SS, 3) th't Sievers had mado
preparations f.r an ttack on Hitler and Kl-aaler, the execution of which,
however, was erde impossible by th- -.ction taken by the officers' group and
the situ tio:i wider. followed the uncucc-ssful ttack on 20 July 1944, 4) that
Silvers, in tho execution of the duties which devolved upon him by virtue of
his position, did n. c-.-r\> than he had to do to carry out the orders given him.

I intend to c* U five witnesses; two of them will testify to the activity
of the Defendant Sievers, ns Roich Business Uansgor in connection with cun-
n<»- *- -ric s .tit, w^ich ho is charrod, two other witnesses will testify to
tl» inpAr».an.*A *f the resistance novoaont, and one witness will testify to
Silvers* activity within the resistance aoveoont to which ho belonged. Kin- lly,
I intend to c 11 th- Ocf-nier.t Si_vors himself to the witness stand, and X
sh .11 examine several of the c.*-evfondanta on individual points.

I hope th t 1 shall thus be r.bU to give tho Tribunal the nocoss: ry
evidence for e jud-m-nt which will do justice to tho spe-cial situation in
Sie-Vers* case.

ER. FRITZ (Counsel for the defendant Rose): Ur. President, Your Honors:

The defendant professor Dr. Gerhard Rose was appointed vice—president of
the Robert Kcch Institute in 3crlin in 1943 a research institute of worldwide
fame for the cantr-1 of contagious diseases, after Itu nsd boon a momber of


30 Jan. 17 -U-m- 3-FKP- Kuppurstein
Court So. 1

this Institute tlrcady, sir.co 1936.

In 1939, at tix, beginning of thi war he was drafted into tho Gorman
ehnsaeht is conaultir^ hygienist -nd tropical hygienist with tho Chief of
tho -ouic' 1 Service- of the Gorarn Luftwaffe. At first ho w*a given tho rnnk
of Obcrarzt of tho reserve cn was finally pr'-aotod on 1 ^oy 1915 to tho
rnk of eunomlf-rat of tho n-sorve - I wish to emphasize: of the rcoohvo.

Perhaps it could bo asked, whether the defendant Rose attained the
hi. h position jf vice-president :.nd the high military rank because of his—
if onLy nominal — membership in tho KSDAP. or because ho is "one of tho most
eminent scientists" in the fields of hy L i-nc and tropic: 1 medicine ‘ s he was
intro- uce: to Your Honors by General Taylor in his opening speech -f 9 D-roia-
ber 1916. The further evidence in this case will show that the letter is tho
answer.

.,t first it is th. t sk of the defense to make clear

1) whether nl haw Rose- Ms fillc ! the position of Vice-president
of the Libert Koch Institute an*

2) ’..h t w.re his tasks, authorities, : nd competencies, in his position
as consultirv hygienist and tropical doctor with tho chief of the medical
department of the Luftwaffe.

Thin clarification will show:

r.) thet R.se, despite his hi : h position as vice-president n\ despite
his hirh military rank which he finally tt-lncd, i’ not tnko p-rt in
ilanninr or in carrying out the experiments 'n‘. measures indictod h.ro, nor

b) that he was the superior cither in tho civil field or in the Wehraacht
of persons who participated in planning ~nd carrying out those experiments
rnd measures.

In the indictment professor Rose is charged with special responsibility
for war crim-r or/d crim-s a ainst humanity which are considered as such in th
experiments of human beings -ith typhus -nd other contagious diseases in the
concentration camps Bach-nwald and .Natzwe-iler and in the alleged experiments
or. human beings with hepatitis epidemics in the concentration camps Sachsen-
nausen and K'tzweilcr.

iirst, as far as the hepatitis epidemics experiments arc conccrncl, 1


-2223-


10 Jon. *fl feu, —

Court Ho. 1

ay -lrcady r.o* dry■ the attention of th* Tribunal to the fact that the nomo
R 2 sc 'io- £ n-t appo-r at nil in document book Ho. 8 autcitted by the prosecution
in correcti r. with this matter. Rose did n-t participate in the hepatitis re¬
search and core over states tfc, t he had no knjrl»!gu of these alio go'I hepatitis
experiments.

In the further course of this case I hope to be able to prove tho accuracy
of tho Icfamlant Rose's st tekent.

«a for as the typhus experiments an- concerned, it is true that Rose -
tnouih ho never w-rked on typhus - if only just -nee - was in Buchorwald whxla
tsuSe experiments "ere boiog corriee out. I believe to bu able to prove
beyond boubt ttat this visit to the concentration crxp Buchenwald was not
aade because Rose was ccncorncJ with - or even approved of these experiments
but ttat, on the contrary, this visit was connected with his fundamental ob¬
jection to ouch experiments or. huc;n bein s, "hich led to several protests
by t!.o ’.efeniant Rose. The witn-ss Kogan has already forcibly drawn out
attention to this.

.'J-.r can it bo denied that in tba c-urae of ita presentation f vi -nco,
the prosecution ms produced eoiae Jocusents -.nd hoard acou witnesses fr^n
which a layman could coucludo *. certain connection of the dufondant Rose with
tho experiments of human beings in 3uche-nwald -nd Jh.tswoilor.

Thus ”r. Hardy, f r example, submitted docunont K>-1 22 - a letter by Pro-
f-'caor Rose- to ?r-fess.r Hi.'ima id ted 3rd December 1943 "ith this rosurvr.tion
soyin* tint he expected an explanation from Professor Rose. I hopo to bu
able to offer this requested explarrtlon to the High Court in tho course of
ay presentation of .videnee not only concerning this document but also con¬
cerning other existing corn.sooneunco, in a sense favorable to tho defendant
Rosa.

In the course of its oral statement rcgr.rdine tho extent of the- accus-tiona
against Rose, as contained in the indictment, the prosecution has oven gone
beyond those contained in the indictment.

Thu3, it has also connected hie wit;. ti>c malaria experiments by
Professor Schilling which the latter carried out in the concentration coop
of Dachau. It was evidently led to this because of the frequently recurring


-2224-


30 J n. L7 -X-U- 5-PKP- Kupperstcin
Court Mo. 1


of Rose in Iccunents connected with Schilling's experiments in Dachau.

Fro prosecution has in the first instance overlooked tho fact that Professor
.•.■-so ia o aelnrln expert of intern-tionsl repute and it is hardly in* .inrblu
t..’ his a'jti woul not be nur.tione: when experts arc discussing malaria. Over
-.ru ".hove this I hope to be able to prove th.t tho defendant Rose - who
•.ltojethor ro joe ted Schilling's research net hods quite apart from his experi¬
ments in Dachau - alsi hurt, st n:s wron.fully accused. The last v-sti^o of
doubt abeut -this will bo ruaoved wh~n in cy presentation of evidence, I ccno
to speak about the sanitorius of Pfaffunroco, where the dependent Rose on
his part conducts’ a-laria experiments and used ralflrla therapy up to the
arrival -f tho Aoeric ns.


30 Jan 1x7 -M - 5-1 - LJG - lesser


finally, Pr feesor Rest, as well as all cf his cc-defendants, arc
accused of having ..articipated in a consjiracy to cocnit war crimes and
critas against humanity according tc Count I of the Indictment.

The prosecution sees proof of the existence of such a ccns,.iracy
especially in the repeated meetings of the consulting ;hysici;jis luring
the war at the conferences ef she consulting specialists at the alii tar y
tactical academy. I shall prove that the defendant Rose, as far as his
. a-ticipation in such conl^rences is concerned, and in other respects,
can on no account ta considered a conspirator, iu.it.tr as a L-ador nor
os cr^anizwr nor os initiator or abettor. For it is Just his attitudo,
be it at such a conference, be it at a meting of proainent physicians,
or be it towards the Reich health leacer Dr. Ccnti, cr towards the president
of tho R-bert Kcch Institute, Professor Gildwneistur, which shews that
there can be no question of this.

Ir. the c-urse of ay presentation of evidence, I plan to examine tho
defendant Rose on his own case, to .resent various dc/cunor.ta and affidavits
as exhibits t. the Tribunal and finally t question sovoral witnesses and
ex; «rts.

DR. S..UTER (Counsel for tho Defendant Dr. Slogfriod fluff): Oentlcmen
of tho Tribunal, I hav. njw tho task of submitting to you in what manner
the Defondant Dr. Ruff Intends to conduct his dufonse:

I) The subject cf the indictmnt ajvinst Dr. Siegfried Ruff deals
kjroly *..lth his . rticipntion in tne hi h altitude ex.-crioents carried
out in Dachau, as thoy iro explained in D cuaont Bock 2. N further count

f the ir ictent mentions Dr. Ruff, except for tho question of "Conspiracy."
Consequently, the lefar.so cn its part, con linit itself U doalirv* with
these Dachau hi-h altitude e;c eriwnta.

II) The Ctz f Dr. Ruff* a dafons* will be tc establish the fell owing
fac ts:

1) Tho hi h altitude or criaents carried out in Dachau by Dr.
Runberg and Dr. Reactor with the a.prjval cf Dr. fluff were necessary for

the clarification of the roblea cf "the rescue cf airplane crows fror high

&


- 2226 -


30 Jan U7-M - 5-2- LJ3 -

altitudes.”

2 ) Th& 3 « uxparlaents were prepared in an unobjectionable
scientific ^mi»r 07 Dr. Huff and his associate. Dr. Roricrg, and were
executed in an un-bjecticnafcle sinner by Dr. Rcoberg.

3) While carryirv out t-:ose experiments, Dr. Ruff knew that
tbs only exporinsntal sublets usee for that purpose w*re Goman convicted
criminals, who voluntarily r ut the.-sclvos at his disposal and who, as a
reward f;r undergo!^ these ex crinents, were suosequently to bo pardoned.

Dr. Ruff nods certain -f t. ese facts at the tine by askinj various

participating ex erinental subjects.

h) Dr. Ruff .!id n-t kn ». Dr. Raschor closely before the Dachau
hlji altitude ex.erijauntc. Ho was at that tine introduced ta hiia by an
absolutely reliable Scarce and considered hit to bo a conscientious
physician of tno L»iftwaffo.

5) Bvhind Dr. *V.^erg's back, this Dr. Raschor proceeded to
carry cut still other ex.oriroents, t. which Dr. Ruff never (1 vo his
c.nsont and which he would never have approved hid he boen asked.

6) These other experiiasnta of Dr. Raschor were in no way
connected with the parachute descent «x. -rirwnta carried out by Dr.

Ruifcer,;. Dr. Ruff and the Goman ~ir F rce wv.ro n t at all interested
in these wthor expvriaeots f Dr. Roschor's. It was only in the course

f this ..resent trial that Dr. Ruff f-unc. ut in ootail with what th*so
3 .-called "oxpori-xnts" of Dr. Raschor w„re concerned.

7) .'hon Dr. Huff heard thr u-* 1 report by Dr. HcntosTg that

a fatality hia .ccurroc iurin those additional, that is to soy unauthorised,
ex; arinents f Dr. -aschor, he (Ruff), ordered that these experiments be

9

discontinued and had the 1 w- f rcs*ure charier returned fron Dachau to
Berlin, an ‘ he prevented having the low-pressure charier ,;ut it their di»
pusol durin the subsequent period, althuu.ii Dr. Rascher and various hi.;h
35 offices repeatedly requested the return cf the charier to Dachau for
the purpose if carrying out further .or.erinents.


-2227-


C urt Ho. I

>0 Jan 1*7 - X - 5- 3 - LJG - Us^r


8 ) Dr. ?- ff Is a serious and ccoaei««t1 •dentist# -as "iH
be confiroed by all witnesses. He is herd cn hinsclf but considerate
towards his ax^orir.er.tal subjects. His attitude was, cn principle, that
hu would carry out his ex erinents in the first r lxo an himself and
with the voluntary associates of his institute.

9) Beth before and after the experiments at Dachau, Dr. Ruff,
t ether with his associates, carried out cruntluss experiments on him-
sulf which, f;r tho a.st port, were r r« un;-asant fron a subjoctivo

.int f view, and a ro dan arcus frc.a an objective point cf view, than
th s j va erinents at Dachau of which Dr. Ruff knew and which he authorized.

Ill) Dr. Ruff intends t.uao thu f^U win: as ovidonco: Altogether
no has applied f r 17 witnesses, all of when wore granted by the Tribunal.
Frco r.ost f theso witnessos affidavits are already available, which will
bo submitted in tho Drcunont Book Dr. Ruff. I assune that tho Prosecution,
t , o reus to tho submission A thoso affidavits. Tho naturo cf tho tosti-
xny -f the witnesses has been accurately described in tho applications
subnittod t the Tribunal.

with ref-rosice t. tw wf these witnesses, naouly thu twi .owricans,
Dr. . od and Dr. Bal.es, b- th f wh *i arc n w in rcsidin in tho United
Jtat^s, I havu submitted qu-sticnnairos n the 13th f January 19li7,
vhich ore t be, answered by the “b vo-nonticned ,ors.ns in thoir capacity
os witnesses or/d ox r _rt5 and which, t ether with tho c-nsvorc, I intend
t. r^ad int tho roc rd as seen as they will hove teen rocoivod. with
reference t a furtner African citizen, Ccl n.-l Benf rd, I havo a, plied
.n the 15th of January 19U7 t. .fctnin a statement of s«rvicos rendered and
a ors tial evaluation of the Defendant Dr. Ruff. From tho autunn of
19U5 until the autvem of 19U6, Dr. Ruff was e^ lcyed -»t on
Institute in Hoidolber*, * »hicb CcVnel Ba.f :d w« tho obiof.

I intend to h-ar only twr witnesses in person here in the witness
stand, namely the witnesses Dr. ,fxlt*r Freitag and Kiri Fchlnoister, far
when I a plied as witnesses cr. Dscectoer 13 and January 9 respectively,
and wh so oxaainaticn in court has been granted by the Tribunal. If, t r


C.Tart !L. I

X> Jta U?-b -5-i; - LJ3 - lesser

3 ny reason, the personal appearance cf these witnesses before this
Tribunal cawwt be carried cut, then the Defendant Dr. Ruff is reserving
far himself the right t: submit affidavit# frem these two witnesses also.

The Defendant Dr. Ruff will sis toko the stand hitnsolf, in order
to be ©xanii*i as a witness. It appears su table f-r this to bo done
nef.ro the ther witnqpaea are called, so that Dr. Ruff can make tho
necessary explanations regarding the technical details f his ex.urlswnts.

The laymen, too, will then be in c bettor petition to understand and
aj reel ate tho teettn-ny of tho witnesses regarding these technical
questions.

%

In tho course f the direct oxaeiruticn «f Dr. Ruff, I intend to
hovo a short fila, which had been made in tho institute of the Defendant
Dr. Ruff at tho tiao, shewn to tho Tribunal. Th- purp so of this film
io U onrble the Tribunal and tho Fresocution to take thoir own c'oclairna
about the high-altitude oxperinJTits carried out by Dr. Ruff, in particular
in regard t^ tho character and effects of tho so-ctiled "high-altituclo-
oickncss," in rdur to enable tho Trib nal to sake its findings as to
whether this "higlw.ltitudo-sickncss B can bo considered under tho huading
of a crino against humanity.

IV) «a I have already ountionod, Dr. Ruff is acouaod of special
roa, onsibility by the FT socution an ono count nly, that of tho hi.h al¬
titude ox, oriconts at Dachau. It has n,t boon alleged by the Pr. socution
that Dr. Ruff had in any way ; ortici;-ted in ther ox, orinonts at Dachuu,—
for instance, in the freezing experiments .f Dr. Rascher. H.wovor, ho has
ala beer, indictee fr:a the point I view f conspiracy. In this respect
the case f:r tho Fr socution is in nr way specialized and is not sup; rtud
by any evidence. -lroady tc<^y, on the strength of the evidence submitted
by tho prosocution, it is an established fact that Dr. Ruff, apart from
tho hi-gh-altitude exporirants in the s. ring f 1 ?L 2 , had nc contact what¬
soever, no natter f what nature, with Dr. Rascher .r with the SS or
with tho concentration crops. Particularly ho wjj never a number of the
SS cr any -ther affiliated organ: zation of ti* Party, which war connected
with such exporioonts. During the period dealt with in this trial. Dr. Ruff


-2229-


30 <fea u7-M - 5-S - LJG - Lesser

was rwt even a sc-ijer cf the- luftanffa. The j-xoaontatlcn -f evidence cn
the part of the . r.sacution has already sh.»n that Dr. Ruff was not present
at a single cn« of the various ceotiius and congresses, whore planned
ex.erironts were discussed.

it is, therefore, quite obvious that the charge of conspiracy cannot
oo proved fvainst Dr. Ruff I Tho prosecution »as not in a position to
establish even one single concrete assertion in that respect ^gainst
Dr. Ruff. It w-uld, therefore, be in accordance with Justice to dismiss
tho chor-fc of cons r ir&cy against Dr. Ruff incediately x 8inco there is
absolutely insufficient basis for the indietaent in that respect.

I hereby apply fer the i-coeiate disnissal f tho charge with
reference tc C ns.-lracy.

ctht.r statements with ruforonco to Cjnspiracy I an not going to
repeat since a n-jsfcer f defense counsels have already submitted tho legal
basis with reference t-j tnat question, even if thore w«re various diffor-
oncos in their argu&jnts, and different results. This brings mu tu tho
erd f tho case f tho Do fondant Dr. Huff.

DR. S^OTCRi Hr. President, n.w the penin, sta tenant f-r tho Dofondant
Dr. Rubor/, f.ll W3. Tho dofonso counsel f tho Defendant Dr. R.mburg
is at tho s.ncnt engaged in an official Journey for the purpose -f
intorr ating witr.osses. Ho yesterday tolo..h nod ou, saying that because
f difficulties with trains, he would n.t ba in a p.siticn tc arrivo hero
in tl « to x poor in C urt. Ho asked au t ruad tho ^onlng statement
f^r tho Dofondant Dr. H cfcer. in his .lace and I ask for your poruirM -n.

mo are new - :inr to deal with tho case of Dr. Roab«rgs

I) The presocution char s os the Defendant. D*-. Hans-halfptnf n.abi-rg

with:

1 ) . Participation in a conspiracy tc c.rmit war crimoc and crimes
against humanity.

2) . Participation in High •ltitude £x r orinents in D a chau from


Court Bo. I

30 *fan L7-H - 5-6 - LJQ - Lesser

tarch until approxiaatoly «ugust 19i2, which w,,re carCied out, as tho
Pr-s^cution states, to investigate the Halts -f hunun endurance and
existence at extreooly high altitudes.

H) 1 ). «ith roferonco to the charge of participating in a conspiracy
a.alnst the Defendar.t*Dr. R atoorg, I herewith present the application to
qunsh the procedure and/or to acquit the defendant, Dr. * mbor ;, in
respect f this count of the charge, for the foil-win.- reasonsi

a) The Central Council Law X . 10 provides in nrticle II,
Paragraph la, a >ssibiUty of punishnunt frr [ art\ci,.ation ir. a conspiracy
only in cases _f criao3 against. .oace. Iheref- re, this rule is to bo
regarded os lex s.eciaHs and cannot sickly be extended to war crines
•ux' ciiaes a.alnet hunanity, n which tho entire chare is bain; based.


-2231-


30 Jan M-Ji*-6~l-Cook- m»

Court So. 1

b) Ths deforciant, Dr. Reno erg has never been a asnbcr of any of
the organizations declared as criminal b the ElT, he was not even a
nenber of the Luftwaffe.

c) From the evidence presented it does not in any way appear that
the charge in question is based on facts.

2) With reference % to the charge cade is to participation in high
altitude experiments, it is to be stated:

a) That is was not the purpose of the high altitude experiments

in question to investigutv and I quote: "The limits of huar.ft endurance

and existence at extreme high altitudes', and that those experiments

%

were conducted properly.

b) It is further to bo stated that the experimental subjects used

in those oxp irioeots - re criciorls, condemned to by ordinary

courts, o had volunt*« n-d rnd who wore to bo pardoned rs a reward;

c) That Dr. Rocb-rg was, at first, to considor Dr. Rnsch* r, whom
ho got to know only at the b<gi»«ning of the experiments, a serious
scientist.

d) That at a lr tt< r date Rccb rg succoudod, after having taken
note of R scher's fatal experiments, with tr.e help of his superior, the
co-defen ant , Dr. «uff, in having the low-pressure charab'-r inediatoly
removed free Dachau, and this againtt the will of Kascher and Hisnlor.

o) That Dr. P-ccb* rg nev«r took oay active part in tho experiments
of Dr. Roscher which exceeded the plan; and finally

f) That Dr. Romberg is a serious and conscientious scientist who
hod previously taken part in many high-altitude experiments as a subject.

Ill Dr. Romberg’s staterents, as -ell as those of several co¬
defendants are to serve as evidence. The Tribunal furthwnnore will be.
offered several affidavits."

Arsd in this manner the def-ndant. Dr. .kafcerg intends to conduct
his defense, a'*d this brinrs mo to th- e-.d of his case-

THE KESIDEhT: Counsel fer deferr.ant, Brack, l“elz)


2232


y) Jan 47-M-JP-6-3-Cook - sw
Court Ho. 1

DR. SAUTE R: Mr. ^resident, r&y I come back to yesterday's agree-•
nent of che defense counsel, which was that the c ases of Soahcrg and
’"elx should be dealt with together.

THE PRES HEW; Before proceeding with the statement on behalf of
the defendant Welz, the Tribunal will recess.

(A recess was taken) %

TOE MARSHAL: The Tribunal is again in s ession.

Eft. SIZE PRIED WILLS: Mr. President, Your Honors, please permit me
first of all to state several wcrde outside of the official text.

In view of the opening stateeents of the gentlemen before me and

*

the stateoents of the Prosecution against Professor Welz in the field
of circumstantial evidence, because of the lack of proof, in ordor
to counter this it is nocossary for me to point out a nuaber of
apparently incorrect details in ay presentation of evidence.

My presentation will bo sooewhat enlarged in this way because it
Justified tho actions of the dofonlant Welz, which are only a very
small part of the incidents that occvrred. In order to simplify tho
matter, as far as I can reviow it at this time. I shall not make
fundamental statements about tho legal qjuetion# because thoy havo boon
sufficiently treated in tho presentation of cy colleague.


30 January -tf-OJO-7-l-Mcchac
Court. Sc. 1


"The prosecution accuses the defendant l.clvz of tht xe Heal ns rririnal


acts:

1. Participation in a ccnspiracy to ccaeit war crises and crises zrzir.sl


huaanity.


2 Participation in the coeaissicn of 3uch crd.- «,

I-


In detail, i.eltz is accused by the prosecution of tho following:

1. . Participation lr. the KirK-Altitude- Bx p.rinent s by Dr. Rasch cr. .

Subsequent to a lecture on high-altitude experis-nte or. nonkvyr '

• •

is alleged to havo stated confidentially to Raschcr, a ntsbvr of the ,xudienc«
at that time, (Doc Me. 1W2-PS) that these cxpericonts ought to be s-.do on
honan beings. By virtue of his relations with Kisriler, Raachur is then sllc-pw
to havo receivod pexxalssion free his, in the sucecr of 1941, to carry out
— oxporinents with 2 to 3 criainals in Dachau.

The prosecutor connects this lecture, as well as the reoarh, with V.'oltS/
for the reason that Welts at that tiao was in charge of tho peroanont research
office on tho offects of high-altitudo and thoroforc worked at the some insti¬
tute as Raschcr. (Geroen Transcript p. 217). 'This is surely an assumption
on th* part of tho prosecutor, I shall prove through witnesses end doeunents
that it is without rr.y foundation.

2 , Other d.ductions of the prosecutor arc basoi on tills assumption. Mo
deduces that -eltz wa3 a starting point fer Keschcr : o further preparations,
although Vieltz did not yat knew Raschor at that ti.-a«. Here the prosecutor
r.cntlons a r ma-rk in R'idcif Brandt's affidavit (Dec. ;ic. 191), ac-crdinr to
which Himlur had in Juno 1941 given ..eltz, nescher, and Kott^nhcl p-ivriaFio..
for lew pressure ocporiner.ts. In this cno-sic*d statenent it wan further
alleged that i.eltz had postponed tho cxpcricent3 again end again for fear
that they would give off-.nsc to the liedical Inspection. The truth is that
h'eltz had never asked fer nor received this puraission- The prosecution
then alleges that heltz used Ruff and ?.cmbe-x"g, of tho Research Institute
Adlershof, es a frent. Before that, he is alleged tc have vainly offered

his assistants. Lutz and Lendt, tho opportunity to collnborato with Raschcr,


- 2231 -


30 Janu ry-M—DJ5-7-2-Me char.

Court No. 1

Through the necessary assignments Welts is alleged tc have nr.de it participation
in the experiaents possible. Because cf this attitude of belts, whe secretly
reserved fer the Luftwaffe or for himself the credit fer the scientific
wults of the experiments, the l&inich representative of the SS Main Office
is alleged to have stepped the Dachau experiments without Rasch^r until
Hicmler's decision (Mrs. Mini Raschcr, Doc. Ho. 263). Kelts is allegod to
have hedged in this way until tho spring of 19L2. Then Welts apparently
. succeeded in overcoming Hippke‘s objections (Gorman Transcript 2^>-22 2). Tho
prosecutor states that Welts also received information about deaths subse¬
quently. Tho witnesses Luts and Hoff woro to give testimony to prove this,
but their statements did net really implicato tho defendant. As regards tho
high~altltude experiments, the prosecutor draws the following conclusion frcri
thus.

It Is true that Welts did not actively participate in experiments, but
ho obtained export assistants for Rrscher, who was not convoreant with high-
altitude rosoarch (German Transcript p. 222).

3. F reezing Sxperlaents ;

V?elts is known as the real discoverer of tho freezing problem md was
aware at trn early date of tho scientific investigation cf it through animal
experiments. Konco his basic experiments on small animals, anil also the
experiments on shaved cats which were treated with irony by Rancher. Himnlcr : s
offer of an opportunity to experiment on human beings did not seem attractive
to him, not to sperjr of his basic repudiation of experiments on human beings.

A co—responsibility of Wolts for tho freezing experiments, which only began
in May 1?A2, that is, long after Raschur's dismissal from tho assignment, •
cannot seriously bo considered. Therefore, the prosecutor could present
hero only cne single fact. In Document .Vo. 3A3 a-PS, a letter from Milch to
holff. Milch notes the conclusion of the altitude experiments in Dachau and
suggests going over to freezing experiments which Waits wr.s ordered to carry
cut. Fer this purpose Raschcr could be mode available in the future. I
shall prove through witnesses that this order was n,vor given.


- 2233 -


30 Jenuaiy-»J-Dv , G-7->-&fcahan
Court Nc. 1


n.

Tho charge against heltz is not complicity, but instigation and assist¬
ance. Belts is alleged to have given Kascher tho idea of making experiments
cn hussar, beings and afterwards to have helped him in their execution. These
accusations ore in no small measure tho results of tho one-sided and noticebly
prejudiced affidavits by Brandt, Ruff, end Romberg, Lutz also i3 not cn un¬
objectionable witness, as he is politically too implicated by his SS member-
ship. H«. thereforo avails himself of every opportunity to make hlhsolf appoar
in a core favorable light.

In reputation of tho statements cf tho prosecution I shall prove through
documents and witnesses:

1 . Holtz had nothing whatsoever to do «sith Rancher's assignment to his
Institufio. it was net '.idtz but Stabsirzt Kottonhoff, cf Luftgau VII, who
gave tho lecture cn tho aonkoy experiments. Tho suggestion to mukc experi¬
ments in the future, not on monkeys, but or. two or threo habitual crisinols
can therefore only have been node by Kottenhoff. I shall substantiate this
through presentation of a reprint cf Kottonhoffs article in tho magazine
VLuftfchrtsaedizin" (/.victicn Uodldno) and through witnesses.

2 . Raschor’a aasigneent tc Holtz' Institute tcok plrco at his own insistence
and with the support of Kottenhoff. Ranehor wishes to establish hiuself in
Halts' good grocos."

Cutsido of thu text, may I h^re dorr up t misunderstanding end a foloc
translation into the English language? To habilitate, according to thu
German concept, that is to gain permission to be an active lecturer in tho
German Higher School. Hew, I continue with the text:

,: 7he- experiments cn human beings that Hinder peniittud him to carry
out wore to assist him in tils, heltz, however, repudiated th«, proposed
experimental research, the gradual ascent to nigh-altitudes and tho freezing
experiments. The reason for this will bo seen in .itltz' basic negative
attitude toward freezing experiments cn human beings, •3 set forth by nc
under 1, 3.

I shall further prove thrt heltz, on the occasion cf Hippke's visit


-2236-


Court No. 1


in the succer cf 1911 ex p l i citly, stated to him that experiments or. human
beings were to be nedo only in the nest pressing cases and only cn criminal
prisoners serving long terms. These prisoners would have to nake themselves
available voluntarily, end be rewarded by a termination or shortening of
their sentence.

?. Thus hoscher*a assignment to i.elts frea the late suiter cf 1>U U the
beginning of torch 19L2 meant absolutely nothing. Rascher went to lAjnich
only soldca, without visiting the Institute. Therefore., in fulftUm-nt of
his official responsibility, Wdtz ordered Rascher to report xwaca *<.vi.0y <

shall prove that the second time he reported, Rascher produced a telegram
frea Hinalcr stating that ho should keep the experiments secret from ovtryona,
ovon Kelts. I shall further produce witnesses to prove th-t Kelts discharged
Rascher at thet very timo and rujuastud his ianudietu transfer back to the
Luftgau, at the beginning of Uarch 19L2. On the brois of document No. 310
I shall prove that dready in this letter Rascher appears after 16 torch 19L2
as member of tho Ruff-ftccborc-Rascher uxpcric<ntol group with on assignment
for tho Rcoearch Instituto for eviction, et the Dachau Branch. From this
it will be sc that tho inauguration of high-dtitudo experiments in Drchnu,
coincides in point of tine with Rascher's separation frea Kelts. Thus I
shall make closr that halts did not call Rascher to him end instigate bis
experiments, but that on the contrary, he kept Rascher at a dist-nco and dis¬
charged him free his assignment when Rascher attempted to withdrew fran Kelts'
supervision!

U. In cy submission cf evidence I shall further take issue with the assumption
tnat Kelts wishexi to provide Rascher with —"

An-d I must bring cut a mistake in the text, it oust be Veits instead
cf V.ors.

"experienced helpers in the person of his assistants, Luts end vor. belts
while making sure- to keep himself at a discreet distance. 1 sndl prove
through witnesses that it was custcaary in Kelts' institute to determine and
draw up in writing the wcricing program through joint discussions of the
collaborators. If, therefore, Idts had over Intended that his institute


-2237-


30 Jsnucry-M-DJG-7-5-Ueehin
Court So. 1

should participate in Raschcr's experiments in Dachau, cr that hia collabor¬
ators should seriously concern thcoselvca with it, there would have tc *-'-st
a written elaboration of Rascher's progress. I shall prove through wltnosscs
that i.cltz never suggested such a collaboration of hia assistants.

5 . I shall further prove through docuacnts, and also through logical de¬
ductions that it was not Vertz' intention to induco Ruff and hoaberg to entor
into a plot with Raacher. Hia presence in wil-rshof was fortuitous. It was
only through this visit that Holtz found out about the -eric progrh-a in pro¬
gress thoro involving high-rltitudo experiments. I shall prove fron this
that there was no question here of a prearranged ncoting.' I shall further
prevo that thero were discussions th t took plrcc among physicians of equal
rank ir. gcod faith. The experiments woro to bo carried cut on the doctors
thcosclvos or on habitual crUdnals, who were to bu rewarded -with a mitigation
of thoir sentences. 1 shall further prove by witnesses that up until then
Raschur had dooardod this and thot this work pregrwn of Dr. Ruoff's was also
approved by Hipr*o. It will be soon from this that this discussion offors

no grounds for the contention that bolts deliberately associated himself with
Haschar. The shipment of the lcw-presouro chasbor to Drehau end the advance
inspection of D-chau Concentration Comp by baits will, in view of this, no
longer be incriminating,

6 . I shr.ll further prevo by documents and witnesses that the high-altitude
experiments in Dachau from March \9U2 on lay outside belts' responsibility.

a) Furst, b.causo at the beginning of lirrch, Raschcr had separate from
his asoigna-nt with holtc;

b) Uso because the experiar-nts w^rc carried cut under th. oxclusivo re¬
sponsibility of huff in his capacity as leader of the medical department of
tho Research Institute at ..dlvrshcf. g other things, it will be soon
that the oeperiraents were carried cut under the herding "/.dlershof dear*;.'.
Institute, Dachau Breach." Ihis latter I 3hall prevo by documents."

lhoro is a little change in the text there:

«c) I shall further demonstrate by witnesses that ,eltz learned nocliing of
the results. Ho received neither current reports nor the usual scientific


- 22 .#-


30 J ".uary-tf-D JG-7-^o ehan
Ccurt Ho. 1


analysis. It will bo seen free this thrt his Institute was regarded ns not
taking part.

7. «s incrimination through the freezing experiments the prosecutor merely
pointed out that T.cltz was intended as pnrticiprnt in them. In answer tc
this I shrll prove, froa documents pres-ntod by the prosecution itself, that
this intention was not put into execution. Rather, Professor Holzlochner
was commissioned to carry then cut in plrcc of '..dtz.

8. I an oil clarify ..cltz' character and personality through the t»tiracny of
his colleagues. Through their testiaany, I shall prova that his attitude tor-
word life, ns non.* Tested in his many years cf activity, does not fit him

for the rclo that tho prosecutor ascribed to him. holts is not only a scient¬
ifically distinguished physician, but rlso humane on-, upright, without
timidity, end without dopetisa. Ke is no ambitious in such a way as ever
"to derive benefit free the work of his •'ssistants.

7 I eh: 11 prove tills through affidavits by competent persons. His sense
for tho heeling and constructive activity of the physician cannot bo recon¬
ciled with experiments cn human beings such es Rascher was carrying out. In
fact, ho eppesod these uxperia-nts for so long t'n-1 HLmlor threatened to
put him in a ccnftentr.* tion ceap os a traitor to his country. Tho chiof pre-
socutor defines thu goal cf Germcn audicsl 3ci*icc ns killing :.nd extermin¬
ation; in refutation cf that I sh-ll prove that '.cltz' life work was devoted
exclusively to the preserving *nd saving of human lives.

9. Finally I shall bring forth my objections to the charge of conspiracy.

In cy ex-minrtion of tho dcfcn-'-nt and occ-.sior.rlly cf the ether defendants,

I shell prove, that belts had almost no connections with the leadinv doctors
of the i.chrmacht -nd the SS who arc gathered h-ro. This ci re-ms tan at resulted
quite naturally from his position as loader cf a purely research institute
that hod nothing to dc with th. general nodical -.dninistr tion. His only
task was the elucidation of scientific problems, accordingly, it naturally
follows that kilts' participation was only ef scientific choractor. I

know of cnly one such act of participation; namely, th_ congress on "Ship¬
wreck end Hintcr Suffering" (See note and ..internet) on 26 end 2? Octobvr


-2239-


30 Jrx.u^ry-J-DJG-7-7-li: chan
Court Ho. 1


1942 et numbers.

Participation in a conspiracy with such fnr-reachir.g coal3, honevor,
would also, require proof that the participants were crimi na l ch' ractora.
Unpremeditated crises can be alien to the person's csscr.ti,-! character. ..
criac cf sich lous duration aa a conspiracy is only conceivable if eho per¬
petrator's character is criminal and if his depravity is manifested also in
his entire behavior. Tho evidence that I htvo premised to sutalt regarding
Weltz' personality and character will a»Jco dar the impossibility of such
an assumption


-2240-


3G juft

Court Ho. 1

Outside of tto tout -ay I mk. «» foinwlns .tntomnt. Tto dofon.. OOUM.1
of tto d.foadn«t» BBft 2««6 tax. !=»«•• dltoontinuanoo or

tho trlftl «ad I went to Jim this raqa.st r.t this tie*.

10. Tlnnlly, 1 tool It to to CT duty to rorop In quite G.noml tor:* to th,

foliowl..; Objection: •

x, too ho. too.-. ootobUtood, after th. Stolon or tto prosecution's
nc.i-.onts, that auotor .to « crL-itol. It »ould have boon o orlos to support
,11. Dr. Basetor, «hou «o no. ooo In aU hi. depravity. In tho ovn»ur.tloh,
ho-OTor. or tto dafaadnnt ralts's possible cullt and r.spunslblllty, »o too not
concornoil th thl. Dr. BaMtor. I tovc reached tto oonoluilon or ar •■*«“»•

Da. OBOWav.’TO [Dot onto counsel ror Viktor BrnoM Ur. resident, your
Honor.. Tto nrostoutlon mouses tto dafandtot Brook or: 1) t-Mne Part In a
or. on oonoylrooy ro- tho oesrUstton or ~r aria. and arlm. toe1«* •“»*«

2) c emission of tor orlno.; and 3) octrlooloa or crlnoo "Gainst hunanlty by
rartlolpatlw la tho oottoatola on! rtorllltotlon masur.s to toll to 4) ranalto
in,- conker or tto 3S, to thu. ot a orltor.nl orttoltotlon, nftor 1 Soptoi.bor
1939, although to too. that tho ss M tool ror tto .emission or tor orlm.
and orico* rxr.QiMt humility.

in refutation or tho.o aeotootlms ooutool ror tto defendant Brook toll P«“>
to.tlmny or .1 too.to., lootoont., tlto, cud oy. vltto.ooa and al.o by .boolhi
th. til. , "Ieh Kla... in-, -I acouao", to preva tto roUo«l.u. and too. hlo sr.no'
lira and to" hi. onto « iatotM la la. no asylum. Thl. lo to adlltloaal port

of :.y text.

1} ~r-cl: va-hau la the Fuehrer's Ch-^collory ns syoOinliat for II, "huro
It w Li a function to h>udlo 'll cor.plnlatn r M 1 a?porls cSdroMod iiroetly to
tho fuehrer * y.orhous free. nXL - lies of life, rad to mxfelt then to Rolchnlolto.
aouhlor for hi3 decision.

In addition to thw duties Brno* .to Instructed by aolohsloltor Bouhlor In
1939 to assist hlr. In tho ttohnlc.nl nron.-r-.tlm or sack to-s.ro. »oro require
in tho oreeutlon or tho task th-.t ritlor had aral n»l to Douhlor; th-t 1. ohort-
onln* tho worthlos. liras or Incur-’ ly Insane roroons, attar nost critical “•fi¬
ns,!,. by s-toirlc-.il-, d»lto-tod doctor., and In tho technical preparation or t
osoutlon of tb.so mantas. Brack Wt no doubt., nftor tho dwUimnt of
Cor an lu» slue 1933. a. to tho constitutional loyalty of idolf Hitler's


30 Jon .;7->'-?JC-8-2-niMtuok
Court HO. 1

directives.

Brock cvrie- ut tho instructions 3i~cn hin and bin other duties la his
ca"'city rs mx ivtiinistmtlvo official soborllnftto tc Bouhior nai subject to
tho isdlTMud instructions of noichaloitor Scuh.er, with no indepondant power
to tako :*cisians. *

Dmck hr.I nr coatcct whntaoovor .:1th any of tho lofondonts who mrs
rinaninc cr pro^rin.' a - or cri^a or a srU-J against humanity. Only with tho
lufoadont Karl Brandt Hi ho hero o few =r loos incidental conforoncoe,

the purpose of which, hovovor, was not tho erosion of war crlx^o cr orluoa
against hu-ianity.

2) Tho tack whth which Hoicholoivor Bauhlor oatrustol Zrcck lnvolvod
only lacura-ly liwerui parsena. Brack h-d nothin te It tilth :-o-suroa deal, nod
to shorten tho llvos of dofer-ai chlliron (whioh was within tho coi:potonco of
tho so-callol nolsh cu.hsslon for tho Surroy of Sorious cr lahorltod
,Vff notions"), nor with :on«uros offoctlnc inour-Uo invalids in f.onoral.

Tho task oasi r.,! to '.mck involvod only Gor nn ins r.o arsons, oxcluoing
joroona wounlod in tho -i at "orId ~or and industrial ccsualtloa. It did not
lucludo forol n anti wilr, ;articularly tho-o of natlora at war with Oonmny,
ut r. th. 11 -rty Editors ind J«bb livinc la Oonany.

Brock rnva cloto atu’.y to vrltia;:* cn tho probl*. nf shortonln^ tho
oorthloaa lives of Inc irmly Insane parsons, '.dtlch has boor. disputed for
conturl.8 y physicians, Jurist.-, philosophers, scientists, and ordinary
dtisoac, and, for othical reasons and on the b sis of a carefully fon od
e.iarlotio:i derivlu. fr ; his n icperloncoa, education, spiritual oriontr.tion,
an! poraonai. study, aneworo 1 la tho affir.*tivo tho question, which oonofi up in
connection vith tho abovo-iantionad probiu;, as to tho Justification of
euthanasia in such cases.


-22L2-


30 Jan 1-Putty - sw

Court So. 1


Brack did not participate in the other oxteraln.tion naaauroa
.ith which the Prosecution charge, hin, *ich -ere directed against
G.r=an= and ncn-Con=n, through a clause of the organisational

apparatus that Bouhler^had created.

3.) Never in hie life was Brack's attitude anti-Oocdtic. On
the contrary, in .any cases he interceded in the interests of Jews
even at the *nger of personal detriment. Consequently, Brack became
an cn«y of Hcydrich and Bcrran. Just before the end of the war at
the instigation of Boroam he was even sentenced to. death by a
ciUtary court nartial. And I continue with cy original text:

Cons' cucntly Brack was dismayed by his progressively clearer recog¬
nition of the radical intentions and extenrlraticn plans embraced by
Hitler and hi' advisors.

Prsek wicked to frustrate thsso plana st »11 costs, for lids
purport, .busier th. confidence h. -uOd-sd, h. attaopted to indues
th. ran in th. on itrol to adopt «ana and roo.dura which apparently
ore raised success but Which actmlly , according to the state of
rasesrch st that tic, hod to bo regard* .. urtlsss. and ot any
rat. .Me . succssoful affliction of those plan. iapcaibl. for a
con.ld.rnbi. ported of tic. This is th. origin of Brack' . correspond¬
ence with and sterilisation prop,sal. to influential person, in th.
govemennt xn 19U — WM. Brack's activity In the., year, will,
in the light of the evidence that the defense will produce, take on
nn essentially different psychological aspect fr«. that which tho


Frosecution has pr sented.

Brack did not furnist ooraonnel for the extonslnsticn of *»>-
U.) in -ha spring of 1MZ Brack volunteered for sarvios at th.
front with. th. vaff.n SS bacauso, after tho failurt of hi, effort.


and realizing that the radical tendency -a, now irresistible, he did
not wish to fe. associated with or even to cos. into contact -ith an
activity that seared to have criminal tendencies.


30 Jan ,.7-!<-S*-3-2-?x.cty- sir
Court Ho. I


Fa transferred to the troops In ignorance of facts Going to prove
that trn SS was used for crinirnl activities,

That is th- end of fay staterents.

DR. UARX: Ur. President* your Honors, I ar. now beginning the
opening state;.«nt for the Defendant, Dr. Becken-Freyseng.

The Prosecution charges the f error Stabsarst of tW Uiftwaffe
Reserve , Dr. Hermann Beckeiwriyseng, first, to have participated
in a conspiracy and a .'oint plan to coreit crines against humanity
and war criors. Those crises are alleged to have been ccomitted under
camouflage as so-called scientific, eedical txperiuenta.

Tho indictment thereby was based on tho assumotion that in the
execution of individual exporters or a»riaa of experiments sovoral
of the here present defendants or the age.-icles they ropre*A>ted at that
time had taken part or were interested in th; or should have had
knowledge of theta.

However, the Prosooution did not leave any doubt that in Its
opinion the carry ns out of so-called radical experiments "as only
a pretext to dc h'-rm to anomies of tho Kaal State, to torture them,
even to exterminate them. Tho Chief Prosecutor, General Taylor, dovotod
* nAjor pox-tion of his


??y t


i


30 Joo-H-OES-9-ty

Court ». 1.


addraei before the High Tribunal la iononstrating that the basis for such a
B conspiracy vero the doctrines of the Sat local socialist Goman Vorkore'

Party (HSH 1 P) particularly In regard to the race question, and that also tho
personal basis of tae cruel cad abominable crimes le to bo found In thoso
characters vto frooly foil for tac rosults of those slogans about 3 oco and
Stutu, vita out Inner ties vita and religious consideration, true cortical
calling;, genuine science, and tan tornal hua-a v.luos. That is th- plcturo
of tho conspirator vhicn ta.. Prosecution dovelopod boforo our oyos.

2) In contrast to th t. Counsel for tn« Defendant, Dr. Bockor-?roysong, will
ntto-pt to prove tn-t the latter, r.e a rornlt of his aduc'.tlon and his con-
copt of cue nodical profession, as v.ll ns h&s general philosophy, for tho
factual results of *.lc.; vu vill offer evidence. is really unablo to show
•uca attitude.

,u) Co-lng froa a Christina family. Dr. Bockox^Troysong prosorvod his
r.liglouo attitude nt later tli.es also as n etudont. as a husband and fiuilly
father, ho did not abandon his Christian posltloh. ovia at a tlco when uany
Geruuxs broke vita church and religion, cor. ly as a natter of oxpodicncy. in
accordraco vita tho P««rty trend, and left the church.

b. ) neither did ho belong as a studont to the Bngi studonts ‘.seoclatioi
r.or did he belong, ns n physician nod young academic te-caer. to the V\tl
Fhyslclans ^seociution >r the Hi.tl •.crdo-ic 7v chore Longue; only In serious
scientific vork und evrvico to tao 111 did ho soo tho fulfillnent of his froc
caoscn profession. 31s superiors • nd t^xaers voro no so-called Snxi Pro¬
fessors but v„) today r .uin hold honored positions.

c. ) This picture of tae Defendant vill bo completed vfcon I subhit cvl-
durxe to the Hi*. Tribunal that Dr. 3ccker-?reyseng — ns far a# It vr.s In
nis pover — aided cni supported racially and politically persecuted people,
thereby certainly not follovlng tae principles of tho P»\rty.

d. ) iready froc tho boginning of his ova scientific erroer tho experi¬
ment carried out on hlcself is of exceptional importance, already as a youn
Interne ho toetod nev drags on his ovn body Had studied in cxporlaonto on hi
ovn person, tao results up to tac Halt of his physical endurance.


30 Jan Z.7—!H!ES-9—2s~Fut ty—sw
Court Tfo. 1


At th- Research Institute for Aviation Medicine in Berlin Dr. Becker-
Frcyseng carried out on hlaaalf even the most dangerous experiments that
ever were carried out there and the-eby contacted a soricus case of
pasuaonia. %

In more than cne hundred experiments with lack of oxygen ho 3orvjd
■.a experimental subject for his colleagues, thereby losing his conscious¬
ness and exposed himself to other dangers; and when, after the war, he
with other Goman aviation ;hysicians wus j.akcd to coop*rato at the
Aroo-l'rdical C-nbir of the American Air Forco in HoidolfcYrg, ho carried
cut almost one hundred dangerous low pn ssure chaatoor experiments in
loss than a year 1 s tine, which caused an illncse of several months
duration to one of the participating oollrnguro. All these experiments
on himsolf did not bring any naterial gain to Dr. Bock-ti^-Froysong. Hia
scientific works aro regarded cs cl*an and abaolutoly raliablo by
today’s critical obs' rv_rs, too. Ho cannot bo accused of an unhealthy
acfcition, in unf actual f-naticiso or reckless egotism, and nothing
of th« kind co-ild be proven against him.

>fcv r did h«> carry out *ny dang-rous oxperir.onta in hia own scientific
fi« Id any other my than as an experiment on himoslf or on similar
minded co-woriccrs.

e.) The outbreak of the war int- rrupted the medicnl-sciontific
activities of Or. Bwcker-rrcysong. In 1940 he was drafted ns Unterant
of thr. Luftwaffe Roserve and transferred in 1941 to the Medical
Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe.

The iiY'ictc.eit chiractericcs Dr. Bocker-Freyseng as "Chief of the
Division for Aviation Medicine" -dth the Chief of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe. Actually no Divisicn for Aviation Ledicine at the
Medical Inspectorate has ever existed; thus, this is a contortion by
tho Prosecution that cannot be proved ct ail.

“Ithin the Division 2 (the Medical Division ) there existed only

a branch (a raferet) for Aviation Medicine. Dr. 3eck«r-rreyseng was

working there as an assistant consultant up to tne middle of 1944

22Jj>


3C Jan t?-4J-CES-9-2£-Pu'.ty
Court o. 1


without authority to sign ary papers and without any independent respon-
aibiUty. Only free Slay 19U. until the end of the war Dr. Bcckor-
Freyaeng was hiaeelf the head of the branch (Referent).


2246-a


JO Jao-!WF-iO-l-Sampscn - aw
Court Ho. 1


Ifey it please the Tribunal: The presentation of evidence will prove
that thia clarification is more than a merely formal correction . Sphere
of activity arai Mainly responsibility of a division chinf wore in
principle different free those of a chief or even assistant subordinate
to hie. Along at all the defendants, who had any function in the civilian
or military sector of the Genian health service during thenar at
all, Dr. BFCKJB-PRZTSEKO is the only one Whose activities were
never autonomous, and who never wne authorized to make independent
decisions.

This, high Tribune 1, is th' picturo of tto charnct-T of the defend¬
ant Dr. BECKTUPrEYSENG, *iich the Dof- nac will prove in detail, in
order to demonstrate, that in no way does it conform with the descript¬
ion of a criminal conspirator tho prosocution has drawn.

Pur the more the Prosecution ' s assumption that Dr. BkCKER-FREYS&iG
participated at the "Coneultlr* Conference" of tho year 1943 incor¬
rect. The Dof.nso is going to prove thnt he actually participated only
at tho Conference of 1944.

Most of tho dofon 'ants he saw for tho first tine here in tho
P lr.co of Justice, others ho kn-.w by nar.o on account of thoir high
position. Tit* tho renters of tho Luftwaffe ho had naturolly official
contacts.

n.

In particula r, the indictae* charges Dr. BEEKEi-FIXYSEIG of
participation or specie1 responsibility for high altitude experiments,
freezing experiments, sea water experiments and the experiments with
sulfonamide , epidemic Jaundice, typhus and other infectious diseases.

1) The Do far sc is going to prove, that Dr. BBC KEh~FR£YSE*C had
nothing to do whatsoever with the high altitud e experiments and heard
about these experiments only after their conclusion, and thenonly
unofficially and by chance.

Furthermore, wo are going to prove, thut th# low pres*:re chanter
. 2247


30 Jar. AT-T-JP-lO-l-Sasracn - w
Court :»c. 1


uaad in Raocher* a experiaenta na not furnished to W. RASSHER by
the Aviation Medicine


22A7-A


30 Jan son-

court :io. l


Hra'ich of the nodical S.pectorate of the h*!; that Dr. BlEKHtr-
FUSTSTO actually saw this ch«ber for tho first tine about July 1942,

•hen it already fad returned fron tfcchau, and tfcat he took it over
free Cancan A viation E*paria«tal Station (WL), » brand ne w.

Ur. President, I «ill % oait the foiling paragraph; I request that
thi. pawph be stricken f*» the record. I -LU now continue with the

next ''aragraph. A

"To lllurtret. th. attitude of th. dof.nd.nt Dr. BKOK-fHETSEI*)

to . request of Dr. RASHCH! to b. foml.«d »1U> . oh*.r again, th.

D*f«nso point, out th. folio-tag, .nd -ill .ubdt avldonc. for It,

During th. -dolor 1942^3, *n inquiry *«■ “• of tl * SS "

offlc — receiv'd by th. 1*1«1 Inopretcret., .bout lotting th. h.™

. aotorired lo. pro.sur. <t-reb«r «lth . t.o ph... uMt " Dr -

BECHR-FRSTSEW hod an order to report tho position of hi. trench to

superior.

H. cocrend* o nn.tlv. reply, tath th. .rgurent, that non. of th.
.raUtai. chrefcare oculd b. ^red, .nd th.t there ... no rewn for tt»

Ho die. 1 Inspectorate to tare RASCH® conduct high HIM oxp«rlm.ntv.

» i. obvious, th.t thl. refurel night tare had rerlou. con..qu.n...
for Dr. WnWHEKWO. H. Are re. to It th. only Oorenn .poci.llred
fim reuld not .-.snu factor. any lo. prrerer. chrefcore for tho SS ml
RICHER.

2. Freezing ix pcrironta.

-au, the pUnnlng and oendret of th.. fr.o-.ing experiment., Dr.BECKHt-
ransac had aim never to do. Of th. foot, that freotl.g oxp. rlr.nt. had
boon conduct* on human beta-,, h. poreonally hoard only through tho
lecture by Prof. HOLMBMR during tta »* mberg Conforonco of InfUaff.
Physicians in October 1942.

Conc-rnlng tid. object, th. Defense 1. going to pro.., that no cno
could loam from Prof. HDLZLCffiP®'a lecture, f*or. -hat typo of person,
th. experimental refejtata rere chore.. Tho gened opinion of th.
participating physician. that th. rv- ' W -re cpnducted .on.
fr ; -in.nla sentenced to death.


30 Jan 47-’*-v'F-10-3-Seap»n ( - sw
Court So. 1

Dr. RAXHER, who wt con bating the ejqwriaonts, had ^ecially re¬
quest'd pornisaioo free HDMiR to handle th< act tor absolutely secret.

Dr. BECKBUPRSYSBIG after the iuernberg Conference never saw

FAXHER again, ana never had an;.- other cent act a with hia.

%

The Luftwaffe toe, shifted avay cceplotely froa RAXHER, and thereby
got into disfavor with hia sponsor, the Reichsfuehrer-SS, KHC'I^R.

Free document a offered by the Proaecuti -n it baccara evident that

1. ) RASCHIR wna free, the very beginning -n veiy close

contact with the SS end particularly with Hllft’ISt.

2. ) That RAXHER oontimied freezing experiments without

any participation of the Luft.affe for y.rs, and that
under really pervorted conditions.

Therefore, Dr. BECKKft-FRZYSEC cannot be considered responsible for
a participation on tho freezing oxp-ri=wnts.

3. ) Tvchua o::p rirxnta. h.ytitis and Epiderdc Jnvn&co .

In rll these throe cases re are concerned with -urelv hygienic, or
bacteriological Questions, even in the difficult specialized field of
virus research. 1th t is field. Dr. BECMR-rSYSEHO in hia official
position at tho >«dical Inapectorate of the Luftwaffo waa not at all
concerned, he n-ver had to voice an opinion on any of theoo qjeetions,
he never participated on a conference concerning then., or oven heard of
than. These questions did not even belong to tho field of aviation medi¬


cine which waa tic exclusive fiold of ncti vity oi this aoionoonc.
Scientifically Dr. BXKZR-PrSYSEC never worked on these problems eithir,
and is entirely unfamiliar with this specialized medical field.

Dr. BECKER-FREYSr.C «s in contact with tho affair HAAGEN only
insofar as his branch forr*lly -wjrtad in single casos on research orders,
in order to uniformly control the porsanunt regulations about allocation
of funds, priority rate assignment of porsonrfel, otc. Furtimnaare, nll . q £


these rocetrch orders


2249


30 Jan 47-U-JP-lCW#-Sa=pson - sw
Court Ko . 1


•.he 9a.-.o flic into , (no, 55) and, therefore, a-raly for filing purposes
were handled by his branch,

Ihus it was nothing but an administrative and file net tor l Tho real,
that is the f actual contents of the ordor were handled by the respective
consultant for that specialized field.


In the caso of tho defendant Prof. Dr. 3CHJOEER I dealt already
with the dual position of Pro:. RAACEN the different typos of research
orders he *crkod on, and therefore how the ordering agencies opposed
each othor.

The Defrnso is go:ng to prove, that Dr. BIEKEWTtEYSEJG even in
th« succor of 19 Uh novor oonsidor. d the cxpiriaonts HA/GB1S ns anything
but of an aniaal oxporiaocl.nl type, This is to bo deducted from nn
order subedited to Dr. SCUHALLA, chief of tho brooding institution for
such oxperiaental an'.-als.

A.) Dr. BZCKHi-PPrrSEC hoard first about the $ttlf?fla-4,d 5*P!>E:


c. As far ns


these exneri-.enta are concerned, the notives, which had been guiding
for Dr. BSEKTR-FRETSEX) as veil as his proposal of carrying out experi¬
ments for this purpose on hunan beings, wore alrendy elucidated in
ry plea for Fjof. Dr, 93i’K>EDER.

Tne Defense will effer proof , that Dr. BKKER-FRKTSENG advocated
the conduct of these experiments not for vicious planning or with tie
intent to torture, and to destroy. Cniy by the attitude of the follower
or the Other method "E rka" and due to the particular circunstances
caused by the war then forced to suggest experiments to bo carried out
cn inrates, after the originally.intended experlcantation on roldiers
of the Luftwaffe in a Luftwaffe or parachutist hospital and in the
Military Fedical Acadecy had proved to be inpossible as a result of

the war sitation in the sumer of the invasion.

2250


30 Jan -7-i4-JF*-10-^-Sa.-p3on - sw
Court Ho. 1


Tho Defense intends to be in a position to prove that the planning
of exp-riaentc, fr uhich from the start the volunteering of experi-
s^ntal subject s-h ad been the first ccxdition, had bc«« so prepared and
that the carrying out had been laid down in such detail that according
to all medical exparionce and nodical estimates evexy procaution had
been taJcon to prevent any disturbance of health, but certainly fatal
results. ^

In sharp contrast to experiments the outcone of Wdch caild no
longer be directed by their irresponsible initiators, th«» naturo, the
preparations and tho carrying out of the so-ctliod soawater oxperioonts
guarant od that r.t any time when reaching the limit of «.-iduranco the
"inglo experiments could bo brck.m off. And only in those senator ex¬
periments did tho defendant Dr. HECKBt-FREYSEKC participate directly.

The volunteering of oxperiaontal subjects was a roally necessary
rrruislte for the e.cporloerrts, as it would have been impossible to obtain
an absolutely unobjectl Table observation result in forcing peraons to
take part in. Because the physician and scierAist does neceotmrlly depond
U”on the cooperation of the experimental svfcjecte in ovaluctlnfl subj;

<active atAterents, like thirst, hunger and other coaplaints.

It. BTBKXfr-fBKXSBMO, therofore,ie of the opinion to have do no all
that was at all possible according to the well-known standard of medical
science, especially as the supervision of the experiments had been put
nto the hands of an experienced physlcj n\ nnd of a blameless character.

This picture of Dr. BECr'SR-FKZTSDC shows him as a man whoso concern
was sericus ecientific research and objective work, *:o cede very high
demands upon hi.-.self, not sparing hie own person, a man who dons draw
and who nay dr?w a sharp line between himself and such "would be -
scientists", «ho have made tests without considering health, and life
of their follow-cun, finally as a physician who always endeavored to
live up to the high ethical standards set by his vocation.

According to the opinion of th Defense after tho hearing of the
evidonce

2251


30 Jan /.7-4t-JM0-6-Sa=p»n - sw
Court - ! o. 1


the picture of the defendant will be on entirely different ono
froa the one rfiich wea painted by the Prosecution,


30 Jan 47-iWF-ll-Seslcw - sw
Court So. 1


M r . President, in addition and outside of this writtm statement
I would like to state several words. I t of the opinion th't I na
entitled to nieo state for Dr. 3eck.:iwFr«yf eng and also Professor
Schroedor, *ce I ac also defending , to nakc the request in their
behalf that the triil bo discontinued in so far as this includes
their participation in a criminal plan or a conspiracy and oven perhaps
to a higher dogroo than is the case with ono or the othor of the
defendants. However, I shall refrain fron ranking »uch * request because
I ac of the opinion thrt the vurdict will have to be urdfora about all
the points with which the defendant is being charged. Therefore, I do
not consider it appropriate to decine about part of the Indictment
fron the very beginning.

TOE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will now rocess until one-thirty
o'clock.

(A recess was taken until 1330 hairs.)


2253


nfl

33 Jtu>*13~l~;>-AID-3ums-JP
Ooart 1


C0HB2CT3D COFT


rr? yj&SE&i The Tribunal It again In session.

HU BZLCZKAilF: Year Sonare. Dr. Boldceonn for the defendant Dr.
joarad Schaefer.


tppeero to bo of a tpedal kind, even to the superficial obtervor of this
trial.

&

In those proceedings, vhlch havo lasted for weeks, the nar.o <*f
3CHA2FZ2 bus boon nontioned only a few tinos by the Prosecution. So ia
nllogod hy tho Prosocution to haro participated in only o£e oxporlr.ont
conducted on ooncontration carp lncctoe, in which oxporlncnt a drug woo
tostod which was intendod to rondor soa wator potable.

Tho Prosecution all egos that, in spite of this very United activi¬
ty, Schrofor was participant In tho conspiracy which conprisos all thooo
defendants.

To proro its thosls of tho conspiracy of all tho dofondnats, tho
Prosecution has prosontod'two points in dotoil.

1. Tho porvasion and corruption of Goman nodical scior.co, prl-
uarlly tho young nodical non, by Fatioaal Socialist idoas, culminating
in a dioro.,-nrd for h\nnn lifo which found its expression in tho oxpori-
rents on concentration conp lncatos.

2. Tho doso cooporation of all dofor-danls in various sphoroa of
nodicino, primarily in tho Amy, in tho Luftwaffo, and in tho SS, which
put each dofondaat in a position to rocognito the criminal activity of
tho others and to contribute his share knowingly.

In this connection I shall provo that, ospocially in Schaofor'o
case, those too do not npply:

SCiai^f'haa «. ^cen an outspoken opponent of rational Socia¬
lismof militarism. It. was ho who already in 1933 and in tho sub¬
sequent years as a student and as a youn£ physician opposod tho noasuros
which 'the Prosecutor described so fully on 9 December 1946 (page 100, 101
of the Soman transcript, and which were intendod to nako of those youns


30 Jan.-12-2-»-*TT>-rurTB
Court Jfo.I


aer. willlr*. instruants cf the Motional Socialist reclao by training then
within organixatiOM of the Party, eren at the nxpenso of thoir scieiw
tific achievements.

Ir. spite of extremely strorv pressure - which the Prosecution has
described very vividly - he Refused to Join the Party or any other organic
zation, thereby eniangoring his a (Mission to the axaninations. Ho finally'
had to dve up his position as assistant at a university clinic, although
his scientific achievements would have entitled hin to a position*as
locturor.

Later, too - fron 1937 until the outbreak cf the war, still more
during the war, and also after having boon drafted into the Luftwaffo in
19U1 — he continued to criticize the existing systea and its cxcosscs


especially in the field of noOieino, and last but net least the experiments
on human beings "hich woro conducted in tho concentration camps.


Ifaw is it to bo explained, then, that SCHAEFER hold a position
in tho public health service of the Third T.oich (Ooman transcript pngo $7)
Dut how can the irosocution contend that the sharo of oach of tho


20 physicians - including tho defendant SCH-iTETt - in tho conspiracy and
in its execution corresponds most closely to his professional interests and
his position within the hierarchy of tho Third Reich? (cf. Goman transcript
page llli.


I shall prove that thoso contentions of tho Prosocution concerning
the position of tho defendants within the hierarchy of tho Third Reich
and their closo cooperation with each other do not apply in tho case of
SCHAEFER.


From 1937 until 19U5 SCSL>EFZR held a position as medical man and
chemist am’ as deputy section chief ir. privr.to industry, sinco official
positions wore not open to him on account of his antl-Mazi convictions. In
19Ul he was drafted as a private and after 6 months became Untersrzt in tho
Luftwaffe, sinco ho was a medical can. An Untorarzt in the German :vehrnacht
does not have the raric of an officer. Through an accidental meeting with
his former fellow-student 2ECXER-FRSYSEJC, he was given the opportunity of


2255


30 *iw~12-3HH.TD-aurna

Court So. I


entering the Research Institute for .Metier Hedicine. He seized this
opportunity immediately, because in this way he was able to continue his
activities in private industry, naturally in civilian clothes. He rarely
entered the Institute, and he aelcton wore a uniform. Ho knew only a few

of the other medical can in aviation. He talked only once to his supreme

%

superior, HIFrJCE, and he talked only twico to HIPHE's successor, SCHXEDER.
Such an unimportant person was SCHAEFERJ One cannot speak of a position
within the hierarchy of tho administration and of nodi cine of^the Third
noich.

Duriix: the war be held a position like nany thousands of othor
Gormans, who wore glad to be able to escape the deadly dangers of tho war
at the front, who had no inner comeottora with this war and with this
system, who oven woro its radical opponents.

Ho was given th> order to investigate problims arising from
distrass at sos, particularly tho problem of thirst.

Ho obeyed this order with groat satisfaction, bo cause ho know that
tho solution of this problem would put an end to tho tortures of Tantalus
suffered by shipwrecked persons all over tho world. Ho sjt to work with
scientific thoroughness, which I shall provo in detail. A study of tho entir
literature, which took ronths, enabled him to hold aloe lure on thirst and
tho ncasuros to be taken against it during distress at soa, by order of tho
Chief of tho Medical Inspectorate, at tho neoting in Nuo-nberg in 191*2.

The lecturo contained pure theory and was not a roport on experiments on •
human beirvs. The Prosecution assorted - tho contrary on 12 Docontcr 191*6, it
is true (sheet 331* of tte Goman transcript, but the complete Document
1*01, Prosocution,Exhibit 93, proves that this assertion is false.

The further occupation with this problem'brou ht SCHAEFER to
acperiironts, which wero carried out by the IG—Farbcn. In a scientific
cooperation with this firm, a drug was finally found, by which sea wator
could be made drinkable without any prejudice to health. This result was
obtained by many chad cal, and pharmacological examinations of the bac toxi¬
cide effects and experiments. Jfc expexdaents on human beings with this


2256


30 Ja ru-12 :7>-3uma

C«irt So* l


drag were necessary, for SCHaEFEU had recot^dsed on the basis of all the
other scientific methods of investigation that this irur was absolutely


inroccuous*


33 Jtrutrj-k*: JOl 3-1-? «ldt

Ccurt No. 1


The drug was called "Wofatit St* "IG Drug ■ cr "Schaefer Drug."

It is fundamentally and also in its nay of presentation with only very
slight differences the some drug which was invented bv the American Dr. Ivy
and used by the US Armed Forces.

The Schaefer drug was co mpletely ready at the end of 19A3, end Schaefer's
supreme superior, the Inspector of the Modical Service of the Luftwaffe, in¬
tended to introduce it in the German Luftwaffe.

The Technical Office, another branch of the German Luftwaffe, however,
opposed its introduction, offering as a reason that thuro was not enough silvc
available, which was needed for tho production of the drug.

Tho Important men in tho Technical Offico, Oberstingenieur Christensen
and Stabsinecniour Stickler, demanded the introduction of a drug which has
been invented by Stabsingenieur of tho Air Force Borkc. It consisted of
glucoso, which recovod or diminished the salt tasto of tho coa water without
changing the actual salt content.

I shall prove with special aephoaia that Schaefer opposed this "Borkc
drug" as being a fnko, ovor aince the origin of this plan.

He wrote a crushing report on the results of experiments which Oborctarzt
von Sirany hod conducted with tho Bcrka drug on volunteers, patients in a
Luftwaffo hospital, by order of the Tochnical Office. Schaifor had boon
ordered by his superiors free tho Medical Inspectorate to o&ko this chock.

Tho result of Schaofcr's attitude in this respect was that he wp.s sus¬
pected of sabotago by the sen of the Technical Office end by tho officers of
tho Luftwaffo.

Schaefer knew very well what this accusation meant in the Third Heich
during the fifth year cf war. He knew of other instances in which nodical
sen had been persecuted by the RSKA, that is, by the Ge3tapo, only on account
of their diverging scientific opinions cn subjects of vital importance for
the war.

But nevertheless he explains his opinion of the senselessness of tho
S'-rke method also at the conferences cf 19 and 20 Jay, during which it is pro¬
posed that this method be tested on concentration coop inmates. As a final
warning he states that with the Bcrka method death Sets in on the 12th day at

2258


y, jir.uary-A-DJ3-13-2-Feldt

Court Sc. 1

lotMt- This is proved by the Prosecution Document JO 177, Exhibit 133.

This was all he could dc under tho circumstances, not being an officer,
but the least important person ng the brilliant uniforms of the 13 high-

rcnlcing officers.

At these conferences Schaefer makes no "resolutions." This is impossibl
in the Army. Tho top-rankikg chiefs of offices present "order" and "coanand.
But the defendant Schaefer is not evon ordered to conduct experiments on
concentration ermp inmates. He is not even assigned to tho cession which
had been appointed to dotcraine the conditions for the experiments, because
he is known to be an opponent of tho entire enterprise. x

Another chance for preventing theso - in Schadfor's opinion completely
pointless - experiments on human beings with tho B«rka drug, whother in the
concentration eemp or in tho Luftwaffe hospital, passes by. On 25 ilr.y 19W.
the world-famed internist Professor Eppingor from Vienna declares thr.t ho
does not consider entirely wrong Berks's idea that his drug would "sluico"
tho see water through tho human body without any injury, which Schaofor had
hitherto considered absolutely absurd. Thruo aero professors, outstanding
medical sen, shared tho opinion of professor ifcpingor.

Thus Schaefer lost one coro medical pretext to declare himsolf still
core openly against tho performance of those experiments.

No law in tho world can dee nd of Schaufor more than h® did, if ono
appreciates rightly and with understanding the generd circumstances in Hitle.
Cormany and Schaefer's special situation on account of his official rank.

Now I already put tho question why none cf the participants in tho conference
of 19 and 20 Jay 19AL, who in contrast to Schaefer kept silence, ere prosont
here in the defendants' deck, with the exception cf Bcckor-Froysong, and why
Just tho inventor of a method which selves a very ancient prcblio of humanity
is accused.

In none of tho conferences mentioned in tho documents of the Prosecution,
ir. which Schaefer took part, was it proposed or ordered that tho "Schaofor
drug" be tested on concentration camp imatos. Cnly for ouch an act could
Schaefer have been held responsible. But ho would never have shunned this
medical responsibility, in view of the good quality of his drug, although


225 ?


30 J aruary-i-DJG-1 3-3-? cldt

Court He. 1


he never have approved the uae of concentration caap inaates.

The experiments with the Berka drug, which ho is net reapcnfible for
ordering, wore carried out without his cooperation.


Court I

30 J an U7-A - 13-la - LX - Feldt

He therefore cannot be charged for having listened to the lecture of
professor Beiglbock, which fully revealed the uselessness of the Berka

A

method.

lour Honors, I hereby ask you to consider the Prosecution documents

%

and the speech of the Prosecutor, before listening to ny case, and to
take into consideration ay stateaonts concerning tho Prosecution documents.

This examination alone w.ll put you in a position to realise 4iiat
tho Defendant Schaofor is not guilty. In accordance with the practico
of Aaorican and British courts in penal cases, I request as a measure of
precaution that the trial of ths dofondant Schaefer be discontinued,

/

without tho submission of any further evidence.

DR. OuiLIK (Counaol for Defendant Hovon): The dofondant Hovon has
been accused on all four counts of tho indieturent.

Regarding Count i of the Indictoont, cost on plan or conspiracy: In
tho first ploc^,tho fust of a conspiracy rujuiros a cosnon plan or
agreement botwoon at least two arsons. The prosecution shouln, thoroforo,
have stated: 1, when; 2, *soro; 3, between what persona this comuon plan
or this cannon agroeoont was r^achod; and L, what tho substance was of
this coor.on plan or agreeraont.

The prosecution should have uado a particular point of stating that
this plan or agreuojnt ai»,d at the conaitting of those war crimes and
crimes - gainst humanity, which are the imbject of those proceedings.
Furthormoro, tho prosecution should have proved that tho defondant Hovon
took part in such an agreement.

Now that the prosecution has concluded its presentation tho following
nu3t be stated: tho prosecution has no reason whatever for assuming and
has produced no proof whatever that a plan of this kind ever oxisted or
that the defendant Hovon took part in it.

I thoroforo ask that tho defendant Hcven be declared not guilty under
Count I of tho indictment.

The opinion expressed hare this morning gives mo occasion to add a
fow words at this point. I s of the opinion that the Tribunal does not

2261


Court I

30 Jan U7-* - 13-2a - LJG - Feldt


naod ary instruction on ho* proceedings should be conducted most

efficiently. I shall therefore a* rely conmt on the question of Aether
such an application is legally admissible or not.

According to Geraan penal la* the Court can at any tine refrain from
hearing defense witnesses if it is of the opinion that the evidence presented

by the Prosecution is not adequate.

As far as I know, and I mke theso statements with a certain Reser¬
vation bocause I have foreign literature available only to a limited extent,
this principle applies under the law of all states. This principle also
arises freo tho lows of lc*ic, for what purpose would thoro bo in .-resent¬
ing defonse witnosses on the count of conspiracy undor the presont diffi¬
culties of bringing then to Nurortoorg and of taking up tho tino of the
Tribunal by their examination if tho Court is already of the opinion that
what the Prosecution has presented is Insufficient to prove tho partici¬
pation of tho defendant Hovon in a conspiracy?

I shall now c ntinue. If this application is r-fusod, I ahnll provoi
a, that the defendant Hoven did not tako part in such plat* b, that ho
did not oven know his co-dofondants, with tho exception of V4rugowsky,
until tho boginning of tho present trial; and, c, that ho had only net
tho defondant Jlrugowsky once, unofficially, and that at thi3 mooting
thoro was no discussion of an agreement for the cccnittuont of war critaos
arxi crimos against humanity.

Regarding Counts 2 aivd 3 of tho Indictment (war criws and crimes
against humanity) i

Undor these Counts the defendant Hoven is accused of having carried
out on inmates of tho concentration cacp 3uchen»ald: a, typhus experiments,
and b, tho euthanasia program.


As an introduction I should like to point out tho following in order
to clarify =y presentation cf evidence:


2262


33 Jan-i-S-t-lS-lb-Poldt-J?
Court I


Thxj fact that the provocation hae proved that a crlno has toon
omdttod does not .office. Lav Fo. 10 1. only applicable If these
erica, voro coralttod on citizen, of the United Hattons. I gather fron
the orldonee so far sulcittod by the Prosocution, and o.peclally fron the
vitnoa.o. auctioned by t$o prosecution* that they also oro of this view.

I shall now doal with tho individual war crlno. and crino. against
tacanlty with which tho defendant Enron 1. charged, and enno first
to tho question whether there is t ba«i. for tho assunption that tho
defendant Horen participated In tho typhas exporlnonts - a punlohablo
act acootding to Law So. 10.

It cannot bo doubted that between January 1942 and tho ond of 1944
typhus oxporlr.onts wore carriod out on lnnatoe in tho ooncontratlon canp
Buchonwald.

Tho do fondant Horen wo. nrro.tod in Soptccbor 1943 and was, until
March 1945, a prisonor in tho concentration carp Buchonwald. TM. is
cloar fron tho oridonco pro.ontod by tho prosocution. It Is thoroforo
out of dooieiro inportanco whothor and to what oxtont t!io dofondrnt
Horen actually took part In tho typhus oxporlncnt. January 1942 and
August 1943. Tho pm.ocution hae etotod ooroctly that it wao not
tho dofondont Eoron who wae supervisor of tho doprxtnont for typhus
and virus rosoarch nt tho Hygiene Inetituto of tho Waffon SS which
was o.tablishod at tho Buchonwald Concentration Carp, but that this
wo. tho Into Ur. Ding-Schulor.

Tho activity of which tho dofondont is nccusod nllogodly consists
in

a) having boon Dr. Ding's doputy.

b) haring soloctod prlsonore who woro used as hucon oxporlnontnl subjocts
In tho typhus oxporinonts.

Ho point c) As has been correctly eutalttod by tho Prosocution on tho

strength of Dr. Ding's diary - Doc. rC.265, Doctccnt


2263


33 Ja=r-Jr-S*-13-2b-yeldt-JP
Coart I


3ook 12, psgo 36 to 56 of the Goman. pages 33 to 53 of the Snglioh text
_ lho activity of the defendant Horen as Dr. Ding's deputy has to ho
orokea down into*

1) His vork as deputy in tho oxperinental station 31ock -46;

2) His work as Deputy in 31ock 50.

Tho cvidonco of tho prosecution has shown heyond any douht that tho
experiments woro carried out only in Block 46. In Block 50 on* tho
typhus vaccino for tho Gerr-an soldiers at tho front was nanufacturod.

This is shown by tho tostir.ony of tho witness Dr. Engon, pego 1192 of
tho Goman transcript*

Only tho pcrfomanco of tho typhus cxporir.cnts in Block 46. how error, con
bo oonsidorod a crininal actirity in accordance with Law Fo. 10. Tho
nanufacturc of typhus vaccine in Block 50 is beyond any doubt neither
A war crino nor a crlno against hunnnity.

Only in Block 50. tho section whoro tho vaccine was nanufacturod,
was tho dofondant Ho von Dr. Ding's pemenont doputy. This is ohown in¬
dubitably b7 tho abovo nentlonod Ibcwiont 2!0-265, Document Book 12, proton
38 to 53 of tho English and page. 36 to 56 of tho Goman text, parti¬
cularly by page 41 of tho English and tho saco pogo of tho Goman toxt.
Thoro is tho following entry on 9 January 1943*

•3y order of tho surgeon general of tho Vaffon SS. SS Grupponfuohror
fuid liajor Gonornl of tho Vaffon SS. Gcnxkon. tho hitherto existing
typhus research station at tho concentration canp Buchonvald boconos
tho -Doporteont for Typhus and Virus Research". Tho bond of the dopart-
r.ont will bo SS Sturr.bannfuohrcr Dr. Ding.

2264


20 Ja»-ir-S*-13-3b-?oldt-JP
Court I

Soria* his abscaco tho station nodical officer of tho Voffon SS Vcinur,

SS Hauptstumfuohror Horen, vill suporriso the production of raccinoe."

I drew tho attention of tho Tribunal especially to tho expression "pro¬
duction of raccinoe." *

The defendant Horen was Dr. Din* 1 * deputy in tho experimental
station only temporarily. during an illnoe. of Dr. Ding'8. Thio ia
to bo soon fr<« tho entries on p. 37 and 38 of the Goman Do<&nont
Boole 12, pngo 38 end 39 of tho Znglith Docunont Book 12.

According to tho.o ontrios, I*. Bing raccinatod 135 prisoners in
tho ported from 6 January to 1 Tobrunry 1942, and aftorvarde on 3 Kerch
1942 , infoctod thoto vaccinated priaoncro and 10 control poroone with
culture Yirus. On 17 March 1942 Dr. Ding, who had infoctod hinoolf, foil
ill with typhua. During this illnono tho dofondant Hovon actod at his
deputy, according to tho ontry in tho diary on 17 :larch 1942. Tho
next infoction took place on 15 October 1942 and wan undo by Dr. Ding,
iron tho ontrios in tho diary ono can ooo without doubt that in tho
period from llarch to October 1942. especially during tho tine when tho
dofondant Hovon actod as deputy for *. Ding, no infections woro nndo.


2265


30 Jan. 4? -A-14-1-PKP- Blaklcy
Court Ho. 1

These entries aro corraboratod by the testimony of tho witnesses examined
by the prosecution, who stated that the defondant Haven did not porform any
experiments. Witness Dr. Kogon declared that tho defondant Haven could not
begin any experimental serivs on his own initiative, but that only Dr. Ding,

as head of tho experimental station, could make decisions in this matter

♦

(p'.re 1210 of the German transcript). The witness Kirchhciacr stated,
corroborating the testimony of tho witness Dr. Kogon, thrt all tho typhus
experiments wore begun by Dr. Ding, (page 1360 of tho Gorman trans<y*ipt).

Only Dr. Ding infected the exporimenUl subjects. The dofendant Hovon, os
the witness Kirchheimor uxplicitly stated, was not in a position to provent
the experiments aftor tho experimental persons had boon infected by Dr. Ding.
According to Klrchhoimer's statements, the defendant Hovon never had a v .
vaccination noodle in his tonds, and never ©ado any injoctions on tho
experimental persons (page 1355 of tho Gorsnn transcript).

Of docisivc importance in this regard should bo tho furthor testimony
of the witness Kirchheimor that during a poriod of li years, namely from tho
ond of 1941 until thobeginning of 1943, the defendant Hovon entered tho /
sard ofBlock 46 only twice. Thu witness hereby left roco for tho possibility
that the defendant Hovon wqs only visiting tho Jowish prisoner Cohn, who was
employed in the wnrd as chiof male nurso and whoso lifu tho defondant
Hovon had saved (page 1355/6 of the Goman transcript).

If the defendant Hovon had boon active in Block 46 as Dr. Dixy's deputy,
then ho would tovo had to enter the ward more than twice during 1 i years.

So far as tho infection through typhus-boaring lico in Novoebor 1942 is c
concornec., tho following facts aro clear from Dr. Ding's diary - Document JO-
265, page 36 of the German and pago 38 of the English Document Book 12 .

1. Through the infection by lice no persons died. Tho test persons did not
even fall sick, for according to diary entry of 4 January 1943 five persons
showed only atypical illnesses of short duration, i.o. illnesses which tod
no causal relation tb tho infection through lice (Document Book 12 , page 40
of the German and page 41 of the English.)

2) Lice wore sent to Buchenwald coly twice. Both shipments were destroyed
(page 39 of tho Gerncn, page 40 of the English Document Book 12 ).


2266


30 J?n. 47 -A-14-2-PKP- Blakley
Court So. 1

Regarding this the witness Dr. Kogon testified that it ns the defendant
Hover. who ordered the destruction of the lico (page 1203 of the German t
transcript). The witness Kirchheiatr has confirmed thoso statements by Dr.

Kogon (pago 1351, 1353 of the Gorman transcript).

It will be proved that the dofendant Hoven: a) did not order or carry
out any typhus experiments in Block 46 whatsoever;

b) that ho consontod to Dr. Ding's appointment of him as deputy for Block
50, afor a short tine also for Block 46, only upon request of the under¬
ground caap go Vermont. This was done in order to enr.blo him to accccnodato
political prisoners who were endangered, especially non^Goraan subjects, in
the wards 46 a«i 50, ar*i it will be proved that his activities as doputy
consisted only in this assistance to the political prisoners.

As far as the soloction of tho persons for typhus experiments is concornod
the testimony of tho witness Dr. Kogon proved that the defendant Hovon did
not soloct all tho tost persons for tho typhus experiments. (In this connection
I refer to pn;c 1197 of the Gorman transcript). According, to tho transcript,
tho method of solocting tho tost persons differed ct different times. V
Volunteers were used in tho first two experiments. Later on the tost pornons
»«re picked by tho a) camp physician or SS camp coemandant, b) mtionnl
Criminal Police Burear (Kripo). Towards tho erx! transports errivod from
other camps for those typhus experiments.

Accordingly, tho dofendant Hovon pickod only a small nuobor of tho tost

0 .

‘ parsons.

I shall now prove:

a) that the defendant Hoven chose only Gorman habitual criminals for tho
experiments; and furthermore, b) that tho dofendant Hovon took ovor tho
seloction of prisoners on tho express request of tho underground camp
gjverancnt in order to prevent other* than German hrbitual criminals from
being used in these experiments.

„s to the further charge against tho defendant Hoven that ho took port
in tho execution of the euthanasia'program, it has already boon proven by tho
testimony of the witness Dr. Hennache th"t the defondont Hovon had no part in
it whatsoever, ffcither did the -efondant Hov^n select prisoners for euthanasia.


2267


30 Jen. 47 -A-lir- 3 -FKP- Blckloy
Ccurt Ho. 1


nor did he give other orders for the carrying out of the euthanasia program*

%

According to the testimony of the witness Dr. Munnockc, prisoners of the
concentration carp Buchenw*ld were selected for the execution of the
euthanasia program in the years 1940 and 1941 by a nodical comaission which
caae frem Berlin and of which Dr. Menoocke was a member.

This comission filled out its own roports for overy prisoner who was to
be killed. Those reports were sent to the Reich Ministry of the Interior,

■here they were examined by three exports independently of one author
(page 1880 of the Goraan trenscrlpt of 17 January 1947). After the exports had
givon their decisions on tho basis of the roports, another commission
passed final Jud^ont. On tho basis of this final judgment the transfer of
tho persona intonded for the outhanasia prograa to tho euthanasia institutions
ms ordored by Borlin(pcgo 1881 of tho Gsrscn transcript). The Bornburg
asylum was docidod upon as tho one to bo used as the euthanasia institution
for tho prisoners froa Buchenwald Concentration Canp.

It is therefore incorrect when tho prosecution assorts:

The dofondant Hovon as chief physician of ftichorwnld Concentration Camp
took part in tho euthanasia prograa ani porsonnolly ordered tho trnnsfor of
at least 300 to 400 Jewish prisoners of various nationalities to tho
Bornburg euthanasia station where they wore killed (page 107 of tho German
ini pogo 59 of tho English transcript of 9 Docorabor 1946). Tho high
Tribunal will remember tho chart which was oxplrinod in this court by tho
prosecution. This chart showed tho offices that took part in tho outhanasio
prograa. Tho dofen-lant Hovon did not oven appear on that chart. These
explanations. In connection with the testimony of tho witnoss Dr. Uonnccke,
show without a doubt ttat the defendant Haven could not have given tho orders
is assorted by the prosecution. The transfer wes ordered by Borlin offices
after the export and the final cootaission h^d given thoir decision. Tho witness
Lr. Honnocko testified in addition that the defendant Hoven did not take part
in selecting the prisoners for the euthanasia program. 1 refer in this matter
to page 1930 of the Goraan transcript. Dr. Uonnecke also testified that the <•
cefendant Hoven did not bring the prisoners intended for the euthanasia
prograa before the comission (page 1938 °f the German transcript).


2268


30 Jan. 47 -A-14-4-PKP- Blakley
jourt Jio. 1

according to the testimony of th* witMM Or. Memcckc, the entire activity
of the defendant Koven in the progmm Ming carried out by Dr. Uennockc
consisted in greeting the witness Mennecke in 1941.

He did not even seo the dofondant Hoven during the previous visit of
the witness Dr. Hennecku at Bucherald in 1940. This is understandable since,
according to Document NO-591, submitted by the prosecution, defondant Hoven
was not yot worlds; in tho concentration ccap at Buchorfcald in 1940.

Thus it nay be accepter! as proved by evidence submitted bj^the proaocution
thet tho defendant Hoven did not participate in the euthanasia program.

beyond ttot, cn the basis of testimony given by th* witnosses Dr. Kogon
an! Kirchhoiaor it is to be accepted as proven that tho dofondant Hoven, In
collaboration with tho urvlergroun^ camp govuranont at Buchoriwald, prevonted


the execution of euthanasia progr


vC camp govorar
ran^U f 13 by


substituting countor-action


13 f 14. That persons, dosigrtfted for euthanasia by Dr. L'onnocko, especially
tho 1200 Jewish prisoners, wore net transported to Bomburg is especially duo
to tho intervention of the defondant Hoven (pages 1238, 1292, f n! 1295 of tho
German transcript).

I therefore request that the defendant Hov^n be acquitted of the chargo
tbit ho participated in the oxccution of tho euthanasia program.

In the event that this application bo rejected, I shall submit further
proof that tho defendant Hoven did not participate in tho execution of tho
euthanasia program, and that, moreover, he took counter-measures to koop
this program from being into dffcct.

On tho basis of the ovidonce submitted by tho prosecution thus far only
the following facts stand:

Tho defendant Hoven participated in the killing of prisoners. Tho killing
jf those prisonors, however, was in no wise connected with tho euthanasia
pragma.

»ith regard to this I shall prove that:

1) the number of these killings was considerooly lower then tho witness
looahild, for example, stated;

2) th'.t these persons without exception, were not political prisoners and

especially not foreigners, and, above ell not subject to tho United Jfctions,

2269


JO Jan. U1 -A-U-5-FKP- Blakloy

Court No. 1

but exclusively Go roan habitual criminals who acted as informers for the SS

4

caap management and tho Secret Police;

3 ) that all these killings were carriod out at the instigation of tho under¬
ground caap government;

U) that by each killing the lives of a groat number of porsons were saved,
i.o. of political prisoners and Jews, end particularly of subjects of tho
United nations.

5 ) that thoro was no other way to save these ondr.ngerod persons than kill
these SS and Socret Police informers.

In order to prove this I do not hve to refute tho evidence submitted by
tho prosecution; end I do not need to present anything thr.t has not boon
discussod already in this rooo. Tho witnossos whoa 1 shall call end the
documents I shell autait will suppleaent tho testimony alroady given by tho
jdtnesses for the prosecution. 1 shall prove that all tho killings in which
tho dofondant Hovon took part wore exactly analogous to the case Kushnir
Kuahnaruw doscribod by tho witness Dr. Kbgon. Dr. Kogon, e person with high C
Christian ethical and moral concepts, a witness far superior to the aver ago
prosecution witnossos, a witness whose truthfulnoss cannot bo doubted in tho
slightest, expressed the following opinion about tho killing of Kushnir
Sushnarew: "I porsorwlly as a convinced Christian do not i.ony those pooplo tho
rifht to hr.vo killed indisputably dangerous porsons in this emergency who
in collaboration with tho SS endanger tho lives of individuals or a largo
nuaber of porsens in tho camp." (Pago 1298 of tho Gorman transcript.)

Tho Tribunal, however, would have no true picture of tho dofondnnt
Hovon if I should fail to prove that tho dofendnnt Hoven had savod numerous
political prisoners from certain death and holped many of thorn to find
free dec, particularly non-Gorcans, Jews, and subjects of the United Stations,
inder peril of his own life. This concerns among others numerous non-Gcrraan
persons ondangcrod by the Night and Fog (ffecht und Hebei) Decree.


2270


criminal y tho DfT.


Ac cor Inc to tho decision of the DC persons are not to be chargod with
ncnborshlp In SS organizations designated as crininnl, if a) they with!row
bofore 1 Soptor.bor 1939; b) the state had placod then in tho ranks of the SS
in such a way as to loave tlfcx; no choice whatever in tho matter (pago 16527 of
tho Gorman transcript of 30 September 1946.)

On tho basis of this decision of the IKT I shall prove that tho defendant
Hotoc received an order on 26 August 1939 to report for active duty with
tho Waffon SS and thus; a ) loft tho Allgoooino S9- to which he had beloved
slcco 1934; b) was pressed into the ranks of tho Waff on SS, caupulsorily anl
•gainst his will.

I shall provo in particular that tho ordor to report for octivo duty with


the Waff on SS had tho same legal forco as tho oxdor to roport for actlvo duty
with tho arcod forcos, and that it was Jest as impossible for a ren der of tho
Waffon SS to rosign during tho war -s it was for a xxnbor of tho amod foroos.

DR. STHIE/jm (For tho Dofondont Beicl^oock):

Uonbors of tho Court:

In uodost an1 sinplo laxxguago, but I hopo nono tho loss offoctivoly, 1 an
Going to oxplain to you in a characteristic outline tho prlnolplos in accor-
d»nco with which I »*n intoeding to put forward tho arguments in favor of ny
follow countrymen, tho defondant. Dr. Wllholm Boiglboock, univorslty profosnor
la Vienna.

In tho big trial against Goorlng anl othors, I havo had alroady an oppur-
t unity of roll vine tho growth and tho disapponr-nco of Adolf Hltlor's Rolch
Wlch w-.a finally marked by tyranny, oaslcvonont, war and Jungor, torror and
=ms Oird or. in this trial wo a:.aln hrd to hoar about blood shod, cruoltlos,
aalloa, assassiactioa and mass auxdor. Both trials havo ono thing in canon,
Mhjly, that tho victims wore chiefly non "behiwi b-j-bod wiro* whoso normal

alroady was to bo deprivod of their f rood on, to havo to corvo as slr.vos,
to suffer hunger, long, drawn-out sickness and early doath. Public opinion,
^1=C almost crushed by tho worries for thoir daily broad, follows tho War

Trials which continue ono after another with an ovor-docreusing latorest


2271


30 Jen 47-^?JC-15-2-?oater
Coart So. 1

a3* views In particular the so-called doctors' trials, as the oapty gnllorlos
show, with reluctanco and inn or reserve. TMs ie duo to the fact that the
noa who are here indicted should not open wounds but heal then, and that

y

they should not kill but nrevont deathl But this circunstanso doos not only
Involve tho danger of biased publicity but also thrt wo, the guardians and
servants of Justice, unconsciously boccco hard, thus unjust, in view of tho
strongly optical offocts of the facts with which wo are hero concerned unloso
wo pay the Greatest attention also to tho so-callod lnnor facta . For this
ro-.soa I an coinc to bogin by roplylng in r^r defonse to the quostlbn: who is
this Dr. Bvjielboock?

1. Persona 11ty: '

;.o tho son of a country doctor, ho had personal oxporlonco fron the
lays of his oarly chilhood of tho Joys and sufferings of tho uedlcal profossion
end choso out of ldoalim the occupation of a doctor as his lifo's uork. I
ru going to prove to you by questioning tho dofondaat hixaolf, by subletting
docuoonts, in particular cortiflcatos frai hlo to-.chors, by prosontlng to
you tho long list of his works, that tho .‘rosocutor was not wrong whon ho
said of


2272


Court I

>0 J'n h7-A - 15-la - LX - Foster


Esiglboeck: -that he, although still young in years, is, nevertheless,
known for possessing remarkable scientific aptitudes." Beiglboeck had
tbe good fortune of meeting among his teachers two people #iose names are
imortal in the history of medicine. They are the two internists, Frant
Chvostek, head of the Th*rd Medical Clinic at Vienna, and Hans Enpinger,
head of the first Medical Clinic at Vienna. Chvostek enphasizes at the
conclusion of his certificate not only the scientific abilities, the
Industry of his student, but, abov* all, his humane attitude towards
the patients entrusted to his care. Epplnger, the famous internist who
counted the most prominent statesmen like Marshal Stalin among his patients,
calls Beiglboeck in his certificate his most capable student. Chvostek
and Eppingsr are already doad, and the two certificates originate fran a
period bofore the experiments which are here under review, thorefore,
must bo considered as correct and unobjectionable docuaonts.

I can, thereforo, sum up ry remarks about tho personality of tho
defendant by saying that the words apply which Euripldos, tho great Grook
poet of tragedieo says about Anaxagoras, the philosopher*

“Happy is the man who achieved knowledge
For the bonefit of rosoarch t

Novor ho fools tho urge to make his neighbor suffer.

Nor is ho driven to do wrong for such motives f
II. Order free Above:

Ity second line of argument is going to bo the reply to tho quoation
as to how it is possiblo that a nan of such high qualities finds himself
lr. the defendants' dock as an alleged criminal. The saiai question was
asked by the Heidelberg psychiatrist. Dr. Mittscherlich, the head of the
joraan Doctors' Delegation, when he wrote: "In the defendants' dock there
are side by side with scientifically meaningless doctors exports of great
reputation. Free the prison witnesses with prominent nines are brought
in. Two famous scientists have ccrsitted suicide in connection with this
trial. These events prove that in passing Judgment on tho ovents, con¬
siderations of a purely legal and criminalistic nature will not suffice;

2273


Court I

30 fee 17 - k - 15-2a - LX - Poster


that, on the contrary, the question rust be asked how it could happen
that such aen found theaselves in the defendants' dock."


30 Jre>-15-lb-A-.C3-To a to r-J?
Coart I


I ic not going to reply to the question of the ethical notives as a
defense counsel until I deliver rxj final ploa, and I an going to linit
nysolf at this stage to the purely legal aspect of tho subject. Tho
reply is: 3eiglbocck vas forced to uadortako tho soa-vater experinonts
for which he is indicted an<? has carried then out against his will, act¬
ing upon "an or dor fron abovo" os a soldior. I an, of course, well awaro
of tho fact that tho Chartor of August, 1945 and Control Council Law 10,
which is tho ooro dlroct basis of this trial, provides in Articlo 4,
Paragraph 2, that tho fact that a nan acted undor tho ordor of hie ouporior
deos not roliovo hin of his responsibility, but that this fact nay bo
consldorod an an attenuating circunstanco. This, howovor, noroly noma
that roforonco to "an ordor fron abovo" nlono is not sufficient to
oxonorato a dofondant but that this provision is by no noans intondod to
rondor it inpoosiblo to i-voke generally valid principles of law such
as tho exclusion of guilt on tho grounds of foar and coorcion. Fow no,
fortunatoU» have a very remarkable precedent in this question, nanoly,
the verdict of the International Military Tribunal of ilurnberg which
declares in respect of Article 8 of the Charter: "that a soldier was
ordered to kill or torture in violation of the International Law of
Var has never been rocognixed as a defense to such acts of brutality,
though the order nay be urged in mitigation of the punishment. The true


nations not the crlptence of the ordor but whether a morale cholco wan
in_fgct possible .

I shall provo to you beyond doubt by questioning the dofondant hira-
oolf, by producing evidence froa superiors and colloaguoo, by submitting
letters written by the dofondant during the critical period that the
defondant did everything in his power to disassociate hlcsolf from tho
experiments which were contrary to his high conception of the profession
of a doctor.


S3 Ja^-A-15-lb-A7D-7o ■ ter-JP
Court I


A.) T^_


Although It la contrary to the natural sense of justice to render
any one responsible under criminal law for offensos ooaaittod by
Other rorsons. the lndlctaotft has. nerertholess, attenpted to rondor
the defendant, Belglboedc, responsible together with the other defendants


on all counts. In ny final ploa


50 Jen 47-A-SW-15-l-C-Fbster
Court Mb. 1


I shell not only Joel fron the legal point of viow with tho quest¬
ion of the "orvlor fron above," but I shell elso oxprosa on opin¬
ion on the problen of tho logr.l cherector of tie so-called con¬
spiracy. At this ate -o of tho procoodings I shell doal only very
briefly with tho local cspocts by saying that tho Prosocutor had
no ji stificatlon r.t r.ll in this trial to uso tho ergunont of
conspiracy sinco tho nost iuportrot olocont, nonoly, tfco^logal foun¬
dation is lacking: if wo turn to 'Control Council Uv 10 for a
uooont, we find that only participation in a coixron design or a
conspiracy in connootion with a crirao against poaco is puni3hablo
(Artlclo 2,1a). For this roason I an not going to say ono worl about
the othor oxporinonts, although it would certainly bo tonpting
to oxpross an opinio, as a Jurist on tho question of Euthanasia.

At any rato, ono this clo rly rosults fron tho docunonts. Exhib¬
its Ho. 129 to 137 subtilttod by tho Prosocution: that tho dofon-
i-nt, 'ioiglboock, has hx nothin'- to Jo with tho plrnnlng of tho
r.llo'-od crir.os. I an -dna to provo by questioning hin .and his
co-dofond:nta that ho know only two of tho so-callod conspirators.
Those woro Handlosor, who onco gave a nilitrry nodical locturo
In Vionna c. Ion " tino beforo tho w. r, and *>chrr.odor whom ho know
~.a his suprono superior Juot r.e . ny soldior knows tho nanos of
his gonorals without over having had any closor associations with
thou. Boigloboock subsoquontly not dockor-Froysong and Scha.ofor.

All ho can bo inlictod for fron tho point of viow of crininal law,
thoroforo, is his cooporation in tho oxocution of thoso oxpori '.onts
■'nd this loads no to tho noxt point of tho procoolings:

B.) T1 o Crininal Cfc.,r.. tor of tho Exporinonts in General:

1.) Tho Prosecution considers oxporinonts as

1.) T/ar crinos.

noro priru. facio const Aeration cf tho Prosocution docunonts
rovoals that there c:n novor bo -ny quostion of war crinos for

-lo sinpla ro..son th. t such war crinos. accordin'- to articlo lib.

2276


30 J n 47-..-S’.7-lS-2-C-Fostcr
Ccurt Ko • 1


of ConCT ol Council ... 10 o_n only to .—*« in ro.poct of
„ c ^ on ..la of 0111*1 countrio.. -1 the ?™..cutio» utterly
f U oi to pro.ont proof of 0.1. to th. ^un.-.li I- 7 . P°«"
; p5 rou ina you in tMf connootlon of O, SOS .ell *

z ——- - —- ~ “* -r

. nty wuro t,o inru-to. -let » » — - f ° r “° 7 !;t0r

oxporluonta?" a* 1 . roplll. »X ~ ««• “« r ^


r jurt So* 1

3C Jar. 47-l-16-l-IE»-Kolcy


(.«. 4,3 of th. t,™ record). The U»m, Vle«. n!.° te.tifled thet

tt , .ohj.ct. of the experluente vere vl.h»t exception
OT . 1 „. I ehalli therefore. not utter . .!«!• vord .tout «r crln.e «
ou. et«. end I an nov turMu to the oueetloo M to aether the eo.-uet.r
.ro.rtu.ut. reproeent eo-c.U, crlne. «.in.t huu.Mty. Control Council
u . 10 «,r.e .0 defimtlou Wt content, t.e.lf «lth eitl« «»• !•

-order, r.oo, end other =.... of tnh^n treutuon, of ,h. ct.iltnn Popul.-

tlon.

„ 1 . nn old erportono. of 1» thet th. oroe.ou.or «».*• loud.r n»d
oor. ecphotlcally vhoncr.r th. fnot. .. .uch furnt.h only Itttl. proof.
Therefore, the chief ~o.o tutor « conp^.ttr.ly little ehout the n...
curler, vhtch h-r. .hechod th. clvtlt.ed vorld hecue. they ..oh. for thon-
e.lvee. hut he ho. ..Id rol.ttr.ly uuch .tout ...-.Ur omertnente. I
e*U. therefore. d.el .« n, T«un.n» of proof tn th. ftr.t piece utth
B ) the character thu experiments
to) the manner &f th*lr ©x-icutlcn.

* 1 . «otn* to pro,. t- you ty ..« lent the def.nd.nt htneelf. ty
product* ... expert., the eo.-v.ter oxpertn.nt. -A* hed t..

rr.ecr.hod to n, oltent free the out... up to th. -»»» -

nlcced under . eut..,u,nt Chech vero .xp.rln.nt. vhtch eld ho .topped .t
. w accent. In th. eeno vny I *o .o.re, to prove to you thet Dcthlhooch. .«
w rate, eotu^ly dtd tntorrupt thee. .xPortnont. o„l, ono«h to

render . dn=«. to the e»h>ct.' honlth cult, tupoeethle. . «1- -
or a completely h*rzl«e. Injection va. eufficient to re.tore to the ^Jeot

hie full efficiency.

Iu hl. opening ep«=h donor.l Teylor ..Id. 'The cxp.rtnent. »ro pro

ducod nothin* that could.he ut.ltrod for ctrtltrod nolle In.- < *

Gorurn rocord). I -t very definitely contradict thl. concootlon. So
^ ns there notion., th.ro exl.t. .1.0 the -eh. rnd 1, hr.

O-y. teen on nln. vhlch It me -rthvhlle to 1 — *• — “
vhich 1. on el«.nt nr.ll.hlo In .uch Irr*. —title., ecrrlco.hlo to hu-


iee , p^cicm- u «=.. - -■ - ■*"- '• “

i —X. —ft- — *“ “ r ■' ltCtl,t ‘ ° f 7
unci«— -—- •-— ,o ,=i ”• ^ ; 0 thll

r .^ loi ... — »«.. i -a — *°»- —— vor “

— - u * u . .- «••*• —• “ s 77 7‘

c „ Ukl nton. froi — r~ - - «- —“ “ l “ tl *“ ,h °

u ; ... .... U t. «- —“ -  •“*,

,.!« -lob 1. * M * ° rlM - KM ‘

«u «m.——- -*«“ iu ' iw * * ooe of tho *;;;

„ «—«.«. --——• —•  777

,. 1 « tin. Wor. tk. 0 .r=xn 5th..f.r Wdcl.d It.

C «, VU1 turn .l«h herror fr~ th. -W «hl«h nr. tb. —

of thl. Indietnont, «h r. «... ft— * *“ -Wl

„.cb.r; tut ... tnw .111 cl«rlr r..uu ft- - *

- -—*• - - - ~ 7 1 :;:

lutplolon in front of .orld ft*. -pin .on W — thn. non

cxn.riuoati — .men tn. indict* te ‘

„ contribution to 0lT.U..tl=n «d bun.nltjr.

, no. prop. to turn to th. U.t point of * —»

tb. crlninnl cbnrrct., —» - — - — '«» ^

cm. out. ,o chief P r,ccu,or bo. - -t -« - — “ “
,uc.cb. H. acntlon.* in pnrt.cuXnr tb. .on vnt.r — -

prrtlculrrlp .trlbln, - - «“• — ~ ^ “

1. of fi .lbtln. . — — - ~ ““ ” 7771 .

tb. — V.bruncbt vltbln . ft. hour, t, rep, to - —

tlon end . ririw. If «, bed bnd to W tb. ~U — of t.o do „

for .neb .ubloct. tb. -on. Pblc. .bleb -1- — 7 ‘2 [ t
Z tb.. nubt bur. con.ld.red tb. nntt.r nor. cr.fuUr - — -

::. —-——- 7771

.0 «r. t,tur.d, ,.. : bnr. tb. *».t«t -ft- - - - 77

cutor .0 ororot blc.lf to,, -nent - — » ° U ' ‘


Court So. 1

3C Jtn 4?-A-16-3-13K-*aloy


.«. U ,1. «~h — *. «— E ^ f ' * h ‘

>utalt ,o « MU «-* “ — 14 - «* “ tM C “ PCt "‘ eXPert * “

,iv« rculie. on special quctlcn. of detail.

DiCU= ent ibit » 132. report of the technical office of the Air

jorce to the Belch-fuehrer SS. nov .hove that tvo asthma for rondorin^

.ter drinkable ver« under dlac-i- «* -thod invented by Schaefer.

for «. nor. ..«« »P of «* *UU *"

 of Iron ,nd «.« - «P— - - «" «

U.M. M UP Po Pon. of pur. '-«» ~ *-

.,1. proooo. nor, PM. M *-«-» !«««. U ””

Ml Mi U P-- — ~ —* °° lh ' “ ,h “ 1<r “

nothod rtoulrod no .poclM -M-M «- “

MU ond ,no. off.rod Pho po.MMUPP of M U—PU. V -
Luftvaffo end the navy.

A ( .. .dovn * «h. «*. PoU« «— <““ M » to ‘° r 1!7> U8 '

»> PP. 3-rKo ooPh.d W on tho POP unfororpPlo UU«r M

m* on. or Colon.l M «* *'• °" th ° 4 ^ ' ,P ° nly

^ M» Of .fficPlvon..*. in .P». 01 •» *« — ^

, V „ n CT „ n .uch snail profit could not bo turned do*n
ty tho aedical prufeaalon. cv«n .ucn

>uh BaffIcl.nP e.rP.inPy .n «r .« .« «- — * “ “ M " “ ^
for ... «M. TM. M.o l* nn UPinM* roo.nUod

,U. 11" o— *° f ‘” r ,h “ 4 6y

cv.d.neo .Mod Ph. fnnou. pParnnooloK... of B.rUn »«"« *• ~
vu; *.. M V- nonPlonnd, PP, — “

. on ;..or,odPonroUonPnpPoPM.—■ • ^ ~

m »»*.—«— « - ~' f “ - ,h "; '7

. m.. ^ «• - mite

^-.fd-d... p-——■ “ - - in th ‘ :;r

.nporP^P oue.Pion .. .. -» - — ^ ^ V.P-

o,rr,d on.. « -1 ^ V - — “ ^ ^
no.... PMP u P" 11". PI-". ^-T 1 ''


C'^urt So. 1

3C Jen ^-J.-lo-3-lHK-Haloy


in a. w-* *- 1 Stsff ' tat h * lW4

,o th. prince thnt U .We h. Uf. » ~* *°

, 1Y . renlle. on .p«l«l «u..t»on. of d.t.ll.

_«» HW «-« «. "»» - *“ “ ehnl ^ ° fflC ” 01 ,h ° A ’ r

Iorc . ,o th. B.lc-fu.hr.r SS. no. .ho- th., t« —•

... -,.r drinkable «r. ond.r duel- » *— * 5 ^ Cf ° r '

v ,,h for Oh. .■»>« »P - - ——“ r00Ul " 4 tV °

«. too. of iron tad coo.* - «P— - *" ‘“' 4 " 4 *"

u, V. thr .0 ton. of pore .ll.« W.h» for th. Pro¬
duction proto.., nod. thl. nothod pmctldl, ltpo..lU. In ,U. of «*« *

-.t.rlnl ohort«e In th. o.r»n »nr »«- °* - •»« “ *“

nothoe r.oulred no .pocUl nW.c.orln* Ph rod no hottl.-n.ch r„
caterlol. rnd tho. offr.d ,h. P-lhUlt, of .pood, Introdootlon t, th.

Luftwaffe cad the ntvy.

xa 1 . .b- hr th. Tlonnr polio. r.oord (Whit, ^ 1*. -

*, tho Burxn noth. - W tho tot unfcorohl. or.UolnrrP ori¬
ent. eorriod oot hr Colonel *U -hod op.nod op -W

^UlhU prcp.ot. of offectl.cn.... In .*» of .U tho dooht. orpr....d
hr th. n.dlonl prof...Ion, «.« .ooh .nnU profit oooid not ho turnt, “°

.Uh .offlo,.nt cor,-lot. In ~r nt th. tin. .hon . *r.at « <«"

for It. .xl.t.nco, Thl. U~ W nn Int.rnrtlonUlr r.c*nltod .clon-

tu. llh. th. cllnlcnl phy.lci.n BpplnBor to f.vor th. ro-oxonlno.tl

..ld.no. -hlch «... f« phnrnacol!.. of Berlin Unl-r-ltr, Pr o. ,

. .ha. already boon nontlonod. th. «P-« nroc.dor.

:i:..cr,od ton, client OP to th.Wlo.te.t.1,, H - forth-

h. th-vn h, th. .ho,. Cdonc. thnt th. -f— of th...

on hunrn .oh.oct., -oh nr. ,n thon.ol... ooltc -ml..., 1- —

Ratified. Th. P.n.1 l.o,or. howe.er, U “  ~

..«--—- - --• T r ::..t-

.or. erriod oot. . W1 pro., h, th. h-rl« of th. dcf.ndnnt -W«

no.... thnt in th. flr.t pUC. .coordl« to XPP^.. orcpo.1,

2 co-J


_te W to * P— —^ "

^ rj rer tt „ =« — and thl« -U — »"» " ™ °J .
w * t-t «. -M~ - — — "" ^

z x. •. -—- -—^ - 1 " :

,0 M8l e« - X«t tt «■. “ - 111 ^ ^ W

r—«—- >—-*~ -

„ *. —-r - - •— BOiSlbMCk ‘ h " I

^ to co-t in th. operation - — «• — —‘

v

■snU wore


30 juv ■-A-ATO-*feloy

Court So* 1


Mrrl ^ on. The concentration camp and it, method, .cm absolutely urknen
to bln. and they ha„ cc to hi. horrified kmcledge fd 1" th. coumo of
tide trial. it jo Chau they had deliberately kept him .pd^ fK- everything.
Mt finally. I am altk, happy to Sheri th the 1*1# of original notes cade
by the mediool assistants InVhese concentration camp exporimnta "hieh have
haen found end by affidavit. made by the., same persona that Boiglbeoolc
garrlod out these experiment. .hich he had been ordered gainst his rill
„ a soldier to perform. dfr exporimnting on him elf and in accordance
!Tlth the rules and precautions of nodical science.

The,, doeusenta -hen oxmrlnod by expert, -ill she beyond doubt
that the experiments hsd no laatlng dmmglng effect. and caused no death
.song the subjects. They rill objectively refute the contradictory eridonco
of the prosecution ritneasa. .ho esthomd their knclcdge from hearsay.

Frm this it must be concluded, hcovor, that them can be no
quoatlon of crime .Ealnat humanity either. In conclusion I can therefore
say that if the evidence «hlch I shaU protore only yield half of .hat can
be expoeted, the rid. atmorim of Cmrgo. emoted by the pmseoutlen on
the subject of .cantor experiment, rill coll.*., like a houae of card,
and give effect to my sutal.slon to acquit my client. Prof. Dr. Blegiboook,

I should be happy shout this h.oauso I-mqld thereby have contributed tor
w Part to preserving an onlnont physician and nan for my country -hloh
mod. every man for its moonatruoUon, and I -ruld fur the mom havo pmvod
that scientific research and tho physloito in the mom direct sonso am not
exclusive of *roh other but that they can .ell be . synthesis in the serrie.
Of hummty and for the benefit of suffering nartdni.

DP„ KARL TOFFXANi 1 tr. President, and Tour Honors i

The Prosecution has sutsdttod only .a «i»fle Jocunont gainst Dr.
Attolf POSOiWI, vritton by himself. This is his letter to HDKA dated
October 19la - Documnt t*-3S, Exhibit 1U2. The o- rcr document, .Mch
tho prosecution has sutrittri in this case am outoardly in no connection
rith the defendant Dr. iWDBK. They even, as Document 10-39, Exhibit
153 arxl tho fencing abes, start a ride nc causal scries, in .hich the


3D Jsn-j^lS-2*-Jl3>-Maloy-JP
Court I


.urgo.tlon of tho defend,. I». KtOPit i. ovor.hto.=d by tho ou^.tion
=a dc by .uch a powerful .gene, .. the deputy Gauleiter 1= Hiodordonsu.

^ho defondant vlll now toho tho witnoas * l “ d “ 4 el, ° tBo r0 “°°”
which led to hi. lottor - *xhlblt *o. 19«. So .111 poiht out that o.

. physician ond a person Interested In Botony ho .»o oourlncod, oftor
.tudyine tho puhllcotloa. of Dr. !'adauo ud Dr. loch, that tho plant
caladluCs fro. the nodlo^ point of rlov. doe. no. have a sp.cifKtoll,
.torlltsing offoct. and teat. fro. tho hotonlcal point of rlov, a plant
Udiconou. to north merle. e*mot ho grown In Gomany'on onoh a largo
,enlo that It would ho available In largo enough Sumtltio. for atorl-
lltatlon. So .111 explain .hy In hi. lottor ho «ld exactly tho oppo.lto
of .hat in hi. opinion «. tho truth. Ho vlll refer to a report which
h. received, that .torUl-tlon h, operation ... to ho carried out on a
Urge .calc, hut that It night ho po.tponod If there should ho any po.ol-
Mlit, of carrying out .uch .Mrlll«.lon hy now., of a drug. The do-
fondant Dr. Pohom, .111 .«.«= that It .a. hi. Inton.l n to dooo.ro hy
praising ..eh a drug and thu. to po.tpono tho .torll.aatlon by operation


as long as possiblo,

Tho Pro locution h». .Iro.d, Indicated that It doo. not propo.o to
admovlodgo .uch an ardent. (P. 557 of the Goman tran.crlpt). The
dofoadant Dr. Pohorny, ho.oror. .Ill .toll .l«o..eo to prove that ho
nontlonod thn.o con.ldar.tlon. ween ho .rot. hi. letter, and that ho ha.
not juat invented then nor. Tho defends. Dr. Pohom, .111. In addition,
reroal .hat tho Pro.o=u«on could not pro.ont, the fact that ho received
„ an ever to hi. letter and that ho In turn answered onoo nor., .o
that in *11 tho crlno. -1th which ho 1. charged hi. ectlvc p«t.clpa«..n


inrolYod only letters.

The defense will show that Stonier-e effort, to produce a .torili:
tion drug free cslad.un were un.ucce.sful. Tho -Itnoo.o. to ho oxanined
on thl. point ere the rospen.lbl. non of the hadau, Tim In Dresden. Tho
cuoal.t of the fira will dlscu.. the -d «mtho,ls of a caladlu.


2283 -


33 jai>. 16 - 2 »-Jr-JLTD-«aloy-JP

Co'zrt I


pl » t u tb. b.tbc».. rww. w »• <*» h “ ' dro * i; ' w Bro,10 ° o4
,„.«1 tl«. 14 16. "f *41. IrlU, the «Sl«i director of

the Itodam*


2283 (a)


Court lfc>* 1


nrc , riU appaar a. . 1««U #r. «WR -111 be .eked by the dtf.n .0 to -ho

artent he M-..H ball.vea ttat the BdenUflo aasertlen -hi* he cade,
that caladln oen b. teed to sterills. . hunn being, 1. true. He rill *l»o
b, .eked b, the dofene. -bather It ie .t all poeelbl. In precUce to produce
ccujh ealadlun to jueUfy oven thmdn,-: of poleoning by oaladlun. Finally,
he -111 ri. be .eked to to.tlfy, -hat progroee the ealadlun experiment, -hi
KDSlEa had ordered had node by the end of the »ar. It -111 then be eho-n
that the caladlun oxp.ria.nt. -erei at the end of the -ar, .till In the
.tag. of arinl experlaenbi and had net yet led to aw ueablo reeult. If the
ritnoa.ea fron the HiDiDS Fin In Draaden ehould In thl. oonnootlon not
aeon to be dl.lntora.tri ritnee.oa, Inetruotor (Dr. JDIC of the Ph.rn.oolo,
*ori ImUtut. of the University of -uortburg, -ho ho. been wiled by the
lefena. ae an export, rill disease objoctlvoly the eolontlflc value of
Dr. WDA'Bi urd nr. KOCH', the*, of et.rlllt.Uon -1th caladlun. Horwver,
ho rill .tat. ■pacifically -both* oaladlun is eapabl. of .terllitlns a
hunon being at all. He -HI flnlly .tat. ho. high the eoneral eolontlflo
value of drug, pro diced by the IimOS Fire Is and -hat Ooman physician,
thl* in general of the preparations -hlch the HIDAUS Fin ha. produced. Dp.
JDID »1U say In thl. oonr.ooUon that It 1. hi. opinion that Conan nodlwl
non kne fron cxporlcnc. that publications and drug. of.the HMUDS Fin do
*t have absolute eclontlflc validity, bocaue. It noetic considered that

this 1 . a fin -hose ain It 1 . olso to .HI the drug, -hloh It produce..
Finally, the defena. rill call ritr.o»e« -bo rill tetify to the reputation
tho polltloel attitude, and other conduot of th. defendant Dr. TOKOHNI
during M. civilian aoUrit, up to 19« a. -ril a. during hi. period of
military service. Evidence a, to Dr. WKOHHI'a stUtuda rill furthencro bo
-van bv nucorou. affidavit, -rich rill appear In the docunent book.


226k


33

Coart I


au Htnr.JOT: Sh. opening statement. hate no. boon concluded.

M3, iwmxi If the Tribunsl pleases, the Prosecution hn. .ororol

r _u s. to nskc concerning urtaln question, which here hcon raised

h, the opening statement. of the Defense Counsel to the Tribunal. Docs
,he Tribunal wish to adjourn prior to these rnnuts for the afternoon


rccoitT a

BE PiCSIDSBT: »=•» ore the noturc of the cements the Prosecution

desire, to coho ad ho. long -ill It toho to coho then! „

KB. HdLUmi They conc.rn briefly to notion, end the neture of

the notion, to diesis, cortoln par.gr.ph. of the Indictment «. conUlnod

lB . n'dbor of the opening sUt-ents. o. ..11 .. the .tuck on Count 1

of the Indictment; thnt i. to soy. the Count .hid, chorgo. con.plr.cy to

coff sIt war criaoa and crlno. a*nin«t hunar.ity.

The Proeecutlon. of oourso. is not propnred st this tlno to Cab¬
an, argument on sny of these points, but I think it would be «11 U
.o could roach sue a^.-.C « to tho corner in .hlch those question,
are to bo settled. In other words, tho Pro.ooutlon would look with
disfavor upon tho procedure now. to settle ench sad ovory notion to
dismiss prior to tho tine tho Defuse Counsel began to put in oridonco
on Wf of their defendants. Ko would prefer, if it 1. suitable with
the Tribunal, end with the Defense Counsel, to hare tho Tribunal rule
upon the particular notion, to dismiss, a. made by each Defense Counsel,
prior to or immediately after such Defense Counsel hu put in hi. approval.

IE PT3SIET: Tou coon tho rulings will bo node in tho ease of
each individual defendant -hoc that defendant has rested hi. c.soi


KB. KdUBTl That would suit tho Prosecution very nuch. Tho
problem is this; Tho first question raised by substantially all of the
opening statement. 1. the legal basis for the crlcc of conspiracy.

That quoction is coirr.on V* nil


2285


Court No* 1

30 to U7-* - 17-1* - LX - Beard

„ drftotots, .!«• «■* * -= — CMrS ' d ^ ^  ""

— - P-P-* “ —“ ‘ 6rl " th! ‘ ‘ P “ U “ “ *

r ,,.,r early date. I should think, .t tho laast, * ^ of next -oek,
sc that the Tribunal could et ^ tin. rule on the ,u.,tion of conspiracy.

, fl that's. it msy, I do not think there le ^ -e.sity *- * ^
that particular Ration hec.ua. . do not think It affect, the rights of
^ of th. defendant, in eo far a. proof 1. concern^. In other -«*.
a conspiracy 1, «d. out normally by .being the parUcipation of th.
defendants or their connection 1 th the subsequent ci».| that is, 1 th
th. crises as alleged in Count II or th. cine, again.! hunanit, a.
alleged in Count HI, and ehlch is not normally th. subject of .operate
proof in and of itself.

and, I should think that ehateeer the ruling nay be on th. conspiracy
question, each of th. defeats 111 put in all of th. proof that he
ha. available, that he -as not connecUd in any sub.Untlal .toner 1 th

any of th. crises charged there - Counts II and III.

*. to the notion to dial.. 1 th respect to certain paragraph, of
Count II, there nay bo a slightly different question there ehlch night
retire an early ruling by th. Tribunal, but even a, to that I am not sa-e.

The third question 11 ch has b~n raised by the opelng .Mtone.t
1 . that a nu*er the defendant, have been ..plicated by proof of crlninl
experinents ehlch wore net explicitly particularised in the Indlctnent.

For exsnple, the blood coagulation, fleckfieber and -arfaro experiments.
The Defense Counsel uniformly have taken th. poeltion that they are going
to ignore this proof on the ground they -ere not claimed 1 th the crine.
ehich ire Involved in the experinents. As to that point, I should think
there mould necessarily have to be a ruling by the Tribunal before any

affected by such proof, has conpl«tod his case.


defendant, who is


-fi jaai-ry-«-DJG-17-lb*9>-ard
Court Ko. 1


«nd, I might say, without octsftdetf argueeent, that the Prosecution takes
tht position thet the defendants hft*« been sufficiently charged under para¬
graph 6 of the Indicta-nt with having committed war crimes, in that they
performed medical experiments cn involuntary human beings which resulted in
surd era, tortures, and other inhuman acts.

The sub-paragraph of paragraph 6, purports to give particulArs^of certai.
of such experiments, but it is explicitly stated in the Indictment, and in
par-graph 6 that the experiments were not limited to th' e jjarticulariaed.

The Prosecution urges that, because we have made every effort to advise the
defendants in great detail of the nature of tho crimes with which they aro

charged, wo should not thereby be limited in submitting our proof and incrim-

• •• *

inating these defendants because they happen to have been involved in ono or
tho ether experiments which aro not particularised in tho Indictment. This
laat point I should think, would roqui.- an -arly ruling by tho Tribunal.

Tho ruling on tho motion tc dismiss, and particularly on tho conspiracy Count,
I think, could bo handled on an individual basis sometime boforo tho defen¬
dant had rested its case. a

To rule on ell of those questions, as raised by the defendants, would
put cn intclorablo burden upon tho Prosecution in preparing the nocossory
briefs for all 23 defendants, and would also require extended study by tho
Tribunal before a ruling could be roachod, and this would result in a delay
in tho continuation of tho presentation of the defendants ovidenco for, I
should thirk, a minimum of c wcok, and very likely aich .ongor then that.

So, ny position is that wo bo p-.rn.ttod tc file brief on each defendant at
a time, I should hope, before he begins tc present his defense evidence.

Such briefs, of course, would be m do vailtfclc to the Dcfonse Counsel,


3D J az.—Jr-C?-17-1 o-5e ar d-JP
Court I

asd at sono point before tfco conclusion of his caso tho Tribunal would
reach a ruling on the question raised,

7rZ PH2SIIG2*7: The Tribunal will oak tho Counsol for tho Prooocution
•hat boforo tho defendants are call upon to proccod with their ovldonco,
the Prosecution ietonds, itsolf, to ask a disnlssal as to any oount
against any dofondant?

XP.. KcfiASZTl That nay woll, bo. Tour Honor. I an not propared, at
this tiro, to rako any dctallod statonont on thr.t point, but aftor a caro-
ful analysis of the proof as it has gono into tho prosocution's cnoo in
chiof, wo will attempt to bo quito liberal in ol 1 = 1 noting any points
which wo do not think wo gonuinoly in issuo and not gonuinoly provod
by tho Prosooution#

TK2 -KMSimtt It would aooo, as to tho objections rnisod by Dofoifto
Counaol, to cortnin ovldonco that has boon introducod, as not falling
within tho char£0s nanod within tho Indlctoont, that tho soonor that
quoation bo eo'.tlcd too bottor in ordor that tho defendants would know
what ovidor.ee they would fcavo to proper®. If that quootlon was not
eottlod until or.eh dofondant was callod, ho would probably fool onmpollod
to proparo ovldonco on those points which night or night not bo portinont.

KP.. KeSAHETt I think that is vory truo. Tour Honor, nnd that was
tho third p* int which I hnvo stated has bc:n ralsod tho oponlng statononts
of tho Dofcr.oo Codneol.

THE Fassmttli I understood tho Counsol for tho Prosocution, but
I had tho inproasion that tho Counsol for tho Prosocution though each
ono of thoso quostiono could bottor bo sottlod ns tho enso of each
individual dofendant was callod instead of sottling it in r.dvnnco. I
cay be incorrect. I nay have cisundorstood tho Counsol for tho Prosocution,

KR. IIcHAFET: I probably did not oxprosa nysolf clonrly. I think
tho question could probably be ruled upon rathor easily and without tho
sub=iB3ior. of any oxfcansivo briefs. It sinply is a question of whothor


or not tho


i


2283


JO jaa-*-G2S-17-W.-3««ri
Coart 33- !•


ctarfifl contained in paragraph 6 is proof enough to perait the Prosecution to
, # > a proof of experiments which are not particularised in *uVparagra--hs
of jyiragraph 6. And. once the Tribunal has decided one way or the other on

question t5ien it will be either incumbent on the defendants to Beet that
proof in their case or they =ay if they chose disregard it.

Of course, the evidenco. I think, no natter what way the Tribunal rules
on the question Just raised would be adnissible aai could be considered by
•a* Tribunal against the particular defendant, especially on the conspiracy
Count, and in any event, going to the notice and knowlodge of *he particular
dofennant; th^t ia, knowledge of the scope of medical oxporiaontatlone on
concentration camp lncates.

Going to the question of cdaiseiblllty of evidenco. it is simply a
TjUestlon of whether or not it now constitutes a charge of criaoa against
toe defondant upon whether he could be found guilty by tho Tribunal; and,
w.«t is the question whica, I think, would haoo to bo rulod upon probably
boforo any of the Defonse Counsel presonts any ovidonco In ordor thet thoy
would bo odvlood of the Tribunal's attitudo on that point.


2239


M


30 Ja&-Jr-JF-16-l-?itxgorald-JP
Court I

JUKE snusat Mr. XcHaney* tho Tribunal understand* as far as Count
II and Count III nro concerned, charges of cricos against Huaanity and
ver crinos they are in and of thonsolvos sufficient basis on vhich to
predicate proof of crlalnality. The particulars of sub-parngraphs A to
L, inclusive, are not a linitation upon the general allogata, but ooroly
descriptive particular* of tho gonoral criea chargod. Is that vhrt
you contend? A

J3U !!eEA23Yi That is corroct. Tour Honor.

IE. Fiaxzrot Attoraoy for tho Defondant Hrugovsky; Mr. President,
tho Prosocution has Just suggested that it did not soon dosirablo to
thon if tho Court should now docido whothor tho lndictncnt is insufficient
on cortain grounds and should thoroforo bo dismissed.

I would liko to point out tho following: Tho cajority of dofonco
couneol hold tho point of viow that thoro Is no logal basis for tho
chargo on tho count of conspiracy. If tho Court decides this quostlon
now, thoro will bo no nocossity for any defonso oouneol going into
this question during his case. It will thoroforo savo tino for tho
dofonso counsol and it will also savo tino for tho Court who would hnvo
to llaton to statceonts of dofonso counsol lator.

Turthomoro, tho Prosocution in rogrxd to Count II of tho Indictaont,
hoc stated that thoy considor it dosirablo, unless I ni^ndorstood tho
translation, to state in dotoll what is chargod against oach dofondant
only when tho coso of that defendant cocos up.


j


2290


l-o Jin-47 A-?JC-lS-lb-Gitzeonli
! 'r-urt no. 1

If tho auacostioo of tho prosecutions followed on thl3 point, tho
. :sSd -uoaco would tbr.t the dofenso would not know, durine tho whole period

-r prepnrr.tion, for which counts it asst propnre mterlcl.

yor oxr^plo, la the cof Defondint Uwccwsiy, I hr.ve fivo counts of

Count II 'of tho Indictamt. I hnve atr.ted thet tho chnrso-is aot founded and '
aUould ho dlsnissod. Tto ^uostlion new* ia 'Aether I rust 0*01 witnesses for
taose five counts, have cffidnYita prepared — conorrlly, pro-aro the ontiro
defense — or whether the Court will now ax-rlno tho question whothor tho
p-caocution has presorted evidence on these counts wbioh j\ y he coasfderod ^
cccelusivo proof nealnat tho Defendant Urecowsky.

If tho Prosocution has not autxxittod such proof, thon, la ny opinion,
tho ohrr» should bo disniasel and tho Tribunal the dofonse will not havo
to concorn thonaolvoa with thaso counts rnyrv’rc. Othor dofonao counsol aro in
errctly the mne position.

Furthor, the rrosooution pointed out that durin r. its caao, it aubulttod
rr.torlil on counts whioh woro not inoludod in tho Indiotuont at nil* I any
point out that a regular chnrco, aa de.w«dod by the Chartor, has not toon undo.

■3x0 Charter roqulroo thot the Dafoadant known when he is chnrcod and
»lth whnt ho is chnrcod* fittl that ho 3o prosontol with this infomtion in
sufficiont do till. We do not know ovon todny, -hloh of tho dofonlanto tho
Trmacution ia ohnrcln, for tho varlcua expori-vonts. i rofor, for axacplo to
the Polyral oxpori nntB rod similar oxporisxmte.


>D J: r.u ry-A—DJG-18-lc-Fitzgercld
Court So. 1


In the entire c«e of the Prosecution, this hoe not boon etotd. Ho
are told only new which defendants are charged with which crimes, and what
evidence and whet proof the Prosecution has. I should therefore like to oak
the Tribunal, whether at the present stage of tho trial, a docision can bo
reached as to which counts the-charges arc inadequate and not according to
the charter of the Tribunal, and should therefore be dismissed.

I ask that so defense counsel may know for the preparation of our ccso,
■hat we have to deal with and what evidence wo will have to present-,

DR. FEZlAGNGs Attorney for Viktor Brr.ch, Ur. President, part of de¬
fense ccunssl in their opening otatoownto did not mention the inrdmiasability
of Count I of the Indictment. I do not know tho reasons for this. I cen
cnly speak for aysolf, consequently, when I sty that I ocpressly end inten¬
tionally did not discuss this question because I consider it a part of tho
final plcc. However, sinco tho Prosecution has brought this important point ^
up for discussion, and has suggostod that it migit be expediont to hc.vo tho
Tribunal decide on certain Important points new, I should like to state, ex¬
pressly for ay client, Viktor Bruch, that he agrees with tho otatments of
dofense counsel who objoctod to Count I this morning.

JR. UcH^NEY: I would like to stqto tho Prosecution recognizes that tho
issue of the logal basis cf Count I is being raisod by all defendants. They
need not make their application, i.o concode they all rciso this question,
although it has not been mentioned by all of them.

THS PRESIDENT! The record nay show that that is understood and agreed
to by tho Tribunal.

DR. SEIDELt Attorney for the defendants Cobhart, Oborhauscr, and Fis¬
cher; Jr. President, to supplement tho statement of ay cclloaguo. Dr. rloxdng,
I should like to add the followings

I make tho application which the Prosecution has Just suggested. In tho
ccursc of tho proceedings, dccu-»_nts have been submitted concerning experi¬
ments and oedical experiments which are net listed in the indictment.

At the beginning c£ the trial, one defense counsel stated that the In¬
dictment did not fulfill the requirements of the Charter. It was pointed

cut that the Indictment did net list, in detail, the crimes with which the

2292


y> Jam r7-/.-WG-l&-2c-Fit*€crald

Court Ko. 1


defendants are charged, and that it licit©! Itself to legal statement*.

I refer tc Article IV of the Charter where it says:

-To preserve the rights of the defendants, the following procedure is
tc bo laJcen: The defendants ore tc bo given a copy of tho Indictment as
well os all documents within a reasonable period before the proceedings. The
Indictment is to list the charges dearly and in sufficient dotcil in order
to inform the defendants about tho punishcblo actions with which they are
charged."

I take the liberty of pointing out that before tho proceedings


4

2293 -


JC Jaa-^-KS-lS-ld-ritsgerald

psurt So* - •

• U defendants were not given any docunents *.® r. I take the liberty of
jointing out. further, that in all these nine count, of the Indictment. for

exasplo* the exporin-ni. on Polygcl are not aentionod.

-ten. aonths after the begirding of the trial, the Prosecution cone. with
now charge, fnis is in opposition of the Charter, and the rights of the

defendants are being Infringed upon. Those rights wore to bo protected by

A

t&cfto rules.

tb.refor.. =•!» *pUe.tl« th.. th. Utobtion of Ibo Pro..cuUo„ to
latroduco new char go 1 be rojeotod.

,B. KcHaWT: I thick the Tribunal understands tho position of the Pro¬
secution on this point. I do not ~nt to oven begin to engage in extended
argusont. It couo. a. southing of a surprise to hoar any defense eouneil.

» 0 participated In Case Sumbor I before tho International Kilitary Tribunal,
tt^gost that wo have not advised tho deforciants of tho nature of the crinos
with w.icii they are chargod.

The Indletcent in this case contains so nany tore particulars and is ">
mi mt9 definite than the Indictment which was sustained before tho Inter-

a

national Kilitary Tribunal that th.ro is no comparison between tho two. The
Prosecution ha. node an effort to advise each and every defendant in the dock
of the ^ajor charges against hiu.

We now hoar th- suggestion =nde that wo ar* to bo United because of the
particulars shlcn wo have given. Th- crinc charged against those defendant,
is t hat they hav* conuittod war crinos aid crinos against humnity in that
they they have unlawfully and criminally experimented upon involuntary human
subjects. I submit that it would not h..vo been r closed question if Paro-
j gra* 6 without any particulars whatsoever would h-vc boon a sufficient

indictment, particularly in face of tho Indictment vnich was sustained in _
Cu#d I.

Use. in the charge sheets wnicn are submitted to tho defendants before
-.no . .litter. Cessions, such a. the one at Dachau, they have tried upward,
of 75 on a charge Keel of not more than one page nrd which contains only


JC jan-^-OZS-ia-ld-msgerald

Court S’. -•


.« defendants were not given any docunsat. *W>Mr. I take the liberty of
pointing out, further, that in all these nine co-date of the Indictaent. for
exasple, the exportin'.* on Polygnl are not nentionod.

^.en, aonths after the beginning of the trial, the Proeec-ation cone. with
new charges. This is in opposition of the Charter, a* the rights of the
defendant, arc being infringed upon. Those right, wore to ho protected by
these rules.

I, thoroforw. =«*> application lh.1 Ih. lnt.ntlon of loo Prowcution to

X

introduce new chorgos be rojected.

l8 . KcHdUXT: I tnirJt the Tribunal understand, the position of tho Pro¬
secution on this point. I do not want to cron begin to engngo in extended
•rgUBODt. It couos a. soothing of o surprise to hear any defense couna>l.

*•<, participated in Case Sunbor I before tho International Military Tribunal,
suggest that wo have not advised the defendants of the nature of the crinos
with wnich they are charged.

Itoo Indictcent in thia Case contains so aany noro particulars and is so
cued aore definite than tho Indictaent which was sustained before tho Inter¬
national Military Tribunal that there is no coeperison between tho two. Tfco
Prosecution ha. undo an effort to advi.o each and ovory defendant in the dock

of tho -ajor chargos against hiu.

Ve now hear tho suggestion code that wo are to bo United because of tho
particulars *ich wo have given. The crinc charged against these defendant,
is t hat they hav„ committed war crises aid crino. against hunanity in that
they thoy have unlawfully and criminally experimented upon involuntary human
subjects. I subnit that it would not h..wo been , closod question if Para¬
graph S without any particulars whatsoever would hrve boon a sufficlont
indictaent, particularly in face of tho Indictment wnich was sustained in

&.8d I.

Uso. in tho charge shoots which are submitted to tho defendants before
too . unary Commissions. sue:, ns the ono at Dachau, they have tried upward,
of 75 =»on on a charge sheet of not more than one page nrd whicn contains only


50 Jhn-.*-5I& i l>-ld-ritxgorald.

Court So. 1.


general languor* of crises. It is sot hero a question of dismissing any
paragraph of tse Indictment. Those son are charged under Paragraph 6 end
osier Paragraph 11 vith having connitted van crises and criaos against
humanity respectively. Vo describe tho way in which those crinos wore sub-
nit ted.

If tho Prosecution is prepared to concodo it has not proved that Earl
Brandt was inpllcated in the hi^>-altitude ezporiconts or that ^Looo «b not
implicated in ono of the other ezporisonts; it is not a (jiostlon of die-
nlosing any pert of the Indictnont. Tho crlno char god Sc cor-tainod in Pnra-
gra.-h 6. The Prosocution nay woll concodo wo have ondo no proof on a part¬
icular sub-paragraph thereof: but it constitutes no disaietal of anything
Against that particular dofendant.

It docs rolisvo his of tho liability of going forward with proof that
he was cot i.plicated in that. Of course, this Tribunal has ovory right to
caw review the evidence in tho prisa facie caso srdo by tho Prosoaotion.

If it decidos wo hevo not put in a priaa facio caso agninet Karl Brandt on
the uign-altitudo experiments, tho Triburol can so advise Karl Brandt, and ho
will not have to go forward with vro of on that particular oxpurinent. But,
certainly, thor. is no question of dismissing anything in tho Indictnont.

Earl Brandt stands equally accusod under Pnragrn.h 6.

7K1 PHSSIISKTt Counsol's position is corroct in ruling that if tho
Prosocution has not aado a cuso under a count, it would n*x cdll for a
dismissal. It would call for a ruling that tho dofondant would bo rollovod
froo going ahead with robuttal ovidonco on that certain charge or count or
what it night bo callod.

KB. KcHilZY: Bint is correct. ?hf* is tho way tho Prosocution
undorstands it.


2295


Car t So. 1

3G-*er. 47-A-£2-a-ia<-fc£yac


TK£ MA R S H AL; The Tribuna.1 it again la session.

I 5 i rRiSiriKT: The Tribunal has tehee note of the cueationa raised by
the defecae counsel ea to whether, aa e natter of law, not a netter of feet,
the defendanta any ho held to anaver the charge of ccnaplracy to oonalt war
crlaea and crlcea against hunacity. Thla la a basic legal cuoatlon which,
toetuae of ita extreoe lnportance, the Trlbunrl la of the opinion ahould bo
answered only after the aueatUn has been fully briefed and asgued by all
pertlet to the caus*. Therefore, the Trlbum1 will not prse upon the quca-
tlon at this tine, but will reserve Its ruling thereof until finol hearing
,nd rfter full consideration md argunent and will Incorporate lta conclu¬
sions on the oueetlon in such cplnl-n and Jud/pont of the Tribunal na will
finally be rendered.

Second; Soas thing was said by the r rosoeutlon innsdiMtely prior to
tho afternoon recess of the Tplbun/1 to the effect that It wee not the
deelr« of the prosecution to put any defendant upon proof as to any charge
which tho prosecution night feel It had failed to establish. In view of
tho etetenent of tho nroeocution, which the Tritun.'1 contends, tho Tribunal
suggests to the prosecution that It be prepared to Mice any announcenont
upon that natter which it wishes t^ naJce prior to the opening of tho

S

defendants' ceso on Monday, 3 Jobrurry 19-»7.

Third: Concertfts^:'Questions roieed by defendanta' counsel ae to evl-
donco introduced by tho prosecution concerning acts of defendants not spa-
eiflcaliy charged os crines by paragraph 6 nnd paragraphs "A" to "L",
inclusive, A the Indictnent, tho Tribunal nnnouncce that it reserves lte
ruling upon any such question until the close of the caae.


2256


JO Jar. 47-A-FJC-22-1

Cocrt i* 5 . 1 ; -

Is thero any further cutter to be cfilled to tho attention of the

-ribunul?

ja. UC H;jfK: In connection with tfco Tribunal's ruling on tho
sa-oal point, I would like to ask if it would bo satisfactory if on Monday
TO c«lo such announcoccnts as wo cay haro to cako with rospoct only to tho
ease of Karl Brandt*

1H3 p'BSIDZ’.T: Ite*PP®are to-tho Tribunal that it would bo only
ftXr to the defoliants if that annou n co c ent wore nado as soon as poaslblo.
It dfrt not necessarily bo u*io Uondny corninc, but, if any sucS announ¬
ce .on t is to bo cade, it would b. well to nrjco it as soon as possiblo so

X

■MX tho dofoalants would bo ndvisod that as to rjjy such specification
or chnrse it would not to nocosa-ry for thou to procuro witnossoo or
introduce rrtdoaco. That was tho only point in the alnd of tho Tribunal
in suRfiootlne that announcouoat be urdo Uondny ivorninc. Iho Tribunal is
sot holding tho Proaooutlon tc anythin*. In oonnectTun with that nattor,

-at if tho oanounaoajint, if any, is nrdo as soon as possiblo, with duo
regard to tho cutter which I havo Just nontionol, that would bo satis¬
factory to tho Tribunal*

W. UC H-J3Y: Tory well, Your Honor,

THE ra dP HTi Does that answer your quostlon?

IX. UC H'JfEf: Yos, indoed.

U!. R.VJSCH2NZL.CH (Counool for Dofondant Schaof jr)s Hr. ?rosidont,

I have a quoation which has boon touche! upon noithor by tho discussion^
toforo the rocoss nor by tho rulinr uhich has Just boon -iron by tho
Tribunal. It is a question connoctod noithor with tho quostlon of tho
conspiracy nor vith th^ by th©


2297


Court I

30 Jar, U7-A - 22- lb - LX - Haynes


fTosecution.

I aade the request with regard to the defendant Schaefer that his
ease be i.-sai dl ately dlsaissed. I believe that I have understood the
ueeber of the Prosecution ©crrectly to the effect that he aeans that such
a dismissal could only be decided upon when the case is being presented.
However, when the case is being presented and the presentation of evidence
has been completed, then wo may Just as well wait until t£e vortiict.

It is the pract ce of the English and kserican courts to which I

X

have referred, as far as it has cone to cy knowledge from the literature
tiiich has boon nade available to has the effect of finishing the case
before the presentation of evidence; that is, after the presentation by
the Prosecution when it is already demonstrated that the defendant can
not be sentenced. Ihoreforo, I want to point out once ooro tho
possibility with rogard to the case of Schaofer to make a ruling to this
effoct boforo I present evidence on behalf of the dofendant Schaofor.

That is the quostion of the dismissal of the proceedings against Schaefer
and his discharge fr«a confinement.

DP.. WEI3Q8RBER (For defendant Silvers)j Mr. President, nay I bo
permitted to ask one more question withregard to point No. I? If I
have correctly understood the ruling of tho High Tribunal, thon tho
decision can only be aide on Foint I when tho defense has raado a statement
with rogard tothis quo^ticn.

In my presentation this morning I staUd that I have not taken any
atar.d with respect to tho question of the conspiracy bocauso I have
joined in tho state amt tj f try colleagues, and, therefore, I have not
--ado axy statement of ry own in this connection in order to avoid repeti¬
tion. If the Tribunal should desire a statement of all the Defense
Counsel who have not touched this question specifically, then I would
request the Tribunal to nako a statement with regard to this subject.

THE PRESIDENT: I stated thatT this question would be reserved until
*>.€ close of the case when all defendants may be heard upon the matter.

The ruling cf the Tribunal is nade strictly without prejudice to the right.

2296


Court I

30 Jar. U7-A - 22- 2 b - LX - Haynes

cf ary defendant to urge the natter of the conspiracy charge and its
inapplicability to ary or all defendants. The right is expressly reserved
to any or all defendants. The right is expressly reserved tc the defendants
to argue and present that question at the proper tire at the close of
the case.

Upon the question Just suggested by Counsel for t\o defendant Schaofer,
*ich has been auggosted by other Defense Counsel, the Tribunal will
reservo its ruling upon ary such notions, »hich cay be renewed at an

X

appropriate tino. The Tribunal strictly preserves to the defendants
the right to urge tho question «tiich has been suggested. The Tribunal ut
this tine reserves its ruling.

Thoro bolng no further question to eons before the Tribunal, the

%

Tribunal will reaoss until 0930 o'clock Monday Morning.

(Tho Tribunal recessed until 0930 hours, 3 February 19U7)


2299


3 7ob-S35-l-l-7ostcr-JP

Court I


C033XCTE) COPT

Official Transcript of the Ac ericas Military Tribunal
in tho natter of the ttaitod Statos of Aaorica, against
Earl Brandt* et al.. dofendante, sitting at Furnborg,
Goraanyi on 3 Fobruary 1947* 0930, Justico Beals presiding*


TEZ MARSHAL: The Honorable, tho Judges of Military Tribu na l.
Military Tribunal 1 is now in Session. God savo tho tfaltcd Statos
of ^norice and this honorable Tribunal.

Thore will bo ordor in tho court. ^

TEZ PRZSIDETT: Mr. Marshal, you ascertain if the defendants nro
all presont in tho onurfroo*.

THE KA? SEALS May it pleoso Tour H«n'.r, all tho dofondants aro


presont in tho court.

7H3 PRESIDENT: Tho Socrotary-Ocnoral will noto for tho rocord
tho proscnco of all tho dofondants in tho court.

Tho dofoaso ney proceed.

MR. UcEAXET: Mo/ it ploaso tho Tribunal, prosocutlon wlshos to
announce that in ordor to shorten tho trial and to ollnlnato arguoont
it Toluntarlly renovos as lssuos in this action, tho following chargos
containod in tho indictaont. Agalnet tho Defendant Karl Brandt, tho
Chnrgo in paragraph 6a concerning participation in tho higi>-altitudo o»-
porinonts; against tho Dofondant Handlosor, tho Chnrgo in paragraph 6a
ooncorning participation in blgh-altitudo oxporlsonts. Vo will havo
further announccsonts of this sort to siOco in tho courso of tho next
fow days we oxpoct. It is undorstond that tho rceoral of thoso
lssuos fr»c tho ccso with rospcct to tho foregoing-dofondants constitutes
no adaloalcm by tho prosecution that such dofondants did not as a


natter of fact


in thoso experinonts.

will noto for tho rocord tho
by tho prosocutlon.


tho Dofondant Earl Brandt): On behalf
and with tho penalssion of tho


of tho Lofendont Karl


-

? ?c'


? Jcb-Z3r-l-2-Tost^r

Court Vo. 1.


Tribunal I shall call the d-'frndant to the witnesc stand at once.

•y? F’"«I’"T: The Tribunal grants the perr.i salon. refon¬
dant lari aren't will take the witness stand.

: ;c "At'BT: .‘ay it pi. ase th< Tribunal, we havo no objection

to the defendant Brandt taking the witness stand it this tier. However,

I wish the record to she*? that the prosecution has not bocn advised that
*.=c lefendant Brandt would take tho stand at this tine and hencoforth I
will ack that all defense counsel comply with the rule of the Tribunal
vhich requir s that a rininuc of 34 hours notice- br given to the prosecu¬
tion. It is to br xn'ct. d that pros-cution will have a few quostions to
put to one or the other of the vitn.o«.s to be called by the defonse end
vc would like to hire cone tin-' to consider those questions.

yr fTSI^: In the fdtur. the defrns-- counoel will obs-rvo
tho rulo end give the pros- cution 34 hours notice of the calling of any
witness whether a defendant or a witness.

I*. S~BYATrJS: Kr. President. on Saturday the ! arshnl of the
court asked r»r who the witness s weuld bo that I was going to call and I
told hie that the defendant hlrs. lf would, be tho first to take the stand.
I assured, that the prosecution too would be inforoed accordingly. That
is how the error arosr.


l'JLU 3 r AFTT, a defendant, took tho stand and. testifi'd. ac


follows:


3Y JUICE ST3VIKG:

0 Hold ur. ycur ri-;hth»nd and. b. svsra, rep. ating after nc; I cw.ar
by God. the Alrlghty and OcMeci. nt, that I will sp «k the pure truth
end will withhold and add. nothing.

(Th. witn ss r-'peated tho eath.)


■uiAriFtTio'


BY STl-ATIUS:


^ Witness, state your nan.' and when yen were bom.

A Ky race is Karl Brandt and I was btrr. on January 8. 190*.

^ Will you describe to the Tribunal an element of your life until

2201


I


3 }Vb-IBH-l-3-?ostcr
Court Fo. 1.


you started studying at the University.

A First of all, in ny ho=c- town at Kuohlhausrn I visited school
and a condary school. In 1919 when i:u.'hlhaua«-n and Alsaco had been oc¬
cur loi ^y the French I was instructed to 1-avo and I ter-porarll;' took
up rcsid. r.ce in Thuringia, *h ro I visited a prep school for secondary
school, and tne last two years until cy ratric I spent at Ircsdcn in a
boarding school vher- I passpd ay ratriculation exaninntion. I Faosod
sy ratriculation in 1933.

<i What did you decid' to study and how -id you arrive at that de¬
cision.

%

A On ny rothrr’s side ny fnrily was one of <*oc«rs. So that it was
a fairly obvious thin* to no to stu*y nodicine. A brother of ny -others
has been a pupil of th;* first psyeholiglst in "urick, Professor Borol,
r cently ocntlor« d by Prof.'esor Lclbbrand.

: 'fcwro did you stu<*y until thi cs.-yletion of your studies?

A First cf all at J«nn. I should li v e to point out that those
Cays vor.- very difficult onrs for uo. It was the tinr of inflation

4

with all its social co-pllcatlons. Ky otudi s nt J-na did not proceed
si to gothor too snoctHy. Since I m studying nsdloino an<* was intending
to becon* a doctor, I vao short of connections with r *nl jrtients dur¬
ing the pro-clinical part ef ny studies. Just ao soon so ny fourth torn
I visited, thu clinical lictur-jo *md in that nannor I got into touch with
ny Liter chief, .-rof.ssor i.n.;nuo, who in thoso days was tho Chief nodi¬
cal officer at th- surgical clinic at Jena. I owe it to hln that after
four toms I succeeded in jascing ay phytlcun exanlnatlon so that I ac¬
tually arrived at th* clinic prematurely, After I hod passed thio phy-
cicj- *xarination. I first of all rcco ded to Freiburg where I contin¬
ued -y studies, and since rr-n in those days I had already decided I
would be a surgeon, r«y further studies vere adjusted accordingly to this
surgical teaching and I chang'd universities quite frequently. I went
to Berlin where I studied rost sf all und^r August 3ior. I went to

•unich tecr-us tlvr« .rofecsor Saucrbmch was lecturing. And finally,

2?C2


3 ?ob-Z3S-l-4-?ostor-JP
Court I


for the purpoeo of passing ny Steto explication, I roturcod to Froiburg
whoro I was during 1927 and 28, during tho winter terns, to ppsa my
oxanination. I Lnaodiatoly procoodcd to pass ny doctor examination so
that tho spring of 1928 for the conclusion of ny studies at universities.

Q. Then whoro did*you actually roceivo your practical inotructions
as a practical doctor?

Am I had previously sectioned tho nano Professor Kagnus who at tho
tiae had bocn nodical officer at tho surgeons unirorsity clfhic at Jona
a-.d in tho noantino ho had bocono chiof doctor at tho hospital at
Bergsoans Hoil at Bochus which was a largo hospital with a groat doal
of accident surgory, accident casos. Proa thoro I wont upon cooplotion
of ny study and temporarily during ny yonr of prnctico I also prnctlcod
at Chcocitx and at a Oonoral Hospital in Volnar. And from tho boginning
of 1929 I bcccno assistant doctor at tho surgoon's department at Bochua.
York in that hospital had tho particular characteristic that tho nodical
dopartnont was closoly conncctod with tho placos of work whoro tho ao-
tual accidonts had occurrod. As far as tho ooal nlning Industry lo
concomod, that ond tho steel industry, was loading thoro.


2303


3 ?eb-*i-JP-2-l-3card-JP
Coart I

Q, Did yr.a havo any special training in any nodical branch?

A. During this a eeldint surgery, injuries to tho skull playod a
particularly leading roll; surgery upon eztmetlest and, one important
chapter, injuries to the spine. Perhaps I shall havo to go into this
soro thoroughly. Every assistant doctor at tho hospital at Ber^aanns
Hell found it his cost difficult task haring to take caro of patients
with injurios to tho splno. Oieso peoplo voro usually paralysed in
the lower organs of their bodies. And, they roont to us tho greatest
husan demands. Zvory ono of these patients know thoro was no help for
hin, and that his fato during a porlod of weeks, nonths, or in oxcop-
tional caaos, yoars, would bo ondod. Shore was a trenondo neuralgic pain,
ncr7or loaving tho patlonts a coeont'e poace, day or night, to

all of us it was a groat offort, again and again, having to visit thoso
patients, having to stop up to their bods, and having to say a fow words
of greetings, which practically voro nothing othor than Just words.

Aftor a cortain tino, again and again, thoso patlonts would nnko tho
ssno roqueot: "Doctor, glvo ao an injoctionl I aui-et stand it any noro."
I think that any doscrl- tlon of this situation, howovor oxtonslvo it
night bo, would always fail to liro up to roality. I did not intond,
when I first wont to Bochun, to rooain thoro for good. I was intending
to cosploto ay training as a but goon. During ny poriod of studios I had
already nado contact with a nan known not only in Go many, but beyond
tho bordore of this country, a doctor nanod Albort Sohwoitsor, ±nd, I
intended, onco trained as a surgeon, to assist hin with his work ns
a doctor in Lanbcrone, Fronch Kongo; whoa. In 1932, I was roady for tho
carrying out of this plan it was no longor possiblo sinco a roquest was
nado that I should sorvo in tho French arsy, which probably would havo
noant having to adopt French citizenship.

*4% So you droppod tho plan?

A, Tos, thet was tho reason why I abandoned that plan.

So, ono could say thoro was a national consideration?

Tos,


23)4


3 7aVH-JP-2~3-3o*rd-JP
Court I


Q, Thee# what did you do after your tiao at Bochun?

A, There was one particular interruption during the tiro I spent
at Boehiet In 1933» sore by accident than by doeign, I was present whon
a car accident occurrod, during which the Fnehror's Adjutant, Vilheln
3ruocknor, sufforod a screro facture of the skull. And, a niece of
Hitler's was travelling in*tho eano car, and other passengers also boing
injurod. At that tine, I carried out icaodiato care on tho porsone, and
cortain eurgical troatconts, and by roquost of tho Fuohror, I spont six
vc oks in a Baall vllla^o hospital attonding to Vilfcolo Bruodcnor, as a
doctor, and then in tho autuan of 1933, I went back to Bochun. In 1934,
in January, ay chlof at Bochun, Profossor Kagnus, was callod to 'Join
tho University Clinio at Borlin, noanwhilo having boon uacatod by
Profossor Bior.

Q. You, yourself, wore at Bochun. And, who bocano your chiof thont

A. Profossor Kagnus wont to Borlin, and I wont to Borlin with hin,
and likowiso, Profossor Hostock to Borlin and again ho bocano tho flrot
assistant to the chlof; eo that altogothor I havo boon with hin now for
19 yoars.

Q. And, than until tho boginning of tho war, you ronnlnod in Borlin;
did you not?

A. I was in Borlin. yos, until tho boginning of tho war. Thoro I
workod p .t that clinic, whero I was, first of all, tho hood of ono station.
Ar.d, boginning in 1936, I think, I took charge of tho accident soction,
and tho Polyklinik which I howled. Tho Polyklinik had a largo intnko of
patients, rcounting to appmxicately 18 to 20 nr 21000 pationts per
annua passing through.

• CJ. ’fhnt hopponed at tho boginning of tho war? Did the situation
change at all?

A. i S hall havo to cone back to that at a later tine, showing which
after 1934, I acted ns Zscort Physician to Hitleri which ce«nt, that
during the period of the war I had n special task, that of Inspector of
the Araod forces, attached to the 3eadquartors of the Fuohror.

q. Did that nopn your cocpleto soparation fron tho clinic?

2X5


3 7eb-K-JP-2~3-3oard-JP
Court I

A* Sol I did not separate fron that Clinic. I trlod overything
I could to rotials In Contact* And, lator on, when I hccano General
CraBlMionor for Health and Sanitation* and evon as Hoich Connissionor,

I had ny offlco there. I va# doing ny wort and directing it froa that
clinic* %

Q, Which personalities in tho cedi cal field, had influence upon
you in your nodical profession?

A. If I an to glre you tho nanos of ny teachers onco again, passing
through then quickly; then, first of all tho Surgoon Loxor, von Moollor,
Biss, and tho gonoral psychiatrist, Hocfior and TrelBurg in Munich,
vsro tho docisivo personalities in ny nodical training.

Q. Through having not thoeo outstanding exports, did you ovor
find yoursolf drawing toward scientific ectlvltios?

A. !7o; in tho first placo I was lntorostod In tho clinical work,
and as for as sciontlfio work was ooncomod It was noro or loss a
hohby with no.


v/


2X6


3

Court I


Q, Did you work on any scientific things at all

A. Together with ny chief. Prof. Magnus. 1 did carry out a certain
aar.unt of weric, writing works about surgery on skulls, injuries of tho
spine; and thoro wore certain special oxccinations which I carried out
during inspections of choic 0l But it would ho wrong to soy that I had
played any loading part at all in any scientific flold.

Q. Did , ou carry out any laboratory work?

A, Apart fron tho fact that teoporarily 1 was tho hoad of tho 1*-
oratory at tho clinic, X did not carry out any laboratory worki Haybo
I night add ot this point that aoproxinatoly in 1936 I epent aono
oxtra tino working in laboratories duo to tho fact that an event occurred
outside which influenced tho situation. Kay I refer you to tho tostioo-
ny given horo roecntly by Prof. Lolbrand, which night neon that it is
inportsnt that ! should cn in to detail. There was a nan oalled Von
Brohnor who had approached. Stating that ho had found tho cause of cancer.
Through those channel, ho wont to Wing with this story; and Gooring
took this trccondou. di.oovory to Hitler, who in turn Instructed no to
discuss tho affair with Horr Von Brohnor. In order to give tho natter
a oclor.tif lc end oxpert background, wo obtainod ny chiof' o pomission,
the pomission of Prof. Magnus, to ask Brhtaer to cono to Berlin,
vhoro investigations carried out on hi. instruction, produced no unoni-
nou. results, no clear-cut results, so that tho idea hod boon and
cr.uld bo turned down by exports, nooning that a cause or ono of tho
cause, of cancer appeared not to have boon found. Then the results fron
3 rohnor wore taken under tho wing of Mr. Strolcbor right horo in
Surnbcrg. Strolchor established a pationts' dopartnent, to which ho
gave tho nacc Paracelsus Institute; and thoro one con well soy in the
no.t irrosponslblo nannor exanination. and observation, wore carried out.
Tho result, howovor, was


2X7


3 7cb-J«-S*-3-2-31akley^7P
Court I


that tha goriouanoas of these cxperlnents of Brefcsaer's was pointed out
to Hitlor, this tine by Stroiche^.

?horoforc, once again X^crfuetrueted to carry out cortain obser¬
vations, this tico here in Kurnborg, and to ennfirn If possible what
Ton Broico* had alroad* stated. In ardor to be quito sure of tha bo
nbsorrations, I brought along with no a photogranhor; and tho findings
on tho concor patients wore photographed and rocordod ovor periods of
voeka. 2ho rosult was aboslutely nogatlvo. Although this orat so,

Stroichor used this opportunity to nake public statononts without
criticise, without responsible dealing with thoao possibilities for
treatnont producod by Brehoor. Ho was not ovon ashanod to publish pho¬
tographs which I had nade. For instance, in th4 caso of ono sciontific
cancerous infoctlon of tho breast of a wooan, a photograph was takon in
ordor to chock tho disoaaod ono; but a hoolthy ono was publishod in
tho rororso, saying that this was tho curod previously disonsod broast.

In that connoction, of courso, I had a very sorious argunonts with
StroIchor, which, as far as I was concomod, had two practical rosults.
firstly, tho prosident of the polioo suggostod to no that if poosiblo
I should aroid coning to Kurnborg, whoro on tho othor hand I rocoivod
tho infomation free tho Fuohror nevor to go to Kurnborg without hin,
in othor words only when acoonpmniod by hin. This I enrriod out.

In ordor to dooonstrato how in fact this charlatan buolnoos was
actually progrossing in Gomany aftor 1933, thor. nfior Brohnor had
discontinued his work in Furnborg, on tho stroagth of tho documentary
oTidcnco Einnlor first of all took hlc under his wing I was otill rocoiv-
ing photographs in connoction with which Hlnclor hinsolf was nuking
t tat scents in rolation to tho inTOStigation of fact as to whothor tho
person was oithor suffering froo cancer or night have boccoo a cancor
patient;

2338


3 Teb-#-5V-3-3-31akley-JP
Court I


Q. Witness, did you haro any additional surgical training?

j. I hare told you that In the nain ay training as adjutant but goon
took placo nostly in Bochun. I had furkhtr surgical training in Berlin,
which, as years went on, was supplemented by the fact that I was work¬
ing undor Gehoinrat Hgickel where a spocial oothod of operating on
stomachs was being used. In addition to that, with en ordor to aoquiro
additional knowledge of atoeach surgery, I spent sororal nrnths at tho
ISj lrorsity Clinic of Bonn. In ordor also to collect oxpoaionce with
breast surgory, I spent seroral aonths with Sauorbruch.

Q. Just before that you had contionod those 'bpocial tasks with
reforonco to tho 3reheer-Stroichor cattor. Did you haro any othor
special tasko giron to you which actually foil outsido your nornal
sceno of activity?

i, Tho wort: In Borlin had tho difficulties which tho construction
of tho task fron the point of view of spaco brought with it. It nonnt
to us at tho clinic in B orlin the task of having to plan now buildings.

In 1937 I rocolvod tho task at tho ti? 0 in collaboration with Spoor,
the plenipotentiary of tho reconstruction of tho capital, and tho
spocial task of architects of doroloping piano first of all only for
a surgical clinic and lator for tho ontiro university clinic at Borlin.
This was work which extended oror a period of yoars and which lod to
tho result that during tho first years of tho war thoro was a final plan
concludod. I shall giro you tho cost of tho building so no to <*ro
you an idoa about tho natter. It icaountod to approxinatoly two hundrod
eighty nillion. Tho buildings which roachod tho hoight of tho radio
towor in Berlin and which could house all tho studonts in additim to
four thousand patients belonging to the rprious clinics, all tho pro-
clinical institutos were thoro, tho pathological and anatocy institutes,
and so on. Arising fron this connoctlon


2309


3 ?oW^-sa-5-4-3lckloy-JP

CnaTt I


3 7eb-i»-?JC—1-1-Cook-JP

Court I

q. Vo shall coao hack to that cat ter later. During tho planning of
these works in Berlin for tho Clinic, did you haro any othor nodical
ssaistanoc?

A, It van nccossary to carry through this building progran and it
vas nocossrxy to haro assisting physicians. My clooost collaborator was
Prof, --os tod:. At that tino % Profossor Hostock had bccono ny clinical chiof
a inco Frofossor '.agnus in tho noantico had transferred to !Mulch. I askod
Professor -V>stock to give ne his assistance nainly bocauso of his organi-
xation of talent. In addition, I knew that because of the porsoapl
friendship which existod between us there could bo found a special roliiw-
bility. Horo perhaps I ray point out tho personality of Trofossor
Rostock. Urory person who had any doalings with hln will at first say,
and tho expression used in Go many would bo that -ostock le a good nan,
and as our oocnoa teacher Magnus ho had a consoiously hunan attitudo towards
pationts and then this attitudo can bo found in Rostock, and it originals
free a bora friendliness. With roforonco to tho treatment of his
subordinates in tho clinics and tho nurses or assistants, it Is a foot
that tb 07 , as woll as the patients, roepoctod hln. Ho is nedically
absolutely rolinblo, and all of his activities wore devoted to tho
benefit of tho pationt, and ho was superb teacher for to studento. Iho
Prosecution has alroady pointed out tho rospoct which hns to bo granted
to tin as a scientist and rightly so. How nognificont it is nay bo soon
fron tho fact that tho faculty of Sorlin noclnatod as thoir Doan and with
that thoy ebowod vory clearly and with that ho bccono vory dourly ro-
prosentative of all tho Goman nodical faculties.

q. Vitnoso, I shall now turn to your political caroor. Vhon did you

.Join tho H3DAP?

A. I bo car. o a c«bor of the National Socialiet party in January 1932.
q. And what was the reason which load you to it?

A. Tor no a docisivo reason was tho ooncoption of the social ques¬
tion. At that tino I was an assistant in tho Ruhr territory and every
poraon who rocords thoso years will inegiho the bopoloso situation


2311


3 ?eVW-?JC-4-l-Ook-JP
Court I


which existed at that tino. Ihero was unccployneat end suffering, a
ror 7 uncloar prospect of the future. Ihero was unreliability. All
of this in a country of this rod earth daaanded soncthing fron us.
Pron the start, he cans o of family acquaintances,


3 Job 4 7-lC-TJ C-4—2—Cock
joart »». 1

I ~ 3 clcsa *» circles of y-iedrich fcunann, and erlslne free this connec¬
tion tho decision to beccne.a corbor of the Party was sot very difficult.

'I Did you belong to cny othor nodical association?

A I becar-o a susbor of tho national socialist Loacuo of physicians,
but 1 cr*o into no closor connection with then. Apart free this rxnborship,

I did not at teal a slnelo sooting and it nay have keen an oversight on yy
F that I renamed a Mtftor. •! then Joined.the Lo-sue of Physicians with a
condition which i put in writinc, that I would not oxorciso any active duty
in any SS or Si fornation. i thoafjkt it was nocossary at tho tine, so that
aa a physician j waild not be ooasidorod a politician by r-y patient^ who
followod devious political linos.

X

\ 30 thon 7°° •rorcisol no activity m that association?

A Ito.

'I :;oll how did you oexje into cont-ct with tho fuohror in spite of that?

A I forr-orly pointed out tho rotor car accident of Bruocknor and it
* in 1954 whon tho first nootinc of Hltlor and Jluscolini took placo in
T»sico, and Hltlor hlnsolf noodod an oscort hyoician thon beoauso thoro was
possibility of an attoiiptod assr.ssination. Bcnonborlns thio rotor car
sooldont I*is Adjutant Bruockhor telephoned :» in Borlin and ordored ne to ccuo
io Bunich and i flew with bin to vonlce, and this ovent really was tho
b*,1aalnc of ay subsequent funotion as tho oscort physician of Hltlor. I should
liito to point out tho difforontiation *iich I rate botwoon tho personal physiol an
cal oscort phyoioian. Hie personal physician is porhaps a physician who
occasionally is called in casos of illnoss. in ay c-so as an oscort physician
I tad to bo In readiness, at sia disposal, and whonovor Hltlor had to leavo
lirlia it w s ry duty to accompany hia. That, of oourso, entailed, at any
p,t * r - ftor th ® be-ainnla.- of tho war, that I needed two roprocontativac for
^ function, oao was In Eorlln and tho othor lr. Munich. Othorwlso, I oould
k*. hare regained in Berlin at all.

A , ”oro you at that tine already a :xn'or of tho SS?

A In 1933 I was a ronbor of tho SA, and only aftor tho visit to Venioo,

1 v ~ 3 transferred to the SS. This v-s for :;oroly external reasons. Thon all

r-arsons acconaanyia.; Hltlor voro SS unifon-s and 1 had civilian clothing and in

:r;or to presont a uniforr: picture ho wanted ro to waor a unifora.

2312


3 FoWWU-t-S-l-Grosfr-JF
Coart I


Q. Vboro did you serve your nilitary duties?

A, I sorvod with the Amy - it was ia 1935 - at first with tho
Infantry Eeginont. It was in Slankenburg/Hars and la tor after I bccano
nodi dal officor la tho Airy I sorted ia ho«pitala whoro I served ny yoar-
17 duties. I havo boon aasigned to Berlin as a surgooa.

Q. Aod what activities did you axorciso during tho Var?

A. 3y ordor of tho Airy Iaspoctorato I was assigned to tho 'uohror's

Headquarters in tho ysar of 1940 and also, bocauso of fornor roasons, I

A

was troneforrod to tho Vaffen-SS by tho gcnornl SS without holding a con-

%

cand and also without loading a unit. Sinco I was still sorving in tho
Arry and Exorciso thoroto ny promotions woro a proxlnatoly parallol. Usual¬
ly.' I was first pronotod by tho Amy. Uy last rank in 1943 was Gcnoralnrzt,
and in accordance with that tho SS pronotod no.

Q. Uas ouch a ere bination of activities, both in tho SS and in tho
Amy, soao thing custonary7

A. Vith tho oxccption of ny own oaso I know no othor.

Q. How wan your rolationaship to Himlor? Did you bolong to his
closer circlo?

\ I had no personal relationship to Hinnlor. I pointod out boforo
that I really had oorious nodical difforoncoo with hiu - von Brohnor and
Strolchor, *nd also during tho Var when a closer contact night havo
taken placo thero was certain poroonal tonsion of the circlo around Hitler
and tho circlo around Hinnlor.

Q. Voro you alwayo officially askod to attond Grupponfuchror
discussions hold by Einclor?

A. As I said, I had no rclatiofiship to Eimlor. Shis also oxtondod
to the official fiold, I took part in nono of tkoao co-oallod Gruppon-
fuohror or SS leaders' discussions. I was novor invited to attond any¬
one of then. Sren professionally there was no contact be two on us. Sono-
tifioe it even went so far, and documents will probably confira, that, that
Hinnlor consciously tried to ronovo no fron his circlo and his path and
soeotincs even pronounced prohibition to get into any contact with no.

2313


3 7 pb-*TMAJ^ 5 - 3 -Sro ss-JP
Court I


How was contact of tfao staff belonging to Hitler and Hlnsler?

Vas there a close cooperation?

A. They did not collaborate, they hardly saw one another, and over.

free tho point of view of location woro vory far apart. At lowral occo-

Bions tho word "Tuchror Bauptquartier" is used hero and one nay gain tho

icpresslon that it was a litVle carp whero evoryono was togothcr. That

wasn't tho caso at all. Binder's Headquarters or tho Instituto of tho

C*V, tho Instituto of tho Vchrnncht Gporatlon Staff and the real Fuehrer

Eoadqurrtoro - and that was tho only ono that could boar that nano -

woro wry far apart, eaooticos 30 to 30 kilonotors apart and nunberod a

%

largo Mount of porsonnol oach. I rooonbor that at ono tino when wo
had to novo fror tho Ukralno to another torritory wo had to transport
sonothing liko 18,000 hvean beings.

Q. And how did thoso two staffs collaborate poroonally? Did you
hero any cloaor relation with Roiohearst S8 0rnwit*7

A. I had no porsonal contact with Orawit*. Ho wno a typical subor¬
dinate of Sicalor, Judging froo gonoral uttorancos, ono who wns crrplotoly
doTotod and oubordinato. During the last part of tho War in 1945 I had
a fow discussions with hie but not in tho capacity as Rofcchonrst SS but
ao Prosldont of tho Rod-Cross, since at ehat tino togothor with tho ^

Chiof of tho Aray Kcdlcal Sorvico I triod to doelgnoto cortain citlbo an
hospital cities in ordor to'keep then away fron the Var in that nannor,
and for this purposo wo noedod Orawit* in ordor to uso hie oonnoction with
tho Goman Rod Cross and thoroby establish oonnoctions with tho Intor-
nationol Rod Cross in Geneva.

q, Then what wore your political tios in your officoT
U In any office fron a political point of view I was loft conplote-
ly along up to the autxcn of 1944, and by that I moan cy office which
I hold ovor since 1942 after I bccaso Gonoral Coanissioncr for Hoalth and
Modical Sorvices, not a singlo ono of cy co-eorkors, noither in ny offico
Planning and Econony or Science and Ho so arch, was a nor.bor of tho SS, not
even a d cr.bc r of tho gonoral SS. In tho Departoent of Planning and

2314

. . - . _ : j


3 7c^--i^5-2-C-ro 8 »-J?
Coart Z


Scotty, even up to >rccber 1944, I hud t. Jevish vortcero out of ten
•ocrctarioi I had, and vfcn caao frre Industry, together with their
section chiof. I cfcaao ny collaborator* only going hy tholr

%


3 7cVK-Kl^-S-3-^"«*-JP

Court I


professional knowlodgo - everything cl bo did not natter to ao.

Q. D ld you than reject tho SS or. principle?

A. So. I sorer sew la the SS a gathering of car. who had only not
in those units a load through- And if I think of tho young officers
who were etchers of tho Waff on SS who wcrkod in Hitler's Eoadquartors aa
Ordnance-. Officers, then ! think of thoso four non, throo have died, and
the fr.uXth was hoavily woundod. I. whenover I wear tho uniforn, always
were it with on ldoe to hare a spocial coral obligation and I did not
roar it without prido.

Q. Witness, I now coco to another subjoct, sooothlng which wo haro
already touchofi upon, nacoly, thoeo Bpccial hoBpital inatitutoa wo
haro alroady diacuaood, spociflc task of hospital planning. Will you
shortly dofino your attltudo to that?

A, X pointod out that arising free tho planning of tho Borlin Uni¬
versity Institute X had a spocial study of hospital buildings of tho
entire Oornany. 3 oforo tho beginning of the War I nado nany journeys
abroad with an architect and X inepoctod hospital buildings and studlod
thoir orgrnlxatlonal fraco work and that noodod certain knowledge of tho
situation of hospitals In Goroany itself. Before tho War, and I re just
giving you tho round flguros, wo had approxiaatoly 5E0 to 600,000
hospital bod in Go many. And you haro to take away approxinatoly 250,000
Mid 250,000 bolongod to Genoral Hospitals, that is to any, gonernl
hospitals, surgical clinics, etc. Tho tmo anount, thet is approxinatoly
250,000 bods up to approxinatoly 300.000 conprised tho nontal Institutes.
Bods for tuboroulootfc lllnossos. TMe was a bad situation which probably
now has bo coco nuch worse. There wore cortain cantors of cravlty In this
hospital concern which wore cnlnly at points where Industry was concen¬
trated, that is, in the Ruhr territory and central Goroany. In con¬
sequence there was a lack of hospital space in these territories and it
van especially serious there. In tho year 1941 tho first Snglish air
raid took place on tho tpwn of Sedan. At that tine tho entire hospital
vas destroyed. Ur. Todt who was carrying out the repair work and tho

rebuilding as f -r as possible and who

2315


3 Feb 1 7-..-ibb.-5-l-Grc3s
Court ifc. 1


'.-as au.vcsod to be In charge of that vrrlc osro tc the Fuehrer's Ifcadcuartcrs
with a de. anti that a new hospital *>c built an .ierfen. On tho sere day \rhcn
iviJa.j tlvis dcicni I was assigned by tho Headquarters t. designate evacuation
li.ffiitals for cthwr cities which wore in danger. These plans, which in tho
h^imir.j '~?rr c a .-rativcly s -V . ll , attended in tlx. subsequent years, that is
up to 1?U2-U3, end iron tiiis ifv.lc qaootx'n there developed even later after
Tedt line’ lie.'.


3 Peb. 47 -M-6-1-PSP- Leaser i
Court Ko. 1

Then, In connection with Speer and his department, Building, thor« dovolopci
the task of the building of the special Hospital Institution Action Brandt.

Up to the yo\r of 1944 approximately 30 institutions which at that time had
operated, were being used. In every case there were cceploto hospitals with

500 bods each which wero buUt according to a systen of villas -nd were

%

located approxi-a-taly 20 kilceeters outside the linits of the city in clangor.

Starting from the y«=r -f 1943, these hospitals had to accept mainly such

patients whoso trontnent would probably last for s:oo considerable tine, in

order to use the space inside these citios in c-nror for pitionts whoro

illness was only enticipitod for a short tine.

In this connection I should like to point out that it was necessary to

start a special transport system of the sick which was intended for those

hospital institutions which wwi\» *11 under ay administration. These woro

busses sit trucks which were rebuilt in accordance with its purpose “nd which

had on their outside tho designation Hospital Institution Action Brandt.

There wasn't one of our destroyed cities whoro those busses wore not used

•

— them- busses for the sick — and it frequently occurred that they not
only collected eick people and injured pooplo who wero offectod by tho last
raid, but they also h:/ to take care of evacuating other pooplo. I assuoo
ttat this was submitted horo, I think it was in the form of nn affidavit by
Ifcser, whoro the question of general sick transportation erno up.

Q. V.itnoss, this yas “ spooial assignment belonging tb the building
system which you received for tht institution of those special hospitals.

Did you administrate this work fr_c the Fuehrer Hondquarters and did this taka
up nuch of your time?

/

A. I exorcise 1 ! this activity, which at first was a planning activity,

certainly up until the yoar of 1942, end I directed it from the Fuehrer

Headquarters since I was tied to the t Hvadquarters.lt w-.s only in the year of

1942, in the suomvr, when I took ov*.r the Office of the Commissioner Gonoral,

that I received a representative so th-*t I was in a position to move about

aore fraoiy. In addition, the situation was tb t the Fuehrer himself

currently wanted to be informed about those building operations. It was a

hobby on his part to build and the building of hospitals :K bunkers was

231?


3 Feb. 4,7 -54-6-2-PX?- Lesser
Court Mo. 1

really a thing which played an essential role during the lest yoars of the
war.

Q. Did those assigraents extend to other fields?

A. Liter, certain connections began with the satire air raid precaution

medical program, which really h=d more to do with the defense against

%

poison gas, but still established a certain connection with hospitals.

Q. Urs this poison gas doerte in any relation to the nssignnent to
the hospitals? ^

A. Mo.

Q. And th t took place in the year of 1943 - 19U* ani that was tho
situotion as it was then. At th-t tine you hr..-: already bccooo tho Reich
Commissioner General forHcalth cnl Uodic-al Services?

A. I becaao Roich Coaaissionor for Health and kodical Sorvicos through
a Fuehrer Decree of July 19A2.

TIE PRZSIDdM: At this tine tho Tribunal wiU ixcose.

(A rocess was token.)


2316


3 G—Kc ohaa-JP

Court X

733 KJ3S LAL: Ao Tribunal it again in soteion.

K2. !ic£LL3Y: If tho Tribunal plcaiO. X an adriood that tho witness,
Karl 3randt, is testifying free*, nates and other papers which he had
before hia. I objoct to this and if tho court nwer-rulos this nbjoctian,

I will ask that tho Prosecution bo furnishod with copies of theso notos
and translations tho roof.

IF.* SS27ATIUS* Hr. Prosidont, in tho trial boforo tho International

Military Tribunal, it waa pornitted for tho dofendant to testify tho

witnoss stand and to tako notos with hia in ordor to sicplify tho procood-

%

ings in riew of tho oxtonsiro notorial, othorwlao, tho oxanination will
bo carriod out, but it nay tako a littlo longor.

733 HTSIIBBTl Tho objoction of tho Prosocution is oyor-rulod*

DIB2CT EXAMINATION - Rosunod.

BY m. SB7ATIUSI

Q, Vitnosa, now I cono to your position ac Cocniosionor Oonoral for
Modicine and Health natters. Vhon did you roooivo this ooaniaoion?

iu By a docroo of July, 1942, I was assigned to this office. It
was callod tho Gonoral Coaaisslonor for hoalth and nddical nattoro.

Q. I shall hand you a copy of this docroc and ploaao connont on it.
It is Docucont Bo. 000 and it is in Document Book No. 1. Will you
ploaso first oxplain how this docroo cono to bo issued?

A . This docroo was issued on the basis of a prictical dec and ■ nf tor
tho wintor battlo in tho East in tho wintor of 1941-1942 and a roport
cono through Dr, Todt and various other ngenclos to tho Puohror. I was
oont along tho road froc Ssolonsk toward Moscow bofiauco rory nany battlo
wounded woro said to be thorc who could not bo taken core of. Tho infor-
nation was inoccurato and in part ontiroly incrediblo. I wont to tho
area of Niascar end thorc at tho railroad station in tho snail vllingo,
tho picture was about as follows: Thorc were ton big froight trains,
closod froight cars all filled with wounded. Tho tenporaturo was botwoon
35 and 40 degrees colsiua bolow zero. Sonc of the bandagos and drossings
of the

2319


3 7eV44-7-3-LJG-KccfcjL>-J?
Court l


233 )


wounded wore eetua-'-ly frosen to the floor of thesara, Tho looonotlroe
«r» fr«gon asd tte boilers broken. Tho nedieal persona©* troro trying
to bolp th* wt.uni'ad as auch at thoy oould, but, of course, thit •
;rut&«U| iap'iggiblo. Xn the district, tfcoro woro about 10^00 woundod*

At the rollroa f gtatioo, thero wore Wo nodical officers with a ntalnua
Of ncdloal supplies and thogo two officers could hardly stay la tho town
Itsolf, Ikr.ro wero snail building, which had bac# axran^od to jocolro
the side, Vt they wero ovor erovdod and tho situatloa for tho woundod

i i j r | ^ ( 9 ij/i »* m • 1 *

wag slnlljr. Vchraacht a^enclos, with which X ostabllshsd sontaot, attonpt-
od to nr tribe thogo conditions to a falluro of tho aodicri gonn*n<U Tho
sacs altitude was taken within tho Vchrnaeht oporationnl staff.

Actually In tho nodical sorwleo, tho nodical sorricos woro to bo clvon
tho rosponaiblllty for the falluro of tho strntt*i« oo.mnnd and oepoolally
for tho lnadoquato suppllos of wlntor clothing, I wont on and followod
%'ac rlrcr toward i!osoow until I oore to tho bandaging ulacos and thoro X
lour nod free tho roplacononts that thoro wero lnofflclcnolos boro.


3 Job^fr-S»-$-l-«nlo7-JP
Court I


Iboat ® kilocctcrs fron Koscov at a Kiall station by tho nano of Koochoisk
freight card had piled up with Soda vator, all froxcn cad conplotcly
unnecessary. Iho aost urgontly neodod nodical suppllos voro lacking,.

Discussions vith tho cocpotcnt nodical agencies la this aroa, ia tho

%

Central soctor, shoved the lapossibility of gotting aid front tho Amy.
About 10 kilonotere away fron tho station of Viasoar, which I nontionod
before, thoro vas an airflold. At thie ^irfiold thorc vas a nodical
officor who had nothing to do, but ho had ordore not to loaro tho airfiold.
Aftor throo day* I rotumod to headquarters. I doecribod^tho eituation
as I had found it. Tho only possibility of getting aid sinco tho Amy
would not help vas for tho othor branches of the Vohroacht, prinarily
tho Luftvaffo and tho Kavy to oono to the aid of tho Amy. At that tino,
in January 1942, thie vas possible only by spocial and procido ordor
frns Hitlor hinsolf. In this vny it was possiblo to arrango that within
24 hours, with tho aid and support of our own couriors to tho Fuohror
Hoadquartcre, that 45 nodical officers woro ouaronod to this area, and
tho nearby stations of tho Vary and tho Luftvaffo, probably tho Koonigs-
borg pooplo sent tho nocossary supplies. Fron that tiro on tho quoation
of uniflod nodical corps went undor unlfiod. coenand in tho Vohrcacht and
was not dropped, but novortholoss it lastod 7 o» 8 nonths, until noot
of tho difficulties of Jurisdiction voro solvod, and this docroo of
28 July 1942 vas issued. Tho ossontial point is tho roforenco that an
ngoncy of Chiof of Vohrcacht Modleal Sorrico vas to bo ostabllehod,.
and on tho civil oido tho Roich Boalth Lcador and Socrotnry in tho
Ministry of Intorior vas to bo givan tho responsibility, and I nysolf vas
cado rosponsiblo for a special task and to ooordinato tho noeds of tho
Vohrcacht and tho Civilian Soctor. For no personally thoro was still
anothor dcoand, that I vas to haro a reprosontativo at hoadquartors oo
that I vas not obliged to bo thoro as nuch as boforo, Tho docroo


2321


3 Yob-H-SV-G-Z-ilaloy-JP

0>urt I


wa« Issued bccauso of tho noods of the frost. For tho Vohrnacht head
thoro wero a few basi» shortconlngs. *cd attanpt was cado to invostigato
this caso in 1944. Tho now chief of the Ychrnacht Kodical, Genoralobore-
tabsarzt Hendlosor, who had previously hooa Amy physician and Arsy
nodical .Professor, rotaiaod this position. Tho organization an eot up
was not adjusted prnporly to tho Luftwaffe and tho Hovy, bocanso tho
Ar=y itsolf was not represented, hut that tho Chiof in chorgo of all throo
hr an eh oo was of tho Xxry.

\

Q. Kow, would you plonso look at tho docroo itsolf and connont on
thoso points whoro you yoursolf aro naned, that is B 3* and "4" of tho
docroo?

A. "3" says Z onpower for spoclal tasks and nogotiatlono, for
special hospital supplies, and so forth, "I ocpowor Prof. Dr. Karl Brandt,
subordinate only to no porsonally and rocoivlng his instructions diroct-
ly froc no, to carry out spoclal tasks and negotiations to roadjust the
roqulroncnts for doctors, hospitals, nodical suppllos, otc. botvoen
tho nilitary and tho civilian soctors of the hoalth and Kodical Sorvicos."

Point "4’ says, "That as Connisslonor Oonoral I an to bo lnfomod
of all hrpixjnings in tho military and Civilian Soctor." Tho practloo
undor this docroo uoant difficulties for no too.

JUDGE SESinrGt Just a nlnuto, plooso, Vltnose.

Dr. Sorvr.tius, In tho translation which wo havo hero, which is
apparently tho official docusont filod with tho Socrotary Oonoral, this
docroo of 28 July 1942.

IE. S3EYASIUS: Tos.

JUDOS SSSIIiG: It takes caro of Paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 5. "4*

apparently is onittod.

IE. S—IYAT I US: Thero is no "S" on tho docroo. It oust bo a nio-
tako in typing. Vo. 4 roads, *Wy plonopotontiary for Hoalth and Kodical
Service.■


2322


3 To b-H- SV-S-3-Kal 07-JP
Court I


7SZ VITS3SS: ... I had direct contact with tho Luftwaffe and tho
Vary end a Nodical Officer of the Luftwaffo was assigned to hixu

IE. KdLUBTt That had bottor bo repoatod, tho ^liglish toxt didn't
coao through for six or oight santcncos* I think it would bo host if
they repeated that for tho record*

ST IE. CTVATIUS: Will you plcaso gn back? Tho English translation
did not cone through, - and com on t on points B 3* and *4" of tho doffroo7

A* Soction 3 says that X an ccpoworcd for apodal tasks and nego¬
tiations to adjust tho roquiroconts for doctors, hospital and nodieel
supplies botwoon nilltary and civilian soctors, and the Hoalth and Nodi¬
cal Sorriccs, and that I re subordinate only to tho undorslgnod, that
is to Hitler pors<-nally, and rocoiro instructions diroctly fr»n hie.

Soction 4 says that I an to bo kept infornod about fundmontal ovonts in
tho civ 11 Ion oorvico of tho Vehmacht and Nodical Sorrico. It oays ho
is authorized to intorvono in a responsible nnnnor.

Q*. Ifcon tho purposo of tho docrco wos to guarmtoo this eooporntion?

A* Tto purposo of tho docroo, fron ny point of flow, was to adjust
tho noeds of tho Vohrnneht and ncods of tho Civilian Hoalth Sorvico
to carry on tho negotiations, and in addition was fron tino to tino
glvon spocinl tasks. Thoso social tasks, of course, crosultod fron dlroct
instructions fron Hitler.

Q* Tbon y<.u did not got any gcnorol authority, but spocial ins¬
tructions in each caso?

A* In tho courso of tho noxt two yoars I csticato 15 to 3)
spocial docrcos wore siffiod by Hitler for tho individual tasks.

It cay bo one or anothor of th ce can bo suboittod as a docunont.

Can 70 U nontion any such spocial assi&mcnt?

A* In tho boginning I had to ostablish hospital basos. Such


3 rob^t-SV-S-^Haloy-JP
Coart I

b docroo wca foroulatod rory cloarly and signod by Eitlor. But tho ono
dcpartcont wan important, — I believe I hero to toll this, that whon
this docroo vac issued vfcoa Hitler si£icd it tho SS was not includod.
Apparently H i m! or had already talkod to Hitlor about it. Slnco thoro
were basic differences botv^on Einnler end no in our ieproanions of tho
dutios of a nodical officor, and vo had quarreled about it on ono occa¬
sion, I was of tho opinion tho nodical officor is first a doctor and eeo-
ondly an officor, whilo Hlnnlor was of tho opinion ho is first*"!
officer and sooo.idly a doctor. Shis was cado eridont by tho fact that
nodical officors of tho Vaffon SS, not liko to Arry, Vary and Luftwaffo,
and so forth, woro tho insignia on their shouldors and could not bo
distinguished free a roguler officor.


3 Peb-fc-GSS-^-l-Hlcabuok
Court *o. 1.


Sow, In cosher 1, paragraph 3* the Waffen SS is sectioned. Will you
please explain the seanlng of this paragraph? It ssys; "for tha ^irpoao of
coordinated treatment of theae problem a nodical officer of the ISovy and
a nodical officer of the Luftwaffe will be assigned to work under bin, the
latter in the capacity of chief of staff." Bow, there followo the eontonce:
Puaianontal problems pertaining to the cedical service of the Whffen SS will
be worked out in agreesent with the nodical Inspectorate of the Waffen SS. ■

A. I began to point out before that there was a nodical officer of tho
Luftwaffe and one of the Bevy as liaison officers to tho fcovly created chief
of the Vehrnacht nedical service, but that althougi the Waffen SS, as long as
it was assigned to Wehrnacht units, was undor the control of tho Vehrnacht
nedical service, the Waffen SS did not send an officer to Handlosor. And
lator whon a request to thrt effect was node to get closer contact, it was
refused.

This is what I Just said with reference to nyoelf; th-it tho SS. tho
General SS an well at toe Woffon SS. wore outelde this decrou for the nodical
and health service. ?hii is the standard decree. The lutcr docreoe for the
General C« ulseioner or the Reich Coaslesioner wero b -eod on thin ono aid it
was nover ropvaled.

n. *>w will you plorte put this decree to one eldo? Bow, did you built
up a big agency for thoso duties?

a. So, In Berlin I had a sort of post nail offico in tho Reich

Chancellory fros where wo hid courier concectione end docuoonts ver.? brought

to so constantly. Tho sail waich wo roculved was first of a quito genoral

•

nature, but aftor a short tixe, six or oig.it weeks, it consisted prisarlly of
inquiries and dosands fron industry. Ihesc requests wore quite outeido of
tho task as originally Intended.

It had been intended th t I was to coordinate the existii* installations
of tho ccdical servico.

q, 4hat wts tho oignificncco of the fact that industry approached you

with s eny inquirios and requests and opened up problems?

232E


3 7b-^-5£S->-2-l.i3*buci

Court 50 . 1.


— X obtained insight Into the production situation in «42 and 'U 3 . end
on the basis of the information *.icn I received I saw that unless a unified
planned econoigr was established the production of nodical suoplioe would bo
crippled conplctely in '1*3. Th^s wac because within the production agencies
tneasolvos there was no unified leadership. There vcr» throe agoncloo wnlch
conflicted with each other; First, the i-iaistry of Econonics, the actual
produotl >n a. ency; then, under Gocrlng, tno Four-Yorr Plan: i-nd finally, tho
ainl^try for ircacoats and Var Production.

-oido froa the fact th-.t the limitations of the Jurisdiction of thoso throo
Of.loot wore not clour tho organization within thoso agencies was based on
tna raw natorinl situation end not adjusted to tho deoand. Tfco hlni-try of
Foono-lcs and tno Spoor Jlnlstry had crooted spocinl connlttoos end working
cou..ittoos, specialist groups welch took caro of tno a torlols. Thor* was no
contrul agency for acdicol su piles: for example, our surgical antorinls, our
catgut, was in chi-rgo of a group who took onro of uusical lnstrunonto. This
group for Lusicul instruments wn* iaterostod only in getting strings for
violins and so forth, but they did aot core wnstner wo had surgical catgut or
not.

v Witness, thus* demands froo industry ’pcaod up n now fiold then. Did
tbit load to Decree Uuab.r 2?

a. Yes, this led to Dccroe Eusber 2.

I shall snow you tais docreo. It is Document 1XM.1, KO-081, also
in Document Book 1, page 14, in tno 2ngilsh vorsion.

(Document handed to witness).

.k. Cccrox. 2 of the 5 tc >f Spetenbor 1913 vrs to the offoct th*t I w^s
outnorizod to trJco cne.rge -- to coordinate and direct centrally tho problons
nd nctlvitlos of tao .ntiro -cdical and h-.alta scionce and rcsoarch no well
as to tho orga irational institutions concerned with tho uanufreturo and
distribution of aodical cctcri^ls.

<. Witness* can you tell no wnat your collaboration vita the civilian


an. Vcar n i c Bt sectors was?


2326


3 T\>*-GZS-9-yiiaabuck.

Court mO. 1.


A. I suit distinguish betvoun two things: first. the noccity for no,
frou the sca.l office of throe or four persona which I had at thot tino, to
dor clop two offices, one dealing with neterinls, planning and econouics,
and one with tho scientific a*tt V s. the office for science and rosonreh.

Ifeoso two officos. together with no, had to coordinate fisst tha
natorlal hoods between the *ihraacht and clrilian soctor. Our position


2327


3 Fcbruary-M-OJG-9-le-Kinabuck
Court So. 1


*aa that cf a differential. Through this second decree the first decree was
not repeated. It was outside the authority of material needs as wall as
science. I did not establish any connection with tho SS, and until the fall
of 1944 when there was a visit by Gcnzktn, the SS did not attempt any
coordination.

Uy two offices, planning and economics, and science and rosearch.
Professor Rostock was in ch:rgc of tho latter, hed assignment* which moro
or less complemented each ether. If I referred to tho production difficult¬
ies before, I did so in order to dcscribo the necessity and the need for
thet production. The ogroatant with the three competent production agencies
was that I was the o.ily responsible representative of the needs cf the
V< three eh t and civilian sector. plan of dosends for civilian supply had
to to sot up first.

Until 1943 in spite of the war conditions this plan had not been com¬
pleted. Tho Ministry of the Interior hed no idee of wh't these demands
%

wore. 1.1th tho aid and support of Lohrateht ngencios end industrial agen¬
cies, it was finally drawn up. This plan of civilian deornds was worked
out in do tail end coordinated with tho central plan of tho l.ohmncht which
had boon worked out in tho ceantioo. The adjusted pirn, coordinated plan
between l-chrnacht and civilian wrs dicussod with the production reencios
again, and this was tho first task of qy offico for science rod rosearch.

Production; that is, industry, ottunptod to prescribo what wo could
got. It was Rostock's task to establish wh t was nccossary and not what
wrs offered us, in a v.ry difficult procedure. For cxamplo, our pharmaceu¬
tical preparations which, up to than, had been producod in numbers of about
35,000 different pr^par*tions; they were divided into groups rcducod to
12,000 -ni 6,OCO. 4nd finally, a program was s^t up in which only about 40
absolutely essenti; 1 preparations were contained. The same was truo of x-ray
machines, instruments, all pieces of equipment cf a medical nature. Tho
distribution of tho supplies within tho hehrnacht was within the l.ohraacht
and within the civilian health service, their cwn organizations, and I had
nothing to do with that.


2320


3 FcbO4!7“M-0JG-9-2a-Kinebuck
Court So. 1


Q Then the office for science end research gavo research essignaents
itself ns they have been discussed here?

A The office for science and research did not give any research assign-
aents in that precise fern. It supported research.

It mist be considered thet in 1943 =nd '44 in general there were other
d cards cn the aidical rnd hcelth service, net only in thwarting scientific
activity, but the Uinistry of the Interior and the Propaganda Ministry,
the Party Chancellery and oth-rs triod to h-.vc studies, pnrticul*rly nodical
studies, stopped. In 1943 * decroc was drawn up and signed that all tho
universities wero to be closed. «t that tine I tried to^rnvc this repe.ilod
and as far as the acdical fccultivs were concerned, I succowdod.


2c29


3 Fob 47-M-S VlO-l-Putty
Court Uo. 1


Ho °fficw for Sclcnco and Roscx'.rch undor Rostock rocolvod frar.
r.o tho r.osl^aiont to try cvcrytl in- to ppovonl* tho Interruption
o l nodical rttfliv-s which 'as pl.nnod in 19'.4y In individual ass i£>
nomte w! let .vO stock au£portod — I could nontion the cttor.pt to
cultivate tistuo culture a — the question wca breu'd t up ox“ flndin-
nn a^r subatituto which is noooesnry in r.rbj. .r:\ry work, Ho supp¬
orts t) o work with th.o oloctronica nicroscopo and various othor
tl in s Mild ho hlrs.lf can dueo^ibo hotter then I r

I si ould only like to say ono tl -n~, first of all, tint th.o
work wl ich Rostock did, ho did on ’ -k«^Lf on ny or ora, and I
n.aolf, if I clclnod successes forriorly, ©ontj. uod to boor th.o res¬
ponsibility for ovwryfehlnc olono,

Q. You spolto of attache on r.odicr l studies. Whc.t woo tl o pos*
Iticn of nodical scloncc rt tint tii o in -onoral? ’'loaso connont
briofly end conaidor what tho wryoft Profosror Lolbrnnd h.r.c test¬
ified hero.


A. •■r. Lolbrand doscribod tho situation qrito oorrootly in
nany points. I do not went to ’0 very far beck, Tho situation in
1933 was that rlth th.o boyinnin- of tho influonco of politics on
ovor.tl in-, .n otto pt was rondo to have politics provc.ll in univ¬
ersities ns poll, Tho If iional Socialist bccf.uo of Studontfl was
cle. r of rll tl wee units .nd orv*-n}s:.tipnr wflch v/cro forr.cd, That
led to a false conclusion. If wnc bolicvou tl; t if tl is was ach¬
ieved, science itself would bo furthered^ ovorytl in- that was
Qctivo in any way, all the c.ctivo forcos available whoro m rttowpt
was opdo tc iliroct tl on into politics. It was not realised t’at
scionco itself, scientific r-aep.rc'. and nork essentially Jv.fl I'ofcl.Jry
to dp nitl* politics, A nunber of pen who obtained influence 'pp
half odpqctcd.


3W0


3 7eb 47-Jk-JJC-lO-la-rutty
Court !fc. 1

So resulting inferiority feelint they triad to compensate for by trying
to push the scientist, the real scientist, aside as unequal to then, and
cn the other side helped the dilettante. I refer to the description of
von 3rehnar which I cave this nornine.

Jkrr when the war had be^un the question of science was overlooked ontirely,
Dqforients for tho universities had not been ^lvjn so that teachers woso
sullenly drafted, and the training of the 3tulents u a s distorted in sene
cases. Co nailorations of basic research had boon overlooked, and the idea
of resoarch on the ba3is of excellency prevailed. The lack of interest
of the universities thaneelves led in 1943 to the decision to closo the
uni varsities altogether, Thero were a amber of doctors with whai I was
In contaot at that tine who exerted their influence to liave the unlvorsltles
reopened and contlmed, tho doan of the University of Bonn, for instances
Sohulecaan, and ono of Kuenator, Slociamd, and Souerbruch, rnd, of course,
Rostock who was dean of tho Berlin faculty and oxortod a certain influonce
in this respect. After that thero waa an enomous nunbar of llttlo annoying
difficulties. 2 vor 5 *one waa suddenly Interested in these questions of
universities, and everyone had sooathinc to do with thor.. Tho Hieh Cajiander
of tho Uataraoht was interested in it beoauao of defendants. Sauckel as
plenipotentiary for Labor Comitrvmt wanted to havo studonts fiven acne
sort of labor duty. Contingents for ostablishinf institutions, otc.,
were in charts of the ::«nlatrr of joononioe. The Sneer Ministry rofusod

to take charge of tha_. if social papers ware to be printed, tho

%

Reich Press Chanber opposed it, and in spite of ^11 that thero was no
person who was roally in chare® of tho universities. I say this only to


2331


3 Fea-Jt.JP-10-lb-Putty-PH
Court Kb. 1.


show that from my Office of Science and Research that this
was the primary decisive task, and I attempted to keep
physicians free of politics as far as possible. Without

knowing It directly, S found support In the tfforts of

/

Dr. Blome essentially directed against Dr. Conti. Professor
Lelbrand has already described Conti. He was a political
oxponont end called himself that, and saw the task ot the
health leadership whloh he represented aitlroly from too
political point of view.

That the training of the young dootor, the studont, o
suffered eapeolally during tin war in Germany I don*t
bollcvo I need to emphasize espedlally. Everyone knows
how difficult training opportunities were. Novortheles a,
a groat dealwis cortninly done for research and actual
raodloal troatnent of too doctor at homo, and before 1939 the
modlcal offlcore wore on the wholo outstanding. Thoro wore
oomo scientific suocossos, tho dorolopmont of oulfonmldco
in too surgical field because thet was tho closest to mo,
tho bone troatmont according to Fuetsohor and too further
rosults of hoart surgery are significant.

Q: Witness, I cooo to a different subject. Zbu woro
given ar, assignment called by tho Prosecution Chemical
Warfare Agent Decree from tho first of March 1941. Wo
do not have this Decrco Itself, tut you wrote n lottor
atout It to Himmler, a copy of which Is here. It is
Document NO-012. That is also In Volume I of the document
book. Z on not certain where It Is In tho docunont book.

It Is a very brief letter. I shall read It so tint the
Court any take notice of It.


2332


3 Feb 7---I —.-10-lc-rutty
Ccurt Jc. 1


3irlin » C --^ch 191*. Tb_ Gener a C-rciMicncr cf the Fuehrer for bcdical

rr 8 ^- 1 " &er “‘- ^ rtf

-W«te.tete. —3noW y« «m «*; the . bet-etna,,
c,-/ rf c. erfen tr n tbo nmr ^ u * a,^.; t .

- * “ < - *™hnl Z an’.: , . ^ t , in _

*“ *“ ^ °“- a “•• ^ m y . ««. x « u

^ ^ ““ t= f.ot in tend _ thon

;r~~ ■ tcic ' An ° — - ■« -* >—- ,« „ t sottlo

: r ^ icea,5i * lto —w. Hou latte,

" i 1 '•“ lte “ ^ ^ *»-» •'••=* -« th, «, t,. _

“• “ °^ X ™ - W ' * *» •— P— Wte y:u ^

~ i0 intcr - ,r, -tcr can't V He; othoruieo.

 • !SS:=,,ti °' un “ 1 ’ 1 ~ * r» t, te tte *u *««t «
=lrcr. t v in ovi^nco.

“* S=ViI1BS: IJewtS ““ 611 “•-=■• » the aJU*. 3 ciucnt D ac

t:X ^ » 1 «“ «■ X-o mrfttre *<. *„ rocoM .

T. - -r-SEClir. Can ycu tecr,. * the ncia- cf tho a«9

^ aiV - JnWl 1 hc ’- •» «»• «*. I ten.! .vw a act

“* to It. Oarrott cf tie te n.-.U.n Center - tbi. ^ , net


2 333


3 IoV*OJG-ll-l-3oar<WP
Court I


Q, Witness, will you ploaso axplain this letter?

A, Ilrst I should llko to point out that tho tolophono nueber which
sounds secowhat nystorlous was tho tolophono nuebor of tho Rolch
Chancellory oxtonslon 183 ftas cy rooc In tho clinic In Ziogolstrasoo.

Tho ordor which is nontinnod thcro, which was a docroo dated 1 Kerch
1944, was noroly a production notbod of oquipcont against Chonlcal Vnrfaro
and had tho following history: Whon, in tho Fall of 1943 air folds on
Germany wero intonsifiod and thcro wero certain runors which causod tho
fear that there night ho gas attacks, Chemical Warfare 'end rarieus agencies
ohtainod ens caaka. Sinco cy offico. Plans and Ecor.oaics, was working
on a gcnoral nodical supply, tho Rod Cross which was ono of our custonoro,
and tho rST, had tho inprosslon that I night ho In chargo of gas nooks
too. I got two inquires and roquosto for doliTory for about 100,000
cask,. As I had nothing to do with thoso I oont th<o to tho conpotont
office in tho Spoors Kinlstry. Aftor about four nonths, at tho boginnihg
of 1944, I rocotrod the sano roquosts again. I took then, nyoolf, to
tho head of tho Aroanont Dolivory Offico; his n*o was Doctor SchioBor.

I loarnod fron hia that ho oould not dolivor tho 100,000 gas nnsks that
woro asked for boenuso In tho prorlous yoar tho incroaso in production
of such apparatus had not taken place, hut production had actually boon
roducod. Hr. Sc hi o her hie sol f — this was sonowhat mb arcs sing and unplea¬
sant to Ifr. Schiobor boenuso in tho noantlno confidential agents had
brought tho nows that tho Anoricans had shippod spoclnl oquipaont for
that pur oso, which brought gas to Snglnnd; and, that go* tho fomor
African Ihoator of War was boing transforrod to Italy. Undor this
situation, 1*. Schiobor callod a oonforonco about tho ond of Fobruary,
and ndvlsod no at this conference that all industry and development who
had anything to do with this nattor participated. Tho rosult was that
tho supply of Chanicnl Warfare dofonsivo apparatus was disastrous in view
of this situation. Within the Wohmacht. within the Russian area alono,
there were about lO.OCO.OOO casks, with two to throe tinos as neny filters
which had been abandoned thcro. This was about two-thirds of tho total

production sinco 1933. Tho Airraid Warden

2534


3 Ftbrw rj-M-OJG-ll-2-Btard
Court He. 1


Service hid abcut twenty percent of its needs. And, for kinder gas masks
there vcs about seven or eight percent cf the needs available. The product¬
ion cf chlcrlua calcato was adequate for caking it sAfe for the populction
of on* large city after one largo raid. Ur. Schieber caked me to inform
the competent e>ncics, vhich he could net roach directly, about the result
of this discussion. Since I went to the Fuehrer's Headquarters the sane
night and =et Go«rinr, who was really the nan responsible for air raid pre¬
cautions, I informed hin. Gccring had no idea of this situation at the- timo.
For his it wrs of the same importance; Tor hin, it awrnt that uftcr one gas
raid over Gcrnmy, the war nauld havv been over, .md, with this ettitude
and with the drnwn-power cf conviction, he infora.d the Fuehrer, himself.

On tho noxt 'ey, I was celled to the Joint conference 'nd asked whothor
I would toko the production of g-® nask® into ay effico for planning and
cconcalcs. I took tho point cf view th:t such *t. rssignn-nt which night
have further developments was not exactly cccmensurato with ay office of
Planning and Econo -ics. 1 said thrt 1, oyself, night set up a p'.rrllol
organization to coll ber-to with tho competent <r;cncioB. and, th t is hew
tho decree cone abcut, rtiich in addition to g ® &-* rrve n3 control of
gas itself, jas production. This use necessary, bocauso in view of tho raw
materiel situation, the previous counter-cc-'.surcs which we had produced
could no longer bo produced, so a substitute a-terial hod to bo selected,
and these had to be tested with our Guram grses. It w: s necessary to bo
informed about the effectiveness of thuso g. se*s. On the i.hclu, this assign¬
ment was a-iorussed to the ministry for /ornament and ..or Production at tho
Production agency, and to me in a sort of control capacity, for tho exe¬
cution of the program which w s to bo sot up, and where the noods of tho
’..ohrmacht and the noods of the


2??S


3 Job4-STMl-la-3oard-JP
Court I


Civilian soctor woro to bo adjusted and coordinated la »o far as possiblo.
ley assignment of our ova sclnatiflc research vas not givon la oasy sonso.

*kcn I roturned to Borlin with this assicnaont and triod to loarn
about tho situation as a«vhnlo, that is, to find out tho c<npotont
agencies for tho productions and distribution and ueo of this apparatus,

I loamcd that thoro vas no uniflod corn and. It vas qulto confusod.

Sot only voro tho Individual nattors In dlfforont hands* but,"* for oxanplo,
tho Airraid Polico had tho right to tako noasuros during an attack*
but at tho noeoat of all cloar, tholr authority coastxl, and tho noaauros
had to be considered and continued by tho aviation Ilinlotry. Thoso
things wore lnpocsiblo sinco a largo nunbor of orgtu'i»tIons oould bo
offoctod Iff tho dcoroo* which I did not know at that tlno. But, on tho
othor hand, because of tho runors of Cherleal Varfaro, vo had to tako
ovory precaution In thoso dofoneo noasuros so that thoy would not
bo cone '.mown and thus start now runors.

I ves forood to send all ny lottors as top socrot or ao top nllltnry
socrot. I turaod to all loading non In So many so that I would not
got In contact with subordinate ages cl os who night think thoy hod oono*
thing to do with it, but wt* actually did not. So, I did not send
thoso lottors to tho Roichsfuohror $S Hlmlor, but to tho Roichcnlnlotry
of tho Interior bocauso In tho Kinistry of Intorlor voro tho doclsivo
agonclos of airraid precaution.

' Q. So-, did this activity, on tho basis of tho docroo, tako that
euch of your tlno?

■a, Tho work with this progrie vas tho doclsivo work for no in 1944.
This progrre developod liko an avalanche. Ono Rolen ngoncy and ono
spcclnlixod group, ono aftor tho other, Jolnod in It. Thoro was not
only tho very painful dove lope ant of a now gas cask for tho population,
but at tho ond vo had to build airraid sholtors.


2336


3 Jeb-H-Sl£-ll~lb-3c ard-JP
Coart I


o specially tfcnao In connection with Spoor bocauoo of the ventilation nr-
g-ocont; they wore taken care of to goth or with ventilation prohloaa in
the 5ary. It was a prograi which affcctod porhapa noro pooplo than
any other progrnn of the }! ini a try for Aroaront and Var Production. I
did not catch 11 ah any special agencies for thia work. I workod hy
collahornting with the cospotcnt agoncioa which actually carrioi out
the work for no.

IE. CTTATHJSi Kr. Proaidont, I re poring to another euhjoct now.

7EZ ?33$X!E27l Tho court will rocooa until 1330 hour a.


2337


* rob 47- A- GE3-12- 1- Blakley- (AS)
COURT I


CORRECTED COPY
AFTERNOON SESSION.

(Tho hearing reconvened at 1 T, 0 hours, * February
1947.)

KARL BRANDT — Resumed
DIRECT EXAMINATION — (Continued) A

BY DR. S2RVATIUS:

Q. Witness, you wer.- speaking about the emergency
situation of air-raid preOAutlonary measures. Were there other
fields where a similar emergency prevailed In fields with
whloh you wore In contact?

A. As far ns wo are conoornod with modloal matters,

I roooivod an additional field of tasks In connection with
the oo-callod Gollonborg program. This doalt with a moroly
Industrial program for the robulldlng of a oortaln works.
Howovor, this robulldlng played a doolslvo rolo for mo. I
must say at first how thu medical care was handled In In¬
dustry during tho yoars of the war. fhon pointing out oor¬
taln mattors about our medical science, I said that wo tried
to oen trail ro everything and bring It Into a oortaln direc¬
tion; and I said that the result, of courso, was dlfforont.

It was similar In our civilian modloal caro. The roason was
that the leadership itself within tho civilian care was not
unified at all, although It was always doored from political
points of^^w.^yiystriAl work was cared for medically from
three dkW^frent sources which not only had no connoctlon
' 1 th another but really quarrelod with oach other.

At fix'd < it was the group of works physicians, an Institution
which was subordinated ,to the German labor front. That is
Dr. Ley, who had rjially nothing to do with medical mattors

28


» Fob 4?-*-S2S-13-l-21akloy- (AX)
COURT I


as 9uch but who fron his own Initiative and from hie nodi¬
cal organization instituted about fifteen thousand organiz¬
ations. Ho had desired *to push aside ah read nodical
efforts in Industry. These works pnysioians had to care
for the supervision of the work with reference to hygienic
institutions, prevention of accidents, et cetera; but^they
had already started to oare for the actual nodical treat¬
ment of the workers* x

This actual nodical treatnont in faotorlo6 was tho
task of tho modtal insurance companies, an office whloh
was hoadod by Dr. Orotho, who wao a collaborator of Dr-
Conti, tho Reich Holdth Leador whon Dr. Lolbrandt


3 Fob 47-A-G£S-12-2-51Akley-(AX)

COURT I

mentioned recently. A third institution was added, the
nodical confidential service, which also oarriod out
export opinions. Thls^ was an institution of the Reich
Minister of Labor, In this case Dr.'Del to, and to vhloh
other Booial institutions wore added. Those throe organiza¬
tions generally cane to the worker In Industry; and^thus
It occurred that In a roal case of energency the Jurisdic¬
tion was loft unclear. '

\

* Now, in the year of 1944, the first alr-rald against
the Goman ball bearing works started and shortly there¬
after etartod against waterworks. Slnco as a result the
entire war potential was endangered, the previously mention¬
ed Gellonborg docroo was lsauod by the competont minister
and the Fuohror. In this Gellonborg dooroo thero was a
clause which concerned Itself with medical care for
Industrial workers. I was commissioned with tho task of
carrying that program through. I could only do that with
tho assistance and support which undor tho clraumstanoes
had to coao from the framework of civilian and perhaps
also tho military sector slnco I had no organlrational
institution of my own.

A Justified prerequisite for such a measure was tho
knowlodgo of tho necessity and the size of the need whloh
night arise. I have alroady indicated that I had quarrel¬
ed partly with certain party organizations; and Dr. Ley
In this case belonged to that, with reference to his work,
medical institutions whloh were based on a purely political
level, and Dr. Conti, who followed the same direction. When
a few days later, aftor this docroe was signed, tho Louna
works near Merseburg were attacxed, I immediately wont there

2«9


' F«*b-A-^&-12-2-Bi“Jaey-(AK)

COURT I

in order to look over the situation, I was not introduced
to the works physician as soon as I arrived; but I was led
to the works managoV, who told bo that I would not be able
to speak to the physician. He explained that, owing to a
clroular after the issuing of the Gellenborg dooroo, Dr.
Loy had ordered that his works physician should not doal
with no and that pooplo conaisslonod by no should not
speak to hln and glvo no any information.

I thon succeeded in speaking to this works physlolan
privately. I happened to find out that undor certain cir¬
cumstances assistance could bo


29 a


3 Fab-.»-C£S-12-3-3laJclay (BK)
Court lio. 1


brought fron other surrounding works so that there we.s no
additional nilitary help necessary, that is, nodical
officos end materiel. But oven for that I noodod on in¬
sight into the situation as 3.*. Conti gained it in

%

nodical insurance organizations. I established connection
with D . Grothe by tolophone and askod hia to oono to no
with aatorial about Leuna. He said that hj would but did

A

not coac personally. He only sent a personal friond, who
told no that Conti hr.d forbidden hin to spunk to^a-. This
noant that tho order with which I was connissionod failed
conplotcly sinco I could not do anything in any natter
at all.

I thon spoke on the telephone to »r. Conti, who con-

f

firnod tho fact that he had Jtyiddon his subordinates
to speak to no. Consequently, I wont to tho hoadquartors
of tho Fuehrer and told hin that I wanted to resign hy
offices sinco under those oircuustonoos I was not in a
position to perforn tho tasks which wore put to no.


2340


* rob 47—A-MAA-l-*-l—Cook— (AX)
COURT I


ft. And how were those difficulties finally overcome?

A. After very violent quarrels during the course of
which Martin Bormann who was continually in the headquar¬
ters played some part, It finally cane to th* hitherto men¬
tioned decree, about the health .nd medical service, accori
ing to which I was appointed at the sane time to Re^oh
Commissioner, whloh gave mo the possibility to doAl with
an agonoy concerned with the medical servlco and to give
them directions In order to bo able to oxoouto my own
part.

Q. Z shall later cono back to this first dooroo. You
wore speaking about difficulties In the olvlllan sootor,
was It similar with reference to tho Wehrmacht?

A. Within the Wehrmacht thoso difficulties vox's por-
hnpo not so obvious and open but thoy exlstod In prnotlcal-
ly the samo way, and abovo all*thoy woro oupportod by tho
different oonoepts whloh oxlstod about tho tasks of tho
chief of the- nodical servlco, that Is tho leadership, and
the medical sorvlce ltsilf. In addition tho question was
never dosed about the collaboration between the ohlof of
tho Wehrmacht modlonl sorvlce appointed In 1942, and the
other medical chief belonging to the Luftwaffe and the Navy.

Q. Do you remember tho directive for tho Chief of tho
Wehrmacht Medical Servlco of the 7th of August, 1944, whero
you too recolvod a spoolal function?

A. This official directive was a special directive
approved by the Fuehrer on tho basis of a docroo which he
had signed. The decisive thing about It was that a differen¬
tiation was made botwoon tho Chief of tho Wohrmacht Medical
3ervlce, tho Army Physician and the Army Medical Inspector


2*41


3 Zeb-4?-A-H~~-l*-l-C00k-(A:<)

COURT I

on the other side, who until that time wore concentrated
In the hands of Chief Handlosor of the Army Medical Service.

DR. SERVaTIUS: hr.*Prosldont, that Is Document Ho. 227
I don't know whether the Tribunal has a copy of this docu¬
ment. I havo not been able to find the page in the Document •
Book during the recess, but I now hear It Is contained In

Dooument Book Ho.l . and If the document is available I

% •

should like to hand It to tho wltnoss. (Dooument Is handed
to wltnoss)

BY DR. SERVATIUS:

Q. Did you define this dlroctlvo which you rocolved
on the basis of this


2"* 41a


* Pe b 47- Mjto-1 2- COOX- (*K)

COURT I


decroos?

A. To lndioafg ay own tag&g J oust point to the
position which the new % Chlof of the Vohraacht Medical
Sorvice received fro- the strength of this docrco . That
situation was that within the Wehroacht the Fuehrer was tho
3uproao Comnandor. To him wore subordinate, as tho noat
oxocutive agency, the Chlof of the OK*/, Flold Marshal Keitel.
Tho normal channels for tho Chlof of tho Modlc*& Sorvloo
of tho Araed Forces should have boon that the Chief of Iho
Medical Sorvloe of tho Air Force, tho Chlof of tho Modloal
Sorvloo of tho Navy and also of the Army should havo ended
at tho highest plaoo, that is, in this caso, at tho Fuehrer's
. That


2*42


3 Feb 47-^-13-le-iJG-Coak
Ccurt I


Th:t should hav.. been the case through the Chief cf the OKI., especially
through Hendloscr, th't is tc sty through Handles or as Chief of the
"ehnsecht ucdicel ScrYico. In actual fact, ho«ovur, the Supreme Cenaand-
er cf the various rr-Jed forces circuaver.t.d the Chief of the OKrf, K-it-J.,
by trJc-ng the direct route »c the Fuehrer, sc th-.t cuite obviously Kict~l
s no active orgen within the ’.chracht leadership. Since Hitler liii-
s-lf was at the sane tine Suproao Ccecndcr cf the ..r~c, the r.ewl} created
.jrx y Physician end *Jny Medical InspwCtcr »-cre Iso therewith dfVectly
subordinated to Hitler, end the Chief cf the -..died Services cf tho
;.rued Forces w.uld r gain be circuaventod ivtur-i-y. In order to find
c link for the Chief cf tho Uedicrl Service cf the .joed Forces in this
decree cf the 7 ;.ugust, 1944, the directive st tea: TTwt he, accepting
his nerely technical or-or, should le. d tho nodical service according
to the general outlines of the Fuehrer. These goner.* 1 cutlin.a with

which wo ere ccncemc tore ncrsur.s which wuu tc be token in accord-

*

'nee with the Decree Ho. 1, and rtiich neic tc be adjusted to the civil-
ian nodical service. I give ycu two precise cxcaplcs. Since thore wa o
p lack cf nedied equipment, especially because of the inroads cf tho
vcrtinc neods, the '/chruacht had tc put wenc arterial at tho disposal
cf the public, end nt the crae tine had tc Keep fr-c i c»rt.'in racunt
of hospital anr.cc fer the civilian •‘dainistratlon, but there ?ro other
points of view ir. this decree which arc certainly important. There is
the newly creo.tod -my physici-n, :my nulled inspector. He was at
th t tine appointed on the b-sis of the prepend and if I reateiber
ccrrectly without any influence of Goncrrlcbcrst. bsarst Handlosar,
-ppcinted by Hinder, wee ir. the aeanti-ie load becc. o the Supreme Coa-nnnd-
cr cf the Reserve arcs, since the 2Dth ef July. This *..-s possible, sinco
coinciding vith the 33th of July, tr.c Chief adjutant of the ..ehmucht
tdth Hiilcr was injured, and his successor, General Schcundt, was in
close ocnnecticn with !I rtir. 3cmann, and the Generd of the .aJTcn-SS,
Fogelein, whe at the sane tine was a liaison non cf Kiaal-r tc the
Fuehrer. If it is cf importance for the creation cf that decree, I
should like tc point cut cnc sentence with reference t ^ special vi-n


3 Fob 47-4-13“2a-LJG-Cpck
Court No. 1


of the decree, that is to aa.y, the Chief cf the Medical Service cf
the ‘..Ghraeht, or through, ao far «a the special field ia concerned,
the Ilcdicel S-rvicc of the ^ehraacht, the organization within the franc

work of the ..ehraccht. Thia catcbliahca dearly that the representation

•

ia really carried out by the Ucdical Chief hiesdf. If such e unified
aclution was established with reference to the eehraacht, it would
ncccaaarily have been necessary to do'the sitae thing on the civilian

side, that ia to say, the creation of the office called the Chief of
tho Civilian ilcdical Service. Prcparetic ns in accordance with that
wero actually acdo for thia Chief of the Civilian Uedical Service, and
this is scuething where Uertin Boraenn wes interested end it was pro¬
vided that the health leadership would also have to be represented in
the fr.co of foreign powers. .


2344


* Feb 47-£3H-14-1-Gross-(AX)
court I


Q. Witness, these are the difficulties which lead
to this so-called decreet

A. Yes. %

Q. Who was the successor of Schmundt? Wasn't that
General Burgdorf? Would you please correct yourself. You
made a mlstako boforo. a

a. The sucooasor of Schnundt was General Burgdorf.

DR. SERVATIUS: Hr. President, there Is obviously a
mistake of translation with reference to tho Gellonberg
Program and to wator works, hydrating works la montlonod.
This is something a little dlfforent than wator works.

These are roally petrol works wo aro conoornod with, tho
production of fuol from ooal.

THE PRESIDENT: Conoornlng whloh doounont la that?

DR. 3SRSATIUS: It Is not oonoornlng a documont. Tho
witness had said that largo difficulties had started In
connection with the Oollenborg Program and ho montlonod
hydrlorwerko which was translated "w»ter works".

THE PRESIDENT: You roforrod to tho translation hor.j?

DR. SERVaTIUS: I now oomo to Dooreo III. It Is

documont NO-, In Doounont 3ook I, bohlnd the first two

decrees. I hand tho doounont to you.

THE PRESIDENT: I will ask the transl-tor If ho
recollects the phrase which it is contcndod was mis¬
translated.

MR. HAULER: 4 translator): Yes, sir, I do.

THE PRESIDENT: You are confirmed that the translation
really was lncorreot and that counsel's suggestion is
correct?

HR. RAMLER: As far as I know it Is correct. I thought


2*45


S Fab-23H-14-l-aro88-(.»S)

OOURT I

that tho word itself aouia bo translated as these works.
However, before consulting a dlptionawy I aan't make a
definite atatonont as to'what Is tho correct word.

THE PRESIDENT: You will Investigate the natter?

HR. R^HLER: Yos, air. ^e are concerned with merely
a technical expression.


2*45a


* Fob 47-£HB-l4-2-Gro88-(«K)
COURT I


3Y DR. SSRVATIUS:

Q. witness, would you deflno your attitude to that

•

decreo, especially In relation to former decrees I and II?

A. Through Decree III of the 15th of August 1944,
whore at the sane tine I was appointed tho Reich Commis¬
sioner for Medical and Hoalth Services, it can bo said
that tho first and socond decreos were not roeclgdjd. This
oan be seen by tho tttrds "at the sane time as well". It
also says In the text "in this oapaclty this officer ranks
as highest as Helchs authority." That is whonovor I signed
In my oapaclty as Cocalsslonor for Moaical and Health Ser¬
vices, not when I did It as Comalssloner General. This Jus¬
tified me to take oaro of natters concerned with the Modloal
and Hoalth Sorvloos and issue directives. On tho strength
of this decree it had at least formerly become superfluous
that in the caso of diroctlvoo from tho Fuohrer I did not
have to re-lssuo another directive, but I oould do It with¬
out anything elso In writing. That was Important with
reference to tho multitudo of tasxs that had in tho meantime
arisen, a big conoroto oxanplo about the collaboration
betwoun me as General wonalssloner and later Reich Commis¬
sioner with the Wehrmacht will explain that. I previously
pointed out there tho situation which at that time prevailed
among our wounied. From this developed the concrete task of
rebuilding of hospital bases In rear areas, a further task
was collaboration with the air Force and with special Air
3quadrons put at my disposal which camo from the contingency
of the Fuehrer Headquarters and which were necessary for tho
transport of woundod and thv Transportation of medical equip¬
ment to the front. In this manner thousands of heavily wound-


2*46


* »ob-£3H-l4-2-Groe&- (AX)
COURT I


ed persona were brought back. For this purpose I needed
aone plai* in order to Judge the needed material, and for
thla I needed tho development of Troop Special Sorvico In
tho detailing of medical educational posalbllltlea, the


2*46a


s ?eb 4?-i-3JG-14-la-Grc«s-(«K)

COURT I

commitment of transportatIon dapartnent of sick, of hospi¬
tal trains going bach to horns cltlos, the collaboration
with Industry as I ^ntlonod before with reference to the
Gellenborg Decree and nany other matters. The case Is
similar In Civilian Soctors. Tho difficulties which I had
with Mr. Conti were Just mentioned by mo. Here wo »oro
ooncorned to koop physicians at home as far as possible and
at thaisamo tlao cover the needs of the front. The creation
of ovacuatlon hospitals, of hospital cities as they booamo
necessary, ^apoclally toward the ond of tho tfar, which
wore to accept sick pooplo from tho various "gnus". Moaouros
wore nooossary to take care of tho hoavlly damaged aroas
of western Germany. If ono trios to recall tho situation
as It provallod at tho tlmo In one's memory, ono knows that
It was not posslblo to do anything by long ways of negotia¬
tion and to clarify matters It was necessary to ajt Immed¬
iately and make decisions and to do everything which soomod
could bo attalnod and which soomod necossary. It happonod to
mo In Hamburg that after the sovore raids there a transpor¬
tation department whlcn belonged to tho Police and consisted
of thl-rty to forty sick cars could not bo usod slnco tho
President of the Police could not be reachod and gave no
order.

Q. From this now special task which you received ono
could.only conclude you received new Jurisdiction to carry
through these tasks?

a. The possibility of execution was to be set up. I
should hav^ said It should have boon ®t up because It only
seemed like that when the decree was Issued at the end of
August 194a, at the tine when Germany Itself was an area of


2*47


* F e b 4?-A-DJG-14-l»-Gro88-(«JC)

COURT I

warfare.

Q. 'fitness, wa shall coma bach to It. I should like
to aubnlt charts submitted by Prosecution with reference
to the position which you held, your own plan, tho plan
slgnod by you, and I should like to Illustrate your position
using these charts to explain how far you wore superior,
whother you had orders or directives, and so on. Boforo I
submit theso charts I hnvo a few tochnlcaT corrections to
make with ref erenoe to the .-translation. I am being Informed
about the following alstako. It was said that the Army
Modi cal Inspootor as of 20 of 7-44 was a >polntod without
rtandlosor's lnfluonco. In tho translation tho opposite wao
said, namoly, appolntod by Hand-


* 47-A-DJG-l4-2a-Gross-(«K)

• •

COURT I

loser. I visa to correct that. Wltnoss, It la truo, isn't
It, that the Radical Inspector of the Array was appointed
without Handloser's Influence? Didn't you say that?

«i. Generalartz Walter;- who at that time was Army
physician and Army Medical Inspector, became ovldont to
Himmler since ho had Instituted certain hospitals ancT there
In ho saw something very special and on his ovn Initiative,
probably through Burgdorf a:d Fegololn, appointed Woltor
as Medical Chief of the Army without Handlosor, exclusive
of any Influence In that respoot.

Q. I now sub-alt to you thoso six charto which aro
documents coming from Document Booh Volume I, at first
645. The chart Is headod "Organization undor tho Reloh
commissioner, Karl Brandt." Those two linos, howovor, were
struck out. Is this chart available and doos tho Tribunal
have It?

TH2 PRESIDENT: Do you have the oxhlblt numbor of
that chart?

DR. SERV.iTIUS: Tho exhibit numbor I in afraid I don't
Know. Tho ohnrt was subalttod In the first document book and
Is NO-645. I am Just hoarlng that It is oxhlblt #"S.


2*48


* Fab 47-^MA.V-15-l-Lesaor-(AXJ

COURT I

Q. Witness, would you define your attitude to this
chart and say something about Its creation?

-i. The decisive thing about this chart la that at
the head, the designation "Organization of the Gorman
Nodical Sorvlce under Reich Commissioner Karl Brandt" was
struck out and this was then signed by me. In ordow to
understand it further i must say something how this chart
originated. In the last year during the course of 1945, I
was repeatedly Interrogated about my activities and position
in 1945 In Xranzberg. In connection with theso Interroga¬
tions two charts wore made by mo and on theso oharts I
illustrated the possible organization as it maybo should
have been at one time. During thoso oonvorsatlons, In order
to keep ovorything simple, cortaln designations of tho
offloos wore not consldorod Important and thooo two charts
wore then submlttod to ae horo with tho quostlon whother
I made thorn, which quostlon I answorod in the afflrmativo.

I thon slgnod thooo charts but with that signature I did
not moan to any that whatever la oont lined In thoso charts,
ar.d thoro Is no accompanying toxt to It, is corroot. It
could not bo correct at all, slnco it says on tho chart
horo on tho right sldo, "The Chief of the Civilian Health
Service, Dr. Conti." From my present testimony It can clean¬
ly bo seen that there wasnit such an office but that It was
the wish of tho people who participated that there should
havo such a position. This "Chief of the Civilian Medical
Service" firstly did not exist at all and thoro was no
department In the Reich Labor Service co-ordinated, a6 It
Is indicated on this chart, so the entire combination Is
wrong or. the civilian sldo as they are described In my two


2 , 49


3 Fob 4?-<r-H.w*-15-l-L068er-(.JO
COURT I


charts, that can only bo understood If certain explanations
sre made.

On the loft alio It says "The Chief of Medical Sorvloo
of the ’iohrcacht. * Tho Relchsarrt-ss and Polloo was novor
subordinated to that office. At that tine, during dlsousslons,
It had boon aild In ordor to rondor a complete understanding
of this chart posslblo, that In this spoolal roepoct tho
Rolchsarrt-SS and Polloo was also subordinated to Handloser
but not generally.

My dopartaent for Modlcal Solonoo and Rosoarch with
tho nano of the Chlof, Profossor Dr. Rostock, novor had any
oonnectlon, for lnstanoo, with tho Kalsor tfilholo Instltuto,
and tho arrows whloh can be ooon hore do not show that thero


\


2*49a


3 Teb i 7-,,-MAi-15-2-Lessor-( aX)
COURT 1


was no subordination of those offloos to mo. The Office
of Science in the Reich Ministry of Education on the sooond
chart on the lqft 16 an office of tho Roloh Ministry of
Bduoatlon and that can very clearly be soon, and comprises,
as the word science genorally doos, not only nodical witters
but also philosophy and astrology. This is similarly tho
oaso with the other offloos described horo.

Tho Military Medical .icadoay is nn x Institution of tho
Arnod Forcos. The row of positions as there lndloatod at tho
top of the chart only show offloos whore tnodloal mttors woro
worlcod upon or could bo worked upon.

Q. To whom was tho Military Medical Academy subardlnat -
od?

A. Tho Military Modioal Academy wao a puroly armed
rorcos institution and I an suro Ocnoraloborotabsartt
can give more information rt>out thlo rolatlonshlp.

I must now point to tho Dopartmont of Planning and
Soonomy, the loader Slcklngor, Hero, for lnstanoo, thore
are arrows pointing to tho Roloh Ministry of Economy or
tho Roloh Hlnistry of Armament and the Four Yoar Plan. That,
of course, doos not moan that I could give any dlrootivos to
the Four Year Plan, whoso chief was Ooorlng. Tho chart can
only be used for tho purpose of giving some kind of idea
or picture of the ontiro field of the Civilian and tho
Vfehrnacht 3ector. This adjustment was my personal responsi¬
bility. In other respects tho Office of Scionco and Research
and Planning and Economy were for the purpose of adjusting
the needs in those departments and bringing them up to tho
needs which at that time were necessary.

Q. And you described the whole thing as a working chart


2350


* Fob 4r-^-JU4-15-a<L0S80r-(*iK)
COURT I


or a working plan?

.i. Tho words "working plan" was not nontloncd for the
first time In Kransborg*two years ago but In order to glvo
this chart somo kind of a heading, since "Organization of tho
tiodloal Sorvlco" was struck out, I agrood with one of those
gontleaen, I think It was Herbert Moyer, to tho words "working
plan." It only has a moaning where the nocossary explanations
aro given. I night road tho text which I addod at that time.
■Ity own offlcos wore subordinated to no personally and I was
ropponslble for then, that Is, tho Dopartmont for Modlcal
aclenco and Rosoarch, and the Dopartmont for Modlcal
planning and


2*50a


Court I

3 Feb U7-A-:iAA-l5-3-Le33er-LJ3


EConocy." How follow tho naecs of the aedical chiefs. "For such tasks
as wore given to mo or to ny departmental chiefs, or for such tasks as
aroso free special situations to =e or to ny own offices, there was a
power of direction of the various offices as they are described in the
plan, that is, from the Office*of the Reich Cconissar for the execution
of such tasks as far as it was not in contradiction with the other offices
frcn which they received direct superior directives. For the execution
of these mentioned tasks of ny offices, I bore a personal responsibility.

The tasks of the General Cocsaissioner, the co-ordination between Wehrmacht
and Civilian Sector, that is in reference to nedlcal and health natters,
continued to exist as the basical task of the Reich Cosndesioner. The
Decree 1 of 19U2 which roferred to radical and health sorvice was not
rescinded through the decree for the appointment of the Reich Coemiseionor.

Q. dr. President, another Bistake of translation is pointed out to
ne with reference to Harcilosor. It was said that the Reichsarst-SS
Grawitz in cortain respects was subordinated to Handloser. Would you '
explain what you said, witnoss?

A. I do not recall ny sentenco.

Q. I shall ropeat it to you.

A. Tho Reichaarzt-SS was in no way subordinated to Gonoralctoorstab-
sarzt Handloser. He was corplotoly outside his Jurisdiction and compotonce.

Q. I should like you now to consult tho second chart, which is...

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, Vie Tribunal would like to know whothor or
not Defendant Brandt, the witness, and hi3 counsel, wcwld care to have
the Defendant Brandt propare a new chart showing his present idea as to
what the true picture is, to be compared with the chart concerning thich
counsel has Just oxaained the witness?

DR. SERVATIUS: I have not prepared a chart, as is suggested, but
I can do th-t later and submit it to you.

THE P3SSIDEJrr: With such a chart before it, the Tribunal could
weigh one chart against the other and prcfcably understand the situation
aore clearly, together with the evidence of the witness in connection


with the chart


2351


s Fob 47-.WKA-T-15-4-Loaaop-l.JC)

COURT I

DR. SERVaTIUS: Yes, Your Honor, I an going to draw
up a chart, aa you suggest.

3Y DR. S2RYAHUS:

I now subnit to you tho chart of the :a*mod Forcea
Modlcal Services which was slgnod by your oo-dofondaift.
Professor Handloser. It la the Doouaent NO-282 and It la
Exhibit No. 9. Would you define your attitude towards
this chart?


2*52


* Feb 47-^DJG-16-l-Meehan*(«X)

COURT I

A. the head of the chart. It Is aald and conflrnod
what la oatabllahod Xn the official dlroctlvo of August,

1944, where It aaya that tho chief of tho armed forooa med¬
ical aorvlce will havo to work according to tho general
dlroctlvoa of tho Reloha Commissar for Medical Health
Servlcea. It dooa not aay, however, and that It confirms
In tho aamo chapter, that tho Chief of tho Mo'dlcal Service
of the tfehraacht lo technically in charge of all radical
problems, according to tho dlroctlvoa of tho Chief of the
OKtf. I bellovo that General OberstAbsarzt Handlosor wanted
to lndloato hero with reference to hla rolatlons to rao and
I on suro thAt he wl 1 bo able hlasolf to explain tho
official relationship botween no and him. In adiltlon, I
I ora of tho opinion that «--r. Handloaor has tried to doacrlbo
nattora as they actually wore, ospoclally whon ono points
out to the note which he made himself, According to ray
opinion, ono auat draw a clear out line between tho buroaua
of the ^ray, Navy and the Luftvaffo on ono eldo and tho
field of tho V.ffon 3S, tho Organization Todt and the Rolchs
Labor Service, that Is tho affiliate 1 associations as they
are designated. I know of the difficulties and particularly
tho responsibilities which Dr. Handlosor oxporlenood In order
to rocolve nedloal tochnlcal reports froa those lattor throe
organizations, With reference to tho left boxes In tho chart,
that is Army, Navy and «lr Force. I should assumo that tho
description Is correct certainly In prlr.clplo.

ft. Then, I r.sn you to look at Chart No. * and this la
Document No. 418. Exhibit Jo. 12. Von't you define your
attitude to this chart?

«. It is a chart, which originated from Professor


2 -* 5 *


3 ?„b -.'r-DJG-16-l-Hoehan- l.JC)

COURT I

Schroeder and la an organlrational chart of tho Reich
Radical Rasearch Organltatlon. The chart looks very com¬
plicated and f as not vary well versed in thjse relationships
of positions so I could not gain a complete picture of these
charts and various arrows whore I could say they are ^correct.

Q. ./Ill you pleas a refer to your position ?

.%a far as ay position Is concerned, tfco designation
according to ay opinion Is not very clear from that crossed
line and technical subordination should be deduced. Tho
decree from the Yehraacht Helical Servlco of ..ugust


2-*5^a


3 F obrur ry-~-JJG-lo-2--let‘-tn
Ccurt Kc. 1


7th, 1911 says very dearly that tho technical subordination hra tc c° tc
the chief of the OKW of the Arsed Forces. In this chart here, soa« such
description would hove to be ^ivui. Furth.irjcre, it is not dear to me why,
fer instance, free ny Dsprrtbent Ec-nu^r, there is nc connection tc Hwxd-
Icsur, »fciic there is such o li-.e frea tho office c: lied h os torch. 1 think
th't these r«l ti.nships which were with a. 'nd tho chief of the *my iiodictl
Service have to bo described, e I uesoribui th»xa b>fcr« end that everythin';
else in this eh -x-t can bo left aside.

*

Q Then, I ask y.u tc lock rt tho r.ext chart. It is Ho. 119. This
is else c ch'rt signed b th. cc-'-oi^olmt Schrjvd-r and is for the time
fre-t January 1, 19U cr. :r.1.

A 1 can only say the c--r.e thin. in ccnnecti.n iith tids chert as 1 had
said befor:; I ou not --ell en.uj. infes-d sbeut th.- jener l fl.att.rs with
reference V. position at the »U aention J:i*?ry 1, 1911 nc chmr,o
occurred ccup red u Janu-ry 1, 1913. Tbs cnlj ^u.sti r. :.ay be the dusigrw
nticn cf the buichs Joe laser full th t ccc-xvei cliruv-qu rters .f a year
later sad cannct bo included in tfcst plcn.


3 54


* Fob 47-A -SW-16-la-Hoofaon-(«JC)

COURT I

Q. As tho fifth chart, I should like you to look at
Document No. 416. This Is a ohart headed "Organizational
Chart of tho Modloal Sorvlco of tho "S3" up to August 1,
194* drawn up by tho co-do fondant, Profosaor Dr. Mrugowsky.

I r.ak you In this ease to doflno your attltudo Insofar as
It concerns your position.

A. There 1s a blank lino here going from my nnmo
poraonally. On the oasis of the decree of July 28, 1942 tho
Chief of tho .u*mod Forces Modloal Service and this black
line la oxplolnod as tho channol of command. Tho docroo,
which we dlaoussod this morning, gives you no Indication and
doos not Justify such a description. It says that my function
was tho coordination b otwoon tho l/ehraaoht Modloal Matters
and Civilian Modloal matters and oomo ospoolal tasks and I
quote the last dooroe of tho 7th of August onco more, that
Is a much Inter period so tho superior offloe Is roally tho
Chief of the O.K.VT. It oar. bo soon from that tho superior
agonoy la the Chief of tho O.K. J. That means that this black
on thla chart la cortalnly not corroot and I an suro that
Dr. Mrugov3ky wantod to Indicate some othor description.

Q. How about your connection to tho Rolchsarzt S3
Professor Crawltz?

a. That, of oourso, is completely ridiculous. I had
no connection at all to Grawitz and oertalnly there was no
channel of command emanating from me. I thins thero Is
material to confirm that. I said this morning that after tho
signing of the decree the SS as suoh was very clearly out-ie
side my Jurisdiction and that was done by tho Fuehrer himself
in the presence of Hlmmlor.

Q. «nd I should nov like to ask you to look at the last


2*55


* Fab 47 -«* 3 i- 16 -l^-Meohan*(iJC)

COURT I

chart, No. 417, which la a second chart signed by tho co-
iefondant rrofoascr Dr.* Mrugowaky , which doala with tho
porlod starting fron S^ptonber 1, 194*.

This chart la essentially the ease aa the ono I
looked at boforo. I should like to ieflno ay attltudo*with
reforonoo to ny


2^55a


* Fab 47-.,-3'rf-lS-£a-Heehan- (-JC)

COURT I

own position. It la wrong becauso on September 1, 194^ I
neither had the ordor to institute a Departnent for Science
and Reaearoh nor was th# aooond deoroe that la oonoornod
with that oatter Issued at that Ueo. With roforonco to
Handlosor and Grawltr, the aace relationship oxlsts as is
indicated on the chart.

q. you put th-so oharts asldo now? On tho basis

of the third deoroe, you had rocolvod a speolar position
with roforonco to tho execution of your old task. How did
these new authorities actually affect praotloal dovoloi>-
ments?


2 T 56


3 F ebru«ry-M—DJG-i7-l-^=Icy
Court Sc* 1

„ At that tine in the autuan of 19 UL I tad to take two basic uiffi-
cultiea into account, one wrs tlut the civilian cb.rtcr una nen-exietent,
that is decrees for the Chief cf Civilian -edical Scrvico. It was surgestod
by Minister Lemurs c/vi should hr.v« received aiidltr designation, ..s the
Chief of Nodical Services cf the «rsy, but it never originated. On tho other
hand, the authority of Dr. Covbbels tcck place at the sane tine with refer¬
ence to results for total warfer.. That has as its consequencethrt Dr.
Goebolls interfered and had the power t~ interfere in o/ory department
ho cculd dispose cf, end adept aonsuros which tv his cs^he said at the timos
sceaed necessary for optical reasons. Cnc of the first a.asures in this
rcspuct was a-tin tho attest to discontinue studi.s ct hi^hschocls, and
fer this reason 1 had a heavy quarr J., a serious quarrel with him. 1 must
point cut th't .*t th: t paric i cf tine ohe discussien b tween Dr. Centi
and muself h*i intensified and Dr. C.(«ti, with the support of iiartin Bchr-
aann and his cennection with the party chtnc-llcry end Gauleiter, nede
difficultioe in every r-spect. Durin such a quarrel Dr. Cocbbels errivod
at a formula Lion which I did net understand rt the tine, whsn he said thet
I had te bo quit-, cle*r th't th.re .ru lirtin Soroann ojflnst me, and with
hia the G-ulcitcre and else Dr. Centi. ..ft.rwr.ris I f.und out that the
real cause that l‘rtin Bcmrnn »•» a ; :inst appointment as heich Coimio*-
icner, and fer this reason during ay rbswncc fra:i the Fuhrer Hoed quarters
put forth a mincer of


V.


2:57


* Fob 7-.r»3W-17-l-Kaloy- ()
COURT I


arguments, which In hit opinion wouli lnoi .ruinate mo.
Certainly some mention was mado regarding m;» attompto to
establish connection with the Red Ctjsg, anc a few other
□aybo not so othur Important faotor* vero mentioned. «t
any rate a few days later I lost sy position *s Escort
Physician of .dolph Hitler, what a' tfc*t tlmo I occupied.
Hitlor in those days had been 111, and 3 jj was « nly presont
In the headquarters for one lay. A' this oocasl^n I was
told that he would rocolvo medical supplies frot Professor
Morrell, among which strychnine was avallablo. . t was not
quite clear to me what he meant, since Professor iorrell,
as personal physician slnco 1S*7 wr.s rospanolblo for
internal dlsoasos and had tho ordor not to inform mo
about anything which oonoornod the Fuohror hlmsolf. Whon
I lnvostlgatod tho mattor I found through a sorvant that
Morroll notually in January of tnu year 1S*-1 had orlered
thoso tablets which oontalnod stryohnlno, but which at
that time Hitler too* In suoh an amount that he dally
roaohod tho maximum dosago. I pointed that out to Himolor,
and I also spofco to Profossor Morroll. I tun loft and
two days lat«r I was ordered to come baoX again, and vory
shortly without .any further words was dismissed from that
position as Escort Physician. Ky doputy was Immediately
llsmlssud too, and In his plaoe the Escort Physlolan of
Himmler, whom I did not know until later was appointed as
my successor. Starting from this period of time my office


2358


Court So. I

3 Fob 17- - 17-lb - LJ3 - Haley


»aa placed under control and ever increasing ocntrols were exercised.

That is something I found out because of conferences which were heard
at the Fuehrer's Headquarter* which I attended a few times because of
official business, and I was warned of a poesible interference by xartin
Bormann. In October 1911 I asked all my staff tc com to There
were only o few people, kri I clearly told tluc about my situation. It
the sm tir.e I told th«* that this should not desist then in any way fren
their technical rorkj everything thich was not technical, which did not
belong to their tasks should be loft aside, and whatever was necessary should
bo continued under all drcuaataacea. Ov. has to lock at tho entire
situation for /hat period of tlsb, includin': th« beginning of 191*5, It
was hardly possible to mintaln a connection with cne mother. Tho possi-
bllity of Conti, in territories whore troops were, Conti's position was
not vory important ary longer, since the *rry n-diOCl Service also had to
toko caro of civilian r.eoda. At that tK rd- s » u rc lvun to transfer
•fflcos at that time lccnted in Northern Gerr.any. I had rocoivod directives
from th. ministry cf the Interior to transfer my office slnco it was
r.ct tiod down ta Berlin to Thuringia. This opportunity was at the end of
March, and the first April days of 1 J L5. I sent r.y family to tho location


of ry office. This was used as r.ascn for try arrest later, and I was con -
dtanod in a w,ry peculiar procedure by the Oau Court in Thuringia. Tho
procedure was peculiar for th-reason that tho judges who were to participate,
that was an S° ^cr grupponfuehrer, and . n* S« Fu hrer, had received a
handwritten letter by Hitler tefero t^.c procedure stsrtod, whoro it was
said that a death sentence was to be paused cna. In this manner questions
and answers won r»v_r in coapliar^e, because ry ans-«r was always
interpreted in such a manner it would 1-ad to ry sentencing. It was printed
out to m I was giving directives which eaus.d the hospital to fall into
enemies 1 hands, a oeasuro which was a matter of course, because there was
no purpose in sending wounded people free -«stern Germany t- ^astern Germany
and fren ^astern Genoany to western Germany. It was pointed cut 1 ostae-

2359


Court Ho. I

3 Feb U7-* - 17-2b - LX -


U shod connection with Switserlaad, and I think it concerned qy attempt
to establish contacts with the Hod Cross in. Geneva, in order to point
out the aodical difficulties,in the crerrurt countries, — in the overrun
territories, a' sort of res^rv* of radical supplies, which was callud by
us a so-called "pcaco reserve-, such a store was interpreted as a si«{n
of dopotisa, and th-ro is hardly any need to action any one poUt.


• s

3 ?ub-Jr GZ 5* 18- l-ll cebuc k
Court Ho. 1.


A t ney ruto tho roeult ve.e that I ur.a trenefcrrcd on tho sane day to tho
Geattpo yffico In Prinz ^lcrcchtitrano la 3orlin aftor tho death eontonca
vaa confirmed, and I taink it ia duo to Spoor 1 a offortthnt r. poatpononont of
too execution took place, ff poatponcaont of 24 hours, since it was triod to
inclwio professor Hoatock in that procoduro v*:o, ia tho nonntlao, had {pno to
acurth-rn Gcrtny. Rostock vs to bo brought to Berlin. Eovcvtr, thoy wore
cot ia o poaition to find Boatock at th/-.t tiao aincc tho co.-junicntion oyatci.
did not function quit- veil, since. in tho nuxtluo, t.:o cnony hi.d ponotn.tod

V

into Thuringia and Saxony.

./tor another fov poatponoi«r.ta of day* t nd half-dry a I vne tmnaforrod
to a Gestapo offico in Schvorin at tho -ui of .^ril. Or. t:.o 28th of April
thia offico received a tel.tno frou 3>nnnn fro.. Borllr. t»..t 1 and to bo aont
to tho priaon in Kiel, but bocrusc of t:.e advance of tho Suecier.a tr.ia Gestapo
office had to -ore tovorla the voet, to flor.abur,:, ao that thoy could not
to Kiel, v.'.&oa hod aa it a course tnnt I vna aubaoquor.tly liberated /.round
the ulddlo of hoy.

So u.*t van your situation, too situation under wold. you rccoivod
your authority aa Rolen Co:~ltaioa. r. Sut v-t tao ru;#oa I put thut di-ation


to you.

DR. SZSTATICS: hr. Pr-aidont. I a nov couin.; to thoieporiuonte in
dotail and tuit Lay bo un opportune uosoat to atart 1 . rccoon.

TEE PRZSlDZiTT: Tho Tribunal will bo in recces for a few nouonts.

(ReCwta vna t;-kon)

TEE PRESIDE!": I will nek tu- reporter if he hr.s c correction to ivJco
for tao benefit of th« record, tao translator. I . oan.

IiCSRPRSTER )hr. S-Alor) Ion. your Honor. Th- *ord ..ontlonod oarlior
today, the DoT.-^a word, aydrlorverkc. should hnvu boon translated aa hydro-
donation works, vnic.. ia tho vorka fo.- tho process of tho rofinoaent of


gasoline.


2ZS PR. -I2S.T: Counaol -ay proceed. I viil suggest to tho r-portor rjd
tho Soorettvry Goa-ral th_t they see th? t tao trr.nalc.tion ca contained in tho
record appears correctly.


236I


3 .6b-A-Gc3-l5-2-N<nabuck-

Ccurt HO 1.

Q ( ?„ Dr. Scrvatius). I have cm m:re qu-sti a cn the Id subject.
Witness,whoa did y u l~ae yrur praitl'n 2 s eserrt physician cf the Fuehrer?

Wes it after y:u had bccc&c Reich C.-naisi ncr cr bef re?

%

A H- that was afterwords, shcrtly afterwards.

Q Was there any e.nntcticn as far as c-tiros arc concerned?

A One nay assun. . ccnntcti n because I b-cauac u cich Crnaisirner
against th. will . f “artin B roam and h. tried everything tr influence
Hitler against ex. h& pr'br.bly submitted the lett.r fr*Q cj which ne had
obtained freo Dr. C nti wh.n I J intd ih. SS Physicians' Uaguc wnich I
mentioned this c.rning, wh-n I put J m in writinf that I did n t want
tc de any active Sa -r SS Service. I h.av. been t Id ab*ut similar things
and arguments.

Q That is en ugh. N.w I e xx t th. exp-ria-nta. Ac Dacunent KB
N nlxr 2, 1 sutalt a chart, th. c rr.ctnes • f which yru will ccrtiry—

•s

D?.. StSVARIUSi Hr. Pr.oident, th^ chart is n-t y.t ready in English.

I shall turn in n_ c py in Gorsu. “t is priaxily a chart which is un¬
derstandable in itself. It sb the dur *.i n / the exp-riments in col¬
umns and there are red lines cr cswis. ^hich lb r. the p siti.n af the wit¬
ness in each case, right at th- b-tt a his l-.ot ? siti n as “eich C.nxai-
si'ncr ’nd cb v. that his preiti n ft.r ’h. sec nd 'i.eree, r that du¬
ring the exnminati.n n. will .lways hsv. - picture f th- chr n lr'lcal
relationship f an cxperiw.nt with th- p siti n f th witn-33.

Q ( By Dr. S.rvr.tius) flitness, y.u have the d cumext bef re y u?

A Xea.

THE rRESUEMT: J u st a n-xxnt. H-3 the e r sccuti n a c py 'f this chart?

k cCHaJET: yes.

Q (By Dr. Scrvatius): X u prepared thi3 chart. Is it c rrcct as far
as the entries 'l yur p siti n a ft.r th. see nd nd third decreos chrr-
n-.r gically?

A It is c rrcct as frr as this decr.e is. c nc.rr.ed, and I have als-
entered under Siirh-r 6-C, Lest, ini in 6-A, Sulf'n cidc, when I learned
f these twe gr ups f exp .rimer.>3 c nc-rning the Hire and Gebhart experi¬


ments.


3 Feb A - LJG - 13-3 - •- &0UCX

Court Nc. 1


DR. SERVATI18j Then pleaso put this chart to or* side. I cffor
the document as Exhibit ftaber 2.

THE ffiESIDEJff: Referring t-xl.cu.3ant of Juno h, 19u5, this
document was identified January 27 as Xarl Srindt's Sohibit 1 for
identification. It has not yot been formally efforud as an oxhibit
before the Tribunal in this ccso. Does the defendant desire now
to offer it as an exhibit? It was oscroiy identified. I :-*an this
document, counsel. x

JIDG2 SS8Ri:Ot Drt Survatius, during tha case .f thu preseoution
on 27 earner 19i*7 y^u ertviblted, ce A rvceUect, tc *nc ^ the
prosecution's witnossos un omurpt fr "life* ic,nsinti *-t tht.t
tine tho Court tns of the vxo* th t alth ugh it c mid then be
catalogued us I-vrl Br. ndt'a uxhioit for identification only in
order to uli&dnato confusion, th-t it sh uld b- off-rod prior to
too oxhibit you tv~.ru in y ur hand, ns *arl Brandt's atfiibit l.'cfcor 1.

D:t. Si.1V..flOS: I should lik« t? sutait it .s iutoibit 1, but
it is nit available ~.t too n. unt. T«vt is why I Lit th.t aifcbor
opon and suV.it this ucuaont s iblt >u bur. 2.

THE r. J5SIDE'. 7 s Vary woU.


2363


3 ? Ob-ArGSS-19-l-^i - *7
Coart yo. 1


'Te&t)ET: The Prosecution has just a fonoal question with rospact
to tori Brandt's Document *>. 2, end I understand it is now being offered
- s Exhibit Ho. 2 for tori Brandt. I 4>n«t thii* we have any groat objection
to it voin; in as an exhibit, but there is »ao question in ry uind as to •

whether or not it really isn't a setter ef ar-.unont rather than a document
which has any probative value in an.’ of itself. It simply purports to ffivo
the chronology of tho various o-.p.rients charred in the indictment together
with tho throe ocr^s which vested the Dofondant, X:rl Brandt, v.lth certain
authority. I cfan't kno- but chat it would be hotter if this document not
bo includod as an exhibit in th. rcccrd but simply presentoi as a attar of
argUBont.

TJE PRESIDENT* Counsel for tho Prosecution m;’ have tin to a tudy this
document. It con bo used today for axamin.'tion. C-unsol nay study it to-
rl^ht and infom tho Tribunal in th nornUr- if ho a,-rocs that it is
oorroot or if ^ <’-ojs not, ar/* then Counsel nay crons oxrjd.no tho witness
upon this particular docansnt if h- lociros to to so k Tho Tribunrl will
delay pass in on tho a ' dssibility or nri>-a .lssibilit/ of tho V'ounont
until tomorrow nomin , but it . ay be used this ft.mocn’by Counsel for
tho Dofondar.t in xr.dnation cf tho -dt,:;..

~.i 3x. szswrinsi

q , v. in.-dvi-li.al oxp ri-.ntn ir. tho order

in which thoy are listed in the in.detoont. First w* coto to tho freuzinc
jxperinents h-re during tho trial. Did you hr.vo any part in then?

. t Ho, I had no part in the ft-eaRlnc’ wperlncnta. I board of thoso
oxpcrincr.ta for V.v. first time oft_r 1 rs arrest. If I recall correctly,
it waslast year who.* I was hm-o in IJumber.. oef--ro that I had no know-
lodgo of than. It is not quite clear to » in what way Office. for
Scionco and Research cculd have boon inf.rved about it. It is possible that
a general report was received there. Schrocrkr sal ’ once in another con¬
nection that copies of reports w~ro scr.t there, but I bdioVo that tho fraez-
inr, experiments were sc lor.-; a S c - I don't have the tablo of chronology hero

236L


3 Feb-ji-GE3-19-3-Putty-PM

Court No* 1.


Hay I — ttet I don't believe I hod that Offlco for Solence
anl Research yet at that tine. The freexlng experiments were
In Jfcy — they were already oonoluded in Hey, 19-13. That
was at least three months^ before the nominal decroc according
to which 1 Was to establish an Office for Science and
Research vhlch actually went into operation only In 1940.

Ql Ybu wont to correct yourodlf; you soon ’44? «.

As Yee. * 44.

Q: How about Count C, color la experiments? •*

A: I learned of malaria experiments only after I was
arrested. I know nothing about them before. During tho
whole war I had something to do with malaria on two
o ocas ions quite Independently of tho experiments mentioned
hero. Once the dean of the University of Bonn, Profossor
Sohulomonn,. In his capacity os a nodical officer had a
scall malaria hospital near Bonn in whloh the normal treat¬
ment of refractory patients was carrlod on. Booauso of
an air raid on Bonn, the continuation of this hospital
and tho University Institute was endangered, and ho approach¬
ed no on this c»tter. We never discussed any experiments.

I never made any such request of hln or he novor ntxdo any
suoh request of me. The other tine when I had something
to do with malaria was that Profossor Rose, who waw carry¬
ing out malaria treatment on Insane persons, or at loast
had a part In the, approached me about the sheltering of
those patients. He came to me because — It was wither
1943 or *44 — because In connection with the transfer evacuation
of hospitals I was connectied with an agency of tho Propa-
ganda Ministry, and he knew from the Uftwaffe through sone
agenoies of the Air Raid Precaution Medical Service that
I was connected with It. 1 bid Rose at that time to & to


2365 M


3 Feb.-A-SZS-ia-a-Putty-PH
Court So. 1«


the competent agency in the Ministry of the Interlo?| opd
he did whatever was noceseary. e took up the nooesBany
negotiations. I had nothing else to do with malaria or
with patients suffering from malaria.

Q: What did you have to do with lost experiments? Do
you remember the diary of 31evcrs, the final report of
Himmler — the final report of Birth* ^

A: After 1 had received the assignment to make gas
masks on the first of '


2366 («


* Fab 47—ArGSS-19—''-Putty- (.uC)
COURT I


March, '44, at the end of the aano month Slaver called
on me and on Himmler'a orders, aa ho said, ho gavo mo a
final report of Professor* Hlrth about tho treatment of lost
Injuries. Ho visited mo In my office In 3elltr. Ho said
nothing else. Tho void ■.ibnonborbo" was not mentioned. Nothing
was said about any other vorh of a scientific nature admin¬
istered from there, and I promised him that In April, In

%

tho next month, I would visit Professor Hlrth myaolf.

Sievers could not glvo me any furthor information about
It, and apparently did not havo eiy Inclination to do ao
olther. Then In tho following month since I was In Strass-
bourg for another reason, I vial tel Frofoocor Hlrth thoro
onco. That was at the end of .ipril, 1944. Hr. Hlrth explain¬
ed to mo the essontlol points of his plans of treatment, and
with the aid of a nunbor of animal preparations, ho explain¬
ed whit he had called significant in this final roport. It
was tho question of supplying the organism with vitamins
and the rolo of destroying poison whloh tho llvor plays In
connection with lost damage. I assumo that I was with him
for about one hour., cortalnly no longer. With tho aid of a
nunbor of explanations of a chemical nature which I cannot
ropoat altogether, tho final conclusion was that it was
necessary if one wants to treat lost Injuries to lntroiuco
certain vitamin groups Into the organism In larger quanti¬
ties. In this conversation between «r. Hlrth and myself tho
quostlon of lllogal or special human experiments was certain¬
ly not brought up, not because there was the Impression that
wo were trying to avoid anything, but because the questions
a9Ked during my visit to l-ir. Hlrth were of an entirely dif¬
ferent nature from the beginning. I was there after I had
read Hlrth's report In order to obtain Information about


2 -* 66


* Fob 47—JrGES-l9- , -x > utty- (aS)

COJRT I

tho special vitamin questions.

It was, of course. Hr. Hirth's lntorcst to prosont
hia special view-point? and If one consldora gonoral lost
treataont, this* was not anything so special. Tho previous
treatment with llvor oil salvo had tho sane la. It Is not
cloar to me whether In tho course of 1944 I had any further
connection with Hr. Hirth. It is posslblo that there was

X

some oorospondonoo. It cannot have been important. I never
saw Hirth again. I novor visited him again. I had no further
oontaot with him.


2*66a


* Fob •i7-.^G£3-19-'*-i > utty-(^X)
COJRT I


tho special vitamin questions.

It vas, of course, hr. Hirth's Interest to present
his special view-point, ci*i if one considers gonoral lost
treatment, this was not anything so special. Tho previous
treatnont with livor oil salvo had the same -In. It Is not
doar to me whether In tho courso of 1944 I had any further
connection with Hr. Hirth. It Is possible that there was
some ooreepondenoo. It cannot have been important. I never
saw Hirth again. I never visited him again. I had no furthor
oontaot with him.


2366a


s Feb -i7-,r-DJG-2C-l-Seard- («K)

COURT I

Q. Now, what about the sulfanilamide experiments.

Did you understand the question about sulf-.nllamldo and

%

tho treatment of wounds?

A. Siorthly after tho beginning of tho war and In
every theater of tho war tho question of tho sulfanilamide
was dlaoussod. At that time sulfanilamide was oxactly the
same thlr& that a few yoars lator. In tho Uni tod Sfatos,
penicillin was. Every one was interostod In It, and the
Profosaor Morroll, whom I montlonod before, had dovolopod
hlo sulfanllaoiao oxporlaonts, and tho qaestlon of sulfan¬
ilamide was dlaoussod at largo. A sulTanllanlle treatment
In the Wohrmaoht was started with tho oloar formula, with
the aim — I must mention tho namo of Profosaor Kruogor
because anybody who had anything to do with It know what It
wae<bout, and booldos Profossor Brack, who was a consulting
aurgoon at that timo, should have boon lntorosted In tho
question from a purely scientific point of vlow. This was
my connection with Profossor Rostock and with tho Chief of
tho Medical Servlcoa of tho Araod Foroos, Dr. Handlosor.

An attompt was mado amongst tho troops to obtain clear results
- oloar findings about tho effootlvonoss of ».ulfanllamldo.

myself, In 1944, had a spoolal hospital, ambulance, and
so forth. I had mado them avallablo, thinking that Instead
of tho usual t'po of observation, wo would have to accompany
tho wounded with a typo of hospital from tho first wound at
the-front until final hoallng. Tho doctors should always bo
under ono chief; that Is, the treatment of the patlonts should
be controlled from tho boginning to tho ond, which othorvlso
was Interrupted by transfer from ono hospital to another. In
all questions of sulfanilamide there was no case of the


2*67


* Feb 47-A-DJG-20-1-Beard-(AX)

COURT I

Gebhardt experiments. I know that Professor Gebhardt onoo
thought that after ho finished his exporloonts, but before
the report In tho Military Medical Academy, he had informed
mo about this quostlon. I believe he was mistaken when ho
sold this, and he will probably confirm this himself, th-it
ho mado a mlstako. I can only say that bofore Gebhardt an¬
nounced his experiments In the Military Modlcal Aoademy,

I was doflnltoly not informed. I did not ordor the sulfanil¬
amide exporlmont s. I did not have any other connection with
thorn. I was Inforood by tho report


2"*67a


* Feb 47—A-DJG-20-2-Board- (AX)

COURT I

in March 194. In the Military Medical Academy - May 194,
in the Military Medical Aoadony- The nature of the roport of
Oflbhardt did not glvo no the impression that the oxperlraonta,
themselves, had boon oonduoted in any criminal nanncr.

Q. Did you objoct to the roport?

a . No, I had the lnprc88lon, and Gobhardt will probably
confirm thla, that Gobhardt gavo the description in auch a
way that those proaont at thla roport had to gain the ln>-
prosalon that ho had teatod a llaitod nunbor who were effec¬
tively condemned to death. So, I oortalnly did not objeot in
any form; otherwise I would have a different memory of the
report than I do. I oannot reoall the aotual working of the
report. I remember the fact that I waa there, and that I
did not object. From that, I conclude that Gebhardt made hlo
report in suoh a way th«t those who wore present, who heard,
the report had no reason to object in any way.

Q. Persona condemned to death were mentioned. Did you
have any misgiving a that suoh death sentences were complet¬
ely unobjectionable from the legal point of view?

A. No, I did not have any misgivings in that form. I
said before that if i reoeived suoh I would havo misgivings.

Q. Now, I come to the experiments on transplantations
and regeneration. Wore you informed about them?

A. I can say nothing about these experiments. I was
informed of•them only here in Nuroberg. I knew nothing
about thorn before. I have nothing, whatovor, to say about
them. I wa6 temporarily of the opinion that they were repor¬
ted in some other form; although I was not present at the
discussion but later on, that was not the case.

Q. Now, you are charged with participation in the Sea


2*68


S Fob 47—A-3JG-20-’-Baard-CAJ:)

COURT I


Water ibcperlnente. Do you have anything to say about that?

A. I learned of the Sea Water Experiments for the first
time through the Indictment*. I knew nothing about then
beforehand. I did not learn of then — I had no part In
then, and I only knew of thorn after reading the l n dlotnent.

I could not, at first, realise what It was about. I asaumo


2368 a


* Feb 47-A-DJG-20-*-Beard- (AX)

COURT I

Schaefer say a In hi a affidavit th*t he thought that the
higher circle* of phyalolans Knew of thla problom, that It
waa an open secret, he*probably meant tho people who partic¬
ipated.

Q. He will be able to tell us that. Now, did you have
anything to do with removing pol8on from water? *

A. I had a oonforenoo In 3erlln for obtaining apparatus
for disposing of polaon gas. It was a quoatlon'of obtaining
apparatus for tho war against oheoloal agents. Apparatus for
removing poison from water was dlsouaaod but no final
doolalon waa roaohod. J mot Mr. KrugoweKy onoo, who was
oonnootod with auoh apparatus; this removing of polaon from
drinking water aftor gne attaoKa.

Q. TMon, the Indlctoont list's axporlmonts with Hopa-
tltls. A lotter from Grawlti to Himmler aaya that you fur¬
thered these oxporlraonts. Did you, yourself, work on this
quoatlon, ollnioally?

A. I never did any work with Hepatitis Spidemloa.

If so. It wvuld have had to have boon during tho war, since
the war this disease was of no loportanoe In Gormany (during
the war). I did not deal*with thla question beoauae I was
too buoy with other things In tho first place, and In the
second place such a purely lntarnal disease Is of lnteroot
to Hygienist, and was relatively uninteresting to mo as a
surgeon.

Q. Did you Issue research assignments on this subjoot?
How about Doctor Dohment

A. I do not know why I should have given a research
assignment to Doctor Dohmen: Of course, the quoatlon of
Hepatitis was *>. question which interested everyone. Every
one oncounteed it trverywhore In the East. But, for that

2*69


3 Feb 47-A-DJ&-20-^-Beard-(AX)

COURT I

reason I would not have given apeolal attention to that
disease. It had no relation to other things which Interest¬
ed me more as a surgoort. I know the lottor. I was told
about It last year. I saw It here for the first tlmo, this
year. It says that I had asked Mr. Grawit* to *»ve a Doctor
Dohmen oarry out speolal Hepatitis work. Doctor Dohaeh, the
letter goes on, was to obtain soven or eight prisoners for
that purpose and the lives of those prisoners iould bo en¬
dangered. It Is not dear to ao In what


2*59a


* Feb 47-*-DJG-20-4-3eard-(AX)

COURT I

connection and for what roaaon. In the letter, mentioned my
n ,me aa the instigator of Hepatitis research for In all the
rest of the correspondent* and in all the other documonts
there la not even the slightest hint that I had any particular
interest In this question or That I was so Interested that I

would have started It. Assuming that the experiments vote
carried out. I would never have received any report citing
roeults. i-horo aro indications against the sonso of this
letter, espoolally when It says theso experiments are to bo
oarrled out on persons to be oondomnod to death. Hepatitis
Zpldomloa la not a dlsoaeo aa dangerous aa all that. I havo
inquired meanwhile, and know that for example, oomparod with
Malaria it Is dangerous only about tonth of a fraotlon as
Malaria. Today, I havo alroady dlsoussod my relationship with
Hlmmlor and with Crawltz; that was not lnvontod; that was
actually the truth. On the other hand, all the corrospondenoo
- in all tho corrospondenoo, Hopatltis, ono yoar lator, after
tho first letter failod to have the desired offoot, Profoosor
Sohrelber is looking for a way to approach Hlmmlor in ordor
to havo Hopatltis rosonroh work continued.


2^70


•» Fob 47- A- 3JG-21-1-Bliley- (AX)
COURT I


Sohrolber was tho deputy for epidemic control In the
Reich Research Council so that I may assume for a reason
which is not quite dear to me that Gravity possibly confus¬
ed Sohrolber and me in the first letter. That is conceivable
The letter' Is dated the 1st of June, 194*. a short time
before there was the meeting of the Military Medical Academy;
and probably Gravity who was prosent, talkod to Sohrolber
as well, in any case I am not able to give any information
about this question of hepatitis and certainly not about
any experiments which actually took place. I have no infor¬
mation; I roceivod no report; and I did not hoar from any
othor source even now that these experiments woro roally
conducted. It soocs to mo significant th^t tho witness
Schmidt who was here testified that the experiments woro
not conducted in Strasbourg, as Dohoen. who was to conduct
them, was thore for only two or three days himself.

MR. HoHAHflf: If It pie as j tho Tribunal, I don't llko to
got up and objoot; but It soems to me that the wltnoso should
oonflno hlmsolf to answering questions whloh aro put to him
by his defense counsel and refrain from making arguments on
the basis of tho evidence which has gone in. He has now
been discussing at length the testimony of various witnesses
and the assumptions that he draws from them. I think that
argument can be taken caro of by dofonse oounsel at tho
appropriate time.

DR. SSRVATIUS: Mr. President, the onswors were no
doubt all essential. Whether I chop those questions up In
pieces or lot tho witnoss speak consecutively makes no great
difference in ny case. It would only take longor and would
bo confused. 5ut if the Court wants me to ask him short
questions. I will do so.


2371


s Fob 47-AOJO-2l-l-BlaKl«y- (AX)

COURT I

THS PRESIDENT: Counsel had boon proceeding satisfac¬
torily with tho examination of tho witness. Tha witness has
included occasionally natters of argument which night
proparly bo nade by his counsel but has not oonsuadd much
tine; and tho prosecution witnesses were allowed considerable

latitude also. Iho examination nay prooeed in the manner In
which It has been conducted horebeforo.

q. wtnoaa, you are moused of participation 1

sterilisation oxporinents.


2*71a


* Fob 47 -a- DJG-21-2-Blokloy-(AX)
COURT I


You 'snow tho documents which the prosooutlon haa subnittod.
Whan did you first loarn of thla problem?

A. I learned of thla psoblom of sterilisation ^ftor
I was arrested here; and I learned for the first time only
now tho typo of procedure. From this fact that two or throe
minutes of X-ray treatmont was lntonded to storlllra I wank
to prove that I cortalnly did not know about It for that Is
such an unsclontlflo conception of this biological phocoss
that one oannot lmaglno any doctor would be In favor of such
a plan. I was oonnootod with It by the fact that a Dootor^
Schumann, who was connoctod with an agonoy of Bouhlor, was
lnvolvod In thla question. I oannot remember over having soon
or talkod to this Doctor. Schumann. I cortalnly novor gavo
him any lnstruotlono to tako up this question of storlllra¬
tion; and I was not consulted, I was not aokod whother ho
could do that or not; and tho namo of Dr. Glnuborg, who also
played a role In this, I hoard only horo during tho trial.
Concerning Dr. Schumann, whom I mentioned first, and tho
agonoy In which ho worked, I must add that I novor onterod

his offloo and, of courso, I had no lnfluonoo on tho hiring
of poroonnol by Bouhlor's agoncy.

Q. We'll come back to that when we discuss outhanasla.
What part did you have in the typhus oxporlmonts?

A. I i^arnod of tho typhus experiments, not dotalls,
Just tho fact that such oxporlmonts wore conducted, as far
as I can recall In interrogations last yoar; but It may havo
boon at the ond of 1945. It Is asserted in tho documents that
my agoncy and Prof. Rostock wore informed; but this moans
only that tho subject but not the manner of oxecutlon was
discussed If at all. Rostock was not asked for approval for
tho oxecutlon of these measures; but I know that In this


2*72


* Feb 47-A-DJQ-21-2-3alk*iy-(AX)
COURT I


case he received a carbon copy. I car. testify about these
experlaents only what hae been presented by the prosecution
here in documents. %

Q. Now, did you hear of the report at Hohenllohen and
protest by Prof. Rose?

A. No, as far as I as Informed this protest ot Prof.

Rose's was not reported In the minutes of this meeting at

%

Hohenllchen. If typhus was dle-


2'72a


 Feb 47-A-DJG-21-*-31akley-( AX)

COURT I

ous sod then, this was within a certain group of interested
persona; and I did not participate In It.

Q. Witness, now there are a number of points which
are not directly the aubjeot of the indictment but which have
been brought up here in the course of the trial, the questions
of blologloal warfare, polygal treatment, phlegmon, oanoor
research. Did you have anything to do with any of these
fields?

A. Cf those which you have mentioned, phlegmon, cancer,

I can answer only that I learned of then solely hero through
tho prosocution. Also about the polygal experiments. I may
aay tho following about tho polygal experiments, that Prof.
Rostock on tho basis of a publication about tho blood ooag-
ulatlon drug polygal In the Hunohener Weekly approached this
papor, this magazlno, and askod for further Information. The
fact that ho approaohed this magazine onTho basis of the
published artlclo shows oloarly that ho had no provlouo
knowlodgo; and after that ho did not reoolvo any further
Information about theso things. I know nothing about phleg¬
mon exporlmonts. I know nothing about them before, if
biological warfare is dlsousod, 1 must explain a little.

When I received the assignment on the lot of March, 1944,

%

about the ohouioal warfare apparatus, Field Marshal Xeltal
spoke to mo and asked mo whether I was Informed about biolog¬
ical warfare. I said "Ho," then he told mo tho followlngSit< >
194* and apparently at the boginning of 1944, too, altogether
three times on express orders from Hltlor, he had passed on
Instructions that preparations against defense measures,
against biological warfare, were forbidden.as well as offen¬
sive measures; but he said It would bo Important If I had
some knowledge of what work foreign countries wore doing on


2 , 73


S T a b 47-A-DJQ_21-.VBlaj£l8y-lAX)
COURT I


biological varfaro; and he said that through Generaloberstab-

sarst Handloser I should go to Stabsarst Kllove, who was

%

gathering the material, I obtained the permission from Hand-
loser to taUc to Kileve; and then I did talk to Kllevo; and
ho showed mo the material whloh agents had brought him,
whloh showod that preparations for blologloal warfaro wore
being made by the United Statos and, above all, by Russia.


2S7Ba


S Feb 47-A-DJG-21-4-31akley-l aX)

couar i


He himself had no special laboratory or anything else. He
was only registering thoso reports on paper. A letter was
submitted horo or a fll« noto, rather, from Hr. Kllevo,
which 1 s supposed to show that I had close contact with
31omo concerning the question of biological warfare. This
contact certainly didn't oxlst in this fora. After I teamed
of this clear ordor of the Fuehrer to Keitel, I could not on

X

ay own Initiative malco any preparations for blologolal war-
faro. I could not oven present oountor-moasuros. The file
noto of Xllovo probably means that 51omo wants to tell
Kllevo that hie Institute in Poson was being generally sup¬
ported by mo. That is truo. At the end of 194% I thlnlc,

Bloao oailed mo up, called me on the telephono. I polntod
out this morning that I was conoornod with construction and
ropalr questions oonoornlng medical matters. Ho askod me to
uso my lnfluonoo to have his lnstltuto In P 0 son promoted
from the construction anglo. It was to booomo a genoral
serum Institute. Since I rocolvod this roquost by telephone,
one can see from that faot alono that wo oortalnly did not
dlsouse biological warfaro. I vroto a lotter to Spoor's con¬
struction office and suggostod that this office should support
Blome on his plans as for as posslblo. Thoso were all the con*
noctlons I had with biological warfaro.


2*74


3 Fo'jru-r 7 ~- 0 J-:- 22 -l-Cr 'Sc
C urt H • 1


Q B*t) at ^hlc^i n and concur?

A I in a* n.thin,; ab ut >fcl^a r. _r.x.rir.nte. I lcarnoc’ X t ^ 3
tore, .* fur ca career ia c -neemed th-re was rwv-r any quusti n of -xix.ri--
a^nt*. I kn.w thet Blooc was the aan in th- Reich Research Council in olvtreo
of enne-r and that ho hart hejun ' -f r- th. war t bo interested. in this


question .£ cancer r-acorch. I n_v_r ’ifcusa-C with his that -x w rii*.nto
were necessary -r ah uld bo c orri.-* at, I .acstiru ho ha<’ n intonti n -xcopt
« jk whioh rd. fit bo c rv Hie tod roxyv.v-To -Iso, ^

Q H.w ctb.ut the ty.hua -x.ttor. I --lx-Vw th-rc ms a i.iatrico. Y.u
eaid that ir.Xv.as r h-a- w-.eln H-onlych-u in 19 UI, rtan't tnat in 19 U 3 in


Berlin, in th. Military Jfcdic-al AcaVy?

A T-a, that waa a oittako .n y .oart, that ia « c nfuai n botw-on tbo
».otin: in Rc-nlych-n an-* th- fth-r :.uotii\,.

Q II jv, wiuv-ea, will yu iOurao tell uc eV;ut th- *cn-rnl aa^ot of
the 0X4J.rin.Rta. Y u are aware that ax. -ris.nta n hurnn bcin. a can '»
criainal. Will y u ploaco c .w-ont up.n this?

« *irst f *11 1 can say that -x. .n.-nta n hxraan ocirva have boon
c rw’uct.d -a 1 n. a a any aci-ntilic off rts h-v- boon nV c in ^'‘lcin-
T what extent they can been clo~rly classified -a criw-s rno h.aa t: Occid.0
,n th- basis -f individual caa-s. It nt. -nt to go inta the -*criu-nta
rloht n w ainco I ka* «f th-c .nly fr a th- Fr c-cuti n ci '0, ut t. vent
oxtent huaan -xp-rijxnta arc etiU c-n-.'uctod. t.'iay I can ah'.w 'y a literary
r-.foror.ee, a r .f.r.nco t 8-rx.tHir. .hioh ca,x* ant- ay hm-i lnat year.
Jraf.Bsor K’.uTi, I bcli-v. f th- University f BceVn, printed, ut that
if «no wmts to -i'k- ,r rcaa in th- c neer .r Mojj 'iv. abe lut-ly has to


oniuct certain v-ry car.ful anij al ex^rii^-nts and th-n tv. w.wld have to


decide fr a the aninala. 5 ith cancer n. voul’ have t. cxnalno th- r.;ana
by takir.. a r.rt ,f th- liver and th-r r, anc and -xasinin thua .ace nlins
ta 87A.ci.al aethv'a. T.hon that has been d no, it will be necessary to c.m’uct
sinilar QX,._ri -nts very carefully n huraan *x.in_e t ', that is, r-.: ve
parts f r^ana, the liver, etc. I r ’ n.t -i.-n thia in the sense that .no
c nai-ers such thirds fr a the sci-ntific . int f view which c tv.8 within

2375


3 Vcbruazy-l-OJG-Z2-2-C ark

C urt Jfc# 1

the herder line between rl%ht and wranj;* ftv. w;uld h».v. to conflict such
experiments bccrusc fru cert-in int n a '-i U.ical c-aparieon '»tween
ordj^la .-.nd imwn boioa i« n I n cr p-saibl.. >.o tomd recently tort
crinnale ore, under certain circuuatonc-s, «*.«! f.r ouch -xi^riraonta. ?hia
la c naldor.d triin i chanco. Tto criaixvl ia ,-ivun the rp^rtunity X
establishing hlisclf by a ''cciai n f iT-.videnco and it ia nfT.-cessr-rily
cmiv.ctod with -any alleviation X ais ln.riaoai.nt, out thoao th up.hts nro
nly th- c naoq«v.nco X .1 1 iatic t.ttokin., and *s frVowor Inibwndfc
said, the further advnnood and the wro differentiated scientific w.ri: bo-
c -men, the » r_ accurately rmrt it to nine'* at th- fin-.l 'hjective. Hew
Xaat this «llffwrontl.ti n hs r.dvtnoed in th- 1st •'eoadc ia ah \m 'rj an
exan.-L. 1 hav. roenti n.d, bl ed. Durin. th. first tori'* T.ar wo had n iOoa
thcr. w.ro bl rou.s, bar-ly ton y.ars 1 -tor rlr.oat ov.ry n. ko».w anothin.
abut the f.ur bl cd ,x upe, an-* t. wo r.luc that within the individual
lT -u;.a there nro five •‘iff.r .ntiatl na, juat ts bl rd was ri inr.lly dividod
Into f ur bl <1 r u;-a. .^dically -nd >i 1 ic-ily science with tho aid cX
tccnnolojy, end with th. -1 * f firv.r bl 1 xc-.l invest! -.ti n is r.dvrncin i;
into th. atr-tos.hure in which actually nly th- tamn bein hi.ua.if can
brio th. fin-.l '’cciai n, an wj Jen -.r t -bay vciy tx. 11 that anlarin cx;..ri-
*.nta mat In th. last analysis be conducted ^n hvn-n bein a. Th. sa x. is
true X tto classic typhus -n" den uo f-v,r nnd th.r inf-cti.us diseases*

In to. -3Qx.rir .nte which wore c nductod in Gorrany tho ,.ors-nr.lity 'f
Hireil.r c-rtoinly ’id play a r lo. I kn w that h. *ae f-racrly a torctor and
he nev.r 1st this quality and he r-3 t. .’.tod t. t-.ke uj. thin a f all kin's
an' carry th-. n Ho was -’istrvstf. 1, to l-.t o. n. sx his fil.a. Oub-
hard.t will to able to toatify t this t , n . if n- wants to escribe tho
"scientific ftold" * th which h- c ncerns hi self, an- s.os th- dilottantiss.
He a-Jeta ;r colair., he had a 1 srith; to tri -d to ;akc jas lin- rut f
water r.nd cml. He. f reed his wry Int --"leal aatters. This armin. I
s. 'k. f V.n B uker an'' hia canc_r r-sc arch and :n this aido to had his
cxcavnti ns .an-’ G:-dn«.83 kn-ws what -Is-. I assun. to 4 r-V.bly >*culd havo

2376


3 ?cnru-ry-u-9JG-22-3-C»ck
CurtH. 1


C'nsii'orv *. a, insxi- if ha had hoard that in 19>i I «Rde attaints ualor tho
-> st difficult c n-'iti ns tn btain cni*’ls n-c-ssary for oxp-ri: a-ntd pur-
sus. J just sv that tho qu-stx n cf t» wfl-ctiVcrK.se cf Oor.aan civonical

w-trf-.ro ms i. -.rtant in ocnnwCti.n mth tbw c. unt-r ocasuros, ant' tho hchrf

I

rr.cht t Id _vj th-y hnc* 'ifficulty -ttin -nli-ala. I turo-d t. <L catcher
e-ciwti_s an'* 1 was 11* thnt m« n t -n v. ht fr.a the par&liolis*-.i to
nuxin coin s ut that n nkeys were n.-d-d an., then I trior thr:u w h all th.
a. 1 -n.ie 1 -r-’.nc t. . ,-t tfc- :: nk-yc t. -th.r s. that th.y w uld bo avail-

X

able, f r thw wx^ri^-nts. La th. aa:„r i Uli I 1- .rood that »v.n that vrna
n t on u h pjv! in c ntact with tlv. S.^-r iiinietry h ib ut 200,000 franco
in Swiss curr-ney whicn was safe -vail- 1- t vs, an-' it SoUic:* tho nly
cp;i rtunity tr -t th- r-c-ss-x/ - afays -ith.r fra H rth .»fricr. or iroia
Oibr-lt-r, -n:' *v s-r.t a nan t S.ain an had • nkwys cau-ht rnd *..u ht
thoro end br u ht thee ‘y -'evi us .-ans, >yth- iAiftwaffo an . rt had a>nts
in ft-rdo.au* on't k y.r thw tr. 1 : ic.al rrdens in Or-s-cn %c'oac that
sccti-d tho fastest t. us. I cito this nl" in rlcr t sh w that the ;xin-
cl.'lw was .a t Juct t c nduct tho hxtar. ->i ri. _ntc, rut that .y --a vi.de
ab'ait thwSw quwfti:ns was that thw anlrl -x x:. -nts r.rc tho wcisivc
fact r arv* th -1 hwvan .xi~rir».nts v.r- c ndocted nly un'*cr c.rtr.la circuv
otincce -n ur. -r c-rtiin •v.dical •o. -r. s. If rv. scales f barn -x.crinent
at all, t'.n in .ini n n. ws n-,t c niuoo thw r.sult cl tiK. w7.--rii.i.nt t
with thw Ju.'itiTicati n f r it. .. Jurtifi-.'* x. -ri-^nt ray l-ad t n negative
r.sult because it : zs n t th- final titan and th. ri. ht thin and -na
aust , -tforve ju . rinciplo, that rn -x.orient must n t be leapt ns siall ns
^ .ssi 1 , but it aust ho as *ji , as .xUnsiv- :.s r-ccsaar/, s that th- r-sult
is actually user.;!-,

THS . SSF/vT: C urt till r-co-s until rone-thirty -'clock in the
n?rnin •

(The Tribunal ndj unv.-’ until 0930, U Fohru-ry 19u7)


a 7 e b 47 H«?JC_i_l_H*ynes (MSB)
Coart So. I


ccsRicrrD ccpt

Official Transcript of the Aeerlcmfl
Military Tribunal in the Hatter of the
United States of America against lari Brandt,
et al., defendants, sitting at Kurnbwg.Psraany,
on 4 February 1947, 0930-1630 hours. Justice
Beals presiding.


SHI PHl$ia!TT: Mr. Marshal, will you a certain that the defendants
are all present in Court*

*H1 MAR SH A L : If it please your Honor, all the defendants^are pres¬
ent in the Court.

TKX PRX3ir*3i7: The Secretary General will note for the record that
all defendants are present in the Court.

Defense Counsel nay proceed.

DIRICT LXAMXSATIOS—Continued

BT IP. SZZ7ATXU3—Restated

k Witness, yesterday afternoon you were diocusslng your attiltudo
toward experiments on human beings. *111 you uloaso say when such
oxperimsnts in your opinion are pernieelble and what tho guiding
prlnclplos in such caaee are?

A I said yesterday that within modloal scientific research in cor-
tnin dlsoases and under cortain conditions, in order to guarantoo
further dcrolop-«nt exporironts on human beings aro absolutely
csnontial. 1 said that there can be tenoral rosaions for this.

Of couroo, there can alao bo special reasons — I refer to tho
vnr—for spocial experiments and spodal work in certain directions.

It is a natter of course thit before ono undertaken a htaan
experiment ell possible animal experiments oust bo oonductcd first.


of an experiment on human beings requires all ced¬


ed briefly that "nr can not Judge rotroactivoly from tho


romultt of. an experiment its testification and that, rice versa, a
negative result does not nean that tho experiment as such was not

Justified. v


2370


4 f 0 b 47-X-7JC_l_l_H*ynei (KSD)
Court *o. I


If one does conduct cxperlecnts, they W»t be kept on as *=11 a
scale as poaalble and, on the other k*id, mist be sufficiently cxtoneivc
that tho results are certain.

I bell ere th-t there are two basic 'questions which one must
consider If one intends to undertake a hunan expcriaont. That is tho
question of the l^>ort*nco and the question of the unlrportanco.


* 7 e b 47- u -JJC_l_2_E syn et (KSD)

Court So. I

"Importance* la tycoBorua Oth 'nsceesary", In the Interests of humanity,
which ono must consider as represented by individuals.

Assuming that the experimental subject volunteers for tho experiments
as such is not danforous, or is as little dangerous ns la humnly poaaihlo,

thon I consider that such an oxperinent is not ouch disputed.

%

It is different vhon I do not say that tho aeperiment is lnportnnt,
the suhjoct is voluntary md the experlecnt not dangerous. If I sny that
the experieent is not irpOrtant, a hiaan experiment, scon fron tho
point of view of tho unimportant, is In ay opinion impossible. That
Is, porhaps, ths first point where one could actually spqak of a crioo.

If tho experiment is unimportant, tho subject a voluntocr, and tho
experiment not dangerous, this is nevertheless no Justification for tho
execution of such an experiment, because It is in tho first placo un¬
important.

Tho question becooos difficult ns soon ns tho question of tho
voluntary character of the ■xpcrlaontal subjoct is dlscusnod In an
exportoont which Is rocognised ns i^ortant. It la that tho subjoct
docs not volunteer, evon if the experiment as such is not dangorous. In
such a ca 0 o, tho words *not voluntary" must be dofinod, and ono will
oobo to different points of view.

Recontly tho question was discuscod whothir a prlsonor can voluntoor
for an apartment. I do not want to take the dofinltoly opposing
▼low which was taken at that tlao, for I consider it quite posalblo that
a prisoner may voluntoer to have non-dangerous oxperinonts performed on
hie person, but froa tho moment when there Is danger—thnt is, duigor to
tho llfo of tho experimental oubjoct through the experiment—at that
aonont, the physician « such can not alone decide whether or not to
carry out tho experiment. H 0 re it is necessary that a superior auth¬
ority giro at lea^t approval for such an experiment: that is, permit
H.

Here tho question of persons condemned to death booomes acute: whether
tho person eondoaned to death volunteers or not. I will leavo that


2379


4 7ob 47Jt_7JC-U2_& v -ci (MSC)

Court lo. I

ooeatlon open for t he accent, ffae peraon 14 ^iveO an opportunity* h
chaaCB, • and the declelon is core or leae left up to hl».

?h«e® experlaente will also lie discussed where the lsportance of the
experiaent Is reoognlcod, the subject does not Tolunteer, end the expert-
sent la diuifercua, or, even If the subject volunteers, where the oxporl-
aont la dangerous.


« Tab 47-*:-?j:-i-3-Ha7ao«

Court !J°. 1

It *111 probably ba accessary to aattlo these questions basioally, probably
on an international basis; all the acre because Ofi the basis of the indications
Siren la literature, oTory oirilirei state today — if ono considers huL»n
axperioenta a crioe—erery state is guilty. I should Ilka to say that the
hi^er scientific research is csrriod, the furthor this dereloxcant has
p-otjesaod in a stats, tho grootor,would ba the jillt. The purpose of an order
for experlaents would ba siTon; the point of riev would be established free
■blch exporiconts can be conducted, and, in tho third ci4ss, for tho oxocution,
of the oxperiuent Itself, the nocossary nethods would ba established*


C‘JQTt Sc. 1

•i 7ab 47-*-2-l-£B(-Hcehan


Q. Sew, witness, will you pleas* eons beck to the uxoerlnents carried
out hore in Qernary. Would you have been able to stop such exnerinentsT
A. It is difficult to snsvsr such a question tine* it is oore of t
theoretical. Question, but nevertheless I do not believo that I would have

been able to stop then. If I had been inforned hbout the nethods of exccu-

%

ti.n in the ease of the dangerous sxporlaents, I would corta.ily have been
told that they were persons who had been ccndemed to death; and in the non-
dangercus experinents I would Juve been assured of the voluntary nature of
the subject, also the luoortance of tht exper icdnts, Which in s-ae cases
were ooual to a strong dispute! All this would krve^been pointed out so on
the whole I consider it lnpossible for n* to have stopped or prevented tho
experinents as tuflh.

THE HKESIDESTTi The Trltwnr.l understands the witness has nla.ccd basic
stress upon ths loportrnce and the non-inportones of the experinents, having
in alnd tho goal to bo attiined. Tho Tribunal would bo interested in learn¬
ing the attitude of tho witness concerning his view, having in nlnd the cir¬
cumstances of tho occasion and his view of the lcportanco or non-lnportanco
of the exuerlusnts cnarged in this lndictoent to hive boon conducted by tho

defendants. Do you understand, sir?

m. SaEVATIUS: Tee, sir. Witness, you have hoard what lnfornntion tho
Tribunal wants about ths oxoorlnents. You know tho exoorlnents. i>lorso
spoak of the cold exocriuonts. the freezing experinents. as you know then.

THE VTTXSSS: I oust state that I know the experinonts only froa the
prosecution's side and that I do not yet know the attitude of those who
actually carried then out. I could possible express ny views on tho ox-
periaents nure clearly if I were asked to do so ct tho end of tho oxaninn-
tlon of the actual defendants; if I uuet nvw conncnt on the ectuol oxoeri-
nents, I night later have to sake scue c'-rrectiope.

na. SZBVlfflWH Mr, President, I do not know if I understood tho orurt

corroctly.

THE KfcESIDEST: Tho poiwt la this. Doctor, n®. u ossune for the
nonent that the prosectttixi' e vsrsoo of these various 1 * nwroct.


2>.l


Court lo. 1

4 lob 47;K-2-2-SHk-Me«hrn


Beaod upon that supposition, the court vould be concerned in knowing the
attitude of the witness ab«it theo. If an untold theory or point of viov ie
presented by the several defendante -hen they take the etend on their own
behalf, I ac confident tfco Tribunal will alloy thia defendant to go back on
the etend aw*, exorees hie attitude or viov in consideration of the entire
evidence thon before the Tribunal.

BT SR. SLRTaTIOS:

j ■

k- Vltnuee, you heard vhat the Judge hae eaid. Would you pleaee assume
that vhat the proeecutlon has presented ia correct?

A. If I apoak of the cold experiments, thoy vere conducted in the year
1942 and the occasion for thoao vi*a a deaand of the Luftvaffo in order to
brin* aid to those fliers vho vere in energency eituations. A superior state
of interest, which I aentlonsd bofore, vns no doubt decisive in this case.

The execution of the exuorlnenta, insofar re they concorn Hr. Raschor, soon
to as exaggerated for his oerson froo e certain period of tioe on. I knov
that similar exoeriaents in tho year of 19*-1 vere carried out in the United
States vlth sluilir nsults. rrlsoners vere not ueod but insane persons vere
used. The cooling vr.s down to 25 dogroes body tsoperaturo and thoro wore six
ca.see of dea.th. I aseur.e that sitiilar interests and conditions voro decisive
as vero later decisive for our Luftwaffe. That these experiments thonsolvcs
have certain importance ia shown by the fact that tho American Air Force also
announced in the past nenth that tho experiments in Dachau hrd given then an
Advance of several yoars in their ovn research, so tho eroerlnonts in Dachau
have led to a generally pcsltivo result.

C}. Witness, about the high altitude experiments. Can you comment on
thea also, ev«n though you vere not a specialist? A t leaso please express
your opinion.

A. The high altitude experiments vere possibly initiated for the sane
reasons. As far as the person of Dr. Raschor again is connected vlth theo,
->aa aust assume the seme thing that I Just said about the cold experiments.

I believe that freo a certain point on he acted beyond the Units necessary.
Cte is the importance of tho experlnents being carried cn as stall a scale as


Court Ho. 1

4 rob 47-H-2-3-hEM-Meehaa


possible.

Q. Vhat is your opinion about calarla experiments?

A. They axe a tyoical exaaple of the fact that exnerinonts on hunan '
beings aro neeesscry. Eesevch into urlarla can be conducted only with
fcunan beings. I referred to Dengue fever yesterday where the situation is
slallcr and the references, which you yourself nade recently to the research
in Acerica now being conducted on one hundred prisoners, soaaks fur the fact
that this is not of a criulaol neturej that it is siuoly n demand in tho
interests of humanity and one knove about one Dili ion persons dying annually
in India of ualria and the downed to help here is all the greater.

Q, hi ease eoeakahout the Lost experiments?

A. The lost experinent# are to be ooneldered first of rll ns ocm-
dangerous. Thsy have generally been carried out ever since chonical warfare
agents have oxleted. A low Quantity nllllgrtu of Lost la out on the skin in
ordor to examine the roiction and later new ustbods of treaUiont aro devel¬
oped. It is e typical oxarple of the fact that tho volunteering, tho aeoect
of the volunteering nose, is decisive. I know that in the Military Medical
Acedecy praotically every officer candidate riade such a Loot exnerinont on
himself. The degree of danger 1# virtually nono. This would be on eroerl-
nent which foil into the first group which I said vot necessary, voluntary
and not dangerous.

You havo also hoard of tho sulfonamide experiments. House spook
about then.

A. In 19*il and 19-2 the Question of sulfonamide was dobatsd in tho
Vet^oscht aaong the phyoicione of the Vehmacht cad at hoca. It was not
dear whether the use of sulfonamide administered locally on the wounds, or
orally, that is, by administering sulfonamide tablets, whothcr this would
give protection in all front hospitals. This Question was dobated end the
decision as tc whether sulfonaaide was to be applied or not was at that tine
Quito unsettled. There were individual surgeons end consulting surgeons who
held the point of view that for the hosoittls sulfonaaide was to be rejected
in erring for the wounded in operational .methods and one should not put


Court So. 1

* lob •i7-K-2-i-E*-#®«hes


aulfonaolde powder on the vcunde end thick that that was enough. I know that
In the eroerioenta of I'rof eager Gebkcrdt and other agents possibly the death
of Heyirlck in Prague cloyed a role, perhape as setting the tioe for thie
esalnm«nt. I eaid yoatordaythat I ay a Hi was of the ooinion that thla
question ahould be aolTed in a different way b* establishing a aort of noreble
hospital which would follow the petlente end thua control the effectiveneaa of
the sulfonanlde. ^

. %, Vhot la y-ur opinion abait the trrnaplnntatlon and regeneration
experimental

A. According to the ono-aided proaentation of tha oroaocution I cannot
undaratand thia problon coupletely. I do not underatand the reaaona for the
type of experiments conducted and I wiah to aak that I apeak on thie after
Professor Gothardt haa toatlfled hiaaalf.

Q. Tou have heard of the sea water experlnentaT

A. The tea water exoariaenta poaelbly fall within the framework of the
two experinenta nenticnad where the interoate of the Luftwaffe wore the In-
pulse, whleh in the lost analysis cace free Guerin* and were exocuted with
that lnpulao. Whether danceroueneea played a apodal role I cannot aay.


4 ?eb 47-X_3_L-UC--L*Mcr (HSD)
Court *c. I


ft *hat it your opinion of Hepatitis rcsoarch?
k Hopntltit ^pldoslca was a disease which effcctod all the *ohr-
racht la tho last severely. It is known that certain units lost 40$ to
30$ by this sickness. The disease, as such. Is not dangerous; in tho
llteraturo which was published only last year, 1946, it Is said that
special measures for prevention arc not necessary bocauso thoro is no
danger to life. I said yesterday that the aortality figure Is about onai
tenth of that In tho casd of sal aria. If experiments wee conducted,
and I assume that they were now, they were no doubt not d^mrerous and It
Is probable that the methods used In tho Investigations, such as tho
stonach Juice investigations, or tho liver functions, wero not
danger ours. The dlseaso, as such, in view of tho mob or of lossos

• t

which tho *ohraacht had froa this dosoase, was of special intorcst, and
I assuao that experlnonts In this oonnoctlon vero Conducted In other
countries in tho saao way as I assure they were conducted hero,

ft S^orlllsatlon oxperlront* were also oontlonod - Schuaann and
Glauborg - will you plonse oosoent on thcat

k Tho Schuaann oxperinonts soeaod to ao to havo boon useloss
cxporlnonta. I cannot larglne that with two or throo nlnutcs of
x-ray troatoont one can offoct etorilltation. I cannot doclaro eyeolf
positively In favor of tho principle. There wero no modlcal Indications
of why tho sterilisation was to becarrlrd out.

ft ViU you pleaso consent on tho Thphus oxporimonts?
k "yphus is a disease which Is to bo consldcrod as euch ooro
serious than Hcpatltla or Malaria. Consequently, bocaure of tho
■ctual lose of life through typhue the superior Stato Intorcst in this
disc B so during war tlno was all tho greater. In order once acre to givo
a a^arieon of tho dangerousness of these diseases, one era as sue o that
Typhus is 100 to 200 tines as dangerous a6 Malaria, An exes^lc occurs
to =e on tho question of the experiments. In tho first *orld *ar
D ‘'crkish doctor, in order to study typhus and Its transference froa one
huaan bolng to another, infected


Court No. 1

U Fob. li7-M-3-2-»T!>-Lca


310 Turkish soldiers with infected blood. About 170 of then fell ill* The
others had already had typhus and apparently were incune. Of the approxi¬
mately 170, 65 patients died* The result at that tine, it was 1916, was
declaim in many respects for the nodical service of the Turks and they
sought an excuse, a Juristic excuse, for this physician who was responsible
for these deaths, by declaring him teeporarily insane.

0. Now there remain the phosphorous experiments. Will you please

A

speak about then?

A. The dangerousness of phosphorous exporinents, as such, can bo
Judged only as in the case of the Lost exporinents. I ssw innunarablo phos¬
phorous burn* on wcnen and children in our citios and tho oxporlnonts con-

.•

ducted in Buchomald mu jA have dealt with tho sano symptoms, since phosphorous
came from English incondiary bombs) Tho wounds healed after suitablo troat-
sent by various methods. Doath oocurrod only whoro there woro extonslvo bums
and where tho symptoms of the patient woro those as in burns in general.

DR, SE.1VA7I03I Doos tho Tribunal dosiro any further information
on these individual experiments?

JUTOE SED3ING* Assusdrg tho Prosocution*s testimony to be truo
conoemlng the chargo of extermination of Jews for tho purpose of completing
a skeleton oolloction and tho lator extermination of tuborcular Polos, will
you have tho defendant ooenent upon what military nocossity existed, if any,
for conducting those programs?

Q. Witnoss, you have hoard the question of tho Tribunal. Will you
pleaso consent on the tubercular Polos and tho skeleton collection?

A. There was cortainly no military intoroat in question in the
skeleton collection. In the case of tuberculosis, I must assuno that sueh
things did occur. I wculd not consider it Justifiod. I consider it necessary
that as long as ore can help a hunan-being and as long as there is any
prospect whatovor, one must help him. That one nay consider transfers of
tuberculosis patients from ono place to another is a ttought which is not
Unfamiliar to me. When I spoke of these 3pecial hospital installations yes ter-


4 Jrt. 47J(-3_3_An5_L. #ter (MSD)
Court *o. I


day I can add that we considered aoriny tuberculosis patients and concon-

tratlny than at certain points In the Allpau end aoreral such Installs-

•

tlona, hospitals, tuberculosis hospitals, vhlch already existod, or In
tha southern Black Borest near St. Biaelen; but I*soe no Justification
because a person is sick or lufferlry, or because ho can no lonyor
work, to kill hln, no natter what Ms nationality is or what his aye is.

TE1 FRZSirXKT: I hare a question. A question by Judye

A

Beals. I understand «he witness, In discussing experiments upon human-
belnys, to stress the danger to life only. I would llko th^ opinion of
the witness upon such experinents which it would be reasonably anticipated
or known would result in serious physical injury to tfao expcrlaontal
subjoct, whether internal or external, as to whether that would not
also be an ol*aent to bo considered, ae woll ae danror to life only?

BY m. SHTATIUS:

^ Will you please connect on that?

A It le a question of serious sickness and of subsequent symptoms
to be considered but in sr opinion a distinction aust be aade botwoon
whother there is actual danyor to life or possible dnnyer to lifo. X
•aid before that I consider an exporlsent a# not danyorous if it le not
danyeroue as far ae a human bciny can Judyo. Of oourso I admit
that there it no experiment which actually and undar all clrcuastancos
is not dnnyerous, slnco cron In tho cost olaplo injury there can bo
cos*licntlone. But it le not oxpected, Bor example, if a nalaria patlont,
vho has contracted nalaria through an experiment, cannot yet rid of ms-
laria and dooe not respond to treatment, that has to bo cvaluatod
differently than If tho solaria could bo treated and cured. But tho
conditions under which one undertakes such experinent* is that ono aeeunos
that it is not danyerous.

PPISIBBT: The witness did i»t quite answer ry q-»ostion. I
intended to request the opinion of the witness as to whether or not tho
pertically certain serious bodily injury, peraanent injury, either in¬
ternal or external, to the experimental subject, was not also a serious


consideration


2587


4 *eb. 47-H— 3 -4-J rn -Legaor (MSB)
Court »o. I


that the only cone 1 doratIon la not the possible death of tho
subjoct? That le, In any experlaent upon a huaaa-beinr If It would
reasonably be anticipated that the experlaent would result not In death
but In serious pcrtoml Injury to the subject, either Internal Injury or
external Injury, would net* that also be a aerloua ooneideration In de¬
termining whether or not any experl-ents should be conducted?

A Such a point of view la decialvo In tho eolectlon of experi¬
mental subjocte. I would consider that of about equal lnportanco

with giving a person condeanod to death an opportunity to preservo hla

%

life ur.dor the conditions to be expected. I fallod to point out
ono thing — that Is, that In all oxporlsents ono nuat -sake It clear
to tho subject what tha experlaent le about and what results nay bo
expoctod. Whether tho oxperiaont Is dangerous or not, this eoens
to me to be a decisive factor In tho question as a wfcolo.


2388


4 7.b 4%-Sf-4-l-Haloy (MS)

Court So# I

BT 9# SHTATIUS:

<i Vltness, hew I coae to another subject; you were not alone
os these things, you were In a circle of officers and aeeoelatea.

In thla way you could learn^of =*ny events and be informed of thee.

Vlll you please explain your relationship to the group, so-called?

1 I mist distinguish between several grox^s. Of the 23 co-defondl
ants, I set nine only here In the prison In Kuroberg. Those are-^uff, Rom¬
berg, Rector-7reysang, Melts, Shaeffer, Rowan, Plegelbock, Pokorny
and Miss Oberheuser. I knew by nane, but did not ha to ahy closer
connection with three, that Is Poppendick, Pitcher and Ruldoph Brandt.

Mith six others, Mrugoweky, Schroeder.'Cebhardt, Bloat, Bose and
Slewore X had only brief and occasional contact, and only with Slavers
did I have any contact in connection with tho experiments which aro tho
subject of the Indictment. I was at a conference with Hrugowsky onco on
an apparatus for removing poison froa drinking water, which had nothing
to do with the thing under dlecuseion here. It wae a dlscuselon In con¬
nection with m assignment to detoralno tho application of apparatus to
detoralno uss in choelcal warfaro. *lth Schroedor, even beforo ho was
Chief of tho Medical Servlco of the Luftwaffe, I sot hi* one© or twlco
in connoctlon with tho question of construction of hoepltale, nlnco
he too was lntcrc«tcd In such natters froa tho luftwaffo eido. I sow
C-onskoa only onco. I no longer rcaoaber exactly what year It was,

I believe It was 1944 when he approached so In order to got some
nodical of floors for tho *affen SS, whoa ho had asked for froa tho
Aray end not obtained. H 0 thought In this v ay ho could havo hie
vlsh fulfilled more quickly. I did not know C* 0 bherdt before tho war.

- net hla tho first time during tho war, at tho beginning of the war
with Poland when the headquarters leaders and Hiaaler's H eB dquArters
were in a special train, and the trains were near each other at Oroue-
Souorn whore tho troops were on nanouvors. There wae


4 7e* 47Jy_SY_4_2_X*l37 (USD)

Court Ho. I

4

* big troop bandaging piece where Polish soldiers were boing cared for,
end Oebhardt and I helpod there day and night to take care of the wounded.
It was =y first personal contact with hits. I saw hin screral timos when
Hiaaler visited the Headquarters, but we did not really talk with oach
other. I wa. with hin a longer tine the first tine at Hohenlychon at
the sooting in 1944 in the spring. I have known Biose since 1941, I bo¬
ilers. I set hla with M r . Conti. There were tho differences which I had

A

sentloncd between Dp. U> y, C 0 nti, and so forth, and Bionc *>d taken up
a ror7 doflnite attitude against Conti. 1 net hin occasionally on the
■see question of leadership of Wohrracht physicians, but we never dis¬
cussed the things which are under discussion hore. Roso visltod no
onco in 1944, I believe. Yesterday 1 nentloned his desire to hero
the paralytics, whoa he was treating with aalnrla, put in a hospital,'and
X was in contact with hla a second tino, X believe it was in writing
though, when he asked for additional food rations for thoso aalnrla
patients. I passed on his roquest to tho food oinistry. I roforrod to
Sievers yosterday. I saw hla only onco, when in oonnoctlon with tho ap¬
paratus against gas ho gnro so a final report fron Hirt. H 0 did not toll
no about tho Ahnenerbo nt that tloe, or about other oxporinents which woro
boing conducted. Then thoro is another group of gontloaon, Hmdlosor,
Bostock and Brack. I dlscustod zy contact with Professor Rostock yostor-
day. I worked with hin for 19 y^ars. Oenoraloberstabsarst Handlosor,
aftor 1942, the events ovor v lae=a, 2 caao In contact with hin and since
that tiao I have had Increasingly clot# oontact with hits. At tho end of
the war, his office as Chief of Medical Servico wpb opsn in Bents, a
inall suburb of Berlin, where I w fi s also located nnd fron tho practical
necessity of location wc case together there, I did not discuss tho
Mporiaonte which are on trial here with hin. 5fee last is Brack. I
net 3rack In 1934 as the Adjutant of Buhle, the head of the Chancellory


2390


4 Tel. 47 -M-SV^_ 3 -Mal 07 (MSD)
Court -~o. I


of the fuehrer in 3erlin, I had acre closer concoctions with his Inter
in 1939 or 1940, when the proxies of euthanasia had boon brought up, and
then until he went into the Vehrsacht in 1942 I saw hin frequently.

H Xho»c * crc tfc* individual portonfj shat contact did you have
with the nodical societiest

A I did hot belong to any radical socloty until 1933, I was e
aonbor of tho C-orman Society of Sur#ery, and in 1933 I tisif-ntd n# that
X had no connecti'ne with those societies.

k How about tho Bational Socialist Lcaguo of Physicians? You men¬
tioned it once?

A In 1933 I Joined tho “ati-nal Socialist League of Physicians.
Before those was any nccting or discussion X wr* tent material and with
a request to make a speech on racial questions. X refusod bccauoo in tho
first plade the material < iv«n to me seemed to no toe primitive, and in
tho socond place bocauso I did not havo adequate sciontlfic knowlodgo
to say anything basic on this question. I do not mean to say I would
not rocomirc racial points of vl<a* ns such and that X do not think
on tho whole thoy play an Important rolo in tho livco of nations. X
did not pnrtlcip-to in tho first meetings of tho Hatlcnnl Socialist
Loaguo of Physicians in Bochum, at that tino, and rv*ro or l«so from
latinoes X contiruod to ronaln a moaber. Othor organizations which might
bo important horc, Profossor Llcbra&d mentioned tho Altrooo organization
tho othor day. X was never there. Neither Conti or Biooo rsked no or
lr.vltod mo to participate in ary of tho roootings,

<i Vh«t wore your relations with C«ntl?

A Hy rolation t4tk Dr. Conti wan at first very uninteresting, Wo
had no contact of any kind. Tr-a the moment whon I had tho task of
coordinating Wohrnacht and Civilian health matters, a tension ardso
betwoen us which never ceased. It ''as well known that I had to


2391


4 Job. 47-K_SJf-4-5_Kelo7 (KSD)

Court So. I

be careful wkonsvsr wo sight get In public thet it «a» not cxprossod.

H I have a question about the settings; wero you not invited to
castings, wore you not inforaed there about the questions, tho issues?

A I took p>rt in few nestings during tho war. Until 1942 it would

• A

not h-vo boon possible, because as Escort Physician * was tied to tho
Eoadouarters. Pros 1942 on I was in Marburg, once ft a celebration. I
then participated in the third sorting of tho consulting physicians of
the Military Medical A^dcry, whit* was in 1942 in tho spring. Ono norn-
lng I epont at the sooting of C-croon soldiers in Dresden. Ii^ tho fall
of 1943 on bohalf of the Juohrer, I had to give Sauerbruch the Knights 1
Crose of Mar Merit Cross. The-c vat a eeoond sooting of consulting

physioians of Eononlychen in 1944.

At thie at ating at Hohenlychon did 70 U hold tho -elconing addross?

A Toe.

k I will show you thie eponing speoch, which ie Document MO 924,
which ie not in any doeusent book; which was euboittod in ono of tho lnet
acssino. I do not know whether tho ?rjbuual hrt a copy in English.

A I suet explain the history, tho events loading up to this
aoctlng, and point out tho reason why U was hold in Hohenlychon. In
tho spring of 1944 It was hardly poeelblo to hold a sooting in a
Oernan city, bccauso of constant air raid alarns tho oxccution of a Dott¬
ing would havo been lnrpossiblo. r or a reason which I do not know
Oebhardt learned of this. Oebhardt loarnod it hod not boon settled whoro
this aeoting was to be hold and no doubt offerod Hohenlychon os the placo
for holding tho sooting, and Generaloborstabsarst Handloser accepted the
invitation.


2592


4 ?et>-*-G3S-^-l-I/enhardt.
Court uo. 1.


It was possible to put up the sany participant* rt Hohealyehen -sA
receive then, and there was enough rooa to hold the icdividual conferences.
Kohenlycaen v s. at tae sase tioo. ar. SS Hospital. 3ia supreme Coldf in
t..ls c so was Hli-lor. I tu& to partieW.td ia this conforonce becnuso a
word was to bo given on behalf of the Huohror by oach one of the represent¬
atives froa tho Luftwaffo. the juy. end tne Savy. In order to docido W-.o
was to a'Id tae opening speech there, in any cane, I hnd to distributo the
decorations. Gobharlt. who vt-i the nost, asked no to hold this spooch, end
no s- id t..is was in :.roeiont witu Kial«r. 1 did not dltcpss this question
vita Hia-lor hicsalf either before or aftor and for fornal roi.sons I nedo
tols spooch in tho xuao of tho H.ichfuehror. I pointed out the nocosoity of
eonAD work of the doctors, in tho intorest of thu s> Idlers, and gr.vo this
decoration to Gobhardt hlasolf, first. I onphasirod tho value of Hohon-
lychon as a place of knowledge whora post-operative care was carried out.
Hohotilychen hod gained a certain reputation in Goraany during tho llynlc*.
Gcbhrdt wr.s in charge of the nodical care of tho sportsnen and through tho
nature :nd uotnod of this tr«.»t:.ont he was a nan who was known far boyond
tr.o bordors of tho Reich.

Th- t Hohealyehen wu* to play c special rolo in this direction wr.s
backus* in tho acdic-4 Zone Uxor was a hue and cry for a new Hohonlychon,
und it wr.s upp. runtly .-.greed tJ ostnolisa r now aospltal in Luedenscholdt.
Sohcnlychon, as l sports place of treatment, in tho cr.se of Ocbhr.rdt, wao
a well known conflict with us.

s to the oth«.r gontlonon who wore gi*cn an award, thoro was ftitsoit.
Gutxoit was the consult in, head of the /Jirnocht nodical Section. :xA I
had oxprossly given hlu the ewerd, because, in addition to ..is pood work
itself, Internal Kcdlclno, which he represented, «\s to be honorod as tho
text re:ding. Gutielt was theonly Internalist th> t rocoivod this award.

So far as surgeons wore concerned, Gutsoit had alruidy rocoivod the Knight's
Cross froa Gobtn.rdt, and the third was Profostor Tnooniss a well known brain
surgeon known in G^raan nodical circles. Hcroon Backnoistor. at tho head


- 2393 -


4 ?eb-w-C3S-^-Z-Ls hr . hA rdt.

Court . •. 1.

of tie ..cdlc.-l Center at St. 3lasioa as I nontionod a while ago. received
:ae award in view of his work and participation in the fight against
Tuberculosis.

3T DR. S H7.JIUS: *

Sow, I should like to conclude this subject. I cono to the
Helen Research Council; you woro a not-bor of the 3orrd of Directors of tho
Helen Re scare.'. Council. v„ro you nott ^

In 1943 I bee.no 0 aeubor of the Reich Research Council. ,.t thi.t
tine the Reich Research Council was under tno Education ].inistor, «.nd by a
spec!el decree in JUnu of 1942 they reaovod it fron tho Education ! lnistor
and it was put under Gonoralnrts Schreibor. Scientific work was to bo put
on very broad basis of goncral scloncc end Schrolbor scoaod tho right nan
to do this. Thv Rolen Research Council consistod of a prosidont and an
administrative nchino. Toon, it hud a sot of loodorshlp staff, about
thirty or forty branches of difforont typos of rosoarch. Thor.- wore bonds
of oreh of the spociolist groups. Medicine coning under tho hand of
Clnssic 1 Medicin. was placed under Snuor Mhch. There wero a nunber of
Deputy . inisters. The Doputy ut tho hoad of tl.e Roi h Hedichi Control wns
Dr. Schrolbor vno wn« nentlonod yesterday* ^sldo frou the Board, and this
..didnlstrativo uhChiBu, the R_ich Research Council, wp- » roprosontr.tlvo


€

|


- 2394 -


I reh^OT-4t-«7D-5-»la-iehnh?.rdt
Court So. 1


arrangement, There were representatives of the highest Reich Authority,
and free agencies of which one could assume that they had sooo contact with
scientific work. The Plenipotentiary Minister was in it. Speer was in it.

And I was also one of the neobers, there were over twenty. The Board did not
have oiy right to issue instructions and could not exert any influence on the
heads of the specialist group and the deputies and the Corrdssioners. This
was not possible because the composition of this Board was not from the
point of view of Profession but of Agency. And it did not in effect play
any inportant role itself, by reason of the faot that froa a Military
research viewpoint, the Society was founded in July 19Ui. This faot was
not even ro ported to the coshers of the Board, and I Byself 1 oar nod of it
only on the basis of the document. I must point out that in April 19U*,
shortly before the end of the War, I received an appointment from Goering
bins elf. That is, as the individual Deputy over a specialist group to tako
up the point and establish aedidno and to take chargo of then, I was to bo
tho Deputy Oeneral Surgeon within the Reich Research Council, I rocoivod
tho dogree only a week before sy nodical agency was dissolved in l?ldu

Q Were you connected with the Roich Research Counoil through your
offioe of Resoerch?

A It could only be a natter of gonoral nuaca which Professor
Rostock has for all office ehiof direotor with Prof. Ur tad. He had no right
to issue instructions to the heads of specialist groups because they wore
undergoing supervision tho re was no other connection. Rostock node all of
tho appoint-onts bins elf.

Q What is tho Ahnenerbe Society; what was your comootion with It?

A Until I was arrested, I considered the Ahnenerbe Society .
Organization a sort of SS Administrative Agency concerned with Research in
connection with antiquities of sene sort. I did not know aqjr details or any
facts of c.ry thing that was done. I never had ary contact with the Ahnenorbe
at all. The only contact I had with Hr. Si overs is that he did not inform me.
I did not even know that he came frea the Ahnenerbe.


-2>9*-


t Teh 47-H-A7D-5-2a-I*chnkardt (HSD)

C"irt Ho* I


EH. S1B7ASHJS: M r . President, now I cone to the next count of the
ir.dictaent ab-ut Xuthanasla. Shall I begin n-V ot after the recess?

"HI PSTSimr?: C-unsel, you say oontlnue wish the exanination of
the Defendant.

3T IB. SIB7A7IDS:

it Vitness, you appo nr to have participated in tho expcriccnta on
Luthanaaio. I shall show you tho decroe of the 1st of Docoabor, 1939,^
that i» D oc. 360. It is in Docuncnt Book Ho. 14. Ploaso discuss how
this decroo caae about. . x

A After the erd of the Polish enr^aign in about October, tho
fuehrer was at Obernnl t burg. I cannot longer cloarly renenber tho
advaaoe but I was called to hia and ho told =o that bocauso of tho
Docuaont, which ho had received free Professor Bcuhlcr, he -anted to carry
out a solution of tho *uthanasia question. H 0 favo no gonoral diroctlvos
of how ho inafinod it, and tho fundasontal; insano persons, who wore in
such a condition »hat they could no longer tako any conscious part in lifo.

Theso pooplo wore to be givonrollof by doath. Gonoral instructions
about info mat ion which ho hlnsolf had rocoivod followed, and ho told
so to got in touch with Boohlor hinself about tho natter. I did so by
tolophono on th« sane day, and then I inforoed Hitler about cy talk
with Boohlor. Then ho sont so lator tho decroo, not in tho fora
In which wo hrvo it hero, but in a sioilar fora, and cortain changos
woro made. My request wps that a precaution bo introduced for tho
participation of Doctors, and I used an expression which was fanillar
to no,It said that buthanasio could bo carried out on persons incurably
side with probability bordering on certainty. Sinco this formulation wao
itr-ngo to hin, it was added with tho nost critical Judracnt of thoir con¬
dition of sickness. This dccrco was signed about tho ond of O c tobor,
which repds as follows: "Bcichslcitcr Bouhlvr rad Dr. Br-ndt, M.D., arc
Charged with the responsibility of cnl*r.- ing the authority of certain

0

doctors to bo designated by nano in such a nanner that perrons who, ac¬
cording to hunac 'u^gaent, arc incurably ill can on tho omst careful diag¬
nosis of their condition cf sickness, be accorded a cercy doath. 11


• leb. M-TP-16-L-Hinabuch (USD)
Co’^t 3o. X


<1 Did you tAlk to Bouhler?

▲ I talked to 3ouhler only by telephone at first and after the
decree wee timed I did not talk to hla immediately but sent the decree
to hla in Berlin. •

<4 A c d what was Hitler's idea of euthanasia? *hA did ho understand
by It?

A The decisive thine for hla was what ie expressed here in the
decree; that incurably ill persons — really I should have said insano,
other persons were always exceptions — a mercy death couli be accorded.
That is a noasure dictated by purely htaaano considerations, and nothing
oioo could bo thought under any circuastanceo, and nothing oloo was ever
said to bo.

Vt Tou said that tho Fuehror ,nvo you tho assijtunent on tho basis
of a call froa Bouhlcr. It could not havo boon a call froa Bouhlor
alono. Thore must havo boon other reasons.

A It was not a call. It was eo»o kind of a documentary prodocuro
which was doclsivo. It =ay bo that tho Tuohrcr already had thoco
documents or that Bouhlor epoko to hin about it. I don't *now exactly.

But this was not the cause of the euthanasia problons being taken up.

In his book, "Mein laapf, Hitler had referred to it in cortain chapters.
The law for tho prevention of the birth of sick children is a proof
that Hitler had concrotoly conccrnod hlnsolf with such problems onrllor.
Tho law for tho prevention of the birth of children of ctfigonltal dcasoao
follcvod tho evonts. It was written because people with congonital
diecasos oxistod. It is a problca which affects tho whole world.

Similar laws have been passed in other countries.

Dr. C-ehardt Wagner, who was tho predocossor of Dr. Conti, at tho
?-irty rally in Hurnbcrg discussed these questions. I did not talk to
&rhardt Wagner at that tine and had nothing to do with these things,

Vat I havo heard now that in 1935 Gerhardt Wegner had a filn made present¬
ing the problem of the insano.

It was apparently a fila made in asylucs With insane persons.

2397


4 Job. -M—.T’-S-l-S inabock (HSD)
Court So. I


H Witness, wore there not request* reeoivod toy Bouhler and tho
TuchrerT

A Bequests to th^s effect were cer^irOj received constantly by
3ouhl#r


4 7.b 4 -JJ:^_£Jlnabuch (*SD)
Coxxt *o. I


?he Chancellery of the Fuehrer always recel-ed euch thlnfa. I only
knew that theee requests were jilted on to the H e ich Ministry of the
Interior. I sgraelf know of one reques^ Ip the spring of 1939 which

vaa sent to the Fuehrer hlaself through hie Adjutant's offieo. The father

%

of • daforaed child approached the Fuehrer and asked that this creature
should he killed. Hitler turned this natter over to ne and told me to
go to Leipzig 1 mediately — It had taken place In Leipzig — to conflrn
the fact. It was a child who was horn blind, an Idiot — at least It
aeesed to he an Idiot — and It lacked one leg and part of one ara.

7HS PH 1 SIIKHT: We will have a recess for a few aoDenta.

(A recess was taken.)


U ? Q b . 4* 7-4Wn-7-l-Pot ty

Court Ho, 1


THE MARSHAL* The Tribunal is again in session.

51 DR. SSRVATIUSI

q. Witness, you wore speaking about the affair at Leipzig, and
regarding this deforced childj what order did Hitlor give you?

A. He gave no the order to talk with the physicians who were
taking care of the child and to, first «f all, test the statements of the
father as to their veracity. If they wore correct, then in his najje I was
to infora the physicians that they wore permitted to carry out Euthanasia.

It was important in this respect* that this should not hap?on
in tho fora toward the parents that they themselves at some other period of
tiao should feel incrirdnatod as a result of this Euthanasia, and, there¬
fore, that the parents should not havo tho depression that they thcoaolvea
had boon tho cause for tho doath of this chili, I was further ordorod
to stato that if these physicians should becone involved in legal procedures,
they should take care by order of Hitler that this procedure should be
halted. Then Boraann also was ordered to inform tho Minister of JUstico,
Guortnor, in this caso,

♦

Q, what did the doctors who wore involved say?

A, Tho physicians maintained tho point of view that tho keeping
alive of such a child could actually not bo Justified, and it was pointed
out in this respoct that in natornity wards under circumstances by dootors
theasolvos in such a caso Euthanasia wcaild bo performed without arything
further being said about it. Any preciso instructions woro not given in that
respect,

0 , This problem of deformities, was it treated in any othor way?

A, The problem of deformities has probably already been discussed
before this caso in Leipzig, Hcwover, thon in the course of the aurmer
there was work done in a roro concrete fora, first of all, on tho part of
the rtinistry of the Interior, and in this caso we were involved as woll as
special consultant to Dr, Conti — who became Reich Minister for Health
after the death of his colleague, Wagner, and then after that became Stato

-2399-


h Feb. 4i7-4-A!T>-7-2-Putty
Court Set 1

Secretary In the Ministry of the Interior, so that Dr. Linden continued to
occupy himself with these natters,

Q Who was Dr. London?

A Dr. Linden was Ministerial Counselor in the Reich Ministry of
the Interior, and he was a physician, and ho was a oonpotent official who
later on was in charge of all these sanitorixos, and la tar on in the course
of the treatment of the Euthanasia question he was appointed na exponent
for all these natters,

Q What was the proceduro at th: tine? Was Hitler informed about
all those natters?

A In August of 19U* by his ordor I participated in a conference
which took place between Dr. Linden and Mr. TOuhlor and some additional
cor., and in its course tha question of troatoent of these dofomitiee was
discussed, and which also Included a discussion about the nothod of treating
thoso cases. On tho part of the Ministry of the Interior Dr. Linden put
forth documents, questionnaires, etc., which had been furnished which wore
then discussed or.co sore in iotail, and in this case it was tho preparatory
work for the later-established Reich Corrdttoo for the dealing with sick
persons who wore suffering froa inherited diseasos.

Q Did Conti attend thoso conferences?

A I have never soon Conti in any conferences of this kind, and I
have never hoard hin speak in this connection at ary placo,

q To what extent did Conti deal with those natters in tho Ministry
of the Interior?

A It certainly is not only the question of this Reich Comnittee,
but it is the question of dealing with dofornitios, and it was discussed
in the Ministry of the Interior as long as the question of Euthanasia was
discussod at all. At that tine I did not havo any knowledge of this purely
*>-v-inistrative work, and only new I have had the possibility of getting a
certain in3ight into tho existence of all those conditions.

In the oourse of the Polish campaign around the middle of September,
a conference took place between Dr, Conti and Mr, Laaaors and tho Fuehrer.


- 2100 -


u Feb.-l;7-it-ATD-7-3-FUtty
Ccurt Jfc. 1


This conference took place at Zopcot near Danzig. There the question of the
introduction of an Euthanasia law was discussed, and Mr. Lascars M a int a in ed
the point of view that such a law would have to be worked out through the
general ASainistration. E©cause of *he Iona adalnistgative channel connected
with this. Hitler apparently'objected. The whole question at that tine was
that no result was achieved between Hitler, Lastsers and Conti.

Q. were you at that tine already inforned about the natter, about
the question of the legal prcblen with the Ministry of the Interior?

A. I was not inforned at the tine, and I havo only been inforned
about it now. I did rot attervi these conferences, and I havo neither dis¬
cussed then with Conti later on nor with Laniers about the question of
Euthanasia.

Q. This, all those incidents took placo in tho year 1939?

A. This conference near Danzig took plaoe in the middle of Septem¬
ber and when I referred to tho Decree and Its signing, this took plaoo
towards the end of Oetobor.

Q. Jfew why was this natter dealt with and star tod during tho war?

A. I mist assume thnt the Fuehrer was of tho opinion that such a
prcblen could, first of all, bo earrlod out nore snoothly 'hiring tho war
beoauso tho opposition which night have been expected fron the aido of tho
church would rot play such an important part during twrtine as it would
in other times.


2401


4 TebJt-JP-Xl-SaEpson CMSI>)
Court I


H Therefore, there 1 b b large prelislnary history to the Euthanasia


pr-grea.

A It certainly has been traced back to the time of 1933, and before.
It would perhaps be is^ortant to point out that the decree was actually
predated, and the formulation'only took place in Oetobef, While the date
of the decree was the 1 st of September 1939. This pre-dating toward tho
beginning of the war shows that Hitler actually believed that tho lntro^
ductlon of this law would be easier during war tlae. In 1935 he Is alleged
to have told the foreor Helch physician, Vagner, that if war should ever

X

break out, he would deal with the Euthanasia questions and that he would
have then carried out.


Q How, If you cone back once core to the text of the decreo; then,
you were given orders, together with Bouhler. Vhnt official position did
Souhler occupy?

A Bouhler was Chief of the Chancellery of the Puehror.

Q Just a ninute, witness. In connection with this I aa handing
you the sketch of the Euthanasia program which was presented by tho

prosecution. It is SO 253; it Is located In Part I of Document Book 14.

\

It tho sane tine I an handing to you a docuaent. It is a eketch conposod
by tho defendant. Brack.

Xr. President, the plan has not been translated ao yot, and for the
tine being I have submitted a plan in C-ernan; it is not very Important
beenuso 1 am not going to deal with the details In the plan, but only tho
top containing the naaos, so that you will alio bo able to follow the
'-•ornan copy.

In connection with this sketch, the defendant Brack has givon an af-1
fldavit and I want to read it. It Is Itecuacnt E3 8 , with tho skotch
belonging to it So. E3 15. I want to subolt both of thee as Exhibit Ho.

3. Th 0 plan will later bo presented to the Tribunal in English, and 1 hopo
It will be ready by noon. I shall now read tho affidavit: "I, Victor Sreck,
11/9/1904 at Huron, near Aachen, at present a defondant beforo Mil¬
itary Tribunal at Humberts depoee the following affidavit, after I have


3402


Court So; X


boen informed that violation of an oath, by standing or making false

statements will result in aovere punishment. ^ho plan submitted

waa Document SO 426, inhibit Ho. 106; it ia plan So. 254, which I

an submitting, waa at th« tin® partially conposed by ay *tatemonta and

partially according to tho suggestions by Dr. 3 0 ckwald, who ia an

interpreter. t waa draftod by member of the proatcutlon. A* tho tino

I objoctod that auch ® organisational plan had rv*vor oxlated, and now

a

this only can be construed by =e, and thcroforo it may contain in¬
correct st&toments. The Proaocution aaaurod so of tho fact th*t tho plan

X

had only boen composed according to the beet of ny knowledge. In tho
-oantime, I have diacoverod by looking at various docuner.ta of tho
Prosecution, and I have obtained a clearer picturo than I had at tho
tlaoj and, therefore, I have composed a now plan about the tuthanaeia
Prorras and its organisation, «nd it shows tho relationships to tho
persons and officos involved in it and that they actually oxlatod. I
en submitting thle skotch with tho request now to submit this plan
to Military Tribunal S 0 . 1. *he truth nd correctnose of tho plan X
have cortifiod. The plan forma a vital part of thie affidavit. Sumberg,
3? January 1947. Then follows tho signature of Victor Brack. And
then the document concludes with tho certification by Dr. Prooschsonn,
counaol for tho defendant."

k Witnoss, first of all will you give us your opinion as to tho
skotch of tho Prosecution, and only as far as tho top agencies woro
concorncd, with which you wore conncctod; that la without firat going
into detaila.

A In the plan Ho. 253, which haa boen presented, there ia a
lino under ay name tfich connecta to the naso of Bouhloxi and below there
is a further line In the program of Euthanasia. IMa connecting line la
incorrect ao far aa it haa been dr«m to sy naso. ^he edainlatrativo
machinery for the acention of tho Euthanasia program was an establish¬
ment which was exclusively subordinated to Mr. Bouhler. It had boen
established by him and it wn« administered by him. Likewise, tho connect-


2403


4 Tsb -K-JpJB_3_5«^aon (HSD)

Court So, I

lc« line fro« ay nn« to Dr. Conti, la not correct because It did not exist
at all. -be upper connectli* line froa Bouhler to Brandt, which has boen
struck out In perl, end which In pafrt has bean continued at a lino, to

Minister Brack la not correct In this fore either because when anything

♦ ®

took place as far as the administration was ooncerned, that Is, It

all con-.ected to the Ministry of the Interior. Then this al B o originated.

with Bouhler. In =y opinion, In order toocplMn the sketch, It would be

A

appropriate to state that also tho statoacnt In tho affidavit by Brack
would have to be repeated onco sore because also, the other ^skotch in this
plan which refers to tho subordinating agencies are alto incorroct, and
I would aloo consider the title kuthanasla Prograa ae incorrect, bocauao
It wao not described or outlined froa the vory beginning as far as Its
extension was concerned,

Tou aay put the sketch aside now, Kow, I want to doal with tho
sketch which tho defendant. Brack, hao coaposed. I m now handing you
tho plm. Havo you already seen the plan!

A Toe.

Q C»n you confirm, with regard to precision, that this plan has now
boen drawn correctly according to your opinion?

A In ay opinion this plan lack* tho connecting lino botwoon
Bouhler and sysolf; and furthcrsorc, It is corroct that tho rod lino
froa Bouhler to tho executing agency of kuthanasla is Tiergraton Strasso
4, and that fron thore also tho connection for tho Belch Comlosionor for
tho cental institutions and to Dr. Linden is correct. I assume that If
such an organixatlonal plan as nca* dream up. It Is correct in principle
at least.

<4 Of what a/ency was 3ouhlcr in char. o?

A 3ouhler wps tho Chlof of the Chancellory of the Tuehror,

\ And with what did the Chancellery of the luehrer doal?

A Tho Chancellery of tho luehrer, first of all, dealt with tho
privato natter* of Hitler himself* then, it wps alto a receiving agency
for everything th»t arrivod In the fores of requests and conplainte* and


2^04


4 J?-l8-4-SKT>ion (KSD)

Court lo. I

frca there compensation* Mid bther assistance vas granted concerning
requests. And then later — during the first Bonhler vai able to nek®
certain decision*, and then later the Job was taken over by Dr 4

3or*ann. *

4 What the character of Bonhlerl


4 Tab 47JOUA-*-l-3eard (KSD)
Court Ip. I


A Bouhler na<*e a eaewhat reserved iapression. Ho was very quiet
sad whenever scnebody Bet his ho gained th* lsprestion that ho was
dealing with an honest pef eohality, la hi* character, he nay have been


somewhat soft. •

<4 What was the party political connections of Bouhler^

A He cay have become a necber of the party at a very early period
of tins. Hitler had known hia for many years, and certainly before the


tine prior to 1923, and he had an unlimited faith in hia and confidence.

x

As a result of this fact he obtained knowledge about nany things in


his official capacity. Ho certainly could always act as a barometer to¬
ward Hitler as to the attitude and feeling of the population. I did not
know ary thing aore in detail about his office, but X hare said that X


made the aeouaintanc# of Brack in 1934, as on Adjutant, and prior to the
time of 1939, end later after 1941 or 1942, X did not have any closer


contact with hla.

What was the contact between 3ouhler, ContlT^And LacnersJ
A I knew of lasers, and that a closo relationship existed thore,
and certainly was the esee with Dr. Conti, and the Ministry of Interior.
Since a lot of nail arrived in the Chancellery of tho fuehrer, it woo
also the task of this offico to distribute the nail further to the con-


potent agencies.

(4 Did Bouhlcr deal by hiasolf, particularly with tho Euthanasia
problos:?

A I assuao he wps also personally interested in this probloo, Lator
on I al»o hoard that he was one of its originators because he foarod
under tho circumstances that existed in the individual districts, lator
on ho would coac to deal with this question individually, without
having — without being able to cause the proper effect there in tho
diotrie'e. X cannot Judge as to what extent this plan was dealt with.

-ov to the question of Euthanasia. When X discussed this question in
October with hi-., he had cade the decision to carry out the question and
so solve the Euthanasia problea, end ho calntained the sane point of


24C6


4 7ob JO(AA_9_2-3eard (KSD)

Court So. I

Tie* which I previously stated. Be ha* noi stated anythin* to =e
about Euthanasia. as it is described by th« *ord, nor has ho =ade any
other requests 4 b words ^Useless oat«V never foil in =y prosehco,
and I do sot think that thoj* played any inportant sajor part in this
problee boeauae that refers to the consumption of food, and the number
of patients coneorncd did net play any iaportant part.

3 ut new you nuat have had soao personal contact with Botlftler?

A Later on I net Bouhler; that, as far as I know, was only in
SoYoabcr. Previously X had not spoken to Bouhlor because Bouhler
was in Berlin and he continued to work tho-e by hlnself after he had
rocoived =y letters.

* Thero was no special organisation necossary in order to onrry
out Euthanasia?

A T 0 s, a special organisation was established, and it is located
in tho oiddlo, and it io sketched in pink (reforrln* to tho nap boforo
him). Shall uac the nap once noro? I want to assume that this
representation, by dividing it into threo parts, it corroct. Thero was
a .'.utual Transport Company which was closely connoctod with tho problom.
Thon,thero was tho Mutual Transport Association, which lator on was
connected with, and carried out the roaovals. Alto in tho Ministry of
Interior thore was tho Roich Association for Ksntal Institutions
which dealt with the diagnosis, and tho evaluation of the questionnaires
and so forth.

These throe or four nenticned business titles were connon noneo
which wore used during tho tine thrt Euthanasia was being carried out.

I finally mentioned tho Belch Association for Mental Institutions; that
was the group which, first of all, dealt vith scientific evaluation of
the Questionnaires, the rroup of diagnosis, ®d tbc previously oontionod
agencies which evaluated the questionnaires,
ft Whore was this agency located?


2407


/

4 7et>-J<-Ji , -9-l*-Seard (MSD)

Court So, I

A This agsncy «u located at SLergaatsn Strasse 4, which ie
generally described afterwards aa T-4.

(4 Were phyeiciane working at the T*4t

A Te«, there were phyeiciane workihg at the T-4. The Bain diagnos-
tlcitt and the chief diagnostician vert there, ^he nain official agency
was at this address.

<4 Sow, what was you takk, at the sain office, at that addrosa?

A fho task of Bouhler was connected with that of execution. My
task within*. the entire Euthanasia Program had already beei detornlnod
by the docreos. It consisted that I, together with Bouhler, had tho
authority over the physicians who wero participating in this prograa, and
furthermore, we had the provisional task toward the Fuehrer, hlneolf.
ind, then, I had to ^intaln a certain contact with Bouhler with regard
to decisions about questions which could be dobatod in any way,

q What was your agency and how wero you included in the adminlstra-
tive apparatus?

A I dd not havo an offlco, and I was not included in tho ontiro or¬
ganisational aachine. Outside of special authority which was given to bo
by vlrtuo of docreos from the fuehrer, 2 did not havo any Instructions
ordlroctivss in any fora. I was not the exterior in any way toward this
administrative =achine.

14 Well, who did havo this superior position?

A Bouhler- it was Bouhler's T_4, end that wns his agoncy.

<4 What v*s the connection with tho B c ich Ministry of Intorlor?

A Tho H«ich Ministry of Imterlor had another agency In connection
with this program in the for* of Doctor Linden, who was rerponslblo In
this question that Is, the Belch Committee which I have nontloned

before. 3etween the office of Liaicn and the executive agency of tho

*

Luthanaeia T-4, there was a corresponding direct channel.


24 C«


4 7eb-X— JP—9-2a-3eard (KSD)
Court So* -


S. I eo now submitting DscUi^nt So. 156, I vas unable to ascertain
in what document book It is contained. It Is 4 very short letter and I
shell read It. 1 shall submit the report tt yon ltt the Ceraan text*
xa. KcHjISXT: The Prosecution hat not lets furnished with either a
copy of a Ceman tranalatlon or an *vli.h translation of this document.

I roaenber It is a document *±ch we had some discussion about in the early
stages of the trail. The document. Itself, subaltted by the Prose,
cut Ion to the Defense Information Center, but was not used In the trial.

I have no objections to this docueent. This natter wn's not introduced
in evidence by the Prosecution, and if it 1. now offered it will have,
of course to be an Ixhlblt for lari Brandt. l urthermoro, it is not
certified by any one; however, I sake ho objections on that ground
since tho docuoent was secured by tho Prosecution, and we are willing
to adalt its authenticity. However. I think that unless tho Defence
Counsel mthor pro^tly established a more smooth working procedure
for tho introduction of documents, and furnishing of copies and trons^
lotions for tho Prosecution, wo will be in a rather hopolcos infusion
with respect to tho progress of the caso. Vo will have to start
maintaining files on the Defendant* documents, and it is going to bo
rather difficult to be going back constantly to bo sure wo havo recoivod

coplos of tho documents.*

JUICE sEBaUEr Xr. HcHancy, is It not true that soao of tho con-
fusion that 1 . beginning to arise is becauso of tho fact that tho
proper administrative agency ha. not yot been able to translate those

docunonts into English?

MR. XcEAKTT: I « not sure that I understood tho question. *ill
you ploasc repeat it?

JOTC-I S5B3RIKC-: I understood from Dr. Sorvatius that although ho
had been reserving exhibit number, for acnc of these documents, he had
not been placing them in evidence solely because of the fact that tho
Translation Division had not yet been able to put them into English. *o


that truo?


2409


4 ?«b -M-JT,9-3-a-3e>rd (USD)
Court So. X


K3. McHASIti 2 Understood his statement to that effect.

JLTCB SttSmB: It aay not have been exactly that, but I understood

It In that nanner.

MH. HcHiSST: In «o*far as It ^plies to this document. It has been
in tha possession of the Defense Counsel for two or three nonthe,

•o obviously there should be no difficulty In getting It translated. -
as perfectly willing to have tha document go In as an axhibl*nov,
but I «uld ask that Dr. Servatlua and the other Defense Counsel be
advised th*t It would be necessary In order to proceed snoothly with the
trial that the Prosecution be furnished wlthalrance copies of these

a

docurents, both In *n«llsh and in C-ernan, as the rules of the Tribunal
prescribe. And, "nly In tfcnt -V w111 v * 10 “ P 0,Ulon t0 aako
our objections at the tine to the docuaents as offered.

TCE PRISI3ST: In tha Interest of tlao, ^nglleh coplos of
thoso documents should be furnished to the Prosocutlon, and should also
be made available to the Tribunal. I do not know whether the fact that
this has not been done has boon due to sdalnlstratlvo procedurs or to


some other reason.


C'iurt So. 1

4 It'D ,7-H-10-l-ZEH-3uras


». SiBTitlUSl M». Pre.ldent. 1 bculd not Ilk. to iUH -11 of the
technical difficultly. .hieh the d.t.n.. he. had “ lll > «>• tranalatiM e.

«J1 r. the other cectl-u. It It very difficult to run everythin* monthly
end xe ere trying to Key the’., difficultly, to . very «nll -tent. With
regard to thl. Docnaent to. 166 I hex. looked through the doounent hook, be¬
en,. I -.tuned thnt the, h.d already been nro.ent.d <• on exhibit end there¬
for. i e.suned thnt it bed been tron.lrtcd b.e.u .0 I ve. given thl. doeun.nt
by the pro.eeutlon. I r.oue.t thnt It be t.cuorerlly -(tallied -nd I .hnll
then tutnit It inhibit So. 4.

da rniSiantT. Thnt nrocedur. «111 be foiled. The pro.eeutlon he.
contented to thnt end If. .11 right vlth the trlbunrl. Whet nunber 1 . thl.
exhibit glxonl Whit nunber e. to the def.ndend Brendtl

DR. S^hVAlIUSt It *111 “» lblt So * 4 *

na rhnSIM?. nine, -re too doeun.nt.. exhibit to. 4 end hxhlbl, to. B

Bn. S»VnTIliS: they or. ixhlblt 4 end 4-B. I »n»t to reed the .hort
letter thet the, hex. no, tren.li.ted. The letterhond 1. -Chief Bro.eeutor.

Stuttgart, 16 July 1910, .ocr.t.

■To Reich MJnUter of Juatlc*

•Attention of klnltturlrl of Dr. Stnd.l^ann or hi. deputy

■In offlca, Berlin

.Subject. Inf or action n. to th. unnatural death of Inarte. of ln.,itu-

i

tions.

•Anclo.uro: One nnonyuou. letter vlth cnr.lcno. The onclo.ur. nddr.M

to the Chief I'ru.ecut-r at Ravenehrucie.

■ I enclose ,h. folloxlng for neknovlodguent. Sine, recent elnller

ruuor. hex. coo. to ay knoxledge. I traction. If I -hould laltlet.

Investigation* -nd hov for thl. ^rpo.e th. Snore, State hollo, end th. State

Pcliee 1 .hnll find nt Stuttgrrt.*

Jhen follow th. .lgnnture. -By order of. signed Kol.hnen.cr-

Then c-ac. « rer-erlc.

-Dr. Frei.lor hn. dl.cawed the natter vlth Hol.hneu.or pcr.onnlly end

secondly no action 1 . to be taken and third th. Incident U to be kept to-

2111


4 ? e b 47Jt-10-2_SaLBar» (KSD)

Court s o. I

ether with all other Better* pertaining to the subject. -

This letter which hss been sent to me by th» prosecution has the
following lncloture with it:

■The Chief of the Chancellory of the Fuehrer of the 3SHAF
■Berlin, V-8, 5 June 1940
■Vositratte 4

"Vilhelaetrasee 65 *

■Dear Dr. Ouertner:

"This ref era to tho telephone conversation of the pnl few days,

I -ant to infors you of the following: by virtue of the authority of

• •

tho Fuehrer, I, ae the .ole person rep.on.ible for tho execution of the.o
tasks, have issued the neceaeary order, to ay collaborator.. In excoaa
of this tho derreo of .uch guiding regulations doo. not seem necoaanry
to ae anymore."

Then follow, tho signature which I consider to be that of
Bouhler. Witness, will you .tate your opinion with reapoct to tho
to tho oocond lettor? »U1 you tell us whethor tho .ta'eaent by

3ouhlor about Me po.ltion le eorroett

A Tho referonce of Bouhler with reepoct to hi. po.ltion within tho
euthanasia question 1 . cortalnly corroct. I cannot al.o confirm that tho
signature of this document io th»t of Bouhler. In thl. ca.o ho roforo
to hie po.ltion at Ticrfartenstrasso 4, froa vhero this work was being
carried out. A. a parallel to that there oxi.tod another outside offico
of tho Boich Minister of tho Interior as far ao I know in tho Columbus
house which ha. also been casually mentioned in this connection,
t* Hare you ever been at that office in the Columbus house?

A I hrro never visited the offico in tho Colunbus house and I
havo never visited tho offico at Ticrgarton 4 cither.

1 * But you did work together with Bouhler. Of vbat did your mutual

tasks consist?

A They consisted of tho fact that first of *11 wo were together with
tho Fuohror to discuss foreign questions which resulted and later on tho


* Teh 47_jdT„ r C_.10-l-Srs* (HSD)

Court *o. I

procedure V». that —tine. Bouhler alone and » by «y.elf vent to the
Toehrer and then he, Bouhler* obtained these dOcunents Vain.

^ V)»t questions -era discussed there?

1 In th« beginning jiccc very fur.dancntal queetione were discussod.
Tiret of all the question of the vetcrene. *bet included tho.o in tho
first World War. ?hen sone persona who had beecne injured in the lino
of work end the following were to be excluded fron luthanasiai foreigners.
Thue the order only applied to Geman nationals. Another exccption-I _
cannot recall any other exception* and by ny.elf 1 cohld not confirm that
tho Instructions were given to exoept Jew. fro* the frasework of
luthanaaia as far as tho Goman nationals wero concerned.

^ How, wha t vaa tho procedure?

X First of all by tho use of a quostlonnatro all of tho.o sick
parsons -ere to bo registered. This was not so such discussed and
dlsputod as there was a socrecy In connection with tho uao of
luthanasla, *Aich had been expocted by the Fuehrer. He was of fco
opinion that this entire luthanaaia prograa oould bo carried out with¬
out tho public obtaining ary wnsiderablo knowledge of It or
without it having indefinite influence on tho public. Mr. Bouhlor
as well as nysclf pointed out several tinea that this wao lnprobpb>
that perhaps it would be oost appropriate to nako tho Iuthanasin problo
public. However, this vr. fundacontally disapproved and Hitler clainod
that tho ndainistrative apparatus


2413


/


4 7#b 47-^WC-10
Court !to. 1

could not function ?rprly In tho execution; that this h«J to be possible.

X just cautioned the <iuostioniielr* and It was of court, n«o wry to st»t*

^t cscrlexos of what diseas o oould b* concerned Which wet*' to dealt with by
».tbansi». In this roopoct th question of the disoeao, the, tho conduct,

^ duration of tho sickness, tho reaction of tho patient to aothoda of troat-
o, Bt , etc., pUyod a cajor part. ijlninlstratire, tochnical lnstltutiona, ro^str.
officials which had boon institute in tho dnistrlnl lnatltutlona In connec¬
tion with tho Ministry of the interior wore also dlsousood. a


f


2414


4 Uh msttjuMnaar C*»)

Court no. Z

<i V# vlll later on refer 4o this question wain la detail. You
have heard of the QUestirft U-f-13i la what way vma thle action la con¬
nection with the euthanasia program?

A The action 14J-1» had BothiBC »t sll to do with the euthanasia
program la sgr opinion. I only want to ®rrect the word "program" because
it hag a different meaning In the case of euthanasia. Dr. Bouhlor and I
had Instructed certain physicians to carry out euthanasia and Had given
then the authority to do ao. Then we were to eee that these patients were
then transferred to these Institutions In a certain method. p lrst of
all they were registered by scans of questionnaires. Yhe questionnaires
contained certain formulations which were to enable ua to gain a plcturo
about the condition of the patient.

The Belch Ministry of th« Interior sent theeo questionnaires to
mental Institutions and other Institutions which kept montal patients
la order to hove them filled in. At six sonth intervals theeo Institu¬
tions had to send these questionnaires back to tho B 0 ich Ministry of the
Interior aftar they had been completed and with the corresponding en¬
closures. These questionnaires were sent to Ticrgartenstrasso 4 to this
office which hat previously been described, tho Belch Association for
Mental Institutions. There the originals of tho questionnaire wore
filed end photostats of than were sent to throe specialist physicians who
woro completely independent of each other. Thoso specialist physicians
then made a diagnosis on the basis of tho availablo Information; and they
nade their decision either by a nogativo or a positive ctatenont to^
wards the patient. In a case where the questionnaires were sont back
to Tolrgartenstrasee 4 showing a throo-fold positive diagnosis thon'thoy
were subnitted for further deeisl ns to a ehiof expert who by hlmoolf now
again dealt with the question.

It may perhaps bo important to point out that these experte and
chief experts were specialist physicians; that th<gr wore directors of
largo mental institutions and nursing homes; and that in part they were
professors in Carman universities. Even If tho chief experts


3415


^ - ——■— — --

4 7eb JU»S-ll-lJlakley (MSB)

Court lo. I

decidod positively fef euthanasia, then the connacti«n v.i established
with Ur. "laden of th« agency of the »aich Ministry of the Interior!
which, by virtue of its superior status, now instructed tho nental
Institutions to eend and t* transfer these patients to an observatory
institute. ?hey were then transferred there with all their case histories
and docuaents so that this institute w*s able to obtain its own diagnosis
and obtain its own picture aside froa the questionnaires and doeuaonts
which had been subnitted. Sven if the phyeician in charge thoro express¬
ed hlnself in favor of euthanasia, another ordor was teit to Tier-
gartonstrasse 4 and another agency: and froa the last mentioned agoncy
again se a superior office, frea there the order was Issued to transfer
tho patient to a euthanasia institute. In the caso of the transferring
of pationts, tho previously aentioned transport .’or Fationts Company
participated. *het wns an offico subordinated to Tiorgsrtonstraoso 4.

In thie euthenasie institute tho doctor in charge thoro hod to
=ako hie final dedision. If he wantod to hnvo tho pationto subjocte'd
to euthanasia or if ho had any misgivings on hie cam initiative, from tho
nunbor of potionte transferred approximately four to six percent woro
again returned to their original inetltuto bocauso with the rotponslbll-
ity of tho physician in tho observatory institutes as well as in the ou-
thanasU institutions tho physician could not doclaro hintolf agTooablo
to euthanasia froa tho standpoint of the aedical profession.

In ny opinion th« nusbor of two to four percent shows two indications,
First of all, that when tho basis of tho procedure was questionnaires
and diagnosis, very clear diagnosis of the patients took place; and in
the observatory as well as in the euthanasia institutes tho physicians
who were working there wore able to decide by their own initiative and
responsibility. With, regard to this whatever we havo heard hero of tho
action 14 -F -18 is in contrast; and in ry opinion it does not have anything
at all to do with tho considerations which had been doternined by tho
decree of the let of ScptetfSer 1939*


2416


4 ?eb JLGIS-U-S-BlakUy («D)

Court So. I

<i Do you know the »Wln« of 14J-13T

A I would say I hava heard th* description of 14-1-13 here for the
firs, tine. Previously i hve fievef dieCoverek anything at all about it;
and therefor* I could not have any ide*. Ao far aa I can ace now on
the bull of


— ?«b 47J(-ll-lA_p5rp Blakley (KSD)
Court So, I


documents* it was a file nark which originated with the Acononic
Administrative Office of the SS. Without knowing: for cefiaih
what it really neansi as far as I »owl li ehowa clearly for tho first
tiae in the lodger of the Aetrtioaie Administrative Xain Office, the WKA,
which called D*. Mennecko to Berlin or to Oranienburg in order to got
some more instructions and information there,

3efore, when I was askod as to tho connection of euthanasia to tho
concentration camps, I stated that I es of tho opinion that no connection
could possibly have existed because the patients who were'includcd by us
in this projras under norsal clrctestances would not be located in a
concentration camp. Dr. Kennoeke has testified here th"t 14-J-13 had
nothing to do with nodical practice but that it was ouite clearly a aoasuro
which can be traced back to racial, political roasons and that there¬
fore it has quite a difforent origin.

Cl Then how do you explain tho connection that physicians who workod
in euthanasia natters r»w aloo aake their api>earenc© in concentration
cacpe?

a

A The esnnrctlon is not clear to no. Of the two rinse which
appear hero. Dr. I-bncr is unknown to ne. T hen occasionally this Doctor
Schumann has n'de his appearance; and 1 do not have any idoa about him
olthcr. 1 an of tho opinion that this cosplox 14-T-13 undor tho cir-
cu=8*.anco6sv actailly havo been connected with what Beichsloitcr B^uhlor
oithor expected or feared; and when he thought that tho euthanasia pro^
fran could arbitrarily bo usod by the individual district lcadors for
their own individual actions, in this case 14-J-13, in ry opinion
the decisive factor oust have been Eirslcr because it is also shown
hero that he alone was entitled to decide as to the lives of prisoners,
and he also always made the decisions solely by hinoolf.

Even subsequent measures after 1941 to which I shall yet refer
speek for the fact that sono individual actions of district lcadors did
pley a pert in thio but that in the documents pertaining to 14-Kl3tho
fact becoaes apparent that 14-1-13 did not cover all the concentration

2418


f

a ?eb 47JClL-lA^kp Blailey (KSD)

Cotfft So. I

C a»Si But this action only ea'e It. appearance In the Bavarian area and
for the =».t pan In Be... and thurWial I eanntt ... any connection
between 14-1-13 and whatever represented euthanasia to zfntlfi

How, 1 have one que.tfon about the extermination carp of Lublin*
TEE pRISIZEST: It will be understood that the two doeunente

offered.


3418—A


L Feb. Ul -4I-L1-2A* PK? 91ikli*7
Court No. 1


u.curent Km r 156, worn adaittol in evidence as the defendant Karl Brandt's

Exhibit 4.

DS. S2WATHJ5: Yes.

THE P?xSIDE;.T: It -ccura to zl thrt it possibly ai. ht be A convenience
r£ save time if the proxovti .n could pro pore, a Hat A the documents which
it h a introduced in evidence, thie -in- in ehronslo; icnl order and followod
b 7 the nusLur of each document sain exhibit; find if that Hat were furnished
to the !cfcndanta, it w old be a ccp-.r tively aiaple atttur l »s dofondant
U ascertain whether .<r not a particular docuoont was already in evidence
-nd cansequently had been tranlatod int. En Uah sm! also the exhibit number
jf that Jocua-nt. Th-t ia Just a au oati-c.

The Tribunal will nM receaa until 1:30 o'clock.

(A receaa wna taken until 1330 hours. )


°*419


Court I

U Feb U7-A-12-l»LJG-fcstar

Corrected Copy
AfTERNOOl SESSICK

Ohe hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, h February 19ti7.)

THE MARSHAL: The TrfWnal is again in session.

KJAL BRANDT - Resumed.

DIRECT EXAMINATION (Continued).

BT DR. SHiVATIUSi

Q. Witness, you were speaking of Action UiF13. Now, something
similar took place in the East, in Lublin. Did you have any connection
with that?


A. I heard of these events in Lublin only here. I learned that
an SS fuehrer named Lubucsnik played a role in it) I did not know the
name Lubucxnik. The other persons nentloned in that connection wore
not known to ns eithor. I believe it was Doctor Eberle again, and the
Doctor Schuhaann who has already been mentioned.

Q. Aside from those big actions other things happened) for example,
war wounded are supposed to have been effected. What do you know about


that?

A. In the course of 19U1, Field Marshal Keitel reported to tho
Fuehrer once that war wounded from the first world war were being in¬
cluded in the Euthanasia program. He had not heard of it as an exact
case but only as a rumor. The Fuehrer iroedlately ordered that all the


evidence available on the subject should be examined. I passed on the
order to that effect to Bouhler and he examined the files. That was
in the early summer of »Ul perhaps. It was learned that thore was one
clear case as follows, it was an insane person who had been drafted


He was in the array for six or eight

of his eental condition and returned
the case history was not started over
so that it was not clear from the
participated in the war. In the course of
two or three other similar cases wero discovered.


There was, however, no case of


21*0


Court I


h P-b L7-A-12-2 - LJ3 - roster

which iajur> inct. -d during t.._ w-r a-.d l_o to - -.nt-1 ditturo ,.c-, or th t
n dis- s- h- • o- ntr.us.-d by '.ny -v_nt of ir. it wis i t.Tpor r> &_rv*Ce of
th- p ti.i.ts. i bcli-v- th-r- war- four iltogeth-r, *a f-.r -.8 I c n ru..i-mb_r.
ih- die.’8. .hich led to cuthinnsie l't^r had no connection with th- r~r
s.rvice. I know not ing els- .oout th t a-.tt-r '-^d th- report to this -ff-ct
wr.e a.r.t to itl-r.

4* ::ow .-.oout tnoa injured invror;, or toot. »ho b.cn. inv lids, did
you heir an. tun cut th-.t?

A. I a .-jo not-ung a oout inr -it-s oar t. t suer, thun « s nil ;n.d.

Q. Di >.-v not rcCviv. r. orts ir. tiue cor.-ction froa instit ti ns in

Fcncrmia?

A. In 19U*, 'h$ t I e-nnot st t- -xr.ctly ^th-r it 'lifa or th. begin¬
ning of 'L5, it bri-f int.rv-ls I h- r<- .r 6 -cunt* Serviceo.n working in
th- ca-nc-llory in .rlin tQ-.t in t o c i.c in nixony -nd in on- c-.t. in
Pcexnni-, cut.-n-si'. » 8 ,-.in s.m t rr. d cut in r.nt 1 institutions. I
inforxd ouhLr's office ims-di t-ly. I r-./Ort-d to the Fu-hr.r, nd I
ilco r.port-d to Kr.ialiit.r . -rtin cna-Jin, s ince both c-s-a in jixony
indie-ted t: p-rtlclp- tior, off t.. ti-ul-iter. I know th-.t tn- .u-hr.r iccu-d
inttructiono to -.rtin 3cra-nn ia»-di~tely to h.'.vu the a- n.-5ur-& Etopp-d.
3cuhl-r ttl-.s li ir. touch with th- co::.A.t-nt officers. I did not l-.-rn
til-1 theS- obv . usly llult-d ■-■aur.s . «r. '.ny r*y outsid- of th- ;r-.ctic- of
cuth-.rv-si- -.s it -xiated up to 19U1. In ot -r words, th-y w-r- ..-lly s-rious-
ly ill persons.

1. Tn-n you i-r. led only o, s-tic 1 joints of vi.w in -uth n*ai-.?

A. I w-.s corx-m-d only in -ur lj -*icnl n_-.sur-s ind consicLr-.ti ons
cleirl; -.rising fro..; th-cbcroc its.ll. I, -nd -s 1 r t I know, ouhltr, nev.r
intensified this euti.-nrain in r.ny, on t - ccntr.ry, if -nythin;, s-ejv-d
qucBtion-.jl- tie. X ct th'.t it ns qu-st.. r. i- l_c* uf to conclude th fc tills
w-.s i r--son *.. '-list -x-cution.

Q“. You s-.o - of th- proc-cdufc, is it tru- th-.t a qu.atxotmair. tor i would
b. b *.sis for it?

2i*21


Court I


U Feb L7-A - 12-3 - LX - Foster

A. first basis was a questionnaire.

3. I shall show you such a questionnaire in document book 1696 FS,
will you please caaoent on it.

(Document handed to witness.)

THE PRESIDENT i Has this docusent already been received in evidence,
counsel?

•A

DR. SERVATIUSt I assuoe so* It is in the document book. There
are several questionnaires, all with the sane contents. ^1 assume that it
was offored in evidence. It is on page 209, part 2.

A. The questionnaire indicated, gives indications for determining
tho disease. There er* general registrations, whether tho parson is a
twin, whether there are insane relatives, and then an indication about
provious histoxy, the ccurso of tho disease — .
witness, Just a mlnuto.

DR. SERVaTIISi It is Exhibit 357.

5. 'witness, will you pleaso continuo.

A. There is a note that in every case there are adequate indications
of tho aontal condition they are to be aaded. Ao arc getting individual
diseases which aro montionod, Schisophronia, in addition to the condition,
whothor it is a fresh attack or a final condition. The reaction to troatmont
is also asked for. And then there are similar subdivisions under feeble¬
mindedness, epilopsy. There is a question about tho treatment itsolf, and
it is asked when treatment was carried out, whether there was permanent
success or not. Then, it is asked about crimes as to bo evaluated in
Judging the condition of the patient and it is asked about the value of
the work of the patient.

3. Ahat was tho purpose of this questionnaire?

a. Tho purpose of the questionnaire was the indications given in
it which were given by a specialist were to give a picture of the disease
to another specialist who was to Judge the case.

+• Bo you believe that this questionnaire is adequate 1 Don't you think

that it is too s\x>erficial to fora a final Judgment?

2422


Court I

U Fab U7-A - 12-1* - LX - Fee tar


A. Tfto questionnaire alone would probably not have boon sufficient
for a final Judgment* it was necessary for the records of the patient
hiaaolf to also bo consulted but this was certainly done in critical
cases by the chief sxperl. Jmd when the patient was transferred the
observation institution had all the records and the patient himself was
ebserved so that there were various opportunities for control.


Court I

U Feb-A-Si#-13-l“?eldt-LJ}


The other document* were added to the (fciestionnaire to help in under¬
standing the entries. Then it was indicated whether the person was
a foreigner or not.

3. How, witness, the creation of crises is included here and
it la asked about paragraphs* 51 and U2b of the Penal Code.

A. I have already pointed out that these questions were designed
to have a standard for Judging the condition of the patient himself.

As it was similar to the questions of the employment of the patient,
it was not intended to fore any legal judgment on the basis of this
information.

Q. The questions about the patient*s ability to work, was tho
purpose of that to remove persons incapable of working bocause they
wero incapable of working?

A. Euthanasia was not intended do roly to romovo huaan beings.

It was designed to free him frox his sufferings. It had nothing to
do with his ability or inability to wcrk.

Q. Then if I understand ycv correctly these symptoms of montal
dotoriorotion, that ho can no longer warts, or that he has boon a
criminal —

A. The;' or.» to bo evaluated in this connoction, but they havo
only a partial influence on the decision. Tho docisivo thing is tho
entire, tho whole condition.

Q. Titno: 3 , how was tho responsibility of tho doctors concornod
with tho questionnaire divided?

A. Every individual doctor was responsible for what he did in
tho course of thceo measures which led to Euthanasia. Each doctor
was absolutely responsible for his Judgment. The chief expert was
also responsible, and the doctor at the observation institution, as
well as the doctor in the Euthanasia institution, were also responsi¬
ble. It oust not be assumed that the doctor involved in these measures
would have boon obliged to.carry out Euthanasia if he did not agree


2UZh


Court I

l Feb-A-SS-13-2«?i;idt-LJQ

on the basis of his own decision* He had the.right and the duty* if
he did not approve, to refuse to carry out Euthanasia.

Q. Veil, What did these powers mean to the doctor? Didn't this
put him in a special situation?

A. First of all the doctor was given enormous responsibility. It
was not only a responsibility in view of his right to decide abcut life
and death, but was also burdened by the fact that he was responsible
for the continued suffering of this human being. One must mention
this in order to make clear the extent of the responsibility.

Q. Now, was the responsibility on one doctor alone, or was it
divided?

A. No, the responsibility bolongod to each person who was concornod.
I estimate there were ten, fiftoen, perhaps ovon twenty exports who,
according to instructions and directives which they had received, to¬
gether with the chief export, had carriod out their activity.

Q. Were those exports independent of ono another?

A. The oxporte worked completely independently of ono anothor,
and that was how it was intended from the beginning. Not the question¬
naires, but photostatic copios of thorn were sont to the exports so
that none knew what tho othors had decided.

Q. Did you help to select the oxjrts?

A. Thoy were suggested by the Roich Ministry of the Interior
and Bouhler assigned thorn thoir duties.

Q. Did you negotiate with then?

A. No.

Q. Did you instruct thorn?

A. No.

Q. Was thoro any appeal?

A. No, there was not. It nas our opinion that since each judgment
*»a3 independent, each successive judgment was a type of appeal, and we
saw in thi3 measuro a sufficient safeguard against any excesses on

21*25


Court I

h F*fc-A-S#-13-3-Feldt-LJG


f allurea of the ays ten which sight otherwise have occurred. And besides.
Decausa of the necessl ty for secrecy, no other appeal procedure was pos¬
sible.

Q. Did not the physicians involved have any legal misgivings?

%

A. In practice they no doubt did not} otherwise they would not
have been able to participate. If they did have legal misgivings, they
were certainly dissipated by the entire nature of the procedure itself.
First they were instructed about Euthanasia in the Fuehrer's chancellery
by Bouhler himself. They learned that the Reich Ministry of. the Interior
was connected with this measure from the beginning to the end. The
Ministry of the Interior had rocognirod the decree and acted according
to it. It supplied tho necessary information. It assigned the physicians.
The questionnaires went through the offices of the Ministry of tho Inter¬
ior and later through those of the provincial governments. The insti¬
tutions thooselvos had beon suppliod by the Ministry of tho Intorior.

The Ministry retained its position superior to tho institution. Regis¬
tration offices had boon arranged in the euthanasia institutions and
the physicians knew that the Reich Ministry of Justice was inforsnd.

Tho financing of the whole thing was cloar and regulated so that tho
doctors cortainly had no Justification for having legal misgivings.

Q. And what do you yourself think of the question of logality?

A. Ctao decisive point for no, perhaps, was that the head of tho
State hinsolf had given no this assignoaent, and I cortainly could
not expect that I was given such a decree for any criminal action. And
at a subsequent tire for me as well as for the others, it was soon that
everything was done as if everything was in order, and it was in order
as far as we were concerned.

Q. How about tho question of the approval of the patients? Tho
Insane?

A. Tho question of the approval of tho insane was disregarded.


Court I

U Fab-A-Sl-13-U-Feldt-LJG


The point of view was that the insane person himself is in no position
to Judge his situation. These were not persona with light cases, but
the worst ones. For this reason since the patient lacked understandiig

of his cwn situation, there could be no question of approval. If one

•

were to say that the patient gave his approval, that naans exactly if
one says he did not approve. In individual cases where th j s question
of euthanasia was discussed with mentally healthy persons; sane person*,
the point of view was gained that the patient cannot decide about him¬
self, but that the decision «ust be left to the doctor alone. Through
ncoentary pain the patient nay be so deceived. Just as through a rolative
ccofort he nay be deceived about the severity of his disease. Here one
can Judgo only on the basis of the diagnosis, and considering the con¬
dition and the prognoeis, and only the doctor can reach tho decision.

It cannot bo left to tho patient hiesolf.

Q. Than *iat about tho approval of the relatives?

A. In tho case of the insane, tho consent of the relatives was
not obtained for Sindian roosons. First of all, tho question of secrecy
was important. Cut more important froo the nodical point of view was
tho fact that the layman is not able to Judgo tho condition of his sick
rolative. Ho lacks knowledge of the disease. Frot actual criminal
considerations he could not give his consont. He can bo deceived by
uncritical pity, and actually tho relatives nero not considered in this
respoct. Another decisive point was that one cannot expect a rolativo
to docide about the life or death of soaeono else. It was the opinion
that the doctor, with the support of the state, has to take the responsi¬
bility.


4 Feb-X3E-14-1-I«nhardt
Court So. 1.


especially la the case rf insane persons. Ths relatives frequently *ro
inclined to jive their consent tc Euthanasia. There le an Indication In
liter-ture where lc absut 160 questions to relatives of idiotic children,
1*>0 parents can consent. Also the cany appeals and approvals within the
Euthanasia escrlax showed the attitude of the relatives toward the atient,
but this is no reason for giving the responsibility to the relatives, who
are unable to bear It. ^

^ What was the purpose of secrecy, was there s-ncthing to be con¬
cealed? %

A The secrecy was certainly deeanded by the Fuehrer for political
reatens; mainly on account of the Internal political situation In connec¬
tion with the question of propaganda, and so forth. I do not believo that
inner oil tics was the decisive thing; sere solution could b found in that
respect. Final resistance from the churches, for examrle, could not be
obtained permanently.

$ Sow. witness, I show you a letter fron the head of the Cental In¬
stitution. air. Schleich. It was Document Ho. 53C, Exhibit 774, Docuacnt
Book 14, Fart 3. This Is a letter tc the Reich inieter of Justice, in
which this head of a mental institution objects to the ;roceduro. rleaoo
read ths letter end ce-n«nt en it.

A The letter from hr. Schleich to tho Reich : inister of Juotice
points out that among the node there is great uncertainty in connection
with the removal and the death notic«s about insane persons. "Is it pos¬
sible, ■ tho second aragraph cays, 'that such n measure is being carried
out without such a law having been rroclai—<.' And then it go s on,

"In conscqu'ncn of the coadeto secrecy in which th o measures arc being
carried out not only do the wildest rumors gc about among the people
(for example that also people unable to work on account of vre or injuries
receiving during the first world v«r have ben done away with or ar- to b<

J ono awey with). But al3o the impression,-I shall ski-, a little-

as if a toally arbitrary manner prevailed at the a*lection of tho parsons


conce rned


2428


4 rcb-HBH-14-2-Le=hardt

Court to. 1.


•a 2 c you consider the attitude of the Blither of thie letter correct?

A I consider the attitude of the author of thie letter »s abBolutoly
correct. If a physician who is in charge of an institution has no idea of
what is actually going on, in py opinion it was his duty to ir.quiro of the
conpctont officers whether seeething unjustified was not being done. r roo

the Documents, which hare been subnitted here - this is the only letter

of this type one should really wonder that no ror* of euch letters

woro handed in. The necessity for such letters arose frot the awkward
attempt at secrecy which was net practicable. The letter was also inter¬
esting because it refers to nrors arising fre* the lack of clarity. I
said before that in the case of tho war wound, d, there was serothing of
tho sane kind.

Q *®re there any eiailar cooylaints?

A I nyself saw fov complaints. I loarnrd of others fros Blshon
Safclcn in '..venstor; and from .' artin Borran I learned of the letter fro*
the Bishop of Yuitj. I know, and the Documents '-ill show, that a large
nusbor of other letters were rec* ir d which wore sent -ither to Bouhlcr.
to the Seleh I inister of the Interior through . inister Larnars. or the
Holch hinister of Jus tic . In any case, they wore sent to the nearest
agency. is far as I know, only the letter which I hawr n^ntioo-d beforo
froo Cafclcn and fron 'Jure w^re referred to Hitler hinsrlf. Whether he
learned of th*r later on. I do not know.

Did you hear of -ny other obj- ctions, ru-oro or eonolairtB?

A I heard about complaints and obj ctior.c. first, in the course of

19<0


Court I

L Fob U7-A-SW-lli-l*-Ienhardt-LJG


through Dr. 3oehe, who was connected with a wall group of physicians
o want to sot Martin Boraann, who caaa to See =i Be expressed his
objections to the secrecy and he spoke of the rtKors which I have nen-
tioned. Then, later I was in contact for the same reasons with Pastor
3odelschwing of the Bethel Institution. I had several talks with
Dr. Bodelschring. Ho case to soe ee and I went to see hia at Bethel.

Uy contact with his was not on an administrative plane. It was our
mutual need for discussing these questions. The consideration of
secrecy was discussed by the two of us. The question of legality of
Euthanasia on principle. Me observed that there were no cloar indica¬
tions in tho document itself, and that that could be explained by the
fact that the Christian Church is opposed to these ideas. It was men¬
tioned to a nan like Lutherj he was of the opinion that such dofaraod
children should be drowned. It was said Uat the solution of this prob¬
is® is less theological, but rather not so right, or — tho concept of
pity was discussed. Talking to Pastor Bodolachwing in Bethel, I visitod
patients with him. We were in the Children's ward and after that wo
discussed the individual children, not as to whether we should actually
subjoct this particular child to Euthanasia or not, but as to whothur
such s croaturo is still a human being, whether it has any feeling itself.
I rocall children of eight or ten years of age, who were really nothing
but a pitiful, miserable creature. Children known aa "head cases" could
not even sit up, with an enormous head ard a tiny body. And Pastor
Bodelschwing also folt it is a blessing if such pitiful creatures are
(pauso) — if an end is put to thoir lives.

We were not always of the sane opinion, but it was possible for
us to respect each others' views and to understand each others' views.
Pastor Bcdelschwing is of the opinion that if a legal regulation of
this question was publieally made, the decision of the state would havo
to be binding on all, of course. That had no connection with tho fact


Court I

ii Feb-A-S*-lli-2a-Lenhardt-LJ0


that innerly he was Boat closely connected with the church, airi that he
saw ever, in the ooet pitiful creature, a human being.

Q. New, it waa stopped. Execution of Euthanasia was prohibited,
lhat was the reason for that?

A. The talks which I had with Pastor Bodelschwing were perhaps
not the final, decisive eleaent in this, but thero were quite a few
other considerations, misgivings which had arisen meanwhile from the
question, and so forth. But tho responsibility of the Church did play
an important role in having Euthanasia stopped in the sumyr by the end
of August, l?bl.

The Fuehrer gave me orders to act on these instructions and from
the Headquarters I immediately passed on the news to Dr. Booh lor and
he did whatever was necossary. That is, the Euthanasia institutions
wore in this case given the order, through tho Roicb Minister of the
Interior, that thoro was to bo no further Euthanasia.


U Febi-JiT-A^nVl^-L-Gallartor

Court Ho* 1


Q Could you yourself not hare stopped it sooner?

A I believe that objections or opposition fren no would not have
beer, sufficient to stop it. For froa that I approved Euthanasia in tha
for I have described it. lhe question at issue was the nattor of socrocy.

Q Now, was tho idea of Euthanasia given up completely?

A fc| aft^r the end of the war Euthanasia was to bo rosuraod, and
was to be carried out further. ^

Q What was the offoot of this stopping of Euthanasia for tho
organisation? n

A Aside fron tho fact that no nora Euthanasia was oarriod out in
the Euthanasia Institution, tturo was no further consequences. Tho ques¬
tionnaires continued to bo sent in f t six aonths intervals. They continued
to bo registered and evaluated, but nothing olso was dono about than,

q Now the Roich Comittoo for Dofomod Childrens Interest, was
that also offcctod?

A ?to, tho task of tho Roich Cocnlttoo was not offoctod by tho

stoppage.

Q Was there a definito irobloe in tho Roich Corraittoo as in tho
other Euthanasia institutoe?

A No, tha procoduro was not tho sano. Tho quostionnoiros in which
certain entires wero to bo nade about sovero mlformtion. Scheldt had re¬
ferred to these ccor-ittees. Thoao questiomairoa wore sent to tho Roich
Committoo, which was subsidiary to tho Roichsrdnistry of Intoriorj from
thoro they wore coordinated with tho necessary othor docuner.tsj they woro
fiUod out by aidwives, and doctors, and aatornity hospitals. Tho purpoao
was that such deforced children wero re per tod an 1 woro sent to tho special
institutions.

Q And to whom was the authorisation ^ivan?

A In concert with Euthanasia, which had boon aentioned boforo, the
authorization was connected with the individual child; there was no gonoral

authorization that tested a case. Authorization was requested and was riven.

2432


U Feb.-iiT-A-ATD-lS-S-Gilli-hQP
Court So. 1


Q Saw does tho consent of parents as to bein' necessary enter?

A The consent of parents was necossary. Tho consent had to bo
obtained scoetlmes through the official position, and s one tines through thw
institution which reported the case, and it was Hr.. Undents task to , ot
those Jocunenta together*.

Q And what about letting these children starve to death. New, Jid
you loam anything about that?

A No, I do not believe it in that fora. I believed that it was tho
iiannor of roalfomation in the inner organism which caused complications. I

X

never learned arythiry; about children, or casos of childron or adults whoro
ira tractions beinr given to let theso patients starve to death. The food

rations given to these institutions ir. ny opinion were oxaotly tho sane ns

•

giver, to the noma* consuner. Sinco they wore not acutely sick persons,
thoro was the idea that it was net nocessary to givo then spocial rations.
The concerns had to send food rations as to tho nursos, doctors, and so on.

Q You said boforo that this procedure of the Reich Coraittoo was
not offoctod by tho stoppago which was put to Euthanasia?

A Jfo.

q ffas it continued to the end of tho war?

A In tho year of 19Ui, in the sooond half of 19UU Hr. Douhlor
inforned no that a doar execution, which wore difficulties of corrospon-
donce for technical reasons, was hardly poesiblo, and ho askod us for this
reason that Euthanasia be stoppod hero as well. In 19U2 sinco I was no
longer tied down, I gave up ns* authcriration. I did not loam that after¬
wards, after the stop of 19Uli, any furthir Euthanasia approval was i.lvon
for children.

q If I understand you correctly, the reason for s topping the
activity of the Reich Ccmitteo was the technioal roason of the general
Festal conditions at that tine?

A Yes.

q Did you work in this procedure until the end?

A Ho. in 19U2, as I have Just said, 2 gave up the authorization

2433


I ?eb 7-A-. 73-15-3-0 alloghsr

Court So, 1

which I had received sinea I was no longer so easily available, as would
havo beer, necessary#.

3 Mow, Witness, if you consider this whole Euthanasia . - 1 s
a wholo, is thero not something horrible about it?

A It has the appearance that it night look horrible, it can look

%

inhumn,.bufc in this light the execution itsalf was not oonsidorod from
that aotual point of view alone when you considor what is behind it,. Tho
hucan boii^s who cannot help tho natives, and whese tests show a life of
suffering are to be given aid. This consideration is net inhuman, I novor
felt that it was not othioal or ».-as not noral,.I know tha\ tho external
drcunstancos at tho execution in spito of this soctcr of socrccy, and that
went through the sector of socrccy, rogrottablo instancos occurrod ropoatod-
ly, irreepootlve of all endeavors to provent then by the authorities,. It
has been said horo that two urns weso sent to one address. It wns said that
bocauso of post diagnosis difficulties aroso at the doath, which is ragrut-
tablo, but that this doe# not offoot tho principle, anl in ry opinion can-
rat shako this principle. If ono die cussed tho problon of Euthanasia openly,
and t riod to fern a basic understanding, a basic nutual undorstan ’In” of
tho faot, than in ny opinion a way ray be found for such execution in tho
future, Tho problca on such ie not new. It has always boon intorosto l, and
has boon discus sod for conturiee, A Profossor Loibrandt nentionod tho oath
of Hippocrates. That -aeans that ,-art of it which calls upon tho doctor to
not to ijivo to a pationt poison even on tho patient's request, This is a
dograa which is tho basis of our science of diagnosis today, an' our know¬
ledge of prognosis, anl tho knowledge of the lirdts of therapy, can no
longer bo naintained in this fore,. I an convinced if this Hippocrates w a ro
all vo today he would fornulato his oath differently,. Hippo era tos was not a
nan whs did r»t rivo life its iuo«. In Athens about tho year of U30 thero
was an epideaic, and Hippocrates wae asked for aid. Ho rave tho simple in¬
struction that the patients should be left alono, nothin- cculd be done for

then,. Ho ill not do that becaueo ha had any idoa cf tho prc.mo3is, or the

2434


U Fabi-^T-^-^TD-lS-^allarhei*

Court So* 1


Infection, for he ted walla built to keep the wind out of the city, nc, V
did that sinply trem the feeling of what ia health and whet is sickuos .

You see, the Rippoomte. oath ia alao cited today, and it is sal’ tet
patients and sufferer, are not to be given any poison, and a lector el r
declare, and assert, such a thing, that is, either a lie, or a hypocrisy.
There is no ctoctor today who doe. not give a suffering patient narcotics,
and tries to sake the final hour of a dying person easier- One oan say that
1 , m t euthanasia. In any case it is against the oath of Hippocrates. It
begin by not giving the patient who ia expected to die axy more heart
atimlante.


2435


court l

U Peb-A-«AA-l6-l-Karrow


Tho next atop is to give hia narcotics. One nay hang a copy of the Oath
of Hippocrates in one’s office but nobody pays any attention to it* Tho
patient expects the doctor to help hir and the relatives also expect
it and I aay nention in this same connection that since I have re.--, ‘i-
a newspaper that the sick person was finally released free his suffering.
But these thoughts have nothing to do with the concept of dussonic order
■fcich Mr. Leibrandt mentioned. It is shown by the fact that today, and
perhapo at t<ds very ncoent, in other countries the question of euthan¬
asia is again being discussed. The exponents of it — churches are
joining together, Evangelical and Methodist, and the physicians' leagues
are Joining then. I know it is said if one knows that a doctor has sou¬
thing to do with euthanasia thon he could lose the confidence of his
patient. This confidence of a pationt which has once been won is not
capital that ono holds for intorost. As I see it, the duty of tho
doctor is to earn it anew at every contact with his pationt and tho
same is true of institutions. Ono cannot say that an institution's
imputation is taken awayj tho institution is not thoro to proaorvo a
roputationj it is there to toko caro of sick persons and to holp thon.

If one speaks of institutions, ono must havo on idoa of what that is.

Ow hundred years ago was tho boginning whon tho largor institutions
were first oponod. I roooctocr tho name of Feroll of Zurich. But, in
reality, those institutions are gold cages. Ono nay well say that lifo
bohind these walls is tho Dost horriblo, fce aost unfortunate for a
human being that there is. In tho last fern weeks and nonths pictures
fiavo been pub 11 shod in magazines which show something comparable to
■hat has boon said about concentration camps and it has even boon called
that. Tho people are not for these institutions. There havo always
been difficulties in the finandi^ of then, and there is no aodorn state
■here this question is not repeatedly discussed. It is said that such
a thing is necessary — tho state should be willing to supply this money
and where positive aid can be given, where hupan beings can be givon
care of huaan beings, they should get it. And fras the church side too,

I should like to nention Dither again. It was often said that tho

. - 2*36


Court I

h Feb-JL-J4LL-l6-2 -Karroiw-LJG

existence of an idiot is not aa God intended it. It is felt a s unnatural.
If, in connection with our practice of euthanasia in 19U0 and 19Ul,
letters were received in large makers which were quite understanding
that is another factor in favor of it. I do not want to refer to tho
large mount of literature concerning Euthanasia itself. In many cases
one copies froo another and tfce problee is avoided. But one thing sees
necessary to a - that if anybody wants to Judge the question of
euthanasia he oust go into an insane asylum and he should stay thoro with
the sick people for a few days. Than wo can ask him two questions tho

first would be whether he himself would like to live like that, and the

•

second, whether he would ask one of his relatives to livo\hat way, —
porhape his child or his parents. The answer cannot be connected frith
the concept of demonic order but it will be dooply folt gratitude for
his own hoalth and the quostion of whotbor it is nore huaaiw to holp
such a being to find a peaceful ond or to care for it further — this
aiawor results without being oxpreasod. In this connection I havo a
refaronco to litoraturo whore it says about having a child with a
hereditary brain disoaso kept alivo fer throe and ono-half years and
that this croaturo scroaaod for throe and ono-half years. I soo nothing
particularly huaane in this. Ono can say that the execution is not vory
pleasant and the death of a human being can bo horrlblo, but everything
in life that ia biological is not pleasant — it con be horrible and
unaesthetic and unploasant. Ono can say that of everything from tho
bogiming to tho ond of digestion, but, in the last analysis, this con¬
stitutes life and it is necessary. Ar. oporation is not pleasant but it
can be useful, and tho bloody act of birth is certainly not pleasant
nor is tho ond of lifo, Hiich cay last for days, pleasant. What is im¬
portant is how ono considers these procosses. They become boar able to
us and grow into what they aro in reality by seeing in them acne thing
enlightening. I believe if one holds this point of view, thon in tho
consideration about euthanasia,a poor suffering croaturo is includod in
this thought which in reality goes far beyond tho limited earthly exist¬
ence, that they can be included in the concept of existence altogether,
— 21x37


Court I

1* Feb-A-MAA-l6-2-Karrow-LJG

and to mention Hippocrates once acre and his period when one spoke of
Leges and ordering understa nd ing, I believe that the doctor can create
the necessary scientific basis for euthanasia and the theologian can work
It into his work and the lawyer and the state authority can give tho
doctor the opportunity to help human beings, including such miserable
creatures.

Q-. No", Witness, what was Hitler's point of view? Did he ask
anything unmedical of you?

A. No, he did not. a

Q. Do you know whethor ho knew anything about the Extermination Hi

r 13?

A. I do not know whether he knew anything about that. I did not
know this term earlier and I never hoard it free hin.

Q. ’Then did he say anything to you in favor of extermination —
anything that indicated that?

A. No, he did not.

Q. Do you bo lie to that he know itiat was going on?

A. I do not boliove that Himlor carried out these raoasuros without
Hitlor's knowledge. It is ny opinion that he know about it in oomo fern.

The quostion is Mother he gavo tho orders or whethor ho gave hints so
that Himmler carried thorn out in this fora. Tho relationship betwoon
Himm l er and Hitler nay haro boon similar to that bo two on Martin Boraonn
and Hitlor. In that ccnnoction, it was cortainly so th..t if Hitler nado
seme statooont in tho courso of conversation, Martin Bornann passod it
on as an order free tho Fuehrer. If Hitlor perhaps said in conversation:

"A man liko Pastor Niomoollor can't bo lot out of a CAnp. Such pooplo
vo to bo troatod in such and such a way", then Martin Boraann reported
to Himmler that "Pastor Niosoellor is to bo kept in a concentration canp
for tho rest of his lifo". It is possible that Hitlor and Hlnmler wore
In a similar relationship, that — I as basing this again on Martin
Boraann — Hitler did not actually give an order but that he knew that
*^rtin Bcrconn would pass on a statement of his in this form and, on tho
otter hand, that Martin Borcenn passed on an order or a statement which

*


2ix30


Court I

1* Feb-A-MiA-l6-3-Karraw
had the effect of an order


Q. Witness, oust one not assiiae that both thought# were united in
Hitler's mind, radical extermination and euthanasia, and that Hitlor
learned of theo?

A* This necessarily did not exist. Aside free the feet thrt
knew nothing about it, it was ono of Hitlor*s characteristics — th-t
events and plans and projects wero kept so secret that actually only
two people learned about th^s. I aa thinking of Prince Philip of Hosse
with 'hoo he talked at the Fuehrer Headquarters. He had supper w^th
him once and after supper he wont out of the room and was arrested at
tho door. I aa thinking of the beginning of the campaign 'in Franco. We
left Berlin by train tho night before tewrard Hamburg. Everything was
arranged to go free thoro by ship to Norway. Even the officers of his
untourago wero not informed that there would be a war with Franco. At
night near Lohrto on the way to Hamburg, tho train turned and wont toward
tho west whoro tho fighting had already begun. It was so with nany
noasures. Thon thoro was no reason that noro eon — the vary saallost
circlo of people — would know about such aoasures. I can say that of
tho circles around Hitlor ono parson did not discuss his tasks and
assignoonts with othors unloss tho Fuohror Massif folt it nocossary or
spoko about it.

Q. Thon you loamod nothing through Adolph Hitlor about tho
oxtemination cat tor?

A. No.

Q. ixa you consider tho wholo thing do you fool today that you aro
incriminatod by euthanasia in any way?

A. No. I do not fool that I an incrininated. I an convinced that
what I did in this connection, I can bear tbs responsibility for it
beforo ay ccnsciorce. I was notivated by absolutely humane feelings.

I never had any othor bolief than that the so poor miserable creatures,
that tho painful lives of these creatures wero to be shortened. Tho
only thing that I regrot in this connection is that oxtornal circum¬
stances brought it about that pain was inflicted on tho rolativos. But


Court I

L Feb-A-D JS-17-l-Gro68-IJj


I as conviw:ed that these relatives have ovorccee this sorrow today and
that they theaselves feel that their dead relatives wore freed from
suffering.

Q. Mr. President, I have no further questions to put to tho wit¬
ness.

THE RESIDENT* The Tribunal was inforned at noon that the defendant
Cberheusor desired to be excused at throe o*clock for reasons of health.
Does her counsel know Aether that information is corroct? A

DR. SSIDL (for Cberheuser)* I heard nothing about that.

THE RESIDENT t IX, lor reasons of her health, the defondant (fcorhousor
doslreo to be oxcusod at three o*clock froa further attendance of tho
afternoon soasion of court, she nay bo so excused. Counsel may obtain
information Aether such absence on account of her health is desired.

If It is nocoasary, she nay bo excused. Tho Tribunal will now have a
short recess.


21*0


Court I

h reb-A-F JC-ld-1- Haynes-LX

THE ULBSBILl The Tribunal is again in session.

May it please Tour Honors, the defendant Ofcsrheuser has taken the
permission that was granted prior to the recess and is now absent from
the Court,

TVS RBBlDDff: Let the record shew that the defendant Cfoorl-ouser
is ebsent Tilth the permission of the Tribunal on account of illness.

Does ary of the Dofensa Counsel desire to cross examine the witness-
def»«flant Karl Brandt?


BT DR. :*EL7E (Counsel for defendant Handloser) i

Q. Witness, during your examination of yostorday, you cited the
decree of the 28 July 19U2. This is document N0-080, in docuoant book
•tosher 1, on tho strength of which you were appointed Conaissionor
General for Health Matters and Genoralctoerstabartt Handlosor was
appointed to tho Chief of tho Tlehrmacht Modic&l Service, and Dr. Conti
received new authority. Did you participate in tho origination of this
decroo?

A. I explained yesterday that the docroo rosultod fran tho inci¬
dents rtiich took place in tho Best during tho winter campaign of 19bl-
191*2.

Witness, I do not desire any ropotition. I still renorhor
that, and tho Tribunal roo&hers it too with reference to rti.it hippo nod
during tho winter months of 19U1 and why it was tho cause of thoso
neasuros. I am mainly intorested with reforonco to tho wording of the
decree, whore I am sure that you participated and which you got to
know as it was originated. What conclusions can bo drawn from tho
wording with reference to the interpretation of the authority of tho
individual participants? In my case, I am interested in the Defendant,
Professor Handloser. That is the reason I asked you whether you par¬
ticipated in the origination of this decroo.

A. I have seen this decree being cccpoaod, and I know the circum¬
stances which led to it and individual sections. I know tho difficulties
with regard to competence rtiich played a major part in this, but I have


2Uxl


Court I

U Feb-A-F X-18-l-Haynes-LJj


not taken part in its formulation.

«. For purposes of interpretation, it is acre important that one
experienced it. In a doc inert which wns not an evidential doco-i:'.
but which was submitted to the Tribunal by General Taylor and which
was basic inforaaticn about the Gernan Medical Systen, the Fhosocution
has stated th_t on the basis of a decree of 19L2, Hitler appointed the
defendant. Handle so r, as Chief of the Medical Services of the Amod
Forces. In this capacity, Handloser co-ordinated and supervised the
activities of the Medical Services of all three branches of the Arned
Forces, as well as the Haffen-6S. In this aanner, he became suprono
Health leader in the military field.

1 aa now asking you if that is a correct interpretation of the
decree, the origination of which you exporionced and the wording of
which you kqjiw.


2hU2


Court I

U reb-A-D Jj-19-I-3eard-LX-


A. No, it certainly is not the correct interpretation of the
decree. The decree stated that the newly appointed chief cf the Amod
Forces Medical Service wanted a uniform control and work on the ccucon
tasks. But surely no superior relationship conditions existed with
regard to the chief of the tfehnaecht Medical Service with the chief of
the Medical Service of the luftwaffo, of the Navy, and of tho Waffon-SS.
It was likewise truo with the units of the labor servico, especially
tho difference) with regard to the ccepetcnco which prevented that if
it had not been thero, otherwise a corresponding relationship with a
clear conception of thought would have oxiated.

Q. In that case, there was no authority to give orders on tho
part of tho chiof of tho Medical Sorvico of the A.mod Forces?

A. No, no military relationship with regard to issuing orders
oxisted with tho Wohnaacht chiof of Modical Sorvico toward tho Navy and
Luftwaffo, and after all, tho toxt is difforont frern tho formulation.

Q. Words like “stooring", "loading* aro sonotlnoa misleading, and
you, yoursolf, have said that tho purpose was to coordinate all of tho
tasks which appliod to tho Hohraocht. New, I want to ask you how that
was actually achiovod. How was tho inclusion of this now offico
actually carried out in offoct. Was any assistance nocoasary from all
sides or how was it in roality?

A. In roality, for tho tino boing, it did not have any offoct
whatsoever as far as tho chiof of tho Wehrnacht was concerned. I
pointed out yesterday that Koitol was circumvented by tho chiefs of
tho Luftwaffo and tho Navy and so on. La a rosult of this tho same
thing applied to the leadership of tho Nodical Services because tho
official status of the chief of the .tehrmacht was dependent on tho
chief of tho Kodical Sorvico of the '/ohraacht. It also would havo boon
the normal way to have a direct way to go to tho centrally located chief
of the rfohrracht Medical Service, and the further way to go to tho
directing agency. In order to represent coccon interest with regard
to the fulfillment of tho tasks, it is always difficult to defino.

It can also be explained and it was not mutual as far as medicine,


Court I

U Fob-^-D X-19-l-co ord-L

aviation ajdicine, which is a task of the chief of the Iuftwaffe*

Thus, like certain tasks of the Navy, in the nedical field also wore
located with the then Raoder, but outside of the field of compoteoca

of the nedical phlef of the Wehraacht.

Q. According to the*decree of 19U2, the research system fell

within the framework of the mutual task?

A. As for as I know, research was not mentioned at all in the

decree.

q. Do you know the size of the working staff of this now Chief?

A. Yes, I knew it.

Q. Was it large cr was it small?

A. It was very small, very fow people.

Q. During the prosontation of the Prosecution case, no differen¬
tiation was made between the docroo of Mo. 2 and tho decree of No. UU.
The chief of tho Medical Sorvico of tho Araod Forces is continually
being mentioned. Tho iaprossion nay be created thereby as in 19UU,
that is on tho 1st of Septocbor thoro was Just a little unimportant
organizational extension of .an alroady oxi sting agency. T/ould you
please tell mo what was tho real roasen which led to tho oxtonsion of
the Jurisdiction of this chief?

A. Of courso, it was tho requirements of that period. In the
last phaso of the war it became necessary to concentrate everything
that was possible. On tho other hand, it was necessary, — and that
say be tho decisive part of this decree — that through this socond
docreo of tho chief of the Medical Service of 19Uli, this position was
separated toward other offices which Gonoralctoerstabsarzt Hand loser
occupied as .iray Medical Inspector.

Q. rfith reference to this docroo *iich was brought into effect
in Docerfcer 19Uli, wore any effects possible?

It did not havo any practical effect any more because at this
period of time the possibility of effect of any decree becare practic¬
ally nil. I believe that this was about six or seven months prior to


Court I

h :ub-»-DJ3-19-2-eeard-LX


th« and of the war. In any case, it could not have a decisive effect
ary acre,

Q. Would it not have been of importance in that rogard, that
this very dnicua of a staff, is you described it, was newly extended
and had to be extended?


ma


k F efc rur-ry-A-Dv' G-19-3-3 oard
Court He. 1


k It falls within the seme frame work which 1 have just hinted. Durir.
that peridd of time such a measuro of time was not possibla any more. I
personally experienced the development of thrt office beside ay own office,
end I know exactly the difficulties which arose at the time which node the
fulfillment of their teak impossible.

Q At wh; t period of time was your office, Science and Research, practi¬
cally put into effect?

A Frcm approximately the middle cf F-bruery 19W..

Q Do you knew whether Genorel oberstebsarzt Hendloscr belonged to the

Reich Research Counsel?

A I knew that he was not a member of it.

Q You know Gcnerftlstobserrt Schribor; do you not? You mentioned that
h« belonged to the Reich Research Counsel rs a Plenipotentiary for combating
epidemics. ..as Sch richer in that capacity, subordinated to Genoraloborstab-
sarat Hendloscr?

A He was subordinate to Hondlosor. I said this morning that the
aertoors of the operation staff of the Reich Resoarch Counsel wore subordinated
to Goering personally, and thus they oould not be subordinated to anybody
else.

Q Do you know that Genoralstabsarzt Schriebor exorcised a double func¬
tion. And I an putting the question to you for the reason - becauso I want
tc know whether Schriber had to report to Hondlosor in his capacity as
Sanitary Inspector?

A I do not think so, I don't think he had to do thet, and I don't think
he did it.

Q Do you think he was allowed to do so?

A In ny opinion, he would have then had to obtain the permission of
Geering.

Q Very well, did you evor discuss experiments on human beings as thoy
■ore carried cut in concentration camps with Genercloberstabsarzt Hendloser?

A No, I neve net even hinted at then.

Q Professor Lcibrsndt at one time mentioned Doctor Bernhardt as an


-2U.5-


U F efcruary-A-OJj-19-A-3eard
Court Sc. 1


Cberfeldartt of the Armed Frcces, end in order to clerify this point, I want
tc esk you »hat control did Dr. B mhardt exercise. Vhfit was he in relation
to Kandloser, and to the chief of the nreed Medical Service?

A As far as I know Doctor Bernhardt, as far as the '..ehraacht was ccn—
corned, belonged to the nir Division at l&ienstcr. He was a .nar.ber of the
Luftwaffe. He was free there assigied to a certain teak or he was classified
as essential, *t least he was working in the agency of Docto^ Conti in the
Reich Ministry of Interior, and thero took over the mental functions. I have
never heard anything about it, x

Q S 09 that in this case, there was no connection with the chief of
the Medical Service?

A Ho.

DR. JlSLTE: Thank you. I have no further questions.

BY DR. PRIBILLA:

Q Witness, Brandt, you know the defendant Professor instock, end hnvc
known hia for sccc tine?

A Yea.

Q Woro you active on the same clinic as he was?

A Yes.

Q And you went with hin to Berli-i, and you were then the Obcrstabsarst
in that clinic, actually ®corcising that position until the beginning of tho
war, yes?

A I did not exercise that position practically during the war, although
I was at the clinic and continued ay work there.

Q But, even beforo the war, you wore already escort physician of the
Fuehrer, and your duties were performed at the clinic in so far as your
activities as escort physician to the Fuehrer permitted?

A Yes, that is free the beginning of the war in 1939.

Q The situation changed in as such as you were more or less permanently
outside and only on occasions visited the clinic?

A Yes,

Q During that time free 1939 to 19A3, did you frequently see Professor
ac stock?


u February-A*-OJ3-19-5-Bear’i
Court No. 1


A No, I set hie on occasions. During tho first part of the war he was
:lways oontinually outside of Berlin, so that little personal contact bo-
t»een us existed.

Q i.h«ever you did met* him, and that is from the tine of 1939 to 1943*
did you then infora hin about your activities as escort physician to tho
Fuehrer?

A No, I did not inform >im about any details.

Q Did you inform hin about ycur oth.r activities, for instance, in
connection with the Bithaneaia program?

A No. Tho cnly subject of which 1 informed hin was in the preliminary
work which was connected with the sick transport and other latter hospital
facilities.

Q For what reason did you not inform hin about your authority and
activities which you exercisod?

A That was in the fundamental part of the orders which I rocoived,
which 1 was net oven able to stato to Rostock in detail. It was noccssary
for me to keep this thing to qysclf and to only inform those who wero inmedi-
atoly effoctod by them. That was a directive which wo always strictly com¬
plied with, and which appliod to all of those who wore in the close circle
around the Fuehrer.

Q If I understand you correctly, thero was a concrete onier to that
effect, namely, to keep everything secret?

A Tes, secrecy by all c*.ans, y«.a.

d And, you personally felt, yourself, obligated to carry out that
order, even toward your acquaintances?

A Yes, naturally.

Q Now, through a decree of the 17 of August 1942, and that is Document
080, Exhibit No. 5, did you redeve certain coordination tqaks on the econ¬
omic field between the civilian sector cn one side and the military agencies
cn the other. You know the decree?

A That is a decree which also simultaneously appointed me General
Cuaaisslcner, yes,

Q And, that was in August 1942?


L Feb. 17 A-20-1-PKP- Lessor

Zoart Ho. 1

Q. In order to exercise these tasks did you institute a new office?

A. Not in the beginning. At the beginning I exercised this activity fran
the Fuehrer's Headquarters and only had a nail connection with the Reich
Chancellery, but then I did not have any further office.

Q. Kith reference to this activity which started on the basis of the docroe
af 1912, did Rostock take over any official activity for you?

A. Ho.

Q. And then in Septaober 1%3 the seccnd decroe was issued, and th?t is
&i»nt 061, Exhibit No. 6. On tho strength of this decree the co-ordination
Ufko wore extended and you wore givon thu task co-ordinating the various
interests, that is, in the fiold of hoelth services, and, as it states in tho

decree, y=u .ere to etoor tho.. «t«r. eccordlnf to il^«lve» or by -ay of
dlroctivos. How could that have been understood. Judging froo your knowledge

at that tine?

A. I nysolf received certain directives and I had boon given tho authority
!>7 virtue of the sane decres to appoint deputlos. Kith roforonce to Rostock,
in the course of the subsequent tino, on the occnsicn of the second docruo, ho
took over the office for Science and Rosonrch again by virtue of tho diroctivo
■hich I gavo to him.

Q. You alroady previously stated a nuaber of tasks which were taken over on
tho basis of this decroe. I shall not revert to that once more. Later, in
c .nncction with tho offic*. of Rostock it wiU again bo clarified. But I
mpi to ask you very concretely whethor, on the basis of this decree, there
■88 any directive froo which could bo soon thet you had to doal with research,
that is, concrete research assignments or research fields?

A. No, these were not concrete fiolds but in tho beginning "o "ore dealing
■ith fundamental quosti^is of the highor schools, which Rostock was to handlo.
"tet was the maintenance and continuance with regard to students as well as
■ith regard to teachers. Of those tasks then, is perhaps one which I could
naoe new —collaboration with the Office for Planning and Economy, which dealt
■ith retterw an! saw that these supplies were set according to nodical
viewpoints. It was a fixed task for Rostock which arose froa tho office of
Planning and Economy.


A Feb. 47 -A-20-2- PKP- Lessor
Court No. 1

Q. fitness, if I understand you correctly, I can conclude fra* your
ms»er that you were concerned with goneral questions but wore not concerned
■ith any concrete assignaent of tasks in the field of research?

A. No, there were no concrete tasks in the field of research.

Q. You already mentioned, witness, that you chose Rostock because he was
i scientist and 70 U gave hia the task in order to naintain scientific levels
in Geraany and you aontioned the differences with othor agencies which you
sxpjrionced. He* did it cone about that you nonaged to choose Professor
Rostock as your collaborator? Uas there any political intention, any tactical
intention, in connection with that?

A. I selected hostock because in ay official position I wanted to have mn
to represent qy two office groups who could certify to the outside that thlo
■as a aodical office. I initially selected Rostock because he was n professor
at tba University and because I knew hia; any politicql considerations did
rut play anjr part whatsoever. If they had plr.yud a part I would probably
not have seloctod Roatock.

Q. fitness, ay queaticn was not quite answorod. When I askod you whothor you
tai any political reasons, then I could also hnvu ooant that you oithor wnntod
to choose a specially active representative) of National Socialise or that you
nnted tho contrary.


-2449-


Court Ho. 1

4 Tab 7-A-20-la-£EH-L osier


A. Ia connection vith Rostock there vas no aucetlcn of ary politlcol
considerations. Rostock was n strictly non-political person. Ko did not
pursue a political extreme in any vay.

Q, I w-Mld like to frase ny ouestion even nore concretely. When giving
sor.ebody this task, didn't you wnt to give it to soue non-nclitical oerson-
slity in order to establish a counter-balance against Conti, etc?

A. This fact alreacy resulted out of cy position because when I selected

Rostock for this office of Science ind Research X vns already engaged In a

%

severe struggle vith the political exponent. Dr. Conti.

And the lino pursued by Conti was in contradiction to a scientific
and nodical purpose?

A. It had nothin#; whatsoever to do with it. These wsro tvo different
varlds. 9

Q, The work in your deorrtuent, Science end Research — did that al¬
ready start in Decscber 19*.3, or only later?

A. So, it practically began in February 1944, when this branch agency
for this agency at Belit* was ready, so that ws could both novo in.

q, It is correct that rrofessor Rcatock, up Ontil the ond of the war,
continued his activity as dean of the asdlcal faculty and tho loadorshlp of
the Surgical University Clinle in Berlin?

A. Tos.

q. Isn't that in contradiction to the tasks vhich you had glvon hin?
Didn't you want hir to reaove hicstlf cocplstely froa that activity?

A. Bo. I have already Just stated that I had selected Rostock because
he vas dean of the nodical faculty of tho University of Borlln. I vafitod to
occupy ny office with a clear exponent of the higher schools of learning sc
that this ct fic« would not be brought into a nanner of acting as was the erso
vith other political offices. I also wanted Rostock to continue directing
his clinic. I have stetod that I also rerdned in this clinic for tho sane
reason, in order to dearly enohesixe the nodical aspect.

So I nay suv-arize that you approved the continuance of Rostock's
activities fight fron the start?


-2L 5©-


Court So. 1

4 Tat) -i7-A-30-2a-iZK-I.o*ser


A. Tea*

lor you, as Cocalaaioner General iar Medical and Health Service*,
wore there other field* of work vhich were not Included and worked uoon by
the Depertuent of Science nnfi Research end the other office?

a. To. lor ne there were decisive taak vhich I had to handle ny*elf

ACd with which the Juat previously nentloned office* did not have anythin# to

a

do.

kith reference to theae teak* vhich were net Included by the*o two
Jut nantlonad office, but which ybu worked upon yoiraelf, did tho oro#raa
of the coabettln# of chemical warfare c#onto — wn* thi* pro#raa included!

A. Tea, that alao wee Included.

. Q, Did you personally work on the oueation* or did you have any col¬
laborator*?

A. Within the cuabattln* of the ehaaical airfare a#onta I handled all
these quaatlon* by ayaelf. My collaborator* were not free ny offic* but they
wore froc aatnbliafcconta which until then had occupied theaaalvoa with thoeo
rroblen. Thera were certain office of th* Speer Minlatry and there were
Individual aan freo the proving ground*. there were reaoonalble oeople froo
air raid precaution ayator., ato.

(i, Tou at lecet inforaed Roatoek ab ut theat taak* which you keot for
ycureelf?

A. 1 did not bother his with then bteauaa Roatook had ao nuch to do
with tho clinic that 1 woe «lad when I could devota fill ny tine to the
other teak*. He did not receive any further inforaatlon free ne.

q. How if your were inforaad about one of theae field*, and I an, for
instance, thinkln# about the infuraution #iven to you by Dr. Slover* ab?ut
the result* of experinenta of i-rofaaaor Hirt with reference to Loet dnna#ea,
didn't you then lnforo Dr. Bcatock about thi* oueation either?

A. S«, 1 did not lnfora Roatock about that.


-2451-


U Feb. U7--TD-21-l-Meehan

Court Ho. 1

Q Tou roc aired yet another authority and that was in March of 19b$J
you were to sissnarize aedical questions within the Reich Research Counsel.
Will you pleaso oca acre confirm that this was actually in March of 19U5?

A It certainly was in the year 19U5) it nay be that it was in

%

April when I received this decree, which was signed by Goerin?. In any
case, in this connection I did not answer nor did I do anythin" else,
because at that period of tine Berlin was already located within^tho zone
of operations* /

a

Q Wore your info raid by Rostock, as the head cf thp Sdonce Rosoaroh,
aiything froc which you could conclude that the office of Rostock received
krowledgo about axporlnents on fcusan baings? Do you remember ary such
information cord nr to you?

A I had not rocoived ary information of that kind fron Rostock,
however, I an convinrod that if ho had had it hinself, or if ho had known
anything at all about that, ho would have informed no of that fact at that
tine. I want to concludo that ho did not know anything at all about then
I did not discuss this prsbloa with hits and I have only, with rogard to
axperlaonts, discussed tho jrogrea cf m l c als with hia, which had boon
detailed and bequested to hie by semo institute. In o.y case, wo did net
discuss ary experiments on hucan beings

Q Would it have been tho duty of Rostock to inform you ol v.ch nuttors
if ho had cone to know about then?

A He certainly would havo informe;' no, It would also havo boon his
duty to inform no ache wasry subordinate in this case.

Q And you can confirm that freo the practice that when you collabo¬
rated in such a case, you would have been informed by hin?

A I certainly would have boon informed by hin.

Q Thank you, I havo no further quostions*

THE PRESIDENT: Papers to the Secretary General.

DR* SEIDL* Ccurmel for tho Defendants Gebhardt, Oberbauser and
Fischer,


-2452-


li Febi U7-A-ATD-21-2-Heehan
Court !tci 1


31 DR. SEIDLi

Q Witness, yesterday when you discussed the Sulfanilamide Exporinonts,
you sentionod penicillin) what did you scan by that?

A I Mentioned penicillin In ordar fco express the fact that wo, in

%

Gersany, in the years fres 19lil to 19U2 reoonsiderod Sulfanilard.de as tho
therapeutical nedicine, which was discussed wherever doctors assembled)
similarly as on tho other side the problen of penicillin was taken. I only
meant to sake a comparison in this way.

Q And on that occasion you mentioned Professor Kruqger) is it oorroct
that Profossor Krueger was tho consulting surgeon with tho Airy and Navy
in Reeoarch?

A Profossor Krueger was consultant physician with tho Group Scuth
and Group Center in the East. I havo at ono tire seen hin in tho vicinity
of Posna and I had also violtod hin lator on. Ho was problenatical porso-
nality and froo the very boginning he had decided hinself for a cortuin
Sulfanilanide dru* at a period of tine when the effoctivonoss of Sulfaniia-
nldo for prevention of injuries did not toes socure. For this reason, ho was
cochatted in his opinions beoauso it was believed that tho younger medical
officer deponds too much on ths offoctivonoes of'Sulfanilanddo and as a
result of this night neglect tho necessary troatnont of tho wounds,

Q Professor Krueger was then tho representative of tho groups, whloh
attached a spocial lnportanca to Sulfanilanide whon combatting wound in¬
fection contrary to other groups, which woro of another opinion?

A In contrast to otters, yes. At tho tine, tho opinions woro still
conplotoly experirwntal an! tho effectiveness of Sulfanilanide had not as
yet been dote rained.

Q Tostorday, you spoke about the difficult situation of tho German
treope in Russia during the winters of 19& and 19U2) wiU you agree with mo
when I say ttet in view of the experiences of that winter the question of
the affect of Sulfanilanide was a military, medical problen of the first

degree?

-2A53-


U ?eb* U7-A-IT>-21-3-fc«tan
Court Jfa. 1

A I agree with this ooncept,

Q I have no further questions 4

DR. WEISSGERHSR for Defendant Sievers.

DI DR* WEISGERBER* * ,

q Witness, this nomine you told us that you saw the Defendant Siovors
one single tine and that you spoke to him thenj is that corroot 1

A Yes. *

Q Did you know his official position?

A Mo, I did not know his official position.

Q Did you know that an institute for .military science and research
was affiliated to the offioe of Ahnonerfco?

A No, I did not know that.

q When talking to Sievors that one tino, did Siovors thon toll you
that he had an ordor to speak to you about the Lost Roaoarch »©rk of
Frofossor Wrt?

A Mo, he told no that he had the order to give no this final report
about the Lost work of Professor HLrt and ho had to do that by ordor of
Hlnrnlor, but ho did not say he had the order to discuss tho eontonta of
thoso mttors.

q At tfrit tico was any nention nade about any othor experiments 7

A Mo, we did rot discuss axporinjr.ta at all, Siovors noroly handed
this report to so as tho final report of Profossor Hirt regarding Lost
treatnontj as such there was no further connection,

Q You knawthat Sievers was rot a physician?

A I had to assume that imediatoly, otherwise ho would havo approached
oe in a different manner; I did rot krow hin and I did not have any concep¬
tion whatovor where he car» from; what agoncy ho came Trca and I did rot ask
hi* about it.

Q You, therefore, had ro reason whatsoever to discuss any experiments
with hin?


-245A-


b Feb. U7-A-ATS-21-b-Meehan
Co-art ?fc» 1

A Ho, I did not apeak to Ms about that.

Q Did you knew Professor HLrt?

A Jfc, at that tiro I did not know Professor HLrt?

Q But later you beoana acquainted with tho official position of
Professor Hirt?

A Yes, I was told he worked at Strassburg University.

Q This no mi nr you spoke about the military xvacossity of the iwistl-
tution of a skeleton colleotion and you denied that necossityj would such
a necessity be confirmed under different pointsof view? '

A From the point of view of a scientific interest it would bo corroct
if skeleton collections were made. I knew of vory extensive collcoticna
whLoh are affiliated with ovary anatomical institute. In particular, I know
of a large collection at the Haseun in Berlin. Thoso aro really purely
sdontific interests, but certainly not military interests.

Q Could a layman, a nan who is not a physician, sako tho doclsivo

jadflttnt about the necessity of such a collection?

\

A I cannot answer that question.

Q I have no further questions.


-2A55-


4 F cb ru* ry-A-D JG-22-1-Xinabu ck
Court So. 1


31 DR. FRITZ: (Defense Counsel for Defendant Rose)

Q witness, did you know the defendant Rose before the 8th of Uay 1945,
that is , before the collapse.

A Yes, I spoke to hia once. I net hia once, yes.

Q Did you ever have any other official connections with the defendant
Rose as arc nentionod in his affidavit of Septeaber 1946 which is Document
872, Exhibit 408? A

A I only had two dealings with hose, and since I don't know what docu-
aont you aro speaking of I think that we are there concerned with malaria
treatment of paralytical questions, and then again thoro were nourishment
questions concerning the same persons. I think these arc questions whoro I
dealt with Professor Rose.

Q Did you ct any time speak to him about any points as were mentioned
by the prosecution before Uay 1945?

A No.

Q Did you have any correspondence with him or did you deal with him
in uny other form directly or indirectly?

A No, neither directly or indiroctly, nor by way of writing.

3 Did ycu over ace the defendant Roso as a prrticipant in a discussion
where the points were diceussed which are hore under indictment or where
reports wore taade on those points?

A In order to answer this quustion, one would hove to assume a common
participation in such meetings, but I cannot remember any ono occasion whore
I sew hia or spoke to hia. I add this morning whet Beatings I attended. If
Professor Rose also attended these meetings it is certainly possible thit
I saw him, but certainly we did not establish any contact or speak to one
another.

Q witness, you were just spooking about meetings. I meant conferences,
discussions. Meetings usually mean to describe lergcr congresses.

« I had no discussicnns wh.tsocver where Rose was present or whore I
net him. 1 cannot reeeeber that.

DR. FRITZ: Thank Ycu. Ur. President, I have no further questions.


-2456-


u ?ebruar7-A-DJG-22-2-Hinabuck

Court lie. 1


3 Y 31. KAUnWffl: (Defense Counsel for Defendant Rudolf Brendt)

Q Dr. Brenot, I Jiave one single question to put to you. Ihe prosocutio:.
designates tho defendant Rudolf Brendt as the so-called special referent of
Hied or. Kould you agree with % ac if I say that Rudolf Brandt was everything
but a counselor of Himmler in matters which are the subject of this trid?

A That is ay conviction. It is =y conviction that first Himmler did
net accept any advice in his questions on principle because had thi^ been the
case, such matters would not have been dealt with by him, and I am quite sure
that Rudolf Brandt in particular would not have been in a position to give
any advice to him. He would not have tolerated it.

DR. KAUFlUINi Thank you. I have no further questions.

BY DR. ShUra: (Doftnse counsel for Defendant Blcnc)

Q Dr. Brendt, you nay perhaps rcembor that the prosecution in their
material usboitted o file by Professor Klieve with reference to a mooting
of the ao-callod Blitzablcitcr Comittoe. This ao-callod Blitzableitur Cecrw
ittco was known as the agency in the Uehraacht which dealt with the prepar¬
ation of tho defense of biological warfare. In this filo about the mooting
of this Blitxbloitcr Comittoe Professor Klieve writos and says that the
defendant Dr. Blooe made utterances during that meeting which woro to tho
effect that the Blittableitor Cccsaittco was working much too slowly; that it
had to be dissolved. He said that Blooe would have to turn to Brandt; that
Is, your, or to Gocring. I don't know whether this nan, Dr.Klievo, will
appear as a witness. I asked for him, and I therefore want to ask you Dr.
Brandt, at any time did defendant Dr. Blcne turn to you in this matter? Did

he make any proposals to you? Please reply.

/. I heard this work, BUtcablciter, for tho first time through this
document Klieve. I did not knew thit before. V.ith reference to such a pro¬
posal Blcme certainly did not turn to me as can be soon fran this Klieve docu¬
ment, orally nor by writing. I had no conversation or correspondence with him
at all, and he nevor approached me vith reference to this problem, 51itze-
bleiter,

Q Dr. Brendt, I have e further question, referring to a different chtp-


-2457-


U Fobruery-A-D JG-22-3-Ninabuek
Bcurt Bo. 1


ter. This morning during your ex a mnation you repeatedly spoke about diff¬
erences which you yourself had with the Reich physicians' leader. Dr. Conti,
jnd you also spoke of differences which the defendant Dr. Blome had with
the same Dr. Conti. Dr. Blcae was the deputy of Dr. Conti, end I am inter¬
ested to know whether you can*give us any more information as to what kind
of differences existed between Dr. Blaze end Dr. Conti, end to what these
differences refurrod?

A Without going into details, I would like to describe them "as follows:
-henevor physicians ere represented as a community Dr. Blcoe was of the

X

opinion that only professional reasons must be decisive for the manner in
itfiich they are represented, but that it would not be correct to involve a
physician in political questions and put him into a political harness,
thinking that one could further medicine by that.

In this connection whenovor 1 into contact with Dr. Blorac I had
many discussions with hia. «t these occasions it was clearly nentionod that
in addition to the personality -of Conti himself, which brought difficulties
of lta own with it, these mentioned material reasons wore dccisivo.

Q In this connection , Dr. Brandt, I should like to put the following
quostion to you: During these conversations which were cairied on b; Dr.

Blomo with you, did he say anything about wanting, under all circumstances,
to tako cut physicians from Party matters and that for this rocson ho dosirod
to separate the union of personnel which existed between the Reich Choker of
Physicians on one sido, and the Main Department for Public Health on tho othox
and ho wanted to do that for the- reason that this so-callod public health
office was on express Party institution?

A The situation was as you described it, yes, exactly. 2von in December
19U. we discussed this question. I think it was even after the decree which
was mentioned this morning, the decree number 2 where tho Army Medical Chief
was separated.

Q Dr. 3r?ndt, do you r«aazbcr anything about tho following: Ifith refer¬
ence to these conversations rtiich you had with Dr. Blome did he complain
tc ycu that Dr. Conti, the Reich physicians' leader, kept many things away
free him. Dr. Bloce, so that Dr. Blome was net informed about important


-2,5*-


4 P cbru a ry-A-DJG—22-4-Winabuck
Court No. 1


matters in tho heloh Chamber of Physicians and matter.. which concerned the
laedership of the medical profession? My question is whether he told you the.
or whether he eccplaincd to you about it?

A He did that and the por*jnality of Conti was always mentioned, who
was a distrusting porsen, a difficult person to cope with, who concentrated
everything to himself personally, everything that happened in his office,
so that not one collaborator of his could receive any insight in the^activity
which ho himself exercised.

Q Witness, one further question. Do you know th*t this Dr. Conti,
apart froo other offices, had two main positions? Which wc^e thoso positions?

A Thoso wore tho two positions. Ono was a Party position, Reich Hoalth
Loader, and the other, Undor Secretary of State of tho Ministry of tho Int¬
erior.

Q That is Roich Health Loader; is thet identical with flho Doputy Roich
Physicians' Leader?.?


-2459-


h Feb. U7-^-ATT>-22-larJiinabuek

Court to. 1


A The position was that, as far as personnel goes, ho was tho phy¬
sicians* loador, and at tho sane tine, Raich Health Leador. In addition,
in tho state aootor he was ^Jndor Secretary of Stato of tho Ministry of
tho Intorier. °r. Blene was his representative in his capacity as
physi dan's loaderj that is, sorely partly a representative of Conti's
personality, not on tho stato sector. *■

Q The latter is vary important to no. On tho basis of your know-
lodgo cf quostions of co^xitcnco, you said that Conti in his capacity
as Stato Secretary was not roproaontod by Er. Conti?

A to.

Q For that ho had other collaborators?

A Tos, for that ho had offici a ls of tho Ministry of tho Interior
who represented hi;'*

Q In that connection, Dr. Brandt, I want to put tho following
quostions to youi This Doming you told us what position you yoursolf
hold within tho euthanasia progron, You naturally know tho jurisdic¬
tion and tasks of tho participating agondoa and porsons. Did tho
dofondarrt Dr. Blono exorcise any function in tho euthanasia progron?

Was ho in ary *=y participating in it?

A I did wet noot hfcn at all, and I hoard nothing (ibout that.

Q Witnoss, I an putting this quo3tion to you for tho following
rooson* You rcoccbor that on tho wall behind you thoro usod to bo a
chart which wca nado according to tho sfcateconts of tho defendant
Brack, awl on this chart which I thirk you had, thoro is in tho oenter
a squaro for tho Stato Secretary Conti in the Rcdch Ministry of the In¬
terior, awl you, I an sure, will rexaerhar that to tho right of this
squaro thoro was a scalier squaro whioh said Dr. Blono. You roaonbor

0

that, dent you? You already explained that Tar* Blone had nothing to do

"1th tho euthanasia progron and did not represent Dr. Gonti when he

actod in his capacity as Secretary of Stato. tor, is it your opinion

that this chart which was mde according to the static.onts of tho do-

- 21)60 -


h F obr.ii 7-A-AnV^ 2-ia-Nirjbuck
Court So. 1


fondant Brack, 1* wrong in rospeot to tho squaro whoro Dr. Bio no* a nano
is nontionod?

%


- 2l/>0 a -


h Feb. U7-A-ATD-12-2a-»ilnafcuck
Court !fc. 1


a This square with reference to Dr. 31coe is wren*, and Dr. Brack
In his new chart already corrocted that;

Da. SAITTE?.: In that case I hare Do further questions. Hr. President.
Thank you,

THE PRESIDENT: Is it aftticipatod that there will bo ary further cross
examination by ary of the defers e oounsel torerrow aorning7

DU. FROESCHt'.Ni (Counsel for defendant Brack) !(r. President, I have n
nueber of question which I want to put to the witness. Dr. Erandt, which
will t ake hobo time.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Secretary General, hero is another paper that
bolongs in your custody.

The Tribunal will now rooess until 9*30 tonorrew —

MU. HoHAKEIi If it please the Tribunal, I would liko to ask that the
Tribunal rulo that the witness, Karl Brandt, bo confined so that ho nay rot
be talked to by any of tho dofonso ecu ns el, including his own dofonso
counsel, until he has completed his exanination on tho stand,

DR. JSRVATIUSi I 4>n't know whether I understood correctly. I cortain¬
ly shall bo ablo to speak to cy diont, or is that to be axcludod?

MR. MoH'.fET: I think he has now taken tho stand and is to bo trontod
as ary otter witness, and I think it is propor that in tho case of any
ordinary witness appearing bofore this Tribunal that ho not bo talked to by
oithor side during the courso of his exanination once that exanination has
begun.

JUEG5 SEBRUC: Mr. HcHnnoy, does the Tribunal understand from your
statements that during tho course of prosocution when tho witness had once
takon the s tand, that throughout the courso of the exanination no m.Qber of
tho prosecution or its representatives attested to discuss any natter with
bin at ary tirt during the course of the examination?

fTv, HoHAKETi Well, I thick that has boon uniformly true, ycur Honor.
However, I can’t speak for everyone. However, in view of the Tribunal’s po¬
sition, or rather, the question Just put, I will ask that when Karl Brandt
«ces under cross exanination tomorrow, that his defense counsel not be per-


iL61


L Feb. U7-A-ATD-12-3a-NlBabuck
Ccurt Nc» 1


nitted to th*in confer with hlcj at least, I would like a ruling to that effec-

DX. SEH7ATIUSI Mr. President, I would be in conplote agreenent with
this ruling. As soon as the witness is at the disposal of the prosecution I
will not apeak to hie. H^rovar, before cross axaaination has started I rast
have tho possibility to speak to =y client,

THE PRESIDENTi The Tribunal is of the opinion that under tho circun-
stances at this present tiae ccunsel for defondant Karl 3r^dt nay speak to
Hn until tho defendant is turned over to tho prosecution for cross exami¬
nation, and aftor that tine tho witness should bo under the rule to not talk
to ary one until his cross exard nation by the prosecution is conploted. I
understand that counsel for the defondant, Karl Dranit, is in accordance with
that principle?

DR. SEIWATIUSi Tea.

THE r?ESIDENTi Tho saao principle will be followod with tho othor
defendants whon they take tho stand.

Tho Tribunal la of tho opinion, and I think the Tribunal's ruling was
dear, that defendant Karl Dranit's own counsel and no other counsol for
ary other defondant or anybody olso, should consult with tho defondant Karl
Srarxlt durii^ the course of this night. That's understood.

Tho Tribunal will row recoas until 9i30 o'clock tomorrow naming.

(Tho Tribunal ad Journo d until 5 February 19U7, *t 0930 hours.)


-2462-


5 Feb l*7-4«X«I^LHCaprar (n )

S«Tt to. 1


xrercrr coft

Ofilaial truncript of the Anerlcan Hilitaxy
Trltwnftl ir the rat tor of tho United States’
ot Aaarlra against jfcrl Brandt, ot al, do-
Xtcdanta, s.t'-ine at tourrberg, Goran.-.-, on
3 FabrufiT 19U7# 0930, Justice Boals presiding.

7HZ MARSHAL! Pcrs-.na in the Court Roon will plcose find their

*oats.

Tho Honorablo, tto Judges of 1215 tajy • -iburol I. *“

Solitary Tribunal I is now in section. God save the United Status
of Anerioa and this horcrublo Tribunal.

Tho re will be order in the Court.

THE PRESIDENTi ltr. Ifcvrahal, will you ascertain that tho dofon-
lanta are all proaent ir. Court.

TIE MARSHAL! Iky it ploaao your Honors, all defendants are
proaent in tho Court Rooa.

THE PRESIDENT* Tho Secretary Gunoml will no to for the rooord
tho fact that tiio defendant* aro all present in Court.

JWtL 3RAJDT - Resuaod


«AK:a*iDjf

BT DR. FROESCHUIiH*

Q Mitnoss, yebt -rday ir. the last j-art of /cur discussion of


the Euthanasia progrna - I would ^iko to address sono questions to
you in that oonnocUon. Do you knor that in August, 1939, an oral
order had alroady procodud tho written deer jo by rfltlor to Bouhlcr?

A. No, I do not know anything about that. Howovor, I ccatiidor
it possible because otherwise this coneroto order to Bouhlor would re>t
l^vo boon assuae that perhaps Bouhlor say havo had a certain

th/^.

itiora which wore taking placo botwoon Dr.
C°/\tinnd Lai r ors, which', at the tine, wore Innediatoly discussod at
in tho rddilfl-of ^optcebor.

•-\Q .-Tosterdajr hare already spoken of exceptions — the por-
Jora were r»t all<^7ad to fall under the euthamsia progren — and
* n “W-® connection you have already nonticned tho


-21,63


S ?eb U7-M-SW-l-2-Earrcw (n.)
Court No. 1


war invalids. Hare I understood you correctly that thoso war invalids
were to be excepted from the euthanasia whose cental disease was in
direct connection with an Injury during the World .7ar I or World War II?

A Toe.

Q Do you know anything about the fact the the defendant Brack,
together with his coll a borators, drafted the law?

A I have only fomd cut about it at a later poriod of tine. At
the tine I did not know anything at all about it, '

Q It should bo of interest for the Trlburd to know the nunbor
of insane in Germany in 1939» «fould you bo able to givo some inform-
ticn about that subject to tho iVibunal?

A I oannot givo the exact mabar for the year of 1939 to you.

In goner&l we have no idea abcut the nucbor of mentally diseased in
tho country. Tho rnnbor which I know had probably been dotoreinod in
tho year 193U, but I cannot oay that with certainty. Tho rain contin¬
gent concerns people oufforing iron parol;-ais in all tho phases of tho
dlsoaso. In this ocnr.octior., of courso, th ro wore not only tho siok
porsore who had to bo confinei to an institution out altogothor a nunbor
of pationts who wore suoJoCtod to gonoral nodical treatment. Tho nunbor
ims estimated at approximately one million. The next bipgost nunbor of
patients was that of schizopiirorda which was locatod around six hundrod
thousand and that was out of a population of about Sixty million. This
schizophrenia, at tho sane tine, represents tho mental contingent for
tho cental lnatitutioro and that was approxiratoly two hundred thousand.
?or the nurfcer of beds available, that n eo n s 70$ to 80%. Of these
Ms os of schizophrenia, approximately 20> could bo cured. The remainder
continued to be patients in mental institut ions. Tho sano nunbor of
approximately two hundred forty thousand patients is the number for
iloptics and for the mardo^opressivo patients.


5 Fab li7*4S-&#—1—3-Earrow ( 2,

Court ffa. X

The statist}.oo for the Huntington Disease stands at about 60 % against
tho others. However, altogether, the nurber of noptal l y insane and
idiots nas approxiratod at one rdllion. Altogether there nay have boon
three nil lion cental oases.

Q How =any, in your opinion, of those cases wore confined to in-
stitutiom?

A Of tha three nillior, tho nr bar of two hundred fifty thousand
occupied beds in institutions. That is, about kiu hundred thousand wore
under constant radical oc.ro and one part of tas'., approximator two hun¬
dred fifty thousand, wero confined an hospitals xhilo the othors wero
troated by a private physician.

Q Do you havo an insight into tho fact of how cany people koto
included in tho euthanasia pro gran described by you yesterday in tho
years 1939, 19hO, 19Ul, until tho ond?

A Tho nurbor woa ccnputod iron our statistics, ono thousand —

10 to 5 to 1, ir. which oount is tho nurber of porcono who aro healthy;
ton of th»jo a\: under nodioal caro, fivo aro undor constant troatrwnt
ir. institutions, and ono cocos undor tho euthanasia pro gran. That
r.oana that aaongst one thousand healthy pooplo thoro is ono such caso.
That again is figured froc tho population of sixty rdlli on - that is,
approximtoly sixty thousand*

Q Hotrovor you had no access to exact statistics?

A As far as I knew no statistics have boor, ocnpilod.

Q How, one other quostion.

If he gave orders within tho euthanasia program? Did you give
then or did Boulor givo than thoro with raspect to the physicians?

A Yesterday, I stated that tho T-Ji was an office of Bouhlcr.

As far as I know tho physician* wore suggested on tho part of the
i’inistiy of tha Interior. In tho course of that ti=o I attended about
four conferences- which took place at tho office of Bouhlcr 'There tho

expert and three other experts also attended. Tho recoining con-


5 Fab li7-H-fr^L-3-Karrow (31)

Coart So. 1

ferencee which took place elsewhere ware carried out without cy partici¬
pation. .


- 21 * 66 -


5 ?eb-£3H-2—l—Lessor (H?
Court Ho. 1


Q Could the Defendant Brack issue .ny independent orders within
the Euthanasia Program?

A No.

Q Wa a 3rack eubordiretod to you, witness?

A No, Brock ms not subcriinatod to no but was subordinatod^to
3ouhlor.

Q Did Brack discuss nodical oattars with you? *


A No.

Q Did ytw knew that in the -./inter cf 191/1 to 191/2, at the tino
when tho cataetApho breko over the Oaraar. in the East, aesnbors
of tho T-4i wore assigned to carry cut r. rtcouo action in tho East by
ordor of Hitler?


A I an of tho opinion that tl*jy ::oro air oft tr used baforo I visited
Vic ora which I hero doscrlbod x> ycuj that would be alrea^' in
Docanbor of 191*1. Theso units wore alroacfcr usod on tho railway fron
1’d.rok to Scclonok. I think that this was a nor.suro which was suggostod
by Dr. Todt,

Q Do you know how long this roscuo action lasted?

A In ty opinion and as far as I raoonbor, it ms ooncludod with
the or.d of winter, around Jfcrch or April.

Q Thor. I would like to ask you tlic following question, witnoss.

••

By virtue of this iecrcj of Hitler of 1 Soptoefcor 1939 1 wore you apd
Bouhler given tho assignment tc authorize cornain pliysiclans to givo
"-?rcy deaths tc incurably nontally Insane — m 3 it your opinion to
obtain tho assurance of Hitler that those physicians, after having
perfornoi such euthanasia, if they vox* threatened with legal procedures,
‘bat they should bo saved fron such rith intervention by tho adrdnistra¬
tion?

A Tcs, absolutely.

Q Therefore, in the decree of Hitler, you navo soen a statement
~j the head of the State, according to which theee physicians were ex-

- 21367 -


5 F *!>-£= Looser (IL)

Court, Jfo. 1


cop tod forn any le, prccodj^ras?

A Yea, that •& quit© cj^ar. That has also been the caso in tho
continuation of to* prcgrfl in 191*0 and 19lil«

Q Mow do 7o\ agree with no that tho State did not cease intoroat
in the lifo of a hi san being which :.as worth;. of protoction?

A I have noi. understood the previous question*

Q I have cs!»i the question, do ;*cu arras with no that the State

X

haa not oeaaed an i.nteroat in tho llfo of a fcunan being worthy of pro¬
toction?

. A Toe,

Q On the authority of Hitler ar.d being fa. il liar with thoao pre¬
requisites, that is, the incurably inaano, have you aeon in that tho
■tatenont by the he id of t!.o State that too intoroat of tho Stato
cooaod in tho livoe of thoao people, nacoly tho nontally andi rxjurably
ill?

A NO, I ho\i not aoon that*

Q And why net?

A In thia I have noon only tho thought to '..dp the ccnUtion

of tho person and to brii^ it to an and in the intorost of the afflic-
tod p ora on. That was part of the Stato intorost.

Q Theroforo, tho reason for those otatenonts in this ca3o lay
in tho person of tho patient?

A Only in the person of tho patient.

Q T! it nos a, new according to yctrtaodical knowledge are they
alive or hive they lost so nuch cf their legal valuo of living that
a continuation as they ere for all tine has lost its value for tho
person?

A Yes, for tho person Idrsolf, yee.

Q Do toe sc—calidd mentally dead balong to.that group — that
is, nooplo who are in a condition of final incurable idiocy?

A I would count those people into that group, yes.


5 Feb- EBB-2-2-t*o3«r (IL)
Court So. 1


Q Tou hft7o stated th t the deed si» about the diacnoaoa aa to
thoir Incurability *<;aa In he bends of op or ta wto worked independently
of each other on the individual oaaos, la that correct?


21*66 a


5 ?ab-€BH-2—3-Les ar (i-)
Court !to. 1


A lee.

Q for : n your opinion nan -ho3b export*: now, in a certain sense,

%

State Organa? I rant to repeat too questioni K era tho p^-sicians whoso
task it was t> nake dicgroeoe, through the fact that th*' had been given
the authoritj •, woro they now in a certain sens 3 organs of the Sta^o as
far as thoi: diagnoses wore ooroornod?

A F.th regard to the do-reo thec' have t * a Just in'that capacity,
in an off.dal position*

Q Tn^did not have on o;‘*ioial position b it with rogard to tho
decree '.hey have had that cap* ity. fitness, wi'.h the specialised physi-
dai« is it possible to letcm -o ouch cases ol Incurable Rental disea¬
ses with abaoluto certainty?

A Within tho frarorxrtc of the goi.'orc- dua i ctnii-or ..1— , y-#,

that possibility oxiats.

Q ,/ith tho irfiuffioior.cy of humn kaowiodfte tan a edetoko occur
ir. the person of ovun a p-yaidan ith such ur, •rioncoV

A A niatako ia, of courso, possib'-u*

Q fow, foes not now a ioputy of the hood ol tho Stato have to
boar this possibility of nistakoa in dnd?

A This possibility was taken into account *jy tho foot that a
rxzbar of experts and also subsequently a rainbor of observatory possi¬
bilities of tho pationts woro mdo available to tha physician; furthor-
rcra by tho fact that after :svvii^ boor, oonfinod to ar. institution for
5 yoara, tho institution whoro the pationt was located would still
subject this patient tc a period of leng obsurvntion.

Q Therefore, to sun up for conclusion, you have aoen in tho
security noasuros widch you have Just nentionod, you have seen Stato
and r.edical guarantees?

A Yes, the State and nodical guaranty.

Q Then I ±> not tove any further questions.

THE PRESIDENT: Is there any further cross-exadnation of this

- 2lj6 9 -


5 ?eb-EB?V2-U£e' 3 ex (IL)
Court !fc. 1


witness on the poft o5 ary defense counsel? .t re being 7*0$; tho Prose¬
ction nay crcas-exazdno.


r jUTJ.TlOW


BT ISR. SCHANETi

Q Herr Brandt, eince you 1 ve Just co i Hecusdjg Euthanasia wo
shall centime on that subject. I would liko .« ask you hew raiohj^y-


chiatric training you have roceiv »d?

A I have had no psychiatric training in particular. x
Q How ouch first-i Jind kncwl< d o lavo you receivod on insane pat-


ionts?

A I an afreid I shall have to ask you to repeat the quostion.

I did not quito understand it.

Q I asked you tow mch first «JanJ knowledge cr oxporlonco you
hnvo had with ireana persons.

A First of all at the unlrere. ty I tod ry ordinary training and
r.ftartrarda I hod no ooro praotioal axporlunco in touching rogarding


insane pationts.

Q How nany ireano asylum havo you bo.'n in for tho purpose of
obaorvation and stu<br?

A I did not havo ary observation in or visits to inoano asylums.
I said yostorday ttot I had boon to 3othol and at a latar stago I onco
visitod a special ollrdc at Kassel. Apart fron ttot I havo n o spociul
export kmwlodgo in tho fiold of psychiatry.

Q Let us go back to tho Fuohror«s letter of 1 Septorbor 1939.
That is Dc cun ant 1630-rS, Pres ecu tier. Exhibit 330. I will road it to
you, alttough I an quito suro you aro vory familiar with it. It is
dated Berlin, 1 Sopteefcar 1939.

"Roichsloitar Bouhlar nto Dr. 5rr.ndt aro charged wi^.h responsibility
of enlarging tho authority of certain physicians to bo designated by
nano in such a rxmner that persons, who, according to human Judgement,
aro incurable, oan, upon a nest oareful diagnosis of thoir condition
of siokness, be accorded a mercy doath*"


5 Feb-E3B-2—5-Lesser (71)
Court Bo. 1


(Sigr^d) "Adolf Hitler"

This pro gran wag pot Jirltod to tho incurably insane, wcs it?

A It was stated in its content that in the case of a verdict of
incurable disease, nercy death oould bo granted. I do not know whether
you have Just nentloned insane patients. All I heard was patients.

Q That is the point I an raking, Herr Brandt. The ordor Itself
dooe not say "incurably insane patients" but Just "incurable porsons."

A Ir.curablo persona, yes, I sec.

Q And I therefore put tlio qx ostior. to you that the progran was not
linitod to insane persona, ..as it?

A To begin with it was rot a propor progran at all. V.hat I con¬
sider to bo a progran is an exact ruling on tho Unite id fair, which
people wore to bo loalt with in this _atU-r. It was generally loft opon
Just by using tho word "pationts" without quoting nudburo or typos of
illnesses. Without that thoro was a lafiidto lidt irposod in this
ratter. Since tho word "patients" is usod *Jds also entails tho possibi¬
lity to deal with inaar.o jationts within the franowcric of tide outhn-
nasia and to roliovo then of the dogroo of illnoss they r.ra suffering
ftan. Tho affair ana designed for ircano patients, sush as T«Jj at e
later stago, on collaboration with a*. Linden's oorroeponding depart¬
ment ir. tho Idnistry of Interior, carried out later. Individual oaaoS
of individual pationts waro not insano did occur and did notu-
ally cone to ry knowledge. It did not ocno to ry knowledge on the
other hand that they worj sub j jetod to euthrnoaia, ’Je'rr&c thoro con¬
cerned generally with applications coring frea patients cr fron their
relatives thorn elves, which either wont to tho Chancellor-/ of the
Fuehrer or wore dealt rith by tho : Inis try of the Interior or son© other
agency which transmitted thee thoro, in such a case oeuhler's department,
incidentally, one individual case dealt with by so which cano to
cur clinic for observation. Generally speaking, those pationts wore
enabled to go to a sanitarium cr some other institution.

- 2h71 -


5 Fobruary-4t-D JG-3-l-Blak lo y-PM
Court K>. 1.


Q : Now, Kerr Brandt* lot's got clear at the beginning
that wo don't want to bo quarreling about the use of the
vords "ccthcnasla program. “ I am going lb continue to say
■program*; and I underatnni that you disagreed with that
use of the word. 35t I think we understand Chat we mean.

So lot's don't consume time arguing about Chl3 triviality.

How, are you ready to 6weor that only income oorsons,
incurably insane peraons, were subject to ouUtonaela in
spite of the broad Fuehrer order hero which aaya that
outhrnasla can bo applied to any incurable person whothor
insane or dtherwiac?

A: Yea, that la preclaoly what I wish to express
boco.uso of tho individual cases which I Know about bolng no
more t.xxn four or fire as years wont by; but in rogard
to tnoso oaaoG I auat say that outhannoia wno not oarrlod
out and there were no corresponding authori tat ions coning
through*

0,1 You made a consldorablo point of tho humanitarian
notivo in relieving these peroons from pain and sufiorlng.
Thoro is nothing in this lotter whloh limits tho applicability
of euthanasia to those porsons wro are suffering pain, is
there?

A: If I wore to read through its text, I prooa.ely
wouldn't come across that >x>ri, r.o.

Q: Veil, I suggest to you that you couldn't swear
to this Tribunal that tne program was limited to tho persons,
insane or otherwise, sufforlr.; severe pain, could you?

AS We weren't concerned with pain in tho case of
tiiooo insane patients. We were concerned with their
condition, their entire condition, their mental condition.

It isn't tint stupidity or being demented is a painful affair


2472


5 Pobrtxcry-K-DJG-S-S-Blakijay - PM
Court No. 1.


It is dcf .ctivenoss of thi mental structure; and it is
cou. octea with the disintegration of a nan's personality;
and, of course, those people because of tie disintegration
of their personal structure vero included in t! t program
which you have Just described.

Veil, I an 6ure that we all rcalito tha t, Herr Brandt;
but you had made auen a considerable point of tho huainltnrlan
r/otlwo of relieving tho patient from subjective pain and
suffering; and I'm putting it to you that thore aro a la.rge
numbor of persons who cen be classed a.s insane who arc in
fact porfootly happy poople. Isn't that true?

A: I don't thin* that an insane person is a happy

•

hunan olng, nor do I think that the life of an inor.no
person, considering the circumstances under which it pro-
groosoo, is something which is wlthlr. the keeping of human
dl jnlty. Thcco are considerations end trains of thought
with which ono will have to grapple again and again. Ur.dor
oortaln circumstances this may be :iothing but an avgunont with
wo vds; but the fact of the condition of ouch p..tionto and tho
fact of a condition unfit for the continuation of llfo —
that is the decisive factor. In that connection tho question
by She psychological burden which socoone will havo to bear
who is, for instance, suffering fi*oc t..o condition of
depress ion.

Q: Of courso, if you trso the Justification, tho
moral Justification, on relieving people from pair, and
suffering, you ernsjo that it la both consistent with that
nigh 3Dral principle and the wording of this Fuonror
letter to ap,ly euthanasia to so-called hopeless cases of
t. bcrcaiosls or cancer or syphilis and what not; isn't that
true?


2473


5 February -lU>JG-3-8-Blakley-?K
Court No. 1.


A: That Is not possible. I have already said
earlier to Dr. Froeschmann and I ccphaslzcd it yesterday
that as far as the status is concerned it cannot be

considered a burden and patients v:ho are still in a

%

position to ba helped should be holped. The burden which
is after nil nothing but a burden to the budget must not
undor any olrcuastcncos fclny a pert. That woe'1 be
sad condition. It is a end condition in nil olvlllzod
8 tat os that they do not raise tho coney md tho^fund
osncntlal for this purpose, both, I aeon, for the supply
and tile welfare of such persons who aro worthy oC such cere
in insane asylucs. On the other hand as to cr.ro for
tuberculosis patients, I should dislike to see thoco
pcoplo included in tho euthanasia program undor any
clrcunatanoes. It is a principle and most docisivo
difference which play a part horo. I have told you onrlior
that euthanasia can only play a part in tho interest of tho
patient hi©eolf and undor no circumstances must any other
lntorcot, auiy dthor facotr, be of significance in this
connection.

If I apply this to conditions in Gormaiy. then bo fore
tho war wo spont


2473 (a)


Court So. 1


throe hundred fifty niUicn fc • th^gg asylias, >*iph In com¬
parison to other states fj t largo .u- of non. in £}# 28 2

total expend!turo it i; , s .f -on consider :hat three fzpdrod fifty

-11 Ilo na a day went for t*o pursul » ©a. t •- "r, or -f you ocascro it
rith tho coot of a battleship, t*' ± U ©lout the sico. These funds,
this equipment, and the cay f • the 3* »et -ry personnel ic aoaet&ng
v*ioh overy well organised tU a ough to riig$#

Q !fow, this Fuehrer levtar ctoo* • »t e«; tf at tog patient has to
bo doonod to an early death, dcos itt

A Ho saya that if tho situation is x.st ari&ttlly Judged by tho
dcotor .then t!w nercy dev.tho oar. bo granted. In the otoo of incurablo
diseases, any other quoctions wldoh right havo ,nlay»d a part in this
ooimootion aro not dealt with in ..-rlting in this 1o.too| but appropriate
lnstruotions issuod by the Fuehrer to Bouhlor or to re in order to have
thoo paaaod on to Bouhlor for Us carding out rare, c.*oalt with in that
natter.

Q ' oli, : don't tfairfc you aasawsi sr luottion. I A*s put
it in another my. Tho outhanaoia progrer - not licitol to persons
who woro downed to die an early death, «s it?

A I don't knar whether you aro applying tho words early
death to tho ago of the parson or the condition of hi a illness, It
right havo boon possible — it was possiblo that pationts voro included
in tho pregren who under certain circumstances right have boon able
to live another two or three years; bit it was not tho easo that with
rofcronco to tho insar.o patient only the aged person ms affected.

Of importance were tho auostiojxairo and tho stage of his illnoss which
W» shorn in those details and facts.

Q Dr. Brandt, isn't it true that yen can hare a porscr. of
fifteen years who is suffering fincurable insanity cf one sort or
arothar, yot who say livo to rips cld age cf seventy-five? Isn't that
treo?

- 2Ji7U -


5 Februar7^tt-OJG-3-3-eliiaaS' (XL)
Court >fo. 1


A It3 r»at l^robatala 7% Edfht U^i^« eeptajp drcuMtanaea
heppon occasionally, cooaadcmlJyj but 1/ ^ i* insana.

It U root Inprobablo that % fie will livo to tho aeo of eevonty-fivo. I
en pretty auro that thir would be one of tho rest outstanding exceptions.
Generally


- 2Ji72i a -


6 February -IUDJ&-3-4-Blafcloy -PH
Court Nc. 1*

It uouldn*t bo the case at all. Tr.e life of lnscnc poroona
who fall 1 X 1 at on early age usually coses to an end fairly
early, too.

Q: Well, whatsis tho averngo length of tine that
on insane person spends in on asylum in Gcvmany7

As I am afraid I car. ! t tell you that, what tha nvornge
flguro is. It will depend on tho jbype of disease^ but I
ocn*t give you an average age. I'd afraid.

Q: Now, do you want the Trltunal to believo thr.t tho
euthanasia program was applied only to such porsons as in
tho Judgment of tr~- exports would die within a period of
ono yoar fir two years? Is that what you want tho Trltunal
to bollovo?

A: I boliofo that the translation into Gorman is not as
cl oar no it is nccossary for me to understand your questions.
Maybe I night ask you to speak a little ne»a slowly oo that
the interpret or can kcop the pace.

Zi I aksod you, Doctor, whether you wish tho Trltunal

J


2475


5 Fcb-24-JP— 3-la-31akloy-£K
-ourt Ho. X.

to believe that euthanasia was applied only to such persons
vho v.culd In any event die within ono or two years.

A: I can't tie cy^sclf down by saying that tho patient
effected would have alod one or two years later. Sorac of
tfcon nl = ht have died earlier; some of then all it have died n
little later, lhc decisive point was not that tho antici¬
pated year of ebatr. from tte date of their being found vice
condldorod but wnat wc6 decisive was the condition of the
patient at tho time he was being considered.

Q: Bouhlor was not a doctor, w-o he, Herr Brandt?

A: Ho, Bouhlcr wca not a doctor.

Q: Now, this lottor from Hitler says that you have
tho responsibility of enlarging thcauthorlty of certain
physicians by mao. Did you do that?

A: Those wore authorisations given to certain
aedloal offices by Bouhlor and myself Jointly.

Q: It says here to enlarge tholr authority by a-nc.

I take that to nona that you know who those people ware?

Ihcse doctors were dealt with through the Hinistry
of tho Interior, which actually had Jurisdiction ovor
those aaylua3 ard vhlch nominated them, since noitnor
Bouhlor nor I could make n survey of these asylums to this
degree, so that in fact suggestions were made by the ogoncy
concerned, who had knowledge of tho personnel under their
Jurisdiction. Afterwards, after this designation had
trkon plnco, tto authorisation was then given.

Q: Did you investigate these men or enuso any

investigation ts be made?

A: No, it was done on request of the Ministry of tho
Interior, which was the superior agency of that institution.

ft: 3ut, Herr 3r-ndt, ultimately It was your respbnslbllJ


2476


5 ?cfc-y~J?-3-la-3lokley -PH

Court No. 1.


and ths responsibility of Bouhlcr to design" t- those men
and to authorize thee, was It not?

A: With the authorization and the signing, I carried
out an order which was given oc, a task of thu soloctlon of
those rwn, I noon, "e ourselves could not carry out the
designation of those non; and In that connection therefore
we relied upon the recognized department, vhlc.. rl^v.t from
tho beginning was r.sponsible for such instbtu .ions; and wo had
to rely on then; and we did rely on then. There was no other
solution in practice. Otherwise It would have boon necessary
for ono of uc to have first of all tho management of euoh
institutes in our hands; and oC oourso that was not the
sltuc tlon.

Q: dut as a good follower of tho Fuehrer, you of course
accept responsibility for their designation, Isn't tir.t right?

A: as to responsibility for the designation of thoso
aaor., tho designation, the selection, took place through
tl.o Ilialstry of the Interior, n* through no.

Qs So If els takes were nadc In sclcotlng those cion
and thoy picked out o few reprehensible characters, you
don't accept responsibility for that? You hnd nothing to
do with It? Is that right?

A: No, I couldn't say that. I wouldn't say that I
had nothing to do with it. Tho selection did tckq place,
nowover, through an offlci'l a .cnoy; and also of courso it
was to make the difforor.ee between authorization and tho
aatftal currying out of sue*, anx-ion. authorization alono
in not the only decisive factor in the fitting lnh, effoct
of this plan. Thoro wore various cnannels which wore
instituted; and the possibility of a wrong selection there¬
fore* appeared to us to be out of tho question.


2477


5 ?cb-K_JP-3-2a-31ciley-?K
Court No. 1.


q. Now, you must hove been interested In who was
being selected. Do you recsr.bor cny of tne names of the
•people who were authorised to accord a mercy death*

A: I can't tell yo* a single one of tr.-sc nr.ncs.

Eioro weren't neny of then. There vrere chief a of institutes.
I jnvo Just rend one none, Pfannmeuller; and th n the name
Kartell played an important part. a

Q; Now, how about the nano Bonno?

A: It doesn't mean a thing at the noment.' v
He was strtioned ct Hartheim.

A: No, the name henno docs not mean a thing to no at
c.*j ..»~ent at any rate. I did n-.t learn of hin


2477 (a)


5 ?cb-K-GZS-3-3a-31akley -PM
Court Ho. 1


ft: You knew Hartheln was one of the extermination
stations?

a: In Hftrtheia there was a euthanasia institute,

yes. •

ft: I don't suppose you knew toe nn^o Christian Virth?

A: I krow him from the files. I know his from toe
files, without the Christian. I know the name '..’lrth ficm the
files. Probably ho is the some.

ft: That 13 very interesting. You reecabor'that
iir. Oorstoin la his affidavit said that Virth was running
tois Jewish extermination camp at Trebllnka. Do you

remember that?

That's how I knew the nano,
ft: You moon you know his name fron the filco of this
or.oo; you didn't know l^ls nano during t m euthanasia
program? Is that whet you neon?

h: No, I can't reoolloct having oono across this
n-no during the euthanasia program. I n u aorcly trying
to express toe fact that I know it fron the filos hero.

ft: I misunderstood you. Virth, I will suggest to
you, also voricod at Kr.rthela; :nd of oourso you don't
know the none Schumann, do you?

a: Only now fron toe files did I get to know it.

It wasn't know to no beforehand. I didn't even know that
he wte in Karthoio at cny tine.

ft: No, he wasn't; ho was at Grafeneck. How many
aon wero.authorUed to administer euthanasia? You said
there were -eryfcv. I should think that you t*>uld member
them.

a: Those were the people, presumably t n to fifteen,

I should assume, apart from individual autnorizations which


2473


5 r cb-H-SE3-3-3c-Blr-kloy -?M
Court No. 1.

hrvd boon given In connection with the Reichs Connlttco
Children. Those, of course, wero different doctors.

ft: Ton to fifteen non — well, let's see that
wc understand one mother* tforo those ten or fifteen
uon the non who actually geve the Injection In the
oxtormlrvntlon station or herded the people Into the gas
ohenborf :.ero those the ton or fifteen who wore r.uaior-*
ltod to administer

*


2476 (a)


5 7ol>4-3IS-.' J ->-3l'Jclo;*>JF
Court I


tho -ore 7 deaths, or wna th*t Heydo and "iotsche "-nd the top exports?
row, whoa are wo talking about bore?

A. In ay opinion we nro talking about these people who had authority
to carry out the euthanasia na such. They woro tho people who had to
carry out tho work of exports. Vill you repeat tfco question, ulonso?

I*a not buto that tho translation caoo through ao I'll repeat
it. I understand that you are stating that tea to fiftcon non woro -a
authorized -ctually to carry out outhnnaAia in tfco outh- -asin atationa?

A, I do not think that there wore as nany as th^t aiarltanooualy.

The total w-.a that hi£w Ono or two doctors woro working in tho cuthnnaoln
institutes who had authority; and, if I rocollect it oroporly, thcr.
the total nunbor of institutos amounted to six, so thnt this would bring
us to a total of twelve. 2 ut I also bjlievo that doctors changod so
that ono sight havo droppod out and then another ono would bo glvon
authority. At any rato, tho figuro was a vorr low ono.


3479


5

Court .to. 1


5 la avr^Utef^tU drop ctW X^^->-Jc>y«i <\'\~-'irth
went to the Beat to help with the cxurnln: ticn of the Jews, end
SchXuoann we-.t to tMoctorttz to help cut wit 2 i thc-mxUa wi na ti on of
the Jena, but I cn .'uriv- to knew why a acn in your position ;.ith
Vio responsibility to dc*i$nat« theso non with authority to perform.
jgfumaaLa c. uld net rtnoeber the neats of !• or 15 non who were
actually dome it. You recalled cnly yesterday thrt t>-o to ficur per
cent cf the people ac.:t to a cuthanrax. at..ticn were rejected end
weren't killed. I ccn't undtrat-nd in the f. ct of au^h roaerkatlv.
naaory th t ycu rculdn't r«iuc=b..r th- iv-acs cf 10 or 15 a»n?

« I can't rcacobwr the nr ua. 1 -a quite sure thrt nene cf
those pcoplo ccnccrned Here sent to the Best with qy knorlt*-'. e, noithcr
for tho axtcr-dnntlcn cf the Jens nor for nay sterilisation ectivitioa.

Q Hew arny outhanr.sia stations did you visit?

A I have visited cn cnc occasion.

C ‘ h:t atetien did >cu viait and *>h«»n?

a Grrfcncck. This aust have been cn cr rbcut the beginning cf
1910. It vos r t e tiae when the first rdainiatre.tiv*. act up there had
begun to oyercto in connection — thcae ..ere dvpr rt-.cnta instituted
in ccnnecticn with .Ministry cf tho Interior. It v: a bee-use cf thcau
registrar offices rnd news which hrd cc.ac frett there, there had been
cbjocticna cn Bcuhl^r'a pr-rt right free: the werd ".jc" rnd on :ny cwn
part reg.-rdinf the secret procedure connected therewith, rnd I desired
to bo once acre- informed abcut the prcblens cn h.-nd ana sc I went
there on cno ccceaicn rnd sew it t'.ex-c nysclf. Apart fre . thrt I heve
not visited nny other cf these institutes.

Q So ycu w»r.t tc Grafcncck in 1910; dc ;tu r-iuaber whet month?

A I crr.'t tell ycu exactly which aonth it v.r.s.

Q hell, was it the first p-rt cf thv year or the sccend pert
of the jut r?


2180


Q. Now, how rany observation stations did you visit?

A. I didntt visit any. I only went to Orafenodt",

0

Q. I want to understand this, Grafonock was a outhanasia station
that is whero the poople were actually kiUod. I now put tho quostion
to you, how naigr observation stations did you visit, which is a placo
they stopped and they kept th«= boforo they went to tho euthanasia
stations?

km I have novor visitod an obeorvation station, noithor an ob¬
servation station nor a euthanasia station, I havo


21,81 -


5 ?cb-:>5-PH?-Kalo3-J?-p-e lA.
Court I


only boos 9r,aefncck is ill.

q. gov, you h-re testified that this letter of Hitler was pro-dntod
aoaotluo in October 1939. 1 September 1939?

A. That is right. *

q. The day Poland was attacked?

A. ?os.

q. Vhy wr.s that done and vhat wore the conditions of pro-d-Hing the
lottort

A. It vob attempted to express that thio decroo va£ the fora in
which during tine of Var ouch an euthanasia progrtm could proporly be
carried out aftor the war. at loa.t that wan the interpretation of nine
at a lator stage aftor I hoard about conversations between Dr. Lannoro,

Conti nad the Taehrer. At n later stage tho progran was to bo defined in
another fora and continued. The roa.ons wore of forvor dooireo. tho
reasons for pro-dating of that,

q. I find thio a noot curious conception that euthanasia oonohow in
peculiarly applicable in a ti-.o of war rathor than of poaco.

A. It vaa r.oant to bo continuod in tino of poaco. I ®aid yootorday
that before that it had apparently boon quite clear through tho discussion,
on tho part of thn Ministry for tho Interior and Dr. iA-.ncre, and oven
boforo tho Var a-roprlato preparation:* had boon nado. but at that tino.
at tir.t nonont aooarontl7 theflo preparations had not reached such a otago
of formtion and also apart fron this in 1935 Hitler appears to have
said thr.t in tho introduction of such a Law and carrying out of such a
euthanasia progmn. it was said by bin to bo r. good thing for the begin¬
ning of tho Var. He also added that he was quite clearly of tho opinion
that in tho Var tho introduction of ay possible objections raised by
tho Church would bo tho easiest, and as far as that is concerned tho datin/
and signing of this decree is in ay opinion to bo interpreted why it wn*
signed on 1 Soptonbcr 1939.


2482


5

Court X


q . you undented I an not argui:* vith you that thi. roallvas
a ‘Sax uo-^oro. I Just thiak thoro is sorvj fundft-.onV’l disngro-^ont
tetv0 c= u. a. to th. rowon. !« «. carried out during the «ar«l«.

I an .ugj..tln* to you It »a. carried out during -.rtlno In order to
•1 Inina to th. hind of .o-colled .orthlo.. H'«». to il r ho^ltnl.
for 00 ..IM. woundod .oldlor., to rdre noro doctor, and nu«o. avallatlo
for tfco caro of tho voundod soldlors, to ^


2482 (ft)


v


5 ?oly.a-5-2fy-PFP-M'*-o'^>J?

Court I

•lialnnto tho noce*ait7 for the care a-.d feeding of tboeo vorthloas lives.
Iac't that tho reason that tho orogran wae initiated at tho beginning

of tho 'far?

u Regard lag tho quoatior. of food, tfcis oxprcaaion new used by un
■uaoloaa oatora*. lot no aay this to bogin with, if wo take into
coneidemtion 60 aillion population for ainplc reasons of arithmetic, and
then toko into


2483


5 Jan IiT-*S-5^>-BHWblo7 (IL)

Court '.a. 1


oorai deration 60 million patients, and this work concerning thfa, then
this means nothing further than the maintenance of these 60 nillion
people, or 6 to 6 calories per head of the population per day, and I
an sure this would not bo ^ decisive factor in the condition of the war,
and another consideration if this had been decisive this certainty would
not have remained stopped at a tine when the food situation beginning
in 19U2 was infinitely core ooqxLlcated, and certainly wo would^have
restarted the program, and it would not have been dropp -until the
end of the war. I thiric these mat be decisive arguments speaking
against the conception of the "useless eater" and gaining space for pa¬
tient*, and gaining medical offices nay have boon a consideration which
was acre of an administrative nature* It is not, however, decisive

0

since this gaining of patients* space 'n amount of 60,030 bods did not
play and would not have played an important part. During the war wo had
up to a million wounded, apart from ordinarily sick pooplo, so that
60,0C0 would be a very small percentage of that. In fact tho gaining
of a corresponding number of beds oould not be oxpoctod opart from tho
firal gain of Just a few thousand. Since tho further arrival or
accruing of insane persons T.-a a taking placo at a very rapid rate, such
considerations as I havo Just described wore in any caso without any
inter oat whatever to the medical tain concerned — to tho doctors con¬
cerned. Ho was only concerned with his patients, not v th ooonordcal,
political or administrative considerations.

Q. Woe it not also decided that those persons able to work should
not be killed?

A. The ability to work has nothing whatever to do with these
euthanasia or not euthanasia* I pointed out yesterday the question
•ontained a statement not concerned with the extent of the program but
\in order to find an expression there. Just as it oan be in the case of
a criminal person, a question of th© mental condition of the person him¬
self. We are r»t concerned with the process of the work of a few years

— 2ij£U —


5 Jar. l»7-4*-$^Lt>-eaMfeloy (IL)

Court Ho. 1

t’.iere.

Q. Well, I taka it than that the questionnaires were filled out
on those able to work as well as those unable to work. Is that right?

A. We were not groomed with the question of subdividing then
into people capable of work and people not capable of work. What is
significant ia the reaction of the person to this treatment and the re¬
sulting s ta taient as to how and to what octant he is capable of work,
how he can rx>rk and what he ia capable of doing, in order to form a
pioture about cental activity and ability to ooncentretc* and


I


- 2U$


5 ?cVK-?JC^&-lcv-»aloy-JP
Court I


la ordor to for= a picture of that and in order to find out to what oxtont
tka uorsnn fcSnsolf can ho a possibility, soon fron that ooint of view.

you fcrve told us ttet twice already. I wish :-u would pay closo
attention to tho formulation of nw quostion, and answor it profcrably in m
fcriof aonnor. Tou said that consideration of ability to work all ployed
„ jrrt insofar as a diagnosis of tho patior.t's condition is concornod. I
then, put tho question to you whether or not indlTiduols tbaKdid not fill
out questioanairos wore fxun both tho. o able to wort and those unable to
wort, and I as asking you for a -vos* or "no" answer'.

A. Tho quostior. whothor aonoono is capablo of wort or not can bo
-nswored with a •yos* or -no*. I can answer it "yoiT or "no", if you put
it separately with the ™ napablo of wort and tho ono not capablo of wort.

Korr Bmndt, you invo stated th-t there arc questions to bo answer
od in tho questionnaire which concorn tho ability of tho non to wort,
tho patient to wort. It baa to bo stated whether ho can wort and if so
what ho dees. vow. you state that thnt quostion is not nut in thoro for
tho purpose of ronoring fron possible outhunasia those -hlo to wort,
vhilo applying euthanasia to thoso unable to work,

A. I understand that.

q. i then put tho quostion to you that quite noart fron tho content
of tho questionnaire was not required that the questionnaires in tho
asyluro bo coalotod and bo filled out on those oano persons in tho c.ylun
whs wore ablo to wort -.8 well ns thoso unablo to wort. It is ninply a
question upcnvMt patients did they co^loto questionnaires, and I hnro
secured no answer.

A. Upon persons who for at least 5 years had boon in the Institute..

Q» How w-s that again?

A. Tho questionnaires wore filled in regarding patients who had
boon in the Institute for at la*.t five years. And in reference to that
it is possible that patients had questionnaires filled out about then who
were perfectly capabl. of wort, patients likewise who in no way wore


5 Tob-Ip-S-lo-I'.oloJ'-J?

Court I


lnciaiod 1= tho pror«u 7. rocol.od to.tructionc

-.0 ud questiomlroo to tho ««clo. coccornod ov.r7 .1«

dot-Jl. r.bo« jntiosts .ho hr.d boon ir. th. IMtlWto. for « loo.t tlTO

70 a-ro or :aoro 9


2486 (a)


5 ?ob-JS-?JO&-?o-K«loj-JP
Court i


Yov, i think ve arc ateut to got the answer. You state then
that questionnaires were completed then at least or. ono class of por3ons
who had been in the asylum at least five years, and that quostionnairoo
wore fillod out on such persons irresponsivo of ability to work?

A. Yos.

Q. veil, I trust you soe the importance of the question, because
if la fact the requirement was that questionnaires bo


2567


5 Feb h7-&4l^-W-U&oy (IL)
Court Ho. 1


filled out only on those persons who had been in the asylum for five
years* and those who also were unable "la work then there -ight be a
serious question as to whether or not really ability to work was not a
very great and compelling consideration in the applicability of the program
to insane persons. I don’t get a clear pioture of Just what you did to
get this euthanasia pro gran in operation, and what y«- aid after it was
functioning; would you go over that Jus - briefly now please; v.hat did
you do to get the program under way and what did you do aftor it was
functioning, briefly and concisely?

A I had nothing to do with the putting into effect of the program.
The carrying out of this program was headed by Kr. Bouhler. In fact
during that period I eyself, with a few exceptions caused by different
oircumotanoes, such as tho Fuelirer being in Borlin, I did not cono to
Berlin aysoif Airing ail the years, and in 19U2 I was tied down in the
Fuohrer 1 * Headquarters where I hod no deputy for tho carrying out of the
program and preparations, and which wore nontionod oarri out by Bouhler
in collaboration with Undents agency. I sysolf was prosent during Just
a fo.: conferences hold by Bouhler but my function was to be able to
inform the Fuehrer repeatedly fron the point of view of general medical
considerations regarding ary special oausos, any special events which
might occur in tho carrying out of the rogroa and in connection with
which it might have appeared necessary to Bouhler to have the decision
of the Fuehrer obtained. Apart from that it was ty task as designated
earlier to authorise, together with Bouhler, the doctors’ selections for
the program. On the chart, which is hanging behind mo, it is apparent
in cy opinion Just how Bouhler, through the corresponding channels of
orders, authorised the carrying out of the euthanasia program, and how
from that the channels load off to tho agent concerned in the ministry of
the interior. i$r function within the carrying out of that program was
individual, not in any way in existence apart from the a thority, the

authorisation which I have told you about.

- 21*68 -


5 Fob U7-4WttA-5-lI>-aaloy (H)

Court !k>. 1

Q ”*11, you hare spent considerable tine tolling us what you
didr.it do. The only two things that I think 70U said that you did do
were to assist 3 ouhlar in 00operation with Guertler in designating the
doctors to perfora •


- 2U33 a -


5 ?3b 47HMUA-^-2Mial©y I=z)

Court 7o. 1


the euthanasia, pad pl»o g$ pctinr. es somethin-.: ia the nature of

* • • * * * * *

e liaison am tetveen the ^uehre? red Bouhlor cad the rest of the
proijrra, Is that ri^htt

.v T'-.-t w-s la fp^t =y pcturl fuactlor. ia that connection, vith
one differerxe though, thpt I did not designate, I did not select
the doctors. I .-eve then the authority, the selection pad desi.rne-
tlon erne fron the Mnlster of the Xntorlor, ^


243g


5 Jeb-K-GSS-’r- lc-;>loy (31)

Zsjjt To. 1

\ I take It that although you and Bquhlcr were charged with the
responsi dlity for this pro-ora, you ir. feet, do not rccept thnt
responsibility her before this Tribunal?

a ?or the carrying out of such, no, end I ni ht cnll youx a.tten-

%

tion to 3ouhler's letter to the Xinirter of Justice, Guertncr, in which
he strtes quite clecriy he alone was responsible for the carrying out
of the pro crm. I, nyself, could not h-ve been responsible for the
carry in*: out of the pro.-rra since durin. the period this pro,jrre. wns
running, durin tlie period of I 9 UI, I vra in rncti\c end novor in
Berlin, with v.o exception of a. few days and wr.a working in an offico
rv*y fro.: Berlin cr.d it vra never planned la this connection thnt I
should be at the hord of the pro-rm, or it*i cexryin : out or that I
should supervise it fror the point of view of_n nedicrl expert, I
could not hrvo been in control because I was not «, psychiattic expert,
but a surgeon,

* Vo IT, now Horr Brandt, euthanasi- involves a considerable nodicrJ.
problsa; how could e layc*n like Bouhler fortulnto r.ll theso piano to
carry out the prolan, r rr.tY.tr elaborate structure? It aeons to no
that poaaibly vou nust h^ve conferred with Bouhler and Jointly ronch-
cd aono understanding of the nechanics of the pro rrea, the question¬
naire, the fora of the questionnaire, the places %fcors euthanasia was
to be carried out and a. whole host of probleno which your ?uchror
surely nust nave had sone interest in?

a These natters which you have Just nentionod were principally dit-
cussed botvoi-n Bouhl'r and Or. Linden’s dcprrtner.t, rnd not with oc;
becruse firstly, I have no knowledge as to the nwiber and situations
of these -sylur.c, end secondly, the interest, - perhaps that is not
quite the ri ht word - should I say perhaps ny p rticipntion in the
ratter va B co-ncctc-* with tcnerrl nodical problems, but not special
redical jTOblcrtB, which the chief expert or ox-erts had dealt with and
v«re dealin .with. I hr 4 said errIter thnt I bad not actually
participated in the conferences dealing with those setters, end in


5 ?rt 7“ loy

Co’irt "o. i


fret the r.uthorixla of the nedicrl croer.ts too v.'j carried out hy
Bouhler r-nf not hy ne.

IrT PTSIDZT: “rl'-ucrl vill he in recess.

(- recess v»e trleen.)


2“^0 n


5 Feb L7-d«IfcA~4-l-ttachca
fccurt Bo. 1


THE ILJLSKlLi The Tribunal is egein in session.

CROSS KI w >n'iUTIOH - Resumed

EY Ifi. JfcH.JCY:

Herr Erandt, before the reccos we uoro dealing with the question
cf ysur responsibility in the operation of the Euthanasia program. 1
have und or steed your tcstla-'y to b«. to the eff-ot thrt if my criraos
war© ccrsattcd ir. the operation cf Euthmeoir, then ycu were not rospon-
siblt for th'.ec- crim-s _nd h-vo bo-n frlacly chrrjwd ir. tho indictment; •
is th-t a correct conclusion?

a I did ;ict ary whet ycu htvo srld Just new. i.cn?rdL'^ to .:y
opinion, ry fcraul'.ticn was a different cne. I ahculd like to sa; thrt
within this Euthanasia proeren, eriaes wv.ro excluded according to zy
opinion end thrt cno hra to differentiate basically h s-er. tho lopal
program rs d:find by the decree end ril cth-r setters which have
happened in Lublin with stcrilizrticn end tho li-F-13, »W.oh has Act
been nont.cncd y:t. kll those things hevw nothing rt ell to do with
the Euthmraic progress and ero ir. no way or. the ocuo at died rnd human
level ao nra defined by thn decree.

t Kerr Frendt, I understand ycur difficulty ir. answering tho
question. The purpose cf this question is, 1 -a asking ycu to assume
thet crimes were ccaitt.d pursuant tc the operation cf Euthmcsic. It
ia a question cf f ct whether such crimes wore cesnittvd, hut right
new, I went you to assuac that, and I ra trying to dotcmir.a who can
bo responsible fer tr.-s- cri es. 1 have understood your testimony ir.
such p ucinr.cr that it ie-ds ac tc the ccnlusior. thrt if crimes wore
committed; ycu assert ycu were net roopcnsiblc. Is that right?

.% I did net learn that cri—s cerurred within the frsnewerk of
that program. If crioes had occurred end I rssusu, thet - thon they
only hr.v; occurred at the Euthanasia station itself, but th t too ia
impossible since the prtients whe caae there cnly eisao through a number
cf exp-rta whe passed an opinion cr. them. The purpose was that rdthin
that progrra very person - and I arid thrt yesterday - that is every
phyoiden hod tc act within his cwr. responsibility and all physicians had

2L91


5 Feb 4?-L-k'w6-l-^hen
Csurt lo. 1


to eet Lviopcndcntly of one encth-r. If rnycno hrd ccjai-tei r criae
cn thet stc.ticn, the person concerned would bo


z.yi*


5 Feb U7w-&Jr-t-2ilc chen
Court Ho. 1


responsible icr thet crii-e personally; because IT h« h»d ccaaittod
such - crir.-. he eoxdttcd it contr-ry to the directives, which he nrc
giv-n 'a e physidhA.

3 .ell, new, Herr Brendt, pc .*rc st getting rlcng very fc at
with tile point. Let us cssu-.e thrt there w a no valid G«rsccn l'W pur-
-attinj Zuthrarain end I suppose ycu r re not ijr.crar.t cf the fact that
«\ number of Gcrscrn ocurts hrve ilrecdj sc held; I t;i: > it v*.ct you deny
r.v.cnai'oility fer the cp-r.- lien, the functioning of the Euth/uicadr
erorrru cr. th_ raauxpticn th.-t it crirunrl; y.\ rr ..o?

r. S:v. execution - a not etrrivd cut ca & criainrl pre- j-.n. I
yest-rdc: at Ud whet re-aons the physician hed fer hie canu,jpticn thr.t
it > a r 1- '1 x. sure ad in r^kiiticr., during the -.ntiro ti jo tida
prorr-x ..ra c-rrl-d ut, it w: a hmiled in such c nenner th-t uYcryeno
had to o.vunc - if he prrticipcted i . the execution - t! t it vna r
l-6'l pr-jr.-. Ir. *• letter fret Guentler t< Fcuhlcr, it i» arid thr.t
there non he no l.;,'’- coqjlrinta. I s-v tria letter h.re cn paper,
tut it Justifies .sy cpirdon th.-t :t my perit i cf tine wo, whe prrti-
cipcted i. thrt pregrrm, considered it .-a .-naclutely lugd sc th.t tho

• xccutio n cl t crime during ita execution crane t bo considered.

*

q .ell, y.rhrpa you would be willing to give ua tn cast, r to the
question if vo exclude your responaijility; would ycu acy thrt if tho
presrex n s cri.~r.rll: ccrri-.d cut thrt the docecaci Hcuhlcr could bo
found rospciutiblc fer thr.t?

« Thw entire vroprer., rnd I aist repeat thet, nr.a net consif'orod
by Bcuhlcr; Beufcler ’ » of the cane cpidcr. as 1 was, njsoly, that tho
Suthgncair. pro^r;i vra net crirdn'l. Certainly if he hed r.asunci thrt
it wr.a crlnLnrl, he wculd net hrve p-rticipfted in it any xerc than
anyone else.


2L92


5 ?eb - •- 7JC-7—1-”inabuck (3K)
C 7o. 1


3ida*t you receive reports on the op^ption of the prormat
a Vo reports were nrde ns far ns I know, rnd I therefore did
not receive any reports. v

I thought you stated that part of your responsibility, as B^rll
n It was, was to report to the fuehrer about the operation of thie
pro Tan. How could you report to the fuehrer If you didn’t receive
any renorts or otherwise gain knowledge of »*r.t vra ;;oln' onT ^

A I hr/ these first discussions together with Bouhltr and tho ?uch-
rf r. When you said report I thought you r.car.t a. writte’h surcarry and
strtenent, and I then said that no such reports were erde. As far os
directives wore concerned, all of then were £ven orally nn A a report,

I understood n jrocrly report of soce report ..Ivon ct n certain period
of tine about the results of the execution, and I wanted to say that
such reports were not ar.de rccordir..* to ny opinion. I havon 1 1 rocoiv-
cd rny, end f certainly haven’t seen any.

* ‘/ell, how dotailed knowledge did you grin of the actual function-
in.: of tho pro xan and ifcnt reports did you nrJco to the luohrort
a With roferenco to the raanner of the exocution in the forr. of
reports the Juohror was not infomed by u. Whenever any oxcoptionnl
questions r.roso md whenever soeothinr inportnut croo up which Bouhlcr
didn't want to docide on his own initiative, ho oither aporonchod
Hitler hi ns o if personally or he ashed ao to report the natter to
the Juehrer and- then Inf ore bin in turn.

V‘ What wn:i the arturc of soue of these special probleas that Bouhler
didn't want to trhe responsibility fort V e rd.-ht be interested in
those.

A ^or instance, there occurred the case of the children, children
that w c .-c seven or ei-'ht years old rnd were to bo indudod.in this
Eeich Conaittco natter or whether they wore not to be included, or tho
question crao up whether they vert too old, and in individual cases


such natters were reported.


obot


5 7 mb -iWJJC-7-WTinrback (3S)
Court ~o. 1


Vith reference to the euthanasia program there were administrative
technical questions vhich partly were because of ^oznpleiniu- lettore and
ones that started after Septeeber 19 ^, end then we* were also concerned
witb letters that c*=e (rdz the church, it that tine I car-e into
contret with rnator 3odenschwrcrler cad I talked about that yesterday,
pnd these were the natters we were concerned with.

A

v In other words, you were sonethin.- in the nature of a trouble
shooter, were you!


5 ?eb :-rJG-7-2-5i na tuck (21)

Court To. 1


* That would 30 1 be correctly expressed is that way.. I was raked
to eoncorr. nysolf with these difficulties without bein:,- a.ble to decide
upon the rgrsclf.

^ You -or.t* mec the euthanasia of children. I take it that that
or^-naixr.tlon, tho Reich Con-.ittee for research on severe heriditnry
( iecr.sea, was :art of the whole euthanasia picture re wet up after
Eitlr’ o letter of 1 Seitesber '39; is that ri ht?

A :'o, this Reich Coscittee hr.d already been or.rrnisod beforo. It
was only up to the tlse of this decree it was not crlle\euthnna.oia
but nerely n collection of these children.! aentioned ono caso of
Lelpxlr yestordpy *.ich hnd nothinr to do with this Cosrdttec.

< Veil, that would be the actual killin' of children did not start
until nftor Eitler issued this letter of 1 Scptoabcr 1939, did it?

A It did not take pines before October sinco only fror that uorsent
on tho authorisation had b«-un; that is, frou tho tlao this wns si Tied.

v And tho extermination of these children: that is, tho authority
for doir- that, cone fror. this sree docuocnt of 1 Soptcnber 1939 addrcoo-
cd to you nad to 5 ouhlcr, is that ri^ht?

A Too.

ifc 3ov, didn*t ycu help formulate the o.uoetlonnaircs which wore used in
this >ro rnr.T

 I wns ire sent durin.- one conference where drafts of these oucstion-
r.nir s were -resented. The drafts rod Questionnaires h*.d boon prepared
by the ministry of the Interior rod we were concerned with tho question¬
naire in connection with the Reich Coir.ittec. ^he questionnaires ■
which wore .reparec for euthanasia propra , accor’’inc to py recollection,
were ar.de without njr participation. They were prepared by the expert
ih^sicir.ns w’-o ver* at the disposal of the Ministry of the Interior,
if they hat not already been ready at the Ministry of the Interior before
October.

v l*ow, you knew Mr. Eeyde axe Hr. 3iotscho, didn’t you?

A Yos.

\ Ihey wore t..e so-called top experts for Questionnaires?

294


5 Tcb V-^JC-7-3-5iw*^cic (Bfl

Courb "o. 1


A 5ot r.t once. At first It was EeydeEeyde, es fsr as X know,
left either at the end of 19^0 or r.t the betfinnin.- of 19^1 ond his
successor was iletsche.

* Did you select thee or appoint then to their Job of expertis-
In.; these questionnaires?

A Ho.

} Vho did that? ^

A I bellcvo that that wes done by tha Ministry of the Interior, but
I on sure that at the end Bouhlcr did It, -ftcr he had r-a«Io the acquaint¬
ance of the .'.ymtlccer. of the Ministry of tho Interior.

1 Did you confer with Heydc and riotechc?

A I re * -.her hrvlrv spoken to Eeyde on two or throe occasions at
the Mlaco of 3 0 uhler. 1 think two or three othor physicians voro
present and it r.ust have been at the he„-lnnin,< of the year of 19 1 #.

; Herr Brandt, whore was your offico located in Berlin?

A I had office at the University clinic in 3orlin.
i »et f Herr Brandt, you also had an offico in tho Belch Chancellery.

didn't you!

A In the putunn of 19*2 I instituted an offico there consisting of
a telephone, one roon for n secretary, mi ono assistant, which I had
there oftor I became Coucissloncr Ooncrnl. Before that tino I had no

offico in the Eeich Ch-ncellcry.

Vfhcrc was this office locatod with respect to *ouhlcr's office.

V-s it the saro floor of the building
.v It nay *ao that it was on the sacs floor. The Seich Chancellery
va, a Irr-O -mildin^ mounting to three hundred esters of lcn.-th, md
consista' of various win's and conr.ectin; corridors. There wrs no
contact ~ith the offices of *ouhler fron the point of view of space,
tho offices of Souhler were at a different wine.

i Sow, Eorr Brandt. Just how far was your office in the Beich
hanccllw-ry fro: the office occupied by Bcuhlert


5 ?■ -b-47-!:- 7 JC-7-in.-iuc* (=r)
r - irt ;*o. 1


A It vrs ncccserry to dovn tvo fli-~hte of stair6, to co through
one connecting corridor located rt tho penter of the bail&in.~ t then
-o op or.c fli ht of strir6 rad to the other «i4e| then .-.•o rloa? n
corridor for about sixty Seters


2U 95 e


5 f • V47-lv-?JC-7-4-»iafbock (SE) .
Sturt Fo. 1


nad r.t the end of t tint corridor Bouhlcr* s offico vrs located,
i Shut sound* to be about e sixty dnute trip; is it?
a To, ccrteinly not.

i Di Hcyde and Fictsdhe over these questionnaires tith you
in the early stages of the pro.^rant
A I cm not rcceober Tietschc having boon present. ?ho discussion
of the Questionnaires for the Purpose of outhonnsin only stnrtod,
accordin’ to oy opinion, vith reference to the questionnaire vhcre

X

the synptons of the disease were nentionod. Hoydo, I think, was
present r.t t.^.t tine, but 1 don't think that the qui stionnnireo wore
drafted r.t that tine. I think discussions took place after the
questionnaires had been finished rad nrlntnfclo. Vith roforence to
the contents rad th* foraulntlon of tho questionnaires, I was in no
position to participate, this was carried out by the expert
physicians theaselves.

% Aro you villinr to svtax that Hcyde or lliotscho nevor vent
over or.o of the so conpleted questionnaires and discussed thoir
din-aosio vith you?

I don't think that that has hrpoenod.

* Vhnt ordors were issued by you and Bouhlcr concerning tho
classes of persons upon whoa the ouestionnnlroo verc to be filled
out or coir>lcted in the nsjnlunsl

A If anythin.- was srid by ce duxir.: these discussions vherc I
jartlcipate', it could only have beer, concernin': the fact that tho
nodical res- -'nsibility had to play a decisive rolo rnd that tho
physician had to be quite clear about the neasuros that ho took
rad about tho nanner of his expert opinion that ho rave, and to bo
rw.-re of the responsibility rf-.ich he took. I can sry that ronorrlly
since even at other occasions vhnnever any such question arose, I
rlvryB naintained that point of viev.


Court So. I

5 ?eb 47-K-9-l-LJG--*Vtty (AJ)

q. Eerr Brandt, you either didn't understand the question or in oay

i J •

event y :u did not answer it. I assure ou were not interested in having
every so-called insane person in Gerreay fill out one of these nuistion-

aalres. Certain clesses of ceoole vara not to be considered, isn't

«

that true7

. A. There were no erceotions with reference to the filling out of
the questionnaire. Later on, of course, this chaged, but at^first the
questionnaire vara filled out hr all the patients who vjre in thooo
institutions, and then the certain prereoulsltes vara, taken lntc consid¬
eration with reference to the length ofstay in the snstitution and
the progress of the desease.

Q, Herr Brandt, suppose a ©arson had been comitted to an nsvlun
for a period f one -.onth. v as it required that a Questionnaire bo
filled out on such a person?

A. If a ©arson was in the hospital institution for one mnth,

I don't think it wne ncc.'Si are according to tv recollection to fill out
such n auestlonnaire. It could have been filled out if it in refor-
ence vo the disease itself such ao schlroohronia, epilepsy, and it w«
provided that such patients should also fill out these questionnaires,
but according to qy opinion, it was not absolutely nocesrar”.

q. Veil, that is v»-.rt I an trying to get at. I should have supposed
that there would be certrin obvious classes of persons «ho were exempt
fron the program, rnd I should further think that ••m wouldn't bother
y ;urself and so end the tine nd trouble in having oueotl'-nrairos cn-
pleted on such persons; and I have nut the question to you rs to what
orders were Issued concerning that problem. Do you kn-w or don't vou?

A. Vitfc reference to the illness I g ve no directions, and I
certainly issued no orders. he ou stionnairs were compiled according
to the possible sv^tons. There are certain os-chiatric illneor-eo which
i d not lead to such c oneeauences rs prralytica.1 diseases. In cnaeouenco
the droert physicians listed the illnesses where the:* thought that the
series c nseouences —~uld ccur aost frequently.


2497


Court So. 1

£ >eb 47-Ii-9-2-IJC rutty (AJ)

Q, Harr 3renit, suppose yM had a non-Gernan Hntiond in rn insane
rsylun for a period of thirty day*. E« had Just he-a com.itted or.d had
been thtre thirty days. Did they fill out »• Questionnaire on thnt
person cr not?

«. The pr cedure of the filling rat of Questionnaire in reference
to Gernnns or non-Gernans scde no difference at all. A ouestionnaire «po
filled out in the sane wry for a non-Goman as for n Goman. ^It «rs
not the nrinciole of natlon'lity hut it w e the principle of the illnnsB.

Q, /ai right, I dvn't thinlc you hrva rnswurod t$o Question yet.
Suoooso you had tvo oer* >na, one r Corora and '•no r non-Gorrvn who had
boon in the nsylun for »• period if thint" d»y 8 . Did they fill out n
Questionnaire on both euch oorBOna or one of then, and if s->, which
-/no?

•i. The Questionnaires were voiced uo n in the 1 are wry whether vo
were concerned with a Qorann or a non-Oemnn.

Q. I didn't ssfc you whether they vero worked on in the onn.r wny.

I naked you If they wore filled ou*. Sow la your answer that they voro
fille out?

A. According to ay rocollection, they did not have to he flllod
jut at thnt tine already, hut only at euch p oeriod when the patient
had boon in the institution for a oerftod of five years. It deocndod
on the length of tine he stayed *t the institution with reference to
the question of filling or not filling out.

Q. Herr 3rar.dt, I an not in the least hit of a hurry. I will keen
you on this etand for three days if necesrry to got resoonses to ny
auestions. I go b ck to ny hypothetical Question. Ve hrve two persons
who have been ’n the p sylun for thirty days. One is p Gemrn and one
is a non-Goman national. I ask you whether they filled out the ouesti'iv-
ru-ires on those two persons.

... .according to ay opinion, they need not he filled out. They
were only to he filled out if they had retained for mother f tit wears


and eleven nothfcs in that iastituti n.


Court So. I

5-^ < ”’-<>-9—e—LCS-Ptt? ty«*( Aj)


Q, Vary wall. Your response is that thay weren't fillJ d Tut. Y u
hr 70 testified that luthuuir yps no? arolied t' nonparr.an Hatlocals.

Is that correct? Is that yw testi-tony}

-il. %

Q. By vfcoa were euch orders issued?

A. *his vrs decreed by the 'uohrer eroretsly.

Q. Did you get the order?

... Scuhler and I received It. ‘hat occurred rt the sire tine
when thewar wounded were accepted. x

Q. And to *hon did you rad Bouhler issue the orders? r o whon did
yju oass it d-vn to?

A. -ouhler cassed cn this :rder to his own agency which workod on
the Questionnaires. The nuestlons of foreigners and wnr wounded wore
donlt with within the ..gene:* T-4. The Questionnaires of 'ftr woundod and
foreigners were not passed on for furthor working on so that a transfer
if such patients could not take nlace.

Q. Io vhon did you orss down this order?

a. I didn't receive this order for -yself, but this ouestion wr>s
reported to the fuehrer by Bouhler, and the fuehrer decidod that wf*r
wounded owl foreigners wore to be accented. I think that vre evon
before the ..goncy T-4 vrs instituted, and that neons that before any
Questionnaires wore worked uoa, and I rn sure thnt it wps even before
the tine when ridstionnaires had been oreoared because the designation
of foreigners into Questionnaires can be deduced fron that cause.

Q. Kell, you want to change ymr testin->ny and then say that ym
did not receive the order that non-Ger-an Nationals were to be excluded,
that that order v?* given only to 3ouhler, and that you did nothing
with rosoect to such order?

A. The execution of euthanasia and the execution of his orders
and directives vis carried thrtugh Yy Bouhler in his own agency, rad
it va.s r. t d'ne by ~.e. I never entered this *gency T-4, add I never
CJuid issue an:* orders to ther..


2499


Court I


S Seb 47-K—9—4—LvC-Put ty-( AJ)

Q- Sow J-J.tr erectly to vhon did Bcuhlar v«a down thlsorder that
non-Gernan Satlondi we to to eveooted?

14 -hit order, according to ny opinion, he had to trot on to
the agency which worked on that# oueetlonnalreo. I didn't atk Kr.

Bcrikltr sMt It. I didn't* ask bln to Aon h# petted tklt order el nee
ho received th t order very clearly, and I an are that he mted It on
In the tace fora at he received It. I tr os laforaod ehofit the
Interior itructure of thle agency, and I vat neither lnfcrned abo*t
the nann or how thle adnlnistratlv* eooaratus worked in detail. I can

• X

only eay that Bouhler reallv did that elnce he, I an ture, evecuted ouch
an ordor.

Q. w ejl, you are attuning that he did; that It what you r.ean to
eay. Isn't it?

*. If Bouhler received en 'rder, he -.uit have executed it.

Q. All you know It that he received the order?

A. *ee, That he received the order.

Q. "by. Herr Brandt, If thle nrogran v not to he aoolltd to non-
Gerncn Xatlonrle were auettlonnalros euboltted on Son-Gerian Hatlonalt?

A. I cm. not i ay anything about the tingle r eat one about that. If
tocrjed ei.njler to have these ouestlonnriree filled out tr* theta institu¬
tion! with the order to ert out the non-Gerroans.

Q. I haven't heard arthlng about any order to tort out non-Oornan
Hatl nols. All I kn w it that the cu;etl onnr.Iro con taint a blank label
"nationality.■ Are y*i now suggesting that orders went down to the
etyluns that they were to tort out non-Canan B*tionals?

A. So. The orocedure wrt reverted. The cuettlon -tf deciding
uoon a foreigner or non-flreignar «at not left to the institution, but at
the Central Stei on 1-4 the differentiation ws arde on the basis of th 06 ®
Questionnaires, these foreigner- rnd n.n-f-Jt'gnert, war wounded, and
with reference to these ouestl-anaires where we were concerned with war
wounded and foreigners, we keot then there while the others ware distri¬
buted.

25CO

- _.• J


5 Feb 47-X-9_5-LJG-Put ty-PM
Court Ho. 1.


caong the experts for further treatnent. In this rxmnor
It Mis made lapoaslblo that during the later procedure
the transfer of such a patient couldn*t be made possible

to an observation or Euthanasia Institution.

•


2501


5 F-b -Sy--10-1— Beard(sw)

Court So. 1

Q. Herr Brandt, do you realise that the execution of non-German na¬
tionals in this so-called Euthanasia order would have be<n criminal?

A. This killing was absolutely incentreat to thu order rfiich Hitler
gave in this connection, absolutely.

Q. In the face of yoiy testimony, Herr Brandt, I must suggest to
you that it appears to ae quite ridiculous and absurd , that you would
have put yourself to the troifcle of filling out questionnaire s on persons
who wore fren the beginning <oc<npt«d from the program, tiy did'Vou go to
that trouble? %at was the point in it?

A. Uaybc it was just a general registration. Other questionnaires
were attached to the original questionnaire; namely, the institute to
which they bolonged, end that was necessary for the purpose of statis¬
tical sumation about the cental inatitution space that was available.

Q. You r re suggesting that those questionnaires ware really some¬
thing in the nature of a survey of insane persons in Gomn<iy ; is that
right?

A. No, 1 do not want to say that. I want to say that in the proce¬
dure *en ono turnod to these institutions there wore furthor materials
necessary for adainistrativo purposes. You havo to differentiate c ques¬
tionnaire ns to the kind of illness, md the questionnaire with rofaronco
to statistical *r.to, itilch was needed.

Q. Now, HeiT Brandt, the questions.ire was designed and issued for
the sole purpose of implementing the Euthanasia Program, and I put it
to you that it is n littlo incredulous that this questionnaire would bo
completed and filled out rad sent to Berlin on a substantial group of
people as to whoa the program had no application.

A, I do not know whether you ore putting a question to mo or who-
th'T you are merely giving me ycur opinion about it, ns it came through
the translation.

r. I an asking for your concent on the opinion which I have Just
expressed. Isn't that procedure a little bit absurd in your opinion?

A. No, at this tica everything was coppressed, su-ccrizcd, as far

2502


% w

5 Feb-E^H-10-2-Eeard( sw)

Court So. 1

•s possible, and I know everybody knows what It ceans to fill in a ques¬
tionnaire. During the last 15 years we had to fill in so cany question¬
naire*, with so rany details, which had nothing to do with the original
point that it does not seea at all absurd to me that we used such a pro¬
cedure to receive additional information — additional data.

Q. "Sell, let us carry It a little further and see what happened to
the ^lestioon&ires of these non-Geraan nationals. They were filled out,
presumably all over Germany, and th<y were then dispatchod to Berlin,
correct?

A. 7*8.

Q. Now, wo have heard scao talk about Iheso questionnaires boir«
photostated; is that right ?

A. Yes.

Q. I ask you, did they photostat the questionnaires filled out on
non-Conran natio'dls?

A. According to ay opinion, no. I cto not think thoy woro furthor
marked upon, but I u of tho opinion that at the collecting point they
romoinod as thoy woro; so that no photostatic copies wore sent to any ex¬
perts.

Q. in other iwrls, at the collecting point in tho T-4 in Berlin
tho qur stionmiros were sorted out so that no non-Goman national ques¬
tionnaires wore photostated; is that ri^it?

A. I an of tho opinion that it was so.

Q. ffew, Herr Brandt, suppose I put this Question to you: Woro
any questionnaires of non-German nationals expertised? And, your answer
to that would be, no?

A. I think that it is highly improbablo that that was dona, for in
this case it would have been superfluous work for theso non-G* irons wore
executed prior to the execution of tho Euthanasia. I do not think that
any photostat".ts wore soot on fer thn purpose of expertizing.

Q. ’'ell, Herr Brandt, I sc happy that we can agree on this absurdi¬


ty, but I want to rut this oth*-r absurdity to you. You recall tho t.sti-

2503


5 ?et-Z2K-iO-3-8eard (H)
Court No. 1


rxny of lit dm Fennecke? Do 7 <>u not recall that Mennecke testified be¬
fore this Tribunal that he, hiasalf, expertized a rturtoer of no^man na-
tioMla* ques tionraires ?

A I & not r3Be=bar\hi3 to-tinony in detail, but it is quite poa-
aible that he said it. If you are tel Ting that to =e now, if thinker- •
flupua work had boon carried out in one or the other case, I an really
not clear why it was not done because it was really superfluouSj but, it
is possible, even if this expertising was carried out,^thon I an quite
suro th*t a transfer of the pationts .was not carried out, and I an of the
conviction that on the basis of this procedure such foreigners wore ex¬
cluded. I do not know with reference to what period Kennocke spoke, and
when he roceived such questionnaires for expertising, but naturally 1
krcw such expertizing had no senso whatsoever.

Q Well, I think your Attorney will agroo with the statenent that
•tennecke testified concerning the period froa 19U0 to 19U-. How, Witnoss,
you apparently wore nistakon whew, you said that those questionnaires by
non-Goraan nationals wore not photostatedj and you apparently also wore
mistaken when you stated that the questionnaires of non-Oonxm nationals
wore not oxportiaed. Now, just exactly where was the safeguard in this
program which made it inpossible for these non^oroan nationals to got
transferred after those questionnaires had been expertised?

A The safeguard could only hare been with the central agency in
the T-h. It was not possible at any other a E ency as far as ny opinion
goes. Fron there the order was issued that patients wore transferred
through the office of Lind*; and on the other hand, the transport dir¬
ectives were given froa there, sc this information nust have boon ini¬
tiated fron T4i, aM there the separation between the Osman and non-
Geman wac aado.

Q 3 ut you, yourself, do not know exactly where that sorting out

of non-Goraan nationals took place, do you?

A », I dr not krwr whore it took place. It is qy conviction that


5 r-b.Ui-lC-A-iie ird-3Cr
Court ho. 1


it could only h v. ta:.en place at the central ageaey because oily there did

ttw ou -stlonrvxiros arrive with the designation •’foreign", and only there

did they hsvw t. possibility to separate these questionnaires, Gtraana and

• •

no.a-Ge naans.

And, th t ■ *os boforo the questionnaires w-re photostated; was If
not, Herr Dr .ndt?

A. According tc ay opinion tn t occurred before th. questionnaires
were photostated. Th- judgment rad -xpj-tixing of those questionnaires was
superfluous and foroi«{n-rs were to be excluded. x

Q. If you do ;ot h.’.oe exactly wrwrv the G-mans aid non-Ceraan*
sorted out, hcM c a /ou swear to this Tribunal that non-Gemans nationals
Were not actually tnnsf-rr -d to a tuthnnasia, SttionT

A. A guarant-e .;ich enables n. to cay th t is th* order which was
given to Douhl-r v.rv cl. j v, and w.iic.i I ac quit, certain X executed. I
think it is quite out of the que&ticn that when he r-ceived the ord.r to ex¬
clude foreign.rs that A- shnuld have t.u-. included.

“. But, that is an aasuB*tlon on pour prt, Hut Brandt? Is that
right? •

A. I cannot r e t it in any other a-nner than 1 h v- Just »-id it.


2505


5 Fob Irf-^ATD-il-l-Blnklcy (FJC)

Court I

Q Now, Horr Brandt, vc have talked about those questionnaires and
th. classes of persons about whoa they woro fillod out; and you have
testified that it made no difforcnco whether a nan worked or not; that
they filled out tho questionnaire on hin. You further said that it mado
no difference whether he was a Gorman or a non-Goman; tluro was no dis¬
tinction made between tho two and quostionnairos woro fillod out under the
sane circinstances for both classes of persons. Is that right?

A I said that it was ny opinion that it was so.

Q I want to show you nor Docunont ID-825. This is Prosecution Ex-

*

hibit 358. It appoars on pc go 216 of the English Document Book, Number lh,
Part 2. Horr Brandt, I want you to turn to page 3 in that document whore
it says up at tho top, "Instruction Leaflet." Do you find page 3 of tho
original, Horr Brandt, where it says "Instruction Loaflot"?

A Yoa. Yos, I havo found it.

Q "Instruction Loaflot. Head carefully before filling out tho
quostionnairos."

A Yos.

Q There was an instruction leaflet cont to tho asylums, ’.fas there
not, advising then how to complete those quostionnairos?

A Yos.

Q And this instruction loaflot tells then upon which petionts tho
quostionnairos aro to be completed, doosn't it?

A Yes.

Q Lot no road to you the first paragraph: "All pationts are to bo
enumerated who ( 1 ) arc suffering from tho foil erring illness-s and cannot
bo ocployod, or for mechanical work only, plucking or similar work, in tho
institution."

Notr, Horr Brandt, doosn't th:t instruction say quito clearly that
those persons who suffer from tho illnesses enuonorntod but who can be
enployod, who can work, aro not to bo enumerated or aro not to have
quostionnairos filled out on than?


2506


5 Feb. A?^.7D-ll-2-31rkley

Court Nr. 1


m


I leek at it in the following tray. These persons had tc fill in
the questionnaires when they tier* afflicted tdth those diseases and,
reforrir.; t: Paragraph 2, when they had been in the institution for five

years.

Q Sow, Herr Brandt plot's net \ley with cno another. Ycu can road
the German language; and 1 den't -.tent ycu tc sake a st' -aaent which is
net true cn the face cf the document. New isn't it true that Parsrraph 1
and Parc roph 2 are mutually exclusive? Isn't there the word %:r" be¬
tween Paragraph 1 and Paragraph 2?

A Yes.

q *11 right, lot's forgot the answer ycu wore about tc give and
divert our attention to Paragraph 1. Doesn't it state thcro thr.t quest¬
ionnaires ero tc tc filled cut only or. theso per sc ns whe have the enumer¬
ated illness os and who cannot bo employed, or fer mechanical work only,
plucking and similar work? Isn't thr.t whet it ssys?

A Yos, thet's whot it srjrs thorc.

q Then ycur testimony wns quite incorrect thr.t employment or
ability tc work ployed no pert in the euthanasia prefrra oxcopt insofar
as it permittod a diagnosis cf the patient? Isn't that right Horr Brandt?

The question cf cut : ut of work rs such is net listed because cf
the offoct of the work tut is listed in order to Jud t - tho health of tho
patient end condition cf tho patient. If a patient is in c situation
where ho ccn work in an institution and work in factories, cs is scao-
tincs tho case with p<xple with epileptic disease, it shows thr.t ho can
under nc circumstances to s: severely ill that it would warrant his fall¬
ing within the frenew, rk cf this ev anasia program. Therein I do nut
sco an intensification; but I see in it a safeguard in that the people
who wore nly mildly ill but who wore still in need cf the institution
should bo excluded. It has, however, nothin:* tc do with what tho patient

actually puts cut in the form cf work.

q No*, Doctor, yn» don't seriously sug^ust that you cannct have
-ersens very severely ill, incurably ill, of the diseases hero listed, yoi
who ere ehlc tc perfero seme work; end ycu are trying tc insist tc this
Trihunal that ycu


5 Fob ii7HH>-ll-3-Blakloy (FJC)

Court I

can autcnatically state n priori that if porsons with thoso illnossos
can work then there is no justification for putting than to death. Tho
point scans to bo that if they arc afflicted with tho same illnesses
and for on- reason or another cannot vorie, then you put thus to death;
and I'n asking you ifHhen one of tho aost decisive considerations is
not tho illness as listed in Paragraph 1 but tho ability of tho person
to perforn work.

A T ho ability work ocn only bo considered whan


Court Sc. 1

5 Fob i,7-^ll-Ia-5E*-aiakley


considering th^ condition cf the patient. It is quito absurd to think

cf tho output. The output cf werk as such cakes nc difference at all.

It plays nc part. Sven if it is productive, it is net decisive bocauso

whatever a non can dc in such an institution is only saall errands.

Q Uhat was it that ycu said wasn't important, tho output?

k I said that it was net important, that tho out .ut cf work was

Kt Important, and with that I understand tho calculable value cf tho

work bocauso it plays no part whatscovcr incsauch as there wo only

snail teaks being performed in such an institution. Tho output of work

con only bo ccnaiderod when ycu consider tho ability tc m?rk which in

%

turn is tho ccrviiticn cf tho patient.

Q Hew, H«rr 5randt, lot's turn bock tc the questionnaire itself,

one page bock in tho document book. Do ycu find new at tho betton whoro

it says -Kind cf Employment ••?

k Yoa.

Q Thoy apparently theught cutput was important for the diagnosis
cf the insans person bccouso it reads -Kind wf Bsployaont, nest prcciso
designation cf werk and cutput; for example, agricultural labor, Jeos
net do a:eh, cr a locksnith, good specialist; no vague str.taacnts llko
donostic work, but particular cncs, re on cleaning, and sc forth; also
state always whether .mployed continuously, froquenU; , or only toapor-
arily". Now, I think that they were very aich interested in knowing
quito a lot about the ability cf this person tc porfern work, and I
suggest tc you that they were int -rested n.t ftr reasons of -liagncsing
the cenditicn :f the patient's nir.'’ cr the nature cf his illnoso, but to
find cut his valuo as a useful werk tc the German war machine. For
instance, a locksmith, geo." specialist, whe c;uld make bcob fuses or tho
p-rts fer a V-l. Do ycu reject that suggestion?

A Yos. I think it is cut „f the question that an insono person
could be used for tho production of V-l's cr V-2«s. This ruforonce hero
in =y opinion is in connection with a reference cn page 2, nunkor 3, where
patients are listod whe were in these institutions ever since five years
bufere. If a aan is in one such institution for five y-ars, it is under
the circumstances


2509


5 Feb li7«ftll-2a-Sa —3laklay (IL)

Court '*Ca 1


quite possible that he had even beer, there for longer, and it is possible
the ho worked in such a factory and that this reference is concerned
with his output of work and as such sh old be taken into consideration

when judging the condition of the ran.

•

When it says hero, "waridng as a locksmith", etcetera, one would
havo to investigate wl»t actually was produced in these locksmith*s
•.forkahope of tha institution. It is single repair work which is being
carried out there. Partly thr.y were used for therapeutical measures.

Q Witness, what diagnostic >idgr.ont did you draw froq the fact
that one patient who had sohisophronia for fivo years could havo a good
output of alarm clocks while another pationt with the sano disease for
tlio sano poriod of tiso could =ako wood carvings, wood . ‘-oppers for
bottloa, with a reasonably good output, 'km, what diagnostic judgmont
oon you draw from thoso two typothetioal oases?

A None whotoeover.

7m Hissne:.?! Tho Tribunal will now rocoss until 130 o'clock.

( A recess was tokon until ’ 330 hours )


- 2510


5 7eb47-L'-MR-
Court No. 1


CORRECTION 3 K 3 3 T


V


%


Page 2511 io non-axist^nt.


5 Feb Z.7-A-ATO-12--1- Foster- sw
Court Ho. 1


AFTERNOON SESSION

TJ'i &.V&A:.. Th« iTibc-ai is again jV jejsio.-..

DR. SETDL: (Counsel for the Defendant Cfcerheuser): Ur. President,
the Defendant Cberheuaer ddee not f 'el well and, therefore, she requests
permission of the Tribunal to leave the court room at 1500 hours.

THE PRESIDENT: In view of the physical condition of the Defendant
Oberheuser, she cay be excused at 19W hours in accordance witft her
request.

X

KARL BRANDT (Resumed).

CROSS EXAMINATION (Continued).


BY !!R. IfeHAlXYt


Q. Herr Brandt, wa ware examining before the luncheon rocess the
instructions on filling out the qaeetionaires and no saw iif paragraph
1 that no questio'rfiaires were to be filled out on those persons who
wore capable of ecploy-i«it, isn't that correct?

A. It was done in such a way that after the first paragraph —
(Document book handed to witness)

—yea, that is correct.

C. Doesn't that seen to be a bit inconsistent with your slatwwnt


that theso questionnaires rally constituted a registration of all
insane patients?

A. That does not r«-for to all mentally insane patients but only
to those who fall within that framework. In =y opinion *-ven pati'.nts


who were si« for short periods were not raportod so that a regiatratlon
of all patients by means of thjse questionnaires was not possible anyway.

that was what I had suggested to you this
were filled out on those
to euthanasia if they fell within the
incurable, and as I recall you rejected

that sutVstion of cinia.C'"/

A. I X dcn^t I have understood you correctly at the moment.

The auestionnaires were filled in for the purpose in order to establish

251 2


5 Feb 47-A-ATO-12-l-Po3ter - sw
Court No. 1


general baaical document a, in order to register all the patients who
night be Bade available to euthanasia.’And within the group of porsons
registered in this way, and whose registration took place on the
basis of their physical condition, there were several exceptions; and
in order to determine these


2512- A


5 Feb U7-.W.3U-12-2-FC 5 ter
Court Ho. 1


exceptions certain info nation which exceeded those fields, which excoedod th>
medical fields as, for exacpla, to their beins injured in the course of tho
war, etcetera*

Q Karr Brandt, since those persona who wero afflicted with schizophrenia
epilepsy, and tho other iseases listed in paragraph 1 wero not reported on,
that is, questionnaires wore not ocnplotod on such persons if they wore capabl
of woric, I havo considerable difficulty in understanding why you Insisted that
questionnaires on Hon-Gcrsan nationals be conploted, 7/hy woror.'t they also
oxoaptod on tho sane ground that othjr persons wero exonptsd, Looauso of the
ability to work?

A In tho sane rospoot tho war invali ’.s woro not exempted olther and that
had to bo registered separately. This certainly has nothin." to do with rogard
to thoir transfer to a euthanasia institute. I tako it fron your question that
you aro of the opinion that tho roforonco on this quostionneiro that Non-
Gorr.nns are oonsidorod in this case was doeorvod to the fact in order to
rocognizo a group of patients in such a way then, under tho circumstances, to
havo then subjected to euthanasia* You have not expressod that but apparently
your question is pointin. to that faot. I have previously stated in connoction
with that tho the foreigners wore tc be excepted under all oircuostanoos. I
only want to havo thoso references understood to the feffoot that they woro
redo in ardor to bo ablo to determine thoso exceptions, that they wore not to
bo subjootod t- euthanasia, and that they wore itot to bo subjected to outhanas
porhape frr reasons of another 'Usoase.

Q •'oil, Horr "raadt, you will concoed that tb< aoat offootivo way of soo-
inr to it that Hcn-Goman nationals woro not included in tho prolan would
havo been a simple crier that no questionnaires woro to bo filled on such
persons, wouldn't you say so?

A That depends what place you believe to have the most security. Ho doub*
it can bo ar„uod and disputed if it could bo done this way or another way.

P rhaps there is evon a third possibility that nirht have been use-1. If this
proceedure was folluwod here in this forr., th:r. it certainly is in connoction


5 Fob. li7-«r^TD-12-3-Foster
Court Jfo. r


with a general re -istration about transferring th* tsnMl institutions, but
certainly ®t with any ether intentions.

Q Herr ~rar.it, by dropping down to paragraph 2 of the instructions,
isn»t it true that the questions concernin', ability to work cane into play
only when the jctlent had boon in an asylua for at loast five years7

A I only believe that this also hold in the diagnosis and Juioent bo-
causo with reference to the kind of occupation the difference was made if the
person could constantly work, frequently, or temporarily « In any cnee, it
wasonly tho possibility of contacts which a subject rd~ht have to his sur-
roun'inrs. And certainly those were not the sole roasons which led to tho
Judgment f 'la ncsos, “ut they could only be ovnluatod in connection with tho
ether statements which had been aide also.


Court I


5 Fob U7-A - 13-1 - LX - Sorrow

5 . witness, I an sicply trying to sake cloar »ho was uxcluckid
fraa tho program on the basis of ability to work, and wo see in paragraph

1 that ary one vho could bo eaplcyed was not reported on - did not have

•

a questionnaire filled out on hin. Then we drop down to paragraph 2
which says, "All patients aro to bo emigrated -to have boon in an
institution constantly for at least five years" and it is on that
category of patients that tho question of ability to work cases into
ploy. If the patient had been in the asylxso for only three y-ars and,
in tho Judgnont of the chief of the asyluc, could be craplcyed or could
work, than no rusntionnaira was filed, dut if tho saao patient had
been in tho asyltsa for rivo years or sort they hd to file a quostion-
naire and then and only then did tho questions in tho quostionnicro
concerning hility to work caw into play. Isn't that correct?

a. Tho questionnaires havo to be uruorstood that way and then
what I have Just said is correct.

*. *11 right, that is sufficient. So wu exclude, undor paragraph 1,
all of thoso who have not boon in anasylun for at least five years aid
who are able to work. No quastionniaro is filed. Paragraph 2 - if
they hva been in an osyluci for five years or core then a questionnaire
nust be filed and tho questions in the qu.sticnnaire concerning ability
to work are filled ir.. Mew then, cn tho questionnaire under the question!
doaJing with -jnplcyrwnt and ability to work, is it not truo that thoso
persons a could be •jojloyod in a skillful waploycont, skillful work,
and who had a reasonable cutput wore excluded?

nero ox. -pted frora euthanasia or oxenptod froa filling in the
questionnaires?

•i. Exempted freo euthanasia.

« If such poopls wore acle to carry on sock special work within
their respective irsti tut ions then this wus proof of the fact that
their physical condition was probably not so bid that tney w c rc dis¬
integrated personalities.


*515


5 F b L7-A-13—^-UG-Karrow -ST
Cc.rt So. 1

Q. Very well. I think then that the picture cone3 a bit clearer
that the ability to work was a very substantial consideration in the
operation of this oregras and a great deal of weight •••as placed upon
the question of ebiiity to work. Is that true?

A . That dc ends on how Vou interpret the words "ability to work"
and on what the nost emphasis is placed. The decisive point is that
it nay b* usod as a reference, tog* th< r with other statements, if

A

the patient is psychologically or severely ill or if he i3 not severely

ill but thon his work has nothing to do with the effect arising from the

%

work. That is, if the can plays a part in the war potential or not and
in this case the statement coitalned In question 1 certainly does not
have any connection but is only th'*re in order to serve as info mat ion
- additional i''forcation as to the picture of the disease.

Q. Lot's turn now to one of the other questions in the questionnaire
nan'-ly that concerning race. Do you find that question?

A. That is on Shoot 2.

Q. The footnote is on Swot 2. The footnote reads, "Of Goman or
Goman related blopd; of Goman extraction; Jew, partial Jew of Grade 1
or Grade 2; Negro, partial Negro; Gypsy, partial Gypsy; etc." Now,
what was the point in having the race of the patient reported on?

A. In ey ooinicn, that could have only been used for on evaluation
In the statistics. I carnot see any other reason for it.

Q. You can see that it was not needed by the expert in diagnosing
the patient's cor*iltion and thus de-ensiling Aether or not euthanasia
should be applied?

A. That would have nothing whatever to do with it. I cannot rcnccbcr
either, but I k-«w it has been discussed - that I have been asked c bout
it - if Jews were exempted iron this program. I cannot reneeber if this
has been the case. I would not k«ow in this case either as far as
Reich Germans were concerned.


2516


5 Fwfc Z.7-A-13 -3-UG-Ka rro »- sir
Court !*o. 1


Q. “5b 11 , I at not suggesting to you, Herr Brandt, that under any
properly enacted law - valid law dealing with this sifcject or any other
subject that Goman >-’ew8 should be excepted,but I put the question to you
of what is the value of balding up anothor category of persons in theso
questionnaires? T.-.at 13, distiijguiehing between a Je« and an Aryan? What
possible pertinency dees the answer to that question have to tho deter¬
mination of whether euthanasia shall be applied? ^

A. In ay opinion, it does not have any special value whatsoever. I
havo Just said that I a.- of the opinion that this was ohly a natter for
the statistics. That it was not a creation, which on the basis of the
statements, wa^li have had any influonco whatsoever.

Q. Cf course, witness, you will concc-do that the question would
have a great doal of portinonce if in fact euthanasia were boing used
as a method of exterminating the Jews, wouldn't you?

A. If that had been thn case, a certain basis would havo boon
ostablinhod in this way. That is quite possible. However, Nogroos and
Gypsies are stated here and also "of Goman and German related blood".

I havo nothing to add to what I havo previously stated or nothing coma
to ny knowledge that such statements would havo boon used for any other
purpose than for statistics, nsido free tho fact that I do not know tho
very cloco dotails of those questionnaires and, above all, tho enclo¬
sures with further explanation an 4 . instructions and I havo Just 3oon thorn
through theso documents. I only know about tho references to what oxtont
theso questlo'i-jftires might sorve to assure againr^--i*ieorrect diagnosis.

Q. Witness, since you mentioned Gypsies, I think there is some
reason to boliovo that the Goman Roioh indulged in some discrimination
igainst Gypsies as well as Jews. So there again that category' of persons
- .;ht possibly bo of interest to T-^ and other operators of tho euthan¬
asia program.

A. I havo never known T-- in any other capacity than as an estab¬
lishment which was connected with euthanasia - on the basis of Decree


5 p-b 47-A-13—3—I-JG-Rarrow- STf
Court Mo. 1


Q. ‘‘ow, Herr Brandt, let's go bade to the instruction leaflet and
1 ask you to look at paragraph 4 where it reads that ■ all patients ere
to be enunerated


2pl7


5 Feb Harrow - sw

Court So. 1


■ho are not of Geiran nationality .or ar* «.ot of Genran or Canaan
related blood, indicating the rece and nationality". You will recall,
Herr Brant, that I put a hypothetical' question to you here, citing a
patient cf Goraan nationality and a patient of non-Geraan nationality
who had each pent one tenth in on asylun. You stated that no distinc¬
tion was made on the basis of nation lity. I now esk you - don't you*
have to change your testimony in view of the feet that paragraph U
explicitly requires that questionnaire bo cocpletod on any end all
patents of non-Gcraan nationality? x

A. I must correct myself in this fora. Ho..over, I would still llko
to add th*t now as before I still mints In tho opinion thrt the timo
of reporting those patients consist'd of fivo years and, in this
respect, I ea also of the opinion that if tho questionnaires had to
be fillod in by non-Co nanns that this probably served lor sooo sort of
statistical computation whose origin I do not exactly know. I cannot
soy why this was done.


251B


PC

f*

5 Feburar>*-A-DJG»lA-l-Lesser
Court Ko. 1

Q uitnoss, - o understand thot you are insiting that no ncn-Gtrmns
were exterminated pursuant tc the euthanasia program, but *e are now trying
to investigate why it was, firstly, that questionnaires bed tc be filed on
any non-German nationals^ and secondly, why questicnmires in fact had to be
filed on all ncmf—Geraan nationals whether or not they fell in the foregoing
3 categories listed on this instruction sheet, which applied both to Germans
and non-Geraans.

A The reason, in ny opinion, can only lie in some st. tistical evaluate
I do not knew cf any other reoson why this formula tio>j took place; it nay bo
that as to other circumstances, tlso cn tha part of the .linistry cf the Int¬
erior, there was a certein interest, but I do not know.

Q Lot us turn to the next page of the docuaont, Herr Brandt. Tho 5th
paragraph, which reads: "In cases cf patients boing newly aijitted after
the deadline date, questionnaires are to be filled out cs well end to bo
sent to me collectively every year, on 1 February for the doadline date of 1
January and 1 August for tho deadline date of 1 July." Doesn't that para¬
graph otrte, in fact, that questionnaires were completed and sent in on pa¬
tients who had been in asylums for one nenth or loss?

a Yes, fer subsequent reporting, yes.

<* Tho questionnaire, however, w s completed cn tho basis of observotior
made over a period cf or.e month or less in some c; sen, was it not?

a If the patients '-.re not located in ether institutions before then
tho quest-c-v. ires were then filled in with proper ref rentes and ieie sent
to tho collecting pcint.

5 «nd tr.ercaJter expertized?

A I do net consider this probable because after question 1 there is the
reference as tc r.cw long the patient ha3 been sick and in a further question
there- is a reference >ith regard to the condition of the patient. If these
quest - ennrires were then passed on fer diagnoses, it cay be possible, but
then the decisions cf the diegneses \culd have corresponded.

Q 'feu have testified that 3 to i& of the persons transferred to an
observation station after an affirmative decision on euthanasia by the top

2319


5 Febnu ry-A-DoG-lA-2-Lesser
Court U-. 1

exports, were returned as ineligible and euthanasia was not applied — is
that right?

A /vs fr as I can recall, there vere U to 65.

^ Ho-- do you knew thin figure ao precisely?

A Bouhler informed ne about it, that is to say, — yes, it u>s Bouhler-
he info reed ae of the fact with the reasona which I also stated yesterday
when I aentioned the subject.

Q Does this not indicate a rather remarkable analytical and diagnostic
dbility cn the part cf the experts, with only a two-p-ge cnicstionnaire to wo)
on?

A I also asked oyeelf thtt question at the tii4 but I was assurod thot
a proper questionnaire would to filled in by a specialist physician and that
a diagnosis would bo Bide by a specialist physician; furth.-rmoro, it was
pointed cut chtt here the description was not sufficient for the synptons,
ooiresponding differences could be aade.

Q But you aade no personal investigation into this mstter yoursolf,
did you?

A I had beer, told that it was possible on the basis of this question¬
naire to obtain ccr-osponding Judgment of the condition of the 'patient.

Q Does not this -can, in offset, that the great ua.lcrity of patients
were assigned to death without ever having bocn seen by the experts who
passed tho Judgment?

A The experts thacselvos never saw tho patients. The experts thmselv-
only roached the decisi n cn the basis of the questionnaires.

Q And ycu seriously surest to this IribunLl that a psychiatrist can
actually det< mine froe this short ''uesti'-nnr ire whether a person is incur¬
ably insane, is that right?

a 7h t he was to get a total impression as to the ccnditicn of tho
pati-r.t was assured to me ty the s/eci. list physicians who participated in
this natter. „ftvr all, this was net the only diagnosis, for subsequently
further nedicai exasinxtions took edece; in addition tc this, outside of cer-
tain exceptions, they had been in an institution for a very long ti-e so thol

2p20


Ccu-v 8*^. ^

d dear picture cculd be obtained as to his condition.

Q But the first and last placo -here a p- tient was actually in a pos¬
ition to be physically ax c slr.ed r.as in the observation stttion, wesn't it?

A In the observation station ar.i also at the euthanasia st-.tlon, be¬
cause patients hove also been returned by euthanasia institutes.

Q As you had vary accureto inforcaticn about the percentage returned
from observetion stations, suppose you tell us tfco percentage thfft was re¬
turned free euthanasia stations?

a The number AX to 6 1 ccn be applied, as far as 1 cin reaeebor, to
both institutes, to th«. outnanasia institutions as well as to the observing
institutions, although I c.nnot say if this ►as in every c«-»e AX to 6%, or
a total of AX to 6X.

Q '..hat instructions wore issued to those observation stations anl euth¬
anasia stations tbout their right to over-ride the affirmative decision cf
the exports?

A Nobody was ordered to errry out uthancsir. if he did net agree with
the findings and in observing institutes no outhamaio wrs carried out rt
nil.

Q But you do not knew cf cny precise ins’ rurtiens that wero issued
to tho cboerv'-ticn stations and the outhuioaiA stations con coming their
right to cv.r-fido th- opinion cf the expert in Berlin?

A It was never a question at any place. Tho ordering of the doctors
did not take place under tho condition that they had to comply with the
diseacais but it »-s always doter..in-d in the opinion or the phyeicirn;

S

thojo also tho experts did not hav- to ugreo ir. their di'-er-osis.

Q How long did t patient r-*t.' in the observation station?

A That v ri-d, in ay opinion. Ihe tine cc.ld consist of several
months; sometimes, es I have s«o» fres the files here, it .xy have been from
A to 6 or 6 weeks.

Q '..ell, your opinion was to tnrt off ct. Bo ycu actually Kft'Cto approxi¬
mately hew long these people remained in the cbs«rvticn station?

A I cannot st;te exactly how leng they rtx- intd there.

2^21


5 Fabrua:y-A-DJG-I4w.-Les3er
Court Ho. 1


Q Hew big were the observ. ticn st. tiona?

A I cannot t»U you that. Aa far as I knew, tiny ~cru whole institu-
tiona which had b-.cn oatcbliahod end furnished as observing institutions. I
hevo pwvcr soon ray of thca.

Q You don't know how nany doctora they had per nuatur of patients in

_ •

thu observation station? ^

A No, I cannot tell you that.

Q You don't know anything about their tj.ining cr haw'jxpcrt they wuro?

A Those things v.«rc handled only by Bcuhltr together with the i&niatry
of the Interior. Uy opinion ia th. t r.c doelt rith Buitrl institutions which
in thia caso woro unifornly established »a observing institutes and where
partial transports «vi larger trenanorta weic then sent to euthanasia in-
etitutoa.

Q ’..hat precautions did you taka that proper ex.-ainatiena would be con¬
ducted it the observe tior. stations?

A 'dll you plonso repvat your queatic*. or.co sore?

Q Wist precaution* did you Uke that prop nr extinctions would bo
conducted at the euthanasia stations?

A I ayaelf hevo not issued rny astsurcs ot all.

G And you do not know by your own observation th*t Boulilcr or cnyono
else took ~ny precautions, dc you?

A I *r. of the opinion that these positions wore occupied by specialist
physicians end that those specialist physicians had been instructed no to the
activity and their responsibility which *»s connected with it.

Q Can you nno any of those experts at thu obsox-v:.ticn stations?

A I cannot give you any wies cf these physicians.

G Td.tn.ss, you appreciate the i_pcrtance cf thu issue of the annner
in which thic euthanasia pragma was conducted, do you n.*t?

A Y-s, I knew exactly.

Q And ycu appreciate that the- only opportunity for personal otanincticn
by n doctor cr. the scene was st the observation st: ticn?

2522


5 Fcbruiry-A-00G-lA-5-Lea»«r
Court So. 1


1 Yes, certainly.

Q Wasn't it part cf your duty and responsibility tc «*u v-ry auro
thst the proper type of cx-sdnctiai was conducted on these patiuits who
were b«ing put to doethf

A Tvt coxt’-inly was not J task. In order to carry cut this task I

first of all would havu h-d to personally visit th-ao institutes -md then I

tlao would have had to obtain specialist training, neither o'* which was pro-

Tided for so. J was neither able to pu-sonclly visit th« institutes nor di

%

I have any specialist control or supervision.


5 February 47-A-A1t>-i&-l-Mechr.n
Court So. 1


G. T 1 '.a, ^ was going to put that to you. Nc:r, on the basia of the
nunb'r of visits you made to the observation stations, which you
admitted was none, are you in a position to tell the Tribunal anything?

A. I never visited any observing institutions.

Q. Yes, that is shat I say, therefore, you cannot swear to this
Tribunal about the manner in which the examinations were carried out
there; can you? ^

A. I can only say that I am of the conviction that they wore run in
a professional manner.

Q. Can you tell us anything about your observations at the Eutha¬
nasia s’ation?

A. I have visited one institution, that was at Grofcneck. At the
beginning of the yo-r or during the first half of the year 1940 I visited
it. Few Patients were located there there were approximately thirty
patients there and I saw the patients. Then I visited the adminis¬
trative office, which '•s established as a registration office. It wus
then discussed further how the question of *he formal written correspon¬
dence program should function after the Euthanasia was perform«xi. That
is the only time I saw such an institution.

Q. Has there any one killed?

A. Ko.

G. Do you know how these patients were killed in the Bithanasia
Station?

A. They were killed by carbon monoxide.

Q. Co you know what was done with their bodies?

A. The corps® were then cremated.

Q. You saw the pictures of the Hadamrr Institute in this Tribunal;
did you observe the disinterment of large numbers of bodies from the
general grave?

A. Yps, I have seen that.

Q. You spoke of the humane way in tfileh these peoplo were put to

death; I cannot say that you ere in a position to testify :oncerning

2524


5 Fet /.7-A-ATD-l5-l-4fe*han ( belles)
Court Ho. 1


5 Fob. U7-w.A7T-l5-2-ifce&m
Ccurt ?»o. 1

q I said I think you arc urahla to testify about the humar-c-waanner in
Khieh those people wars put to death) isn't that true?

A I believe a bij difference ms*, bo aada bjtweon the pictures of
Hadanar and between the Euthanasia Institutes, for example at Orafenook.
Hadamnr with the oorpsos, who had not been credited. cortein3y has nothin#: to
do with tho performance of Euthanasia, which was known until the end of 19U3

A

azvi I say that for the reason that at Hadoxar the corpses were not crcoatod,
while tho oerpsas, who were accuralated in connection with the Euthanasia

X

program, were cremated*

q Is it your opinion that the Euthanasia stations wero operated in the
host possifclo nannor?

A I an of tho cpinion that they woro ©onluctod in tho best manner, yos.

Q lou spoko «f relieving thoso patients from rra't^ln and sufforingj
do you thiric all those patients wanted to diet

A That is a question which I cannot answer in this form, I raa of tho
oc:iviotlon that tho patient* ttd not havo a cl oar concept of their actual
condition because they were insane and arson; then wero cortalnly oasos, which
in oxcosa of that, certainly woro suffer!» • It Is quito possiblo that a
lumn boiir;, who cd ht bo doscribel by tho sicplo word "cra*y«, ndf.ht under
circumstances mt evon roallxo the difference botwocn lifo aj d death. In
this fora, you cannot OTen include such people as to tho question if they want
to 'Ho or if they da «at want to die*

Q I think that you will concede that possibly a substantial number cf
thoso victim were fully aware of what was happjninr V themj won't you?

A I -to not think sc. If I ip back and r<sa®bor the pationts whom I have
seen at C-rafonock, they wore very door creatures who woro all confined to bed
and certainly scoe otbsr* nay have boon ttere who coul 1 be up and were rot^
confined to*bed, however, for tho most .art they aero or less would havo boon
confronted with certain death*

Q I think you observed frea tho instruction sheet, which wo wont ovor
together, that feeble rdniod person* and . ersons suffering from senility woro
subjooted to tfie program*


2525


5 Feb. ->»fcehaR

Crurt to, 1


A Such patients, feeble drxiod of cairse tc a severe degree and also
certain foma cf senility could also bo included in this frcup.,

Q Did ycu employ a can by the rvu» of Fritz Blelch?

A notch c'xo into =y office n 19U2 or 19L3

. q What did ho do?

A Ho workei for no in the regLstreiion office,

Q Registration of docuaonts, nail and the like? *■

A The registration of r b Roral nail uittera, Fur the mo ro in 19UU when
ny office was novod troa >rlin, he got tho anil and brought tho mil back to
the dty e

q Which offico waa Frits working in?

A Ho workod in ay office*

q Fritz Dleich?

A les.

Q Tou have stated that you had two offices in "orlin; one in tho Univoh-
sity Clinic end one in th> Fuchror*s Chancellery, I oak you whothor or not
Fritz Bloioh werkod in your offico ot tho F»Mhror ! 8 Chancellery?

A I did not have W offico 1-. t!» FuobrcSa Chuncollaty. I had ny
offico in tho Roich Chancollaiy and in tho Utica Cncncollory waa located tho
Chancellery of the Fuehrer, tho KLnfetry of Lojaraurs and ’(cleaner and tharo
were still sovorol othor office

q i an sorry, I aide a rdstake, I neant tho Reich Chancellery "horo
ycu did have an office, Waa Fritz Dleich working in that offico?

A to, Frit* Dleich did not woric in tkrtt office. office there oon-
siatod of three roeaa, ono bed the telephone agency, one contained tho
secretary and ny collaborators, rieich cane tho re senowh-t later on and it nay
have been as late as 19U3.

q Ho*-, I an aaklnr you whether Frits JUeich physically worked in your
office ir. tho Reich Chancellory or your office in the University Clinic?

A to, he did a=t work at tho University Clinic,

Q And ha waa a clerk in the Reich Chancellory?

252o


5 Fab.

Court So. 1


A Ha was aaplcyed by ne in =y office in the Heich Chancellory.

Q Herr 3ran.lt, who wsuli know core about the operation of the Euthanasi;
prograaj you or Frits Bleich?

A I believe that horpaje Frits Fleich nay have sore informtion about

%

lt r

Q lour cloric is better info mod on those natters than you arj>

A In this case, it nay perhaps bo possible*

a

Q If you consider the Euthanasia pro-;ran to bo in the interests of tho
patient and not for fiscal par-poses, why wero veterans ff tho first World
War and thoso injured in tho course of iirsts trial labor exraot frou taAa
proerwa?

A This question is in the fiold where I ha rc to say Is basically not
corroot, Accor tin* to the ©inlitlotui and chc sufferfi* of tnoso pooplo- it
is cot ri^ht to aako thcoo exceptions. however, other considerations wore
dodslvo in this caso, in ardor to have those exceptions nade« Thera was tho
consideration that boc-.uro of tho war and also because of vho co;scription of
labor, tho nontality cf tho people tcna.Vs such ;uostions would bo difforont
than in casae whoro only purs insanity is ecncvrnad, an! bcoav.ro of thoso
considerations, tho oxcjptior of tho wav end the pooplo injured In

Industri?l labor and tho aotual point of view fro- which tho thought of
Euthanasia originate!, it would not have been correct to nako those axooptloiv


5 Feb. uT-A-uTD-lS-l-l&lcy
Court *fa. 1


0 Tcu hi Vo testified that the euthanasia program would have ro proper
relationship to concentration eenps, is that correct?

A lee,

fl '.fhy is that so, weren't there insane persons in concentration carps?

A I an of the opinion that there were no insane persona in tie concen¬
tration canpco

Q Upon what do you base the opinion, did you cake any InvoatiRation
to find out?

A ffc, I did not. However, I rain to in the natural pdint of view that
scraebody who ccnes into a concentration canj becauso of a political or othor
crino, would have no correction with a nental disease,

0 Hut you didn't inquire os to whathjr there woro any insane persons in
concentration ensps when this pro.Tan started, did you?

A too

Q I«.u heard the toetliicny of the witness Vonocko about his visits to
concentration carps, what say ycu about that?

A Kenocko has testified that this ox-nination, - I Vo not even want to
call it in oxaaination, was a nodical wrljthot he had the inprosslon it
was a purely political racial ratter with whi'-i ho had occupiod hinsolf in th«
case,

Q But Harr Brandt, Dr- Mcneci.o was ono of the operating experts undor
T-h In Berlin*

A The propria is I personally passed the -aateria.'. in 19kl, and it was
halted in August of that yev« I not know that after the prolan wa3 hilto-
that euthanasia was performed in one place or another on a getor scale. It
is not clear to ae either freu what office or froc what possibilities Dr,

Vine eke nade his exardnatlons or was able tc carry out his exard nations in th<
nuchenwald Concentration Cnap. It certainly is not possiblo that it started
with 7-Aj, bocauso frea all that has beer. 3hewn hero th:t what took place in
the concentration caeps was the sole responsi’.ility and was subject to the
sole docisicr. of Hlnnler. Tron the files ocncernlr -3 the subject it was stem
that Kerr Monocko received orders free his clerks in oirav-ction with the


5 P«*. U 7-A-A ZD-16-2-Jiiioy
Court So. 1


Inspectorate for the concentration canps.

Q How, Herr Brandt, you are a nan of intelligence out of tho or Unary,
and I aa sura you rtceaber Honeeke*s tostlmory qiito vividly. He was oallod
to Berlin in January 191 j 0, glvon instructions about what he was to do in
connection with tho opera ticn of euthanasia. In the suaeor of 19U0 ho was
instructed by perhaps the defendant Brack, who issued instructions to him on
at least one occasion he testified, or Heppelnanr., or one of fcfio other pcoplo
nentioned on the chart consornirv; the euthanasia pror'ran, Ho wrjj ordered by
the* to concontration cacpe awl to nako excadnatiuns, 'end he testifiod chat
ho visited a nuaber of concentration caaps frees tho aumor of 19lj0 until
January 19U2, so these visits woro otartud quito early in tho program, and
wore carried out oven nftur you say tho pro-ran had on-led in August of 191*1,
Munecke was wot a concontration amp nan. Ho os not un-ar the direction or
orders of 01sucks, Pohl or Hu color. Ho wca a rum worldn- in tho pro,-ran wldch
you assistod in setting up, and '•ettin- into operation*

A I can only say tho sano thing again on tho subject, I theu -ht that
within tho concentration cacps there wero no nontuUy insane persons and I
have never heard or discovered that such e\c dilations ha 1 boon carriod out in
the concentration canps, and I have not biarn aw/tidi*- about tbo fact that
after tho susnar of 19id outhanasia ras still bciw: continued by sono other
agendas. Of ocurse I have not taard aiythuv; in this respect from tho con¬
centration canps. I a* also of the opinion that'tho fact that Monocko has
been sent to canps by order of T-Ji, that such a .decision would not bo undo
either by T-h, without Himler sotting it up such seasuros could not bo
carriod out in ary carsp.

Q According to the tosti-oory which Keneoks has -iren here about the

exocirations in 1911 and the te-innin- of 1912, it certainly tad ncthia* to dc

with the euthanasia prepran, as it ta! beer, da tend nod with Wi or either in

tho fiold concerned. ?fcw, Witness, I lon^t wish t arfuo with you a’xsut it,

.

but it is quito obvious it did have scoathing to to with T-li, and }fenccke»a
testimony vas to the fact thet Brack hinsolf tad ordered hin to jo to the cany,
new, thero is no dispute that the concentration oaaps were also in the progress


2^29


5 Fab. h ?-A-»ID-16-3-i4aloy
Court'So* 1

and they had to cooperate and they did so, and I also will not argue with you
about the oode nane, 1U F 13* The witness Ifenecka hinsalf did not know that
code case, but how do you explain the fact that these concentration oaap
operations could be carried out by personn.a of the eu hanasia pro.’ran and
they could be oxturninated in an Euthanasia Institute like ~>ernburf’ without
your knowledge* '»ltneis?

A I cannot give you any expC .-aticn to this question, I canno^ say
because it is not dear to no in what e-innor and by wnat orcceiuro TWj parti¬
cipated and in what way the connection w-is establish*; l. I erfr. o.»ly say X did
not find out any thing about it, and in addition I want to stato if I had
found cut arythln, about it I would havo tono anything in order to stop such

Eioasurwe whioh later on def’eOr.’At.id into Just a jdain forn of oxtorrination,

%

with all possibilities available » nc. Li cy opinion it had nothing to do

with tho concept of suttamsla, uvd I cannot possibly axplain it, - first of

all how this oontnet wna estab.isho 1 , and it is not clear to no with whom tjho

criers for such aeasureo were .sauo i«

1 What waa the oxplanat.on you gave on direct ax-.sdnation about tho •

lli F 13 order being sent onjr to concentre uion ocaps in Bavaria and Thuringia’;

A I havo stated here :hat ry attention vas drawn to the fact that the

reference nurfcor 1U F 13 .n connection with what tforecko has tostifiod at one

tioo, is concerning the istrict of Bavaria and than Hess and all Thurlnrin,

and sono docurvjr.t state* that sose poople woro sent fren the concentnti in

oanp to the Ducherwali c cap in this aotdon, — I think it was 3uchonwald, and

fron there they wore ircnsforred to r-ernburg, so that I an of tho opinion

that perhaps within «rtain areas under tho leich Def.jnse Cxsdssioners, are

perhaps by ojjdsr c: HLanler, and in collaboration with Kinder; because they

listened to those eaanda theic results w^re carried out in this way. This

is an assunption n 1 perhaps a way to roach clarification on this point, I

*

canr/»t say anythin in addition about this subject,

Q Ycu t«f\ified the progran was stopped in Au aist 19U1 duo to the re¬
sistance of the church and press; is it true ycu got the order for the dis¬


c'r.ttnuance :f the progran fron Hitler?

2530


5 Fob, 17 -A-^7T?-l6-ii-4feilcy

Court So, 1


Q And then you passed it on to -ouhlerl
A Tea, I passed it cn to 3och* r by telephone.

Q Wlgr is it the cessation order was ?ivon to you since your teJtinony
hero indicates yru had so ^little responsibility in connaction with tho prorram
A I was situated in tho Fuhrar headquarters, and I reooi’'©d tho ordor
fpoo thera beoabse I was together with Hitler, *

Q But the operation of tho children-a euthanasia continued ur.til
A It was oarriei on until tha fall cf MW., or tho late turner of 19U*.


2531


5 Feb-..-JP-17-l-Ninabuck


Ccurt No. I


Q. Why was th: cfistincti.n drawn betv-^n the twe typos of cuth.-nr.8ia7

“• Bocauao in the question of thy children we wanted ta avoid and
prevent the fact, also because of difficulties nith th-ir families and so
on, th’t this ob.uld develop furth-r. uc wanted to kill and put an end to
theso dofor-dti-s - a seen n possible after they had been b-rn.

Q- Now, I uw'orstacd you ary yn diroct oxasdnsti n that y>u c ntinuod
in sene association with euthanasia uhtdl 19U2; is thit ccrroct?

X

... Until 19U2, ne. Euthanasia was disc nti..u_d in tho summer cf 191*1.

• i

Q. «nd y ur testin-.ny is th* t yau had nthin,, f urther tc do with
outhanasir. ~fteT ..ugust 19fil?

... That is s a.thing different. I have at ted tht in the year 1912 I
roslgn-d th- -uth rity which I had bo-n „ivnn by tho special decree. That
ryfors t-. the at nty with regard to the children *.f the Reich Ccmaittqo.

Q. toll, that's what 1 wns trying t. t et straight* Now, pr-cisely wton
did y.u resign thy authj-ity which y u r-ccived n 1 soptoaber 1939?

• U I resigned this auth.rity in tho spring of 1912

Q. Well, y.u sh:uld bo abl- th-n to give us acua infernvati n ab ut what
happened t, the p-rs-nnol in T-l* anJ in -t.-r parts ;f the euthanasia program?

A. I canu.t o~y that.

Q. Tou said QUeSti.nnairos c ntinued t bo Sent in and evaluated after
..ugust 19Ulj is that correct?

... Yos, certainly th. questionnaires c ntinued t- bo w. rk-d on b.cnuso
this material was pnasod ».n t oithanasia institute. In this c.as- it w uld
bo 191*1.


Q. Did thyy c ntinuc t yxperti*-- th- qu-sti nnaires?

... I assume that perhaps tn.y c ntinu-d t handle th_m, but I cannct
say it with Cert"inty.

Q. In ether words, th-y c.ntinu-. t. < eVerytilng except oXyCuU. the
patients, is that right?

... That ~ay have been tho case during the first tict trv.ro, yos.

*5 Isn't this an thy r -tiu of th so absurdities? Why ware thuy going
• ' * *1 • u “' 2532 >


<


5 Feb-.'.-JF-17-2-Hinabuck

Court rio. I

through ell t,h_Bv. useless notions whonthe German Ruich * p.b in such .rising
need of doctors and other medical personnel?

1 boliovo that the titter of the diagnosis were elso di8c_ntinuud,
and only that for the time being a diagnosis was givon because th«so ques¬
tionnaires rcr_ still arriving and f r tfco tl. o being tho personnel was still
available and th-y w.re occupied with rg-nisati-nal matters. .ji office had
boon established and wo wanted to r-strrin fr a dissolving it c .apletoly for
the tiev. being. That was the only Teas n.

Q. roll, d>-s itsoet a bit s.ns.ldss Uc ntinuo t- file these ques¬
tionnaires in vi.v ol tho fact th“t it c uld n. molly be cxpoctocl that thou¬
sands of these patients » uld prcb.’.bly dio be. -re the end ef th- v.ar frou
nature 1 causes or they night recover and be with ut —

U, Th-t w uld have been senseless in p*xt t. c.ntinuo with the so
questionnaires. 1 d net cv w n len-w if these qu-sticnnaircs were completely
disc 'ntinued. I co.iUKt s»y that.

Q. 'bro yeu familiar with the fact th't tho Gem on Gc.v_rno.nt was

indulging in repressive ooasures against Jews?

%

Lm ..t the ti ac I did net know anything nb ut those noosuros in the f arm
as I knjw of thoa today. I did not kn~w any acre than shot could be seen
generally; that certain groups of Jaws woro first of ail given r certain dis¬
tinguishing "rk and th^t later _n it oocomo gcn-roly clear th*t t'ney had
boon settled in ceitnin ar-.as. Outside this I did net kn-w anything.

Q. Y u did n.t kn. w that J_ws tor. bein systematically oxt.nlaated?

A. Mo, I did n t kn .w th t.

Q. Do y u n w admit th t they were, in fact, systematic ally murdered.?

Nc, I die n_t know it.

Q. I osi asking ycu if y_u n w k.i <v it?

... Yes, n.w I kn w that this has ha. ea.d t n groat extent. Through
this trial and aft.r 1 was arrested it c*ao te jy kr.-wlcdgo. I did uvt kn^w
of it before.

2533


5 Feb-. k -JF-17-3-Kinabuclc

Cwt Be. I

Q. Harr Brandt, hew d. you oxplain th-'t th_ extcradnati.n >f sea- sixty
thousand (fcraena, using your i wn figures, in -uthanasia prograa was c-oumon
knowledge in Oewany as the proof in this caa- has sham, while a man in your
high pcsitl.n did r. t knu that Jews metering in sev^n figures w>ro being
executed?

A. I do n.t bcliovo tnat a nuru-r ci SwV.n figures was g.n-r-lly known
in Germany. v

Q. Kell, will you nako an aejission ab ut something loss than seven
figures?

Lm Bo, I do n.t want t de that either, but I * nly want t p-int out in
this way that the meber as such is n t t’w -cisive fact r bociusc if sixty
thousand insan- purs ns w.rc kn-wn, tn-n, -1 c urs_, the seven fi^uro nuubor
of the Jows w uld _ st certainly h-v- be~n jon-rliy kn wn, tut this has
n:t bo-n th. cas— The fact th'.t euthanasia boccno piblic — that 0*\n bo
tracod back t the oppesitien by th. church no! tho fact that the church
dlacussod the so questions, and th.ro fere it b«cauo kn wn mere c-ncretoly with
regard te tho Jews. I have net heard anythin*. Ilk- it. I nn c.nvincod that
the maaber of th.se wb had nwv«r heard of It ;r did n t kn w anything
ab ut It within the Roich will oo cn.r.j us, cert-inly within tho Reich.

Q. I tak- it fr. d y ur st-tom-nt that th- r--s n f r that is that thoro
was n opposition t. the Jewish oxt-rainatxon?

A. It just was net known.

Q» Horr Brandt, did ycu issu- errors 'iroctly r indirectly t- thi
Patients Transport Corp ration for t. - tr-nsfer .1 innatos?

A. Vo, I did rut issue any such rcers.

Q. Is th- nreu £lankcnbur s familiar y.u?

A. Blank.n'ourg, y-s.

Q. Did. y u $iv_ Blankcnburg orders directly r indirectly for th- trans¬
fer of imates of insane asylios t. euthanasia stati.ns such as Graf-neck,
Eadaaar, Kartheia, Bemburg?

2534


5 Feb-..-JP-17-&-# ins buck


C urt He. I

Ko, I did n-t give hia any such erders.

Q. After the ..uthanasi* pragma aU-r,odly cane tc % st’p in 19lil did
you «Tor issue .rders ciructly or i..'Aroctly t- civ. cf the euthanasia stations
that imates of insane asyluas sh:uld b_ tr-neforred t. thes- st.-ti. ns?

-• Wo*

A

Q. I would like t. put to y.u D cu^nt VO-892.

m. heHAKE?t If the Tribunal He as-, it difcht be ap^r-priato tc tr.ko
the afternoon rocoss at this ti e until she c~n leC'to the cadiibit.

TH3 Pd£Sir»iyr* The Tribunal will oo :t recess fra fow minutes.

(.1 rocoss was takon.)


2535


?--= 1. it r -in Si. : -*ntou. V.qv It ?loaso YMir

Honors, D-Xcnd/.o. Jburheusor is absent this ir t-ruo»»» h-.. lrv b.ue o/.rueod
by tho TrJbunrl earlier todey

772 PHESiTYCf: Xte .-bs^ntc of »'.o >f:vl j . v:i* :,.• .‘or tho

record. ob*erc® parsona' .o . zouso.

2Y XS. hcIUSSl.

'V Herr 3-tn.it. i .u-1 to yai to jn-i D^uu.m ;/. S-.r^ imndt, this

is a loiter on the luivorheao of »..o Con -.il S-i er.es VTnnr.crt o-'rp-.mlloa

%

dated Berlin, ?0 July I$ 4 j • »ae Ow^to.Ioi :tdau.r f-tr dnburs/

icon. it roods as

■In the cours- of the owountioa >f : .•sti'.vicns sir.unt.ji. ii tno H>rtorn
ter.itory of Gera* y opdoftfe . t? ai I order trjnf •«:» of iusr.no

persons to your Jai'.tntl>.a «_o. t i ey onlor 'i ?.*cfob%or .u.ndt, t‘»u
Co-jaiisioncr-O'.Cit/u or for Kod>.fJ ud H:w.a f v:\icos

■you will tho «?©<£ of yuly, l^UJ, >:.j hcnirod f \f cy Ii.sr.m '/soon fr<u
tno Do&t’J iasbf.;uVton twitiu if t.\*. R-.lchsnrhn w.‘ 13 •.\xni ii tho accaassry
cars os requested. ?..c ;oasp»rt *1.1 be .wcoi.pr-inW. by abcu 1 f/ci-v poraint
ts na-'ls,. personas]. I re?r.-.t -you to yr? >•’« ;• hc-ieio/; «.<d foodie.: of

the sccojpanylnc porsoncol * .i-jy a*-, tot c«U -- lot/o /oar iastitution
beforo th< fcliovlry dt/ in ore * •> rwtura to their oi/i:s.. «n.tlM\t«cu.

’In rll —.tiers cf bills ed equate nr o-.uk. w. lob ruf.hi rcfj.lt fxou i
tho trunoport of 1:# val-_..u:s, J r quest you to -vtirocs tho Control Ciefrlx-s
Office for Aintfl i. ••.ItuvLor.a. -~c» *rtcnitr. -r - U, Berlin V 35, r.fcrrirv:
to tho foct that »/.? ;rjirfor hr.j tom ct.vrie -1 <m» by *lo tci\.rii Srtiontn
Transport Coipor*».c? c;..

Hoil Hitler.■

lad I cobalt to you that the sinv.ur» is -ilonvn;.v--;. :. *■! >v of this

letter, don : t you nov wirh to chv.ro y'ur *oalic''ny to ?he affect tYm ym
never file isr.uo any orders to J lmA -BbuiV icaitrali^: t.:c at/e. e.i. of Ir.scre
p.* .ora to on Scthnnosin s^.tltn


?iis letter certainly c-vxot be c nsidoreJ to be in ccaacetfon wrt’a


5 Februory-*-DJG-18-2-Futty
Court Ho. 1


the Euthanasia station. In the year of 1943 the ~ir Rrid Freenutionary Cone
ittoo, which I touched upon yesterday, was already cctivetod. This w?.s an
institution which was activated occordii. tc a Reich decr-e. In this «ir
Reid Irccauticnrry Coeeitteo there were Dr. Cor.ti, ar.d I wes also a mcnfcer
of that Ccedttuc, and in this Air aid Precautionary Ccasnittuo X was in¬
cluded because I was already in cfarrgo of these special hospital institution

A

If in this enso ths ChnrUcblc Patients Transport Company perticipi ted,
thoy did so bccrusw of their transport facilities, because ^cthun ise no
transport would have been available. This nomine it »cs already nonttonod
th:t this trrnsport which was available hod tc bo specially' coadttod during
the wintor cx.tastrcphe of 1941-1942 with the Group Center. I asoui-e with¬
out raaaaboring the details in th:t ocnr.ccticn th-t w u rro here concerned
with tho saso thing, r. -a«iy, that considering the hospital iacasos which
wo had in the host end which then extended tc tho rest of Germany, & transft
had to bo c*rriod through. The n-mo cf the Lirtitution Hudom-r boccc.o known
to no through tho trl.-l last year, end 1 do not know where the Institution
Varstidn is located.

Q Do you knew whether thoso enu hurd.vd fifty Jnsrno persons woro
exteruinated at H-dcarr?

A I don't knew that and I dcn : t blievo it, and it is not known to no
that tho prtients would hove tc bo sent there. This letter dees not clarify
tho situation at -11. I merely w-nted tc point cut what it says at the top,
the evacuation cf nlr-dcaaged territories. ihyt. ycu could toll me whore
Karst win is loeetjd.

Q I dc not know, witness. However, ycu will recall, I think, that
th* fora letters issued from the Feticnts Transport Corporation concerning
Euthanasia in 1940 and 1941 usually carried such words as, "Dub to planned
uccnccy, *« sw;t order the transfer of sc aany patients to such and such
a pi -nee." Ycu recall that don't ycu?

A Yes.

fi Dc ycu deny th-t this letter is in fact on order frea tho same
Patients Transport Company, irtJfiferrinf: insane, persons' f. :n an twyluu

255/


5 - evruary •#»-DJCr-l S •W. .t t~


tc the SuUianasia station at Raisas??

A According tc the letterhead *e are concernod with the Ctortiable

Patients Transport Ccapan.-, G!SH a one cf the sut-departeont of T-4.

%

Q a»!, ncrocv-r, 7-4 covered tho jrovcoert totpcnj'-s, didn't they?

A The oxpcnsej of the oitire Euthavoaia P.-ogran rare dealt 't.tn by an
advr-r.ee cf Reich Treasurer Sri. ware, an-: Ch« wore then accounted with the
State. It so; s here that queatiens cf account lit/o to be dealt wilh that,
agency, thr.t ia, with reference tc transport.

Q Wall, Schwarz advanced ■onlcs t.- 7-4. did he net?

/. You. Yea. That vns so„

Q 7tad T--4 t.&o peying for the transfer of these ir.Moe pereor.o to H&daai

was it not?

A Yes. It was sc c n car. be seen free tho letter.

r


2T3*


5 Feb 47-A-F jC-19-1-5card- an
Court So. 1 *


C. Did you have any supervisory control over insane asylums in
Gem any, either during the operation of the Euthanasia Program up until
1942, or thereafter by virtue of being General Coccissicaer?

A. So, I certainly had no supervisory duties regarding these in¬
stitutions .

Q. Did you have any authority to give orders and instructions to
the doctors of such insane asyluos?

A. I do not receeber ever having issued such an order to any such

A

mental institutions. I cannot r«neafeer any one such event.

Q. Did you ever issue any such orders to directors asyluns
through the Reich Coccittec or any other agency of tho Rithannaia
Prog ran?

A. I do not rcsober. fJe could have been concerned Kith questions
of inforoaticn. Although, I <*> think that they would have been passed
on to Doctor Linden. Kosovor, I do not rtsoaber any such incident.

Q. Did you evor intervene for victims of the Rjthanasia Program,
so that they sight not be killed?

A. Since I was only in one way aancornod with reference to these
Euthanasia institutions, such a question could only refer to a conver¬
sation I had with Pastor Bodelschwing regarding his patients. That,
accordii^ to ray recollection occurred in the year of 1940 — 1940 or
1941, I as not quito sure.

Q. Now, Horr Brandt, you have Md eooetioo to consider this
subject vory carafe ly. I am asking you if you over intervunod for tho
victins of the Euthnasia Progrna so that they night not bo killod?

A. I do not believe that I intervened in that matter since I was
always in full conformity of the id^a •! Euthanasia. VTc can only bo
considered with discussions in Bethel, as far as I think, that iv> wh re
I spoke to Pastor Bodelschwing. And, this discussion which I carried on
with his was decisive, not finally decisive but helpod to decide the
-stoppage of the entire action. I do not r<cenber having intervened on


5 Fob V7-A-FJC—19—1-Beard— 33
Court So. 1


any other occasion or in any individual case, or h ving given ab¬
normal directive. I really cannot rfcetier,

V?.. McHANET: I f the Tribunal pleases, I have put Document No.
0692 to the witness, and would like to have it adadtt'-d in the record
at this time as Prosecutions' Exhibit No. UU2. Heretofore, it sooca
that the proper


2539 -a


5 Jab 47-A-?J&.lS-2-2oard
Court Mo. 1


j#

procedure would b j to xarko tho exhibit for identification with a .nunbar, and
adult It a* or. oxhlbit lator. Doos tho Tribunal think it would bo dosirablo
to put or. xchlblt nunfcor on it for identification or would tha identification
nucbor 0652 be aatiafactory. llj own point of view is I hnvo noticed Heretofore
that tfco Tribunal doairod that tho Dofonso Counsol havo tholr docu&jnts normally
oduitt^d luring the ?rosocution(a caBo. I do know that boforo tho XM7 that
th- Trooucutlon's docucwnta and as far aa I know alao tho Dcfanao documents
wore, in fact, admittod into ovldonco durine tho Dofcnaoa coco. And, I an
jurt afraid tharo nljrt pooalfcly bo sono slip np in tho letter atago of fho
trial and wo nijit not formally ^ot thoco docur-onte into ovidocco. If tho
Tribunal aooa any aorloua objoctlon to it, I na porfuctly roady to roeorvu
until a later tlsu to put these in, but it night bo best to havo thee.normally
adulttod at thlc tiso.

1HS PRESIDZMT: Tho Tribunal la of tho opinion tho bottor aotJ.od would
bo to rark it for identification with tho nuubor It would havo if tt wgs now
r-colvod aa an 2sfclblt, and then hold by tho Proaocutlon to bo offorwl aa an
oxhlbit at tho appropriato placo ct al'.tor ttao.

2f». !2C !IATJY: Vary woU, your Honor, I would liko for tho rocord to

ahow that Docunant Ho. 0092, which tj tho lottor I hr.vo rjr~-.dy put to tho

uit 0088 , bo marked nr Prosocution'a Sxhlblt Ho. 4*2 for identification.

v

HZS FRZSIDTiJC.Tho Tribunal cello tho Counsel's nttontlon to tho fact that
tho copy of tho document 3utnlttod to th- Tribunal ia incomplete. It dooa not
corr-spor-i with tho cory of tho locur..r.t tho Counsel roqd to the wltnoss. Sera
p’Jncrcnha .ro Ltokinc, pparuntly.

IS. i:C E1KST: I will be glad to Levo that checked into, your Honor.

"U7 BIZSOSTt It la tho can. in substancj, but it Id not idontioal with
■whet thu Counsel road.

y r. ic;v.Hri:

* ~itn.ee, in vi-w of th- fcoatinoay you have just t,ivun, I wish to put
t!.e iM'jn-nt to you, Docuu-it !C 090, x»d i uiU sk that tho record show
that this Tocuc.at a .3 ta^n idor.tifi-d as Prosecution'.' Ir'nlblt Hq. *43 for

idontific tie...

(A copy of th- docicient w.c h ndoi to the -witness.)

2540


5 February-^ JG-19-3-3 sard
Court Ho. 1


Herr Brandt, this letter is dated Berlin, November 16, 1943, and fr.w
the letterhead of the Belch Cc cs ittce for Research cf Hereditary and Constit¬
utional severe Diseases. It is merited evidential, and it is addressed to
Obcrorzt Dr. Schmidt, Scnitcriun Eichborg. You remember Dr. Schmidt's tosti-
acney before the Tribunal? *

Tha letter reads as follows:

"Re: Inmato /j \na Gas so fra; Frank furt/H*in

"Dear Dr. Scheldts *

"Cn the basis of a letter directed to Professor Dr. Brandt concerning

X

the above mentioned I request cn elaborated diagnosis about the mentioned
Anna Gasse who is reported t: bo at your institution at present. „t some
time, tho Cberprcosidont at l.ieabadm was concerned with that fetter. It
scoas that tho relatives of *nna Gases try to obtain her relapse by every
possible means. If from c medical point of vKw such release is warranted,
one could tako into consideration whether cno should not perheps cc.--ply with
such request in tho interest of the good reputation of tho institution.

"Hcil Hitler
"Signature: illegible."

Now, Horr Brandt, will you iv,t again have to change ycur testimony? Die'
you net, in fact, intercode for punitive victims of euthanasia? Did you net ;
in fact, got in touch with the heich Comaitteo and through thee, with tho
director of the Eichberg institution?

A I assume that wo are concerned h-re with r letter directed to no by
a B'lsbcr cf the Gasse family, and I think I probably passed this letter on
with tho directive end request tc sulci t a detailed diagnosis about tho
condition cf tho child, probably in order tc enable me to inform the parents
about this setter cr let the doctor inform the parents. Sine. I knew nothin,
about tho further developments of this letter, I cannot c?ke any other states
nent about it. This letter can cnly oepress that 1 personally passed on the
lettor which was directed tc me to the agency which dealt with tho question
of research of hereditary and ccnsitituticnal severe diseases; nothing else,
as far as cy opinion gets, can be seen from this lettor. I cannot remember
the incident with th -1 child, nor do I know whether 2 received any concrete
reply in that connection.


5 Feb. 47-A-*TO-2C-l-Xarrcw
Court So. 1


Q But, witness, it is true that ycu ware injecting yoursolf into
euthanasia natters at as late a da to as Ncveefcer, 19U3, is it not?

k I would probably even have done that in February of 191*5. If I was
3 !'!rcosed personally I always tried to 'leal with those natters and reply
personally and if I had perhaps the impression that something was not quit a
In order or quite dear it would have been a nacter of course for ne to in¬
vestigate such an incident, I believe that quite concretely I have dcuje so in
this case. The letter starts, "On the basis of a letter Hrected to Professor


Dr. Brandt", Certainly, sooe such letter was directed to ne personally. I
didn’t noraly put it away, but in this caso I requested to reoeivo an
elaborated diagnosis.

0 Put, Doctor, I have put tho quostion to you whether you had ary
authority ir. regard to those natters. You stato "Jfc", and now you toll no that
you (Qvo instructions that thcro would bo an olaborcto iiagnosis of tho
possiblo vlctin, Anna Gasso. Isn't there a littlo inconsistency thero?

A I soo no inconsist<rcyv It is a natter of ooursu that whothcr I haro
authority or have ro authority that whonovor I gain tho lnpros^on that some¬
thing is not quite in order that I should try to do something and clarify
tho nattor as far as I oan. Ir. what way oxaotly I Hd ttet probably difforod
according to tho spools! situation which pr?rallod. I isn't know to whom I
passed this ratter a n* I assume this letter is correct. Tho signature of this
letter is not very clear. It is certain, however, that after this nattor was
pointed out to no throu h this lottor I did everythine in order to clarify it.
This tea nothing to do with the authority as such.

Q But, in any cvcr.t, you forwax-led a lottcr to hin without krowing who
ho was7


A I probably passed it on to Dr. Linden*

q ‘That mold you have Vono if you had ascertained that thero had been

an improper diagnosis in tho caso of Anna Gasse?

A That is a question which retroactively after a period of four years or

three and a half years I could not answer vary clearly. In any event I should

have tried to find a correct way of dealing with it - a correct and simpler

2542


5 Feb* ■ .TD-2C-2-iCarmr

J-*urt o. 1


way — but I camct say what we were concerned with at that tirvj, Consequently.
I can*t answer the question which you put tc ne.

Q Well, witness, isn*t it perfectly clear what we’re concerned with. I
taka it that th> question wasVtaether Anna C-asse was to be improperly executed
Her relatives - h--r parents were showing saae concern in that natter, and I

ask you if you had ascertained that there had in fact boon an improper dioj>

a

ncsis and that she was about to bo improperly subjoctoi to euthanasia what
would you have done?

X

A At first I would have aide a report to the Fuehrer and in ary case I
would have notified the Reich Hlnlstry of the Interior, in this oaao Linden's
agency, but all thoso aro assumptions. Hut one cannot soo from this letter
that ary such question cculd have arisen- It only ap.)oars firm this letter
that tho rwsabors of the fmily had semo'desire that this child bo released,
but it could well have boon that I wroto to the paronts after I had oonfiraod
that request, ai«d I think that is a matter of ccurso that I would havo tried
to convince than about the correctness 01 euthanasia. Put tho docisivo thin.-
is that with reiorunco to tho children belon^nr to tho Reich Cotxxitteo tho
approval of the parents was nocossary. It my bo that In this connection the
parents did not £iva an approval and for this reason a let tor cano to rac.

3 *)r. D tt andt, are you seriously sur as ting that no children woro sub¬
jected to euthanasia without tho consent of the parents?

A Accor din.- to ry knowledge tho approval of tho parents was absolutely
necessary cni had to bo given, and itwas the task of the agency of Linden to
esta'lish oorxocticn with tho - cal physicians in order to rot that approval.
At that period of time I he-.rd 'f no case where a child roceivod outjianasia
without the approval of tho parents. The fact that tho parents wore told that
it was done cr. tho basis of approval is somethin’ completely different.

Q witness, this is the first tine that I havo over heard mentioned

in connection with the euthanasia program ttat arybedy's consent had to bo
obtained and I take it that it is a rather fundamental natter. Are ycu ready
tc swear to this Tri'-unal that the Reich Cosrdttee never performed euthanasia
on children without obtaining the »:naant of the parents of the child?


5 Feb. l*7-K-ATc420-3-Xarrcw
Court Ifc. 1


fi I said yesterday that the approval of the parents was necessary for
the euthanasia of children* and I an of the opinion that such ar. approval was
actually given.

Q Was the approval written approval cr verbal approval?

A That I *>n't know. I cannot say that.

Q Have you ever seen ary written approval?

A I believe that during the first period, when this authorization was
submitted for si (-nature to Doubler ani ae, all the othor papers wero tegothor
with it, such as approvals, etc. It nay be that '.urine the later period wo woro
only concerned with the authorization papers and that tho othor papors woro
left with tho Reich Ccmitteo. However, I did see such letters of approval
but I don't bolievo that they were in every case in writing but I think thoy
wore partly given orally thrcu;di the local physician or other agency which
dealt with Shat oase.

Q Well, witnoss, let's look at this letter again. I find con© difficulty
in reconciling ycur tostinony about tho nocossity of consent by tho relatives
of tho child with what's writton hero in this letter. For example, tho thirl
lino roods. "It soooe that the relatives cf Anna Gasso tried to obtain her
roleoao by evory possible too ns." If, witness, it was nocossary to obtain
oensont why was thoro any question about releasiiv- Anna Gasso?

A I cannot say that olther. According to ry opinion, the child could
rot be kopt in an institution if tho parents wanted it at homo.

Q And tho last sentence which roads, "If from a noiisal point of view
such roloaso is warranto*., one cc-uli perhaps take into consideration whothor
one should rot perhaps ocnply with such roquost in the interest of the good
reputation of the institution." Don't you find that laiv-uare Just a bit re¬
strained, witness?

A Tos, I thirk it is very restrained.

Q Let's pass on to anoth-sr matter.

.That happened to the insane as/luas in Poland and in Russia In the areas
which were rverrun by the Geman army?


5 Feb. U7-t>nTT>-2*-i.-«arrcw

Court Jo* 1

A I oannot say what happened to these institutions. I saw one sin lj

■ • • *•

institution in Winiza which ms oonpletely evacuated since 7ehroacht unite
had moved in. Otterwise, I saw no other institutions for mental patients and
I don't knew what happened to 'ten*

q Doctor, you had authority under the order of 1 September 1939 up until
the Spiing of 19U2. Tty that &! =•.- all of Poland and a substantial part of

a

WoeternTRussian had been overrun?

A Tee*

Q Didn't ycu obtain Information about hat was bain- :k-no with tho
patients in Polish and Russian asylums?

A Ifc, I received no inforcation about it.

Q Do you know what happened to then?

A Mo, I don't know th-t oithur*

Q Do you know whether euthanasia was exton loi to such aroas?

A It is not known tc no that euthanasia was oxtonlcd to thoso torri* riva.
Q Suppo»a wo pet ycur roaction to Docunent H3. 1758.

Witness, tho <lrcurunt which has boon handed to you consists of extracts
taken fron tho dlAry of General Bailor and I w-uld liko to ttroct your
attention to some of those oxcarp to.

I ask th't this document bo nnrk«*d ns Prosecution Exhibit Udi for i
identification*

Do you see tho exoorpt taken from Volume VII, ptfo 92 of tho original,
dated 21 September 19ul?

A Yes*

Q It roads "General Qgnar (Quartermaster Gonoral) 1 ’ an 4 then I ten d
soys, “Attitude towards tho irentos of insane asylums in the occupied terri¬
tory." Do you find that?

A Toe.

q And than on pa* o 100 on 26 September 19U1 "General Quartermaster


Wagner" Iton h "Insane asylum in area cf Arny Group "Herd", Tusaians consi lor
feebleminded people tely. Despite cf that, killing necessary*"


5 Feb. l*?-i»-».7D-21-l-L«sser
Court !fc. 1


>


Q And or. page 106 , "October 1, 19U, General *aoner (Quartermaster

General).Insane aysluns Itawgorod.." Dees this docuner.t Indicate

to you that Euthanasia was extended to a sylucs in Pussia7

A It says here, "Despite of that, killing necessary" that is under the

%

26 of Saptecfcer 191*1. I did not speak to General Qiartonaaster Wa.gner nor with
!tr. Ilnldor recording these questions. I did not speak to hln nor -did he
approach ne so that I can say nothin further regarding these 3 in'ications
than what is seen anyway. I to not know who was supposod to carry throu gh this
killinc; and I (to not knew what this one word "Insane asylums l^rwgorod", that
is the 1st of October 191*1, neansj this is Just one worU It oan well be tho
caso that this was merely is cussed or that something sh~uld happen there,
but I do not krow.

Q HorriTrandt, ho~f much tine Ud you spend in the Fuehrer's Headquarters
on tho Eastern Front?

A Fron 1939 until 19l*2, with vory short interruptions, I wns thore f
Later, the ro7erse wns true. I was thoro or. lossor occasions and was more on
tho way — on Journeys.

q And you also have relato-l to tho Tribunal that you nndo an inspection
tour in the front areas of the Hussion Front beforo Hoscow in 191*1, tho wintoi
of 191*1?

A In tho winter of 191*1, that is from tho 7th until tho 10th of January,
I was there.

q Anl you wjro novor consulted in the Fuehrer's Hea-Yjuartcrs about
extending euthanasia to asyluns in Ifussia?

A fo. I did nst take part in ary conference whoro General Oborst Haldor
wnoprecont. I did x»t participate in ary conferences whoro General >*arter~
nastur TTaznwr was together with the Fuehrer. All this took place—those
’iscussions of this kind, which were colled discussions of the situation —
t ok place sor.«whoro else and I did not participate in thoa*

Q Do you finl it curious that euthanasia was jxtend-ad to Russia without
consultation with one of the leaders of the euthanasia prerran in Germany

2^0


itself?


5 Feb. l7-w-TD-21-2 -Le 3 3 er

Court Ho. 1 '

A I sust say that I was not included in that prograa and I was not in-
foraad by tho Fuehrer about this question. It was never under discussion,

Q Kerr Brandt, after 19U2, don»t you think that you had sufficient power
ani authority tc put a stop to kill i ng of Eastern workers in euthanasia insti-
tuteo?

A lidld not know anythin- about it. I lid not know that Eastern workers
wore killed in euthanasia institutions. Consequently it was not possible for
no to do anything against it in any fora wtetac&ver. If I had learned that
healthy persons were killed in thoso institutions I an sure th\t 1 would hero
do no everything to prevent it, not only because these wero institutions for tho
slok.

Q Herr Dran.lt, lot*s novo along to a different subject. I listuned to
ycur teatiaony with rospoct to your own peter an*, authority as Oonoral
Cosrnissionor and Reichs Ccmisslonor and also as to tho power and authority of
tho Defendant Hanaoser an! tho Defendant lostock, with groat attontior., nn!
fren the picture you havo drawn it soew that ono oust conclude that you hoi
vary little authority anl ver littlo powerj and that although Har.dloaor was
appointed as Chiof of tho Hedioel Sorvioes of tho 7chmscht in July 19U, ho
roally was not Chiof of tho HedLoal Sorviaos of tho ^ohrmcht because ho
didn’t have my jxwerj an' 1 , although Rostock was Chief of your offioo for
Scionce and Roaoarch, ho had no concern with nattore of science an! rosoaroh
and that that was Just a ross alsawr, and was roally concerned only with
tho cat tor of ecorKcy .an the allocation of raeiical supplios, except that it
nay have had 3 one passing cone urn with trying to keep nodical schools open.

I mul i like tc invest!geto with you aoao of th>3o natters now and I surest
that wo first discuss for a nonent the position of tho Defondant HandLoser.

Ho was the Amy Medical Inspectorate frvn 19ul until Sept nber 19Ui, was ho
not?

A You taint tako into consideration the double position which he hold by
being Airy Physician and iXKf Medical Inspector. In his capacity as .my
Physician he was tied to the CSHj in his capacity as Arry Inspector he belong.*
to an institution which belonged to tho Sane Territory. Since Oeneraloberstnb-

25^7


5 rob. L7-A-^TI>-21-3-L©S8er
Ccyrt Jfc, 1


ar.rzt Handlosar was tied to the OKH, his position as Ar=y Medical Inspector
was a Vlcistratcd by hie together with the OKW and this position ho hell, I
think, up 'intil August of 19Ui, when, on the strength of a new docreo, this

union was -oparatod and he hinsolf bocar^, in 191:2, the Chiof of tho Medical

%

Serviaea of the Arasd Forces.

Q Witness, which branch of the Wehmadit aad the largest uedioal service*.
A Certainly the Arsy and for that reason at that tine, in 192:2, the
Chief of the Medical Service of the krry r. j-roootod to Chief of the Medical
Scrvicoo for tho Araed Forces, which Includes ill branches, x

q Would you say that tho nodical service of the any wns larger than tho
nodical services of the other branchee of tho anaol forces combined?

A I canxvDt say that with certainty but I wcul! nosur.c that, according
to figures, that is with reference to th^ nurber of nodical officors, it wae
larger than the Luftwaffo and Navy together.

q Arvl didn't the ;xw Hodicol Inspectorate handlo substantially all
nodical probluns for all branches of tho TTohraacht with the exception of
thoso nodical problems which rolatod primarily to ono of tho other branches
of tho anaod forcoa, for instance, aviation medicine?

A The ir.divi '.uol branches of tho arnod forces worked on aodioal question
by themselves. 9ucause of this independent activity, rwarkabla hspponincs
occurrod. For ins banco, ir. tho sane locality, let us assunc it is the Crimea,
whore thoro were certain Navy units,tho sanj vacoinatlon procoduro was
carried out which wi3 bra at Iffarcnt periods by tho ,»my, Navy and Air
Force, This i3 merely an in ‘icatior that within the indlvi 'ual Wohmucht
branches thora was a basical independency cf action an* it was the dosire of
the independent ~«ohrracht branches to maintain their special position, oven
ttlfeh reference to their owr. acadicios. Therefore, it ms not the case that the
«ruy wa3 in any way in a leading position rop-.r ting its measures which it
t'ck within its own branch and was in any way suggestive to tho measures of
tho F-.vy and Air Force.

25U8


5 Feb i?-A-i£A.V-22-l-Nimbuck - Stf
Court Vo. 1

Q. Now, Herr Brandt, after; Handloser was appointed as chief of the
acdical services of the •’ehmacht, on 2B July 19A2, was \it> or was ho not
the superior of Hipj*e?

A. He was aot the official superior of Kippke.

G. Now, Herr 3rendt, »e ait not in this trial concerned with the
right of the superior to punish hie subord nate or natters of that con¬
cern. I aa, however, concerned and this case is concerned with whothor
or not Handloser could stop certain research w rk which was being
carried on by Hippke as the Luftwaffe Uedical Inspectorate?

A. According to nsy opinion that would only have been possible; that
is, to stop thee or not to atop thee, if we were concerned with natters
which equally concerned all branches of the a mod Torcea. But tlile
word, nutual, I think, was expressly eentioned in tho decroe eo that
everything which does not represent a nutual basis was outside tho Juris¬
diction of Handloser and wao within th* freaework of tho respective
•"tohraacht branch which dealt with any such natter. It nay have been
the Navy or tho Air Force.

Q. As I put it to you, nodical research on typhus, nodical
research on epidemic Jaundico, nrdical roaearch on yollow favor, are
nutual probleos. Could Handloser issue orders to Hippke initiating or
stopping research work with respect to such rrtters?

A. Before giving ay reply sny I look at the decree once nore, which
is relevant in connection with this order? That is tho decree of tho
26th of July.

(Document handed to witness).

A. (Con'd.) On the basis of this decree and its formulation and in
view of the situation which prevailed, I would net essuae that Kami-
locer was in a position to give such a directive. The entire complex of
science and research was not mentioned in this decree at all, and if I
take into consideration tho history of the creation of this decree and
taking into consideration the lack of materials, a special readiness for
conrdteent h^d to bo gained.


2SA9


5 Fob i.7-A-4HA-22-l-Kinabunk - mt

Court Jo. 1

In the heading of this decn-e, the first sentence is of ira-
portance, idiich says; ”The utilisation of personnel and material in
the field of


2549-a


5 Feb rue ry 47-A->JAA-2;.*-2-?.'inabu ek - sw
Court No. 1


medical and health oat tors demands a coordinated and planned direction."
And this refers to paragraph i, namely, the coordination of all tasks
coxon to the radical services of the Mehrcacht et cetera. I ar. of
the opinion that on the basis of this decree Dr. Handloser quito apart
froa tho Question whether fie had any knowledge or not, could not have
been in a position to give any orders to Hippke in his field of science.

Q. •‘ell, this opening paragraph you have referred to talks of "Tho
utilisation of personnel and naterial in the field of medical ahd health
natters demands a coordinated and planned direction"; is that right? Is
medical research not a problem very directly concern'd with the ooordl-
nfttad ard planned use of personnel and naterial?

A. But thr.t is not meant in this decree. I havo Just said that
you have to take into consideration in addition, the history of tho
creation of this dtcroo. -'obody, wh* n speaking of personnel and nate¬
rial, will connect this with research work as such.

Q. Is that right? Wall, let's look at Document JO-924 —

A. I would like to ask you once core, did you ask ne whether that
is correct or not? I said that personnel and caterial <*ieations havo
nothin.' to do with research.

Q. That's exactly wh’t I understood you to say. N 0 w let ne put to
you Document 1C-022 which was introduced as Prosecution Exhibit 435»
and read you the words of Genoralob-rstabsarzt Handloser himself, and
these words were spoken at the me* ting of the consulting physicians of
the Military Medical Academy from >3 Novesber to 3 Deceebor 1942,
approximately six months alter this Fuehrer order th'.t we have b«en
studying was issued. He opens his address:

"Gentlemen: The demands and extent of this total war as well os
the relationship between needs and availability of personnel and mate¬
rial require measures also in military and medical fields which will
serve the unification and unified leadership. It is not a question of
marching separately and battling together, but marching and battling must

be dene in unison from the beginning in all fielns. As a result , as

2550


5 F«b LI -k-Al}Jt*2s. imbaek - sw
Cc-rt So. 1


concerns the ailitary sector, the Tehrcscht Medical Service end with
it the Chief of the Medical Services of the


255^-A


5 Feb t7-A-4iAA-22-3^>inabuck - sw -

Court To. 1


Wefarmacht, came into being. Not only in matters of personnel and
material, ever, ts far aa this is possible in view of special fields
and special tasks itfiich must be considered, but also with the view

to medical scientific education and research, our part in the 'fohmacht

*

Medical Service must and will be an unified one. Accordingly the group
of participants in this second work conference East which I have now
opened is differently composed from the first work conference^ }{ay

of this year. Then it was a confererce of the Arty. Today the three

• • • •

branches of the '>fehnacht, the flaffen SS and police and labor service
and the organization Todt are participating and unifiod."

Do you wish to change your testimony, witness?

A. No, I do ot want to change ay testimony. If this has happened
in this case and if these questions went parallel to scientific
questions too, it was .ot something that was based on an order which
was initiated by Prof. Dr. Handloser, but it was the realization of
tho participating p ehroacht branches to try on their own accord to
coordinate their functions. Thr.t wasn't the case evorywhoro, and evon
on the occasion of such meetings of the East and I don't Know who ms
detailed to attend those meetings, there was some copying done with
reference to the various ••‘ohraacht branchos.

Q. ttell now, Herr Brandt, I think that is a dually what tho
situation was. Weren't the various branch*s of the "ohrmcht being
coordinated b 7 Handloser and aren't they boing coordinated in tho
field of medical rosoarch as veil?

A. The academies ere not carried on as r ehraacht acadtri.es, but
there was the academy of the Air Force, the academy of the Army and
the academy of tho Navy. Even the "affen SS had later started to insti¬
tute their own SS academy. Thet cay have been earlier too. At any rato
the acadenir-s are not sub-organs of the chief of the anacd forces
medical s- rvices but they rerained institutions of the cocqxitent "uhr-
macht branchos and had their names. Dr. Handloser, as medical inspector

2551


5 Fftfc-H7-A-UAA-22-0-Ninafcuck- sw

"ou-t So. 1


and Arny physician, had the Military Medical Academy and similar
situation was with the Kavy,

Q. And he used the Military Medical Academy to coordinate
research activities in»all the branches of the "ehraacht, did he not?


2551-a


5 Pc —-22-lHttna'cck

C u*t .1

»

- ..c wore then c rccmo>‘ with the :u.otin- f Itx. a nsultins ;hysicia:is

t T.ijich ; .u . r ' print. Tiese .ectin s cf the. c nsultin; physicians Tx.ro
- r the .jut;.- 30 of cxchnncinr .f experiences, ' ut acc-rdinr t a channel f
c -wan :ian!I'5cr certainly c uli net interfere with any if the thcr research
• rancho. In such a ease the respective chiefs <.f the Navy tr Air F.rco w. uld
have r-ferroA t this decree which nl, s oaks cf pors.imolOK' .latcrial
dircc ticn.

A

l Herr Cran’.t, bef re we adj urn f r the evening I n.uld lil:^ t. put
8 x f Y^r own » ri tv y u in c n:xcv,i n with the p^siti n f the dofonclant
Handlooor, and I want ycu t recall t .in’. tJx. wer *a Uct y u s rko at the
co^tiir of the Illltary ...’lcal ..cade;/ at ILhenlichon In ..ay f 19! i which
I nec-l n t ra-trr. y u, was bef re the doervx .f August 19Wi w Idi y.u assert
oxten.'nd Ben loser's powers s oewhat. T..A is 2 cu >ont .r sccuti<n

Exhibit U37. feu said tlsc f- 11-x/in-:


5 ? true ry-A-DJG-22-la-Sinacuck
Comt Ho. 1

"Generalcberstabsarzt Haniloscr, you, a soldi.r and a physician at the
soic ti^e, ora responsible fcr the use and the performance of our modifccl
officers." Ten went cn to say, "I believe, and this probably is tho sole
expectation of ell concerned, that this seating which today starts in Hchco-
11 chon .ill be hold for the benefit of cur soldiers. The achievements to
late of ycur physicians, Herr General Oberstabsarzt, confirm this unequivo¬
cally and their readiness to do their share makes ell of us proud, end I
cay also say confident."

ThcnVyou said a little Inter oni"It is good .-impl^tc call those things
by their names and to look at thee as they arc. This n.oting is tho visible
expression of it is. It shall bt, and it must bo so in evoxy rospoct. Tho
consulting physicians are gathered around their nodical chief, 'uhen 1 look
at theso ranks ycu, Gonorolob-rstobsarzt Hondlcsor, rre to be onvlod. Uedicr
experts with the best and cs:st highly trained special knowledge are r.t your
disposal for coro of the soldi rs. In reciprocal action botwoon ycursulf
and ycur medical officers tha problems cf our medical Kr.cwlodgo and capacity
are kept alive."

Herr Brandt, wero these words addressed tc a man with no power and
authority ovor those nodical experts gathered free all branches cl tho
hohnsucht, including the Vaffun SS?

a Fron what I hove said can bo seen that /grin nodical officers r.ro
spoken of. That is in compliance with what is meant here in the forumlation
cf the decroc with personnel. It docs n t metn that dr. Handloscr was in
tha position tc direct thu -rk -k.no by these gontlcne:i in their v/ricus
branches. So doubt it would have teen correct if we had some central nodical
service, but that did not ^-xist and that c~n also be soon frea tho fret tliat
scientific werk within the acadtdes was carried cn under the designation
cf tho own special arm and that it was not see*, thing cf the chief of the
medical services cf the anted forces. Otherwise the modical offices wculd
have tc be exchanged; that at the academy fcr *ir Force, .jny physicians
would have to be - but that w s net the- ease. They were clearly Separated.

I th'nk it was cniy twice e year when they reported cn their activities.

2553


5 F wbrun ry-A-DJG-22-2a-Kinabuck
Ccort he. 1


Gcnuralcberstabsarxt Hnndlcser ct that tine was the chief of the nodical
services of the anted forces end was according to this nana the exponent.
He was just the represent tive, but he was not * representative according
to the function. *

•£.. ifcHWEXi I guess the Tribunal wishes tc adjourn now end I v,culd
like to stetu e^ain that, cf coursa, since the witness is now under cross
ux.sinr.ticn ho shall not bo in contact with his dofcn-c counsel.

THL .RESXDEZTTi The rule -nncunced at adjournment yustoriay will bo
carried cut again this cvvsiin*. The witness will be'sccluded.

The Tribunal will recess until 0930 o'clock twnorrow morning.

(The Tribunel adjourned until 6 Fofcrucry 1947, at 0930 hours).


25 #


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 4


Target 2


Voluae 8


Feb. 6-11, 1947


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vs KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 8


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


6-11 February 1947 pp. 2554-2869


6 Fob-!t-FX-L-l-foaUr (FL)
Court Uo. I


COZLJX3, COP Y

Official transcript of the African
Illitary Tribunal in tho natter of
the United States of America, against
Karl Brandt, at al, defendants, sit¬
ting ct ,'urr.bcrg, Germany, on 6 Fe¬
bruary 1947, 0930, Justice Beals, pre¬
siding.


TH3 A.!SH4L: Persons in the Court rooa will pie..at fiid tboiv seats.
The Konor.'.*>Ic, the Judges of Military Tribunal l. A

lUlit.-ry Tribunal 1 is new ir. session. Ood savo the United States

X

of Aaoricn end tills honorable Tribunal.

There tilU bo order in tl^o courtroom.

THB .T^SIDii'Ts Ur. Marshal, will you ascertain thet tho dofondants
arc all present in cosrt.

THB 'URSl'ALt Jny It please your Honors, all defendants are presort
in the Court Ilocu.

THi HtaSIDZiT: The Secretary Cener.'l will note for the record the
pro sen oo of all the def„ndnnts in court.

Counajl my procoed with cross-aaa a iratl on.

KARL BRAi.DT — Rosiuod.

CROSS 2XAME.ATI0.'.* (Continued.)


3Y ffi-UcHAKEI:


Q.- Herr 2r. rdt, at the end of tho session yesterday wo wore inves¬


tigating the poDor and authority of Gonoral Hand loser and I tad out to
you ourtcir. -lords which you had spoken in Lay 1944 at Hohenlyc'cn. 1 vent
to ask you on which occasion you uere r i ht, whether when you stated as


2fay 1944 that Bnrdloser was responsible for the use and porforornco of the-
□odical Qffi^-.’PDyfcpthur, as you testified here, ho was not so rospon-


the question of responsibility ir. tho s&ac
differentiate b.twocr. the responsibility of the entire
the redteal officer within the aray rx.d within the troops.


- 2554 -


6 Feb-UFJC-i-l-Footor (FL)

Court Ho. I

in roforcncc to reserves, etc., and the things which are connoctcd *.?ith
research as »- spoke about yesterday. In addition, it has to be added
that wt*an I sooku in Koheolycboa in tho y-ar 1944 I was speaking about
a feraal use, end it certainly wasn't some kind of an affidavit that I
was tanking at tho tine. During such a meeting, where medical officors of
tho various armed forces

A

%


- 2554 e


6 Fob 47-M-rJC-i-2-Fostor
Cc^rt Hq, 1


bronchos hr.vo gothorod, It la quit* custcwery thr.t tha chlof of ono arch
*?ahiur.ent branch la contiocod. It la a gosturo, ra cpprocir.tivo Gooturo, rothor
than -a fixing of lila functions la various cnpocitlos.

1 Horr Bronit, lot no put a hypothetical coao to you. Supposo Hnndlosor
In Aucuat of 1942 ar.do .-a inapoctlon of tho nodic-l service of tho Luftwoffo,
if ho i\*. that tine was undor Hlppko, -ad aupposo Hondlosar found conditions
Mhlch woro not to hla likinc, could Kr.ndlooor lcauo an ordor to Hlppko
instructing hin to correct tho conditions of 7*1 ch Hondlosor did jiot approvo?

A Ho probably wouldn't V.vo boon in a poaltlon to glvo dlroctlvoa of
thr.t enanar to Hlppko sinco Hlppko rocolvod Ms directive* fro tho Chief of
tho Air Forcoo hlcsolf and wr* subordinated to !iln in n allitnry w*y. Horo wo
would cor.carnad with a purely nil it ry ordor. Ho prob-bly could hnvo pointod
out thr.t southing was wronc, but recording to ny opinion ho would not hnvo
bodn in c. pealtioa to tiv- any ordura to a difforoat branch of tha ’’ohrancht
r.o for os it was not concoraod with unto rial or poraoanol matters. Svon in tho
coso of nr.toriol and parsonnol aattoro it would hovo boon nocoocary ovon boforo
such an inapoctlon took plr.co to infora tho Chief of tho roopootlva !7ohmnoht
branch about hla luj -autos.

q I toko It that you oxclwiod nolle -1 roaonrch free whr.t you doscrlbo no
•tho flold of nr.toriol -ad poroonnol?

A Z .alroaly ttedo that dlfforonco yoatord-y, In thr.t docroo tho word
rosoorch in cot usntionod at oil*

q Lot no put onotbor hypothetical crjto to you. Hnndlosor nndo tho o-co
inapoctlon of tha aodlcol corvico of tho Luftw-ffo undor Hlppko nd found
conditions of which ho did not r.pprovo. Hmdlosjr than wont to Koitol and told
Koltol thr.t intolor-.blo conditions provr.ilod In tho nodical aorvlco of tho
Luftw-'Xfo. TTould Koltol or would Kc' tel nr.vo not, aont on ordor down to
Hlppko to straighton out tho affaire which woro cceplainod of by Hondlosor?

A I dbn't bollovo that Koltol would have dono so, and for tho foil wring
reason, tho nodical aorvlco of tha Air Forcoa was an lndopondont institution
and tho supreme ccrricndor of the Air Forces has a diroct channel to tho Fuohrar.
I have already pointed out that the position of Koitol w-a uoro or loos r. joock
position claco Koltol was olrcucvontod by tho various chiefs of tho TTohrcnoht


-2555-


6 Fob 47-i^?JC-l-?-7C3t8P
Court !ta. 1

bxvnshos and , thorofore, it would not h-*va boon possiblo for Koitol to givo
Cooricfi ".*J ouch directives in nay rash ovont. I think th.it it is out of
the ^uastlon. Koitol coy havo nontionod this or.ttor to tho Fuohror so that
ho, ovor Goorlng, could biro erdors to Eippko and Soil with tho natter, but
I don't bollovo that Koitol oa hio own initiative could hero sivon my
liroctlvoa Hippko. •

t\ './can't it proclsoly tho duty end tho responsibility of Handlosor to
nako such iaspoction trips? I think you ycursolf stntod that you wont on
such iaspoction tripe with h i zj ifow, hariaG cado such on iaspoction trip Just
exactly what did Hirailoaor do concerning tho conditions which ho Found? If I

V

uoioretand your tostlnoay you aro tolling thts Tribunal ho could do nothing,
is that right?

A If ho undortook such a tour of iaspoction to tho Crli-oa, for instinco,
or Poland, ho lafornod tho rospootlvo aodic 1 offlcoro that ho war on his way and
it is iulto probablo th-t rftorwirds ho r.-do -n according roport to tho nodical
offlcoro. But horo wo aro cmcornod with tho quostions as laid down in thu
docroo, whoro it wxprossly said that it doala with the porsonnol and natorlal
coiitnont. «

q Hon* Brandt, lot'r issuro that tho natter of whloh Hmllooor disapproves
fills within thu scope of the docroo — I -r. try lie to find out proclsoly what
Hanllocor's powers and rooaoasibilltioa woro in such a caso ml oxactly what
orders ho could iosuo, occctly what a-n ho could go to to have such orlors issuod,
and you havo oxcludoJ tho possibility of Koitol. You havo oxeluded tho
possibility of Kandlosor hinsolf issuing such onlors and I tea loft with tho
picture that Dr. Handlosor had no pomrs whatsoever.

A Tho fact that tho power that to had at tho tii» was not sufficient is
conflrr-od by tho fact that in tho year 19-14 a soccnd docroo was nocossiry whoro
ho rocoivod noro oxtonslvo functions. If in 1942 on tho strenght of this docroo
ho actually had boc>.'_o tho nodical chief of tho ontiro at'-x! Forcos, that is to
say if ho would havo tikon ovor tha ontiro lo-dorship ml ascu;^>l a clear posi¬
tion of superiority ever all ^rnod Forcos bronchos, this second docroo of August
1944 ::ould r.ot ha Vo boccro accessary. In this socond docroo tho wasn't only tho
separation of his position as tho Amy Insroctor-to and tha Hedic*l Chiof of


- 2556 -


6 7ob <7-L-FJC-l-4-703tor
Court Ho* 1

5*0 # vcod TOTC08, but it W ns Tory clearly ost-bn 8 hoi thoro that he rocoivod
certain functions. ito functions which ho rocoirod thoro cortainly woro not
^ivon to hln boforo boc-.use othoiwlso this aoconl diroctiro would hr.vo boccco
superfluous*


-2557-


0 ?«b-JfSaS-3-l-B«ard
Court So. 1 .


q, Undor the second directive could Handloser iaauo orders directly to
Ui« Chief of tee hcdlcal Surico of the Artsy. of the Iuftwaffc, and of the
Uevyl

^ r *y I *»sk you to give thii aocond decree together with the
official directive? •

Q. Herr Brandt. I would like for you to testify froa your own know¬
ledge of the nodical eorvico in Germany. Aftor ell, I think, you wero in a
position to kn w. Tku Tribunal has the decroe of August 19W4. And, if it
is sio.ly a question of interpreting the written words, I tnink perhaps wo
ero coupotcnt to do that. I would like to csk you now to testify fron your
own knowledge. I askod you if Hnndlosor could issue orders after tho docroo
of August I 9 UU to tho Chief of tho Kodicel Service of tho Amy. Luftwr.ffo,
jfavy, and Voffen SS. ns attached to tho Wchraaeht?

a. .xcording to ny opinion, he could only do so within tho fr/ujowork
of ais entire tasks: tb t is, within the fraaowork of his autunl tasks.

X do not believe trial it is dourly stated in tho docroo that bo oould havo
done so in suen tasks that wore not sutual. But, I still should liko to *.
soo t.ie docroo onco noro together with tho official dlroctivo. In ony ci so,
tt.ls socond docroo of 19 UU cocparcd to too docroo of 19 b 2 , r, nro Hnndlosor
very cloar powers and authority which previously wore not cxlstont.

v Is nodicrl rosoarer, a mutual task?

A. opart fro- the special fiold, yos: end, I should like to designate
aviation nodicino os a special fiold.

Well, could not Ef.ndlosor issue a general ordor that there would
bo no nodical experimentation on concentration coup inoutes?

A. Tho proroquisito would have been that he hrd tho knowlodgo thnt such
oxp.rincnts vwro being Ci-rriod out to a certain oxtont or at all. If ho did
not know thet it is very icprcboalo that ho wold hi-vc issuod such o docroo.

I do not bollovo thnt ho would hj.vo h -d the influence to bring such a decreo
to its final offect. sinco he than would interfere in n field which wio not
nodical and which wes subordinated to Himmler. Iho only channol would hr.vo
beon to roport to the yuehrar, and neve falu deal with the nattor. I an


-2558-


o y.cx'-K-OES-Z-a-Seard
Court So.l

quite sure no could cot have issued any order to Hiu_ler.

q Herr Brandt. you did cot answer the (question. Ve are not concorned with

the likelihood a S:.ndloser having issued an order. Ve are eicply coccrnod wit!

the power to do so.Asd, I bar* put tr.e question to you: Vhec in SopteaborigUh

Eaailoser, as Chief of the fcodic -1 Sertico of the Vbhrcacht, could have lonue.

an order to tho Chief of the Kedicol Sorviso of the Any, Havy. Alrfoce, and

tee Vaffeo-SS. as attached to tho Vehrcacht. that no nodical experir-ontation

would bo carriod out by officers of those services upon concentration crop

incatos? ^

A If succ an order n d been issued, tho succoss or non-succoss ard, an

ordor would hove occursod whother or not it was in oonPr. st to an ordor which

any chiof ot the Vahruacnt rocoivod fro- his own superior. That ie to snp, if

a directivo hod boon glvon by Qooring that such and such ©xporloonts woro to

be carried out, and if the order of Hnndlosor was in contrast to this ordor,

tne order of Eondloser's cortelnly would have no offeet. It would have boon

*

corely lllusionnry.

q Horr Brandt. I insist that you answer tho quostion with a yos or a no.
Vo aro not concorned with any conflict betwoon nn order of ».ndlosor'o or an
order of flooring's or an ord^r S1-—ler's. Vo aro sicply coocornod with tho
powers «.ad tho right of Hruvdloser to havo issuod ouch an order to tho Chiof
of tho hodic- 1 Service of the Ar~y, Kavy. lAiftvrvfio, and tho Vaffon-SS. os
attached to tho Voknwcftt. I think you can answer that quostion with a yos or
a co. Did ho have such powers or did he not7

A Vitnout seeing tho doxroc once aoro, I cannot unswor thio quostion with
wither u yos or a co.

q alright. Herr Brandt, wo dll pats on. You do not c--ro to answer that
question without seeing tho decroo; is that ri htT

- I cannot answer tno question in its prociso fora with yes or no. wl
thout a- vlng once ore tho opportunity of seeing tho decreo togchtor with tho
official directivo.

q You mentioned tne 3loao in connection witn n pocition ho hold in
tno Intwrl^r.


- 255 ?-


6 Fco-U-G££-2-3-3oard (FL)
Court So. I


A.- In connection with the f.iot that he hed no position in the
istry tho Interior.

Q.- I understood you to doscribe Blctx cb h'ving two positions: ono
with tto Party end o:* with tho State?

A.- That is an error. I do not think that I have stated that. Doc¬
tor Conti had a doiiil* position, but Bloat, wns aeroly the roprosontfttivo
of Conti in his capacity as Leader ol physicians. Ho was tho deputy
leader of physicians while Conti was tlx lvcdor of physicians. And, ho
was Reich Hoalth Leader, as a party lunetion end at the saao tiiuo ho was
Undor Socrotary of State ir. the Ministry of the Interior. Blono luu\ noth¬
ing at all to do with Doctor Conti'a position as Under Secretary of
State in tho Ministry of the Interior.

Q.- And, you testified that tho only Job that Bloax hod wns that as
Deputy Roich Hoalth Loader.

A.*- In his relationship to doctor Conti, he was only hio Deputy
Physician Leader.

Q.- Horr Brandt, I did not ask you whet his Job was in relation¬
ship to Conti. I cskod you what Jobs ho hold. Now, will you plonso

answer?

A.- Doctor 31ooo was the Deputy I^ador of Physicians, nnd I think
ho had in addition a function in tho Party with tho main office for Pu¬
blic Health. Ho nos active within th« Roich Research Counool as pleni¬
potentiary for cancor research. And, I do not knew h:*t far his official
position in tho Party had something to do with the educational rr.ttcr
or whether lx hod aoex ofiicir.l naao for it, I cannot say, but I did
not hear about any other functions of Blooo.

Q.- iierr Brandt, your attorney asked you, during tho course of tho
direct examination, for your Judgment on the importance of tho experi¬
ments with iihich this cas^ is conceraod. Do you rorxnbv-r that?


6 Fcb-Ji-GiS-a-3- xsrd (PL)
Court So. I


Q.- I recdl thr.t jou toatifi:, in affect, that nil of tho aipcri-
aoata charged ir. tto Indictment worv Inportent oxporiaonts *ith tho ox-
c-ption of atorlLiaation? *


- 2560 a -


o — *<4

Court *>. 1


A lfcon answering tho quostioa about the importance of cxperioonts, I
answers* In the affiraatlTO, but vlU that. 1 aid not want to express that
at tho tl-u the Banner of execution. *=4 the oxperlr^nt • in this form,

vero important. I can only open* about that if I had hoard then spook Ao
participated In tbusu oxpo?in«:.ts. The fact that such nuostiocs of sulfnr.il-
u—lie playod an important port with us. and that Its clarification was im¬
portant, and that tho of foot teat high altltudo oxporlcunts could bo of
importance Oocauso of special doaonds of taw Alr^foroo. It was In this
■ ur.so tant 1 wn.itod to establish tho Importance of tho qxpcrlncnts nrd I,
lr. that connection, poir.twd to tho skoloton collection and storllltatlon,
and thoso oro two groups which hare to bo oxoludod frou consldorntion.


-2561-


6 Feb- ■-Jr-3-l-£l'Jclcy


Court I

a.f-r datinui.., w th this 11. of quosta.ning, Herr,Br-ndt, I would
like to clo r up y ur relationship te t;i- rx y. Is it tru_ that y u h-1 a
r-nlc in th- aray? *

1*084

Q. ;hat was your r-iti nsnic t tlx r^y an what r nk did you held?

... Ttv- last tlsu I was 6-m.rolrrst f the H-torrc.

1. Did y.u hav- any fur.cti n fr.n th- r.ivy? x

... I had r. furtlwr c noocticn with th- tray. .‘.ftcr participating; in-
the first jr.ixcxs s in th- ye r f 1?35 I c.ntinu-d the cxercis-s up until
the bo innin. f Uv •; rj ’nd during th. war I was ccwdssi.n-.! t. exercise
functions -t th- .u-hror'a h_--*qu-rtors.

Q. Horr 'rarn't, d> y u regard as crlalnil oxp-ri xntati n n hu;.~r.

Ooines with ut tlxlr or.o-nt?

... That ck.pur.is up n what -xp-ri. -nts y u 'r- ep-nkinc «b ut. Tho quos-
tl.n of apjr v'.l -ctr -inf. t ny pin! n pLya an essential rclj in the entire
jud,h-nt f the ox;xrLc.nt3, th'.t is, in Jufclv xl y.u want t us- tho w.rc.
crinlnal.

1. '.oil, Herr °r-r.. t, shy ‘ y.u draw a distinct! n between tl*. typ.
f cxp.ri.xnte? Vert difference 00 s it nako nhrt typ- -f oxp-rir-nt it is
If tn. capcrl-nta. subject has nte ns-nt-’ t. un'er^o the oxp-ri’n.nt?

:.. Y u c*n sp.ak ab ut -xp-ri vots .ifccn > u st-rt usinr, a now drug.

Ono is th-n f tr._ pir.i r. that it is f us- it ut kn.wir* it in its final
details. 3v-n such r thin.- can o_ c usi cr-d at an experiment; and that is

why I w*ntcd to "ifforontiJtc betwo-n the pr blca; am in acdlti n th- question

*

Of v .luntary r inv luntary n tur- iltn r_f-r_r.ee t an innate plays a psy-
ch logical part, an* if rv_ c.nsidored inaat-r too re f n. .no w old have to
bo clear if a;iswcria such a qu.sti r. fr n tho st- rt as criminal wh-t cxp.ri-
=^::t rx is c nc-rn. - with. Tlx di.ficult poir.ts retarding t» crits arc
Suco in thre- p intr. Cn- is involuntary ..~tur_, that nainl> t... lack -f
n-_c--ssity £ sue:, an-xp_ri.-m.nt; an , tliird, t _ '-n; _r'.usn_sc f an -xporia-nt.


6 ?ob-’:-Jf->-2“ 2i ‘ ifl -' y

Q. th-: u r,'s, y-u fin'.* siconti n: vh_r. it la p-ssibl., alth ugh
wj expori-~nt*- subject koa n t v lantour, th-.t n rt>, tne leas th_ -xporlawnt
ic pur alas ibl_, \xVi by way f law ' •-ris? la tn-t right?

... Beth car. bo p-aaibl-, yos.

Q. leu cro a factor. I ah uld think tlvt y.u aro probably rnthor
frsili-T with aalprrctico ^aaco an. at".tut-a in c-Tinny. Supp. so, Herr Branch,
y u trie! ut c jww 'ru*. n n. cf your p ti-nts in pre-v'r G-r.’~.ny wit;. ut
tollin'. th_ auoj.ct -a ut it r aakin hi a c. ns.n- in any way, ^a. as a r-eult
tho pera n w-r_ in.‘,ur— by this -’ru^. «2*‘. y u nr w ul-‘ y u net bo subject

to a char> .t rr.ljr-.ctico? x

... 1 certainly* ul o- aubj-ct t • such a charge.

Q. roll, ttxn I f! n't quit. uncUffat-n* th- situ-.ti ns ir. tf.ich you aay
it ie p> r laaiblc t a •v,thin v> t a xrocr. v.ith ut Ala c neent*

U. F-r th t n-.i n I arte th- iiliun-otintl.n bof ro, nm* I a-i' 1 that
we iru at t.u. a — tir- e ncorn.with th- ru-ati n <f ’"Ofor uan-aaj -.nr’,
whit y u just o-.l poae-se-a so>»r uan.aa in a6 iti n t < oing f -n invo¬
luntary nttur-. fnis nakua it .' ubly A i ~:i i c ura if it io n t essential,
then that <• ul’ bo th- crux of th. pr blu >.

J. Hurr ^-n t, w ulrt the -xp-ri.v-nt* c.i in th- if.'Ictn-nt bo
e-l-dnal if th- orp-ri...nt ;1 tubj-ett n t c.newnt t uitfer. in;, thoso
VXD rlr* r'«? 433 ' u ".»s>er t.-x ,Ue8ti.n?

DR. £ jiV., f U’S» Hr. Pro«i'!ont, w. 'r. hero c ncerne*' vitftth- lo^r.l
quoati n hich cmui t bo put t th- eltixas.

TH5 PR SniNTr I w ul' aek c uns A if by hia quo a tic a no l.ic-r. a to
nsk th witrxas whether th. -7? ri’xn-.s — I dsn't kn w t which oxp.ri wnts
c unaol refers — v ul b- bj-cti.v.olo r ill-, al if c irrie l n by a physician
up n p-ro.na in civil iifo riscennocto with ti illitiry s-rvico.

’irLL'EY? That ia correct, y .r = n r. I v. ri ply trying t.» s-"rch

th j.r-.l value* '■•tic rh it»a plrc i n-» -vr-rin-nt.nl -itu-.tl •• l

tnia type.

JUO'" P.I..G: S- w thon, r. cHnney. in .sin*. y ur quoad, r., are you


-J3©3-


6 Feb-KJ-3-3-3L-JtU»y (?U
Court So. I


attor.ptins to oUcit from this vitrxss hia views r.a to wialftcr each of
those cicjxri :orts i t illo £ al or criminal cruaauro or oro you cotxorncd
rri j-rily with :*ctlxr\ pawing the prosecution theory of tho cose
to be true, these vxporLeor.ta were iUcg'1 »■ criminal becauaa of t’.x
■xnrter in which tboy were executed?

IE, 'teKUSXs -oil, I think it ia the latter, your Honor.

JCDG3 SEFISGt I think oerhopa tret ie not too cioir.

%

IP.. UoHAIZT: I ax trying to determine U* importance which tho uit-
r.oaa attaches to ccrsunt by the oxo-rimontal subject in tlx context of
tr» expurinmts here c’ erged.

jyOG3 SKMXfc It would ae^a to on that there night bo a certain
typo of so-called o-dccl exponent ifclch in and of itself night not
be anticipated to produce painful or diro corus-quencea. On tho otbor
hro-.d I apprdtend that any typo of •xporls.r.t, if continued tc OXCOSS,
aiglit oo a erfclnal axpori^ntjand 1 would suggest, if I nay, that if
that diffovcntiatico ia oado tc tho witnoaa, perhaps wo can yjt at nhnt
are trying to here sore quickly.

>2. iJeWSY: If tho Tribunal please, 3 think I wiU proceed to put^
ting questions to hia with roapoct to oaeh experiment in Uw inrtict-
Mr.t rathor t.ion in tho general aannar I hr.vo stated it.

C,.- Horr Irandt, you rave heard tlx testimony rnd ovidonco in thia
case with respect to tho freusing vxporinu.ta carried on at the Dachau
concentration eno:. I will •* you to assus* that tlx proof as adduced
by tho prosecution, for puipoaes of this question only, ia correct and
true; and you will recall tint hh.ro was substantial to at loony and proof
that tlx experimental object. in that experiment did not consent to un¬
dergo tto o^erWta. wiU toU tlx Tribunal your view on the crlrw
Inal character of that experiment on tixt assumption?

jUDCS SfflBIS: Ilr. UcHcn-7 are you ccooomod don with tto c^ori-xnt

cr tlx armor of its ^x-cutior.?

•jr. HcHoncy: Tlx experiment ca it was carried out.


6 Fcb-y-JP-J-U-S^* 1 ^/

C -urt I

jODGi SJOSIuO* ^ It «« aup^5-<! t been execute.: in nee rc'.zncc

with tn. prosecution pr<cf?

wr. ’cHAFSXt That is^rirht.

q. .Jssiiin- ti -vx? riaents were carried cut in tho nnnn r th?t thu
pr-aucuti ,na pr»f tea tuirfcc f ah.», in your cplni n ne that a criminal
txpuriaont?


-2565-


6 Fab U7-* - U-l - LJj - Harrow


A . In thin fnn I cannot answer that question. Che conploxity of
criminality is being presented to me and I as asked to judicially evaluate
this concept. Basically I can only speak about.-freeti.ng experiments and the
necessity for freexing ex^riaents and I can only say something about
that is all thoprerequioltea which led to tho experiment are clear.
Therefore, I oft. only say something about the ethical point of view and

A

this othieal point of view is influenced by the marj*r of the tasks

which have led to such an experiment. Tr.e cost decisive thing In the

*

assi-;rjBei.t of an experiment is the following question! Is the experiment
important or is it not important? If you refer that question to the
freerinp expert. .;nts, thon the iaportoi.ee of surh experiments can play
a ~wr* order tho circumstances of tho war. The then clrousa tancos of
• «.»n wt* >h- of tho state to the interest of .wdicino and

thon 1 -ad to »ho yr, that such f\>aing exporimonta have to be

carried out. Them, frer. s certain point on, »e arc ccmcerood with the
manner of jxeeuti.>> Tho execution of such experiments oust again bo
subdivided into voluntary nature or involuntary nature. If, in addition
- I spoke about tho darioruisiv*s3 and harsTulnoAS or the experiment -
then the oxpurioont, if it is harmful, can't possibly bo carried out by
phuslciuns when considering all husan considerations. If any dangor
c o-ao up, then the physician has to assume tho responsibility for tho
dangor in connection with that experiment, mxy state order con be a
safeguard, and a state order cun be interpreted in various ways during
a war. Jut I ca r.ot dofino ny position with reference to the freezing
experiments and I cannot establish whether such an wxperiarnt, from n
juristical point of view, was criminal or not criminal.

W. Do ycu Think the freezing experiments w c r<; dangerous?

A. '"ino•* fatall''# \w\ u (J. •'••.7 ... r- i:~ ,r dwTer 1 '"

nants.

JUIXJE SjSRIWJ: Hr. HcHar.ey, I would like to address a question to
the witness.

aitness, for the soke of clarification, let us assume that it would


Court I
fc VtH.W? u _ »*


- Narrow


b~n hUh* i^-t to *. t to —tn, - • —' 01


f „t. ho. lo* . husan being could -i«h.W e^oauro to cold before
suoettijirg to the affects of it* Do you underttand that? Uf. «.


toco^ that h^ccn .*J-U -.re aolecUd for euch freeing c^rDtente
rttheut their ccncSnt. Lef. thirdly that euch lnvclun«ry hunan

subjects .era subjected to the oxp.rtn.nt. end died as a direct or
Indirect result thereof. He, .ould you be good enough to intern the
Tribunal .hat your vie. of such on exp.ris.nt 1. - either from the legal

or from tho ethical point of viow?

IHB : IHBS 81 I oust repent coco more, In order to make sure that

I understood you correctly. Aon assigning tho experiment the following

things are assuaxit highest military necessity, involuntary nature


of the experiment, and the dangorousrwss of the experiment with the
eventual fatality. In this case I am'of the oponien that, vhon consider¬
ing tho circumstances of the situation of tho war, this state institution
which has laid down tho importance in the interest of tho state at tho
some tic* takes the responsibility r.way fren tho physician if such an


experiment ends f • filly and such a responsibility has to be taken by


tho state.

JUTGE SEBRIHGs Now, doas it taka away that responsibility from
the physician, in your view, cr does it share that responsibility Jointly
with tho physician, in your view?

TME ifITKSSSt According to :y opinion, this responsibility is token
away free the physician because, from that moment on, the physician is
rarely ar. instrument maybe in th. sa-e sonse as it would be in the case
of an officer who receives an order at the front and loads a group of
three or four soldiers into a position where they have to !*eet death.
That relation, if I apply it to German conditions during the war, is In
principle tho smo. I don't belic-vo th t the phusician as such, fren
his ethical and aoral feelings, would carry out such an experiment
this assurance of tho authoritarian state which giv-s him a fntan 1 and


-25‘7-


Court I

6 F»b U7-M - li—3 - LJ - Narrow

legal assurance on oa« side and, on the other side, gives him the order
for the execution* Naturally, in this case, it is a tnooretical quj3tlon
since I cannot survey the position in the case of the freeling experiment.

I don't know hem this assurance was given and hem the order was given*
Basically, I want to differentiate between the order for an experiment
which arises fron radical mods os such and whore, under the circumstances,
the stato only has a secondary Interest on the basis of medical initia¬
tives, ard I would differentiate between the reverse stato of affairs
where the state uses nodical activities.

JUIXIE SEBRINOj Tho Tribunal ins one further question of interest.

In your view, would on order which authorized or directed a sub¬
ordinate radical officor or subordinate nodical group to carry on a
Certain radical experlrant - lot us essune for the moment this freezing
experiment - wo have then o general ordor, let us assume, direcUng a
certain institute to carry on frogling experiments without delineating
or specifying in dotall tho exAot courso of theso experiments. Would
you conceive that such an ordor would authorize tho medical officor to
whcc tho order who addrocsod to solwct subjects involuntarily and subject
thorn to experiments, tho execution of which that officer absolutely
know or should have known would likely result in death to tho subject?


6 Jc&-«-£££-7-1-Putty

Court Jo. 1.


13 ¥IBESS *  1 have 7Jur U8t -ntenco reputed, please? This
quctloc i. Ctrc-el7 difficult to answer. ft order hat to be taken into
consideration wich i. giran in such a case. :* y ■ >Jrhapi . enBw .,

an ont.io of sue- an order. If 2i-ler give. an order to n Dr. - Z - and
toll, hi, to Ci-rry out ^certain exponent. then it would have boon possible
th,t M. a Dr. -*• did not vise to adhere to this order. In such a c so.
covcver. this Dr. will not hare orerlookod the inportanoo of tho
experiment itself, tho sai* way a. tho Lieutenant wno received a certain
-.Hilary order - and w B are horo concerned with a uilltar.v order - doe.
cot overlook th,t ho would hare to hold out with a group of eight non at a
bridged «* vnlch would end in hi. death. , a . plto of thl . offlcar

with hi, wight aen to ^ou ho passed this order on would Boot hi. death nt
thfcl P °* Ul0n - So tnls physician -X- who rwccived this order frou Hlnnlor
V ° Uld thu ••*■««■«■ have to carry out an experinont without ovexw

looicinK the importance of the ox..orinor.t whicn prompted a central agency.

If * lAT,lcUa ^ n0t c ' rrlod 0ut th-t exporluunt. he would have cone


into a posits vLoru ho would be taken into account If ho h «4 not
' Ut tb.it expwriwnt. In this case, and thorc we havo to consider the
authoritarian i*turo of our State, the personal fooling and tho fouling of

u sped* 1 professional, othlcal obligation ha. to step behind tho totnli-
tsrira nature of Ih, war.

I nuct soy once o3r0 theso -re theoretical oscuaptions which I an
expressing here. At U. 0 sane ti;-o I want to oxproo* now difficult such


decisions arc if I wu'd point to an oxo-pU weich recently was quoted
f.jre, .ad I wean tho olgfe hundred innate* in a prioon in Africa who woro
infectod wit* uil^ria. I OncH want to point to this oxaaplo in ordor to
Justify tho cxp*rii.ents which.ro under indictment hero, but I want to
express t^t the question of tl« iu ortoncc of an experinont is basically
end ro-ilns basically of a decis-vc importance. Sven in tint case a certain
amount of fatalities ca£ to bo t£k.,a into account from the start won in¬
i' ectinc; oifit hundred people with seluria.


In. voluntary nature wnich an It. to adopts nd with wnich tax innate

ii*u -O


-


6 ?ufc-.-3IS-5-2-FMtty
Court jJ. 1.


put* hlusclf ut this disposal la a relatively voluntary naturo. I don't

it !• tho same if one vo id receive such voluntary natures fron poopl<
vno <je prosout here. One has to consider the moaner of tho voluntary
nature. In ay opinion, tala round figure of eight hundrod speaks against
the entire viluntury &ititfo. I would assuco th. t if it was aovon hundrod
tnirty-fivo or seven hundred forty, it would bo difforont, but the round
figure of ci.-ht hundred sec-:* to lead to tho rwiult thr.t there wna a cort’ •
order for tho ozp«riuoat before tho boginni.v; of tho oxperiuoift, and thoso
exporinonta, too, wore directed fron tho point of view of a superior St-tc
interest, and tni* superior State intoroat, at the so^e tine, tcleoa over
tno responsibility for the result of the oxporlccnt with reforonco to tho
experimental subject.for reaponalblllty.in a nodical aonae cannot bo
a,asuuod at all alnco oven a negative sorios of oxporinonta spooks ngnlnst
the urgency and necoaalty of theao oxpcrlnenta; and particularly wfcon
answering the question about voluntary or Involuntary, dangerous or non-
iangoroua natures, it la vorj difficult :.nd oluoat not possible to ary
basically with rvferenco to experiments that ox;««rir;onta on huuj\ bo'ngo.
taking .41 these things into consideration la l critic or ia not u or no.
r.'.v quostl c can only bo Judged whon ovor and abovo tho oxooctod roault
oxperli.’ojnta arc atill continued. If a result wre already oatabliahoi and
tnuo further axporlucnts on hu-rji being* are c-vrriod out, they nro not
important, and witn rofcronco to tho oxporlmont wnich la not in^rtmt w: ic*
ia only a diluttucticol oxperisent, in that caso I would fron tho start
assume tho word ■criminal". but 4ion dealing with important exp«.rlnonts,
it oust bo nocesatry to tako into consideration tho entire circumstances »
wnich playod a part nt that tine; that is to Bay. tho inportant oxporir.cnta
froa the morvont a result ia achieved become* not inportant. ?roa thut
noaont on, according to x^f opinion, tno experiment is criminal. Thoroforo,
it will bo necessary to. t when spooking about hurv-n experiments nt all, ono
snould put those results at tho disposal of tho State so — not only to ono
Stuto bpt internationally — so that experiments which are enrriod out in
Russia and proved, results would not bo continued in oth_r countries.


-2570-


6 Jab-*r-f2S-5->?utt7

Court Jo. 1

Vith roferonco to freezing experiments. 1 can only say In tnls con¬
nection tuet In <■. certain for., without saying "criminal" or "not criminal"
tawy snowod their value. The Indication for that is that tho results in
t.'.e j-eriC'-o .^ir yorcc voro considered as something particular end hclpod
t cxi _£orleun ..ir yorco to gain years, and I think that those experiments
would alto bo of uso within Dining works tdtoro n nunbor (£ fatalities occur
boc uso of froocinfi. If you consider tho freezing exporinente in that li^J
tho victims in offoct aro tragic, and it is to bo regretted, but with
rcfcronco to subsequent periods tnls victim is a real sacrifico for words
or :oybo thousands of pooplo would keep thoir llvos and prolong tholr lives
bec-.use of it.

JUDOS SS3RIHG: Vitnose. this question of tho nocesslty for ar. oxpori-
uont, is it your view th t it is for tho State to detornlno tho extrono
nocesslty for such oxp-rluunt >-nd thoreaftor thoso who sorvo tho St to
aro to bo bound by that procedure? I think you can or.swor that "yos" or
•r.o".

VTlTeZSS: ?.il« trial snows that it will bo tho task of tho State
utd.r ell circumstances to basically clarify this question in tho futuro.

JUDGE SEBHI9G: Witnoss, as I understood your statements a nonont ago,
Dr. 3r ndt, they woro tin t tho :hyslcian having onco bocono the soldior
thereafter cust subordinate such medical-othleal views as he may h vo that
-ay r.riso ir. confliet with a military ordor from bi,*or authority, is th-t
true?

:a tflTKSSS: I didn't wont to express it in that fora. I did not
can to say that tho physician tho uonont ho boconos uodicnl offlcor should
ca-ngo hi s basic attitude as a physician. Such nn ordor in tho vory same
woy can go to n physician who is not a soldior. I meant it referring to tho
ontiro situation as it prevailed with us in Gemmy during tho tino of nn
authoritarian loadersnip. This authoritarian leadership intorferred with
tho personality and tho personal foolirge of tho human being. At tho nonont
as r. personality is dissolved in the concept of a collective body, overy


-2571 ~


6 Fob-ir* CIS- 5~4- Put ty
Court ifo. X.


iaujvd which is put to th t personality tu* to to dissolved in tho concept
of a collective systo-. Therefore, tho dcnnrds of society nro put abovo —
every individual hu;jui being as an ontiro con-plox, and this Individual coi*-
;.lex, the huu-n being, is conplotoly used in the intorcst of that socioty.

TCc difficult tr.in#*ond sooething which is hard to understand beoio-
nlly is that during our ontiro period, and Dr. Lcibrand roforrod to that,
that ot thr.t no:wnt everythin,; was dono in tho interest of huaanity .^ad do
taut tno individual person hrd no P e nni ng wfcrtsoovor, and the fr.rthor tho
wsr proyrssiod, tho strongor did this principle thought appear that wub
dosignotod at the oai as total war furc, and in accorfcnco with that tho
losdorihip of tho Str.to quito generally ordorod and Aoaxndod th: t ordors bo
errriod out. It Is a very tragic for a nusbor of persons not only within
the framework of those oxperinents but ulso in other situations th t they
»..d to work under such orders. Without consldcritg tho ontiro situation
as it provallod in 0 «r~-ny, one cannot understand tho question of thoso
particular ojqericents at rll.


-2572-


6 Fi»b-*-SM>-l-Cro3s (FL)

Court !io. I

J\EGE SZERIfJG: Dr. Brandt, is it not true that in any military or-
gr.nlactior., over, or* of an authoritarian Statu, there comes c point
beyond which tha officor receiving an order subjects himself to indi¬
vidual responsibility, at least in the oyos of civilised society, for
carrying out any .uilitary ordors, particularly if tho ordor is unlaw¬
ful or transconds tho linit of extreme military necessity?

A.- There was a gonorol law stating that an officor doet^not have
to carry out an ordor which ho roalisod is a crimo, but tho question
with reference, to these various experiments is whothoj tho ordor con¬
es. n«d can ror.ilso what he is doing is a criac. If ho can realize it
tto, according to .ay opinion, he cannot follcw the «*dcr.

1a. McHAHZY: You hov* stated that where no are concornod with an
oxporiaont which is extrsosly important for tho SteU, then t!w Doctor
who is diroctcd to carry out such on coq>oriaont is oxtrical and is not
n aponsiblo for any death which aay occur. Is tho person who issued
the order responsible in your opinion?

A.- Are you referrirg to the freezing experiments and would you
tell .no who gavo tha order?

Q.- Ho, wo aro going back to tto hypothetical question put to you
by the Tribunal which stated that an officor ordering a subordinate to
carry out an oxporlmor.t, which wo will assume was of Stnto importance,
that that subordinate carrying out that experiment upon unvoluntary
uubjocts, so-xj of trhco died, as I recall you stated upon thano assump¬
tions the doctor who carried out tho experiment which was of Stato im¬
portance was relieved of tho responsibility beenuso of tho totalitarian
State. Is that correct?

A.- I said generally that in such a <gpe the state as such oust
take away that responsibility beforehand, that is , frees the physician.

Q._ ;:o«, I would like for you to toll 3*. whether anyone in the Stato
anyone suer. a3 tho one who issued the order, oust assume tho

- 2573 -


6 Fob-H-S .-i>-2-Gro3s (FL)
Court So. I


responsibility far thct experiment?

A.- Tixjro ia the question whcthur ho cm assume it. .Lion consider¬
ing tboce series of experiments it lust bo dependant or. who non jus¬
tified to decide about thi life the experimental subject. IX I cassidor
the case of craontrntion'cases, the, according to ay opinion, the oor-
aoa who is alow responsible was Hisnlcr himself for it was only liith
his consent, or only on the basis of ids order such experiments woro
carried through. These people attached to the concentration cojips had
been hcr.dad over to him and, therefore, he boro the responsibility fer
these for theso people tar thoir living or not living. If Hiaalor has
given such an order, or if he ordered the execution ol such an oxpori-
n*nt, the,according to ay opinion, the responsibility was with his, o
responsibility which he had to assume in his position as tho snprono do-
ciding am in these affairs.

G.- Suppose you have a case whore ttw experiment is ordored by tho
Chief of the lirfical Services of tho Luftwaffe. TJ» export, aont is carried
out by tho Luftwaffe doctors, and all that Hlasalor dooe is to xftlo tho
experimental subjects available to tho Luftwaffe. Does Hiaalor boar tho
sole responsibility there or does tho Chiof of tho Nodical Services of
tho Ljftwaffc also share tho responsibility?

A.- Accord!.^ to my opinion tho rc^>onsibility in that rosooot
rested with IdAfLor clone and not with tho Chiof of tho Ifedical Sor-
vices of tho Air Force because without Hiualor's consent and furnishing
of experimental subjects that mod* it possible to carry out such expe¬
riments. Tho Chiof of the Uudical Services of thu Luftwaffe couldn't
have carriod ttea out. Ttoro is perhaps a very clear proof for tho fact
that tha responsibility rostod with Kiaalor for those experiments woro
carried out, so to speck, in his house within tha framework of tho con¬
centration ermp. I don't believe in this case tho i\.sponsibility bon bo
attached to


- 2574 -


6 Fob-!*-3f-6-3-C-ro58 (FL)
Court Ko. I


the Chief of tho !ixlicd Services of tho Luftwaffe. The Chief of tho
&dical Services of tbe Luftwaffe could 'ut forth tho problem end the
urgency but in that manner ho would have regained at a vacuum if tho
person of Hi m l or, together with hi a personnel and huaar. boinga at his
disposal, would hot have helped hio putting at his disposal his space
in his camps.


- 2575 -


6 Fob. 47 -*-7-l-«CP- Lesser
Court No. 1

THE MARSHAL: Tho Tribute 1 is again in sossija.

DR. SAUTBH (Counsol for the Defendant Dr. Ruff): Ur. President, bo fore
•he 3rond> case is continue! I should liko to present to you the following matt,
and ask you for your decision and for your assistance. On the 13th of December
applied for a witnoss, Dr. Erich Hippko, that is, the forcer Chiof of the Modi
Inspectorsto of the Luftwaffo. Tt&s witness was approved by the Court. His who:
abouta wore unknown. I endeavored to find out the address of the witness. At t!
beginning of tho trial he was at liberty -.nd shortly after the beginning of th:

A

trial ho had been put in a British prison in Hamburg. In response to my
application ho was brought to Numbers and I was informed that the witness had
Trivod hero. This witness hed also boon approved for the dofonso counsol of
Cvnorrl Field Marshal Milch and hat*, been brought to Number? for him, too. In
th- last few days I have ropoeUdly tclkod to the witnoss. Dr. Hippko, in order
ta determine whothor I an to submit as affidavit iroo him or call him to tho
witnoss stand for oxemination. Yesterday afternoon, botween 3:00 and 4:00
o'clock, I was talking to tho witness, Dr. Erich Hippko, In the interrogation
room. Tho Prosecution had a Lieutenant Garrett telephone down to tho
interrocj tion room and say th t I was to stop questioning the witness, Hippko,
immediately, and that during tho next 8 days tho witness could not be question
by any defense counsel. On the basis of this situation I ask the Prosident to
ocide whether this action is correct end whether I have to accept it. Accordii
to tho rules of the first Nurojor-, trial and also according to tho rulos of the
present trial, if I umlcrst'-nd them correctly, a witness who has been requester
by r. dofense counsel and has boon approved ani h s. been brought to Nurnberr
•t the application of this defense counsel — such a witness is primarily
available to this dofense counsel. I do not believe that under the rulos of
African trial procedure the prosecution has the right to destroy this ri ( ht
-f the dofsnse counsel because they perhaps .-.lsc want to examine the witnoss.

If such a right is _ivon to the prosecution in the future-, then, in effect,

‘•K- defense counsel would no longer h-Vc my clAin to examine tho witnesses
rMi » requested and to prepare for his caoe. I therefore ask for a ruling of
'ne Court on this question, which has a certain basic import: nee for the
befense. As defense counsel, I do not want to claim anything for .myself wnich

2576


L


6 Feb. 4,7 -M-7-2-PKP- Lessor
Court Ho. 1

is not cy duo under Aaerican Trial Procedure in a fair trial, but, on the other
tend, I cannot tive up any of the ri,*ts which ar- granted at by law or by tho
co'JTt-. This is especially true if I would thereby cooo into denror of being

unable to complete ay document books cs e result of this delay and turn them ir

•

for translation. Mr. President, that is what I had to pre* ot to you.

THE PRESID-AT: I hove not the facts of this situation entirely in mind.

I remember aiming on order sock; days since, sequestering this witness for a
period of 8 days only, after which he would be op-n to ex'i/aiivtion by any of
the defonse counsel. The Tribunal will examine tho record at tho earliest
possible moment and announce its ruling on tho matter. I Qoticu, however, that
counsod for Defendant Ruff, on the 30th of January, advised tho Secretery
General that the witness, Hippko, was no longer require! as a qitness for tho
Defendant Ruff* Tho Tribunal will take this under advisement-and edviso counsel
it the earliest possible cement of its ruling.

DH. SAUT3t: Mr. President, may I add socothinp? V,hon Ulting to tho witnessi
Hippko, I had 't first had the impression th't it would be sufficient to submi
•.n affidavit free this witness end 1 had worked out tho affidavit together
■ith the witness, Hippko. At tho Inst n»ent, however, the witness. Dr. Hippko,
told me that for some reasons he did net want to sign this affidavit. Thoroforc
I a hr. 11 presumably have to coll the witness, Hippkw, to the stand nftur all. 1
c.y add that the sac* thing is true in tho case of attorney Bor gold, who is
defending Field Marshal Milch in the trial downstairs. The witness, Hippko,

■»s also approved for him nnd he too is not allowed to talk to this witness
ny core and we do not understand whether that is ri-ht or not. That is why
*. are asking for a ruling of tho Tribum 1.

THE PRESIDENT: It was not ey intention to indicate that counsol
■:uld be bound by this nvtico of January 30. He may stiU call the witness
if he desires to do so. The Tribunal will announce its ruling on the matter
sr.:rtly. Has counsel for the Prosecution anything to say in this matter?

* a ‘ ^cHANET: I thind I any be able to clear up the situation to tho
aitoal satisfaction of everyone. It is not correct th’t Hippko was found throur
“y of defense counsel, he have been looking for Hippkc since May of

and wu discovered, through our own efforts, his address in Hamburg.

2577


i it

fc F-b. 47 -i*-7-3-PXP- Lesser

Court !io. 1

*“ lh ° rCq ““ t ° f ““ PrJS '- c " Ui " •“ ■’■ there arruated erf kept in Kanburg
'* ° '“ rt tJa * ' n ' 1 U ’ on Sroa e ht ^ Kurnberg .t our requeat. In the m*Mm,
:.rt-lh of thu defend counuel applied for hha as » .itness end, of course,

" node » objecti*. On thu othur hr, hi, thu Prosecution take. thu position In
-.r.l, coo.-, and »1U toku . slrflnr position in thu cut of Eagur.. Hocgen, for
..--■,olu, thr.t thu Prosecution hA oucry right to interrogate uuch poruon.
ufon, they aru turnud o«r to dofonuo consul, m thi. particular c-uc, duo
; »*> misurderst-nding on thu port of thu Prosecution ond thu Secretary

it hoppoiud thot curtain of the defense Counsel in thi. com ok! in

“ ““ ““ 1 “ t#rr0 * ,,U ' 1 "*■ — • length before ho h»d over boon aeon

1 thu Prouocutlon ond, o. a aattcr of fret, exhibited to hie u uubut.-.ntial
•xoror of docununto .hlch fom thu haul, of thu record hen,; and, c. Hlppku
i-o.lf ho. put it, ho 1 . no. uo confused thot ho dou.n't kno» »h-.t ho oun
..tiff to frea .unory end fro. .hot ho ha. ,„u„ in thooo docununto. Consequent!
O, Prouocutlon asked thu Tribunal horu to rule tht thu Project ion h-.vo ono

•'* “ i,h ° * th “ rl ^ ht «■' interrogate Hlppku. *t thu conoluuio.

! ltr,t h ' ,nrU ' 0f '.rallablu to dufunou counoul for Ruff

d any other of the d.fonoo counool .-rf I think there .111 bu.no delay in
rx.din with this cr.so.

Dr. Bor^W ir. thu Uilch casu h-.s n.quustod th t Hlppku r = s r. witness
* rr^, in th~.t fcourt an! hu h-s also n-qu^stod the rifcht to intorro^to

this .iXtornoon. I hive confer^ with the prosocutor In thu Uilch wse,

L Ih'^ Jn th * r-r t of thu prosecution in this wsc, th.t that is

risible, but tho render of thi. wouk wu would like to h'vo Hippko
* to thu prosecution for Inturrogr.tion =nd on next Uzodzy ho will bo
ii blw to dofunsu counsel ? .t =ny tiao they went hia.


2578


6 FOb-lf-KBohnn (FL)
Court No. I


<


EP-. SUSTSl: Just a ainute, please, Ur. President, I do not believe

that I can oo satisfied with this explanation. It is ay opinion that

this cr.se would bo aiitablo lor roaching a basic decision of r basic

question.^ The following is the issue. As I understand African trial

procedure, the defense is to* be put on an equal basis with the P roso-

cution insofar as it is at all possible. New tho situation is as folios:

I apply for a witness; Dr. Bergold also ap P Uos Tor hin. TJw wit^ss is

unknown; we send one of our associates to Kruaburg and this aan finds out

•

the address of tho witness, then tho witnoss is brought t» Nurnborg. ”o
would cssuac as a natter of courso, that ho coaoe cs our witnoss and
that c onooquo.it ly he is at our disposal so that we can prepare our cas-.
Wo believo that in such a cas*. the prooocution should not havo tho rifeht
lo uxoaino this uitness without our presence and without our Jcnarledgo.

If no work frees the principle that in general, as far as possible,
defunoe is to have tf* soac rights ns the prosecution, then in ay
opinion this action is not quite ri,ht. If tho case wore opposite; if
i lx prosecution brought a witness boro, then the defense dooe not iicvo
t.x right to say. "I will now oxnnir.o tho witness ono week for tlva do-
fense and when I no finished, then tho prosecution can havo him."

Of course, the African prosecution knows African trial orocoduro
bettor and no dolonsc counsel are dependent on esperiur.ee in tho first
trial and tho rulings of this tribunal, but I would be grateful to tho
President if lids question could bo cluarod up. In ay opinion it is noo-
euarjr so that tho trial can precocd quickly and without difficulty and
ir. a fair mnner. Thank you.

*• fcHAIST: I can only repeat, there is absolutely no disagreement
I betwoun thu prosecution and tho dofonsc about their right to their onn
-1 trusses md the prosecution cortainly does not take the position that it
. :-a interrogate any of the dofoneo witnesses in the absence of flofenso
Joursol, but it sc happens there will bo certain cases, such as in tho

- 2579 -

L_


6 Feb-i*-<3-2-ZHii-lfeehac (FL)

Court So. I

witness.

Those are just situations that will have to be worked out. as they
case up. The Prosecution can do nothing .wore than take the position that
■hen we find th»a and bring t'roa to liucrnfcerg, or. our own effort, then
«e have the right* to interrogate thea first excluding the right* of tho
defense to interrogate then.

‘Jew, He poke was not found through tho efforts of the defense,-his
address was found by ua at the Aero Jctiical Center ir. Heidelberg and we
then got in touch with British authorities at Kaaburg and agents of the
British authorities arrested him then and he was then brought to Kuernberg.
But, by some strange coincidence defense counsel also found hia adilroso
and located hLa before that time. \.*hy, it is no nore t..an a coir.ci'Jonco
and I don't think t.’.ero is any fiuvdaoental disagreement as to right
of the defense counsel with respect to these witness, but we nill lave to
have these cases coae up froa tiae to time and they wiU just havo to bo
decided upon when they arise.

THE HtBSIDdiT: how, Kr. ItoKanty, can you jivo soae indication to the
Tribunal no* as to the nazes these witnesses that you say you havo boon
looking for and aro anxioua to get as witnoss, who perhaps may also be
usod by tho dofonsa. You eentioned the name Heppko and n» Hogon.

Hr. McHAHBY: Hoj.on and Heppl.o aro two that coao to oiirf; there are
of course many othor numbers of possibiUties that wo listed when wo first
started investigating tho matters at issuo. U drew up a list in oxcocs
of 250 to 300 doctors whoa we felt oither '. ore icplicatod in so_tu uuinor
or who at least had soce knowledge of the matters at issuo. Jo circulat¬
ed that Ust with tho American and British authorities to try to locate
thea. Sene wore found and a groat number of them were not. .0 could nake
that list availabto to the Tribunal. On the other hand, even though a
ran is on our wanted list, if the defanes counsel locates him first and
brings him co Juornberg as a volunteer witness, thea I as willir.- to con-


- 2533 -


6 F«W-SHS-8-2-io«ban (FL)

Coi»t No. I

calm they have exclusive right to that <aan even though *e havo boon
looking for bin. Of course, wc don't cLiia any exclusive ri^ht to the
aan even though no have been looking for hia and of courso wo don't
claia any right to arrest Ida at an appropriate opportunity


2580 a -


6 Feb M BH-fi-3-lioabftn (FL)
Court ::o. I


tf he is uar.tcd as a war criminal. But vo do insofar as being a witness
and insofar as interrogations arc concerned, if »e shall locate t.» .»n
first and bring hia here even though the prosecution says he is a de¬
fense nitress. On the othfir hand, if *o are looking for him and bring
nia here. Just because defense counsel has put in an application for tho
witness, uo ca-inot take ths vie, that « have lost our rights to hi as
a prosecution witness or shall »e vaivo our rights to interrogations.


- 2581 “


6 Ftb-l^ IAA—9-l- , fc , -oy (FL)

Court Ho. I


SB. SUTBSLt Mr. President, nay I =ake the following renark, the
Last thing that the Prosecution .lust said is precisely what oppresses us.

*5 things arc deno no. I cast fool that every tine I bring a witness hero
or give the »iitmsa*s address, ^fchat the Prosecution then says, "Stop!

We have boon looking for hi* for a ions tie. '• MiL1 exaaino hie first
for a .oak", and after he ;*s been examined by the Prosecution for a week
thon of course t!» defense can have hia. Tfat is .hat .o are .oroto^ing
against, at loast that is .hat I a-a protesting against. Uy point of view
is if this procedure is applied on a large scale, it aight Wo bottor to
chance tta practices of legal procedure ontirely and to say, no natter
nhethor the witness is brought hero by the defonso or tho prosocution, in
ary case tho prosecution is to have tfc. right first to oxaainc tho wit-
nos., and when it has no sore questions to put to tho witness, then tho
defense aay question hia. I aay point out southing else. Gentian,
this witness, Hippko, has bc.n hero in the prison for so«,ti»o. The case
of the prosecution has long been finished. The prosocution did not pro¬
duce this witness, and as far as 1 kno.: it and not subnit an affidavit
from this witness, therefore, in ay opinion, tho prosecution has given
evidence that it is not interested in this witness for this trial. How,
as tho defense has begun tho casus for tho defendants, in ay opinion ti.o
prosocution sliould no longer havu tho right, as far as this trial is
concerned, to exaaino this uitnoss without the aporoval of tho dofunso
counsel, but at least it should not have the right to keep tho witness
for itself for a certain period. Those are ay objections. Those arc cy
objections on the basis of ay knowledge of African trial procedure,
and concerning which I ask fer a mling of the Court.

THE PRESE- T: Dr. Sautor, in your opinion hew vitally necessary is
it that the d.Ienso counsel shall have precedence over tfc, prosocution
or vice—vor 5 a so far as priority in examination of any particular witness
or interrogation of any particular witness is concerned?


- 2582 -


6 Fcb-M-HU-9-l-Jaloy (FL)

Court !io. I

D.\. SAUTr?.: As far as I can Judge free tho cuatons of tto firat
trial, American la:* ia that tho aide Vrdch haa naasd a witnoaa has
priority and


6 Fab-WOA-9-lrMaloy (FL)

Court So. I

%

Dr". SiBTSlt As far as I can Jodgo free the customs of tto first
trial, Aaorican laa is that tbo side which has naoid a witnoss lias
priority and


- 2532


6 ttb-tf-lAA-9-3-:'*loy (FL)

Court So. I

t'rat the other side can exasine this witness only with the approval and
in the prosoncc of the opponent. That '-as ttc procedure so far aa I
kn»<. If the prosecution brought a witness hero then the defense counsel
ccn talk to this witness with $hc approval of tte prosecution, and only
in the prcaonce of a .aweber of the prosocution. Newt, vx aro told tliat
dofenau and prosecution have the saca rights. If that is true, then it
would have to bo exactly the aaae in the opposite case. In ay opinftm it
should not lattor wbother xt was the prosjeution who brought the witness
to liurnbors, or whether it was tho defonso which brought tlx :dtnoss to
Kuraborg voluntarily. If he dous not went to coao I cannot send a joop
after him, put hia in it and bring hia to Humberg by fcrco. Tho Prose¬
cution can oral auat. Therefore, it aakoe no differonje who brings tho
witness to Kumborg.

Wo defense coune-lwcre told tho witness, Hippke, could not be
found. Thon wo sent one of our associates to Kaaburg, Ho found out tho
address of tho witness, and Dr. Zxrgold and I told tho General Socrc-
t*rykOffico tte address. Wither tho prosecution was trying to find out
tte address of the witness and wlxthor tlxy found out this address by
tho .natives, I do not knew.

TK3 PP.3SID2HT: It will accoaplish as a natter of convonionco in ex¬
pediting tho preparation for trial, if tho witness is going to ho brought
here personally to be personolly present as a witness by tho Court rathor
than to take his affidavit, then as I 'understand you are ceroly con¬
fronted horc with the procedural inocnvcniunco, becauaj tho prosoevtion
Jas irterrogated hia first. I suppose that is the point, tacause theo¬
retically I think that the Court nust assu.-®. that any witness laving
beer, placod under oath will bv assu-xd to speak tlx truth undor oath, _
r.o ratter by uhco ho is first interrogated or by whoa ho is questioned.

Is that not true, sir?

DR. SA'JTZR: Theoretically, fat is true, but in practice J.he prose¬
cution

- 2583 -


6 Fcb-lHttA-9-3-::al°7 (FL)
Court Ho. I


h>« a dIffcroat vio:?. II that wore trio what you have Just said then it
would sake no difference whatever to ti* prosecution who examined the
witness first. If tho prosecution is interested in questioning the wit¬
ness first anti demands that wl^n tho defense counsel questions the wit¬
ness a manbor of the jroa-ciiion should bo jrosent, then the daiense should
have tto oar— ri^ht, or one should say in the beginning that tho Prose¬
cution awl defense do not have the same rights and we would have t3 ad¬
just ouraclvos for that.

THE PRZSHJa.T: The Tribural will tk~ the natter under adviaant
end cnnounce a ruling as soon as possible.

DR. SALTER: Thank you.

C,.- Horr Brandt, if an order was issuod to a medical officer instruct¬
ing bin in general Urns to carry out a free ring experiment without
stating the *nn~r in which the experiment was to be urformed, would you
say that this nodical officer was resoonsiblo for the manner in which this
oxpulaent was carried out?

A.- My point of view would be according to a phmso I uood justor-
day, that tho officer would have to keep the experiment on as small a
scale as possible awl tu possibility of a positiv- result should bo
assured; but ho is retponsible for the. mannor of oxecution of such ox-
porlr.onts,since nr. experiment may be extended unnecuosarily and may ohai
accompanying fjrnptaas which have no connection with the question at issue.
For all these things th> person ' .rrying out the experiment would bo
responsible, that is to say for the manner of execution of the o;pcri-
SM’lt.

Q.- Korr Brandt, is it not true that you held positions of groat
poier and no»>oi»ibility in the medical aonricos of Goranny after July

19U?

A.- 1th reference to the tasks which were assigned to ao, yes.

Q.- Couldn't you ev^n direct German doctors to disregard the Oath


- 2581 -


6 Fcb-!*-IOA-9->:iloy (PL)
Court Ko. I


of Hipocrates?

A.- I think tho Oath of Hipocrates is not an oath which is to bo
cttsngcd as a law. Oath of Hipocrates is a foraulation concerning
sorcl •


- 2534 a -


6 Fob--' IA-9-~-A'-loy (FL)
Court Ho. I


end ethical obligati crj. I do not believe that anyone is ordered not to
observe tto asral obligations of a doctor. If I said anything jfcout

this it was that t to ^ die el end norel attitude aust be the docisivo

%

thing as fir as tix. doctor is ^oncornod. I do not know whether that ia
an answer to your question. That is be* I understood it.

£.—Didn't you cn at least one occasion, and I now have roforunoo
to a cattur other than euthanasia, diroct that ctoctors should not bt
bound by a certain provision of the oath of Hipocrates, and a certain
provision of the oorally accepted code of ethics for physicians?

G.- I do not be Li vo that I _ssu_d any instructions, the irord in.
^ructions tiouM ooan soo. thing general, to observe anything but the rx<U
lcal point of view.


- 2535 -


Court Jo. 1

6 Feb 47--10-l-iaC-Hintuck


To refresh your rseollecti -n, witness, I ~ant to out Docunont KC-119

to you.

(Docuaent handed to witness.)

(cont'd) Witness 1% h*ve y~u bed an &i->ortun'.ty to look rt the docu-

QOBtT

A. I Just ate it aov. .;ay I reed through it?

Will ycu look r.t >age 3 of the document? Is this not ^n order frc a
Hitler /living ycu authority to instruct all Gercan doctor! that they are re¬
lieved freu thoir olod^o of secrocy concerning their patients end further
ivln you authority to direct thea to report confidential inf or nation re¬
ceived concerning the condition of their o. tlcnte?

A. Thttu ver» not py patients. It «rs an order signed by Hitler say in r.
tho following:

■I not only relieve ohysiclens. nodical nractitionero, end deatlots of
thoir olodgo to socr.cy t-wdi ny Ccoalssloner-Oenorel ?rcfecsor Dr. Xnrl
orendt, tut I plr.ee upon then the binding obligation to adviao hla - for ny
own lnforcatlon - lmcdUtoly after a final diagnosis hr. established a
■oriouo disease, a dioenao of ill-boding chrracter, with a neroonallty
holding a lofdinjc poeitlon or a position of responsibility in the State, the
knrty, the Vehrsccht, in ind.uatry, and .o forth. (signed) Adolf Hitler"

Q. You passed thia order d.vn to all physicians, doctorc, and. dentists
in Corn any through tho agency of Dr. Conti, didn't yc/ul

A. I ^ysolf did not onto ,on tho order, but rs far ns I recall, Martin
Boroann passed on this »rd«r frou Hitler and. Martin Boronnn or .bably addod the
necessary words so that it was prod/ iaed ra nocossnry.

q. Voll, look rt the second p<.„-«. That's n lottor fr«n Tr. Conti to
tho heads of the nsdicel chambers, dated 9 January 1943, "Subjoct: Fuehrer
Decree on Suspension of r'lo.^o to Secrecy in special erses. Oentloien; I an
sending to you enclosed c Fuehrer Decree which I received fr» ''refossor Dr.
Brandt." Wouldn't that indicate that you erased the order do^n?
a. It ie possible that I passed it on.

25 <*

-2586-


C-«rt S^. 1

6 7sb *.7-«-10-2-Sa<-S i na buck

Q. And that dees relievo German nhyoicians fro." one if tho nornally ac ¬
cepted principles of nodical practice, doesn't it?

A. In special cases.

Q, Did you ever relluvc doctors froa their code of ethics in any other
instances?

A. I did not fr>s thee in this case either. It was a clear or<or frea
the Tuehrer.

Q. And in other cases?

A. In other cases? I don't recall any other cne^s. This is a quite
clear order free the fuehrer for specific reasons «ivln,; rise to this docree.

Q. Herr Brandt, didn't the decree A 28 July 19*2 eppointln r, you Gonerol
Coflnissioner require thrt y.u he kopt inforned about the fundamental events in
the nedical service of the Wehmacht and civilian health service?

A. Toe.

Q, Veren't asdioal oxpsrlocnts on concentration earn innrtos without
thoir consent fundamental events?

A. I was not inforned about thou. Conseouently the offices which hed
to deal with theo r.nr>«rontly did not oonsider then fundamental.

Q. Wasn't the very -surpoao of requiring you to bo inforned. so that you
could at.viee Hitler?

A. Since I was subordinate to bin Personally, the -mrotsc va> that I
could inf ore hin.

Didn't this Fuohror decree cf 28 July 1942 enpower you to intorveno
in c responsible canner?

A. Within tho framework of t>* assi.pir.ccts *iven no it would havo boon
possible.

Q. If Encr.loeer had cor.c to you on 1 August 19*2 and told you tho de¬
tails about tho typhus experiments in Suencnwrld, what would you h^vc done?

A. It is not clear to no in what forr. Handlcowr *mlfi hrvo described
these experiments to ne. That cones bade to tho noint v hich I nentionod

once before this uernin*;, discussing the basic attitude towrrd experiments,

*\ .,

that the person who conducted the experinonte, the causes and so forth,


-2537-


Court lo. 1

g Jab 47-H-1CK—LEk-S inr tuck

v*ro n-t discus sec yet. I cssu-c that Eandloser's description cf the oxperl-
sects. If ho had kn-vn It, v:uld have bien different fron the one vhich has
been given here.

<t» Veil nov, Eerr Brcndt, for turposes of answering this quuetl c, 1
want you to assu.e that Eandloser told you all the details of these tyohue
oroorlaents; that tho subjects were cone on trot 1 .<n ca=p innate* who did not
voluntocr; tha.t they tested various typhus vaccines by i rtlflclglly infecting
tho cxncrinentel subjects, nvst of vhco bed not been previously orotoeted ty
vaccine; that he further told you that each aenth they Mcked out six concen¬
tration canp lnrcntes nan Inf octet* then vlth typhus f.-r tho solo nurpoee of
having tyohus-lnfected blood available for the exneri*«nts; and that ho fur-
thor told y^u that a Urge nuiber of oooole '•ere dying as a result of thoso
exoerlnents. Vhat w«uld you have done after receiving that lnforaatlon fron
Kandloser?

A. Tha.t Is such a theoretical auostlon lc a fora in vhich I conn-t
answer it. I consider It icuossitle.

Zfi. XnLTi (Counsel for Erne User): Hr. ^resident, a hyoothctlcnl ouos-
tlon is being asked by the or-eecut^r. This hyootheticrl ouostion, of oourso
not lntentivnally, but In fact, contains nccusrtions against o defendant who
has not yet boon exanlnod and concerning when no facts have boon proved which
would Justify such a hypothetical asauuuti A. The sene aucstion could bo
asked if tho prosecutor said, "bhat would you do if itaeono, anyone, ronortod
such and ouch fact to you.* The uontloning of this on« defendant Aofanetes

his eharncter without pny -xusitllity of his defending hinself.

kC HASLT: If the Tribunal nlorse, I think tho record very clearly
•hows that this is a hypothetical Question and is put to the witness with cor-
toln aasui.T’tiJns r*de. I used tht defendant EcncMoear beenuso Hrndloser is
aentioned In the decree of 28 July 19<-2 and according to the *\rosecuti-n he
was subordinntec to sene de,;rec to the vitness on tho stpnd, and I wanted to
try to estrblisfc tfcp.t power, vhrt authority, what influence, this witness
would havo brought to tear if he h it knowledge of t> crl::inrl er-x rinent. He
denies such knowledge. Ve will ettennt to prove, end I think ve have plrerdy


-2538-


Court So. 1

6 Tab 47-H-10-*«-i3i-B lncbuek

Trowed, that he did hare knowledge, but he denies It end I now vent hin to
aaauae that knowledge ie brought hcce to his by acceone who Is eubordinetod
to hln In eoce decree end try to get en anaver froa hla which will givo ua
aoae Indication of the atepa he would then have taken.

THL ehiS I3ZET: Tho uao by counsel fee oroeecutlcn of the nace of the
defondaht Rendloaer hna no effect uoon the Tribunal. The Tribunal understands
that thla la alnoly t hypothetical questiofa. The nan* of nny^nerticulnr
defendant al^ht well hr.we been submitted but the Tribunal urdorairnd® orxctly
what the oroaecutlor. Intend* by hla questi n and the Mfe of the neae of tho
defendant Randloaer la entlroly wlth<»t prejudice tc hia.


-25S9-


6 Fg b—^-DJG-11-1-? u tt y (FL)
Court So. I


BY !Xr. 'fcHAKSY:

Q.- Son, ui tress, tell us shat you would hive done if yor had re¬
ceived this information?

A.- If I had received this information, I would have rocctod to it
in a cortair. fora, but this wsuld have had nothing to do with the. pos¬
ition *ich I hold at tint tins. Hy position in respect to fr. Hcndloser
at that tine was not in anyway that of aubcrdinatico of Handlbtxr to
oc. That is a decisive factor in this question. If 1 disregard ay pos¬
ition at tto timo, if I nssuae that the year was 1941? I woulu first
hr.vo triad to [rot aon. inforcction and find out exactly what hid hnppon-
ed and what Lx; reasons wore, and in soce loro possible to .* I would
probably have tried to clear up the situation if it was described to .x
as critical.

With rogard to ay position r.» C&a-issioner General and Hcndlos-r's
position, my position in resect to Handlocer, ay position in 1942 v;nn
clear that it t.-ao a mxation of ooordiirtion of general needs with xv-
fp.ct to the Civilian Health S-rv'.ce, and within tlx framework of this
work, I could have tnhjn action if it ur.s r> special task which !iail been
assigned to me.

C,.- /ould you have gor*. to Hitler?

A.- I rould probably have gor.e to hi-i after I had discovered what
*is going or. by ay sc If.

Q.- Do 70 U think your influence w<t.h Hi*.L.r was such that you could
b:vu had this ciporiment stopped?

A.- Titafc is also a hypothetical question which I shall however, try
to answer. Ic would be vary important what tho experiments were end what
the purpose of the exp^ri-Lnts was. It nould be Important whet.xr ho !i.a-
a-lf had given the instructions which I might have learixa only at that
'.cwxnt. I could have roforred to various points. He wouLd probably in tho
case of typhus cite casualty figures, and it r.aa said that in such and


- 2590 -


6 Fcb-Sf-DJG-li-l-Putty (FL)

Court Ko. I


such on aray group there wore sj naa7 deaths froo this disooso and that
he w-.ntv-d to have tho infoiretico discovered about tho therapy, and it
would hove been possible for at to hove acid it is inhunanc. In that caso
ho would have givon Be ton or tvonty photographs frcre his desk of the
lost cir raid:., end at tho end ho


6 Feb-H-DJG-11-2-Putty (FL)
Court Ho. I


would aay op.nly: "I don't care hoc 1 win the war; tho important thin;
is that I do win it. p I cent to stem tat tho possibility of such n theo¬
retical attempt to > re vent experiments would hove been limited in its

effect. As far ".s I nc concerrud, it is an open question whether in ouch

•

on actual ease I could tavo pxovuitcd an arporlaunt or not.

C,.- Didn't you concern yourself at all with medical experimentation
on human beings during th> tiou you woro General Coraissioar? ^

A.- You -ay bo referring to the letter of 1943 concerning hopatitis
cpidonica concerning which I said yestordajr or day before. fcat it is pot
clear to me to chat extent this letter was writ ton by Granitz date t;x.
first of Juno. Up to that tiau I ted promoted research in tho field of
epidemic.'., r.t first, and ttnt to clear up the virus question 1 had sug¬
gested to Grnnitz thet experiments should be carried out. Thus I has for-
aally brought into connection wltfe those experiments after ay time in
1942.

./oil, witness, I Bgv« to get a different picture nee about this


2391


6 Fc b-l^^HU-ln-Put*.7 (FL)

Court No. I

letter thin the coc I received froe your direct examination. Do I urcor-
st-rd tint you nos admit that you spoke to Crawitz and 3uggcst_d to him
that cxp-rlionts be carried out or. concentration cnap iiwxtcs in con-
zvjction with Jaundice virus?

9 %

A.- Ho, You did not understand ac correctly. I said when I began
this sentence that this assusption nay hav., criginntcd with this letter.
Tso or three days ego I said that it is cy opinion since I ftid not dono
any work in connection uith hepatitis ooidcaica beforohand that there
was probably confusion iktc, but at the oaucr.t I cannot prove it, of
course. I pointed out that om jear lator on the cane question of hepa¬
titis cpidocdca :<r. Schreibor, who was in charge of epiaeaic control,
sarrtod to carry out such axporia-nts.

But, witness, you now stjt.-d thr.t you yourself were not corcorn-
ed with jaurdlce research end that you did r.ot ask Craw its to aako pri¬
soners available to Dotoen as stated in the letter.

A.- I cannot remember that 1 askod Grawitz to do this.

Q.- ..’oil, ttoro you Interested in jaundioo research at about that

tine?

A.- Xiao question of Jaundice os such wes not a specific question
which effected nu pcrsonr-aliy at tint time. It wan a qxstion which was
encountered by evoryone in tho East. The orobL-n of hepatitis opldordca
as a disease, as an epidemic, free the year '41-*42 on wo3 general pro¬
blem.

Q.- Did you concern yourself with experimentation on human beings
in connection with any setter other than this Jaundico probloa?

A.- I cm not cnaru tint I occupied aysclf with coq-erlnonto on hinnn
beings dunlinj with otfcr diseases in any way.

Q.- .ias it not one of the anin reasons for the issuance of ttoa sec¬
ond Fuuhror Decree oa 5 Soptcaber 1943 that Cor.ti was refusing to su-
irdinate hims-lf to you?


- 2592 -


6 Fcb-a-sat-n-iis-Piittj (fl)

Court Ko. I

A.- Conti not subordinate to oe end could not ajborci.^sto him¬
self to x alter the first Puohrar docrco. The first decree had not
said that ho was sutordircte to jc or that I ^cd any authority over him
with tha exception of curt*if! tasks of coordination. Tho Sccaxl Decree,
as I said, was issvtd


♦


6 Fcb-ir-ii?f-H-2a-?utt/ (FL)

Court Ko. I

primarily booauso of th^ aaterial difforcrccs. kc far ns Conti pleyod
any rolu horo personally, they wore differences concerning x-ray machin¬
ery, x-ray apparatus. I gave on x-ray coni any the assi.gifixnt to estab¬
lish our supply x-ray apparatus. Conti told this company and tho
husd of tfe coopany not to carry out this assignat nt. This nos the con¬
flict with Dr. Conti in connection with the Second Decree as .'.do i~xi
the gene ml rodiccl program tasks which r^re the nxt urgent things.

Q.- Didn't this Sucond Decree ocpros-ly state that your uitliority
covered the Gold of acdical sci^ncu and roserreh?

* •

A.- As for as it is to u.xer stood .. sen wo of Dooroo No. 2,

I established nn offlc* for that reason called Office for Science ard
i k esearch.

THZ PBKDgffi The Tribunal will bo in recess until 1:30 o'clock.
iL recoss was token until 133 hours.)


\


- 2593 -


Coart I It *7

6 Feb-4-F X-12 -1-Beard-LJ3


Corrected Copy

SESSION

THE MARSHAL* The tribunal is again in session.

DR. SBIDL: Ur. President, the defendant, Dr. (berhouser, wishes

to be excused because of her health today after 3 o'clock.

%

THE PRESIDENT* On request of Counsel for the defendant (berheuser,
the defendant Cberheuser nay be excused fron attendance in the court
roos after 3 o'clock this afternoon.

The Tribunal has considered tfco question raised this morning by
Dr. Sauter for the defendant Ruff, and under the peculiar'circumstances
of this case, the Tribunal orders that Dr. Sauter bo permitted to talk
to the witness Hippke froa this time on, and the order previously issuod
b7 the Tribunal is modified to that extent.

The Prosecution nay procood.

MR. McHANEY* If the Tribunal ploasos, with respect to tho ruling
Just male, is the Prosecution roquirod to apply or cfctain the clearance
from any and all tho Dofonse Counsol prior to the interrogation of
Hippko on tho part of the Prosecution.

TUB RESIDENT: It is not the intention of tho Tribunal to includo
any such provision in tho rule Just made.

BY MR. McH.»JEY:

Q. Horn Brandt, I would appreciate it if, in answering tho
question *iich I will put to you, if you would cake your answers brief
and concise as possible in order not to prolong the interrogation to
too groat an extent, ife were speaking of the second Fuehrer's decree
of 5 Septcrfcer 19U3. This decree empowers you with contrally coordinat¬
ing and directing the problems and activities of the entire Modical
and Heatth'1jertfp»V''-lfa3 it part of your functions pursuant to this
decrow.to- coordinate aria direct medical research?

The sonse of tha fording in that decree was *-o avoid having
research assignments goin^ entirely to one or the othJ, and in ordor
to insure that if throo fit four agencies were working on the cane
subject, that they be coordinated to start on a con-on task; that is


Court I

6 Feb U7-. k -FX-12-l-3eard-LX


to aay» the results of one group should be accessible to another.

This fact accelerated tha completion of the tasks with which we
were coccissioned.

Q. uell then, if I understood you correctly, it was the purpose
and function of your office to coordinate all nedical research work in
Germany?

A. The word “all" goes a little too far perhaps. In ordgr to do
that, I would have had to have an extensively largo office, a larger
agency than I had. x

Q. Did you receive copies of research orders at the tine by the
nodical service of the Wehmacht and the civilian sector?

A. I assume that certain information came from the civilian and
the military sectors.

Q. Didn‘t that decree then give you the power to stop experimen¬
tation on hucan boings, if you had received knowledge of such experi¬
mentations and regarded it is improper?

A. In such a case, the question would have arisen about itfioso
arm was longer, For instance, if the Reichnarshal, through one of
his delegates, maybe within the framework of tho Raich Research Counsol,
and perhaps in connection with Himlor, had order tasks, such an in¬
fluence on ay part would probably have not been possible.

Q. I can agree and understand, Herr Brandt, that in a given situ¬
ation it may be that your objections would have been overridden, but
my question was whether you did not receive authority to interveno
with respect to nedical experimentations, to tho best of your ability
and power?

A. The question of human experiments was not touched upon at all
when this decree originated. It was neither assumed nor rejected with
that order. What we understood by this order was an order to our
scientific academies. It was a completely different line of thought
than these diich have arisen here. That is why the question with
reference to the decree is a question put retrospectively, and not a
qiestion diich was considered dien the decree originated.


Court I

6 Feb b7-l-i£AA-13“I-31*kley-LJG


4 * *h«a did you appoint Rostock as chief of your Office for

.

Scientific Research? And I aak you to distinguish between the use of
the word "appoint" and the tine as of i*ilch ho may have become active.

A. It is not possible for me to give you the date when this
appointment took place. * It certainly occurred sometime before the
office was opened. It nay perhaps not have been declared formally;
but Rostock knew that he was going to assume such an office. As to
any written appointment, no such appointment was made.

Q. As I recall, you have previously testified that Rostock became
active in tho Office for Science and Rosoarch in February 19Ui. Is that
correct?

A. Since we had our office in Belits, we exercised our practical
work there. It was possible that before this he wrote somo letters
from his clinic; but I could only refer to an office in Belitt; and
that approximately took place in February of 19Ub.

Q. But you don't oxcludo the possibility that Roatook may havo
boon activo in the Offico for Scionco and Rosoarch boforo that time
in the Offico at the univorsity clinic or olsowhero?

A. It may perhaps be better to explain it In tho following way*
that if Rostock had asked anything with reference to science and re¬
search beforo the assumption of his duties, I would have boon tho chief
ayself, and Rostock would have written as my deputy or representing
ms.

Q. Didn't Rostock,as a matter of fact, perform duties for you as
general conaissiorer before 5 Sopterber 19U3?

A. I had no functions for him; and Rostock certainly did not
hold the Office of a general secretary or anything like that. Maybe
ho asked for information on ay orders, for instance sane questions
that he put with reference to medical question. He askod around
universities with reference to various medical equipment; and he also
discussed the question of consulting various professional exports.

But I can't recall exactly what period of time that took place. If

2596


Court I

6 Feb U7-A-*-Afw-13-1-8lakley-LX

he did that, it had to be understood that I was doing it ad he was
sorely takii^ sooe of the burden of ay work.


Court I

6 Feb L7-A-MAA-13-2-31akley-tJG

Q* I understand. Serf* Brandt, that you accept responsibility for
Rostock's actions; but I flow want to find out the extent of his coopera¬
tion and activity with you prior to 5 September 19U3. Now can you
give se any period of time prior to that date that he was active with
you? *

A. It is hardly possible to give you any date. Maybe he knows
it himself; but I really could not fix a date.

Q. Xou had offices in the university clinic in Berlin, the' sane
building in which Rostock had an office, did you not?

A. Rostock was ny chief there, yea, clinical chief.

Q. Shat was Rostock's connection with the Reichaforschungsrat,
the Reich Research Council?

A. After I became a nesfcor of the Reich Ro so arch Council, that
is, after Hoveefcer 19i*2, then at a later date — I don't know whothor
it was 1913 or 19U — the question arose that a representative had
to be appointed for the Rosearch Council, fihon this quoation aroso,
Rostock took over his dutios as my reprosontativo as a mcstoor of tho
Research Council.

Q. Do you romocbor more exactly when that took place?

A. No, it is not possiblo for do to say that.

Q. it beforo or after tho decroe of 5 Soptentoer 191*3?

A. I can't say that.

Q. As chiof of your Office for Scionce and Research, did Rostock
investigate what radical assignments the Reich Research Council had
made?

A. He approached certain organiaationa in order to find out what
research assignments were given out; and I assure that he received
mtorial free the Reich Research Council for that purposo and then re¬
ceived current reports on the work which was done. But whether he
actually turned to the Reich Research Council for special information,

I cannot say at the accent. I an sure that he will be able to testify
about that very clearly.


2597


Court I

6 Feb U7-A-itAA-13-2-8 lakley

Q. Did he not investigate these research assignments and aoo
what was being done and then decide on their essentiality?

A. I think the question was first as to the subject; ho was in¬
formed about the subject. The manner of the execution of these research
assignments and the extent of these assignments was certainly not re¬
ported in that fora. Neither did it happen that Rostock or ay depart¬
ment, Science and Research, wore concerning ourselves with these
questions alone. Thore were also certain departments in tho ministry
of Speer which started functioning in tho year of 19bb.

Q. Didn't you and Rostock have the power to decide on tho neces¬
sity and priority of all medical research work?

A. Tho question of urgency of those research assignments was not
directed by Rostock nor by mo. The dogroe of urgency was dictated by
cortain urgency priority designations which woro givon by tho various
rosoarch groups. I don*t think that I could answor that c^icstion with
"yos."

Q. Didn't you and Roetock thon have tho power to docido on tho
nocossity of cortain rosoarch work?

A. It has to bo considered in tho light that ono could aid
Institutes to cariy out work.

Q. And you also saw to it if two or throo indopondont groups
were working on tho same nodical problem that thoir efforts were co¬
ordinated, did you not?

A. It could well occur. I think two questions aroso. Two or
throe groups could work on the oar*j field; for instance, at various
places, work was done on penicillin. But that has to bo separated
free tho fact that scientific research itself had certain organisational
frames. For instance, thoro was tho Reich Rosearch Council; and thon
thore was a department. Science and Research, tho Ministry of the
Interior with Dr. Conti. Then, of course, thore was the Ministry of
Education itself, which dealt with such tasks within its institute.


2598


Court I .

6 Fob Ia7-A-WAA-13-3-31akUy

5. Herr Brandt, Atf* could you and Rootock perform this coordinat¬
ing function of nodical resoarch without knowing what was being done
in respect to nodical research by the various groups working on a
given problem?

•

1. This task could really not be fulfilled in this manner. In
order to ful f ill it completely, it would have become nocossary that I
hold a much larger position and a larger office than Rostock had a*
that tin*). Rostock, in addition to his other work, has managed that
work. The question was that certain matters of scienco and research
had to bo aided and scadosias also bolongod to that question. Tho
quostlon idiich you put on tho basis of tho wording of tho decroo was
not in accordance with tho factual ovonts as they took place.


2599


Court I

6 Feb U7-A-*ID-lu-l-Malqy-LJG

Q. Wouldn't Roe took, as Chief of the Office for Science and Research,
go to tho Reichfofschungi-at and investigate what nodical research was
being carried on there and direct that priority be given to one medical
research task as against another?

A. It would perhaps take such a proposal, but the profession
aedicino within the Reich Rose arch Council was not headed by him. For
that thoro was a apocial expert designated, and he in turn was subordin¬
ated to Gooring personally. It is tho aaao relationship as was disc us sod
with roforonco to Genoralarat Schreibor. In this capacity as ploni-
potentiary of tho Reich Research Council, he was also only subordinated
to Gooring. Thoroforo, it was only possiblo over Gooring's hoad, that
is, only with his consent to givo a diroctivo to tho professional oxport
in the Roich Research Council. It would havo boon different if Rostoct
had mado a proposal to this professional export, and ho had approvod
it and thon startod to work on it, or oxocuted such work. This, however,
still moans that this professional oxport was independent.

Q. Horr Brandt, Wilholn Gooring was interrogated about tho Hodical
activity cf tho Reichforsehungsrat from tho boss chair in which you
are sitting, and I am sure it will cone as no surpriso to you that
ho was no moro anxious to accopt responsibility for what wont on within
tho framework of that organization than you aro, and os you say you
•ere too busy with othor matters, tho Roich Marshal protosts tho saooj
and I aa now trying to investigate to find out Just who can bo rospon-
siblo for thoso nodical activities at tho Reichforschungsrat, and I
ask you whothor Restock, to your kncWcdgo, over proposed or ordered
anybody in the Roich Reaoarch Council to givo priority to certain
nodical research work being sponsored by tho Reich Research Council?

A. The Roich Research Council was an Institution which was svb-
ordinatod tc Gooring b.- spoclal decree. Before that, it had been on
institution of tho Ministry of Education. On the strength of that
decree, Gooring became,as a president of the Reich Research Council,
th^t nan who had tc as sirs? Rostock could make any proposals as to


2600


Court I

6 Feb U7-l-ATD-lli-l-4tolo7-LJ3


degrees of urgency of tho work that was done in the Reich Research Coun¬
cil, I cannot say, and I should like to say a^ain that he probably could
talk about tfnt. If in this case, the oxpert in tho Council, and horo
wo ire only concerned with nodi cine, if he in turn recognizee that pro¬
posal of Roetoek this does not nean to say that Rostock was the superior
of the Roich Research Cowcil. According to the charter of the Reich
Research Council and according to the aaterial that I know about that
sat tor, tho export was very cloarly subordinated only to the President,

Q, lour answer is then that you ycwrsolf do not know of any
specific instance whon Rostock proposed or orderod that a ceVtain rosoarch
should givo priority by the Reich Rosoarch Council, is that correct?

A. At tho monont I cannot reooeber that anything like that has
happened, I think it poesiblo that he proposod it. Ko would probably
know naro about it than I do. I really appointed hin for tho purposo
of being active in tho Qffico for Sdcnco and Rosoarch.

Q. But you assuao tho rosponsibility for his acts pursuant to tho
operation cf tho Qffico for Scicnco and Rosoarch, don't you?

A. Certainly, I assuaw it.

Q. Now, tho docroo of 25 August 19Uz, garo you tho titlo of
Roich Canaisslonor, did it not?

A. Yos.

Q. And that gavo you an office equivalent in rank to a Roich
Uinistor, didn't it?

a. Uy position was considered as a position of a Stato Socrotary.

a. And sirco you wore subordinated directly to Hitlor,your offico
"as in a position similar to that of tho Roich Youth Lender, Von
Schlrach in tho organization Todt?

A. I aado no comparison bofore. That nay be an administrative
political question.

a. '.fell, Wilheln Frick has drawn a chart on *iich he shows your
Offico, your holding an office sinilar to Von Schirak in tho organi¬
zation Tcdt?

A. I should like to say in reference to the position of ay office,

2601


Court I

6 Fob U7-A-A3-Iii-2-Kaloy-LJG


Minister Lcccors could rako so=o stnaeoRta, sirtco ho at that tioe
played sons


2601 a


6 Feb. U7-A-,-.TD-U*->!£alcy
Court Sc. 1

part ir. the friedrv. of the decree In the year 19Ui. Frick maybe had some kind
of lea dration about itj but when I beoame Reich Ccseissioner Frick had ix>t
been Reich Minister of the Interior for a year and a half, no ho spoko aa a
Reich protector for Bavaria and Moravia, so I djn't know if he oould overlook
a situation like thatl *

Q Did the decree of August 19Ui give ycu any power in addition to that
which you had as a practical natter on the 5th of Septesfcer 19U3t

A He said that the authorities at that tine wero not oRxosod and he
therefore gavo ne the responsibility to oarry out the tasks which wero
assigned and tho basis for tho aasignaent was the docroe of July 19U2.

Q Well, precisely what additional powers did you recoivo in tho dooxee
of 25th August 19Wi?

A Tho decree stated that in order to carry out ry task I had tho right
of dreotive to those agencies which were dealing with questions of nodical
acrvicoo, that is Stato, Party and Axrxxi Forces.

q Conti really knew he was your subordinate aftor this deoroo, didn't
he?

A Keithor Conti bocane ny subordinate on the basis of this doerso or
Gancralsiabsoberst Kandloser. If it had been one it would hado been the othor.

Q Didn't Conti, as a natter of fhot, subordinate himself to you aftor
this docroo of 25 August 19U*?

‘ A No subordination was mentioned in this docroo. This decree was not a
docroe which creatod any Ministry of Health where I became its chief, but on
tho strength of this Jocree =y possibilities of functioning were extended, —
and the word "extended" probably wouldn't be quite right - "Strengthsnod"

•wild bo better. I have stated that the decisive thing for tho creation of
this decree was the attitude cf Conti, who prohibited his associates to : ti
lid no in ny tasks which were assigned no by the Reich.

%


-2602-


Court I

6 Fcto-A-G=S-l5-l-3ro33-LJG

Q* Foil, that is ifcat I Say. After this decree, Conti was no
longer able to put up any objections, was he?

A. Certainly ho could raise objections. Wo wore not concerned
that I becooe his superior in the Ministry of tho Interior but wo were
concerned thfc whonever I roffoivod any assignment I could only carry
it out with the air of othor institutos. The budget of ny office
was kept so low that it was ir^oesible to carry out the task which I
received. As I just centioned, the work I had in ny office Planning
and Econccy, it was necessary to extend it by aid of tho Ministry of
Econony, Ministry of Speer, and naybo use Industry itself. Thj Four
Tear Plan at that tino no longor playod a decisive rolo. Sinco, how¬
ever, that was not possible, tho situation was that tho tasks were
carried out with tho holp of cortain parts of those agencies. But I
did not becoso the suporior of tho Ministry of Speer, tho Labor Minis¬
try, and the saco was true in relation to Dr. Conti. If a demand was
put to mo to carry out sene additional nodical care, for instance in
the Ruhr territory, I could only do this with tho support and adninls-
trativo holp of tho Civilian Hoalth System, Dr. Conti on one sido and
the agency of Gonoralcborst’bsartt Handlosor on the othor sido. If
one of theso parties rejected such aid, tho carrying out of measuros
*hich I had to carry through was cade isspossible. Khonevor I took
ovor such a task I was always responsible for its carrying out and I
could only bo thnt if I received aid free tho two participants accord¬
ingly, but thore was no relationship of superiority.

Q. This decree rupresontod southing of a triumph over Conti and
3onnann, did it not?

A. “no circunvonting of Bornann could not cemo about by tho
signing of this decree.

Q. But ho was opposed in fact to you, was he not, Kerr Brandt?

A. Tcs, that was so.

3. So it would bo true to say that the issuance of this Third
Fuehrer Doc roe did constitute something of a triumph ovor Bornann on
your part?


- 2603 -


2603 a


6 7e'3--r- SIS- 15 - 2 - Gro % a
Court ; o. 1.


it la In reference to tho talk which I had to carry out and which I had to
tJw over. The notorial work which I hiA to carry out went far abovo any
personal feeling and certainly above cy fooling towards an oneny.

q. Herr Brandt, you do protest so such that I taink I nay have to put
a document to you. Z havo aero in front of so the ulnutcs of tho roport
of party sc-bor, Dr. Gross, to the Holchsleitor, dntod 6 Octobor 1944J
wr.ich says "prosent relationship between Dr. Conti ond Professor Bornann
it suen that Dr. Conti at the request of Bornann and Kinnler is to koop his
position as R«-ich Couniesioncr fo; Health. In tho npnntlao Dr. Conti has
subordinated hlssclf to Professor 3r. ndt. Thorcforc, Bornann drops Dr.

Conti altogether.■ I ask you t,sin if this T-.ird Puchror Docreo doosn't
roprosont something in the nature of a trluuph on your own part ovor souo
very powerful forcos th. t wero opposing you?

... I c. n only ropoat what I havo said before. In such n enso tho
question of notarial necessity is uore important than any personal fooling.

I know at the tit-c after this dogroo, without roforrlng to thoso ovonts
that y.u havo Just contionod. I knew at that tino I had hardly any contact
with H rtln Bortnnn. Tho question of a subordinate of Conti undor ao aroso
but it novor case about and cortalaly w.-s novor intondod by tho dooroo.
Othorwiso ssao othor titlo, soao othor position would have originated than
Reich Couuiosioner. Tho position of Conti and Gonoraloborwtabnrzt Hond-
loscr wore oxoctly tho stao to do. Thoro was no talk about that whntsoovor.

Did Hitlor ovor show his rpprociotlon of your good work by gifts
of oonoyf

A At one tine I roedved oonoy froc tho Puohror.

^ When?

A Perhaps vns in the year of 1943 , or perheps I 9 U 2 . But. I do think
it was I 9 U 3 , but it say havo boon I 3 UI*. But. I think it is norc perhaps
1944 than in 1942.

$ How such aoncy wore you given?

A At that tlno I received nonay amounting to 50,000 narks. And, about
30,000 regained for sysolf because of certain expenditures I had at that tine


-2604-


6 February-A-OJG-l^-3-Grcss
Court No. 1

Q Did you have tc pay any inccnc tax co this racnoy?

A No. I did not have to pay inccoe tax.

Q For what reason was the ocney given to you?

A )fy pay as escort physician I have sinco the year 1934 was very

%

scarce. I received a oonthly additional salary - I dca't .mew hew it was
designated - of 350 narks per aonth. Then I received ay foes free the
clinic, that is, what 1 earned through cy activities there. This sura was
increased to 750 aarks durine the War. Uy personal expenditures, boceuso
of the docrease of ay incoeA *iich cans about aftor th^ beginning of tho
bar, were in a different relationship* At that tine I p>t into dobt and the
Fuehrer knew about it. Consequently, I receivod this sun of noncy.

Q Did you say that you received 750 narks a year as General Coral 33 -
icner?

A I never nenticned tho rcount 750.jaarks with Reich Coraraissioner.

You asked ao for what reason 1 received this sun and I said that at first
as escort physician 1 received 350 aarks and that this sun at the boginning
of the bar was increased to 750 mrxks. When I bocarae Conrdasloner General
this sun dropped out and I received, I think, 1200 nrrks, that is monthly
end not yocrly.

Q New, Herr Brandt, you have already mentioned that you were a raonbor
of tho Presidential Council of tho Reich Research Council?

A A ncabor of tho Prosidil Council of the Reich Research Council.

Q hhnt year did you bococe a a«cb«r, 1942?

« 1 boeace a ntuber in the year 1942. That's right.

Q And Gocring was the Frcsident of tho Reich Rosonrch Council, was he

not?

A Coering was president. Yes.

Q There were twenty-one ntnberc -1 the Prosidial Council, were thoro

ret?

A I wouldn't knew that. I didn't count then. I cnly know about it
fren the documents that are available h<-re and it shews that there were
twenty-one if they were all listed.


-26C*-


6 Februrry-A-OJG-15-A-Grcas
Court. Bo. 1


Q Conti v.3 a ateber, wfca he r.ot?

A Yea, Conti waa a 3 ccbor of that Preaidial Council. Yea.

*

Q Bonaann?

A I don't knew who the individual nttafccra wore. There is* a liat

%

available arxng your documents *ere they are all liated. I don't know who
exactly compiled that liat. In the Preaidial Council of that Reich Research
Council, that ia to aay, a aecting of that Council nevor took place and I
never loamod that any such netting cane r.bout. It waa in the rutujm of 19A2,
subsequent to the decree giving the Reich Research Council to Goering, thero
waa an intrcductory neeting of the Reich Research Council in ita entirety
■here about 150 to 250 persons attended. That took place in tho Ministry
of Aviation. At that tine no differentiation waa nedo whether anyono waa
a Preaidial Council ceefcer or Plenipotentiary and I cannot aay ».ho tho in¬
dividual moabora wore.


- 2606 -


6 Feb-il-JF-l6-l-Lesscr
Court I

Q. Horr. Brcndt, the docusent which you hcv. reference to nos obj.ctcd
to and consequently it is not in the record; so, therefore, I ecu having to
you -a fow questions about the R.ich Rusu.rch Council and the ambers theroof.

If you do not know, than sisply say so, v-ry shortly, and we will procood*

Ves Riailcr a richer of the Prasidinl Council?

... I do not know that.

Q. Keitel? *

A. I cannot say* I cculd only say on tha basis of the list which I
saw hero anc which I do not know whether it is correct*

q. oil, you roxnber Hentcl?

... .enrol, yes.

Q. .jxl ycu rc.fe.sbor Osenborg?

... Osonborg, yts.

q. So we have 6, cumting .^njol and Csenbcrg. They nre ell doctors,
aren't they?

... Csonbor;, was certainly not a physician *nd '-enrol was not a physicJ an
oithur.

q. eo only 2 doctors on the i-rosidial Council, ?e tT as you know.

... ..s far as I know, th.r. m.re only 2 physicians thv.ru• I do nit know
that Os.nburg .r Itonrol were in that irosidlal Council. I * s in a Chip to¬
gether with Cs.nb.rfs and I was of tho opinion th~t ho was th.ru on th. brsis
of his activity in the planning Offico within the Reich Research Council, but,
:f cJUTS., I jey b_ wrong.

q. Did y-,u ku.w that the Dof ndant Siov.rs was deputy to . enrol in his
capacity ns th. . rma^.cr of ...

... I die not know that at the tiio.

q. Y u Icnuw that th. oper tin suction of th. R.ich Res.arch Council was
divided int scientific depart ^nts Xiclos of pl.nipotuntiari.s, don't you?

... Th.r. w.ro certain ne.ads of usp.rt '.p rUi r.ts and certain plenipoten¬
tiaries.

q. -nc’ in thus. .Xpert or sci-ntific rtex-nts th.y w.re cenc.rned with


-2607-


6 Fcb-..-JP-l6—2-LjS3cr


Court I

a greet rnnbcr of thirds oth_r then _*»dc-l r~ search, weren't they? For
sxaaplo, thuy ha a do part-*, nt on physics, choaistry, mathcoatics, motels,
engine ring, n^riculture, forestry, an:, goo-physics, did they not?

— I hare soon a list ho«e and because cf that list I saw the nun-rcus
kinds of departaants rtiich existed within tha entire organisation of the
Reich Research Council,

Q. Her you re.:u--bur the naye Sauerbrvich, den't you? Ywa kncw*whc he

was?

V

A. Yes, I know that.

Q. .Csn't he twad of t hj scientific dep-rtr>;nt for nodicino of tho Roich
Rose ireh Council?

A. Ho was the hoad of the scientific department and I think the nano was
•classical ijcicino".

Q. And in tho fluid rf plcnipetonti-ri-e you had Schroibor ns plenipo¬
tentiary for upi-’eniics. I think y«u havu already at'tcd that, havon't you?

... Yes, plenip. tentiary for th- c :ib*ttin; .f epidondcs I think it was.

Q. And Blcno for enneor?

... Yos.

Q. .nd did ynu know a nan ivuiod Jotton?

... Jotton - Jetton, yes.

Q. Ho was plenipotentiary fer lung diseases, wasn't ho?

... Yes, the sc-callod lurv dur - -iecasv.

q. De ye u recall any other heads of sciuntific departments r 'lunipotun-
tiariws c ncciMinfc .-uilcino?

-• Ko.

Q. .s'ow, doctor, I put it to ycu th t ther„ wore cnly two ambers of tho
Presidiol Council of tho Reich Research Council who wuro dcctcrs and thoro wero
cnly four sae-ibers of scientific dop-rtu._nts »r fields of plenipotentiaries who
■cro deters. I ask ycu, weren't each cf you . -ntlorson fssiliax with itho wDrk

th t the oth-r nu was doing?

... I don't think so.


- 2608 -


6 ?eb-WP-l6-3-Les3ar


Court I

Qi Dicin't you ever c -nsult with Soucrbruch, Bloae, Schroibcr, or iny f

then?

... ;.s far as I roneeber I did net speak to Saucrbruch ab.ut cny ques¬
tion: with reference to the Reich Research Council. I occasionally not
Sauerbruch but that was costly in connection «ith conplotcly difforent questions,
xroly of z c: nsultntivo nature. Neither die* I speck to Blia, nb ut questions
cf cancer rcs».*rch as f-r as I recollect, And I certainly never spoke to S
Schrclbcr ?b ut tho c. chatting :f opidcnica. ;.t the beginning of the wnr I
eccasi.nelly saw Schrciborj After 19U2 or 19U3 1 hardly saw hi:a nftor that.

:.a fir as I recollect, I saw Hr. Jetton only cnca end that was at e period of
ti o whon the Instituto for the ccnbittlng of lung-dust disease had net yot
oxistod.

Q. Did Honxol ever c-nsult with >.u?

... I talked t: oniel regarding general academic quostions. >Jon*el was
not -nly th- busin-ss ennsgor and prosi'ent cf tho Reich Rosoarch Council but
his inportent tr.sk was the leadership .f th. Department scionco within tho
•'inistry of Education and this deportment c ntainod tho Sub-dopnrtront Kodicino,

I spoke t; hi_; with reference t; this Sub-depart; lent Kodicino within tho
‘inistry f iSrtuc ti;n btt as far as 1 to n I never discussed any research
tasks with him.

Did you knew anythin, -b ut cr have any c.nncction with tho assignraont
issu.d by t!w oich Research Council to Rascher t: conduct dry freezing
experiment*?

... I die not kn w that. I learned ab.ut Uv.se axperirents hare for tho
first tino.

Q. Did y u kn.w nnytning ab ut r have any c ..t.octi^n with the assignment
issued by the Reich Research Council o- ilirt i Strasbourg to conduct gas cx-
fCriionts?

••• I di ' not participate in this * 33 i^naont an - 5 I did not kn:w about it.
i heard ab ut -:irt's activity an.' the work itself because of tho final report


-2609-


6 Fob-. JP-16-ti-iA- :sor
C urt I

which Dr. Slevora brought to ae in I arch of 19Ub. But even at thot time I
iid not knew that this resignaent and this work ware done in eonnocti n with
tto Raich P_i search Council, or < urc initiated by the Reich Research Council.

Q. Di-’ you kr. w anything abcut the support of the Reich Research Council
and th« Luftwaffe of Hasgen's typhus, yellow febor and. jiundico research?

... !*c. 1 only learned about the a. experiaents ho re, on tho basis of
djeuaontary ovidenco. ^

Q. Wore you or Rostock or any c«Vj in y.ur cffico connectod in any way

X

with the research conductod by Raschor, Hirt, and Hongon, or any .no of thon?

... I don't know no ut that.

Q. Did y-.u kn. w that c .ncontmti.ncr p inentwS were boing systematically
usod in Ger.rny f r .cdical exp-ri v-ntati n?

A. Mo, I did n.'t kn-w that.

Q. Did you never hear anything ab ut such uxpiri;}nts <th.r than tho
occasion, which I think y u have already ad^itiod, in connection with Ocbhardt's
•xpsrinonts?

... It is wry diificult new to say, now that th.ro is sc much talk about
axp-rinonts e in^ n, th't one had n. knowledge at that tino. H wovor, I was
a w lnf:rxd ab ut thus, oxperi—nts. Rwaardio^ th. -xperimonts of Hirt, for
instancu, 1 was at Hirt's place at th. -n ‘ of Ipril 19Ui, and 1 did n t gain
tho i.iprossi n th.-t wo wore ccnccro-d with ^xperiitents on seme concentration
caap imrtos c-rriv-d thr ugh inccjpe.

Q. Herr Brar.dt, cno f th. Lipcrt-nt issues lv.ro is tho extent f your
knowledge ab ut nodical e xperi.- .ntati n c.ncontrati'n canp innntes and I
■ant yru to h. v«,ry frink with us and toll ua wVorythine ycu know ab ut that
subject -.thcr than th.su few instances ycu hnv„ already aonti.acd. De y.u
linit y ursolf t ths. experiments sp.cific.ally particul-rizod in tho indict-
neat. I aa interested in kn.-wing the dull oxtont of yeur kn> wled/jo “.b ut tho
use of concentration canp iirates for exp.rinont -,1 jwrp:ccs.


- 2610 -


6 Fob 47-A-S’ -17-1-lwohcn
C< urt He. 1

A, Any kncwlotlro, ifr.ich wont boyend tfco frcxio of whet hr.a boon
plrcod in tl o Indictoont against no, is n^t knewn tc no; Tho ontiro
^-.torial ernprisos r. nu:i>or cf experiments end thoro oxporJnonts
woro net k.cwn tr no. Jays rgc, I dofinod ny attitude towards
tfcg individual oxpcrinor.ts. Boyend that, nothin" bocano known tc
r.o ab« ut any oxporinonts end, apart fron that, I know nrthinc
r.b ut ttoso oxporinonts, hew thoy w-ro c rriod rut, olthor nunor-
ic-lly cr to whr.t extont thoy woro or.rriod thrru^h.

Horr Brandt, is it truo that Hit lor had ordorod that criminals
fii-ht bo uaod fir nodical oxporlnonts?

A. I assuno tl at sue! an ordor was issuod by hin, Hinnlor, on
Ms wn initiative, wrull ‘not hr.vo d'no that without bolng’ covor-
o.l by Kitlor. "urin;- r. provlrus interrogation, I atetod that, nccor-
:in tc ny opinion, it hepponod subsoquont tc tho throat rporntion
which ho oxp-rioncod in 1935, when ho said th. t ronorally it would
bo ccrroct t use crininals in order tc clear nodical prcblons with
tholr aid, Ko did net rop-at thr.t in any prociso cr basic caso,
but it was his crncopticn that it was ccrroct. That is why I have
fefco pinion, abevo all, after cettinc to k. cw all cf tho ovidonco
horo, thr.t Hirnlor was only carryln" than t hr curt after boin'-.
m vomod by Kitlor aftor ho saw to it that ho was covorod.

u c you knew, as a nut tor ef your knenlodco, that Kitlor ovor
issuo-l such, an 'r’.«r?

A. I nov r loamol tho fact that ho Issuod such rn erdor; this
is merely a crnclusien and rotrcspoctivcly apoakln-, which I acs-
uno is corroct.

^id ycu ov^r hoar Kitlor discuss such a natter?

A. Nr, I noV'.r ho. rd hin 'dscuss it, oxcopt in c*onoral stator.onts


abut such a natter.

n .. 7oll, wkr.t wero his "onoral statonents?

'hr t I said bof ro. According tr :iy rpini'n, tc ok placo in
1335 whoh ho discussed tho question rf oxperinonts cn human boin^s


-2611


Court I

6 rub U7 -A-CT-17-2 -iiee'nan-LJj


as such. It happened without any particular case or without indicat-
i-g an 7 cortain procedure, ithother he caae back to that subsequently
or during the war, I do rot rcccrber. At any rate, it did not occur
in ay prosonco, but I an of the conviction that he did that especially
in view of the personality of . Hi mm l er.

Q. Aral you state it is also your conviction that this oust have
been so bocauso even Hlmlor would rot have undertaken such things
without being covered by Hitlerj is that right? A

A. I only drew a parallel with Martin Bornann and I should like
to ronlnd you about ay discussion regarding Pastor Nloaooller. It is
possiblo that tho discussion between Hianler and the Fuohrer could
have bcon carriod on in a similar Banner. It nay well have boon that
tho Fuohror said sooetning liko that quito generally and Hiraalor thon
urderstood it and appliod it to sono specific caso and thon on his
cwn initiative continuod to deal with it.

Q. Horr Brandt, I know you havo boon interrogated many tiros,
but I would liko to ask you if you roroebor having boon interrogated
on this sano subjoct, about a Hitlor order, in August of 19U5, possi¬
bly by a British officor.

A. I don't know that any ordor wont fren Hitlor in that fora
in 19U5.

Q. You did not understand do. I askod you if you remonbor having
been intorrogatod by a British officer in 19li5 on this sane subject
cf radical experiments?

A. In August of 19li5; it is possible.

Q. Horo is a report I havo in front of me, it indicates that you
stated: first, thfc Hitlor hioself had ordorod condemned criminals to
bo used for rodical experiments; and socondly, that nobody should bo
purdshod for obeying orders; is that an accurate account ?

A. I can do nothing with thoso two sentences.

THE PRESIDENT: Has the witness boon shown a copy of this Document
in German?


2612


6 Fob i7-;.-S - 17-3-*doGhm
Court He. 1


*T.. I 1 CEAHEY: If it plor.so tho Tribunal, I don't attach such in-
p-rtanco tc tho ovi..onco nccoaaary md I will just withdrew tho
question. This ia aiuply cn intorregatim rop rt, it ia not a
verbatim report cf the ^ntorregatien. It shows arch 24, 1945
by ^ejer °ill. It wna deno by on organizaticn known as FIAT; a
Field Intolligunco i-lliod Tochnicr.l organizaticn.

KB PRESIuEFT: ‘.Jhoro we a it node? *

MR. hCKAHEY: At a coup known as buatbin r. thor cloao to Frnnk-
furt. I on net suro of tho oxr.ct neno cf tho city, hewovor, wo
will net offer tl ia w ccunont in ovidonco. I on si :ply trying tc
rofroah tho witnoea' roc: lloction end I on asking hiu new r.bi ut
this Hitlor order and whether cr net it w-.a actually iasuoil.

IKE P;£Snr;NT: Tho c unsol can r.al: tho witnoaa if ho knowa
of ony auch order and if ho rononbora any such ordor ut this tiuo.
BY MR. ’ICHANEY:

Q. K orr 3 rundt, havo you t< Id ua all 7 CU knew about thia erdor
cf Kitlor, about which you ate.tod it wr.a ycur conviction th t it
wr.a isauod; do ycu knew cny uro ab ut it th;n you havo clroady
told ue?

A. I den't kr.< w an erdor in tlr.t foru, With roforonco tr thia
intorrogatii n cf Certain 0111 , which ?• aaibly originated after a
nu.:'jur cf diacusaicnb, it must o a fc mulaticn wl ich ho nr.de for
Ua enn pm*pesos , m.rcly , a ropotitirn tf what I havo arid,
iheso quoatiens wv.ro put tc no at tho sar»o tiuo that tho chart or¬
iginated abtut uy functi ns and physicians when nly partly truo
statements *oro ru-do.

M. iiorr -randt, did ycu kn> w a Kcitol trier that tho amy wr.a to
t ve nothing to dc witl -xpvriiwnts cn bmr.n beings?

A. i»o, I den't know that erdor cither.


Q. If ho did net in fact iseuo auch an order, hew do ycu oxplain
t -voitcl know that nodical o::. riuonts wt.ro boing carriod cut
r. human boin\a and that you did not?


-2613-


6 ?cb V7-A-S -17-4-Hcchr.n
Court Hr. 1

A. This possibly is sinil r t' yesterday's ronrrks -.Ik Ut non to. 1
institutions in the eastern territory. Thicso thirds c uld hr.yjo been
iiacuasod during c'nforcncoa 'n tho situ fcien in connection with tho
. ily rop rta » n tho vr rxcua illinosaoa , otc., end r.t such opport¬
unities thoao oxpurinonta crulu woll *>o nonti<nod. I r.ssuno thr.t
If Koitol rocfiivod roports through such c chonnox, I think it is
qulto prsaiblo thr.t rny results of such oxpori.-.onts woro reported.

6 ' Kir’Jilor tr Fitlor anti this was d.ono In crnnoctiin with such
e nforoncos rn the aituntir n; thorefero, Koitol grt tr knew
r.b« ut it, Thoao crnf-roncoa rn tho situation wero usually of groo.t
longth and thoy r f ton lrstod for h'ura end Fitlor hinsolf rfton
apclco f-r h «irs. during such on opportunity it is quito p'-asiblo
th t sr.no auch thing was nontlcnod.

0 , Horr Brandt, I rent to ronind you cf Weeunt nt Hr, 1309,

TVS PRSSI3'" T: Bof'ro pr'-cuvding with, tho oxrmnatl-n cf tho
witness rn thoco Ireunonts, tho ‘ribunr.l will rocoas.

( A rocoaa was trJ’on.)


- 2610 -


5 7o‘ UT-w— .—-15-1-Karr. n
C urt .1.1


7__5i .X: icrs ns in the C_urt It...; will please fin-1 their sects*

The Tribunal is again in scssi.n,

.ay it . lease Y ur Honors, the defendant Cborhcuscr has availed herself
cf tlvc . craissi n granted oarlicr today by the Tribunal and is, at the
present tine, absent fr the* C„urt.

Til. .HLSnCtfT: The Secretary General will nctc fer the record the
absence cf the defendant Cfccrhcuscr pursuant tc excuse by the Tribunal.

nriicfucr:

Q I_rr 3remit, I have handed t ycu D cuncat He. 130^ which has boon
introduced as *r-sccution ictfiibit 326. It concerns biclocical warfare
and is an official note slcnod by Kliovc concerning a convorsaticn with
.refesser DIcuj cn 23 Fobruary 191*1;. Do ycu find the sontencu about tho
niddlo of tho first paragra.* whore LI says; n 3y request cf Field i-arshal
Kcitol, tho ar.cd f-rcos are n t t. !;avc a responsible share in tlio experi-
.ents since ex.xrixxmts will als. bo c nductcd on hunon beings'*?

A Its, I have feund the sontonco.

Q Keitel was net a doctor, was he?

A He

Q Hew do you explain that Keitel, Chief cf tho High Ooaxmd of the
iohnxcht, w uld know about such a natter as this whilo ycu state t< this
Tri'unal that y<.u have nn knowledge of systcnatic use of huaan beings in
.icdical cx^ criccntaticn?

A I assure that Keitel obtained this knowledge fron t.’*o discussions
;f tho situation, which havo already been aontioned, at which these things
ncrc apparently also discussed. Tnese were basic questions of biological
warfare rhich uorc certainly liscussod in this ocnnccticn.

Q Dut, Herr Cron.lt, isn't it , -fcctly tbvirus fraa this sentence
*-~t .leitel ha I scat. knewlodgo of previous cxpcriucJitati n c nccn-
troti .n can. inuatos and that ho know that these biological warfare
eqierhicnts were something of the sa~c s:rt and he knew that he did not
visa to be associated with then hiuscif and sc issued this or lor?


-2615-


6 Feb —-19-2-fcrror

Crart ifc. 1

.. It -:ust ^aLloI that this was a ropcrt :n a discussion ’xstwccn
Xliovo and Eleno* It is assuned in the quest!, n which is asked cf uc
that what is stated here corresponds t. the facts* I believe cno shculd
-at lx, Klieve an:’, possibly .-r. Dlc-*o about this discussion.

0 Kerr Hrandt, y:u have* sen asked by y.ur wr» c unscl abcut su;pert-
in;; this icscn Institute cf Diane's which was ccnccmod with quostiens
cf biological warfare. ..'as this vast suppert which you assured dlo-o
yru T.'.uld r.ivo simply in the nature :f hclpinc hin with construction
problems? x

A It was cnly hcl,. in rarer.', t c natructicn questions, net in
c .sncctivn with bi logical warfare, but in view of his institute which
he intonded tc cst .blish there f r the .awrol production .f vaccine, I
nay call it that. I said that the inquiry t: which this decument refers
uas ’jo tween D1 no and uc by tclo. hcno and that a questi n cf biological
\.axfare and possibly any furtterrcsultinc, huian experiments wore cortainly
net discussed ty tclcph nc. I have also said that I wreto a lottcr at
that tins to the c.nstructi:n cfficc ihich was holpinc in thoso natters
in the -.inistry for Arcaaent and ar i reduction and asked that ilr. Clone

it bo helped tc establish his institution. In this ros.>oct, in
connection with hunen exporiuents an*, s. forth, thcro was nothin; ncro
bctwcon uc and Dlcto.

Q -tat was this scruu that i*c was tc manufacture?

A I cannct say exactly what kind ef suruu it was. I -ily raicrior
cn institute in which ho wanted t nkc arranccounts t bo able tc produce
various scrums. Fr n later discussions I knew that ho c nsidoroc! dcvclep-
iaj various substitute pr>duots, but I cabinet civo any exact infenction
a’: ut thnt either.

Q bill y;u lc k at the see nd sentence in tho soc.nd paragraph where
it starts, "In particular, irefesser bi ne sees an obstacle -n the onplcy-
:.cnt rf the Chcaical h'arfarc Section cf the --ruy Ordnance Cffico. There—
f re, he wishes tr ;iakc the suppoct*:n t. tho Rcichs liarstel and


- 2616 -


6 Feb —-16-3-fcrrcw

C;urt H,. 1


C acxdcrst .r fcsszr 2ra!t ttu-.t tl caaccinticn be di 53 lived ad he bo
knitted, net thr.uji the inter.* aiti.n cf the Chcoicel .1st f-rc Scctlcn
f tl'.o .j-_y Ordnance Office, t' requisition cir.:lanca fer ox.-cri:xntel
.ur.. sea directly freu the ..ir F.rco .lniatry.- .ihy enzuld ho aontien
7 ur rxox in c nnccti-n with e cati.n that the ..ssacir.ti n
dlitxer’.citcr bo diea.lvod?


-2617-


Court I

6 Feb !7-*TD-3$-Wttnabuek


A. I do not know. Perhaps ke hiftself will be best able to say
why ho did that. Ho certainly did not report the natter to m, and I
could even asstna that ho did not report it to the Reich Marshal. Tho
nast, Blitzabloiter, I learned of for the first tine through this docu¬
ment, 1309, itself. I never h^ard it beforo.

Q. Did you have any connection with this chemical warfaro section?

A. Chemical warfaro? With the choedcal warfaro section I had a
certain amount of connection under the anti-cheaical warfare program
which began in 19U*. It was a tooting station for the necessary dofonse
materials, and in connection with Luftwaffe Ministry’s own testing
stations, but it was certainly a different group of peoplo who wrkod
on these natters than the ones contacted with this raattor.

Q. Well, Horr Brandt, I rather thought that you had something to
do with chemical warfare and Lost problems beforo Peering's order of
1 March 19U1*. How long woro you connoctod with this chemical warfare
soction of the Array Ordnanco Qffico?

A. Thoro was a Colonol Hirsch, whom I boliovo I net for tho first
tire In the alddlo of March »Uli. I did not know him before then.

Q. Well, Herr Brandt, this document is dated 23 February 19hh,
and I oust assume that you woro therefore interested in chemical war¬
fare problems beforo the order of 1 March 19Ui, that has already been
oentioned in the record.

A. I have already said that this question was certainly outside
of that. Tho decree, because of which Mr. Slevers visited me at that
tiae, it was dated 1 Harch. In ny opinion the question of Blitzableiter
and ay connection wl th the Blitzableiter is to be traced back to Blaae's
idea, i#io approached re about his general institute, and the reference
that he wants to report to the Reich ilarshal and Oeneralsarzt Dr. Braixit
tr..it the association will be dissolved and so forth has no Justification
in ay opinion, has no basis in fact. Mr. 3lose could not have had arty
■eason to think that I had anything to do with the central office for
tr.e *W K Prufstolle 9" before 19Ui, and I myself do not remember that
1 aet these gentlemen for ar^r other reason.


2618


5 Feb* U7-A-* . , rc-19-2-JJl»buck
Coart !fa* 1


Q Herr Branit, did you hare ary connection with any experiments with c 38
prior to 1 March 19UU?

A In the fall of «U3 I was info reed about general laboratory experiments
which a Professor Bickenbach had sale. These were experiments such ashad been
iono in Strasbourg and I belief in Heidel b erg too, and these are the only ones
which occur to no in this connection* I also know that I no longer recusabor
the dato I was informed in a conversation that experiments had been oonduoted
on cadots in the Military Medical Aoadery, but these are things *iich had
nothing to do with the problem of W H Prufatelle 9.

Q Upw did it ccno about that Cickonbach’s experinents were reported to
you? What interests did you havo in his gas experiments?

A I had r» intorest in his gas experiments, I not Bickenbach for a noth or
reason, for a different reason, and then whon wo net again ho infornod rao
about what ho had done,

q And what did you do with respoot to nickcnbach'a reports? Did you havo
any othor association with hin?

A Later I helped him to arrange a laboratory in Strasbourg*

q And thit's the laboratory wo heard ooat mention about fron ono of the
witnossos fron Strasbourg, was it not, Herr Drandt?

A I assune that it was tho eano one*

q Do you rocall that the witness Schmidt testified that thoro woro runors
in Strasbourg th-.t Bickenbach was experimenting with gas in ono of the old
forts?

A Yes, I rocenber that.

Q Do you also recall that he said that those rumors included tho use of
briar, beings by Uickenhach?

A !fc, I do not reneeber that fron the testimony of the witness Sobnidt,
and it ni;ht havo boon a rarer, I Jon«t know, but it is improbable since
Zdckenbach hinsolf ted approached ne on the question of ardnals and I nyself
aade eveiy effort to get suitable experimental animals. And I do not believo
that the fact that crdoal experinents are conducted Justifies tho conclusion
that ai ring! experiments are ccaiucted in order that human experimento nay be


Court I

6 Feb !i7-A-A7I>*19-3— Ninabuck - LJG


conducted. The problem la rather 6f the opposite sort. Animal experi-
aents are conducted because one is convinced that they are right in
theaselvos and can lead to a result,

Q. Did you ever visit Bickenbach's experimental station in
Strasbourg? ,

A. I do not know that ho had an experimental station in Strasbourg.
I looked at an electrical apparatus in Strasbourg,the cyclotron. I be¬
lieve it was one of the only ones of this type that we had in Gemanyj
it was finished but it was not used,

Q. Do you deny any knowledge that Bickerbach did experiments
on human beings with gas?

A. He conducted aniaal experiments and he approached no expressly
in order to obtain animals. I was only able to help him to a Halted
extent. It was very difficult for no to obtain animals, ard before I
set hla, Bickerfcack had only conducted animal experiments. The quostion
of huaan experiments was something rtiieh was not diacuesod at this time.
The experiments which he had begun before the war, I bolleve he wantod
to continue, and these experiments were significant but only in rather
theoretical beginnings.

Q. But so far as you know, Bickerbach did not experiment on huaan
beinge?

A. Bickerbach did not cenduet any experiments on human beings.

Q. »fay woro you so interested in Bickenbach's work that you went
to considerable trouble to secure experimental animals for him?

A. The task which he had sot himself was a special one and it
■weed quite Justified to support this work. I was only ablo to help
bin in tho year 19 UL, after ho himself had established this laboratory
for himself.

Q. Let's look again at the document before you, 1309; at tho botten
of tho second paragraph we find the language: "Especially necessary is
an examination of our vaccine, the pestilential virus, plague vaccine
in particular. Experic-srts mist, accordingly, be made on human beings.


2620


Court I

6 Feb ii7-*-An>-19-3-HiMbuck


Furthamore certain misconceptions concerning the effect of naxianaa
dose* of several poisons can bo corrected only by experiments on huaan
Dairgs. As scon as Professor 31 coo has conferred with the Reich

garshal and Generalsant Professor Brandt, he will notify me."

•


2620 -A-


6 Feb. i/^WT>l£-L-tfLmbuck

Court Ifc* 1


Did dcoe confer with ycu about these virus vaccina experiments on human
bainrs?

A No.

Q Did ha eonfor with ycu about the poison experiments?

A to.

Q Lot*s torn to the next page of tho docunentj tho memorandum dated 22
Hay 19Ui directed to Dlitzableitor. In tho last aent<nco it says r "Furthermore^
a nebulizer with cotar drivo has been built which atcrlllzoa and disinfects 1
the air in the roce. Tho apparatus can also be used simultaneously for the
purposo of decontamination. As soon as the various oxporinents havo boon com-
plotod tho apparatus will be demonstrated to tho association."

Horr Drandt, is that tho apparatus in connoction with tho decontamination
of poisoned water that you havo previously motioned in direct examination?


5 Feb !i7-v.-.—.-20-l-Sx--3 n
C:-rt No. 1


... (Cent 1 d*) There is a difference in discussinr the nachino tee la to
docentar.inatc air and apparatus tv dee. ntee inatc water.

1 Dc y u kn w whether a Goruan la’.- presides fer iii.Tia. rront in
e.nccntrati n cac,>s cf criminals tried by ordinary Genian o urts?


Q Yeu were a c- ndcnnod crirdnal in April of 19U5, wero y.u net?

A Yos.

A

Q Sentenced tc death f*.r tho allogod treason; is that ri:;ht?

A Yes. x

Q I assuco that yeu da not regard yeur trial os a fair cno — that
is the trial for troasen?

A No, because the contenco Jiad been established boferoliand*

Q Korr dr ant, cf your ctm personal experience with Oernan cri:ilnal
Justice, oast yeu net conclude that Inindreds cf thousands cf c neentratien
«... inuates were improperly incarcerated an.*, ccndccnod t. death?

A in the ' asis f ny nm coqioriwr.cc I ai. cinvinccd that that is so.

0 H u cany e.nccntrati .n ca^:_ s havo you visited?

.. 1 !i! not visit c.ncentrati n cai^s axactly; .nee I was with !r.

3ic!:cnr.ch; I was -utsidc the emv cf llatzrroilcr where ho ha his animl
station, and ha! set u.- an cuor.;cnc 7 laboratory thich he wanted to five
u. and he wanted t* sh w no what it was all abvut. On this ccaaicn wo
wr. a.t the oar..: itself an*, we pichod up scao administrative efficial
there c rvductc.’. us. Then, as far as I rocnll, it was during the war ;
I wont thrru'h the caiq> ‘..authausen, \tacn the stinc quarries wore to to
exauinod ait*, the- Fuehrer w s in the noi^hberhecd.

<1 boro th-sc the inly t*r. cv.uccntrr.ti_n cos ps yau havo ever toon in?

A Th so were the cs:.»s wSiich I sa* .

n . Had yzu ever been in Sa::cn Hausen rr Cranicn'ur.?

A I z-za in Granicn urr nee *. cf.rc the raj.

! V u were never there* durln t* ; war?

~ I think it was def fc the war; perhaps in ..u-jost cr July, 1939.

Q Have y u ever ‘.con in Dachau as the witness Neff testified?


- 2622 -


Court I

6 Feb li7-A-MAA-2C-2-Saspson-LJG


A. No.

G. Have you evar been in Buchorarald?

A. I was not in Buchenw&ld.

Q. I aa glad to hoar you nention that you had been in Natrwoiler
In connection with Dr. Bickertoachj you neglected to say anything about
that when we discussed Bickerfcach a few ninutes ago, and we will return
to that subject a little later. How, Herr Brandt,do you reaccfcor
having boen interrogated in tsy presence on 5 November 19ii6j at the
Interrogation — the interrogation you went over with your attorney

X

last Tuesday aftornoon; the document that was Introduced in the record.

That was Doc\*ent Ho. 1730, Prosecution's E>hibit Uhl. I don't havo
a Goman copy to hand you right at the rccaent, but I Just want to re¬
view with you book answers you gavo no on that occasion, arri to ask
you then if you still maintain the correctness of the answers you gave.
The quostion was put to you to give us a briof statement of what you
know concerning nodical oxp-rlnonts on husan beings. You answerodj
■Thoro is nothing olso I could say bosldos th-1 *iich has alroady boon
recordod here and Hiich was said in tho courso of the interrogation
by tho porsons interrogated."

Tho next question was: "I only would like to know what you know
about thoso oxporiaents." Answor: “I only know about tho experiments
of Oobhardtj this nattor case to cy knowlodge only after I was arrootod
in Hay of last year."

Questioni "And what did you know before you woro arrested?"

Anawort "Before ny arrest in Hay of last year I know of tho cotters
Dr. Gebhardt and Dr. Fischor enphasizedj I rofer to the quostion,
krugewski. Anything olso in tho way of exporioents did not cone to
=y knowledge. I had no contact with any of the offices, institutions
and persons *iich played a part thcroin, ncr did I know then previously.
Harr Pohl and I not for the first ti*e when he pas sod tho death sentence
on me as President of the Summary Court."

^-cstion: "What I would like to know is what you had to do with

the exporinonts." Answer: "I had nothing to do with then."

2623


6 .o'_ lx?—--.— .-20-3-Sai^acn

C:urt Uc. 1

t*icsti:n: •nthat da y:u kn w ab nl . ru;; wski?" «naw^r: “I said that
..mbcwski was attendin'- this neetin anil was explainin'; at .r-blcns ctn-
cemln: the cicccntaainatirn of water."

Quest i-.n: "Did yru knew before cf any cx.erincnta be in;; uado cn hunan
’.diva?" iowrer: "As I havo^lrca:^ stated the natters verc Qcbhardt's."

Questicn: "Do ym knew that Gcbliar’.t t/as uakinr experiuonts cn hunan
•oinct previous t< 19U5?" answer: "La 19lx3 he cave a lecture at the
IJlitrry Acadojy. He speko abcut cxcriccnts cn hunan bain:a."

Question: ■'..•hat did .rujowski tuli abcut ueperinonts na.'o on hunan
beings?" answer: "liruccwakl was nly cxplaininr nattors c« neeminc
doccatardnation cf water."

Question: "tore those experiments concominc docentadnation over
aado :n hunan bcincs?" Answer: "I an cf tho opinion that pcplo drank
this water."

Question: "Has anybody elsu carriod threwfh o^orlnonts bosidca
:ruj .wski?" Answer: "That I do not knnr."

Question: "Dr y u knew a^rthinc about lew prossuro ax.wrinonts?"

Answer: "lie."

Question: "Do you know anything abiut typhus experiments?" Answer: "No.

Question: "Do yru knew anythin: nb ut bene cx,>criiicnts?" Answer: "No,

I cannot say anythinc at all abcut that; I did net hoar of these thincs."

Questi n: "Dc you know anythin: abcut the Lest Axperinents?" Answer:

■No,"

Question: "Do y u knew anythin;, a’, ut the w- rk in ca^criixnts at tho
Univ-rsity f StraaVu ref Answ-r: "I hoar:' ab ut it nee, but these
"cro net ex, crincnts cn honan boin^s. Sievers went ti no enco only and
told no al ut c^crincnts :n animals -ede by irof. Hirt; it was a very
»h:rt visit only. I talked tc .-ref. Hirt and he shewed no idcrcsoopic
sli -cs cf rabbits, but ne won* was uttered then ccnccrnin; bi:lc leal
e^criaents on hunan Icinrs,"

Question: "Hut y.-u told us that ycu had no contact at all with these
^ poc. lc, and new ycu say that these people have Visited you," ..nswer:


Court I

6 Feb U7-A-MAA-20-ii-Ssapson


■Stivers visited ae Just once. That Professor Hirt is an SS nan is
not known to co to this day."

Q. Kerr Brandt, do you have anything to add to what was stated
in that interrogation, or to what has been so far stated by you in
connection with experimentation on hixaan beings?

A. I should lilce to go back to these experiments of Professor
Hirt once mere. The roport of the findings of the Final Report. J
read hore carefully: If one is looking for tho question of human oxperi-
sents, one could get the impression that they definitely wtfro node.

If one considors tho question fran a chcoical point of view and wants
to nako his observations in that respect, then then this question of
hu&an experiments, expocially in connection with concentration camps
would not bo rocognized. fihen I visitod Professor Hirt I did not
talk to him about oxporlmonts on human beings; and after that I did
rot bocano awaro of any fact that night indicate then.


2525


6 Febni?.rx-»-0JG-21-l-Kaynca
Ccurt He. 1


Q Witness, I want to put a report rsxdo by Hirt to you. This ia docu-
cent NO 099 end wes introduced as Prosecution Exhibit 268. Can you say
whether this is the report which you received free Sievers?

A I assume that it ia this report;

Q And you, I think, have already ednittod that if on© reads this
report carefully, one re.-chea the conclusion that experiments wore carried
out with Lost on human beings; is that right?

L That is quite possible.

Q Have ycu also observed that mention is made of heavy, medium, and
light wounds caused by Lost?

A Differentiations were made between the various types of wounds with
rtfercnco to their severity, general sysptens and local symptoms.

Q Tou hod menticned in an earlier stage cf the interrogation that you
did not think thtt Lost experiments were dangerous. Does not this report
indicate to you that scae of the experimental subjects wore rather severely
injured?

A This report is not a report of findings about individual experi¬
mental subjects. It is a general report, fran whach ono can conclude, how¬
ever, that supplementing previous general experience and ovidonce, further
experiments can be mado. I have said that the Lost experiments, as gener¬
ally conducted and as I knew thoc, as they have been described to mo in the
Uilitaxy Academy, arc unimportant, at first painful local skin symptoms,

■hich later heal. In the meantime I have seen literaturo on the aubjoct
which confirms this.

Q Well, Herr Brandt, ycu did read this roport, and ycu got it free
Sicvcrs in «pril 19 UU, did ycu not?

A I read it lcter. *t thet time 1 merely roccivod it.

Q Did you road it fcoforo ycu visited Hirt in Strasbourg?

k Tos, I no doubt read it before that*

Q .-nd didn't ycu observo open reading it. Just as you have now observed
hero, thet it was perfectly obvious th-t he had experimented cn human beings?

A I did net examine the repert to that effect. I examined it to see


-2626-


6 ?ebruar 7 -.- 0 ^C- 21 *- 2 -«ayna

Ccurt Sc. 1

whether tharc we* anything for ne to do in ccnneeticn with the result, end
vhet seemed significant to me was the reference to vitamins.

Q Yes, it says, dees it not, that the "organism stands the best chance
of absorbing the daa&go caused by Lest if there is a largo vitamin reserve
in the body"? Didn't ycu further Hirt's experiments after reading this re¬
port?

A He, this final report hod established the result, and at that time

a

I attempted to create a certain vitamin reserve, seeing in that a certain
protection. I did not support Hirt himself.

Q You deny that ycu and Rostock issued priority orders concerning
Hirt's Lost experiments?

A I do net underst:nd what you noon by "priority orders".

Q Did you issue any orders to any insitutulcn concerning Hirt's experi-
asnts with gas?

A I don't know.

Q Herr Brand t —

A Do you mean any aenticnief Hirt's results or the fact that vitamin
reserves were important?

Q No, I mean, did you issue rny orders supporting research by Hirt
with gas?

A I don't recall that I did. On the contrary, free a statement that
has been made now that Hirt is supposed to have complained that I did not
help him. I am not awaro that I gevo Hirt any special aid or spocinl support
of any kind. It might be that thero was something in tho Institute, since
the name of Rostock was mentioned. It night be in connection with tho
general demands on the Institute from the University, eddrossed to Rostock,
but I do not rmember anything of that kind.

Q But ycu do not exclude the possibility that somewhere along the line
there may have been some support by ycur office cf Hirt's work?

A I don't know. I can only say that I dc not remeefcer anything of the


kind. It might have boon something tc dc with tho question of vitamins.

Thrt might have been possible. I Just said that I tri*<l tc create a vitamin


6 ? cbru: ry-^-0 JG-21 —3-Hayn ea
Ccurt He. 1


reserve.

Q Herr Brandt, can it rot be definitely concluded frem tho report given
cn the sulfanilamide experiments by Gebhardt that those exp crimen tel subjects
wero deliberately infected^ with gas bacillus and gangrene in order to test
tho effectiveness of sulfa nil amide?

1 If experiments were conducted with certain infections, they wore
certainly conducted, if sulfa ni lamide was used, therapeutically, in order to
show tho effectiveness of sulfanilamide.

Q Dc you see any roaaon for the nocessity of artificially infecting
■omen with gas gangrene when you had thousands of Goman soldiers who had such
infections?

t. It night in such a case be a very precise question which caused such
an experiment.

Q But do you seo any recscn now, or can you give us any roason why
these experiments could not have been carried out on Goman soldioro who had
been wounded?

A It wes perhaps necessary bocausc ono wanted to hevo quite cloqr diff¬
erentiations, definite conditions of the wounds. 1 have already pointed out
once boforo that the quosticn of sulfanilaaide was a problua to all of us
and that the idea of having a wounded soldier accompanied, as it wore, from
tho time ho was woundod until he wae healod is a solution, but that tho coo¬
perative offoct of sulfanilamide is more difficult — the realisation of the
effect is aero difficult bocauso the conditions of oach wound are different.

I could spook of these a>ru easily if I knew aero precisely the events from
the side of thi, picplu whe actually ;*.rriod out tho experiments. Tho one¬
sided presentation makes it difficult to Judge because those who participated,
for example. Dr. Fischer, I know personally as human beings, and I am con¬
vinced that they would have been willing to Conduct such experiments only for
definite reasons or under definite conditions. It was certainly not merely
the desire to conduct experiments. It would perhaps bo easier for me to
i-.sver tho question when those who have participated in the sulfanilamide
experiments have spoken themselves.


£?eb. U7-22-L-A-^ZMJaylord
Court No, 1


Q Witness, isn't it a fact that this Loet gas decreo or chemical warfaro
decree which you received froa Goering on 1 March 19Ui concerned itself not
only with gas nasks, but also the treatment of wounds caused by gas?

A It referred to the apparatus against poison gas in general. That
incl u ded deeontaai nation including calcium chic ride aftd ether drugs,

Q But did it include medical therapy of gas wounds?

A It did not include therapy, but it included the naterialo for therapy,

Q Well> witness, how oan it include naterials for therapy such as drugs~-
I assume you have drugs in nlnd — unless there has also boon sons stuefy as to

X

hew effective such drugs and material are on wounds causod by f;as?

A It did not inoludo the studies, I said that originally it included
only gas nasks and that in the course of tine the prorraa was expanded* As
far as the drugs noeded for the treatoont of gas wounds was not ostabliehod
only until 19UU, tho methods of treatment in gonoral are tho sarao as in tho
First World War and havo not chang od in principle. New gasos havo been added.
The effeotivonessof these new gasoa was not quito clear and special oxpori-
nents woro oortainly nocossory,

Q Can you suggest any reason why this docroo of 1 March 19 Uj, whloh

you s ont to Hirclor, should havo been ferwardod to Grawiti and Siovors if it

%

didn't cor.corr. Lost oxporirantation and gas oxperiaentation?

A I oortainly did not pass it on to Siovors and Grawitz, I onlyn
approached Himlor. I have alroady said that I apnroachod Jttmlcr because the
Reich Itinistry of the Interior was competent for cortaln noasurea of air raid
precautions, of tho air raid police, and becauso I noodod information on tho
need of air raid precaution apparatus. It waspassed on to those two gentlemen
by Rudolf Brandt, apparently bocause they misjudged the situation. He was
presumably of the opinion that because I had passed on this decree as a doctor,
it was a nodical natter. It was, in principle, not a medical natter but it was
ry task in tho controlling of production,

Q Herr Brandt, I want to put to you an extract fron the Sievers* Diary
for 19UU, This was Docunent 35^6-PS, Prosecution Exhibit 123, On the 2nd of
February 19Uh, Sievers cade tho following entry*

2629


& Feb. L7-A-ATO-22-2-Oaylcrd
Ccurt Bc # 1

■Met Professor Bickenbaeh in Karls Ruhe and he put his research *crk
under the oontrol of General Ccasiasioner Professor Dr. Brandt. Discussion
with SS-Kauptsturefuehrer Hirt. Professor Dr. Dickonbach, without instructions
frea Hlrt and Profossor Stei>. contacted General Comlssioner Professor Dr.
3randt concerning the phoegene experiaente that were in Natsweiler with hin.
Cocniaaions to be withdrawn; For our part, Natsweiler is to be dosed."

Tell the Tribunal what "phosgene" is, witness;

A Phosgene Is a chtdoal warfare agent in gas fore whioh can bo usod in
gas fore#

Q What was the Professor Dickonbach doiiy; with tho rosoarch station at
fatxwoiloilor?

A He had beon given aidaals at Natsweiler and had conducted his aninal
axperinonte there. Thoro wasobiiously a tonso relationship botwoon hin and
Hlrt so that ho wanted to disassociate bins elf free the group there. Ho asked
ao to help hin and I did help hin then to establish this laboratory which was
Independent of totxwuilor. It was near Strossburg. And thors he wantod to
rosune his phosgone cxporloents and ho didn't begin to work — later his work
was brokon off throuch the war conditions, about in Soptonber.

Q Herr Brandt, is it not a fact that Dickonbach was performing phoscone
experiments on lnaatea of tho Nat swell or coop?

A Dickonbach conducted aninal experlnonts thore.

Q What kind of ardnals did he use?

A Ho had dogs. I did not boo the exporinents thero itself* I visited
fdn, I sow cat experiaente in Franaedd. I aseune that there nay hare boen cat
experiments too. When I was thoro, that was in February, we woro thore only a*
about ton dnutea and ho showod no the kennels and tho cages to give ne an
idea of the extent of this experinental station in Natsweiler, in conparlson
«lth what he intended to ostablish in FranrecJd,

4

Q Dickonbach was a Stress burg University Professor like Hirt and Hapon,
•asr.'t ho?


2630


7 Fab. U7-A-^TC-2?-3-Gaylofd
Court tick 1


A Ha workod at tho PoXydinio in Strassbur;;, the tiedloal Polyclinic,

Hagan was tho lygienist.

Q Was Dickenbach an SS nan?

A I do not know that*

%

q Do you know that the Strassburg University was in effect an SS Uni¬
versity, don't you?

A No, I do not knew that either. The only SS neabers that I know^
according to tho iocuaonts here, where Wrt hiasolf was an SS nan.

q Witness, since we are talking about the Sievers' Diary of 'M, I would
like to put anothor entry to you, this one dated 1 June, "To Dachau, SS-
HauptstumfUehrer Dr, Fleet nor and SS-Untorscharfuchrer Ebon. Answer of Inquiry
concerniry; Polygol froo Professor Rostock. Dy ordor of the Doputy of the - :
Ooneral Cocnissioner for Medical and Hoalth Mattors." Do you know that Rostock
got in touch with Siovors concerning polygol which had been dovolopod at
Cachau?


6 ~7-».-FX-23-l-Grc5s

Court Kc. 1


I kn w that Hcstcck -n t.h_ '.attach publication ah.ut .s-lyral in
tho t-nlch Medical ./ockly (tfxnchntr Ixdi. inischc ••ochonachrift) wrote to
the addresses clvcn in tho ac&sinc itself tc fine’, ut what it was abcut.
ilostoek certainly did not fire! cut that the testing cf the pro/aration
pclycal was carriod out as a hucan capcriixnt.


Q leu have .rtrrioualy aonticnod that ycu had kncwlcd-c of experi-
uonts .n hunan teinca cenecrainc the chad cal troatoent of poisonous
rotor, ia that cor roc t?


4 That is not richt in such a ease as you t. oak of exporixaenta I
IC8 cf tho opinion that this water was tested in acno way. It cculd just
as troll have boon a treep axporinont cr anywhere else in thop.pulation.

Q °c ycu knew upon when these cap crii»_nta were c endue to-’.?

.. Nc, Z do not know that. I assurro that ih-ucewsky will bo able to


tell ycu that.

Q Didn't ycu receive any report ab.ut these oxpcriixnto?

A He, 1 did net receive any report ab ut than. This quosticn of


apparatus for dee. ntanination of water codo up bocauso in connocticn


with the rcncral apparatus tho question of water dcccntaainatina apparatus
was also discussed. Within tho Mohrracht thoro was nc acrccajcnt upon
uctho ’s which wero not suitable and tho Civilian Air Raid authorities were
acrecd. In tho Ministry for Aawniticn end War rroduction thoro was a
social rcutino for tho prcducticn of such dccc ntanination apparatus. I
cskod tho head cf this c-crdttcc tc Jiavc these who wero interested in
this quosticn an’, cculd tell nc aVut it tc ceix tc soo ix. Ho did so
and since he else knew fren the product! n side that such an apparatus had
l>ccn constructed with which Jin^ewsky was in sort cf cennocti.n, I an not
suro T/hat the connection was, -ju..cwsky nrs also invite*, t. this c<nfcrcncc.
i apokc t hin aften/ar Is. n apparatus fcr dee ntanination f drinkinc
water was discussed which was such a success that it could bo .ut into
prcducticn. I cannot say *icthcr that was actually dene - it ai^ht havo
been in the sunucr of 19Ui when there wero certain raw note rial difficulties
~ V - it( Hrs decided tc brine fresh water into such cndanccrod areas.


6 ?«b •i7-*-fJ'>23-E-Grc83
Court Ho. 1


iFZ PPJtSIDffTT: T^o Trlbua»»4 »i»l adjourn until 0930 ta»ltcw nornlng.
fx witness to bo put to cross orrcination will be kept so per?, to frcri tho
cthsr witnessos.


CRe TVibunel adjourned until 7 yobmary 1947 nt 0930 hours)


7 FeSjSp-l.

Ccurt I


1-Leaser (iJ)


Official transcript of the Cnerican ailitaxr
Tri' unal in the natter of tho United States
cf *aorice, against Karl Brandt{ et al,
deferxla-.ts, sitting at i.urecl erg, Gemtj or.

7 February 19A7, 093C, Justice Beals presiding

TtiZ Persons in t»c Court I.oae will please find thoir sects.

The Honorablo, t .c Judges of Military Trlbuncl.l.

Jfir.itary Tribunal 1 is non in session. God save the
'.‘nit od States of Aaerica and this lior.oreMo Tribunal. ^

7r.Z P.3SIDL7: br. Marshal, you ctcortein if the defend .ts arc all
present in the courtroom.

? n —J5IIAL: May it please your Honors, all defendants ?rc present in
t..o Ccurtrcoa.

THE PRESIDE! T: Tho Secretary Oer.oral till ncto for tho record the
pr.so.icc of all tho defendants in tr.c ccurtroca.

Tho Prcaccutico nay procood.

K. KL bWD T (hcsu.od)

CROSS S3WJJL.TI0K (Continuod)

3Y .J.. IIcK/JETi Hay it please the Tribunal.

Q. .’ err Profocsor, mo voro discussing the poisoned vator exponaonts.
Did ; cu suggest oxperinents :1th poisoned n-tor?

A. f.t tho discussion which teck placo cn tho question f tho pess-
i' ilitios cf rcaeving pci sen free atcr,thoro woro t*o fundanaatsl points
of view; cne, as far os I roc ell, nas that certain dooent . ihetien
epparctua Us needed, 2 r.c ledger re-.u-' or the nano c ovxlurt.

r.v- ot. cr ires a procedure uhore chlcric ccid i os usod. The result of


tee i ? discussion uas that by virtue cf the situation a decision as

te'le prcceduro uas not possible,
rt t.-c'vtl^ was that in ccso of poisoned vator one voulc
jt& | ring fresn water in tank sets cr other containers free an area
lei: Jad act eon pcifs^iod/ The ti c representatives ex t.:c doccr.taiJ.-


was tlict in case of poisoned ator one vould


\vi\ .

not boon pofs/iod,
n-tic processes were of*


The ti c repres
IJCzg opinicr. that th


c representatives ex tho doccr.taci-


their apparatus >-s ccd. l.’o


:--cisirr. rencl.ee ■


7 ?ei-!-JP-i-2*Lcs3Gr

Court 1


at this mooting. I issued in?tructions to continue testing the apparatus.
I said that the tests should to continued but in r.o concrete fern.

Q. Why did they cccc to ycu with this problem? Wes that in your
capacity as General Ccnaissicncr?

... Tnat was in iy function of the quostion of production of
apparatus to ccotat gas in general. It was connected with ny function
os General Ccacdssioner ctly to the extent that it was a special assign¬
ment, not otherwise.

Q. Did you not suggest that experinents ;o conductod with tho
poisoned *atcr?

A. I aay possibly hsvc suggested that tho apparatus and tho process
should be tsstod. These were primarily laboratory tests and wero no
doubt continued aftor tttf discussion as they had boon carried on before.

Q. Don't ycu kiKw that it was necessary to ... don't you know
that the experiments wore in fact carried out on concentration carap
inmates?

A. That was not knewn to ne in that feru.

Q. Ycu didn't concern yourself with tho -annor in which those
experiments would to carried cut?

A. l.'c, I did Not.

Q. Ycu Just gavo thoso men carte blancho to do tihat thoy wanted

to?

I did net give thee carte blanche to dc uhatovor they wan tod.

The offices concerned with it ccntinuod their work as hoy had boon
carrying it cn f oferu. It is not possible in gonoral to cstn‘ lish the
aanner ir. which tests ore to be carried cut. I vaa interested only in
Iteming whether a certain appera tus for docontanlnoting wator was
considered tho Lest nd the easiest to produco in this special cconittoc
in the Spesr .Ministry, cr whether there was any such apparatus. Those
conferences were devoted only to tho possi’ ility of producing apparatus.

0 . lihe *as 0‘ erstarzt Dr. irth?

2635.


7 Feb-M-Jr-1-2-Leaser

Court I

A. Clcrstarzt Dr. wirth was the oonsultant for gas natters in the
Military *edical Acedeegr. I do net knew whether that was his official
title but in any case, in eg opinion, he was the Chief of the aen

concerned with chtnical warfare agents.

%


2635A


7 Fbb-:;-JM-3-2<5»er


Court I


3. arc h* cc nf erred with you on th_s. sxiscr^f* water exporl-xircs, ut'n't
be?

X .-!a n t >_licVw that h- we 8 jx-cscct at this cv-s-tin^. I cvuct
for euro but I do not be Hove so.


V


2636


Zjart So. 1

7 ?cb 47-K-2-i-£EX-*te'nan


Vnan vaj ^ci« neetin.;, to the best of your recollection?

A. In the sucaer of 1944.

Ant- Hi you not surest that water he oois-ned with Lost and then
•cst«£ for the «ff«ctlveaess of the dec-ntar.inetlon process?

A. It is ouite pocsftlo that soosthing of this sort was said. It ie a
Question of the apparatus itself. It has to he poisoned with sons gas and.
then with aoae filter ncthod of chenical ncthod. The poison has to he re-
moved, that is the point of this prohloa altogether.

Q, What is t substance?

A. That is a chcoical warfare agent! gas in general.

Vhat is S substance?

A. As far as I as inforned, it is a fuel which was «,o he used for ex¬
plosive purpwses but which the Woaoons Office rejected at that tine and it
was thereby eliminated froa the list of chocical warfare agents. In ny
opinion it was to be used ir. a alullar vny to phosphorous. I nay be oietrkon;
fc.vever, I have a) exact knowledge about It.

q. Could it be that » substance was a type of Lost gas or nustard gas?

A. So, certainly not.

And you don't know whether or not thoss exocrironts wore carried out
cn hunon beings?

A. In ny opinion the water decontnuiw-tion crocrinents wore ourely
la'orctory experiments with cheolcrl tests. I did not sec any nyself but
that was certainly the general aothod of tests.

q. Did you follow up this ruvter and receive rooorte on It?

A. I did net follow up this ouestion of docontaninetion nysolf. There
vns the head of a special c^oaittce for thnt pur-v-sc who tostod these things..
It is cossible thnt I received one a-re report to the effect that one woeest
- another *r.s more suitable. So neasures or stops were actually taken be¬
cause the row material wns cot available.

(± vhrt was this coauittvc that was concerned with this natter?

A. That vos the Speciel Cccnittee for Drinking Water Deeontonlneti n


Apparatus


2637


Court So. 1

7 let 47-M-2-2-B3i-Meehar.


v Suppose we put Document So. 154 tc you, doctor? I h»>ve mt Doenaent
So. 119 to the witness tut I felled to have that narked for identification.

I would like that the record now sh-w Document So. 119 has toon offerod cs
rrosecution Exhibit 446, for identificetion.

This is D-cucent So. 164 which we offer as Prosecution Exhibit 446 for
identification. Herr rrofessor, is the Reich Institution for Voter and Air
x-urificetion the cceaitteo which you have nade reference to?

A. So, tho head of this coanittee which ! nontioncd was a Ministry of
Henrlch. I believe this ccunlttee which I aentioned. belonged to the Ministry
for *raaaent and Var rr-ductIon and ves nanaged like tho other special coa-
nittoee there.

You stated that it was one, and that those oro*-rinon'.e woro not
carried out on concentration eaap innntes. Lot ue look nt this document,
which it Report Ho. 26, dated 31 March 1946, epoerently nede by the Reich
Institution for Vater end Air Purification and concerning experluents ccrried
out at Htabur.T-Heuc^amo, a roport by Or. Jaegers and Reg. Bnuinsooktor
Kunpfert:

■In agreement with the Reich Puehrun,; SS, exuoriaents voro carried out
at Hanburg-Heungatiiw with drinking water preparation 44/6 in ordor to detor-
nino whether »-ocid of various concentrations would ccusc any disadvantages
to health and vhathcr, if this wwro not tho caso, drinking water containing
£ substance would not be in^hirious to health rfter treetnent with V-ecld.

■The exporlnonts vero carried out on eoproxlcctely 150 poreone who eoo-
rxised a singlo cooaur.ity. Tho corns doctors uade the nodical observations.
Sturabennfuehrer Dr. Ztel also took oart in the oxuerincnts for sovorol days
during which the high lewisite concentrations were used.*

Do th-se first paragraphs indicate to you that concentration entro ln-
netos were used?

A. Yes.

Q, I don't think it is nectseary that we r^ad tho whole reoort but I

would like for y-u to turn to the second nage. Do you see the sentence

which eays, "The caao doct-re could not observe any effects hemful to the

2o5S


Court So. 1

7 ?et *7-M-2-3-SX-Mt.«haB


hedth A the erocrl=eatd aubjecta."?

A. Tee.

I*. And the following pare^rtnh reeda as follcwa:

*a third scriea -f ereri-eatc van carried out with an r,;ur.t of the Lost
•T °?> the A*^ty»iatlB< <at L>at ( in accordance with the eu^veation aede by
Cberatarrt Dr. Virth at the conference on 4 Dececber 164-; with Reichakoanieear
Dr. arandt. Since chemical analyala can nrovo the oroaence of tho naohyxi-
otin* Loat only within a ooriod of euproxlaetely one hour, the nreaence of
l subetenco in the untreated water vaa probable in every inatance, whllo in

X

the crae A notable water it vac believed the ievel of notability (below 8,<
silli^rara ner liter) or tho S-Loat had already been doatroyed by tho V-ncid."

Ia that tho conference ond. neetln,* which yai hrvo been tell in/; ua about
here, cr la thia another neetln,; hold by you and y./ur aaacclitcs?

A. I cannot any. I had -aly one r.eotln* with thia coocittoo about
drinking water apoaretua. I aaid that v 8 a in the aunnar of 1944. If the
date ia lvcn hero aa 4 Decanter, it la o.aaiblo thi t tho dlacuaalon *a» not
in the auaror but in Doce ibor.

And you now rnxat conclude in fact that the «. r^erlcente woro carried
Ait at tho Eaatur*- 21 eun,:a'i::a concentration ccr-p. Ia thrt richt?

A. On the voala of thia docunvnt it aooeara that aoccirl teats wore nr.do
in the caap at Kcntuz«-Kcuna'no f-llvvin.; the dincueeion. Tea.

In order to be purfeetly fair with you. Doctor, I want to point out
the r.cxt to loat ^erajooh of thia roo-rt. It arye that thoao exoorinento,
ehich were aucated by birth ia your oreaence and. apoarently with your auo-
?ort, thet they did n^t cause any effecta haruful to the health of tho ox-
oerinental aubjecta. Do you fine thrt?

A. Tea,

Sw, Sector, did you ever au^eat any other ex , oerlncnt6 on concm-
treti.n canp lnrirtea?

a. Ae far as I know, I nede no oreciee su,v;eati-ns concerning concen¬
tration ce-ra inantee. I r:uet esauno free tho report thet even before thft the
cxcerl-ientB had been carried -ut in a ainilrr way, tut none wore eoccial

2639


tipwlMata. This nitrasen-Lost exparicent vns cade later. I do not recall,
either In this case or in any other case, that I sweated experiments on
concentration camp inmates.


7 Fcb-*WF-3-l-Nin«buck

Court I

Q. Kell, now, ycu httVo told us -ccut yiur astool-.ticn w ith Bickcnbach.

Ycu deny that ha experimented on c ncontrcti_.. cn<ip inaatos; ycu deny that
you had any knowledge of Hirt's gas uaporLacnta on incurs at Last; you deny
having aup.jortcd Dr. Dch.n'a jaundice ork in Sechsenhaustn. Did y_u ever
have anything t d<. with incendiary boob cr phosphorus cxpjriaonta on con¬
centration caap im-tes? *“

i.. Hot that I knew of. Tho question of the treataont of phosph rus in-

%

cendiary bo* w.unda was discussed in 1913 and *U. :.s far as I know tho
decisive thin;, as tho typo cf truut».nt, results ccning fr n a Jtunich clinic
concerning tho us^ of copper sulfate seluti. n.

Q. Bid ycu evur aek the SS thr-u^h K«:-..L.r, Rudolf Brandt, Orawitz,

'"Iff, or any cth«.r person t* put cenoentr ti n c-szp inmtes at y ur disposal
for cxp-rL*-.nta of any kind?

... I do n t recall any c - nc r_ to ccso.

q. Did you ovor write Karl f.olit c letter su^os'lng that food oxpori-
rwnte bo conducted cn concentration o~-p innrtcs?

... I cannot rcoall it. I do not low in r.hat year that wr.s supposed
to have boon.

Q. oil, lot's refresh y'ur rocolloctitn with Document N0-U*19.

(Docuaont handed t. witness.)

Qi la that ycur signature cn that letter?

... Tos, that is ny signature.

IB. HeiUNEY: T.e offor this docaxnt as ir_sucuticn Exhibit U*7 fer
iHentif ica.ti. n,

Q. Sup.c*. y.u read this letter t- the Tribi-nal?

... ’’Obor^rup.enfuehror »olff, Headquarters ;f the Fuehrer"; the date is
26 January 19U3. "Etoar Obcr._ruppcnfuchrcr, Since I hav_ had aicplu natorial
in the acantiuo ao ut the dcvol a ont of c. neentr-ted feed, as a special
scoter, f- r example, thow-oa of the f rtress jf Stalingrad, I would liko
1 repeat -.nee acre the natter a s discussodat that tire. Is it possible
- carry .ut pertaining nutritional oxp_ri.Ti.nts in o. neentration camps?


7 Fsb-JWF-3-l-Mnabuck

C'jurt I

Q. Well, new, you have told ut adoout your association v ith Bickcnba.ch,
leu deny that to experimented or. c ncontr=ti..i crxp inmntosj ycu deny that
you had any knowledge cf Hist's gas uxpcriicnts on imaUa at Last; you deny
having aup.xjrUi Dr. Dchntn's Jaundice erk in Sachacnhauscn. Did y v u ever
have anythin* t i. with incenetiary boob cr phosphorus experiments on con¬
centration caap irertos? ^

• Not that I knew of. Tho question of the treatment of phesph rus in¬
cendiary b.ijb w.uncfc was discussed in 19U3 nnd 11. f-.r as I know tho
docisivc thint as tho typo cf tr^ata-nt, results ccaing frna Itunich clinic
coneorninj tto us.. of copper sulfate scluti. n.

Q. Did you ov«r ask the SS thr.uji BirtOor, Rudolf Brandt, Grewitt,
v.olff, ^r any -thvr person t- put ccnccrjtrti n eonp innaU-s at yur disposal
frr cxp.rL *nts of nny kind?

... I do n t recall any c-’ncruto caso.

q. Did you ovor writs Kerl Wolff c letter su^gcaiing th“t food oxpori-
wnts bo conducted cn c rncur.tr atien inn-tes?

*»• I cannot rcoall it. I dc not ton in that year that was supposed
tc have boon.

Q. ell, lot's refresh yur rocollocticn with Document N0-liil9.

(Dxununt handed to witness.)

Q> Is that your signature :n that letter?

... los, that is sv ai 3 naturo.

!R. ItoH-dCT: T.o offer this d,cu:xnt as ir^socuti'n Exhibit 1^7 for
identificati.n.

Q. Sup. .a. y_u read this lottor t* the Tribvrwl?

... "Obor^rup-onfuehrer »clff, Headquarters ?f the Fuchror"; the date is
26 January 19U3. "Doar Obergruppenfuehrer, Sincu I hav. had ar.plo material
ln thc co ut the dovol pent ol concentrated feed, as a special

scct-.r, f- r oxrr.plc, thowea of the f rtress of Stalingrad, 1 would like
- repeat .nee r*:ro the rnttcr a s discussed at that tine. Is it possible
* carry .ut pertaining nutritional experiments in a neentratien cnnps?


7 Feb-k-J?-3-2-Hin. buck-(GJ)-
Court 1


In this connection I should think it necessary to contact Dr. Luft
at the medical Research Institute for Aviation and idnistcrialrct
Zicgulweior, the consultin' nutritional expert with the Tchrnccht.

A dear chart of the experiments, corr.sponding with the actual
conditions, should then bo drawn up Jointly. I think it quite possible
to obtain eventually now, valuable results in coapnrativ> 4 y short
tine."

Q Well now, witness — x

A Tho letter is signed by bo.

Q This was a contact by you with the SS, wasn't it?

A YeS.

Q I unitrstood that you have previously testified you novor
had any official contact with SS nan?

a This Ob.rgruppcnfUehrer -olff was at the Fuehrer's headqueters.
That is shown on the address. Be was tho liaison nan with the SS.

He was formerly the adjutant of Htnalcr and then in 19L3 or the begin¬
ning of the 'Ui ho was replace. Tho discussion which ire nonlloncd
here, s tho first sentence shows were results of concentrated food
eiv.-n to our Wehrnacht in surrounded an: os in the East which was
dropped to then by parachute.

?;>.s«- concentrated rations consisted of various groups. There
were distinctions especially in the Banner in which the fat was
included. They also varied according to the protein content. The
rations intcndc-d far ono aan, as far as I recall, corresponded to
about 3500 calories. TheS*. 35CO calories w_rc calculated in the basis
of various suns of fat, carbohylrates and prfctain, and aft-r the expe¬
rience of Stalingrad it was not clear, -sp_cially in view of the food
which the Feed ilinistry could nakfa available for this purpose, which
was the cost suitable foro. In order to cle3r up this qu< stion, I
.“.as cade this suggestion to or. Wolff s this document shows, after


? Fcb-fc-v?-3-2 -H inabuck- ( 0J ) -
Court 1

I had inforccd the Fuehrer on the basis of a discussion with !>.
Zitgelweier that there wxs no agreoaent in this food question. had
said that this was probably the quietest way to solve the question,
and I passed on this assigeeaent. I did not consider tnis anything
special, and besides, I had forgotten about it


261*2 -A


7 Pttb-H-JM-3-Ninabuck
C art I

Under oth^r circunstancos it valid have boon called a troop exporiisont.
q. nG® the export»cnt carric * out?

... I cannot say whether itw.s c nrriud cut.

Q. Didn't y u havo *^»c contact vith SS Obcryuppenfuohror P hi in
connection with this matter?

/„ I do n:t recall that I receive ’ any inferaati- n froa £hl ~.b ut it.

It night oo> but it la possible that according t tho suggestion :aado hero
the continuation of this question was 'cnc by Ziosolwbior an Luft thciaaelvoo.

Q. And this natter cane up Iona oof.ro the Swccn*' Fuehrer ccrte which
explicitly coverod nodical science an* research, didn't it?

A. The date of this letter is the 26th of January 191*3. This was n.t
a quest! -n jf rose rch. It was c question f practico.

Q. Don't y u ixacabcr that ..olff wna sick ab ut this tii*. an’ that ho
passe*' y ur letter on to Pohl? ,

... No, I .len't reajQber that. It is possible that ho wna sick nt thia
tiso* It is els: possible that ho pasao the letter < n U fohli

q. YiU eel * tho other ay that y u had nly a-t Pc hi horo in the prison,
.re you sur- th~t } hi did not got in touch with you in crnncction with this
ratter?

It ia possible that ho wrote t -*j. 1 cannot renunbor it. As far na I

kn-w I saw Puhl fur the first tiac heru in the prison. I night have not
hin onco before without knowing th-t it was pehl, but I -'c not rua-abor.

q. Ifc you roocaber whether »hlt.l'yu ab ut certain food experiments
he was carrying .ut in c nccntrati.n ca pe, oxperiutnts with poisonous food*?

... I cannot roncabcr hnvin sp.ken t ihhl at any ti 0 bofcrc I was
1 treated h-ru. It is, ;f c utsj, p ssible. It is p. ssiblo that tho re aving
f p is .n fr f.cd w-s sai t ce n rj c occasion, but without any documents
I cannot r-m_::bcr it. Perhaps I ai ht explain it Just as I have explain^
this case here If I have a ':cuncnt tcfcrc n_.

6243


Court I


7 F«b -7-H - h-1 - LX - Ninabuck

h. ZeS| it's always nice to know iftat's in the document.

a. In this document htra, yes, it is very clear what's in it.

Q. Horr Professor, did 70 U ev^r suggest that arjy drugs bo tested
cn concentration cajp iwtes?

a. I do not believe to* I cannot rcaenber. hhat specific drugs?

i. Suppose we soe if Document NO-1382 will refresh your recollection,
in that regard? This is offored as Prosecution Exhibit UMl for identi¬
fication. This is a telotype froc the dofondnnt Rudolf Brandt to SS
Ctorsturrbannfuohror Barnert, narked secret.

"Door Paul, SS Erigadofuchrer ft*ofessor Dr. Brandt called up and
requested tho approval of the Reichsfuehror 3 S that ten prisoners fran
Oranicnburg should bo nade avail-.blo as of tomorrow for two days, to
t-st a certain drug. Nothing would happen to then.

"Iho tosts have already bean discussed and oust be started taaorrcw
noming, 5 February. 35 Qrupponfuehrer Dr. Grawitz is only waiting
f'r Remission fr ob the Reichsfuohror SS. Please obtain tho decision
and pass it on immediately to Dr. Orawitz, H«il Hitler, signed, yours,
Rudi.»

a. I do not retaenher what this was about. I dc n 't Know.

Q. Do you dony the possibility that you requ-stod Grawitz or
30 E 0 other S3 nan to have those prisoners nade available to you?

A. According to tho telotypo Dussago horo, I did that, assuring
that this is authentic, but I cannot reoesber what it was about. Thera
ie no indication — it says two days. I don't reaeaber It.

3. Tou ace the second pago of the document, wltnsor,, indicates
that the prisoners were aade avai lable . This is dated 9 February 19Ui,
Field Co -and Poet. "GS Gruppenfuohrcr and Generalleutnant of the
•i ffen 3S Gluecks hereby ccnfira approval of Reichsfuehrer 33, for ten
prisonars froa Oranierhurg to be placed at the disposal of SS Prinade-
fuehrer Professor Dr. Brandt (S3 Gruppcnfuehrer Professor Dr. Grawitz).
Signed, GrothEann."

Tell the Tribunal who Gluecks was, witness?


Coart I

7 Feb U7-M - U-2 - LX- - Ninabuck


A. Gluecks was the head of all the concentration camps. I did
not know hie. I did not even knew his name. I waa of tho opinion
that that was Pohl, but I have learned hero that it was Gluecta, ard

ti'^t rohl had only on intermediate or a liaison position between

♦

Glueclcs end Himlcr.

Kell, Herr Brandt, Aether cr not you knew Oluecka you knew
where to go when you needed concentration carp inmates for ^experiments,
didn't you?

A. If there had been anything like that 1 addrossod Viclff in this
cose, as in the first letter in «U3, and hero apparently through the
anno channels an appeal wont to Hi-waler.

Q. But you havo very expressly denied ary connection with tho
Jaundice matter ifcich is the con ton t of the letter of Ainu 151*3 whore
it eays you were furthering Dohaon's experiments and wanted ton
prisoners fraa Oranionburg.

a. I do not reneefcer that I turned to Orawitx on behalf of Dohaon
or that Grawits approached no in this fore, ihoso thrue letters »*icn
I have horo, the first with the food question, there is nothing which
could fall ur. -jt the cot.copt of experiment. The second lottor, this
tulotypo, it's not clear to me what could have been tho causes of it.

I do not knew whottv-r anything was done. Certainly I did hot knew
»hothor ary thing was dono. Certainly I did not oo anything. Othorwiso
I am 3uro I would rorcstoer a drug. I don't know what it was.

3. But, Herr Braivit, it says you called up and requested —

A. Yes, I can road that h-re, but I do not rertenbor what it was
about, what it could havo beor. about. I want to clear up this concept
of experiment. This document that you show>d mo before, of tho 26th
of January 13 cn the food question; that is not what wc normally *
understand by an experiment. It is a parallel use of cortain foods,
but it is not cn ex;«rii»ont on hissan beings.

noil, Harr Brandt, it does chow though that you ware in contact


Ccurt I

7- :.7-h-6-3 UG-Kinetuek (;.J)


ith the SS and that jxu had gone there to obtain prisoners for whatever
-uryese, er .d you have very vcheecntl; denied that earlier in this inter¬
relation end in ether interreg.-tiens that you had anything tc do with
the SS, end nor we find that you knew exactly where tc 50 when you
h i o:-.c little teat thet needed tc ho made or. hu aa n Vcings. «cw, do
. - -rant tc tell ue about any further experiments whero ycu wer.t to the
S3 for priseners?


I have already said that I dc net rcaa-'or any. 1 have no idea


of rny.


Q. hell, oay? c ycu *dil recea) or tide cne a littlo - otter. Lets
have a lock at Document Hc-1620. This is effored as Prosecution Exhibit


U9 for identification,

(Document handed tc witness)

«. horr Prefosser, will ycu plccso road this docu.vcnt olcud?

... fcs. k lettor signed \y Gra» tz tc t.jc hoichsfuohror SS filmier.
"SS Srlgedofuchrcr Prcfoeaor ^r. Brandt has ey.-fochod us with
t:i- request tc tost a new ointxnt fer tre: Lacr.t vf phosph reus bums
which is still in the experimental atr^a.

"..a I concidor trying cut this cint sent on Conran civilians
f:r ' ms received in terror raids, would teJee too ouch tl .10 and would
c unroll, tlo in respect of testing netheds, -uA cn, in vict. of the
i- rttnee cf the protloa, I do net o’ -lve thet axporlaonts on animals
-dJ prcduco sufficiently ccncluelvo cride .ee, I rospoctfully esk ycu,
Roichsfuehror, tc grant pond salon for cxpurinor.ts to *o rjado in tho
bespit cl cf the Sachs enhnusen concentration cacp on individual prisoners
*-'• prisoners the ere unfit for work er. account cf illness• Sigi.cd,
“ra-itc."

<• Dc ycu or anything a* cut this matter?

... I rtmen. er this ointnent. I eleivc it ;as ado " y c firr. in
I vent tc various agencies vith the it which hed something to dc
i::. air r erf arc. 1 gave, it tc the civilian air rai service end I no

t . eve it to tho Batch physicians cf the S_ nod tho police. In

2646


Court I

7 fob U7-M - h-h - LX - Kinabuck


this letter Gr suits saysx °ks I» 4 . 4 meaning hisself, ..."consider
trying out this ointoant on German civilians for burns received in
terror raids, would take too auch tine and would be unruliable in
respect of testing methods, and t, in -/lew of the importance of the
problem, I ■...Qrewits...’ do not believe *hat experiments on animals
would produce sufficiently conclusive evidence, I "...Grawitz...."
respectfully ask you, Reichafuuhror, to grant permission"... ^rd so
forth.

I certainly did not Kiv„ this ointaent to Grawit* in order to
have it tested on any concentration canp inmates. I ^ayu it to him as
well as to other pooplo, to other agencies, so that it might bo triad
In practice. This suggestion did not soon right to Grawitz sc that
or. his own initiative ho translated my suggestion of a test, and ho
oenoidered that it would take too much time to test it on civilians in
air raids. I suy expressly that I &avc it to him to be tested in
this way.


264?


7 ?.*o-:.-0-S-5-l-Putty

Coart !•


f.-.ia latter la only obiut throe uonths aftor too Jaundice letter fro..

&r wit*, l«a't ItT

... f.a, tarcc con tea lrtor.

.jjd it ia only twenty-fivo days eft or too issuance of tho Second
jUchror Dccro. voice you state wee thu firat tico you co Id have had any
oaal'olo interest la uodlc*l aclonco and research?

x: Ifae dates aro correct, hut aa appolntaant which I pas-! on to other
moacioa boeausc It w £ivon to so haa not .la* actually to do with the
loa itself. at la generally UMknt by aclonco and r^socrcr. la a noro oxton-
•lro concept tluv. the rcfororxo to thv tooting of a salvo.

3. Lot 'a look at tho aocond pu*o of the docuucnt, Horr Brandt. It la
dated 7 October I9U3. It ia a lottor froc the Dofundent, Rudol' Brandt to
Gr.vlts,

•7r. 0 Rolchsfuohror-SS aroo to exp .rloenta boln*; undo with tho ointnont
for phosphorous turna at tho Snehsonhnusen Concentration Ou--p on Individual
;rison«rs who havo bocouo unfit for work throu^J illness." with the ir.lt&ala
•3H“. I would like to roclnd you, Doctor, that too incendiary boab oxporl-
nent na charged in tco lndictccnt In this c * so took ;<lnco In Sovoeber 19^3*
tt the Buchonwold Concuntratlon C*u.p. Do you tnlnk thnt there la any
possibility that those docuaonts which you havo boforo you now really r>-
iresent too starting point of tho inc.ndiary bocb oxporinonts which took plcco
at 3ucho.iwald r ther tuan Sictscranuaen?

... I cannot say wnothor ther. ia nay direct conr.octior.. I cannot
elluln. to tho possibility. I can odd text fron 19U3 on tho problou of
incendiary boob* and injuries froc /.hosphorous was 1 tenoral prooloo in
Quraangr, and If one uxaclncs oodlccl litoraturo. ono will fix* thnt thoro
vna probubly a new ccntion of it lr. every weakly. It ia quito poaalblo that
1.-lope ado ntly of oach other oxp-ricont* woro carried out in Buchenwnld no veil
c« In Sr.eUcnhnuacn eal at other place*, ha for as tino la concornod. '‘t this
tlLx ve wcr. ell intoroated in tr.la question of phosphorous burns practically
or theoretically.


2648


- Fe -4WSS-5-a-Putty (i-J)
Ccurt Ho. 1.


Doctor, isn't it a ncnstrous thing tc conduct phosphorous
c^psrinenta cn concentration caap inaates *her. you have sc -aeny pitiful
Goraan civilians who had icon burned in air raids?

A. I vas not of the opinion that such experiments td to Is carried
out in concentration cac*ps. The lotter shows that this ires Grawitz 1 s
:pioicn. If this was his opinion, he, no doubt, had t.-c idea that in
seas casos of injuries which wore kept parallel, & conclusion could be
drawn sore readily concerning the effectiveness of a thorapeutic agent
than if the prlaary injuries and bums wero different, siail^r as in the
ceso of gun shot wounds during uertiao.

Phosphorous bums, no dou't, cccurrod in tho concentration csnps,
toe, tecauao they woro sccetixocs hit ’ y air raids, As far as I know,
that was the case particularly in Buchenwald. If cno overlooks tho •
.-rosary pain involved in the injury and tho wound is not *x> extensive
so that there aro gonoral burn aiontcos, tho injury is not too soricua.
Decisive ir. the quoeticn cf tho thcrapoutic agent is Tibet chexical is
used tc neutralize phosphorous which has a rolativo low burning tcrapor-
tturc. cocporiaonta carriod out in tho cesp Saohaanhauaon, I lid not
leers anything about than free tny report, and the first report cn such
urns inflicted for tho purposo cf thorapeutic tboataent I heard of in
the trial.

Q. I can appreciate that ycu fool it necessary to Justify theso
incendiary 'cxb axp<riaonta # , Doctor. Do ycu duty tdxt you asked
"rcdti to test tills cintaent on concentration oa^ imxtos after they
ai * con deliberatel; tumsi with phosphorous?

... In answer to this precise question I raist say tj.ct I am net
‘ -re that I rocc n a o nded this cintc.cn t, preauae' 1;* x'ds Dorm ointment,
to Grawitz in order to have it tested cn concentration of.-: inmates. 1
do not knew whether it ires a suggestion 'y telephone or in writing froa
:.o. 2 cannot say.

.R. i'cHAJEf: I have no further questions.


2649


?eb-S£-'aS-5-£-Putcy ( \Z)
ourt Ko. 1 .


K2-D1KZ3I EXAKIHi'flON

b'i DR. SZ&7UZDS:

£• ./itreas, the beginning of the cross oxiainiuion
70 U were shown


2649A


a docuaont Z&-890.

72 FHJSICS.T: Lot tho rocord show that Counsel for Srandt is conducting:
tfcc ro-cx--u. lent ion after cross exo-ination.

3 T Da. SSaT.JIUS:

Q. Docu-^nt S 0 - 890 . Iritlll: Ul*3. was shown to you. The docuaont rofers
to toe c~ild, .-one Cease, erd t letter rcpxhcd ou cccordiiv; to which you wore
ashed to intorvono in f«.ror of the cnlld. tfcat spocinlisod Jcnowlod^o was
necessary to toko action in this casot

n. So specialized knowledge was rwes scary. Too lottc^r does not say
wane was wron^r with tho child so that this (juostl n could ho cleared up


- Feb. 47 -H-^-U-PX?- Putty

C-urt No. 1


- - goner 1 asodiral understand! nz. In this can. I had to get c. >nurnl ieprossion
0 f th. condition of thr child.

q, Vitaesa, you told of the case in Leipzig where this child was borr. that
KUnd -.nL without a hand and a foot. Mint specialized knowledge did you need
.. that -ice in -rdor to fulfill the assifrraont which was ^iven you by Hitler?

A. There wes no question of Ipoci lizod knowledge here. The decision was on
* hua-n othical basis in regard to the child 'rod the parents of the child.

Q. Witness, you talked to Pastor S-dolachwii^ the question of Euthanasia,
that specialized knowledge did you need then?

A. Here again it was not a question of specialized knuwlod-o, olthor surgical
of psychiatric. The talk was entirely on a medical rnd hum.-ne discussion of
ideas. It did not require any special psychiatric kn^lodfo on ay part as
'or as tbo Institution at Bethei was concerned. A part of the pationts at Bothol
■ere not psychiatric casus prim-riiy. Tb-y wer« deformed and monstrous. a
jerwril medical knowledge was quite enough to bo able to talk on thoso quooti^is
in general.

Q. Thun I may conclude that yuur -ctivity w's not that A specialist
basically?

A. It could not bo If you mean mj activity rs far as the problem of
Bithanasla was concernod. 1 did not exercise any function as a specialist in
psychiatry. There woro other doctors appointed for this functi.n. I was concerned
■1th the general medical questions.

A. Then how was tho decision of specialized question taken c*ro of?

a. Specialists were appointed fer tn t purpose. Thr-o '.ays ago I said th't not
«Hy psychiatrists were included uf spurts and chief experts from general mental
institutions but that the heads of university clinics participated, \ uorzburg,
f r inotanco, Berlin. I believe there w,.ro tw„ -or throe others, tco,Hoidelbore.

You were also shown a document NO-625, ExMbit 356. Ibis is tho
qu-sti-rr.nire with the aeaurandua. s this questionnaire sent t. all
hospitals in Germany?

a. No. It was sent only to the cental institutions, tlr.t is, to plhcos

^ thc P rti ^ nt8 -.no primarily insane.

2651


7 Feb. LI -Sfr-5-2A-FKP- Putty

Court Ho. 1


Q. Was it sent to Kuppurheiacr?

A. Ho.

V.s it wont to tuberculosis sanitariums?

A. K-».

Q. Is othar apccinl institutiasa?

A. I do not believe as. The indications, referring to specific dosoascs


such aa uoilepay, echir-ophrenia, a now clorrly that they ^ro in snn,. It wos
Bont only to euch inatitutiona.

Q. In th*» inatitutiona wh.r». no questionnaires wore aont, wero thoro

N

persona incapable of workir*;?


Q. D- y-u boliove thrt there wore lrr^e nunsbera?

A. Tlr.t woull dopond -n the institution in quoaUai. For example, tho
tuberculosis sanitariune have a euch larger percentage of seriously ill persons
■ho wore iU for lone porieds than o small city hospital with a rapid turnover
of patients.

Do you believe th -1 in tho institutions which old not receive any
questionnaires that there were aor« people incapable of workln.; th.n in the


aontal inatituti .ne?

... Ho. Thoro would probably bo aero in tho aent^l institutions. The numbore
•ere c tanned urin the w.r ’_y tho nuuber of injuries, the injurioa in Gomany,

Q. But you believe that there were a lar.> neoser?

A. A rolrtivvly larpu number.

Q. N.w why 'id those inatitutiona not receive any questionnaires when tho
question jT inability to work wo a buourht up?

A. I h.vfl pointed out aav.ral tiaoa hero that the question of inability
to ssrk had n-tnin.- to do with product!» but was only a part of tho diatnosia
in -re-r to ;ot a picture of tta total condition of tho inaan. per o on. If it
ho-: teon a quest! «i ;f gotting 'hold of people* in ocpablo of working as such,
•-her. questijnnairos wjuld h'vu .Kjon sent to all institutions.

h. I have another question about these questionnaires. In 19?9 an: 19A0
■^rc there still Jewish hospitals, end wore thare Jews in other hospitals?

2652


7 Feb. 47 -¥-5-3A-r?J>- Futty
Court Ko. 1


A. Yos.

Q. Did tMsc hospitels rocolvo quostionftairus?

A, /. "-in it liquid have bc«n nucols'r/ to send questionnaires to all

hospitals.

£. Then I a*y conclude thet it was not intended to >t hold of all Jews
in hospitals? *

A. No. In 1939 th; questionnaires ware set up purely for the insane erv!
s«nt to tho cental institutions. Probably for general ati tistical reasons
oirtiti-nal information was asked for on tho questionnaires Just as a gcnorcl
questionnaire on the institution was included.


26*3


7 ?o* 4?-v'-?JC-6-l-3o--xl
Court |o< 1

- t you hr.ro already sail that during cross oxrxainr.tlGn. 'fitness, ycu
belonged to tho ontour-go of Hit lor. Ifhon Jo you boliovo thr.t Hitlor docidod
to ojtorr-in-to tho Jews? Do you knew anything .-bout that?

X I era say nothing .-bout th.-t. Looking back at tho porioi as shafn by
tho iocur-onts, I o.-a assure it rj about tho niddio of tho v-r. I did not
lo-rn anything about it nysolf at tho tire.

o Y-uaforo also shown Dccic^nt !fc. 1750, Exhibit Ik. 44-1. This is an
oxcorpt fren Raidor’a diary. According t° this, tho killing of ins-no persons
• c tho insano asylixjs in tho occuoiod *-.ntor torrlt-ry is loscribod ao noco-
rsrxy. TT.o that decision free, tho nolle 1 point of view?

A I do not know ho»; thio decision e-no abcut. I hoard nothing about it at

X

tho tiro. I do not know tho condition. It night h-.vo boon duo to Othor nattors
rr.thor than tho nodical ono. I do not know.

^ '/itnoss, tto incidout >t 21 3optonbor, 20 Go?toiJ>or, and 1 Octobor 19U,
rj that tho tiro th- oon-an .jay Croup North was odrancing?

A Worth anl Contor, I boliovo.

- Do you boliovo that tho killing of insano porsinr at that tins was
p;ofliblo without tho aid of tho organizations undor tho aathry.asi.a prccoduro?

A I ru convince that tho two things had nothing to 1c with oach othor.

Do you boliovo that th-.ro waj any intontion of c rryino this <"*t by
way of zuthanasia as 3ouhlor*s offico had carriod it ait?

A I do not know. I cannot say anythinc about that. Tho infomatlon
tifM have to bo supplonontod by thor inf mention. It io possible that tho
diary of Haldor’o doos not contain >nly thoso throo ontrios, but furthor
lafcnw.tion. Tho eno word rental Institution Kc*.r.orod has no running in ny
opinion. it could noan that see adi-iuiatrativo staff or scuothlng olso w-.o
to bs ostabliehod in that uroa.

a Thoa, I nny conclulo that thoso re-sores co-ill bo carriol out without
7W being infoniod?

A I was not infotted.

^ Thon, Decineat He. 092 was shorn to you, Exhibit No. -.42. That is a
Inter free: tho Public Transport cenpany of 20 July 19«, tc the -_ont-l
institution Hoiacar. Tho lot tor cencemstho transfor of ins no persons in
connection with tho ovacuaticn of -rcas onlanaorol by air rails, ‘.fore cnly


- -i


7 Fc\ A7-K-FJC-6-2-3card (aJ)
Court Ho; 1.


inaa.it persona trenferred fraa theso areas at that tiao?

«. No, at that tine there mas a general evacuation of the sick,
which was undertaken at that tiao. 1 locked at a sap and dioccverod at

first a sanatcriuo a little south of Padertom. I assuaed that this

•

sight concern an evacuation of the institution for the insane tc have
an evacuation hospital for Paderbcm which was continually boing attacked
becauso of its railroad Junction. And, in the saae way as Doctor v^haidt
indicated fer Eichberg free 1V43 on it wes used as a gcnoral evacuation
hospital. v

Q. Then I aay condudo that theso wore general measures and not
specific acasures?

A. No, not specific neasmros. x t was a gar.oral ncaauxsc which was
necessary free thia tiao on.

Q. Did you issue instructions as to how the individual hospitals
i<ero to fce evacuated?

/. No. There wore general inatxuctions which »cnt through tho
entiro Adninistral Air Raid Caaaittoe. There could bo special cases.

If 1 encountered sccothing on tho spot, for exaraplo, thoro was Cologne,
Perm—-there wero such possibilities, but in general I did n.t deal with
the specific causo tut only with tho general instructions.

Q. uitness, yoaterday it ves said that tho Fuchror principle was
decisive for ycu in your profession. Do you b-liovo that nodical question
could lc doait with according tc that principle?

A. Ho, nodical questions depended or. tho doctor ac far as thuir
decisions wore concerned.

THE rRESIDENT: The Tri' anal will ruct-ss for a few ninutes.

(A recess was taken)


2655


7 Pebruarj^-M-JWG—'7-1-Blakley
Court Sc. 1


THE UAESHii: The Tribunal io rgain in session.

Q witness, dc you believe that it is correct to knew whether the people
with whoa you collaborate cro physically and mentally healthy or whether
they are considered as suffering soverly?

A It certainly wculd \jc decisive to knew efc-ut the possibility cf
efficiency of his collaborators.

Q Do you believe th;t it is ir^ortant fer tho state to know whether the
responsible politicians or ether personalities arc physicially md mentally
ccapetcnt?

„ The same thing as what I have Just said will epfcly in this case and
oven to a irrger ext ait.

Q And dc ycu fceliovc that applies still nore if the state is in danger
as a result of tho war?

A That would bo the s-no thing for both cases; end I wculd ovon say
that in the last case it wculd be ncru acute.

Q Do you buliove that the state is entitled to sake this information
avallablo to it?

A The institutions within the state were free tho very beginning foll¬
owing this prcceduro. For exaaplo, in this ccsc I can refer to the Wuhr-
sacht whore losses ui a largo scale or cvoi smaller losses wero reported
through normal channels.

Q Kitaisa, I ns asking you or.ee nore to look at Document NO-119, which
wa3 presented yesterday in the course of the cross oxnainrticn. This is a
letter according to which doctors wero tcld that they did net h:vo to main¬
tain their secrecy any core; and I want ycu to tako a lock at Pago 3. Then
I want to rend the text to ycu enco mere. It is stated there: "Physicians,
practitioners, and dentists are net only relieved fr:m sccrocy towards the
General Ccosissicnor Brandt but I now cbligt ting thtm to report a medi¬
ately after their diagnosis of a serious end progressive disease to a person
occupying r. lea dine and responsible position within the silt, tho party,
the '.chra-.cht, the economy, and so on, and then to inform no for ny own
information. 23 Detacher 19A2. (Signed) Adolf Hitler."

2656


7 p€bnttrj-4t-IWG-7-2-Slakley
C-art Mo. 1

In your opinion does this request violato the oath of Hippocrates? Is
scaething being demanded her*. »hich the physician free his professional
ethics should refuse?

* In general the physician is ohliy-tod to maintain secrecy about whet
ht fi.-vls cut in the course cf hia profession end not tc peso on any infcrot¬
ation. He is relieved free: this a-ral law at the v^ry moment when hia know¬
ledge implies a general danger beceuso a physician kntws thft in soou asses,
for instance, in the eras of the dangerous insane patient, he of course is
obligated to impart the knowledge which he a- a gained in practicing hia
prcfcasicn and obligated to pass it on for general safety. 'Then the general
interest exists; an-i it is far alsvu the interest of the individual patient.
Therefore there can be exceptions. In the previously mentioned questions
there is a reference toward the necessity, resulting from tho decree of the
23rd of Doceofcer 19A2.

Q Do yr.u knew the history end the origin of this docroo?

A Yes.

Q What woro the reasons for it?

A Theio wore two ccuto ccsos; in one enso a rauleiter and in another
casu a goneral buccmc insano. The physicians who were treating than, espec¬
ially those of the general, maintained socrecy <nd carried out c treatment
fer a peried cf two yorrs without r.ny information being imparted to the
public. Those precise cases were the causes cf this rtecroo.

Q 4 uvd tho obligation to maintrin secrecy has been determined by law?

/. Yes.

Q Ves this is the cnly case where an exception wes made froa tho
obligation to maintain socrocy cr woro there ether eases whore reports had
to be submitted rbcut diseases?

.. I can cnee more refer to the military procedure. That is abcut tho
cnly thins that 1 recciabcr at the tacooit.

Q In the hospital is then, an cblii7-ti.n to ropert?

A Yes, naturally.

Q Therefor^ I can cer.cludc frea ycur st .taunts thr.t tho interests of


the individual under certain circuostanccs must be subordinated to the

2b57


t-7-?-KlJdclcy


Court Me. 1

interests cf the pwblic?

A Yes.

Q Kitr.cas, today several documents were presented to you about drinking
■•ter exparisent3 and f-od end the testing of cintaor.t. Hew, first of all
I went to ask ycu, is there any difference between experiments which woro
carried out far purposes of research and experin_nts in practico which were
being carried cut with drugs?

.. Before a drug can be used in practico, thoorctical laboratory pre¬
liminary tests are usually made. Under scoe circumstances certain experi-
c«nto arc carried cut on animals; end it, of course, depends cn r.hat drug
Is concerned.

(, In testing and practice there is e fundamental difference from
caking experiments in research?

« From a cort--in period of tine let us assume that a drug is rondy for
practical use end from that accent cn this ->nif is used in such o way as
though it had already been tested for years in practico.

Q (.itness, in ycur interrogation ycu have stated your views with regard
to tho individual experiments end you hevo Judged thee with regard te thoir
necessity and with regard to the voluntoors. kill ycu plocse toll us some¬
thing about wh’.t has boon nonticcod today? perhaps first ef ell you can
toll ua something ebcut the question of drilling water, that is dcccntom-
irvetod water.

A I vrnt to statu in ccnnoction with this that I aa not acquainted with
the exact procedure. Tho document shows that thu testing of this decontam¬
inated water no doubt already had behind it o long period of preliminary
testing in laboratories. /.ftor all, these ere special appomti and such
apparatus was suggested for production.

Q witness, will ycu give me- a brief staton-nt as to the danger of the
experiment8 wuich have tocr. presented hero?

A 1 want to describe then os negative because the- document itself set3
forth th-t no danger was iaplicated. In tine cf war the production and pro-
paration cf apparatus for the decontamination of drink in: water is of tho


7 Febru* ry-U-3vO-7-4-Bl*klcy
Court Sc. 1


highest importance.

Q Hen can you judge in this fleso the question of the vcluntoers?

A In this case I cannct Judge whether these experiments were carried
cut on volunteers cr not.

^ You used the word# "troop experiments." Is a troop experiment a
voluntary oeporiaent?

A k troop experiment in ay opinion is quite natural. «n order is
issued or. the basis of considerations which havo boon undo pr^icusly; and
then within the unit a corresponding erdor is issued to test and to carry
cut the experiment. The question of using vclunteors cr not using volun¬
teers is of sufcordin-te importance in this caso because in the imposition
of such an experiment the dancer end othor consider ti<ns are not even
considered,

Q Kero the experiments which weru carried cut cr ?u coated with regard
to concentrated food important experiments?

*» They wore important experiments which wero net in any way dangerous.
They actually meant the contrary. The ration conboinod twice or more the
nurbor of calorics; rnd certainly those whe took that wore not subjected
U any danger.

Q Can you perhaps describe tc us more in detail of what such expori-
senta consisted and with what they dealt? If I aa informed correctly, then
ch feed in concentrated fens was to be dropped from the air.


Court Ho I

7 Fob 1*7-M - 8-1 - LJ3 - Blakley

a. These were rations which had been computed in relation to
the donanda of front-line soldiersJ and I think that the rations had
been set at 3500 calorics. This nueber of calories was to be brought
together in as snail an area as possible. The selection cf special
fats, oils, and so on os a*substance played an important part in order
to fill the intestines. Various kinds of protein had been selected,
consisting of various aoat substances and various sorts of nA»at. Ihoro
wore difforoncos vhich lay wlthir. this fiold.

Q. Has the experiment carried out to see If this ffcbd "“S
dangerous to the health of those who wore taking it?

a. VI e wen tod to test the composition of these food substances
as to what exposition would bo perhaps tho most agrcoable and easily
digostod. However, noet of all we wanted to test which would be tho
nest suitablo in helpir^ a soldior tc carry out his assi^nnent.

£4. Hill you please stoto your view with regard to tho quostion
of the treatment cf loot burns ar.d .also with regard to thoir dangor?

A. Too, I will aention this phosphorous ointment. 1 believe
that I received such an ointment frcci r. factory with the corresponding
labolj and it was pointed <A»t that this was particularly suitablo for
the treatment of phosphorous burns. ..e tested this ointment and used
it in our clinic ct Berlin. However, in order tor^ach quickor rosults,

I passed this ointment on tc othor agencies.

Q. Professor, I should now like you to state your views with regard
to tr.uir danger and importance. iio know tho r*»t of the subject.

A. At that period of tir.e such an ointment was very important
to us. The dan ter depends on tho sise tf tho phosphorous burn*.


'2660


7 Fc- L7-- .-iw.- 0 -l-Or 38
C art *'c. 1

u .. SS.-V..TIDS: llr. .rosidane, X - not lave any further qu^sti-ns
for tl- witness. I vculd like t clarify- a -istake which has been uado
in tsio translation. I aj inf-^x-d n~w that tU fcllcwinj lifts keen
«r-n^iy translated. Wo spoke here tf “educations if reportin' c:ntc^lcus
Oecoa^s* aix! then it was tra. island as "c-^-ulscry rc.>ortin_ of diseases
in h s.-ltals". 1 twlicvc it will suffice for uc to point ut that-tills
bos keen a nisundoratondin...

VI.. ..J-SHQfT: Is that in cn- i the documents, or in v tj witness's
tcstiiKny?

L.. SL..V..TIUS: This ter : was pr bably niaundersta*! by tho inter¬
preter.

Titi ...LSIELKT: liy qu-stt n for inf-rjati-n was whoth.r tlie .Istakc
ns in cne of the docuucnta or ft .dstronslaticn of wltnoos's oral
testimony cn the stand.

15.. S 1 -CV..TIUS: It w s a .datoko in tho oral statCBients. I do not
have any further quostiona.

Zl .IGSUCtfT: The witnos.; ua. bo o;xusod, tlicrc boin, :v furthor
oe-dnati n of the witness.

tt«J)Y »rosccutien has ao farther questions, T*ur 1! nor.

T : i.-ESHOIT: The wifcviss jny be excused^

11.. S.-.V..TIUS: ZSagr it please the Tribunal I new want to call the
witness Laniers.

Y;:. ii^snciff: The Larshal trill suncn the witness Karr Hans Lannors.

JUIXF Sb3T.HK) dr. inrabal, place the heat’, phenes on the witnoss.

T.uIS HLDf.JCH L- ILS, a witness, to !: the stand an-’, tastified as
follows:

JUKE STtilHQ: Y u will hold u. ycur ri ht hand and rc.»oat after
ac the follcwin oath; I swoor by Ood, the XJulJity and .anisciont, that
I will speak the ;mrc truth on *, will withheld and add nctiin-.


(The witness repeated the ath.)

2661


7 Feb 1*7-
Ccurt Ho. 1


i—.-9-2-Grcsa


Di.-CV - uTl.il


VX SDL.V..TIUS:

Q bitncss, please state ?"cur na.^ ok 1 , date of birth?

A Hans Heinrich Ladners. Dorn on 27 ..ay 1879 at Lublnit*.

Q bhat position die! you occupy durin;. the Vnr?

A I was Chief of t^ic Reich Chancellery.

Q ./hat was ycur assirnwnt am! y.ur activities?

*• Tho Reich Chancellory was the office cf Adolph Hitlor in his
conceits* as -vcich C hone oil or and it was the aconcy which nontally handlod
tho contacts between the inis trios an/, tho Roich Chancollor as far as
nc otlcr channel was prescribed. Its t£in task ccnsistc;! in tho
for.iaticn of directives, it tic loyislati n, laws, docroes, and Fuehrer
decrees which wore submitted by the : inistries cr which wore rebooted
by tho Fuehrer are! Reich Chancellor.


Court I


7 Feb U7-H - 9-la - LJ3 - Gross

Q. Witness, I am now handing three decrees to you. According to
one the defendant, Karl Brandt, got a special position as Commissioner
for the Medical Services and also as Reich Cccraissiooer. Do you know
of these docrees? •

A. Yes, I know of t.«se decrees.

Q. Did you play a part in their drifting?

A. Yes, I have helped to draft then and I have suboittod those
threo decrees to the Fuehrer for his signature.

*

THE RESXDBfr: Counsel, have these documents been admitted in
evidence in the cose?

DR. SSRVATIUS* Yes.

THE PRESIDENT* For the sake of the record, will you refer to
the nuebers of the exhibits?

DR. SERVnTIlS: They were presented .as exhibits.

THE PRESIDENT * Mill you rofor both to tho document ninbors and
exhibit numbers so tho record will identify then?

DR. SERVaTIIB: Tney are* Docioont N0-080 - that is Exhibit 5,
document N0-081 - that is Exhibit 6, and document H0-082 - which is
Exhibit 7.

BY DR. SERVATItB:

3 . witness, will you now state your view with rogard to the
docrcos, first of all with regard to the first decree. What was tho
purpose of this first decree?

A. Tho purpose of the first dec reo was U appoint a Cocmissioncr
who was to carry out the coordination between the interests of tho
rtilitary Medical Services and the Civil Medical S.-rvices. Furthermore,
it sets forth that the person to be appointed Ccacissioner for the
Medical Services, Dr. Brandt, was to handlo curtain special tasks in
the Military and Civil sectors, also for the coordination betweon tho
two sectors, and particularly he war. giver, the right to be constantly
informed and given authority to include himself in hi3 responsibility.


C^urt I

7 Fob 1*7 - * - 9-2a - LJ3 - Gross


q, as a result of this did Karl Brandt fceccee the superior oi
other officers?

A. In ay opinion .rofessor Brandt did not become the superior
of igancios 1*1 ich have Beer, enumerated expressly h-.ro. Ho only had
the right to issue directives according to State legal procedures
*iich wo used. Such a right to issue directives did not yet establish
a superior relationship, a typical exasple for this is probably the
Coaoissionur fer the Four Year Flan, Geering. He had the extensive
right to issue directives toward all agencies of SVuto and Party and
he still did not becoao superior cf those agencies. This docroo had
also boor, intended that Brcndt lid not beccea superior. Ho could only
issue orders arxi issue diroctivos if ho wanted to include hi:\self and
ho had that special right.


7 FcL-JW?-9-l v -Gross (AJ)
Court I


This authority depended orj the feet that a certain directive existed -
tr--t he issued such a directive tc these agencies for tho fulfillment
cf his tasks. And, such a directive had tc be cc.jpli«I with ' y all
agencioa and he cculd only give sue. 1 , a directive in else ieid cf Lis
special *-c»k. He was only authorised tc issue orders within the frame
nr.rk of his tasks.

Q. '..hat vas the meaning of the second docrec? ^

second dccrco, in ry estimation, is only a relatively
unimportant extor.sicn cf the first decree in which urp. \l ..as appointed
tc represent tasks and interests cf the Nodical Services and in this
supervision .-..re included certain special tasks in the fiolds of Scionco,
acsocrch, and organizations! ostablis. jaunts for t*«c distribution end
production of medical supplies. Ho hod also been ^lvcn the authority to
appoint certain cocrdacior.ors and deputies for tho f'-lfilLcent cf his

teaks.

c;. In the order regarding science and research, . ut did the subject
deal with?

This individually wero tho orders which Dr. - received.

- ca.-inct rcr.erd.or it all. I only knew that tnoy *rcra lr. the fields of
tho eodicol cervices or that they wore connected -it., u is, fiLld.

Q. Hew, give us tho r-aaons fer the second uccroo, and what is
its importance?

... in t:.o year 19 Li t tho Fuehicr wanted a consi.'ora' lo extension

ef tho authority of •'r. ‘-rondt for tho fulfillment cf the tasks which had

ccr. ecsigned to him expressly. I had several notes Lav sC t. mo. I

received the erder to draft this decree. I aysolf maintained the point

ef view that th<- new authority txuld have tc bo Halted, that it would

:.p.Vv tc limit the competencies \ ith record tc the rtLor arencics of tho

-'.odiccl Services. I feared that extensive authority would lead tc strong

competition in the administrative field. Therefore, ao I cen romunior

•-xrctly, I drafted approximately four different decrees in v hi eh, first

-- 1 precisely limited the competencies and in tho third on less,

2665


7 ?cb-!i-JP-9-S-Grc33 (AJ)

Court -I

end t 4 .cn in the fourth and fifth decrees which was not limiting then
vary dose. I myself fevered the acst United draft for giving authority.
The Fuehrer, however, favored the cost extensive version, that is, the
• version which was contained in the decreo of 25 August 1 %i t .

For the previously aontioned reason I did not liko this vory ruch and
I uado the remark that it would be otter tc transfer the vholo Ucdical
Service from the “cich ^Iniatry of Interior and the other Ministries*
and tc appoint a Minister of Public health. Then tnc Puohrer repliod,
"That is exactly uhat I do not want.

Brandt is only to have as freo haj.d as possihlo for this special task,
and extensive right to issue liractives." Because this as legally of
tho utmost importance to bo I expressly stated that as a result cf tho
third dccrco the authority cf Brandt from the flret and second decrees
"cro not roscindod and tho Fuohrar answered this quosticn in the affirm
raativo and as a result of tho third docroo also contains tho words "at
tho same time". «t tho aoao tiao ho was Reich Ccenisrlonor for Sani'-
tation and Health System and this was tc shew that tho two other docrces
and authcritios wero continued in existence. However, os a roault of
tids I the.-, publicized the third dccroo in the Reich legal ccdo without
roecir.dlng the *wc other docrecs because the first t:io wore tc remain
offoctivo. In this decree, namely in tho first, it is stated that tho
main direction was with the Chiof of tho hohnaacht hedical Scrvico and
Chief cf Hoclth Scrvico and i&nistry of tho Interior, competent Stoto
Socrctary, and then what is r.ot contained in tho docroo, r.cturally, to
tho Roich Ministry of Interior who raa tho superior of tho Chiof of tho
hoclical Scrvico.

Q. Witnoss, you aro speaking cf tha right to isauo directives.

Did tho first and soccnd decr^os already issued give such authority to
issue directives cr was this given only in the third dccroo?


Court So. 1

7 Fet *»7-M-10—1-EHH-Xa rr ov


rlceae pernlt ne to lock et the decree for a ninute.

In the first decree paragraph 3 eete forth that for the social tasks
Brandt will receive personal directives free the Fuehrer. However, in the
first decree I do not see anythin* about e ri*ht to issue directives and only
nt-ut the authority to intervene in a responsible naxmer. Of course, this
uay have aoant a certain rlht to issue directive. In the soc-nd decree I
do not bolieve that this is particularly nontl-nod. But then tho third de-
cree sets forth thi t Brandt is authorized to issuo directives to or,vmiccti-.ns
of the state, Party, and Vehrarcht. x

<v- It is therefore correct that only Tree Anxust 194- on euch a to

issue directives had been specifically stated!

A. It vas only sn«cifienlly stated in the third decree.

Witness, did. Brandt, as a result of this, tocoao the head of tho
entire nodical service!

A. This Question nust be answered in the negative in uy opinion because,
os I have already stated, he was not tho euDvricr of tho other agencies of tho
health rad nodical service tut wrs only equipped, with the rifiht to issue
directives for certain specialised tasks and. this rirfht to lsouo directives
he e.uld exercise in acc-rdancc with the dlroctlvos of the Fuohror and ac¬
cording to his own osticntlon. The head of tho codlcnl service, llko c
Minister for .-utile Health, ho could not be. *irst of nil, it hrd boon odo-
clficrlly state! he was not to cccucy that petition aK*. secondly, with tho
saill rdcinistretlve nochine at his disposal (nd with the linltod enount of
funds which hod beon grunted, to kin for his tasks V ne - and I had to *rant
thee tecruse I had boon ordered, to do so - then he could not have fulfilled
ell the trsks presented by tho nodical ned health service.

<v I» it correct thet he was only t- h/vo a free hand, for the execution
of the sovclel tasks which were *iven tv hiu!

A. According to the directive nnd actives which were *lven to ne in
drafting the decree, this authority v«.s jti ly to extend to these spoclcl tasks
whose extent wa6, however, not kn^wn to no.

£. Will y^u please put these decrees aside and we will cone to a


Court 3o. 1

? Fob -t7-*-10-2-Z9(-l£arr;v


different subject. That U the question of euthanasia. Do yju know that a
solution.cf tko euthanasia prcgran vas suggested by Hitler?

A. Tea, I know about that.

Q, When did you first hear about thiaT

A. I heard of it for the first tiee in the year 1939, in the fall of that
year. In the fall of 1939, it nay have been at tho end cf September of the
beginning of October, tho State Secretary Dr. Conti, tho Chief oA the Civil
Medical Service in the Beich Ministry of the Interior, was callod by the
Fuehrer to attend a conference. I vnt also consulted foi* this conference. On
that occasion the Fuehrer discussed in ny presence for the first tiao tho orob-
lea of euthanasia. He statod that he considered it aooroprlatc that lifo unfit
for living of severely insane pationts should be rcooved by intervention which
would result in death. Aa far as I can roaenbor, ho nnasd as or. oxanple the
sevors usntal diseases in the course A which aental patients could only bo
tedded -n boards or excelsior because they could not keep clean and in cracs
whero patients tole thsir -/wn wxcrcsent as food, and in connection with this ho
statad that it probably would be aost appreoricto to oxterainato tho lives which
wore unfit tc llvo cf such pationts. Ho also stated that this also ncant e
eortcin saving in hospitals, Dhysicans, and nursing; personnel. In jy orosonco
he issued the order to State Secretary Dr. Conti tc occupy hinsolf with this
question cad to use ny sunport in Handling: the lcgcl aspects. Dr. Conti ro-
olicd that he also aooroved {Ton tho csdlcal standpoint tho cxterninetlon cf
such lifo unfit f-r living and that ho voulc oxaaicc the cmcstlon in detail.

I h/d dot to«n prepared to cny extent for thie subject and at that tine I only
nrde c very gvnorel strtecect that the subject Included innunerable oroblens
n^t only A a asdical kind but also, to a large extent, inner political, far-
ei^-n political, and also clerical political problems, and aleo nroblcns of o
reli.-ious end othlccl kind, and I also stated that it did not seen appropriate
to ne to select a tine of war for the Solution it suck oroblen and that tho
ratter should bo n-stponed, if crsslble. I then sletod further thet if It hri*
ti bo ccrriod out under all circucstcnccs then it would be only a aucstUr. of

establishing a lav provided with all legal guarantees. The Fuehrer did not go

2teS


Court So. 1

7 Feb 47-H-10-3-B*-f>.rrcv


into ay statecents in detail and stated that thie still could he examined,
tut he cp ictaincd the order kfaich he had ^irec to Conti rnd dienleucd u«.

Q* At that tlno wae the nane of trcfeeeor Brandt aentloned?

A. During the discussi^p the nace of rrofessor Brandt, according to cy
recollection, wa not centlcned nor were any other naaes mentioned. The dis¬
cussion only referred to the general soluti-n of the orohloa and, lnnodia.tely
foli-win* the discussion, I told Dr. Conti I would think over thi* netter
once core and that I would contrct hia lrter. I tfcon bo*en to draft a lav
which, ae I inclined, would contain the le^al .guarantees i^.ich were necessary
undor all circunetancee - exact lluitotione of the noet eevero casts which
had to be deUruinod by aedical nen, and exeaptione which were to bo aode,
for example, for those patients who hac bocooe insane during tho war, during
.inneuvcrs and other civil service, or so-called "old r^e Insanity" and slcilar
cases. In ay opinion it vas also necessary to specifically state that only
Goraan iesano patients should be subj. cteft to this procedure in ordor to cx-
oress the feet that foreigners would be oxcaptod.

Q. Vitness, these aro views which ycu nalntalnod with regard to tho
problsc. However, that was not tho subject of tho discussion.

A. At thi t tiae this was not the subject A the discussion but I only
flnlshod this and I waited now fvr State Secretary Conti to contact -is in
a.ceordcnco with tho instructions ho had received.

<%. Did Conti do this?

A. Conti refrained fron doin^; thie. Only after several vocks ho tele¬
phoned ao and told ne thet he had been rolievod of thie r.eslfinnont by the
Fuehrer and at that I considered this setter as closed. However, in tho year
1940 I a;aic Kid to occupy ayself with the ouestion. In tho serin: of 1940
nelchsloiter Bouhler visited ce. He was the Chief of the Chancellory of the
Fuehrer, 5SCAd, and he visited ue in ay railroad conch In Bel*:iua und told ne
that he wes just c-oixw; fr-c the Fuehrer and tho Fuehrer now wanted to turn
over the solution of the euthanasia cuesticn to hia. I discussed the severe
jbjoctl.n* existing e^nin&t thot with hiu and also submitted the drpft of the
lav to his cad told bin this would still be n solution if this subject could


Court Ic. 1

7 Fob 47-K-iC—V-EKH-K«rrcv


*« approached in auch a vay ao that a publlclaad Raich lav vra eatc.bliehcd.
3:uhl«r didn't Bees to approve of ny draft and did not refuae it, but he tcld
r» that the procedure to be applied cculd be routed through adniciatrotivo
channela .


2670


l '


7 Feb. U7-tt-ATO-l!-l-Lsscr

Court Jlo. 1


At the conclusion I told Bouhler that I wauld have to report to the Fuehrer once
more about the mattor. I did this a short tine later. At that timo tho Fuehrer

read over the draft of ny law. Ho did not expressively disapprove of itj however,

•

ho stated Jhat for political reasons such a law soenei undesirable to him.
Subsequently I did not hear anythin* noro about the subject#

Q At that tine, duriiy: the discussion which you ha ' with him, did the
Fuehrer mention the name of Professor Trandt?

A That naru was not mentioned#

Q 7/itncas, when did you hear of the authority which actually was pi van to

%

Brandt and Bouhler?

A I was not informed about tho authority which had boon i.lvon to Brandt
and Douhlor through official channels. As I havo previously said, after many
renths, it may havo been oarly in 19l/>, I rocoivod knowlotleo that action was
actually under way of which I had not previously known. At that tino I found
out that the Fuohrcr had actually i^ven an authority to “ran't and Bouhlor for
tho oxocution of the euthanasia program. This authority did not pass thr^uph ny
hands. Only in tho course of discussions which later on I had with tho Reich
Ministor of JUstico I four*! cut and was infoirmd about the contents of those
auttoritioa.

Q Kcw what sort of Cbnplaints woro there which oaro to your attention?

A Theea complaints wore not vory numerous# First of all thoy earno from
individual parsons and thero ware seno trea relatives of those insano patients
who had dloc!# However, the asst important complaints cane from tho church. I
also can remember that thero wore two complaints which I bolioved it to ba ray
duty to follow up icEedlatoly# One was free tho Ucrttorbor^ LarvJos Bishop,

>*'unt, the evangelical Bishop, and the second cane froo the Catholic Pishop,

Count Gahlonj I beliovo toat ho lived in Huonstor. Thoso complaints woro
officially ahhcn'Oed by soj I passed thsc on to the Reich Minister of tho
Intorlor, who was coopotont for tM.3, and I brourht ttem to the attention of
the Fuehrerj I also discussed toe question with the Reich Minister of Justice.
After the complaints wore drawn to tho attention cf tho Fuehrer tho wholo action
was d-soontirued. ffowevor, I did not get aiy official information about this


7 Feb. L7-*-ATD-il-2-Los«er
Coopt Mo. 1


cither. I had not boon consulted but I only obtained knowledge of the fact that
in tho year 1911, this nay haro been in the spring or tho surnor, tho action
was discontinued.

Q Witnosa, w:ron't there also ccaplalnts by prosecutors courts and other
authorities? *

A Yes, wo had such complaints, especially by Judgos and fruardiana who had
to earo for their adoptol children. I followed up this aattor and I contacted

tho Reich Minis tor of itestioe. Tho Reich Minister of Justioo started an investi-

•

Ration and I can re n eaber exactly that two detailed reports arrived, one fron
the Osneral Attorney at Stuttgart and tho second one fron the Chief Prosecutor
at Haumburp. Theso reports occupied thens elves with these questions. The
Raleh Minister of Notice passed this on to no an! I took then to tho Fuehrer
and then passed than on for further handling to the Roich ’tinistor of tho
Intorior. You havo those oonplr.ints hero in the tem of docunonta and they
havo boon prosonted to no in previous interrogations,

Q Witness, what did tho Roloh Minister of .hxstice do thon? Did ho con¬
sider the natter illogal and did ho doclaro it illegal or was it legalised in
tho end?

A Tho Reich Minister of Justioo, Dr. Gucrtnor, cate to see no and at that
tino he was in a great difficulty. Ho had gravo misgivings and he did not knew
what to do. I advised hia that he could only report to tho Fuohror — I myself
sould not give him any advice. I considered a law necessary under all circum¬
stances. I had played no port in granting tho authority and now I could also
not toko a stand at this tino, However, tho Rolch Minister of Justico, Ouortnor,
as far aa I know, did not consult tho Fuehrer but he probably maintained tho
point cf view that in issuing tho authority tho Fuehrer had laid down a Law
which he had to comply with. I do not know—this is only an assumption on my
part. Ary later procedure which ho wanted to do in this aattor, wa3 stoppod.

Q Do you know how the authority was distributed between Doubler and Brandt?

A I do Kt knew tho least thing about it. I only know that only BouhLer
confronted ae in tte natter lr. the spring of 19UX. ?randt has never nado his


7 Feb. rV-H^-3-Lessor

Ccyrt So. 1

appoaranee before se. I knew that Bcuhlar has nade his appear arte o with the
Hatch Minister of Justioe. Bone rax*, I have never dealt with Brandt at all in
the whole natter, neither before the action.or after tho action, and I havo
only discussed with hin a long tise after the action, when I was a prisoner
together with hin at Mandorf, in Luxecfccurg, in 19US, However, I knew that the
authority was in the nano of Doubler and Brandt.

D3. SSV/.TTUSi May it please the Tribunal, I Jo not havo any more ques¬
tions to put to tho witness.

DJ. FH)ESCHfeM?fi (Defense counsol for Defendant Viktor Brack) i Mr.
President, I want to ask tho witness a nurfcor of qiostions. However, I bcliovo
that tho Umo would new bo approprl-.te to call a rocoss.

TfE iraSTDhMTi Tho Tri'mnal will bo in rocoss until 1*30 o'clock.

(A rocoss was token until 1330 hours.)


7 ?&. hi *A-12-1 -PK?- Foster ( J)

Court .'o. 1

CeSPJSTdD CG.Y

A?rae;oo. session

■ ■ - ■ - .. ■ ■ ■

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 7 Fobruary 19c7 .)


THE -AESHALi The Tribunal is a-air. in sossion.

D . S-iluL: .r. President, t'.io Defendant Oberhouscr asks the ‘Tribunal,
ir. consideration of her status new, to bo excused again today at 3 o'clock.
TIC RCSUKrTx Upon request of Defendant Oborheusor ext:nc<*l through
her counsel, tho defendant aay be excused ro- attendance in the court for
reasons of hor hoolth at 3 o'clock this afternoon. x

Counsel iay .iroceod with tho ex am ination of tiio vitnoas.


ILLS c: . Lb 3ts — - - ad.


SLUXIAXxCSI BY Dh. FROESCKX-I*

Q, V.’itr.oss, you woro Chief of the cichschancollory?

A. las.

Q. As such you had opportunity to oast high parsonalitios of tho
ioraor Goman Oovornaunt—at lotst .-art of then?

A. At least part of then.

Q. Do you know Lartin Dsn .urn?

Too.

Q. \f.iRt position did cor .arm lold?

A. o una at t..o end, head of tho Portoikantlui, after .bolster Hess
loft in 'hi.

Q. I ooroly want .to have this cliarod up for tho inl'oraatlon of tho
Tribunal. art in Doruonn -as a personality .v> ‘ill ,.1-ty an inixjrtant
role in -he course of tills trial, '.'itr.sss, 1 should like to ask you vhat


line of a


was hartin Borasnn?

to say in a fc n sentences. Plcare, .lake
concrete.

•f-ro prcdcair.ant in the tiinkir., and actions

sistaken about his character 1 finally' reached

he *xis a very subelo and hypocritical c. arr.ctcr -..ho


oa able to sak his truo intentions skillfully.


7 Feb. 47 -A-12-2-PTF- Foster
Court Hoi 1


Q. has Martin SjK'jm c men who trio_ to cenc--r.tr.-to as ouch power .is
possible in hissolf?

A, He actually ’id attempt to i: that. Ho always denied it, ho always said
vh t he wonted r.othin fc less than power. But cn tno basis of ay tawwledau of
dovuljf>cacnts of which 1 Lx.raud to c largo extent only .after tho collapse in
1945, I ccod to tbo conviction that ho actually tried to out-in a certain

p mr and tried to elinir. t« other people ir. his field. In particular, I had the

a

experience that he tried.

Q. Please speck ft little aoro slo^y, witness.

A. I wac ccnvinced that ho tried to take eway 's nuch pwier as possible froa
me since I was r. state agent fr.a which he Uliev-d that he was constantly
rcceivinr opposition in his actions. This position whicn I might have nr.d ho
constantly tried t- un onai.x, esp-cia’.'.;* y having himself appoint*;.’ Secretary
of the Fuehrer ~rx! r.a such bccnce ctivo in the state sector too.

Q. i.'itnoss, re you -.ware that Martin Borodin was filled with rdent hatred
of Jets?

A. Ho did not tophaslso it when spe?kin* to ae ’*ut I 'a convinced th-t he
was 'n opponent of the J~ws.

Q. ’.iltness, lo y_u agree with ay opinion tn t Adolph Hitler, under the
influence of boraftnn in tho years 43 r.! 44, srdu r.nd partly realiied these
plans to evacuate ni exterain te Jews in Swrepo?

«. Yes, those wero things wr.ich I .as c witness under oath, testifyinr to f.acti
those are things about which I can say nothing.

Q. .it:;eso, d: you h* ve any indications, any reasons to share this opinion
which I h' vu Just expressed?

A. At the accent I c-uld not .jive . ny indication,

Q, Did you have the Lapressi n, witr.-ss, that Kitle-r was under the influence
.«f Borar nn?

«. In ny pinion Bomann’s influence n Kilter was rather yeat, exactly h w
•T X it was I -n n t -’,1* to jua r >. Those ar_ subjective things that happened t
Bmanr. ~ n. Hitler bout which I can say nothing rs a witr.uss.

Q. Thun you will not be able to answer th_ question whether Martin Bonaann
was Adolph Hitler'o evil spirit.

26?5


7 Feb. 17 -A-12-3-FX?- Faster
Court Ko. 1

A. That was as a personal opinion w.iich I would like to affira, but that is
only a subjective fatliac, intuitive feeiinf which 1 cannot prove by any
c incrctc facts.

Q. Do you know Obergruppenfuehrer Heyd rich who was aerdorod?

A. Ye*, I knew HoydrichT

Q. -s Hoydrich r.lsj a person like Bohaanr. who was striving for power?

A. In xy -pillion Huyurich was to n auch Te'tor degree wen, rnd it was

a

expressed each aore openly.

Q. Did Hoydrich influence the hoichfuohrer SS Hianlur strongly?

Do you know anything about ttet?

A. Ho certainly had an influence m hi* Lut I cannot : *ivo any concrete
facts about these things.


2676


7 Kehpu&ry-«^MC-i3-I-l*e«fcaa
Court No* 1

Q Now, witness, wr.zt was th .-sletionship between Martin Boraann and
F.eicbsleiter Bcuhler?

n I believe it was rather loose, they did not see each other often and
they were in a sense rlvalV The agency of the heichsleiter Bouhler widen
was called the Chancellery of the Fuehrer of the N5DAP was a party organi¬
zation. In addition to the Party Chancellery, there were certain orgajdzat-
ions, end I knot- there was strong friction between Bouhler and Borrtann, be¬
cause Boraann wanted to control matters hioself.

Q '.Itnees, dad you leam that dartin Borcann did not approve cf Bouh-
lor'a so-called weak attitude on Jewish questions?

A I never talked to Bcuhler about it end I did not . <*ar about it.

Q Did Dr. Conti telonr, to Bor-ann's staff?

A As frr os I know, no. He was under the Heichs Ministry of the Int¬
erior, alio he was an honorary officer in tho SS - 1 must correct nyself,
he wcs later made suboriina'.o to Boraann by being made legal health ieador
in tho party sector.

Q i.itnosa, do you know anything ebout the fact that «dolf Hitler,
befer-j the events which you diacu-oed this morning, gave tho assignment to
Bouhler to introduce fcuthtnasia?

A I can say nothing about that formally, but today I am convinced that
the powers which were given to Brar.it and Bcuhler bear c different date —

f. I will come beck to that witness.

A Than the date of the signature.

C I merely wentud to ask you when in the suaaor of 1939, or in August
1939, Adolf Hitler might have given hcichslcittr Bcuhler tho assignment to
introduce Euthanasia for uncurcbly inscr.e persons.

A I knew nothing about thi t.

Q Do yen knew that ICartih Boraann heard ebout this and tried to appro¬
priate th* Sc Euthanasia measures?

« I dc net knew anything at that either*

U' Then ycu do net know either that Ifertin P.crmann aug> acted tc Hitler
thet he assign *his tc Dr. Conti.

2677


7 yebrucr7-^X'G-13-2-Cteeh«n
Court No. 1

A Nc, I do not know about that either.

Q You probably do nat knew th t Cent! did not want tnia assignswnt and
than the situation became as was described?

A I can only say th£l Conti tcld him the assignment had been taken
away from hie.

Q Witness, I shall stew you Document 630-PS, Exhibit 330. That in the

a

decree of Hitler of September 1, 1939, which I need not read again as it has
boon acntlonod several tiacs. Plccae road through this decree witness, hhet
do you consider the legal character of this statement of ..dolf Hitler?

A If I aoy express oyself generally, I can only say that in this cx-
traso fore it doos not correspond to the foro which wao customary for state
decrees.

C Did Adolf Hitler issue many such important decrees in such fori.;?

A In individual cares, but I believe ti^r- wore only e few cr.ses. lho
Fuehrer did not like to worry .about Jdtnnl for.a>, so....tines he usod this
fora when it was not suhnitted by an expert but th t happened very seldom.

Q How, witness, what did you do when such significant ir.structions fror.
Adolf Hitler ccao to your attention and they i.ore not .n the correct fora?

A That h-pp.ned v.ry seldca, only once or twice. If such r docroo in
this fem was submitted to co, because I el so'hud to si gn it, thun 1 adjust-
f ~d tho fera to whet was custoa&ry for a state decree; that is I crossod out
Adclf Hitler and at the bottce. rbovo the none Hitlur, I wreto The Fuehrer
or the Fuehrer, lieichs Chancellor, or I changed it at thu top rnd I wroto
tho Fuehrer cr l.eicns Chancellor and that was changed in tho course of tino.
Thai, I put the Reich seal cn such decrees and 3inco I had to certify these
stetauents cf tho Fuehrer, 1 sign-d than.

Q Witness, new this stetoaer* f «dolf Hitler of September 1, 1939;
did you ever see it?

« 1 believe I saw a copy or the criminal; I do net know. Fcr the first

tine when the heichs Minister cf Justice Dr. Curtner, at the end of 19A0 cr

the beginning of 19A1, visited = as 1 testified before, and talked tc uc

about what was to bo dene about the infometion received, that was the first

2673


7 fefcrui ry-A-WG-13->-24cehen
Court Mo. 1


I had acw-i it. It did net 20 through ay hands, but today i cannot say
Kith certainty whether I saw the ori'ii^l or whether I eaw a copy.

Q i.itncss, you Just ^id that a parson who did net have tho necessary
specialized infoiaatdoo could not find any objections to the form of such
stetecvttts of adolf Hitler; is the' true?

A Yea, it happenod that if Minister Speer submitted sa.ething in a fora
which was not correct, if it caac to jy hands I corrected the fora. *ho
Fuehrer himsolf did not thinh it was v_ry important, if ^cnathing was shcim
to hia, he thought it oust bo right and he aien«d it.

Q hltnosa, I :-3k«xi you before whet you consider the legal character
of this stataunt of Adolf Fit] ,-r without consideration of tha f<ra; please
answer this question.

A That is l .uestion which is very difficult to <ujj»er, It lc debat¬
able. I said bjfcre axprosaodly tnrt I explain.d to the helchs Minister of
Justice that I considered a low necessary. 1 did net consiior this wiough,
but tho heich Uir.atur cf .'ustice Dr. Gurtner was appe rcntly cf tho opinion
thrt this wae a vtlid orier :roa the Fuehrer, th;t is t law, consoquontly,
ho stopped tho proceedings.

Q Viitness, if outstanding Jurists wore of tho opinion that this docroo
of Hitler was a fully valid lognl decree, that it had tho valuo of a law,
than persons without lagol training certainly had to think that this decroo
wos e fully velid lrw?

ifi. McHJi'iI: Just a ednutc, pl'.rc. I oust object to the question
and 1 -sk that it bo atrick^. X know of nc testimony in the rocord which
rivee the opinion of -ny groat legal exports th t this was a valid lew «.J I
don’t think that the question cor. be put to hio in thrt fora. He has been
usk^ for his cpinicn rnd hu has clvon hia opinion.

THE PESSIDiITt Tho objection of the Prcs-.cutior. will be sustain^. Tho


natter is net pertinent to the question in its present condition end th>
•_-.3wor insofar co it has been nsae will be stricken.


2679


,


.BY Dr.. Fr.QzSZrsirJV .:


7 Feoraary-«-C JG-13-A-si-.er.an
Bcurt Ho. 1


q V.itncsa, this acmii-g you spolo of e meeting between you and hoicha-
loitar Bouhlcr in 1940; dc you knc» wh-th.r heichsleiter Bcuhlor in Uay or
June of 1940 Visited Adolf Hitler in order to ask hifi that he be relieved
of hi a duti-'s as head of tfiv Chancellery?

* 2 Jo, I do net rtaaeber that.

Q I have no further questions, » hr. President.

%


7 -Ob c7 -A-JJAA-lIi-l—Jinabuck (3J)

Court .!o« -

TiC xOZSID21T: Is there any further examination of this witness by
the defenso counsel?

(. 0 reply.)

Prosecution nay proceed to cross oxaaine.

cRosh nmi/jicw

31 .a. IL'JOYt

Dr. LooMrs, do you still have the throe decrees, the Fuchro*
deer 003 , concerning Karl Brandt's appointomt as a General Coxjissionor
before you? v

A. I do not havo the docrcos.

(Docunonta handed to witness.)

Q. '.Titnoss, you soy that Or. .varl Brandt \ma authorized to issue
instructions within the wdical fiold of hie social tasks. Now, those
tasks have not boon defined. Do you know w.iat those sp.clal tasks lforo?

'• rili8 “orning I said that th: contents and oxtont of tho special
tasks -ro not kno-.n to no in detail: tiiat I only know that ti.oy :orc in
fields of oconouica and scicnco which had sane connection with the radical
T4id health sorvico; for oxoaplo, in obta. nin^ drugs, otJior nodical suppli,
ond ci.L.iar things and in scientific rosoarch in the field of war injuries,
fruit is what I know about it. I did not eonoorn zqrsolf with tho details,
and Z had no interest in tho do tails of Dr. Brandt's special assignment.

Q. How, Doctor, will you kindly look at tho first section of tho
July docroc of 19h2 and 'rtdeh you aided in the draft.nc thereof concerning
the powers given to the c..icf of tho nodical services of tho 'ohmacht;
aotoly, Dr. handloaor, and .dll you toll us hat powers as a practical
-•attar did this first decree give to Handloser?

A. Para^ra/h 2 of liuuber 1 says about liondloscr• s tasks: "The
chiof of ^ -dical Service of the '.hr -acht is to represent the ’.Tclirnacht
tolcro the civilian authorities in all corzaxi nodical problems arising in
'•••* various branches of ti.c . -hraucht, tho .offen SS and organizations
•-.its subordinate or attached to the .’ehraocht, and will protect the
-i.iercsts of the .iuhraacht in all uadic .il a-asuros taken by tho c:.v_lian

aut; ion ties."' This defines tho task of Handlosor.

2681


7 F 0 fc Ii7-A-^U-Ui-2-iiinabcck (BJ)

Court „o. 1

Q. Could you toll us as n practical latter /hat powers Kandlosor
received Iron th;s language you hav_ just read to us?

A. Ho reqrosents the .'ohrxacht as c.ilof. He negotiated irith dr.

Conti on the civilian side and also idth ‘x. Brandt as far as Frandt bad
any special assignments.

•-i. Did no have any powers over the. other sectors, such as the

:o_dical services, tho .ou$r, tho Luftwaffe, the :iavy and the doffon SS?

a

A. Tlia powers of the chief of the .e'.iraacht n-dical s-rvicc l don't
taiov in detail. They arc s.t down in other acUinistaativo formulations,
not only hero. Thoy are all tho powers wliich tho head of the fohrnacht
■v. ducal service hid. They wore not repealed by this. They *orc o,:ly
n-.itioncd hor- in a curtain direction for tho purpose of this decree
to coordinate military and civilian Iwdwh services.

Q. Wow, itness, as Z understand it you were chief of the Welch
Chancellery. now, in that position you woro considered to bo a so-called
link bo tween tho Fuohrer and all tho T—ich niniators; is that correct?

A. Yos, unless there :erc express exceptions.

<i;. Wow, isn't it true that your duties dealt mostly «d.th the
1-^lslatlon of new la/s?

A Wo, only with formally riroctins this legislation. 1 did not
ven fornulate new laws. I only cLroctcd v n cours- of tho lc.yslat on;
that is, bills w.iich casx. froa szinlstors cr Oth-r officers I turned over
to the proper authorities. I received objections and negotiated, and fi¬
nally- some law or soae runlet ion \:c agraod upen and then I edited
that. 1 was not tho legal authority for all qu-stions by any uaans. I
•as only Ji charge of for.vil things, of tho proc.dure of l-gislotion.

toll, now, in that conn-ct_on for the ben-fit of the Trib nal
111 . ou Izindly outline uhat r-quir-ne«ts had to lx. .-t lr. ord-r to pro-
ul_atc a valid law; that is, did it require a vote of a governing body?

Wiu it n.ed to be duly published x. tho official law journal, the

.. .c .j-s-tzblatt, u.d all other details recc-s:-rxy to validate any such law?

A. .fa law was to be issued tho draft had to bo jivon to all

25S2


7 rob 1 . 7 -A-hAA-lL -3-<Inobuck (5J)
Court !!o. 1


sobers of tlso government, to all t o Rcioh ninistors, with a c-rtain tim
Unit. A stanp eu put or. it which said if until such and such a date —
it -T03 ;»riod of two or throe wocks, soectij-s long_r, sac»j tines less —
if tfcoro lias been no objection by this tiao this rill bo considered
a p proval. As sessions of too Reich Ca -not took place only until 1937 tlion
such tilings r-ro still discussed orally. After 1937 there *.:as &ily a
-riLter. ..roccdure, and this ended ' ith cli-iination of c-rtain objections
end then approval of agroenunt or. tiw la:.'.

If on- could assure toot to.-re was no objection by x the Uni*tors
•-’.or. I got too signatures of the linUton concorn-d, not all of then, end
then I gave it to tto Fuehrer for his : ignaturo. If there were still
objections toosa objections .»cro decided by the FuAiror, or it '.-as said
- h.-d to work on it sooj noro untal too objections had b—n -ltoilnatod.

.led if it was a law it had to bo do..c in this way and th-n published in
the Rolchg-s-tzblntt.

Q. How, Doctor, you havu stated that you participated in tho draft¬
ing of toe proposed euthanasia law. '.fill you tall us what this draft
ccntamod, uivxt r-.<iuirouentc rust bo not bofor. tho execution of tho
-fo/ren would hivo taken place?

A* I can tell you op :roxi.tatcly the contents of cy draft. First,

*. .. s said tiiat und-r c-rtair. conditions tho lif j unworthy to 11 vo of
ieivan insane persons can bo raaov-d. Tho, as I had intended it—those wore
anly ^ ideas—then there was to b- a provision that tho savor., disoasos
•-r- listed froa tho u-dical point of vies;. A paragraph was to bo added
ext blishing general exceptions. As 1 alr-ady said this noming insane
.•-mens „ 1 io had b-cca_ insane through injuries in war wore to l- excepted;
-Iso t..03e -who had contracted too dis.asc in public 3-rvico, a.lso
S-itility; also a nunix.r wore left open because that 'Was prinarily a o.di-
cal gu-stior..

Then careful obs rv-.ticn r-s provided with consideration of tho air-
I had set this obs-rv .t.on for on year. -t was variabl.. Thun

inU.r_sts of to- /-arson coneern-d u_rc to bo pras-rved; a sp-cial

2603


7 ?-b -U-iii-Jj—li'in-Vjuck (;.J)

Court Ho. 1


nurse was to be appointed; the relatives _re to b_ questioned; the
commit;- was to bo consulted and so fort:-.. And after t o period of
observation, a croup of doctors and specialists, • 1 th a legal official
predicting, .ra to decide. Sine., the composition of this croup v-ri-d,
one could make various suggestions.

Then the typ- of election, of voting, ./as to b- d-Urrir.-d, and
then an eadcutinc physician n s to be chosen, Li ay opinion thi£ doctor
was to hzvo the opportunity to obs-rvt the patient for three Months, and
if :e believed that t.w decision of fcw board vas not right he should '.iavo
tho case reviewed. »her- should be an appeal authority. Then th-re Vero
a nunbor of other questions of axecution :*.iich I do not rwueaber no/,
which -.fv.ro to have had to be settled if such a In; was poss-d, so that
actually only the most s-vero era-a -.-oulcl be affected, and so t.int a
decision in favor of cLath would b- reached only if it -./as such a
i-vorc case that it s-oasd advisable to brine «‘bout death, if on- In
general holds tho point of view tat a .*.rcy death is idviaable.


2631:


7 Fob W-^H-15-l-Kiaabucic
Court Mo. 1


(3J>


Q. '.l<n, Doctor, it is true toot your dr eft of this euthanasia ha:

■jos never enacted or sccoptod. lou lied the intentions, of courc., of
having this lar ncct the rc.quiree^r.ts of nil other proposed Ians; that is

go through the regular procedure end cvuntually resulting in ;mblicition

•

in tho ilcich^cs.tzblntt. Is that a correct assumption?

A* J«wn I thought about this question, of course, I considered a
problem which was not in tlio field of Ico: 2nd ;v_dicin_ but a probleU iftich
;=s ijoro in tho field of legal philosophy and othics. The qu-stion —
ohr.t are tho Units of tho .xr.'or of tho lcgisl-tor — that, i:< ry opinion,

;as tho basic question in whet ,r or not to pass such a law. ut I did

not roach any decision on this basic question. I did not .ant to; I
could not; aid I did not have to. 1 as convinced that if this draft is
submitted and distributed to all the ministers — this took fifty to ci::ty
copies — then tile objection to this ti-a:.ure •ill be so strong tliat this
•x.aaurc dll dio of its enm accord, a' leant id. 11 not be s.ttlod during
‘artlix and can be taken up only , .d;on r. -hxj cooes that these problem
OCQ bo .nvestigated thoroughly. I v. s convinced that the objections to
a draft would be so strong that tho La;/ uouli b>on JXUI

. 1 .. HVU 3 Y: Thank you, Doctor. 1 have no further questions, your Honors

RZDIiGCT Hl-.'IV.TICH

EY DR. OBiTATIUS:

Q. hitness, you i.rj eked whether tills was a for ally valid In:.

You said that fcio cuatooary requiivoents wore not fulfilled, x- thero
other .cosibiliti-s in .addition to a 1~;?

Burt the prosecutor asked :j- -.as only vhat in Gcr-.nn jurispru -uoo
call a for.ial 1 at, a law v ich has ' -a passed by way of legislation, and
n- of 5 ucs a 1 ; -ssad by K .-.m^-nt. Other aays w-rt

. passing a e-cr- or a d_cr_o of t’.u, :-^u'.r. Tin Fu.hr.r dcci\-e had been
‘ever froa tile period of von Hind a nburg. it ...is nothing r. a. .* that had
h. .1 established b V the Puolir-r, and this .'ushr-r d-cr-e «as not pasood in


..is forrual ay. . 0 one had anything ‘.o do *rith it -xcept t’. e :lirist.rc who


7 Feb la7-A-J3-I5-2-Jiin3cuck (2J)

Court .io~ 1

were participation, end they were only csiruitod. Their ;.p roval -s not
nieces'-”’, r.ic Fuehrer alone determined. And ii the Fuahr jr /anted r.

Fuehrer deer— or if a sinister vaniod a Fuclirer decree, then I sent a •
draft of such a doerv-o t^ the idnisters concerned and nak-d lor their
opinion. It was sufficient if the -d: lister a aero consults, ."hether
they hart objected, vhotlur thogr had approved Aide no difference actually
b-cauao tivc Tuclircr .done decided. ^

Q. Then the -ztarnal fora of a < ccroo does not indicate tint it vos
invalid? '

A. That is, in :y opinion, a doubtful question.

Q. leu ajntioncd two cas_a before • .lion th.es. r.-qulrcjcnts wore not
nccossary.

A. I produced then.

Q. The liinister of Justice considered it a legal docroo?

A. 71 vo . inis tor of Ju-ticu co.sldorcrt it a legal Aiclir.r ox-dor aivd
a lair. Oth.-rls- he would not have etopped the proceedings.

SS3V TIU3: I have no further questions.

)T>. 1~LT2: (Counsel for Handloscr): lx. President, through tlvc
questions .asked by .x. Hardy the question of minber 1 of tho -croo of 19U2
•.•as brought up for the firct tine. Therefore, I ask t at I nay he allowed
to ;ck a question on this nunber 1 -.rtiich rffocts tho ’ .'chmaclit IJadical
Servico.

THE ;iti>IDEirr: Counsel ary px*o~<und the qu.ction.

EliXIATIOH

31 3.. .XL7Z:

Q. lx. L_- ers, in th- croctian of tho OSf oo tho Lth of February 1938;
that to, when tl-.e po.;.rs of this 01 TT wore fomulatod, you fore present as
chief of the iwich Chancellory?

A. Tes.

Q. Tlircugh the deer— which has o_cn slvofli to you of the 2vth of July


19e2 tlie organisation of th— 0ft7 su. pl-i-.iUJ by tie creation of tho

26u6


7 Feb li7-A-J?-15-3-iin.-fcuck (BJ)

Court IIo. 1

office, c'.iief of the lohraacht »_dical scrviccj is that true?

A. Uhen the chief of the VTAiraacht -edicnl Service — when this office
V8i created I do not know.

Q. If you still hivo the decree b-fore- you, you .rill s-c it.

A. H_r_ it says: "For the L-hruacht I coznission the a-dical inspector
of tbo as chief of the Tfohrozcht .cdic-1 Service", and so forth.

Q. Than, tlirougr. this doore- c_- is auparcred jid thus the office is
created?

Q. Yos, it is possible. I did not dr.-ur up this d-croe. r,» chief of
tho OrCIT end others laid this and exadned it. I do not kno-.; whether the
chiof of the ueSirmqfat -uicnl Service eoist-J b-fero this or not. I
cannot say. I don't knor.

Q. Do you know the pefc-ors o.' tho chief of the Hi^h Cc;..rr.d of tho
'.fchrcacht -*eitel?

A. Yea.

Q. You t-otvfiud -.Lout t:.at ' . r, .n iho bij trial, ’.fill you plv-se
toll the Tribunal dwth-r t!>e chi_f of t - -dgn Cojamd of the A. r.r.cht,
Keitel, was the ou;xrior of the cocaand-r s-in-c hi of of the branches of tho
Whhmacht?

A. Till clxiow of tlio :dgh Co-x-uxl of tho ttahraeht, Keitel, ;ao not
co aondcrnin-chlcf of the branches of the >x _\c t.

Q. Then Keitel could not 0 ivc orders to Coertnc or Kaeder or Doeritz?

A. They could issue ord-rs in t!k lr “ n fields.

Q. * said Keitel could not £ive orders to the co r-mders-in-chivif?

A. Keitel could not sLv. an. or re to the coaaand-rs-in-ahief. Ho
could only tranerdt orders fron the -hielircr to then, but that as true only of
the rdlitnry field for the -ere comax.d r-attors. ..s far is tho chief of thcOKi.'
rcis-cl tho functions of a sinister of xrsr, than tldngs tore different.

Q. Handlosur was ritBin the O.T.' tho subordinate of Keitel?

A. Hot' — uh t Handler,r's iHtiry ositi . vus, I don't know. 1 don't
bur; eO .;hoa he .as subordinate.


2607


ere


7 ?cb Ii7-A-JB-l5-t-JIinabQCk (3J)

Court i.'o. 1

Q. T!icn the internal conditions of -he .chmacht ^-cic~l Service
cocplotclj' unknown to you? You cannot c;otcss -jy opinion?

A. The organ! z '.tional plans of the 0*37 —

Q. I uas asking you whether you could express aqy opinion Vo-ut toe
powers which Handloocr had, froo your an knowlodgo?

A. Ho.

ER. JCLTEs Thank you. I hav- no further questions.


26oS


7 Februnry-A-D.tG- 16 -l-Futty
Court mo. i


DR. FBOESCHUAKN: Mr. ^resident, Dr. Frceschmann for Viktor Brack. I
havu cno question arising frea the ex amination by the Prosecution. May I
ask it?

TH2 PRFSIDB.’T: Counsel nay propound the question.

2UMIK..TI0N

BY DR. FfcOESCHMUffil

Q Witness, do you recoaix-r th-.t.-.at the uid of 1940 or tho beginning of
'41 the Defendant Brrck called on you at your offico >.nd th t you told him
about tho draft of the lew which you have Just been discussing and thet
finally Brack rsked you to give him this lrw?

A I cannot r«««*£.cr it, out 1 consider it possible that Brack celled

%

on no and that wo discussed thj draft of the law.

Q Witnoss, cen you ren^ebur ttv*t this draft nliich was worked out by
you was Jivon to Kuichsluitcr Bouhler or the Fuehrer Chancellory?

A I do not knew, but I consider it possiblu th t 1 gave Brack or Buuh-
ltr a draft of thia lar, but it w s - rough draft; 1 oust state that express¬
ly. It loft quite a number of questions epon.

DR. FROSSCHMaUN: Mr. President, I have no further quostions.

RECRCSS EXaWUaTION

BY UK. HaRDYs

Q Dr. Lantiers, will you kindly toll us what wro thu limits of validity
of r. Fuehrer Docroe?

A Free tho local point of view which had prevailed sinco 1933, tho
Fuehrer Decree had the same force ns i law passed by tho Roicharociorung or
by tho Reichstag.

Q Than, re I undorstsnd, your special decrees of thoJhKhrcr usually
contained your name an' tho name of tho particular ainist.r and then duly
published in the Hdchgesetsfclott, i3 that right, such os these decrees
conferring tho authority as General Cccaissar- for Health and Sanitation
on Karl Brandt?

A Tho Fuehrer Decrees were published in the Seiehgesetzblatt cn

principle if they wore to have full force as lrw, but ther-- were Fuehrer

26S9


7 Fefcruory-A-OJG-16-2-Putty
Court So. 1

Decrees which were not published in the Reichgesutzblatt because that did
not seas necessary. Fcr example, all the organizational decrees aocut tho
occupied territories, none cf thec were published in the Reichgesetzblatt.

Q Well, those were usually decrees cf an adodui strati vo nature, wcr-‘
they not?

A Yes, they we. e adniniatrativo organizational decrees.

Q WOU, then, Dr. Lacners, if I h-ve understood you correctly, it is
your opinion that the Fuehrer letter of 1 September 1939 pertaining to the
rXithonasia program was not a valid Fuehrer Decreo, ia^thet a correct presirap-
tion?

« I nave already said that I would have considered a law necessary.

DR. SERV«TIUL: Ur. President, thi witness is now being asked c legal
question which it is the tack cf the Tribunal to docido. 1 do net believe
that this question is adsissable, end 1 ask Uvt the nnrwer bo stricken from
the record.

H«RDY: I submit, Your Honor, that the witness here is an export
on Gorman law -nd 1 put the question to hie was it his opinion.

THE PKESIDan: Tho objection is overruled. Tho witnoss may state his
opinion on the question propounded to hie.

UK. HaBDY: The witnoss has answered the question, your Honor. I havo
no further questions to put to this witness.

hEDXKBC? swjcn„tio::

BY DR. S?icV..TIUS:

Q Witness, ycu said that there were decrees which wero net published.
Was the reason for this secrecy?

A That wps partially the reason.

Q These wore docreea concerning the -.dainistraticn of the occupied
territories, is that ccrroct?

They did not .ill hive to be kept secret.

Q But it was tb.- pppsop tc keep thu secret as far as possible.

/. Yes, and also the fact that it did net affect the Reich territory.

Q Are there not also other decrees which were kept secret concerning

2690


7 Fcbruc ry-,.-0 JG-l6-3-Putty
Court He. 1


the conduct cf the war?

A It cay te thrt there were such decrees.

Q I as thinking of the r.eich defense laws.

*. The Belch defense law was not published, and when I was examined here
by the big Tribunal last year, I always called it an administrative order
which was quite valid and permissible because the measures in the field of
Reich defense did not require publication.

Q Then the usual fora was dovieted from?

i. The lew was not published. x

Q «nd who ordered this violation of the fern?

A The Fuehrer did not want this law published end it was net published.

Q Then I conclude that the FuOiror h-d the right to dot. mine devia¬
tions from tho usual fora?

A Yes. In tho case of every law ho could say, "I do not want it pub¬
lished," and then it was not jwblishod. It has only a question of whother
it cane into axistenco, as a law. It was certainly not a law if it was not
published, a formal law, I underspend, only a published law.

Q Viitruss, I aa not opoaklnr cf fcrwl lews. 1 an speaking of a decree,
You said that tho fore could bu modified or changed at tho discretion of tho
Fuehrer.

a Ho, not always, formally the Fuehrer Dccrcos w^ro published.

W licmally, yes, but you ycursdi* nur.ticnei two casus where this form
was changed.

A Veil, then, the Fuehrer ordered thf t they should not be published.

Q «r.d ho had tho power tc dc th- 1 ?

A I assume that ho did.

DR. S2tV..TIUS: I have nc further questions.

DR. FR0£SCH1A.NNj iff.. President, I ask that the riling Just node by tho
Tribunal bo reviewed. I asked the witness whether the Fuehrer Decree of tho
1st of September, 1939, could be understood as a decree by persons vhc wore
net legal experts, thrt is, the population in general. The Prc3ecutor ob¬
jected to this question, and the objection was upheld by the Tribunal. New

2671


7 February-*.-iJJG-16-i-Putty

CiliTt So. 1


the Prosecution for the sc~o reason has asked the witness about the signifi¬
cance cf these decrees. The Prosecution in view of the legal kncwledgo of
the witness ccr.siderod this question Justified. I believe that the Tribunal
will have to change its previous ruling, since whrt has been granted tc the
Pres-cut ion mr.y also to granted to the Defense. I therefore, nuJce cpplicntic
that the ruling of the Tribunal be changed and that the question and answer
which was stricken froo the record be rostered.

TH£ PRE3IDLIT* The question pounded by Counsel for the Defense to
the witness sought tc elicit cn onswer as tc whet sono other pooplo thought
or nirht have thought of tho lew. The question propounded to the witness
by the Prosecution was as tc tho opinion of tho witness upon tho law which
is qulto a different scatter.

Mr.. H.J-.DY: I havo no further questions to put to this witnoso.

DR. 3ERV..TIUS: Tlth tho porodssior. of tho Tribunal, 1 shall new call
tho witness, Gutzcit.

THK PhESILLYi: Thoro being no further examination of this witness,
the witness. Dr. Lasers, will bo excused.

The Marshal will surra-n ths witness, Gutzoit.

KURT GUT207, a witness, took the stand rod testified as fdlcwsi

JUXS SaSRli.G: You will pl-as* tree thu Tribunal, hold up your right
hand end be sworn, reporting -ft<_r ao tho oath: I swear by Gcd, the tlnifrty
and Coni sclent, thet 1 will speak the pure truth and will withheld and add
n-thing.

(Tho witness repeated the oath.)

JUDGE SZBRi.'fc: Tcu any bo so*.tod.

DInSCI EL UHIIC’..’

BY Dh. 32*V..Til'S:

Q \.itness, when -nd -here w«ro you bern? what is ycur naiae?

„ Kurt Gutzcit, bem on the second cf June, 1893.

1 You are a prof-sscr n^dicioo?

/. Yes.

‘ q Dc you h‘ive specialized kr.owlt/ig© in rny field cf a-.dicin.;?

2692


7 February-*-!L>JG-16-5-Putty
Court He. 1

* * 9 %

.. In =y stdicel activity I dealt prlmrlly with stccach and intestinal
diseases, liver diseeses end infectious diseesos.

Q Witness, will ycu plecso tell the Tribunal rny infomation that may
indicato your specialised kncwledgo, especially since 1 am .Tcing to examine
yeu cn the subject of hepatitis?

1 In 1920 I took the nodical State oxae&nation. Then 1 was an assist-

A

ant at the City Hospital in Hcu Kcdn in Berlin. Then I bccaae assistant at
the nodical university clinic in Jana. There in 1923 1 ^qualified as a lect¬
urer and received porsdssicn to held lectures. In 1926 I beca.sc assistant
at the university clinic in Breslau. In Breslau I alsc obtained percussion
tc hold lectures and was instructor for internal aodicino. Internal nedicine
is ny special field. In 1929 I bocciu Professor of Internal dodicino at
the University of Breslau. In 1930 I fcccnaa Chief Physician of the Breslau
University Clinic. In 1933 I was ^trusted with the direction cf tho
Hospit'l in Berlin. In 1934 I becsco r regular Professor for Internal Jtod-
icino at tho University of Breslau end boenuo director thcro of the radical
university clinic whore I had fcnacrly worked as assistant. I hold this
position until Broslru was evacuated ir. January, 1945.

Q Witness, durinj the war ycu woro consulting jhy® lclan of tho Wohr-
.r.-cht and work cl in the l&lltrry lAxlicnl /.endeuy, is that right?

A Tos.

Q Tc when wore ycu sutcr.'.inato there?

A In the military Helical ..ccd-xay I was under tho conrnnling officer
cf Instruction Croup C of the Jilit- ry dodical ..cadocy. Ihr-t was Gonoral-
arzt Dr. Schriebcr. «s Consulting Internist, vhich I was appointed at the
beginning of tho war whtn I ves drr-ftod into tho i.uhrcacht, I was undor the
,.rrjy Medical Inspector, Professor Dr. holdacnn.


7 Fob !:7-.>17-l-M3rd (3J)

Court ; .:o. 1

Q. That Information will be sufficient. -itr-ess, did you concern
yours-If -Jith H.po.titis r-sjorch?

A. los.

Q» Do you fcner.; the- specialise, the other sp-cialiats vho vorkod in tha
fi-ld of Hepatitis research?

A. I hno-./ nua>_r of tlioa b„* a vs-, perhaps all of thee.

Q. hill you please ajnt_an ti-o -ore important ones? --

... tn the -Alit.ary .-dical as atabs-rzt Doctor Donen, >'ho

iSM also suberdinnto to the CorruuV-_n- Officer of ti.e -iHtary Ivdicnl
•verdetx*. dealt with Bacteriology; tluat is, 1th research into the cause
of Her t.'.ie htidaiica. .Iso, I know of two ..osiat-ats frau the Lei>ciC
JaiYoroit;* Altaic, .aid .. third nMo 1 do not r»naibcr ut too uouent, iroro
coaconud trlth roscarch into the causo of Jjindlco. The two ussiot.ats of
Prof j'.aor hur r.~r wero hied or ad Curtr.cr. who hud. at .n o.Jllor 'oriod,
worked oa the question of Hepatitis.

1. ‘-Itaeso, that will bo onought, thenk you. You cpofco of Doctor
Saico. Did lector Douen hare a ro->c rch asoigauent?

. 4 j f.r as Z roo 11. -ad ! do sot bulUvo th-t I t» alotcCcm, in tho
course of Me work on Hepatitis. Donee roceivod a rooo.rch asai^xi^nt.
ho 0*4 know frou u;y>a the assignaust cjjoT

^ Tho aai.igrtioat cmc free tho Commission for ^>ido>ica .lace- - eh of
tho ..cicr -LCoourch Co^nool. that was O-Aorul.rst Doctor Schrcibor.

Did you work with Doctor Dor.en?

a. la tho fiad of Jaundice it vos one field, bo worked tosether
in different ooctors; and I was latere.tod in tho c.*ar.o of tho dico co,
ini tho coailitioas which cauaod the diBO.se, *lth tho st-tistice of t.;c
dioo.'.oe, tho question of how d_n*eroue it was -nd tho consequences. Ulilo
Doctor D-i.et t;.!S is charge of tho bactoriologicJ. research. I tried to
dotck-jiao \itr.t < as tao

2694


7 Pet L7-K-S -17-2-1 e-r-f
Court !'o. 1


Cause of thi* dlso s«. Chat this dicease ..as co.-.ta 'our had .already been
r. -w to be very prcc-Lle t:* the clin' research wlich 3 had conducted.

itness. what kind of voric did Doctor Danan do 9 Do you knc» that

A. Doctor D.sen woriced froa scratch. Ke tried by coans of animal
cxperlxce.it a, froa certain see rations of the stlent, to cultivate the tom
in the anlaal. It •.»* necessary first of all to fin-* the right ani-ials in
let these -er-s con'-' be cultivated and finall* It Mas -osslble to tmnsfor
the seras to the animal, to inject the mi-sal, that is tc •'roduco an ani-oal
dieojse; and r.o > .- y transferrins the er.: froa cn*i a;. a»tg to another, to
ass on the disease froa one aniael to another. — that is colled animal
culture, aniral orra.-e, And, t eso in vor*. lotions t ere carried on later
>7 the cultivation of the era in the clinic. It v*as shown t at this vas
not a bactorlun as 1 i: s oen a oaed r. revioup sears; that the cauno of the
disease wao a suh- ver sco r e crganlpa »J icfc ha.* to be gr.M'csc* -lth the virus.
Q. itr.oso, what :d ~octor Do -eft actually ’’oi *ir ■!'* his vork


A. He believed V t he :.V - u r/ the cau'o Epidoiica Jnun'ice.

This vas In icatod b'* a na-ilor f fict-rs.

. Itness, th.»e * ."nnaation is sufficient, hV.r, did Doctor Graultz
have anything to do wj.th tide experiment*

A. hen Jcctor Couen had cultivated Lis cultures in the anlsal and
i.en in the aoctincs of . oical Societies, Vis research work of lector Donen
had been diccucsed frequently, t! e wls« mbs er.-ressed y various oeo-le
•hat those cultures shoul* bo ta'o.i ever fro.-. Dce*n. -rai-itz -as ir. tores led
in Jaur.’ics rerc»rc:. because evaixihero Geranv, varticularlr among the
trca a and in the c».»-a, in refugee cim, concer.trrtic-n c/unps, in children
e" aeration


2695


7 Pcb 4?-A-S‘-17-3-B«»rd (3J}

Court :'o. 1


csjts. Jaundice war 'lftying vs erv>rsrus role : n Curwiy. Ho a? so wante-
to 1 avc cu3 taros frai !>s-on so that he, hiaeelf, could l, avo further
ox;eriJsents aade. This request of Srmitp,


2696


7 Feb A7-3K-17-1*-Beard (FJ)
Court Uo. 1


as well as i aicilr.r request f rca i.aagen, another research worher, also
concerned with the bacteriology cf Jaund5.ce — Co-:on rofusod this ret.va st.
i. hat vaa tie re’son for this'

A. And, he did this fcr the i'oll<r-xng roa' r.f: JIe did ;ct want to
give his cultures avay. lot that out of * s hands, because It vas a certain
sc-ontific -roporty. 7. o oth r w # who a-croachod him in order to get
the cultures ha* net, or had hardly -«oaU with the whole quostion of Jmin’co
at that time, ho : antod to retain cont*ol of Uj use of these culturos, and
that is Hljy he refused. Gravitz a preae - od ao to Jnduco Doctor Doraan to
give up santj of lu* cult-res. I also took Doctor ^ooon’s point of view.

%. "itnoss, did Profossor Brandt lava sn'thing to ‘o with this
ho ot'tls research-

A. 1 did not hoar that 3randL carriod on this roaoarch. Ku was inter¬
ested in It as -Any p o lo, as o»ny ’octors vjro at that lino. In view of
tho urgency of the f -oblou ropetltis 'as an iafortant orob'.ox bocauao 'Jo hod
no way of prevent!:.- it, to roduco tho ‘r.cldonts of tho dldoaso, and wo
had no way of ccnbating tho 11 .so*so with any s-cclfic drugs.

Q. !!<, did professor Frondt do anything 5n tho way f research; did
ho a-poar in tho field of rosearch'

A. Hot to ay !cn ledge.

. Vas Doaon a subordinate of . rofoasor I mndt"

A. Ko, I havo “lrvady said ’'o.acn 'as under th. Military Mnlical Aca-
d-uay, and rofeesor randt had noth- v Co with tho Acadony iiroctly.

•<. Did Sse n-t rccciv. an assi?naont Sroea Brandt directly outside of

this?

A, I knov nothin. cJ ut that.
r ». .ould you hnv' loarnod of it"

A. I think so, yes.

<• .itr.sso, nau for tl e 'isos so itself, is 1 o otitis a dangerous dis-
aaso, danger is to lifo?

A. Keratitis he® a mortality figure accord! r to the ax-crioncj yalnpd

in the second '. 'rid ;ar f less than G.l. T-.c deaths which occurred wore

2697


I

7 Feb-I5H-17-2i.-nct.nl
Court Ho. 1.


£:nertlly not cu. tc Jaundice itself, but ether diseases ccusoi death
and JaundiM .ta only an ndditionnl factor.


-2693- •


7 yob '/l-U-TZ C2lS-l-«!l/vkicy
Court Rc. 1

'l "ttnoss, ia tho therapy of this diso-.Bc dan;;arcus?

A ffc.

A Bov is tho disenso trontoi?

A I h-.vo already said *o had no s *cific tharapy. Ttio therapy conalatoi
:* roct io toi, warnthi oapocinlly tho atcracft nr., intostlao nnd livor rollon,
troafcont »ith vitrj^csj ami so*fcrth. Ocnv loacent sor;s-s could also bo uaoS,
that i3, aoruc free. pooplo who hod rocovorod frcti tho dlsoroo. That sorui. wculd
cu.-lnlatorol. J, cortoin diot was also important ia erdor to :yotect tho
liver as uuch as pcaaiblo. ^

'l That Ij oncuj:. Thanh y xi.

X

3HJ FSOSIDSTr: Tho Tribunal will new ba in rocoao.

(A rocoaa Was taken).

THB I'ARSVi: Tho Tribunal la 'vain in aossi'n. Hoy it ploase your Honora,
dofondant Oborhousor has availod horsolf of tho -orrisrlor. granted by thio
Tei t to abaont - - - latter part of this afternoon .

T3 FP1TID3T?: I ask tho Socrot-ry Go coral to xiofco a nrto for tho record of
tho aboonca of tho i of end-at Obor’ous^r tecauso -f hor physical condition, with
por-ioslon of tho Tribunal. Counsel try procool.

'i Vitnooa, Is there any .urophylaotio . oaauro posaiblo a^alnat hopatitio?

If such a prophylaxis 1= -lvon by :*ono of r cclnatioar, tho a arc vacolnati cna
ajcoacary which o-n bo ratal to tho axporlj-jntal subjoct?

A VaocinoB against hopr.titis as far as l know hnvo not boon f-uad c:U
havo not booa lntroducod yot. Tkoso oxporl -or.t a wo: o nador way at that tU».

In :y capacity no a clinical ran, as far as I can Ju!. o thio, tho dovoloirant
f tto vr.cclaos and tho axporl.-ar.to in winning those vaooinos ,-ro not d-jy.o-
rc us. Tho fact that they are u^t dan or us sbeme thaw tho spontaneous •’ioorno
cf Jcundlco ia itoolf 13 not danorsus. Ll ro rOl other vaoelnoo, a vaccina vhich
i. .t bo dovol po-I ac-Jnst hopatitis could havo occu slijit unlx.p-rtnnt
ro-ctlons at tlw spat nhoro tho ▼»><;.• iantitn is porfcnxoi.

A . Ti’or of ora you consider it lr.yossiblo that f-t-litios e-uli occur?


A !*c, I cannot iraglno that .

OH. SSSf’JOVSi Thon I da not havo any further it ati ns f tho witness.


-2699-


7 ?obru ry-.r-3JO- 19 -l-Gro ■ t
Court 5>. 1


ST IS. ,2L?I (for th- defendant Bandl .0 s«r)j

^ 'iitnoaa, you aro Con ultant Internee vith th. Kftdlcnl Inspector: to
of tac .jr^rl

A Tot.

^ Tint vita Profoator Unlduxnn acd then afterwards. froa tho 1ft of
January ljhl on, vith Profcaeor ludloiirT

A 5xat ia coraoct.

A

q IXiring your activities a a Consultant Intornco vith tho Ar~y Medical
Inspectorate did you aaintoin your position at rofcssor ur< diroctor nt
3r 03 lout

A I anvo u-ictoiaod cy civilian activity t Broalnu r.a far r.e nilitary
duties vhlch had boon ,:ivon to o* T»ruittod it. Part of the tiuo I van nt
tno Military Wedioal :*nde.y in Berlin, at ay pluco of work, and looctiaoa
I vns nlao at tho Brcalau Ohlvwcalty Clinic and I havo troutud tho pntlontf
K.ich voro located thorw ard I have alao given locturca.

^ Mrs t..ia alao tho caao vith other consulting phyeioiona?

A H- t vaa co.~or. prsctlco in tho case of clrttit all consulting physician
v..o vorkad vithln tho fono of tno Intorlor.

^ Th. t la vita all taoto vno hero worked vith tho Nodical Any Inopoctor
ato. Tbit vet couuon pxactlcot

A Ho. Th t cannot bo sold. I vaa a reserve Dodic .1 officor and I alao
cad a civilian activity. Sovcver, there voro alao consulting physicians who
voro ectivo : llitnry ^yaiciuco or'. tn-y, of courao, worked at all ti 00 in
tho military aoctor.

i •/oil, of courao. I only referred to tho .-os.rvc ;hysicinnt. All thorn
consulting physicians *.;o woro only civilloi v-yalci-ona, did they not alao
oxlst?

A Thoro wore several consulting hysicians who woro not in uniforu nt
nil. I can rano-bor Professor von Siccen in 3-rlin, the diroctor of tho Snr
Uni vor city Clinic, and Professor Iphloin, tee director of the ^.’C Clinic of
tuc University of 3 rlin.


-2*700-


7 Fob A7-A-DJ19-2—-ross
Court He. 1


.. Is t, therefore, correct to r-?y that the consulting *ysicians who
othoxviae had a civilian aodical activity al«o durinr their censcrintion as
cor.sultir.? physician carried out a double function?

A. Y~3, certainly - in a «ay.

And tfat alo in their civilian sector they w_re not subordinated
to t:.a A ray epical Inspect ore to.

A. In civilian dical Activities thoy wore not subordinated to the
odical Inn ectorotc.

.ill you pie iso toll the Tribunal about t' c official positions of
the consulting hysicians which layod an Jancrt»nt orraninational role in
tl:o caso of Kandlosor'

A. Thorc w«.ro c>n«u!ton: hysJclnna in the field Arqy, within tho Sicao
»rsy, and further. or. with the -.icyr eO:col Ins octorato and wore ovoryvh v rc
"hero so-called .udical officers in c‘ arjo oro located. Furthoroora, con¬
sult n; physicians -. oro usod for the _ or*, of the hysician An d arge.

Q. Did those eons- It' ns -hysicians hav a cortain military rank'

A. frat «as r.ot tho caso. A certain rt>do had boon -rovldod for t! o
consulting hyaiotans r. "uo-tion. Fo'uror, ho tins only *‘-lo to roach this
-rodo vhon thoy had roon into that position on me of thoir ago. "or
osaarlo, there * .re ocneulti.i? 'h sic ins with tho relatively low .ilituy
ride of t: - assistant physicians ard thoro 'ere other consulting physicians
vho in accord»nco *.::t.\ their ago or their special skills occupied hlrher
Glittery grades. Actually there w;ra all officor grades represented by
ccnsultin ph.veicia.is.

Is it not dlitarily un-.norml to a certain extent?

A. The uholo sta us cf consulting hysicione froz a military point of
’•‘I- ac unusual and it wo un-ncr.nl. The consultin' -hysicianc on the
asis of their portion actually di^ r.ot fit m -ithin t:*, s-ali ailitary
fraaei rk. ilroe^f fw* tic reason bee they > -re in art also: taking
caro of the c.v:_ia.. r’:. *7 . consult r. sici-na or example in con-

-r t lit ot'.-.r lodiccJ officers did n* t have an; authority and they .'id not
•--v any disciplinary author 1 ty cither. Thoir activity consisted, as is
ai-ovn by


2701


7 Febru2r7-A-:0G-lS-3-Grcss
Court Bo. 1


their ruse, of consulting others. -:.~7 actually did net hr.v-. any office.

They did net have any official stanp. They did net havo any coccand author¬
ity. So, that actually the position of the consulting physician basically
varied free the other parsons eff the cdlittry systja. The activity of the
consulting physician consisted of scvoral functions. It is sot forth in thu
so-called directives for consulting physicians. It represents part of the
directives for the collection cf military nodical experiences. ftccSrding
tc these directives the consulting physicians, first of all, had a consultinf

X

function. Secondly, they had a collecting function for the effect of exper¬
iences which had accunuleted within the Medical Services of the ..ehroacht.
And, finally, the function was to teach and to lecture in erdor to raiso
tho level of training of the a«. ileal officers. Point two of this activity,
the activity pcrt'-inir.g to the collection of experiences and the effects, is
also known ns scientific resosrch work.

Q ..o will refer to this lotcr cn. Is it corroct th: t all thoso con¬
sulting physicians who were with the «ray -nd *nsy groups, who for tho roost
part harl a collecting activity, and who at hoa*o in particular, thoso who
worked with tho arny Medical Inspectorate hoJ a utilising function at hone?

A Th't aay well bo said but it is still net quite corroct. Tho con¬
sulting physician in tho ,%ruy and in tho Corps Areas had a utilisation act¬
ivity as wull as a collocticn activity.

W Is it perhaps sc that Iced prctluns wore also utilizod r.t tho front
and th t acre octensivo problems were utilised at hone?

« Th’t is correct.


-2702-


7 /Ob L7-X--' 1-20-1-Loss or (BJ)

Court .To. 1.

w. Km: do you »rcw that the *rry medical regulat ons havo contained
tfco Tact t:iat tl o consulting physicians, and this is tho technical
ox ression — since tjc question of tho cxtablishsont of sroups plays a

certain role in this trial, I rouid like to ask *ou tho following ruostion:

•

Docs a ;roup of specialist physicians, with all tho officers Jn charge,
indicate that they vaoa.st V aasolves constituted a *rouj>? That is, that
they subjectively w.ro ccnn„ctod with osch other' Or is this only^a
statement as to tho coistonco of a number of physicians with equal
objective marks' v

A. Tho latter is correct.

Q. has tho ontiroty of tho consulting hysiciane at tho front os
well as at homo anoncst themselves, — ore they connected with each bthor?

A. Ko, in many eases they did r :von fcnm» each other.

Q. Kem do yew kr .a that tho consulting physicians .not at conferences
which also placed a s.-^ocial part in this trial' how did tho consulting
physicians cornu tojothor by agroasont?

A. No. Tho consulting pfc -sicianr wore ordorcd nnd dotachod and
the a ray medical inspector soloctod thoso consulting ohysicians rho woro
to attend •» conference and than thoy woro sent by their dJ roct suroriors,
tho raodical o.'ficcrs in charge, to Attand thoso particular mootings.

Tho proeoexttion has cla mod that these conferences had boon
typical mootings of conspirators, that is to say, of physicians who net
in order to coezit war crisis, crioos a alnst humanity, and o plan thoso
erimoa and to carry them out. Ycu knot- of those conferences and tho
composition or thoso people who att-ndod. Tthat can 'ou say to tho
accusation of the pros ocution'’

A. Ihc confcrcccor served a ocr'ose, ac far as I know, to discuss
the experiences * hich had been gained ir. the various solical fields in
the field and ’.t heuv, which wore ;ainod by tho individurl consulting
physicians, and tfcon to put then den in sort of directives. Tho consult-
ir.r physicians then a~ain returned to thoir offices and they then utilized
the experienco of which thoy had boon informed in thoso conferences.


2703


7 ?-b i7-A-41U-2C-2-L.ssor (3J)

Ccurt Ko. 1


lectures t:oro ~ivcr. and they wore discussed -and then directives r. sro
issued is to certain methods cf treat-cat and about the diagnosis of
certain diseases and tho evaluation of tho physic*] condition with
r.jard to the diecso. Tfeon these directives wore axaoinod by the a nay
nodical iar -.ctorato and they wore then sent to tho front lino units in
order to have ticso d rectives carried out.

». Do you "c* ether those printed reports .-.ad the Printed ^

directives wore clcss.fi-d as-secret?

A. I do not fc ink that cost of th.s. reports •,;ore classified secret.

Q. Hone .f then wore classified secret. I only * ant><d to ask
because I thought you ai.<ht to able to :aiow. I'crfor consideration of tho
circunstar.cja as they existed in Joratny at ti r.t tine, .’o you considor
thus- conferences -s a necessary institution?

A. I aa of the conviction that they vorc. It was tho host *ay in
order to collect and acourtulcto u.>. exp-rloac«s ullch had been gained
at all the various s .c’.ors and to discuss t’ ec n.jonfcst representatives
of this up.cial field and perhaps to correct *-? <xz and then to r.^ain pass
on those eapxr’.er.cos tc the front lino units.

C ."ou have 'roviously stated that discussions took lace. Wore
there discussions aubjoct to any linitations?

A. I do not know of any particu 1 - csss, only in so far as tho
cio-t-ngs had to be concluded idth.'n a certain period of time, ’Yt I do
not know cr any military order or of any ulitary prohibition to discuss
anything — i J o not knew anythin* about t!vt.

1 would like to ask ‘ou now to tull ns about your srjclal activity
as an internist uitl the amy medical ins-'octomte and to clrc us a
'icturo s to hoi: you have »orke* ithin th* circle ihich was pis-aidod
over by the Dofundoat 1 ndloser, vhat -our t ake eero and hoi. you carried
t; uz oct.

A. I had to trav.I -a lot. T had to visit :r_ay field hoe itals and,
o:" coursd, ith s eci 1 oafbasis on these places •: ^ro ccrt*Jn L.- rtant
lisoasoa had occurred in large nu zb .rs. In this * ay ayself have

27C4


7 '-b 47----—2V.-7-!-S3 j- (?•’;

Court Tc. l


collact-d jc _i oecet.

Did you -l«o Ivp.vj certain or loro ~nd «u;n ..-.to' Did you
receive thta from Profcsaer !.ar. 'lose- or. vhat s-eel'll iisnfat yni u-ro •
to ;1 ce articular ea hasps'

A. Pest ordois acd a^si jncaitf .«"3 fro the xecos'itiis. Already
Trot -It articular vector w^uXd come t! a call to take care of certain
disease* 'accuse t e iuor of such 'Jcoasas .raw enormously. i only want
to laontion dysa texy. tvphua vj-* erhara malaria, although that vae not
ay field, ax' a --eic JsurUce lid, d.urin? tho la ft vefrrs of t'o var,
the ao-cailed war nephritis. In 19A0, -Sen lour:’ co Pecan to ‘-row -ncre
frequently to a tnrrU>inc fi’iure, I 'is r.i van t.-.e assl nrarnt by tho
ory modi cal '-rctir t. particular] c:>v sreolf Kith this diseaso.

In purfurco cf t. is aesi-nont I t on >ent to t'o *ri us theaters of
Operations, to roocc, to Russia, to ranee, i d T have ersonally lookod
at tho various cr.con at U i viriour hospitals. I think In t! > courso
of tho time 1 saw an* touMi..*" of -uch *v»tlente. Then X ! ave lcokod
ct t! o ca-ser for I s 'i.rovo an* 1 /avo pars aally doemined that tho
rear r.s which ’ad for :orl* boon C'.r.s dere’ &r ba ,r. ■ '-* cause of tho
dissaso, for tea >3o, food poison in,, c'ixr.Uc influenco, bad conditions
<•:' drink • --or, iftd other factr, vero not tho evens cf this disease.

I mv in t'.a niroof tlao f at ti e disease could So enrriod from one
h’VAT coin; to t i no:* and t st thir disease bolon o<1 in tho jroup of
stalled infectious d u?<js. I further ias ablo tc doturaine that
cnco this dir-tso ! v* been ov-re -.e, t o or on vho : a* overcome it would
e protected fro-, it -or t .*• rest of Jar life, co fat a ereon would
• te a’:le to « i 'factod with t t Issbm cno t.,:.o 'uri u* Me life.

7 oru arc orl>* rcro G.-ceot.or.-’. 1 -..as -'urth ?r ablj to d 0 terM‘.o that
jaundice i.eral y is a hi:-xlaos dise-.ro wi ich doas not causs any pain
and v'.ic! c.-r.cje the itimt to be -ellt*: litre in 2 , «, and f -oaks and
fcol very _>ha"'.cd. c uld bo furf ur scarf -lid Uat no injurious
cr iic-:lions ou .* serin after tho dircasj. *hat as ccrtrnst to the
union vlich var 'sv.ously held, which -tated t:.xt da.-a.;us to th.o Jivar

r-,uA_n.


2705


7 Fobruar7W.8DJG-2i-l-Karrcw
Court So. 1

Q ifcy I interrupt you for a airvute?

In tho speech cf G_ntrcl Tqylor - in his general speech - in the tres¬
cript of 9 Deceshor the transcript contains the following sentence cn Prge
82 of the German versin> and the speaker here tells of a letter »iich Gr--
witz wrote nd in this lotto? he i~ alleged to have discussed the ovor-all
importance of a vaccine of extraordinary military vrluo for the treatment
of epidemic Jaundice end he ccntinu-s, end I quetos "In several companies
there wore fatalities up to 70* os e result of epidemic Jaundice."

k Kay I esk you who -rote thJ letter end te hc it was addressed?

Q It is "Uo.-.d to havo been written by Grnwitz tc Hinder.

„ This stnteaont ia in contrast to all experiences. I believe that
this is p .-aiatake in printing. It probably should not road 60* fatoliti-s,
but it means tc say that in scoc companies 60* of the entire coupany cc.ught
the disease. If uny such asrtality rato hrd occurred at any plnco I beUeve
that it cert-inly wculd have <xau tc ay knowledge. 1 conn-dor it cocnplotuly
lapossiblo.

DR. N.iTEi Jr. President, 1 have tried to obtain the English vorsion.
However, I was una.blo to obtain the English version in tho General Socret-.ry'
office teday and I would request tho Tribunal to rulo if that shtultl bo tho
cr-ss what tho itness has Just sedd that this word "fatality" in the offic¬
ial version cf tho Gonaan transcript should be changed in such a way as tho
nooning night b« implied. 1 an told thnt the word neons exomptiens and in
this casu I cnly wont to point.cut the necessity for a corr^cti-n cf tho
transcript,

ifi. acH.wSTT: Ury it plcas.‘ the Tribunal, I tako it that General Taylor
is percdttod tc sr.r what h« will in his opening st toaent and it is tho func¬
tion cf the Prosecution in this case to try tc prove his st atonsets. I don't
think it is anything tc -r^ue about here. Th*. lott-r they are talking about
is Document Ho. 010 - I dcr.'t havo tho Exhibit number hero new - but it very
clearly says "The practical importance cf tho matter in question for cur
troeps, especially in Southern Russia, results fren the fact that this
disease fcas spread sc extensively during the past years, beth crr.cng us in


-2706-


7 Fob 47-A-OJG-2l-2-\ar'on (EJ;

Court :.'o. 1

tho affen-SS ar^f r.lice and in the arny, that un to 60. caaualtias for a
period f up to ?ix *.»o ks suffered in *aao coapanioa." it doesn't say
tl.at 6Cv dlod.

D . M.XT3: ; r. 1 resident, if 6meral Taylor had added six 'ocka to t’ o
tact than, of co urso, it raild have been c^car t' at a aist-iko had occurred,
it is only duo to tho fact that in tho s>eoch of -nrural Tay:or tho addition
for six --joks had :ocn loft ait. That as the cnly reason I *jstod a
uistake 'vad recurred.

Ti PRZSH) M: I ..ouid sta‘-o to lounasl t: at a cc>y of th-j 3h;lish
vora. on -ill bo .ado available to hi*. In so far ?s tho statement of Gjnoral
Taylor ia corcorncd, it is clear t‘at sooo oiror lea eon carriod through In
tho record. It is not or any inoortnneo, but as stated by Counsol, tho Olen¬
ins statement of cithor tho i-esecution or tho 'Wenao aay contain or.lv uh&t
that aide cf tho caao expects to ?rcvo. It I as no binding .orco as ovidoncc.
OX DP. "SLT3:

%. .'itnoss, .«tto:*nov Sorvatlua has oreviou rly as od vou *) o occupied
Idnrulf v'th this rollon of hepatitis jnidoac'. You had rvun..i two officoro
and * lent to ain r. correct picture ;.r>d I ant to j.-.-s on 'is oicturj to
the Trib'U-.al. Just ho*, frequently did this iseaso occur and also l ow many
officers occupied thoosdlvao * 3 th ti.»a xoblaaT

A. kay I first of all state tat in tho veers 19A-C and 1941 t: o di«ooeo
; a.I an cnore us increase by nunbort. In order to ;.ivo a picturo 1 would
like to n&rj tho folio-, n; nuefc ra which I can still rj.uar.bor. in ono
sin 1. sooth, I ’.-oliovc it t as Saptaabar 193, <. tho ist ?rn Front alono -
within one uinth t' ere vore 1*0 or I? M.ousanc now c^.aos. Tho anutl in-;’
ervaao ,r. eases cf ti:. disease in Oort my, 'nclodii our troops* at tho front,
is uatimatad at l\ or 2 tillions. .Is xs already soon staled in ono lotter,
in seen lac os tho dir,, so '•at-, reached 50 * to 60 - of tho uoricora or tho
soldiers in tha c©.. mine. In tho - ar 1T6C, 1, ' avo soon 95 h’er-

roceans in a French field hospital - that res threo-fourthn of ar. entire
cu any. In a prisoner of war can- in Fo- rania, here S-.rl'rh officers
-iv located, ’ithin - vory short period of time, of 3ll tho oooolc
that w t ri there had C&e^ht


27C7


7 Febru-jy-..-WG-Sl-3-Xarro*
Court So, 1


the disease* In twe other prisoner cf war camps in Greece and Crete, amongst
the thrao or four thousand ins- tes, 30% tc 40S fell ill with the disease.

This already indicated that hepatitis is dourly a camp or c oan nnity disease
end that it appeared everywhere where human buinjs wore located in crowded
billets and where the general hygienic conditions did net correspond with
these which he h*i in Germany in ti-.-s of peace. I believe this indicates
the inportanco cf the disease elonc dread;’ because of the enormous casual¬
ties on human beings - first of nil, fer the ccabtt units, and then for tho
work r.t heme. Of ccurso, it was quite natural that with an epidemic of
such gian proportions - I don't believe the we rid has over seen anything like
it - every physicicn who hod a laboratory tried tc find the cause of the bac¬
illus by scoo means in sea* way. Many thousands, end perhaps hundreds of
thousands cf bret.rlolcgical investigations of the urine, of tho stomach
Juice, cf the intostinal Juice, end so cn, wore carried cut practically with-
cut the least success, ar.a cnly mn of research, who on the basis of their
preliminary kn.vlcdgo, weic fibs to carry on virus research wore rsoro for-
tunrto in this respect. In Germany, at least 5 to 6 officers worked in
order to find the cause fer the contagious Jaundice. *Ricy included Demen,
Hnagen; they included the two assist onto from Leipzig when 1 havu .already
n'aud; then irefesser Horzwald free Grcifswald, and there arc still throe
or four others wncae names I can't rocall any more. They all tried tc find
the virus. If the virus had bv.en found then it wculd have been possible tu
first cf ell tr*et the disease in acccrdenco with its ccurso, end, secondly,
to find a vaccine and a protection which wculd prelect millions cf people
froa this disease. Up tc new, the treatment of this epidemic jaundice had
only beer, carried cut with symptoms. The medical trocteumt which was civ an
I hav« named. Drugs, rust — --

r . Do you knew hew the tn-'.Uiont for hepititis w.au carried out bread?

.. ..eccriiro tc the literature which was available to us up tc the be¬
ginning cf the war end according tc the lit^wturc which w« wore rite to re¬
ceive fx\e. 'treed during the war, th- foreign countries did net have any
other methods cf treatment end protection thm we had at tho beginning cf


-2703-


7 February-«-DJG-2lW.-i£crrcw
Court He, 1

tho er Sv.r. during the war, as far as 2 tux*, no specific therapy and
r.e specific protection *a developed in connection with the disease. /.
number of becks have been written abroad which indicete that the foreign
countries also tried tc Jind the cause fer epidemic Jnundicc and tc appar¬
ently develop a protection against the disease. I cyself can remtober a
beck from the year 194.5 contained in the Journal of the American Medical
association by the authors Seefo, Stccktcn, Kncwley and hhinetoaxt. Ihe book
described that within a circle cf pursens consisting cf s-coiled "conscient¬
ious objectors" that the excrements of petients fuffeYlng from this disease
were mixed with water and then these excrements wero given to twenty-fivo
people tc drink. They were in throe groups with five to a group. Certain
chlorides end disinfection drugs wore given to thus. In thocasc of two
groups such disinfection drugs wore not used.


-2709-


7 ?eb 47-XJ-22-1-,..o’ zn ( J)
Court Ko. 1


Ir. this froc s i ng or hepatitis a?idcr:ca ten pooplo bocanu ill, but not
of epidemic Jaur.ico. Ih.sq ~oop>o wore such an oas'- caso thPt it cculd oot
be countod o:.ons tho cases of cpidcaic jaundice; all tho others remained
healthy. Thereforo, that is roof of the fact that tho foreign countries
lik-wiso occupied V »-wo1tos for tho cause- nf this din,as j and they tried
to kill the bacteria and uxcraiont and thus orotoct othor people.

i. Eut, no fatalities occurred in this -lay A

A. /all, that had to bo axpocted.

'• *•«», »ill you please toll the Tribunal about you? res-arch and your
attcapts to find tho virus; so far -ou Javo not done that. I aean your
sothods of work.

A. I, myself, '..ave never looked for virus as I am not a bacteriologist.
Within tho sector of tho army, Dohaen trlod to eultiveto thio virus. I hivo
att^-tod to d.scribe th-Se ex-arlaants.

./ell, firs*, of all I ar. interested in 'our activities, because you
as consulting internist of Erofcssor -andlos.r to a certain oxtont belonged
to his close surroundings and porha s ho nay be held rcs-ror.siblo for * hat
you night lave done and what .aay not have been poraissiblc. Therefore, I
think you should describe to us Just he* -ou worked, what were your methods
in curr/in^ o-t ycur activities ir. regard to he -otitis research.

A. I havo actually described it already.

Mil you •'lease repeat it orco xoro briefly.

A. I have .ndj observations bn patients in tho field hospitals, I have
listed the case history, subsequent coa-licationc vnd faUliti s and frt»..
3wV„ral hundred thouaand of case histories, our young physicians and i ! av !
d.tciriincrf what da^a occur aft-r hepatitis, vhat is the iv.r* e de roo
of tho sis^asc and what fatalities occur, vhat causes t:.c fatalities and I
haV0 ruined tk*t hepatitis is contagious. I ;&ened this experience froc
-v.y examinations an-* x rave further dot.rained that tho cause is not of
t-acteria ret of virus.

'• Hav. you car ie-’ cbt -unctur-s of ’ivers iuri.-r vour work?


271C


7 Fvb 47-i-an-22-2-K6ihAa (BJ)

Court *o. 1

A. Punctures of livers ' ;re carried out, Hut I personally have not
carriec. ti c out, b*.-t tinctures f the liver *ore oerfomed in individual
fie d hcs-itils. ;1 i as a method - a technique, -title!, had sen dove!cped
j two Danish authorities, loh^la and Ivoro'.n. For t! is puncture c< the
liver, he atit's c:cld not to treated, 1: cat ever. It could bo dotero'ne'* - hat
da_ia:es the liver ! as sustained arr* vhat t l e chances cf c ue » ’re ith t! ir
diroaee. It cxl be determined if fter tho e-idesic jaundice -helivor
vas ajain i'ioe lonin. vit! it' organs or if in; ' had raaa-nsd In t! e
livor. This t. '5 i-aoortn t :’or - s erojnosis, it is also ia>ertsnt fer the
q oatlon should sue:. huaan coin ayain be r*tur-ed to woric, could he to
allcr-ed to serve, cr •■cuid l o further have to \ erso treatment.

h. Can this j*.v.jtur>a£ cf the liver be cc-nevcioreJ as an «perL.ent on
hu-Jin tei.r.a'

A. Tho 'unct"ii% of the liver . ..ot in ox^eriuent, but a t >thcd


2711


7 “ob J.7-A-G 5-22-la-: ©ehan (3J)

Court ;*o. 1.

■r lamin ation. It equals \.he so-celled lumbar ur.cture where the spinol
fluid is drowned in order to exsuine the fluid secretions and consequently
this puncture could not b-_ considered as danrercus. It is not daP7eroua in
the hands of a person qualified to carry it cat. It is not more ;’•> aye rc-us
thin i lirJrax- puncture UCT'ld be in the esse of a person who is not ex-er-
ienoed.

Ir. /our -'O'itior. as consulting internist; have you diseased the
hepatitis research ith I rofessor Hmdlosor.

A. I h've discusso* he; atitle quite a lot. *

i. In this resroct, did the question evor arise that ir tie frtae of
he-.atltis researc eX'Orlcants should cr ould have to be carried out on
t.xuan fcein-oT

A. As far as ntx t is question has never been discussed.

«• iut, surely you have also nc .aports a_out t!.e ^ro?ross of your
examinations*

A. I 1 ve atu-o cither written or Orel roports when t' e necessity scoood
to ariso.

m. And in that r js'oct, did xu on -our ert over nention the quostion
of [ortorolrtS oxcorlnonts on human boinys?

A. No, I cannot rxcorbor.

}. •, have yew over urittan a ijttor, vhioh I am -oirs to hand to -ou?

It is a lettor date-' t o 24th of June 1944, to “rofoseor Hainan and in this
lattor it is atat-V, "In lino with sy statements at the Joint hepatitis
discussions -1 " roslav, * havj tried to =ako cru 1 " rations fo. ox'.orimonts
on human bfti-'is". (2:-orUer.tu= Ciucis der Uebortragunc honinen)."

nz sr-ZSHIT: hat is the Tocu-ont hock

!‘3TZ: P- .t is the Document took about the ha-»atitis oridamca and
it dees not have -ny nu..>er. *'es, it a- .V'cu.vent jeok Ito. 8, pate 11.

Here ou will fin,-' the letter which I h've Just sectioned.

L?.. VJCDX: It is Inhibit 193-


2712


7 Fob L7-*-G27>-22-2r--ll ea.«na (3J,
Ccurt He. 1


i

V:3 PK3SID—T: T.-.c exn.unsticn of this ritnese •»111 take how nuch
Ion, eF;

KT. :?2LT1: It \ ill t-“Ice a little acre tine. : r. Frasldent, thi" is
<r.o o' the most ixoortant % % itnossaa for the ^ef^-nt Kondloser and 1 Iv.ve
to interrogate his new because he will not be ".v-~.ilable to bo lator.

7:3 PH2SID317: The* witnoss will bo ivail-blo on Uonday .-ncminc. Ifce
Tribunal will noi- rocess until 9:30 '■’'’’ock Londay .Timing. •.

(The -ri’unal adjourned until H .'ebxv'.fy 1917, at 9:30 house,


2713


10 Feb 47-H-DJ 0- 1-1-Fo at op- (AX)
COURT I


CORRECTED COPY .

Official transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in the mattor of the United States
of America, >;galn*t Xarl 3r':ndt, ot al,
defendants, sitting at Nurnborg, Goraany, on
lOFebruary 1947, 09*0, Justice 3eals prosldlng.

TH2 MARSHAL: Persons In the C-urt Room vlll ploaoo find

seats. A

Tho Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal 1.

Military Tribunal 1 la now in session. God save tho

United Stateo of America, and this honor ole Tribunal.

Thoro will be order In the courtroom.

Trfc.’ PRESIDENT: hr. Marshal, will you ascertain that

tho do\*ondants aro all present in court.

THJI MARSHAL: May it please your Honors, all defendants

.re present In the Court Room.

THJ PRESIDENT: Tho Socretary-Goneral will note for the

x’uoord the prosonoe of all the defendants In court;

Thu witnoss Gutsolt Is still cn tho stand and the witness

is reminded that he is still undor oath.

Counsol may prooeed.

DR. 32AVATIUS: (Counsol for tho Defendant Xarl Brandt):
May It pleaso tho Tribunal, may I first discuss briefly a
technical question. On Friday the two witnesses, Relohemlnls-
ter Lacaers and the witness uonoralartt Dr. Outsolt wore led
here in handcuffs. I do not know tho reasons why Rolohsmlnls-
tor isomers was handcuffed. I do not know if any special
reasons oxistod for that. Professor jutrslt Is a prloonor
of war. At present he is in an open coll In prison .nd la
allowed to sore around. I be 1 lev a t.iat It should bo avoided
to bring a witness here in such a way so that ho will not have
*-r.e feeling of being under pressure and that ho perhaps nay


2714


1C F 0 b 47-K-DJG-l-l-Foater-lA?;)

COURT I


refrain fron tolling the truth hero. I would be very grate¬
ful if the Tribunal would nafco a ruling In this onao.

THE PRESIDENT: Thla la a matter concerning which the
Tribunal has no lnf.rantlon. Neither la the Tribunal advised
as to the status of these witnesses- The Tribunal will inquire
into the natter but that is, of course,


2714a


10 Feb 470X-OJG-l-2-Foster-l AX)

court i

1 nit-or for tho seaurlty officer In charge to determine.

The Tribunal will Inquire as to the situation.

Proceed with the examination of the witness:

KURT OUTZEIT - Resumed
EXAMINATION (Continued)

BY OR. NOLTfi: (For the defendant Handloeor)

Q. Witness, at the end of the last session I had A
doouaont booh Number 8 handod to you and I had callod your
attention to tho letter of 24 Juno 1944 which you addressed
to Profoasor Kagon at Strasabourg. Ihla lottor la part of
correspondence In which the namos of Dr. Orawlts, Dr. Dohraen,
Gonoralarst Schrolbor, Professor Hagan «i*l your name la also
mentioned in connection with Hepatitis research. Will you
ploaoo dosorlbe to the Tribunal If any and what connootlona
exist between those persons with regard to Hepatitis reso tr'.h
and your luttor of 29 Juno 1944.

THjS PRESIDENT: Will counsel repeat the numb or of that
doouaont.

DR. :I0Li£: I did not understand your question, yc-ur
Honor.

TH£ PRESIDENT: rill counsol repeat the number of
tnat uocumont.

DR. N0L7S: It Is ptgo 11 of Doouaont 3ooh 8, Document
No. NO 142. It is Exhibit 19*.

A. This lettor of 24 Juno 1944 vhioh was dlrooted
from me to Professor Haagen, It la the result of a Hepatitis
conference of all research poople who wore ooncornod with
this problem In Germany. In Juno 1944 thlp Hepatitis con-
f-ronco took placo at 3roslau. 3otweon six and seven —

I do not know tho exact numoor — various rosoarch mon
wore there who had worked on tho Hepatitis experiments on


2715


10 Fab 47-M-DJ3-l-2-Fo8ter-lA£)
COURT I


animals, and also many other persons interested, physiol ms.
In the course of the conference the experiences vhloh had

been collooted In the meantime by the Individual research

•

men wore publicly printed. It became ovidenS that the various
rosoaroh men hod roached completely varying results as a
result of their experiments on animals. All these research
men strovo to find the oourso of Hepatitis through animal
experiments, ./hlle one p'irt hod carried out thee* experi¬
ments and the other part had carried them out with nlco,
the third group carried


2715a


10 Fcfcrr r7-ifr*DJG-l-3-?cster
Ccurt Sc. I


thea cut with rtts nd tho fourth -Tcup carried thta cut with canaries.
Tfcqjr "t-r* unable to dotcraina if tho bacteria which had been cultiv ted
et different pieces ell represented the sa=e 'Tcup, of if they included
a Ufi variety cf different haejerie.


-2716-


10 Fetru :ry-M-QJG-2-l-Hinetuck
Ccurt Sc. 1


If any human material is vaccinated cm animals, cr if nay animals are
v-ccinftad with material cf human Lein’s, and if then the animal becomes
sick, then in the. bo'i.inina it cannot b« stated with certainty if the

disease cf the anir.'.l has been caused by the specific bacteria cr the dis-

%

case cf the animal has been caused by bacteria which is h - raless to human
tein-s.

Then, in the course cf the discussion at Breslau uhleh .tas presided

a

ever by Generalartt Schreiber, Schreiber su -osted or ordered thrt the in¬
dividual reaesren men and cuthcrs should form. md fellow certc in procedures
of work, in order to compare the results they had achieved in thw ccurso
of their experiments cn animls. Che of those rcups c.nsistod cf Dchmen,
Haarui, oysolf rad severe! cth.r authors who \ v-iv. v.sy dcso tc H:.a-cn.

The becinnin* of the letter deals with -u assignment cf Dchm-n to
Hfisrcn. This assignment w s approved by Gvhordnrst Hr.*. -u r.s a result of
tnis rc*rtupin :, end it was intended that Dchmen, t- -other with Hon ran,
should ccapr.rw the rosults they had achieved in the ccurso of animal exp-ri-
aents in their respective laboratories. That is the first prrn'ropi

ihe second paragraph then dorls with the fact that during the ccnfcrenco
V. Breslau I had acdo a statenent which deals with the expirir..nt c* crucis
hecinco. I will have tc explain this. In the ccurso of every prr*. of ro-
so^rch, medical resu rch, which dorls with buaen t.in s rnd which is then
eentinuod ir. the fem cf .xp. rluv.nts cn cniu'ls, scut time tlio nest important
prrt cf that research has tc be reached; th. t is, experiments crucis where
the results p.chi .vcd in the c.urse of ntpericients cn aniav la have to bo
transferred end applied tc the human b.in-; because ell experiments cn animals,
in the ccurso cf research, can only have results hen th. results cf the
experiment cn n :nimal are applied t. human tcin.-s. This part represents
the m:st important phase cf the entiro research because all research h'd tc
-c ardc cf uso to th. human fceinr; the possibilities cf diagnosis fer the
'-'an t inr, metheds of trofim-nt rnd preventive measures a;inst diseases.

In Breslau I had e number cf medical students. I hd wen th^a ov r to
'-he point cf view that the virus which had been cultivated by Dchac-n after.


- 2717 -


10 ?ebr-r- ry-U-SJ j-2-2-Kinabucfc

C'Wt Kc. 1

as is likwwisc stated in th«. 1-tt^r, it had been frozen for a period of weeks
end ser.tha, it was tried tc bo transferred tc e huaan boi nr and it was to
be applied tc- the students nrri internees tc whex I had explained the x-.ttor
previously. Sine.- the virus jx.t-.rial was frozen end Dohaen did net have
any ether material, it bed to be assus-d th t thesu bacteria hrd already
b.on killed cr that with rorerd t-. tho virulonta they had become sc weak
.Ircady that this vacciruXi.cn boc rice e true vaccination; th t is to say,
t preventive measure afeinst this heprtitis. It was the seme thim^fer
txcaple, as tho sac 11 pcs vaccine. Since it wr.s not absolutely certain
that the becteria sere completely ncn-virulent it therefor c<uld not cause
the infection. It could have happened thet in the course cf this vaccin-
eticn, in cnc or sene other case, the rofd. infection still could have occurred
in the fern of a very work uvd vory li«>t case of hepatitis.

I then, in tho letter, discuss certain criteria which have to be applied
if this virus is . ppliwd to hucan bein *s. then a certain dan -er odstod
that in tho case cf Jaundice, on infection cculd le transferred free the
viccir..«Ud persons tc their nci-hbors. I thoreforo had tc prepare* f.-cilitles
for isclatinr thoi sc thrt the people who hrd b c*i tre'tai in this :/

■or o ccaplctoly isolated free the cutsido world end these isolation facili¬
ties were net so aisplo to cbt-ir. in Ereslru at that tine- because \ were
subject to severe air raid re uUticr.s rnd the clinic hr.d tc be cle:..-3d tc
sene extent so th: t tho individual *jx 1 separate recas first of all had to
be prepared.


-2715-

U« _ MSkLa '. J - MM J


C 3irt II

10 ;eb U7-M - 2-la- N'inabuck - LJO

This ax^rlr.ent was to be carried out during the holidays, during
*h3 acadeclc vacaticr. which was between ’he middle of august and the
niddle of Septerber. Since I had students and nodical students at try
disposal I had asked in this letter if Haagen would and scoe cf his
virus material to ne so that I could carry out this experiment on
his naterial, on Dchnen's saterial, and on my material. The expari.aont
was never carried out because the students concerned and the radical
students concerned uer* conscripted f^r military service at the beginning
of their vacation and thus were rec ved fro* -y field of authority.

That is the explanation for the contents of this letter.

a 3 .. NoL.£: Mr. President, bofero I continue ry exar.inaticn I
would like to point cut that the interpreter has changed the stateront
by tTofeasor Outxoit. Professor Outxeit has stated there and ho has
translated tho statement tnot tho virus was transferred tostudentc and
internees. I do not know if the word "internees" in this ccnnoction
rey not perhaps be clsundorstood. Tho doctorar.den ar«- studonvO who

11 v 3 in ccoplit*. freedom. I requo t that the transcript bo corrected
if possible.

q. (Jy Dr. Molto) professor, you spoke about the Breda i sonfer-
cr.ce--

THE PHESIDB.VT1 The Tribunal understands that radical students
are called interns. If tho * tness roferrod to theso students who wore
serving their period as i terns you car. ask the witness If ’bet is "hat
ho intended to say.

D?.. HEtTJi rrusidont, tha witness did not suy interns, but
ho s.dd doctorandon. Tnoy are persons who war* once students and are
2 bcut to take thair radical oxanination and who have already c-unplotud
their studies.

3. (3y Dr. .'Jelte) itr.es , you spoke about hepatitis *rch at

the Erosion cenforunca and also the attempt at coorcinati: g the vari us
a ancles whe occupied the selves with nopititis research. Did Dr.

Dohmon ulso attend this conference?


271'?-


C urt I


10 rob U7-M - 2-2 a - LJQ - Kinabuck

k. Dr. Dchaen attended the conforerce and presented the results
he had achieved In ani*il experiments; also Professor Haagen who also
reported about his exjwricents on animals and the results ho achieved.


- 27 ?


1C Feb %7-X-;iAA-^l-reard-(AK)

J0U3T I

Q. On tho basis of the Broil ou confcrarco. It Is
lctoralnod then, until that time, experiments we.*o only
oarrlod out on animals?

A. Yoa, In tho courao of tho Breslau conferences on¬
ly experiments on animals wore discussed.

Q. I now roquoat you to re .d pngo It~ls a latter

of tho Rcioh Physician S3 Grawitc to tho Rolchsfuohror-SS,
Hinder. It la Doounont Ko. 010 of the prosoout^on. Th :t
letter states tho following: ■Tno work, namely, the research
for the reason of Spldeclo Jaundlco hco been ao far oarrlod
out by Oberatabaarrt Doctor Dohaon within tno Roscarch
Laboratory of the Army Hodloal Inspectorate, and with tho
cooperation of Robert Koch Institute, In conformty with
results obtained by other Goroan Scientists, -hi a research
haa led to the dlaoovory that Infectious Jaundlco \t tot
caused by b.nctorln but by a viruo. In ordor to o *ur

knowledge which to date la based only on lnnoculrr n
anlaals with gorna taken fron huaan beings, tho r *•. la
now neooeaary, namoly, tho lnnooulatlon of human telnet with
viruo cultures. Casoff of death oust be anticipated."

I now leave out tho noxt aontonoe.and I continue;

■Sight persons condemned to doath — young If possible, —
are noodod In the prison hoopltal of Concentration Canp
iachsonhausen."

The no-.t lotter of the Rolohsfuehror S3, Doounont No.
Oil, on pego 5 of Document 3ook No. Q, contains tho approval
of the Rolohsfuehror SS; that olght criminals condemned
to death at Auachwltr should bo used for these experiments.
It further contains the approval of Rolohsfuehror SS that
Doctor Dohmen should carry out these experiments at Saohsen-
hausen. You will see that the letter is of June 194 T . That


2721


10 Feb 47-H-HAA-*-l-Board-(AX)
COURT I


la one year before the 3roslau conference. You have tes¬
tified that Dohxon has reported at Breslau about experim¬
ents on animals. Do you* know anything about'the fact that
Doc tor Dohmen had worked at the Concentration Camp Sach-
sonhauson?

A. I have alroady stated in the course of my last
examination that the Reich Physician S3 Doctor Grawltt
shovod a very lively lntorest In obtaining tho oulturos
from Dootor Dohmen in ordor to personally carry


2721a


10 ?Jb 1:7-.-
C art U . 1


3-2-Do=rd


at tS 3 »rfcxnt 8 with these cultures vn ..unan beings. D cVr D.Jcioo tel'!
ss ab v.t this thine- Dihsen refused te l»=nd th_sc vaccines "v-r, and I
sjr/trtcc hie in his refusal because Dduisn did nrt want f l:s- c r.tr. l
:.r these,cultures and because it r._:.crr_ a scientific arc asiti,n fur
Mr. and because he ha’ cultivate! t.-ae cultures. -‘Itor •> ,.u.n Lac!

: .f see! te hand *ver tbs.se cultur-s Grrx.itx hicsclf ur.cd hi t ; .era anally
carr; exit tie. wx.^-ri-ents which bed -rcvieusly ir.toado.*. t carr. cjit
a self, and carry then -ut at Sachs-nb-asan. In order t. a. ease
Or-dts, and in crier t ov i‘ . - It* - - -a laddc _r he

had been ur. ed several tia.es, t.. x;.r!c at S-.cistnhausen , but n.t as
Qr-Mlti: ranted t — infect heal ’cars there. he nly wanted ♦ rr:rk
there in cr '.cr t r. uakc. thin s lc k ;r >:r t- tfa. tutsidc and ux rder t'
.-./,c se Or-."it a in t.iis .-armer. T» _ivf-re, in the end he carried • ut
ea* t”c r/.ainst what Orcr/it* brA nantod., Then uc olmys discus see! :ur
res.-ctivc Hepatitis n-scarc’. fret tie. t tine. D ctor D.ivvjn always
r- rte ‘ ab ut lAs w rk at Sachsoniuuison. Eo nadc ex.-xuin.ati ns 'here cn
tu risners The had Veen plr.ee! at .As dis.xaal, In %U ecu . .us this
in als carrival eut in field bs.itals am*, h spitals, in di- c ... X
. c.-.;lo \ri “to suspected f bavin. Jaundice .and tn sc x.1w hav.. .ir .t
alroady. Tlacn he ala, carried ut pr-v.ntitive infeeti ns tl e liv.r
by .'sc cl vitadns, which is als n c . . n nodical practice, ut he ncx\.r
inf.at-'. 1 .ir.an beings as far .as I !cn w.

I want t r..;oat. *J star liheven, when ho rep.-rt-.! at Lrtsl.au,

’id net refer t U-.Sc experi unto a*.' did nit press theu?

/'•

<] ..s far s y u kn v at it this w.rk at S-ohsenhausun, d.i ’ you

-v r iscuss this w,rk with .T-foss r Handlrscr?

.. f , I never did that.

•: y u leave state! that D.ct.r D.luxn in the y-ar 19LL "as cssi/ned

t Str-ssbur by Sebrti’ _r. D. u ii.v anything; a! ut th. results -f
1 • £ „ umey rr the discussian with Kaa_.cn?

.. ..s far as I b.v, D;ci- r D .riwn carried ut s x hexae

-2722-


10 17-.-— .-3-3-3e :rd

c ~-t 1

os^-riauits with vires at th_ la.-rat-r. t -otter with D c' r . ~ on.

;L .nl; spent a few >ys th-vc. I d. xt Icuw aqythinj 3b at anj f:r-
r-'-clil-. results -f this c:llc'. rati.n.

r ; -ftor ti» j uruy.as’ ’.e~n c .vlotcd, was th.ru anythin
^enticnod ah ut the fact that *.kj .au! been at Ur.tswoilcr?

H , I eld net kr. it a-sythinr ab ut it.

Q D-. ycu kn.w where .iatswoiler is? a

L I did net lauw anything a'.-ut It . revi nisly. I -'id net even
ta w tho ncuo. I have new disc-vcred that a,.. >rantly itVwi a c ocontra-
tiiii coup. I, ..ysclf, have *icr-r c-n at tfatawcilfr. I da net knew it.

I Save nuv.r visit-'! any ce.jccntrsti n coups at all, an! I dc net Sokw any-
thia;, a' ut ti_j c . .sltisn I th. c ncentratl n cr -..-c ,t cnyttiiv, obtut
•• r ;.i • visit a c ncuitrsti • n ca:. s.

0 ;.t the *x."innirr- uf / ur err. i-e-.ti.n, y u hr.v~ alsc jJvnti.ncd

Ty d-.us a a a specifically an:’. particularl curl us disc ~o, r.J far os the
.s ^ c nccmcl. Did ysn discuss t*- problcu of Tj-pLus research ur
i; vs vaccine with .refess r II-Vl-ser at the end *f l?lil?

•

orally I discuss- *. tl>e a-.:.te~nt rf fy; iws with . r i .mo r
:-->.lvscr by diacn-sis.


- 272 >-


10 Feb. 47 -M-4-1-PKP- Blakley

-sort to. 1


Q. Can this be explained by the feet that in 1941 for tho orcy and the ,radical
-enoies of tho arny, fa- all tnese arencics, typhus was only a question of
asdiesl treatment?

A. In 1941 tho research institute for typhus had already been oetablishcd
-• Ooehauj and there the woll-l^.:wn lice vaccino which had previously ooen
i-tr vjeed was oanufteturod. That was the neigel vaccine. It had proved itself;

:rd as far as it could be produced in larger anounts, the troops who had becoato
erdang-rad wore vaccinated with it. Therefore, the typhus vrccination was nothing
for the amy; and when typnus aade its appearance for the first tine, only n
certain poriod of tine passed until technically sufficient Vaccine was produced
in order to innoculato ell the troops in all the units.

Did you at any tiae receive an ordtr to carry out research with regard
to typhus?

A. to.

s. Did Prof. Hnndlosur ovor or.ke an expression towards you that it was
necessary in the fiel. of typhus rosoarch to sw\k« use of oxpurlnonts on hucan

leinra?

A. to.

Q. It h's boon st-toi here that on the 21st of Docwnbor, 1941, a coherence
li allufod to have t-ken place which was attended by Prof. Gildoaoister, Prof.
r.eiter, Dr. Cor.ti, Prof. llru^owsky, Dr. Brandt, and still others; and the
prosecution claies that in the course of this conference Prof. Hmdloser in his
capacity as represent tive of the l.ohraacht suggested then to carry out typhus V
research through oqvriaonta on huaan boinga and to continue thee in this
certain way *y infecting huaan lyings to brir. typhus research to ccmplotoly
Afferent fields then ha I orovi ouoly been done in accordance with the Bodlccl
profession and science.

I on now asking you, if Pr^f. H'rviloser hr.d actually considered this problcc.
it 1-,r, 1941, w-uld he have discussed it with you?

1 assur.o thrt I would have found out something about it. Actually, however,
- did not hoar anythin*, about those things.

.. H:w long werx you consulting internist with Prof. Handlosar?

A. During the entire tiao when Prof. Handlosar was tho aroy aodicol inspector.


-c7c.'^-


LD Feb. 47 -tf-d-2-PKB- Binkley

',MTt Hz. 1

Q. Thet is, until the 1st of Septanbcr, 1944?

A. Yta.

Q. Then why die you not have any aoro official contact with hia afterwards?

A. Because I was consultant to the army r.s.dici-1 inspector end Prof. fcndloser
frea th-t period of tiae on — an« I do not knew the uoutet date — became chiof
J *.r- - ray nodical service.

Does this she* tfrt ttw chief of toe nod*ctl service In tf^t capacity
did not have any consulting physicians? ^

A. Tho chief of tho ewdical servlet did n.t t, v t zny consulting physicians.

Q. has he able to lsau*. tny direct orders to tno consulting physicians of tho
Idhraccht brioches?


-27 2*-


•* Hn- l

iC Fct 47-Jt-*-^.-7»^Slekley


A. He vr.s cot rble to do that directly as far fit I know. I had net re¬
ceived cny direct order* froa bi= as chief of the cedlcal eervice.

^ Your contcct vlth rrofeor Handler aakes It risible fof you to
Jud^e hln as a physician, aea soldier, and as e hunm bein. In this trlnl
it will be laoertint for Professor H/ndlosor that a picture of his personality
tm gained. For this reason I would ask you to describe to the Ki«h Tribune!
froa your own personal knowledge how rrofessor Handloser rpoeart^ to you and
to others as n soldier, as a physician, and as a hurj-.n being.

A. In ny opinion, Judging Profess-r Handloser as a clinical nan, he wi s
not only n sbldier. I cannot Judge the ounllficaticne of a soldlor becouso I
have always v„rk«d In clvlllrn life and because I have not been an active sol¬
dier, but I have always belied to the reserve. I can only Judge hie ©artj-
cular nedlcrl attitude. He did not only personally take care of the organl-
istl.n but I hi ve oersocally seen and have always heard that In nony instances
he took ptrsom.l cero of the sick and wounded. Hat Is somethin*: which was
not always done by all cedlcal officers. As a nan I believe that Professor
Yj ndloser had c very n-tlo nersonallty and that he hod a :'lawlt*s character,
Kov, .-v final ouestlon. Frco ycur knowledge of tho oorsonallty of
rrofossor Handloser ere you rtle to sny whether Professor Hnndloeor In his
orders rnd directions had followed any other rules than the acknowledged rulos
of jcdicel ethics?

A. I have never personally scon any Indications of the fact that Profes¬
sor Hcndloser hi d violated the rulos -f nedlcrl eciccce or that he had Issued
orders which would lead tc It.

Q, I thank you vory ouch.

Ut. SiLTn: I do not have rny further ouestlons.

iXAkIKAlIWi

5Y JUStt bnPHISG:

Witness, how nany tines during the course of your orofosei< nrl
carter hi ve you actually ccce Into personal conti ct with r rofe»sor Handloser^

a. At the beginning ’-f the v f - I had been o-nscrlntcd for military ser¬
vice. I wes conscripted fr-n ny civilian activity. I w ■* icuediatoly asalKOt


-272o-


Court Si. 1

10 7eb ‘.7-M-4-2a-iZh-31akley


r« consulting physician of the eray uedical inspectorate. That was without
,cy activity on ny part. Hy first ei>ief wee Generelober ‘nbsrnt Professor
Valdnnnn. Veldnann became 111 end Whs retired. Ee vas succeeded by Professo:
Handleser. 7raa that sonant on I was subordinated to Professor Erndloser es
his consulting physician. During the tine vhen Professor Eandloser vas chief
of the aray uedical insuecotaf I v*. also at ell tines his consulting

Internist. ^

Q. That continued over hov long a coirsc of tine?

A. I do not coonletely reuenbor the exact dates* I believe free
December 1940 on. I think the*, is the date vhen Professor Handloser bocano
*roy aedicol inspector.

EH. KELTE: hay I perhaps sey that in Dccecbor he becane deputy of rro-
fssscr Veldnann and in January 1941 becant uedical inspector.

A. Until his final ooointaent tc the cedlcal sorvlco. As far as I
know, thxt was on the let of Septouber, 1944.


-27df-

J


10 7ob i7-i>7JC-S-l-Cccic
Court So. 1


JTT333 SZ3TT21

r 4 that «M r. porlod of aoro thnn throo yoers, is that true?

Y«3 sir.

n ,j* during that lira hr. Iftnn ad you actually erne in contact with
p^onn.r MlMT. 1*» in a r»i«a pornnnnl «T or in . Jrofetoicnal ««
,, oro prcbioun, prefennlonal Slieal problem. »uld in dlncunnoi between

y.u, r.z cfton «C osoo C. Kooic for oxrr.plo?

Tti.ro * no rosular ucrtinc. It «a» doro in cuch n my that whon-
0 v-r -. mdlcnl noeonolt* eppoarel rithln the /ry, »««« BandJoeer called
... «* then in oeeorlance with w dutloe. «>* --tout M. thine, but it
„ nr*. Tico-vorea, that «hen t, on ay trip, or othenrteJ, In «•» hcnpltale,
„ Sy mean. of ro-ortn fro. other eoMultlns phyrlolann, if 1 had *° report
B ,. ud *. , f importance to hlr. then I tan. to soo hin or I eubulttod a report
in writing. There me no procedure .nlch edW for ro.uior •.actla.o onco n
Mlt . araetlirw eev.ral woke Pneeed. Ihorof-To, the Moline and the am-

CU231-M cr c Jafaroncon tci* r-lcco fr

PH. nSLTl! Kay I ank a luortl.-n in -rlor to complete the «ubj«t?


3Y 33: :r2.T3:

^ rjo yM fensa «tet fucctloaa profoccw Hrnilooor h.%1?

71rnt of -U ho w.i oruy 'Jodlo-a Innpoctorr.to and at the e-nc time
ha cceneetod «... thin the cc-callel Chid IMI. 1 Offieor of the May.

a in order to expl-in anl clarify the provlouc guontion. ovory tie
that Prufonncr HarrUonor rleitod Dorlln V It the procedure that ho «uld
dleeute the mot important ,uon.ltnn «.h you by ankle, you tc report to bin
r you rant to 200 hl:i *!wo you !mar tfcnt ho ve-vs in Borlin?

i not orory tiro .hon TWfoerur Srndloner — In Be-tin was I called
t coo Mr. 1 h-.ro alro^jr et-.tol that the lUeueeiono took place from can.

, can... If ho h-.d ..«toiw. important he called =®. If I happened to hi
in Berlin I went tc coo hit., "hen I M « :* Uhl. in Brcnlnu I «uW
rocuiTo a tolepi-.no *01 toUin. in to e«. to no, hit. at Berlin, and *onovor
I btl nenun. -f i J? .rtar.co to dlecucn «.h him. then .hoc Profonnor Kandloncr
nan not at Berlin I «uld report thi. to the Chief of to. I 0 Itt the recent
. oaon it on to Cooor-larr. Dr. Schxeiher. pd -hen he had nufficien. tine for


- 272 &-


in the cjurso


10 7e* 47-:i-sJC-5-2-Coo5c
Oourt Jfc. 1

;a I couli O o to so© fail- personally.

a llny x j&r-so the quoatioa in conclusion rs follow:

tt „ ^uninto*. «hioh y» hM -th hiu; 1 = th. course of th. throe yonM,

_v, it sufficient tint o-n Jud.o Mb «h*Mt«. nnd hi. undorat.-niinc of
01 . iutios, -Id that ycu fhflnt aUrx Ji=ture of tb««

A X boliovo thot » for ««.. field. «ro =oornd in «Mch I d.nlt or
rtlntoi -th bin, I =-n «. <u n door -=tur. of f. jorsondi.y ns a
vholo« It »-> thro, ycnra, «hl.h 1. o Ions i»rld too, nod I enrol «. no»
it re—bara JuBt too roar «.« I bln. hot in tto ocorro of th. tftro. yonr.,
of courso, I tod fr.,u.nt orcortunlty to hnT. root dlBcuMionn -th bin.

DR. :r*L7S: I d" not tr.ro my further quoationa.

.'.TWIT MOW: (Counaol for the Dofondmt UruK^;)

:t dr. 7Ls:rt;:

, Frofo.nir, on S Joomry you fiovo : on dfiin.lt. If. «■>*.»« hnv.
.aroniy boon clarified for tbo : ot ,«rt by th. ouo.tlonB »hlot hovo been n.kd
on until a». I only w-ot to .:t you th. folK-lny Do you knc« th.
iofondont, Uruc^o^ 7

L 1 40 net to* :-rui.o«*y Tory cloa.ly. In th. corn. of th. »nr I h.vo
-oon hiu nt th. ccaf.rooco of th. consult!* phy.lcl-.na nri I hovo .lno tniked
with hlr. there but v.-o do not kneu o~ch other very oleaely.

n in the c-urao of yir bo.octitla «r «•« th* ^ VhMfccarrty over

*nslcooft?

U Bo* •

^ Did y u to-r in nny »* thnt ho ocou,l.l M.-oolf — th hepatitic roaonrol

I do r.'t ^ thnt. It noror boon a ta-im to o.

n Dn you holloro thnt you o uli rtlU roro-bor if th. no.* hnd boon

rantlaxwd In tiv.t cnnr.octirn?

/. I boliovu, yo3.

. w - I atlll -.-to ono :-ro gallon. Attorney Bolt. ho. J»* told you
t th. Fronooutlon elnjlis thnt on tho 29th of Sootohor. 1941, n oonforonoo
to.e Jlnou. nt nhleh, o«,a< othora. Hondl-oor nod UWC«A, *
roaont; on! shore tho «r.ri.nta on hunon bol* -th typhus •» doclhod on.


-2729-


10 ?o'< :7».5-FJO-S-3-Coofc
C crt "To. 1

t „ M already been tuestloa* os => ' aur relationship to Dr. Kanilosor. Do
’ . t, Um that professor Haniloser would tats discussed the typhus »«on
rttt yea. ui particularly tbo gotten If you aonsiderod It appropriate to
cirr , ..at srporinants oa hu.-n taln.5, .ft..- suoh o dlscus.l=n bod taboo
jlaco <* tfco 29 Doca-ibor 1941? %

. , bailor. that I hero alrorfy WWW.* this Station that I would
personally taller, ttat If =spsri:ents on hutan taints with typhus hod boon
planned, that Professor Horflosor would have told no sc.ootMnt about It and
•bet if ho said anythin. I taro alterfy stated I haoo not head -uiythlnc

about it. x

35 . umci' Thank you. I have no further a uestlons.


-27}0-


10 Feb 47-H-KAA-o-l-Groas- { AX)
COURT I


BY DR. FRITZ (defense counsel or the defendant Rose):

Q. Proroasor, what did Dohnen do In hla civilian
capacity, in what Institute, and whore else did he work

before he vaa coneorlptod?

A. He *->.8 assistant of the Hamburg Cllnlo for In¬
ternal Dlaoaso8.

Q. Car. you tell me the reason that he was especially
selected fer fcoi'ktltls resoaroh? '

A. At ace.- . artier period Dohoen apparently had been
assistant t. 01\0 Bolster or worked with him I personally
do not knot/ that exactly. Howover, I believe that was the
oaso. I bol: .*ve that at the tine Dohaen was reoommendod
by Gildonoitfter nu ooaeoody who was acquainted with
hepatitis rJtear'fc »nd I have stated earlier that In tho
courso of the ollnlc work with regard to hepatitis, tho
necessity had resulted to appoint a physician who was
acquainted with virus research In order to find the cause
for the Jaundloo.

Q. Professor, can you toll no when Dr. Dohmon was
assigned to the Robert Koch Institute?

A. Apparently that was In the year 1942.

Q. And do you know how long ho was assigned there?

A. Until the destruction of the Robert Koch Institute,
until tho loss of the cultures which had been cultivated
by Dohnen. I bollovo this was in tho fall of 194*. I do
not know the exact month any more.

Q. And with whoa did Dr. Dohnen collaborate In tho
Robert Koch Institute?

A. He worked In the laboratory of Professor Gllde-
seister and -as udvlsod and s pported by Professor Gllde-


27*1


10 Fob 47-K-hAA-o-1-Gross- (AK)

COD.-.T I

aeleter In his work.

q. Do you know If Dr. Doh-en had anything to do with
professor Rose?

A. I have never heard anything of It. I do not know.

Q. Do you know after the destruction of the Robert
Xoch Institute, do you know whore Dohmen continued his '
hepatitis research?

A. .Ifter tin destruction of the Robert Koch Instit¬
ute Dr. DohT..*n went to Giessen by order of the Coranandor
of Arny Croup 0 , to whon he was subordinated, and In
Gleason he or hud in a laboratory which had boon


27*la


10 ycb L7- -» —-6-2-Grcss
C art 1


Irc ct at his lisp sal thv.ro t t.x &. r .aar University.

Can 7-u tell ne, A-ofaes-r, tfxn and rticr^ and wn Jr. D.Vccn
i.st hie hepatitis cultures?

tryin t find the cause lor hepatitis n ani-^ala Dr. fthnen
in the course cf tlx ocpv.ri.-cnte irs var/ unfortunate. -IroaOj in the
year 1512 he frequently had had difficulties by animal opAdluics am!

Indues and in the year 19h3 ho suffer ' fro: Ik Ain.; attach rail then
he alroys lest his -aicrial aid Ms cultures. then vhon ho finally
rent t. Giessen it was main attested t transfer hu en Tutorial - n
juiliials by . uncturinr livers .f patients sufferin' fr*a Jaundice and
these cultures did not have -.ny effect mi the anir-als booausc apparently
tlui Kv&ila'ulo animals were unsuited and there wer- also difficulties in
•rjcurliy. tho anicals. Various races f -doc reacted diffcrontly tc
those •/cccinatl n cxjcriucata. Those axe the a,.; a rent rca« ns; (fi.cn
Oiesaen was c ylctwly destroyed tin- u^h air attacks ".yam all uatcrial

which tl.en exist a =a dostreyad.

D y u rc.xj.Vcr th_ incident botvixjn . rr.fwcn r 11 on .".ml Dr.

.. ... -.r; let. urs caused by the fret that Dr. b huoa rofu ver

’us cultures?

U ..t tlx c nfercnco in -~y l?li3 & lean sp.ko a* it hifl ojeperinonta
i anlals cr.l Ms culUvatl ;n af tie bacteria and Hejen also attended
t.ds c'-afcrcncc. «fUr tlx cufaroaco H ;en rrdcrod Oh ion t hand ever
his cultures t hi- Be tliat no like o uld cany ut such cocyorlronts.

At the tine D taxa felt t r ctly the sauo wry tooord Gravdtz.

Ho refused tc turn -ver the cultures in rdcr tc avoid l^ttins the

jatcrial int hands which c-ul‘. * - nai.ve’ frtu hie cntrcl.

.. . RolBXs If the Tribunal Ur ^ thin sa... ,r end has coen c vcrcd
, tiic itftocas when questi-a.-! J Dr. H-ltc aix! I can* fc se- any rcas.n

■ r flrrtl.cr questi ain- al n*. those lines.

..LSSCOT: Since tho Tri' considers that the . siti n cf iro-
c-cuti n is correct that the .dtnosr has testified at c.nsidoraU- length
b.-s, -atUrs, the Tribunal


- 2732 -


20 Feb-WP-o-la-Gross

Court I

ices not cWsire to licit yoir cross •xtnlnatioo 'out it she Id oe cc.-fina-- 1 to
uq cuterial w.ich it not already in tfce record.

3 ? DR. 7HITZ:

q. rrofessor, cid joc*c- var co? liberate tdch the defendant .-cote on
hepatitis?

A. So.

q. AO f.-r 3 3 ;ou know did ;roToss«r hoa take any active: «art in hopa-
titis research?

A. I did not hear anyth*. , aooufc it.

q. Do you now that irofessor Rose did not p-.rticipato at the hepatitis

conference it ^reslcu?

A. I believe that be was not th-re.

q. At that flr.-sliu co:.f*ronco ^11 the lc-iin { hspntitia research awn
had boon i .rite c“ the chrocht r uvt rtu fro > the -^cbora of t.:o luftwaffu
enn you ruDO.bev attendoi?

A. I -alre' -v stated th-it Ho;,en a= there. »bon Koo atUb od. also
"uc-'hiur. A-v. 1wr. wua the patholo^st losUr th r;. because it olao a
patnolo iat'o vetir;. TlRfc .'era cartrxnl oc. . sorters of th; luitw ifo
out 1 ..’o n o hr.* tV- xact n.s-a. If I would teosked for cortex v> us I
inir.ht be ijI- to ivo >cu tort is.or -tiofl bout thw.a.

q. That rrofotarr Kos.-, ns i sci -Uet me -eater of the Robert Koch
Institute, had to ^ interested in th. result* of your hopatitie rose, rch,
Just like for any othor progMM in t - lieldi of Infection* diaonao, is «f
courre natural, «r, I want to a\ ,.u, rmitrsor, in oxccca of tliat would
you consider .r?icsscr Ror- as a sect lift fur hap-title and would you
aantion his n if ,ou ne-tiooe i 1 owl- '« hopatitis specialists?

A. ;;o, I '*'ulu not consider ,i.f. hixtitis scientist.

q. j hoards lecture t ceor ttoao -bcut » ti Lis?

A. 'Jo.

1 . !iv. you -vur s-cn any scientific article in a. ic»l literature on
*-ne subject b. ;r:fcisor Rose?


- 273 >


10 ?eb-i?-JP-6-2a-Oross
Court I

A# ifo*

'l. J.-.v- • .rj heard hi . s -rtc ir. ?; it evasion durln_, .-.nj scien¬
tific ---.tuv u . thj subject o> hepctxtas?

,ii Ko, I enn't recall eus.a an occasi ...

Do yau tau't anythin., ., ut haf.n c-pcri^-nts on hepatitis by
professors -tee.n and Kolb?

I do ..or. k ur* anythin-;. . it Lw exec -ion cf such cx-x.rim.nts.

y.v hi:v» previously stie-d, xruf«ss..r ••heut the intended hui&nn
. xp--ru-wn'.s • rich vur. planned at £>r .si u. hr.t wise do you' «cno : *ui. he-
patitia jxp- -i »jnts on hua»n ocin„s?

a. I fcr .01 only ci two export onto. C!no ms carried out in 19li2 oy
.anist .nta of clinic. In thos- oxf-wrii^cnts it v as discov^n d lor the

first tiw t-.'t vith ttw. duodon -1 licpld of the- patients and by placing it
In Uw stOMieha . jeplu that t ; .ic (UtwUuO uld b. caused. Th-tuna

th_ basic wx.e- at in crckr to shew ti «-.vtcis can K tr.anof-rrerf throu^
duodenal liquid cn. that it ia infect) ua »*»-n tr'r.sfwrrcd iron .u.w '.mien
h-iin* to another. This uxp-riax.nt - carrier cut by aociatints nd ctu<ionta
of ay clinic -s c unifor-t group. ?h~ e-eon u--pwri»wr.t via carrlev cut on
n. personally. I •Sp6rint«d or. -yculf. That was at the bu.innir. cf 19u3-
I hourly infect-c vsdf rtt- t,r. baewri- culciv.tud by rwhinon bjeauso I
«r»ud to bw able t jv.d,.w ahethwr t.v, b ct rl- cultivated by Dohaon were the
actual cauc_ titis. IK r_ei<l vs - v i; U_ht c 3. o.’ the dlswrsu

onnysi.il t • r -c* a. sii.htly yullo'. In tb

reepect I vos carta, a that -bw crltur-s -,r t - actual c-usu of lie pat ills.
•r:n any . side I did not Krr *-• "t auch sxpjrioouts on human beings ,
ihattur such -.ssi3c:iiv cxp-ridM? - r ore.-ntl uxporir.nts verw c rriuc out.

Ir. my c as- 1 do —«t c,‘.c» anythin- as ut it.

. v r.o further questions.
m • The Xriba.iel will • be in recess.


- 27 > 4 -


10 Feb. h TD-7-l-T.arrow
Court He. 1

THE JOaSH.'.Li The Tribunal is arain in session.

THE FHESIUStfTi la there any further cross-examination of this vritnoss
by dafttDM counsel?

yr CR. noEHM (Counsel for defendant Poppenrtick)

%

Q I'n oire: to submit to the witness a publication reparding tho typh
treatment with acridin by Dr. Din^. This is Document No. 582, Exhibit No. «fi<

JUKSE SSTRllCt tfhat bock, ploaso ?

D3. TOEH!: Exhibit No. 286. It was not in any locunent boot;. It was
presented sinrly.

X

TTf DR. TOEHJIi

q Professor, did you fevo sufficient tioo to investigate the acridin
work by Dinr so that you con state your expert opinion boforo tho Tribunal
today?

A I read it, yes.

Q Anon * others, you particularly doalt with questions of infootious
isoaaoa?

A Tea, that's right.

Q Is it corroot to say that you wroto a book rewardin': infootious
‘iseasoa where in .articular you worked on experiences Bade during tho Inst
war?

A Yes.

q As a consultir. physician in tho .,rvy Inspectorate you oust hnvo
.ainod experience in the field of typhus research, in rticular, regarding
the circumstances which 'eal with the ori inatin- of opideaios.

A Yes, I dealt with that question.

Q Tho document which was submitted to you boars tho stamp "No objoctl
from a radical point of view-'. There is a 3i;-nature, i.a. Poppondick - by
order of Poppen •ick, is that correct?

A Yes.

1 ilell, is that thesis a typical report as it is made to a superior
agency cr toes it have the fern of a publication in a professional periodic


- 2735 -


10 Feb. !i7-H-.‘TD-7-2-^rc
Court So. 1


A It has the fora of a publication In a professional periodical.
q jfcw do you soe that?

A I can aoa this by tho lotto* hood - by tho h»d of this «ork.
Furthorooro, I can ooc It because of tho scientific di.ouoolon «hi=h ioals
with use of other author. foGOriin* tho «a> Hold, flat 1. at tho end of

this thesis.

0 . 5-0. it custocnry with tho ors? to approve .olontiHo work, in that

fern?

Tilth the omy it wo. oustomry to ootablioh tha modiool homloMne.
of the work,

q Now, „ on ..port in typhu. ro.ooroh, if one lock. through thl. wort
•oo. on. hove to earn to tho ooncluolon that one 1. horo concerned with in-
tontionol artificial infection of le»t bingo a. it i. de'eribod in thi.

work?

A on. doss rot hjvo to coco to that ooncluoion of noooo.lty. Tho onl;
passage which nay porhap. in-iooto that 1. U.t >*>. 1 -horo tho trootnont
thor. uood 1. laid b« in tho oooo of two poti.nt. -horo it «. .tortod on
tho first and third day, of tho incubation period. That i. only po.olblo w».
one i. concerned with n *aoll opidonlc which 1. oorofully observed ond -hero
on . enn oxordso tho .tally control Hardin* tho lino with reference to »U
th, offoctod person. out wh.ro o louoo «aa still found in tho por.on of son.
hunen bin, -he appear, to bo health!'. If thoropi- i. .tartod on that doy. th.
you can M out on tho first or oooond incubation doy and you can .tort
treated. For inotonoo, in tho oooo of transport whom ddouolnr ho. taken
pUce - that i., oomfuly dolousln. - ond whore tho.e ; -plo orrlvod at thel.
•ootinotlon with llco, you con, du-lr, a tyrhu. K-riod, assure thot tho in-
footlon took place on tho day th. 1^' too* pUoe. Thot io to .oy, in tho
case of woll-observod eplddea it 1. poo.ibl. that treat™at .tort, on th.
first or ..coni incubotion doy hat thorn are only only very fc ouch ocoo.lc
o Thar* you* that is suffiden* .

According to your knowledge io Poppondlck on export in th. Hold of
typhus research?


- 2736 -


10 Feb. U7-M-AT!)-7-3-Sarrow
Court Ho. 1


A PcppeBttck is a physician dea-in? with internal diseases - internal
aedicim. I don’t know that bo specially dealt with typhus cases.

Q How, if you just exmrtne this thesis as a non-expert ani if you roa
it through could you cone to a conclusion or suspicion that crininal export-
aents are beir« desdribel in that thesis?

A I don’t think that is possiblo.

Q Thar* you, I have no furthor question. ^

A Because in that thesis you can, at no passage, find that there is
any artificial ejddonic in question. It says here "typhus ^search wit*
acri-'ln" and then it further says "within U» franowork of an opidonic".

DR. ~0E»': Thar* you, I have no further question.


-2737-


10 Fob £7-::-S r -8~i-Ic060r
Court K . 1

2 Y jp. # STS2;3AU2R (Counsel for the Defendant T7ZIEE. I 3EIGLE10CL):

Mtnese, last weolr you shortly nontionod liver pur.ctions. In
- publication of tie First diversity in Vionnu, I road tho follow¬
in' sor.tonco: "Ifco Liver junctions, when local nnoathotic is used,
i5 pair;loss end hardly interferes with tho patient's health." I
tek you, do you Sfcr.ro that opinion?

A. Yes, that is also uy opinion. ^

n. y0 you know that ocpecially r. t tie Clinic Sppingor in Vionna

this no the d rca workod upen a groat deal? x

A. In tho Cimic of ~ppln~or, as tl oy boccro known, livor pur.st-

iens woro often usod.

Do you knew free literature or personally, the "ofondcmt Dr.
3oi3lbock?

A. i laiow i in personally, mu bocc.uso of cttondlnp scientific uoo

Inca.

n, ,ould you so;* ti r.t lo aciontificclly oxorcisod this nothod and
tk: t ho is fully acquainted with it?

I think cl at ovorybody can lonm that nothod who is skillful

annually.

o. i 8 ia correct tl tho Dritld sciontiats, Svonson and Hoholn,
porXemod t. Is livor punetica an oven quito fcoc.lthy 1 unnn-boings?

A. 1 do not ro tonber t: t oxactly. I boliovo, howo vor, that
pictures of quite ncmr.l li*‘ rs rro contr.irod in tie nono^raphy wl i
has appoarod on tL.t subject. Jut I dc net rouonbor it quito woll.

I do not ro..o;ibci whcth-r liv^r .junctions vr.ro purfonaod cn porfoct-

ly healthy hunan-'Joints.

Hank you. I ha;o no furtl or questions.
tv? ?.Z23IDE''T: Is there cny further cross o cnination of this wit
r.css by any of tho defense counsel? There boing nono, t’ o Prosocotl
ray cross or.:i:inc.

close h a::mTioK


- 2738 -


10 Feb 47-!'-S' -8-2-Lcrscr
Court 1


3X :3. E/.HDY:

itnoss, you fc.-.vo stated In direct oxauinatlcn that you wore
consulting pfcyslolan rltt tho Hodienl Inspect or,-to of tho -'.my
end that Kandloser told tkt poslton ns Hodlecl Inspector fron .Tnn-
urr y 19/.1 to Soptonbor 19-14. few Wo Tribunal has cskud you how
neny tinea did you consult with Irnilos-r. I ask you again, how nany
tines did you physic.-.lly contact Eandlo.cr In the course_of your

duties .-.s a consult Inc physician to hint
u I tr.vo .-J.ror.ly sold that I ernnot sry that I .spoke to h.ln onco
. , u0k ; soaotlr.vS It occur rod cn-o In 3 nooks, ot! .r th-os onco In
/. weeks, end sonotiros I S.-.W hln one week after the other. H r.t Is,

6 ph sic:.l contact, .-3 you said.

Toll, tie, witness, null you say that you saw Eandlosor 10

tl tes r. j-o-.r?

A, Yoa, I could quit* a:.y tfcr.t.

hro or loss? ita-ss, I or. shyly asking you hew nany tlnos
jo you ostl te tl. t you saw Eandloscr in tlo course of a yoar -
5 , 10 , 15, or 20 tlnos? flat lsi't tee difficult to re -.c. bur.islt?

... I should say tl. t I net hln 10 th-.es a year, but It nay well
h aTO been 15 or 1-1 or 15 th os; I rn sure th.t It differed In tho


indlviduc.l yjf.ra.

e. thank you. Tcu w.ro «Iso a touched to tho •l.llte.n- lodloal Acad

on y ;.s I ur..orst;.n i it?

A. Y.s.

n. You have stated th t ’oner, lent Dr. Sohrolbor wr.s the com-
ndlng e-fleer of tl o K lltary Ucal -etatoay end t! at you w.ro
subordinate to hln in th t oonn.otlor.. Is th t correct?

... V. H e Wat not tie err. ander of tho rilitary ’lodlOnl Aoadony
but the CO. render of the so-called Trainin'- Oroup C of tho unitary

litiicfj. rtlch is i. P- - rt of it.

a. .vt fcj Hit ry noilcpj. -c:. y tr s under the control of tho

::-lic;.l Inpscctrr of the -.rr.;*,M. ? it net?


2739 -


10 fob 17-’!-S -6-3—Lesser
Ceurt He. 1


A. Dx T-ainlng Group C was auborlin ted to the ITilitcry 'ludlor.l
ixndcuy ini its ccrrxadcr; and tho -ilitc.ry I.odlc^l /.cadony end
with it this fiv.ining Group C, was subordinated to tho Zroy hodic-
ul Inspectorate. "he 1 v.r.d cf tho ~my liodical Inspector, to was tho‘
V-1' -lo<*icr.l Inspector. •

o. Honco, ^r. Sclrolbor, r.e chici of tlis dopertr.ont in the 'Ill-

|

ltery “cdical ..cadony, wr.a, ir. fact, r. sub-vrdinato of tfco bodice!
Inspoctcr, *»crdlnaoy, during tho tl. o 1 *andloaor hold thnt^pooition
cs Hectical Inrpoctcr, is fclut corroct?

A. Yea. In tho find .analysis, ell nodlc: 1 officers wero subor¬
dinates of tho h.ighost nodical officor; thr.t, rf ®urso, also in¬
cludes Oonoralcrrt Schreibor; r.s the ccnnandor rf tho ae-callod
V-inlrG >roup C he it. r tho aubordinr.to of tho Arr.y lo('.icel In¬
spector.

1 . cw, witness, in rdditicn to the duties you ht.vo outlined in
tU direct oxauln tion, .11 you ov.r rocoivo quostlona in scientif¬
ic roaoa rch f roil tto .»oich Hoauarch Council?

A. ’.culd you plcr.se rup^. t t! t qu.ction :xro precisely? I did
not quite undorstend.

". Did you over rocoivo roqu.ats or questions frm tho Hoich l<o-
surcl Cci'ncil on erttors of scientific ro-oorch?

A. On occasions I was naked by tho Koich Research Council cn
numerous nodical natters; this war neatly done by writing and I
•don defined ny praiten to the q«vsti'is !>y rritira. Iheso quest¬
ions concerned nunorous fields. >cr instance, I ro enbor ono
qu r tier about r pr poeoJ trcr.tnont rf typhus. It w.-.c intenflod to
•reat it with certain bathing prrcoaaoo -- warn b. thing precoasoa.
3wro were also rtLr questions I had tc deal with — questions
incoming cortain tr.: trie.nt cf diavasoa, whether c. cort..ln r^thod
‘ tx^ntoont proprsod by aero '-no had .any value according to r.y
tptaxon so that it could generally bo exploited :n\ used. Ho aol-
•c'icn cf cert in drugs w..s doalt with by r.e by request .of tho


-2740-


10 Fo'j •’,7-1l- S r -8-4-Lo a so r
Court Kc. 1


Hoick hc.aot.rcfc Ccuucil.

'1. llcw tkoau v ri ua roaoarcl: t ska tL..t Kr- assigned to yru—
w-ro tl.cy assigned to yru by Profits r jr. ..cstrck of tie Roicfc
Hos-r.rck Ceuncil?

L. •K.au rch assignuunts v ro act rocoivod by no fron tl o iioicfc
Rv.aoi.rcl Council. Tioao w..ro t.roly inquiries ..bcvt propcac-ls wl.iofc
ccy h o ccuu fr<c i.ny alio rrvl rn tl o br.aia of. :iy oxperloncos I
l.:.i to statu H7 opinion. I uysulf, fccwuv r, di*. not rocoivo r.ny
certain ruav-c.rck . saiga. unts. lowev.r, tl is wr.a nrt^tko cr.ao in tlo
caao of hopi.titia. buring tl o I-opr.titia work, :Xter having worked
cn that for a long tL*:u, 1943 cr 1944, I don't jrouanbor uxuctly,
tl-o Hold .^sucjck Council &.vo no sucl an c-saiKr.nont. I did not
.sk for tli.t c.aaign.’.or.t. I t m.e no roly Inn-Iod to :jo.


-2JU1-


■


10 Fab 47- S5S-9-l-Moehan- (AX)

COURT I

Thaaa waro Inquiries. I said nothing about any certain
assignments. At laaat I do not renonbor anything about

thvjc. I Just aald they were Inquiries ibout proposals which

%

oano froc ono aldo and it was my duty to make statements
about tholr execution. I gave you in instance before. Any
nodioal officer sight have suggested a oortaln fora of
typhus treatment. I susbaequently was askod whether It was
also oy opinion that typhus treatment should boused general¬
ly; experiences wore to oe collooted on that point, that la i
Just an example. These also eoinated from Profoaaor Rostook.

Q. Regarding yellow Jaundloo, what are tho dangers and
possible complications of Hepatitis?

A. I already stated the danger of Hopatltls during my
previous examination, rfith roforonoe to the life of tho
patlont, the danger Is very small. 4 ho figures snow in
literatures about so-oallod mortality in the oaso of Jaun-
dioo la loss than one thousand. Jaundice In Itself, with
roforonoo to tho mortality figure Is a harsloas dlaeaao.
Jaundloe, on the other hand, cannot bo avoided through any
oafuguard whatever its nature may be. ±her : Is no possibi¬
lity of preventing tho infection and oxtonalon of that
disease. The avoroge lengu» of Illness Is usually four to
oi^ht weoks. There aro very easy cases vhoro patients are
restored to health within a few d ^ys and thoro are aoro
severe cases whore pntlonts are yellow for weoks and
sometimes months. During tho war wo learned oftor-effecto
and complications of this disease are very vory rare.

Patients usually become 111, they fool badly. Generally,
they havo no pain, but after a cortaln period of time, as
I said, six to eight weeks, they are completely restored
to health.


2742


10 Fob 47- 9-1-Mc ehan-1 AX)

COURT I


Q. Does It not oftan cause severe damage to the liver?
A. That was a belief whioh was hold before the war.
3uch oasoB occurred before the war sporadloally, that is,
singly. In the case of those single dlsoasos, there are
oertainly a number of oases of lnfootloue Jaundice. In tho
sane way, however, there are quite a number of cases which
have nothing whatsoever to do with tho lnfeotlous Jaundloo.
Those aro liver inflations of another kind whioh have


2742a


10 Fa'o 4?-£3:4-9-3-Meohan- ( AK )
COURT I


existed free the very beginning and which nay have been
oaused by rood poisoning or other poisons. During the war

ve learned that the infectious disease leaves no damage

%

to the liver. That is the result of a number of liver punc¬
tured as they were perforaed In a number of oases. They
were performed in order to be able to tell the patient

A

concerned, with certainty, that the liver damage during tte
Jaundice, Is completely over. x

tfo physicians and also pathologists were very surpris¬
ed at the changes of the liver as they occurred during the
Jaundloe period. They completely disappear within a relat¬
ively short period of Qae. Plotures of the liver after
Jaundloe has disappeared do not at all differ from tho pic¬
tures of a noraal liver.

Q. Vhat are the causes and oondltlonsof death in
Hepatitis?

A. In most casos, death during Jaundice Is not
caused by Jaundioo itself, but by other diseases. For
instance, if a person is heavily wounded, and then a so-
called sopsl8 devolops, and thon ho becodes Infected with
Jaundloe; the person concerned will dlo booause of sepsis.
In thoso casus where Jaundice is another sovero Illness,
one can alvayo Judge them as Jaundice death oases. That Is
how it is done m literature. In reality, they are not
dead booause of Jaundice unless one wants to put it that
way. it Is merely an optical science. A death case merely
is something which had never been observed with certainty.

Q. Doctor, is there any difference between Hepatitis
as is occurs in epidemlos and sporadically and that produc¬
ed by lnnoculatlon?


2743


lv Feb 47-£3*-9-2-Meehan-UK)

COURT I

A- May I repeat once aore, did you as* me whether
there was a difference betvoen spontaneous dlseaae and a

disease oaused by lnnooulation?

%

Q. That is correct.

A. Is that correot?

Q. Tos. Is there any difference?

A. According to my opinion, there oan be no difference.
A difference oannot be expooted. x


274»a


10 F«b- 53 H-9-3 -Meehan (LJO)
Court I


If the cause of jaundice against which I as inoculating is that very

• •

cause, the disease oust be the s®e as the spontaneous disease* However
I have to add that there is a difference between an infection and an
inoculation. You inoculate by scans of a vaccinaj that is to say, a
dead excitor, a dead infector. During these inoculations, diseases
of Jaundice are not to be expected at all. If, however, the virulent
cause is being bred as in the case of animals and if it then infected
into a hxcan being, then the well-knom Jaundice cones about as^it is
known in its spontaneous cause.

Q. How witness, you have told during the course of the war, you
did not know of a single case tfiore a patient died from Jaundice. How
do you Justify the fact froo the document Dr. Nelte exhibited to you
this morning? That is the lotter free Qrawitz to Himmler requesting
permission to conduct these hepatitis experiments on human beings. Those
inoculations were to be made froo virus cultures, and doath casos wore
to bo anticipated?

A. I can only explain it by thinking tnat Grawitz, hiaaolf, was
not sufficiently informed about Jaundice, its cause and its danger.
Grawitz was not a specialist in Jaundice aattere bocause as Roichsarzt
AA, he was not in touch with practical medicine.


10 Fob 47-::-S'r-10-l-“r.loy
Court No. 1

^oc, "itnoss, Is 61 ere any diff orenco betwocn hope tit la of
.-sxi and that of oxporinentnl rninals?

Tho differences _ro groat, n.o aninal, for incta nco— troll,
let r:o start again. *V.o ani-inl oxporinants, tho r.ni::al uoos not
rocoivo jaundico at ell, defos not contract it at all. ihe yellow
coloring novor appears in tho case of tho animal. Kowovor, ohangos

of tho llvor aro roticonblo In tl.c c s o of tho r.niaal which was

•

lrfoctod, and thoy aro very cinilrr as in tho c: so of a non who is
lnfoot od with tho sane virus. Thun there aro furtl or difforoncoa •

X

I alrocdy said that ye Hew fov;r novor has a fatal rosult, whoroas
In tho ease of aninr.ls, at any rate u prrt rf tl o iz, llo as a ro¬
sult of this dlsor.so. 1! t is t ruo as in tho caso of other cor.par-
lscns botwoon anii^.l oxporu*.onts and hunan oxporlronts, nanoly
that tho oxtomal apxarnnco of tho dlronso in tho caso of non
cr cnlaal by using tho anno virus ern bo conplotcly difforont and
In a ddltion tho danger of t’. o an Inal dlsoaao and tho h.uzian dis-
.:so can differ conplotoly, although cno is concurood with tho v^ry
icco virus.

Is lop.titi? L*oro dangerous in overworked or imdomourishod
people?

*. Spooking on tho wholo tho figures of the dlsor.so :nd its den¬
ser in tho caso of w:ll nourish od or undomeurishod pooplo contract¬
ing jaundico aro tho snt;o. '/I on jaundico occurs ar a conplication
of anothor sovoro infoctious dlsoaao tlo cr.uso of tho original di¬
verse by vlrtuo of tlo added Jaundico is not influoncod whatsoovor.

^ t is contrary, for instanco, to other infoctious disoasos. I
si: 11 givo jou one oxrj pic, typhus has r. r ury dofinlto courso nnd
' k ow nor tall ty figures in tiro case of typhus. Now, if within such
- typhus opldoiiic, and that is southing tl • t wc-.e froqvontly obsurvod
uring tie ' ar, a jaundico opidcnlc con os into appearance inaddlt-
lcn » so that pocplc inflicted with typhus ..t tho sr_io ti :o thoy arc
Inflicted with jaundico then tlo typical c.uso rf tho typhus lllnoss


- 2745 -


10 Fob 47l0-2-:^loy
Court No. 1

is not at all changed by this addition cf Jcuridico and no largor
- cunt of ucrtality f iguros con bo observed during this typ: us opl-
;calc. In tLo cr.ro of other infectious disor ec tl la la baaicc.lly
different, fer lnstmco If typhus dia-ased persona contract dipthor-
ir., which hop pons on nutiorous occasions, thon this cdlitional con¬
traction of dipthcria, this additional infection practically norns

• death suntonco for tlo person ccncornod, vheroas in tho cr.ao of

a

jeunlico it la ontiroly differont.

n. ttu.t apodal facilities are necessary to treat hopatitis ndo-
quatoly?

a. TJ.o uothods of tho troatuont of hepatitis can only bo dono on
tl o bcsle of syuptous. I alrocdy nonticnod oc.rllor that thoro is
u apocIflc kind of therapy, — t: t there la no apociflc kind of
tlerapy, such aa aeriri therapy. Ilany persona inflicted with hepatitis
■1 c^ arc not aoveroly ill rooolvod no treatment whatsoever, and in
pr.rts continued their civilian and ailltary dutiua, In otlur creoa
they w^ro told to ;.o to bod :.nd rocolved a llgl t diet. Sor.etlnos
tUro was aoae w. ru tr-ataont. On tl c whole fcref.tuent of drugs ahow-
odod no particular auocoas in tho caao cf Jaundico. J

'l. Considering tl.o physical conditions of concentration coup ln-
uatos, .jul tl o l.yglonic conditions cf concentration cnap hcapitalo,
■cullin't it havo been noro dangorooa to perfoni l.opatitla oxpor-
lnonta cn concentration coup in-vtos tir.n on woll nouriahod volun¬
teers?

n. In all tl o c- ps, and tl *.t includod concentration coups, Jaun-
lico illnoascs, spontanoous illnossos occurrod to a 1. rgo oxtont.

I i.onticnod tho jaur.dico opidonlc, for instance, in prisonor cf war
c-aps. ihoso r ro persona witl a Very nucl dotorioratod constitution.
Hey had ondourod la rd h.ttios and they had a v ry banourisl-iunt,
end even in the case of thcro spontaneous opidcnics within tho carips
■ higher aortnlity figure than the cno alrondy uentionod, or cd’tor


-27U6-


10 rub 10-3-1'--icy

Court ITc. 1


cffoctc which hrd ccr.plicr.tioRs of jc.un’.lco 11 C. not bocono Imcvm.
In the cr.ro of ij-. ontlrc division In Russic., wlich wc.a cont frcn
fro Criuca to .’crthom


- 27 ^ 7 -


Court I


10 Feb li?-H - 10 -la - LJG - Malcy


?-uasia, I personally saw high disease raMs of human beings o had
deteriorated in health, who were undernourished, overworked and ex¬
hausted, and "here the cause of Jaundico was secondly the same as in
the case of other hinan beings with good conditl;ns of nourishment and
who lived under good conditions.

Q. Aro states of mental confusion or doliriin ever associatod

with hopatitis?

a

A I personally didn't see it.

Q. Are ary lasting or disappearing neurological changes ever
associated with liver disease, and if so are they also associated
with cases of hepatitis, especially in individuals who are undernourished
or deficient in viteains?

A. May I ask onco sore, what kind of a condition are you suggest¬
ing?

9. I will repeat cy question. «ro any lasting or disappearing
neurological changes over associated with a liver disoaso, and if so
ire they also associated with cor os of hopatitis, but especially in
individuals «ho aro undernourished and doficiont in vitamins?

A. I knew of no disoaso or norvo degenerations, and that is
probably sc«cet.J.ng that you mean by tho neurological conditions,
rather I didn't knew of ary such cases in doallng with hopatitis, and
they are never doscribod in literature. No matter whether tho poople
cmcerntd arc healthy «r streng, or whothor in any way undernourished,
and whether there is a deficiency ir. vitamins, we only knew one disoaso
that is a liver disease during the course of which at tho same timo
neurological syaptccs appear. This disease firstly is very rare, and
secondly has nothing at all tc do with hepatitis epidoaica. Wo are
not concerned with an infectious disease, but »e are concerned with a
.-rinary simultaneous degeneration of liver tissues, and brain norvo
tissues. For tho r.ost part those diseases art ncstly hereditary.

3. You have compared the liver punctures with the lu_bar spinal

-27h8-

I


Court I


10 Feb 1*7- U - 10-2a - LX -Maloy

and the sub-occipital punctufe; isn't it true that with tha various
kinds of spinal puncture you only reaove tho fluid which surrounds
the spinal cord cr brain, while with the livur puncture you actually

enter the organ itself; isn't that dangerous?

•

There arc two cases hare. In one c<iSe you take away some
Juico where tissues are available at the same time. That is in the
’so-called spine puncture. I n the other case you only take tissuea^away.
!.*ow, you could compare tho liver puncture with tho so-eallad gland
puncture. In that case organs are being punctured in orc'*to take
out certain snail parts of tiosua. Both kinds of puncturos are con¬
sidered harmless, as the gland puncture is today used in hospitals
and clinics for diagnostical reasons.


- 27  9 -


10 February-tf-OJC-ll-l-Burns
Ccurt No. 1


I


Q Didn't jrcu, yourself, cnce describe Jaundice as a serious sickness
owing to tho damage dcno tc the liver?

n s long r .s jaundice exists there certainly is a damage cf the liver
to be noted. But, as I said, that these donates necessaruly are restored
tc thd proper order. During thv first period when wo saw Jaundice epiderd.es
appear to a grater extent we occasionally received reports about patients
who shewoo changes in thoir liver for a longer period than was customary.

In the case of those patients, however, we were n-t concerned with ^laoapoa
which roaultcd fnua Jaundico but there ire certain jaundice cases, as I
stated before, which have nothin: bt all to do with infoctivus Jaundice.
Jaundico is an optical synpten which is valid for quite a number of Jaund-
ico illnessos end >nly q part of tho Jaundice illnesses aro in compliance
with the sc-cellcd infectious diseases.

Q Ycu have st ted, doctor, that the llsoaso lasted from four to eight
weeks. Now, is solvers-n used for tho trc'taoot of Jaundice?

A Srlvtrstn was not used for infectious Jaundico but thoro is a kind
of Jaundico which is r. symptom cf tho sc-called syphillis and furthermore
thoro is c Jaundico which originates as r. result cf thv salvr.rsan treatment
cf syphillis. ;dl cf those aro various Jaundico disposes. Salvr.rsan it-
solf, when toalln* with infectious J'undico is net used unless, cf ccurso,
syphillis exists simultaneously. Then syphilUs, although Jaundice is thoro,
has to bo treated with salv, rsan.

Q Ycu said this acming cr. direct examination th t cno could trout
hepatitis, if I understood you correctly, on the saae Jay of tho incubation
period. How is th't possible? «n incub. ticn por.vd is known es the poried
preceding the actual manifest.ticn cf tho disease.

« I didn't sperk about Jaundico in that connection but I speko about
typhus. I was askod efc.ut tho foetus which dealt with tho treatment of
typhus with acritlvno. I was rskod thrt question ty tho defense counsel
cf Fcppendick and in ccnr.oction with thrt work in the- cesa cf two types of
illnesses, the treatment w'.s strrtcd on the first and third day of incubation.


This, however, is impossible in the case cf jaundice because one nvver knows


-275°-


i


10 Fabru: ry-MJG-ll-2-Burns
Court Ho. 1


whi tho patient concerned was inlected. In the case of typhus it is scao-

tices possible since we knew thrt typhus is usually cnly transferred by

lice. How, if I, for instance, deloused the husm being today I know th. t

he h-s no acre lice end if on the next -ay I found a louse on his body I

can ’.sauce that this very day As tho very first incubation day. l.heroby,

of course, it raar.ins unclear whether this louse really trensferred typhus

rikettsir. t»v t is soexthin- that cne doesn’t know but this holds not true

♦

in the case of jaundice.

Q Dcctcr, you have ccnvcyod the thewht to no th-'t liver puncture

X

is not considered to be dangerous. If so, why is it necessary to obtain
an operative perait in writing free tho jr ti<et or next of kin for the pur¬
pose of all kinds cf puncture? Spinal, liv^r or glandular in all Goman
hospitals by those physicians who carried cut such puncturo?

. In tho case cf punctures which r.ro used for diagnostical and prog¬
nostics! purposes it is custcaary thet cno toll the p^tiait that I


-2751-


C'JQTt So. 1

10 Fet 47-K-ll-la-I£M-Burns


& golnt to perfors thl« or that puncturo ad that really settles the natter.
If uce wants to ha particularly florcfui tut that Isn’t cuatonary at all,
then you ask him to give you e written certification as is the cate In a
real large scale operation. In aoet cases, however, one Just tells the
patient, "I Intend to dc this or the other", and under tho clrcucstance you
give hin the roason for y*ur doing these things In order to help the prtlent
but a written confirmation of tho patient is usually not applied for.

A

Q. Sow, witness, this uemieg you nentioned et groat length Dr. Dohnan.
Like yourself, Dofaoan wee ettechod to the Military Medical Acrdony, wnsn't he?

A. Yes.

Q. And Schrelber was also his superlu-t

A. Yes.

Q, How, you have stated that Haagen reproached Dohnan after one of
theso scientific nestings at which Dohnan had, as I understand, said how far
he hod advanced In his research v^rk. How, were you In the pr^onco of
Hoagsn and Dchaan when this discussion took place?

A. During these Breslau hepatitis conversations Haagen, Dohoan and all
those who wore c-acorned In Oernony with hepatitis research were present.

Q. I an referring, doctor, to the eolsodo where Haagen reoroachod
Dohnan and If I on correct It took placo after tho actual neoting hod con¬
vened. That Is, I aeon they wero, so to speak, on their way hooo. They
talked to one another and you were In the circle of Iieegen, Dohnan und your¬
self. Is that correct?

A. Whatever was discussed there was actually discussed during the con¬
gress. Schrelber ordered this so-called division of work during that con¬
gress or rather proposed It.

0. Schrelber proposed this collaboration on the part of Haagen and

Dohnan?

A. Yes, Schrelber proposed It.

Q. Sow. you have stated that Dohnan did actually go to Strasbourg to
w-rk on this hepatitis with Haagen. Is that correct?


10 Fob 4?—H- EHH- 11-2a-3urna— C AJC >

COURT I

Schrolbor. He had to go to Haagon thoro and a comparison bet¬
ween the viruses as wore bx*ed by Dohman was to bo oarrled
out with the ones that were bread by Haagen.

Q. How do you explain tho fact, doctor, that Sohrelbor
sufficiontly arranged the collaboration of Haagon and Doh-
nan when in Exhibit 19*, presented to you this morning by
Dr. Nolto, tho socond sentonco states; "I" - moaning your-
solf - "havo roquosted General Sohrelbor to assign Mr.

X

Dohman to mo as of 15 July for a limited period of time to
begin with." './ho arranged this aaslgnmont of Dohman to
work with Hiagon?

A. Haagon and Sohrelbor arranged the collaboration
of Dohaan and Haagen and I belonged to that group too and
in addition to the formation of this collaboration of work
Dohman had to, of nocesslty, got into oontaot with Haagon.
Suoh a mooting had to bo arranged by Schrolbor and ho had
to detail Dohman for that porposo. I spoke to Sohrelbor after
the Congress. I told him that those two pooplo would havo
to got together. Thon Haagon invited Dohman in a lottor to
oomo to Strasbourg. I had arranged with Schrolbor that this
channol was to bo in aocordanoo with what had alroady been
established during the Sroslau mooting; naaoly, that Dohman
wont to Haagon.

THE PRESIDENT; Tho Tribunal will now bo in rooess until

1 : 30 .

(A reooss was takon until 10 hours.)


275*


if+7

v; r«b-A-jp-ia-i-rddt (bj;

CeTt *.o. 1


ccR?ugTiD c:ri
A-arcc. sissia:

(The hiring res'-r.venod -t 1330 Lours, 10 Pe’aronrr 1917)

TC;2 ,.\RSH\I1: The •'arsons in V” court rooc ill please find ti oir seats.
The Tribunal is ncftin in session.

OR. 53HL (Courts >1 for Defendant Obertutuser): -ay it plor.se the Tribunal,
the defendant Cbert.-.uscr asks to be omitted to leave ti e courtroom o* three
o'clock in vie" of her physical condition.

TVS RSS133KT: The roquest of the Defendant Ctcjt.ausor, oxtondod through
h«r counsel, uill bo granted. Tho defendant awy be excused fron »tter.d-ncc
in the court roo* r.t throe o'clock.

1 *!C?. 3UT2 TT - Hosuaod
CSGSS vOiCTStTiaf (Continued)

rr; r. :ar3Ys

,. itness, I cii still uncort-tn about four answer to sy cuostion co.t-
cuminy. th.o ncub'tlon ?riod. I repeat that the incubation i*riod is !:no-.m
as the oriod procodlftj the actual stnifoot tion of th.o disois... ? *ou, ;ou
h-.v.j told nw that not in connection » ith her at tir, ut in connection vlth
ty h.us, that yee oar. ot -raino on tho second day f tho incubation period - hat
twt-aont woulf' bo nocosanry. I want to -ok /m to answer very briefly, '.on
could you toll tint a -arson has t! j 'iso-so unless infoctod then yourself
durinj this incubation oriod?

A. In th.o caso of typhus tho infection is transmit tod by toons cf
Infected louse. If, ti oivforo, in t c c-.so of a -ationt ./ho r.-.s previously
frjj .'roc: lice, --.v* if 1 find a lots? in a tyrius r c^A~, then I c-.n safe¬
ly -ssuffio that this ious., cn the day on which I h-vo tiscovarod it, that is.


10 Fcb-.v-v^-12-2-:-clrt

Court I

It isr ah-r duficult to txa* a crocturt of that six- on r. person,

isn't it?

A. Our wIdlers and also er_ mirsin, jv-rwnsvel hiv- r&nak-d tc do that

hundreds of thousands of ti*»s durian the war.

Th-n, jcijr, if Ur you fin-* the leuso, then you havu to ntsu^c that

th. louS' is carryic. the disease, don't y u? A

A, I any th-t in a juried fla.ru cas-s of t;.hus occur, that it, iu.in
1 United 0|<id^.aic i.h-ro also ot.» r .rtiencs .are suffering fro% typnur, and
int. 0 bo assure that th. lour. which is discover-* is inf.ctod.

Of ciurs-, this .y Tx a ietake. *Utri®c a i*cur. But on th- vhol-, the
suspicion -xlst s that those ltc- *a\. infected. That has a defiaito r...con,
Ucauec tho leuso oust hivu D jlO er.i.r utt-d tc J. patient by another person,
wun I have (totor-drud that on the .layr '>_f.«- I hswo discover-<. tho louso,
m lice nt ell w-re pros-nt.

3. You -Iso have to nasuiu th the i<u-c h*s iri'eCtdd the p-rsan or
th- patient?

.i. That ia what I have a isu. - d.

Q. Actually, based on iU these -cir..ti as, isn't it far fetched for
jou to state that you c n fccido vhr.t treat’ont to -dr nister t> e person
'luring thio incubation period? Yeu t.uui<' ft t kn.w whether tnot |X.rson had
contracted that eis-'s- at that -arly St: e, w ulc you?

A. Th •- ic ccrr-et. It is cciTeCt f. '.t I cannot knew th-t a 1 th certainty
. sutpiclon ta t t. louse has hicctcd the- patient, tint

vhen I have such s suspicion, th-n it 1 h: v- n. lt » if 1 believe

that th- budlcinu c-n bo - IiWJ -f*:-ct:ve “ ainst typhus durin,, the incu-

*

bition period, then I can apply this r- icir. iro^ tl- first <r the second
i-y of to- incub-t ion. Of cours- in t.us cas 1* is *:t cert-in If tho
purser, inqu-stion rcrllj : :ets ty.hus or f-.-fc h- is infected by typhus. I can
only see that when the disease, th.V a t sr, th- fever, begins ir. the c-sc,
of typhus,. That ir - :raxi~atv !;• _i 4 he a. t-~ ’ S s l't--r.

*71 >3


10 Pab-A-JP-22-3-AOdt
Court I


q. Now tli- question of hepatitis. As I unJorstoad it, toon it oul' bo
ispossiblc for cn; to idadniator tror.txont f-.r hopititia nn the soccnd day
of *n incut-tlcn period; is tort correct?

•v. In the c-.s- of hepatitis?

3 . Yes.

a* In th- e ls- of hujwtitis I cannot -’oUrino. ^

Now, b.' ru toe afternoon rjc.^s, vitn.ss, wo voro Jiscrssin. the
collaboration cf Dofuon and Higen in whicu ;cu p rticipatod, rakin' jour
lugpaation to Gen. Schruitur, end sc forth. Did jea rvport tc tho dofomVmt
Hv.dloswr on this collaboration betwwvn Polcc-n -.ix’ baton?


y


10 Fdrcai7-A-OJC-13-I-Fitx --raid (3J)
Court Ko. 1


A. I have not cute any suggestion at all. I have not aado any sup .cst-
ion. X law* not su&vostod that Dohcoo and Kssgon shouV vork together,
ftie collaboration botuoon Dohaon and Kaogen v s discussed at tho Ganoral
Parotitis lonforcaca vhich I .*-vc already jsontionod. it -as suggested Vy
tho rrosidont of this Conf-mnco whilo formula tin* voicing aotheds.

I do not viefc to quibblo with you about vi.othar or net you suggested
the collaboration >f Do'cscn and Baagon. - havo roviously s oferr ^ -o the
second sentence of your letter to Baagen "hare y©« *tatad you requested a
: to or ‘1 to assign Dohaon to you as of 15 July for n limit & orlod of tlxu.
to bogin *ith.

How I ask you, did you evor ro-ort to Handlesor in rop-rd to the colla¬
boration of Dohaon and :>.agon? Anr.jr yes or no.

A. I did not have to report about this col 3 -' oration at all hoe-use
during the Conf-runc., tills collaboration had already b_.n dptomlMd.
jror-s"or laadlosor was also pr.sor.t.

.. Thank yeu. or- you in attendance at the so various ttilit-rv Hcdical
kuotings for Consulting .hysicians" fact, 700 ; X>ko at ono such -looting,
did you not? la it true that reports voro fl'do at thus- Bootings on results
of jxojri-xnts in vrious fi-lds of aodic-1 research?

A. In tha course of the coaf-rone-- of c at 15 physicians, 1-cturcs
were liven about too experiences and also about tho ux-jsir.atio.is which had
'ccuaulatod. In this connection, I h vo also reported at see: of to 18O
•—otin-s about vl at ‘ad been discovered *’ith rogard to "jpatitls up until
that tin- ty varicus vork.

Th-n it is true that the cxpcxiaertal cone’ tions wore jxolAir.cd by
tho ro. ortirv; physicians, is it n-*'

A. Durinp the conferences, -s far as 1 knew, the cX'X.rbaenta rorc only
'iiacossod insofar as the cultivation of b-etcrl* ir t* ; cocnorimonts on
Sniaals ware described in tho fori cf a lecture and address.

Q. itrvoss, r* arias the war, did -ou «-v.r ’.car anythin concerning
-x.. riii.nt r or. concentration c-xp inn-.tos, that ic, free your com knowledge,

fren reports or ixetings, or conversations with ot! r ooopl-, -T • re:-. rejrora

-2757- •


1 C Fobru r 7 -»-DJG- 13 - 2 -Fitz?«rald
Court So. 1


cr eny ether scurco wh tscever?

„ 1 cannot reaach er th:t I have hoi rd anythin:* ccncrcte about tho
execution ana also about tha results cf such exporisents.

Q Since 70 U are fauilirr with Jaundice research in Germany, you pro¬
bably knew of th« work cf Professor Dcctcr Drcsel, Director of the Hygiene
Institute cf th« University cf Leipzig, do you net?

Hay I ask tc hear the nrne once acre?

Q Dr. Dresel, D-r-c~s-o-l.

„ I have seen this nac in litercture. «s for cs I can recall, experi¬
ments on rninals ner« involved in this case. 1 believe that canaries voro
used r.a aninrla.

q Did ho net cultiv; t* 1 Jaundice virus frua persons sufferin'- from
Hepatitis, and succeod -ir. transplanting it to adonis?

* Sc f“r ns Z know, and cs it was always done in ether Jrundicc uxpori-
nents, ho tock tho infectious sntulrl freu infected persons, tnd injected
it into nniaals. He then continued tc trrnsait this disease fren one cnimel
tc another.

Q Doctor, do you net knew tliat ho cariled out experiments on concen¬
tration caap inortes?

I have never heard that.

Q In connection with Denaen's eerie cn Hepetitis at Srxhsenhcusen you
h-ve told this Tribunal th-t these were acre or less uxperinunts of cppocso-
=.,nt. ;.hy should Dchaen core two phennirs ebeut the feelings cf Grawitz in
this connection?

A Gr*wits wnnted the cultur-s which Dchacsi hed cultivated in the :niiual
experinents. Ho wanted tc obtain thua froa Dchcon. Ho wanted Dohacn to
-iva theffl to bin. ,.s fer as I knew, he personally wanted tc have hepatitis
experiments carried,cut. Dchaor. h*d refusal tc leave these cultures with
Grawitz. Grawitz was unalle to obtain these cultures. Dolmen did not want
to let these cultures cut cf his hrnis because he did not uant tc lose centre


ever then. He ordered Dobson tc dc these thlr.-s hiasolf. 1 have already


described ihrt this aomina.


27 5 *


10 ? ctru ry-*-DJG-l>-3“Fitz‘%reld
Court Ho. 1


Q y 0 u stcto th: t Dohaen did net went to turn his cultures over tc
cthor people so he would not lose centre! of thee. Miy would Dchcon waste
his time swain* ei.^ht Fellah Jews condemned tc death in Sachsenhrusen to
sac if they, perchance, had Jaundice?

I did not completely understand the Inst p* rt of your question.

Q 1 say, why would Dohaen «sto his tine exaaining ui^iit polish Jews
ccndasnvd tc doeth in Scchscnhnusen to see if they, perchance, had Jaundice?
V>es this act to appease Dr. Grcwitz? x

k Tcs. Things were such that Dohaen cs»ried cut tho work in ordor to
avoid h?vinc to turn his vaccines over tc Grawitz. 1 have already said that
D.haon had sabctr.red Griwltz' erdor tc carry cut such epeporinonts. Th: t is
the reason he worked at Sachscnhaua ji.

Q ..t Sr.chsonhauscn in conn action with Dohaen* s work, you cannot swsar
tbrt Dohaen did not infect these inartoe, cen you?

.. Dohaui has always tol l an reportedly about this wcric. He told aw ho
was only deceiving Grtwitz in carrying out his work there.

Q Do you net think, Doctor, th:t Donaon alcht bo a little reluctant
U publicize his activities in Scchacnhausen?

Otherwise, hv used to toll tc all about th- results of his work.

„fter all, the cdlctor tion consisted cf the f. ct that ho hcndlod the bact-
ericlcrical part of the Hepatitis Kcseurch, and 1 handled the clinical pr.rt.
Whenever I discovered scocthir.'- iapcrt.nt, or r-n-rknble, within this field
cf »<rk, thvn I would infens bchstri cf this fact, ’..honover Dohavn rcachod
acne results, than he would infers nu cf than. Both cf us we; o ffluabors cf
the „rny. This Jaundice work could r.ct be separated into two prts. One
cf us hd to report the result tc the cthvr, and vice versa 1 believe that
if Dchaen had infected pocplo at Sachscnhauscn, then cn tho basis of those
infections, onuses of the disease would irvu to have been disccvorexl at
Sachsenhauaen. Thc-t would have Leon r. result which would net have been
-itheut icpcrtrr.ee for tho hi-hor r search field, and I believe I would have
found cut about it.

q Doctor, were you ever in Saohsenhauscn with Dvhncn?

‘7W


10 Pebrua ry-*-OJG-13-4-Ti ttgorald
Cc.rt Sc. 1


I have never been in Sechsenhauscn,

q Could wo assume, fer the accent, th-t uchotn had unclean hands in
this art tor? Icu think if that were the condition Dehacn would tell you
about the work ho w s dcinf.et Sechsenhauscn?

A 1 do net think sc.

q You do not think he would tell ycu about it?

„ 1 btliwve ho would have told no soacthinr about that. ^

q Dcctcr, can ycu awonr here th t Karl Brandt did net h'.vo any ccnnectic
with Do tenon's work in Sechsenhauscn? x

I have stated that I have not heard frej Dohn_n, ncr from any ether
sources, that Karl 3rcndt was n-jaod at all in ccnnocticn with Hepatitis Re¬
search, end experiments cn human bointa. I can net recall th t I cannot
roc nil that this he a over been tho ctso.

Q ftitr.ess, wh:t w s tho last renk that you held?

« I wra General ilysiciw. cf the l^servo.

Q You woro r. noaber cf tho SS, wore ycu net?

I Sec your porden?

q Ycu wuro e aoabor cf th So, ware you not?

« I wr.s in the Gcr.ord-CS in the «ll«'<nr.tao SS up until the bc,;inninc
cf the war.

q i.hct waa the last rank ycu hold in the SS?

„ Uy rank waa caaisuTtwd tc a rank in the kchnaccht. It corresponded
tc tho rank which I held »*t the bc-innir." cf tho war, cr a short time before
tho war. ..t that tine I was e Stabserst. I was net Obcretnbanrtt.

IK. H..FDY: I hrve no further quosti.ns, Ycur Honcr.

TH ^RESIDENT: If there arc nc further questions, the witness nry bo
excusoi.


27o0


10 ?;b J. 7 —S'-'-U-l-'itag .raid (SJ )

Court ..'o. 1


?.. SETS' .TIUS: I wish to ask crv. question o«i r--c:5tin*ition.

3‘S PHBID3IT: You any -wood.

REP 13 ST ^I/.ViTCC:

5T DR. SaWMlUS:

Q. -.fitness, a short tlae ago, you apoke of tho order of a Cenejil
rhyiician Schreiber with regard to tho collaboration in the field of
Ke-atitis and also in tho formation of Groups. teli ua in 1,h ' lt

capacity Doctor Schreiber ordered this collaboration and this format on of
groups? On the basis of what position did he order this? Or who orderod
t! at ho do this? Did e issue this order as Cajaisrior.or or Reich ftoooarch
Council?

A. I do not know tut exactly. Sohroiber • ac the Chatman of the
hepatitis Conference at Troslau. Ho was there as Connal Jhysiciar. Aftor
tho individual results of tho various scientists had boon prosontod, ho
then was called u on to s-cak a" out authorisation of groups. 7i is was not
only for mosbors of tho VVihracht, but also for civilian Hocatitis scient¬
ists. It is poasibl that ho as a aosbor or Ccvanis-ior.or of tho Reich
Resnroh Council or’erod this - on oral coUat-crotlon, or that ho su-rjstod
it. ho--over, it was not stated if ho did this in his capacity as a a-obor
of tho Amy as a panoral physician, cr if ho did it as Cunnissionor of tho
Reich Research Council.

. .«U, witi.oss, ccuid this not bo soon froa »ho way in which ho

oado his address?

A. I cann.t exactly recall his words, but ho said ha thought it would
so a ood idea if Sr u? A collaborated rich Troup 2; and f Gioup C coll-
V: or at ad v 1th Crown D in order to cot their results of oxrarinants on
sisals. That is aipraciaatoly tho • a- in r.: ic!. tho suipcction ras aado
by Schroibor.

;. DR. SCRViVIUS: I thank you. Thor: aro no further question*.

DR. FF.I'IUA (Attorr.oy for Dof^ndint Rostock): I have a question.


-2761-


10 r-b i7-A-S-H-2-rits;orald (3J',

Gcurt He. 1

7Z FR3SXD21T- You nay proceed.

By Dr. Fribill%:

Q. rrofofls r, in connection wit!, the 'uo'tior. of t:.o 1 rcsocutor, can
7 W toll ao if ho handled orders c- questions f--*r tho rude!- Rosoarch
Council? as Irofe-sor Rostock in any mj connected with tho Reich Rt-
s-arch Council? Do you knew "hat -osition Professor Rostock occu dud in
the Reich research Council?

A. No.

X

Q. Lay I no. tell you, Professor, ti nt Restock, hiasclf, "as not a
uouibur of the Reich Research Council, but that l e cnly "as deputy to Karl
Brandt' Ho, hiarolf, has nov_r had anv corr-spoc' , onco .a the art of the
Reich Ros .arch Council, rwr Ua ho iven any orders or aSsljnnjntn. I at
further tolling ou t’ at Professor Restock occu-iod the -.ffico for scicnco
ard ros;arch; that : rofossor Rostock hns ut co.ac questions to -ou, is not
dia-uted. With this state of affairs, do you consider It '•ossiblo that tho
questions by Trofdssrr Rostock cnao in his capacity an Oirjetcr of tho
Office for joionc. and .^search or I rof6ssor, ’o "cm want t claia that
Frefursor Rostock !or turned to von in hie c-^acit" as holdor of any
pi si tion vithin t! . R-ich Research Council"

A. I, personally, aa not oriented ir. da tail nr to t:.j oanpesition
and air-.' tho waSsnewnte individu ily of tho Roich Iosoarch Council, nor
ua I faniUor with .the r -nisntlon of the Offico for 5cior.ce and Rosoarch.
If I have stated fcofora that those quostior.s ca .c Xroa restock and tho
Reich Research Council, t: «n I cannot say that vitfc abeolrta certainty. 1
cannot ssy t!.at t! is was : o I-eich Research Council. besfevor, 1 do kn»
that thesa questions originated froo ?rofa?'or Restock. It ris clear that
fi;ey ca.10 • ithin tho fra-ie of - oric of the ffise for scic ce and Research.

: have already eiatod fat I have never received an/ research a-ri.-,noento
-rca i ref jssor Rostock.


-2762-


10 "ob 47-A-S -U-3-it cerald (3 J)
Court .:o. 1


.tth this, I ccnsider *7 question clarified. Fr^fessor, I have
a second question to ask you. Did the -uostio-s fron Professor Rostock
■Mch asked -cu to state your point of vie*.- have anything in their con¬
tents which related thee to erperfaents or. himn beings?

A. I canrofc reaeaber than. Hoe ever, I have not seen, nor hive I
read anythin* in those questions about experiments on human beings.

A


-2763-


10-rob •17---T:c-15-l-Gtylor^
c:^rt :'o. 1


", la It correct or possible thnt Just thoao quostioua iftich •..Tiro
ailroasoi to you osncorzol the seloetloa of cortnin dxugs ral nL»c orxticulnrly
the conaorv-t.oa of lrucs» i-odlclw?

Pnrt of tho qjiostlraa cortnialy lonlt with thnt subject. I *ns
frcq'oortly lcfcrr-od .-a to tho nppronr!'tonose m»S tho nocoaslty of foll<win5
55 u r»thoda of t-onfc-oat 8'Jicosto' by other scientists. I wns rakol r.bout
thoao thiaja raft I ir.s to uxrross tho oxporioaco I h-vl collootoi on tho aubjoct.


n profoasor fc lo you rougher If those *100611030 lonlt ;v\rttculrxly cr
doc.lt nt nil with hopntltls nnd typhua?

3 kr.ju thnt they lonlt with tyohuc nnd I f.ou thnt I wna ntdco4 nt
c;o tlio nbcut thla .othcJ -f trontooat with lncxorelujly hot bntha; but
rbrat tho trontraoat of hopntitla or tl-o dlncaeala, I cannot r&aor.bor nnythint,
jorasnnlly. I onnnot rwvw.tor ovor bvrl&6 rocoivoi ruoh -. 0 pool nil so’,
luwtloa. Aftor -11, wo 114 act lir.ro nay i-olloino wit!; roc r- to hopntltlo
which hnl nay opociric effort.

1 tfx.nl: you. I do not hnvo nay f Jrthor qu.cticaa.

DR. syVATICSi 1 dc aat hnro nay further quoatlcna t: tho -rltjooa.

::R. K/J'DY: tto proaocutlon h~n nothin.-. further, Y«~ar Hcn r r.

7!’3 PRSTIDST: If thoro is ao fxthor oxn.nl anti on of thlo witnote, tho
vitsoss Q\y be oxcusol.

DR. STY/JIOSs I'x. Proaidoat, for tho tins 'olac, I do act wnnt to cnll
rxy othor.witBooa, nnl nt thla ti:.o 1 wnnt to prosont n nu;bor of nfflinvita
t*. tho Tritunnl. I bollovo thnt tho Trlttinnl hna rooolvod Dccurent Books I
'■a ; VIII, rjx* I ehnll now r;cd fr>-«- tbn..

'JP3 FRSGIDS’fP: ILnvu thoao dcea oats :oor. furnished to tho Socrot-xy
Oor.ornl*.-) .leak?

DR. S3R7A7LUS: I bolloro thnt Dccu^ont Pock Ho. I hr.a saw boon proaontol
to t;..j rribinnl. /.a first dccir.ant, K5-x, co>;tniii3 nn excerpt free tlv.

Life, which hna nlro-ly boon iiocussod nnd I wnat tc sub-iit this
A - -'3 si’.iblt 1. I So czt a*?at to xonl it nay r.ero boocuso It hna
^rcni;- boon rod la tho c :urso nf tlx socsloas.

:3!. ::c H/JBT: If tho Tribunal ylenao, I woulh like to hnvo r. attaroat

■iV<»


!


It 7eb /.7-A-7JC-15-2-3e/iord (BJ)

Court lo. 3.


fro defense counsol as to the Air-ose of the offer of the Karl Brandt
Document ll o. 1, which is an extract fra: Life Har.-.zinp concerning certain
^ lari a experiments c-irriod out in the Uni t ed States. I think, under cor-
tain circv^s tar.ee?, I might tjf/o no ob Joe tier. to its admissibility, but 3
thLJc we will Kayo icue very strong objections de~onding upon the purpose
for which the document is offered.

DR. S-KVATIUS: .'ny it please tho Tribunal, this docucor.t has Soun hand¬
ed to tho witness in the examination. It his boon offered as evidence and
I think that It las already boon admitted. It is of further ia'.ortanco for
the question which has to bo decided hero of tho admissibility of oxpori-
aente on human beings and in oxcoes of this in order to Jud.c tho question
— tho humanitarian qu.stion—all together. Tho prosecution charts tho

• ■

dof ndants with crimes against humanity. In order to clarify this oonccpt,,
«o will havo to soe W.nt 1 c bolrg con-idored as h"x.anw In order to bo able
to sake con arisen#. I e\nt to suboi.t on additional number of documents
fron litorat iro which Ukowlae deals with jx; i riwits and which for tho
can. reasons will bo of tho utmost importance. T, theroforo, roquaot that
Document lie. 1 bo admitted as S±ibit No. 1.

7. •: PPES.tDST; If ay recollection is correct, l is exhibit was narkod
for identified cn: Karl Brandt, ^chibit 3 fa- identification, but has not
bc:n -vinitt xl lr. ovidorco.

VLR. :C ilAIICf: If tho Tribunal pluaso, re offered no objection whon this
docuaont was put to Irorossor Loibbrand becauso the witness me called upon
tc ;ivo his opinion as to tho othical value of th. ciroori-ajnts hare carriod
out, and ho testified that he had some objection to ti e xpcrirxmta rclatod
her. in Life i'acazinu. Tor tho purpose of eliciting an ex-rossion of opin¬
ion from tho »itr.oss, ro had no objection to that procedure. "c havo very
rtrenous objection*, tc the ether puiposo, ns stated V - defense c-unsel
for Karl Irandt. Chic document obviously can have no probative valuo in
f roving that any of the experiments

-2765-


10 . Ob i.7-15-3-^aj’lord (BJ)
:oirt .io. 1


charged in this iniictamt are lawful or non-crininal experiments. If the
Tribunal -omits docu_wnts of this kind to do into evidence, it will very
prooablj sean that the prosecution will be forced to assure the burden of
Justifying cvory cx-iorlront vhifch has ever been carried out or at least
all of then that the defonso counsel can find informtion on, wore carried
on in a lav/ful aannor, that is to say, upon volunteers.


Id’ - u7--.

C art . 1


lS..-1-Galla h*r


I thiol; ttar- is n- issaa in this case ccnccrninf: h- ..act that an
jc. -riuant ccrriod -ut in n r.-7olrr.t3cr= js r. t f the nature cf vi-lr-ful
r criminal c^icrixats. Tik defendant s. tastifta • en tit stand. 1
iu:.’sratai»c'. lie ataitto' it* It *.cs noeessary tact the ar.crincntal subjects
• g vluntaars. The -rcsccuti-ui Li tils ease lias undertaken ta .r;vo that
the cc^tri. uital su* jeets used in * - c.Tcrixats at issue core r.. t v Inn-

A

tears, tlicref re, adds nrtiiin. t tdu. .r; f, r the. clarlficaticn -f aitf
iasuad in this ocs*. frr tlw 'efense c.uaacl to Irin; in roat h:ots -f
docuuents in writing c nccroin; ^3Q>eri-c:;ts carried -ut in t..~r c*untrics.
There is tin. v.ry str »;cet ofcjecti.as ta have adnlttc! that t pc »f
atarinl into evidence in on> event, i lliink in substantially nil casco
t.-sc uritin-s trill net tvv ,al the circumstances t>urr un-Vi i t: - ex. crl-
ixats, end, I au quite sure they -rill atta . t U dr.r.r infcruioos fn.
these oriti.T.8 tliat dec ton in the United States, cr clsouhorc, .wave cl no
the sc c thine as d n- in this cast, newly, carried at r, jri..oi ts on
,.c ,.lc idle wore not vc luntoc.ro under circumstances jus til led to the
-clicT n tho . art f the c^oriacntors, tdiich aid .t bad 1 * result in
.loath. Tl.-t a ul ! sioan the *r c.c» t‘ n lor the circunstcnccs on its
n initiative c.uld investigate orch nc ~t these instances, an l rin..
ir. .ire f ire think rt can brir,; in tVat tic oc>ri:xnU wr, unotiiical
rr zttj -nc point f view.

JULGL SS-'JKa. Ir. Servatiuo, .lid r. t y ur witness, Karl ran-lt,
alee tilt statc.xnt that in his c.Ani n ~y . n- wh is tnlor ..caical
restraint, such -3 a ..rlsirwr w ui -c in t ienitentiar/, c nix. n-.t
o -all;, ivc v luntary consent t f a. subjection of nodical er.purii-.cnta
n hi:., even though he cave li. service, even tli ttgl. hw ha *.::tari rly
str.t that he * aid vduntcer f r such oqxri uits. I thin: th. doct.r-
.itaese aril ta t even then acccr’in: t his 3^:ise r.f je’ioal ct.ac3
* -at c aid net Vo said t bo a voluntarily hman service.

’ td.u, r cue din up-a the .reniso that y. a hav- ostrv'licV. by
:• r TTita-ss, u all it n.t rta s-.e-th.in; as a -.attar ;f ;jt.I ativo
value t.'t Dr. Servatius wh star tad with t. .sc .xcciisoc tuat ta so .-epic


27»7


10 >V _-l5..-2-Galla'yxr

C'-urt 1


a : oatt-r how juch they consents c ul asfc la fact .Tilli.-._ly consent,

-nd, then tc s.. w j.Jcr these circ stances cx,>crlr«at3 rare c aducted
.. . su Jeeto? I UttSara fe t «s the .ur^ese f r c/ Dr.

Sarvatius ha introduced thJs -jticlc ir_ ■Idfo". Of c urso, i-s tlx
li-.t analysis It rr.ll c u,> t. this Tri'.uroi t. say what .r Native value
6ho> trill l-Ivc the natter, -f c ursc, the crtiole as it a ..or. v; n

a

its face, end in accc.it in'. tfw . raise laid down Ly year ’.fitness Karl
rrr-v’t, ir.ui: t.nt ,rvo -aly that in other parts .f tlx v rid cx.cri-
.«nts rare c nductjd u;.n ha can su’.Jccts.

SBRJ3Y: If tie. T r i>-ncl .'Icrsc, th- * x* sceuti .1 ij rf/ared
tc adit that. I Just ’ n't s~c that the .atter is at Issue raid .r ves
anythin;. -Yen if it Vo aasoMd that c: ;.criox;jts wore ocrrlod cut in sccio
ether ccur.tr>' of ti.c world, and La ccrtaji or. cs u. n a •i.-vrluntccra, 1
0 a't think it Justifies any of t.~ nllcjJd crimes in this ease. T;.ty
can c rit cri-ics In tlx Unit*' Stat—, -r elsewhere, Ju:t ro t-'.-y can
in Gor.any, and ;r. f -f any >vc.- 1 atac-ca that such a erL-j l.ao . oon
c^. it ted in tlx doit. St".t>. s I thin!: d as nt boh vc tlx *oic.inc any¬
thin.. in this ease.


3 Fob 17-A-S -16-l-r.ym.a
:ur6 Ko. 1


J : JL-OE FE3RIH0: I h--' understood tl t . a tho purposo cf this offer.
: irn't suppose that tfcoao dofandmta r.ro will in- to a dnit to tho
er.ao of tho Prceocuticn ;t this ti :o, in'. I hr..; auppoaotl that tho
purpose of this prcffor was to shew th t thoso dofondcnta tr 3 con-
pert d with whrt ihoy hr.I ccnaidcrod to bo accoptod standards in tho
fiold cf codici l oxpori. ents. Isn't htr.t tho purpt so2 A

DR. SERV/.TIUS: Yos.

:3. ::c HANEY; I don't want to naJco an oxtondou ar~ur.ont, but r.s
I aoo it, thoro ia no diaputo oitthor on tho bi.ais <-f tl ia article
:r cn ti o pr.rt cf tlo Lofcnso with tho Pmsocution thc-t it ia
r.occasary th: t cxporir.cn t..l subjocts bo volunteers, and I do not aoo
that leading down tlia r ccr.l wit', oxtr.-.cta takon free Li fo and
codiec.l Journals, :n.’ ..11 cthr pcaciblo sources ia ~oin3 tc r id
tho Tribunr.l or do nytMry except roault in r. lot of sarko boin^
thrown up around th.o cl ..motor cf tho oxpori or.ta carrio 1 cut olao-
• here.

Per o.tarplo, the \fon'.j'.t Karl Brandt rn tho stand, une'.or ques¬
tioning by hi a rwn Ccunsol, tv.do an : Hurl on tc cortain frootin'<

.xp riaonta ; llosodly carried cut on six Insano persons in tho
fttitod States. I thirk he said that thoy diod. 1 .lid not oxanino
trl 3r:jidt about tlv.t atatonont because I did net went tc oonsuno
tho tlno that it wruld hr.vo taken, but I think Karl Lr.ndt will
•Miit th t ho lid not la rt a t in - ..bout what ho was spoakin^ about,
"o looked into the natter. Tho oxporironts wero c. riod cut, in
f'.ct, at tho ?'c*<jio Sanitcrlun, whicl I undoratanl, ia eno of tho
•'.cat oxp»,naivc privato inst.no asylis.s in all t: o ncrll; that thceo
to-callod fro-zin^ ..xperl onCa which ho ’.oacribed w re a nothol
:f th or .py applied to cortain ins.no pej sens in the a ay luc, .nd I
;i ~ht say that it probably coat thee a wry l ryo sun cf nenoy, and
:h ' c certainly nc m. was killed.

it is a little bit ridiculeua tc bo r.rlrin^ thoso allusions, ern-
a nothod cf troatnont c: rriocl cut inv'.or auch circirlatar.coa


10 Fob v7-;-S' -lG-3-Kr.yik.fl
Court Sc. 1


cr rr.«- cr.rriod cue In tl u ^robr.u c.-nccntr. ti< n cc.::p.

How, tl r.t will cax up cr.cl tii.o prr cf Is put in - Vut ro oxpor-
1 . _nt jx.-'-o in tlo Dnitu-I Sfc.t*>s, cr in Frrr.c~, cr dcouloro. Tl o
rrcBucutlt n will bo put tr the burden of inv^aci^.tinj tl.rcu~,h. its
•cureca ;.a to prociauly wl r.t wont cn, cr tl.o -nfcr.30 Crunccl will
*5^ r;.iainc drubta in tic nlr.d if t!« Tribunal tl .t tl.o smo^tlins
Itpponod in t! o inst:nco wlich thoy cito c.s hr.ppono <1 in tl o Dr.cl-.u
neentr tier. cr. o will kr.vo to co:*o in c.n -1 pr vo'fch't It aid
net Ir.ppon fcfcr.t wr.y, th t tho oxpcrli entr 1 aubjocta we r o ^ivon r.
cert: in fern to oonpleto, that thoy voluntarily un orwont tl-o ox-
perli ent , tK.t it t; s fully ocplr.inel to tlon bcferuh'.nrt, tl . t tho
wide pirprao of tho ox -n.-ont w-a I. 1A cut tc tlon — nil eh ro
rnttura.

/.a pr-ctic.i n. ttir, I thl;’ th. t w uld bo tro burden thr.t w'uld
j lsi.-p-u upon the Pxx e-cutirn, cr wo weul find t: ia rocerd apror.d
full rf littlo short oxtr eta frii tl ia rr tint nulled jcurnr.l, rr.k-
ln.3 rof ronco tc r. frouzlxic oxjcri :ort 1 <.re ( r. Jic.lc.ric oxpcrl lor.t
there, or yollcw fov r cxpori. ont .n tic Fen joc C-nnl Zeno. XIo
rcul. than h&vo to ccio fcrwi.rl nn oxplc.Jn tl^ao oxporlrxnta bo-
cr.use I think Afonso Coioxawl ir und« ubtodly net In r. pcpiticn to
ah;w tk.'t in • ny cno of tlv co lnctrncoa w;.s tlo cxpcria:o.it or.rricil
ut rn inv'lmtc.x-y aubjocta or in roy wr.y t. into! with crinl nr.litty,

IVo Pr socutior. i ro 13 willingt' accopt tl.o burlon cfpavvlng tint
tr.u uxporx: :onta lore cl rxd woro CMri.l rut <n 'cn-volunte_r3 In
tv.ry eonao ~f tic re r , nl I ncm by tt-.t ^canc .-rv.-.tly beyond r.ny
erncept of durusa wl ich :uvy bo lAr.vni froi: ; » ro inerre^r tlrn in c.

prim r., 3f I tl ink tl.t it is r. nutter cf reno censidor tirn for tho

C&irt ;.a tr hew tth-ac litters .-.ro tc bo tree. to.’., bvci.uco tloro is
-v ry r. .srn t- boliovu tl.. t ofensu 4 'cv , nrol will fill tile r-ccrl

f’-ll ex sucl ir.ttors i.s th t, rn t: o ?r-sccuticn oitl.or cm t:.ko th.

P siticn cf ijnerin^ tl cn cr trj-in^ tc fin*. - ut exactly wlr.t wont on

v

ir. or cL wXpenrxnt.

2770


10 ?ob 67-A-S -16-3-- ;.yn«-s
Ccurt Fc. 1


Fcr Ly nm p. rt I c n n.t 300 tl oir 1: t.ri-.lity, r.n' c^telnly
I c n net £uo tl oir pr bitlvo v..liiu; unluta tl^y : ro Tilling tc
taauric tho burden tl. t oxp.ri. .^nts ,jt ayatour.ticc.lly cerrlod
cut in ..tier p..rts f tie world in tho ur.nr.jr hero ..llo-o' by
6! u /rcsocuticn, t! on I err. not soo tl.t they l...vo .r»y : ;;'.fcwrlr.l-
!t:. If t- uy c:r. pr vo tl t end if th t is tlo purptso frr which
tfcoy r.ro fforod, end tfcoy c.-n afcrw th. t ov rybo'y r.ll ever tlo
world w. 8 dciny vt c w„ cl .\r,->o tl eso porplt witl Coins) why, t! on,
it cor t..inly would Y '• o ac:.o ur.tcrlr.lity m' prrMtivo vr.luc,
Otlorwlao, I fc r i no cbjoct t ti e offor <f tl ia Veurvont


2771


....iii.r. fr.-:. tho iritr-css w’.c -.ms


10 - - rH-16-lr.-fcynca
~ -rx. I- . 1.

f.r rsy . ur, sc, cUi r thou olicitin an
_r. ii.c stanr - , cn! I J n't thinh it o fiCaittcf r tixt ,>ur. sc
since tins olrco/j loon s', m tho cuxnt nvl has ;iven Uis - Xdcn.

£-.V..TR*S: J-. .-rasi lent, A.' I state sy int cf view with

re ,t< tho speech y tho rr.socut r?

fee ..r itivc value f ‘-is . cv :;nt, in ay /-inin, ia cry «;■ *rcnt.
.' .st -.That Uc 'efen’.eat is 'win cher.C with ttoru is s’.: un V/ u*:c cn-
Li.nt with the. ease it Bets f-rtrt. It cl. s that, ' y r^r f the •vorn-
.xnt, uc;x.ri'vnts ere -oir. carrle : at a ..era ns t wh tx . x>rt f
t;» * r- occuti n his-lf says teat tl«.< c .XI net ' - c nsiXav.’. s v lun-
WP/•

in £•• "iti n t this, the ,-n-rai i . rtrjvco «>f t’nia '.ccua-at ?s r.- r -

..arant. ene s. aaks a’: ut cr es v.; ca t.w 'uXcixhmts r.r- alJe .ix‘. tc

;-.av« c .Acte;’., * ut wont -in-.- - if t.xy an. crl-s. . r-CiSely

. : A: ical lial X*s.s arc v..v - u tfal in tills ease Tx .r. Btcu-

%

t; a r-'ers t the cri X»ol lto '.c :i .all countries, which ia t 1«

•sic in Ju.’ in th-sc cfcn’^.to, cut! t.x .n sccuti n :«o lac-’ an ex-
-rt the ston-l Iwro wh- has vies.: an .•>.:! a in tho ethical sonac.

Xa .ur. ra- vs t esta’ lia!-. a *vsjs t r e.:o rccusati n. Inn .wit 'o
Lrori tie . 3 :' Llitg t .-- .sort tho srtterial that e enters t..-->e i lives.

! iX r. t ncei t * Int. the facts X .-II t?x o: ^crXxntc a.c Xccri’to!
la articles an. * hs In acc r.'~.:o. vith u j truth.

* r :£ it is an 1 ^- rta.it . iit I vier that thoso tlo-i.e arc ' ein :

. Ua ; v .c ..u Uc all v.r . • " « ut any , - ... r

:.-rc in E caxnt 1, n. v ir- as raisc<: in .. ._rica l s j*ct V<

-i=. ii is is ttot a sir. X cru... ha SC ot • U

c '.’n'riwS f r :-nj years. Ia i cc *nt I: 3 I l.avc c . s- .. n.aXr

: articles fr : literature al-.vc*. J . 1 * -sXniah every' :t it is
till -.re C3t nishin. that i tl»c w rl*. has ?ecn _x--:L. . at

!• •.; Tie have an accusstr n r.'.c li t x srr*. sens-, aisa - la\- f
or.it; is r_I-rre.’ t —that it «st c f 1-'. rtrnce t _ o' lc 1 c

2772


10 7ob 4?-3 :-lS-2a-:*VROS (SJ)
Court Ho. 1.


>?rov« that fcucaaity and hus an oaoss have not beer, considered to that extent
up to no*.

It is correct that tho deeuaent has been presented only for identifi-
cation thus far, but I new request that it bo admitted in evidence.

DR. SUDI (Defonco Counsel for defendants Gebhardt, Cfcorheuser and
Fischer): lay it lease the Tribunal, in consideration of the fact that
this is a basic question, I request -eraission to axoross aysolf briefly
in connection with this question.

May it please tho Tribunal, a nunbor of defendants, and ;articularly
the defendants vhoa I ro'resent, arc boi-v* accused of havins carried out
nodical oc^ericonts, and U.at these acts ronros^nt criaos. in ordor to
support those clniiic, tho ; rosccution has referred to the sen oral ref¬
lations of the erlnir.il code, is s.t forth in Control Council law I’unbcr
10. This law does not set forth that an axnerinont undor certain condit¬
ions is a crir.c, but this law cr-ntains every ethor law and reads like
aurdor, injury, and so on.


-2773-


10 Tab A7-*-fJC-17-l-Sup.3or3toin (SJ)

Court .Jo. 1

The law is not something that i- hovorin- ir. tho air, but, in order
to reach a just verdict, it i a necessary to 9ha. actual conditions Li the

field in question and to examine thee. Therefore, if tho defeneo presents

•

ovidenco of this kind, it is not in ordor to claim that in other countries
— in tho Unitod States and In Franco — crimes of this kind are also boing
e.gaittod, but t’.o -no to fulfill th.o abstract contents of the criminal
code. It is a fact t! at eanv lars do contain those characteristics of tho
actual deeds. — Indications which have a oet4A±n evaluation as a ovel-
uation as a prorequisito. In ordor to Judge the quost on, if a aodical
experiment, it's a crime. The question has to ’-c examined if this oxpori-
sont violates a Jaw. Furthermore, tho question has to bo oxaminod If such
experiment is a deed with which a -orson can bj charged. Ibcaaining those
questions, It cannot bo indifferent If ~hyaiclans In othor oour.tr'oa act
In such a fiven situation. Per tha dofeneo, thoroforo, it is decisive,
if also in other countries and under application of tho j unorally valid,
ethical and nedical prcfoeaiocal standards, physicians, in tho interests
of a higher goal, of a view to a special necessity, can cony out -ucp
CKperisents. Insofar aa evidence eo far presented by tho dofense is im¬
portant boeauao it laces the Tribunal in a ro*»‘ticn to ..xardno, to abstract
the lv s in their application and reality and to nroporly evaluate tho

presentation, Jurt like international law, can thuro things bo equally
%

represented, Just as little as possible in Judging the quostion, if n cer¬
tain s.odical experiment rot resents a crime, without considering the pract¬
ice of physicians ir. othor countries. That is all I have to say.

I7CFZSS0F. SttJT-S: (Counsel for the defendant Blooe): lay it ploase
the Tribunal, first of all I would request vou to tell me if a voiy
principal question is not invol-ed hero. In ay o-inior., we have reached
a I^elrlve piase in t o trial. For us dcfur.so cour.sols it Is not a ca3e
cf raining a lot of anokc, as the representative of tha prosecution i.as
stited.


-2774-


10 ?o'r 47-d-7J0-17-2-Eur*por2tcin
Court *ro. 1

.. '.jfeaco which realiz-s ita responsibility &ci fulfills this duty
■*zv»rly rejects that. ?,r us, wo on our pert war-t So contribute tc
the ilorificatida of t:» lo^ai situation, and so, to ,,ivo the nocossary
‘.coin to tho Tribunal la -rior to roach a verdict which will actually.


frcn all Silas, to considerables fair, correct aai wiso. Tho dafandants
havs been accusoi of iaflictir^, injuries, physical injuries and uirlor.
ji t jj law is written, in yiur law colo as well as sura, "Thou ahalt
not kill. Thou ahalt not inflict physical dcia^o. Thru ahalt nov
injure anybody." hut what the huuan boin. has to do individually in
order tc fulfill this la , and In what casos ho can liter >> frc:. this
law, we aro not diroctly told by the law. In a case, like the coso
-n hand, the rolic 1 professional othlca will hovo a doclsivo vol,.ht.

/. professional concept of tho physician who pro>j-ly fulfills his
duty, •'ill shew to tho Jud o, in ~rder t'- onablo his; to Jud. o What is
uococcary for radical silor.co, and what is nupjrfJuous; what oan bo
c nsilorod as lo„al, and whet is without any dnubt lllo.al. Tho
'r-fosslonal concopt of jho radical prof os ti a c lvoe this information
-a tho subject. That lc the profosaioaal concopt not only of tho
Gor-an physicians, tut also of th j for-ii^i nodical profession, Just
like cortaia basic principles exist which always return In the su.«
way la oil criminal Cv>ioa, oo for tho uadioal prorossion, in all
cirilizod statoo there aro cortaia prooodurec on’ dl-octivos which
are hoinj followol by all countries and which :oist bo oensidorod
correct. If now the dafonso is ablo, by .a ns of a lar..o auior of
liturory ovidonce frau th_ oroes and also fret; spocial :adlcal Journals—
IT tlt» dofjr.no is able t~ _ivo u -acis for tho Tribunal in -rdor to
clarify this difficult 'uostioa, under what conditions anl with what
precautionary -ecsuro3 such oxpdrli-or.ts ero par: zlsniblo, then tho
?rl‘ anal will certainly wolcciyj, if it can also consider this material
i vouching » voriict. Tho dofonsc cannot bo satisflol th;t any


L dividual export, frr axanplo li-:a Professor Loib>-nnd, is a certain
a.- 13 th. nly noaistent of a. Tribunal In io?iUa; the no iifflcult

iu*-stlcaa. Your Honors, already tfc. fact that Proforccr Loibtroni

2775


1 C Tab Ll-k-? JC—17-3-Xu*perstein (3J)

Court :.'o. 1

saintains the point of vi er t!.at & prisoner was not at all able to give
his consent to an experiment requires a certain aauunt of coercion towards
accepting this opinion, Furthermore, wc have heard that a large number
and series of experiments was mentioned by this ex-ert rhich the medical *
literature deala vith. For the most part, he did not kno*. it at all.

And then, he on^' stated: "Yes, I know then", but :.e did not with a
single word state his opinion to thee, and he did not oontion any word,
if ho likewise considers the experiments carried out in forei'.n* countries
ao criminal, or if he ccnsidors these experiments abroad Justified and
legal. '

Your Honors, if it has been statid, crimes are being coeiaitted every¬
where, not only in Germany, but also in foroign countrios. Then this
phraso dees not servo tho dociaicn f our caso at all. If serious scient¬
ists rooort ir. nodical Journals about experiments which they havo carriod
out and if, furthermore, no public prosocutor and no crurt in tho world
objects to thoso experiments, or has taken those soientists to givo an
account of thocsolfos, then this oxproasos tho fact that, in tho case of
the rosoarch emcornod, no crlsas v 0 ro cooaittcd, but that thorc wero
aoricus scientific attoopts. And, when i road t! rou^h thoso document
books, whon a.-.«ong3t tho sclontists fron whoa tho reports oripinato 1 sco
Jlroctorc of international refutation, directors uho have rocoivod tho
highest distinctions for their work, for thoso ox orloonto.


-2776-


1C Fob Li -A-Ji -17-la-Kupr e rst oir.
Court Vo*. 1.


than this say load to a certain caution with regard to the quostion that it
is stated then, those eople who are living abroad, also aro Just simply
criminals, and thoir research aast be considorod as criminal. But tho pro¬
secution does not bear this consequence into account. And, in tho intorosts
of Justice, in =y opinion, it nust bo oxaainod if, and to what extent, and
ir. what connections on- or the other exporioont, 'hich ono or tho othor of

tho c'ofendants say have carriod out aust bo placed on tho saso lovol vith

a

experiment* which have boon not ■'cscrlbjd as crLios by tho intamational
press, but as aedical achiovieonts, which in many cases rocoivod tho highest
recognition. As a result of this. Your Honors, 1 an of tho opinion that
it is not only in tho interests of tho verdict in this trial, but also ir.
tho intorosts of radical scionco itsolf, that thoso trials should contri-
b uto to toll the nodical aciontista in Germany and all ovor tho world,
when they can carry out experiments, and under what'proroquisititoe thoy
lav- to start, and that precautionary s»asuroa thoy havo to follcm, and
things of that kind.

Your Honors, if this question is clarified as a result of your verdict,
then this -. ill contributo Just as .such to tho noods of tho nodical profess¬
ion as tho first Turcaburg trial contributed to tho furthor dovolonmont of
international lan. I thoroforo roq»*cst that it is necessary that you should
obtain knowlodgo of this Utoraturo, and t >t perhaps you shall occuoy "our-
solf with it ir. yoar vordict. That is all I havo to nay, Ur. Prosidont.

Ul. .£ KAK2T: 2 havo listonod with grer-t interest to the inoassionod
pleas of Dr. Sautor and other doftnsu counsel, but I havo not yet heard a
clear dolinoation of th. purpose for which this proof is offjrod, and tho
aatcriality to this caso. 1 would suggest that the Court rororve its ruling,
that the defence f.«t t.gather and sake un their collective ninds :.s to pre¬
cisely what they expoct to prove with this, and Just exactly how it relntoa
itself to the aetter at issue in this case; that, on the basis of such a
stateaent, the prosecution wiU subsit a brief to the Tribunal. The proso-
cution has alvays assured the burden, and has added in the indictment, that
these experiments or these surders and tortures and other inhumane treatment-
resulted free.

-2777-


10 Feb Z.7-A-J?-17-2a-rupperstein
Court Mo. 1


cedi cal experiments can -ed cut on involuntary human subjects. I do not
think they can find one word or one statement, anywhere the world over, that
says such medical experiments are lawful anywhere. The thins *t issue in thie
case is the voluntary character of the experiments hore carriod out, and it
behooves this Court nothing, adds nothing to the proof, to have thorr. load down
this record with hundreds of oxamples of human experimentation. This trial
is not condemning human experimentation ger.orally at all, and not one word
has been uttered by the prosecution to indicato such a thins* ordinary
l*w of assault and battur/ and manslaughter certainly ives to the Waited
States; and I take it they exist in So many, and if those defendants comsdtt*i
od experiments upon versons who didn't consent to undertaking thosa axpori-
oorits, then I soo no difficult legal question presented at all. And now wo
can talk in very ia<*ssioned terms about the nocossity of this Tribunal oriont-
ing itself upen the procise conditions undor which ovary human ax orimunt has
ever boon carriod out. I submit that it is both unnecessary, immaterial find
constitutos an intolerable burden, and will prolong this trial beyond any
asure cf reason. Tho vary experiment thoy'ro talking about in Life Uag-
i:ine, roads on its faco tfat it is voluntary; then how can it bo material
to justify tho experiments carried cut by Schilling in Dachau, then tho pro¬
secution has undortakan tho burden of proving thoso oxedrimonts woro carriod
out on non-voluntoors, porscos who wore forcod to und».ryo tho experiment.

Thon whence comas the materiality of an oxporlracnt carriod out in a orison
in tho State of Illinois, with rvalnria. Kow it so happens that wo knew* a
l.ttlj bit about that cxocrlmont. Ho have tho forms which wore submitted to
the prisoners, which ndvisod thorn what wculd bo dono to thta, and which re¬
tired that thay sign their non. to it on tho bottom if they wished to under¬
go it. Ho have t radio speech made by one of the 'arsons vho did undergo It;

■» have quite a mass of facts concerning this particular experiment, and ho
thing will be true of other experiments, to which they will make some
sort of an allusion durin. the course of this case. But I submit they -rove
nothing,


-2778-


rt ; o. 1

they don't clarify anything at issue in this trial, and uooU ;ui, fac ‘>
the burden on tie nrosecution of clarifying the little scrap of evidence -
if you call it evidence - which they will try to t! re* into t! e record of
this case. Then we will have to cone fon*a-d and really tell the Tribunal
ahat it's all about, or the Tribunal will have the uneasy feeling that r<ay-
be there was something going cohere, like somethin- that has been charged
here. I think it'd a rather important issue, and one which boars voiy
-atorially on the len.th of this trial, and I think it would clarify the
situation if defense counsel would cloarly and concisely state what^thoy
expect to ;rovo by tlis type cf evidence and he* it bears on any issue
which we have in this case, and then *o will undertake to answer it.

HIE PR2SIDERT: The Tribunal will be in recess nc*.

(A recess vas ta!:on).


-2779-


10 r,-b->C?-19-l-S«cpaoa

Court 1

THD IIaSSEaL: Dio Tribunal it rgain in session. May it ploaco
Your Honor tho dofeaient Oberoauser is absent in accordance with tko ap¬
proval of tho Court.

Tho question of admitting an exhibit was being considered by tho
Court beforo tho recoss.

DP, lUMCTOl Yes. A

TEE ??.aSID2 ^T: Tho Tribunal is ready to rule on that question.

The Court has considered tho docaaent of the defendant Brandt no &>•
Mbit Ho. 1, and without establishing any rule which will be a jrroco-
doiit In cay future case, each case as it ariseo will bo individually
conolderod by the Tribunal, The Tribunal sdnito in evidence tho do-
fSK&ont 1 c lari Brandt, Exhibit Mo. 1.

IP, SZBTaTIUS (attorney for defendant JLirl Brandt):

Docxtsent Ho.2, 2 shibit So. 2 , I submit tho periodic list of o*?or-
iuonts; it hasn't been node ready in the English yet, and it vill bo
ouboitted to the Tribunal in the jfeglish tranelation at a lntor date.

ae Exhibit Mo. 3, X as outsitting the chart, xdiich can bo noon
on the wall, together with an affidavit of tho co-defondant 3rnnk,
iftich was already rood into the. record. This will becoeo Exhibit Mo.3 a;
it is DoctKoat 23 15. Exhibit Mo. 3; 13 0. Exhibit 3 a.

TED PRESIDENT: Tho Court will roquiro that copies bo fumichod
to each cumber of tho Tribunal.

DR. SZRVaXIUS: They haven't boon a ado available as yot sinco
tho aicoogrtqjhing department is overburdened, but they will oc oub-
cittcd to tho Tribunal ot a later date. Hr. President, I subuit tho
oricladn and I shall see to it th^t the Inbund will rocoivo their
copies.

THE PR1SIDKT: That vill be sufficient; you ncy submit tho

copies.


-2700-


1C ?cb 47-BS-2&-l-iiinabcck (BJ)
Court So. 1


JUDGS SSBBDrGt Is it the chart, D ctor, or Brandt's affidavit that
you are asking to be submitted as Schibit y

DR. S2WA7IUS: Tho chart as 2, and the attached affidavit as 3-X.

I further submit as Exhibit 4-A the iocunont 13-29, which was tho docu-
n>nt ot the prosecution, NO-150. That will become Zxhibit 4-A and 4-3.

It was already submitted during tho course of the examination.

LR. HARDY: Vhat does that docuacnt refer to that you just mentionod
Doctor?

DR. S2RVATIUS: Thu contents cf tho docuacnt constitute a lettor by
Bcxihlor according to which ho has to rive directives with reference to tho
execution of euthanasia.

THE PR2SID1I - ?: Voll, whoro lc that docuacnt to bo found? Is that
contained in Brandt's document book?

DR. S2RVATIUS: To, it Is not contained in tho document book. It
mas submitted during the a-uuninaticn. It ^^as suboittod by tho prosecution
and you will rocolvo cooios la tor, and I have already submitted tho Pho¬
tostat.

23. HATJY: Your Ilonor, I do not recall that Document !.'0-150 was
suboittod by tho rosocution. I bollovo it was suboittod by defense
c cun sol in jxoni nation of "randt, and I ioaglno Khglish copies aro avail¬
able and I will tiy to assist Dr. Sorvatiua in jotting thco for you.

DR. S^vVATlUS: It has boon suboittod to tho Language Division but
was not vot returned, i shall submit it as soon as I have it.

I as now off.ring in affidavit of kiaa Alike Krchno. Sho is an aa-
ployoc who worked in tho office of Trandt. It cm Ho found in the docu-
sar.t book, oago nunber 7 under .:3-4. I have a tobhnical question in
that connection. Thoro aro two Iocunont books, This In contained in
docuaont book number 1, •'ago 7.

IK2 PR3SID3J7: Copies of this document book fu mi shod to tho Tri-
' r ;r -al i: not . avo the pages numbered. \horo do wc find this docuacnt?

DR. S31VATIUS: Thoro is an index at tho beginning of tho ‘ocumont

book, and tho document books aro numbered according to their figures so

-2781-


10 F;b-SC-20-2-ffiaBtacic (3J)
Court Kc. 1


that you can easily find document KE-4.

IfcZ I-TESIDJT: Unfortunately, the index pago of tho Brandt dccur.^\t
book 1 is illegible.

DR. SETVaT!’ 5: Your Honor, It is page nuabor S. Your Henor, tho
jiglish UiXt isn't quite legible.

THE PRZSID3rT: '!o have found tho document, -*arl Brandt Jbehibit U.

DR. SET'AUUS: Ilr. President, I v.ould bo grateful if you^rould toll
.o how •• u want cc to road tho documents. Till it bo sufficiont if 1
Just rcughly toll you tho contont and then cito certain passa oa, or is
it rocossaiy to read tie document in its entirety? 1 nay point out that
during tho trial before tho IKT it uaa considered sufficiont if merely
tho essential -oints wore referred to in ordor to shorten tho orocoodings.

T.;s FR3SID3 T: Iho Tribunal is of tfcu opinion that that will be su¬
rf lei on t, to call attention to jssentiil uortions of the docuncnt.

UR. HARDY: Hay it oloaso tho Tribunal, I havo two questions to ask
Dr. Sorvntius in connection with this affidavit.

JCD0H SEBRDC Uay I ask first, that is ccoing in as ..hoc oxnibit
number?

DR. sav.ms: It "ill bo &hibit -unbar 5.

UR. HARDY: In connection with 3chibit Kusfcor 5, as I ooo it fren
ay copy, I boll eve this docuexmt was not signed in tho >rosonce of Dr.
Servatiua, and not having the rulos of tho Tribunal before ae no* in con¬
nection with the rocedure necessary to receive a docuncnt hero in evi¬
dence in good fone, I qtiosti.n the right to admit this into evidence due
to tho fact that such certificate that it is a correct signature was not
obtained by Dr. Servatius or in his presence. It shows on tho faco of
the document that the affiant is froa Ervmen. 1 reserve tho right now
to object to this document later after 1 hav- had tins to ooruso tho
rule of t! c Tribunal in connection 'ith tho admissibility of affidavits.

THZ P^S:D3:T: The prosecution may reserve tho right to object to
the iocuaent.

DP.. SERVATIUS: L'r. President, I signed this docuacnt and thereby


2782


10 ?cb-BSK-20-3-3tinafeuck (3J)

Ccurt !io. 1

c.rtifiod that it was sijncd in cy presence. I believe it is an error
vx: the part cf cho prosecution to say that just b .cause tfco vo:an was in
Bronon it wasn't signed in =y prosjnee; it actually was. If this ex¬
planation doesn't suffice I wmld have to bring a new certification of

•

tho witness saying that aho signed this in ay presence.

kR. HARDY: The prosecution accepts the word of counsel that it was
signed in his presence and refrains freo objection.

®B j R3E)3!T: 7o nvo future trouble a corrected certificate should
be found shewing that tho witness signed the document in* presence of
c>. unsol.

DR. S3WATIUS: Tho witness Xrohnu was caployod as a secretary with
the dofendant Sr..j.Jt free tho v -ginning of the wtr until January’ 19U,
and aho says that tho Agency was normally in the Reich Chancellory- but
that in reality Brandt uorfcod in tho surgical university clinic. She
knows atout tho order if Kirch 19UU which referred to tho anti-ch-anical
'.rf-.ro agents and she says th t that docroo was very brief. I quote:

"1 definitely know that It did not contain directives on exporiraxits.
with poiscr. gas nor did I soe lator in tho corres; ndor.co r olsowhoro
anything that w-'uld have intLaitcd that hrofesse r Brandt had anything tc
dc with such." aid quote.

Then tho witness refers to a radio interview regarding tho offica
cf Trofass r Brandt and she says tho following, and I quoto:


-27*3-


10 F oh-..-J P-2 0-1*—Rtr-sbcc Sc


Court ?fc. I

'Jlr. January 19U5 Professor Branf.t participated in a r- 'io interview by
Dr. Ott in t-.j Berlin Broadcastin. S»aticn -rod ssade tis« followin-clar'tiens
as to the functions of his new agency. I rc.j-i*er th~t up-.n t«w quest! n as
to th. character of Lis position towards th- other agencies of the Raich ho
r-^li-j - that no hr.' tc oonsi ‘or his position as th t *»f a sort cf •differential'

7h- witn-ss c .ntinues and I tjjfto: "I wr^te that interview to-ettvr .. 1 th
th. secretary Hrnk- at the ti e an ’ was also pr-sent wh-n it was oci.V; recorded
xnr' was c iparln. the transmission with ay rnvscri. t."

Finally tiv. xitiv.se sft-s tfc - the irefus‘..r Brant was active o an
Ctoerirxt in addition t his otlvr 'uti-s, in r&.*iti.-n to his uth-r or-r.nisa-
ti ml duties.

This ! >rln..a ... ti ay next *V?cu-;nt nicn can t- found in th- ’ exigent
beck un!ur KB-5. It is an *fii<i.vit r» - by a certain Dr. Ricnard ■oinhar.’t
•he was coaiiosi ,r_d t institute th- treasury rj. who ruceiv-d -11 ti»a
mtyrial c nnoctwl witn that oncy. ".h- witneso, .as a .*xbor of the '..ehriacht
.. a cuinlssl.ncd -n-’ r.soi c -nc 1 t.- A oncy Brn’t in 19U5 V text by urrer has
19J;3j th-t is, h- was rly nssi.jno-* t this * ency no-’r the -n of the war
out -.n th- basis f his special tasks roccivod insipht lnt th- entire fil~s.

Hj settles In otail the structure '•f the office; ho ,ictur-s tko legal
f un.htionj an’ he c nfirns wh“t wo alror. > Jaw fr.r-. the testimony a l itn.os
Dr. Laj*v.rs, n\4ely, the six., th- -ffico, i - sc-rcity of fun s, an’
thonc. cs t th- qu-.sti-r. f c nth-ana si , an in th-t connection he s _ yc,
and I qu.toj

"I can „ivc the ~ssur j:co tn-.t n-_ to- c r.tralled cash receipts no
itoas p-rtrin -* t .r ver- in c .nn-cti u wit . th- euthanasia ro-r _i.“

Th>; witn-cs knows su-thirv “b ut th- j'S ef-nso d-cr-v of tlie let of
rch 19Ui which «as racrc ’ un er tiv osi n-ti-a, » li, an-' in that ccnn-c-
ti n he ..../.


10 Fob 47-A-S -20-1B—i'insbuck (BJ)

Court Vo. 1

sa.-s tho following and I quota:

"•ho idcraa v fc lc h «as filed among tho usual secret records of tho
c^jncy hod been fc*^K?o». ^ver to so by tho 'sec rotary for a quick study. I
da not roe oil act its uordin erectly but it reads about as fallows:

'char - ay U-noral -osaissicnor : rofessor Dr. Xarl Drendt to ir.tervcno
a-vhoritatively in questions of -as defense. The .’.eich Minister for A:m-
a~*nt and -ar Production is instructed to rive Professor Drandt ad-aittar.ee

A

to the assembly stops at any tine and to offer him all necoesary assist¬
ance and information he might require.'" %

I new cojae to tlo following ’ocuaer.t rhich is document Kr-6 which I
offer as Bchibit aber ?. It is the affidavit or anothor employee, .a
certain Prau Jutt- facto Proa the 1st of April 1943 until April 1945, sho
was active .n karl Inimit's office. Sh» vaa In charge of keo;ins tlie
registry and she became familiar with the contents of the records kont
there, amen.. thee Hitler's initial euthanasia decree to Prandt and Beuhlor,
and in that connection the ray* tlio following and I quoto:

"Kith reference to this outhanasla docroo t! ere was no special corros-
-or.donco and what thore was only in tlio for., of reports frt«r. doctors or
a rents on births of r+.yecially or mentally hondJcaopod chlldrod for whoo
oirhanar.ia was roqueated. Hoy ucro dealt with only insofar as it was nd-
vlood to consult rucomsonr'od aodical authorities for study of the case or
to et financial assistance, \pprovals for tho roquostod outhanasla wore
never given."

Tho witness furthor makes statements about the rorsons that had access
to tho office and says the folia inf, and I quoto:

"Reichslotter Bouhlor and the agency chief Br-afc I am acquainted with
as -jjetoors of ti e .'uo'ror'r Chancellory. Thoro vas no official corros-
por.dcr.cu with thus in any way connoctod *-ith outhanasla or the Reich.
con.jittee. iho r.vws of Professor Dr. Eoydo, Professor Dr. Viotscho aro
>' n<*»n to w. If tl.oy had had anything to dc with our


-2785-


10 rub 47-A-S -2C-2B-:'in9tuck (B J,
Court Co. 1


ssencjr in ay tico I voaU necessarily have known tfcaa. Thu naaes of Dr.

:fanreuollor, Schuaann ond Fa Ikon hauscr wore not known to so in tho a^nr.cy
oithor. Corrospcnder.cc with Dr. Linden's office, so far qs I know, was
liaitod to boabod out hospitals and their transfer. 71 era was no corr.s-
ndor.ee oithor with Dr. tenti in connection with euthanasia and Reich
Coj.rittco ratters. So f ar as I 'mew ihoro was also no written corrcspond-
xnca with Blankonburs, Hog on or and Kao f nor. Blankenburs and Jlacfnor are
indeed known to ao but only for the reason that they worked In tho suno
office building."


-2736-


10 Fub-A-JP-21-l-3-.ord-( GJ ) -
Court 1


I don't know cf any discussion on Euthanasia with Bouhlor'a office.

I would have necessity known of this.

I ;:ow skip a paragraph and I coee to the part There the witness
spooks about Bodolschwiii^, and I quote:

"I furthor testify that at that tiao Professor Brandt enjoyed
thoroughly friendly relations with P_stor von Podclschwing. In the
Susn-.r of 191*3 I was present when raster von Bodclsci.wing on^o spent
a whole afternoon as a guest ir. Professor Brandt's residence, and
both of then conv-rsed very unreservedly. I can further recall that
Pastor von 3edolschwing once spoke publicity of tt»c fact that his
institutions had been spared such cnreachn^nts."

I now cone to docuue.it !»B ?, which I aa offering \s Exhibit No. 8.

THE FRFSZKMT: Just a cooent. fhnt document did you offer as
Brandt's Exhibit 6.

DR. SJWAYK5: Exhibit 6 is Docuaxt Karl Brandt, KB 5, and tho
document vhich was Just read, KB 6, rill bocono Exhibit So 7. That la
the document of Jutta Rich.

I now coau to Docuaent S3 7, *rich will become Exhibit Vo. 8.

It is an affidavit of the nura< Netty Gerornn. It only h.-s a general
content and shows that the Jofondant Karl Brandt was an active
physician in tho clinic and that hu carefully cared for hie patients.
This is being submitted in erd or to slior in what tanner tho activity
of Karl Brandt was exercised and how he was engaged in his various
tasks.

And, the Cocuaer.t KB 6 has already been submitted, and that
brings ao down to Document KB 9, ::fcich .rill b.-coae Exhibit No. 9.

This is an affidavit Of Professor TTemcr Schulcminn. Doctor Schulcmann
is a specialist in Ualaria research, and I quote:


10 Feb-*-JF-21-l-5card-(GJ)-
Court 1


Hospitals Godeshohc and Rhcinblick in Bad GodeSberg, in the A ray
Coenand District VI. In th.se hospitals in connection with ay institute
Uilaria research was carried on, and carried on in accordance with
the nctnods recognized and custcaary with specialists


2767-A


10 ? c b-.v-JP-21-2-f--r’.
Cjurt I


-.t hor-t md abored.

"I cr-x in contact with Prof-ssor K.arl iravdt or. the Sumer of 19k3
wlxn I apf-ro'.cnce' him in order to sake uk- . alarin hospitals secure frtn
other claims end was successful ?n winking his help. In the scientific dia-
cuscions on "claric research which took plnco then rrofesser Karl 9rnn;'.t
never m-tc any su .cations or ^avo any •.fractions to su, or even inace any
allusion to tno effect that expcrixr.ta f'.ioul ’ o: perforce?' or. hurra ooinjs
in nn unlawful mnner. In particular, he ii ’ rot spink of Malaria uypwri-

X

•xnts which had be«n carried out in Dachau.

"If frolessor Karl Brandt had been active in this typ. of research he
would have had to discuss the questions involved with a- especially cs I
no known r.a a specialist in this fiol«’. I r-ccivod very hlfh scientific
(dstinctlons for zy -thieves*.nts in ti production of synthetic rr.l.ri-.
ncdlcinos, men. others the >'.nry-::in.;sl«y oednl of the Livorpool School
Tropical ieiicihc in 193dj and -fur tie occupation ay the allied troops I
l-oncdiateiy r ot ..emission tc continue the vork in :sy institute. On f.jc
• isls of all that I ta.o» nbiut .Tolcusor Sr-ndt. I ci nsidor it hi t hly ir>-
prcbnblc that lx had anything te dc with criminal exponents, or that he
npprovod of th-.-., naked for then or su ;•>» tod. then.

"I net rrefesaer Brandt twice <urir. the- arando-*ch ti:c I was pleased
•at his cle-r, cl~nn an: frankly critical attitude tcw»nr a thv entire c’evulop-
r„nt. I ccphasiee -socially his frankness an his undorstan “in for
acaduaic-sclentlffa problems."

I *c p >ut Dncu.xr.t KB 10, which is tix witn-ss Gutsoit, and 1 subnit

now Docun-nt K* 11, lirfiibit No. 10. This is an iffid-vit of Doctor Schiuber.

It is Ocsi-nat«fc’. as ..ffidavit IT, since, uo:*e then one ran iiv»n bj hin.

The witness Schieber speaks -.bout Vo "icticn 3r-.n«t". This «rk wan already

•.ntioce. c’unn tc-.-urfe of thu rocccdin. s =r. ha e.^l'ins tlx ".Icti.-n

fron.'t" as tlx execution of a n-dic .1 ..re r ... He ous on to sr.

these special orders which 3„am't receive ar 1 quote: This or ’-r w s issue

it the boiinnin b of arch 19U* ns a parallel v* tlx nedical pre^r'.?.,

ZJSb


10 r b-il-J i>-2 l-3“3card

Court I

"..cticn Brandt". This decrt- in itself, co.. -ents, is addressed to tho Spcor
!i,r.istry cnt'ms, ccccrdin. to its purpose, i-ixdi-atc production order by
■nich Frofv-ssor Doctor Karl Bron it *rca opaosc to the samifacturc, ns p.
buyer, on*’ ccnceaina tho production ha full ;cvrs of control st t/v. cooe
-i .. .4S fr "s I re..^ ber th.ro w.as nc scientific medical ros-irch criLr
for irofusscr Karl Brandt attached to it. Vb aro here concerned with ttvo
ir.ti-chuaical wnrcf.ore decree.

44nd, I now co~ to th_ next document i£tich*cs -lao nude by the witness
Schicbor. It is KJ 12, which I sa eutaitti.* as exhibit K... 11. It deals
•dth thj fact that Defendant Karl B .rn.'t cauerc' w let aninals 't ro".t
expense In the Sir. .r of 19Wi, arrf tut to transferred thw fror Spaor. to
(Lmany. It says hero in order to c'rry out the task, and wo are concerned
with biological rosearch parallel ic honor. bcin as certain ardnr .1 p.cticn
ms started by nc and Krufosaor Karl 5 .an’t for tho Arsanent office, of
approximately 20C,0C0 Swiss Franks, noi. aft.r »y njcornitior. ae Chief of aray
Supply Office in Ootetor 19l*L, fr. tto Spoor niotry, 1 sedo stronieus efforts
tb.ethar with rr^fwssor Krl Brcndt u h .v a It.,*, amber of aniutfs broutht
by oxtre.a^ly iifficult air transport ti n fr.i Spain to O.n any. ThuCu -re
put at Fr.fosaor X-rl Brandt's Ispes 1 fer export until purpa. s.

I thon submit Docuaont KB 13, as Exhibit no. 12. This is an nffl avit
by the co- ’cr-n .ant Su If B\ndt, itilch I o ;.oing ta rear., and I quotoj
"I, Ru if ran-It, *ofe.a '-ant in Cane 1 before, the ’lilitary Tribunal r.t
Surenoor , <Vr-ny, !rve iven a r-rts.s of .affi *avits which were . racucc ’ in
or! once b t>x. Pr-c .cution Win tils cas . I -mm, under oath, ehat
' tUjr h=vin b -* n '“ly warned to at I a liable to .uidshavr.t if 1 nnk- c fisc
tt'U-v.nt. v st ta.nt corr^spon . tot.. . truth *.n w.s tsrio t- be ilier-d
in ?l ' oncc at ttv- slitary Tribunal I at . ure. bur*,, C-r. arty.

n Ir. this -ffi '.avit I have sivji t\. t,;e iraswcutisn, and wnlch wure -ro-
" s evi-Vjnco, 1 declared that t. a co-.'oi .a'ant ITofcssar Karl D-amit,

^Vs.ly has hab kncwlc t of th- Stcriiisati;: j an tiirt, '-femurs., he had Icncim

2739


10 l 'ufc-.--JP-21—2;-3tar J


C on- T

of «- tfo t ha n a ala cpcriacnts, an-that h. surely tec known of the Ty.-auL x-
ptri-aonts. I ^ n«t tears any actual -vidence for this atrtownt n-.do by
I n vo sirred tl.w affidavit a it r . 5 proser.tod to *. without proper knowledge
in no knowL. ’ u o oftte circuit .Sieve, cn the fact which Juatifiad thlo

- ncluaicn. In one affidavit I declare/, furt.tr that the decree dated 1

- rca 19lJi ccnc ‘- rns chanicel wnrofnr. ijonU, tad confine’ an nuthcri-
xition for jrofcaaor. Doctor Kcrl Brandt to ep. naor wdical roa^-rch in
connection with 3P.8 raids, -.nd 1 vxntj nod f t tola conccrnod oxporim.nta.

"I have ai^n-d thic reels. vor.in, olthcu„fc tit c ont.nta of the
‘ccrec wore not present to cy tlnd. Likcvifo, i c-nnot aacartein that fron
sy own knc.wle.lcc, *hcn frcfoaaor, Doct r ;tr.rl Brandt, h-.d been informed of
too ietaila of the Kuatard 0 "a Exp.ri-t.nta."


*790


10 2-1-L-r. .-r’t

Court .1.


I furfwr su’iiit th_ 0oco.xnt ns ixhi'jit 13. This is a fur-

r,h-r -iffi "arit ia:o by the witrviss Schij'.-T. It cone ms a letter fren
iniator T'r ..nr-.unt Sp-ot to the Fiji-*. . arshal Keitel, which is atta¬
ched as an anr.jx. Tb-j witn-ss h-ro in this effi Vavit confirms that the
vxt is cornet. ..n'., in this connection, 1 wouli like to ay that lv

a co yj on his . rs-n, only T aontion h-re the onissicr. if the 'otnils.
' j-i dt this letter in or or to prove fat in th_ Istri' uU^n list at
tbo on* of tho letter, Karl *ran't was not .xntionc J , an', th-rof .ro,
oalt 'iroctiy with Ktitol in ictt.rs -f . In the lottor itself, the
lidtationa as product ion are sot out.

T»o next 'ocuivmt is cn effi avit by t»w witrv-sa Lam_rs. I an
lust tol * ' y the r sucutiin t vat *ho ori Inal letter Is rvcila' lo, with
tl-j . rasecution.

,"0Y: I 'o not wish to 'x. on borate o*. as aayin that I ask> 1
Dr. Sarvatlue If tv. ori ind 'ocurvint .os stalin' lo. ut tat I

n'.rstoo hia tc say that it ^ss availa lo. -k. has a copy c-rtifij* by

liasolf.

Dl. S' 0V..TIU3I I tn-n hav- thu 'ccunont X" 16 which I n.i iff-rln.-
s *bthl’it lh. It is n chart on Euthr.nasia in th r uiich Coiteitt^o which
has not • won cc-a. 1-tc 1 -a y-t. .. copy will be pr s-.ntoi tj.hu Tribunal
at a 1 tor ato. c aru tv ro n-roly o^no rno with th- Chart.

rr ’"STTEKTs ‘hat ..ns th- last -xhi.it before this Chart which
coun3«l has referro’ to.

TU S* ty^nus* Tzit was bchiblt 13, Docuaunt r 111.

T~ . *“SID“t , T: That's curr-ctj I have a note of it.

•01. STUBBS: Cw:J-nt Ho. 17 can V. 1-ft out, since it was ns-e
'■y Lau rs, wh~ was -xavin. ’ h_rv. ..n' .( now su* .ait Docunont S'-16 ~-s
x i* it 15, which is a ocuumt in tha fom of an affi ’avit aa'o by Dr.
.nv.r Xirch-rt, who was foraer n- leal officer of the \-.ff-n-SS, an'
ho -ns conc-rnc’ with th*. 1-a’orship of on Suthanasia institution. ~n'


I lU'te fWatfco affidavit:

"In Sap^ a -r 193> ioich fhysician SS Or. Towitz suraasna!

2791


on


10 H-22-2-Lohnhar "t

C'urt * ; :. 1.

-3k.-- ' 30 te nake a list of tho r-cr.ian Lunatic asyluns an’ their nun or of
iryv' -s, as :' 1 an th.. ’etc in the loich Medical Calanar, The reason, I
vr-3 tol’, vas the fact that because of tbo ova-*uition of ti» cstwall zone
the imate a ha’ tr :c transferred to oth-r asyluns. fU I ha finished
eonpdlin tte list an’ hal hanrio ’ it in, 'rawitz sont no to r T. r.^jmann-
ihcncvllery of tho Tuohror-. Th.ro I learnod that actually it was a
natter of euthjnasia of the insane, an’ that the- transfer was only a j.ra-
t-xt. It was pointc *. out to uo that it was lone on direct or‘era fron
tho Fuohror an J that i-ich Leit^r ouhl-r ha .con instructor^ to carry
thoa out. I was vary stocked at such an order fronthe Fuehrer an* I
spoko a ain to nr. ^revitz an*, had another two r throo ’iscussions
vith Dr. Hofolraann to which iVofossor nr. Koy'o of u;rz\ur- was also
callod in. Tho ontiro cuthania .iroco-hiru was still ontircly in its
early sta .8 an' a iilan was ’.rafted as to how th. natt.r should bo
carrio J out. It was to *.» ’one in several institutions. ..t first 3
institutions in ’iff rent *c.rto of f \jr>>?ny mjro mntioned. Tho insane
tropic concerned whs shoul ’ c o un'or the ,rrrn woro to he soloctod,
wh.ro. y "oy-'o as chief .x?.rt ros.rvu* tho final Aicision for himself.

"v rythin should So ‘ased on strictly re ’leal views an* only such ix*--
s-vns were to bt selected irtio in a psychiatric Definin' cul” o callod "chron¬
ically" ill. Hoy’o hinsalf wanted to isit the lunatic asyluns, to se¬
lect tho . .rsonn.l an J instruct it acordin ly. •.s I oould not and
would not arprovu of such n glen I told 'bvivitz that I refused to tnko
• v.r an outhanesia institute. Ha, th-roforc, ’corad it a-’visa’.lc that
I l.avc “erlin as soon cs pcssi* lc an’ or’orod -sc ta take over a nodical
c n.ony of tho affon-SS which I ’±1 on 7 Oct. 1939. Durin all the
na -otiations t*» na^s which woro aontioiwd or the j.rsons who took


1C F sb-A-JP-22-ln-Lohnh ard t-( BJ )

Co’irt Ko. 1


part wore: GRAI/ITZ, R3FF3UA.V, K2TDE, BIATXHTaEG, BRICK, and CORHiat.

Tot - single *oni -s sid about Dr. Karl Brandt. Svorything at that tirco
was still in the early stages.

I wish to odd that I was told at the negotiations in tho chancellery

%

of tho Fuehrer that out>-was!a was regnal tod by decree of the Fuehrer and
Iso by Goail^G's signature, as chair-van of the Reich Defense Council. I
did, hcMovur, not see those signatures. Later tho problira arose aeiin when
I was p. dc artnent head with KationaJ <Uw*lth '• e-.der Dr. CO'TI, nomoly nhon
at tiro end of tho aiuuor of 1941 the Fuehrer's order caaa x that ftuthannsi.a
should be stopped. Sinco approximately at the sane tine CCl'TI rocoived a
copy of tho protest lott-r of Archbishop Count van GAK13! of Kuonstor, in
which the latter objjctod most strongly to the execution of outhanasia,

CvFTI said sooj thing liko ho had always wamod against this unreasonable ex¬
ecution. But here too the nnao of Prof jssor Dr. Karl Br’.adt was r.ovor
nontlonod.

I know nothing of 14 f 13 in concentration coops. Froa the tin» of ny vox’:
►1th CC«n and »’ith tho .'offm SS 1 know that rolat one between HIIO'.IBH and
Dr. ICarl erindt were strained."

Tho next docmeont aado by factor* or.nor Ruoggoborg, which ic K* 19, 1
r.cw effor as Schlbit "o. 16. Tho witness t 11s about in int.rviow which
Pastor Bodolsctaingh 1 -d with tho broadcaster OKAEil. and he says the follow¬
ing, and I quote:

ho mentions that being %u-stloncd y tho cosaentntor. Pastor von
Sodolsehring said, almost literally, — in any case in effect- "the follon-
ing, in paragraph, to o: "You oust not picture rofossor rRAP'D! as a criminal,
tut rathar as an idealist." This radio talk loft t.o under the iaprossior.
that Pastor ZCTSISCK/ISGH did not agroe with th. nacuro of Professor BRANDT'S
activities, yot ho had a f-’vomble opinion of his human qualities." I njr.
not sutcaitting Dcsuaunt 20, sinco tho witness is going to appear.

Thun ccr-es Document Ho. 21, which I an offering as adhibit 17. This is
an affidavit cf tho it. less Dr. Schnallc, who appears about the "AiTICC
-•at’iD*."' in a different sc$sc, namely: th- transfer of the special hospital
institution

-2793-


10 Fab 47-A-JP-22-2’%-Lchnh/irdt~(5j;
Court No. 1


-nd the evacuation of patients free citi.s into that Institution. It is in
connection with the suspicion and the charge that the ro-transfor of the
sick and old »as conducted for the urrose of Suthanasia. The witness nf-

firzs that these transfers took clace because of air raid precautionary

%

soasuras. Then, I an ffering T.~ !fo. 21 as ichibit 18. Again, it is made
by tie already -Motioned Schieber. The affidavit sets forth ir. detail what
■ins understood by 'AJCTICK DSAtfDT" naaely: the entire aedical co^ps and the
fi* mi ah lng of aedical wquipcent.

The next document is KB 23 ' hich 2 aa offering as Exhibit 19. This is
an affidavit cade by t. e succos'or of Taster Bodolschvin^, *t the cental
institution in Dot; -1 'ear Bielefeld; the •• itr.ess says, as follows, and I
quote hia:

"The director of the XE2LS CK.* ISOE institutions in Bothel near Biele¬
feld, pastor D. Friedrich von 8c02SCOTCH, who dlod on the 4th of January
1946, has bad several discussions with Frof. Dr. Karl BRA2DT ovor tho question
of "extirpation of-life not worth living", in February 1941 an 4 during the

e

following .tenths. Taster D. SCDSISCK-T'GH has ro-'brted about this nly very
dlaorotly within a ver close circle of co- iorkorc, to uhich 1 belongod. Ko

•nphatixed thon:

1. that, thoufck they hold fundamentally different vice* of thase moasuroz
hu hod cot a willingness cn Irof. Dr. BRANDT'S "art to hoar tho

obj ictions.

2. that Frof. Dr. BRANDT had talked about "completely extinguished
life", whilo other axronoats of these measures basod than uoon
the foroula "Incurable" or


-2794-


10 -A 47-A-Sf-22-15-Iehnhardt-(BJ

"©art Bo; 1

•hOT.olcSS".

3, that Prof. Er.V’UT was awaro of tho fallibility of thosa

aoasuros, an' 1 that ho was -iroantcd to act, not by brutality, but .
by a certain idoalism which was inherent to his conception of lifo."
And this briars as to tho conclusion of tho document book belong¬
ing to "VO V! 3 DCCII 3? TCOK 12." Do you uish no to continue?

2'Z PRSSDS’T: Tho Tribunal doos not wish you to proceed furthor
this ovonir.-. I will ask tho Sec rota in- -Gen oral to taka those books and huvo
thoa furnish and combine !!o. 1. Uy v oluao of l!o. 1 is 'completely loose,
and number tho ragoo in tho socond document book, which vakos roforcnco
ooro easy. Do you want to do that or not? (pause) Tho Secretary-General
will !iaro those ready for uso in the morning. The Tribunal will bo in ro-
cufs until 9:30 o'clock tomorrow aoroinr.

TV.S LARSKAII: Tho Tribunal is in recess until 9:30 tomorrow mo mine.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned -until 11 FobniMy 19*7, at 0930 hours.)


-2795-


il Fob 47-M-DJG-1-1-Foster-( aK)
COURT I


CO J13CT£D COPY.

Official transcript o* the American Military
Tribunal in the natter of the united states
of Jtoerloa, against Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Nurnberg, Germany, on
11 February 1947, 09*0, Justice Beals presiding.

THE MARSHAL: Persons In the Court Room will pic aso

find their seats.

The Honorable, the Judges of Military Tribunal 1.
Military Tribunal 1 Is now In session. Ood savo the
Uni tod States of Aaerloa and this honorable Tribunal.

Theru will bo order in tho courtroom.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Marshal, will you asoortoln that
the defendants aro all presont In court.

THJ MARSHAL: Hay It pie aso your Honor, tho Defendant
Oborheusor la absent from tho court today due to her recent
illness. A oertlfioate ao to the cause and duration of her
nbsonoo will bo prosonted at the oarliuot possible opportun¬
ity.

THE PRESIDES?: Are the other defendants all present
in oourt?


THE MARSHAL: Tho other defendants are all prosont In
court, your Honor.

THE PRESIDaiT: Tho Socretary-Oonoral wi 1 noto for the
record tho presence In oourt of all defendants oxcopt the
Defendant Oberhouser who Is excused on aooount of lllnoss.

MR. HARDY: Kay It please the oourt. In tho early stages
of tho trial the court ruled; thht^n the oalllng of a witness

' \\c • ~y..

to the stand notloe will' bd glven^t<j the defonso or the
proseoution and such notice will coptqln tho pertinent Infor¬
mation regarding the particular witness. I have Just received
six requests to call witnesses on the pat of the dofonso


11 Feb 47-M-DJ&-1-1-Foster-(AS)

COURT I

containing merely the last naao of the witness, no other
pertinent information. With such a fora as that I will bo
unablo to preparo myself for cross-examination. Henco I
respoctfully requost that in the future all requests of that
naturo sent to me oontain all the information and tho first
name of the witness, and in addition thereto, substantially
what they will testify to so that I night bo in a pooltlon

X

to prepare mysolf for cross-examination of tho witness.

TH2 PRESIDENT: Dofen^o counsel in the futuro will
obsorvo the rulos


2796a


11 Fsonitrj-fc-DJG-l- 2 -Foster
Court So. 1


csncernlng applications for witnesses to which counsel for the prosecution hat
just called attention.

Defense counsel say proceed.

DS. SS37ATIUS (Counsel forrtho Defendant Karl 3randt)j X now come to
Document Volume Somber 2 which deals with the count of the indictment rogard-
lr.fi membership in the SS organisation which was declared criminal. There aro
a number of affidavite wnich I am submitting. First, we have tho document
D 30 which I am submitting as inhibit Ke. 20, It is an affidavit made by
Adjutant of the aelchsfuohrer SS Himmler with the name of Orot h an nn . From
19 h 0 until I 9 U 5 he was Himmler's adjutant. Ho states tho following:

" 1 . Professor Dr. Karl Brandt did not belong to :he t'.<iff of tho Bolcha-
fuehrer SS at this time." 3«t is, 1940 to I 9 U 5 .

"2. ht t.'.ls time Profsssor Dr. Karl 3randt maintained no closor relr.t-
lonsnlp to Hloalor.

3 . Elc^ler never hlntod at suen closo relationship with Professor Dr.
lari Brandt in conversations and wirtlcularly govo no indications that a
modical technical-contact existed.

4. Profsssor Dr. Karl 3randt wae not Senior's medical adviser.

5 . I do not know of any correepondonco botwson Himmler and Profoeeor
Dr. Knrl Brandt doellng with Bedl.'al questions.

6 . Professor Dr. Karl Brandt was never lnvitod to conforoncos or part¬
icipated in such conferences, which unitod the highor SS-Fuehrer Corps or
ports of it. They were eo-called Gruppenfuehrer confo.oncoe.

7. Profoeeor Dr. Karl 3randt did not have any official functions within
the SS, and thus did not hold an offleo or on official position.*

Signature — Yornor Grothnonn"

7ZL PHIS IDS.”: ttu.t number does this document boar as Dr. 3rondt 'e

exhibitT

DH. SZH7..TIUS: That wss Exhibit So. 20 .

I now couo to document X3 3* vnich I am offering ns Exhibit 21 . This
is an affidavit aade by tho Koneistorialrat, Doctor Theology, Bugon Gerst—
«omaier. Eugon Geretenaaier wus one of the main participants of tho 20 th of


11

Court Jol


July. Ho is a theologiet who worked together with Koltice who*® friends were
sentenced and executed. I ,a= submitting this affidavit to show what Prof¬
essor Brandt — rather I aa not submitting It to show what Professor Brandt
did but to show that people turned to him. that Is to say, that Earl Brandt
was considered a person who was not envftlpped In extr ~-e ideas *ut acted
according to coral-ethical considerations and of whoa It could bo expoctod
that ho would Intervene In an objective Banner.


- 279 *-


u F eb. U7--TD-2-l--:l&klcy
Court Ho, 1


This affidavit is similar to others which I an polnq to suhrlt an* one
of the f^ts relating to it is ttat it was not asked for and was voluntarily
sufcoittodj ani therein I sc* a social value of this affidavit, that is to
say, that those people on ttoir own initiative wanted to nako those statements.

I an reading a few passa os from this affidavit, and I quote i "V'hen I
was boing tried for high treason by the People's Court because dT qy direct
participation in the coup d'etat of 20 July 19UU, qy wifa, throa-h the »di-
ation of third persons, approached Prof. Dr. Karl ?rani£ now a defendant
in the Number;- doctors* trial, in -rdor to induce hin to intervene in ny favoj
at the chief of office in the Tteich Security fain Office, SS-Obor?rupponfUohrei
Hucllor. Thereupon, Dr. hrandt precised qy wife that ho would comply with her
request and intercede on ay botalf." Further, it is stated that Drandt inter-
voned. I oa not -oin? to real aU of these statements in detail.

This brings ne to tha next document, which is Kr-’2, and which I an oub-
sittirv; as Exhibit 22. This is usoi as a confirmation of tho statements of
Oorstermior arxi is an affidavit of his wife, Frau "ri^tto Oorstonmalor, who
stetos in do tail how this intervention was put into effoct. Sho sal-’ that
"rondt r*ino<J insi ht into tho filos of Oorstarwiior and ]«sild on information;
are 1 furthermore sho said that in Miry other nasos Drandt triad to help.

Hy diont states that tho nstivo of his action in thu first placo was
that of tolpinr pooplo wto Vs.ru ethically unobjectionable and who wore of
moral an-* onntal superiority. Ho wanted to help th-jn without aqy oonsldorntion
of thuir political rfews. This brings r.o to Docur.unt XT-33, which is Exhibit
23. Thi3 is an affidavit male by Frau ianci Schacht, That is the wifo of tho
minister Schacht whs was acquit tod hero before the International ’Olitary
Tribunal. Sho, too, turned to the defendant Karl “randt for his assistance;
and sho, too, confirms th, fact that at that time Brandt intervened in favor
of Schacht.

This brings me row to Document F"-3U, which I am subrdttin-- as Exhibit 21.
This is an affidavit cade by Dr. Julius !fayor-'k>Qkhoff, who, cn his own irdti-
ativa, approached me. This witness denied givi*- his oath to Hitler» an! he


- 2799 -


11 Feb. !*7-M-,.TT>-2-2-^lUcloy
Ccurt Ho. 1


says* "For reasons of conscienco I refused to .’ive the oath of unconditional
?Ile:danco to Ritlerj ani ry wife in her aradoty turned to Ur. Karl Drandt to
ask for blip. Frof. "randt in a lottjp pl^dvod this hole to ny wife, riving
a prerriao to look after rry cafe."

TJw docuaont XT-35 I an offering as Exhibit 25. This is an affidavit of
the wifo of ths witness Just oontionodj and ato describes in detail how
assistanco was Ivon at that tin«. The next docuDant is KT-36j andl an offerinj
this exhibit as Exhibit 26. This is an affidavit froa "taria Kellner, who
is tte !tother Superior of the Frenoisoan Hospital and who on her own initi¬
ative approacho-* as. B.T statesxnt is of importance in so far ns it shows
that Dr. Karl "randt was not an outspoken Kami as he is being indie tod hero.

Sho doooritos in detail his character and soyas "Dr. Drandt was always vory
friendly towards us an 1 , novir showed hinsclf to be a !!ati," Further, aho
saysi "Consilorir.- his kind disposition towards us Catholic Sis tors, I cannot
boliovo that ho would oonsclously ccadt a criminal act."

I now cono to t*v. Doounont KT-37, which is Exhibit 27. This is an affi¬
davit aado by a priest of a Chtholic erd-.r. Father Unto Sebastian Woih. Thin
Catholic priost approached no and at ry repost (jmvo no this affidavit in
this fom. He describes here a Bootin' with the defendant "randt at Christmas,
19b3j an' ho says that the dofondant Brandt at that tino, on Christnas Evo,
wont to tho front dispensary in order to hslp so=e of the physicians thoro
and to take ttoir turns. Ho further statos that Karl *Yandt lntorvoncd is
favor of the Sisters of tho erdor, and ho soldi "I shoul' like to givo you
a Chris teas surprise. I have boon ablo to intervene sc that tho Sistors can
roaoin in that hospital." The priost told us that there was a hi * do.*ree of
03teen for reli-ious values in ’rar.dtis character and that all the assistants
wero very nuch inpressod with his staturo an* that he 6 the ref ore Judged
‘randt vory favorably.

Then tho General Secretary sent a letter tc no, askirv- no to su v Rit it to
tho Tribunal. This is a lotter of a woman physician, Louisa Errwoin, of
Muchlhauson, who, as a French conan, was confined in a concentration canp.

This lotter is addressed to the Tribunal. The witness says that Draodt had


-23 OO-


11 F 0 b. h7-*W.7D-2-3—'l^kley

Court !to. 1


helped har in ordGr to get her out of the concentration can? into a position
as a physician. Tbb essential points of this staten-nt arc that sho thought .

cf turning to the defendant Rraadt for hilp, and that neons that sho con-

%

sidorod hirs a person whD Hd not belong to the circle who hold the extrone
SS views. This lottcr cannot \o submitted by ao as an affidavit since I have
not yot received an answer fron the witness. Hot ever, la sk you to^itnlt it.

Th3 letter is hero available in the French languapoj and I ask tho Tribunal
to adnit it. '

THE ’--RESIDENT i Do I ondorstaa! thrt this lottcr was delivered to tho
Secretary General of the Tribunal?

DR, SERV..TIBS 1 Thj General Socrotary had this lettor handed tc mo by Lt.
Garrett and asked that I translate it and thon su'mit it.

THE • RESIDENT 1 I also un ’orstan! that tto lottor was roooivod without
solicitation of \ny kin’j this witrvoss was unknown to ccunsol, as I understand
it?

DR. SSJW..TIUSI Toe, sho was unknown to r».

in. H..RDT: Tour Honor, th.re are throo letters in this docunont book.

One is attached to. Carl ?roo‘t Exhibit M*&er 31, one to Karl Drondt Exhibit
f!uchor 37, «n’. th-n this last one <hich wns reforrud to horo. I objoct to the
alaissibility of any ono of the throe 'f these letters bocauso of tho fact
that they ore not affidavits, they aro not statos^nts in J uo formj they don't
boar any scnblanco to a local instruront to bo n ’alttod into ovidonoo boforo
this Tribunal.

TIE FTESIDENTi Itoferri-v to the othjr lottors nuntionod by counsel for
the .rosocution, I woul *. ask counsel for the defendant ■'randt if theso othor
lottors were received by hin without solicitation on his part or without his
kncwlod'e of the writcre.

DR. SER7..TIUS* I received thoeo othur letters also without qy 3olici¬
tation. Tho poopl-- ccncernod vroto to 10 on their own initiative. That is why
I attached these letters to the affidavits which I asked for formally. I rwrol
attached these letters in order to show that those people approached no fron


- 260 U


11 Fob. U7-H-. .7D-2-b-tlakley
Court !fc« 1


tbair own initiative.

7m r^SIDSi.T: 7hJ letters reforr_i to rkj be a*nittod in evidence; The
Tri'-'Mml will rive thorz whatever woi.-ht is daoud proper to plaoo upon then;
but they will be received is ovi-fence as exhibits on behalf of defondant Karl
Irarvlt.


2602 -


Court So. 1

U 7sb 47-K-3-l-l£K-Cc=k


SEiYAlXUS: On pa*# 82 in ay docuoent book there Is Document KB 24 cf
Hrs. Schsundt. This concern* the question of euthanasia.

TEE rUSIIUTl X do not find that cony of the document.

3. SUVA?XUS: It was submitted ns an rnnsx to this docunent book. If
it is not available before the Tribunal, I an not i*oi-r t. reed it. I expect
e nuaber of other affidavits and strteaents and I will not be in e nosltion
to conclude ay evidence entirely since svae of the witnesses haven't as yet
arrived and I should like tc reserve the ri«ht to nresent theso natters at a

later date.

THE PhiSIIXST: You any offer evidence at a later date and the Tribunal
yill keep all of these cases open for a reasonable tine so that the defendant
Tay present evidence which will coao in at a later date.

3. SBYATXUS. Hr. President, then thie brings ns tc the end of the
evidence which vre prepared in such a Banner that I could sutnlt it. I eleo
had another Docur.ent Bock Bo. 3 *lch I bended in for translation last week
and it is not yet finished and I think it will he finished during the course
of thie day, and et a later date I shall eooe trek to that, and. if it pleases
Tour Honors this third book. kr. President, contains mainly oases of cmerl-

aonte —

THE PRISiaiBT; Counsel nay offer evidence at a later date. The Tri¬
bunal understands the difficulty unc,r which counsel for both nrosecution anr
defense are laborin' in preparin' the evidence ,nd the technical rule that
all evidence oust be pre.entcd at one tire will be r.lcxed to allow Ml par¬
ties a chance to offer evidence which it now delayed and which nay c*o at
a later date due to the fret that the delay i. not due to a fault or n«rloc<

of either party.

EE. SiSTATItSi I th.r provi.lCMlly CKlui. =7 of .vU.n-

on behalf of the defendant itarl Brandt.

THE yR iSITEKT: She reexd will eo show.

EE. uum: hr. Pre.lfi.rt, ff-r. } -> .tert fierllw: *>“• lh ”

case, I should like to Bake ax acplleetion.

V. .horifi llh. to fr...rt to 7 c 1= *hl. courts or. of the n.fileel

-2i05-


C'-urt Be. 1

11 Jet 47-M-3-2-IHK-Ce'-k


experlae&ts end should like ts have your peraissica fur thoi. Ve ere con¬
cerned with the followin,; uattor.

I en speaking In this case for the defendant Dr. Buff and for the defen¬
dant Dr. Beater*, whose defense eounscl Is prevented fron attending hero be¬
cause f e derth erne, these two cefendents ere nostly Indicted bacrueo of
the so-called "hitf. altitude" experlaente «n Dechaui

You will oerhaps rsnooter thnt tho urosecutlon has arlntalned with
reference to th.se -r.eriaent. thet the hl*h eltltudo^constltuted a torture
of the exncrla.ntal subjects; thnt is. a cruel aer.uro which hes to be cCn-
.. . erluc cflnn. ta»»lty. Wo .hould Ilk. to Ho* you crodf to tho
contrary. Already In ny oomln* .tnt.nont. I pointed out that th... defon¬
dant. MO only rc.pon.lbl. for n part "f the »«<»““ andrlsont.1 nnnoly, for
th. flr.t part, dor In* vhlch no f.tdltlM or d«o«o. to h.dth occurred Mi
„ nl.o already hoy. points cut th, t th..a defendant, arc not ro.oon.ltl.
for th. ieeond part of the .xporlnont., that L, not ro.pon.lhlo for th.
pMt where f.tdltle. oeourrod. Durln* that part of th. .xoorln.nt., for
which th... two trfenmt. M. re.oon.lhlo, th. .o-call.d hl«h altitude .lck-
n... played a PMt. that la. th. c .ndltlon. th. OTP.rln.nt.1 .uhj«t

1 „... ccn.clou.n.>. when th. nlr pro.mr. doo...... nc.ordlnnly and when

tovord. th. end of th.. .xp.rlo.nt th.y r.wlw. chain fron thl. uncon.dou.

and where th. pr-mention nala-dn. that thl. con.«l.«.o. a torture. .
cruelty, toward, th,... oxo.rlu.ntd .object., ,nd wo la thl. c... In thl.
courtroon would Ilk. to pro.cnt to you thl. oxporln.nt 1= order that you, ..
Ju'*.e, cm (tain a plctur. of thl. kind of exporlnent.

Pa.ur.lly, feller... of the inland, « cannot trio* « 1« nrodurc
chanter Into thl. eourtroon hut that redly 1. no. noe.rn.ry and f=r th.


fell-win#: r««s >ns:

*1. entire oxo.rln.nt. Including dr dekn..., cm h. mrrlcd out and
nro.anted to you com without thl. 1» P-.ur. chmh.r. Tor thl. nuroo.c .
only need n few little neccmorlc. which can ...lly L hr-wj-.t into the eour

ron; nnr.ely, e.pecldly m dr Conor...! .n hottle. that L. ho.tl.
cr cee.d air. with . ulxtur. of » -Uh oxy.. md hydn, ; cr.. Then .. ned ,


- 281 *-


Ccurt So. 1

11 reb 4?-M-3-3-MC-Cc ok


r.-.TZJtl breathing apparatus fc r the aouth, as one usually uses In pirolfinoe,
and, thirdly, ve need a rubber breathing tube. Then ve need o can as used
by air erevs, then ve need a breathing cask ns air crews use It. That Is all
ve shall need here In order to present this txoerir.ent to you in nr. orderly
nanner.

So* the question arises: Who can be considered as an experlnental sub¬
ject here? I would surest to you that ns an experimental subject oither the
defendant Ruff or the defendant Rooberg be used, ioth have aerforned theso
exoerlaents on numerous eecasl.ns, on- concerned with the excerinental subject
and the other one as a person in charge of the porfornance or ex^erinent. If
you consider it necessary, you oould have a nodical expert present and I an
sure that the expert of tho oroeecution, Dr. Aloxrndor, would be very euitnblc
for he vne active in the air force. He knows these cxnorlaents and at any
rate is at *11 tines available.

The natters obiut which I have Just spoken. that is, the acocsecrice
which are neceeeary for the experiment, oould be gained free the Aoro Xodicnl
Center at Heidelberg without eny difficulty. Dr. Ruff knows thcec accessoriei
ire available and I v-uld like to eay about the danger, that le, the danger
for one of the Participant eubjccte, that dang-r it ontirely out of tho ouoe-
tlon end the entire exnericent will only last for ten nlnutce, that it to spy,
if the Tribunal attaches value to it, it could bo reported without taking uo
too such tine of tho Tribunal.

Vc attach value to this orcericent for the reason that v« are horo to
nrove to you end offor a vory concrete crenels r.s to what tho cxoorincr.t is
considered to be and. how erroneous it is to nake a eocelotoly wrong Picture
of this oxeerlaent. V«, want to show you that this unconscious state, which
■tarts with th* expcrisenti-l subject and which is a completely unconscious
•tntu, vc want t. show you that this unconscious state is a ccrolotoly hrro-
lvss affair. The experimental subject, a few nonents p-ftcr the end of the
experiaont, will regain his full consciousness and. the Tribunal can convince
itself that the cxperimcnti 1 subject will l-oaedic tely be eeoable of action,
the experinentrl subject will feel no pain, the experimental subject will


-23C5-


COUXt So. 1

11 7efc 47-H-2-*-SEK-Ccok


her® no after effects of this eroerlaent whatsoever, and really the cfcaer 1-
-ental subject would «• a mle n-t know et all that eoae euch exoerinent wet
carried out end thet they were la fact unc ntcloue.

If thlt It decouttrated h-re before your eyee, then you will convlnco
y-ureelvst, at leate at far at the Dachau evperlaente and at far et rr. Buff
ic-dv about then, rad you will nako a ecnolotely different and e very objective
picture of thlt affair.

Kr. rretldtr.t, I th.uld like tc atk the Tribunal to contlder thlt, ay
or jposal, during the next few day* and then lot ut have their dec It lea, eo
that perheps la agreement with Dr. Alexander, perhaoa we could nrenare thlt
procodure and for thlt reason, kr. President, I allowed aytelf to aake thlt
application at thlt tlno although the eaeet of Ruff and Roaberg any only be
trpedted to dtoe un in-. few ..dee, and that 1. all that I have to e«y to you.


-2306-


11 Fob 47-25R-4-1-Gross-(AX)
COURT I


TH2 PRESIDENT: Doctor, would It bo your purpose to con¬
sider those human subjects ns volunt :ry or Involuntary ex¬
perimental subjects? *

DR. SLUTER: This question with reference to those
experiments can only bo considered In a sound line because
If we are concerned with experiments that entail no ^aln
nor any dioaivnntAgo for the experimental subjects then,
according to ny opinion, one could never consider theao
experiments as crimes against humanity for an unconscious
stato which Is not felt by the experimental subject and
bocauao of which he fools no pains whatsoever. This according
to our opinion, doos notpprosont a orlmo against humanity
but, in my opinion, the question of voluntary naturo had to
bo considorod. And, If prlsonoro at Dachau had known and
soon how harnloas thoeo experiments were, and I mean tho oneo
Dr. Ruff and Dr. Romberg carried out, then I am suro they
had no misgivings whatsoovor to put themsolvos at our dis¬
posal booauso carrying out thoso oxporlmonts constituted no
danger whatsoovor.

THE PRESIDENT: Can you say that thooe human experimen¬
tal subjects whom you want to produco here for demonstration
nro in tho same physical condition that thoso oxporlmontal
subJoecs at Daohau wore in?

DR. SAJT2R: I cannot say anything In that connection sim¬
ply because I do not know. Those persons, and I moan tho ones
Dr. Ruff 6aw when ho onco visited Dachau, wore as far as ho
could Judge in a proper physical condition and wore well
nourished.

JUDOS SSBRING: If t'neso experiments were permitted
would It be your purpose ns far as you could to slmulato

2807


11 Feb 47-4-1-2BH-Gross-', AX)
COURT I


conditions at 68,000 feet altitude as charged In the indict¬
ment?

DR. SAUT2R: Yos, quite. The experiments, even without
tho chanbor, will be carried out in the same manner and
In the same conditions as Dr. Ruff carried them out on hlm-
solf and on his voluntary collaborators as numerous times.
The conditions are qulto the same and, theroforo, tho effoct
will be tho same and, therefore, you will convlnco yoursel-
voe that hero ono could not speak of torture or a crime
against humanity. That la something we want to prove to you
booauao wo maintain tho point


2807a


11 Fob 47-23B-4-2-Gross- (AX)
COURT I


of vlsjw that If the J u dgcs can see something for thomsolv-
08 then they can better understand it.

JUDGE S£BRING: You say It would slnulato conditions
as they would exist at 68,000 foot altitude as charged in
the Indietaent?

DR. SAUTES: Absolutely. Absolutely. Sxnotly the samo
and the experts will confirm that to you. If x thnt wero not
the oaso, gentlemen of the Tribunal, thon we would not
nako such an application. Vo are only making that ippllca¬
tion for the purposo booauso wo know that the systom will
bo exactly the same as thoy aro during experiments in that
high altitude.

THE PRESIDENT: The Tribunal will tako counsel'o sugges¬
tion undor oonsldoration and will adviso counsel in a short
tlmo as to the ruling of the Tribunal on the mattor.

DR. S.JJTER: Thank you very ouoh, Mr. Prooidont.

MR. KcHANST: I might say Just a fow words conoornlng
the proposal mndo by Dr. Sauter. Prosooutlon objoote largoly
booauso we don't think it will prove anything. ^ I understand
it. Dr. Sautor proposes simply to show that during the oourfo
of altitude sicknoss, whloh results during tho oourao of
certain low chamber experiments, the exporlmental subJoet
undergoes no physical pain or suffering. As I understand
that, based on tho supposition that tho experimental person
blacks out or loses consciousness within tho space of a fow
seconds of tlno, I think there is no doubt that 6ueh persons
do show expressions of pain and reactions of pain, such as
scroanlng, etc. I take it Dr. Sautor is trying to prove that
in spite of that tho subjects undergo no physical suffering.

I think tho simple way to take care of aich an issuo, from the


2808


11 Fob 47-ZBH-4-2-Gross- (AS)

COURT I

point of view of the dofenao, Is to obtain affidavits from
properly qualified exports who have oonducted and undorgono
suoh exponents. Certainly th ro aro «corloan Authorities
avallablo at Holdolborg Aero nodical Centor without the noooo-
slty of conducting experimentsJn this Court Room, Sooondly,
as the Tribunal ltsolf has obsorved, both Ruff and Romberg
havo undorgono a largo number of high nltltude x experiments,
tho result of that bolng


2808a


11 Fab 47-3BH—i-^-Gposa-(AK)

COJRT I

they havo galnod certain altitude tolerance, as I understand

It, So, qQlte clearly, the experimental subjects, I don't

%

think, could be ooaparod with Ruff and Romberg, that le, the
experimental subjects actually used at Dachau. Furthermore,
whllo I am not an export on those matters, I undorstq^d tho
question of pain depends quite largely on tho physical con¬
dition of tho subject. For example; if tho experimental sub¬
ject has a diseased Eustachian tube, which 1 understand Is In
tho naturo of a passage to the middle oar, If that tube Is
blookod so that the subject Is unable to adjust the pressure
In tho Inner oar, to that ere itod externally, tho.n very
severe pain is apt to result. Unloss defonso is prepared to
assort and establish that they su-.de examinations on tho
subjoota used at Dachau with respoct to the propor function¬
ing of tho Suatnchlon tube I don'X soe that tho demonstration
proposed horo would really provo at all that tho subjects
thoy used thero did not suffor. I object to tho above
boo au so of the cumbersome and unnecessary manner in which
to prove a rolatlvoly slnplo lssuo slnco In either case tho
ansvor to tho quostlon of pain and sufforlng Is based on a
numbor of assumptions, namely, physical ocnditlon of tho
subjoot and the clrcumstoncos .ndor which thoy woro carried
out. Xcroovor, I would bo quito at a loos myself to urdor-'
stand what was happening during the course of tho exporlaont
and to interpret It and I believe It would bo bettor to have
an expert do that for the Tribunal. For examplo, If Dr. Ruff
suddenly lot out a piercing scream I would assumo ho was suf¬
forlng pain. Howevor, after the experiment Is over he contends
he was In an unconscious state and didn't feel a thing and
the screaming was completely Involuntary. Thoso aro all ques-


2809


11 Fob 47-ZBH-4-.‘'-Grcss-(.C<)

COURT I

tlons which could bettor bo detorained by on export than
by tho demonstration whloh has boon suggested.

OR. SA'TER: Hr. President, any I Just nake a fow
short reaarks on that question. « nunbor of collaborators
of Dr. Ruff have alroady subalttoe* affidavits to us. Mostly
they wore nado from thoir own initiative, not at our roquost.
At tho proper tlao I shall submit tho so affidavits. Naturally
wo havo no objection whatcoov * that an export, for Instance


2809a


11 Fob 47-SBH-4-4-Grose-(AX)
COURT I


somebody from Holdelborg, would bo consulted on thnt ques¬
tion. On my own part I askod two fcorlcan scientists who
wore active at Heidelberg to answor questionnaires. Unfortu¬
nately, I havo not yo t rocolvod thorn. Tho Prosecution
attaohos a special Importance to the physical condltlorvof
the experimental subjects and, as an example, statos that an
experimental subject..., x

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, I think tho Tribunal under¬
stands counsel's position In tho anttor without furthor
onlargomont on tho subjoct. I do not think furthor argumont
or statement on tho part of oounsol will onllghton tho
Tribunal any furthor as to tho matter which oounsol has
already statod which will bo glvon duo consideration by tho
Tribunal.

DR. S.JJTER: Very woll. Thank you vory much.

DR. NELTE: (Counsol for tho dofondant Handlosor): Hr.
Prosldont, ^ontlomon of tho Tribunal, beforo I start my sub¬
mission of ovldonoo, I should llko to say tho following and
ask for your decision: During tho sosslon of tho *lst of
January, Mr. McHanoy, prompts- by the High Tribunal, doolared
hlQSOlf vory kindly roady to compile facts and ovldonoo
In trial briefs, upon which tho Prosocutlon bases their
indictment against tho individual defondants. 1'ho record of
the transcript of tho *lst of January, unfortunately. Is not
available to mo. Howovor, the Tribunal will remember this
event and will also romember tho promise that up to Monday,
that Is tho beginning of Brandt's submission of evidence,
all tho trial brlofs against 3randt would be submitted. Up
to this present date I an not yet In possession of such one
Indictment against the defendant Handloser.


u job 47-*i-?J3-5-l-Iesssr
-ourt HO. 1

It is tho first privilo.o of a dofoniact and an urgent prerequisite for
ilc lofonao that ho know® OoaizJt -hat concroto assertions ho has tc dofonl
iiieelf. Tto Infiictoant against Pr-fossor Honliosor is basod upon tho respon¬
sibility which eriaos or which should arise fra. his official positions. Tho
Tjitunal and tho Prosooution aro aware, fro.. oponin; stntorant, that thoro
oro no coneroto facts available) gainst tho defendant Knadlosor. I havo on-
ioevorod free doouuonta, toatlcony, witnoaaoa, and tho presentation of tho
: rosocutlon, to find out hew and bocrusa of what facta tho possibility w-uld
griao that a roapmsi'oilitjr c uld eocur in connection with his p-sition ns
Chiof tho Uodical Sorricos. In s-'ito of hard labor I did not succood in
'India: 'ut any such nooslMo rolati-.nship fra. thoso facts. Tho prosocution
paosod tho indlot-.jnt against tho dofonl ant l^ndlooor or,.-rather, withdrew tho
indictment OoQlaat tho dofon'ant Hondloser on account of hi oh altitudo
jxporL-oats. In rdor to clarlfj tfcla na..->r I ah.uld liko to point out that
thoro ia a coao whloh ia oron ..uoh clour jt than tho o^so of hi (J h altitude
oxporL.onts and that is tho ccoo of tho ;.alarla oxporlrenta.

r.a dofondant Honll.'wor is now Vofcxo tho bo.lnuinc of auVx-iaslon of
ovilonco on his bohnlf and I ir. n.t 'ey what I oc to oak hiu on tho witnoas
stand oni what individual points ho is V- spook ob^ut and I should thoroforo bo
.rato.ul if tho rr-.socution u uld at to whothur, tn inat.eaco, thoy oointnin
tho indictment against tho doferad-nt Handlosor on tho participation and
particular rosp nuibllltj -f rsalcrin an.rUn b, If yos, I should llko to
eoh you t- ur.o tho roaoeutl'h to ^lvo us tho concroto f-ett on which it bneos
this responsibility. If, on tho othor hand, tho -r-socuti'n nrlll not oanply
•rtth this ->rreoduro, I w-uld bo f-rcod to request tho Trlbun-1 for a decision
that tho indictcoQt atilnst Professor Honilosor, becauco tf participation and
lersrnol r-spcnai v ilit7 zz. -alaria oxpori onto, bo withdrawn.

13. !*.C lfcjr It plonso tho Tribunal. I w uld lika acr.ln to point

:ut to dofonso c unaol that thoro is r.e question in this o-.se of iis;4ssinc any
c unt -r any pcra,.raph in tho iallotruct. Handles .r has boon charnel, as havo
til tho defendants, with participating in nodical axpori-en;s up c mv luntcry
bian subjects, which experiments resulted i;: ..uidjra, tortures, Inhumane tront-
JBt, otc., waich constitute war crimes and cri.es oddest humanity. 3y way f
ttomple wo cl tod


- 2611 -


11 Fob 47-H-?JC~5-2-Lessor-t.JC)
COURT I


certain spcolflc experiments and alleged In one Instance or
another that tho particular dofondont was concerned with
thoso. I do not think 4.t is incumbent upon tho prosooutlon
to now go through and produce proclsoly for tho bonoflt of
dofenso counsol. Its ovidonco on eaoh such particularltod
experiment. Tho count stands If wo make proof on ono^expor-
lmont as particularised in the indictment. Now, as a natter
of fact, wo have tried to slnpllfy the isouo and to ollmlnato
from oonoldor itlon certain experiments on tho pa*t of somo
of tho dofond/ints. tfo havo not ohoson to dlsnlss tho malaria
oxporlnent or to remove it as on issue against Handlosor
for tho ronson that tho experiments centinuod ovor such a
long period of tlno and were oarrled on on a rathor substan¬
tial sonlo; during tho whole porlod of that tlno tho dofon¬
dant Handleser was Chief of tho Army r.odioal Sorvioo of tho
Wohmaoht. It is the prooocution's position that by showing
a knowledge of nodical oxporlaonts on Involuntary human
subjects, plus his position of very substantial rcononolblli-
ty—physiolan of the hood of tho nedioal sorvlcos of the
nllltary sootor—that a Judgnont of guilty con bo prodlontod
upon tho malaria oxporluonto ovon though ho hlnsolf person¬
ally did not lnfoct any one of tho experimental subjects and
tho like.In any ovont, I cannot soe that is burdonlng tho
dofenso in any mannor whatsoovor not to ronovo tho malaria
oxpGrInonts fron the indictment as charged sgalr.st Handlosor.
Tho prosecution has cortalnly not elaborated that point in
its pro8ontatlcn against Handlosor. I should think that all
*o lefonsv. counsel would havo to do is ack him "Do you know
anything about it" and “Did you participate in then in any

manner whatsoever?■ The prosecution will be quite rank with

• •

tho Tribunal that if his part in tho malaria experlnonts was


2812


11 Fab 47-K-FJC-*5-2-Lesser- («X)
COURT I


the only thing in tho caaa I should think that we had a
vary weak case against tha defendant Handloser. But for
reasons which are satisfactory to tha prosecution, wc do
not find It desirable to remove tho malaria experiments as
an Issue igilnst him. They want on, as I recall, from 1941
until 1945, and wero carried out on from upwards of 1300
poople, so wo don't ohooso to remove that as an issue now.

I don't sea that it is any burden to the defendant and II:.
don't think that there Is any reo.ulrer.ont that wo treat it


2312a


11 Fob ■?-V.- FJG-5--IiCsb or-1)
COURT I


as a notion to diaries, booauso there la other substantial
evldonce concerning the defendant Handloser's participation'
in nodical oxporlr.oata on involuntary subjects, which is the
charge in Paragraph 6 of Count Two and it la not to bo expoct-
od that the particular setup in the sub-paragraph are to bo
divided up and viewed as anyunlng in the naturo of^sopnrate
counts or separate charges. Thoso are simply particulars
vhioh we gave.

The Prosecution is sorry that we have been unable to
prepare briefs on oaoh Individual ns wo had hoped to do.

The Tribunal will understand that wo have * attorneys working
on this oaso and 2 of us are in oourt substantially all day
so it is rather much of a burden, in addition, to got up
anything in the nature of a woll preparod brief, wo will
do that aa fast as wo oan but it is not moving as rapidly as
wo hoped. 3ut I ask that dofonso counsol for Handlooor oxpo
dito natters anl procood with his oasu. I do not think ho
lo being imposed upon In any way.

TH£ PR23IDSNT: The ootlon of dofondant Handloeor to
dismiss tho specification lr. connection with the malaria
experiments is donled without prcjuilce for ronowing tho
notion at tho close of the case when such notions nay be
nado .and considered In tho light of all tho evldonoe.

DR. WiLTS: Hr. President, I have yet another oonplaint.
Yosturdny nornlng the marshal gave no a list of the witnesses
whoa I named and who wore approved by the High Tribunal. On
that list were tho names of Schmidt-3ruookon and Hartlebon,
and it was stated there that they wor^ in prison. I asked
that those two witnesses ccne tc no last night for a conference.
Tho security officer stated to ne that after to had telephoned
tho prison office ho was told th:t neithor of the witnesses


281 *


11 Feb r JC-5-Losacr- Ui..>
CCUHT I


wore In the prison. I oust as sun o that tho official
reports 3 f too marshal ftro correct and I should ask for the
assistance of the Tribunal In placing those two witnesses
at ny disposal so that I bo In a position to speak to then
bofore they appear on tho witness stand. A

TH 2 PRESIDENT: Tho Tritunal will do anything It can
to procure counsel consultation with the witnesses. Tho
Tribunal has no Information concerning tho aattO'*. If ooun-
80l will request tho Dofondar.ts Information Center to
procure possible Information as to the whoreabouts of the
witnysjos, tojaattor will be given consideration at the
earllost possible date.


281* a


11 76b *:7-Jl_7JC-:->Lo'!Sjr

Omrt a-. 1

3r T- ttaffi

I -• ai rt tho SU-. lesion jf U'.l-oto or. Joh-nlf of tfau fyar Chief
f tho ;;o.ic-l Jorricos of tho Fcrcoo, tho l.-vot Ar..y llodic'l

la: oct r -a: ^r.y Physicim, Profoes-r Dr. He^Ilosor. Ho Is :.ot inilotod
\jc usj . crl ui f .uV'_-a~si storillsr.tlrn, ox jri' .ants with ^oic .n c~,
It.. rois-n, fci -ltltu-lo or-orl ants, iacondiery b3;b ca;'ori:ants or
enthr-vrloclcnl oxTori—oata of tho sk. AJ .-.n cllocti a. Furthor, ho
is afct iaiictol tac-uao of .oirlorlrc tuborculosis efflictod Polos end
• ray oti:or frets.

%


-^1U


il F-_-6-1-Indian

C.urt :• . 1


I ddl c-nfine - 73 df ta tix iiidivi-V'd. frets, as state -1 in *J.c
Indictxnt ar.d I shall n t teach p;>:-n t!i so 7 .ints in re an 1 t '. Jet. n:.
ir.divViial ii vile tint is raise! i dU.:a^h lx* lioRaacy, if 1 urn’, ere t !

!L c rrectlj, state! tlct«tf the Lv'tctaunt is aintained .n : 11 counts ,
-van tlx ir'secuti.n does n^t want t .alntnin oxyrcosly a >artici;>ati n
.f rosucnsibility in tlx indi vi du al c unto.

-x. . reel lent, I -..-ant yea t .cr.lt . 0 U call the x?itn.ss? . r.fcss.r
Jr. .andl'.scr t vltrwss stand.

X

Vu. . -SIX.T: TS.» :er*atent, St- fried kandloaor, uiU trJee the

uitoaor stand.

r. liui'-ait, 1 sub* it Utrc« Dcottxnfe k».

Hi. l c riL’. first \>c a*.: r-.

il-Grai-D L.iCl S-u, r. witr.-aa, t !: ti . stand on’ testified ao
f.liens:

f vTiCL GSUtlJOs

(1 “hat ia yur na.iw?

.. Siv;fri. nandltscr.

ij ill y u r-v^'-t t!in mth rJt.r cl

I avaar , G , t . ..ld;:t; an.*, uniscicrit, Uxt I will s.cak the

. ore truth n! rill uitiih 1 ! ..n a n tfcii...

(Tlx vita.ot; rc.icatcl ts- cafi.)

t::. .uLsxmrr: n.aycit *. -.m.

lhlx 7 u.L. . ,.Ti h

Tf j... .LIT :

Q Ir. . real tent, I hav. cv‘ t.n.u <! cmxnt V- lx an-’ 1

3 ;. uld Ilk- t suhi.it Uia: bef re the Tribunal. Tv? :*.cu.x.it * ke "re
ready tiia . rnin an' I believe they re r.valid 1 - bof iv the Tri* unal.

I — ' these '.cicxnt ' v ks auxin. u.e oxadnati n > f the defendant
ika X-.scr, Vcer.UiX I in t qa* tc these ’ cxxr.ts 'uriiv the
- vrse I .ds oxaidnaticn and I shall su's dt the. t- y u, with y:ur
a.^x.-.-al.

.ref-33 r handleser, jive as y ur first and lr t nax frr the record.


/

11 Fc\ 1x7—^ -6-2-c-cohan

C-urt il . 1

Sicfricd 1-anClcscr.

'i “hen and ttf-.ore wore you Uat?

I was born n 25 -larch 11 j 5 in S cstznz near Ikxlonsoo.

3 ‘ all y.u . l£asc- toll tis s'vut ycur cducetienal career u. tc

tile ti—o cf year real study?

r‘r..; ld?0 until 1 visits', tlx Elc.xnt-ry Sen. 1 i e-nz.

la the at toon cf 199U I -ent t. the Ku-.anist Sic.ndary sea X ia K.nst'nz,

uhiek - visit- a t l.rrch 1503. In l-arch 1J03 I undo ny mtriculsti n.

%

••lor 'id y a stu'y .wCldnc?

.. ->urin tlo lost yeera :f y .cri.-l at tl*. Soccniary Scliecl, I
a or.t y vacation, tiblch lasted f r thro.- ii.ntl.o will; ;\y Swiss relatives
in Geneva; a brether cf y n u _r %cs t: ere whe vr.s a nan am’. a .hysician
Tdth re.at; and was very ~uci. res lie trek a groat interest in re

ami . hr.’ su'co.quont cccari n t; receive r. vary «’coi insight Jnt hio
.radical activities; ir. Ids r.laU ;u t. : Is . atient3 mxi r. Ms ccnccpti n
ab'ut bio . r fesai a. Ibis was the fact nldch influence' do Curin' the last
yerr i .y .orled at the S^c ndary eel. 1 . . at cf all, locaucc <f his
1 vo f r his lvfcssi.n, I -ado the decide n t bee. .jo a Cocter tfc. \y
no t m K.nst ry little tun with aV at 20 , 1/00 Inhabitants,

-cenuso f its location, hwover, and bconuoc . f its vicinit; tc Switzer¬
land and ' -cause cf the lnrjo anoint cf t urlsts fren nbrr.a'. it wr s an
oxtra el; lively city.

X.x r--t.ont stationed there -..-it:. 1,200 nui rlayod. a s. octal .art in
tills city, burin the years f ISrO u. t 1903 thixe socially sldliid
• ilitary ..c-lical officers wore stationed there; .no in turn wh \r.s the
cli^f -hysician cf the rr.y . ;s. it.i :n ’ tli-re tr\s . ne o-.r socialist
-*c vo o. cc is list wha led r-vi -isl> a very extensive civilian
-ract ice d r.- -ritb th..ir ailit-r/ 'aties. In adliti.n, tlure rre a sen
f -he Sr.ttcli nC aesndcr, vli -..-.a als r illtary rielical fficer, trh:
visit the 1 _litary edicl -c*. eo --riin. .dl :f t.'.ezc circuii-
e 'v-..;c_s, cc. ^cially aft.r c nfcranc-s :stl :isc-.ssi ns with thx.se cntlc:xn,
i--.' t. tie r-sult that they advise' :j ^ nakc .an ex.xriiicnt - rather n. t


-2uIo-


ii ?c I*?-:.

C CUT- . . 1


: v an tx. criier.t, ut try a..:: a-.dsi n tc tho fnanus /xxlic^il A.’adt y
Berlin, ‘ids won extrenely difficult, ijcaust there ttzs a [Test dcnaiid
: r adaissi n and a'- ut three hundred ay; licaticnn were nadc far at cut
thirty vacancies which tr-rw t;.orc ;cr year l H *cvtr, I r.as successful
hcvca-liclcoa tc receive an a.^reval an' that is hrw it cane ab.ut that I
started tc itu ly at tnc Academy in -orli.i, rtdeh at that tlx hold the
title £ K:dsv.r «ilhcL. ..cadct^r. I its aAiittcd there as a ctudont at tho
Berlin U.dvcraity in 1?03.

%

. Tell os ai ut y .ur .Ur/ol . ixnt as a .'nysicisn.

.J£SXAl(<t: Doferc ..recce'1 , Tribunal will take ito

ur.ndnc rccosr..

U r^css vrs trhon.)


li yebru rj^k-OJC-c-l-Hinabuck
Court So. 1


T£2 iJJIBEJli Too Tribunal 1 b again in session.

n-3 PHZSirS..T: Counsel say proceed.

31 DR. CLTTJ

<i The last question which I asked Vs« yiur further developao.it an a
paysioian*

A la 1906 Z took tho preliaiiuiry exacin tion. Is October, I9OS I bo-
cc-e nr. t-termt, and until October 190$ I v:.e an lntorn in tho ch-.rity
ao spit si in Berlin. Af tor that I took ay nodical stato examination rnd then
I carlo to ta. ,.arrlson at Strasbourg. Thoro I tarred ns a doctor ir. on art-
illory .'.gieent, *nd also in a yard In a l«rgo hospital.

In 1912 , in October, I cano to 3 -rlin as battalion doctor. I was In a
battalion with dirigibles and i-mother battalion vaich worked with bclloona.

-t tnls tlao I also took ny oxwiinrtlon as cou /aider of a balloon. In 1914
I boc'-ao Oburarst rod bee -c corps physician of tho gurrd corps in 3 orlin,
and I went into ta fc first Torld War in this capacity.

IXiring tac forld War I was with the corps couavnd s troop physician
In a guard rogioant, end flnlly I was cnicf physician of a nodical conparvy.
Fron 1920 to 1923 I wns ordorod to tho I.-dicrd University Clinic at Gioooon
to 00 tn.lr.cd r s r. sjvci list for intorru.1 di season, of tor tho ond of this
■ .'vcl.-llsed training I was • ont to Ulo *<hero I becono head of a big internal
nvdic 1 section of tac aospitrl and was in this capacity frou I923 to 1928.

I wr.s uddonly c died to Berlin to tho ministry, to tho .iruy ' odicrl
Inspectorate., <nd the.u I ..td to tukc over tne departs at for tho caro of tho
sick for iht -os ituls and for ov„rytaing conncctod with tho sick. Ir. 193 «?i
oftv.r I h..d worked in that c pocitjr for four ;-car'>, I bocncc dofonro district
f..ysicion in Stuttgr.rt; that is, I was tho chief -edlcrd officor ir. this
Vohrkrois. On the 1 st of Jam. ry 1935 I eecono Gcaerolorst, »nd or any
group physician I w s eer-t to Dresden. I remained in this position until
193 d. At that time I was transferred to Vienna. still ns r.r:y group physician.
In this position, ns any group physician rxd later as any physician, I
worked under ?iold Karsnal list. I participated in tho campaign in Poln.d
and then in tho campaign in ?r nco.


2813-


11 ycjroirj^k-SJO-S-Z-SlrjiJUCi
Court l'o. 1


la October l^hG our uraj vcc sant hack to tho Sast. to Zrnkov, r.nd there
on the 5th of lovciAor I rocoivod an order fron 3orlin that I was to ler.vo
the trie dr./ for 3orlin since the Kodiool Inspector vns sick. On the
6th of Kovoahorj in Borlft:, I ti-lkod to Professor Vcldaonn vary briefly. £0
was 1 o«.y 1 ..» 1 .--odli toly for r snnit.»r*xe in southorn Goranny sinco ho wns
v^ry seriously 111. On tho 1st of January I9UI I was appointed his successor
aid also promoted to Gcn-raloberstnbsr.rst. Pro.. 19hl on I vns Arny Modical
Inspector, \nd lr.tor, Chief of tho Vahr.*icht Medical Sonrico.


-2519-


11 Fob 47-;..-SV-9-l-Putty-( AX)

COURT I

Q, You had tho position of Army physician Heorosarzt?

A. Yos.

Q. .That happened After tho capitulation?

In 1945 until tho 21st of April I was no at Borlir..

I suddenly h id tc loavo this post slnco tho Russians voro
approaching. I wont to tho Northnnd came to tho area of
Flensburg. Flold Karehal Xoitol was also th^ro with a largo
part of tho OK*. After the capltulat.on I *o woll as tho
rost of the OK'T roportod to tho English staff and work devel¬
oped slnco I w'.s vo.*y frequently callod upon to work out a
number of questions.

When thu High Command of tho Kehmaoht was takon Into
custody on the 2’rd of May, I romalnod whore I had boon and
was still callod on by an English staff to work on furthor
questions. Later an Anorloan Army doctor was also odlod to
this staff. This was callod tho Control Commission OK'T
North. I did work for thlo Commission which consldorod from
ay point of view was to holp to tako care of tho Innumerable
wounded and sick, especially of tho amputees, and to trans-
for those pooplo to civilian life.

This was a very close collaboration, and on the 16th of
Juno the .imcrloan Colonel told no that a Gorman Hodlcal Ad¬
visory Staff w.i to bo created of about sever, to ton nodical
offloors. I was to moke sugge *lons. I did so, and 6lnco a
few of my nost important associates wore lr. tho South of
Germany, I suggested that they be called upon.

On the 2*rl of June, 1945, the English Colonel £s-
critt ordered no to cono to the airfield at two o'clock
with nr. escort sc that wo cculd fly to tho south together
to look for these gentlemen there. Ye left at two o'clock


2820


11 Fob 47-H-SW-9-l-?utQr-(«I)
COURT I


and arrived lr. Munich at throe-thirty. Wo vent to tho hond-
qu«rtors of tho daerloan /tTnyi thofu tho English and ;<aer-
ldan 3 olonols rojfcrted, and thon wo — that is, tho person
ncconpnnylng no and I woro sont to tho prlsonor-of-war


ca-p at Pularoh near Munich. Tho Ccrnnlsslon — that Is,


tho two English


2820 a


11 Feb 4?-M-3rf-9-2-?utty-l .kX)

CCU '-.r I


offlcors and tho African offlcor went from tnoro to
Thuringon with us because all ay material, all ay fl'.es woro
Chore.

’/hen wo got thoro, everything had already boon taken
away by other commissions and officers. Thero was nothing
loft. Then the gentlemen said that wo would all come to tho
district of Knsaol to work on a staff, but nothing came of
this.

I wont fron one prisoner-of-war oaap to another. Finally
on tho 21st of Soptoabor, 19-i5, I was put In solitary con¬
finement lr. Oborursol whore I renalr.od until tho l’th of Oc¬
tober. Fr^a October to wnr.unry there was an lntoraodiate
period. On tho l*th of J-nuory 19-i6, I was sont to a war
orlao camp near Stuttgart. In August— that is, eight months
lator — I was sont to Daohnu, and on the 2 -ith of .oigust I
was sont hero fron Dachau.

Q. You said a while age that during the big war you
woro Army Medical Inspector and finally Chief of tho ’fohr-
raaoht Medical Service?

A. Yos.

Q. Will you first doscrlbo your function generally as
Army physician?

A. The functions of tho at cy physician are octabllshod
precisely In the regulations, ooicclally In the 7ar Medical
regulations.

DR. .i£LT2: Mr. Presldont, in regard to this dooroc,
for your orientation I should like to submit Document HA-23
as Exhibit 1. It is in tho document book 1, Pago -11. It deals
with tho function of the Army ph siclan. I ask that this
document bo accepted as Exhibit 1. We nood not go into this


2821


11 ?ct 47-::-? -9-3-.Vtty
Court Vo, 1

i>R. K2LI2: In t*rl3 ccnn.ction I suter.lt _n oxcorpt from tfco 7r.r
-cdicc.1 Cccrco, Bocurnont EA-28r., ?»'* o 44 of ay docxncnt bool: 1
r.c Exhibit 2.


-2823-


11 Fob 4?-M- FJ 0- 10-1- Board- («X)
C0U.1T I


n. Thoro was a spoolal decree, tho docree of 1942,
s.-oolflcally, and ths dooroo of 1944 with the regulations
pertaining to it.

Jhoro was tho soat of tho various agoncloe?

... Tho soat of tho .irny Physician was at tho -«oad-
quartors of tho High Co^arnd of tho ..ruy; that was usually
In East Prussia. For sluunonths In 1942, It was In tho
Ukraine.


2823a


ii rob -:7-: :-r: c-io-3-5o-r■

(Jcurt jr. 1

ria SO-C :f tho .try ::o.'.lc 1 Ins.oc.tr-.to *ns 1- Berlin, osl the seat of tho
C'ljf ' tho ::o'.lc-J. Gorrtea --S also la Berlin. Until 19-K It w-.s

ir. tho julllla -f tho .jy IToIic-l Iasrootir-.to; fro:: so. tcribor 1944 on,

It ••-£ 50 fcilo-otors fret; Eorlla la a acr.ll town*

^ koro woro you r*-st tho ti: <4
?ri-.-xily at tho :~§qiquctors.

1 Thr.t -.s tho relation, fra: tho ;>olat of vicfi< of tho tL, Iwtwooa
tho tlra a-oat at He-.: quart ova or. tho oao silo ani la Borlia or. V author silo?

.1 Ono o all ary alao tonths of tho ti. a r.t Hor.dquprtara, r*al ‘ro-tonth

*

f tho tlao rt Borlia. At thor ti.ao -no oculi 3 - 3 - throo-^urjtors of tho
ti;-o -.t rio-.qurrtors, rai 'no-qu-rtov cf tho tiro .t Borlin.

.T». 1>. rrosi ont, in this C'ur.octl'n I sutr.lt trhlo, thr.t

•

is >ou: ont 1L’. 29-;., thlUt 3. This tr’ la hr- tho follcwia si, ni-
fic-nco: Y-u will '.oo thoro tho r rt t .y -s’ tho lcagoat trips
inayooti'n tri-n, f tho TofoiJmt H-nUoaor tc tho TRTi us thotor rf vrr,
tha tiro is rlvca -a rocanttol;* -.r o-solblo. Y-u will fi::‘. it lr. t!»
Dtoisjnt B r 'ie 2, 7. :o 67. ia tho caso of tho .of-aVat Hon lonor, it in
is^ortTat.

!2. HO F.JSY: If tho Tritunrl ;1 * •*, I will not offov iui c'ojootion
t tho ci-iasl ,illty wf this lcou:^nt if it c-n bo ,-ut in without ror;!inc;

;• -..It:.out -ay llscusfliuith tho witr.oss. *h.o Trlhund will noto this
1 j nrtlaa ..:ro t:u-.u rx .-Xfidtrl*; fr .. th- uitnoss, ot-.tin,. that ho ill
.rho thoeo tri s. la r'or t; shtrton tho .T'-coolia^a, If doctor Ilolto
U vllllxv t ,\:t this la -Jlth ut ro%Llai it into tho roevrd, -a. - , with mt
quostions f tho witness, 1 -ffor no rbjoctirnc. If ho is oia to
oa,-..o ia intorra^-tir^ tho witaors r.h ut thoeo tri e or -nythiiv 3f that
r.rturo, than I c .'set to its r£: laalhlllt? an tho ~r unf. it 'a nothin
ro th-n etrtoL-oat tho Itr.oBs if;- ir a~ -a tho 3t*nl.

' rr ~i ?R3^I?TT: O-os thr.t rofor t' vnT ror's 1 ex oat !T . <tl?

T. "UL73: Doeu :at HA S9nL, SrM v it T .

7 r t'-o rorrras which 1 ^. "cHrjioy h-.s Jurt iv.r., I hr.' this tr io

A

.T^rv’. Sr th-.t I -.•-cl' a't h-.Tc t- -sh tho ritnors n the rt-jr* ahrut
is ir.Uvl'.u.*u tri as.


-252U


11 ?ol ^7-::-/JC-10-3-Eorj'.

Curt no. i

I thorof -ro ossur.o tint ho hca a? c'ojocticn t a tho subrrission cf this
Ires ort, ■ i i»5ic y u t accopt this d.cucnnt. In tha c-so af iofoal-Jit
H t'losor, It is import ~nt vhothar bo _~o~ of cortnia ovonts which tack
plp.so at ha», la Berlin. It n lifferoaco whothor sc^o one was con¬

tinually in 3orlla, «t his office, or vhotter ho w-s at tho Ko-zlqu-xtars of
tho j-y, nal ct tho -rnri us tho-iore of wrr. This tablo Is to holp you
to dotor.lno tho ^uostlon cf shut nctunl possibility thoro vrs at vcrl us
titlos fi H~n‘lcoor — ^

5K2 ^2SID7 T ?: (Ir.torr'slnr.) Dos tho C-unsol unlorst-n*? Tho Counsol
for tho Pr'SicutlT. hr r.- objoctlca to tho nteissi* iUty 'f this 4ocu::oat
in orl’coco. Tho C-unsol hr.s slrrply at-to*, that ho wull sue .oct that tin
orp.-lantlon of tho vltcoac ho lirltol to rofroshla.: his roc llocticc frx:
this 1 :cu -ant os t cortnlc :r.ttore, -.nl cot tostlfyin, la lotr.il coucorrlac
It. Now tha dcc\cioct ny bo i*fc;ittod m orl-loaoo. Y^u my procooi.

BY HR. J-2.T3:

^ I asic you, iTOfossor H nolle so r, whothor this tr.blo which you hr.vo
3l,uoJ is corroot?

It Is ccrroct. I h-.^o soon only cno e^stnko In It. That is on pr.t;o 6Q,
la tho yotr 19-1*1. Cho :soti% la Broslnu which hna ' oon ^outlonou fro^uontly
horo Is oatarol uclor August; It v s act In ^,u*t, It w~.s la Juno. Th-.t
la tho only thl:.£ that is lnocrroct.

713 ?R331D2:T: TtiO orrir cf tho witness crjr ho oorroctol.

•\ »sw, tof ro y.*u pros act ycur lcilviiunl functions, I should llko to
-ck you tc explain ts tho Tribunal tho tor* lioilcnl Smitnor.oson on!
Sv.itnos’lonst, ipich h*\o froiuontiy loon use! horo?

Ttat Is ra follows: If the rr'. Smlt-nos'lonst is use*, that .o-os
tho iutioc roforrlcc pri-axily t tho 'to’.ic-l forrico in criuoccloa with
tho troops; tint is, tho :allc-l tasks which ara concocto* with Ulllt-ry
“orrlco, -n* whor- tho aoSlenl suporl'Ts nr a v un* to tholr rillt-ry superiors;
wh-thar that is la the fioLI nrsry r la tha hc«n m-y, It r.nkos no Ufforonco.
If I uso tha wcrl S^lt-orofja, than la nhlitioa to this mitnry Sorvlcc,
tnis is oYorythlrv, which rakes p^rsi'lo t^ls 'lolic'l. Som-lco in tho Wllt-y/
Sarolco; tlat is, nil tha b-sic w.Tk ml lutlos which rako tiro Idollc-vl Sorvlco


- 252 ^-


11 Fob •<7“Jt-FJ ^>-10--i—5oa.*d- (.vC)
CCU.-.T I


In the s%rz.y possible at . 11 . «nd, if I may give an example,
sonothlng which played n, role here. It must be emphasized

that research has nothing to do with S-inltaoatllonst. Those
wording in the Sanicaosdloust in the Kedloal Servloo have,
on thv> whole, no opportunlty to concorn themselves with
research. Hovovor, the basic work of the Sanltaeswoaon does
include research. Conoornlng the extent and the manners as
to how research is connected with medical matters, I night

X

say It is another phase.

3. How, will you ploase tell the Tribunal about your
activities as .a-ay Physician?

.i. I must make a distinction boSwoon tho two fields
of work horo.

MR. Ho H.'uJ2f: if the Tribunal pleases. I think that
Doctor Helte should be admonished to try to keep to the
issues of the oaso. How wo aro about tc hear a long and
dotailod exposition on the exporlenooc and functions of
Hooresarzt .»ray Physloinn. I aaeumo that the lofondant onoo
h-ld suoh a position, but there is nothing In tho Indictment,
or no issue in this case conneoted witn his activities as
tho Hooreaarzt. »e have got an affidavit from the dofondant,
beginning on p go *8 of your Doouaont 3ook, and it runs
to pago 52. Pages -i5 to 52 all doal with tho aotlvltlos of
an .uasy Physician, and only on page 52 do wo begin to hear
about tho Hollcal Inspector of tho .,my. I an perfectly will¬
ing to have tho defondant explain at longth about his activ¬
ities, duties, and functions, as the Army Hodloal Inspector,
but I do not think there is any necessity to hoar any groat
exposition about his activities as .easy Physician with vhioh
ve

2826


C*urt Sj. 1

11 leb 47-M-11-1-ZB1-Binkley


Dn. h&LTX: Hr. President, I wn# also of the opinion thr.t the defcndrnt
Knsdloaor wea not indicted aa Keerearrtt, hut the prosecution suhaittod re
D.eimont EO-1766 a diary Hrldef, or «xccrpta fTcn It. I do not kr.ov the
exhibit aunbcr* It wea handed la late In the proceeding*. In this dirry
Ocr-eruloberatataorat Kandlosvr is sectioned four tiroes. One tlao nrny phyei-
einn la ncntlcncd. That wee Dr. Cbernrxt Schrelber. ^

Q, In vfcr.t capacity wero you, witness, In the headeiurtera when you re¬
ported to Haider1 x

A. I vta concocted with bin only in ny capacity aa an e.rny r.hyoician.

IS. K1LTI: Mr. rresident, would you »ah the or'aecutlon whether Docuncnt
1768 la lr. conncctl .a with the defendant Eandloaer. If they do not Intend to
draw any conclusion* In connection with the l&'lctoont, then I ar. ready to
diapenae with the diacuaai .n of the defendant*e position aa aray phyalcian.

If they do not want t< do that, then I shall hi.ro to Insist thrt this activity
of hla he discussed her*.

KH. KC KaE&Y; *he document cb-.ut which Dr. Salt# la new hi viiv: «ono con¬
cern contrIns certain uctriie dated Axv;u«-t 1*1, 1941, and thcrorfter. Aa I
rocall, the witness becaac the a ray eedlerl inaovctor on Ji-uary 1, 1941, or
seven nontha procedinc this entry. Bo thrt re it any, we don't draw ray
crlr.lonl inferer.cea froo this docuoent. It aiaoly ah. we thrt the witnoao hrd
aooe interest in August 1941 in typhua problems, a artter which I think ho
would not docy in rny event. So, therefore, I think that wo ito nil probably
orP’eed thr.t it !* unnecoatary to discuas these ectivltlee of the defendant aa
ar=y physician.

KZL7B: Then nay I any that oa to charges rrlain/: r,:nlnot Handloaor
free Docuawnt HO-1758 the prosecution dooa not wrnt t; nrlce any charge* on
this basis.

Then will y.u plieao till about yvur cctitlt 7 xd 7™ functions,
witness, ca arty uedicol inspector?

A. T- cxplein the contrast b. tveen the activity of the rrry physician
rnd the arny aedicoi inspector, I nuat any scaethin*; ouito briefly nb?ut the
pray physician. In the field he bar a ssall atrff. His activity was United


-2827-


C.urt So. 1

11 Jet , 7 -*-ll- 2 -L£it- 31 akley


entirely to taking erre of the tiff .1~», troops and was directed to a lrrgo ex¬
tent by nilitery viewpoint#. In contrast to this the Activity of the aroy

nedical insocct-r was sore A A fllnifcteriel nature, I should lilte to say, n

%

fer as ik did not refer to the practical care cf the sick and tho v-undod in
h,#citals at hoca end rt far aa it did not refer to the nodical erre of the
troop* A the roplacenent arry ct hone. She i.etivity A the ^rny ohysiclan
recuired oulck decisions end it wrs free of all bellrst. Tho oray nodical
inspector had to deal with big profclcae. Ke hi d to efoate the foundation for
evorything Aich the troops needed in the fiel' and at huso. Consequently,
tho arsy nedical inspector had a big staff. He had to deal with tho ocroonnl
data of all nedical officers, with organlsetloucl qu«»tione, with questions of
scionco and. the care of health, with supplying Use injured and voundod, with
tho nodical cere of tho prisoners of war, with nil the volunteer nedical holn,
end with all the transp-rt systea for tho sick and. wounded rs far ns it was
carried on on lend. The ar-y asdic-' inspector vat also cocp*lled to nalntoin
nunoroua connections and contacts with other authorities or institutes or
organisations at h o. o, which woro «bswlutoly nccos.-nry in cn-rying out his
duties.

OR. S££T1: Hr. ^resident, Mr. KcKatey has already minted this out. I
hrvo a work of the defendant Hendloser. HA- 29 , Document Book 1, orge 48 . Thli
work Contain* tho eehcre of work and the nesting of tho herd# of tho nodical
sorvico of the erny rnd the Vehrnacht. I subnittod this work in ordor vhon
cxaulnlng the wltni.se on tho stand to envc tine and also to help you by a
detailed exposition to Judgv the functions of the defendant as Hooreserst, as
ar.-y aediccl inspector, and «,s chief of tho Vehmccht nodical service, ns
well as the nethod* of v.rk in these agencies, nvtn if tho defendant is n t
indicted as Hecresarst, os rmy ohysician. he held this position and thle
activity took a greet deal A his tine and his efforts and therefore I nsk
that these carts of this document also be e,neldered boceuee only through
tfcou can y gain a true picture A the total .ctivity of frefessor Handloser,
n knovlcdgo wkieh Is ieportant in judging the further auctions as to whrt
extent he had cpn.rtunities to learn A certain things or not. I ask that


-2S2a-


C-urt Si. 1

11 ?eb 47-K-ll-a-i»-Sleklajr


this dicunent he ecccpted os Exhibit 4.

An. AC EaLETi Ik* pr^eecution rs with the crecAding docuncnt will uake
c: objection, with the un^ei'stan?lag thet the general statcncnt cf the wltn v . :
which he hae Just given about his functione ae any ne<*icnl inspect.r, will
suffice end that c.u noro ouestions he nut to fcia. I would ask, if that is
satisfactory to Dr. Seltc, that he auv nut a general ouceti>n hiu about his

activities as chief <t the cedical services of the Vehrnacht and lot hin an¬
swer that an r. then ndr.it the affidavit because it also Veals with his nctiviA
ties as chief of the nodical services of the Vehrcacht.

Tri PS1SIXCIY: C .ur.s«;l for the defendant ie referring v.0 Bocucent HA-29
on page 48, Handlosor D-curent Bock 1. Is thr t correct?

». KaLTi: Yes.

TKI a&lSirSJ.T» The document nay he afrittod in evidence. That will bo
Kandloser Exhibit 4.

Q. As to y.ur function as chief >i tho Vehrcacht nodical eirvicoe, we
oust spend a littio norc tine. 7-r tho stato-.ent which y-u nust nr.ko, I will
hevo sfc.wn to y:u E cunent K0-C80 of tho srvocoutiun, Exhibit 5 of the tx ^so-
cuti-n, in Decurent Book 1, page 10; also rr'oSocutlon Document BO-837, Exhibit
6 of D-Cua«r.t Book 1, page 18.


- 232 ^-


11 Fob -i?-M-..-wl3-l-C20fc~(^K)

COUr.T I

You will also receive your diagram, to which you have
sworn, on tho nodloal service of tho Yehrmnoht. 3ofore y.u
explain your functions ns Chief of thj './ohrnnoht Modlonl
Service I oust point out to you that the Prosooutlon alleges
that in your capacity ac Chief of tho Yohraaoht «oi4oal
Service you had authority and supervision of the nodical
Sorvlcos of all throe branches of the 1/ohrnaoht. This Is
quoted from the speech of Gi..»ral Tnylor, page 61 of the
Transcript. General Taylor also says slnoe tho SS developed
to an Important part of the German .irned Foroos, Handloser'a

•

supervision also applied to the do fondant, Gonxhon, Chief
of the Modical Sorvloo of tho Vaffon S3.

Furthermore, tho Prosooutlon In a document which Is
not an oxhlblt, but which was given to tho Tribunal, It
says: Basic facta about the Q 0 rmnn state Health System, tho
Prosecution says the following about this;

■3y a docroo of 19 j 2 Hltlor appointed dofondant Hand-
loser, Chief o: tho .lodlcal Sorvlco of the Yohrnaoht. In
this oapaclty he coordinate! and suporvi sod the activity
on the Health So.-vices of all three branches of the Wohr-
naont, as well as of tho rfaffon S3. In this way hj beoamo
thu Supreme Health Of floor In the military flold as Conti
was in tho civilian sector."

How, ylll you please comment on these decrees hero, tho
decree of 19-.2, and the decree of 1944?

-vs far ns the history of the origin of tho Chief of
the *ieileal Sorvlco of tho tfehrnaoht la concerned, Professor.
Brar.dt has Already t03tlfled. I ytn only confirm his statements
and I should Hie to repeat briefly that tho occasion for the
creation of tho Chief of the rfehrmacht Medical Sorvlco was tho


26*0


11 Fob 47-H-h12-1- Oook- ()

couar i


emergency In tho winter of 1941-1942. The deoroo of 19*2;

In tel8 docroo I aust onpjiaaize the Introductory sentence,
which roads: "Tho utilization of pereor.r.el and natorial in
the flold of tho Kedloal and Hoalth aAttera takes a coordinat¬
ed and planned dlrootlon. ■

Undor Ho. 1 It 18 also said: "That tho *my Modloal
Inspectorate as Chief of tho tfohraaobt Kodloal Sdrvlcoa is
coordinating all taaxa oonaon to tho Nodical Sorvlco of the
tfohra iOht. ■ and so forth.


23*0 a


11 Fob ,7-x-Ji*r 12- 2- Co ole- («Z)
COURT I


The eaphasla was definite^' on tho porsonr.ol and material
tasks, and for the soke of completeness one should real¬
ly hare added that In addition to poraonnol and material
q cations, there was abovo all the just distribution of tho
accomodations for the wounded andsioh. This Is no doubt
included In the concept of material in oon .action with this
decree.

X

I should 'll so like to sapbtsl&e that I did not partic¬
ipate in Its fin 1 ooaposl :lon. That was done by the OK./
and a .ny thlr.-;s «er«- changed from the draft whioh I had aub-
□11tod. Thus, for cximplo, I had not requested that I shoul
have a Chief of dtaff from tho Luf swiff o and an assoolato from
tno Navy. ;*y application was that the ..ray Nodical Inspector
will be given the tasks of a Chief of the bhrnacht Hodloal
asrvloos, his working staff for the .erzy ltedloal Inspectorate.
It did not do ne any good to have this Chief of Staff and
this man fre i tho Navy who were In no position when tho
tasks of all parts of tho .cht woro coordinated to do

any ooaprehenBivo work horo. In offect, they primarily mado
the work more difficult since there were thus two Chiefs
of Staff, enu from the .iroy Mouloal Inspectorate and one of
tee Chief of the 7ohrmaoht kedloal aervloe. On the side of
tho .*roy hodloal Inspectorate there wore all of them workurs.
On the sluo of the Chief of tno ifehrnaoht, Kodioal Sorvloo
or his Chlof of Staff thor~ was only one person, a r.odloal
officer from the Navy. I omphaslre this bocauoo It forms the
basis for further conslloratlons. Now, if it Is a question of
whlcn work th.. new chief of thj 7ohrmncht Holloa Scrvlco at-
t exod first, this tiovelopod from two points of view, first,
urgency, and second, the point of least resist moo. Cno must
understand that it is very difficult with a newly created

2*31


11 Fob •»?->.-;,.^l2-'-Cooic-US)

COURT I

ngonoy to Incorporate one's self Into the activities of the
old branches of the 7ahrnht. Consequently, the first things
that wore undertaken aro work dealing with personnel .nd
tho oorjaltQent of personnel.

%


88^1a


LI Feb. 47 -41-12-U-PKP- Cook
Court No. 1


Tfca winter of 1941 - 1942 was not only the occasion but also a very ?ood
cxocplo. The tutorial work, that was the field where there was the le:st
difficulty end least opposition to bo - .ctec, but ir. this field too, as can
be proved, it took cm your untiil *« hed core or loss ccccopliahed wtet had ’>
dear.ndod of the Chief of the Vehroacht Uodicnl Service.

I oust at this point describe the relation with the various branches of th-
'..ehrcacht. I stall skip the laffen SS, bectuso it was not very iaporfcant. Wo
tave heard th; t in the year 1942 when the Cniof of the Wchrr.acht L'cdical Service
<11 established tho Waff-n SS htd about four divisions. At tfte end of the war
it had thirty or thirty-six 'nd since tho Chiof of the '.-ohmeont ldodicnl
Service doalt only with tht front divisions, that is the four divisions of tho
1'affcn SS, this h*d no iaporUnt role in tho fr _»-work of thb whole tning,
but it was socn shewn ttat tU Waffon SS insisted strictly tta the Chiof of
the Wohrancnt Uedic&l Service was cavtt^Rt oruy concerning those divisions of
the Waffon SS which w-ru cocnittod to the Wehrnocht. They refused any
interforonco boyorvi those divisions. Nothin; was changed in this relationship
when tho nuabor ef divisions of thu :>rr.n SS inercuod in the course of tho
years. Whet was tho grentost burden to th. Chiof :f the Wohraachfc ilodic-l
Service in tho following tine was tho clrcuost-r.cv tint tho \>cffon SS always
approached tho Chiof of th* Wehmacht Medical Service with deoands. This roforru
primarily to doctors, but also dentists end other personnel. The Chiof of tho
i.ehmacht Itedical Service was in no position to decide whetbor he snould lot
thus n've their personnel or not. The dosiod was nedo with the explanation that
the Fuehrer \r a ordered sc ;nd so aany divisions to •'o set up, *nd h # c at tho
IMM tiae issuer the order that tn* Chiof of the Wohrcncht Uodical Service is
to sake tho rx,c.osry personnel r valla bio.

TIE f?.Sbl;El-7: It is tic*. for tho Court to recess.

The Tribunal will recess until enc-thirty o'clock.

(A r~cu3s was taken until 1330 hours)

- 2532 -


«*7

U i e t>-A-13-i-FM?—Gross (FL)
Court Ko. I


coascrj copy
AFT3S00K SESSION

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 11 February 1947.)

TKJ 1ARSHAL: The Triburwl is again in session.

THE FRCoIDof.T: Before proceeding with the evidence, counsel, the
Tribunal desires to read a statement, an amendment to Rulos of Procedure
for Military Tribunal I, 10 February 1947.

"In all cases where persons are detained in the Humbeyg jail ard
who have been approved by Military Tribunal as witnossoe for tho defense,
it is hereby ordered ttet aftor the date of such approval by Ulitary
Tribunal the following procedure shall be followed in the interview or


interrogation of such witness or witnesses by either counsel for Prceo-
cutiOB or Defense:

1, Counsel desiring to interview such witness shall petition the Tri¬
bunal in wrltinj, stating in general the ocooe and subject .nttcr of such
interview.


2. Tho Tribunal W'.all thereupon appoint an impartial caanissionor
to represent Tribunal at such interview to tho end that it shall ho or¬
derly, prepor, and judicial in character arri within tho scopo of tho pe¬
tition filed and to the further ond that thoro shall bo no atta<>t to
tJirr&ss, intL-^idato, or improperly influence tho witnoss in giving his
answer.


3. r/henever such a witnoss is being interviewed or interrogated in
the presence of such cosaisaiorEr by counsel for eithor side, counsel for
the otter side shall not be ortitlod to be prssont.

4. If in tho course

alssionor that tho proper scope.hKalich ifctv^ViCwV as sot forth in tho


of such intru-vioTiyshall appear to such cou-

\ _ g -- _ \

proper scoj^^aUch


petition thoreforo, is being exceeded by the cour^A^ conducting such in-

| I '2*

torviuw or that it is in any;oihor manner being ir^Sfopcrly conducted,
said ccnuiasioncr shall or. behalf of tta rrib^jnal^itop said interview.

5. In such event said ccaaiisloncr shall import in writing to the


- 2333 -


U Fc b-A-FXP-13-l-Gross (FL)
Court Ko. I


Tribunal fee substantial and significant facts in relation to such in¬
terview and his reasons for having stop"x>d the saae.

6. Counsel conducting such interview may, if he so desires, proopt-
ly bring before the Tribunal in writing, after giving notico to opposing
ccunsa, his objections, if ary, to the action of thu conrnissionc-r,
nhereupon the .residing judge of the Tribunal shall either confirm the


action of tho


2333 a


11 Fcb-A-l>-2-?:~-Oross (FL)
Court No. I


cceciissiorv-r or direct the interview of the witness to procood r/ith such
directions or li.il tat Ions as he cay order.

7. In any appeal to the Tribunal from such act of tha connisaion&r,
counsel so appealing shall stale the naco of tho witness, the -coo of
the defondant whon ho represents, and tho title of the cause in which .
ho is acting as counsel.

b. The above rroccduro shall not bo ir.torprotod as in cffoct in cases,
a) whero tho witness or prospective witness has been procured by tho
Prosecution but has not boon x>provod by the Tribunal as a witness for
the dofense, or b) whero tho witnoss for tho (tofonso has boon procurod
as such by the defense and voluntarily appears without being confined
In the Nurr.bcrg ^ail."

The Tribe r*l understands trtit this procedure has boon previously
discussed with counsel for tho Prosecution and with counsel ior the De¬
fense and has bo .n fc*ind satisfactory to both counsels.

I will file this original with tho Secretary General to bo notod in
the record. Translations will be furnished defoiso counsel.

I will also file with tho Secretary General the doctor's statuuent
that th. defendant Obcrhauscr should be oxcuacd on account of illness.

Counsel nay procood with examination of tho witnoss.

DR. inLTB: •*. President, with rofororce to tho ruling of tho High
Tribunal which was Just road, I should like to ask that dofonoc counsol
bo permitted to sako a statement after having read this rulir . Tho
translation was not such fctat we can at the .soaent sur/oy tho fur ready¬
ing effects of that ruling. I hope that the High Tribunal will perait
us to present cvuntuel considerations which uould be in the intorcst of
tho procoodln^a, if such suggestion can bo made.

TH2 PRESIDE IT: Counsel for defense may make any presentation to
the Tribunal t..at they .iay dcsir>- in connection with this ruling. Any¬
thing they nay present will be considered by the Tribunal.

- 2834 -


11 Pcb-A-?S?-l>3-Groas (fL)
Court So. I


ER. K5l*TJi I thank you vury euch«

SIEGFRIED -.IWOLOSai - Seauncd

DIRECT SXAMDttTIO*: (Continued)

%

BY DR. MSUB:

Q.- .ritncaa, nhon unding thv aarning auaaion you wero aocaldnc «><»*

the

*


- 283* a -


11 Ftb-A-?S?-13-3-Gross (FL)
Court Ko. I


relationship of the Chief of the Araod Forces Uedical Service to the
Waffoa-SS. Would you please continue that part of your statoixnt?

A.- I was saying before that the ruling regarding pcrsonr.ol in tho
oaffen-SS was uost in reference to distribution of personnel to other
parts of tic Arad Fcrccs. ;.ith reference to the scttluocr.t regarding
sate rial the attcr t as such; the Chief of tho Ajjied Forces liedical
Service had a control agency. This central agency was at tho .lain nodi¬
cal office. This doparta-nt ted the task to cover the u^iro rood of med—
ic* oquipeunt fer tte Arncd Forces and ord-r it froa a central agency
and distribute it according to the strength of tho r^sp-ctlve '/onriacht
branch.


11 Fcb-A-ZHL-U-l-Lcsscr(FL)
Court Ho. I


In tho case of tho Waff on SS difficulties resulted in that connec¬
tion. It was because only a small part of the. Waffon SS was subordinated

to the fchmacht, while ert-her parts, and that includes the polico which

%

belonged to the Reich Physician SS, had nothing whatever to do with the
•ichraacht. ’.Jhorcaa it was possible with tho Army, Navy and Air Forco to
control thoir needs exactly and establish it, such a procedure was not
possible in the caao of the SS, that is tho Roichsartt SS. T:» Rcichs-
arzt SS not only had to cov^r neods for thi Vaffen SS bqt also for other
parts of tho SS, including thj police. At no tine, not even 1944, was
it possiblo to exercise an exact control and an exact distribution in
connection with tho SS. Too SS <*iito clearly rofused any such Interfer¬
ence and oven ir. the year of 1944 rejected making reports to tho Chiof
of tho Uohrsacht loth cal Offices about tho statu of thoir oquipment.

They gave as tie reasen t.-nt the Roichsfuohrer SS hod an authority from
tho F u ehror, according to which his oquipment and his orders wore only
a natter for tho Rcic ha fuehrer SS to docidc. In this nnnner thoro was
no control ox-rcisod with roforonco to the knffen SS ard thorc wao no
such task in cawoction with material distribution end stuorlng of
such distribution.

I now cone to the Navy.

Q.- ftjforc you continue, I should like to speak, Mr. Prosident,
about tie relations nip of tto Chief of tho Araid Forcos !fadicrl Services
to the Mr.ffcn SS and in that connection I should like to submit two
affidavits. (fr.e affidavit mado by tho co-dofindant, Professor Dr. fru¬
gal sky, which is Docusunt HA 17 in Docirsent $*>k 2, page 28, and fur¬
thermore tho affidavit of tho defendant >r. Gcnzkcr. as Document HA 16
in Document Book 2, page 27. Both those affidavits are dooling with tto
relationship of tho Chief of the Armed Forces ifcdical services to tho
inf 1 en SS and I think it is o-ecssary to submit th.se affidavits in
that connection since this will simplify the procedure and will confine


- 2836 -


11 Fob-HM-H-1-Loseer (FL)
Court No. I


it to the cooploxes ani thoreBy the proceedings will bo shortened. I
ask for poraission to offer these affidavits as Exhibits 5 and 6 to the
High Tribunal.

THE fttESlDZhT: Vhich affidavit docs counsel offer as Exliibit 5?

ER. MELTS: HA 17, iocuacnt Book No. 2, page 28. Exhibit 6 will bo


- 2836 a -


U F c b-A-£K!I-U-2-Lfcssor (FL)
Court So. I


Docucont HA 16 ir. Docuncnt Book So. 2, page 27.

Jr. f'cHAKSY: If the Tribunal please, it so ess to the prosecution that
instead of stertcnlng the cay of^ the defendant Kandloscr, it is apt
to prolong it considerably by this procodurc of bringing in all of tho
evidence while tte witness Handlowr is on the stand end calling for his
concert on each affidavit and other docu^nt which is going in. How a*
have hero two affidw'.-its, one froo Urugowsky and one from Goniken, coirorn-
ing the relationship of tho Chief of tho i/jdical Services of Cho fchr-
cacht to tho Motion SS. 1 don't understand tho order of proof in bringing
those (faaicents, which arc quite unrelated to tho testimony of this uit-
ness, into tho proceeding while he Is testifying. I (ton't have any par¬
ticular objection to tho admissibility of the docittnts thcmselvos. It
is more a question of order of proof. I think wo would g:t along much
foster if ho would proceed to interrogate the witnoss, release hin for
cross-examination, and tten put in his otter documents.

DR. NEL7E: I bolievu that Mr. UcHaney is right and that it in a ques¬
tion of tho expediency of the subaission of evidence. I think it would
bo core oxpodiont if a certain cosplux of questions is concluded »hilo
submitting evidenco. I don't think it is advisable to let tho dofendnnt
spook first and tten submit affidavits when submitting documents. I
think that the Tribunal will gain a auch better picture about this oor-
tain complex of <*icstin n s when it at tho saao time tokos Judicial notico
of the documents rather than after the examination of tte defendant So

•

concluded. I thin!: this is a question of expediency ard I think that tte
procedure as I. adopt it is in accordance with expediency.

Ur. KcHANZY: I »»uld ask the Tribunal to request Dr. Nolto to stato
whether or not he now plans' to read those affidavits into tho record dur¬
ing tte course of the interrogation of this witness and, further, wheth¬
er ho intends to direct any questions to the witness Handloser, based
epon natters which are 3tnted in these affidavits.

- 2837 -

\


11 Feb-A-SHS-L'.-2-Lesser (FL)
Court Ho. I


Dr. K2LT2| X sorely wanted to aufcrait ard present those affidavits
*rrf should like to emphasise the nost essential points end then loavo
it to the prosecution to put any questions they nay desire in connaction


11 Fob-A-tMf-14-3—lessor (FL)

Court Ko. I

d cement.

THE PR4SDJ.T; Counwl for defendant nay proceed according to tio
plAn which he .ica outlined, for tho present at least.

BY Lfi. liZLTZ:

Exhibit 5 is on affidavit of the co-defendant. Professor frugaicky.

It refers to tho cinrt which he him so If handed to the prosecution and

A

which was aiiwittcd to the High Tribunal, He says:

"In thj pcrphlct known as 'a-.sic Pacts about tho German State Health

System' which uaa uibuitted to the Tribunal by tho Prosecution it spears

as if tho Chief of tho Uchraacht liedical Service, Profosatr Handloscr,

hnd directed and supervised th. ILdical Service of the Wnffen S3.

"I have to stato the folio* lng: Basically and generally, tho ifcdical

Service of tho Batten SS was not subordinate to tho Chief of the Y.'ohr-

aacht nodical Sorvicc. There was only Halted supervision by hia, *.<hich

oxtondod only to t Iso liodicnl Service of tho front divisions of tho Waffen

SS whin in action with tho Wchrtaacht. Tho Vfaffen SS trained and obtaimd

the necessary medical personnel independently. Tho Chief of tho VTchrmacht

Ibdicnl Service did not have any authority over tho nodical porsonnol.

Only units of tho Vaffen SS in actual coobnt service wore subordinated

to tho Wuhrr-acht. Thoreforv, this subordination was only temporary rrri

within the franowark of tho cone.quont nccussitiuc.

"As soon as tho ixiits of tho Waffen SSworc withdrawn frexa tho coabat

area, the tanpomry subordination nni suporvisicn coased, just as it did

when wounded or sick SS non were transforrod to rear ochelons. Tho t.'af-

fen SS saw to it that its men wort sent to its c*n hospitals. Tno VTaffon

SS was independent in establishing nen units, as far as nodical supplies

were concerned. Just as in the case of personnel. The Chief of tho We hr-

•

aacht Hodical Service did not hive any authority over this.

"The connections of the Chief of the t.chraacht Nodical Service to
the Idical Service of the Uaffon SS were thoreforo very limited. Thero


- 2336 -


U Feb-A-SSf-U-3-Lcaaor (FL)

C<xxt Ko. I

■as no official connection with tho aodical research institutes of tho
Waff on SS and the SS.


- 2838 a -


II Fcb-A-aat-14-Z.-U>s»cr (FL)
Court No. I


n r» Institute for Typhus and Virus Research at Buchorwcld, which
■as subordinated to did not have any official connection with tho
Chief of tho Ttohroacht Ifcdical Service or thu Aray Medical Inspectorate.
It was neither subordinated to, nor was there any supervision by, the
Chief of tfc i.ehrancht Modical Service."

Dr. Gcnzkcr., in Exhibit 6, confirmed this statenent in its ontiro-
ty as being correct and true.

Now, Profossar, I ask you to continue describing tf^ relationship
of thi Chief of tho Vehraacht Medical Service to tho various branchos
of tho Armed forcos.


11 Feb-A-FJC-15-l-lScc ran (FL)

Coart No. I

A.- I n m come to tto Kavy. The Navy was an armed unit with special
tasks art* they always lod - special existonco. Even in peace time there
aere only Halted a>nnoctionsj>otwcen the Army and Mtvy. As closed as
the Navy always was, it continued to be that way toward too Chief of
the Wbtnacht .'fedical Service. It strictly observed its jurisdiction
and whoever it was possible, they rejected, throught their Suia-cn*!
Ccaanndur, any intcrferrcncc or insight of tto Chief of tto Ar ud For¬
ces lfodical Service, giving the roason that ho was only thwre for tho
purpose of coordinating out uni tacks, but not in ordor to intorforc with
tho sjxci&l tasks and special sphere of the Navy.

Concerning tto number of nodical officers, the Chief of tho Tfchmacht
Itodical Service was fully aware that to could not decree tho number
of medical officers who wore in tho Kavy.

Tto Kavy Airing this war, in addition to thoir tasks at son, that
is within tto so-called floating units, hod a nuabor of tasks on lend,
which it had to take over; to that one has to count tto anti-aircraft

•

system of tho ontiro wooUrn coast starting froa Norway down to Spain.

Tto roods of tho Navy on medical equipment octorially differed to
such on oxtont from tto ocjiipocnt ttot was needed by tto Aray that oven
hero a coordination was hardly possible; that meant that tho poonibility
of oxorcising influence by tto Chief of tho t/ohrancht liidical Scrvico
on tto Kavy rocairod vory small.

I now coco to tto Air Fcrcc.

Q.- I should like to interrupt you tore. You are spooking about tho
actoal facts, which rade it impossible to coordimte mutual tasks of
tto Navy and tto other Arr.ed Forces branches, but I do think the High
Tribunal will bo interested in knowing whether on the basis of that de¬
cree of 1942, you had the authority to assume that authority whenever
the occasion arose.

The Prosecution maintains cn the basis of ttot decree of 1942 you


- 2340 -


U F eb-A-FX-15- 1-Heehar.

Court So. I

had the obligation to assuae authority ana exercise control and had you
not dona so, under circus stances, one could say that you neglected to
be a*are of your taske aod exerciee supervisory powers in such a namer
as your responsibilities should have required.


- 23L0 a -


U Feb-A-PJC-l5-2-4fcehan (FL)

Court So. I

Sow, fill you say so ne thing about hew feha authority has to be interpre¬
ted on the baais of that decree; the first thing, of course, is the au¬
thority to issue orders?

%

A.- Th® Chief of the no tarmac ht Hedical Service, on the basis of th>
decree of 1942, did not in any passage receive the authority to issue
orders and it -las not expressed in any passage; just as little was^it
expressed that he ted the authority or the duty to exercise supervisory
functions. On the other hand, I interpreted the decree of 1942 as it
"as thought and that was cn the basis of its fornulation that in ths
field of ccCrdination and adjuatawnt of personnel and equipment, I had
the duty to do everything possible for the purpose of salvaging in order

to aake a just coordination; that is for the purpose of saving .mterial

•

and equipnent. That did not present any difiicultiee with the Amy, Navy
and Air Forces and I concluded that the introductionary words of the do-
croo of 1942; namely, the leading of personnel and mterial direction
into the various branches of the armed forcos had to bo interpreted in
such a way as I did.

The armed fa-cos branchos would never )avo givon tho right to tho
Chief of tho Arced Forces ifadical Service to oxercisc any control in
their nedical service or any supervision. Thie was novor wpressod. It wao
rover said that this docrec could bo interpreted as an authority to is¬
sue orders.

In addition, I should liku to state quite basically th»t it was not
at aLl irtoidcd to completely leave out tho various nodical oorvico3 of
tho anted forcos branches or to interfere in their independent rights.

Ihat actually never took place. Just as little as it was novur intended
to create such a situation wh-n introducing the Cocnissioncr Gonsrai and
t^oreby cut dexm the jurisdiction of th>. Ckiof of the Lfcdical Servico of
tne Aratd Forces.

Q.- Did you at any tisc inspect an institute of the Navy; and you
krxw there was 3uch an institute in Tuebingen?


- 2841 -


11 Ftb-A-PJC-15-2-Uoohan (FL)
Court Ho. I


A.- In Tuobingon Uiore was tho Stodlcal Acadcoy of tho Navy. I never
inspected it; I rover vias even there.

Q.- Yoa, will you please continue and apeak about the relationship
of tho Chief of the 'itdical Service of tho Araed Forces with tho Laft-
waffo?

A.- Tlu Air Forco was a young aray. At the head of tho Air Force

was

*


- 2841 a -


11 Fcb-A-FJC-15-3-]*Jchar. (PL)
Court Uo. I


Geering. The Air Force whwi it mbs first created could, with right, ex¬
ploit everything tmt was available and Gooring did everything to fur-
ttor that. In connection with tho Luftwaffo, we grarted that right to
tho Luftwal fo and by saying Vo, I the Ar=y. There was ..o one in
the Array who was not of the opinion that tho Air Force had to bo equip¬
ped better than the aray in every sphere. In peace tine and during tho
building up of tho Luftwaff-, that was quite understandable, but^aftor

tho kray had to boar the :ein burden during the war and that quite ob-

%

viously appeared to bo possible; that this difference in oquipicnt could

not bo maintainod. Therefore, it was quite cloar to the Air Porco that

a Chlof of the Ar-xd Forces 2Sodical Sorvico could have not other task,

that he intorforod with thj nodical equipoent of tho Air Force in favor

of th3 kray. It is quite urdorstandable that tho Air Force dofonded it-

self against that procoduro as well and as long as it could, but bocauso

of the events in tho winter of 1911 and 1912 the relationship of tho

position oC tho various araies had become so obvious and the Air Forco

was in a position to transfer about one hundred of th^ir radical officors
%

to the aray. That node it clear that further interference with tlx- Uift-
waffc would bo possible. As Chief of tho ’ odical Services of tic Arraod
Forces, handled this matter in such a way or.d wo cano to scoo ogre era ent
in that connection.


- 2812 -


11 Fcb-A-A7D-l£-i-Haloy (FT.)
Court Ho. I


The ate rial coordination and the stoppage of the supply channels to ttc
Luftwaffe made no difficulties whatsoever. However, what rightly was con¬
sidered by the Luftwaffe as thoir property were tho tasks and the work
which was in connection with Special affairs of the air fccces and in
connection vdth oar field, aviation medicine. I, end the former axdical
chief of tho air force and tho last acdicnl chief of tho air force,
Schroedor, never had any doubt that aviation medicine and its research

was a special sptoro which ecu Id not fora within tho coordination of

%

othur tasks and coi-ld not bo coordinated by the Chi>of of the Arnud Forces
lkidical Service. Tho sane was truo in tho case of aodical research :iork
of tho Navy, which often had to specialise in hygonic and special medi¬
cal resoarch with rcforenco to things peculiar to tho Navy. 1 rofer to
U-Boat Hygiene, and whatever else eay bo in connection with tho aorvico *
of tho Navy at sea. There nos never cny quarrel about that, because free
th. vory beginning there was a clear differentiation made.

Q.- Docs that conclude your description and report with roforonco to
your Jurisdiction on tho basis of tho docroc of 1942?

A.- I hevo yet to sent ion the Aray. Ia the case of tho Array, tho re¬
lationships were very simple, since at tho same time I was at the head
of tho Ifcdieal Service of tho Army. All aired forces branclus know exact¬
ly th\t the Amy could not give any of their bos.s away, but rather tint
they had to receive sane more, aid I should like to say •mMthinfc in
that connection in order to clarify tho situation. At soon, point tlx. pro¬
secution put tho ouostion to a witness, "hew the nunarical rolatiohship
between the Ar~«y and tho other armed forcos branches wore, nhethor air
fcrco and Navy together were larger than the Ar-iy" and for that reason I
should lik« to spook about these numbers in round figurus. I, as Army
'4-dical Ir.s-cctor, that is during the war years of 1942 to 1944, in ngroo-
acr± with 0X7, had to dual with tho stan«iart figure of the Array of 10 mil¬
lion, and thee wac the basis or. which I planixd. Iho strength of the Air


li Fcb-*-AO-16-l-lfclo7 (FL)

Court Ko. I

Fcrco aaountoc at its peak to around two million. That was a fifth of
t.*v strength of the Aray. T^o Navy probably never oxcuudod cxio—half or
ooe-fowth of a ciliion. Fraa that one can oco clearly that tho Air
Force in rclaticnship to th# Army was ono-fourth to thrao-fourtte, —
rather ono-fiftfi to four-fifths.


11 Fub-A-AiD-16—2-*&loy (FL)
Court Ho. I


Q.- Ifcy I rm •uaoarizc your juristctioo on the basis of the do-
cro. of 1912, first -ith referoreo to the Wohwach Branch and the Uaffon
SS, on the basis of the *croe of 1912 as Chief of the Medical Services,
you had not authority, is that* correct?

A.- fee, that is correct.

As fax r.s a coordination of -sutual spheres of sork tins striven
for you and reached, you had a technical ri £ ht of giving direction* and
wxercising oar.trole, is ttot correct?

A*— Yc9«

q._ Thirdly, the rosecrch system did not belong to this sphere,

that is Fiffxo 1 of the decree of 1912?

A.- Ho, rot the research systea, only nodical measures ;:hich could
b- adapted to a ooordirotion. If I can give you an example, the ccmon
vcccimtions r.hieb hod to bw carried through on the Army. That is the
b>st value available for the rocossity of such a coordination. For in
special parts of the front, more for i tanco the Army, Navy roC Air
Force sere forking along side of one another, and wore committed together
the type of i-jioculr.tlon as soli as the tine of innoculatlon, or a pre¬
vention, for instance in the ease of mlar&a, differ, in the cnee of all
thD throe '..'ohraacht Brinehun. Of courso, that *ns such e situation nhich
could not last.

q._ It is clear tfrt tho prosecution did not consider that s?l:oro
of rosonrch systcu, OKI I -TO roforrlnt to -.hot you hnvo just -ontlonod
.Mch .o. coordination in rvf.ronc to innnocuUtlon «lth provoo vaccines.
Fourth, I next to my scruthi.-® rop.niirc othur nodical . rvic of tho
. woffen SS; there ,.os only o toctaioal ri s :.t of giving directives for
troops .ho uorc loco tod ot Us, front, and during tho tl» of c nobat,
is that correct?

.nth roferurcc <o front territory, thoro .os clear U o tech¬
nical subordination* On. *s to insane -.hot those division, .ora first

- 2311 -


11 Pub-A-AH>-l6-2-Haloy (FL)
Court Bo. I


■ubcrdlmUd to the Corps Cettaarder, tho Corps Csmndor to tho tony
Cooaondsr, the A;-ay Caaaandsr to the Troop Cocaandor and tho Troop C«*-
nar.dor to tho SujroM Coaoan^r of tho Ar-y. In tho saac say tho subor¬
dination of n Division Physician* of such a systoa kb carried through,
that is Corps Aray Physician, Troop


- 28 AA a -


11 Feb-A-AID-l6-5-Sfaloy (FL)
Court .So. I


Aroi- Physician, Ax-ny Physician and Ar*y Ucdical Inspector. Thoro was a
very clear sufcordirntion for the medical service of these divisions. But
not for the rcdiccl service as such, no.

Q.- .Ihy not?

A.- 3ocause those divisions could not deal with nodical scrvico or
ret her medical affairs, that is research, assigna^nt, and so forth.

Q.- Now —

Mr. NcHAi'SY: If thi Tribunal, please, I think it would be helpful
if the interpreter uculd use the German word Sanitactsdionst as dis¬
tinguished foxm Sanitactswosen. I think that is the distinction the wit¬
ness is trying to do note, and when translated into Engli:.. it is uxtro-
rely difficult to follui. I think if ho uould uso the words Sanitaotsdionst
and Sonitoottfreson, which the witness uses, in drawing this distinction,

I think it might be oasier to follow.

TK. L.TSlPflETSR: I thank you, !!r. KcHancy, for this suggestion.

BP. iL-XTSt It is ore of tb. most essential points to duflno tho dif¬
ference botwoen Sanitaotsdionst and Sanitaotsweson. I* will sou thr.t
dvir-; tho course of th: fa-thor presortation of evidence.

q._ i should like you to look at tho dccreo of August 1944,

end the official directive dated tho srac day —

DR. JELT•: !ir. President, you have both of those documents in your

possession.

G. (Cor.tinixd) - ..ould you pl-as^ ctr.W what difference thero was
between the decree of 1944 rnd th- jurisdiction which you received thero
nrd the decree of 1942, nne t..c tasks which* ero then in’ nded for you?
in U.U decree of the year of 1944, it says -In extension of ay decree

or 1942.“

n# - In the decree X 1944 it has to be pointed out that here in ad-

ditior. to tho decree of 1942, it is being expressed that we arc corccrred

with a stronger ability to gat ter strength in the sphere of ocdicp.l
• •

- 2345 -


11 F6b-A-i“n>-Kr-3-fcloy <FL)

Court No. I

»;rvicoa. T.x decree of 1942 spoke of the coordiretion of materiel end
poraoonel, and hero one would havo to add tho word "stil strorcor," aid
U 7>u add thooo v.orda aid take not*, of thj jou will urdor&tand whnt io
being ebant. The difference •


- 2845 a -


11 Feb-A-A'D-lfi-/^liloy (FL)


Court 3 io. I


aa regards to 1942 are very clear and obvious, and authority to issue
crder- being given, which however, confines itself and limits itsolf to a
technical, authority to issi» orders to the nodical chiefs of the Arood

a •

Ftrees Branches, Tilth reference to the h'affen SS and other unite, cs far
as it deals with their activity within .e arraed ferces.


11 Feb-A-S3H-17-l-Kinabuck (FL)

' 9 t

Court Ko. I

Q.- la crder to enable the Tribunal to understand better, would
you state what difference ther* is between authority to issue orders,

as such and technical authority or authority to issue orders in tech-

*

nical matters?

A.- An authority to issue orders as ruch presupposes a relationship
of superior and subordinate; that is to say, that anyone who has a to¬
tal authority to give crders must be a superior. Then, we further have

to differentiate between a total authority to issue orders and a limited

• *

authority as it is :*re, limited to technical matters.

*

Here this authority is technically limited to the Sanitaetsdionat,
and ono may understand it better if I say that a medical officer always
had two superiors; one military superior that was his divisional coranand-
or, his regimental cousaardor, his ccrenandor or supremo compandor, and on
tho other hand ho had a technical suporior that was his aray physician,
division physician or regimental physician. An authority to issue ordors
in technical natters it has to bo understood that tho chief of tho amod
forces medical service in technical .-otters could give an ordor to tho

Chief of t.'o cdical services of the Luftwaffe, but you havo to add,

•

without his becoming a suporior on tho strength of that authority.

I shall later cent back to this superiority relationship. Tho rcxt
thing was tho separation of tho personnel union botwoon • a chief of
the amod forces -odical service ard tho amod forcos nodical inspector;
that is, tho croation of irdcpcndcr.cc of the office of tho chiof of tho
firmed forcas nodical services ar.d tho appointajr.t of a raw nodical ins¬
pector of tho ar:\y and aray physicians.

In connection with that a rr,w work5 ’ staff was croatod belonging
to the chief of tho armed ferecs medical services. Tho third now tldng
created was tho natation in tho Fuehrer order to the offoct ttot the
of*, icial directive by General Kcitol had the approval of th. Fuehrer;
ti«st is to say, a sanction by the Fuehrer.


- 2e47 -


11 Feb-A-£HK-i?-l-Hir»b tick (FL)
Court Ko. I


Q.- ten acid that you then received a row staff. In ordor to give us
a picture of the situation can you toll no hew largo the staff aftor

194* was in relationship to 1 Soptcaber ,'44, as far as the budget was

%

cor>-


*

11 Fob-A-£3H-17-2-?iinafcucfc (PL)
Coirt No. I


corned?

A.- The chiaf of t ho sodie 1 services of tie arrnd forces had# in
tho year of 1942, one =*dical officer of the Air Force, ono nodical of-
fleer of th i ‘. 'ivy, on.- registration official# and a few clerks. Tho staff
of the chiof of tho ccdiccl services of 1944 comprised about thirty raedi-
cal officers bolontixv* to all the :fad *or^os branches, and about ae-
vonty oth^r coployocs.

i.- Dil that include officers of tho V off on SS?

V

A.- Wo, they tier officvrs of tto Any Air Force and Wavy. A suggestion
of nine that a number of SS physicians wojpo to be included into that
staff was roJuctcU by the Waffon SS.

• i.- Ihy did you want to include .icdical officers of tho 'Waffon SS

in your staff?

A.- I oi phasixtd boforc that I had .o possibility to gain my in¬
sight into tho . ersonnel arc! aaurial situation of the SS, and I -.ias
of tho opinion that in this nonnor 1 would aucceod in receiving ouch an
insight, "hon ay suggestion was rejected this channel, of courso, tras
blocked.

Q.- On the atr ngth of thu decree of 1944 did cn extension with re¬
ference to the Uaffun SS arise?

A.- JIo, ir. no wry at ell. The numerical relationship of the SS divi¬
sions who voro cuslttui ir. tho Wchraacr.t had b-ccnc different, I should
aeroly like to correct a figure that 1 aontionod before. previously
mentioned tho yoar of 1941 wher. spur.kin about divisions of tho Waffon
SS, tfturo&c I should hnve spoken c'-'out 1942. In the year of 1942 thoro
weru nine divisions of the Waff on 3S at the Eastern front, but with ti»
decree of 1944 nothing was changed in ay relationship towards the ,/affen
SS conparc-1 to the year of 1942.

DP.. hWLTE: :<*•. President, in that connection I refer to the official
footnote in tr>- official directives intended for tho chief of tho

- 2846 -


11 Fc b-A-SBH-17-2-Hinab uck (FL)
Court No. I


anned forcca aodical service^ dated the th of August 1944, which is
before you*

Q.- In this footnote it says in thie sense tho Arafed Forces, tho

%

Ar«y Air Force, Nary as well as tho units of the Wcffcn SS subordinated
to


- 2C43 a -


11 Pob-A-£EK-17-3—Nincfcuck (FL)
Court Ho. I


the Vchmachfc arc the organiaation* ard unite included within the fac-
work of tie TZchraachtj that is to eay, this relationship of subordination
Juet ae before referred to that part of the l.aff-n SS and tiat part of
thu nodical sorvico of the J.'affon SS that wee coaaitUd at the lYont?

A.- Toe.

THE PRSSEa^: then counsel refers to an exhibit if he would »ivc
tho ntnbor of tho exhibit for tho record it would aakc xv^ronco ranch
easier;

:,h. 'SL7Z: This was already aentionod by no bo fere, since uc were
dealing with an otfilblt of tho prosecution.

Tn2 FRESLSTi I urdorstand that, but if the nunbor of the orenocu-
tion exhibit wore included in tho record together with counsol'o statenont
It would na!» future referoneo to that c :ibit sasc other time .aoro con¬
venient. Counsel :*.od not 550 back rnd cite those nunbera, but in tho fu¬
ture when attention is called to an exhibit alroady in evidence, if tto
uiabor of tho exhibit could bo nxntionod it would faciUtato raudnetion
of tha record lntor.

DR. VuLTZi \lo are here concernod with Docuaont NO-227 ir. Docu-xnt
Book iJuaber 1 of tho Prosecution, page lfi, nrd Echibit 6.

Q.- or.»t you please continue? Extensive authorities and extensive
tr.aka wore planned, ’..herein were thoy extendod? Tho staff that you non-
tlor.od was intorriod to ou your working staff, interred fo: larger function a
what were t:»So larger functions which you w^re to nssuw free that po¬
rt od on?

A.- Those interpretations arc not ouite correct. One oust not fergot
that up to that time the working staff of the chief of tho jodioal ser¬
vice of tho armed forces was givvn by th People from tho Arty Ir.coccto-
ratu with roforerco to the .-ntcritj. and technical tasks that had to bo
performed. The Any Jiodicai Inspectorate was an office with over t;o hund¬
red people. A. or., t.boa I ca sur. there were fifty or sixty ac ical offi-


- 2349 -


11 Feb-A-i2H-17-3-Hir-abuck (FL)
Court }ic. I


cere. After the regulation of the year of 1$A4 that aeant a so jaratior.
of the chief of the amed fcrccs Mdicol eervicee with the arny iasoec-
torate, tro >er3onrol


- 28J.9 a -


II Peb-A-HJH-17-4-KImbuck (FL)

Court Ko. I

that was at the disposal up to that tine had ba be substituted by now
personnel of necessity. T^at was a necessity, autooatice necessity,
automatic necessity, in order to create an extensive independent staff
of one's own.

Q.- rfher. was .hia now decree put into effect?

A.- It casn into effect with the 1st of September 1%U, and I tliink

A

the uonth of septerfcer 1944 passed before the individual .-radical officere
arrived in Berlin free the varioue Vehrnaeht branches, ur^il thsir hous-
itii was rattled, -.ost of aU until the female clerks had boen employed.
One could Util say that wo started to work on the lot of October.


- 2850 -


11 Feb-A-UC-13-l-Futty (FL)
Court Ko. I


Q.- What did you actually do on tha tails of your new tasks?

A.- On the basis of ay newly-given authority of issuing orders,

I ordered at first that all J.ehraacht branches and the Waffen S3 jive ne

*

an exact re wrt about their personal and -aterial strength at that tLne,
Secondly, I started to see that tho ccitral departaonts who up to t.»at
point were still nor Icing within tho fraamtork of Aray Inspectorate
were to bo tp.’con ovor ana includod in tho staff of tha Chief of tho Arrr-
od Froces .’odictil Service. FuTthuraoro, tho sphere of hohmscht caro o:ri

X

wolfaro was takon ovor from tho Arey todical Inspectorate, thm tho Do-
partaent oi Voluntary Care for the Sick and basically tho oroblcn of
cart for orn».ro of war. This, of courso, extended this sphere of work
quite considerably. Furti»jraor.., tlxro was introduced, and this was ixi-
pertant for tho -dlitary services, a central exploitation of the old; ro-
ports which oao from thw variouc . chraacht branches.

Q.- 1 soo under III aider this Service regulation 3 that as Chiof
of tbo Medical Service of th. hehr.-acht you had tho right to insooct cor-
tcin units. ..'ould you please say southing about this riyht of inspection
or right of control that you started to assuie free the let of Svptc^bor
19U?


2851 -


11 i ob-A-MAA-19- 1-Bcard (FL)

Court No. 1

A «- Thia right of infection is Halted to the Sanitaotsdionat Ifc-

dical Service, to the tedical Unit, among others, roughly soealdnc,

0

hospitals, and xdieal troops and institutions of the Ar 1 Kfrcco, tiwt
is to say, the various Ar.xd Force ararchcs. In addition to this li.Tvi-
tation, the Chiof of the Wehnacht of the vdical Service nad tho ooli-
gation to roort tlx reailts of such inspections to tho various branches

A

of tho Aracd Far cue, or rather their Cosuandcrs. And tlx re is tho fol¬
lowing to an/ in this connection: In ay capacity as liedical Inexictor
of thu Aray, with the Aray, I had a unli-dted right of inspection. '.Tion-
cver I did not riant to, there was no nocossity for ax to infora any ono
about any intondjd inspection tour, ihirin*, tho years of offico, I
also aalntnined the point of view that any inspection could only rxrvc
a purpose if It corxs unexpectedly us possible, and that it uould bo com¬
pletely nonsensical if days before an intonded inspection all sorts of
pmw»rvtvis w^n beire* mads so that tlx mar. wno is inspection ujuld bo
satisfied, i.'ith this limitation, namely, that tto 01G. was to bo inform¬
ed, the min perpooo of such an inspection was lost. For *hoao inspoct-
l .rs that uer- carried through with tho Chief of the ifohr acht liedical
Service could ixvur servo tlx purposo of controlling tho medical •..•or!;a
of hospitals fer tint wr.o th right and tho duty of the Ixdkal Chiefs
and ’ heir subordirr.tod ag. ncios. Thu p«u*poix would have been to establish
hai the hospitals oi one Armed Force arc oquipp.d with T.teriul and >r-
sonnel In r-lntior. to the hospitals of .other Armed horco dra.mh. Yfixth-
er this purpose could havo beer ful-iU-ci with such an inspection tour
wea highly quostionatle. For example, I wanted to emphasis© particularly
ti-at the Chief of the hehrsaoht lidical Service did not heve tho ri~ht
to appear as a controlling person at an> branch of tho Ar ed Forces; I
na sure that tho Chief cf any such branch would havo re^ctod Uds intor-
ferc;:cc, riglS ly SO.

The:., it -ne^irs that cost of your authority was in your capaci-


- 2852 -


u Fub -A-^-19-l-3card <FL)

Court Ko. I

ty aa Vodioal Ina.-cctor of the Aray?

A.- That io true, Gcrwraioborat Fra. , *o at ttot tiao was ay su¬
perior in the nhole aray> 3rd to whoo I *aa suberdinrtod aa Array Medical


2852 c -


LI F-b-A- 'A4-19-2-5card (FL)
Court No. I


Inspector, told oc whon the question became acuto. Whon preparations were
Bide in the Spring of 1944, he said I would receive a high sounding na:ro,
but I would re.tun a ppor sen, end that is actually what tappciod. .

Q.- Ir. the C-rvicc Regulations, I see undur Renan Kuneral II, Arabic
4a, wiiat ttt« duties of the iedical Chief o: the -hroacht will bo: "A)

In thi medical scientific field uni fore -asur-s in the field of health
guidance, r-soerch, ano the coabating of opidi.nics. " «ould you oloaso
~tate what cor. bo understood in that connection under y£ur Jurisdiction
gone rally? •*e shell ecc— to thi research question Later.

A.- Already under the old Wohraccht Mod leal Chief of 1942, and then
strengthened by the Regulation of 1944, the mutual tasks in tho field of
Health Leadership, and that do-e r»t only seen innoculationa, but that
also includes directives and regulations for Hygiene with units, new regula¬
tions about troop Hygiene, the introduction of mutual vnccin-s, tto
discussion of questions whether it would bo nocossnry to nl with tho
question of I.ifluonsn, and the ccnbatin, of such a disease, am' similar
questions w_n dealt with.

rx.t us asaicK thnt you had in this sphere of Typhus — tho Air

Fcrce res conducting research, that is to any, tudical officorc of tho

Air Force were dealing with tint proble... On tho basis of your authority,

would you frm. hrd th- cfcliration to interfere and to »y that you mat

r.ot dual with Typhus research and Typhus experiments; that is ooncthing

that is be. 1 .; oso: Inr*, d; t.et is bei.\g done in Krakew, for instr.rcc,

•

“rofessor oyer is working on that or somebody el3e i3 working on it. Can
your jurisdiction be understood in that manner?


A.- Jeit.i-r jurisdiction can bo uiderciood in that manner nor
nould I rev- .an occasion to do it nor would I ,.nvo thought it correct to


11 Fcb-A-UG-19-La-&icr4 (FL)

Court So. I

JUDGE SSIHIliC: I wart to direct a question to the witness.

BY JUDGE SucKLiGj

a.-Supsocu you had learn, d, Doctor, that in those exporinonts they
were being cend'X ted under the cireuistar.ees Doctor Suite has tnlbod
obcut, upon nen-Gomen nationals in concentration camps without their
consent, and as a coraeqixr.ee secros of them wore dicing froa the .xdical
experiments. Vould that chanpj your an»er to the question?

A.- If I ' ~d learned that which you have Just describe, tho first
question would hrvo been in what sphere it was done, and by whom it
was done. And, s ch r rxort which wool© have roached rx. as Chief of Tho
Arard Forces edical Service, I would have transmitted, by official chan¬
nels to the Kcdioal Chief who was responsible for the porsons conoorrcd
in the first place; that is, uith-r tho Army, fovy, or Air Force. And
when tr uuvnittiiv thir report, I would have asked him to supoly me with
inforanticn, ackin, hi* hew the «tur stood, whether it wo correct or
Whether nc !awu anything about it. This would have ended one obligation
or. ay part. The accord obligation which would tavv resulted, tut only
after I ivsolved a confirartion frcn the .xdical Chief concerned, would
have beer, a report to ay military suporior; that would h -c been tho
Chief of OK;. And-, no doubt I would tevo aado a report to thu Couraiosionur
General because in tfx Service Regulations it said that ho is to bo in-
forrasd about basic utters; and by that I also understand thoso important
matters. As CM f of t’..o ‘.ehra-cht Edical Service I hnd no authority
tewnrd the individual aedical officers Z vould have had to turn to tho

V

medical chiefs of tho various branch-s of the Aruxd forces. Tho situa¬
tion world rt vc been clear in rel-tion to the Voffcn SS; namely, that
any ouch report r out such happenings would have- boon reported to tho
•tedical Chief of the Voffcn SS. In thu Latter case, however, thoro would
lave been a difference; nasxly, that this would have been a .attor out¬
side trx sphere or the Vhoraacht, and in that conrection tills -<ould not


- 2854 -


11 F'-b-A-UX;—19-lc-5cnrd (FL)
Court So. I


\

hr-vo boon cn official duty on ay part, t .t aorely a report to which I
would .v’Vo t.v3u^.-:t I wca obligated to acke.

THE PRBSIDgT; Tto Tribunal will telco c recess.


11 Fcb-A-UG-20-l-Blr.klt.y (FL)
Court Ho. I


THE iARSXAL: Thj Tribunal,la again in session*

DIRECT fLUffJUTIOHj Rosunee.

3Y DP.. !ZL72:

%

Q.- '.tness, every nos regulation tr..~s a certain tiao befero it
bccocofl off active. Tbo decree of the 7th of August, 1944, was to go into
effect or. the 1st of Soptesb«r, 1944. Will 70 U pl-esc toll utetho^
the new a-der aa planned ivally went into operation before tic collr.pso?

A.- ■•‘hat had been planned could not bo put into a reel practical
effect before the collapse. Tho ooin reason for this was that tho agencies
with which oj>i i-ad to work becaac so diflicult and the transportation
conditions boccft. worse every day so that the connection no longer exist¬
ed which would have been rccessary in order to put the intentions of

\

the ni» regulation into effect. One auat not forget that aa early aa at
tho erd of 1V44 and above '11 in January and P-bruary of 1745 tho supreme
agencies of tic '..ohmaehfc had gradually been troreferred /.way frcci Sorlln
in part to Thuringia; and when sent free one by railroad to establish cer¬
tain contacts, or-, could count on boing mry lor several days. 9 u t that
fan .ot only to r..; that heppenod to nil agencies, ns can bo proved.


- 2855 -


11 Fcb-A-FJC-21-1-Cook (FL)
Court Ao. I


Q.- Can is it correct if I cssuce that your seir. activity fro.a tho
point of vior of tf.-x ana fran the point of view of subject utter it -11
under the decree of 1942? ^

A.- Yes, one can aay that.

Q.- I have hat' c diagram, a chart handed to you, which is ccllod
"lfcdic'1 Affairs of tlx i.ehnaacht" and to which you have sworn. Will you
please look at tlx chart and tell us what the document number is?

A.- JC-2C2,

Q.- It io in Document Book I of the Prosecution. Do you have anything
to say about this chart which boars your signature?

A.- Yes, I :?.vo seas thing to say. First, I must explain t.ia follm-
irg: Tlx hoatini of this chart is m uhraacht !!odical Ser*. co (Snnitr.cta-
d least). .Ihcn .r. Itavp, ifco was interrogating sx asked ao about this
Kchrnr.cht . edicrl Service (S-.nitaetsdier.st) he shvwod ao o slxtch which
ho had probably .icde, which contained tho ohmacht and Civilian iiattors
and th- SS. I pointed out several errors and then I was given this sketch
and I was to propero a now or® for the ehr*rcht, that is, for tlx Chief
of the fohrncht 'udiccl Service and I did so. New I oust remark in con-
tvetion with this sketch tret thu squ-.re at tho top abovu tho Chief of
tlx \ehnaacht ’.fcdiccl Service assignud to the Roich Coanission-r, Profes¬
sor Br*rdt, cm or must givu the iaprvssion that hj was a superior of tin
Chief of the chr.iacht a.dical Service. Ho was not. I considered it i\v
duty to .sake that clear. In this connection I should like to say tint a
few days later 1 was shesin ft report of jy career. I do not knewt who wrefco
it. I nndo at least fifteen to twenty corrections bocauso it said a nura-
ber of thirds which sinply were not true. I recall that ’t said the Gcn-
sr"l Cotaaissioner, Prctfessor Dr. Brandt, nns ny .-ailitory and .xdical
oj peri or. That any Icve been at tlx end of this report of ,ay career. In
ay corrections I crossed out th- word "-ilitcry", and, t 1 a. ref ere, ns I
can reex-oer 1- read "radical superior". In conrxction with my explanation


U Fcb-A-FJC-21-1—Cook (PL)
Co art :*o. I


thet tM3 15 -ouU =»«*~ Iroe thi. .k>t«h thct SranSt

«P^or, I .hoild nb. Uto to correct thi», if St i, triB thr.t U ,o
.ord "ailltory" ...pcrlor ... cr*»od out In the report of ty corccr, hut

the word «,dicrl» re. loft. 1 rould cm* thet thl. report i. i„ tho
Docusunt


- 2856 r. -


11 ?«.b-A-F JC-21-.;-Cook (FL)

Court Ko. I

Book which contains all of tto careers of ell the dofondatos.

Q.- Then hai irculd you describe your relationship with Professor
Karl Brardt? %

A.- I would explain thet ea hns already been done hero. According
to the assignments to red cocrdimted between the V.'ohrmacht end the Civ¬
ilian Sector, end that within the frcmeiiork of his duties, if itched
been tfc.cesscry, could hive given =>- instructions, whether general direct¬
ives or in a specific case. I have or.e .lore thing to say about this
chart. I made eoae notations which arc unfortumtely hard to read. Ttoao
notes arose from tto two interrogations and acne qu.stions coreorning the
request to roper© such a sketch. Thu Prosecutor lias h<.r~ roforred to a
noto No. 5, which indicates a note concerning ay tophus research insti¬
tute at ICrakon, whether, to what extent end in what way, thcro was cor¬
respond enco between the Typhus Institute in Xrak<x and the Typhus Ins¬
titute of the ..offen SS I do not knew. In any case if there was any oor-
rotooril-ncc 1 did not go through ay hands. Tho Prosecutor pointed out
In connection with this sketch tint this note refers to a aan who has
a bad conscience in this oonr>-ction. 1M» . ote was mdo because I was
shown a stotch, in which the research Institute at Krakow was listed un¬
der the r&hrcftCftt and the Typhus Institute in B u chenwald was listed order
the SS amd a lino had been drawn between the two. Thereupon, I crossed
out this line with pencil, rad said that was not right, there -.as no of¬
ficial con.«ect>on here. Ttor. I was asked specifically w to ttor they had
anything to do with each ottor, and I answered as for as I kr.ou, ''no".
Because of this incident, the sketch with the connecting line and tho
specific question I added note ?io. 5, '.a - ell as four other notes. This
was done -Iter *. direct question. I have nothing elsv to rey about this.

Q.- Jbw eo ccau to another subject. You arc told responsible for
actions and amissions of persons for whoa you bear tto r© span db Hit .
That is what ehc indictment says. In view of tto various positions 'i.ich


- 2857 -


11 Feb-A-FJC-21-2-Cook (FL)
Court Sio. I


you held I oust DfCm it clear what group of persons is concorrud ior
wh aa you oust bocr responsibility. Pl*a»- teU ac who wore tbo toads of
the agencies of tto Army UcdflSal Inspectorate and the Votttaccht ISadiccl
Service, if you Hero not present at the aoat of your ager.cy?

A.- The regulations on this subject state very clearly in the oaso


11 Fob-A-DJG-21-3-Cook (FL)
Court r«o. I


Array IbdLcal Inspector, as wo 11 as Chief of the Ara y Ifedical Service, i.x>
reTcsontativ- ir. ell current business is the Chi~f of Staff. By "current

business" wo now tho norar.1 official business, and in addition to t:«

%

corretpondonco chore arc only personal authors of a^dicnl officers *.iho
aro considerably older then the Chief of Staff and have higher and apo¬
dal positions or if fundamental questions coao up of social importune ,
in which tto Chief of Steff is not in a position to xvfor to his absent
insp-ctor end if he -mat be reached iiwaodiatuly, in such cas%3 ay chief
uould have approached the oldest medical officer in tho fiold or at home,
but ttot hardly happened.


- 2358 -


11 F»b-A-J?-22-1-Gross (FL)
Court Ko. I


Q.- It will bo very important whether you ted knowledge o l certain
setters precisely, including reports. Therefore, I oust ask you what
was the course of the business, that happened when the anil was received
in the agencies in the aoming? Hon was it handled, and Ivm: was it dia-
iributcd?

A.- I a tel), tala, the lldic.al Inspectorate as an exoaplc. The prSbo-
dure was the saa- with tte Chief of tl«e i.ohrxacht IS^dictl Service. The

V

so-called "open sail", tl*j ;rdirnry anil, vos sent to a central office,
th». ref&stry office, was opored by the rc^strar, and according to tho
contents was sent either to tho Chief of Staff or tho heads of tho in¬
dividual departments. "Secret ratters" wore ontored in a special bool:
and tho procedure differed at different tices, eith-r all sont to tin
Chief of Staff or part to the Chief of Sta.i and part to the heads of
doportajnts. Far "Top Secret" iapttors tlacru was a special remoter and
th.se thin^ wore all sent to Ux, Chief of Staff. These things, even
the "T jp Secret" clings addressed to the Array '.iadical Inspectorate or
representative - tho Chief of Staff was oopewered to -pon those. Tho
only things ho could not open was what was sent as "top secret" with
ray nano personally without the addition of the words "or representative
in office". But those w^re .ixtreordinnry cases.

Q.- 1 ar. asking you tr.is becau3o I 3teuld like to lenow whother on
prir^iple your Cilels of Staff know what was to coae to your attention
or what did corao to your attention.

A.- \Tr.t erne by anil th«y had to kn^» as I teve Just described tto
procedure. The only cxcepti ns would be the f-w "top secret" lettors
sent to ay personal address.

C.- '..ould it not be a possible exception to bo rede for things which
the registrar s^r.t directly to heads of departments?

A.- Yes, that is true but tbu heads of departments again hofl the
obligation to work on these matters .and, according to tte urgency, to


- 2859 -


11 F.b-A-J?-22-l-Gro3 a (FL)
Court Ho. I


present th.a to tho Chief of Staff, either imedictcly or within a fo«
days Just as tho heads of tft d-partoents who reported to &3 whan I was
present first had to %


11 Fob-A-JP-22-2-Gross (FL)

Court No. I

fwvc reported t: sc entters to tho Chief of Staff. Th-roforo, tb.ro
ruacined only cases which were, not questions of sale, but where I bad
ttgdlntkn or tclles with sooeSn.. And, again or*, must distinguish bet¬
ween whether I was titr« cion, or whether there was someone with cx>. In
.-at cr.scs I did not go to such talks alone. Generally there was an c;:-
pert on the subject needed and, in the second place, it was ornctWl
for oc to have ay adjutant with ce because telephone calls were rocoivod,
etc., so that, in fprxrol, t*x: person ;>bo Went with no usually infonwd
the Chief of Staff afterwards even if I did not so and even if 2 par¬
ticipated alone. If they w«re aore or less important matters then I ab¬
solutely hr.d to infom the Chief of Staff, because in ay absence Ik- had
to know what was going on, what could happen, or what had been discussed.
Oth-rwi*., it would not have been possible to carry on business of our
office, sinco in ny absence thu people always approached ay Chief of
Staff personally or by telephone.

Q.- Then tho two Chiefs of Staff who will appear here aa witness
oust be rble to toll us what you desired on tho one hand, and on tho
other hnnd what you lesrn-d of?

A.- Xcs, absolutely.

Q.- It any be necessary to explain a few terns inportant for tho
questioning of your competency ard your authority. A little :Mlo ago
you spoke of the relationship between superiors .and aub-rdinr.too in de¬
viation fror. tho tern "authority" to issuo orders. Sinco your responsi¬
bility is dependent on this point I should like to know whothor terns
like, direction, aanagoaont, etc., fbotljor they are anywhere set dam
and regulated authority?

A.- That can be best seen as I an to give a concrete example es¬
tablished by document. In the Docuaont Book on page Lb and 46, tho Ar¬
my Hcdical Inspector is prase rlod.

Q.- I ui.r.t point out that this is document HA 28A, Exhibit fe.


- 2360 -


11 Fob- ft -JF-22-2-Gross (FL)

Court Ho. I

Docuaunt Eook I, pa go A4.

A.- T7» tcc:t spooks for itself. It seys, undor £6 "fho Ar«y Jlcui-

• •

cai Inapoctor is the K*.ad of ^tbc ISodicel Section of the, Her Ti,ae Ar.jy.
Ho is tho


- 2560 a -


11 Fob-A-JP-22-2—Gross (FL)
Court Bo. I


superior of the entire audical personnel of the Var tia- Arzy in ,aoci-
cal aattors and he is the superior officer of all nodical units of tho .
War tiau Ar.iy." %

A footnote hoc been ceitted here which is contained in the ./nr ilodical
ii. crec which orpin ins whet is ..eant by cedi cal personnel. It cays "nod-
cal personnel include n odical officers, non-coonisaiorod officers,
oflicinls of tlio Kcdiccl Sorvico, pharmacists, dentists, officials of
tho Adainistretivo Service, special leaders ir. the Ucdlcal Sorvico, ard
volunteer nurses." This shews clearly that thla is a superior and I oust
add that under tli the follcwire io stated: "3y deans of inspection ho
convinced hinsclf of the execution of his orders and of tho state of
health of tho ?iold and Reserve Aray."

In rogard to tl>c ri^ht of lnsowCtions it was not said that he r.oodo to
ask anyone r.bou' it before hand or over, to infora any uno.

Q.- Tl.en that is a clear ccso of the relationship of superior and
subordinate well as the total poi^r to issue orders?

A.- And, another orx> which we do not have a copy here is -txdo equal¬
ly clear - the case of the .'say physician, the Array Corps and Divisional
doctors of t!~ Ar-y. In Aher branches of the Wchroacht it was tho saao.
It said that they are superiors of thoir . .died personnel in question
of radical servio- and they are troop superiors to nodical chiofo undor
their cunoand. ;<c*i I should li»&- to say in this case wv lave a clear
relations.dp in t!*J .say «ir force and too Kevy. Tho Medical Chiefs arc
superiors ol oil th- .n-dicrl personnel and if in the Ssny one species of
a superior tills cut erotically and 'f necessity includes the oniur to
issuo orders.

hjn in lilitcry regulations we find soa-thing about instructions -
about who beinc a superior - this is always a very luke warn and weak
rnd unclear .meter. And, if one calls a high oedical officer the lead of
an agency and -atri-sted direction of it to hiffl without aaldnj Mo a


- 2361 -


11 Fub-A-J?-22-3-Gro ss (FL)
Court Ka. I


STD^rlor flnH without giving hin unlimited authority, this is a very weak
uncuprising solution which everyone who understands these mttors nill
recognise as weakness


- 2861 a -


11 Feb-A-J?-22-4-Gross (FL)
Court Ho. I


and that is the relationship as one looks at instruction of Chief of
the Wefara&eht llcdical Service in contrast to regulations of Amy Jfcdi-
crl Inspector or Chief of the *i»dicnl Service of thi Air Force and

Navy. That is what I wanted to clear.up.


-‘2862


11 Fcb-A-JB-23-l-Lcssur (FL)

Court So. I


DTi. :ZLZ:z !r. President, I should like to sufcolt to the Tribunal
D:cuaont HA 50, ihlch is in ay 3rd docuoont book and therefore is not


yet available, This is a copy !ro= the ’Jar lfcdical Decnx,, pages A to 6
and duals with Ihc problems of shier. Professor Handloser has just spo-
':cr.. I nay submit this docuaor.t non, as uahibit 6a. Docunent Book 3 will
be handed in taaorr^i. ^

Q.- »sldo ffoa the nodical units or -udical aga-cics, uoro there also
institutes under you or your agencies as Ary/ kxlical Inspector or
Chief of tho lehroacht ildical Service?

A.- Yos, there Here such institutes; there were 7 of. they, I should
like to distinguish between tbo U -.ihich existed during pLac- ti.ue, that
is, tho Military lieical Acadeay, thu Uodlccl Training S-ction in Berlin
and th; 'tain ; Jodi cal Cnap in Berlin, — 3 th,n. During the war thoro uero
added tho Typhus Research Institute in Krrl<-« and U^hurg, tho Surgical
Special Hospital in Brussels, tho Central Archives for War ILdicino in
Berlin, and tlx. Ar.iy fountain ledical School in St. Johann. Those insti¬
tutes nero diroctly urdur the Amy Uodical Inspector.

Q.- .ill you please describe the official relationship vhlch vou,
as Arar faeicr.l Inspector, hr.d with those institutes?

A.- They uero military erganizati 'n heeded by a c naandim officer.
That i3 to cay, primarily th- coscandinr. officer is responsible f.s- what
happens in his dLitary institute; he again is under ard is theroby rc-
romsiblu to tho Arny Itidical Inspector, who, of course, sinco the Insti¬
tute is directly subordinate to hie, on tlx whole bears tho ro:paneibil~
ity for it. Thai was tho cas. with the „c.nceyy and tint was the case ;dth
the other institutes. But I consider it necessary to give an oxanple of
what these institutes were like. I shall take tho Military ifcdical Aca-
dimy and say briefly what it was and what the supervision within the Aca-
* V W"8.

The Military Ilcic.al «cade.py, which wo shall a.ntior fre rcr tly. Is

- 2863 -


U Fcb-n-JP-23-1-Lcss^r (fL)
Court So. I


50 3r08nl “ fci5n * ^5. Its nact £t ttat ti™ ms t* Friedrich

ilhoLa Institute, bocau* the King, Friedrich hilhcla II, h «l founded
it. After ICO


- 2863 a -


11 Fe b-A-J?-23-2-Losscr (FL)
C-urt !b. I


years of oxisttr.cc, in 1895, it changed its noas to Kaiser ilhola /ca-
dusy nrd when it was ru-established after the first lor Id '..'ar, it was
given th. n:\io i till tar y :<dical Ac&ooy. It had always had 2 tasks, in
the first place to givo thi new recruits for the carter of Oodicrl of¬
ficer, additional training arri in addition, in its xm sclontific in-
stltutis, to help tl*j students; and or. the other hand, to carry on such
research as vtaa directly connectod with military rwdicine. At thp head
of the acadorjy tlwre was always ar. especially proved cor.mar.ding ofiicer.
The picture of the acadesy in the lottor lie Ids was that under this con-
oandlng of.icor. The picture of the ncndocy in the lower fields was
that under this comar. ndirg officer thcro wore 3 training groups, bonded
again by a Gcnoralarzt or an Oberstarzt. In 2 of the so groups there wore
tho studonts in Group A, those before the phyafleua, the first -cc'ical
examination, and in Group B, those in their clinical seawaters. Tho
third group. Training Group C, was tho scientific group with tlx. scion-
tific instituteb. The Inst director was Gcnoralarzt Schreibcr, who Ins
frequently been mentioned.

In those institutes, .military edicr 1 research was carried on. Tl.o
nedic'l officers in these training groups, I an thinking, for example,
of Stabaarzt Dohnon, who has also bi.cn mentioned frequently, wore prima¬
rily under the camar.iing officer of tho training group and ho in turn was
under tho cm-uandin*; officer f the Academy and tho C-xaaareling ofilcor
of tho Academy sac under tho Army Uedicnl Inspector. The organisation
in other institutes was built up ;n tho saw principle; whotJwr it vies
St. Johann or th. Central Archives, it was all tho sano; only tho ho^oi-
tal in Br-isceis was different, which was purely a hospital 'nd to which
was attached a special scientific research department.

Q.- You wore Arny Physician (Hecrosarzt) and Array Modi cal Inspect-r
and until you create Chief f thu ' ehraacht ii.dical Service your functions
wore separate, “rat was tbs reason for Joining the functions f Army Fry-


11 F_b-A-J?-2>2-Lesscr (FL)
Court Ho. I


aician and Aroy iSodical Inspector ? I ”ill, in a nacA.nt, point out ivhat
is ia^artent for -y ccs. so fret thj Prosecution does not think that I
aa bringing the Arty Physician into the case unnecessarily. Amy Physi-
cL-n and ! Sortie al Inspector were two functions which up until then had
required ell tho services of orx


U Feb-A-J?-23->Lc5Ser (FL)

CviTZ Ho. I

an, c high military dec tor. They wore united and a spiiero of work ncs
created fr:n which I au3t assonc, without explanation, that it ties too
auch for one p-rs:n ar.d wouij perhaps not give you tte opportunity to
do jostico to tho reqoonsifaility which you had in this high position,
ill yM pL-nsc explain this art! tell us how it was possible to fill
those 2 positions and later 3 positions responsibly? «.

A.- In 1939 I was in Poland. In 1910, I was in Franco. I was an Ar-
oee Arzt (Arny Physician). Thus froa two s.c rs, from tWb theaters of
war, I was able to fora a Judpoent about the nan' gonent of tho fxdical
service and of course I also talked to their cxirades about it. I was
in ttx> first ..orld *. ar, too, and I was able to a-i that wr Siire.oo Hod-
IciV Coaoardcr, that was von Cumin, as full ’^dic.-l Chief raid Ocrcrnl-
stabsartt of the «rcy, was in the field, r„ huadqa-rtors, and not at
hfb. Ho arranged it at that tiiae s > that he was in charge of rnttors in
the field hi/ass-LT and that nt hxao ho liad o representative, who was a
Gonuralarzt, but ho hLoself was in charge of the dlroction of all nnttcro
nt h ou and in the field. In the recent .Arid ..ar the Ar.jv Ilodical Ins¬
pector, Haldoonn, was ir. Berlin, and a Kooresnrzt woe appointed for tie
Field i»r TJrt wes certainly not duo to tho desire of tho Army Ikidlcal
Inspectorate ant! cy preueceso r. That was c luxetod with the ai Lit ary or¬
ganization end with the point of view tret in the Hold *vj cannot have
aay ministerial people with ministerial habits. !{y predecessor, Profoo-
s >r Valdnann, during tho campaign ir. Polar.d and during the campaign in
Fr.’.ucc, lie wai i net in Berlin eitixr; out he led the fooling, just ac

• 9

cvory:nc else did, that the pri-cry thing ar.d the nephnsis, — the first
concom — was with th; troops in tho field.


- 2865 -


11 Fofr-A-33B-24-l-aochan (FL)

Court Ho. I


If tl»7 i»ro not cared f >r properly, if things did not run right at the
frxit, then no mount -f work at home die any good, Uy may in Poland,
ca well as ay army in Franoe, in spite of tt* brief duration of the enra-
paipis, he visited iiy arnics repeatedly.

h’ow what I bocams his successor, I was imrxjdistcly confronted with

the question in ftorlin, if there is a change n~M ar.d it was known that

A

Generalstabsarzt Ott in the very near future would give up his position,
it was said, "Hew or Never." This obvious ni. .ke in org-r^zati on must
bo dono away nith and therefore from ny 3»n experience, as noli as on
the basis of tl» fact that from t*x first Vi rid nor rnd frw tho precod¬
ing ccapci^ns in 193° and 1940, case that decision that Goncralobcrst
Frora, who was Caxundor of th; R»sorvo Army and th- Co-nsandor in Chiof
jt the army von Bracchitach, that I should suggest to thorn that tho two

xgenirations ah-uld bo united. First, this was to bo a simplification,

• •

froondly, tLw was to be saved and third, ovory possibility for friction,
which f course o:dsted between the field armies and tho homo ir.y, nr.s
to bo reojvod.

C,.- Toon, La your opinion and in tho opinion f tlx. aray oodicrl of¬
ficers, you prose..tod tho necessity, hat is important, hare, howovur,
is ttet you soy hew y.u created th- safeguards, tho -rdor to safoguard tho
responsibility of aicha high officer as tho Any Ibdical Injector. Ploaso
clarify your responsibility.

Tix. extent of tlx duty alono, from tho point jf view of aroa al*ne,
had bee cx so jrc .at as thi ter expanded tfet no one in charge, even tho
Hoorcsarzt could bo ovoryw.xn.. The Army iedical Inspector at homo could
not do that, everything had to be built upon the basis of the decentrali¬
zation ar.d cxi the selection of the best people as supports for the exe¬
cution of the duties on tho principle that the best men should be put in
the best places. This was done at home by the selection of the 1/ekrkrcia
physicians and by the promotion ar.d support of their authority and that


11 Feb-A-:3H-24-l-Iiehan (FL)
Court Wo. I


was done ir. tic field by the selection of arsy phys clans.

l.'ner. the area became substantially rreater and the difficulty be-


- 2366 &-


11 Feb-A-£3H-2A-2-iieeban (FL)

Jourt No. I

carae substantially greater, tto railitary agencies, on their own initia¬
tive, since they eel's in the sane position, created a new agency be¬
tween the high coxierei of the axny and the various araies - tho so-crilod

%

a my group coa-onds, since it could not at first be achieved that array
group physician should be asai gned to those army group canr.ands. Con¬
ditions later shewed the High Coosand of the Array that this bed to bo
done later and so at the end of 19U or the beginning of 1042 array group
physicians, with the rank of Cereralarzt or .eneralet^bsarzt vtoro creat¬
ed, who were above the physicians of too various araios as connecting
link to tto Heorcserzt and the Array Medical Inspectors. That is a tyo-
Ictl exar.ile of the fact that the «:pa:.ded duties and tho expanded aroa
required a new safeguard for tho execution of control and supervision
and advise.

I flhoull only like to add to clarify the rattor, that tho 'JohrlTOis
physicians at ’:aae, I beliove with one or two exceptions, and thero noro
nineteen of tnor., that thoy were all oven older than I and tliat a con¬
sider- proportion of thora had for-Mrly been ray superiors as '.iohrkrois
physicians or as array group physicians ir. peace tine and that in tho
field, thoy inro of tto sarau ago as I with very few oxceptiono. Thoy More
can with tto rr.nl; of a Gorcralarzt ol ConorsIstabsarzt, who had roaciwd
this rank only on tho basis of long oxpcrionco and fecial achiovo.snt.
Thcso won not .-on uhea ono tod to watch or control. These rn.ro mn tiho
guarantood *.tot thoy would do their utnost atw their best and that thoy
had the reccssary experience and tto necessary ability.

Q.- In connoctior. witn this policy of putting tho best non in tho
most difficult posts, there had to bo added, I should like to say, tto ^
lepfelitlve activities; you r.ad to issue instructions, directives, orders,
etc., was tact cr anizod in that way?

A.- Do you ,xan those Amy Ca.ro Physicians?

All physicians froc your point of view?


- 2867 -


11 Fcb-A-23K-2A-2-}'eehar. (FL)
Court Ko. I


A.- Yes, of course that was done.

Q.- This is wcat I should like to learn; were nuaerous instructions,
directives ard orders issusd by you?


11 Feb-A-23H-2/.-3-!fcohan (rL)
Court lio. I


A.- Tcs, of course.

Q.- I aontion this because unfortunately nc have no doeuwnte in the
PrceQCulion'3 Docuaoot books bearing your signature. If such orders had
not corresponded to the riles dosanded of an orderly coaaand, I ai con¬
vinced that no would have seen thea horc. I should also liko to ask you

i: you knew of any si-nificant, or were there any significant violations

a

reported to you in connection with lnaded ssrbiLity, or the (Stucution of
the nilitary .-xdical point of view or t.';_ --hical point view?

A.- .‘Jo.

Q.- I aa not -icrciy tweaking of the front, the doctors at tto front;
I an opeakiir of at hoe*. too?

A.- Yos.

DR. KEL1E: !&•. President, now I want to coco to the quostion of tho
consulting specialists, on the ; motions of those consulting specialists,
but Goncralartz Guizcit has testified about this as a witnoss, so I be¬
lieve 1 can dispense with this matter; but in this connection I should
like to present t'.K> docuajnts to the Tribunal. In the first place an o;.-
cerpt froa tlx- or .edical uocrev, Vo-222, 22b and 235. This deals with
tto group o; consulting physicians in tho Aroy.

•

THE PRESIDSI.T: In what Docunent Book arc those documents contained.

DR. h’ZL'E: You will find these docu'onto in 3ook Wo. 1, 'a c 36. It
is document ;!A 19, ard will be Exhibit Wo. 7, if the Tribunal accepts
this docunont as ar. exhibit.

THE rfcEJIUlT: Is it counsel's intention to read the doc iocnt into
the record or sicply have it offered in evidence?

DR. leJLiE: I ^croly want to subait it. In tho exaairetion of the
witness Butzcit the contents wore already frts-ntod. It is only the lo-
gal regulation of thu position which Ux consulting physicians had.

THE PREuIDEilT: V^ry woll.


- 2363 -


U ?wb-A-2BH-24-3-:fc^han (FL)
Court So. I


DP.. CUB; And the rext docusent on the seat, point I subait a statc-
x ent of the defendant Professor Kandlo»or on the establishment of tho
consulting physicians. I shall not read this either. I cr.ly offer


2363 a -


u ?c b-A-3BK—24-fcchan (?L)


Court No. i

it as an exhibit. It is in th« Docuaent Book Ko. 1, Pago 32. It is docu¬
ment HA 13. I ask that you accept this stateatnt of th*. defendant as
Exhibit No. 3.

•

THE PBEolBS 7: In tho Docuaent Book I do not find Docuaont HA 13
Listed in tho index. It is in tlx. book, but not indexed.

DP.. KELTS: Tho section which producod these documents loft this do-
c-xnt out, but only in tho index. In tho document book itself, on Pago
32, you will .ind the. document. x

THE mESIuS-T: It is in th. Docuaont 3ook. I havo it. I ins calling
attention to tho fact it was emitted froa the indoc.

Thoro being no objections the documents will bo admitted.

Tho Tribunal :dll n«i recess until 9:30 toaomxi aorning.


- 2869


Roll 4


Target 3


Volune 9


Feb. 12-19, 1947


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U S vs KARL BRANDT at ol
VOLUME 9


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


12-19 February 1947 pp. 2870-3212


ostor-JP


iM

12

Court i

: GOTBECTZS COPT

Official transcript of the Jeerlean Kilitary
Tribunal in tho nnttor of the United States
of Anorica against Knrl Brandt, ot al f
defendant it sitting at Suomborg, Gcranay, on
12 February 19-17, 09®» Justico Beals prosiding.

732 ILAHgUI: Persons in tho or.urtrooc will ploaao find thoir sor.ts •
Tho Hon'.rablo, the Judgos of Military Tribunal 1* Military Tribunal 1
io nov ir. session* God snro tho United States of Aacrica and this hoaornblo
Tribunal, Thoro will bo ordor in tho O' urtroon- A

THZ P~~-S ^TT; Kr. Marshal, will y u ascertain that the dofondnnte
pro all pros ant in court, N

TE 1X.SHALC !’i*y it plonso Tour Hon r, all defendants aro prosont
with tho oacoption of tho dofendant Obcrhauoor who is absent duo to a
continuation of hor previously existing illnoss.

THH rosiUBT! The Secretary General will note for tho rocord tho
prosonco of all tho defendants in court with tho oxco^tion of tho doforv-
dant Oborhauncr who is absent on account of illnoss as por hor physician*a
cortificato.

The Tribunal has considorod tho application presontod yootordoy by
dofonso counaol Sauter for a dooonstration boforo tho court in connection
with tho high altitude oxporlconte. Tho Tribunal has considorod tho
application and tho application Is donied.

Counsel ncy prococd with the cxnoinatlon.

SI20FB1B3 HAH3L0S2H - Rosixsod.

ZXJXXXiSZOr (Continuod)

FT TR. ItELTS s


Qr Profossor, you said yostordry that tho Modi cal Sonrico of tho
An^y, whoso chlof nodical officer y~u woro, had to cero for tho honlth of


about tor Billion nonbors of tho orcod i^rc^» clrrifj- this question
I shuld like to ask you: Foe* this no an ~nl? . ^ldiorc for whose hoalth


y'*u hud to cero?


, w w

A, So, not only soldioVs, Of theso nF^r ociKp.tcly ton nilllon thoro
were included all the c bors «<f.tho families s'-ldiors at bnno. Tho


nllitrry doctors since 1922 had to Coro :


families of tho soldiers as


2870


12 ToVi S-1-3-Jn s tcr-J?
Court I


woll ra tho soldiers thcnsolvcs, Thorc woro also all those porsons coi>-
acotcd vita tho Vohrr.acht including all tho aursos, all tho S ignal Corps
assistants, all staff assistants. *lso tho population of tho occupiod
torrltorios until tho civilian nodical authorities vexo cblo to toko over
tholr caro and B’^orvision; also the prisoners of w:-r in tho oporationnl
area as veil no at hone.

3. Hov nisny nodical officers, active and rosorvo, bclnngod to tho
nodical oorrico of the arcy? ^

A* I can giro oxact iafomation nbfut that since I still have rocordo,
docunonto, of tho 1st of Fobruary 1943. At that tl~.c th* Amy had 2,191
active nodical officors. Including tho reactivated forocrly activo offi¬
cers who were 3,242, That nakos a total of 3,433. Own thoro voro rosorvo
nodical officers, 19,580; together, 25,013. On tho 1st of Fobruary 1943,
and lr. tho following period too, we had the senior nodical otudonts as so-
callod Folduntcraorsto; that is, assistant doctors in hospitalc and
vlth tho troops. Thoso voro 1,638 at that tine. That nakos a total
of nodical officers at \vco and in the field of 26,651. At this tine
tho Luftwaffe had about 10.CCO physicians and dentists. Tho Vaffon SS
at tho front had about 3,000 nodical officors. That nakos a total of
39,651, Unfortunately I do not have any figuros froc tho navy.

This nay bo a good opportunity to nontion an official figuro which

I have that is tho lost official report of tho «V including tho tino

froo tho beginning of tho enrpaign on 2ussia in 1941 until 31 January 1945.

Aftor this tlno it was no longor possiblo to oonpllo roports, at lonct wo

did not got any roports. Tho &unbcr of dond at that tino was 2,100,000 o

Tho ninbor of womdod during tho empaign in Hussia was approxinntcly

5,000,000. Tho nur.bo r of prisonors token during tho poriod of fighting

was 2,500,000. This nay also bo tho appropriate opportunity to nontion

tho casualties Kwng tho nodical officers. I have official figuros hero

too giving insight into tho confehs of Juno to Ooconbor 1942. At tho front

we had 6,048 doctors. In thoso six non tho 791 of then foil; that is, about

12.5 percent. 1,533 were wounded; that is, 25 porcont. Fron tho yoar

2971


12 7oVJi-2Z2«-&-?ogtox-JP
Court 2


1943 as Azsy Itodical Inspector I should lilco to aoation that with tho
disnotor of Staling ad wo lost 274


2871 (a)


Court 3c. 1

12 Jeb 47-M-l-S-EEH-Fcster


doctors ot -see. Vitfc the disaster of Tunis vo lest about 25C nidicel offi¬
cers. I section this because it ves cy duty as Medical Inspector to cover
these lo'ses, to fill these geps, tad this ves an especially difficult end
expensive field of vork for so.

TFs. eTJ. SI2XST: Just & accent, counsel. I neglected to renind the wit¬
ness that he ia still under oeth, having been svurn yesterday.

Counsel nay oroceed.


12 ?eb-tf-4UA-2-l~I7 innhuck-JP
Court I

As chief of the Vohmacht Modi cal Sorvico you woro tho highost
nodlcd officer la the Vofcrracht. Iho prosecution has concluded froa
this position en organisational responsibility for tho •tttlonst tho
allowed actions of or/ nodical officers*

I should like to ask yru, woro you as chi of of tho Vfohrnncht Modi cal

%

Scrvico responsible for tho actions of all nodical officers of tho
Vohmacht?

A* I aust on over this quostion in this gcnoral fom^with no. I
was responsible for tho Individual nodical officer, for what ho did on
epoclflc ordors free no, or what ho did as tho result of gonoral ordors
which I had given, nothing olto*

Q. ITow, It Is possible that without such an order or such gonorol
x^rdors a nodical offlcor undor your ooacaad in oxocutlor. of his profosolon
sight coii.lt a pualshablo action. Must you bo rosponolblo for ItT

\ If I loam off*clall/ or in any othor way of this punishnblo
action and if I did not clou up tho situation, and If nocooonry f tako
stops against It, thon certainly a chargo could bo nndo against no.

Q. Sow, I should llko to exhaust ell possibilities in connection
with your responsibility. Vhat about tho ohargo of inadoquato ouparvlolon
in this connection?

A. Tostordoy I attenptod to oxplaln tho relationship and tho poworo
of a ouporior and this lncludos tho factor of supervision, but it Was
not understood end It cannot bo undorstood to norn that a highor ouprono
supporter Who is rosponsiblo for all thootors of war and for tho boaolnnd*
that ho cen oxorcioo supervision over over:’ lndlvlducl subordinate.

That is lu-possiblo and that is not possible anywhere in tho world in
nllitary or Civilian lifo, and It c-nnot bo dorandod.

Mjr supervision, for cctavplo, as Amy Hodical Inspector appliod to tho
amy group physicians, to tho Vchrkrois physicians, rad to tho cocnanding
officorc of the institutes and organisations diroctly under ny comnnd*

I will noniion ar. oxnnplo. A nodical officer with tho troops or in
a hospital, just like a soldier in tho c-npany or battalion, is undor tho


2873


12 Jefa 47-*J &A- 2 - 2 -«iiiabuck
Court Ho. 1


supervision of his immediate superior; that is, the chief physician in a
hospital and above hia the camandins officer of the nodical section, end

then tho .'ehrkrais physician, but that goes very far.

0

Another example; Stabsarxt Dohner., who has been nantionod repeatedly,
..-as ono of the 26,500 o-'dic^l officers under comand. The commanding
officer of tho training group C is rcs.xnsitlo for supervising hia and in
addition, tho coanandin.’ officer of the -ilitary -odical Acadonjr* lihat
I said quite generally, of course, applies. If in any way I hod^lcaraod
of anything about on individual ncdicel officer wno was far away from
30 it would havo been duty without consideration of tfio many superiors
botwoon us to take up tho ease to sue that it was cleared up end to take
tfio nocossary stops.

Q IJow, I cojq to anothor chapter of ny examination. As you know,
tho individual charges which aro raisod against you concern experiments
connected with research. Tho prosecution alleges that you wore not
diroctly connected, but that, bccauso of your position as Arty ;odical
Inspoctor and chief of tho T/ohrcacht .cdical Sorvico you woro connected
with tho oxperiaonts which arc called illegal, and that you havo special
responsibility. Does tho fiold of medical rosoirch boloni; to tho nodical
natters?

A Tos, research is connected with any health service.

Q Is there a special military medical scionco?

A Yes, thero is. It i3 called rllitary aodioino, or '*> use tho
expression, "irohnodisin", for it. If I aa to explain that briefly, ex¬
plain it to this group, I raist make a co:iparison. Imagine a big strong
treo with widespread roots, with a strong trunk, and with many branches
and twigs. The roots and the trunk which give strength and which give lifo
to the whole treo, that i3 general aodicino. And the branches and tho tirigs
are the nany individual fields which aro larger or smaller, which aro tho
specialties. Cto- such branch is military aodicino, under a:dicine in
general. This branch is an indispensable and integral part of uidicinc
as a whole. It has a certain life of its own which, however, is dependent


12 “eb U7-a-v-•-2-3-riin-buck (H)
Court ?Jo. 1


on the strength end the influence which it gets from the roots -nd
the trunk, -nd it will newer h?ve the idee of dis associations itself
fro= this 'trcrk because that would take aw.»y the source of its lifo.

This br-nch again. h«e branches rnd le-ves -nd fruit, -nd in the lifo

%

of this tree it gives the whole tree » great de*l of nourishment. That
is how one mat mdenrteod xllit-iy B3dicine ra r -n integral p»rt of the
whole thing which grows out of general medicine ~nd receives an
:noraous amount from it, but by way of gratitude in « sense rnd as ■
natural consequsr.ee gives it a mrsber of suggestions *ivd experiences
which only military medicine c-n collect.

Military medicine Is determined b-» the character of sdlitaiy life
■nd the ■ilit-ry on he re. I -ust sum th-t un briefly. I c-n give only
• few ex-roles by w*y of exultation. We h-ve definite military
diseases, if I a ay cention a few surgio'1 cnas. There -ro the woll
knewn dlse-scs of the foot which soldiers acquire when aarohing. The
foot swells. Often there is • fr-cture which is hard to recognise, of
» act-tarsal bone. In "11 countries special -ttention was devotsd
to this disc-se. It has -lw.-ys be»n said the r«n we-pon of tho
infantryn-n Is not his gun; it his his foet. "nd the great majority of
the Gcra-n soldiers in the second World A-r were not driven but were
dependent on their feet.

May I bring an example fron internal medicine? We soo-k of the
dangers of the spec!si surroundings of tho case eccerodatlons of
soldiers which formerly had existed only in the -rey. This, of course,
brings the dangers of the transfer of diseases to a much greater
extent th-n in civilly Ilfs. For the scientific senate I worked on
epidemic rer.lngltis. ’t all times we had c-ses of this frequently
fatal diac-oc. I went through all the literature on th» subject, and
I sew th-t in cany countries military medicine was especially


interested in it


12 Feb 47-ir-S-'-3-l-Putty
Court Fo. 1


Ike English ir. India in their barracks often had actual epidemics
of meningitis. They found thrt the bacteria which cauced this dis¬
ease exist everywhere and that tl irtv — forty — fifty porcent of
the people in their nasal passages havo theco bacteria., Only under
special circunst nces incases of colds, special physical offorts
such as marching do i l ese bacteria suddenly got tie upper hand, as
it w ore, becomo donjorous, and apparently healthy soldiers fall down
and if thoy aro unlucky they are dead in twenty-four ol* forty-eight
hours.

-art was the beginning of a loi corios of oxperimonts which fin¬
ally lod to varloue measures with wi ich the military doctor is
familiar w! ich aro still In use today, the most si pie one to koop
the pooplo separated so that during sloop tho broath dooc not affoct
thoir noi.rh.bor.

Q. Professor, may I interrupt you. You havo alrondy givon two'
oxamplos of typical military modic.no, I boliovo that a p .cturo has
boon given to tl o Tribunal of Mb. t it is about. r 1 at I an intorost-
od in hero in conr.oction *ri th the trial is tlis: was military
nodicinc a typically Goiwn, I nitf.t nay, nilit. ristic phonomona,
or did tlis military nodicinc exist ov rywhmrc?

A. Tfccro w. s military medicine in all covntrl s whorovor thoro was
an army. I personally had tl.o inprocoion booauso in IPS 6 rftor tho
first World Ift.r a Goman nodical aologa.tion consisting of ono
nodical officor of tho army, tl o navy .»r.d tho Luftwaffo was undor ray
direction which was invitod to tho International Congrats in Irus-
80 l 8 .

c. *ic th t only c Congros? or u a It a socioty, a. pornanont soc-
ioty?

... The basis for it \.\.s a pomanont organisation, an intorm.tion-
al organization w*.icl included .bout fifty countrios wl ich had a per¬
manent office ir. Hors taal no r Brussels under tho direction of tho
Bolgiums.

2*74


12 Fob 47- -S'-3-2-Putty
Court No. 1


r.. I think it wcs ftt Liogc?

A. Toe, t -loco. Every two years thoao nllitrry doctors hr.d r.
ntictir.g, I attoneod the aooting ir. Buchrrorfc. 3'rr.ony hr.d bocono.a
ucr.bcr 03 -in aftor the first orld riz r althcur:! I was still a
guost r.t Brussels, rad tho lr.st "ongrerr in 1939 w; = in arhington.
It tl.oeo acetings or Congress quostlors nv.ro discus sod which *. 7 uro
important fer illltary nodicino in pee.co timo and J.I 30 rorpoct
to a pcrsiblo war, and I bolicvc th. t tho cruntrioa ccncornod brou¬
ght ono or two nilltory doctor” rho a. io a speechevgroed upon bo-
forohend at t: is Congress.

Than if I hvo ur.-oretooi you correctly, r.t thoao planned r.oet-
in:a of nllltr.ry doctors o i tho wholq world questions r ro discucsod
end tfc. dangers w-rc dircursod w'ich threatened soldiers in peace
end in war?

/ A. Yos, th.t is co.

y

* rs that the orr.o f-ing thr t w. r tho purpose of tho ueotinys
which tho Prosecution has hero cr.ll„d m-ctln'-s of conspir.-tors, tho
mootings of tho consulting specie.}icts of tho Wohrrsnch.t?

A. The purpcoe and tho :S feet of these ^ongroares v;oro exactly
tho fir.no as in our riu. tinge. After the so uo. tings, too, a printed
report of the Mooting rr.s publishod »i ich was sent to tho pv tici-
panto and to the highest nodic -1 agcnclos in tl o countries concern¬
ed. '

Ih.on tho nedioal ir spec tors oi the so co»«rtri r and their oconop-
ic advisors selected those spoochos wl icl t.-ro of special inport-
anco and bro ugi t ooaothi cr nor, cn in each country thoy were nodo
known to tho public, the saao tJ in." that t;e- did in .. so:icwhrt diff-

cront forn .Tt^r our iio.tinyc.

"• In th .ro r-ports ;1 : ch. t! e wet fe.*>ua Military doctors of tho
world n ado at those r:_etiry3 in roportiny tic r suite of their ro¬
se:-rch, cculd on. alua-a judge how they reached there conclusions?

A k fc was possible in many o.-.a-s end in oth.r cases not.


12 Feb 47-::-r*-3-3-Putty
Court Ko. 1


Q. fcow 1 t u s go Into your cr.sc Concretely, »\.t fields of nodical
research foil under your control as --my L‘odicc .1 inspector?

i, c will reach our aln -*ost quic! ly if I nontxon a few oxoraplos.
Lot u c take dysentery, for cxcnplo. I nontlonod tils or.or.plo In uy
affidavit.

1HE :HE3IL~ T: Counsel, tho Tribunal hoc listotsed to tho witness
for seno tine on funeral state:>onts of tv u nlllt ry pr$f sslon vrhidh
tho nonburs of tl o Tribunal und ratand, nd I thirk It Is rbout tl:no
that r.oro ccncroto questions are : sked and rnsw,>rcd. I understood
that counsel wr3 about to ask poxnt-d questions concerning tho nu, s-
tionc now boforo the .Yibin.nl, but tho Tribunal would not bo inv¬
ested in dircussions of questions which .re foreign to tho nrtto.ra
slid are now before th w -Yibun:.l for consideration.

DH. NEi-TE: Hr. Presidont, I lavo ..shod, “Ebr.t fioldc of nodical
research oax.io under your control as -rray .odi'..l Inspector?" dooa
not tho Tribunal bwliovo that t) is is a concrot„ question?


12 ?ob. L7-H-»TD-ii-I-Board
Court So* 1


jrjrftZ SE3RI1C: Doctor 1 can clarify for you what the Tri¬

bunal is Interested in> which encompasses not only the question you have asked
but tba entire field of inquiry that the Tribunal would like to knew something
about and I -an soing to ask a few questions, to the witness, if I nay, and ±

-hiric per’.iapa you will see $hon the tyve of informtion we would like to have
from this witness, if he can give it*

or judge seam i

Q Doctor Hanilosor, during the course of your prcsonco on-fcho witness
stanl, you have exhibited a traaondous knowlortgo of the •tanner in which the
various radical activities of the Qomn Govorrrwnt wjre' organized, and the
nannor in which they operated durian tho recent war, ar*J I should like to put
this question to youi You have heard tho testimony of tho Prosecution wit¬
nesses, an! doubtless have read tho documents submitted by tho Prosocution.

Now, lot us aswurK that such ovidonco produced by tho Pmosccution is suf¬
ficient to prove that tho nodical or.perinonts wore, in faot, carried out in
coreontratlon canps upon non-Gorman nationals without their consont, and that
such uxporlnmtal subjects were killoJ as a result of sucho xporinonts. Lot
us ass’xao further, for tho purposo of pointing up the question, that tho ovi¬
donco submitted by the frosocution is sufficient to provo that tho oxporimonts
wero ccraMctod by and for tho benefit of tho *affon-SS. Now then, in your
opinion, gainod from your intimate knswlcdgo of the frano work of tho Oerman
Govermont under Hitlor, what officials or agoncios in tho German Govomnont
would have boon rosponsiblo fer tho deaths resulting to non-Gormnn nationals
fron 3uch oxporinents?

A That would have boon those who had ordorc 1 the experiments. I must
as sum that they woro illogal crirdnal axporiawnts.

q I am assuming that for tt» sake of this question. That is a mattor
ultimately tho Tribunal must decide, but for tho sake of getting your views
lot us assume that faot.

A If it had become krown to the responsible agencies, that they wore
criminal, than the agency which had official supervision would have boon
obligated tc interfere. That would have been for the concentration camps. As
far as I know, the Raichsfuehrer Himler, Raich? Physician Grawits, sinco they


12 Feb. L7-B-«TB-t-2-5eard
C<irt Ho 1


were neiical experiments, that would be the actual circle in this sector. To
what uxtont tte Reich Health Leader Conti had anything to do with it or would
have hai aiything to do with it, 1 cannot judge. Ho would bo of fee tod if such
measures had boon originated by hin or he would have been in a position, as
Chief Health Loader of $he civilian sectorj if ho had learned of thorn he should
haro brought then up with his llinistcrs, the Reich liinistry of the Interior
or the Reich3fuehrer of the SS.

Q 'What would bo your answer if wo nay assuoe that the evidence of the
Prosecution shows that these nodical oxperlsontw were performed in a criminal

V

aannor and wcih. conducted for ths benefit of the Coran Navy?

A Then, ths question would have boon to what extant tho Navy had parti¬
cipated in this ant tor. You said, your Honor, that I had an extensive know¬
ledge of the organization of tho nodical system, an 1 I notice that tho Indict¬
ment, in spooking of thoso experiments, frequently saya "In tho intorent of
tho fohrnacht"; that is ; of caurso, a vory va.*n torr;, it is not conoroto.

Q That is precisely tho roason that I aa asking you thoso questions and
particularizing. The question uj * io whr.t would bo your answer if tho experi¬
ments woro conducted by and for tho Ooman Navy?

A If you say by tho Navy, thon thr Navy must have participate thon tho
Xavy rust have known about itj thon tho Navy ordered it or approvod it for
certain roosons; that it thereby is na!o responsible would bo beyond doubt,

Q What would bo your answar if wo assuno that tho Prosocution»s ovidcnco
shows that such experimento woro conducted b7 an 1 for ths bo no fit of tho Comnn
Air Foroe?

A If thjy wore carried out by tho Air Force, then, in uy opinion, it will
ar^in bo truo hero that the Luftwaffe, the Air Force, is responsible for it,
but with tho limitation that th? execution of tho experiments proceeded in tho
way in which the Air Farce intended*

Q Let us assume that tho evidence shows ttet although such experiments
wore not conducted by tho Air Force* that they were conducted for tho benefit
of th. Gorman Air Force, and that tho C-erran Air Forco aoooptod tho results of

?.S8r


12 Feb, h7-W-«n>-Ji-3-Soari
Court Mo, 1


tte experiments for tho benefit of the nodical prcblens in the Gorman Air
Forcoj what would be your anawir?

A If the Air Force learned about it after the <xpcrinenta i-roro completed,
and saw that they hr! boon conducted in a fora which it did not approve, it
would probably have lirarm^tha conclusion for thj future, that it would have
tc proofed ouch nora carefully than in the first case. Tho second quostion
whothor the Air Pcreo had instigated ary thin” is, in ny opinion, a theoretical
question, ^

Q What uould be ycur answer if we assuno that the ovidonoo shows that the

%

experiments wero conducted by and for tho be no fit of the Goman Arry?


Csurt So. X

12 ?eb 47-K*-5il-EHK-Gr sa ■


A- If that had been carried out by the Geraan aray, cs you say for tfco
Gernany cr=y, then I assume that there was a clear order fraa the arny, and
the -no who levued this order cannot escape the responsibility to the extent

thr.t the exoerisent vos conducted In the vcy In which he ordered It. Cf

%

etur*o, the oucitlon ie ipportrnt here at nit the ex-erlcentnl subjects. If I
recall correctly, yu* spoke of foreignore.

Q. In posing yy rmesti ;n w hi re esour.od, for the srlco^cf the {mention, (
th» t these people i re n^a-G^r./a nation/Is, incarcerated in concentration \ ,
c/nos, German concentration crt:ps, *nn that they verexexperimented upon with¬
out their consent - Vo assume those three premises for the sake of the cues- t
tion. ,

A. Ae fir re the nucetlon of volunteers is c-.ncorr.ed, ono would h-«vc to - .
sry that as fer as the experiment vr.s to a curtain fic^roc dangerous, that then
it is a proreouislte thr.t the experimental subjects be volunteers. And I can¬
not lnarflno th» t lr. the Vehr,'.acht, according to tho customs which prevailed
in Gcr.mny, tho idea would heve cone up t. use foreigners for thtoe erpori-
iionts. Thors oust havo teen s social circumstances vhlch I sann -t Jud,;o.

<w Then it is your opinion thrt it w.uld havo boon irpcsslblo for ncdl-
cal experlr.ontb t. h/vc teen carried out uoon Involuntary subjects in concon-
tri tion ca.cs vh> were non-Goman nationals whoreby hundrods of deaths occurrod
wlth-ut that fact bucaiin,c either actually or officially known to tho hitfh
officials in the respective branch of the service under whose auspices the
oxycrl-.ents wore conducted. Is that correct?

a. I understood you to say, your honor, that tho suorcr.c authorities
had ordered then in tho interest of tho branch of the Vohmacht concernod.

The fcnolddpe A tho exoeriront itself rnd the olaco whore it was carried out
w.uld result frcel that fact dine.

Ci. Let us assume, then, th/.t tho heed A tho - well, tho hoed of tho
German cr:y emld h/vc c.irectly ordered such hupan exoorL:onte to have been
conducted at Dachr.u, lot us say. And, thr.t in order to carry n those experi¬
ments it was necessary to have the human ia tor ini sent fr-x: Kctsweiler, and
that it was ols> necessary to have the apparatus and couippunt with which tho


2.c2


C~urt 2*c. 1

12 7eb 47-n-5-2-2&-Oross


oxr-«rlaesta were conducted sent free eo:s other p'rt of Germany, necoBSita-
• i-g a c-nBldarrblc amount cf detail in assembling in that one soot the scr¬
eens who were g-_leg t. conduct the experiments, tho honan subjects upon when
the experiments were going to ho conducted, pn<* tho material with vhidh the
experiments were goiu,g \o be conducted. And, lot us rasu-u, for tho sake of
•to auostion, that many hundreds A such subjects ware killed ra r result of
such experiments. Would it hare boon ohysicinlly ocaslblo for such a orogrem

A

to hi vo been carried on rnd yet the knowledge A thrt fact be known only to
the nrn at the ten vh. gave tho order and the .".an rt^ the bottcei who exocutcd
the order? Would not necosscxy agencies end At icicle in betwoen tho nan at
the top who gave the -rder rnd tho cm at tho bottoo who executed tho ordor
have known about these things?

A. Ycur Hon^r, y.u said that all kinds of crgrnixntionnl measures voro
necessary. 7or exnmplo, bringing up instruments end eoorrr.tus. Then o sub¬
ordinate agency "ust have received orders t < hnw dsllversd those things, to
have delivered thee to a certain p^cs, >r to deliver then somewhere. I con¬
sider It quite possible thrt such intermediate agencies recoivod ouch de¬
tailed MiUKMBti Without kn-ving, or without having to know, for what pur¬
poses it wrs neodod. There may to intermediate agencies vhich carried out a
particular assignment but where it was not possible to sec froo the assign¬
ment vhrt it vbs about.

Q. Y.u do not exclude the possibility, however, that those lntornedioto
agencies under cortcin c.nditi-ns may hrvo known tho reasons for the experi¬
ments or why they were being celled uo.n to oroduco ccrtrir. oquipoent rnd
mrtoriel, do you, Doctor?

A. Thrt they did lo/xn southing, I moan that occcrding t- this nro-
Svntntlrc it is oultc uossitlc that they did not kn-v anything because in
view of thu strict eocrecy thi t existed - one must assume thrt a vnr was
going -n - rnd in view f munlshoeot for breaking secrecy, and in view of
repeated orders and Fuehrer orders which were p-stod in every barracks rnd
in ever/ office, and there were ell kind* of Placards in trains, etc. In
view f these circumstances cvery.nc was ellcved to learn ebsolutely vhrt ho


2 :y


Court He. 1

12 >'eb 47-M-&-S-LEK-Grce«


,jy i to kn-v. I ec of tM G'ti&l'.n thnt an order say very veil hcvu been givon
fer e particular action end that the -rgnrlration, evon if e cccorratively
high agency, would not know the uurpoee. Xny I give an exeitulc that hr8 just
occurred to at? I believe in connection with the chanter It vae lenraod here
that the chanter vra not delievored to Dackeu at ell tut it wa.e intentionally
delivered eaievhero else to -«revent it being ie/.e cleur that it «r.s to to
taken to Dachau tccrusc the nano Dachau hrd r. certain escciia notoriety.

That VAild fit into this question.

<t- What do you acna ty notoriety? x

A. I oeen the norual Oornan know only one concentration coup ty nece,
whether toceuae It voi the biggoet or cldeat, I don't know. But, with the
nano concentration et?, the :..niel Oeruan of any clcaa associated the ivtuo
Dc-chru.

Q, How long had that teen going cn in the Oen-ar. nation, doctor?
a. V* were all surprised and I havo rlroady aeld that after tho cnoltu-
lrti-n until the 23rd .f June I vea perhaps under ovaervati n tut atill at
liberty, and that I was atlo to road ntwa-wuera end thctl vro able to carry
_n c averaati<n» and I was able to learn that, for exonulo, nruco liko
Rnvonabruck, Delsen. Buchonwtld, rad othora wore unknown to all of the beetle
to wheel I talked, evon the highest loaders, and I vr.a able to note about the
relieving situation. On the whole, that it, people c-fiing frai verims dis¬
trict«, the nnue Dachau uni known, and the nnr.e Crrntonburg. I should liko
tv sey that the ncao Orrnienturg cuat bo ldenticrl with Saxenhauaer. - that
vra tho coup north of Berlin. That was tho knowledge of concentration eanns
ir. tho broad unaa of the Gonna population. 1 assume that oora^ne vho 11 vo
at Welnar knew tho c-ncentreti.n canp at Buchtnwnld, ainllirly in othor
■Jlr.ces. Ho doubt if Osmans hrd soon the experiences aa I have soon nap*
end tto ea:o for Alliea - there were dotona of concentration canoe that
everyone will to just as estvniohed ea I.

^ now lwi« do y -u think that the Oercrn people knov of Dachau as being
a notorious since? Vhen do y.u thick they first began to learn of that fret?
A. ferhaoa I did n-t express nyaelf right. rerhaea I should h-vo cald


Court 5c. 1

12 Jet 47-K-5-4~£3(-Oross

‘.fact Sechcu vac better known. 1 did not .lean that there vr.s nothing wrong
exactly. I merely -leant to aay that anon* the 'X.-mlatlon if anyone said nny-
thin,; r^einet a ooliticrl oenen there wee Mid. "3e caroful, you will be * ea t
to Dachau.* That did not a can anythin*- eaoaclolly vea *r .ng about it, emo-
cinlly aiace naaurance ves rencAtedly givon that the noodle weru treated not
•orerely end they were kent in our field one. hy,;lenic field rad there were
exemplary coaditiona thoro. Later I heerd a teething like thrt*rtcut Suchen-
wcld, that accordingly everything vn done, nod vhethor it vj-a in the hoepitrl
or in the whole cm*> or whatever it vea that poor ccndUima began only na r.
direct affect of the air war, when, for oxa-.ale, lneterd <f 10,000 thcro wore
auddenly 2C to 40,000 crowded there.

Q. At what tine did that begin, Dr. Haodlosar, when the crowdod con¬
dition bagi-a at Dachau, aec-rdlng to your knowledge!

A. X cannot give any exact indication about that. It ia, no doubt,
connected with the weakening of cur front. I hrd the exrxt data on that but
It waa all taken away fron =e. Ctherviee, overy 50 kllcetera the onc\v ad-
vrncad condition* been* verse. Our hotiitola vero in the acne situation.

The:* voro wercrovdod three, four, ten tinea beenuae ao :.uch aron woe lut
and vo vero forced to AvercrcW. too regaining hoenitala. I cannot givo any
exact figures. That Aononded *n the or-gross A tho wrr.

Q. You think tho knowledge A the oondltln of Dcchru, that la, the
overcrowded condition, nay hrvo b«c-:o known to y m ir. 1942-43, along In that
ooried?

A. So.

Q. Later than that?

A. Yea.

Can y.u ary that It wt.b in 19^.7

A. aside fr'x. tho influence cf the withdrcwrl of the front, the -oolnt of
tho evacuation ce.sended on tho *ffcnts of the r ir war end I cvnn-t ary fren ay
awn oxperieacus that that to gen in 19*3 end that we Gernani knew, and fron
k. erlctn -fficiel re .rts knew that Kcvdibcr 19-3, r.side fraj the Shinoland,
frvu the west which suffered fr^.-i ettseka ;:uch crrlier, th -1 this began pjic*


■ 2-5


&-urt Sj. 1

12 Jet 47-K-5-£-ia / .-3r t ■


tecr-e .-.ore bo In the section ncd In 193.


I Jura no further quaBtl&nl nt ?hl» tin©, Dr. 1'elte


Court I


12 Fob U7-& - 6-1 - LJG - Cook


51 DS. KELTS:

Q- The questions tfeich the Jorge asked you wore hypothetical,
that is, asswdng that Wat the Prosecution has presented is true, and
that the experlnenta were criminal, now I ask for the approval of the
Tribunal to ask a general question once ■nore, because I aust ask tho
defendant concretely about the fields of research with which he \ras
concerned as arry «edical Inspector, so that you -ay see that tho sub¬
ject of the indictment was that exoerinents were conducted under his
control too, but that he had nothing to do with thos^ experiments which
are the subject of the indictment. Hay I ask this question.

1HE FRE3IDS7Ti rCiat is tho question?

by dr. mat

Q. Mill you pleas*, speak conc.etolyand as briefly as possiblo
and indicate tho fields of rusoarch with which you were concerned os
Arty Medical Inspector?

A. I cannot give than briefly. Ihorc woro qulto a number of thorn
but I can mention those *ich havo ary significance hero, first tho
quostion of sulfonamides, I onn only say that that was important with
us sinco 1937, that wo later had a central agency from 191*1 on, which
was especially interested in it, that was the special hospital of the
OKH at Brussols, but I night almost say that all rurcarch workors,
the specialists at the front, not only surgeons, but also bacteriolo¬
gists and those especially intorestod in chords try devoted spocial
attention to thi3 field, and that there was an urtorokon chain of rusoarch
workers boginning at the front and going deep into Gcrnary, and that if
one looks at tho reports of our meetings, then or?6 repeatedly finis tho
subject of sulfonamides, and finally one finds the fact that the quostion
was not sottlodj that that is a subject, that was a Tield of rusoarch
which was continued until the end of the war and boyond, and 1 personally
after the invasion used spocial research troops in the .»ost, on^r one
of which actually cace into action, and what we intended was no lo^er
possible.


Csurt I


12 Fob 1»7-Si - 6-2- LJQ * Cook

<• hat do you jean by "research troopa"?

*v. hey ware consulting physicians or specialists who had the
assirraaont to establish special bandaging places at the front and
treated the mounded in ^danger of gangrene with sulfanilamide and from
tho parts which had to be removed they took samples with thur* to the
test tubus and tested theu bact^riolcgically, and they carried out
other oxporlaor.ts in teat tubus, and they were not to lot t!hjso
murriod out of their hands, to ass then on to u different aoctor every
two or throo days, but to follow then to a hospital'In tho west whore
those people are all collected and whore in a la^go laboratory thoro
is a possibility to ccrpluts this priedtivc research.

Q, Vury »o 11, that was tho rjothed of the research of tho Amy in
tho fiold of sulfcnauidoo?

a. Xus, it was not co*pl«tod with that, but I am supposed to bo
briof here, ,

w« Now so.)thin' else, ’-hich was nontioned hero, hepatitis?

a. llo havo hoard a tt reat docl about hoputitis already, a field
which was especially onphoeixed fcocauso it Ms new and it lasted until
tnc l _ st day of tho war and wao not completely settled, and as wo heard •

Q. Just a .Inuto. <hero and how did you carry on research about
hepatitis?

A. New I must say aoaething abcut research. C*io .oust distinguish
between clinical rosuarch and laboratory or oxp.ri^ntal research.

v. Prcfecsor Qutxoit, I beHove, has already told us that.

A « ‘l ureforo, I must tell you at tho wry front, operational
areas, there cannot ha any oxperiaontal research, but there can bo
clinical research, ovon in hospitals, which c m be continued at hone
end that wrm what was done, and research on animals for oxpuriraonts,
that, of course, can only be done at here. Our workers, the consultir^
physicians did that, whether in the niiitary sector or tho civilian
sector nnkos no difference, and other workers did the sa-im


2^eo-


12 7ob-W-6-o-LJi-Cooi>-J?
Court I


Qa ^nd concretely you woro At the ncoting in Breslau as Profoscor
Cutset t said!

*. Tes,

Q» Vhnt vtts the situation as far as you know at the tino ns Amy
Kedical Ine -octor, and *hnt da you know about cxporir.cnts which had boon
conducted n? to that tine* and was anything snid about whothor othoro wore
to be dono7

1^ knowlodgo is limited to the big rooting on internal nodicino.
on the 13th and 14th of October, 1943, In Vienna, where only aninnl
cxporlncnts voro roported on, and at tho Breslau ncoting whore only
nninel oxperi-jonts wero nontioned. I went to Breslau fron hoadquartcra,
especially for that ono thoro and listened to tho nccting at which
Schroibor presided, and I was glad that Schroibor had ouccoodod in
getting all of thcoo scientists togothcr who voro partly in tho nriy and
who wero partly eivilian, and that thoy had agrood t'- tho work which
Schroibor had suggested and tho oxchango of rosulto ff«i ono group to
nr.oth.or. Ho thing was said about aeperinants on huann boings in concen¬
tration carps at this rooting. Tho n;otlng wac in Juno, 1944,

3, H'.w, another fiold, how about nolnrln?

A . Krlnrir. - a disonso in which wo woro greatly interested, of
c- ur sc, r.ot only bocauso of Africa, but bo cause of tho 3alknno and othor
areas. Tho nost torriblo noct of onlaria which I nysolf saw was in
Salonika whore it was oron worso than in a fiold of particular intoroot,
in the Caucasus, whoro I looked at the nalaria prophylnxio of tho
Huasione, nalaria expert was Professor Bodorwald, Ho has his tro¬
pical hj'gicno institute in Berlin at tho nllitary r.cdical acadony. Ho
had zoologists rad entomologists at his disposal there who advised
bin and he had special nalaria training groups which wero to go to the
front ir. Africa., Italy and tho Balkans and to lo-k for the enuao of
nalaria and oonbat nalrxir. and hold cr ursos for the doctors. « spocicl
laboratory train was created which was takon b7 rail to tho worst plr.cos
and covcrrl especially trained doctors holpod the troops in


12 Tob U 6-4.- L J£-Cook-J?
Court I


their prophylactic noasoro*. In rogerd to nnlaria research wo had a

dosed subjoct undor Frofossor Hndenwald, who was a fomc? nllitnry doe-

•^r. Before tho war he was a Professor of Hygieso at Hoidolberg, nnd our

aalarin question, as for as you would spook of it being conplotod, wo

had a very g od prophylactic noasuro in atabrinc, end for troatnent

through the nev drug such as placiaino. Vo had nado considornhlo nd-

theco but I W'.uld not want it to bo nisundorotood, what I said boforc,

Tho research was not c/'oplotod and wont on, end thcro woro nnny problcno

to bo solved, a certain advance had been roachod fron uy point of viow

%

bcc&asO I o-uld issue an ordor regulating prophylrjcio and tror.tnont in
ordor to provont rolnpscs.

Tie. Thoro will bo a rccons of a fow nlnutos at this tlno,

(A short racoon was taken)


2890


12 Pcb 47-:i-S‘-3-l- L cs3~r
Court Ho, 1

THE ’uiESEAL: Poraons in tfco courtrcon will pleaso find thoir scats.
lfcs. Tribunal is again in acssior.

SIEGFRIED HAND LOSER - Resumed
DIEZ97 SXAUNATEON - (continued)

3Y DR. !EL1E:

Q. i/itnoos, wo faevo previously spoken aboutthu malaria oxper-
lmonta and re a. arch wild the *rny and tl.o l«odle:-.l Inapcctorato hen-
dlod, Bxo froaocutionhas not prusentod any ovid^nco that it was
ccnr.cctod ir. any way vdth tho nelarift oxperliwnts at Dachau. Sinco,
however, the Prosecution has claimed that in thia respect, I ir.uot
..3k you tho quo at Ion: Did you or cro of your officos hc.vo any conn¬
ection with rtgr rd to tlo nr.laria oxporlmonta or with tlo oxperinon-
ta at wc.chr.u which woro there carriod out 'yy Dr. Shilling or by
others?

A. No.

Did you over obtain lmovlad o of ouch oxporironta?

A, w o.

'. Now probably you will loiow from tho field of your rosearch, you
will 1 avo rogul.-rly rucoivod rop • rta. ihr.t wea t) o procoduro?

A. Do you n- n genorally about roaoarch or about nr.larla in
particular?

Mc.lr.rla, sulfon..nid«.3, ard wh..t you havo Jurt eta tod, and all
tie other fields w’ri l w_ c.nnot mention and discuss because thio
could load ua tee fra*,

A. I havo received reports about t ia reaearcl in v:rioua ways.

Oi one occasion throng, tho consulting pfcyaicima who wero porson-
fll~ p rticipating in then or wl o w.rc personally inforraod of them.

, for oaccaplo, through the *1 litary Todlcal ..cadony or through
-loir official reports whicl i re frequently submit tod to vs. Also

lecture of individual a who visited ab at Berlin .nd wj.o reported
about the etato of affaire.


2vyl


12 ycb-K-S?W-34ossor-JP
Court I

Q. Ihun ;*<-u rccclvod such reports free your field of cnnpotccco.

3<r-' we havo to dctor-.inc hnv tho fiold of your eonpotonco is correctly
uadorBt'od* Vo hero el rendy Bo nit vith tho question of the connection
between the Vchmacht Kodiool Sorrico to tho Yaffen SS nnd ve have do-
tcrr.inod thnt this concerned tho frontal uso of the SS. How vhnt wore
y«ur eonnoctions to tho Vnffon SS in the Kodidal Service nt ty<no7

\ There were no connections whatsoever.

. • * • X

E3 FT^SIHI.T: Counsol cv inquire of tho witness c.s to vhnt ro-
ports concerning onjorinonts ho did rccoivo, when he rccoivod then nnd
fr c. whr.t brenChos of tho eorricc tho reports Cfno. I did not noon
to restrict counsel's cxar.ination so etr. ctly thnt ho could not ask th-t
question.

3T ISU 3i23l

Qa Tou have Ueord tho quostion of tho Prooidout. i/ill you plonoo
nnsver it?

*, in order to ,;ivo a concroto acaaplo, for cxrci>lc, tho Spoelrl
Surgical aospitol at Brussels oulaittod tho roporto about its work
directly to tho Amy Medical Inapoctorato; then for tho consulting
phyciciaao thoro was a roport-collecting agoncy within tho Military
Nodical Accdony. ?irst of nil, nil of tho roporto wont t ro which
tho consulting physicians had to submit. Thoy voro thoro ovnluatod by
tho r»coulting physician of tho Amy liodioal Services, — evaluations
about corerlcncos nnd results or nVut questions which still rcr.ninod
opon.

Q, Voro thoy free tho consulting hysleisno with tho Military
Aesdeny or fr(-i others?

Zxclusivoly frm the physicians of tho Hilitcry ’lodicrl Acodcoy.
An' fir.nlly, in es abbreviated f->r=, boforo thoy wero sent out again
to the front md at hone, they also voro br-ught to ny attention. Or
there voro reports directly froc tiw Kilitnry Nodical Aerdory which also
were sent to tho Amy Kodical Inspector.

2092


12 IttVSi-StM-3-Dcsacr-JF
Court I

Did you sot the roports in other ways?

i >jy i atnto with regard to the question of tho President there
«„ report. ohout «ort «hlch hod orLon within nr flcl? of ccpotonco
r* Arsy '.xdlcal Inspector.

Q. I then cono to your connections to other flolds. First of nil
to -he Vnffon SS at hone. Did you know or did you hare cay official
contact with the Axnod Forces Institute for Research In tho Ahnenerbe?

A. -Jo, I did not even know that institute. \

Q, Did you know tho Hyclonic Institute of the 7nffon SS under Pro-

fossor ISragcrral^?

A, I only know that Institute hy none because boforo wo wore trans¬
ferred froa 3orlln, I pncaod by tho Institute nt Zchlondorf. I have no-
rcr been In:ldo. I did not hrvo any contacts with it.

Q. Did you know tho dopnrtaont for Typhus and Pod oar eh in tho

Concentration Cenp Buchonwald?

A. ?o.

Q. :;crc you youroolf over In tho Concentration Cr'tp Buchonwald?

A. ro.

q, !Wj »a we V- one of tho -.o.t lhphrtn.it nuo.tlon. for you In
thtc trial. Or. tho ba.l. of an entry In the Dins Blojr, It ha. boon
stated that Profoosor Dior, tha Director of tha SrtOcov In.titnto for
Tjphu. rnd nr. 3crnhord Scheldt, nf tha .airy ::odlcal iMpodtornto had
visited tho 3nchcnvali Canaontmtlau Oca®. Did you ardor .uch a rlsitt
K 'Jo.

Q. ’Jea this visit, reportod to you?

A. So. Only froi tha d-cunont. riant tho Dine Diary I hnro found
out "bout it horo In Fuember-;.

Q. L-Ul you ploa.o oxplaln that to u= - hn» this oan ho poa.lhlo


2893


12 ?c^>S^-8~i-Losscr-£P

CflUTt I


thrt till* wrs ot brought to /NV knovlo' ~o7

*, I cannot explain that boenuoo I don't know tho reneono for this
visit. Only tho pooplo ooncorr.od, Scheldt and Eier, can jive you nny
isfornation about thrt, or porhaps ny Chiof of Staff.

Q. Veil, wo shall question then r.s witnesses. According to this
3lsj Dl"ry which I hr.ro alrondy sontinnod, by order of tho Supreme
Cornrnd of tho Amy, tho sshrinj Varies, tho Robert IToch Institute, end
the ftrphus rad Virus Heserrch Inetituto at Erdcow, ore rllojod to hovo
been ordered to produco yellow fovor vaccine. How according to tho
entries in tho 2>inj Diary, a ro-oxrcination of tho yollov foror vaccino
took pl.-.co ct Buchonwald. It is stated also frnr. Kr.-kow, What do you
know about it2


12 7cV;i-9-l-P^-'=oha3-JP
Court I

i. Yith rojard t« tho question for tho ordor of producing such a
% ool r-j. I n«o-jno that that crqr have boon the caaa boemso under condi¬
tions in Africa such a ^r.ccinc won necessary for us.

Q. "ere you trying to find a yollow fever vaccino?

A. Co, it was only a quostior. of producing It. It was tho pro-
coduro to produce ouch a vaccino which was ciaplifiod; it was oely a
technical production in tho laboratory of tho instltuto; tho woll
known Poltlor vaccine. x

Tho ^inj Diary also nonti'-nod tho fr.ct that ohipaents of lice,
which had been Infacted with typhus, vero eont to 3uchcnwald in ordor
to infoct pooplo at 3uchonwnld do you know anything about that procodure?

K Ho.

q. I's, .President, in this concoction and in ordor to clarify tho
• tato of affaire, I shall subr.it Ittcuncnt EA--13, in Document Book
Hmdlooor 11 on pr^o 33 and I want to preoent it as Exhibit 9. It In an
affidavit by tho dofondant Dr. Eovon. At tho tine Dr. Hovon was in tho
concentration esq? Buchcnwnld, ns you rry know and ho has personal kno*r-
lod,;o of tho shijocots of lico and to this question ho ft-toe, rad I
road:

■Tho aM{cant of lico, nontionod in tho Dine Dinry and in tho
tosticony of tho vitnonoos Dr. Kogan and lirchhoinor, cano fro= Dr. Kruua
Lvov. I know this for certain bccruso I infornod Dr. Haas that tho lico
had boon destroyod.

■I can therefore nffirr., fror. -y own knovlodirc that the otatenonto
of tho witnesses Dr. Ko^n rad Kirchhcircr - Dr, Kogan was not yot with
Dr. Din,; at that tl-.c - that tho lico ohipaocts oono frr-r. tho CSC-: Ins¬
titute at Cracow are besod on a nicconcoption."

I requort th-t this affidavit bo accepted as cvidonco, na exhibit 9.

In tho Dirv Diary, tho Voigol vaccine is frequently nantionod*
because r Iso the other vaccines which arc r.or.ti^ncd in the diary frequently
were used for re—cxar.inntion; I wont to ask yau i: this was also tho


2895


12 ?oVK-*KF-9-W:aofcaa-JP
Cwirt I


c*-jo with roscrd to tho Voigol wccinot

^lrofidy In 1939 during tho c«ipaign in Poland, tho eany hr.d
ite own tynkys research instituto at Crooow and it produced tho typhus
YACeicOa wnicr. was trieon fron lico according to tho ^oi^ol nothod. This
mccino hM rlready for nany yoars toforo teen testod In othor countries
nnd it had proved itself* a


2095 (a)


12 T cV ^s-wi^:^-‘-J p

Court I


n hod not only been to.tod »* *»- «. in «porlnont. on

^ hut ^cnorally it hod boon — “ "

ichcc e. a. » « fr-dnoin *“• ltt ““ “ 4 thor ° M

romon for sculled r^.lnn.lon ,. « ho. boon- -died hero. M. ™v

el: o hod t» rocofSlMd In nmy f.oldn.

q. Whore did Bnchonviild obtain thin rneolnol

A. I cannot any that. « «— — » *° ^ W *

If th0 tfaffon SS wonted «o obtain thl. m.cln. for 'it. unit. * <»«

then It on, dol irorod to the naln «dl«l «* of the Wfen M.

A* dollvorod in the «, voy V other ^nclo. end If the office
„ f ,ho lfoffon SS wonted to here .one of thl. mcclno, they prohnhly

„ w tore turned to the nnln nodlc-1 T'» « 3orlln -

Q, I on now enalnc f the txtln auction. to the action of the

typhu. dloontolon* for thl. I - ^ « *» ^

^ IT. K«. Before wo po.. on to the next exhibit.

»tn T u hf/o the wltne*. .tote *. *. *to. - ™ - * l »

office r-ioney he * mooted nt the tine, which nceordln, to

Dr. Enron thcao lleo .hijnont* crr.o to the corp.

^ aao, You hro herd the quctlon. vitnosc; < taw Dr.

Hvsl

<E 3 y^SSi I do not « *» per.onnlly. I only hno. that ».
ga , a ™ the aireetor or o coUnbornter >t o typhuo.rcoeorch inotltute
w the n»e of Bc&rlne which teword the end of 1«3 hod Been e.tohlUhed

nt , m . The institution hod nothing V. do -•> ° *•" ^

0 . for no X M *. — wo. -» n r, her of the Vohntocht end what

clTlllnn - tuney «. M. -uperlor ^ , - — *“

,, X oenr-ot ... X al~yo —— » to he on industrial onto.

price.

3? 33. 22LY3:


12 ?cb-j;-9-2-PEP-i:cchfiZ>-JP
Court I


Ojt lx. President, thoro will bo witaossoB hoard with rognrd to this
quOBtion.

At I it .-.tod, this fvLlo.Tcd typhus ca.Scrcncc which you will find in
Locanont Book 12 roquirco dotnilod explanation. lie • Prosidont, it io
>oarer.t Book 12, pego 36, Purthoir.oro, tho Prosocutioj. in oormoction
with thin cfiostion hno sulr.ittod on "Xfidrvit fron tho ifoll-kr.ovn Kopo
Dictoch# This Ik.eunont 'Bo. 1413 was subsequently Buhr.ittod nnd I do
not Icv-v its exhibit nenbor by tho x


2896 (a)


12 Fob. 47 -K-9->PO*- Hoohan
Court So. 1


Prjsjcaticn. I therefore request ttot you reed ir. Paragraph 6 wh*-t is stated
.b^ut i. 'iscussijn of Kapo Diotsch. “IV.ore are two docuasnts about tliis alleged
discuss! n, pa ; ... one cf the Dinr D1 thy an. th* affidavit by Dietsch. The
prooccuti.<r. has not stct_v^ on w*at two Documents ;r which one of the two
Documents if supports itself. Apparently, it is sup* ox-tin;-, itself on both. One
lanti.ns a discussion in Kov-aber an.’ the other -xv, mentions a discussion of
Dicuajcr 29th; r..w a pre l iainary question; Jo you kn.w where yxi were on
Ducecbcr 29th, 1941?

A. No, I ctnnot oteto that exactly. In cnnojctiiti wity. the .into of December
29th, I nly kr. w that at the onJ of December , 1941, 1 certainly was at the
headquarters n. tbtt /.r certain «i the plat >t December, 1941, I was in the
Hearlquartors - ty~t was How Year’s Eve. I ccnr.ot statu with certainty if I
was tit the Headquarters «. the 29th.

Q. I j aokini tbc qu-sti «r. in vie.. A the 2nd entry >n Pa e 1 of the
Din/; Diary, where it is slat- in rd.r to test typhus vaccine, tin Concontrat
Coop Buchuiwald has been chosen. It is t state who Selected the Conccntroti
Cwap Duchjnwild, but with coneldoratixi to the fact that y.u are allcg* to
have been present at a discussion of December 29th, I would lik^ to doturmino
if it is -t least clear that on the second of January you coul* r. t p.ssi?ly
fv.ve been at Berlin x»ni it was impossible for y-u to take part in any
confei-uncc.

A. Or. January 2nd I was Certainly not in Berlin.


2S91


12 :-.b- -J.-IC-l-iitnabick

C.urh I

I r. "it ycu V st w ur 'J'J-fn If such a conference whic:. Jr
senta'..red in the Ding Diary under t!:o dateline of the 2?th of December l?iil
aetirli.* df t'.:* plnce . I^fc tba s cirds oi ersone -ndwiih the sr.je
contents?

... I heard the first ti.e c. r tt r -fter I had been arrested .and
I heard of it in the iiterro;;' or. center it (/norursui towards^ ho end of
Sept«bor 1‘ 4$. There the iaterro .'tor road 'O re excerpts fros n document

X

which, '8 far ~s I know not/, con'-axnid several things which ar scLso sectioned
in the ‘/in. Diary. Ir. general it dealt x.itht»:pcrijj:ntr in tne 3uetonwr.ld
Concer.tr'tion "“'ip#

I at-.ted that I only got to know the nmw of Buchentald .".'ter tho

c ipitulat an, and t the ease ti>c that 1 ad sever visited Buchonwald, and

that ..it t »Mch h“d taken place thoru T»wre unknown to no* Thon tho in-
t rro. - tor o-l t -at. It was superfluous for V dor.; th .. tx.cr.vc.. they had

a phot r .aii ren ouchcm Id *fh„ru I wai ?. r. be- other rlth t. j ..ic'isfuchrer

and Conti; furth. earc,tbo7 had j r cord fres tchonrold which 1 was alleged
to h Vc t igntd.

I thon I'opUod tc t..-. lnt«rrof.ator t h t this was .iot correct, and then
said .hat ttoeocbcuBjata t._-r- air. - d> on th. n~y, and that thbj would.be
presented to a. at the v.ry 1* • : i on .. m following day* Howuvor, this n-vor
hupp-'fi-d “-fid iT*r iinco th.cc difficult d-y® in s»olit ry confinu.xnt,—

P.. cKiKZY: li tao ir: >m 1 pL.rtsc, first h_ isked ni.4 vhothei* or not
the -act- - toe' piece on the 29th Of December l?lil ind now wo have listurxd
for five ndrmtos to tr*. first tipj ho hu-rd - j .m t the Booting and *rta t hnppono<
to hin ~n -ho rr.a going to present . - tith documents and so forth. I think
it ir :i qu: to i- .at.rial and i * - if ,vj ould confine hinsclf to directly

answer pactions v.. would get-long *®:ch faster.

d'.. _ : ay it plt'&: tho frisuncl, I believe th th. pros. out!on

ns .. 1 oi.ly cLvotud s. ._rl hours to tur - ct, but several •' ys, sy reading
all possible accusations.


12 -b-. -J.'-lC-Z-UL.’.ouck

C'-urt I

’ . ;7. l 3ZTx Counsel any proceed with the ex aiiwtion.

3. ; 3 y "a-. ’cite) :lc<sc continue

... -v_r since I have natur- % y c civ-tartly occupied xysclf with this
stion. X can only st"te os-; t..in in c on with it. that a conference

in which U, x which his been yr-se.itcd lure i& allugod to h-v_ boon planned,
nvwly, to carry out illegal .x erasaents or. hioau beings, 7 have never*'parti¬
cipated ir. any such conf-renco, r.nrl in connection with this xnust state that

*

I tuVw naturally had discussions in tb_ winter of ’Ll and 'Ii2 "lao with
people free the civil ncdic-1 serviej. That oa;. hr.vu boon Conti, end I
probably -so h d discussions with C-ildcaoister. However, then, the stato of
-.ft Its ti'3 as fellows: Toward tii- c tv. o: tl- ye r 1911 at the vari.us places
in tit Scat, ty-j,us bc c an to ao.*cr to a -..erasing extent. Ifcor- • a no
doubt tii-'. I. ie nur r of eas.sv.as rcr.-fr ,.

the o'SAinst .typvis Ln itself it ooOb tt . '.owevor, as

a rocult 0;' t.- surprise -.<hlch .as caused to us ;• tfw canpaign in the Zest
lr. J v r.c 19 hl the ^edicil s.rvico had n^t been able to c-rry out - dtlousing
process bohiad the operation croc, hhead 01 tind also in the area of opjr*-
tions.

iti; c- .xtensJon of trv front In the Iwt and in view of the . ct that
in tie jn r v.n.a ,r.t vhlci: icr.erly .-as rolend at V ars.n- - nd oth.r places,
typhus occurrud rcquontly t:u c'.-nser *f “ spoadin, of th ••lso.se to the horac-
lar.d bocca*j incro'Shg’-i great, r. hat tl;. c~s-s of typhus bo gar to increase

13 shown o. t v.i. hi-;-, nta>-r:. m e t .phuc unfortunately ronehod with us
in th \.-rs l?L-2 and U 3 . That it pi'ye:' a pj-iicular part is-Iso shown by
the d-tcs-i.lch are not ’.mown t - -a zx.\. :ut the lectures' ith tv aldcf
of t.i-. ,Ln.r 1 staff, wt.r-., fore _fl_. ■ ihink it was in January or ; -rch
1912, .alreati; 10,000 - nd s vor~ hundr- c-: s oi typhus had b_.n registered,

13 CO of tber. - 03 V-TO f -tal. .md 1 as U ttbL, t • stato

- t is ti > if 1 reported to OeR-r.aloberst Haider the total number of
ta.e ens.s as they had occurred, only .a.nut the :n=b-r which had bcienxcached
during the pruvi'us few conths.


12 7.b- nr.buc --


.curt I

rae cbfi preventive. j-.'Bure? did have * vaccine which ve
-r- pr .'xciB«, ouraUvwS. Hoirevor, <• r.oro or* lir-dtcd in its production,
r C'U rj*..number o. 35,0^) portxo: pcraor.th, and it nay be that it
is the nuaber of boconoer 19U1. I had fcivon the order th-t the production
of this vaccine be increased r.t all casta. I can r aeebor for certain that
I had dircusstona -went tnr.t cud v 1 uct at ho.*. -no Iso tl.it 1 probably have
discussed ituLth Conti, and I rw quite ou. t 1 discussed it with

OUdJBoistor. •-

I did this for r. certair. purpose and vith a curtain plan a..d I have to
uaphasito ir. this respect that I, i .szy odical Inspector, or even if I had
already be-n t:.e ch-of of the Vehroadit odical Service, which I was not nt
tint t: to, ! did not have any of: iclcl in_ uonco on the ci* linn coctor, I am
of the opinio, th.t \t the ti-c. -no qu.-t.on o first to do scribe the danger
at home of U\.r typhus situation t .ie front, wlach typhus n iy\t cause; and
secondly, to rise . x lnt out tc t. -a t t tie dole-ring procedure bet.?oonbia
.re o' op.rat_ooa -utdttu hOBolan*' had not bocr. obstructed t sufficient

nr yet or th-*t it had only oe-n e: . blirhed to qdto an insufficient ox-
tont; ant th .t durint th- »int r period the ch nce3K.ru 7-ry slight th'.t tho
construct on Ceuld be inprovod.

Secondly, in n; opiuiai., 1 ;v. pointed out that w. h-d r. v.accino but onlj
in such a li.-is -wtont ta t a. w_r suable te riv anyt- inj to the p-oplo
at haie ...cyt for c . sliyt xr «.x- ti .-is| and thirdly, I oclicve that

I have ask -1 fivf-ssor jilekr. st-r .. - ail praviour experiments >y -*e to
rbt-in infar.ation : to how uctu 'j. t. cth- r typhus vaccine could bo used —
which was rat mo fret lie: but fre c _c'..r — by l-rafessor Otto at

Fr.nkfurt, by tho it.bort Koch Institute. ,ia ..r in, and *1 by the Ichring
rkr . arburg, that actually bchr Lear me I had net succeeded in obtaining
ny • . • inf r ti r. t.ut it, vh-.c in g-a.ral this v-ccine was being us-d
and h effective it was.

I era. re ±r that Oil victor — I don't kn» if it war in Iwcombcr

I


9 ^


12 7oW:-JB-U-l^Paity-JP

Cosrt I


^r.d I hr.vc certainly rooauBondod to tho nor. with whoa 1 discus sod this
problcn under consideration of tho situation ns it oxistod with us to do .
everything ir. ordor to now obtain this so fnr prcviously-1 r. eking orpo-
rioaco end to fain additional infoxention. la ny opinion, this could
not wT.ua o rry difficulties at p!1 bccauso in tho civili : soctor nt that
tire good opportunities existed to carry out this test in nrcnj^ In tho
Z~.st or In other regions vhoro tho ior.,;cr existed and t< toot tho natter.

0. STow I vnnt to coao back to tho question whleh*iow has to ho
put in such a way. Did you participate in any discussion with tho circlo
of persons re it in stated in tho Dir.r Diary?

% ro.

Diyou aitond n conforonco which ronchod a resolution that*
ns tho Pro so cut ion h~s intorprotod it, tho typhus rosonrch was to ho
continued by c-nyln: out oxp.rinonto on hurra beings by infocting
healthy pooplo?

A . Fes

Q* ’. r oo tho vaccination of concentration crip ian-tos or prlconoro
frr c* icontratioa cvrps discussod nt nil in tho conforoncoo?

a. ro.

Q. In tho c oroo of such a discussion was your c ntnet to inoti-
tutos of the Vrffon-SS, was it the suh.ioct of tho dlncunsiono?

A. !Io.

Q. If I nadorot-nd T' u correctly, y< ur t-sh was fulfillod whon
you printed out tho seriousness of the situation in tho Dost to tho Hono-
l.-r.d ~r.' when you pointed out to the that tho arry ty no.-ns of its
institutes and its vaccines was unable t*- ~ivo nay of it to the Hoa&Lamf?

\ Toe.

Q# -o y^u !ci r v thr.t pnr^Taj'fc 6 r »f the ccc^nd do cur.on t ronti/‘DG
tho fret that Dr. Dine is alleged V- hnv nttor.dcd this circle of persons
which, is not nenti'-nod in tho Ding Diary itsolf7 Have you discussod
this quest!- r. ray .tine with Dr. Ding?


2902


12 7 ; b-»I—0?-l 1-2-Pu t ty—JP
Co-3-t :


■*. ro.

Is the KC'::d Dlotsch dneunont Profoseor Rose has boon nentionod.
Did 7''U discuss tola question with Mel

A. I hftTO novor diocuasod It with bin at any tlno.

0, ;rn*r -a - procaution ne Defonao & unsol, I would llko to p.sJc you
tho follovin,; question: "111 y< u pie- o ror.d tho loot contonco of tho
first entry which states; "Since nnlrrl oxporinar.t it>aa nrit porait o
aufficiort cvrlur.tlon, tho expori-onte ;uat bo carried out 03 hun.-n boingo.
Tov let ur. neeur.c that this atntcncnt h~.fi been cn'c In jnur dlGcnsoiono
ir thla wry. Hnv would you hwo lntorprctod it?

A. If I ror.fi over tho scntonco nnd I dr. r.ot ’-now anything about
tho incidents ne they hnvo been proaentofi by tho Pr< so cut Ion, 00 thoy
nro atntofi In the dneunont horo, I would not find anything at nil which
would cause no V. bo ahochcfi boenuao I would n.asuno that tho word "ox-
pcrir.cr.t*, which noro and r-.ro aofna to nn unfortunate word — fco cololy
at.-toa that tho ucas export".out nnfi tho n~.no uoo of bnnnn boingo r.uat
t'o place in order to finally roach tho clarification nbut ltB offoo-
tlvanoaa r.c r. yrovontativo on tho wholo which waa ntlll lacking, and I can
jy lnt ou* la thio roapect that In an artlclo by Gohclnrat Otto, who In 193C
dlBCoworcfi thla vaccine nnd wlv~ wrltco In this artlclo; Bio '..’olgl
vacclno which. in bci - ,. produced la Krrkov, la Chinn and ntlll in cono
othor city, has -lxo 'y pr-ved itaolf for r.rny yo~rs even on a l~rgo-ccAlo
use 03 hu-.m boir-ge. ”ie e v yolfc rncclno hod provofi itself cffoctlvo
ir. laboratory oxperi -onts and ir. export’.onts nr. v-.inrle. Bio practlcnl
experience tr n lar~o extent lo atill lucking. That w-.s wrltton In on
artlclo w .ich oncoa fro- the onfi of 1942 or tho first part of 19*13.

<?• I& it correct thrt this Otto vaccine -rs profiucod in 1941,

*42, *43 and go or.7

A. I car. only actually spark abort 1941.

Q. 'fas it only to a snail extent?

", Toe, by the Bohr in,- Vorka, by tho Sobert Koch Instituto rnd by


Dr. Otto hinsclf


2903


12 7cWWF-ll-Putty-JP
Cx.urt I


0, I »hr.ll now present a doeirront. The Prosecution osksd; I only
vmt to ?cv>w the following fror you in this connection; it is possiblo
th-t r. vox duo of this kind ^alsn provos itself in rolr.tivoly largo indi-
sridunl onperinents with threo or four hur.drod pooplo. Does this indivi¬
dual esporirent not offer proof of tho fact that it cannot possibly bo
dangerous in a large-scale ospc.riror.t? ^

I havo not understood tho 1 rr L port of your question,

I norm the circusstanco that n raccino when it fb nppliod to throo
or four hundred pooplo in a singlo orporlient, dooa it not nffor proof and
lOi.iti* ati r n of tho fret th-t it con be appliod on a lar -70 ocaloT

A, Yen, this Quito applies with ro^aris to its corrpatibili but
wo ust with every voccino difforor.tir.to botwcon the of foots and its
C'npatibilit;*, Vlth reg-rd t tho c-r-patibility, ir. rjy opinion no doubt
oxlntc< r;y.mro with regard t« tho o/y: yolk voccinc, but pooplo havo
difforcr.t rjact'.'as to these vaccines, end if sonot Ins of this kind is
t' bo introduce.” with tho Vohrr.rrcht whoro alllions of -ooplo -ro affoctod
— t'T Ohr. rpic, until 1943 noro than ono million pooplo had nlroady
Kc:: raccir.ntod with tho "foigl vaccine, md thin was otill bo in,- cxetlnuod,
'lllions wore boicj vaccir.-tcd with it, ord after nil, nillinns would
have t< bo vaccinated wit v this r.cw vaccir.o. Thon I ncod a noro pooltivo
and noro strblo basis frop a lar.qo-scnlo oxporlr.cnt which has to include
at lorat one thousand poo-lo.

How di y u do it with the Arr-y hodical Inspectorate in othor

eases?

d* Jirst of all, as vo di" it with the Rchrschutz vncolno, wo
first of till nr.de - snail expert cat with ton pooplo in tho aendony,
or first of all several do ton nay have beer, includod, and thon after tho
,-ood compatibility and tho hamlossnoso of the vaccine had been deton inod,
a troop experiment was nado with a certain unit, and thon it was ox-.ctly
obeervod first hov cany pooplo were unable to per for- duty for how long
or booms: of what explications, and then aftorwerds '.t wre do tor:'-inod

2S04


12

-our t I


by the expert by neon* of cxaninatlon* vhet tho proventotivc situation
vns is tho body of the porson as e result of the vnecinetion, ~nd
vhoa this roault also was•satisfactory besides tho rosr'.t* of the
oncpatibllity, then before it v»s introduced, I roTortod to ny nilitnry
cor.-and or s nV-ut it, and then I vouched for tho fact that tho pooplo
v-uld not bee . .c sick through ray C'r.plic-'tior.a arising fro.". tHo vncci-
r.ation


290-i (a)


12 y Q ,-F-l 1-4-Pu t ty-JP
Court I

rad thr.t nn lrvrailxatloa would bo achieved within the tino Units which
til these vaccines hnvo,

l r ov, how do J'U explain tho fr.ct that ct tho bejinn ins of 19.12
the oxjcrl-ioots v.ro carriod out in Suehcnwald of which yoviihnvo hoard
horo?

A « Veil* first of all, I r.ust asstr'O that this was dono nfc it has
boon nlitcd* Ho wo 7 or, I nc not in a position t*JuS$o that in any way
beenuao i &» lv >t hove any basis for it, '


2905


12 Fob 47 -"-S.;- 12 -l-Lv.Ricl 8
C'urt Nc.. 1


In itsolf, th-r- c.nnot bo any doubt that Infections xrcro
..ccut.ll 7 cc.uacd? Or, on the basis of tl prosonontlcn of cvidonco
dc yen 1 . "o imy objection to that?

«s for as I know, ^ * "o not rocoivod any positivo bnsisfor

it so f-r.

r. You boliove tkx t you c nnot nako my judguent?

.. Ho, I c n only nako r.saunptionBj thoy aro not always good to

uso, ^

n. In tie affidavit of Bclcchowaky, docui:ont nuubor 484, which i.
exhibit 91 of tlo ?resocution, docunont book 12, pa-o 64, you will
find tl'.o following entry:

•".•.ra graph 4: in tho chiof comitteo of tlis dopnrtr.iunt"—and I
odd "block 45, Due. onw: Id" --"tl o following persons aro located:

”Dr. '-cndlcs r, Inapoc tcr-Qonural of tho -odioal Scrvico of
tlo Wciruacht.

"Dr. Conti, ^’r. Poppondick, r.nd :*• Qonekon
On tlis nr -called Chiof C 0 nittoo, pornons v/ero inrtructod by
; cU , -'r. F. opondick, and Dr. Oonzkon*.

Do yru ’new anytl irr: about sue*, cl i-f ccanittoc ?

... In connection wit! t in I c n only rope t tl .t I do not Jmow
tl.o Buchonwc.ld C 0 ncontr..tlon Co p, th .t I do net 1: ov tho Inntitut
for typhus hos-arcl at -vcl orwald, nd t! t I 1 v- r.ov-r had my
contact with it. *1 r.fore, I c.r.not h;.vo been a uotibor of my
superior cc , of w; icl I 1 VO never oven ho a rd,

DH. «EL7S: Ilt.y it pK. so thv Tribunal, eftor f o conclusion of
t is co'.iplox, I would like to present tl o following documents:

Firc-tt cf 11, I would Ilk- to present ..n affidavit by Profossor
• r jit-r. it is document 15A-25; it is located in ny document book
c p e 38, end I present it s Exhibit 10 to tl u rribunnl,

iCF.jTZY: With r-spoct to tlo affidavit of Reiter, tlo pro-
soonlcn reservos tlo right spocificaily in this caoo to c 11 tho
witness :md subject bin to cross-oxaoinaticn- 1 o is right hore


12 ?av»-r-ia-a-3fioi»-ap

Court I


t - -ucrotorj In jail; or. ns on alternative* wo reserve the richt to
6ulr.it o erees-affidavit It<* Hoitcl 1 * Sr. ordor that thoro bo no nla-
understanding X v- uld like to have it understood that the prosecution
reserves such a rijht Ath respect to any of the affidr.vits boin G sub-
nit tod, end that it will not bo necessary for no to nnko that reservation

on oacli occasion* ^

TIC PSSSIflEH: Tho prosooution nay hnvo tho rifiht to oithor coll
the affiant as a witness or to put in another affidavit nr stotonont by
tho witness*

31. lELCDl 1 ohly wnnt to point out that Profocsor Heitor has
(•newerod the question that ho nrticlpntod In any conforonco. ns it lo
e-.tod in tho Dine Diary, on tho 39th of Doconbor, 1941s Ho has stated
in this connections "X have not participated in any conference with this
,rr,up of .croons deal in- with this subject."

Ho further statos that discussions about typhus did take plaoo, but
not in tho way as stated in tho diary. I therefore request that this
dneunont bo accepted ns —

IB. ::cHJ13ri Unlcrpr.Wc): I n* thrt dofon.o cruBMl bo dlroot-
oi V. road ir.it or -ploto nffldnvlt Into tho record. Ho hn. noroly
pnrApbrued cortnln portion, of It. It 1 . qnlto npr-nront, on rondlng tho
nfflterlt c r .hole, th-.t Sol ter hln.olf o4r.lt. thrt ho 414 ntton4 n
nootlnc on or rhout tho dr.to nontlonoi In tho Wnfi Blnrjr. Ho coo. on
to .oto thr.t thoro vo, rr.o tn6!c-tl-n thr.t thoro nltft-. Be .cplclou.
exporinonts enrriod nut.

I think it only fair that this affidavit bo road into tho record,
since ho is offering it.

IS KCSI3EOTJ Tho suggestion of tho Prosecution is appropriate.

Tnc entire exhibit will bo road into tho record.

HU 13L3X "I. Professor Dr. Heitor, have been waxnod that I will

ho cuhjoct to pum^ont If 1 nnho a frl.o nffldnvlt. I 4.o!nro under
noth thr.t ny to.tinony cnrro.rrnd. tr tho truth md vn. eivon in ordor

to bo subr.ittcd in ovidcnco to Military ^-ibunal

2907


12 Job-fr-o43-3-Doniol*-JP
Court I


X, 1'uornbor,-, Palace of Justice.

'Tko defense counsel of Professor Dr. Hftr-dloscr, Dr. Otto 'Joltoi
fart carted to sc the entry in tbo diary of the Section for typhus
n B d Virus I’xscrrch of tho*»affcn SS. Buchcnvald, of 29 Docoubor 1941, as
follows*, and I quote:

■Conference of Kodicol Inspector, Gcneraloborstabsartt Profossor
Dr. BmUosor.

■Belch Eorlth Loader, Stoto Socrotcry, SS Grupooofuobror Dr. Conti.

■President Profossor Hoi tor, Rot. a Ho.olth Offico. x

•

■President Profossor Gildtr.oistor, of tho Hobort Xoch Institute,

Pujich I-.otitutlon for Conb-.tting Contagious Diseases.

■SS Ctradertonfuchrex Locturor Dr. lirugovsky of tho Hygiono Inotituto
of tho TfoffoB SS in Berlin.

■Tho conclusion was rcochod that It is nooossory to tost the con-
pntnblllty raift effectiveness of typhus v-ccir.es node fron chicken vitollino
sacs. Since nalnal oxperinonts do not pornlt ndoqunto evaluation,
oTpert-ents nuct bo conducted on hmnn beings." 2nd of quotation.

■in nr.cvor to tho quostion of vhotbor I particioc 3& in this cor.fo-
ronco, I declare to tho boot of ny knowlodgo and boliof:

■I did not ^rticirnto in a conforcnco with this group of porcons

and with this result.

■I cb uld like to add, b 7 way of explanation, that tho typhus
pmblcn and tho ian-jor thrc-tor.lnc S' 0"U.c4 .orlau. concorn at tho

ond of 194 . =*- all nuthorltlo. hovln.;: aay rcepanolilllW for public
hoclth. Accordir^ to ny rocollcctloc, I participated In one aactlag at
the cad af 1941 ar the hcglaalag of 19-13 .hich dealt- *lth the typhue
vnccino situation.

■? i t vaa ono of tho custor.nry nooting* in tho Reich Ministry of
tho interior designed to enlighten the head of tho Health Section on
n specific question. In general it cm bo said that Dr. Conti, vbo
called those sooting* and presidod over then, reached his " “


2908


12 TcV^-3V-13-1-1>ci1o1b-JP
Court I

decision indoposdontly• on the Wi. of tfco reports unde to bin according
U, tho leadership principle.'

"In addition to Dr. Conti, Dr. Gildcr.oistor of the Robort Koch
Institute -ad Dr. Llndoc were prosent at the rooting on tho typhus
vaccine situation, as far ns I can recall. I cannot ronorbor that
Profossor Hnndlosor.or any special SS representative attended. ^At thin
Booting Professor Ooldenoistor Cere an orientation report to tho Roich
Health Loader, Dr. Conti, ccphaslxlng the ossontial difference betvoon
the t;phus vaccine produced In Lvov and Cracov by tho Voicl nothod
rnd the vrcclno produced at tho Robert Koch Institute in Berlin under
tho direction of Professor Oildcnoistor, according to tho nothod of
Gohoinrnt Dr. Otto of Tmnhfurt-nn^Caln. Thoro follovod a discussion
in which tho offoct of the tostod voccino produced by tho OKH Institute
in Crr.cov and Lvov vas particularly roengnisod, vhilo tho offoct of tho
Otto vaccine vas roportod as boing not so certain.

•fho confcrcnco vas broken off by Dr. c ontl with tho ronark that ho
would dlscuoo this question in tho future with Professor Dr. Glldonoiotor
nlono..

■I did not attend any othor discussion of this subjoct. Tho entry
in tho so-called diary, of the Sect!'-. for Typhus and Virus Roooorch
con therefore not rofor to. the abovo-nontionod dlscuoo ion.

■In the ncoti-ir which. I nontiW, no conclusion was reached, no
giver, in tho entry. This is especially true of the following sentence:
•Since oninnl o.vpcri~onts do no* permit adequate evaluation, exponents

nust bo conducted on hur-or beings.’

sjfor was anything aaid at thio discussion of transferring oxperinonto
dt h typhus vaccine to the SS; that is, to the Hygiene Institute of tho
Vnffen SS. Tor did I hear anything later on about the Soction for
Typhus cad Virus Research, nor of the none Dr. Ding.’


3909


12 cb-4-S£-13-6-Daniol*-JP
Court I

■Hurabor^t 24 Jonurry 1*47. SignOds Prnfoc«nr Dr- Bolter.

"The oboYO -ffidurit vrs eignod on 24 Ja&unry 1947 poraonnlly in

ny prcflonco by Profoaenr ?>r. Bolter."

TH3 KESim^: «u) Tribunal will now rocosa until 1:30 o'clock.

(A recess vns tokor. until 1330 hours.)

%


2910


12 Fab 47-«-DJQ-l*— 1-Beard- (^K)
COURT I


C0RR^C7£D COPY

TH2 .-LjRSH^L: The Tribunal la again m cecalor,

Trt£ RRZSIDZST; <%t this time the Tribunal ca$i:*oa to
cnnounco that at tho*cloae of tho aoaalon ton Arrow aftornoon
thu Tribunal will bo In rcooaa until 9;0 Tuesday nornlng.
Thla la done on account of confllcta with ol.hor Tribunals,
ao tha rocoaa at tho ond of tho aoaalon tone rrov aftornoon
will bo until 9:*0 o'dock Tu08day nornlng.

%

Tho Counsol nay prooood.

DR. UZLTZ: .uiothor docunont on tho subject, Tsubmit
an affidavit of Doctor Gontkon. Ha- 26, Docunont Book 2, pago
41. I offer thlc Docunont as Exhibit 11. It oo.atalna tho
atatonont of tho dofondant, Dootor Contkon,
that ho did not belong to any connlttoo auoh as Bnlaohowsky
oontionod, and no such oonnlttoo existed. I ask hat this
bo aoooptod aa £xhlblt 11 .

Thuro are tho sano atateaonts In tho nffldavlt for
Doctor Poppondlck. Thla la Docunont Hir-27, In Docunont Book
2, page 42. It also soys, "I never bolongod to a oonmittuo
or control oonnlttoo and I do not know of -ny such o.^nralttoo
or o-ntral connlttoo. - I ask that this bo accoptod as Sxhlblt
12 .


Tho third participant In this connlttoo was ProfosJor
;<rugowaky, and I also offer an affidavit frora his as Doounont
H«p*24, In the Docunont Book 2, pago 25. This will bo Exhibit
l”*, and In agroonont with the Prosocutlon, I will not road thla
affidavit, but only rotor to ttsroontonts. It contains argun-

A


ents to the effect Ihtiyoh' 1941, no such

discussion took place,’ and It also explains tho nano for
Typhus and Virus aosoarch. J.rugowsky, paints out that the nano
which was announcod to 1 the Krakow Ii>stijfute did not moan thoro

t»’*l


12 Feb 47-Board-(.-*£)

COURT I

was any official connection with the Krakow institute I aok
that this Document bo accoptod ae 2xhlbit 1*.

Finally I submit a Document from Professor, Doctor otto,
who has several tlaos boon mentioned by the lofendont on the
witness stand. Ho Is tho Inventor of the Typhus vaccine from
ohlokon eg 0 's. Tho essential point of this affidavit Is to
prove that In 1941, the Typhus vnoolno produoed from tho
Intestines of lloo, according to tho 'Jolgl method, is produo-
ad at OKH Institute in Krakow, and was tho boat vacolno at
that tlmo and did not roqulro


2911a


12 Fc , -rutry-^-DJO-13-&-3cor4
C;ur: So. 1


~xy orporioxntr.tion. I subr.it tnis nffid-srit, H>-44, o* Sxhiblt 14, This
rffib rit is In Docunoat 3ook 3, which unfortunately hns not yot boon trans¬
lated and is not yet avail blc.

T13 P^clTJETT: Till? affidavit of Doctor Otto, where is It Doctor Holto?

33. SSXfflt It is in Document 3ook 3 veiefc is not yot available. It
will to Sxniblt 14 and 1U-.*; 14-;. is a spoclr.l reprint fron n .lodicnl Journal
which the .'.of on.Ant Profossor Ehndloscr nontioned. ^

3. KeF-^ZT: Ibo Prosecution, of course, roserves the rl£ht to otjoot
to tho adalssablllty of this document vhon it is available in Srv;litn. I
hove not toon it.

IKS PFZSirCTT: Tho whiiisabillty of eho document will not to considorod
until it is boforo tho Tribunal and cxanlncd by tho Prosecution.

DA. J3LTSI Kr. Prosidont, tho docaaont is nvnilablo only tho translation
is not yot ready.

T:3 PSESMGi I undentin'. t.vt. but it is not available to tho Tri-
ouaal nor to tho Prosocution, ns I uni ox stand it, nt this tluo.

2X. nUl. ?nsn, I nsk th't t..is nu-eor oc reserved for this docunout.
DT 33. HZLTSI

* Profossor Smdloscr, you nontioxwd thv n/uoo, Oildonolstor, with
vnoa ym hrd discussion* nt tho oni of 1941 eonoorzdn. Typhus vnccincn: is
that truoT

L Yos.

Professor Oil .ouoii-tor is Iso r-ontionod in tho Din.; diary scvoml
ti_os in the jrof r 1942 r.s bavin: visited 3uchonvr.l 4 ., and 3loclt 46. In
ordor to clrxlfy this, I ask you li ‘ Profossor OilAoaoistor ov;r toll you
of those oxp.crliionts in 3uchor.vrai, in', tho aothods uood in DocfconwnldT

A So, n-vor.

i Doctor ro.ou, in his tostiuony, oasortod thoro wns a connection be¬
tween tho Typhus r.nl Virus ro-tonrch r.t 3uchonvald ur*. tho Kllitnry Kedical
-iC -do-y. 3o assorted thnt because Doctor Din was ct tho ouotir. of tho
consulting r:odnli»ts in Ihy 1943, and -ado a speech in which ho sold tint

tuvre *jr.s connection between Duchc av ail and the Solitary Hodicnl .xndory,

2912


12 Jv..rurj>-j-rj>l»-2JQrI

C-urfc So. 1


-111 y a _ loi.eo cl-'X up this er.ttarT

- 3*tvocn tho Military fcxlieal _crij;: wjfi tho nootinro, thoro wna

’air oac connection; that 1., tho -codcry ando lt« rooac available for tho
-octin,;. nothin,; also. .

: Did you hoard Doctor Diw'« spooch a* tfca hcndc-y in hr.y 191*3?

- tei* v^aoch va« tfvon to tho e.TOup of ^r,^oncet, ru-d I did not

.articipato in this ^rou;., ^

l Vfco it reportod to jr,ut

a I hoard that in tho diocuaoiin w.-.ich follovod, rr.itod on ot*.

Jootion, tut that not roportod to co nt that ti::o.


2913


12 Feb-A-'AA-lA-l-HLakley (?L)

Court No. I

r H.~ did you not Icar of it privately either?

A.- No.

Q.- To cplain furtter a connection between Block 46 at Buchomald
and tho Military ifcdical Academy, Dr. Kogcn referred to tho wntry in tho
Ding diary nhich speaks of the control, tho testing of the blood conser¬
ves. I dll read you only one of the total of three on trios. "22 Septem¬
ber *43« Test of blood Bonn preserves. 16 January >44: on behalf of tho
Military it-dical Academy, 18 ampules of blood serum wore tested on 18 ex¬
perimental subjects. 17 February «44: records of v»st^ sent off." Then
ttoro is another such entry on tho 25th of January '4*. aid in tho 22nd
of May '44.

Can you say anything about this, that is, about tho fact that tho
Military Medical Academy sera blood soma to Buchertwald to bo testod on
huaan beings thoro?

A.- No, I can my nothing about that. I did not know of the ovont
or tho reasons for it.

DR. KdLTX: lir. President, at this joint 1 should liko to sutmit tho
affidavit of Prof. Fr. Konred Lang as HA-38 in Document Book 2, pa go 56.
Dr. Lang,whoa I askod for an affidavit as the* only request I ind to make
of him, answored the following:

"I, Konred Long, herewith staU> under oath the following facto which
I km* freo personal knowledge: Tho scrum conserves produced by tho Amy
Medical Accdvny »ro supplied to the ana? froe 1941on and later also
tho navy and tho naff on SS. All physicians using it wore instructed
to report about th. therapeutic success, the compatibility, are! posaiblo
incidence so that experiences could be collected. Therefore, a qu-ction-
ncire was attached to each ampule. . hen filled c*ut, it had to be returned
to the Military 'fcdicnl Academy directly. In addition to that, soao uni¬
versity clinics, municipal hospitals and arc? hospitals currently received
•tnoulvs for scientific testing ard research. Also, all medical offficos


- 2914 -


12 Fob-A-'JU-U-l-31akle7 (FL)

Court Ko. I

■hich »cru supposed to collect their o*r. oxpcrionccs before application
on a large scale received cspulea for uxporloental purposes.


X


- 2914 a -


12 Feb-*- iiA-lA-2-Blfikluy (FL)

C eurt Ho. I

"The unitary Medical Agadeay did not cemission the Laffer. SS to
test serin conserves on prisoners. The entry in the Ding Diary that
serin conserves were to be tested upon request of the Military 2-edical
A cade ay and again that in the examination findings were to oe *nt away
I can only e.plain by stating that all offices which used serin conser¬
ves were generally instructed to report on success, compatibility, and
possible incidence. The Military Medical Academy never received any
reporte rtiich allowed that they aemnated from concentration camps. I
learned from conversations that the SS carried out on Its own initiative
the development of blood conserves and blood substitutes.

"The good compatibility and din-ability of the serum conserves pro¬
duced by the ."Aiitary Medical Academy was proved by 1941 and documented
in scientific publications. From ths oany thousards of reports, one did
not learn of a single case which showed permanont damago to health or n
fatality caused by these sorua conserves.

"I have real, ti^ one pa^e of this aifidavit carofully and signed it
with my own hand..." and so ferth. It Is certified by a notary on tho
15th of January 1947.

I ask that this accoptod as Exhibit 15.

Q.- Son, I ccuo to tho individual casos whoro it must oe uxaminod
ae to what your connection was as tho chiof of the ..ohraacht Jtodical Ser¬
vice with tho research conducted in tho branches of tho ..ohraacht. Tho
Individual branchos of tho ..ohraacht , as wc know, had their oun research
institutes. You have spoken about this already. You have said that these
wore primrily ^iccific experiments. Mill you ploaso toll no briofly
w*at your powers wore on tho basis of the decree of 1942 in tho field
o 1 research which uo have not yet aontic.icd?

A.- It is no*bora sot down precisely. Even after 1944 thoro was
never any authorization or influence from me as chief of the ’..'ohraacht
Medical Service on the specific fields of research of tho Luftwaffe and

- 2915 -


12 Pcb-A— IAA-14-2-Blakiuy (FL)
Court So. I


the navy. Thoso noro fields which "ere specifically connected -rith those
branches of tho ..chroacht and wore thus autooatically el Inina tod froa
ay duties, vhich


- 2915 a -


12 7©b 47-XJUA_14_3-Blakl'ey (MSS)

Court So. -

• •

vera to coordlnata the joint field* of Work. I can, therefore, only
BB 7 that I was neither lnforned about the work of theae tranchea of
the Mahrmacht nor did I hare any supervision or other influence on
thli work. %

q But now it hae teen shewn that the Luftwaffe, for example,
carried on research which one cannot call specific luftvaffo problems,
for example, the typhus question. Shat is your viewpoint on thds
question?

A Scientific medical research Is a subject which "Is not subject
to military orders. It was never the intention and under the decree
of '44 It would not hare resulted that the chief of tho *ehmacht
Medical Service was tc prevent work's being dono In general flolds
of rosorach by anyone Interested and capablo: that ho was to bo
eliminated by an ordor that ho could not do It; that all othors
could do it.

My assignment of '*4 is to bm interpreted to mean that ur—
noccoasnry duplication, where It is absolutely dear, and tho uso of
porsonnol and materials unnecessarily, aro to bo aroldod as far no
nooolblo. I vos to consult tho nodical chiefs of tho various branchos
of tho b’ohrmacht and thoir scientific consultants and find vhothor and
how wc could contrailto tho matter.

^ If I understand you correctly, you did not havo tho duty in
such a caeo of coordinating but you could havo coordinated if It had
boon oxpodiont for this flold of research.

X First, if I had learned of it and, socond, if according to
my information I had had tho impression that this was unnecessary
duplication, then 1 would havo tried to prevent this duplication.

14 Did you l«.*rn of the typhus research which the air force
carried en?

A Ho.

I* I must point cut tc you that in the typhus document book


2916


12 Tob 47-A_MAL_14_3-Blaklcy (MSD)
Court > 0 . 1


exports jets are sentioncd, conducted by Prof. Haagon, Strasbourg, on
bohelf of tho air force and the Beich Scsoarch Connell. Do you
rcaaabor that*

A Tot.

Q Plcaso take this dscsncnt and look at Pago 77 In this docueont

book.


2916 A


12 Fob-i-RAA-lWi-Glakloy (MJ)

Court 1

That is Docunont :©-306, Exhibit 296 of the prosecution. It is a
letter fron Prof. P.oso to Prof. Haagon.

A. Sfty I os k for the page again?

o, Pago 77, Page 7U fn tbo English document book. The Prosecu¬
tion believes that they sco in this lettor a connection with ytxi, as
srdof of the ffohrracht Medical Sorvico, to the typhus research in Stmss-
bourgh. ’’That do yea have to say about that?

A. It says hero that tho inspector of tho radical sorvico of

%

tho air force is to approach tho chief of tho Tfohmacht Modical
Sorvico with tho re^uost to have typhus vaccinos produced for tho
•rforaaoht. I can only say that tho application nado to tho inspoctor
was not roallzod. It did not couo to ay attention as tho chiof of
tho TTohnaacht Modi col Sorvico. This suggostion to vaccinate tho wholo
Eastarn Front is now to no.


-2917-


i2?ob 4“-A-7T>15-l-Coak

S.jri So- 1

ft y c u vlll find la tho b'-cSc bo fori you -a v^o 75, c d;cu.iont, 2?o. 137,
29S, ;ci3 7§ 1 - tho fctlloh Book* 3»at i« ea application -f Jycfosoor
----or v tho Dirqctcr of tho University r.t Strasbourg with roforo^o% to
flvo roao-rci nMlps-onta. Do 7^1 kna. tho 3 - rosorrch resilient s?

i That la on jrgo SO?

* so, rnao 79. •

/. Uo, I do not iOCKi til030 r«si0IXBtO>

r ’.111 you ploaso look la tho doauriont book on pneo 74. ibis is
pocuront !lo. 370, 2 rhiblt 292 of tho Proaocutien. Thla is -a affidavit of tho
dofordant, Rudolf Brandt, vhloh Bmolt cavo '- r tho Prcsoouti'-n. Xdode with

X

orroriEonta la tho coacor.tr-.tl 3 a cmp !l~.tzuoilo»< Tho defendant, r<udolf
Bx-'.adt, told tho ?rneocvtlrn tho follainc:

"Obor^ruyaoafuohjor, Dr. Karl Brandt, ?oich Ccuiaslonor for Hodth and
Sanitation, Ooaornl ..soloteBt of SioCfri od 3 nndlcaor, Chi of of tho Modiod
-or*loo of tho •/ohxTJftoht," cad so forth and so forth, "naturally know of tho
or.joriior.ts by Hmfion on hu.-n subjoets. Tboso -*n woro lafcrood of nil
fuadf.-umtnl ovonta la tho nodioal scientific rouorrch and thoso oxpori-anto
Cculu not hr.ro boon cm led cut rlthout tholr fcnowloduo approfnl"- :.*hr.t
4 c ;ou hr.70 to s~y about this affidavit?

L I ora only say that ?-dolf Bmadt wan niet-jeoa. 1 do not kucw whoro
ho j t tho ovidonco for this atntouont.

, lr. rrosidont, In thlo ccaaoctioa 1 out'It Doounont lij. K in ny
Icouiont book 2 , pneo 24, Ihxioir Bmadt boro doolnros in oenaoction *.rlth
I >vo Just road fix. Mr affidavit ., 0 . 37C I qurto:

"Tr.is prra raph -f r? affidavit d' 4 s r.ot jivo r.ctunl frots. I cana-t cite
my c:r.croio fret whloh could eorr.borato tho minion. On tho b-.nlo of tho
iatorrofiat-r'a atataunt I as.-urcl that this c'incljod with th- actual fret."

I ask that this affidavit ba accoptod as nhibit fr. IS.

:-, niaco t:.o 7r-socuti'c haa dm^aod tho charge of hij» altltudo
uXynL «r. 3 , wo cr a t.' th^ cold ox. jrl c.ts. oro ccld oxaoriror.ts eoaduetol
-r /-ur authority?

”03, cold exaorlronts woro c endue tod by the tolled Schxl in

*>• J haii.

29 I 0


12 rob .;7-*--7C-15-2-Cock
Court !'• 1

-Toss cold exporir-ents coneomod too adaptation to cold in too nountains for
ivumtain troops. ;»s far as I know thay wsro carried out oxcluaivoly on
- AT _ -a soldiors. I did not boccto aware that any of tha- sufforod any ior:
fr*i tho orporirxinta.

-i Hr. Proaidont, in t^is connection, I afcould liko to subdt Docunont
:r. 17 - This la an oxcorpt frc;i ra^jasay concerning investigations on
olr.ptr.tlon to coll.

pocunoat, EL 29, It la in docucent book 3, docunont HA 49, which ia in
doexBiont book 3, and la net yot r.Tallatlo to too Tribunal. Shis article which
u-3 writtoa b7 Dr. Drier, too has boon ~ontlO-*>d fcovorcl tlnoa huro, concerns
*ho ox;oriienta in the U untain PhysiclOt'ia-1 Inatituto at tho £runtaln
Uodieal School at St. Johann, which *-t uador tho dofondant, Profoaacr
Hr.aUoaor, and contains an oxrct description of hen thoao oxpori"onta wore
o undue tod, and it atatoc that tfcoy uoro ccnductod on our own pooplo, our own
ooldlora. *;ith tho cuatcrary roaorvation, I aak that this art 1 cl3, which
tho author rwntioned in an affidavit by Dr. Kra=or, I aak that It bo
ouhittod aa Exhibit !Ic. 1?. Mow tho Droaocution haa oroaontod on oxoorpt
frx: tho report of too rooting ccncominc winter dtotrosa and diotrooa at coa
er. tto 26th and 27th of Octotor, 1942, lr. ltobors* I sh-.ll haro you ohown
too docuunt book on tho oolu oxporinonts. it is D'Ommt Ho. 401, exhibit
93 of tho rr socution, and in Docunoat gook 3, pago *. You will find thoro
r. liat of too participants in this cootlrg. Ia this :eotlng* Dr. Kraner
free. st. J Shaun* a ——

WS :?^3IDSrrs -hat waa tho mnbor, ?loaso, tho nunbor cf tho document?

DP.. 172.73: Decuront 401, Exhibit 93, prgo 79. It la r. Proeocutlon Docunont,
yturncnor, Document Sock Mo. 3, aafio 79.

BTD2. 1*3L3:

Did you over rocoivo a report o:. too locturo cf rrcfoeeor Holzlochnor
tt this nootlng?

Ho.

a ?ollcwino this nootlng thoro soans to have boon contact botwoen Dr. Kr-cior,
as tho officer of tho Amy Mountain Modical School and Dr. Daschor, tho woll
'am a oxaorinqntor at Dachau. aa anything rorortod to you or did you loarn

2919


yob 47-A-?J0-15-3-Cock


•-.thins of this contoot?

It wna not roy-artai tc no olthar offlc-ily, or unofficiftliy, my
connection hot*»on Krrz or mi Hoscbor.

n r -3 tho connection to two 3 n tha /jry llcdintnln Jlodicftl School ad tha
Crs^lv.-i 30 r -t Dachftu roymtod to you?

So, i*sfl I should llico t-> ary tfcrt I m crnrincoi that tha vary strict
C^nzi Officer ox* tta I'ount-.in Uodic-1 School nt St. Johann would cortoinly
;-.to ro^ort-4 that to the Amy Medical Inspectorate.

o :Cr. Trosidont, I rhculd 11 to to sub:dt on affidavit of Dr. Xrmor end
rito of Dr. Schcoffor. Dr. Xrmor soyt tho following, rad i quoto. That la

X

ryjcvxont HA 37, docur-ont beck 2, pneo K. Dr. scya tho fullawl-i:

•I rjtondoi ns ri rojjrosontfttlTo th-* riountrln Uodicnl School tl.o
ooaforoaco on tha ^bloi-s of 1 aw torporr.taros which was hold in Nurnbort; In
tho fr.ll of 1042. I llstonol to tho locturo by rrofossor Hclnlochnor and tho
ra/ffka rn .io luring tho diucunsica by Dr. anchor. On uy wry b-ck to st. Johrum,
I hftTpoaol to sh-.ro until Ijialch, tho cai^xtraont with Dr. Roochor. Only oneo
Dr. Dnschor :;ontlonad briofly his axporliionta nad doscrlbod tha. in tho
.'oli-wirvi w-yj

1. .Irporirontal subjocts: Tti oy woro hardoood orl.lnds sontoncoo tc dor.th
»:.c had volunto.rod for tho Dachau ox.-orii^nts to bo glvon lifo end liborty
i*.Tine prosed threuflh tho oxnorinont.

2. St-xirir'onts: Tho arranGor-onto for tho scientifically oonductod
ax*orlnonts \r s cueh that tho oa-orir.ont.-l Jubjoctc sural va if yosnlblo.

2. Results: As lifo-nrosarrim; aoasuro for yoc ylc who 'save boon axposod
ic lew ta/or-turcc, - hat bath of ap toxI: r.toly 50 1c>,/rco3 is .'.vat fo-oiblo.

To whet an axtont tLa doneri^ti n by Sasebor io in accordance with tho ono
Jv-.a by bin and rrofaac r Holxloahcar at tho oenforonoo, or wunt boy :vd it,

I c\a r.o lotv,or rucoll.

1 - -oil calculated contrast to thoso ox-orL-onie with hx.m beings, which
•7 solLaoarators and i c^pcsol, .and which, as fax nB I know, woro novor ai>-rovod
•7 tho .jiy I-odlcftl Inspect3r~to altaor, I cutllc&i for Dr. Roschor tho minor
- »V0, in 3t. J.-hgpp, h r£ »i tho ox;xirLaauts cancorninA -tdjustr.or.t to

~nd hc-j wo :v.d :-.a3o yropprr.ti czs for thcxi with 'M -—.1 axyorir^nts.

2520


12 ?ot 47-V.-JT C-15-4— Cook
Court -

0iu7 R^® ild 1 1 ° 4 '- ra free 3ocuiant !>o. 1519-25 thr.t Dr. R-schor pictured thoso
4j 0 ra -s :*_ia on rj id that ho clftlr-od that i dosiroi to ccooor-.to with hin.

; pointed out I aont this docuront to Dr. Hmr-or t >t St. Johann.

•Xn St. Johann, wo conduct®! oxpcrlronts ns to tho adjustment to cold usias
5UTJC1V03 f'S.i. soldiers of tho jury Mountain Mod to School as axnorlLoatnl
subjects, ns doscribod la the attached study tafera free tho Clinical TTookly

P071CW."

That Is tho document which I sutelttod.

*


2921


12 -Gross


0 urt I

»2von -ftcr Dr. Rnacher's 1-ttor cl 12 fov-rsb-r 191*2, nc further c-nnoction
.ltr. Dr. .tascbcr cr a collatorsti rx with I>i—which could havo boon arranged
only thr.ufh th- -xay : cdical Inspectorate, vns accomplished. -3 far as I
rcs-ob-r tort letter me never ^ar.st/-r-c'.

•The lurt:»j: collatomtiun watch Ur. H-schor wanted was a uppoewd to consist
of Dr. Rase ho r torr-ving scientific A^cilr-r. anc. tools fro-. the institution
,t 5t. Johan.i. I particularly rut- bor that ho asked whether it. J?4ht a.
feasible to *nlco avrliable e Haldane apparatus tor the analysis of respiratory
jjascs. "he loan cf any appliances fr ur institute would'hr.vc nocossitctod
i written request irax Dr. Raschtr lexica ic.rl t; oe eutrittod for decision to
the .jvo' ideal Inspectorate. Such an lie tion of Dr. Rnsehor, as far ns
I Know, rv.vcr readied St. Johann wncr-upcr. it w-s necessary t. -.id c r_,>ort
to tho .juy 1 otJic.nl Inspector* to. ncith.r .if I cutnit a r-. rt -.b ut the
Nurntorg ceaf-jxnco to th. ..ray rad cal insjxct rate.

°1 intonwed Dr. Seh-~f-r, whi at th*t tine was ay ccrrvjid-r, i n the
conversation with Dr. P.nscher a .Vi his letter t a-.

’’In ccncluai n I would like a *in t emphasise th-t at notirao any
collaboration between Dr. RascL-.r a..J t»v unt-.ln fhyai> logical institute c
thj ..rty Uiuntair. cdicnl School, hlch I c c-uctud, w?a x<-ugi;'- ~b ut boc.auoo
»u di< : n.i* d sire it ner -fply tor it."

I ask to-t this .dfidavit bc.-ccepted as Exhibit 18.

The next -xhibit is the dfidrvit of Dr. Schaefer, the Ckxanneiing Olficor
of tile . udic'.l School - Hocunont :u-J*2 - Docufv-nt Bo .k II, pa&e 66.

’1R. ‘ Cri.JfE'.t This drcur_nt vp-~rs cn pa.'c 66 -f ’ -ndlcser IXcu.wnt Book II.
Fr s.cuti-n rbjects t its adsisaibility n the sr unds to t it is at sworn
to r. r cji-tlfl. ! before c H.t-ry .vblic r r. Kcltc -s ttofense c unsel.

•fc. hlLTifj I do mt kn w whether r. IcHnnoy h~.s soon tills Certiflento
of the *J tary /.ncoloch en the ri^inai, rhe aiiidcvit is certified cs follows i
■I certified hore-<ith the ’/.v. s.sn turc f Jr. med. ..ilh-La Ctto Scnaofor cf
Sai S-lzh-.uscn wh.- identified hixs.lt by ait ne Cermn Identity Card, D lU* 061,

. 2922


22 F-b-..-Jf-l6-2- Gross


Court I

issii-ti by the. Landratsasfc in Buedingen, 30 Sw..to=ber I9I46. Kidds, Gborhaossen,
10 January 19u7."

•5. ?5c1LiHEIt r;s-cuti has n. eestra to be hypertoc hni c! in those 'vat-
t.rs but since defense ccai^l cheso V- jnku such a large Issue rC this natter
it sworn str taunts end the like during .rca-cuticn's c.sc in chief, we arc
compelled tc cbjoct tr tho sdJ.ssi'.n >t this document. ft oath was a&sinistored
in so f-r a ir r.pjoars in this str-.tc.t-nt, n r is thcro anythin; 'miah indicates
that the certifyir.i -uthority had tl~ right t< ac-inistcr an .nth, let ale no
that irv- was - c : mistered. 0 have offeree several dccuacnts'w’.icb wero
cortifivjd in exactly tnc srau aanr..r Which ix.ru objected to an’ e/ccludtd cn
the saao grounds I m new urging t th. Tribunal.

DS. NSLTEi It is correct that tils dc-cxsMnt is n t s*-rn. The heading
-bow, this d :cu..kjnt roads: ".’.ffi davit". It c itinucs, "Up.n t»to request
of Dr. Nolte, Defense Counsel ef f.« farter 'ucneraloburstabsarst Prof.

Hind loser, I -r.k. the followin', st tJi-ni?" Tht is, in goner* 1, according to
rules valid in fr-ro-ny sufficient I .signatc the d'.cuo_nt s r.n vit.

If tho C.urt wishes that * further ox. rose r t'tea-nt bo raado in this f.ru
"I herewith docl-.ru up n..oth" tb-n I .*bk that this drcuuuni bexcoptod tempo¬
rarily one’ that a special statcoont frer Or, Schaefer is submitted l*tcr that
he hrs nndo this strtea.nt exprjssly as .an affidavit.

THn S.'.ioITYT* Tho Tribunal will.xcopt th. exhibit pr vioionally subject
t c it ooit.r 1-ter shewn that tiv. atat-v-nt was sir rn tc er w s -.da in liou
.f .atb under pucaltios of f-lse sr.^arin, r o-r^^ry. -*t ary be .-aark-d
"jr- visi nelly *' dttod".

!lf.. iMLTEt To- drcxrent reads ns .ell.ws?

JJCG: That is the exhibit n t-b-r -tf this d-cunurt?

DR. HE1TS: exhibit 19, D.cumont Ljck II, p\gc 66. Dr. Sch-ofcr lakes
tiu f ;1 lowing statoKonti

"1. The «rxy ' .untain Lo 'ic-1 Sc.i .1, w'rjch I cc»a4J, -was OJroctly
Mberdinato to the CJCK/.i'ry tceicr l Inspoct-'ratc. ?r a its oegirming

2923


jp y b- - > >co

C urt I

Cerurilcb_ret=bscrst Prcf i nr. Haadloacr na -r^y i^dlcil Inspector until iit
v'S r.pointed Cnief of tnc cchiricht . cclicnl Service.

"2. lie cat-oliahed this school ?jji 1 t 1<? d<wn its principles. It txict_d
fros J-.aury 19li2 until the csp^tolr.-icn.

■J. —"oons its tasks w’s the scientific r-c^.irch concernin'j tin effects
cf hiih iltitade cn human oeir. avit'i tlv. ni* f preserving he.-J.th ~rA
efficiency. TheSu questions wero studied j;- fie r.cs^srch./...^.

•

%


12 Feb JG-16-li-Gross-()

COURT ;


Group of tho School in the Mountain Physiological institute
by specialists in the field of physiology. Thu head was tho
forcer Oboratabsarzt Dr. nod. habil. Hana-Dlotrloh Crcm&r.

P.4. Each and every scientific problon resulting from
tho Mountain service was submitted by 30 to the Army Modi cal
Inspectorate for approval. This made it impossible ttmt any
official connections to othor research establishments could
have existed without my knowledge as commander of the Army
Mountain Medical School and therefore, --rithout the knowledge
of the Army Medical Inspector.

"5. a collaboration betwoen the school I conducted and
Dr. Rasoher never exlatod. Never did I issue order oonoernlng
the establishment of contacts to Dr. Rasoher, whoa I did not
icnow. at. y relations of Dr. Cromer to Dr. Raschor (Compare the

file notes of Dr. Raecher).■

This la the same dooumont whloh Dr. Crenor montlons.
"therefore oust have beer, of merely private nature. It
is therefore lapooslblo that any contacts betwoen Handloser
and Raschor could have been maintained through my school.

■6. Cold experiments were conducted at my school undor
scientifically correct, medically ethical conditions; thoy

X

wore performed with animal experimental subjeots and physicians
and medical personnel who had volunteered for that purpose.

The method ar.d the results of this research work were published
In a special leaue of the "Clinical Weekly Review" which
car.e out in the Fall of 1944. I am in a position to name at
any time a number of German Scientists who can give information
about the scientific, medical and othical methods of this
school whloh I conducted under the supervision of the Army
Medical Inspector."


2925


12 Fob 47 -a-FJ 0-16-la-Gross-(AX)
COURT I


Sow I aubalt this document as Sxhiblt 19. The next
document I do not want to read. If the Prosecution agrees.

It 18 the affidavit of Generalarzt Hartloben who belonged
to the Organizational Section of the Army Medical inspector,
Professor Handloser.

I asked Dr. Hartleben to speak«fcout condition^ at the
Army Mountain Kodlcal School and tho connections between this
school and tho Medical Inspectorate. He does'so In an
affidavit, document HA-40, in Document 3ook II, page 60,
which I submit as exhibit 20.


2925a


12 Fob 47-A-FoG-l&-2a-Sros8-( AX)

COURT I

Tr.o question of sal a* la exponents was settled by our
examination this morning, I should Ilka to ask the Tribunal
whether under these circumstances I nay submit an affidavit
which I obtained by % vay of precaution from Professor Roden-
valdt whoa the defendant Professor Handloser mentioned sevoi--
al tlaos. Ho was his specialist on malaria questions and ho
stated In an affidavit that experiments In tho fldld of im¬
munization against and tho treatment of malaria new drugs on
and with human boings were not conducted. He goes Into detail.
This la in Document 3ook II on pago 1. In this case I would
havo to ask that I may oorrect this to the form dosorlbed
by the Tribunal later. This affidavit was given at a time
when the ruling of tho Court had not yet been made known,
at least not at the moment when I addressod Professor Rodon-
valdt. I ask that I may be allovod to submit this as exhibit
*1 provisionally and I will submit tho now form lator.


2926


12 “eb 47-A-S*-17-l-Lesser-(AX)
COURT I


TKJ ?R£SID£rIT: "hat is tho proposed n-nbor of this
exhibit. Counsel?

DR. S£LT£: exhibit 21.

THS PR&3IDENT: The exhibit cay bu previously admitted,
subject to the form being later c.ado tc conform to thc^
Tribunal's rcle. .

BY DA. WJLT£:

A. Nov ve coao to the Los- fias experiments. I will show
you Document Booh r*. 1 refer to Doouaont 1JO 097. I do not
know the exhibit number. It is in Document 3ook No. I', on
page 19, iir. President. Thie is a report which Professor
Hlrt sent to tho Ahnonorho which Dr. glovers presented to the
Reich of uohror 32. '.Pr.go 20 in tho £nglloh Document Booh).

Do you Know Profesjor Hirt?

A. I never saw him and I never talked to him.

Q. This roport, which I showed to you once before, NO
097,page 19 is a report whioh Prof-.* cor Dirt tnnkoe about a
report which ho had previously male to an Army Agency and
that latter report is the one I would bo in barerin, in
connection with you. Do you Know anything about auoh a report?
A. No. I cannot soo hero what the date of tho report

vas.

Q. The report wnlch yt have before you is of the year
1942. Have you found it - .;0 097 - it is the cnoloruro to
a letter?

A. Tea, I have found it. Yes, “Secret Report about"

etc.

i. Yoa. This report before you was made in the year
1242. This is shown by the letter which Dr. Sievors writes.

A. I do not know this roport.


2927


12 Fob 47-A-Si#- 17-l-L058cr-(AX)

COURT I

Q. Ir. this roport which you should look at, reference

is uado to a roport which Hirt made in 1940 when ho was

%

still a t/ohraaoht kedlool Officer to ». Oanoralarzt, a sup¬
erior of his at that tlao, and he reports here about or.porl-
nents which he porforaod on Lost In the year 16“S until nay
1940. He writes that In lu40 he had to interrupt this work
oeoause he was called to the front at the beginning of the
war against Franoo. If you wore *.o road this report you would
soo.... I do not bollovo, Hr. President, that It will bo


2927a


IX Fob 47-A-3tf-17-2~Lossor- (AK)

COURT I

nocossory for him actually to road this report. I spoke
of It in ray opening statement but I pointed out that the
report spoaxs only of*animal experiments and experiments
on 2 cadets at the HI lit ary Medical .vadeoy. Tho only thing
important here ?s tho following page » of tho report; it
soys: "A transfer of these oxporlments to hyaan-boirffca could
not tf*e place because I had to r-turn to my unit at tho
beginning of the Offensive agalnet Franco. The Prosecution
refers to this sontenco and intends to prove with this that
a medical office of the Arm,, know about medical export raont
—Lost gas experiment*^ on hunar. belr.gs and Instigated them
or at least know of them. 7111 you ploaao say what you have
to say about this mattor?

A. First I must say about this report that I did not
know of the lnoldont but since 2 oadots are mentioned and
since he says that In 19*9 or 1940 ho was at tho Academy, It
is clear to me that ho saw tho experiments thoro whloh I
might say wero almost constantly ooi uviend on our oadots, that
la, the nodical students. under cn r.&slgr.mons by w!‘doh the
Academy had to find a method for treating Lcot daa«-go to tho
human shin. There were dotons, perhaps many dotons of oadots
who volunteered for thlc experiment until , x don't know
whether It was 1942 or 194*, the doelrod ointment was finally
discovered. I must conclude 'jAt If Lr. Hlrt Jn 199 and 1940,
that Is at a time when I did not yet have anything to do with
the Academy, If he participated In sum experiments on oadots
or watched them, then the concluding sentence boro that ho
was occupied with new experiments on rats and that ho vnntod
to transfer suoh testing of treatment to human-beings, was
again a question of volunteers, In any case with us In tho
Academy. Therefore I am not able to draw any conclusions from


2926


12 ?eb 47-A-S*rf-17-2-Le88or-(A:<)

JDUST I

this sentence. I can only refer to the fact that the
Aoaduoy conducted


2928a


12

Ccui t So j 1


ixce jx?-rtsenta to 'isoovur a Lout ointnunt on volunteer students rnd that
art •’entiona those 2 cadota in the y<x-r 1939 or 19U0„

3 The report cad* in l?leO — yru did not receive this report?
x I ooul l not hire received it because i.. 19h0 I had nothin* uo do
with the dci Umj*

; It si jht bo poss5.Ua that tho Ganorelawt to whoa the report was jive
in 19 itf was your subordinate as kxur Ar*L — yoa A 1 r.ot learn of it in that
o-.paoLly wither? %

A Mo.

q fcw tho Doouiant K 372, Docarenb lock 13, P*C« 1, has boon subnittad
by tho Prosecution because there are no otter 'oc-user.ts in Docuoont Book 13.

r-2 'rlSSIEC!*": If Counsel con >#; the Tribunal bio exhibit nurib-jra of
theso dccurents which have alrea y boon add ttod, it will bo convenient.
y\. KSLCEi Mo. 2£2. As I bare alraa.v said, Daca-unt Book 13.
q In addition to the report already aontxeaod., rhleh you did net knew,
there is also Dccuren. NO 372, r.n affidr.vit fron the tofWiicnt Ibi.olf Brandt,
wto soys that in a’diUon to Xnrl Bran\t an’ tho oMur .ereonj nenclonod,
Smdloscr an’ tostock mist have k:own cf tU'.? fxporicnnts. I thoreforo ask
you, !i:' you learn of any Lee 6 Gas axpari^jnts such as wore tho oubloet of
tho Prosocuiion's case horo?

A Jfc®

Or<. KELTEi !tr. Prosi tort, in this connection I suLait an affi 'avit fron
Pr. Rudolf Brandt, r«ocuiv>nt i' Bocuuont “-ok 2, pag® 3, as drJidit 22.
to-Velf "randt s.ysi

"In ry affi-nvit date.! Hi Ooto’ er 195.6 (Docun;nt 10-372)

I tortifio • t n ail.- knwlo -a of tho LOST Cdustar l) jas .aporl-
nonts on hurrn subjects. ibo lost prra T.iph subsequent to this
tpstinory reads as fellows:

• In addition to Karl Braadt an’ the other persons
nontiorwd above, Han'loser and tcstcck roust have had knu rled o of
-hose experiaents.*


2B29


12 ?eb. U7^-T>.l?-2-i-UMer
Court Ho. 1


■Concorairv" this I dadaro tto following
"I# etc tenant In this case is a -nro assucntion which I
pronounced only in reply to a correspond q -ostion of the
interrogator. I car. d no factual data for this assumption. I
te^e never had ary associations, neither official nor privrte,
with Professor Bandloso:-,*

I ask that this affidavit ho accosted ns SUhihit 22.

Q Professor Han J l-Ser, in the various counts of tiio^in.’ictoir.t it is
royoato 1 y said, an*, a/nin in tho Iv:st Onu torments, that your responsi¬
bility oan bo do Mood froa too fact that tho experirvonte *^ro oon&otad in
the interests of tho HbwU. T shoal' lita to ask y u to «oy whether any
exporlaonta conhictod hero of which it is said they were on bohfllf

of tho Wohnaicht, rvjcossarily had ary connection with tho agencies of tho
Kohnaoht as insti_ftto.-s or as participants?


/


2930


12 Feb 47- Z5H-13-1- He eh an- (AX)

oooaf i


A. I ojb considering what example one should give.

C n o oust realize that, for example, lr the whole flold of
coamunloaOlo diaoasos th*c the Wofcrsiobt particularly during
the war was espeolally. interested; but these are fields
where oven under normal circumstances and especially ucaer
the living conditions, which beoaco constantly worso duMng
such a large war, tho wholo state Is equally Interested.

As I have already said, that not only the rosouoh workers
of the 'iehrmacht woie Interested, but every research verkor
who conscientiously took an Interest In such things - arid I
should like to add that fornerly the '/etrnaoht was predom¬
inately interested In the thingo and problons dealing with
wounds, but in this war that was changed completely. Through
the air raids, winch had oxlcted for yea-s and wore constant¬
ly increasing, which or.e could compare with a heavy barrage,
of gun-fire on the civilian population, the doctors at homo
were equally interested in wour.de, injuries, and burns as
the doctors at tho front, so that llr.-ly one oan say not
only In the field of Internal medicine and the flold of oora-
cuniontlvo diseases, but also in tho entire floict cf Injuries
the interest was definitely a common or.e and one onn no lon¬
ger spoolfy WohrmROht interest.

Q. You taho as an example opldeulca.-. 'diioh aro probab¬
ly especially convincing, but I should like to come buck to
your statement of till* morning where you spo<ce of the jroup
of pooplo for whom you a3 chief of tho Vt'ohraaoht l-.odloal
Service and as Army -lodlcal Inspector had tc oarry medically.
You said that first thsy consisted of the soldier, members'
of the army; 2, the relatives of the soldiers it home: *, tho
occupied, territories and the population and 4, Prisoners of
b'ar.


29*1


23 *la


12 Feb 47-SSH-18-2-Hoahan-(AX)

COURT I

I want to prove that ho, ae Chief of tho Vohraacht
Kedioal Sorvico, was obligated to caro for the Prisoners of
tfar, I have gathored tho bvldonco for this and ask that
It bo accepted. It is first, Dooument HA-5, Document Book
No. 1, Page 27. This Is an excerpt from tho War Kodlotl
Crdnanoo of tho Army. It deals with tho medical sorvico A
in Prisoner of War oflsps. I offer this as Exhibit No. 2*.

Then, I submit *>oouaont HA-5-A In Do cum on t 5ook No.l,
page 29. This shows that tho duty of the eodloal offlocrs
in tho roar areas was to care for tho civilian population
and tho Prlsonors of 'far. I offer this Doounont as Exhibit
No. 24.

I offor tho affidavit of Qonoralarrt Dr. tfaltor ponnor,
HA-6, eoouaont 3ook No. 2, Pago 4. It contains a gonoral
presentation of tho observations of Qonoralarrt Dr. Ponnor
of tho dofondant Handlosor. I do not want to offor that In
this connection, but I should like to oorao book to tho
letter. Tho reason why I oonticn it .* f is tho fact that
Dr. Ponnor points out that Professor Handlosor Issued orders
corresponding to humane treatment and dealing with tho
uodloal caro to bo given tho population of tho oocuplod terri¬
tories. With tho approval of tho Prosecution, I should llko to
offor this Docuaont as Exhibit 25 without roadlng It.

and now I havo two special Documents of tho Swedish
Colonel, Dr. v. Erlach - Ha- 7 in Document 3ook 2, Pago 7.

This Document I should not like to road In Its entirety,
but only insofar' ns it contains the question, which wo havo
dealt with, tho treatment given tho Prlsonors of War and
Professor Handlosor 1 s connection with this natter.

Dr. v. Erlach, who was chairman of tho Kodlcal- Cocci 8-


29*2


?.2 Fe'J 47-i3»-18-a-Heahan-(aJC)
XAJRT 1


elon In Goraany frca Hie suaner of 1940 until the lato fall
of 1944, jcnew conditions in Germany. Ho Units his tostio-
ony


29 •'2a


12 ?eb 47- £5ri- 18 - 3-haohan- C AX )

COURT I

alnco ho doals with throe nationalities and not the Russians.

Ho says:

■Tne medical care gl\on to the prisoner! of war Is Ger-
B ,m Prisoner of Var Camps and. hospitals for prisoners of
y»r can generally bo celled good. The offocts of the p u-tlc-

A

lpatlon and use of 'enemy doctors 1 for taking caro of tho
P07' s w \s particularly beneficial. Cooperation between tho
Gorman crop doctors and tho enemy doctors was ^ratifying In
gonoral. In tho course of the war, tho Sermon comp doctors
and tho onony doctors was gratifying In gonoral. In the oourse
of tho war, tho Gorman crop doctors wenv professionally used
also outsldo tho comps to take caro of cho civilian populat¬
ion. and had, tho-oforo, booonc ovorburdoned with work to
auoh on exto.ot that tne prioonors of war wore in nor.v casos
almost exclusively in tho caro of enemy doctors.

•Until tho onu, thoro wjre ol .nr difloronoos in the
.nodical caro given to tho prison.*.'! of var In tho varlouo
3orvloo Commands. This olrcuasta*!.'. » l .-ajiy 3.novci how very
ouch dopendad also In this case on the personal lty of the
nodical, officer l.n charge of such a command, and of his
assistant handling mattors concornlr.g Prlsonors of far.
Deficiencies obsorvod w.?ro regularly comunlrntod to tho
ropro3ontatlVGs of the Armed Forces High Com- nd, the prisoner
of war organization, to tho medical Inspectorate, as well
as to a representative of tho Foreign Office, at tho closing
mooting of tho mixed commission. Tho medical Inspectorate,
which subsequently became the Medical Services of the
Arced Forces, often


2_33


12 ?eb 4?-.W?-18-la-Keehar-fcAX)
COURT I


issued special lnstruotlor.8 to the nodical officers In
charge of Service Connande during tho tlno until the next
ncoting of tho nixed commission, In order to remove tho
doflcloncios vhloh had boon orltlclzod at tho closing mooting.

■It must, therefore, bo stated that Goneraloborsti-
3 arrt Prof. Dr. Handlosor omitted nothing to lmprovo the
medical care of the prisoners of rfar during tho rforld War
- 19*9 - 1945.■

Then It goes on to say:

The second question: "Did the medical care -considering
tho possibilities existing In Gomany - correspond to tho
provisions of tho Genova convention and to tho principles of
generally practiced nodical treatment of human beings?"

The answer:

'.vs soon no the provisions of t*K Geneva Convention had
boooac Known to all Oernan gene 1 os concerned, the -fodloil
oaro In Germany corresponded In general with tho principles
of the Geneva Convention.

"The chairman of the nixed medical oocalsalons wore
able to state that good will prevailed and that efforts
voro made to observe the provisions of the Genova Convention.

“The Gonoraloborsta'oaartt Prof. Dr. Handlosor always
favored a .nodical - humane treatment of the Prisoners of
•far. ^0 a coneequonoo of the development of tho war In the
-iroctlon of a 1 total w>ir' in particular, however after
• risonera of ./ar questions ease under Himmler's Jurisdlc-
-lon In J u ly 1944, the fate of Prisoners of 'far became
scr. si durably worse also In its nodical - human aspects. This
applied in particular to members of enemy air forces. The
x-raying of Prisoners of Har was United to a nini.-.un owing


29 "*4


12 Fab 47--JMM-Keohan-(420

COURT I

M the shortage of x-ray flU.a, lr. the samo way, tho supply
of tho Prisoners of War with artificial tooth broke down
progosalvcly.

•But I would like to state uxpllcltly that this (••.Tid¬
ed turn for tho worse in the faio of tho Prisoners o£ Vnr
eccurrod completely outside Gonoraloborstabsarrt Professor
Dr. Handlosor's Jurisdiction.■ '


29*4a


12 ?ub-v-J?-l3-2a-iLchan
C'-urt I

I will not road the Answer tc Ifurfc.r t'areo, because it c-nc^rns the
personality of Dr. -mdlcs-rj I will dc f.rt Inter, Vith reference t this .
D>cuiont, I effor this atqtenant cl fTefoSSor Dr. v. Erlnch as Exhibit "o. 26
Tffi P.l SIDEHT* The Tribunal will n*w b_ in recess.

(j, r-ecss was taken.)

a

*


2?35


iL rub 47—A-3JG-20-1—Putty-(«K)

OtfJnT I

TKi .iARShAL: Tha Tribunal ia again In ness.™.

3R. .I2LT2: I now want to offer to tha Tribunal Documont
An. H.V-i€ in document beck No. 2 on page ?0, and * of fur
• t >m m r 27. This ia an answer to tho questions to

Oolcn.i rr-nuier ac huoo'.'.acht In Zurich, a phy«loirx vfii:

/.nows conditions ir. Goruar.y -.s a rusult of bio ofx'lclal. task.

If tha J-rcauoutlon dees r.ov put *«y epanlal emphasis o.n

*

ic, I dc r.ot want to' read «..* anotors, because in general
tha an-vers contain tha aaao .'ud^.jpt vbiob was -uw j>;pros3-
ad by Dr. vor. Srloofc and which I have alroaiy presorted. Tha
only chirg ci importun-: u. •• t. bo 1: ;;uo3._cn ::;ur.ber 2

that tho oodlcul owe wan In avoordanoo with tho Ik nova oon-
vcr.tlnr. and '.ntsrra'ota? lav that human audicnl trontoont
was gtvun. "ir. any <uO-> ( as long r.r I worked ir. -Vaiuany us
ofcairaan of r. nod 106?. commission -rco June, 1C40 to 13^2."

In this casa i-ieo T. would like to lutor cn road tho
character Judgment of Professor -xi that to when

?.‘3l086or Hondlosor 1? »ot or. th-. vet.:;* stand ...•.ynoro I
new offer this document as ikhibit k? /u.S nqusas vuat It
bo admit to 1 lr. evidence.

31 PR. HELT2;

C* I rofcvt-cr Kundlf -«r, J sa now handing to you document
be 3.t number 10 abxit su^ ran alio arpi-rlaonti. In tl.ls book
In page 94 y.u *.iii find Dormant v:iioh Is oor.tair.od

In doaunont book aumbor 10, ah hi bit 2*1. C.a this document
.io. 472 on page 94 there Is ^ affidxv.lt by or. Ftaofior.

Da. X2L/2: It Is cr. po^o 96 of tn « rng.'.isb deouaont
book. Because cf paragraph 7 of this affidavit, the Prasoout-
ior. has presented It In tho accusation oi.d In tha case against
Hinilosor, and paragraph 7 statos:


2~/*6


12 Fab 47-ir-DJ(j-2p-l“?uity-( aX)
COUaT I


■Whan tho sulfanllaalde experiment started, I vae told
by Profoasor Oo'ofcardt, =jr military and xedloal auporlor,
that those experiments were oarrlad out by order of the
Chief of the Medical Office of the Wehnnaoht and tho Ghlof
of the Medical Offlco of tho State."

Q. Did you aa Chiof of tho Kohrcacht Moilca^ Sorvlco
or In any other capacity glvo auch an ordor to Professor
Gobhardt, or dld»you paa3 It on froa a higher agency, accord¬
ing to which the experiments carried out by


29*6a


1 z r- , .rarry-i-rj>2^-s-putt7
C-urt i'o. 1


- r# Qc’:fc«'-rdt, Oborsouaor and Tiaeh^r vcro ordered?

i B3.


293?


12 Feb ,7-«-PKP-21-l-3oard-(.,X)
COURT I


V .ay It please the Tribunal, I ac now presenting two
affidavits by Dr. Gobhardt and Dr. Fischer. This la H r-8, In
Doouaur.t Book 2, pogo^l2, and I offer it as Sxhlbit 28i
Dr. Fritz Flachor states In this affidavit: "I ha/e signed
an affidavit which in the preaont trial has been submitted
as evidence by the Prosocutlon. 0 In paragraph 7 of this affi¬
davit It is stated, and then follows what I have Just read.
.»nd, I contlnuo with the affidavit of Fischer^ "This
affidavit originated under circumstances which I an going
to explain In detail when I shall be questioned on the wit¬
ness stand. In reply to Professor Dr. Handloser's Defense
Counsel, I declare that It Is not oorrect to oay In the
affidavit Professor Dr. Gobhardt had told ao that the

4

experiments aust be perforaed by order of the ohlef of the
Medical office of the .»rnod Foroos. Nor did I mako suoh a
statement. I oust eaphaslzo In this connection that the
interrogation took place In the English language, and that
tho above affidavit datod 21st ootober 19-46, represents a
summary of a long Interrogation record. This summary, which
was drawn up by combers of the Prosecution Stiff, was submit¬
ted to ce ready for signature. !•, cysolf, don't raastor the
English languago sufficiently well to have ayself noted
this nl8understandlr.g, but since I have, ;aysolf, no knowledge
of such in order cf the ohlef of tho Medical Sorvlcos of the
.*rcod Forcos, Professor Dr. Handlosor, I hereby rectify
Item seven of ay affidavit, dated 21 October 19-16. ■

I request that this Dooucent oo‘ adaltted as Exhibit

26 .

In the affidavit, H.r-9, Document 3ook 2, Page 14, which
I u. presenting as Sxhlbit 29, Dr. Gobhardt has stated the


29 T 3


12 Fob rKr- 21- i- 3 card-( )

XUriT X

following: "It Is not true that 1 ovor told Dr. Frits

Fischer that those experiments wore being carried out by

ordor of tho Chief of the hodloal Office of the tfohrsacht.

In tela connection Dr. •Flachor must have nade a mistake, or

the affidavit dated 21 October 1946 must have been baaed

upen a nlsunderstanding of the facts glvon bv Dr. Frits

Fischer. At any rate, I as not aware of any suoh order from

the Chief of tho Kodlcal Service of the Vohrmaoht, Profoasor

%

Dr. Handloaer. Ilor did I dlsouse It with Professor Dr. Hand-
losor before tho beginning of this experiment. The
uxporlaonts for testing the aulfsnanldos wore oarrlod out
on Hitler's and Hlnalor's orders, upon dlreot instructions
from the Soloh Phyalolan SS and Police, Dr. Oravlts."


29*8a


12 Fobi 47 -..-21-2-PKP-
d.ert do. 1


I roqueat tret this af fi_rvit be admitted as rb-hibit 29.

Tht »'s Professor (hibhardt's conn-ctlrns to you?

... Pr.fcsaor Gw’ohardt *.<a3 a chief Hy^enest for the Reich Physician SS.

,r.:, rvoith-r s ..ray 1. ic-1 Iiup-ct-r n:t is Chief .f the hohraacht il-dical
service did he stand in 'ny .fficjr.l connection with ce.

. ir. an affidavit .r-seated b7 the Pros«cuti;n, of Dr. Fiachor, it is stqtcr"
th t 7 -o hc ‘. participated in the ter. years' enniv-rr.ry r.t Hohonlychon: is
th*t CDITwCt? *

.e, th t is i. t correct. Dr. Fischer is aakinf a adst-ku there. I have

r-t oarticipote r.t the ten y-«ra' nniverscry Celebr-tion mr'did I know
•nythinf about it. I r>-v-r rec-ivo '.ny invitati n to ctt.n'. it.

Did you ev.r f-.ve r.y official contact with nurslm: hocao at H’henlychun?

A. I did not h-.ve any official contact; hrsicvor, I aust st.atu h-re that
the f-LI s in inci/ent occur re' : It ar.y probably h've Va in tlx> ye-r rf 1942
ahon C-nti or Gebhardt, I do not ivaunber -x c*ly "ny aaro, c-j^j to o.. xno in
ny fficj it Berlin, nd they requested to enter the humtoriun «f srm.
rurrixv h ne at i.oh-nlychen. I would not be spending cy tine to nuch in ray
oth.r way, lout after the nun h:d au&cateC Dr. hrldaann, since he had eon in
th; i.urrteriur.; they r.ls» cxei^r-i. it doain le th t 1 , :s a successor, would
clso -.iter th- roup. I had no cause not to c.ply with tlv request, :n there
x'.s n» caur- for aijr objection on oy part,

. . uid you participate in ny Section of the Kui-toriurj, tliis c-j»dUce?

«. I two not p-rticip-t i* ir. any discuss! -n not h-vu I ever r-c-ive-' an
invitati n t. atteu ouch a c-nf.r.nce.

Q. The Prosecution has atrte her-, in c-nn-ction with tho Confi.renco of
-.r.cultin physicians in 1944, has described H -h^nlychen here as the center of
th. jo. Can yeu state -nythin in c nn-cti n witn it?

.. Y~s, I c-n =rk- the following st tenant: I cann. t un'erst'ixi this ipini-r.
‘—cause orior to th. war Hohenlych-n was a well kn un h spit l Center which,

,-a f r -o I kn w, w?-s 'Is well kn:wn utsitt- ->f GcmaQjr, ' r. wh-re fr n "11
circl_s if the popul ti :n, patients were accepte ' there. «r. 1 , wh. r. a v. all,
3 -r was r ctic. . in sp.cial fields, an- whore special confidence hi;-

-ine ’ in tills field. As f r 38 I C-n r -ea-.r n* fr noj a-nory, I can state

293*5


1 2 Fe'o. Ll ~k~Zh~y-7S^- 3c-“ rc
J.urt :.»• I

th“.t ?<e, in the Eehrancht, stceticoa w-re r-~.ily -via'’ tfc‘t -ur ffic-r? ; these
l-clu -d hi ;h -fficcra, whose relativea ii, f-r d.aaole, they it.rc suffering
ir ~ j int disease nr*, whore they ibtxi oper'ti .a, they -'id n t e j into .ur
-e-it'-ls; f.r ux~j&plo, ir. Berlin >•_ had an uxc o llont aurjicnl s~Mcl. - .llat, but
trwy ooiieVe' they could ,*.ly + helped at K h-nlych-n. Thia applioe ala a ta
L ‘uriw8 jccurr«-d in sp>rta, sapeclnlly injuries to the joints of the kn-oa.

Ar. , ' 1 .ut thu center of the SS, I understand :ny institution which works .
strictly recording to the politic.” 1 practice f the SS, but which i$ not r.
hospital with three hun.h-ed civilian y tier.ts ir n LI class-s A the papulation,
rv’. with three an.' f.ur hundred w ended an. aick soldiers a? the Luhnnacht,

:.ni furthu'raore on d/itixir 1 three hun'r- injure! an’ aick patients -f thu
aff-n-3S ..r« lccatw .. hh*t I want t- sr.y is, th t according to the whole
c.natell ti r., I la not fine ny cause to &eo that th-n.spital at H-henlychen
ar.s the center .f t!>* SS. In -rdvr to aok- this at~teaer.t caapl-tu, I .nly
•ant to re.: hur- that 1 h ve »»-n Hah-nlycncn f >r thu first tiao; that I
hav. vicito' SeVer~.l at-.tiona there or. the occasion of th- Cunforonoc A the
„ nsultln. Physicians in Iday 1944..


294C


12 Feb r-J P-22-1- 31 nkloy- (*eC)
COURT I


The facilities thoro, especially those for the sub¬
sequent treatment of severe Injuries and where arms and
logs wore again rostered to activity, were so Impressive
to no that later In 164-. I sent ay son there. Ho had boon
aoveroly injured In the Caucasus and was sovoroly hanporod
In breathing because of four of five operations in his chest.
I also brought hin to Hohenl ychen buoaueo, I have Ator on
rope-tod, I could not have round any bettor Institution for

V

that purpose; and I roally would had quite a numbor of
hospitals at ay disposal for ny son.

Q. *hy was Hohonlychon selected for the conforonco
in Hay 1944?

.». It was selected for the following reasons. Tha
previous conferences took plnco In the Military Medical
Academy at 3orlln; also the conference of May, 194*. Ever
after the air attaoks on Berlin In the fall of 194*, which
increased to an enormous -xtent every nonth, the Military
Medical .icad-tyr had sufforod some sort of danago In every¬
one of the air attaoks. After the rovoro attacks In the
aiddlo of Fooruary and In March and In .,prll cf the year
1944 the Academy had bojn damaged tc such an extent that It
could not be utillxod at all ..ny more. In addition to this,
because of the constant air alarms, oven If no actual
attaoks were taking plnco, there would have bo-n no possib¬
ility In Sorlin or in Its vicinity to hold any mooting thoro
whore after all two hundred to throe hundred physicians had
t- be billoted there for a period of two days.

Therefore, I was confronted by the problem when I come
to Berlin on one occasion in .*>rll of actually net knowing
where I should go for this conferenco whoso preliminary work
had .already been concluded, at that tine Prof. Gobh-irdt


2941


12 Feb 47-A-JP-22-1—Eiacley-(AK)
COURT I


offerel Hohenlyohen to ne; and I really was very glad to
accept this offer which later on was confirmed by the

Reich8fuehrer. Hohenlychen was about ninety Kilometers

*

from Berlin; and around the vicinity there, not only in
the vicinity of the hospital but throu-ihout the region,
no bomb had ever been dropped; and we actually were able
undisturbedly to carry on the conference from the 16h to
the 22nd. That was the only re-son why this conference
took place at Hohenlychen.


2941a


12 Feb 4?-A-JP-*22-2~Blakley-(AX)

COURT I

Q. At the conference at Hohonlyohen In 1944 how many
reports were presented^

A. Outside of the printed report, 168.

q. How many of these were by 38 physicians?

A. Three.

Q. On Page 96 of the document book you will find NO-
619 about the meeting and conference at Hoher.lyohen. This
la Exhibit 2*6. About this list of the participants Dr.
Fischer states in one of his affidavits that tho lists
contained In Document 619 are representative lists of all
these who participated in all four conferences. Is that
correct?

A. No. In this case it was forty. In this caso Fischer
Is mistaken. Tho participants in the four conferences voro
only In part tho same; and probably it should not be a
representative list but lists of thoso prosent.

Q. I think that it should be a representative list;
that thoso participants actually roprooent tho conspirators
in their entlroty who regularly attended the conferences
of tho consulting physicians. Perhaps Dr. Fischer has not
meant it In this way; out that is tho vay in which It was
p.-osentod hero.

a. Yell, this is completely out of tho question
because the participants in thoso conferoncos which took
place participated for tho following reasons. Tho Wohrmacht
bronchos wore able to express tholr wish os toward the sub¬
jects Co bo discussed as well as those w ho woro working
tho spoochos. Thon these pooplo who had to be there were
soiocted by mo either because they were to glvo *». speech
or because they ver- told to participate in discussions or
because they wore specialists in tho particular field.


2942


12 ?ob 47--JP-22-2-EIakley-(AO
COUAT I

Of tho number which resulted then there wore those who had

to participate In an official capacity. There were a certain

nunbor of nodical offloors from the nodical Inspectorate of

the tfehrnaoht branohos. ttl*n It was determined how many

persons could still be accoenodatedf ; and this number was

divldod into army. Vehrmacht, Luftwaffe, the toff on 33,

the labor sorvloe; and then it was left to the branches of

tho Wohrmaoht to send whom they wantod to the plaoos which

%

wore put at their disposal .


2 3 4 2 a


12 Feb 47-A- JP- 22- B- Pu tty- (AK J
COURT I

Therefore, regular members vfere only those who had
southing In particular to do with It In tboir official
capacity or with regard to their skill.

q. Now, let us refer again to the experiments at
Havonsbruck. It has been determined that you did not have
anything to do with the beginning and the execution of theao
experiments of Prof. Qobhardt and Dr. Fischer. 71th rogard
to these oxporlmonts which were oarrlod out at Ravonsbruok,
were there any lectures held by Prof. Dr. Gobhardt and Dr.
naoher on tho Invitation of tho conferonco In Kay 194* at
the Military Hodlcal Academy? Did you attend tho spooohos
by Prof. Gobhardt?

A. I assume yes.

Q. You say you are making on assumption. Don't you know
that for cortaln?

A. Yea. I really oannot romembor the spoooh any more.
However, It Is actually Impossible that I should not have
boon thoro because In the oourso of that oonferenco tho
first day I mado an official and rather long addross.

I oponed the oonforenoo and then built the fraoovork of tho
specialist group for surgery; and thon tho working soaslon
of tho surgory groups cooaoncod.

In this conference about six or seven locturps wore
given on sulfanlllcldo expo-d^ents; and I aesumo for cortaln
that I attended. I cannot remombor tho addross; I oannot
remember any details. It may bo that after I came from ray
opening speech thon I occuplod rayself with all the oth^r
questions. I can only say one thing. It did not have an
effect on me to the extent that I was especially Impressed
or that he should have given mo any cause to reach some
conclusions.


294.7


12 Fabr. U7-’-23-l-?FP-Cook (IL)

Court So. 1

Q Then I cannot actually address any further question to you with
«n objective content. Therefore, I ct. only «*sk you questions -ftcr you
h-’ve received knowledge here of wh’t has been add here. How do you
explain the fact that this lecture did not c->us« -ny oartlcular re¬
action of yourself, la there* any plausible explanation for that?

* Yes, there la only one expiration, that the lecture according
to It's fara-tlon and after the description cf the courso of the

A

redlcsl treasures caused the lsoresslon that they had been done in
accordance with the rules of the nedlc »1 profession.

X

Q If aftor the ccncluslon of every locture a discussion took place,
■ore you present at the dlsousslona?

» Tes, I «o quite certain of that.

Q Did anybody make objections then with reference to the lectures
by Oebh-rdt -nd Flschor?

* As I gather free the report of Dr. Sohwelss, speaking on the
subjoct Immediately aftcrw»rts, and -t the conclusion of the sulfana-
llalde loctures there were about six or seven, to which those of
Oibh-rdt and Fischer also belonged, about six or sc von people spoke in
tns courso of the discussion.

Q Did r.ot any cueplaint reach you subsequently through official
channels or any voice of opposition?

A Neither after the lecture, not In the recess which was called,
nor during the lunch which was also taken In the 'cadesy or In the
course of the day or the following day or -ny othir tlno nobody
-pprorehed bo In *ny »»y, who expressed th-t he had the Impression
tht something wijust was being done here which would cll for oppo¬
sition.

Q H«d the lecture by Gebh»r*H and Fiacher been submitted to you
before the conference?

A No, that would h pvc been screwh.-t difficult because in the first

h.^lf of the month of 'J- y, 19U3, I carried out Inspections In Italy,

'rrece «nd Crete, and then I returned to Berlin and I stayed there for

- 29LU -


12 Febr. b?-*-&-l-ffP4ook (IL)
Court Ho. 1


* very short period of tire and then I went by pl*ne to the head¬
quarters, »nd I snly returned to Berlin - very short tine before the
conference, but even In the course of =y very brief stsy In Berlin,

where I certainly •eked tho working staff of the conference If ev;ry-

•

thing w»s going In order, because It w's r»ther difficult to organise
sore thing of this kind, and If ttere were »ny special questions,
nothing w.-s brought to ay attention, -«ny oc«pl»lnt "bout the lectures
»nd about the course of the coeing conference.

Q kjy it please the Tribunal, with regard to this complex, I
request te present the following document, first of »11 affidavit by
Frofessor Dr. Frey, Document H5-10, Document Book 2, page 16, which
I offer as Ejdilbit Ho. 30, Professor Prey's answer to the question:

" 's f»r *s tho field of sulfonamide cxoorlrents rod exporlronts
with bone, nusclo «nd norvo regeneration, *s well «s bone transplant¬
ation, Is concerned, can you say fron your <wrn knowledge whether Prof.
Dr. H-ndlnser, In his oap»city «o Chief of the Hehrr.acht Medical
Service »nd *rry >tedlcal Inspoctor, ordered experiments In contradic¬
tion to "11 recognized nodical nod scientific methods?"

*Se answer reds w follcwst

"I know Prof. Dr. Hndloaor in his edacity -8 Chief of the
kehrnacht Mrdloal Service -nd Arry ttJdlcal Inspector. I do not know
»nd have never heard, th-t he or any of his offices carried out or
ordered ary experiments In contradiction to recognized radical ond
scientific net hod a. According to sy knowledge of the character of
Prof. Dr. H«ndloscr I cannot Imagine that he erdered or even cpproved
of such experlrcnta.''

I now request tht this affldrvit be *adttod as Exhibit No. 30,

’nd a further affidavit of the av» Professor, in which Dr. Frey de»la
with the irpresslons during the lecture by Dr. Gebh*rdt «nd Dr.Fischer,

-nd states here:

"In the lectures of Gebh-’rdt rod Fischer, which Is nenticned In this

letter of 2? ef January, 19li3 is contained - report pbout the result of

- 29L5 -


12 ?ebr. Ii7- *-23-2 -PKP-Cook (IL)

Coart Ho. 1

series of exoerinents which »« cerrfsd out simultaneously on
hua-'n beings. This series  concluded and after the series had
been coapleted * repetition of the series was out of the question.

In the lecture in question we discussed people who had been condemned
to de»th end that experiments on concentration crap inmates were
carried out ’gainst their will was not exoressed. So far as I know
I personally o-intain the point of view th-t such experioants on
he»lthy people


29U5 a


18 fab 47~^?K?-2.'*-^CQok-C4X)
COURT I


with tho Intention to cause symptoms of diseases on thorn
and to test tholr therapeutic Influence would be prohibited

by thv ethical rules, -nd that theory must be dlcppproved. 8

•

I want to point out expressly that the next aontenco Is an
objective subsequent opinion by Professor Frey, and ho does
not state any fact. A

MR. KoHANEf: This document which has JuBt boon road
is not in tho document book and I must object tout's being
offered until I have an opportunity to look at it and soo
what It Is.

THE PRESIDENT: I was going to ask counsol If tho docu¬
ment oan bo found In the document book.

DR. NELTB: It Is contained In doounont book Wo. \
vhloh has not booomo available ao yet. The sano


2946


12 rc'o 47-A-JP-2' T -lR-Cocfc~ vAK)

COURT I

applies to tho document HA 43, which I have Just offered, And
It la an affidavit by Dr. Professor Randoralf and I request
that both documonts bo admitted with tho reservation that the
documents will later on be presented to you and the
prosecution and that .they can then object to then.

i.R. McHAHSY: The Prosecution has no objection to his
roservlng an exhibit number in sequence and no particular*
objection to his now reading tho affidavit. However, I would
like to havo It clearly urdorstood that It Is incumbent upon
Dr. ilelto to re-offer thoso documents at a later stage when
vo havo tho translations* before us, tocauso otherwise the bur-
don Is on the Prosooutlon to koop a check on thoso documents
provisionally admitted and wo aro going to lose track of them.

THE PRESIDENT: I wao going to suggest if counsol has
the doouaonts ho could offor now in his document book, thoy
should be offorod first and these documents rosorvod until
the doounent is preparod and given to the Frosooutlon, and
Cno Tribunal. Is counsel advised as to whm this Document
Book Ho. 3 will probably be prepared-/

DR. H2LTB: I was told It would be ready by this morning
but I guess It was not completed. In the document book there
are only four documents. It contains on additional four
documents, and perhaps it would be appropriate to admit them,
because otherwise the complex of the question ^uld be
Impaired.

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel may offer them provisionally If
he desires and reserve the nu :ber, but It must be read again
when the documents are again offered as exhibits.

DR. NELT3: Yes, Your Honor.

Professor Randeralf states at the third working session


2947


12 Feb 4?- < fr-J?‘-e*-la-0ook-(A:<)

COURT I


of che consulting specialist physicians from the 24th to the
26th of Hay, 194*, in connection with the leotures by
Fischer and Gebhardt, I have not participated in the disous-
slon, but after hearing th* lecture with regard to injuries
sustained by bullet wounds, this leotuie didn't have anything
to do with lectures by Gebhardt and Fischer, who are complete¬
ly unknown to mo.


2S47a


12 Feb »7-A-Ji2*-2arCooic-(«£)

SCUiiT I

iiy lecture was completely Independent from the report
by Gebhardt and Fischer. It vas supported by experlenceo
vhloh I myself had gained by dissecting the corpses of German
soldier who had died lr. ba\tle, and *fcioh were supported
by studying world literature. I have not made any remarks
in the discussions to Gebhardt and Fischer.


2948


12 Fob 47— A- Ail— 24- 1 -Gro 5 S-
COURT I


■I can't remember In detail my core the lectures by
Oobfaardt and Fischer but as far as I remember It could not
be seen by roports from Gobhardt and Fischer that experiments
on concentration camp prisoners had been carried out. The
consulting specialists physicians have discussed the modlcal
experiences at this conference. In All combats, and In all
hospitals at home In order to gain new methods of treating
voundod and alok soldiers, as a result of this conferenco
of the consulting physicians the now oodlonl experiences
wore changed by the Arm/ Medical Inspectorate to dlrectlvos
nnd through those medical directives It was posslblo to bring
these experiences to the young physicians who voro used in
tho hospitals at tho front and were unable to attend theso
conferences.

DR. NSLTB: I roquost to provisionally admit this
dooumont a Exhibit 2.

I now oorao to tho Dooumont Book about the Sea Water
Experiments. That Is Document Booh V and the affid-.v.'*. by
Dr. BooKer-Freyseng, HO-448, which Is not contain. in this
Document joofc. The exhibit number of the Bo Oku r- F<*« y no. lg
affidavit oannot be determined yet. The exhibit nu-iber of
.10-449, that is the affidavit oy Profoosor Schroeder, and
this will be exhibit 10. This will be exhibit n. This book
I am holding to you does not contain any documents with tho
exception of Document SO-449 which mentions your name direct¬
ly. In the affidavit of Profoosor Schroeder, HO-449, which la
exhibit l*Q by Professor Becked-Froysong certain statements
-To contained which might give cause to tho conclusion as If
you had been In some way connected with the son water exper¬
iments or in the very least that you hid knowledge of them,
'/ill you please make . statement with regard to tho assumption

2949


12 Fob 47-a-AK- 24-2-Gres8-
COURT I

that has been expressed by the tvo other defendants?

a. In connection with this I can only aay that I have
heard of the sea water experiments hero In Nurnberg. Before
they wore completely unknown to bo.

DR. .iiLTZ: kny 1* pleAae the Tribunal, I therefore
request that the affidavit by Professor Schroedor, Document
3ook II, page *0, document HA-22, bo admittod as Sxhlblt
aa. Profosaor Schrooder states here under paragraph 2 -
■Under Ko. 81 said that Professor Dr. Handloaer know
about the medical resoorch experiments carried out by tho
Luftwaffe. I have to add thu following In that connection:

■a) Xy testimony rofers only to the time of ny tour
of duty as Chief of the Luftwaffe Modloal Service from 1
January 1944 on. About the procedures before that tlno I
am In no position to oako any statements.

“b) Luftwaffe rosonrch was not subordinated to tho
Chief of th- Vohrnacht hod leal Servloo; It v R8 not among
tho "common" tasks of the Yohrmaoht Medical Service. ’hat
is why a report to the Chief of the tohrmnoht .'.eulc.Yl Servloo
was not considered.

■c) When tho Luftwaffe handed out rooearoh ni-slgnmonts
about strictly aviation medicine fields, the consont of tho
Chief of tho tfohrtaaohi Hodloal Service was not necessary.

Tho Chief of the Luftwaffe Medical Service could on his own
responsibility carry out research In his .aviation medical
research Institute without inforcing the Chief of the Johr-
■acht Medical Service.

The information concerning research assignments given
to third persons was connected with the assignment given
to Professor Dr. Brandt in 194.a, to guide tho whole research
vers In order to avoid duplication of work. After that time


2950


12 Feb *»7- A- AX- T - Gro s s-
CCURT I

all proposed research assignments had to be reported to the
office of the Reich Commissioner, Office for Science and
Research. .This was done In the following aonnor: Copies of
che letter sent to the mop assigned the research Job wore
sent to the Office for Science and Research (Professor Ros¬
tock); an additional copy went to the Chlof of the Vahrmaaht
i.edical Scrvlco for his lnfornatlon. Those reports contained
no lnfornatlon about place, methods of execution of such
rosearch, assignments, nor wore any possibly oontbmplated
experiments on human beings r.entloned In them.

■d) As for as the sea water experiments (No. 5 of my af¬
fidavit of 15 October 1946), It becomes evident from Document
No. 17? that no representative of the Chief of the tfohraacht
Nodical scrvlco or the Army Nodical Inspootorato participated
In the preliminary conference on 19 Ray 1944; It further
becomes evident from the distribution list that this record
was not submitted to the Chief of the .ohrmaoht Medical
Scrvlco. Nor was a copy of tho letter whloh was sent to tho
Ralchsfuehrer S3 Himmler, bearing my signature, forwardod
to the Chief of the ‘fehrmacht nodical Service. No research
assignment was lss.od In this matter."

I roquest that this doci'_«nt bo admitted as exhibit fT.

Dr. Becker-Freyseng states In Document HA-2*-

TH£ PRESIDENT: Before entering upon any further docu¬
ments the Tribunal will recess until 09*0 tomorrow rornlng.
(The Tribunal adjourned until 1* February 1947 at C9*0
hours.)


2951


im

13 FaW>-i~l--LJG-?c>ster--J?
(tart I


Official Transcript of tfco ^ericnn KUitnry
Tribunal in the natter of tho United Stotos
of An crier., against trrl Brandt, ot al.<
defendants, sitting at Bamberg, ^enany, on
13 7otruary 1947, ;9#>, Justice 3onls prosiding.

TES KJ2SSAL: Persons in tho Court Hnoo will ploaso find their neats.
She Honorable, tho'judges of KUitnry Trigonal 1.
mitary Tribunal 1 is now in sostion* God snvo tho Unitod States
of Xnerlca =nd this honorablo Tribunal.

Tvoro will bo order in tho courtrooc.

TEE EGSIXlTl Mr. Marshal, will you ascertain that the defendants
oro nil present in court.

IS KA3SULI Kay it please your Honor, all defendant, are present
with tho oxeoptir.n of the Defendant Obcrhausor who is absent with a

continuation of her rocont lllnoae.

rs ranOSi Tho Socrotoxy-eonornl .111 nolo for tho rooord tho

oroocnco of oil tho dofondont. .ovo tho Befondnnt Oborhou.or, tho
Dofondnnt Ohorbnuoor loin* otoont on noonunt of lllnooo according to
n d-otor'o oortlflcto vhlch I vlll hood to tho Soorotnry-Oonornl.
(Cortlflcoto hondod to Scerotory).

rn.ro HX-fcWO <T-r the Dofnafnrt Rudolf Brre 0. Hr- Prooidant.
I requoot pon.lt.lor- to rodeo « roquo.t hoforo tho dofen.o contlnuo. to
nrosont its cr.ro.

IS E 3 S:mriJ Counsel nay prococd.

E. ElEI-v’. !>y It plor.o tho Tribunal, I -rat to roho o roqoo.t
font tho Dofor-daat ludnlf Brandt ho r^-lttol f. he nhoont fr.c tho
curtronr: oftor tho rocoo. thl. ror-lnc for oooh « period of tin. until
It ho. he on dotorr.lnod h, a oodles «»lh-tl-n by tho prioon phy.lclon
t>.-t ho 1. Ohio to P-rtlolpjJ^ay^xooc ooool'-no. In W opinion
Hodolf nrondt I. .id. and. 'hcoordinn to'Shn.^tono -hloh I hnro tho
opportunity to oboorve. bo 1. 1= ny opinionK^roly HI. Ho only «o»<*.
50 irllo^rn. nod ho It barely nhlo to over, folio- the proceeding.

El. rental crpnelty 1. deteriorate free, drf V. dry. 00 that It hocono.


Ccurt I

13 -“--b U7-i' - 1-2 - LX - Feel«•


questionable to ^ if th- defense can even be consluded in a professional
atoncr. I, therefore, request, ard I would te grateful, that an oxasdna-
ticn 07 the orison physician bo ordered so that I will obtain full
clarity as to whether tho Defendant Rudolf Brandt is still able to
Attend tho ccurtrcoc sessions.

THE PRESIDEfTt Counsel should ,iake his application in writing so
that tho -iatt~r will bocono a oattor of record. C.uno«l vill proparo
an application and haai it to the Tribunal at any prior to tho
.mming recjM. The r.attor will then b« considered.

DR. iUUF.UJKi Thank you voiy uuch.

ER. NKJTfitx Fay it please thu Tribunal, at the end of yesterday
Afternoon's session I hid started to r_.td tho affidavit of Dr. Becker^
Frvyson, with regard to tho copl-nt cf questions regarding son-water
orpcrl or.ts. The affidavit which I r resented before of Professor
Uchroodar, as you will recall, refers to the tino of 1 July 19Uu until
Jjiuary 1SU5 when Frefossor Schroudor beconc -odical Oflicor Inspoctor
oX the Luftwaffe. Dr. Freyoeng previously belonged to tho edical
Ins, octornte of tho *<uftwoffo in a position which onablud hira, and
enables hin today, to L lvo a Judgjont about tho relationship botwoon
tho Chi-f of tho ..ohr acht .^Jical Service and the -odical Inspectorate
cf the Luftwiffo. Dr. BockoreFrayseng had giver, tethu pr^socution
affidavit Kurhir SO *tit> which is toh ibit 01 and in this affidavit tho
following is st*ted under Ko. 61

■Hsndlrsur, .as Inspector of the chmacht wdical Service, nod to
bo fully '.cquaintod with tho reSoarch work don-, by arry, Navy, and
Luftwaffe. .0 had orders to ropert to these gontle-nn cn all research
oasignenants -f tho scientists working f r us, so that duplication of

■or’: ;i*r£t be avuidud."

In connection with this, vT. Beckor-Freys^ hoc iinn the
1 lowing affidavit which I shall offer and present as D--cu.:ont Ha 23.
It is contained on pago 32 of Document Book II. It will have Exhibit
S . 3k. In his affidavit. Dr. k-ckor-rreyseng stotts the foil wing«

- 295 >-


C art I

13 Feb hi-.. - 1-3 - LJG - Foster


■Im interprutctioc which tho Frr-secuticn gave this part of :ay
affidavit praipts ir. rder tc avoid aisundcrst-vndi-ig *nd wrong
conclusions, upon r«,u»t of the Defense Counsel cf Professor Handlosor,

to Tflka the f.Hawing explanation*

■ 1 . The cextents gif He. 6 of the affidavit wo naver too subject
of the questioning in the previous interrogations. ..hon the interrogator,
in too presence of Hr. HcHaney, gav. e an relish copy of the affidavit
to sign, which was supp-acd tc boa suenary cf the interactions aid
which had been fornulntod by the ft*< secution, 1 told hin especially in
r-spect to S-s. 5 and 6, that because of the genoral'fcrelation cf
these sections I bad tc rake explanations. *r. JcHaney told :» that I
oould nake explanations later. *horoupon 1 signed. I was not sivun
ary opportunity later to explain He. 6 of the affidavit.

the question -f Fr fosser Dr. Handler's jurisdiction as Chief
„f the -ohr-jocht -edical Sorvico concerning the ros-arch work dono by
the Luftwaffe, l state*

■a) -ms- arch psrferjsd by the Luftwaffe was net subordinate to
tta Chief :f tho Vehruncht -sdical Service, it was not anong the "joint"
t alks X the wehrnacht .odical Sorvice. lh-refere no report was nado
tc tho -hiof f the ..ohr . cht .medical Sorvico.

"b) Ho.. 6 dodls nly with the ariod after the Office for Scionoo
and .tesearch had boon established urrfor Professor *orl Brandt. At
this period  -oust eisUnguieh bota.oon the r-s-arch dciu in the
L’af twaffo's cwn institutes. Only concerning the l itver report was
...do to Professor Rostock, conflicting ■ f sending a copy of tho research
aasignsonts b- Profosscff Rcst.ck and V- the Chief f the ehraacht
ftodinsl Service. This research assisnoent, h-wevor, did not contain
my information about tho DothMs to bo applied.

■c) The sea water oxperir-ents w.ro n t the result of a research
-asignaont. Thercf-ro the Chi-f .f the -*r»cht *. ical Survica cad
r. t recaLvo any copy.


- 295 ^-


Court I


13 Fab U7-H - 1 -L - LJj - Fcafcor

* 2 . The wcrds:

|n andl.. acr, aa Inspector of the Lohmacht Kedlcal Service,
had to bo fully acquainted with the research work deno by
Ar.y, Navy, a.id Luftwaffe,'

in this general fora are inqorroct. They ref^r t- the foil-wins sontenco
and are reant to express what I hr-.ra said above under Nr. 1.


-295^-


13 Fob-ii-kAA-2-l-Lesscr
Court 2*o. 1

n 3. Moreover wh».n I spok- of Eandloscr, I did not -xan Prof.Dr.
Bandloser personally but his office, which, accordingly to the contents,
of the copies of research assignaents sent it fron the end of 19h3
on, would hardly have any reSsen to subait such things to the Chief
of the TTchreacht hodical Service hissclf, but only to the suctie.n
chief in charge.*

I request to adait this affidavit as Exhibit 3lj.

SIEGFRIED HANDL06ER - (Hosuacd)

DIEEC? EXIUIKaTIGK - (Cont'd.)

BY DR. MILTS:

Q Uny it please the Tribunal, I have only a brief question
with regard to the bon. and suscle regeneration and the transplanta¬
tions. The Docusent Book does not sention the none of Handlosv-r and
his offic- so that I went only to ask if he knows anything about thu
experiments which wer. carried out at the Kav>.nsbrucck Concentration
Crop, or if he received any reports about then?

A No.

Q On the occasion of the conference of the Consulting Physi¬
cians did you hear any lecture on this sublet?

A No. This subject was not discussed at any conference.

Q The question of the exp-riaenta within the fr-.acwork of
hepatitus rcsoorch aust be considered ns concluded by tho interroga¬
tion of Prof. Dr. Gutieit and your testiaony, as far as it night
contribute* to the gerv.rcl clarification in this ease, hay it please
the Tribunal, in this connection I only want to refer to Docuaont
NO-371. This is again an af idavit of the Defendant Rudolf Brandt,
which states the following:

“Hondloser and Schrouder also aust have infora-d about th- fact
that Haagen and Dcho-n were physicians in the Amy Kedic .1 Service
and th-_ Robert Koch Institute.”


-2556-


13 Feb Ii7-fc-MAA-2-l-Lcs3 cr-{GJ)-
Court So. 1

This affidavit is Lxhibit 186 of th- Prosecution. In connection
with this I subait an affidavit by the Defendant Rudolf Brandtj
Doc®cnt HA-11. It is on page 17 of Documant Book No. 2, and Brandt
states the following: %

“In ny affidavit of 11 October 19L6 I aentioned a Dr. DohiJen
and described his as "A doctor of the A ray kedicol Service and of
the Robert Koch Institute.' ^

*


-2956-d-


i3 7ob4>4IiJr-2~2-IC88or-0P
(hurt I

■la this connection I doclaro that I f nyaclf, did ant uso this for¬
mulation but that it was suggested to no by tho Prosecution. I did act
kaow Dr. Dohcon porsonally and I do not roeollcct having known whore ho
vnrkod* want his function# woro, and to whnn ho won subordinated.

■If I said in this affidavit: 'Hendlosor nust have boon inf.irncd
about that it was a noro ossunption. I cer.not cito an* facts which prom
tc or suGgost that Prof, Dr. Hendlosor know of ouch things. 1

I roquoat that this affidavit bo adnittod ns Exhibit 35.

I now cono to a point of tho indlctacat which was not*pontninod in
tho original indictacnt. VI thin its presontntion tho Prosocution has
proaentod Docunont Book 11 about tho Polygnl Srporinoats. In this
Socvciont Book tho w:o of tho Dofondnnt Handle ««'. or one of his offlcoo
is not ncnti'.nod oithor. Hnwavor, in tho c^ui so of his prooontatior.
the prosecutor has dainod that tho Dofond-nt Eondlosor was connoctod
with tho poctir. rooonreh. In tho session of 2 January 1947, tho pro-
socutor stated tho fallowing with rofcronco to Siovors ‘Diary, "Tho
Ahnonerbo, ■ That was Jbaunont Ko. 3546-FS and I quo to:

"2 S3 Hnuptfltumfuohror Dr. Pb ctnor. "

In connection with this, according to tho record, tho Prosecution undo tho
followin- remark, and I qunto: ■&o Rosca-ch Institute was subordinated
to the Defendant Handlo.or- - to which fact bo had already referred pr^-
viously in tho crurso of tho trial. I c: now asking you, was an institute
tc with tho nano of Instituto for Oorcen Snstom Ro soar ah at ,.rnkow —
was this instituto subordinated to you?

Ay It was aovor subordinated to no.

q, Do you know this instituto?

A. Bo.

q. Since the Prosecution apparently wanted to prove a connection of

Prof. Eandlosor here with tho Ahncuorbo Instituto, a part of tho S3, I

barb asked the Defendant Siovors V> dctominc hero if, and in what place

ir. this 3iory tho nnro of tho Defendant Handles or apporxs and if ho hod

2557


13 7cV*WlLir-2-2-Lo«Bcr-J?

C^crt I


caj ooatact with th« Ahnonorbc and with this for Sostorn
Seaorrch. I cn now offering Ibcaaont KAr-15 on pa<* 25 of Bocunent
3ooSc So. 2. I request that


2957 (n)


13 Fee -i7— —-2-3-Ioascr
C.urt ID. 1

it \c axdttc 1 a® Sxhiiit 36. Dr. - lfJra. Silvers 3tct,_e tha f II ninj :

"The .rcsccutien su’idttc * v £icr/ '.J'-rxncr’c' (-'cuvcnt 3>b>-*S) in
.ri .crco.

■C aeomin Ux c -.•.cfcixlant rX. Dr. Han .loser, I state cate '.rically
tint there was no c nnccti n or ccllal retien * ebrcer. ilia an! rus, c.* tlx
.'Moos t *Jiich I * .1 engod, either -fficially er . rivatcly; 1 'iD net kn it
.r Ilanloscr pore'nelly .ri-r t this trial.

"Since tL ncao .rf. Dr. San/lx^DT a. . errs in tw. iiffsrait lecca in
c'lary, I c.nai ler it iy -utc t s~vs that nr. c nncctim r collal oration
sit. .r ;f. Dr. Kantlcecr roaultc ’ in dth-r cere.

"1) Lntrys 2 February 19UU-*

Cnforencc Tilth .r-foee r Kirt In trab ur. :

influenza vaccinatin by .r »• i’aa .n. Influenza vaccinati n, aucccoa-
Itolly ccrriatl ut in cantoir&I h^Atol *y iref. Rasrcn ms reject,.’ iref.
••nloser : r uri in the ohnaccht. *:c. rt r-ejioate for su .-isal n tc tho
adciafuchrcr SS.

itativn by Dr. Sievars:

.r.f, ilirt til this with tl: _ re. ark vr,t he c. ns lie re i tide natter
r_r; clynlficant an:’., c r.tr _ r. t: Hr.m’ios-r, he was ef the ini.n tbit

this vaccinati n shoul’. ’ c intr. 'nee.*, at least ir. t'.c CS. Tiatis -.Thy he
--a':.*, f r a r_. art IT ;irf. Uaa.on f r the .ur.cso 'f su' tUsien to the
*ic sfuchrer 3S.

"2) Intr;: 3 February ltfdi.

c jiforcncc ir. Str~~' ur with *r '. *..c or, • c :-.r acht bi 1 iatj ur
nr; rt f their institute requests'.. i\r rcc xxn'c ., thor f:r- lotto*

. C. issi-n-r Qcooral .r f. Dr. ran t tier v i-c. ..cs.r in t. ' u nTrie’

• s i alar letter is t. s_ne t *r . Vxullcear.

b'.taticn by Dr. Siovars:

.ref. .e'er, heal :i tV r “i 1 ;y cj >1 Cr.i^ •' the

-- .rt .ont f Di 1 : ~j in the '.Jmener'e.' •- .cr.ti »' -specially in re ar *

vest!-ns c nee min re. lacc-cntr, that he vza very .rxh interest.. in
<- n nc.it bi.ic-iets which were i!iscuseo 1 at that tfcx. s rca. .nsi'.lc loader


13 Fo’.

C-jrt 1


• t!~ '-iclc iata be ahculd like tc ,~t in t-uch rith !scn in shew undoratant-
fcS a nrc likely tc hoi;; hia ,;l^na. He c nst’.ero: oayooially auited the
r^fintionc:! ntxa eixl tra f tie e-ini.n thr.t it :d fct he r.'vanterc'us.


L


- 2 ^ 5 ?-


13 ?«£. U7-?-rvTD-3-l*eohan

Co'art Ho, 1

if at tho tine Professor !4jyer, tho head of the Department of Biolory in tho
~:ich Research Council, should also approach thin. It was docidod tlat ho
r.idrooa e letter to Professor r rondt through u in ord_r to enable us that
the like letter b7 Frofosssr ’ ’ey or nay be added,

"Profossor Kondlosor wr.s so completely unknown to no that I w-.., unable
to give any information about lxlaj iir.t is thj reason why Professor Feb or
asked m to inquir at Professor :teyer. As far as I reneabor, no such letter,
hewovor, was ever written, x

"Cn 2 January tho prosoou.ion oitou. vhen reading the docuuor.t book nbou
h-oost&t "Polyyal", froo ty dir.ry («hnjn..rbe) cn-i quotation of tho 26th and
31at ’lay 19U., rojardin', a conferonco with Dr. Orauer of the Reich Rosoarch
Council and with Dr, Flootnerj

‘ Pootino rosoc.rch at the institute for Qoratn Scat
Rosocrch in Cracow,

"Tho Prosecutor doscrl’ood this quotation as vory lntoro :tln , boo uso
this Institute was under tho defend.'.nt H ndlosor, This v-nt-.y thoroforo provos
V.vt Ik was faniliar .. 1 th t!-> spoly.al* "-ttor.

"Thi institute for Oojrvan Fast Roso.vra'.a r Cracow »ras connected with
th. Reich Rosoerch Co'UKil rad with rofossor ibis an, the Chief of the T)upar<
-at for Inorganic Chemistry mxS !" atrodu-lstry of th- Reich Rosor.rch
Council, Its aanajor an:, at the sreio tiro, Thiosnon’s and th. Reich Rusearoh
Council’s deputy, was Dr. Piotsch,

'Frofos3or Sandiesmr definitely had nothing to do with this Institute,
r»r did I ever hoar iis mas in connection with it. This Instituto was not
under tho OK"-' either,

'It is quite apparent that this is one of th anrgr confusions cr con-
* true tod artefacts of the prosecution trying to -stablish a connection of
F oplo and facts where actually none existed,"

I now request that the affidavit bo a±ittod as Exhibit ” 0 , 36,
ind, finally, the prosecution in excess of the ireiiefcoent ha? offered
Docu.u--nts Ho. 1308 are* Ho. 1309 about tho question of bacteriological warfare


-2560-


13 ?cb-i f-JJZD-5-2^tcohaxr-JP
Court I

Those doecncnts cro not contained In any do cm act books and I shall in r.
few r.inutoa £ivc you the exhibit numbers. Those Arcuncnta also do not
cation Is. Hacdlosor'e s*=0| hwerer, a nodical officer is nentioned horo
as Stabsarzt Dr. Ellers, who had sovarnl functions and anone othor things
ho had the work of the Amy Kolical Inspoctorato wf th tho Kilitnry
l.cdicel Acrdccy with the Weapons and Amanent Offico 1*0, 9. Tho docur.onts
-ro Prosocution Ibchibite 2?o. 325 and Ifo. 326. In connoction with this
I should liko to ask you tho following quostion; who was or who is
Profoscor Uliovo? ^

", When in January, 1941 I stated in ny offico as Amy J.'cdiwd Ino-
poctor I not noon.: tho nodical officors of tho Amy Inspoctorato, Prof.

Dr. Eliovc. *~o was personally known to no fron tho yoor 1922 whon I was
ctudyinc at tho Ililitory Modical Clinic at Ciooscn when I was assigned
thero as Stabsarzt. At that tino, ho was a nodical practitionor at tho
oano clinic t< which I belonged. Sinco tho yoar of 1922 I did not ooo
hin aorir. until tho yoar 1941. At tho outbroak of tho war, ho hud boon
called into tho Amy Hodical Inspoctorato by ny prodocoosor, Dr. Waldnonn
nnd thoro ho wr.s to deal with tho nodical aspocto of br.ctorioio,-lcnl
wjfaro.

Q* To whon was Profoscor Kliovo subordinate?

A. In hit nodical actlvitios and ac nodical officer, ho was sub¬
ordinate to no r.s tho Amy J.cdical Inspoctor and in his actlvitios no no¬
dical consultant and advisor nnd specialist, ho was subordinate to tho
nrranoat Offico to the Dopartr-.ant VauPruf 9 whoro ho also rocoivod
ncsi^nconts.

Q. Was tho hoad of this offico in tho Vau Pruf, Colonel Hirsch?

" Tos.

* v . '/hat were the asai^nsents which Profoscor Eliovo had to carry
"•it in this position?

. -irat of ell, Profoa3or Eliovc had all tho publications end
Professional literature of the foreign countries and he had to evaluate


2961


13 ?eb-:^4Z>-3-3-c:oobaa-v’P
v ourt I

th«c and use thee In order to find out, as far as this was at all
possible, vhet work as being done in this field by the foreign powers
and what point of riow they nalntained in each case, what intentions and
conclusions could bo drawn*fron it and what prorentivc no a. our on could
bo trie on against such potential coasuros.


2961 (a)


13 Fob. U7-!*-AH>-3-3-^eeban
Cc-!rt :<Om 1

In this case, i'.ms a question of protecting th^ people against sor.o potsAtia.
bacteriological warfare.

3 ■‘Tnct was thu status of this work in 19U1 when you entered your offico
as Any Nodical Inspector?

A :.s far as I can rorwnbar, this work was in a very early stage and the;
had to work on a new basis, \.hich had b»jn discovjred in Franco in the course
of the French campaign and Mch furth-moro ,_ava us a ood iapight into the
work which was done by tlu foroi n countries in this fioldj for axaraplQ also
in th) United Statos. x

3 D-d you offic ial ly participrto in this work?

A As Arcy '/.edicai Inspector, I had neither a docislvo position nor a
dodsivo influonco and I was infonasd by Profossor Xliovo about tho progreso
of the work only insofar that I r-ccived roports at » B ry largo intervals of
tiro and without thoso reports do'lln with any details. Through tho ivpart-
:wnt fa Pruf 9 and with Colonel Hirsch I did not have any contnot and I hive
n«vtr bolongod to any vwjrkin .roup at ary tins. I did not belong to tho
w!d.n roup Pioitscibloitor, which has roper, todly boon nentioned hero.

Q Son, wiihout any doubt, the question of bacUi-iolo loal warforo and
r-v ntivo measures Rust havo at ono tiro bo.n discussod within your field o;
co:spotonco and you, as Ar=y : cdical Inspector .and Chiof of tho Ary Vodical
Scrvico, uust havo at or.j tiro or -nothor havo voiced your personal viewpoint
in this qujstionj will you pl^aso tell us your personal opinion?

A As to tho intontion tc n ago in an active bactoriologionl wa.rfaro
on tho part of th*. r-orrv.n ohrracht, no information has -vor boon .avnilablo tc
•J3, oitlvir officially cr threv ’a oth:r channels, however, sinco throughout
-he war it could bo Soon fron the literatura of foreign countrios that this
;v e Stic a played ft part in all countries and that on sorx- occasions considirq-.
or': was boin don; in this field, it of courso was ay natural duty to occupy
ys_lf with all possible noasurcs in order to prevent this warfare fron being
carried out.

I hero ''-re preventive msesures and they wc-r«i primarily for the ehrrnoht


- 296 ^-


13 rib. l:7-?W.ro-3-U-l50ehan

Court Ik j. 1


Itself and secondarily, thoywero also intended for tho civilian population,
purthomore, Profossor move throu.hout the war was infomed of the fact
that I personally, with ra ard to the question of bacteriolo icol warfaro,
asintaiiMd a ccopletoly r. Ji-tive point of vi« . In order to uso sono banal wo:
*hich I have expressed on the subject, I would like to aention horo that I
have always said to zy collaborators that in ry opinion bacteriological war¬
fare for tho next few years in .any case would bo a still-*orn child. I have
Iso ecphnsizud that I did net want to obstruct Dr. move's noalouanoas in
his work, beciuso tho work and counter noanur -3 wire ur-ontly nocossnry and I
believe that he understood uc quite correctly.


- 296 >-


15 rob K -4-« l >-8lnahadc-JP
Court I


Q. ro you know tho opinions of the chiefs of the Goman leadership

vith roerrd to banter iologica warfare?

I know that tho Tuohror repeatedly did not only erpross, 'but
that ho also ordered, that active hacteflogical warfare would ho conplo-
toly out of quostion for tho Goman kokmacat. On ono occasion it was
also statod that tho TuoSror had nadc a statorcat to tho offoct that
tho prcreative work should only ho carvlcd out to a very lir.itod extent
bocnvso he did not approvo of tho whole nnttor.

Q. ^d what was tho point of vlow of Koitcl. 3rauchlto<* and Holder?

Ao yield -.juohal Koitol and ny suporior, Brauchltsch and with tho
chief of tho General Staff Holder, this question was never discussed.

However, I c»n recall that tho Ouartomastor Gonoral, General Vu^cr,
dioatw-oC f-w Buhj«ct wttn no on ono occoslo*. ar.d Ho ookod nc if tni»
was a natter which would cause us a lot of worry in tho circunstancos rnd
thon I infomod hin to tho offoct that in tho lltoraturo, this work was
constantly holnc nontioned; that I, on tho other hand, aintninod tho
personal point of view that wo nood not worry about it, and whon ho
askod no why not, I replied fron tho nodica point of riow tho drnjor
was so Groat for ovorybody who night enca^o in this tn>o of wnrfaro for
his own territory aau for his own troops, I aveye had tho inprosslon that
our ililitory loadors wore not la favor of this ontiro typo of a bactorio-
lo,-ica warfare as a woryon, and that they did not hnvo a vory favorablo
attitudo on tho subject.

I can aso rccffibcr thrt cn ono occasion I wont with Kliavo*to the
now chi of of tho Sonora Staff, Zoisslor, who was to bo infomod about
everything end what wo were working on; that wo reported to hin and that
Zoisalcr showod vory littlo intorcst. and ho showod »o littlo intorost
that I actuaiy folt sorry for Elicrc on that occasion.

q. 2Hd yau know that Prof. Blcoo rccoivod an acsi.Tnont in that field'
", I uust state tho following in that oonnoction; In Juno or July
of 1943 I, in c? capacity rs chief of tho Vohmncht c.a Sorvico, re¬

ceived a letter with tho letterhead Reich Research Council, Coralssionor of
Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research. Shore I was invited to attend a con¬


ference


2964


13 ?ob-J4-KAir-4-3~2iusbuck-JP
Court I

i3 Berlin at a certain date. 1 then vent to Berlin, accordingly, coninc
:ron the ruchrcr's he-adquartors. and elnce we wore to d.' to., cancer re¬
search I had also '■ nlons ny consulting turcoon, Bo.toOc.

The conference took place In nooo's office, end besides hin tho
following person, were present. tfini.torial Diri-Tcnt Schunnnn. the Vete¬
rinary Genoml Achtor and* one or two norc con. but I cenrot roc«nber tho

onact nunber anyrmre.

». Blono opened .he conference .Ito » .tatwnt the. U* 41.eu..ion
te he eheut tactortoloslcal .erfere and the. ho hod received or. ncisc
noet ty Belch Ihrehel Swrinj V. err r, out preventive to* end to put It
on . hrondor hclto He .lto ...ted the. ty virtue of thl. order ho .no
... Mklnc «, end tho order * -lto hnvo ...ted that he ... to eetlvoly
Include htMOlf, tut I to net realtor the. erectly nnynoro-thorofnro,
he ... nrictos a. to . 11.0 hln tone hrlcf report, .tout toe .tote, of the
dofonec .ert end el to .tout toe tori, end report. »h!oh « hnd received


nVut tho work which was bo ins dor.o Abroad,

: to. the flr.t .no to telco too .tend, end then 1 .toted thnt flr.t
ef nil thl. did net fell W»l» V field of crpetonee. end .oeendly. I
did net hnvo toe nuttorlty «. dl.cue. rich tor.: .hlch hnd hoon dene In toe
rilltory field end to <lvo eny lnfemetton .tout too .utjeet -lthcu. flr.t
hevlnc received tho pemle.ton fra: ny .uporlor. neld Kerriud Holtel.

I elto rtoed hln If pmhnp. he hnd re olved » letter etnttofi *at Keitel
npproved ef ny nrkl« n .tet-ent on too eutjoot. He.ever. .Inee thl. ...
net the c-no I oneo roro doelrred ny.elf unnhle to rive hln eny Infomntlen
.hettoover. The ether natter, ef to. "obmncht. «■>* »«“ 1

31 eh tor end lUMd »«« — «■"«* * ltt> °»

Blone .her. told ton., of curto he eMOd quite under.tend our point of

vie. end that no. he vuld hnvo to nrico n return Journey, .hleh tould ef

c.er .0 tnko eor.o tine. Thl. to. re^rettohlo tcceu.e he elec hnd teen

inferred te the affect that et certoln place, .trend to mere... In too

toric tolch .on terns done In thl. fluid eeald te dote -mod.


2965


13 ?cb-d*4Ui-i-Wrincbuckh-JP
Court I

I cm also rcnc-.bor thr.t ho nodo the stateeont thr.t ho actually In¬
tended to also in cl ado tho Ccmiu prose in ordor to point out to tho nnsoos
tho lrrgo denser which nirfit or iso in tho eircunstanoos. Tnon, na tho
only sto.tenant which I nndo during thr.t conforonco, I stated to Bioco

that in ny opinion I had to warn hi.- of carry in,- out thr.t intontion nt this

%

tiro pr.d evon nt n lntor poriod of tlno, oocnuso now, in tho yo»x 1943,
as a result of tho air attacks and as a rosv.lt of tho fonr of phosphorus
which really plryod a najor part with tho pooplo, and as a result tho
incidor.ts during tho first half yoar in 1943 whore rJ.roady thcro was oono
err os*, which could ho folt in tho pooplo, that they shotu^bo protoctod
irre thoso nov foars undor all drcunstanccs. rurthemaro, tho wholo
problai was not suitahlo for discussion in the daily press. Blono acknow¬
ledged thr.t rnd then he hroko off tho anloronco.

”ow, what did you do on your part with rogord to your nllitary

superiors?

A. ?ror ny offico I Innodiatoly established oontact by tolophono with
Tlold ".iarshal Koitol, and I broifly roportod tho courto of tho conforonco
to hie, roe. I reported to hln what I had told ^lono. Then ho briofly
oaid over tho tolophono, "I agroo with you, hut sinco tho Hoi oh Korshol
to includod, send no a writ tor. report about this innodlatcly so thr.t I 'fill
hr .70 that in hand I did that, Vhon, aftor i'co tlno, nb'.ut oight or
ton drya noy hr.vo passed, I told hln onco r. ro that in ny opinion thoro
was no urgent nocoasity nt nil end that it was not epprnpriato to follow
this nou procoduro, 1 hr.* the ieprosaion that ho agroc with no. Hfwovor,
a short tlno afterwords I rocoivod nr. ordor which read awroxinatcly as
follows:

Tho notch !Inrahnl has cocidod in tho natter of bactoriologicrl wnrfnro
that tho ropxosontntivcs of tho Vohmacht which nttondod tho conforonco in
June, nro to give tho nocossary inforration to Dr. 31onc who is acting on
ry orders.

I sout this lottor to tho Airy Hodical Inspoctorr.to for conpllenco
with iloitol* s order, and with that the whole incident was corplotcd for no.

2966


1? 7cV*:-4L^-4-^inabticfc-JP
0 >art I

it lrrgo ir.torrals then I f^und rut frr-n ZIIcto tbet asido fran the
... r-fcrcncco which t'."k plr.ee at Ant Office 9 and which to-k placo at vor;;
l-r-o intorrola* that nothing -f particular tapertanco haa happened
tboro.


2967


13

Court I


0 . 2-70 you spoken with Dr. 51ncc onco acre afterwards, or hnvo you

enrr — pc o dod with hi= oa this natter?

A. I hr.vo not corresponded with Bloao on this r^xttor aor did I

hnro nay discussion with bin after Juno. I .» bin o^nin oaco noro. That
WM rftor Janucry 1945, or it nay b<Vo boon February 1945. I saw hin
in 3olits in connection with another natter, end I only know that wo
briefly touched on the subject. I think briefly it was touched on by
both of us, Blor.o a. well as ny.elf, that now .with the present state of
affairs, the fear of b-ctoriolo.Tical wnrfrxo which r.l,*t bo applied^

the cnony n now finally oror. %

n. In the trial hoforc the International KlllUrf trltnmol, the
fro,anntly~antloaed Generator,! Schrolher ... -1." nonttonod 1= connon-
,1a, vltt thl. .uhjoct. »11 yea toll u. .tat -a. Sehroltor'. attitude.

In year opinion, - 1 th regard to taotorlato!leal .arfrxot
A. Els attitude Was also a ao/y»tlTO ono.

Q. E 0 has also expressed that hore on tn* witness stand and, fur-
thor. that yen hod .upportod Mn la that rotoot. K:o Ration of
haotortolofclonl .rrfare 1 . topartant for our cone alto hecouao In the
cro.. oxnnlantlon of Sr. Karl Brandt, too Pro.ocutor atood tin Quo.tlon,
you too. of m ordor hy Knltol that no onportoont. tooeXd ho oarrlod

out on hirion boiafls?"

i. I hnro r.oror dtaculaod tola q-ioatlon with Koltol.

<j. The quoatl'-r. 1. .till ayr.ptarr.tln hecauao the Pro.ecutlon 1.
try In.! to. erprea. toe fact foot hnovloduv. erl.tod that exporlrent. -ere
holn .1 carried out an henna helm, to thr.t cmncotlon.

I nn nor anting you hnro you ever dl.cu.aed the prohl« of erperl-
nent. on *r.nn hotor. «P«lnr to tola connection or to nny

othor connection?

^ tl no. M V. another ch,ter. nanoly, thr.t of the tofluonec
of too Ertiannl Sodallat Ideology. General Taylor to hi. Me opening
.reach tea .tried thr.t the ortoo. to tod. caM had tholr origin

2958


13 7oVJfr-S3*-5-3-? , itty-JP
C^urt I

la toe r-ti'.nol Socialist ideolos*. In a part of the atntcnoats Which

i, not totaporton. ho deal. with the direct effect of Hattonel Socin-

M on nodicino. The.t i. on peso 96 of too record. Since too rational

SocinJUt ideology hero in in n certain sonac described ns roapmaiblo

for certain thing. which h».wo he on pfosontod her*- I oust nsimno in

eotooction with too s to tor. entity Gonornl Saylw-I rmst ato you now

too following question: woro you a no hor of too "SDAP?

$

JL 3o.

i Vcro you a ncr.bor of too SS?

A. ITo. x

q. Did y'u holoc,- to too Poich Looguo of Physlcir a?

A. S6«

q. Did you holnug to any othor arga-.ixntton of too Party?

q. Tar.t wri you: attitude toward too Party, toward, too idooloar

nnd too offoots of Fat tonal Sncinlian’

* A* I huvo already .tstod, I -no fro- 1904 until tho ond of tho

-or eoMlrntly or active r.llltary till, and Itt-c r oot -on of ry 0,70
on tho hoolo of tho oxporluaco. -hloh 1 had oo’lootod during o lone
period of too. I hod ol-rao nolntoinod tho point of vlov tho. tho pro-
fo..lonal .old!or - ond thot -loo include tho nodlool offlcor. - thoold
ho hoot out of Forty oolitic, nod politic, nlto.hthor. Accordingly, I
hnvo never ocou.lod ry.olf - 1 th Forty politic, throw* out tho tlno in
oxooo. of -hut n —oll-odueotod hnnon holr.- nu.t tan- nhout tho happonlnfo

ir. the world end nlso atout politics.

A, i, oho-n hy tho history of ny life, throw* tho may office.

end throu-ph tho uocoo.lty of c.toUl.hlw: no- oamelo., 1 navo had .0
moh «.r!e that I did not even bore on, two, or that I did not oven fool
into occupying ny.olf -ith politico •'nonoror I had two. I u.od It
W order to ooatwuo =y .tudlo. of Utoraturo. ond If ony ^oro too
rtcainoi, I occupied ay.olf - 1 th ny favor 1 to hohty, n-o-.oly


2969


13 ToWfr-S-#-S-«tttty-JP
fr-crt I


ecsic, I playod alto and availod nysclf of all opportunities to attend
an opera or a ccncort, and in this wey I kept ooeplotoiy out of Part;*
politics*

Q. Here you ovor had any contact with Hltlor?

• Aftor I fcd faocono a*nodical inspector in January 1941, I had
to report to the Fuohror in March. Aft or this period of tino, I have
only had a direct oontact with hia or.ee noro. Shat was in Angust or
Soptccbor of 1944. I hod to report to hin togothor with Frofosso? Brandt,
and thcro wo discuasod tho organisational quootion of tho honlth lordor-
ship* Otherwise I did not hero any diroot contact with hin,

Q* In Doconbor, 1941. Kitlor bocano Suprono Comnndor of tho Amy
and you nrodlogod to have frequently boon rocolvcd by Brarohitssh and
roportod to hin. Eow was it that Hitler bo Cano Suprerso Coneandor of tho
Ary?

\ Shis oonnootion was, un for tuna, toly, to our j'or.toot rogrot cor>-
plotoly interrupted. I can only siy that wo of tho Amy fron the vory
r.ooont of tho di*i eaal of *iold Marshal 3ranchitsch in a prnctlcol sonoo
did not hnvo a Coanandoa in-Chiof at all onynoro.. whilo, for ox«t>1o,
tho Luftuaffo was roprosontod by Snoring, tho lfavy by Itaodor and Dounl tr.
tho SS by Hlonlor, and nil of thoso brmchos had vory poworful roprooon-
tativos In th/>oo non.

In tho cr.so of tho Amy tho pffico of tho Cuwndor-in-Chiof hod boon
torn into sorornl pioccs and now various loodors had obtrxinod control
"vor tho difforont pLccos. '*hilo I roportod in dotnil to Brnuchitcch nt
locst '»nco in ti" wo ok 3 and I could toko oil ny ■uggostiono and fcaro
V hin — • I knew personally that ho quito openly errod for his sick and
injured soldiors and was vory such interested in tho Kodicnl Sorvico —
such imodiato possibility of exorcising any influence ended for no as
•‘my Kodicrl Inspector, and ell ny ir.fluor.co onduf. toward the end of 19-11.

that tino on, I had to turn ovor ny *u«;-ostior. to tho Quar toman tor
--cnoraij end


2970


13 Joh-K-SS- 5-4-Putty -JP
>urt I


I do not tev.w In what fora or to wfar.t extent ho bmu^it thoso natters to
tho hnowlcd^o of tho Tuchror.

\ On tho occasion of tho conversation which you had with Hitler,
did you discuss research questions?

J- So.

Q* Vhnt was your oontact and what was your relationship?

I rlsltod tho Hclchofuohror-So on ouo occasion at the tino he
was alroady Corccndor-1>-Chlof of tho rcurro airy. That was In August
1944. I Tioltod ’:ln at hie hoadquartore In order to uwl to a discussion
vhoro tho distribution of physicians was dlecussod^ Tho questlro wao
dlsaussod how roplaccrents could bo pro cur od for the oxnjr units. OthorwioO:
X did not hero any other contacts with Hl'nlor.

Officially, ar.d personally?

K I did not haro any porsonal contacto with hln at all.


2971


13 Fob 17-:-?JC-6 -i-3o axd
C?irt Ko. 1


:fcrt ccnfcts ill you havo with GoariaG?

A In tho wintor of 19-13 I rorortod to GooriaG together with tho ModicrJ.

Chief cf tho luftwaffo and tho !>.vy, ct his Hoadquortors in tho ItaJinctor Hoido,
irhoro in tho and, wo else discusaod tho question that tho iddical officorn
would hp.vo tc bo oqaally distributed} that coordination with ro'.ard to tho
tiro factor should ho .j^o hotwo^ tho front and tho facrolr.nl. 1 .t that
ti:a, ho str.tol that ho h-i ho-xd fiat wscx»n nodical officoro woro still at
tho front whoa they ahoull bo at fecejo, end olnilrr mtior. That was tho only
discussion which I had with 2oich®'arshall Goorinf. ^

- I now want to rofor onco ovoro to HiJiJor. Did you ovor a.ttond n

X

locturo by Hi:j lor?

Yoa, I attended it in tho yo-x lSd3. Tho CarnuJor in Chi of of tho
nosorvo ±xny, hi* none was Brxn, tc.othor with tho Axry Cerno Aroa Coitjwdors,
hr4 boon ordorod to r.tts.vl a sorios of locturos at Bad Schachon oa Lako
Cacataneo. I was also < rlorod to at tort as 1 Nodical I natter. 1 only

rant to cay this in erdor tc hevo tho record cc^ploto.

<rhct rolotioaship lid you haro with Barnaul?

A Uoao, uhatsooror.

* vfoll, BeK-ann, in a certain wry lo a ro^roa-utetivo of tho 1'rxty. Did
tho .“arty c^oMios attaint to Gain influonoo and to lntorvono in tho todloal
field in tho sonao of dr-wir* It away fra: tho radical nrofosoion'o rulos, a*
t!;oy uood tc ho allied?

It was n't tho withdmwl of tho radical rulos l-ut it was quite r dorr
rroooduro that tho l-xty axyrossed its crini 'n that our radical roplacoronts
rec-i-oi too little cr a: nolltical trairtinr. which was iron tc all othor
etuloat*. In connocti a uith this, I mot stato that wo of tho , ohrvicht
hi', orrjmizo-’ tho stuionts lr. tho 8*'-callol otudont crr.j.aaios; thoy wor- soldioro
ha: fcjon at tho frtnt a yoar and a half, and whe hoi dlatlacuishod thcr-solvoa
t! ro; they received pcxidaai*» to cr.tii.uo their studios but.-thoy rcc-ainod
= ‘iiioro, anf wo had orcaaizoi tho:. lnt' tho ao-c.allod stuiont ca^aaios, rtioao
iocilor was a radical cfficor end a university locturor. bo also UUitod
••bt. t. jxhor in a Mock of barracks in sa:o c-oiiinity. Until 19d4, they
inalulod a.iproxi.atoly 15,OCO -oiical students.


- 2973 -


13 ?ob •i7-' I .-?JC-6-2-3of*x
Court Tn. 1


Of course, tho /jry, tho rrrty, nil sod objections a,.clnst this procoduro nad
It ceased the ^oich studont Lordor to c-rry cut tho i-ilit-ry tossions of
thoso studont3 md to plcco tao Into civillm huad3. Tho roes on ho gp.vo
wrs tliAt tho word poliosj^hlcel politioH oduor.ticn of thoso ran w.-a vory
icportAat, end whi would l-.tor on hcct^o phvaicinus, end would ;ot in contpct
with tho cth-r poo-.lo, ehoull lo «x:plotoly di&chrr.od fra tho sorvlco in
tho 7ohxvnoht. 71 th n lot of of fort -ad difficulties, I succeeded until
tho o.d uf tho rj to countorect rll thoso ett-phs. j,-. d, I would liko to
rant I on -t this plroo thr.t porLme I would act h-.vo succwodod el one 1 ? I
hrd net rise, threu-f: Profoas :r Dr-ait, whonovor tho d-n_or wm Tory rort,

I hr.’ toon supported ty Profossor Drmdt, rid ho roper tod to tho Fuohror
■honovor tho dm.:or wa vory xo-t. Tv.t was cno wry cf exorcising our
lnfluonoo in tho :adiCAl sorvlco.

:>y I Interrupt you r. rdmito. GonorAl TWylor, in hlo bi„ oponinc
sooch h-rs rlan discussed rotted trrinln-. unslor tho TV.zl 3ystoi., or. paco 101 ,
nad ho hr.s rt~.tol thet tho s-.lrit hnd loon apollod. Yru Just .ontlcnod

e

tho ctruoilu 'v.r.lrat this influence tho universltiur whoro it kao not
•>:dy the ACtlvo -iilltAry •.todied Corps, but All through tho otulonts who
waro t. toc.'.io rocorvo rolic-J officer;.. In this connection, I would liko
tr know how tho 0-.IO s.-o \ with tho r.otlvo dlilitAry Corps which w.o „ivon
a: aolAl trninin;; 1 .* thoy roro undor tho lnfluonoo of nr.tiovl socirlien,
tad ra Co \or-l Taylor st-tol, thr.t tho spirit of tho studoatc w-s prooaol
.-*•0 to r. voir lew I070I. Ho s id that tho lovol hAl sunk in r. torriblo
Annor. Cm you toll -o Anythin, About tho directives mfi with tho spirit
•fit;-, which yu w-ntoi tc fill the stu'.ont IIodio -1 Cor c?

Until tho vory l-.ot rax oat, in rcsarlmoo with ur tr-Jiti n -’f ono
‘.un’.rod rjjd fifty yo-re, wo oduc-to" .-ur youth, m*. wo h vo net difforod
thoso -Id rrlacip~ls -no lotr..

Cm y-u iro un my ’roof -f th-t yet? I at. thinkin: of tho words
: -lch you r.'.'xosto* t- thoeo ooplo on 8-ccIaI occ-ai'ne, r.t tho tiro of thoir

r- -tica.


237 >-


7

13 ?ob “'-•7-: :-?JC—5—3—3orr*

Ccurt So* I

A Yos, I ces 6lTo you on axerplo. *faoa our -cti7o ropleccnonts, wfcon In
tboir ontiroty, yiasod tfcrcuch our K&litery Kedicel zcedory, whon nftor thoy

liatlnculshol thanaolrow at »ho front nhoro thoy had toon oncnsod In co:-bnt
iporetiona, thon oithor tho Cccrv-jadin.^ Officer of tho Acedauy or xhonovor
I wee in Borlin, I poreonelly aworo then in. And, thoy el30 rocoirod e
certificate at th-.t ti:* which oe*teinod a cortein r-otto accordin;; to whet
ycu wrjxtod to have ttoci oducetod, m3 thic r..tto was lainteinal until tho ond
tfc. wer, end rs lon^ an ceniidatod fer s^>ilcr*l officers woro tola. treinod.
Tto -cti. of Hijnoaretoa str.toa: "Dovout yair life to tho sodleid acia&co
cal cenooatreto ell your work in celnloc ymticel oz/orionco in uodicino#

X

^opoebor tho practical wordi ./horooror Ioyo to huxr.a toin^a exist thoro
you will elao Xii4 lovo to the uod.cel profooalon. Humanity end tho :iodicr.l
:rofo83ioa cannot bo aoperetod frc*» oech other. 'Jork conatently in ordor
to bocoiu e phyalcien eni with c firr. cherector cad with lovo to huaen
})1 bgSi .Vowor aoo anything olso in e petiant then ti aufforinG follow hurra
fcoiiv uha. y-u heYo to holp. Try to undoratend tho alr.plo aoldior in auch
away ea if you had crown up tocothor with hir: hoc-uao all of uo ero coanoctod
with tho a-rx> feto."

1 'fill you now continuo tho tho doacrlptlcn of ell tho concopto end ell
tho iafluonooa which wea bjlnr, oxorciaod by tho ?erty?

7rr. r'KIDET: Bofcro tho ’Titnoaa prrcooloc with tho ce»o of this
ox* 1 ration, tho Cnurt will bo in roccsa. If Doctor Kaufman cen trine up
the applicetitn for tho oxcuain^ of tho doforrient Dudolf Brealt I con aoo
Mil duriiv tho rocoas if tho Socret'-ry Gonorel will rofor hia to xx>.

(A rocoaa w-xa tokon)


13 r-b. -7 -L'-6-l-Pk?- Cook
C urt No. 1


Il'ulSHnL: The Tribune 1 is a-ain in session.

7HJ Th- Tribunal h.e received th- “pplicrti i Rod 'If

Brandt tr.rouh his counsel to be -xcusoc fr» th- s-ssion. The Tribunal will
c..rsi.'-r th t arttor in it's rder durlnr th. nx>n rec..es. Counsel ar.y proceed,
BY D?.. NLLTE: %

Q. Professor, I put ay Inst question to whether any further -nterferoncos
task place frt thj party, or rather tlx xrly creacies, r.ni I an referring
to interference in y-ur so ho re of activity?

A. In this co.mectijn I shuild .sorely like to a nti-n th t ar. -.tteopt was
aoe- to interieru with the us- of C-th-iic nurses in jut hosbit’ 1. Repeatedly,
it ms dumndod thrt these nurses bn Jicaicsod, end ih.y be substituted
rj nurs-s fr-o the Red Cross :r the National Socialist nursing association.

Dp until the end f the war I succoedcd in orevonting th-t procedure. Those
people wore excellent in oorfer-dng their work, tnd I was sure rny substitute
■ ouL. h.vu been .. change f r the xorsw. Apart fr.«a th-.t, those nurses from tho
start b-d bean s.« devoted to their .ubius -nd behaved in such :n eXieanlary
a'.nxxr townrd -ur patients tb“t it would It v. constituted a Tert injustice
•. einoiss then. An! in this commotion too, I should like to ecnhrsize that
I -n ny -*n initi-tive probably would not have succeeded in doing thot if it
•ron't in this c a- too that I had th- holp of Prolesnor Karl 3rn<’t r.;rinot
these int-rfotvnces . f the p;-rty. He used all of his influence in sc-ins tbit
theiK nurses remained in our hospitals :.n thereby defended us r.-ainst the
attacks of the party.

Q. VI.en sulxlttinr documents, 1 sb 11 suonit a few affidavits in th*t

c mecti.n.

N.w, di ’ jr u -vur attend any l*r t -o sc lie m rty neotinfc, for inctrnce,
tl.e lj;n;b-r. party Rr LLy?

a. il , rt n- ti_le . t *.U.

Q. :.ltn wn -a f the c-o-dofanknts x-' y- u no c nr.ecti>n wh“.t«ouVer, th t
is t- sr.y, “5 f-r s tixre wet cry ffici'-l c nnec'ion. *.e hive already
-.-.1 r._. the-; .nr* shell repe~t th-a a rein, but I n-w want t- fir ut with

•r.x. -f th-Se - -f.n'-nts y.u h' I n. e nt ct wh ts-v.r, ariv.tely r -ffici.ally?

. 1 . "ntil ny -rrivr.l in Kurno^r- I h'd r. contact of -rv- ffici 1 'r


-2975-


13 F-h. LI - M -S-2-PB*- Cook
Court !ia. 1

personal rxztar. with th. f .ll^iln^ *_»olv. fcontl^atni '-Its, laif:, 3-ckor-
fr-yolr--, “ui’oLf 3rrndt, Ho von, PAmgr, Si-v-rs, OKrhnu&.r, Popposv’ick,
Schr.-Ur, 3reck, nr. Eonbor..

Q. During the st..t-ic.nts er.Cc by th. Chi-fCounsel h- a-r.ti'rw on prgd
96 of th- tx. nscript nJ sp-'ka -bout tb- participation .f th. Gv-rarn
physici-ns in th- exc-ss-a of «?ril, 1933, nnJ h- apu.ko -bout th- coab.-ting
3 f the old phyeicinns• -ssoci-ti n. '.ho corps of th- .xui’ic'l 'lfic-rs, as I
s-^d be for- nt n-t nanli xud in rry of th-.a- st-'t-nentt,. Tho aili^crv
o.iysici*na ..n th- th-r hand -.ust be c.-nsi-cr-d ; n rt -f th- G-man physicians
■h: were -ctiv. in ailit-ry a-rvic- r.:’. you r- th- r- or-eant tiv-, th t is,
as Amy Jicrtic 1 Inspector, f-r th- ray ohysicions, ’.nd Iflt-r os Shi-f of th.
tt-hraacht I/w’.i© 1 Sorvic. v-u cr- th- r-pr-s-nt'tiv- f >r 11 physicians in
th or»j-‘ t rc-s. In 7 -ur c/.p city a r-pr-s-nt tlv- I shoulJ lik- to r.sk you:
i.huthwr th- .-liit. ry physici'-sis individually x '-r. thoir or.tir-ty •>* rticij>nt-ri
in 'ny vr.y in th- -xc-oc-s *oich took pl'C© on th- 1st .f April, 1933, ■*
Hhetlxir t:-.-y pcrticlo t- in ny ’icy ir. th- c oaV tin,: .f ti>- ol! physicians
^rgmiz-.tions.


- 237 &-


13 Fob. a Cress

C-Jurt So. 1


A. I law of iv* cess and no cose rts ever mentioned cither before the \ar
nor iuriiL' the entire bar.

Q. Tiv.t is to sty, the 'Itdicel Officers Corps ha., nothing to do r.iih these
political instances?

A. Ho. %

Q. Cener 1 Tnylor, in his> opening speech, on p=go 9d, sne.'ks .-'out, and I
quote: "The Prostitution of Corasr. Uecicine under :ational Socialism". Are,
in this connection, ne aentioneo the principles of medicine to reViorel -
socialist population policy.

And on p.ge 99, 1 quote: "The entire public health polity ol the Third
Rjich MS put in line iiith this pronouncement of principles".

a.v' on pflfco 100, I quote: "AU Ceram physlcims wore reorganised through
an orgnnic'.tion derivod Iron tlie Reich Physici: ns Chamber." Although military
physicians were not aentioned in particular hore I .-»uot ask you, since thu
assertion *'& rv.de tret til physici-ns ».c»o included, noro aortic 1 officers of
the ‘.ohrr.iql.t includoa nd hid cblig. tions to chide by then?

A. No.

Q. Durinc the ox* ain tlon -nd rerdift, ol cfiidovitc thore *as much tr.lk
• ojut the or nizntioi., its purpose, nd &> nint of tho uoetings of tho consulting
ehysloi'ns nd I shill rosist fro putting any further questions to you ibout
the prop r tion, conduct, nd results of Ukis^ noetingo. i>inco, hosovor, thin
count is coiinocto.’ with tho question of conspiracy I should like to ivo ou
•n opportunity to deiino your position with r.leiMncu to the importancu oi those
codings.

A. In susaorizing, 1 c nsfV the following in th t connection: These
nuttings origintod iron n«rv necessity. Thoy -.or- ordered to tk^ pL'Co
publicly. Or. swry occasion I o*du application to .uy ailitcry su^urior and
trio, to ,xpl“ir. tho necessity for these mootings. On th t occasion I gave
* survey of «h t I considered to b- cost urgent problems. Th-n the oi lit ry
:; -rior ueeiJ whether such . Quoting c*n t ko pliCv or not, becuiae th t wco
3 In, ttrt dit.jcndcl on jilit ry situation nd the intontion of ..Jlit'ry
1- C^r-hio. i:- lU _re* c.s laic, down '.nd discussion ot. rted when- these
prebieas nuiv discussed. The rvsults of the so meetings "fro corvil*-^ in


-2977-


13 F-b. 47 -*-9-2-?KP- Gross
Cairt Ho. 1

directive8 for the benefit ol physicians in general, southing that was publicly
distribute-! casrjg *11 physicians; As soon ' s there wes a possibility those
printed reports -or- Sunt out to various agendas and medic' 1 officers - sent
out to *11 physicians in order thit they _ry servo as r basis for srincioal
assures ?nd for th. information free older physici ns to younrer physicirna.

I ra convinced thrt cv-ry physician, and every non-physician, who hr a an
opportunity nl takoa ar. opportunity to try to get insight into tho*j mooting
reports, will too be cceplet-ly convinced that thur-in the Seriou* work in
the scientific field of ell the German physicians is Id'! down, opinions that
»ore represented by leading 'uthcritiou from 'll territories of Gem.-.ny. I
refer you to xy spe.ch-s uhlch I ar.de or. those occasions and which always
constitute*! a review of t.io prat y«'r, • nc! at the same time a survoy of tho
■ork to be done durirg th. period to corn. And, I st-'nd up to every one of the
•ordo which wore pronounce on these occasions. The Prosecution submitted one
of those apcochos a a a document. In spite of gr-at.-st efforts I, not oven up to
now, could have found anything in thet speech which in any way Justifies tho
Severe chargo th-t thcBw meetings wer- expression and a typical jxjmolo oi a
conspir cy of Goman physicicns in order to cosait war crises and crimes rg. inst

* I

hur. nity. In conclusion I should lil - to say th t 1 hopo th t hei^ nt this pL-.co
these Quoting reports wiLL become document and mark atone for the serious,
dutiful, awl almost superhua-n work which th Gera n soldiers performed during
this long *n- s-verw w.~r. Aw!, ' a the words of Kippocrrter were mentioned here
p-pe* twt’ly I should like to uaphr.site th t the Gervn pnysici ns not cnly
»uru lully ware of these, namely th. words "Primea non nocure", but at all
times they endeavored to help ’w. to cure whenever they could. And there is
nothing furth.r I h ve to say.

Dr.. ,‘elLTe: Hr. ?r-sie.nt, th t brings =- 1° tk- end of "V ox-nin tion of
th. iefundant .nd in subst-.nti'tior. of the -.ords which th- defendant "
pronounc-d at the on- I should Lik- to pres-nt affidavit HA-2 which deals
with the n_c ssity it'. *rjrpos- of th- consulting physic inns. Ton will find
th* t on o fe 5 of Document 3ook I *n it will become Exhibit 37. 1 further
suoiit to you dv rt cl the a— ting cl consulting ohysicians on th- 17th of
11-y 1944 which took pi: c- at Hahenlychcn. This will o-ccrj, document HA-2-A,


-297S-


13 Pcb. 47 -iL- 9-3-PIi?- Gross

Court So. 1


exhibit 38 an.' it con oc found ir. the annax of Doci»nt Book 1. Th_ chert is
to show tr._ Tribunal th«. extent of the work th t rs done within th-&o two
days rv 2 the IdttJ of l»ctur«-3 th t were given.Further rvor_, that for the
lu-Jors of this cutting rvl the individual paritci-xants it was L-nossibU to
listen to a part of the:*, lectures - that -'ll hd to confine thoosclves to
their own field. In conclusion I refer to tbo lr.~ady suhaitted .flit'.vit
of Gen Arzt Pernor, HA-6 which will becoa- inhibit 26 :ni th- af/idrvit of
Prof. R ndercth HA-43, exhibit 32. I finally sucait as KA-1, and exhibit 40,
an eXerpt froa the Jud,$a.nt of the Intern'tior.~ 1 liilitary Tribunal, rep rcling
the question of conspir'cy ■ n' crijin'I organisations. Thi^ is not rn evidential
docuaent. I *orel> ask you to I k. notic- of it.


“ 2975 -


13 ? oWW tUrlD—1—Lo s s cr—JP
Court I

JUEGS SBBlirC* Sr. Sol to, hero J'U identified EA-32 by any exhibit
r.urbor?

IE, i'iZL~: HA-32?

JUICE 533111": Yob.

jE* IELY2 I I believe H32 w«a not yot emitted. Tnis ia in
0 ,000 Sook So. 2. Ih'cur.cnt HA-32 la nn affidavit of tho 3cnodictino
Abbey, Karla Leach, Xoblonx. It was net yot autoittod.

TH2 PH3SII8OT; Vi 11 you plonao giro no once noro tho nunbora of
tvn 8 o oxhibita? You proceeded a little too fiat for no to note then no

you fiovo then, beginning with Exhibit EA-2?

m. HU?St HAr-2 ia in Do cur. cm t 3<>ok So. 1, pn^o 5. It ia offerod
„ 8 Exhibit 37. Docun-mt HA-2n, in ^client Book So. 1, con bo found in
tho Annex. It ia offered aa Exhibit 30. I nov offer r.o Exhibit 39 nn
affidavit of Gcnsralrxt Juedocke. who openk. nV.ut tho inportonce of the
ncotin,^ of the conaultin.: phyaiciana. Thi. Document HA-51 con bo found
in Docunont 3eok So. 3 and la therefore not nvnilnblo to tho Tribunal.

A. I arid thi. nomine Went Book So. 3 i. available in the Soman text
but a trrnalntion ha. not yot beer, unvoted. Therefore thi. document
i. bom* aubnittod with tho re.ervation that it will later bo aupplonented
by ita English tmr.alation. I aa* you to accept it aa :*ibit 39. Tl.cn

the Lr, cun cat M «»t *”  »■  * n * * "
excerpt, froa the Jud. T .ont of the International XiliU-jr Tribunal dated

30 Soptor.bor end 1 Octobor 19 i6.

Tr - PBSJ2ET: Owniol. It H not noeo.sniy V offor thet ns on
MU. a- Trlbunel vill toko jtf! 1* -ties tf It If M
lion V. It in your Dncuwmt >■ » »<"* »* h " v0 ro ° xMU *
to bo introduced aa an exhibit.

HU 3C, It -111 here no exhibit number. to Tribunal «U1 ro-
-rbor the, they n*od the Prosecution to put tho printed report, of to
posting. of the MW phy.lcln-.. nt ny disposed. Fro.ecutlon did
thr.t -ery kindly. in eceordenso with the section, of the Trlbunel I

eskod to reed. copy, end MU. M. " f «— ^ toi r ° iX ' rt “* *

trentotlon. of the copies of these report, here not yot been node end I

29 SO


13 7ob4WOV-lO-&-LosBOXwJP
Court I


liko to to nblo to subnit those o^corpts *b evidence as soon as
tta, coco tack v. BO. It oey to possible to do that «hon I presont ny
short dncmcntcry evidence,

SlBsOly. I should like v. »* tho KWh Tribunal to help no In tho
natter of ay 1tao.se,, Setaidt-Sruckon on' Hnrilohon. tltor-a* tho
:> r.hol toid no a fov day% on", «d .qnvo no « lottor free Ml* It »onld
onporx thr.t those Itns.so. «ro hero. I hove not jot hod on opportunity
M .poo* to those Itnoseos. I «• told that thoj oro rot hero at all.
iftor the conclusion of crosa oroMnotl-n I should like to ho*r tho.o
t„ 1tno.se. in tho ccortreor. -end I should 111- " a too Tribunal to
find out on tholr part vhoro those wltnossos nro.

~r; BOSXSS^t VU1 tho Cocrctary General or.dcm" • to ascertain
tho vhoror.tftuts of tho two wltnossos r.cntionod by cun.ol for tho Do-

fondant Handloscr dur'jn: tho iv*or. rocons?

BU mOt Tn-nic yu Tory r.uch. M that brings no to tho end of

ry cxrc:iar.tlon of tho Defendant Handlosor.

TOMB sn Sr. Sol to. on February 12 *» roforor-co -a. undo
to a Dr. Bra. of Laval. The Tribunal put a question to tho dofondont
eor.comIns tho Identity and offlolal etntu. of tho footer, to vMch eono

con oral nicer vac .plv* V ~ »—» *» *>” *

thaw that Kaos »a. a civilian connected 1th eooo eort of olvlllon

rosorxeh institute. I believe that at that tine y-u eftod to the Tribe
r.-l that hoforo J-u concluded y-ur oa. J-u -uld ho nhlo to rive u. f~-
thor infori-tl-n. either thr-.-h a Itnos. or hj of.-ld-nvlts. of tho enact
and precise nature, or.d It 111 ho jour purpose .*o *luo hoforo ,o„

Close your cr.ec to do that, I sur»;oso?

3U HZLS2* Icb.

jraop ffi®. tohi the curse of tho exsrinatlon of this dofoc
d-nt tho defendant ha. referred sovurrl tine, to tho foot that In certain
-.tor. lr.vol 1 .-v certain doolslons. tho defendant Bnrl Drondt succoec
full, ir.torcodod for hln ond 1 * no. directing this queetl-n to tho 1 t-

r.css: mth Hoc did Karl Brandt In oroodel

2981


13 7c 'r-; lAi-10-&-Lo 6 G exv-JP
C^nrt 2


aa- S3:

•TV.9lr.tlr.-z vac
vrhted.


I don't holioro tho translation wra quito correct. Tho
.jivon ns *ral«od objdc'lon". I think that tho Jui,~o


2981 (a)


1C 7 . b-£ W. 1'Jr -lG-o-I-3 3 *cr—Jr
Court I


to ’mow at what r,^ency Prof. 3randt stgjportod you?

ITT 'Z'Z.~2SS~. Yes. lhat could only have boor, do no at any agency which
had nry influence* I sujposo that in Party affairs it would have been
Bornena c::ccnt for the Fuchror as for as I can judge it, and if "o were
cncerr.cd with nilitary affairs I think ho would hare ir.torvcr.od with tho *
Fuehrer end spoken to bin, •

JUDGE sssznt fcr.otbin* vas said about Ir. Handlosor he in.- ur.tod,
evor. casmndod, to rid his organisation «.f catholic r-ursos end to supplant
then with nurses tokos fron tho SS organization, and tart Karl Brandt sup¬
ported hie ir. Ills viow to rotnin tho catholic nursos. With whon did Xorl
3r-r.dt intcrcodo ir. 7our support?

TS VXSJSSS: I nay soy that "SS Sisters 1 is not corroct. It ie "2 T G—
Fntifttnl Socialist Sisters." It was a rational Socialist I'ursin,- Associa¬
tion which has really- nothin,- to do with S3. I cannot r y in this spocinl
caso in vh’ t nmnor 3rmdt C'-uli -ivo no support. During onothor oxrsii-
notion I thiJc a docur.cr.t was nutnitted uhoro sor.obocly conflmcd th-.t
Brandt trie*, t interrono in favor of tho catholic sictorc. How ho ronlly
did that, Frof. Brnndt would hnvo to stato hinsolf* I oonnot .*ivo you
ny details about it. I only know its effocto.

JUH02 S23U3SQS What did y u undorstnnd was tho sphoro of Dr. Karl
Brandt's authority or influonco, oithor In nilitrry nodical nattors or in


Poxty no died cat tors?

err MlZ’ZSSl Wo wore then sot concomod With an;.- authority but it
vas r-thor r. siturtion where Prof. 3rmdt had tho possibility which ho
ueod to .'.oution ouch anniotioe and uorrice to tho Fuehrer by way of
conversation, in ordor tr oountoivb.-la.ioo to a cortoin extent tho things
which wore triod fron another side. Wo voro not then concomod with nny
authority but, as I said beforo, it was a possibility t bring those nat¬
ters V. tho attention of tho Fuehrer and inforo hie about theso things


fr^r. ’-cr point of viow.

JUDS3 SES1H5: Will y u state ag-ln who had a onflictin,- point of


view with teat of yours in ro.-y\rd V- these natters—vh-.t persons or ngcncioe


either in the yrroraaont or in tho party?

2S81


13 Feb ii7-'l - 11-1 - LvQ - feebaa


a. his care to ry knowledge through a liaison can between the
Party Chancellery and the OX.'. He was present at that tico during dis¬
cussions regarding these student cccpanies and was with the OKA freo whom
he received thase directives and when he had to influence him, but ho
was the liaison nan between toe Part. Jhancollory and the OK..

IKS .RESH32T: Has counsel for the Defendant Handlcser any further
questions?

D?.. HKLTEj Ko, thank you, not at the =i<xaunt.

THE P. LSIDET s .efense counsel ra y now cross-examine Defendant
Handle, 3 er as a witness. «rc there any questions on behalf of any dofenso
counsel?

3- D. . HTTZ tlS illfGi (Defunso c unsol for Defondan t Doachin i rucowsky.)

% As the highest ranking representative of the '.ehrmeht hero,

I should like to ask you wlAt influ^nco does any nilf- ry asci ;rmont in
military life haw ano *hat responsibility. However, at first I should
llko to ask you wtut tho responsibility as re-arcing the suporior nnd
subordinate should coar.? Is tho followin': correct; the superior in
r arsenal and organizational zattars and also in technical rat torn has
thv- right to issue orders to tho sub -dinito; is that correct 9

A. 1 should '.ike to r-.fur you to the fact that I aentioned before
toot we hare to differentiate between U.e ailLtaly and technical superiors.

h . fahat kind of su,ci .*s are y u .« positing of Then you say technical
superiors?

«. With ro*,ird to the technical superiors, there were two ocssi-
billtles; either bo was ruprior in jv«ry respect, as I road to you
be for j, whore ho at tho sa o ti_~ is tie troop cocnandur and at that
tie* bo b-jcor-4,3 the superior in all matters. Cn the other hand, he may
only b*j a technical superior and in that case he is ly a superior in
Batters that refer to nodical natters.

Q. Hew, if ary subordinate was assigned too different agency,

• culd the following be correct; the superior *ho was superior up to
*i -t Vi. o recoined rs such, that is in a personal regard. The superior
of the r.aw agency, on the oth-r hand, had the right to issue orders in


-2Sk5>


C.irt I

13 Feb k7-H - 11-2- LJG -cahan

technical cr.ttars?

*. Yea, teat say wall be correct.

Could a situation arise ir. question- f rilitary competency
that a superior had th- right tc issue directives to a subordinate ,
nho was not directly tuberoinatc- to him?

A. Tea, that happened too.

3. .hat influ.nc- did those relationships hiv - the superiors -
in relationship to r.sponsibility; is it correct that who-9t;r issued an
ordor had tc assure responsibility for whatever he ordered and that
whovor carried out the order hart to -ssxrre responsibility for what ho
ans doing?

A. That is correct.

Q. Then, I should like to ask a question with reference to nnothc
sphere; fer xhat r asen .-as tho participation of the -affon SS nocossnry
during tho re-tin* of tho consulting physicians?

•v. Tho .nffun 3°, over sinco tho bopinning of the war, was particl-
. "tin,. with the .ohnracht and ca .itted to the ..dhmacht and in an
ever irervasin amount the entiro services, Including tho modi cal oorvico,
had tc -otabllsh con acts, of co rso, fighting should • to shoulder with
other branenos <f tuhr mcht ar.d of course wore livin;: under tho sane
conditions and w„r<. c> . iyir. with ‘.ho sa-iu diroctl os. That is why it
tr\z nuceosary *r.it -.von i .. ti- ., «hon there wore only a few divisions
chitted, that tec so iecicrl i fleers hud contactWl'Jl tho entire londor-
ship and received kn .locito end re} is about the principles, which
" re valid for tho entire sysa.v and that is in jarticular reference t o
y i-r-o.

•A. ihmk you, I have n. fur char qu-_3tions.

•r.. cHJtBTs 1 -oulcl like to have the r-ccrd shew that tec question-
r.ich have just bevr. put to the witness, huv« been put by Dr. Fleming
for tha Defendant -;ru cwsky.

.'.-a rFSSiiSkTi Tho record will seshevr.

... >r.fense C: unsol fur Defendant Gerhard & 06 Q.)


-23


Cwrt I

13 F-j U7 - A - 11-3 - LJ3 - Heahsa

*• .d truss, did you kr.tr the IX-fendant Rosa befor-. the 8th of :iay,

15U5?

*»• YwS. *

•}. Did you it any tic*. speak tc the Uefendwt ftose about any of
tho counts as charjud by the Fr-Socuticn before eay 3th, 19L5 or did
ycu have n^r written or other cot. urdeeti ns directly cr indirectly with
hi*.'?

A. Ho. '

Did ycu at any ti:» see the r*.fendar.t Rose j: irticipata in any
cenfwronccs w.-.;ra the counts as charged in the indie too nt wore discussed
;r ropertod?

a. No.

•1. .ip xt fro; whether the date r thu ccnt--nte of tho conferences,
jontionud in tho Dir\> Dicry of tho 29th cf D-icc-toor, 1/Ll, oro correct
or not, I should like you U toll wh.tn.r the Defendant Rosa at any
ti * took art in c typhus taotln* where y^u er SvCroV.jy cf St~M Centi
.ttor.icd too?

A. No.

... Is the Dof6ndant R^se, as fur as you know; or rather was tho
Befondant Rose considered as a specialist for typhus vaccino?

A. He, Res. in She first instance w~s a troop hygienist.

A. bid you as.; the Defendant Res-* to *i v-j you j ccinsal about
the investigation of tho typhus vaccine.?

a. He.

i. Is it corr-.ct to say, i. a assume accordingly, that Rcso was
r. t censu.tod by ycu in typhus v-acoino ratters, bc-causi he was n^t a
socialist in ti; .t field, although u, yourself, -s Chief of the
•lehr, cent -cdical Service, would have, had tho possibility tc ask hit'. haJ
u rooted to do 30 ?

f>.s, that is cc r_ct. -M.se did net belong tc the cont-.r, which
I would hr.vu turned to in r^k,ard to these qu-stiens.


Co- rt I

13 ?Jb U7-h - 11-U - LX * ifeebaa

And n»w another question; you w^r* already speaking -.bout the
taala -f tho consulting physicians with tho axr_e <2 forces. I should
li 5 : you to .<iv_ r* so.£ inferjrtion about tho social physicians and
the consul tin* physicians with tho :fedicel Xnspectcrate of tho imed
Forces Branch. V.oro these ccMultin specialists f tho Judical
Insect r-.to tho superiors in any respect of the consulting physicians

at any ioodir. leal o^ncy end by that I uean the .r y rcup physicians,

\

the district cc^and physicians, tho air float physicians, u tc.?

A, No, they w.ro in no way superiors.

s*. .^cording V tho principles which wvro valid with the CVar-an
ohrACht, would e consultin', socialist r .nodical lnspjctor over bo
considered as responsible for what-vor another consulting physician in
his sph-ro did or did n t dc?

a. No, thftt is out i tho question.


-23 oc-


C-urt !»-• 1

15 4?-fc-12-i-Ei;-2iw tuek


. Could you ,t!vo ue the remens why one desisted fra nrleixv; tho cor.-
sultin. Tfcysloims with the hedicil Inst-ctor- tee superiors of the consultin
nhysicirns at 1 echelons?

a. Thrt would have heer. ouite i-rrostiVle rnd voui sot mvo Veun cor¬
rect. Thece consult in,: hyslci- ns hrd ccenletoly different p««. They were
in different r^e ,-rou->s. Shcy vwro n/.turrlly retired fre-o different nrrto
if Qcr rny rnd the principle vre rlvrye followed thrt they Vo i-aeKnod to
each rry ,roues thrt were in the sr;.e hoje territ.r*, bo you hive to con¬
sider thrt. rnd if yvu rls> ccnsicer *. - difference of rink it could v e
ouitw -»*ai.le that tn older md roco<nit<xi okysiclftn, clthou.-h ho nry hive
o lo«er rrnk fro- the t^innin,-. thrt he would he confronted with r younger
physiclrn *»ho started hit erroer in tho Any orrllor rnd. therefore hrd r
hi. her rrnk. This in it.elf would hr.ve resented us with irvocooitto ai.ur-
ti^ns which v.uld hx.vv ccferto." tho suocirl ouriose which vo hrd in *ind vit
these cor.nultir^' ohysiciccs.

... Vhrt -personal kno~l*d«ce did you -rein rhout tho netivlty of tho do-
fowrnt Hose during tho vorkln,; Qflotin.:« of the c .nsultin* •physiclrr.s?

A. i.r. Rvso held ..try lectures. Shcto lectures • ro liatontd to with
.TTert interest rnd wore finrlly concluded with the list lecture in the yorr
of 19 - which vrs J-de durix..* the lrst a*etinc, r.tout the effects on tho


hu.:rn tody of —

v x>. # defondrn. Kotc furin,- the entire ~rr vr® tho consulting hv rT ie-
ni.t rnd trooicrl t*dicrl e^ert with the hedicrl Inonectorrto. or rrthor.
with the chief of the hedicnl Service A the Luft-r/f^. In this cr-rcity h<
into contact with you rnd verier, of ycur office. Vould y-U olorso eay
S^othiru- r .out the vcy he considered ^terirlly and -rofcssionrlly Vy


y-u rad your r«e ncy7

a. Hose vns considered es *n exirc ely experienced s’ooclrlist in his
field, vv o caoMned *rer.t scientific tacvlcc-o with oncticrl rVilitlos. :
knowledge k. e always considered to he very high, roscected. His strtcr entr


were rlwryt to the noint end cs^ecirlly criticrl.

.v_r Verc the i.iliUry authorities end treks; thrt !


V


Ar.>th«r aueetion. Vcrc


C-urt So. 1

12 Job ,7-fc-ia-a-iEI-5ix«iucic


ta soy, tka executive authorities pas' the vowr -if co~-.end of r consulting
scientist who hrr beccr.e Goncrdnrrt of the reserve, lnecsplirnco with ouch
thrt -tc valid fcxv. t, expect with MV ran vhc holds such c rrnk; tha t is to
spy, itn active Ceotrpli rctl

A. At first, I h»re to si y thrt . .c f ;enord '-ositloa of dl senerde
vf^s the sr-io. There m s no difference rt dl. that you ere rodly referrin,:
to ire tho authorities rad the pw*r of cc.^rnd *+.ich he hr/ inf. in thrt con¬
nection I hrve to sty thrt the consulting nhyslcirr-s hr/ m> *>ovor of cofTinnd
it* no nuthonity to issuo orr.ors. In nd ition, I hrve *o sry thrt iJ r.n
ectivo Osnordcrrt was c Cvnsultizx Jhycicier. the oucstion of whether he wrs
r.ctive or not rctivs plrys no tart rt dl. It is the nosition which counts,
nr during the entire '/or there wrs no aeesosity to ,;ive »ny c ccid *:ower of
eotuenr t* these consulting -.hysicl/ns.

v Do y-u rericatcr thrt durin.: the cutunn of 19«t*i he ST v»,ntod to
intr-ducc ';roce«6in..s *vnlnst rrofessor Hose bvcr.ust *f trvi son, since rro-
fosor ?.oso held, lectures in tho noutrrl countries r’rrcnd, Svitrorlnnd nw
Turkey, wherein ho described tho nro^-ross in detrll which wrs :udc in Qerr.wiy
in the field of coobnt of ty-ihus aid arlnrid

*. Ycc, I roauiher thrt.

^ Do you further kn-w th> t .-refesn-r Hose exdrinod hie rttltude by
Bcyln£ thrt record in.* t, his opinion the results of nodicrl reoerrch in vro i
wull rs in -.o-co should lore* it the entiro society, Just in the snno wry rs
the indlvidud physician vee otli^od to C-ke no difference ir. his wtrk bo-
tveen friend or foe?

A. Yes, I knov th; t.

v Did you knov vhc*. ccnsoottor.e«s rrofessor Hose hrd to expect roeulti
fr ls hie ettitudo, end did you cover tin with the nuth.rity of your n^ncy.

Yes, I did thr.t in n^reer.ent with tho aedied chief of tho Luftvcff
~- f-r cs I rejeabor.

v Vhr.t v^uld rrofess-r Hose heve hed to exccct hrd he not Iclr ccverc
y;u end his sujeriors rt the eirforce?

A. he valid hrve to eroeet thrt sece uoliticrl roer-surce would bo trker


Court So. 1

I? Je> -;7-ii-12-3-*»M:inetttek


t;n iut hirj. Of c-ursc I cannot sey vfapt kind of r.e*surc.

v ny inst aucstion. *ou were tettifj'ic. - : earlier th't you attended
the keortitic noctins in Bresleu in the ye-r of 1944. Ues Professor Rose
there?

A. Sc.

IE. 5EirZ: Think y.u. kr. president, I h/vc no further ouestions.

A

XHL pSZSXXES 3; I vyuld like to ti.vite Ur. Solto, attorney for the de¬
fendant Handloser, thrt I hr.ve hec tone inf-r.-ptior. Jurt hinded to oe thr-t

X

the witnesses, Dr. Uolf.-oxv Schoidt-Br ceken turf Hmo Kortleten, rro not now
ftvrilr'le in "uernter,:. Counsel ni«;ht ineuire p.t the Defense Information
Center cn.'. nossi.ly oltria core lnfomptlon then I have available here.

Cho r.'itunol will now r«*ese until 1:30 o'clock this rfternocn.

(A recoss vrs taken until 1330 h«Airs.)


-25S9-


n -eb I*7-t-FjC-l>l-putty
-ourt I

CORRECTS COPY
ATTERiPOK 3ES3I0K

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 13 February 19!tf.)

"HE LARSHAL: The tribunal is again in session.

THE PRESIDE?”: In regard to ‘he application of Defendant Rudolf
Brandt for an excuse, the Tribunal directs that tho Secretary-General
inform the commander of the prison that he should instruct t*e prison
surgeon to examine the defendant, Rudolf Brandt, concerning his phy¬
sical condition and report tc the Tribunal so that the Tribunal thon
nay doton-ino its future action. As tho Tribunal rill not be in session
after thi- aft moon until Tuesday morning, there will be adoquate time
for the examination and the roport.

Tho defendant, Rudolf Brandt, my bo excused from attendance at
the roquest of his Counsel for this aftomoon session.

Is thoro any furthor cross-oxom nation of dofondant Hsndloser by
enj' Dofonae Counsel? T.jere bolng nono, tho Prosecution my cross-
oxanino.

SIB3FRI2) HaJDLGSER - Rocunod
CROSS 2LJ X-.TIOH

3T IR. VC HAKEY:

‘R. 1C EAKET: lay it ploaso the Tribunal:

Q Qeneral, as I understand it, you admit that by virtue of your
position as army physician and aimy medical Inspector, you had complete
cormar.d end control over tho AraQr kedical Service, the Sanitaotsdienst
and tho Sanitaetswe3cn, is that right?

A los. I was the hoap'<7( t\e_ mod foal, system of tho army and the

Av: ^

superior of the entire medical personnel.

< rxi that control covered the period January 19Ul, to September,

19to? ’ , 7 •

\ v V /

. A Yes. \ . : _ 1 , ' /

i I take it, therefore, asSuae responsibility for

-H official activities of the J-dical Service durinr that period?

2990


13 ?eb Ii7-A-?JC-13-1-Putty
Court I


A I have already stated that I do not have any doubts about the
fact that I havo to bear the responsibility for whatever I have ordored
through a general order or by aoans of a decree.

3 'ihat was this institute for typhus and virus research at Lemberg

%

which you testified was under the control of the OKH?


%


2990 A


13 Fob 47—..-FTC—13—2—rutty
Court B°. 1

Yos. It was subordinated to the KOdicnl Inspectorate of the Rich
Caxanl of tho A*cy.

* '..'oil, was that tho vaccine production plant of tho Bohrlnv ’Parks
at La. tor;?

*»• As far os I or. infoit»d rf tho Institute of tho QBH at Krakow or
at Lor.'-orp dil not hovo anythinc to do with tJ-o instituto for the Bohrlnc
’dorks. In any oaso, I havo not boon infcri-sd of anythin olso.

. Did this Instituto for Typhus and 7lrus Hosoarch at lo:.bor_ for ^
tho OKK produce typhus vaccino?

A 7hoy producod tho well-known typhus vaccino fra: tho intostinos cf
lico occorcUnc to tho Total =othcd.

*. Tfafior whoso oontrr.l and Jurisdicb.on was tho vaooino production plant
of tho Bohrin Torts?

A I cannot say that exactly. I only know ono thin- about tho Bohrln
'■'orkM, that tho necfl of Dr. Bane was i-intlonod in that cnnoctlan.

•. Did tho typhus instituto of tho OKH at Laibor'j und at Krakow So any
rosonrch work on tho officacy of typhus vacolnos, or vcs tholr work oLr...ly
roatrictod to vaccino production?

A Tho :;ol 1 Vaccino which was produced by tho Instituto 2it*l alrocdy
oxiotol oovoral year* uforo tho outbroke of th* war, ■»! os I have already
st-t&i in yostordry*s sosolon, it Mas produced on a lor o-scalo in vcri.ua
c cun trios, and it wan tootol in various countri-s with ro^ord to its
offoctivonoss n‘ its oa;patlUlity. Thoroforo, a tostia. of thio vaccino
wns not nocossarry nnyiroro.

*. ‘tall, your answer tkoro is, than, that thoso hr. typfcua instituto of
tho OXH restrict®; thoir aotlritloo to vac&lno productl :n, is that rl ht?

Yos. I do not know what othor possibility c-n ’jo soon bo3idos production,
JC ” usa typhus Instituto at Krakow or at Lor bor , as far as I krrw, triod
*• flal yot another vaccino. First of ail, it was tho task to carry nit and
• ncroaso with all cssiblo roans tho production of tho vaccina, and as far as I
rXxr ‘ r » ^ has also nedo oxrorirxints .1 anlUals in orlur to Vo able to cut
“ - --- ore onto, o of tlK vaccino and thus to obtain a larpor amount.

2991


13 -'Ob hl-^Skk -lii-l-Beard (?X)
Court I


3 Did you ever visit tha Institute GKH at Lenberg?

A In 1939 I visited the Institute at Krakow, and in 19U1 or 19U2
I have also visited the Institute at Lemberg. On the occasion of the
visit to Lemberg I also'talked to Dr. ‘••eigl, himself, who was the man
who had introduced the vaccine.

3 In ot!.er words, ^eigl was working at ienberg in 1911 when you
visited thero? A

A las, ne was working in the the Institute.

Q •too was the Conrar.der of the Institute?

A Prof. Dr. Kyer, a high staff medical officer who had received
special training in this procedure.

Q He was also the Coacanding Officer of the Institute at Krakow;
is that right?

A Yos.

3 Kow, General, . ou testified on direct examination that after
being appointed Chief of the l.odical Servico of tho nohre&cht on 28
July 19U2, it was one of your dutios to provide uniform and coordinated
measuros in tho field of Health Guidaneo, research, and combating of
opidoalcs, and all medical neasuros which retired a unifonr. ruling
among the uehrmncht; is that right?

A A uniform coordination and coordination was one of ry nss5gn-
ronts or measures.

Q »r.l that applied to the fiold of health ’uidanca, research, the
combating of opidnnics, ar.d all medical measuros which required a uniform
ruling; io that right?

A A similar text is contained in my official instructions, as to
the performance of my duties.

3 *'-nd your tasks also covered tho evaluation of nodical experiences
•nd medical ratters of tho recruiting system, of tho - >lforo and main¬
tenance of prisoners of war?

A Yes, hit I want to point out that what you arc reading nor,

’• -* is from the official instructions for cy duties of tho year 19hii.

2992


13 Fob-ii7—?JC-U*-2-3 mM
Court I


Q Jfow, General, I want you to pay close attention to ay questions
and T,- will get along a little faster. The first question I put to you
was, your tasks after you were first appointed on 28 July 191*2, and I
asked you with nj3poct to that, if it was not your duty to provide uni¬
form and coordinated erasures in the field of health guidance research,
ar.d the combating of opideaics, and all nodical measures which required
uniform ruling. Ziow, give me an answer, yos or no? «.

A .lie docrco of 19l*2, this Js not contained —

i (Interposing) General, wo all understand it is ftot in the decree
of 19U2, or I would not to asking you the question. The fact is there
was a service regulation issued on 28 July 1?1*2, which tho Prosecution
has not yet put into cvidonco, and I aa asking you aono questions about
your duties os contained in that scrvico regulation, and I will ask you
to give in answer now to the ;uostion I put to you.

A x ho tasks of tho Chiof of tho Wchmacht lodical Sorvice generally
roforrod to, what you have cantior.ad, tho coordination of those — also
in view of those soctions of tho nedical aorvico which could not be
coordinated at all.

Q nd that covored health guidanco, did it not?

A .'oil, this quostion is vory difficult to answor. *..'hon I issuod
an order, then ttut Indlcatod alroady that by sooo noans I shall soo that
those r.oasuro3 aro carried out.

Q And your tasks in tho field of having coordinated treasures also
coverod the :ocbating of cpidoaics; did it not?
lea.

Q A nc i scientific research?

A les, scientific research has boon ropoatodly discussed horo, and
it has toon described, and it ha3 boen statod now this has to be under¬
stood. Jbw. or.o must differentiate on the subject.

Q 'nd the service regulations of 23 July 1922, also stated that

it Tfas y c ' dr Joo to have coordinated the evaluation of nodical experiments

• •
nodical natters of the recruiting systenj did it not?

2993


13 *eb U7-^-:^>lii-3-3oard (?JC)
Court I


A That nay bo, yes.

Q And it also covered the welfare and maintenance of prisoners
of war; did it not?

A Yes.

%

Q I tor, General, as you have already observed, the dutios which I
have Just been interrogating you about, which wore contained in the serv¬
ice regulations of 23 July 191*2, issued to you by Field Uarshal Keitel,
are soma of the sane dutios t^at are contained in the servico regulations
of 7 August l?!!. v

A I an not able to confirm that because I have personally asked
for this servico regulation, and as far as I aa Info mod, qy Dofonso
Counsel has tried to, by ell means, to uroduco this regulation in tho
official A ray coasunications of 1912, and in tho Any guidance shoots.
Thoy havo boon repoatodly requestod and ro tore unable to find any our-
vico regulations contained in than.

*oH, uonoral, wo are mutually distrossod that you do not hnvo
thon in front of you, but in spite of that, I an going to ask you a few
r,oro questions about it. It aust bo a natter of considorablo Information,
chich you have, since you wore operating 'under that service regulation
for a littlo more then two yoars. I have had placed bofsrc you tho aor-
vico regulations of 7 August 1911; that is Docuocnt lio. 0227, Prosecu¬
tion's Exhibit 6, and I Just briefly want to „o ovor it with you, to boo
exactly hot; nuch difference there vas bot*.;oon thoso service regulations
of 23 July l?ii2, which you do not have, and thoso servico regulations
which you do tavo of 7 August l?l*k.

1 --. KELTS: ilr, President, nay it ploaao tho Tribunal, I request
ruling or the Tribunal, if it is admissible, that tho servico regula¬
tions of 1911 are present in tho so.-vico regulations of 191*2, if tha
s:rvico regulations of 1912 are not given to the defendant. If there is
3 con P ar ison to be drawn between thoso two servico regulations, thon ho,

-c dofandant cannot support himself on that alone, iihat the Prosocution
- reading to him is contained in the service rerulations of 19hL. but

299h


13 ?eb li7-~--*A-lii-3-3eard (PJC)

Court I

he aust also be given the opportunity to exa&ino that and to point
out the practical differences, which perhaps


299h A


13 ?eb U7-A-3Jl-JM-Boani (FJC)
Court I


cannot be recognized from thj text ale no, especially with regard to the
authority.

1 ?., *£ HA KEY: If the Tribunal pleases, I must object to having
the cross examination in to rr up tod in this Banner. I have nothing elso
to say about Dr. Ifolto's objections on this part. Thoro cortainly can¬
not fco ’ny objections to ry putting these questions to the witness.

THE PRESIDE IT; Tho Counsel for tho defendant nay interposo my
objection that ha dosiros to intorposo. Tho Tribunal will r.sk tho Proso-
cution If it has available tho regulations of 19U2, % which havo boon
roforred to?

UP.. ’£ FAXZT: do not, your Honor.

7ii2 rRSSIDaT: If tho ritr.oc? is unfamiliar with tho regulations
th -1 aro not boforo him, ho asy any so, but tho objection as medo by
the Dofcruft) Counsel rill bo overruled.

5Y I?.. 1C HAMEIt

Q Sonora 1 , I did not toll you that wo had the so sorvico regulations,
rxi If 70 U juapod to that conclusion by soao of tho quo3tions I put to
you, >rhy that is your own responsibility on tho tootimony that you ero about
to give. In any ovont, wo ore interested in knowing what wao in those
sorrlco regulations of 23 July 191:2. Lot *c look at tho ono of 7 August
1911, which is before youj look undor Part 2 whoro it snys "Duties".

*ho first paragraph roads: "Tho Chiof of tho Ledicai Sorvico of the
T/ohrnacht ia the advi3«-r of tho Ch'af of tho High Conrwid of the >Tohr-
macht and of its health guidance." -as that snao paragraph in the regu¬
lations of 23 July 191*2?

I cannot tell you that* I cannot remcober tho oxact teat of tho
sorvico regulations.


13 ?o=ru-r;'-i-3JG-l5-L-3lttJaey
Court Jo. 1


4 Souornl, wo uaiorstand thet you couldn’t «it down nnd dictate this
sorvico regulation of 23 July 13li2; but isn't It & fact th> t you wore tho
adviser of Keitel after 2o JUly 19 L 2 on nodical questions? Isn’t that rl : dit'

A Toe, that is correct.

•i Isn't that all that this first Taro.Th.ph says?

A Tho fir3t .xtra,T .nh states; "The chief of tho nodical sorvlco
Is tno advisor of tho chief of tho OK J In all questl ns poitninin,; to tho
ser.'lca of the '..ohrancht nni the o.hor or,/mirations. ■ That Is tho text
ns It is Arondy contained in the sorvlco regulation of 193<J or 1940 for
the arpjr .-died inspector.

* Sow, Ooh.nl. wo aren't intorostod in what wa« cant; ln«d in that
one. Vo ; ro Just intorostod iu the or.o of 23 July 1942; and I t:Jco it
tout substantially the sane ycri^raTh was in tlmt *>no. Is that rl.fct?

A Since a si.ilir .crcgroph is also contcinod in the ro.ul: tion for
tao spec ini consultant of tho OW it is proa: bio that it in providod for
in tho similar text in tho rotation of 1942.

s Y.ry well, lot's look at Pura,;r .ph 2 . That sr.ys: "Tno chief of
tflo nodical ervicos of tho Vahr.xvcht will direct the total nodical oorvicos
of cr»o -ohr.cent as fares the special fiold is concornod with ro,: rd or
tho .dlit ry loot rue ti 70S of the cnivf of tho hi.fc coenml of the ar.iod force
end the . Onoral rUcs of t..o ?-ohr«r's co.-roisnioncr ,\«n>rnl or r.edicrl an d
health do. art.-nt." 2 tnt s'.w yum. rnph wt c in tho norvlco regulation of
2u July 19-2, vtss't it?

- I u unr'.le to ivo you an exact statement ->n that.

v VU too sang r»vrph in subftunco in tho sorvlco rerul-tion of
July 1.42?

.. I ernnot so;- how .c.ny r.ra.T'.yhs wero contained in tho scrvico re¬
flation; how they were ordered; and vhat they contained individually.

.. Gon-ral, doesn't the FUohr.r decroo Itself require ym to toko
cert instructions in tho v-ecil field fron Karl 3r nc.tJ Isn't he autho>-
i:.i to intervene In a responsible naanor by that decree?

A Li the directive by tho Fuehrer of 19*.2, ns far ns I enow, it is

2996 v.


13 ?cbruc-r^-2JG-15-S-3lrJcloy
C urt St. 1


ctstcd that tho .ronsrol connisaioaar of the FUohror Is authorised to docido
that so has to bo Informed about fusdu-.or.tel tillage fro.: the ox: y nodical
aarvico; that ho la authorised to include tinsolf; that ho io cllovod to
int-rveso. that ia vhnt l\ cor.ti.in_d is the Fuehrer doc roc wild, wo hrve
hero.

. Lot *8 ,.o oa to too third psrr-.-rr.ri. General, rho first part roadat
■jho c-’.iof of tho nodical aervicoa of the tfehrn&cht will infora^thc Fup!>-
ror's co:-.laeloncr .“ca_rcl ..;out aajor over.to in tno fiold of tho nodical
aervicoa of t'.:o Vohrsmcht." Ct-t waa required y tho tarvico rculr.tion of
2e July 1942, wnac't it?

A 1 cannot as}’ that with Cvit'inty. It ia po»alblo thrt thia atato-
_ent ia contained ia r;y -o.iory fro., perhaps thia ro .illation. It io quito
:: oo ai lo that tho text ori-lcr.tos fro.i thia, Slat ia tho dircctivo of 1944.

^ Voror.'t you required by the fuehrer docroo of 2 S July 1942 to
rv.-ort to 3ror.dt on basic or fundamental event at

A Voll, I would have to oak you to hr. ad ovor thu docroc to :.w>. I
cannot ot .to that vitk-.ut it.

i 3ut, General, you've eoor. thia docroc I .'juoaa a doron tinea already;
uni you ope rat od und^r it for about four yours. Did you ua r. nnttor of
fact report to Lori Drnndt on fundnnontal events in tho nodical eorvico
after 2 o July of '42? Can you tell ua about that!

- J:out sat tor a pertaining to the nodical fiold I cannot ro:>o:-bor any
apoeifio cate. They ><oro neatly caaoa which perttlnod to tho statue of tho
..Hit. ry .nyaiolona or uuloh cult wita ap-ci.-l v .urgency coalitions,
or it w.b n request for -.>^e *u: port or nid with vohlclos or nlrplnnoa.

Let 'a o on to too next p*ra.i-ph, rarn^-.ph 3 . It anya: "You
will re.resent the Voursscht to t-.c civilian authorities in uutunl .wdical
affairs mi will protect their interests in connection -dth tho health
-ensures of the civilian ndnioistrutivo cuthoritloa. ■ ‘fi’.an't that contained
i.. aubstaacc in tho service regulation of 26 July 19 L 2?

_ I csnr.ot any th t. It ia understood that t..c t *Y. of the chief Of
the nodical aorvicc toward the civilian minorities is. I would llku to

2997


13 7oirwu^->-IW0- *-15 >-3lr±lcy
Court Ho. 1


Buy that It Is a certainty.

; 3ut yiu would like to scy that It was coatr-iaed ir. tkcro? In that
rl^t?

A I cr-oaot say thr.t. I have to stato n^aln thr.t It is after c Ion/;

%

*t_o hero when wo discussed theso questions for the first tiuo la tho dli>-
cusslor. aid out basic docuu^nts waled I would like to hivo. I cr-w hero
without cay docu^-ats nt ell: end then I requested tho Fuehrer Aocroo of
lS4d. If thero wore oay addition:.! explanations for it or not, I person¬
ally stated on the subject t.o.t aoaothl'h^ could still bo jsyoilnblo in
vrltlr,. I know for cert .In ..w.t Dr. ITclto cm obtained tho nrcjr ro.pu-
lctloa naoet; but I cna re-e-Acr ween he told us that thero Is nothin,-: on
U.e subject C-ntninod In it. I told hi:; that I would road It over .ysolf
perhaps sinco he was unr.blo to find It. actually, It was not lintod in
tee table of cor.t«nts; cad I havo looked thread: tho nhoots for tills
SOTticulr.r shwot. Then tho re Is the further doea-ontary sheet about ,"onorol
s.y co:. .ur.icr.tions. pr. Kelte obtained t.ils shoet alto, and nothin.-was
c:nt: laod In It. So thr.t I .yself bocaae suspicious. ffion Dr. Hclto vroto
to so.jobody else cal he received Uo information that thio aist bo contained
in tho cr.y ro-ul- tions, either on shoot o A. 3. or C. 3>on wo n,»in road
over tho arjy shoet of re.,-ulr.tions; rad wo dl not find anything vhntooover
in Parts A, 3, cad C.

^ ITow, General, this Is all very sed that you hnvon't boon able to
find .11 these docu.-jr.t3 that you'd liko to hnvo; but both tho dofonuo and
the .riaooutlen a.-o labor in.. under so.^e of those sr-io ifficultios. I SB
Just try!:, to ,.ot a little infcrmctlon fro., y/u -ere a out whrt you woro
do in. ,.g cnief of the :.cdicd serricos of the 'ahnxcct; and I assu-oo thr.t
tiace you cold th-t Jo: for t* out four yeexs, you hr.ro bo.;« vr^c rocollr-
cctloc about v_-.t you wore doin, an’, went you wore -up^ored to do. One
of tee questions is Just ox-ctly what chan.:es took piece after this eervico
-elation of 7 Au .uot 1944. I hare a very vr^-uj suspicion tijit your duties
and y ur _ overs woron't broadened to any substantif-l ^xtont r.t all: and I
r— nov try ir. to find out vhcroln lies the dlffcronco betveon your duties


1 } Fcbru. r;OOJG-l7-U-31ul©r
Court So. i


and rvr^nBi'^llitioB ns of 25 July 1942 and as of 7 Auuot 1944. Sow, If
you dtn't ~cv rad can't toll ua *e t thcao differoncos were, will you Just
f ;o thocd red state ri,it now tint you don't Know, «md thor. wo can aovo on
to ao-.c other topic. *

A I nave already stntod hero that It 1 b elor.rly Indicated T>y tho
Fuehrer dccrcaa that the anin dlfforonco Hot in th-t I was ranted nn
authority to Ibbuo orders; and the sooond le n bc^ .ration of tho previous
.eraonol u.:lon hotwoon tea :.eiic:l inspector.

X

•v Sow, GwUBcnl, wo understand tr.ls separation; and I'u of tr.u opinion
that that was really t.:c rots>n that this aocool Fuehrer docroo was lafiucd
end that that was au. at ant lolly tao only roason; hut yni any that in add¬
ition you .-ot so o pawor to ls*vu» ordoro. I sup oso .that la contalnod In
Fort I of t .Is Bcrvico ro, ulr tlor.. Vlll you look >xt th» t nnd toll ub
h... r~i.: t..is r.ddlti onnl power was ,lvcn to you?

_ It la stated under ITuJber I In tno last sontonco of Farr-ya h 1 of
tho -Uo..ror decree: "Ho is authorised to issue order# In all spoclflc
qu.stims within his flold of co:.potcnco. ■ In the docroo undor Articlo 2
In tr.e "crvlco retaliation approvod by tho juohror it Is nt- tod undor Parr—
r.-.jfc 2, II, "Ibo authority who, accordin, to Butwyaph 1, that lo, is
the authority in question, also refers to the nrpy nodical i.-.s-octor, tho
cnlef of tho navy aedic.il ocrvlco. too cnlof of tuo .icdical ocrvico of tho
Luftwaffe, t..o ohlef of the nodical sorvlcc of t-;o 'Jaffen SS. '-nd tho
— lieA c.lvfs of tho or.ruolsaiiJnc and services o~ loy.>d within tho fr.-n o-
wtrh of the Ue-ir. cat, w.illo t«'.ogr oro act in.; In thv area of cortand of tho
•Cnnxicht#" Therefore, that la la F:xa.T: _ih 2 the explanation of tho
.ut.nrity .Ivon In Fnrsfir.Vi. 1 of tho Fuehrer decree.


1 ? Fob !.7W.-F'C-l6-l-Cook
C-jurt I


Q You didn't have any porer to issue orders to Hippko and Schrooder
byforo 7 August, 19UU, is that what you want to say?

A Before 19UU I did not have authority to issuo orders.

Q Boforo 7 August, 19UL? %

A Xus.

Q A'oll did you have any power to issuo general instructions which
•.rould bo binding upon Hippko and -chroodor? ^

A After tho docroo of 19UU I was ablo to do that.

Q .«o are not talking about the period new after tho seYvica regu¬
lation and the Fuehrer Deere- of 7 August, 19UU. aro both agroed that
fron and nftor that tiao you could issuo orders. 1 an non inquiring
about your authority before that '-imo, and I askod you if you could issuo
gor.oral Instructions to Hippko and Schroodor which would bo binding on
thoc?

a In tho fiold of notorial coordination and fron tho noconsity
which nroso for a sinplo caso within the fcxlicol Sorrico and its coordi¬
nation, I was ablo to issuo on order in cases of this kind, bocauso othor-
wiso I would have boon unable to carry out such a coordination. Hwrovor,
thj branches of tho ••chrsacht ar.d the i-edical Chiofs woro ablo to object
to those orders and I did not hav: the authority to issuo diroctivoa,
authority to i 33 Uu those diructivos in tho fom of an order, and that is
what is the noin thing in the military fiold.

Q ~'j foro August 19UU you diu have power to issuo diroctivoa, but
you sey you lid not have power to issue ordors, i 6 that right?

« "os, that is correct.

Q Could you go to Eoitol and have hin pass down an order for you to
Kippk- end Cchroodor?

A Yas, to a certain extent Keitel was able to issuo such c diroctivo.
* .3 i 3 also tb. caso with ragard to mutual erasures, like, for oxaxplo,

•h protecting of troops against the winter and sinilar cases.

* o understand your special field. General, and nobody is insisting

: u -.id the power to issue an order to Hippko having nothing to do with

3000


13 Fob L 7-^-r 'C-l6-l-~ook
Court I


the nodical service of vour so-called special field. mj aro Just linit-
ing ourselves to the special fiold. Ikrn, doctor, Hippke has testified
before another


3000 A


13 Feb u7-^-?jC-l£-2-Cook
Court I


Tribunal hero and ho was -la reading free the Znglish transcripts,
of tho 7 February, 19h7, in the action “United States vs. Srhard Milch",
pogo 765, Hippka was aakod:

■Tfaat was your official connection with General Oborstebsarzt Hand¬
les or of tto Lodical Haporteent of tho Tehraecht?"

And Hippko replied:

"'.ihon tho lodical Dopart&jnt of tho T/ohraacht --as created it was
sought to coatdno all questions that concornod any of the throo brrnchos
of the Arqy, and ho was ny auporior as Modi cal Oonaral. x Kandlosor who
had previously boon on an equal basis with na as nodical inspector for
tho any, new when ho also took on the new task, ho bocauo ry sujwrior."

And then tho further qxastion was put to Hippko:

•Coll could to givo you orders? uhat do you noan by tho word
"superior"?

And X know you will be surprised to hoar that Hippko ansircrodi

"Yos, ho could givo bo orders and establish a policy."

?fcxf, was Hippko not tailing tto oxact truth whon ho said you could
iss* orders to hin? lou know Hippko went out on the 1st of January,

19Uj, and that was seven months before this second Fuohror decroo wns
issued. Tihat do you have to say about Hippko's testimony?

A In connoction with his tost loony 1 want to say that if Hippko
clains that I had authority to iS3'io orders and If he has described no

superior, then I an ur.nbln to understand that, bocaON then it would
hrr> boon conpletoly unnecessary' to expressly denand in 1?UU that I bo
given authority to issue orders in a particular aanr.or, and «dniral Doonita
would still t«j able to r.rcrtor this exactly, that in accordance -..'ith cy
previous experiences, I could anly recall carry out ny assignments if I
•3 to tccoen his superior, and tho Gross «dairal, in spito of all efforts
by heitol, disapproved this, and with a lot of difficulty in 19Ui, to
finally succocdod in obtaining for i*? the authority to issuo orders. AH
of this ~uld have boon unnecessary' if 1 had been given authority to issuo


ord rs already in 19U2


3001


13 Feb i»7—'?jC-l6-2-Cooic
Court I


Q Soli it still would have boon noccssary bacauso you loft your
job as Arny Nodical Inspectorate, you know, so that it is quite natural
they would issuo a new sorrice regulation. uaa there any difforonoo
betwoon tho Aray


*


3001 A


13 Fob 2i7-A-F jC-l£-3-Coo:-:

Court I


Medical Inspector and the Chiof of tho l^dical Sorvico of tha kray?

A Ko, but between tho Arty Uodicol Inspector and tho Chief of tho
•chroacht Medical SorriCo.

Q “het wns the difforenpo?

A Tho -nay Medical Inspector was tho hoad of the kray Uadical Ser¬
vice.

Q Gonoral I understand, at least I think I understand, thcy«wcrc
both heads of their respective medical services, but I am curious to
know why there was this verbal dif’oronco between tho Chi dr of tho Medi¬
cal Service of the Luftwaffe, and tha Arrjy Medical Inspectors. Is thoro
any reason for this or is it Just old practice?

A The Arty liodical Inspector, whose off ico was already in oxiatonco
before tho Luftwaffe was established, has always had this title, bocouso
tho arny was organized ir. this manner. It was organizod to the extent
that nil of the branches had thoir o>m inspector. There was an Inspector
of the Infantry, of tho Artillory, and also an Army liodical Inspector.
t. the course of tho years this could not bo changed in spito of the title,
although the titlo did not apply.

Q .'ith ruspoct to your nodical duties as Chiof of the .-lodiool
Servico of the •Johraacht, was Karl Brandt your tochnical superior?

A I hivo already stated yo3tordf>Y or tho d->y befora th-t Hrandt
was not ay superior.

3 '-oil why did you nalcc such a statement in your affidavit, Gonoral?
•or> you ir.pos >d upon by one of those interrogators?

A I have also statod hare in tha brief history of ay life, as I
h‘.v_ called it here, thi3 containod nmy nistakos, end in tho and and
also sac- part of the draft .-hen it was presented to me, it contained
- following sentence: "Professor 3rar.dt was ay military and ay nodical
:U F rior", that is approximately what was stated there, <nd then 2 stated
* connection, that is incorrect, and I have crossed out tho -ford

=7" "nd then.by =ist:ko the "superior" remains with regard to the

3002


13 ?ob i.?^v--jC-l£-3-Cook
Court I

radical field and I have corrcctod that thoro.

Q ‘'oil General, I hove hoard .rhat you have tostifiod, but I an
at a loss to got any sonso frocc the testimony. You adait you struck
out 30ro


3002 A


13 ?o ; : -:7-;-r: c-i-5-;-coofc

Court IV.. 1

lan.ua- a in tho s-:j santoncc, why didn't you strila tho uhclo lino out? Shy
ill j-m Iot.to t:» words "ho was you radical superior", eft or all you cro r.
ran of intolli'oseo?

.. Tfcoro wore so tinny corroctlons and i mdo a cistrjto thero. i hr.vo
loft r.t lo-.st ton which nccorila^ to our oancopts voro not correct oithor.

- But, Goaoral, iiln't you draf this chart far us in your can handwriting?

.. That is tho dir._r*n;I

* # Doosa't that show Karl Brandt up at the to over you? 'Jrz that a
ni stake tco? ^

A I havo also trio! to explain that.

' I hoard ycur explanation, Conor-1, but thoro a. in it didn't satisfy :«>.
Ihy 11* you put :>rl Smelt up at tho top, unloss ho was in fact your superior
in toohnlcal attora. •'hat did you :*it hi:, on tho chart at all for?

BoOauso It cannot to c'elno! and Vocnuso I war.to', to a-.'id statins
that I had not had any contact at all withTrofossor Brandt v ocauso aftor
i'll tho e.ntacts are stated in tho Tuohror Docroo and 1 lid r.'t want to
/lafio hie noxt to :.o cr tooldo m. That is purely tochnical question.


13 F’-b-A-.J?-17-1-C-ross


Court I


Q. «n.rcl, ersn't rTofcsscr r--r.it yw superior rlth r.s ,_ct to r.ll
duti-s . utl£ud in thv First ?i*.hr..r \c:vo?

A. Ir. tU irat Decree, as f.r .-.s I k.:on, it is stated....

* General, r„ knew *hat^ tie Docroo states. I ac asking jau to draw
a cone usion. Isn't it true, wit.i respect tc .our functions n'tlin-d in this
First Tua&rar IXcrvt, tbit Karl 3r. ndt c-.r superior?

*• I ‘"Vc rlrays r .ept. A

’• *- ‘-mbH jfnur super! r, wxtly »;vt r . . id ho

hivo to yea? >.

I turned it his »h-norcr I b-liuvoc th-t I snculd report a •* so^ciln
incident . :.*to t - .: a. dice1 fields tc hi.. and th?t I should bring it t-. hie
kiy.vl_c'> 'ccause 1 nfsuc_d tirt this j. ulc suusjbcw roach the oars ci tlio
F .ir,r. uld b<. Bter np rcjnrx >«.. r. to b. ini r-.d by c s;Sccialii

in tn t 2U1 , cr if it Wore to be.9 lunoc* tt ir. by a^ci-.lists in th-t field
b.c”iso i : -ro to b- r^p. rted by lay. u. tiv. wh. 1- * in r*.y In. ..n

r ’ * • ' /vjn^vor *. in en CftrguOoy position rit rd t

trwapMt ti n £ ;• :ur v.funded I turned t. i md -shod hi ix yusrAw to
ft.lp tntBoae •. ay, f r oxaaple. By furnishing us r. squ-dren o 1 -.irer-ft -Men

rters h d at its s woi i > : -i.

i. isn't tutiliaati.tor 111 tnd ,.rtnn.l n c.aojn pr blew of

“ill br-.ne ..a .1 -Ju Vehraacht?

Yos.

i* • Mt£or«| it is true t tor i : si thin r indie fcion?

•*. l'cs.

«. — »d th » o as of tiu. ? 20 July 192 * 2 ?

•»• Yws.

!> c ' Gon-ral, will y u ...1 uc rh- in s.r.-ny i. rutl.r

0X1 "ilitcjrj sciencw and research lr. ..r.„r 1?

*• .»? - a lit-ry codic-1 science?

!• -wi* run. rch.

3CCb


13 17-2- rocs

Court I


A. In cy field? Sell, there sc: quit: n rarbar of speci-Iistc.

• ° us ‘- "• * minute, ger.aral, I a... -,.«jre sre probably a lot of peoole

*ho bad v.ra irucruatioa about typhus, -k ct.. rs had nore infor-r.ticn about
epid&nic jaundice, -d othur ^Oj.le he aid sore infons :tior. 'bout
fev«;r. cut, I ask you who In Qor^-ny was hotter informed than you ,.crs on
iho general picture of ailit ry aodiccl science and research?

... If you spoilt aoout gon.r 1 a-ttors in tlv field of military medical
sci-nct as f r - r tho *chrmcht rras concerned, then I believe that I ea quite
 U ^ ' r ' od ' ‘ o*eVcr, I not oxcopt t.-c spdeial ar'nch-s o research and
zxc’ic i rs of tho Ixftw'Afu mv! C. vy of which, to at-t. briefly,

I do ot h vo slic;htuat lie:.

1 . I iuvorstr-ad ^rhapa oo .-u* dot a veil infona.d ns o.turs on tho
r.?_*rc. probleus ulilch porta n exclusively to tho Lu: .cvy.

°» you up.nk of calling together tho udtoal chiefs of tU _hrn.-cl.4br nch
In -n effort to avoid duplication e. i.s. irch.,W»n du you do «

... I til 't in tiic n 1 of -_r did it with regard tot lie

laocul ion.-* f r -s this refers to ty diuo, par:-typhus, am' chloiva. I hnvo
f.rt .r Ir-ctcd coordination of t u Scientific b.n u conference which dealt
•• ral vac :nation -gainst tfrsontory. ..side of that I ca.-u.ot n> nny
oWa r prude case in that connection.

ton you give us the dates or. which ..cu c llod tie c - t toge¬

ther?

..r. not only audical Chiefs Mfe _ro spdcl 1 dV son, .ith
r-G- tc -1 ri- I b.licve that t.is :.- 3 in lr'.Jj bec .urc Sci.ro.d.r had

*— Prior to t..at tirto 1-fi.a -r.d combatcing aniarir » as
cecr-in .it ^ut nny conf_n.ic k Oe*. wdic-1 chiefs xrras , as In 1 9l2,
u_*»in..‘nv of 151 . 3 , bec-use the inosculations were c-r~ivd cut in

^Cj 1 . t ,,f * 1% » ?

* vi'4#

-• bat oeut th, typhus?

T- 't i: .ot a typhus v.accin t on. wc e -y typhus tbtn wc .an

uost State bar t you 8 typhus, shat wo

y*o


13 ?cb-^-v*F-17-3-Gross


Court I


cill fleckfi-bur, srhlch wens typhus.

Q. I U 101 .fat I understood you to etito th-.t you called tc. jttvr uodioil
chiefs tht branches to coordinate vcceimtiim against isalaria.

You -o.iticrod eo.xhing else a%a * thought you ae'r.t flockfiebcr.

«• I believe tut I hrv. said typhus, . - hue, nod e .

J3U eg fcy iioid, is th-t rl^ht?

... I 1 . vc amt whit you describe, is tyheoid.

3* Gon.nl, whr.t ws tA- Scientific S n"tc of the cdicix 3wr.icos of
tr.. Mhra»cht?

A. The. 5-ciJHtiIic S.r. tc ic in i. stitution which v: is first est/.bliehed
in 1895 end .• cs. scr&.ra «t th-.t ©art. ? y.ointcd by the -inporor nod,
Bubocquentl}, by the heads of t!*- So.-rn..nt. It had n certain niVoor of
regular onb-rt ind of irrwgulir o .ra r.:o t .. »*srw tn_ loading scientific
p-rsomlitios ir. C.mny in the --die-.! f i-.ld, -.A also a nuUbor o. oldor r.nd
ospuciil 7 x ; xrlenced end .lao spucvlly trained active neuicil oliicera and
If on- of those r-,- lar or other neuters left, th_n the ._uy edio 1 | ctor,

vdio was in c . r'_ of th. Scientific S n-.te, i ouccossor wio su ecter to the
h-id of t..e St-U rrlio found th t one rs ip ointud . v_iter of the Scientific
Scr. ic.

You wore Irusldont of tfi-.t boi'y, -r-n't you?

... I ’resident of S-i-.iti c L ante, Just Ilk- 11 wy

pr-d.c- sir. c‘. icl 1895.

.• An : you havathat rnsidenoy by virtue of bein_, -a’lO' ’odlc 1 Ins¬
pector or Chief of tin. iitdicnl S-rvic-s of t.o -ohnsicht?

... I h'.iJ th. s (residency in .1 c-.pre t> -r .xmy ft.dicil Inspector and
* 1; Scientific S int-, rosined 'a ent'blinha-nt of the .my until tlic -nd

“• t vu intended t unort i din cht Scientific Sen to
-• r, -■* ,-osult of tht h-ypem.. s ci t*.e ir which cim. bout s s jcdily
it s n*ol. tc carry th-.t out.

V v. continued to be Jrusidou^ager 7 August 19.C*, didr 1 you?


13 "ob-\.—Jr-i?-ii-Oross
Ccvrt t


Tbo S-a to vs not celled sir.co tl;e ;/2'x 19ii2.

Q- 7hr>t * h -“ t I =s*ced you. I asked you if it isn't - fact that

J-OU continued -.0 bo President of the Scientific Senate of hh_ ’.bdical Strvicos
c: thi. .w hn s no h t -fte .• 7 August 19a.'. as it states in the Scrrico Regulation.

... ..c, t.ur- is sorfcthiu', KTonj. here In t.._ Service Regulation tr.o Senate
of the cfcmrebt •..dical S~rvic» l: a2.r.-.ny included here. HcrOTCr, it was
r ~V'-r establish^- but it ratal n.d t-e .. '<y Scientific S rrto and, «*orofor u ,
before it was r .converted ay successor, toe .ir_y cdic-.l Inspector, nculd
l*vo continue . to be its president. x


13 ?ob Ji7-^-i2H-l8-l-Oanicls (PJC)
Court I


Q Did you avor 33 '*- any reports on sciontific rose arch to Karl
Brandt?

A I cannot rcsjccbor tha*. that has ever bo:n the case.

Q «':.Et about after hi 3 Offico for Scionco and Rosoarch vas set up?

A Sven than I did not su'enit any reports to hin.

Q Did you request tho Uoiical Sorvicos of tho «ray, !Javy, and
Luftwaffo to kojp Brandt's offico informed? «.

A Cortainly aceo fora oi correspondonco cuat have existed. Frcm
c cortain period of tine, porhapa February of 19UU, I assu?So that thoso
reports soro given about rosoarch assignments ani that the Offico for
Soionco ard Rosorrch tns to ho informed.

Q Didn't you also roquiro th, llodical Sorricos of tho Aray. Navy
and Luftwaffe to Sund you copies of thoso rosoarch assi^nr.ants?

A If thoso agrooaonts iroro roachod, or how they wero roachod, I an
imafcl to say. Hewrovor, it is sor thing which is closely connoctod. In
this ease thoro woro not reports concorocd, but, first of all, assigrtnonts.

Q You havo said that aviation ocdicino could not ba coordinated by
you Li your capacity as Chief of tho Lodical Sorvic,s of the ..ohnrnoht.

Vr.at ubout the work of tho Luftwaffe hy-ieniats working on a problem
like typhus?

A If any question tns discusin tho field of typhus, then oithor
- conforonco was callod in t.hich all th. hygienists participotod, or some¬
thin ; :.—e drafted in writing •'hich was s^nt to the various br-.ncho3 of
"ahrrv'cht for their comcnts; am! th. hygienists -*ould have boon
coapetent as socialists ir. that field. In particular, in tho fiold of
typhus, I can reacaber, with th- branches of th uahraocht, only tho preb-
1 -z of dolousing, t.-hich pie 73 a very irportur.t


3008


13 ? cb U 7-A.-&FK-1S-2 -Daniels (?JC)
Court -


part in tho coso or typhus. I assies that in this fiold with tho
c h o ai cal as woll as with tto physical dolousing, a connection and a
nutual orientation of tfcs hygienists, especially since I had an assist¬
ant who ms particularly aquain._-d in tlds field and who had actually
devoted all of his work to this question of cheeical dclou3ing, which
had assueea some new aspects.

Q how you have adaitted that on a probloa like vaccines ^rou,
as Chief of tho Medical Services of the ••ehnaacht, had the power to
establish a ur.iforn practico in the “ohnnacht, for example, as to tho
typos and tines of vaccination, didn't you liavo to know of the efficacy
of those vaccines, and ttoir ro-ctions to nake a decision like that?

A In the Military Judical Sorvices there was no decision made at
iny tine about a vaccination without first calling aoveral physicians
for consultation or without a S c i r.tific Sonato taking place, Sxnmples
are indicated by the progran of tho session of tho last Scientific
Senate whore this quostion particularly ployed a special port.

Q “ho wr.s tho CoBDnr.der of tho Military Aodical Acndor. y7

A 'hat. was Gonornlstabsnrzt Frofossor Dr. Homan.

Q “to invited tho various doctors to participate in thoso coolings
of the consulting physicians?

A The can in charge waa tho person directed to preside over the
coating. Before 19h2 it was the -»:cy fcedical Inspector, and after
decidin' on tto progran, ho distributed a list of tho ninbor of poreons
participating, to tho individual brancho3 of tho ..'ohreacht. \fith tho
exception of those


3W


13 Feb L7-^--FjC-X3-3-3aniels
Court I


people who were requested to i3sue reports, it was left completely to
the branches of the Hehraadit as to mho= they wanted to send. Therefore,
the selection was loft to the Arny, the 'fcvy, and the Luftwaffe.

Q I take it, thon, that you decided on the lectures and tho persons
who were to give then; is that ri;ht?

A A working staff was appointed, and through the years of my activity

it was Ganeralarst Schreiber -..-ho was the ran in charge of the working

staff. I, on ay part, stated the subjects on which I placed special on-

*

phasis. And, on the part of the individual chiefs of the branches of
the .lohmacht, all tho subjects wore suggested on which they placed spe¬
cial emphasis. At tho s-use tLyj, several na-es wore offered who could bo
considered .3 pooplo to nr.’.co tho reports.

Q '.ell now, aro you tolling us that you Just simply suggested tho
subjects for discussion and those subjects wore then passed on to tho
Army end the Ihvy end tho iTaffan SS, and thoy pickod out the doctors
who were to give thoso lectures?

a lea. Of courao, thoro wero also casus when I, for example,
stated to the Luftrraffo th A I would liko to hear a lacturo by Profossor
loonnos, who was a leading ran, or, in some other fiold, Profossor Roso,

,rKo gave k ctureo rather froiuontly; or, porhrps I cay have nentionod some
particular person in tho ievy. I?a<."cvor, tho offers usually cene from tho
bronchos of tho ‘..'ehraacht.

Q All ri ;ht. lo*.:, the ’bvy, or rather, tho Luftwaffe, has decided,
since you -.hln:: you want a talk on malaria, that they will aond Profossor
.‘hat does tho Luftwaffo then do about that? Do they sond in a
'bar*, synopsis of r.-hat .lose is going to s~.y? Or what do they toll you
tt.ua?

A They say that Rose is at -y .disposal, or that Rose


3010


13 ?eb Irf-A-EBH-lS-li-ainiels (?JC)

Court I


cannot be furnished, and then we have to select somebody else.

Q .ell, then I assine that the progran was finally drawn up by
you, or Schreiber as your agent, for these neetings of consulting phy¬
sicians. That is right, is^'t it?

A Yes. In the end, the working staff had a draft which was divided
into the individual working groups, the people '."ha wore to give tho lec¬
tures, and the subjoct of the lectures. Then ^chreibor cano to “ftoe no
and ho submitted this big draft to oe. Then, in goncral, outside of
ch'mges with regard to the tine, we did not make any changes in the pro-
gran which had boon composed by the various pcoplo irho wcro intoroatod.

Q ".ell, what I an curious to knov is how Doctors Ding, Gobhardt,
1 ‘ischer, and Holzlochnor cade roports at thoso neotings.

A What do you coan by how did they givo tho reports.

Q Hot.* did it happen that they wore invited to aakothose roports?

A That nay have boon dono for different reasons. Eithor tho
•Taffon SS or tho Luft'.njffe nay bavo suggested tho aviation nedic-.l
officer Holzlochnor to Dr. D ingj or, with rogard to tho Problem of
cold, which also existed in the Army, porhape, in the courso of a dis¬
cussion botwoon thr. working staff, somebody may havo raised n o.uostion
ns to whether Holzlochnor — who had gainod special practicrl oxporionco
in tho Antarctic — night not bo able to report about his exporionco3.

I cannot state it exactly boc-usc I hsvo not participated in ary
sessions of tho working staff. It was only ay task to state boforohrnd
what had ’,o bo included in tho progr.'n under


3011


13 7 ' -=?F-18-5-Bnnicls
Court t. . 1 .

“11 cirBur-at-.nc^3, 'n’ to acr.fcc r.t K
if tUia 'r n't.


13 ?ob Ii7--S-19-l-?aldt (FJC)
Court I


Q -11, uer-oral, I an Just carious. Haw let's take Ding for an
exacplo. You have passed along tho word that you want typhus discussed
In tho rooting in hay, 1?U3, and that goes dorm to tho TTaffon SS.

Oonzken over hero 'Titos back and scys, "Dr. ^ing can give you a good
talk on typhus." )Sow doesn't socoxwfcr in your office ask, "Kor whet in
the world can Ding toll us about typhus? What has ho boon doing in
typt.ua resoarch? TTho is Ding anyway? "hat can ha tell us about typhus?"
Doesn't socobody ask those questions?

A I ms not asked any such questions. x

Q a ooon't your prograa chnlrnan inquire into tho qualifications in
tho work which a proposod locturer has done?

A Tho working staff contacted tho individual brrnchos of the *ohr-
aacht. Thoy, after all, had to kr.ja what nan they wanted to furnish for
tho lecturo. They would not call a mi who was not an export in his
.‘iold, bocauso he had to count on tho fact that in tho courso of the dis¬
cussion ho would, in a cortain way, also bo cross oxaninod. And with
such circle of scientific outstanding personalities no nnn would bo
furnished of whoa it is assirvod that ho does not possess tho required
know-lodge. Thoroforo I really cannot toll you Just how, in detail. Dr.
Ding \na suggested by tho iTrffon SS and her- ho formulated tho program.

Q Had you over heard of Dr. Ding as boing an export in tyhus?

A Xo.

Q "hen did you first coot Dr, Ding?

A 1 hav. statod hero that D:. Ding is coaplotoly ur.'.aiovn to aw,

2 nd : ha? told ay interrog tors, Hr. Rapp, with rog.rd to this porson
2 nd to others, that he should not bo surprised if it should bo dis¬
covered scnotinc thet on 3cce occasion or other, for example, with tho
opening of .? session or at tho end, such a man has boon sitting togothor
w:‘.h no in ono room. However, I do not understand th’t to bo an acquaint¬
ance, nr.d I cust state on tho subject I have


3013


13 Fob U7-^-5»-19-2-FoLlt (FJC)

Court I

, wrd the nc-* of DIr.g for tin, «»t «-—.!«•» «

sons, IT. tt. B^tlsh .one, A. the capitulation, s*. X «. -®

artldos by hi, in the, pc^r. I hoard W»  tto tlJM

.hen X received . letter to the effect that Sehroiber he. teetiXied
•,„ before the Intcrmtlonel mitory Tribunal, accord* to vhich

Dr. Ding hod giron o lectura. *

q Sou, just e ,1-oote. I think you IWc dv.n » . .ufficieht_

cruder to that. I »* «t to ask you no* if ;-u r.ad the.o report.

yeu published or. -hose Stines of consults HV-M*— “= 1™ not-

sally road thooo?

A Tha printod ropoxts?

Q Yoa.

4 I hove rood thou exactly in „H, end port of thon did not go
over, ,«t u, it 1. usually don. with booh, of that Kiri. »»* of all
the chapters are .olocW shlch or, of special interest or -hich have the
cat priority, o* everythin* else is laid aside for a l.tar opportunity,

which of courao r.ovor nriscs.

q I think that is sufficient, Oonoral. I Just cant to ask you now
than, x asset that you did not road tho ry of the report node by
Din. at tho nootinr. of your const!iin* M- *» • »»• "" *

rood that?

K I have rood ‘-bo report try Dine boro.

q But you didn't road it after it tree published sonotlak, in 19U37
i I earnot ro-cber it, because tho report ol -U3 -a probably
publish site Btnths aftorsurds. "hen and if It cane into ny honds,

I cannot say; and I cannot say, either, IT * »ava it at aU.

, tour s»ory uns pretty seed ehcr. you tostiflod -a nonant ago that
the first ti» you over hoard the no- Dine «. in the British -no and
ynu road it in a nauspapor. Bo you not: «®t to toll us that ,aybo

you did road this Dir>G report >ack in 19^3?

A I cannot toll you that. Tho ro^rts offorod car* imr 1*., « • ,

• a B A


lute the, after the loot*,. I that because


1


13 -’ob Ii7--ST-19-3-*oldt (FJC)

Court I

of this re son I nado an innovation in 19Ui that the -•aost inportent
par*, sanely, the directors, should bo separately printed in the form
of a little booklet, that they should bo given priority, because it
took an oxtrencly long tin<* during the war to have these roports
printed, because quito a niabor of copies were noodod, and it had
lrondy bocono very difficult with regard to the printing facilities.
THH rESSIDSbT: Tho Tribunal is about to rocoss. Tho witnoss, tho
Defendant Handlosor, boing undor cross axnaimtion, will not bo allowed
to cormunicnte with any person ur.‘ :.l his cross oxaaination i3 finished.
Tho Tribunal >111 bo in rocoss•

(A rocoss was taken.)


13 F cb U7-A-JF-20-l-~itzgortld (?JC)

Court I

7HS MBSK&L: Tho "ribrnal is again ir. session.

Q General, do you want the Tribunal to beliovo that no onj on
your staff checked into tho qualifications of Dr. &ing as a typhus ex¬
pert before it was approval that ho deliver this lecture at tho mooting
of the consulting physicians in Ucy, 19 h 3 ?

A I cannot make any Judrpent on that question. Tho working staff,
in gcnoral, probably thought that tiioy were tied to the suggestions of
the '•fehrmicht Lrcnchos.

Q In other words, they ebd-cated their Judgment to tho Waffen-6S
that Dr. Ding ms a typhus export >nd that he had some words of inportnneo
to oocuny tho time of such can as Schrdbor, Rose and Eyor? Is that
right7

A If I personally rccoivod those suggestions, I would only hsvo
raised on objoction if thoro voro any occasion to do so.

Q Let 3» put a hypotbotic*■ 1 quostion to you. Doctor. Lot us sup-
pos in April, 19k3, you wore porsonrlly arranging tho program for tho
oooting of tho consulting p^ysici n s i n Ley 1?L3, -nd that you had des¬
ignated typhus and typhus vaccinos as ono of tho natters to bo diacussod
-nd that the Yaffon-CS suggested tho nas» of Dr. Ding. You have nlroaly
testified you had never ho-rd of Dr. Ding. I am asking you what you
"ould have dono with rospect to including Dr. Ding on tho program to
lecture on typhus under those conditions?

•v I would have dono tho sa= thing I did with reference to other
3ugrc3tio::s by tho S3 or suggestion; by other tranches of tho Sehraacht
when I diu not know all the r-ntleeen. I would have to rely upon their
suggestion. This was not ay task, i did not havo time to investigate
* he 0^9 of the individual suggested. 1 was only interested in gotting
■ loading people for these loctures to which I attached particular im¬
portance. I had to have enough confidence in the medical chief of tho
•-v.rr.acht branches to know the;.- would put people at ny disposal who would
vo the purpose well. That is all I can say.

‘ 1 7fouid ILRo to investigate your failure to read this report by

3016


13 ••b U7-A-JP-20-l-Fit*flB»ld (FJC)
Court I


Eln> , OB t ..... rr- that, tot .you -» net interaatad in the
9-' to Whu. vaccl* produced fro= T


3016 k


13 Feb U7-A-JP-21-l-OaTUgher (FJC)

Court I


A No, that i.3 not right. According to aj opinion ever since 1?U3
I received information about the vaccine situations, and I can say that
so far as I an concerned, and so far as I had anything to do with the
natter, the entire typhus cosplex W3s postponed. For the center of
gravity and all the work was based on the delousing, That was a basical
change which was of great importance.

Q Now you recall having read Dings' report here in Humberg on
egg yoke vaccine, and its effectiveness was really the c^re of the prob¬
lem he was dealing with, and ir. this report he compared the effective¬
ness of egg yo!» vaccines to the better known Corgi's vaccino, and I
think also vaccine developed from rabbit lungs, Tou were not interested
in that natter, is that right?

A Certainly I was intorosted in these quostionc. 1 ronoabor that


through various ways I tried to gain various information on tho typhus
question, and among othors I road an articlo which appoared in tho pross
which ’■-•as a long article on roasuros of ability of leadership at homo,
which was contemplated in order to protect against typhus, and this
articlo — this egg yoke question was also mentioned. Then discussions
•.ore carried on with Ur. Eyer as to whether we should oxtond the difforont
vaccine procedure, and, Vr. Eyor also dealt with tho question whether ve
could not use rabbit lungs, o: Jog lungs in a nuch more productive nwnnor.
Apart from that -r. Eyor increased his production in such a manner, which
'■as groatly to sty satisfaction; that considering tho progross wo nado in
tho program of dolousing, these questions, \*hich you have Just .nentionod,
vorc not of such a primary interest as you tried to oxpross hero.

Q General, I am not tryini to oxpros3 anything. I am asking you
-out your interest ir. those matters. I suppose you know where Eyor
rut his information and tho effoctivonoss of thsso dog lung and rabbit
-•®* vaccinoa, don't you? Eo got that from Buchornrald, didn't ho?

A I car. r.ot say, but I am sure that it was contained in literature,

•M.


3017


IS 'Ob U 7-^-JP-2H-Gallagher (FJC)

Jourt I

Q *11 right. Shore did they tost the so dog lung and rabbit lung
vaccines; ir. other wards, where did Syer get his info motion if he did
not get it froa Bochersrald?


13 Fob U7-WP-21-2-3al^ JC '
Govt I


X iou w.  forgot «.t II-*- 9 * *° w

m . - 1 - - “ f *“ *“• * ?

»» hlelf aw. h..led <~U~. «•» * » * “»

in. -. -n X only *« -t tb. —* * -

..;.*«- th. i—> ° f *• *«• aM —" ourda '

musing progra., and considering tho typ.ua action, a. it P-allod

„ »«, tut -as tho socord half of X, « -uXd nut «od to rcao

* tut, and «. actually proved thia. I - «■»» ««* *"

^olna, not only orfieidly  alao paraonally, tut uo am no- .coins

to thin*, in a r.troapaction, and at that tlno X .« «- 130 °‘' h0r
-ay nroud, and X loohod at the thins. I- * vary different point of
vWI , a, 1 . tho caao bora to-, tharofora, tho altuaUon i»

different.

q -ho -oo your hy cl uniat on the ataff o,. .hon you roXlodX
X That tos Loctur-r 3r. Dlolcart.

Q Tilll you spoil that?

X F-I-C-K-A-R-Cf 3ickort.

Q X,u did not anmor ay pravlou. location. .horo in lamany to
your ^ did ho carry out any ro.oarch on tho oXrootl-onca. of

Xus and r-.hhit Xus vaccines; In foot, on any vaccina, do you Ot
* -oil, x only nc that tho *art Koch Xnatifoto horo that
vaccine, the Bohrins ., ani pWhXy Uao Xnatituto far ^rinoataX
therapy in Fradfnrt, and if you -ouXd he hind ancush to road the article
nhlch waa autalttod by ny dafenao coed of e docent at.-eh ... a -t
hy on. of tho ddcat _purts c. typhuo =» - - --cc,,, nanoly. ‘

M Otto of crardefurt, thin X - aura that you ..odd bo onli.*tanod about
thia conplor Ration regarding dee and rahhita, and you idll t» cor
wod about th= cubjoct. *» -a "itton in a papor M

am could understand it, -icb -a c - — —• Sut " ■“" Bl
•fOttWlcodgo Journal, ond I think it if wrlttan 111 3 ' C -' * ‘ ra * ^ 1
t- -nd edict 3 *°“‘ »• • it ” tton - * 55 Mt *

3019


13 Fob li7-*-J?-21-2-Gnllagfrar (FJC)
Court I


subjectively rritton report, and it is not a report made fey e general
nodical specialist of Frrnkfurt, but cede bj* an expert, and 1 think
this report would snorer all your questions.

Q. Gehelsrat Otto, as I rdfcall it, was attached to the iUnistry
of Interior, is that right?

A. Ko, this Ceheir-rat Otto was always the president, or at least
for -any years, of the Institute for firrerioental Therapy in Frankfurt.

Q. And did you rely on his advice on this typhus question?

%

A. He was sy adviser, and it was his task to do that. He had so
much knowledge and ability that I could roly on hin in the sane way I
could rely previously on Schreiber.


3039


i


13 Fob l*7-A-JP-22-l-Eayx»s (FJC)

Court I

Q That do you mean, "roly previously on Schroibor?"

JL I roar, that on the basis of Schreiber's knowledge and work and
his efforts, I could roly upon ovoryt:*ing ho suggested or whatovor ho
gave ao for :uy information. Considering the extent of ny work, I vns
not in o position at oil to road everything aysolf, and that cort'inly
rus not ny task. I bad tfreso tilings reported to rsc by ay department
chiefs, and I then had to draw ay own conclusions and sometimes asked
questions if I thought it was nocoss'.ry. x

4 Tioll, I understand that, Qonoral, but the way you phraaod your
-.naror, it night lead sor-ebody to oli.vo that you quit relying on
Schroibor and strrtod rolling on Otto, and that is not tho case, is it?
Schroibor was working with you up until tho ond of tho war, wasn't ho?

A f.s, but Schr^ib>jr did not ect as sy ircodiato advisor in ay
aic.'nity until tha und of tho war. Schroibor was with =»a in tho army
at the front until l?!i2. Ko was at tho liodical Inspectorate until 1?1*3,
and t].on ho wont to tho Acadoc^, shore ho hoadod a scientific group,
nd of course ho reroved himself froa ao to : certain oxtont. I had,
of course, an opportunity to collaborate with him, but he was not my
isncdi .to collabor tor rnyaero.

Q -cs it not tho piirpcse of tr.oso mootings of coneulting physi¬
cians to establish a besis for th issuance of cod‘c 1 directives?

A les.

3 j ji* 1, I understood that you n.vor were r r.-r.ber of tho Roich
Bose arch council; is that right?

A Yus, that is right,

3 "id you aver attccpt to become a nesbar?

A 1 spoke to ?iald karshal Keitel about that whan tho Roich Re¬
search Council was created. I asked hie whether it 'ould not be right
th. uohraacht was represented there. Ho at that tins was of tho sane
oainion and made that application. Ho repeated it at a later date, tut
th. application r~-3 ra^oct-d. Th reason was given th th- individual

ox i xj rt departments were all covered by experts, that Field Marshal Keitel

3020


13 ?ob U7-A-Jf-22-2-H^T..a (FJC)

Court I

-a a noabor of tbo Prosidial Council, and that, in addition, tho
President reserved tho right "honour any basic question gang .up trhich
particularly concerned ailitary awdiciw to call upon tho $S

Hd'jn~cht Hylicnl Sorrico in such a case and uso his advic:. That,

fcoir.ver, never happon-.d.

q OoBoral, I think that is a voxy clear picture of ho* thJso mem¬
bers of the .Reich Research Council operated. They vare representatives

X

of tho other medical services, T.-crun'i they?

A I person* lly?

q -Tho noabors of tho Reich Reeo rch Council wore appointod to the
Reich Research Council in a sort of representative capacity for socw
other nodical agencies, such -s tho Airy Lodical lnsp.ctor-.to, weren't

they?

A There was no representativo. The An*r Hedioal Sorrico had no
representative on tho Rich Rose rch Council.

Q ffho res Schroiber? .

A Schreibor ms a nodical officer who had tho export doprrtnont —
I should not o-ll it a dopartrwntj he was a plenipotentiary for tho .
combatting of opid«ics. That was o task which had nothing to do rfith
his position as nodic-1 officer. In this position he bad no relation
to do whatsoever and was not dopondjnt upon bj or the trsy.

Q Toll, now, Gonoral, do you want to go back, then and chango
that unfortunate werd that you used oeraent aco when you said you
xrgod your appointment of th- Prosidi-l Council of tho Reich Research
Council on th. ground that you -.rould then b. tho representative of the
“ohrsacht? Isn't that rrhat you said?

A Xcs. Schruifcor was not a repr-santativo of the -ohrmacht.
Schroibor entered the Council as an expert on the very spaci'l field
of hygiene. I certainly did not fit into any position as a plenipo¬
tentiary or in n expert department. I ~b only interested in seeing
to it th t if s or. a thing like that ras created that the Iodic?! Service
1 ould bo represent _d?


3021


13 Fob l7-k-22-y^T-^m (?«)
Court I


A ^ o 4A ban w~ Mi f ^presentation, « « <£& > h ?


Ciso.

Q AKlpu want the Corn* to believe Schroibcr worked in the Roich
Roso-.rch Council with his loft hand and in the -my Nodical Inspectorate
uith his right hand and that th. ono did not know what tho othor was

doingi is that right? ^

A I would not like to load you to believe tint. The first part

is a fact. Whatever happened in too second part, nanaly, >tho knowledge

of tlio right or tho loft hand — a nan cannot cut fciasolf into two

ports, but sene personalities oan koop thoso two things apart quite

ruU. ? or Schroiber this no doubt noant n recognition of his efforts

0

38 rn export, being incorporated into tho* Roich Research Council ns a
roprosontr.tivo for tho coobatting of opidor.ics. Ho emphasized that,
r.d h. folt Masolf rather elovatod tl«rough his now position.

q koll, now, wasn't Schroibcr, ao a natter of fact, tho roprosen-
tativo for tho Amy U*licrl Inspoctorato on too *eich Keso-rch Council?


A No.

q Did Cchreibor not report to you concerning his activitios ao a
Q«:.;bor of the Roich Rosoarch Council?


A 2 to.

Q How did it cooj about that Schroib-r was appointed to inborn
ship on the Roich Re search Council? Did you rooonoond hla?

A No. Schroibor one day cane to sae, very nuch ploasod with hie-
solf, and ho told a; that ho had received o request to tako over this
position. Bo asked whether he would have to infont his chi..- first,
sfld in reply I told hia that I authorized him tc accept this position
in tho Roich Research Council -nd that, if n.cossary, 1 vould holp him
in his n.:dical sphere if it should cocaa about that he could not quite

- nasu his work. *tet is what happened.

Q Didn't you exploit his work In the Reich Research Council which ho

p-rfonwd them? hasn't he really doing tho s=» work in tho Raich Ro-
3- arch Council that h. was doing -s -n officer La the Artsy liodioal xn-

-3022-


sp.ctoratc?


13 ?eb l» 7 -A-J« 2 -<*-fiayne 8 (FJC)

Court I

A I received no insist whatsoever into his assisrxants or hia
tasks during the tire that Schreibor was in the Raich Research Council.

Q Is it not a fact that the kray Medical Inspectorate or some
other appropriate arny nodical agency represented officer associated
with the a ray for aeobershlp in the Reich Research Council as their

representative?

k I don't know that.

3 Did you or any agancy subordinate to you ever reco'.ve reports
on scientific research froc the Reich Resoarch Council?

A According to ay fmoeiladge, no.

Q How rere the results achieved by the Reich Research Council
applied in a practical nanner in the nodical field if you did not re-
eeive any reports?

A I don't know whether Schrcibcr had an;* possibility or used
ary possibility of corounicsting directly with the hygienist and thoro-
by recoived soce rotor LI, or whether ho used the natoriol which ho
recoived as cor.* ar.der of tho scientific ~oup, I cannot say. At any
rate, no authority, no assigmonts, cz.ec fron no officially.

} .ell, do you want this Tribunal to believe th>.t the Reich Re¬
search Council insofar os it investigated nodical and scientific preto-

e

less was working in sane sort of a vacuuc and that tho results they'
achieved did not cone to anybody'3 attention? After all, thoy wore not
of any use to tho Reich Research Council itself.

A Well, 1 don't know how fer tho Reich Resoarch Council pro¬
gressed with its intended work. There were aany institutions which
were thrown up, but you never heard anything further from then. I
can only say that I personally received nothing; nothing caoe through
wy hands which iapressed c" in any -y, nd I an referring to any portio-
ui-r point or files regarding toe nodical research which was sent by
the Reich Research Council to ne. I don't know whether the Council had

or any othor such channel through


a special organisation or a newspaper

3023


13 Feb U7-A-Jr-22-l«?ayr.e* (F*3§)
Court I


•Mob this agency could publish Its roty but I don't render anything
like that.


3023 A


15 ?o- -5 7 .-FJC -23 -l-!&i;nor3 tc- i r.

Co*irt !Jc. 1

I -*cii;v, then ths Schroibor liia't rpond nucb tlno on his work with
tho Hitch E«so*r«h Council, sinco thoy didn't pr^luco anythin^ thct you
knew anythin abcut?

Schroibor was very industrious. Vhothor any rosults woro nohloved,

I cannot say, If thoy .ust have re for rod to axyorionces which he nrotiously
rnthorol in tho at. y llodicol Sorvlco, or sccr» sun^orizinr, iafometien about
uilltary afti civilian er.yorioncos. At tho o-raont I cannot rocolloct any
specific ca-o. A

* Nc», wasn't Schroi'or, as e practical riattor, subordinated to you in
all his official activltos, incladin. rhatovor ho did within tho fra-owerk
of tho notch RosorxeL C xjrxll?

For Mr acti~it" ir. the noich Rosoarch Crur.cll, as I roroatodly doclarod
hero, Schroi' >r was crrviotoly indoyorvlar.t of no and tho Hohrracht.

' Su^rcso you loci iou that Cutroit would be ::oro usoful tc tho Any on
tho Rolch Research C'a:ncil than Schroibor; couldn't you have subatitutol
>:tnolt for Cchroilor?

A 111 .

■

o How lid Schroibor divido hit ti-u, with rosvoot to Mr. work on tho
Bolch Rooiarch Z uncil and as an offlcor in tho Ary liolieal Ins; octorato?

I cannot ray that. Schroibor was no Ion .or In tho Ar:y Modi cal In-
i.ootorato, whoa ho oatoroi tho Rolch Rosoorcl; Council, and how ho divide! hlo
ti n a.- a quosti.-n that ho had to docldo with hlo caranlor, who woo hlo

Oi~ori *r.

r . Cunoral, I want to h-nl you Doca-ar.t Vi. JJO-1-590; ay bo vo err. riot a
littlo ’ it '-•jttor Hoc about what tho so follows it the r.olch r.oso-rch C u-.cil
frr.. tho any — hew thoy woro appointed and who thoy woro ro.rosonti&yt

:a. ::c HAHST: I Cffor this as lYesocution Uhl' it Ho. -550, for ldontifi-

Wlcn.

(c^ntisuin ) Conoral, rill ye-., road aloud thio lottor fra. Frern to

“--rit: , da to'. 9 Soytar.bor 19-527

”'25. "Cn 20 Au ust 19-52, I ortnod 52 -ontlonon thr u.Jh Azny OrInar.co

zn of thj Roich ?.03oarch C-mncil. in tho field of aranont.

":o'c. the further any 'ranchos, I havo tc yrcyoso:

302 *


13 Feb li7-A-PJC-23-2-Sa|»o«»ieia
Court I

• d) presiding Council. Jiinsfi Sessgtax^ of Slain Cpoli and
Processor Brandt are ner.bers of the presiding council, it seems to
follow to call the Chief of *he Kedical Service of the Anny-Ger.eral-
Oborstabsarat Prof. Dr. Bandlooor - also into the presiding council,
in compliance with the decreo of the Fuehrer concerning the lodicnl
and Health Service, dated 28 July 19U2 (Reich - Law - Publication07/h2).

"(2) Reich Research Council. It ssc-as to me to be necessary to
adopt the natter 'killtor/ l^dicino' after (e) Luftraffe’es a special
fiold of research for tho consulting board of aanagora.

"I requost to call Oborstarzt Dr. Schreibor, Chief of dop rtnent
*th tho Amy !M!«1 Xnspoctorat., e. . m»bor of u» Roooorch Cornell

in the field of :ilit r/ Modicino.

"I assure that if necessity should nriso, individu.il experts in
social fiolde, for instance, veterinary service, protection against
opidanics w* poison gas, nutritional chemistry, Textiles could be
assigned to tho Reich Research Council without giving a nominal quota¬
tion at tho pros-nt.

"(3) Consulting board of manf-fora. I roquost to ©all Profasoor
Dr. Loos fron tho Toctaieol ColloEO *» Eorlin, ,» an *pert for tho Amy
Into tho consul tine boon! of aonagors. If tho consulting board of Pro¬
fessor Loos should door It nscosscr/ to how, an Amy Offioor osslsnod,

I shill note suggestions." Signed "Front.”

q Did you confer with Frcre about the nppointaont of those aim

to the Roich Rosoarcli Council?

A In sy opinion, discussions of that question -.rent through Xoitol,
ti*n to tho Chief of General lohmacht Office, Roinecko, who was exactly
informed -bout that matter, -'hothor it was from there transferred to
From, I cannot judjo. From had nothing to do with no as Chief of
Tohroccfat ilodicnl Services. He only had something to do with no in ny ^
capacity as Axay medical Inspectorate. The Chief of the ^ohrmcht ilodi-
cal Sorvicos ns tied to tho OKS, which was. tiad to the higher agency.

I have said before that 1 havo discussed this question with Keitel and


13 Fob L7-A-?j >23-3- Kuprerst cic

Court I


u it » reject, x =--J= »««* «* W. »■ ■«« thot

orls i M t»d froa fctt* or 3oi»,^a. K—  ■*“ «
lay I say soeothing olso? In addition.


3025 a


13 Feb li7-d-S2E-23->Suppar»tein (FJC)
Court I


it «y, hom, .t to top. "0,-ier A—-t *  13

a* tot 1. <H, aatoly, • jow-I «—» Office. 1 thia* to 3 ito-
tlor. naa tot tor cauBod to* to =*» this application, rator than
* to « * it toasolTOS, M I thto «auld to. boon to too

correct wn> of delin': vith it.

q wm, Ganorol, sonant to Court to boliova tot toytppolntod
to» subordinate. or you to to Role* Eoaoaroh mi«M* —
la* you about It or atone you your V.em In to *»ttor?

1 -ath .0- ■aubardlnato." you arobtbly naan Sohroibor, don't you?

It says hora, -bout Schra!,ar, tot to r. .ur^tod a. nonbor for the
fiold of BilitJry aodicln-.

Q Very roll, do you ton to .V rt MM.X, «• "

roprosontod or. the Roich Boscoroh Co well?

K Military Uodlcliw wsa not rjjrtaontcd .-t all.- 1-tar. , 0 '™
coroly rooponalblo for the spcciM Mi of co-bat of cpiuomics.

q X>b asking you again, did r.<« or Xoitol or Roinocko or any one
of thorn Mk you your opinion bafor. Sohroibor on. rooounor.dod for appoint-

oont to the Roich Rosoareh lo’acil7

A I cannot wy that. now. Tint ra la. Suptobor 1«. H 1.
roaUy improbably tot a nodical offioor la, ny ofrioo vould havo boon

disposed of -.rithout ny knowHdgo.

q I ahouli thin* » too. K<n,, do you want tho Tribunal to bollovo
that Ooreral Fro* and your.aU, in bavins Schrolbar -.^olntod to bn
Solch Potorch Couns-1, wart abdicating control ever M», and thoroby
loaing hi. sorvico to to extent that ho « active In to Reich Roaoaroh

Council?

A In tot connection I havo to .ay tot thoao .-<L-.tion.hip. a,
toy can ha =,on ton thin decent a* couplotoly dUforont ton thu.o
,.«ah actually can.- Into i«arao .ban Sohroibor actually entered to
Reich Roaoareh Co«oU to aaniatto. of to ~ht. Hero ha

*» auppoaod to raproaant tho Hold cl Alitor/ Sodlclno and tot 1.


13 Fob U7-A-SB2-23-3-S-?7 fcrst - in {?&

Court I

^thtas entirely UM, «» «« iS *“

^ aodicol Inspector or it you Uta. the ».ltf o£ the IMlffA Scorico,

but the field of *


13 F ob U7-A^*-23^-K^?or8toln (FJC)

Court I

-.-ork which actually was assigned to hir later was no longer a certain
soctor frer. the ailitary field, nsaoly, the military aediccl sorvico,
hut that was an all-cocprising field of tho combat of ooideaics. Those
are two entirely different fields, and, in this latter field, ho had
no connections with us whatsoever. I don't say "to ao" but I say "to us."

A

If, on the ot'.^r hand, he had cone to tho Poich Research Council as a
.•Hitary nedicin- nan, if - nay say, then tha thing would h~vo boon
ontiroly different.

Q Did ho, in fact, go there first ao a ailitary nan, rs you put
it?

A No; nothin; over cano o. his suggestion, as of tho intention
that tho Chiof of tta .ohmacht ’odical Sorvico is doarnded horo bo
included in the records.

Q ..oil, wo undoratand that you didn't succood in your doslro to
bo appointed to tho prosiding council, but it doesn't follow that Schroi-
bn* was not appointed after this latter n swr.t and I sutedt to you that
h.- was, in fact.

A That is an error for no further application was nade, coming
fror us, that is tho Tohntachfc, rvoly, that Schreitor w.*s to bo lncludod
in the Reich Research Cornell, trough wlPt channels this cum about I
can't so;*, but, at any rate, it v s not through ailitary ohannols.

Q ‘Toll, *1v-n did *>chroibor b;co=a a nanbar af tr.a Reich Research
Council?

A Ihj ohango of the Reich Research Council taok pl'co about tho
end of 1?U2, but I third: 1 heard h,;v that in 1?U3, thj Reich Research
Council reactivated itself in 1SU3 ir. nnr fona but I'n not quito sure
whathar that's correct.


3027


13 Fob U7-FjC-2!->I>s*-r

Court I


5 0 moral, you she on «*SlU -0=0>7 on sooa points and conpl.-to
l,o-= of nanory on others. K>r you insist =t groat long* that Sohroibor
m not appointed to the cl(> Hcsosrck Council on tho b-sis of this
lottor -.-hid, I have Just out before you. lot you cannot toll no -•bon
M bco-sue s nanbor of tho «oich Research Council.

i I csnnot 21.0 you tho enact dotes. 1 -.ss'soo it ms in the
year 1*3. I only tar that on. day duo h_ nos in Berlin ho c-no to
v roes end told no that ho received thnt request. 1 cs^uno that ny

ChioT of Stiff, ufco rill appear hoi. os . '•» * ««

sphoro of nork to do, could toll you . little nor. -bout this .Ubjoot

.-.id probably glvo you non. exact dotes. I csnnot do tint.

5 And this letter does not indies to to you that tho tray had
conploto control cor the ro.-DV.tion of its any officer, in tin Solch
.Toaoorch Council?

A In th. first letter it says — fro. the further ronark "bronchos"

I .eve to on,™,. .... It say. I he. to .... I banco that .one request
x ., „de - that soswbody redo a request; than there is a nan rationed
a, coning free a technical high school. I can only iuaglna that thoro
. , Mrt of a request and'that this res tho reply rith roforonco

to the 80 officers that aro nentionod boro.

a Lot us pcss on, Oonoral. lour attorney asked you vhethor or
net you over gained any infection concerning tho fnoosing uxporiiaonts
carried cut by tarcknr, Kolxloohnor rnd dink,. 6. yea deny that you
over rocoivod SowulodiN on that erttar?

A I snid no.

q An a result of th- Hasten, Crnfiign w»H. you very nuoh inter-

isUd in "Cold* ?robL-=3?

A *os.

q isn't that vhy you sent array offioors to the luftraffa Confarenco
in October 15-2?

A Of course tho interest in cold problna ™ of an inportant nature.

I do not knee =ho assignee th». Fro. Hay until th. and of October

3025


13 Feb UT-A-EBS-Zii-Z-Icsscr (?JC)

Court I

I was with 'aadquartors ir. tfco Ukraine and I balijVu that the chief
probably telephoned = , other or how many people re should send, and
be nay have nado sono proposal, ar.d I think I rouid have told hia on
that occasion B Yos, I an in fifil ncrocacnt. Send somebody there.” It
ia quite a aattor of coixso that wo send soma of the peopl- who knew
son.thing shout cold because thoy wore intuxvabed in it.

Q moII, having sent then, you then iandlatoly lost intorort in
the problem, 1 suppose?

X

A !.'o, I did not lose interest. At some period of tioo somebody
probably reported to no whether sonething particular had happonod or
rrhethor there woro any particular results or not, "h*t could be oxploltod
by us. But at that tieo it was not .Mentioned that anything in partic¬
ular had occurred, nor was it said that any particular revolutionary
results were achieved. At any rate, - cannot recollect anything like
.. t to have happonod. I should merely like to point out thet my inter¬
ests in cold problems, that is theso sphere problems, that is tha co-
callod earth-bound cold, that is, .oraal height or as it referred to
soldiers in mountain troops. That was something that was discusnod with
us during various mootings, at first during 19U2, something that wan
discussed to a great extent and vory exact directives wore contained
in these reports of theso meetings. You will find them in 19l*2 #nd you
vi 11 find then in 19U3. Haturolly wo wore interested in oold problem
and it is quite a matter of course that whor.over we v;oro invited by the
Luftwaffe '. :t -..-a would send our experts there and this is something that
is one everywhere, not only in t Aray and in the fiold of medicine,

’ut lr, technical fiolds as well.


3029


13 Fab U7-*-J?-2li-la-I«sssr (FJC)

Court I

Q sell, I thought that ras probably correct, -cnoral; r.o'.i I
want to put it to you that Kolzoefaner had cade a very recarkablo dis¬
covery ar.4 one which - ar sum ca^-e to your attention. Holzloehner and
Rascher had round out that this passive warm bath was an extrecely effcc-
tvo vray of reviving persons fror. shook duo to long exposure to cold, a
treatment which had been first discovered by a Russian in the 19th
century but had beer, forgotten so:.choc. Hasn't this a natter r«*rk-
cble enough so that Schreiber -ho was at this cseting, oY one of the
-any other ore;’ doctors rfco veje dorm there, .rould perhaps call to your
attention, after tho extru io cold you lad suffered in Russia the previous
rintor?

A 1 said already beforo that at all tiaaiwo voro interested In '
cold problaas and as you say, very correctly cainly because of this
torriblo Trintor of 19U1 and 19U2, We already Ir.or boforo that and V.aro
ora regulations up to the tn*r and porhaps during tho first war, no.nely
that people '•••ho wore froaon 3hould not bo renraraod vory quickly, Evon
beforo that vo included in our regulations that or.o should concentrate
on ltr.fanaing onri cortain fores of rcr/arcing voro doacribod. If ve arrcy
people Mho Umw frontal territory and Russia, WO not so impressed »y
this irarn bath, as you nontionod it, as you say think v;o wo, it is
probably for tho reason that the ontiro Eastern Front Just had no hot
baths at thoir disposal and that plays quite s big role regarding tho
inprossio:. :ny nr* invention cay hovo taado on us.

Q -oil, rxrr, jo rural, lot aa put it to you this ray. *>id you
r.a’:o any changes ir. tho basic dir ;tive3 concerning the manning aftor
stuck fron exposure to cold afte- this Uiftrraffe Conferonco or aftor tho
cor.foror.ee in Docor.ber 19L27

A If one would look through the reports of tho neotings ar.d the
ir stlvoa it is quito possible that saa place, 2 can't tell you exactly
r although I roed th± , saws thing is a-id a * -ara or :»t baths in
regard to freezing- You yourself brought to our knowledge, through =
doc-rvar.t, that in Docccbar 19U2 Bolxloeteor spoke about his rewarding
questions during a coating. -3030-


13 Fab l~-L- j: -2Ji-2a-Lossor (FJC)
Court I


h' held* That was reported to 300 or U00 goct l o a ar. who transferred that
information to the front end I -a sure that later or. new directives
contained th.- weir: bath too.

i I an auro it did, too. General, That is tho roason I nskod
you bocausa I t^LrJc that thera is no doubt that groat importance was
attached to the results of this oxperirint ir. ^acheu b7 Raschor, Holz-
loohnor r-nd Pinto. I no;.* want to ask if you didn't actually hear Holalooh-
nor sneak In Ooconbar 19h2 Qt th masting or consulting physicians at
tho Military Lo Heal Acedesy?

A I cannot recollect that and must say once noro that is 3or.o-
thing that ros dona within tlw various expert branches. I an euro you
will 80 ^ that those expert brenc’.os doalt with thoeo suggestions th*n-

solvos.

e

< ..'oil, thon, to . it it to you, Gonoral, this soooch by Hole looh¬
nor is roportod in our Dociront Jr 722 , Prosecution exhibit U35* and it
goes or. you taro a vary short synopsis hero of his raport but ha does
rivo clinical observation in cases of death* resulting fron cold and I
find that you nado sooo consents at this cold aossion on page 51 of tho
ori ,inal Report. It roads:

•liandlosor stresses th- extraordinary inportanco of education -'Iso
in combatting cold offsets and 'ppccls to all nodical officers, in their
capacity as loaders of th. health •service, to sao it that through over
repeated explanations each individual is taught to observe tho nocossary
proeaution&ry measuR^s."

A Lay I ask you i thorp it is stated that i3 in refor-nco to tho
lecture by Holzloohnor? It soema to ba within tho framework of tho
cold problem.

Q Gonoral, I rill put tho Goman tc you so that you can soo for
-ourself. General, let us rc-d th. little suscary of the speech by
Holzloohncr because the Tribunal doas not have this docunoni before it.

-t reads:

"Stebserst Professor Holslcahnar:

"Prevention 'nd Treatment of Freezing.

' 3031


13 Fob I.7-»--J?-2li“2c-lcs3or (FJC)
Court I


In case of frooains in vntor of a tonocraturo be lor- 150 bio lo gical,
countcr-aca auroa aro practically in affective, whothor in the caso of
huaan boinga or -.ninela. H«an being* aucctnb to reflectory rigidity.


13 ?cb h7-A-JF-2i*-3a-Lo8sor (FJC)
Court I


increase or blood sugar, and acidosis, at an oarlior stago and to a
groafcor extent than animals. At a rectal toeporaturo of bo low 30°
undor such conditions of distress at sea auricular flutter regularly
sots in; at under 26 ° hoart-failuro froquontly occurs in human boings.
(Oroz^-oxjrtion dua to unequal distribution of blood, incrcasad rosistanco
rnd increased viscosity). Troatoant with drugs is scnsoloas and^as r.o
effect, -n tho ca30 of hisaar.-baings bast results are also achiovod with
hot baths. Tho foam-suit w s developed as a prophylaxis sgninst freezing
in water bolow 15°."

I'cr:, General after th-.t little axamarj of tho talk by Holzloohnor
thjro tjoxxj several other lectures on freezing problems rnd then at tho
end .to have the gentleman »ho wide sor. coszaonts on thoso locturoa, wo
find "rrong them Srocor, Ifr. Hippko, the am who comissionod thoso ax-
porinente, and Jarisch and 3uochnor. Her .: I want to ask you if this docu-
rent rofroshes your rocolloction ao that you can toll us whether or not
you hoed this report by Holzloohnor.


3032


13 'ob U7-^-?jC-25-l-iicoh2n
Court I

A -os, after reading what I have in my hand, now it is cuito
possible that I listened to this locturo. At tho saae tiro, it is a
proof that I hivo not as ^jod memory as you assured, because I already
had this Docieont in ny hands once before hero in Ihirnberg; you onco
govo it to ca and I forgot about it.

Q "or., did Holzloohnor dcscribo clinical ob3arvtions in^h.*t death
resulting from cold hinan beings in thi3 locturo which you hoard?

A I c.-nnot toll you that. x

Q Does it not say so in your own report hor ?

A It says hero that Holzloe’mcr bolongod to tho Luftvaffo and
as far os I •..-as inforrod lat r, Holzloohnor had gainod large experiences
fron his acrvico at t!» Atlantic Coast. I an suro that iras oo no thing that
•.a ftontlonod during his lecture. Ho had on oaorgcncy sea station nonr
tho Atlantic Coast and near that thoro ms a hospital whore ho tro"tud
those frozon pcoplo who had boon rescued fron tho soa. Thoro was no
03080 to suspect anything special bohind this.

Q . .ns it apparent to you that ha carriod out oxporiraonts on human
beings?

A Ko.

Q ^oll. General, kj hnvo hoard soew testimony horo about tho talk
Holzlo-hnor g-.vo In -'umberg t to months before this and as 1 rocall, thoro
was acre indignation in this mooting in October, 19U2, bccau3o all thoso
gentlccen nolizcd what had happened; aro you tolling na that no rumor
of this soaped up fros Uumbarg to Berlin in two months, so whon tho
3 ar t o nan gave the sane talk, you gcntlaaon wore in coaplato ignorance
about tho fact that those axp:riaonts had been carriod out on living
hiraar. beings in a concentration escp?

A How far any discussions or ary particular impressions were noted
la "urr.berg, I cannot say. At any rate, I nover hoard anything about


13 ?cb l7--Sy-25-2-Moahan (?JC)

Court I

any discussions or any ckscline. I could irall iaagino that if I would
hold ; lecture anynhoro and if afterward I gained the inprossion that

tfcora was sor.,- kind of unclarification, or sone one night call too

•

nuch attention, -.nd if Wo aonths Tatar, I was holding the soao lecture
-.c another placo, I would naturally chango ay locturo and I would drat*
ay conclusions fron what I had loomed previously. I an sure that this
vail night have boon the casa horo. At any reto after reading this
oxcorpt, if a fov pages aro aissing horo and if scoobody d^os not look
t tho pagOB oxcctly, ho oust assure that (bo nan noted dorm horo as
Handloaor spoke imodiatoly after tho locturo of Holzloohnor. X boliovo
that tho roport of the rooting itsolf lill show you that botr:o..n tho
lecture of Holzloohnor and tho discussion, there wore c for othor locturcs
and you -ill havo to adnit that considering tho fact th -1 wo wore npprooch-
In-i t. inter again, because this rooting took plac; in Docoabcr 1?U2, my
ruaarka did not r .for so nuch to Profossor Holzloohnor's locturo, but it
wm corely a r joinder that wo it nfced to do everything and in that way
.*nr.te<l to concantrato our entiro interest to tho front whoro froozlng
took pi co in order to help our soldior3. That is all it noons to say.


■

3C>3h


13 ?ob ii7— jC-2>-3—-chan
Court I

Q I supposo tho Tribunal wishes to adjourn at this point, i
night say it is not tho dosire of the Prosecution to hanper oithor tho
Defendant Handlosor or Dr. lijlto, his counsol, in th- continued prepar¬
ation of their cos-. In view of tho feet that ro ara nor; .adjournin':

.'or ‘ period of four days, I would bo rilling to porait Dr. Nolto to
confer with his client, if Dr. *^olto will st to for the record th l ho
rill in no aonnor, shape or forr. discuss with his client tho setters
about rhich .. has rlr.sdy boon interrogat-d, or ir. ay '~V co eh hie on
sub Joe.: which cou up. I don't near. b - that to bar hin fron discuss¬
ing • ny of the subject, which I rd.ll interrogate hin about, that is typhus
or -nything lik. that, but if ho wants to iicouss with Dr. Bandlosor tho
question of aor.e witnesses, further affidavits or matters of that charac¬
ter, 1 i.ill b. lliir..; to lot him do it on tho basis of th. understanding
that ho will not ir. any r-y influcnco the vritnoss.

V.'Z rRJS2)2:.7: The Tribunal inquires of counsel "or D-fondant
Kandloocr whether he doces it important ao consult with his client
during those d ,*s of recess, th.- Tribtr.nl stating tint if he does fool
th* th-t is important, tho Tribunal *111 consent relying upon Dr. holto
ts confom with thoso principlos of profession-1 ethics to rhich ho
should confirm rr.djr the circa st t.c.3.

DP.. :~ZL7Z: Yx. President, 1 Monk *-r. dcH'noy very kindly for
hie suggestion "nd I thank you for the confidence r hich you place


13 -’eb L7-A-FJC-2$-j ; fooh an
Court I


ip. to and I cm assure you that I shall caaply with the professional
ethics of our profession and I shall only ipcak to ny client about
questions, which have nothing to do with the complex of questions that
r-ro the subject of cross-oxaainetion.

TKZ FltSSIDEIfT: The counsol for Defendant Hendlosor nay talk 'dth
his witness during the rocoss.

A

The Tribunal nail bo in rocoss until 9:30 o'clock Tuosday morning.

%

(Tho Tribunal recessed at 1652 hours.)


16 Pob. U 7—; .IS—l-i-5lckley
C-urt )Io* 1


Official Transcript of the .easi-lean !tllitary
Tribunal in the nattar of the Unite! States
of -verier., ar.ainst Xarl 5rundt, ot al,
defendants, sittin. at Hardier*, Germany, on
13 February 191*7, 0930-1630, Justice Seals presiding.

THE 1 iJSH.it Persons in the Court Boon will please find thoir seats.

The Honorable, the Ju of Military Tribunal 1,

Military Tribunal 1 is new in session. Oo! save the United States ol
.jaerica and this honorable Tribunal.

Ttiero will bo order in the Court.

THE PHBSIIEHTi !x. Marshal* have you ascortainu ' tho dofondonts
ore rll in C jurt?

THE ’..RSH.-Lt May it please your Honors, aU defendants uro present


ir. tho Court Roca.

THE I.TESIDBHT* The Secretary Ooneral will note for tho record tho

prosor.co of all the defendants in Court.

Couno-il aay procoed with t^ cress uxaninaticn of tho witness.

It;. Ho&JCI* it plenso tho Court.

SIEGFRIED HeKDiJlS-l - #ino'
ca>SS ~X. TIUTI.iS (Continued)


-r . C tMTt

q r^n-ral, lan't the utilicrtion ! .ct.rlal and personnel In
tho field f «.««* r^-rch a c-v m |.rS*» * «H branches -f the ~>chr-
3 AMf i will report tho . sUon, on rol. Isn't tho utUinati n of
vxtorlrl on' pert-mul in Ww field ,f sedical research a comma prolix
of -11 br nch-s ef tho obrrwcht, requlrin a c?or’lnut..’ and planned
Lr.y’ti.n?

.. The -ywsti-n nlv^r o nfr nto d -so.


*hot-~r it confronted y u r not, wasn't the utillsnti
in t ik. ii-li cf ’Icul research a c-wa-vn , r -
f the ehraacht?

was Istri'utcd in such a way as ms practicn .1
Institutions an n vr.ci.s; and the Constant r-quirs.-
which they ha’ were settled automatically acearlln t


18 Feb. U7-i'/-i.TD-l-2-51dcloy
Court 1’


th o dmaa* 3 , which I did not have in ny hands.

a Get*rel, ycuOl recall that tbo ?u:hror Decree of July 19U2 vostc
you with Jurisdiction ov^r prohla:.s oonceroin. the utilisation of raptorial
and ; oraonnal* You rvswrd_-jr that?

Yea, it was th. material and personal coot 'irationj and the roaec
for thia «a that at a central v-ffico for reasons of economy tho stronrth
of tho individual branches of tho .ahmaoht was t bo 'is tribute! accc^r in¬
to tho aizo *nd the roquirenonta of the individual branches.

q Tioll, now, GvrurU, wo ur. -stand that; but wo are tryin' to rivo
acno content to those encrai -rds "material" and "personnel"; and I'm
askin- you if tho utilization of aatorinl and personnel ir. tho fiold of no !i
cal risoarch wasn't a co ;an rc';l~r., roquirin c ordination, which foli wi«
in y ur Jurisdiction und-r the oor« cf July 19U2.

i. I car. nly say that in raotico — and tint is tho roost important
this question did not yvjn oo=o up ir. sy-staff and within my field, of c -ap -
tonoo. Kothirv- was over aul -ittod to no with ropard to tha istributlon of
mtorial or pcraonnal where I woui l have had to make a decision because
th.ro wore 'ifferont 'ifficultioo ir. this respect and that is tho neat lap j
tone.

q General, y u'll rnor: r that Ira', part of your spo« eh to the
consul air. physicians nt tho sootla h,l! fra 30 !;ov,-r.bor to 3 Dooonbor 19)
X Yoa.

That was Ducus*nt fo-922, .rcsecution Exhibit 13 $. In that speech.
0 ti. r 1 , ycu said in p“-rt that "it is not a luostion >f narchin sej^r t.-l*-
m. 1 'uattlin .7 tc other, Vat narchin- xurf br.ttlin: must bo -done in unison ft—
tho Wimdn? in nil fields. ,.s result, aa cone, ms tho military eaotv,
•Vhracht nodical service, and with it the chief of tie nodical turviers rt
the Tfehrmcht; case into -oin . .Jet 'nly ir. n-tt rs of r-"somel and aatoid
••von as far as this is pcssi-lo in view of special Ctrl's and special task*
which must be consider©:, but also with tto view to nsdical, scientific u u
cation and raswtrrh, ur ,a4 ir §> • «■*♦• n.. .Hoal s-rvico mat toil .til


be a urdfi-: i on:


15 Pal. h 7-.7D-1~3-Elakl ,y
Court 2fc. 1


A 103.

n Aren't y u sayin thro, G-ii^r-1, that the coordination of scien¬
tific research was ore f y ur jobs ns chief cf the no leal service cf the
Tfehrcacht?

Tos, itvr as infill tto fiidls where this was roruirod and noccss'.i

1 Oonorr.l, i' yiu have any interest in tho treat sont of wcun.’s can?
by fcao cf v-.rieu3 ty ; «3?

A Of ccurso I was interested# A

tl hat research war V>n , to ycur !m wle Ige, on this o.uestior.?

%

A In the Tehrsacht vo --.1 t.ro Soparr.to They wore tho nili-

tary fiol'. ibout the uso cf churdcrd warfare aronts ->n 1 th: ;nc 'lord fiol 1 ft *
th. treat Kin t f injuries sustalrv'. boc.uso of such che-lcal events. ncoor !•
in ly. thcro w^ro tiro separato r.. ulations. Thors w-.a ono regulation which
referred to thj military usoj an’, t ro was ore r.-rulation v;hich roforro.'. to
tho troatmnt. Those war,: tho arsy r .illations Nuubor 395 and a printo I rar-u-
laticn Jhtior 396, That vis th) nodical ro ailati.n. Durln:: tho war it wan
completely ropr- ’ucod on two or throe occasions. I hav. always shown a opeci
interest in this service ro ulatdon# In connection with this tho noat ir\]'W •*
sis was plaoi *r. tho quucticn of th- V.uminv churdcrd warfare aconts, naixd
lost aaj an! as far as I can r • \ r th '‘irst crl! ‘ar, tills was a fi.>l 1
f spooial int -post, ret nly *.rith us tut als? in all ccnxntrios,

q 7!oil.- di ’ you know of any as uxpurirwnts carriod out on hunan

beings?

(W Xos. •Vo hr : a la 1 crater;', an institute in tho sealery .hieh hs l
nlwuy had th-! a3si rsxint and which vns .alsc ivon tho aosi. asont by mo to
try finally to fin’, -a very practionbi) rofhod of tr atn.ntj as wo call (it,
to fiti 1 a lacoutoai nation procoiirv $ nr. 1 this assi nix nt as voiy soalo':sly
aarri A out. It finally rosultsl in tho fact that in th, courso of tho yonr
1?U3 wo f<ur. I an excellent skin i^o.-tard. nation pr co lure# "xporirx nts wure
carried out n aniesds. Then thy wore carried cut on voluntary -fficor
car. "i ’.atos. Thjy W ro a o -deal- students in our illitary no deal ucadoiy. Th.y
ware fttrthom.ro eorri«d out - i rel-M rt. in »1»- r.r=y chemical w.arfarp s^rvis


- 3 - 35 -


18 Fab. l7-iW.TD-l-J-21akley
Court So. 1


school whor* the traicin; took olaoo for the ns protection offices. Tint
ras lccatod at Zolle.

q Did you kajw of arc* -a axpiriaonte carrio out on c< ncontration

casi imatos?

k to.

0 Tou testifie 1 that you kn * nothia. about ..u-ust Kirt«s lost

6XporLaonta? Is that osrreot? ^

i Ho, I -lid nat know anythin about then.


-3039-


C:urt I


18 Feb U7-H - 2-1 - L-JG - Gross

q. x-u robably r-ue^ber Harr Brandt and I dircusaing the exportaants
of Bickerfctch which Brandt described na being carried out on cniiials,

.hosgonj oxaarii.ente, I think* i>o y a know mything about the experi¬
ments of Bickenbach? %

Aw Mo#

Did you have an fiicer by ths n os -t "irth, V.-i-r-t-h, working
jn gaa problems in the -odic.'-l inspectorate* ^

I cannot rcanber tho na^>- .irth at all.

2. Shy I thought y.u .v-r\» calling ..irth here trustify in your

behalf?

a. I hevo not hai called h-re.

■*. "no ncr-i is ..irth.

a. Yus, ..irth. 1 r.ve r. t had -irth c«dlod hero.

4. Mid you d n't know hit:?

a. Of course I know hit. I hav- fcn wn hire f r years. Ho was a
socialist n tho ttlltaxy Medical acodony.

4. That io what I as trying to ,ct at. 18111 yuu toll us whnt ..irth
was and wh ;t ha di- 't

A. ulrth 5. a a student f 'Ivri and -irth was the successor if vunsch
wh bed wrkod m chuidcal warfarv - into fer r.ny ytars and who hod
written books which can bo found my bock st.ro .b-ut chondcal warfare
a ency. .irth * a th_> heed t t - Fhartrx .logical Institute Do artriont
in the kSlitory radical Acadtr-y in whoso Held he duhlt. a ten tr..r
thir s with the s-rvicu rogulnti n *..c 396 which h s been ...entlon-d Nrf r".
Be had -on as3i nod by tgr pred-cuss.r, Dr; u.ildmim, <■ lnpm-vo tfio
doc-.:.train at ten drugs and durin, tho entire ti-c which I held ffico I
have kept or. workin n this ud tl ntx > nt.

.lully ir. y.ur pinion, Jirth would probably be infemod n all
ra re;: xch ir. Gcr vy, wouldn't ha?

a. I hr.ve n with all -eh in Qeraaqp but-1 said th. t

he was head S tho Institute at Borlin and that h- was special consultant


in tho field, that he was sp-cial consultant fr the ohr-..cht, or the
.jay, ir. tho field f chordcal warfare agents.


C.urt I


io F-b U7-! -2-2- LJj * Gr?3S

doll, h« v .s or ( tuj sb auth-rity -n g -s i>rcfclur_-, was ha n t'.

I wculd r. t c_ll hi to- first auth rity but it rnthor is my
pinion that tot. first auth rity v.uii bo his tuach.r, tho »-lI Jen. wn
Frciosscr rluri. •

O uh. 1 t is .irth's fir. t na y u Jen w?

... .v . I assao tot his first nr. o begins with " I think on
ju3 ccasion I ruad «. •irta, but 1 au n t euro. A

Did you icr. w if ..irth ov-r w-rk-d with Bickontich?

X

a. N-, I c um t toil y u th t.

.lirth is too an wh- roc. .n id t; Xarl Brandt exp-riaonta for
too decoctasiinaticn of w-tor poiacr .’ with 1 st, isn't ho?

a. I havu road th ? a-ro fer tn- first tico in too d-cui-nt toich y:u
havu pr-auntod n-ru.

T u.t . .s in D .cuaoiit . 0-1 *t o-evti n jehibit Uh6, f.-r idonti-
•ti.r.. X ■ win r. o-fcor th t cewsnt c ntoined too par irajfc which
r. ;i as fill.Tsi thiru s-ri-s f ox K -rir.-nts w-r- c.irriod ut with

too ■. .oat f too 1 st r too -vhixiatio* j 1 -at, in .cc. rcanco
with au -s‘i n rv.do by 0 or xtt Dr. *irth at to- c.nfuroncu li Dsc^bur
l U» vito .v-ich 0 so r Sr an t.» . .

ut .n c ncontratir. ecu.;: in: -3, w.r-n't tooy 3-nural?

*. I cannot ;iv- you in -i r. at all ib ut that. I do not
ka w -jvtoin* v ut too sussi n, which is nastl :.t, :> t

c-.n I toll y u too raaoctuj f:r it.

o. r ^ it s- . j 'i x . lit lo strand to t no i tiio . flicors

ii. tht «av:y .oiieal Ins.---ct.rato v . \ bo r-c nr«.r. In,. -xj-.riu;. nt® .*ii
r - i-contration ca.i in_tos uni-so h- know that *h»t. ,-rat-tire was approve,
by his su^ri’rs?

1 cr.rv, t Ju *„a if i. Irth asda this suggestion that such

riuwnts bn carrl.xl H n o t/j -.n ttinu c -., p.rs ns. I d*»n't kn w
•nythinT a.i..ut th-t.

4. I -us Juot asfcin. y u if j u uldn't fin- it str ^o that an


C .st I


13 F~ kl-.L - 2-3 - JQ _ Grcaa


*my fficor w old su^.-st r pcrttcivato in uxauriir.ts n co'ncantraticn
ooap iiez'.tus aildss be knaw that bis an* orlor* had n bj-ct: - it.

.. uldnt y u find it atran* if hu did that?

irsfcsa r «irth c* int havu o u licv.d that I w. ulc agree to this
because wo haae nsvor diacuaaad this qoosti n -t any tine.

Q. Did yiu kn.w D_&i*n?

... I know D.hi-^n v,ry alijbtl. . Icinr. -ri>«r bin bucats* in ont»
f ur . ujtin.8 bo gntw a very (P '• lecturo - it epidoaic Jaurvuico. I
ean rwaxjbur that .-n the ccaei.n t - .-Mating which 1 attended whon 1
wwlc-;ajd all the pcoplo attuning. X oetad r.. £ then, " r- aro y u
rldn ilf r.: Outaalt tcld me "That is sWoaarat D.hnon."

I did n t hTa or- pobMoal c atcot with i . ». i car. nly rcoetdber hin
.-caus- hu v/«. an oxfcullunt loetr . ab.ut the Jauntica and ah ut tho
littlu inci-unt with :• xi.it.

4 a I recall y u tastifiot •- t y u kn i b^on'e

ux. -riauhtc in 3 oha-.cncua-n r. c r.contrati r. ca=p inmates, is that c rivet
-v. Xos.

«. y.tt call . . Drealoa c nfoxvnco n Jaundice in 19bU?

«. ..hun I ,-n-. U.u c.-nferutco in 19LU * at-trt, and th .t ia c.n-
tsined in v penin* a.i roaa, thfc I had Iran r era >*

haptctltls acioatlate, r_ .-rdluai *f w rking in U.u .uhrr.^ht r civilian

cur.t^r, .Cfitin in l. fc in r. -r t ivo Uon tho

,. (J rtur.it y i oxchuivu th-ir -urluncws and, ab v u ili, t cent ra f.io
cultures uhich tfcuy hnd i-c vv-r- , t c , 1J»«a t then,

old y u .ttorii t;.vi .'oalva c nfur«nco?

... Xus.

n’t y i .n.w .f tho c .rati n f Ha,<<n ok! l hian in

Strnss ur ?

... r ciid n t isntw anythin- ni at that. 1 kn r. they

in this field. nly knew r.« ti-.u -■ ut it - th t w::a Schrofi?«r pros' -i..

*

var thu sutin 1 kn r t-ia* ir. the c urs. i th- -.etia ; : he ha‘ the Very


C.-art I

18 Fob U7-ii - 2-ii - LJ3 - Or.es

f rtunat-i i-aat su., at that vari-us - rtan^ .;r u|« sh uid bo f raed
: tiw-t at least those n ridr. : r ujj c uld *atohaiue tndr exp^rioncos.

1 board hore fr Ouieeit, fr._ hie t-stir. ny, that is far as * can
r««S>«r that tte rin,; «3 m included ftitrdt and DJaaen and' also
I ta w that ,6; oddly batr-on Ha on and b h=on difficult! os existed,
jhably a Is. in tho confcrunce oi the duinan S ci..ty f r Internal Ajdicim.
(fc tuber 19U3 in Vienna, it wr.o n t the Military c nferorce. F^r this
reason it waa -dtfc;ut cny '-ubt a 3uccoss n the part f Schrei «rao if
r.e succeeded by -wans f this w rkin r up pr ceduro l nxaavu theso
difficultly that axio tod.


-3Cd^-


18 Fcbru.-ry-J4-OJG-3-I-<Carr«i
Ccort :.'c. 1


Q Dc ycu knew xh ether Hetgen zs.l Dchera conducted acpericcnts cn huunn
: jir .38 't Str-.sbeurr?

.. Kc, I do net knev anything rbcut it.

hell, ycu talked to H^-Een '.t tho ue-tin 2 t*t Srealru in 19 UL, didn't

jaut * .

„ 1 have rut underrtacd your question.

q Did you talk to H"-Sen yours. If t thu -oetir.^ in Breslau in 19AA?

» I do r*t bediove th - spoken Kith Kcceon r.t Sroalau? 1 nay

have wolcc=vi his Just like -il th- cthsr yoopl- there, -*t 3«n net quite

. '

certain cf th't either.

Q Didn't ycu r-ceiv. cay r-perta cn Jrundicc r-s- rci:?

I did recuivo reports trout Jaundice frea ry own car.sultriRts »ut net
in eXCeBS of th't.

q Did ycu receive none free. Kar n?

.. Me.

i .ell, Doteer. wrs cn- cf ycur aunordinatco, h. wr.s rttrehed to tho
Jilit-iry -tedicti Ac-d xy. Didn't you ever yui - report freu Dohaco?

.. I have "lr-*dy pr-vieusly ot ted th t Dch.-en one of fifty, sixty
or seventy a-dical officers cf the scientific croup, end I hev« net received
ny report fre;- Dohacn k-c'uae Dchaeii ».-s, first ef rll, aufcordinetod tc the
chief of th- uic l sci aitific Teup -nd then tc tho hn.: f 'ho «cr.duy rnd
vktncvur reverts were su’.-rdttei then they first of ell went cither tc the co:>-
euitent cf th. nodical insp-ct.rrte or the -edicol inspect.r, (this wr.s Cutsc
r tl.-.y went t; ;-y scientific .epartsent in -no a. lied inspectorate, without
V * In? lirwctly inf-rrze: -1 cut it. Gutcult hiasulf has rupcatcdly powriwl 1
r . rind tc r.-j »n . large seal- r’rut the cpidesdc Jrundico. Cf ccurco, thrt
••a hio nrt.T -1 duty bocauao th- prc.Lea played c ;>art- h<v.cv r, your

T--stion if 1 had recoivoa >-»/ repc. - Xroa Drhaon 1 rust answer in the negc

. D. you kr. w cf any Cxy-ri- 1-vino- with .iumdic*?

-

3 •.•11, Cji-rrl, in vl* .f th- testimony cf Gotaeit th t jaunlico t.a
v-iicd prcfclen cf orjor prcccrticns, and in fiarth-r vita-, of his toatiacry


li Febnn. ry-ii-3J&-3-2-K arrem
C.urt Ho. 1


it was n.t ' a-.ricua disease, her dc . 1 ex p l a i n the fact that nc experiment*
*«ro carried cut cn fcarua beings t.c determine whether in fret you had isolat
r. Jaundice vine?

.. I can only explain this through the f.ct that r-scarch was still
way and that .»t the Breslau Conference, v-ith the- utmost variety cf scientl 3
present, on*, cf the scientists still disputed with the ether if this was the
cause at -U. Ion tell you further th: t 1 lid net even know anything a» u*.
the f-.ot, tr. t I r-s never tol , that Gutzeit had carried out an experiment
_n himself. I can explain the fact in the nay thr-t h'J n^t yet succeeded
in fi the virus, There wcr. only assumptions and scet>of the scientists

Relieved they had feu.-., it. H wtvtr, tho feet had not jut boon established,

1 Well, but General, aa 0 rly rs the jiiile ef 19A3 Gr*witx was stating
that it vac neCersary t hotfe adzrl to can virus . -t

f the importance of the pri-l— he;, is it thot n. experiments were carried c
cn human beings?

.. 1 cenn-t tell ycu anythin* r! -t it. Heftov.r, I believe th't Grndtx
opinion was n-.t decisive for :e btco-s., without . ny doubt, he hod handled
scce pro blue .j which Were net rlpo for discussion y.t, while we, in tho *..uhr-
aecht, naintjinei the pcir.t ef vies that on a should be very careful in all

th.Se cccuo.

, General, ycu trv testified th*t ycu ctt-jiJei the O-etinfi of tho con¬
sulting physidnns t the Hit y, . .

/. Yos.

C Ycu have alsc te-tifi.J th/- yau h.ard the report by G/ehnnit in- Kir
eh .r -t the Buetinc- I? th't ri t.t?

.. I have su ted th't it c r. fc« snicei that I attir.iod this confer coco.

r t I Xsai : u if yo" fc *>»■ r ,-rt t.; Celi-.-it -nd MacheT at. t} ia
c.Alng? .

.. i assus-- sc, y^-s.

• • -11, -ie ycu r^ .ed.er whethe. ycu heard it? Did it aeko any ijaprerr
:n you?

.. i:_, I —-i—t re- ■ r that 't - I :u« »• *• i y»« *hfft 1 hr.vu net


16 ? cbruc rj'-ii-D JG->- 3 -Ktr re*

C-urt Sc. 1

sh'-'n "JIT oped cl Interest In these roperta cr that they did not ackv cny
_ci '1 inpreasion because, otherwise, 1 w»Ld bo able tc rcuoab-r then.

Q . ell, v. 3 r,«t it =«de deer i.. this report that they had perfern-d a-

perlacnts cr. concentration cjx inset cs?

Ih =7 :pinion, ra f?r rs I ., it has beer, stated here that prison*
era wh- had boon cenitsn-d to lie ml these »hc hod been perdenod were ccr.cer
od.

Q hell, General, yiu ea» these tcr.ai, these Polish wco-n mhc cane fc-ro
testify, fell sr* to • tl ir icjs war- aifcllstad. Vill ycu tell the Tri’
„h\t yc«- third: cl iut sulfenctldo cxpe;-i~c:.ts ct rt-.vcnabNucck? Dc you think
they »crc ril ri .ht?

.. I c*.n only r-p»- t ' "in that in the lecture cert-inly the subject of
ccncontrnticn ci»p prisoners w-.s n:t concerned. It tea net discussed boettuso
enc cr th. ether -f the words wvoli her- roarinod ir. sy noncry. I m quite
certain thet oq fcaaX t oners sees incus?.. I. 1 fcavo ae-.n the idish wocu

s tto« subsequent result. However
I cannot atrte x-ctly wh’.t u-s d:;i> to thoa mi the ocplnnr.ticn was net lvc
;• Or. Aboccador here. Hu has lvca* a dispwsis » if 1 «*« to tdl :
vtnt I think r.b-ut these xporl^-nt. then I aurt -.sk ycu th-t 1 c r. postpone*
*.i.;s ot t<sait until 1 r.-.vc horri th. /oqplw carried tut the oxporln-nte
-.jid sfco sill 1.scribe he* tfc .y crrri.d then out. 1 dc not knew anythin? rb.e
It .c*u . I cc.'-.ct tr. lecture.

V s it rut cl-tr oven fr.r th. suoner; -f tnis lecture in ycur report
-r this aoiti:.; that th- expuriaontd subjects had b-c=n -rtificdly infoct^
ihcn i »cui: havo t. re ! t. a :v r r k .

Q ;.vll, let's th t. 2*11 have tc read this t. r u, General, • " ‘
a* a t have the Gerssa hors. Shis is Deettamt KC. 92}, Prcs«*ut4pn Exhibit
' /.J 6 . .'.ft.r Gubhorit nivi Ficch.r ;*v, th-dr rojert th<r * 14Ulu *'

sad taan by th- n f ScttrdBa he I th. fallo wln . say: Vs for as 1 pi
, • r tt'snnd schor's ac ri oiti . net qualify*or an ianWieti
' cj ; *rircn with cnicd tixpurlsmU. _s purfcirc^l by .cysulf rnd ethers bec-uj-
ii~tur_ . : vessels di~ir.~• -i l.-r'-r p rta nd prevailed the i-.f-'-


IS Fcfcruiry-H-DJG-j-i-i: arrow
icurt So. 1

■f oaragerally - iainiator-d aulf ini Imi ic . " This fcllcn has already point- :
.ut that th--y tied off soil blocd vtB3-ls in Cothardt's and Fischer's oxpori-
u^nta, hasn't he?

„ L-r-er aaiaculnr parts rcro inciuloJ in this or »crc ruaevud.

~ Ko xcs cn tc says "The «-t.-c cf locally adednistored sulfanilamide,
ftS-_oiclly .f ncn-sclufcle onus, auct not . evcr-catiar.t_d because the c:n 11 -
tlcns of iiffusion arc net sufficient due to peer solubility. -Specially aor-
nsl h s tc be considered in this r spcct." Then h. says: "The pc^r tr: -a
.f infections with ;na ynnereno, s*hi i3 stressed ty the lecturer, coincides
c-xplct-ly vith the fir.iin’.s in rninrl experiment*." Hen, Choral, isn't ho
oayir.j very dearly that they -rtificdly infected these human bein-s with
s .y\n.jruii?


18 Jcr C-.-1-Lc—or

CJirt !k . 1

.. Emt cnrunt bo doductoi fr ' la toxt. Iboy -nly sponk c'ccyt tho fcnd
r-c-jll a f RfV<-ano lrfacil -.y-riy tint d or n't oxrctly «ca<w whnt

'.r. -ocnol /•.rid knows tint -'-.a Infocti -in .rr t hnro boon p-tificinlly
a-osoJ, cm.r. :t doduo , It nly 8t-.tos ..ore i»t ut tbo bnd

r traits f ..msronc Intact I n rn: l.-r * /-no-; „£• . c, •».: v n bnctori olo. in

•

» *

old nvt .Vv r nchoij r;.y cjneijpi --3 in tfcitfc s zo* or c ili fcrvo

> "jiTtnln^ »*« you hn.vo fmat su&oatei.

- GonamI, =y zagliah tronr.Ir.ti n r--v!s »t..o • cr trv oa f iiu'-cti.nr

*.’a :r.3 -jyono." I cna ... c or. u -.o by tint nn<l tint tbr.t tb

i/sturor wne p i::tin<_ ut tbnt tl.-y lr.l tr uMa «,oc .in,. 0 n~. c.-JkJ'ono iafoctic
*

at * ctiur ouncluaiva e a bo drawn?

Tell I cnaiirt 4r.'i tint c nalaal -re.; it boenuso tint la n dlsouer.l-c
fcatwo-U tv; pocola nad -u iwca-n ro.'ora to Me o?..ori—s;.t£ rad 1 dc a t in; v
:p ,. r.t octant tM: c .-nri; . . c r.-oo’.. I a- • - " anoei liet In

r. -r t jaSfiQ tint. I c-a nly «nS t ; : u - rorfl thi* roy.’rt t ,
nftor ororytldi^ I hnvo lo-ri, 1.* I wjro : ro-d It vor vitb ut fcn
nnythda* la prrkiculrx r.bout tbo cv tbon 11 oortnlaSd - •:. • t dr-, a y
pnrtlaulrr nttontl n.

\ AU ri .t, Go - • n« a of thl a

- JP 08 I . u y u. Ir thnt r!-.’

7 o ! 3 Vt'-.t fret r 1 fil- c" - ir, jocn’uia .:rsr r*Ji -no nuat non-
r tbj cirrKsv, * ~.t rvlt: u.- ^50 t 400 pu< plo prjtldpntud r.r.J nil

•. - . ; til -Inna, tKnt Is to *•& nil t tttOA tIOPO opoclnll-

«.i r- ti; i daria, t.uj i^ovuro t 1 nftwP tl . locturo r daring tho intorvnl
r /von lntar : dy n Uoo lood tile ^Ubotl BiittflS P

• till Id nat soon t

i:. r^.or loro. 7.*ro-‘ ro I ii t n. y e.-; ao t p<.- nnv • nri-^

: .v.nti-rti...itl rof-j'i t. f. - r. ojoct.

' ut io-varnl, c-_. dr.» i . i na ;'ro:; */nur ntnta«ont. Oro,

- - thor 4«

• nt ovoryb : aro Juat hryi a: r rasa t ,-bjoct to tboso oxoori o r..-; they

t/.n- it -j nocopto*. . lioy f y ur r^ia-S.-at. ocyorieont on
• . ration c-i.? lottos eo.thoy cn . act;'.!: . b- - r ■ thnt e-. a-

cX’i.l u, cna't y-u?


- b 4"-'-rrC-— 2-L-: r'r

5 ff"* ' r • 1

I Tint report sc-- :.aro that I * bt that t>.o v-ndc =*c acontrati -a crnp"

- •’e.acontraticn crop priss-nors" ssjpo ^oatl'-aod at '*- 11 .

r von- HO 11. I think if tio bed pr v:d huro thee tkoro was -a sbjoction
this Tory iacturo that y u a uli c croniontly he to boor, utsido tho r ~

• . that ti.-a. 2 n I put t ;• u thr.t at this ee:*, nootiiy ia liry 1943 t-s.ro vas
hjocti a by Air dofpnd-r. ?. soj ta 3i.^*s rop.rt Ifpkus ox -oriisjuts aai
a* — v- schraib-r wta c hair.au f tha -o.. sp'ko. Y u oay

;vu waro u.t tboro but . u -lea kava tostifiai cn 5Ma at-a. thr.t y;u hoard
•. . . A
X. I rad a t nly i -_ut it hao nlro-dy ropoetadl? boon atetoi :.oro -ad it
ha* * 1 -' boon flo.n b> tho incus tf-loh naro prooontod hora,M;'-t this we*
t\ caforonco - Ik dif-’.raat : -jcleli-'t cr j'a, *; ’ that tho individual
epoelaLifft rr • a had iaSi-ilual sv.otia^a and tv- it r Li haro boon O'- ijilotol^

l«w»st plnco at tho . .. tine. i hero otetod u.*Sar

at’: a verl u* ooaci as \jtj that I 1 *. r. t attend t‘a. c nforonoo f tho
nioniot Cfrru vuaontk Bohralbor he* n' t told sb

ab t s »3*a ' mtl . boro. Dobhnrdt'o loo-

vo t L .Ilr.co la lar*o eullt.-i-. eftor I bed :lv-n thu zoning »;:©&oh

s j fr-ftow rh f oargory. "too

-.ctari 1 1c 1 h:\_ioai3t aixicialioto hoi: a onforonco by thaioolYor at
U;or pleca. i c-.a l. royoat too ...to that 1 vaa n t jrosont.

•

1 amoral, I e. a t -rocont 1 wru-»t iro i:. tho -blob "rial Utt 1 thirl:
if anythin? ur._r al happen.,: : . than end :vct particularly if -nybidy waa
..illJ «1 1 • tiioro i thi hat :!:■ that I * uld ka~r ah .t i*. up boro twt i

m: ovjr. ; u vj .uld, and 1 a: a~ ia. y u if it is.-'t a bit str-aa-o that '•'hon rp
-rtaat Uhj ^ ro LJ ts u; in a -i-tin^ f an inatituti . f -4.1oh ycu \<ort*
tho o . an-lor, an’. t-Joctc tz what h t.re !' bi u lor, I ark ; u, iar.'t it
:A -i:if rtrr.ro that Schroi l ar r r.v _ no ol-o did .a t a-a: anythin, ta you
a 'it its

.. It .-ay :oi rtranc- : T -:t I c^n nly ro.or.t tho fact noo

r. *\~.t r. t '.y t 1 ‘ .-o u -t thi ra-a nr soro r tho 50 -la that attoalod t
' ■ l v : ot r.r- I - statj an:"' * ’ "Titb ro; r.. . R 05 boeauso I . 11 '

•ar 3i...


-3^.9-


Oolihardt's


1= --::-S7C-4-3-Lo&scr

C art * . 1

" "opo - j military i n j torl :&*saros takes a tho b-jeia
- Ifonilasilo export::onts?

You, noosuro w.3 t-yan; thj c r *.asi S3 thick wore roachoi in tho onl

*A

oro ehoasol 1st dipoctir-s just as t: ..- oro stated, os flsnl c nclusi as whic
ur. n 7 * ~ by all tho . ->!lc-l :_.a wh r.tton’od.
n -'oil. In t^jr rr^Tlo, r.s r result f the oriaonta r GolkarSt, no m
s ileal lafltruoti -3 uoro Issui!, is that rioW

i ' r~. - P. "oro

a’: ut 10 iocturoc an£ . - rj- J.tr r* tho subfkJija-at lioeucsl no wuro auinrris.

. - .rr: f V.._. poforrol t- tha results aohlorol by Gubhnnlt. 'Shat lfr•* tho

aotual roar a f too lfuro.aoo c t at :..o .o ;lo a., ul. ku.v what tho rosuT
varo with ros'r! t t - » ;o nil eh- o^oeinXlvts* That tine not elwn
_ jtU a, ; Jti7o, but vary froquontl: in thor ->rtl>lx.3 tho *uo8tioa ru^int
. that n lor&o nusber f .kysl class utsilo ths c-uutry wo o t bo Given
ola* if/ t^at thj ioal.ra f “.:*-. :./iio 1 sorric- oa‘ tho c aaultihc jhyfliciaao
v,7 o c natostly on! r.t all t -or *r i , t find r - lu'.l?:. t -11 tho oation

still rccnlsrt 3?oa, ir. War t holy all t undo .

* Ooooraly that liakos tdiat wo arc ab ut tho sa - tUa&< Oil tho

. - :* ::olic-i i-.arsctr-to Iro-o isotrustl rx n, 1 -eo -f -a?or t- tho phy.-ici
.. rkir-6 i- flail etnti-.- that in o-.-o coboo f oh ck luo t* n-olrnaoi

I TO t c 11 ,* u eh ull tysa« tho -ntlcnt In tho r 11 --in. :>- ior or..l tho.-
•Itli-.: tho iu-r f treat oat? Di th- irr.y ll-'ic-l Iax-oct-rate lamia t>.t
Ida*. .« iaotpuoti no t r. t?

L Toe. Flrot t all th&y ato t Insfer t»l eoo idly it in ala.

c aforoaoo ft', o. :ibu1U.w phyoioinne.

* i oako’ y u if t . oo I atpucti ,i8 c acoraiai, tho trunt: e:it f wual

p lafluoacol -y tho talk z oobh-x-t an- yiwlvtf*

, . . : n’t a-spo w thoj -or. c*';.-', .'ar t a

r iiz —--r. th-;- chan o! r w-ron't th;y chanKoJ?

.» : - • «41itlm t: tho .-rovi u» r

r.sult was ala -llol—thoso po- -:lts .hich hal to-u achiorol by tho

-Inrjcsi r.


-305C-


Jeb 47-1C-4-4-L>> ? 3or
:cirt r&. i

\ 'oil, prod roll what a: a: led to the instructions which you gave to
field oiical officers on tnatlos infections or rounde?

i To# instructions begin - '.ho following, ith a abort review. There
it-.* about I, 2, , 4, 6-1/2 -la., hero about the osperiuoata which were

;orrl©l out ~J GeCharit ad then fron the nest lecture axe the results of
If on* tides, -hen application, then the 11 deal result*, an. then it states
.o followln. rules aro to a a-ie_ for the praxis. Thorofare what i.aa tool.

oi hoxo not., tha itebo-* t..a; the lerolo^iont of a: inflaiaation oounoi

A

canal causes o:_ the. internal and ortomul cannot he rovontoi by tho

xornal ad ox.oraal application of uulfcuad oa. Chon it statea about tho

X

.fla.-ati'a tho ic. ortar.t part cf tMi that also in this coso of vorninj,
al to to iesuo'i to tho iurgoonn outsllo that tho ox orlaonto hal eh-fl'n that
• .07 couli not aoioly *.o oni cn thoco Ifona-lloa but that they uould ro:alr.
aintain thoir cur iccl troat* art. Th! a a o very ln-portent point


at only In scco oasee they should a‘..‘ eul'm.a Mao.


-3051-


lc Feb-Vp-l-PinabUCfc

OOurt ;■>. 1 .

General, would your orfiSLr.lzr.tion, your staff. sbJco such nd*itionr
:* -.ediol instructions without invest!,• tin precisoly 'fen*, had been done
durln t.:e course of cx-.-.eriuontB upon ocich those now Ine!ructions wo.o
i sod? _h. t's a proto;- important .roblc_, isn't itT

e- That would not be the tosh of uy staff, but it would be tho task
of the specialists, and tne reason for tnis conference and everything thct
h - icon r.owly diaoOYcrol since l ?-3 was th-t sovornl dozen loading ecionti
co. d read and that they cou d consul, about thoso instruct!cu which voro
issued hore. Neither I nor uor-*liy peop-lo of zy rtuff participated dur'.y
t-is conference, but tho procedure was thr. t on the very l.’.t day boforo thir
opting w niabunied, h:o 12 or 1 different specialist groups wmouncod ti
text if wflesv instruct! :uj. *nd i:. t..ia cr< c it w« *o be asked once niro
if thero vut ony furta-r ^iscuosio.-i, and if not, then these inotructi'nn v.
accopted. rhojr vero printed os quickly or r,o slowly ns this co Id bo dono,
cA then tcoy were oent to the front.

.. Veil tto, Gou.r , I take it th.*t these speclnliots group0 lnvcutl-
Cutsd ;..c conditions of tho oxj- rlaonts which vme rooortod on with tyc t
c-ro; ia ih..t rlgr.tT

.. Tes. Unturraly pu will have considered in thi t r socct under whn
-lie 1 foms; thr.t lo, in t-.is case br.ct.ri?lo,;ic-d forns or ourgie 1 forut
. iio 03 -ri. — r.ta .. oon : -Tied out: •• is :o any, now the renelLr. wor.
c-.i-vcd cm be aeon by the cose histories end ...o person who iuio c. rriod
thot out will fxowm tho questions hero w..icn w v ro put to hia, bocauoo r.ftoj
-11, c nuaber of physicirns nro V-* : lv.iys of the s u. opinion.

7~er. various questions were ut.r^d and the;’ v\.ro discussed and we also
.. vo instructions with vrrious t..i.. o that were .ot added end >&oro pooplo
-ere racing wh-.t procedure s~ mid be followod, nd tiu t, re r result of th
.iacuasions wc saw a bi.; ndrantago.

... Sostocic was a -ouber of 12. rurjlc. 1 group, v sr.'t he? Ho >»o
. .•inarilj concerned with this sulf nilfu-ide problem?

.J 1 j." up v_re interested in tee culfo nnni do expcrinjnta ■— robi

... Veil, w-;o r.e a -e-ber of this group of specialists which inv roi


- 3052 -


1£ r<ft-X-3S9-5-a-Jineluc>:
Court 3c. i.


▼cry carefully these reports bocau they were goir£ to issuo nodical
instructions based on those reports, and they wonted to ho sure that their .
in-tructions wrv ri,^it end that the reports were correct: and now I
idr- you v.a Hostock r. her of t..io specialist croup?

— Toe. •

.. l>o you reueuber jyocuaoat vy-Z^J, prosecution Exhibit 283, ''-ich ir
af:id it it of Dr. Din,; telling about hio nee tin,, with Hrugovsky .iad Schroibe
t the liltary S.odicol .icadooy at th-. ond of 19h2 on ,«b bun* odo.r.?

-i. So.

... that is ,ms odo_v? x

... 3 t« edeco is n disc;jjo w.-.ic-; is caus.d by wounds and Injuries,
vuor.ovor a curtain typo if rims, rh ir. this case they are bnctoria, aro
intro dac od into the wound, rue word odo^-. can bo translated into C~r/.::-.,
vlu: certain swollin. , since this diaonso is c..- motorized by ; swoliirv,

ca t tno lu—« tlu> by for^itl ir. of ,71* vhlc.i is caused by those bnotorl
Then it is cr.llod ;pi burn or e ui*\. It it or.o of the ;>ost foarod cor>-
•lic■ ttons which wo c find in th- field kftorir.Jurioo nml the mortality
r .tc >i such eO >1 e Id terrlfyir»;ly -oi«£». rurtaerhcrc, this disoano is v.-r
often ohuraetorlz.d by the fact that tho surgeon lo forcod, In order t- try
to save the life of tho cfflictod person, 1 .e n s to c< rry out very lcr,:o
upat-tims, or perhaps he ar.s to anputnto o lihb frou tho Joint of tho hi;
of ihc nliouldor.

,. That will bo sufficient, I think. Gone ml, how, did you h'.vo a &
edona oerun in Gumrcny?

... 7es.

. Did it over cone to y ur attention th-1 soldiers treated with f,r.o
-dc-a sena. died suddenly after app'-rent re cup. ration?

— Tea. ..a far ae I know this enno froa tho fields of professor hil:
If • ..y success was to be nchioved at all with this ,.i.b 6erun it 2nd t) bo
i*.-n rc. -atedly in v.r; 1 r c do .s, and 8-nobody finally had the idea th:
huso f- tclities V. ic- co-id ..ot -e properly oil inch ed.-h- >rha s be tr
bech to tne ueaol co_.-oor.vuts which were contained in tco sonr..


-3C53-


16 rob-;.-6gS-5-3-gis$bac k :
C -art ^3. 1.


... taia £ac odea.* w? ■ ts to~ic of me of :»ur conferences at the
.ilitnry fcodicil .Lcr-dc-y, was it n't? Didn't you havo r report V cmoulti
aysiclana on tala to-ic «t one of your laotia. 3?

— ky predecessor directed tao fir3t confcronco during the :>rot unr.
5. t v. i.. 1940 . It vat hold by Dr. ifaldnr.nn after th» cr ipoi (l -n in Pol :.(
a been completed and clren’y mo of the i-nin locturoo v s ,-iven about th
, b roblo... Svcr since that ti ~ tao ijportcnco of this problen hno alwny
bucr. discussed vita rc : r.rd to f ;.s odona.

.. Veil, lot's (O back to t. is Sis.; affidavit, Socuacnt ! ? 0-2S7. Pr>-
ecut 1 Zzaiblt 2*3. T3U have ioscribod this r s odora roblo Junt clout
t..e 0 -.e way t-.t Sr. Sic, di-. It roods: "at tao o.-.i of 19 U 2 I too* •> rt
*. a conference ir. tAc ..Hilary Doctors' ac ac.y in 3orlin. “Tao t pic of
iscucs! a vr tao ftclity of . .0 bur:, soru. 0:1 wounded. vitondantB,
J-aer-l Sv. Profeusor Scaroibor. SD ?rl .ndlor S..nor."l Professor jlru.yovoky,
a A-'ic 1 officer w..o v s unknown to _o vao v a n our,:eon, aysolf an ooctlo
le or it fifth Cer.tr Institution ! . Berlin for ?l,-tin, Epldo'.lcn. Mil■ n»
w..... ; a a v, already .wntl-ned... ■ nd fcrarovsk; nvo reports of soldi .rs
v. hid r.eoived . ;.s odc:r. uoru- in ..i h quantities, up to I 5 CO cubic
continetere, and -ours ;.ften/. Jds, fter couple to recup. ration died miAdorl
without any visible reason. «.ru. ovsky ourpeoted that the phonol content
br u. .t cbout tao fated rooult of t.u oor.ooli • t'of the separate inject!
In the presonco of t..w other .rontloaen, i!ru,ovcJ qr cou ended no to trkc pn*t
i out:.cane ic. with paoaol in r. concentration ca p '.rod to doscribo the rosu?
in detail, oir.ee neither I nor ::ru,-ovck> ever nrv n «■ no of death thrcu.ch
.Jionol.»

0, S'.d Schrelbor over tell you anythin.* about that?

... So.

... Scaroibor didn't te.l you very _uea about twytalar. did ho?

„. Schroib^r reported Very nuen to a, rad I ft .v. worked to .ether wit!

~i~ for -any years.

. 3 yj do-s i. pen ho sever told y- about these little disagree
incident r of kiliia. of concent rat i-n era ica. tcc by Dr. Din.-?


lb ?->-:-3ZS-5-4-Eincincj:

3-uri .1.

... I do not know the reasons :ich Schroiher hud for doinr th t. I
also .' i not know to vh-.t extent SchrelToor vus informed*.

.. rid'you know of Keitel'a order ter,t tho Yohrrccht wi to Ivo
3thin, to do witn ox. orir.cats on oiaa bcin-E?

la this for.;, • do not know anythin,: eh oat it in the forn in vh.’rh
it h i. boon ot-ted in o .u lace h-r... I err. only any that thin wr.e ex. *>1
oint of view of t..o ’to hr . o cht red -i.r t perhaps Keitel brou/£t this up one.
tin . t bouc place but I- do not know it in the connection in Miich it i-in
boo:: mentioned hero.

.. Wh-.t do you n_-.. tix.t '■ <n old vi.v of tho VehrsochtT Vd-' t'a rn
lu /lev of tuo Jjs.r-j-c.it T

.. I h/.vo und-rctood you to Bn: th-1 Kelt el hud fltntod th t r.o ox or?
tits should bo c .rriod out on ktt»* bvla o.. bohnlf of cht.

5le.t st'.toaoRt ir conv in * in Docx.eut •.•>1309. Prosooution Ec'ii’ol
325, w..ie. is a ao orru-ix <n a - tin.: letwoon Profosc-r XIlove and Pr>-
fooeor plo..o corner i blolo leal vnrfaro rad proponed oxporihenta or. .'nr/
beings, dated 23 February 19~h. *hlo;a h- • nr ortod that ho h-.d until now
.,.lo no ox-a: ta in tne field of humn uodlolno, 2 h

\

neccoa-ry rad ho plans to take tue_. .. mv institute ur.d v r his control io
bain.-; built boot Pooon 1.. v^icr. bi'la-icnl weapons nro to b_ ntu.’iod tux
touted. ?iold jkira.-l Xeltol bus Ivox the poniiauion to build. Roiciv
fuehror SS and OcneraLarst Frofocsor 3rradt neve osBurod hi:: of vast au;ro
3:' roqucit of Field Xnrehnl Keitel tho ar.ai forcea arc not to have a
r c .onoi'.le share in tnc oxpjriaonts air.ee oxporlaor.r* will nlro be conduo'
on hx .u: tclr-a «• «b»t •» Xtit-i • *-o sr


3C55-


c*


- - - 1 -

... 1


1. Ti.it la ruito ;:sci


• . w :• ’ifcusc. • i: T. rol rc, I cannot


iv: ;*.-u


-


. - • •• c i fct ic tot Koitcl, wh o too t -


, . ti r.


-i:\-3 *.rh ilc . \ aro .i.t


-"•* ha - Usuo' :r. . r _*• \.


. c_cn u-i'cr I:io c ,:U 1 X10


. u*tici ate iii v uj 7 li a e: lain Uc.t Jena.- a\

.o.mc r.i* yao 'i.ln't?


.. I can a* lain this i.i L.ic t ..t ..-ltd •• .. In ;’L . -Uirur 1


arterc, t:_ t : I.’g ho r s


tint he fcovr L • ■- ec:ic


■■■■'- t In t o r-r'o

rxt-ra-— e.at tU cjrclc n dw I'--er'a ic p- • lac very

end r ’ fi&ly -’l ajt varic-.:, ... . j ten t in a - v ."v. ' non
' at u: . Fac;Jcr'o v - ••• ’~c' -i not cc_._ t U»6 lowAot)

: .c:. lc.


r.vc .ut 'iiotisB, : x .r.


i . c vith iv r.i’vl—: net


••o, n c ;s-


LV t. -.t l.» c .v..cti n


-1 r ei* t r. v


l r .ach


k* crticl.cte in t.o. ,


<- »:.•. r3T? 7 u ct


c.-uf ... sJcian T -Jc ccc cf t..c c r --c. *-7

.. • I n t r-Ce.iv -i .

. •• tv^.urc nn-ct.. a ' ~ ~ i..;_ ldt. rC d ’.ti. '

.. re - c .U-Cii :: z


ir-o't y u in char a: a ..attar fee:, X L.. atu


a urn..


ci.r- 1 .


c L-;cti .i '... i led •onr.rr.ro?


A * t v s n fc ij raoi-i,— it, * at it rio U- -*al n:-eat i a oi
. 'led

i : rcL countries : ciX ct n h.-.’ ' .ca acJjlcv *


- feel’., cat vl. fm-ti.r t vc *- o-i : .vac. t


- , c


'. :.cn an^ quest* :ia trrr
. .... -. 1-5 cher e f nai:

A . etna •_ tell ycu that.

- - . Central Vetarinar^, jp.

•

3 i- he * nly then zr So, at.
.. Mo 3 oo&list f id!. ;

IU; hi .

. 3i»!n* t y a 5a; t r.t 1 :

-•its u -u v. ‘ .in 3?

*

•• t


' c. :.l_

* iCtciM'2 ;•?

.0.. . u t t -t th. wli; *.ith Il4:c

rcsw.it. H trev ., . n t

ins ~cu r rii .u. :za tl- iv
. I . -vw ncvwr ’laouaoa: the im-oti

8U .~ c ‘" -i 1* :ic'.l warTci’c cx,.<

%


. Vital u

3 rl

- . I. • or o 2

. ccrtrXi «*.. ..do ^ o enuoo dloar,

• • < :i

•m;. c -I! rwj.ct th-.- *t „;l .r.t w t.ic I-’ tvl K,d the -
\ lilt ry ...’lcltw u.ilwii. . . r 6o:a*ol' . -?

lo. ivll.V.. •, tQVO sal'

t Js c lwtwl, ut f th. •fi.et.. u : .r ro, m' I c -il.*. lin. tie t


r: ..*-tv Jr;’ r.t riwa wit 1. ut r_i c
1 t t -thw-r, -xfr.li, t
1 - ' ’ aly c eun - . ;


. .

- rutrri-« vi c. •; ric Vw

its a nnlllhls.


yru • c.y a.y ~*1.0

e -11*' ut n * On s?

 , ' ’ -i t ha v aaythia ..

■- ... r.qu ctuyi.

•4fll • acri; : -a c..-/—J,i . v
, t li U-. -• r : "^n;" ie
- • cotrothj .

~ .. . ..itcnti a ,f ctiti.1 -

•. r Ur s she will i«: :


4 ri .. ita *■: 1 JerJ vcu-f-.rc

. '. , Ul

* tJ.w r- rl u .or.. u —it t,

,

■ - - C.'Sw, ill :.«T I vs It

-> u4- r-tia ,

n- , .-rIV! s c .12 ■ - It. .-O


- r u --ita tliw a


ri. . Gur.rji


- - --- - -- V
C zr . :* . 1


v.rl - r it ruich is “s' straiten 44


. Very well, Ooocral, LoBtf.t'rtS rare r;-iuc*n ,:i f fti

v-ccia s in Go may?

. - '

-Cv- Frr as it *t\s the c . .• c . r r. •. . ...


-7.0 .S3 Oi Uir.t I have zls: he r* ._


•r.* rcc-lv .


i c


- I ’ ' . . : , a

-:-C. ...I ..


r.i --v .. ;xnt I caan t r-:-i


: r . .r r N , L. v fever


tl i.sti .1 in Oor-xny ns ..!> lisc a a ,v. t- rrrilv r_: ' it Oy 1-jc-’ a


art r* L n ;.o the coil ai .n i:


. IKx', General, - a Jcv .

Br'.t-rt K cl. Institute nLv r ‘rcL. ; ;11 lev r vaccines?

.. t: t j ’v. ruitc . a v

Q .ex:. the Tyv.ua :u\ Virus Ji-atiaut. .1 the IK at Or c ./

. ,

j •-»' >-u r '..it ii.-.t y u : v : -. c . ~ca :i tl- : . t -raluf; ct-.rc

t.£o vac cLie?

• •

'-as live virus use ~i t o- v7


.


r_(t. tr


stv._ t';a -it . t.e 1


r lua i tiv i t very


"• r — .niter, '.at fc.-re v„ njv.-* — vfr r .‘eh is L-.j i_. i ur


re vliich v. nr- just lisc_


c--.. really . ut v _\n Lit-


the fir- ’dth r.. ari V the fact


-an c-n suTf-r ny a. - c


'r Lie vaccine,

. .ell, Ttli-i .r?a t:,. r *-• . :D_ria t- test thiovcci c?

- r.-U cana t tdl . - t‘ ' c - . . . n ,


x -rLich ha * air- >


.. . i :c • ,


er_ - uc. a-_r


r. re' s . _. . .-a .i-


it. I ca.ai - . 1 Li Ir


y a recall tfc : it . vi ,:i ;■ l-’ary, ~.,ic - c


I cr.-.rv t ss^' 1 ;- na Tezstna *. it. Hcwcvtr, I


=n noitbcr c sdral ;ist r : baeorl legist. Ic.-..
fctat C5 Smcwloij - is eUwomol, e t unicrstan! . r.-.i.

which is ccataino.'. in th- -ir.. Dicr_ • ^

Q And y u never hear.*. raiytijia. e. .:\t t'^ro ex. -ri.;onts at johenrrai
with those ycll-w fever vnccinos? '

•• •

*. 'Jr. Select ain't t-U u?

.. Bey

n . Ar. \fi\ is -r. Sch d *t ?

.. Sclteidt W - •; . hygienist . ; . :.r. y ' c .

wont tfcr.ujh Ui- Trench ce-.,=i : *. .t. U. ; .xi’.ic'l Ins. -c - r r.„ in

l?h2 wl-.cn I . ecu. led :y effic- in the Ar y .. Heel Ins; ect r-.t*. ;\t orlin
r undor no until ..c li .

He narcr re. rt-i enytdn. t / e* nt this?

A * r •

0 Is he ti;. sm:e Scheldt . u cr c.J' a ha* t fc-stif ?

A res.

TBS .. LSHEOT* The C urt will bo in r-ccss f r a f ov . :»at<.

(.. recess wrs todron)


3C59-


Court I


18 Feb L7- - 5-1 - LJG - Karr t

r-3 ImHSULs The Tribunal is c in ia s.ssi n.

BY :S. VcPJSSZ i

-4. General ,;<hon tt..s the ty^fcus and virus institute f tha QKH at


Lcaijorg activated?

i cann t tell y a th-t exactly, : a y I:tj t th -t in t'-.. year f
19U1, I think it iron in Amc, I ctUn’.e t v- Institu . c u arin an inspocti n
i:. -- -;er$ and that, at that -l^, it v a fa Oy activate .

».. . v : w, Sonoral, I listjnjd t r ir t lii nj c necroin, tv hus and
tho , 33i:ility f y ur ha-in ’o-on res-ni lac nf-runc% n typhus on
2 ? i^c. t.r 191*1, and I'-.; a it cjniusc r t.-.t t-stis ay, i- y u d-ny
linvir.-: boon resent at sc i:.r.'ia «ith ,^ti, vit.r, Gill- -wi star,

Jruj .s!<y r or.y no f ti c n 25 oao. r 1 ' 11 c nCwrnin* typhus
vaacirws and tn- testin th.ro ft

... Already in 0 . urursvl in 8a *. or, Xi -5, I salt? th t re rin •


Wu to, c \y, ti o m: .a co r. . riclsM:. f such .. c nf-rcncu I

. t litLr+ *tich proccdod it. 1 kn w

n thin cle ly in . ; red>: -cti . f j in th -t to . ti - viion
frphtt* started t *d With us, t •< winter r l&l r 15 .2, I

ru-n ttonti n t t,.; civilian .«:•, n I 4.i:.k it « u C nti, f tho
ler..<* 1 OfluS I i .rial rs. -vr.ir. o: v • X r. Ur tho nun’. -r f fifty
r rsj j«-r c«nt in that c nn.cti n. ..t * - t U * I liv ;dy stated in
C -rureol t Uiu ti o tfvs,r. I .1 r.U r. v t»a nothin: tn t 1 taV-vr n sr -
I 1 r.'t kn ' what it n r.ally - 1 • ut - Qi .t 1 ha n thin t c!l rith
■a C'.nfaronco in any >tty in c nn.cti n *-4th c nC.ntrati n ca s r tho
ut j f in :t ;s r tho :so f any * th s *hi h d. 1 - 1 -_ fr u the n-s
Vl yc a f r, and I c-r. .aly t\ -at th-t h-ro.

«. ..oil, Qacoral, since y u .:.:.ti n. this s* t*. *-r.t at 0. ,-arsol Jet's
f-ut it bof ro the n . This i: ^canent KU # 712 vhich w_. £f«r os

r; Sxhi it fa* . o: . •

hat at .*-nt y u :du in C erur 3, an 1 1 it?

... "-Sj in 0 ctmrsol 1 v. - vach :t

— L -- , 5 t-rr. t v s.:.. J this st *.-^xnt -n-.r. it rv :


Ct-


C art I


1& . ; -i u7-> - 9-2 - LJj - Zarr v

"iv3c-tvin t the statement - * - intorr sting *njricaa fficer,

I was su^p-.s-d t. hero attended a acotin* in 19hl, at which Hoitor, C ntti
n nd 'xu_ -sky sjto pr-s-nt, -ni t h su .st-i. tho c-rryir. ut f
typhus research n hunsn tin s. I conn t r-c licet tho date, -l-'ce .and
particip:nts, n r the c;ore- f each an..tin b-ccus- f t‘~ ’ V y^'-rs

that hr.vo passed and the n’-c.r us i n cice n ts th t h ore ecu

rcrn. rr.ph 5* *.

"..s f x as th- typhus r hi- ic c r.c.m-d, it a.y h.v_ -on tho
i 11 wir.-i f r .‘ccti.n f the kn , ry effective tyjhui ,

in& t- tho th r rr f. «hieh /.-s dor fr n lie-,

draped far behind tho actu.-l d-ocn-'x, despite an increase. Ty■. hus vaccine
was .Js r lucod in th- *• -rt * ch Institute, thr u. h cultures in chicken
- 3 j ita dependable uffidency, . , iuntty pr-vod.

lo . B qu -to ,.r tootica f.r tho c hat ar-as, is well cs f r tho
z no f tho int.rl r r. irjt t,.hus, it . c_no n^cusc .ry t cl .rify tho
valuo -f this rcc:ino at tho offfUest ,5.r-nt. It is t -r-f re quite
. .ssiblo th t in th- o i-rst '' r. c nf. r^.c- hr. -Ini «3ky ii ht hr.vo
boon aaai_r.ud t c .rry .n stu i-« • t r. 1^1 t-sta, w ut aa u,

. .ti ility md oflicionc; . r.

"Thu , ur. s- was t. rrivo at r. iir.-.l c i.clusi n whutho • ho vxeins
pr .ucud by th- x b-.rt X.ch Institute s *. oqurUly -f icl-r.t .nd c uld
bo usud in (he .ohr.wcht ar. in V .i.is x- x n U.o oasU.rn - r at v:.'th
•i c nai . .. r s .act f success. 0

K y u cji't 'Mi •• * u ,urticij iU;’ in such a .jeetir.

*t i oro?

I 8-J.d t .-t I c n soy n thin ut tho ti-._- it t k \-\cc and
I havu --Ir.-.dy t tific ' h *- - t, ..ctur .lly, c nf-r-nc-s t :: . 1 c-
r- ut tho typhus oni . rr •*t Q>aru»ol

ukod - car-ctly idiothcr it c .ui ’r't — ssibl- that It's, -k-n t
i'xu, -.ski' ai/1 that such a c ni-r-rco h\ t.k-n ,lace 1 t 1 - hix. ‘that I
.3 luit- S- * t k ji. Co. "hot I *as c nc-rr.-d


C art I


IS li7- { - 9-3- L«X» - Sr-rr r

with - I spclc. . ut it .f ri- '..as "h. t.-tin* f thu chickon <*_s vaccine
n •- sufficient noriier f -rs os in a c«,rt_in vicinity; that is, within
on oron whore spotted tvJius or already ccurr j ’ r tf.ru was trinont

dar -r oxistiit;.


X


“ - -


- - -lC- 3 -I^co.r
-- * • X •


a tonc-rsif! t*zfc!i vr.^c_;;r.;_ :c >f vcn as i;~ca,

• ' I • s-

t:-' '-o ■ ti-t :-.bo lr*u. :> c'_7 loft tl^is crj£-.;v::cc -
;u- 2 "uchcn-rl -n* cam. >ufc t*.. 3 .s :-33 vrccx:-.r.C;. ••. or
• -c ' • pc . iris,

n.aoi’ llit* t ->?

I cm «rl“ 3=7 :Iro.w fox. ?Mc *-"3 r •. _ .

’=0 caul' r.>C "isriVlr oread r ~r-clao •\-fcc t > v *•,-:' /

3 .. flTCthln- t: r t il; - - - rt ■ ■

rn r v -

Ji'na to 6I.0 s *1 *icr but 0; •• fcrci - c-untn. 3 :: 3

:\v. -r -f v=ccln-a, 2 , 3 , .* • - - eti .

... ... --f >poi n oounfcrlca ' • . . .

CW6.8 lit 'cr *a7 tl^ru -\;i\. still c o i- ibid .m vi
t*o• Tiio -a ouxtv

.' '.Ti-- aflit-.ti.ic s.. -. ? • rone .-, v* . . _ -1-

. . iocusoi >::c. Fwiv' 3 I ‘ 3 ..

Mff-i \«l»r. this c>ri)in“ti'.j v-cox-V.x i:o -a i.i. r)*; ‘., u t

* -I--. * - t *.«. aro 1' .3.

~ut ■ ■ -t —c t’vt ouVj.ofc • vr cv.xd- ,-.fc io.*.

iv sir ' c in -tt.n i.:.sfc • u ; >v- • inti--.?

I cr.nt tell • v t.-.- , I • v t ro- - •* c*- : n-

; “ lfcl ' u - 10 '- s t,,!: rl“oc i*.r- *t *a . - .ufi ••-.iw.a

“ »..ct it is qui c i .raill- . \ c. t..-t I 0 v.l* .ol-
* cl1 * ' u cl ~ c-w cud c'r.forcnci xl 7 a: n*>t

• - *tOTlfl!, ■ . 0 - - . . p ,

c t- i esret ' - :o.


S, O .


^vq;i


-id: —ji* r.lris’..


3“t other •


it:-.


1 ‘ pel ...

^ »i k - • • i* .

' * w “ ' “ - — - - - ^ • - Wkv Xi. U # .V


J Sv. ar C^P^Xii Ml

• «• •


- 3 * L 4


id T i.rtu;


fJFgb Y7-* ¥~ L


rc^ilcall in


" -r.* :,v


• I tlar. .

‘tiv. :.15 ;


3»- 1: ,


-on'-


*' tUvr. .c - -re
^- 30 - ,r 1 •'*; 1 4


I e“.r. ,:wi*


- the. • .


v ,


* •— r - •


'~-a£


.

ce-c^rr-e re


.it..


~!:ur?


' 1.


I . 3nt“5t»- •


t'l •


~t ' ,1


*ter 52. ..

1 m c^aXex-waow
i'.'tw. t I

*oii, fc -1 0

r-i'...p —a Fr.ai'c.tt ~
1 tLi. ': t :_-1 cue* - .- r


c xi; 1


.


r-1 r *


±Ts*cl±\ *n


■it i.


f > ,


ru-l.e 1:


I -t ul' ,


- r-4.lv’


t 1 *•

•*■1


-306c-


:; _ c c cr '- "it


*"cll he —a -rr
St'i-e. : 1* •-'•lf.l,
Y~o, r-, th. ?.».r


tr— *'inic<

-s' '-rtw.-s i

•>r the. l-ct

, ,

N ?•>•»* * N -• t O v 1^

t*.w rwc tair i % l. r n..r . *-•

308 ?r lnflOwas- — c Mr to Le e va

j •

.


Sv t


c


I


: - *1

• •* * • • «


-.3 "lth

itr.i v-r v - v-ov. «. or i^ .y.

" * I r w: . :• _r c . ;*-


* r.-y fi-.it'-ct -;

-11 but" • JU

- * » | i ^ »

- : mV t


ot ..ir i. •. * i


3067-r


3 "V' <7-• -r -Il-l- in ’Suck
or* Kc. 1

. t. Oil ._!.ji3t r r ? rcsi .nt f tho “r'>crt 1'rcl Institute,
.m't he?

... '--a, Oil .c: -let .r - rcei ant pf the “cbort Kech Institute Vr
. *t. t] u •• - v ..rt Sr cl Institute v..s «uv r '.inr.to *. tr ti o inlets-
rf Interior, -s it nrt?

... YL»a, I *-^liov tc im-w t] t on it -„c jo *-oici inetitut
it i uo t Y vo ’-cn ax rin-to tr tie rt oich *!inis rv rf tt» Intor-
: I v-.'t kne v wfcr.t t) eitu ti n r ? - of with o< rt in-

ty. I 1-; ,;-r in cinol th c tfco 4i *>ort Xrcl Inatituto V 3 tlo r-conc
f vUcl tho Hold . inietry «f Interior :: c use v.*» on it noo'c

ny cruneol n any n ttor. I think th .t is hr I n lwnye unlopat
it.

. 1 n tti r Ctnti i U a • n in oY'.tzo cf tlo

ort tool* In«tituto in ti inirtr;' f Xrtori.r?
h. Yea, I w. ui: any t: fe wit! c rt inby •* on it xr • . .tele) i •

. : n »t !• ■ wl t the situation ■ r bef* ro ti t wit) c

o n ! 1 " v- 61 -


y ? rt.

• ‘ , ■ ‘ t

Syph.ui, pr 1 • .’’.cti rf typhus v .rcir.s, t: . offioionc; 1 typhus

- rcinec?

. . ; rntr.cfc with Cmtl w~a

n r r t' prwa.rt thv r. -or- re oltu* tim r - t: wlnt r 'f 19'il
10*2, • when 1 uy' n' t! - • " •

ttr v eel--. : Olf

r this vr.ee ino,

> * f - tl r v. ccl. ,f ri le! e ;vj mtc r. pw.-J*nnca l'-tor *.n

. ->eir.■ Mention.:. 1 ru wr-.. * nc ctceaptl> r. t r. <-.t thfct t*. a


• ,

- : ‘ ’ ,

ispufc. , La , t: .t yru '.j ir. £ r. crhforoncp vJ


v! lc queati'u rf tiu ifflcLonpy «* «


7 < Ik v.ccino v c


3063 -


Jdi'-l-''- SU-ft-Z-

Cdyrf #?'/

: ,!e ” !,rf -<^ »l-ro it v, , uc , - .. . .

■*• - c j ox>,ri. s.ntn v ’’1 Irvo

tCb ° ' ° Wt W t™,

• “—•".» «1. : . tlr!0

r: vo I fir.i.l c c t .

“ 0R 0 - h *-70 =c 1„ e nf jroneo in 1 r -o cir-

W * 1 - •. * • ■ t *«»,„ two

'"'' »-+» , * Si ^ Bc6l ,

’ SK C ' s * n't loicw,

, it ant siu,: in e o A x* in « U '

6 *" -CJS “ ns ; t: •’ • - ^- c;. . t; f x ■, ,

►*r * •

*

„ " : » !:- <• un or ul . «, , leM „ « . , r . n g t; .

..ccinu crj.o?

1 £ •'• * r !rl; - ■'■<• ., tlo .1- ‘.ucti n r V ccinu

r ; ' ' ■ ’ « - "*•- 7 ■ - Ileal Inpwotcr,

I ° ^ ^ ■ 3 -*» n- , Pr „ .........

' «*. * • Mkdu •.. :c :o f /0 t: .:r 'l,vct,,. fc «,

” hln ' ?ltU6 ° “* ««* « 1 t cy. X, u) - , IWS# „ .

* 1 ”' ntUt0 ‘* ° uc; •• f » »*««■ cf Oohninrc.t ott. fa l>nfc-

■ ’ ■  • « « ■■ :■ r guot

UlM " l r 01 - v r U'-ct r . r t f root.

' tl -°’ •■-» :iroctiv« rto-rlin.: t . , rt

tn T aM ;:ic! ^ : ’ ««* : r tf 194 S; B t fa

- until U 6 ri «uol institutions wl „ r. ■

•>• HP or S_ ; rt . ,, r „r .1 C aw X C. cl. c no , m O „ ltl

“ v - colr -o quo at li ns :.c tloy t} u 1 tt fit t' . -1 t ir • . r - i r k

* 0l - v. .Odin- oi-ntot 1

'

• : — a- V..CC1... c rtr-i, . : i

- * ~ « typhcc » « vor:- hi ,. -,1m, fa loci,

r;- Oifitic : pr hl« v, I ,! ul- K htSs lt 1# .. ..

- -nt 1 tut «..r, „ Ul. , t Uon a. ,.. r: „ P r . jnc -.


- 3069 -


It F.b ,7-:-£ -11-:- nr&XQk

CrVTt r . 1


ccnMW _ . ■ --- * '"’“' nt

u -= pr. ' . • • « ' :i c 1 -

. , • « ptotor- fr :• ••' '

«, to. ;lfcu 6 c. of tU 0 ». . Sr-V ■- - ?« »-» ' 0 **

I .. fv„m « - -- '

, . . f . .. .. v„ r n tli -■ ut tU R '

c.6 -crtourij -• -* *

, I *>

Institute n si oir pi

'oti X v BJO tjr. 1 •

'

_ . .. , V in’ . r; : »"= >

n . m \x 61 - rc w c.oitr. l • on

T « riVl - - - e 5 .V r ^ury vXtl ev ^ Srr.tvn «

, ,, .. .. r fua? nc: i: f r tU c;vili:r. ojc

if V ^ n * a,t

:or al r* •« —’•«• * " ‘

er-t; :y to « , -to tototW : ' r > 3 “

C.,..r,r ttt r.. .«v t < ■-• l ' Kr -  m 1

-' 6: - n ' , ' nti ■" *r

i ... It -- r.f t: -r

, r. v rd:-,- v r «r

t TOW lr -il t:

. .. . . x ro< In- c* M-mu

Z - »./« - tLto * « ■ - ■ ■ - r ' • " '

yr u woron’6


C -urt 5 — 1

16 -,7-ii-U-lc-IK.--it: "=’*'•


ralyla* .Lraly cn th,.. t». .«««.. -». •“« «* y “ *“ *' try *"

-«t vrcclna tt cuctl a, tyto* vrcciac -w-^acti-at

A . Mil, vu received e-.r.ethin. fr_n th* lehr In.- v.rkc. rr--V.Uy -

Gahalnret Ott. fllvarad #«tUK f r tha *=. t«rit ry » f« « »“ ” r '-
du=«d than. It  t. that tha Sot. • *-ch Iht.ltuto irttrarat. "•

tha teat ka.va azalea. thara vote tha Saachaiacha Sam-. V .rtf. !W «»

here It order t •* .due* vrceir.ee — A

v BvB i t you ien-v whether y-u ,:-t vecclr.*e fr,-. the'. >r r. tl 1 u c ' 1

that. 1. a ,.aaitmty. “y,u 6 a't vrat thl. MM th ' 1 !

hMtaa. nailcal .fficar la tha Vahnaeht hlfa't to- vhara ha -r. ttt.ln: V

vpccltce, d. y-u?

.. i jua, ar ah th-aa .,-aaclat fr «hara tha Vahmraht nay have ra-
aatrah thalr vacclaa. - lahrlrv: ' rhc. aajrt. tha h tart t«h laatltuta - I a
t .ay that vith cartetaty ua.aa. I t-a't ha- It. ..teat rah It. oat,city
-r-fuctl a, : f .«■« think It v,. tet lax. fhea tha la.tltata I r hx.ar
aaatr 1 tharrey la rrttkfur. -a th. yta, «fi - racclvaf -ar dy.aat.ry vracl
at tha Eyrtoaa :a.tltut. -f th. Lalvar.lt:- -f iarllr. vhlch vra
2.1.., la aifltl.a. at th. aal'. Vra «c at tha a.hrlv ' ar/. otha- v,

Cl... C*» fr.-. th. Srach.lacha Sar , Lark., raf I h.a't think I t r,;.t aas-

tt 1 . Iha.a vara tha kWh. *M Oar. tU,ah t- «».. «M» <

the Vpfcrnrcht, raft thrt, Is fret, did doliv*r.

Vary vll. 31 y.u raaalv. ar.r.uctl.r. mart, fran th-.a e acaracV

, v . i nea't .a. 1 ML fer -.a- -ff». «» *" =u " hr, ‘

..hat ar ha *». h.Va nth. .«t the -rr.ar tad h. iwt hrva oarrloh •» ■«« «
ra.naaf.aBca ,a .xf« t. ..a vhath.r fallvarla. *ku t. and. to th. a.-cf.f
axtaut* :h... varaa't ay affrlr.. I-r thrt cur-.ta I hrf ry c.Ur.t nr. x.
rtd -.y ex .*rte.

v hall a... It hr. trh.a » a rr.hr !•« * « "> <»* t!l ' fl

, . „ vr verv wdi taev cxrctly vhrt th- ty^hn

Is thrt y.u, .r rt lerst y-ur -...c*, •>—

r fuctl -s eieurtl.a ws. Ica't thrt ri.ihti

^ m th. .ahrrcht taa.tr: ar.irLly ta««ll!,a -cl r t .

, Sj o. chant tt. all-rtl-a of tyaha. vroolaa.I DJf aayhi'.V c .


C'-urt 5 . 1
ic 7c'.


tr .1 th: tl

. It .» first fr IM» - -t first Oter.trhorr.t tier, Chle vr
,h« tin.: tor.t 1.. .h he receiver certrlh renue.t. ft-
e.rtrl. urrt. of the ft* he .11 c.ted the . .«C*«W to the heed. M
h^r. W to (ifflcuiti.c a* th« the fth, k»i lancet rote to* -«

Ur, or rcthvr. fell )Mi. !>-«' -• rW W

Inoocetorcte .or treferred It to the Chief -f the ™rr,oh. .uric,a Serv,-

MU vhcre « received r«orto , * * »« rod rtl ft* n.

wu thrt -.erl.d -f tit. «hrt 1.. IM »v3 », -til 19 -. tft ft H.dic,

Iconvct rrto vro in ch»r. - i th/.t

h,u. thrt vro y.u to h th lottroce.. T.u «ro the Ar y H.dic,1

Inncet -rr te ft, » -« ■«. -* P «rc hi. • Chief * the Vchr-,,.

hciicrl Service# S.v, l»n't it true th:t . v * r ' °" oU "

hod the o.ver «, c-otr-1 th- all Ctttl.n tychu. vnccloe to «-«*>

*. Vhot V. meed V.0 .tly - .Oh * ducod vccclo. ft» xrrt.v
rod Lather.:. I thick w tnhehly received revert, frod the ther ffleet,
■n-ft .he. err. ft - ^t ... ready, rod the. a c,n,rl. » »

,to tott the heed tod. thee It vr. m.crted. cc.erdlc: t. thrt need.

V. dllo't -sly hove t. cere f.r the ft-at «ny tut rl. f r the hen.

I cros-t ,.ive y » «* * *— - h,e tut . -r,dIcily «•

lccIdeate recurred lot th., 1. vhy fttftU =• hud t he -rde. vh.ch -hr*

exteeded te c 1.x. jr.uertut. i *-»  r» ‘hot.

, ceoern, : don't tolak y-u —red the cue., lee. I eked, y.u ■

l. O, . f.ct that"yu , «— — -« ' »“  ““

.... t.ver -ver to. hll-Cl o -f to— vrccioe. ty — ——’ '
t.„ d,h Ift.tltuto, lootttute .f the «K r, ftrk v. the — -
nnyh .ey el.o-didn't y u r -he .f r-ur . the never t. m -

that tTJ'nus Vr-ccinto nr-.ftioti.nl «• ' r -•

•• t ' r -ct thrt v.. hrd o-rtUin,; * *> ^ th th

A. S j, m. l a r.uttn t .<r.,-wv

eivilifca »*etor cue that th- civilly -vct.r die n ; t nly h - t ecu .
,t ^ ^ ^ — - - — ^ ^ ^


C urt s-. 1
13 Feb


;.r thit tut the civilien s-ct-r, vfc.ru they had n .ufflcUat r--unt f Icp/’-
fccelt'r. It the eastern territories. in the Ukraine, in the e uth an*

lB jrrice, rad that it itself secludes the *j.. nihility thrt the Vehracht -T t
the r^wcoy vfcicfc 'a d to erxe *r hrd t- rt.tr anythin.: rV-ut tho entire ell er
ti.t uf veccino a-iducti .n. Thft is the ear.e ee vitb the del ueir-; r.veac •'
the civilian eect^r vr.s relied upon Ur enstern territ-ries. i"* hone ountr
Ojd f .r vfcit ve needed. X ait say that the civilian lector, tho-cuesti'n
vfcother I hr/ vaccine nr -ducti n in =y hand., =u.t he clearly denied 'y e.


-307>-


16 Feb U7-h - 12-1 - LJj - x'-tty


*. All ri. at, let 1 3 a. lit it u. . Did you haw complete control ever
the ell-cati-B as between tr.. varl tranches of the ..ehr-acht?

A. *as. ..hoover fl^rJced cn that ;ad a list where stock and derand

%

could e c. -red, and according to the size cf the branch ci the ..ehraacht
or, ainli', accrrUr. t the ur .xr.cy -f the eecand, he allocated however
he cculd, it it v< a£ . possible, to tfie larger extent cf the w^son.'., If not.,
a little leas. I think that Qborstabaarat Schrddt could tell you - re
about it than I could, whe uaa actually working Inthat office.

jenara . . and allocation of tychus vaccines as

but .eon t:ui .dlitary ar.d civilian .i outers xas a ,.roblo= vhich fell aquarol;
v.ithin the fuehrer 5ac.ee f -uly, 191*2, ; isn't St?

A. C to core fer ac» -*ms r.uods. I h.d nc author 11; itch

the civilian sect.r, no duties J allocation. «11 I had to a was co.rdi-
hr acht. Ir. Conti was native la the clvi sector.

% . T.-.it«a right, and Dr. irondt was standing between y u and Dr. C .sti
t cc. t .t t.tn s y u ,.t whet needed insofar ns that was possible,
unnn't ;-?

a. l oe. For t.«» .ersoresol an* 4 .-lerid qturti.n, yes. I don't know
her the a ,ujBti.n of vcc . tne *.r • . .-d any flscua-

ai no th hi n :t v esinos.

H . -a it n .t 'r;o * .' certain r- .n hy.lonists hold t-he vlon thtt
the ui tctivotwsa 1 ty.hus • iccinoe c.ui n t U» ustablishod in advance
*hv.:u. i n rai->C -i, -ri.-ur.ta ucr-use r. t forty .vrcoSt f t.»- twin.-Is
n iv* V. » •- - ■ • .•Ist-arxca and «ii *» t . *t cick -lth-url. artificial 1 /

Inf* >c tod*

A. E «not S '. that. '*

.. * fr .-hure y u t sh a uf-i-nco. but it Jp s.^thiu a. social that
•t ociy

c .ris* n in t . r rs -. 5 .

,. . . , • .cd Ter? Pry. »ify fr »iu a a., t t i: his

ii n ;u x irlrntfite .-r- n^c-ojary in typhus just as in .-lari-.


C;urt I


16 Fob L7-. - 12-2 - LX - hi tty


Dr you r-:-3ur that?

Ko. I cannot r.-u bur t t.

.. jftli, *.hit is y ur i-inicn in tiw itu.-, r d-. y-u h. - ne?

D- ycu :oUov- that it i3 rwcoaatxy t; vx—ri on, .n iwa —in s -\s
diatteiuishci fra. antaala ts c-i-• ini th* offvctivwfciaa .f itf.-huc

vaccinia? ^

.. I c-t. -nly acgr the iA. - L. in that connection *n

tha practical co.-. ito-nt r an v. 11 -bio . ut not tosto* vaccina with
hu ..n V jin ,a and vith hinan boln.a t a lar c extent. They w-ra tc bo
inreul .t-d with a nOcino, the -fioct f ahich - as twsUd t. •; aufiicior.t

uld be deno. ..ith rofereno.

to r.-ccinu o^ori'vmtc cn h *Wel» : • » * ith

referonoo to the rttcoaaity -f th*t with -.-.f -r-nc- t. the limitation r--

i^xd ic.: , «noh utap technical

concerto which ao a ..r-r-qidaito duAaO a let f kn *l»d,u nd which
cannot V* -cne amy nth , jr.ral i-hrac-e where tho c-n-r.l odical nan
could not osijly Ju ' -, and l sh ul: have t. sk you t, h-*r rui «x. :-t
un that qu-oti n cactus* I . n t in ' ; citi.n t. i - .ny Ju're, -nt n

that.

: m , Sutural, y u -dt t a extru > c necessity -xuci.d to

Ut V co':- ir. in. "inter A$Jil-*u2.

lot iurf-r a- it in y.ur *.n at .want h.;x th-t this chicken v.-.cciu


15 Job 47- A - ? j C -12-la-Bitt7
Csurt So. 1

sufficiently proved. You >c on to say that to previio eioquato arotoction
isv tho ccnbat aroes as aoll e- Tor the Zono of interior against typhus, it
boctTO noeossary to clarify tho valuo o this Taeciao at tho oarlioft
r.ccont, and thin you soy that it 1 .-. or to yocsibl* that : iru ;ovrkr ai -it have

boja aoaitnol to carry out “hone stu’i .

*

\ Fa* just "hat Ud yon do :o a.U. liah tho offoctlvanoss of this
a; yolk vaacino? An! I !ont -n’. to - or you tull . . cl ut ccr:pet ability
ts. X to la or i . that 7 r.r 0 corriod out to doboruino

aj offootivanoar. or thi- 0 . yolk me :

A I fccTj alr^clj :a;i ./.at for . ol — a— I cannot toll you for
how lonfc — oal I boliovo Z In Cborurso 1, too, tho roport cono

clone that this vaccina ha, boon cocuitA! ani had roved itoolf to bo loo’.
and won coin, pro c&o ontonfc. That was or.o roport. 7..0 othor

fact was the* *..’j hr.d dociiol to frao ouranlvoa f.or. v-.cci .uc. rji such *.ad
«• n subatituto rotert and ec.^o:. . u .ana,

*1 Hoi lit' 1 farcoS , . 1 j

fioloualna Is not in laauo Jioro. You havin't pot told aa n
•oats that ’..oro corriod cat to iotor .ino tho offoctlvonosc of this obl
yolk v-aoinu. That ccorinonts woro c-rriol out? Xat did thoy
So? How 111 tho7 dotorrlao that tho o yolk vaccine wan or 7.-3 not
offootivo?

A I is'n't e-tablin'. a y of.* .ctlv.no-?- at all. I :orol cold that
t thoulc ;o used 'ractleall- , -ol this ir r.ot -r. -ri:.ont, hot it lo

-r.ly a use an in tho c.aro of a dree froc rhiefc In yractlco can bo coon
ihothor it Is offjotiv^ or uhotbar it ie not effective. fcayoal that 1 had
'< !ntorocfc at all. ’ n-jv-r initiated any u yuririontn nor vac 1 inform*'
abewt any onporirunts. Jr. 2-/uT

'/■it tiiJn in itself was a vary positivj ido of tho affair, a r f'w onyori-
: about thab, t:-ic -sn*t a junction 1 dealt with.

4 do: iral, you 3 -ay hoiu that tlui .urpou —You say first that
* * --.’oro, .uito possible that ; • - * • a.<» or oonfaroocn nr.

*- r .■ ’ ht havo jot < 1 - i a.. to c.arr;' :a n.ociao r.-o.-.t orollol t-sts,

a - - t . ooc^tahillty .*yj officio ay of this ty-hus v-ceina on


- 3076 -


- ?ob 47-A-j;C-i2-Zc-?atty

Court No. !•

bolngr. Iho ourposo was to errlvo r.t a fl n~j cow-luslon whotbor tho
—ccinu produced by tho Robert loch Institute "-.3 oioquatoly officiant
could to used in tho *7ohxwicht and i= tha typfaua areas of the 3'atorn
-rant with a consider'bio prospect of ccoss.

I nc asking you whether or r.ot A-i ~rs over dotorr-inod whotbor tho
ZB yolk 7r.eeico was suitablo for uso by tho "ohrv'.cht. Did you over
-rriv. fit any conclusion on that?

A I wcwld osauno fren tho start that typhus vaecirw free chic Icon ^

AA wos us.d to a sr-ollor ox:oat. Fro:, fifuroa of production
*ron Trankfurt, for lnstonco, it can to neon that they olroady'ioliTorod to
to rdlit-ry -ad ciTlllon sldcv. Share was no largo ccrr-itaont or that rucc.
and I think it actually lac happened at r.a^.tlr.j an. saao uhoro.

Cocothin* wan published about that in tho ‘rose, and I think sera*
c-x^aoivo article a poo-*c.i a: a latar ir.t: acout it. i rr. quito sure that
I oai Schroibor, too, -ad tho i.-;;ro3oiou that tho question ai' tho offootivo-
noss of tho o&s yolk toco loo could bo acsiuad as having boon conflraod.

'.bothor and how far vo wuro caLaj 1 boaauso of that and wo ;.-oro natiefiod,

I -on't knoi/, boc-.UBo i: i. rat^xkabij chat all rose xch work in foreign
-’Ojntiioa a- •'* "obo erf franco, R ... a rrd '"or.-any always roarchad for


C-urt l . 1

lo c-iSK-rutty


E different v/cciac. Shit is the rcM-avhjr the- oneetir.n couldn't hrv* .-c!
yet fiarlly c aelucef tut f r :.c it w» c-seiudod iasofrr re vithin the fra
vxlc -f vhr.t vn» evciltUc this veccine c.ul tc use.-'. rnd I didn't vrnt t
ieniv ray thin*; a-re thin theft.

... Aftdhov rein vi a it det_r\ined thrt this v. ccinc ceuld. to ucod! K
..id y-u rrrivu rt thf t JvL&ontl

a. Schreiter geet hive received i/« hind -f trterirl *-» thrt '.r to

.u-.jr hedierl Inspect in te. I -r.ly r«t» >ter th: t I w o told that thio v.ccir

%

vto rll ri^ht.

^ . r.d vhsn 'ure y.u t-Id tiu tl

I o<toa<.t ijlvo y.u cry cxret dr.tc. Kiyte ..r. Scheldt vguld Jcaov th.
vh. v-riced on thrt mu.otl.a.

^ it oust hi ve teen o-r.eti. - ift-r the first . rt if 19 2, r

your sti tenant here li-ut hrt*uvsT rs/ necessity ^f testing this vr eo!

!■ just r lit .f JiUarish. *>n'% y.u hive rny 1 dec -hen y u decided thrt

wo -Very v. kj i her/ vith e.v yvl* vaccina uee?

A . I .-.ectl.n It ves x.f.uced, I tcnti.n it wt used. t< Ml 4n-

cretsin,; tenure. I r.wnti n re.-rts arna rt.ut it fr.r. eitterr. Urrit-rieo
vhsre it vr. used pr-.hr.fcly. ‘-hit the extent w c I d.n't hn.v lec uso C*to
Still -rites in 19-2 thrt it hasn't yet c«en '.r -Ved to r li>r.:e •Ci l®, Vat !
ust r s oin nantion ceUu.ic. rnd you cin't Wh h* nvry frx. thrt locruoo
•-..rein we the nev dcci«i'« t •-1 W tt* thio -ther .r-ce.uro. Cur in¬
stitutes. -vrhrnc, c-ulr. hive teen ir.utcd rnd c.cctr yd in Cnc.v rnd U-tr
Then vu v.uld h vc teen left vith r thin.; *hr.t is vhy - p.ncontrrted cn
<r.ieu.lf.: vith rll .ur wren tecitMe it vr. sure cert r-in thrn vrccir.es.

„ Oenercl, wsn’t there e ioci.n f -rnod lrtor in 19-1 to mtnfr
TUB vh.le ty -hue vaccine prolient
I d.n't iawv r.’.-ut thrt.

. T.ud.n't te-v tfc/t Conti nd nild«#iet«r. Ech: ' olV

»n J Kru.:-V8hy ver. ,n tLi n nri;il r.i

S-.

% . bh v s l-iotcr, I—i-e-W-r?


- 3076 -


C-urt S . 1

16 Jet -,7-»-12-2t-iiK-.-uttv


Zh: t la r ,;cntle..ru fr-c. the Kiaiotry .1 the Interior.
j. »fcr t v /b he d.in: in the Ministry .f the Interi-rl

A. He v; a a -fin - he »^6 n coliitoret-T f C .nti.

v. "Id he over do rnythir.; n tjnhusT

... I cosn.t toll y-’.u thrt. I oors.nelly cevor^-t into contpct with

Huber. *t the - ..ent I C'-nl n't tell y-u vhon I vrv hi.', r when I oooVt- te

hir. I only knew Slater boerusc >f hio nr-e vhich d.ow* a.t oxelfcd.o tho - co

lillty that I -at hi : ..r $-eke t. hi , tut I h*d. r- -.ore nrl or official rc~

e

1 /itl .r.a with kin.

v *ad y:u can't tell this ^ri.unrl vf rny specific inotrr.co in which
y ,u received. « reT.rt cn the efficiency f the y-lk vr.ccincT Ycu kn.v
a. rjedrl ins trace where doer incut e were :^do r In vhich thl« ocr J-lk vr
cine vro tec ted. io that rltfktt

U. : C.ulm't tell y-u anythin* .f that nr-ture ti the -/.-.cat.
v All y-u icr. .v if thrt it Vf. r very l:«crtrnt nrohlcr. ft the er.d ’ll
19,1 tut c.-ehfv the r.blo.: cee-.ed. t» ovr»r»t« rnd ynx don't kn v h-v it


vra rec-lved, io thrt ri.ht?

A. r-. *he 'r-Ui- didn't even rrto. In cy nlni'.n, tho ir-ducti n
this vrccinc *m ir.cre.acd. Ihrt U why v« didn't have to *lvc nythin- r.v,

a

f tho racein, thrt U 1 n>d t. uc which in lteolf helW uo caPwRtirll". .
, d.iti -a, there vr. the rueoti.n f ttX urin o it ccrtrinly didn't evnOO-
rattf. It r.«oced syct.-rticclly rnd. I ah.tild like t r-->ei t . ncc -i-.ro
thrt it la c -itur- eretnc.*if-: f y *>.aiti n rnd ry trUcc end n r.icunde—
a tux. la.; -f the tra« -f V c.llil -t.ro if y-u think thrt I c.uld. .tive y
ouch loteiled inf-mtl.n. I !i-«. thrt if. f lnctr ace. y u net these
tl.ae t. tho exert. Sctoitt. vh. icr hycieniet end who v,rW -n thce
ou.sti.ns, he v-ulc. to *Uo t- heln y-u ,v«r thio vrcuur: of Mention. •
-nly :e-.ert vb*t I hrva rlrecdy ctr ted.


„ tell. c> Ur c.8 y-u y.urrelf ko-v, y u crJir..t tell this Trihur.i *
the nr -tic:: -f the efficiency f -*•- v-lk -»'•» « lv "‘ thcr '


ly y-ur -x lra:-ti -a al-ut J .>1 usin.-T
^ l*v doutt ty the use.


- 30 ^ 9 -


Ccart 3-. 1
15 Ic-


->3 rilSIDiST: IrLoral lr. r-«e«r uitil uc-thlrty

.'elveic.

(A rcc-st vca trices ustil 1250 fc ure.)


X


-


13 Fob. U7-^-ABW3-l^Blakl«jr
Court VCm 1


s>


THE 'ARSFALl Persons lr. th; Court Roco rill plcasa find thoir seats.

Tho Tribunal is again in session.

DR. FIZZC-TH-i Attorney Flo.-rdng for Dr. Kauftaam and tha defendant
Rndalf Brandt. HBy it picaso tho Tribunal, the defondant Rudolf Brandt re¬
quests that h* be excuud fro - .', the Court >oon after tho recess in duo con¬
sideration of his physical condition. ^

T.~ ~R~~Z~£'SU That is tho physical condition of dofond-.nt Brandt

X

today > Counsel?

DR. F12 l?Ti Thj defendant Rudolf Br ndt has recently requested
that ho bo -xa^in-d by tho urison radical officer. The prison nodical officer
has det.rainjd that Sutolf Brandt is in a bad gor. ml physical conditionj and
oth-r things ho has ordor-d that ho bo given additional food and also
has ordered that ho rost. Rudolf Rrandt fools very rtuch exhaust 'd by this
o>min.:*3 ao sion and th.refor j requests that he bo excused imodintcly follov
in* tho afternoon recoss.

THE .RESIDENT: Tho Tribunal has boforo it no bools upon which to
oxouao tlw defendant Rudolf Brandt. The Tribunal will requoat the prison
physician to make another examination of tho defend.nt Brandt aft.tr tho
session today and r.port to th Tribunal W.3 findings on tho uattorj but at
this ti - the Tribunal has no justl-ioatlon upon which to excuso tho defend¬
ant Brandt from attendance. ttll tho Secretary General roquust tho prison
physician to rate.- another ex-vi nation of dafondint Brandt after tho closo of
the session today? Tho prison physician should report to this Court con-
oar ring his findings as to the p^y^ioal condition of defendant Brnndt and give
Us opinion as to whether or not tho defendant Brandt's physical condition
is such that he should be excused from attendance upon tho trial tomorrow
subsequent period.

v SE S F RI DD SUBHDS22 - Resumed

©OSS mid:iATIO!I (Continued)

~ :r. ::oauEi«

Q General, do you roaucbar aqy specific steps which you took in the


I


_T-S1-


i.3 Fob. - TD-d3-2-0lalcl ey
Court lio# 1


latter part of 19ul with respect to th: typhus problem?

A In the latter half of l?2il? I have already said that the lattor
half of 19hl would have been the period of idmj when the cases of typhus
began to spread#

Q Did you ever suggest placing the production of typhus vaccines in
ti» hands of tho pharmaceutical industry?

A If this qaa at tho very beginning, 1 cannot say. Howover, I am of

the opinion that, for example, tho foundation of the Behring Institute at

L^iberg was caused by tho necessity of producing noro typhus vacoinc. I

cannot to nonbor axactlyj but I can still rciaonfrqr that tho question was dio-

%

cussed with r jgard to tho industry# I was thinking first of all of tho
Bohrlng "forks at 'larburg and that vo should request tho:a to inoroaso their
production. That is the only thing I can say on tho subject,

Q ell, 1 ts ut oca at ja-1323 to you. Doctor. This is thu letter
you wroto to Conti, isn*t it, on i October, rather than on 10 ftovenbor 19hl?

A Yos, that la quite posaibl .

• '!cHA?r.T: '.h rrosocutlon cff.rs this as Prosocution Exhibit 1x52
for identification#

Q YTlll ywx pl .aso read this letter aloud, G<>noral?

A "Tc th Reich B alth Leader, for infomation of tho Roioh Minister
cf th. Interior, 9- rlin, th- Govurnn.nt of tho Government General, at Cracow,
tbs JtaLeh Health Office# Institute for Typhus and Virus Roso-.rch, Crooow#

"Sov ral officos, rtioulirly in tb-i Gevorrr :jnt General, havo
apparently exp.ri.ncad an increasing Aroni for typhus vaccine during tho
past few months. At any.rate tv C~r. has rp-.at dly boon aokad for typhus
vaccine# On account of tho roquircr-ants of tho OXE itself, this request could
ba not only in part. As far a it ispossibl to judge th. development of tha
'3'ic, it is to bo oxpoctri that tho demand will contiruo to exist in
th future. It is thorofer- su ostri tc place production of the typhus
vaccina ir. .nds of f • - 0 - - pharmaceutical industry. The airy,

”, although probably on a 3 —Her seal., would bo consid.red a customer."

Q Ton'll notice from tee attachment that this letter was passed


-3


2 F *. L7-A-.-.7r-13—3-5lakl oy
C art !c, 1 •

ilor.- ly Conti to thi Robert Koch Institute, wasn't it?

A I'ia " eich 'in is ter of th: Interior requested it to to roturaod by
th* Robert Koch Institute.

3 That noons that it*undoubtedly ca^o to the attention of
Gildq- j is tor, didn't it?

A Yos, C lid:.sister was tt resident of the Robert Koch In3tltuto.

Q Did thi3 letter in any way refresh your recollection oflbut any
reacting in Doc-.br -f 'Ll with Gildcetdstur and Reitor ‘ one or nine typhus
vaccines? x

A Ih't only refreshes :y xxcory to th: extent that before I knew
of tho decur ent I had nnsrarsd ir. r:ply to your question that 3 cculd faintly
r . -Voor — and I was thinkia.: of ta. B hrin’ orks first of all — that tho
question had arisen that the oirilian industry was to bo included* and this
fact has bojn confiriod by this doc -jnt. h t Conti did afterwards with this
lot*, ir —.s net within =y sph.ro of influence. If it has been asnur.jd that
the Rob art Koch Institute .-.t th; institute and ; rof. f-ild- roister was tho
person subordinated to Coati uho advised bin, th r. this would be quit: -.n
ordinary yroceiiro nnd then tho stato scer tr.ry ir. th: Reich ?lnistry of thu
’ rlor shc-iid p.se :n such a lofct r frou th. OKH to such a subordinate or
consulting .gjney.

J You don't knot what was don.i c-'ccorninc your su go3tien that tho
phar -.ooutical Industry be ( -;in production of a typhus ra< ine?


-3C83-


su- -s-i -n -rt the


IS 7o" • L7 -. - C-r S3

C art 1- • 1

-■ •; * n*t kn -• -ii-.t -.-as d c-.m. ii-. ; ur
» *
her . ;c tical in’.ua r;- \c in -h. r hseti r. f r. vaccine, t.-yhus vaccine?

A. .'ell, I nl. -cat t s v U-.-fc -i.i.er the .r 'ucti a us incr-asc.'

:r that iho Institute f the Civilian -.ct r at Lcr:'cr , r f he industry

liiich lias already ^ccn . . , . ... ,

X '\r s I Pii e* lc - -. cr, is * .utc r.t Le:;c.r has r uccd

rr:ci.»c Irt. he intcSt*n-s f li^c la Us. vr cine fr.: ichen t

. ... cf -r., this ia the f it ,* tie r.quas v -

• - t their -X -vi.u at the e; rlr. i*c?!« in Ltt&on

In the . i*. Jsicti-a ef .'ei 1 vccciaot

*

: oanmrt ull . n th t at

Forte; a they have nly ,'r !ue% ' .ia v.< c.'./.v -r : chicken - s ’ ut I
atr.V. I tli u ht they v-rc .r <:cl tl:; that in the v.ry * a innin
.-i l vaccine, : eereaia, tint io aJy an

. ti .i n y ; art, - ; r c n c d ..

r i. .7ns '.Vci 1 ti rJcLa • r.t .i-.c v in th- Ci;: j Institute at Lo:.i<.

1 , Cn he ccaai c T visit in Ui saner f l?lil I haw s. .n hit;

■' -l'.".! institute .in.' I have tall;- ,o .. am’ icrxnr th't ho .>a.’ \c:n
i:r. f r uiu a i n . rl ' . i. e.

I teat to ,iut an User , - 1321 , TItis is

. ao Irceecntl n ontification. Ooncral, tide ic

• • -in. 'at a sL ;i- litU- c ver I VUa- -/.ic'. ;«keo sxnti.n f -. : . -tia-

. -c. -r 1/ I - i.-mir.

- ... s c a! and third . - c. It s-.vo u; at thL e pi

"2. )T:

.... Str.te Institute
frp ir ariiantol Thera. 7
Frankfurt / :.ain°

- Institute un'-r Ock-iaiv.t Ctte?

. r Gchc: Of

-3 net have a 1-tter as call i-.


, I- :*a aait Just a .inutc. General, *11 fini cut tthst tho


18 - e’ . 47
J-UTt .» • 1


14-i-rX?- Gr cs


recent is firit.

"Inci.o^i fir. c y .! n-t-s A . c-afer-nce which t 4c .il'Cu hor- un
29 .-cosher 1941. I request y.u roi rt uh*t quantities A typhus scrua can
- r ice in y ur institute >r n r.th, T. ill x. avail'..>1- f r the
civil! r. ul ti n. FuiV'xr.r-r., is this v ccin- ir-. f char.;r will it
x eh r > n t h w nush?

"In * itiin, I w-ul w-ciato >ur e;;, -r ti n v.ith the Institute f^r
r.c* i us -vis- o-o •?.. xrt Rich.' Berlin l -r the ;or -3- f eot listen.: a

t-st ieth. i r ty .-.us v ccin-, n. au'xait sra. t x."

%

Th-r. *- a-- "-h.-t c y f tte.se rir.ut-s f this n-etin.' w.r. c-nt la. ti
iwrfc eh Institute, t tb- G Tgrn»nt £rur 1 in Cr os, ta first the
.rjyHu'lerl Ins -ct rt., which « ul - t v ur ffic-, t th- Behrin
rla t the 2. ... F-rUn, n t Lr. C r.ti. . xe this little * cunent
7 • .v obsne svfrtob .* ur r-c.il.-*: n at iiu Be tin f 29 1 r 1941?

♦ •• •

. T.u c n s-c ti. t r r r.tly w a a-etln ?

a.

. - ... r.*.r. y th- n ae : J r^t : rrt i-r. Scfc ltz?

.. T-0.

. ."ul. .rl' urv 1 a Sch. It"

. 0 nr«t '.a rrt Lr. Mlvltl ..~t Cull.', r t.r in th. Arty i: 1

-ct r tu.

. - 11 r t r n \-h t?

... He u s in th- 0 . rtr-r.t 1 r Scientific K-'.lth L- -rrhi r te Isj
c «. v. n rk- ir. th. Jr ni: ti r.l — rt-u-nt. KnieV.r, 1 ennn-t c
t t r . i r-r, to w s - lln litb - ic 1 ortturs. I, thcrefsr,

1th - • -raid >.

U - uith tyhus, f.r a-:. L-?

.. :..t .x r.r.iVv. . ... hrii 1 - -v.rvhir. 1th Q-nsur*>8

i Itn xi nc-. H. -r n. ic 1 :i:.r vh te r.-c-ive -r-vi us

*t . . i_ y.u -v-r h - ny cunt, ct wit
... I h ! th- aea» c.ntict uith Ida s I h: tu the uthur fifty re.lic'l


IS • .

, jri ..


.nicer: - - - \% -- * — ic_i r_t

.. 50 -r 15, I i rJl •- • ’*' 7 ».

.. 5C.

*„ ?r r Dr. Ku-’Ick.?


D j y-« 1» " • ® • r


.... - * J ' ,

... K-u- -i—s-k--?


.... -r a-..- :;. 1 .

V t. . 3r r w, 3-u-u-r-. - -r.-n?


. I u .3 w r. cna *

• •

. u U :a El.* II*- a ID-•“•••


« •


- c hi . - •hyaioi n wha
. ,U- v icl Xmh I 1 • H-


.. nr.?

... 1 kn * *. aw
lur r. >. rlu n ,-r: . —:

• • - • thBv.ic

. fci -i ay ftf ’y -v- • • - *--* f i

• • "

it a.'t

- ut D^-nits aooo toy.


jut, la at r.tL*. I - & lr.


K -


• u *. little it rn: ut tj


OU r.ort f 49 t—~r 19U -=•«. It -. th.ru mu W*

J. I h r ' l t - no f «“ «•

I think r.u nlU tU. it inl.r-ctlr.., il . • r.T.rh ».« «=»/. ul lh “

.•• •.: :. -x- t This

wiU. •>- —

• . / . eh. - : 10-1521,

i.Vi * - • * - •* i »

. _ . • , ^ omunt IC-131 f>,

;; c lir t • * t‘, .eh. •?

. . : : , . • '

■*

Th nk y-tt. laU will - fr n L% f.r

i, , . . -ui-likut.ru-. tl.it 1-, ■> tk M *4 |


13 r - .47 -fc-L t^L~?KP- Gr-ss
- rt 1


sill Irvc it before it.

Itetu.' ierlin, U Jenur-ry 1942. Muoemn u-_ .ri. in-.tinr iron th- Reich
:inistcT7 of th- Int-ri-r sirno ’ey Dr. Bicbor, you t-l‘ us cbcut this
cemin^, reals is follows:

“On 29 -/eCejb-r 1941 n c^nf-r-nce t.rfc nl".cc t th. Reich Ministry -f
th- Intori -r c-rccrnin. the ’.-vwi.Tajnt -f n typhus v-.ccine in which, ~si>*-
fr . tho un’.-rsi xv-I, th. f-ll.*in t k nr t:

a

»Fr.’. th- Institute 4 Infectious Dis-.ses 'Hubert K ch': Vico Pr-sj ont Dr.
iLuooist-r.

X

"ir i the Sovornini jr 4 the Sjrurm-nt &-r.er* 1: Dr. Sui'icko Me ’. R-t. Dr,
imrr.-nn,

;r ; th- .ray ’ic“l Dervic-: 01-rst s-rst Dr. Sci 1

■Fr a th- \y . F r :-n In ustry, B-:: In rks D-.'-rtaunt:

■Direct,r 2ita
Hwua*an
Dr. Dcardts


"The c nf-r-nce h th- f 11 *in r-suits:
r.J r • ucti .n c nt-r is t u -r-ct- in th. C *»mr..nt G-n-r 1,

: cittc- 11* t L-ri r , which is t -v-1 .> r. nti-ty.:huo v.cclno r.ccjr'infi
t r„ .1 ; Beth 7h- .)£• ucti cont-r is t -r-ct- n\ -oUvU.

;• the 3ohrin .r3:s, Th- -hranefct fc-.s -e-n sk-.'., n’ h s ir.'ic tv. its

-illir. r-ss, t 1 o. ?r f-ss.r ei 1 t is^-s-l f r trlnln f -raonnol,

■|U» ir> i r ;a,.-tc. Th- v-rn rs ! th- G-v-rie-nt G-n-r*l ..ill furnish
saw oil in : r.-B*. Tho B-brin rks will s-.cur. the n-ciss-.ry


vCd-. ert? rj. 1 ce th- require:’ r -rs f r this ith the Reich Office I r

• r 1.

-r ucti ah til e uili u in the sh rt-st .ssi’.'le tir- o th t its c.\-V.city

•

iU e t h. equivalent f th’t 4 th- -xistir, ii-rrr cht Institute (Kr-.kr.u

.. -V-1 H..: is t ■- «rijnril7 t th. ills; b l ft


16 *0-0 47-;.-i
C -art 1


.lc vr.ccino *.;tich is pr.sortly oir. : prcluco'- >y *;hc 3 chrin;-
.rrks fr.'r: chicken o.ys, s* -.11 *;o tostcl f'r its effectiveness in
n .xpcri -nt. ir r c: is purp- s« Or. sennits qill c nt*.ct 0 '>orstum-
bauifuol'ror -»r. Mrirrvaky.

c. I;' tMs 3chrin * -“-rkc vr.ccino is prevoi*. t' ho offoctivo the
pr ’.uctl'n cr.p-city C) y olrin "fries in -:r'ur - sVr.ll ^ osson-
:ir..ly incror.co'. Ho Jolrirv- rr!:c -Jill V.ross .n r./plicr.tir n Bntho
v,icJ iniatry f tic Intorirr f- r r. .ri-rity cortifipr.to fer tho
aocruln ; f tho require , c -ntin mfca, n l ph.ee tl o nocosscry rr .oia
<<tl tho 'oicl Oxfico f r lc n-.:ic ^ovolc-ynor t '..it! t: ir priority
cv>rtificr.ti..

. product ir n r tfcphua vr.ccino c tlw or1 ' inatit-

uCo ahr.ll u incror.sc...

. ott s f'r. toatir ty hue vr.ocinu ah 11 *'o lovol^pod v) ic)

'.ill n.-Jcu at tu Cm* fcr 1 prrci’jlc.

Hu 'Johrin. • " r’-s :.ru sor.'ir. . ropr^aunt-fcivo tr tie 0 vorn-
Ocnor 1 n 6 J.nu.rry lf-iC c t! t pr-;': rr.ti- r.e c n be initir.tod
l nc'.i tuly f r tlu pr luofcl r - f t pirn v.cclnc recrrlir* • tr tl-o
»1 1 tl- .

Si 7i w ‘ Wi>or

iris tori • Ir t

~ r in, 2b Occo : «r 19*: 1.

J -i’ 1, or tl io r.fPwC’ • ur roe liocti r in zny vrr.y . ut r.

• r.tton'.o". r.n tie erzu.

•*. .

• • - y< ur aubcr.tinntu, Schi lr, p ;-t t •• u •ut tl la '*.outin~?
•. -* t tMs x.tin?

.. A - s •

• c:.:.-= t.il *• * tl t * t :• J1, •}


• •


r c -Ur. : s very r. r- 1 j» it ’/or r


- V


t:_! rjiyt' in in


r S. ct #} _c‘. il'. 1 v, c..vri . y ir.tervcnti - r wild* rrul.'.

'?.n, r.ytl i: ir pr rtlcul r * si '.c fr i th. frct tl t r.n in-


16 r~ -r -15-2-Srjxrr

c in-t n . l

in t'«. prc 'uctirn rf v-.eeinc v:.s t be r.ifcc .• l ore,
oil, 1 »" like tr ut t t it ory 1 k-

• ri. n: 6t in , p rtloul.jl; ?- rr. rr.pl 2 :r.'. tl r.fc is th t l>r.

' eky, •.?] rr.s rut C t: c : v-tin , r i- o cent etc', sc thr.t
>. c uil erjry rut o:.. < ri :,nts t t»r In. tl o effectiveness rf
t'r. i ;*• l!c vr.ee inc, ?r- bio rt id r.u h o lr *.y * ittoH

t t: a -ri'-ur.. 1 r; .c very lrp rt -it rr. rno in rt ir; • u t*o$o in-
• * ' “illonoietor, i v rno,

rc.r rent .ti*., fr . • ur f ico -n‘ po'pl fr- >Ur n - r!:a
r. t th~.t testa v- ul • .

•• e nrb r..;?r ront.-.Mv.. fr — . ’ r : :

Oil erneittor r-.s xp isoly f . n viiiT aoc-

: n . ho : \t.j ! vc, *■. r. t ! *vir r r 1 c- 11 v r-t r f C<rti
mt i t f nysolf.

• , 1 n rt fco.tor.i r tlr t. Yr\x nio-

ropr oontr.tlvo ur

office" rt n v a Sohclc-Overi t-.>a rr-t . ‘ '

rcco ,:b.r?

t t’. it c. ifi voncu, yes.

. vo ao. smot: In • ”• tl r then tfco

• • ,

tl In * 1 " ft t:

''t .

• - rlivT or.trier in tl © *'in •

V-. rl;* r.a 6 Jrjiu n; 1 r-

l-.r.C 1 p ries trr.s \ m '.vri.-r rl-:. h 31 p^rs. nc r...-o tr•.uni=v:: , .

-it! t' cl 1 ’T.cciro fr y rr inr ituto .t Or k-w; 35 p-rv ns

Prccocn 0 x, Oil‘oi ulster 'On; 35

. ; rn r_tl tl , v ccir- “-hrir. * • s*rr.l ,; nr.'.o f c- rrco by the

4

.rLr * •• ur ; r tl -r p.rs ns ritl ti er Iv-hrin.:;

• • :* u uxpl «r. 51 t *-y G J.inu ry h: r .ci -1 Vr.eeino


1 13 ?c*' 47 -. -S r

C- urt -> . I


fr r. r ur institute t CrrJtrr, th* o - vr.ccin- or *.ucof. by tlo
"v.) rir. ' v rks Ji - ddl r vr.eein- r.n. ..n inf-cti n rr tori -1 frrn
Herbert A-ch institute unless tl t ncutin^ bctvfion •- u, CV ntl/
lil'o: deter rn' :.ru~. v/s]~- t"k pL.ee?

... 0 t cf.n bo oxdf.irud v ry si-pl;-. -it! re t tic fold
v-cclne, I cm »nly r-p«r t -nee re t’ t tfcu .oi l v-.cc^.'O wr.e •

Is tribute Sr r. 1 rp_ nu b.r -f pL-.cos as n r tl - instltuto
:..i: •; w s oat lisle/, in 1939; tl* t, f r o fjjplo^tfco ” in Moil-
: .1 i>Oi6 f tie Y/ . tl it; tl t, in ; n,

It -lar etr.tvw in tl is 1 tt-r t: t it 1 s b-on ;:rovi-uoly fur-
: t v ri ua pl.-.c-s .\n r r. resile t t: < c . t it \ir.s r. ft vory

1 ffloult tr r’;t in f is oi -1 v-ccino.

••• rjvyf.in r,b ut - *oerco ^5Jr.ur 1943 o rn-

ia tvpl.us?

• • , ’U tf rw tl • t r.ltl ] '.

Uk.. t« toll ;• u v.::* aucK I c*nri t etr.to tl“fc 1 1 --u.

• • fcyp-
U\z v.ccino n r nc ln ur t •( icsu,’ t: tlo v ri'ua in'.ivi Iml

’ r ncrus f tl- obrrv.cl tt ’"it rnl- t * u jCur f tlo .ohmr.clt

.l< 1 “,HCg rr t' r rr In r.o/.i-.r.l ru?pl;* • frico?

. I olio Vi tl t I Lr.vo ..ir ; ?rvi ual;- ntlr 1 tl. t ’lat-

rf-ti n v a wit: tie -u*ic:J. Incpuctr to n tl t tonrr.la

! - > fVW - iefcrlbuticn ^iof f t: . olri: cl t ?!o*icr.l Sor-

xi r*

• , , in :• cu unfc 1318. 'ills

.

— a •• • r ill *iblo.

t: * *i.rt 7 cl Institute t tl “del -inlet r f tfe

1 r. It r t 21 nu r* 19-13:


.>hu r v. c- Ip r t

f 31 -cc * -r 1? 2.


r . r: -


1


is rv s' -os ---j . »•

C vrt . - .. 1


'Bo Ciur f tl c. el rr:..c! t l.ciicc... Vrvico, .;pprc re! o *. wit! c.

-- r 11 J'-nu -ry 19^3 — ctpy end'so'. -- tc tie &evom*wnt emC

iniustri-l f'.cfc<ri^£ f-r typhus vr.ee in o, wit! tl e roquort in future

•

r. len ur t supply t: is Vf.ccino t* the vji vs hr nchos

f t! i . oln. clt, etc., hut ~ly tc ti c Chief r f t! o ’..ohrur.cht

I-c:.l Service r i is , tic --..in ::o ic 1 Supply office.

^•wru r.ro n* chjocti n3 t. tli& rrlcr c f r .r c’o Report Itch
Institute is c<nc-rnou, » x

FUrtlor rr-, infrr.-.fci* n ir roquoetcl r.r t<- the p, seihlo ruoc-
ur. rutput <f typhus v.ccin.., vhr.t ir.cror eo -f pr lucti'n c m * o

clievV. * v •. h.t V tv, . r. *. vi • t C;u ntitius c n '»o : u vr.il ' lo

t tl - cynir.oht r. ffili tol f r tl-ns. - c 'f the reply whioh
aunt t tl ■- c! iof f tl w -ol n *^t I’c.lic 1 Sorvioo t lie roquuct

- Ir .it'.cho . - s . o at... u. , f i 10*13 nucip. tu , <f tt-o utput

1 : ry c : r. rv tivo llrorj tho

.u ntity f 2 -, liters p-.r ntta u y u >xc ocnai Ij .

• v, O.n-.r. 1, .1 In’t y u ..lc. exorcise r c ::tr 1 ver the ;»r 1 -
uc;ii.n f typlua vc.cc in- z istm luiaho.’. fr • tl o llic.6i*n rf
typhus vaccine?

• I

f tl

u Plo n uy at. ff in r or tc o i f r.V. -•

ic quito p sex* Is. r..\ I cr. n« t r..y rxythin • ; *c .Vut it r.t tl o

:.unt.

• : :..ll tint in " cuixmt .1 , acuticn

1'it 306 - it v c ■ vo: r n *.xt: e r.c.rnir r ito.l fov r re-

- r* r .r ’>y K nt t ->r. V o * it i t-* • r.ls< r. c py t<

' . : .rr Or p ft "ilie x? . i 1 y .

. U . . .. r . 1 : r: .. looial n ..a t»

-t 11: : r v ciiju Jiuf-.ciuri:v: pi nt c.JT.ft yet * o

: -c..ur. tl I'li-f f tl w . o.'.ic. 1 Service f tie ulri.cht, wlr

" t tc ecilo . ' ut the precur j f vrccinos, l...a
r - t y_t „ ko . ir. tie - .tter. "c-jsn't tl: c r tl.or in’.ic to


15 ; -7-—-S -15-5-Iv riv v

C ure 1


ti t r'u ! s :u. c-ntr 1 -.r j rr .ucticn cf typfcus v.-.ccinus?


%


Co rt I


IS Fob U7-* - 16-1 - LJC- -

---. Something -Is- is involved with regard to this aocuaont. This is
- r_qu_3t to establish c. new place of production and to obtain 3 largo
mount of personnel end aatorfcal in order to establish n«.w production
foe ill tins. I con only say wi'-h r-* rd to this, that such a r-quest has
r~v_r re-chud ry hands and i aacu_>- that sore body from the luftwaffo, or
perhaps rro:.ossor Rose, could iv_ you rare infe-ation 3bout it b^bauso
you hate also Seen fr:. tha docu.'unt that no reply os ever received by
the Chi-f of the 'ahraacht Medical S-rvic«. -e w-r« never so impolite
that wo did not give any answer for ncnths to Utters which ware received.
C«u can only say that this request referring to the establishment of such
-n institute or th* extension of ouch an institute n-v«r reached ny hands
-nd that is why I n-v-r , -v_ any reply.

rtoil but the pcint is they h~d to -;.t your permission to establish
now faciliti-s, didn't they?

/v. It ay only b- n this case t at all now constructions and all
new facilltiaa rvqcir-d the approval of the OK and that I, In :ay capacity
as thj ef of the .tohr’.acht ..die?.} S.rvico, -as ;lso included, in connection
with tills I want toat-.to th'-t I con'd not «ive any .-pproval of that kind
becausu I did r/ t have ny funds. 1 d to sub It thorn to tho OK,, and obtain
tn-ir approval. .

7. Uhat about the production facilities it Duchcnwald—they didn't
start until 1Vu3 — I dcr.'t suppo o you r.now anything about tho production
f vaccine th-re, do you?


i. a~v .r n_ .:-d of an. vacci:.- . roduced by the -ffor.-S^?

A. I We h- rd for tbu first ti-a r a typhus v ccire produced by
• \j .affer.-S3 in the y.ar lyui, whoa I was vaccinated in the prison camp
.3 Eibli. g with this vaccine.

... ;• u -.' or . ign ranee :f the sach-nwuld

rL ntr and vaccine production ir. h. f Ce of your critical inCrJstf
ith typhus probljes and year p-rsonai control ov_r
allocation?

*


C:urt I


13 ~-b W-n - 16-2 -IJ3- L-sscp

I can only explain it tc th. fact that I did not know the nas* of
Buchcarrald at all, and if ary vaccina b the. affen-SS h:,d r-ached .ay
hands, or if I h .d -var heard f such a vaccina of tho '.affon-S^, which
is net ir.pcssitlOj. t-icn I wauli irtadiat-ly hav- brought it into connection
with thu Hygi-nic Institute of the .nffen-S*. I hre nov^r entered this
institute but in ary case I Jenax of its existence*

Q. Hut General, in Jcnuaiy 191:3* the Re -rt Koch Institute ^cognizes
an erdor fro a ycu that they ere to quit allocating vaccines tc any of
th- branches of the •ohzaaaoht and have to channel '-vorythlng through
you. How do you naan to toll tfco ribunal that the typhus vaccina produc¬
tion station of the -ffen-SS at Duchurtwald could do what they wanted
to do ith th.ir production -- you had no control ever that and never
board of it — is that right?

a. I can only j ;r thfct if such cn order, because of the delivery,
was issued by the Chi-f cf tho .uhr. acht -cdic .1 Service, then this- was
only sent to a Certain distribution ruvi the -ffon-S° was also included
in it. That probably war directed by tho Chi.f of tho Medical Service
*f—£fco fan-SS, Dr. Oonzkon, bvc- 's- his isttors fere always kept voiy

• anurallyj if, md how Ion this -rccinu «J produced with tho affon-SS,

I etna t tall you. Perhaps Pr, Schddt cm give you r.ore information about
ms with thu -iadic 1 Inspectorate. J «ysol: only

- r -d It for «:e first tLv. in 1 ?Ia5,

Q. uorviral, hot oosaiblo interest could the 3S h.vo in testing
tv.oo ogg yoLk -.-.coines on its on initiative in Buchenwuld without your
op rt a tile xry edicol Inspect r ind tho support of Conti as Socrotary
f 3.ate f r Health?

- k * ~ h0 SS • aintair.-d Its cwn field, .s I hv- already previously
tescrlixid. The fact could r.; - hava r- nlnod hidden bare that this sector

voral decusocts

‘ - f r t •.: jStabllshaeat of a wholu series of scientific

- rc " institutes ar/i . wh: .e na i -r cf approvals by ag'.-nci-s for that
. vs never found cut earthing about then. 1 beva repeatedly


Court I


15 rab 1*7-- - '- 6 — 2 - LJ3 - ^-ussor

£' -ted *- t it ws not possible f?r 30 to gain any insight into the chcr-
-cwr -ad the systaa ard tfco intentions of the SS end tberefro it is
not surprising that this was else the case in that field. I cannot say
viat the purpose of tho S° was but I nssu-o that cm. of the reasons was
Mat they wnr.tjd t. b & L-dependont and they wanted to bo independent of
arynllocation throu.h hj sc that - would not be able to say "You rdll get
very little now, or nothing." Tfc t is enc -xpl-n.-.tion. I cannot state
anything further -_n the sublet.

« *n: r SS troc$s W -"‘3 the . .. rin; eC ( >yolk vac ir.l would be in the
field un<Lr the Jurisdiction ol thj arsy radical inspectorate in nodical
itters, T.-uld they not?

ft. ?ho units at tho front with regards to the nodical service
and, in this connection, which ccnc-mr the c r the non in c. .bit,

S w units were also vaccinated, and I w quitu certain that at tho
begtaninj they wor* innceulated tho ..»lgl viceino. I boliovo they
oro subsequently irmocul-tod vlth tho egg yolk vaccina but I cannot
• tto * at tith certainty.

■i. Her you explain y-iur ag-jd ignorance of the typhus uxporinunts
at ouchonwald in the face :f the fact teat &i«r sido a visit thoro,

Sch idt ado 0 visit thors, ..~rj hrj bo«n sr. testimony that lice
xu soot frr. tho institute t or k , in th- f :c- of the fact that
Dim. mdu •. report A tho .-tin- f tho -':noulting physicians in Aay
1a; 3—ho* do ycu lair. ; ur 1 .-.nor nco cf those iv.tturs? Did thaso r.cn
Jurt fa51 to report all this to you?

ft. ..ith rcg*;rd tc Din t ., I must repeat that I have net listened to
rt uhat 1 hcvu board -f it, md hat I .ad, docs net

rl - iai ary information ab- t r5u.ro and hr., his exporiaents or his t--3ts
•v carried ut. -ith r. "ra t tho visits i Schrddt and Si r, I was
o 1 -tcly s--ir -is.d t. s.. tais -r.tr/ inn I cannot ,:iv- you any inforra-

bout it. v.r, - asstre .hat it will b. giv-: ibody else.

•

• r Q>* talkjc t. . about it and nobody recoivcd my ri-rs Xrot o.


C urt I


15 -D k~-n - lfi-li- LJ~- - L£cS£?.

-A

Insofar as Buch-nrold is ccncorr.cd, I can say that I h-v,. hoard the name
n-nticnad fcr the first tii - after the capitulation.

__ c-.. "Eiz I have no further qixstions.

TH3 F?.ESTr2'7: Any r^-dircct ersnination of this witness by defenso
counsel?

RS-ror,.- re.-..Tier

BY DA. I^iTS:

-*• r rcfos3ar J -r. hcHanuy r.as askvd ycu b^ut the. report and tho
l-c;uro which Dr. Eclsloohrwr p ve at the .ting :f tho Cexulting
Fhyaiciana in DtCwofc.r 1 :2. It ra one f nu croua l-ct.urco in this field.
!<■ I -ant to ask you once n.ro if you know *ith certainty that you have
. r this lecture by Dr. Hdsloohnar?

... .cccriin.- t thw ontira situation 1 nu t ansr„r this question
ir. the a f fir ..-.tiro because th.i-cturo .f Hcl-lcehnor tack place flnongst
a whole 0Jri.»8 -f l.ctj.-^c ebout fr. .win.; ar.d this rating tork place
-t .a.0 a ir.t _r. it v fro;. tho 31th cT JicVwrber until the 3rd of
DcceSbap, and for «. it : .3 the- * .pertant or cik of tho 3.oat important

, ...r^Xoro in ny opening speech -nd .Iso in tho discussions,

I n- vo ir-ct-d and or.j.:J-d to tht:.i and hw. . .rn.d the:, that they woro

° 60 •" » * in 0» course tfthe winter, that wo

should again 4.1 into such a situ tl ,;,.i - r 2.

■*° r toi3 r *aon, uni buc:.u3- ?f th. ir,pcrtunco cf tho prtblaa, i consider
l * certain that x hav. ttiended thj ,cturo.


is --17-i-PE?- ?.in- :uck

; art . l


H . Cviii: i* Is - c—n fr.j the 1 -ctur* th t uiocri&nts wore c-rri-j'.

.ut -n hua-.n ’-win s?

I ::rsi t rv--a ~r tr.* 1 . star* .x-.ctly -Rjnar*, ut .ihen I look t the
p.;. rt then it eh -s whet I h v- -lr-- 7 r-vi usly st t , th t r*s_:rch wna

.jiA'C"rri-: -ut .n nirr Is r. -r. :vnn ’_i: s, ' r. t the r,rtici->-.nts w>n

*

,r* iaf vrnu'. t. - cert'in ,xtr.t th-rc c-nr.-t h v ’-..on '■ny ' u‘ t, nne ;x»rhnp®
this i. s >jun a-r.ti.n. in th fdl.‘ l.ctur* th t H. 1:1 hn>r h s colloctoi'.
hia ux,:cricnoo ir. etod sec uoir, -noies r.' th*.t sea t th. Atlrntic^Caast.

. 'liuTsJ rv 7 u s-.y t th. I ctur* h t c nv-y th- in.'i-asi.n to
th ilatervr w: . Jen... K«lzl jehner th-.t he h hio _x. -riq-nta n dl-ta

■h r. 1 lln i;.t th a-- n' ah. h '-r. turn * v-r t- hie f.r trontn-nt-

at. UbHUUV: If th* Tri'jUirl 1 * t , I f.'t think it is noas-ry t>

1 -.-. th- nitrvaa jit th t uch. i. 1 , h* tak* th- witix-aa .iruct question
•v.v. hia nn enepwr *...ic:. I think u a un erst r - . . f ur, n I

think ti la quit* 1 . r p-r f -r Id . th-r. t r.ot t- the :-ttr th ur y he has

• .iv it n' . ut >1 r a In th uth .t this vitn-as th t hu ’i 'n't utter.

DE. . 1 X 12 : i:~.y it lur.sa th Tri un l, I h th* 1 *. r.uaJ.n th-t in
tft. c.urse f th- ir.Urr ti n iy i;r. JicKn-y th -1 this r 'l*.-i h n t boon
-X’l.ir- na cl. irly a I n.ul like t h v* .t cl rili* 1 r th. un .erst n in,*.
t th. tri jut.-.I —

RSSXD2 C uns*l, th. 7n‘un 1 overrules th- n.

I a . 1.7 -r c

.. ilr. ; a oh 'in y u rt 1 th- t.-atie r," 1 ho f raer

■Jen.r 1. .rat a-rat id . v, which th- 1 ttr v* ir. th- c ura* S th* 2-ilch

•

trl 1. I • r. t h v f Sts r J Rt ti r. wr th* rc.r’ of th

teatia ny. «a ir .a I c r. r . r Oen-r 1 ratr S rt .. th-t

7 u h • .*n hie ou *ri r uh.n h. ..-a ... ic 1 inc- *c: r f th Lttftwiffo; th~t

. In the •«ro. : 1912 >r the

: rvi • r- -1 ti -n hcc«; <».•' lot':, ir. c rjwcti . -it!; it, is th* n r’ "su.xjrior"

• .-.fine ith r* r t th* Chief f th* '...hr-- ckt U* ic 1 S*rvic?

.. r :

- r.« •

In th* Uag V u ur Chi-f it th* wehra - : 1 Survico nn


18 »c' . 47 -«-17-2-?'3- Hir.- icl:
v -art . 1


n’r.-n Hi; >kc w.s Ohi-f I *-h- H-lc 1 C~rvicc i th. Luftwaffe, was there any
c-.ue. - ■ 'w-Je.r. the ia'r- asi.n with Dr. Hi' kv th't ho i.ns y ur su’ .r .irate?

... , a I ‘ -ii-v- th t if Hi.>yfc. h' be-n &k- t the tine, r if

s.a-b.'y h t. L'. nla th t I . a his su .ri r, then ho a il‘ h v- refute.: this

1 -u^ly n* cl- rly.

. pr o :-n : -• - ■ 1490 — tty it >1.* o- the

jribm'.l, I r. - ka *.h eX-.ct ..v.r i r.a-.'r-r. It is • Utter which the
Jhiof f th. scy .rrcta-nt n Riiof J th- R-s-rv. ,.r.jy r Uress.* t3 Rg£ch

Harahr-l *U«ri . It -.is k u-e.. r. f y ur -ntry int the c incil af

th* i-ich .use rch Council, r. the su >ati r. t ait Dr. Schrvibcr int
th- ..eich tUiSw-.rch - u. oil. _ • it -I th- Tri' un 1, t.is cuacnt .0-1490
is exhibit 45-. • . .U-r-8 t the f r.—r Obvrotr .a-ret Dr.

ochr.i')-r h‘ ‘ in c-rt In wt; —r. :r.- li is.n officer f th- rt r.ay U* *ic 1

Inn.'ect r u t th- Uich ..oB~-rc:. - .'incil r. trr.t h- h b.r. cu oetw by

♦

y u f.r this . eitin; is that c rr-ct?

«. ..t this ti I c re; t .* ctly -scri * the inci -nt • ay- r*. a it
courr-! -t U. t M -. In ny c a*. t- :a wr.s in cc r nc- with wloh f the

J :t r.-r-in-Shi-f f th- .Us rv- «.-ay, th t th- Lekrancht oh ul 'o

r- T-Sente i:. lhif ..

... h-t I :.t t kaw is, e: tb. xs.qu.rto which ' r- e .-.fin- in the
r : -- r 19 :. i M\ • la tf* V V


er. Kelt*: :.r. . r si t, this ie ah in by th-- letter f 21 Oct -r
1942 which w-5 1 a zxfleOt * • ., ;- m. v-r, h's n t


. In the lytt r 1 th. 1 : 1 .: r th- Guwrni Ivhrrr.cht Cffic. t Tr i.ss r
a r. 1 a-r, f 21 Oct -r 1942, : II »ir. * is at* t- :, -i; 2 qu t. fi

- nt-y-i "T\. .i^icr. rah 1 t 1 ... ... is •.. r T- “ f irti.-.r -xt.nsi n

... Uicb e» r 11". At -I a ski:. u — Dr. S^hr-i -r, »h3,

; - kn wr. v. ^ th- U .^issi n-r f th r-ich ?.-s- rch C ur.cil f r the

? . .«nr f 1 a- 3 , . - . ra -t - ? ;• u ft-r tr ie is- r v* 1?

... . , i re.. . ntan uaiy r. inf ra- a- th t ti- Ifer

- .r. r. r


-3=3?-


0


1? 3tf:

jourt 1

:r. "C HSIJ3?: If tho ^tribunal plor.so, i don't think this is tho propor
i=a to rrguo tho intorprot-tion of loeuDosfcs, tat i just *nt to st-to that
the -xcorpt frau tho letter hich has Just boon road t; Dr. IJolto cortainly
-cnatitatoo as ro Joe tic:. on t:.o pert of tho Roich 2osoarck Council to tho
iiilnatloa of Sckroih.r by tho Ar-V Helical las ootr-.to. ?.o lottor which I
road co.-.cor.-; itsolf o.yy i .h .ha aypoi ; .one of Hacdloaor. It is r
^rccnal lottor to Hanllosar stating that ho hits aot t.or. appoint©! tc tho
prooldlsQ, council of tho so&j-rch council -.3 ho wntod o 0, and that's -.11 it
3tya. It rs-Jcoo ao poforoaoc t. Gchro’ or -.-s' it can't to torturod-ta tho
c ii.-y that Sehroibor and the other rocccaonlatlocs ..-.do by Trooha uoro
turned dona by Gearin'.

-r. Ur* Proeldont, 1 bollovo th-t 1 • roo ant it.. :: r . KoHn

that I car. lonv- tho int-rfrotation and judging of thio lottor to you. it is
ol--tly - osplicltlv f t the Roic . !>rshr.l fiuvla'tentnUy dio-^provoi
furthor e.tonal n :? the R.'.el. Hjcsarol. C vr.oil.

- Tltnooa, t: hr.& aakol you t\. f& quostioa; is sjot

the coil-cti :: .f -at-rlal .or re;:--.rch pur? ooi a task which

-c ccanon to all braaceo: h . ho .• ao 7 ; . tho doaroo of 19*2, poreonnol

»ad : c c. :. ,~-ii. ...ti.:., , -..-i -sxno* nakia you, lid this

^rrc.xol a:— ur.t orinl r.j.'l;-:—r.t of oeorii.-.ti e:. aloe ref or tc tho aoiio-J.
ffleers which w rs bo aoaip.;ei roe.arch jobs?

A : at is aot g? ocific ally -u>::tionoi as any pl-.co there hao n-vor

cor. • " >ooial Jincuaalai a that ou'-jjct,

- I uaat to a-, y. if, as Chief of tho Wrr.-.cht Nodical Sorvloo,

♦ •

roso-^oh, « old

r oa -oit; Chief .of th i/ohzwaoht ^
: sSic-l .:er-lco ;• •: s'- rule hava lad a io -xtiout ilk- with tho Vohmacht
biic-1 l-.£ act r? Di’ v-u Have - >cl a Ce—rtr.ut, for :^lo:;co - - iNrasoarch?


k ", 1 had - man th.ro t k c-; -


:. ileal, aciontific r.d


fT . : - . ataravor to do With

rch.

- ■ - yw. Aftor

hmcj lid •/u ava nay fueds all;tt-d i*=s roso-rch?


• •


r-'fft 1

a : ndthiag -r thtt kind cnao

: . fund; —.11-. r r r~r

ci rll, but th- n *-.a f’s t i- teRr-elfaa tJso usr,cht.

q star f Dr. Gatfeirtt rod Tiachor

: ; -rcoucitl _ :r-._ .V t>i tl- 7-11 . — I b_ ; ur p-a-len — you l.-vo

atf.tid ir- oca.icti vie, nil - :j - rl-j •' -ttended ill not cljcct

s: *oi?le-.lly t. tin at :.—ol -.«o .. Ir f.na r r^bk-rdt r.ad

3r. yiachor, r.fc lo-.r. noth! . r - violin *> -t thr.t aubjoct.

hv- - t .o' i- c-v la sovaml vn;- s, o*t lor

•j u ir.z,t it, tkoao s' did .. t c-.ao cposilio i.-toroat,

.? v t:.w >r.:-cj ;:.4 nz .t-.wl, t : rtll t j .*rao:^ .: proaont did

: •. Jjet t: than ao taa;- rlrj-dy *»captod tfcftt f’C't “-a ar.turrCL;

- ... 1 : ..ic-i oxporlaan a.

• , i “.akin; a M .Ml .i„ q.jtMia; is f-.oro :. it yot “.nittor
5 aci Uity wkieh ?:. •;. ;-.ur r.oiu -1 n'-untor-jnti n -ad your ;'-.lluro
t Vo «*sr -.c?i •?


-JICX^-


Court I

15 jb U7-» - 13-1- J3 - Putty


.oil, this could only bo in y cun person. That I did not under¬
stand in that way.

<• ..ell, net only you but else the others. I new want to ask you
In tho fcrailstjcn of the iocturo r Went Proftaaor Gobhnrdt stated,
could thuvo ..anythin, contain-d :.r. it as f-r na tho ntnn-r f tho
.xtcutlen - ccnc_m.i, which vight sh.v. th .t y..u xid the otaurs —
a. Th-1 is What ■ h to roj oatodly s. :t%.d h-r.., th .t in qy opinion
th. f r.ulr.ticn end tho desertptlon and th. explanations w.r. preaonted

N

in such a .n.r tn t n< r ioons I r cbj.cticns .xiatod.

4. ih-rof ro, there *.a tho third pcasibility that son,thins 'which
i.;>t hx ol' -rt-d fra. th. rd.nr.ry -Jght have been ;ru8ontod, but
t at the ann.r in ••'ii<'h it •-.a -r-Sor.tjd conv-yod the ir.pr.ssicn with
tno Uatoxtora th .t thia wsa n t 'ra, . r.
a. r.. .t ia qui ; r.oai \», -a.

Th- rv-.sec t.r -S r. • suntioiud h .ct riol.-rtc.l wirf.aro onco
ncro, end ho has r . : n tfcich te-. alao tavaanted ta Professor

t, • to Btato r no-

ivoly tho r.i.raca to P-cv.wr.t 133? which in itaolf r a not pr-sont-d

tlcn n .i quoation he*
i rcUouin* santcaoo la - interpreted, Cn pea 1 t file rk
r - jO, r.i : Tttutot "Tho ..uhroecht by r.quost T jon.rel Field --irahal
.1 lc n.t t xticipat- in r.tpcnsibl. -,ur..r in the jr erir.onts
o .c .'ioj oxperinonta w:uid also be cerr'.d out on hu-.an bo in s. !l

r os this r r-ul-.ti. a at el that an o-d.r r i8 issued in that

r cticn by u lt.1T

ho.

j

•%. - i.-. did . 11 - _ -• :rk?

... .

his ncr t - OUxtoL it.r rped-list?

-- Ib tVi r.t o. xt .r.t .


, bo h cto to co -ith tho 'fcdical Inspectorate?

... aJ medical TXic.r, bo* firat cf all, belonged t: the icdical


Court I

15 Feb J»7-A - 15-2 - LJj - Putty

Inspectorate organisationally, and then h- was a good g-r.-ral hygienist,
a. s tha h-od r an investigatiiv; ffico in S.mny, and he -as net
fully occupied tr.orc, and h- was also occupied with ether patters.

t. I only want to dotag^dn; hare who was his superior with regards
to tho work.

•v. That was .. ..'.pen s Gflico tco ..r ar-nt Office 9.

3. In the crcac-exarinati-n th- D cu--i.t I.T-1'J has b--r. hetMod to
you. It was not paresontod t you, but it wan used os blsife for your

: rat r a jctioood the na* of rfcf.sser ..!rth,
and h. nna sv.t-d Uir.t Dr. .Irth bed su: .. t- d th t -/p iaer-os should
be onrriod out on c:ncontration cae? in.- t .3 t Neuen-pusaen, that you
rust h.vc had Jennie 0 e f th-...

1 would liku U r-’ l y-u tr. r.unt.nc. wi*ich has glvon the reason for
this c,u-sti.n ir. D;cu «t lf ;s tl&rd s-ri-t f -xperinenta was dis¬
cussed with the r-pr-cont-etivo f the "l-st" gr.ui according t' the sug¬
gestion which (Wsterst Dr. n the cession f ti-.o discussion

with tii- fleloh Ccaalssloher n tha Uth Ducvter, 1-eu." This is a sontonco
suitable t ivo c. urs- t til* corie.’.uc ;n th 1 irth slid that this •

; oriental s,ri.s o', old be ctxriad ut uf-oucn;i-rrva cr nt any other
c c-ntr ti.r. c _

a. .• , he dij n t c z' th t with ary oth.r r .rd,
s. ‘'.urvfure, it is nly a conclusion fren tho --..sur-s vtoich
Pr-si.’-nt Konrich drew fr . the ciscusai n ,n th- feurth f -ectnber,

a til

1 /•

. i.TSi :i--y it ploato tho Tr -er.-l, * shill have tho frefsssor,

lhVit,

d id * - tr s-cuticn r*-s t kn. r- ifc.ut the afliduvit, then ho
cii : - .-*43 45l a -5 i 'Itn-su .t or,- tire.

.. « th* typhus question -.<hich

c crirl. i 5 .rach U . in :iu ir .rr - .tier, y the irec.cuti r.. I

e

c.li.v. ui t wo c r. be -r Llul tr. .t tha It s_cuti'r. has presented tho


-3i^S-


Court I


13 : -b L?- k - 16-2- U3 - Putty

. 'it fc j dccur-nts bec-usj they really give a certain clarification T*ith
regard tc tte qouati .. £ t ia typhus vccrir.- production and distribution.

Is it correct fer a tc s?.y that tho bi? ir.t_r_sb ir. the typhus question
— snd I rant tc s -y genuraily — consisted ir. the fict how can typhus
bj cccfcattod -ffoctivcly?

. ¥a, by ali . -ana.

-hat is the c s: .; r r 1 t.*,. . st inprtnt -. ins l^ccobatting

them?

V

DoL-usin:, t , c b'.t .1.- . tto Ilea.

..her. towards tho oad ! 1 111 t x tan r :: ;-.u ilac hsvo

t7ph'ia vaccines available?

... Xharo was ttoo * . tho td also the cbiok n

o .lie vaocino.

v -csn*t Were Is . r u6 ’/acclnw?

«. I r. • r. . i. 1 - wietod t that ti-but I issu e tht it
.%>* hi-- st d than.

4. .as c y lk vaccin- »?r.viy pr.ducod at tout ti*w?

... -. 3 .

4. Bor if u i v« olf-ctir - ccln a In v ri us typos, will it

bo wron* t discuss to- r.r. rch ... r tc- V. . twin? instead «£

li-rtin. tl a t the rr ucti r. .f r ecir..n?

A. it is o iTOct ith - . . f th3 t.vigl

/accine r.-lch -as o;.c-i ant, t. v - re ucti n c ulu n.t bu raised v-r a
curtain aarunt, and with the - y~.»>. vaccine *o hu4 difficulty in cb-
t-.inii the e- • s : tcause *ve v v *uld havj needed hundreds i th-.usands if

... ...r. Idy . 1 tc 1 ' k fra setting which ctuld bu produced a

-wily.

i* s ia ~jy fr tcv. ir .at pr.bKn f tryir. t raise th^

“ f vaccines?


C urt I
13 X\2» L7-a.


l6-o- LX - Putty


— that Is to- s tilin'.

... I -maa that tocdocn.--nts which the Prcs.cution has presented

ive s*-. -d in toe ccerso .f ry cir-ct .
In-.ticni “I hid t -%rr. th, pcaplo ith xj Ih 3 to tell then
th.t I c.uld n t furnish tv rxy vaccina fTor. Cracow."

... is stated there.

ent tin n those c.cu”A, that

is, if y:u r-copnize the . _r c’-'Jly, t...r. y u Bust przduco a ro and

%

then y u intend t ' fchrnh the it. cstry. I, therefore, in
toaso docunjr.ta *hich 2uvo >o-n s«l ttad aid toich I assuvw y u confirm
completely —

A. 4 -s,

- — "* :« •'-< racxnizu .os carrot ted ay, that I have to

:-i : 7 tho qu.flti.Tj3 n -i y ur v cry uni yrur urging f .r an inc o.oao

in tho p.'tfaction f vaccine, -a tus :v,an to- n cwssity f toe kncwl-
od a hew c-v.ril ;• tefirid-inl poi-ntist* actually eccupiud thwnaolvco
in s.Ivin t.Js r Is.?

... *t -a n thin: * with -ach vto_r.

• • • ■’ -' f • -a y .r \ ; r uv’ ils fror. tow ti cunont about

tv- 'iocuso 1.n / 2 "-c. b-.r 1 :,1 x. t n this diy thu typhus research

pr blwc tos discussed?

» . t 2 b the vaccina situation.

• 1 " -•'-« ciai i ' to t . s.c'nd c j'.r-nCw to k piftCO

r. t;- 2 to 1 !>.cc b-r, , in .-.icfc 7 u did n.t incuse anything Tfith
te - cjrc -- f tno pe.pl- oanti-:n-"4 in tow bin 5 diary?

... . s, i n vu at ukI th.t c.torlj*.

: • . quosti ns. - it

» ■ . c ..

2 “SITS 7 : -ributv 1 has :• c-i*.--d _ c„rtific.a. fr r. Captain

• * i

ini^r. It ul. b- advisable tl; ■ the D-fonaaA, duaelf r--.net, be

urin i... b : .no. f this aft.rnz.n.


}1Z~


14 Feb U7-~ - 15-5 - LJl - Putty


Defendant Rudolf Bramt sill, ther-fere, be -reused frea attendance
in Court for tho balance f this nftomaon. The Secrctajy-Gcn-ral will
file the certificate rcc-iv-c fr:.a Dr. Sus3ell.

The Tribunal will now bo in recess f r .few ninutes.

(A recess woa taken.)


16 Fc'J <i7-_-S -20-1-
Cc t rt H t . 1


1B2 Ij.RSK.i: TV.- -r ' vn I is ir in soseUk. . * pi so y< ur

hcncre, w. “u > If 3r r. t h :. v rJ.lv. : M-.eolf f S - Dr:cuco r.ntcl
;.L cJh* is r^Jaunt f(*r tl I.P «if .

3EE PRESIDE 7: H.o Sooxv t.ary 3oiu?..l vill n to- fr r tl o rvc r'. tlvo
ounce tU lufun ijit -u 6 Rrsnv'.t purei r.t c, . n oxcuau. Oic
n .uit . r. .1 sop V a \%juix .“cu;c *. .a .. wi . " 11

trill au.t:cn tic t itroae , • ul u.iv'I.r, r. cf tl o lofon:\-

A

.^t . n 1 acr.

, as, t»<k tl'O at. n’ -.n'. fcostifi*

ff Hews:

j:r> E ST3RIK0: *l-c wltnuaa will ».icg Us rt 5 t hnU n' ’.o mvnra,
r«.,Je tin • ..rs*r • o :

1 cwu r 'v Oil, ul ililtb;- 0 .rci-nt, ’-1 t I ri 1 a >oi k tho
.jure cruttl -n vl. 1 rritll i ' n
( * 1.0 WitnoPO rep t^ . ti e t: .)

Je>-2 iEBRl G: Y* u . y e . ...

jlLZC? ~C ’JP.WX0.

3Y UR. 'I'.Li

.. »'ltnoaa, tn ul j

... ?..Ul I’UoPl'leP •

1 <n ' rijf.ro ro ;• u ’• m?

a. on tto <itl . ' (-otal-T

n i- - In).

•• n*t ; u pL .f. Zeaori y 1 o .\ r until tto

y r r 1939?


.

: c! . r c * ry

or.: 1 n

ir. 1* 13 \

tricul

..t-

.

icine In 9

t“it i on

n *Vrlin,

•n Ev.rv.3

a

- a'l'i-r fp

.. Mi Met 191?. *

’vri tl ^

first -irLl

r I r.-.a r.

ao: .-

'eP . ? ti U :0

ic. 1 : ras a

r tK. 31.

:t f J. nu ry

1915 I n..E ’

is-


...


. . . y atu i.s rjri in 1929

i-.Jv ux. in Cl : y 1 ,r ti n. it tl t tino

IT


18 Fob ; 7-..-”_-20-2-3r: si
Cc UTt He . 1


: V'.B \cttivo . S .. yrnctic i p! rs-ci j. n. r ti- r, in 1925 ‘ta¬

il ccmun 1 re. .Is trie t ..1 ••c?.ci v: _cl .-i r - I 1 ol*' f r t\»r
rc. Can I '-OP. u SI - /..ycici r. 6 tl I-stltuti n, t. payclir.trist

; 2 1 . : scrv f roHt y< rs,

tl t ia until 1935. I tlcn v lu.t rlly v lunto-po.'. f r re-entry intc
ctu -olrc cl t since t! o v r!c in tl a payc* i..tric fid*. ‘ oc r o very
llflcult. _ C ••'I - n ; C.po v;it: tl'O CUi r. . Hcl .t tt t^tiru ptOr
vr.ilo" Ln tU paycl lr.trlc flel. r. . I c vi; . c cr.ir« tto-s ritl ny

. . - - -c 1 eve) r. On the

first -f July f tie y. r I o : ti ' t< t! Suf tvrXfo,

W t ia * t :: cni c\er • in rv: ci • I v fc :r ? .Jyr.ci n with ..n
nti- lrcr it unit. -nr. t, t *or lore, I we.a

tr r aferr- 1 tr t. o e .ic 1 I: r. c r v, i t* - r • reo ..n’. I s tr.yoJl

• • •

«o : Hal c pr.i r. : -a. . nil*


nlrcu 15 »f July lu*.0 i: •-

u t tr r.sf re . v - ’ t*. . i

-f it If tfuro I or ..r ;i j »r.t
1 i rvi<*o ao-.-.

■ ir.t- ' c) 1-f f if vitl S- w

.

. - r • u r lit
3 lif r tl - .el r. cl t \ ‘i 1 ~
• . : e. *i . s . ;• pt ri .

.

- . .S i r z. z .. . -

i.t u 1 .. J • 1 - J# I

request ft 1 ,. .irvi.-r;' -.=*

'. : :.t is -• vr osi


• . •

. o :» — =•: *• r-aufij

. fx"si f Ocv - r 1941 I
-. f t* -lr * < rco . ..» Cl-iof
C T, Ol " Cl t 1 O’iC-
r c ‘ . l* 1942 1 r r.pp-
rl t e lie 1 &cr-

f X wt: *1 T tl — .. -cr.cy


r.. ‘ : It -.y ln 1 “

i i* . 5 pr^F n :ont by
1-: icl rf,

1 -riel c Ln tl t “ n 1 >1? n.


c :urt I


18 ?«b U7-.v- 21-1- LJ3 - Karr.-w

h. In particular I v._-t t. s!< you iai.it thj p sitlon .f tho Chief of
tho .ichr -cht Radical S-rvic* was and he?, the w.rk and activity was carried
- - .ncy frea the year i 1 .2 until the end -f tho war. I
have shewn you the decrees f 2Tt July 19U2 and th. dcc:cc f 191&, together
with the official'rogulati n, in r - sk j u t refresh j ur ry.

•%t first I should lik* y u tc uvrror tho qjeati.n, r. tfta basis of the
:oereo of 28 .oi.est 19h2, d. y u 'on h ~ this cocret cv-o ab cut or.3 I
roan this dce.ee f l?h2?

a* Tho creation of th* jctrj t ..or. acht ^.d'c .] S.rvicc, as caused
by the difficulti r. f tho sir.t r f 1 fcl end 1 l&, •. • , . ,2,

there woro ur or.t c'o anti fr tho «r y uhich wont tc the Savy and ..ir
Forces in or ,r to bt'in .nodical officers. *.ro .-.-inly c ncorr.od with
wp-rt Ad wel i-s in winter.

«• n cw wso this CS'ISO .f tho cr ati r. oxpr.fCvd in the cLcroo?

“• - basic t u ht in tho decree vus t u.. th; .viilablo personnel
•>rd ant.orinl and us tr. ; in a lamed fashion. l.-.at is, at pl;cos whoro
they were ^st ur -.ntiy r_* oirod.

tdict is called, , 'th : : • rsnnel

C - rdi nation"?

“• *ea, that is ri ht. • .rs *nol that, for instance, was at cno
ujhirvcht branch tsc.s to ho tt-incf. it,' to •, th; r ...hr-, cht branch
which JK' dod tnt -1 r; re urgently.

r.i Chief f tho

-'htvneht ’{oriicnl S.rvic.?

"• a !1 to. necic-J. tisles which occurred rf-.ult no •usly with all
4-hrnacht. bronchos w_ro t- b. r r!;:d u:.n by ,r.j control --ency and this
"-o in rdor tc s-.tc p-rsoonel.

'*• n-L'. " ci c :: speak f mutual

r " c acurnia-.. tne entire ar-.i • rc.s? : r instance, affairs f
F by i c-_ rhich cccurroc i'.- rr und ar_.ps _ni nrry :r ps .and
T_r - r:i ~ 3 ~o in both cases?

*• * Cr Active casur^c, -.1 ria prophylaxis, rr;tcctivo vaccinations


Court I


18 Feb U7-k -21-2 - LJj - Xarrcw

againat tho various epidemics od, finally, xclc:l cduc

Hctt do y-u understand tho dccr__ f 15^2, bearing in oind the
point cf view the cr.cti-n f t new c.-.rcy? .-> c it an .avency which,
it tho noaont cf its cri-d nation, had a vory definite sphare f effectiveness?
That is tc 3ry, alnsst nutcr-. tic ally c _-c under ths authority of the chief
cf tho a- arc??

that wasn't to- c so at cl?. •- a, re concerned with Hvj
quostion tc build up this a-oncy and only r r .'.I;-- • ._! • ith t.j

task after tho oth-r. x

Did the chief i this a^ncy hav* a spec! fchorlty which, in
the isLlitary raj*, ru can deal note as an authority to issue ccomnds?

a. Ho, ha hod no cilitaxy authority t. is n. In oho official

rc .ulnti n, slich is not availafcl her., It » s .a-pr-ssud that he had the
rlght f directives?

*• The difforonco is that a nu/ori r naturally has auth rity to
issu- r ers. But y u c r. r. / Jc : to® rl nt . ;ivin ,*i r^ctl vos
nh .re thoro is not a rdfitixshi? f su, ri r an:: subcrc'inato and, them-
i re, r. mth rlty tc is-uo c .


- 31 ^ 5 -


13 r-. • 7-..-S -22-1-“ esu r
C rt Be. 1


r . m -ill u pi r.eo it clc r t• tl . :-i 1 . -Y; un 1 1 w this
r:.s fcx-rclso.; r. . r ticoi t:I _c* or.. 1 S3 - *■: ±-f f the i'.olicr.l
Service t' r I.- t: - pr M- r ’• icl J . ?

It w:-.r vr tr.sk c o it el-..r - j*. -1 f rccs *r id es vl t-

%

jy u r c r.-ccsa- ry . ' oj l. . t * o c i.vincu' a’, wen rvur

y tlat tloy c «1Z c per ;o r. S’ - c *•! r. ~ ' o :V tv. *'y '.ircvc-

cirr.a n. c rforoncos.

r .. Mew, if sue! ta*k c ul n ' -.it ricn’.ly

, v ; c u: ' . x ?

A., <r 3 is ir. ir ti ;ivc, c r .. i - 'Vrt; ..r *:ut rep-rt

the Ir.ok <f cvccefl s rf lie -?? e t! Jl i.f f? O'.r ? n in this
,rre? '• til 1* -V- ‘ r ■. • ’ r i - -• ■ P

. • i lr. -

loi:.l fliip.rviai -a • * lit t. - .x'-. : • * -r * re-j

r nchefl?


i •


- •


r. Dl. to : va : n • t •• f f ti * ■

... - ernn t t-12 . u • • 1 ' v-n in fflci-1

, • 'cM * t :* - ::: 1-i u 1 -Jr. cht >r nd on


nrt w


t ir, ;i


-r.


~r rr r ' rr.r.ch o?

- . v ir c n ‘>o


v r ■ i-s t-n lone ice rl*ick


i- I r o f *

.. 'fl u . ttitul-a t v re

u: crat i ! V/ trlrin kit. o iri-" t, r
. r. tv.il, . nri-r- f - r . -«• r ;• c rtr rt t- ti e ton'ency

p • ‘ pcnchus

•• : ri • tr, Ml:

• : to 1 v : : . t - • t % i with

• • 2 , -net ns i t fr ; t". - eifc-

. • I crul • rol to


T* r


i


Cii r


_hi' *:.ckt


I .


• . ••

; N ; . : : - • - ' ' r t! -ir


18 IV. 47-..-S -22-2-Lcss-r
c urt y . 1


c p.rr.61m up t-' tl o present zz. •_ r. . ..11 V.ic: 1 rfficus

6 eoitinuu working* lr. v . t» : . 1 ? t!« w .o - i'i-rs. fcurir.

61 c ur:_ f J r.u ry x 1 t.fc fit: uprono Cc::*-

txi'.vr >t tl u 8 vy pr tcstin*, in p liic n r s, tl: t ti c Chief cf
si. * clr:-.c!t -o’.ic 1 1-r c u a 1 . s! rl. *. 1 ir vy rio'ici.l rff-
ic^.ra x wialV. thou .. • na' y r.

..1 tv:.: tl u rolc.tiincl.ip t; tlx, T. ffon-SS, tl.-.t is, tl o
i..lic;.l s-rvico if tl o itff or.-SS?

A. Just li ;tlo .c tlo tl* r .Vi xv. clt 'r .nc:,?; tho Cl iof r.f
tl o Toll-.clt nolle 1 service w s tl u aup-rix ‘1* t! o :ffon-S£.

_ • oroV. wit; tlo entire ..S', n-CG. Wo wero r.lwpyae

concern*.vitl tl .c« * r.r.cKe tile! vwi-«s c u.ittc-’. wittl tic
-1 r.v .cl t, tl t is t< fi •: t.:r fr nt tr ps.

r. SI rtly, 1 v v ul y'» os ri c .V .vl tl cl ip < f t: o Cl iof
tf 61‘v. ..ohrui.cl t ’Vlicr.l Corvi-.o ; -! iofc ft!,- c lie: 1

Sorvicoa »f * reus r-rnnbi-oa? Iry'te ioflno it.

... On tl . at rc\ -tl r T ocro. , ;hu Cl lof f tl Tohpn.-.cht
‘c .lc 1 Services v c olov-to,. ..’.-rvo ;1 o t..r -1 i>.fr »T 61 o "oC-
. 1 r rvi- r - f tho

jr.tlsi 3 r r.c! lo 1 t< -op: sc it tl . in fr r.t cf tl o civil-
; - • • . • ■ -
tl r. ru, 1 , is. tU 6: si: 6 c rlin.-.t li ;.vtu .1 pr ' lo:;s cad

. - r tl,.e t..sic l.o

t’. j ri.-lt t -ivan," irtictiv-s.

\ On tl, s run t: cf or f 1C .1 •• .3 tlo rcoor. r- atm

in tho -!r..c’.t : T : r. tlo ffon-Si 6't'cho.l upr n?

- A. K< .

. - ■ -* •

. . . eictc. V ntr.l cl ifif

: , 1 • , r.v pi r: .cist * f

. . ; , : r r

r iatr- ticn cl-rl: . : Ter t~pi£ts.


'32-o-~. sscr


ie rob :
CcurC 1T<


a c-*

w


Di*. fcbo Cl I of if CI-^ obrnccbt Sorvicoo h-.vo uiy

•jo.-jib in erlcr to c^crcir r- -crcl ::’r!:?

... “e. -c b. nr i.o .ns tif.tov. r. c crul- n't oxpuiu*. r.nytbin;; rn
tb t.

•

", '.e tbo Cliof -f tLo cb.xvr.cbt --o'.ici.l Services, this Prcf-

0 3 2 ' r *v.n lcsc-P, in !ia prsitim r.s C] i.,f ; f tbo •clrv.cl't oC.-
icc.l S.-rvico2, in r.n iflucnti.1 :r.'. atr' n .ys. ti-n?

. . . s cnly . • id v \ tr ovol poll,

. :• i: _ ; z'.y : bl n’ tl o influonco x $id Prrfoaaor
in>s.r nc ’/u'C b-.I?

Ho inflv.onco errelate* ir. 1 a p r ti r. r.r .r.-.y "otUc. 1 In¬
spect r , t! •, r n ct ol r. .cb.t v r neb.

", ^ ycu n w ».-l- t: r, in 12 .r., r. 'lei 1 r. i'ir.tl n w.a
r.tc tb^j *cr«v?

... Yea, tl-t.ro w.a rfficir.l « julr ti r, ' ut It is net r.ttr.oh- J

c* l i.ro.

. you, d r

tur tic. cffloir.l ro u: iti net , ’ wrfco?. in thr.t

iffico, writ 2^1 perl ut it. Host *f

Ml wo .n inter etui in tl qv.otl r. rtf ivr rcb •' icb I icntlonoft
*>of ro. In tl t rfflclr.1 re vl-.ti . -nti n rr.lc cf

r 4 -rci, roa crcl r - : :* - rd It! ro r* tc tfco "obr-

r.:.cl t •-r.'.ncbep?

... In tl is ffio - , : * ■

th.ru wna nr auc! rv nti n * ac »e V. la 7 lnt tr.s cnly nont-

i'ns,' in tic jivt ' .cJ.-.i t.-iu ti n.

. b. n ••

. . y a. Ho r i* id .

• t - - : v rl -Vt

i i: r. cticn After tl. ifici 1 r- pii-ti^n -f il : : 2 ?


r. • v,.r ccrri *.


IS F-* - 7-.. -r -22—i— ss.r
C urt He . 1


A. Ye 3 1 .uri. 19 -. 5 . 1 -u fcU C. .. v f ,* SI.a ohrst c! t I'-odic 1
£orvice 3 o ai cffici 1 trip t’ I- ly .sx , cc«r',in* t< r.y

1 U'JO, i-‘.sp>-C5-1 inst 11 r ; -r 5 n . . rco.

It ly w..e c!r..c>i -istrie5, •- ^upro: u C. m w. c .’oil—

c! t C 47: xn'-tir, m' -1 c j.'lc 1 fic-r i:. cl r «, in cc r -
nee. vitl t* fc, 1 *. /. r: cl t fincti ns.

H c 12 t er.y : . v.e c - r ^

. . Yu a, r. ti.«. vory : .

Di. ?r fu S' r » n .1 r r 6 n - -l • r; c«C *n inetittt o f f
tt e o!-n melt t Hr: .r.c>-r"

a. He, ..cc ;• In t *1 1 "C, n .

. ;«.a f ttc X n-Si ci lottlbh

sitl r-c-..rol f f- r is : t*. . .• -io. -ne .tutu f r foasrr

llru . - v.s!:y?

... I I-:-. \ w r ti - il) 6 5 i fcU t rr . .f. or.-CI.

. *1’. ; u .r. ny ci. U t; tut- f r illt:.ry

Eciunco :xi tco-rcl^, v • tl in u .-toior-r'ie?

» it, T nnv. v 1 r t

* * n “ * * %

- . •• r

”ru •rrrel"’?


n .. I rxj f r : ?

ly iorv. K. t< \tt-r 1 *.


p r5c • f

1 it: qv ti J.r f tr- r p


. , ' '

lj : us r.c. rcl. , v Yu '.iccrrs- ••j'.l hi;.?

... I • t s..y cl. t.

. -i ; In * -r, Di-a ■?

. It is n:-n t: b ic lion . .u,

- 3113 -


1' FtAni^*^^BJG-^1-Klnebuck
n art 1-. 1


Q I cs sur > th-.t ycu repeatedly spoke tc Professor Handlescr. During
such conversations, bo they official cr private conversations, was ft any tiae
the ncao cf 3ucken«&14 ccnticnod?

A It ns never stationed during say such conversation cr conversations.

\

i Vero ycu *t rny tire in r concentration cie??

... E.fcro the cc-pitula&cr. never; only r.ft.r tho capitulation, as an
inssto.

1 Dc you fcn:n the aicr.cy cf the i.eich Hcsccrch Council?

.. Y.s, I knew c that but : t'tc.kncv any details about it.

Q Ycur .agency chief cf tho i.ohrsr.cht U-dical S rviceo, did they have nn

X

ffici-1 contact with the Reich r.esw*rch Council?

/. So, •- hr', n; official cent:-?. Cn tho contrary the Chief, l.ehrnacht
.{'.ileal Services, was cl the opinion that he .act-oily should heve '.denied tc
. -oh Boa :i! Just ■ the civil! r bclcn£od to it,

but th< offer*.® ho .e cn thtt score vore reject.

. D. ycu fcn-w Canur nitre! Dr. Schrcib.r?

.. Yco, I knew hi-..

" ’.hat position did ho hr! '.?

.. Ho, -t that tint, wes dcparttcntal chi _f in the ny 1 -die’ 1 Inapoct-
:-t., :ct-.rto.ent i. r oci-nco rat res. rch guidance. ..ft.r that he boc-Jic
- .. odor cf •-iuc'.ti.r.-l r up ; nit hi . bho iliury Ufldloal ..ca-i-.y, *nd
r.xinr.tcly at tho sacc ti w ho v: a plcnipctcnti rry cf the hoi eh Research
C.unc'.i for the coo-t cf cpi'tscics.

. ;:leni; ctor.ti-r;- f the Reich I.osoarch Council for the ccaV.t cf
i .-vie.*, t-s h. subordinated tc Frcf.sscr Kanulroor?

.. Sc, n hr : oorresacndooce with hin under hi* cm lottorhoad and us.nl
'•is c*ri rintoi oovelcpes.

; Ti.vi -i.ncy ;hi.f, Am-cht -leal Service?, lid this - vney roe civ*)
rta on r-sv.rch n:rtc and assi-Trs-nts?

- , . ■
i y - n whether this v ? the cast ever since the be.ainnin'*; th^t
? I'o., r r a other that only erne int_ effect later?


3111-


-OJG-23-2-: ttnRhu ck


.V,


. k ..cccrdin- tc ny reccllccticn -his case into effect - little Inter. I
icr.'t r- o=l-or rrc definite subject, tut I think star-tine froa 1%3 this ary
fc'Vu cl :.e intc -ffcct.

r . IhTt it as ycur position r-s chief cf staff cf the l.chrnocht Nodical
Service? %

In the eld cfficid retail: ticn it wes lcid down thr-t I had to represent
the chief :f the chmecht ^odicel Services.

Q That is to scy, you were the representative. h.uld you *leusc describe
the practical ccurso cf ic?lin with natters within ycur -’tncy; acil thet ra?y
hr.V- arrived which y:u had tc distriluto end which then :>ont tc Professor
Hfuilcsor?

.. She. roil was delivered tc th j re. istretien office. The ordinary anil

w.i cpjtai there -nl r -istero.. Sccr.t tturs, t.; secret nrtt.ro, i.-ero

mod by Ihen the anil ues diotrituted tc the various

-x rts. Fort .r then r .re nerfc-d u. . by cur little stiff and the ether pert

•ire w.rkcd upon by the experts cn the rrr.S. fcrcos bronchos. Then, whonover

§

It was n.ccoarry iiscuaoi.ns woro hold about these letters end everythin • ms
prep-red t. re. th t the 1 ertent aattera cr.ne tc the sijnr.turc cf the chief
:f th-. chraacht de licrl Services.

Q I 'a lotstod in atobUahlng l "° following thing. th-novor anil
cv* t. ytu -nd to the 1 .pr.-ta-nt-l chi-fa, rh-t nrs actually preoente 1 tc the
cl.i-f f th- uhrr-rcht foiled Sc:-/ices cf that a-il end who decided vrtr.t wr.a
‘ tc pr.seated tc h-i?

.. li'turrliy only the ~ct import-at thin s could tc nroaentui tc tho
chi.f cf .cnrciacht .l.licrl S r*.i = ;r, '.a the .---rta.nt 1 chi.fc hr.l the took
t. .erst pr.scnt the in,:rttnt c.*tors t: n’ th.~n I in tern .cciiod wh't

, Ken *. “3 the situ ti.-r. :hx Fr'-racr Handles.r was net in B rlin, hut
' • a!. Te cutsiie?

.. if there Were ur «nt r. tters I .vric a telcph.nic r rt tc hiic cr he
-• up and cc.-rissi-nd se tc M with important tasks. User.

: - dly courier \i_-ir *vck and forth 2 . th't th’- ia:ort,mt letters c ul 1


1 s • rutry-..-OJG-23-3-ninibuck

i urt i


te 5c.1t cut cni cent brek. Loss isportent setters, bee vor, ^er« kept in Berlin

u tc the tin- cf his prcs-r.ee, were prep-red sr th.it ho could then .-'ice i

%

! cisi n ‘ si-n his nine. The s;-celled cu r«nt cutters r.erc- dealt with in
the Lnay helical Inspectorate or in cur little stff -n' wore then signed by
at *.7 order.- •

i.ra Professor Hrr.Ucscr frequently ir, Berlin?

.. No, he aoetly st-yoi ct tho hor-lqucrters. Only occasionally did ho
cc.;_ tc ?.rlin for just r tea :rya.

4 ' itn-st, I su’rnittvJ tc ycu the affidavit cf Frcf.aaor H.indicaur which

X

he auhedttod tc th; Tri-unci rbcut the werkir./; 'ctivity md the sphere cf the
terk in the l-vicrahip .f the ..my rr* chrnncht, rnd I raked ycu tc rend tho
vrt which referred tc th-- ’.tahxsaeht Medical Servicer. 1 ok- y tc invosti-
te it. £, «a n:t to lest ayadf in tee jre-t devil a, 1 should like to :sk
ycu whether y u can s*y under y-ur erth that th- description of Yrcfoaaer Hand¬
le «-r vhich ref-ra U. the r .cecy cf the chief «i ohmncht Hedic.il S«.rvictn in
true in' correct?


.. 1 hove reel the stftencnta »ith r«. t c re, end I cm only confirm


th.xu

Q D. ; u t: nk th-t th- .raters which rr. subject cf this trial, matters
i.Uch ycu kn w -cc riiny u their contents, nro iapertmt waters if th-y
h- ,ci-' tv . su J ct cf • re,: rt cr my letter which c- .-o into your agency?
i. Yus, r.c '.u* t. .honever ny experiments ner- cr.i-rod and whenever any
ecurr n it would bev n ainantly important affair.

; Ceui: y.u sry rith cert:inty ‘hit such e r-r rt, such letters, never
“v.-e ; resented?

.. It w's neV-.r : r- -Mated tc ao.

3 Did ycu pcrh'ps rocoivo knrwlod/c th-t i cert-in art ter wr.a scu.tines
-it with by dreunv cation cf ycur p^rsen end reported iaac liatuly tc Pr.

*■•••• 1 t-r?

.. ..' , th't n-v r era. t: ay fcn.iludce, end if th't hie happened, then I
thinr »

Z siciliy you w-.uld have tc knew -bout declaims, rcjxrts and letter


-3116-


IE ?C rurrv-
l.urt lie. i


which «cre isr-.ert-nt oncu *h sc th t th-y h'd to be presented t- Ircf-sscr

*

H-'r.HoBor?

Yea, thtr: required cf nc, I never hr.d th- inpressien that rrc-
f.as.r KcwUcs-r intcnticnclly end k i. »i_. ly lid net infcr.a ae.

o Cn the 1 st :f Septcor-r 194/. ■- nc* sottlencnt cf th- rruncy chief cf
-hrar.cht Helical Services emu r.V.ut, ehrt t.s the intention which ley be¬
hind the creation cf this nc.« agency?

.. It t s the- difficulty cf the verk. It nado it appe-r necessary tc
croetc c deer r-l*ti nship cf superiority and tc arrive *t r. cnoral authority
tc issue erdura. *

Did the r -cncy cn their wn initiative rite eur>sticns rh ut this new


a-ttlc'i-nt cf the .latter?


Yes, these sur ns ’ ere re-do ty uc. Th> cenf : re very

len* ni todicus *nd I think that the my »o 3 jo it n w c lstituteo the twel¬
fth or thirteenth ir-ft. Ihoso crafts hr_. to be present.1 tc the bchror.cht
tranches, t< the a SS, t. the Cctrdssicner Gcner*l, tc the OK , epor-
-ticnal oteff end t . tho Chief, OJf , end wer Iso mfbrdttcd t; the chief


of C». t

'i ’ h.*t is ‘ efrr. ycu n-w as the decree cf 19 U. including tho official
r l ti n, is it s.rethiii* th t ir-fesacr Han 11-sor streve fer as chief,
.ehr. .-.cht Helical Services?


.. Kc, unf-rtun.tdy not.

; Vh t nor- the rlsjivir.-a mi the cbj.cti.na which led to r. chcn-e?

.. The Leftw. ffe ur.igrstmlinrly cc:,.r t.-i. Tho SS rwdo the eld well
k~n licit cticns with referjnco tc their pmta :n:l units whicn were aub: r-
iinrtel to th: hehrcrcht, rnd sinca cth-ndso they wore net cencomvd r.t nil,
'■is net interested ir. the furth-r details. *ho ..ncy suhiitt d a different
-raft, -r.d thj N'-.vy aalo the str r.- cbjecti-r.s and did n.t wrnt U rliew
*- d i.f cf the ’ -hraacht Jodicrl S rvicos nny ri +.t cf superiority and as
ittl- a * sri'-’le uthcrity.

, this situ-ticn, these r-j-ctin: rttitules cr r-ther, --re they
: v r_=3«j In the finrl tact?


IS retru-’ry-.'.— DJG-23-5-Sia4budc
C urt :.*c. I


.. Ycr-, hcuvir k.xws the story can well recc-nizo these points. The
clear dlivn- c r.ccpts .f xo-.rirr -- 4 subordinate wore left cut. The herd
aub.rdinr.ticn is r.:t acr.ticr.ui - single tine. Iv th r, it is nmticnod nee.

Th t is cr-y v.ith the r.cdicnl — with the ohroftcht Chief of llodicrl Services
; %rs n*llyj thrt is, hia aulcjdir.rticn under the Chief of C1C . In addition
the -jcrcssicn technical authority is used, rod furth.racre, those technical
cuth- rdtics arc Unite! t: the sciiccl chiefs but net to pocplo whe were
subordinated tc th-cu 1 hat is t; say, the Chief cf the ohrr-acht Nodical
Services cculd, fer instance, issue ar. erder t- the ..ray dodic-l Inspector
acccrdin. te Figure tut he couldn't issuo an crier t.- 'ny arny tvuc
physician er any 1 ter cschdcn 1 ceruse he is not ncnticned un ler this author¬
ity cf iasui.a: directives.


- 3115 -


IS “. o-l- -ty

Court I


4* Yrv - authority to c . rt'crs in ox fy

that paint?

L. . cr :• r.,-. t cticn v 5 limited The nj.t to

iaau- .r i *: „•; .nc; si r % . i injnrticunlr t. t it is not

188U5VJ-' '-a r. n-tUr cf ooursu “.a it u cl- biro been in a easo r.i tionahip

ration Sb«r.i . t t!«w footnote n pago 1

is it io cit- . ~n th.ro *

.oil, U.ul-: you please r --.Z it?

... Y.8, ' - L'Oinj, t- r • it: 1 : ta .; «c f tnN r- ul .. ». thuro
btlAV-.'. t t - Ux. cht, jry, .: vy, ia t - , th. unitt of th- -.iton-SS

rut r ..vt^t t ’.- c’ir -cht in t . unit* ’ . rg* nlsatima cor.-ltt-c* >*ithin

j-fic» -tion

i: - pro.r .; . vtur cph.r.r l r. -..at.. .iJjr r-.Oully - »r- t. - i.itro-
uc. * iit t: v^cy*

j, h t v-a th. ir.t.n w ns h th lunctiona n# -r. laid
•cm ia ft- t-rt?

... ..rt n j .r-«t • ■ . p rttioi » th. * hraaoiit

l .-ic l >.ivi;c.c li.in uu. .Uat r r k *ar lai. down r.t til t oy Xa-.uro
I lie r.i . h j th. d »:. ■ Di - - 'rt;~nt chi.. *.. jacif lurry
t\ t cc r i. t Co u 0 1* -n ‘11 th. t rati r t‘

.in ih. r-oy - ii ore ;cc *no laid down tit r_v i: . in th-

c-s.. . t.u .jr y o'.'ic l Inso-ctrr «v. only it".- th. irciplin-r; position of
i Di- - -i. or 1 -i cr.

.vi-t. r ; f ii-ii* 4 * r.is < s i. *. t-vor ia &-at i.u- viidcr Ill.
t *. - purer to a

y .t a« nl;. ‘ r - . The ri.,h. »1 In
b-.V i 7i. ,h, ri .it i iu>ct..a *.•: tv. riint t iisue i .. xzto

r nine: -' •

. - -Tr n.tv, th ri; ;i * . x..ting p-.pi- in .’ii.l'-r positions

v- r . ;• rr:.-* *. t,<. Clu.f f t - cat . ±c3l i~rvic-s, = :/ finally

■k-E. _ ic-il e.rvic.s i-

-3U9-


13 .-2-Patty

C^urt I


which c-.iccr.i_ all th- hr.,-.cM or—r-.-s -x rfcicn c alc: be settle* by the
Lui r * __et 3 .-.£c pic be .

• h - 'ncuml, I • sure, ia irWreBtc in r t c : __ un erst

ur: '- r : - - l ...

... ~ccotOjv t. pin! n, trt he* to b_ un orate lit .r~ily, quite

lit.r .11*'. It Lera

&rvire.

0 •’l *lfy t- . int cticelly?

r r.B th. :ur.ari itr-lf , thlo -Jpr.osl n * .? .» t ri-

• • t • . _.r -c!it Op.r«ticml

-ri.r v ul h .• ' •• very

c; -r c r.eo t, c nc -t » c* 1: u i. r. . s ~.ny a. 1 r ul-tions,

■i'-- n * t . r roe* :irt io, t a n t

: ~' n 1 c - v -- “ tlur v rior*

Ki l. J .n 1 -rcut, th-n ti.r. Oati n *. ul n t fc-.Vu t xxat

■ *r. vitw • rtt : r t-cnnic superior,

s n C-. rd: t-y f.-t lt.i r.'.r.nco t th- M-’ic-l •i 1 'n •Ik.cU ire
.- W ul-* Q| .r ©rs c •:i bo lrca U ko -r. c rc-m •'

’ • Sorriest,

r

if

*- « - • - < . r icht br- : 11 in: ■ uch -nd

In r _ • L cl-r-__j ta*t p lnt, : .ul t. ...tv ul th- altunti n i.. IX n
fcr-n.-h ..-r tent r ul r.'iu. t r » . t itrcli *. ..Az r -r in

t.clinic 1 tr.f.cra?

-• h- ti le i* t.-,_ ehrr.set c‘ S rvic-r e> ul n . n tie wn

C. IX the Ch

“ - r hr-


-ney, - -.1 Just : -i !•-


22 -b— .- 2 . -3-rutty

G-nrfc I

Kr. ll-. ~ -c-1 chief of ary cocr-a’ ~f the .^2cd Force? fr'acch.

La the case f refusal :f bcyonca ;f an error, the Chi.I. tho
chmacht Ic-Hcal Servicesvui:. have t.*.»port this *-ttcal chief tc his
1- a- iate super r in -r.tr t eras. a auniShr-r.t, a punishaent which would bo
Cet-u:- . the rwocyoncc f . t chnic 1 pc . thiss tuition aloha

Ulfieolt this cl cr-cticc.

hroacht brenehas oyer ecus to
. • -- " at?a. c — I than:: it is n „
• Tof » 1 •* . b^t i a-ver c-.:e t. a

rub a • the reSearcr. institutes.

.. Di - rvi't-:nship, t’.i. ; car. rel-ti.nshlp t. the 1 odicr.l
U..~ric. tt too .af/on-St chan «:t dl t r u the Docn. of •&?

• • I ' il r: ' -- -■ thoso units unlch cciwittod ot

th r r.t*

n t in practice was the «In? whip f the e Steal S.i-vlc. f the

• ifen-SS?

... I alroa y sal- th t th- tfXen-Sb war n.t v.ry intorosto , an' in

■ ~ • Ua ■ r-ters in ur w rkin tt f.

I r - .a- x. ~. ent that t. l n t f.-ll<r» an r-'or 'Mt,i r..r ( u.rtit!

Ui * * •• . ;-' -t rial at th ir rl.

a. XT v -r t c ?let A t - ctur., 3 th ul lik. t rale y.i- Author
- .* rxM.. a. tho res. rca inr •' -«f..s f rel-ti nsh.lp t th. .affon-SS
dvr. .* in the y.ar .f 19 UL?

... , it *i r. • chan ..

.. hy r.:t?

ht in tho

•rut. a institutes.

W ' 1 cr5t 1 1 - tt •; . : ‘_cti\. ... t m » f

r ® full extent?

> • rJcin ttaf w*e built up, it : k quite

• •• : •


r -Putty


C urt I

' J-x icftt o ical Services, f.r inst-ncc,th. xeical wolf ire oitf err., the
r .tt:r - v lunt r- serein;, t.v. c.ntr Idali^ with notic'd s upply of ill
kin's, p-rtly ..-ic-l natters c «ora-*. »-iw ... pr.scntr-=f-crr systca, but

tr.:t it s -t n that wo a fa is lost ct a i't.r >.to ttcaus. to. rxt.n.r-of-

%

*-.r v.it. -. -nt v.r In the or t. the. rt.s,rve .xt^. Th. fvrtb.r up-builc'ing
dist-Tt. ;y fact that tX - -nci.s irtthrhtchtt ha' to* in eonst:.nt
t uch w-r. -vwt-tc fr - B-rlin, an finally urs.lvca ha t ^rccuato cur
v ncy to Thuringia in torunry, 2%. TX "ifficult lin.r i n

m’ ti. if ieviti-s ir. t-L.nh nin ... a. . any c nrxeti n with thuBt .
a flnoics c ..pLtoly i: p fb h

•tryin t ex. f rt un’c' m-.ictth ry* tvi.; t otr.vit.ware's the heart
f ".r iny fr • its v r. ur c rn.rs, an-, i r .. ..all th. tia. n-w hcopitnls
ha t. cr.'.tw a.-, a.-.rclu * f r, -a in iti r. t that, .... t care
r r ' ' a because all ..* Genaany ha 1 boo at c war territory.

.K- AAI . T: Iha IW - cs until nine-thirty -'deck

t •• • r. nr.


xTX ~r'“ * urn. wtii 1


1?1.7 0?3C h urs.)


- 3122 -


C.urt S-. i

IS 7<-t ‘.7-X-l-l-ZEX-rvSttr


Official transcript -»f the American kllitery
Tribunal in the matter of tho United States
.i Anericc e<'claBt horl Brrxdt, et rl,
defendant#, Bitting at Suernbcr*, Geraany, or.

19 Jetruaxy 19-17, 0920, Justice Beals orcaidin,'.

Z~L KARSHALt Pers-nt la tho eourtr^M will *ilec#e find their eerto.

The Honorable, the Juf<tel of Kill ter.- Tribunal 1. Kllitery Tribunal 1 is
nov in session. GoA save tho United St. tes of Anoricn end. thle honorable
Tribunal. There vill be ^rder in the courtroom.

THE rSiSOSST* ;tr. Krrshel, vill you aeccrtiin that th*defendants rr
ell present la the court.

THh KA&SHaLi «.ay it please your honors, ell defendant# nro oroeent it
the cmrt.

THE rnnSIDESC; The Secrctery General vill note for the record tho

oretoaco of ell the defoadente in court.

Zt appears to the Tribunal that Tribunal INnber 2. vhich is now in set
oion trying Case So. 2, deeirc# tho nroconco of tho defendant Rudolf Frand*
ao a vitncBs before that Tribunal this nornin,:. She defendant Rudolf Sran'
Vill be orcusod thie aorning et the ononin,; of tho Mrnin* recces and. in
view of the certificate filed by the orison chysicien yocurda.v defend-nt
Brandt vill be excused fr«J further ettendanoo before thi. Tribunal for th

bSlnnce of this day.

CM ,d noy DT00..4 - 1 th tho cxialnf-tion of tho vltno.o on tho .trn
Da. PAUL VUhhTLER - Rosuhcd
DlriCT ECAKXSaTIQS (continued)

THE PRESIDEST: She vitnees on tho stand i» ronlndod that 1* *• stJ l

unc.cr -• th.

1Y DA. liiTEt

•ounce, Sur'ln* your ox-_-.ln.tUn rvtcrdry you onovorc.-. tho ouoo-
vhich von to the effect thot tho cconcy ,f tho Chief
■tof.ieol Service. ho uuth.rltr t- ,;1« r.'cr. with refer
eye ton of tho Ic.lvl.hnM Vroncho. of the Ve-hmncht r.

corroctl

5123 . #


Court So. 1

IS Jet 47-H-l—2-HH-?wBtor


q, la supplement: tioa I heve to it'c v;u, did the office of the chief
of Vehr .rcht Xodierl Service# fcrvo any fficirl euyervisien?
a. Ho, cot ic uccordr-ncc to thr.t.

Q, Sow, ic this cwcaeetion I auit show y-u c document which vr.s sub¬
mitted ty the sro.acution ..rc yesterday. This is a letter conic fran
r.obert Eoch Institute on the 21st of Jrau?ry 1943. This Docunent SO 131c.

!n this letter it srye rcerdia ty i# vrccince for arr.ad forces, "Tho Chic
,f the Aedlcal Vefcmr.cht Services, eccordia* to the letter of tfcc 11th of
January of this yew which I an rttechla* la cony, has mcrorched the citi.c
which are producing tyofcos vaccine. enC rcki-d then not to scad this veccir.e
t« the individual trenches of tho Vchr-icht red so on, tut only to tho Ch' <i
.{ th «ehraacht i.oficrl Services or to hie vloalooteatirry." Vhit is your
rttitu-'c to t'is letter I

A. The letter thft y.u Just outod free: the Chief cf the Uohrnacht
Jttdlenl Services is really o owt tticea ax t .f r lrr*or fn one it dor la
with central dUtritution of product.. Tho notarial c rdlmtion vro only
nessitlc whoa all the needs A the ‘ ehr «cht trrcchas v fc rc 1 reeled to the
Chief of tho Vuhrrucht hedictl Services. It «-cs noceocrry th» t fror. this
r.-ocoy the necessary distribution hoc to result. In order to »ln r survey
about whrt wro available any burin.; A quantity on the nrrt *f tho Vohr-nefc
branches had to te stopped. Sfcrt Is why the iilniftry A Xcononloa rnd tho
ministry -f Ar-rrer.t had t. anurorefc the industries which verc ^r -’ucln,:
ncdiccl eQuiuasat rid had to i-.ue r decree thr.t such orders wore only to l
executed whoa they emanated froa tho Chief JUdical Supply Office, the -fflc
which wt. voricin,; on those natter, for us. -11 other orders hrd to bo cent
to th« Chief of the Vehraccht Hodicrl Services for lavesti.-rti n rnd the:
did n»t hrvc tK ruthority to deliver uoon then. In order to distribute
the vaccines in , Just aaanT. that la, recr rfin.- to t!u urgency rf the

need A tho Vefcrnrcht hr:aches, vre rcrlly tho «•»>• A tlu letter thrt

• • •

•— • *

3i«:o


y u Just aeati.ecd.


t


C-urt Bo. 1

19 Fee -i7-h-l-3-ia«-Foeter

v It een fce Boon froa that th*-t it vna one of the- tpokc of the Chief
of the Wohrweht nedlefl Service# to diatrihute rsrterinle. Thrt includes
vaccines.

a. Ye■.

On the strangle of that do you law* the cities vhere oroductlons

case froa, that ie, the factories!

a. Yob, they cre lcnovn to the Chief i.edicrl Suo^ly Offico.

Q, Do you knov vhethcr rs no; thcBo suoiliert, eyccotin,; privato indue-

try or erny institutes, that ia, Crcc.>, there v C re any SS ir.otitutoe?

s

a. I te-v nothin/: of that.

this right -f distribution rnC the rtli ti*-nohln 'f the oumlierc t
the Chief Pedicel Suo-Jly Office- contained the authority to control the oun-
oilers, tr _-1 la to say, the feet xUtl

vo ,niy hre to check ;n the production, the esour.t of the

*n.


TT^UCti


C-.urt Kv. 1

IS Tub -.7~.:-2-l-L3i-3fccr<‘

I esk whether yju, y-ureelf, vr representrtlvoB >f y uro were rctiv
in this Vvtrk. I- r iastincc, 1.5. rrrben c.uld send oe.nlo there ia wder U
c.ntrol h v they vest about pr-ducir,; viccines?
a. Ho, ve had no rir-ht of e-attvl.

5., I ur.r.oretrSid you c-rruetiy if I say thrt these ncreures of ,;rir
in* the vrcclnoe in order to distribute then Justly is one of the tyoicrl
ci-sos which the Chief ,f the Uhrsaefct Keller1 Services hrd; nrrely, to dis¬
tribute this v.'ccinv mutually f-,r rll ' ehraacht branches?
a. Yes, this coaceot is ouite c-rr.ct.

X

C^, D,es this nranor of your activity relrtc rt all to the research
aystens?

a. S., this vis a ..gi euro of tu.nly.

>ith reference te a oueoti-a which the irooecutor presented hero
yesterday during th- er-«s (nomination, I have to cek you: The Chief ef th
Vohrorcht Xcdical Services as such. did. he hive ray authority with re for one.
t , the lastrllr ti -a «f v-rics f or ty hue vaccines?

a. Basically, no. Hero v« were als c-ncornsd with the cutstion f t
ruleroo ,f personnel and the urgency*of getting -(torirl rad thooo wore the'
things thrt vt were oopr-rcho f. eb.ut by tho fir-o. Vher.ever wo had ray oor
t-nx-el rvnilrtlc OBong .the? otdiccl personnel, v. c uld, of course, role.- ,
the- rr.' ’"O could soon.r any urgency r-.cu.st on tho orrt of the Industrie
v Veil, then, is it orrect t j sr s v thrt you - thrt is, tho Chief f
Uchrcrcht i.ecicrl Service* - had a decisl-n >vcr the Ouostion when euch r
fret ry wi e t. be orocted, but thrt y^u aly had to be listunod t slnro

cedlcrl service cu«eti,ns wore touched u-t*?

A. He hrd m ri-*t .f ruth rity rnd ho did net have to be heard under
rll circumstances, ’-hen the firms wished, they ceuld do these thin * —
their vt. initletivo, but they needed >ur resistance . rA th.y ur a

sis trace end- w t c.uld >oae-r their wishes.

^ Cvull this >r .ccduic extend t institutes la the framework £ the

V-.hr oacht branches?

Shat v juld have been o circucvcntion bdcausc the Vehrnrcht trrncc


Court So. 1

15 Jot 4?-K-2-2-Sat-3«arc


wore rocily independent. Shey hr', their ova contla-->nt of raterini.

«v. la r B-^cirl cr.ac tho setter sce.so to J»ve toon different. It vrs
lrif c.vn ia c letter on the * rt 4 the hedicnl Ineocctorcte «.f the air for
th*t In the ccse 4 rc inetitute vfaic.'. belonged to this brunch 4 tho Chief
the Vehr rcht *.edical Services bit. to be heard. Sir. you over heir of any
such .r^ceruru7

.•v. I reenter a • concrete cite.

I u eaerJcin,- r.t-ut this snecirl caso. ^

a. Ho, I do a t rc^e^ter such an application. Of c urce, when the

%

Wehraacht needed .ur assistance, then, -f c.urec, thoy approached us.

You ,etn only that?

a. Yes, -sly that.

Sid y.-u attend the aeetin^s of the consult in,; Physlcirno?

a. Yes, I attended thoc in 19-.2, in the soring 4 19*3, and the svrir-
4 19 ^,.

v In jfey IS-3 n lecture was held by Dr. Din^ with rcforcnco to tjrohur
Did you lifter, tj this lecture?

a. So, I did not heir it and I d not knw his nr^e. I hivo no inagl-
nnti.n about it whatsoever.

During that speech an incident occurred, hrofoss'ir B -so uttered o
alsgivings ond I r. asking you, do you know officially or Personally, I nerr
during the recesses or during the evenings or whenever the participant*
grthorcc, that any such protect vf o aa* o ty rr-fecc r Bose?

a. So thin,: ever tcear.c ka.vn t. xae at ut that urotsst.

^ D. yj U know whether irofusoor Kaa^loser directly roocived ary r.v-.r

at «ut thrt?

a. S-, I know nothin,- rt-ut it.

"orin.- thnt sc.se seating did JA i listen t. tho lecture 4 rr fuse •
Gchhardt and Fischer? It v* a a lecture at ut special orwri wsti! with ref.
eacw to sul-hr ail«;:idc.

a. I did a.t listen to that lector, beerur. I -r* tntcrccto.' in iectu


regarding ceychictry


C-urt S% 1

IS Job •,7-k-2-3-2Si-5eer<‘


v y-u ever gain ery knovlc :e -ffieirl -r unofficially f this
lecture vfcick attracted attention?

«• Bo, nothing is known to r.e -f thtt..

didn't ^r.fcse.r Kand-l^ecr o ».nJc tv you tfter this lecture and dis-
cuss this :irttor with you?*

a. JIo, that vps n,t the case..

\* 3' y-u know vhether froc any side corrolaints «cre ot\o with your

• a

agency etout the contents f this lecture?

A. So, according t i uy knowledge no such cocolaints were nado.

X

■e* 3o y.u still ro:.i iter what the situation was in the Horticul Ineoeo-
tornto during the middle of Kay, that is, shortly tefCrc these locturcs?

a. Yes, the situatl>n vrs very tense. In January v t hid those losses
Stalingrad and in Anril ve hrd severe losses near Tunis. Vc c mid - I r.onr, *
the nodical Service of the on*.ire- behrr.ncht considerable physicians were- lor
According t- ny recollection ve lost 400 in Stalingrad and about ."00-?60 in
Airier end ve ha: ,Tect worry ib.ut getting substitutes for then. Vo had t.
take physicians awry fr the- civilian sootvr if ve wanted then.

So that vns a tine of great v.rry f-r the Chief of the Vehrnrcht
AediCfl Services?

A. *e8, no doubt.

Cv. And, his tine was taken u*» to a c-nsideTetle degree in order to car
through "oaaures which would lend t the dealing with these enurgoncy eltur-
tions. ’-ere the oanuccriote .t the lectures shown t the Chief .f the Wchr-
nacht itudlcrl Services - the ,-nuscriots -f the loctur. c during there neetln

A. j., that vrs nit the cite.

„ Ver- they oresented. t. hit: rftervrrds?

A. 2? -, they w c r n »t resented t. fci“ rfte-rv»rds.

x. Vfc . worked -n these lectures?

a. "hit beloved t- the Departr-c-nt i Science end «cplth at tho hedic*
Inspectorate and they hit t t rert eff rts t get all thaso nanuscrlH
;fter the lectures '-ere held.

■v Sow, ,ni. final cueSti js. J.r rjzy years you v.re a c-<llr.fccrat r ;


312d


Court 1

19 Jet 7-4t-2--iSt-5ecrr


the Chief .i the ’ ehr cht ..o'icrl Services. Alth u.-h y u vero Ills sulcrdi*
- I think I cib ut the cu-sti at y u in this c nnccti-r. rad I think I

h/ve t -,ut the cuccti a t- yju. '•‘bit is y « ju -r:«.nt of ''rofeaaer Hrndlce

Thrt lc t- e:y, whether fro r ed.icrl -r othicnl n . ir.t <.{ viev, do you thin'

hi., cnr.r.hlo of ray trd rcti -n?

3-ct-r, y-u vill undsreten thr.t it is difficult for r.c to r.rke my

Jud*r-. &nt is the presence -f the public rn (. ir. the ••.resence -f ny euoeri r U.

a

since it hr.# t . he I eta -aly ary f-ll vir..: I b" rr'-fessor Hwidl.sej
is e wtr^ -ereon vith deeo feelia s, t vho hre^.-rert frith in his frien'
i af hrs r very fcu me <'e;' -f thinking. I -xuv hi ro c frithful Catholic
Christina who I think utterly lacBorbU t. hive c.u. itted the crimes of vhii
he is hero cfcrr :td. I kr..v hi^ re rn educated, skillfully oduerted nhyoicii
who rl-cyo --ciatrir.tr r hi. h level -.f cci.acts rod “ho nlwrye hr A interest
tho volftre i his tick rad woqndod, rad rls<. hid r. hi,-h cthicrl concont f
his orofeasion. He is rn energetic ucrl -ht a Idler with r hitch sense of h.j
rr.f duty. Cn the whole hi is r .:ra *fco hecruse f his -.edicrl m' hu. rno
viluct vis reapected. ty hlc a« lcil .fficers, by clvilirn ohyeicicno, inclu'
in,; the scientific rear, oenti tivco, rn: by rll nhyoiclma rfcrord who know hi
Hio - -sitl.n rs i fci,h edicrl officer he ,;rlntf tecrust f hio efficiency.
He fCrlaed it durln.- r cUrn nllitrry erreer uit ho does not hive to tlirnk
this oiti r. to so .iu n litici 1 cachin' ti -ns.

Ze. 22LTS: I thunk you. Kr. rreai.Vn*. ! lw Vo a further "Uostleaa t
nit t this vlta-oc.

75 i. .-P-LSIDLST: Ic t.Vr. «nr ei re n 1 this vltncro n the


orrt f ray dof-ne# •'cuntell


15 7-0 --3-l-C •

C:urt I


DR. "L , Gs cassa F\ . 1 ... rv-i-., -t, ru.rsky.

37 'll. FL . MG:

r: t_ • ;*.s. that th Cdiif f th. ahrancht ! ecOc».3

Service, ix.it his serf:* v -01, i 11. Di Jhiof f the

%

‘ chraacht : >i=l S.rvic- ir. .ns sph-re f -rh iv_ cr _ro t the ..r..y .I’iciJ
Insp ct r-t- -n his st-.l. hvl n x:o_rt > r th, quest* :nc which jay have
c rx. up?

... Yc3, t:. •_ is c rr-ct.

;• h-.T-v-r i t :curr„<!, e 'f s :h a *.preS.nt-tlve re sponsible

f:r th- r 1— -3 vlth which h- n ’ - c. issi n- ’? las n- res. ncible to

the e.. .r sobt . it 1 • 0- r t:. i he received l . rfcr r

*ns hw r-tp.osabl- t Me re-.i eh.-i, : . ry - lc 1 lr.sp.ct r?

... Kerns r-sp naiol. to t .. * . ar- ,.i.. th or.’cr, that is, t)iu

&r >-r>.

*• 6 - ■ t .. rle, -r. these rep; rts cent to

hie v.-. Colei, t . .jry edical . ar -ct r r r. th.y rent t the jiiijj f
th- uhrs-.cht j'‘ 1- i Service?

... The r.. rts *-nt t. th. •; j-f Statt / the .jry - 'ic l Inspectorate,
o CM.. : Staff £ the - r oh lc .

. . rtiv-r u-ati ns.

: : tl witness,

n It . Be c ° i n-, the r a.cuti I *N

ar or _jr t-w “.tr..ss.

C.ff»Si. . .. e..

c ? "... .i-lDT:

t . -itinaa, y u h -_ i -i‘_ . r, . r c*. xaninati ;i that t ! >c

" ' - :• r -r ~ ir ' • i.jrv * -r« ■ , -a' 41'll, TO

r f rth. I! c I 'X y u —

heur qovrtl i .

. k iv.


3130


15 Feb- -J. -3-2-c :<

Court I

. : > tint liroct examination th-.ttho besia

re-s .n fer the S\jOir..r -civ. f I?i2 t prcc*rvc porenncl an; - t.rialV
— " v I nsk - u tc repent th_rp-.fti,n nee icrc?
i. Darlai. c urso £ ur xr..ct .x aaati n by 'cf_ns. counsel you

hv . * -la _ <« t tfc- r.-.= n '-..i - isavneo efthc Fuehrer -cr... f 2fi

July 19ii2, v-s t preserve pers nncl - -t- -I-2 byway r pr -r c rdlnstii

» ’ « nterlal -n puraenncl^n t)i- riel-’

u ^ r-c.-rc; •• c • n pr -e- . 11 r. nch«o . the ..ohr.vxht, which

r.quire! - ct r.iiv^. : aa- pLuut.* * cti n?

... Ir. tho ’scree ~t 19h2, *. *aci- r^.ul ti n f rue.arch un« n t
rxinti nc • at ni m tJv, twice i r the C ... ttc .ohnacht lbt!ionl Service.

C .nsequuntly, v. cl n t - i..

.. Isn't it Ir..., bt r, - . ...

b-iru. p-rf r.--. ’ r.r..r. p_rs n.;*l nit.’ _ t-r;-.i t -r- at in uoo’ in th- c urs- tC
:v, what v.r it — y ...» isn't it true, that r i
exist . I c r'in-'i... the - r> r tn-t y-uwul n.t hive - ulicneJ n £

• . o .1 c-rry ut th- b-«ic porp ao f this cro , that

is, t -u-. -rw. ,>wr# nocl m »t_ri-l?

- T :r : cot r is r l i! r - fuel. • ni , .ul* h'v. ix-on hi is

ro ul-tl a j Ipls/i, r lnoii .

su. J.ct i f iciil JX. el-.tl .s

i. . • •

■ f ' h uhrrohtw " 8 «*« «1X. r i c ul' 1 net ew c ..ctu. nith

r • , • ’ " - ; -r hrve -ii . -cJliLi. r •.

th . -»rpy u ’ic :1 Inspect rstu tt ,1c 1», tzl £ r th t purp.c-, nad didn't hn
i:. £~rt • cc- : -Uah c r in^.n i fclv. iwlc-i .search to the l-.ct eayve

* :r u 1 *- " • ‘ r -‘ u * t , . tin c.-nsciti... physiolcas vt the

-in-.ry ’irl^c-Viy?

•r - ic'd icadwgr thisw.-a 'unit with

,

Insect rs i th_ th-r ehmmsht tr-r.chcs T.^ r - invite! t the8^ _^ot.

3151

»


?cb-'w:—3-3-C-. k
C urt I


but y V. C l- ;t ell it a rc^ulr.tivn f the- c-.r.lncti n -f rus-:ircl!.

.. uil n:w H-ntloser did in fret h v. the. focilitius 'f tlw ..roy
__-\Lc -1 Ir.rp-.ct r~tc r.t nil is t'-I, dv* h- n .t?

A. Y-S, fc- Id.

.. b - ifcwW ^ incorrect - fncttltto* tt nia «1opo»r

-e Cni-.f ftht -hr.".cht -dic‘1 S-rvicoS .re sj-.11?

.t 1 -rt f your quoiti n? ^
s r.i-* it v ul ■ fcw Inc r. -Ct 3. — th* t the Chl-f f the liidic-il
Sjrvic-o I th- ohn 1 v lUi it, in £K f.-.r '£

Dsiic'.l reSo^rch is c nc-rm.', ia " » "h 3 !irvn ‘iisor h • til f::cilitiu <f
th- -c-'ic-l Irjxct r tc -.t h*s la cnl?

nly h ' th- inatoll-.ti no f the. way in hi* Ohpaoity ••• arty

co 'ic-1 inop-ct r.

t . The :jray tt.b th.. lftrgurt bnach o£ th- ohm-cht, wr.c it n t?

... lea, it* ww the 1 r c . the ohmteht.

> Sew y u £ i , D ct r, t:. : » - ohi-I f the -'xi-'icrl Service of the
chrrr.cht - v « irv, tcetifU* -r., Dct r, <-1. th- Chi-f th. .v‘ior-1
Scrvico r t: - vhRveht roc-iv.-* r-a-'-rcb •'crifr. -nts fr * the r-nchca of

. h '-ir-cfc-' ct tor i bol 11 «- ?

Si* y» u hoar e.u-rti r..

... I c-.i! : t r y tii- t r.r.i.i . 1 / rt rtin, fr a 19 .3, e ’pi-o f th;
rop rts f the ohrrv-.cht br-ae:cc b vt r.s. .rc ; -relents « -re oent to
th. Chi-f f ... -hnrtcht lIc- 1 S-nic. . r '-a nckn,vl--‘jJ*.nt.

,. • - • : - *ont t tho Cffic- .f th- Chief

f the o ic-1 S.rrtcc f tho .vtr-cit?

... This >r-3 tu v lunt-rily wif.-.-ut Li Mkt ! f r by the. Chief f
tl . .hrr. cht 1 c i - rvico.

, ctor, »ht £!» jurp.s- f Mrw‘\-.a- *
thos. re. rt: • ror^'rch ; rfc?

... : • • •

3132


1 ? k

C.urt I

t X svtcunt € Science -r.' arch rtth th- Cenaissi n~r r;_r._ral, rxk*
thoy nr. t.l th.natives that i u -r_ -in_ a r_p r*. ibis t the

C.or.isai r-.r Gcrural, it -r.yb. - 'vis*- ‘1 t the Chivf f the uhnnoht.

<. *ioal £ .rvicc rc-caivu - cpy t •

•. *. h vas this C -rdasi a-r _n r-.l y u r^f-r t ?

... TV C- rUsi r._r Qu»,r.l f r . . * ie-1 -n. Hcilth Service, irolcac
Bran t. ^

.. D r’ •- -ny r.- rtf n •_ leal wqvrijtent

... I :n*t • ' -out th-t? I nly k: v i'j ut thtac. c i.o that I
n-.nti r~ yoe*. .riay.

Th-n . v. v ul-' st t- that i- the c urt. f y ur .fici -1 ’uti.a : u
rwvcr V.cax ctrart f any :x'ic-i . • - i -Rte n huu*n • -in r in c r.ccntrati’
cnr.pc?

... n ne„-fc~ll.

.. D n r, if I un -ret' j u c rrcctly, :hcn r. Holtc nr. a int.rr ati
y U in c nn.cti.r. vith y ur bi .r .leal i-r.r.1*. y u first chief f tfc.

8toff t ttu . I S-rvic-- t t - Ini that is, fr n the let f Cct -

19llt, il 1 S. r 19!*2, isn't that c-r:cct?

... 1 ur : ir_w - r- n’t ui r it, r the 1st f Oct bur 19hl* until

tV 31 f ..’V ust, 19L-2, I me Thie, - - Staff rith th. Vic 1 inspector

af the Luft U-...

viz ■ . ic l Inapoct r c£ the Luftn&ffc at that ti A ct.r?

... O ncralot.ratabr rxt Hi rt.

If in y .ur capacity as Chiif f St af. t Hippk-, I -.scu - y ur uti.
..r si.il-r t th sc as Chiu.' f St-Xf t Han^acr ir. his capacity a a Chi-f

-f th- /id Servlet cfh, ...xrc t, in that anythin th t Hip^W w ul

have h ' t. -i.Vc r, y • ” '*1 h/. *-1- f. '»’■ tw.-.f


3133


— .. -“•‘I *•
- - . • •


I ' quit s-,'.r., ’ cr.uc
-11 ftlcl.

f'ct^r, I
Uj I • :n*t I-“V-


, ° ^ "A


cl: '* Inti _ 1


a Tr 53


. 76


PC, Dr


. It


r_;'5rt >f r!;c Sc-


rt •i xcL ".'a ti *a


-< m t: t -tc.


t? the Swcx’ctei- ; t-.t

*

*• • *.• t ^ .M •»/’«

• I •


ii, !?-:a— 1


UP " . “wPS u


l\ .* lli“ 61 ' 50".


' X*? I !v.'w Si ‘Xcixnoc


1 “b!: * 3u 15 re


.


3 i'rboV. a --.rnt or.

, cc tele.-.' ..ic .:u

• - • it: C'-. P ' • •' , •• •- c * itc •"cp . t: ■. -

. -' tt the 6-c.

,

4-0 C3UP0C f • .iol r r - • .’’J Pi>'onti c—. 3 . i-.x.-.-.x u rd8-

3 \C Jf«s POr-t hoi Sr zZo, Ch t:-w SI . /.ctur.

.


in t*..-. -ntv.3!-.- :? c

c COTi’-.r (* £t ?f the: ;•


cnt.il :: : i. i) vre


x. 1 * r 3 * r. ,-.t rrevi 3 ; k
t ‘m c: -T, n tl.“t r 11 *.


- c^a.Pu.-.c» n . ->ti n “'totiu’o wra


ti n fialsvpc v-. :n


o »■ 1 r. 1 r


1. - c.ro -. 1 -


.


:• -


r*. X -r 11 - r , ,m -


- 7 , * c 1 • ‘ -n invc • .iCvrs, • ’ r. rrceetioo ,-vr- *


0 iU VI-V 5 f t*x t


-1 -COO-


t--.ee 1:.


fvrs'r.c r:co:;t ■ \-,r


3237


15 ?eb ;r-H> c -l-.e

Court 1

r 2 r.'I 122 -T: 111 counsel plena- Identify l-ineelf for the record?

kisser sn xnoxos

jY D3. .3L3B: (Counsel for tuo Defendant SanAlOser.)

v. 3i0 prolocutor jU3t acid th t just in the field of rose rch
:y coordinating various research offices one c uld save -^.inly personnel;
nay I at/, you aa ecieatiat ie tnore e field here one c uld not save
personnel:by -ay of coordin--.tion :>-.d I neon the field of research?

A If aonot-.lcj has to rerult fro- research, then research h o to
nave freedom and one only hoe to oxc~An<;e results.

X

- In order to ive you on eracole, for last aco. if five parsons
are c^rrirv; on rusearon *-ork about very icr;ort. nt robloo, thon you
Thin.-: th:t it t.a tue cxpcdlont ttak of the leader of suoh n rooc-.rch
ey .to.: to a. vo on« re o re- '-arkor, ir. pl.vco of these five, vho would
work n t.’.ia problc- nlaaolf?

A 3*0 londor could only do that :oa convinced that tho four
ot.;oro arc not qualified. Since research workers lwuys v.ink tnoy ro the
eeot, it would probably bo very difficult to declare objectively • ; o
the beet one la.

3:o toco, d uc-tion, tno prosecutor bellvos that Frofeanor
Eandloaor, oinco he -to art? in«j>ect>r, hi* two officoc: tho bo- collod
C-iof of tho lehmncnt ..-deal Service and Arty Kedical Insooctorato in
ordur to deal vita hi a t eke. Is it correct that everyone of tho nvccncios
krd t..cir own circle of t skat

A That is correct.

Ii it corr ct that -von if thoro vat the crnbimition of ono
pit con doinfe two joba, ns it • ae the caao h-rc. that tho Chief of tho
...ruwsht i-^-dic..1 Service could sake uso of tho personnel, arterial,

<-*.3., of *.iO Arjy TnapoctOtnw for the of cho lo raicht

h-llcul Scr icol

A 50t- of these activities h d to be difforontiatod.

-•.ere tacre independent chiefs of staff for both of tneso


e£0ncio3? ’


19 ?cb l.-HD-5-a-iw^.B
SiUTt 1

L Toe, a. turally.

Bid nit tioso c..icfo of st ff see to It that the interests
of t.:o t'.’o i£03cics -ore divided fro_ one ’-Other?

^ Tea. they sav that c very clear dlvifion -a codo end tho
terreney of both up to c cor*:in point voro contrary to onch r^orey.

> Toe, you said that ycst.ricy- -hi I Correct if I «y thcro
vr* evon tension between thceo two n encies workln.; in tho UBO building?
A Tea you ccn call tho- offlciri tensions ovon If thoy did

aot. h '.vo any personal effect.

-OW. r.t too end, I o..ould lllco to ash you with r3*orcncv
to hr. hardy 1 o question; is It truo that ? W vent to tho uoctlnc r.t
tho -vlntlon kialatry la y ur capacity r.s C-.ief of st ff of
Axllcrl Sorvico of tno Air ?orco?

Ton, rant is v.iurc too tension vas on power end authority;

as I ■ re. i not tho c..lof ay loader.

But, 7 u vero still pr ctlcelly thtf c..lof rood you were not
with Professor E.adlas.r elaco ho only cane froa tho


yjt T-or.-lus


19 ?cb

Oilirt 1


1 Too, naturally.

311 not tncso chiefs of at ff oco to it that t.ic later*sta
of t:.- f/o ,:orxicB -crc divided fro one .-ffiOthcr?

Yea. they igv that u very clear dlvieioa tad. o cad tho
toadoooy of both up t« b cortrln ^oiat v.ro contrary to onofa n^erxy.

. Yo». you acid tl-.t yect*ricy. -o 2 Correct if I acy thoro
- a ever, tcadoa hetwoca taoio tvo r ::.cioa world:..: in tho mbo buildinc?
i Y-b you cc— call then offici i tonniona evon if tMoy did

not h vo any ticraoar.1 effect.

Sov. r.t Uo end, I a-ould like to calc you with roforcnc.
to ;;r. Hardy *d ^uoati^a; ia it tnxo t-.r.t ;nu -cat to tho ucotinc nt
tbo _vi .tioc idolatry i:. your capacity r.t Chiof of St ff of
.Idler 1 Servlco of tao Air ?orco?

1 Yob. tnat io where tao tor-cion v C « on ?ovcr und authority;

aa I vr.o uot the c-.iof : ry longer.

3ut. y u voro Btill pn-ctically t.:o c..iof na& you were not
yjt vor-ia*. with FrofoBoor E-xdloaer ci:xo ho only er-e froa tho


19 - - - 17 -J.-S -la-=K?- 1 l^h-r.
- 1 rt 2«-. 1


jjfcraixio t th- -n -f S--«t«i>-r in . -r t- strrt bis ffico; is th t correct
... I-s, th t is c rr-ct, :.s f r -.. th. ^.rs.r. ->f Prjfgaa r HsnCl.'Swr is
: neuno ’; bat I 4 virtJjr - lr.- .y " -rk- t th- now -ffic-.

. r:r tlw -ir>;a- I tnirir..—

... I ': 1 s r. t tmin.ayc.ir r tsrs n’ succ-ss-re.

. .»i ‘ y a inf-r ?r loss r Kartil.s-r “ ut this r. tt-r '.t th-
.viiti.n liinistry?

. , a r*. inly n t - r. t t *01. This -.-s just • a ttor A which cv,_ U '

su ’ -nly n' th-n 'i oz.'7’~ r- '.

KRAUSS: (- ur.-l : r D-i- r. Knk « st ck.) %

. itnusa, 7 -u 3t*t- th t th- in ivi'u-l -fjv.cht r nchci r-e-iv-'
c 'i».s f th- r-n-'rcb -3sL-n--r.tc, which tf.-y h -liv.r. -r ratbor s-nt
thua t th. „hiof f ih. :.«hra-.cht ic-1 S-rvic- a th t tho ri inti f
thwoo r-3-arch - ssi ni-r.ts w-.c :-r.t tj th- U rtr.-nt .1 Sci-nc- n. l.-c-crc'.
hitn-ss, I or. r-*. shin; y.u is it r. t r. f“ct th t th- rijinr.l I my rca--»

< jai nr-nts *«nt t. th- r-c. xch v rk-r c nc-ra.' -.n th t th-D-. *rto-nt f

f

oci-r.c- r.n R-a-rch -nly r-c-iv- »y si the- * ssi .v.-:;to; r. w is it

th-.t y.u h v- lff-r.nt kn ..L- - th n th t?

... I oust c rr-ct ay at t-c-r.tr th ’ I . - r.; *h ■ rr * *

th<- ri ir. 1 w o cortoir.ly s-nt t th »~n c.r.c-rn-:, th- a-.n t wh a th. tv l
ri r.aoi iw ; this v- ru. th t th- - -trta-nt its-lf r-c-iv- * - o.py n'
r-c-iv. * nr. th.r.

.. Thanh ym, I h v - r. - iurth-r quvoti.n*.

8T DR. UnsJii (- - « to*. . ./.-..r-Fr-yrir. .)

. hit axis, v u a* to -: : th t uri: > ttfcln -ri ' i ti - tt

w-r- CM-f t .t -h i= 1 2n» -ct r -f Uu. Air F rco, -i. t uod fr j

first .< Oct • -r, 19U until th- ?lst f «u unt in 1912; 1 will a •" --ok
. «b . vs i- . :*ly su'-.r ir. to t y u ir. y ur y-siti.r.?

... Ih-r. *-r- W - .r:«.wt - rt

. . , *

, ’r.r let- c r£t Li-V rr.-.m *n th thutu vr.s an in - vacant r.u;' f

rz Cists, ti.r. >:-s a static ffjap r.: - r- istr ti n r.uc n-. 1 thd:J:


t IS. 11.


33 /*


I


19 . .17 "-.h r..

--urt ; . l

Q. :,”r. t pjaiti ft i. Uw H-fs-r. nt -r. Baekcp-Fr-ysin 1-1 t th.t ti

with th*. Insect r f th. Air F.rc_.

... Dr. —fr -ysin waa th- * vis ry c imacl f r avir.ti n r..

Q. An rtaonva «x>rt f r rvinti n.m icir..? .

... I think it -as St s rzt Pr,i.rs r Ant ni th t nr: with th- U.’ic 1
D-.'-rt-a-r.t,

q, I n» c '.cl: t. tiio c nfur^nce f H Sv .t.^ .r, 1 / 1 /; i y u
. . ; nr. B-'h:-i : ./• ' - - r? ^

... N , certainly n.t, »lncw ray infara ti wsa rwfusw to 1 bl •• tic

th t I c ul. apeak t hi*", at. x

Q. Yiu »-.y th t 7 u kn« n thin ’ ut hi h ItituV -xpcrLc-nto, which

tturg c-rri ut >y Dr. P.-.ochr n - . R '-r ?

... , I h n k: .L.: - f th t -t *11.

Q. Li 'n't 7r fvit r Hi • ku U.11 y.-a ? rythinr r* -ut th t?
a. K , ?r i-itB.r . k~ t L - n t: in ut it.

Q. :. , ■ vi« ry c unouX 1 r

Avi ti h ■ '.-‘ici:. , c-r. 7 u ny 1- t.. a f r -ciai n r ;i tur», r i ' !.

pr-o-r.t ary r-. rtc t ;• u ut th. -Xvcuti-n f nr such •js.^rfaunts in
Dichr.u?

a. ’ .. «. ..3-i .. ;: It M • r ! >’ ur i ' !t

qu-cti n, ’ut I ill r~^ t tr. t I n-v-r r-c-iv- ouch r-p rto n* such » tt,

.. ir. jck :-1 r jnin .

Q, ;.a, Witn-oe, th *- i» ^ rr-ct, *ut it c ill' ' poaaihlA.that y .u T. r
*o autltth. ’.y k- 7 f • r. • rt -r l.ctur.?
n. th t to n t c-rr-ct. s

c. Md anythin V«c aj kajm t •-* a 1 -x • * -> ich v»or*

r. ?r -f oo r K-tel vtekr in th- c nc-ntr-ti n

ui th *..

url-. t -.-tin/ in 191^; -r- ru t. t, in


c _i i t >chm?

.. . .

*

'. 3ut u . r - -.ft

v

S.ni .r. ?


3- V


f Z


O H


- . sera nly .resent ' . -..is . otin : a:.- c csnltir. iys -

cions?

.. -\it that -ccurrc ’ .nch later,

-•at I noon tills accfcinj in Jtanfjcr . '-ere v r --ant?

, I was net. *

<; lid y U b. cak tc Ki.,.k; o’ ui- thin questien re !i 1~1 diner

.-.tv’, -rjsohor, r li*. ill ; i:o s.caJc t: j u?

.. il , nevuv,

,;- 3 the nr -v - f Jtaechcr over c iti nc<! ' ctirc-n y*v. ei.' ycur chief

%

after So. taJ er, 1;I|2?

A I ca; Just tellln y u that at first the nano wrs unlsnsun tc nc.

It .. a net : .nti ;u after that, an.’ I r t ut it cn tiro Is until X was
rnh’j* a! t it a a in, an’ nly by rca'in the rccs it ca:.o 'Jac’.c t y
c r; vo:y si vly.

i o this was really a vcr. iL:. -rU*rt affair f r yu?

Xcs,


.... Thank yu. I haw n further queotien*.

7 ; ..finri.T: Any further e:e~-d”-.ti-.i f U v .io witness?

I have no further quati.no tt tl ur

H n r.

7 % .TSSEEIT The witness Paul 3hoi&l r - y »c coecuaod, tijero ’

• •

c that £r. Scheldt

. ■ • ‘ *

he celled re a witness?

T;.c ars *1 will * rir in cr. *:• he! tt, a ritncec fer

vllcscr. , . r

IL. SIR T ?. a witness, til- «tcn anl tcattflod 20 - 11 wo:

;• srrare-, i >•- - r :

J av r T j 1 t.. id .1 ..<y .vded-nt, that I tnll s . U.i ’.urt

-r.f r. . - ill withh l aal r. r.

(The witness - t.'.. ea».)
me: Sir hE.3: X u .ay -c sca-v

. rv_

31 il


Fa’ -s-2-fcldt

G -urt . . 1


degc? .. 77 - r:

r ZZ7-, (C: unscl f r defendant Ha nd l-scr):

witnoss, w:ul' y u loose rt-.fco y:ur first .-n! surname?

Sr. -cr.-u -'r.! 3chid. !t.

•1 j’.ul! you ;•lor.se . * -oo -t roor. . y.cstj » an:! y ur .nsror anfi try

t r Blctdy sc es t- cmblo ti . Int r -t.ra t. !:cc; u. . 3 'i

\ m an' r!«n?

: Was ’ m es tiK 20 t:. f , 1T06, in :

: U-ulil y u . lu-.oc desert ’d . «u- educ.-.tV nal care .r v.ry c!i vtly?

%

.. 1 first went f cJLcaxnt-r, ach. 1 in Berlin. Then fr-u 1P13 t:

1 $ 2 $ 1 \r-r In . I was odueat ' at tbu see •' r soh 1 tl.oro. I . ado
■; . -trierJL-.U. n in 1525 in . -Am. 1 on I otudie’ :.e.'icins an natural
..int.r. in Gicaacn, Krcisholtun; in uio!). « nalo .y sv.k «a*£nation in
a ’ q r X?32 in . • ,• ot r Incti :

• ’-’ - t tlct tino :.o a atu^nt. Z Jtacl

jxro .-:ic-la!ucr.ti n in t'..- tv hcsrltol in Stettin in.r?32i v

.til 1?3J|. Fra; 1531a t1936 Z wont t l.ucstrln. In 1936, feat is fmv
;;3v o 1939 , I rood? feioaticn no a hrjfc-niot ctfho University :£

■ a ye or t Jr an and

. - -» •>oet 4 Jir..lin«

: t;.. • o inn inj f the rrr I • o i u n r.r.y bp i •‘it- r: *'t

1

: r

.

t!:o *<rs? ic l Inspectorate at -crli r thfl fdl 2 1. 1 VI a

:* -- . l rdet 2 ’ c : ie ill tin Jvficnist. I • acci. i;.--'

* •

. Fr - 3co I or, 191 : ■

. r • . . 9 - - w year

: n r,'.*a in Franco,, an
arch 1 rcloncc I fr-a yris n-r- f-«r •

r I . -eta.', rvc t-._ Univ_rsitr>’ £ Frcn^irfc t .*x; ortauittal cl-iof with

•

.t :r 13 t 17f^ I a c i-y “.”iti aal -axir.ti n :n.. ent-r. .' tl*


i 2 -.-6-3-Fci .t

C apt 1


anlvsi aity an! ~c n Anate * as - 3 -cturer.

Then y v r;cru ulthin th: «. 2 e : -ificc tf *r f cao r Irmlcscr
ft-.-.: 1 ? 2*0 tc i:Ui?

 ZwS, t’v-fc is crrrcct.

«; -:v-t ; rsiti^ns 'A* y u h 1 -’. js t.'ej Ary iacx!loal Ins -cct.r.-.tc?

I was a liyci^nist in tlu .'a-. _ Inspect-rate an 2 r«u;i 1 c

la tba As.«rtaeat f Science on£ OtJ Qui. a n co.
fl ..let was y-er 'c.arbxnt?

’cerrtcoot .X •

Q TT.uld y.-.u -lease ictura te the TriT anal ycur a; her a • f v.r!: .-s a

hy .ic.iiat in that tier.'art .cat.

A I he, t Ital vith .-11 qiuati ns vile!; referre. t the a. here of
y;l nc. -* r instance, :xaurlch.it , ky i.ne acC* . Vatl no, cl. thin
o ftr.t f c' 1 »e'ics, then the cqai; v.:«t • the 'aetcrl i leal t a tiny otafcl
ntdTiC q wrti ns in tbo s-.h-r

have t- :sal with q-Jcrfti ns : tr loir.. .;.'’rio n_r- X- r * -.viciiJj, X

*

'/rich there were s. .ci 1 :*e.. rt

i'. -hat was tl l . rolr.tl. nahi. . .- A artaent t the institutes f
tho Ar.;; ai*.: th- ther ..'ohr.iacht ’-tm c us? ^

A he hr-', a fer inctitut_s t. .v j .It’ rhich no ixrc .... c-nnect
P r inatmocj tho Military . .'.ic-i ,

Virus Eocoaroh in Cr*c *. i . ti c .a- .. 1 in a. J . J: V.nn,

P. './ar t-.arc any •ffici l relay i.ns!d t* institute l* UV.iSS.-n '

’ *’afr-r. SS?


[ flirt • 0 ••:. i. .. . a it. . the aXX.n Sh?

h Ut Z '; '. t ! :..y it.

• 1 u . .an y u h- ' - - '*r:ce • fich J c . - eti.no t.. that instdtati «

*•

u ka-V . r feaa r ru


'.r..w . \t rat ccrsi a ■ - a. .re -xx c ntact 'xtrsan .r /era r
re. awly ur agency?


IS ?C .' 7- - —,-6-L—F_l!t
Curl .1


- jnEI'cr £ SC f r--ti ns • stf lvumt--' t. tjj r.r.y at the.
fr at, rui' th-ref r; questi na nr ccnsi nnlly v’dch c ac-rn •‘•Iv.se

ic r R , tlvt ir, a qu*ti.n n urir

amt, c -tat f i ’.udcs, h usin , -tc. These vcrc tin- saaa quosti.ns qhioh
c nc_rr~ us, t , rn ’ that was nl- c ncomu'. idth units f the 3. : - su'.-
r ’inato t the ar.gr.

n D- / u hr. rr tk. Institute ; r illt-ry Science nith tlw .Jm-ncr 1 ?

.. ' , I ' n't ever. hn*ir the r vzto, .c. ^

B y u koss t:*c Institut r Virus :t.Z Ty. hus Icsenrck at hucivcn-

wOd? "

u that n;3' suck .institute adotci.

Q U v what ms tta sitaati re .r'-.v- tho qucfltl n af t; ’res—ty. inis
a articular . ;rt in the c . T k i-calos7 Tlir.t is nc f

tlw - 1/1’- • wl,iQh


Coals *.dth C nferoiWiS rej-r’in t-» ©o (v.-sti ns, r ‘.iC y u ..uroclf

0 • •

Coal vitli sue! cnforcncce? '*'

^ .^.un*. that tine -..v .;cnomlI-, ha; re at c noon rojnr'..tl:c vr.ee’

.r c. - n. . i «»r m lust., vat-, Ty .ui Institute -.t 4rnc. . which

• * . i

oxn vaccines £ r us. -tit in r..Vdticn,.i.

.» * . v

hor ■fohnacl.t 'ranehec. re© tv ll relatively : /': •

carlncy rice ’ far lir, .

rcc-.lv-'*. d ac Ir stat lnstltaU I r c^ -riir.-.t-l them . at Frr.nhf.. - -

.i, *.• t t»: J - t - •- r u. u .. t cuffic- - r nil

* • • •

: - r “

‘ c : 're'Tient cca •» :ir.


I# Fob 47-: :-S'. -7-1-rit z ycraL
urt Nc. i_

c only used vaccines which r:re known to us to *‘o offoctlvo. In
pite 0 / ti o cnornor.ry sltur.t?.on, wo nojoctcd •* vrccino v?5 ich v,t. 3
rxt rocc.~nir.od to 0 sufficiently # effective cn t!:o basis of a state
It sticrtioru ftoro was ?n£ vacclno v! ich can fro:.: tho 3ohrin'-
Varies.

'i. /hat w r.a the su*'st;-nco of tHa vaccino?

A. It tcj r cMchon-o.'s vacelno. brother procoduro vc.s carried

*

uc and tho cntiro or.* rye w.;e uoo '.. Tcc uro of .tho i^so of tho on-
.irc onbryo, tfcoro is o Irrsor . cunt of vrccino available, if
•Ms vaccino had boor. valid, w would I \ s Vrewfr.t about an incror.o-

4 %

A production. Uhtf: rtur r *; .ly , -! t u-.t r.. cfcr. cr.so,

*. Uo I urulor I you oorrectiy *d\on you cay tho Behring orbs
: .'rr ; ur- l.rd ont typhus v. ccinc froa chickon or a to tho -riy?

• Yss .

.. In tils crat you r« I tho offer of delivery 'ocr.uoo tho ty-
hue vaccino was not cffoctivo?

. . Ko, not sufficiently off
low ?j,d you fi»i S) - -/out'

' rni' t; 1 : 0 OU |) 8 ol, ifc.Ii now 11 o'clock. fto Tribunal will

••

3 in rocors for r. c’rrt t o.

♦ ® •

- 1 "• ricorr for fl^t n inut s.

(A -iort rr.cj-c • ? ~rJ:rn)


C-urt 3.. 1

15 ,-7-h-6 -l-£5t-3e arc.


TES KAft S ? , « Li *hc Tribunal Is r.;«in in session. Ary it 'ilor.so Y ur
K.na-, the 'ofextent Rudolf 3r«ct, having tom excused ty the Trlbunnl, ie
e.seat f.r the talcnee A the day.

Thi rR3S 131111 *heSecret:ry Gcr.orrl •'ill n-te for the rce^-c* the ab¬
sence A the defendant Rudolf Brandt f 'mrsurnt t excuse In order thrt he r.py
testify tef-.ro Tribunal 2. The counsel rocy r>r >ceed.

a

3Y DR. SCiu.IDTx

• v Mtnets, before the recess you said thr t the^ty^hus danger pt the

cad A 19<1 led to the consideration of increasing the r.roductlcn of typhus
%

vaccine. Du y.u icn.v vhxt rr.fccscr Knndluscr, es Arjy Medical Inspector, did
rt this tiae -a this set*er?

a. Yes, i-r.fots'ir Knt'l.ser ti ir that industry should nr'/.uco r.ore vne-

clno. He vrnted to lneito industry to >rod.ucc soro.

• •

-v. v Q t this the Industry -hich v ( « rirerdy producing typhus vrcclr.o?
a. lirst it vr.t th« industry vhich *vc already nr o due in.: vcccino, and in
addition other fret ries, if nossltlo, wro t. *:rcd.ueo vrocine.

v Du you ’<n.v vhether this attitude A rr.fcti r Hendl sor resulted, in
anythin*; c.r.cretc?

a. Yot. Ih. Svhrin<- V rhs bed th. intention A cetrblichln.- e now fre-
t -ry ir. Lv.v end. the” a ; ror.ched the Ar y, *rofc8s.r KrndloscT, f -r thrt «ur-
-..8c nnd •'Pi.t—'. t- hrve the r.lish rr.foss.r Voi,-l ilrcod rt their dieoccfil,
vh vpc r. e ecirlist ;n th. or c.ucti r. f vrccinc fr /: lice.

v So”, v> b r fact <ry built by th« Rvhrir. - berks? ^

... A s.w nrxucti-n feet ry vjo ouilt In L*-.v.

. N . Did. this fret ry have any fficlr c-.iu.ccti r. vith the Arny Hcd.ical
In6-ACt .rr te?

A. Bo, it vre ur.ly rn i^vi^rli: -rlcs. It ves s.t under the Ar-y

Hedlcel Inspect rate rad it die r. t hive rhy connect! "he vith it.

v Did this institute lrtcr ..el ver t the iryl

^ •

«. I do nut kn-.v axretly. -hey -'orcT hrbly only s-tll quantities.

r # vl

-o frr cs I kn-v this fr-t.ry.vts essentially t. su-, ly the civilian sector.
v Vcs there cny -thcr c nr.eeti.n ttet Lvov Institute or.duced ty-.huo


C*urt S-. 1

19 Jet -,?-*-e-2-£KK-Seard


vtccinos aentivced, end the ntse Dr. Keas? Bo yju know Dr. Fees?

A. I do Bit k-v Jxla -er»'.t«aiy tut I kov that he worked »t thin
Institute of the Behring *~rkt la Lv.v.

Then this institute rnd Ir. Hats had no rclati'.nshio to the Amy
Hedleal Inspectorate?

A. lo relations, no. ^

°hlaments of lice fron Lvov have been aentlonod here to the Concen¬
tration Cano Buchenvrld. The prosecution expressed th* suspicion that these
hiooents if lice could *iev« c~c frvn the institute A 0KK in Crecov. Do
you know anyth in#; about that I


3150


19 Fo- 7-%S"-Cccl:-9-l
C urt -’c. 1


, Fe, if th t hr.. I '.c n the cr. c I c ort: ini; world h.-.vo lo.- mod
cf it. Tl'u Institute wculd 1 vo h.. i/tc sk tic -odicr.l Inspector
f rr r.o^rovi.le.

Do yev consider thr.tfrc:; fcl-o institute in wi ich Profossor
Hyor worked , thr.t ho sent this on 3 ia own initir.fcivo? Dr you
c nsidor tint .ossiMo.

A

t wo -1 n qiitc 1 rsi’ilc.

- cw r.-r.Ln, br.ck bo the qi: ati of tic ^vr.ccino situation
r.t tl o and of lO'll, tie you 1 c • w wlothor • t tile t ir:o discussions
otwoon the v nous r.fjoncicr, t'. various interested r.“oncios
terk plr.co ?

... .t U o on cf Ifil th iv. --c ro t Ike, diacuarlena r.Vut tho
vr.ee i.no s ittur.tior .

I ’ ;.vo hero c. docunont, . 1315 , Ex] r :t i’t . it wr.a

s 'zilttcd '? ti e ^roaccutlrr. >c5. r in crcrr o.w. in. tlcn of

“radio a^r. 2 w!12 br.v« t: is decu-umt alr«n to you s’- you wl-on
v 1 ok v i r.t it be (maw r . f r quor. wV-na. Md you km
tl. t this lacu i i«n took pl .co?

• , cl Is t * 1 ; lb, * rsyr.olf i;’. not p .rtic-

t in *.3 llacuaeirq since I r.o on luo.vo.

.. .r-jv - s Dr. Sebolz?

Dr. ^cl olz mb one f f y %roup nnd lr. tl ia

c- cu he represented r*o. t

- « i • . n

tier ?

. . •

'-••• will yen pi. c. l- k : 2 ? •• ~l ro

' I not hr.? c • - . 112 yen r ~ * .


• • - vr.ccinc row prcducod * y tl i SuI.rin 'r'*s, which is

*ucod fr- : cl ickon - c, is to ho tested for its effectiveness.
~ r r tlK^pwry r dr. .Dost, its will ct in t ucl with tie £S O''or-


IS rv- '-7- "-S’-S-2-Ccok
Ccu;-.'c. 1

sturr;'j:.nnfuoLror, r. ru • vaky.

'.4 he w. a D$sinita?

. . ->r. knifcz v:.a . rw n :: c. >. J rin ~6rks in -• r'jurr, - a .

f r a 1 \cr.r\; j.„ « .s*lr. clo.rv <f .£• duci-ico.

If y-u !: ’-o«n s! v. fir file nr to o.rlior, wull ycu 1 ;vo

nctioo-: myt* in-j ir tils point *3 ? ^

. . Sfo.

• • • - tfcula ycu Jits, tt -ir. Dornitz w.'.o to

•oC in t-ucL with Dr. wroeky ' “.it m ex?.ri;-.ont?

... Dr. -ru p!*; ] 1 ienc inrsituto r.\ _>p:.rontly tils

Mrlr. ; vo.cfcino r.s S' - tc . inttituto.

.. .£ tl . .. ye; ir s: . v.-.ul : • ateniaLed ycu?

. o’, vn« c_h o iv.'.uc ; t . any tyyion© institute.* ,

% -on»t you s: • Ma . 'slvuft rieo to my o.ue-

piciicn 1 I. t tl.uao lii 1 tt ; 7- * wn r'non;s n V.w: n ‘ oinyo?

•

. ■ -’c, net :it . 11 .

• ‘ ’ id V..v w ti. ro

ir i rkod soerot?"

•_ , it is an ?*:• In;;-, If

.

. .

aews notfcxnr t.e r.ia * ■■ t Ju . • .: , f. r j i:*. tr “at the idor.

1 I t 2 v* * r r . e :n col vrlfcl _-uol nwr.ld t3:uro?

• xi f r !•” BUspiel

. • .

lUscuosi n ir. v _ rt,

, ,

, , v

' - ■ s r, tie r;_ .v

-

'".t: ncicl. inistry in ^ djitLrir r.-L. t il _r^ vr.a ..lror.’:? rr’

: •

i r r, Pl'cf.cr r ..’cit^r, Sr.-to -~civt ;*y Ccnfci, - n r

3152


»rtl. r.nu


v ?o*; -7-s -5-3-C-cl:

CrU! t rc, 1

sc fcrtt, Iripor p.rs-T lici-s P -ticip .tcd?

.. D; t Is very unlikely. Such r’liecuafflcn or '.iscussions
1 .VC \-n pr.p.*.P 0 d fer na c ir.tfcor cf covjeo, aT invitations ro
issUod few {1.-78 '2c.frro V-V.. ‘Kn tfr-ro would rev -r twr
Ir.p rfc-nt 'laeuasicna cf i p'rt-r.t people vie hr A r. -re .t dor.l rf
rork r 6 tMa ti ;o. Xfc«ro would n-v r *x tve • auch -diaouasi na on

the arc .0 U.y.


sirs


-13-1-":. lc


19 So' 47-/.-S
Court * : c. 1


V


"\

q. It would hr.vc b.cn ?f£tl*3lc t: .t t-..c weeks cr cno vrock ':ofcrv.
thero wt.s set 10 discussion cf i. diix'-r.r.t jrcv.p rf poopio

. « Tj- t la quite poo a 1 ‘; la , yes.

>ut 16 T7c ul 1 pro:..' ly h. vo ’>ien i.;p-ssiMo cn the sr-.c dr.y?

... i'oa, I ernsidor t! r.t irepr arlMc..

.. ycu knew t! t -ir fosser H..rv’lcs~r trek pr.rt in rdllfforont
:iecuasi:r. end v.ith .* Ir.r-r nut.r f pojplo n thu typhus
question durln tMa tl:*.? x

... Ye.

I nor.il a cror.ee, — ti t t!.ru we.> liacuaaitna with In-
;iviaur.la, yes, but r. cinforonco?

... Ho.

q. ..’ould ycu l :.vo 1 . oec.'.sa■ r. go knew 1. . * Prefers, r *. ndloaor

participated In auch .'.lacu:*a> r. cr cenfuror.co?

... I wt ul'.*. ourt&lnly : . lo . .

h. ' ey I or.y oithor '3ofcro cr .ft rrarla v .out tJo results, yew
' Jopc.rtaont prnjr.bly 1 d to ' o infer..od of the rerultr?

T. I would t lor. at fcr.vo le. :• t 11 vo ex¬

ploited the results.

:\vs the. nono 3uchenw:.l * : ■ ■ r. jiythl : tc 7 u, did you OVon
r fcl r. :. 'UohonwrlJ in c< r-.csi'n witl typhui roi r.rch, r tho
iv.a quocti :6 ;.ll? •


A^ r *TII !t!.


uhv.t! „r X tween tie Ole Institute in Cracow :nd


•!. u oncontr..6ien p _ , r

Vi-l ua ns-'rc!., t! • ;*c • s .ny c r?.. cti :.?

... Sv.ro wc.s nc c-nr.ecfcio!;.

. • • , it s n st: to., t: -.t i 3 : : ; i:ek 46, th. t

■ l'l vr.ee ino in 1643 wee froqrenfcly issued f r vc.coinr.fcic «8j

i « -ro lid Buchenwc.il ~et t: is v. ccino?

BucTanwnld ocn hevo oht.-lnod t; is vr.eeino : rly :r:: tho SS

■— ic:.l store. The vc.ccino distri'iutod wr.s r.s fcllrws: It wr.a

3154

• -Tt A.* 1


astribwtov*. t tie izkdlvi - : 1 - ^cnokce rt the


Jr?/ cht, * ici istrf'utc,.


t' - rrupp. 'Ha -i-::* odifer.l


Inspcetcrr.to ad not fcrotr, fr - «" -pr roeolvo.’. tte

f '.U • • ■•--* «• - !vs ' ! ' 1 * rfncfc; rf th0

dr.* eM.

':ru : - u ov r In -’ - r ^

• N

Toff# •

ill yru twH »L..t tl.6cee.ti •• ; N •P° nod *

Ilimins f liv.j, I a i cno ey ny gotten ffllof
. . , •. ,.« TWfo.afr -c! roi'jor, tfcrt tr.ro wr-a t. apoel.-J. M 3 •

„ 4to _ , <:i ..'-lc . r< :• ..a KPup ««? « tl ro:.t '« r»-

r v.r.'-.r OV lr :-.r. o. •- W>* «* yolfc-w *«»>» '" c “ n0

tea to v . produe-O. i 0 to lr, f 5 * rofu.ocr 3jM lA err.er« te»

„ cae .4 « -- tftc, «t «•» ' ' nus 1 'i»r of diffloultlo.. »o
vooolm f tr* proiucoi » t : --t_-r-p..rly n 3uMo, -n _w- r not »t Mo.

It , , t: orally o.trfry ' - " *>« • "• fcr0

ooiartcp. f .'.rotor. •• ... tr . s.t v 3 to r r.eolnr.ta tl-o troop.

r tt . .pot 'tilnrS lit* r v . v * ' « ’ ho

• ~ : i:r- v. . frlc-. Y-r» « n- - - iffldultio.

' v.t Mu s-lv'illlty r tho v.-.cclao 'v Aovloln ,:i foror.t not!-'

r : : C » ' ; ' 1 ”

• fs . . cttil - i .. O. 'f ao SS-J-r* to

rr;* . ct tt jf ru •*»- • i‘ . c ir * •

?

.n V- 5 ..-O ct.;. i. - «:»cir.l ivir'.cr.n rf tic SS #*W

t) i • xntimc. fn*

.r • ; tr 7 t r. S3 -rrvn nc.-j

: n t: lc su-j.ct' .-n*. 'CC'Ti¬

ce '*.,coiv. vs t tV n Air -\


• *


... # -r


, .1*


t


i:v.-.*h vc -


. r.;* H c TTv-rt r

*

.r.kor. tr *tc *rrr t wf c \-.rr-C’:* \ff.6pc * tf.l; nr.s s- t -p, md -c
• •

fS totlior.l ffieevs r»-,.ro r. tr* lt w s ?-1 t'P, n rc n,,t


».t r. f tx


19 Ft': 47->S -10-3- < Icy
C' ur t 1 * . 1


fou £S icc.l officers t \>lcr, : 3 rl\.cs r -y r c^mst r..tou 3 is
vc.ccin- pnckin. . c ' 1 is p:.ckirc, —l:o 1 ’a* 1 u *11 tho vr.ccin^ with

lin, r.ir r_.pul^a cnZ 8201 I c t: it « c tc "ic -irs lv_ •. It
w.\s c. Iry prtduct.

*1. ivcn tt 8 c l r • x.

; r u plcr.sc cscrl* o wlr.t tils w.'.a?

... Tho vr.ccino W'.o fcr :.rly pr.cho£. : n t-rt tu')o, r. r;lr.sa
tnbo. . t t!., ’ Stci or tils -It.as ttj.s t! - *vy vr.ccino. -lc rlr.os
hcJ t< *jo capoci .ily tixoJ, tho vrccinc r .s i:opfc in r.

V..CUUT.. It V r Vo.;- *. .fflcttl■ t no: ills . pulo vlt'. >‘vt infoct-

inr feho vr.ocino . Few, Prcfocorr 3yor

■ . r la ;I s’, po r luck.

If I uv; r .l;c,-uoo t< .~t pi tho V.cclno • r in tho ’ c:.y

f tho due!:. L*. tho noc! f V. c‘ ‘ w -1 r v: r -n -r apocl-.l

tonaicn. If no fll ' xlo eponod fcttoaiatoly

without ’.ruckin it nil « c <1 ’ put into it raid the vc.co-

•

ino w.-.e lirsrl -1 y with tho .-iycoc f Cl.* ns tf" Ich wuro

ir. tl o «-nh!:cp, r«;. tl o i fic\ltics ic) 1 •! or.ictoC w.ro thus
lv . :;iy ti e. Vaccine still ! unclor

r^fri irct. ;r.. Th.nbf c. It 1 .* tc *jo


19 Fab. 7-iWE-10-43aoy
Court Ho. 1


flown to «fric^*

, Itoto purpose, of tto visit not to tost tto vaccine, but to
denonatrato these nnpulcs?

A Tto purpose of ttovi.it was to detonstrato those anpuos end the
toctoic of opening <ton and dissolving the vaccine. This technic wns shovn to
mnbors of the SS and tto :MUA Corps of tto SS, and all of then repeated
it in order to guarantee the results. Then as far as I know Dr. Ding vacci¬
nated e for people 1 th this vaccine, five or six non cans in and they sere
vaccinated in tto am 1th this vaccine. TM. corresponds to tto roll known

onullpex vaccination, a scratch on tho uppar ora.

' , -- U ld on, call this vaccination an ox?,rinont in the nodical sense?

9 s, this was an international known vsedn; whloh is produced in
11 civilised countries, and has proved it, value for =nny years. It 1. even
lees dan;,reus than smilpox vaedto. a-xtllpex vaeeine can load to ccnpll-'
cations, but tot yell*. fever vaedto. Tto streets of tho vaccine were well
known and -o had tested it by tho usual bacterial--leal and ctosdeal noans,
that io no had tested it for sterility end phenol content.
q toll us .that olso you smr in Puchotwvld?

A our stay in BWhonrtd WM relatively shrrt, about an hour and a

h-lf.

q Did you knew that Buchonnnli ttvs n concentration ennp?

A Sof'-ro this visit I r»t kns it.
q Did y~u see the concentration ca-^> irrotoc?

A Th CUT was craeticaiiy «. .Vs*, only a for people doing
cleaning up sc. ,rU-on th reads, and sc forth, .and on ingdry wo loomed

. that tto innate3 pore bin- toed ftr «». linie we Were MM »“'• froo
tto point of law -f :-’d,n , '■ *t th, hitch .ns, tto or throe of tto

stoltors, tto aerugo syst®, cad that was the end tf «>e visit, -hen we loft
re saw a Urge group of concentration esnp lnastus nnrcMro in. They were

rtn~inr and wnro accccpnnied by r^utr. ergans.

O Thjn what was tto inproesim you got there in Bucherwald?


19 Fob. U7-M-#.TD-ao-2a-»felcy
Court Sfc. 1


A Itad tho ir.prosd.on that it was a big barracks and trca the peisi'
of view of the hypicnists it was extroeely clean, and nado a vory clear im¬
pression.

Q Bow, you want hono, that is to Berlin?

A Yea.

q And Tfhat did you report?

X I reported to -• option clef, Profo.sor Sohrolbor «h»t I hove 1
reported hero.

Q In thu talk with Dr. Ding, I assur* that you talked with hin?


A Yes.


q Did you not discuss what case mo deno in those roor-s in which .
dooonstratod tho nnpulos?

A So, th»t <nu tt» entrance of tho barred... I don't kno* "hat woe


the building itsolf.

q Dr. Dine could have told you, for otarplo, that ho «. conduotlnr

typhus research on ooncontratibn casp inrntos?

A Mo, wo did not talk about that, and I know nothing about it.


Q was that bjoauso tho Uao was short, or was there no opportunity,
boenuso usually colloa^s discus^ tlwir roric with each other.

A Wo bad vox? little ti>, it is two. I imuirod about tho «<*«
in tho o.iEp bacr.uso I had s --on an*- other barracks, and ho ahwad no th,.su
things as I hr.vo reported.

q to, in the Din. Diary *hloh ho. booh suhnlttod to tho IWbunal,
U-.cro 1. an entry about this visit ahloh^ou and Dr. Syor ntd. to Buchan.,..'
cn February 6, 19U, but It ==y. raottin: else too, nuocly, n unnber of
vaccinations vdth yollo. fever <® pirforted beginning .dth the 9th of F
and lasting for several aonths, on! the yellov fever vneoin. used for
00=, frea the OSS Institute In Or-.ore, did Professor Dyer or the :to*»a
m=pootor-.te ever get an assiuuraent to tost the vaccine*

S,, end that vculd havo boun quite superfluous, because tho off


of tho vaccin-i w ro known.


C art I

19 rub U7-: - 11-1 - IJj - has


.. But it was n_; b * did It happen th .t the Csncontr.ti n Case


It c.uld n:t*'.v. c x. fr os, because -..o did n- t i30Uw axgr
yullcw fever vaccine at =* . ?he vaccine was locked in a special re¬
frigerator Vx.d was n.t used. It ~i ht have bu-n possible th t in tho
cxip the as^sula, ittid; uu tad • penad nt that tirre, was m.- V vr.cci-
natl nr. Of c -T-u, we did n t t.-lo it along with us when "e‘* > ft , it
«u useless X r ur hod be* . Statist niy explanation

V

tr.-t I can thiiuc f.

Hew .\ny ees i -a such an a pul- c aueutf
a. VtJ* ouch cn raipulu iu c-r. vneoimio fifty to uixty pe-plo.

». Nr Jf yfli L-ft o. - / tho pen aqnil. s th re whur. you left*
it wjuld nr. -w bven p sainl* t iosuj thos f r accir.ati na?

.v. r * j nti :. .in the D • nt. ••

»

I ...ru -r» .b-vt rixty.

But i- y.u a-- j»y ir. the v.Coinati:na? .

a. Kthu.-o t s n. r. L3 a f• r it.

Q. New, wiln-oc, is itn tr-o t -t thio vaccine"was c plutely
.vuvleao ar.i viccir. ti na with It had n of: cf: nhateuuvar, -s ,dally
in Comauqr?

a, as I h-.vu nlr-ady said, this vaccine w-a obs-lutely haraloao,

- v.jr .a; h .rsXul ti. n sn 11 r. v ccir-.s.

%

.. ~icr. r. ,r.uc .i -ie fr t.?

- T. t is qviU i. vsniblo.

W. w, f «.r u-turned t Berlin, 1c y u re fr fosa r “uhdl r.r?
i r. t. rv - Jv ; r.

Did : u r«j> r. t M. >ut =Wo • W .r 1 n P'*V i/« .1 ..7
.. - , .y i n t. r_,' rt t hla* I r«p rUC t t

Cr*.-f and i_. t *• c * . icuol pr co -ro.

But, rnbf lieva that this affair, which jr u huvt described,

5 s -thin which Gchruibur -- nld hnv«. had t rep rt t Fr foster
K&ndl 5 or?


-ire


C.'JTt I


1? .'_b U7- - 11-2 - LJ3 - r.4Cbsr.

S , that ius quite a suberdinate atur, *hich ha took e re f
thr.x.h hi3 s-cti n chief.

In Conclusion, i should lik- * ask ycu about a *r. did

y u knew pr.fess-r Kiiove? *

*. Yes, * know hi .

«*. where did Fr.foss r Kli^vo w rk?

Profess r Kliova worked at the >af onset, at th*. ^rdnandt Office
and ho also had a certai n ccntact :dth the Medic \1 *napect rata.

Q. What did iia w rk on?

rt . no tr i*ud in tr.u field f c -•'.ter xeasuros - ainst tho so-called
bictoriulr ical wurfaro,

4 . H u d j u kn that thoy wore c unter b» wires?

Ho told c« about it nd ho air ys said tn .t they w*re working
cnly n oovntor tu suroa. Per ox-r.plo, there "ao a Puohrer r-.cr that
nly dofonao r.oarores were t tu workod n. ^

.. Y-u acy a no :ative -rdor t- .t only d«fensu n.asurvs wore to bo

worked on?

a. ll « rk could be d m t w acteri l leal an' dvoly,

th-ro tt-o pr.hibiti n inat " .st.ri 1 -ic 1 wtrfaro.

D- y u havo tho conviction th t that r .o rlehtj that thoy noro
w rking -<nly n dafonso tonsures?

•v. Yui, I cj c:nvincod f that and it was necessary.

q. D. y.u <n.rr that frny ur «n p^ra nvl kn wludge?

h- fosa r Kliovo t:ld i:n tbr.t ur Intolllgenco had r,p rt.d that
tho Russians wor planning tha usu of bactorla and far that r. v*.n it. "nw
nocoos iy I r us t takn precautionary aaasuras.

... I have n . furtfc-r qua; ti ns t this itness.

THE FflSSIDF.sT: D cny t r .. ft.ns.* c wwl t. or rs-'X.anJnu

this witness?

BY IS. nSODQx (C unsal for the l-fondant wu,: wsky.)

q. witness, is it true that a* tho b-~innln: f ttu, ctepai n in tho
last in 19U a typhus protection f r tho Gcraan tr -ps by protective


C art I


19 Feb la?--- - 11-3 - L “» - ^ckur.


vaccination was r.-t pr: ."ided f r? t

a. "here ,r..'.t difficulties, ttoo radical pors.nnul raid thu

d-ct:re were vaccinated.

. ,uid the tr -pe; it was t p.ssible t vaccinat: the tr:ope f.r
what rcos-n?


There was r. vaccina available.

.. Is it true that at the boglsnin f the cra.p.i ;n in the -cst', the
demon tre-ps had no pr tccti.n .gainst lic«?

a. There was no effective. : r.tecti-n. ,e had a nurbor f del uain
•stobliohnonto, which were n t bi. on-u-hj thu churicr.ls wor- r. t odoouato
and had n t been developed far or.-u-h.

Then an effective dol usii. atb d c old be developed nly during


the war?

a. ijs, the roa.’ :octivo obotioal ims dovul.pcd nly t ward tho
end f tho r .r; that ma cdUd icusot; and it c ntainod tho sar.,o substance
as tho a -ricon DITT p vdor.

Q. Under thoso circumstances, at tho bo,; in:-in, f tho war, was tho
typhus (’an,or In tho i.ict very rr« .t?

a. it -a a o*oat \n -r.

... l'hon, j- u eay, in ,v thorn circa 3tanc s, fr n the .mdionl and
rcilitnry point f vlotf, it xtrotuly i--p rtant t have an offoctivo
pr.tecti naainat typhus?

a. T-<3, I nt-Jt uiy s .

Q. H.c, A c. as t another sub^oct. D ; u kn r that after 1 r*>
nuantitioa f .-irarorw 3-ru_. hr.' b-or. a.: inist.r,.., tfc .r w r< -*alho *.nu


si* ck i. n tho p tionts h: * hen 1 c ntents?

a. , • H ' c ntonta *-8 osnti ned as pten 1-

.. D j a kr. 71 vfaathar f r ^ '


industries r«i v*. tho ph-n-1 contents fr a tho .;.n;rem. serua?

a. i.n, I kn w cb .t that, especially since ftench fir-j pr .:ucod
this Borun with ut ch-.n 1 , but industry sUnsibly ciuld n'-t w rk with .t
phenol sinso they did nt have or. u. h traino-d p^rs nn«l during the ear

ZrZGl


C urt I


1? i’cb U7-. - 11-4 - - ---ihaa


an-: there was th-.ref-r. dnn_xr f c.ntaainati n by bacteria.

•i. '-s .on^rono a frequent c lie:.ti n in w unds?

Yus, It waa q^oito frequent in the field,
t* Must one therefore say that the pr blen f preventln « rone,

Xr -a the .tdical, as veil na fr s tho niUtary p.int of view, can bo
called oxtranuly lapartant?

a. -03, anb mat a a;* ao. ^

h. Zo ardin, tho aepuloa with yoILv fev-r scruu, y a said bof ro
that tho a pul.a which hr/ been op .d wore loft behind in Buchonwald;
you a aid bof ro y ur r.utoot difficult! tr.uro wer.. in at rin ani
koupin this a-rxi. .. u y u tell tS j Tribunal hew 1 n , in ur pini n,
the auru.. c„uld be k«-.:t in the --wpulo?

.v. ih't depends n li they ’.jro handled; and if they wero iunediatol-
oltiood and put ir. froeair. tcoporwir, they si ht be kept nu day.

Q» 1 aa thinkin of tr.o a^jului which y.u left behind in Buobonraldj
wore thoy cl Bud i^.ueuiaUjV after they vuro pen-d r wero they laid
to no side?

a. Thoy *uro lyii r. tho table.

%• at. ib ut d 1 1 n were they Jyin th-re?

4 1 cannot a ; . : i la tiao r-xi half an hdnr at tho n st.
wall, rntneas, y u apeko f paaait .gurus o .inst

bocterlel ic :l .arfaro and y u ad.' th .t ur » enta h id r jp. s-ted hot
Russia was propnrln frar. activu irfaro with p is^n?

•• , - dii n.t .ear that.

t vrccir.iti.na. was it oust afliy in

•.r.o -tr y bef r v tho . on-.r .1 ir.tr “ncti n f a new vaccine first t. tort
•■a effect t h j vaodho n - 5 ill t up f pers no and eb. vo all .ho
reactions ir. r ’ur *. kr. w what the c.riiUi'lily f U.c vaccine *,tb?

• if it wax -c’.ually a type f vaccine this sis d re n
•v luntears, ■ ...b-.vs £ the -ary and nasb-rs .X the llilitsry .^dical
-vcac.ry, hat ia students.


1 ? r-c- -J. -12-1- _1 t


C urt I


.. ul! y u c-nsi cr it e roX-M r iir.aponsibl. if such = n.w vr.ccino
wcr. us..-:, rcijin. ,r. th« st-.t»:,nts by th. cr hicin. firi -b ut cupv
tioility, wite ut V-stia v.ccin. in nqy i n - s.. r.ll ir .up?

“* ' n ‘‘ 6r; ’ ul - ' c P- r * . r -'ucc' it. If it*-ui r.- # ai kmiMi iir=

* h r - a ' biilt y h '' ? r v - ■» I W-WW "*t c nr 1 r r, Mt ifcCMBory,

In thar c's-a, yos. A

~^ * °* Thank 7*u. I b.-.y- r. further cuccti ns.

?• . ..":T| le th.rc any further cj pgrint tl n f tiii« rdtn-c& .y any

r’cfonsc o nn»tl7 Thera -civ. nr.,, . - . Drcu iJ#


C«0S5 X. 1*QTIC:‘


.


*• ltacM * ot oil - r i -• - i ur pait. n ir. tU a. *ictl

•• • -rvctiy aub.r ir.-tc.'.?

A. I v.-r. Ilroctlj :••• : -aaar fichroibcr.

.. ~n' »n 'i ;• uhivb r-Ln n • ?

• '' • • . eltor nr.

... Pootsoh , . phanaciat,

“r. Iftfcnn , : . ,

..

itb butv-cen ;n.-ra »1*0 ~.r,' • i?

thtrv antn - h - *- • l i n poet r-.tv., 19U0

-*• - - r bl - ' * ' t.vrhue vneeinue v. ch fa «f


.


i rt f c nf.ct


• rr i cbT’et-r?


- ’ " 1 s_r? “c it "roqr^nt


• : , :


rc-


r S' i


r zng r;.zT.


K ^ rf i


- . n chit f, .


■ r - wsccfcl chu: c .
C> r,B8 r Icc.r fur r. *. rt


r.- •ir-.otl’- tv


at-*-:.


i tbjs c .-n, - CC-.V: .


-*iji j


- :t-n r-& rti-ij, ^r,-ctly


• 16 .


15 Fob— —Jr—12-2—*' .1 t
C urt I

t H~-n I r_r?

... L’cT rcur.-.tcly 1 0 a. t Ur. u. >.to rhan Fr f..ss.r Sehrcibcr left
the .a-;* . ic -1 Inspect ntc, ant! I . nt thin bore. “ it that

cv. pr. j-.oly bo 5 urv’ in the record.

-• 0 *•-' -'-r when Schroibor 1^'t -X ..rry -’c-iccl L.spcctcrr.to?

•». Mo, I -l n *. re. -racr tbs p-r. A

.. .hy i ha le’.vo? 0 y.ul.uw?

... Fr r Schreit^r • - .'icor f Instruct! n Or up "C"

■>f tJv. ’ illi-ry o licil ..c- ’vuy, ti:t he iucr *„ - ,-wbtr cf

the Reich Berreh C.uncil.

i. That ’ oen't oocu t. leal jnaptoet-r-.to, if ho

biccsc instruct r -f the iiit-r c Me-? .. - ;.. * .5 it?

... i r, t.. s. r - qilt l - c . . ilii-:-- oiical ;»cr.*'eny

In

•-1 f trn» instructs nr . .

:• ■■ J

Inapoebcmtc, etc it n t? *

Xes, -*v ietru., att . v tore r 8chroi!--rr c n t Ivootty un or tho

” " "c ..yin 1

• s

- loopootcr*to«

J. Is-.', ii trv. t. . cv '• : -3 :n ' kw n 1' the pini-.n that

ani.'-'l oxpjT entr.ti n rita t’-'"3..r T r- „ *>aci r bec-ur.. f tv. I ct that

r ’ ' ^ x . : so?

•“ : 1 ~ ! -n. f r . - ’.ri:. a r r * c* inihe atn$o

- f-r osperisental *--r

tn V «v •» used.

.• ,

- • a ? rop-.rb,

1 r ' * - pd-'-ivr. r-s hil» qr certai* • .1 x.rtr V t -;.i .’.I o-?.rL ., 1 . L n

4

, , :

" i'ncls .in rasist-.noj t. : ..r y.u ewe-rin that v M-wc

•a * •

f ▲ J


C urt I

• , rc : r_ r ts Bb -it it, r roa c Tty rtLei

in n. ’ic'i j am - .Is?

I tUate-j, in rsy pini n, it * truo, :: testing

* ... . t

th-.t : ? teats c*n . cn' ct. • r. - i - 1 : - r.ll.

> n't 1 rv. anawcr&’tha questJ n. Istt r

.. n »'ith typhus ic . i wilablo?

Hi tm* cr yes r r. •

I t* n t to • f this ; I .

Tlvn if tl; ’-.f... -nt .rl r . : ..-pr-rs. • sue". r« plni n t thi

Fribunr.l, .. to w'thot ho a as ttldn \ it? r.. viso£tlu Tritwftol

th"t he th ..t it nr pr b-.ni, a recuse r. t x;<-ri tnt n totiitn ocin s

, : 'IT ,'i •>?

It Is » * ; pl-.i •« Ur ; t; h vi or >. -i entr us* :«c c n'uci n

huoan jo 1 u*s«


*


i: ■- —i2-i--?ci'

C VsTt . 1


■


- . u lav- rfccth-r certain _ri. .:jV 2 antwls hive resistance t
t; ins? Is it eust-.uary t...it ftcu t ;v v?

•* i-tinca i s—'in' tfc.oo * . ac mindc c ncuii. '—tJscra arc

: -

tL„3 cith ut -x.in -Jifoctc • ith t -:us, Skips : ncrc sc:. tovcratrreo^Ut
- r Ms r ac . i r . n ' ..r are tcicn t oliuinctc sue.'-. inaccuracies.

'! Criticise -en lcvoll. : it the erori-xnt.-.l iicth-'u: .X the
institute at Pranld *

.. In'.us try a nctiico qute-i nc* t. esc testwe satoy'x, sircc induatr, .

%

itself crllc ' the vaccine t ' iriiiic -lx staU institute aai*. Eat it res
0 Toctivo > wo thcref re reject- *. it. This was the vaccine tlict I
: xntl.no'. oC.*.re.

" •

-- 1 * y 4 . enti rv. a thin .V i iMs 1 o'.rin ./erico, tli- vaccine
2 Wfed b;- their institute at nr/ur. ' .in c ir a the o-i'-ryo in r. chicko •’ ’
°~* *ou weren't o-^oldn, a! at thair total ;-r?OucU:n, waro yeu? They.

'id r >uco vccaincs level .cl'j> n tio 0 j 15:, i '.n't they?

.. Tea, U.-rt ore tw oti V hioti In tlw first .lnco the

c_':r/c is us>:.. Then a r or ntit; of vaccine is sL-taiuc.*, \In tho

0 c .'^acc the eabry is n t use.:. Is u

0 footivo bet a a&allcr quantity, j uno.! nly this latter ty.o idthrut
the uao r Era L.'.ryr n tlx * asia ; J>. roc .cn'iti n X th- state in-

BtitutC.

> ' tao i... rcssi h with U.v

Tri*. inol tleit the «r.y Ix.licnl Ins ;ct rr.V. nr.s rojcctin ill ,f the ty. hur

•* r _. That Vs a t true, is it?

" 1,1 i- net say that. I &.; u t. t th-re r.-orc t-.t. v eoinoc

r ■ r - • ri»« tno vaccine tra quit- an? another uwin;* the

-* n tr._ ' isis X thin v;.ini< n, which was c nsieJorod

—' . r-'cctiv., -n ’a;! net use it.

Cl 3 y u ko - an r.--e: vver. Hc^on?

— YeSe

i*r>


hi-..
: up: . i


-I2-2a-?d *t


: hcl‘. the sane ini r. th - y v !iu -• ut this ty Inis vaccine

' - • . t trite letter ;.e

it. yeu kanr anythin;; =T Wet?

»■ •
i4 •!: •

>4ir.t c nt-.cts i ! y*u bar- wit Hr. cr.?

.. I n c ntnets •'ith A = . =11. I^t bin n e cersi n
oinec I tea a hyricniot. i !c; •• that .. —5 a .rafeso r ct 8tr sm’iut .

n . . 'r.r v.-ccLxa, 'l'ji't y.u?

'•*“»« ftc W.S at the n ' ri " oh Institute he rr.r. wr.'riiy n the
rime fid’.

Wfia't y a kanr U it vacclno c:: rlacaitc* \c

vneoin- ox. crlitfnte, aft-r h. loTt the * rt * cl* Institute at Straaalur,-?

a n .

Q Vvu have aev.r ' con ta Straw'wr s-t Idji?

“ .

0 . Jii: ycu usually -.tun t. hoc. tin c r ttu, c noultin sicir.no
f tho an:,-?

I ittui.a few txct'jva, a a t all i then.

Q '"rich noa ‘iO y u at ben;’.?

.. I can-, t say f r curt^.:. * «t . ary iv «hich o;.cific
--♦in fi : attcalc

i.~rc wore sh ut Bw* t «iioc«. flsi. y«u raaotfjsr taideh «r.co y u

at^nflpd?

J printer that I 1 ’ . . *» 3 neotin at E hoa-luochon.

■..'ell, !i ■ J U att a 01 at J... idH&zy and

•here ;-:v were • rhin;?

» i n t ‘11 f ticn. • . j ro-.cci f t.h Ino-ect. rat c vil r *

• •• r I ir n 12:3 *d 7 . Tri'- 1 ’ 1 c.. mtll

-•3S 1 clcc!:.

U r •--- - taken 1330 hours.)


IS y,b -A-~C-L4-1- car

C'vrt Jr. 1

ZI3 URSSAL: Sfcs. 7rlbu:.a2 is a_ai : in sossi ..

T!. S2D2: (C uriscl - r thi -lofoadant Forte Oborhausor). Fr. .rosidor.t, th
lofoudant Dr. Fort a Oborhausor askfl in vi <x; f hor aituati-r. f hoalth t • bo
• tS3at fr a this sosoi a after d o'clock. Tho IVis'n Physician -.rill sutalt a
-alical certificate t tho rribu-ai.

PF3 mialDT’r: Tho ’a; Jviaat Cboiha-'or a:' bo orcuso! after tho aftoru'Cn
cocoos u?*n film a certificate fr-: tho Prion Physician. A

"3 XT.':

1 -itnoas, c y u toll w 'ufl. itol” f f tho aooti *c.c f tho •

Z -.rultii, Phyaicia - • hicl y u r* arbor harir. attonlol?

A I ca : t tall . u that i r eortai.. alnco l .nly attonF . iiUlvKual
WtiOfiO f the 1 - oulti:‘ 0 ph.:icia-.-!, ■. ic. : oC a a hun -ecturos.

n ‘y j P 33i‘lr ro:a- or havlr.*. attor-ioi tho rootin. f Jay 1943 at tho
LI lit or/ Fo'ical Aca'o ;• 1. sorlin?

A DJrl:. Fat ti.», i ia la ^>rli::. It ia *uito pas ibio that i attoaHofl
:.:r noitio., at lo*ot i .a: »to Cttaafitf id looturos.

1 I q::.-ao y u attorned ;hi lootur.o = .'.ocralu. hyclor.lc pr>bluao?

A P at ray ho. 1 c ulln't toll ; that f r oort-ia.

'.'oil, ’ll y u ttcuaily ntto: ’ tho .x,otl:cJ rhoro th- aurcocna -.oro hcldii*

rtth?

A , : * - wost t phys - late.

* D • J P :riU' re « -r at t: at no .tin- in at the Hyyionio

i t at D at - Dir /* ;„ tall: hi; ox'xjrinQnts?

• : - by Dr. Di-. at any ti ..

' H &,.t Dia^ ' '

I ca* t r_ . t r iir.t.


-S 7-t 17-A-3JC--.-.-B-
; urt If • 1

A no, I eona t toll.ycu that,
o Do 7-u *hr.t Ding Wnfl dolao?

A I only Sr: a that ho bol-n^od t: tho crllr.bcmt rs of Prsfosaor firugcwaky.
^ D ru i’.» that ho w-a working in Buohonwald -ftor you first acit hia?

A H-, I didn't kn w that.

^ Hew naay tima did you soo bin Ir.tor? Did yen h-vo froquor.t cont-.cta

with hie? «.

i

A !!3, I only .oot hie ^a cao ~r tvs occasions r.t tho nest. I hod no ;xor-
wanoX centreta with hir. at all. x

o Di’. y u hr.vo my c strata with Krug'vsky?

A Yob, in a- for nr. hygienic problems v so alcco port -.f tho "nffon-ss
v\b out rdluatcd undor tho Aj-ry. I royrrtod r.b-ut that bofTo.

% H v frcquontly di'. y u fcwa c ntr.ct with Jirufrvafcy?

A Vary rarely, only toloph nod u-.ybo onoo 'r t.rico q yoar. At any
r.to, vory, vary, ror-ly.

*\ Did y u «.v,r c nault with hie c nc oral as syjbua yr-bla-a?

A »•,

a do you kn~w that thoy had a 'fc'pfcno producing oatabliaheont r.t Buchonwold?
A 1 to, I only ruo 1 that tut horo.

*1 I suynoa j y u know !>r. ‘blgl?

A A ?r foon.'r "olid* Yor I saw hi : :r.co who.: ho vial tod Crrc.v.

\ as a att-r f f-ct, wasn't ho u rkin* f r the. Ary, Or. /oigl?

A Preface r "oi 1 was working os a baotorl le^at in th. instltuto f*r
I T7?huc 2ocoareh in Sr-c:v r La-.burs* Tho natkrds ho usod f r tho -reduction
- V'.ccir.a: woe takon ror l us.

- 'foil, but ho was att-chod to an-' wrkiag f*r tho /.my, won't ho ir.
v.‘ 13-12?

.. Yo», ho w-.s o eivilioa -uplcyoo, : t speak

* Ar^., tho Amy trJo hie available t- the, 3cbring •'Tried now plant at
-■ • -r. -idn't thoy?

: r , tho Qohmacht nado hir: available, rs I arid bofTo, fer the iaati-

■ ~ a Typhus v-ccinnti a -reduction .* tho industry, that is to cay,

P±r! _ •• jk s , only in rdor to incrons a or eduction cad in era or to toaoh than ?f

31t.


19 ?<oc 47->— C-14- r -3ocr-
C .-JPt V . 1


I


the, tochnic? uhlch ho -orol no '.

n That Is vhnt I soil, tco /xny ntdo "old ar-Alablo to tho HohrinG "arks
»> they o"uld start - TrrJucin^ 7 lent at Ixmborg; that is ri;.ht isn't it?

A Yos.

o Then did this ;r luctl-x plant at^xiborg boi.in its cjornti ns? "hon
*il it actually got 1st: Typhus vacclno .r luction?

A I boliovo no pr-ducti :: f any rsx unt cr;x> p.t-rut siaco tho technical
insbnllati as bx uiht ab ut sclq toohmccu. difficulties, since no cctual ^
;r luotica eculd c:ao ub'ut. At any rat , 2 aover hoard that no rocoivod
■ 7 Typhus v-flcinor froi ti:o:. for tho pur;*so of tho Amy.

* • Don't you roaabor, r ighly, Aon thoy actually bognn opor-.tlcns?

t-u rccanbor that tho plant hadn't boon built at tho first Tart :f 1941. Nov,
n't y -a ro<uxJbor whon thoy actually, formally cporod tho 3ohrlnft ‘IttY.s at
lA'.bort-?

A :to, I don't rorar.bor that. Yru noo, no didn't rocolvo :ar vnocinos fron
thoro, and thorof-ro, didn't knew fr: what nrcductloo ar.oncy tho
rohrine V rkn this vacclno oa:o.

* Y"U Just turno: Volfil 'v-r to tb and fore t about it; is that right?.

A It?| I didn't knew h r.r lenc'/oltl had w rkoi thoro. I only kn*w» that


”3l 1


3170


19 ?cb. i;7—.:T— Hi— 1"-—Baord
Court !! 3 . 1


wua ■--do av-ilabl by us in ardor to -rorfc tharc* with this institution. It was
not ry tnck to -err. ci~l there or call him back. I hod nothin; to do with
tint.

q Y u don't rraefflber having attandod the opening of tht 3obring
forks? They had l bit of a celebration there Into in 19U2. You koto not there’i

A !fo, I ttj not thore.

q «nd you bn-t evon knew when they started producing typhus vaccine
thoroj all you know is that they woro vox-* much interested in typhus vaccina
promotion. Is that right?

» !fc, I don't r:ce-i>ar thoso details. n s j said boforo, It was bocauso
wo didn't know whuthir it was doliv-r-d to us by the Behring 'forks. I only
knew that no substantial quantities case fron t hare which wo woro to uso.

3 If you ft t my foil vaccine free th j Bohriny rks, you certainly
kn-jw it caao fron that plant in La&berg bocauso that was the only place they
woro producin' tho 0 I 7 I v.ccino, oxcopt in the two CKH Institutosj is that
right?

A I didn't quite unuratand that.

q I said if you rot any foi^l vaccino fror. tho Bohring ’V’orks or any¬
thin- 0 I 30 you ten-* it had to 00:00 fron th? Behring "forks in Leiibarf? buoauso
thoro wan only three places in all of Goraary ai^ I think in all of Europe
prottadn? the *oigl vuccinoj ©no of then was the OEK Institute'at Cracow, tho
OJ'H Institute at Loraberg, and th Sshrl&g 'forks at Lonbarg, three places?

A That 13 quite correct, but I had 1 * list at all about tho amounts
of vacoin or th? way th vr.Ccina wr.c produce . It ms not ny task, you soo.

Tha vaccine was distributed by tho min aodicol supply office. 7 q in tho

jdioal Inspectorate only ©alt rith tho question of whether sonebo'y will rot

«

vaccina or net, but net that kind 0 :' vaccine they wore to otj so, I know
n ‘•lin-f about tho ■uacunt of vaccines. I f only know hat amounts ware available
th. b'3ic rf the list which I rocciv, d from tho Chief Ilodic.al Supply


19 : b. hi-. l-».TD-U*-2a-Boerd
Co-art So. 1

q yi-I you cntrcl tfr:- allocation of lyphas vaccines for the chrmcht*
1th reference to the vaccines which wo roceivod ourselves, it was
distributed by us to the various /ehrracht branches acccrdinr to tho size cf
tho opid/adc, and tho a.cunt cf people that wore there. Arc you referring to
an iirroatination of vaccine, osybo I don't understand you ccrroctly.

Q No, I should think tijoro would have been a central agency in Oermny
which vac advised about tho production of vaccine, who vasproiucing it and how
nuch« I should else think that this . ;:on<cy would htivo cc ntrol x ovor tho allo¬
cation of that pr: Hiction, so nuch all catod to this f-roup and so nuch to
that "r-upj is that ri ht?

A "o dj 1 k»5W • aounta those varies wore producing, but wo only
kno hat aaounts wo roedv.d, an’ th,-' wuro then distributed. I didn’t knew
whether tho Bchrir.'. 'orks distributed ary of their vaccines tc tho civilian
sector, for instance; sc, wo wore not Justified in approaching tho Behring
'.forks and askin tb.:i shot aa:unt of vaccines they woro producing. So, thero
wasn’t any roal control.


19 ? ebruary-A-D JD-15-l-Ccck

Court No. 1


Q bhat about the production of ,v< e Robert Koch Institute? Did you have
any control cf that?

A No, the Robert Kcch Institute delivered their vaccines for the civilian
sector. It nay be at the beginning they sent us a fe* litres of vaocibut*
it didn't ancunt tc anything auch.

Q "ell, witness, tie have e» letter here which I think is froa Cilde-
aeister, dated January, 190, in reply to a letter which was sent to hid by
Handlcscr, in which he was directed not to distribute any typhus vaccine to
any branch of the Qkrcxcht. It til had to be sent to h^r. or to his Ltdical
Supply Officer, and noreev.r Gildenoister g: o hin a report on tho production
of the ..ebert Koch Institute.

A The individual Vehmacht branches wo. e always trying to get vaccines
through deviating channels since they iere not satisfied idth the distrib¬
ution and in this way a i.ohrtuicht branon nay have approached tho hobort Koch
Institute. Th't is quito possible.

. itnesa, about thisc lico which w<it tc Buchcnuald. There were only
three places whor- auchanvold cc uld easily obtained lice. As I soo it
one place was Eycr's Institute in Krakcw, ar.d tho other place wns the OKH
Institute in Lcnl^rg arid th: third place was the Behring orics in Lcrcberg,
only thrv« concoms in all Europe, caking cigl vaccine fro:- the int.stinus
of lico and only throo a*, cieo with typhus infected lico roadily available,
now how can you swear to thio Tiu.H r, 1 th: t Ding didn't got his lico frera


Syer?


A I didn't quito understand you. .ho i* luppoaed to roccivo these lice
frc.7. Sycr?

Z Or* Ding at Bttchumald.

/. «.s I said before, ahat the z =p of ouchenwaid did i.-t r-.cuivo an>
lict. l'rca Frcfts 3 cr Syer since otherwise I or tho Medical Intj tern? * would
have i .. raed about thet situation or «c would have been as* .jrsission.

1 -xplained that before, sc the vaccir. of the CKK cannot bo included. in
th ? case there only roaains the Behring Corks in Leribcrg. It nay bo the
Bt-hrin-: corks in Marburg fer instance had scce lico. I den't knew about that.

3173


1? ? >r- • r: -..-DcG-i5-2-Cock

G'-rt 1

'i -.her. did the Echrift; lories . Lusters ret th-ir lice fro:-, from
.. i -i when hw c^-.e cv-r fres dyer's I- -tituto?

.. _ dt-.'t lexer tfept. Lice ore ell cv-r the world. -ne only hat tc
-iv»• lice suck cn any typhus diseased porson in order tc ret such lice, thet
is ill thet i3 r.eccssery. *

q Thit say tc true, vitness, tut suppose you tall us hew srny places
In Cerarny rare in the business cf cultivttin C typhus infected Uce?

„ '..nerevsr typhus occurred.

•; :Jo»., ltn-ss, Jtu aren't suggesting tc c° around and look fer typhus

*

inf^ctad lice, re you, I r.ox. thet we should get lice and feed then typhus

infuctvd .I::d, tt. * isn't the wey tc do that. In ether words, hew liany

places in Ownerny ner. actually cultivating typhus inl'ect^d lice, riny place

besides Iho CKH in Krejeew, the CliH in Lei .rj, rnJ the B.hrinr berks in

Lcctcrj. Those rr- the or. y three .-Irccs, isn't that ri ht?

• •

„ Yes, they arc the criy plocos whero lice w„ro cultivated, tut you
can alnays build up such a breeding place rhero you went to.

Q He* I tnink you told 'Jnn-owciy's attorney that the typhus vaccine
situ.ticn ta3 so critical in the letter part of 1941, that you only had
,.r.ce;h coins tc innoculcta doctors nr.i nurs-s and other people who were
ir, vor; expose! places, is that rieht?

. k Y*.s, th:.t is correct.

I , therefore, assume that typhus vaccine 'list have buon allocated
vdth considerable cere, is that rieht?

.. Y\ , according to the Cv-v.ds of thv individual 1 chraucht brrnchos,
who naturally had to c denends. lidn't

kn » -rythir.r eteut the ?itu._cn.


3174


19 V--~-.\-13-I--C k
Ccurt I

.. r instance, if the alien SS sai-. then, "wc nee-' 100 litr..c", y. u
just a-.': b*ck in j or chair an scidj C&uh, *ivc then 100 litres," and shipped
it .ff t Gonz:-xn -v-r here - ’-i'r.'t .r.y n.ay .attention tcwhnt he >3.1

with it, is t'.v ri t ht?

%

h-.-v.v-r, the ehroacht ir-cioh* aeon-led 2 cert-in a .3 unt ;I "X" v.-.ccinc
then we tri--' t fin* ut whether w- hod = sufficient asunt f vrccine and
we istr ' th. vnccioo ir. nee rdanco with what was available. - •iccri-
butw it t tha c.'ic'i Supply O'ficc f that chraneht Branch an' that con¬
clude 1 cur 1 .'.ak. '

;• it neat, I interested in ;• . rin. h * Dr. Din;; n the 5th f

January, 1?L2, six •‘ays aft r th. eetin; < n te 29th f December 1$>’:1, at which
} ur -tan Sch le ^tten u iv.:‘ btained a suf.'iciwnt ar. ur.t f till vaccine
t f tart ar. - p..L.-nt, urln to. c urae I ehich he artificially iniected
a substantial r up f pc pic?

... If V- 1 ,r_ c r.curn^ 1th t - ei 1 vaccine it must h-vc c r ;a

th- rin a.’ic.al supply office :r .. Ui- .affon SS. .hen this ccurrcd ve c ulrtlT

kn w occaua*i v;_ i'r.'t ( :n » »h-r. th. chi... x ic 1 supply f.'ice delivered
twe- vacciixs 1 their r up i hr nofc.s.

.• .'• '-his vaccine xcopt trout U •, lid they?

•ind ■ u ‘i 'n»t h v .. ugh t inn dilate the fcr dps? Ten c ul dust give it
t ctcrs an’ nurses, c ul n't yeu? Hew ycxtoll .x y u doliv-rad a subrtnn-
ticl on.ur.t -f this vaccine t. the SS in j-riin -n-' then! r t nb ut it?

... e-rsu.. that thu SS in the very itx way ul use that vaccine

'S it -ran ' e -3j t: th-r hm-.cht ranchos, t’ ~t is t say, ivc it t the

. r- - : 'I r ;r e:.,l.

a i • . rt: . r typhus vaccine Into in 19-1,

»!uit y.u • -> ut r-‘yi-t. t>-.. ri-unti r.?

... ?iu ara,- .. Heal Ii ,

in ustry in the pr .•ucticn f vaccines. _ er.ti n, that acf .ro.

.. Didn't y.u fill * that siteti novtty carefully.

; in i o. a evst .xr f thx. phar actratlcri industry toe?

3175


asr.'t the .any


C urt I


a. Ek in ustr; uf t tir.t .t bvicurly 1» n -roat interest in
pr . . £ T?eeina, an it is a mtt&r ■' c ursc that this wns - quca-
ti.n - '-rosin as : r l..'us try, ?.n the ^reduction T the typhus v'ccinc is
very uxpenaivo, ... thit c ul fcr.v. b,en t: - rur.a.n why ir. ustry was n-t very
intcr-ste ’ in tnis ustt^r.

a. ‘ hy ’ . * s..r. * y ur nan Sch lz t this /...tin, .r. Dcc^.: cr 29, 19L1?

. .. • • r. .r s cut r. ft didn't send

hln r~.

.. itl , '.cisaunt by Cr'Koltc c nc-rhiny a

ntetirv .-1 in the : «nistry i - - rl.r r. t ho 2Vth D.ce;ib-r 19l»l # at
xhich typhus .r 'ucti r. on ' typr.v- v .cc r. tostin was ur. .-r lacuoo\on,
in* that t.i- r.prec.nt tivc . j Boh it,

an-' y j w. re h;j i o iitc su r wh t pur»> s*. ns Seh lz Os»nt t

tlile ;*at\.v ?


C-urt 5-. 1

19 Jet -.7-A-16-1 -SW-Malojr


*. I he vo el ready said that I dldn': send this can there tut that thie
nan repreaontad.ee during ty vacation. Of course. I didn't send hia to that
acetic. I vean't there to do that.

q, Vhat vra the tLray dole* there? Vhy were they interested?

A. According to that invttrtl-n I think vo are concerned with on invi¬
tation of tho Belch Minister A the Interior, and circlea interested in tho
jroduction of ty-ihus vrcclnct vere invited, anon* then the'Vay Medical In-
aoectcrate, vh-te representative Dr. Scholr vea.

v D-yiu reccnbcr having received cay report on this aeetlrwT? Vhat

trrnaptrod there?

A. I have already said that I vat infuroed abeut thla nootlnc by Dr.
Scholt tut I den't reuentor tho report ltaelf. It la very iopmbablo that I
roa.d It aytclf.

v Vltneaa, prra,:raoh B in there arya Stfaethln* ftbeut toatln,: thoao o*v
yolk vaccinoe end acne body hr a to aeo Mruovky about Denalts, didn't acnobody
have O' nothin.: to a ay ab ut that?

A. I cmn-t reaonbor theae detalle. I aa auro he nuct have rsoortad
that to ac. Vc are very concerned with a Dr. Denalts, vho vas representative
of the Industry end who vas to ri.lt Dr. Kru*ovsky. but vo arc nbt concerned

vlth a nenbSr of the Medical Inspectorate.

q, Vltneaa, to «ot it rather narrovly nuv, tho vhole Purpose of con-
tactln,: Kru^vsky va. to teat thi. o*; yolk vaccine, of vhich you vero afraid.
You had. confidence .nly in tho Voi.:l vaccine. I think the array as a vhole ha
,ycc.t Intorost In the «*,: Y<>lk vecclnc produced by the 3ohrlnk Vorka at
Harburs and by tho Robert £-ch Institute in Berlin. »ov, didn't they toll
y,u about that?

A. they told ne that the Bchrln,: v.rke, r.e before. Insisted that thio
vaccine vhich vc refused because A its late-effectiveness, had been uroved
successful after their investigation and fr^ that, in ay opinion, the note
in this d.cuncnt can bo explained, vhere It says that any other party vhich
vr.e not Interested, like Industry, vould. have to test this vaccine.

^ •witness, you see it is not ouite so slnolo because only tlx days

3177


C-urt S-. 1

15 Ieb 47-A-16-2-SH.-KB1: y


later, JefiOArv 6, 1S-2, Dr. Din.: in ruchecn Id started te-stin.: this e« yolk
vrccinc. -hat vrs the vh -It uurn-oe star tin,: the ex^crincnto in Suchenvnld
-n livir_- hunan be In.;*, during the course of which several hundreds «.f then
vre killed; thrt vro the very pnrp-se -f the Buchenvrld exnerlnents to toot
this -k.’ y-lk vaccine. ! r— suA;«sti*« t y<-u the- aray was very nuch inter¬
ested in the teet in.: -f this vreeir nod thrt you very voll knew they wore
•r-in.: t. toot it ft 3uohenvcld. Isn’t that true?

A. So. I oust deny thrt very energetically. I underotrod thie note no

x

I arid tof.ru by kn-vlc#: th /1 this lo '.eroly in Investigation ef the vaccine
in r.n cniuel oxoeri :«nt. I r.i not convinced 1 1 nil that any ouch vaccination
.a the hu;:en heir. v.uli brink about r reoult which vr.s of any value, for in
thio case, f-r no car. novor laltete tho bi-,l-. s -icol ccndltlcna which nonly t
the hu-an beings oo that t. *et a tlul^lcnl cxneri:.-ont the reoult, in iy
.pinl-r., v.uld to of n. value at all.

D. * understand y -u t. state the tyohus oxoorlrionte -n huoan bwin^o
ere -f n. valueT

A. According t :;y -oini n they rre ct lo. ot f n- lno-rtance. I cannot
enlrin f.sy i.. rtmeo ot all. Vere-crlly, I think they rre ef n value.

v I r.: cure that It will to .f intorost t. Dr. Din*. H v, lot’o «<.
tr.ck t y ur visit t Buchon’-rld In February 19*3. Just exactly whey, okain,
did you there with Dr. Ayer?

a. Initially I arid I stated thrt the oueeti n wuo to send n coaalceion
,f ohyolclcno there t show thou h-v the -typhus vaccina vr.s proonrod and In
.rder t show then h-w the difflcultioa which urcvj.ilod uo t that aunont,
aracly t diae-lvo the dry vaccine, wore evorc.:vo. This CoonlssioB f
oicinna, as It wrs >r -vldcd, vtro t vrcclnrtc tho tr.-.oo rikbt tJierp lu
Africa, because the transo-rt f


3178


19 Feb :7-A- AA-16-la-Kalcsr
Court ; ! o. 1


the vaccine by ordinary channels, that is by aedical supply office, war
iir-ossible since the vaccine is to perishable and can too easily be destroyed
and i*. could not be preserved under freezing degrees.

f, That is yellow fever vaccine new, and not typhus?

A ’Jo, that was yellow /ever.

Q And wJy did you go to Wei.-..*, is that where you went to visit to
.Teiitar?

A I tias told that this was to be presented in the vicinity of beimar,
where tho SS was. 3e were to be fetched there by the SS and then sent to
the place whero this presentation iaa to take oiaco.

Q You were Just scoins the So doctors in TTeinar, is that right?

A I don't quite get you. TFould you lease repoat?

Q I say, you were soeing only t!e SS doctors of tliis Cc-idasion in
‘/oicar?

A Yes. Wo wero to presont this dissolution of tho vaccine to tho SS
physicians at i'oisar.

Q What SS doctors were on tlds C omission that was going to Worth
Africa? What wero thoir nar.cs?

A I cnly rcoeuher the naac of Dr. Ding.

Witness, are you tollin'. : mission t on n

Cofic-icr. tliat waa ;.oi;y to be flown to ,!orth Africa to vaccinate save- troopr
with yollow fever vaccine?

A I do not know whether Dr. D .ay vco to do that, but I a. smio that
tlicso fen.* physician# who si- that ..v* -o *-rc:U: other piyeicioiu: in order for
i to racticc this nfmner :f vaoc^na .. There were only a row pk.-ricians
ssed t at. I wouldn' t arsuoo t.^t only these f an pStysioions voro
t' fl; :c Africa. I an sure tlrro aart avo beer. r.orc than that.

at wore, the aaacs of 5000 of these other SS doctor 3 ?

A I regret I can't rnadnbor any of tJi-_ other naoos.

~at is unfortunate. Ard ow nan; were thero?


A


Five to six, I think.
High ranking doctors?


3179


I


' 1? rcb . ~-k~. AA-l€-2a-.-2lo7
Court :;o. 1


k She gcntlaxn rerc dr.ss.l ir. v.dtc coats, and jl oouldD't tell.
..!>crc or-j this da_ itra.i.n carried out?

said it in ar. one. kxi of the baa . TJw exup •
itself consists of a iw=r- :r ci barroetw such ante- roou a tool; ms
erected ..ilr presont book • .

. Tids ms in BuchciroCd c itself, it vasn't ir. .foiuar?


7 TC nor : - *-chtd oa fro . oar, os I raid


19 ?ob-3SH-16-lb-; >.1 ; -
C'-.urt I.’:. 1 *


“- rv * irlv-r. t* >xchor-.~*. 11 , -al t!.ia .rosjct'.tion occurrol ir.
Bucijn«“.ld itsolf.

*1 ? ®»° i14 "' u tr-v -1 free to t-t to BucLaauLi, did y u .

• • • l-erllr. ;r c> a fm. Ir'.crw?

A », I c m 7rc- 3crlin.

1 HMT9 11 Hr. 3yj» e- -a fro?

Or. ly-r :•*• bean in Berlin boforo. ^

'i *••’• -11 7 u 4: durla: thla lor astrr.tlon, I rtrc-».«r a-r-othing

It % ' • 36 it? is

thf.t rlfht?

/. th-*/ la i:t aulto Ti.lit. I • : . ,t!_ ; t- bo

flU-i, «nd -lt.rfrr.t tho ttl© V’ c. be. t r~l 1 ,c-.uao n thu
llctlj 7i ; . Lvofl,

Zr. tho M O r i: Trxolnp Vottloa it ccysi A'.!!:’ h jpona t t:.o (.Iom
in 5:3, a lac a •. tjc —

1 •vo i-Mkir.s thla "Vi-rj-.l •-> Volta*, o t'.-.-.t v. mich liatljguinhod


o-'-ti—a -■

. .

1.1 fr... r.


•ni;t 1^. 61: j

o wifctf ii' n •.. >,

•*

.*> .r tol . ivu «■?.

;/.• uu i:

•• * f "V * ■ • . I», ,

“W. *\| l A f

•otr-.tol to

•

c;* -J; thj


Jl- i ~ -0

It; 1c t‘:~.t :

.-t y u -..-a tTvi ur-l

- J i'.COe *J . .

:r ^llovj?

-..’.I t. .. 133 . 1 VO


It laa*t i." • • * c^on tho % -ulo,

. . jr.

■•3 nttar S tao Uoa luti n f tto- sal .. i - t, - it la


19 Feb 1:7- a - LJG - lieehan


n, aell, you tau ht the SS cen firs*., then tl:e whole thin was dropped
ani yc did not do arythin .acre. Is that ri ht?

a. iO merely trained the S3 physicians and then preserved the vaccine
in rder tc be able t- use \t at a iver. tine.

«. fcitn&as, did you not see the typhus experimental station when you
wore in Buchenreld?

a, ri o, I already said that i did net know that such a station was
there.

«•. Dr. Din did not tell you that he was c:.rryin~ or. a typhus experi¬
ment although you woro in Buchenwuid. Is that ri.ht?
a. Ho did not tell o anythin about it.

Ycu know they had an experiment . edn cn the vuiy doy y u were
there; they wore testin «4o4dla and bethyleno 91uo in the Bohrin.; Works,
lou w^ro actually familiar with those dru s, were you not?
a. Ho, I know nothin about that.

*cu never hoard f Akridin and !ethylene Blue?

•

iu «ero concornod with ..ethylene Slue, which is somethin.. which wo
used in uedioino f;r vanp years, but I cann.t kn.-w for what purpose it
was used tr.oro. F r decades it as ijed in laboratories for oolorini;
purposes, akridin is a yallca-colorad x unt arri I do not know what It is
used for. It absolutely did not ccr.com qy sphere ~f icrk.

Haw Ion; were j u ir. the ruc'.v -Id Carp? ‘

a. I already said that i stayed Mt.ro f r ab ut n- and no-half

•

hours.

.. los, I recall you sai:: y a sav a r-up cf happy, -ll-fed * rkors
•'■urchin . ack tc the camp sin ir. .

a. -e3, *• saw a column, -wiich marched past as ne went out bain
acccr:pini.d by a harmonica r so ethir. .
d. Did they act like happy bo> 6ccuts?

•v. That I could act jud o.

-!• Kc»* ycu apparently don't kr. t anythin about these .-ellow fever


vaccine testa that Dr. Din carriod cut frr y a in Bachonwald, cla you?


Court I


19 r =b 1:7 - A - 17-2 - LJ3- ^eebaa

.i. ^ already said that Dr. Din die n t io any yellow fever testing

f r us.

%• y u s c-. -ed the ;:-ssibility that ho kept four or five of those
ar.pul=s f vaccine after y*u h- fce-r. th.re and he ci ht h vc conducted
so::-j tests •' his ..wn 4th these. Is tout ri.ht?

«. This pcssioility exists.

ft

4. .* 011 , I want t.< dor castrate it t y.u that thi.ro is nc such
possibility, litr.jc:, y u • .r ts.ro n Kibruiry 8th, lvi-3. titr^ss,
lock «n ; i u nine.

*. Yos.

Soo thoro r-.oro it says Fbbrcay 3, 19U3* "•'isit f Gsjrstabsnrzt
Dr. ajcT tree, the Institc o for onetted F„ver ant Virus Roaaurch of tho
OKH in Oralcow and ^joratabsartt Dr. Sch-.i It fr *rcy *o<iioal Inspoct-
rute. u Do y u sew tr.itt

ft. Yos,

j. 21 , il] y u • m nek i* . u j 7? tnu untxy, 10 January,

17U3, which was Jest thirty iayo bof««r re in ducnonwald. I

think yiu v411 sut tn-.t the y„liri: fev.r t.sts «■ r. curriwd mt thon

t r. . :t.» y.ur yoll m 1

ft. Teat is c-riTwCt - set r t •-.‘.is b kj it is c rroct.

h. 3 than the fusibility, t . i: r 1 nc sci-

bility at nil; is it?

.t tbe proof _ this - -tt,r is.

-i. ..itii.a:, direct y.ur .ttoa-ti r. t this -ntry sn . : .von, ill
you, in the first *r rapn t...roV It z-..ra lice virus is buin handled
i :• saffltF, bwcauf f r aach vaccine t ot ir t be rl r d » five
persons, i u want t tall - * t Pr. Dir. just did r. t !mcrr

nh'.t h-_ ti-os taikir. .about; there *..-as really nc p:int ir. t-3tin-. this
yailcw fever viccin_?

A. I sell that th. t-stin of the. yell .* fever vaccine was considered
t be superfluous by no since the vaccina -as pr-.-uced acc r J ir. • tc no


19 Fob U7-. k - 17-3 - LJJ - ocfaan


oeth -da and it was h-rr-lass as it rrx.

a

.. Dir. just c!id net kn r *at ho was dcin-; is that rl.jit?

I do not knew.

W. L_t us r-ad f.»_ pdh rapfcs d m where it s ays: "“no results .f
’ 7^11 w fovjr v ccino t_sts r_ tr ba a<.r.t t; Doparteor.t 16 in the 3S
-oic •' 1 a-di?inrt .nj in du, Ilcatoj vu trill f r-iru r.c t the Manufacturer and
one t the Supre e C rrv; f tho ,.ry, fdH. ..tunti.n Cbur3trbsnrzt
Dr. Schmidt." Did y.u - v r t any r;p;rts n th rw -.ts?

A« .V «

'• c n 7u offer .Mjy explanation for this entry?

iv. K ,.I C.-Jii :t explain it.

Y.u uls Uatifio , itn.a , th'.t y u kept Very caroful cl so
watch n these yoll .w f.ver r..ccineoj thin aa-.o entry ur.uer I ton 5 aluv/s
tft.t they hr.:’ s ;oU» f^v.r ccln.s fr-. tho Oi<H - Kr:c n, ur.dor
XWi 5 and Iton 6} i-. y u Mo that?

• k * I havo r. t f ur. it y«t - pr a 5?

*. Xoo.

Sk. U.-, jr 1C Jau:ry l/;3, ex y.u c-o there the UsU.d lint f Oi
Nuaburs?

«. r v • c, t *. t ia ri ! t.

• . . 5 «n£ ifc. fl that they had sjo» 1.11 v fovar

vrxeinoa fr the OSH in r . us r th t t uy received t it

threu h t»io SS ao dic-tl Derrw-jst t. us. lire they rid in the, oi. 1
vaccin-s?

*• by us it allj I

therof:re oann t explain this entry at all.

:icw, 7itrjss, !cn’t y.u think it is b ut t’ y u o i: us tho
truth crncornin this visit t- BnchomnJd. I hvu th-_ n.rk report for
19L3 f Dr. Din and he says th:.t £ February, 191*3, y u ins pahtotod tho
clinical statirn in Suefcuarml-: and tho clinical st ticn is ahere they
carried out fc.yso typhus bxpericostal . utters; n ». i .n’t j u want to tell


Coart I

19 Feb L7- * 17-1 - LJD _ iiefcan

tea Tribunal y. u impact* that Typhus oxporlrontt! block Ilka Dr. Din.j
says In the report! Bculd yen like tc sec it?

 I should Ilka to state that I did not sec say typhus cxporWtal
stations -r anythlnr llko that, I rarely ritnosacd the presentation
and tbs dissolution of the vaccine, rtlch I nmtiooad bof-.re.

u. Itauss, this fora Kr.. 571, rros.cutian Exhibit 285, it saysi
"Visit of raj! r Dr. ayor C-K) fr.c tho Institute for spotted fovur end
virus rcsoorch .f tr.o Offi in Xrcko* snd Major Dr. Sctaidt f«* tho arty
nodical inspectorate." If y. u don't have this docuront bofero you, I
rtll pass It up to you. Si. ht at tho button <t th. po';o, tttnoss.
a. loa, X can boo it.

•. Did y,u ,r die you net inspect tho clinical xction with Dr. Din?
*• £ did n-t.

h. I haw, n further question*.

TH2 PRESIDENT! .av fvrth.-r re-civss oxnnlnition of this witness
by tho Dofonao Counsel? .cxy ra-<»lr_ct oxa-inaticn?

P3-D insr mazsuTxoy.

BY DR. JELTEi (C for tt r.)

*• D 7 u h ‘ vo Wo w=rk ran.rt, which the ft-osocutcr Just montionod
boft ro, tho rup.rt with th* OF SatL^.-a.

"• Xcu .vjan pa 0 He. 3?

3. "ill y u ploos: 1 ok t D et ent I> . 571 ?
a. ios.

4. ^ Fa „ 5 f the . r,: rt, under j; . Ill, you will find an

r/ ' r 0 - " » • - *7 i" « .-ntic ii ind conferas with tho

:-y in the Din . . I n nr .ok y u t. .1 k at tho

• ■ r f ur visits. Bend then

a air., it say 3 cn the nth f February, 19U3« «7isit f the clinical
- .tier, by (fcorstebaarat Dr. Btft and ft-rst ±s :r=t Dr. Scheldt." and
-n tho 2Uth of ut vst and 3rd f September anc the 29th f Soptorf>er.
iou alwaya find the dosi. nation visit by these various visiters. Fren
toe use cf tho word usually used in aUltuy chamois, e* ycu say what

3185


Court I /

19 Fob 1*7—w - 17-5 - LJ3 - _ohea

tho basic difference is whether you consider srnethif. as a visit r
ar. inspection?

'*• Tha (jxjrossi-r. "inspection" is only usud when oau is c ncamoc
with f-icial rolctionahiis -sf subordinates ond sup_ri;rs. If sciiobidy
visits with ut axor official s urco, that is t. say there can be no
official rolati nshlp between tho visitor and tho tne -hat is b:in •

visited.

%. I r.-.vu no fttrt-.er questions.


3166


C.urt S-. i

IS 7cfc -;7-j,-18-l-iSK-7elftt


—(C.unacl for the defendant ..ru,-v S ky): ._r. President, I ask
y u t Jvreit e that I c -ulf ask another f c v ouesti r.s a the fcpeio of the
ou.oti as out ty the or eccut -r.

YHh rJiSIZillC: C unosl -ay ccvd*

* Swisher iz^.zsszzca

rT US. ILLsUs

v itR.oe, y.u hi vo st» ted thi t the toctia,; -f tjnhus vaccines r. hur.cn
teic,:# vrs f a- value. *>tt y .u ever v.r : with tythuel

A, 3-.

X

V In that cice y ur Ju* w-at at ut the value f the tyohuo csnerlacnto

••

lo r. t derive/, -a the hails f y ur .v& o c rs .ad oratricnce vith tyohuo vlruoeo

Mf tjrofcus v; ec.ir.esl

*. S.

v Y u or id y.urswlf thi t the toctla: noth 4 the ty-.huo vicolr.cs :.n
the talul which v*r« carried. ut by the instituto it Frankfurt n KMn wire
-artly rtticke: :y industry. Have y.u ray rers-n t believe thrt this Inter¬
ference -a the tert i the Industry vre ur. fc *uctificdl

.e. I have a reis-a t. Cellcvg that - veil, y.u no, thlo lc r scientific
oueotl a Vhlch hit a t yet :-cr. s,:.e/. Thrt It vfc* *. oryo la tho d cusor.t
that o c kind ,f a unified testis: atth ft vw t =e defined. Vi, rt nay rrto,
topt t the itati lariitl rtl n because thrt, f r us, v fD the nr.-jer ruth rity.

Witness, d. y.u'ka •• ^..ther the tr*:hut virus in the enro f the cnl-
vrn trin-s r'. ut e diseice vhlch In *ver" »ry cm *-c c- '.nrrci' t <• d.lstrse of
o hunca to in-: 7

"• She typhus virus has a such effect.

v Thea v.uldn't ae have t- sey thrt the Uotia f tyohus vi.oclaec a
hu.rr. beln.,6 vts a-t vith ut vrluc rt that la td.diti.n t oyucrinents on
caiv.lc, •CT'erlnentG on hunrn tela,-B had t to carried thr u,;h If there vro
raj' latent 1 a t. or duce certrin tyohus vaccines ia the rroy and In eacce In
tho ccse f hundreds f th-usmr.s f jc.oie?

Vw hid another sefe^uard, ae-ely, cve'ry s Idler vc« vrcclnrted
rurelnst ty-hus vea registered la his ony t..k end It c uld be seen vith vhat


3167


C urt Sw. 1

IS Jet -.7-A-l 6-2-IH-.-?el <t


vpcciso rad h t -f-ducti .a f vrcciac -.hi nee y t8 veccinrted. If s:net-dy
vh- vis vrcciarted c atrretod tyhue, such as entry vas te>oa ever let . hie
cpbu hie? r;*. On the heals -f th« cr-e«. hie? cry ne could ettebliah vhich
vpecinc -r-v t d t- >e th« totter or the v.. r8e . t thick that thie is r. r-cthud
vhich vc carried thr u h end*which led us, I cure, t *

v rhi* ceth.d, co d-u;t, ia c :eth-c vhich -ne v uld have edited in
c.r^el ti-.we -ut didn't it tp>c ca oxtro^rdiccxily loc,; tir.e unti£ r.r.e c uld
receive ueetU rcoulte?

a* That ie correct, v

v lht CPBt f « vr^eccy vhich y-u hrve nentlcnod w.on't it^cea-
tcry t. sec t<, it that -a« c .uld Jui ro r.e euickly *s r».eelclo vhrt vrecin.o
v^re i valid or tcctl.a la .rdor t. rv-ld. hrvin.* t vr.ccicate hundreds red
th-uerr.de f o.Idlers vith Unuccble vreeinoa?

*• r ~ euveti aa the iacue r.t ctrka vne t' d.ocido Mother no vre-

la a little =.rv affective • • Vo, art £ ->r duct ion,

vvrv nly lnt*ri.ct«d in nr d.ucin ; re 3uch -f it ea n cai fc le. It io r. t o
lio.rtrnt t te-v vhetUr no veecine ie c little bettor then the thor. •
v ’h*n ualu.- t. io • th I Uc?ir. , vror.'t thorc / 'nr.-vr r.t nly f-
ueo vrcclnvs vhich “-ore r little Ivoe effective thra th.rc, tut rlo t ueo
vrcclcco vhich h*d a .r t.eti t vi lu. vfc<.t c »vorT

A. I! . Vo tested th-.ee vaccines ia ml al ojcjerinentc rn.' no c uld
nover ccy in cuch c c*a« that .no v.uld receive c vcccir.e vhich *tb f n
value rt ell.

... D- y u <a v the e -called : seen vi - sin. fr “ tonhi con?

‘V •» -a

th ‘ '“to, y.u ■*.-n T *. lui-v th«t tele vie Tory effective- ir. the epee
-f enitela but -f a. value ia th-- crec f fcu-.rc lcin,;a?

-^* I d n 1 1 kc-v that.

■* Tau ft.n't.ka-v it. T:j*a> y a. I hrve a further rueatl ne.

SHn r:--aS:3£_“: sy -th-r cxeular.ti.n f this vitae* hy defeneo c'unsel?
Has the -;r-B.cuti n pc*' further puteti na? She v «- =uS6 - t y ; u excused.


D.cB ctucsul f r defca -cat HVadl dc-air. thrt the vittese Hertl."-cn 1 *


0 -urt 3z, 1

is - 7 -^- 18 - 3 -iak-rcif.t


e*ll«&! The Hershel vlll roaa.s the vitheae Eras Kwtlcter..

Eic:s :--A3TL.;3*: , f Vltr. t se, t. -k the stand ir/ testified. rs f'.ll.va;
JEDG& SI13r.I2.0j rlease b^lr uc yvor ri,;ht heat'. rad he 6 v%tt., ro*>cptln.'
eftcr at:

I «v*-cr ~y S-d, the a? 1 x.ty esi Cr.r.iseicct, thrt I ''ll! #-5rrk the *mre
truth end vlll vitfcfc.ld. «j (. a-V a.thlrv;.

•'The vita'll! Tenanted tfco -rth.)

W3J* Sl-a&JSSi V-u he seated.

TEL .-3i5I"i.T: 3*»f ir.cfcodln,: vitk the cxi--init! c -f this witness

X

thv Tritunel vin -c e in rocee*.

(* recess v ts teken.)


31S9


t


Court o. 1

rd


TKZ The Tribunal is -f-ir. r. session.

, i-. ic-3 your Honors', the defendant. Korta Vfc.rh-us-r hvint. been

i r it.

1 ® * • sr -• 7: V •ocrotery . 1 .note for the r.c.rd that defondant

h-r,-. Oberh-ue »■ h-.s boor, -xcus cl for the ta-neo of the nTUrctoon.

ry Oun.nl will Jilo the ' rtific

Th- Counsel any procard with . .. r *:•.

B’ Pi. - 12


1 . it:.. 6, will you . . • ou- -. x

-i. H-ns -rtl:Obxn.

Q. Uun and share r tti.'.

WS H'xlo ... SJle.

r •.

1 I. d • l. ;i ; c '.DO u.3 :n H ilu ou S r.d

.i.d - dielac in Trsibur*, Brels ga: . , .1

entered tho Any of . posts -s aodloal officer,

and Z was *,ro... . . f in ehrroo or-

trie Intern 2 -'ficnl • jetior i.. - .cat c; - 1 in Stuttg'rt, r.nd


ry 1937, I trrr.if.xr <1 to tin .»my .die 2


Insp-otor-

— w -r » * , «

to. Originally J

• • • <ui kj • - .a.v. i

,

T.-. n, I •

r- -r i-nd-r, r .

. 1 . r, ‘:d o. the let of Qetotor

191 * 0 , 1 b.

• ’. . r ct.ori q

... - . 1 n f* ►

-fcdiccl 7 .i

w • • * * • w * • *

• .

• la* v* . a * -Cv^Oii Ol LAO

' * t*.. front e corps


physician *ith tto 38th - • r . r . Corps.

In J,ily 1 b.c-a;-: .rfv fbjrie: '< r Third ..rsourud, and

I *ms c.'dc until 1 * s c- - _r.d.

.. .. shore ere you at the •

— • • on the ritReSB Si -.s:d in 1

this Tribunal.

Q. und, 'cfwn you -.r . not bar-?

— •••-- I nr not hero, T in r. prison c-u=p -it Girnisch.


3190


Court Ho. 1

19 7;-b* 0-2—U-v--ro

4* Ir * ftrisonar of rr r C'ra?

... prisoner of ar tcr.p*

.• r o cIiL-f of l!.u Cr^nnicr.tional

Section ir. the Irnjr "-dic-.l Inspectorate. tou said this was fr 1st

. ■ do scribe your work as

h. r.d of fcnit section? „

... ..1 or rdzational ju v on: r. . Ti Id of t:w -a-dic-l service
«>-r are of in nddltios. to basic pcstioas; organisation l questions

in the rici.r r -r , ruch c trai :i,_ of the aon-ec :.ic^Lon officers
and tho .sen, :-.cir H . th .t tlvj -r. r. ,1 i he ho: it-.ls -r.d with the units in
the field, .dicnl unite i t tha field, -r,d in addition h--d to obt-in
nodical oqu' enfc •. .. in charge of

, -'-in-l Urtr.aa.nts, nd-*o-forth.

.. third r.-. p ; in c.;* rgc of l or- r.i: tlon 1 >. r. :\: of

.

Fin-.ll;*, :‘.-..ro s nnoincr .rou, ir oh : of t.:. n nation o' r.d»ni

th die- r.-lc

Did the org-nii tiou 1 • n: include - orKlng nut r .Ions

for th, n_ off led Of th* ■: t it ; . eh*. ifcdloal Services?

• *.

«»• • •

, -i.-d in .rtr.tang tnis

iro intrusted in the intfirprota-

tien of tho inctructi-nc of 1 ; . jg this «» published or it

and th. Prosecution i: v ry vn.- f.dc bee-use the p» u rs of

defundan «\ndlor..r . s to h-ve .... r^u. ;„d by tnis regulation. I
do not rant to Ir£urrupt

about the. deer j of 19U2; the instructions, it c-~. about, nr,.- it
'.-.a >fritter. <>_ cause tho interpretation Is of ep oiol inport nee*


31?1

i


19 Feb. i.7 -*-21-1-??:?- Cook
Court 1


A. The instructions bad quite a long nistoiy v during the wnr.

It C..C. about that in the nature of the thin; thr t tho d^velofrants for the

.min- of the war the

ry.dicr.1 service of the -rjy, n- no dou t eiso of the other branchoo of tho
. not -ii-ve aay super flu »n and efttorials.

conai crablo lack in important fields. To give r. example - at the beginning

jf ' : 3 v-ry lei - - - jk -f tr* ined nodical personnel,

but also u. tbu XioU of n * r . ■ t

scarcity. T .v an ojcraplo - 0 i srtunt poop of ntdionl instructs
hr.c not b W :. . .t Up t th- .. ir-olr. of th .t « in doe*. fields .’i ■ not
^Vwn exist, x-r y o.*v.r..tuP * 1 dir.,- t-j, n. ^buV nc-s v r- 1 chin
end oth r t -a. -.or... r t -n • . r •*. *fc : _ i ..i. of th r thu nofcd for

r.ll of those thin, •: personnel ros. sudd* ly. : ,

atdeh •.».s th. lor est branch th tohrasvcHt, this v.s Boat urgent, but in

= na ou'.t oi'iL-r. . orcov r


cv.tvri-.la fir'dunliy -
wfficionr. in Joil Tfc
The tv. mt.o ..it r.iy th,
civil!-. r. x r ..

Still 1 SU 11 :, but 1


- ~irv
iti: th


r. sc rev, nt. industry V a r.ot a
: o in - r. v 1 y short ti ..
a f thu t.vhra-.eht, bqt c.lso


• »


f : i3.


-.V \-r W.nt

'-r- Ir ■ difficult!


t th- b- -ir.r.ir..* of tho war

• r t d- 1 of r ol-cURcnt
l:i th- n-iTleal ruppli-r for the
r. ry for - c.rv.in unity to bv


civili-.r. poanl-tii:;. Th-j- tl _ it .. r y for

or. Ud.

Q. £xcur . ., th •. . , :• th position

>f th- Chivf ;f th- ..-hratcht 'rvic- w b ar- t.d by the ..-cr-- of

> • *,pi olein e ly It t >bk so Ion , you

•is- s~ -kin A th- scarcity in 1939?

. aver* v s^tsur- or ;-r and i rovii ion, mt then

r- jslly t:.v L.r. -r tiu nor ltst-d th- norv uryoat thu n—d bcecau end the
norv Rvc-setry t curtain unification wr.s nor- n-cvss'jy tlso bc-caus- the
bnnehus of thu chraecht -i. r.ct ch_ck upon one =r.oth-r nd did not knod

v

nhuthur on- br nch >f thu . ouuncht, for -Xf—'l-, h~.. oru-r-d sor- rx<’icrl

3192


Feb. LI U-2-PKT- Cook
Court No. l


oquipcont than another, Inon there «-. E - necscit;- f t - central r-tulr.ti >n
ir. th. br'ncfKO of the '..ehr=ncht, but :.or.c of the br-r.ci.os of th- V,chraacht


'ir^.d such . r-.-ui.-ti,.:.. Thor. wor or: - 1.- two reasons for this. On- r.
is ;>rob“-bly th-.t - eh branch of th- '..ehro.- cht f- -.r-o th- cr-.ntdon A •« cent.

* , -s ... r- -f .ctiviti -j noul

restrict. ! ti.-..r. ir...ividu 1 r r<cnes l th- ;.-hrj .cht h' C worked in;..p-rv

:• ch-ck h ; to -xp-ct-c'.. Or. th- other haivl each
of th. hih-.r cwdiccl offic-rc ..Lo \ -uld lik-Iy . csj.ci'-r... for this pjoit


no ’’ -ubt f.tTw-v th't h.- would not h v. -r.-u. h.

. .... 0 Jr.'s c-t up ur.s urk
on b-half f the Fuehrer, th- OK*, n-.; in -i


~-uth rit" within th. Hifch C .i .-
«

«

sitior. t.o iv- t'.finite or is


to the YCrioaa br nob . : th. :.t, no there ny h.Ve '.--.n the f. r

th*t *. Chi.f of th- ehrsicht U.«ic-L S»rvic rout o. very Haiti in hi a
authority. Thun in y. r WA, * Hi :. : nru it. ...r. :ht intor-
.v-n.d ito.ll, not tlr.t it h - v«ry cl*, r vi . : eon in th- tie 1

i

question was buou ht up for dircussion -n’ ' Ion or .r fron th. Chief ft *.

Le, r ord.ro. 4 . his St.'U,

th- Hi h C cen ^ f t!- euutcht, to ir.tr /uc unific-tl n wher.v-r this


was necesr r.-, t :-i. illfy o! coorCirrte r rcea. 7.-.. /.r.r^ & ic-1 In.-.

Wts «:i. , , t 2tu !h Hr.fl ir. eh r - A the ('iocusaions frow tlv

•

ch r ht -r.li dn ry !i*c . . not nt collabor felon with \

e- i-• f th St f: f io i "tor i. r. the Anoy Medical

Insp-c* ,.r ,rt il.*, •!».:. i a cum i,nr r c rriid r.. Ir. the. nr-ll-lnir

'.iecuGsi r- it ro r;...«n cl -rly -h t tr.-r- -..n ny oij-ctions Xrcn the
r-.-.ch-: f th . hr-r.c.-.t which h t x ct. ', ir/ th t not xaurh .a re
c!u1l b- r._ t first thro t:da c r i.r.ti;n thin-s in sou. f -jn In which
the St- to of - f: :iro . - it urr-r.i. This -- .nt priaarily ccrxjin tien t


the br nchos of th- ‘ ehm-.cht *.n<’ th. .--ffer. SS or. the one si/.e -n' the


civiii n r-ctor on the other side, --s f .r -.s personn -1 r rv-t-ri-ls -x- o
Tn6 Fuehrer -cbou wrs uiscuoo-d ni dr*fte<! rlso the officir.l
instructions f -r the Chief of the Hi ;h Couinrs! of tho *Johnaccht, which


19 F~' . 4?

C urt . 1


r ■ f : rtc. cht Service. The inclusion ol

•

• r : ; -r n£fc 1 E elso iscui.s- . IIu'c: v tv.-.tly instruct! J

fr-a his sty-rioro on this tp-ation, it u:.s provi-V. th t Prof-as or 3r;.n
t^ - c-!l upon prioriiy to c-orinr.t- th. two i o. ;t.ra, th. civil!
Sector -/r. the .ne ai u r. the 3iUt r • - - X r : • - : -

r. .r -o.rw auborCin tot ■* ■■ ■ - athor siCt,

..... • ^

fir.-.liv in t..- 1 ait-i.r A 19-1 th- ru—r.r 1-cr-v m this c ordination .1

; i instructions f-r th* n-u Cfd-f -*f the
Uhwccht !&ic 1 Sorvic. c-uL‘ 0 . issu.), -ith th. r..t- »-rt:.y c* i-ctorlati
th t the nri/'ie.!ic 1 Insp-ctor, mi. -- Ire y t th. c ao t? -u. ^rforain;


the ’.utiwB .f .» r. v our . r. w-.s


utl-r of th- Chief


Of th- V-hr-. cht-•» the -- sure th t sp^ciol
chief A staff f r th* Chief A th- ^Uacr-cht l^lic 1 S rvic. to leal with

• ■


.


C-urt S-. 1

19 Fet -.7-^-22-i-L:-^.-*Ql .7

::-v, the difficulties vhich you B- .icft of, th« differences existing

*

icf.re the 'ecree vre issued, v,r, they ex-.reared in the fer':ulati r. .f the -
fficiil iistructi.es?. V ‘11 you Please explain that in connect!»n vith the
teaks .r fuccti.ns.-f the Vehmaeht ..cdicel Chief, according t ’the decree
enf the .fficiel instructions?

-heoc difficulties, re I el ready sold, already' Indicated, ir. cnee, !
■' the 'orellulsnry discuss! -r.s, v^re d.u'.tlvss expressed in the fficiel ir.-
otructi.r. 8 . “hey even er>resee& ir. the Fttohror'• Fccree^-hlch contain
n preaatle vhich assumed that the c - rdinati .r. in the field f Personnel
aeterl’ls vte the nin thin,;. The- Fuehrer's Decree i-lc contained, nuch li
toti.n .f taper tint instruct! .r.s c-ncerr.ir.: the fcrffen SS. It sold that t-lj
Chief vf the Vehrrucht Medical Service In fctaic "Uetti.r.s the Medical Se
vice >i the ‘faffon SS could act only vith the *>revl uo r'l^r.vcl >f the Medi¬
cal Chief f the Wcffon SS t ■ give an;-' .rders. This in effect neant n
previous u roo.-.ont and -r.e *y er that in effect, rs far re the ether
-ranches f the Vohroacht tro c ncornod, this v;s the situation fron the v«
tv, inning. Generally it crr.e «,r.ly t. orders issued ly the Chief "f the Veto
cicht Medical S« rvicc »*on there had ceer. urvliulnary discussions -n tide
oueetl.ne tetter, th.se c.ncerned. This vholo solution v, o t, a certain
extent c c-;or—ise t- r. ouitc c-r.sif.sretie extent and this comronlso io
oxnrecred in the fact that the -fficinl instructions, vhich I helocd to dra«
uo, v v rw relatively ;rlef and. v t re also in relatively general terns. First
it stated, that the holder .f the .ffico, that is, the future Chief of the
Vohnareht Medical Service in Vuhrr-acht natters, vis under the Chief -f th<
High C.-t-and .f the 'lehrnacht, vhich rraent that the' Chief of the Vohrnacht
Modlrcl Service vec under three authorities, under the Chief of the High C
nand .f the Vehnaeht f -r V-.hr xcht ouesti.ns, unde-r the' Chief of the Gone
Staff f.r cuestions c.nceruin. the field ersy, under th. Conm-ndar of the
£<» serve vfc- vts General -Ursarzt Fr.hr:, ct that tir.e, for cuestions conccr
In.; the reserve er.cy. The -fficiul instructions in general forn then said
that the Chief .f the Vehrnacht Medical Service vie to direct end canape'
the Vahmacht Medical S-rvle- in rraestl-n* c ne.-rx.lng the VaUrnaeht hrrncr.


3195


C Sc. 1

19 ?oi> •i7-A-22-2-£3C-Ki,l-y


Jointly, cai I ney oerhc ;s, if this it desired, Int the cuestion f vt
ouch «:cr.:rel ouettixs vure ft that ti~:e. rri-nrily, rs hr e been renept.
ceid, it ie th' cuesti.n of co-rdim tin.; r-rterinlc cud 'cro naol, then the
question -f volunteer nurses, cou'.-ftin,: eoidenics, r.nd x.-rhuos hoenitole fr
ai.il: r cucsti-r.s, vh'^ch suvin,: _-.^r6.:.r.cl end r.otdriale could he effects
'ey the coord lent ion, end la which sinlificrti-n ec.\ild to effected.

v *J-V, ay I intervene h«re to sueeJe -f oidcnic central, which ie
es-.ocir.lly interesting here, r.vt thrt ::enn thrt rcscrrelxvps under the
Chief f Vchrorcht Kediccl Sorvioc - the? thrt vne ..no .f the dutioo?

A. As ftr (s : re-.o dvr, thie must!on vlryeft no role et nil £t that
tine. Iho pueeti-ne which n.odod c . .rt-iar ti .n vxrt -.ers.nntl rad ai-leriilt
I thin* I ecn recull thrt the cu-i*l-n -f returre'r vt 6 n.t .entioacd rt all
in theoi instructions, “hit ie indicated rlo tiy the clreu stance that we
hr d rec^niSed this cv.rdinati.n f-r cuite different rone no and that thee
instruct! .no v« r<- .f suite n -ei.errl ture rnd cuito trltf and did not •
ir.t. details rt nil. Z. thrt extent this ruoctlun woo certainly not In t r.
f -r«,Tound, cortcinly n-t tut meh.

V : -v, will you -.ioneo try vhu ,r whnt vro under the Chief of the
Wo hr.', cht .-.t-.icrl Service?

S.tfclft renlly, /side fr a hie -va otrff, which, Cf c uroo, vnf
und«r hi .. Ch^re vi a really suh-rflnr te relnti' nofcl*> . entioned in the i
otructi.nc. It v LS uly said thrt the Chief ,f the VehMrcht Hodlcnl StrvJ
in ^enerrl *^int puestions "it :• cct .n he half the Chi-f -f the' Kl£h C<
rnd .r the i/ehr. cht rn rive in;?ructi .ns t the* rtc.'icrl Chief -f the acd
cd breaches .f the Vchrrxcht, n t riero in the rctual sense. hut direct!*
Tr.-r- wre c freeuent distinct!x in ivru r«vul:-ti.r.s between orders rod
instructi iob. This is a ,;cs*rcl v *d, a excrete tern which vrs Just in r

CtSt.

... Ihen the Chief -f the Uohr-r cht Kadical Service directed, ns y«
snii, in ,;cnercl the Medical S.rvio. cc^-hItv t». n.* U- okr which wore rir
nixed ns J-int ones end whirl, h- hnc. tekcn7


A. 'feS


31 *


Court S-. i

19 Fed •.?-A-22-c-Z3.-ii»l y


v Secondly, he did ant have cry *>ov.r t. issue ordere in thie con¬
nection - he e uld norely Iseue instructions?


A. SwB.

... and you express this oath rity cs the exorCBol >n of * re.Tuli.tian

h-t «d on r^rocr-ict, nrcli Annry r-rcenent?

A. Yec, thet is fcov it in -ffeet, that there vp.b first agroeeent
«.fi this vea n.cesarry because in' the strict sense there vne net oc.vcr t
issue -rdorc and the Chief ,f the Vohroacht hafiicrl Service di$. a >t have ,
cuth-rity, nay uoane t essert hie ruth .rity and if ve *ere t. av>ift thot
-pooBition to inttructi.no ,r feiluro t- f>U« instruct! ns. it vns acre,
orcctically to sit d-va nr,uni a table ■• hand n£ «r« an tetlo rue

tijM. to thot after the Instruction# wore itsued, the vark vuld tegin i


cedittciy.

v SUV, b concrete cuectl.n. Vt the defendant Kandloaer, ns Chief
the Vokrnecht Xediccl Service. in chrr,;. of the research inttitutoo of the


Wuhrsncht rnd the Wpffon SS?

A. Sot aeowdiv t the inetructi -ns, nothin,- vr.o under hi-.. The
roaenreh institutes, I think thrt retained undvr the chief of the various
trinoh-o A the Lehrnneht.

v Uov, hov C uld the Chief -f the Vwhrr-iCht J.odicnl Service, in orde
tv roclixe hie duties, obtain any c.ncreto t. cio f r hit > •Hi ». f " Uil
•ff ice?


A. I hove already described thrt in “*rt. In .rdor t ho able t *

,rk, he needed natericl fr._ the vrri.ut tranche A the Vehrnrcht rnd \

instruct 1.ns -raided that the :rrxches ,f the Vohmncht hnd the duty *

<ivo infor ntion in such gen.rrl otters. Ace rdln. V the instructive

this referred .nly t. y>tters which affected nil hrrncU-s of the ’Mir.^e

not anything soacificnlly cel-n.in to the Luftwaffe or the Kcvy, "hich

concerned this narticul-r trench A the VrtnuwUt, 3? «•<«• vMch ^
1

fcct«,d ell v r—= .f ‘v- Wv^trb* '*• a ”~ H v *‘ y *


?1?7


15 F«b L7- n - 23- 1 - LJG - Koohan


.. H * That is the relaticn t the ^ricsl Service f the ..affon
S3, y u spoke f tho basic rustricti.r.3 in the ducrce -f 23 July 1-U2;

7no thin expressed c re cncrotoly Later n?

a. Thu instructions, as far as I recall, contained a passa o which
I beliv-va even r.strict^* tho r r In f toe Fuehrer's : «crec; the
Fuehrer's ecrou speaks only f the .;aff«n SS, but 1 believe that those
instructions contained a p.ssa e etneomin to. units f th. uffen SS
under tho Ahrracht r s Athin liku that and the r. anizaticns att„chod
to the ..ohr aeht, such s the hoich L-h r Service, r x tho OT or 3. nothin -
like that, .vs fir as I roc-.'. , t .re vas such . passa e In these instruc-
tions f 19U2.

.. H in iver t uko a cle-r . ictun. f tfc. rclati ns botwcon
19ii2 and Soptuub^r 1, 1>.. , t icrea cncorni: th

,i«.hr.;icht • -j'iical S,rvico an tv. ccc nil f.'iciil instructions; 1 will
ask yut Uk.tthj cluoroo an-', the instruct! na f 1 st, l'lili,

which I have '.ir.- y ivoa y . -his 1 S u ouaant i> . 287 anJ
Exhil-it Ko, 6 r the Pr socution. o rill -. clear picturo if you wii
dice:- tho individual j rts f ■ otructi ns in.' toll us, as far as

you can r. . bar wh instruct! ns f 19..2 s-.i-!, t rill be
cl«.*.rly oh- n h st. n v.e .aiti a I the ^hi.f f the ..ohr.-ccht
>Ltlcel Service .tus *n i 3 U2 »r. h - it van t to ucc rlin t tho cloCreo

•

First, I b.li^vu 1 sy ir. .

' . . it is

t take f .r this extended ox . - r. * te x -i a l

Defendants Brandt and Hondo . sever-J th*»r fitnesses.

It fb rape,titi uo or*! t-.lcin up ti. inc f tr.e Tribunal. I think wo

> ah-cUid sh.rtgn uj in ti n - . ate it as brief as p.ssiblc.

•

-H2 .-.-iSIDS:”* I an suri't.. t tho c unsui f r tho ufondont Hondl s
G.s.3 n.e =ant t rnst/j r^y ti c -.nd it 3^cs t -c the tostir.-ny of tho
witness 3 r-ith^r cnli nt.rlr- •».- rn rh ;t. Trr-'uly ext^ndln. this ^xa-in *

it nay pree-ed.


r-155


/

C urt I

19 Fwb U7-a - 23-2 - LJj - i~ehm

3Y DE. rSLIE:

Briefly c ~ent r» each Individual part an, pcinfc - ut the
differences.

a. first, . rnally, tho, rugulatl ns f 19fcl are nuoh Ion -r,
throe and am half typewritten p as, ailc the r. ulati no f l 'b? were
hardly :.re than ino • o.

In fi uro no t- -re is s nothin now as ». ainst tho ra, ulation « f
19U2, that is the ratter f .vsciolinary M n. It «s -t define who
is un'lor tho Chiof f th« lobe eht -dic.l S^rvicj and I ccnsidor this
sontonC'j -roly r. p por with, ut any radical effect. In the Regulation
f 19 <2 , vo als had r. suj-ivis ry uth rity f the Chief f tho lohrucht
nodical Sundco, no real inspection ri ht in tho narr * ssnso.

Q. II v, c -ncrotoly, ray I ask y u the queoti n f the pwo that
KO spoke f bof r, us rdors, Instruct! r.3 and dir cti.no, as oxproorod
in I - 2?

rt . This rs ul ti n is Slot':, uishod fr tr tho first; it r. IctV’or
speaks f instructions but aith rity acc i in-: t l> .l f tho fuehrer
looroo. ibis Fuehrer .c . i says that in technic 1 n i' 1 , colors
can be i ilo Jnet 1 r -li 2 .


2199


15 Fco. A7 -w>L-^PK?- ifccfctn.

C^oit Bo. i


Q« "'.hct does this paser t» issue '.ora urn?

.. -: _/ aUic 1 Xicli; fivld f th rvic ,

-rv.:„ in ailitar 7 -.t. ,r?. Civ t is cl- r a thu - ..’.ir.-l


*.rvico is ilitat
-hr.V '/.t .


j .1 ttors, whi


^ -t th t


IMot :: vri as ->r >kno oi the


:lei 1 v.ttvTc in th. r*.'’ic."l service


'-r- licit.: t th fi^ I : in ; hich tu f th. '..ohrw.cht icnl


• r Khich :i.- jointly.

Plots- t .11 x...t... i • ale . - -i task, it la - tPi.d in tnia

aorvic- r« ul-ti n; th t it '.^s n t c :.t .. v 1 uth rlty?

Ur’-r IT, ‘.a . .1 ,i i.\ r.. -til 1 ih’t i.’i-

r- J-int -r .. luti.s. :u first rv ul ti n
t t, . hurt

io quit- n. l .r u; tin.

Thw -.Ut.. itities il scientific . . ic 1 Lnslitut . ...i .

vthwr . ic 1 iicotitutl.ns I th. o.. T .-us f th ...hrr ej.t m' f th-

■ 2-3 n th i . t th first v rai but I auat ooy

There So r. t. L* i na r.in ti .. Ur., it *-?o ir. tUCfciuX >f t.;v Ulic-l
S«rvicv, t«r. : th Chlttf » • n r the Vohns oht, but ji . ..

o’-y vr. .. : I l ... ’ic i Urvic-, a; ^rr.ntly tids

. .••' r. sin . i . il. vi , it WJSt Cff.rf * ■ k- thwS*

thir. e cl. r ir. . r. ;1 - r.c.


WO


»


Court,. 1 A '

15 f/--.. >^£-2 3—lb-ED-iie - fcjiw

„ in ttw Bltt-u lt-dicra Service, it is - ratter of course
ttant vb.ro thorn is s position of subcrdln-tion, this is cle-rly -s:.r..T.i
i. Th-.t .-.s ilsoys cl-srly exposed in th. service r.;»l-.tions,
which I rtssafcor. In the re$ul tirns top th. *V, tor cxcpio, the t sks
of the il=y IfcdlMl Inspjotomto nro mntionod in on. point -at it it •
imadi-.tely listed w\c is urior hia, .ho a. lie si officers, the r.on-
MtaM officers, the non, etc. I tave seen the* in thet for,-, in
nnny such rogulitlons snd there i. opooisl refta-.ti.-n .bout renhs whore
th-.t is cL .nindd specific rllj.

Q. K , I vy Trh.ro U i not sp.Cificrvlly r id th .t th-ro is
- relationship f tu. .-ricr and subordinate, thin tht.ro is no author ty
to issue crdorc in Goncr r .l?

A. Th-.t i? ry opinion.

q, ll0Tf cac could hr.to to 1 ciali3d euthcriti s

Issued veur it ipf 1 Institutes r.d BChdo 1-s, *tO.,

rnd t!u.rc it orys gain th. . -ffon SS; i.v about th. TTnffon '3 ".cccrding
tc this re,ol lion?

A. Hir. it r-ys it thi hott in ii>U f*otn.tc that tho Uhr.r.cht

cludis cmly tlu units und.r c':- * hr. • cht, tho units of the •• rfcii 88 *

Cj. th it re - ■ ins th- r uo?

.v. in offoct it r siftai . 1 Uc not kne* whothor tho

Kftffen SS, -a far as its unit • .r. unuer thu • -hr .-cht, 1 V inetitu

Q. Will y.u picneu lock nt 11, U-A, idwro it soy s th-.t other c -i..
of trw Chief of thu !i.dical S.rvl -a of thu ..ohm-.cht will 'oc in thi 3U»d1
scientific , unifora aoasuros in the I •»

research nd tho eotfwttins ef cpid -Hoe -nd all acdioil nsrrt»r.»s rf ’eh
require - wrffor.: ruling v.i 04 . tlu* -obrr e'-tt V »• * ls<» '»•

10J,??


2301


C-urt So. 1

13 7«ifc -17-A-23-1 c-ZEK-Ke ehi-n

A. So, It wr.s not included in 19-.2 in this f'-rn?

^ Kay one conclude tkit irxz the let of Scotoabcr 1944 the Chief 'f
the WehraaCht Kudieel Service not -nly c uld ccahrt coidcaics but els; in
edr.it 1 .n e.uld intervene la the rv oarch v-rk carried on ty the individual
branches -f the Vehmach^?

A. Chet teens euite inpr-fcetl« to aefre tho situation. 7 or exrr.'.i
if the Luftvrffc- planned tee research which affected only that trench f
Vohmacht ... ^

v. So, no, I a can -nly if these ere things which affected the ccm
interestt for cxenole, henititit eoidi .ica, which yrh kmv, or tyohus. 1
this research n ouesti.n which can te uniforuly ro^ulrtcdl

Sc, the ur.lf.rr. r^-ulrti r. of research vculd r.it serve tho r.chicv
nent of fr.v.ratlc rcsulto. In :y cpir.icn -no cun isouo rselfnnor.ts on rc-
search end >nc cm cay vc ere not sitiofiod with tho dru,; or thrt corur., t:
that vhlch vc fc. vo is not sufficient rnd •Uf.vest thrt thoee things ho i:v>r
tut nuch cannot he done eontrr.Uy. A roetrrch worker, who receives ouch r
su^estion, will first hive to try f,r hi.sslf the aothods which he will
t- coao to r result. Porhras ho will take two r three vr-n#' oaths, vv.ich
- .t Iced t. the rl. In ry opini a this txt-:nlo shows ovon to r lryr.an t
resoxrch csnn.t tc bridled In this fora tut -ust have a certain froedor..

.. Vill y ax ? 1 «» sc toll us under tho rest of tho recil'tions, esnee*.
under III, vhi*t differences tb«re nro at against the regulations of 1942T
A. 1 was c ntfined in 19-2 reerdinr tj tho sane sense end *crhr

Under tho se:tc- wording. Sc. 2 ia now, conolotcly now. So. 3 vac contain
in part in e slilar f-r in the roulntl n of 19t2, rc#:fxdin the rcstrl
o.ver of inspectl n. I believe thrt this was expressed in r similar t
with the sr c restriction in 19-^. tut it ie nuito new that the Chief of
kehrr.-cht Medical Service is t. have the authority to issue rdeve •» tb-
so.t in the field i :.odicnl service if those nre necessary f^r the rcr •
f.f cn e er,;er.cy rnd do a t disejee with fundamental orders *f thi-'trnnci
of the b«hrnr.cht. that is also any cover to issue orders on the sx-:t.

t‘is rl,;ht <f I ra-t Ua»- »" J »••»«.« a* it J* r^ry 11 lit..

3202


C-urt S'-. 1

’S V-X-2Z- 2c-EBt~«<: c haa


caxiac -ne oust first eak the tranches -f the Vchmacht if ho can t!icre,
H-. b e: a'- power t. Isaue -rtfcra, no p.ver -f supervision end such inepootic
trip# c uid only have teon f-r the -.urj. sc f aors nal teorvntion and, no
i utt, tfcia vea to he adjusted ty this nev Sentence,’ which I have nuoted er
>ioh in itself contains^ two auch str.n limitations vhlch I would not h?<v.
enjoyed as Chief -f the fcofcraeeht j. Service inso.ctin^ a trench of t>
Vehrnacht.


19 Feb. 47 -424-1-30- F-.l.'t
C-ort 1


Q. loa IT I ask yxi h« j-s the regulation ->r 1944 in the -.ciaive .points
JiTIer fr-n tfk. regoUti a of 1 % 2 , plcosu c -11 v- thri la f n r's.

Sx-. it up.

«. TJ>- wB£-nti:0. rtr re ...re -He' .script! n f the fields if

*jrk, r. Halt- u.r t- issu. r‘.r;, .x th- Jirtt re isliti^n apak- -»nly j'
instruct! -na; c.rt-.i:. inflnunct r. th -. ir t.,.;.tr t. physicians,

Gener L.r=t, n’ Cert .in .x^r t. istjo .jv-ra -n the so^t ’urin. inspect!
in c-s- if eri-r, Tho*- r- the. »ss<.n;i.'l points, in ay ^pini-n.

N m Cenc.rnir. r.s-.rch I aust ak sh* quw8ti>n, in wh-t^r.y w.o th-
ct‘ic 1 service : the *, -If-r. SS ..t : 19.2 ■ r. it_r 1944 under th. chit:
jf the lehmacht n. .ic'l o-rvicc?

A. It MBS rut : . I VUUttt See 'IJJF sub T ’if;' ti n ir this r« ulnti

~ry‘ n ■* nly . I . t r ... .r t 1 Y ]?..?, at it i r. t xist, '.a it ar.yc

iv. lnatructi ns : t obroocht,

:-rnin th. unit* \ ffer. SS tn -r th- .ehraacht. Ti.-re wn* na

ti a. :t- c-ul 3-rely iciue i istrueti -a. Th.r. Were sl iil-r rvl

c r.-.r,: th. rancht . : •.‘ r . i ..

J 'ir. .tc 7:.. o) iof

: '■ • <i ivw I Pi t l.ehm ehL. bronchos. They

were n .‘. -r. r ftia.

Q. 1 aerely ... 1

"tint t- - ok j i; : ti rc!. institutes f the SS n thb

f: SS L94 -r :.ia, r t-o there 'r.y ; '».r t, insu- instru ,

• ,.r_ ••.-v.r t. issue teChnio 1 r»ers in 1944?

... In 1942, a l-r ; I r,.-..a'.i r. 1 ti r. f 1942, I n t Ve

ther« w-s -r.y. .r t is-u .. tru-ti.ux tj liutilut-s f IheWf.n


• 20 !»


C_ XT*. I


IS Feb L7-ft - 2U- la - L.X3 - Feldt

3S, and in tbo rv ulnti.n f l?iiU it 'upends n wh-th-r they w-ro institute..
~iith thu units f the ..=f en SS un-lar the ehrsacht. Oth-rvdse the
..offer, JS rza n:t under hi- and the institutes f the affen SS could n t

bo tinder hit:, but whether these units f the if ion SS had such institutes,

*

I canr.ot say fr a ay (Mn kn erled e.

4 . ..as th«ro a enoral sup-rvio-iy ri'ht f the chi-f f the .to hnoacht
nodical service?

Ko.

Q. Is the sue^rris-ry ri.ht c nr.octeiwith ary ^ther p.vors?
a. Yes, generally with tho disciplinary auth rity. Eup-rvision
renair.vjd with the bronchos f the nacht thcnselves, the chiofa :f th-
niodical service in this case.

*». Then I nay c oclude the questions n this subj.ct, end, r.
President I hnvo or. affidavit fr.:.- this witness. I h vc submtted it on
Exhibit 20, D-cuttttt Ha 1 * 0 , in Dscuaant B. k 2 , Pn..d 60. Ido nt wont
t- repeat this affidavit hero. It has air- .dy been read in part. I nore
want t- ask you whether the state: uints which y u nude th-re ab. ut the
tasks f the «.rty K untair. Nodical Schc 1 oixl the V untiin HiysloL ical
Institute in St. J haru., h.v. r y •: .ckn wl> : o thee os ri nt here under
cath.


Kot t r^p-.r.t tC.u ui -lr.aticn f this .ritn-S3 n c nmiltirv; physi¬
cians, I shew the witn-os .rtL.ben Hi 13 Exhibit 8 , D cucer.t Bo k 1 , Ft 0
32, and I Mk you, witness, have y.u r-t . this state:-- nt f Iv fens r
Hniv.loeer?


•. I have road thO wh lo d cu nt b k, but Id n t knw frer. tho


nuaher *hioh no it is.

x. It sny 3 *Tho instituti n f nsultin^ physicians."

T-a. Ics, I r-ad that n».

.. Con v u c nfirn tho c ntents f thiV.affidavit?

.1. Yes, fully.

.. Ar.d finally 1 hav« given y u Z cua-ct H% 2, Exhibit 37, Dccuracnt


3205


C.-urfc I


Yj PVbruaiy U7- ft - 2U- 2a - LJj _ Foldt


3 -k 1, c>- 5 an: fall win. arI ask y u t. r_i~ it, the stit.mer.ts about
necessity and purple f the rcetir. - f the c nsultin. specialists, that
is, the AOtlxt s f the c nsultin socialists. Have y u read this stato-
B-nt ?

ft. las.

}. Can y u c*nflr= tho c.jTeCtr.eSS these statements fr n y:ur
-wn kn^!< o?

ft. I c-j. c .nfirn it fr = ry jto kr. wlad o. ^

Than in c ndusi-n I shod' nly like t ask y u, what is y ur
pini r. of Profess r Han-'1 ser, and in particular, hi^ attitude n nodical
othioo?

ft* In ^ affidavit f tho 13th X December, nhich hie just boon
montionec’, I speke n this question and I ; int-d ut that It Xoss. r
Hindi-a er raa always j-rl-arily interested in the -utstandin nodical
achiovocent an c n uct .f his . icol ffic-rs. Perhaps I nay undorlino
this by s jin. that, f r ex olo, h_ -sat sharply f.pp sod t: hiving tho
rank nsaea -f tho radical cfficare chair'kd. Tho i 'physician",

'..rzt“ is always inclulod in the nr. ir. tho Oaraan arny, « bs.irzt.

Goneralorat. iff rts were ado t chnnw those narws, t soy "Captain"
instead ,f »8tabeirst" r "it. C-olcnol" ir.sWad f "Cfejrfoldarit."

He al «ays .pp sed such efforts b.cauoo he was f the pini n that cur titlo
was t sh-w primarily ur capacity as a ct.r. I have sold m ha' a supc.*-
l r Qi .. , | JiiMlj ■ u.- «n i!»l i". • >1 UtCiB

nao n m ir-., ,«•«/• f n ♦htjv.r *nd Hi , as n


3206


Coart No. 1

19 Feb. -;.-r.d-2i.-lt-?o Idt

super’or, weighed his decisions su carefully. I hive knomi Professor
Handlos^r for thirteen or fourteen years. I was in close contact
7,1 ’ h ftir ‘ for y-~ r: > p nd I believe that I ea in a position to pass
judgrtnt cn his personality. I can only say that in view o his oxciaplary
re die '1 attitude, it is oy firs convioticn tii t any medically ethically
inicrlsaiblo oicpjrisfcr.te could nit have been im*n to his. He wculd hive
ond-.r^crud the whole air of J is life as piysician, -ml his whole atfitud
wculd have had to bo champed suddenly. But that does not happen at his
-ge. Th-refro I believe that ia ro h'd learned of such\hingo ho wculd
have objoct-d a far as h*. h portunity.

*

Dn. N 2 LTE: I thank you. l ;« vo no further questions to this witnoSE

BY THE HiESIDEl.T:

Q. Witnees, were tho ary regulations of tho Gorar.n any published
in print-d fora prior to 1S39?

“• 1 q«i*« understand wnat regulations y u scan. If I

sight ack y u to ex,-lair a little?

1 . There -re certain ro K as published, I assuoo, or issued
by tho proper ntharlty cf tho sovora:x>nt for ^v„ry amy. In tho Stnt.s
they arc called the ..my Regulations. I do net know what they nro
null A in Gcr.-r.ni-, but in t lu Uhit_d States t ey >ro printod in a berk
f ,ary Regulations, gcmr-l I n c valuing thj nenberc of tho .a-racd

* s there liar to that printed in

Tcrrvny i;r the bcr._fit and inctrurtiin of tho Gcrnon ..my?

“* Y ’ 3 » ^Gul-ti ns cf “v. Z.rr-n nrcy cxisfcud — always .
existed in a Tinted r m, cr at rt rd vagr-jj^d fora, and v.vru not
publish-.! b" tho


3207


S-urt E . 1

IS ?e- 47-A-24-lc-«aC»rold?


saveresent, tut thoy v e r<- issued ty the fcl^fc cocnnad, that is, the Vor Hini
try, jr 1^:1 sally; later, ty the hi,* cceaaad of the Vobrsacht fer the Vehr-
naci.t os- ty the hi<;b eoanatd \f the cr;;y f,r the amy an.*, they vere 61 ,-sed,
ia scseral, aee.riis^ to the ei r *slflessee, usually ty tho cengender in Ohio.

e

-f tho trench if th^ Vohrnacbt, but is this care ty tho ctoaarv'.er in chief
the arrjy.

v Vhat vero these re^ulatlsxu called? Vhct vr-s the- titlo of the: ?

A. h« titles varied. There era a lar»;o sinter ,f regulations. S-a
tf thea vere still tci*- vtrked -a. J.r oxanale —

v vor-; th*.a« r->,^ilati x.s &cwr essettled ^nd irlatcd la cno

Tuluao?


3209


Court Fa. I

19 F-b. *z,:-r--ld


A. They wore too cxtonsivo for that, 7her«. ware unny huhdrodr of
regulations, but they v.re it. a soocir .1 folaor with n index giving tho
tifcl~s of the various r-gelations.

Q. Uhftfe as the mm, the ?orxric group n-at, of these regulations?

A. -? r. . *:..r .1 ' r.y -re Any Service tU/ulationr.,

H--r-8 Vorschrtften, EDV, Jin a* so ad so. Then there wat the Title
givin; the contents of thes- spec!, c rc G ulntiona, r-nk -nd suy.rior
relationships in th- .iny, and disciplinary penalties. Thoac .as a n-dic
war regulation or instruction boo/, for nor.-coraicsiori-d officers -nd so
forth. x

r»c jroo know of -.ny onj print In which th-:e things

w.re -11 -ascnoled nd bound toother?

A. Ho. As f r os I know, th-.ru is no such book.

Q. As to tho authority of c!;- Chiefs of the Wsta diOfll

S-rvicc, under tho ord.r of XU2, would ho hr.ve authority to crcor the
Oenior surgeon nodical officer of r. rogluent or of a brig-ado to -ako
a ro.sort to his upon tho health conditions of th*t organisation?

•.!'* •. v. ic:. . The Chief of tho Judical

Twhrr.-o S rvico, in this c r If v. t -d -o know sonothin? bout a
specific re,:irunt, would pr.su;i b-j ’r. VC urn-d to tn- r~uic 1 c-iiof
of that branch of th- 7.ehr--cat sked hit for the n.eosr- ry infomatlc

H. was r.aily in no position to eo so. Kc was r.ot ly th superior
of thio rc^injnt'l doctor ir. thffl base.

4. Tht ord-.-rs could h. h v. issued? Tou said ho cculd have
issued cc^j ortV.re to so-vj adainistratlva eh. Do you noon Infantry,
rtill-ry. or tank corps?

A. A -di.c-.l officer cmiT not »rtvc ori.rs to troopo at all.

Ha could only give orders In nis specialised T\ Id, *ud t! at, is *.ho

field o.' u-jdicino. i'w -ould issue diroctiv s on the =oet favorable

trc-at:>:-nt of pneucoain, but hu c*>uld not rive th. troops any dir ct

ord_rs. ..rJy the military ccu md. r. could do that. If he had a wish,

?2C9


Court b'r . 1

1? Fcb.-A-HD-25-2-pitt S or Id


lx; the radical respect, «.f fee tin- t'-v_ troopr, he hid to ask for -n ord< r .

" r *- troqp cocnander. E to aek tho chief of tho hi^h

cosuiind of tho 1 ahrrr.eht, or s -rqy cdic.a; inspector, he rould have
to zb.: the Ca-rmwkr of the ?-.c .ci-o :.rq;, ol G.mny. Ho r.uuld issue’
the ord.r. That ie th, re-.sen th a :v.c- jcgulitione always any bo is
* " of his In pica lou o' the radical service.

Q. Tho Chi_f could isF-je, I und rstard, r. directivo that
h.rc-f. r prv-.u;:onLa would bi. tr. a d .n a certain vay, ro fhnt a
eorthln vnrinty of splint should Nj .attached to euro a broken log.

That would bo t directive, -xuld it?

Inrtructiono w-.re not i:. i in th. c connection. Adviao was
river.. :?-> certain aotbed of tr- t.at at jrosorlb J for tho dee tor.

The n-in thin r th t nr i: vke ».a djj wiKth.r one doctoj* prcforr.d
onu drur and -aotbw doctor prof rx\.d nnette.; drug, t^a up to the doctnr.
J. It would be i recooan tatirji, no. : coiTon*

A. A r«cot: nd.tion, adviso, .-.a.


Crurt I

19 Fob L7-* - 25-la - LX - Fitz orald

..-at Would bo the effect .f such a reccrrindati cn upon tho
officers t- whoci !t na directed? hey a uld uso their wn Jud nent in
applyin it or w. uld they follow it?

a. Iqu naan tho radical officers?

*. y o3.

Tho radical fftcers kr^w that what tho hi -h u r nodical officers
told then in this respect was too fruit of medical and scientific
experiorveo f tho latest years. Tn^refcre, they welc -red such directive
cr advice, and enerally, nc d ubt, f llcwed it. They were^n t so limited.
If T think —bout proicdnla, f r exrr.ple, various modern methods of treat-

X

■ant were reported in this bi.klot and cv spared with one ahothew. Tho *-
Dodical officer had tho u mrantee that he was advised according to tho
host radical knowlod c.

Q. * directive, thon, c uld bo lisn. ordoi by a nodical officer of
a ro; inont, bri ado :r division, if ir. his jud-oent, tho directive was not
corroct, vis not siuni in principle?

", He had that liberty. In th:t case he prooably wruld have con¬
sulted the others.

Did tho uudiool direct.r have auth rity tc direct or rder,
whatever it should be cal.ud, ro inental sur. eons to rake report# to him
at monthly intervals about the health of their OOOBAndfl?

rt. T r.ore was n. spocial instruction noodod f ir this in tho medical
aervice. Tc-jre was quite a C of ini report sysioa. Every c nth a report
win nade by every unit ibeut the S'.iu :f health. This was done auto¬
matically.

i. nh. required that th so rep-rts bu made? ..as th-t in these airy
ro-Tilaticns wo ■entioned?

I believe tr..t t r.t- was sot dwn in the re illations, but it is
poesiblo that there wore individual Tiers. K., I Just rer.aibor the
rt illations. Thera was a ro ulation abiut r.ip rts f r the nrtjy which
settled this question in detail.

2211


C-urt I

19 Vjt U7- k 25-2R - LX - Fits>rald

^ It t r~ Chief cf tho Service desired, cuickly, • C jrtdn r ~ V '
up:n a curtain dirision, oculd h. send ^ “ *

that division t rep-rt t. tin innate* upon
in thit divisi n?

A . The Chief of the aehroacht -n^ical Serv.'.ce?

a . He. He could not. It waul’ have be«n f r hl ,v ” ppP

tho nodical chief t the branch t «» -hn^htj c.net-mod. *
doubt have he, bettor connection.. - basic pi-incipio. in such .hint*
.ere, os Ur as I saw it, that the Chief of Use ehmacht WM

Service -on ho ashed i r infr-ti n, did not r, ■ *•

placos, hut t -.00 superi r f the judical ,ffi.:or fr a - si he .anted

inforaation.

. e. Ton naan the -litas, snperior, n t »« nucical office, do

a. Ho. I SB afraid to haw cl sunder. ta_d e.sch other. I undorst
tho quusti-n t.ba thlsi If tha Chief -f tho iJaxaoht -.olc.a 3or

wonted to how inf emotion, to shoe «U “ - « **’
to the person fr = -, ho wanted inflation .r thr uh chanreisf
Q. Teu understood i. c reCt*. hut I «» n.t understand you, I

think.

m PJHSIDn. the tribun-1 rill «*«“ 9 °° C ’ CW

t i:i rrcw’E:rnin. .

(The, -rit’mnl V— ■■■» W l’ * f» hU, “- >


2212


MICROCOPY
