CELTIC

HERITAGE

Ancient Tradition in Ireland and Wales

ALWYN REES and BRINLEY REES

THAMES AND HUDSON

LONDON

fS'^rz- 6z ‘

** • » i* f jj ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

■•«*'' '»«>• W W © © :

© ALWYN REES AND BRINLEY REES 1 96 1 
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
WESTERN PRINTING SERVICES LTD BRISTOL

CONTENTS

PREFACE pa^e 7

PART ONE 
THE TRADITION

I Introduction 1 1

II Branches of the Tradition 26

PART TWO

THE WORLD OF MEANING

III

Darkness and Light

83

IV

Coming into Existence

95

V

A Hierarchy of Provinces

118

VI

Involutions

140

VII

The Centre

146

VIII

Five Peaks

173

IX

Numbers

186

5

6

Contents

PART THREE

THE .MEANING OF STORY

X

The Storyteller’s Repertoire

pa£e 207

XI

Births

213

XII

Youthful Exploits

244

XIII

Wooings

259

XIV

Elopements

279

XV

Adventures

297

XVI

Voyages

314

XVII

Deaths

326

XVIII

Epilogue

342

ABBREVIATIONS

NOTES

359

INDEX

415

PREFACE

The bibliographical references at the end of the 
book give some indication of what we owe both to the Celtic 
scholars who have edited, translated and otherwise studied the 
medieval texts in which Irish and Welsh traditions are en/ 
shrined, and to those scholars who have made the traditions 
of other peoples accessible to us.

We are grateful to Professor Georges Dumezil, of the College 
de France, for reading the typescript and particularly for the 
encouragement he gave us after reading an early draft of 
Chapters IV — IX. Dr Proinsias Mac Cana, of the University 
College of Wales (and professotz-elect in the Dublin Institute 
for Advanced Studies), was also kind enough to read this 
draft and the final typescript, and furthermore, both he and 
Professor J. E. Caerwyn Williams, of the University College 
of North Wales, read the proofs. We wish to thank them for 
their advice and corrections and for the interest they have 
taken in our work. None of these friends, of course, should be 
held responsible for anything we have written.We gratefully acknowledge the award of a research grant by 
the Leverhulme Trustees, and we should like to thank Pro-- 
lessor J. H. Delargy, Hon. Director of the Irish Folklore 
Commission, for his kindness to us when we read at the 
library of the Commission and also for allowing us to quote 
so freely from his lecture on ‘The Gaelic Story-teller’, Finally, 
our thanks are due to Miss Phyllis Manning for typing our 
manuscript and to the publishers for their patience.

7

CHAPTER I

Introduction

. for as God uses the help of our reason to illuminate us, so should 
we likewise turn it every way, that we may be more capable of under^ 
standing His mysteries; provided only Aat the mind be enlarged, 
according to its capacity, to the grandeur of the mysteries, and not 
the mysteries contracted to the narrowness of the mind.’

FRANCIS BACON

In a certain parish in Galway there are more good storytellers 
than are to be found anywhere else in Western Europe. Such 
was the claim made recently by an Irish folklorist.^ He was 
speaking of the art of telling traditional tales and it certainly 
seems as though the remoter parts of Ireland and the Western 
islands of Scotland will be the last refuge of this ancient art in 
Western Europe. Here it is still possible to come across an old 
man or woman who can relate scores or even hundreds of tales 
of long ago’ and ‘once upon a time’, and in some districts 
people may even now foregather in a house where such tales 
are to be told. The storytellers are people who from early youth 
have availed themselves of every opportunity to add to their 
repertoire and to perfect their manner of delivery. Many of the 
listeners at the fireside gatherings will have heard the stories 
before. Some of them may even know them by heart, though 
they would never venture to recite them before an audience. 
But the lack of novelty seenw in no way to detract from the 
delight they take in listening to them again.A brief account of such a gathering in a crofter/storyteller’s 
house was given by Alexander Carmichael at the close of the 
last century.® From his description of the scene, we will note 
that the peat fire was in the middle of the floor; that the house 
was full, with girls crouched between the knees of fathers.

II

12

Celtic Heritage

brothers, or friends, and boys perched wherever they could 
climb; that the host and his family and neighbours were en/ 
gaged in crafts such as twisting heather twigs into ropes to 
hold down thatch, making baskets, spinning, carving, knitting, 
and sewing, and that there was no lack of general conversation. 
With ‘that politeness native to the people,’ the stranger was 
pressed to come forward and occupy the scat vacated for him 
beside the man of the house, and it was he who in due course 
asked his host to tell a story:

‘First story from the host,

Story till day from the guest.’

This tale was ‘full of incident, action and pathos’ and it was 
told ‘simply yet graphically, and at times dramatically — com^ 
pelling the undivided attention of the listener’.

Here in the memories and on the lips of these country 
people are the living survivals of the tradition which we shall 
try to present in this book. Let us look at them more closely 
before turning to the written texts of an earlier age. In the tiny 
mountain hamlet of Cfllrialaig in the south-western corner 
of Co. Kerry, J. H. Delargy, now Honorary Director of the 
Irish Folklore Commission, met in 1923 ‘the man in whose 
tales or traditions I found the inspiration to collect or have col- 
lected, in so far as in me lay, the unwritten traditions of the 
people of Ireland’. He was Sean (3 Conaill, a farmer-fisherman, 
then seventy years of age. It is worth quoting Professor De- 
largy’s description of his background and his art at some 
length.*‘His family had lived in the same place for at least five 
generations. ... He had never left his native distria 
except on the memorable occasion when he had gone by 
train to the famous fair at Killorglin, and had walked 
home again! He had never been to school, was illiterate so 
far as unimaginative census-officials were concerned,and he 
could neither speak nor understand English. But he was

Introduction 13

one of the best/read men in the^unwritten literature of the 
people whom I have ever known, his mind a storehouse of 
tradition of ail kinds, pithy anecdotes, and intricate hero/ 
tales, proverbs and rimes and riddles, and other features of 
the rich orally preserved lore common to all Ireland three 
hundred years ago. He was a conscious literary ardst. He 
took a deep pleasure in telling his tales; his language was 
clear and vigorous, and had in it the stuff of literature.

‘It was my custom to visit him three nights a week during 
my holiday visits to the locality. His house was a two/ 
roomed thatched cottage, one room a kitchen where all 
the indoor work was done, the other a bedroom. Over the 
bedroom was a loft which contained also a bed, fishing 
gear, a spinning/wheel, and the various lumber of an old 
farm/house.‘On the kitchen hearth was a turf fire, and on either side 
of the fire was a little stone seat from which one could look 
up the soot/covered chimney, and see the twinkling stars. 
To the right of the fire was a well/scoured deal table, and in 
the corner a bag of salt for saldng fish. On this bag I used 
to sit, pulling in the table beside me, and there at various 
times I wrote down from the dictation of my friend nearly 
200 pieces of prose narrative. Before we began work, I used 
to help Sean and his old wife to tidy up the house: I swept 
the floor, strewed clean sand on it, brought in an armful 
of turf, and lit the oil lamp. Part of my task was to chase the 
hens which hopped in over the halfedoor. From the door/ 
way one gazed right down into the sea, and the distant 
roar of the waves crept into the kitchen and was the ever/ 
present background of the folk/tale.

‘While I wrote from Sean’s dictation, the neighbours 
would drop in, one by one, or in small groups, and they 
would listen in patience until the last word of the tale was 
written. Then the old story/teller would take a burning 
ember from the fire, press it down with a horny thumb on 
the tobacco of his pipe, lean back in his straw/bottomed

14 Celtic Heritage14 Celtic Heritage

chair, and listen to the congratulations of the listeners, who, 
although they had probably often heard the tale before, 
found pleasure in hearing it again. Their plaudits merged 
into gossip, in which the events of the countryside would 
be discussed. Then after a while, someone might ask the 
“man of the house” to tell another story, and for perhaps 
an hour or so we would be transported by the wonder of 
the tale into the land where all one’s dreams come true. 
Silently, the audience would listen, with a hearty laugh 
at the discomfiture of the villain, or at some humorous 
incident introduced into the tale; at times, too, they would 
applaud with appropriate remarks the valour of the hero 
fighting gainst impossible odds seven/headed giants or 
monsters from the sea, or the serried ranks of the armies of 
the King of the Eastern World.’These stories were told around the fire to while away the long 
winter evenings. Old people speak of storytellers who could 
recite a different story every night the whole winter through, 
but it was unlucky to tell hero/tales during the day/'time. Apart 
from this regular activity of the winter season, storytelling had a 
recognized place on certain ceremonial occasions: during night 
vigils at holy wells, after ‘stations’ and religious services held 
in private houses, and at wakes and christenings, while 
fishermen have often listened to tales being told at night as they 
waited for the haul. Stories are not the only traditional forms 
which came to life at these gatherings; there were also rhymes, 
riddles, songs, fblk/prayers, proverbs, genealogical lore, and 
local traditions. But pride of place was given to the hero^ales 
and wonder/tales, many of which would take an hour to 
deliver, some of them as long as six hours or more.* It was not 
considered proper for a woman to tell the stories of traditional 
heroes. Furthermore, no man would tell a story in the presence 
of his father or of an elder brother, and it was young men in 
particular who on winter nights regularly frequented the houses 
where such stories were told.®

ItttrohctionItttrohction

The story tellers do not claim to be the authors of their stories. ,< 
Most of the longer tales they round oif with the traditional tag: / 
‘That is my story! If there be a lie in it, be it so! It is not I who I 
made or invented it.’ They have learned them through hearing ' 
them told by earlier practitioners of the art, be they members 
of their own families, neighbours, ‘travelling men’, or beggars, 
and individual stories can sometimes be traced back from one 
storyteller to another for several generations, in rare cases as 
far as the early eighteenth century.® The feats of memory of these 
unlettered folk are such as to amaze those of us who rely on the 
written and printed record. Of a Benbecula storyteller who died 
in 1954 it is said that if he heard a tale told once and then told 
it himself, he retained it all his life. Thus he would sometimes 
recite stories he had heard only once, fifty years before. A crofter/ 
fisherman of Barra maintained that in his youth he went to 
listen to the same storyteller almost every winter’s night for 
fifteen years and that he hardly ever heard the same story 
twice.’

An interesting feature of the storyteller’s art, and a mark of its ^ j 
high antiquity, is the use made of stereotyped descriptive pas/ , | 
sages or rhetorical ‘runs’. Archaic and obscure in diction, they ' 
are introduced when it is required to describe a hero setting 
out on his adventures, a battle being fought, or other recog/ 
nized scenes. They serve to embelHsh the story and to impress 
the listeners while affording the narrator an opportunity to be 
ready with the next step in the story. How many of the tales 
themselves belong to ancient Celtic tradition no one can tell, 
but it can be said that as regards form, characters, and motifs, / 
they have much in common with those tales from medieval 
manuscripts which are the pride and glory of Irish literature. j

zz

Traditional tales have not always been confined to the pea/ 
santry. On the contrary they were once a fundamental part of 
the culture of the aristocracy of the Celtic lands, and in Irish

Celtic Heritage

and Welsh tales from medieval manscripts there are references 
to the recitation of tales by poets of high rank. In a Welsh 
story® it is related how the magician Gwydion and his eleven 
companions arrive at a prince’s court in the guise of poets. The 
guests are invited to tell a story. ‘Lord,’ said Gwydion, ‘it is 
our custom that the first night after one comes to a nobleman, 
the master poet shall speak. I will tell a tale gladly.’ Gwydion, 
the story goes on, was the best storyteller in the world. In an 
Irish story, the language of which shows it to have been written 
in the eighth century, the learned poet Forgoll recites a story to 
Mongan, an Ulster king, every night throughout a whole 
winter, ‘from Samain to Beltaine (November ist to May 1st)’— 
a phrase still to be heard in connection with storytelling.® The 
custom of telling the stories at night, and during the winter, is 
not to be dismissed as merely a matter of convenience. Reports 
concerning peoples from parts of native America, Europe, 
Africa, and Asia show them to be almost unanimous in pro/' 
hibiting the telling of sacred stories in summer or in daylight, 
except on certain special occasions.^® Similarly, the significance 
of telling the stories around the fire cannot be fully appreciated 
without reference to the central role of the hearth and the fixe/ 
altar in Indo/European and other traditions, while the recita/ 
tion of tales by poets brings to mind that prose interspersed 
with speech poems was a narrative form known in ancient 
Egypt as in medieval Europe, in Vedic India as in modern 
Ireland.^^In medieval Ireland and Whales, poets were not regarded as 
eccentric individuals as they are in the modern world. They 
were members of a privileged order within the learned class. 
Though, in Ireland, their profession was largely hereditary, 
their apprenticeship w^ both long and arduous, and an essen’ 
tial part of it consisted in learning hundreds of tales, ‘to narrate 
them to kings and lords and gentlemen’.^® The learned class, 
comprising druids and poets, was comparable in many ways 
with the Br^man caste in India, and an account of the art, 
status, and conduct of Irish and Welsh court poets was

Introhctiott 17

described by an eminent orientalist as ‘almost a chapter in 
the history of India under another name’.^® These classes are 
survivals, in the East and in the West, from the social and 
religious hierarchy of the peoples who spoke the ancient Indo/ 
European languages.

There is evidence from the Celtic countries and from India 
that the poets were also the official historians and the royal 
genealogists. The poet’s praises confirmed and sust a ined the 
king in his kingship, while his satire could blast both the king 
and his kingdom. There was a tradition that the learned poets 
(JiUi) of Ireland were once judges. They were certainly the 
experts on the prerogatives and duties of the kings, and a 
mastery-poet (ottm) was himself equal to a king before the law. 
Such priestly functions as divination and prophecy also came 
within the province of these early Irish poets who, it may be 
added, wore cloaks of bird/feathers as do the shamans of 
Siberia when, through ritual and trance, they conduct their 
audiences on journeys to another world.^^ It was initiates with 
this power and authority who had the custody of the original 
tales, and they recited them on auspicious occasions, even as the 
priests of other religions recite the scriptures.It is no wonder that the greatest care was taken to ensure the 
integrity of the tradition. In the Book of Leinster* a colophon 
to Tain Bo Cmiln^e, the most famous of all Irish sagas, re-- 
minds one of the end of the Book of Revelation. ‘A blessing on 
everyone who will memorize the Tain with fidelity in this form 
and will not put any other form on it.’^® The rewards promised 
to those who listened to the recitation of the tales make it 
abundantly clear that they were no mere entertainment. One 
of the three wonders concerning the Tain was: ‘a year’s proy 
tection to him to whom it is recited’.^® At the end of the tale 
called ‘The Fosterage of the Houses of the Two Methers’^’’ 
it is said that St Patrick ordered ‘that there should not be sleep 
or conversation during this story, and not to tell it except to a

* A twelfthycentury manuscript.

B

i8 Celtic Heritage

;few good people so that it might be the better' listened to, and 
Patrick ordained many other virtues for it /

‘I shall leave these virtues

for the story of Ethne from the fair Maigue,

Success in children, success in foster-sister or brother, 
to those it may find sleeping with fair women.

‘If you tell of the fosterage 
before going in a ship or vessel, 
you will come safe and prosperous 
without danger from waves and billows.

‘If you tell of the fosterage

(before going to a) judgement or a hunting,

your case will be (prosperous),

all will be submissive before you.

‘To tell the story of Ethne 
when bringing home a stately wife, 
good the step you have decided on, 
it will be a success of spouse and children.

‘Tell the story of noble Ethne

before going into a new banqueting house,

(you will be) without bitter fight or folly, 
without the drawing of valiant, pointed weapons.

‘Tell to a king of many followers

the story of Ethne to a musical instrument,

he gets no cause to repent it,

provided he listen without conversation.‘Tell to a king of many followers

the story of Ethne to a musical instrument,

he gets no cause to repent it,

provided he listen without conversation.

‘If you tell this story 
to the captives of Ireland, 
it will be the same as if were opened 
their locks and their bonds.*

As Professor Myles Dillon has pointed out/® all this bears a 
striking similarity to the power ascribed to traditional stories in 
India, where tale after tale is wound up with the assurance that 
‘he who knows this conquers all the quarters^^® Several stories

Introduction

19

in the epic Mahabharata end with the claim that those who 
recite them or listen to them attentively shall be blessed with 
health, wealth, and progeny. The Ramdyam of Valmiki pro^ 
mises long life to men, and to kings victory:

‘He who listens to this wonderous tale of Rama unwearied 
in action shall be absolved from all his sins. By listening to 
the deeds of Rama he who wishes for sons shall obtain his 
heart’s desire, and to him who longs for riches shall riches 
be given. The virgin who asks for a husband shall obtain 
a husband suited to her mind, and shall meet again her 
dear folk who are far away. They who hear the poem . . . 
shall obtain all their desires and all their prayers shall be 
fulfilled.’^®

Another story ends with a promise of rewards in this life and 
entry into the heaven of Indra.®^ But the power of the tale is 
effective even while it is being narrated. Thus, in a folktale from 
Galway®® it is said that the Devil could not enter a certain 
house because Fenian tales were being recited there, while the 
Indian ‘Twenty/five stories of the Spectre in the Corpse’ 
{Vetdlapancauinsati) end with the spectre’s promise that ‘neither 
ghosts nor demons shall have any power whenever and where/ 
ever those tales are told. And whosoever recites with devotion 
even a single one of them shall be free from sin.’®®When one inquires what kind of stories are these which have 
been credited with such extraordinary power, one finds that 
they tell of the adventures of heroes and heroines; enchantments 
and disenchantments; kings and queens, ogres and monsters 
and fairies; animals which speak and act as humans; journeys 
to another world, beyond the sea or under a lake, where time 
holds no sway; ghosts and revenants, prophecies and destinies; 
quests for magic vessels and weapons, and similar marvels. 
Such is the stuff of the stories told by all peoples whose tradi/ 
tional culture has not been upset by the teaching of modern 
history and modern science, and it is remarkable how the same

20

Celtic Heritage

themes or motifs, and even series of motifs, recur in the tradi-- 
tions of peoples widely separated from one another in space and 
in time. The very homogeneity of the material presents a con^ 
siderable problem to the modernist. What is there in this fan/ 
tastic heritage that from time immemorial it should have retained 
the sympathy and excited the wonder of mankind?This question is presented in a dramatic way by the strange 
contrast that appears in the attitude of two successive generations 
towards the tradidon. The old storytellers believed in all the 
marvels of the tales. Hector Maclean, writing in i860, observed 
that the adventures of heroes such as Ossian were as true and 
real to the storytellers of Barra and those who listened to them 
as were the latest exploits of the British Army to the readers of 
newspapers.®* Even in our own day Professor Delargy speaks of 
the horrified dismay shown by a storyteller in Co. Kerry when 
one of his audience ventured to cast doubt upon the story of 
Oisin returning from the Land of Youth and to wonder 
whether Oisin ever existed.®® ‘There was magic in old times’, 
but with the spread of elementary education and the amenities 
and outlook of a materialistic civilization, these ancient won/ 
ders pass with remarkable rapidity into the realm of bygone 
superstitions. They are out of harmony with the new/found 
faith in historical and scientific explanations, and once the 
horizons have been narrowed by this new Weltanschauung, the 
old/world tales can no longer compete with the effusions of 
popular novelists.

Thus what remains even in Ireland and the Islands is only 
the last vestige of the tradition. Here as elsewhere the tales will 
soon be regarded as suitable only for children’s books, childish 
things to be discarded as the child grows up to be an ‘educated’ 
man of the modern world. The pathos of the situation is indi/ 
cated by Professor Delargy:®®

‘In Sean (5 Conaill’s youth story/tellers were quite com/ 
mon in the district, but as he grew older the old tales were 
not so much heard as formerly. Finally, there came a time

IntroducHon 21‘In Sean (5 Conaill’s youth story/tellers were quite com/ 
mon in the district, but as he grew older the old tales were 
not so much heard as formerly. Finally, there came a time

IntroducHon 21

when it was but rarely that he had an opportunity himself 
of practising his art in public. So, lest he should lose com-- 
mand over the tales he loved, he used to repeat them aloud 
when he thought no one was near, using the gesticulations 
and the emphasis, and all the other tricks of narration, as if 
he were once again the centre of a fireside story/telling. His 
son, Pats, told me that he had seen his father thus engaged, 
telling his tales to an unresponsive stone wall, while herd.' 
ing the grazing cattle. On returning from market, as he 
walked slowly up the hills behind his old grey mare, he 
could be heard declaiming his tales to the back of the 
cart!’

33

While the traditional tales have been losing their hold on the 
countryman, scholars have been finding a new interest in them. 
They have recorded them with elaborate care, classified their 
motifs, and tried to trace their history. But whereas the story.' 
tellers and their unlettered listeners found no difficulty in 
believing the wonders of the tales, modern scholars, conditioned 
by a factual and rationalistic education, cannot accord them 
the same naive faith. For many, the tales are true only in the 
sense that, together with old customs and beliefs, they form a 
corpus of facts which are relevant to the study of human his.' 
tory. They have no intrinsic worth. A generation or two ago it 
was the fashion to explain them away as products of a ‘disease 
of language’ or as examples of ‘primitive science’, ‘primitive 
philosophy’, ‘fertility magic’, or ‘the childhood of fiction’. But 
the scepticism of writers who never questioned the adequacy 
of the current evolutionistic theories was sometimes belied by 
their own life’s work. At the age of sixty Sir James Frazer 
still found it impossible to justify even to himself his pre.- 
occupation with mythology: ‘If we are taxed with wasting life 
in seeking to know what cannot be known, and what, if it 
were discovered, would not be worth knowing, what can we

22

Celtic Heritage22

Celtic Heritage

plead in our defence? I fear, very little.’®'' Yet he continued to be 
engrossed in this ‘worthless’ subject for the remaining twenty/ 
seven years of his long Hfe. When, at the end of The Golden 
Bough^^, helooksback at ‘the melancholy record of human error 
and folly which has engaged our attention’ and welcomes the 
displacement of religion by science, we again see the sceptic 
assuming absolute authority. The ‘revels now are ended’, and 
those magic themes — ‘The Perils of the Soul’, ‘The Scape/ 
goat’, ‘The Marriage of the Gods’, ‘The Dying God’ — ^become 
‘insubstantial pageants’ which fade in the cold light of day. 
But mere scepticism would not have given us The Golden 
Bough.

The conflict between scientific rationalism and intuitive 
faith is seldom completely resolved in any of us, and it mani/ 
fests itself in various prejudices and inconsistencies. There are 
some who would read the tales as if they were modern works of 
imaginative literature. They insist that they should be studied 
‘as tales’ — ^which usually means that they are studied in vacuo, 
as though they had no relation to hfe, while their original mean/ 
ing is disdainiully left to the anthropologist. But this deliberate 
superficiahty, again, does not always accord with the values 
cherished by those who seek refuge in it. There are scholars 
who, though they refuse to regard the tales as anything more 
than fine things to pass the night away, nevertheless treasure 
the tradition of which the tales are an integral part as a priceless 
heritage which can be a source of inspiration even in our 
modern world.Though the old rationalism dies hard, the intellectual out/ 
look of our own day is profoundly different from that in which 
the tales were studied half a century ago. There is a growing 
awareness of the deep significance of realities that cannot be 
fully reconciled with the categories of reason, or explained by 
history and science. The study of social anthropology and of the 
history of religions has brought home to many scholars that for 
coundess ages men have found in these stories a support for 
their material and spiritual Hfe. Peoples throughout the world

Introduction 23Introduction 23

accept their sacred tales, or ‘myths’, as ‘a statement of a primes 
val, greater, and more relevant reality by which the present 
Ufe, fates and activities of mankind are determined, the know-- 
ledge of which supplies man with the motive ifbr ritual and 
moral actions, as well as with indications as to how to perform 
them’.®® Furthermore, fantastic as they are, such tales have 
proved an inexhaustible fount of inspiration for poets and 
artists throughout the ages. Only through blind arrogance can 
all this testimony be dismissed as of little or no significance. 
More recently psychologists have found that recourse to ‘this 
treasure/house of archetypal forms’ is invaluable for the cure 
of psychological illnesses®® — a rediscovery within a limited 
sphere of the ‘life^'giving’ powers which the stories were 
believed to possess in days of old. Other scholars discern in this 
heritage a body of metaphysical doctrines and maintain that 
although the modern folk storjrteller may be unconscious and 
unaware of the import of his tales, ‘that of which he is uncon-- 
scious and unaware is itself far superior to the empirical science 
and realistic art of the “educated” man’.®® A crucifix would 
still be a crucifix even if it were found being used as a child’s 
plaything, and to insist on considering only its function as a 
toy, or its aesthetic qualities as an ornament, would be to dis«' 
regard its nature and its essential form. Theories and emphases 
continue to vary, but it is true to say that increasing numbers of 
modern scholars, including many who are not given to making 
pronouncements on the ultimate nature of myths, are learning 
to treat tradition with respect and to realize that ‘wisdom did 
not begin with us’.As we have explained, traditional tales used to be trans^ 
mitted by a priesdy order in the Celtic lands, and diverse bless/ 
ings accrued to those who heard them related. The prototypes 
of these tales were clearly parts of the oral ‘scriptures’ of the pre/ 
Christian Celts. But there are many obstacles in the way of 
reading the surviving versions as such to/day. None of them 
is available in a manuscript dated earlier than the twelfth

24 Celtic Heritage

century, though it is clear that some of them were already in 
writing centuries earlier. These remnants of ancient tradition 
have come down to us through the hands of Christian scribes, 
and while it is remarkable that those scribes recorded them at all, 
they have taken liberties which would not have been per^ 
missible in the oral transmission of a sacred tradition the 
authority of which had not been challenged. We have already 
cited an Irish colophon to Tain Bo Cmilnge which invokes a 
blessing on all who memorize the tale in that form. But there 
is a Latin colophon, to the same version of the Tain, which ex^ 
presses a point of view that must have been common among 
the monastic scribes:®^

‘But I who have written this history, or rather story, do not 
give faith to many of the things in this history or story. For 
some things therein are delusions of the demons, some 
things are poetic figments, some are like the truth and some 
are not, and some are for the amusement of fools!’How far the tales found in medieval manuscripts may have 
been deliberately altered or rearranged we do not pretend to 
know. It cannot even be assumed that the earliest recorded ver.' 
sions are more authentic than later ones. When faced with 
stories, and they are many, which defy our understanding, or 
which appear to be out of harmony with others of the same 
kind, it is tempting to accuse the vsoriters of invention. In the 
words, though not perhaps in the meaning, of the colophon, 
some of the stories ‘are like the truth and some are not’! But 
since the fault may lie in our own ignorance, we have left the 
problematic ones as they are rather than explain them away. 
Tales recorded in modern times from oral tradition may have 
been less subject to literary manipulation, but there has been 
no insurmountable barrier between the learned tradition and 
that of the people and, moreover, for well over a millennium 
the storytellers too have been Christians who have gone to Mass 
and believed in the heaven of the Trinity, the Virgin, the 
Angels, and the Saints. It is small wonder that the divinity of

Introduction 2$

Celtic gods is hardly ever recognized in these stories. The tradv 
tion has also probably lost many myths which, though they 
may have been of great importance in the living religion, did 
not make good stories when divorced from the rites.A religious tradition consists of a ritual and an art as well 
as a mythology, and each of these components is intelligible 
in terms of the others. Symbols, whether they be myths or 
ceremonies or objects, reveal their full significance only within 
a particular tradition; one must be part and parcel of that 
tradition to experience fully the power and illumination of 
the myth. Such participation in the old Celtic tradition is 
no longer possible. For these reasons we do not consider it 
enough to re/'tell the stories as they stand, without comment. 
In pondering upon these fragments of tradition it is not enough 
for modern man to disabuse his mind of the preconceptions of 
the historian, the prejudices of the scientist, and the aesthetic^ 
ism of those who read the Bible ‘as literature’. He needs all 
the clues he can find. Although the full meaning can never be 
fathomed, we believe that a comparative study of the stories, 
combined with some acquaintance with the mjrths, rituals, and 
doctrines of other lands and other ages, may help us to obtain 
glimpses of the tradition of which the stories, even in their 
original form, were but one expression.

CHAPTER II

Branches of the Tradition

The traditional irish tales which appear in medie^ 
val manuscripts comprise four groups or cycles, usually 
referred to as

X The Mythological Cycle

2 The Ulster Cycle

3 The Fenian Cycle

4 The Historical CycleX The Mythological Cycle

2 The Ulster Cycle

3 The Fenian Cycle

4 The Historical Cycle

In the so-called Mythological Cycle, the chief characters belong 
to Tuatha De Danann, ‘The Peoples of the Goddess Danann’, 
who are said to have occupied Ireland before the coming of the 
Sons of Mil, the ancestors of the present inhabitants. The stories 
of the Ulster Cycle are mainly about the warriors of King 
Conchobar of Ulster, and especially about the exploits of the 
foremost among them, CdChulainn. The Fenian stories are 
about Finn mac Cumaill and his roving warbands (jiam). 
This cycle is sometimes described as the Ossianic Cycle because 
most of the poems which belong to it are attributed to Finn’s 
son Oisin, or Ossian as he is known through the work of 
Macpherson. The so/called Historical Cycle is a more miscel-- 
laneous group of stories centred on various high^kings of Ire/- 
land and on a number of provincial or lesser kings. Each of 
these four cycles^ contains material which appears to belong to 
a common Indo-European heritage and which presumably 
was part of the tradition of the Celtic peoples before they ever 
came to these islands. But in the works of early Irish historians, 
the personages about whom the tales are told are arranged in a 
chronological sequence extending from the time of the Deluge 
to the time of the Viking raids in Ireland. The events of the

Z6

Branches of the Tradition vj

Mythological Cycle of traditions are synchronized with the 
main events in ancient world history; King Conchobar is 
said to have reigned in Ulster at the beginning of the Christian 
era; Finn and his jiana served Cormac mac Airt who is be^ 
lieved to have been King of Ireland in the third century A.D., 
while the tales of the Historical Cycle are centred on kings who 
are ascribed dates ranging from the third century B.c. to the 
eighth century a.d.A certain amount of supplementary information concern^ 
ing the characters and events in these four groups of stories is 
supplied by various learned works cony)iled in the early 
Middle Ages,^ in particular Lehor Gabala Erenn,* a ‘history’ of 
the Irish and of the peoples who occupied Ireland before them, 
with its accompanying List of Kings, the Glossary attributed 
to Cormac mac Cuilennain, the king bishop of Cashel who 
was killed in the year 908, the Dindknchas, lore associated with 
hills and other features in the Irish landscape, C 6 ir Anmann,** 
which gives brief stories in explanation of the origin of the 
names of traditional personages, and finally poems, triads, and 
genealogies, which record famous names.

Early Welsh traditions are found in the ‘Four Branches of 
the Mabinogi’,t comparable in some ways with the Irish 
Mythological Cycle, in the poems and stories of the Arthurian 
Cycle, which is also represented by extensive texts in many 
other languages, in some miscellaneous stories, and in poems 
which probably once formed parts of sagas.® Most of the latter 
poems are attributed to Llywarch Hen, Taliesin, and Myrddin, 
poets who are said to have been associated with kings of those 
regions of north Britain which, in the sixth century, were still 
Welsh. Wales too has her genealogies, triads, and stanzas of the 
graves of heroes, compilations that bear witness to traditions 
which perhaps were never embodied in extensive narratives,

* ‘The Book of the Taking of Ireland* (LG).

** ‘The Fitness of Names* (CA).

f (PKM)^Mdm£h ‘story of youth* or ‘story*.

28

Celtic Heritage* ‘The Book of the Taking of Ireland* (LG).

** ‘The Fitness of Names* (CA).

f (PKM)^Mdm£h ‘story of youth* or ‘story*.

28

Celtic Heritage

and to these may again be added two important Latin texts, 
both of them landmarks in the history of the Arthurian tradi^ 
tion: the Historia Brittonum of Nennius (early ninth century) and 
the more elaborate and presumably more fictional Historia 
Return Britamiae of Geoffrey of Monmouth. In Wales and in 
Ireland, the lives of native saints, written either in Latin or in 
the vernacular, may perhaps be regarded as an extra cycle of 
stories. Like the saints’ lives of other countries, they have 
many motifs in common with the ‘secular’ tales and they are 
by no means irrelevant to a study of the pre-'Christian tradition.

2

Five successive groups of invaders are said to have occupied 
Ireland before the ancestors of the Gaels eventually settled 
there. Their significance will be discussed in a later chapter; 
here we will only give a brief indication of their several fates. 
The first three groups are known by the names of their respective 
leaders, the last two by group names, thus:

1 Cessair

2 Partholon

3 Nemed

4 Fir Bolg (Hr=‘Men’)

5 Tuatha De Danann (‘The Peoples of the Goddess

Danann’)

Cessair was a woman and her predominantly female expedL 
tion came before the Flood. The only member of the company 
to survive that catastrophe was Cessair’s consort, Fintan, who 
after spending long periods in the shapes of a salmon, an eagle, 
and a hawk, and witnessing all the succeeding invasions, 
appears (in stories of Christian Ireland) as the supreme authority 
in matters of tradition. The country had been waste for several 
hundred years when Partholon and his followers settled in it.

Branches of the Tradition 29Branches of the Tradition 29

They and all their progeny eventually perished in a plague, 
but a story similar to that of Fintan is told of Tuan son of 
Starn in this second group. Nemed, who came next, also 
died in Ireland, but his people, after suffering great tribulations, 
ultimately abandoned the country. They dispersed in three 
groups, two of which were the ancestors of the two peoples 
who next occupied Ireland. The first of these two were Fir 
Bolg, and they were still in occupation when the second, 
Tuatha De Danann, arrived there. According to some 
accounts, these last comers demanded either battle or the king/ 
ship, and Fir Bolg were defeated in the First Battle of Mag 
Tuired and fled to the islands of Islay, Arran, Man and Rath/ 
lin. They are said to have returned, as a subordinate people, to 
Ireland, about the beginning of the Christian era. According 
to another story,^ it was half the realm that the Tuatha de/ 
manded of Fir Bolg and this was refused them: when the 
First Battle of Mag Tuired was fought between the two 
peoples, it ended in a compact of peace, goodwill, and friend/ 
ship.Here we shall confine our attention to Tuatha D6 Danann. 
As we have noted, the chief characters in a whole group of 
independent stories belong to the Tuatha, who are thus dis/ 
tinguished from all the four peoples who occupied Ireland 
before them. In contrast with all their predecessors and the 
Sons of Mil, their successors, they stand out too as a people of 
magic wonders, learned in all the arts and supreme masters of 
wizardry. Before coming to Ireland they had sojourned in the 
northern islands of the world, where they had acquired their 
incomparable esoteric knowledge and whence they brought 
with them four talismans: the Great Fal — ^the person under 
whom this stone shrieked was king of Ireland; the spear of 
Lug— no victory could be won against it nor against him who 
had it in his hand; the sword of Nuadu — ^no one escaped from 
it when it was drawn from its scabbard; and the cauldron of the 
Dagda, from which no company would go away unsatisfied. 
All the other groups reached Ireland by ship, but the Tuatha

30

Celtic Heritage

came in dark clouds through the air and alighted on a moun^ 
tain of Conmaicne Rein, and for three days they cast a darkness 
over the face of the sun. The late, rhetorical account of the First 
Battle of Mag Tuired describes them as ‘the most handsome 
and delightful company, the fairest of form, the most distin/' 
guished in their equipment and apparel, and their skill in 
music and playing, the most gifted in mind and temperament 
that ever came to Ireland. That too was the company that was 
bravest and inspired most horror and fear and dread, for the 
Tuatha De excelled all the peoples of the world in their pro/ 
ficiency in every art.’®The learned men who recorded the old Irish traditions in the 
Middle Ages were embarrassed to know whether to regard the 
Tuatha as men, as demons, or as fallen gods. In the story of 
Tuan mac Cairill in the Book of the Dun Cow, written about 
1 100, it is said that the learned did not know whence Tuatha 
De Danann had come, but that ‘it seems likely to them that 
they came from heaven on account of their intelligence and for 
the excellence of their knowledge’. According to a text in a 
fifteenth/century manuscript, they used to be worshipped, 
while a poet writing about a,d. iooo finds it necessary to say 
that ‘though he enumerates them, he does not worship them’.®

It is said of the Tuatha in general that the men of art were 
gods, the labourers non/gods.’’ Danann is herself called ‘mother 
of the gods’,® and several of her people are described, indivi/ 
dually, as gods. Thus, the name of the Dagda is interpreted 
as meaning ‘the good god’, and this is upheld by modern 
philologists. He is also called Aed (aed=S.tc), Eochaid Olla/ 
thair (‘Eochaid All/father’), and Ruad Roiessa (‘Lord of 
Great Knowledge’), and described as the god of druidism or 
magic (draidecht) of the Tuatha.® In Cormac’s Glossary, Brigit, 
daughter of the Dagda, is described as ‘a poetess ... a goddess 
whom poets worshipped’, and her two sisters, both of the same 
name as herself, women of healing and of smith/work respec/ 
tively, are also described as goddesses. Dian C&ht, according 
to the same text, was ‘the sage of leechcraft of Ireland’ and ‘god

Branches of the Tradition 31Branches of the Tradition 31

of health’, Neit was ‘the god of battle’, and Manannan mac 
Lit, ‘a renowned trader who dwelt in the Isle of Man ... the 
best pilot in the west of Europe’, was called ‘god of the sea’ and 
‘son of the sea’ (mac Ur) by both the Scots and the Britons, 
and the Isle of Man (Inis Manann) was named after him/® 
Furthermore, names corresponding to those of Nuadu, the 
king of the Tuatha when they came to Ireland, and of Brigit, 
mentioned above, occur as names of divinities in inscriptions 
of the Roman period in Britain. In Irish story, Nuadu’s 
place as king is said to have been taken by Lug, and the name 
Lugoves, found in a few inscriptions on the Continent, may 
be a plural form of Lug(us). The same god is also possibly 
commemorated in place-names such as Lyons, Laon, Leyden 
(Lu£(u)dunum), on the Continent, and Carlisle (Lu£uvalium) in 
Britain.^^We have already mentioned the First Battle of Mag Tuired, 
fought between the Tuatha and Fir Bolg whom they found in 
occupation of Ireland. The Second Battle of Mag Tuired is the 
subject of one of the greatest stories of the Mythological Cycle. 
The adversaries of the Tuatha in this battle were the Fomoire, 
the only mythological beings comparable in mystery and magic 
with the Tuatha themselves, and in this story the character of 
‘the Peoples of the Goddess’ is revealed more fully than in any 
other text. The Fomoire had already made their presence known 
in the time of Partholon. Lebor Gabala £renn describes them, 
in that context, as beings with single arms and single legs.^® 
They were led by Cichol Gricenchos son of Goll (‘One-eye’) 
son of Garb (‘Rough’). Each of their four ships’ companies 
comprised fifty men and thrice fifty women, and their pre- 
dominantly female character is further emphasized by the des- 
cription of Cichol’s monstrous mother. Lot. Her bloated lips 
were in her breast, she had four eyes in her back, and she 
equalled all her troop in strength. According to some versions 
the Fomoire were destroyed in their battle with Partholon; 
according to others, though the battle was fought for a week, 
‘not a man was slain there, for it was a magic batde!’^® Nemed,

32

Celtic Heritage

the leader of the next group of invaders, defeated and slew two 
kings of the Fomoire, and later he again defeated the Fomoire 
in three battles. However, after his death, his progeny suffered 
oppression at the hands of these same enemies under More 
and Conand. Every Samain (first of November) two^thirds of 
their corn, of their milk, and of their offspring had to be sur/ 
rendered to them. Ultimately, Nemed’s people assaulted the 
sea^tower of Conand, but after they had secured his downfall. 
More appeared with three^score ships, and only one ship with 
thirty warriors of Nemed’s people escaped from the slaughter 
that ensued.In the First Battle of Mag Tuired, the arm of Nuadu, King 
of Tuatha De Danann, was severed, and thereafter^* a con-- 
tention arose between the Tuatha and their wives concerning 
the sovereignty. As Nuadu was no longer suitable to be king, 
their wives said it would be better to give the kingship to their 
adopted son, Bres, or Eochaid Bres,* son of Elatha. Bres’s 
father, Elatha son of Delbaeth, was a king of the Fomoire, 
and his mother, Eriu daughter of Delbaeth, belonged to 
Tuatha De Danann. At first sight this proposal, which was 
accepted by the Tuatha, seems strange in view of what has 
been said of the Fomoire as the monstrous enemies who chal^ 
lenged Partholon and as the oppressors who caused the rem/' 
nant of Nemed’s people to abandon the country. Moreover, in 
late stories the name of the Fomoire signifies giants, and in 
ecclesiastical texts they are classed with elves, horseheads, 
and other mis/shapen creatures as the race either of Cain or of 
Ham, the accursed son of Noah.*® Nevertheless, before coming 
to Ireland, Tuatha De Danann had made an alliance with the 
Fomoire, and Ethniu daughter of Balor, Fomorian king of the 
Isles, had been given in marriage to Cian son of Dian C Aht. 
From this union was born Lug, the dominant figure in this 
story. When the wives of the Tuatha urged that Bres the Fomo/ 
rian should be made king, they said this would bind the allv 
ance between the Fomoire and the Tuatha.

* Eochaid the Handsome*

33

Branches of the Tradition* Eochaid the Handsome*

33

Branches of the Tradition

The kingdom was bestowed upon Bres on condition that 
he would surrender the sovereignty if his misdeeds should give 
cause. Nevertheless he proceeded to strip the Tuatha of their 
jewels and their tribute, their cattle and their food. There was 
no house in the country that was not under tribute to the 
Fomorian kings, Indech mac Domnann,* Elatha (father 
of Bres), and Tethra. The Dagda, the ‘god of druidism’, 
laboured at building a fort for Bres, while every day he sur^ 
rendered the best part of his food to a monstrous satirist who 
tyrannized him. Ogma, the mighty champion of the Tuatha, 
likewise suffering from lack of food, had to supply the host 
every day with firewood from nearby islands, and the sea 
would sweep away two^thirds of his bundle because of his 
weakness. The niggardly Bres deprived the Tuatha of the 
pleasure they might have enjoyed from the feats of their men of 
skill and their champions and, moreover, ‘their knives were 
not greased by him and however often they visited him their 
breath did not smell of ale’. At last he became the victim of the 
first satire ever made in Ireland — ‘nought but decay was on 
him from that hour’ — and Tuatha De demanded the restitu/ 
tion of the realm. Even then he was allowed to remain to 
the end of seven years and he proceeded to muster the champions 
of the Sid,** that is the Fomoire, from Lochlann to the Western 
Isles, to impose their rule by force. ‘Never came to Ireland a 
host more horrible or fearful’ than that host led by Balor, the 
champion, and Indech son of Domnann.The maimed Nuadu had long since been provided with a sil^ 
ver arm {airgetUm) by Dian Cecht — hence he was called Nuadu 
Airgetlam — but later Dian Cecht’s son, Miach, healed his 
arm of flesh, and he was reinstated as King of Tuatha De 
Danann. He was now holding a great feast for them at Tara, 
when a strange company was seen approaching, headed by a 
young warrior, fair and shapely, with a king’s trappings. He

* Indech son of the Goddess Domnann.

** sii: magic dwelling-place.

34 Celtic Heritage

was announced to the doorkeeper as ‘Lug of the fierce combats, 
son of Cian son of Dian Cecht and of Ethniu daughter of 
Balor’, and as ‘the fosterson of Talann daughter of Magmor, 
lung of Spain, and of Echaid the Rough son of Dui’. The 
doorkeeper asked him what art he practised, ‘for no one with/ 
out an art enters Tara’.“ ‘Question me,’ he said, ‘I am a 
wright.’ The doorkeeper answered: ‘We need thee not. We 
have a wright already, Luchta son of Luachaid.’ He said: 
‘Question me, doorkeeper: I am a smith.’ The doorkeeper 
answered him: ‘We have a smith already , . .’ And so the 
dialogue goes on:

‘Question me: I am a champion.’

‘We need thee not. We have a champion already, Ogma 
son ofEthliu.’

‘Question me: I am a harper.’

‘We have a harper already, Abcan son of Bicelmos whom 
the Men of the Three Gods entertained in magic dwellings 
{side):

‘Question me: I am a warrior.’

‘We need thee not . . .’

‘I am a poet and historian.’

‘We need thee not . . .’

‘I am a sorcerer.’

‘We have sorcerers already: our wizards and men of power 
are many.’

‘Question me: I am a leech.’

‘We need thee not. We already have Dian C&ht as leech.’

‘I am a cupbearer.’

‘We already have cupbearers . . .’

‘Question me: I am a good metal worker.’

‘We need thee not: we already have a metal worker, Credne 
Cerd.’

He spoke again: ‘Ask the king whether he has one man who 
possesses all these arts, and if he has I shall not enter Tara.’‘We need thee not: we already have a metal worker, Credne 
Cerd.’

He spoke again: ‘Ask the king whether he has one man who 
possesses all these arts, and if he has I shall not enter Tara.’

The doorkeeper announced the arrival of the SamiUamch, 
‘the man of each and every art’, whereupon the king bade

Branches of the Tradition 35

them bring the fichell boards. Lug won all the stakes. ‘Let him 
enter the garth, for his like has never before come to this 
fortress.’ Lug entered and sat in the seat of the sage, ‘for he was 
a sage in every art’, and then Ogma gave his challenge. It 
would require four score yoke of oxen to move the great flag^ 
stone which he hurled through the house so that it lay on the 
outside of Tara. Lug cast it back to the centre of the palace 
and made the building whole again. The host demanded that a 
harp be played for them. Lug played three magic strains which 
set them first sleeping and then lamenting and then rejoicing. 
Nuadu now considered whether Samildanach might release 
them from the bondage of the Fomoire and decided to change 
seats with him. ‘So Samildanach went to the king’s seat, and 
the king rose before him till thirteen days had ended.’Lug conferred with the two brothers, the Dagda and 
Ogma, and then the brothers Goibniu and Dian Cfoht were 
summoned to them. At the end of the year Nuadu enquired of 
his experts what each could do. The sorcerer Mathgen pro-' 
mised to cast the mountains of Ireland on the Fomoire, the 
cupbearer that he would hide the lakes and rivers of Ireland 
from the Fomoire whereas the men of Ireland would not lack 
water though they should fight for seven years. Figol, the druid, 
said that he would cause three showers of fire to fall on the 
faces of the enemy host, ‘and I will take out of them two^ 
thirds of their valour and their bravery and their strength, and 
I will bind their urine in their own bodies and in the bodies 
of their horses. Every breath that the men of Ireland shall ex/ 
hale will be an increase of valour and bravery and strength to 
them.’ It became the turn of the Dagda to declare his powers: 
‘The power which ye boast,’ said he, ‘I shall wield it all my/ 
self.’ Upon which everyone said, ‘Thou art indeed the Excel/ 
lent God,’ whence his name, the Dagda.

Lug, the Dagda and Ogma went to the three Gods of 
Danann, and for seven years they were preparing for the battle 
and making weapons. Then we are told of the Dagda, ‘about 
the Samain (ist November) of the battle’, having intercourse

36 Celtic Heritage

with the Morrigan.* She and Badb (‘scald/crow’) and 
Macha** were three sinister and destructive female beings 
who prophesied carnage and haunted battlefields.^^ She now 
said she would go and destroy Indech son of De Domnann 
and ‘deprive him of the blood of his heart and the kidneys of 
his valour’, and she gave two handfuls of that blood to the 
hosts. When Indech later appeared in the battle, he was 
already doomed.Lug then sent the Dagda to the camp of the Fomoire, to spy 
on them and to delay the battle until the men of Ireland should 
be ready. The Fomoire granted his request for a truce, but in 
his relations with them he again appears as a figure of fun. 
Porridge was made for him, ‘to mock him, for great was his 
love of porridge’. Goats and sheep and pigs, as well as meal and 
milk, were cast into the king’s gigantic cauldron. The food was 
then spilt into a hole in the ground, and the Dagda was obliged 
to eat it all on pain of death, so that he might not reproach 
them with inhospitality. The ladle was big enough for a man 
and a woman to lie in but the Dagda finished by scraping 
the hole with his fitter, and then he fell asleep. The Fomoire 
laughed at his huge belly and his uncouth apparel — a hood 
over his head, a cape reaching to his elbows, a tunic reaching 
only to his buttocks, and shoes of horsehide with the hair on 
the outside. The track made behind him by his enormous club 
was enough for the boundary ditch of a province. A Rabe^ 
laisian passage follows which tells of his intercourse with 
Indech’s daughter, who promised her magic assistance against 
the host of the Fomoire.

Then we hear how Lug inquired of the chiefs of the Tuatha 
what power they wielded. Goibniu, the smith, promised to 
provide a new weapon in place of every one that was broken 
— ‘no spearpoint which my hand shall forge shall make a 
missing cast. No one which it pierces shall mte life afterwards.’ 
Dian C&ht undertook to heal the wounded overnight,

* Either *Great Queen’ or *Queen of Phantoms’.

** The plural is used for the trio.

Branches of the Tradition 37* Either *Great Queen’ or *Queen of Phantoms’.

** The plural is used for the trio.

Branches of the Tradition 37

Credne to supply rivets for the spears, hilts for swords, and 
bosses and rims for shields, and Luchta to make all shields 
and spear-'shafts. Ogma declared that he would repel the king 
and his friends and capture a large proportion of the enemy 
host, Carpre, the poet, that he would satirize the enemy, and 
the sorceresses. Be Chuille and Danann (or Dianann), that 
trees and stones and sods of the earth, through their enchant/- 
ment, would become an armed host and rout the enemy. The 
sorcerers, the druids, the cupbearers, the Morrigan, and the 
Dagda again declared their powers.When the battle had begun, the Fomoire sent Ruadan, son 
of Bres and of Brigh (i.e. Brigit) daughter of the Dagda, to 
report on the fighting and also to kill Goibniu. He succeeded 
in wounding him with a spear but he himself was slain in 
revenge. Then Brigh came to bewail her son, and this was the 
first time crying and shrieking were heard in Ireland.^® The 
Tuatha, fearing an early death for Lug ‘owing to the multitude 
of his arts’, tried to prevent him from entering the battle, but he 
escaped from his guardians and appeared in the forefront of the 
men of Ireland, heartening them to fight. Singing a chant he 
went round the host on one foot and with only one eye open. 
Eventually he met Balor, who had already slain Nuadu. Balor 
had an evil eye, never opened except on the battlefield, when 
it needed four men to lift the eyelid. If an army looked at that 
eye it was rendered powerless. He now bade the eyelid be 
lifted so that he might see ‘the babbler’ who was conversing 
with him, whereupon Lug cast a sling^stone which carried 
the eye through his head, and its destructive power fell on the 
Fomoire. According to some versions,^® Lug cut off Balor’s 
head, and though Balor had bidden him set it on his own head 
so that he should gain its power, he set it on a pillarz-stone. Its 
venom split the stone into four pieces.

In the rout which followed. Lug spared the life of Loch 
Lethglas,* the Fomorian poet, on condition that he should be

* *Half/green\

'I • 38 Celtic Heritage

1 ) granted three wishes, one of which was that till Doom Lug

i I should ward off from Ireland all plundering by the Fomoire.

! Bres, seeking quarter, offered that the cattle of Ireland should

i always be in milk. Lug brought him the verdict of Maeltne

|:i of Great Judgements: ‘That does not save thee: thou hast no

1 power over their age and their offspring though thou canst

; milk them.’ Bres then offered that the men of Ireland should|:i of Great Judgements: ‘That does not save thee: thou hast no

1 power over their age and their offspring though thou canst

; milk them.’ Bres then offered that the men of Ireland should

1 reap a harvest in every quarter of the year. But that again did

not save him, for they were satisfied with the normal yearly 
I : round. ‘Less than that rescues thee,’ said Lug. ‘How shall the

men of Ireland ploughs How shall they sows How shall they 
I ; reaps’ His answer to these questions was accepted, that their

! | , ploughing should be on a Tuesday, their sowing on a Tues-'

^ I j day, and their reaping on a Tuesday — a formula which recurs

I i| ; in modern folk charms used to ward off supernatural beings

I who would steal the produce of the farmer’s labours. Accor d--

I ing to the dindsenchas, the death of Bres was encompassed by

Lug in a magic contest in which Bres, while seeking to deprive 
the men of Munster of the milk of their dun cows, was obliged 
to drink milk which was not real milk from cows which were 
not real cows.^^ After the Battle of Mag Tuired, Lug, the 
Dagda, and Ogma pursued the Fomoire and recovered the 
Dagda’s harp. All the cattle of Ireland, recalled by the lowing 
of the black heifer which the Dagda had chosen as his modest 
reward for his labours as a builder, resumed their grazing. The 
Morrigan and Badb then proclaimed the victory and the re/ 
turn of prosperity, and also prophesied the end of the world 
and the return of chaos.

The world in which the Tuatha reigned supreme did even/ 
tually come to an end with the arrival of the Sons of Mil. 
After their defeat in battle, Amairgen, poet and judge of the 
newcomers, is said to have ‘divided Ireland in two, and the 
half of Ireland that was underground he gave to Tuatha De 
Danann, and the other half to the Sons of Mil’. The Tuatha 
then ‘went into hills and fairy regions (sidhrugaih), so that 
fairies (sida) under ground were subject to them. For each

39

Branches of the Tradition39

Branches of the Tradition

province in Ireland they left five of their number increasing 
battles, struggles, strife, and conflict among the Sons of jMil.’^* 
One early text says that Tuatha De provided the Sons of Mil 
with wives; according to another, they destroyed the corn and 
milk round about the Sons of Mil until the latter made the 
friendship of the Dagda. Afterwards he saved their corn and 
milk.^® In the same story the Dagda is said to have shared the 
magic mound/dwellings (side) between Lug, Ogma, and 
himself, the three protagonists of the Tuatha in their battle 
with the Fomoire, but Oengus,* son of the Dagda, ousted his 
father from Bruig na Boinne.**In a later text, the king of Tuatha De Danann is Bodb, son 
of the Dagda, but it is Manannan mac Lir, described as over/' 
king of the Tuatha, who distributes the side, ten of them in all, 
among the nobles of the Tuatha, while he himself dwells be/' 
yond the sea in Emain Ablach, ‘Emain of the Apple/trees’. 
It is Manannan too who institutes the Feth Fiada ‘through 
which the Tuatha lords were not seen’, the Feast of Goibniu 
‘to ward off age and death from their high/kings’, and the Pigs 
of Mannanan ‘to be killed and yet continue to exist for the 
warriors’.®* Under this new dispensation, therefore, the high/- 
king of the Tuatha is the ‘god of the sea’, who dwells beyond 
the sea, even as the mysterious Tethra, king of the Fomoire, 
dwelt beyond the sea when the Fomorian Bres was king of 
Ireland. For both Manannan and Tethra the fish are cattle®® 
and Tethra’s name, like Manannan’s patronymic, is synony/ 
mous with ‘sea’. Henceforth, the Tuatha occupy those hidden 
and external regions, the mound/dwellings and the islands, 
which were the portion of the Fomoire when the Tuatha 
possessed Ireland, and their role now becomes similar to that 
of the Fomoire: they provide wives, they promote strife and 
conflict, and they have power to destroy or to save for the 
rulers of Ireland the produce of the land. From now on, the

* He is also called Mac ind <3c, or In Mac C3c (‘The Young Son’).

‘ The Mansion of the Boyne.’

40 Celtic Heritage

distinction between the Tuatha and the Fomoire is blurred. 
The opposition which divides them holds only while the 
Tuatha appear openly as the occupiers of Ireland. In the islands 
of the north before the Tuatha come to Ireland, and in the 
underground side and the islands after the coming of the Sons 
of Mil, Tuatha De Danann are at one with the Fomoire. 
Originally and ultimately, or in the realm of the occult, there 
is no hostility between them; the opposition belongs to the 
realm of the manifest.The Fomoire never appear as settlers in Ireland. Champions 
of the Std, they remain in the background throughout, con/ 
stantly associated with the sea and the islands. They are only 
vaguely depicted, and their chief features are their unformed or 
monstrous appearance, their single eyes, single arms, and single 
legs — ^the oneness which is split in the world of manifestation — 
and their hostility to the established order.^® Nevertheless, they 
intermarry with the Tuatha, and in some respects they seem 
to represent the feminine principle. It will be recalled that as 
opponents of Partholon they were predominantly a female 
company, and that it was the wives of the Tuatha who urged 
that Bres of the Fomoire should be made king. Furthermore, 
the contests, lavish hospitality, obligatory over/eating, obscen/ 
ity, and mockery which characterize the way in which the 
Tuatha and the Fomoire behave towards one another in cer/ 
tain episodes have their counterpart in the ritual hostility and 
disrespectful joking which is typical of the conduct of people 
in many human societies towards the kin groups fiom which 
they obtain their wives.®^

From the point of view of the contingent world, the super/ 
natural world, whether it be inhabited by the Fomoire, the 
Tuatha, or other beings, has an essentially feminine quality. 
Women are far more prominent than men in medieval accounts 
of the magic mound/dwellings and of the islands of immortal/ 
ity which lie beyond the sea. In the delectable Other World of 
‘The Adventure of Conle’, ‘There is no race there but women 
and maidens alone.’ The fairies are known as ‘The Mothers’

Branches of the Tradition 41

or ‘The MothersVBlessing’, in parts of Wales, and they are 
sometimes thought of as being exclusively female.®* We shall 
revert to this subject in Chapter XV.Branches of the Tradition 41

or ‘The MothersVBlessing’, in parts of Wales, and they are 
sometimes thought of as being exclusively female.®* We shall 
revert to this subject in Chapter XV.

A primeval battle between the gods and their adversaries, 
such as we have described, occurs of course in other mytho/- 
logics, and there are striking similarities between the stories 
told of these conflicts by the ancient Indians, Scandinavians, 
Greeks, and other peoples whose languages are derived from 
Indo/European.®® At this point we will only notice the oppo/ 
sition between the two Indian groups, the Devas (‘gods’) and 
the Asuras, which has been described as ‘the basic theme of 
the Vedic tradition’.*® The Asuras were malevolent beings, the 
regular adversaries of the gods, and yet the name Asura, which 
means ‘possessor of occult power’, may be used of the greatest 
gods.®^ According to A. K. Coomaraswamy, all the Devas 
are Asuras by birth, ‘for the female principle is always an 
Asuri in the Rig Veda’. The Devas and Asuras are thus 
kinsmen. Distinct and opposite in operation, they are in 
essence consubstantial: ‘the Darkness in actu is Light, the 
Light in potentia Darkness’.*®

3

Both Tuatha De Danann and the Fomoire have their counter^ 
parts in ‘The Four Branches of the Mabinogi’,*® which may 
be said to constitute a Welsh ‘mythological cycle’. These tales 
are full of marvellous happenings and feats of magic, but such 
is the storyteller’s artistry that what is mysterious and wonderful 
is accepted as naturally and immediately as the realistic dia^ 
logue and the familiar setting.

The tales are about three groups of personages: the First and 
Third Branches about the family of Pwyll, Lord of Dyfed, the 
Second Branch about the family of Llyr, and the Fourth 
Branch about the family of Don. A son is born in each of these 
families, and the tales are mostly about the marriages of the 
mothers and the birth and destiny of the three sons: Pryderi42 Celtic Heritage

the son of Pwyil and Rhiannon, Gwern the son of firanwen 
daughter of Llyr, and Lieu Llaw Gyffes the son of Aranrhod 
daughter of Don. What follows here is a mere summary.

We are first told about the parents of Pryderi, the only person 
who figures in all four branches. Pwyil, Lord of Dyfed, sets out 
from Arberth, a chief court of his, to hunt in that part of his 
domain known as Glyn Cuch. He loses his companions and 
soon finds himself face to face with the king of a mysterious 
realm with whom he is obliged to come to terms. It happens 
in this way. When he sees a strange pack of hounds bringing 
down a stag, Pwyil drives the pack away and baits his own 
hounds on the st^. Thereupon the strange hunter appears. 
He rebukes Pwyil* for his discourtesy and reveals that he is 
Arawn, King of Annwfn.** To redeem his friendship, 
Pwyil is obliged to take his place in Annwfn for a year and a 
day, after Arawn has exchanged their forms, and at the end 
of the year to meet Arawn’s enemy, Hafgan, king of another 
realm in Annwfn, in a contest at a ford. To defeat Hafgan he 
must refrain from giving him a second blow, for that would 
restore his power. During the year Pwyil observes strict chastity 
while sharing the bed of Arawn’s queen, and in due course he 
defeats Hafgan and so becomes sole king of Annwfn. A firm 
friendship is thereby established between Pwyil and Arawn, 
and moreover, Pwyil, as a result of his stay in Annwfn and 
his success in uniting the two kingdoms, is known henceforth 
not as Pwyil the Lord of Dyfed but as Pwyil the Head of 
Annwfn.

The second episode begins with Pwyil holding a feast at 
Arberth. When, after the first part of the feast, he takes his seat 
on the throne/mound (gorssed) by the court, he knows that he 
will thereby either suffer wounds and blows or else see a marvel. 
Presently he sees a lady riding past on a majestic white horse. 
Three attempts to overtake her prove of no avail, though theprudence, deliberation, wisdom.

** 2 ‘Great World’, ‘Non^world*, ‘Underworld*.

Branches of the Tradition 43

swiftest horses axe used, while she does not change her leisurely 
pace. Yet, when Pwyll at last asks her to wait for him, she 
readily does so. She is Rhiannon and she declares she has come 
to offer to be his bride. At their marriage feast a year later, 
Pwyll, by thoughtlessly granting a boon to a suppliant, allows 
his bride to pass to Gwawl, the disappointed suitor who has 
the support of her family. Rhiannon however insists on a year’s 
delay, and by means of a ruse, Gwawl too, at his wedding/feast, 
is obliged to give up his bride. Pwyll enters disguised in ragged 
garb and entices Gwawl into a magic bag provided before^ 
hand by Rhiannon. Then Pwyll’s men descend upon the court 
and each gives the bag a blow or a kick, thus making Gwawl 
the first victim ever in the game of ‘Badger in the Bag’.In the third year of Pwyll’s marriage with Rhiannon, his 
subjects remonstrate with him on account of his wife’s childx 
lessness, but he counsels patience. Before the end of another 
year she gives birth to a son, but the night he is born the women 
who are in attendance fall asleep, and the child disappears 
mysteriously. To save themselves, the women kill some pups, 
smear Rhiannon’s face and hands with the blood, and cast the 
bones before her. As a result, she is cruelly punished for the 
alleged crime of destroying her child. Meanwhile, Teyrnon 
Lord of Gwent Is/coed, who always loses the colt his income' 
parable mare foals on May Eve, at last decides to keep watch. 
After a big commotion, a great claw comes through the win^ 
dow and seizes the new/'born colt, but Teyrnon strikes off the 
claw at the elbow and rushes out. He fails to see anything, 
because of the dark, but at the door when he returns he finds a 
child in swaddling clothes. The child is brought up by 
Teyrnon and his wife as their own son, but when they realize 
who he is they restore him to Pwyll and Rhiannon. He is then 
named Pryderi (‘Care’), because of his mother’s words when 
she has news of him: ‘I should be delivered of my care if that 
were true.’

The Third Branch takes up the story after Pryderi has 
married and has succeeded his father as Lord of Dyfed. He

44 Celtic HeritageThe Third Branch takes up the story after Pryderi has 
married and has succeeded his father as Lord of Dyfed. He

44 Celtic Heritage

now gives his mother, Rhiannon, in marriage to Mariawydan 
son of Ll^, of whose family we shall speak presently. With their 
wives, Pryderi and Manawydan resort to Arberth. After the 
first part of their feast there, they sit on the throncz-mound, 
whereupon a great peal of thunder is followed by a fall of mist, 
and when it lightens, all signs of human life have vanished. 
They can see ‘neither house nor beast nor smoke nor fire nor 
man nor dwelling, but the houses of the court empty, desolate, 
without man or beast in them’. After remaining for two years 
in the deserted country, the four of them go to England, and 
Pryderi and Manawydan earn their living as saddlers, shield/ 
makers, and shoemakers, successively, moving from town to 
town on account of the conspiracies of villein rivals. Eventually 
they return to Arberth and the two men set out to hunt. In 
spite of Manawydan’s explicit counsel, the impulsive Pryderi 
allows himself to be enticed into a magic fortress where he sees, 
in the centre of the floor, a well with a finely wrought golden 
bowl hanging above a marble slab. On taking hold of the 
bowl, he is unable to remove his hands from it or his feet from 
the slab, and he loses all power of speech. Rhiannon, chiding 
her husband as a poor companion to Pryderi, straightway goes 
in search of her son, but the same fate befalls her too, and the 
fortress then vanishes. When the humble Manawydan turns 
again to shoemaking, he is once more faced with opposition, 
and returns to Arberth. There he sows corn, but two of his 
three crofts are plundered, and on keeping watch he sees a 
host of mice making off with the ears of corn from the third 
croft. He catches the only slow/moving mouse among them 
and, again on the throne/mound, he prepares to hang it as a 
thief. Three clerics who appear in succession offer to buy its 
freedom. The third, a bishop, ultimately reveals that the thief 
is his own wife, in the form of a mouse, and she is with child. 
He himself is Llwyd, captor of Pryderi and Rhiannon, author 
of the enchantment which has made the country desolate, and 
friend and avenger of Gwawl, Rhiannon’s ill/treated suitor. 
To redeem his wife, Llwyd frees Rhiannon and Pryderi,Branches of tbe’fTradition 45

removes the enchantment from Dyied and promises that no 
spell shall ever again be cast upon the land.Branches of tbe’fTradition 45

removes the enchantment from Dyied and promises that no 
spell shall ever again be cast upon the land.

Pwyll and the members of his family — ^including Rhiannon 
after her marriage — are not shown to be possessed of any magic 
power, though they have to contend at every turn with the 
hostility of mysterious enemies. But here, as in the Irish stories, 
there is ambiguity. Pwyll himself is called the Head of Anm 
wfh. In this story, Annwfn is a country of elegant perfection; 
in other texts, it is a palace or realm located sometimes beyond 
the sea, sometimes underground — ^in a word, the equivalent of 
the Irish 5 /d.®* Again, the manner in which Rhiannon makes 
her first appearance is magical enough, and the singing of ‘the 
birds of Rhiannon’, according to a reference in another story,®® 
would give sleep to the living and awaken the dead. It may be 
added that originally her name may have meant ‘Great 
Queen’,* and she is repeatedly associated with horses. 
Wrongly deemed guilty of destroying her child, she is obliged 
to sit by the horseblock ready to carry visitors on her back to 
the court. After disappearing in Llwyd’s magic fortress, her 
punishment is to have the collars of asses, after they have been 
carrying hay, about her neck. Furthermore, the loss and recovery 
of her son is linked with the birth of a colt which is later given 
to him when he shows a remarkable interest in horses, and (in 
the Fourth Branch) his acceptance of a gift of horses is the 
prelude to his death. This aspect of the story has been described 
as the myth of Epona,®® whose name occurs in more inscrip^ 
tions of the Roman period, and with a wider distribution, 
than any other Celtic name of god or goddess. Epona is some^- 
times styled Regina, and she is the only Celtic goddess known 
to have been honoured in Rome itself. Three of the inscriptions 
are associated with figures of the goddess, who is depicted with 
horses on either side of her. About two hundred other images, 
most of which show a mare ridden by a female, are also* Teyrmn perhaps originally meant ‘Great King*.

46 Celtic Heritage

assumed to be representations of Epona. It has been argued that 
her concern was as much with the journey of the soul after 
death as with the welfare of horses and mules and their attend.- 
ants.

The three plagues that befall Britain in the short tale called 
‘Lludd and Llefelys’®’ bear certain resemblances to the en^ 
chantment of Dyfed and to the despoiling of Tuatha De 
Danann by the Fomoire. The first of these plagues was wrought 
by beings called Coraniaid (a name derived from corr, ‘dwarf ’) 
— ‘so great was their knowledge that there was no discourse 
over the face of the Island, however low it might be spoken, 
that they did not know about if the wind met it’. The second 
was a terrifying scream which was raised every May Eve over 
every hearth in Britain and which left all animals and trees 
and the earth and the waters barren. It is found to be the scream 
of a dragon in conflict with a foreign dragon, and the contestants 
are revealed beneath the mid.-point of the Island. The third 
plague was a giant who stole all the food prepared at the king’s 
court, except what was consumed the very first night.It will be remembered that Nuadu, King of Tuatha De 
Danann, yields his throne to Lug, the sage, in order to be 
delivered from the bondage of the Fomoire. In this Welsh 
story, Lludd the king of Britain, whose name is probably the 
equivalent of Nmdu,^^ rids the Island of the three plagues by foL 
lowing the instructions of his wise brother Llefelys. The barren.- 
ness caused on May Eve by the dragon’s cry brings to mind the 
theft of Teyrnon’s foals by the mysterious claw every May Eve 
and the precautions which in some districts are still considered 
necessary on this night of witchery.®® After the dragons have 
been buried, they ensure that no plague shall enter the Island. 
This safeguard, together with the giant’s promise that he will 
restore the losses he has inflicted and never repeat them, and 
that he himself will become the liegeman of Lludd, recalls the 
conditions which Manawydan demands of Llwyd and those 
which Lug, after the Battle of Mag Tuired, demands of Loch 
andofBres.

Branches of the Tradition 47

The chief characters in the Second Branch of the Mabinogi 
belong to the family of Liyr: two brothers, namely Bran the 
Blessed, a colossus who rules the Island of the Mighty,* and 
Manawydan, and a sister Branwen, ‘one of the three matrix 
archs of the Island*. These three have two half/brothers: 
Efnisien, who always creates hostility, and the peacemaker 
Nisien. The story begins with the marriage of Branwen to 
Matholwch, King of Ireland, who comes to Harlech to seek 
her hand. On the occasion of her marriage feast at Aberffraw, 
Efnisien, who has not been consulted in the matter, takes his 
revenge by mutilating the bridegroom’s horses. As part of the 
compensation for this insult, Brin gives Matholwch a magic 
cauldron which originally was brought out of a lake in Ireland: 
slain men would be resuscitated in it overnight, but they would 
be bereft of speech.For a year Branwen is held in high honour in Ireland, She 
gives birth to a son, Gwern. But afterwards Matholwch is 
constrained by his subjects to make her suffer for Efnisien’s 
outrage. Driven from the king’s room, she is compelled to 
work as a cook in the court, and every day the butcher comes 
and strikes her a blow. This goes on for three years. Meanwhile, 
Branwen rears a starling and teaches it to convey to her brother 
news of her woe. Thereupon the hosts of the Isle of the Mghty 
invade Ireland, the gigantic Bran striding through the channel 
and later lying down to form a bridge for his men to cross the 
Llinon.** Matholwch offers his submission and Branwen 
urges that it should be accepted ‘lest the country be spoiled’; 
but when peace is in sight, Efnisien again takes offence and 
casts Branwen’s son into the blazing fire. In the battle that 
follows. Bran is mortally wounded and Efnisien sacrifices 
himself in order to destroy the magic cauldron which has been 
giving new life to the slain Irish warriors. Only five pregnant 
women are left alive to re/'people Ireland; only seven survivors, 
among them Manawydan and Pryderi, return to Britain,

* Britain.

** J Shannon.

48 Celtic Heritage

bringing with them the head of Brin for burial. When they 
come to land, Branwen — ^throughout a figure of great dignity 
and restraint — ^looks at the two countries, what can be seen 
of them, and, saying that two good islands have been laid 
waste because of her, she dies of a broken heart.Soon, news is brought that the seven lords left in charge of 
the Island of the Mighty have been overpowered by their 
kinsman Caswallawn son of Beli, who wore a magic mantle 
to make himself invisible, and that Bran’s own son has died 
of heartbreak ‘at the sight of the sword slaying his men and he 
not knowing who slew them’. Following the instructions 
given them by Brin, the seven survivors then spend seven years 
in a feast at Harlech, with the three birds of Rhiannon singing 
over the sea to delight them, and another fourscore years in a 
royal hall at Gwales,* where they remain, oblivious of every 
sorrow and loss and unaware of the passage of time, until a 
forbidden door is opened and they are obliged to continue their 
sorrowful journey. The head of Bran, which has been as 
pleasant company as Bran himself was during his life, is then 
buried in London, and like the buried dragons mentioned 
above, it ensures that no invaders shall plague the Island.

The story of Branwen has some features in common with 
two Irish stories which have little or no connection with one 
another.*® Inasmuch as it is an account of a marriage alii/ 
ance between two peoples which is followed by a great battle 
ending in annihilation, it has affinities with the story of the 
Second Battle of Mag Tuired, which concludes with fore/ 
bodings of chaos, the end of the world. In the Irish tale, the 
function of the magic cauldron is performed by a well which 
restores the dead warriors of the Tuatha to life. But while the 
evidence of two early Welsh poems might suggest that the 
Ireland of this Branch represents Annwfn or *Gaer Siddi’,** 
no close comparison with the story of the Tuatha and the 
Fomoire seems possible.

* An island off the coast of south/west Wales (Grassholm).

Branches of the Tradition 4$* An island off the coast of south/west Wales (Grassholm).

Branches of the Tradition 4$

Another Irish tale,*® which we would mention, was written 
(in its present form) in the Early Modern Period. It is concerned 
with the tragic suffering inflicted on the daughter and the three 
sons of Lir — ^Manannan does not appear among them— 
through the spell cast upon them by their jealous stepmother. 
It will be recalled that the pathos of the Welsh story of the 
family of Ll^ is heightened by the account of the blissful 
interludes provided by the feasting at Harlech, during which 
the seven survivors are charmed by the singing of the birds of 
Rhiannon, and the untroubled timeless sojourn at Gwales. 
The Irish story provides the same contrast, for the singing of 
the Children of Lit, in the form of swans, above Lake Derry^ 
varagh, holds Tuatha De Danann and the men of Ireland 
entranced for three hundred years. Their singing would give 
sleep even to the sick and the troubled, and make happy all 
who heard it. After spending equally long periods in two 
places off the coast of Ireland, the Children of Lir return 
home from their exile only to find desolation awaiting them, 
and as in the Welsh story, it is the daughter who gives voice to 
their grief.The name of Manawydan son of Llyr, who is closely linked 
with BrSn in the story of Branwen, is clearly related to that of 
Manannan mac Lir.*® In an early Irish story, a personage 
named Bran son of Febal, voyaging to a magic wonderland, 
meets Manannan riding over the waves, while according to 
the dindsenchas Manannan had a brother by the name of Bron.** 
It will be remembered that when Manannan distributes the 
side among the lords of Tuatha De Danann, he himself takes 
none of them, but dwells beyond the sea in Emain Ablach. 
Similarly, Manawydan, who plays no part in the action of the 
Second Branch, is in the Third described as a humble lord 
who has never claimed land or territory, and though, by be-' 
conaing Rhiannon’s second husband, he secures the use of 
the seven cantreds of Dyfcd, this territory remains Pryderi’s in 
name. Nevertheless, it is Manaavydan who succeeds in corny 
pelling Llwyd, the hostile wizard, to remove the enchantment

50 Celtic Heritage

from Dyfed, to restore Pryderi and Rhiannon, and to promise 
that never again shall a spell be cast upon the country.50 Celtic Heritage

from Dyfed, to restore Pryderi and Rhiannon, and to promise 
that never again shall a spell be cast upon the country.

The Fourth Branch of the Mabinogi, like the Second, intro/ 
duces a new group of characters. They may be broadly des/ 
cribed as the family of Don. It is a peculiarity of Math son of 
Mathonwy, Lord of Gwynedd, that he can live only if his 
feet are held in a maiden’s lap, unless the turmoil of war should 
make this impossible. He loses the services of one such maiden 
through the intrigue of his sister’s sons, Gwydion son of Don 
and Gilfaethwy son of Don, an intrigue which also results in 
the death of Pryderi. Nevertheless it is Gwydion, the counsellor 
and schemer in each section of this Branch, who advises Math 
about seeking a new fbot/holder, Gwydion’s sister, Aranrhod 
daughter of Don, is fetched, and to prove her virginity Math 
commands her to step over his magic wand. In so doing she 
drops a boy/child, and as she makes for the door she again 
drops something which Gwydion promptly hides in a chest. 
There he later finds another child. The first boy is baptized 
and named Dylan, whereupon he immediately makes for the 
sea and receives the sea’s nature — whence his name, Dylan Eil 
Ton (‘Sea son of Wave’). When Gwydion later takes the 
other child — ^who seems to be his own son — ^to Aranrhod’s sea/ 
girt fortress, she is so offended with him for thus pursuing her 
shame that she swears on her son this destiny: that he shall not 
get a name until he get it fiom her, Gwydion and the boy again 
appear at her court, this time in the guise of shoemakers, and 
she is induced to remark on the deft hand of the fair one, 
whence his name Lieu Llawgyffes.* Similarly when she swears 
on the boy a second destiny, that he shall not bear arms till she 
equip him, it is again Gwydion who by means of his magic 
illusions brings her to do so, and a third destiny, that he shall 
not have a wife ‘of the race that is now on earth’, is circum/ 
vented by Lieu’s marriage to Blodeuedd (‘Flowers’), a woman* Lieu of the Deft Hand (H««: light, feir).

Branches of the Tradition JI

conjured by Math and Gwydion from the flowers of the oak, 
the broom, and the meadowsweet.

Blodeuedd falls in love with Gronw, lord of Penllyn, and 
plots with her lover to kill her husband. Feigning solicitude 
for his safety, she elicits from Lieu how he might be killed. He 
could not be slain within a house or outside, on horseback or a^ 
foot, and moreover, the spear would have to be prepared during 
a whole year, but only while people were at Mass on Sunday. 
Eventually a tub is set under a thatched frame on the bank of a 
river, and Lieu, halfrdressed after taking a bath, is inveigled 
into taking his stand with one foot on the back of a he/goat 
and the other on the edge of the tub. Smitten in this position by 
Gronw’s spear, he flies away in the form of an eagle. After a 
long search, Gwydion, by following on the track of a wayward 
sow, discovers him in an oak.^tree on an upland plain — ‘nor 
rain wets it nor heat melts ... the sanctuary of a fair lord’^® — 
his decayed flesh dropping to the ground. Gwydion, with his 
magic wand, restores him to his human form, and all the good 
physicians of Gwynedd are brought to heal him. Then Gronw 
is made to suffer at Lieu’s hands the death he had intended for 
Lieu, and it is said that Lieu later became lord of Gwynedd.

Like the Peoples of the Goddess Danann, the family of 
Don include several wizards, adepts at feats of illusion and 
transformation. Of Math it is said that whatever whispering, 
however low, that would be between men, if the wind met it, he 
would know it. He seems to be related in name to the Irish 
Mathu, named as one of the three prophets of the heathens, 
the other two being Nuadu* and Goibniu; also to Matha, the 
druid who represents the old faith in early accounts of St 
Patrick, and perhaps to Mathgen, sorcerer of Tuatha De 
Danann in ‘The Second Battle of Mag Tuired’.^® In addition* In another Welsh tale, ‘Kulhwch and Olwen’, there are brief references to 
Llndd Llaw Ereint — ^whose name is equivalent to that of Nuadu Airgetlam, 
king of Tuatha De Danann^ — and also to another son of Don, Amaethon.

52 Celticlienta^

to Gwydion, Gilfaethwy, and Aranrhod, the family of Don 
includes Gofannon, whose name, like that of Goibniu, the 
donor of the Feast of Immortality, comes from the same root 
as £of, Irish £obat ‘smithk^’ The story of the slaying of Dylan 
by his uncle Gofannon, which is alluded to in the Mabmo^i, is 
probably cognate with the story of the death of Ruadan at the 
hands of Goibniu/®

The name of Lieu seems equivalent to that of Lug, who is 
sometimes called Lug Lamfada — ‘Lug of the Long Arm (or 
Hand)’. ‘Lieu of the Ready Hand’ does not manifest the alh 
round competence of the Irish Samildanach, but the peculiar 
conditions which govern his death, and the way he survives 
even when these are fulfilled, show his supernatural quality. 
Lug too has a wife who proves unfaithful to him with Cermat 
son of the Dagda. Cermat is killed by Lug (as Gronw is 
killed by Lieu) and the role of the Dagda who, after searching 
the world for the means to heal his son, resuscitates him with a 
magic staff, recalls that of Gwydion, not in relation to Gronw 
but in relation to Lieu. Lug in turn is killed by the spear of 
Mac CuiU son of Cermat.^® The name of Blodeuedd, Lieu’s 
unfaithful wife, is partly equivalent to the Irish Bldthmt, which 
in one story is the name of a wife obtained from ‘the House of 
Donn’ for Lug’s son, and in another the name of an unfaithful 
wife who reveals to her lover when her husband (CuRoi) may 
be slain.®®The name of Don seems to be a bye^form of Donwy,^^ 
which occurs in Dyfrdonwy* and, perhaps, in Trydontvy, both 
apparently names of rivers in Wales. Dyfrdonwy is certainly 
given as the name of one of ‘the three wells of the ocean’.®® 
The other two wells are identified with the sea^flood and the 
fall of rain through the atmosphere, respectively, while Dyfr.' 
donwy, according to a late text, ‘comes (?) through the veins 
of (the) mountains like the flinty feast made by the King of 
kings’. The name Donwy can be related phonologically to the

^ dyfvK ‘water’.

Branches of the Tradition 53^ dyfvK ‘water’.

Branches of the Tradition 53

Irish Dfl«aKK and also to Danu, the name of a goddess who 
figures in the Rig Veda. In the Veda, danu signifies ‘stream’ 
and ‘the waters of heaven’,®* and the same root is to be seen 
in the names of rivers, from the Russian Don, Dnieper, and 
Dniester to the Danube and to several rivers in England known 
as Don.®® The Vedic goddess Danu is the mother of Vftra, the 
chief adversary of Indra, the king of the gods, but she is also 
the consort of the sovereign gods Mitravaruna.®® Her ambi-< 
valent role is paralleled by that of Danann in Irish tradition. 
Danann is the mother of the gods of Ireland and gives her 
name to the wizard Tuatha. On the other hand, ‘the Three 
Gods of Danann’ are usually her three sons, Brian, luchar, 
and lucharba, who appear in Irish story only as the ruthless 
slayers of Gian, the father of Lug, the saviour of the Tuatha 
D 4 ®® Nevertheless, in ‘The Second Battle of Mag Tuired’, the 
same title signifies the three craftsmen Goibniu, Luchta, and 
Credne, while in another story, ‘The Wooing of £tain’, it 
signifies Lug, the Dagda, and Ogma, the three leaders of the 
Tuatha.®’ The Dagda and Ogma, as well as Lug, are some/ 
times described as sons of Ethniu,®* and in ‘The Wooing of 
£tain’, Ethniu (which also occurs as a river name) is said to be 
another name for Boand, paramour of the Dagda and eponym 
of the Boyne, the river which, according to the metrical dindy 
senchas, is known as ‘Roof of the Ocean’ as far as Scotland, as 
the Severn in England, as the Tiber in Rome, as the Jordan 
and the Euphrates in the East, and as the Tigris ‘in enduring 
paradise’.®®

4

The tales of Tuatha De Danann and the Children of Don and 
other ‘mythological’ tales abound in enchantments and trans/ 
formations, and victory is gained by superior knowledge and 
wizardry. Intelligence and magic are the distinctive features. 
When we turn to the tales of the Ulster Cycle, on the other

54 Celtic Heritage54 Celtic Heritage

hand, though we are again in a world of marvels, the heart of 
the matter is quite different. The central group of characters 
are not wizards but warriors who glory in their prowess and 
their unyielding endurance. It is not primarily intelligence but 
wilhpower and fearless action in the face of terrifying odds that 
are celebrated. Here we are in the world of the hero.Challenges, taunts, and the vaunting of exploits, already 
accomplished or to come, serve as the theme in several tales 
of this cycle, where honour and prestige are the motivating 
principles. The rivalry between the two northern provinces, 
Ulster and Connacht, provides the setting for several of the 
tales, for it is said that ‘for three hundred years before the birth 
of Christ there was war between them’.®® When Conchobar 
was king of Ulster, the dominant figure in Connacht was 
Queen Medb. Her husband. King Ailill is a much less im/ 
posing character, and before her marriage to him Medb had 
been the wife of King Conchobar of Ulster.®^ In ‘The Story 
of the Pig of Mac Datho’,** the king of Leinster, Mac Datho, 
had a famous hound, the guardian of his kingdom. This hound 
was sought at the same time by King Ailill and Queen Medb, 
on the one hand, and by King Conchobar on the other. Mac 
Datho’s wife suggested that it should be promised to each in 
turn, and plans were made for the rival parties to come for it 
on the same day. At the great feast which was prepared for 
them, the main dish was a matchless pig, nurtured for seven 
years on the milk of fifty cows. Bricriu, who in several tales is 
the evihtongued counsellor who sows dissension among the 
Ulster heroes, suggested that the pig should be divided 
‘according to battle/victories*. After a brief exchange of taunts 
between the Ulstermen and two heroes of Munster, a Con-- 
nacht man elevated himself above all the men of Ireland, and 
placing himself knife in hand beside the pig, ‘Find ye now’, 
said he, ‘one man among the men of Ireland who can contend 
with me, or else leave to me the dividing of the pig.’ This was 
Cet son of Magu, of whom it is told elsewhere that he often 
went into Ulster to seek the slaying of a man, ‘for from his

Branches of the Tradition 55Branches of the Tradition 55

initiation he never went without the slaughter of an Ulster/ 
man’.®® One after another of the Ulster warriors take up his 
challenge, but each has to retire in shame when he is taunted 
with some past occasion when Get brought humiliation upon 
him. Get is now ready to carve the pig, when Gonall Ger/ 
nach* of Ulster enters the hall and contests the privilege with 
him; “‘I swear by that by which my people swear, since I 
took spear in hand I have never been a day without slaying a 
Gonnachtman or a night without plundering by fire, and I 
have never slept without a Gonnachtman’s head beneath my 
knee.” “It is true,” said Get, "thou art a better warrior than I. 
But if it were [my brother] Anluan who were here, he would 
match thee with victory for victory. It is bad for us that he is 
not in the house.” “But he is,” said Gonall, drawing Anluan’s 
head from his belt; and he hurled it on to Get’s chest so that 
blood gushed over his lips. Then Gonall sat down by the pig 
and Get went away from it. “Now let them come to the con/ 
test!” said Gonall.’

In ‘The Feast of Bricriu’,®^ the three rival warriors who con/ 
tend for ‘the champion’s portion’, a huge cauldron filled with 
the choicest food and drink, are all Ulstermen — Loegaire 
Buadach,** Gonall Gernach, and GuGhulainn — and the 
tale serves to bring out the incomparable fearlessness and power 
of GuGhulainn, the matchless hero of this Gycle. Here again 
it is Bricriu who brings about the contest and he also sets the 
wives of the heroes wrangling over precedence at the feast. 
The three warriors are sent to Ailill, King of Gonnacht, and 
later to GdRoi mac Dairi, King of Munster, for judgement. 
At Gruachan, the residence of the king of Gonnacht, three 
m^ic cats from the Gave of GnSachan are let loose to attack 
them during the night. GuGhulainn alone stands his ground. 
When eventually they reach the fort of GuRoi mac Dairi

Gonall the Victorious 
** Loegaire the Triumphant.Gonall the Victorious 
** Loegaire the Triumphant.

56 Celtic Heritage

CuRoi is abroad on his travels as usual: ‘Ireland could not 
contain him for his haughtiness, renown and rank, overx 
bearing fury, strength and gallantry/ Following CiiRoi’s in/ 
structions, Blathnat his wife tells them that each of them must 
take his turn to guard the fort until her husband returns. The 
first night Loegaire, as the eldest of the contestants, keeps watch, 
when a huge and horrible spectre appears from the western 
sea and throws him out over the fort. The next night Conall 
fares likewise, and on the third night it is CfrChulainn’s turn 
to take his place at the look/out post. This is the night on which 
it is foretold that the monster of the nearby lake will devour the 
whole company of the fort, man and beast. CuChulainn first 
kills three groups of nine attackers, and when the lake monster 
appears he hacks it to pieces after tearing out its heart with his 
hand. The spectre then appears from the west, from the sea. 
As a result of CuChulainn’s salmon/leap, his swooping/feat 
with his drawn sword over his opponent’s head, and his dizzy 
circling in mid/air around him, the spectre is constrained to ask 
for quarter. In return for his life he grants CiiChulainn his 
three wishes, uttered with one breath: for himself the sovereignty 
of Ireland’s heroes and the champion’s portion without dispute, 
for his wife precedence over the ladies of Ulster for ever. The 
spectre vanishes, but soon afterwards CuRoi returns and hke/ 
wise gives his verdict in CuChulainn’s favour.when they return to Emain, CdChulainn’s rivals still re/ 
fuse to admit his pre/eminence and so the matter rests until, at 
eventide after the assembly and the games, a huge, horrible 
bachlach* appears in Conchobar’s hall, the Branch/red, and 
stands beside the fire like a blazing luminary. He carries a huge 
tree, a block, and an axe and craves a boon he has not been 
granted anywhere in the world, namely that a warrior shall be/ 
head him the first night, he the warrior the following night.**

* Shepherd, peasant, boor.

** In its original form the challenge is that one of the warriors should allow 
he bachlach to behead him first, but in the event this order is not followed.

57

Branches of the Tradition

Munremur, Loegaire, and Conall accept the challenge on 
successive nights, but after seeing the challenger leave the hall 
carrying his head and his axe, none of them abides to face the 
ordeal. The honour of the Ulstermen is clearly at stake. 
CdChulainn now strikes off and smashes the giant’s head, and 
the following night he lays his own neck on the block. The 
bachlach raises his axe till it reaches the roof-tree of the hall. The 
creaking of the old hide worn by the giant and the crashing of 
the axe are like ‘the loud noise of a wood tempest^-tossed in a 
night of storm’. But the blade is brought down with the blunt 
side below, and now, in Emain, CuChulainn is awarded the 
triple prize already adjudged to him in Cruachan and at 
CuRof s fort. The hachkch then vanishes. He was CiiRoi mac 
Dairi.In yet another story,®® CuChulainn, fiesh from his victories 
over Goll, a one/eyed champion who appears from the sea, 
and over Garb who has slain many of the Ulster host, appears 
unexpectedly at the door of the hall where Conchobar and his 
warriors are feasting. He insists on being announced only as a 
youth of Ulster — even as Lug declared himself a mere wright — 
and on being refused admission he forces an entry and threatens 
destruction to the king and all his company. Reconciliation 
follows, and as Lug was assigned the seat of the sage, so here 
CuChulainn is given the seat of the champion.

The central story of the Ulster Cycle is Tdin Bo Cuailnge, 
‘The Cattle/raid of Cuailnge’,®® an epic narrative which tells 
of an expedition by the combined forces of four provinces, led 
by Medb of Connacht, to carry off by force a great bull pos/ 
sessed by one of the landowners of Ulster. The ambitious and 
ruthless Queen Medb coveted the bull, Bonn Cuailnge,* lest 
her possessions be one whit inferior to those of her husband 
Ailill which included the great bull Finnbennach.**

* The Brown One of Cuailnge.

**Whitehorn.

58

Celtic Heritage* The Brown One of Cuailnge.

**Whitehorn.

58

Celtic Heritage

In the Book of Leinster, ten tales are listed as ‘preliminary 
tales’, that is tales which precede the Tam^ There is only a 
tenuous link between some of them and the great epic, but 
one of them tells how the story of the Tiin was recovered from 
Fergus mac Roich, one of the chief protagonists, who arose 
from his grave to tell it; in others, such as ‘The Adventures of 
Nera’, the Tain is prophesied or prefigured, while others again 
throw light on certain aspects of the situation which is en/ 
visaged in the epic. Thus, in the Tain, Fergus mach Roich, 
former king of Ulster, and Cormac son of King Conchobar, 
together with other warriors of Ulster to the number of thirty 
hundred, appear on the side of Medb. One of the preliminary 
tales shows that they were in exile in Connacht because Con^ 
chobar had broken faith with them concerning the sale-- 
conduct granted to the sons of Uisliu* and they in revenge 
had slain many of their own people and burned Emain. 
Another of these tales accounts for the strange disability which, 
for three months, prevents the Ulstermen from undertaking the 
defence of their province. Macha, a woman who had appeared 
mysteriously in the house of a rich Ulster farmer and brought 
him great wealth, was later compelled, in spite of her being 
with child, to run in competition with the king’s horses. At 
the end of the race she gave birth to twins (hence the name of 
Ulster’s royal residence, Emain Macha, ‘The Twins of Macha’) 
and pronounced a curse on the Ulstermen even to the ninth 
generation. In their time of greatest difficulty they would be as 
bereft of force as a woman in childbed and that for the space of 
a notnden ** — a ‘confinement’ of warriors which is paralleled in 
the thought and custom of other peoples.®® However, CiiChu/' 
lainn and his father are not affected by this torpor. In explana^ 
tion of this it is said that CdChulainn was not born an Ulster^ 
man, and in other texts he is described as a foster^'child of the 
Ulstermen.®® This recalls the ambiguous affiliation of BresBranches of the Tradition 59

and of Lug— Lug who like CuChulainn is deliberately but 
vainly restrained from taking part in his great battle and who, 
in the r«7«, heals CuChulainn’s wounds and for three days 
takes his place as the defender of Ulster. According to one 
tradition. Lug was reincarnated in CuChulainn.Yet another of the preliminary tales tells of the origin of the 
Whitehorn and Donn of Cuailnge,’'® the rival bulls whose 
tremendous fight provides a fitting conclusion to the Tain. 
They had previously appeared in various forms. As the wizard 
swineherds of Ochall, king of the sid of Connacht, and Bodb, 
king of the of Munster, respectively, they were first friends 
and later rivals. Afterwards they appeared as ravens who pro^ 
phesied the slaughter which would be occasioned by them; 
then as water beasts devouring one another — when they fought, 
‘fiery swords darted out of their jaws and reached the sky’; then 
as famous champions each again tested his comrade’s might 
before the two became demons, and then again water worms. 
One of the them, when taken from a spring by Queen Medb, 
advised her to marry Ailill; the other, taken from a river in 
Cuailnge by Fiachna mac Dairi, prophesied the fight with the 
beast of Connacht. Both of them were then swallowed by cows 
and reborn as the finest bulls ever seen in Ireland, Finn and 
Dub, ‘White’ and ‘Black’. The Bull of Cuailnge could 
shelter a hundred warriors of Ulster from the heat and cold, 
and fifty boys could play of an evening on his back. He would 
beget fifty calves a day, and these would be born the following 
day. During his wanderings on the occasion of the great cattle/ 
raid, he is counselled by the Morrfgan, and in his fight with 
the Whitehorn he courses over the whole country, and for a 
day and a night he carries the remains of his slaughtered foe in 
torn fragments about his ears and horns before scattering them 
over the face of Ireland. He ends his career by making a great 
slaughter of the women and youths and children of his own 
Cuailnge, and then, after he has turned his back to the hill, 
his heart breaks in his breast and he belches it out like a black 
stone of dark blood.

60

Celtic Heritage60

Celtic Heritage

This clash of two great powers by no means overshadows 
either the long series of combats by virtue of which the youthful 
CuChulainn, during his long sleepless vigil, stays the advance 
of the enemy host single-handed or the final great battle in 
which the hosts of Medb are routed by the awakened Ulster- 
men. In one story,’’ ^ CuChulainn is described as a small 
black-browed man, greatly resplendent, and in the Tain much 
play is made of his youthful and inoffensive appearance, his 
beardless countenance and his boyish gaiety. Yet when his 
terrible battle frenzy canie upon him he changed out of all 
recognition. From crown to sole his whole body trembled like 
a bullrush in mid-torrent. He made a mad whirling feat of his 
body within his skin so that his heels, his calves, and his hams 
appeared in front. He drew one eye back into his head, the 
other stood out huge and red on his cheek, and his mouth was 
distorted and twisted up to his ears so that his throat appeared 
in sight and a man’s head could go into his mouth. His hair 
bristled all over his head like hawthorn, with a drop of blood 
on each single hair. The champion’s light stood out of his 
forehead as long and thick as a warrior’s whetstone, and from 
the ridge of his crown there arose a thick column of dark blood 
like the mast of a great ship. It is no wonder that he was called 
‘The Contorted One’. When he displays his comeliness to 
the women and maidens, the poets, and the men of art, it is a 
baroque kind of beauty, as M.-L. Sjoestedt remarks’®— his 
hair, brown at the skin, blood-red in the middle, golden 
yellow in the crown; four spots, yellow, green, blue, and purple, 
on each of his cheeks, seven pupils in each of his eyes, seven 
toes on each foot, seven fingers on each hand, ‘with the clutch 
of a hawk’s claw ... in every one of them’.In his rage ‘CuChulainn would recognize neither comrades 
nor friends. Alike he would strike them before and behind.*’® 
Even so, it is to be noted that he rejects the advances of that 
dread figure of destruction, the Morrfgan, and so incurs her 
hostile intervention when he is hardest pressed in battle. May 
it be that sheer destructiveness is an enemy that the warrior

Branches of the Traction 6i

must constantly shun, and that the Dagda, the creative All^ 
father, the lord of life and death, is the true consort of annihi-' 
lation? With one end of his staff the Dagda can kill nine men, 
but with the other he restores them to life.''*We have already noted that the qualities revealed in this 
cycle of stories are violent assertiveness, invincible energy, and 
power of resistance. Here too one finds the conflict of loyalties 
which, without the warrior’s discipline, would paralyse the 
will. The host of Medb is guided by her lover Fergus, former 
king of Ulster, who is constrained to face in battle not only his 
own stepson, Conchobar, who has ousted him from his 
kingdom, but also his beloved fosterchild, CuChulainn. 
CiiChulainn himself has to fight to the death his best friend 
and former companion, FerDiad, and the extreme courtesy 
with which the grim battle is waged serves only to heighten the 
personal tragedy. The same theme is typical of the early poems 
and sagas of the Germanic peoples.''® Again and again the 
hero is confronted with a desperate choice between two courses, 
each of which is felt to be evil and each of which presents itself 
as a duty. Unlike the wizards of the Mythological Cycle, who 
display their superiority by the circumvention of destinies, the 
hero justfies himself by his unhesitating choice between dire 
alternatives and by the resolute way he follows his chosen 
path though he fully realizes where it will lead him. It is the 
apotheosis of the will that is depicted here. Nowhere is it better 
exemplified than in the short tale of CiiChulainn’s only son 
Conlaf.'® Brought up in his mother’s country, the boy is a 
stranger to the Ulstermen when he arrives in a skiff off the 
coast of Ireland. There is a charming picture of him shooting 
down birds without killing them, and then releasing them and 
bringing them back with his call, but the way he repulses 
several of Ulster’s greatest warriors shows that his skill at arms 
is prodigious. CdChulainn, the defender of Ulster, cannot 
evade his duty to compel the stranger to reveal his identity. 
Conlai, for his part, has been sworn not to make himself 
known to any one man or to refuse combat with any. When he

6262

Celtic Heritage

is warned that this might well be his own son, CuGhulainn 
replies: ‘Even though it were he indeed, I would kill him for 
the honour of Ulster,’ And when the deed is done, he carries 
the youth back in his arms and throws him down before 
Conchobar and his warriors: ‘Here is my son for you, men of 
Ulster.’

5

The tales of the Fenian or Ossianic Cycle are similar to those 
of the Ulster Cycle in that they tell of heroic fighters, but the 
two groups of stories differ profoundly in their characters, 
their milieu, their ethos, and their provenance.The Irish call this third branch of their Ikexaivxtjianaigheacht, 
lore of the fiana. The word jian (plural, fiana) is used of a troop 
of professional soldiers and also of ‘a band of roving men whose 
principal occupations were hunting and war’.'^^ Thurneysen 
suggested’® relating the word to the name Feni which some/ 
times signifies the Irish people, and sometimes the body of 
commoners as distinct from the ruling classes. When used in 
connection with board games, the word Jian itself sometimes 
denotes the set of pieces used in the game, but when it is said 
that ‘their Jian have checkmated our king (hranh)’ in a game in 
which there was apparently only one king/piece, the term seems 
to denote the pieces of inferior status.’® The same word is 
sometimes found in conjunction with the word foirenn and it 
is interesting to note that the Welsh word gwerin which is cog/ 
nate with Joirenn signifies a set of pieces, a complement, and also 
the people as distinguished from the nobility. Another Welsh 
word used for commoners as a body of people kgwring, and in 
medieval Welsh this compound of gm (‘man’) and iemng 
(‘young’) denotes young gentlemen training to bear arms. In 
Irish too, 6c, ‘young man’ could also mean ‘a warrior’, 6c Jine 
‘one of a roving band’, ‘a “fian” warrior’, and 6c^aire Jdat 
lowest grade of freeman of full age and status’.® ® This asso/ 
ciation of juniority with a military group and a social class

Branches of the Tradition 63Branches of the Tradition 63

occurs in other societies. The Roman juvenes were men whose 
age qualified them for military service and marriage, while 
among the various meanings of the English word yeoman 
(‘young man’) one finds ‘a servant’, ‘an attendant in a royal or 
noble household’, ‘a freeholder under the rank of gentleman’, 
‘a freeholder ... serving as a foot^soldier’, and (in the plural) 
‘pawns at chess’.®^ The Irish word fan is found glossed by 
ceithearn (anglicized as kerne) which denotes ‘a troop of foot/ 
soldiers’, and one distinguishing feature of the Fenian warriors 
is that they usually fight on foot, never Like the Ulster heroes in 
chariots. Another is the camaraderie which they display, the 
intense pleasure found in a life shared with members of one’s 
own special group, particularly when that group is ‘a picked 
body of fine young men’.®^ This is in marked contrast with the 
harsh individualism and clamorous rivalry which char/ 
acterizes so many of the Ulster stories. Finn is pictured as the 
captain of King Cormac mac Airt’s soldiery, his house/ 
troop, his mercenaries, and his huntsmen. His role is very 
different from that of CuChulainn, the lone champion who 
commanded no army.

The fana had their peculiar organizadon and customs. Of 
‘Finn’s people’ it is said:®*

‘their strength was seven score and ten officers, each man of 
these having thrice nine warriors, every one bound (as was 
the way with CuChulainn in the time when he was there) 
to certain conditions of service, which were: that in satis/ 
faction of their guarantee violated they must not accept 
material compensation; in the matter of valuables or of 
meat must not deny any; no single individual of them to 
fly before nine warriors.‘Of such not a man was taken into the Fiana; nor 
admitted whether to the great Gathering of Uisnech, to 
the Convention of Tailtiu, or to Tara’s Feast; until both 
his paternal and his maternal correlatives, his tuatba and 
kindreds, had given securities for them to the effect that.

64 Celtic Heritage

though at the present instant they were slain, yet should 
no claim be urged in lieu of them: and this in order that 
to none other but to themselves alone they should look to 
avenge them. On the other hand: in case it were they that 
inflicted great mischiefs upon others, reprisals not to be 
made upon their several people.

‘Of all these again not a man was taken until he were a 
prime poet versed in the twelve books of poesy. No man 
was taken till in the ground a large hole had been made 
(such as to reach the fold of his belt) and he put into it with 
his shield and a fore/arm’s length of a hazel stick. Then 
must nine warriors, having nine spears, with a ten furrows’ 
width betwixt them and him, assail him and in concert 
let fly at him. If past that guard of his he were hurt then, 
he was not received into Fianship.‘Not a man of them was taken till his hair had been 
interwoven into braids on him and he started at a run 
through Ireland’s woods; while they, seeking to wound 
him, followed in his wake, there having been between him 
and them but one forest bough by way of interval at &st. 
Should he be overtaken, he was wounded and not received 
into the Fiana after. If his weapons had quivered in his 
hand, he was not taken. Should a branch in the wood have 
disturbed anything of his hair out of its braiding, neither 
was he taken. If he had cracked a dry stick under his foot 
[as he ran] he was not accepted. Unless that [at his full 
speed] he had both jumped a stick level with his brow, and 
stooped to pass under one even with his knee, he was not 
taken. Also, unless without slackening his pace he could 
with his nail extraa a thorn from his foot, he was not 
taken into Fianship: but if he performed all this he was of 
Finn’s people.’

Fianship was an honourable institution, recognized in the 
laws and considered essential to the welfare of the community.®* 
According to Keating,®® who wrote in the seventeenth

Branches of the Tradition 65

century, the Jiana used to be quartered on the men of Ireland 
from Samain to Beltaine, while in the summer half of the year 
they engaged in hunting and supported themselves’thereby. In 
both seasons they were expected to police the country. More*- 
I over, no girl could be given in marriage until she had been

I offered to the fiana.^^ These last stipulations remind one of the

privileges and duties assumed by the traditional youth/groups 
( still found in some rural communities,®’ while the literature of

Robin Hood perhaps offers the nearest counterpart in English 
tradition.

, In one story®® we are told that Feradach Fechtnach, King

I of Ireland, had two sons, Tuathal and Fiacha. Feradach died

' and his two sons divided Ireland between them — her wealth, In one story®® we are told that Feradach Fechtnach, King

I of Ireland, had two sons, Tuathal and Fiacha. Feradach died

' and his two sons divided Ireland between them — her wealth

and her treasure, her cattle and her fortresses to the one; to 
the other her cliffs and her estuaries, her mast and her ‘sea-- 
fruit’, her salmon, her hunting, and her venery. When this 
story is related to the nobles of Christian Ireland they protest 
that the partition was not equitable. Whereupon Oisin (the son 
of Finn) inquires of them which of the two portions they 
themselves would have preferred. ‘Her feasts, her dwelling/ 
houses, and all her good things,’ they reply. ‘The portion 
which they would deem the worse,’ says the Fenian leader,

I Cailte, ‘that is the one which we should prefer.’ In this story

(according to the poem included in the same text), the 
elder brother assumed the kingship, while the younger, Fiacha 
Finn, chose to cast his lot with the Fiana. Fiacha chose 
‘rivers, wastes, wilds and woods, and precipices and estuaries’. 
But this did not prevent him from succeeding to the kingship 
after the death of his brother. To enter a fan was thus a suitable 
role for those who, because of their junior status, were without 
land and office.

f The partition we have described is comparable with that

made between the Sons of Mil and Tuatha De Danann, by 
which the latter received the underground or hidden half of 
the country. In a Fenian story it is said that St Patrick will 
relegate Tuatha De Danann ‘to the foreheads of hills and

E

66 Celtic HeritageE

66 Celtic Heritage

rocks’.®* The Jiam, the slMolk, Tuatha De Danann, and the 
Fomoire belong to those parts of Ireland which are outside the 
regions of settlement. The Jiam are depicted as belonging to by^ 
gone days, to the pre-'Christian past, and their name is found 
in association with those of the Fomoire and the fairy host 
(sHhcbuire).^'^ The mothers of the Fenian heroes are said to be.' 
long to Tuatha De Danann,*^ and their opponents likewise 
belong to the nd.-dwellers. In a tale now dated to the eighth 
century,®* Finn slays a foodz-stealing enemy, Culdub,* as he 
enters a sid. Finn’s thumb is jammed in the door of the std and 
when he puts it in his mouth he divines Culdub’s name. This 
illumination obtained by Finn as a result of chewing his thumb 
recurs in other stories. In several early texts, as O’Rahilly and 
Murphy have shown,*® Finn’s enemy has a name or else ante^ 
cedents which suggest the character of a supernatural male/- 
volent burner. We will merely mention Fothad, one of a trio 
of that name who are also called ‘Single/god’, ‘Strong'-god’, 
and ‘Fair/god’, Dearg (‘Red’) who used to jump ‘to and fro 
across the cooking hearth’, and Aillen mac Midna who, 
blowing fire from his mouth, burned Tara every Samain. 
Aillen, like Culdub, is slain as he enters the sid. Finn ousts 
from the sid of Almu his maternal grandfather, Tadg son of 
Nuadu, who was responsible for the slaying of Finn’s father 
by Goll** mac Morna, a rival ^aw'captain also known as 
Aed (aed—‘€xe). In tales recorded in the modern period, Balor, 
Lug’s maternal grandfather, is responsible for the death of Lug’s 
father, and he also threatens to burn Ireland with his evil eye. 
It appears that in all three cycle of stories the hero has to defeat 
an antagonist whose one eye and destructive character appear 
to connect him with the Fomoire, the representatives of chaos. 
In the Ulster Cycle the theme occurs in the story of the slaying 
of Goll and Garb.f

* ‘BlacLhair’.* ‘BlacLhair’.

** ‘One/eye’.

t P-57-

Branches of the TraMon 67

The fact that the fana are warriors links their lore with the 
Ulster stories, but their close relations with the r/Wwellers, and 
Finn’s role as a poet and diviner, seem to connect them with 
the Mythological Cycle, There is a correspondence between 
Finn’s name and that of the Welsh Gwyn ap Nudd, who is 
likewise a warrior and a hunter, and Gwyn is the king of 
Annwfn, the king of fairy.®* But in the same way as the warrior^' 
ship of the fana is on a lower plane than that of the Ulster 
heroes, Finn’s divination is on a lower plane than the wizardry 
of the Mythological Cycle. As to the character of the f ana's 
hunting and their delight in the chase, comparison has been 
suggested with the hunting on foot and with dogs which is 
still popular among the small farmers and townsmen of certain 
districts of modern Ireland.®®There is evidence from about the eleventh century that the 
Fenian tales were even then a part of popular tradition,®® and 
they have been cherished by the countrymen of Ireland and 
Scotland down to our own day. On the other hand, while 
references dating from the eighth century or earlier show that 
some of these tales were known also to the literate classes, and 
while there are references in the Middle Ages to differences 
between folk and learned versions of the same tales, it seems 
that this branch of the tradition hardly formed part of the 
repertoire of the learned fiUd. In a twelfth^century list of more 
than nine score tales which the f lid were expected to know, 
only five belong to the Fenian Cycle.®^ Again, whereas the 
extant text of Tain B 6 Cmilnge is apparently based on an 
earlier ninth/century written version, and the story may well 
have been in writing before the end of the seventh century, the 
most comprehensive text of the Fenian Cycle does not appear 
until the end of the twelfth century. This is Acallatn na SenSrach, 
‘The Colloquy of the Ancients’,®® a long rambling narrative 
in which Cailte recounts to St Patrick and others of his period 
the adventures of the fana in war and the chase, adventures 
which were associated with the hills and woods and lakes they 
see as they make their way over the face of Ireland. From the

68

Celtic Heritage

twelfth century on, the stream of Fenian literature flows 
strongly. On the other hand, the great period of the Ulster 
stories was nearly over, and it seems that very few of them were 
ever included in the repertoire of the storytellers of the ordinary 
people.The Fenian Cycle differs also in form and temper from the 
other cycles. It comes into prominence in the period of the 
poetry of the troubadour and the trouvere and the Arthurian 
romances of Europe. Its greatest story tells of an elopement — 
‘The Pursuit of Diarmaid and Grainne’ — ^which we shall dis^ 
cuss in a later chapter.* The characteristic form of this branch 
of the literature (from the twelfth century onwards) is the 
speech/poem or ballad, usually ‘spoken’ by Oisin or Cailte 
or Finn, and often giving expression to a delight in the sights 
and sounds familiar to those who live an outdoor life in the 
waste and the wild and the woods. The following is a trans^ 
lation of one of the poems in the ‘Colloquy’:*®

‘Arran of the many stags, the sea reaches to its shoulder; 
island where companies were fed, ridges where blue spears 
are reddened.

‘Skittish deer upon its peaks, ripe cranberries on its 
heaths, cold water in its streams, mast upon its brown oaks.

‘Greyhounds there, and beagles, blackberries and sloes 
of the blackthorn; its dwellings close against the woods, 
stags scattered about its oak^-groves.

‘Gathering of purple lichen upon its rocks, grass with/ 
out blemish on its slopes, a pleasant covering over its 
crags; gambolling of fawns, trout leaping.

‘Smooth is its clearing, fat its swine, pleasant its fields, a 
tale that may be believed; its nuts on the tops of its hazel/ 
wood, sailing of long ships past it.

‘It is delightful when the fair weather comes, trout under 
the brinks of its streams, seagulls answer each other round 
its white cliff; delightful at all times is Arran.’

* Page 281.

Branches of the Tradition 69

In the Ulster Cycle, the only poems that are comparable are 
uttered by a woman whose lover is doomed.^®®* Page 281.

Branches of the Tradition 69

In the Ulster Cycle, the only poems that are comparable are 
uttered by a woman whose lover is doomed.^®®

Whereas the Ulster Cycle is characteristically heroic, the 
Fenian Cycle is characteristically romantic. In the ‘Colloquy*, 
for example, everything is tinged with the gentle regret aroused 
by the remembrance of things past, the cherished memories of a 
happy life in which one has shared. Thus the three great Irish 
Cycles between them figure forth the classic triad of faculties: 
thinking, willing, and feeling. Whereas the Mythological 
Cycle features intelligence and knowledge, and the Ulster 
Cycle wilhpower, the distinctive quality of the Fenian tales 
is ‘human warmth of feeling’.^®^

6

We have seen that Tuatha De Danann, the dominant people 
in the Irish Mythological Cycle, are paralleled by the Children 
of Don in the Welsh Mahino^i. The names of some of the indi-” 
vidual personages in the two literatures correspond, and also 
there are broad similarities between some of the stories on either 
side. There is no correspondence in name between the warriors 
of King Conchobar and any Welsh heroes, and there is no 
group of Welsh stories which invites close comparison with the 
Ulster Cycle. The cycle of poems associated with the name of 
Llywarch Hen, like Tain Bo Cuailn^e, tells of lonely vigils at 
fords and border battles fought in defence of the country or pro^ 
vince. Moreover, the milieu and the standards revealed in these 
poems, as also in the panegyrics and elegies attributed to 
Taliesin and Aneirin, are thoroughly heroic. But the prose 
narrative which may once have provided the framework to 
the Llywarch speecbz-poems is now lacking, and the elegiac 
tone of the poems themselves, and their close relationship with 
certain descriptive and gnomic nature poems, have prompted 
comparison with the Fenian poems of Ireland rather than with 
the Ulster stories.^

70

Celtic Heritage70

Celtic Heritage

Several scholars have remarked on similarities to be observed 
between the Fenian stories and the Arthurian stories.^®^ In one 
of the earliest references to Arthur, namely that of Nennius’, 
Historia Brittomm, about the beginning of the ninth century,^®* 
he is described as dux bellorum, ‘war leader’ or ‘leader of troops’, 
a title which, as van Hamel remarks, ‘would make a very 
satisfactory equivalent for rtgjiimid, the Irish title of Finn’.^®® 
Like Finn, Arthur is here a warrior who defends his country 
gainst foreign invaders. In the mirahilia or Wonders of Britain 
(which are included in the same book), and also in ‘Kulhwch 
and Olwen’ which was probably written earlier than any other 
extensive Arthurian story, he figures as the hunter of a boar, 
Twrch Trwyd (or Trwyth),*^®® According to the latter text 
this hunt, the greatest of several mentioned in the story, began 
in Ireland, where the boar had already lain waste a third of the 
country, and the chase was continued through South Wales 
and into Cornwall. It required the co/operation of Arthur, his 
huntsmen, his house/troop, Mabon son of Modron,^®’ Gwyn 
son of Nudd** (in whom God has set the spirit of the demons 
of Annwfn), the sonof AlunDyfed, and several other notables. 
Twrch Trwyth, a king transformed into a boar (according to 
this story), figures also in early Irish literature. In Lehor Gahdla 
Erem, Tore Triathf is described as the King of Boars. A 
story dated to the ninth century or earlier mentions an assembly 
or fair known as oemch Tuirc Thriith,\\ and in Cormac’s 
Glossary the name t is interpreted as ‘the assembly of a king’s 
son’.^®® This explanation is immediately followed by the only 
long anecdote concerning Finn to be found in the whole 
Glossary, and it has been suggested^®* that the reference to the 
assembly brought memories of Finn to the compiler’s mind. In 
any case, boar hunts have a prominent place in the Fenian

^ porcum troit; twrch trwyth,^ porcum troit; twrch trwyth,

** V. supra^ p. <57.

^ Twrch Trwyd mi Tore Trkth dxe,cqmvdtntiotms, 
ft ‘The Assembly of Tore Triath {or of the dzirkthy,

f With instead of the synonymous iofG

Branches of the Tradition 71

literature. An account of a great boar^hunt in which all the 
fana of Ireland took part is the prelude to the story of Finn’s 
death, and Diarmaid’s destiny is bound up with the life of a 
magic boar whose human origin and venomous bristles recall 
Twrch Trwyth.^^®The brief references to Arthur in the work of Nennius and 
in several early Welsh poems show that he was a figure of 
renown in Welsh tradition at least from the eighth century, 
but as in the case of the Fenian tradition, which is likewise 
known from the earliest period of Irish literature, the extensive 
literary texts of the Arthurian Cycle date from the twelfth 
century and the Arthurian legend then becomes the dominant 
story tradition, a tradition which draws mythological person/ 
ages from all types of story into King Arthur’s entourage. We 
have referred to evidence from about the eleventh century that 
the stories of Finn were even then current among the common 
people and that these popular versions differed from those of 
the learned literary tradition. Similarly, learned writers of the 
early twelfth century in Britain refer to the stories of the common 
people concerning Arthur and object to what they regard as 
their distortion of the truth.^^^ In Wales, Cornwall, and 
Britanny, at this period, there was a firm popular belief that 
Arthur was not dead but would return to deliver his people 
from their enemies.^ In the early Welsh poems and in 
‘Kulhwch and Olwen’, Arthur (Hke Finn) fights witches, 
giants, magic animals, and the powers of Annwfn, while in 
twelfih/century folkloristic texts he is himself the king of a 
subterranean country.^^® Like the Fenian heroes in the *Col/ 
loquy’ and in modern folklore, the Arthurian knights in ‘The 
Dream of Rhonabwy’^^* make their latter/day successors 
appear as a ‘lesser breed’, and again in the topographical lore 
of the modern period Arthur is envisaged as a gigantic figure.

If the tales of Finn and his companions were destined, 
through the works of Macpherson, to give Celtic literature a 
European renown in the period of the modern Romantic 
Movement, the Arthurian tales, the matiere de Bretagne, heczme

72 Celtic Heritage72 Celtic Heritage

the staple of the romantic literature of Europe in the high 
Middle Ages. ‘The Pursuit of Diarmaid and Grainne’ is 
paralleled by the still more famous Arthurian story of Trystan 
and Esyllt,* and in the other Arthurian romances the explora-- 
tion of sentiment and the celebration of courtly love are seen 
to have become the chief concern of European poets and 
stor3rtellers. Like the adventures of the Irish fana, those of the 
Arthurian knights have as their setting the forest, the wild, 
and the desert, together with the mysterious dwellings where 
the knights are received as guests. It is true the knight travels 
alone, he fights in single combats and is typically a horseman, 
and one hesitates to press the correspondence too far. But it may 
be pointed out that the knight’s investiture is nowadays traced 
back to the initiation rite by which a youth took up arms and, 
leaving his family, began his military apprenticeship^^® — ^the 
earliest meanings of the English word knight are ‘boy’ ‘youth’ 
‘military servant’ — and that the knight of the shire is the tradi-- 
tional representative of the Commons, the third estate.

However, the precise extent of the Welsh, or Celtic, element 
in the vast Arthurian literature of Europe is still a highly con^ 
troversial question. The true relation of three of the major 
Arthurian tales in Welsh, ‘The Lady of the Fountain’, ‘Pere-' 
dur son of Evrawc’ and ‘Gereint son ofErbin’, to three of the 
narrative poems of the twelfih-'century French poet, Chretien 
de Troyes, is likewise problematic.^^® We have not excluded 
these three tales completely from our purview, but we do not 
attempt to comment on Arthurian texts written in Germanic 
and Romance languages, or on Welsh texts which are clearly 
derived from them, even though the origin of much of their 
content, and indeed of their mystery, is perhaps to be sought in 
the lore of the Celtic countries.

* See p. 283.

73

Branches of the Tradition 
7* See p. 283.

73

Branches of the Tradition 
7

The Irish tales nowadays classified as the Historical Cycle, or 
the Cycles of the Kings, are in general less magical than the 
Mythological Tales, less heroic than the Ulster Tales, less 
romantic than the Fenian. Though these qualities are by no 
means absent, none of them may be said to be the distinguish-' 
ing feature of this extensive group of tales. These tales are not 
only about kings, but about kingship, the founding of dynas-' 
ties, dynastic succession, and the fortunes of the royal houses of 
Ireland and her provinces. Stories about several of the re-' 
nowned kings who figure in these cycles, from Conaire Mor 
to Conn of the Hundred Battles, Cormac mac Airt, Niall of 
the Nine Hostages, and Domnall son of Aed, will be told in 
later portions of this book. For the present we shall confine our 
attention to tales which are concerned with the nature of king' 
ship as a marriage between the king and the realm.^^'^In their youth, Niall (of the Nine Hostages) and his four 
step'brothers, Brian, Fiachra, Ailill, and Fergus, were given 
weapons by a smith and sent hunting to prove their arms. 
After losing their way in the forest, the youths lit a fire to cook 
the game they had killed, and Fergus was sent in search of 
drinking'water. He came to a well guarded by a monstrous 
black hag who would grant him the use of the well only on 
condition that he gave her a kiss. The lad refused and returned 
without water. Each of his three brothers in turn went on the 
same errand, but only Fiachra deigned to give the hag a ‘bare 
touch of a kiss’. For that she promised him a ‘mere contact 
with Tara’ — meaning that two of his seed (but none of the 
descendants of the other three brothers) would be kings. 
Then it was Niall’s turn. Faced with the same challenge, he 
kissed the old hag and embraced her. When he looked again, 
she had changed into the most beautiful woman in the world. 
‘What art thou?’ said the boy. ‘King of Tara, I am Sovereignty,’ 
‘. . . and your seed shall be over every clan.’ She sent him back 
to his brothers but bade him give them no water until they had

74 Celtic Heritage

granted him seniority over them and had agreed that he might 
raise his weapon a hand’s breath over theirs.74 Celtic Heritage

granted him seniority over them and had agreed that he might 
raise his weapon a hand’s breath over theirs.

Sovereignty presents herself as a loathsome hag, and is trans/ 
formed into a fair lady by the embrace of the destined king, in 
the story of another five brothers, sons of King Daire — and the 
same motif recurs in English and French romances. It had 
been foretold that a son of Daire’s would obtain the kingship 
of Ireland and that ‘Lugaid’ would be his name. Daire gave 
the name to each of his five sons, but a druid told him that his 
successor would be the one who would catch a golden fawn 
which would enter the assembly.^^® When the fawn was 
hunted, a magic mist was set between the five brothers and 
everyone else. It was Lugaid Laigde who caught the fawn, and 
it is he who entered the bed of the hag who was revealed as 
Sovereignty.The relation between Irish kings and their realm is often 
portrayed as a marriage, and the inauguration feast of a king is 
called a wedding/feast. The country is a woman, the spouse of 
the king, and before her marriage she is a hag or a woman 
whose mind is deranged. When she is united with the king, 
her countenance is ‘as the crimson lichen of Leinster’s crags . . . 
her locks . . . like Bregon’s buttercups’, her mantle a matchless 
green.^^® In later literature she is described as a courtesan, and 
she has been compared with the Roman Acca Larentia, a 
courtesan who endowed Rome with her earnings, and with 
Flora whose name was also Rome’s.^®" A union between the 
king and the goddess of the land was an essential part of the 
royal ritual in ancient civilizations of the Near East — and 
sacred prostitution belongs to the same complex of ideas. 
According to a Sumerian hymn of the second millennium 
B.C., the marriage of the king with the goddess Innana, ‘the 
Lady of the Palace’, was consummated ‘at the New Year, on 
the day of decisions’, in the bed/chamber of a chapel built for 
the goddess.^®^

There are indications that Queen Medb of Connacht was an 
embodiment of Sovereignty. A daughter of a king of Tara, she

Branches of the Tradition 75There are indications that Queen Medb of Connacht was an 
embodiment of Sovereignty. A daughter of a king of Tara, she

Branches of the Tradition 75

is said to have been married to King Conchobar, but ‘through 
pride of mind’ she forsook him against his will. Thereafter 
she mated successively with Tinde son of Connra Cas, with 
Eochaid Dala and with Ailill mac Mata, each of whom be/ 
came king of Connacht. She was sought by other suitors too, 
for she ‘never was without one man in the shadow of another’. 
It is said that Eochaid Dala was appointed king ‘with the con/ 
sent of Medb if he became her husband’. Irish tradition also 
tells of another Medb, the Leinster Queen Medb Lethderg,* 
daughter of Conan of Cuala. She was the wife of nine of the 
kings of Ireland in succession, including Conn’s father, his 
son Art, and Cormac son of Art, ‘Great indeed was the power 
of Medb over the men of Ireland, for she it was who would not 
allow a king in Tara without his having herself as a wife.’ So 
when Art died, ‘until Medb mated with the son, Cormac 
was not king of Ireland’.’^^^Both Krappe and Coomaraswamy have identified the 
Sovereignty of Ireland with the Indian goddess §ri/Laksmi 
who is ‘the personification of the right to rule . . . (the) Spirit 
of Sovereignty . . , and certainly so when the relationship is 
... a marital one’.^^® She is Indra’s consort, and she has many 
names. As Apala, the ‘Unprotected’, she woos Indra, bring/ 
ing as her sacrificial offering Soma, the drink ‘of which none 
tastes who dwells on earth’. This she prepares by chewing. 
And Indra ‘verily drank the Soma from her mouth’.^®* Here 
we have another quality of the goddess. Medb’s name is cog/ 
nate with the Welsh meddw, ‘drunJc’, and related to the English 
word mead. She is ‘the intoxicating one’. Medb Lethderg was 
the daughter of Condn of Cuala, and an old poem says that 
no one will be king over Ireland ‘unless the ale of Cuala comes 
to him’.^®® Referring to the water she gives Niall from the well. 
Sovereignty says: ‘smooth shall by thy draught from the royal 
horn, ’twill be mead, ’twill be honey, ’twill be strong ale.’^®® 
In a story to which we shall refer again. Conn is confronted

* 'Half/red' or ‘Rcd.side’.

7<5 Celtic Heritage

with Sovereignty in a vision. This time the king does not mate 
with_ her, but she serves him with food and with a drink called 
dergjlaith, a name which can mean both ‘red ale’ and ‘red 
sovereignty’. She then continues to ‘give’ the cup to a long 
line of future kings whose names and reigns are announced by 
her consort, Lug son of Ethniu, Sovereignty is a bride, the 
server of a powerful drink, and the drink itself.

88

We shall not concern ourselves in this book with the extensive 
body of literature called the ‘Lives of the Saints’, though some 
individual saints figure as characters in certain stories of the 
Fenian and Historical Cycles. The role played by the saints 
in these stories and in the Lives themselves, as scholars, judges, 
prophets, and controllers of nature and fertility, is comparable 
in many ways with that of the pre/Christian druids, while they 
are peers of the Tuatha De Danann as masters of wizardry. 
The legendary material in the Lives has much in common with 
that of the other Cycles, but it contains elements for which 
there are no native or biblical parallels. Comparative study will 
probably show that these owe less to monkish fabrication than 
has often been supposed. Here we will content ourselves with 
one illustration taken from the Irish Life of St Moling.^

At the end of his period of instruction for the priesthood, 
Tairchell (who was later called Moling) requested a boon from 
his fosterer, namely that he be allowed to go on a circuit, to 
collect alms for the Church. As he proceeded along the road, 
bearing two wallets and a bowl for the alms, and his fosterer’s 
ashen staff in Ids hand, he met ‘the Evil Spectre’ with his mis^ 
shapen household. The Spectre grasped his weapons and 
entered into a dialogue with the saint, in which each threatened 
to destroy the other: ‘I will drive this spear through thy side,’ 
said the Spectre. ‘By my fosterer’s hand, I will rap thy head 
with the staff,’ said Tairchell. The saint then requested a boon 
from the spectres: ‘to let me have my three steps of pilgrimage

Branchei of the Tradition 77Branchei of the Tradition 77

towards the King of heaven and earth, and my three steps of 
folly also, so that death may be the further from me.’ The boon 
was granted and he leapt his three steps of pilgrimage and his 
three steps of folly. ‘The first leap that he leapt, he seemed to 
them no bigger than a crow on the top of a hill. The second 
leap that he leapt, they saw him not at all, and they knew not 
whether he had gone into heaven or into the earth. But the 
third leap that he leapt, ’tis then he alighted on the wall of the 
church^enclosure.’ The spectres pursued him, but he escaped 
into the church. Collanach, the priest, recognized him as the 
prophesied one and said: ‘Thou wilt be (called) Moling of 
Luachair from the leaps* thou hast leapt.’

In Irish tradition St Moling figures as the friend of another 
celebrated leaper, the mad Suibne Geilt, who, resorting to the 
woods, grew feathers and so could jump from tree to tree and 
from hilhtop to hilhtop — an Irish counterpart of the Welsh 
Myrddin Wyllt.^^® But for a parallel to the tale we have just 
told we must turn to the contest between Vishnu, one of the 
three supreme gods of Hinduism, and the demon Bah son of 
Virocana. This is the version related in the Ramaya^a:Bali, who had overcome Indra, Lord of Gods, em 
joyed the empire of the three worlds, and he was cele.' 
bracing a sacrifice when Indra and the other gods, dis^ 
tressed with fear, spoke to the great ascetic Vishnu who was 
engaged in mortification and contemplation in ‘The 
Hermitage of the Perfect’. “‘Bah, son of Virocana”, 
they said, ‘‘is performing a sacrifice. . . . Do thou, O 
Vishnu, for the benefit of the gods resort to a phan-' 
tom shape and assuming the form of a dwarf bring 
about our highest welfare . . .” Thus addressed by the 
gods, Vishnu, adopting a dwarfish form, approached 
the son of Virocana and begged three of his own paces. 
Having obtained three paces Vishnu took a monstrous 
form and with three steps the Thrice/stepper then gained

* leap.

78 Celtic Heritage

possession of the worlds. With one step he occupied the 
whole earth, with the second the eternal atmosphere, 
with the third the sky. ... He made that demon Bali a 
dweller in the underworld and gave the empire of the 
three worlds to Indra . .

The predicament of the gods at the beginning of the Hindu 
story, which reproduces that of the Tuatha before the Second 
Battle of Mag Tuired, has no counterpart in the MoUng story. 
Otherwise, the parallelism is welknigh complete.^®®

MOLING

VISHNU

1 A candidate for the priest/ 
hood practising austerities.

2 He is collecting alms for the 
Church.

3 He is armed with a staff of 
ash — a wood used to keep 
demons at bay.

4 His contest with the Evil 
Spectre.

5 Three steps granted readily.

6 The prodigious three leaps.

7 He is named Moling for his 
leaps.

1 A hermit perfecting himself 
in a hermitage.

2 The contest is such as ‘is 
engaged when a man offers 
the fore/offerings’.

3 He is armed with a ‘thun/ 
derbolt’ (a ritual term for 
anything used to destroy 
spiritual enemies).

4 His contest with the king of 
the demons.

5 Three paces granted.

6 The prodigious three paces.

7 He is called the Thrice/ 
stepper.4 His contest with the king of 
the demons.

5 Three paces granted.

6 The prodigious three paces.

7 He is called the Thrice/ 
stepper.

In the Life of Moling this episode could be dismissed as a 
mere story illustrating the superiority of sanctity over evil, and 
it is as a story that it is told of Vishnu in the Kmayatia. But 
A. M. Hocart has demonstrated that it has antecedents of the 
profoundest spiritual significance. Here is some of the evidence 
he adduces.^®^ In the ^atapatha Brabmaifa, which is vastly 
older than the Rmayam, the story takes a different form. The 
gods (Devas) and the demons* (Asuras), both descended from

* Or counter/gods.

79

Branches af the Tradition

Prajapati, vied together. The gods were worsted, and the 
demons proceeded to divide the world between them. When 
the gods, placing Vishnu, the sacrifice, at their head, approached 
the demons and asked for a share, they were grudgingly granted 
‘as much as this Vishnu can lie upon’. Though Vishnu was 
dwarfish, the gods were not offended: ‘They have given us 
much who have given us the extent covered by the sacrifice,’ 
they said. ‘They laid Vishnu down and surrounded him on 
all sides with poetic metres . . . and having piled up fire on the 
east they went on singing hymns and practising austerities and 
since by this means they acquired the whole earth . . . hence 
the name vedi for an altar. Hence the saying, “As great as the 
altar, thus great is the earth,” for by the altar they obtained the 
whole earth. Thus he who so knows this appropriates this 
whole earth from his rivals, deprives his rivals of a share in it.’When the fore/offerings are offered, the sacrificer bears a pan 
containing the sacred fire, which is Vishnu. He then ‘strides 
Vishnu’s strides’ — ^the sacrificer becomes the sacrifice and pos/ 
sesses the worlds. The story, and no doubt the ritual too, is as 
old as the Ri£ Veda: ‘Indravishnu [sacrificer/sacrifice], this deed 
of yours is to be praised, in the intoxication of soma you took 
vast strides . . . you extended the regions of the air that we might 
live.’ ‘Friend Vishnu, stride vastly. Sky give room to fix the 
thunderbolt. Let us slay Vrtra; let us release the streams.’ ‘The 
highest step of Vishnu the sacrificers ever behold like an eye 
fixed in heaven. The poets rejoicing, wakeful, kindle that which 
is the highest step of Vishnu,’^®®

If the simple story of Moling is connerted with all this, 
there is no doubt a similar wealth of meaning behind such 
incidents as the lighting of the sacred fire by St David at Glyn 
Rhosyn and the ritualistic strategems by which his wizard 
opponent tried in vain to resist him.^®* Similarly, the great 
contest between St Patrick and the druids of Tara, in which 
the saint forestalls the druids in lighting the sacred fire and 
defeats them in a series of magical competitions by which he 
demonstrates his superior command over the worlds of light

8o

Celtic Heritage

and darkness, fire and water.^®* Here the pre-Christian druids 
have become the powers of evil, and the saint has usurped 
their role, but the story may well be an adaptation of an original 
in which druids and demons vied with one another for pos- 
session of the world. Without the aid of parallels we cannot 
penetrate behind these tales, but they appear to bring us as 
near as we shall ever get to some of the mysteries of the Celtic 
druids.

Fig. I Sketch-map of Ireland

CHAPTER III

Darkness and Light

. . . and God divided the light from the darkness. And God called 
the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.

GENESIS, I, 4-5.Fig. I Sketch-map of Ireland

CHAPTER III

Darkness and Light

. . . and God divided the light from the darkness. And God called 
the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.

GENESIS, I, 4-5.

The alternation of day and night, light and darkness, had a 
profound meaning for the Celts as it did for many other 
peoples. It manifested a fundamental duality which had a 
variety of other expressions. Even now the dead of night is 
felt to be nearer to the Other World than is the light of day, 
A person born during the night can see ghosts and phantoms 
which are invisible to the children of day.^ Fairies and other 
spirits become active after sunset; night, in a very real sense, 
belongs to them, and it is fitting that mortals should with/- 
draw to the security of their own firesides. In Ireland, country 
people still say it is inappropriate for persons to be out at all 
hours of the night. Such wanderers might disturb the ‘Httle 
people’, and they run the risk of recognizing among them the 
spirits of dead relations. The country people also doubt the 
propriety of staying up late at night, because the dead approach 
the house silently every hour between ten and twelve o’clock in 
the hope of finding that all is quiet, and the way to show them 
respect is to retire early, leaving the hearth swept and the seats 
arranged for them around a well/made fire. Throwing out 
water or ashes at night is prohibited, lest the spirits be disturbed, 
and it is dangerous to whisde out-of-doors or to call children 
by their names. As dawn dispels darkness, so does the crowing 
of cocks send the spirits and elves to their abodes — ^night seems

83

84 Celtic Heritage

to be their day and day their night.^ Given this atmosphere of 
belief, it is small wonder that night is the propitious time for 
divination, witchcraft, wakes for the dead, and the telling of 
supernatural tales.As the day consists of two halves, so does the year consist of 
summer and winter.® The first of May is the Calends of sum/ 
mer, the first of November the Calends of winter, and these two 
festivals divide the year into two seasons of six months each. 
Summer is the period when nature is awake, and when young 
people used to leave the winter homestead to spend their time 
in summer dwellings, tending their herds on the hills and in/ 
dulging in outdoor pastimes. By November Eve (Samain), they 
returned again to the old home and spent the winter nights 
plying their fireside crafts, listening to fireside stories and enter/ 
taining themselves indoors. The Fiana likewise used to spend 
the summer season, from Beltaine (First of May) to Samain, 
hunting and fighting in the forests, but from Samain to Beltaine 
they quartered themselves upon the settled population. Winter 
is the dark side of the year, nature is asleep, summer has re/ 
turned to the underworld and the earth is desolate and in/ 
hospitable.* In Wales, January was called ‘the black month*. 
November, the first month of winter, was known as the dark 
or black month in Scotland, Cornwall, and Brittany, and 
the Scots referred to the depths of winter as an DMlachd, 
‘gloom’.® It was the season of ‘death revels’ presided over by a 
‘king’ with a blackened face, whose emblem of office was a 
sword, a scythe, or a sickle.®

Time as it manifests itself in this way consists of the alter/ 
nation of opposites, light and darkness, warmth and cold, life 
and death. The Coligny Calendar (a Gaulish calendar en/ 
graved on a bronze tablet which was unearthed in France in 
1897) bears witness to a still more thorough/going application 
of this dual principle to the measurement of months and years. 
While most of it is inscribed in abbreviations which cannot be 
interpreted with any certainty, its basic structure is quite clear. 
It covers five years— a significant period in view of Diodorus’s

Darkness md Li£ht 85Darkness md Li£ht 85

testimony that the continental Celts held quinquennial sacri/' 
fices. The five years consist of sixty months plus two inter-- 
calary months, one at the beginning of the cycle and another 
in the middle. The second intercalary month thus divides the 
cycle into two moieties oftwo^and-'a/half years each. The whole 
cycle is inscribed in sixteen columns as is shown in Fig. 2. 
The Gaulish names of the months have been inserted and each 
column should be read downwards.It will be observed that the first half of the year begins with 
a month called SamoH'', and the second half with a month 
called Gtamony, two words which are related to the words for 
‘summer’ and ‘winter’, respectively, in the surviving Celtic 
languages. In accordance with this, early interpreters of the 
calendar concluded that Samon' was the mid/summer month 
and Giamon' the mid/winter month.’ Alternatively, it might 
be argued that Samony and Giamony are the first months of 
summer and winter, respectively, corresponding roughly with 
May and November, the two turning points of the traditional 
Celtic year. Other considerations, however, suggest a complete 
reversal of this order.® In Ireland, though sam means ‘summer’, 
Samain (cf. Samony) is, strangely enough, November Eve, the 
beginning of the winter half-year — the season of storytelling 
and feasting, and in Christian times the season to which most 
of the major church festivals belong. The Coligny Calendar, 
like the Church Calendar, was ‘a timetable of ritual’, and the 
fact that most of the rubrics believed to indicate festivals are 
concentrated in the first half of the year suggests that winter 
preceded summer, that Samony is, paradoxically, the first month 
of winter and Giamony the first month of summer. Such an 
arrangement of the seasons would harmonize with Caesar’s 
testimony concerning the precedence of night over day. The 
Gauls, he says, called themselves sons of the god of night and 
defined ‘the division of every season, not by the number of days, 
but of nights; their birthdays and the beginning of months 
and years they observe in such order that day follows night.’® 
The order of the seasons does not seriously concern us here.

86

Celtic Heritage

fPRIN-

MAT

WAMON'

ANM

CAHT105

AMM

SIMMS-

ONK-

CAHTLOS

AKM

SIM1V15-

OHM-

MAT

AdVOS

AKM86

Celtic Heritage

fPRIN-

MAT

WAMON'

ANM

CAHT105

AMM

SIMMS-

ONK-

CAHTLOS

AKM

SIM1V15-

OHM-

MAT

AdVOS

AKM

but to facilitate description we shall assume that the year and 
the first half of the five-'year cycle began with winter, while the 
second half-cycle began with summer.

Again, the months of the year were of two kinds. Six of them 
had thirty days and are distinguished by the rubric MAT; 
the other six had only twenty/nine days and are inscribed 
ANM.^^ MAX'- (cf. Irish maith and Welsh mad) probably 
meant ‘good’, whereas ANM seems to be an abbreviation of 
AN MAT', ‘not good’. We may compare the Athenian 
calendar in which thirty/day months were ‘full months’, 
twenty^nine/day months ‘hollow months’. In south-'cast Asia 
these two kinds of months, called ‘complete’ and ‘defective’ 
respectively, alternated in a regular sequence.^^ The MAT and 
ANM months of the Coligny Calendar are also interspersed 
except for one adjustment. If the sequence had been preserved 
throughout, both Samott' and Giamotu would be MAT 
months of thirty days, but there seems to have been a deliberate 
rearrangement so that the first half of each year — ^the ritually 
important half— and the first half of the cycle as a whole, 
should begin and end with a MA T month, and that the second

Fig. 2 The Sttucture of the Coligny Calendar

Celtic Heritage

87

EQVOS

BHi

mwi

— 1

EQVOS

:;SAM0N?.

EQVOS

.•.■mtm'th):-

ANM

ivlMAT/.V

ANM

:;;MAt;'-;

■yMr::-:

ANM

Kffl

R19

1^23^

EEHBJV-

ANM

•;;;matI-;-

ANM

••.vMAT'.v:

ANM

(JUMOK*

£DRTN*

•••.RIVROS-

eiAMON*

EDRIN-

•IWRDSV

GIAMON*

EDRJN-

ANM

MAT

ANM

MAT

•:-:MAt:y.

ANM

MAT

CANUOS

ANXWli-

SIMIVIS-

CANUOS

•ANAOANfr

SIMIVIS-

CANUOS

m/Em

■'.••.■•.•■.TJOsd

ONN-

.■•.••ynos;-.

ONH*

QQQH

ANM

MAT

ANM.

::‘ANMv;;

MAT

ANMANM

MAT

ANM

MAT

•:-:MAt:y.

ANM

MAT

CANUOS

ANXWli-

SIMIVIS-

CANUOS

•ANAOANfr

SIMIVIS-

CANUOS

m/Em

■'.••.■•.•■.TJOsd

ONN-

.■•.••ynos;-.

ONH*

QQQH

ANM

MAT

ANM.

::‘ANMv;;

MAT

ANM

halves of both years and cycle should begin and end with an 
ANM month. Excluding the intercalary months, both halves 
of the cycle consist of thirty months, a ‘month of months’, 
and on the analogy of the months they are of two kinds, 
MAT md ANM.

The same pattern appears also in the structure of the months 
themselves. Each is made up of two parts, in the first of which 
the days are numbered up to fifteen and in the second up to 
fourteen or fifteen according to the length of the month. As in 
Indian and other calendars, one half is doubtless the ‘bright 
half’ of the lunar month, the other the ‘dark half’, but as with 
the seasons it is difficult to decide which is which. In between 
the halves is inscribed the word ATENVX which is inter-- 
preted either as ‘renewal’ or as ‘the returning night’. The 
former interpretation could be consistent with the principle 
recorded by Caesar. On the other hand, Pliny says that the 
druids used to begin their months on the sixth of the moon,^® 
and if they reckoned from the new moon this would mean 
beginning with the light half. In India, however, the month 
began with the bright half in the south and with the dark half

88

Celtic Heritage

in the north.^® By analogy, it is not inconceivable that even the 
year and the cycle should have begun with winter in one half 
of a country and with summer in the other. With reference to 
principle both concepts are equally valid. Equated with the 
primordial chaos that precedes the creation of the cosmos, and 
with gestation which precedes birth, darkness comes first, 
but as a symbol of death and dissolution it follows at the end 
of the day.

We may now summarize our pairs of contraries:

Night

and

Day

Dark half of month

and

Light half of month

MAT month

and

ANM monthWe may now summarize our pairs of contraries:

Night

and

Day

Dark half of month

and

Light half of month

MAT month

and

ANM month

Winter

and

Summer

5(jmo«/half of cycle

and

GiamowhzK of cycle

Each half/cycle consisted of five 
winters, the other three summers:

seasons; the one had three

A. Winter: Summer: Winter: Summer: Winter

B. Summer: Winter: Summer: Winter: Summer

The symbolic meaning of Day and Night as the microcosm 
of time, and indeed of the ‘whole world’, could not be stated 
more explicitly than it is in a story preserved in the Book of 
Leinster.^* After the Dagda had apportioned all the sii'' 
mounds of Ireland between the lords of Tuatha De Danann, 
the Mac Oc came to him and asked for land. ‘I have none for 
thee,’ said the Dagda, ‘I have completed the division.’ ‘Then 
let me be granted,’ said the Mac Oc, ‘a day and a night in thy 
own dwelling.’ That was given to him. ‘Go now to thy fol-- 
lowing,’ said the Dagda, ‘since thou hast consumed thy 
(allotted) time.’ ‘It is clear,’ said the Mac Oc, ‘that night and 
day are the whole world, and it is that which has been given to 
me.’ Thereupon the Dagda went out, and the Mac 6c re/ 
mained in his sid. A variant of this story occurs in ‘The Woo/ 
ing of JEtain’, but there the meaning is less cryptically expressed. 
The Mac 6c claims Elcmar’s sid in perpetuity on the grounds 
that ‘it is in days and nights that the world is spent’. Similarly,

Darkness and Li^ht 89Darkness and Li^ht 89

Conchobar wrested the kingship of Ulster from Fergus mac 
Roich after being granted a year’s temporary kingship.^® The 
consolidation of his position is explained politically, but the 
logic of the ruse seems to be that it is ‘in summers and winters 
that the world is spent’. As we shall see later King Conchobar 
personified the Year in himself, and there are grounds for 
regarding the Mac Oc as a personification of the Day. He was 
called Mac (3c (‘Young Son’) by his mother because he was 
begotten and born all in one day which had been magically 
lengthened by the Dagda.^®

2

The dividing lines between the contrasting periods of time are 
haunted by a mysterious power which has a propensity both 
for good and for evil. Certain acts were forbidden at sunrise 
and at sunset because these were moments of danger; on the 
other hand, morning dew and morning water had a particular 
virtue, and cures could be effected by remedies sought at sun.' 
set.^^ This supernatural power breaks through in a most 
ominous way on November Eve and May Eve, the joints be/ 
tween the two great seasons of the year. These two Eves (to/ 
gether with Midsummer’s Eve) were known as ‘spirit nights’ 
in Wales,^® and throughout the Celtic lands chaos was as it 
were let loose at these two junctures, fairies were unusually active, 
witches worked their charms, and the future was foreshadowed 
by omens of all kinds. The customs of both Eves have features 
characteristic of New Year celebrations generally; for example, 
the practice of divinations and the re/lighting of household 
fires from a ceremonial bonfire. But in atmosphere the two 
festivals differed fundamentally in that they epitomized the 
contrasting seasons which they inaugurated.

Hallowe’en, the Calends of winter, was a solemn and weird 
festival. The s/d^mounds were open on this ‘pdca’ night, and 
their inhabitants were abroad in a more real sense than on any

90

:lii

Celtic Heritage90

:lii

Celtic Heritage

other night. The souls of the dead returned and became visible. 
In Ireland, until recently, people did not leave the house on 
this night unless obliged to do so, and if they did they kept 
clear of churchyards. They should not look behind when they 
heard footsteps, for it was the dead that were on their tracks.^® 
In Wales it was said that there was a phantom on every stile. 
Food, called bwyd cemad y meirw, was left out/of-doors to pro-- 
pitiate the wandering dead, doors were left unbolted, and 
special care was taken before going to bed to prepare the hearth 
for the visit of dead relatives.®®

In Scotland, it was a ‘night of mischief and confusion’,®^ 
and its eeriness was intensified by the impersonation of spirits 
of the dead by young men who went about with masked, 
veiled or blackened faces, and dressed in white or in disguises of 
straw. The boundary between the living and the dead was thus 
obliterated, and so was the separation of the sexes, for boys 
wore the clothing of girls and sometimes girls disguised them^ 
selves as boys. The general disorder was further intensified by 
mischievous pranks. Ploughs, carts, gates, and other belongs 
ings were borne away and thrown into ditches and ponds; 
horses were led away and left in other people’s fields. The peace 
of the household itself was disturbed: the door was bombarded 
with cabbages pulled at random from gardens, the chimney 
was blocked with turf, and smoke was blown in through 
keyholes.®®An extraordinarily wide variety of divinations were practised 
on Winter’s Eve to discover who would die during the 
course of the year, who would marry, and who the future 
partner would be. In Wales, anyone bold enough to wait in 
the church porch until midnight might hear a voice calling 
out the names of those who were to die during the year — but 
he ran the risk of hearing his own name among those of the 
doomed. Marriage divinations were a particular feature of this 
Eve, but even in these death lurked round the corner; there was 
always the danger of seeing a coffin instead of the face of the 
future partner. Hazeknuts and apples, the fruits of two trees

91

Darkness and Light

with rich otherworld associations, figured prominently in 
many of the divinatory pastimes.

A period of disorder in between the old year and the new is a 
common feature of New Year rituals in many lands,®® but it 
is soon followed by the re/creation of an orderly world which 
lasts for another year. At Hallowe’en the elimination of 
boundaries, between the dead and the living, between the 
sexes, between one man’s property and another’s and, in 
divinations, between the present and the future, all symbolize 
the return of chaos. It is noteworthy that the ‘day with a night’ 
which the Mac (3c, in the foregoing story, equated with the 
whole of time, were those of Samain. This day partakes of the 
nature of eternity. But, bonfires apart, the positive side of the 
ritual is not evident in the surviving customs. What Hallow/ 
e’en inaugurates is winter, and much of the uncanniness of 
the night, when man seems powerless in the hands of fate, 
will prevail until the dawn of another summer.Summer’s Eve, on the other hand, has a positive as well as 
a negative aspect. Fairies can work mischief and witches can 
bring misfortune by stealing the year’s profit from cattle and 
from wells, but the dangers of the night are different from the 
awful imminence of death experienced at Allhallowtide. This 
world is no longer swamped by the world beyond; one’s luck 
in the ensuing year may be in the balance, but one is not 
brought face to face with an unalterable destiny. And effective 
measures can be taken to ward off evil. One can keep watch to 
prevent witches from stealing the first milk and from skimming 
the well on May morn, and other precautions against the 
dangers of witchcraft can be taken by refusing to give away 
fire, water, and food. Branches of the rowan/tree, placed ovct 
the doors of house and byre, will keep away witches and fairies 
alike. Whereas folklore has litde to say about what one should 
do on the first day of November, the perils of May Eve are but 
a prelude to the joys of the first summer’s day: a climb up a hill 
to see the sunrise, washing in the morning dew, drinking from 
the well before sunrise, the gathering of leaves and flowers

92

Celtic Heritage

and the wearing of greenery instead of the straw of winter. It 
was the dawn of a new and orderly day, the sun rose early and 
so should men, and the ritual niggardliness and guarding of 
property on this day is in marked contrast to the free giving to 
the living and the dead, and the liberties taken with other 
people’s belongings, on Hallowe’en.

33

While the twofold structure was basic to the Celtic conception 
of time, other patterns, such as the fourfold division of the day 
into morning, afternoon, evening, and night, of the moon into 
quarters, and of the year into spring, summer, autumn and, 
winter,^* all had a meaning beyond the purely temporal one. 
And the moments at which the divisions joined partook in some 
degree of the significance attached to the great turning/points of 
the year. Midday and midnight, like sunrise and sunset, were 
moments when the veil between this world and the unseen 
world was very thin. Fairy funerals were to be seen at noon, 
and it was an auspicious moment for banishing fairy ‘change^ 
lings’. Midnight was the ‘witching hour’, fairies and phantoms 
became visible, and to visit a churchyard at this hour was a 
challenge to be reckoned with.

St Brigid’s Night (The Eve of the First of February) divided 
the winter half of the year into winter and spring; Lugnasad 
(Lammas, ist August) divided the summer half into summer 
and autumn. St Brigid’s Day, Imbolc, is the old festival of spring, 
and the Eve is still observed in Ireland with various rituals and 
divinations. Spring activities are over by the time May gives 
the trees their ‘green livery’. Summer ends in July, and Lug^ 
nasad, the first day of autumn, was a festival of firstdruits which 
used to rival Beltaine and Samain in importance. By Samain 
all the crops had been gathered in. Fruit left on the trees after 
this date was contaminated by the puca.^^ Thus the main 
divisions of the Celtic year were related to the annual round of 
agricultural life rather than to the movements of the sun, though

93

Darkness mi Li^ht

it is clear from the Coligny Calendar and from folklore that 
the solstices and equinoxes were also observed.93

Darkness mi Li^ht

it is clear from the Coligny Calendar and from folklore that 
the solstices and equinoxes were also observed.

In Scotland, Quarter-Days still fall in November, February, 
May and August, but various changes in the calendar during 
the course of the centuries have resulted in minor displacements, 
so that the actual dates are now November i ith, February and. 
May 15th and August ist. They are known as ‘Witches’ 
Days’, and fairies hold revels and raid helpless human beings 
on their Eves. It is said that the fairies remove to different 
dwellings at the beginning of each quarter. Lending is un- 
lucky as it is on May Day, rowan crosses are used as a protec- 
tion against supernatural dangers, and divinations are practised. 
Changelings can be got rid of on Quarter Days as they can at 
noon time, but it is unlucky to ‘straddle’ the beginning of a 
quarter — ^for example, by proclaiming a marriage at the end of 
one quarter and solemnizing it at the beginning of the next.®®The turning-points in time have a paradoxical quality 
everywhere. In one sense they do not exist; in another sense they 
epitomize the whole of existence. Their significance may be 
compared with that of the ‘Twelve Days of Christmas’ each 
of which prognosticates the weather of the corresponding 
month in the New Year. These twelve days were marked by 
mumming, buffoonery, licence, mock-mayors, witchcraft, and 
other signs of chaos. In Scotland, no court had any power 
during these days, and in Ireland those who died went to 
heaven without having to face Purgatory and Judgement.®'' 
In Wales they were called omen days (coeUddyMku) and in 
Brittany ‘over-days’ {gourdeziou).^^ It has been suggested that a 
period of twelve days between two mid-winter festivals in the 
Coligny Calendar had a similar significance.®® Furthermore, 
the thirty days of the intercalary month which precedes each 
half-cycle in this calendar bear the names of the thirty months 
in a half-cycle. The intercalary month is thus a microcosm of 
a half-cycle, though it has recently been argued that it is a 
recapitulation of the half-cycle which precedes it rather than a 
prefiguration of the ensuing one.®“

94 Celtic Heritage94 Celtic Heritage

In later chapters we shall discuss certain features of the 
mythological structure of space, but it may be added here that 
boundaries between territories, like boundaries between years 
and between seasons, are lines along which the supernatural 
intrudes through the surface of existence. Water which flows 
between two or three parishes or townlands has curative 
qualities, it is used in Hallowe’en divinations, and it has power 
both to charm away the ‘profit’ of milk and butter on May Eve 
and to break such a charm. Again, the fact that unbaptized 
children used to be buried in boundary fences suggest that these 
lines, like the unbaptized child, did not really belong to this 
world.®^ Stiles were favourite perches for ghosts. And terrv 
tories, like seasons, must have their boundaries ritually re-- 
defined every year. In many parts of Ireland May Day was spent 
in mending fences,®® and the ceremony of ‘beating the bounds’ 
is in the realm of space what new year ceremonies are in the 
realm of time; both concentrate attention on a line of division. 
The date of the ‘beating of the bounds’ varies from place to 
place, but the most usual day is Ascension Thursday,®® which 
usually falls in May — at the end of winter, when the world is 
created anew. This mysterious character of boundaries (which 
usually follow rivers and streams) enhances the significance of 
combats fought at fords, which are a recurrent feature of Celtic 
story. Fought at such a place a combat partakes in some mea/ 
sure of the nature of a divination rite, as do contests engaged in 
at the boundaries of seasons. Thresholds have a similar signi^ 
ficance, and in several Fenian tales the hero overcomes his fairy 
adversary as he is entering the std.

CHAPTER IV

Coming into Existence

‘Beax us across the Sea as in a ship, thou Comprehensor.’

RIG VEDA, IX, 70, 10.CHAPTER IV

Coming into Existence

‘Beax us across the Sea as in a ship, thou Comprehensor.’

RIG VEDA, IX, 70, 10.

Celtic tradition has preserved no native story of the creation 
of the world and of man. Even in the oldest documents that 
have survived, the Biblical Adam and Eve have already been 
accepted as the first parents of mankind. Nevertheless, Lebor 
Gabala Erenn, ‘The Book of the Taking of Ireland’, is un^ 
doubtedly a laborious attempt to combine parts of the native 
teaching with Hebrew mythology embellished with medieval 
legend. It begins with In prindpio feat Deus caelum et terram 
and proceeds from the Creation to the story of Noah and the 
Flood, the Dispersal of the Nations, and the descent of the 
Gael of Ireland from Japheth son of Noah. For the early 
Christian Celts, as for Africans and others of our own day, 
the acceptance of the new Faith, which has a cosmogony of its 
own, inevitably involved severing the stem of native tradition 
at some point or other and grafting it on to the Christian roots 
through which it would henceforth draw its sustenance. Lebor 
Gabala lErenn performed this grafting so far as the Irish were 
concerned. It demonstrated to them genealogically that they 
too were descendants of Adam, and that the Biblical theo-' 
phany had to do with their destiny. And there can be no doubt 
that it fulfilled a need, for the memorization of the long arti-- 
ficial genealogies, and the (to us) tedious exploits of the des^ 
cendants of Japheth in the Mediterranean lands,^ became a part 
of the education of the filid, the official custodians and trans^' 
mitters of the mythological tradition. This work of bringing 
the Gentiles into the Christian family by linking up their 
diverse traditions with those of the Hebrews and synchronizing

95

96 Celtic Heritage95

96 Celtic Heritage

them with the ancient history preserved in the writings of 
classical historians was, of course, going on throughout 
Christendom, and it was achieved for Britain by Nennius 
and Geoffrey of Monmouth.This biblicized ‘history’, as set out in Lehor Gahdla, cuh 
minates in the story of ‘The Sons of Mil’.® After journeying 
through Egypt, Crete and Sicily, these ancestors of the Irish 
eventually reached Spain, and one of their company, Bregon, 
built a tower there. From the top of this tower Ith son of Bregon 
saw Ireland across the sea and set sail to investigate the land he 
had seen. At that time Tuatha De Danann were in occupation 
of the country, and they, suspicious of his motives, killed him. 
Then his kinsmen, the eight Sons of Mil, invaded Ireland to 
avenge his death. The most prominent among them were 
Donn the king, Amairgen the poet and judge, JEremon the 
leader of the expedition, and fiber. They were accompanied 
by Lugaid the son of Ith, their own sons, the sons of Bregon, 
and a number of champions. On reaching Ireland, they de/ 
feated the Tuatha, here associated with Demons and Fomoire, 
and then proceeded to Tara. On their way they met in turn the 
three goddesses, Banba, Fotla, and firiu, each of whom ex/ 
tracted from Amairgen the promise that her name should be 
a name for the island. At Tara they encountered the three kings 
of the Tuatha, Mac Cuill, Mac Cecht, and Mac Grene, 
who ‘pronounced a judgement against the sons of Mil’ to the 
effect that they should leave the island in peace for three days. 
The justice of the case was referred to Amairgen, on pain of 
death if he judged falsely. ‘I pronounce it,’ said Amairgen, 
‘Let this island be left to them.’ ‘How far shall we go?’ said 
j^ber. ‘Past just nine waves,’ said Amairgen. This was the 
first judgement he gave in Ireland. And so they withdrew and 
went through the motions of landing again as though they were 
performing a ritual. Their first landing had been resisted, for 
every time they came up with Ireland the demons made the 
port as it were a hog’s back, and they had skirted round the 
island three times before coming ashore. Now the druids and

Coming into" Existence 97Coming into" Existence 97

poets of the Tuatha sang spells against them, and a magic wind 
carried them far out to sea, but Amairgen countered with a 
poem which calmed the wind. The invaders landed for the 
second time and, after a further victory over the Tuatha, took 
possession of the country.The repeated landing, which may have a significance com^ 
parable to that of the ‘second birth’ in the Kfe-'Story of indivi/ 
dual personages, is not the only feature which reveals the pre^ 
Christian origin of the tale. As the invaders raced for land for 
the first time, Donn showed envy of his brother fr who had 
gained the lead. The oar broke in Ir’s hand and he fell back-' 
wards and died. He was buried in ‘Skellig of the Spectres’ off 
the west coast of Munster, and his brothers judged that it 
would not be right for the envious Donn to share in the land. 
After they had landed, Donn offended £riu, the queen of the 
Tuatha De Danann, and she prophesied that neither he nor 
his progeny should enjoy the island. When he again spoke 
threateningly of the Tuatha before landing the second time, a 
wind arose and his ship was wrecked. Lebor Gabala also says 
that the youngest brother, Erannan, climbed the mast to recon/ 
noitre and fell to his death. But according to the dindknchas^ it 
fell to the lot of Donn to climb the mast, to chant incantations 
against the Tuatha, and as a result of the Tuatha’s curse an 
ague came into the ship. Donn asked that his body be carried 
to one of the islands lest the disease remain in Ireland, ‘and my 
people will lay a blessing on me for ever’. After his ship had 
foundered, his brother Amairgen declared that his folk should 
come to the high rock. Tech Duinn, ‘the House of Donn’, 
whither his body was carried, and so, according to the heathen, 
the souls of sinners visit it and give their blessing to Donn 
before going to Hell, while the souls of the penitent behold the 
place from afar and are not borne astray. There are references 
to the House of Donn as the assembly-'place of the dead in 
earlier sources: ‘To me, to my house ye shall all come after 
your death.’* And the belief has survived in Ireland that on 
moonlit nights the souls of the dead can be seen over the Skellig

98 Celtic Heritage98 Celtic Heritage

rocks, on their way to ‘The Land of the Young’ (Tie na ftOg).^ 
Until recently, people used to resort to one of these precipitous 
little islands to perform a mountairuclimbing ritual the sym^ 
holism of which is manifestly pre/Christian. Leaving votive 
offerings at sacred wells at the foot of the mountain, the pil/ 
grim ascended by a narrow track, squeezed himself up through 
a chimneydike chasm called The Needle’s Eye, crossed the 
‘stone of pain’ which projected perilously over the sea, and 
mounted the dizzy pinnacle known as The Eagle’s Nest, 
where stood a stone cross. The ordeal reached its cHmax with 
the pilgrim sitting astride a ledge overhanging the sea, which 
lay some 460 feet below, and kissing a cross which some bold 
adventurer had cut into the rock. By making this pilgrimage 
in life, the pilgrim was believed to expedite the progress of his 
soul through Purgatory after death.®

The Celtic substratum of our story is particularly evident in 
an obscure poem which Amairgen utters as he first sets his 
right foot upon Ireland, a poem which gives the coming of the 
Sons of Ml a significance beyond that of a mere historical 
invasion. R, A. S. Macalister translates it as follows.’’

I am Wind on Sea,

I am Oceamwave,

I am Roar of Sea,

I am Bull of Seven Fights,

I am Vulture on Cliff,

I am Dewdrop,

I am Fairest of Flowers,

I am Boar for Boldness,

I am Salmon in Pool,

I am Lake on Plain. . .

I am a Word of Skill,

I am the Point of a Weapon (that poureth forth combat), 
I am God who fashioneth Fire for a Head.

Who smootheth the ru^edness of a mountains 
Who is He who announceth the ages of the Moon?

99

Coming into Existence

And who, the place where falleth the sunsetJ 
Who calleth the cattle from the House of Tethra?

On whom do the cattle of Tethra smile?

Who is the troop, who the god who fashioneth edges . . .? 
Enchantments about a spear? Enchantments ofWind?On whom do the cattle of Tethra smile?

Who is the troop, who the god who fashioneth edges . . .? 
Enchantments about a spear? Enchantments ofWind?

Potentially, the whole creation is bound up in Amairgen, and 
Indian parallels preclude the dismissal of his speech as simply 
an expression of ‘the pride of the sorcerer’. Thus Krishna 
in the Bhagavad'Git^ declares himself to be the divine seed 
without which nothing animate or inanimate exists. He is the 
Atman, he is Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma and all the gods, the 
beginning, the life-span and the end: ‘I am the radiant sun 
among the light^givers . . . among the stars of night, I am the 
moon ... I am Meru among mountain peaks ... I am the 
ocean among the waters . . . Of water-'beings I am Varuna: 
Aryaman among the Fathers: I am Death ... I am the 
Wind . . .’ He is pre-eminent among hymns, poetic metres, 
the letters of the alphabet, the months and the seasons: ‘I am 
the diceplay of the cunning, I am the strength of the strong . . . 
I am the silence of things secret: I am the knowledge of the 
knower. . . . What I have described to you are only a few of my 
countless forms.’ Vishnu, dormant during the interval of non- 
manifestation between the dissolution and recreation of the 
universe delivers himself of a similar series of ‘I am’ utterances. 
He is the cosmic juggler or magician and he is all those 
appearances through which the true essence of existence mani- 
fests itself— the cycle of the year, light, wind, earth, water, the 
four quarters of space, and so on. ‘And whatever you may see, 
hear or know in the whole universe, know me as Him who 
therein abides.’® Similarly Amairgen on the ocean of non- 
existence embodies the primeval unity of all things. As such 
he has the power to bring a new world into being, and his 
poems are in the nature of creation incantations. With one 
of them he conjures fish into the creeks, with another of them

100 Celtic Heritage100 Celtic Heritage

the attributes of the land of Ireland are re-'created by being 
spoken, or rather twic&'Spoken, anew:^”

‘I seek the land of Ireland,

Coursed be the fruitful sea.

Fruitful the ranked highland.

Ranked the showery wood,

Showery the river of cataracts.

Of cataracts the lake of pools.

Of pools the hill of a well,

Of a well of a people of assemblies.

Of assemblies of the king of Temair;

Temair, hill of peoples.

Peoples of the Sons of Mil,

Of Mil of ships, of barks;

The high ship £riu,

£riu lofty, very green.

An incantation very cuniring . .

In the new era that is being inaugurated £riu will be the ‘high 
ship’ of the Sons of Mil, and to them and to Lugaid son of 
fth will be traced the lineages of all the tribes of Ireland.

After they had gained possession of the island, a contention 
arose between Eremon and Eber concerning the kingship. 
Amairgen, as arbitrator, said ‘The heritage of the chief, Donn, 
to the second £rem6n; and his heritage to Eber after him,’ but 
fiber insisted upon a division. Here we have the inception of a 
territorial dichotomy which is fundamental to the cosmo-' 
graphic structure of Ireland, firemon took the kingship in the 
North and fiber in the South, or according to some texts, fiber 
took the South and firemon took the North with the kingship.

In any case the precedence of the North appears in other ways. 
Seven chieftains went with firemon to the North and six with 
fiber to the South.^^ A further contention is said to have arisen 
between the two brothers concerning three ridges, ‘shining 
treasures with a canned to each of the three’.^® The northern 
half had two ridges whereas the South had only one. Dis.' 
satisfied with his lot, fiber rebelled and was slain by firemon,

Coming into Existence loiComing into Existence loi

but the feud is said to have continued between the descendants 
of the two brothers. Throughout the period of Irish independ/ 
ence, dynastic succession usually took the form of an alters 
nation between two lines which traced their descent from two 
brothers.^* The division of the country into two halves is also 
said to have given distinct attributes to the North and South of 
Ireland. Before parting, the two brothers cast lots upon their 
artists, a poet and a harper. The poet, ‘learned man of mighty 
power’, went with Eremon northward, ‘so that henceforth in 
the North he secured dignity and learning’; the harper went to 
fiber southward: ‘string^sweetness of music ... in the South 
part of Ireland; thus shall it be till the mighty Judgement’.^® 
Throughout Irish literature the Northern Half of Ireland is 
known as Leth Cuinn, ‘The Half of Conn’, and the Southern 
Half as Leth Moga, ‘The Half of Mug’. As a common noun 
conn means ‘head’, ‘chief’, ‘sense’, ‘reason’, while mug means 
‘servant’. The traditional boundary^line between the two 
halves runs along Eiscir Riada, a broken ridge of low mounds 
running between Dublin and Galway Bay, and the names of 
the two halves are explained by the story of a struggle between 
Conn, the eponymous ancestor of the Dal Cuinn dynasties 
of the Northern Half, and Mug Nuadat (‘Servant of Nuadu’), 
also known as Eogan, the eponymous ancestor of the Eoga^ 
nachta, the rulers of Munster. Mug Nuadat, by storing up pro^ 
visions for a coming famine, gains the Southern kingdom for 
himself.^® To quote a verse from Keating’s ‘History of Ire^ 
land’:^’

‘Eoghan transcended Conn,

Not in number of battles and conflicts —

More plenteous the food of adventurous Eoghan 
Was being distributed according to the laws of peace.’‘Eoghan transcended Conn,

Not in number of battles and conflicts —

More plenteous the food of adventurous Eoghan 
Was being distributed according to the laws of peace.’

Thus the ‘Servant’ king gains his position by the peaceful occu/ 
pation of providing food for the country. Later he renews war 
against Conn, but is defeated and slain — ^another case of a

102

Celtic Heritage

Southerner being dissatisfied with his lot and suffering ultimate 
defeat.

The division of societies into moieties symbolized as upper 
and lower, heaven and earth, male and female, summer and 
winter, senior and junior, north and south, right and left, and 
so on, is world/wide, and the dichotomy is expressed in a two-- 
fold division of countries, provinces, cities, villages, temples, 
halls, kindreds, and other phenomena.^® Often there are two 
kings, or a senior king ruling over the whole realm, but parth 
cularly over his own half, and a junior king over the other half. 
The superiority of one moiety over the other is, however, formal 
and ritualistic rather than political, and it is often the case that 
the lower in status wields the greater power. The two halves 
have distinct and complementary duties and privileges, and 
they perform various services for each other. But there is also 
an antagonism between them which manifests itself in mock/ 
conflicts, team/games and other contests. Such a dual organi/ 
zation seems to underlie the common division of Welsh can/ 
treds into ‘above’ and ‘below’ the wood, or ‘above’ and 
‘below’ the river. ‘Great’ and ‘little’, ‘within’ and ‘without’, 
or ‘upper’ and ‘lower’ are commonly used to differentiate 
between two neighbouring villages or parishes of the same 
name, or to describe subdivisions of villages or parishes — and 
rivalry between the two halves is common, We have already 
met an example of this kind of duality in our discussion of the 
relationship of Tuatha De Danann with the Fomoire.

22

In Lehor GabdlaErenn the story of the Sons of JMfl is not, as we 
have implied here, a continuous narrative. After tracing the 
fictitious history of the Gael until they are ultimately at Bregon’s 
Tower in Spain on the eve of their voyage to Ireland, the nar/ 
rative is interrupted: ‘Let us cease from the stories of the Gael,

103

Coming into Existence

that we may tell of the five peoples who took Ireland before

them and we are taken back to another in principio when,

notwithstanding what had been going on in Biblical lands, 
Ireland was still empty and without form, and we are told of

five earlier ages during which the island gained its familiar 
features, its archetypal inhabitants, and its culture. When that 
has been done, we are returned to Bregon’s Tower to pick up 
the story of the Gael and their occupation of Ireland. But the 
native tradition has not been allowed to go unedited. The pedi/ 
grees of all the five peoples, including Tuatha De Danann,

104 Celtic Heritage

are traced back, like that of the Gaels themselves, to the Biblical 
Noah, and scholars have been tempted to dismiss the whole 
composition as ‘a medieval work of fiction’. But it is well to 
remember that the monks or poets who compiled it lived 
much closer to the pre-'Christian world than we do. The work 
still retains features which the study of other m)rthologies would 
lead us to expect in myths about the beginnings of things, and 
the more one studies it the more one is persuaded that the 
compilers had some understanding of the nature of the material 
they were endeavouring to reconcile with the new Christian 
teaching.As we have already mentioned, the five invasions of Ireland 
before the advent of the Gael were those of (i) Cessair, (2) 
Partholon, (3) Nemed, (4) Fir Bolg and (5) Tuatha De 
Danann. We shall mention some of their general character/ 
istics before proceeding to a fuller discussion of their individual 
and collective symbolisms. Ireland at the ‘time’ of these ‘inva/ 
sions’ was vastly different from any Ireland that men have 
known. We are taken back to a prehistoric condition of things, 
when the island had not been completely fashioned, when its 
virgin ground had not yet been divided into provinces and 
when its features remained nameless. From a mythological 
point of view, nothing really exists until it has been ‘formed’, 
‘defined’, and named,®® and in as much as Lehor Gabala 
Erenn is concerned with the origin of physical features, bound/ 
aries, and names, it retains some of the essentials of a cosmo/ 
gonic myth. When Partholon arrived, there were only three 
lakes and nine rivers in Ireland. Seven more lakes burst forth 
in his day, four in the time of Nemed, and three in the time of 
Tuatha De Danann — a. recurrent motif is the eruption of a 
lake at the digging of a grave and the naming of the lake after 
the person buried therein. The making of clearings is a further 
aspect of the process of shaping the country. Partholon cleared 
four plains and Nemed twelve, for when Partholon landed 
there was in Ireland only the old plain of Elta, made by God 
the Maker, on which no twig ever grew. Throughout the book

Coming into Existence 105Coming into Existence 105

we find hills, mounds, plains, promontories, lakes, and the 
very country itself acquiring names and significance from their 
connection with the lives, deaths, and burials of the personages 
in the myth. Division of the land is another aspect of the pro^ 
cess of creation and definition and there is mythological 
authority for almost every division of Ireland. We have already 
mentioned that the Sons of Mil divided it into two, but it had 
already been divided into four by Partholon’s sons, into three 
by the remnants of the Nemedians, and into five by Fir Bolg — 
‘As everyone does (says one redaction), they partitioned 
Ireland.’ ‘And that is the division of the provinces of Ireland 
which shall endure for ever, as the Fir Bolg divided them.’^^ 
The invasions also provide the genesis of much of the every^ 
day culture, such as cultivation, building, trading, grinding, 
and churning. The origin of the kingship and the admini^ 
stration of justice are accounted for, as well as knowledge, 
poetry, arts and crafts, battlez-shouting, chess/play, balhplay, 
horse/racing, and the holding of assemblies. In Lehor Gabala 
care is taken to commemorate the occasions when things were 
done or experienced for the first time and to record the names 
of the persons concerned — the first to land, the first to die, the 
first to be king, the first to pass judgement, and so on. In this way 
the prototypes of existence in this world are established one 
after another. As with other traditional cultures, Celtic society 
could not function without precedents. A dispute over 
boundaries could not be settled on grounds of expediency; 
the oldest and most learned historians had to be called upon 
to recount how Ireland was divided in the beginning. When 
the original model had been recalled, there could be no further 
argument: ‘It is thus it has been, and will be for ever.’®^ That 
the need for archetypal precedents of this kind persisted even 
when the old tradition had been supplanted by Christianity is 
clearly seen in the incantations and charms of Scottish crofters. 
Cures derive their efficacy, and daily activities their meaning, 
by being regarded as repetitions of what members of the Holy 
Family and the Saints did once upon a time:I06

Celtic Heritage

‘I bathe my face 
In the nine rays of the sun 
As Mary bathed her Son 
In the rich fermented milk . .

‘I am smooring the fire 
As the Son of Mary would smoor . .

‘I will pluck the gracious yarrow 
That Christ plucked with His one hand . .

This is the way of all ancient cultures. Life is meaningful in 
as much as it is an imitation or re-enactment of what the gods 
did in the beginning: ‘reality is acquired solely through repeti- 
tion or participation; everything which lacks an exemplary 
model is “meaningless”, i.e. it lacks reality’.^* And one need 
only think of Greek mythology to realize that these models 
are not confined to what is morally approved; they relate to all 
human situations. It is said that Partholon went hunting and 
fishing one day, leaving his wife and Toba, his henchman, to 
guard the island. The woman seduced the man, and that was 
the first adultery that ever was in Ireland. A great thirst pos- 
sessed them in their guilt and they drank of the vessels and tubes 
of Partholon. On his return, Partholon perceived the taste of 
their mouths on the drinking-tubes and, incensed by their mis- 
deed, he killed his wife’s lap-dog. That was the first jealousy 
in Ireland. Then Partholon upbraided his wife, but she put 
up the defence that it was her husband’s fault for leaving her 
in a situation in which the inevitable had happened:

‘Honey with a woman, milk with a cat, 
food with one generous, meat with a child, 
a wright within and an edged tool, 
one before one, ’tis a great risk.’

‘The one with the other will go together.’ Therefore it is right 
to guard them well from the beginning. ‘Not upon us is the 
blame . . . but it is upon thee.* And that was the first judgement

Coming Mo Existence 107

in Ireland, ‘the right of his wife against Partholon’,®® a judges 
ment which seems to echo the words of the Indian Laws of 
Manu: ‘the adulterous wife throws her guilt on her (negligent) 
husband’.®®The five pre.-Gaelic peoples may be compared with the 
Indian ‘Five Kindreds’ which are spoken of in the Rig Veda 
as immigrants who have come from another place across the 
waters and have settled and tilled the lands on the hither shore. 
This was no historical invasion, but a crossing over from one 
form of being to another, a crossing variously described as 
having been accomplished in a ship and in a heavenly chariot. 
As we shall see when we discuss voyages to the Other World, 
‘in metaphysical formulation a “crossing of water” always 
implies change of state and status’. The voyage of the Five Kin^- 
dreds seems to be the other^world voyage in reverse, a coming 
into existence, a change from infinite possibility to actual mani/ 
festation.®’’ It is indeed a far cry from the hymns of the Rig Veda 
to the pedestrian prose of Lebor Gabala lErenn, but the patently 
artificial derivation of the five peoples of Ireland from Scythia, 
Greece, Egypt, and so on, may well have been substituted 
for a tradition that they too hailed from the ‘other shore’. The 
four cities of the northern islands of the world, whence Tuatha 
De Danann came with their supernatural talismans, certainly 
have no place in terrestrial geography, and there was a diver-* 
gence of opinion as to whether the Tuatha came in ships or in 
clouds through the air.

The Rig Veda also speaks of the eight supreme Hindu gods 
known as Adityas as crossing over the waters in an amphi-* 
bious chariot ‘with seats where eight may sit’.®® These may be 
compared with the eight Sons of Mil. Donn, the eldest of 
Mil’s sons, recalls Vivasvat, the eighth Aditya. Vivasvat was 
the first to offer sacrifices and those men, his descendants, who 
follow his example postpone their death, that is the moment 
when they will be received by Yama, his son. Donn sacrifices 
himself for the Gaels, and when they die their journey takes

108

Celtic Heritage108

Celtic Heritage

them to, or past, the House of Donn. jfiremon, the leader of the 
Sons of Mfl, has been compared with Aryaman, another of the 
Adityas, and some philologists have suggested that their 
names may be cognates.^® Aryaman is also the chief of the 
Fathers, as Eremon is the chief of the ancestors of the Irish. 
Indeed, inasmuch as the Sons of Mil are the ancestors of 
mortal men, they bear a closer resemblance to the ‘Fathers’ 
(Pitris) of Indian mythology than to the sovereign gods. Donn, 
who is described as ‘king’ of the Sons of Mil, may then be com-' 
pared with Yama himself, ‘king of the Fathers’, ‘the first of 
men that died, the first that departed to the other world ... 
the gatherer of mankind’. ‘Yama chose death, and found out 
the path for many, and he gives the souls of the dead a resting 
place.’*®

3

In the story of the five primeval peoples of Ireland, the waters 
of the Flood separate Cessair and her company from the four 
peoples who came after her. Partholon and his people, though 
they came after the Flood, also perished from the earth leaving 
no descendants. But the three remaining groups of settlers, 
Nemed’s company. Fir Bolg and Tuatha De Danann, belong 
together. After the death of Nemed, the leader of the first of 
these groups, and the destruction of most of his people in a 
conflict with the Fomoire, a remnant led by this three sons, 
Starn, larbonel the Soothsayer and Fergus Lethderg,* escaped 
in a ship. Fir Bolg and Tuatha De Danann were descendants 
of the first two of these sons, while the descendants of the third 
are said to have settled abroad.

Unlike all their predecessors. Fir Bolg and Tuatha De 
Danann were ruled by kings, and the two peoples seem to be 
complementary to one another. We have already seen that the

* Fergus Hal&red or Fergus Redside.

Coming into Existence 109* Fergus Hal&red or Fergus Redside.

Coming into Existence 109

Tuatha were divine wizards or druids. It was Fir Bolg, on the 
contrary, who instituted the political division of Ireland into 
five provinces, established the kingship, and first administered 
justice. The most imposing figure among their kings was 
Eochaid son of Ere: ‘There was no wetting in his time save 
only dew: there was no year without harvest. Falsehoods were 
expelled &om Ireland in his time. By him was executed the 
law of justice for the first time.’»^ Another of their kings was

CESSAIR

Flood

PARTHOLON

Plague

NEMED

FIR BOLG TUATHA DE DANANN

Fig. 4 The Five Peoples

Rinnal: ‘In his time weapons were first given points’ (rmn= 
‘spear.'point’).®^ In the First Battle of Mag Tuired,*® Fir Bolg 
and Tuatha De Danann oppose one another. Nevertheless they 
are kinsmen who speak the same language; they approach one 
another with mutual respect and they agree to forge weapons 
for one another. One of the Tuatha voices a eulogy of the Fir 
Bolg javelins, but the Fir Bolg sorcerers, on the other hand, 
play only a minor and negative role in the battle in comparison 
with Badb, Macha, the Morrigan, and the wizards of Tuatha 
De Danann.

Among the five peoples, Tuatha De Danann and Fir Bolg 
are clearly the spiritual and temporal elite. In comparison with 
them the peoples of Partholon and Nemed are inferior groups 
who have no kings, and in some ways they ‘look like doublets 
of one another’,®* Both leaders have to contend with the

no

Celtic Heritageno

Celtic Heritage

Fomoire, both clear plains, both die of plague. But Nemed’s 
name means ‘holy’ or ‘sacred’, or as a noun ‘privilege’, 
‘sanctity’, ‘sanctuary’, and in the earliest Irish law tracts it 
occurs as a term signifying all persons of free status. As 
MacNeill remarks:®® ‘We can hardly doubt that freemen were 
“holy” [neme^ in the sense of being qualified to participate 
in public religious rites. Caesar tells us how those who refused 
obedience to the judicial decisions of the Druids were excluded 
from the sacrifices, and how this exclusion involved the loss of 
jus and honos.' Partholon cleared four plains, but Nemed cleared 
twelve and also built two royal forts. This seems to signify that 
Nemed cleared four plains for each of his three groups of 
descendants and prepared forts for the two royal groups among 
them. In other words, the immediate company of Nemed 
subserved the two groups which succeeded them and which 
were included in them in potentia.The character of Partholon’s people is more clearly indi/ 
cated. There were seven labourers in his company, two plough.- 
men, two plough^irons and four oxen. Though, like the Fo-- 
moire, they engaged in hunting and fishing, they were ob/ 
viously tillers of the soil. But Partholon is also described as 
‘chief of every craft’®® and many crafts were first practised in 
his time. The first guesdng.-house was made, beer was brewed 
and flesh cooked in a cauldron for guests. ‘Under the taking 
of Partholon was building first done in Ireland, and a quern, 
and churning, and ale.’ Duelling was instituted, and of 
Partholon’s two merchants, one is said to have got gold in 
Ireland, the other cattle and kine.®’ The eldest of his chieftains 
was the son of Senboth, a name which seems to signify a serf 
or servile tenant.®® Partholon’s people have no place in any 
independent Irish story, but in modern Ireland the day of 
Parthanan falls at the end of harvest time, when the dread 
Parthanan comes to thresh all corn left standing. He is an 
agricultural demon, like the betterAnown cailleach or hag who 
falls to the lot of the last to finish with the harvest, and the 
puca who befouls all fruit left on the trees on Hallowe’en.®*

HI

Coming into^^ExistenceHI

Coming into^^Existence

In terms of social functions we thus have the druid Tuatha, 
the Fir Bolg rulers, the people of Nemed to whom we have as 
yet ascribed no distinctive role other than privilege and service 
to the two royal groups, and lastly the husbandmen and crafts^ 
men of Partholon. Turning to the social system of the Irish as 
it is known from the early laws and sagas, we find three types 
of freeman, namely, drm, ‘druid’ (or in later times fit, sage 
and poet), faith, ‘lord’ or ‘person exercising authority’, and 
hS^aire, ‘freeman’. Dm is probably derived from a root mean^ 
ing ‘to know’, and faith is related to the 'WA%hgwlad ‘country’, 
gtuledig ‘ruler’, and the German gewalt ‘force’, ‘violence’.*® 
The word aire in ho'aire means ‘every freeman, “commoner” 
as well as noble . . . who possesses an independent legal status’.** 
Similarly, the Sanskrit arya covers the three ‘noble’ or sacri^ 
ficial classes, though philologists are not agreed as to whether 
the two words are cognate. Bonaire means ‘cow aire\ and com-' 
parative studies show that cattle/men typify the free com/ 
moners from Indo/European times.*® This third estate, we 
submit, is represented among the invaders by the people of 
Nemed — ^who were despoiled of their corn and their milk and 
their progeny, by the Fomoire.*® This is borne out by what is 
said about five names which were given successively to Tara, 
names which are correlated with the invasions as follows:**

The Sons of Mil . . . called it Temair.

Tuatha De Danann called it Cathair Crofhind.

Fir Bolg .... called it Druim Cain, ‘whither chief/ 
tains used to go’.

Nemed .... called it Druim L&h, after Liath 
son of Laigne Lethan/glas, who cut 
down its tangled wood so that ‘its 
com was rich corn*.

Before that it was called Fordruim — ^‘there was a time 
when it was a pleasant hazel wood 
in the days of the noble son of 
Oilcan’.

112

Celtic HeritageBefore that it was called Fordruim — ^‘there was a time 
when it was a pleasant hazel wood 
in the days of the noble son of 
Oilcan’.

112

Celtic Heritage

Professor Georges Dumezil has related the three free classes 
in Celtic society with the brahman (priest), the hatriya (warrior, 
royal) and the vaisya (farmer) castes in Indian society.^® In a 
series of books and articles published during the past twenty 
years he has traced the ramifications of a system of three func/ 
tions in the mythologies of various peoples who belong to the 
Indo/'European linguistic family. These ‘functions’ he des/ 
cribes as:*®

I The Sacred. The relations of men with the sacred and 
with one another under the surveillance and protection of 
the gods — on the one hand, cult, magic, and on the other, 
law, government; also the sovereign power exercised by the 
king or his deputies in accordance with the will or the 
favour of the gods, and again, more generally, knowledge 
and intelligence, here inseparable from the manipulation 
of sacred things.

II Physical force. The use of main force, primarily though 
not solely in war. [Also the executive aspects of kingship 
and government.]

III Fertility. This covers a wide range of related qualities 
in which the unifying principle is less apparent. It includes 
fruitfulness in human beings, animals and plants, but also 
food, wealth, health, peace and the fruits of peace, as well 
as voluptuousness and beauty. There is also the important 
idea of ‘large number’, applied not only to goods (abun/ 
dance) but also to the men who compose the social body 
(mass).

This hierarchic structure serves as a framework of concept 
tion and a support for all sorts of beliefs, rites and institutions, 
so that the harmonious and orderly working of each function is 
necessary for the welfare of society and the world.In Ancient India the three sacrificial castes which embodied 
the three functions were subserved by a fourth. This was the 
siidra caste of agricultural workers, craftsmen, entertainer sand

Coming info Existence tii

other menials. ‘We hear of carpenters, wheelwrights, potters, 
smiths, fishermen, dog 4 eaders, and hunters. There were drum^ 
mers, conch/blowers and flute/players.*'*' Similar skills were 
covered by the fourth class in ancient Rome. In his De lingua 
latina, Varro lists in succession words relating to officers of the 
state and then to (i) priests, (2) military affairs, and (3) per.-- 
sonal fortune (degrees of wealth). After these come words for 
artisans and men of special skills such as jugglers, ‘namers’, 
boxers, trackers, runners, hunters, and fruit^pickers.** Likewise 
in early Ireland there was a fourth class which comprised a 
variety of people in addition to agricultural serfs. ‘The folk of 
vocal and instrumental music besides, jockeys and charioteers 
and steersmen and followers in feasts and retinue (;), and 
mummers and jugglers and buffoons and clowns and the 
lesser arts besides, it is in regard of the honour of those who 
keep them that dire (honour^-price) is paid for them. Otherwise 
they have no franchise apart. Certain kinds of craftsmen 
attained the status of subject nemed (‘subject freeman’) by virtue 
of their art. They were ‘house/builders, builders of ships and 
boats, and of mills, wood-'carvers, chariot^makers, turners, 
leather/workers, fishermen, smiths and metahworkers, and some 
others; among musicians, harpers only’.®® Some of Partho.' 
Ion’s craftsmen perhaps correspond to this intermediate grade, 
but in the over/all social system as symbolized in the Invasions 
he and his labourers and his craftsmen fall naturally into the 
fourth class.Even the addition of the fourth function does not complete 
the picture. Lebor Gabala Erenn speaks of Jive peoples, as does 
the Rig Veda of a totality of ‘Five Kindreds’. In Hindu ■writings 
these enigmatic Five Kindreds are variously explained as five 
orders of divine beings, created beings in general, the ancestors 
of humanity, the four castes and the barbarian Nishadas.®^ 
Thus, when the fifth group is included in the Indian social 
system, it is the aborigines utterly beyond the pale. Similarly 
with the Irish invasions, the one that remains to be considered 
is the primordial Cessair.®® Her company consisted of fifty

H

Ii 4 Celtic Heritage

women and three men, namely Fintan son of Bochra, Bith 
son of Noah and father of Cessair, and the pilot Ladra. The 
main action of their story in Ireland turns on the division of the 
women. Fintan took Cessair and sixteen others; Bith took her 
companion Bairrfhind and another sixteen, whereas Ladra was 
left with a mere sixteen and was dissatisfied with his lot. 
Nevertheless it is of him that it is said that he died of excess of 
women — ‘or it was the shaft of the oar that penetrated his but/ 
tock’. After Ladra’s death, Fintan and Bith shared the re/ 
maining women between them so that they then had twenty/ 
five each. Bith went north and he was the next to die. When 
the women returned to Fintan and Cessair, Fintan escaped 
‘afleeing before all the women’ until he came to the tiill of the 
Wave (Tul Tuinde). Bereft of her father and her husband, 
Cessair broke her heart, and all her maidens died, and then 
forty days after they had arrived in Ireland, came the Flood. 
Fintan spent a year under the waters in a cave called ‘Fintan’s 
Grave’ above Tul Tuinde, and so survived.In its overwhelmingly female character, this company bears 
a resemblance to the Fomoire in the time of Partholon, among 
whom women outnumbered men in a proportion of three to 
one. Cessair was the first to bring sheep into Ireland and it is 
noteworthy that the Fomoire in Nemed’s time turned Ireland 
into a sheep land.®® As we have seen, the Fomoire are closely 
associated with the sea and its islands, and their name suggests 
‘under/sea’. Cessair is connected with the Flood/waters and in 
this story women and water seem to belong together. The divi/ 
sion of the women, like the other divisions we have mentioned, 
was an art of creation, a separating out. Their re/unionsym/ 
bolizes a return to an undifferentiated chaos. All this took 
place at ‘The Meeting of the Three Waters’. Ladra’s death was 
caused by women or by the oar with which he plied the waves; 
Fintan fled from the reunited women and was overwhelmed 
by the Flood. His flight before the women is reminiscent of 
inundation tales in which a person is pursued by irrupting 
waters.

Coming into Existmci tij

According to the lost early manuscript, ‘The Book of Druim 
Snechta’, the name of the woman who settled in Ireland before 
the Flood was not Cessair but Banba, and she, as eponym of 
Ireland, is to be identified, not with water, but with the land 
that would emerge from the waters, ‘the island of Banba of the 
women’. She survived the Deluge on the mountain peak of 
Tul Tuinde — ‘To this present mound the waves of the Flood 
attained’ — and she lived to proclaim to the Sons of Mil that 
she was older than Noah.®^ The peak recalls the ‘primeval 
hill’ of Near Eastern cosmogonies, the first land to rise out of the 
waters of chaos.®® In other words, the first woman symbolized 
both water and land, and the two basic elements seem to be 
further personified by Cessair’s husband, Fintan son of ‘Ocean’ 
(Bochra), and her father whose name means ‘World’ (Bith).In some versions of Lebor Gabala which include Cessair’s 
expedition as one of the five invasions, it is observed that 
‘others do not accept it among the invasions’,®® and Nen^" 
nius’s Historia Brittonum, which contains one of the earliest 
records of these traditions, begins with Partholon and does not 
mention Cessair. Fintan, who lived to tell the tale, is duplicated 
in Tuan (of Partholon’s group) who survived all subsequent 
invasions and recounted the story in the time of Colum Cille. 
The whole scheme is thus feasible without Cessair. So too in 
the social system, in India and elsewhere, the aborigines (like 
the outcastes) stand outside the four principal castes; yet they 
must be represented in any complete symbol of the whole of 
mankind.

The antecedents of the five Irish invaders offer a further clue 
to their status.®’ Tuatha De Danann came from a land of 
magic learning. Fir Bolg came to gain freedom from the oppress 
sion of overlords, but Partholon was an outlaw who fled from 
his homeland after kilHng his father, and the plague which 
overtook his people is seen as retribution for his crime. The 
company of Cessair also left their homeland in disgrace. Noah, 
so the story goes, had refused to admit them into the ark, 
declaring that ‘this is no ship for robbers and no den of thieves’.

516 Celtic Henta^

IRELAND

Noah

I Bith

Aithechda cessair (v)

Tat (‘Father’) partholon (iv)

NEMED (ill)

I ^ 1

! Fergus Lethderg

i FIR BOLG (ll)

I

TUATHA DE DANANN (l)

INDIA

TRIBE ABORIGINES (v)

1

ARYA (Initiates) sudra (iv) (Profane)

I ^

SACEIFICERS YEOMANRY (ill) (PlMveyors)

H

PRIESTHOOD (l) NOBILITY (ll)

Fig. 5 Invasions and Social Structure

Coming into Existence 1171

ARYA (Initiates) sudra (iv) (Profane)

I ^

SACEIFICERS YEOMANRY (ill) (PlMveyors)

H

PRIESTHOOD (l) NOBILITY (ll)

Fig. 5 Invasions and Social Structure

Coming into Existence 117

Sundering themselves from the God of Noah, the outcasts set 
up an idol and worshipped it, and then proceeded to build an 
ark of their own.®® While Bith, the father of Cessair, is an 
apocryphal son of Noah, the ancestry of all the post-diluvian 
invaders is traced back to Aithechda son of Magog son of 
Japheth son of Noah.®® Aithechda, the first unbiblical name in 
this pedigree, is a derivative of aithech, ‘churl’, ‘rent-payer’. 
Aithechda was the near ancestor of Partholon (Function IV) 
and the remote ancestor of Nemed. Nemed was the immediate 
ancestor of Fergus who settled abroad — ^so that his people 
(Function III) took no part in the later struggle for supremacy 
— and the remote ancestor of the two ruling peoples. Fir Bolg 
(Function II) and Tuatha De Danann (Function I). As will 
be seen from the diagrams opposite, this is almost a replica of 
Hocart’s analysis of the relationship between the Indian castes.®®

CHAPTER V

A Hierarchy of Provinces

‘Whatever exists is fivefold.’

TAITTIRIYAKA/UPANISHAD, I, 7.CHAPTER V

A Hierarchy of Provinces

‘Whatever exists is fivefold.’

TAITTIRIYAKA/UPANISHAD, I, 7.

Modern Ireland comprises four great provinces, Connacht, 
Ulster, Leinster, and Munster, whose origin lies beyond the 
beginning of recorded history. Yet, the Irish word for ‘pro^ 
vince’ is coked, which means a ‘fifth’, not a ‘fourth’, and the 
expression ‘five fifths of Ireland’ is familiar to all who speak 
the Gaelic tongue. The antiquity of this five/fold conception 
cannot be doubted, but tradition is divided as to the identity 
of the fifth fifth. Lebor Gabala lErem attributes the original divL 
sion into five provinces to Fir Bolg.^ These settlers were led by 
five brothers and they shared Ireland between them. The fifth 
province of that division consisted of a subdivision of Munster, 
and in accordance with this, Ireland is represented throughout 
most of the early literature as consisting of Connacht, Ulster, 
Leinster, and ‘the two Munsters’ (East Munster and West 
Munster). It was held that all five provinces met at the Stone of 
Divisions on the Hill of Uisnech, which was believed to be the 
mid/point of Ireland.

The alternative tradition® is that the fifth province was Meath 
{Mide), ‘the Middle’. This is a common belief among present/ 
day Irishmen who are unfamiliar with the historical Literature, 
and it is not a recent invention. A poem which is attributed 
to Mael Mura, a ninth/century poet, tells of a revolt of the 
vassal tribes of Ireland under the kings of the Jour provinces, 
a revolt in which Fiachu, King of Tara, was killed. After 
a period of misrule, the legitimate dynasty was restored in 
the person of Fiachu’s son, Tuathal Techtmar, who defeated 
the vassal tribes in each of the four provinces — Connacht,

A Hierarchy of Provinces H9A Hierarchy of Provinces H9

Ulster, Leinster and Munster. According to some medieval 
texts, it was Tuathal who created the central province of Meath 
by taking a portion of each of the other provinces; Keating 
states that before Tuathal’s conquest Meath was but a minor 
kingdom (tmth') around Uisnech. We must, however, con/ 
sider a body of comparative evidence before accepting the view 
that the central province, without which no province could be 
called a ‘fifth’ in this scheme, was the result of a military con/ 
quest in the second century a.d.What we have to try to understand is the meaning of the sub/ 
division of an island into four parts each of which is called a 
fifth, and the existence of two apparently incompatible tradi/ 
tions — ^neither of which can be shown to be more authentic 
than the other — which, respectively, locate the implicit fifth 
fifth at the centre and as an entity within one of the other four. 
In the Middle Irish text called ‘The Settling of the Manor of 
Tara’,® which relates how the territorial divisions were con/ 
firmed at the beginning of the Christian era by a supernatural 
authority, both these conceptions of the five/fold structure of 
Ireland are re/authenticated, and there is no indication that the 
writer of this remarkable document was aware that the one is 
inconsistent with the other. The text relates that, in the reign of 
Diarmait son of Cerball (a.d. 545/565), the nobles of Ire/ 
land protested against the extent of the royal domain, and that 
Fintan son of Bochra was summoned to Tara, from his abode 
in Munster, to define its limits. Seated in the judge’s seat at 
Tara, Fintan reviewed the history of Ireland from Cessair to 
the Sons of Mil, and told of a strange personage called Tre/ 
fuilngid Tre/eochair who suddenly appeared at a gathering of 
the men of Ireland on the day when Christ was crucified. This 
stranger was fair and of gigantic stature, and it was he who 
controlled the rising and the setting of the sun. In his left hand 
he carried stone tablets and in his right a branch with three 
fruits, nuts, apples, and acorns. He inquired about the 
chronicles of the men of Ireland, and they replied that they 
had no old historians. ‘Ye will have that from me,* said he. ‘I

120

Celtic Heritage120

Celtic Heritage

will establish for you the progression of the stories and chro^ 
nicies of the hearth of Tara itself with the four quarters of 
Ireland round about; for I am the truly learned witness who 
explains to all everything unknown,’ And he continued: 
‘Bring to me then seven from every quarter of Ireland, who are 
the wisest, the most prudent and most cunning also, and the 
shanachies of the king himself who are of the hearth of Tara; 
for it is right that the four quarters (should be present) at the 
partition of Tara and its chronicles, that each may take its 
due share of the chronicles of Tara.’

It will be observed that the basic idea here is that Ireland 
consists of four quarters and a centre — the provinces of Con-- 
nacht, Ulster, Leinster, Munster, and Meath. This arrange/ 
ment was confirmed by Trefuilngid, and in leaving that 
ordinance with the men of Ireland he gave Fintan some berries 
from his branch. Fintan planted them where he thought they 
would grow, and from them are the five trees: the Ash of 
Tortu, the Bole of Ross (a comely yew), the Oak of Mugna, 
the Bough of Dathi (an ash), and the Ash of populous Uis/ 
nech. Though the location of most of these five places is un/ 
certain, there can be no doubt that the underlying idea is that 
the trees symbolize the four quarters around the centre.The confirmation of this pattern by Fintan on Trefuilngid’s 
authority at Tara was not, however, the end of the matter. 
‘Then the nobles of Ireland came ... to accompany Fintan 
to Uisnech, and they took leave of one another on the top of 
Uisnech. And he set up in their presence a pillar/stone of five 
ridges on the summit of Uisnech. And he assigned a ridge of it 
to every province in Ireland, for thus are Tara and Uisnech in 
Ireland, as its two kidneys are in a beast. And he marked out a 
fomch there, that is, the portion of each province in Uisnech, 
and Fintan made this lay after arranging the pillar/stone.’ In 
the lay Fintan defines the extent of each of these five provinces, 
and they are not Meath and the four quarters but the provinces 
of the Fir Bolg division — Connacht, Ulster, Leinster, and the 
tm Mmsters. ‘So Fintan then testified that it is right to take

A Hierarchy of Provinces izi

the five provinces of Ireland /roffi Tara and Uisnech, and that it is 
right for them also to take them from each province in Ire/ 
land!’ The two alternative ideas may be represented as follows — 
and they are alternatives, for to merge them together six pro^ 
vinces must be reckoned with, and that would belie the very 
name for a province — ‘a fifth’.

Fig. 6 The Five Provinces

The reader will no doubt have observed the coincidence in 
number between the Five Prez-Gaelic Invasions of Ireland and 
the five provinces as described in Lehor Gabala Erenn. The 
authenticity of four of the invasions and of four of the pro/ 
vinces is beyond dispute, whereas the disagreement of the 
authorities as to whether the prediluvian Cessair should be 
reckoned among the invasions may be compared with the urn 
certain status of the second Munster as the fifth of the five pro/ 
vinces. The analogy may be carried a step further. If we

122 Celtic Heritage122 Celtic Heritage

exclude Cessair, there are sdli the Sons of Mil to turn the 
remaining four invasions into five. Similarly with the provinces, 
if we exclude the second fifth of Munster there is room for the 
central fifth of Meath. These correspondences may be tabulated 
as follows;

INVASIONS PROVINCES

The Sons of Mil

Meath

Four Pre/Gaelic Inva^ 
sions

Four Provinces

Cessair

The second Munster

2

Leaving Cessair and the second Munster aside for the moment, 
it can be shown further that the four great provinces and the 
centre constitute a hierarchic system which corresponds to that 
of the invasions from Partholon to the Sons of Mil. When the 
representatives of the four quarters and of the Manor of Tara 
had been assembled together as we have just described, the 
supernatural Trefuilngid asked: ‘O Fintan, and Ireland, how 
has it been partitioned, where have things been therein’’ ‘Easy 
to say,’ said Fintan, ‘knowledge in the west, battle in the north, 
prosperity in the east, music in the south, kingship in the 
centre.’ Then Trefuilngid proceeded to indicate in detail the 
attributes of each quarter and the middle. There is some over.- 
lapping in these descriptions which blurs the clear distinctions 
drawn by Fintan, but we will give them in full, italicizing the 
items to which we wish to draw attention.

123

A Hierarchy of Provinces

West (Connacht)

LEARNING (Hs), foundations, teaching, alliance, judgement, 
chronicles, counsels, stories, histories, science, comeliness, eloquence, 
beauty, modesty (lit. blushing), bounty, abundance, wealth.

North (Ulster)

BATTLE (Cath), contentions, hardihood, rough places, strifes, 
haughtiness, unprofitableness, pride, captures, assaults, hardness, wars, 
conflicts.

East (Leinster)North (Ulster)

BATTLE (Cath), contentions, hardihood, rough places, strifes, 
haughtiness, unprofitableness, pride, captures, assaults, hardness, wars, 
conflicts.

East (Leinster)

PROSPERITY (Blath), supplies, hee'hives (i ceasa), contests, 
feats of arms, householders, nobles, wonders, good custom, good 
manners, splendour, abundance, dignity, strength, wealth, house-' 
holding, many arts, accoutrements (?), many treasures, satin, serge, 
silks, cloths (;), green spotted cloth (;), hospitality.

South (Munster)

MUSIC (Seis), waterfalls (esa*), fairs (oenaigi), nobles, 
reavers, knowledge, subtlety, musicianship, melody, minstrelry, 
wisdom, honour, music, learning, teaching, warriorship 
(fiansa), fidchell'playing, vehemence, fierceness, poetical art, 
advocacy, modesty, code, retinue, fertility.

Centre (Meath)

KINGSHIP, stewards, dignity, primacy, stability, establish/ 
ments, supports, destructions, warriorship, charioteership, 
soldiery, principality, high/kingship, ollaveship, mead, bounty, 
ale, renown, fame, prosperity.

Learning and Battle clearly refer to the aristocratic functions 
of the druids and the warriors, and their ascription to Connacht 
and Ulster fully accords with what we have said about the 
superiority of Conn’s Half. In Chapter II we observed that the 
Mythological Cycle of Tuatha De Danann was characterized 
by wizardry, the CiiChulainn Cycle by heroism and the 
Fenian Cycle by romance. It remains to add that Tuatha Dd

124 Celtic Heritage124 Celtic Heritage

Danann first appeared in Ireland on a mountain of Con/ 
maicne Rein in Connacht and that Mag Tuired, the scene of 
the great battles which form the central theme of this cycle is 
also in Connacht.® The warrior Cycle of CuChulainn is the 
Ulster Cycle, while the Fenian Cycle, the tales of the ordinary 
people, axe located mainly in the South of Ireland.® The three 
qualities which we have discerned in these three cycles thus 
have their respective provenance — ^thinking in the West, willing 
in the North, feeling in the South.

The correlation of provinces with functions makes the great 
epic of the CuChulainn Cycle more intelligible. It comme/ 
morates a struggle between the two aristocratic provinces of 
Connacht and Ulster, in which the protagonists are Queen 
Medb ofConnachtontheone hand, and King Conchobar and 
his nephew CuChulainn on the other. Professor Dumezil has 
singled out ‘Sovereignty’ in its magical and judicial aspects as 
the primary attribute of Function I, and we have seen that 
Medb personifies Sovereignty. It is said that Conchobar had 
been Medb’s first husband, and her desertion of him against 
his will is said to have been the first cause of the Tain.'’ On the 
other hand, the immediate cause of the Tain was that Medb 
coveted Ulster’s great bull. The bull symbolizes the warrior 
function both in Rome and in India.® Thus the Tain appears 
as an example of the classic struggle between the priestly and 
the warrior classes, each of which tends to usurp the functions 
and privileges of the other. It may be compared with the First 
Battle of Mag Tuired between the Tuatha wizards and the Fir 
Bolg warriors. That battle belongs to the Mythological Cycle 
and in it the warriors are defeated, but the warriors are victorious 
in the struggle of the warrior Cycle.It will be remembered that Mug Nuadat gained possession 
of the Southern Half, the Half of Mug, by feeding the people, 
and that when £rem6n and Eber originally divided the country 
into two, the harper went to the South and endowed the 
Southern Half with music in perpetuity. In the fivefold divi/ 
sion which we are now discussing, these two attributes.

A Hierarchy of Promces 1^5A Hierarchy of Promces 1^5

‘Prosperity’ and ‘Music’ are separated and allocated respectively 
to Leinster and Munster, the two provinces of the Southern 
Half, here identified with ‘East’ and ‘South’. ‘Prosperity’, com^ 
bined in our text with such other attributes as wealth, abun/ 
dance and hospitality, singles out Leinster as the province of the 
Farmers, the third estate, and this is in full agreement with 
what is told of Leinster. Laigne Lethan^glas, father of Liath, 
the representative of the people of Nemed in a text quoted in 
Chapter IV,* is the eponym of the Leinstermen (Laigiti). We 
have noted that the usual term for ordinary freeman is bS^aire, 
‘cow^freeman’, and it is recounted that throughout the early 
centuries of Irish history the people of Leinster were obliged to 
render to the high^king of Ireland a tribute known as the 
bSrama, ‘cowz-counting’. Several tales are told about Leinster’s 
revolts against this obligation, among them the story of the 
Battle of Dun Bolg.® In this story, young Leinstermen are 
smuggled into the king of Ireland’s camp, hidden in baskets 
loaded on to three hundred teams of twelve oxen each. Straw 
is laid over the men and food upon the straw. ‘What are the 
Leinstermen doing;’ asks the king of Ireland of a Leinster spy 
who has been sent ahead to collaborate with the attackers. 
‘They are preparing food for you, and never have you had more 
satisfying meat: they are boiling their swine, their beeves and 
their bacon/hogs.’ ‘Who goes there?’ cry the men of Oriel as 
the procession makes it way to the king’s camp. ‘Soon told,’ 
comes the answer, ‘Leinster’s servants laden with the king of 
Ireland’s provisions.’ Feeling the baskets, the challengers find 
nothing but food. ‘It is the food that’s come,’ says the spy, as 
the intruders reach the middle of the camp. The oxen are ua/ 
loaded, wild horses are set loose to bring confusion into the 
camp, and the Leinstermen arise out of the baskets and rout 
the king of Ireland’s men. Here the Leinstermen identify them/ 
selves with the products of the third ‘function’. Thus the 
^atapatha Brdhmam: ‘the king is the eater, the yeomanry food’,126 Celtic Heritage

‘the yeomanry is another’s tributary, another’s food’, and again, 
‘whatever belongs to the yeomanry, the nobleman has a share 
in it’d®

Two of the most famous hosts of Irish story, Mac Datho and 
Da Derga, had their abode in Leinster,^ ^ while the tale called 
‘The Melodies of Buchet’s House’^® brings out the oppressive 
as well as the benevolent side of the relationship between the 
king and the third estate. Buchet, bo^'dre of the high/'king, was a 
Leinsterman ‘rich in kine’,^® and a paragon of hospitality. 
With him in fosterage was Ethne, daughter of Cathaer Mor, 
King of Ireland, and Cathaer’s twelve sons used to come guest/ 
ing with large companies, so that his seven herds of cattle were 
reduced to seven cows and a bull. It was in vain that Buchet 
sought redress from the aged king who, unable to restrain his 
sons, advised him to leave the country. Buchet, with his old 
wife and Ethne, then dwelt in a hut in the forest until they 
were discovered there by Cormac mac Airt, the future king of 
Ireland. As a bride/price for Ethne, Cormac gave Buchet so 
many herds that he could not take them all back to Leinster.

‘The song of Buchet’s house to the companies: his 
laughing cry to the companies: “Welcome to you! It will 
be well to you with us! Let it then be well to us with you!’’ 
The song of the fifty warriors with their purple garments 
and their armours, to make music when the companies 
were drunk. The song, too, of the fifty maidens in the 
midst of the house, in their purple dresses, with their 
golden/yellow manes over their garments, and their song 
delighting the host. The song of the fifty harps afterwards 
till morning, soothing the host with music.’^*If Leinster represents the third function, the only function 
left for Munster is the fourth, that of the Serf. And it is note/ 
worthy that Mug Nuadat (‘Servant of Nuadu’) is the epony/ 
mous ancestor of the ruling peoples of Munster only, while 
Leinster, the East, is often inconsistently counted as part of 
Conn’s Half.^® In the succession of mythical Nunster kings,

A Hierarchy of Provinces 127

the son of Mug Lama is followed by Mug N& and then by 
Mug Nuadat,’* It has recently been argued^^ that Mugain, the 
name of a matriarch of Munster, is a feminine form of Mug. 
While Munster and her rulers signify the South, Leinster’s 
position is ambiguous, like the role of Nemed in the story of 
the Invasions, and like the status of the b6^aire who, though 
a freeman, was normally a client (cele) of a ruling noble and 
therefore a rent/payer (aithech).

The story of ‘The Expulsion of the Dessi’^® also helps to 
define the position of Munster in the hierarchy. The Dessi’s 
name means ‘vassals’ and they may be compared with the Vedic 
dasas and dasyus (‘foes’, ‘demons’, ‘slaves’) who were both ter/ 
restrial enemies and demons. The champion of the Dessi kills 
the high/king’s son, who has taken his niece without his con/ 
sent, and he maims the high/king himself. As a result, the 
D&si are expelled from Brega, the seat of the high/king. Like 
the lowly Partholon, the slayer of his king, they become out/ 
laws. Wandering in the South of Ireland, they acquire terri/ 
tory for a while in Leinster, but it is in Munster they eventually 
settle and there they claim equal freedom with the ruling people. 
Though Macdonell’s remark concerning the Vedic references 
to the dasyus ‘the line between what is historical and mythical 
is not clearly drawn’,^® may be equally applicable to the Dessi, 
the story purports to show why the Dessi were to be found as 
vassal peoples in the southern half of Ireland. They were also 
to be found in Meath — ^for Meath was a replica of the whole.Again, the characterization of Munster as the province of 
Music identifies it with the fourth function. We have already 
drawn attention to the association of craftsmen with low/class 
musicians in Irish and other societies.^® Among the ‘folk of 
vocal and instrumental music’ in Ireland, only the harpist 
could aspire to the rank of freeman — and he only on condition 
that he ‘accompanies nobility’.®^ A gloss in the Laws defines 
the unfree musicians as singers of crondn. The word crondn is 
also used of the buzzing of a fly.®® In Wales, minstrels were 
called cUr, and a homonym cUr means ‘flies’.®® At the bottom

128 Celtic Heritage

of the social scale in Ireland were the disreputable cross din, 
lewd, ribald rhymers or buffoons who went about in bands. 
There is an account®* of a band of nine of them, jet/black and 
hairy, chanting from nightfall till dawn upon the grave of a 
king after his burial. They are likened to demons of hell, and 
when they are dispersed by Mass and holy water they appear in 
the air above in the form of jet-'black birds. Though satire was 
permissible to all poets, the satirist as such is classed with ‘the 
sons of death and bad men’ — ^fools, jesters, buffoons, outlaws, 
heathens, harlots — who hold demon banquets.®® In India too, 
the labourer caste, with its lowly musicians, personifies the 
demons.®®A medieval text, which gives the characteristics of the king/ 
ships and peoples in Ireland, assimilates Munster’s two king/ 
ships to flies and its peoples to bees.®^ Flies are believed to be 
embodiments of demons, witches, or the souls of the dead by 
many peoples, including South American Indians, and not 
all these beliefs®® can be derived from the notoriety of Beelze/ 
bub, king of gnats and flies, in medieval Europe. Ahriman, 
the Persian god of darkness, used to appear in nature as a fly, 
and it was in the form of a fly that the demon of death brought 
decay and destruction to dead bodies. (It is said that Adam, 
who was given dominion over all animals, had no power over 
insects.) The five regalia of the king in India and Burma®® 
seem to correspond to the four castes together with the king/ 
ship: crown (kingship), umbrella (priest), sceptre (warrior), 
sandal (commoner) and fy'wisk (serf). Whereas the symbols of 
the first three castes represent their respective functions, that of 
the fourth is an instrument with which to exclude them. It is 
in several countries a symbol of rank.

We now leave the four quarters and turn to the ‘Centre’, 
whose key word is ‘Kingship’. Most of the attributes ascribed 
to this province, apart &om ‘high/kingship’ which is peculiar 
to itself, have already been met with in the quarters. The 
Centre combines the outstanding features of all the functions. 
Except for the inclusion of the fourth function,®® this accords

129

A Hierarchy of Provinces129

A Hierarchy of Provinces

with the nature of kingship, whether central or local.®^ In 
his comparative study of kingship,®* Hocart demonstrates that 
over a great part of the world kings, who were believed to be 
divine, had three essential attributes: justice, victory, and the 
power to give fruitfulness to the earth and health to mankind. 
Kings personify justice, whether they themselves exercise the 
judicial function or not; victory too belongs to them even 
though the actual defence of the realm may be in other hands, 
and however remote they may be from agricultural labours, the 
fertility of the earth depends upon them. Of these three attrh 
butes the primary one is justice, and it is from the king’s 
justice that victory and prosperity ensue.

So it was with the king of Ireland, and also with the lesser 
kings. Thanks to the righteousness of Cormac mac Airt’s 
government and judgements, calves were born after only 
three months’ gestation, every ridge produced a sackful of 
wheat, the rivers abounded with salmon, and there were not 
enough vessels to hold the milk that flowed from the cows.®® 
As Professor Dillon has pointed out,®* texts offering Tnstruc/ 
dons to a Prince’ lay great emphasis on the power of Truth as a 
prerequisite for a successful reign. The oldest of them declares:

‘By the prince’s truth great peoples are ruled.

‘By the prince’s truth great mortality is warded off from 
men.

‘By the prince’s truth great battles are driven off into the 
enemies’ country.

‘By the prince’s truth every right prevails and every vessel 
is full in his reign ...

‘By the prince’s truth fair weather comes in each fitting 
season, winter fine and frosty, spring dry and windy, 
summer warm with showers of rain, autumn with heavy 
dews and fruitful. For it is the prince’s falsehood that 
brings perverse weather upon wicked peoples, and dries 
up the Suit of the earth.’®®

130

Celtic Heritage130

Celtic Heritage

Similar testimony could be adduced from a variety of Irish 
texts, and in Wales a vaticinatory poem in the Black Book of 
Carmarthen speaks of years to come when there will be ‘false 
kings and failing fruit’.®® So much did the stability of the 
realm depend on righteousness that in one Irish story the part 
of the house of Tara where a king pronounced a false judgment 
‘slid down the deep declivity’ where it stood ‘and will so abide 
for ever’.®^ As in other lands, the falsehood which brought 
catastrophe was not limited to lying and wrong judgement. 
Wrongful succession and wrongful marriage had the same 
results. During the reign of the usurper Cairbre Caitcheann 
there was only one grain on each stalk of corn and one acorn 
on each oak, the rivers were empty of fish, the cattle milkless.®® 
As the result of Conn Cetchathach’s marriage with the sinful 
Becuma ‘there was no corn or milk in Ireland’.®® But ‘a 
prince’s truthfulness — ^it is known — ^is a conflict which brings 
debility on (enemy) hosts; it brings milk into the world, it 
brings corn and mast’.®®The three qualities essential to a king are defined in a negative 
way in Queen Medb’s requirements in a husband. He must be 
‘without jealousy, without fear, and without niggardliness’.®^ 
Jealousy would be a fatal weakness in a judge, as would fear in 
a warrior and niggardliness in a farmer. The higher the status, 
the more exacting are the standards that go with it, and it is 
noteworthy that the most reprehensible sin of each class is to 
indulge in the foibles of the next class below it. Meanness may 
be excused in a serf, but it is a denial of the farmer’s vocation; 
fear is not incompatible with the peaceful role of the farmer, 
but it is the warrior’s greatest disgrace; jealousy, as we have 
seen, is a trait of the warrior’s character, the correlative of his 
virtue, but it can undermine the impartiality required in a 
judge. A king must have the virtues of all the functions with-- 
out their weaknesses. The same doctrine may be found in the 
ancient laws of India. Transgressors of high caste are liable to 
heavier penalties than those of low caste, and from this point of 
view it is the serf, not the king, who can do no wrong.®® And

A Hierarchy of Provinces 13 1

with this we must call a. halt to our digression on the nature 
of kingship, a digression prompted by the need to ■ consider 
why all the Tunctions* , are represented among the attributes 
of the central province.

The text on which we have based our discussion of the hier/ 
archy of provinces, survives only in late medieval manuscripts, 
though there is mention of ‘The Story of the Manor of Tara* 
in the iiniknchas.^^ The provincial distribution of functions 
can, however, be shown to be older than the Middle Ages. 
Its main outlines appear in a poem ascribed to the ninth-^ 
century poet, Mael Mura:^^

‘Bremen took the north 
As the inheritance of his race.

With their ancient lore, with their good fortune.

With their laws.

‘With their fortresses, with their troops,

Fierce, active;‘Bremen took the north 
As the inheritance of his race.

With their ancient lore, with their good fortune.

With their laws.

‘With their fortresses, with their troops,

Fierce, active;

With their rash fights,

With their cattle.

her took the south of Ireland,

The order was so agreed upon.

With its activity without power,

With its harmony.

‘With its excellences, with its grandeur (humility),*

With its hospitality.

With its vivacity combined with hardiness (without 
harshness).

With its loveliness (festivity), with its purity.*

Comparative evidence shows that the system is of even greater 
antiquity. An Indian text/book for kings gives a detailed 
account of the lay/out of a royal fort.^® In the centre of the fort is 
the apartment of the gods and the ‘honourable liquor house*

* The words in brackets are alternative readings from the Book of Lecan.

132

Celtic Heritage

(like the mead/circling hall of Tara), with the king a little to 
the north of centre. Around all this are arranged the quarters of 
the four castes: the priests in the North, the warrior-'nobles in 
the East, the farmers in the South and the serfs in the West. The 
order, proceeding in a clockwise direction, is the same as in the 
Irish scheme, but whereas the Irish scheme begins with the 
priests (learning) in the West, the Indian priests are placed in the 
North. The evidence at our disposal does not enable us to 
account for this difference.^® But more remarkable than any 
divergence in detail is the presence both in Ireland and in 
India of the curious idea that social classes have to do with the 
points of the compass.

The correlation between peoples, functions and provinces 
which we adumbrated earlier in this chapter can now be 
tabulated in more detail:

People

Function

Caste or 
Class

Province

The Sons of 
Mil

Kings

Meath

Tuatha De 
Danann

I

Priests

Connacht

Fir Bolg

II i

Warriors

Ulster

Nemed

III

Farmers

Leinster

Partholon

IV

Serfs

Munster

Cessair

1Province

The Sons of 
Mil

Kings

Meath

Tuatha De 
Danann

I

Priests

Connacht

Fir Bolg

II i

Warriors

Ulster

Nemed

III

Farmers

Leinster

Partholon

IV

Serfs

Munster

Cessair

1

Aborigines

The second

Munster

3

We have still to consider the alternative location of the fifth 
fifth. Modern historians regard the allocation of two fifths to 
Munster as a spurious tradition invented by the ancient history 
ians, but we have already suggested that the analogy between

A Hierarchy of Provinces

t33

N N

Fig. 7 Classes and Directions (India and Ireland)

what may be called the ‘central fifth’ and the ‘outer fifth’, on the 
one hand, and the invasions of the Sons of Mil and of Cessair 
on the other, is a sufficient justification for considering both 
traditions seriously. To equate the royal central province with 
the Sons of Mil, ancestors of the kings of Tara, is appropriate 
enough, and if one had to search on the face of Ireland for a 
territory to correspond to the pre./diluvian Cessair, whom we 
have equated with the chaos that preceded the emergence of the 
castes, it would be impossible to find a more fitting location 
than the farthermost extremity of the province of the ‘Servant’ 
king. It behoves us therefore to look more closely at some of the 
traditions concerning Munster as a whole, and West Munster in 
particular.

In discussing the Five Primeval Invasions we observed that 
whereas Nemed’s people. Fir Bolg, and Tuatha De Danann 
belong together, Partholon and Cessair are separated from them 
by plague and Flood. Similarly, the province of Munster 
stands apart from the other provinces. The current opinion is 
that the overdordship of the king of Tara was not recognized in 
Munster until the ninth century.*’ Munster has a measure of 
autonomy and it has a hierarchy of its own which reproduces 
that of the superior realm. Like Ireland itself, it is divided, not 
only into two, but into five*® — North, South, East, West, and134 Celtic Heritage

Middle; Temair Luachra in Munster is the only Temair of 
note besides Temair Brega (Tara) and in the two stories about 
five brothers encountering the Sovereignty of Ireland, the king 
who is revealed is, in the one case, Niall ancestor of the Ui 
Neill who for many centuries were able to assert their claim to 
the kingship of Tara, in the other Lugaid Laigde, ancestor of 
the £rainn of Munster, In the text on which we have based this 
chapter the attributes of Munster are almost as alkembracing 
as those of the Central Province — they include knowledge, 
wisdom, learning, teaching, and poetic art, warriorship, and 
fertility, as well as attributes which connect it with the fourth 
‘function’. It is a world in itself.

This separateness and self-sufficiency of Munster is neverthe- 
less a concomitant of its peculiar role in the wider cosmology — 
a role which has many facets. Firstly, Munster is associated with 
the dead. The House of Donn and the world of the dead lie 
off the coast of West Munster, and a story which tells of the 
return of the dead Caflte to confirm a statement made by Mon- 
gan in Ulster says that he was first heard approaching in Corco 
Duibne in West Munster.*® ‘The House of Donn’ occurs too 
as a name for Munster or its royal house.®® MacNeill reckoned 
that five-sixths of the ogatn inscriptions on memorial stones in 
Ireland are located in the three south-western counties of 
Waterford, Cork, and Kerry, and they are particularly numer- 
ous in the barony of Corco Duibne.® ^ Among the invaders it 
was the companies of Cessair and Partholon who perished 
utterly.Secondly, Munster is pre-eminently the province of female 
supernatural personages. ‘The Sid of Munster’ is known as 
‘The Sid of the White Women’. Ireland is sometimes called 
‘the land of Anann’, and Anann, described in Cormac’s 
Glossary as ‘the mother of the gods of Ireland’, is comme- 
morated in the name of two hills, ‘The Paps of Anann’, near 
Killarney in Munster. Also associated with a Munster district 
is £bliu, sister of Lug, who was a wife of Fintan son of B6chra 
(‘Ocean’). Aine, variously described as wife and daughter of

A Hierarchy of Provinces 135A Hierarchy of Provinces 135

Manannan mac Lir, and grand/daughter of Donn of Uisnech, 
gave her name to the Munster hill Cnoc Aine which, like the 
Paps of Anann, was a r/Wwelling.®® The Caillech, or Old 
Woman, of Beare is known not only in Ireland but also in 
Scotland, where she is said to be ‘the most tremendous figure 
in Gaelic myth to-day’.®® Mountains, lakes and islands owe 
their existence or their location to her, and cairns are said to be 
stones that have fallen from her apron. Beare is a peninsula of 
West Munster, and a note in the medieval Book of Lecan 
says the Caillech was of the Corco Duibne, to whom it was 
bequeathed that ‘they shall never be without some wonderful 
caillech among them’.®* ‘This is why she was called the Old 
Woman of Beare: she had fifty foster-'children in Beare. She 
passed into seven periods of youth, so that every husband used to 
pass from her to death of old age and so that her grand/ 
children and great/grandchildren were peoples and races.’®® 
Munster is the primeval world, the place of origin. On its 
west coast are the landing places of several of the mythical in/ 
vaders, including Dun na mBarc in Corco Duibne where 
Cessair came to land. Under the name of Banba, this first 
woman lived to meet the Sons of Mil on Sliab Mis, again in 
Corco Duibne. Tul Tuinde where Fintan, or alternatively 
Banba, survived the Flood, is likewise in West Munster, accord/ 
ing to the Fir Bolg division of Ireland. On Valentia Island off 
the west coast of Munster dwelt the wizard Mug Ruith who 
lived through nineteen reigns.®® Sen means ‘old’, and Sen, 
Sengann, Ro/shen, Senach, Sengarman, Senlaech, Senan, 
Senfiacail — ^who appear in diverse stories — ^are all Munster 
characters.®’ Again, the firainn are believed by historians to be 
aboriginal inhabitants who were already in Ireland when the 
Gaels arrived. Unlike other tribes, their pedigree is traced, not 
to the Sons of Mil, but to Lugaid, the son of fth®® — ^the fore/ 
runner who was killed by Tuatha De Danann. Their name is 
traditionally linked with that of Ireland (&iu), and their pre/ 
sence is recorded for many parts of the country, but the Sen 
‘the Old Erainn’, belonged to Munster.®®136 Celtic Heritage

To describe Munster as the province of the dead, and as the 
province of female and ancient personages, is to stress only 
some of the more obvious pecularities of its character. It is a 
land of surprises, as was dicovered by King Fedlimid and his 
men when they approached the house of Gulide of West 
Munster, in a snowstorm. Gulide was the sharpest and bitter/- 
est lampooner in Ireland, ready to ask anything of anybody, but 
‘not good at giving’. He had three daughters, ‘Fly’, ‘Smasher’ 
and ‘Scream’, and he sent one of them to parley with the visitors, 
‘to see whether they will pass us by tonight’. She confionted the 
king with a most discouraging account of the poverty of the 
household — the old food had gone, the new had not come, the 
women were pregnant, the cows barren and devoid of milk, 
the mice were active, and even the hard benches were rotten. 
Eventually, the girl led the king by the hand into the house. 
He stayed for three days and three nights, and never during his 
reign did he fare better as regards whitemeat.*®®The paradoxical nature of Munster manifests itself in many 
ways. If the kingship of Munster is ‘Hke a fly’, the people are 
‘like bees’, and in Celtic tradition, bees have a secret wisdom 
and hail from Paradise.®^ The supernatural beings of Munster 
have a dual nature. Cessair, the outcast, is also Banba the 
queen, Fintan the idolator is the sage of the ages. Mug Nuadat, 
the ‘Servant’ king is also known as Eogan the Great (Eo^an 
MSr). Mugain, the Munster queen, seems to be the same person 
as Mor of Munster.®® The story goes that the kings of Ireland 
were seeking Mor. Her ‘House’ is pointed out at the western 
extremity of Corco Duibne, and when the sun is shining it is 
said that ‘Mor is on her throne’. Fintan changes his form, and 
the Old Woman of Beare renews her youth, time and time 
again. A similar metamorphosis appears in a Fenian story in 
which Finn’s destiny is revealed by a visitant from the Other 
World. This stranger was Crdnanach — ^his name is suggestive 
—from Sid ar Femuin, the Sid of Munster, and he appeared, an

* i.e., milk food.

A Hierarchy of Provinces I37

enormous, black, mis-shapen churl, upon Finn’s hunting- 
mound. He brought out two pipes and played ‘so that wounded 
men and women in travail would have fallen asleep at the 
exquisite music which he made’. Later, ‘As the light of day 
came there came upon the churl a beautiful form and shape- 
liness and radiance, so that there was a delightful beauty upon 
him . . . and he had the demeanour of a high-king, and there 
was the charm of a youth in his figure.’®®We have connnected the Music of the South with low-class 
entertainers, but this gives only one side of the picture. Time 
and again, both in the early literature and in folktales, sweet 
music is revealed to be one of the essential attributes of the 
Other World. Its sound often heralds the approach of the 
supernatural, and by means of it the si'iSAk place men and 
women under enchantment. Just as, in the story of the Sons of 
Mil, the learning of the North is set over against the music of 
the South, so the Ri^ Veda bears witness to the fundamental 
opposition of the brahmans and the Gandharvas ^^ — beings who 
dwell in a world apart and whose name is also used with 
reference to human musicians. In the ^atapatha Brdhmana, 
Words and Chant (Rik and Saman) are equated with Earth and 
Heaven, respectively,®® and in China ‘right behaviour’ (Lt) 
and music are similarly contrasted: ‘Music ... is of the order 
of heaven, Li .. . is of the order of earth. . . . Music was made 
manifest in the genesis of all things, and Li has its abode in 
their completion.’ It is a universal belief that words have a 
creative power; they symbolize the ma ni fest world. Music, on 
the other hand, brings us into harmony with the non-manifest, 
and ‘to understand music is to be at the secret source of L/’.®®

In the time of Conchobar and the warriors of the Ulster 
Cycle, two kings are said to have ruled in Munster, Eochaid 
mac Luchta and CuRoi mac Dairi. Some texts say that they 
were the kings of the two Munsters, respectively, others men- 
tion only one or the other as the king of Munster.®^ The pedi- 
gree of Eochaid is traced to fth son of Bregon, but we are told

13 8 Celtic Heritage13 8 Celtic Heritage

little about him. He was one/eyed, a defect which would dis-' 
qualify a person for the kingship in other provinces. He shares 
this Fomorian feature with the primeval Fintan and Partholon, 
with Mug Ruith the ‘giant slave’ and sorcerer, with Nar 
(‘Shame’) the swineherd of Bodb of the Sid of Munster, and 
with ‘Ilhomen’, ‘Damage’, and ‘Want’, the three sons of 
Uar (‘Cruel’), of Tuatha De Danann, who plundered Finn 
in Munster.®® The latter three are described as ‘three foemen 
. . . lame^thighed ... left/handed, of the race of wondrous evil, 
from the gravelly plain of Hell below’; ‘venom on their wea^ 
pons, and venom on their dress, and on their hands and feet, 
and on everything they touched’. Personages with one eye do 
not belong exclusively to Munster in the stories, but they 
characterize the role which is Munster’s.The other king, CuRoi, is more of an enigma than any ot 
the Munster personages. In one context he is a giant herds/- 
man or peasant (bachlach), who may be compared with the giant 
lords of animals who dirert Arthurian heroes as they approach 
the confines of the Other World.®® In another context he is the 
‘King of the World’.®® His remarkable fortress at Sliab Mis in 
Corco Duibne recalls the rotating cosmic palaces of Asiatic 
legend. ‘In what airt soever of the globe CuRof should happen 
to be, every night o’er the fort he chaunted a spell, till the fort 
revolved as swiftly as a mill/’Stone. The entrance was never to be 
found after sunset.’®^ He himself is a sorcerer and a master of 
illusions. Standing in Conchobar’s hall he looks like a blazing 
luminary, but at the same time the noise of his movements 
sounds like a great storm. As the high/king of T emair Luachra,®® 
he belongs to Ireland, and yet he is not of it. From the time he 
took up arms at seven years of age until his death, he had not 
reddened his sword in Ireland, nor had the food of Ireland 
passed his lips.’® He is addressed as ‘thou man who traversest 
the stream of brine’.®* CuRoi has close affinities with the 
Indian god Pu&n,®® who is sometimes represented as god of 
the siidra. Puian too is a cowherd and a protector of cattle; 
he carries an ox/goad. On account of his lack of teeth he does

A Hierarchy of Provinces 139

not eat ordinary food but feeds on a kind of gruel. On the 
other hand, he is the distributor of portions to the gods, and 
he and Soma have the guardianship of living creatures. He is 
the protector of all this world — and he is a patron of conjurors. 
Born on the far paths of heaven and earth, he sees all creatures 
clearly at once and he is a guide on journeys to the Other 
World. He also aids in the revolution of day and night, the 
epithet ‘glowing’ is frequently and exclusively applied to him, 
and he is sometimes identified with the sun.CuRoi plays diverse roles. He appears as CuChulainn’s 
helper in battle, as one who brings contempt upon him, as his 
challenger and tester, and as his rival and victim.’® We have 
already told the story of CiiRoi as the challenger in a beheading 
contest, a motif which also appears in the Middle English 
poem of Gawain and the Green Knight. A. K. Coomara.' 
swamy has interpreted this theme in the light of Indian paral.- 
lels, and in the giant herdsman he sees the Cosmic Man or 
World Giant who is identified with Varuna, Prajapati, 
Atman — ^the highest gods — ‘in their sacrijical aspects as the source 
from which all things come forth ”. And so we reach the ultimate 
formulation of the paradox of the fourth ‘function’. Personi/ 
fied by serfs and outcastes, it is the lowliest in the hierarchy, but 
as the embodiment of the sacrifice it is at one with the highest 
gods. Divided into two, one half of Munster symbolizes serfs, 
the other the Other World. But as one province it is a land of 
contradictions. In one of the earlier law tracts, its king is des-” 
cribed as ‘a master (ollam) over kings’.’® After Tuatha De 
Danann have repaired to the side, leaving the daylight world to 
the Sons of Mil, it is Bodb of the Sid of Munster they have as 
king. The visiting high/'king who instructs their rulers is not a 
king of Tara, but Manannan mac Lir, the god of the sea.’® 
In the occult, Munster and the powers beyond it are supreme. 
There, the last is first.

CHAPTER VI

InvolutionsCHAPTER VI

Involutions

The correlation of the provinces of Ireland with 
functions and social classes was, of course, symbolical. We are 
not suggesting that all the inhabitants of Connacht were 
druids, or that all the inhabitants of Munster were minstrels! 
There are units within units. Thus, there is a story of the divi-- 
sion of Ireland into twenty/five parts among the children of 
Ugaine Mor, a division which is said to have lasted for three 
hundred years.^ Indian texts sometimes speak, not of the ‘five 
peoples’ but of the ‘fae five/peoples’,^ and there are many divi^ 
sions and subdivisions within the four main castes. Whereas 
the five peoples of Irish tradition symbolize the major functions 
in the hierarchy, there are indications that each was also a com/ 
plete society in itself, a replica of the entire series. Kingship be/ 
longed pre/eminendy to the central province, but every pro/ 
vince had a king of its own. If, in the larger unity, the king of 
Munster’s part was that of the ‘Servant’, in his own province his 
role no doubt corresponded to that of the central king. Similarly, 
each province had its druids, warriors, farmers and serfs.

Furthermore, the social classes themselves were not homo/ 
geneous groups. Each had a structure which seems to have 
reproduced that of the larger society. Just as there were high/ 
kings, provincial kings and tribal kings, so were there grades 
within the learned class. We hear of dxnids, Jilid, and bards, 
and these seem to correspond to the druids, vaks, and bards of 
Celtic Gaul, of whom classical writers give somewhat con/ 
fusing accounts.® The druids and the vaks were apparently 
closely related in function, though the former seem to have been 
held in highest honour. Both were learned philosophers, but 
whereas the druids, who apparently presided at sacrifices, were 
judges in public and private disputes, the mks were probably

Involutions 141Involutions 141

seers who foretold the future by augury and the sacrifice 01 
victims. We have already noted that the name druid probably 
comes from a root meaning ‘to know*. On the other hand, 
words cognate with votes in other languages are connected with 
prophecy, inspiration and poetry. The third class, the bards, 
accompanied their songs with instruments resembling lyres, 
and they praised some and reviled others, and so too in medieval 
Ireland, praise poems (then composed by the Jili) were sung 
by the bard and there was a harp accompaniment. Indeed 
the original meaning of the word bard appears to have been 
‘singer of praise’.* The preoccupation of votes (and prob/ 
ably of filid) with inspiration, with prophecy, and with the 
temporal, seems to connect them with the function of the 
warrior — debordant, berserk — while the praises of the bard are 
analogous to the food/gifts of the third function and the acclama^ 
tion by which the third estate confirms the actions and status 
of its rulers.® Thus, within the learned class there were grades 
corresponding to those of priest, warrior, and farmer— and be/ 
neath them were disreputable entertainers such as the crossdin.With the advent of Christianity such a pattern would in/ 
evitably become blurred. The druid, as priest of the old religion, 
lost his function, and in the Irish laws he is degraded to the 
subject nemed class, while the Jili, who seems to have inherited 
something of the druid’s role, ranks with the upper nemed 
class.® Later still, the role of the Jili became assimilated to that 
of the bard, so that the thirteenth century Jili was above all a 
composer of praise poetry. However, ‘The Book of Rights’, 
compiled or edited in the eleventh century, states that ‘know/ 
ledge about kings and their privileges is proper to the Jili and 
not to the bard’. According to other texts, the honour/price of a 
bard was but half that of a Jili, and moreover, a bard could 
claim nothing on the ground of being a man of learning but 
should be satisfied with what his native wit might win him.’^

The pattern is again mirrored with varying degrees of clarity 
in the composition of the successive companies of invaders.

142 Celtic HeritageThe pattern is again mirrored with varying degrees of clarity 
in the composition of the successive companies of invaders.

142 Celtic Heritage

In Gessair’s company, Fintan (the sage) and Bith (who went 
north) are clearly superior to Ladra, the pilot, who went south 
and was the first to die. Partholon is said to have had three sons 
and a hireling, a company which, including himself, made five. 
Another version states that he had four sons (with no mention 
of a hireling) and their names appear again as those of the four 
sons of Eber who were granted rule in Munster.® Among 
Nemed’s four sons, larbonei the Soothsayer, ancestor of 
Tuatha De Danann, represents the First Function, Starn, 
ancestor of Fir Bolg, the Second Function, Fergus Redside the 
Third, and Annind, the first to die, the Fourth. The five Sons 
of Dela who led the Fir Bolg invasion divided Ireland into 
five. Two of them, Gann and Sengann, who took the two 
provinces of Munster, have the same names as two Fomo-' 
rian kings, antagonists of Nemed. Slaine and Rudraige, who 
took Leinster and Ulster, respectively, are namesakes of two of 
Partholon’s sons. Sldim means ‘health’ and Partholon’s Slaine 
is described as the first physician of Ireland,® while Rudraige 
was also the name of the founder of the royal house of Ulster.We have identified Tuatha De Danann with Function I, 
but the other functions ate represented within them. When Lug 
appears on the scene, their leaders are Nuadu (the king), the 
Dagda (god of druidism), and Ogma (the champion), to-' 
gether with Dian C&ht (god of health) and Goibniu (the 
artisan).^® Lug’s birth was made possible by the alliance which 
the Tuatha made with the Fomoire before coming to Ireland 
firom the islands of magic arts, and in the Second Battle of Mag 
Tuired he assumes the form of his mother’s people by going on 
one leg and with one eye closed. In some versions of the tradi^ 
tion he returns for the battle &om the Land of Promise.^^ At 
Tara he declares himself to be a wright. Though the crafts-- 
man’s status is, as a rule, a humble one, he can rise socially by 
mastering more than one craft: ‘Whose art is many, his honour-- 
price is many. It increases franchise.’^® As the Samildanach, 
the master of all arts— including the arts of the scholar and the 
warrior as well as the humble crafts — Lug ascends to the seat

Involutions

143

of the sage, and the king rises before him till the end of thirteen 
days — an honour which recalls the twelve ‘omen days’, and a 
r%ime which recalls the temporary kings of other lands. The 
reign of such kings coincides with a period of ritual chaos 
during the course of which they are expected to defeat the 
powers of evil and ensure the growth of crops. In some cases, 
standing upon one foot is an essential part of their ritual.^®The polarity of the outer fifth and the central fifth is trans^ 
cended in Lug. The outer realm is the original unity in which 
all statuses and destinies have their being in potentia. At the 
centre is the kingship which synthesizes all the functions and 
upon which the destinies of the realm depend. Between these 
two poles lies the cosmos, in which each province, each func/ 
tion and each craft has its separate existence. Assemblies, as 
we shall explain, represent both a return to the original unity 
and the re/creation of order. They are presided over by kings, 
but in ‘The Settling of the Manor of Tara’ they are listed among 
the attributes of Munster. Their originator was Lug. Again, 
fidchell is a game of kings, but in the list of provincial attri/ 
butes it is ascribed to Munster. It was invented by Lug, and it 
was he too who instituted horse races, an important feature of 
assemblies, and balLgames.^* He has been compared with 
Varuna,^® the possessor of creative magic (mayS) and the 
asura par excellence among the Devas. In Lug, king and crafts/ 
man, Tuatha and Fomoire, unite.

Julius Caesar, who numbered a druid among his friends, 
observes^® that the god whom the Celts of Gaul worshipped 
most was Mercury, whom they declared to be the inventor of 
all arts, the guide on journeys and the greatest power in com/ 
mercial affairs. After him they set Apollo who warded off 
diseases. Mars who controlled wars, Jupiter the ruler of heaven, 
and Minerva who supplied the first principles of trades and 
crafts. Professor Dumezil has pointed ouP* that whereas these 
five deities do not figure as a group in Roman religion, and the 
Roman Mercury is not described as the inventor of all arts, the 
five leaders of the Tuatha who confer before the Second Battle

144 Celtic Heritage144 Celtic Heritage

of Mag Tuired do correspond to them as regards functions. 
Thus, Lug the master of all arts and the institutor of fairs was 
joined by the Dagda and Ogma, and to these were summoned 
Dian Cecht and Goibniu. Mercury is named also by Tacitus as 
the god who was most venerated by the Germans, and it is 
clear that the god referred to is Wodan,^® whom Dumezil 
has equated in ‘function’ with Varuna.^® What has been said 
above about Lug’s paradoxical nature helps to explain why the 
greatest of all Gaulish gods was the inventor of the arts.

The figure antithetical to Lug in the Cycle of Tuatha De 
Danann is Bres. Both Lug and Bres are half Fomoire, but 
whereas the former has a Fomorian mother and a Tuatha father, 
the latter has a Fomorian father and a Tuatha mother. Each 
in the event supports his father’s side against his mother’s. 
Whereas Lug’s inferior connections are with crafts, those of 
Bres are with agriculture as we saw in Chapter 11. But his nig^ 
gardly behaviour is as discordant with the generosity of the 
third function as it is with the magnanimity of a king. In him 
the negative, Fomorian side is dominant.The prominent part played in various situations by the 
sister’s son or daughter’s son of a king will appear in Part III 
of this book. Generally speaking, there is a conflict, as in the 
cases of Lug and Bres, between the hero and his maternal kin. 
Even CuChulainn, the great protagonist of his mother’s 
people, sometimes displays hostility towards Conchobar, his 
maternal uncle.®® The term by which Bres is described is goV'' 
mac which means ‘a dutiful son’, ‘an adopted son’ (adopted for 
the support of the adopter), or ‘a sister’s son’. Words which 
have a comparable range of meaning are nk and £nk, both of 
which mean ‘champion’ and ‘sister’s son’.®^ Among the 
Germans, according to Tacitus, the sons of sisters were highly 
honoured by their uncles, and this tie of blood was regarded as 
particularly sacred.®® Bres does not live up to the epithet of 
‘dutiful son’, and we are reminded again of the ambivalent 
attitude towards cross^cousins and uterine nephews in societies 
where a man’s choice of spouse is limited to the daughters of

Involutions MS

his mother’s brothers or of his father’s sisters. The cross-'cousin 
is a god, yet like Bres he steals the offering and is treated like a 
scapegoat,®® Hocart, at the conclusion of a discussion of these 
uterine relations in Indian mythology, suggests that Christ 
fulfils the role of cross^cousin in the Christian tradition, and it 
is noteworthy that in Irish literature there are references to 
Christ as ‘our sister’s son’.®*The fact that every unit, however small, tends to have a 
structure which mirrors that of the whole®® makes the overfall 
picture extremely complicated. Personages and sub/groups can 
have associations with a function other than their primary one. 
For example, the bard belongs to Function I, but in the sub/ 
division of that function he corresponds to Function III; the 
Fiana belong to Function III, but in as much as they represent 
the military aspect of that function they have affinities with 
Function II.®® All this offers unlimited opportunities for con/ 
fusion in the transmission and interpretation of a tradition 
which has been only partially preserved.

And there is yet another complication to be noticed. Finn is 
associated chiefly with the southern half of Ireland; his prin/ 
cipal residence is said to be the std of Almu in Leinster.®’ His 
chief adversary, Goll mac Morna, on the other hand, is repre/ 
sented as the leader of the Connacht _^<i«<i.®® That is, in the 
lower cycle of stories, the one/eyed antagonist within the jiana is 
located in the North of Ireland, the hero in the South, This 
inversion of the relationship between North and South hitherto 
considered is in accord with the belief that in the Other W orld® * 
everything is inverted. For example, we have already noted, 
with regard to ghosts of the dead and other spirits, that our day 
is their night. In Hindu belief ‘ “left” on earth corresponds to 
“right” in the beyond’,®® while according to the Dyaks of 
Borneo, in heaven ‘no means yes, black becomes white’.®* 
Such inversions have to be borne in mind in any attempt to 
account for contradictory beliefs concerning ‘right’ and ‘left’ 
as well as ‘north’ and ‘south’.®®

K

CHAPTER VII

The CentreK

CHAPTER VII

The Centre

In ‘the settling of the manor of tara’, Fintan de^ 
dares that it is ‘right to take the provinces of Ireland from Tara 
and from Uisnech’, two sites which are for Ireland like ‘two 
kidneys in a beast’. Uisnech, the mid/point of the island, is in 
Meath, Tara is in Brega, but this territorial duality does not 
seem to have been absolute, for, according to ‘The Book of 
Rights’, Brega is included within the larger unity of Meath. 
It behoves us therefore to look more closely at the roles of the 
two great ‘centres’ of Irish mythology. We will begin with Tara.

In discussing the feminine nature of kingship, we observed 
that the kings of Ireland were men who showed favour to, or 
were accepted by, the lady who personified the realm. Installa^ 
tion was a ‘king^marriage’. In the ritual of Tara, on the other 
hand, the king must be acknowledged by an embodiment of the 
masculine principle. Ireland, in addition to bearing the names 
of various goddesses, is called the ‘Plain of Fal’, or the ‘Island 
of Fal’, the Irish are ‘the men of Fal’, the king ‘the ruler of Fal’. 
FaP is the name of a stone on the Hill of Tara. It is character/ 
ized as ‘the stone penis’, and in later tradition as ‘the member 
of Fergus’. This is the ‘Stone of Knowledge’ which cries out 
under the destined king. One story speaks of a more elaborate 
ritual in which the ory of F^ is preceded by a symbolical re/ 
birth. There were two flagstones at Tara, called Blocc and 
Bluigne, which stood so close together that one’s hand could 
only pass sideways between them. When they accepted a man, 
they would open before him until his chariot went through. 
‘And Fal was there, the “stone penis” at the head of the chariot/ 
course (?); when a man should have the kingship, it screeched 
against his chariot axle, so that all might hear.’® Similarly in

r4(S

The Centre 147r4(S

The Centre 147

India, notwithstanding the personification of sovereignty by a 
goddess, ‘the essence of kingship . . . was also believed to reside 
in a Ungay, a sort of palladium of the kingdom, which was 
regarded as a presentation of 5 iva himself. This lihga (phallus) 
was placed on the top of a pyramid, in the very centre of the 
royal residence, which was supposed to be the spot where the 
axis mundi reached the earth,’*

The court of Tara, the centre of the Plain of Fal, was the 
quintessence of the state. A medieval source tells how King 
Domnall son of Aed established his seat at Dun na nGed, on 
the banks of the Boyne, because Tara had been cursed by all 
the saints of Ireland. ‘And he drew seven great ramparts about 
that fort after the manner of Tara of the kings, and he designed 
even the houses of the fort after the manner of the houses of 
Tara: namely, the great Central Hall, where the king himself 
used to abide with kings and queens and ollams and all that 
were best in every art; and the Hall of Munster and the Hall 
of Leinster and the Banquet/Hall of Connacht and the 
Assembly/Hall of Ulster.’ In addition to the Central Hall and 
the Halls of the four Great Provinces there were ‘the Prison of 
the Hostages and the Star of the Poets and the Palace (Grianh) 
of the Single Pillar (which Cormac son of Art first made for 
his daughter) and all the other houses’.®It seems likely that the four provincial halls at Tara were 
arranged around the Central Hall, and the plan of the whole 
state was further reproduced within the Central Hall itself. 
‘And he (Domnall) summoned the men of Ireland to this 
feast at Tara. A couch was prepared for Domnall in the midst 
of the royal palace at Tara and afterwards the host were seated. 
The men of Munster in the southern quarter of the house. The 
men of Connaught in the western part of the house. The men 
of Ulster in the northern. The men of Leinster in the eastern 
side of it.’ And in the middle of the hall sat the five kings. 
‘The centre of Ireland around Domnall in that house. Thus was 
the court made. The king of Leinster on the couch opposite 
in the east, the king of Munster on his right hand, the king of

148 Celtic Heritage

Connacht at his back, the king of Ulster on his left hand.’® 
Thus the orientation of the group accords with the dual mean-' 
ing of the usual Gaelic terms for the four directions, north, 
south, east, and west, meaning also left, right, before, and 
behind, respectively. These kings may not have had the political 
power of a Louis XIV, but in the realm of symbolism they 
could legitimately proclaim: V^tat cest nous.The division of a city, a land, or the world, into four quarters 
with a central fifth is anything but unique. The Rig Veda speaks 
of the jive directions, north, south, east, west, and ‘here’, and 
this is echoed in such Gaelic sayings as ‘the five parts of the 
world’ and ‘into the five points’, which correspond to our 
‘four corners of the earth’, and ‘in all directions’.'^ In India, 
realms and cities used to be divided into four quarters, ‘some^ 
times with the king’s country in the middle making a total of 
five’.® The same concept is fundamental to the elaborate cos^ 
mology of China and there is a striking resemblance between 
the five halls of the Irish court and the ‘Hall of Light’, the cos-- 
mic palace of Chinese tradition. This also consisted of five 
halls ‘which were for the worship of the spirits of the five Ti,* 
who ruled in the five directions’.® Again, the Grail Castle as 
pictured in Sone de Naussay is a complete cosmic symbol. It is 
built on an island, with four towers on the outer wall, and a 
central round tower (elsewhere given as square), which ‘is 
the palace’.^® Evidence of this kind which could be quoted 
from many other parts of the world leaves us in no doubt as to 
the cosmological significance of the four and central fifth in 
Ireland.^^

The story of ‘Bricriu’s Feast’ preserves a different tradition 
about the arrangement of the Banqueting Hall at Tara, Bricriu 
of the Poison Tongue, trouble/'maker of the Ulster Cycle, 
made a great feast for King Conchobar and his men in Ulster, 
and he built a new palace for the occasion. ‘The house had been 
made on the plan of Tech Midchuarta (Tara’s Banqueting Hall), 
* Deified Emperors.

The Centre

149

having nine compartments from fire to wall. ... A royal com-' 
partment had been constructed for Conchobar in the fore/part 
of that palace, higher than all the compartments of the house.149

having nine compartments from fire to wall. ... A royal com-' 
partment had been constructed for Conchobar in the fore/part 
of that palace, higher than all the compartments of the house.

. . . The twelve compartments of the twelve chariot^warriors of 
Ulster had been constructed around it. ... A sun/chamber 
belonging to Bricriu himself had been made on a level with the

Fig. 8 Tara and the state

compartments of Conchobar and the champions. . . . Glass 
windows had been placed looking out on every side of it, and 
one of these had been cut above Bricriu’s couch, so that he 
would have a clear view of the great hall from his compart-' 
ment; for he knew the Ulstermen would not permit him to 
enter the house.’^^

The assertion that Tara’s Banqueting Hall had nine com-- 
partments does not tally with the plan we have already des-' 
cribed, but a glance at Chinese and Indian cosmologies re-' 
solves the apparent contradiction. The evidence concerning the 
Chinese ‘Hall of Light’ is particularly striking. Its division 
‘seems at first to have been into five, and afterwards into nine.

150 Celtic Heritage150 Celtic Heritage

rooms or halls, the symbolism of these numbers being that of 
the directional and seasonal schemes. . . . Certainly the Nine 
Rooms represent the co/ordinate scheme of eight directions of 
the compass (quarters and half-quarters) plus the centre, just 
as the five rooms represented the simpler scheme of the four 
cardinal points plus the centre.’^® The Hall of Light also had 
an upper chamber, an astronomical observatory — ‘Skyward 
House’, ‘Skyward Look^'out’, ‘Spirit Tower’, ‘Bright Palace’^* 
— ^to which Bricriu’s many/windowed sun.-room seems to bear 
some affinity. Notwithstanding the pre/eminence of the number 
five in Chinese symbolism, nine too is a ‘perfect number’ and 
the country was divided into nine departments corresponding 
to the nine rooms of the Hall of Light. In Java also the ‘Holy 
Five’ becomes the ‘Holy Nine’ by the addition of the four 
secondary points of the compass. Similarly in India, we have 
alongside the four/five/fold conception of cities and lands a 
tradition that the city and the military camp consist of nine 
sections. We are also told that the king’s quarters were in the 
northern ninth of the central ninth, while the gods dwelt in 
the actual centre.^® The plan would therefore be as in Fig. 9 
and it is similar to that of the Hall of Light and the Chinese 
state.Around Conchobar’s couch in Bricriu’s Hall were the 
couches of the twelve heroes of Ulster, an arrangement which 
is paralleled bythe beds of the Twelve Peers of France set around 
the magnificent central bed of Charlemagne. It also brings to 
mind King Arthur and his twelve knights, 05in seated in a 
circle with his twelve god/councillors, Hrolf and his twelve 
berserks, Odysseus and his twelve companions, as well as the 
Biblical twelves.^' Mrs Mary Danielli has shown that a four/ 
five-'fold conception of the state is also combined with a 
twelve/thirteen-'fold conception in cosmologies as widely sepa/ 
rated as those of Iceland, China and Madagascar.^® Like 
Ireland, Iceland consisted of four quarters, north, south, east, 
and west, but every quarter was further divided into three

The Centre iji

sections, making twelve in all. These twelve sections, or 
‘Things’, sent a given number of men to the annual meeting 
known as the Allthing, which was held at the theoretical 
centre of Iceland under the direction of the Lawspeaker. Here 
a temporary town was set up which reproduced the pattern of 
the state, the four quarters, the twelve magistrates, and so on.

Fig. 9 The ninefold plan

and the area seems to have been elaborately laid out for this 
purpose. Conchobar and his twelve heroes are by no means the 
only example of a king as the centre of twelve in Irish tradition. 
According to Crkh Gahlach, twelve was the company of a king 
of a tuath and there were twelve couches in a royal house.^® In 
‘The Wooing of Emer’ we hear of a king of Munster and twelve 
under^kings of Munster’®® When Conaire proceeded to the 
bulkfeast of Tara, where he was chosen king, three kings were 
waiting for him on each of the four roads to Tara with clothes 
to cover him. Before his death at Da Derga’s Hostel, four sets 
of three men were stationed all round his room.®^The Irish are said to have had twelve free or noble races — 
six in the Half of Conn, and six in the Half of Mug. ‘These

152 Celtic Heritage

are the free states of Ireland/®® The country was divided into 
twice six parts when five chieftains went to the North with 
firemon and five to the South with fiber. According to other 
versions, there were seven in the North and six in the South, 
making a total of thirteen.®* In agreement with this, there are 
indications that at least three of the four great provinces of Ire-' 
land were once tripartite. We hear of the ‘three provinces of 
Ulster (East, North, and West)’ and there were ‘the three 
Connachts’.®* At the Fair of Carmun in Leinster, the king of 
Ossory (a province in south Leinster) sat on the king of 
Leinster’s right, and the king of Offaly (a province in north 
Leinster) on the king of Leinster’s left,®® an arrangement which 
implies the conception of a tripartite Leinster. The Life of St 
Patrick also speaks of ‘a twelfth part of Ireland’;®® there were 
twelve mountains of Ireland, twelve rivers, twelve lakes, twelve 
winds, and the firmament was divided into ‘twice/six parts’ 
corresponding to the ‘twice^six months’.®’In China and Madagascar the twelve divisions around the 
cosmic square represent the twelve months of the year.®* That a 
correlation of the twelve divisions with the calendar was also 
known in Europe is attested by Aristotle’s observation that the 
Athenians had distributed their four tribes in inru’tation of the 
seasons of the year. By dividing each of them into three phratries 
they had twelve subdivisions corresponding to the months. 
Each phratry comprised thirty families of thirty men each, as 
the months had thirty days.®* We know of no direct evidence 
connecting the divisions of Ireland, or the court of the king of 
Tara, with the calendar. But it should be remembered that the 
very division of the year into four seasons, like the division of 
a land into four quarters, is an idea and not a natural phenom-' 
enon. The account of the construction of Bricriu’s Hall cer/ 
tainly embodies a calendrical symbolism. It took seven o£ the 
Ulster champions to carry every single lath, and thirty of the 
chief artificers of Ireland were employed in constructing and 
arranging the building. The hall contained the couches of the 
twelve heroes and it was built in the course of o«e year.

The Centre

153

The connection between Conchobar and the calendar is 
further attested by a text from the Book of Leinster.®® Concho^ 
bar’s mother, Ness, had twelve foster-fathers; he himself became 
king of Ulster by first being granted a nominal kingship for 
one year. There were three^hmdred^and^sixty^fve persons in his 
household — ‘that is, the number of days in the year is the 
number of men that were in Conchobar’s household’. Each 
man provided food and drink for the household for one night, 
‘so that the first to feed them . . . would come again at the end 
of the year’. But Conchobar himself provided the feast when 
the great host assembled at Samain, the year’s turning. In the

Fig. 10 Cosmos and calendar (China)Fig. 10 Cosmos and calendar (China)

household was the gigantic Fergus mac Roich, from whom 
Conchobar acquired the kingship for a year as a bride-price 
for his own mother. Fergus seems to have symbolized the week, 
for all the measurements of his huge body are given in sevens — 
‘the heptads of Fergus’. Unlike the others, he fed the household 
for a week. But while Fergus was the embodiment of seven, 
the number is connected in a less emphatic way with Con- 
chobar himself. Seven prophets foretold his advent seven years

154 Celtic Heritage

before his birth, he attained the kingship at the end of his 
seventh year, and the feast he gave at Samain lasted for seven 
days — Samain itself and three days before and after. He was 
both the year and the week.

Was the identification of the king and his household with 
the year peculiar to Ulster; Comparative evidence disposes us 
to the view that the king of Tara and his court, no less than 
Conchobar and Bricriu’s Hall (which was modelled on Tara’s 
Banqueting Hall), symbolized the year, vidth the four quarters 
corresponding to the four seasons.Although the four great provinces and the centre constitute 
the state, the ordered cosmos, they do not comprise all that is. 
Beyond the confines of Ireland and beneath its surface lies 
another ‘world’ and, as we shall see in Part III, Celtic stories 
are largely concerned with the intrusion upon the cosmos of 
strange chaotic beings and with the adventures of mortals 
who enter that Other World. Similarly, beyond the ramparts 
of Tara, the microcosmic symbol, there is a world that is 
‘other’ and often hostile. The opposition between these two 
worlds is expressed by another analogy, which likens Tara and 
Ireland to the board on which the game called Brandub was 
played. This was a game in which a king.'piece and four sup^ 
porting pieces occupied the centre of the board, and com^ 
parison with the Welsh Tawlbwrdd and Swedish Tahlut, about 
which more is known,®^ suggests that there were eight opposing 
pieces distributed along the sides of the board. Comparison 
with these games also suggests that a board with forty.-nine 
‘holes’ or squares (7 x 7 ), like the one recovered from a lake.' 
dwelling in Westmeath, is the appropriate size. ‘The Settling 
of the Manor of Tara’ states that the green of Tara had ‘seven 
views on every side’,®® while according to a poem which por/ 
ttays Ireland as a brandub board, Tara is the central square, the 
four squares around it are the provincial capitals, the king^ 
piece is the king of Ireland and his four defenders are the four 
provincial kings:®®

The Centre 155

‘The centre of the plain of Fal is Tara’s castle, delightful 
hill; out in the exact centre of the plain, like a mark on a 
parti^coloured bmmumh board. Advance thither, it will 
be a profitable step: leap up on that square, which is 
fitting for the hranan (king), the board is fittingly thine. I 
would draw thy attention, O white of tooth, to the noble

Fig. II Probable plan of hranduh boardFig. II Probable plan of hranduh board

squares proper for the brandn (Tara, Cashel, Croghan, 
Naas, Oileach), let them be occupied by thee. A golden 
brandn with his band art thou with thy four provincials; 
thou O king of Bregia, on yonder square and a man on 
each square around thee.’

The game implies that Tara and the cosmos of which it is 
the centre are surrounded by hostile forces. These board games 
were favourite pastimes in the households of kings and nobles, 
and the evidence of Welsh and Irish Laws shows that they 
were invested with considerable significance. Originally, their 
purpose may have been similar to that of the ritual dice con/ 
tests of Tibetan festivals, whereby the Dalai Lama defeated a 
man from among the people, who played the part of the King 
of the Demons. In India, too, sovereignty was related to the

" ■

#

•

m

#

156 Celtic Heritage

decision of the dice. During the inauguration ritual the priest 
handed the king five dice saying, ‘Thou art the master; may 
these five regions be thine , ." ■

#

•

m

#

156 Celtic Heritage

decision of the dice. During the inauguration ritual the priest 
handed the king five dice saying, ‘Thou art the master; may 
these five regions be thine , .

It is said that Conn, the high^king, used to mount the ram^ 
part of Tara every day lest the people of the sii and the Fomoire 
should take Ireland unawares.®® Potentially, Tara was always 
in a state of siege. The great ‘Feast of Tara’ was held at Samain, 
a time of year when the citadel was more than usually prone to 
attacks from sid folk such as Aillen mac Midhna who used 
to come at Samain every year to burn up the fort and all its 
gear.®® The description we have quoted of the seating arrange-' 
ments at Tara comes from an account of one of these Hallowe’en 
feasts. On this night of mischief and confusion, the four pro-' 
vincial kings and their people sat fourz-square around the king 
of Ireland, symbolizing and asserting the cosmic structure of 
the state and of society while chaos reigned outside. Pre/ 
cedences were of prime importance in this setting, and com 
troversy over precedences is the favourite theme in stories about 
feasts. No transgression of the customary hierarchy could be 
allowed to go unchallenged, for it had the force of an omen 
of the way things would be in the ensuing year or period.

22

Whereas Tara is the seat of kingship, several considerations 
associate Uisnech with the druids. It was at Uisnech that 
Mide (eponym of Meath), chief druid of the people of Nemed, 
lit the first fire. The fire blazed for seven years, ‘so that he shed 
the fierceness of the fire for a time over the four quarters of 
Ireland’. From that fire were kindled every chief fire and every 
chief hearth in Ireland. ‘Wherefore Mide’s successor is entitled 
to a sack (of corn) with a pig from every house/top in Ireland.’ 
And the indigenous druids said: ‘Evil (mt'ydd, a pun) to us 
is the fire that has been kindled in the land.’ On Mide’s im 
structions, these druids were marshalled into a house and their

The Centre

157

tongues were cut out. He buried the tongues in the ground of 
Uisnech and sat upon them.®’’ Another story of the lighting 
of a symbolical fire is linked with the neighbourhood of 
Uisnech. It is told to explain how Delbaeth got his name. 
Banished with his five sons from Munster ‘he went to the cairn 
of Fiachu and kindled there a druidical fire, out of which burst 
five streams of flame. And he set him a son to each stream. 
From these descend the five Delbnas. Hence the name Delb.' 
aed, “shape/fire”, clung to him.’*®The lighting of a fire as a ritual proclamation of the ascends 
ancy of the one who lights it occurs in several other Celtic 
stories. For example, St David on taking possession of the 
land which bears his name lit a fire, to the dismay of the local 
chieftain— ‘the kindler of that fire shall excel all in powers and 
renown in every part that the smoke of his sacrifice has covered, 
even to the end of the world’.*® Similarly St Patrick, through 
lighting the Paschal fire, usurped the privileges of the druids 
who were preparing a fire at Tara.^® The story of the founding 
of the monastery of Loch Ree by St Ciaran recalls Nemed’s 
company of eight. ‘With eight upon the loch Ciaran travelled 
but with twelve hundred on land. ... A fire was lit by the 
clergy. . . . Said his wizards to Diarmait: “The purpose for 
which yon fire is kindled tonight is such that it will never 
be put out.” According to the Welsh laws, the right 
to enter and occupy land which one’s father occupied until 
his death was the right to uncover the fire (datanhud).^^ Men^ 
tion may also be made of the firm tradition that a humble 
squatter who builds a house on the waste during the course of 
one night, and has smoke rising from the chimney by the dawn 
of a new day, gains possession of the site and the land around 
to the distance to which he can throw an axe from his cabin 
door.*®

In the Rt£ Veda the arrival of the Five Kdndreds and the 
Eight Adityas marks the birthday of the Universe, the origin 
of months and days, ‘the Springe-tide of the Cosmic Year, when 
dawn first shone for Man’. On landing, their first concern is to

158 Celtic Heritage158 Celtic Heritage

establish on earth a rimai in ‘imitation of the First Sacrifice’. 
They erect a fire/altar, and by this sacrificial act they gain pos/ 
session of the land and secure their legal title to it.'** In Irish 
tradition, Partholon, Tuatha De Danann, and the Sons of 
Mil are all said to have struck the land of Ireland at Beltaine, 
the beginning of a new summer, the time of year when it is 
the custom to rise early to see the dawn breaking — and when 
‘ship^processions’ used to form a part of the folk^ritual in 
several of the coastal districts of Britain.*® It is said that the 
Great Assembly of Uisnech used to be held at Beltaine,*® 
and though we are not told at what time of the year the people 
of Nemed landed, it is a safe presumption that Hide’s fire is 
the archetjrpal Beltaine fire. Cormac’s Glossary, as well as 
Keating’s History, states that Beltaine fires served to preserve 
cattle from disease throughout the following year, and the 
Glossary also says that the druids chanted spells over the fires.*’ 
The custom of kindling them with a fire-drill survived in some 
districts until modern times,*® and Beltaine continued to be 
the occasion when the lighting of the fire on the hearth of 
every home was charged with danger and significance.*®The druids of Gaul used to hold a central assembly which 
was no doubt the counterpart of the Great Assembly of Uis- 
nech mentioned in medieval texts. Caesar testifies that ‘on a 
fixed date in each year they hold a session in a consecrated 
spot in the country of the Carnutes which is supposed to be the 
centre of Gaul. Those who are involved in disputes assemble 
here from all parts and accept the druids’ judgements and 
awards.’®® It is noteworthy that among the few details that 
have survived concerning Uisnech is the tradition that it was 
at a great meeting held there by the three noble tribes who 
divided Ireland that the first judgement respecting distress was 
passed in Ireland.®* According to the dindsenchas it was at a 
great peace-making assembly held there that the death of Lug 
was encompassed by the three grandsons of the Dagda,®® an 
event which would doubtless contribute to the sanctity of the 
spot in pre-Christian times.

The Centre

159

Giraldus Cambrensis records that the Stone of Divisions at 
Uisnech ‘is said to be the navel of Ireland’/® and in a poem 
Fintan says:®^

‘It is long since I drank a drink

Of the Deluge over the navel of Uisnech.’

This is no chance metaphor. The centre of the world is sym^ 
bolized as the ‘navel’ (omphalos) in many other traditions 
ranging from Indonesia to Greece and Peru.®® Nor is the choice 
of Uisnech as the site of the original fire fortuitous, for the 
belief that there is a hearth or a fire/altar at the midpoint is also 
common to other cosmologies. According to the Pythagoreans 
there is fire at the centre of the universe.®® Agni, the Vedic 
sacrificial fire, is the navel of the earth; ‘this altar is the further^ 
most border of the earth, the sacrifice is the navel of the world’.®’Agni is also a pillar at the parting of the ways, and is com-" 
pared to a column supporting the (five) kindreds.®® The pillar^* 
stone at Uisnech was five^ridged, symbolizing the five pro/ 
vinces at the centre.®* Around it was marked out a measure 
of land consisting of the portion of each province in Uisnech. 
Here, as at Tara, the world was symbolized by a series of 
microcosms, each set within the other. In the cosmologies of 
other lands the centre is often an axis which extends from the 
netherworld to the heavens above, uniting the universe vertically 
as well as horizontally. Or at the centre there is a shaft which 
is the mouth of the nether regions into which the waters of the 
Deluge flowed, a hole in the ground like the Roman mundus 
into which the spirits of the dead depart, or an oracular cave 
as at Delphi.®® No tradition of this Idnd survives at Uisnech, 
unless it be that the tongues of the aboriginal druids beneath 
it have that significance. But we would suggest that the Other 
World is represented there in another way. West Munster, the 
‘outer fifth’ province which leads to the House of Donn, has 
its place at Uisnech along with the other four provinces. It is 
perhaps significant that whereas the Sons of Mil encountered

160

Celtic Heritage

the kings of the Tuatha Dd Danann at Tara, it was in West 
Munster and at Uisnech that they held converse with the 
queens. At Tara, the bounded cosmos is represented by four 
within four within four; at Uisnech, the cosmos together with 
its source in the primordial chaos is represented by five within 
five within five. In the stories, Uisnech has no ramparts. 
It differs from the four-'sided Mount Meru of Indian tradition 
and other pyramidal symbols of the centre, and compares 
rather with the fivc/'pointed star and the five-'petalled flower 
with which the alchemists sometimes represented the ‘quintes^ 
sence’ in the centre of the cross of the elements.®^In diverse cosmologies the mountain in the centre of the 
earth is the source of the world’s rivers. The centre is symbolized 
not only by a mountain, a pillar, a fire/altar, and a tree, but 
also by the well of life.®^ There is more than a suggestion of this 
in the derivation of twelve chief rivers from a mythological 
event which occurred at Uisnech. It was during an assembly 
held there at the accession of Diarmait son of Cerball that a 
great haibstorm fell upon the gathering. ‘Such was its greatness 
that the one shower left twelve chief streams in Ireland for 
ever.’®® Another version of the story attributes the streams to a 
miracle wrought by St Ciaran to relieve a drought, and just as 
Mide who lit the first fire was entitled to a hearth tax, so Ciaran 
was entitled to a general cess throughout Ireland.®* In ‘The 
Colloquy of the Ancients’,®® when Cailte, Patrick, and their 
companions were ‘at the pillar«-stone of Uisnech’, Oisin went 
in search of water for the feast. He went alone and kept his 
face turned backwards to see that no one watched him. In this 
fashion he came to the ‘white^rimmed’ well of Uisnech, which 
no one had found since the battle of Gabhra. There he saw 
‘eight beautiful salmon clothed in their diversely shaded hues, 
the intricacy of the place being such that they needed not to 
fear anything’. He took e%ht sprigs of watercress and eight 
of brooklime, and dipping a pail into the well he scooped up 
the eight salmon alive and plunging madly. On his return, 
he set the vessel with the cress and brooklime floating in it

The Centre i6i

before the king of Ireland, and the night was spent in feasting 
and story/telling.The Centre i6i

before the king of Ireland, and the night was spent in feasting 
and story/telling.

Uisnech is not in fact the hydrographic centre of Ireland, 
but the derivation of the twelve streams from a miracle wrought 
there would appear to endow it with that significance. Further^ 
more, the secret well brings to mind the mysterious Well of 
Segais, or Connla’s Well, which nobody durst visit except 
Nechtan and his three cup-'bearers. Like Mimir’s Well at the 
root of the Scandinavian world^tree, this well was the source 
of inspiration and knowledge. Over it grew the nine hazels of 
wisdom, ‘out of which were obtained the feats of the sages’. 
The hazeknuts dropped into the well and caused bubbles of 
mystic inspiration to form on the streams that issued from it. 
Alternatively, the nuts were eaten by the salmon in the well, or 
they passed into the River Boyne. Those destined to partake 
of the nuts or of the salmon obtained the gifts of the seer and 
the poet. The location of the well is variously described. It is the 
source of the Boyne, the source of the Shannon, the source of 
the seven chief rivers of Ireland, and it has its counterpart in 
the Land of Promise where the five rivers that flow from it are 
the five senses.®®Though Tara was the centre of political power, Uisnech 
may once have equalled it in presage. According to the 
eleventh^century Book of Rights, Meath, of which Uisnech is 
the centre, contained Brega, the province of Tara. Meath 
proper consisted of five free kingdoms and five tributary king-" 
doms; Brega consisted of six ttibutary kingdoms only, one of 
which was that of the D&si.®’ The two seem to have had conv 
plementary roles in the national ritual. According to the 
dindsenchas, ‘when all were bidden by the king of Ireland to the 
feast to Tara, a feast used to be celebrated by the king of Meath’ 
on the hill of Slemain Mide. Unlike the other kings of Ireland, 
the king of Meath did not contribute to the feast of Tara, yet 
it was a calamity (a violation of ^eii) for the king of Ireland if 
the feast of Slemain were not celebrated by the king of Meath 
when he himself held the feast of Tara.®® A fairly early text®*

i 62 Celtic Heritage

tells us that the provincial kings, and apparently the king of 
Tara, had ‘seats in Uisnech’. They ‘had a claim on the king 
of Tara to hold the feast of Tara for them. And it was after 
that that the kings of the provinces used to purchase their seats 
at Uisnech. The tax and purchase price was this: the warrior’s 
gold armlet which was worn on the arm of every prince in 
Ireland, he used to leave it in his drinking^place,’ Whereas the 
festival of Tara was a feast (Jeis), at which, perhaps, the 
marriage of the king with the realm was celebrated,’® the great 
assembly of Uisnech was an oemch, a ‘(re)union’ of the people. 
The fire of Uisnech was first kindled for the clans of Nemed 
(i.e. the householders, or those admitted to the sacrifice), 
whereas it is said that it was Eochaid, the ideal king of Fir 
Bolg, who ‘sat in the beginning in Tara’.’^The duality of Uisnech and Tara is strikingly paralleled by 
dual ritual sites both in Rome and in India.’ ^ In the Brahmanas 
it is a strict rule that every sacrificial site must comprise two 
essential fires and one accessory fire. One of the two essential 
fires, namely the fire of the householder or sacrificer, is the 
original hearth from which every fire is kindled; it is proof 
of the possession of the land, and it symbolizes the world of 
men. The other, kindled to the east of it, is the place of offerings; 
it symbolizes the celestial cosmic world of the gods, and its 
inauguration is marked by the same wealth of numerical 
sy mbolism as we have observed in the arrangement of the court 
of Tara. The first of these two fires, that of the householder, 
must be kindled with a fire/drill and the spot is sprinkled with 
salt (among other things), for ‘salt is cattle and one places 
cattle in this world’. This hearth is circular, whereas the other 
is square and orientated. As regards the association of Uisnech 
with Eriu, it is noteworthy that whereas the eastern fire was 
for the worship of the gods, the western fife, by which the 
sacrificer’s wife sat during the rites, was for the worship of the 
consorts of the gods.’® Professor Dumezil has compared these 
two Indian fires with two types of ritual sites known in ancient 
Rome, the first represented by the hearth of Vesta, the second

I63

The Centre

by the templa qmirata of which the original city or its central 
symbol was the prototype. The former was round, it symbolized 
the earth as the home of men, and it was the centre of the world. 
If the Vestal fire went out, it had to be re^kindled by Ignis Vesta, 
that is by means of the fire-drill. As its name implies, the other 
type of site was square and or/ewtated, and it was there that the 
great rites of the national political life were performed.With regard to the implicit identification of Tara with the 
world of the gods, it must be remembered that whatever ‘celes- 
tial’ beliefs the Celts may have had have been lost, or at least 
‘grounded’. In India, the king is a personification of Indra, 
the king of the gods, and his courtiers are embodiments of the 
corresponding members of the celestial hierarchy.'^* And it is 
Tara, not Uisnech, that has the greatest resemblance to the 
Heavenly Jerusalem of the Christian Apocalypse, which 
stands four square and orientated — a walled city from which 
sinners, sorcerers, and the legions of hell are excluded. It would 
appear that Tara originally symbolized the cosmos of the gods 
as opposed to the chaos of the demons. Uisnech was the pri- 
meval unity, the principle in which all oppositions are resolved.

3

Whether Hallow’en fires were ever kindled at Tara itself, we 
do not know. Keating says that it was the custom to assemble 
the druids of Ireland at Tlachtga, some twelve miles away, on 
that eve, and that a fixe in which offerings were burnt was 
kindled there. This was a ‘prelude’ to the Feast of Tara. Keat- 
ing maintains further that all the fixes of Ireland were quenched 
on that night and that the men of Ireland were forbidden to 
re-light them except from the fire of Tlachtga.''® If this is right, 
the summer fires of Ireland emanated from Uisnech, the winter 
fires from Tlachtga. The account given by Keating of the 
arrangement of things in the central province does not fully har- 
monize with the concept of Uisnech as the navel of Ireland,

i<54 Celtic Heritage

He alleges that Tuathal Techtmar built four fortresses in 
Meath, one in each of the portions taken from the four great 
provinces. In this scheme Uisnech is connected with Con/ 
nacht, Tara with Leinster, Tailtiu with Ulster, and Tlachtga 
with Munster.The authenticity of Keating’s arrangement has been con/ 
tested by modern scholars, who ridicule the idea of connecting 
Tlachtga geographically with Munster."® There are other con/ 
siderations, however, which suggest that Keating’s testimony

. TaiUm 
. Tjach^a

Tara

. Uisnech

Fig. 12 The four centtes in Meath

may not be a complete fabrication. Tailtiu was the queen of the 
most illustrious king of Fir Bolg,^' the warrior aristocracy who 
founded the kingship, and it is appropriate that the assembly 
centre which bears her name should be associated with Ulster, 
and that it should be the burial place of the Ulstermen.'^® 
It is also appropriate that in the two stories of an encounter 
between five brothers and the Sovereignty of Ireland the 
brothers after their testing should proceed to Tailtiu,’® and 
that the assembly of Tailtiu, convened by the king of Tara, 
should be held at Lugnasad — the time when Fir Bolg, and 
Fir Bolg only, landed in Ireland.®®

The ascription of Uisnech to Connacht, the province of the

The Centre

165

priesthood, is natural enough, while Tara is situated in Brega 
which medieval|writers,^as well as Keating, regard as a part 
of Leinster.®^ The personification of Sovereignty whom the 
kings of Tara were obliged to wed was Medb Lethderg of 
Leinster.®^ Again, while Fal is a symbol of kingship — and its 
heart is in Tailtiu — ^its sexual symbolism connects it with the 
third function, the embodiment of fertility. As a warrior the 
king’s closest affinities are with Ulster, but as the giver of 
fertility and prosperity he belongs to Leinster.®®Tlachtga (which is associated with Munster), owes its 
origin and name, according to the dindsenchas, to Tlachtga, 
daughter of Mug Ruith of West Munster, ‘who had been with 
her father learning the world’s magic’.®'* For her, ‘Church 
legend had a hatred not found against [any] other of the Celtic 
gods and heroines.’®® Another sorceress from Munster inti^ 
mately associated with Hallowe’en was Mongfind daughter of 
Fidach of Munster, the wife of King Eochu Muigmedon and 
hostile stepmother of Niall of the Nine Hostages. She died on 
Samain Eve, by taking poison which she had prepared for her 
royal brother. Samaimtide was called by the common people 
‘the Festival of Mongfind’ because she, ‘so long as she was in 
the flesh, had powers and was a witch: wherefore it is that on 
Samain Eve women and the rabble address their petitions to 
her’.®® All this accords with what we have already adduced 
about the association of Munster with serfs, witches, and 
demons. Samain Eve is the night when these nefarious agents 
are at large, and it is fitting that the Samain fire, kindled, in 
modern parlance, ‘to burn the witches’, should be on the site 
which symbolized Munster. Furthermore, Tlachtga may be 
equated with the accessory third fire of Indian sacrificial rites, 
the fire from which the eastern fire which we have equated 
with Tara was kindled. Offerings to the ancestors were made 
on this third Indian fire, while its name and location associate 
it with the South. It was intended to defend the sacrifice about 
to be offered on the eastern fire against the evil powers of the 
southern regions.®^

166

Celtic Heritage166

Celtic Heritage

Keating’s association of Tlachtga with the feast of Tara har/ 
monizes with medieval statements that Ireland had three great 
festivals, those of Uisnech, Tailtiu, and Tara.*® The sacred 
rites belong to the first three functions, and it is understandable 
that Tlachtga, which represents Munster and the fourth func^ 
tion, should have no independent status as the centre of a 
fourth festival. The fact that the assemblies of Uisnech and 
Tailtiu, the two sites associated with the provinces of Conn’s 
Half, are summer festivals held at Beltaine and Lugnasad, 
respectively, while the two southern sites are involved in the 
celebration of Winter’s Eve, suggests an identification of the 
North with summer and the South with winter — and we may 
note that it is in winter that the commoners are expected 
to provide hospitality for their lords. In India the North is day, 
the South is night, the North is male, the South is female; 
spring and summer, respectively, correspond with the priest^ 
hood and the nobility, the rainy season with the common 
people.®® But there is no evidence from the Celtic lands of any 
such systematization, and the inversions to which we have 
referred make it unprofitable to speculate. The imminence of 
the supernatural at night and in winter suggests the correlation 
of these periods, like the South, with the Other World. Con-- 
versely, the Other World is depicted as a land of summer, 
especially when it is winter on earth.

With regard to the inconsistency between the twoToId 
and the four/fold conceptions of the middle province and its 
centres, it may be added that the co-existence of contradictory 
cosmological systems is by no means peculiar to Celtic tradi- 
tion.

4

The provincial capitals of Ireland had many features in com- 
mon with those of the centre. Almost without exception they 
stood on hills, or at least on artificial mounds. They were 
burial places, a feature which they share with the churches,The Centre

167

rather than with the palaces, of our own time. Like churches, 
too, they were dedicated to the memory of founders, who were 
in most cases believed to be buried in them. The founders 
were almost invariably female.®® In the centre we have Lriu 
at Uisnech, Tea at Tara, Tailtiu at Tailtiu and the sorceress 
Tlachtga at Tlachtga. Emain Macha, capital of Ulster, was 
founded by Macha the war.'goddess, Naas was the buriaL 
place of Naas, wife of Lug, while Cruachan was said to have 
derived its name from Cruacha, a handmaiden who acconv 
panied Etain when she eloped with Midir of Tuatha De 
Danann.®^ The names and exploits of women also figure in 
traditions about less welhknown sites, such as Carmun, in 
Leinster, about which we shall have more to say presently. 
Continuing our analogy with churches, most of the Irish 
centres were ‘notre dames’, like so many of the great eccles^ 
iastical centres of latter^-day Gaul.In most cases the female founder, like Cessair, the first to 
occupy Ireland, had an untimely end. Tailtiu’s heart broke 
under the strain of clearing the plain that bears her name; 
Carmun died of grief in exile, and death ‘came upon her in 
ungentle shape’; Macha died in giving birth to twins after 
being forced to run a race against the king’s horses; Tlachtga 
had been ravished by the three sons of Simon Magus, and when 
she had journeyed to the hill that now bears her name she died 
giving birth to triplets — and over her the fortress was built. 
There is a widespread belief that the victims of miserable and 
violent deaths are restless in their graves, and the corpses and 
graves of women who have died in childbirth are particularly 
feared in many parts of the world.®® That this fear existed 
among the Celts is indicated by the fact that such women were 
not permitted to be buried in graveyards founded by some of 
the Celtic saints.®® These considerations gave the places we 
are discussing a proximity to the supernatural which hallowed 
them and enhanced the significance of words uttered, and 
actions performed, upon them.

168

Celtic Heritage168

Celtic Heritage

Assemblies similar to those of the great centres of Meath 
were held at provincial capitals and at lesser centres.®^ and as 
far as their dates are known, they were held at sacred points in 
time. The folk/customs observed at Beltaine, Samain and Lug/' 
nasad are thus popular versions of a solemn ritual which was 
fundamental to the well/being of the community and which 
formerly required the participation of kings, officials of the 
court, and all classes. To neglect these assemblies brought dire 
consequences. ‘Everyone of the Ulstermen who would not 
come to Emain at Allhallow/Eve lost his senses, and on the 
morrow his barrow and his grave and his tombstone were 
placed.’®® A poem preserved in medieval manuscripts®® des/ 
cribes one assembly, namely that of Carmun, which was held 
at Lugnasad, and it is clear from the more meagre information 
available about others that the description is representative of 
assemblies generally. Through the holding of this assembly the 
Leinstermen were assured of an abundance of corn and milk, 
freedom from conquest, the enjoyment of righteous laws, com/ 
fort in every house, fruit in great abundance, and plenty of 
fish in their lakes, rivers, and estuaries.

‘There comes for neglect of it 
baldness, weakness, early greyness, 
kings without keenness or jollity, 
without hospitality or truth.’

Like the ‘truce of the god’ which ensured safe conduct to all 
who attended the Olympic games and other sacred assemblies 
in Greece, an armistice was imposed. Samain was ‘a dry of 
peace and amity between the men of Ireland, on which none 
is at enmity with his fellow’.®’’ Similarly at Lugnasad at 
Carmun, deeds of violence, abductions, the repudiation of 
husband or wife, and the levying of debts were all prohibited 
— and the penalties were severe:

The Centre

j69'The Centre

j69'

‘Whoever transgresses the law of the kings 
Benen prescribed firmly for ever 
that he should not thrive in his tribe, 
but should die for his mortal sin/

The festival was a return to the beginning of things. In the 
first place it was a commemoration and re/enactmeot of the 
mythological event in which the sanctity of the site had its 
origin. It was a wake for the dead founder, and the races and 
other competitions were her funeral games.

‘Thither came, for the delight of her beauty, 
to keen and raise the first wailing over her, 
the Tuath De over this noble plain eastward: 
it was the first true assembly of Carmun/

The poet is at pains to recall the hundreds of times the same 
scene was enacted after that inauguration, and in the following 
three stanzas he seems to invoke the presence of the universe 
and all its component parts, as does the Christian Benedicite,^^

‘Heaven, earth, sun, moon, and sea, 
fruits of earth and sea/stufF, 
mouths, ears, eyes, possessions, 
feet, hands, warriors’ tongues*

‘Horses, swords, chariots fair, 
spears, shields, and faces of men, 
dew, mast, sheen on leaf, 
day and night, ebb and flow —

‘The hosts of Banba, free from enduring sorrow, 
gave all these completely [as pledges] 
that it should not lie under gloom of disputes 
to interrupt it, every third year.^

There in the presence of the kings, the nobles, and the 
people, the whole mythological and chronological past of the 
nation was conjured into the present by the shanachies:®^

170

Celtic Heritage

,*Lore of Finn and the Fkna, a matter inexhatsstible,

Destructions, Cattle^raids, Wooings, 
tablets and wooden books,

satires, keen riddles:

‘Proverbs, maxims of might, 
and truthful teachings of Fithal, 
dark lays of the Dindknchas for thee, 
teachings of Cairpre and Cormac;

‘The great feast of Tara and other feasts, 
the assembly of Emain and other assemblies; 
annals there, this is true;

every division into which Ireland has been divided:‘The great feast of Tara and other feasts, 
the assembly of Emain and other assemblies; 
annals there, this is true;

every division into which Ireland has been divided:

‘The story of the household of Tara, that is not scanty, 
the knowledge of every cantred in Ireland, 
the chronicle of women, tales of armies, conflicts, 
Hostels, Prohibitions, Invasions:

‘The tenTold Testament of hundreded Gathair 
to his right pleasant oiffspring kingly of stature: 
[assigns] the estate of each man as is due, 
so that all may listen to it • . .

‘Violent Deaths and Slaughters, strains of music; 
accurate knowledge of the goodly race; 
his royal pedigree, a blessing through Bregmag 
his battle and his stark valour/

This declamation clearly had the force of a creation rite to re^ 
establish the foundations of the tradition at the inception of a 
new period of time. The social order was also re/affirmed. 
The emphasis on ‘the estate of each man as is due' is in accord 
with the careful observance of precedences at Tara and the 
seating of each ‘in due order by rank in his place' at the assembly 
of Tailtiu.^®° In addition to confirming the status quo/the 
assemblies were also occasions for granting new statuses. It is 
said that candidates were received into the Jiam at the assemblies 
of Uisnech, Tara and Tailtiu.^®^ There were horse/races and

The Centre 171

chariot'-races through which new orders of merit were estab-' 
lished, and at Carmun poets, pipers, fiddlers, tympanists, 
bone^players, homz-players, and roarers, all exerted their powers 
before the king and he bestowed upon each art its rightful 
honour. The competitions at eisteddfodau, ‘gatherings of the 
clans’, sports, shows, and fairs in our own day are clearly 
survivals of such rituals as these.Evidence concerning legislation and the administration of 
law at the Irish assemblies is, on the face of it, somewhat con^ 
tradictory. Of the feast of Tara it is said: ‘Here too is the reason 
for which the feast of Tara was made at all: the body of the 
law which all Ireland enacted then, during the interval be/- 
tween that and their next convention at the year’s end none 
might dare transgress, and he that perchance did so was out^ 
lawed from the men of Ireland.’^"® known that laws and 
statutes were proclaimed upon local meeling/hills within 
historical times,i“® and the promulgation of the law from Tyn^ 
wald Hill has remained a feature of Manx ceremonial to the 
present day. The settling of disputes is the only function of the 
assembly of the druids of Gaul that Caesar mentions, and 
an early Irish text says that at the feast of Tara the kings of 
Ireland ‘used to settle the affairs of Ireland for seven years, so 
that debts, suits and adjustments used not to be submitted for 
judgement until the next feast seven years later . . Simi/- 
larly at Carmun, dues and tributes were discussed and legal 
enactments settled.

On the other hand, the poem on Carmun emphasizes the 
importance of avoiding quarrels and the levying of debts, 
while the assembly of Tailtiu was held, not only ‘without 
wounding or robbing of any man, without trouble, without 
dispute, without reaving’, but also ‘without challenge of pro/- 
perty, without suing, without law sessions, without evasion, 
without arrest’.^"® The most feasible explanation seems to be 
that the references to the avoidance of litigation appertain only 
to the opening stages of assemblies, symbolizing the conclu/- 
sion of the preceding year and its affairs. In the same way as

17^ Celtic Heritage17^ Celtic Heritage

the stopping of the clock in a house which death has visited 
indicates the supervention of a world where time does not 
exist, so profane time with its debts and quarrels was suspended 
during the sacred phases of the assembly when the whole 
heritage of the people was accurately and vividly remembered. 
And we may infer that this unifying experience promoted a 
state of mind which was conducive to the settlement of differ^ 
ences and the recognition of law. Fortified by its tradition and 
purified of its contentions, society could begin its life anew.

CHAPTER VIII

Five Peaks

Wales, unlike Ireland, is a peninsula of a larger island. 
It was occupied by the Romans, invaded by the Saxons, sub/ 
jugated by the Normans, and eventually united with England 
under the Tudors. If we were dealing merely with an original 
geographical pattern, the prospect of finding it in Wales would 
be very dim. But we are concerned not with geography but 
with a conceptual framework which was by no means con/ 
fined to the Celts and which could be impressed anew upon 
whatever territory was considered a unit. We have no evidence 
as to how Britain was conceived of in pre/Roman times, but 
it is noteworthy that Roman Britain was divided first into 
‘Upper Britain’ and ‘Lower Britain’, then into four provinces, 
and eventually into five. The names Essex, Sussex, Wessex, 
and Middlesex are an abiding reminder of the existence of the 
pattern in the world of the Saxons.Britain has her primeval invasion in the legend of Brutus. 
According to Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Historia Return 
Britamiae,^ Brutus, prince of Troy, was incestuously conceived; 
his mother died at his birth and he was destined to kill his 
father. Voyaging to Britain with a company of his people, he 
was joined en route by a further group of four generations of 
Trojan exiles under the leadership of a champion fighter named 
Corineus. In accordance with prophecy, they eventually 
landed in Britain which was thinly peopled by aboriginal 
giants. Brutus built a city for himself at London and divided 
the island. Corineus chose Cornwall as his province because 
‘it was there the giants were most numerous’, and when, 
twenty/four years later, Brutus died and the island was shared 
between his three sons, the first of them was given England,

173

174 Celtic Heritage

the second Wales, and the third Scotland. These three sons 
may perhaps be compared with the three Nemed groups, 
leaving Corineus the giant-killer to be equated with Partholon, 
the first adversary of the Fomoire, Geoffrey derives Caerludd, a 
Welsh name for London, from the name of King Lludd who 
built the walls of the city. This same Lludd, according to a 
Welsh story, by measuring the length and breadth of Britain, 
ascertained that Oxford was the mid/point of the island.'^Mil and his eight sons may be compared with Cunedda and 
his eight sons who are said to have invaded Wales and settled 
there in the early fifth century.® Tybion, Cunedda’s eldest 
son, like Bonn the eldest son of Mil, died before the family 
settled in the new country, but in the Welsh story the dead 
man’s son, Meirion, takes his father’s place (as Lugaid son of 
fth took the place of his dead father in the Irish story). Cunedda, 
however, is the founder of the northern dynasty of Gwynedd 
only, and his sons and his grandson are eponymous founders 
of territories in North Wales, with the exception of one son 
whose name is borne by Ceredigion (Cardiganshire).

In Wales as in Ireland — and indeed in France, England, 
Germany, Egypt, Israel, and India — the main traditional divi- 
sion is into North and South, rather than into East and West. 
We mentioned that when Eremon and Eber divided Ireland 
between them there were two ridges in the North and one in 
the South, and there is a tradition that Eremon shared the 
North with another brother named fr, while £ber had the 
South. The proportion of two in the North and one in the 
South also appears in another Irish story, which tells of the 
massacre of the nobles of Ireland by tributary peoples.'* Three 
pregnant wives escaped to Alba, and their three sons eventually 
returned to Ireland and were granted their birthright. They 
were the ancestors of Conn (eponym of Connacht), Araide (of 
Ulster) and Eogan Mor (of Munster). The Second Branch of 
the Mahinogi contains a similar story of the birth of five sons to 
five pregnant women, the only people left alive in Ireland 
after a disastrous war. The sons grew up and in due course

Five Peah 175

united with one another’s mother, and from them are the five 
provinces of Ireland.®Five Peah 175

united with one another’s mother, and from them are the five 
provinces of Ireland.®

Conn of Connacht, Araide of Ulster, and Eogan Mdr of 
Munster are described as ‘the three free/'born ancestors of Ire^ 
land’, and they may be compared with ‘the three royal tribes 
of Wales’ referred to in early modern manuscripts.® The three 
tribes are the dynasties of Gwynedd and Powys in the North, 
and of Deheubarth, the one southern province. Giraldus Cam-' 
brensis attributes the same division of the country to the three 
sons of Rhodri Mawr in the ninth century, and it also appears 
in the law-'books.'^ The eleventh/century protonyms of the 
three tribes are said to have raised two others to the same dig-- 
nity, making a total of ‘five royal tribes’. One of the two addi>' 
tional protonyms was Lord of Glamorgan in the same period. 
Of the other, Elystan Glodrydd, there is no reliable historical 
evidence, but his realm was in east Central Wales — ‘Between 
the Wye and the Severn’.® The correspondence between these 
five realms and the five provinces of Ireland can hardly be 
fortuitous.The central province apart, the fourfold division is further 
reflected in the medieval bishoprics: Bangor (North-'West), 
St Asaph (North-East), Llandaf (South-East) and St David’s 
(South-West). In the centre of Wales, near the point where the 
north-western, north-eastern and south-western provinces and 
bishoprics met, is the mountain of Pumlumon (‘Five peaks’),* 
in which the Wye and the Severn have their source. Like the 
Stone of Divisions on Uisnech Hill, not to mention the five- 
peaked world-mountain of Chinese tradition, Pumlumon 
symbolizes the whole. (Extending westward from its top is a 
commote called Perfedd (‘Middle’),* and the ancient mother 
church of Llanbadarn Fawr in this commote has historic 
claims to be the centre of a fifth bishopric.) To the south-east 
of the mountain, in the fifth province, ‘Between the Wye and 
the Severn’, is the commote of Gwrtheyrnion, the land of

* Or, possibly, Tive Banners (or BeacoEs)^

176 Celtic Heritage

Gwrtheyrn (Vortigern), the ruler of Britain at the time of the 
Saxon invasion.^® His name, as Dr Nora K. Chadwick has 
recently observed, is the virtual equivalent of the Irish ard^ri 
(‘high/'king’) and ‘may originally have been a title’.^^ If 
Pumlumon has some affinity with Uisnech, what little is 
known about Gwrtheyrnion entitles it to comparison with 
Brega of the kings.

In his study of Irish dialects, O’Rahilly comes to the con/ 
elusion ‘that historically there were but two main dialects in 
Irish, a Northern and a Southern, and that each of these (but 
especially the Northern) was divided into two lesser dialects’.^^ 
In Wales too, the major linguistic cleavage is that which divides 
the Northern and the Southern dialects, and within these two 
main dialects there are features which indicate a less marked 
division between Gwynedd and Powys and between Gla/ 
morgan and Dyfed.

22

In the ‘Four Branches of the Mabinogi’, three groups of char/ 
acters predominate, two in the North and one in the South, 
though there is one episode in which a fourth appears, namely 
Teyrnon and his wife in the South/East.^® The wizard children 
of Don, the equivalents of Tuatha De Danann, are located in 
Gwynedd. The Children of Llyr, who figure in the Second 
Branch, the only branch which has anything of the heroic 
qualities of the lister Cycle, are also located in Gwynedd in 
the story, but modern place/names seem to link them with 
Powys,^* which is also the province of the Llywarch Hen 
heroic poems. In the Mahimgi, it is in the two branches which 
tell of the northern families that one reads of stormy passions 
and violent deeds, interludes of timeless bliss and tragic deaths. 
The southern family of the Mabinogi, that of Pwyll, has to 
counter with submission, self/restraint and patient persistence 
the antagonism of the mysterious powers of Annwfn, on the

PumljAmon a 
Llanhadarn Fawrli«

\ RHWNG 
GWYh 
W HAFREN

St Davidsx"^

Arherth

Hg. 13 Sketch-map of Wales

lyS Celtic Heritage

one hand, and of villein craftsmen on the other. Pwyll’s son, 
Pryderi, finding himself duped by Gwydion son of Don, 
wages war on Gwynedd and, like Mug and Eber in Ireland, 
is defeated and slain.

Arthur belongs to many parts of Britain, but in Welsh 
tradition his court is located either in Cornwall or in south-'east 
Wales. In the work of Nennius, Arthur appears in the place/ 
lore of the Builth district and of Ergyng (now in Hereford/ 
shire) in the early Welsh poem ‘The Spoils of Annwfn’ he 
is associated with the lords of Dyfed, and in the story of Kul/ 
hwch and Olwen his great boar/hunt ranges over South 
Wales.^® His geographical background in Wales is thus 
comparable with that of Finn in Ireland.Like Munster, Dyfed in the south/west has a mysterious 
realm within it or beside it. Pwyll, Lord of Dyfed, loses his 
companions while hunting and finds himself face to face with 
Arawn, King of Annwfn. He does not recognize him, and 
when they exchange roles for a year and a day, Arawn’s 
realm comes as a revelation to Pwyll, though it appears to be 
within easy reach of Dyfed. Henceforth Pwyll is known as the 
Head of Annwfn, and the new friendship between the two 
rulers leads to an exchange of gifts, including swine which are 
sent from Annwfn. Elsewhere,^'^ Pryderi son of Pwyll is 
described as the swineherd of his foster/father, Pendaran Dyfed, 
and as one of the three renowned swineherds of the Isle of 
Britain. In an Irish story,^® a vision seen by a swineherd fore/ 
shadows the coming of Conall Core to Cashel and to the 
kingship of Munster. The swineherd is given freedom for 
himself and his children, and it is he who proclaims the king 
of Munster and receives his garment. His people (the Mus/ 
craige), the first to offer a hostage to Conall, are also freed. In 
short, swine belong to the Other World; tending swine is a 
servile occupation,^® but in Dyfed the chief is a swineherd 
and in Munster swineherds are freemen closely associated with 
the kingship. The paradoxical character of Dyfed appears in 
other ways, for not only is its ingenuous ruler®® known as the

Five Peaks 179

Head of Annwfn, but Manawydan, the correlative of Manana 
nan, the ‘outer’ high/'king of Tuatha Danann, appears 
there as a ‘humble lord’ who engages in hunting and agrv 
culture and readily learns a craft.® ^Off the west coast of Dyfed, the island of Gwales, which in 
the Mahmogi is a station on the route of the seven survivors com-- 
missioned to bury the head of Bran, brings to mind the House 
of Donn.®® Off the coast of Dyfed too lies the land of Plant 
Rhys Ddwfn — ^the name is probably a corruption of Plant 
yr Is'ddwfn or Plant Rhi Is-'dwfn, ‘The Children of (the King of) 
the Nether World’ — a. fairy people who had the power to make 
their country invisible except from one small patch of ground 
in Dyfed.®®

3

In describing the division of Wales into three provinces, 
Gwynedd, Powys, and the South, between the three sons of 
Rhodri Mawr, Giraldus Cambrensis states that the South was 
given to Cadell ‘with the blessing of all the people and his 
brothers. For although this last portion was by far the largest in 
size it was nevertheless counted the worst’ because the gentry 
(uchelwyr), ‘who teemed in this province’, were habitually in 
revolt against their lords.®^ The association of rebellion with the 
South is clearly not peculiar to Ireland. At every court in 
North Wales there were five officers, of whom the fifth was an 
official judge, but in the courts of the South there were only 
four officers, together with a host of judges, to wit, every owner 
of land.®® Here the mass of landowners indicates the democratic 
third function.

An undated poem (published in The Myvyrian Archaiology^oj 
WalesY^ gives the characteristics of the different parts of Wales. 
It does not provide a clear and simple picture, but we may note 
that it attributes to Gwynedd boastful words, timid (?) men, 
and great intentions, and to Anglesey high birth, wise men.

i8o Celtic Heritagei8o Celtic Heritage

and relics. To Powys are attributed brave men setting out for 
battle and also a welcome for minstrels; to Glamorgan, genial 
men, women in majesty, and churls (j) and rich men in 
market, while the people of two of the westernmost divisions 
of Dyfed are described as serfs. It may be noted incidentally 
that the statute which in the early sixteenth century governed 
the training, conduct, and privileges of poets was ascribed to 
Gruffudd ap Kynan,^^ the protonym of the royal tribe of 
Gwynedd. On the other hand, a twelfth.-century poem on the 
privileges of the men of Powys^® emphasizes their aristocratic 
and martial qualities. These privileges included exemption 
from certain royal dues, from providing quarters for huntsmen 
and from receiving royal ladies on circuit, together with the 
right to be in the first onset in battle, to be in the van of the 
hosts, and to guard the rear when withdrawing. The qualities 
traditionally associated with Glamorgan are generosity, court/- 
esy, and festivity.®®One of the poems we have quoted ascribes a position of 
honour to women in Glamorgan. One of the very few ex^ 
plicit differences betweeen North and South Wales in the Laws 
is that in the South a woman who married independently was 
assured of her bridal gift (from her husband) exactly as if she had 
been given in marriage by her family, whereas in the North, un/ 
less she had secured an agreement in advance, she could claim 
only three steers.®® Similarly, only in the southern versions of 
the Laws is it stipulated that for lack of male heirs a daughter 
could inherit all her father’s property, while the poem on the 
privileges of Powys definitely states that ‘a share to the brother 
his privilege commands, a share to the sister is not had from 
Powys.’®^ This evidence suggests that, in some sense, the 
southern half of the country may have been regarded as the 
female half, and this would be in accord with Irish tradition. 
Munster, as we have seen, has associations with goddesses 
and with the Fomoire.®® Matrilineal succession is attributed to 
the Cruithne in particular, a people who are said to have first 
appeared in these islands as allies of the Leinstermen.®® They

Five Peaks

i8l

were allowed to settle in. Leinster because of the cure they intros 
duced for mortally wounded warriors, which was to make them 
lie in trenches filled with milk. According to one early text, 
they stole the wives of the Sons of Mil; according to other 
sources, £rem6n, who banished them from Ireland,®* gave 
them wives on condition that succession with them should be 
through the female line as well as through the male, or through 
the female line only — ^the versions differ.In Wales as in Ireland, there were grades within the learned 
class. In the pre-^Christian society the highest was doubtless 
that of the druids, but even in the earliest Welsh records the 
druids are hardly mentioned. The ‘chief poet’ (pencerid), ‘a 
poet who has won in a contest for a chair’,®® was at least 
equal in honour to the highest court officers. He seems to cor-' 
respond to the Irish ollam or chief Jili. Beneath him was the poet 
of the household or house/troop (barM teulu), who was one of 
the twenty-'four court officers. When the bardd teulu took office 
he received from the king a harp, with which he was never to 
part.®® He sang for the troop when it went on a raid, and before 
it set out for battle he sang ‘The Monarchy of Britain’. The 
term cerddorion seems to cover yet another class of minstrels 
who recognized the pencerdd as their lord, and there are refer-' 
ences in the laws to the lowly croesaniaid.* In medieval tracts 
on the art of poetry, slightly different terms seem to refer to the 
same classes: prydydd ‘ poet', teuluwr ‘poet of the household or 
house/troop’, and clerwr, ‘minstrel’. Three duties are assigned 
to the teuluwr:^^ to gladden the company, to be generous,** 
and to make courteous supplication — ^terms which recall the 
festive music of Buchet’s House in Leinster. The teuluwr, who 
also composed love poems, was the disciple of a prydydd, but 
the prydydd should shun the chaotic art of the clerwr (Function 
IV), for ‘their arts are opposed to one another’.®® With the

* C£. supra, p. izyf.

** Litetaliy ‘generosity’ — ! ‘to promote generosity’.

i 8z Celtic Heritage

eclipse of the superior functions of the master/poets, their art 
became for the most part confined to the composition of praise/ 
poems. When the law and the prophets belong to the past, the 
psalms remain.In Ireland in the early seventeenth century, the traditional 
precedence of the North was challenged by a southern poet, 
and this led to a sustained and wide/ranging poetic disputa/ 
tion concerning the relative claims of Leth Cuinn and Leth 
Moga.®® Towards the end of the following century a similar 
case for the greater importance of the southern contribution to 
the Welsh literary tradition was elaborated, not without 
fabrication, by lolo Morganwg. In the context of the four/ 
fold structure we have discussed, lolo’s claim for Glamorgan 
as the seat of bardism may well be correct, provided the ‘bard’ 
is duly assigned to the third place in the learned hierarchy. 
And it is fair to add that lolo particularly claimed for his 
native province a wealth of pleasant ‘household poetry’ (cam 
teuluaid ^*^ — ^the poetry of the teuluwr or bard.

The dichotomy manifested in the division into North and 
South appeared too in the division of the Welsh royal hall. 
One of the terms used for the partition that separated the two 
parts of the hall was corj, a word which is also used of ‘a wood 
on the steep brink of a stream’,^ ^ such a wood as often formed 
the boundary between the upper and lower halves of territorial 
units. The king and his heir, his judge, his chief poet, and other 
dignitaries, sat in the upper part of the hall; the captain of the 
house/troop and his men, and the household bard, sat in the 
lower part.*® When the king wished to hear a song, the chief 
poet sang two songs in the upper hall, one of God and the 
other of kings, and then the household bard sang a third song 
in the lower hall. It was also the household bard who, with a 
quiet voice, sang for the queen in her room. The two songs — 
of God and of kings — in the upper hall and the bard’s one 
song in the lower hall hardly call for further comment, and 
the same is true of the association of the bard with the queen 
and with the troop. One officer connected with the court.

Fit/e Peaks 183Fit/e Peaks 183

the maer biswail (‘dung officer’), was responsible for the king’s 
mensal land. There the villeins came under his jurisdiction 
and he ordered their ploughing, sowing, and other activities. 
He had charge, under the steward, of the maintenance and 
supplies of the court, but he belonged to the villein class; 
scant respect was shown to him in the precincts of the king’s 
hall.«

4

The centre of the mysterious adventures of Pwyll and Pryderi 
is the throne^mound (gorsedi) which was outside the court ot 
Arberth. Whoever sat on it would see a wonder or suffer 
wounds and blows. It was from this mound that Pwyll, the 
Head of Annwfn, first saw Rhiannon on her magic horse. 
There sat Pryderi when enchantment fell upon Dyfed, and it 
was there that Manawydan was on the point of executing a 
supernatural, thieving ‘mouse’ when the land was disenchanted 
and his lost companions restored to him.

The association of a ritual mound with Annwfn appears in 
Ellis Wynne’s Gweledigaetheu y Barid Cwsc (1703), which tells 
of three visions — of the World, of Death and of Hell. The poet 
falls asleep and sees a crowd of people whom he takes to be 
Gypsies or witches until, noticing their beauty and recognizing 
among them the faces of deceased acquaintances, he realizes 
they are fairies (tylwyth te£). They are dancing on the ‘play 
mound’ (twmpatb cbwarei^, but they now take hold of the 
poet and they carry him over land and sea until he espies below 
him the most beautiful castle he has every seen. Meanwhile they 
try to get the poet to satirize his own king, when he is rescued 
from their clutches by an angel who informs him that they 
were the Children of Annwfn. A ‘play mound’ used to be 
found near or inside graveyards in Wales. The mound was 
banked up, with turf seats for the spectators arranged around 
an open floor where the games were played.*^ It appears to 
be a simple version of the Cornish pUn an gwary (‘the place

i 84 Celtic Heritaiei 84 Celtic Heritaie

of the play’), the examples of which have been described as 
‘the only surviving medieval theatres in Britain’.*® The Irish 
watA oenach (assembly) is glossed by theatrum, and the Welsh 
word £orsedd which means ‘assembly’ and ‘court’ as well as 
‘throne^mound’, occurs as the equivalent of thidtre.^^ That 
‘mound’, theatre, and place of general assembly should be 
closely related, or indeed identified with one another, is not 
peculiar to Celtic tradition.*^

In Irish tales, mounds outside courts are scenes of games and 
visionary encounters which do not belong to the round of 
mundane existence, and the holding of assemblies on hills and 
mounds is a commonplace of Irish history. It may be assumed 
that every local community had such a traditional assembly 
place, but it is to Munster that assemblies are attributed in ‘The 
Settling of the Manor of Tara’, and the gorsedd celebrated in 
Welsh story is in Dyfed. Moreover, CdRoi, herdsman and 
King of Munster, has been compared with the giant herdsman 
in Arthurian stories who sits on a mound and directs the hero 
to the strange palace where his mettle is proved. In the story of 
‘The Lady of the Fountain’, this director is a big, black, ugly 
forester, one/footed and one/eyed, and wild animals ‘numerous 
as the stars in the firmament’ assemble and disperse at his 
command.*® In both Celtic and Norse tales,*® the person who 
sits on a mound is usually a king or a herdsman (or both at 
once), while many a Fenian wonder^tale begins with Finn seated 
on his hunting-'mound when his company follow the chase.Like the throne^mound outside the court, the sun/chamber 
(griandn) outside the banqueting/hall has features which sug/ 
gest comparison with the ‘outer fifth’ province.®® In some 
contexts, the griandn is the women’s part of the court. Again, it 
is from his grianh that Bricriu, the master of ceremonies who 
always stands aside from the conflicts he initiates, watches the 
proceedings in the hall from which, though he built it, he is 
excluded.®* Bricriu and CuRof seem to have their Norse 
counterparts in Loki and tJtgar&a-'Loki, respectively. titgarOa'' 
Loki is the colossal lord of an outer world, and his conduct

Five Peaks 18 5

towards Thorr, the champion god,®^ is in some ways similgr 
to that of CuRoi towards CuChulainn. Loki, a ruthless 
deceiver and creator of conflict, is of the gods and yet not of 
them. They vainly try to exclude him from their feast, and 
later he seeks refuge from them in a mountain where he builds 
himself an observatory from which he can see in every 
direction.® » It is no accident that Bricriu and Goll, in the 
Ulster Cycle, are both sons of Carbad (i.e. they have the same 
patronymic); that in the Fenian Cycle, Conan Mael, the 
reviler and trouble/'maker, and Coll, the slayer of Finn, are 
both sons of Morna, and that Kei, the churlish seneschal®* 
in the Arthurian Cycle, is concerned with the service of the 
king’s table.

CHAPTER IX

Numbers

‘Every moment beginneth existence, around every “Here” 
rolleth the ball “There”. The middle is everywhere.’

NietzscheCHAPTER IX

Numbers

‘Every moment beginneth existence, around every “Here” 
rolleth the ball “There”. The middle is everywhere.’

Nietzsche

At Uisnech and Tara we found a concentration of symbols. 
Not only did the provinces and their kingships converge upon 
these centres and fuse together, but there was an assemblage of 
such symbols as a hill, a stone, a palace, a seat, a tree, a well, 
a fire — and they were places of contact with the supernatural 
world. The other great centres had similar concentrations. For 
example, some of the principal features of Cashel, capital of 
Munster, may be gleaned from two tales. The first^ tells of the 
return of Conall Core to Munster after a sojourn in Scotland. 
On that day the swineherd of Aed, King of Muscraige, was 
tending his swine and at night he told the king of a wonderful 
sight he had seen. He saw a yew tree on a rock and in front of it 
an oratory with a jkgstone before it and angels ascending from 
the flagstone and descending upon it. The vision was inters 
preted by a druid: the place (Cashel) would be the residence 
of the kings of Munster for ever, and the kings would be the 
descendants of the first man to kindle a jire under that yew tree. 
Aed would have gone there at once, but the druid advised 
him to wait till morning, and Conall unwittingly forestalled 
him. The second story® says that when St Patrick mounted 
the flagstone legions of demons flew out from beneath it. The 
saint blessed the stone with the virtue of counsel and ordained, 
firstly, that an angel should pass over it every even^tide; 
secondly, that if the king of Munster accompanied by the nine 
sons of a great chief fasted upon it he should have whatever

186

Numbers 187

boon he craved, and lastly, that its fire should be one of the 
three that would be alive in Ireland until the end.186

Numbers 187

boon he craved, and lastly, that its fire should be one of the 
three that would be alive in Ireland until the end.

On the other hand, in Ireland one may sdll be confronted 
with the riddle: ‘Where is the middle of the world?’ The correct 
answer is ‘Here’ or ‘Where you are standing.’* The same 
question appears in versions of the medieval European tale of 
the ‘Abbe Sans Souci’, including one recorded in Brittany, and 
to explain the answer a finger is placed on the surface of a ball, 
showing that the centre is wherever the finger touches.* The 
riddle is in harmony with the Rig Vedas five points: north, 
south, east, west, and ‘here’. The directions are orientated 
around wherever one ‘is’. Similarly, significance is not confined 
to the great ceremonial centres. Every ritual place or cult object 
is endowed with what Professor M. Eliade has called ‘the 
prestige of the Centre’,® be it a local meeting-'hill, a pillar/stone, 
an inauguration tree, a sacred well, a grave, or what it may. 
The identity of the domestic hearth with the central one is ex' 
pressed in the re-'kindling of its fire from the central fire. For 
the purposes of this ritual the centre of any locality is the hill or 
cairn on which the bonfire is lit, and in the house the focus 
is the hearth. In recent folk^belief a priest’s house assumed 
something of the role of ancient Uisnech, for when a pestilence 
broke out in south/western Ireland it was customary to quench 
the fires in the homes and to light them anew with embers 
obtained from the house of a priest.®Temair (Tara), which is mythologically derived from the 
name of £rem6n’ s queen. Tea, is a fairly common hilhname, 
and it is said that every other Temair which exists in Ireland 
was given to Tea, as well as Temair Luachra and Temair in 
Brega.’' In as much as Tara is a hill, it can be symbolized by 
whatever hill is chosen for the purpose. Every beehive tomb in 
Greece is a symbol of the omphalos (‘navel’ of the earth); every 
stupa (gravemound) in India is a miniature of Mount Meru 
in the middle of the world.® In Yorubaland, Frobenius found 
little clay cult objects which consisted of a central cone, repre/ 
senting the god of world order, with four smaller cones around

I88

Celtic Heritage

it representing the gods of the cardinal points.* Similarly every 
cairn in Ireland represents the whole. A cairn is a mound of 
stones erected over a burial or at some other point with other/ 
world associations, such as wherever a man has died out/of- 
doors or where a coffin has rested. But, in a discussion of the 
title Nia in Cbairn — ‘The Champion of the Cairn’ — given to 
Conchobar’s son Cormac, it is noted that ‘some of the learned 
assert that every place wherein there are five stones, or any other 
five things, or the five provinces of Ireland, is properly called a 
cairn.’^* Therefore Cormac as Nia in Chaim was ‘champion 
of the five provinces’. A pillar/stone at Keimaneigh (South of 
Cork) is said to be a petrified woman and in it are five cavities 
with five oval stones in them.^^ That, according to this defini/ 
tion, constitutes a cairn. Even children playing ‘fivestones’^* 
are unwittingly playing with symbols of the whole of Ireland.The pattern of the whole was again mirrored in the houses 
maintained by kindreds of the /«/<?<> tenant class. ‘Afuidir does 
not incur liability of his kindred, unless they maintain five 
dwellings. If it is with five complete dwellings, they share 
their family lands.’^® The subdivision of land into quarters 
also is symbolic. In Wales, according to the law/books, there 
were four acres in a homestead, four holdings in every town/ 
ship, and so on.^* In the Isle of Man four quarterlands at one 
time formed a treen, the smallest unit for administrative purposes. 
Similarly in Ireland and the Western Highlands of Scotland 
the quarterland is regarded as the primary division of farmland 
(though it is further subdivided into eighths, sixteenths, and so 
on). The Irish haile hiatach, like the damch or ounce/land in 
Scotland and the Hebrides, comprised four quarterlands and 
was a tax unit.^® There are also traces of the existence of this 
fourfold system in medieval England where four wards, four 
townships, or four villes constituted a unit for various legal 
purposes. ‘There is definite evidence that the number four was 
associated in the medieval mind with the four quarters.’^® 
While the dominant idea in these cases is the four quarters, the 
elusive fifth is not altogether absent. The Irish consisted

Numbers

189

of four fields, one on each side of a homestead/’’ and a similar 
concept is implied in the Welsh system of four acres to one 
homestead. We also know that in at least one district of South 
Wales the inhabitants of four adjoining sharelands used to 
meet at a. focal point on three annual holidays to play games and 
to listen to songs.^®Five is not the most prominent number in Celtic tradition, 
but it nevertheless appears in a large number of significant 
contexts. Ireland had five great roads and five celebrated 
hostels.^® There were five paths of the law, and five prohibitions 
for each of the four provincial kings (but seven for the king of 
Tara).®® Both Finn and the fairies counted by fives.®® Finn 
was one of the fve masters of every great art, and was killed 
by the ‘five sons of Uirgriu’, each of whom ‘planted a spear 
in the royal fian.-chief’.®® The unitary character of five is also 
suggested by an episode in the Tain in which the Galioin, 
whose loyalty is suspect, are distributed among the other 
troops ‘so that no five men of them shall be in one place’.®® 
Mythical personages wore fivefold cloaks, and CuChulainn 
had five wheels on his shield, which is particularly note.' 
worthy when we remember that Achilles’ shield was made in 
five layers and that shields representing the cosmos were wide.' 
spread in the iconography of the ancient world.®* When his 
wife, Ethne, and three champions of Ulster visit CuChulainn 
on his sick bed, they arrange themselves around him, Fergus 
between him and the wall, Conall Cernach between him and 
the bed'rail, Lugaid Reoderg between him and the pillow, 
Ethne at his feet — one at each point, with CuChulainn in the 
middle.®®

The secret fifth also has its counterpart in the fifth of the five 
‘families’ (or groups) of five signs each which constitute the 
o£am alphabet.®® The first three groups of five stand for the 
different consonants, the fourth group for vowels. The fifth 
set of five, called the ‘supplementary family’, is said, in the 
medieval tracts, to denote diphthongs. Early Irish stories com 
tain several references to the use of ogam to convey secret

190 Celtic Heritage190 Celtic Heritage

messages or for divinatory purposes. In one case four sticks are 
used, in another a four/sided stick. Vendryes notes the import.- 
ance of twenty in the Celtic numerical system, and also in the 
numerical system of certain peoples in India, and the five 
‘supplementary letters’ (Jotfedd) are dismissed as a later addi.- 
tion,^^ just as the fifth province has been accounted a later 
addition. The signs in this fifth group are different in character 
from those of the four other groups, thus:

Fig. 14 The o^am charaaers

Are we to consider it an accident that each of these five char^ 
acters of the fifth group is formed by a cross (single, double or 
quadruple), a diamond or circular enclosure, or a rudi/ 
mentary spiral— all apt symbols of the mystic centre?

A medieval tract on language teaches that ‘five words are 
adjudged to be a breath of the poet.’ ‘And when dithyramb 
or metrical rhythm was present, how was it measured? for 
there is not couplet rhyme or caesura rhyme in it. Not hard.

Numbers

m

By a word completing a breath which was indicated by the fifth 
word . . Again, there are five kinds of language, namely: 
‘the language of the Feni, the precedents of the poets, the Ian/ 
guage of separation, the hidden (?) language of the poets, in 
which they speak with one another, and iarmberla, such as cuich 
[? coic ‘five’], that is a secret, and ballorb, a member which com/ 
pletes the poet . . . The fifth kind of language was learned 
by the poet in his fifth year of training.In a Fenian story,*® a spell involving the number five is 
chanted upon a spear; the spear moves from the chanter’s 
hand and impales the enemy. Modern card games are played 
with four suits, but in Irish a ‘trick’ in these games is known 
as cuig, ‘five’.®^ In Indo/European languages the first four 
numerals were declined, with feminine and masculine 
forms. Five was thus the first number that had only one 
form, and it was by invoking this number, which was both 
masculine and feminine, that Indra defeated the Asuras 
in a ritual counting/contest. Hence, according to the $atapatha 
Brahmana, the Sacrificer when the first fore/offering has been 
performed, says: ‘One (unus) for me!’ and ‘One (una) for him 
we hate!’ ‘Two (duo) for me!’ and ‘Two (duae) for him who 
hates us and whom we hate!’ and so on to the fourth fore/offer/ 
ing. Then, ‘Five for me’ and ‘Nothing for him who hates us 
and whom we hate!’ ‘For, there being “five” to “five”, he (the 
enemy) is defeated, and whoever knows this appropriates to him/ 
self everything that belongs to that (enemy of his), strips his 
enemies of everything.’**

There are Indian rites in which groupings of five gods are 
placed in a cross formation with the principal symbol in the 
centre,*® while in Buddhist teaching the human body and the 
human heart have the same five/fold structure: ‘O nobly/born, 
these realms are not come from somewhere outside (thyseF). 
They come from within the four directions of the heart, which, 
including its centre, make the five directions.’** Again: ‘This 
fundamental idea of the four cardinal points and the central 
area (below and above) which forms the fifth ... is found in

192 Celtic Herita£e

the religious expressions of the Aztec peoples.’®® In You/ 
doun: ‘The figure five is as the four of the cross/roads plus the 
swinging of the door which is the point itself of crossing, the 
moment of arrival and departure.’®®

22

The number nine figures so prominently in Celtic tradition 
that it has been described as the ‘northern counterpart of the 
sacred seven’ of Near Eastern cultures.®’’ Briaiu was not the 
only subject who built a ninefold residence for his king. It is 
stated in the Welsh Laws that the serf class should build nine 
houses for the king, while the serf’s own house should also 
consist of a hall plus eight penthouses.®® Repeated allusions 
to houses comprising ‘nine houses (or rooms) in one’, in the 
fifteenth/century poems of Guto’r Glyn,®® confirm the exist/ 
ence of a Welsh tradition that a complete house should consist 
of nine component parts. A holding consisting of a homestead 
and eight acres (erwau) is sometimes mentioned in the Welsh 
Laws as an alternative to the more usual unit of a homestead 
and four acres, while in Ireland there are instances of kingdoms 
which consisted of nine cantreds.^®

Apart from sporadic pointers of this kind, and the sub/ 
division of quarterlands into eighths, the eight/ninefold con/ 
ception of things has not left an enduring impression on the 
territorial divisions of the Celtic lands, but it is to be found in 
a great many other significant contexts, among which the 
following are but a small selection. We have mentioned the 
nine hazels of wisdom that grew at the heads of the seven chief 
rivers of Ireland.*^ There is also a story^® of a marvellous tree 
which grew fiom above downwards, like an inverted Yggdra/ 
sill. It had nine branches, of which the highest was the most 
beautiful, and in them pure white birds listened to the melodies 
to be heard there. The story is interpreted allegorically, the 
tree being Christ, the nine branches the nine grades of heaven, 
and the birds the souls of the just, but the symbol of the inverted

Numbers I93Numbers I93

tree is as old as the Rl£ Veia.*^ An early Welsh poem which 
mentions the Csiuldron of the Head of Annwfn says that ‘by 
the breath of nine maidens was it kindled*, and in the Vita 
Merlini the Fortunate Isles are governed by nine sisters, the 
first of whom was Morgen.*^ In the dindsenchas^^ there is a tale 
of Ruad son of Rigdonn who rows north of Ireland with three 
boats and finds they have no power to move. He swims to a 
secret spot and finds nine fair and strong ‘female forms’ with 
whom he sleeps nine nights ‘without gloom, without tearful 
lament, under the sea free from waves on nine beds of bronze.’ 
One of the women bears him a child.

Irish literature abounds with ‘companies of nine’, and in a 
considerable number of cases it is made clear that the nine 
consist of a leader and eight others. This is strikingly illustrated 
in a description of Medb’s mode of travel in TSn Bo Cuailnge:^^ 
‘and nine chariots with her alone; two of these chariots before 
her, and two behind, and two chariots at either side, and her 
own chariot in the middle between them’. King Loegaire, 
when setting out to arrest St Patrick, ordered nine chariots to 
be joined together ‘according to the tradition of the gods’.*^ 
Eight swordsmen guarded Bricriu on his way to the feast he 
had prepared in his nine-'chambered hall.*® CuChulainn had 
nine weapons of each kind, eight small ones and one large 
one.*® Cathbad the druid had eight disciples and Finn 
appears with eight Cafltes gathered around him.®®Nine, like five, symbolized the whole. In Welsh medieval 
society the ninth generation was the recognized limit of kin 
relationship, and even the human body had nine principal 
parts.®* The number also appears in traditional British games 
such as Ninepins, in which the middle pin is called the ‘king’, 
and Nine Men’s Morris which was played on a square divided 
into eight sections around a central ‘pound’.®® In Scotland, the 
need^fire was kindled sometimes by nine men and sometimes 
by nine nines of first/begotten sons.®® The number was also 
connected with the Beltaine fire in Scotland, and in Wales, 
as in parts of Scandinavia, the fire was made with nine sticks

N

194 Celtic Heritage

collected by nine men from nine different trees.®* Nines, and 
particularly the ‘ninth’, were very important in divinations and 
in folk cures,®® and even the waves of the sea broke in series of 
nine, the ninth wave being larger and more fortunate than the 
rest,®®

Almost as common as nine in Celtic tradition is twenty^ 
seven, frequently expressed as ‘three nines’. Three times nine 
plus a leader, making twenty.^eight in all, seems to have been a 
numerical arrangement of considerable significance. Calatin 
with his twenty/seven sons (and his grandson) insist on their 
being regarded as a single warrior, claiming that all Calatin’s 
offspring were constituent parts of his own body.®’’ In ‘The 
Wooing of Emer’, CuChulainn was opposed by the lady’s 
father together with her three brothers each of whom had 
eight men — a. company of twenty.'eight altogether.®® Again, 
Bran set out on his voyage with three companies of nine, each 
commanded by one of his foster/brothers.®® Companies of 
nine, comprising a leader and eight others were customary 
among the Fiana; these, however, were grouped into larger 
units comprising three companies of nine plus a leader.®® Thus, 
time and again we encounter the arrangement: [(8 + i)x 3 ] 
+ 1 = 28.The number nine may at one time have had a place in the 
calendar of the Celtic peoples. In the Welsh Laws, the ninth 
day of the month often marks the end or the beginning of a 
period, and a period of nine days or nine nights is certainly 
in evidence in the literature as a significant unit of time.®* In 
Wales the period of bright moonlight during the harvest moon 
is called y naivnos olau (the nine light nights), and in Irish the 
terms nSmai and mtnden stand for units of nine time^spaces 
(? days or half-days).®® From such evidence as this, Rhys and 
others long ago drew the conclusion that the Celts had a nine/ 
day week, or rather a nine/night week, for they reckoned by 
nights.®® Three weeks of nine nights would give a twenty/ 
seven/night month, and the importance of the number twenty/ 
seven in Celtic mythology is perhaps related to the twenty/seven

Numbers

195

constellations of the lunar zodiac, as it is in Hindu mythology 
where the moon, King Soma, has twenty/seven star wives with 
each of whom he spends one night every month.®*Numbers

195

constellations of the lunar zodiac, as it is in Hindu mythology 
where the moon, King Soma, has twenty/seven star wives with 
each of whom he spends one night every month.®*

Apart from traces of an ancient nine^day week alongside the 
present sevenz-day week, seven and nine appear as alternatives 
in a number of contexts. The Hostel of Da Derga is variously 
described as having nine doors and seven doors.®® In some 
contexts in the Welsh Laws it is said that the serfs should 
build seven houses for the king,®® not nine. Similarly, the limits 
of kin for purposes of the blood-'fine are variously defined as 
nine generations and seven generations.®’' Seven is as popular a 
number as nine in some branches of Celtic literature and there 
can be no doubt that it had a significance for the Celts, as for 
other Indoz-European peoples, long before the introduction of 
Christianity. Among the Greeks, the relative antiquity of 
seven and nine is not known; both appear side by side as 
meaningful numbers in Homer and in the oldest cults.*® 
Seven sometimes alternates with five. By reckoning Fir Bolg 
as three peoples, some texts speak of seven invasions instead of 
the usual five.®* The basic division of Scotland was into seven, 
between the seven eponymous sons of Cruithne.’® England 
and Ireland also have had their respective heptarchies. Again, 
in contradistinction to the twenty/seven lunar constellations, 
we have the more usual lunar zodiac oftwenty-'eight ‘mansions’ 
(4 X 7) which is believed to have originated in Babylonia and 
to have spread to lands ranging from China to medieval 
Europe.’* Gildas, writing in the sixth century, says that Britain 
was adorned with twenty-height cities.’® Unlike Bricriu’s hall, 
the splendid house of Ailill and Medb in Cruachan has 
‘seven compartments from the fire to the wall in the house all 
round’. In one story’® a quarter of it is allocated to the guests, 
and this together with its sixteen windows (plus a skylight) 
suggests a fourfold division with perhaps seven compartments 
in each quarter making a total of twenty-height. The magni-- 
ficent four-hpillared compartment of Ailill and Medb stood196

Celtic Heritage

in tlie middle of the house. Medb had seven sons, the seven 
Maines, and it has been suggested that they personified the 
days of the week. Ever3rthing connected with Medb’s lover, 
Fergus mac Roich, was also reckoned in sevens.'^'* Thus, 
whereas the royal household of Ulster figured the solar year, 
that of Connacht may have figured the lunar month.

3

The figure of twelve individuals around a king which we dis/- 
cussed in connection with Bricriu’s Hall is reproduced in the 
tradition of Crom Croich of Mag Slecht:’®

‘Mag Slecht, whence was it namedf Answer: It is there 
the kingddol of Ireland was, i.e. Crom Croich, and the 
twelve stone idols around him; but he was of gold. And 
until the coming of Patrick he was the god of every people 
that occupied Ireland. It is to him they used to offer the 
first/born of every stock and the firstborn of every family. 
It is to him that the king of Ireland, Tigernmas son of 
Follach, came at Samain, together with the men and 
women of Ireland, to adore him. And they all bowed 
down before him, until their foreheads, and the soft part 
of their noses, and the caps of their knees, and the points of 
their elbows, broke; so that threeffourths of the Men of Ire/ 
land died of these prostrations. Hence Mag Slecht.’

The metrical version adds the detail that the twelve subsidiary 
idols were arranged in four rows of three,’® forming the now 
familiar pattern of a centre and three in each direction. Through 
a miracle performed by St Patrick, the central idol ‘bowed 
westwards to turn on its right side, for its face was ftom the 
south, to wit, to Tara. . . . And the earth swallowed the twelve 
other images as far as their heads.’”

With the number twelve, as with the number seven, there is 
always the possibility that native tradition has been affected 
by Christianity. A recent writer dismisses the story of Crom

Numbers I97With the number twelve, as with the number seven, there is 
always the possibility that native tradition has been affected 
by Christianity. A recent writer dismisses the story of Crom

Numbers I97

Croich as ‘an ad hoc invention to account for a circle of twelve 
low boulders surrounding an inner taller one tilted over west-- 
wards on its right side/’® If the story is an invention, the twelve 
stones around a thirteenth which are said to have given rise to 
it still have to be accounted for. That the number is not fortuit-- 
ous is suggested by a ritual of circumambulating a sacred hill, 
which has survived at Locronan in Brittany. The path around 
the hill was twelve kilometers long and it was punctuated by 
twelve stations marked by sacred stones. The circumambula^ 
tion was performed every seven years, beginning in the west, 
rising northwards, descending eastwards, and proceeding 
south. The participants then climbed the hill and descended 
westwards. On their way down, they went three times round a 
massive stone, representing the moon, which stood close to a 
wood called Nevet (Sacred place).’®

The symbolism of twelve, like that of seven, is certainly 
older and more widespread than Christianity. A knowledge 
of the zodiacal twelve is found throughout Eurasia, and it was 
firmly established in Scandinavia in prez-Christian times. That 
it should have been unknown to the pre-Christian Celts is 
hardly probable.

44

Finally, we shall turn our attention to the numbers seventeen 
and thirty-three. Partholon and Nemed between them cleared 
sixteen plains, which together with the ‘Old Plain of Elta’, 
fashioned by God before any of the invaders arrived, make 
a total of seventeen.®® According to the ‘Book of JRights’, 
seventeen kings accepted annual gifts from the king of Cashel 
and there were seventeen kingdoms in Meath (including Brega 
as one);®’^ Cairbre Crom is said to have conferred seventeen 
townlands upon St Ciaran.®® Seventeen may thus have been a 
significant territorial unit. Seventeen days, the seventeenth of 
the month, and seventeen years occur in a number of interest- 
ing contexts. For example, both Partholon and the sons of

198 Celtic Heritage

Mil arrived in Ireland on the seventeenth of the moon, the 
Battle of Tailtiu began on the seventeenth of the moon, and 
there are several examples of reigns of sixteen or seventeen years’ 
duration.®® Lebor Gabala lists sixteen triads of Tuatha De 
Danann, together with the three gods of Danann.®* Finn’s 
womenfolk numbered seventeen, and seventeen chieftains in 
succession commanded Ireland’s Fiana.®®In Ireland, as in Rome, youths became men at the age of 
seventeen years. Fosterage came to an end and marriage could 
be contemplated. This transition is marked in CdChulainn’s 
life by his great exploits during the cattle/raid of Cuailnge, 
and the first of these was to thrust into the ground a forked tree 
which Fergus, himself an exile for seventeen years, tried seven/ 
teen times in vain to pull up.®* Mongan, fostered in The Land 
of Promise, was brought back to Ireland after sixteen years, 
and then betrothed.®' A druid advised Maelduin to take only 
seventeen men with him on his celebrated Voyage, and his 
three foster/brothers who insisted on joining the crew against 
this advice were lost on the way. When the company reached 
the Island of Women they found seventeen maidens, in addi/ 
tion to the queen of the island.®® In this tale seventeen is clearly 
a fated number, though Maelduin himself and the queen are 
not included in the reckoning.

A division of the heavens into sixteen regions appears in the 
cosmic systems of the Greeks, the Romans and the Germans, 
and among the Etruscans these divisions were used for divina/ 
tory purposes. The Egyptians knew of sixteen giants who were 
closely connected with the celestial regions. Sixteen perfect 
lands were created by Ahura Mazda. Given a centre, such 
cosmologies®* become seventeenfold. In the Satapatha Brah'- 
tnatpi we have the now familiar play of the odd and even num/ 
ber:®* ‘Let him (the sacrificer) seize seventeen victims for the 
central stake, in order that he may secure everything; for seven/ 
teenfold is Prajapati and seventeen (stoma) is everjrthing; and 
sixteen at each of the other (stakes) in order that he may gain 
and secure everything, for everything consists of sixteen parts.

Numhers i99Numhers i99

and the Asvamedha is everything.’ The Brahmanas also un^ 
ceasingly reiterate: ‘Prajapati is the year, so Prajapati is seven/ 
teen.’ The correlation of the year with seventeen was achieved 
by adding the twelve months and the five seasons. Sometimes, 
however, Prajapati is declared to be eighteen, comprising the 
twelve months, the five seasons and the year itself.®^ Similarly 
in some Irish instances, seventeen is as it were further completed 
by an eighteenth. For example, it was on the eighteenth attempt 
that Fergus succeeded in uprooting the forked tree, and 
Maelduin himself constituted an eighteenth member of his 
ship’s crew. CdChulainn broke all the seventeen chariots 
which King Conchobar kept in reserve, and was satisfied only 
when given the king’s own chariot.®® The force of Medb in 
the Tain, including the Ulster exiles, was seventeen units; 
the Galioin were the eighteenth.®®

In Ireland, the ‘sixteenth’ and ‘seventeenth generation’, like 
the ‘ninth generation’ in Wales, marked the limits to which 
kin could properly be reckoned, and even in modern times: 
‘There is not an old seanchaiihe (storyteller) in Tirconaill that 
has not heard times without number of the seiseadh ^lun deag, 
i.e. the sixteenth generation.’ Curses are invoked to the seven/ 
teenth generation.®* Indeed, the ancient Irish kinship system 
incorporates all the uneven numbers which we have hitherto 
discussed. It classifies kindred into four categories according to 
their degree of remoteness:®®

1 ‘The geilfine extends to five persons.’

2 ‘The deirhhfine extends to nine persons.’

3 ‘The iaifine extends to thirteen persons.’

4 ‘The innjitte extends to seventeen persons.*1 ‘The geilfine extends to five persons.’

2 ‘The deirhhfine extends to nine persons.’

3 ‘The iaifine extends to thirteen persons.’

4 ‘The innjitte extends to seventeen persons.*

The system is conceived of as expanding in ever/widening 
circles, the outer ones containing the inner ones. In other 
words, the innermost circle o£thegdlfine comprises five persons, 
while each of the other three contains four additional ones, 
making a combined total of seventeen. A great deal has been 
written in an endeavour to identify the seventeen ‘persons’, but

200

I

Celtic Heritage

while it is now generally ^reed that they represent classes of 
kin rather than individuals, the evidence as to the nature of 
these classes remains inconclusive.

Time and again the numbers we are discussing have resolved 
themselves into multiples of even numbers, plus an odd one.

4+1 = 5

(4x2) 8 + 1 = 9

(3x4) 12+1 = 13

(8x2) 16+1 = 17

If we take the process a step further we get:

(16x2) 32+1 = 334+1 = 5

(4x2) 8 + 1 = 9

(3x4) 12+1 = 13

(8x2) 16+1 = 17

If we take the process a step further we get:

(16x2) 32+1 = 33

— a. number which would take account of, among other things, 
relationships on the mother’s side as well as the father’s. 
According to Giraldus Cambrensis there were thirty/two 
‘cantreds’ (trtcha cit) in each of the five provinces of Ireland, 
and sixteen in Meath.®® As listed in the Tain, the muster of 
the men of Ireland consisted of thirty-'three threes.®^ Thirty.' 
two leaders of the Tuatha De Danann are listed in the story 
the First Battle of Mag Tuired,®® and this list does not in/- 
elude Lug — ^their saviour in the Second Battle. With them may 
be compared the company of thirty/three men, all seemingly 
thirty/two years of age, who sit at tables in the otherworld 
island/castle in Perlesvaus.^^ Nemed reached Ireland with only 
one ship; thirty/three of his ships were lost on the way.^®® 
CuChulainn slays thirty/three of Labraid’s opponents in the 
Sti, and a late account of the Second Battle of Mag Tuired 
names thirty/three leaders of the Fomoire — ^thirty/two plus 
their high/king.^®^

In the story of the Wandering of the Dessi we are told that 
it was thirty/three years after their expulsion from Tara that 
they again fought the Leinstermen. The divisions of Fiachu 
Suidge, their rulers, numbered thirty/three, and it is perhaps 
significant that to the name of the middle or seventeenth man 
in the list of eponyms is appended the observation namely a 
man who went into a n'H/mound’.^®® In a poem, the two great

Numbers

201Numbers

201

rival groups of Fiana— Clann Mhorna, who had the support 
of the high^king, and Clann Bhaoisgne — are each represented 
by sixteen men,^**® Another poem lists the leaders who in sue/ 
cession commanded the Fiana during its history of 320 years 
(and a half) to the death of Finn, while Oisin’s ten years would 
extend the period to 330 years. For thirty/two successive years 
included in this reckoning Clann Mhorna had the command; 
Goll later held it for ten.^®^ The story of Bricriu’s Feast in/ 
eludes a list of the names of the thirty/two heroes who accom/ 
pany King Conchobar to Bricriu’s hall.^®® So too in ‘The 
Dream of Maxen Wledig’, ‘thirty/two crowned kings, his 
vassals at that time,’ accompany the Emperor in a hunt which 
leads to a vision.^®*

The number thirty/three has a time/honoured place in the 
traditions of other Indo/European peoples. In Rome, thirty 
lictors representing the thirty curiata acted in conjunction with 
three augurs. Thirty, or thirty/three, days (tusti dies) inter/ 
vened between a declaration of war and the departure of the 
full army. The Vedas speak of the thirty/three gods (Visve 
devah — ‘All/the/gods’), and these have their counterparts in 
Persian mythology.^®’

5

We have implied that each of the odd numbers we have dis/ 
cussed is, so to speak, the completed form of the next even 
number below it. This is borne out by the fact that, both in 
old authorities and in modern Gaelic, seven persons are some/ 
times referred to as mor'sheis^ear, which means literally ‘great 
six persons’, while the dialect word mor'oehtar, ‘great eight 
persons’ signifies ‘nine’.’-®® The unit which transforms an 
even number into an odd number is more than a quantitative 
addition. In the majority of the examples we have cited, it is 
the centre or leader, the unifying principle. The inferiority of 
even numbers is suggested by such details as that after the 
massacre of the nobles by the aithech'thuatha (‘tributary tribes’)

202202

Celtic Heritage

Ireland is said to have had four associated kings, that Niail 
of the Nine Hostages was so called because he held five 
hostages from Ireland and four from foreign lands, that there 
were five officers in the courts of North Wales and only four 
in those of the South, and that in the board^games to which we 
have referred the number of pieces in the ‘king’s party’ is odd 
or even according to whether the king/piece is counted or not, 
while, lacking a king, the number of opposing pieces is un^ 
ambiguously even. For Pythagoras odd numbers were mascu^ 
line, even numbers feminine, and it is perhaps noteworthy that 
when the plague destroyed Partholon’s people they numbered 
five thousand men and four thousand women. In the Indian 
story of the contest between Indra and the Asura, it is the 
feminine forms attributed to the latter which give out with 
‘four’, while Indra goes on to win with ‘five’. The Chinese 
express the fundamental duality of Yang and Yin in terms of 
odd and even numbers, while ‘In Voudoun one and one make 
three; two and two make five; for the and of the equation is the 
third and fifth part, respectively, the relationship which makes 
all the parts meaningful.’^Yet, compelling as it is, the concept of the additional unit 
as the unifying or superior factor by no means exhausts the 
symbolism of numbers. In many of the groupings and divisions 
described in this book there is a category which stands apart 
from the rest not by virtue of its superiority but because it is 
external in some way or other. And this tends to occur whether 
the total number be odd or even. As we have seen, two is 
constituted of ‘upper’ and ‘lower’. Amor^ the three men of 
Cessair’s company, Ladra was inferior to the other two; of the 
three Nemed groups one settled abroad, and in the division of 
Wales and Ireland into three, the third portion represents the 
‘lower’ element. Similarly with the four ‘functions’, the fourth, 
represented by the unfree class, is external to the other three. 
Death separates Parthol on and his people from the three sub/ 
sequent pre/Gaelic settlers who are all of the same stock, and

Numbers

203

we have noted that Munster stands apart from the other pro-* 
vinces. Again, of the five peoples who took Ireland before the 
Gaels, one was prediluvian and was led by a woman, and in 
the Fir Bolg division the fifth province is the ‘outer’ one. In the 
Mabinogi, the Island of the Mighty is left in the care of seven 
overlords ‘and Pendaran Dyfed as a young lad with them’. 
Cunedda, founder of the dynasty of Gwynedd, had nine sons, 
but of these the eldest died before the family came to Wales and 
the number was completed by the inclusion of his son. Eight 
Sons of Mil set out to Ireland; the ninth member of the expedi^ 
tion was Lugaid, son of their late kinsman who had recon/ 
noitred the country. But, Lugaid apart, there was one of the 
eight sons whose portion was the land of the dead.The completing unit changes the structure of a number, but 
its identity is often problematic. The Welsh laws speak of 
seven generations of kindred, but only six are clearly identi-- 
fiable.^^^ According to one version the seventh is ‘nephew son 
of fifth cousin’ (net vab £orchaw) who marks the limit to which 
kin is reckoned. But other versions ignore this category and 
the seven can then be accounted for only by counting ‘the man 
himself’ at the centre of the web of relationships. One of the 
most puzzling problems of the Irish kinship system is the 
identity of the iffih person of the geilfine, and in reading the 
medieval and modern commentaries one is reminded of the 
enigma of the fifth province. But here too on the fringes of the 
kin is an elusive category called the ‘finger/-nails’ — a term which 
also occurs in Germanic laws.^^^ Similarly with the classifica/ 
tion of land: odds and ends of unused lands associated with 
English villages were called ‘no man’s land’, ‘anyone’s land’, 
or ‘Jack’s land’, and in Scotland such fields were left undis-' 
turbed to the service of the devil. G. L. Gomme compares 
them with fragments of uncleared land which villagers of some 
parts of India left as habitations of the dead and other super-- 
natural beings.^

Thus we return again to the fact that the excluded, the wild, 
the dead, the young, the female, the Other World have their

204 Celtic HeritageThus we return again to the fact that the excluded, the wild, 
the dead, the young, the female, the Other World have their

204 Celtic Heritage

place in the total scheme of things. The significant unit can 
be the last as well as the first, and it can be both at once. Niall 
of the Nine Hostages was inferior to his four half/brothers in 
that his mother was treated as a slave, and superior to them 
in that he was destined to be high^krng. The ninth wave is the 
greatest, but it comes from the outermost limits of the cosmos. 
What lies beyond the bounds of the cosmos is, in a sense, 
inferior to it, but it is also the source of all things. Thus, 
whereas the centre turns multiplicity into unity, the external 
factor sets it in the context of infinity, and between unity and 
infinity there is a strange identity.*

* It remains to be said that the symbolism of numbers is not confined to the 
principle to which our evidence points in this chapter. Thus, while there are 
instances of three as two^plus^one the number was also conceived of as a unit of 
three equals, as for example in the*triads’ and in the ‘triskele’ figures. Again, nine 
was envisaged as three threes as well as eight plus one, and three nines occur 
frequently without a completing twenty^eighth. Although the Celtic examples 
of thirty^hree illustrate the concept of 32+1, this number is also interpreted in 
Indian texts as 30+3, and 3x11. We have also excluded from our discussion 
the larger numbers, such as fifty, which was a unit of considerable significance 
in ancient Greece and the Near East generally as well as among the Celts. 
On the analogy of certain other numbers we have mentioned, it could be con^ 
ceived of as five decades, but there is no clear evidence of this. In Irish texts 
there are numerous examples of ‘three times fifty’ while ‘three times five’ is rare. 
Numbers, like other symbols, have more than one meaning.^^^

Part Three

THE MEANING OF STORY

CHAPTER XPart Three

THE MEANING OF STORY

CHAPTER X

The Storyteller s Repertoire

‘Nowlsuppose most people will think I am but entertaining myself 
with a toy, and using much the same kind of licence in expounding 
the poets’ fables which the poets themselves did in inventing them.

. . . But that is not my meaning. Not but that I know very well 
what pliant stuff fable is made of, how freely it will follow any way 
you please to draw it, and how easily with a little dexterity and dis^ 
course of wit meanings which it was never meant to bear may plau^ 
sibly be put upon it . . . All this I have duly examined and weighed . . .’

FRANCIS BACON

In the first part of this book we have introduced to the reader 
the main personages which figure in Celtic mythology, group/- 
ing them according to the ‘cycles’ to which they belong. 
Though the ancient storytellers were doubtless aware of the 
existence of these separate ‘cycles’, each with its distinct 
dramatis personae, there is no mention of them as such in the 
extant literature. In the classification of tales that has survived, 
the stories are not grouped according to cycles, nor are the 
events in the hfe/stories of individual personages arranged 
chronologically, as they are in the Lives of the Saints. Instead, 
the stories are grouped according to the subjects with which 
they are concerned — ^as in a modern index of folktale types. 
There is no way of estimating the antiquity of this mode of 
classification. All that can be said is that the two extant 
medieval versions of it, nowadays designated List A and List 
B,^ are probably derived from an original which was already 
in existence in the tenth century.

The order of classification is different in the two lists, each 
of which contains some subjectz-headings which are absent 
from the other. List A contains seventeen types of tales. List

207

208 Celtic Heritage207

208 Celtic Heritage

B Meen, thirteen types being common to both. There is no 
reason to suppose, however, that types recorded in only one of 
the lists, such as Conceptions and Births, Voyages, and Tragic 
Deaths, are less authentic than the others, and little weight can 
be attached to the omissions. The two lists may be collated 
as follows:

Types in Lists A and B

Destructions (Togla)

Cattle/'raids (Tana)

Courtships (Tochmarca)

Battles (Catha)

Feasts (Fessa)

Adventures (Echtrai)

Elopements (Aithid)

Slaughters (Airgne)

Irruptions (Tomadma)

Visions (Fisi)

Loves (Serca)

Expeditions (Sluagid)

Invasions (Tochomlada)

A preamble to List A in the Book of Leinster indicates 
that the poets memorized the tales under these headings:®

‘Of the qualifications of a Poet in Stories and in Deeds, 
here follows, to be related to kings and chiefs, viz.: Seven 
times Fifty Stories, i.e. Five times Fifty Prime Stories, 
and Twice Fifty Secondary Stories; and these Secondary 
Stories are not permitted (assigned) but to four grades only, 
viz., an OUamh, an Anrath, a Cli, and a Cano. And these 
are the Prime Stories: Destructions, and Cattle-'raids, and 
Courtships, and Battles, and Caves, and Voyages, and 
Violent Deaths, and Feasts, and Sieges, and Adventures, 
and Elopements, and Slaughters.’

After listing the tales under these twelve headings, five more 
headings are introduced with the statement that:

Types in List A only

Caves (Uatha)

Voyages (Immrama) 
Violent Deaths (Oitte) 
Sieges (Forbassa)

Types in List B only 
Conceptions and Births 
(Coimperta)

Frenzies (Buili)

209

The Storyteller* s Repertoire

‘It is as Prime Stories these below are estimated; namely. 
Irruptions, and Visions, and Loves, and Expeditions and 
Invasions/Frenzies (Buili)

209

The Storyteller* s Repertoire

‘It is as Prime Stories these below are estimated; namely. 
Irruptions, and Visions, and Loves, and Expeditions and 
Invasions/

While the preamble asserts that there were 250 Prime Stories 
and 100 Secondary Stories, less than 200 of the Prime Stories, 
and none of the Secondary Stories, are listed. It is possible that 
certain categories of Prime Stories are missing from both lists. 
For example, a section of the Tdin is devoted to the Mac-^ 
^nimartha (‘Youthful Exploits’) of CuChulainn, and there is a 
tale called Macgnimartha Finn. In any case, the absence of any 
reference to the nature of the hundred ‘Secondary Stories’ (Jo^ 
seek) constitutes a serious gap in our knowledge. The omission 
of these tales from the lists, together with the fact that they were 
the prerogative of the first four grades of poets, suggests that it 
may not have been considered proper to tell them to the public 
generally, and there seems to be no justification for regarding 
them as ‘secondary’ in any pejorative sense.

Again, the body of the traditional lore recounted at the 
Assembly of Carmun includes such subjects as Assemblies, 
Annals, Prohibitions, and Divisions, which do not seem to be 
fully covered by the headings in the Lists. It also mentions the 
important class of tales known as Dindsenchas, stories of places, 
to which there is no reference in the lists. Thus, important as 
they are as an indication of the way in which the poets organ-' 
ized their material, the lists as we have them cannot be regarded 
as a complete canon of the traditional literature, though evv 
dence we have considered in Chapter IX suggests that List 
A with its seventeen types made up of twelve plus five may be 
an attempt to arrange the tales in accordance with a cosmo-- 
logical pattern.

2

The question arises as to why the poets learnt the tales classified 
in this way according to events or deeds. Why was it not more 
o

2102

The question arises as to why the poets learnt the tales classified 
in this way according to events or deeds. Why was it not more 
o

210

Celtic Heritage

convenient for them to memorize them according to cycles.or 
at least as narratives about the entire careers of individual 
heroesS The concluding passages of the Irish burlesque ‘Vision 
of Mac Conglinne’ seem to offer a clue to the answer to this 
important question. There it is satirically claimed that ‘Nothing 
sorrowful shall be heard by anyone who has heard [that story]; 
it will be a year’s protection to them.’ The narrator goes on to 
say that

‘the married couple to whom it is related the first night 
shall not separate without an heir; they shall not be in 
dearth of food or raiment. The new house in which it is 
the first tale told, no corpse shall be taken out of it; it shall 
not want food or raiment; fire does not burn it. The king 
to whom it is recited before battle or conflict shall be 
victorious. On theoccasion of bringing out ale, or of feasting 
a prince, or of taking an inheritance or patrimony, this 
tale should be recited.’®We may conclude from this that a wedding/night, the ‘warm-' 
ing’ of a new house, the eve of battle, the bringing out of ale, 
feasts, and the taking over of inheritance were some of the 
occasions when tales were traditionally told. The poem quoted 
in Chapter I shows that they were also told before setting out 
on a voyage and before going to a court of law or to a hunt. 
Again, storytelling was a feature of the celebration of seasonal 
festivals, while it has been the custom at wakes for the dead, 
at christenings, and at weddings down to our own day.* 
Although the sources we have cited prescribe the same tale 
for a variety of different occasions, we would suggest that 
originally there were tales appropriate to each occasion. In 
the ‘Colloquy of the Ancients’, in which St Patrick and his 
company move from place to place in Ireland, it is legends of 
places th.sx. are told at every session, and in modern folk-'custom 
ghost/stories are considered particularly appropriate to Novem^ 
ber Eve. Is it therefore not likely that it was ‘Battles’ in parti-' 
cular that were related to kings about to embark upon war.

The Storyteller’s Rjepertoire 211The Storyteller’s Rjepertoire 211

that ‘Cattlexraids’ were told before undertaking a cattle/raid, 
‘Voyages’ on setting out to sea, ‘Conceptions and Births’ at 
births, ‘Wooings’ at weddings, ‘Death Tales’ at wakes, and so 
on? Arranged as they were in the Lists of his memory, the 
storyteller could easily select his stories to fit the different occa^ 
sions as they arose. We are not suggesting that the telling of 
each type of tale was ever restricted to the circumstances that 
corresponded to it in real life. Indeed, we have noted that at the 
Assembly of Carmun, and probably at other great ceremonial 
gatherings, the whole repertoire of tales was declaimed. In this 
respect the custom among the early Celts may not have been 
very different from what it is in our own Christian ritual. The 
Baptism of Jesus in the Jordan is cited at every christening, 
the miracle at Cana of Galilee at every marriage, the Resur.' 
rection at every funeral. Each allusion is appropriate to the 
occasion, but the relevance of these scriptural events was never 
confined to birth, marriage, and death.Evidence to which we have referred in Chapter I shows that 
the narrator of ‘The Vision of Mac Conglinne’ is parodying 
what was once a serious belief when he claims that to listen 
to the tale will bring life, offspring and prosperity. But com 
Crete benefits apart, the stories served as mythical models. In 
the words of van Hamel,® they provided examples of which 
‘the deeds of other men must be regarded as a reflexion’. Van 
Hamel’s further statement, that the heroes were intended to be 
‘imitated’ by people in early Celtic society, must nevertheless be 
qualified. We shall speak later of correspondences between 
myth and ritual, but outside the ritual the deeds of mythical 
heroes cannot be repeated by mortal men. As events in ordinary 
life they are, as often as not, fantastic, antiz-social, immoral and 
catastrophic. Yet, as we shall show in the following chapters, 
it is one of the great paradoxes of human life that it derives its 
deepest meaning from a mythological realm the inhabitants of 
which conduct themselves in a way that is antithetical to 
what is normal in every-day behaviour and experience.

In Welsh, the very word for ‘meaning’ (ystyr) comes from

212 Celtic Heritage

the Latin historia which has given the English language both 
‘story’ and ‘history’. ‘History’ has now been emptied of most 
of the original extra/'historical content of historia, which derives 
from a root meaning ‘knowing’, ‘learned’, ‘wise man’, ‘judge’.® 
The old Welsh word for ‘story’, cyjarwyddyd, means ‘guidance’, 
‘direction’, ‘instruction’, ‘knowledge’, ‘skill’, ‘prescription’. Its 
stem, arwydd, means ‘sign’, ‘symbol’, ‘manifestation’, ‘omen’, 
‘miracle’, and derives from a root meaning ‘to see’.'^ The story/ 
teller (cyfarwydd) was originally a seer and a teacher who guided 
the souls of his hearers through the world of ‘mystery’.In the remaining chapters we shall follow the classification 
of tales adopted by the ancient storytellers, but since about 
three/quarters of the tales in the Lists are not known, while 
many of the tales which have survived are not included in the 
Lists, we shall take the liberty of applying the traditional 
classification to the material as we have it. Space does not permit 
us to deal with more than a fair sample of the types listed. 
We have referred to the great ‘Battles’ of Mag Tuired and the 
most famous of all ‘Cattle/raids’ in Part I, while ‘Invasions’, 
‘Divisions’, ‘Feasts’ and ‘Assemblies’ have figured in Part II. 
The remainder of the book will be devoted mainly to the classes 
of tales which are most directly concerned with the Hfr/cycle of 
the individual.

Myths belong to the world of symbols, and one’s appre/ 
hension of them is a matter of insight. The ‘scope’ of a symbol’s 
reference cannot be limited to a particular concept, or set of 
concepts, and we need hardly stress that the commentary 
offered here is of necessity neither final, nor complete, nor 
exclusive of other approaches. We shall consider, for example, 
the light which the hero’s birth/story sheds on the mystery of 
human birth, but this does not mean that birth/myths may 
not also be valid symbols of initiation, conversion, or ‘re/birth’. 
The full ‘content’ of a myth can never be adequately expressed 
‘in other words’. There can be no definitive exegesis.

CHAPTER XI

Births

*. . . trailing clouds of glory do we come 
From God, who is our home.’

WORDSWORTHCHAPTER XI

Births

*. . . trailing clouds of glory do we come 
From God, who is our home.’

WORDSWORTH

In all mythologies a great deal of attention is given to the ways 
in which gods and heroes are conceived and the circumstances 
of their birth. Their youthful exploits, their winning of arms, 
their gaining of recognition and power, their courtship and 
marriage are also outstanding events in their careers, and their 
deaths are usually as memorable as their births. In this we see 
one of the fundamental differences between a mythological 
hero and a famous man. Generally speaking, the birth, max^ 
riage, and death of a famous man do not differ in any significant 
way from the births, marriages and deaths of other people; 
they are not remembered as outstanding historical events. The 
great men of history are celebrated rather for their individual 
achievements, which belong for the most part to the period 
between marriage and old age. Some of them, it is true, die 
young, and a few violently, but most of them leave the world 
as unobtrusively as they entered it. Heroes, on the contrary, 
do not even enter the world ‘with a whimper’ — and they go 
out ‘with a bang’. But whereas the pattern of the hero’s life 
has little in common with what is historically significant in the 
lives of men, it does, as Lord Raglan has shown, correspond 
with the ritual life^cycle.^ In human societies generally, the 
times when each person becomes the central figure in a ritual 
are those of his birth and baptism, initiation and marriage, 
death and burial. The myth has a bearing upon the meaning 
of these rites.

Celtic tradition is particularly rich in coimperta (tales oi 
conception and birth), and we will summarize some of the

ai3

214 Celtic HeritageCeltic tradition is particularly rich in coimperta (tales oi 
conception and birth), and we will summarize some of the

ai3

214 Celtic Heritage

most important before examining their significance. The 
remarkable births of Pryderi and Lieu Llaw Gyffes have 
already been mentioned in Chapter 11. Of the birth of Lug, 
all we are told in ‘The Second Battle of Mag Tuired’ is that 
the Tuatha made an alliance with the Fomoire, that Balor 
gave his daughter Ethniu to Cian son of Dian C^cht, and 
that she brought forth the gifted child, Lug.^ We must there^ 
fore fall back on later tradition which has preserved more 
elaborate accounts. In these, however, there is no marriage 
alliance. Instead we have the widespread motif of ‘the secluded 
maiden’, and Lug, like Lieu, is born of a woman who has 
been deemed to be a virgin. Here is the gist of the story.®On Tory Island dwelt a robber, Balor, who had one eye 
in the middle of his forehead and another, which would cause 
the death of those he looked upon, in the back of his head. It 
had been revealed, by a druid, that he would be slain by his 
grandson, and so he confined his daughter Ethne (Ethniu) 
in a high tower and set twelve women to see that she learned 
nothing about men. Balor coveted Glas Gaivlen, the mar/ 
vellous cow of Gavida the smith who lived on the mainland 
with his two brothers, Mac Samthainn and Mackinealy (Mac 
Cennfaelaidh), the latter being the lord of that district. By 
trickery, Balor stole the cow. Then Mackinealy, helped by a 
druid and a fairy, succeeded in gaining access to Ethne and 
in due time she gave birth to three boys. These Balor gave to a 
servant to drown, but one of them fell out of the sheet in which 
they were wrapped and he was taken to Mackinealy and brought 
up as a smith by Gavida. Mackinealy was captured by Balor 
and killed, (In another version, Mackinealy sleeps with the 
twelve women as well; their children fall into the water and 
become seals. Ethne’s child does not thrive until it is taken 
back to Tory Island to be nursed. In yet another version, Cian, 
the child’s father, is told by his druid helper that the boy will 
not thrive until his grandfather calls him by name. Cian en/ 
gages himself as a gardener to Balor who, however, does not 
like having any child near him. One day the boy very nimbly

Births

215

picks up some apples that have fallen to the floor and Balor 
cries ‘Away with you hi* lamia (“little long/hand”).’ ‘Oh, 
he has the name now,’ says Gian. After that, the boy grows 
wonderfully.) The remainder of the story is concerned with the 
death of Balor.A folktale version of the birth of Finn* has a great deal in 
common with that of Lug. It was prophesied that Cumhal 
mac Airt would be killed in the first battle he fought after he 
married, so he knew no woman for a long time. Eventually he 
secretly married the king’s daughter, who was closely guarded 
from men because of a prophecy that her son would deprive 
the king of his kingdom. Before going to his fatal battle Gum^ 
hal told his mother that if a son were born she should hide him. 
A son was born and, at the king’s command, he was thrown 
into the loch, but he came up holding a live salmon in his 
hand. His grandmother then disappeared with him and despite 
the king’s orders that all male infants be killed she succeeded 
in rearing him in a chamber in a tree. When he was fifteen, 
the boy defeated the king’s people at a game of hurley. Where^ 
upon the king asked, ‘Who is that Jinn cumhal (white cap)?’ 
‘Finn will be his name, and Finn mac Gumhail he is,’ ex^ 
claimed the grandmother. The king pursued them but sue-* 
ceeded only in slaying the grandmother.

Of the birth of Bres it is said in ‘The Second Battle of Mag 
Tuired’® that Eriu daughter of Delbaeth, a woman of Tuatha 
De Danann, was looking out to sea one morning and she saw 
a silver ship which brought a fair^-haired youth, wearing a gold-- 
adorned mantle, who greeted her with: ‘Is this the time that 
our lying with thee will be easy?’ They lay down together and 
the youth then told her he was Elatha son of Delbaeth, king 
of the Fomoire. He gave her a ring which she should give only 
to one whose finger it fitted, and he prophesied the birth of a 
beautiful boy who should be called Eochaid Bres. The boy 
was duly born and grew twice as rapidly as other boys.

^Luf==Lu£aid,2idmYzmeo£Lu^.

2l6

i

Celtic Heritage^Luf==Lu£aid,2idmYzmeo£Lu^.

2l6

i

Celtic Heritage

Oengus (the Mac (3c) was the son ofBoand, wife ofElcmar 
of the Bruig.® The Dagda desired carnal union with Boand, 
and sent Elcmar on a long errand, making nine months seem 
like one day. In the meantime Oengus was conceived and 
born and given in fosterage to Midir. He was called in Mac Oc 
(‘the Young Son’) for his mother said: ‘Young is the son who 
was begotten at break of day and born betwixt it and evening.’ 
After a playmate had called him a hireling whose father and 
mother were unknown, Midir, his foster/father, brought him 
to the Dagda, who acknowledged him as his son and instructed 
him how to take possession of Elcmar ’s lands.

We will now turn to the wonder.'births of three heroes of the 
Ulster Cycle, Conchobar, CuChulainn, and Conall Cer.' 
nach.We will now turn to the wonder.'births of three heroes of the 
Ulster Cycle, Conchobar, CuChulainn, and Conall Cer.' 
nach.

Of the birth of Conchobar to Ness, daughter of Bling Eochu 
Salbuide, there are two distinct stories. The first says that Ness 
was on her throne outside Emain, with her royal maidens 
around her, when Cathbad the druid went past and the maiden 
said: ‘What is the present hour good for?’ ‘It is good’, said he, 
‘for begetting a king upon a queen.’ The maiden invited him 
to her, and the child she conceived was in her womb for three 
years and three months. The second story begins with the 
slaughter of Ness’s twelve foster^athers by Cathbad and his 
band of twenty^seven men. In her wrath the maiden herself 
set out at the head of a band of twenty/seven to avenge her 
fosterers, plundering as she went. One day, when she was 
bathing alone, Cathbad came between her and her weapon 
and threatened her with his sword. She bought her life by 
promising that there should be peace between them and that 
she should become his wife. They returned together to Ulster 
where King Eochu endowed Cathbad with land. During the 
night a thirst fell upon Cathbad, and Ness, finding no drink 
in the house, fetched water from the river Conchobar, straining 
it through her veil. A light was kindled, and Cathbad, seeing 
two worms in the cup, compelled his wife to drink the water 
herself. With two gulps she swallowed the two worms and

Births

217Births

217

thereby became pregnant. (Another text says that King 
Fachtna Fathach was her lover and that he caused her preg-* 
nancy). The pangs of childbirth came upon Ness when she 
was journeying with Cathbad over the plain of Muirthemne 
to a meeting with Eochu, but Cathbad said that if the birth 
were delayed until night the child would become king and the 
most renowned in Ireland, because a glorious child, Jesus 
Christ, would be born the same night in the east of the world. 
So she reached a flagstone at Mag^Inis and gave birth to a boy 
with a worm in each of his fists. (According to the other text, 
Ness declared that the child would not be born until the auspi-' 
cious time unless it came out through her side, and she sat on a 
flagstone on the bank of the River Conchobar, while Cathbad 
uttered a poem prophesying the illustrious future of the child 
about to be born. At birth the child went head over heels into 
the river, but he was seized by Cathbad and named Concho/ 
bar after the river. In a further poem extolling his future great/ 
ness, Cathbad curiously addresses the child as ‘my son and my 
grandson’.)There are also two versions of the story of the conception 
and birth of CuChulainn.® The first begins with the repeated 
appearance of a flock of birds which grazed the plain of Emain 
to the roots. The warriors of Ulster pursued them in nine 
chariots, Conchobar’s grown/up daughter, Dechtine, serving 
as his charioteer. The beautiful sweet/singing birds, each two 
linked with a silver chain, were divided into nine flights of 
twenty each and were headed by two birds joined by a silver 
yoke. In the evening, three of the birds detached themselves 
from the rest and flew before the pursuers to the End of the 
Bruig. There night came upon the Ulstermen and it began 
to snow. The only shelter they found was one new house, 
occupied by a couple, where they were entertained until they 
were merry and drunk. Then the man of the house told them 
that his wife was in labour. Dechtine went to her and a boy/ 
child was born. At the same time, a mare outside the house 
dropped two foals, which the man gave to the child. By morning.

2I8

Celtic Heritage

both house and birds had disappeared, and all that remained 
with the Ulstermen at the End of the Bruig were the child and 
the two foals. With these they returned to Emain.2I8

Celtic Heritage

both house and birds had disappeared, and all that remained 
with the Ulstermen at the End of the Bruig were the child and 
the two foals. With these they returned to Emain.

Dechtine reared the child, but to her grief it fell ill and died. 
On her return from the lamentation she felt thirsty and tried to 
drink from a copper vessel, but each time a little creature, 
which was invisible when the vessel was removed, sprang 
into her mouth with the drink. During the night a man came 
to her in her sleep and declared himself to be Lug son of 
Ethniu. It was he who had brought her to the Bruig, it was 
with him she had stayed the night, and the little child was his 
son. He would now enter her womb and she would bear a 
child whose name would be Setanta. The Ulstermen could 
not understand how it came that Dechtine was with child and 
suspected that her father had slept with her in his drunkenness. 
Conchobar betrothed her to Sualdaim mac Roich, but she, 
ashamed of her condition, induced a miscarriage. Then she 
conceived again and bore a son. (This was Setanta who was 
later named CiiChulainn).The triple conception of CuChulainn does not figure in 
the other version of the story, and Dechtire (as she is called in 
that version) is not Conchobar’s daughter and charioteer but 
his sister. She and fifty maidens had disappeared from Emain 
three years before the events which we have just told began, 
and it was they that plagued Emain in the form of birds. When 
the pursuing Ulstermen had been made welcome by a man 
and a woman in a small house at nightfall, Bricriu went out 
and guided by a low plaint saw before him a magnificent 
house. There he was greeted by a nobleman and his wife, and 
learnt that the latter was Dechtire, that her fifty maidens were 
with her and that they were the birds which had allured the 
Ulstermen thither. When he rejoined his comrades, Bricriu, 
withholding a part of the truth, spoke only of the beautiful 
woman and her splendid entourage. Conchobar asserted that, 
as the warrior was his vassal, he was entitled to have the woman 
to sleep with him. Fergus went to fetch her, but as he was

Births

219

returning with her she complained that she was in travail, and 
a delay was granted. The Ulstermen lay down to sleep, and 
when they awoke they saw a little boy in Conchobar’s lap.Births

219

returning with her she complained that she was in travail, and 
a delay was granted. The Ulstermen lay down to sleep, and 
when they awoke they saw a little boy in Conchobar’s lap.

Conall Cernach’s mother was Findchoem, daughter of 
Cathbad and wife of Amairgen.® She suffered from ‘hesitation 
of offspring’, and when a druid told her that she should bear 
a noble son if she paid him a good fee, she accompanied him to 
a well over which he sang spells and prophecies. He then told 
her to wash in the water, and ‘you will bring forth a son, and 
no child will be less pious than he to his mother’s kin, that is 
to the Connachtmen’. Findchoem then drank a draught from 
the well and swallowed a worm. That worm was in the boy’s 
hand in his mother’s womb and it pierced the hand and con/- 
sumed it. Druids baptized the child into heathenism, pro-- 
phesying as they did so the havoc he would eventually wreak 
upon the men of Connacht. Get, the mother’s brother, who, 
although he knew of the prophecies, had protected his sister 
until her delivery, now drew the child towards him and put 
it under his heel and bruised its neck. Thereupon the mother 
exclaimed: ‘Wolfish (conda) is the treachery (fell) you work, O 
brother.’ ‘True,* said Get, ‘let Conall (Conffeall) be his name 
henceforward.’ Whence he was called wry/necked Conall.Many strange births appear in the Cycles of the Kings. This 
is how Cormac mac Airt was born.^® Before the battle against 
Lugaid Mac Con, in which he was slain. Art son of Conn 
of the Hundred Battles spent the night as guest of a smith 
named Ole Acha. It had been prophesied that a great honour 
would derive from the smith and he asked Art to Ue with his 
daughter fitain that night. This he did and Cormac was con/ 
ceived. Before departing to the battle in which he knew he would 
die. Art instructed fitain to take the child to be fostered by his 
friend Lugna in Connacht, When her time drew near Etain set 
out for Lugna’s house so that the child might be born there, 
but as soon as she arrived in that country her pains took her 
and she gave birth to her son on a bed of brushwood collected

220 Celtic Heritage

by her maid. Thunder boomed, and Lugna on hearing it 
exclaimed: ‘Noise — ^thunder — birth of king’, and realizing 
that it was Gormac that was born he set forth to seek him.

Meanwhile, £tain went to sleep, leaving the child in the care 
of her maid. But the maid also fell asleep and a she/wolf came 
and carried the child away and thereafter brought him up 
with her whelps in a cave. Lugna found the distraught mother, 
took her home, and offered a reward for a clue to the infant’s 
whereabouts. One day a man named Grec chanced upon the 
cave, and in front of it he saw a child on all fours amidst gam-' 
boiling wol&cubs. The child, together with the cubs, was 
brought to Lugna’s house and Lugna hailed him as Conn’s 
victorious representative. He named him Gormac, which 
was in accordance with Art’s instructions.The story of the birth of King Fiacha Broad/crown^^ begins 
in the same way as that of Gormac and ends like that of 
Conchobar. The night before the battle in which he (as well 
as Art) was killed, Eogan, King of Munster, cohabited with 
the daughter of a druid at her father’s request. The girl con-- 
ceived and when her time came her father said it was an ill 
thing she was not brought to bed the following morning, for 
had it been then, the child would have overtopped all Ireland. 
She replied that the child would not be born before then unless 
it came through one of her sides. She sat astride a stone in the 
mid ford, appealing to the rock to maintain her. When she was 
loosened next day she died, and the child’s head had been 
flattened against the stone — whence he was called Fiacha 
Broad-'crown.

There are a number of conflicting traditions about the parent^ 
age of Mes Buachalla and her son Conaire Mor, King of 
Ireland.^®* According to ‘The Destruction of Da Derga’s 
Hostel* she was the daughter of Gormac mac Airt and his 
wife £tafn. £tafn had proved barren until she conceived this 
daughter after being given a pottage by her mother, a woman 
from the ni/mounds. Gormac married again and ordered his 
daughter to be abandoned in a pit. Two servants were entrusted

221

Births

with the task, but they lost heart when the child laughed as 
they were putting her in the pit and they left her instead in the 
calC'shed of the cowherds of Eterscel, great-grandson of lar, 
king of Tara. The cowherds reared her and she was named Mes 
Buachalla, ‘the cowherd’s foster-child’.

According to other sources Mes Buachalla was the daughter 
of Ess, who conceived her either through incest with her father, 
Eochaid Airem, King of Tara, or through intercourse with the 
^/<f-folk of Bri Leith. Eochaid ordered the destruction of the child, 
but she was left in a kennel, with a bitch and her whelps, at 
the house of a herdsman.We now revert to ‘The Destruction of Da Derga’s Hostel’. 
The cowherds kept the girl concealed in a house of wicker- 
work which had only a roof-opening, but King Eterscd’s 
folk discovered her and told him of their find. It had been 
prophesied that a woman of unknown race would bear 
Eterscd a child, so he sent people to break into the wicker house 
and bring her to him. Before this was done, a bird came 
through the skylight and told the girl what was being planned. 
He shed his bird-plumage on the floor and she gave her love 
to him. He told her that she would have by him a son, whose 
name would be Conaire, and that he should not kill birds. 
She was then betrothed to King Eterscel. Others say, however, 
that Eterscd was Mes Buachalla’s father and that it was he who 
got her with child.

Another king who was believed to have had a supernatural 
father was Mongan.^® Fiachna Finn, King of Ulster, was 
sorely pressed in battle in Lochlann when a tall warrior, who 
transpired to be Manannan mac Lir, appeared on the battle- 
field and offered victory if Fiachna would allow him to go to 
Ireland to sleep with Fiachna’s wife. He would go in Fiachna’s 
shape and beget a glorious child who would be called Mongan 
son of Fiachna Finn. The king agreed and secured his victory. 
In due course a son was born to Fiachna’s wife, but when he 
was three nights old Manannan came and took him to be 
reared in the Land of Promise until he was twelve years of age.

222

Celtic Heritage

According to another version, Manannan first went to Fiachna’s 
wife and offered to save her husband’s life if she consorted 
with him. He then went and told Fiachna what had taken 
place and gave him the victory.The shape^changing motif also occurs in Geoffrey’s story 
of King Arthur’s conception.^* His mother was Igerna, wife 
of Gorlois Duke of Cornwall, and she was being guarded in 
Tintagel castle against the amorous intentions of King Uthr 
Bendragon. Uthr, aided by Merlin’s magic, visited her in the 
form of her own husband, and ‘that night was the most re/ 
nowned Arthur conceived’. Merlin himself had been begotten 
upon a king’s daughter by a mysterious youth who visited her 
in the dormitory of her nunnery and united with her in her 
sleep.*®

Features similar to those which recur in these tales are found 
in many others. A druid had foretold that the death of Ragal/ 
lach. King of Connacht, would be caused by his own child. 
When a female child was born to his wife, the king ordered her 
to kill it. The child was cast into a bag and given to a swine/ 
herd to be destroyed, but the swineherd left the bag at the door 
of a pious woman and she reared it religiously. This daughter 
later became Ragallach’s own concubine.*® Before the birth 
of Sechnasach, his destined mother, M6r of Munster, fled 
from home under the influence of voices threatening her with 
evil. She regained her senses, and Sechnasach was begotten, 
when she slept with King Fingen mac Aeda.*’ Again, Fingel, 
who was to be the mother of Noidhiu Nae/mBreathach,* 
was closely guarded lest anyone should make her conceive, but 
she was visited by a phantom from over the sea and was preg/ 
nant for nine months and nine years. When her son was born 
she suggested that he should be put to death, but the child 
spoke, uttering nine judgements.*® When Ai mac Olloman, a 
poet of Tuatha De Danaim, was in his mother’s womb, a 
blast of wind shook the house, and a druid prophesied the 
birth of a wonderful child. The king would have slain the 
* Noidhiu of the Nine Judgements.

Births

223Births

223

child, but its father hindered him, and the child demanded a 
boon from the king.^® Segda Saerlabraid was the son of a 
‘sinless couple’, for his parents, the king and queen of the 
Land of Promise, never came together except when he was 
conceived.®®

Some of the most striking features we have encountered in 
these tales may be tabulated as follows:

1 The advent and future greatness of the hero have been fore^ 
told.

2 His advent is destined to bring death or misfortune to a 
presiding power, his grandfather, his uncle, or his own 
mother.

3 Certain difficulties have to be overcome before his future 
mother can fulfil her destiny:

(a) She is closely guarded or confined in a fortress, 
or (b) She has to be induced to leave home, 
or (c) Her own resistance has to be overcome by force or by 
cunning.

or ((?) She is married, but barren.

4 There is a mystery about the hero’s begetting:

(a) Whether he has an earthly father or not, he is usually 
begotten by another — a. king, a man from another race, 
or a supernatural being.

(b) Others say he is born of incest.

(c) Others again attribute his conception to a creature 
swallowed by his mother in water.

5 There is an auspicious time for his birth, which is heralded 
by signs in the natural world; his birth is delayed until the 
appropriate time.

6 Certain animals are associated with his birth and up/ 
bringing.

7 He is lost at birth, or an attempt is made to kill him; he is 
thrown into the sea or borne away in a boat.

8 At birth and in his youth he displays qualities that reveal his 
extra/ordinary nature.

224 Celtic Heritage

9 Difficulty is sometimes experienced in securing a name for

him, or he is given a name in peculiar circumstances.224 Celtic Heritage

9 Difficulty is sometimes experienced in securing a name for

him, or he is given a name in peculiar circumstances.

Stories of the coming of saints into the world (recorded in 
the Lives of the Saints) have a great deal in common with 
those of the ‘secular’ heroes. Their births are foretold by an 
angel, another saint, or a druid. St Beuno’s father and mother 
had been continent for twelve years before the saint was be/ 
gotten in their old age.®^ St David and St Cynog were the 
products of rape, St Cadoc’s mother was abducted and St 
Lonan’s mother was tricked into having intercourse with a 
man other than her lover.®® St Budoc’s mother was accused of 
infidelity.®® St Cennydd and St Cuimine Foda were born of 
incest and St Declan’s ancestry was traced back to the inces/ 
tuous Clothra.®* St Finan’s mother was impregnated by a ‘red/ 
gold salmon’ when she was bathing in Loch Lein.®® In 
several cases, the saint’s mother has a vision or dream at the 
time when her child is conceived. She sees a star falling into her 
mouth, a ball of light descending upon her head, or ‘her bosom 
full of gold and her paps shining like snow’.®® During her 
pregnancy, St Columba’s mother received from an angel a 
marvellous mantle which then floated away from her to heaven.®®

St Senan’s mother, like the Buddha’s, was delivered from 
the pains of travail,®® and other miracles are characteristic of the 
births of saints. The child may speak at birth, or a spring may 
burst forth and he is baptized in it.®® There is often a plan to 
kill the child®® and in some cases, like those of St Budoc and 
St Cennydd, he, or his mother before he is born, is set adrift on 
the sea. When St Brendan was born, a cow cast thirty calves 
and they were given to him. When he was five years old, a 
wild doe came daily to provide him with milk.®^ St Cennydd 
was fed in the same way;®® Saints Ailbe, Bairre and Ciwa 
were all suckled by wolves.®®Needless to say, tales of this kind are not peculiar to Celtic 
mythology. They are the common stuff of birth myths the 
world over, and if one went into detail one would find strange

Births izs

s im ilarities between the Celtic stories and stories collected from 
the far ends of the earth. Lest anyone should too readily dis/" 
miss the visions of saints’ mothers as the fanciful imaginings of 
Christian hagiographers, we will just mention that a Chinese 
dynasty traced its origin to an egg, dropped by a heaven-sent 
bird, which was swallowed by a girl while bathing; that 
several Tartar tribes ascribe their lineage to a virgin who was 
awakened one night by a light which embraced her and, enter- 
ing her mouth, passed through her body. The Aztec deity, 
Huitzilopochtli, was conceived by a mother who caught and 
hid in her bosom a little ball of feathers that floated down to her 
through the air. Her children conspired to kill her, but Huit- 
zilopochtli, issuing forth from her womb all armed, like Pallas 
from the head of Zeus, slew them and enriched his mother 
with their spoils. The virgin mother of the great Mexican hero, 
Quetzalcoatl, was visited by a god who breathed upon her 
and so quickened life within her.®* The mother and father of the 
Hindu god Krishna were imprisoned in a castle because it was 
prophesied that their son would kill the king, his own mother’s 
brother. When he was born, the boy stood up before his parents 
in the full glory of his divinity. He then became a human child 
again, the doors were opened and his parents were freed of their 
fetters. The father took the child across a river, which rose as 
they went through it and almost overwhelmed them, and he 
left it to be reared by cowherds.®® Tales of this kind could be 
multiplied indefinitely without touching either Classical or 
Biblical sources, and they could be augmented by stories of 
heroes born of incest and of heroes set adrift at birth or reared 
with animals.

zz

From the point of view of the established order of things in this 
world, the way in which the hero is conceived and born is 
‘all wrong’. Ordinary children are born of married parents 
who are not blood-relations. The hero is more often than not

:P '

^2^ Celtic Heritage

conceived ‘illegitimately’ by an unmarried girl and born out 
of wedlock. If the mother is married, he is begotten through 
what would normally be called adultery, and the irregularity 
of the union is often accentuated by violence and trickery. 
To make matters worse, even the integrity of the family is 
violated: a father begets a hero upon his daughter, a son upon 
his mother, a brother upon his sister. A mockery is made 
even of the laws of biological nature, for a barren woman may 
conceive a hero by drinking water, by swallowing worms, 
or by eating a fish or a grain of wheat.

Yet, these were originally religious stories which were be.' 
lieved to have a liberating and elevating effect upon their 
hearers. We have inferred that it was appropriate to recount 
them at the birth of human children and have suggested that 
they had a validity as exemplars in the light of which the mean.- 
ing of ordinary births could be apprehended. But they were 
obviously not patterns to be emulated in real life. To resolve 
the paradox the myths must be regarded as symbols of the 
transcendental meaning of birth, of what birth is from the 
point of view of the unseen world. From an earthly standpoint 
a child is conceived inadvertently during the course of its 
parents’ conjugal relations, without the intervention of any 
other agency. But from the point of view of the supernatural 
world, the child’s birth is destined, the parents are chosen, the 
time and place are ordained, and the earthly life of the child is 
‘pre-'figured’ before he is conceived. The hostility of earthly 
powers cannot prevent his advent; his mother has no choice and, 
in a sense, is violated.And in every conception there is a third factor. The child 
may derive its biological inheritance from its earthly parents, 
but it is also the incarnation of a supernatural essence. This 
doctrine, that a spirit enters the womb at conception, is wide/ 
spread among both ‘primitive’ and highly sophisticated peoples. 
To the Indian, ‘three things are required for conception, viz. 
conjunction of father and mother, the mother’s period, and 
the presence of the Gandharva: of which the first two may be

Births ii?Births ii?

called depositive and the third an essential cause’, ‘Man and 
the Sun generate man,’ says Aristotle; ‘Call no man father upon 
earth,’ says St Paul, and according to St Thomas Aquinas, 
‘The power of the soul, which is in the semen through the 
Spirit enclosed therein, fashions the body.’®® The myths are 
concerned with this third factor, symbolized by the mysterious 
begetter and by the fructifying substance which is swallowed 
by the mother. In some of the stories, the begetter is a super-' 
natural being — Lug, Manannan, a bird/man, or one of the 
nif/folk. In others he is the king or a stranger from another race. 
These latter invite comparison with widespread rituals by 
which supernatural powers were given access to women 
through the agency of such human personifications as kings, 
priests or strangers.®^ Traces of rituals of this kind in the Celtic 
lands have survived both in the mythological literature itself 
and in later tradition. It is said that King Conchobar, who was 
regarded as a ‘terrestrial god’, was entitled to the first night 
with the bride of every Ulsterman, ‘so that he became her &st 
husband’.®® According to oral tradition, Balor’s two deputies 
exercised the same right.®® The Fenians had the option on the 
women of the tribe and claimed either a ransom or the right 
to cohabit with even a princess the night previous to her mar^ 
riage.^® Boswell refers to a Scottish laird who insisted that the 
Mercheta Mulierum mentioned in old charters did really mean 
the privilege of a lord to have the first night with his vassals’ 
wives, and that on the marriage of each of his own tenants a 
sheep (or a payment of five shillings) was still due to him.*^ 
In Ireland, there are sdll ‘widespread traditions of the days 
when landlords excercised the jus primae metis over their tenants’ 
wives, and one hears of leases which contained clauses govern/' 
ing the right,’*®There are indications that these rights were not confined to 
the time of marriage. ‘When any man of Ulster used to give 
him (Conchobar) a night’s hospitality, he used to sleep that 
night with the man’s wife,’ and there is mention of a king of 
Ireland’s son who came to his father and said: ‘I desire to make

cMc Heritage

“a stripling’s free circuit of Ireland” and the wife of every king 
in Ireland shall pass a night with me.’^® As Mrs Chadwick 
has argued in her recent study of Pictish and Celtic Marriage, 
there is a great deal of evidence which ‘suggests the right of a 
king or his fill to beget children ritualistically among married 
couples’.^* The ‘Devil’ of the medieval witch cult exercised 
a similar right over his female subjects,^® and tales of incuhi, 
demons which assumed the shape of men and held carnal 
converse with mortal women, seem to be related to this 
practice. In Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Hhtoria Regum it is sug/ 
gested that Merlin was begotten by one of these demons.^’The begetting of a hero is, however, nowhere attributed to 
such rites as the jus primae metis, and to derive the stories from 
the rites is to confuse cause and effect. It is rather that the mytho^ 
logical realities with which the stories are concerned are also 
the raison d’etre of the correlative rites. Stories in which the 
supernatural factor is symbolized as entering through the 
mother’s mouth also seem to have their counterpart in custom. 
A belief in the fructifying potentialities of water has driven 
childless women throughout the ages to bathe and to drink at 
sacred wells in the hope of conceiving, and a belief in the em^ 
bodiment of the supernatural essence in worms and flies seems 
to account for the fact that in Wales it is still said of a pregnant 
girl that she has swallowed an insect (pry’) or a spider (corryn).*^ 
In the stories, the role of the earthly father is minimized or 
discounted altogether, as though to stress the third factor in 
conception — ^the mother is a maiden, she is secluded from con- 
tact with men, or, though married, she has proved barren 
until the intervention of the third factor. But an inconsistent 
passage in ‘The Wooing of JEtain’ combines all three factors. 
£tafn, a Tuatha woman transformed into a fly, fell into the cup 
of the wife ofEtar, an Ulster champion, and was swallowed by 
her. ‘In this way she was conceived in her womb.’ But the story 
adds paradoxically that she was called Star’s daughter and 
was begotten by him}^ In other cases too, where the mother is 
married, the child is often called the son of her husband. Thus

Births

229

CuChuIainn, though begotten by Lug, was called Setanta son 
of Sualdaim, and Mongan, though begotten by Manannan, 
was Mongan son of Fiachna Finn.Births

229

CuChuIainn, though begotten by Lug, was called Setanta son 
of Sualdaim, and Mongan, though begotten by Manannan, 
was Mongan son of Fiachna Finn.

In some of these tales, the supernatural essence in the child is 
personified as the incarnation or reincarnation of a particular 
deity. Individual reincarnation is also implied in the story of 
Daolgas®® — and there is perhaps a hint of the rebirth of the 
begetter in the birth-'Stories of Finn, Cormac mac Airt, and 
Fiacha Broad-'Crown, whose fathers were destined to die as 
soon as they had begotten their sons. When Daolgas son of 
Cairril lay dying, his daughter stooped over him and kissed him 
As she did so, a spark of fire flew from his mouth to hers and 
she became pregnant. In due time she gave birth to a broad-- 
crowned boy, and, since no other name was found for him, 
he was called by his father’s name, Daolgas. Tuan, the sole 
survivor of Partholon’s company, after successive trans^ 
formations into a deer, a boar, and an eagle, was eventually 
eaten in the form of a salmon by the wife of King Cairell and 
reborn of her. He was called Tuan son of Cairell, but he bore 
within him the whole history of Ireland since the coming of 
Partholon.®^ It will be recalled that the two rival swineherds 
who finally became the two great contending bulls of Tdin B6 
Cmilnge passed through similar transformations before they 
were swallowed in the form of water-'worms by the cows from 
which they were reborn. In the Welsh Story of Taliesin,®® the 
witch Ceridwen prepares in her cauldron a magic brew 
which, after a year’s boiling, will yield three blessed drops. 
Whoever swallows these drops will know all the secrets of the 
past, the present, and the future, and she intends them for her 
ugly son Morfran (‘Sea/crow’) who is nicknamed Afagddu 
(‘Blackness’). The drops fly out of the cauldron and fall on the 
finger of Gwion Bach, the boy who has helped to tend the 
fire underneath the cauldron. He puts his finger in his mouth, 
and then, realizing his danger, flees. Ceridwen sets out in 
pursuit. Gwion transforms himself successively into a hare, a 
fish, a bird, and a grain of wheat; she gives chase in appropriate230 Celtic Heritage

forms — greyhound, an otter-'bitch, a hawk, and a hen. In 
this last form, she swallows the grain of wheat, and in the fulness 
of time, Gwion Bach is reborn of her as the wizard/poet 
Taliesin.

While individual beings in some of these stories retain their 
identity through diverse incarnations, the child Taliesin, in a 
poem replying to the king’s question as to who he is and whence 
he has come, envisages himself as a ubiquitous presence which 
has witnessed the history of the world and will endure to the 
end. The blessed drops did no more than make him aware that 
he was there when it all happened. The poem, like several 
others in the same strain preserved in the medieval Book of 
Taliesin, exalts him to a plane which transcends that of finite 
human beings.

I have been teacher to all Christendom

I shall be on the face of the earth until Doom,

And it is not known what my flesh is, whether flesh or fish.I have been teacher to all Christendom

I shall be on the face of the earth until Doom,

And it is not known what my flesh is, whether flesh or fish.

In a poem in the Book of Taliesin he claims to have witnessed 
the fall of Lucifer, the Flood, and the birth and the Cruci^ 
fixion of Christ. And, while in another poem he says that he 
was created by Gwydion, he here says that he was in the Court 
of DSn before Gwydion was born. Some of the poems in this 
Book are replete with utterances beginning with T have been’, 
and the things he has been include inanimate objects — stock, 
axe, chisel, coracle, sword, shield, harp/string, raindrop, foam; 
animals such as bull, stallion, stag, dog, cock, salmon, snake, 
eagle — and a grain which grew on a hill. He declares that he 
was not made of father and mother but was created of nine 
things^ — ^fruits and various flowers, earth, and water from the 
ninth wave.®® Like Amairgen whose poem we have quoted 
before, Taliesin is everything, and it is a fair inference that 
among the Celts, as in India and other lands, there existed 
alongside the belief in individual reincarnation, a doctrine 
that there is essentially only One Transmigrant. As Ovid

231

Births

expresses it: ‘The spirit wanders, comes now here, now there, 
and occupies whatever frame it pleases. From beasts it passes 
into human bodies, and from our bodies into beasts, but 
never perishes.’®*The supra^personal character of the incarnating spirit is also 
indicated by other motifs. Thunder peals when Cormac is 
born, and at the birth of certain saints a spring wells forth, a 
wood lights up, or a rod held in the mother’s hand bursts into 
leaf and flower,®® like the trees that blossomed and fruited 
when heaven and earth rejoiced at the birdi of Krishna. 
Animals are born simultaneously with the hero — a colt with 
Pryderi, two colts with CuChulainn, a dog with Finn, a fish/- 
like brother with Lieu, and with Lug twelve halfrbrothers who 
become seals. In other tales the hero’s animal connections are 
established after his birth. He is suckled by a she^wolf and goes 
on all fours, he is left in a kennel with a bitch and her pups, or 
he comes up from the loch with a fish in his hand. Some heroes 
and heroines are named from their association with animals: 
Kulhwch is so called because he was born in a pigstye (kil^ 
hwch); CuChulainn is ‘the hound of Culann’, Mes Buachalla 
‘Cowherds’ Fosterchild’, Oisin ‘Little Deer’, and Oscar 
‘Deer^Love’. And there are many whose animal names are not 
explained, such as Ruadchoin ‘Red hounds’, Conchenn 
‘Wolfrhead’, MacCon ‘Son of Wolfdog’, March ‘Horse’ (he 
had horse’s ears). Bran ‘Crow’, Echbel ‘Horse-'lip’.®®

So close is the affinity of some heroes with particular species 
that they are not permitted to eat their flesh. CiiChulainn was 
forbidden to eat dog;®' Conaire was forbidden to kill birds, 
which should be dear to him because of his father.®® It was 
fatal for Diarmaid to hunt swine, because of a prohibition 
laid upon him as a boy. It happened in this way. Finn’s 
dogs fell to fighting and Diarmaid’s foster/'brother, seeking 
refuge between the knees of Diarmaid’s father, was squeezed to 
death. The dead boy’s father transformed the corpse into a 
grey cropped pig and pronounced an incantation over him 
giving him the same life-span as Diarmaid. The latter eventually

232

Celtic Heritage232

Celtic Heritage

met his death in a boar hunt in which he killed this pig and 
was himself mortally wounded by it.®* As a youth, Finn tasted 
of the salmon of knowledge; according to one tradition he was 
slain with a fishing/gaff.®® St Ailbe, suckled by a wolf, 
acknowledged to the end of his days this ‘kinship by the milk’; 
St Ciwa, suckled in the same way, had a great nail like a wolf ’s 
claw on one of her fingers and was called the ‘Wolf Girl’.®^In mythology, animals are not mere brutes; they are possessed 
of a supernatural intelligence and power. Their association with 
the birth and infancy of heroes is world/wide, and in many 
cases they befriend or serve their heroic ‘kinsmen’ beyond the 
days of childhood. We need only mention Cormac’s wolves, 
Conaire’s birds, Finn’s dog, and Pryderi’s colt. CuChulainn’s 
celebrated chariot/horses have been identified with the two 
foals dropped on the night of his birth. According to another 
story, one of them emerged from a lake, the other from the 
Great Glen, and they returned there at the time of their master’s 
death.®^ These animal correlatives of the hero may be said to 
symbolize the extra/human, otherworldly or unconscious 
ground of his nature, a symbolism which is well illustrated in 
the stories of the Welsh twin brothers, Lieu and Dylan, and the 
Indian half-brothers, Krishna and Balarama. The moment he 
is baptized, Dylan makes for the sea and receives the sea’s 
nature, swimming as well as any fish, and because of this he is 
called Dylan Eil Ton, ‘Sea son of Wave’. No wave ever broke 
beneath him.®® Though Balarama lives on earth with Krishna 
until both have grown to manhood, he disappears into the 
same element. As he sits one day under a tree by the sea/«hore, 
lost in thought, a snake crawls out of his mouth, leaving his 
body lifeless, and winds its way to the sea. ‘The ocean itself 
arises in the form of a mighty serpent king to salute the great 
guest, its own higher Self the serpent of the universal waters. 
The serpent essence of the divine hero goes back into the form^ 
lessness of the Abyss— returning into itself after having accom^ 
plished the momentary role of companion and supporter to a 
human avatar.’®®

Births

2^iBirths

2^i

The universality and oneness of the otherworld progenitor 
has a bearing upon the incest motif which appears here and 
there in the birth stories. This is a world/wide feature of the 
conception of heroes, and, treating it as we have treated the 
other motifs, we must accept the proposition that the concep-- 
tion of every child is in a sense incestuous. If the begetter of the 
divine in each individual is fundamentally one, it follows that 
mother, child, husband, wife, plants, and animals are spiritually 
brothers and sisters. Incest is thus ‘inevitable because of the 
kinship of all the manifest principles, ab intra.^^ The same truth 
can also be expressed cosmogonically. Incest and kinship with 
animals, and with nature generally, symbolize the primeval 
unity before animate and inanimate, plant and animal, man 
and beast were separated out. Many cosmogonic myths repre^ 
sent the beginning of things as a division of the original whole 
into two: heaven and earth, land and water, male and female. 
The first couple are brother and sister, and from their incestuous 
union mankind is descended. So far as we know, no story of 
this kind has been handed down in Celtic tradition, but it is 
noteworthy that incestuous unions are frequent in lineages of 
the Mythological Cycle, and that certain Irish tribes traced 
their descent from a founder born of incest.®®When the world comes to an end, its manifold forms will be 
reabsorbed into the unity which cannot but appear as chaos 
when viewed from within the framework of the world itself. 
It is implied in an ancient Irish charm — ^the charm by which 
Tuatha Danann took away the kingship from Fir Bolg, 
and by which the Sons of Mil took away the kingship from 
the Tuatha — that the world, or an age, endures till o£am and 
achu be mixed together and till sun and moon be mixed to*' 
gether.®’’ And in a poem in which the Badb prophesies the 
end of the world, incest appears among the disorders that 
presage the end:

‘Son will enter his father’s bed.

Father will enter his son’s bed.

Every one his brother’s brotherdndaw.®®

234 Celtic Heritage

Thus, the incestuous birth of the hero again symbolizes the 
presence in the child of a universal, the beginning and the 
end, which recognizes neither brother nor sister, father nor 
mother— and in the last synthesis, neither species nor gender 
nor element.Unions between brothers and sisters are alluded to enig<' 
matically in the above poem: ‘Every one his brother’s brother.' 
in/law.’ Similarly, those who told or listened to the birth 
stories were intrigued by the curious ways in which incest 
confuses kin/relationships, and causes categories that are 
usually distinct to overlap. In the context in which it has been 
preserved, the story of Daolgas’s incestuous birth is told by 
Finn as the answer to a riddle: ‘What man was the son of his 
own daughter?’ Similarly Cuimine, born of a union of father 
and daughter, is alluded to in a quatrain: ‘This Mugain was 
his mother, he to her was brother.’®® Mes Buachalla was 
‘grand/daughter of her father, sister of her mother’.’® Although 
there is no incest motif in the birth^story of Conchobar as we 
know it, Cathbad addresses him at birth as ‘my son and my 
grandson’, which would be hterally true only if Ness were his 
daughter. The most remarkable case of incest in Irish story is 
that of Clothra who slept with each of her three brothers un.- 
known to the others. Her son was called Lugaid of the Red 
Stripes (Lugaid Riab nDer^) because he had two red lines round 
his body which marked off the portions in which he resembled 
his three fathers. When he grew up, he in his turn begot a son 
—named Crimthann — upon his own mother:’^

‘Lugaid Riab nDerg to fair Crimthann

Was father and was brother.

And Clothra of the comely form

Was grandmother to her son.’’®

This interest in the enigmatic implications of incest is by no 
means confined to the Celtic lands. For example, stories of 
father'-daughter incest are expressed in the form of the follow'- 
ing riddle in Hebrew, Islamic, and Christian contexts:

Births

m

‘A woman said to her son,

“Thy father is my father.

And thy grandfather is my husband;

Thou art my son and I am thy sister.”Births

m

‘A woman said to her son,

“Thy father is my father.

And thy grandfather is my husband;

Thou art my son and I am thy sister.”

Arabs in North Africa and Negroes in Central Africa 
justify the exposure of children born of incest on the grounds 
that the child would be, for example, ‘So and so’s son and 
his nephew’, making it clear that the existence of such a 
living contradiction among them could not be contemplated,’^ 
Mythology on the other hand, as we shall see later, is largely 
concerned with persons, things, and acts which are both ‘this’ 
and ‘that’, or neither ‘this’ nor ‘that’, and the principle can be 
extended to birth myths generally. Most of the tales we have 
recounted could be envisaged as answers to paradoxical riddles. 
For example:

‘A dog that was not a dog, born of a woman that was 
not a woman, in a house that wasn’t there; he was be.' 
gotten by a man that was not a man; his father was 
reared by his mother as a child, a child which died and 
did not die; his mother swallowed a worm that was not a 
worm — ^and his father was also his uncle,’

The answer to the riddle would be the complicated stories of 
the birth of CuChulainn. It would be wrong to try to make 
sense of these traditions by tearing them to fragments on the 
assumption that they are a confusion of unrelated motifs. Their 
very ambiguity is of the essence of mythology.

CiiChulainn’s mother entered the realm of Lug in the form 
of a bird, and the story of Cathbad’s interception of Ness, 
between the spring in which she was bathing and the place 
where she had left her weapon, is reminiscent of a world/wide 
folktale in which a mortal surprises a swan^maiden when she is 
bathing, steals her bird/dress, and makes her his wife,’® The 
supernatural lover of Mes Buachalla visits her in a bird/dress, 
and, as we shall recount in a later chapter, it was in the form

236 Celtic Heritage236 Celtic Heritage

of swans that Midir and fitain absconded from Tara’s court to 
the sii. There is no suggestion that a swan form is the norm in 
the Other World. The implication is rather that the form of a 
swan— perhaps because it is that of a creature of land, water 
and air, a creature whose milieu has no boundaries — ^is approx 
priate for communication between two worlds, and that, at the 
time of the hero’s conception, the mother as well as the super-- 
natural father is in that transitional zone, neither completely 
in this world nor in the other. Girls are metaphorically des^ 
cribed as ‘swans’ both in Irish and in Greek literature, but 
whether they were ever ritually dressed in swan clothing we 
do not know. What we do know is that Irish poets had cloaks 
of bird feathers and that such clothing was worn by shamans 
in Siberia and North America for their excursions to the world 
beyond.’®The mothers of Lug, Conaire, and Arthur, like the mothers 
of Perseus, Gilgamesh, and many others, were secluded in 
special buildings, while the virginity of some of the mothers 
who are not said to have been confined was closely guarded. 
The seclusion of a maiden in a high tower is also a wide/ 
spread motif in marriage tales, and we shall recount later an 
Irish tale in which the bride is confined in ‘an ingenious, 
bright, shining bower set on one pillar over the stead*. We 
have already mentioned that the buildings of the Court of Tara 
included the ‘Palace of the Single Pillar’ which Cormac mac 
Airt made for his daughter. The reasons given for these con-- 
finements, in the stories, vary a great deal— the girl’s marriage, 
or her destined son, will bring death or misfortune to her 
father, to her mother, or to some presiding power, or it is pro/ 
phesied that she will marry a commoner, or that she will be 
impregnated by the sun.” But the seclusion motif itself invites 
comparison with a profusion of customs, from many parts of 
the world, arising out of a wellnigh universal belief that women 
at certain periods— puberty, menstruation, and childbirth — do 
not belong entirely to this world. They are both holy and un/ 
clean. They can be a great source of harm to themselves and

Births 237 '■]Births 237 '■]

to others, yet, controlled by ritual, their condition can be made 
a source of power for good. In custom they are excluded from 
society, they are confined in separate huts, they must not touch the 
earth, or they are ‘forbidden the sun’. They are ceremonially 
‘taboo’, like divine kings and priests. ‘The uncleanness, as it is 
called, of girls at puberty and the sanctity of holy men do not 
differ materially from each other. They are only different mani^ 
fostations of the same mysterious energy which becomes bene-' 
ficent or maleficent according to its application.’’® Puberty rules 
in widely separated parts of the world require that a girl should 
be secluded for a period of days, months, or even years, and the 
place of confinement is sometimes a dark cage raised above the 
ground, or a hammock suspended from the roof. ‘The general 
effect of these rules is to keep her suspended, so to say, between 
heaven and earth.’’®

When the tale of the hero’s conception has been told, his 
origin remains a mystery. Merlin is enigmatically described as 
‘a boy without a father’,’® which, taken literally, implies that 
he was born without being begotten. In other cases the mystery 
lies, not in the absence of a cause, but in an embarrassing 
multiplication of contradictory causes to produce an effect 
which by the dictates of common sense can only have one 
cause. And there are other enigmas. The Welsh Lieu seems 
to have been born from the afterbirth.*® If so, he could be 
said to have been born of his mother and not born of his mother.The Irish Furbaide is said to have been brought forth through 
his mother’s side,®’ — ^like Goll mac Morna, Julius Caesar, the 
Egyptian god Set, Indra, and Buddha.®® Indian gods are 
indeed brought forth in all kinds of fantastic ways: through 
the forehead, the hand, and the armpit.®® In Shakespeare’s 
play, the witches assure Macbeth that he cannot be killed by 
‘a man born of woman’. The paradox is resolved when it 
transpires that Macduff was ‘from his mother’s womb untimely 
ripped’— and that a forest which is not a forest can move. It 
is along this knife-edge line between being and non-being that 
the gods appear, and the impossible becomes possible.

238 Celtic Heritage

3

The advent of the hero is almost invariably an embarrassment 
to someone or other, and an attempt is made to get rid of him. 
To the examples we have recounted we could add Niall of the 
Nine Hostages who was exposed naked beneath the green of 
of Tara because of the jealousy of his step/mother. After he had 
been there for three days, Torna the poet took him to his home 
and reared him.®^ Morann, destined to become chief judge 
of Ireland, was born with a caul, and his father, deeming him 
a monster, ordered two of his men to cast the child into the 
sea. When this was done the wave broke the helmet and the 
child spoke, saying, ‘Rough is the wave.’ Then they took him 
and left him at the door of a smith, who reared him and eventu/ 
ally restored him to his father.®® The infant Taliesin was sewn 
up in a water/tight bag or coracle by his mother, Ceridwen, and 
thrown into the River Dyfi. The river bore him down to the 
sea, and he was found by ElfRn in the weir of his father, 
Gwyddno Garanhir.®®The hero is disposed of in the same ways as peoples in many 
parts of the world dispose of children whose existence is an 
af&ont to what is considered normal. Exposure was a wide.' 
spread practice, and so was committal to the waters. It is said 
that the continental Celts used to submit the question of the 
legitimacy of their offspring to the judgement of the Rhine. 
‘Bastards were drowned, but the river bore the true born on its 
surface to land.’®’’ Speke mentions a similar practice observed 
in Africa, and it is said that in India children were sometimes 
placed in wicker baskets and set adrift on the river, the child’s 
future caste being determined by the place where it was washed 
up.®* In Ireland too, in the case of certain categories ofincestu.' 
ously conceived children, ‘the law is that he be put in a leather 
box out to sea as far as a white shield will be visible on the 
sea. But if it is in the same land he chances again he gives the 
service ofa “fuidir” to the sons of his father’s first wife and he is 
like every illegitimate son in the kindred.’®®

Births 239

Just as both gods and demons are supernatural, and both the 
‘inner’ and ‘outer fifth’ extra-territorial, so the bastard and the 
hero are both beyond the social order. This affinity of the higher 
and the lower category of outsider manifests itself in diverse 
ways. Not only are bastards, like heroes, exposed instead of 
being simply destroyed, but traditional methods of executing 
criminals are analogous to sacrificial rituals. Outside the 
Indian caste system there are outcasts who have transgressed 
the laws of their castes and also homeless ‘holy men’, some of 
whom wear rags or the traditional ochre-coloured garb of the 
condemned criminal as a sign that they are dead to the social 
hierarchy.®® The hero and the way he is treated cannot be 
explained away in terms of bastardy, but there is a connection 
between the two categories — ^the affinity of extreme opposites.The personification of the hostility with which the advent of 
the hero is greeted varies. In some stories, the resistance is 
offered by his mother, or his maternal grandfather or uncle; 
in others it is offered by his father, or his stepmother, or by the 
king. Equally various are the motives for resisting his coming. 
But the resistance itself is one of the most constant features of 
birth-stories, not only in the Celtic lands, but throughout the 
world.® ^ It is inevitable that the intrusion of the universal 
into the world of particular things should be resisted. The 
phenomenon is a miracle, an incongruity which challenges all 
the pre-suppositions of that world as a self-contained and self- 
sufficient reality. The intruder must be repelled as a potential 
danger, an illegitimate who has no right to be there, an in- 
cestuously conceived enigma, or a monstrosity. And as we 
have shown, these reactions are by no means groundless. From 
the worldly point of view, the universal cannot but appear 
chaotic. In the interest of law and order, normality and morality, 
the disturbance from the Other World must be repressed and 
forgotten. And so, the infant prodigy is expelled to the wilder- 
ness beyond the confines of ordered life, or to the waters of 
non-existence, the otherworld chaos to which he belongs.

240 Celtic Heritage

Alternatively, he is denied a name and thus kept outside the 
cosmic pale where everything that exists has a name.240 Celtic Heritage

Alternatively, he is denied a name and thus kept outside the 
cosmic pale where everything that exists has a name.

Unlike the ordinary unwanted children, the infant hero does 
not die. Notwithstanding, or indeed by virtue of, his abnormal 
origin, he comes to land again. But this time he arrives incogy 
nito — a foundling whose parentage is unknown or concealed. 
His voyage is his ‘invasion’, the process whereby he comes 
more assuredly to earth. Oftener than not, the people who find 
him are of humble status and he is reared by these before he 
claims his birthright in more exalted circles. If he was an out/ 
cast before, he now takes his place in the home of a smith or 
among fishermen, cowherds, or swineherds. This accords with 
the social doctrine of India: ‘Before initiation a boy was 
theoretically a Sudra; that is, one not admitted to the ritual. 
On initiation he becomes a Brahman, or a nobleman, or a 
farmer’®^ — ^he is admitted into one of the three castes of the 
‘twice/born’. There is evidence from India too that the children 
of some high castes were given to a pastoral people or a cow/ 
herd caste for fosterage, and it is significant that an edict in/ 
corporated in the Theodosian Code forbids parents to entrust 
their children in this way to the care of shepherds. The Welsh 
Laws contain a stipulation concerning the rights of a free/born 
child fostered by the kirk’s villeins, and there is a Norse saying 
that ‘he is a lesser man who fosters another’s child.’®*On the other hand, not all heroes are reared among the 
lower orders. Niall was found by a poet, Pryderi by a lord, 
Cormac by a king, and Taliesin by a king’s son, while in tales 
wherein the hero is actually given in fosterage the foster/father 
is usually of high rank, though the hero may have foster/brothers 
of a status inferior to his own. Fosterage was a very important 
institution in Ireland, but, apparently, the Irish Laws give 
no clear indication of the social standing of the foster/parents 
to whom the upbringing and education of the sons of kings 
and nobles was usually entrusted. Some sources show that it 
was a mark of status for a child to have several fosterers.®* 
Four of Conchobar’s warriors contest the honour of fostering

Births i4tBirths i4t

CdChulainn, an honour already granted to the child’s aunt, 
Findchoem, and it may not be fanciful to discern in their 
claims traces of the pattern of functions discussed in Part IL 
The first to speak is Sencha, who in various stories is the peaces 
maker who acts as a foil to Bricriu the creator of discord. Like 
Bricriu, Sencha stands aside from the contentions of the chief 
warriors. He claims that besides being strong, noble, and skilful 
in combat he is an ollam, wise and not forgetful. He addresses 
people in the king’s presence; he arbitrates before the king in 
battle and he judges for the Ulstermen. Blai the Hospitaller 
(Briugu), the next to speak, protests that if the child is entrusted 
to him, neither neglect nor contempt shall destroy him. It is 
he who calls together the men of Ireland; he entertains them 
for a week; he supports their skills and their plunderings and 
sustains them when they are defamed and in honour contests. 
Next, Fergus boasts of his valour and his prowess, his rank and 
his wealth. He is a champion who gives protection against every 
evil; he lays low the mighty and upholds the weak. Finally, 
Amairgen claims that he is praised not only for his valour 
but also for his wisdom, his good fortune, his age and his 
eloquence. He is a poet and the bane of every chariot^warrior. 
In the event, each of them is given the share in the boy’s up/" 
bringing that befits the particular qualifications he claims.*®During childhood the extraordinary nature of the hero is 
revealed, not so much by his ancestry as by his own preco^ 
ciousness. Though an infant, he speaks like a sage, expressing 
himself in poetry and pronouncing judgments. He grows with 
superhuman rapidity and becomes the master of various 
skills at an absurdly early age. While still a child, he can don 
the king’s armour, slay a monster, or present himself at the 
king’s court with an assurance that leads to the recognition 
of his identity. Taliesin when taken from the sea claims to 
know more than his rescuer can ask him, and at the age of 
thirteen he dumbfounds the king’s bards and again reveals that 
he bears within him the history of the world and the lore of the

a

24-2 Celtic Heritage

ages.*® ‘I am old, I am new. . . ‘I have been dead, I have 
been alive. ... I am Taliesin.’®^ Such a being had no need to 
grow up. Neither is what is essential in man subject to the 
processes of physical growth.

When he is expelled or lost, the hero is still a nameless 
nonentity. But he acquires a name when he reappears. Con/ 
chobar is named from the river from which he is rescued. 
Elffin on finding the nameless child in the bag in his father’s 
weir exclaims: ‘What a beautiful brow (tal iesin).’ ‘Taliesin be 
it,’ says the child, accepting the name. Lug after being taken 
back across the sea to Tory Island gains a name from his un/ 
witting grandfather. Lieu, arriving at Aranrhod’s fortress by 
sea in Gwydion’s magic ship, likewise wrests a name from 
his hostile mother. Conall Cernach is given a name from the 
assault by his uncle which nearly kills him, Pryderi from his 
mother’s first remark on hearing of his return. In each case it 
seems to have been thought appropriate to name the child from 
an exclamation made on the spur of the moment, as though 
truth were unwittingly revealed in a moment of thoughtlessness.A comparison between the exposure of the hero, particularly 
by immersion or by setting him adrift, and the sacrificial ritual 
of baptism is therefore inescapable. Baptism is a death and 
rebirth ceremony by which a child is named and is given new 
‘parents’ who accept responsibility for the way in which he is 
brought up. In the West of Ireland to the present day a new/ 
born child is palpably within the grip of unseen forces, and 
precautions have to be taken lest it be borne away by the fairies.® ® 
It will be remembered that it was a supernatural claw that 
snatched Pryderi from his mother’s side. The danger of abduc/ 
tion is greatly reduced by baptism, and the child is sometimes 
given a temporary name, or a lay baptism is resorted to, to pro/ 
tect it until the proper ceremony can be arranged. Baptism is 
also widely believed to be efficacious in restoring a child to 
health, that is, in preventing it from slipping back into the uii/ 
seen world. By being returned through water to the world be/ 
yond and brought back again by the appropriate ritual, the

Births l4i

ciiild is separated more completely from its uncanny associations 
with the unseen world. From now on, its relations with that 
world will be channelled through the proper rites.Births l4i

ciiild is separated more completely from its uncanny associations 
with the unseen world. From now on, its relations with that 
world will be channelled through the proper rites.

When the fairies steal a child, they are prone to leave one 
of their own progeny in its stead. These ‘changelings’,®® ugly, 
olddooking, peevish, and insatiable as they are, resemble in 
their precociousness the infant hero. They are recognizable by 
their adult speech, and they are sometimes induced to speak, 
and thus to reveal their true identity, through the performance 
in their presence of some absurd act, such as cooking in an 
egg-<shell. Their remarks betray an agelessness like Taliesin’s. 
‘I remember seeing an acorn before an oak, a nut before a 
hazel, but have never seen brewing done in an egg-shell,* Or, 
according to a Breton variant: ‘I remember when they were 
building Babel, and never heard before of a brewery of egg/ 
shells.’ To the suggestion that he should be christened, one 
of them is said to have responded with roaring and screeching 
that would frighten the Danes. (It will be recalled that it was 
through baptism that Dylan returned to his element.) Methods 
of banishing the changeling and retrieving the lost child in/ 
eluded abandoning the former on a dung/hill or in a boundary 
ditch, exposing it to fire or casting it into a river or lake. 
The real child would then be restored. If we are right in inter/ 
preting the changeling as a personification of the other/ 
wordly side of the human child’s nature, these tales may refer 
to a pre/Ghristian rite analogous to baptism, whereby the 
human child itself was ritually ‘expelled’ or ‘exposed’ so as to 
separate it from the supernatural and save it from being pos/ 
sessed by its mysterious ‘other’ self.

CHAPTER XII

Youthful ExploitsCHAPTER XII

Youthful Exploits

Born with the wisdom of a sage or the strength of a 
champion and growing twice as fast as his fellows, the hero 
soon abandons childish things, and his triumphant intrusion 
upon adult society is one of the universal themes of mythology. 
The spectacular ‘epiphany’ of Lug described in Chapter II 
is a notable example. Wizard prodigies in particular seem to 
require no education in their art. While still a child, Taliesin 
could dumbfound all the king’s wise men with his poetic elo/ 
quence.^ Ambrosius (the Merlin of Geoffrey of Monmouth) 
was called a boy without a father in the course of a quarrel 
with one of the boys with whom he happened to be playing 
ball. The taunt was overheard by emissaries who were search^ 
ing for such a boy to serve as a foundation sacrifice for a new 
citadel which was being built for King Vortigern. All efforts to 
build the citadel had proved of no avail, for whatever materials 
were gathered to the site by day disappeared during the night, 
and Vortigern’s druids had declared that the building would 
never be accomplished unless the ground were sprinkled with 
the blood of a child without a father. Brought thither, the boy 
asked the king who it was that had instructed him to kill him. 
‘My wise men,’ he replied. ‘Order them thither,’ said the 
boy. He then asked them by what means the procedure they 
had proposed was revealed to them. Promising the king that 
he would unfold everything to him, he questioned them further: 
‘What is hidden under this pavement;’, but they did not know. 
‘There is a pool. Come and dig.’ They did so and found the 
pool. ‘Now tell me what is in it,’ but they were ashamed and 
made no reply. ‘There are two vases in the pool.’ These were 
found, and while the druids remained silent to his questioning 
he revealed that in the midst of the vases there was a tent and in

Youthful Exploits ^45Youthful Exploits ^45

it two serpents (vermes), the one white and the other red. The 
serpents began to struggle with each other; at first the white 
one seemed to be the stronger, but at length the red one rallied 
and drove its adversary from the tent and through the pool. 
Ambrosius asked the wise men what the omen signified, but 
they admitted their ignorance. He then explained that the pool 
was the world, the tent Vortigern’s kingdom, the red serpent 
Vortigern’s dragon, the white that of the English who eventually 
would be expelled. The boy ordered Vortigern to depart and 
to build himself a fortress elsewhere. T, to whom fate has 
allotted this mansion, shall remain here.’ And the king assigned 
him that city and all the western province of Britain.®It was a playmate’s jibe about his obscure parentage that 
initiated the course of events which led to the Mac Oc’s being 
recognized by the Dagda as his son and to the ousting of 
Elcmar from the Bruig.® Similarly, Cormac struck one of 
his fbster.'brothers at play and the latter cried that he had been 
stricken by a fellow ‘whose clan and race axe unknown, except 
that he is a gentleman without a father’. Cormac complained 
to his foster/father and learned that he was King Art’s son and 
that he was destined to the kingship which Lugaid Mac Con 
had usurped. Accompanied by his foster-father and by the 
wolves with whom he had been suckled, he came to Tara, 
where Mac Con took him into fosterage. It then happened 
that Mac Con pronounced judgement on a woman whose 
sheep had eaten the queen’s crop of woad. The judgement was 
that the queen should have the sheep in compensation for the 
woad. ‘No,’ said Cormac, ‘the shearing of the sheep is suffi- 
cient to offset the cropping of the woad, for both will grow 
again.’ ‘That is the true judgement,’ exclaimed all, ‘it is the 
son of the true prince who has given judgement,’ and the part of 
the house where the false judgement had been given fell down 
the slope. Mac Con was then deposed in favour of Cormac.^ 
We read in ‘The Destruction of Da Derga’s Hostel’ how 
the young Conaire was called from his play to attend a ‘bull 
feast’ at Tara. This was a divination rite in which a bull was

2^6 Celtic Heritage2^6 Celtic Heritage

killed and a man ate his fill of it and drank the broth. A spell of 
truth was sung over the man and in his sleep he would see 
the destined king. On this occasion the diviner had seen a 
stark naked man with a stone in his sling going along one of 
the roads to Tara. As Conaire rode in his chariot, he saw some 
great white^speckled birds and pursued them into the sea. The 
birds cast their bird/'skins and turned upon him with spears 
and swords, but one of them protected him, saying: T am Nem^ 
glan, king of your father’s birds.’ And he explained that Conaire 
must not cast at birds because they were his kin. Directed by 
the bird.^man the boy went his way naked, and three kings 
were waiting on each of the four roads to Tara with royal 
garments to clothe him. He was placed in a chariot and in/ 
stalled as high/king.®

In another account of Conaire’s inauguration® the boy is not 
received with such a demonstration of good will. He pro/ 
ceeded to Tara accompanied by his mother, who was a sor/ 
ceress, and a formidable army which, presumably, she had 
conjured from the SU. The hosts of Tara withdrew, leaving 
the chariot of kingship to them. This chariot would tilt up 
before anyone not destined to receive the kingship, the horses 
would sprir^ at him, and the king’s mantle that was in the 
chariot would be too big for him. But the horses stayed for 
Conaire, and the chariot received him. Standing in the pre/ 
sence of the hosts he doimed the mantle and it fitted him. The 
chariot moved towards the two stones Blocc and Bluigne and 
they opened before him. Fal cried out, and the hosts cried ‘Fal 
has accepted him’. Declining to give battle, the hosts in Tara 
made submission to Conaire and gave him his father’s heritage.

2

While we hear little of the childhood of most mythological 
personages, the ‘Youthful Exploits’ {Macgtiimartha) of CuChu/ 
lainn and Finn are stories in their own right. The careers of

Youthful Exploits 247Youthful Exploits 247

these two heroes from infancy to young manhood could appro/ 
priately be described as successions of epiphanies. The Ulster 
exiles, Fergus and his companions, recount the boyish feats of 
CuChulainn to the anxious Queen Medb before she sets out 
to oppose him in the fateful Cattle/raid of Cuailnge.'' In his 
fifth year he had set out alone to Emain Macha to join King 
Conchobar’s boy/corps, playing with his toy weapons as he 
tan. Breaking the rules of entry into the corps, he gate/crashed 
into the boy’s game, carrying all before him, and when the boys 
threatened him with death as an intruder he scattered the whole 
hundred/and/fifty of them. At the demand of the four/year/old, 
Conchobax placed the boys under his protection, and in no 
time he was the king’s favourite, doing what he hked with the 
boys at play, giving mortal hurt to fifty of them in a fight and 
defoating the whole corps single/handed at team games. One 
day in the following year, Conchobar and his men went to a 
feast given by Culann the smith, leaving CuChulainn (or 
Setanta as he was called until then) to follow when he had 
finished his game. When Conchobar’s party were safely in the 
smith’s house, and had forgotten all about the lad, their host 
let loose the monstrous hound which guarded his land. As 
CuChulainn arrived, the hound charged at him with open 
jaws, but the boy threw his ball into its throat and taking hold 
of the creature by two of its legs he dashed it to pieces against 
a pillar/stone. Conchobar and his men rejoiced at finding the 
child alive; the smith lamented the loss of his watchdog. 
CuChulainn then assumed the dog’s duty, and from that 
he was named CuChulainn, ‘The Hound of Culann’; his 
guardianship of the smith’s domain symbolized his future role 
as the guardian of Ulster.In his seventh year the boy happened to overhear Cathbad 
the druid tell his pupils that the life of the youth who took arms 
that day would be short, but that he would win eternal fame. 
CdChulainn went at once to Conchobar to demand arms. 
Fifteen sets were offered him in succession but he smashed each 
one of them and was satisfied only when furnished with the

248 Celtic Heritage

king's own weapons. Then he shattered twelve chariots and was 
given the kite’s war.-chariot. After a ride to the playing/fields to 
receive the salutations of the boys, he bade the king’s charioteer 
drive him to the Look-Out Ford on the frontier, where Conall 
Cernach, the Ulster champion, was keeping watch and ward 
of the province. There the lad broke the shaft of Conall’s 
chariot so that he could not follow him, and entering alien 
territory he challenged the three terrible Sons of Nechta Seme 
to combat. The first could be harmed neither by the points nor 
by the edges of weapons; the second, if he were not defeated with 
the first blow, would never be defeated, and the third could 
traverse the sea with the swiftness of a swallow. CuChulainn 
slew all three of them. On his way home he ran down two 
stags and shot down a number of swans without killing 
them. With the wild deer tied behind his chariot, the tethered 
swans flying over it, and the heads of the three sons of Nechta 
Seme in the chariot, he approached Emain Macha in battle 
rage. To subdue his fury, the Ulstermen sent their women 
forth naked to meet him, and when he hid his face from them 
he was plunged into three vats of cold water. The staves and 
hoops of the first vat burst asunder with the heat, the second 
vat boiled, and even in the third the water became hot. When 
he had been calmed, they dressed him in fresh raiment and 
henceforth he took his place between the two feet of the king.The youthful hero’s departure from his mother’s home, the 
threat to his life when he joins the youth group, the contests, 
the acquisition of a new name, the taking of arms and the first 
foray, all recall variants of the world/wide rites by which boys 
are initiated and sent out to blood their weapons and to win a 
scalp or a head. CuChulainn’s assumption of the role of 
Culann’s dog compares with the magical identification of the 
Scandinavian herserkir mth wolves and of members of African 
men’s societies with leopards and other beasts of prey, while 
his slaughter of the dog with his bare hands brings to mind the 
initiation test of unarmed combat, with a wild boar or wolf, 
which prevailed amoi^ the Heruh. ‘Wolf’, in particular, is

Youthful Exploits 249

‘the cognomen of members of Indo-'European military frater^ 
nities.’®Youthful Exploits 249

‘the cognomen of members of Indo-'European military frater^ 
nities.’®

CiiChulainn’s crossing of the frontier and his combat with 
the three supernatural Sons of Nechta Scene has been identic 
fied as an ancient Indo-'European initiation scenario of a 
struggle with three monsters or with one three^headed monster.® 
The battle fury in which he returns to his people is analogous 
to the ‘ “extreme heat” and “rage” which, on other levels of 
sacrality, characterizes the incarnation of power.’^® This asso-' 
ciation of heat with the warrior’s frenzy has been shown to 
exist both among Indo-European peoples and among peoples 
who cannot be shown to have had any historical connection 
with them. Professor Dumezil has drawn the analogy between 
the cooling of CuChulainn’s ardour and certain features of the 
initiation rites of the secret Cannibal Society of the Kwakiutl of 
British Columbia.^ ^ After rituals involving seclusion in the 
bush, the consumption of human flesh, entry into the cult- 
house and a symbolical ascent to the world of the gods, the 
initiate is no longer a mere human being. When he returns to 
the village after three or four months’ absence, he behaves like 
a wild beast, biting the arms of whomsoever he meets and 
swallowing bits of the flesh, and it takes four men to hold him. 
The woman who has served him in the bush now appears and 
dances naked before him, with a corpse in her arms. He climbs 
on to the roof of the cult-house, removes a few of the planks, 
jumps into the interior and dances in ecstasy, trembling in every 
limb. To calm him the ‘Attendant’ seizes him by the head, 
drags him out until they are both up to their waists in the salt 
water, and plunges him four times in the water.Macgnimartha Finn'-^ has a number of features in common 
with the story of CuChulainn. Thus Finn encounters a group 
of boys on the green of a fort. He beats them all together at their 
games, and when the man of the fort incites them to kill him 
and they all throw their hurleys at him, he again defeats them. 
In response to a challenge, he even drowns nine of them. It is

250 Celtic Heritage

during this encounter that he is named Finn (‘the Fair’): 
hitherto he was called Demne. Like CtiChuIainn, Finn cap/ 
tures two wild stags, and on another occasion he brings home 
a live duck after shooting it.^® But the story as a whole is less 
spectacular than CuChulainn’s.

Finn was brought up secretly in a forest by two warrior 
women because his hereditary enemies, the Sons of Morna, 
were lying in wait for him. On leaving the women he wandered 
incognito, but his skill as hunter and jidcbelh'^ls^et betrayed his 
identity when he entered the service of one king after another. 
Then he came to a chief smith who gave him his daughter to 
sleep with and made two spears for him. After bidding farewell 
to the smith, he slew an extraordinary sow which was devastat/ 
ing the country, and returned with its head as a bridal gift to 
the smith for his daughter. Going his way again, Finn met and 
slew the warrior who had dealt the first wound to his father in 
his last battle.At last, after a visit to some of the old fian in a desert wood, 
Finn came to learn poetry from Finn^ces on the Boyne. For 
seven years Finntes (‘Finn the Poet’) had been watching the 
salmon of FA’s Pool; for it had been prophesied of him that 
he would eat the salmon of FA, when nothing would remain 
unknown to him. The salmon was found, and Demne (as 
Finn called himself) was ordered to cook it but not to eat any 
of it. The youth brought the cooked salmon. ‘Have you eaten 
of the salmon, my lad?’ said the poet. ‘No’, said he, ‘but I 
burned my thumb and put it into my mouth afterwards.’ 
‘What is your name my lad?’ said he. ‘Demne’, said the youth. 
‘Finn is your name, my lad,’ said he, ‘and to you was the 
salmon given to be eaten, and truly you are Finn.’ Finn then 
ate the salmon. It was thus that knowledge was given to Finn: 
whenever he put his thumb into his mouth, and sang through 
teinm laida, then whatever he did not know would be revealed 
to him.

After this, Finn went to the poet Cethern son of Fintan for 
further teaching. At that time there was a beautiful fairy maiden

Youthful Exploits 2$%After this, Finn went to the poet Cethern son of Fintan for 
further teaching. At that time there was a beautiful fairy maiden

Youthful Exploits 2$%

in Sid Breg file. Many of the men of Ireland had tried to woo 
her on Samain Eves when nothing could be hidden in the 
rtii/mounds, but the only reward that each had got for his 
pains was that one of his people was slain, while no one knew 
by whom it was done. When this happened to Cethern, who 
‘like everyone else’ went to woo the maiden, Finn sought the 
advice of the champion Fiacail mac Conchinn, and was in/ 
structed to go and sit down between the two mountains called 
the Paps of Anann, Sitting there on the Eve of Samain, Finn saw 
the two fairy hills (that were between the two Paps) open, 
revealing a great fire inside each, and he heard voices on either 
side of him discussing an exchange of gifts between the in/ 
habitants of the two side. Then a man came out of one of the 
hills and proceeded towards the other, carrying a kneading 
trough and on it a pig, a cooked calf and a bunch of garlic. 
Finn threw Fiacail’s spear at him and heard wailing in the 
fairy/hill from which he came. It transpired that the victim 
was the slayer of the wooers* men.

Fiacail set out to a tryst with the^aw, and Finn insisted on 
going along too in spite of Fiacail’s belief that the lad could 
never keep pace with him. Fiacail carried twelve leaden balls 
around his neck to curb his swiftness, and as they went along 
he threw off one ball after another. Finn picked them up, bring/ 
ing the twelve with him to the end of the journey, and Fiacail’s 
running was no swifter than Finn’s. Keeping watch that night, 
Finn heard three fairy women wailing on a fairy/mound, and 
he snatched the brooch of the cloak of one of them as she was 
entering the mound. As a reward for returning the brooch, she 
presented him with a vessel full of gold and silver which he 
divided among the fan.Here again we have typical initiation motifs — separation 
from motherly care, the new name, the acquisition of arms, 
and victory over a wild beast. The story tallies at several points 
with the ritual by which youths were admitted into the fana/^ 
a ritual which involved the severing of family connections, and

252 Celtic Heritage252 Celtic Heritage

tests, not only in athletic and soldierly skills but also in the 
twelve forms of poetry. Particularly noteworthy is the parallel 
between the story of the boys throwing their hurleys all to^ 
gether at Finn and the test in which nine warriors threw their 
javelins at the candidate while he defended himself with a 
shield and a stick. But there is nothing in the extant accounts of 
the rites to correspond with Finn’s encounter with the adverse 
forces of the unseen world as he sits between the two Paps of 
Anann, on the borders of West Munster, during a night which 
does not belong to mundane time. Such an encounter is an 
essential feature of initiation rituals generally, and it figures in 
other youthful exploits of Finn, such as his victory over Aillen 
mac Midna (who used to burn up Tara every Hallowe’en), 
the victory which brought him the chieftainship of the Fiana.^® 
Folktales of the Fenian Cycle also describe a visit of the 
youthful Finn to a strange land of giants, where after being 
swallowed by a monster he cuts his way out through its side 
and gains a magic healing cup.^* This motif again has a wide 
distribution, both in story and in actual ritual. For example, 
ceremonial re^birth from the inside of an artificial cow was 
practised in India. Certain tribes in northern New Guinea^'' 
initiate their youths in a hut modelled in the shape of a mythical 
monster which symbolically swallows and disgorges them. 
Circumcision is explained to the uninitiated as the bite of the 
monster.^® In the initiation rituals of the Bushong of the Congo, 
the youths pass naked through a tunnel which symbolizes the 
inside of a leopard and are reborn from it. Inside the tunnel, 
‘hammering out new men’, is a smith who personifies the first 
ancestor, the originator of the rites.^®A smith plays a decisive role in the Youthful Exploits of 
both CuGhulainn and Finn, and this is not surprising when it 
is realized that smithcraft has a supernatural quality and that in 
many parts of the world there is a close connection between 
iron/working and alchemy and between smiths and initiation 
into ‘men’s societies’.*® A further Irish example of a smith as 
initiator occurs in the story of Niall and his four step/brothers.* ^

Youthful Exploits .253

Mongfind sends the boys to Sithchenn, a smith who is also a 
magician and a seer. He gets them all into the forge and sets 
fire to it. Niall comes out with the anvil, and the other four 
brothers with the sledge-'hammers, a pail of beer and the beh 
lows, the spearheads, and a bundle of dry sticks with one green 
twig in it, respectively. From this the smith foretells their 
future. Monghnd sends them to the smith a second time to 
obtain arms, and he sends them forth to prove their prowess, an 
expedition which culminates in a further test — ^the encounter 
with the hag at the well. In several traditions the forge is sym.' 
bolical of the womb,®® and the smith’s test may be regarded 
as a re/birth of the boys, through fire, into their respective roles.

3

Before leaving the subject of the initiation of youths, we must 
consider the story of ‘CiiChulainn’s Training’. It appears as 
an independent tale in eighteenth century manuscripts, but we 
will outline the older version which is incorporated in the 
story of CuChulainn’s wooing of Emer.®®Discovering that his daughter, Emer, was being wooed by 
CdChulainn, Forgall Monach* went to Conchobar’s court 
in disguise and, hoping to get rid of his daughter’s suitor, he 
recommended that the lad should go to Domnall the Warlike 
in Alba to complete his military education. CiiChulainn set 
out, accompanied by Loegaire the Victorious and Concho^ 
bar.** ‘When they had come to Domnall they were taught 
by him one thing on a flagstone with a small hole, to blow 
bellows. Then they would perform on it till their soles were 
all but black or livid. Another thing on a spear, on which 
they would climb. They would perform on its point; or drop-- 
ping down on their soles.’ Domnall’s loathsome mis^'shapen 
daughter, Dornoll (‘Bigfist’), fell in love with CdChulainn, 
and when he refused her she vowed revenge on him.

* ’Forgall the Wily.

** In other versions: Conall Cernach.

254 Celtic Berita^e* ’Forgall the Wily.

** In other versions: Conall Cernach.

254 Celtic Berita^e

Then Domnall told CdChulainn that he would not be 
fully trained until he came to Scathach (‘Shadow’), and at this 
the three companions set out to the abode of this female 
champion in the East of Alba. Then a vision of home, con/ 
jured up as it seems by Dornoll, caused his friends to forsake 
CdChulainn. He went on alone. On his way he encountered a 
dreadful beast like a lion, which fought with him, and he was 
subjected to foul/play by youths who laughed at him. (Accord/ 
ing to some versions the beast carried him on its back for four 
days, until they came to the uttermost bounds of men.) He came 
to a house in a glen and was welcomed by a maiden who 
declared that she was a foster/sister of his. He was also wel/ 
corned by a warrior and from him he learned how to cross the 
‘Plain of Ill/luck’ that lay before him. On one half of that plain 
men would freeze fast; on the other half they would be raised 
on the grass. The warrior gave him a wheel and an apple. By 
following the wheel he crossed the first half of the plain, and the 
apple guided him the rest of the way. Then, after traversing a 
Great Glen by a narrow path and crossing a terrible stony 
height, he reached the fortress of Scathach. (In other recensions 
the house was on an island and could be reached only by a 
perilous bridge which threw people from it unless they leapt 
from one side on to its middle and reached the other side by a 
second leap. CuChulainn successfully negotiated the bridge, 
much to the surprise of FerDiad and other Irish youths whom 
he found playing on the green before it.)As CiiChulainn knocked at the door of the fortress, his 
spear/shafi went through it and he was admitted by Uathach* 
daughter of Scathach, who soon became his mistress. As she 
served him with water and food on his arrival he broke her 
finger, and her shriek brought the champion Cochor Crufe to 
combat with him. GiSChulaiim slew him, and when Scathach 
(like Culann the smith) bewailed her loss, the youth offered to 
take on the man’s services. On the third day, the maiden

* ‘Spectre*.

Youthful Expolits 255

advised CdChulainn to go through his salmondeap at Scat/ 
hach when, reclining in the great yew tree, she was teaching 
her two sons. He was to set his sword between her two breasts 
until she gave him his three wishes: the first, that she should 
teach him without neglect; the second, that she (presumably 
the daughter) should wed him without payment of bride/ 
price; the third, that she should say everything that would be/ 
fall him, for she was also a prophetess. All this was granted.A battle broke out between Scathach and the people of the 
princess Aife,* the hardest woman/warrior in the world. 
To keep him out of harm’s way, Scathach gave CuChulainn 
a sleeping potion and bound him, but this only put him out 
of action for an hour and he was soon fighting against three of 
Aife’s warriors. Then he overcame Aife herself by a trick, and 
carrying her on his back he exacted from her ‘three wishes’: 
first, that she should give hostages to Scathach and never 
oppose her again; second, that she should be with him that 
night before her own fort; third, that she should bear him a 
son (Conlai) and send him to Ireland at the end of seven years. 
All this was granted. On his way back, he met an old woman, 
blind in her left eye. She told him to beware and not to be in 
her way. ‘As there was no footing on the cliff of the sea he let 
himself down from the path so that only his toes clung to it. 
When she passed over them she hit his great toe to throw him 
down the chfF. Then he leapt the chariot/chief’s salmon/leap 
up again, and struck her head off.’ Before CiiChulainn de/ 
parted for home, Scathach foretold the great perils that awaited 
him there.

The version of the tale preserved in eighteenth/century manu/ 
scripts^^ says that CdGhulainn began his training ‘with 
Uathach of the Glen in the great fierce province of Munster’ 
before he set out for the land of Scithach. Both of these places, 
together with the ‘Terrible Valley’, the ‘Green Isle’, the

* ‘Reflection’e

256 Celtic Heritage

‘Lonesome Isle' and the ‘Eastern World’, which figure in 
analogous adventures in Celtic folktales,^® may be equated 
with the Other World entered by noviciates during initiation 
ceremonies. For example, the secluded forest initiationdodges 
of the ndembo secret society of the Lower Congo are ‘The 
Country of the Dead’,^® and descent into the infernal regions 
is a well-known feature of initiation, be it into shamanism or 
into the Mysteries of antiquity.®'^Like CuChulainn in the land of ‘Shadow’, noviciates in 
initiation ceremonies are confronted by hostile initiators in 
monstrous disguises, and are taught secrets by their ‘super- 
natural’ instructors. The later texts of our story explain that the 
feat taught by Domnall (or his daughter) involved resting with 
the chest on the point of a spear without tearing dress or rai- 
ment — a feat which recalls the ordeals of Indian wonder- 
workers. CdChulainn ‘leapt aloft hoveringly, so that he laid 
his breast and bosom on the sharp point of the spear, and he 
cared little if that were his place of rest for the whole fair day.’®* 
After crossing the Bridge of the Leaps, which becomes as 
narrow as a hair and as slippery as an eel’s tail, he is left by 
Scathach’s daughter at the house of the ‘barbers’, with the 
injunction that they should ‘deal gently with him tonight’. 
They, however, throw him on to the top of the house and they 
all throw their spears and darts at him — a hardening process 
after which he will be calm though there be many armies be- 
fore him.®® In this, as in his other exploits, the hero turns the 
tables on his testers and vanquishes them, but it may not be 
without significance that they were barbers, for hair-cutting 
seems to have been an initiation rite in Celtic as in many other 
societies — we have already mentioned the humiliating hair-cut 
which CuChulainn received at the hands of the giant CdRof. 
Furthermore, CiSChulairm appears to have returned to Ire- 
land with an ‘initiation scar’ upon his arm. In a mortal combat 
with Scathach’s gigantic son, the latter ‘fell with his face on 
CuChulainn, so that a foretooth of the big man chanced on the 
top of CuChulainn’s shoulder and took a piece of flesh and

Youti^ul Exploits 257

skin completely from him as far as the tip of his fingers. So that 
was CuChulainn’s Shearing.’®®Youti^ul Exploits 257

skin completely from him as far as the tip of his fingers. So that 
was CuChulainn’s Shearing.’®®

The sexual content of initiation rites is well-'known, and 
there are sexual episodes in the tales we have told — ^the naked 
women in the story of CuChulainn’s first foray, Finn’s union 
with the smith’s daughter, the quest for the woman whom 
everyone woos at his peril, and Finn’s capture of a fairy woman 
as she enters the sid. CiiChulainn consorts with Scathach’s 
daughter and with Aife, and according to the later texts he 
even wrests from Scathach herself ‘the friendship of her 
thighs’.^^ The feminine aspect of the Other World and the 
appearance of mysterious women in each class of tale are men/- 
tioned elsewhere in this book. Here we will simply observe 
that the union of CiiChulainn with the female warriors, like 
Niall’s union with ‘Sovereignty’,®® is a marriage between an 
apprentice and his vocation. Craft initiations generally have a 
strong sexual reference, and the relation of the craftsman to his 
craft and materials is that of husband to wife. The farmer is the 
‘husband’ of his land, the smith the husband of his forge. For 
example, among the Chishinga of Northern Rhodesia, a 
smith would be guilty of adultery if he slept with a human wife 
while his forge was ‘pregnant with iron’.®®Initiation involves both a humiliation and an elevation to a 
higher plane of being; it is both a terrifying experience and the 
means of triumph over terror. Though the hero is exposed to 
fbuhplay, mockery and mortal danger, it is the positive, vic/- 
torious side of the ordeal that is celebrated in the myth, rather 
than the submissiveness that one usually associates with youths 
undergoing initiation. During the course of initiation, the 
noviciate learns that many of the frightening trials to which he 
is subjected are really hoaxes, and that his formidable initiators 
are really his elders disguised as ghosts and other supernatural 
beings. These secrets must not be disclosed to women and non/ 
initiates generally; on the contrary, the latter are often regaled 
with deliberately exaggerated reports of the cruelty of the ordeal 
and the heroism of the noviciates. Sometimes the noviciates 
R ^ ^

258 Celtic Heritage

themselves, at the end of the ceremonies, put on masks and 
invade thevillageto terrify the uninitiated.®* It may also be note^ 
worthy that Finn, in the land of giants, ‘put his finger under 
his wisdom-'tooth and found out that they were people under 
glamour {sgleo), that they were not really bigger than other 
people and that he could kill them all if he tried.’®® The dis^ 
covery that the truth of myth belongs to the realm of drama 
rather than to ordinary life should not, however, be dismissed 
as a disillusionment in the modern sense of the word. While it 
brings a liberation from childish fears it also exalts the novi-- 
ciate. As an initiate into the mysteries he can now identify 
himself with supernatural beings and personify them in the 
rites.The function of initiation as a means of education in the be^ 
haviour appropriate to everyday adult life is well known. 
Equally important, however, is the ritual transgression of 
taboos, the indulgence in excesses which break the bounds of 
everyday life. The Kwakiutl noviciate into the Cannibal 
Society eats human flesh, an ‘inhuman’ act which the un-- 
initiated contemplate with horror, but an act through which 
the noviciate attains a goddike transcendence over the rights 
and wrongs of ordinary life.®® In Buddhist Tantric rites the 
devotee partakes of the sacrament of the ‘five forbidden things’ 
—wine, meat, fish, parched grain, and sexual intercourse^ — 
and in so doing rises to a height which is beyond the law.®^ 
If we view the audacity and the excesses of the hero from this 
standpoint, he seems to personify not only the initiate but the 
inner meaning of initiation. He is the victory, the embodiment 
of a spirit which no boundaries can contain.

CHAPTER Xm

WooingsCHAPTER Xm

Wooings

It will be remembered that CuChulainn’s perilous ad^ 
venture in the land of Scathach was contrived by Forgall 
Monach, the hostile father of his future bride Emer, when he 
discovered that the young hero had been to his fort to woo the 
maiden. Forgall was a nephew of Tethra, King of the Fomoire, 
and his fortress in Brega was called Luglochta Loga, ‘The 
Gardens of Lug’. Before CuChulainn drove to it in his 
chariot, nine men had been searching every province in Ireland 
for a whole year in the hope of finding in some stronghold a 
maiden it might please CuChulainn to woo, but their search 
had been of no avail. Though Forgall’s fortress was in Ireland, 
the journey there was a metaphorical adventure into a mysteri/ 
ous world. Conversing in riddles with Emer, CuChulainn 
says that he passed the night in ‘the house of a man who calls 
the cattle of the plain of Tethra’, and he has come ‘between the 
Two Props of the Woodland, from the Darkness of the Sea, 
over the Great Secret of the Men of the Gods, over the Foam 
of the Two Steeds of Emain, over the Field of the Morrigan, 
over the Back of the Sea Pig, over the Valley of the Great Ox, 
between the God and his Prophet, over the Marrow of the 
Woman Fedelm, between the Boar and his Dam, over the 
Washing/place of the Horses of the Gods, between the King 
of Ana and his Servant, to the Food Storehouse of the Four 
Corners of the World, over Great Ruin and the Remnants of 
the Great Feast, between the Vat and the Little Vat, to the 
Daughters of the Champion of Tethra, King of the Fomoire, 
to the Gardens of Lug.’^ When the hero goes a/wooing, the 
drive from Ulster to Brega becomes a ceremonial progress into 
the world beyond.

On returning from the land of Scathach, CiiChulainn set 
out again in his scythe chariot for Forgall’s fortress, leaped over

259

26 o Celtic HeritageOn returning from the land of Scathach, CiiChulainn set 
out again in his scythe chariot for Forgall’s fortress, leaped over

259

26 o Celtic Heritage

the three ramparts of the fort and ‘dealt three blows in the fort, 
so that eight men fell from each blow, and one escaped in each 
group of nine, namely Scibur, Ibur, and Cat, the three brothers 
of Emer.’ Forgall fell to his death from a rampart as he fled 
from CuChulainn, and the triumphant hero carried off Emer 
and her foster/sister with their weight in gold and silver. Escap-' 
ing towards Ulster, they were pursued by Forgall’s men, and 
CdChulainn had to pause at various historic places on the 
way to do battle with them. But the incidents of the struggle 
were no mere contingencies. During the punning conversation 
of the lovers at their first encounter, CuChulainn had seen the 
breasts of the maiden over the bosom of her smock. And he 
said: ‘Fair is the plain, the plain of the noble yoke.’ ‘No one 
comes to this plain,’ said she, ‘without leaping the hero’s 
salmon/leap, bringing out two women with their weight in 
gold and silver, and at one blow slaying three times nine men 
but saving one man in each group of nine.’ In the event, 
CuChulainn and his adversaries were simply going through 
the motions of a drama, the course of which had been pre/ 
ordained before the action began.

Before we comment on the prodigious difficulties encountered 
by the most admired young man in Irish story when seeking 
the bride of his choice, we will outline two other tales of a 
similar character as a basis for discussing the salient features of a 
hero’s marriage. The first is an Irish tale in which the winning 
of a bride is the direct objective of a journey like CiiChulainn’s 
journey to the land of Scathach; the second, the best known 
‘wooing’ in Welsh, is an elaborate version of the widespread 
type of tale in which the fulfilment of difficult tasks is a condi/ 
tion of marriage.While Art son of Conn is phying jUchell at Tara with his 
stepmother Bfouma (a woman from the Land of Promise), 
the Sii'tnen steal the pieces and he loses the game. BAuma lays 
a. gets on him to search for Delbchaem* daughter of Morgan,

* ‘Fair Shape*.

Wooings 261* ‘Fair Shape*.

Wooings 261

who dwells on an isle amid the sea. He sets out and finding a 
coracle on the shore he travels in it from island to island until 
he comes to a strange island full of apple-trees and lovely birds 
and bees, where a company of ever-beautiful women dwell in a 
house thatched with bird-feathers and equipped with a crystal 
bower and inexhaustible vats. Among the women is Grade 
Fiiralaind.* She gives him a splendid mantle and, seeing that it 
fits him, she welcomes him as Art son of Conn — ‘and it is long 
since that thy coming has been decreed*. As he takes his leave 
after staying with her for six weeks, she warns him of the perils 
ahead and advises him how to deal with them. ‘There is sea 
and land between you (and her). . . . There is a great dark 
ocean between you, and deadly and hostile is the way there; for 
that wood is traversed as though there were spear-points of 
battle under one’s feet, Hke leaves of the forest under the feet of 
men. There is a luckless gulf of the sea full of dumb-mouthed 
beasts on this side of that immense wood. And an enormous 
oak forest, dense and thorny before that mountain, and a narrow 
path through it, and a dark house in the mysterious wood at the 
head of the same path, with seven hags and a bath of lead 
awaiting you, for your coming there has been fated. And there 
is somewhat more grievous still, even Ailill Dubhdedach** 
son of Mongan Minscothach.f And weapon cannot harm him. 
And there are two sisters of mine there. . . . There are two cups 
in their hands — ^a cup filled with poison, and one filled with 
wine. And the cup which is on your right hand drink from it 
when you have need. And near at hand is the stronghold of the 
maiden. It is thus: with a palisade of bronze round about it, 
and on every stake of it the head of a man slain by Coinchend, 
save on one stake alone. . . Coinchend, wife of Morgan, was 
a monstrous warrior-woman. She was fated to die when her 
daughter married.* Firakind: ‘Truly Beauriful’.

** ‘Black-toothed Ailiir.

f Mfnscothach: ‘Tender Blossom’.

26Z

Celtic Heritage

On his way. Art also crosses a sea full of monsters, a forest 
in which he encounters evil hags, an icy mountain, a forked 
glen full of toads, a mountain infested with lions, and a narrow 
bridge over an icy river. He then overcomes the giant door-' 
keeper of Morgan’s fort, whom he finds sharpening his teeth 
with a pillar-'Stone. Despite all obstacles and opponents, he 
arrives at the stronghold in the Land of Wonders where Delb-- 
chaem, the king’s daughter, is housed in a bower set high 
on a single pillar. He slays Coinchend and Morgan and after 
taking possession of the Land of Wonders he brings Delb-- 
chaem to Ireland as his bride and banishes his stepmother ftom 
Tara.®

In the story of Kulhwch and Olwen, the stepmother of 
Kulhwch son of Kilydd swears upon him a destiny, that he 
shall never win a wife until he wins Olwen daughter of Ysbad/ 
daden Benkawr,* and love of the maiden enters his every limb. 
He sets out in splendid array to the court of Arthur, his first 
cousin, and after a parley with the porter he boldly enters the 
hall on horseback, regardless of the rules, when Arthur and 
his warriors are feasting. The boon he asks for is that Arthur 
shall trim his hair and that he shall get him Olwen— invoking 
her in the names of Arthur’s warriors, with whom are included 
a host of the supernatural personae of Welsh tradition.

For a whole year, messengers search in vain for the where-' 
abouts of Olwen. Then Kei, Bedwyr, Kynddylig Kyfar^ 
wydd,** Gwrhyr Gwalstawd Ieithoedd,f Gwalchmei and 
Menw set out with Kulhwch, declaring that they will not 
leave him until she is found or until he says she does not 
exist. They approach a great fort, and not far from it they meet 
the shepherd Custennin tending sheep on top of a mound. 
From him they learn that Ysbaddaden and Olwen dwell in

* Ysbaddaden ‘Chief Giant’ or ‘Giant Head*.* Ysbaddaden ‘Chief Giant’ or ‘Giant Head*.

** ‘Kynddylig the Guide’.

f ‘Gwrhyr Interpreter of Languages’.

Wooin^s 263

the fortress, and that no one on such a quest as theirs has ever 
returned from there alive. They enter Custennin’s house, and 
with his wife’s connivance Olwen is brought to meet them 
there in all her glory. Kulhwch recognizes her: ‘Ah maiden, 
it is you I have loved. Come with me.’ But she has promised 
not to leave without the counsel of her father, who is destined 
to die when she is married.

Silently slaying the gatemen and the watchdogs, Kulhwch 
and his companions enter the presence of Ysbaddaden and 
declare their quest. Servants raise the giant’s eyelids with forks, 
so that he may see his prospective sondndaw, and he promises 
to give his answer next day. As they leave, he throws a 
poisoned spear at them. Bedwyr catches it and hurls it back, 
wounding Ysbaddaden in the knee. A similar exchange takes 
place on the next two days, when Menw throws back a second 
spear, wounding the giant in the chest, and Kulhwch pierces 
his eye with a third. On the fourth day, Ysbaddaden agrees to 
give his daughter to Kulhwch if he will accept his conditions.

In a long parley, the giant sets Kulhwch thirteen difficult 
tasks. As each task is prescribed, Kulhwch makes the ‘re/ 
spouse’: ‘It is easy for me to get that, though you think it is not 
easy,’ and the giant proceeds to the next task with: ‘Though 
you get that, there is something you will not get.’The accomplishment of these major tasks is a preparation 
for the nuptial feast. A great thicket must be cleared and the 
ground tilled to provide meat and drink for the guests; scattered 
linseed must be collected and resown to produce flax for the 
wedding/veil; honey nine times sweeter than that of a virgin 
swarm must be found to make bragget. Kulhwch must bring 
the cup of Llwyr son of Llwyrion to hold the drink, the horn of 
Gwlgawd Gododdin to pour it, the hamper of Gwyddneu 
Garanhir* in which everyone finds the meat he likes, the caul/ 
dron of Diwrnach the Irishman to boil the meat, and the 
harp of Teirtu and the birds of Rhiannon to give entertainment.

* Long4eggcd Gwyddneu.

a<54 Celtic Heritage

Ysbaddaden’s hair must be cut and washed and his beard 
shaved. For this, Kulhwch must obtain the tusk of Yskithyr-* 
wyn Chief Boar as a razor, the blood of the Black Witch to 
dress the beard, and the shears and the comb that are between 
the ears of Twrch Trwyth.*

No less than twenty^six subsidiary tasks must be performed 
to provide the means to accomplish those necessary for the 
feast — ^special oxen for the ploughing, special horses, dogs, 
leashes, a special collar and a special sword for hunting 
Twrch Trwyth, and the services, not only of Arthur and his 
huntsmen, but of supernatural personages such as Amaethon 
son of Don, Gofannon son of Don, Mabon son of Modron 
(who was taken from his mother when three nights old and 
whose whereabouts are unknown), and Gwyn son of Nudd 
(who cannot be spared from Annwfn).

With the co.'operation of allies ranging from ants and the 
oldest animals to the supernatural powers invoked at the out^ 
set, the tasks are successfully performed, Ysbaddaden is slain, 
and Olwen becomes Kulhwch’s wife.®Features which appear in one or more of these three tales — 
the dangerous journey through a strange land, the guides on the 
way, the initial encounter with the bride, the difficult tasks, 
and the escape with the bride — also appear in various combina-' 
tions in a wide range of folktales. Sometimes there is an un^ 
expected connection between the guides and the female side of 
the hero’s own world. Custennin’s wife is Kulhwch’s mother’s 
sister, while in a folktale the hero spends three successive nights 
in the dwellings of three giants who are his mother’s brothers.* 
The maiden who helps GuChulainn on his way to the land of 
Scathach introduces herself as his long-'forgotten foster-'sister. 
Though Creide who receives Art to the otherworld house of 
women is not said to be his kinswoman or his foster-sister, she 
knows his name, she has a mantle to fit him, and she has been

* Cf. supra, p. 70.

Wooinp 265

expecting his coming. Art succeeds in his quest thanks to her 
connections with, and knowledge of, the other underworld 
which holds the bride in its clutches. With her we may compare 
the faithful Luned of Arthurian romance who befriends 
Gwain and brings about his marriage with the Lady of the 
Fountain,® or again the young kinsman who, in the form of a 
maiden, repeatedly brings Peredur back to the true path of his 
destiny.® In folktales the helpers are sometimes an old man, or 
a succession of three old men, an old woman or three old 
women, animals or kings of animals. We have interpreted the 
animals connected with the hero’s childhood as expressions of 
the extra^-conscious side of his being, and it is noteworthy that 
the animals that help him now are not entirely independent of 
him. In many cases their help is the repayment of a debt of 
gratitude which they owe him for the consideration and respect 
he once showed them when they themselves were helpless in 
his world.After passing through this comparatively friendly world of 
the animal, the aged, and the feminine, the hero forces his 
entry into the hostile Other World of the bride, an Other 
World which is ruthlessly masculine. The bride’s mother is 
not mentioned, or she is under enchantment, or she is a fierce 
Amazonwho resembles the manlike Scathach of CdChulainn’s 
military initiation. The bride’s father is a grotesque and cun/ 
ning giant. If we were to interpret the mother’s kin and women/ 
helpers as the feminine substratum of man’s soul, these mon/ 
strous and wily creatures, male and female, would personify 
the dark masculine substratum of the feminine soul. The bride 
herself, on the other hand, is the embodiment of all that is 
good, beautiful, and feminine in woman. But she too is other/ 
worldly, albeit in a different way, and the hero must negotiate 
the gulf that separates her from him — ^he must bring her to 
earth from her high tower. Kulhwch first meets Olwen in the 
house where his mother’s sister and the giant Custennin live 
in matrimony, a house where two worlds join, and CuChu/ 
lainn makes contact with Emer through a dialogue composed

266

Celtic Heritage

of riddles whereby two worlds are spoken of at once. In the 
Welsh story of Llyn y Fan, the lady from the lake refuses the 
hero’s offer of bread when she first appears before him, and 
again bis offer of dough on her second appearance. When she 
appears the third time, he offers her half-baked bread— bread 
which is at once both baked and unbaked — and with that the 
gulf between their two worlds is bridged.’ In other folktales 
there is yet another symbolism. A number of swans alight by a 
lake and, doffing their swan’s dress, they bathe in the lake as 
maidens. The hero steals the dress of the most beautiful of 
them and constrains her to take him to her father.® As we have 
already noted, transformation into a swan is a mode of com-- 
munication between two worlds.After they have been brought together in this way, the girl 
helps the hero to avoid various perils. For example, she in/ 
instructs him that, lest he be slain, he must meet her father 
with one foot inside and the other outside the doorway; in 
some cases she helps him to overcome the obstacles which her 
father places in the way of their marriage. Yet, her attitude to/ 
wards her father is strangely ambivalent. She refuses to be 
abducted until his preposterous terms have been fully complied 
with, but she can then contemplate his death with the most un/ 
filial indifference. Alternatively, she and her bridegroom, 
sometimes aided by her enchanted mother, elude the pursuing 
father in a magic flight.

In the popular ballads of England, Scotland, and other 
European countries, and in the folktales of lands ranging from 
Europe to Polynesia, the solving of riddles sometimes takes the 
place of the difficult tasks which the hero must perform to win 
his bride. There are also many examples of the converse of this 
motif, where a clever girl, by ingeniously answering her suitor’s 
questions, or matching the tasks he sets her, wins herself a 
husband.® Finn, in wooing Cormac’s daughter Ailbe, asks 
her a number of riddles before he invites her to share his forest 
life.^® Scottish tradition connects the same motif with Finn’s 
wooing of Grainne, of which we shall speak in the next

fVoomgs 21&J

chapter— and it is said that Finn would not marry any lady 
but one who could answer all his questions.^^ In the oldest 
Irish version of this wooing, on the contrary, it is Grainne who 
sets Finn a difficult task. She hates him and demands as her 
bridal gift that a couple of every wild animal should be 
brought to the rampart of Tara.^^In medieval Ireland and Wales, the most highly esteemed form 
of marriage was a contract between consenting kimgroups — 
marriage ‘by gift of kin’ (as it is termed in the Welsh laws) — 
and between partners of comparable status, with proper 
arrangements about marriage payments. Abductions were 
known and there were procedures whereby such jaits accomplis 
could be legalized, but these were inferior kinds of marriage.^® 
Similarly in more recent centuries, although temporary mar^ 
riages and other irregular unions existed, the approved union, 
even among the common people, was a ‘match’ negotiated 
by two families. There was shrewd bargaining over brideprice 
and dowry, and a ‘good match’ in the material sense seems to 
have counted more than mutual attraction between bride and 
bridegroom.^^ How different are the marriages of mythology! 
Just as the hero’s birth has an outward resemblance to the most 
disgraceful births in human society, so does his marriage have 
more in common with abductions and elopements than with 
the socially approved forms of marriage.

Yet some wedding customs express attitudes towards marriage 
which are strangely reminiscent of the stories we have related. 
As a counterpart to the sober contract, there are displays of 
mock/hostility. Gates are tied and rope/barriers and other 
obstacles impede the bridegroom’s progress to church and his 
return with his bride, and forfeits must be paid for safe 
conduct. Hostile powers threatening the success of the marriage 
must be banished with gunshots. In parts of Ireland, on the 
day of bringing home the bride, the bridegroom and his friends

268 Celtic Heritage268 Celtic Heritage

would ride out and meet the bride and her friends at the place 
of treaty. ‘Having come near to each other, the custom was of 
old to cast short darts at the company that attended the bride, 
but at such a distance that seldom any hurt ensued; yet it is not 
out of the memory of man that the Lord of Howth, on such an 
occasion, lost an eye.’*® This brings to mind the spear^hrowing 
contest in ‘Kulhwch and Olwen’, while the escape with the 
bride in the tales is recalled by Lady Wilde’s description of the 
bride ‘placed on a swift horse before the bridegroom while all 
her kindred started in pursuit with shouts and cries.’*®

Similar accounts are given of the ceremonies observed in 
eighteenth/century Wales on the morning of the wedding day.

‘The bridegroom, accompanied with his friends on horse/ 
back, demands the bride. Her friends, who are likewise on 
horseback, give a positive refusal, upon which a mock 
scuffle ensues. The bride, mounted behind her nearest 
kinsman, is carried off, and is pursued by the bridegroom 
and his friends with loud shouts. It is not uncommon, on 
such an occasion, to see two or three hundred sturdy 
Cambro/Britons riding at full speed, crossing and jostling, 
to the no small amusement of the spectators. When they 
have fatigued themselves and their horses, the bridegroom 
is suffered to overtake his bride. He leads her in triumph 
and the scene is concluded with feasting and festivity.’*''

In Ireland the ride of the bridal party is termed ‘dragging home 
the bride’.*® Thus, in the same way as CiiChulainn’s ride 
from Emain Macha to Brega is elaborated into an invasion 
of another world, so in the wedding rituals friendly neighbours 
are split up into two ‘hostile’ forces, the bride’s people are 
‘overcome’ and the bride is abducted ‘by force’.Just as the hostility of the bride’s family is expressed in ritual 
rather than in earnest, so in the stories the powers of the Other 
World do not make a concerted attack to destroy the hero. As 
if there were rules to the game, he is given a chance to overcome 
his adversaries one by one or a few at a time; or, instead of

Wooings 269Wooings 269

being met with an unequivocal refusal, he is promised the girl 
if he can perform feats which, though apparently impossible, 
can nevertheless be accomplished. A curious heptad in Irish 
law implies that mythological suitors were not the only ones 
to be faced with such a challenge. Among the seven kinds of 
women to whom neither compensation nor honour^-price was 
due in case of their being cohabited with unawares is ‘a woman 
who offers upon a difficult condition, i.e. she deems it impos/- 
sible to come to her by force, because of her strength, and she 
has defied him: “If thou wert able to force me I would Ue 
with thee.” She offers herself for a wonderful or difficult 
dowry, i.e. a bed/tick full of harp strings; a fistful of fleas; or a 
whiteffaced jet-black kid with a bridle of red gold on it; or 
nine green/tipped rushes; or the full of a “carrog” of finger^ 
nail scrapings; or the full of a crow’s house of wren’s eggs.’^® 
In ordinary wedding customs, however, the obstacles placed 
in the path of the bridegroom were of a more modest kind, and 
impossible tasks could by their very nature be accomplished 
only in a figurative sense — as in the solving of riddles. In parts 
of Wales, the bridegroom’s representatives were at first refused 
admission at the bride’s home and a contest in verse between 
the two parties ensued.®® Such contests ‘in the doorway’ also 
featured in certain seasonal rituals, and riddles were sometimes 
embodied in the verses.®^ Riddle contests took place in the 
marriage rituals of parts of Russia and central Asia until 
modern times, and in some cases the riddles consist of requests 
for impossible things. Thus, in one of the villages of the 
Government of Yaroslav, the ‘bride/seller’, sitting by the bride, 
invited the best man to ‘bid for the bride’, offering him the 
choice of trading either in riddles or in gold. The choice always 
fell upon riddles, and half a dozen or more tasks were then set 
by the ‘bridc/'seller’. For example: ‘Give me the sea, full to the 
brim, and with a bottom of silver.’ The best man gave him a 
bowl full of beer with a coin at the bottom. ‘Tell me the thing, 
naked in itself, which has a shift over its bosom.’ He gave him 
a candle. ‘Give me something which the master of this house270

Celtic Heritage

lacks.’ The best man then brought in the bridegroom-pre/- 
sumably to remedy the lack of a son^in/law.*®

The function of impossible tasks as a means of keeping apart 
the denizens of two worlds is well illustrated in Indian ritual. 
To prevent the malevolent ghost of a woman who has died in 
childbirth from returning from the cremation ground, mustard 
seeds are strewn along the road behind her bier, for the belief 
prevails that the ghost can succeed in returning only if it can 
gather all the scattered seeds. In some places, loose cotton wool 
is used in the same way and, like the difficult tasks in so many 
stories, its collection must be accomplished in one night. Since 
this is deemed impossible, there is no fear of the return of the 
ghost once the cotton has been scattered.^® The gathering of 
scattered linseed is a favourite task in Celtic stories, and this 
may well have a bearing upon the Hallowe’en divination rite 
in which a girl scatters linseed or hemp seed and calls on her 
future husband to come and collect, rake, or mow it. The 
husband’s phantom form then becomes visible.®^

In folktale versions of the Giant’s Daughter theme, the hero, 
after the tasks have been accomplished, is confronted with the 
further superhuman test of seeing a distinction where there is no 
difference. His bride is presented to him as one of three or more 
sisters, pigeons, or swans, who are exactly alike, and he must 
identify her.®® This too seems to have a counterpart in marriage 
customs. It used to be the practice among many European 
peoples to substitute a false bride for the real one when the 
bridegroom or his emissary came to fetch her from her home. 
In Wales, the bride was disguised, sometimes as an old woman, 
and the bridegroom’s attendant had to identify her,®® while it 
was the custom in Brittany to substitute first a young girl, then 
the mistress of the house, and lastly the grandmother.®’In sum, whereas marriage is from the overt social point of 
view a happy and amicable affair uniting two people who wish 
to be united and establishing a new bond between two kin/ 
dreds, myth and ritual are at one in proclaiming the converse 
of this view. Peaceful and friendly on the surface, marriage

271

Wooinp

symbolizes the victory of a principle from an upper realm over 
the sinister powers of a lower one, a victory won on the condi^ 
tions set by those powers themselves. The prize is the emanci/ 
pation from that lower realm of the opposite principle and the 
consummate union of the two. Formulated in these abstract 
terms, the meaning is not inconsistent with our own char/’ 
acterization of marriage as signifying ‘the mystical union that 
is betwixt Christ and his Church’, a Church which has been 
emancipated from the clutches of the Devil by a victory won 
against him on his own ground.

The recitation of these stories at the wedding/feasts of humble 
folk enlarged the meaning of the contingent act. Yet the rele-' 
vance of the stories is not confined to the union of male and 
female. The bride as a rose among thorns may be compared 
with the quest/objects of other adventures, such objects as the 
Sword of Light, Vessels of Plenty, or the Water of Life. Like 
Psyche in her search for Cupid, Jason in his quest for the Golden 
Fleece has to perform tasks very similar to those imposed upon 
Kulhwch by Ysbaddaden Benkawr, and quests for marvellous 
objects, no less than ‘Wooings’, often end with a magic flight 
from the pursuing forces of the underworld. ‘Wooings’ are 
thus a variant of the quest for ‘the treasure hard to obtain’ which 
man needs for his wholeness and fulfilment, a treasure which 
must ever be wrested from the grasp of an indefatigable foe.

33

We shall now turn to the most extraordinary of all early Irish 
‘Wooings’, a tale which, while it contains a number of elc/- 
ments in common with those we have already discussed, is 
informed by a new theme — ^that of the supernatural rival.®®

The Mac Oc invites his foster/father, Midir, to spend a 
year at the Bruig as his guest. JMidir agrees to do so if the Mac 
C>c will reward him with a worthy chariot, a mantle befitting 
him, and the maiden that surpasses all the maidens of Ireland 
in beauty and gentleness, namely fitain Echraide, daughter of

272 Celtic Heritage

Ailill, King of Ulster. The Mac (3c goes to Ulster to seek 
fitain, but her father raises difficulties. The Mac (3c offers to 
buy her, and Ailill sets him the three tasks of clearing twelve 
plains, draining the land by making twelve rivers flow from it 
to the sea, and paying the maiden’s weight in gold and silver. 
With the help of the Dagda, each of the first two tasks is 
accomplished in a single night and, with the bride/price duly 
paid, the Mac (3c brings Etain home to Midir. After his first 
night with her, Ivlidir is also given the chariot and the mantle 
he asked for.When the year is ended, Midir departs with Etain to his own 
land at Bri L&h. But his first wife, Fuamnach, who is skilled 
in magic, resents JEtain’s presence and, striking her with a rod 
of scarlet quicken/tree as she sits on a chair in the middle of the 
house, she turns her into a pool of water. Fuamnach then goes 
to her foster^Father, the wizard Bresal, and the wifeless Midir 
leaves the house to the pool into which Etain has been trans^ 
formed. Presently, the pool turns into a worm and the worm 
into a purple fly as big as a man’s head. The sound of her voice 
and the hum of her wings give forth sweet music, her fragrance 
and bloom banish hunger and thirst, and the spray shed from 
her wings cures all sickness and disease. In this form Etain be-- 
comes Midir’s constant companion — ^and he knows that she 
is Etain. But Fuamnach comes again to Midir and with 
powerful spells from Bresal she wafts Etain away in a magic 
wind so that for seven years she is unable to settle anywhere save 
on the rocks and waves of the ocean.

At last, the fly alights on the breast of the Mac <3c on the 
mound of the Bruig. He welcomes her as ‘Etain, the careworn 
wanderer’, takes her to his house, dresses her in purple raiment 
and lodges her in his ‘sunbower’, which he takes with him 
wherever he goes. Presently, Fuamnach hears of the love and 
honour the Mac Oc bestows on £tain, and, pretending that she 
wishes to make peace between her husband and his foster.'son, 
she induces Midir to summon the Mac 6c to him. Meanwhile, 
she goes secretly to the Bruig and blasts Etain out of her sun/

JVoom£S vjiJVoom£S vji

bower on the same flight as before for seven years. Ultimately, 
in the time of King Conchobar, she lands on the rooftree of a 
house in Ulster and falls into the golden beaker that stands be/ 
fore the wife of the champion £tar. The woman swallows her 
with the drink and she is reborn of her. One day when Etain, 
now daughter of £tar, is bathing in the estuary with her fifty 
maidens, a splendidly/dressed horseman approaches and utters 
a lay alluding to her pre/history and the strife that will ensue 
because of her.The scene now moves to Tara where Eochaid Airem is high/ 
king. The king’s subjects refuse to convene the festival of Tara 
because he has no queen. Eochaid dispatches envoys to seek 
the fairest maiden in Ireland, saying that none shall be his wife 
save a woman that none of the men of Ireland has known before 
him. They find Etain daughter of £tar for him and he marries 
her. At the festival of Tara the king’s brother, Ailill, falls in 
love with £tain and he becomes ill lest his honour should be 
stained. The king’s physician finds that he is suffering from 
one of the two pains that kill a man and that no physician can 
heal — ^the pain of love and the pain of jealousy. Then the king 
goes on a circuit of Ireland, leaving Etain to look after the dying 
man and to perform his last rites. But fitain’s presence alle/ 
viates AiHll’s sickness, and after eliciting the cause of his trouble 
she promises to become his paramour on a hill above the court. 
Thrice £tain goes to the trysting/place at the agreed time, but 
on each occasion sleep prevents Ailill from keeping his appoint/ 
ment. Instead, a man in Ailill’s form appears to her. He 
addresses her as Etain Echraide, daughter of King Ailill, and de/ 
dares himself to be Midir of Bri Ldth, her former husband. 
It was he who had caused Ailill’s love/sickness and his sleep, 
and he has come in his place to ask her to join him in his own 
land. She refuses to elope with him, but says she will go 
willingly if her husband bids her.

One summer day. King Eochaid arises and climbs the ter/ 
race of Tara, and there he is surprised to see a finely/dressed 
stranger, for the courts have not yet been opened. The stranger 
s

274 Celtic Heritage274 Celtic Heritage

announces himself as Midir of Bri Leith and tells the king he 
has come to play Jidchell with him. When Eochaid says his 
board is in the queen’s room and that she is still asleep, 
Midir produces his own silver board with men of gold and 
bronze. It is left to Midir to fix the stake and he promises the 
king fifty beautiful dark grey steeds with their enamelled reins. 
Midir loses and departs with his board. Next morning 
Eochaid finds him again on the terrace and with him the fifty 
steeds. This time Midir offers a still more marvellous stake, 
but Eochaid, warned by his foster-<father to be careful, imposes 
the famous great tasks on Midir, namely, to clear Meath of 
stones and to put rushes over Tethba, a causeway over Moin 
Lamraige and a wood over Br^fne. Midir protests, but under/ 
takes the tasks on condition that no one watches. Eochaid, 
however, bids his steward spy, and it appears to him as 
though all the men in the world are at work, with Midir 
directing operations from the top of a mound they have made 
with their clothes. The tasks completed, Midir comes again to 
Eochaid with ‘an evil look on him’ and rebukes him for the 
unreasonable hardship he has imposed on him. Eochaid is 
ready to make amends, and again they play Jidchell. ‘What shall 
the stakes bej’ asks Eochaid. ‘The stake that either of us shall 
wish,’ says Midir. Eochaid loses, and Midir then declares his 
wish: ‘My arms around £tam and a kiss from her.’ After a 
silence, Eochaid promises: ‘Come a month from to/day and 
that shall be given thee.’On the appointed day Eochaid locks the courts and sets the 
best warriors and the war/bands of Ireland each encircling the 
other around Tara. Etain serves that night, for the serving of 
drink is a special gift of hers. To the astonishment of the hosts, 
Midir appears in the midst of the house in all his splendour 
and demands what has been promised. When Eochaid pre/ 
varicates, Midir discloses that Etain has agreed to join him if 
Eochaid sells her. *I will not sell you indeed,’ says Eochaid, 
‘but let him put his arms round you in the middle of the house 
as you are.’ ‘It shall be done,’ says Midir. Taking his weapons

Wooiftp 275

in his left hand, and with the woman in his right arm, he 
bears her away through the skylight of the house. The hosts 
rise up in shame around the king, but all they see are two swans 
flying round Tara and going in the direction of Sid ar Temuin.It is decided to dig up every ^/i.^mound in Ireland until 
£tain is regained. Eochaid and his men spend more than a 
year and three months searching and digging — and what they 
dig by day is replaced by night. Eventually, as they are razing 
Sid Breg Leith, Midir appears and reproaches them for the 
wrong they are doing him. Did Eochaid not sell him his wife? 
When Eochaid refuses to yield, Midir tells him that, on the 
understanding that the king will do him no more harm, his 
wife will be returned to him at the third hour on the morrow. 
When the hour comes, Eochaid and his company are baffled 
by the appearance of fifty women all in the form and raiment of 
fitain, with a grey slut before them. They tell Eochaid to choose 
his wife now, or bid one of them stay with him. Eochaid recalls 
that his wife was the best in Ireland at serving drink: T shall 
recognize her by her serving.’ Twenty/five of the women are 
placed on either side of the house with a vessel filled with 
liquor in the middle between them, and they serve from each 
side in turn. It comes to the last but one and Eochaid says of 
her: ‘This is Etain, though it is not her serving’ — and the rest 
of the women depart.

It is Midir, however, who gets in the last sally. One fine day 
he appears to Eochaid and his wife and after again rebuking the 
king for his unfair behaviour he tells him that £tam was pregx 
nant when he took her away and she had given birth to a 
daughter. It is not his former wife but his own daughter that 
Eochaid has chosen as his present wife. By this time the 
daughter is herself with child — ^and the rest of the tale has 
already been told in this book as the story of the incestuous 
birth of Conaire Mor.

Unlike the stories we have already discussed, this tale does 
not say that King Eochaid married a woman from another 
world. On the contrary, his wife was to him the daughter of

2'}& Celtic HeritageUnlike the stories we have already discussed, this tale does 
not say that King Eochaid married a woman from another 
world. On the contrary, his wife was to him the daughter of

2'}& Celtic Heritage

Star, a champion of Ulster, and he had to undertake no 
arduous journey to the Other World to win her. Yet, the tale 
appears to demonstrate the same principle as we found in the 
previous tales — ^that the woman, though in mortal guise, is 
essentially a being from another world. As Olwen hails 
‘geographically’ from the Other World, JEtain hails from it 
‘historically’, and it has by no means finished with her. She 
turns out to be as mysterious as any fairy bride, for she has a 
complicated history of previous existences. Of all this she her/ 
self has no conscious memory, and her husband, who has made 
a point of marrying ‘a woman that none of the men of Ireland 
had known before him’, is unaware of the fact that he has a 
supernatural rival.The supernatural suitor seems to correspond to the Indian 
Gandharva, whose presence, as we have observed, is considered 
necessary for conception. At weddings, the Gandharva is a 
kind of rival who, to the last, disputes the bridegroom’s pos/ 
session of the bride.®® The few references to the Gandharvas 
(in the plural) in the Rig Veda show them to be spirits of the 
air or of the waters, but other texts associate them with moun/ 
tains, caves, and forests, with the world of the dead, and with 
animals. They are half-man and half-bird. Their wives or 
mistresses, the Apsaras, appear as water nymphs. The Gand/ 
harvas have charge of i-owa, or they steal soma; they are skilled 
in medicine and they are fond of women. They also appear as 
singers and musicians who attend the feasts of the gods, while 
from the time of the Mahdhhdrata their name also denotes human 
musicians. The Centaurs of Greek mythology are said to be 
cognate figures; one of the exploits most frequently attributed 
to them is the abduction of a betrothed woman or a bride. In 
the Celtic countries there are stories of the abduction of brides 
by fairies,®® while the ‘straw/boys’ (youths disguised in straw 
suits and masks) who appear as uninvited guests at wedding 
festivities, the leader claiming the right to dance with the bride,® ^ 
seem to have a role which corresponds still more closely to that 
of the Gandharvas.

Wooings 277Wooings 277

While the Gandharvas are the special personifications of the 
supernatural lover, it is said in India that a woman is never 
without a husband. Until she is four years of age she is the wife 
of Candra (Soma); then she becomes in turn the wife of the 
Gandharva and of Agni, after which she becomes the wife of 
her human husband.®^ The order of these four seems to sym/' 
bolize a process of descent or of coming to earth, for Candra 
is the moon, the Gandharvas are spirits of the air, while Agni 
(fire) presides over the earth. The details of Indian marriage 
rites also imply the possession of the bride by each of these 
divinities in turn, and such a doctrine would explain the nup/' 
tial continence which used to be customary in many parts of 
Western Europe. The order of precedence in Brittany is striking 
in the light of the Indian teaching. The first night was the night 
of the Good God, the second that of Saint Joseph, the third 
that of the Patron Saint, and the fourth the husband’s night.®*A welhknown Indian story®^ tells of a king named Puru-- 
ravas whom Urvashi, an Apsara, married on condition that 
he embraced her three times each day, but never against her 
will, and that he did not let her see him undressed. But the 
Gandharvas, considering that her absence had been long, con^ 
spired to get her back. One night, they earned off the two pet 
lambs that were tied to her bed, and Pururavas leaped out to 
pursue them. At this they filled the sky with lightning, and 
Urvashi, seeing her husband naked, vanished. Searching for 
her in anguish, the king saw a flock of swans on a lake and 
they revealed themselves to him as Apsaras with Urvashi 
among them. She took pity upon him and told him to come on 
the last night of the year (by which time their son would have 
been born), and he should stay with her one night. He did so 
and before he left the golden palace where they had met, the 
Gandharvas offered him a wish. Forewarned by Urvashi, 
Pururavas replied, ‘Let me be one of yourselves,’ and, his 
wish granted, he was transformed into a Gandharva and 
dwelled with Urvashi evermore. According to another version 
she returned with him to dwell on earth. Like Urvashi, the

278 Celtic Heritage

otherworld brides of the heroes of folktales have the pecu/ 
liarity of beeoming approachable at turning points in the year. 
The Irish ‘Dream of Oengus (the Mac ( 5 c)’®® offers a close 
parallel to the latter part of the Indian story.Oengus pines for the love of a beautiful maiden who for the 
span of a year appears to him at night in his sleep and plays to 
him upon a timpdn. On the advice of a physician he seeks the 
help of his mother, Boand, but a year’s search for the maiden 
proves of no avail. Then his father, the Dagda, is consulted, 
and eventually Bodb, king of the sid of Munster, whose know-- 
ledge is celebrated throughout the whole of Ireland. After a 
year’s searching, Bodb discovers her at Loch Bel Dracon and 
Oengus recognizes her in the midst of a hundred^and/fifiy 
maidens, every pair joined by a silver chain. She is Caer Ibor/ 
meith, daughter of Ethal Anbuail from Sid Uamain in Con^ 
nacht. The Dagda has no power over her, neither has her 
father to whom they go to ask for her. The latter tells them that 
she spends every other year in the form of a bird and that next 
Samain she will be on Loch Bd Dracon with a hundred-'and/ 
fifty swans about her. The Dagda sends his son to the lake on 
that day and there he sees the hundred-'and/fifty white birds 
with their silver chains and golden caps. Oengus, sdll in 
human shape, calls the maiden to him, promising to return 
with her into the lake. He puts his arms around her and sleeps 
with her in the form of a swan. They circle the lake three times 
and then, with Oengus’s promise fulfilled, they fly to his sid, 
where their song lulls the people to sleep for three days. And 
the maiden remains there with him.

The equation of the swan^maidens and fairy brides of Celtic 
story with the Indian apsaras seems a reasonable one, and 
Oengus thus becomes, at least temporarily, a ‘Gandharva’. 
Scholars have dubbed him the Geldc God of Love, and it is 
noteworthy that Kama, ‘the Indian Eros’, is also called ‘the 
Gandharva’.®*

CHAPTER XIV

Elopements

‘To separate us two is to separate children of one home, 
it is to separate body from soul . .

Grainnc’s sleep/song for DiarmaidCHAPTER XIV

Elopements

‘To separate us two is to separate children of one home, 
it is to separate body from soul . .

Grainnc’s sleep/song for Diarmaid

Irish storytellers had a distinct class of tales known as Elope-- 
ments (aitheda), and another called Loves (sercd), which portray 
the eternal triangle of two men in conflict over one woman, 
and the clash between morality and erotic love. The best-- 
known of these tales are ‘The Exile of the Sons of Uisliu’ and 
‘The Pursuit of Diarmaid and Grainne’, while ‘Trystan and 
Esyllt’, an Elopement whose renown rivals that of the Tale of 
Troy, stems from Welsh or ‘British’ tradition. There are in 
addition diverse less elaborate variations on the same theme, 
both as independent tales and as motifs within other tales, to 
which we shall have occasion to refer. But we shall begin with 
a resume of an early recension of ‘The Exile of the Sons of 
Uisliu’,^ which was already in writing over a thousand years ^o.

One night King Conchobar and the men of Ulster were 
feasting at the house of Feidlimid, the king’s storyteller, and 
the storyteller’s wife though pregnant was serving them. As 
they were about to retire, the child in the woman’s womb 
saeamed, and Cathbad the druid foretold the birth of Der^ 
driu, a girl of surpassing beauty, who would bring great sorrow 
to Ulster. The men of Ulster wished to kill her at birth, but 
Conchobar ordered her to be reared as a wife for himself. No 
one except her foster-'parents and Lebarcham, the womans 
satirist to whom naught could be refused, was admitted to the 
house where Derdriu was being brought up, and there, coiv 
cealed from the eyes of men, she grew into the most beautiful 
girl who had ever been seen in Ireland. One winter’s day, seeing

28 o Celtic Heritage28 o Celtic Heritage

her foster/father skinning a calf on the snow and a raven alight-- 
ing to drink the blood, she declared to Lebarcham that beloved 
would be the man who would have hair as black as the raven, 
cheeks as red as the blood and a body as white as the snow. 
Lebarcham replied that Noisiu son of UisHu was such a man, 
and from then on Derdriu pined for a glimpse of him.

Noisiu and his two brothers, the three sons of Uisliu, were 
valiant warriors, equal in prowess to all the other warriors of 
Ulster combined, and they were so swift that they could run 
down their quarry on foot. One day Noisiu, alone on the ram-- 
part of Emain, uttered his musical war.-cry — a. cry which gave 
pleasure to all who heard it and induced cows to increase the 
yield of their milk by two/thirds. Derdriu escaped from her 
confinement and ran past him. ‘Fair is the heifer that goes past 
me,’ he cried. ‘Well may the heifers be great,’ she said, ‘in a 
place where there are no bulls.’ ‘You have the bull of the whole 
province, the king of the Ulstermen,’ said he. She replied that 
she preferred a young bull like him, and when he demurred 
she sprang upon him and, seizing his two ears, cried: ‘these 
will be two ears of shame and of mockery unless you take me 
away with you.’On hearing Noisiu’s story, his brothers and their men resigned 
themselves fatalistically to leaving the province with him and 
Derdriu, though they knew that evil would ensue. For a long 
time they wandered through Ireland, pursued by Conchobar 
and the Ulstermen, and then they crossed to Scotland, where 
after dwelling for a time in the wilderness, they entered the 
service of the king. Soon, however, their lives were again in 
danger, for the king of Scotland had designs upon Derdriu. 
Learning of their pHght, the men of Ulster persuaded Concho^ 
bar to allow them to return under his protection, and Fergus, 
Dubthach, and Conchobar’s own son, Cormac, were sent as 
sureties. On their return, however, the three sureties were side-- 
tracked at the instigation of Conchobar, and Noisiu and his 
brothers were slain at Emain by Eogan son of Durthacht who 
had been entrusted to kill them. Derdriu was bound and

28 i

Elopements

brought to Conchobar. When Fergus and his two comjpanions 
heard of the treachery, they perpetrated a great slaughter in 
Emain and then went into exile to the court of Ailill and Medb 
in Connacht, whence they harried the Ulstermen for sixteen 
years.

For a year Derdriu was with Conchobar, but all that time 
she never smiled. She ate and slept but little and she did not 
raise her head from her knee. Whenever they brought musicians 
to her, she replied with memories of the joy of her life in the 
woods:

‘Though you find sweet the goodly mead 
That battle/'glorious Mac Nessa drinks,

Before now I often have had on the brink of the sea 
Food that was sweeter.

‘Every dme modest Noisiu prepared

The cooking hearth on the fan plain of the forest.

Always sweeter than any honeyed food 
Was what the sons of Uisliu contrived.

‘Though Conchobar, your king, finds 
Pipers and hornblowers melodious.

More melodious to me . , .

Was the strain sung by the sons of Uisliu.’‘Though Conchobar, your king, finds 
Pipers and hornblowers melodious.

More melodious to me . , .

Was the strain sung by the sons of Uisliu.’

Conchobar asked her what she hated most, and she replied, 
‘You yourself and Eogan the son of Durthacht.’ ‘Then,’ said 
Conchobar, ‘you shall be a year with Eogan.’ Next day as 
they were leaving, Derdriu stood behind Eogan in the chariot. 
‘Well, Derdriu,’ said Conchobar, ‘it is the eye of a sheep 
between two rams that you make between me and Eogan!’ 
At this Derdriu shattered her head on a great rock that was in 
front of them, and so she died.

In the Elopement of Diarmaid and Griinne the plot is 
essentially the same. The earliest fragments of this tale date from 
the tenth century, but complete recensions are available only in 
late manuscripts and in oral tradition. Since these are long and

282 Celtic Heritage

complicated stories which lack the restraint of the earlier ver>’ 
sion of ‘Derdriu’, we shall have to be content with a mere 
enumeration of the points that appear relevant to our theme.^

1 At the wedding/feast of Finn and Grainne daughter of 
King Cormac, Grainne administers a sleeping draught to the 
whole gathering with the exception of Diarmaid and three of 
his friends. She puts Diarmaid under of danger and des/- 
truction to elope with her. He is reluctant to break faith with 
Finn, but his companions tell him that he has no alternative 
but to go, ‘for he is a wretched man who violates his gessa.’

2 Pursued by Finn and the Fiana, the couple dwell as fugv 
tives in the wood. Diarmaid builds an enclosure with seven 
doors of wattles and a bed of rushes and birch^tops for Grainne. 
There they are surrounded by the Fiana, but Oengus of the 
Bruig comes to the rescue and bears Grainne away under his 
cloak. Diarmaid leaps clear of the Fiana and follows Oengus 
and Grainne. When Grainne sees him coming, her heart is in 
her mouth for joy.3 Left to themselves, the two continue to wander, neither 
eating where they have cooked nor resting when they have 
eaten, and Diarmaid overcomes the Green Fiana whom Finn 
sends by sea to slay him.

4 For a long time, though they sleep together, ‘there is no sin 
between them’, and Diarmaid leaves raw meat at their campings 
sites as a token of their continence. Then one day as they are 
walking together, water splashes on to Grainne’s leg, and she 
says, ‘Diarmaid, though your bravery is great in battles and 
contests, I think this bold splash is more daring than you are.’ 
‘That is true,’ says Diarmaid, ‘and although I have kept my-' 
self from you for fear of Finn, I can endure your reproaches no 
longer. It is hard to trust a woman.’ And then Diarmaid makes 
a wife of Grainne.

5 Diarmaid gets permission from a one-'cyed giant to hunt in 
his territory, provided he does not touch the berries of his 
magic tree. But Grainne, who is now pregnant, longs for the 
berries, and Diarmaid slays the giant. They climb the tree

Elopements 283

and eat the life-'giving berries; the berries below are bitter 
compared with those above. While they are together in the 
giant’s bed on top of the tree, they are again surrounded by 
Finn and the Fkna, but they escape, Grainne with the help of 
Oengus, Diarmaid by leaping.

6 After further encounters, Oengus makes peace between Finn 
and Diarmaid. Diarmaid and Grainne are given lands in Con.' 
nacht, and there they bring up four sons and a daughter.6 After further encounters, Oengus makes peace between Finn 
and Diarmaid. Diarmaid and Grainne are given lands in Con.' 
nacht, and there they bring up four sons and a daughter.

7 ‘On the last day of the year,’ Diarmaid joins Finn in hunting 
the Wild Boar of Ben Gulban. (The boar is really Diarmaid’s 
foster-brother by whom he is destined to fall.) Diarmaid slays 
the boar, but is wounded by one of its poisonous bristles. Only 
water from the heaUng hands of Finn can save him. Reluctantly, 
Finn goes for water, but, remembering Grainne, he lets it run 
through his fingers. He does this twice, and when he returns 
the third time Diarmaid is dead. Oengus comes and bears 
away the body to the Bruig of the Boyne.

8 The ending varies. In some versions Finn and Grainne are 
ultimately reconciled; in others Grainne mourns Diarmaid as 
long as she lives.

The oldest extant versions of ‘Trystan and Esyllt’ are to be 
found, not in Celtic sources, but in medieval German and 
French Romance. Yet the similarities between them and the 
Irish stories we have outlined are so obvious that scholars have 
long since reached the conclusion that ‘Trystan and Esyllt’ 
is derived from Irish prototypes.® More recently. Professor 
Carney has argued the alternative possibility that ‘Diarmaid 
and Grainne’, and even ‘Noisiu and Derdriu’, are to be traced 
back to a ‘primitive Trystan’.^ However, the question as to 
whether the archetype was a primitive ‘Trystan’, a primitive 
‘Diarmaid’, or a primitive ‘Nofsiu’ does not seriously concern 
us in this work.

An anomalous Welsh version of ‘Trystan’,® preserved in a 
sixteenth-century manuscript, reveals a definite seasonal sym- 
bolism. Trystan elopes with Esyllt, wife of March ap Meirch- 
ion, to the woods of Kelyddon. Trystan’s page is Bach

284 Celtic Heritage284 Celtic Heritage

Bychan (‘Litde Little^one’) and Esyllt’s maid is Golwg 
Hafddydd (‘Aspect of Summer’s Day’). They bring tarts and 
wine with them and a bed of leaves is made for the lovers. 
March complains to Arthur, who then goes with him to seek 
the oifender. After setting out to fight March, Trystan passes 
unharmed through three armies and Kae Hir bears the good 
news to Esyllt who promises him his beloved Golwg Hafddydd 
as a bride if the news be true. When March complains again 
to Arthur, the king advises him to send, first, musicians and 
poets to mollify Trystan and to sing his praises, and then 
Gwalchmei (‘Hawk of May’) as peace^maker. With some per^ 
suasion Trystan is thus brought to Arthur’s presence and he 
promises to obey the king. Arthur arranges a compromise: 
one of the rivals shall have Esyllt while there are leaves on the 
trees, the other when the trees are leafless, and the husband, 
March, is given the choice. He chooses the leafless period be^ 
cause the nights are then longer, and Esyllt, overjoyed, sings a 
stanza saying that the holly, the ivy, and the yew always have 
leaves. And so March loses Esyllt.®Thus, March, the husband, identifies himself with winter, 
the leafless period; Trystan, the lover, with the leaves of summer 
and the open air freedom of the woods. There is ample evidence 
that this is not an isolated adaptation of the theme. According 
to the twelfth/century Vita Gildae, Arthur’s queen, Gwea^ 
hwyfar was carried off to the impregnable fortress of Glaston.' 
bury, the ‘Isle of Glass’, by Melwas, king of Summer Land 
(Somerset). Arthur searched for her for about a year before 
he discovered her whereabouts, and he was about to give 
battle to Melwas when St Gildas intervened and persuaded the 
latter to return the queen.® In a medieval Welsh love poem 
the poet complains that though the night is cold his loved 
one will not admit him, and he adds: ‘Alas! that with a lover’s 
sigh I may not call for the art of Melwas, the robber who, 
through magic and enchantment took away a woman to the 
extremity of the world; he, the deceiver, went into the woods 
among the branched walls of the tree^tops and to-night I

Elopements 285

should like to climb on high as he did.*® Another poem re.' 
fers to ‘the sleep of Melwas under the green cloak’.^® A version 
of the tradition recorded in the Vita Gildae occurs in ‘Le 
Chevalier de la Charrette’ by Chretien de Troyes. Here 
‘Meleagant’, prince of a land whence no one returns, wins the 
queen by combat in a wood on the May festival of Ascension 
Day. The final battle, which takes place a year after the chab 
lenge is given, is fought in a glade where the herbage is fiesh 
at all seasons.^ ^ In Malory’s work, the queen and her com-' 
panions, all dressed in green and bedashed with herbs, moss 
and flowers, are a^-maying in the woods and fields, when 
‘Mellyagraunce’ and 160 men attack them and carry off the 
queen.^®The association, in this tale, of abduction with May, the 
beginning of the summer half of the year, and with the custom 
of maying, is particularly significant, and so is the perennial 
May/Day battle inaugurated by the abduction of Creiddylad 
daughter of Lludd Llawereint. Creiddylad was affianced to 
Gwythyr son of Greidawl* but before he had slept with her 
Gwyn ap Nudd (in whom God had set the spirit of the demons 
of Annwfn) came and carried her off by force. When Arthur 
heard of this he came to the North and commanded Gwyn to 
set her free. ‘This is the peace that was made: the maiden 
should remain in her father’s house unmolested by either side, 
and there should be battle between Gwyn and Gwythyr each 
May/Calends for ever and ever, from that day till doomsday; 
and the one of them that shall be the victor on doomsday, let 
him have the maiden.’^®

This idea of an annual combat may account for the inter.' 
vals of a year which occur between events in a number of other 
tales. Pwyll, who in the form of the grey.'clad Arawn, Lord 
of Annwfn, defeated Hafgan (‘Summer White’) in what 
appears to have been a yearly combat and gained for himself 
the title of Head of Annwfn, is invited to wed Rhiannon a

* Cieidawl: ‘Ardent’.

ZB6

Celtic Heritage* Cieidawl: ‘Ardent’.

ZB6

Celtic Heritage

year after he has met her. Gwawl (‘Light’) appears at the 
wedding.&ast and tricks Pwyll into yielding Rhiannon to 
him. Rhiannon obtains from Gwawl a year’s delay before 
their nuptials, and at the end of the year Pwyll in turn intrudes 
upon the wedding/feast, overcomes Gwawl by a humiliating 
trick and regains his bride.^* Similarly when Brandubh,* 
King of Leinster, wins Mongan’s wife from him by a trick, 
she exacts from her new master a year’s delay, and at the end of 
the year Mongan recovers her by another trick.^® CuRoi mac 
Dairi, ‘the man in the grey mantle’, from Corco Duibne, wins 
BMthnat (‘Little Flower’) from the Ulstermen and carries her 
to his abode after defeating and humiliating CuChulainn. At 
the year’s end, CiiChulainn elopes with Blathnat after killing 
CuRoi with her connivance.^® In this instance, however, the 
battle takes place at Samain. According to the version we have 
followed here, Blathnat had become CuRof s wife — as Perse/' 
phone became the wife of Hades — but in another version she 
belonged first to CdChulainn, and CuRoi came three times to 
demand her from him, each time at the end of a year.^^ Blath/ 
nat’s name connects her with the Welsh Blodeuedd (‘Flowers’), 
the unfaithful wife that was magically made for Lieu Llaw 
Gyffes from the flowers of the oak and the broom and the 
meadowsweet.

2

These stories have been correlated with seasonal customs in 
which a mock^battle is staged between a personification of 
summer, clad in green or white and crowned with flowers or 
ribbons, and a personification of winter clad in furs and 
crowned with holly.^® But less attention has been given to the 
fact that the elopers’ transgression of marriage ties also finds 
direa expression in folk-'custom. A correlation of freedom and 
eroticism with summer, particularly with May, the first month

* *BIack/K.aven’.

Elopements 287* *BIack/K.aven’.

Elopements 287

of summer, and especially with the first of May, survives in 
popular belief. May is the ‘merry month’, the month of ‘may^ 
ing’, of dancing and of love/making, ‘When merry lads are 
playing . . . each with his bonny lass.’ To Welsh poets of the 
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. May was pre/eminently 
the month of love and of extra^marital relations. One poet 
closely associates this month with a return to a primeval free-' 
dom in these matters:

‘Before there was the law of a pope or his trouble,

Each one made love 
Without blame to his loved one.

Free and easy enjoyment will be without blame.

Well has May made houses of the leaves —

There will be two assignations, beneath trees, in concealment.

For me, myself and my dear one.’^®

Love.'poems ascribed to the greatest of these poets, Dafydd ap 
Gwilym, are replete with praises of May, the three months of 
summer, the woods, the leaves, the song of birds, and the 
green bower.

Addressing a nun he has fancied, he or a later poet says:

‘Is it true, the girl that I love.

That you do not desire birch, the strong growth of summers 
Be not a nun in spring.

Asceticism is not as good as a bush.

As for the warrant of ring and habit,

A green dress would ordain better.

Come to the spreading birch.

To the religion of the trees and the cuckoo.’^®

The poems abound with lines associating the birch/tree with 
love. The lover’s bower usually stood beneath a birch-'tree or in 
a birch-'bush; wreaths of birch were presented as love/tokens, 
and in Wales the May.'pole was usually a birch/tree.

Dafydd ap Gwilym’s most celebrated paramour, Morfudd, 
‘god.'daughter of May’, was a married woman (‘I love only a 
girl who has a husband’, says another poet). Dafydd sends birds

288 Celtic Heritage288 Celtic Heritage

and animals as love/messengers to invite both girls and married 
women to trysts in his house of leaves, and there is throughout 
a contempt for chastity and an implication that they should 
answer the call of May and Summer. The despised husband, 
styled Yr Eiddig (‘The Jealous One’, the cuckold), does not 
like summer:

‘To hear the song of the little birds of May,

And fresh leaves, wounded him.’®^

‘Winter has been given to men of his age;

Summer belongs to lovers.’

And indeed, the husband seems to be in full possession in 
winter. January, the black month, ‘forbids all to love’. The 
poet bitterly complains that he is forlorn in the cold and the 
frost outside the window of his beloved. She is under Eiddig’s 
roof and when he flees alone to the birch grove he finds 
nothing but desolation there.^®

It has not been left to us to connect these ideas of erotic 
liberty with the elopement tales: poetry and tradition do that 
for us. Depicting himself outside his beloved’s window on a 
cold night, Dafydd ap Gwilym contrasts his luck with that of 
Melwas. Although, in various poems, he likens his loved one 
to several of the beautiful women of Welsh tradition, it is the 
story of Trystan and Esyllt that fully mirrors his own situation. 
He compares himself with Trystan and calls his love the ‘niece 
of Esyllt’, or ‘a second Esyllt*, while a poem sometimes attri-' 
buted to him®* says that Eiddig, ‘Esyllt’s husband’, loves neither 
play nor nightingale nor cuckoo nor fox nor hound nor bush 
nor song nor hazeknuts nor leaves.Various impressions on rocks and megaliths in Ireland are 
known as ‘Beds of Diarmaid and Grainne’, the beds on which 
the lovers slept as they eluded Finn and the Fiana. ‘Modern 
travellers report that on asking village girls to accompany 
them to the localities in question, they found them visibly 
embarrassed. Further inquiries elicited the information that a 
girl accompanying a stranger of the opposite sex to one of these

Elopements 289

“beds” cannot refuse him any favour that he may ask of her.’®® 
The Beds of Diarmaid and Grainne also promote fertility. It 
is said that if a barren woman goes with her husband to one 
of these beds she will be cured.®® In terms of our interpretation 
of Birth Stories, the ‘third factor’ essential for conception is 
present here.The profanity and laxity of May^Day celebrations in 
Britain were condemned by several sixteenth/' and seventeenth/- 
century reformers. It was the custom for large parties of both 
sexes to go to the woods on May Eve to spend the night in 
pastimes there and return in the morning with branches of 
birch and other trees. Stubbes, who castigates the Mayz-pole 
as ‘this stinking idol’, testifies on what he claims to be im-- 
peccable authority ‘that of forty, threescore, or a hundred maids 
going to the wood over night, there have scarcely the third part 
of them returned home again undefiled.’® ^ Of May customs 
in France, C. B. Lewis concludes: ‘They all go to show that 
the May^Day fetes originally were a festival of love, but I 
should add, of love outside the ties of marriage. On this occa.- 
sion the sexes, both married and unmarried, were exhorted to 
indulge freely in love, and many May songs and “Chansons 
de malz-mariee” contain an apotheosis of free love together with 
scorn and contempt of marriage.’ Lewis has correlated these 
customs with the idealization of love outside marriage in the 
poetry of the Troubadours. Particularly relevant to our argu^ 
ment is his reference to a passage in the Provencal poem Fla-' 
menca which describes May/'Day fetes and in conclusion sug/- 
gests that if the husband raises objections his wife should say: 
‘Silence, go away, for in my arms my lover is lying, Kalenda 
Maya — ^the First of May!’®*

Not without reason has it been believed that it is unlucky to 
bring Mayflowers into the home, that it is unlucky to marry 
in May or to marry in green, and that ‘May cats’ bring mis^ 
fortune, or that they carry snakes into houses.®® May is the 
month of the open air and of love, and for that reason every/- 
thing connected with it is a threat to home life and conjugal

Celtic HeritageCeltic Heritage

happiness. In parts of Central Europe it is said that one should 
not marry in May, when whores and knaves go to church, or 
when every ass is in love. It is also said that marriages made in 
May last for only one summer,®® a saying that accords with a 
reference in an Irish law-'book to Beltaine as the usual time 
for divorce.®^ Hallowe’en, on the contrary, was the auspicious 
time for marriage divinations. In the Shetlands and northern 
Scotland until recent times, winter was the popular marriage 
season;®® in Ireland, as in other countries, the period between 
Christmas and Lent was a great time for match/making and 
marriages, and at Shrovetide, unmarried adults were subject 
to mockery.®® But in May, it was not the unmarried but the 
unloving that were ridiculed. Thus, in parts of Wales young 
men used to fix bunches of flowers tied with ribbons to the 
houses of the girls they loved, but to the door or window of a 
prude or a girl who had jilted her lover they fixed a horse’s 
skull or the straw effigy of a man.®* (Esyllt’s husband was 
March, ‘Horse’.)®®

This regime is remarkably similar to the custom in ancient 
China.®® There, the season of marriages extended from shortly 
after the autumn equinox to shortly after the spring equinox, 
and towards the end of this period young men and women 
who had remained single for too long were bidden to marry. 
On the other hand, the idea of love was linked with spring.

and with the return of this season young girls and youths 
assembled and sang songs of love. They entered the woods 
(south or east of the town) where they gathered flowers, and 
individual couples went apart and indulged in love-making. 
But like the £andharva^pe of marriage in India — ‘a union 
between lovers without the consent of mother and father’ — ®’' 
such unions were not universally approved, or at least not 
for all classes.The polarity of summer and winter and of the spring and 
autumn festivals which inaugurate the two main seasons is

Elopements 2$t

correlated in Chinese thought with a whole range of other 
polarities. The spring festival is a festival of youth as well as of 
betrothals, the autumn festival a festival of old age as well as 
the time for setting up house. Women played a leading part 
in the spring rites (as in European May customs), men in the 
autumnal ones. ‘When the Chinese philosophers wished to 
build up a theory of love they explained that in springtime 
the girls were attracted by the boys, and in autumn the boys 
by the girls, as though each of them in turn feeling his nature 
to be incomplete was suddenly seized with the irresistible desire 
to perfect it.’®®The ‘Elopements’ and ‘Wooings* of Celtic tradition seem 
to constitute a similar pair of contraries. In the ‘Wooings’ man 
is the suitor while the role of the maiden is largely passive, but 
in the ‘Elopements’ it is the woman who chooses the man and 
compels him to do her will. This difference may account for 
the origin of the two uses of difficult tasks and riddles in tales 
which end in marriage. In the one the obstacle is set by the 
woman or her guardian, in the other by the young man. The 
polarity of ‘husband’ and ‘lover’ in the Elopement tales is also 
the polarity of age and youth, of jealousy and love. The original 
marriage is portrayed as a misalliance. The husband is old 
and has grown/up sons by previous wives. All that Finn 
wanted was a suitable wife, and it was his followers who sug-* 
gested that Grainne would suit him. She had already refused 
all the kings and champions of Ireland, and to her father’s 
question as to whether she would accept Finn she gave the 
nonchalant reply: ‘If he be a fitting sondndaw for thee, why 
should he not be a fitting husband and mate for me?’®® — a. 
marriage of convenience. We have mentioned that in the oldest 
version of the story she attempted to evade Finn’s suit by setting 
him an ‘impossible task*. ‘Then in an unlucky hour Grainne 
was given to Finn, for they never lived in peace until they 
separated. Finn was hateful to the maiden and such was her 
hatred that she sickened of it.’*® In the medieval German story 
of Tristan, King March has no wish to marry but his subjects

i&i Celtic Heritagei&i Celtic Heritage

urge him to do so. Like Grainne he tries to avoid his fete. 
Two quarrelling sparrows drop a woman’s hair from their 
beaks, and March proclaims that he will marry no woman 
other than the owner of that hair. Ironically enough, it is 
Tristan who finds him Isolt whose hair it is*^ — and thus the 
quarrel of two men over one woman begins. Again, Con-- 
chobar’s earmarking of Derdriu for himself on the day of her 
birth was hardly an expression of love, while in the more 
elaborate recensions his sensual lust contrasts unfavourably 
with the unselfish devotion of Noisiu. Indeed, the husband in 
these tales has more in common with the possessive and jea-- 
lous father than with the young suitor of the ‘Wooings’.

The lover, on the other hand, is a dashing young warrior 
and more than a match for his fellows in manly feats. Yet, he 
combines valiance with such feminine qualities as beauty, a 
musical voice, sweet words and charm. Diarmaid is said to have 
a lovednducing spot on his forehead and he is ‘the best lover of 
women and of maidens in the world’.^^ A fifteenth.'century lay 
refers to the story of his death as a ‘tale that makes women 
sorrowful’ and closes with the lament:

‘Master (i) and charmer of women.

Son of <5 Duibhne of swift victories,

Wooing has not lifted her eye

Since the clay was placed on his cheeks . .

In each of our three elopement tales, the lover is related to the 
wronged husband through the female Hne: he is a sister’s son,^* 
We have already noted the ambiguous position of this class 
of nephew in various societies and the peculiar relationship 
between him and his mother’s brother. In general, the maternal 
uncle is a kind of female father to a female son— and the latter 
is often allowed to take great liberties with his uncle and his 
uncle’s possessions.*®The lover’s connections with the Other World should also 
be noted. Diarmaid ‘son of Donn’ hails from West Munster;*® 
his foster/father, and the guardian spirit of his elopement with

Elopements 293

Grainne, was the Mac C)c (of Tuatha De Danann), foster-' 
son and love-'messenger of £tam’s supernatural lover. The 
ability to cause cows to increase their yield of milk was a gift 
which Noisiu shared with Tuatha De Danann. In continental 
literature, Tristan is the son of Blanchefleur, as Eros is reputed 
to be the son of Aphrodite whom the Cretans called ‘Flower-' 
lady’ {Anthia}.^'^ Blanchefleur died in childbed in a ship at 
sea and Tristan was cut from her womb. According to a 
twelfth/century German poem, Lancelot, Queen Gwenever’s 
lifedong lover, was borne away when only a year old and reared 
by the Lady of the Lake in Meidelant, ‘The Land of 
Maidens’.** To generalize: the man upon whom the ftustrated 
wife fixes her affections is, by virtue of his nature and other'- 
world associations, a human personification of the supers 
natural lover— the beautiful Gandharva — ^who interferes with 
marriages. He is the feminine man — ^not an effeminate man 
in whom the female aspects of the male triumph over the mas^ 
cuhne— but ‘a woman’s man’. As Heinrich Zimmer says of 
Lancelot: ‘He represented something very different from the 
heroic medieval ideals of his companions, something much less 
timely, more profoundly human and enduring. Sir Lancelot 
is an incarnation of the ideal of manhood that exists, not in 
the world of mascuHne social action, but in the hopes and 
fancies of the feminine imagination.’*® Just as the ‘Wooings’ 
depict the mythological inversion of marriage from the male 
standpoint, so the ‘Elopements’ may be described as the mytho-- 
logical inversion of marriage from the female standpoint.Such an interpretation explains both the abiding appeal of 
these tales and the fact that, exalted though he is, the dis/ 
possessed husband commands scarcely more sympathy than 
does the bride’s father in the ‘Wooings’. The sympathy rests 
with the elopers, and great pains are taken to establish the 
hero’s innocence. He is the victim of a destiny which works 
through such media as an accidentally drunk love/potion, the 
inadvertent uncovering of the love-'Spot on his forehead, or the 
fortuitous concurrence of his colours in a homely winter’s

294 Celtic Heritage294 Celtic Heritage

scene. With the woman it is different. She is so possessed by 
the passion that questions of guilt and innocence have no 
meaning for her. She lays a compulsion on the hero to escape 
with her, and he is caught between two incompatible obliga-' 
tions, the obligation of loyalty to his kinsman and the obliga-' 
tion of love laid upon him by his kinsman’s wife. He will 
incur shame if he stays; he will incur shame if he goes. He 
submits the riddle to his friends, and according to their judge/ 
ment rather than his own he can do nothing but accept his 
fate, come what may. In some popular versions of ‘Diarmaid 
and Grainne’, Diarmaid counters the gecsa laid upon him by 
Grainne by setting her an impossible task. He charges her not 
to appear before him either by day or by night, clothed or un/ 
clothed, on foot or on horseback, in company or without 
company. She goes to a fairy woman and procures garments 
made from mountain down and she comes to him in these gar/ 
ments, riding on a he/goat in the dusk of the evening.®® There 
are several variations on this theme: T will not take you in soft/ 
ness, and I will not take you in hardness; I will not take you 
without, and I will not take you within; I will not take you on 
horseback, and I will not take you on foot,’ said he. One 
morning Grainne cried to him, ‘Are you within Diarmaids’ 
She was between the two sides of the door on a buck/goat, ‘I am 
not without, I am not within; I am not on foot, and I am not 
on a horse— you must go with me,’ said she.®^ Through this 
device Diarmaid is ritually absolved of guilt. If he did not take 
her by day or by night, without or within, and so on, the logical 
conclusion is that he did not take her at all— he could not 
possibly have done what he did. It is also a symbolical expres/ 
sion of the nature of Grainne’s love, a love which transcends 
the ordinary oppositions of contingent existence and is a law 
unto itself.Several scholars have drawn attention to the similarities 
between the May ceremonies of Europe and the spring/rituals 
conneaed with various cults of the ‘Great Mother’ and her

Elopements 295Several scholars have drawn attention to the similarities 
between the May ceremonies of Europe and the spring/rituals 
conneaed with various cults of the ‘Great Mother’ and her

Elopements 295

youthful, often effeminate, consort, the ‘Dying God’, which 
prevailed in Mediterranean lands — ^rituals in which women 
played a very prominent part. C. B. Lewis derives the Queen 
of May and the sexual liberties associated with that month 
directly from a spread of the cult of the Phrygian goddess 
Cybele in Europe during Roman times. She was a ‘goddess 
of love, especially of free love, of love outside marriage’, and 
allowing for calendrical adjustments, her great festival, the 
Hilaria, would fall on Lady Day and on May Day in alternate 
years.*® But striking as the resemblances undoubtedly are, it 
would be rash to attribute all the material discussed in this 
chapter to a single cultural influence of this kind. With equal 
cogency, A. H. Krappe has shown the similarity between the 
story of Diarmaid and Grainne and that of Adonis and Aphro/ 
dite. Aphrodite, goddess of love and of nature in bloom, fell 
in love with the beautiful Adonis, as Grainne did with Diar^ 
maid, and he became her paramour, though in his case as in 
Diarmaid’s there is a different tradition which says that he was 
innocent of actual congress with her. Aphrodite was the wife 
of Ares, the god of war, as Grainne was the wife of the Jian 
chief. Suspecting an improper relationship between Adonis 
and his wife. Ares sent a wild boar, or himself assumed the 
shape of a wild boar, which fatally wounded Adonis while 
he was hunting. Similarly Finn was believed to have arranged 
the boar-'hunt to allure Diarmaid to his death at the year’s end. 
Both Adonis and Diarmaid went boar-'hunting against his 
mistress’s will. There is a general lament for both. Diarmaid, 
borne away on the Mac Oc’s gilded bier, recalls the annual 
ritual in which the image of the dead Adonis was borne away, 
mourned by women bitterly wailing, while the couches on 
which images of the god and goddess were shown may be 
compared with the ‘Beds of Diarmaid and Grainne’. At shrines 
of Aphrodite women gave themselves to strangers, as we are 
told Irish girls were expected to do at the Beds of Diarmaid and 
Grainne.®®In India too, devotion to the ‘Divine Woman’ has expressed

296

Celtic Heritage

itself in the idealization of adulterous love, witness the Krish^ 
naist form of Vishnuism which dominated the subcontinent 
from the seventh to the eighth century. Disputes in the Ben-- 
galese Courts of Love between the adherents of love of 
‘another’s wife’ and the champions of conjugal love always 
ended with the latter as losers. Professor Eliade writes:®^ ‘The 
exemplary love remained that which bound Radha to Kfsna— 
a secret, illegitimate, “antisocial” love, symbolizing the rupture 
that every genuine religious experience imposes . . . Radha is 
conceived as the infinite love that constitutes the very essence 
of Kfsna.’ ‘Such an abandonment of all social and moral 
values as mystical love implies’ is echoed in Diarmaid’s 
plaint:®® ‘I have forsaken all my people ... I have lost my in/ 
heritance and my comrades ... I have lost the kindness and love 
of the men of Erin and all the Eiann. I have lost delight in 
music; I have lost the right to my own honor. Erin and all 
that are in it have forsaken me on account of thy love and 
affection alone.’ And so, once more in this study, the most holy, 
in its sacrificial aspect, is symbolized by the most disgraceful.Looked at from this point of view, the return of Grainne to 
Finn after Diarmaid’s death, like the reconciliation of Helen 
and Menelaus after the death of Paris, cannot but appear to be 
an unsatisfactory ending. Nevertheless, it accords with the 
seasonal or cyclical nature of the ritual to which we have 
referred. In other versions of the tale Grainne is constant to the 
end of her days.®® Similarly, Tristan and Isolt are buried in 
the same grave; a rosebush over the woman and a vine over 
the man grow together so that they can in no wise be sundered.® 
Recently/recorded versions say that Conchobar caused Derdriu 
and Noisiu to be buried on opposite sides of the loch, so that 
they might not be together in death. Then a young pine grew 
out of each grave ‘and their branches grew towards each other, 
until they entwined one with the other across the loch. And 
Conchobar would have cut them down, but the men of 
Ulster would not allow this, and they set a watch and pro/ 
tected the trees until King Conchobar died.’®®

CHAPTER XV

Adventures

Visits TO A STRANGE LAND and experiences among a 
strange race constitute a substantial part of Celtic mythology, 
and, as in modern fiction, a whole class of tales are known as 
‘adventures’. But whereas the adventures of fiction are con^ 
cerned with escapades among the natives of distant lands or 
planets in this world, the adventures of mythology are experi/ 
enced among the mysterious denizens of a supernatural world. 
In this the Celt is no exception. The prodigies of Asia, Africa, 
and native America may be sufficient to excite the imagination 
of modern man, but for the inhabitants of those continents, no 
less than for the ancient Celts, the adventures worth recording 
are adventures in another ‘dimension’, and the only journeys 
of real significance are journeys between this world and the 
world beyond.‘In Asia, in Polynesia, even in Africa, man’s chief inteb 
lectual preoccupations and speculations are with spiritual 
adventure. ... The lonely pioneering of the soul . . . and 
the defeat or success of its quest forms the principal theme 
in the oral literature of the Old World. . . . Our modern 
fiction is mainly concerned with social Hfe. ... It is a 
valuable achievement of oral literature to show that this 
predominant preoccupation of man with himself— his 
almost total absorption in his temporary physical life — ^is 
a European phenomenon. . . . Directly or indirectly the 
quest for immortality is the most outstanding motif, both 
in Asia and in Polynesia.’^

Every experience of the Other World is in a sense both an 
initiation and a marriage, and no clear line can be drawn be^ 
tween ‘Adventures’ and the tales of youth and courtship

397

398 Celtic Heritage

which we have already discussed. Indeed, the story of how Art 
won a wife is called ‘The Aduentures of Art son of Conn and 
the Courtship of Delbchaem’, while CuChulainn’s initia/ 
tion in the land of Scathach could well be classified with 
‘Adventures’. But there are kinds and degrees of initiation. 
In this chapter we shall deal with Adventures which are not 
initiations into manhood or into a particular vocation, and 
with the love of a supernatural woman who can never be 
brought home as a bride. Our first story is ‘The Adventures of 
Nera’. It is derived from a text written perhaps as early as the 
eighth century, but this, of course, is no indication of the age 
of a story which is so obviously pre.'Christian in its inspiration.®One Eve of Samain, AiUll and Medb were in Rath Crua/ 
chan with their whole household. Two captives had been 
hanged the day before and Ailill now offered any prize he 
might choose to the man who would put a withe round the 
foot of either of the captives on the gallows. Great was the 
terror of Samain Eve; demons would always appear on that 
night. Every man took up the challenge in turn, but quickly 
returned to the house. Then Nera declared that he would have 
the prize and Ailill promised to give him his gold^hilted 
sword if he succeeded.

After Nera had thrice failed to fix the withe, the captive on 
the gallows told him to put a proper peg in it. The task accom-- 
plished, the captive said: ‘By the truth of thy valour, take me on 
thy neck, that I may get a drink with thee. I was thirsty when 
I was hanged.’ Nera carried him to the nearest house, but 
around this house they saw a lake of fire. The captive explained 
that there was no drink there, for the fire was well covered at 
night. Around the next house they saw a lake of water, which 
signified that there was never a washings nor a bath/tub, nor a 
slopxpail in it at night. They found these three vessels in the 
third house. The captive drank from the first two and squirted 
the last sip in the faces of the people that were in the house, so 
that they all died. Hence it is not good to have such water-' 
vessels, or an uncovered fire, in a house after sleeping.

Adventures 299Adventures 299

Nera then carried the hanged man back to his torture and 
returned to Cruachan. There he ‘saw something*. Cruachan 
was burnt and he saw a heap of its people’s heads cut off by 
enemies from the fort. He followed the warriors through the 
cave of Cruachan and saw the heads being displayed to the 
king of the sid. The king called Nera to him and ^er question/ 
ing him he directed him to the house of a single woman and 
ordered him to bring a burden of firewood daily to the royal 
house. The woman welcomed him and, unknown to the king, 
she became his wife.

Every day, as he bore his burden of firewood, Nera saw a 
blind man with a lame man on his neck coming from the 
fort to the well in front of it. At the well, the blind one asked: 
‘Is it there?’, and the lame one replied: ‘It is indeed, let us go 
away.’ Nera asked his wife about this and she explained that 
the two men, one of whom had been blinded and the other 
lamed, were trusted by the king to visit his golden crown which 
was in the well. Then she told him that Cruachan had not 
really been destroyed as he imagined, but that the illusion he 
had seen would come true next Hallowe’en unless he warned 
his people to come and destroy the std. She sent him to them, 
telling him that they would still be around the same cauldron 
as when he left them, and that he should take fruits of summer 
— ^wild garlic, primrose, and golden fern — ^from the sid to sub/ 
stantiate his story. She herself had conceived and would bear 
him a son, and Nera should take his family and his cattle from 
the sid before his people came to destroy it. Finally, she pro/ 
phesied that the crown of Brion would be carried off by 
Aihll and Medb.Nera went to his people and told his tale, and he was given 
the sword Ailill had promised him. At the end of the year he 
returned to the sid to fetch his family and cattle to safety. Then 
the men of Connacht and the Ulster exiles destroyed the sid 
and took out what there was in it. ‘And then they brought away 
the crown of Brion. This crown, the mantle of Loegaire in 
Armagh, and the shirt of Ddnlaing in Kildare in-Leinster are

300

Celtic Heritage

the three wonders of Ireland. Nera was left with his people 
in the sid, and has not come out until now, nor will he come 
till Doom.’^

The strange challenge with which this tale begins and the 
weird affair with the hanged man — a man who is both dead 
and alive — suggests a Hallowe’en ritual, comparable to visits 
ing a graveyard on this night when time and eternity inters- 
mingle, a ritual by which men made contact with other^world 
forces. The similarity between the opening episode and the 
setting of the famous Indian ‘Twenty/five Stories of the Spectre 
in the Corpse’ bears witness to its extreme antiquity. In the 
Indian tale a king, at the behest of a necromancer disguised 
as a beggar ascetic, goes to the place of execution on the night 
of the new moon, cuts down from a tree the body of a hanged 
man and carries it on his back through the eerie cremation 
ground, while a ghost in the corpse tells him didactic stories 
‘to shorten the way’. When the twenty/five stories have been 
told, the dead man warns the king that the necromancer 
intends to kill him as a sacrifice to enhance his own supers 
natural powers. And he teaches him how to outwit the necro/- 
mancer and secure the powers for himself.^In the Irish story, Nera’s experience with the hanged man is, 
as we shall explain in a moment, an object lesson in how to 
withstand the incursions of spirits into the home. Similarly, 
through the knowledge he subsequently gains in the sid he is 
able to turn the tables on the sidyfolk who are conspiring to inx 
vade and to destroy the royal court of Cruachan. Again, Nera’s 
journey in search of water, guided by the superior wisdom of the 
helpless hanged man, seems to foreshadow the journey of the 
blind man to the well of the crown of Brion, guided by the 
eyes of the lame man on his back. He enacts, as though in a 
ritual, the scene which -will eventually lead him to the dis^- 
covery of the other-'world crown.

This crown is mentioned in another Hallowe’en tale,® A 
certain prophetess used to visit King Fingin mac Luchta of

Aiventum 30i

Munstet every Samain and used to relate to him ‘all the occur/ 
rences that took place in Ireland on that sacred night and the 
results that should issue from them until that night twelve/ 
months.’ On one of these occasions, she told him that among the 
wonders of that night would be the revelation of the ‘three chief 
artifacts’ in Ireland. These were the crown of Brion, concealed 
from the Mom'gan in the well of the hill of Cruachan, the 
fiichell of Crimthann which was brought from the secret 
recesses of the sea and hidden in the Rath of Uisnech, and the 
crown of Loegaire in Sid Findacha in Ulster.

Some of the main features of Nera’s initial adventures have 
been preserved in a modern Irish folktale, though the hanged 
man has been superseded by the Devil, and the pagan practices 
are interspersed with Christian ones. The following is a 
shortened version of a schema drawn up by Professor Delargy 
from a detailed examination of thirty/nine variants of this tale 
recorded by the Irish Folklore Commission.®A youth is sent by his father, stepfather, or godfather to 
fetch some lost object from a field, garden, cairn, church, 
churchyard, slab in a churchyard, byre, wood, or cross/roads. 
The youth meets with the Devil and agrees to accompany him 
or to carry him to a house.

For various reasons the Devil is unable to enter the house. For 
example, feet/water has been thrown out and a lake has been 
formed by it around the house, or there is feet/water inside the 
house, or the fire has been smoored and there is a protecting 
wall of fire around the house.

They go to a second house and the Devil fails to enter be/ 
cause of barriers created by saying the Rosary or by having, or 
by sprinkling, holy water in the house. Another deterrent is the 
presence of a crowing cock in the house.

Finally, the Devil enters the third house, which is occupied 
by a quarrelling couple, or a childless or newly/married couple. 
The Devil tells his companion that a son will be born to the 
couple and will become a ‘priest’. As the ‘priest’ will be the 
son of the Devil, those persons wiU be damned who will be

302 Celtic Heritage

present at his first Mass or who will be sprinkled with holy 
water by him.

Eventually the youth, by cutting oflf the head or the hand of 
the Devil’s son or by some other means, prevents him from 
performing the rites. The priest is revealed to all as a devil and 
he disappears in flames. Or, revealed as the Devil’s son, he 
seeks to do penance, and God outwits the Devil in a contest 
for his soul.Inasmuch as he is carried by the hero and warns him of 
impending danger, the Devil in this tale performs the same 
function as the corpse in the Indian story, while the false priest 
who would perform holy rites corresponds to the sorcerer who 
masquerades as an ascetic. When, at the end of the Indian tale, 
the spectre in the corpse ofiers to grant the king a wish as a 
reward for his toils during that strange night, the king asks 
that the twenty/five riddle^tales related by the spectre should be 
made known over the whole earth and remain eternally famous 
among men. The spectre promises that it shall be so, and adds 
that the stories will have the virtue of rendering spectres and 
demons powerless and that ‘even Shiva, the Great God, Over^ 
lord of all the Spectres and Demons, the Master/ Ascetic of the 
Gods, will himselfdo them honour’^ — a pronouncement which 
may well contain a clue to the original status of other Irish 
stories which are now obscure and degenerate folktales.

It is clear from the folktale as from ‘The Adventures of Nera’ 
that a covered/up fire and the absence of bath/water (parti/ 
cularly feet/water) and slops in a house, at night, keep the 
supernatural outside, and this is considered prudent. Such pre/ 
cautions, however, conflict with the folk/custom of preparing 
the house before retirii^ to rest, especially on Hallowe’en, in 
readiness for the nocturnal return of dead relatives and friends. 
As we have already mentioned,® a good fire was prepared, the 
hearth was swept clean, and food and water were left out for the 
expected guests. It was also believed that to throw out water, 
especially feet/water or dirty water generally, interfered with the 
‘good people’ and prevented the dead from returning. But there

Ahentures 303Ahentures 303

are inconsistences in the folklore evidence itself. For example, 
a record from one district® to the effect that ‘no vessel contain^ 
ing dirty water should be left in the kitchen at night’ is directly 
contradicted by a record from another district. The subject 
needs further investigation, but the explanation would appear 
to be that the measures mentioned in the stories keep away all 
supernatural beings whether malevolent or otherwise. To dis/’ 
pense with these measures involves a risk, as does all traffic 
with the supernatural, but without such risk the return of the 
friendly dead must also be suppressed and man must deny 
himself all ‘adventures’.There are other stories about the Cave of Cruachan, some^- 
times called the Hell’s Gate of Ireland. From it came a flock 
of white birds that withered up everything with their breath, 
and equally devastating pigs which could not be counted: 
whenever people tried to count them the count of each person 
would be different.’-® In one of the Undsenchas poems,’-^ ‘the 
horrid Morrigan’ comes out of this same cave, ‘her fit abode’, 
and in ‘The Colloquy of the Ancients’ the immortal daughter 
of Bodb son of the Dagda comes from there to converse with 
Caflte,^® There were other mysterious caves in Ireland as well 
as elsewhere in the Celtic lands. The Fenian tale called ‘The 
Dwelling at C& Chorainn’ begins with Finn seated on his 
huntingz-mound. The three mis-shapen daughters of the local 
chief of Tuatha De Danann, seeking vengeance, sat at the 
mouth of the cave beneath the hill and reeled off bewitched 
hasps of yarn left-handwise from three wry holly-sticks. On 
approaching them, Finn and Conan became entangled in the 
hasps and lost all their strength, whereupon the hags bound 
them and carried them into the cave. All the Fiana were bound 
in the same way except Goll son of Morna, who appeared on 
the scene, slew the hags, released his fellows, and won Finn’s 
daughter for his wife.^® Thus, caves were entrances to the Other 
World. The storytellers had a group of tales called ‘Caves’ 
(in the Lists), but hardly any of those listed have survived in

304

Celtic Heritage

a complete form. ‘The Cave of Ainged’, in List A, is believed 
to be another name for ‘The Adventures of Nera’.^*304

Celtic Heritage

a complete form. ‘The Cave of Ainged’, in List A, is believed 
to be another name for ‘The Adventures of Nera’.^*

Even today, Ireland has what is probably the most famous 
‘cave’ in Europe, St Patrick’s Purgatory,^® which, as its name 
implies, is an entrance to the Underworld. In it is the very 
mouth of Hell. This cave is situated on a holy island in Loch 
Derg. Formerly pilgrims were shut up in it for hours, and 
there they suffered some of the torments of Purgatory. If they 
slept, they ran the risk of being transported to Hell by the Devil. 
The adventures of a certain Knight Owen in this cave com/ 
prise one of the most widely known of medieval ‘Visions’ 
prior to Dante’s. He first encounters demons who show him the 
horrors of Purgatory and of Hell, and then, after he has crossed 
a narrow bridge over the River of Hell, two prelates conduct 
him through Paradise and show him the Gate of Heaven. In 
modern times, the cave has been closed and the ‘purgatory’ 
housed in a chapel. Every year, thousands of barefooted pib 
grims continue to perform the penances of Loch Derg, and the 
climax of the ritual is to spend a sleepless night in prayer at 
this chapel. A twentieth/century pilgrim describes his experi/ 
ence:^®

‘The night shadows had fallen and but for two tapers the 
Chapel was grimly dark. It was something strange and 
weird, without counterpart on this earth, to look round 
at the rows of white haggard faces peering in the fragile 
candlelight. Generations of Gaels have spent a night 
there ... for few of the Irish care to die without a glimpse 
of what they are coming to. All night we kept vigil in 
our prison/house, reciting the next day’s Stations by 
advance. . . . With the fall of night the world slipped 
away. We seemed to stand in a dim place where two 
worlds meet.’It is true that Nera finds himself in a different kind of other/ 
world, but St Patrick’s Purgatory is undoubtedly a Christian/ 
ized version of the kind of ritual with which the Adventures

Aivenium

ofNera were originally connected. There is nothing specifically 
Christian about ritual descents into caves as such; similar 
practices occur in such widely separated initiation rites as those 
of the Mithraic Mysteries and those of certain Australian 
aborigines, and everywhere they symbolize a visit to the world 
beyond. The Siberian shaman in his ritual journey to the 
Underworld takes his little caravan southward ‘over a yellow 
steppe across which a magpie cannot fly’, and then he climbs 
a high mountain. ‘And having climbed, the shaman in his 
song and ritual dance conducts his caravan down into a hole 
in the ground, and what do they find? In his chanted pictures 
we find precisely the paraphernalia of the Buddhist caves which 
lie under the temples of Tibet where hideous sculptures impress 
on the faithful the horrors of the Underworld. . .

2

In our next Hallowe’en story the hero’s adventure is the outcome 
of a malady brought upon him by otherworld agencies. It is 
called ‘The Wasting Sickness of CuChulainn’.^®2

In our next Hallowe’en story the hero’s adventure is the outcome 
of a malady brought upon him by otherworld agencies. It is 
called ‘The Wasting Sickness of CuChulainn’.^®

The Ulstermen are assembled on the Plain of Muirthemne 
to celebrate the feast of Samain. A flock of beautiful birds 
settles on the nearby lake, and all the women long to have a 
pair of them, one for each shoulder. CfiChulainn captures the 
birds, but after he has shared them among the women there 
is none left for his own wife. She, however, far from dis^ 
playing anger or jealousy, is so much at one with her husband 
that she feels as though she herself has distributed the birds 
among the women. CuChulainn promises her that if more 
birds come she shall have the two loveliest of them. Soon they 
see two birds linked by a golden chain on the lake. The birds 
sing a sleep/inducing song and CuChulainn is warned that 
there is some power behind them. He fails to catch them, 
though his spear passes through the wing of one of them, 
and they go under the lake.

Resting with his back against a pillar^-stone, CdChulainn 
u

f

I

3 o(S Celtic HeritageResting with his back against a pillar^-stone, CdChulainn 
u

f

I

3 o(S Celtic Heritage

falls asleep and, in a vision, two women come to him and whip 
him till he is almost dead. After this experience he lies in 
silence for a year on a sick-'bed. As Samain approaches again, 
Oengus son of Aed Abrat* from the Other World appears 
at his bed and invites him to Mag Cruath where he will be 
healed and where Oengus’s sister, Fand,** is longing for him 
to join her. Then CuChulainn stirs himself and goes again to 
the pillar^stone, where he meets one of the two women he saw 
in his vision. She is hi Ban,t wife of Labraid Luathf f of 
Mag Mell.| The previous year, it was CuChulainn’s friend-- 
ship they wished for, and she now brings a message from her 
husband and from her sister Fand, wife of Manannan mac Lir. 
If he will fight for one day against Labraid’s enemies, he shall 
have the love of Fand. CuChulainn sends his charioteer with 
the woman to learn something of her country. They travel in a 
bronze boat to an island in a lake, where they are welcomed by 
Labraid and by Fand and her company of women. The 
charioteer returns and recounts the marvels of the Other 
World. CuChulainn is then visited by Emer, his wife, who 
rebukes him for being prostrated by ‘woman-'love’, but after 
further solicitation by Li Ban and a further reconnaissance by 
the charioteer, he goes to the other-'world island. There he 
defeats Labraid’s enemies and becomes Band’s lover.

CuChulainn spends a month with Fand, and then takes his 
leave, promising to meet her again at Ibor Cind Trachta.tt 
Emer hears of the tryst, and accompanied by her fifty women, 
all armed with whetted knives, she surprises the lovers at their 
trysting--place. CuChulainn protects Fand from the wrath of 
the women, but the reproaches and taunts of his wife weigh 
heavily upon him. Emer says that Fand is perhaps no better

* ‘Light of the Eye’.

** ‘ Gentle’ (explained as an q)ithet for ‘Tear’).* ‘Light of the Eye’.

** ‘ Gentle’ (explained as an q)ithet for ‘Tear’).

f ‘Paragon of Women’.

ft Labraid Luathlam ar Claideb; ‘Labraid Swift Hand on Sword’.

I ‘The Plain of Delight’,

ItlnUkter.

Advmiur& iof

than herself, ‘but all that glitters is fair, all that is new is bright, 
all that is lacking is revered, all that is familiar neglected, until 
all be known. Once you had us in honour together, and we 
should be so again if you wanted it.’ ‘By my word,’ says 
CuChulainn, ‘I do want you, and I shall want you as long as 
you live.’ ‘Leave me then,’ says Band. ‘It is more fitting’, says 
Emer, ‘that I should be abandoned.’ ‘No,’ says Fand, ‘it is I 
who shall be abandoned.’ But her great love for CuChulainn 
troubles her and lamenting she sings:

‘It is I who will go on a journey.

Though I like our adventure best.

Though a man of great fame should come,

I should prefer to stay . . .

‘Alas for one who gives love to another 
If it he not cherished;

It is better for a person to be cast aside 
Unless he is loved as he loves . . .’

Manannan comes from the east to fetch her, and reluctantly she 
decides to go with him. ‘There was a time he was dear to me. 
. . . Love is a vain thing; it vanishes quickly.’ She says that 
CuChulainn has deserted her, and that, in any case, he has 
another consort whereas Manannan has none. The discon^ 
solate CuChulainn wanders through the mountains of Mun-- 
ster, taking neither food nor drink, until the druids give him a 
drink of forgetfulness, a draught of which is also given to Emer 
so that she may forget her jealousy. And Manannan shakes his 
cloak between CuChulainn and Fand so that they shall never 
meet again.In ‘The Adventures of Nera’ the initiative in contacting the 
supernatural comes from the human side. Here, on the con^ 
trary, it is the Other World that beckons and it does so for its 
own purposes. Strife and longing within that strange realm 
impel it to break in and disturb the everyday world of men. 
The guise of sea/birds is again the mode of crossing the

3o8 Celtic Heritage

boundary. Like Pwyll, who as an atonement for the unwitting 
offence of driving away the dogs of Annwfn, places himself at 
the service of its king, CuChulainn falls under the power of 
the Sfd after he has shown violence to its harbingers. The ‘sick^ 
ness’ which overcomes him for a year after his first vision at the 
pillar-'Stone may be regarded as the ‘this world’ aspect of the 
other/world adventure which follows his further visit to the 
same pillar on the subsequent Samain. Similarly in ‘The 
Adventures of Nera’, the second episode is, so to speak, the 
esoteric aspect of the first.

Strange as it is, the appeal for the aid of a mortal to settle 
differences in the supernatural world is not uncommon in 
Celtic story. For example, ‘The Adventures of Loegaire’^® 
begins with the men of Connacht at an assembly at £nloch 
(‘Bird/lake’), on an unspecified occasion in the time of King 
Crimthann. Early in the morning, they see a man approaching 
through the mist. He is Fiachna mac Retach from the Sti and 
he has come for help. His wife has been abducted, and though 
he has killed the abductor she now dwells with the latter’s 
nephew, Goll son of Dolb, king of the fort of Mag Mell, who 
has defeated Fiachna in seven battles. Another battle is to be 
fought this day and Fiachna offers silver and gold to all who 
will aid him. Loegaire son of Crimthann goes with fifty men. 
He slays Goll and demands the return of Fiachna’s wife, who 
then comes lamenting the death of her two paramours. Fiachna 
gives his daughter, D& Grane,* to Loegaire, and he remains 
in the Sid.Far from beir^ mutually exclusive entities, the natural and 
supernatural worlds thus intrude upon one another in a variety 
of ways. They can help and they can harm one another; they 
can rob and they can enrich one another. Through his services 
to the otherworld king, Loegaire becomes joint ruler in the 
Sid; Pwyll, after resolving a conflict in Annwfn, is known as 
its ‘Head’. Between the two worlds is an interaction which is

* ‘Sun/tear*.

Adventures

309

similar in many ways to the interaction between the ‘conscious* 
and ‘unconscious’ mind as described by modern psychologists.

The otherworld mistress is for man the counterpart of the 
otherworld lover of woman, and she must be distinguished 
from the otherworld bride of the marriage quests. Whereas the 
bride must be abducted from a hostile masculine world, the 
supernatural mistress entices the hero to a friendly feminine 
world like that where the suitor is sometimes instructed by a 
woman or his maternal kinsmen on his way to the perilous 
terrain of the bride. In the Adventures of Bran and of Conle 
it is a veritable ‘Land of Women*. Conle is consumed with 
longing after seeing the beautiful fairy woman and hearing her 
song about this ‘Land of the Living’, this ‘Plain of Delights’, 
and when she appears to him a second time he springs into her 
ship of glass and ‘from that day forward they were never seen 
again.’^^ When Loegaire returns from the St'd on a farewell 
visit to his people, his father offers him the kingdom of the Three 
Connachts if he will stay. But he refuses, saying how he loves

‘The noble plaintive music of the Sid,

Going from kingdom to kingdom.

Drinking from burnished cups,

Conversing with the loved one.

‘My own wife

Is Fiachna’s daughter, D6r Greine;

Also, as I may tell you,

(There is) a wife for every man of my fi% . . .

‘One night of the nights of the Sid 
I would not give for your kingdom.’^®

And so he re/'cnters the Sid, ‘and he has not come out yet.’(There is) a wife for every man of my fi% . . .

‘One night of the nights of the Sid 
I would not give for your kingdom.’^®

And so he re/'cnters the Sid, ‘and he has not come out yet.’

Those who succumb altogether to the fascination of the 
mysterious otherworld woman are thus lost for ever to the 
world of men. But it may be said of these, even more than of 
the heroes of the Elopement Tales, whom they resemble, that 
they are the lesser figures of Celtic story. Like CdChulainn, 
Conle finds himself on the horns of a dilemma : ‘It is not easy

310

Celtic Heritage

for me, for I love my people, but a longing for the woman has 
come upon me.’ But his choice is different from CuChulainn’s, 
and it may not be insignificant that for the storyteller the whole 
purpose of telling the tale is to explain why the father he left 
behind is known as ‘Art the Lone One’. These supernatural 
mistresses bear a close resemblance to the ‘celestial bride’ who 
instructs and helps the Siberian shaman in his art. Desiring to 
keep him for herself) she too is prone to hinder her lover’s 
further spiritual progress.®®

3

This is how Cormac’s cup of gold was found.®* Early one 
May morning, Cormac was alone on the rampart of Tara 
when a splendidly/clad warrior approached, bearing on his 
shoulder a silver branch with three golden apples on it. So 
delightful was the music of the branch that the sick, the 
wounded, and women in childbed would fall asleep when they 
heard it. The warrior hailed from a land where there was 
nothing but truth, a land where there was neither age nor decay 
nor gloom nor sadness nor envy nor jealousy nor hatred nor 
arrogance. They avowed friendship, and Cormac asked for 
the branch. The warrior gave it to him on condition that he 
should be granted three wishes, in Tara, and then he dis^ 
appeared. Cormac went back to his palace. When he shook 
the branch, the household was lulled to sleep until the next day.At the end of the year, the warrior came again and demanded 
Cormac’s daughter as his first wish. Cormac gave her to him, 
dispelling the sorrow of the women of Tara by shaking the 
sleep/inducing branch. A month later the warrior reappeared 
and took away Cormac’s son, and the third time he claimed 
Cormac’s wife. This was more than Cormac could endure. 
He set out with his followers in pursuit. A great mist fell upon 
them and Cormac found himself alone on a great plain. There 
he saw a large fortress surrounded by a wall of bronze. Inside 
was a house of silver, half thatched with white bird feathers.

Adventures 311

There were men at work with lapfuls of bird feathers, but as 
they laid on the thatch, a gust of wind would come and blow 
it all away. He saw a man kindling a fire and throwing a great 
great tree on it, root and branch, but by the time he came back 
with another tree the first was completely burnt. Then he saw 
another royal fortress with four houses in it, and a bright well 
with nine ancient hazels growing over it. In the well, there 
were five salmon and they ate the nuts that dropped from the 
purple hazels, and sent the husks floating down the five streams 
that flowed therefrom. The sound of the streams was the 
sweetest music.In the palace awaiting him was a couple — a noble warrior 
and a beautiful woman. He bathed in water heated by stones 
that came and went of themselves. Then a man came in with 
an axe in his right hand, a club in his left, and a pig behind 
him. He killed the pig, cleft the log, and cast the pig into 
the cauldron, but it would never be cooked until a truth were 
uttered for each quarter of it. The man with the axe, the warrior, 
and the woman each told a tale, miraculous but true, and three 
quarters were cooked. Cormac then told of the disappearance 
of his wife and family, and this completed the cooking. When 
Cormac’s portion was served, he protested that he never ate a 
meal without fifty in his company. The warrior sang him to 
sleep, and when he awoke there were fifty warriors around 
him, together with his wife, his son and his daughter.

As they feasted, Cormac marvelled at the beauty of his 
host’s golden cup. ‘There is something more marvellous about 
it,’ said the warrior. ‘Let three lies be told under it, and it will 
break into three, but three truths will make it whole again.’ 
The warrior told three lies and the cup broke, but when he 
said that neither Cormac’s wife nor his daughter had seen a 
man, nor his son a woman, since they left Tara, it became 
whole again.

Then the warrior revealed himself as Manannan mac Lir, 
and told Cormac that he had brought him there to see the 
Land of Promise. He gave him the cup to distinguish truth

312 Celtic Heritage

from falsehood, and the branch for his delight. He explained 
that those he had seen thatching in vain were the poets of Ire^ 
land, who amassed perishable wealth; the man kindling the 
fire was a thriftless young lord; the spring was the Well of 
Knowledge, and the five streams the five senses through which 
knowledge is obtained. ‘And no one will have knowledge 
who drinks not a draught out of the well itself and out of the 
streams. The folk of many arts are those that drink of them 
both.’When Cormac arose in the morning, he was on the green 
of Tara with his family, and he also had the branch and the 
cup.

The other ‘Adventures’ make passing references to the 
absence of falsehood in the Other World, but only in Gormac’s 
does truth appear as its central principle. Cormac, by giving 
his all for a branch of the otherworld tree, recovers what he 
has given and wins the talisman of truth. Above all he sees the 
Land of Promise and this is Manannan’s purpose in bringing 
him there. He discovers that the source of knowledge and of 
art lies in the Other World, and in little dramatic parables, 
which anticipate the adventures of the Voyagers discussed in 
the next chapter, he is shown how human attitudes and 
behaviour appear in the Other World.

In this Adventure, the storyteller’s expressed purpose is to 
explain the supernatural origin of Cormac’s Cup of Truth. 
Similar miraculous objects figure as subsidiary motifs in other 
tales. We have already come across the crowns secured by Nera 
and Loegaire, and Crimthann’s Jidchell. Again, Conn with 
his druids and poets loses his way in a mist, and in a house 
near a golden tree he sees Lug and with him Sovereignty 
seated in a chair of crystal, with a silver vat, a vessel of gold, 
and a golden cup before her. The girl serves Conn with meat, 
and with red ale (dergflaith) in the cup, and Lug foretells the 
names of every prince from the time of Conn onwards. A 
druid records the names on staves of yew. Then the vision

Adventures 313Adventures 313

vanishes, but the vat, the vessel, and the staves are left with 
Conn.®® Other wonderful vessels are the Dagda’s ‘undry’ 
cauldron, from which no company ever went unthankful, 
Cormac’s cauldron and Gwyddneu Garanhir’s hamper, which 
gave to each his proper food, the cup which Tadg obtained 
in the land of the Immortals and which turned water into wine, 
the cauldron of the head of Annwfn (described in the early 
Welsh poem, ‘The Spoils of Annwfn’), which would not boil 
food for a coward, the cauldron of Ceridwen, which after 
boiling for a year and a day produced three drops of grace and 
inspiration, and the Cauldron of Rebirth (brought from a 
lake in Ireland), which restored the dead to life.®® These vessels 
of life and plenty may be classed with the Holy Grail of 
medieval romance. Everlasting foods, bottles that cannot be 
drained, and the Water of Life, which revives the dead, also 
figure among the objects of the hero’s otherworld quest in 
Celtic folktales.

As symbols in myth, and probably as insignia and utensils 
in pre-Christian rites, such sacred relics enshrined eternity in 
the world of mortal existence. They also enhanced the mean- 
ing of their counterparts in ordinary life. In some measure, the 
cauldron and cup of every generous host partook of the nature 
of the archetypal vessels of plenty, every crown and every sword 
reflected a little of the brilliance of the eternal diadem and of 
the ‘Sword of Light’.

CHAPTER XVI

Voyages

‘Oh build your ship of death. Oh build it! for you will need it.

For the voyage of oblivion awaits you.’

D. H. LAWRENCECHAPTER XVI

Voyages

‘Oh build your ship of death. Oh build it! for you will need it.

For the voyage of oblivion awaits you.’

D. H. LAWRENCE

The Irish storytellers distinguished between ‘adventures* 
(echtrai) and ‘voyages’ (immramd), the latter involving visits to a 
number of otherworld islands. The distinction between the 
two types of stories is not absolute; the famous Voyage of Bran 
son of Febal is classified as an echtra in the Lists, but is called 
an immram in the text itself. Apart from the story of Bran, the 
Lists name seven imtnrma, only three of which have been 
preserved: ‘The Voyage of Maelduin’, ‘The Voyage of the Ui 
Chorra’, and ‘The Voyage of Sn^dgus and Mac Riagla*. 
The theme of the otherworld voyage is one of the most dis^ 
distinctive in Celtic tradition, and through the celebrated 
‘Voyage of St Brendan’ it exercised the imagination of medieval 
Christendom and helped to arouse the spirit of adventure which 
prompted the great voyages of the fifteenth and sixteenth cen-' 
turies. But the discovery of new lands has proved a constric-' 
tive substitute for the endless marvels of the otherworld ocean.

One day, as Bran son of Febal walks near his royal house, he 
hears sweet music behind him. The music lulls him to sleep 
and when he wakes there is a branch of silver beside him with 
white blossom on it. Bran takes the branch to the house and 
when all the hosts are assembled behind closed ramparts they 
see a woman in strange raiment in the middle of the house. To 
Bran she sings a long lay which all can hear, describing the 
splendour and delight of the world beyond the sea, with its

314

Voya£es 315

thrice fifty islands, each of them larger than Ireland, its thou/- 
sands of women and its sweet music, a world where treachery, 
sorrow, sickness and death are not known. She ends the lay:

®Not to all of you is my speech.

Though its great marvel has been made known.®Not to all of you is my speech.

Though its great marvel has been made known.

Let Bran hear from the crowd of the world 
What of wisdom has been told to him.

^Do not fall on a bed of sloth.

Let not intoxication overcome you.

Begin a voyage across the clear sea.

If perchance you may reach the Land of the Women/

As she departs, the silver branch — ^‘a ■ branch of the apple-' 
tree from Emain Ablach*— springs from Brands hand to hers.

Next day Bran goes to sea with three companies of nine, 
each headed by one of his foster/brothers. After two days and 
two nights, he meets Manannan mac Lit riding in his two^ 
wheeled chariot over the sea. In a long poem Manannan tells 
Bran that to him the sea is solid earth, a many/flowered Plain 
of Delight:

‘Speckled salmon leap from the womb 
Of the white sea, on which you look:

They are calves, they are coloured lambs 
With friendliness, without mutual slaughter,

‘Though you see but one chariot-'rider 
In Mag Mell of the many flowers,

There are many steeds on its surface,

Though you do not see them,

‘Along the top of a wood 
Your coracle has sailed, over ridges.

There is a wood of beautiful fruit 
Under the prow of your little skiff , . . ’

Manannan is on his way to Ireland where he will beget Mong^ 
an upon the wife of Fiachna, and he prophesies the coming 
of Christ to save the world from the sin of Adam,

3 i 6 Celtic Heritage

‘Steadily then let Bran row.

It is not far to the Land of the ’Women,

Emne* with its many hues of hospitality 
You will reach before the setting of the sun!’

Bran goes his way and comes to the Island of Joy, where he 
sees a large crowd of people all laughing and gaping. He sends 
a man ashore and the man begins to gape with the others, 
heedless of the calls of his comrades. So they leave him there.Before long they reach the Land of the Women. The leading 
woman greets him: ‘Come hither on land, O Bran son of 
Febal. Welcome is your coming.’ She throws a ball of thread 
which cleaves to Bran’s hand, and she pulls the boat ashore 
by the thread. They enter a large house where there is a bed for 
every couple, even thrice nine beds, and the food that is put 
before them does not diminish. ‘It seemed a year to them that 
they were there; it was really many years.’ Then one of the 
company becomes homesick, and Bran is persuaded to depart. 
The woman says they will regret it, warns them not to touch 
land, and directs them to pick up the man left on the Island of

Joy-

They approach the land of Ireland at Stub Brain, where 
there is an assembly of people. Bran tells the assembly that he is 
Bran son of Febal, but they know no such man, though the 
Voyage of Bran is in their ancient stories. The homesick man 
jumps ashore, but as he touches the ground he becomes a heap 
of ashes, as though he had been dead for many hundreds of 
years. Bran tells the assembled people all his wanderings and 
he writes the verses in ogam. Then he bids them farewell. ‘And 
Itom tli3.t Hour bis wanderings 2 xe not jknown.*^

UnlAe the Voyage of Bran, the three other extant Voyages 
are set m Christian times; neither magic branch nor fairy damsel 
entices the vopgers to sea. Two of them are pilgrimages 
direcdy or indirectly connected with the expiation of rri mes.

* Emain Ablach.

Voya£es* Emain Ablach.

Voya£es

The Ui Chorra® were three brothers who, in the service of the 
Devil, had plundered the churches of Connacht. After the 
eldest had seen a vision of Heaven and Hell they repented and 
restored the churches. Then they set out in a three^skinned 
boat, drawing in their oars and committing their destiny to the 
wind. The story of the Voyage of Snedps and Mac Riagla® 
opens with the assassination of a tyrannical king by the Men 
of Ross. The king’s brother imprisoned them all in one house to 
burn them alive, but on second thoughts he sought the advice 
of St Colum Cille of Iona. Two of the saint’s clerics, Snedgus 
and Mae Riagla, brought the counsel that sixty couples of the 
Men of Ross be cast on the sea in small boats: God would 
pass judgement upon them. This was done and the two clerics 
embarked for home. As they were in their coracle, they decided 
to go voluntarily on the same pilgrimage as the sixty couples 
had undertaken involuntarily, and after three days they, like 
the Ui Chorra, shipped their oars and the sea carried them to 
many marvellous islands. On the sixth island they found the 
sixty couples dwelling without sin, until Doom, in the neigh/ 
bourhood of Enoch and Elijah (who, like them, had left the 
earth without tasting death).The beginning of the Voyage of the Ui Chorra corresponds 
closely with a reference in the Tripartite Life of St Patrick to a 
repentant tyrant who tried to kill St Patrick and was ordered 
by the saint to go to the sea/shore, scantily clad and bearing no 
food or drink, and, his feet fettered and the key of the fetter 
thrown into the sea, to be set adrift in a boat of a single hide 
without oar or rudder, to go wherever Providence might bring 
him. Other references in Irish texts show that setting adrift was a 
recognized method of punishment, but it seems to have been 
customary to show a little more mercy than St Patrick did. The 
virtim was equipped with gruel and water for one night, a 
single paddle, and a hammer/shaped ‘wedge’ to keep off large 
sea/birds. He was abandoned as far out as a white shield is 
clearly visible on the sea. This indeterminate kind of penalty— 
a death penalty which is not a death penalty— was deemed

3i8

Celtic Heritage

appropriate for transgressors whose guilt likewise was not un/ 
qualified* — ^those whose crimes were unintentional and, if we 
accept the evidence of the immrama, those who had acted under 
extreme provocation and those who had tried to make amends. 
It was also considered appropriate for women who had com/- 
mitted murder or a crime deserving the death penalty, while the 
Sencbus M6r speaks of ‘a hermit condemned to the sea and the 
wind’.®We have already noted the correspondence between the 
practice of setting infants born of incest adrift and the myth of 
the committal of the infant hero to the sea, an act which sym-' 
bolizes his return to the Other World. Here we have a similar 
correlation between setting an offender adrift and the voyages 
of mythological heroes to the world beyond. In its ori gin the 
custom undoubtedly springs from the same complex of beliefs 
in an Other World across the sea as gave rise to boat burials 
and the placing of little boats in tombs, the setting of the great 
adrift in burning ships in Norse myth and ritual,® and the 
story of the voyage of the mortally wounded King Arthur to 
Afallon for the healing of his wounds.^ Xhis belief in a voyage 
of death is perhaps echoed in the ribald games dramatizing 
The Building of the Ship which were played at wakes for 
the dead, in Ireland, until recent times.®

2

In her lay to Bran, the fairy woman speaks of thrice fifty distant 
islands, but he brings back tidings of only two, the Island of 
Joy and the Island of the Women. After that his wanderings 
are not known. Many other islands appear in the two voyages 
we have referred to, but it is in the Voyage of Maelduin® that 
we encounter the widest range of islands— thirty^one in all, 
together with two wonders beheld at sea. It is a long tale, said 
to have been arranged in its present form by Aed Finn, chief 
sage of Ireland, for the elation of the mind and for the people 
of Ireland after him. The following is a bald summary.

Vo’ja^i 319Vo’ja^i 319

On the advice of a druid, Maelduin builds a three^skin 
boat in which to seek out his father’s slayer. The druid fixes the 
day on which he shall start making his boat, and the day on 
which he shall start out, and he tells him to take no more and 
no less than seventeen men with him. Diuran the Rhymer is 
one of the crew. After Maelduin has set sail, his three foster^ 
brothers swim out to him and they are reluctantly taken into 
the boat despite the prohibition. The voyagers first come to two 
small islands, on each of them a fort from which comes the 
noise of carousal and contest. One warrior boasts to another that 
he slew Ailill, Maelduin’s father, and Maelduin is about to land 
when a great wind blows his craft out to sea. They cease rowing 
and submit their course to God’s guidance. These are the 
islands they come to:

1 An Island of Enormous Ants, each as large as a foal.

2 An Island of Great Birds.

3 An Island with a Fierce Beast, like a horse but with clawed 
feet like a hound’s.

4 An Island of Giant Horses, with a demon horsez-race in 
progress.

5 An Island where the sea hurls salmon through a stone valve 
into a house.

6 An Island of Trees. Maelduin cuts a rod and each of the 
three apples which appear on it sustains him for forty nights.

7 An Island with a Wondrous Beast, which can turn its 
body round inside its skin and revolve its skin round its body.

8 An Island of Beasts like Horses, tearing the flesh from one 
another’s sides until the island runs with blood.

9 An Island of Fiery Swine, which feed by day on the fruit 
of golden applez-trees and sleep by night in caverns while sea^ 
birds come to eat the apples.

10 The Island of the Little Cat. Here they enter a deserted 
white house, full of treasure, four stone pillars in the middle of 
it and a small cat leaping from one pillar to the next. They par/- 
take of the food and drink they find there, and then they sleep.

izo Celtic Heritageizo Celtic Heritage

Before they leave, one of Maelduin’s foster^-brothers takes a 
necklace from the wall. The cat leaps through him like an 
arrow and he falls a heap of ashes. Maelddin, who has for/ 
bidden theft, replaces the necklace.

11 The Island of Black and White. This is divided into two 
by a brass palisade, black sheep on one side, white sheep on the 
other. Tending them is a big man who sometimes puts a black 
sheep among the white or a white among the black. Imme/ 
diately it changes colour. Maelduin throws a peeled white 
wand into the black section and it turns black.

12 An Island of Giant Cattle and Huge Swine, separated by 
a river that burns like fire.

1 3 The Island of the Mill and the Giant Miller. ‘Half the corn 
of your country,’ he says, ‘is ground here. Here comes to be 
ground all that men begrudge to one another.’

14 An Island of Black Mourners, all weeping and wailing. 
One of Maelddin’s fbster/brothers joins them. He too weeps 
and, no longer recognizable, he is left behind.

15 An Island with Four Fences — of gold, silver, brass, and 
crystal— which divide it into four parts, containing kings, 
queens, warriors, and maidens, respectively.

16 An Island with a Great Fortress approached by a Glass 
Bridge. The bridge throws back those who seek to cross it. 
There is a beautiful maiden who thrice rebuffs the voyagers and 
then welcomes each by his name, saying that their coming has 
long been a matter of established knowledge. His men try to 
woo the maiden for Maelduin, but she replies that she has 
never known sin. They ask her again and she promises them 
an answer on the morrow. When they awake they find them/ 
selves at sea in their boat and there is no sign of the island.

17 An Island of Shouting Birds.17 An Island of Shouting Birds.

18 An Island of Birds and One Solitary Anchorite, clothed 
only in his long hair. He had come there standing on a sod of 
his native land, and God had made an island of it, adding a 
foot’s breadth and one tree to it every year. The birds are the 
souls of his children and his kindred who are awaiting Dooms/

Voyages 321

day. They are all fed by angels. He prophesies that Maelddin’s 
company shall all reach their country, except one man.

19 An Island with a Wondrous Fountain, which yields water 
and whey on Fridays and Wednesdays, milk on Sundays and 
on some feast-days, and ale and wine on other feast-days.

20 An Island with a Great Forge worked by a Giant Smith.

21 A Sea like Glass. ‘Great was its splendour and its beauty.’

22 A Thin Sea, like a transparent cloud, and beneath it a 
fair land where they see a monstrous beast in a tree surrounded 
by cattle. In spite of the vigilance of an armed man, the beast 
stretches down its neck and devours the largest ox of the herd.

23 An Island whose People Shout ‘It is they!’ at the voyagers, 
as though they knew of their coming and feared them.

24 An Island with an Arch of Water, like a rainbow full of 
salmon, rising on one side of it and falling on the other.

25 A great Square Silver Column rising from the sea, its top 
out of sight, but with a silver net stretching from it away into 
the sea. Diuran hacks away a piece of the net as they go under 
it. (On his return to Ireland, he offers it at the high altar at 
Armagh.) A voice speaks in a strange tongue from the summit 
of the pillar.

26 An Island on a Single Pedestal, a door in its base.26 An Island on a Single Pedestal, a door in its base.

27 An Island of Women. Here Maelduin and his seventeen 
men are received by a queen and her seventeen daughters. The 
women feast them, consort with them and try to induce them 
to remain there to live a life of perpetual pleasure and eternal 
youth. They stay for three months of winter which seem like 
three years, and the men weary of it. When they embark, the 
queen throws a ball of thread which clings to Maeldiiin’s hand 
and she hauls in the boat. She does this three times, and after 
each attempt to leave they stay another three months. The next 
time Maelduin lets one of his men catch the ball and again it 
clings to the hand, but Diuran strikes off the man’s hand and 
they escape.

28 An Island with Trees bearing Great Berries which yield 
intoxicating and slumber-inducing juice.

X

322 Celtic Herita£e

29 The Island of the Hermit and the Ancient Eagle. A great 
bird alights on a hill above a lake and eats great red berries, 
fragments of which fall into the lake and redden it. The bird’s 
plumage is decayed, but two eagles come and pick off the ver/ 
min and old feathers. Next day the great bird plunges into the 
lake, and it is further groomed until its feathers are glossy and 
its flight becomes swift and strong. Watching it they appre^ 
hend the words of the prophet: ‘Thy youth is renewed like the 
eagle’s.’ Diuran bathes in the lake, and so long as he lives he 
loses not a tooth nor a hair, nor suffers illness or infirmity.

30 The Island of Laughter. The last of Maelduin’s foster-- 
brothers lands, laughs with the multitude there and has to be 
abandoned.

3 1 The Island with a Revolving Rampart of Fire. When the 
doorway comes opposite them they see, inside, handsome, 
luxuriously/clothed people bearing vessels of gold, and the air 
is filled with music.’^®32 The Island of the Monk of Torach, who had robbed the 
church and put to sea with his treasures. On the instructions of a 
supernatural personage he had thrown his possessions over-- 
board and let go his oars and his rudder. Eventually he had 
landed on this rock where he was miraculously fed. He 
counsels Maeldiiin to forgive his father’s slayer because God has 
preserved him and his men through manifold perils.

33 An Island on which they see a Falcon like the falcons of 
Ireland. Following it, they row until they sight their native 
land. They are welcomed on the island of the slayer, where 
MaeldiSin’s coming is even then the subject of conversation.

We have burdened the reader with this catalogue of islands 
in order to show that the Other World of the Voyages is 
different from the Other World of the Adventures. When 
Bran has passed through the paradoxical zone where sea and 
dry land are one and the same, and where men and women 
enjoy the pleasures of normal life without the attendant griefs, 
he enters a world where our world as we know it seems to

323

Vo-jages323

Vo-jages

resolve itself into its components. The people of the Island of 
Joy are not enjoying any particular pleasure; they are not laughs 
ing at anything. The island symbolizes joy in its elemental iso^ 
lation. The Island of the Women is likewise the quintessence of 
femininity and erotic pleasure, separated from everything with 
which it is intermingled in normal experience. The longer 
Voyage of Maelduin continues the process of disentangling 
the constituent elements. The separation of animals into 
species and natures is particularly striking — ants, birds, shouts 
ing birds, raccz-horses, biting horses, salmon, pigs, sheep, cattle, 
all have their appointed places. Again forms, such as pillar, 
pedestal, arch, are singled out, and so are the contrasting attrv 
butes of ‘blackness’ and ‘whiteness’. In ‘Snedgus’ there is an 
island with two lakes in it, one of water, the other of fire. But 
for the prayers of the saints these two elements would have 
overwhelmed Ireland.^^Again, mankind is segregated into four classes, with kings, 
queens, warriors, and maidens in separate compartments. On a 
similar island in ‘The Voyage of Ui Chorra’ they are classified 
differently into ‘sedate people’, lords, young men, and servants 
(the four functionsj).^^ In ‘The Voyage of Maelddin’ there is 
again a land of Women; Brendan saw an Island of Strong Men 
divided into three age/groups — boys, young men, and old 
men^®— and the Ui Chorra came to an island where Living 
Men and Dead Men were in separate parts.^* To the Island of 
Laughter is added its opposite, an island of spontaneous and 
causeless grief. As things turned black or white in the con^ 
trasting halves of another island, so here everyone who landed 
wept irrespective of cause. The metaphysical implication would 
appear to be that Whiteness, Blackness, Fire, Water, Joy, Sor/ 
row. Femininity, Masculinity, Youth, Age, Life, Death, and 
so on, exist as abstract principles over and above the objects or 
people in which they are manifested. (The doctrines of primeval 
elements and of archetypal ideas have, of course, a far wider 
provenance and a much greater antiquity than their particular 
formulations by Greek philosophers.) As though to emphasize

324 Celtic Heritage

further the detachment of principles from their usual vehicles 
in the manifot world, they are sometimes represented in com/ 
binations which have no earthly counterparts — a horse with 
dog/claws, in ‘Maelduin,’ and three islands inhabited, respect/ 
ively, by cat/headed men, pig/headed men, and men with dog 
heads and bovine manes, in ‘Snedgus’. Like the animal/masked 
mummers of seasonal rites and the hobby/horses (which can 
move round inside their skins), these monstrosities show that 
the principial ideas might have been combined to make quite 
a different world from the one we know.In addition to the elements that constitute the corporeal 
world, human attitudes and behaviour also are depicted in the 
islands. There is an island symbolizing the true nature of 
niggardliness, another the sanctity of property and the sin of 
theft. The Island of the Bridge of Glass may represent Chastity, 
and there is no doubt that many of the other tableaux have 
parabolic meanings which elude us. In the more thoroughly 
Christian ‘Voyages’, islands of mice, of birds, of fruit/trees, 
and so on are intermingled with others depicting one by one 
the tortures which fit individual sins.

Little has been said in this book about the Celtic doctrine 
concerning life after death, because native sources are strangely 
silent on the subject. The only future world of which the texts 
speak is the Christian one. In this respect the native literature 
presents a striking contrast to the testimony of classical writers 
who assert that the druids believed that the souls of men are 
immortal. So strong was the belief that, according to Valerius 
Maximus,^® even the payment of debts could be deferred to the 
next world. Along with the belief in immortality went a 
doctrine of reincarnation. However much Classical observers 
may have misunderstood the religious beliefs of the Celts, it is 
hardly possible that they were completely mistaken about this, 
and it is hot by accident that the earliest and most vivid ‘visions’ 
of a Christian Other World recorded in medieval Europe 
appeared in the Celtic West, ‘visions’ in which there is a wealth 
of imagery not easily traced to other Christian sources.

Vo-^ages 32 $Vo-^ages 32 $

In the religious systems of Egypt, India, and many other 
parts of the world, the priests have been the custodians of a 
body of doctrine concerning the progress of the soul after death. 
It was imperative that those at death’s door should be conver-' 
sant with the doctrine, and measures were taken to remind 
them of it. Even medieval Christendom produced its ‘Book 
of the Craft of Dying’. ‘The Tibetan Book of the Dead’, in 
particular, casts a glimmer of light on our Voyages. This book 
portrays the succession of states through which the spirit passes 
after death, states in which thoughts become things, and attv 
tudes take form as objective entities. ‘The deceased human 
being becomes the sole spectator of a marvellous panorama of 
hallucinatory visions. ... At first, the happy and glorious 
visions born of the seeds of the impulses and aspirations of the 
higher or divine nature awe the uninitiated; then, as they 
merge into the visions born of the corresponding mental ele-- 
ments of the lower or animal nature, they terrify him, and he 
wishes to flee from them’^® — as did the Irish Voyagers from 
some of the islands they saw. Among the manifold connota-' 
tions of the long succession of symbols in the Tibetan book, 
are the four elements (fire, water, earth, and air), the four 
colours, and other sets of four ‘orders’ (each set making Jive 
in its totality and union). There are ‘Peaceful Deities’, and 
‘Wrathful Deities’ with frightful beastly heads, whose aspect 
and behaviour recall the torture scenes in ‘Uf Chorra’.In the ‘Voyages’, we submit, have been preserved the ta^ 
tered remnants of an oral Celtic ‘book’ of the dead, which 
proclaimed that the mysteries of the world beyond death had 
been at least partially explored and the stations of the soul’s 
pilgrimage charted. The Plain of Delight and the Land of the 
Women are but stages on the way. In Maelduin’s Voyage there 
are thirty-'three wonders to be seen, and the number may not 
be accidental. Thus, like the other types of tales we have des/ 
cribed, the immram has its own function. It is to teach the ‘craft* 
of dying and to pilot the departing spirit on a sea of perils and 
of wonders.

CHAPTER XVII

Deaths

The circumstances of the hero’s death have been fore/ 
told by druids or seers and in many cases he goes through life 
knowing precisely what his end will be. So fully are the inci^ 
dents which culminate in the Destruction of Da Derga’s 
Hostel and the death of Conaire prefigured by the wizards of 
the attackers that relatively few words are necessary to tell the 
story of the actual battle. This is no more than a repetition or a 
materialization of a story which has its origin and being in a 
world outside the limitations of here and now. One is re/ 
minded of the relationship between a sentence of death and an 
execution. The sentence has prescribed the form of death and 
nothing remains but to carry it out.CuChulainn’s journey to his last battle^ is a veritable ‘death 
ride*. Before he sets forth, a number of omens warn him of 
impending doom. Weapons fall from their racks, and as he 
throws on his mantle the brooch falls and pierces his foot. 
The Morrigan has broken his chariot during the night to 
hinder his departure. The Grey of Macha resists being har/ 
nesscd to the chariot; he turns his left side to his master and when 
reproached he weeps tears of blood. As the hero departs, 
Lebarcham the female satirist beseeches him not to go and 
thrice fifty queens who love him give a scream of wailing and 
lamentation and smite their hands, for they know that he will 
not come to them again. On his way he calls for a drink at the 
house of his foster/mother as was his wont, and he bids her 
farewell. According to some versions, the cupful of milk he is 
given to drink becomes a cupful of blood, and his path takes 
him past two beautiful maidens in grief and tribulation wash/ 
ing a bloody garment at a ford. It is his garment that they are 
washing.* He also encounters three crones, blind in the left

326

Deaths 327

eye, who with poisons and spells have cooked a dog on spits 
of rowan. The hero is thereby placed in a quandary: it is £eis 
(‘a prohibited thing’) for him to eat his namesake, the dog, 
and it k gets for him to pass a cooking/hearth without partaking 
of the fare. At first he refuses the invitation extended by one 
of the crones, but when she reproaches him for disdaining their 
humble meal he submits. With her left hand she gives him 
one of the shoulder-blades of the hound, and he eats it out of 
his hand and places it under his left thigh. The hand and the 
thigh lose their strength.The violation of gessa is such a sure omen of approaching 
death that it might almost be inferred that a hero is safe from 
harm while his gessa remain inviolate. Then, as his time 
approaches its end, he finds himself in situations where he 
cannot avoid breaking them, just as Greek heroes unwittingly 
work their own undoing when their fated hour has come and 
their divine guardians have forsaken them. Nowhere is this 
process so dramatically depicted as in ‘The Destruction of Da 
Derga’s Hostel’®, where in the course of the events which lead 
up to his death Conaire violates one after another the gessa 
laid upon him, by the King of the Birds, before he was installed 
King of Ireland. These were;

1 Thou shalt not go right-handwise round Tara and left- 
handwise round Brega.

2 The crooked beasts of Cerna must not be hunted by thee.

3 Thou shalt not be away from Tara for nine nights in suc- 
cession.

4 Thou shalt not stay a night in a house from which fire- 
light can be seen after sunset and into which one can see 
from outside.

5 Three Reds shall not go before thee to the house of Red.

6 No plunder shall be taken in thy reign.

7 After sunset a company of one woman or one man shall not 
enter the house in which thou art.

8 Thou shalt not settle the quarrel of two of thy serfs.

328 Celtic Heritage7 After sunset a company of one woman or one man shall not 
enter the house in which thou art.

8 Thou shalt not settle the quarrel of two of thy serfs.

328 Celtic Heritage

The beginning of Conaire’s undoing is the leniency he 
shows towards his foster^-brothers, the Sons of Donn Desa 
who, resenting the peace of his reign, have taken to marauding 
(geis 6 ). First he spares these fbster/brothers while condemning 
their fellow/offenders to death. Then he revokes this judgement 
-^‘the judgement I have given is no extension of life to me’ — 
and sends them all to wreak their rapine on the men of Alba. 
During their voyage they meet Ingcd the One Eyed, son of the 
king of the Britons, and his men, and they join forces with 
him. To begin with, they slay Ingcd’s father and mother and 
his seven brothers, and then they sail for Ireland where Ingcel 
is entitled to a reciprocal plunder.

In the meantime Conaire has gone to Munster to settle a 
quarrel between the two Corpres, foster/brothers of his (gets 8), 
and has stayed five nights with each of them (gets 3). On the 
return journey the king and his company see warbands and 
stark^'naked men and the land around Tara in a cloud of fire. 
This is a sign that the king’s law has collapsed. Gonaire and 
his entourage go right-'handwise round Tara and lefohandwise 
round Brega (geis 3), and the king hunts the crooked beasts of 
Gerna (geis 2) without knowing what he is doing until the 
chase is over. Then they follow the coast southward and decide 
to spend the night at Da Derga’s Hostel. Mac Gecht, the 
champion, goes ahead to kindle a fire for the king at the hostel, 
a building with seven doorways but only one door, which is 
moved around to close the doorway where the wind is blowing.Gonaire sees three horsemen riding before him towards the 
hostel. They are all red, both body and hair and raiment, both 
horses and men, and they are going to the house of a Red* 
(gets 5). In vain does Gonaire send his son to call them back. 
They reply only with forebodings of impending tragedy. ‘Lo, 
my son, great news. Weary are the steeds we ride. We ride the 
steeds of Donn Desscorach from the side. Though we are aHve 
we are dead. Great (will be) the cuttings off of lives. Sating of

* Detg: ‘Red’ (Da Derga).

Deaths 329

ravens. Feeding of crows. Strife of slaughter. Whetting of 
sword/edge. Shields with broken bosses (?) in the hours after 
sundown. Lo.’ Then the company is overtaken by a mon^ 
strous black man, who has only one eye, one hand, and one 
foot, and his huge loathsome wife. He is Fer Caille (‘Man of 
the Wood’) and he welcomes Conaire: ‘Long has your coming 
here been known.’ On his back he carries to the hostel a 
squealing black pig for Conaire to consume. (This too is a 
gets, though it has not been mentioned before.)Conaire goes into the hostel; all take their seats, both 
and non.'^^eif, and Da Derga gives them a welcome. Then a 
lone woman in a grey cloak comes to the door after sunset 
asking to be let in. Her shins are as long as a weaver’s beam 
and as black as a stag beetle. Her pubic hair reaches to her 
knee and her lips are in the side of her head. Leaning against 
the door/post she casts an evil eye on the king and his company 
and prophesies that neither his skin nor his flesh will escape 
from that house save what the birds carry away in their claws. 
‘What do you want?’ says Conaire. ‘Whatever you want,’ she 
replies. ‘It is a gets of mine,’ says Conaire, ‘to receive the conv 
pany of one woman after sunset.’ Gets or not, she refuses to go 
away and reproaches the king for his lack of hospitality. 
‘Savage is the answer,’ says Conaire. ‘Let her in, though it is a 
gets of mine.’ And great loathing and ill.'foreboding falls upon 
the gathering.

In the meantime, the marauders'Ied by Ingcel and the sons 
of Donn D&a have landed, and as their boats struck land the 
Hostel shook so that the weapons fell from their racks. The 
irony of the situation is fully exploited in the narrative. Asked to 
explain the noise of the landing, Conaire says: ‘I do not know 
what it is unless it be the earth that has been rent, or the 
Leviathan encircling the earth that is striking with its tail to 
overturn the world, or the boat of the Sons of Donn Desa that 
has come to land. Alas that it is not they! They were our be.' 
loved foster-brothers. Dear was the warrior band. We should 
not fear them tonight.’ And in the landing party one of Donn

330

Celtic Heritage

D&a’s sons says of Gonaire: ‘His rule was good.’ Peace, good-* 
will, and prosperity mark his reign. ‘May God not bring that 
man here tonight. . . . ’Tis grievous that his life should be 
short.’D&a’s sons says of Gonaire: ‘His rule was good.’ Peace, good-* 
will, and prosperity mark his reign. ‘May God not bring that 
man here tonight. . . . ’Tis grievous that his life should be 
short.’

Through the wheels of the seventeen chariots that stand at 
each doorway of the hostel, the invaders can see the great fire 
kindled for the king (gets 4). Ingcd goes forward to spy, and 
there follows a long colloquy in which he describes the 
orderly arrangement of the rooms of the hostel and the people 
in them. His Irish accomplices identify each one from Ingcel’s 
description, and, in an endeavour to deflect him from his 
determination to sack the hostel, they foretell the mighty deeds 
that each one will perform in the impending battle, as though 
they were rehearsing the course of a pre-ordained ritual.

During the attack the hostel is thrice set on fire, and thrice 
the flames are extinguished. Gonaire kills six hundred before 
reaching for his weapons and another six hundred afterwards. 
But the druids of the attackers inflict a magic thirst upon him 
and they take away the water of all the rivers and lakes in 
Ireland. Gonaire calls for a drink and Mac Gecht sets out 
in search of water, for the water that was in the hostel has been 
used in quenching the fires. He fails to find any until he comes 
to Uaran Garaid on the plain around Gruachan, where the 
water cannot hide itself from him. On his return he finds 
two men striking off Gonaire’s head. He kills them and 
then spills the water into Gonaire’s gullet and neck. The 
severed head says: ‘A good man Mac Gfoht! An excellent 
man Mac Gfoht!’ Then the champion follows the routed foe. 
Only nine of the defenders have fallen; only five of the attackers 
have escaped.When Gonall Gernach comes back to Tailtiu from the 
battle, his father reproaches him for returning alive leaving his 
lord dead among his enemies. Gonall shows him his wounds. 
‘That arm fought tonight, son,’ says the father. ‘That is true, 
old warrior,’ says Gonall. ‘Many a man got his drink of death 
from it tonight in front of the hostel.’

Deaths 331

Conaire’s gessa are a formulation of his fate in a series of 
‘Thou shalt nots.’ All these things must be avoided, but they 
must all come to pass before he dies. The king need not have 
spared the sons of Donn D&a, nor need he have settled the 
quarrel of the two serfs, but after he has taken these first false 
steps events take their own course with gathering momentum. 
He is overcome by his gessa, and there is nothing he can do to 
arrest such precursors of doom as the Three Reds and Fer Caille 
with the squealing pig. When faced with the lone woman at 
the door, he is caught between his kingly obligation to be 
hospitable and one of his personal And it is of the nature 
of personal gessa that they have a proclivity to trap their victim 
between themselves and the more general prohibitions of 
etiquette and propriety. Alternatively, the victim is check-' 
mated by two of his own gessa, as CdChulainn was when the 
gets that he should not eat dog and the gets that he should not 
pass a cooking-'hearth without sharing the repast intersected. 
No longer can he choose between right on the one hand and 
wrong on the other. He is already in a world where right and 
wrong have merged. To encompass the death of the invincible 
hero, the enemies of CdChulainn had already had recourse to 
that world where all things are possible. The Sons of Calatin 
had been learning wizardry for seventeen years and they had 
been mutilated: the right foot and the left hand of the sons 
had been cut off and the daughters had been blinded in the 
left eye.* In short they had been given a Fomorian aspect.As CdChulainn, after his encounter with the three hags,® 
enters the field of battle single-'handed, with the light of valour 
shining over him, his enemies make a fence of their linked 
shields, and at each corner Ere son of Cairpre makes them place 
two of their bravest men feigning to fight each other, and a 
satirist with each of these pairs to ask CdChulainn for his 
spear— for the Sons of Calatin have prophesied that a king will 
fall by that spear. GuChulainn attacks, wreaking great carnage 
upon his foes. Then he sees one of the pairs of contending 
warriors and, entreated by the satirist, he intervenes and dashes

33-2

Celtic Heritage

out their brains. ‘That spear to me,’ says the satirist. ‘I swear 
what my people swear,* says CuChulainn, ‘you do not need 
it more than I do . . .’ ‘I shall revile you if you do not give it,’ 
says the satirist. ‘I have never yet been reviled for my niggardli/ 
ness or my churlishness,’ says CdChulainn, and he flings the 
spear at him handle foremost so that it passes through his head 
and kills nine men beyond him. Lugaid son of CuRoi gets 
the spear. ‘Who will fall by this spear, O sons of Calatin?’ he 
asks, and they answer: ‘A Hng will fall by that spear.’ Lugaid 
casts the spear and kills Loeg, CiiChulainn’s charioteer.CuChulainn recovers the spear. He sees the second pair of 
sham fighters, and the drama that led up to the death of Loeg, 
‘king of charioteers’, is repeated. Lest Ulster be reviled, he 
again yields his spear and with it Ere strikes the Grey of 
Macha, ‘king of steeds’. Then CuChulainn sees the third pair 
contending, and this time he yields his spear because the 
satirist threatens to revile his race. Lugaid flings the spear 
and it strikes CuChulainn so that his bowels come forth on 
the cushion of his chariot. With his enemies’ consent he gathers 
up his bowels to his breast and goes to the loch and there he 
drinks and washes himself. The extended version of the story 
says that an otter — ^the Irish word means ‘water/dog’ — comes 
to drink the blood. CuChulainn casts a stone at it and kills it. 
Now he knows that he must die, for it has been prophesied 
that his last heroic deed, like his first, will be the killing of a 
dog.® He turns back, calling his enemies to meet him. With 
his breast girdle he fastens himself to a pillarz-stone so that he 
may die standing up, and while his soul remains in his body 
and the hero’s light over his head the wounded Grey of Macha 
defends him, making three ‘red routs’ in which it kills fiifty 
men with its teeth and thirty with its hoofs. Eventually the birds 
descend on GuChulainn’s shoulder, and Lugaid ventures 
forward to arrange his hair and to cut off his head. As the 
sword falls from the dead hero’s hand it severs Lugaid’s right 
hand. CiiChulainn’s right hand is cut off in revenge and it is 
buried with his head in Tara.

Deaths

333Deaths

333

In this fantastic battle CdChulainn is once more placed 
between the devil and the deep blue sea. He has either to make 
the foolhardy gesture of presenting his enemies with his weapon, 
or he has to suffer the ignominy of being reviled for behaviour 
unbecoming of a warrior, and that in a society in which satire 
too can be a death/dealing weapon. And so CuChulainn is 
brought to his death by being placed in a series of ambiguous 
situations where heroism is of no avail.

2

This meeting of opposites is symbolized in a different way in 
the death of the Welsh Lieu Llaw Gyffes.’ It is said that Lieu 
could not be slain within a house nor outside, on horseback 
nor on foot, and, judging by the conditions under which he 
was eventually rendered vulnerable, he could also not be killed 
in water nor on land, clothed nor unclothed. As if to put a fine 
point on it, he could be killed only with a spear which had 
taken a year to make and which had been worked on only 
when people were at Mass on Sunday, that is during sacred 
‘intemporaf moments when eternity impinges upon the world 
of time. He was in fact smitten in circumstances where all the 
opposites we have mentioned met. The same motif is to be 
found in Indian stories. Thus the demon Namuci once got the 
better of Indra but released him on condition that he agreed not 
to slay him by day or by night, with a staff or a bow, with the 
flat of the hand or with fists, with anything wet or dry. Even/ 
tually, Indra slays him in the twilight with the foam of the 
waters.®

These ‘betwixts and betweens’® are mid/points or the mid/ 
way/line between opposites; they are neither this nor that. Or 
they may be regarded as a union of opposites, both this and 
that. Conceived of in this latter way, betwixts/and/betweens 
shed a ray of light on the significance of the ‘multiple death’, 
which is another characteristic motif of Irish death tales. King 
Diarmait (son of Fergus) had caused the house of Flann son334 Celtic Heritage

of Dima to be burnt and its owner, sorely wounded and seek^ 
ing to avoid the flames, had got into a bathing vat and had 
expired there. And St Ciaran had prophesied that Diarmait 
himself would suffer the same death, ‘to be wounded, and 
drowned, and burnt’. Later on. Bee, the best seer of his time, 
prophesied that the king would be killed by Aed Dub (‘Black 
Aed’) in the house of Banban,* the hospitaller, where the 
ridge.'pole would fall on his head. The seer also foretold the 
paradoxical circumstances of the king’s end, and although Aed 
was immediately banished these were confirmed when Diar^ 
mait enquired of his druids what death he was to die. 
‘Slaughter,’ said the first druid, ‘and ’tis a shirt grown from a 
single flax-seed, with a mantle of one sheep’s wool, that you 
will wear on the night of your death.’ ‘It is easy for me to evade 
that,’ Dairmait said. ‘Drowning,’ said the second druid, ‘and 
it is ale brewed from one grain of corn that you shall despatch 
that night.’ ‘Burning,’ said the third druid, ‘and bacon of 
swine that never were farrowed— that shall be on your dish.’ 
‘That is unlikely,’ said Diarmait.His death was eventually encompassed in circumstances 
which reconciled all these contradictions. Banban invited the 
king to a night’s entertainment. Mugain, the king’s wife, re-' 
fused to go with him and warned him that to go upon an in/' 
vitation was destined to have evil consequences for him. 
Nevertheless Diarmait went with Banban and when they had 
settled down in the house, a graceful young woman in fine 
raiment entered. ‘Whence the womans’ asked Diarmait. ‘She 
is a daughter of mine,’ replied Banban, ‘and, to spite Mugain 
because she came not with me, the girl shall this night be your 
wife.’ ‘I am well pleased,’ said the king. A bed was made 
ready for them. Then Banban said: ‘Well girl, have you 
brought raiment for the kings’ She handed a shirt and a mantle 
to Diarmait and he put them on. ‘’Tis a good shirt,’ said all. 
‘It befits you,’ said Banban, ‘the shirt of one flax/seed — she is

* Little Pig^

Deaths 335

a fanciful girl and it is she that sowed a single seed of flax and 
made a strike of it which then became a ridgefuL’ “Tis a 
good mantle,’ cried all, ‘It is good,’ said Banban, ‘it is made 
of a single sheep’s wool.’ Then food and drink was brought 
them. ‘The bacon that was never farrowed is good,’ said 
Banban, and he explained that the piglings were cut, with 
knives, from their mothers and afterwards fattened, ‘’Tis good 
ale!’ said all. ‘It is good,’ said Banban, ‘ale brewed of a single 
grain of corn.’ The grain had been found in the crop of a 
ringdove; it had been sown and its yield sown again and from 
the second harvest the ale had been made.Diarmait looked up and observed that whereas the lower 
part of the house was new, the upper/work was older. Banban 
explained that the ridge^beam had been found floating towards 
himself and his companions while they were fishing. ‘Truthfully 
uttered was the prophecy of Bee and the druids,’ said Diarmait, 
and he sprang to get out. ‘This is the way,’ said Aed Dub at 
the doorway, planting in the king’s breast a spear which broke 
his spine. Then Diarmait turned back into the house. Ulster/ 
men surrounded the dwelling and burned it upon those that 
were in it. Diarmait, seeking to avoid the flames, entered the ale 
vat, whereupon the roof/tree fell on his head, and so he died,^®

To the question: ‘What was the cause of Diarmait’s death?’, 
there are four different answers, each of which is both true 
and untrue. He was speared: no, he was drowned: no, he was 
burnt: no, it was the roof/tree that fell on his head! In a world 
of ‘either/or’ or ‘nothing but’ he could not have died at all.

3

The Death of Diarmait brings into prominence the fatal feast, 
the hero’s last supper before his death, which has already 
appeared in a less pronounced manner in the stories of Cu/ 
Chulainn and Conaire. The supernatural character of this 
meal is expressed in different ways. By eating his namesake 
CiiChulainn partakes of himself: the opposition of eater and

336 Celtic Heritage336 Celtic Heritage

eaten, of subject and object, is superseded. The squealing pig 
which Conaire is destined to consume is carried by a one/eyed, 
one-armed, one^fboted man, a being like the Sons of Calatin 
whose bodies are free from the duality which is inherent in the 
human frame. And the transcendence of multiplicity is sym-' 
bolized in the derivation of Diarmait’s death drink and death 
clothes from unitary origins, while his repast consisted of the 
flesh of pigs that had never been born. We would suggest that 
Conaire in acting as a go-'between in the quarrel of the two 
serfs, and CuChulainn in his repeated slaughter of pairs of 
contending warriors, were placing themselves on that super/* 
natural level which is above opposites. In Norse stories of 
journeys to the land of the dead, two armies engaged in unend/* 
ing conflict are among the wonders encountered on the way.^^ 
There is an analogous motif in the story of the feast which 
precedes the sequence of events that lead to the death of Finn. 
The two cupbearers who carry Finn’s magic drinking/'horn 
engage in a quarrel. Neither is the victor, for each kills the 
other in the presence of the Fiana. ‘That deed weighed heavily 
on Finn’s mind, so that for a long time he was silent, without 
drink or food, or delight of mind. ... “I regret those two”, said 
Finn; “but I am not so much troubled about their death as 
about that which gave rise to it”.’ And he told the story of how 
he had received the cup from Cronanach of Sfd ar Femuin. 
‘Thereupon with great sadness Finn put the horn from him 
and thenceforth they ceased from that conversation.’^*Another curious feature of the hero’s death is its connection 
with an incident of a sexual nature. Conchobar is fatally 
wounded by Get when the women of Connacht have per/ 
suaded him to turn aside ‘that they might see his shape’,^® and 
Niall of the Nine Hostages is slain in similar circumstances.^ * 
At the instigation of Ailill, the blind Lugaid unwittingly slew 
Fergus mac Roich with a spearcast when the warrior was 
swimming in a lake with Medb on his breast, her legs entwined 
around him.*® Conall Cernach, prompted by a jealous Medb,

Deaths

337

slew Ailill in his turn when the latter was behind a hazehbush, 
consorting with a woman, on the morning of May Day.^® 
On the eve of the battle at which he was doomed to die, Eogan 
son of Ailill slept with his host’s daughter at her father’s re/- 
quest, as, in a like situation, did Art the father of Cormac.^' 
CuRof’s abduction of Blathnat led to his being killed with her 
connivance as he slept with his head in her lap.^® It is told that 
Cumall, chief of the Fiana, could be killed only when he lay 
in the arms of his wife and then only with his own sword. His 
enemies brought the daughter of the king of Lochlann to be 
his wife, and they took the bridal couple through seven doors 
and seven rooms and left them there, locking each of the seven 
doors as they retired. A traitor. Area Dubh,* the king’s 
fisher, was hidden in the inner room and he slew Cumall with 
the fatal sword.^® Or, according to another version,®* a 
beautiful woman is placed on an islet; Cumall swims to her 
and is killed by Area Dubh who hides in the grass.In the tales we have told in this chapter, the mysterious 
woman with whom the hero consorts helps to seal his fate. 
Diarmait lies with Banban’s daughter who then regales him 
with the food and raiment of his death. It is from among a 
company of women that CuChulainn sets out to his last 
battle. In the version of the story which we have followed, the 
Morrigan (Badb), acting like a friend, breaks the chariot to 
impede his going to the battle. According to the longer ver-' 
sion,®^ his closest companion during his last days is his mis-' 
tress, Niam,** wife of Conall, the woman whose requests he 
finds it most difficult to refuse. With her he goes to a feast in 
Glenn na mBodar to which Cathbad the druid has invited 
him and a company of noble ladies, while Emer, his wife, 
remains behind. The noise of %hting cannot be heard from 
this glen, and Niam’s purpose is to dissuade CiSChulainn 
from joining battle, but ‘Calatfn’s daughter’, Badb, presents 
herself to him in the form of Niam and exhorts him to go. Niam

* *Bkck Area*.

** ‘Brightness*, ‘Beauty*.

..y ,

338 Celtic Heritage

and the Badb seem to be personifications of the two-'fold char/ 
acter of the woman who befriends the hero at the time of his 
death. She is both his friend and the feminine personification 
of his doom.■ Transgressing his gessa Conaire admits the lone woman, 
Cailb, into Da Derga’s Hostel, The description of her mon/ 
strous form includes an allusion to her sexual parts, as does the 
description of her double who accompanies the black man with 
the squealing pig, and she answers Conaire saying that she 
desires what he also desires. In the obscure roll of thirty/two (?) 
names which she chants on one foot and with one breath, when 
she is neither in the house nor outside it, are Samain, Ugliness, 
Oblivion, Crime, Conflict, Fray, Crash, Noise (?) and 
Amazement (?) as well as Nemain (or Macha), the name of 
the goddess of war, and Badb, that of the ominous crow of the 
battlefield.®^ Thus Cailb, like the Indian Kali, is the personi/ 
fication of death, woe, and destruction, and she invites the 
reluctant hero to make her his ultimate bride.

4

We will now relate the story of the Death of Muirchertach®® 
which embodies in still another way the motifs of the bride of 
the victim, the fatal feast, the contending warriors, a Fomorian/ 
like killer, and a body shared between fire and water in death. 
One day when Muirchertach, King of Ireland, is seated alone 
on his hunting/mound, a beautiful girl in a green mantle 
appears beside him and he is so filled with love for her that he 
would give the whole of Ireland if he could have her for one 
night. She describes herself as ‘the paramour of Muirchertach’ 
and declares that, being skilled in places more secret than this, 
she already knows him and the other men of Ireland. ‘I will 
give you power over me, O damsel,’ says he, and she offers her/ 
self to him on condition that he never utters her name, that

Deaths

339Deaths

339

the mother of his children shall not be in her sight, and that 
clerics shall never be in the same house as herself. The king 
accepts these conditions and asks her what her name is, so that 
he may avoid uttering it. Beautiful though she is, she utters a 
string of names similar to those of the loathsome Cailb— 
‘Sigh, Sough, Storm, Rough Wind, Winter/’night, Cry, Wail, 
Groan.’To please her, the queen and her children are turned out of 
the house of Cletech, and practitioners of every craft and art in 
Ireland together with their wives are brought into the drinking-' 
hall. St Cairnech is so incensed by the expulsion of the queen 
that he curses the steading and digs a grave for the king, saying, 
‘He whose grave this is has finished, and truly it is an end of his 
realm and his princedom.’ The king sits on the throne with the 
girl on his right, and feeling that she is ‘a goddess of great 
power’ he asks her what kind of power she has. She replies 
that she believes in God; she is of the race of Adam and Eve, 
yet she can work great wonders. Muirchertach asks her to 
perform miracles. She makes wine of the water of the Boyne 
and enchanted pigs of ferns, and this magic repast saps the 
strength of the Hng and his host. She conjures up illusions, 
among which are two battalions of equal strength slaughtering 
each other, the one blue and the other headless. Muirchertach 
exhausts himself in battling against these shadows which are 
really nothing but stones, ferns and sods. Then on the seventh 
night, the eve of Wednesday after Samain, a storm arises. 
‘This is the sigh of a winter night,’ says the king. The girl 
replies: ‘’Tis I am the Rough Wind . . . Winter night is my 
name ... Sigh and Wind, Winter/night.’ When he again 
speaks of the storm (sin) that is raging she asks him: ‘Why do 
you utter my name, O man;’ and tells him that he is doomed. 
‘That is true, O damsel ... for it was foretold that my death 
and the death of my grandfather would be alike.’ Muircher-' 
tach had burned his grandfather in his house. Visions of 
burning and drowning^* now disturb his enchanted sleep. 
Sin sets the house on fire and arrays around it phantom attackers

340 Celtic Heritage340 Celtic Heritage

said to be Tuathal Maelgarb*®® son of Cormac the One-Eyed 
and his armies seeking revenge. Muirchertach gets into a cask 
of wine and is drowned while fire falls on his head and burns 
the upper part of his body.

Like the feast of Samain at Emain Macha, the story of Muir/' 
chertach’s death extends over seven days, with Samain Eve 
presumably in the middle, and it was indeed a time of ‘mis^ 
chief and confusion’. CuRoi, Crimthann, CuChulainn, and 
Conaire are all said to have died at Samain, while Ailill 
and Flann died at Beltaine.^® Thus, just as the incidents 
preceding the death of the hero symbolize in various ways the 
convergence of opposites, so the time of his death is a time 
when pairs of worlds which are normally in contradistinction 
— summer and winter, natural and supernatural, the living 
and the dead — fuse together and intermingle.

The Irish death/tales are called Oitte, ‘violent (or tragic) 
deaths’. For CuChulainn, and for champions generally, to die 
of disease or old age would be an anti/cHmax. It is essential to 
the ethos of a warrior caste that death in battle should be the 
most glorious of all deaths, the death which ensures admission 
to paradise. Lucan says that the Celtic warrior had no fear of 
death, for ‘death ... is but the centre of a long life.’ Most of the 
Irish kings mentioned in the official annals also died violently, 
many of them at the hands of their successors. In the stories we 
have told, however, it is not merely a case of the strong ousting 
the weak from the throne. The festive occasion, the fateful 
bride and the elaborate predetermined circumstances of the 
deaths of Conaire, Diarmait, Muirchertach — and of Cu^ 
Chulainn too — ^recall the ceremonial ‘killing of the king’, when 
his powers failed or when he had ruled for a prescribed term, 
which was once the custom over a large part of Africa and 
of which there are traces in other parts of the world.®’Nevertheless, if the interpretation put forward in the previous 
chapters is valid, the myths have a bearing on the meaning of 
* *Rough^head\

Deaths

341

death itsel£ They proclaim that death, however peaceful it 
may appear to be, is a work of violence, a cutting down. The 
myths do not mitigate the impact of death with soothing words; 
they present it in its grimmest brutality. And yet, the declama^ 
tion of such stories at Samain, perhaps, and at wakes for the 
dead, had its proper function. They elevated death to the plane 
of the tragic and the heroic. From a human standpoint deaths 
may be dismissed as due to natural causes: accidents, diseases, 
and so on; some are expected, others are ‘premature’. But 
mjrthologically speaking no death is natural, nothing is ever 
premature and there is no such thing as accident. Deaths are 
preordained; and the contingent causes are but the agents of 
pre^-existent and precognizable destinies. It is noteworthy that 
folk^belief is in agreement with the myths. However ‘sudden* 
the death, there will have been omens. An apple-tree will have 
blossomed out of season, a hen will have crowed like a cock, 
or a dog will have howled at night. Someone will have seen a 
corpse-candle or a phantom-funeral or there will have been a 
premonitory dream or an inexplicable uneasiness. These 
portents accentuate the eeriness and mystery of death; they en- 
hance its meaning. It is a reality of whose imminence the natural 
and supernatural worlds are aware and of which they take 
cognisance. Unlike such contemporary banalities as ‘Well, he 
had a happy life’ or ‘He did not suffer much’ or ‘He is better 
out of his misery’, m3rth and folk-belief do not strip death of its 
significance and so do not depreciate the nobility of human 
beings.

CHAPTER XVIII

Epilogue

‘Whatever is here, that is there; what is there, the same is here. 
He who seeth here as different, meeteth death after death.’

KATHA UPANISHADCHAPTER XVIII

Epilogue

‘Whatever is here, that is there; what is there, the same is here. 
He who seeth here as different, meeteth death after death.’

KATHA UPANISHAD

‘And for this cause it were right for thee to buy the poems of the 
poets, and to keep the poets in Ireland, and since all the world is 
but a story, it were well for thee to buy the more enduring story, 
rather than the story that is less enduring.’

JUDGEMENT OF ST COLUM CILLE

In diverse ways myth and ritual loosen the grip of the temporal 
world upon the human spirit. Under the spell of the story/ 
teller’s art, the range of what is possible in this world is trans/ 
cended: the world of magic becomes a present reality and the 
world of every/day is deprived of its uniqueness and univer/ 
sality. The storyteller, like the juggler and the illusionist, by 
convincingly actualizing the impossible, renders the actual 
world less real. When the spell is over, the hearer ‘comes back 
to earth*, but the earth now is not quite so solid as it was before, 
the cadence of its time is less oppressive and its laws have only 
a relative validity.

‘If poets’ verses be but stories.

So be food and raiment stories;

So is all the world a story;

So is man of dust a story.’^

As myth and ritual are realized, the present world becomes a 
stage and ordinary life a play.

Not only is myth not bounded by the laws of nature, it 
transcends the limitations of common sense. To the questions: 
‘Where is the Other World?’, ‘Is it one or many?’, the answers 
furnished by myth are contradictory. It is the ‘lower’ half of

342

Epilogue 343342

Epilogue 343

Ireland, the land under the earth or the r/if/mounds. It is also 
‘the land under the wave’, an island, or a whole series of islands 
beyond the sea. Yet it can manifest itself in other places. A mist 
falls upon us in an open plain, and lo, we are there witnessing 
its wonders. We go to sleep in the enchanted land and by 
morning all has disappeared, or we have been mysteriously 
re/transported to our own homes. The limits of such a world 
cannot be ‘defined’ in terms of distance or direction. Situated 
far beyond the horizon, it is the goal of the most perilous 
journey in the world; present unseen all round us, it can break 
in upon us ‘in the twinMing of an eye’.

Stranger still, it can be two things at once. In the Adventure 
of Bran, even the opposition of land and water is effaced in the 
Plain of Delight. Again, it is a land of truth, peace, and ever/ 
lasting life —

‘Unknown is wailing and tteachery 
In the familiar culdvated land.

There is nothing rough or harsh.

But sweet music striking on the ear.

Without grief, without sorrow, without death.

Without sickness, without debility . . .’®

— and yet, some of the tales tell of battles, abductions, and 
slaughter in this delightful land. The same ambivalence char/ 
acterizes its inhabitants; they are either ‘good people’ or they 
are the most horrible monstrosities conceivable. Its women 
are either divinely beautiful or they are fiendish hags. It is a 
world of superlatives.

Defying definition in space, the Other World also transcends 
mundane time. Characteristically, this is expressed in the 
stories in two opposite ways. On the one hand, a very short 
time in the Other World corresponds with a very long time 
in this world. Many are the stories in medieval texts and in 
modern folklore which tell of a man who returns after a 
seemingly brief sojourn in that enchanted world and finds that 
his contemporaries are dead and that his own name is but a

344 Celtic Heritage344 Celtic Heritage

memory. When he touches the ground or embraces a venerable 
grand/'nephew or tastes the food of mortals, he moulders into a 
little heap of dust as though he had been dead for ages.® On 
the other hand, a long time in the Other World sometimes 
transpires to have been but an instant in this world. Nera, 
after three days in the sid returns to find his companions at the 
same meal as they were preparing when he left them. Similarly, 
Becfola, who goes out early one Sunday morning, leaving her 
husband. King Diarmait, in bed, and spends a day and a 
night on an otherworld island in a lake, finds on her return 
that it is still the same Sunday morning and that her husband 
is just getting out of bed.* Thus otherworld ‘time’ is both 
longer and shorter than the time of our world. The same para- 
dox appears in the Second Epistle of St Peter: ‘one day is with 
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years is as one 
day.’‘The wall of Paradise,’ says Nicholas of Cusa, ‘is built of 
contraries, nor is there any way to enter but for one who has 
overcome the highest spirit of reason who guards the gate.’® 
It is a function of mythology to confound this guardian spirit 
of reason so that finite man may glimpse the infinity which lies 
beyond the confines of the cosmos. Coincidences of opposites 
and of other irreconcilables give a shock to the understanding 
and transport the spirit to the gateway of the Other World. 
In the Welsh story of Llyn y Fan,® a youth sees a supernatural 
woman on the surface of the lake. The gulf that separates him 
from her is bridged when he offers her a symbol of the union of 
opposites, bread which is both baked and unbaked, and when 
he performs the further feat of drawing a distinction between 
identities by recognizing her beside a sister who is exactly like 
herself. She abides with him until he has given her ‘three cause- 
less blows’, and the circumstances in which these blows are 
given reveal his failure to apprehend the universality of the 
paradox by which he has won her. The first arises out of his 
misunderstanding of her reluctance to attend a christening

Epilogue 345

ceremony— a rite which separates a human being from his 
supernatural associations. The second blow is given when she 
weeps at a wedding, and the third when she laughs at a funeral. 
The revelation that seen through supernatural eyes joy and 
sorrow coincide both at weddings and at funerals comes as a 
shock to him, and instead of letting this truth loosen the bonds 
of his spirit he tries to suppress it and to impose upon his god/” 
dess his own one-sided view.The thin line between opposites has essentially the same signi/- 
ficance as the dangerous bridges that lead to the citadels of the 
Other World, the narrow bridge, the razor-edge bridge, or the 
see-saw bridge which can only be negotiated by leaping on to 
its middle. It is the space between the blades that rise from the 
threshold and those that depend from the lintel of the door to 
the giant’s castle, it is the middle course between Scylla and 
Charybdis.'' Irish poets deemed that the brink of water was 
always a place where eicse — ‘wisdom’, ‘poetry’, ‘knowledge’ 
— ^was revealed.® Such lines without breadth symbolize the 
supernatural in the realm of space, and in modern folklore 
banished spirits can be confined in such spaceless places as 
‘between the froth and the water’ or ‘between the bark and the 
tree’.® Temporally, the same phenomenon is represented as the 
juncture between two years or between two seasons, or it is 
‘to-day’, that which never was and never will be, and yet is.^°

Similarly, objects which can be regarded as ‘neither this 
nor that’ have a mysterious supernatural virtue. The efficacy 
of dew (washed in at dawn, when it is neither day nor night, 
on May morn when it is neither winter nor summer)^ ^ no 
doubt derives from its being neither rain nor sea water, river 
nor well water. It appears to come neither from above nor 
from below. So too, the mistletoe is neither a shrub nor a tree. 
As a plant which does not grow from the ground, it falls into 
the same intermediate category as ‘a man not born of woman’ 
or of ‘pigs that never were farrowed’. It defies classification, and 
is therefore free from the limitations that are inherent in a 
definition. Though all the plants of the earth had sworn not

346 Celtic Heritage346 Celtic Heritage

to hurt Balder, the mistletoe was exempt from this oath and 
could still be used to slay the god.^® In popular custom a person 
who stands beneath a bough of this tree which is not a tree 
frees himself from the restrictions of convention: he can take 
liberties. Conversely, he places himself outside the protection 
of normal conventions, and forfeits which he cannot refuse can 
be exacted from him. We have suggested that the reason why 
CuChulainn’s spear could be demanded from him every time 
he intervened in the feigned quarrel of two warriors is that by 
intervening he placed himself in that free but vulnerable posi/ 
tion between contraries, where no boon can be refused. All 
things are possible in this saaed state between being and non^ 
being. The individual who dares to enter it in defiance of the 
spirit of reason places himself within reach of salvation, but 
he also exposes himself to the dangers of annihilation in the 
river of death that lies under the sword^-edge bridge.Much has been written during the past three decades about 
the ritual significance of mazes, both as a protection against 
supernatural powers and as a path which the dead must follow 
on their way to the world of the spirits.^® Here we will simply 
note that mazes are in relation to directions what betwixts-' 
and/betweens are in relation to opposites. In passing through a 
maze one is not going in any particular direaion, and by so 
doing one reaches a destination which cannot be located by 
reference to the points of the compass. According to Irish 
folk^belief, fairies and other supernatural beings can cause a 
man to lose his bearings (just as they can upset his sense of 
time); he can also lose them by stepping on a ‘stray sod’ beneath 
which a foetus or an unbaptized infant has been buried.^* 
Conversely, in some of the ‘Voyages’ it is when the voyagers 
have lost their course and shipped their oars — ^when they are 
not going anywhere — ^that they arrive in the wondrous isles.

Whereas the union of two opposites is symbolized by the 
line along which they impinge upon one another, the recon/- 
ciUation of three or more independent entities involves the

347

EpilogueWhereas the union of two opposites is symbolized by the 
line along which they impinge upon one another, the recon/- 
ciUation of three or more independent entities involves the

347

Epilogue

discovery of the point at which they coincide. The former corres^ 
ponds to a territorial boundary, the latter to ‘The Meeting of the 
Three Waters’, the meeting of three townlands, or the centre of 
Ireland where all the provinces meet and fuse together. Uisnech 
is in all the four provinces, and in none of them. Analogically, 
the multiple deaths we have discussed are points where three 
or more independent deeds meet in one deed. An effect should 
have a sufficient cause, but in these tales the effect is produced 
by several sufficient causes, with the result that a common^ 
place explicable event is transmuted into an enigma which is 
an affront to the principle of causality. For an event to have 
three or more adequate causes is tantamount to its having no 
cause at all. The spearing, drowning, and burning of Diarmait 
are not factors in an integrated process; they are incompatibles 
between which there is no relation other than coincidence.

The discovery of points where unrelated things coincide is 
one of the great arts of seers and magicians. It is said of the 
seer Bee mac De that he could speak with nine persons at once, 
and that with one answer he could resolve the nine separate 
questions addressed to him. Three men once asked him three 
disconnected questions: (i) How long will there be dwellers 
in the fortJ (2) What is the river’s depth? (3) What is the thicks 
ness of bacon/fat this year? *Pas go tSin amarach. A short 
measure (3) to the bottom (2) tomorrow (i),’ said Bee, 
answering the three questions in the reverse order. Here we 
have the compression of three unrelated answers into one 
sentence, just as two or more unrelated meanings are composed 
in a pun.The enigmatic quality of certain situations, things, char-- 
acters, deeds and events is bound up with coincidences which are 
essentially the same as those found in puns — coincidences which 
cannot but baffle those who follow the dictates of common 
sense. Mongan stands with one foot on a sod from Ireland and 
the other on a sod from Scotland. The wizards of the king of 
Leinster divine that he has one foot in Ireland and the other in 
Scotland, and the king concludes that so long as he is like that

348 Celtic Heritage

he is harmless.^ “ When Diarmaid and Grainne are in the forest, 
Grainne sleeps on a bed of rushes while Diarmaid sits on a bag 
of sea sand. By chewing his thumb of knowledge Finn learns 
that Grainne is on the rushes and Diarmaid on the sands of the 
sea, and he pursues both in vain.^^ A multiple death is of the 
same order as a pun, and so is an incestuous birth through which 
a man can be both the son and the grandson of the same 
woman, or his own mother’s brother. They are abnormalities 
which demonstrate the ultimate inadequacy of logical cate^ 
gories, just as the coincidence of conflicting shows the 
limitations of moral precepts.Punning is an ancient art and recent studies have shown 
that it was not indulged in merely for fun. Among the Egyp^ 
tians punning was not only an ‘inveterate habit’; theological 
and cosmological concepts were inextricably bound up with 
it.^® The same ‘insidious habit’ ‘moulds much Hindu ritual’.^® 
The recognition of puns in early Celtic literature will no doubt 
increase as the texts are studied in more detail. It may well be 
that the philological uncertainty which haunts the interpreta/ 
tion of so many names in Celtic and other early literatures is 
partly due to their being puns the clues to which have long been 
forgotten. The Irish Coir Anmann and the Dindsenchas very 
often give two or three alternative explanations of the names of 
persons and places, but unlike the modern etymologist they 
do not single out one of these explanations as the true one. 
One wonders whether these alternatives can be dismissed as 
mere fragments of unrelated lore gathered together and recorded 
for the sake of completeness, as in a modern folkdore collection, 
or whether it was considered fitting that the meaning of sig^ 
nificant names should be complex and enigmatic.

Just as several meanings can meet in the same name, so can 
several names meet in the same person. We have mentioned the 
fateful Cailb who expresses unity through her posture and 
multiplicity through her numerous names. Sin also gives her/ 
self a number of names which she utters together, while her 
insistence that her name must not be spoken by Muirchertach

349

Epilogue349

Epilogue

indicates a refusal to be identified with, or contained in, one 
word or idea. It will be recalled that the wizard Amairgen 
describes himself as wind, wave, roar, bull, vulture, dew/drop, 
flower, boar, salmon, lake, mountain, word of skill, point of 
weapon, god. Lug is a craftsman of consummate skill, but 
his art cannot be defined as that of any one category of crafts-' 
man. Master of every art, he is the concurrence and synchrony 
of what can only appear as many in the world of ordinary 
experience.

To summarize: there is in the concepts of the boundary, the 
centre, intercalary time, ‘to-day’, betwixts^and-'betweens, in'' 
cestuous births, Caesarian births, multiple deaths, multiple 
names, multiple skills, puns and, we may add, metaphors, 
an ambiguity, or a multiplication or concentration of meaning 
which makes them fitting symbols of the unmanifest, which is 
itself the world of chaos and at the same time the ground of all 
being. They can all be formulated as paradoxical riddles and 
this may well be the reason why riddles play such an important 
part in all traditional cultures. The master poets of ancient 
Ireland had their riddling contests, and according to Marban the 
Swineherd, ‘chief prophet of heaven and earth’, such disputa-- 
tions first arose from the knowledge^bearing nuts of the nine 
hazels of wisdom that grew over the mysterious well of Segais. 
In a contest between Marban and Dael Duiled, the ollam of 
Leinster, the riddles for the most part involve such ‘Irishisms’ 
as:

What good did Man find on earth that God did not findj

Answer: A worthy master.

What beast lives in the sea and is drowned when it is 
taken out of it!

Answer: G«/f« Ahraein.

What animal lives in fire and is burnt when taken out of 
i«

Answer: (Salamander).

350 Celtic HeritageAnswer: G«/f« Ahraein.

What animal lives in fire and is burnt when taken out of 
i«

Answer: (Salamander).

350 Celtic Heritage

When Dael Duiled loses the contest, he throws himself upon 
the protection ofMarban.*® Widespread stories could be quoted 
in which people who cannot find the answer to a riddle die or 
are carried away by demons, and others in which men save 
their lives by posing riddles which their judges cannot answer.®^ 
Several kinds of riddles figure in marriage stories and rituals, 
as means of bringing opposites together. In ‘The Wooing of 
Ailbe’ there are many of the kind which requires finding a 
degree beyond the superlative:^^

What is sweeter than mead? — Intimate conversation.

What is blacker than the raven? — Death.

What is whiter than snow? — Truth.

What is swifter than the wind? — Thought.

What is sharper than the sword? — Understanding.

What is lighter than a spark? — The mind of a woman 
between two men.

Each answer involves a metaphorical transmutation of the 
adjective in the question. There are other riddles in which 
merely numerical questions are answered in terms of the duality 
of things:

How many horses came to Tailtiu? — Two horses, mare 
and stallion.*®

How many trees are in Assal? — Two trees, the green and 
the withered.

It need hardly be added that with these, as with the other arti/ 
fices we have mentioned, the answer can be found only by 
juggling with the normally accepted categories of thought.

If we fail to discern a deep profundity in such subtleties and 
satisfy ourselves that punning is ‘the lowest form of wit’, we 
might well remember that our minds are so conditioned that 
we do not see much in myths either. We have relegated both 
riddles and myths to the kindergarten, and it is disconcerting 
to find that for the seers and sages of old they enshrined the 
deepest wisdom, Vishnu, the supreme Hindu god, is known 
as the ‘Cosmic Juggler’,** while the very word hdhman

Epilogue 351Epilogue 351

(neuter) signifies the ‘cosmic enigma*. ‘Expressed in and by 
the liturgy, the enigma contains the sum of the correlations by 
which the hidden architecture of the universe is revealed. . . . 
Through the play of riddles, the great connections and the 
major equivalences are discovered; it is a subterfuge designed 
to admit the ineffable into human discourse.’^®

And is not the mercurial, shape^shifting, enigmatic magic 
which we have described the essence of all art? However exact a 
likeness a sculptor may carve, he is defeating his purpose if the 
work lacks perfection of form and rhythm, or if the fact that 
it is also stone is obscured. A poem, likewise, is a synchronic 
zation and synthesis of many things, related and unrelated to 
one another. There are ideas, often superimposed upon one 
another in metaphors conveying a concentration of meaning; 
there is rhythm which may bear no relation to the syntax; 
there is rhyme which ties together in nearcpuns words which 
do not otherwise belong together, and there is alliteration or 
assonance which establishes further connections where reason 
would find none.

From a mythological standpoint, such correspondences are 
neither accidents nor inventions. They are discoveries, their 
validity grounded in the inexhaustible analogical riches of the 
universe. Their magic has delighted and sustained the spirit 
of man throughout the ages, for it has the power to breach the 
constraining boundaries of the finite so that the light of eterc 
nity may transubstantiate that which is commonplace and fill 
it with mystery. And strange as these paradoxes may appear, 
they do not lack points of contact with our own tradition, in 
which God is both One and Three, in which the Saviour is 
both God and Man, and in which the central rite is to partake 
of bread which is not bread, and wine which is not wine.

ACL

AER

AESC

AIM

AKI

AKSG

ALl

ALW

AS

ASt

ATC

AW

BBC

BBCS

BCCS

BDBM

Bid

BDL

BEE

BL

BLt

BTACL

AER

AESC

AIM

AKI

AKSG

ALl

ALW

AS

ASt

ATC

AW

BBC

BBCS

BCCS

BDBM

Bid

BDL

BEE

BL

BLt

BT

CA

cc

ABBREVIATIONS

G Cardiff 
Cb Cambridge 
D Dublin 
E Edinburgh

L London 
NY New York 
O Oxford 
P . Paris

Arcbiv fur celtische Lexko£raphie, ed. W. Stokes and K. 
Meyer (Halle a S., I900”7).

H. Frankfort, Ancient Egyptian Religion (NY, 194S). 
Annales Economies Sociitis Civilmtions,

Anecdotafrom Irish Manuscripts, ed. O. J. Bergin and others 
(Halle a S., 1907-13).

Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland,^ ed. and tr. J. O’Donovan 
(D, 1856).

Der Ahhandlungen der philologishyhistorischen Klasse der kdniglish 
Sdchsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften.

Ancient Laws of Ireland (D, 1865-1901).

Ancient Laws of Wales (L, 1 841).

Acallamh na Senorach, ed. W. Stokes, JT, IV (1900). 
Aberystwyth Studies.

R. S. Loomis, Arthurian Tradition and Chretien de Troyes 
(NY, 1949).

African Worlds, ed. D. Forde (L, 1954).

The Black Book of Carmarthen, ed. J. G. Evans (Pwllheli, 
1906).

Bulletin of the Board of Celtic Studies.

M. M. Banks, British Calendar Customs: Scotland (L, 
I937-40-

The Banquet of Dtin na nGed and the Battle of Mag Rath, ed. 
and tr. J. O’Donovan (D, 1842).

E. Conze, Buddhism ( 0 , 1959).

P. Mac Cana, Branwen Daughter of Llyr (C, 1958).

A. H. Krappe, Balor with the Evil Eye (NY, 1927).

The Book of Leinskr, ed. R. Atkinson (O, 1880).

A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Bughear of Literacy (L, 1949). 
The Book of Taliesin, ed. J. G. Evans (Lknbedrog, 1910). 
Coir Anmann, ed. and tr. W. Stokes, IT, III (1897).

A, H. Allcroft, The Circle and the Cross (L, 1927).

352

Abbreviations

353

CCC ■ Compert Con Culmnn^ ed. A. G. van Hamel (D, 193 3).

CF J.Rhys^ Celtic Folklore (O^ igox),

CFt Cath Finntrdp, ed. and tr. K. Meyer (D, 1885).

CG Crkh Gahlach^ ed. D. A. Binchy (D, 1941).

CGd Carmlna GadelicOy ed. and tr. A. Carmichael (E, 1928- ).

CGI Cormacs Glossary, tr. J. O’Donovan, ed. W. Stokes

(Calcutta, 1868).CG Crkh Gahlach^ ed. D. A. Binchy (D, 1941).

CGd Carmlna GadelicOy ed. and tr. A. Carmichael (E, 1928- ).

CGI Cormacs Glossary, tr. J. O’Donovan, ed. W. Stokes

(Calcutta, 1868).

CGt W. F. J. Knight, Cumaean Gates (O, 1936).

Chm M. Eliade, Le Cbamanisme (P, 1951).

Cl E. MacNeill, Celtic Ireland (D, X921).

CIL K. Meyer, Contributions to Irish Lexicography (Halle a S., 
1906).

CJS Ceylon Journal of Science.

CK M. Dillon, The Cycles of the Kings (Cb, 1946).

Cm Y Cymmrodor.

CMT Cath Maighe Tuireadh, ed. and tr. W. Stokes, RC, XII 
(1891).

CMT(C) Cath Muighe Tuireadh, ed. B. (3 Cuiv (D, 1945).

CR The Celtic Review.

CS The CuchuUin Saga in Irish Literature, ed. E. Hull (L, 1898).

Csl J. H. Hutton, Caste in India (Cb, 1946).

CSS G. H. Doble, Cornish Saints Series: III Saint Budoc^ 
(1937), XIII Saint Melor (1927), XV S. Senan (Long 
Compton, 1928).

Cst A. M. Hocart, Caste (L, 1950; first published in French,

1938).

CT L Williams, Chwedl Taliesin (C, 1957)*

CTGV A. Varagnac, Civilisation traditionnelle et genres de vie (P, 
1948).

DF Duanaire Finn, ed. and tr. E. MacNeill (I) and G. Murphy

(IWII) (L, 1908, ’33; D, 1953)*

DH M. Deren, Divine Horsemen (L, 1953)-

DIL Dictionary of the Irish Language (Royal Irish Academy, D,

1913- )•

DIL{C) Contributions to a Dictionary of the Irish Language (Royal Irish 
Academy).

D T ■ The Death Tales of the Ulster Heroes, ed. and tr. K. Meyer 
(p, 1906).

£C Etudes Celtiques.

z

154 ■ Celtic Heritage

ECNE Early Cultures of North'^West Europe, cd. C. Fox and B*

Dickins (Cb, 1950).

EHR R. Pettazzoni, Essays on the History of Religions (tr., Leiden^

1954).

EIHM T. F. O’Rahilly, Early Irish History and Mythology (D, 1946)* 
EIL M. Dillon, Early Irish Literature (Chicago, 1948).

EILI E. MacNeill, Early Irish Lams and Institutions (D, n.d.). 
ERE Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. J. Hastings (E, 1908- 
1926).EILI E. MacNeill, Early Irish Lams and Institutions (D, n.d.). 
ERE Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, ed. J. Hastings (E, 1908- 
1926).

ESC M. Granet, iSfudes sociologiques sur la Chine (P, 195s)- 
ESM Essays and Studies presented to Professor Eoin MacNeill, ed, 
J. Ryan (D, 1940).

FB Fled Bricrend, ed. and tr. G. Henderson (L, 1899).

FBI E. Hull, Folklore of the British Isles (L, 1928).

FD J. G. Frazer, The Fear of the Dead in Primitwe Religion (L,

1933 - 6 ).

FESB L. C. Wimberly, Folklore in the English and Scottish Ballads 
(NY, 1928).

FF Forus Feasa ar &rinn. The History of Ireland by GeolFrey

Keating, ed. and tr. D. Comyn (I) and P. Dinneen 
(IWV) (L, 1902-14).

FI G. Dumezil, Le Festin dTmmortalite (P, 1924).

FL FolhLore.

Fn Fianaigecht, td. and tr. K. Meyer (D, 1910).

Fns The Fians, collected by J. G. Campbell (L, 1891).

jFOT j. G. Frazer, Folklore in the Old Testament (L, 1918-19).

GB J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough^ (L, 1911-15). Vols.

numbered as in General Index.

GDG Gwaith Dafydd ap Gwilym, ed. T. Parry (C, 1952).

GHC M. L. Sjoestedt, Gods and Heroes of the Celts (tr., L, 1949).

GL H. M. Chadwick and N. K, Chadwick, The Growth of

Literature (Cb, 1932-40).

GPC Geiriadur I^ifysgol Cymru, ed. R. J. Thomas (C, 1950- ).

GT Genealogical Tracts, I, ed. and tr. T. <3 Raithbheartagih

(D, 1932).

HB Historia Brittonum {Nennim's), Chronica Minora, ed.

T. Mommsen, III (Berlin, 1898), Refs, are to paragraphs. 
HD A Handwdrterhuch des Deutschen Akrglauhens, ed. H. Bachtold^

Staubli (Berlin, 1927-42).

HGS Homage to George Sarton (NY, 1947).

Ahhreviatiom 355

HHM E, Westermarck, History of Human Marriage^ (L* 1921), 
HIF S. (3 Suilleabhain, A Handbook of Irish Folklore (D, 1942).

HL J. RhySj (The Hibbert Lectures^ 1886) Lectures on the

Origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated hy Celtic Heathen/ 
(L, 1898).

HLt W. E. Soothill, The Hall of Light (L, 1951).

HM Hihernica Minora, ed. and tr. K. Meyer (O, 1894).Origin and Growth of Religion as illustrated hy Celtic Heathen/ 
(L, 1898).

HLt W. E. Soothill, The Hall of Light (L, 1951).

HM Hihernica Minora, ed. and tr. K. Meyer (O, 1894).

HRB Histork Regum Britanniae (Geoffrey of Monmouth), ed. 
A. Griscom (NY, 1929).

HRl Heroic Romances of Ireland, tr. A. H. Leahy (L, 1905 -“6).

HS R. Caillois, Vhomme et le sacre^ (P, 1950).

HTI Hero Tales of Ireland, cd.].CuTtin(L,iS 9 f).

HW J. E. Lloyd, A History of Wales^ (L, 1939).

HWI E.D.H 2 ccdY,TheHolyWelboflreland{ 0 ,iU^^^

ID T. F. 0 *Rahilly, Irish Dialects (D, 1932).

lED P. S. Dinneen, Focloir GaeMge agus Biarla, An Irish^

English Dictionary (D, 1927).

lEW J. Pokorny, Indogermanische Efymologisches Wdrterhuch (Bern,

1949-59).

IF lomarUg na hFiledd, ed. and tr. L. McKenna (L, 1918).

IHK R. Thurneysen, Die Irische Helden/ und Kdnigsage (Halle, 
1921).

IMG H. D’Arbois de Jubainville, The Irish Mythological Cycle

(tr., D, 1903).

IT Irische Texte, ed. W. Stokes and E. Windisch (Leipzig).

ITI G. Dum&il, Videologie tripartie des Indo/Europeens (Bruxelles,

1958).

ITr R. Flower, The Irish Tradition ( 0 , 1947)*

IVHB The Irish Version of the Histork Britonum of Nennius, ed. and 
tr. J. H, Todd (D, 1848).

JAOS Journal of the American Oriental Society.

JCS The Journal of Celtic Studies.

JHS Journal of the Hellenic Society.

JMQ G. Dnmizil, Jupiter Mars Quirinus (P, 1941).

JRS The Journal of Roman Studies.

JRSA Journal of the Royal Society of the Antiquaries of Ireland.

KC A. M. Hocart, Kings and Councillors (Cairo, 1936).

KCp H. Zimmer, The King and the Corpse^ (NY, 195^)*

Kng A. M. Hocart, Kingship ( 0 , 1927)-

JCP J. Abbott, The Keys of Power {L, 193^).

55<5

LBS

LF

LG

LGSG

LIS

LMM

LMU

LP

LSC

MA

Mb

MG

MD

MDG

MER

MM

MP

MS

MSL

Mth

MU

MV

MWHT

NM

NSF

OLRT

OS

OST

Celtic Hentagt

S. Baring/Gould and J. Fisher, The Lives of the British 
Saints (L, 1907-ii).

Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts, collected by P. Kennedy 
(L, 1891).MWHT

NM

NSF

OLRT

OS

OST

Celtic Hentagt

S. Baring/Gould and J. Fisher, The Lives of the British 
Saints (L, 1907-ii).

Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts, collected by P. Kennedy 
(L, 1891).

Lehor Gabala iSrenn, ed. and tr. R. A. S. Macalister (D, 
1938-56).

J. Jones, Lien Gwerin Sir Caernarfon (Caernarfon, n.d.). 
Lives of Irish Saints, ed. and tr. C. Plummer ( 0 , 1922).

E. O’Curry, Lectures on the Manuscript Materials of Ancient 
Irish History (D, 1878).

Lon^es Mac n'Uislenn, ed. and tr. V. Hull (NY, 1949)- 
E. S. Hartland, The Legend of Perseus (L, 1894-6).

Leabhar Shedin 1 Chonaill, ed. S. (3 Duilearga (D, 1948). 
The Myvyrian Archaiology of Wales, ^ed. O. Jones (and others) 
(Denbigh, 1870).

The Mdbinogion, tr. G. Jones and T. Jones (L, 1949).

E. O’Curry, On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient 
Irish (L, 1873).

The Metrical Dindshenchas, ed. and tr. E. Gwynn (D,

1903-35)-

G. Dum&il, Mythes et dieux des Germains (P, 1939)-

M. Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return (tr., L, 1955)- 
W. J. Gruffydd, Math vdb Mathonwy (C, 1928).

Modern Philology.

H. Zimmer, Myths and Symbols in Indian Art and Civile 
zation (NY, 1946).

Medieval Studies in Memory of Gertrude Schoepperle Loomis 
(P, 1927).

R. Briffault, The Mothers (L, 1927).

Mesca Ulad, ed. J. C. Watson (D, 1941).

G. Dumezil, Mitro'Varuna^ (P, 1948).

More West Highland Tales, ed. J. G. McKay and others 
(E, 1940).

M. Eliade, Naissances mystiques^ (P, 1959).

A. M. Hocart, The Northern States of Fiji (L, 1952).

G. Murphy, The Ossianic Lore and Romantic Tales of Medieval 
Ireland (D, 1955).

The Ocean of Story, tr. C. H. Tawney, ed. N. M. Penzer 
(L, 1924-8).

Ossianic Society Transactions.

Abbreviations

357

PBA Proceedings ef the British Academy.

PC G. Dnmezil^ Le probUme des Centaurs 1929).

PCR M. Eliade, Patterns in Comparative Religion (£r.» L, 1958). 
PE The Prose Edda, ti. J. L Young (Cb, 1954).

PKM Pedeir Keincy Mahinogi, ed. 1 . Williams (C, 1930).PCR M. Eliade, Patterns in Comparative Religion (£r.» L, 1958). 
PE The Prose Edda, ti. J. L Young (Cb, 1954).

PKM Pedeir Keincy Mahinogi, ed. 1 . Williams (C, 1930).

PLGl D. Deeney, Peasant Lore from Gaelic Ireland (L, 1901). 
PMLA Publications of the Modern Language Association of America,

PP N. K. Chadwick, Poetry and Prophecy {Ch^ 1942),

PRIA Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy,

PTWH Popular Tales of the West Highlands^ ed. and tr. J. F, Camp-^

bell (E, 1860-2).

QJMS The Quarterly Journal of the Mythical Society (Bangalore). 
JR^C J. A. MacCulloch, The Religion of the Ancient Celts 
(E, 1911).

RC Revue Celtique,

RH H. R. Ellis, The Road to Hel (Cb, 1943)*

Rbn W. J. GrufFydd, Rhiannon (C, 195 3).

RIR G. Dumezil, Rituels IndoyEuropeens d Rome (P, 1954).

RlC J, Vendryes, La religion des Celtes, Les religions de VEurope

Ancienne (P, 1948).

RVAV U. Harva, Die Religiosen Vorstellungen der Altaischen Vdlker^ 
(Helsinki, 193S).

RVL A, K. Coomaraswamy, The Rg Veda as Land^Ndma^Bok

(L, 1935)-

SAI R. S. Shamra, Sudras in Ancient India (Delhi, 1958).

SAL J. Rhys, Studies in the Arthurian Legend (O, 1891).

SBE The Sacred Books of the East General Editor: F. Max 
Muller (O, 1879-94).

SC Gon Culainn^ ed. M. Dillon (D, 1953).

SEIL R. Thurneysen and others. Studies in Early Irish Law (D, 
1936).

SF G. Dum&il, Serviuset la Fortune (P, 1943).

SFT E. S. Hartland, The Science of Fairy Tales (L, 1891).

SG Silva Gadelica, ed. and tr. S. H. 0 *Grady (L, 1892).

SGS Scottish Gaelic Studies,

SHI P. W. Joyce, A Social History of Ancient Ireland^ (D, 1913). 
SILH. J. Czcney, Studies in Irish Literature and History (D, i95S). 
SM G. Murphy, Saga and Myth in Ancient Ireland (D, 1955).

SMMD Seek Mucce Meic Datho, ed. R. Thurneysen (D, 1935). 
SnC Seanfocla Connact^ ed. T. S. (3 MMc (D, 1948, ^52).

35 *:

TBC

Celtic Heritage

Die akirische HeMensage Tain Bo Cmlnge^ ed. (and tr,) 
E. Windisch (Leipzig, 1905)*35 *:

TBC

Celtic Heritage

Die akirische HeMensage Tain Bo Cmlnge^ ed. (and tr,) 
E. Windisch (Leipzig, 1905)*

TBC{D) The Ancient Irish Epic Tale Tain Bo CMnge^ tr« J, Donn

(L, 1914)-

TBD Togail Bruidne Da Derga^ ed. E. Knott (D, 1936).

TBDd The Tibetan Book of the Dead,^ ed. W. Y. Evans^Wentz 
(O, 1949).

TU Tochmarc ttaine, ed. and tr. O. Bergin and R. L Best

(D, 1938).

TEF W. G. Wood^Martin, Traces of the Elder Faiths of Ireland 
(L, 1902).

TG A. B. Gornme, Traditional Games of England, Scotland and

Ireland (L, 1894),

THSC Transactions of the Honourable Society of Cymmrodorion.

TI G. Schoepperlc, Tristan and Isolt (Frankfort, 1913).

TIG Three Irish Glossaries, ed. W. Stokes (L, 1862).

TKI ‘The Taboos of the Kings of Ireland^ ed. and tr. M.

Dillon, PRIA, LIV (1951).

TLM G. J. Williams, Traddodiad Llenyddol Morgannwg (C, 1948). 
TLP The Tripartite Life of Patrick, ed. and tr. W. Stokes (L, 
1887).

Trp G. Dum^zil, Tarpeia (P, 1947)-

TS G. Dum^zil, Le troisieme Souverain (P, 1949)*

UF J. C. Foster, Ulster Folklore (Belfast, 1951)*

VB The Voyage of Bran, ed. and tr. K. Meyer with an Essay by

A. Nutt (L, 1895).

VM A. A. Macdonell, Vedic Mythology (Strasburg, 1897).

VSB Vitae Sanctorum Britanniae, ed. and tr. A. W. Wade^Evans

(C, 1944)*

VSH Vitae Sanctorum Hiherniae, ed. and tr. C. Plummer (O, 
19x0).

WAL R. S. Loomis, Wales and the Arthurian Legend (C, 1956). 
WBM The White Book Mabinogion, ed. J. G. Evans (Pwllheli, 
1907).

WFC T. M. Owen, Welsh Folk Customs, (C, 1959).

WFFC T. Gwynn Jones, Welsh Folklore and Foiy Custom (L, 1930),

WTL T, P. ElHs, Welsh Tribal Law and Custom ( 0 , 1926).

Yg M. Eliade, Yoga (tr., L, 1958).

ZCP ZeitscbriftfSr celtische Philologie.

NOTES

CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION

1 Sean (3 Suilleabhain in Four Symposia on Folklore^ ed. Sdth Thomp^ 
son (Bloomingtons 1953), 5.

2 CGd, I, xxiif.

3 'The Gaelic Story/teller\ PEA, XXXI (1945), 183 ff.CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION

1 Sean (3 Suilleabhain in Four Symposia on Folklore^ ed. Sdth Thomp^ 
son (Bloomingtons 1953), 5.

2 CGd, I, xxiif.

3 'The Gaelic Story/teller\ PEA, XXXI (1945), 183 ff.

4 The information in this paragraph is derived from Delargy, op. cit., 
181-96. C. L Maclean tells of a storyteller who took from seven to 
nine hours to narrate some of his tales ('Hebridean Traditions^ 
Gwerin, I (i957)> 3o). In Co. Kerry, Delargy heard of a beggar/man 
who took seven nights to tell a story, while a story current in Scotland 
was in twentyTour parts, each occupying a night in telling (Car/ 
michael, loc. cit. Cf. Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness^ 
XXV, 179). ^

5 Delargy, op. cit., iSi, Maclean, op. cit., 32.

6 Delargy, op. cit., 194 f£

7 Maclean, op. cit., 31, 29. In his youth Sean (3 Conaill twice heard 
the first twenty/five pages of an old story read from a book at a fire/ 
side gathering. Fifty years later he was heard to tell that portion of the 
tale almost word for word as it is found in the printed book (Delargy, 
op. cit., 201). Nevertheless, the storytellers do not seem to regard 
verbal accuracy as essential. 'The incidents’, says Douglas Hyde, 
'and not the language were the things to be remembered.’ {Beside the 
Fire (L, 1890), xxiv.) On the memorized learning of other illiterate 
peoples, see Coomaraswamy, BL^, 25-41.

8 PiCM, 69.

9 FB, I, 46, 49; Delargy, op. cit., 196.

10 H. Webster, Tahoo (L, 1942), 299 £, 309; EHR, 14 f.

11 AERt 140 ff. (where the verse sequences translated are very similar 
in form and mood to Welsh three/line stanzas dated to the ninth 
century), M. Dillon, 'The Archaism of Irish Tradition’, PBA,

XXXIII (1947), 253 CXXXIII (1947), 253 C

12 'Mittelirische Verslehren*, ed. R. Thurneysen, IT, III (1891), 50. 
These metrical tracts indicate what was to be learned during a twelve 
years’ course of study. In the Memoirs (1722) of the Marquis of Clan/ 
ricarde (quoted by O. Bergin in the Journal of the luernian Society^ 
V, 157) the poet’s training is said to take 'six or seven years’.

359 '

3 60 Celtic Heritage

13 Sylvain Levi, quoted by Dillon, op. cit., 259, where he discusses the 
relation of the Celtic learned class to the Indian, a subj ect also dealt 
with in Dumezil, SF (1943)-

14 Chadwick, PP, 58.

15 TBC, 911.

16 The Triads of Ireland^ ed. and tr. K. Meyer (D, 1906), 9,

17 Ed. and tr. Lilian Duncan, iSriu, XI, 224. (We quote Miss Duncan s 
translation.) The injunction that the tale should be told only to a 
few good people accords with the practice, found in some other 
parts of the world, of entrusting the custody of certain kinds of 
tales to a few initiates who tell them to small gatherings or only to 
one sex.

18 Op. cit., 248 f.

19 A. M, Hocart, The Life^iiving Myth (L, I 95 ^)»

20 The Rdmayan of Vdlmiki, ed. and tr. R- T. H. Griffith (L, 1874), V, 
314, n., 1,17.

21 Dillon, op. cit., 249.

22 ESM, 526, There are also peoples who believe that the evocative 
power of stories can be dangerous as well as beneficial and those who 
have been present at a night’s storytelling are enjoined to engage in 
shaking, washing or bloodletting rituals, next morning, to free 
themselves from the uncanny influence (Pettazzoni, EHR, 16 f.).

23 Zimmer, iCCp, 215 f.

24 PTWH, I, xiii.

25 Op. cit., 182.

26 Ibid., 186.

27 GB,V,vii.

28 GjB, XI, 304*

29 B. Malinowski, Myth in Primitipe Psychology (L. 1926), 39.

30 C. G. Jung, Collected Works, XII (L, 1953), 32 f.25 Op. cit., 182.

26 Ibid., 186.

27 GB,V,vii.

28 GjB, XI, 304*

29 B. Malinowski, Myth in Primitipe Psychology (L. 1926), 39.

30 C. G. Jung, Collected Works, XII (L, 1953), 32 f.

31 A. K. Coomaraswamy, Christian and Oriental Philosophy of Art (NY, 
1956), 139 f. ‘What has really been preserved in folk and fairy tales 
and in popular peasant art is, then, by no means a body of merely 
childish or entertaining fables or of crude decorative art, but a series 
of what are really esoteric doctrines and symbols. . . . It is not at all 
shocking that this material should have been transmitted by peasants 
for whom it forms a part of their lives, a nourishment of their very 
constitution, but who cannot explain; it is not at all shocking that 
the folk material can be described as a body of “superstition”, since

Notes

361

it is really a body of custom- and belief that ‘'stands .over** (superstat) 
from a time when its meanings were understood.*

32 TEC, 911.

CHAPTER II BRANCHES OF THE TRADITION

1 Surveys or summaries are available in Dillon, EIL md CK; ' 
D*Arbois de Jubainville, IMC; Thurneysen, IHK; DF, III (G. 
Murphy). For further references see R. I. Best, Bihlio^raphy of Irish 
Philology and of Printed Irish Literature (D, 1913), BihUography of Irish 
Philology and Manuscript Literature (D, 1942).

2 There are English translations of LG (Macalister), Cormac*s 
Glossary (CGI, O’Donovan), the dindknchas {MD, Gwynn, Prose: 
RC, XV, 272, 418, XVI, 31, 135, 269, FL, III, 467, IV, 471, 
Stokes), CA (Stokes). Irish scholars argue that most of these works 
were compiled in the eleventh century; c£ Celtica, IV (1958), 249 
(M. Dillon).

3 The principal prose texts are translated in Mh (G. Jones and T. 
Jones). The early poems, genealogies, etc. are surveyed in Chad/ 
wick, GL, I, and Ifor Williams, Lectures on Early Welsh Poetry 
(D, 19^).4 ‘The First Battle of Moytura*, ed. and tr. J. Fraser, Eriu, VIII, i. 
Except where otherwise noted, our account here and in the next 
paragraph follows LG. Some Celtic scholars have been loath to 
accept as authentic tradition the references to two Battles of Mag 
Tuired. The account of each of the battles in turn has been dis/ 
missed as a later fiction; cf. G. Murphy, ‘Notes on Cath Maige 
Tuired,* ^igse, VII, 191. For arguments from comparative 
mythology in support of the two battles see Dum&il, MV, 180 if.

5 VIII, 21. J. Fraser’s translation is quoted.

6 The sources quoted in this paragraph are VB, II, 291, 300, E. 
MacNeill, Phases of Irish History (D, 1913), 85 f, LG, IV, 219.

7 LG, IV, 163, 135.

8 DJL, Ease. I, 82.

9 RC, XII, 82; CA, 354 ff-; AIM, 1 V, 98; MSL, 402.

10 TIG, xxxiii £; AIM, IV, 15, 36, 82, 78. J. Vendryes argued that 
mac Ur ‘sea/farer* has been misinterpreted as a patronymic; EC, VI, 
248.

11 Rhys, HL, 125 ff., 75, 419 if. The evidence of the inscriptions is 
surveyed in Vendryes, RlC.

362 Celtic Heritage

12 What is stated in some versions is that the battle was fought on 
, ■ single legs and with single' arms and single eyes,- LG, III, 13.362 Celtic Heritage

12 What is stated in some versions is that the battle was fought on 
, ■ single legs and with single' arms and single eyes,- LG, III, 13.

Macalister (LG, I, 260) refers to one-armed, one/legged, one/eyed 
demons who are a source of terror to the inhabitants of the neigh-^ 
bourhood of Mombasa and Zanzibar. His authority is W» Hichens 
in Discovery, XVII (1936), 185. In the sacred drum rituals and 
annual harvest ceremony of the Lovedu of the Transvaal weird 
whistling ancestor spirits of royal lineage come to earth in the guise, 
it is said, of half men with one eye, one arm, and one leg. ‘They are 
in fact, as is known to those initiated in the gomam, old men mas^ 
querading as spirits. They appear in the bush near the village and join 
in the singing of lesugu songs, which are sung on these occasions 
through specially constructed secret whistles.’ ( J. D. and E. J. Krige, 
in AW, 67.) On the use of only one eye, one arm and one leg in 
certain Irish rituals see ACL, II, 257, and infra, p. 37.

13 LG, III, 13.

14 Our summary and quotations from here to p. 38 follow GMT (tr. 
W. Stokes, except for a few insignificant changes).

15 SILH, 103 f. Cf. LG, I, 136. For two hundred years before the 
coming of Partholon, the Fomoire had subsisted by fowling and 
fishing.

16 The same qualification is said to have been requited for admission 
to the court at Emain Macha (ZCP, XVIII, 298), to Arthur’s hall 
and to the fort of the giant Wrnach in the Welsh ‘Kulhwch and 
Olwen’ (Mb, 97, 121) and to UtgarS in Snorri’s Edda (PE, 73). 
Cf. The Early English Carols, ed. R. L. Greene (O, 1935),

‘Lett no man cum into this hall 
Grome, page, nor yet marshall.

But that sum sport he bryng withall,

For now ys the tyme of Crystmas.*‘Lett no man cum into this hall 
Grome, page, nor yet marshall.

But that sum sport he bryng withall,

For now ys the tyme of Crystmas.*

17 See W. M. Henncssy, ‘The Ancient Irish Goddess of War’, RC, 1 , 
32. The Morrfgan appears sometimes as a bird— a hooded crow — 
sometimes as a hag (caillech), Nirrti, the Vedic goddess of dissolution, 
is likewise assimilated to a black bird and to a sterile woman. Refer/ 
cnees to Ninti are discussed in G. Dum&il, De'esses ktines et mythes 
pediques (P, I95<5), 108 ff

18 Cf. LG, IV, 132, 158.

19 C£ CMT(C), 6.

20 M. M. Banks, ‘Na Tri Mairt . . £C, III, 1 31.

Notes

m

21 MD, Ills 2X8, Cs RC, XV, 439. ■ ■

22 Tr. J. C. Watson m SGS, V, 2, (MU, i). ■

23 IKHE, 250; ‘De Gabdilmt/Sida’,ed.and tr. V. Hull, ZGP, XIX, ' 
■• 57 - ^

24 ‘AltramTigeDaMedar’sed.andtr.L. Duncan, XI, 184,

25 FB, 1 , 19; CCC, 26, 35.

26 C£ the Indian belief: ‘A person blind in one eye is a destroyer of 
the world; a person lame in one leg is the bane of all men* (JCP, 284). 
In Egypt, ‘A one/eyed person is regarded as of evil omen, and 
especially one who is blind of the left eye’ (E. W. Lane, Manners and 
Customs of the Modern Egyptians (L, 1896 edn.), 272. C£ infra. 
Index, under ‘One/eyed personages’.

27 See A. R. Radcliffe^Brown, "On Joking Relationships’, Afrka^ 
XIII (1940), 195 (c£ also Africa^ II, 244; XII, 433; XIV, 386; 
XIX, 133); A. M. Hocart, The Progress of Man (L, 193 3 )» 241 ff* 
NSF, 43 f£ ; The Social Anthropology of North American Tribes, ed. 
F. Eggan (Chicago, 1937), 75 ff*; Dumezil, PJ, 272 £

28 CP, 661, 671, FBI, 59. C£ MWHT, 503, 209. Note also the pro^ 
minence of the Matres or Matronae in dedications and images of 
the Roman period throughout the Celtic world (RlC, 275 ff.). In 
Brittany, the fairies are known as ‘Good Ladies’ and ‘Good 
Mothers’— H.^F. Buffet, En Haute Bretagne (P, 1954), ^59- In Jersey, 
too, they are called ‘Dames’ (J. H. L’Amy, Jersey Folklore (L, 
1927), 26).

29 See Dumezil, FI and JMQ.29 See Dumezil, FI and JMQ.

30 A. K. Coomaraswamy in Speculum, XIX, 106. D’Arbois de 
Jubainville compared the conflia between the Tuatha and the 
Fomoire with that between the Devas and the Asuras, JMC, 9-

31 FM, 156.

32 A. K. Coomaraswamy, ‘Angel and Titan’, JAOS, LV, 394 
374. On the kinship of Asuras and Devas, c£ Dumezil, FI, ^2, 
165; //jfm, pp. 78 £

33 PKM; Mb, 1-75.

34 PXM, 99 ff., Loomis, {FAT, 137 ff*

35 WBM, 241, Mb, 115. For Irish parallels see Mac Cana, BDL, 
103 ff.

36 Vendryes, RlC, 268 £ On the relation of Rhiannon to Epona: 
H. Hubert, ‘Le mythe d’Epona’, in Milanges linguistiques offerts a 
M. j. Vendryes (P. 1925), 187; Dum&il, PC, 264; Gruffydd,

364: - Celtic Heritage

Rhh, 103 f., 68 n.; J. Gricourt, ‘Epona»^Rhiannon>'Macha^ Ogam, 
VI, 25, 75, 165. On Epona: R. Magnen, (Bordeaux, 1953)9 
'F,Benoit,Lesmythesderoutre40mk(Bmxdhs,i9SO%id.,Vher0isatm 
equestre (Aix/en^Provence, 1954)* SBE, XLIV, 465 £ 
(^atapatha Brahmana): the earth as mare.

37 Cyfranc Lkdd a Llevelys, ed. I. Williams (Bangor, 1922); Mh, 89 ff 
(quoted).

38 J^ys, HL, 125.

39 HJF, 334ff*

40 The Irish affinities of the Second Branch are studied in Mac Cana, 
BDL.

41 jBT, 54, 33. C£ W. J. GrufFydd, Folklore and Myth in the Mahtn^ 
ogion (C, 1958), 16 ff.j Rhys, SAL, 10. The Other World is a land 
across the water. It appears that for the Celts of Gaul it was in 
Britain (Procopius, De Bello Gothko, vi, 20, cited in IMC, 130. 
Cf. Bedloideas, XVIII, 150).

42 The Fate of the Children of Lir, ed. and tr. R. J. 0*DufFy (D, 1883). 
Dr Mac Cana does not consider this tale relevant to his theme; 
BDL, 122 n.

43 On the conflicting views concerning their relationship see Mac 
Cana, BDL, 122 ff.

44 VB, 1, 17; RC, XVI, 142. In MD, III, 424, the name is Bron.

45 Mh, 73 ; the translation involves two emendations.

46 RC, XXXVI, 353 (C. Marstrander). For references to Math, Lieu 
etc. in Welsh poems see MM, 55 ff., 165 ff., 187 ff.

47 DF,in,lxxxiiff.45 Mh, 73 ; the translation involves two emendations.

46 RC, XXXVI, 353 (C. Marstrander). For references to Math, Lieu 
etc. in Welsh poems see MM, 55 ff., 165 ff., 187 ff.

47 DF,in,lxxxiiff.

48 Rhys, HL, 387 f.,Gruffydd, MM,2iS ff. (See also IED,s,v,rmddn«) 
Cf. Revue des etudes latines, XXXVI, 121 ff. on the offering of 
fshes to Vulcan.

49. MSL, 399 ff-, MD, IV, 278.

50 AS, 19, SC, II, 1 17; IHK, 431 ff-, Gruffydd, MM, 263 ff.

51 Cf. K. Jackson, Language and History in Early Britain (Edinburgh, 
3:953), 382, M. Forster, Der Flussname Themse und seine Sippe 
(Miinchen, 1941), 814. (One would expect Dawn as in the name 
Cair Daun which occurs in Nennius.) Done, which occurs instead 
of Don in one or two contexts, may be a variant of Donwy; see 
W. J. Gruffydd’s note in BBCS, VH (1935), i, where he relates 
these names to Danann and Danuuios. (C£ also Rhys, CF, 441, 
544-)

N0tes

365

52 BBCS, V,"i34;MA25.

53 VM9 158. In modern texts the Children of Don have associations 
with the firmament: IWFC, 16, CF, 645, GPG, s.v. caer.

54 Forster, op. cit., 141 £; Pokorny, lEW, 175.

55 A. K. Coomaraswamy inJAOS, LV, 393 n., citing Rig Veda, I, 
13^ (3)^ 11 ® 41 (< 5 )* He notes that Danu is also named as the consort 
of the Asvins; Rg Veda, VIII, 8 (16)-

56 A similar ambiguity occurs in the case of Beli. A triad describes 
Aranrhod as the daughter of Beli who is thus, perhaps, to be 
regarded as the consort of Don. In the MaUnogi, Beli is the maternal 
grandfather of the Children of Llyr and also the father of Cas/ 
wallawn who dispossesses them of their dominion. The father of 
Lludd and Llefelys again was Beli, but in the ‘Stanzas of the Graves* 
Beli is the son of Benlli the Giant who in modern folklore is an 
ogre classed with the Coraniaid who plagued the kingdom of Lludd. 
For references see MM, 173 ff.

57 RC, XII, 82; TE, 23.

58 MU, 28, RC, XII, 77 (Ethliu is a variant form).57 RC, XII, 82; TE, 23.

58 MU, 28, RC, XII, 77 (Ethliu is a variant form).

59 MD, III, 29. Here, at the close of this section, we would pose a 
question of ‘the fitness of names’: can the similarity, and inter/' 
relationship, of the names in the following paragraph be dismissed 
as ‘mere’ codncidence? —

The Irish Tuatha De Damm are obliged to come to terms first 
with the Men of Bolg, finally with the descendants of Bile (father of 
Mil), and in their greatest battle their chief adversary is Baler, giant 
champion of the Sid. The father of Aranrhod, Belt, who appears as 
the progenitor of several Welsh dynasties, is perhaps the consort of 
Don, while there is some evidence to suggest that the Bellerus whose 
story (according to Milton) was linked with the Cornish St Michael’s 
Mount was, like the Balor of folk^tales, a one-eyed thieving giant. 
Belenus, whose name occurs more frequently than any other Celtic 
god/name in the inscriptions of the Roman period, is described as 
the patron of the Danuhian province of Noricum; the giant or dragon 
of modern Roumanian folklore is Balaur. In Greek mythology, Beks 
is the father of Danaus and grandfather of the Danaids who kill 
their cousindiusbands, grandsons of Belus, and furthermore the 
Medusa is killed by the son of Danae, the Chimaera by Bellerophon 
(2 ‘The Slayer of Belleros’). Lastly, the Indian Bali, mighty king of 
the Asuras, and Sovereign of Patala, an underworld realm of riches.

366

Celtic Heritage366

Celtic Heritage

beauty and pleasure comparable with the Sid and Annwfn, 
conquers Indra and the gods — Indra who is born to be the skyer of 
the son of Dam. No two of these names — ^Beli, Bile, Bali, Bolg, 
Belus, Balor, Balaur, Bellerus, Bellerophon, Belenus — have been 
convincingly related to one another philologically. But to disprove 
etymological relationship throughout would not necessarily be to dis/ 
pose of our question. (References: Bellerus: MM, 1 8 3 £; Belenus: RlC, 
268 f. ; Balaur: Oganu VIII, 268 ; Belus (and Danaus) : C. Bonner, ‘A 
Study of the Danaid Myth’, Harmrd Studies in Classical Phihhgy^ 
XIII, 129; Bellerophon: IMC. 115; Bali: infra, p. 77.)

60 SMMD, 6 . Festive contests in boasting and raillery are briefly dis^ 
cussed (with references to parallels from other lands) in J. Huizinga 
Homo Ludens (tr., L, 1939), 65 ff., and Dum&il, MDG, 122 ff.

61 iSriu, II, 176.

62 SMMD; tr. in HM, 57 (Kuno Meyer), HRI, I, 37 (Leahy), and 
N. K. Chadwick, An Early Irish Reader (Ch, 1927), 16. Cf. also 
Murphy, SM, 37.

63 DT, 36 .

64 FB, We quote &om G. Henderson’s translation.

65 RC, XIV, 396.

66 TBC; tr. TBC(D).

67 See Thurneysen, IHK, 248 ff.

68 As to the meanings of see DJL(C),s.v. ‘Stokes compares the 
Latin nundinae ‘market/day’ (< novem); if the meaning assembly be 
right, its original meaning may have been the time occupied by a 
warlike assembly or muster.’ On the confinement of warriors, see 
Hocart, NSP, 53.

69 TBC, 881, ^!riu, 1 , 126.

70 Ed. by E. Windisch, IT, III, 230; K. Meyer’s tr. in VB, II, 58. 
The story has some points of similarity with accounts of shaman 
contests.

71 MU, 24.

72 GHC, 67.

73 TBC(D), 144.

74 MU, 28.

75 Cf. B. S. Phillpotts, ‘Wyrd and Providence in Anglo-Saxon 
Thought’, Essays and Studies by Members of the English Associatm, 
XIII (1928), 8 ff.

76 Ed. and tr. K. Meyer, £riu, 1 , 114. A recent comparative study:

Note^ 367

de Vries, ®Le combat du pere et du fils Ogm^ IX (1957), 
122.76 Ed. and tr. K. Meyer, £riu, 1 , 114. A recent comparative study:

Note^ 367

de Vries, ®Le combat du pere et du fils Ogm^ IX (1957), 
122.

77 The meanings of fmn (except ‘pieces of inferior status*) and oc fine 
are given from DIL, Fasc. Ill, 1 18.

78 ZCP, XV (1925), 262.

79 Cf. DF, I, xxxiv (E. MacNeill),

80 CG (D. A. Binchy), loi.

81 The Oxford Dictionary^ s.v.

82 SGi II, 1 1 8.

83 Ibid., 99 (I, 92). S. H. O’Grady’s translation is given.

84 Fn (K. Meyer), ix.

85 FF, II, 326.

86 ‘The Batde of Gabhra’, OST, 1 , 135 ff; CF/, 29.

87 See e.g. K. R. V. Wickman, ‘Die Einleitung der Ehe . . Acta 
Academiae Ahoensis, XI (Abo, I937)> A. D. Rees, Life in a Welsh 
Countryside (C, 1950), 82 ff, Varagnac, CTGF, Ch. V.

88 <SG, II, 165*

89 Ibid., 260.

90 PJL, Fasc. Ill, 1 1 8.

91 PRM, XXXVI, C, 8x n.; CF/, 14.

92 Ed. by K. Meyer, RC, XXV, 344; tr. Murphy, OLKT, 9.

93 EJHM, 278; DF, III, Ixiiiff.

94 DF, III, Appendix G (L LL Foster), Ixxvi iff., 446.

95 DF, III, civ.

96 Ibid., xli.

97 Murphy, OLRT^ ii.

98 Ed. and tr. SG; AS (with tr. of parts omitted from 0 *Grady*s 
translation).

99 AS, 10. The translation follows renderings in S. H. O’Grady, SG, 
II, 109, K. Meyer, Selections from Ancient Irish Poetry (L, 1911), 
59, and K. Jackson, A Celtic Miscellany (L, 1951), 74.

100 IT, II, Pt. ii, 127, 158, LMD, 48, 66.

1 01 These words are used by Gerard Murphy in his description of cer^ 
tain Fenian poems, DF, III, ciii. As to the ‘heroic’ and ‘romantic’ 
character of the Cycles, cf. Flower, JTr, loi.

102 K. Jackson, Studies in Early Celtic Nature Poetry {Ch, I935)» 
i74andCh. II.

103 FB, II (A. Nutt), 22 C; PBA, XX (1934), aax £ (A. G. van 
HameL)

368 Celtic Heritage

104 HB9 56* There are references to an Arthur of renown in two Welsh 
poems which are probably earlier; Cam Amirin, ed. Ifor Williams 
(C, I937)» 49, BBCS, VI, 136.

105 PBAt XX, 247. As to the translation, leader of troops’, cf BBCS, 
XVII, 242 (Thomas Jones).105 PBAt XX, 247. As to the translation, leader of troops’, cf BBCS, 
XVII, 242 (Thomas Jones).

106 HB, 73 ; WBM, 242 f., 249 f£, Mb, 1 1 7 ff.

107 On the cult of Maponus (Mabon): 1 . A. Richmond’s contribution 
to Dark Age Britain, ed. D. B. Harden (L, 1956), ii; Rhys, HL, 
21,29, etc.

108 The three texts quoted: LG, IV, 122, 132, 158; RC, XV, 27; 
AIM, IV, 86 £, CGI, 129. (Cf. also CCC, 38.) (In CR, I 
(1904-5), 384, mention is made of a ‘Troit Fair’ held at Alyth, 
Perthshire, about Christmas.)

109 DF, III (G. Murphy), Ixxvi.

1 10 ‘The Pursuit of Diarmaid and Grainne’, ed. and tr. S. H. O’Grady,

osr, 111,36.

111 IVAL, 183, 186.

1 12 E. K. Chambers, Arthur of Britain (L, 1927), 17 £, 46, 107 f£, 
123 £; BBC, 67.

1 13 Chambers, op. cit., 221 £, 249; Loomis, WAL, Ch. V.

1 14 Breudwyt Ronabwy, ed. M. Richards (C, 1948), Mb, 137.

1 15 G. Cohen, Histoire de la chevalerk en France au moyen age (P, 1949),

II ff,

116 For discussion and references see J. D. Bruce, The Epolution of 
Arthurian Romance (Baltimore, 1923), H, 59; Loomis, ATC, 33; 
R. M. Jones, ‘Y Rhamantau Cymraeg . . . Lien Cymru, IV

(1956-7), ^08.

1 17 There are studies of this theme by T. OMaille in ZCP, XVII 
(1928), 129, A. H. Krappe in Journal of American Philology, 
LXIII (1942)* 444, J. Weisweiler, Heimat und Herrschaft (Halle, 
1943), A. K. Coomaraswamy in Speculum, XX (1945), 39 ^» 
T. F. O’Rahilly in Eriu, XIV (1946), 14, G. Dumezil in Ogam, 
VI (i954)» 35 and P. Mac Cana in kc, VII (1955)1 76. For the 
story of Niall, see SG, I, 328, II, 370, RC, XXIV, 190 (ed. and 
tr. W. Stokes), Eriu, IV, 91, and for the story of Lugaid, CA, 323. 
(Cf. MD, IV, 135.)

1 18 Krappe, loc. cit., 446 f£, cites parallels to show that the fawn 
symbolizes the kingship.

119 &iu, IV, 105. In other texts her mantle is purple.

Notes

369

120 Dtimezilj loc. cit

121 Reput fassyrklogie, XLIV (1950), 67.119 &iu, IV, 105. In other texts her mantle is purple.

Notes

369

120 Dtimezilj loc. cit

121 Reput fassyrklogie, XLIV (1950), 67.

122 Oor source, in this paragraph, is 6 Maille*s study, loc. cit. For a 
reference to Medb®s nine husbands, see GT, 148. In the diniknchas 
{MD^ III, 3 66 £) Macha (who in one story overpowers five brothers), 
Medb of Connacht and Medb Lethderg are named together as 
three queens *of fiery force who had right comely consorts’,

123 J. C. De in The Culturd Heritage of India (1937), III, 258, quoted by 
A. K. Coomaraswamy in Speculum^ XX, 393. Cf. Krappe, loc. 
cit., 450.

124 Speculum^ 400,

125 ZCP, XVII, 145.

126 Mriu, IV, 107.

127 ilC, XXVII, 266 jff. (ed. and tr. W. Stokes).

128 On Suibne and Myrddin, see BBCS, I (1923), 228 ( 1 . Williams), 
IX (i939)» 8 (A. O. H. Jarman), ESM, 535 (K. Jackson), 
Carney, SILH, Ch. IV.

129 Hocart, Kng, 215. The black heifer, the surprisingly small reward 
the Dagda asks of the Fomorian Bres, recalls all the cattle of Ireland. 
Supra, p. 38.

130 Cf. Man, XLV (1945), 118 (A. D. Rees).

1 31 Kn£,2i6ff.

132 Ibid., 219.

133 Cf/i,XXIV, lof.

134 TLP, 1,40 ff.

PART TWO

CHAPTER III DARKNESS AND LIGHT

1 WFFC, 196.

2 PLGI, 5 £ ; Beahideas, XXIV, 27, ‘The day is yours, the night is ours 
(the dead).’ C£ Anatole le Braz, La legende de la morte (P, 1945), II, 
69.

3 On the division of the year into two parts in various parts of the 
world, see M. P. Nilsson, Primitipe Time Reckoning (Cb, 1920), 55-75-

4 fo/m,Ch.XVI.

5 BBCS, IX, 40, XIII, 204; BCCS, 11 , 16, III, 107-

6 BCCS, II, 17.

2A: . ■ , . ■

37<> Celtic Herikge

7 J. Loth in HC, XXV, 130; J. Rhys in PBA, 1909-10, 207 ff,; 
E. MacNeill in ^riu^ X (1926-8), 38, 41.

8 Cf. C. Laine^Kerjean, Xe Calendrier Celtique’, ZCP, XXIII 
(1943), 257 fF.,F. Le Roux in IX (1957)5 338.

9 De Btlh Galileo^ vi, 18. On reckoning by nights see M. P. Nilsson, 
op. cit., 14 ff. Cf. J. Layard, Stone Men of Malekula (L, 1942), 290 £9 De Btlh Galileo^ vi, 18. On reckoning by nights see M. P. Nilsson, 
op. cit., 14 ff. Cf. J. Layard, Stone Men of Malekula (L, 1942), 290 £

10 The six ANM months include Eqvos which probably had 30 and 
28 days, respectively, in alternate years — an average of 29. (ZCP, 
XXIII, 253.)

11 ERE^ s.v. Calendar. Cf RC, XXV, 124.

12 See E. MacNeill, loc. cit., 13 f The phrasing has also been con/ 
strued to mean no more than ‘that the moon was that by which 
months and years were measured’. (R4C, 175 n. 4.)

13 Encyclopaedia Britannka, s.v. Calendar.

14 ZCP, XIX, 55. Cf TJ§, 15.

15 IV, 25.

16 TJS, 10.

17 HIP, 317.

18 WFFC, 151.

19 TEF, II, 266 f, BCCS, III, 108 f, 168; UF, 27-30, 86. Cf 
IPFFC, 151; IVFC, I23f ; infra, p. 298. Cf the opening of the Gates 
of the Apsu (underworld) during the New Year season in Baby/ 
Ionia. (See The Labyrinth, ed. S. H. Hooke (L, 1935)5 55 f )

20 WFFC, 152. CiHIF, US-

21 FBI, 282.

22 BCCS, III, 160 f; HIF, 345; i^PC, 133.

23 Eliade, MPR, 51 f

24 On the divisions of the day see HIF, 3 17; on the fourfold division of 
the year, see, for example, G. Lehmacher, ‘The Ancient Celtic 
Year’,/CS, I (1949-50), I44 ff-5 Joyce, SHI, ll, 387, f

25 HIF, 344*

26 BCC5,II,i9ff

27 BCCS, III, 244; HIF, 363, 349.

28 WFFC, 145 f , RC, XXV, 1 18 f There are variations in the dates 
of the twelve omen days. These days have been compared with the 
Zwolften of Germany and with the sacred 12 nights of India; Loth 
in RC, XXIV, 311, Dum&il, PC, 38 f

29 ZCP, XXIII, 251, 263 (C. Lain6/Kerjean).

30 Ibid., 251 f

lsfote^

371

32 Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, XXVI (1889), 398

(J, Mooney).

S 3 FB 4 78 ff.

CHAPTER IV COMING INTO EXISTENCE

1 Corner son of Japheth had been named as the ancestor of the Gauls, 
since the time of Josephus (Lloyd, HW, 1 , 191).

2 LG, V. In writing Mil rather than Milid, the form normally found 
in the texts, we follow the practice of modern scholars.

3 MAIV, 3112 LG, V. In writing Mil rather than Milid, the form normally found 
in the texts, we follow the practice of modern scholars.

3 MAIV, 311

4 IVHBs 248; K. Miiller^Lisowski, ‘Contributions to a Study in 
Irish Folklore’, Bealoideas^ XVIII, 148. (Cf. also £C, VI, 24).

5 BealoideaSy XVIII, 149.

6 Charles O’Conor quoted in HWI, 57. Later writers (e.g. D. D. C. 
Mould, Irish Pilgrimage (D, 1955), 113) give the correct height as 
about 700 feet.

7 LG, V,iio-i3.

8 Tr. S. Prabhavananda and C. Isherwood (L, 1947), 114 ff.

9 Matsya Parana, CLXVII, 13-25, quoted by H. Zimmer, MS, 
35 ff-

10 LG, V, 114-17. We quote R. A. S. Macalister’s translation.

11 EIHM, 197*

12 LG, V, 4^9 94*

1 3 MD, IV, 261 ; LG, V, 160, 420.

14 LG, V, 419; MacNeill, Cl, Ch. VIIL

15 LG, V, 416 ff.

For references to the traditions concerning Conn and Mug Nuadat, 
see O’Rahilly, EIHM, Ch. X. On the names: ibid., 282, MacNeill, 
Cl, 61. Cf. Mug and Seraius (derived (lom servus ‘slave’), the name 
of the first Roman king to be chosen on account of his services, and 
see further, Dum&il, SF, Ch. II.

17 FF, II, 265. (P.S. Dinneen’s translation.)

18 Hocart, KC, Chs. XX, XXI; 84 £, 116, 246 £, 277 etc.

19 LG, II, 183.

20 ‘As far as there is form and name, so far, indeed, extends this whole 
(universe)’ (Safapatha Brdhmam), SBE, XLIV, 28; ‘for whatever is 
not, that is unmarked (by characteristics)*, ibid., XLI, 320.

21 LG, IV,. 13, 27, 39*

3 7^ Celtic Heritage

22 *The Settling of the Manor of Tara*j ed. and tr. R. L Best,

IV, 147.

23 CG 4 I, 57, 239, II, 71 (A. CarmichaeFs translation).

24 Eliade, MER, 34.

25 LG, III, 69-73, 39 (R- A. S. Macalister’s translation).

26 SEE, XXV, 309; cf. XIV, loi.

27 Sec CoomaxzswzmY, KVL^ $ et passim,

2S Ibid., II, quoting Kig Veda, X, 5 3 .24 Eliade, MER, 34.

25 LG, III, 69-73, 39 (R- A. S. Macalister’s translation).

26 SEE, XXV, 309; cf. XIV, loi.

27 Sec CoomaxzswzmY, KVL^ $ et passim,

2S Ibid., II, quoting Kig Veda, X, 5 3 .

29 Dumezil, TS, Ch. 16; retracted in ITI, 94* The births of the Sons 
of Mil, like those of the Adityas, are grouped in pairs; LG, II, 125, 
RIR, 34. Their number varies between three and eight, in different 
contexts.

30 Macdonell, VM, 170; Dumezil, RJR, 34-7 (on Vivasvat and 
Yama).

31 LG, IV, 11,21.

32 Ibid., 33 , 51 *

33 £rw,Vni,5*

34 Macalister in LG, in, 115.

35 PRIA XXXVI, C, 266.

36 MD, III, 418 (in a poem).

37 LG, III, 27, 11 , 273. The king’s villeins, in medieval Wales, were 
required to build houses for the king. Moreover, they were required 
to receive the queen and her retinue, when she made her annual 
progress, and also various court officers on similar occasions (ALW, 
I, 486.)

38 Cf. hothach, ‘cottier, crofter’, (from both ‘hut’) and sen^^chUithe ‘here/ 
ditary serf’, literally ‘ancient house’ (CG, 78, 105),

39 RC, L, 231 (A. G. van Hamel); UF, 134, LSC, 449, on the 
harvest cailteacb; HIF, 344.

40 IEW,iii2,

41 CG (D. A. Binchy), 69. The oc^aire (v. supra, p. 62) is in some texts 
the same as the hd^aire; tdnaise in others, he is ‘an off/shoot of the hoaire^ 
(ibid., loi f.). Cf. Modern Irish huachaill *a boy, a herd/boy, an 
unmarried young man’, and English bachelor, said to be derived 
from Latin mcca, ‘cow’.

42 Cf. L. Gerschel, ‘Varron logicien, Latomus, XVII (1958), 71. 
Mrui^fer, ‘land/man’, seems to be similar in meaning to hSmre, or 
identical with it (CG, 77 f.).

43 Supra,p,i2.

Notes

373

44 MD,l, z; LG, Y, &i.

45 JMQ (i94i)- The people of Nemed were the ancestors of the 
two peoples who succeeded them. Similarly, in India the clans-' 
men (or third estate) are equated with the Fathers (SBE, XLI, 
299 )-45 JMQ (i94i)- The people of Nemed were the ancestors of the 
two peoples who succeeded them. Similarly, in India the clans-' 
men (or third estate) are equated with the Fathers (SBE, XLI, 
299 )-

46 ITI (1958) (p. 19) — a book which provides references to his 
earlier publications and to the work of other scholars in the same 
field.

47 Hocart, Cst, 41 f. Further details are now given in Sharma, 
SAL

48 Discussed by L. Gerschel, loc. cit.

49 PRIA, XXXVI, C, 280. The third estate is referred to as ‘classes 
of worth’ (ibid., 276; cf. Varro’s characterization of them).

50 MacNeill, EILl, 94 f. Cf. PRIA. XXXVI, C, 273. 27S ff.

51 Veddnta'Sutras, SBE, XXXIV, 261 f., Hocart, Cst, 5 £

52 LG, II, 176 ff.

53 LG, III, 139.

54 LG, II, 177. 185, 197. V. 35-

55 See, for example, H. Frankfort, AER, 21, 154, id.. Kingship and the 
Gods (Chicago, 1948), 151 ff.

56 LG, II, 194-

57 LG, IV, 107. 15, III, 9.

58 LG, II, 188 f.

59 LG, 1, 155, 167; GT, 37, 44-

60 Hocart in CJS, G, I (19-25), 67, Cst, 41. We have added the aborL 
gines to Hocart’s scheme.

CHAPTER V A HIERARCHY OF PROVINCES

1 LG, IV, 13, 27, <51 £, 73 f.

2 For detailed references, see O’Rahilly, EIHM, 154-72.

3 Ed. and tr. R. I. Best, IV (1910), 121. We quote (Fintan’s 
words) from R. I. Best’s translation, 145, 147 ff., IS3, I5S-

4 A different meanii^ is perhaps to be preferred. When Cormac mac 
Airt was bom, his maternal grandfather, a wizard smith, made five 
protecting essa ‘against wounding, drowning . . . and every ill’

(zcp, vni, 310).

5 In the dindSenchas, Cruachan is referred to as the burying.-ground of 
Tuatha D6 Danann (MD, III, 432).

6 VB, II, 24 (A. Nutt); Dillon, EIL, 34. We have noted (r»pra.

374 Celtic Heritage5 In the dindSenchas, Cruachan is referred to as the burying.-ground of 
Tuatha D6 Danann (MD, III, 432).

6 VB, II, 24 (A. Nutt); Dillon, EIL, 34. We have noted (r»pra.

374 Celtic Heritage

p, 63) that the Ulster warriors, unlike the Fiana, fight in chariots* 
In ancient India and Persia, members of the warrior class were 
known as ‘chariot men^ (AESCf IV, 718). It may be noteworthy 
too that in the Rig Veda most of the princes, at least in the earlier 
phases, belong to the Punjab, and there are numerous references to 
the Indus and the Sarasvati; the scene of the epic Mahdhharata is 
laid in the kingdoms of the Ganges and Jumna basins (GL, II, 
485, III, 73 7), while the scene of the later Rmayana, in which the 
main action is centred on the abduction of a woman by a demon, is 
South India. Cf. SAI^ 87; information gleaned from the Dhar-^ 
masutras which emphasize the supremacy of the hrahmams is generally 
limited to northern India, that from Buddhist and Jain sources which 
emphasize the primacy of the Ksatriyas is generally limited to norths 
eastern India. Cf. infra, pp. 383, 39^.

7 &iu, II, 176 ff.

8 Dumezil, ii7ff

9 SG, 1 , 359, II, 401; KC, XIII, 36 (ed. and tr. W. Stokes). On the 
name Bmma: £rm, IV, 171 (K, Meyer).

10 Quoted in Hocart, Cst, 40.

11 Supra, p. 54; infra, p. 328.

12 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, RC, XXV, 20. (Cf. ZCP, VIII, 261.)

13 MD, IV, 190.10 Quoted in Hocart, Cst, 40.

11 Supra, p. 54; infra, p. 328.

12 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, RC, XXV, 20. (Cf. ZCP, VIII, 261.)

13 MD, IV, 190.

14 RC, XXV, 31. In LG, guesting is instituted by Partholon’s people; 
according to the earliest law tracts, a servile client {cek giallnai) was 
required to provide a night’s entertainment for his lord during the 
coshering season’ — ^between New Year and Shrovetide — ^in addition 
to ordinary food^rents and services (CG, 81). But the hriugu ‘hospi/ 
taller’, ‘rich landowner’, dispensed unlimited hospitality to all 
persons (ibid., 79). In Wales, food^rents were due to the king 
from both freemen and villeins, and the entertainment of royal 
officers was also incumbent upon freemen and upon the king’s 
villeins, though not, apparently, to the same degree. But it is the 
hreyr or uchelwr, ‘freeman in authority’, who is celebrated for his 
hospitality and ‘householding*.

15 CJ, 59, PPM, XXIX, C, 95.

16 EIHM, 1 86. Mug son of Mil is the eponym of a people who occupied 
land (including Corco Duibne) in Munster (GT, 117). Cf., again, 
Mug Corb, King of the two Monsters (ibid., 96, but in other con*- 
te xts King of the Leinstermen—PJHM, 134).

Notes 375

17 By Dr Mac Cana in ^C, VII, 91 C He suggests that ‘Mugain 
was an old district^name . . . and that it was closely associated with the 
province of Munster in such a way that the two names might be 
regarded in certain contexts as interchangeable.’ (p. loi.)

18 Ed. and tr. K; Meyer, Cm, XIV, 105.

19 FM, 157.

20 Supra, p. 1 1 3 . Irish cerd and Welsh cerdd signify both ‘craft’ and ‘music’.

21 PUM, XXXVI, 280.

22 Ibid., CJL, s.v. crdnan. C£, perhaps, An Chron, ‘Hell or a dread 
female resident there’ (DF, III, 397).21 PUM, XXXVI, 280.

22 Ibid., CJL, s.v. crdnan. C£, perhaps, An Chron, ‘Hell or a dread 
female resident there’ (DF, III, 397).

23 The first (only) is thought to be derived from Irish cUir ‘band (of 
poets etc.)’ (2 Cf. Caiseal na clkr). It is used {a) of poets in general and 
(h) in contemptuous references to low/grade entertainers. Monks 
chanting, before dawn, on the grave of an abbot, and angels singing 
on the grave of a saint, are referred to as dir. See GPC, s.v., GDG, 
438 ff.

24 Ed. by K. Meyer, ZCP, XII, 290 £

25 ALl, III, 25; c£ PC, XXVIII, 318.

26 FI, 34> Cst, 19 (sudra == asura).

27 GT, 189. The people of Ulster are likened to bulls (c£ supra, p. 124), 
the people of Leinster to dung/hill dogs*, and the people of Con/ 
nacht — ^if the editor’s suggestion is accepted^ — to foxes.

28 HD A, s.v. JJkge; R. Karsten, The Civilisation of the South American 
Indians (L, 1926), 292

29 Kng, 124; OS, II, 264, III, 84; CJS, I, 77; Numen, III, 122. C£ ‘a 
tail (-^whisk) for turning away evil’ {^atapatha Brdhmana, SBE, XLI V, 
220).

30 Represented by ‘charioteership*.

3 1 MacNeill, EILI, 97. C£ G. Dumezil’s account of the relations of the 
Roman king to the ‘functions’, in The Sacral Kingship (Leiden, 1959), 
410 f£ Mael Mura speaks of the Sons of Mil making alliances with 
the Children of Nemed, Fir Bolg, and Tuatha De Danann— without 
mentioning Partholdn and Cessair (IVHB, 250). On the other hand, 
the fourth caste was represented among the Indian king’s ratnins 
(‘high functionaries of state’) — SAI, 49.

32 X«i,Chs.III,IV,V.

33 . 5 G, 1 , 90 £,11,96 £

34 ‘The Hindu Act of Truth in Celtic Tradition*, MP, XLI V, 140.

35 ■ Ibid. (Ed.Ef R. Thurneysen, .ZCP, XI,.8i £)

376

Celtic Heritage

S6 BBC, 56. ,

37 ■ SG, II, 288.

3Z AKI, I 951

39 ^>nu. III, 155.

40 ‘Advice to a Prince*, £m, IX, 54 (tr. Tadhg O’Donoghue).

4X TBC, 7; &ii4, 11 , 183. Cf. Dumczil, JMQ, 115.

42 A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Dance of Shiva (Calcutta, 1946), 34*

43 MD, III, 20.40 ‘Advice to a Prince*, £m, IX, 54 (tr. Tadhg O’Donoghue).

4X TBC, 7; &ii4, 11 , 183. Cf. Dumczil, JMQ, 115.

42 A. K. Coomaraswamy, The Dance of Shiva (Calcutta, 1946), 34*

43 MD, III, 20.

44 IVHB, 250 fF. On the attributes of Connacht c£ ^riu, Y, 235, 
‘noble ancient lore . . . triumphs . . . judgements*. C£, further, the 
two quatrains given in Burduin Bheaga, ed. Tomas (3 Rathile (D, 
1925), 10: (i ) Connacht: ‘eloquent, musical, the glory of the com^ 
pany*; Ulster: ‘staunch in time of fighting*; Leinster: ‘cheerful, 
bright, glad, pleasant*; Munster; ‘in deeds and words clearly re-/ 
nowned*. (2) In the same order, ‘talkative, worthless*, ‘covetous, 
given to envy and hatred*, ‘prosperously capable*, ‘vainly boastful*. 
For other modern versions of these characterizations see The Gaelic 
Journal, XIV, 475; Seanfocia Ula'd, ed. £nri (3 Muirgeasa (1936), 
7, SnC, 246, TEF, II, 280.

The association of a particular colour with each of the four cardinal 
points is a very widespread phenomenon. In ancient times the three 
‘functions* {supra, p. 112) of Indo/European traditions were sym/* 
bolized by the colours white, red, and blue (or green) — Dumezil, 
RIR, Chs. Ill and IV, ITl, 26 £, where slight indications of 
white as the druid colour and red as the warrior colour in Irish 
tradition are noticed. To these we may add (i) Laigne Lethany^las 
(Broad^blue/green*) as the eponym of the Leinstermen, ‘green 
spotted (2 cloth)* {hrecc glas) amongst the attributes of Leinster 
(supra, p. 123), and UiEnechilals (‘Blue/GreenTace*) the name of an 
ancient Leinster people (EIHM, 30); (2) the jet-black colour of the 
crossdin. The colour of the Indian fourth caste was black.45 Kautjlyas Arthasdstra, trans. by R. Shamasastry (Bangalore, 1915), 
6i £ On the symbolism of the world quarters and the division of 
society accordingly, see further Vannie sociologique, Ser. i, VI, 34 C, 
60, etc. (E. Durkheim and M. Mauss), AW, 224 £, 86, 89. In 
Zuni society, priests are associated with the West, warriors with the 
North, dancers with the East, and farmers and doctors with the South 
(HS, 1 1 3). If the order of the last two were reversed, the scheme would 
correspond closely with the Irish one.

Notes

377

46 In India different arrangements were stipulated for various rites. See 
CJS, G, I, 105 ff. (references to Satapatha Brahmana).

47 Cf. J?r/«, XVIII (1958). 51 (D- A. Binchy); cf. IF, 45 (a sevens 
tcenth/century poem).

48 IIj 49; FF, I, i 2<5 £

49 VE, I, 47, 50.

50 HQ XI, 43 £

51 PRIA, XXVII, C, 330. In later tradition Gleann^na^nGealt in 
Corco Duibne is famous as the resort of ‘wild men* (Trioca^cead 
Com Duitncs ed. An Seabac (D, 1939), 284 £). In the early litera-^ 
ture, Mor, Mis, and during a period of mental derangement, Cii^ 
Chulainn, are associated with Munster (SILH, 147; Celtica, I, 
382). The story of Suibne Geilt is linked with Moling of Munster.

52 On the persons named see XIV, 3 f£, EIHM, 288, SG, II, 
57 < 5 .

53 MfFHT, xvii (J. G. McKay).

54 ZCP, XIX, 176.

55 PRIA (C), LV, 83 £ C£ FBI, 50 £, 1 , 292 (A. H. Krappe),

L 5 C, 428.

56 EIHM, 491, 519.53 MfFHT, xvii (J. G. McKay).

54 ZCP, XIX, 176.

55 PRIA (C), LV, 83 £ C£ FBI, 50 £, 1 , 292 (A. H. Krappe),

L 5 C, 428.

56 EIHM, 491, 519.

57 £m, II, 25, XIII, 167; GT, 180; SMMD, 26; MD, III, 255, 243. 
(We do not wish to imply that no personage with a Sen name is 
eper located outside Munster.) Fintan, whose abode was said to be in 
Munster, is referred to as ‘Fintan from the hazel woods* (SG, II, 
151). Many a sacred site was ‘originally’ a hazel wood (FBI, 128; 
SG, II, 576; supra, p. in). In two versions of a tale in which the 
provinces of Ireland are figuratively (and abusively) characterized, 
it is the people of Munster and those of Meath and Tara, respectively, 
who are described as ‘a hedge of white hazel’ in battle (£rm, V, 
239; BDBM, 125). Cf. infra, pp. 161, 311*

58 EIHM,Zz.

59 £rm, XIV, 7 £ O’Rahilly here rejects (Professor) M. <3 Briain’s 
suggestion (ZCP, XIV (1923), 327) that £rmnn is derived from 
ihsmnnt, ‘those living in the outer division’ or ‘those outside the 
division’. — ^It may be added here that in the Satapatha Brdhmam the 
Fathers are distinguished from the three sacrificial castes (SBE, XII, 
289 £, 420) despite what is noted supra, Gh. IV, n. 45.

60 HM, 65 (ed. and tr, K. Meyer).

61 GT, 189; ALIF, I, 738; c£ telling the bees about a death. C£

378 Celtic Berhage

H. M. Ransome, The Sacred Bee (L, 1937)* 1^9 ff* Ici a variant vet/

sion of *The Settling of the Manor of Tara* IV, 162) honey is

listed among the attributes of Munster. In Vedic mythology the 
Asvins, twin gods of the third and fourth functions (RIR, 57; SAI 
74 £), were of all the gods the most closely connected with honey. 
They gave honey to the bees and they themselves were compared 
with bees (VM, 49 £).

62 £C, VII, 91 if, 78, 89 (P. Mac Cana).62 £C, VII, 91 if, 78, 89 (P. Mac Cana).

63 Fftt 58 f£ A story in Cormac*s Glossary is about an old poetess of the 
Miiscraige of Munster. Her condition is wretched when she is dis/ 
covered in Man, and her identity is revealed by an unknown black/ 
faced youth, most foul and hideous in appearance, who is able to 
complete the half/quatrains she recites. Thereafter, noble raiment is 
put upon her, and the youth appears as ‘a young hero, kingly, 
radiant . . . fairer than the men of the world*. He is said to be the 
spirit of poetry. (CG/, 135; AIM^ IV, viii).

64 See Dum&il, MF, 42, 45.

65 JAGSf LXl, 65*

66 HLt, 223, 221 (quoting the Book of Rites). C£ 'EJk is Saman\ SBE,

I , 8 .

67 EJHM, 175,177,179.

68 MD, III, 338; AIM, I, 27; LG, II, 265; ZCP, XIV, 155 f£, 
TBD, 42; AS, 170 f£, 239 ff. (tr. W. Stokes).

69 Supra, pp. 55 ff.; c£ ATC, 285 f£

70 MU, 20.

71 FB, 103 (G. Henderson*s tr.).

72 ZCP, III, 38 (in a poem).

73 FB, loi.

74 SGS, V, 15; MU, 21. In an eleventh/century poem which des/ 
cribes him as a blazing lion, he appears as a conqueror who des/ 
troyed the south of the world (ZCP, III, 38). A Welsh poem de/ 
voted to him says that ‘he held (the) helm on (the) southern sea* 
(BT,66).

75 VM, 35 ff.; ITI, 35, SEE, XII, 53, 210, XLIII, 195.

76 See JHK, 431 ff* CuRoi is said to have shaved CuChukinn*s hair 
with his sword and then smeared his head with cow/dung (ZCP, 
IX, 198). In India, when a child was given his tonsure, the follow/ 
ing words were spoken as the left side of the head was being shaved: 
‘The razor with which Pusan has shaved (the beard) of Brihaspati,

Notes

379

of Agm, of Indra, for the sake of long life, with that I shave thy 
head/ The hair was then cast on bull*s dung or buried in a cow*' 
shed, {The Grihyay Sutras, SEE, XXX, 217, 61,)

77 , "Gawain and the Green Knight: Indra and Namuci’, Speculum, 
XIX (1944)? ^^5* On the ambivalence of the sun, the asura priest 
of all the devas, cf. Eliade, PCR, 143 ff.77 , "Gawain and the Green Knight: Indra and Namuci’, Speculum, 
XIX (1944)? ^^5* On the ambivalence of the sun, the asura priest 
of all the devas, cf. Eliade, PCR, 143 ff.

78 PRIA, XXXVI (C), 281. Professor Binchy {jSriu, XVIII, 49) 
translates oUam as ‘supreme’ or ‘most transcendent’ and notes that 
the word is used, in the oldest law traas, for the highest grade in 
every hierarchy.

79 So among the Sons of Mil, Donn was the king until they took pos/ 
session of Ireland.

CHAPTER VI INVOLUTIONS

1 LG, V, 267 ff. In the Fenian literature the fighting forces of Ireland 
are comprised of twenty/'five ‘battles’ (PRIA, XXXVIII (C), 
174 n.). On the twenty^five dioceses of Ireland, see Keating, FF, 
III, 29S.

2 SEE, XXXIV, 257 ff. The commentators differ in their inter/ 
pretation.

3 These classes are discussed in Chadwick, GL, I, 607 ff., and more 
recently in G. Murphy, ‘Bards and Filidh’, iSi^se, II, 202 ff. With 
regard to the distinction between pates and druids, cf P. Arnold, 
‘Augures ct flamines’, Ogam, IX (1957), i39.

4 BBCS, XI, 138 (D. M. Jones).

5 For a study of the power and significance of praise/poems, see 
Dumfeil, SF,

6 PXM, XXXVI (C), 277, 273.

7 Murphy, loc. cit.

S LG, HI, 23, V, 45, 91.

9 MD, IV, 300. In India, the Asvins, gods of the third estate, are ‘the 
physicians of the gods’. — ‘Slainghe of the (guesting) companies’, 
G T, 8 3 . (Sidnga is another variant of the name.)

10 Supra, pp. 3 5 ff. Like Slaine (the first king of Fir Bolg), Nuadu, 
the first king of the Tuatha and the ancestor of all the Irish (EIHM, 
467 n.), seems to belong to the province of the ancestors, the third

, .estate. ■ , . .

11 The. Fate of the Children of Tuireann, ed. and tr. R. J. O’Duffy (D, 
i90i),;4;.cf. Celtica, II, 64.

3So Celtic Heritage, .estate. ■ , . .

11 The. Fate of the Children of Tuireann, ed. and tr. R. J. O’Duffy (D, 
i90i),;4;.cf. Celtica, II, 64.

3So Celtic Heritage

12 PRM, XXXVI (C), 280. In Welsh tradition, the saccessive des^ 
times which Aranrhod swears upon Lleo bar him from having a 
name (Function I), arms (Function II) and a wife (Function III), 
but each of these destinies is circumvented (supra^ p. 50); c£ ^C, 
VIII, 283 n. (G. Dumezil). C£ CuChuIainn’s three wishes, p. 56.

13 J. G. Frazer, GB, IV, Ch. V, Aftermath (L, 1936), Ch. XXVI

14 LG, IV, 128, 161, 197.

15 Dnmezil, MV, 179 ff. C£ Ogam, X, 278 (J. de Vries). A. K. 
Coomaraswamy observes that there is ‘good reason to suppose* that 
the great seasonal festivals of India were primarily offered to Varum 
(Tijte, II (Washington, 1931), 30).

16 De Bello Gallko, VI, 17.

17 Naissance ie Rome^ (P, 1944), ff* (MDG, 9)* Among the Indian 
king’s jewels’ (ratnins), Varuna is represented by the suta, ‘poet, 
herald, physician, sacrosanct charioteer’ (Numen, III, 125), The 
word siita also denotes a low caste comprising the offspring of 
marriages between members of the hrahman and hiatriya castes

(Sisss).

18 Germ Ch. IX; EHR, 138.

19 MDG, Ch.IL

20 RC, XIV, 426. Conall Cernach and Get, the protagonists in 
SMMD (supra, p. 55), are related to one another in the same way.

21 DlL(C),s.Yv*gor(2),ma,gnia,

22 Germania^ Ch. XX. See, further, W. O. Farnsworth, Uncle and 
Nephew in the Old French Chansons de Geste (Colmnhia Unipersity 
Studies in Romance Philology and Literature, 1913); C. H. Bell, The 
Sister^ s Son in the Medieval German Epic (University of California 
PuUications in Modern Philology, X, 1920-5).

23 On the role of the cross^^cousin and the uterine nephew in ritual and

myth see A. M. Hocart, Man, XXIII, 10 £, XXIV, 103 £, XXVI, 
205 £, The Indian Antiquary, LII, (1923), 267 £, LIV (1925), 16 £, 
and A. R. Radcliffe/Brown, and Function m Primitive

Society (L, 1952), 15 i£. 97 f£Society (L, 1952), 15 i£. 97 f£

24 The Indian Antiquary, LIV, 18; DIL(C), s.y. gor, 2; AIM, IV, 81; 
CG/, 121.

25 Legendary families outside the Mythological Cycle include sons 
symbolizing the social functions. Thus the destinies of the five sons 
of Eochu Muigmedon are revealed in a dream: Brian and Fiachu 
will be rivals and the kingship will alternate between their descendants

Nbto 381

before tbe Hne of Brian prevails. AM will strive for territory and will 
gain an abode from his brothers, while Fergus will only beget a 
sorrowful peasant and his kin will be almost unknown. Niall the 
son of a secondary wife treated as a slave, becomes high-^king (KC^ 
XXIV, 174). Again, Artchorp, king of the Dessi, had four sons: 
Brecc, whose two sons became kings; Oengus, a champion who had 
the strength of fifty and wielded a terrible spear—he promised that 
his^children should be the first to go to battle and to go across the 
border, the last to come out of the enemy’s land; Eochaid, who 
like the third group of the Nemedians settled abroad, and lastly 
Forad who was the son of a bond maid and who, like Donn the 
son of Mil, though he was the eldest did not get any land. (Cm, 
XIV, 104 forad = hhxonc^monnd^ — ciJnfra, pp. 183 £)— Five 
generations from king to spade’ (C/, 125).

26 So too in India, the Maruts, gods of the third estate, act as the body/ 
guard of Indra, the chief god of the second function (CJS (G), I, 
67; SEE, XII, xvii, 387, 393 f, 398 ff.).

27 Supra^ p. 124; EIHM, 276 £27 Supra^ p. 124; EIHM, 276 £

28 Fn, <Si. Cf. DP, I, xxxi, xxxvii, where MacNeill asserts that in the 
folklore of Connacht and Donegal ‘Goll is the chief popular hero 
of the Fiana, the paragon of valour.’ It is said that Clanna Baoisgne, 
Finn’s own kindred, supported the claims of the line of £ber (who 
took the South of Ireland), whereas Clanna Morna, their rivals, 
supported the line of Eremon (who took the North), OST, I, 
57 — though, in one poem (DP, 11, 354), Finn is said to be of the 
race of Bremon.

29 On Arthur as the king of an underworld realm, the southern hemi/ 
sphere, or the Antipodes, see WAL^ Ch. V. Cf. Pwyll, lord of a 
southern territory and the Head of Annwfn, and CiiRoi, King of 
Munster, the ‘southern province’, and conqueror of the South of the 
world (supra, Ch. V, n. 74). Irish alltar denotes ‘yon side (of the 
country), the wilder parts, ... the other world, the world beyond the 
grave’ (IBD, 35).

30 Xi, 362. Cf. Enqchpaedk of Social Science, under ‘Death Customs’ 
(A. M. Hocart); also CaiUois, HS, i6i £, on inversion during 
festivals.

31 C. C. Miller, Black Borneo (L, i94<5), 204 £

32 An identification of ‘north’ with left’ and ‘south’ with ‘right’ is to 
be found in several languages. In Irish, not only is this the case, but

3 82 Celtic Heritage32 An identification of ‘north’ with left’ and ‘south’ with ‘right’ is to 
be found in several languages. In Irish, not only is this the case, but

3 82 Celtic Heritage

the word for ‘east* means ‘in front* and the world for ‘west* ‘behind*^ 
thus denoting the directions from the standpoint of a person who faces 
east, as the king of Tara does in stories we shall refer to in the next 
chapter. One Irish word for ‘north’ and ‘the North of Ireland’ in 
particular (fochk, a compound of cle ‘left’) denotes the seat of honour 
in the hall of a king or lord and the warror’s seat on the left side of the 
war/chariot— the charioteer sat on the right. A law-^tract makes it 
clear that in the house of a ho^atre, the man of the house always sat in 
the north end, facing south. MC, III, 29. (In Iceland too, the seat of 
honour was always on the northern side of the hall, facing south. It 
is said that the Roman king Numa faced south on the occasion of his 
inauguration— RJil, 41. As for ancient China, ‘what did he [the 
Sovereign] do? Nothing but reverently conduct himself with his face 
directed to the South.’ — HLt^ i, from the Analects of Confucius.) 
According to Irish fblk-^belief, a new house should always be built 
to the north of the old house. With regard to the burial of the ieai^ 
on the other hand, the northern side of a church or the left-hand side 
of a graveyard is set apart for unbaptised children, suicides, or 
strangers (HIF, 266). Furthermore, one word for ‘south’ {iess) 
means ‘just’, ‘well/arranged’; itei?^ ‘in the south’ is derived from ms^ 
‘high’; ‘the upper part (mchtar) of Ireland’ and ‘the top (ceann) of 
Ireland’ are synonyms for ‘the South of Ireland’ (ffiD, 1281), while 
the usual word for ‘north’ (tmth) means ‘evil’ — ^and similar semantic 
associations occur in other languages. (See H. Pedersen’s contribu/ 
tion to Donum natalkium Schrijnen (Nijmegen — Utrecht, 1929), 423, 
RC, XLVII, 254 n.) Whereas in India the gods were said to be in 
the North (as in the belief of the Romans, according to Varro) and 
the ancestors (and the demons) in the South (SJBE, XII, 289, JRS, 
XXXVI, 1 19 ff«)» the ancient Scandinavians the North was the 
direction of Hel and for the Persians it was the abode of demons. 
(In Persia, the relation of daem to ahura is inverse to the usual rela^ 
tion of (Indian) iem to asma). The statement referred to above, that 
in Ireland the man of the house always sat in the north end of the 
house, occurs in an explanation which is offered of the fact that a 
fine of a sheep was imposed for disfiguring the south door/post of the 
house of a Umriy but only a fine of a lamb for disfiguring the north 
door/post. ‘Why is the south side more nohkl Answer. Because it is 
that is in the view of the good man (of the house). . . Such subtleties 
and inversions have their counterparts in the complex symbolism ofNotes 383

left’ and ®righf in ancient China (on which see Granet, ESC» 
261-78).

It may be added that in Ireland, as in many other parts of the world, 
the sun/wise or right/hand-^wise turn is generally considered pro-' 
pitious and proper, whereas to turn withershins is considered wrong 
and unlucky, but suitable for sorcery and cursing. Apart from the 
latter qualification, all actions should be performed right/hand^wise 
with the exception of turning a plough^team at the end of the 
furrow’ (HIF, 373). It will be recalled that ploughmen and labourers 
figure prominently in Partholon’s company, and it is the same class 
of people (in Uaes trehthd)^ among Tuatha De Danann, who are 
accounted miee (‘non^gods’). In India, some of the features of the 
left/handed’ Tantra are the worship of female deities, the belief that 
deities exist in a benign and in a terrible form, the inclusion of various 
forms of ‘immoral conduct’ among the practices that conduce to 
salvation, and an elaborate ritual connected with the burial ground. 
The Prajnaparamita texts (of the left.'handed Tantra) originated in 
the South of India. (Bdd^ 177, 191 ff. On (artisan) castes of the Left 
Hand in south India, see Hutton, Cxi, 9, 59 ff.)

Initiation involves doing the exact opposite of what is usually 
considered proper (Y^, 3 <52; cf. m/m, p. 258). A. K. Coomara/ 
swamy cites the Acts of St Peter: . . the Lord saith in a mystery: 
LFnless ye make the things of the right hand as those of the left, and 
those of the left as those of the right, and those that are above as 
those below, and those that are behind as those that are before, ye 
shall not have knowledge of the kingdom.’ (‘The Inverted Tree’, 
Q/MS, XXIX, 142 f.)(On ‘left’ and ‘right’, see also R. Hertz, Death and the Right Hand 
(tr., L, i960), PRM, set. ii, I (1879), 355 ff (S. Ferguson). With 
regard to the warrior and his charioteer on the left and right sides, 
respectively, of the chariot, it may be noted that in the Tdin Cu^ 
Chulainn’s battle^girdle and kilt are of cow^skins and oxAides, 
while his charioteer wears a kirtle of buck-^skin — TBC(D), 187 ff. 
Prof J. Weisweiler draws a distinction between a ‘buU.'Culture’ of 
northern Ireland and a ‘deer/culture’ of southern Ireland— ‘Vorindo/ 
germanische Schichten der irischeHeldensage’. ZCP, XXIV, ii ff.*

384

Celtic Heritage

CHAPTER VII THE CENTRE

1 The Book of BJghts^ ed* J. O’Donovan (D, 1847)9 176-90; see 
ESM, 508.

2 DIL, s.v. Fdl; supra^ p. 29.

3 *De Sfl Chonairi Moir’, ed. and tr. L. Gwyniij Eriu, YI, 1 3% 142. 
According to the dindsenchas (RQ XV, 286), there were *three 
small stones’ apart from Fal, namely *Moel to the east, Blocc to the 
south, and Bluicne in the north/ In ^Baile in Scaif (ZCP, III, 
458), these names (with Maol for Moel) are those of Conn’s druids. 
(Cf. also MD, I, 18.)

4 J. Gonda, ^Ancient Indian Kingship . . Numen^ III, 147, c£ 
IV,, 149 n.

5 Tied Ddin na nGed’, tr. M. Dillon, CK, 58; EDBM, 6.

6 *A New Version of the Battle of Mag Rath’, ed. and tr. C. Mar/ 
strander, £rm, V, 233 (quoted). It is noted in the text that if the 
high/king had been of the Southern Ui NMl the arrangement 
would have been slighdy different. In ‘The Banquet of Dun na 
nGM’ this difference seems to be greater: ‘The custom was that 
when a king of the Southern Ui Neill was High King the king of 
Connacht should be at his right hand, and when a king of the■ Northern Ui NM was High King,, the king of Ulster on his right 
and the king of Connacht on his left/ (CK, 61.) One wonders 
whether a high/kii]^ of the Southern Ui NM faced southwards 
: ' and a high/king of the Northern Ui Neill faced northwards. With 
the alternation of the kings of Connacht and Ulster at the high/

. king’s right hand, cf. ‘There was a covenant between Lugaid and 
Ailill Aulum and between their offspring after them that whenever 
Aulum’s offspring held the kingship, Lugaid’s offspring should 
hold the judgeship, but when Lugaid’s offspring held the kingship, 
" : Aulum’s sons were to hold the judgeship. Lugaid and Ailill made

this arrangement in the, presence of Conn of the hundred battles 
over one half of Ireland. Thus the men of Leinster and Munster 
held kingship and judgeship.’ (E«, 29.)

7 FM, 9; cf. A. M. Hocart, ‘The Four Quarters’, CJS (G), 1 , 105 £ 
HIF, 425; CeWm, I, 388 (T. F. O’Rahilly).

8 Hocart, KC, 253.

9 Soothill, HLU 76^ 80, 1 3 5 s and Also, W. E. Geil, The 
Sacred Fke in China (L, 1926). The Five Ti also ruled the five

Notes

385

seasons and were associated with the five planets; There were four 
seas plus a pool in the centre, while the theory was that every fifth 
year a sovereign should go 'to the four, or possibly five, sacred 
mountains'. The four peaks were in the north, south, east, and west, 
and ‘at some period a fifth or central mountain was added'. In 
Ireland, the king of a tribe (or minor kingdom) was known as 
'king of peaks* (ri hem, CG, 18, 104). Cf. ‘Brega of the peaks' 
(ZCP, VIII, 265), ‘Hills* (IHK, 89), ‘Fir Boig of the

peaks* (LG, IV, 49). In India, the regalia of the king are known 
as ‘the five summits’ {Numen, III, 122). In China, the Four Chief 
Barons were known as the ‘Four Peaks* {HLU 104).

10 A. C. L. Brown, The Origin of the Grail Legend (Cb, Massac 
chusetts, I943)» 358 £10 A. C. L. Brown, The Origin of the Grail Legend (Cb, Massac 
chusetts, I943)» 358 £

11 As far as we know, the first writer to draw attention to the cosmos 
logical significance of the provinces of Ireland was Rene Guenon 
in Le Roi iu Monde (first published P, 1927; 3rd edn. 1950, p. 75). 
In Celtka, I (1950), 387, T. F. O’Rahilly noted that a fivefold 
conception of the world figured in the Rig Veda and in an Egyptian 
hymn of the sixth dynasty.

12 PJB, 2 ff.

13 Soothill, HLf, 88, 91 £ Cf. ‘from the five directions of the nine 
Finns’, Dinneen, lED, 22.

14 HL^, III.

15 Ibid,, 36.

16 The Arthasdstra of Kautilya, quoted by Hocart, JCC, 247, and by 
E. M. Sturtevant, Yale Classical Studies, 1 , 219. (On the date of this 
work, see SAl, 143 ff.); CJS (G), I, 106 ff. In the Buddhist 
symbol of the Wheel of the Law, the eight spokes represent 
the Eight/fbld Path to the Centre (Anthropos, XLI-XLIV, 
845 f.).

17 Cf. L. H. Loomis, ‘The Celtic Twelve’, MP, XXV, 345 ff

1 8 ‘The State Concept of Imerina, compared with the Theories found 
in certain Scandinavian and Chinese Texts’; FL, LXI (1950), 
186-202. The Kalmucks of Siberia picture the world as being 
circular with a square pyramidical mountain in the centre. In the 
ocean in each of the four directions is a separate quarter of the world. 
Each quarter consists of a large island with a small island on either 
side, making a total of twelve lands around a central mountain 
(Harva, RFAFt ^5 £)* The Kalmucks also associate a different

386 Celtic Heritage

colour with each direction, and with this may be compared the 
twelve winds of different colours described in a tenth/century Irish 
poem and in the introduction to the Senchas Mot (Sdtair m Rann^ 
ed. W. Stokes (1883), 2; ALI, I, 27. Each of the four winds from 
the cardinal points is separated from the next by two subordinate 
winds.)The pattern we are discussing also finds a close parallel in the 
arrangement of the Twelve Tribes of Israel in four groups of three 
around the tabernacle. Each group of three consisted of a dominant 
tribe situated at the cardinal point and two subordinate tribes. In 
the centre was the tabernacle, looked after by the Levites who *were 
not reckoned among the Israelites’ (Numbers, ii). The pattern was 
reproduced in microcosm on the burse which Aaron wore on his 
breast when he entered the Presence (Exodus, xxviii). In the burse 
there were twelve precious stones, arranged in four rows of three 
and engraved with the names of the Twelve Tribes. For a discus^ 
sion of the Twelve Tribes of Israel and other twelve^tribe con^ 
federacies in the Near East, see M. Noth, The History of Israel (L, 
1958), 87 IF. References to twelve tribe communities in ancient Italy 
and Greece are quoted in the same author’s Das System der zwdlf 
Stdmme Israels (Beitrdge zur Wissenschajt vom Alten und Neuen 
Testament, Vierte Folge, Heft I, (Stuttgart, 1930), 47 f ).

19 CG, 18, 23.

20 CCC, 52. Matholwch, King of Ireland, and his company come 
to Wales in thirteen ships {PKM, 29).

21 TBD, 5, 33.

22 CJ, 58.

23 LG, V 127, 47.

24 MU, 2; EIHM, 405.

25 MC, II, 40 (cf. MD, III, 16).

26 TIP, II, 83.

27 RC, XII,8i;ALLI,27fr.

28 Danielli, loc. cit., 1 91; HL^, 87, 92, etc.

Z9 Constitution d^Athenes, ed. G. Mathieu and B. Haussoulier (P, 
1922), 75*

30 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, Sriu, IV, 22 ff. On Indra, the warrior god, 
as lord of the New Year, see PC, 122 fE; on Mars and the Year, 
Tfp, 238 fF.

. 31 , See F.R. Lewis, ‘Gwerin Ffristial a Thawlbwrdd’, THSC, 1941,

Notes 387

1 85 . fE, and E. 'MacWhite, ‘Early Irish Board Games’, V 
(i 945>25 ff

32 IV, 124.

33 Tr. E. Knott, The Bardic Poems of Tadhg Dali C 3 hUigimh II (L, 
1926), 198. The poem belongs to the period 1200-1640.

34 Kng, zs,79^

35 ZCP, III, 458 (ed. K. Meyer),

36 Supra, p. 66,33 Tr. E. Knott, The Bardic Poems of Tadhg Dali C 3 hUigimh II (L, 
1926), 198. The poem belongs to the period 1200-1640.

34 Kng, zs,79^

35 ZCP, III, 458 (ed. K. Meyer),

36 Supra, p. 66,

37 f£. III, 476; cf. RC, XV, 297, MD, II, 42.

38 Tr. E. MacNeill, Cl, 51; cf. CA, 358, MD, IV, 278.

39 Cm,XXIV, 44 ,tr. A.W.Wade/Evans,

40 TLP,I,4i£

41 SG, II, 76.

42 ALfV, 1 , 170, 538, 754 -

43 See, for example, R. U. Sayce, ‘The One/night House and its 
Distribution’, FL, LIII, 161 f In Scotland the household fire had 
to be extinguished before an occupier could be evicted (FL, LII,

304).

44 Coomaraswamy, KVL, 19 f

45 LG, III, 4, IV, 140, V, 59, 70; M. A. Canney, ‘Boats and Ships in 
Processions’, FL, XLIX, 132 iff

46 SG, I, 73, ZCP, XX, 168, IT, III, 198.

47 AIM, IV, 13. (According to another version, the fires were made 
by the druids ‘through incantations’; TIG, xxxv); FF, II, 246.

48 GB, X, 147, 155, 335-

49 HIF, 334 -

50 De Bello Gallko, vi, 13.

51 ALI, I, 78 £ In his recent study, ‘The Fair of Tailtiu and the Feast 
of Tara’ {&iu, XVIII (1958), 114), Professor D. A. Binchy notes 
that ‘in pre-Christian, perhaps in pre-Goidelic, days Uisnech, the 
“centre” of Ireland, seems to have been a place of religious 
significance, particularly associated with a fire-cult’. He also believes 
that the story of Hide’s fire (supra, p. 156) shows ‘that an aura of 
sanctity most have clung to the district even in the days of the latest 
pseudo-historians* (loc. cit.). Nevertheless, prompted by the absence 
in the annals of references to an assembly at Uisnech, he describes 
morddil Uisnig (‘The assembly of Uisnech’ referred to in medieval 
texts) as an invention of the pseudo-historians. Whether an assembly, 
was actually held at Uisnech during a particular period in Irish

388

Celtic Heritage388

Celtic Heritage

history, or not, it seems incredible to us that the pre/Christian fire-^ 
cult postulated by Professor Binchy and the pre/Christian assembly 
the existence of which is rendered more than probable by Caesar's 
observations concerning the annual druidic assembly held in the 
central kingdom of Gaul were first forgotten and then invented 
again, and moreover that these spurious traditions were inserted 
in stories in such a way as to harmonize with evidence which 
can be adduced from other lands.

52 MD, IV, 279.

53 Topo^raphia Hihernie, PRIA, LII (C), 159.

54 IV, 151.

55 On the symbolism of the centre, see W. H. Roscher, ‘Omphalos', 
AKSGf XXIX, No. 9 (1913), and other references given in 
PCR, 23 S, J. Loth, ‘L'Omphalos chez les Celtes*, Repue its 
&udes Ancknnes, XVII (1915), i93 ff , W. R. Lethaby, Architecture 
Mysticism and Myth (L, 1892), Ch. IV, Eliade, PCR, 374 
MER, 12 ff, J. G. Frazer's edition of Pausanks^s Description of 
Greece (L, 1898), V, 315 ff» L. L E. Ringbom, Graltempel uni 
Paraiies (Stockholm, 1951), 444 ff

56 Plutarch, Numa^ 1 1, quoted in Hocart, RC, 224.

57 Rii Veda, 1 , 16, 4 (35), quoted in RC, 222.

58 A. K. Coomaraswamy, Elements of Buddhist Iconography (L, 1935), 
80, n. 94.

59 Supra, p. 120.

60 R. Patai, Man and Temple (L, 1947), 54 ff ; Eliade, PCR, 376 £

6x R. Guenon, The Symbolism of the Cross (tr., L, 1958), 34, n. i. It may

be noted that Delbaeth's fae sons leave the centre (supra, p. 157).

62 Harva,RFAV,85£

63 VB, I, 57 (tr. K. Meyer).

6450,11,78.

65 Ibid., i6i ff.

66 EIHM, 3 2 z£; infra, pp.

67 See ESM, 508.

68 MD, IV, 297.

69 TKI, 23 £ According to Professor Dillon, the sentences we quote 
are plainly a later addition, but he adds that ‘there is nothing in the 
language to indicate a date later than the tenth century'.

70 Carney, SILH, 33^;feis means ‘sleep', ‘spend the night', ‘feast'.

71 LG, IV, 179.

Nicies 389

72 ■ Dum&il, 'MR, Ch»II, is a comparative study of the Indian and70 Carney, SILH, 33^;feis means ‘sleep', ‘spend the night', ‘feast'.

71 LG, IV, 179.

Nicies 389

72 ■ Dum&il, 'MR, Ch»II, is a comparative study of the Indian and

the Roman centres.

73 J. Abbott, JCP, 189.

74 ^:c, 63,93. 153f 163. ■

75 FF, II, 247 £ ■

76 0’Rahilly,£IHM,i68;i5w,XVIII, i29(D.A.Binchy).

77 LG, IV, 115 £, 148.

78 E!HM,i 6 B.

79 Supra, pp. 73£ C£ also HL, 414.

"80 ' LG, IV, 8, 16.

81 CJ, I9£, 40.

82 Supra, p. 75.

83 The people of Brega are described as *the foodz-providers of C& 
Chulainn" (Cl, 19).

84 RC, XVI, 61 ; MD, IV, 1S6. Of the three sons of Simon [Magus], 
who begot her o£spring, it is said: ‘gigantic was their league of

heir.

85 T. J. Westropp, in JRSA, XLIX, 9.

86 SG, II, 375(1.332).

87 SEE, XII, 340, KP, 189, RIR, 29. This fire, the second in order 
of kindling, was a ‘famished fire*. The fire of Vulcan, which was a 
safeguard against burning, has been adduced as a parallel: Revue 
ks iStuks Latines. XXXVI (1958), 121 £ (G. DumM).— 
The location of the three centres, Uisnech, Tara and TIachtga, 
in Keating’s scheme, is comparable with that prescribed for the 
Indian fires (which we have referred to) in a funeral rite: north/west 
for the original fire, south-east — ^‘an elevated corner (of that place)’ 
— ^for the orientated fire, and south-west for the defensive fire 
(Asmldyana-^Grihya^Sutra, SBE,^^^,

88 V. supra, note 46. In Mriu, V, 232, the three festivals of Ireland are 
those of Emain, Tara, and Cruachan.

89 C£ SEE, XII, 289 £, XLIV, 347. The battle between Tuatha 
De Danann and Fir Bolg was a midsummer battle {^riu, VIII, 
30).

90 C£ Sjoestedt, GHC, 24 £.

91 For references to the personages mentioned in this paragraph, see 
the indexes to MD and to the ptosc diniknehas, RC, XVI; also FL, 
111, 493, IV, 481, 486, 491^

y 9 Z:' FD,. Ill, 175 ffi. Lord Raglan, Death and Rehirth (L, 1945). S9 £

B 90 Celtic Heritage

93 FSB, 90; c£ Lady Wilde, Ancient Cures, Charms ani Usages of 
Ireland (L, 1890), 65 £y 9 Z:' FD,. Ill, 175 ffi. Lord Raglan, Death and Rehirth (L, 1945). S9 £

B 90 Celtic Heritage

93 FSB, 90; c£ Lady Wilde, Ancient Cures, Charms ani Usages of 
Ireland (L, 1890), 65 £

94 Cf. E. EttUnger, ‘The Association of Burials with Popular Assem/ 
blies. Fairs and Races in Ancient Ireland*, ^C, VI, 30.

95 iSriu, IV, 26 (tr. W. Stokes).

96 MD, III, 1-25. E. Gwynn*s translation is quoted.

97 Tjg,i2. C£MD,IV,i 50 *

98 Cf. Mr Aneirin Talfan Davies’s comparison (in a lecture) of 
Dylan Thomas’s ‘Prologue’ with the Beneikite,

99 We have made a few verbal changes in Gwynn’s translation of these 
verses.

ICO MD, IV, 151.

101 p. 63.

102 SG, II, 360, c£ ibid,, 88.

103 SHI, II, 449 £

104 TKI, 25.

105 MD, IV, 151.

CHAPTER vni FIVE PEAKS

1 HRB, 222-53.

2 WBM, 9 %Mkn.

3 Cm, IX, 182 £

4 Discussed by T. F. O’Eahilly in ESM, loi-io. (A division of 
functions between three kings, two in the North and one in the South 
is suggested by the story of the only three kings Colum Cille knew 
who would go to heaven: Cairbre, King of Oriel, on account of the 
gentleness he used towards the clergy; Ailill, King of Connacht, 
because by turning to face the victorious enemy he sacrificed himself 
and his death was a redemption to many, and Feradach, King of 
Ossory in the South, because at the approach of death he repented 
of his former covetousness and resigned all his treasures to his enemies 
-~RC, XIII, 55 *)

5 PJKM, 48, Mi, 40.

6 THSC, Session 1948, 353. 383.

7 Descriptio Kamhriae, I, Ch. II; ALW^ I, 340, 405.

8 HfF,406n.

9 Gneother commote, in south.'west Wales, bears the same name.

10 According to Nennius, HB, 31 f£

11 Studies in Early British History (Cb, 1954), 3 ^. ■^7* The name of his

Notes

391

son, Gwerthcfyr (Vortimer), originally signified ‘supreme king®; 
TH 5 G, 1946-7, 51 (Sir Ifor Williams).

12 ID, 17.

1 3 Like Partholon and Nemed, Pwyll and Teyrnon have been described , 
as doublets (GrufFydd, Rte, 99).12 ID, 17.

1 3 Like Partholon and Nemed, Pwyll and Teyrnon have been described , 
as doublets (GrufFydd, Rte, 99).

14 VIII, 71 n. (T. Gwynn Jones); 51.

15 HB, 73.

16 BT, S4^WAT,m,WBM,2soff.;Mb,i3oK

17 JBBCS,Xn,i3.

18 Ed. and tr. V. Hull, PMLA, LVI, 94^, 950; CK, 37- In Dyfed 
there was a district the inhabitants of which were exempted from 
paying chief rent because they had been the first to offer submission 
to a (medieval) conqueror from abroad. Remembering the ztttu 
bution of fidchell to Munster, we are tempted to note that this distria 
of Whitchurch in Dyfed was remarkable in that ‘in auncient tyme 
in this parishe the meanest Sc simplest sort of people yea the playne 
plowmen were skillfull at Chesse play ... in Welsh Bristol Doh 
harth . . (George Owen, writing in 1603-4. Ed. by B. G. Charles, 
Journal of the National Library of Wales, V, 280).

19 It was not lawful for a faith (supra, p. in) to have swine (ALI, IV, 
383). We have referred to the Pigs of Manannan (supra, p. 39); on 
the pigs of Balor, see DF, 1 , 30, 130. Cf. further, O’Rahilly, EIHM, 
123 f. A sow guides Gwydion to the upland tree where Lieu’s flesh 
is rotting after he has been slain (PKM, 89).

20 In an Irish story similar to the first episode in the Mahinof, the person 
who corresponds to Pwyll is ‘the Great Fool* (S. J. McHugh, 
‘Tk Lay of the Big Fool . . . ’ MP, XLII, 197). The impulsive con^ 
duct of Pryderi (‘Care’) belies his name.

In Welsh tradition, the ‘Wild man of the Woods’, the prophet 
Myrddin, is associated with Dyfed; cf. Ch. V, n. 51.

21 In the iiniknchas (KC, XVI, 276), Manannan is described as ‘a 
druid, a wright, and a chapman*.

22 As ‘the House of Donn* occurs as a synonym of ‘Munster*, so too 
in one poem isdwfn seems to be used with reference to Dyfed

(GDG, 34) V

2 3 CF, 1 5 1, ff, PMLA, LVI, 919*

24 Descriptio Kambrke, I, Ch. 2. As a pun, Leth Moga could mean ‘Great 
Half’ (cf. DIL(C), s,v. mogf(GDG, 34) V

2 3 CF, 1 5 1, ff, PMLA, LVI, 919*

24 Descriptio Kambrke, I, Ch. 2. As a pun, Leth Moga could mean ‘Great 
Half’ (cf. DIL(C), s,v. mogf

25 ALIF, I, 404. This arrangement recalls the distribution of women

392

Celtic Heritage

between Fmtan,Bith, and Ladra {supra, p. 114). In some texts, Ladra 
was given no special consort but after going south he died of excess 
of women.

26 I (L, 1801), 541.

27 THSC, 1913-14, 229 C, 252 ff.; BBCS, V, 25,

28 ALW, 11 , 742*

29 See G. J. Williams, lolo Morganwg, I (C, 1956), 35. A proverb runs: 
‘The height of good breeding in Gwynedd, the height of generosity 
in Glamorgan.*

30 ALW, I, 519.

31 HW9 300 n. For the Irish law in this matter see SEIL, 133 iff., 178. 
(The maximum inheritance of a daughter was equivalent to the 
estate of a homre, ibid., 156.)

32 ‘The banshees are directly descended from these old goddesses, who 
were perhaps the ancestors and became the patrons of the great 
familes, especially in the south of Ireland . . .* (Hull, FBI, 59 — our 
italics),

33 See IVHB, 120-75, 245, 25 x, and notes in the Appendix; Lehr 
Bretnach, ed. A. G. van Hamel (D, n.d.), 5-14, 82 ff.; Dumezil, 
TS, Ch. 16. The descent of the eponymous Cruithne is traced from 
Partholon; he is described as a wright (IVHB, xci ff., 124).

In India, some forms of marriage were peculiar to the two lower 
of the four main castes, and in these forms ‘matriUneal elements had 
some importance* (Shamra, SAI, 203). MatriUneal succession is 
found in southern India, in particular, and especially on the Malabar 
coast in the south-east {Csl, 143)*

34 The fact that one of the three Nemed groups (and also one of the four34 The fact that one of the three Nemed groups (and also one of the four

sons of Artchorp, supra, 381), settled abroad may indicate that the 
class it symbolized was regarded as being, in some sense, set apart 
from the ruling classes. In the mythologies of other peoples the peace- 
ful co-ordination of the two upper functions with the third is en- 
sured by the grant of wives, and temporary kingship, to the gods or 
people to whom the third function belongs (Dumezil, JMQ, JTJ, 
56). In Sanskrit, Vifpati, ‘chief of the yeomanry*, also means ‘son-in- 
law* (GJS, G, I, 73) and the Welsh dawf ‘son-in-law* ‘client*, is 
probably related to the Greek ‘people*. A number of the

kings of the Cruithne are said to have ruled Ireland {EIHM, 3 45 £). 
It will be recalled that Bres, the oracle on agricultural practice who 
became king of Ireland (r/ ocfenei, RC, XII, 64), was the consort of

Notes

393

Brigit, daughter of the Dagda. Something of the role of Brigit has 
doubtless been inherited by her namesake, the most celebrated of the 
female saints of Ireland. An early story (On the Calendar of Oengus^ 
(ed.) W. Stokes (D, 1880), xlvi) tells of a miraculous yield of 
milk given by the saint’s cows — such a flood as would have filled all 
the vessels in Leinster. It formed Loch Lemnacht (‘The Lake of 
New Milk’; the miraculous milk cure provided by the Cruithne is 
said to be commemorated in the name Ard Lemnacht in the same 
province. V. supra, p. 38 the manner of Bres’s death). St Brigit is ‘the 
guardian of the hearth of every Gaelic house’ (FBI, 53) and her per-^ 
petual fire at Kildare in Leinster (PRIA, LII, 150) has affinities with 
the fire of Vesta which, on other counts, we have compared with the 
original fire of the clans of Nemed.

35 The main references to these various grades, in the Laws, are ALW, 
I, 32, 74, 383, 388, 660, 678. Cf. T. Gwynn Jones, ‘Bardism and 
Romance’, THSC, 1913 “14, ^07 ff.35 The main references to these various grades, in the Laws, are ALW, 
I, 32, 74, 383, 388, 660, 678. Cf. T. Gwynn Jones, ‘Bardism and 
Romance’, THSC, 1913 “14, ^07 ff.

36 According to one of the law-books (ALW, I, 32) the captain of the 
house^troop was to place a harp in the hand of the hardd teulu on 
each of the three principal feasts.

37 Gramadegau'r Penceirddiaid, ed. G. J. Williams and E. J. Jones (C, 
1934), 17, 37. ‘To gladden the company’, ‘to entenzixi kyuanhedu, 
from kyuanned, ‘abode’, ‘dwelling’.

3 8 Ibid., 35. One of the chief functions of the clerwr was to defame.

39 IF.

40 TLM, no, 296 ff. It is said that throughout Welsh itory the 
South has been the region of innovation and enterprise and that what 
the South has created the North has elaborated and perfected (W. J. 
Gruffydd, Owen Morgan Edwards, 1 (Aberystwyth, 193 7 )» ^o). 
Thirty of the court poets of the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, 
authors of the most abstruse poems in the language, have been tenta^ 
tively assigned to the various provinces: more than half of them were 
from Gwynedd, eight from Powys, and only one from the South 
(J. Lloyd/Jones in PEA, XXXIV, 194 f-)- On the other hand, 
metres which later appear as accentual song/metres seem to have 
found readier acceptance in South Wales (cf. W. J. Gruffydd, 
Lknyddiaeth Cymru 0 14^0 hyd 1600 (Liverpool, 1922), 67, G. J. 
Williams, TLM, Ch. IV. In what is believed to be the first eistedd^ 
fod upon record two prizes were offered, one for poets and one for 
instrumentalists. The former was won by a poet from the North, the

394 Celtic Heritage394 Celtic Heritage

latter by a harpist from the South— Tywpogyon^ ed. aad tr, 
T. Jones (C, 1955), 166). In medieval Ireland, the/M looked back 
to three early poets of Connacht as their great exemplars, and most 
learned families either traced their origin to Connacht or Meath or 
were associated with patrons from those parts (Flower, ITr^ 6 $^ 85 , 
94; IF, 93)- With the emergence of the accentual metres, ‘which be-- 
longed essentially to the people* (O’Rahilly, ID, 2$$% Munster 
poets came into far greater prominence.

41 GPC, s.v.

42 Welsh teulu means (i) ‘family*, (2) ‘house/troop or war--band*, and 
in the dialect of Dyfed (3) ‘phantom funeral*, i.e. an underworld 
company (CF, 273 £). Similarly cethern means (i) ‘family or kindred* 
(in the dialect of Dyfed), (2) ‘crew of rascals*, and (3) ‘fiends of hell*. 
God is said to have set in Gwyn ap Nudd the spirit of the demons 
of Annwfn (MJ, 119). In Irish tradition, Cethern son of Fintan was 
Finns teacher (RC, V, 202, Fn, 46); Irish cethern, ‘a troop of foot-- 
soldiers*, is glossed hyjtan (and linked with cUar), and an Irishman in 
the sixteenth century suggested a derivation from cith ifrinn, ‘shower of 
heir (SG, II, xxii n.).

43 ALW, I, 62 ff., 192 ff., 392.

44 BGSG, 275*

45 F. E. Halliday, The Legend of the Rood (L, 1955), 22. All the 
examples are west of Truro (ibid., 24).

46 DIL, S.V. oenach, Boaistuau*s Theatre du Monde was translated under 
the title Gorsedd y Byd (1615).

47 See Allcroft, CC, I, 88, where reference is made to the usual posi/ 
tions of the Homeric assembly: at the original landing/place, at the 
gates of the community or at the gates of the chieftain — ^‘at the thres/ 
hold of authority*. The relation of the theatre to the cult of Dionysos 
and the dedication of the circus to Census are not without significance 
in the context of our discussion.

48 WBM, 112;

49 C£ Ellis, RH, 105 ff.

50 We may also compare the ystafell which, in the medieval king*s court48 WBM, 112;

49 C£ Ellis, RH, 105 ff.

50 We may also compare the ystafell which, in the medieval king*s court

in Wales, was a bedroom and withdrawing room. We hear of Arthur 
sitting on a couch, or mound, of fresh rushes in the middle of such a 
room and sleeping while one of his knights tells of the most wondrous 
thing he knew— the story of his quest and discomfiture in a land of 
marvels. (Mi, 155. In later times, the word denotes the

Notes

395,:

bottom-^dtawer.) In the cottages of some parts of Ireland the ‘west' 
room, a chamber to which the old folk retire to end their days, has 
close associations with the fairies, the past, and the dead (C. M. 
Arensberg, The Irish Countryman (L, 1937), Ch. I).

51 The first guesting house was built by Partholon s people. In Wales, 
the villeins were required to build a hall and other houses for the 
king, (Tara was built on the land of one of the Dessi; RC, XXV, 
24.)

52 P£,72£

53 C£ G. Dum&il, Loki (P, 194S), 258 C Comparison might also be 
made with Unferth, the honoured reviler in Beowulf. Like Partholon 
he is guilty of slaying a kinsman, if not of treason, (See references given 
in F. Klaeber's edition (NY, 1922), 148 £)

54 BBCS, XIV, 121 £

CHAPTER IX NUMBERS

1 Ed and tr. V. Hull, PMLA, LVI, 937 £; Dillon, CiC, 37.

2 SG, II, 232 £ While sitting on the stone, Finn has a vision of 
Heaven and Earth.

3 LSC, 159, 4^4-

4 Contes Popukires de Basse Bretagne, ed. F. M, Luzel (P, 1887), III,

370 IF-

5 Eliade, MER, 13.

6 ‘Lageniensis’, Irish Folklore (L, 1870), 207.

7 RC, XV, 445 (Dindsenchas).

8 JHS, XIX (1899), 225 £; Hocart, Kng, 179.

9 L. Frobenius, Kulturgeschichie Afrkas (Zurich, 1933), i73 ff He 
compares the five4egged sacred stools of West Africa.

10 CA, 403*

11 W. G. Wood/Martin, Pagan Ireland (L, 1895), I, 303. That a9 L. Frobenius, Kulturgeschichie Afrkas (Zurich, 1933), i73 ff He 
compares the five4egged sacred stools of West Africa.

10 CA, 403*

11 W. G. Wood/Martin, Pagan Ireland (L, 1895), I, 303. That a

cairn can be a very ephemeral cult object is shown by a custom 
practised by New Year guisers in Skye, To express their displeasure 
with households that do not give them anything, they erect outside 
the door a heap of stones, called Cam nam Mollachd, ‘Cairn of the 
Curses*, which is much feared because of the curses pronounced 
uponit(BCC5, II, 52). ■ ■

jz HIF,66B. ■ . .

13 SEIL, i49lAn,Y,sis.

396 Celtic Heritage

1$ EC NE, 152 (B. Megaw); Proceedings of the Antiquaries of Scotland, 
LXXVIII (1944), 41 ff., 50 ff., LXXXV (1953). 60 £ (A. 
McKerral).

16 Hocart, KC, 253,

17 PRIA Irish MSS Series, I, 200.

18 THSC, 1946-7, 102,

19 MD, III, 278, RC, XV, 455; EIHM, 121, A sixth hostel is 
sometimes added.

20 ZCP, XIX, i65;TKL

21 CGI, 142; CF, 8, 418, 692.

22 AS, 72; jFrt, 99.

23 rBC(D), 24; c£ p. 39.

24 TBC{D), 196; cf. 325, and TED, 20; H. P. L’Orange, The 
Iconography of Cosmic Kingship in the Ancient World (Oslo, 195 3 )» 
91-109.

25 SC, 3. In Merioneth, a ‘houseful of children’ was defined as five 
— one in each corner and one in the middle (Ex. inf. Mrs Elwyn 
Davies, Llanbryn/mair).

26 This system of writing is used in some 360 inscriptions (chiefly on 
memorial stones) of about the fifth and sixth century, mostly in 
Ireland and Wales, particularly the south/west of the two countries, 
with only a few in Scotland, the Isle of Man, and England. The 
signs are discussed in tracts found in late medieval manuscripts. 
See J. Vendryes, ‘L’icriture ogamique et ses origines’, MC, IV, 
83-116 and references given there. On the arithmetical use of the 
signs see L. Gerschel, ‘Origine et premier usage des caracteres 
ogamiques’. Ogam, IX (1959), 151-173.

27 Vendryes, loc. cit., 84; cf. ECNE, 213 n. (K. Jackson).27 Vendryes, loc. cit., 84; cf. ECNE, 213 n. (K. Jackson).

28 Auraicept na nieces, ed. and tr. G. Calder (E, 1917)* 7 ^* Indian 
teaching there are five kinds of breath: up/breathing, down^breath.^ 
ing, back/breathing, out/breathing, on/breathing. (SEE, XV, 50). 
The following quotation suggests that even this may not be ue/ 
related to our theme. ‘We have in xi, 8.3.6. the description of 
the rite by which a new.^born child is endowed with five breaths. . . . 
There is first described the communication by the winds of the four 
quarters and zenith of the corresponding breaths to the victim in 
the horse sacrifice, by which the victim is ritually brought to life 
again. ... In the case of a new-^born son, the father requests five 
Brahmans to “breathe over” the boy in the same way; but if the

Notes

S9T

Brahmans are not available then he should ‘‘breathe over*^' . . . the 
boy himself, circumambulating him, whereby the boy attains the 
whole of life and lives to old age.' A. K. Coomaraswamy, ‘The 
Sun^kiss*, JAOS, LX, 55 if. On the five senses as breaths, see R. B. 
O nians, The Origins of European Thought (Cb, 1951), 66-'83.

29 RC, XIII, 269; cf Auraicept na n^ces, 100; ACL, II, 258 (coic). 
In India, on the other hand, ‘Speech has been measured out in 
four divisions, the Brahmans who have understanding know it. 
Three kept in close concealment cause no motion; the fourth . . . 
men speak.' Rig Veda, I, 164, 45.

30 Fn, 38.

31 JED, S.V.

32 SEE, XII, 154 f. The rite is performed in imitation of the contest 
between Indra, the protagonist of the Devas, and the Asuras. L. 
Gerschel (loc. cit., 159 n.) notes that in Roman families the children 
after the first four were called Quintus, Sextus, etc., and that the 
months, after the first four, were Hkewise numbered.

33 On ‘five* in India, see KP, 295 £; OS, VIII, 247 £; cf. supra, 
p.107.

34 TBDd, 121, On ‘five’ in Buddhism see also Conzc, Bid, 14, 189 £; 
Buddhist Texts, ed. E. Conze ( 0 , 1954)^ 5 ^33 On ‘five* in India, see KP, 295 £; OS, VIII, 247 £; cf. supra, 
p.107.

34 TBDd, 121, On ‘five’ in Buddhism see also Conzc, Bid, 14, 189 £; 
Buddhist Texts, ed. E. Conze ( 0 , 1954)^ 5 ^

35 L. Sejourne, Burning Water (L, 1957), 90.

36 Deren, DH, 41. The equivocal nature of the fifth component 
appears also in the lack of correspondence between the widespread 
doctrine of the ‘four ages of the world* and Hesiod’s ‘five ages’, 
for which he has only four symbolic metals. C£ the ‘four elements’ 
plus the ‘quintessence*. On ‘the swinging of the door’, cf. supra, 
p. 66»

37 V. F. Hopper, Medieval Number Symbolism (NY, 1938), 207.

38 1, 486, 292.

39 Gwaith Guto'r Glyn, ed. 1 . Williams and J. LI. Williams (C, 
1939), 133,275.

40 ALW, I, 544; LG, V, 269.

41 MC, 11 , 143 f.

42 Ed. and tr. R. Thumeysen, ZCP, XIV, 16.

43 A. K. Coomaraswamy, ‘The Inverted Tree’, QJMS, XXIX 
(i 938 - 9 ).ii 9 f-

44 See Loomis, IVAT, 154 C

45 MD, 11 , 27.

Celtic Heritage

398

■ 46: TBC{D),' 17 ^ . .

47 ' Joyce^ SHI, I, aso*

■ 4S ' FB^ 7.

49 TBC(D), 189*

50. Ibid., 60; Fn^ 51. The list of the stmdin^Jima includes eight Finns

besides Finn mac Cumaill (AS, 182).

$i ALW^ 1 , 408, 172, 311, II, 786. An Irish codex, on the other hand, 
has preserved the widespread myth which tells how Adam was 
made of eight parts — his flesh of the earth, his blood of the sea, his 
face of the sun, his thoughts of the clouds, his breath of the wind, 
his bones of the stones, his soul of the Holy Ghost, his piety of the 
Light of the World. (RC, 1 , 261 f.) A variant occurs in LG, 1 , 4% 
according to which Adam’s head, breast, belly, and legs were 
made, respectively, of earth from different lands, and his blood, 
breath, heart, and soul, respectively of water, air, fire, and the breath 
of God. ‘Thus it is that the four elements are in every man/ For a 
note on this myth see Stokes, TIG, xL52 TG, 1 , 414. J. Brand, Popular Antquitks of Great Britain^ (L, 1 849), 
11 , 430, 432. Cf. ‘Noughts and Crosses’ played on a ninefold 
figure.

53 See GB, X, 294; Antiquity, XXIX, 132 ff. (T. Davidson); 
A. MacBain, Celtic Mythology and Religion (Stirling, I9i7)> I59«

54 GB, X, 147 f., 155, 172; G. Storms, An^h^ Saxon Magic (The

Hague, 1948), 96 f, 195 f

55 PLGI, 13 £; TEF, II, 31, 272 £ There was no pestilence beyond 
the ninth wave (RC, II, 201).

56 For references to Celtic nines see RC, XXV (1904), I35 
(J. Loth).

57 TBC, 423. (C£ (for 27) SG, I, 199, RC, XII, 90., XVI, 150). 
As for the grandson, cf. infra, p. 203, Pendaran Dyfed (also HL, 
367 f£) and supra, p. 199 on ‘eighteen’.

58 Infra, p. 260.

59 VB, 1 , 16. The text states that the woman from the unknown land 
and Manannan mac Lit, respectively, sang 50 and 30 quatrains to 
Bran, but only 28 are given in each case. There were 27 years 
between the two Battles of Mag Tuired, and Nuadu’s arm was 
healed in 3 x 9 days.

60 SG, II, 99, 105.

61 See references cited by Loth, RC, XXV, 156.

Notes ' . . ' 399

6i DJL(C), s.w. On nine days or nights in Germanic tradition*, see 
Trp, 234 l

63 Rhys, HL, 362 £; RQ XXV, 113 £

64 P. Lnm, The Stars in Our Heaven (L, n.d.), 116, 1 19. Gf. Dum&il, 
PC, 117 ff. on the 27 Gandharvas.

65 TBD, % 32.

66 ylLIV, I, 486, 192.

67 Ibid., 408, 224.

68 See W. H. Roscher, ‘Die Sieben/ u. Ncunzahl im Kultus u. 
Mythos der Greichen*, AKSG, XXIV, No. I (1904), ‘Enneadische 
Stodien^ ibid., XXVI, No. 7 (1909).

69 LG, II, 176, 194. In MD, IV, 135 f£, Daire has seven sons, not 
five; cf. supra^ p. 74. The expedition of the Fomoire in the time of 
Partholon is called a secht gahdtl—^ ‘one of seven invasions’ or ‘a 
sham occupation’ (LG, III, 10).

70 IFHB, 51 (cf. sevens in territorial divisions in Wales, PKM, 27, 67).

71 See S. Weinstock, ‘Lunar Mansions and Early Calendars’, /HS, 
LXIX (1949), 48 £

72 De Excidio Britanniae, C2p. s*70 IFHB, 51 (cf. sevens in territorial divisions in Wales, PKM, 27, 67).

71 See S. Weinstock, ‘Lunar Mansions and Early Calendars’, /HS, 
LXIX (1949), 48 £

72 De Excidio Britanniae, C2p. s*

73 ‘Tain Bo Fraich’, (tr. SILH, 3; cf. FB, 69, twelve windows).

74 II, 185, IV, 27; Rhys, HL, 367 £

75 RC, XVI (1895), 35 £ (dindknchas).

76 MD, IV, 22.

77 RC, I, 260 (tr. W. Stokes). The ‘chief idol’ is here called Cenn 
Cruaich.

78 M. (3 Duigeannain, ‘On the Medieval Sources for the Legend of 
Cenn Croich’, ESM, 296 £

79 J. Cuillandre, La Droite et la Gauche (P, 1944), £ Cf. CC,

342 £ 350 etc. An early example of the use of twelve is provided 
by the numerous hollow, knobbled dodecahedrons found in Gallon 
Roman sites north of the Alps. These figures have been interpreted 
as dice representing the cosmos, and they may have been used in a 
game of divination of a type known ftom sixteenth/century texts. 
Each of the 12 sides of the figures is a pentagon. (See W. Deonna, 
‘Les Dod&aMres Gallo^romains . . .* Association Pro Aventico 
Bulletin, XVI (1954), I 7 --S 9 .)

80 LG, II, 271,111, 19, 123.

81 CJ, 94 (Ailech, in the north, comprised seventeen states (or tribes), 
Leinster sixteen, ibid., 88, 92); FSM, 508.

400 Celtic Heritage

82 PRIA, MSS Series, I, 24. On 4, 16 and 64 in land divisions in 
Britain and in India, see G. L. Gomme, The Village Community 
(L, 1890), 162-71.

83 LG, III, 5, V, 59, 165. 175. 297. 347. 385. etc; cf. SG, II, 166, 
182, 186, 249.

84 LG, IV, 134.

85 AS, 145 (cf. DF, 1 , 27), 72.

86 TBC(P), 40— the Book of Leinster version only.

87 FB, I, 61.

88 Infra, p. 321.

89 S. Weinstock, ‘Mardanus Capella and the Cosmic System of the 
Etruscans’, JilS, XXXVI, 101-27. On the decoration of cere^ 
monial bowls, in Eastern Mediterranean lands, with sixteen figures 
radiating from a centre occupied by a serpent, the sun, or later the 
Christ, see The Mysteries, ed. J. Campbell (NY, I95s)> ^94 
(H. Leisegang).90 SBE, XLIV, 301 f In the Mahahharata (XIII, 15; XVI, 5, XVIII, 
5), Krishna has 16,000 wives. The number 1600 occurs as that of 
the stars for PHny (JRS, XXXVI, 127), of the women among the 
Fomoire who opposed Partholon (G T, 43), and of the army of the 
King of the World who attacked the Fenians in Munster (CFt, 19). 
If O’Grady’s silent emendation were accepted (see AS, 182, 329), 
the standing Fiana also would number T600, and according to

the same number could sit at King Arthur’s 
Round Table (ATC, 66). In the Book of Revelation (XIV, 20), 
the measure of the river of death is 1 600 furlongs, while the measure 
of the River of Life seems to be reckoned as 17,000 furlongs (A. 
Farrer, The KeUrth of Images (Westminster, 1949), 253 ff).

91 PC, 109.

92 TBC, 137 (Book of Leinster version); cf 133 n. ri.

93 TBG(D), 24.

94 JRSA, LVII, 151 (H. Morris, quoted); P. Kennedy, Evenings in 
the Dujey (D, 1875). 84; SnC, II, 304-

95 ALI, IV, 285. The kinship system is discussed in ALI, IV, xlix f , 
MacNeill, Cl, Ch. X, PBA, XXIX, 222 if (D. A. Binchy), 
L. 6 Buachalla, ‘Some Researches in Ancient Irish Lzv/', Journal 
of the Cork Historical and Archaeological Society, LII, 41, 135. 
LIII, I, 75. On the Continent, the test of gentility is called the 
Proof of the ‘Seize Quartiers’. The claimant has to show that dl

Notes

401 :

his sixteen great^great grandparents were entitled to ^ bear :arins. 
For the very tare distinction of *Trente^deux Quartiers* the number 
of armigerous ancestors is doubled. Only one family in Britain can 
prove 3 2 Quartiers (G. and A. Lynch Robinson, Intelli^ihle Heraldry 
(i 943 )t 178-

96 PilM,LILi6o.

97 TBC(D), 351.

■ 9S ^riu,, VIIL 44.,

■99 PMLALVL 928. : , .

100 LG, III, 128. In some versions he originally has 44 ships. In the 
verse Colloquy between Fintan and the Hawk of Achill, Mil has

32 sons before the voyage to Ireland (AIM, I, 32).100 LG, III, 128. In some versions he originally has 44 ships. In the 
verse Colloquy between Fintan and the Hawk of Achill, Mil has

32 sons before the voyage to Ireland (AIM, I, 32).

101 SC, 21 (c£ PTWH, III, 215); CMT(C), 28 f. C£ the eviLeyed 
Cailb^s thirty/two names (including Badb, Samain, Sinand, etc.) 
which she chants with one breath while standing on one foot at 
the door of Da Derga*s Hostel (TjBD, 17).

102 ■ Cm, XIV, 135. Mug Ruith was with Simon Magus for 33 years 
(PRM, XXXIV, 348). ^Thirty-^three’ also -appears as the number 
of the Children of Calatin (GHC, 78), of the Children of Fergus 
(GT, 134) and of the sons ofMorna (AS, 71). Cathair Morhad 33 
sons (GT, 190) or 32 sons and one daughter (ZCP, VIII, 263). 
A list of the standing Fiana includes the names of 32 individuals 
besides the nine Finns (AS, 182). The Cruithne had 33 pagan, and

33 Christian, kings (IFHB, 153 n.), and in some versions of the 
Hisiork of Nennius, Britain's cities number not 28 but 33 (Antk 
quity, XII, 44).

103 DP, II, 336 £ (c£ III, 161).

104 AS, 71 £ C£ the number in Finn's household, DP, 1, 25, C ..

105- Mh, Bo.

106 PB, I2.

107 G. Dumiiil, Jupiter Mars QuirimsIV (P, i948)» 156 ff. Cf. further, 
the 3 3 enigmas in the Pehlevi version of GSshtA Fryano (Zeitsebrift 
'der DeutsAen Morgenlmdiscbert Gesellscbajt, XXIX, 633 ff. (R. 
Kohler) — a reference we owe to the kindness of M. L. Gerschel; 
33 parts of the body (SBP, XLIII, 76), the 32 marks of a great 
being (Numen,.Ill, 145), and khe sovereignty of 33 towns’ (SEE, 
XXIV, 261). For 7, 9* 12, 16, 17 and 33 heavens in shamanism 
see Chm, 249; for 32 in Jewish mysticism, Tfe Jewish Encyclopaedia, 
under 'Numbers in Mysticism’. G£ Leviticus, XII, 4.

402 Celtic Heritage

10 8 SHI, n, 39^; lED, S.V. mo'r/.

109 EIHM, 156, 172 n. 
no Deren, DH, 41.

111 They are discussed in Llyfr Bkgywryi, ed. S. J. Williams and J. E. 
Powell (C, 1942), xxix ff.

112 WTL, 1 , 95 -

113 Op. cit., 114 f.109 EIHM, 156, 172 n. 
no Deren, DH, 41.

111 They are discussed in Llyfr Bkgywryi, ed. S. J. Williams and J. E. 
Powell (C, 1942), xxix ff.

112 WTL, 1 , 95 -

113 Op. cit., 114 f.

1 14 See W. H. Roscher, ‘Die Zahl 50 in Mythus, Kulms, Epos u. 
Taktik . . ^KSG, XXXIII (1917). No. 5; also, J. Vendryes, 
‘L’unit^ en trois personnes chez les Celtes’ in Choix i £tu^s (P,

1952). 233-4<5-

PART THREE

CHAPTER X THE STORYTELLER’S REPERTOIRE

1 LMM, 584 ff.; PRIA, I (Ser. II), 1874-5. 216; H. d’Arbois de

Jubainville, Essai d’m catalogue de la litterature epique de VIrlande (P, 
1883), 259; AIM, n, 43; ALl, 1, 46. For discussion see IHK, 21.

2 LMM, 584.

3 Aislinge Meic Conglinne, ed. and tr. K. Meyer (L, 1892), 110-12.

4 HIF, 205, 224.

5 PBA, XX (1934). 209 n.

6 The Oxford Dictiomq,s.v.histoiy.

7 GPC, s.w. eyferwydd, arwydd.

CHAPTER XI BIRTHS

1 Lord Raglan, The Hero (L, 1936), Chs. XVI, XVII.

2 RC, XII, 59.

3 MM, 72 ff., 6s ff.

4 MM, 126.

5 RC,XII,6off.

6 TE, loff.

7 IHK, 273 ff.; Irish Texts, Fasc. IV, ed. J. Fraser et al. (L, 1934). 
8 (V. Hull); VB, 11,72 f.

8 JHiC,268ff.

9 CA, 392 f.

10 SG, 1, 253, II. 286; C2C, 23.

Ti SG, I, 314. II. 354; CA, 306.

12 RC, XXII, 13 ff; T£, 56 £; triu, VI, 138 ff.; RC, XH, 234 ff-

Nol^i

40J

43 VB, !;»SS» 42 - 
14 HRB, 424 (cf. MB, 42).

45 HBJB, Vsis

46 Keating, fF, III, 132

47 BL, 6 z.

48 zCF, xix, 48 if.

49 BL, i<i. From its poetic pleading of its cause, the child was named 
AS (which, according to Cormac’s Glossary, means ‘poem’).

20 J^n«, III, 159.

21 FSB, 16.

22 FSB, 151, 27; LBS, II, 264, III, 14.

23 LBS, I, 334.

24 LBS, II, 107; FSH, I, cxxxv, n. 2, II, 32.

25 FSH, I, clviii.

26 Ibid., I, 87, 171, LIS, II, 44 f.

27 The Life of Saint Columha, tr. W. Huyshe (L, 1906), 188.

28 CSS, XV, 7. Cf. FSH, I, clviii, n. 4 (St Coemgen).

29 E.g. LIS, II, II, CSS, III, 2, SG, II, 20, FSB, 153.

30 FSB, 152; CSS, XIII, 5; LBS, II, 107 f., CSS, III, 3.

31 LIS, II, 45 f. Cf. ibid., 12.

32 LBS, II, 108.29 E.g. LIS, II, II, CSS, III, 2, SG, II, 20, FSB, 153.

30 FSB, 152; CSS, XIII, 5; LBS, II, 107 f., CSS, III, 3.

31 LIS, II, 45 f. Cf. ibid., 12.

32 LBS, II, 108.

33 FSH, I, cxlii; LBS, II, 140.

34 For these and other examples see LP, I, Ch. V.

35 M. E. Noble, Cradle Tales of Hinduism (L, 1912), 153 if.

36 See A. K. Coomaraswamy, Figures of Speech or Figures of Thoughti 
(L, I 94 < 5 ), 229 if., BLf, 93 if

37 See Westermarck, HHM, I, Ch. V, Briifault, Mth, III, 226 ff.; also 
POT, 1 . 532.

38 En«, IV, 25; CCC, 64.

39 HTI,292.

40 OST, 1,135 f-

41 Boswell quoted in £riu, IV, 19 f.

42 E. E. Evans, Irish Folk Ways (L. 1957), 288; cf. HIF, 543.

43 Fr/«, IV, 25; RC, XIII, 54, 58.

44 SGS,Vin(i955).i07.

45 M. Murray, The Witch'Cult in Western Europe ( 0 , 1921), 175 if

46 See e.g. St Augustine, De Cwitate Dei, XV, Ch. XXIII, Giraldus 
Cambrensis, Itinerarium Kamhriae, Ch. V. It was alleged that ‘exem^ 
plary Scottish matrons were betrayed into infidelities with him

4P4 Celtic Heritage

[Satan] in the semblance of their own husbands’. See J. G. Dalyell, 
The Darker Superstition! of Scotland (Glasgow, 1835). 547 . referring 
to the trials of Scottish witches (1660, ’6i). Cf. M. Summers, 
History of Witchcrcft and Demonology (L, i92<5), 91 ff.

47 HRB, 381.

48 In India, an insect called pilkupuchchi or ‘son insect’ is swallowed by 
women in the hope of bearing sons (E. S. Hartland, Primitive 
Paternity, I (L, 1909), 47)-

49 TE, 35.

50 OSr,II,i3S-

51 FB, II, 285. if.

52 CT, 3 ff-

53 CT, 12 ff., BT, 22 f, 25 f.

54 See Coomaraswamy, BLt, 122 ff. , 126.

55 FSB, 153; LBS, IV, 184; LIS, 1 , 45. CSS, XV, 7.

56 Afl, 95;/^M,p.ooo;J?.C, XXII,2o;ZCP, XXIV, 38 f.; JHX,58i, 
4 <S 4 . 433 .

57 Infra, p. 327.

58 Infra, p. 246.

59 OSr,III,i75ff

60 Infra, p. 250; AKI, 1 , 120 n.

61 FSH, I, cxlii; LBS, II, 140.57 Infra, p. 327.

58 Infra, p. 246.

59 OSr,III,i75ff

60 Infra, p. 250; AKI, 1 , 120 n.

61 FSH, I, cxlii; LBS, II, 140.

62 IHK, 269, n. 2; FB, 38; RC, III, 180; E. Hull, Cuchulain (L, 1911), 
65 ff. , 272 f. Cf. Ogam, VI, 8t ff. (J. Gricourt). On the custom of 
giving a child a colt which happens to be born at the same time as it, 
see IFFTC, 198, HJF, 210.

63 Mh, 63 f

64 MS, 89.

65 A. K. Coomaraswamy, ‘The Darker Side of Dawn’, Smithsonian 
Miscellaneous Collections, XCIV (i), (1935). 5-

66 Cl, 34 f ; EIHM, 81 (Fiachu Fer Mara; cf MM, 133); HL, 308, 
521 ff. (Core Duibne). The mother of the three sons who succeeded 
their father firemon son of Mil was Odba daughter of Mil (LG, V, 
57, 187). The birth of Brutus, legendary ancestor of the kings of 
Britain, was incestuous (HRB, 223).

67 £riu, XI, 190, 209 f

68 R.C, XII,iio£

69 ^C,VII,96n.3.

70 RC, XII, 237.

Notes

405

71 CA, 333.

7Z FF,ll,2^^.

73 Standard Dictionary of Folklore, Mythology, and Legend, ed. M. Leach 
(NY, 1950), s.v. Riddles.

74 Ex inf. Dr. Emrys Peters.

75 See SFT, Chs. X, XI.

76 Cf. PP, 58.

77 SeeLP, I,iff, GB,X, 70 ff.. BEE, 10 ff.

78 J. G. Frazer, GB, X, 97 (our italics).

79 HRB, 380; cf. HB, 41.

80 SeeMi,63-

81 BL, 30,RC.XVI, 38.

82 D. A. MacKenzie, Buddhism in Pre'Christian Britain (L, 1928), 95.

83 SBE, XLIX, 6.

84 ^r/«,IV.95-

85 BL, 3of.; HL, 310 ff.

86 CT,6.

87 EOT, 11, 455-

88 ]. S.M. Waxd, Freemasonry and the Ancient Cods^ {h, 192.6), zS.

89 ^r/«, XI, 98f

90 H. Zinrmer, Philosophies of India (L, 1951), 157 IF. On the ambiguity 
of the sacred, see Caillois, HS, Ch. II.

91 EOT, Part m, Ch. I.

92 A. M. Hocart, Social Origins (L, 1954). 54-

93 ERE, S.V, Fosterage.

94 SELL, 1 88.

95 CCC, 7.

96 CT,7f.

97 BT, 3, 33-

98 HIE, 211, 146.

99 LE, 77 ff., HIE, 475 ff , TEE, II, 14 f.. WFFC, 68.

CHAPTER xn YOUTHFUL EXPLOITS

1 CT.7.

2 HB, 42. For comparative material, see KC, XLI, 181 ff., XLIII, 
124, BEE, 165 (A. H. Krappe).

3 TE, 12 f.CHAPTER xn YOUTHFUL EXPLOITS

1 CT.7.

2 HB, 42. For comparative material, see KC, XLI, 181 ff., XLIII, 
124, BEE, 165 (A. H. Krappe).

3 TE, 12 f.

4 SG, I, 253, CK, 23.

5 RC, XXII, 23 ff.

406 Celtic Heritage

6 iriu, VI, 133 ff-

7 TBC(D), Section Vn.

8 Eliade, NM, Ch. V, 177-

9 G. Dumezil, Horace et Us Curkces (P, i94'2* Cf. MDG, Ch. VII).

10 Eliade, Yg, 107, cf. 330 fF.; Dumezil, op. cit.; NM, 181 fF.

11 Op. cit, 40 IF.

12 Ed. and tr. K. Meyer, RC, V, 197. 1, 180.

13 In China, a wild goose and a double deerskin are the traditional 
marriage gifts (ESC, 90).

14 Supra, p. 64.

15 Supra, p. 66.

16 CR, II, 151. Cf. HTI, 277 f., DF, III, 140, n. 14.

17 FOr, 11, 34 ff-

18 GB, XI, 240. Cf. NM, 81 ff.

19 4fnVa, XXV, 141 f.

20 M. Eliade, Forgerons et Alchimistes (P, 1956), 109-

21 RC,XXIV,I94-

22 M. Elizde, Forgeronset Alchimistes, 74 ff.

23 Ed. and tr. K. Meyer, RC, XI, 442.

24 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, RC, XXIX, 109.

25 PTWH, m, 202 S., HTI, 242 ff., J. MacDougall, Folk and Hero 
Tafci o/Xr^yM/re (L, 1891), 144 ff.

26 ].ii.Wteks,AmongthePrimitiveBakongo(L,i 9 H)>t^S^^-

27 NM, 126 if., 230, 233.

28 ilC,XXIX,ii2.

29 Ibid., 123 f.

30 Ibid., 131.

31 Ibid., 134-

32 S«pra,p.73.

33 Mrt«, XLIX, 28.

34 See e.g. Africa, XXV, 138 ff., A. B. Deacon, Mafekfa (L, I934)> 
253 ff., 264.

35 Cii,n,i48.

36 NM, 144.

37 Tg, 262.

CHAPTER XIII WOOINGS

1 CCC, 20; AC, XI, 442; CS, 57 (ed. and tr. K. Meyer).

2 Ed. and tr. R. I. Best, kriu. III, 149.

Notes

407

3WBM,226ff.,Mh,9sff.

4 HTI.163.

5 Mb, 164 ff.; cf. KCp, 96 ff.

6 Mb, 183 if., 226.

7 CF, 2 S.

8 E.g. HTI, 163. For further references, see SFT, 255 ff, OS, VII, 2x3.

9 See FESB, 301 ff., GL, II, 212 ff.. Ill, 153 f.

10 ZCP, Xni, 270 ff. Infra, 331.

11 PTWH,m,36£.

12 ZCP, 1, 460. Cf. DF, m, 18 f., CCC, 65.

13 Set SEIL, St S., 109 S.,WTL,l,i9i.

14 TEF.II.33.

1 5 Quoted in TEF, II, 34.

16 Lady Wilde, Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of 
Ire/<z«<? (L, 1887), 1, 219.13 Set SEIL, St S., 109 S.,WTL,l,i9i.

14 TEF.II.33.

1 5 Quoted in TEF, II, 34.

16 Lady Wilde, Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of 
Ire/<z«<? (L, 1887), 1, 219.

17 Lord Karnes, quotedin TEF, II, 35. Cf. IVFFC, 190, J. C. Davies, 
Folk-Lore in West and Mid'Wales (Aberystwyth, 1911), 29 f.

18 TEF. II, 35.

19 ALI, V, 277.

20 IVFFC, 190, H/FC, 164 ff.

21 Llawysgrif Richard Morris 0 Gerddi &c., ed. T. H. Parry^Williams (C, 
1931), Ixxxvi ff.

22 The English and Scottish Popular Ballads, ed. F. J. Child (Boston, 
1882-98), I, 418.

23 FD, III, 177 f

24 WFC, 131 f., BCCS, m. 127 ff.

25 HTI, 163 ff.

26 WFFC, 190. Cf. TG, I, 303 f., II, 486 ff.

27 HHM, II, 522.

28 T£Cf.‘TheWooingofBecfola’,SG,I,8s,II.9i.

29 On the Gandharva(s), see PC, 126, 134, 225 ff., 2nd passim.

30 E.g. LF, 100, Lady Wilde, op. dt., 1, 49 ff.

31 HIF, 20(5. M. L. Sjoestedt equated the Gandharvas with the Fiana 
(£C, IV, 144). On the latter as a youth group inhabiting the wild and 
having claims on all unmarried girls, v. supra, p.6$.

32 KP, 216, PC, 226 f.

33 P. Sebillot, Coutumes populaires de la Haute^Bretagne (P, 1886), 132 f. 
Gf.FOT,I.497ff.

34 SEE, XLIV, 68 ff. {Satapatha Brahmana), OS, II, 245.

4 o 8 Celtic Heritage

J5 Ed. and tr. E. MuUer, KC, IH, 344; IHK, 300 ff. On the swan as 
'the Daughter of the Twelve Moons', in Gaelic tradition, seeJCS, I, 
144.

36 SBE, XLII, 536.

CHAPTER XIV ELOPEMENTS

1 LMU.

2 Ed. and tr.S.H. O’Grady in OST, III, 140.

3 See Schoepperle, TI.

4 SILH, Ch. VI.

5 Ed. by I. Williams, BBCS, V, 115.

6 A. H. Krappe {BEE, 154 ff.) suggests that this ending is a ‘floating 
tale’, not an essential part of the Trystan story and that originally it 
was a tale ‘relating to a contest between the deity and the evil one’. 
(But. cf. n. 46 m/ra.)

7 Cf. Loomis, ATC, Ch. XXXI.

8 TI, 530.

9 Tr. T. Gwynn Jones in ASt, Vin, 66 .

10 SAL, 66.

11 Cf.ArC,Chs.XXIXfF.

13 XIX, 2.

13 Mb,i2S{.

14 Mb, 3-17.

15 FB,I ,62 ff.

16 jSn«, II, 20.7 Cf. Loomis, ATC, Ch. XXXI.

8 TI, 530.

9 Tr. T. Gwynn Jones in ASt, Vin, 66 .

10 SAL, 66.

11 Cf.ArC,Chs.XXIXfF.

13 XIX, 2.

13 Mb,i2S{.

14 Mb, 3-17.

15 FB,I ,62 ff.

16 jSn«, II, 20.

17 WAL, 86

18 T. Gwynn Jones, WFFC, 153 f* Of. WAL, 81.

19 The Poetry from the Red Book of Hergest, ed. J. G. Evans (Lianbedrog, 
1911), 83. iVlay is the month of the Virgin, especially in France, and 
May ist is the Feast of St Phillip and St Jacob the Aposde, patrons 
of marriageable girls.

20 Cywydku Dafydd ap Gwilym a’i Gyfoeswyr,^ ed. I. Williams and T.

Roberts (C, 193 s). 6 (c£ GDG, clvxxii).

21 Ibid., 8 (cf. GDG, clvxxiii).

22 GDG, 71 -

23 GDG, 382ff

24 See n. 21.

25 FL, XLVII, 355 (A. H. Krappe). Cf. TEF, I, 348 f.

26 TEF, 1 , 349 -

Notes

409

27 The Anatomie of Ahms {ls8^), quoted in GB, 11,66 f.

28 C. B. Lewis, ‘The Part of the Folk in the Making of Folklore’, FL, 
XL VI, 37., 61 ff., ‘Survivals of a Pagan Cult’, Evangelical dmrterly 
VI (1934). 337-

29 BCCS, II, 204, E. Owen, Welsh Folh'Lore (Oswestry, n.d.), 341, 
A. R. Wright, British Calendar Customs: England (L, 1939-40), II. 
243,271.

30 HD A, s.w. Mai, Hochzeit.

31 ALJ, II, 391.

32 M. M. Banks, British Calendar Customs; Orkney and Shetland (L, 1946), 
13, BCCS, m, 187.

33 HJF, 328f. Cf.FL,LV, 107, ii 3,LXIV, 476 f., PC, 28.

34 WFFC, 163, 154.

35 See TjT, 269 {., DF, III, 156 n. 2, 446, and J. J. Jones, ‘March ap 
Meirchion’, ASt, XII, 21.

36 ESC, 66, 68, 79.

37 SBE, VII, 108.

38 M. Granet, Chinese Civilisation (tr., L, 1930), I6i ff.

39 0ST,III,46.

40 ZCP, 1, 460 (ed. and tr. K. Meyer).

41 TI, 17 ff.

42 0ST,III,53.

43 RC, XXXIII, 166, 168 (tr. J. H. Lloyd and O. J. Bergin).

44 CS, Iv, TJ, II f., PL, XLVII, 347.

45 See Ch. VI (n. 23).40 ZCP, 1, 460 (ed. and tr. K. Meyer).

41 TI, 17 ff.

42 0ST,III,53.

43 RC, XXXIII, 166, 168 (tr. J. H. Lloyd and O. J. Bergin).

44 CS, Iv, TJ, II f., PL, XLVII, 347.

45 See Ch. VI (n. 23).

46 OST, III, 294; cf. DF, III, xlvH n. On the Other World as a forest, 
see FESB, 122 ff., 314 ff.; as to the distinction between the fruit on 
’ the lower branches and the sweet fruit on the top of the tree {supra, 
283) cf. QJMS, XXIX, 119 (A. K. Coomaraswamy). A. H. 
Krappe argued that in the Elopement Tales the lover is Death (RC, 
XLVIII (1931). 95 ff.).

47 TI, II Otto, The Homeric Gods {L,,n.d.),9j^.

48 SAL, 127 f. Cf. KCp, 135 f.

49 KCp, Hi.

50 Fns, 52.

51 PTWH, III, 40, 46.

52 See n. 29 supra and A Miscellany of Studies ... presented to L. E. 
Kastner, ed. M. Williams and J. A. de Rothschild (Cb, 1932), 308 ff.

53 ‘Darmuid and Grainne’, FL, XLVII, 347 (cf. DF, III, xovi, n,).

Celtic Heritage

410

54 Yg, 264 f. r r'

55 KC, XXXIII, 55, from an eighteenth/century MS (tr. G.

Schoepperle).

56 RC, xxxni, I6I n. 2.

57 TJ, 6 $.

58 E. Hull, Cuchukm (L, 1911), HO- LSC, 426.

CHAPTER XV ADVENTURES

1 N. K. Chadwick, PP, 91, 93 -

2 Ed. and tr. K. Meyer, RC, X, 214. ■ i_ « »■ n »

3 We have omitted a section which links the tale with Tam Bo 
Regamna’ and presages Tain Bo Guailnge (see IHK, 3H f-)'

4 KCp, 202 £

5 MC, III, 201.

<5 ‘Nera and the Dead Man’, ESM, 522 ff.

7 KCp, 215.

8 Supra, p. 83.

9 ESM, 532 £.

10 SG, II, 353-

11 MD,IV, 200 .

12 SG, II, 202.

13 SG, n, 343 ff-

14 LMM, 586, n. 142.

15 See S. Leslie. Saint Patrick's Purgatory (L, 1932), HWI, 4 ft.

16 Quoted in Leslie, op. cit.,141.

17 NM, 126 ff., 230 ff.; B. Spencer and E. J. Gillen, The Native Tribes 
of Central Australia (L, 1899), 523; G. R. Levy, The Gate of Horn

(L, 1948), pawtm; Knight, CGf,pflmm.

18 Chadwick, PP, 100 f.

19 SC; SGS, VI, 147, VII, 47, ed. and tr. M. Dillon; HRI, I, 
57 (tt.).

20 Ed. and tr. K. Jackson, Speculum, XVII, 377-

21 EIL, 102.

22 Speculum, XVII, 384.18 Chadwick, PP, 100 f.

19 SC; SGS, VI, 147, VII, 47, ed. and tr. M. Dillon; HRI, I, 
57 (tt.).

20 Ed. and tr. K. Jackson, Speculum, XVII, 377-

21 EIL, 102.

22 Speculum, XVII, 384.

23 Chm, 79 ff-, 86 ff. Cf. infra, p. 321-

24 Ed. and tr. W^. Stokes, IT, Set. 3, 1, 183- (EIL, 1 10).

25 LMM, 387f..EfL,l07. , . ^ r

25 'For references, see A* C. L. Brown, Notes on Celtic CanMrons of

Plenty’, [Kittredge] Antuversary Papers (Boston, 1913), 236 ff.

Notes

41 1

CHAPTER XVI VOYAGES

1 Ed. and tr. K. Meyer, VB, 1, 2.

2 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, RC, XIV, 24.

3 Ed.andtr.W.Stokes,ilC,IX,i4.

4 See M. E. Byrne, ‘On the Punishment of Sending Adrift’, £riu, 
XI, 97-

5 ALI, 1, 205.

6 See A. F. Major, ‘Ship Burials in Scandinavian Lands’, FL, 
XXXV, 113; also RH, 16 ff., 20 £, 39 S., FD, 1, 183 f.

7 Malory, XXI, Ch. 5. Cf. HRB, 501.

8 TEF, I, 3 1 5 ; Bhhideas, VIII, 126, 1 37 f.

9 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, RC, IX, 452, X, 50.

10 In ‘The Vision of Adamnan’, the fourth heaven has a wall of fire 
(C. S. Boswell, An Irish Precursor of Dante (L, 1908), 37). See M. 
Eliade, Myths, Reves et Mys^res^ (P, 1957), 93 f. The Ancient Egyp/ 
tians believed that the soul at the end of its journey was received into 
‘the Island of Flame’ (AER, 115).

11 RC, IX, 23. Strabo says that the druids taught that ‘fire and water 
must one day prevail’. (Geograyhica, IV, 4, c. 197, 4).

12 RC,XIV,43.

13 LIS, II, 72.

14 RC, XIV, 47.

15 n, 6 , 10.

16 TBDd, 33.

CHAPTER XVII DEATHS

1 Abridged and tr. W. Stokes in RC, III, 175.

2 IHK, 561.

3 TBD; ed. and tr. W. Stokes in RC, XXII, 9 etc. For textual analysis 
see IHK, 621.

4 IHK, 549, 558. 562, GHC, 78

5 RC, III, 177 ff.

6 IHK, 563.

7 PKM,B 6 €,Mh, 70 £.

8 SBE, XLIV, 222 f. (^atapatba Brahmam, XII, 7). In the Mahahh 
arata (V. 9), the same story is told of India and the asura Vritra.

9 For references to ‘betwixts/and.'betweens’ see J. de Vries, Die Mdrchen 
von klugen Rdtsellosem (Helsinki, 1928), znd JAOS, XXXVI, 66 ff.9 For references to ‘betwixts/and.'betweens’ see J. de Vries, Die Mdrchen 
von klugen Rdtsellosem (Helsinki, 1928), znd JAOS, XXXVI, 66 ff.

412 Celtic Heritage

For discussion, see A. K. Coomaraswamy, ‘Symplegades , HGS, 
453-

10 Ed. and tr. S. H. O’Grady, SG, 1, 71, 72, H, 74. 76. St Ruadan had 
prophesied that Diarmait would be struck by the ridge.-beam of the 
king’s house in Tara (SG, II, 83); Bee’s prophecy mentions a black 
man, blind in the left eye, and a black pig (SG, I, 80).

11 RH, 172

12 F«, 57.

13 DT, 7-

14 RC, XV, 296

15 DT, 32 ff.

16 ZCP, I, 104.

17 SG, I, 3i4f-.253, 11, 354f-.28'3-

18 £m, II, 20 ff.

19 CR,II, sif-

20 Fns, 23.

21 IHK, 560.

22 RC, XXII, 58.

23 Ed. and tr. W. Stokes, in RC. XXIII, 396.

24 Cf. Ch. XVI, n. II.

25 Concerning Tuathal cf. SG, II, 76, 514- He had long been dead.

26 £riu, II, 23; SG, II, 375J CHC, 80; RC, XXII, 169; ZCP, I, 
104.

27 GB,IV, Ch. II.

CHAPTER XVIII EPILOGUE

1 Betha Cohim Cbille, ed. and tr. A. O’Kelleher and G. Schoepperle 
(Urbana, 1918), 352 if*

2 FB, I, 6; tr. K. Meya.

3 SeeSPT. Chs.VII-IX.

4 SG, II, 93.

5 De Visiom Dei, Ch. IX.

6 See Ch. XIII, n. 7.

7 See Coomaraswamy, ‘Symplegades’, HGS, 453.

8 RC, XXVI, 9.

9 HIF, 481. Spirits are also banished by being set ‘impossible tasks’, 
e.g. draining the sea with a bottomless cup (ibid.).

10 LCSC, 327. ,

11 HIF, 3 39, FBI, 25s ; etc.

Mote^ 4t3

li PE. to f. The part of the blind Hoar in the story of Balder, as also 
the Christian tradition concerning the blind Longius, recalls the 
blind or one/eyed killers of the Irish kings.

13 See Knight, CGt, 17, 2a, 59 ff. znd passim.

14 TEF, 1 , 322.

15 SG, 1 , 75. n, 79.

16 FB, I, 63.

17 RC, XXXIII, 44 n.

18 W. R. Dawson in jPL, XLVII, 248; R. T. R. Clark, Myth and 
SynM in Ancient Egypt (L, 1959), 40, 43, 266.

19 Abbott, KPf 389* 330. On enigmatic language in Tantric texts, see 
Yg, 249 ff. Norse ‘kennings* were used in magical formulas.19 Abbott, KPf 389* 330. On enigmatic language in Tantric texts, see 
Yg, 249 ff. Norse ‘kennings* were used in magical formulas.

20 CJC, 94 Cf. the contest between Nede and Ferchertne (supra, 
n. 8 ).

21 GL, 11 , 504 f., 584, in, 108 n. I.

22 ZCP, XIII, 271 ff.

23 Cf. a riddle used in Bushong initiation rites: ‘How many people 
are there in our villages Two, man and woman/ Africa, XXV (1955), 
140.

24 MS, 44.

25 R. Caillois, Art poetique^ (P, 1958), 157 f. (tr.,), following L. Renou,

‘Sor la notion de Journal asiatique, CCXXXVII (1949),

12 f., 17 f, 25, 3 8, and passim.

INDEX

PERSONAGES* PEOPLES AND PLACES IN CELTIC ' TRADITION

Relationships are abbreviated as follows: son of: 5., daughter of: i.* 
brother of: b., husband of: h,, wife of: w,

Italic numbers indicate the main references of the series.

Aed, king ofMuscraige, 186 
Aed Dub, 334 £

Afaiion, 318 
Ai mac Olioman, 222 
Aife, 255

Ailbe d. Cormac, 266, 350 
Ailbe, St, 224, 232 
Ailill, b. Eochaid Airem, 273 
Ailill, king of Ulster, 272 
Ailill mac Mata, 54, 55, 57, 59, 75, 
298, 33d £. 340

Aillen mac Midna, 66, 156, 252 
Aine, 134 £

Ainged, Cave of, 303 
Aithechda s. Magog, 116 
Alba, 253 £

Amaethon s. Don, 264 
Amairgen, of Ulster, 219, 241 
Amairgen s. ME, 38, 96 f£, 230, 349 
Ambrosius, 244 £

Anann, 134 
Anluan, 55

Annwfn, 42, 45, 67, 71, 176, 178, 
183 £ ; Head of, see Pwyll 
Aranrbod d. Don, 42, 50 £, 242 
Arawii, king of Annwfn, 42, 178, 285 
Arbertb, 42, 44; Gorsedd, 183 £

Area Dubb, 337'

Art s. Conn, 75, 219, 260 ff., 337 
Arthur, 27, 7a Jl, 150, 178, 222, 262 ff, 
284 £, 318 ^

Badb, 3d, 38, 109, 233, 337, 338 
Balor, 52, 57, 66, 214, 227

B.aiiba, 96, ii5,.I35,,I36 ■

Banban, 334 £

Beare,,T35''- "

Bee mac^De, 334, ,335, 347'

Becfola, 344 
B6 Chuille, 37 
Becuma, 130* 260 
Bedwyr, 262 £

Between the Wye and the Severn, 
X75 £B.aiiba, 96, ii5,.I35,,I36 ■

Banban, 334 £

Beare,,T35''- "

Bee mac^De, 334, ,335, 347'

Becfola, 344 
B6 Chuille, 37 
Becuma, 130* 260 
Bedwyr, 262 £

Between the Wye and the Severn, 
X75 £

Bith s, Noah, 114 ff., 142 
Blai the Hospitaller, 241 
Blathnat, 52, 56, 286 
Blocc and Bluigne, 246 
Blodeuedd, 50 £, 52, 286 
Boand, 53, 216, 278 
Bodb s. the Dagda, 39, 59, 139, 
278

Bran s. Febai, 49, 194, 309, 314 flf., 
343

Brin the Blessed, 47 £, 49, 231 
Brandubh, 286 
Branwen d. Llyr, 42, 47 £

Brega, 146, 161, 164, 176, 327 £ 
Bregon, 96; Tower of, 96, 102, 
103

Brendan, St, 224, 323 
Bres s. Elatha, 52, 38, 40, 46, 59, 144 f, 
215 £

Brian, luchar and lucharba, see 
Danann, The Three Gods of 
Bricriu, 55, 148 £, 152, 184 £, 193, 
201, 218

Brigit, 30, 31, 37, 92 
Bri Leith, 272 £, 275 
Bruig na Boinne, 39, 217, 218, 245, 
271 £, 283 
Brutus, 173 
Buchet, 126

Caer Siddi, 48

Cailb, 338, 348; see also 329

415

4 i 6 Celtic Heritage

Caillech. (OH Woman) of Beare,

135, 136

Ca£lte, 6 $, 67 £, 134, 160, 303 
Cairbre Caitcheann, 130 
Caimech, St, 339 
Calatm, 194; Sons of, 331 £, 33^ 
Carmim (Assembly of), 152,

209, 211

Carmun (Person), 167 
Carnutes, 158 
Carpre, 37

Cashel, 178 £, 186, 197 
Caswallon s. Beli, 48 
Cathbad, 193, 216, 234, 247, 279, 337 
C6s Chorainn, 303 
Ceridwcn, 229, 238, 313 
Cermat s. the Dagda, 52 
Cessair, 28, 104, 108, 113S, 122, 134, 
I35» 136, 142, 167 
Get s. Magu, 54 £, 219, 336 
Cethern s. Fintan, 250 £

Cian s. Dian Cccht, 32, 53, 214 
Ciaran, St, 157, 197, 334

Cichol Gricenchos, 31 
Ciwa, St, 224, 232 
Clothxa, 224, 234 
CnocAine, 135 
Coinchend, 261 £

Colum Cille, St, 115, 317, 342 
Columba, St, 224

Conaire Mor, 73» I5i» 220 £, 231 £, 
245 £, 326, 327 ^£» 33<5, 340 
Conall Cemach, 55 f£, 189, 229, 242, 
248 f£, 33O7 336 
Conall Core, 178, 186 
Conand, 32

Conchobar mac Nessa, 26/,, 54 f£, 
<5i £, 75» ^9, 124, ^£. ^55 /•»

216 f£, 227, 234, 242, 247 ^£, 279 f£» 
292, 296, 336Conchobar mac Nessa, 26/,, 54 f£, 
<5i £, 75» ^9, 124, ^£. ^55 /•»

216 f£, 227, 234, 242, 247 ^£, 279 f£» 
292, 296, 336

Conlaf s, CuChulaimi, 61 £, 309 
Conle s. Art, 40, 309 
Conmaicne R6in, 30» 124 
Conn of the Hxindred Battles, 73, 
xoi, 130, 156, 174 £» 312 £ 
Connacht, 123, 124, 152 
Cormla’s WeH, 161 
Coraniaid, 46

Corco Dnibne, 134 f£, 138, 286 
Corinius, 173 £

Cormac mac Airt, 27, 63, 73» 75» 125, 
129, 219 £, 229, 23 245, 310 C

Cormac s. Conchobar, 58, 188, 280 
Credne Cerd, 3 4» 3 7? 5 3 
Creiddylad, 285 
Cr^ide Firalaind, 261, 264 
Crimthann, 234 
Crom Croich, 196 £

Cronanach, 136 £, 336 
Cmacha, 167

Cmachan, 55» ^*^7, 195 £, 298 f£, 303 
Cruithne, 180 £, 195 
Cuailnge, 59 
Cnala, 75

CiiChulainn, 26, 55 f£, 59» <^3,

124, 139, 144, 1S9, 193, 194, 19S, 
199, 200, 217 £, 229, 231, 235, 
240 £, 246 f£, 253 1£, 259 £, 265, 
286, 298, 305 326 £, 331 €,

335,337,340

Cuimine Foda, St, 224, 234 
Culann, 247 
Ciildub, 66 
Cumall, 215, 337 
Cunedda and his Sons, 174, 203 
CuRoi mac Ddiri, 52, 55 Jl, 157#, 
184 £, 256, 286, 337, 340 
Custemiin, 262, 265

Da Derga, 126, 329; Hostel of, 151, 
195, 198, 220, 327 FT.

Dael Duiled, 349 £

Dagda, The, 30, 33 f£, 53, 61, 88 £, 
142, 144, 216, 272, 278 
Daire, 74

Danann, 37, 5j; The Three Gods 
of, 34, 35, 53, 198 
Daolgas s. Cairril, 229, 234 
David, St, 79, 157, 224 
Dearg, 66

Dechtine (Dechtire), 217 £

Deia, Five Sons of, 142 
Delbaeth, 157 
Delbchaem, 260 f£

Demne, 250

Derdrin, 279 f£, 292, 296 
Der Greine, 308 £

D6ssi, i27, 161, 200 
Dian C^cht, 50, 33, 34, 35, '36, 142, 
144

Diamiaid (Diarmait).s. Donn, 68, 71, 
231, 281 j;, 292, 294 £, ■ 348 ' 
Diarmait s. Fergus. (Ccrball),, 119, 
■■ 157.1^0, 333'"'C,.334:3.37»:340.' ■

417

Diarmait h. Becfola, 344 
Dixiran, 319* 321 £

Domnail s. Aed, 73». 147 
Domnall the Warlike, 253, 256 
Don, 41, 50, 52 £; Children of, 53, 
176 £

Donn of Uisiiech, 135

Doim s. Mil, 96, 97, 100, 107/., 174;

House of, 52, 97, 108, 134, 159, 179 
Donn Ciiailnge, 57, 59 £Donn of Uisiiech, 135

Doim s. Mil, 96, 97, 100, 107/., 174;

House of, 52, 97, 108, 134, 159, 179 
Donn Ciiailnge, 57, 59 £

Donn D&a, Sons of, 328 IF.

DornoH, 253

Diin Bolg, 125

Ddii na mBarc, 135

Dun na iiGed, 147

Dyfed, 41 f£, 178 £, 180

Dyfrdonwy, 52

Dylan Eil Ton, 50, 52, 232

Eastern World, The, 14, 255 
fiber s. Mil, 96, 100 £, 13 1, 142 
fibliii, .134 
Efnisien, 47 
Eiscir Riada, ■ loi '

Elatha s. Delbaeth, 32, 33, 215 £ 
Elcmar, 38, 216

Elffin s. Gwyddno Garanhir, 238, 242,

245

Elta, Plain of, 104, 197 
Elystan Glodr^rdd, 175 
Emain Ablach, 39, 49» 3^5 
Emain Macha, 56, 57, 58, 166, 218 
Einer, 151, 194* 253. 259 /., 265, 
306 £, 337

Eochaid .Airem, 221, 273 ff.

Eocliaid Daia, 75 
Eochaid mac Luciita, 137 £

.Eochaid Ollathair, see Dagda 
Eochaid s. E.rc, 109, 162 
Bogan s. Ailili, 220, 337 
Bogan s. Dnrthaclit, 280 £

Eogan Mor, 174 £; see also Mug 
' Nuadat ■

Epona,45„£

" firalnn, ,134, 135 
Eranndn s. .Mil, 97 
Ere s, CaJ.rpre, 331 £ 
firemdn s.'Mfl, 94 97 * 
i3i;iS3-

firiu, 32, 96, 97, 100, 162, 167, 215 € 
Ess d. Eochaid Airem, 221 
Esylit, 283 £, 288 (Isolt, 292, 296)

2 D

Index

]|tain d. OIc Acha, 219 £

£tain Echraide, 53, 167, 220, 236,

Btar, 228 
Eterscel, 221

Ethne (Ethniu) d. Cathaer Mor, 126 
Ethne (Ethniu) d. Dichu, 18 
Ethne (Ethniu) w. CuChulainn, 189 
Etlmiu d. Balor, 32, 53, 214

Fal, 29, 146, 155, 165, 246 
Fand, 306 £

Fee’s Pool, 250 
Feidiimid, King, 136 
Feidiimid (storyteller), 279 
Feradach Fechtnach, 65 
Fer CaiUe, 329 
FerDiad, 61, 254 
Fergus Lethderg, 108, 117, 142 
Fergus mac Roich, 58, 61, 89, 153, 
189, 196, 198, 199, 241, 280 £, 336 
Fiacail mac Condiinn, 251 
Fiacha Broad-crown, 220, 229 
Fiacha Fimi, 65 
Fiaclina Finn, 221 £

Fiachna mac Dairi, 59 
Fiachna mac Retach, 308 
Kgol, 35

Findchoem d. Cathbad, 219, 241 
Fingel, 222 
Fingin mac Aeda, 222 
Fmgin mac Luchta, 300 £

Finn mac Cumaill, 26, 27, J;, 70,Fiachna mac Dairi, 59 
Fiachna mac Retach, 308 
Kgol, 35

Findchoem d. Cathbad, 219, 241 
Fingel, 222 
Fingin mac Aeda, 222 
Fmgin mac Luchta, 300 £

Finn mac Cumaill, 26, 27, J;, 70,

136 £, 145, 178, 184, 189, 193, 201, 
315, 339, 231, 233, 250 ff., 357, 
366 £., 383 ff., 391, 303. 33 < 5 . 348 
Finnbemiach, 47, 59 
Finneces, 250

Fintan s. Bochra, 28, 114 £, 119 C, 
134, 136, 138, 142, 146 
Fir Bolg, 28 105, loS /., iii, 115,

117, 1 1 8, 142, 162, 164 
Fiann s. Dima, 333 £, 340 
Fomoire, 31 ff., 55 Jl, 40, 46, 96, 102, 
108, ill, 114, 142, 144, 156, 200 
Forgall Monach, 253, 259 £

Forgoll, 16 
Fuamnach, 272 l£

Furbaide, 237

Gilioin, 189, 199 
Gann and Sengann, 142

41 8 Celtic Heritage'

Gavida the Smith, 214

Gildas, St, 284

Gilfaethwy s. Don, 50, 52

Glamorgan, 180, 182; Lord of, 175

Glastonbury, 284

Glenn na niBodar, 337

Glyn Rhosyn, 79

Gofannon s. Don, 52, 264

Goibiiin, 35, 36, 39, 51, 52, 142, i44

Goli mac Moma, 66, 143, 201, 237,

303

Goli s. Carbad, 31, 57» <56, 185 
Goll s. Dolb, 308 
Golwg Hafddydd, 284 
Grdinne, 68 266 f., 2S2 ff., 291 fi., 
294S^U^

Grey of Macha, 326, 332

Gronw, 51

Gnlide, 136

Gwalchmei, 262, 284

Gwales, 48, 179

Gwawl, 43, 44> 286

Gwenhwyfar, 284 f. (Gwenever, 293)

Gwent Is-coed, 43

Gwern, 42, 47

Gwion Bach, 229 £

Gwrtheyni (Vortigem), 176 
Gwrtheymion, 175 £

Gwydion s. Don, 16, 50 f£, 178, 230, 
. ,264' :

Gwyn ap Nudd, 67, 70, 285 
Gwynedd, 50 £. I74» i75 f*.* 179 £ 
Gwythyr s. Greidawl, 285

Hafgan,,42, 285 
Harlech, 47, 48

Iarbon61 the Soothsayer, 108, 142 
Igema, 222

Indech mac De Domnami, 33» 3<5 
Ingc6i the One-Eyed, 328 f£ 
Ir,97»i74'

Island of Joy, 316, 323 
Island of Laughter, 322 
Island of the Mighty, 47, 48 
Island of Women, 198, 321, 323 
Ith s. Bregon, 9<5, 137

Japhetli s. Noah, 95, 116

Kei, 185, 262 ^

Knlhwcli s. Kiiydd, 178, 262 265

Ladra, 114 £, 142, 202 
Lady of the Fountain, 265 
Laigne Lethan-glas, iii, 125 
(Lancelot, 293)Japhetli s. Noah, 95, 116

Kei, 185, 262 ^

Knlhwcli s. Kiiydd, 178, 262 265

Ladra, 114 £, 142, 202 
Lady of the Fountain, 265 
Laigne Lethan-glas, iii, 125 
(Lancelot, 293)

Land of Promise, 142, 198, 221, 312 
Land of Women, 309, 315 £

Land of Wonders, 262 
Land of the Young, 20, 98 
Lebarcham, 279 £, 326,

Leinster, , 125 £, and pass.

Letli Cuinn (Conn*s Half), loi, 123, 
151, 182

Leth Moga (Mug’s Half), loi, 124, 
151, 182 
Li Ban, 306 
Lir, Children of, 49 
Llanbadarn Fawr, 175 
Llefeiys, 46

Lieu Llaw Gyhes, 42, 30 ff., 231, 232, 
243, 2S6, 333 
Lludd, 46, 51 11., 174 
Llwyd, 44, 45, 46, 49 
Llyn y Fan, 266, 344 
Li;^, Children of, 41, 47, 176 
Loch Derg, 304 
Loch Lethglas, 37, 46 
Lochlami,:33, 221, 337 
Loeg, 332 ■

Loegaire s. Crimthann, 308 t 
Loegaire Buadach, 55 i£.r 253 
Lot, 31

Luchta s. Luachaid, 34, 37, 53.

Lug, $1, 32 ff., 46, 32, S3. 57. 59. 76, 
142 ff., 158, 200, 214, 218, 227, 231, 
236,242,312

Lugai^, b. Ailili m. Mata, 336

Lugaid mac Con, 219, 245

Lugaid s. CuRoi, 332

Lugaid s. Ith, 96, 100, i,35» 3;74» 203

Lugaid Laigde, 74, 134

Lugaid Riab siDerg, 234

LuglochtaXoga, 259 ■

... Lugna, 21.9 £

'Lugoves, 31 
Luned, 265

Mahon s. Modron, 70, 264 
Mac Cecht ■ (champion of"' Conaire, 
M6r), 328, 330.

■ MaC'Congliiuie, 210, 211 
M2C...C1M, Mac ' Cdcht, and Mac 
Grene,:Sons of Cermat, 52, 96

Index

Mac Datho, 54, 126 
Mackinealy, 214 
Mac Oc, The, see Oeiigus 
Mac Riagia, 3x7 
Macha, 36, 58, 109, 166 
Macsen Wledig, 201 
Maelduin, 198, 199, 318 ff.

Maeltne of Great Judgements, 38 
Mag Meil, 306, 308, 315, 343 
Mag Slecht, 196

Mag Tuired, 29 /., 31 109, 124^

200, 214, 215 
Maine, 195 £

Manaiinan mac Lir, 51, 59, 49, 135, 
139, 221, 227, 307, 311 K 315 
Manawydan s. Llyr, 44, 46, 47, 49,

179, 183

Marban, 349 £

March ap Meirchion, 283 £, 290 
(March, 291 £)

Math s. Mathonwy, 50 £

Matha, 51 
Mathgen, 35,

Matholwch, 47 £

Meath (Mide), 118 £, 122 £, 127, 146, 
163 i£, 197, 200179, 183

Marban, 349 £

March ap Meirchion, 283 £, 290 
(March, 291 £)

Math s. Mathonwy, 50 £

Matha, 51 
Mathgen, 35,

Matholwch, 47 £

Meath (Mide), 118 £, 122 £, 127, 146, 
163 i£, 197, 200

Medb of Connacht, 54, 57jf., 61, 75, 
124, 130, 193, 247, 336 
Medb Lethderg, 75, 165 
Meeting of the Three Waters, 114, 
347

Meiwas, 284 £, 288 (Meleagant, 
Mellyagraunce, 285)

Menw, 262 £

Merlin, 222, 228, 237

Mes Buachalla, 220 £, 231, 234, 235

Miach s. Dian Cecht, 33

Mide, 156 £, 167

Midir, 216, 236, 271 ff.

Mil, Sons of, 26, 29, 38 £, 65, g6ff., 
105, 107 £, 115, 122, 135» 158, 174> 
181, 197 £> 203 
Moling, St, 76 C

Mongan, 16, 134, 198, 221, 229, 253, 
286, .3 15, 347 
Mongfind, 165, 253 
Mor of Munster, 136, 222 
Morann, 238 
More, 32 
Morgan, 260 if.

Morrigan, the, 3d, 37, 38, 59* <5o, 109,

' 303, ;32d,;337;"

419

Mug Nuadat, loi, 124, 126 £, 136;

see also Eogan Mor 
Mug Ruith, 135, 138, 165 
Mugain, 127, 136 
Mugain, mother of Cuimfne, 234 
Mugain w. Diarmait, 334 
Muirchertach, 338 if.

Munster, 118, 126 if, 133 ff., 178, and 
passim

Muscraige, 178 
Myrddin Wyllt, 77

Naas, 167 
Nechta Scene, 248 
Nechtan, 161 
Neit, 31

Nemed, 28 /., 31 £, X04, 105, 108, 
iiof,, 1x7, 125, 156, 157, 158, 200; 
Clans of, 162; Sons of, 142 
Nera, 298 f£, 307, 344 
Ness d. EochuSaibuide, I53,2i6£,234 
Niall of the Nine Hostages, 75/, 75, 
134, 202, 204, 238, 252 £, 257, 336 
Niam, 337 
Nisien, 47

Noah, 95, 104, 1 15 £

Noidhiu nae-mBreathach, 222 
Noisiu s. Uisliu, 280 f£, 292, 293, 296 
Nuadu Airgetlam, 31, 32, 33» 35* 4<5, 
51, 142

Oengus (The Mac <5c), 39, 88 £, 91, 
2I<5, 278, 295, 382 £

Oengus s. Aed Abrat, 306 
Ogma, 33 ff., 38 £., 53, 142, 144 
Oisin (Ossian) s. Finn, 20, 26, 65, 68, 
160, 201, 231 
Ole Acha, 219

Oiwen d. Ysbaddaden, 178, 262 i£, 
265, 268 
Owain, 265 
Owen, Knight, 304 
Oxford, 174

Paps of Anann, The, 134, 251 £ 
Parthanan, noOiwen d. Ysbaddaden, 178, 262 i£, 
265, 268 
Owain, 265 
Owen, Knight, 304 
Oxford, 174

Paps of Anann, The, 134, 251 £ 
Parthanan, no

Partholon, 2^, 31, 104, 105, 106 £, 
108 ff,, 115 £, 127, 134* 138, 142, 
158, 174, 197, 202; Sons of, 142 
Patrick, St, 17 £, 65, 67, 79, 157* i<5o, 
186, 193, 196, 317

Pendaran Dyfed, 178, 203

Celtic Heritage

420

Peredur, 265 
Perfedd, 175 
Plain of Ill-luck, 254 
Plant Rliys Ddwfn, 179 
Powys, 75 £, 180 
Pryderi s. Pwyll, 41, 43 ff., 47, 49, 
178,183,231,242, 271 
Pumlumon, 175 f

Pwyll, Lord of Dyfed, 41 45,

176 £, 183, 285 £, 308

Ragallach, 222

Binannon, 45#, 183, 285 £; Birds 
of, 48, 264

RJiodri Mawr, Sons of, 175, 179 
Binnal, 109 
Ross, Men of, 317 
Ruad s. Rigdonn, 193 
Ruadan s. Bres, 37, 52 
Rudraige, 142

St Patrick’s Purgatory, 304 
Scathach, 253 ff.

Sechnasach, 222 
Segais, The Well of, 16 1, 349 
Segda Saerlabraid, 223 
Scnboth, no 
Sencha, 241 
Setanta, 218, 219 
Sid of Almu, 66, 145 
Sid of Munster (—The Sid of the 
White Women), 59, I34, 139, 
278

Sid ar Femuin, 136, 275 
Sid Breg Ele, 251 
Sid Findacha, 301 
Sin, 338 fE„ 348 
Sithchenn, 253 
Skellig, 97 £

Sl^lne, 142 
Slemain Mide, 16 1 
Sliab Mis, 135 
Sn6dgus, 317, 323, 324 
Stam s. Nemed, 108, 142 
Sualdaim mac Roich, 218 
Suibne Geilt, 77

Tadg s. Nuadu, 66 
Tailtiu (Place, Assembly), 63, 164 £, 
166, 167, 198, 330 
Tailtiu (Person), 167 
Tairchell, 76 .

Taliesin, 229 £, 238, 241 £, 244 
Tara (Teniair), 33, 34, 63, 66, 73, 96, 
III, 118, ixgg., 130, 134, 146 J., 
X54 g, 160, 161 i£, 164 £, 170 £, 
184, 186, 187, 245, 273 ff., 310, 312, 
327

Tea, 167, 187

TechDuinn, 97; see also Doiin, House 
of

Temair Luachra, 134, 138, 187 
Tethra, 33, 39, 99, 259 
Teymon, 43, 176

Tlachtga (Place, Assembly), 163 C, 167 
Tlachtga d. Mug Ruith, 165, 167 
Toba, 106 
Tore Triath, 70 
Torna the Poet, 238 
Tory Island, 214 
Trefuilngid Tre-eochair, 1 19 IF. 
Trystan, 279, 283 £, 288 (Tristan, 
291 £, 293, 296)Tuan s. Stam, 29; s. Cairill, 30, 229 
Tuatha De Danann, 26, 28, 29 g, 
53, 65 £, 76, 96, 97. 102, 103, 104, 
107, ic8g 115, 1 17, 123, 142 £, 158. 
198, 200, 303 
Tuathal Maelgarb, 339 
Tuathal Techtmar, 118 £, 163 
TulTuinde, II4£, 135 
Twrch Trwytli, 70 £, 264 
Tybion s. Cunedda, 174 
Tynwald Hill, 171

Uar, Sons of, 138 
Uatliach, 254; of the Glen, 255 
Ugaine Mor, 140 
Ul Chorra, 317, 323, 325 
Ul Neill, 134 
Uirgriu, Sons of, 189 
UisHu, Sons of, 58, 279 
Uisnech, 63, 118, 119, 120 £, 146, 
136 g,, 166, 167, 186, 187, 301, 347 
Ulster, 26, 53 l£. 123, 124, 152, and 
passim

Uthr Bendragon, 222 ,

Valentia Island, 135 
Vortigem, 176, 244 £

West Munster, 1 1: 8, 1 3 3 ■ C. '

Ysbaddaden Benkawr, 262'C

Index

421

II

GENERAL

Acca Lareiitia, 74 
Adam and Eve, 95 
Adityas, 107 £

Adonis, 295 
Agni, X59, 277 
aithech, 116, 127 
All tiling, 15 1

ancient personages, 135, 136 
animal connections: of hero, 43, 217, 
231 £, of warriors, 248 £ ; animal 
helpers, 264, 265 
Aphrodite, 293, 295 
Apollo, 143 
Apsara(s), 276 f£

Aquinas, St Thomas, 227 
archetypes, 105 £, 323 £; see also 
first

Ares, 295 
Aristotle, 152, 227 
^ Aryaman, 99, 108

assemblies, 56, 63, 143, (152), 158, 
164 £, 168 if., 171, 184, 212; see 
also Feasts

^ Asura(s), 41 , 78, I43, m 
Athenians, 152 
Aztecs, 191 £

bachlach, 56 £, 138

Balarama, 232

Balder, 346

Bali s. Virocana, 77 £

baptism, 242 £; unbaptized child, 94,

■ .34^

i bard, 140 £, I45» 182 
battle, 31 ff , 48, 53, 125, 160,210, 212, 
326 £, 331 f£; in Other World, 
306, 308, 343; in /the North’, 123;

, primeval, 41

..Beds ofDiarmaid and Gr 4 inne, 288 £,

.■■,■295 '■

Beelzebub, 128 ,

' bees, 128, ,136^ ■ '

■ Bekaine, May ; 
bet vdxts-and-bet weens, 333, 349; cf. 
237, 266, 294, 344 ff.

birds, supernatural, 305; see also 
Rhiannon, swans

bird-feathers: thatch of, 261, 310 £, 
cloaks of, 17

bird-man, 221, 227, 246, 327; bird- 
men, 276birds, supernatural, 305; see also 
Rhiannon, swans

bird-feathers: thatch of, 261, 310 £, 
cloaks of, 17

bird-man, 221, 227, 246, 327; bird- 
men, 276

births of heroes, Ch. XI; see also 43, 
50, 211, 212, 293 
hS^aire^ iii £, 125 ff, Sc^-aire^ 62 
boar-hunt, 71, 178, 232, 264, 283, 295 
board games, 62, 154 £, 202; hraniuh, 
154 Ujidchell 35, 143, 154, 250, 
260, 274, Crimthann’s, 301, 312 
boat burials, 318

Book of Leinster, 17, 58, 88, 153, 208 
hSrama, 125 
Bosw^, J., 227 
boundaries, 94; eHminated, 91 
‘boy without a father’, 237, 244 £ 
brdhman, 350 £, caste, 16, 112; c£ 137 
brandub, see board-games 
bridge, perilous, 254, 256, 304, 345; 
BrSn as, 47

bull, 124; of province, 280; buH-fight, 
59; bull-feast, 245 £ 
buried dragons safeguard Britain, 46;

c£ head, 48 
burner, 66, 156

burning of house, 330, 334, 339 £

Caesar, Julius, 85, 87, no, 113 ff , 143, 
158

caesarian birth, 237, 345, 349 
caitteachi no, 135 
cairn, 188

calendar, Ch. Ill; Coligny, 84 ff. , 93; 
week, 153, 194, 196; month, 86 ff. , 
196; black month, 84, 288; calen- 
dri<^ household, 153 £, society, 
152; see also May, November Eve 
Carmichael, A., ii 
Carney, J., 283

castes, 1 12 £, 117; see also social 
system

■cattle-raids’, 57 ff , 21 1, 212

Celtic Heritage

422

caves, 55, 303 ff.

Centaurs, 276 
centre, Ch. IX, passim; of Britain, 46, 
174; of Wales, 175 £; of Ireland, 
118, 147, Ch. VII, 187; kingship at, 
128 fire at, 159; see also Uisnech 
Chadwick, N. K., 176, 228; also 
quoted^ 297

champion’s portion, 55 f. 
changelings, 92, 93, 243 
chaos. 66, 91, 93, ii4, uS, I43, I54, 
156, 160, 239, 349

cliild-hero, precociousness of, 215, 
241 ff., attempt on life of, 214, 215, 
220, 224, 225, 23 8 C ; see also animal 
connections, baptism, fosterage, 
naming

China, comparison with, 137, 148 fF., 
175, 290 £

Chretien de Troyes, 72, 285 
clearings, 104, no, 197 
cSicedy II 8

CStr Anmamty 27, 348 
'Colloquy of the Ancients’, 67 1£, 71, 
160 £, 210, 303China, comparison with, 137, 148 fF., 
175, 290 £

Chretien de Troyes, 72, 285 
clearings, 104, no, 197 
cSicedy II 8

CStr Anmamty 27, 348 
'Colloquy of the Ancients’, 67 1£, 71, 
160 £, 210, 303

combats: between equally matched 
opponents, 336, 339; seasonal, 285 £, 
at ford, 42, 94

conception through swallowing in- 
sect etc., 216 f£, 224 £, 228, 229 £,

273

‘confinement’ of warriors, 58 £ 
contests, beheading, 56 £, 139, magic, 
31, 38, ritual, 76 i£, 79 £, 155 £ 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., 75, 139; also 
quoted, 23, 107, 233 
Cormac’s Glossary, 27, 70, 158 
craftsmen, 34, no, 112 £, 127, 142 
crossMn, 128, 141

cross-cousin, 145; see also sister’s son 
crowns, 299 f£, 312 
Cybele, 295

Cycles of tales, 26 £, 123 £, 207; 
characteristics of, 63, provenance 
of, 124, 176 £ Irish: Mythological, 
26, 27, 28 €, 67, d9, 73, 123, 233, 
Ulster, 26, 53 f£, 69, 73, 123 £, 
Fenian (Ossianic), 26, 62 f£, 69 f£, 
123 £, Historical, 26 £, 73 f£; 
Welsh: Mabinogi, 27, 41 f£, 174, 
I76£, 203, Arthurian, 27, 70 f£, 177 
yfamydd-^fd, 212

Dafydd ap Gwilym, 287 £

Danielli, M., 150 
Danu, 53

day and night, 83 £; as microcosm of 
time, 88 £; midday, midnight, 92; 
sunrise, sunset, 89; night precedes 
day, 85

day’s work undone at night, 244, 275 
dead, return of, 83, 89 £, 302 £; king 
of, 107 £; resuscitation of, 47, 48; 
abode of, 97, 107 £ 
death foretold, 214, 222, 326, 330, 
332, 333 £, 337, 339 
Delargy, J. H., 12, 20, 301 
Delphi, 159 
dergftaith, 76, s 12 
dialects, 176

difficult tasks, 363, 264, 267, 269 f£, 
272, 274, 291 
Dillon, M., 18, 129 
Dmdknchas, 27, 38, 49, 53, 97, 13 1, 
158, 161, 165, 170, 193, 209, 303, 
348

dioceses of Wales, 175 
Diodorus, 84 £difficult tasks, 363, 264, 267, 269 f£, 
272, 274, 291 
Dillon, M., 18, 129 
Dmdknchas, 27, 38, 49, 53, 97, 13 1, 
158, 161, 165, 170, 193, 209, 303, 
348

dioceses of Wales, 175 
Diodorus, 84 £

directions, 147 ffi, 187 £, social classes 
and, 13 1 £; ‘five points’, 148, 187 
disguise of bride, 270 
divination, 67, 89, 90, 94, 270 
divisions, of Ireland, 38, 65, 100 f£, 
105, 140, 174, 212; of Munster, 
133 £; of Scotland, 195; of Roman 
Britain, 173; of Wales, 174 £, 179; 
of royal hall, 147 f£, 182, 195; of 
.s'fd-mounds, 39; of Cessair’s wo- 
men, 1 14

dragons in conflict, 46, 245 
druid (s), 16, 35, 76, 80, 96, no, iii, 
123, 140 £, 156 £, 158, 181, 219, 
222, 307, 312

duality: in centre, 146, 162 £, in 
Munster, 118, 120 if., in. Welsh 
royal hall, 182; in time, 83 f£, in 
seasons, 390 £; dual organization, 
102 ,£; Nordi'and South, 100 'ff, 
145, 151, 166,, 174, 1S2; lea.riiing 
■ and music, loi, 137; left and right, 
145, 381 f£ ,

Dumezil, G., 112, 124, 143 £, 162, 249 
Eiddig, 288 ,

Eiiade, M., 187, 296; also quoted, 106

Index

enchantment, 44, 48, 49, 303, 339,

see spells

end of the world, 3^, 233 
Eros, 293

evil eye, 37, 66, 329 
exiles, Ulster, 58, 281Eiiade, M., 187, 296; also quoted, 106

Index

enchantment, 44, 48, 49, 303, 339,

see spells

end of the world, 3^, 233 
Eros, 293

evil eye, 37, 66, 329 
exiles, Ulster, 58, 281

‘Fathers* {Pitrls), 99, 108 
Feast: ofBricriu, 55 £, 148 f., 201; of 
Goibniu, 39; of Tara, 33, 63, 147 £, 
156, 161 f£, 163, 171; feasts, 156, 
212; fatal feast, 335 £ 
female kin, 264 £ 
female personages of Munster, 134 
female warrior (s), 254 if., 261 £ 
fiana, 26, 27, 62 ff., 84, 145, 146, 194, 
198, 201, 251 £, 282 £; social class 
and, 62 £; c£ 124 
fianaigheachty 62 
JidchelU see board-games 
JiU(d), 17, 67, 95, 140 
fires, 79 £, 89, 162 £, 165, 187, 193; 
Erst, 156 f£, 186; at centre, 156 if; 
fire-drill, 158, 16 1, 162 
first: adultery, 106; assembly of 
Carmun, 169; building etc., no; 
cattle, no; cooking, no; death, 
105; fire, 156 £, 186; fort, 98; 
jealousy, 106; judgement, 96, 105, 
106 £, king, 105, 109; landing, 105; 
physician, 142; points on weapons, 
109; sacrifice, 158; satire, 33; sheep, 
1 14

five: peoples, 102 f£, 107 fi*., Indian 
kindreds, 107, 113, I57; provinces, 
Ch. V; see also Numbers 
flaith, 1 1 1

ISies, fly-whisk, 127 £, 136 
Flood, 95, 108 £, 115 £ 
flower-lady, 50 £, 52, 56, 74, 286, 293 
food, Leiiistermeii as, 125 £ 
forts: two royal, no, four in Meath, 
163 f£

fosterage, 216, 240 £

Frazer,}. G., 21 £; also quoted, 237 
Frobenius,X,, 187

‘functions*, 112 £, 116 £, 124 f£, 
■140 f£, 181 £, 241, 323

games, 56, 143, 169, 191; Olympic, 
■' see also board-games 
# 'GandharvaCs), 226T., 276 ff., 290, 293

4^3

geis,gessa, 231 £, 260, 282, 294, 327 if, 
348

Geoffrey of Monmouth, 28, 96, 173 , 
222, 228, 244 
giant herdsman, 184 
giants, 173 £

Gildas, 195

Giraldus Cambrensis, 159, 175, 179, 
200

gods, Celtic, 25, 30 £, 143 £

Gomme, G. L., 203 
Grail, 313; castle, 148 
Greece, comparison with, 152, 159, 
168, 271, 295, 327 
Guto’r Glyn, 192

hag at the well, see Sovereignty 
hair-cutting, 256, 264; hair shaved, 
37SGomme, G. L., 203 
Grail, 313; castle, 148 
Greece, comparison with, 152, 159, 
168, 271, 295, 327 
Guto’r Glyn, 192

hag at the well, see Sovereignty 
hair-cutting, 256, 264; hair shaved, 
37S

Hallowe’en, see November Eve / 
halls, symboHsm of, 131 £, I47vfluf i82 
Hamel, A. G. van, 70,. 211 
hanged man, adventure with, 298 fll 
harp, 141; magic, 35, 264; harper, loi, 
113, 127, 181 
hazel-nuts, 16 1, 311 
helpers of the hero, 265 
Heruli, 248

Hocart, A. M., 78, 117, 129, 145 
hospitality, 123, 126, 136; inhospi- 
tiity, 36, 136 
house-troop, 63, 70, 18 1 f.

‘I am* utterances, 98 £, ‘I have been*, 
230

Iceland, 150 £

incest, 218, 221, 224, 226, 233 f£, 238, 
275. 348, 349 
incubi, 228

India, comparison with, 16, 17, 41, 
53, 99, 107 £, 112 £, 125 £, 131 £, 
140, 147, 148 ff., X55 £, 162 £, 
165 £, 191, 201, 240, 258, 270, 
276 ff., 290, 295 £, 300, 302 
Indo-European antecedents, 17, 26, 
112,249

Indra, 19, 53, 75. 77. 237. 333

initiation, 63 £, 248 £, 251 £, 256 fll, 
297; excesses, 258

invasions, 28, Ch. IV, passim, 121, 
141 £, 195, 212

inversion, 83, 87 £, 90, 145, 293

Celtic Heritage

424

■ inverted tree, 193 
lolo Morganwg, 182 
islands, o&r world, 26 1,316,319 fE

jealousy, 106, 130, 273, 288, 292, 
305 k.; the first, 106 
joking relationships, 40 
jugglers, 113, 342; cosmicjuggler, 99, 
350; conjurers, 139 
Jupiter, 143 
jus primae metis, 227 f. 
justice of king, 128 fF., 345

0 Kama, 278

Keating, G., 64, loi, 158, 163 £, 165 
king(s): of Ireland, 147 £, 161; of 
Munster, 137 fF.; of Tuatha, 32, 39, 
139; installation of, 146 £, 246; 
maimed, 32; rights over vassals’ 
wives, 318; king’s truth brings vic- 
tory and prosperity, 138 fF. 
kingship, 73 f£, 109, 112, 123, 128 f£, 
143, 146 fF.; temporary, 35, 89, 143 
kinship system, 199 (Irish); limits of, 
193, 199, 203 
Krappe, A. H., 75, 295 
«« Krishna, 99, 225, 231, 232, 296 
Kwakiutl, 249, 258

lakes, forming of, 104 
Lak§mi, 75

learning in the North, loi, 123;lakes, forming of, 104 
Lak§mi, 75

learning in the North, loi, 123;

learned class, ^16, 140 £, 181 £

Lehor Gahdla Erenn, 27, 31, Ch. IV, 
passim, 121, 198

left and right, see duality; left-handed, 
138

Lewis, C- B,, 289, 395 
life after death, 324 £ 
life cycle of hero, 213 
linseed scattered, 263, 270 
Llywarch Hen, 37, 69, 176 
Loki, 184 £

love, 72; season of, 284 £, 286 IF.;

courts of, 296 
Lucan, 340

Lugnasad, 93, 164, 166, 16S

Mabinogi, see Cycles of stories 
Macallster, R. A. $., 98 
Macdonell, A. A., 127 
■ Maclean, H., 20 . .

MacNeill, E., no, 134 
Madagascar, 150, 152 
Mae! Mura, 118, 131 
magic objects: branch, 310, 314 £, 
fortress, 44; harp, 35, 264; mantle, 
48; wan4 50, 52:; weapons, 39, 
271, 313; wind, 97; magic vessels, 
261, 271, 313, cauldrons, 39, 47, 
193, 263, 313, cups, 252, 363, 
310 fF., 313, hamper, 263, 313, 
horn, 263 
Malory, T., 285

marriage: tales, 259 fif.; rituals, 267 C, 
277; divinations, 90; season, 290; 
marriage of king to realm, 73 C, 
146, 162 
Mars, 143

matriiineal succession, 180 £

May and love, 285 fF., 337; May 
marriages unlucky, 289 £

May Eve/Day (Beltaine), 43, 46, 83, 
91 £, 166, 168, 290, 340; invasions 
on, 158; Beltaine fire, 158, 193 
mazes, 346 
Mercury, 143 £

Mera, Mount, 99, 160, 187 
metaphors, 349 
Mimir’s Well, 16 1 
Minerva, 143

miraculous leaps, steps, 76 fF. 
mistletoe, 345 £

mock-hostiHty at weddings, 267 C 
mockery, 36

mother of the gods, 53 ; the Mothers, 
40 £

mound, primeval, 115; tiirone- 
mound, 42, 44, 183 £; play-mound, 
183 £

mountain-climbing ritual, 98 
nmg, loi, 126 £

midtiple attributes, arts, names, 348 £, 
deaths, 333 339 £» 347

Murphy, G., 66

music, associated with the South, loi, 
123, 124 £, with the stipematurai, 
137, with low class, ' 113,. 127 £; see 
■also harp

names of Ireland, 96, 134, 146 
naming as aeative act, 105; naming 
of child, 43, 214 £, 217, 219, "220,

■ 221, 242 ■

Index

4^5names of Ireland, 96, 134, 146 
naming as aeative act, 105; naming 
of child, 43, 214 £, 217, 219, "220,

■ 221, 242 ■

Index

4^5

Namuci, 333 
navel of Ireland, 159, 163 
nemed classes, no, 113, 141 
Nennius, 28, 70, 96, 115, 178 
Nicholas of Gma, 344 
niggardliness, 33> 9^, 93» ^30

night and the supernatural, 83 £ ; story 
telling at night, 16, 84 
no man’s land, 203 
noble tribes of Ireland, 15 1 £,158 
North and South, see duality 
November Eve/Day {Samain), 32, 
35, 89 If., 92 and Ch. Ill, passim; 
153, 154, 156, 163, 165 £, 168, 210, 
251, 298 ff., 301, 305 £; death on, 
340; s/i-mounds open on, 89, 251 
numbers, 147-54, 186-204; three, 34, 
35, 38, 50, 53, 56, 76 If, 152, 165 £, 
174, 175, 179, 255, 300, 301, 310; 
four/five, 39, 74, 84, 105, III, 
118 f£, 140, 142, 143, 147 £, 157, 
159 £, 163 £, 173 If., 179, 187 f£, 
199 £, 202 £, 258, 311 £, 325, 330; 
seven, 47 £, 49, 152, 153 £, 156, 
161, 195 201, 203, 308, 340;

eight/nine, 58, 96, 107, 149 £, 154, 
192 f£, 199, 201, 203, 204, 230, 
259, 260, 311, 330, 347, 349; 
twelve/thirteen, 35, 93, 104, 149, 
150 f£, 196 £, 199 £, 216, 263; 
sixteen/seventeen, 85, 104, 114, 
197 209, 281, 319, 321, 330,

331; eighteen, 199; twenty-seven/ 
-eight, 56, 194, 195 £, 216, 315, 
316; thirty-two/-three, 200 £, 
3 1 8 1£, 3 3 8 ; fifty/thrice-fifty, 204 n, 
218, 247, 308, 311, 315, 318, 326; 
odd and even, 200, 201 £, Ch. IX, 
passim

nuptial continence, 277

O Conaiii, Sein, ii £, 20 £ 
ogam, 189 £, 134; and achu, 233 
omens, 326, 341; omen days, 93 
one blow (second withheld), 42, 248 
one eye, one arm, one leg, 31, 37, 40, 
142 £, 184, 329» 3$6; c£ 138, 331, 
338; one breath, 56, 338 
one-eyed 'personages, 57, '138, 145, 
255» 282, 326, 328, 329, 331, 340 
opposites, 59; superseded, 336, 340, 
Ch- XVIII, passim; see also duality0’R.ahiliy, T. F., 66, 176 
origin: of physical features, 104 £, of 
culture traits, 105; see also first 
Other World, 136, 178, 203, 256, 265, 
276, 342; adventures in, 253 f£, 
260 f£, 298 fE, 306 f£, 310 ff., 
314 f£, 319 f£; 5ee also std, women 
‘outer fifth’, 133 If, 159 £

Ovid, 230 £

paradox, 93, 139, 211, 226, Ch. 
XVIII

perilous journey, 253 f£, 261, 264 
phallus, 146

pigs and the Other World, 39, 
178 £

plague, 46, 107 £, no 
Pliny, 87

poets, grades of, 140 £, 181 £ 
Prajapati, 79, 139, 198 £ 
precedences, 55 £, 156, 170 £ 
prefiguration, 226, 260, 300, 308 
Pre-GaeHc peoples, 102 If, 107 ff., 
compared with social classes, 109 ff. 
prosperity (fruitfulness), 112, 123, 
125, 129 £

provinces: of Ireland, Ch. V, passim, 
attributes of, 123 f£, origin of, 105, 
174 £; of Wales, 175 ff. 
puns, 260, 347 £, 349 
Pururavas, and Urvashi, 277 £

Pukn, 138 £

Pythagoras, 202; Pythagoreans, 159

quarters, 120; and centre, 118 ff., 
122 f£, 147 £

race(s), horse-, 143, 170 £, chariot-, 
170 £, boat-, 97; race against king’s 
horses, 58, 167 
Radha, 296 
Raglan, Lord, 213 
reincarnation, 59, 230 £, 273, 324 
revolt of vassal tribes, 118, 174 
Rhys, J., 194

riddles, enigmas, 13, 14, 234 £, 237, 
259 £, 266, 269, 291, 302, 347 ff. 
rivers of Ireland, 16, 160, 192 
Rome, comparison with, 74, 113, 
124, 162 £, 198, 201 
rotating fortress, 13 8 £ 
royal tribes of Wales, 175

Celtic Heritage

426

sacrifice, 79, 139; quinquennial, 85; 
sacrificial aspect, 139, 296, classes, 
III £, rituals, 239, 242 
Saint Brigid’s Night, 92 
Salmon of Knowledge, 1 61, 232, 250; 
c£ 311

Samain, see November Eve; ‘Samain 
to Beltaine’, 16, 65, 84 
Samildanach, 34 £, 142; cf. 349 
satire, 17, 33, 37, 128, 331 £; satirist,

33. 136, 331 f-

Scylla and Charybdis, 345 
seasons, Ch. Ill, passim, 290 
seclusion of hero’s destined mother, 
214, 215, 222, 236 £ 
serfs, 113, 126

setting adrift, 224, 238 £, 317 £ 
shamans, 17, 236, 305, 310; shaman- 
ism, 256setting adrift, 224, 238 £, 317 £ 
shamans, 17, 236, 305, 310; shaman- 
ism, 256

shape-changing, 42, 221 £, 272 £, 
337 f*-

Shiva, 99, 302

sickness of the Ulstermen, 58 £ 
sid{e), 33, 34, 38 £, 40, 45, 66, 88, 89, 
94, 257, 275, 278, 299 £, 308 £, 
344; sid-folk, 66, 137, 156, 220, 
221, 227, 260, 299 £; see also Other 
World, Land of Promise 
sister’s son, 144 £, 292; c£ 219 
Sjoestedt, M.-L., 60 
smith, 34, 36, 52, 73, II3, 214, 219, 
238, 247, 250, 252 £, 321; smith- 
craft, 252, 257

social system (Irish), in £, correla- 
tion with provinces, 123 flf.; see 
also ‘functions’

Soma, 75, 139, 195, 276, 277 
South, see duality

‘Sovereignty of Ireland’, 73 f£, 124, 
134, 257, 312; sovereignty of Ire- 
land’s heroes, 56

spells, 97, 99 £, 233; see enchantment 
stone circle, idol, 196 £

Stone of Divisions, 118, 120, 159, 160 
stories, lists of types, 67, Ch. X, 
passim; primary and secondary, 
208 £; power of, 17 C, 23, 210 £, 
302; as examplars, 21 1, 236; see 
also Cycles

storytellers, Chs. I and X, passim, 342; 
memory of, 15, 16; poets as, 15, 
16 £, 208 £; occasions and times for

storytelling, 14, 16, 18, 84, 85, aio 
‘straw-boys’, 376 
‘stray sod’, 346 
Stubbes, P., 289

sun-chamber (griandn), 149 £, 184;

on single pillar, 147, 236, 262 
supernatural father, 218, 221, 222 
supernatural lover, 271, 276 
supernatural mistress, 73 fE, 254 £, 
256 £, 306 £, 309 £, 316; consort of 
the doomed, 334 £, 336 C 
swans, personages in form of, 49, 
236, 366, 275, 277 £; cf. 305 
swineherd(s), 59, 178, 186, 222

Tacitus, 144

Tain B6 Cmilnge, 17, 24, 57 i£, 67, 
69, 124, 189, 193, 199, 200, 209 
talismans of Tuatha, 29 
theatre, 184

thinking, willing and feeling, 69, 124 
tliird factor in conception, 227, 289 
Tliorr, 185

throne-mound, see mound 
thumb of knowledge (Finn’s), 66, 
250, 348

Thumeysen, R., 62 
time: duality of, 84 i£, fourfold, 92 IE, 
supernatural lapse of, 299, 316, 321,

343 f.. 48throne-mound, see mound 
thumb of knowledge (Finn’s), 66, 
250, 348

Thumeysen, R., 62 
time: duality of, 84 i£, fourfold, 92 IE, 
supernatural lapse of, 299, 316, 321,

343 f.. 48

trees: five, 120; evergreen, 384; 
magic tree, 282; trees from lovers’ 
graves unite, 296; birch, 287; nine 
hazels of wisdom, 161, 192, 349; 
c£ 311; rowan, 91; yew, 186; see 
mistletoe

Troubadours, trouvires, 68, 289 
truth and falsehood, 31 1; see also 
king(s)

f

Utgarda-Loki, 184 £

Valerius Maximus, 324 
Varro, 113

Varuna, 99, 139, 143, 144 
vales, 140 £

Vendryes, J., 190 
Vesta, 162 £

0 Vishnu, 77 IE, 99* 350- 
Vivasvat, 107 
Voudoun, 192, '202 
Virtra,53,79

Index ■ ' . '427

warriors, 54 i£, 124, 130 £; caste of, in Other World, 40 £, 198, .261,

112 £; contests of, 54 ff ; ethos ©£ 293, 321

54 C, 61, 340; heat of, 248, 249; Wynne, Ellis, 183 
chariot-warriors, 63, 374

Wei of knowledge, 161, 311 v Yama, 107 £

Wide, Lady, 268 Yang and yin, 202

Wodan, 144

women: Cessair®s, 114; in Sondi, 180; Zimmer, H., 293