Ovid: Fasti (Henry T. Riley translation, 1851)
==============================================
Henry T. Riley’s 1851 public-domain prose translation of Ovid’s Fasti, Books I-VI, with notes. The Roman calendar in verse; source: Internet Archive.

ON  THE  RECKONING  OF  TIME  AMONG  THE
ROMANS.

According-  to  Ovid,  the  year  of  Romulus  consisted  of  ten
months,  commencing  with  the  month  of  Martius,  or  March,
and  ending  with  December.  Numa  is  said  to  have  inserted
two  additional  months,  and  we  learn  from  the  poet  (in  which
statement,  however,  he  is  not  confirmed  by  any  other  writer)
that  he  prefixed  January  to  March,  and  subjoined  February  to
December,  which  order  continued  till  the  Decemviri  placed
February  in  its  present  position.  The  year  of  Romulus  is
supposed  to  have  contained  six  months  of  thirty  days,  and
four  of  thirty-one,  making  in  all  304  days.  The  year  of
Numa  originally  consisted  of  355  days,  which  falling  short


Xll  IIS'TEODTJCTIOK.

of  the  solar  year,  he  supplied  the  defect  by  adding  to  every
second  year  an  intercalary  month,  which  he  called  Mercedonius,
consisting  of  twenty-two  and  twenty-three  days  alternately.
This  month  was  thrown  in  at  the  end  of  February  in  each
year,  and  by  this  plan  four  years  contained  1465  days,  making
an  average  annual  excess  of  one  day.  This  was  corrected  by
reducing  the  number  of  days  in  the  intercalarated  month  in
every  third  "octennium,"  or  period  of  eight  years,  by  which
means,  in  a  cycle  of  twenty-four  years,  the  Calendar  was  re-
duced to  the  same  state  as  if  every  year  had  consisted  of  365
days  and  a  quarter.

The  direction  of  the  intercalations  was  left  with  the  Ponti-
fices,  and  it  is  supposed  that  they  frequently  lengthened  or
shortened  the  year  at  their  own  option,  for  the  benefit  or
detriment  of  the  Consuls  and  other  public  officers,  and  the
farmers  of  the  revenue,  according  as  they  were  friendly  or
hostile  to  them.

These  abuses,  and  the  fact,  that,  as  the  fixed  part  of  the
year  of  Numa  was  not  adapted  to  the  sun's  revolution,  while
the  intercalary  part  did  not  observe  the  phases  of  the  moon,
the  places  of  the  seasons  on  the  calendar  were  not  exactly  the
same  in  any  two  consecutive  years,  influenced  Julius  Caesar,
when  Pontifex  Maximus,  to  reform  the  Calendar,  as  by  virtue
of  his  office  he  was  empowered  to  do.  This  was  the  more
necessary,  when  we  consider  that  the  first  of  January  had
at  that  time  retrograded  nearly  to  the  Autumnal  equinox.  To
bring  that  day  to  its  proper  place,  he  made  the  current  year
to  consist  of  445  days,  by  adding  two  intercalary  months  of
sixty-seven  days  to  the  usual  intercalary  month  Mercedonius.
This  year  is  generally  called  "the  year  of  confusion."  His
chief  alteration  was,  the  abolition  of  the  month  Mercedonius,
and  the  distribution  of  the  ten  days,  which  thereby  became
wanting,  among  some  of  the  other  months  ;  and  by  this
means  the  months  became  of  their  present  length.  As,  how-
ever, this  year  was  still  too  short  by  about  a  quarter  of  a  day,
he  provided  for  the  deficiency  by  the  insertion,  every  fourth
year,  of  an  extra  day  immediately  after  the  23rd  of  February,
which  was  to  be  esteemed  as  a  duplicate  of  the  24th  of
February,  or,  as  the  Romans  called  it,  the  sixth  of  the
Calends  of  March.  It  is  this  double  day  which  gave  the  name
of  "  Bissextile"  to  the  Leap  year.     The  months,  which  had


INTRODUCTION".  Xlll

previously  been  called  Quintilis  and  Sextilis,  then  received  the
names  of  Julius  and  Augustus,  in  honour  of  the  first  two
emperors.  The  Pontifices,  soon  after,  mistook  the  proper
method  of  intercalation,  by  making  it  every  third  year  ;  but
Augustus  finally  corrected  the  results  of  this  error  by  omitting
the  intercalary  day  during  twelve  years.

The  Romans  did  not,  as  we  do,  count  the  days  of  the  month
in  a  regular  numerical  succession,  but  reckoned  them  with
reference  to  three  principal  points  of  time — the  Calends,
the  Nones,  and  Ides.  The  first  day  of  every  month  was
entitled  its  Calends.  In  March,  May,  July,  and  October  the
Nones  were  the  seventh,  and  the  Ides  the  fifteenth  of  the
month ;  in  all  the  other  months  the  Nones  were  the  fifth  and
the  Ides  the  thirteenth ;  and  thus  the  Nones  were  always  eight
days  before  the  Ides.  After  passing  over  one  of  these  points,
the  Romans  counted  forward  to  the  next,  calling  the  day
after  the  Calends  so  many  days  before  the  Nones,  the  day  after
the  Nones  so  many  days  before  the  Ides,  and  the  day  after  the
Ides  so  many  days  before  the  Calends  of  the  next  month.  The
days  were  accordingly  entitled  with  reference  to  the  number
backwards  from  each  point  to  the  preceding  one ;  thus  the
thirty-first  of  January  was  "  Pridie  Calendas  Februarias,"  or
"the  day  before  the  Calends  of  February;"  the  day  before
that  was  reckoned  as  the  third  day  before  the  Calends  of
February  (as  the  Romans  included  both  extremes  in  counting),
and  was  called  "Tertio  Calendas  Februarias,"  or  "Calendarum
Februariarum,"  which  we  translate  "the  third  of  the  Calends
of  February."  though  it  really  means  "  the  third  day  before
the  Calends  of  February."  Pursuing  this  mode  of  enumera-
tion, we  find  the  fourteenth  of  January  (the  day  after  the  Ides)
to  be  the  nineteenth  "  before,"  or,  as  we  say,  "  of  the  Calends  of
February."  So  the  day  before  the  Ides  of  January  was
"  Pridie  Idus  Januarias,"  and  so  on  backwards  to  the  Nones,
the  day  before  which  was  "  Pridie  Nonas,"  and  the  day  before
that  was  "  Tertio  Nonas  Januarias."  It  should  be  remembered
that  the  space  between  the  Nones  and  Ides  w as  the  same  in  all
the  months ;  while  those  between  the  Calends  and  Nones
and  the  Ides  and  Calends  varied.  The  Calends  were
originally  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  which  received  its
name  from  the  fact  that  on  that  day  the  Pontifex  addressed
the  moon  in  presence  of  the  people,  in  the  words  "  Calo  te,


XVI  INTE0DXTCTI01S'.

1.  165);  a  "lustrum"  denotes  only  four  years,  and  sometimes
an  indefinite  number  of  years.  Twenty-two  "lustra"  made
a  "  seculum"  of  110  years,  the  largest  measure  of  time  exist-
ing among  the  Romans.


ON  THE  RISING  AND  SETTING  OF  THE  STARS.

Befoee  the  age  of  Thales,  the  astronomer,  only  the  settings
and  risings  of  the  stars,  as  they  were  visible  to  the  naked  eye,
were  the  subj eet  of  observation.  Ever  since  that  period,  however,
astronomers  have  divided  these  phenomena,  with  reference  to
the  sun,  into  three  classes.  They  are  termed  the  cosmical,
acronychal,  and  heliacal  risings  and  settings.  The  cosmical
rising  or  setting  is  the  true  one  in  the  morning;  the  acronychal,
the  true  one  in  the  evening  ;  and  the  heliacal  the  apparent
rising  in  the  morning  or  setting  in  the  evening.  A  star  or
Constellation  is  said  to  rise  cosmically  when  it  rises  at  the
same  time  with  the  sun  ;  and  to  set  cosmically,  when  it  sets
in  the  west,  as  the  sun  rises  in  the  east.  It  rises  or  sets
acronychally  when  it  rises  or  sets  at  sunset.  When  it  rises
heliacally  it  emerges  to  the  sight  from  the  lustre  of  the  sun's
rays,  where  before  it  was  hidden,  and  it  arrives  to  such  a  distance
from  him  as  to  be  seen  in  the  morning  before  the  sun's  rising  ;
and  when  it  sets  heliacally,  approaching  the  sun,  it  is  lost
sight  of  in  his  superior  brightness.  The  heliacal  rising
of  a  star  takes  place  from  twelve  to  fifteen  days  after  the  cos-
mical rising,  and  the  heliacal  setting  the  same  time  before  the
acronychal  setting.  From  the  time  of  its  heliacal  setting  to
its  heliacal  rising,  the  star  is  over  the  horizon  by  daylight  only,
and  is  therefore  invisible.

Thus  we  find  that  there  are  three  risings  and  as  many
settings  of  a  star,  two  of  each  of  which  are  real  and  one
apparent,  namely  : —

The  true  morning  rising the  cosmical.

The  apparent  morning  rising the  heliacal.

The  true  evening  rising the  acronychal.

The  true  morning  setting the  cosmical.

The  apparent  evening  setting .   .   .  :   .  the  heliacal.
The  true  evening  setting  .......  the  acronychal.


THE   FASTI;

OR,

CALENDAR   OF   OVID.


BOOK  THE  FIRST.


CONTENTS.


The  nature  of  the  subject,  and  the  Dedication,  ver.  1 — 26.  The  divi-
sion of  the  year  by  Romulus  and  Numa,  27 — 44.  The  different  quali-
ties of  the  days,  45 — 62.  The  calends  of  January,  the  invocation  of
Janus,  and  a  prayer  that  the  author  may  commence  auspiciously,  63 — 74.
The  consuls  enter  upon  their  office  in  an  assemblage  of  the  people  ,  75 —
88.  The  mythology  of  Janus  :  who  presents  himself  before  the  author
with  his  badges  of  office,  89 — 99,  and  states,  first,  his  origin,  and  the  fact
of  his  two-formed  figure,  100 — 114;  then,  his  duties  and  his  various
names  derived  therefrom,  115 — 132  ;  then,  the  reasons  for  his  peculiar
form,  133 — 144.  He  next  explains  some  matters  relative  to  the  calends
of  January ;  why  the  new  year  begins  in  the  middle  of  winter,  and
not  in  the  spring,  145 — 164;  why  on  that  day  causes  are  pleaded,
165 — 170  ;  why  sacred  rites  are  performed  in  his  honour  the  first  of  all
the  Gods,  171 — 174  ;  why  words  of  good  omen  should  be  used,  175 —
182  ;  why  presents  are  made  at  the  beginning  of  the  new  year,  183 — 226 ;
why  the  ancient  coin  bore  the  figures  of  a  ship  and  a  double-head,
227 — 254 ;  why  he  himself  has  his  statue  in  one  temple  only,  255 —
277  ;  why  his  temple  is  open  in  time  of  war,  278 — 288.  The  author
then  proceeds  to  examine  the  calendar.  The  dedication  of  the  two
temples  of  iEsculapius  and  of  Jupiter,  259 — 294.  Before  treating
of  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  constellations,  he  commences  with  the
praises  of  those  who  cultivate  the  science  of  astronomy,  295 — 310.  The
setting  of  the  Crab  and  the  Lyre,  311 — 316.  The  origin  and  meaning
of  the  Agonalia,  317 — 334.  An  inquiry  into  the  meaning  of  the  terms
'  Victima'  and  '  Hostia ;'  the  ancient  sacred  rites  and  origin  of  the
sacrifice  of  animals,  in  which  he  introduces  the  story  of  Aristseus,  335—
456.  The  rising  of  the  Dolphin,  457 — 8.  The  middle  day  of  winter,
459 — 60.  The  Carmentalia,  which  introduces  the  arrival  in  Italy  of
Carmenta,  Evander,  and  Hercules,  together  with  the  death  of  Cacus  by
Hercules,  461—586.     The  sacred  ritea  of  Jupiter,  587—8.    Octavius

I  *


2  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  i.  1—8.

is  graced  with  the  title  of  '  Augustus/  the  meaning  *  of  which  word
he  explains.  590 — 616.  The  return  of  the  Carmentalia,  on  which
Porrima  and  Postverta  are  propitiated,  617  —  636.  The  Temple
of  Concord  rebuilt  by  Tiberius,  to  which  Livia  is  a  contributor,
637 — 650.  The  Sun  enters  Aquarius ;  the  Lyre  and  the  constel-
lation of  the  Lion  set,  651 — 656.  The  Sementive  festivals ;  cessation
from  field  labour,  the  rural  rejoicings  thereupon,  the  prayers  of  the
husbandman  for  good  crops,  and  the  great  blessing  of  Peace,  657 — 704.
The  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux  dedicated  by  Tiberius,  705 — 708.  The
altar  of  Peace  is  erected.  The  poet  concludes  with  a  prayer  for  eternal
peace,  and  for  the  house  of  Caesar,  709 — 726.

The  festivals,1  arranged  throughout  the  Latian  year,2  toge-
ther with  their  origin  and  the  constellations  as  they  set
beneath  the  earth  and  rise,  I  will  celebrate.  Receive,  Caesar
Germanicus,3  this  work  with  benignant  aspect,  and  direct
the  course  of  my  timid  bark ; 4  and  not  disdaining  a  mark
of  attention  thus  slight,  be  propitious  to  this  act  of  duty  con-
secrated to  thee.  Thou  wilt  here  review  the  sacred  rites
brought  to  light  from  the  ancient  annals,5  and  see  by  what
memorable  fact  each  day  has  been  distinguished.     Here,  too,

1  The  festivals."] — Ver.  1.  Literally,  '  The  times/  as  set  out  for  ob-
servance, and  arranged  for  particular  purposes.

2  The  Latian  year.] — Ver.  1.  The  Latian  year  here  spoken  of  was  the
Julian  or  solar  year  of  365  days  and  a  quarter ;  so  called  because  insti-
tuted by  Julius  Caesar.  (See  Introduction.)  The  month  of  January
received  its  name  from  the  god  Janus,  and  has  retained  it  from  the
days  of  Numa  to  the  present  time,  with  an  interval  only  in  the  reign
of  the  Emperor  Commodus,  who  called  it  '  Amazonius,'  in  honour  of  his
mistress  ;  but  on  his  death  the  former  name  was  restored  by  a  decree  of
the  senate.  Latium  was  the  name  of  that  part  of  Italy  in  which  Rome
was  situated.

3  Ccesar  Germanicus.] — Ver.  3.  He  was  the  son  of  Drusus  Claudius
Nero,  and  was  adopted  by  his  uncle  Tiberius,  at  the  express  request  of
the  Emperor  Augustus.  Drusus,  the  father  of  Germanicus  having  died
shortly  after  his  victory  over  the  Germans,  the  senate  conferred  the  title  of
Germanicus  on  his  descendants.  Germanicus  died  at  an  early  age,  and  was
the  father  of  the  Emperor  Caligula.

4  Timid  bark.] — Ver.  4.  Gower  translates  these  lines  in  the  following
manner —

*  Germanic  Caesar  !  O  !  accept  our  charge
With  smooth  aspect,  and  guide  my  feeble  barge/

Massey  gives  them  in  a  single  line —

*  Support  Germanicus,  my  feeble  wing.

While  the  one  caricatures  the  metaphor,  the  other  abandons  it  altogether.
6  Ancient  annals.] — ■  Annalibus — priscis.'  Ver.  7.    The  Roman  annals


B.  I.  S— 21.]  OS,    CALENDAR   OF    OVID.  3

thou  wilt  find  the  household  festivals  peculiar  to  thy  own
faniily.6  Often  must  thy  sire,  often  thy  grandsire,7  become
the  subjects  of  thy  perusal.  The  rewards  of  honour  dis-
tinguishing the  painted  calendar,8  which  they  bear,  thou,
too,  with  thy  brother  Drusus,9  shalt  obtain.10  Let  others  sing
the  arms  of  Caesar ;  we  will  sing  the  altars11  of  Csesar,  and
those  days  which  he  has  added12  to  the  festivals.  Do  thou
favour  me  while  endeavouring  to  recount  the  praises  of  thy
kindred,  and  dispel  from  my  breast  its  trembling  fears.  Show
thyself  propitious  to  me  ;  then  wilt  thou  have  given  me  energy
for  my  verses,  for  according  to  thy  countenance  does  my
genius  stand  or  fall.  My  page,13  about  to  be  submitted  to  the
judgment  of  a  prince  thus  learned,  is  moved  with  awe,  as
though   sent  to  the  Clarian  God1*  to  be  perused.     For  we

before  the  time  of  Ovid,  were  compiled  by  Hemina,  Claudius,  Afranius,
Ennius,  Attius,  Quadrigarius,  Piso,  Fannius,  Fenestella,  Laberius,  and
Licinius.  The  principal  annals  were  named  '  Annales  Maximi.'  They
were  open  to  public  inspection,  and  were  kept  by  the  Pontifex  Maximus.
At  their  discontinuance,  in  the  time  of  Sylla,  they  amounted  to  eighty
volumes.

6  Thy  own  family.] — 'Vobis.'  Ver.  9.  Either  the  Claudii,  his  family
by  birth,  or  the  Julii,  his  family  by  adoption.

7  Thy  grandsire.] — Ver.  10.  Augustus,  who  had  adopted  Tiberius.

8  The  painted  calendar.] — Ver.  11.  'Pictos  Fastos.'  The  Roman  books
were  often  decorated  with  colours,  especially  red;  whence  our  word
'  rubric.'  These  were  most  probably  the  '  Fasti  Consulares,'  kept  in  the
temple  of  Janus,  and  not  the '  Fasti  Calendares/  which  were  originally  only
a  calendar  marking  the  days  of  religious  observance.

9  Drusus.] — Ver.  12.  Drusus  was  the  son  of  Tiberius,  and  the  adoptive
brother  of  Germanicus.  The  superior  merits  of  the  latter  are  supposed
to  have  excited  the  jealousy  of  Tiberius,  and  to  have  caused  his  death  by
poison.

10  Shalt  obtain.] — Ver.  12.  '  Feres/  Literally,  '  shalt  bear.'  It  was  a
high  honour  to  be  mentioned  in  the  '  Fasti,'  or  annals  ;  and  the  erasure
of  a  name  from  them  was  a  mark  of  extreme  degradation.

11  Altars.] — Ver.  13.  Built  and  consecrated  by  Augustus  ;  the  passage
most  probably  refers  to  the  dedication  by  that  Emperor  of  the  altar  of
Concord.

12  He  has  added.] — Ver.  14.  Either  by  the  revival  of  festivals ;  or  by
the  institution  of  them  in  honour  of  the  gods  or  of  himself.

13  My  page.] — Ver.  19.  '  Pagina/  This  word  is  very  appropriate,
as  paged  books  had  been  recently  introduced  into  common  use  by  Julius
Caesar,  in  substitution  for  those  of  the  scroll  form.  ,

14  The  Clarian  God.]— Ver.  20.  The  oracle  of  the  Clarian  Apollo  was  at
Claros,  near  Colophon,  in  Asia  Minor.  According  to  Tacitus,  it  was  con-
sulted by  Germanicus,  to  which  circumstance  the  poet  probablv  here  alludes.

B    2


4  THE   FASTI  ;  [B.  lm  21—35.

have  felt  how  great  is  the  fluency  of  thy  polished  elo-
quence, wh^n  it  bore  civic  arms15  in  behalf  of  the  trembling
accused.  We  know,  too,  when  inclination  has  impelled  thee
towards  our  arts,16  how  copious  the  streams  of  thy  genius
now.  If  it  is  lawful  and  right,37  do  thou  a  poet  guide
the  reins  of  a  poet,  so  that  under  thy  auspices  the  whole  year
may  proceed  favourably.

When  the  founder 1S  of  the  city  divided  the  periods,  he
appointed  that  there  should  be  twice  five  months  in  his
year.  In  good  truth,  Romulus,  thou  wast  better  ac-
quainted with  arms  than  with  the  stars,  and  thy  greater
care  was  to  conquer  thy  neighbours.  Yet,  Csesar,  there  is
a  reason  which  may  have  influenced  him,  and  he  has  a  ground
on  which  he  may  defend  his  error.  That  period  which  is
sufficient  to  elapse  until  the  infant  can  come  forth  from
the  womb  of  its  mother,  he  determined  to  be  sufficient19  for
the  year.  During  so  many  months  after  the  funeral  of  her
husband,  does  the  wife  keep  up20  the  sad  emblems  of  mourn-

15  Civic  arms.'] — Ver.  22.  According  to  Suetonius  and  Dio  Cassius,
Germanicus  had  pleaded  in  public  with  considerable  success;  indeed,  every
young  man  of  the  patrician  class  who  pretended  to  any  talent  pleaded  for
his  friends.     Gower  translates  these  lines  thus —

1  For  we  did  taste  those  sweets  your  lips  let  fall,
When  you  did  plead  in  causes  criminall.'

16  Our  arts.] — Ver.  23.  Germanicus  made  a  Latin  version  of  the  astro-
nomic poem  of  Aratus,  which  is  still  extant,  and,  according  to  Suetonius,
he  wrote  several  Greek  comedies.

17  Right.] — Ver.  25.  '  Si  licet  et  fas  est/  This  expression  is  strictly
equivalent  to,  '  as  far  as  consists  with  laws,  human  and  divine,'  or,  '  with
law  and  good  conscience/

18  The  founder.] — Ver.  26.  Romulus.  On  the  year  of  Romulus,  see
Introduction.

19  To  be  sufficient.] — Ver.  34.  That  is  to  say,  ten  lunar  months.
Ovid  is  here  in  error  ;  as  ten  lunar  months  would  be  at  least  fourteen  days
less  than  the  ten  complete  months  of  the  original  Roman  year.

20  Keep  up.] — Ver.  36.  '  Sustinet  in  vidua  tristia  signa  domo/
*  Sustinet'  may  mean  either  that  she  '  wears'  the  mourning  garments,  or
that  she  '  keeps  up'  the  emblems  of  mourning,  such  as  the  cypress  branches
hung  up  in  the  house,  and  exclusion  from  society.  Numa  regulated  the  time
of  mourning  by  the  degree  of  kindred,  and  appointed  to  the  widow  the
longest  period,  that  of  ten  months,  because  that  was  the  length  of  the
original  year,  so  that  the  poet  has,  in  fact,  here  put  the  effect  for  the
cause.     Gower  thus  translates  these  lines —

1  That  time  the  widow,  from  the  fatal  burning

Of  her  dead  mate,  did  wear  the  signs  of  mourning/


B.  l.  36—43.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  5

ing  in  her  widowed  home.  This  then  the  care  of  Quirinus,
arrayed  in  the  regal  rohe,21  regarded  when  he  gave  to  the  rude
people22  the  ordinances  pertaining  to  the  year.23  The  first
month  was  that  of  Mars  ;24  the  second  that  of  Venus  ;  she,  the
origin M  of  his  family,  he,  the  sire  of  Romulus  himself.  The
third  month  was  so  called  from  the  aged,26  the  fourth  from
the  name  of  the  young;27  the  rest  that  follow  were  denoted
by  their  numerical  place.28     But  Numa29  passed  by  neither

21  Clad  in  the  regal  robe.] — Ver.  37.  *  Trabeati/  Literally,  '  clad  in
the  trabea.'  The  '  trabea'  was  a  '  toga/  or  robe,  ornamented  with  purple
horizontal  stripes,  and  was  worn  by  kings,  consuls,  and  augurs.  It  very
probably  derived  its  name  from  the  bars,  or  stripes,  '  trabes/  Servius
(Comm.iEn.  VII.,612)  mentions  three  kinds — one  wholly  of  purple,  sacred
to  the  gods ;  another  of  purple  and  white  ;  and  another  of  purple  and  red,
or  saffron,  worn  by  the  augurs.  The  purple  and  white  was  the  royal  robe,
and  is  assigned  especially  to  Romulus,  who  is  supposed  to  have  derived
the  use  of  it  from  the  Latin  kings.  It  was  worn  by  the  consuls  on
festivals  and  public  solemnities,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  opening  of  the
temple  of  Janus.  The  '  equites/  or  equestrian  order,  wore  it  on  public  fes-
tivals. The  emperors,  of  whom  Julius  Caesar  was  the  first  who  assumed  it,
wore  it  entirely  of  purple.

22  Rude  people.] — Ver.  38.  'Populis/  perhaps,  means  'tribes/  or
i  clans/  not  yet  fused  into  one  people.

23  Pertaining  to  the  year.] — Ver.  38.  This  may  mean  the  rules  and
ordinances  which  were  to  be  observed  during  the  succeeding  year  till  Ro-
mulus again  met  his  people,  or  the  general  regulations  regarding  the  year,
for  future  observance.     The  latter  is  the  preferable  sense.

24  Of  Mars.] — Ver.  39.     The  Roman  year  originally  began  in  March.

25  She,  the  origin.] — Ver.  40.  Venus,  the  mother  of  iEneas,  was  the
ancestress  of  Romulus ;  Mars  was  his  father.  The  poet  here  derives  the
name  of  March  from  '  Mars/  and  the  month  of  April  (anciently  written
*  Aphrilis')  from  '  Aphrodite/  the  Greek  name  of  Venus,  and  formed
from  a(f)pbg,  '  sea-foam/  whence  she  is  fabled  to  have  sprung.  He,  per-
haps, coined  this  very  far-fetched  derivation  to  please  the  Caesars,  who
were  said  to  have  sprung  from  Venus  through  iEneas.

26  From  the  aged.] — Ver.  41.  May — *  Maius/  or  <  Majus/  as  anciently
spelt,  he  derives  from  '  the  aged/  who  were  called  '  majores  natu.'  '  More
stricken, '  or  '  greater  in  age/  would  be  the  nearest  literal  translation.

27  The  name  of  the  young.] — Ver.  41.  June,  *  Junius/  he  derives  from
the  young,  who  were  called  '  juniores/  or  '  juvenes/

28  Numerical  place.] — Ver.  42.  July,  in  the  old  year  here  spoken  of,
was  '  Quintilis/  '  fifth  month.'  August  was  '  Sextilis/  '  sixth  month/  and
the  names  September,  October,  November,  and  December  are  respectively
compounds  of  the  numericals  Septem,  Octo,  Novem,  Decern,  seven,  eight,
nine,  and  ten.

29  Numa.]— Ver.  43.  Numa  Pompilius  was  a  Sabine  by  birth,  and  the


6  THE   EASTI  ;  [b.  i.  43-54.

Janus  nor  the  shades29  of  his  ancestors,  and  added  two  to  the
ancient  months.  That,  however,  you  may  not  be  ignorant  of
the  privileges30  of  the  various  days,  every  light-bearing  day31  has
not  the  same  office  ;  that  will  be  inauspicious  throughout  which
the  three  words32  are  not  spoken,  that  auspicious  throughout
which  it  will  be  allowable  for  suits  to.  be  pleaded  by  law.  But  do
not  suppose  that  its  own  privileges  last  throughout  the  whole
day  ;  that  which  now  will  be  auspicious,  in  the  morning  was
inauspicious.  For  as  soon  as  the  entrails  have  been  oiFered  to
the  Deity,  it  is  lawful  to  speak  upon  every  subject,33  and  the
Praetor,  honoured  by  his  office^  then  has  his  decrees  unob-
structed. There  is  also  the  day  on  which  it  is  the  usage  to
shut  the  people  within  the  polling  inclosures35  for  the  pur-
poses of  election.     There  is  also  the  market  day,36  which  always

second  king  of  Rome.  He  added  two  months,  January  and  February,
to  the  year  of  Romulus.

29  The  shades.] — Ver.  43.  '  Avitas  umbras.'  This  alludes  to  the  'feralia'
or  rites  to  appease  the  '  Manes,'  or  shades  of  the  dead,  described  in  the
second  book,  ver.  533,  and  following.

30  The  privileges.] — Ver.  45.  The  '  Jura'  were  the  distinctive  rights
or  privileges  given  to  certain  days  by  public  order.

31  Light-bearing  day.] — Ver.  46.  'Lucifer*  is  properly  'the  morning
star.'     As  introducing  the  day,  it  is  here  put  for  the  day  itself.

32  The  thr£e  words.] — Ver.  47.  On  the  subject  of  the  '  auspicious  and
inauspicious  days,'  and  the  '  three  words,'  ('  dies  fasti '  and  '  nefasti,'  and
the  'tria  verba,')  see  Introduction.

33  Speak  upon  every  subject.] — Ver.  51.  On  this  subject  see  Introduc-
tion, in  which  reference  is  also  made  to  the  office  of  the  Praetor,  alluded
to  in  the  next  line.

34  Honoured  by  his  office.] — Ver.  52.  '  Honoratus,'  '  Honored,'  or,  as
we  should  say,  '  Right  worshipful,  or  right  honourable,'  This  was  the
peculiar  title  of  the  '  Praetor  Urbanus,'  or  city  praetor.

35  The  polling  inclosures.'] — Ver.  53.  Allusion  is  here  made  to  the
1  Dies  Comitialis,'  or  day  of  Comitia,  for  making  laws  and  electing  ma-
gistrates. The  '  Septum'  was  a  boarded  enclosure  near  the  tribunal  of
the  Consul,  into  which  the  '  centurii '  went  in  their  proper  order  when
summoned  by  the  herald.  There  was  a  plank  called  '  pons,'  f  the  bridge,'
leading  to  the  '  Septum,'  over  which  each  century  passed  in  succession.

36  The  market  day.] — Ver.  54.  The  '  Nundinae,'  so  called  from
'  nonae'  '  ninth,'  '  dies'  '  day,'  returned  every  eighth  day,  according  to  our
reckoning ;  but,  according  to  the  Romans,  who,  in  counting,  included  both
extremes,  every  ninth  day,  whence  the  name.  On  this  day  the  country-
people  came  into  the  city  to  ,§£11  their  wares,  make  their  purchases,  hear
the  new  laws  read,  and  learn  the  news.  By  the  Hortensian  law,  the
'  Nundinae/  Cwhich  before  were  only  '  feriae/  or  '  holidays,')  were  made


b.  I.  54—68.]  Oil,    CALENDAK   OF    OVID.  7

returns  after  the  ninth  revolution.  The  care  of  Juno  claims
for  itself  the  Ausonian37  calends  ;3S  on  the  ides,  a  white
lamb,39  of  larger  growth,  falls  in  honour  of  Jupiter.  The
guardianship  of  the  Nones  is  without  the  care  of  a  Deity  ;40
of  all  these  (beware  that  you  be  not  deceived)  the  morrow
will  be  inauspicious.41  The  omen  is  derived  from  the  event
itself,42  for  on  those  days  Rome  sustained  sad  losses  in  adverse
warfare.  These  circumstances,  as  being  inherent  to  the  whole
of  the  festivals,  will  be  here  stated  by  me  once  for  all,  that  I
may  not  be  forced  to  interrupt  the  order  of  the  matters  treated
of  by  me.

Lo,  Germanicus !  Janus  announces  to  thee  a  prosperous
year,43  and  is  present  at  the  outset  in  my  verse.  0,  Janus,
thou  of  the  two  heads  !  origin  of  the  year  silently  rolling  on,
thou  who  alone  of  the  Gods  above,  dost  behold  thy  own  back,
be  thou  propitious  to  our  princes,44  through  whose  toils  both

1  fasti/  or  court  days,  that  the  country-people  then  in  town  might  have
their  lawsuits  determined.

37  Ausonian.'] — Ver.  35.  Ausoniawas  properly  the  land  of  the  Ausones,
in  the  southern  part  of  Italy ;  hut  the  poets  use  it  to  signify  the  whole
of  Italy.

38  Calends.] — Ver.  55.  For  an  account  of  the  Calends,  Ides,  and  Nones,
see  Introduction.  On  all  the  Calends,  the  Pontifex  minor  and  the  Regina
Sacrorum  sacrificed  to  Juno.

39  A  white  lamb.] — Ver.  56.  A  sacrifice  of  a  lamb,  called  the  '  ovis
idulis,'  was  offered  in  the  capitol  to  Jupiter,  on  the  Ides  of  each  month.
On  the  Ides  of  January,  the  victim  was  always  a  wether.

40  Is  without  the  care  of  a  Deity.] — Ver.  57.  He  means  that  on  those
days  there  are  no  sacrifices  to  any  of  the  Gods.

41  Will  be  inauspicious.] — Ver.  58.  '  Ater,'  literally  '  black.'  The
epithet  was  perhaps  derived  from  the  custom  of  recording  unlucky  days
by  black  marks  set  against  them,  as  being  '  carbone  notandi,'  '  to  be
marked  in  charcoal/

42  From  the  event  itself.] — Ver.  59.  The  Romans  had  i  prseliares'  and
'  non  praeliares,'  '  fighting'  and  '  non-fighting'  days.  The  days  after  the
calends,  nones,  and  ides,  were  '  non-praeliares/  as  they  believed  that  there
was  of  necessity  something  unlucky  in  the  idea  of  '  post,'  after.  So  a
public  calamity  on  any  particular  day  of  a  month  rendered  that  day '  ater,'
or  '  nefastus,'  in  every  month.  Many  of  their  most  memorable  defeats
happened  on  the  Nones,  which  thence  derived  their  inauspicious  cha-
racter.

43  Propitious  year.] — Ver.  63.  As  we  should  say  in  the  present  day,
4  wishes  you  a  happy  new  year.*

44  To  our  princes.] — Ver.  68.    The  princes  here  alluded  to  are  probably


8  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  i.  68—79.

the  fertile  earth  and  the  sea  enjoy  undisturbed  peace.  Be  thou,
0  Quirinus,45  propitious  to  thy  senators,  and  to  thy  people,  and
by  thy  nod  of  approbation  unlock  the  white  temples.46  A
favourable  day  is  dawning,  be  ye  propitious  both  in  your  lan-
guage47 and  in  your  feelings  ;  now  on  the  auspicious  day  must
auspicious  language  be  used.  Let  our  ears  be  relieved  from
strife,  and  forthwith  let  maddening  discords  be  far  away ;  and
thou  envious  tongue,  postpone  thy  occupation.  Do  you  perceive
how  the  sky  is  gleaming  with  the  perfume-bearing  fires,48  and
how  the  Cilician  ear49  is  crackling50  on  the  kindled  hearths  ?  The
flame  with  its  brightness  irradiates  the  gold  of  the  temples,  and
diffuses  its  tremulous  beam  throughout  the  highest  part  of  the
building.   With  unpolluted  garments  they  go51  to  the  Tarpeian

Tiberius  and  Germanicus.  He  may  perhaps  allude  to  the  victory  of
Germanicus  over  the  Catti,  Cherusci  and  other  German  tribes,  a.  u.  c.
770.

45  O  Quirinus.] — Ver.  69.  The  reading  is  'Quirini/  but  I  have
adopted  Gierig's  suggestion,  'Quirine.'  The  poet  is  addressing  Janus,
one  of  whose  names  was  Quirinus,  and  would  not  ask  him  to  '  be  propitious
to  his  own  people.'  Romulus  also  was  called  Quirinus,  but  it  does  not
seem  likely  that  allusion  is  here  made  to  him.

46  White  temples."]—  Ver.  70.  Either  white,  as  being  built  of  marble,
or  whitened  in  appearance  by  the  new  white  clothes  of  the  worshippers.
The  temple  of  Janus  only  remained  open  during  war ;  but  the  poet  must
not  be  understood  as  wishing  it  to  be  opened  for  that  reason ;  but  only
that  the  gates  of  all  the  temples  being  open  for  sacrifice,  the  gate  of  that
too  might  be  opened  for  such  a  purpose.  The  Roman  doors  were  fastened
with  a  chain,  at  the  end  of  which  the  i  sera,'  or  bolt,  was  fixed.  When
the  door  was  shut  the  bolt  was  fastened  in  the  door-post ;  when  open  it
was  drawn  back.

47  In  your  language."] — Ver.  71.  'Favete  Unguis/  'be  propitious  in
your  language/  was  an  usual  injunction  at  sacrifices,  as  a  word  of  ill  omen
spoken  during  their  celebration  on  the  calends  of  January,  was  considered
to  have  an  influence  on  the  whole  year.

48  Perfume-hearing  fires.] — Ver.  75.  Frankincense,  cinnamon,  saffron,
and  cassia,  used  to  be  thrown  on  the  altars  during  the  time  of  sacrifice.

49  The  Cilician  ear.] — Ver.  76.  '  Spica  Cilissa '  means  the  filaments  of
saffron  from  Mount  Corycus,  in  Cilicia.

50  Is  crackling.] — Ver.  76.  When  the  saffron  was  good,  according  to
Pliny  the  Elder,  it  crackled  while  burning.  Probably  from  this,  as  from
the  crackling  of  laurel  (which  was  frequently  burnt  for  the  purpose),
omens  were  derived

51  .They  go.] — Ver  79.  On  the  calends  of  January  the  new  consuls,
accompanied  by  the  senate  and  the  people,  went  in  procession  to  the
Capitolium,  to  solicit  the  protection  of  Jupiter  for  the  state.


B.  I.  79—92.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF    OTID.  9

heights,52  and  the  people  itself  harmonizes  by  the  colour  of
its  dress  with  the  festival.  And  now  the  new  fasces53  precede,
the  new  purple54  glistens,  and  the  much  distinguished  chair  of
ivory55  is  sensible  of  new  weights.  The  steers  unacquainted  with
toil,"  which  the  Faliscan  herbage  has  fed  on  its  own  fields,
offer56  their  necks  to  the  blow.  Jupiter,  when  he  looks  from
his  height  over  the  whole  earth,  has  nothing  which  he  can
behold  but  that  which  is  under  Roman  sway.  Hail !  joyous
day,  and  ever  return  more  happy,  worthy  to  be  honoured
by  a  people  all-powerful  throughout  the  world.  But,  O
Janus,  thou  of  the  double  form,  what  kind  of  deity  shall
I  pronounce  thee  to  be?  for  Greece  has  no  divinity  cor-
responding to  thee.57  Do  thou,  at  the  same  time,  declare  the
reason  why  thou  alone  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  lookest

52  The  Tarpeian  heights.'] — Yer.  79.  The  capitolian  hill,  on  which  the
Capitol,  or  temple  of  Jupiter,  was  erected,  was  originally  called  '  Satur-
nius,'  in  honour  of  Saturn,  It  was  afterwards  called  '  Tarpeius,'  from  the
vestal  virgin  Tarpeia.  whose  fate  is  narrated  below,  line  261,  and  was  the
quarter  allotted  to  the  Sabines  after  they  were  incorporated  with  the
people.  The  '  arx/  properly  speaking,  was  the  highest  of  the  Roman
hills,  and  the  inferior  part  of  the  declivity  was  the  'CapitoliunV  or  'mons
Tarpeius/  The  latter  name  was  more  especially  applied  to  a  steep  rock
on  one  side,  whence  criminals  were  thrown,

53  The  new  'fasces.'] — Ver.  81.  The  'fasces'  were  a  bundle  of  rods
tied  together,  with  an  axe  inserted  in  the  middle.  They  were  borne  by
the  lictors,  as  the  insignia  of  the  consular  dignity.

54  The  new  purple.] — Ver.  81.     The  '  prsetexta/  or  consular  robe.

55  Chair  of  ivory.] — Ver.  82.  The  'sella  curulis,'  wras  a  seat  inlaid
with  ivory,  and  at  first  used  only  by  the  kings,  but  afterwards  by  the
consuls,  praetors,  censors,  and  the  higher  sediles,  when  employed  in  their
official  capacity.  These  officers  were  from  this  circumstance  named
1  curule/  The  name  of  the  chair  was  perhaps  derived  from  its  being
carried  on  the  '  currus/  or  '  chariot/  to  be  at  hand  when  required  by  the
officer  in  his  official  capacity,  either  in  the  sena|^-house,  or  at  the  tribunal
of  justice.  It  was  borrowed  from  the  Tuscans,  and  was  in  the  form  of
the  letter  X,  for  the  convenience  of  folding  up.

56  Offer.] — Ver.  83.  As  though  of  their  own  accord;  for  if  the  victim
struggled,  it  was  not  considered  to  be  an  appropriate  offering  to  the  god.
The  Falisci  were  a  people  of  Etruria :  the  fertility  of  the  soil  rendered
their  pastures  greatly  esteemed,  and  victims  for  sacrifice  were  sought  from
their  fields.  Their  country  was  also  famous  for  a  stream  which  imparted
extreme  whiteness  to  the  oxen  that  drank  of  it,

67  No  divinity  corresponding  to  thee.] — Ver.  90.  Janus  was  probably
the  same  deity  as  '  Dianus,'  who  represented  the  sun.  If  so,  we  must  only
understand  by  this,  that  the  Greeks  had  no  god  corresponding  to  him  in
form  and  attributes.


10  THE    FASTI;  [b.  I.  92— 110.

upon58  that  which  is  behind  thee,  and  that  which  is  before
thee  at  the  same  time.  While  I  was  revolving  these  things
in  my  mind,  my  tablets59  being  taken  in  hand,  the  house
seemed  to  be  brighter  than  it  was  before.  Then  the  divine
Janus,  wondrous  with  his  double  form,  suddenly  presented
his  two-fold  features  to  my  eyes.  I  was  struck  with  amaze-
ment, and  felt  my  hair  stiffen  with  terror,  and  my  breast  was
frozen  with  a  sudden  chill.  He,  holding  in  his  right  hand
a  staff,  and  in  his  left  a  key,60  uttered  these  accents  to  me  from
the  mouth  of  his  front  face,  "  Having  laid  aside  thy  terror,
thou  poet,  labouring  at  the  history  of  the  days,  learn  what
thou  dost  ask,  and  in  thy  mind  understand  my  words.  The
ancients  (for  I  am  a  being  of  the  olden  time)  called  me
Chaos  ;61 — behold,  of  how  remote  a  period  I  shall  sing  the
transactions.  This  air,  full  of  light,  and  the  other  three
elementary  bodies  which  remain,  fire,  the  waters,  and  the
earth,  were  one  confused  heap.  When  once  this  mass  was
broken  up  by  the  discord  of  its  component  parts,  and,
dissolving,  passed  away  into  new  abodes,  flame  soared  on
high,  the  nearer  place  received  the  air,  and  the  earth  and  sea
settled  in  a  middle  position.     Then  I,  who  had  been  but  a

58  Thou  lookest  upon,  #c] — Ver.  92,  93.    Gower  translates  these  lines,

'  Rehearse  the  reason  why  thou  hast  such  odds,
Of  looking  both  ways  more  than  all  the  gods.'

59  My  tablets.] — Ver.  93.  The  '  tabulse/  or  '  tabellae/  were  thin  pieces
of  wood,  usually  of  an  oblong  shape,  covered  over  with  wax,  upon  which
the  ancients  wrote  with  the  '  stylus/  or  'pen'  of  steel.

60  In  his  left  a  key.'] — Ver.  99.  The  staft  and  key  were  the  usual
badges  of  office  of  the  '  janitores,'  or  porters,  among  the  Romans.  Massey
thus  renders  these  lines —

1  In  his  right  hand  a  long  battoon  I  see,
And  in  hi0left  he  grasps  a  pond'rous  key/

61  Called  me  Chaos.'] — Ver.  103.  The  name  Chaos  is  derived  either
from  x^w>  •  to  gape/  or  %uo>,  '  to  pour/  By  it  was  signified  that  con-
fused heap  of  matter  which  the  ancients  in  general  believed  to  have  existed
from  all  eternity.     Ovid,  Metam.  book  i.  ver.  6,  7,  says,

'  Unus  erat  toto  naturae  vultus  in  orbe
Quern  dixere  Chaos  :  rudis  indigestaque  moles/

1  There  was  but  one  aspect  of  nature  throughout  the  whole  world,  which
they  called  chaos  :  an  unwrought  and  crude  mass/  This,  in  their  idea,  the
supreme  power  reduced  to  the  state  of  order  and  harmony  which  prevails
in  the  visible  world.


B.  I.  Ill— 128.]  OB,    CALENDAR.    OE    OVID.  11

mass  and  bulk  without  form,  passed  into  a  shape  and  limbs
befitting  a  god.  And  even  now,  in  me  that  part  which  is
before,  and  that  which  is  behind,  appears  to  be  the  same,
a  slight  mark  of  my  former  shapeless  figure.  Hear,  too,
what  is  another  cause  of  the  form  thus  inquired  after  by
thee,  that  thou  mayest  at  the  same  time  learn  this  and
my  office.  Whatever  thou  beholdest  around  thee,  the  sky,
the  sea,  the  air/2  the  earth,  all  these  have  been  shut  up
and  are  opened  by  my  hand.  In  my  power  alone  is  the
guardianship  of  the  vast  universe,  and  the  prerogative  of
turning  the  hinge  is  entirely  my  own.  When  it  has  been  my
pleasure  to  send  forth  Peace63  from  her  tranquil  habitation,
then  at  liberty  she  treads  her  paths  unobstructed  by  the
restraints  of  war.  The  whole  world  would  be  thrown  into
confusion  in  deadly  bloodshed,  did  not  my  rigid  bolts  confine
imprisoned  warfare.  Together  with  the  gentle  seasons04  I  pre-
side over  the  portals  of  Heaven  ;  through  my  agency  Jupiter
himself  doth  pass65  and  repass.  Thence  am  I  called  Janus,66
to  whom,  when  the  priest  lays  on  the  altar  the  offering  cake

62  l  The  air*"] — Ver.  117.  '  Nubila'  generally  means  'clouds,'  'mist,'
' cloudy  sky.'     Here,  however,  it  means  the  'air,'  or  'aether.'

63  To  send  forth  Peace. ~\ — Ver.  121.  He  here  personifies  Peace  and
War,  and  represents  them  as  committed  to  the  custody  of  Janus.  Some
have  supposed  that  the  story  of  Janus  is  the  corruption  of  a  tradition  that
an  Italian  chief  named  Janus  constructed  doors  and  locks  for  the  protec-
tion of  the  person  and  of  property,  and  that  from  him  doors  received  the
name  of  'januae.'

64  The  gentle  seasons.] — Ver.  125.  The  '  seasons/  or  '  hours,'  are  men-
tioned by  Hesiod,  Theog.  903,  as  three  goddesses,  the  daughters  of
Jupiter  or  Zeus,  and  Themis.  He  calls  them  Eunomia  (good  order),
Dike  (justice),  and  Eirene  (peace),  and  represents  them  as  watching
over  the  affairs  of  men.  They  appear  to  have  been  originally  considered
as  the  presidents  of  the  three  seasons,  into  which  the  ancient  Greeks
divided  the  year.  The  day  being  similarly  divided,  they  were  regarded  as
presiding  over  its  parts  also ;  and,  when  it  was  afterwards  divided  into
hours,  these  also  were  placed  under  their  charge,  and  named  from  them.
They  presided  over  law,  peace,  and  justice,  and  were  the  guardians  of
order  and  harmony  among  mankind.

65  Jupiter  himself  doth  pass.] — Ver.  126.  It  has  been  suggested,  and
with  some  probability,  that  allusion  is  here  made  to  the  etymology  of  his
name,  as  Cicero  derives  the  name  '  Janus,  or  '  Eanus,'  from  '  Eundo,'  the
act  of  going  or  passing. — De  Nat.  Deor.  Book  2.

66  Thence  am  I  called  Janus.] — Ver.  127.  Either  from  the  root  men-
tioned in  the  last  note,  or  from  '  janua,'  a  'door'  or  '  gate.'


12  THE   FASTI ;  [B.  i.  128—141.

of  bread  corn67  and  the  spelt  mixed  with  salt,— (thou  wilt
smile  at  my  epithets,)  for  I,  the  same  deity,  am  at  one  time
called  Patulcius,68  and  at  another  time  Clusius,69  by  the
lips  of  the  sacrificer.  In  good  truth,  that  rude  anti-
quity wished  by  the  changes  of  my  name  to  express  my
different  duties.  My  power  has  now  been  related.  Next
learn  the  reason  of  my  shape,  although  thou  already  per-
ceivest  it,  in  some  degree,  at  least,  from  what  I  have  already
said.  Every  gate  has  two  fronts,  one  on  either  side,  of  which
the  one  looks  out  upon  the  people,  but  the  othe*  looks  inward
upon  the  household  shrine;70  and  as  the  gate-keeper  among
you  mortals,  sitting  near  the  threshold  of  the  front  of  the
building,  sees  both  the  goings  out  and  the  comings  in,  so  do  I,
the  door-keeper  of  the  vestibule  of  heaven,  at  the  same  time
look  forth  upon  the  regions  of  the  east  and  the  west.71  Thou
seeest  the  faces  of  Hecate72  turned  in  three  directions,  that

67  Cake  of  bread  corn.]— Ver.  127,  128.  l  Libum  Cereale.'  Lite-
rally, 'the  cake  pertaining  to  Ceres.'  Ceres  was  the  goddess  of  corn
and  husbandry,  the  daughter  of  Saturn  and  Ops,  and  the  sister  of  Jupiter.
She  was  especially  worshipped  in  Sicily,  and  at  Eleusis,  in  Attica,  where
the  Eleusianian  mysteries  were  celebrated.  The  '  libum,'  or  cake,  here
mentioned,  was  of  a  peculiar  kind,  offered  exclusively  to  Janus,  and  thence
called  '  Janual.'  The  spelt,  mixed  with  salt,  was  coarsely  ground,  and
then  strewed  over  the  victim.

68  Patulcius.] — Ver.  129.  From  the  verb  '  pateo,  patere,'  '  to  he
open.'

69  At  another  time  Clusius.] — Ver.  130.  From  the  verb  '  claudo,
claudere,  clausus,'  '  to  shut.'

70  The  household  shrine.] — Ver.  136.  Literally  '  thelar,'  or,  (the  plural
being  denoted  by  the  singular),  '  the  lares.'  It  may  either  mean  literally
the  spot  in  the  house  where  the  *  lar,'  or  *  household  god, '  stood ;  or,
figuratively,  '  the  family,'  as  opposed  to  the  '  populus,'  the  people,  outside.
These  little  idols  were  kept  near  the  hearth,  and  in  the  i  lararium'  (here
probably  referred  to,)  which  was  a  recess  formed  for  that  purpose,  and
in  which  prayers  were  offered  up  by  the  Romans  on  rising  in  the  morning.

71  East  and  the  west.] — Ver.  140.  ■  Eoas  partes  Hesperiasque.'  Literally
'  the  parts  pertaining  to  the  eastern  star  and  the  western  star.'

72  The  faces  of  Hecate.] — Ver.  141.  This  goddess,  who  was  the  patro-
ness of  magic,  is  sometimes  confounded  with  Diana.  She  was  in-
voked as  potent  to  avert  evil,  and  was  regarded  as  a  beneficent  deity.
Her  triple  statues  were  set  up  before  houses  and  in  places  where  three
ways  met ;  hence  the  name  *  Trivia,'  one  of  her  titles.  This  office  was
conferred  on  her  by  reason  of  a  tradition,  that  when  an  infant  she  was
exposed  by  her  mother  at  such  a  spot.  According  to  Hesiod,  in  his
Theogony,  she  was  the  daughter  of  Cceus  and  Phcebe.


B>  !.  141—166.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  13

slie  may  watch  the  cross  roads  where  they  are  cut  into  three
pathways ;  to  me,  too,  it  is  given,  in  order  that  I  may  not
lose  time  in  the  bending  of  my  neck,  to  look  two  ways  without
moving  my  body."  He  had  said  thus  far,  and  by  his  coun-
tenance acknowledged  that  he  would  not  be  difficult  to  be
moved  by  me,  if  I  wished  to  make  further  inquiries.  I  took
courage,  and,  undismayed,  gave  thanks  to  the  deity,  and
looking  upon  the  ground,  spoke  a  few  words.  "  Say,  now,
I  pray  thee,  why  the  new  year  begins  with  the  frost  of  winter,
which  might  better  have  been  begun  in  the  spring  ?  Then
all  things  are  blooming,  then  is  the  youthful  season  of  the
year,  and  the  young  bud  is  swelling  from  the  teeming-
shoot.  Then  the  tree  is  covered  with  the  newly  formed
leaves,  the  corn  blade  shoots  from  the  seed  to  the  surface  of
the  ground;  the  birds,  with  their  melodies,  soothe  the  genial  air,
and  the  flocks  gambol  and  disport  in  the  meadows.  Then  is
the  sunshine  refreshing ;  and  the  stranger  swallow73  comes
forth,  and  builds  her  fabric  of  clay  beneath  the  lofty  rafter.
Then,  too,  is  the  field  subjected  to  cultivation,74  and  re-
newed by  the  plough.  This,  in  justice,  should  have  been
called  the  opening  of  the  year."  I  had  made  my  inquiry  in
many  words;  he  causing  no  delay  by  many,  thus  compressed
his  words  into  two  hues.  "  The  winter  solstice75  is  the  first  day
of  the  new,  and  the  last  of  the  old  sun ;  Phoebus76  and  the
year  take  the  same  period  for  commencement."  After  these
things  I  was  wondering,  and  inquired  why  the  first  day  was
not  exempt  from  the  litigation  of  the  courts  P     "  Understand

73  The  stranger  swallow.'] — Ver.157.  The  poet  here  refers  to  the  martin
or  window  swallow,  which  builds  in  the  corner  of  windows,  under  roofs,  or
against  rockyplaces,  and  returns  year'  after  year  to  the  situation  it  has  once
adopted,  only  repairing  its  nest.  It  mixes  earth  and  straw,  and  after
moistening  it  with  its  mouth,  sticks  it  against  the  wall  as  a  foundation
for  its  nest.  At  noon  it  ceases  work,  that  the  portion  built  may  dry  by
next  morning,  and  in  about  a  fortnight  its  nest  is  completed.

74  Subjected  to  cultivation.]— Ver.  159.  *  Patitur,'  literally  '  suffers,'
or  l  endures.'  This  term  is  appropriately  used ;  for  the  ground,  before
this  period,  has  been  so  hard,  that  it  would  not,  literally  speaking,  suffer
or  endure  cultivation.  Now,  however,  the  crumbling  soil  is  ready  to  admit
the  plough  and  spade.

75  The  winter  solstice.] — Ver.  163.  '  Bruma.'  The  winter  solstice  is
the  time  when  the  sun  has  completed  his  progress  northward  on  the
ecliptic,  and  begins  to  return.

78  Phoebus.]— Ver.  164.  Phoebus,  or  i  the  shining/  was  one  of  the
titles  of  Apollo,  the  god  of  the  sun.

77  Litigation  of  the  courts.]— Ver.  165.  See  Introduction.


14  THE   FASTI;  [b.  i.  166-181.

the  reason/'  says  Janus  ;  "  I  have  assigned  the  very  earliest
hours  of  the  year  for  the  transaction  of  business,  lest  the
whole  year  might  be  spent  in  idleness  from  a  bad  precedent.
For  the  same  reason,  each  person  takes  a  slight  taste  of  his
calling  by  doing  something  on  that  day,  but  does  no  more
than  merely  give  evidence  of  his  ordinary  employment.78
After  that  I  asked,  "Why,  although  I  am  propitiating  the
power  of  other  gods,  do  I,  0  Janus,  present  the  frankincense
and  the  wine  to  thee,  the  first  of  all  Vs  "  That  by  means  of
me,79  who  guard  the  threshold,  thou  mayst  have,"  says  he,
"  access  towards  whatever  deities  thou  mayst  wish."  "But  why
are  congratulatory  expressions80  uttered  in  thy  calends,  and  why
do  we  then  give  and  receive  in  return  good  wishes  ?"  Then
the  god,  leaning  on  the  staff  which  his  right  hand  bore,  an-
swers, "Omens  of  the  future  are  wont  to  be  derived  from
beginnings.  To  the  word  first  spoken,  ye  mortals,  turn  your
timid  ears  :  and  the  augur81  observes  the  bird  that  is  first
seen  by  him.     Then  the  temples  and  the  ears  of  the  gods

78  Evidence  of  his  ordinary  employment.] — Ver.  170.  It  was  usual  with
the  Romans  for  all  classes  of  people  in  the  calends  of  January,  as  an  omen
of  future  prosperity  and  industry,  and  not  for  lucre,  to  practise  a  little  at
their  respective  callings.  The  mechanic  did  some  trifling  job,  the  farmer
a  little  work  in  the  fields,  and  the  pleader  exercised  his  lungs  a  little  in
the  forum.

79  By  means  of  me.] — Ver.  173.  Fabius  Pictor,  an  ancient  Roman  his-
torian, says  that  the  reason  was,  because  Janus  first  taught  the  Latins  to
use  spelt,  '  farra,'  and  wine  in  sacrifice.  Macrobius  says  it  was  because
he  first  erected  temples  to  the  gods  in  Italy.

80  Congratulatory  expressions.] — Ver.  175.  It  was  the  Roman  custom
on  the  calends  of  January  to  express  good  wishes  and  anxious  prayers  for
the  safety  of  friends.  Our  practice  of  wishing  each  other  a  happy  new
year,  and  the  French  custom  of  making  presents  on  that  day,  are,  no
doubt,  derived  from  this  origin.

81  The  augur.] — Ver.  180.  The  augur,  or  diviner  by  birds,  derived  his
name  from  '  avis,'  a  '  bird,'  and  '  gero,'  to  '  carry/  or  from  some  unknown
Etrurian  origin.  According  to  Plutarch,  in  his  life  of  Romulus,  they
were  anciently  called  '  auspices,'  and  are  supposed  to  have  been  three  in
number,  one  for  each  tribe.  They  were  confirmed  in  their  office  by
Numa,  and  a  fourth  was  afterwards  added,  probably  by  Servius  Tullius,
when  he  divided  the  city  into  four  tribes.  They  derived  the  '  signa,'  or
*  tokens  of  futurity,'  from  five  sources — celestial  phenomena,  (such  as
thunder  and  lightning), — the  singing  and  flight  of  birds, — the  quantity  eaten
by  the  sacred  chickens, — quadrupeds, — and  from  extraordinary  accidents
and  casualties,  called  '  dirse,  or  '  dira.'  Among  the  birds  which  gave  omens
by  the  voice,  '  oscines,'  were  the  raven,  the  crow,  the  cock,  the  owl,  &c.
Those  giving  omens  by  flight,  ■  prsepetes,'  were  the  eagle,  vulture,  &c.


B.  i.  181—195.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OTTD.  15

are  open,  no  tongue  utters  unheeded  prayers,  and  all  that
is  said  has  its  due  weight."  Janus  had  concluded,  and  I
made  no  long  silence,  but  with  my  words  followed  close
on  his  last  accents.  "What  means,5'  said  I,  "the  palm-
date,  and  the  shrivelled  dried  fig,  and  the  white  honey  given
as  a  present,82  in  the  snow-white  jar?5'83  i( A  fair  omen,"
said  he,  "  is  the  reason,  that  the  like  grateful  flavour  may
attend  upon  our  transactions,  and  that  the  year  may  in
sweetness  go  through  the  course  which  it  has  begun.55  "  I
see,55  said  I,  "why  sweets  are  given  as  presents:  add  the
meaning  of  the  little  coins4  also  given,  that  no  part  of  thy  fes-
tival may  be  imperfectly  understood  by  me.55  He  smiled  and
said,  "  Oh  !  how  little  are  the  habits  of  thy  own  times  known
to  thee,  who  canst  suppose  that  honey  is  sweeter  than  the
acquisition  of  money.  Scarcely  did  I  see  any  one,  even  when
Saturn  reigned, S5  to  whose  spirit  gain  was  not  sweet.     With

82  Given  as  a  present.] — Ver.  186.  These  new  year's  gifts  were  called
'  strenae.'  They  consisted  of  fruit,  occasionally  covered  with  gold-leaf,
honey,  and  sometimes  a  trifling  piece  of  coin.  The  fig  derived  its  name
'  carica,'  from  Caria,  now  Anatolia,  in  Asia  Minor.

83  In  the  snow-white  jar.] — Ver.  186.  The  best  honey  was  white,
and  was  especially  given  on  this  day  in  a  white  jar,  as  bearing  the  best
omen.  Honey  was  more  frequently  yellow,  and  the  '  cadus,'  or  jar,  of
red  earthenware,  according  to  Martial,  i.  56.  10.  Pliny  tells  us  that
a  white  '  cadus '  was  sometimes  made  from  a  kind  of  whitish  stone.
Gower  renders  these  lines,

1  What  means  dry  figs  and  palrn-fruit  I  wot  not,
And  honey  offered  in  a  fine  white  pot/

84  The  little  coin.] — Ver.  189.  The  'stips'  was  a  trifling  coin  of  the
smallest  value,  given  frequently  to  beggars,  and  sent  as  a  new  year's
present,  merely  by  way  of  good  omen,  and  not  for  any  intrinsic  value.  The
nominative  '  stips'  does  not  occur  in  any  of  the  Latin  classics.  According
to  Suetonius,  book  v.  ch.  42,  Augustus  condescended  to  take  new  year's
gifts,  and  to  receive  the  '  stips,'  and  in  such  quantities  that  his  new  year's
presents  must  have  been  not  only  of  good  omen,  but  of  great  value.  '  He
proclaimed  that  he  too  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  would  receive  new
year's  gifts  (strenae),  and  stood  in  the  vestibule  of  the  temples  on  the
calends  of  January,  to  receive  the  coin  (stipes),  which  a  crowd  of  all
classes  showered  before  him  from  their  hands  and  laps.'  Queen  Eliza-
beth and  James  the  First,  and  others  of  our  sovereigns,  expected  a
new  year's  gift  (generally  a  piece  of  plate)  from  each  member  of  the
nobility,  and  gave  a  present  in  return,  though  the  balance  of  gain  was
generally  on  the  side  of  the  sovereign.

85  When  Saturn  reigned.] — Ver.  193.  Saturn,  the  god  of  Time,  was
the  son  of  Uranus  and  Terra,  or  Vesta.     When  dethroned  by  his  son


16  THE   FASTI;  [b.  I.  195— 209.

time,  increased  that  love  of  acquiring,  which  is  now  at  its
height,  and  has  scarcely  a  further  point  to  which  it  can  proceed.
Wealth  now  is  more  valued  than  in  the  years  of  the  olden
time,  while  the  people  still  were  poor,  while  Rome  was  but
newly  built,  while  a  little  cottage  received  Quirinus,86  the
begotten  of  Mars,  and  the  sedge  of  the  stream  afforded
him  a  scanty  couch.  In  those  times  scarcely  could  Jupi-
ter stand  at  full  length  in  his  narrow  temple,87  and  in
his  right  hand  was  a  thunderbolt  of  clay.83  Then  used
they  to  adorn  the  capitol  with  boughs,  which  now  they  adorn
with  gems;89  and  the  senator  himself  used  to  tend  his  own
sheep.  Nor  was  it  then  reckoned  a  disgrace  to  have  enjoyed
undisturbed  slumber  on  the  bed  of  straw,  and  to  have  heaped
the  hay  as  a  pillow  under  one's  head.  The  consul  used  to
give  laws  to  the  people,  the  plough  being  but  just  laid
aside,  and  the  possession  of  a  small  ingot  of  silver  was
deemed   a  crime.90      But   after    the   Fortune  of   this    place

Jupiter,  he  fled  into  Italy,  and  gave  name  toLatium,  because  he  was  con-
cealed there,  from  *  lateo,'  to  lie  hid.  Janus,  who  was  the  king  of  Etruria
at  the  time,  received  him  hospitably,  and  Saturn  afterwards  reigned  on
the  Latian  side  of  the  Tiber.  Under  Saturn  was  the  golden  age,  which,
as  Janus  here  tells  us,  was  not  eutirely  proof  against  the  charms  of  lucre.

86  Quirinus.] — "Ver.  199.  This  was  a  name  of  Romulus,  as  well  as  an
epithet  of  Janus.  According  to  Macrobius,  in  his  Saturnalia,  it  was  de-
rived from  the  Sabine  word  *  curis/  '  a  spear,'  and  signified  one  skilled
in  the  use  of  that  weapon.

87  In  his  narrow  temple.] — Ver.  201.  Either  the  temple  of  Jupiter
Feretrius,  built  by  Romulus  on  the  Capitol,  which  was  not  sixteen  feet
long,  or  that  built  by  Numa.  However,  the  sitting  posture  was  fre-
quently assigned  to  the  god  by  the  taste  of  the  artist,  and  the  reverential
feelings  of  the  worshippers,  a3  an  attitude  of  repose  and  majestic  dignity,
irrespectively  of  the  limits  of  the  temple.

88  A  thunderbolt  of  clay,] — Ver.  202.  '  Fictile/  of  baked  clay.  In  the
early  times  the  images  of  the  gods  were  of  baked  clay.  Tarquinius
Priscus  employed  Etrurian  artists  to  make  a  Jupiter  of  pottery  for  the
Capitolium ;  and  the  four-horse  chariot,  which  was  placed  on  the  Capi-
toline  Temple  when  first  built,  was  of  baked  clay.

89  They  adorn  with  gems.] — Ver.  203.  Augustus,  at  one  time,  presented
sixteen  thousand  pounds  weight  of  gold  and  jewels  of  an  enormous  value
to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Capitolinus.

90  A  crime.]  —  Ver.  208.  There  was  an  ancient  law  which  pro-
hibited the  possession  by  the  same  person  of  more  than  five  pounds  of
silver.  Fahricius,  the  censor,  in  the  year  a.u.c  478,  expelled  from  the
senate  Cornelius  Kufinus,  who  had  been  dictator  and  twice  consul,  for
having  ten  pounds'  weight  of  silver  plate  in  his  possession.


B.I.  209—224.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  17

raised  on  high  her  head,  and  Rome  reached  with  her  height91
to  the  gods  above,  both  wealth  increased  and  the  maddening
lust  for  wealth;  and  although  men  possess  very  much  they  still
desire  more.  They  struggle  to  acquire,  in  order  that  they  may
lavish  ;  and  then  to  obtain  again9-  that  which  they  have  la-
vished ;  and  the  very  changes,  from  wealth  to  poverty,  afford
nourishment  to  their  vices.  So  with  those  whose  stomach  has
swelled  with  the  suffusion  of  water,  the  more  that  water  that
has  been  drunk,  the  more  is  it  thirsted  for.93  Money  now  is
the  only  thing  prized  ;94  wealth95  alone  gives  honours  ;  wealth
gives  friendships  :  the  poor  man  every  where  lies  prostrate.
But  thou  askest  me  why  the  omen  of  the  small  coin  is  deemed
desirable,  and  why  the  ancient  pieces  of  brass96  are  welcome
to  our  hands.  In  olden  times  they  used  to  give  pieces  of
brass ;  at  the  present  day  there  is  a  better  omen  in  gold,  and
the  ancient  coinage  beaten  out  of  the  field,  yields  to  the
new.  Us  deities,  too,  though  we  approve  of  the  temples  of
ancient  fashion,  golden  ones  please  right  well ;  that  grandeur

91  Reached  with  her  height.'] — Ver.  209,  210.  These  two  lines  are  thus
translated  by  Gower : —

1  But  when  proud  fate  this  place's  head  had  reared,
And  Rome's  top-gallant  near  the  gods  appeared.'

92  To  obtain  again.'] — Ver.  213.  This  reminds  us  of  the  old  proverb,
which  tells  greedy  people  that  'they  cannot  both  eat  their  cake  and  have  it.'

93  Is  thirsted  for.] — Ver.  216.  The  common  comparison  of  the  state  of
the  avaricious  man  to  that  of  a  person  afflicted  with  the  dropsy.

94  Money  now  is  the  only  thing  prized.] — Ver.  217.  'In  pretio  pre-
tium  est,'  equivalent  to  our  common  expression,  '  Money  only  makes  the
man.'

95  Wealth.] — Ver.  217.  '  Census  '  literally  means  the  valuation  on  oath
of  the  present  value  of  one's  possessions  for  the  purposes  of  taxation — in
fact,  the  Roman  return  for  the  income-tax.  Hence  it  came  to  signify  the
property  itself.  Perhaps  it  might  be  rendered  by  '  the  reputation  of  wealth.'

96  Ancient  pieces  of  brass.] — Ver.  220.  The  ancient  pieces  of  brass
were  welcome  to  the  hands  of  Romans,  as  commemorating  the  arrival  of
Saturn  in  Italy,  by  the  prow  of  a  ship  on  the  reverse  of  the  coin.  These
pieces  were,  doubtless,  the  large  and  heavy  coins  of  copper,  or  rather,
bronze,  and  hence  termed  the  as  or  ass,  which  originally  weighed  1  lb.,
but  were  gradually  reduced  till  they  scarcely  exceeded  1  oz.  in  weight.
The  ases  of  the  early  kings  are  supposed  to  have  consisted  merely  of  square
ingots  of  bronze  of  1  lb.  weight  without  impress,  and  Servius  Tullius  is
stated  by  Pliny,  to  have  first  placed  the  impress  of  an  ox  on  them.  In
the  early  times  of  the  republic,  they  were  coined  in  a  circular  form,  with
the  types  alluded  to  by  Ovid.  The  heaviest  that  have  reached  us  are  about
9|  oz.  in  weight.  These  massive  coins  were  distinguished  by  the  Romans
from  the  smaller  and  more  modern  money,  by  the  title  cera  gravia,  * heavy

C


18  THE   PASTI;  [b.  i.  224—242.

is  suited  to  a  divinity.  We  praise  the  olden  times,  but  adopt
the  manners  of  our  own  day  ;  yet  the  habits  of  either  age  are
equally  worthy97  to  be  adopted.  He  had  finished  his  instruc-
tions ;  then  once  again,  as  before,  in  mild  accents  I  thus  ad-
dressed the  key-bearing  god  : — "  Many  things,  indeed,  I  have
learned,  but  why  on  the  brass  coin  is  there  stamped  on  one  side
the  figure  of  a  ship,  and  on  the  other,  a  two-headed  form  ?"9S
"Thou  mightst,"  said  he,  "  recognise  me  in  the  two-fold  form,
had  not  the  very  length  of  time  worn  away  the  workmanship.
The  cause  of  the  ship  inscribed  remains  to  be  told.  In  a  ship,
the  scythe-wielding  God99  having  first  wandered  over  the  whole
world,  came  up  the  Etrurian  river.1  I  remember  the  reception
of  Saturn  in  this  land ;  he  had  been  expelled  by  Jupiter  from
the  realms  of  heaven.  Thence  for  a  long  time  did  the  name
of  Saturn2  abide  with  that  nation  ;  the  country  also  was  called
Latium  from  the  god  being  there  latent.  Moreover  pious
posterity  preserved  the  ship  upon  the  brass  coin,  attesting  the
arrival  of  the  god,  their  guest.  I  myself  inhabited  the  soil
along  which,  on  its  left  side,3  glides  the  most  gently  flow-
money/  The  omen  of  the  small  coin,  is,  no  doubt,  an  allusion  to  the  silver
and  gold  coins  of  a  later  period;  the  silver  introduced,  in  269  b.c,  by-
coined  pieces  called  denarii  (from  being  of  the  value  of  ten  asses),  and  the
gold,  in  209  B.C.,  in  pieces  of  twenty  denarii.  It  is  probable  that,  after
these  epochs,  omens  were  sought  in  preference  from  coins  of  the  more  pre-
cious metals. — See  Bohn's  Coin  Collector's  Guide.

97  Equally  worthy.'] — Ver.  226.  As  being  the  most  suitable  to  the
feelings,  and  the  best  adapted  to  the  wants  and  comforts  of  the  people  of
those  respective  times.

98  A  two-headed  form.'] — Ver.  230.  It  has  been  stated  in  note  96,
when  coins  with  these  types  were  probably  first  issued.  They  disappeared
altogether  towards  the  end  of  the  republic,  some  of  the  last,  with  the  an-
cient types  of  the  bifrontal  head  of  Janus  and  the  prow  of  a  ship,  being
those  issued  by  Pompey.  In  these,  one  of  the  profiles  of  Janus  was  made
to  represent  Pompey  himself,  and  the  other  Cneius,  his  father.  Macrobius
relates  that  the  boys  of  ancient  Rome  played  a  game  similar  to  our  modern
toss-halfpenny,  crying  l  capita  aut  navim/  *  heads  or  ship,'  just  as  our
boys  do  '  heads  or  tails/ — See  Bohn's  Coin  Collector's  Guide.

99  Scythe -wielding.] — Ver.  234.  Saturn  is  always  represented  with
a  scythe  in  his  hand,  as  emblematical  of  the  ruthless  and  unsparing
power  of  Time.

1  The  Etrurian  river.] — Ver.  234.  The  river  Tiber,  which  flowed  with
Etruria  on  its  left,  and  Latium  on  the  right  side,  into  the  Etrurian  sea.

2  The  name  of  Saturn.] — Ver.  237.  '  Saturnia'  was  one  of  the  old
appellations  of  the  Latian  nation.

3  Along  whose  left  side.] — Ver.  242.  The  Etrurian  bank  of  the  Tiber,
where  the  Janiculum  was  situated.


B.  I.  242—258.]  OK,    CALENDAR  OP   OYID.  19

ing  wave  of  the  sandy  Tiber.  Here,  where  now  Rome  is,  a
forest,  untouched  by  the  axe,  used  to  flourish,  and  Misstate  so
mighty  was  a  place  of  pasturage  for  a  few  oxen.  My  place
of  retreat  was  that  hill,  which  this  age,  paying  me  all  adora-
tion, denominates  after  my  name,  and  calls  it  the  Janiculum.4
Then,  too,  was  I  reigning,  when  the  earth  wras  fit  to  receive
the  gods,  and  the  divinities  were  interspersed  among  the  abodes
of  men.  Not  as  yet  had  mortal  crime5  driven  Justice  away.6
She  was  the  last  of  the  deities  that  left  the  earth  ;  and  instead
of  fear,  a  sense  of  propriety  used  then  without  any  other
restraint  to  govern  the  people  :  it  was  no  difficulty  to  enforce
justice  among  the  just.  I  had  no  concern  with  warfare ;  I
used  then  to  have  but  peace  and  the  thresholds  under  my
protection  ;  and/'  shewing  his  key,  ( '  these,"  says  he,  "  are  the
arms  which  I  properly  bear."  The  god  had  closed  his  lips  ;
then  thus  I  open  mine,  my  words  eliciting  those  of  the  divi-
nity— "  Since  there  are  so  many  vaulted  archways, 7  why  dost
thou  stand  consecrated  by  a  statue  in  one  alone,8  here  where

4  The  Janiculum.] — Ver.  246.  The  temple  of  Janus  was  built  on  the
1  Janiculum/  one  of  the  seven  hills  of  Rome.  In  time  a  small  town  arose
round  it,  until  the  whole  was  included  in  the  immensity  of  the  city  of
later  times.  From  the  dwellings  of  princes  being  in  the  early  ages  erected
on  the  summit  of  a  hill,  which  was  called  the  '  arx,'  the  residence  itself
subsequently  obtained  the  same  title.  So,  too,  the  baronial  castles  of
the  feudal  times  were,  perched  on  an  eminence  generally  for  the  double
purpose  of  overawing  the  vassals,  and  being  prepared  against  a  surprise  by  the
enemy.  In  later  times  the  Roman  patricians  had  their  palaces  on  the  hills,
and  when  they  mingled  with  the  plebeian  crowd  it  was  said  of  them  that

*  descendebant,'  '  they  came  down.'  Thus,  Horace  Od. — '  descendat  in
campum  petitor.'  Our  word  '  descend '  has  a  similar  meaning,  adapted
in  a  figurative  sense  from  this  latter  use  of  the  Latin  word.

5  Mortal  crime.'] — Ver.  249.  '  Facinus  mortale '  may  either  signify
i  deadly  crime,'  or  '  the  crime  of  bloodshed,'  or  *  crime  committed  by
mortals.'

6  Driven  Justice  away.] — Ver.  249.  Her  name  was  also  Astra?a.
Ovid  in  his  Metamorphoses  says,  '  Ultima  coelestum  terras  Astrsea  reliquit,'

*  Astrsea  was  the  last  of  the  celestial  deities  to  leave  the  earth.'

7  Vaulted  archways.] — Ver.  257.  *  Jani,'  covered  passages,  having
a  look-out  on  either  side,  were  so  called  from  Janus.  The  poet  asks
the  deity  why  he  is  honoured  with  a  statue  in  only  one  'janus,'  or
arched  temple,  when  there  are  so  many  places  in  Rome  named  after  him.
These  passages  were  always  double,  for  the  convenience  of  people  passing
both  ways.

8  In  one  alone.]—Ver.  257.  According  to  Varro,  this  temple  was  the
1  porta  Janualis,'  or  '  gate  of  Janus,'  built  by  Romulus.  Numa  placed  a
statue  of  Janus  in  the  temple,  which  was  live  cubits  in  height.

c2


20  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  I.  258—277.

thou  hast  a  shrine  adjoining  to  the  two  market  places.9  He,
with  his  hand  stroking  the  beard  that  flowed  down  upon  his
breast,  forthwith  related  the  warfare  of  the  (Ebalian  Tatius, 10
and  how  the  faithless  guard,11  captivated  with  the  Sabine  brace-
lets, conducted  Tatius  to  the  approaches  of  the  lofty  citadel.
"  From  that,"  said  he,  "  there  was,  as  there  is  now,  a  steep
path  by  which  you  descend  to  the  vallies  and  the  market
places.  And  now  had  he  reached  the  gate12  whose  resisting
bolts  Juno  the  daughter  of  Saturn  had  insidiously  removed  :
when  fearing  to  enter  on  a  contest  with  a  deity  so  power-
ful, I  slily  put  in  practice  the  resources  of  my  peculiar
art.13  I  opened  the  mouths  of  the  fountains,  in  which  kind
of  aid  I  am  distinguished,  and  I  showered  forth  sudden  streams
of  water.  But  first  I  mingled  sulphur  in  the  hot  streamlets,
that  the  boiling  flood  might  obstruct  the  passage  of  Tatius.
When  the  useful  quality  of  this  stream,  after  the  repulse  of
the  Sabines,  was  perceived,  and  the  appearance  which  it
formerly  had  was  restored  to  the  place  now  secure  from  the
enemy,  an  altar  was  erected  to  me,  united  with  a  little
chapel :  this  with  its  flames  consumes  the  spelt  meal  with  the
salt  and  flour  cake  of  sacrifice '."u      "But  why  dost  thou  lie

9  The  two  market-places.'] — Ver.  258.  These  were  the  t  Boarium,'  or
ox-market,  and  the  'Piscarium/  or  fish-market.

10  The  (Ebalian  Tatius.'] — Ver.  260.  (Ebalus  was  a  Spartan  prince,
the  grandfather  of  Helen.  The  Sabines,  who  are  here  alluded  to,  were
reputed  to  have  been  a  Spartan  colony.  Titus  Tatius  was  the  king  of  the
Sabines  in  their  wars  Tvith  Romulus.

11  The  faithless  guard.] — Ver.  261.  Tarpeia,  the  daughter  of  Tarpeius,
agreed  to  betray  the  Roman  citadel  (of  which  her  father  was  the  com-
mander) for  the  golden  bracelets  worn  by  the  Sabine  warriors.  When  she
had  fulfilled  her  promise,  she  received  the  just  reward  of  her  treachery,  for
each  soldier,  as  he  gave  his  bracelet,  threw  also  his  shield  upon  her,  and  she
was  soon  crushed  to  death  by  the  weight.  This  circumstance  is  comme-
morated on  a  denarius  of  the  family.

12  Reached  the  gate.] — Ver.  265.  It  was  the  'Porta  viminahV  that
Juno  on  this  occasion  opened  for  the  admission  of  the  Sabines.  It
was  so  called  from  the  quantity  of  osiers,  '  vimina,'  that  grew  in  the
neighbourhood.

16  My  peculiar  art.] — Ver.  268.  That  is,  of  opening,  suited  to  my
guardianship  of  all  entrances  and  exits.  These  two  lines  are  translated  by
Gower  : —

1 1,  loth  to  thwart  it  with  so  high  a  power,
Did  slily  help  them  with  a  feat  of  our/
u  Cake  of  sacrifice.] — Ver.  276.     These  were  small  calces  made  in  the
shape  of  fingers  joined  together,  and  laid  in  heaps  for  tjie  purposes  of
sacrifice,  whence  the  name  *  strues/  from  '  struo,'  '  to  build,'  or  '  pile  up.'


B.  I.   277—301.]  OS,    CALEXDAS   OF    OVID.  21

concealed15  in  time  of  peace,  and  why  art  thou  revealed,
when  arms  are  taken  up  '?"  There  was  no  delay,  the  cause
of  the  circumstance  inquired  after  was  told  me  in  answer.
"  In  order  that  the  means  of  returning  may  he  open  in  readi-
ness for  the  people  when  they  have  gone  forth  to  war,  the  whole
of  my  gate  stands  wide  open,  the  IWt  being  removed.  In
times  of  peace  I  bar  my  doors,  that  she  may  by  no  means  be
enabled  to  depart;  and  under  the  sivay  of  Ceesar's  name  long
shall  I  remain  shut  up."  He  spoke,  and  raising  his  eyes  that
looked  both  before  and  behind,  he  looked  upon  whatever
there  was  in  the  whole  world.  There  was  peace  :  and  the
Rhine, 16  the  occasion  of  thy  triumph,  Germanicus,  had  now
surrendered  to  thee  its  subservient  streams.  0  Janus,  make
peace  everlasting,  and  them  to  be  the  ministers l7  of  peace,  and
grant  that  the  author  of  this  change  may  not  abandon  his  office.
But,  as  I  was  enabled  to  learn  from  the  list  of  the  festivals,
on  this  day  our  forefathers  consecrated  two  temples.18  The
sacred  Island  which  the  river  surrounds  with  its  divided
stream,  received  the  son  of  Phoebus  and  the  nymph  Coronis.19
Jupiter  occupies  a  share  ;  one  place  received  them  both,  and  the
temple  of  the  grandson  is  joined  to  that  of  his  mighty  grandsire.
What  forbids  me,  also,  to  mention  the  stars,  how  each
of  them  rises  and  sets  ?  That,  too,  was  a  part  of  my
promised  undertaking.  Blessed  spirits  ioere  they  to  whom
first  it  was  a  care  to  learn  these  things,  and  to  ascend
to  the  mansions  on  high.  It  is  worthy  of  belief  that  they
raised  their  heads  equally  above  the  vices  and  the  haunts
of  mortals.     Neither   lust  nor  wine  enfeebled  their  exalted

15  Lie  concealed.'] — Ver.  277.  Alluding  to  the  closing  of  the  temple
of  Janus  in  time  of  peace,  and  the  opening  of  it  in  time  of  war.

16  The  Rhine.] — Ver.  286.  He  alludes  to  the  triumph  of  Germanicus
over  the  Catti,  Cherusci,  and  Angrivarii,  a.u.c.  770.

17  The  ministers.] — Ver.  287.     Tiberius  and  Germanicus.

18  Two  temples.] — Ver.  290.  One  to  Jupiter,  consecrated  by  Caius
Servilius,  and  the  other  dedicated  to  iEsculapius,  the  son  of  Apollo.

19  The  nymph  Coronis.] — Ver.  291.  ^Esculapius  was  the  son  of
Apollo  and  Coronis,  the  daughter  of  Phlegias  and  Leucippus.  She  was
slain  in  a  fit  of  jealousy  by  Apollo,  who  gave  iEsculapius  into  the  charge
of  the  centaur  Chiron;  he  instructed  his  charge  in  the  art  of  medicine,  of
which  he  afterwards  became  the  tutelar  divinity.  In  consequence  of  a
plague  at  Rome,  an  embassy  was  sent  to  Epidaurus,  in  Peloponnesus,
where  iEsculapius  was  worshipped,  and  one  of  the  serpents  sacred  to  him
was  brought  to  Rome,  on  which  the  temple  mentioned  by  the  poet  was
built  to  the  god  on  the  '  sacred  Isle'  in  the  Tiber.'


22  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  i.  301—319.

minds,  nor  the  duties  of  the  Forum,  nor  the  toils  of  warfare.
Nor  did  giddy  ambition,  nor  glory  overspread  with  artificial
glare,20  nor  the  craving  for  vast  riches,  disquiet  them.  It
is  they  who  have  brought  the  far  distant  stars  to  our  eyes,  and
have  subjected  the  heavens  to  their  intellect.  Thus  is  heaven
won,  not  that  Olympus  for  that  purpose  should  bear  Ossa,21
and  the  peak  of  Pelion  touch  the  loftiest  stars.  We,  too,
under  the  guidance  of  these,  will  apportion  out  the  skies,
and  will  assign  their  own  peculiar  days  according  to  the  ap-
pointed constellations.  "When,  therefore,  the  third  night  before
the  approaching  nones  shall  come,  and  the  ground  shall  grow
damp,  besprinkled  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  in  vain  will  the
claws  of  the  eight-footed  Crab22  be  sought  for ;  he  has  sunk
headlong  beneath  the  western  waters.  When  the  nones  are
just  arriving,  the  showers  issuing  from  the  black  clouds  will
give  you  indications  as  the  Lyre  rises.23

Add  four  days  passed  in  regular  succession,  to  the  nones,
Janus  will  have  to  be  appeased  on  the  Agonalian  day.24  The
aproned   priest25  may  perhaps  be  the  origin  of  the  appel-

20  Artificial  glare."] — Ver.  303.  'Fucus'  is,  literally,  a  marine  shrub,
or  sea- weed,  red  alkanet,  which  was  used  for  the  purposes  of  dyeing  and
painting.

21  Should  bear  Ossa.] — Ver.  307.  Ossa  (now  Kissova),  Pelion  (now
Plesnid),  and  Olympus  which  is  still  called  by  its  ancient  name,  were  high
mountains  in  Thessaly.  He  alludes  to  the  attempt  by  the  giants  Otus
and  Ephialtes,  sons  of  Neptune  and  Iphimedeia,  to  scale  heaven  when  they
were  but  nine  years  old,  by  heaping  the  mountains  one  upon  the  other.

22  The  eight-footed  crab.'] — Ver.  313.  Because  on  the  third  day  of
January,  at  sun-rise,  is  the  acronychal  setting  of  the  constellation  Cancer,
the  Crab.  In  the  mythology,  it  is  said  to  have  been  placed  among  the
constellations  by  Juno,  after  it  had  been  crushed  by  the  foot  of  Hercules,
which  it  had  bitten  while  the  hero  was  engaged  in  combat  with  the
Hydra  in  the  Lernsean  marsh.

23  The  Lyre  rises.] — Ver.  316.  The  cosmical  rising  of  Lyra,  usually
accompanied  with  rain.  This  is  feigned  to  be  the  lyre  on  which  Orpheus
played  when  he  descended  to  the  infernal  regions.

24  The  Agonalian  day.] — Ver.  318.  The  festival  of  Janus  called  '  Ago-
nalia,'  or 'Agonic;'  the  meaning  of  which  name  the  poet  proceeds  to
describe.

25  The  aproned  priest.] — Ver.  319.  The  '  minister*  here  mentioned
was  the  l  rex  sacrorum,'  or  '  king  of  the  sacrifices,'  who  was  in  religious
matters  the  representative  of  the  ancient  kings  ;  higher  in  rank  than  the
1  pontifex  maximus,'  but  inferior  in  power  and  influence.  His  duties
were,  to  perform  sacrifice,  to  propitiate  the  deities,  and  to  proclaim  the
festivals.  While  sacrificing,  the  priests  and  their  assistants  used  to  wear
small  aprons.


b.  i.  319—338.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OTID.  23

Lition,  under  the  blow  of  whom  the  victim  falls  in  honour
of  the  celestial  gods  ;  for  he,  when  about  to  stain  with
reeking  gore  the  knives  already  unsheathed,  always  asks
the  question,  "  Do  I  proceed?"26  Nor  does  he  proceed
unless  commanded  so  to  do.  Some  think  that  the  day  has
the  name  of  Agonal,  from  the  act  of  driving,  because  the
sheep  do  not  come  of  their  own  free  will  to  the  sacrifice,  but  are
driven.27  Some  think  that  this  festival  was  called  "  Agnalia" 28
by  the  ancients,  although  by  that  derivation  one  letter  is  re*
moved  from  its  proper  place ;  or  is  that  day  thus  named
from  the  agony  of  the  sheep,29  because  the  victim  shud-
ders at  the  knives  perceived  by  it  as  they  lie  in  the  water?30
Some,  too,  think  that  the  day  derived  a  Grecian  epithet
from  the  games31  that  were  wont  to  be  celebrated  in  the
time  of  our  forefathers.  The  ancient  dialect,  too,  called
sheep  by  the  name  of  "  Agonia ;"  and  in  my  opinion  the  last
is  the  true  reason  for  the  name,  and  to  this  extent  that  reason  is
ascertained  for  certain,  that  the  king  of  the  sacred  rites  is  in
duty  bound  to  propitiate  the  divinities  with  the  mate  of  the
fleece-bearing  ewe.  That  sacrifice  which  has  fallen  by  the
right  hand  of  the  victor  is  called  the  victim  :32  when  the  hostile
troops  are  driven  far  away  then  the  sacrifice  is  called  the  host.34
In  days  of  old,  it  was  plain  spelt,  and  the  sparkling  grain 35  of

26  Do  I  proceed  ?] — Ver.  322.  Ago  ne.  Two  Latin  words,  forming  a
trisyllable,  and  signifying  '  do  I  ?'  or  *  am  I  to  proceed  V

27  Are  driven.] — Ver.  323.  l  Agor'  is  '  to  be  driven/  whence  this  fanci-
ful derivation.

23  Agnalia,] — Ver.  325.  From  *  Agnus,'  l  a  lamb/  as  sheep  were  then
sacrificed.

29  Agony  of  the  sheep.] — Ver.  327.  'Aywvia,  (agonia),  the  Greek  for
*  terror/  whence  our  word  '  agony  ;'  implying  pain,  and,  in  this  instance,
1  extreme  horror.'

30  In  the  water.'] — Ver.  327.  The  knives  placed  in  basins  of  water,
near  the  altar,  for  the  purposes  of  ablution.

31  From  the  games.] — Ver.  330.  'Ayai^fc,  '  agones/  is  the  Greek  term
for  public  games  or  contests.

33  Is  called  the  victim.] — Ver.  335.  So  called,  according  to  the  poet,
as  being  the  offering  sacrificed  by  him  who  is  the  '  victor/  or  conquering
party,  deriving  its  name  from  '  vinco/  '  to  conquer.'

34  The  host.]— Ver.  336.  The  sacrifice  is  so  called,  according  to  the
poet,  when  it  is  offered  on  the  retreat  of  the  enemy ;  as  it  would  appear,  in
contradistinction  to  his  death  ;  '  hostis'  being  the  Latin  word  for  '  enemy,'

35  Sparkling  grain.]— Ver.  338.  Salt  was  held  in  high  esteem  by  the
ancients.    The  lares  and  the  salt-cellars  were  with  equal  care  placed  on


24  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  i.  338— 359.

unadulterated  salt  that  had  efficacy  to  render  the  gods  pro-
pitious to  man.  Not  yet  had  the  stranger  ship,  impelled
through  the  waters  of  the  ocean,  imported  the  myrrh36  that  is
distilled  from  the  bark  in  tear-like  drops.  In  those  days
neither  Euphrates  had  sent  its  frankincense,37  nor  India  its
zedoary,88  nor  were  the  filaments  of  the  ruddy  crocus  then
known.  The  altar  used  to  send  forth  its  smoke,  contented
with  the  Sabine  herbs,39  and  the  laurel  was  burned  with  no
small  crackling  noise.  If  there  was  any  one  who  could  add
violets  to  the  chaplets  wrought  from  the  flowers  of  the  mea-
dow, that  person  was  a  rich  man.  The  knife  of  the  present
day,  which  opens  the  entrails  of  the  stricken  bull,  had  in
those  times  no  employment  in  the  sacred  rites.  Ceres40  was
the  first  who  took  pleasure  in  the  blood  of  an  animal — namely,
the  ravenous  sow,  avenging  the  injury  done  to  her  property
by  the  merited  death  of  the  transgressor.  For  in  the  early  part
of  the  spring  she  found  that  the  crops  of  corn,  swelling  with
their  young  milky  juice,  were  rooted  up  by  the  snout  of  the
bristly  swine.  From  that  day  the  swine  paid  the  penalty.
You,  he-goat,  warned  by  her  example,  wish  that  you  had  ab-
stained from  the  shoot  of  the  vine.  A  person  looking  upon
him  while  imprinting  his  teeth  upon  the  vine  would  naturally
utter  some  such  expression  as  this,  with  no  silent  indignation.
'  Welly  gnaw  away  at  the  vine,  Master  goat ;  there  will  still  be
enough  juice  in  it  to  be  sprinkled  upon  your  horns,  when  you
shall  be  standing    a    victim    at    the   altar.'     Truth   attends

their  tables.  The  family  salt-cellar  was  an  heir-loom,  preserved  with  the
greatest  care.     Horace,  Odes,  book  2,  Ode  1 6,  mentions  the  salinum.

36  Imported  the  myrrh.'] — Ver.  339.  The  myrrh  is  a  shrub  that  either,
with  or  without  an  incision  in  the  bark,  distils  a  sweet  gum  in  tear-like
drops.

37  Frankincense.'] — Ver.  341.  This  was  a  perfume  which  was  imported
into  Europe  from  Arabia.

33  Its  zedoary.] — Ver.  341.  *  Costum'  was  a  shrub  growing  in
Palestine  and  Syria,  and  prized  for  its  powerful  aromatic  smell.  The
Euphrates,  running  through  Mesopotamia  and  the  northern  part  of
Arabia  into  the  Persian  Gulf,  bore  thither  for  the  use  of  the  western  world
the  riches  and  spices  of  the  east.

39  The  Sabine  herbs.] — Ver.  343.  This  was  the  savin,  a  herb  resembling
the  cypress.  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist,  book  24,  mentions  the  occasional  use  of
it  in  the  place  of  frankincense.

40  Ceres.] — Ver.  349.  For  some  account  of  this  goddess  see  note  on
line  127  of  "this  book.


B.  I.  359—378.]  OE,   CALERDAE,   OF   OYID.  25

his  words.  Bacchus/1  thy  foe  given  up  to  thee  for  punish-
ment, has  his  horns  sprinkled  with  the  outpoured  wine.42
Her  guilt  was  fatal  to  the  sow — fatal,  too,  was  his  guilt  to
the  goat.  But  what  didst  thou,  0  ox,  and  what  did  ye,  0
gentle  sheep,  to  deserve  a  like  fate  ?

Aristseus43  was  weeping,  because  he  had  seen  that  his  bees,
destroyed  together  with  their  progeny,  had  deserted  the
unfinished  honeycombs.  Him,  then,  while  grieving,  his
Caerulean  mother44  with  difficulty  consoled,  and  added  to  what
she  had  said  these  last  words  :  "  Cease  thy  tears,  my  son,
Proteus45  will  alleviate  thy  losses,  and  will  teach  thee  in  what
manner  thou  mayst  recover  what  has  been  lost.  That  however,
he  may  not  deceive  thee  by  his  transformations,  let  strong
fetters  bind  both  his  hands."46  The  youth  comes  to  the  prophet,
and  seizing  the  arms  relaxed  in  sleep  of  the  watery  sire,  binds
them  together.  He,  versatile  in  form,  by  his  peculiar  art  changes
his  appearance,  but  afterwards,  overcome  by  the  fetters,  he
returns  to  his  natural  shape,  and,  raising  his  countenance  all
streaming,  with  his  azure-coloured  beard,  he  said,  "  Dost  thou
seek  to  know  by  what  art  thou  mayst  recover  thy  bees  ?  Bury  in
the  earth  the  carcase  of  a  slaughtered  ox  :  he,  when  so  buried,

41  Bacchus.] — Ver.  360,  The  god  of  wine  and  revelry.  He  was  the
son  of  Jupiter  and  Semele.

42  The  out-poured  wine.'] — Ver.  360.  Alluding  to  the  pouring  the  wine
between  the  horns  of  the  victim  before  it  was  slain.

43  Anstceus.]—  Ver.  363.  He  was  son  of  Apollo  and  the  nymph
Cyrene,  and  followed  the  occupation  of  a  shepherd,  according  to  Virgil,
who,  in  the  fourth  book  of  his  Georgics,  relates  this  story  at  much  greater
length,  and  in  more  poetical  language.

44  His  Caerulean  mother.] — Ver.  365.  Or  'of  azure/  or  'light  blue
colour,'  Cyrene  being  a  nymph  of  the  waters  ;  she  was  daughter  of  the
river  Peneius,  and  is  said  by  Pindar  to  have  given  name  to  the  town  of
Cyrene,  in  Africa. — Pythia  Ode  9.

45  Proteus.] — Ver.  367.  He  was  a  deity  of  the  sea,  son  of  Oceanus
and  Tethys,  or,  according  to  some  writers,  of  Neptune  and  Phcenice.
Neptune  bestowed  on  him,  as  the  keeper  of  the  ocean  monsters,  the  gift
of  prophecy.  He  resided  chiefly  in  the  Carpathian  Sea,  and  on  the  coast
of  Egypt.  When  reposing  on  the  shore,  he  was  much  resorted  to  by
persons  wishing  to  test  his  prophetic  powers.  Menelaus  and  Hercules  are
said  to  have  consulted  him.

46  Bind  both  his  hands.]— Ver.  369,  370.  Go wer  translates  these  lines—

'  But  bind  him  sure,  in  fetters  strong,  lest  he
With  his  transformed  shapes,  should  coosen  thee.'


26  THE  FASTI;  [b.  i.  378—391.

will  supply  what  tliou  now  askest  of  me."  The  shepherd
performs  his  commands.  The  swarms  throng  from  the  pu-
trefying ox.  The  death  of  a  single  being  has  produced  a
thousand  new  lives.  Fate,  too,  demands  the  sheep.  She
m  her  impiety  once  cropped  the  sacred  plants,47  which  a
pious  old  dame  was  accustomed  to  offer  to  the  rustic
deities.  What  remains  in  safety,  when  both  the  sheep  that
bear  the  fleece,  and  the  oxen  that  till  the  fields,  resign
their  lives  upon  the  altars  ?  Persia  propitiates  by  the  sacrifice
of  the  horse,  Hyperion48  begirt  with  rays  of  light,  that  no
sluggish  victim  may  be  offered  to  the  swift  god.  Because  the
hind  was  once  slain  in  honour  of  the  triune  Diana49  in  the
stead  of  a  virgin,50  at  the  present  day  she  is  sacrificed  though
not  in  the  stead  of  a  virgin.  I  have  seen  the  Sapaeans51
and  him  who  dwells  near  thy  snows,  0  Heemus,  offer  to
Trivia  the  entrails  of  dogs.

The  ass  too  is  slain  for  the  lustful  guardian52  of  the  fields.

47  The  sacred  plants.'] — Ver.  381.  '  Verbense'  here  means  the  several
plants  used  in  sacrifice,  such  as  the  laurel,  olive,  myrtle,  cypress,  tamarisk,
and  rose.  In  the  sacred  rites  they  were  either  used  as  garlands  for  the
head,  or  were  borne  in  the  hands  of  suppliants,  or  were  laid  on  the  altars.
Some  legend  is  probably  here  referred  to,  the  particulars  of  which  have
not  come  down  to  us.

48  Hyperion.'] — Ver.  385.  A  title  of  the  sun  among  the  Greeks.  The
Persians  worshipped  him  by  the  name  of  Mithras.  According  to  some
mythologists,  Hyperion  was  the  son  of  Uranus  and  Terra  (heaven  and
earth),  and  father  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  of  Aurora,  the  goddess  of  the
morning.

49  Diana.'] — Ver.  387.     See  note  to  line  141,  above.

50  In  the  stead  of  a  virgin.] — Ver.  387.  This  was  Iphigenia,  the
daughter  of  Agamemnon  and  Clytemnestra.  The  Greeks,  when  going
to  Troy,  were  detained  at  Aulis  by  contrary  winds.  Chalcas  declared
that  this  was  through  the  anger  of  Diana  at  the  loss  of  a  favourite  stag,
killed  by  Agamemnon ;  but  that  the  goddess  would  be  appeased  by  the
death  of  the  daughter  of  the  offender.  When  about  to  be  sacrificed,  she
disappeared,  and  a  goat  or  a  hind  was  substituted  for  her,  though  accord-
ing to  some  accounts  she  really  was  slain.

51  The  Sapcsans.] — Ver.  389.  A  people  of  Thrace,  probably  visited
by  the  poet  when  an  exile  in  that  country.  Dogs  were  sacrificed  to
Diana,  because  by  their  barking  they  scared  away  the  spectres  which  she
summoned  to  earth.  These  sacrifices  took  place  at  Zerinthus,  near  mount
Hsemus,  in  Thrace.

62  Lustful  guardian.] — Ver.  391.  Priapus,  an  obscene  god,  was  the
son  of  Venus  and  Bacchus  (a  befitting  parentage),  and  was  principally


B.  I.  391—411.]  OK,   CALEXDAK   OP    OVID.  27

The  reason  is  indeed  one  that  must  cause  shame,  but  quite
suited  to  the  character  of  this  divinity.  Greece  was  celebrat-
ing the  festivals  of  ivy-crowned  Bacchus,  which  every  third
winter  brings  round53  at  the  established  period.  The  guardian
deities  of  cool  Lycseum*4  came  thither,  and  any  one  besides  that
was  no  enemy  to  mirth ;  the  Pans,  and  the  youthful  troop
of  Satyrs  prone  to  lust,  and  the  goddesses55  who  inhabit  the
streams  and  lonely  fields.  The  aged  Silenus56  too,  had  ar-
rived upon  his  ass  with  bending  back,  and  Priapus,  who  with
ruddy  aspect  scares  away  the  timorous  birds.  They,  having
found  a  grove  well  suited  for  their  merry  carousals,  reclined
on  the  couches  bestrewed  with  grass.  Bacchus  gave  the
wine ;  each  had  brought  a  chapiet  for  himself ;  a  rivulet
rolled  by  its  waters,  to  be  but  sparingly  mixed.57  The  Naiad
nymphs  were  there,  some  with  locks  dishevelled  without  the
application  of  the  comb,  others  with  their  hair  arranged  both
with  taste  and  labour.  This  one  waits  upon  them  with  her
robe  gathered  up53  above  the  middle  of  the  leg,  another  exposed
as  to  her  breast,  with  the  bosom  of  her  dress  slashed  asunder.
This  one  bares  her  shoulder,  another  sweeps  her  robe  along
the  grass — no  sandals  confine  their  delicate  feet.  On  this
side  some  are  kindling  the  gentle  flames  of  desire  in  the  Satyrs,

worshipped  at  Lampsacus  in  Mysia,  on  the  Hellespont.  He  presided
over  fields  and  gardens,  which  he  protected  from  thieves  and  blight.

53  Brings  round.'] — Ver.  394.  This  was  the  '  Trieterica,'  or  '  three-year
feast.'  It  was  really  an  annual  festival,  but  was  celebrated  with  greater
solemnity  every  third  year,  to  commemorate  the  expedition  of  Bacchus
into  India.  Probably  the  year  alluded  to  in  the  poem  was  the  ancient  one
of  four  months  only.

54  Cool  Lycceum.~] — Ver.  395.  A  mountain  in  Arcadia  sacred  to  Pan
and  Jupiter.  The  gods  mentioned  were  the  several  Pans,  fawns,  and
satyrs,  the  deities  of  Arcadia.

55  The  goddesses.] — Ver.  398.     The  Naiads,  or  water-nymphs.

55  Silenus.] — Ver.  399.  He  was  the  foster-father  of  Bacchus,  and,
according  to  Pindar,  was  born  at  Malea,  in  Lesbos.  He  had  a  bald  head,
flat  nose,  and  thick  beard.  He  was  the  leader  of  the  Satyrs,  and  was
always  drunk ;  yet,  singularly  enough,  he  was  considered  as  conspicuous
for  his  wisdom.

57  Sparingly  mixed.] — Ver.  404.  Moderate  drinkers  mixed  three  parts
of  water  with  two  of  wine  ;  but  the  present  company  preferred  their  liquors
neat,  or  nearly  so.     Perhaps  the  ladies  formed  the  exception.

58  Robe  gathered  up.] — Ver.  407.  The  female  tunic  reached  the
ancles  ;  but  when  expedition  was  required,  it  was  tucked  up  as  far  as  the
mid-leg.


28  THE   FASTI;  [b.  i.  411—444.

some  in  thee  who  hast  thy  temples  wreathed  with  pine.59  Thee
too,  Silenus,  of  lust  inextinguishable,  they  inflame.  It  k
lust  alone  that  precludes  thee  from  being  aged.  But  the
ruddy  Priapus,  the  deity  and  guardian  of  the  gardens,  was
charmed  by  Lotis  above  them  all.  Her  he  desires — her  he
longs  after — for  her  alone  he  sighs ;  he  signifies  his  wishes
by  his  nods,60  and  entreats  her  by  signs.  Cold  disdain  is
innate  in  the  fair,  and  haughtiness  accompanies  beauty.  By
her  countenance,  she  despises  and  she  scorns01  him.

It  was  night,  and,  wine  producing  slumber,  their  bodies  lay
overpowered  by  drowsiness,  in  various  places.  Lotis,  as  she
was  wearied  with  sport,  lay,  the  most  remote  of  all,  on  the
grassy  earth,  beneath  the  overshadowing  boughs  of  a  maple.
Her  lover  rises,  and,  holding  his  breath,  stealthily  advances  his
silent  footsteps,  treading  on  tiptoe.  When  now  he  had  reached
the  sequestered  resting  place  of  the  nymph,  fair  as  snow,
he  takes  care  lest  the  very  drawing  of  his  breath  should  make
a  noise.  And  now  was  he  poising  his  body  on  the  grass  close
by  her,  yet  still  was  she  sunk  in  deep  sleep.  He  is  overjoyed,
and  drawing  aside  her  garment  from  her  feet,  began  to  pro-
ceed along  the  blissful  path  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  de-
sires. When,  lo!  braying  with  hoarse  throat,  the  ass  that  bore
Silenus  sent  forth  unseasonable  sounds.  Alarmed,  the  nymph
starts  up,  and  with  her  hands  flings  back  Priapus,  and  then  fly-
ing62 arouses  the  whole  grove.  The  god,  already  too  well  prepared
for  his  lustful  attempt,  was  an  object  of  ridicule  to  all  by  the
light  of  the  moon.  The  author  of  the  outcry  paid  the  penalty
by  death,  and  hence  is  an  acceptable  victim  to  the  god  of
the  Hellespont.  You,  ye  birds,  charmers  of  the  fields,  a  race
accustomed  to  the  groves,  and  guiltless,  had  been  as  yet  un-
harmed ;  you,  who  build  your  nests,  who  cherish  your  eggs

59  With  pine.~\—  Ver.  412,  i.  e.  Pan.

60  By  his  nods. ,] — Ver.  417,  4]  8.  These  lines  remind  ns  of  those  of
Milton,  in  L'AUegro  : —

*  Quips  and  cranks,  and  wanton  vales ;
Nods  and  becks,  and  wreathed  smiles/

61  And  sneers."] — Ver.  420.  As  we  should  say  in  common  parlance,
*  She  turns  up  her  nose  at  him.'

62  Then  flying .] — Ver.  436.  The  gods,  in  compassion  for  this  gross
attempt  on  the  nymph,  changed  her  into  the  lotus  tree.


B.  u  44jt_45S.]  OB,    CALEKPAB   OF    OVID.  29

with  your  plumage,  and  warble  delightful  strains  from  your
ready  throats.  But  these  things  avail  you  nothing,  because
you  are  accused  of  the  power  of  utterance,  and  the  gods
believe  that  you  disclose  their  purposes.  And  this  charge  not
entirely  groundless ;  for,  as  each  is  most  familiar  with  the
gods,  at  one  time,  by  your  wings,  at  another,  by  your  voices,
you  give  true  indications.62*  The  race  of  the  fowls,  for  so  long
a  time  secure,  at  length  came  to  be  slain  in  its  turn,  and  the
entrails  of  the  informer  against  them  then  delighted  the  gods.
For  that  reason,  often  is  the  white  ring-dove,  the  consort,
torn  from  her  mate,  burned  on  the  glowing  hearths.  Nor
does  the  defence  of  the  capitol03  avail,  to  prevent  the  goose
from  affording  its  liver  for  thy  dishes,  0  dainty  daughter  of
Inachus.6i  On  the  night  of  this  day,  the  crested  bird  is  slain
in  honour  of  the  goddess  Night, C5  because  with  watchful  throat
he  calls  forth  the  warm  day.  In .  the  mean  time  the  Dol-
phin, 66  a  bright  constellation,  rises  over  the  deep,  and  puts
forth  his  head  from  his  native  waters.

62*  True  indications.'] — Ver.  447.  The  poet  refers  to  the  omens  obtained
from  the  flight  and  voices  of  birds.

63  Defence  of  the  capitol.'] — Ver.  453.  The  city  of  Rome  being  taken,
by  the  Gauls,  Marcus  Manlius,  with  a  body  of  men,  retired  into  the
capitol,  which  during  the  night  was  attacked  by  the  enemy.  Their  ap-
proach was  discovered  in  time,  through  the  cackling  of  some  geese  that
were  kept  in  the  temple  of  Juno,  and  from  that  time  geese  were  held
sacred  with  the  Romans.

64  Daughter  of  Inachus.] — Ver.  453,  454.  Inachis,  supposed  to  have
been  the  same  with  lo,  daughter  of  Inachus,  the  river  god.  From  the
epicurean  taste  which  she  is  here  represented  as  indulging,  she  would
probably  have  been  more  than  usually  pleased  by  a  taste  of  the  *  pate  de
foies  gras*  of  the  present  day.     Ciower  translates  these  lines  thus,

■  Nor  can  the  guarded  capitol  release
The  goose's  liver  from  choice  Inach's  mess/

65  Goddess  Night  J] — Ver.  455.  '  Nox,'  'Night/  was  one  of  the  most
ancient  deities,  being  a  daughter  of  Chaos.  By  her  brother  Erebus  she
produced  the  Day  and  the  Light.  She  was  the  mother  of  the  Fates,
Dreams,  Discord,  Death,  Momus,  and  others,  and  was  worshipped  in  the
temple  of  Diana  at  Ephesus.

66  The  Dolphin] — Ver.  457.  The  cosmic  rising  of  the  Dolphin  on
the  9th  of  January ;  being  the  fifth  of  the  Ides.  In  Book  ii.  the  poet
relates  how  the  Dolphin  carried  Arion  to  Tasnarus,  when  the  minstrel
had  been  thrown  into  the  sea  by  the  sailors  anxious  to  obtain  his  wealth.
It  was  also  said  that  the  Dolphin  was  thus  honoured  for  having  gainecj
die  band  of  Amphitrite  for  Neptune.


30  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  i.  459—476.

The  next  day  marks  the  winter  by  a  central  line,67  and  the
'part  of  it  which  will  then  remain,  will  be  equal  to  that  which
is  past.

The  next  dawn,68  Tithonus  having  been  left  by  her,  shall
look  upon  the  pontifical  ceremonies  of  the  Arcadian  goddess.
Thee  too,  sister  of  Turnus,69  the  same  day  received  in  thy
temple,  here  where  the  Plain  of  Mars  is  traversed  by  the
aqueduct  of  the  Virgin.  Whence  shall  I  derive  the  causes
and  the  forms  of  these  sacred  rites  ? 70  Who  can  guide  my
sails  in  the  midst  of  the  deep.  Instruct  me  thyself,  thou  who
hast  a  name  derived  from  song,  and  favour  my  undertaking,
lest  thy  glory  be  lost  in  uncertainty.  Having  an  origin
before  that  of  the  moon71  (if  we  credit  it  when  speaking  of
itself),  the  land  derives  its  name  from  the  great  Areas.72
Here  was  Evander, 73  who,  although  on  either  side  of  illustrious
origin,  was  more  noble  in  the  line  of  his  sacred  mother  :  who,
as  soon  as  she  had  conceived  the  inspiration  of  heaven  in  her
soul,  used  to  utter  from  her  unerring  lips  verses  redolent  of
the  divinity.     She  had  told  her  son  that  troubles  were  im-

67  Central  line.'] — Ver.  459.  Ovid  makes  the  10th  of  January  the
middle  day  of  winter.     Columella  makes  it  the  4  th  of  that  month.

68  The  next  daivn.~\ — Ver.  461.  Aurora  was  the  goddess  of  the  morning,
and  the  daughter  of  Hyperion,  or  of  Titan.  She  became  enamoured  of
Tithonus,  son  of  Laomedon,  king  of  Troy,  and  took  him  with  her  to
heaven.

69  Sister  of  Turnus.] — Ver.  463.  Juturna  was  a  water  nymph,  who,
according  to  Virgil,  iEneid  xii.,  was  beguiled  by  Jupiter,  and  by  him  made
a  goddess  of  the  streams.  Her  temple  stood  in  the  Campus  Martius  at
Rome.     She  is  again  mentioned  in  the  next  book.

70  These  sacred  rites.] — Ver.  465.  The  Carmentalia,  in  honour  of  Car-
menta,  a  goddess  of  Arcadian  origin,  called  also  Nicostrata  and  Themis.
It  is  said  below  by  the  poet,  that  the  name  Carmenta  was  derived  from
her  prophetic  powers,  '  carmen'  being  the  Latin  word  for  '  prophecy/
wrhich  being  originally  given  in  verse,  the  term  '  carmen '  afterwards
became  applicable  to  all  kinds  of  verse.  Carmenta  had  a  temple  in  the
forum  consecrated  to  her  by  the  Roman  matrons.

71  That  of  the  moon.] — Ver.  469.  Indeed  all  the  Arcadians  styled  them-
selves TrpocreXrjvol,  '  existing  before  the  moon/  or  '  Pra3lunites.>  This
circumstance  is  mentioned  in  the  next  book.

72  Areas.] — Ver.  470.  Areas  was  son  of  Jupiter  and  Calisto,  and  trans-
ferred to  heaven  as  a  constellation  after  his  death.  Arcadia,  to  which  he
gave  name,  was  in  the  centre  of  Peloponnesus,  bounded  by  Achaia,  Messenia,
Elis,  and  Argolis.

73  Evander.] — Ver.  471.  He  was  son  of  Carmenta,  by  Mercury,  or,  ac-
cording to  others,  by  Echemus.


B.  ,.  476—501.]  OK.  CALENDAR    OF    OVID.  31

pending  over  him  and  herself,  and  many  things  besides,  which
obtained  their  fulfilment  in  the  lapse  of  time.  For  now  the
youth  exiled  with  his  mother,  too  true  a  prophetess,  leaves
Arcadia  and  his  Parrhasian74  home.  To  him,  as  he  wept,
his  mother  said,  "  Stay  thy  tears,  my  son,  this  turn  of  fortune
must  be  borne  by  thee  with  manful  spirit.  This  was  thy
destiny  ;  it  is  no  guilt  of  thy  own  that  has  exiled  thee,  but  a
god  ;  thou  hast  been  banished  from  thy  city  by  the  anger  of
a  divinity.  Thou  art  now  enduring,  not  the  penalty  of  a
misdeed,  but  the  wrath  of  a  deity ;  it  is  some  consolation
that  guilt  does  not  accompany  thy  great  misfortunes.  As  the
mind  of  each  man  is  conscious  of  good  or  evil,  so  does  he  con-
ceive within  his  breast  hope  or  fear,  according  to  his  actions.
Mourn  not  as  though  thou  ivert  the  first  that  had  suffered
such  ills  ;  the  same  storm  has  borne  down  many  a  mighty
man.  The  same  did  Cadmus75  suffer,  who  long  ago,  when
banished  from  the  Tyrian  shores,  took-  up  his  abode,  an  out-
cast, on  the  Aonian  soil.  The  same  did  Tydeus,76  the  same
did  Pagasaean  Jason77  suffer ;  and  others  besides,  whom  to
enumerate  wrould  be  a  task  too  tedious.  To  the  brave  man
every  land  is  a  country,  as,  to  the  fishes  the  ocean,  and  as,  to
the  bird  the  whole  extent  of  space  in  the  world  of  air.  Nor
does  bleak  winter  freeze  throughout  the  whole  of  the  year ;
to  thee  too — believe  me — the  hours  of  spring  will  yet  come."
Evander,  with  mind  emboldened  by  the  words  of  his  parent,
cuts  the  waves  with  his  bark,  and  reaches  Hesperia.78

74  Parrhasian.] — Ver.  478.  Parrhasia  was  a  town  of  Arcadia.

75  Cadmus.'] — Ver.  490.  Son  of  Agenor,  king  of  Phoenicia.  His  sister
Europa  having  been  carried  off  by  Jupiter,  he  was  sent  in  search  of  her,
and  founded  the  colony  of  Boeotia,  one  of  the  ancient  names  of  which
was  Aonia.     These  lines  are  thus  translated  by  Gower : —

1  This  Cadmus,  banished  from  the  Tyrian  Bay,
Endur'd,  then  settled  in  Aonia/

76  Tydeus.] — Ver.  491.  He  was  son  of  (Eneus,  king  of  Calydon.  Having
accidentally  slain  one  of  his  friends,  he  fled  to  the  court  of  Adrastus,  king
of  Argos,  whose  daughter  Deiphyle  he  married.

77  Pagascecn  Jason.] — Ver.  491.  Pagasae  was  a  sea-port  of  Thessaly.
Jason  was  the  son  of  iEson,  king  Of  Iolchos,  who  headed  the  expedition
to  Colchis,  in  pursuit  of  the  golden  fleece,  which  he  gained  by  the  aid  of
Medea.

78  Hesperia.] — Ver.  498.  So  called  from  '  Hesperus/  or  i  Vesper/  the
evening  star,  as  Italy  was  to  the  west  of  Greece,  where  it  first  received  that
appellation.    Evander  arrived  in  Italy  in  the  reign  of  Faunus.


32  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  i.  501—521.

And  now,  by  the  advice  of  the  skilled  Carmentis,  he  had
directed  his  bark  into  the  river,  and  was  proceeding  against
the  stream  of  the  Etrurian  current.  She  beholds  the  bank
of  the  river,  to  which  the  fords  of  Terentus79  are  adjacent,
and  the  cottages  scattered  over  the  lonesome  districts.  And  as
she  was,  with  her  locks  all  dishevelled,  she  stood  before  the  poop,
and  with  stern  look  withheld  the  hand  of  him  who  was  guiding
the  vessel's  course.  Then  stretching  forth  her  arms  towards  the
right  bank  afar,  she  thrice  strikes  the  pine  wood  deck  with  frantic
foot.  Scarcely,  yes,  scarcely,  was  she  restrained  by  the  hand
of  Evander  from  springing  forward,  in  her  haste  to  stand  upon
the  shore.  "  Hail,  gods  of  the  regions  sought  by  us/'  she
said,  "  and  thou  country  that  shalt  hereafter  give  new  gods  to
Heaven,  and  ye  rivers  and  fountains,  which  this  strange  land
enjoys ;  ye  too,  nymphs  of  the  groves,  and  ye  choirs  of  the
Naiads.80  With  favouring  omens  be  ye  seen  by  my  son  and
by  me,  and  may  that  bank  be  trodden  with  an  auspicious  step.
Am  I  deceived?  or  shall  these  hills81  become  a  vast  city,  and
shall  the  rest  of  the  world  seek  laws  from  this  land  ?  To
these  mountains  the  sway  of  the  whole  earth  is  promised
one  day ;  who  could  suppose  the  place  to  have  so  high  a
destiny?  And  soon  shall  the  Dardanian  ships82  touch  at
these  shores  ;  here  too  shall  a  woman  be  the  cause83  of  a  fresh
war.     Pallas, w  my  beloved  grandson,  why  dost  thou  put  on

79  Terentus.] — Ver.  501.  This  was  a  place  at  the  end  of  the  Campus
Martius,  where  was  a  subterranean  altar  to  the  infernal  deities.

80  The  Naiads.] — Ver.  512.  The  Naiads  were  deities  who  presided
over  rivers,  springs,  and  fountains.  They  were  represented  as  beauteous
damsels,  naked  to  the  waist,  and  reclining  on  a  vase,  which  was  pouring
forth  a  stream  of  water.  Goats  and  lambs  were  offered  to  them,  with
wine,  oil,  milk,  honey,  fruits,  and  flowers.  Gower  translates  these  lines  : — •

1  Ye  springs  and  rivers  of  this  land  hospitious,
Ye  fairies  feat,  and  water-nymphs  delicious.'

81  These  hills.] — Ver.  515.  Alluding  prophetically  to  the  future  desti-
nies of  Rome.  The  heights  on  which  it  was  built  were  the  Palatine,
Capitoline,  Janiculan,  Cselian,  Esquiline,  Viminal,  and  Quirinal  Hills.

82  Dardanian  ships.] — Ver.  519.  Trojan.  Dardanus  was  the  son  of
Jupiter  and  Electra,  and  was  considered  as  the  founder  of  Troy.  She
alludes  to  the  arrival  of  jEneas  about  sixty  years  after.  His  travels  and
his  arrival  in  Italy,  when  rendered  homeless  by  the  destruction  of  Troy,
form  the  subject  of  the  iEneid  of  Virgil.

83  A  woman  be  the  cause.] — Ver.  520.  Lavinia,  the  daughter  of  Latinus,
was  the  cause  of  the  war  between  iEneas  and  Turnus.  Helen,  the  wife  of
IVlenelaus,  had  previously  been  the  cause  of  the  Trojan  war.

34  Pallas.] — Ver.  521.  Son  of  Evander.     He  led  the  auxiliaries  which


B.  I.  521—533.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  S3

those  fatal  arms  ?  Yet  put  them  on ;  thou  wilt  be  slain
with  no  mean  avenger  of  thy  death.  Troy !  although  con-
quered, thou  shalt  conquer,  and  overthrown,  thou  shalt  rise
again  ; S5  that  same  ruin  shall  overwhelm  the  homes  of  thy
foes.86  Burn  Neptunian  Pergamus,87  ye  triumphant  flames;
is  not  that  heap  of  ashes  more  exalted88  than  the  whole  world  1
Presently  shall  pious  iEneas  bring  hither  the  sacred  relics,
and  his  father,89  a  second  sacred  charge  ;  receive,  0  Vesta,90  the
gods  of  Iliuni.  The  time  will  come,  when  the  same  person  shall
have  the  charge  of  thee  and  of  the  world  as  well,  and  thy
sacred  rites91  shall  be  performed  by  a  worshipper,  himself  a
god.  In  the  hands  of  the  Augusti  shall  remain  the  guardian-
ship of  their  native  country ;  it  is  the  decree  of  heaven  that
this  house  should  hold  the  reins  of  empire.  One  thence  sprung,
the  grandson  and  the  son92  of  a  god,    though   he   himself

his  father  supplied  to  iEneas,  and  was  killed  by  Turnus,  who  was  slain  by
iEneas.

85  Shalt  rise  again.] — Ver.  523.  Namely,  in  Rome,  founded  by  the  de-
scendants of  thy  people.

86  Homes  of  thy  foes."] — Ver.  524.  She  alludes  to  the  future  subjection
of  the  Grecian  provinces  by  Rome.

87  Neptunian  Pergamus.'] — Ver.  525.  Pergamus  was  properly  the  Citadel
of  Troy,  but  the  word  is  often  used  by  the  poets  for  the  entire  city.  Troy
was  called  *  Neptunian,'  because,  when  banished  from  Heaven,  Neptune,
with  Apollo,  assisted  King  Laomedon  in  building  it.

88  More  exalted.] — Ver.  526.  That  is  to  say,  '  in  its  consequences/  if
we  consider  with  the  poet  that  the  foundation  of  Rome  was  owing  to  the
destruction  of  Troy.

89  His  father.] — Ver.  527.  Anchises,  the  father  of  iEneas,  did  not,  ac-
cording to  Virgil  and  other  writers,  reach  Italy,  but  died  in  Sicily;  though
Ovid,  Cato,  Strabo,  and  Dio  Cassius,  say  the  contrary.  The  relics  alluded
to,  are  the  images  of  the  Trojan  gods,  the  sacred  fire  of  Vesta,  and,  accord-
ing to  some  writers,  the  Palladium.

90  Receive,  O  Vesta.] — Ver.  528.  Vesta  was  the  goddess  of  fire,  and  had
a  temple  in  Rome,  which  was  built  by  Numa.  In  her  sanctuary  was  pre-
served the  Palladium  of  Troy,  and  a  fire  kept  constantly  burning  by  the
Vestal  virgins.  The  goddess  received  her  name  from  the  Greek  word
taria,  a  *  hearth/

91  Thy  sacred  rites.1  — Ver.  530.  Julius  Caesar  was  the  '  Pontifex
Maximus,'  or  chief  priest,  and  after  his  death  was  deified.  Allusion  is
here  made  to  him,  or  to  the  Emperor  Augustus,  who  also  received  divine
honours,  and  in  his  lifetime  united  the  imperial  with  the  pontifical
office.

92  Grandson  and  the  son.] — Ver.  533.  Either  one  person,  Tiberius,  the
adopted  son  of  the  god  Augustus,  and  grandson  of  the  god  Julius  ;  or
two  persons,  Tiberius,  the  son,  and  Germanicus,  the  grandson  of  Augustus.

D


34  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  I.  533—548.

refuse  it,  shall  bear  with  godlike  mind  the  burden  which  his
father  bore.  And  as  I  shall,  in  times  to  come,  be  conse-
crated in  everlasting  shrines,  so  shall  Augusta  Julia93  be  a
new  divinity.

When,  with  such  sayings  as  these  she  came  down  to  our
own  times,  her  prophetic  tongue  stopped  short  in  the  very
midst  of  her  accents.  Landing  from  his  ship,  the  exile  stood
on  the  Latian  herbage  ;  happy  the  man94  to  whom  that  coun-
try was  a  place  of  exile  !  And  no  long  delay  was  there ;  new
habitations  were  erected,  and  throughout  the  Ausonian  hills
there  was  no  one  greater  than  the  Arcadian.  Lo,  the  club-
bearing  hero  hither  drives  the  kine  of  Erytheea,95  having
travelled  over  the  length  of  the  vast  world.  And  now  while
the  Tegeaean96  house  is  his  place  of  entertainment,  his  kine  un-
tended  wander  through  the  luxuriant  fields.  It  was  dawn  ;
startled  from  his  slumber,  the  Tirynthian97  guest  perceives  that

Tiberius  alone  is  probably  referred  to,  as  he  did  reign,  which  Germanicus
did  not ;  and  we  are  told  that  he  affected  to  show  great  reluctance  to  as-
sume the  reins  of  government  on  the  death  of  Augustus.

96  Augusta  Julia.] — Ver.  536.  This  was  Livia  Drusilla,  daughter  of
L.  Drusus  Calidanus,  and  wife  of  Tiberius  Nero,  by  whom  she  had  Tiberius
and  Drusus  Germanicus.  Augustus,  in  order  to  marry  her,  divorced  his
wife  Scribonia,  and,  on  his  death,  she  received  the  name  of  Julia  by  virtue
of  his  will.  Though  Ovid  is  here  deifying  the  lady  in  a  spirit  of  anticipa-
tion, and  though  she  survived  him  several  years,  it  actually  was  the  fact,
that  she  was  deified  by  her  grandson  Claudius,  as  Suetonius  and  Tacitus
inform  us.  She  was  a  woman  of  bad  and  unscrupulous  character.
Gower  renders  these  lines  : —

*  As  sure  as  altars  me  perpetually
Shall  worship,  Julia  shall  a  goddess  be/

?4  Happy  the  man.'] — Ver.  540.  If,  as  is  generally  supposed,  these  lines
were  written  by  Ovid  when  himself  in  banishment,  this  expression  perhaps
was  accompanied  by  a  sigh  for  his  far-distant  home.

95  Erythcea.'] — Ver.  543.  Erytha?a  was  an  island  near  Gades,  now  Cadiz,
in  Spain.  Geryon,  a  three-bodied  monster,  lived  there,  possessing  nu-
merous herds  and  flocks ;  Hercules  destroyed  him,  and  drove  his  flocks
and  herds  to  Tirynthus.

96  Tegeceari]. — Ver.  545.  Tegeaea  was  a  city  of  Arcadia,  near  the  Eurotas.
Gower  thus  translates  these  hues  : —

1  And  being  here  entertain'd  by  King  Evander,
His  beasts  unkept  about  the  plains  do  wander.'

57  Tirynthian.] — Ver.  547.  Hercules  was  said  to  have  been  nursed
and  brought  up  at  Tirynthus,  a  town  of  Argolis,  in  Peloponnesus.


b.  I.  548—565.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  35

two  bulls  are  missing  from  his  number.  He  seeks  them,  and
he  sees  not  a  trace  of  the  noiseless  theft ;  the  fierce  Cacus  had
dragged  them  backwards  into  his  cave  ;  Cacus,98  the  dread  and
disgrace  of  the  Aventine  forest,"  no  slight  curse  to  both
neighbours  and  travellers.  Hideous  was  the  appearance  of
the  creature  j1  his  strength  was  in  proportion  to  his  bulk,  his
body  was  huge  :  Mulciber2  was  the  sire  of  this  monster,  and
for  his  habitation  there  was  a  mighty  cavern  made  secret  by
long  passages  retreating  within,  a  den  that  could  hardly  be
found  by  the  wild  beasts  themselves.  Human  heads  and  arms
hang  nailed  over  the  lintels,  and  the  ground  is  quite  blanched,
frightful  with  the  bones  of  men.  The  son  of  Jove  was  de-
parting, a  part  of  his  oxen  having  been  thus  carelessly  tended
by  him,  when  the  stolen  animals  uttered  a  lowing  with  a
hoarse  voice.  "  I  accept  the  recall,"3  he  says  ;  and  tracing  the
sound,  the  avenger  comes  through  the  woods  to  the  accursed
cave.  The  other  had  obstructed  the  approach  by  the  barrier
of  a  mountain  fragment ;  hardly  could  twice  five  yokes  of  oxen
have  moved  that  mass.  The  Hero  strains  with  his  shoulders,
(the  heavens,  I  should  tell  you,  had  once  rested4  on  them),

98  Cacus.'] — Ver.  551.  Fabled  to  have  been  the  son  of  Vulcan  and  Me-
dusa.  According  to  some  accounts,  he  was  a  dishonest,  servant  of  Evander.

99  Aventine  forest.] — Ver.  551.  The  Aventine  was  the  most  extensive
of  the  Roman  hills,  and  was  called  by  that  name  after  an  Alban  king,
who  was  buried  upon  it.  It  was  called  Murcius,,  from  Murcia,  the  goddess
of  sleep,  who  had  a  temple  there,  and  Remonius,  from  Remus,  who  wished
to  found  the  Roman  city  there.

1  Of  the  creature.] — Ver.  553.  '  Viro'  signifies  literally,  either  '  the
man,'  or  the  *  hero ;'  and  Cacus,  by  birth,  belonged  to  the  class  of  heroes
or  demigods.  But  inasmuch  as  he  does  not  seem  to  have  been  worthy  of
the  name,  according  to  our  conception  of  its  import,  and  as,  by  reason
of  his  birth,  he  could  not  be  called  a  man,  the  appellation  used  in  the  text
seems  to  be  the  most  appropriate.

2  Mulciber.] — Ver.  554.  This  was  one  of  the  names  of  Vulcan,  derived
from  '  mulceo,'  '  to  soften  ,'  because,  by  his  art,  he  softened  iron  ;  being
the  god  of  fire  and  the  patron  of  blacksmiths.  He  was  the  son  of  Juno,
and  the  husband  of  Venus.

3  The  recall.] — Ver.  561.  To  be  called  back  when  setting  out  on  a
journey  was  generally  considered  a  bad  omen.  Hercules,  however,  here
thought  it  a  good  one.

1  Had  once  rested.]— Vet.  565.  He  relieved  Atlas,  who  supported  the
heavens,  that  he  might  go  and  pluck  the  golden  fruit  of  the  Hesperides  for
him.  On  his  return  with  the  apples,  Hercules  requested  Atlas  to  hold  the
load  for  a  moment  while  he  made  a  pad  for  his  head.   Atlas  resumed  the


36  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  i.  566—587.

and  moving  it  dislodges  the  mighty  weight.  As  soon  as  it
was  up  torn,  the  crash  startled  the  very  sky,  and  the  earth  sank
down,  struck  by  the  weight  of  the  mass.  Cacus  begins  the  at-
tack hand  to  hand,  and  fiercely  maintains  the  combat  with  stones
and  stakes ;  and  when  he  fails  in  the  use  of  these  resources,
with  but  little  courage  left,  he  resorts  to  the  arts  of  his
father,  and  vomits  forth  flames  from  his  resounding  throat.
Often  as  he  blows  them  forth,  you  would  believe  that
Typhosus5  is  breathing,  and  that  the  rapid  flash  is  hurled
from  the  fires  of  iEtna.  Alcides  grapples  with  him,  and  his
trebly  knotted  club,  swung  back  three  or  four  times,  was  planted
full  upon  the  face6  of  him  opposing.  He  falls,  and  belches  forth
smoke  mingled  with  blood  ;  and  dying,  with  his  broad  chest,  he
beats  the  ground.  Of  those  bulls,  the  conqueror  offers  one  to
thee,  0  Jupiter,  and  invites  Evander  and  the  inhabitants  of  the
country  ;  he  builds  an  altar  to  himself,  which  is  styled  "  the
Greatest,"  in  the  spot7  where  a  part  of  the  city  has  its  name
derived  from  an  ox.8  And  now  the  mother  of  Evander  is  not
silent  on  the  fact,  that  the  time  is  near  at  hand  when  the  earth
shall  have  sufficiently  enjoyed  the  presence  of  her  own  Her-
cules. But,  as  in  her  life  she  was  most  pleasing  to  the  gods,
so,  now  herself  a  goddess,  the  blessed  prophetess  possesses
this  day  as  her  own  in  the  month  of  Janus.

burden,  and  Hercules  forthwith  walked  away  with  the  apples.  The  story
bears  some  allusion,  doubtless,  to  the  fact,  that  Atlas  was  one  of  the
first  to  give  some  knowledge  of  astronomy,  and  perhaps  geography.

5  Typhoeus.] — Ver.  575.  A  giant  called  also  Typhon,  son  of  Tartarus
and  Terra.  Flames  darted  from  his  mouth  and  eyes,  and  he  had  a  hundred
heads,  like  those  of  a  dragon.  Waging  war  upon  the  gods,  he  so
frightened  them,  that  they  fled  in  the  shape  of  various  animals.  Jupiter
at  length  conquered  him  by  his  thunderbolts,  and  placed  him  under  iEtna,
a  volcanic  mountain  of  Sicily.

6  Upon  the  face.'] — Ver.  575,  6.     Gower  renders  these  lines  thus  :—

'  Alcides  drives  on,  and,  with  knotty  bat,
Three  or  four  times  doth  dash  him  o'er  the  pate/

7  *  The  Greatest. ,'] — Ver.  581.  This  altar,  according  to  Livy,  and
Dionysius,  was  built  by  Evander  in  honour  of  Hercules,  and  not  by  Her-
cules himself.  According  to  them,  Carmenta  suggested  the  dedication,
and  the  priests  who  superintended  the  sacred  rites  were  the  Potitii  and
the  Pinarii,  two  illustrious  families  of  the  neighbourhood.

8  From  an  ox.] — Ver.  582.  'The  Forum  Boarium/  or  ox-market,  called
so  from  '  bos/  '  an  ox,'  and  applied  to  that  use  on  account  of  the  sacrifice
there  offered  by  Hercules,  as  mentioned  in  the  text.


B.  i.  587— 598.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  37

On  the  Ides,  the  undented  priest  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter,
offers  on  the  flames  the  entrails  of  a  wether ;  then  every  province
was  restored  to  our  people,8  and  thy  grandsire  was  called  by  the
title  of  Augustus.  Pass  in  review  the  waxen  images9  as  they  are
distributed  through  the  halls  of  the  ennobled  ;  titles  so  great
as  his  never  fell  to  the  lot  of  any  one  man.  Africa  calls  her
conqueror10  after  herself ;  another  hero  in  his  title  records  the
subjection  of  the  Isaurian  power,11  another  the  subjection  of
the  Cretans.12  The  Numidians 13  render  one  man  titled,  Mes-
sana14 makes  another  great  in  story — another  has  derived  his
distinction  from  the  city  of  Numantia.15  Germany  gave  to
Drusus16  both  death  and  a  title.    Ah  me  !  how  short-lived  was

8  Restored  to  our  people.] — Ver.  589.  On  the  Ides  of  January,  b.c.
27,  and  a.u.c.  726,  Augustus  offered  to  resign  his  power.  Being  pressed
to  retain  it,  he  consented,  on  condition  of  handing  over  the  tranquil  pro-
vinces to  the  people,  to  retain  the  unsettled  ones  and  the  army,  under  his
entire  control.  The  senate,  nominally,  at  least,  took  the  management
of  all  the  tranquil  provinces,  and  to  this  fact  allusion  is  here  made.
Octavius  on  this  occasion  received  the  title  of  Augustus.

9  The  waxen  images.'] — Ver.  591.  These  waxen  images  represented
those  persons  who  had  the  privilege  of  using  them.  Those  who  were
called  '  nobiles,'  having  filled  the  office  of  Consul,  Praetor,  Censor,  or  Curule
iEdile,  had  this  privilege,  which  was  called  '  jus  imaginum,'  and  they  were
kept  with  great  care  by  their  posterity,  and  carried  before  them  at  their
funerals.  They  were  painted  busts  as  far  as  the  shoulders,  made  in  wax ;  and
they  were  placed  in  the  '  atria,'  or  halls,  carefully  enclosed  in  wooden  cases,
supplying  much  the  same  place  as  our  family  pictures.  Titles  and
inscriptions  were  written  below  them,  describing  the  honours  and
achievements  of  the  persons  thereby  represented.

10  Calls  her  conqueror.] — Ver.  593.  The  Romans  occasionally  took
an  additional  name,  '  agnomen,'  or  '  cognomen,'  from  some  illustrious  deed
or  great  event.  P.  Cornelius  Scipio,  after  his  victory  over  Syphax,  king
of  Numidia,  in  Africa,  received  the  cognomen  of  Africanus.

11  Isaurian  power.] — Ver.  593.  Publius  Servilius,  the  pro-consul  of
Asia,  conquered  the  Isaurii,  a  people  near  mount  Taurus.  He  received  a
triumph,  and  was  honoured  with  the  '  agnomen'  of  Isauricus.

12  The  Cretans.] — Ver.  594.  Q.  Metellus  was  surnamed  Creticus,
from  the  island  of  Crete,  now  Candia,  which  he  subdued.

13  The  Numidians.] — Ver.  595.  Q.  Caecilius  Metellus  conquered  the
Numidians,  under  their  king  Jugurtha;  whence  his  title  '  Numidicus.'

14  Messana.] — Ver.  595.  '  Messana,'  or  '  Messala,'  in  Sicily,  was  con-
quered by  Valerius  Corvinus  Maximus,  who  assumed  the  agnomen  of
*  Messala.'

15  Numantia.] — Ver.  596.  A  tower  in  Spain,  which,  after  a  fourteen
years'  war,  was  destroyed  by  the  Romans  under  Scipio  jEmilianus,  thence
called  Numantinus,  a.u.c.  622.

16  Drusus.]  —  Ver.  597.     See  note  online  3  above.


38  THE  FASTI;  [b.  i.  598— 612.

that  heroic  career  !  Were  Csesar  to  seek  his  names  from-  the
conquered,  he  would  have  to  assume  as  many  in  number  as
the  vast  world  contains  nations.  Some  celebrated  by  one
circumstance  derive  their  titles  therefrom, — -for  instance,  the
title  gained  from  a  breast-chain17  won,  or  the  assistance  af-
forded by  a  raven.18  0  thou  entitled  ( Great/19  thy  title  is  the
full  measure  of  thy  achievements ;  but  he  who  overcame
thee  was  too  great  for  any  title.  And  there  is  no  grada-
tion of  epithet  beyond  the  Fabii  ;20  that  house  was  entitled
e  the  greatest/  for  their  services.  But  yet  all  these  are  rendered
illustrious  by  honours  merely  human ;  he,  however,  has  a  title
in  common  with  supreme  Jove.  Our  forefathers  style  the
sacred  rites  e  august ;' 21  the  temples  are  called  c  august'  when
consecrated  in  due  form  by  the  hand  of  the  Pontiffs.  Augury
too  is  derived  from  the  source  of  this  word,22  and  whatsoever

17  Breast-chain.'] — Ver.  601.  Titus  Manlius  conquered  a  gigantic
Gaul  in  single  combat,  and  stripping  him  of  his  collar,  or  breast-chain,

*  torques,'  obtained  the  title  of  Torquatus  from  the  circumstance.

18  By  a  raven."] — Ver.  602.  Marcus  Valerius,  a  military  tribune  under
Camillus,  fighting  with  a  champion  of  the  Senones  in  single  combat,  was
aided  by  a  raven,  which,  attacking  his  enemy  in  the  face  with  beak  and
claws,  enabled  him  to  gain  an  easy  victory.  From  '  corvus/  '  a  raven/  he
obtained  the  surname  '  Corvinus/

19  Entitled  '  Great.*] — Ver.  603.  Cneius  Pompeius,  surnamed  'Magnus/
or  '  the  Great/  from  his  great  successes.  He  was  son  of  Pompeius  Strabo,
who  was  distinguished  in  the  Italic  war.  He  is  generally  called  Pompey
the  Great,  by  an  adaptation  of  his  name  to  our  ideas  of  euphony.  He  was
conquered  by  Caesar  at  Pharsalia,  and  was  treacherously  slain.

20  The  Fabii.] — Ver.  605.  Q.  Fabius  Rutilianus,  according  to  Livy,
book  ix.  c.  46,  for  his  efforts  in  restoring  concord,  and  lessening  the  power
of  the  populace  during  civic  elections,  received  the  surname  of  '  Maximus/
or  '  Greatest/  as  a  benefactor  to  his  country,  which  name  his  descendants
bore.  According  to  the  genealogists,  our  gracious  Queen  is  a  descendant
of  the  Fabii,  and,  if  so,  she  has,  perhaps,  a  double  claim  to  the  name  of

*  Maxima.'  In  the  next  book  Ovid  mentions  the  tradition  that  the  Fabii
were  descended  from  Hercules.

21  August.] — Ver.  609.  He  seems  to  imply  that  the  word  'Augustus'  is
derived  from  the  same  root,  l-  augurium/  '  an  omen/  as  though '  consecrated
by  augury/  or  'omen/  or  'understood  by  means  of  the  birds.'  This  name,
an  epithet  of  divinity,  was  considered  beyond  any  human  title.  The
Greeks  translated  it  by  cra/Baoroe.  from  aepw,  '  to  worship.'

22  Source  of  this  word.] — Ver.  611.  The  poet  seems  to  mean,  that
1  augurium  '  and  f  augustus  '  come  from  one  origin,  connected  with  '  avis/
'  a  bird/  and  perhaps,  i  gero/  Ho  bear.'   He  also  appears  obscurely  to  hint,


b .  i.  612— 628.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  39

Jupiter  blesses  with  increase  by  his  aid,  May  he  increase
the  sway  of  our  chief,  may  he  increase  his  years  ;  and,  Csesar,
long  may  the  chaplet  of  oak-leaves23  shade  thy  doors.  The  gods
being  propitious,  may  the  inheritor  of  a  title  so  illustrious
take  upon  himself  the  burden  of  the  world  with  the  same
auspices  that  his  father  did.

When  the  third  Titan24  shall  look  back  upon  the  by-gone
Ides,  there  will  be  a  repetition  of  the  sacred  rites  of  the
Parrhasian  goddess.  For  in  former  days,  before  the  circum-
stances to  which  I  allude,  covered  chariots  used  to  carry  the
Ausonian  matrons  ;  (these,  too,  I  believe  to  have  been  named25
after  the  parent  of  Evander.)  In  after-times  this  honour
being  withdrawn  from  them,  each  matron  formed  the  de-
termination by  no  issue  to  renew  the  image  of  her  hated
lord ;  and  that  she  might  yield  no  offspring,  reckless,  with
secret  blows26  she  was  in  the  habit  of  loosening  from  her
womb  the  growing  burden.  They  say  that  the  senate  repri-
manded the  matrons  who  had  dared  to  perpetrate  these  in-
human deeds,  but  that  nevertheless  they  restored  the  privilege
that  had  been  taken  from  them.  And  they  now  order  two
sets  of  festivals  to  be  kept  in  honour  of  the  Tegsean  mother,

that  'augeo/  'to  increase/  is  derived  from  the  same  source,  per-
haps meaning  that  '  increase '  was  portended  by,  and  the  necessary  con-
sequence of,  good  omens.  The  612th  line  is  of  somewhat  obscure  sig-
nification.

23  Chaplet  of  oak-leaves. ~\ — Ver.  614.  This  was  the  civic  crown,  and
was  presented  to  him  who  had  saved  the  life  of  a  Roman  citizen.  When
the  senate  decreed  the  title  of  Augustus  to  Octavius,  they  ordered,  in
their  adulation,  that  a  civic  crown  should  be  suspended  from  his  house,
between  two  laurel  branches  which  were  set  on  either  side  of  his  gate.

24  Titan.] — Ver.  617.  An  epithet  of  the  sun.  The  Carmentalia  now
return,  not  in  honour  of  Carmenta,  but  of  her  two  sisters,  Porrima  and
Postverta.

25  To  have  been  named.] — Ver.  620.  He  suggests  a  silly  derivation  of
'  carpentum/  '  a  chariot/  from  the  name  of  Carmenta,  The  Roman
matrons  received  the  privilege  of  the  chariot  for  their  generosity  after  the
capture  of  the  city  of  Veii,  when  they  contributed  their  jewels  to  aid
Camillus  in  performing  his  vow  to  Apollo.

26  With  secret  blows.]— Yer.  622-3.  These  lines  are  thus  rendered
by  Gower : —

•  And  to  prevent  her  embryon,  every  mother
Forced  from  her  womb  by  some  close  means  or  other/


40  THE  FASTI;  [b.  i.  628— 643.

both  for  the  boys  and  the  girls.27  It  is  not  allowed  to  bring
within  her  holy  place  any  thing  made  of  hide,28  that  sub-
stances deprived  of  life,  by  dying  a  natural  death,  may  not
defile  the  unpolluted  hearth.  If  you  are  one  who  have  any
taste  for  ancient  ceremonies,  stand  by  the  priest  who  is  pray-
ing ;  you  will  then  catch  names  which  were  unknown  to  you
before.29  Porrima  and  Postverta  are  bein  propitiated,  either
thy  sisters,  0  Msenalian  nymph,  or  companions  of  thy  exile.
The  one  is  believed  to  have  sung  of  that  which  was  long  past,30
the  other  to  have  prophecied  what  would  happen  hereafter  in
the  revolution  of  time.

Fair  Concord,31  the  succeeding  day  placed  in  thee  in  a  snow-
white  shrine,  where  elevated  Moneta32  raises  her  steps  on
high  :  now  with  ease  wilt  thou  look  down  upon  the  Latian
crowd ;  now  have  the  august  hands  of  Ccesar  replaced  thee.

Furius,  the  conqueror  of  the  Etrurian  people,  vowed  the
ancient  temple,  and  long  since  discharged  the  obligations
of  his  vow.     The  occasion  was,  that  the  commonalty  having


27  Boys  and  the  girls, ,] — Ver.  628.  By  way  of  expiation  for  the
children  of  both  sexes  that  had  been  so  made  away  with.

28  Made  of  hide.] — Ver.  629.  It  was  forbidden  to  bring  leather  arti-
cles not  only  into  this  temple,  but  all  others.  At  the  same  time  the  rule
was  confined  to  the  skins  of  animals  which  had  died  a  natural  death.  The
priests  were  allowed  to  wear  leather  sandals,  made  from  the  hides  of
beasts  that  had  been  killed  by  them  for  sacrifice.

29  Unknown  to  you  before.] — Ver.  632.  He  seems  to  imply  that  these
deities,  Porrima  and  Postverta,  were  but  little  known,  and  the  origin  of
their  worship  little  enquired  into.  Porrima  is  so  called  only  in  this  place,
and  by  Servius  (on  the  iEneid,  Book  viii.  line  336).  Macrobius  (Sat.
i.  7)  calls  her  'Antevorta;'  and  Aulus  Gellius  (Attic  Nights,  Book  xvi.  6),
*  Prosa/  or  'Prorsa.'  The  name  of  the  first  signifies  i turning,'  or  ' looking
before;'  of  the  other,  'looking  behind. '  Though  the  poet  does  not  say  so,
from  what  we  learn  from  A.  Gellius,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  were
obstetrical  deities,  to  be  invoked  against  the  perils  of  difficult  partu-
rition.

30  Long  past.] — Ver.  635.  'Porro*  generally  signifies  'the  future ;'
but  its  original  meaning  might  have  been  '  afar  off/  in  either  sense.

31  Fair  Concord.] — Ver.  637-39.  He  says  that  on  the  following  day,
the  17th  of  the  calends  of  February,  the  most  ancient  of  the  temples  of
the  goddess  of  Peace  has  been  vowed  by  Furius  Camillus,  the  Roman
general,  when  he  had  conquered  the  Veienses,  a  people  of  Etruria.

32  Moneta.] — Ver.  638.  The  temple  of  Juno  Moneta  stood  in  the
Capitol :  a  flight  of  one  hundred  steps  led  to  it  from  the  temple  of  Con-
cord.    It  was  the  Mint,  or  place  of  coinage.


B.  i.  643—654.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  41

taken  up  arms,  had  seceded33  from  the  senators,  and  Rome
herself  was  in  dread  of  her  own  strength.  The  late  occasion
is  a  more  happy34  one  ;  Germany,  venerated  chief,  extends
her  dishevelled  locks,35  vanquished  under  thy  auspices.  Thence
it  is  that  thou  hast  offered36  the  first  fruits  of  a  nation,  and
hast  constructed  a  temple  to  the  goddess,  the  peculiar  object  of
thy  veneration.  This,  thy  ancestress37  has  endowed  both  with
property  and  with  its  altar,  the  only  woman  found  worthy  of
the  couch  of  our  great  Jove.

When  this  festival  shall  have  passed  by,  then,  0  Phoebus,
Capricorn  being  left,  thou  wilt  run  thy  course  through  the
constellation  of  the  youth  that  carries  the  water.38

When  the  seventh  Orient  sun  from  this  shall  have  plunged  him-
self into  the  waves,  then  shall  no  Lyre39  be  glittering  through-

33  Had  seceded.] — Ver.  643.  The  dissension  of  the  patrician  and
plebeian  orders  respecting  the  election  of  the  consuls  ended  in  the  election
of  one  plebeian  consul,  Lucius  Sextus,  a.u.c.  328.  This  arrangement
was  brought  about  by  Camillus,  in  his  fifth  dictatorship.

34  A  more  happy  one.]  — Ver.  645.  This  is  a  compliment  to  Tibe-
rius. The  first  temple  was  built  in  consequence  of  civil  commotion  ;  the
second  on  the  conquest  of  Germany.

35  Her  dishevelled  locks.'] — Ver.  646.  It  was  the  custom  to  shave  the
heads  of  captives.  Ovid  may  here  be  speaking  figuratively,  or  perhaps
literally.  The  hair  of  Germany  was  much  valued  by  the  Roman  ladies
for  making  false  tresses  ;  and  perhaps  a  supply  of  hair  for  the  wig-makers
was  exacted  from  the  conquered  people.  Gower's  translation  of  these
lines  is,

'  Brave  prince,  thy  thundering  knocks
Made  Germany  cut  short  her  dangling  locks/

36  Hast  offered.] — Ver.  647.  Tiberius  repulsed  the  Germans,  and
conquered  Illyrium.  On  his  triumph  he  entertained  the  people  at  ]  000
tables,  and  gave  to  each  man  300  sestertii.  The  poet  may  here  allude  to
this,  or  more  probably  to  the  offering  of  the  first-fruits  of  conquest  to  the
deities,  and  especially  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  of  Concord  by
Tiberius.

87  Ancestress.] — Ver.  649.  Livia,  the  mother  of  Tiberius,  and  the
grandmother  of  Germanicus.

33  That  carries  the  water.] — Ver.  652.  On  the  16th  of  the  calends  of
February  the  sun  leaves  the  constellation  of  Capricorn,  and  enters  that
of  Aquarius,  '  the  Water-bearer.'  Ganymede,  the  cup-bearer  of  Jupiter,
is  said  by  Ovid  to  have  been  translated  to  this  constellation.  Gower
translates  these  lines,

*  These  things  thus  past,  Sol  leaving  Capricorn,
His  race-horse  to  the  water-boy  doth  turn/

39  No  Lyre  ] — Ver.  654.  On  the  10th  of  the  calends  of  February  the
Lyre  sets  heliacally.


42  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  i.  654—672.

out  the  whole  heavens.  After  the  setting  of  this  constella-
tion, at  the  approach  of  night,  the  fire  which  twinkles40  in  the
centre  of  the  lion's  breast  shall  be  plunged  into  the  deep.

Three  or  four  times  had  I  turned41  over  the  calendar  that
marks  out  the  seasons  of  observance,  and  yet  no  Sementive
holiday42  was  found  by  me  ;  when  the  Muse  (for  she  perceived
my  difficulty)  says,  "  This  festival  is  announced  by  proclama-
tion ;  why  dost  thou  seek  from  the  calendar  to  find  a  moveable
feast  1  And  yet,  although  the  day  of  the  festival  is  unfixed,
the  season  is  fixed ;  it  is  when  the  ground  is  impregnated
with  the  scattered  seed.  Bedecked  with  garlands,  stand  at
the  well-filled  stall,  ye  oxen  ;  with  the  warm  spring  your  task
shall  return.  Let  the  farmer  hang  on  its  peg  the  plough
discharged  from  service;43  the  cold  ground  shudders  at  an
incision.  Do,  farmer,  give  some  rest  to  the  earth,  now  that
seed-time  is  past ;  give  some  rest  to  the  men,  too,  who  have
tilled  the  ground.  Let  the  hamlet44  keep  holiday  ;  purify  the
village,  ye  swains,  and  to  the  hamlet's  altars  give  your  yearly
cakes.45  Let  Ceres  and  Tellus,  mothers  of  the  fruits,  be  pro-
pitiated  with  their  own  corn,  and  the   entrails  of  a  preg-

40  The  fire  which  twinkles.'] — Ver.  656.  The  star  Regulus,  in  the  con-
stellation Leo,  on  the  ninth  of  the  calends  of  February,  about  nightfall,
sets  acronically.  Columella  says,  it  sets  on  the  sixth  of  the  calends  of
February.

41  /  turned  over."} — Ver.  657.  Literally,  '  I  rolled  over/  If  this  is  to
be  read  literally,  it  would  rather  apply  to  the  scroll  form  of  book  than  the
paged  book  of  more  recent  introduction,  and  which  we  have  noticed  in
the  note  to  line  19  above.

42  Sementive  holiday.'] — Ver.  658.  For  an  account  of  the  '  dies  stativse'
and  * conceptivas,'  see  the  Introduction.

43  Discharged  from  service.] — Ver.  665.  'Emeritus'  is  properly  applied
to  the  soldier,  discharged  when  the  time  of  military  service  has  expired.

44  The  hamlet.]— Ver.  669.  'Pagus.'  Servius  Tullius  divided  the
Roman  territory  into  '  pagi.'  There  was  in  each  '  pagus '  an  altar,  on
which,  during  the  'paganalia,'  a  yearly  sacrifice  was  offered  by  the
4  Pagani,'  or  people  of  the  '  pagus.'  This  feast  was  in  honour  of  the  rustic
gods,  and  was  instituted  by  Servius  Tullius.  As  the  country  people  were
in  general  the  last  to  adopt  Christianity,  the  name  of  'Pagan'  came  in
time  to  be  equivalent  to  the  term  '  heathen.'

45  Yearly  cakes.] — ^  er.  670.  These  were  called  irk\avoi  by  the
Greeks.  They  were  made  of  eggs,  flour,  milk,  and  oil,  and  were  offered
"by  the  different  families  of  the  'pagus.'  The  purification  was  made  by
pending  the  victims  round  the  '  pagus '  before  they  were  sacrificed.


B.  I.  672—705.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  43

nant  sow.  Ceres  and  the  earth46  discharge  an  united  duty.
The  one  supplies  the  origin  of  the  crops,  the  other  the  situation.
Partners  in  toil  are  they,  by  whom  antiquity  was  civilized,  and
the  acorn  from  the  oak-tree  was  replaced  by  a  more  wholesome
food.  Glut  the  greedy  husbandmen  with  boundless  crops,
that  they  may  receive  rewards  worthy  of  their  tillage.  Give
ye  uninterrupted  growth  to  the  tender  seed,  and  let  not  the
shooting  blade  be  withered  during  the  cold  snows.  While
we  are  sowing,  clear  the  skies  with  cloudless  breezes ;  when
the  seed  is  covered  in,  besprinkle  it  with  the  rain  of  heaven.
And  do  ye  take  heed  that  the  birds,  a  nuisance  to  the  tilled
fields,  do  not  in  mischievous  flocks  lay  waste  the  gifts  of  Ceres.
You,  too,  ye  ants,  spare  the  grain  when  sown ;  after  the  har-
vest there  will  be  a  better  opportunity  for  plunder.  Mean-
while, let  the  standing  corn  spring  up  free  from  the  leprous
mildew,  and  let  not  the  sickly  crop  grow  wan  from  the  dis-
tempered atmosphere  ;  neither  let  it  pine  away  from  meagre-
ness,  nor  let  it,  too  luxuriant  and  all  run  to  blade,  perish  by
its  own  rankness.  Let  the  fields  also  be  clear  of  darnel  that
weakens  the  eyes,  and  let  not  the  sterile  wild  oat  rise  in  the
cultivated  soil.  Let  the  land  return,  with  heavy  interest,  the
produce  of  the  wheat  and  the  barley,  and  the  spelt  destined
twice  to  endure47  the  fire.  These  wishes  do  I  entertain  for  you,
these  wishes  entertain  for  yourselves,  ye  husbandmen,  and
may  either  goddess  render  these  prayers  efficient.  Wars  long
engaged  mankind ;  the  sword  was  more  handy  than  the
ploughshare,  and  the  ploughing  bull  gave  place  to  the  charger.
Then  the  hoes  used  to  lie  idle,  the  spades  were  turned  into
pikes,  and  from  the  pondrous  harrow  the  helmet  was  wrought.
Thanks  to  the  gods  and  to  thy  house  !  wars  long  since  bound
in  chains  lie  prostrate  under  our  feet.  Let  the  ox  come  be-
neath the  yoke,  and  the  seed  beneath  the  ploughed  soil.  Peace
nurtures  Ceres ;  Ceres  is  the  nursling  of  Peace.

But  on  the  day  which  is  the  sixth  before  the  approaching

46  The  earth.'] — Ver.  673.  Worshipped  by  the  Romans  under  the
name  of  <  Tellus,'  '  Ops,'  '  Tellumo/  and  '  Bona  Dea,'  '  the  good  goddess.'
According  to  Varro,  the  Earth  was  male  in  producing  seed,  female  in
nourishing  it.  She  is  sometimes  confounded  with  her  partner,  Ceres.
They  are  here  represented  as  teaching  the  aborigines  to  abandon  the  acorn
for  the  cultivation  of  wheat.

47  Twice  to  endure.] — Ver.  693.  The  ancients  used  to  parch  their
corn  before  they  ground  it.


44  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  i.  705—724.

calends,  their  temple  was  dedicated  to  the  gods,  the  sons  of
Leda.48  The  brothers  sprung  from  the  race  of  the  gods
erected  it  in  honour  of  the  divine  brothers,  near  the  lake  of
Juturna.  My  song  itself  now  brings  me  to  the  altar  of  Peace.
This  will  be  the  second  day  from  the  end  of  the  month.  Come
hither,  0  Peace,  with  thy  well  arranged  tresses  encircled  with
Actian  boughs,49  and  in  thy  gentleness  take  up  thy  abode
through  the  whole  world.  While  there  are  no  foes,  let  there
be  no  occasion  for  triumph  ;  thou  shalt  be  to  our  chieftains
a  boast  greater  than  war.  Let  the  soldier  bear  arms,  only  for
the  purpose  of  putting  down  the  use  of  arms.  By  the  wildly
sounding  trumpet  let  no  blast  be  sounded  but  that  of  the
pageant.  Let  all  the  earth,  far  and  near,  dread  the  descend-
ants of  iEneas  ;  and  if  there  shall  be  any  land  that  dreads  not
Rome,  then  let  it  love  her.  Throw,  ye  priests,  the  incense  on
the  fires  lighted  in  honour  of  Peace,  and  let  the  white  victim
fall,  with  stricken  forehead.  Entreat  too,  the  gods  inclining
to  your  hallowed  prayers,  that  the  family  which  gives  us  peace
may  equal  her  in  eternal  duration.  But  now  the  first  portion
of  my  task  is  completed,  and  together  with  its  month  my
little  book  comes  to  a  close.

48  Sons  of  Leda."] — Ver.  706.  Castor  and  Pollux  were  the  twin  sons
of  Leda  by  Jupiter,  a.u.c.  769,  Tiberius  built  a  temple  in  their  honour,
in  his  own  name  and  that  of  his  brother  Drusus.  The  divinities  were
called  '  Dioscuri/  '  sons  of  Jove/  Their  temple  was  built  near  lake
Juturna  and  the  temple  of  Vesta.

49  Actian  boughs.} — Ver.  711.  Augustus  gained  a  great  naval  victory
over  Antony  and  Cleopatra  near  Actium,  a  town  of  Epirus,  a.u.c.  723.  He
soon  after  closed  the  temple  of  Janus,  in  token  of  universal  peace.


B.  II.  1—5.]  OB,    CALENDAR    OF    OTTD.  45


BOOK  THE  SECOND.


CONTENTS.


The  nature  of  the  subject  and  the  dedication,  ver.  1 — 18.  •-<  Some  remarks
on  the  Februa,  from  which  the  month  derives  its  name,  19 — 34.  The
common  opinion  on  the  efficacy  of  purgations,  35 — 46.  On  the  ancient
place  of  February  among  the  months,  and  the  change  in  its  position,
47 — 54.  The  calends  of  February  distinguished  by  the  dedication  of
the  temple  of  Juno  Sospita ;  the  praises  of  Caesar ;  the  ceremony  in
the  grove  of  the  asylum ;  the  sacred  rites  of  Jupiter,  55 — 70.  The
cause  of  tempests  at  this  season,  70 — 72.  The  setting  of  the  Lyre  and
of  the  Lion  midway,  73 — 7&.  The  setting  of  the  Dolphin  and  the  story
of  Arion,  whose  Dolphin  is  placed  among  the  constellations,  79 — 118.
Augustus  styled  the  father  of  his  country;  his  great  virtues,  and  a
comparison  of  him  with  Romulus,  119 — 144.  The  rising  of  Aqua-
rius, and  the  milder  breezes  consequent  thereon,  145 — 148.  The  be-
ginning of  spring,  149 — 152.  Arctophylax  rises ;  the  story  connected
with  it,  153 — 192.  The  sacred  rites  of  Faunus  and  the  slaughter  of
the  Fabii,  193 — 242.  The  constellations  of  the  Crow,  the  Snake,  and
the  Cup  rise,  and  their  story  is  related,  243 — 266.  The  rites  of  the
Lupercalia  and  their  origin,  with  the  story  of  Hercules,  Omphale,  and
Faunus,  and  the  exposure  and  preservation  of  Romulus  and  Remus,
267 — 452.  The  changeableness  of  the  weather,  453 — 456.  The  entry
of  the  Sun  into  the  Fishes ;  their  story  is  related,  457 — 474.  The  Qui-
rinalia  and  the  deification  of  Romulus  ;  the  festival  of  Fools  and  of  the
goddess  Fornax,  475 — 532.  The  propitiation  of  the  Manes,  533—570.
The  sacred  rites  of  Muta or  Tacita,  571—616.  The  Caristia,  617—618.
the  Terminalia,  639 — 684.  The  rape  of  Lucretia  and  the  expulsion  of
the  kings,  685—852.  The  return  of  the  swallow,  853—856.  The
Equiria,  857—864.

The  month  of  Janus  is  brought  to  a  close  ;  with  my  song  the
year  grows  apace.  As  a  second  month  progresses,  so  let  a
second  book  proceed.  Now  for  the  first  time,  elegiac  strains,
do  ye  speed  onward  with  more  stately  sail ;  you  were,  I  re-
member, but  lately  of  trifling  account.1  I  myself  have  employed

1  Of  trifling  account.'] — Ver,  4.  The  Elegiac  measure,  which  Ovid  uses
in  this  poem,  was  usually  employed  on  subjects  of  a  trifling  nature.     This


46  THE   FASTI;  [b.  II.  5— 29.

you  as  ready  agents  in  love,  when  my  early  youth  sported  in
numbers  adapted  to  it.  I  am  the  same  who  now  sing  of  sacred
subjects  and  the  days  of  observance  as  they  are  marked  in  the
calendar.  Who  could  believe  that  such  could  have  proved2  a
path  to  these  subjects  ?  This  is  my  line  of  service  ;  what  arms
I  can,  I  bear,  and  my  right  hand  is  not  destitute  of  every  skill.
If  javelins  are  not  hurled  by  me  with  mighty  arm,  and  if  by
me  the  back  of  the  warrior  steed  is  not  pressed  ;  if  I  am  not
cased  in  the  helmet,  nor  girded  with  the  sharp  sword,  (any  one,
forsooth,  may  be  skilled  in  such  arms  as  these),  still,  Csesar,
with  zealous  breast  I  trace  onwards  thy  deeds  of  glory,  and
proceed  on  my  path  through  the  recital  of  thy  titles.  Be
thou  then  present,  and  reward  with  benign  aspect  my  services,
if  but  for  a  moment ;  if  thou  hast  any  leisure  from  thy  task
of  forcing  the  enemy  to  sue  for  peace.

Our  Roman  forefathers  called  atoning  sacrifices  by  the  name
of  c  Februa  ;' 3  and  even  now  many  traces  of  its  meaning  confirm
this  signification  of  the  expression.  The  Pontiffs  ask  wool  of  the
king  of  the  sacrifices  and  of  the  Flamen4,  the  name  of  which  in
the  ancient  dialect  was  f  Februa  ;'  and  the  purifying  substances
which  the  lictor  takes  for  the  houses  when  ascertained  as  being
impure,  the  parched  spelt  with  the  grain  of  salt,  are  called  by
the  same  name.  This  too  is  the  name  of  the  bough,  which,
lopped  from  a  consecrated  tree,  covers  with  its  foliage  the
holy  temples  of  the  priests.  I  myself  have  seen  the  Flaminica
asking  for  the  c  Februa ;'  a  bough  of  pine  was  presented  to
her  making  this  request  for  the   '  Februa '   by  name.      In  a

was  the  character  of  many  of  his  previous  compositions  in  this  kind  of
verse.     Gower  translates  these  lines  : —

1  Now,  Elegies,  your  sails  you  'gin  display,
Methoughts  you  were  but  little  flags  to-day.'

2  Such  could  have  proved.'] — Ver.  8.  Namely, his  '  Amours'  and  *  the
Art  of  Love,'  upon  which  he  had  formerly  employed  the  Elegiac  measure.

6  Februa.] — Ver.  19.  According  to  Varro  (on  Rustic  Matters,  Book  5),
this  word  was  <3f  Sabine  origin.  It  probably  came  from  '  ferveo,'  '  to  be
hot,'  inasmuch  as  purification  was  effected  through  the  medium  of  heat.

4  Flamen.] — Ver.  21.  The  '  Pontifex'  was  a  priest  who  sacrificed  to  all
the  gods ;  the  'Flamen'  dedicated  his  service  to  but  one  deity ;  the  'Flamen
Dialis,'  or  priest  of  Jupiter,  held  the  highest  office  among  the  Flamens.
Among  other  privileges,  that  of  being  attended  by  a  lictor  was  one.  The
flaminica'  was  the  wife  of  the  Flamen  Dialis,  Her  assistance  was  essential
in  the  performance  of  certain  sacred  duties ;  and,  as  the  Flamen  was  re-
stricted to  one  marriage,  if  the  Flaminica  died  he  was  obliged  to  resign.


B.  II.  29 — 40.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OF  OVID.  47

word,  whatever  there  is  by  means  of  which  our  breasts  are  puri-
fied, it  had  with  our  unshaven  ancestors5  this  name.  From  these
circumstances  the  month  derives  its  name,6  either  because  the
Luperci7  with  thongs  of  hide,  purify  all  the  country,  and  con-
sider that  rite  an  expiation;  or  because  the  season  is  purified,  the
shades  of  the  dead  being  appeased  when  the  days  devoted  to
their  offerings  have  passed  by.  Our  ancients  believed  that  purifi-
cation was  efficacious  to  remove  every  curse,  and  every  cause  of
evil.  Greece  was  the  originator  of  the  custom  ;  she  believes  that
the  guilty,  when  purified,  forthwith  divest  themselves  of  guilt.
Peleus  rid  of  guilt  the  grandson  of  Actor,8  as  Acastus  by  the
agency  of  the  Haemonian9  waters  released  Peleus  himself  from

5  Unshaven  ancestors.'] — Ver.  30.  The  Romans  did  not  shave  until  the
year  454  a.  u.  c,  about  300  years  before  Christ.  According  to  Pliny  the
Elder,  Nat.  Hist.  p.  59,  Ticinius  Mena  first  introduced  a  barber  into  Rome.
According  to  others  it  was  Scipio.  In  the  sixth  Book  of  the  Fasti,  line
264,  Ovid  calls  Numa  '  intonsus,'  '  unshaven.'  Horace  calls  Cato  by  the
same  appellation,  Odes,  Book  2,  ode  16,

6  Derives  its  name.'] — Ver.  31.  He  says  that  February  is  so  called  from
1  Februa,'  '  purifying  objects,'  either  because  the  Luperci  purify  by  their
rites  in  honour  of  Faunus  ;  or  because  in  this  month  the  graves  are  pu-
rified by  the  propitiation  of  the  shades  of  the  dead.

7  The  Luperci.] — Ver. 31.  The  Luperci,  whose  rites  are  described  in  the
present  book,  were  priests  of  Pan,  and  were  so  called  from  '  lupus,'  a
1  wolf,'  as  Pan  was  supposed  to  protect  the  flocks  from  wolves.  Hence  his
place  of  worship  was  called  '  Lupercal,'  and  his  rites  were  the  '  Lupercalia.'
They  ran  through  the  city  naked,  with  the  exception  of  a  girdle  of  goat-
skin round  the  waist;  and  they  carried  thongs  of  the  same  in  their  hands,
striking  whomsoever  they  met,  and  in  particular  married  women,  who
were  supposed  to  be  rendered  prolific  thereby.  There  were  of  the  Luperci
three  divisions,  two  ancient,  the  Fabiani,  and  the  Quintiliani,  and  a  third  in
honour  of  Julius  Caesar.  They  were  not  abolished  until  the  time  of
Anastasius,  in  the  commencement  of  the  sixth  century  after  Christ.

8  The  grandson  of  Actor.] — Ver.  39.  Patroclus,  son  of  Mensetius,  was
forced  to  fly  from  Opus,  where  his  father  reigned,  having  accidentally
slain  Chrysonomus,  son  of  Amphidamus,  and  retired  to  the  court  of  Peleus,
king  of  Thessaly,  and  the  father  of  Achilles,  where  he  was  kindly  enter-
tained. He  was  slain  by  Hector  in  tfte  Trojan  war.  Peleus  was  the  son
of  iEacus :  he  and  Telamon  having  slain  Phocus,  their  half-brother,
Peleus  fled  to  Phthia,  where  he  was  purified  by  Eurytion,  or  by  the
father  of  Eurytion.  Having  in  the  chase  of  the  Calydonian  boar  acci-
dentally slain  fiurytion,  he  was  purified  a  second  time  by  Acastus,  the
king  of  Iolchos.  The  poet  is  mistaken  in  saying  that  it  was  Acastus  who
absolved  Peleus  from  the  murder  of  Phocus.

9  Bcemonian.]-— Ver.  40.  So  called  either  from  Mount  Haemus,  in  Thes-
saly, or  from  Hsemon  son  of  Deucalion.  The  ancients  considered  sea
water  more  efficacious  for  this  purpose  than  fresh  or  spring  water.


48  THE   FASTI;  [b.  II.  40—54.

the  blood  of  Phocus.  The  too  easily  persuaded  iEgeus10
assisted  with  ill-deserved  aid  the  Phasian  borne  on  her  har-
nessed dragons  through  the  air.  The  son  of  Amphiaraus11  said
to  the  Naupactan  Achelous12,  "  absolve  me  of  my  guilt."
Whereupon  he  did  absolve  him  of  his  guilt.  Ah !  too  credulous
mortals,  who  imagine  that  the  guilt  of  bloodshed  can  be
removed  by  the  waters  of  the  stream.

But,  however,  that  thou  mayst  not  be  perplexed  through
ignorance  of  the  ancient  arrangement ;  the  month  of  Janus,
as  now  it  is,  so  formerly  it  was  the  first  month.  The  month
that  follows  that  of  Janus  was  by  name  the  last13  of  the  ancient
year ;  thou  also,  0  Terminus,  didst  conclude  the  sacred  rites.
For  the  month  of  Janus  is  first,  because  the  gate  is  at  the
very  entrance ;  the  last  month  was  that  which  is  consecrated
to  the  shades  of  the  dead  below.  In  times  after,  the  Decem-
virs14 are  thought  to  have  placed  in  succession,  the  periods
before  separated  by  so  long  an  interval.

10  JEgeus.] — Ver.  41.  ^Egeus  was  king  of  Athens?  and  son  of  Pandion.
Medea  having  revenged  herself  upon  Jason  hy  the  slaughter  of  his  chil-
dren, fled  in  a  chariot,  drawn  by  dragons,  to  the  court  of  iEgeus,  whose
protection  she  obtained  by  promising  to  instruct  him  how  to  raise  issue.
She  is  called  *  the  Phasian/  from  Phasis,  a  river  of  Colchis,  her  native
country.

11  The  son  of  Amphiaraus .] — Ver.  43.  Alcmaeon.  Amphiaraus,  the
prophet,  concealed  himself,  in  order  that  he  might  not  accompany  the
Argive  expedition  against  Thebes,  as  he  knew  that  he  was  doomed  to
perish  there.  His  wife  Eriphyle,  bribed  by  Polynices  with  a  golden  neck-
lace, betrayed  him.  On  going  to  the  war  he  charged  his  son  Alcmaeon  to
avenge  his  death,  who,  on  hearing  that  his  father  had  fallen,  slew  his
mother,  and  was  purified  by  Pheggeus  in  Arcadia,  but  being  still  per-
secuted by  the  Furies,  was  purified  by  the  river  Achelous  a  second  time.

12  Achelous.] — Ver.  43.  A  river  of  Acarnania,  near  Mount  Pindus.
which  falls  into  the  gulf  of  Corinth.  Naupactus,  now  Lepanto,  was  a
town  in  iEtolia,  which  derived  its  name  from  ship-building  there  carried
on.     Gower  translates  the  two  following  lines  : —

*  Ah,  too,  too  silly,  who  imagine  water
Can  wash  away  that  heavy  crime  of  slaughter/

13  The  last.] — Ver.  49.  Ovid  is  the  only  author  that  mentions  the  fact,
that  when  Numa  added  the  two  months  to  the  year,  he  placed  January
first  and  February  last,  or  twelfth,  and  that  as  being  last  or  lowest  of  the
months,  he  dedicated  it  to  the  shades  below.  According  to  him,  the
Decemviri  transposed  its  place  from  after  December  to  after  January,  from
twelfth  to  second,  thus  joining  the  periods  that  before,  counting  onwards,
had  been  separated  by  a  long  interval.

14  The  Decemvirs.] — Ver.  54.  Bis  quiniviri.   Literally,  %  the  twice  five


B    ii.  55—69-]  OK,    CALENDAR    OF    OYID.  49

In  the  beginning  of  the  month,  the  temple  of  the  Goddess
the  Preserver,15  adjoining  to  that  of  the  Phrygian  Mother,  is
said  to  have  been  enriched  by  new  shrines.  You  ask,  where  is
now  the  temple  consecrated  to  the  Goddess  on  those  calends  ?  it
has  perished  by  length  of  time.  The  watchful  care  of  our  sacred
chief  has  provided  that  the  other  temples  should  not  fall  down,
tottering  with  similar  ruin  ;  under  him  the  temples  feel  not  the
ravages  of  time  ;  it  is  not  enough  to  grant  favours  to  us  mortals,
he  lays  the  very  Gods  under  obligations  to  him.  Thou  builder
of  the  temples,  thou  holy  restorer  of  our  shrines,  may  the
Deities,  I  pray,  have  a  reciprocal  regard  for  thee.  May  the
dwellers  in  heaven  grant  thee  as  many  years  as  thou  hast  be-
stowed on  them,  and  may  they  ever  be  the  watchful  guardians16
of  thy  house.

On  that  day  too,  the  grove  of  the  neighbouring  Asylum17  is
resorted  to  by  the  crowds,  where  the  Tiber  from  afar  rolls  on-
ward to  the  ocean  waters.     At  the  abode  of  Numa,18  and  the

quiries  having  been  made  by  decree  of  the  senate  into  the  nature  of  the
Grecian  laws,  and  the  code  of  Solon,  on  the  return  of  the  commission  in
the  year  b.c.  451.  Ten  men,  called  the  'Decemviri,'  were  chosen,  with
supreme  power  to  draw  up  a  code  of  laws,  all  the  other  magistrates
having  abdicated  their  offices.  They  were  appointed  the  following  year,
and  were  discontinued  in  consequence  of  their  oppressive  conduct  and
the  unjust  decision  of  Appius  Claudius,  which  occasioned  the  death  of
Virginia  by  the  hand  of  her  father,  to  save  her  from  prostitution.

15  The  Preserver •.] — Ver.  57.  It  is  not  known  when,  or  by  whom,  this
temple  to  Juno  '  Sospita,'  or  '  the  Preserver/  was  built.  It  must  have
stood  on  the  Palatine  Hill,  as  the  temple  of  Cybele,  the  Phrygian
mother  was  there.  *  Sospita'  comes  from  '  sospes,'  '  safe,'  and  that  word
is  derived  from  '  (tw^w/  '  to  save.'

16  The  watchful  guardians. ,] — Ver.  65.  '  Maneant  in  statione,'  literally,
'  remain  at  their  post ; '  a  military  phrase.

17  Asylum.'] — Ver.  67.  Romulus  constituted  an  asylum  in  a  grove  near
the  Tiber,  as  a  place  of  refuge  from  punishment  for  guilty  persons.  He  also
opened  it  to  the  criminals  of  other  states,  that  he  might  thereby  augment
the  number  of  his  own  citizens.  In  later  times  it  was  walled  in.  It  seems
from  this  passage  that  it  skirted  the  Capitolium,  running  down  to  the
banks  of  the  Tiber.

18  Abode  of  Numa.~\ — Ver.  69.  '  Penetrale'  is  literally  '  the  court-
yard' or  '  hall.'  Ovid  tells  us,  in  the  sixth  book,  1.  264,  that  Numa  re-
sided in  the  temple  of  Vesta.  But  other  writers,  with  more  accuracy,
tell  us  that  he  only  lived  near  her  Temple.  It  stood  opposite  the  Capi-
tolium. The  temple  of  Jupiter  Tonans,  '  the  Thunderer,'  stood  on  the
lowest  ridge  of  the  Capitoline  Hill,  and  was  built  by  Augustus.     This

E


50  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  69—90.

temple  of  the  Thunderer,  on  the  Capitoline  Hill,  and  on  the
loftiest  height  of  Jove,  a  sheep  of  two  years  old  is  slain.  Oft-
times  the  south  wind  enwrapped  in  clouds  summons  together
the  heavy  rains,  or  the  earth  is  hidden  beneath  the  fallen
snow.

When  the  next  day's  sun,  about  to  retire  into  the  western
waves,  removes  the  jewelled  collars  from  his  purple  steeds,
on  the  same  night  many  a  one,  raising  his  face  to  the  stars,
shall  say,  where,  I  wonder,  is  to-day  the  constellation  of  the
Lyre,19  which  was  shining  yesterday?  and  while  he  is  seeking
for  the  Lyre,  he  shall  observe  the  back  of  the  Lion  as  far  as
his  middle20  suddenly  plunged  into  the  flowing  waters.

The  Dolphin,  whom  of  late  you  were  in  the  habit  of  seeing
bespangled  with  stars,  on  the  following  night  shall  pass  from
our  sight.  He  either  was  a  successful  spokesman  in  loves  con-
cealed,21 or  it  was  he  that  bore  the  Lesbian22  Lyre  with  its
master.  What  sea  has  not  known,  what  land  does  not  know
of  Arion?  He  with  his  song  used  to  detain  the  running
streams.  Often  has  the  wolf  been  stayed  by  his  voice,  as  he
was  chasing  the  lamb  ;  oft  has  the  lamb,  when  fleeing  from
the  ravenous  wolf,  stopped  short  in  her  flight ;  oft  have  the
hounds  and  the  hare  reclined  beneath  the  same  shade  ;  and
the  hind  has  stood  still  on  the  mountain  crag  close  to  the
lioness  ;  without  strife  the  chattering  crow  has  sat  in  com-
pany with  the  bird  of  Pallas,23   and  the  pigeon  has    been

must  not  be  confounded  with  the  '  Capitolium,'  or  more  ancient  temple  of
Jupiter  Capitolinus.  The  temple  '  of  the  Thunderer  on  the  Capitoline
Hill'  seems  to  be  the  last,  and  '  the  loftiest  height  of  Jove'  appears  to
refer  to  the  former.

1S  The  Lyre.'] — Ver.  76.  The  cosmical  setting  of  the  Lyre  on  the  night
of  the  second  of  February.

20  As  far  as  his  middle.'] — Ver.  77.  This  must  be  the  hindmost  half,  as
the  foremost  had  already  set,  Book  1,  line  591.

21  Loves  concealed.] — Yer.  81.  The  secret  love  of  Neptune  for  Am-
phitrite ;  though,  according  to  some  accounts,  the  god  was  far  too  pressing
in  his  attentions  to  make  a  favourable  impression  on  the  goddess.

22  Lesbian.] — Ver.  82.  Arion  was  a  native  of  Methymna,  a  town  in
Lesbos.  The  Dolphin  is  said  to  have  landed  him  on  the  promontory  of
Ttenarus.

23  The  bird  of  Pallas.] — Ver.  89.  The  solemn  and  taciturn  owl,  which
was  not  likely  in  general  to  form  any  intimate  acquaintanceship  with  the
garrulous  crow.


B.  II.  90— 112.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  51

coupled  with  the  hawk.  Tuneful  Arion  !  Cynthia24  is  said
oft-times  to  have  been  spell-bound  by  thy  strains  as  though  by
those  of  her  brother  Apollo.  The  name  of  Arion  had  filled
the  cities  of  Sicily,  and  the  coast  of  Ausonia  had  been  charmed
by  the  tones  of  his  lyre.  Returning  homeward  thence  Arion
embarked,  and  was  bringing  with  him  the  treasures  thus  ac-
quired by  his  skill.  Perchance,  hapless  one,  thou  wast  in
fear  of  the  winds25  and  the  waves,  but  yet  did  the  ocean
prove  more  safe  to  thee  than  thy  own  vessel.  For  now  the
helmsman  stood  by  him  with  sword  unsheathed,  and  the  rest
of  the  crew  conspiring  with  arms  in  their  hands.  What
hast  thou  to  do  with  that  sword  ?  Sailor,  guide  the  veering
bark.  These  are  not  the  implements  that  should  be  grasped
by  thy  fingers.  And  now,  guessing  their  purpose,  struck
with  terror,  he  says,  "  I  deprecate  not  death,  but  let  me  take
my  lyre  and  recall  but  a  few  notes."  They  give  him  leave,
but  laugh  at  \\n&  pretext  for  delay.  He  takes  a  chaplet  which,
Phoebus,  might  grace  even  thy  tresses ;  he  was  arrayed  too
in  a  mantle  twice  steeped  in  Tyrian  purple.26  Struck  by
his  thumb  the  chord  returned  its  usual  notes  ;  just  as  the
swan  when  pierced  in  his  grey  temples27  by  the  cruel  feathered
shaft,  sings  in  mournful  numbers.  Instantly,  in  his  bright  array,
he  leaps  forth  into  the  midst  of  the  waves ;  the  azure  bark  is

24  Cynthia.~\ — Ver.  91.  Diana  was  thus  called  from  Cynthus,  a  moun-
tain of  Delos,  which  overshadowed  that  island,  the  birth-place  of  Apollo
and  Diana.     The  poet  here  speaks  of  her  as  the  moon.

25  In  fear  of  the  winds'] — Ver.  97.  Implying  that  he  had  no  suspicion
of  the  quarter  in  which  his  danger  lay  ;  but  Herodotus,  who,  in  his
History,  book  i.  cap.  23,  gives  the  story,  says  that  he  was  apprehensive
of  danger,  and  purposely  hired  a  Corinthian  vessel.

26  Tyrian  purple  ] — Ver.  107.  Vests  twice  dyed  were  called  '  dibapha/
from  the  Greek  dig,  'twice/  and  Panno,  'to  dip.'  The  purple  dye,  for
which  Tyre  was  so  famous,  was  obtained  from  the  '  murex/  a  kind  of
shell-fish.     Garments  dyed  therewith  were  very  costly.

37  Pierced  in  his  grey  temples.] — Ver.  110,  Gower  thus  translates  this
and  the  following  lines : —

1  He  sings  in  mournful  numbers  like  a  swan,
Whose  hardened  quills  have  pierced  his  aged  brain-pan,
Then  into  water  thus  assured  doth  skip ;
The  battered  billows  all  bedash  the  ship.'
As  Travesty  nothing  could  be  more  successful  than  this.     He  seems  here,
by  his  translation  of  '  penna/  to  adopt  the  idea  that  swTans  were  supposed
by  the  ancients,  in  their  old  age,  to  have  their  brain  pierced   by  their
own  feathers.     It  seems  rather  to  mean  'the  feathered  arrow/

E  2


52  THE  FASTI;  [b.  ii.  112-135.

splashed  by  the  spray  of  the  water.  Then— too  wondrous
for  belief — they  tell  how  the  dolphin,  with  curving  back,  placed
himself  beneath  his  unusual  burden.  He,  as  he  sits,  holds
the  lyre,  and  sings  in  requital  for  his  conveyance,  and  calms  by
his  strains  the  ocean  waters.  The  Gods  are  witnesses  of  this
act  of  kindness  ;  Jupiter  admitted  the  Dolphin  among  the  Con-
stellations, and  desired  him  to  become  the  owner  of  nine  stars.
Now  could  I  wish  that  I  had  a  thousand  voices,  and  thy
genius,  0  Mseonian  bard,28  by  which  Achilles29  has  been
celebrated.  While  I  am  singing  in  alternating  verse30  those
sacred  nones,  the  greatest  honour31  of  all  is  heaped  upon  my
Calendar ;  my  genius  fails  me,  and  a  subject  too  great  for
my  strength  quite  overpowers  me.  This  day  must  be  sung
by  me  in  a  distinguished  strain.  Why  in  my  infatuation  did  I
wish  to  impose  on  elegiac  strains  a  burden  so  vast  as  this  ?  This
indeed  were  a  proper  subject  for  heroic  metre.  Sacred  Father
of  thy  country  !  on  thee  the  people,  on  thee  the  senate  con-
ferred this  title.  This  too  we  of r  equestrian  rank32  conferred
upon  thee.  But  reality  conferred  this  title  long  previously  ;
and  late  indeed  was  it  that  thou  didst  receive  thy  true  ap-
pellation ;  long  since  wast  thou  the  father  of  the  whole  world.
Thou  bearest  throughout  the  earth  the  name  that  Jupiter  bears
in  the  lofty  heavens  ;  thou  art  the  father  of  men,  he  of  the
gods.  Romulus,  thou  must  give  way,  for  'tis  he  who  makes
thy  walls  great  by  defending  them ;  while  thou  hadst  left  them
so  low  as  to  be  overleap t  by  Remus.     Thee  indeed,  Tatius33  felt,

28  McBonian  bard.~] — Ver.  120.  Homer  was  so  calied  from  Maeonia,  a
mountain  in  Lydia,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Tmolus,  where  he  is  said  to  have
been  born.  Others  suppose  the  epithet  to  have  been  derived  from  Maeon,
which  is  said  to  have  been  the  name  of  his  father.

29  Achilles.'] — Ver.  119.  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  Achilles  or
Hector  is  the  hero  of  the  Iliad,  in  which  they  are  both  celebrated.  The
latter,  at  least,  is  represented  as  a  man  of  better  morals,  and  of  less  ungo-
vernable temper,  than  his  antagonist.

30  Alternating  verse. .] — Ver.  121.  His  lines  are  the  heroic  hexameter,
or  six-feet  line,  alternating  with  the  elegiac  pentameter,  or  five-feet  line.

31  Greatest  honour.] — Ver.  122.  Augustus  having  on  this  day  received
the  title  of  '  Pater  Patriae/  or  '  Father  of  his  Country/  a.u.c.  758,  seven
years  after  his  13th  consulate,

32  We  of  equestrian  rank  ] — Ver.  128.  Ovid  was  of  the  rank  of
'  equites/  or  knights.  The  patricians,  knights,  and  plebeians,  formed  the
three  classes  of  the  Roman  people  who  were  freemen.

33  Tatius.] — Ver.  135.     He  was  the  king  of  the  Sabines.     Cures  and


B    II.  135-148.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  53

and  humble  Cures,  and  Caenina  ;  but  under  this  chief
each  region34  of  the  sun  is  Roman.  Thou  didst  possess  a
trifling  piece  of  conquered  ground.  Over  all  that  is  beneath
supreme  Jove,  does  Caesar  hold  sway.  Thou  actest  the
ravisher's  part :  he  bids  wives  to  be  virtuous35  under  his
rule.  Thou  shelterest  the  guilty  in  the  asylum  of  the
grove  ;  he  removes  afar  all  guilt.  Violence  was  thy  delight ;
under  Caesar  the  laws  are  in  force.  Thou  hadst  the  name  of
Master,  he  has  that  of  chief  citizen.36  Remus  upbraids  thee
with  murder;  he  has  forgiven  even  his  enemies.  Thy  sire37
raised  thee  to  the  skies,  it  is  he  who  has  raised  his  father.
And  now  the  Idaean  youth38  appears  above  the  ivave  as  far  as
the  middle,  and  pours  forth  the  liquid  waters  with  the  com-
mingled nectar.39  And  lo  !  if  any  one  used  to  shiver  at  the
northern  blast,  let  him  now  be  glad ;  a  milder  breeze  is  coming
from  the  Zephyrs.40

Caenina  were  small  towns  of  Latiura,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome  Ro-
mulus slew  Acron,  king  of  Caenina,  and  thereby  gained  the  first  '  spolia
opima.'     At  Cures  Numa  was  born.

34  Each  region.'] — Ver.  136.  The  limits  of  his  empire  at  his  death  were,
the  Atlantic  ocean  and  the  Euphrates,  on  the  west  and  east ;  the  Danube
and  the  Rhine  on  the  north;  and  the  cataracts  of  the  Nile  and  Mount
Atlas  on  the  south ;  they  included  nearly  all  the  then  known  world.

35  To  be  virtuous."] — Ver.  139.  On  the  absence  of  their  husbands  for
a  certain  time,  the  Roman  women  were  at  liberty  to  marry  again.  This
right  degenerated  into  a  source  of  licentiousness  and  infidelity,  whereupon
Augustus  by  law  restricted  it.     To  this,  probably,  allusion  is  here  made.

38  Chief  citizen.] — Ver.  142.  The  name  '  Dominus,'  here  translated
4  master/  comes  from  '  domo,'  '  to  govern,'  as  a  master  ruled  his  slaves.
According  to  Suetonius,  Augustus  would  not  be  called  by  a  title  which  re-
presented him  as  the  slave-master  of  the  Roman  people,  and  was  on  one
occasion  highly  offended  on  being  saluted  in  the  theatre  by  that  name.
'  Princeps,'  the  chief,'  was  the  title  which  the  senate  conferred  on  him  as
being  entitled  to  the  first  place  there.

37  Thy  sire.] — Ver.  142.  Mars.  Julius  Caesar,  the  father  of  Augustus
by  adoption,  was  deified  by  him.

38  Id<zan  youth.] — Ver.  145.  The  cosmical  rising  of  the  constellation
Aquarius.  Ganymede,  son  of  Tros,  king  of  Troy,  while  hunting  on  Mount
Ida,  was  seized  by  the  eagle  of  Jupiter,  and  carried  to  heaven.  He  took  the
place  of  Hebe,  as  cup-bearer  to  the  gods,  and  was  afterwards  enrolled  among
the  signs  of  the  zodiac  under  the  name  of  '  Aquarius,'  the  '  water-bearer.'

39  Nectar.] — Ver.  146.  Nectar  was  the  peculiar  beverage  of  the  gods,
as  'ambrosia'  was  their  food.

40  Zephyrs.] — Ver.  148.  The  zephyr,  or  Favonius,  was  the  western
wind,  which  announced  the  opening  of  spring.


54  THE   FASTI;  [b.  n.  149— 176.

The  fifth  light-bearing  morn  has  raised  his  glittering  beam
from  the  waves  of  the  ocean,  and  the  hours  of  early  spring  are
at  hand;  but  be  not  deceived  ;  the  cold  still  remains,  yes,  too
true,  it  remains,  and  winter  while  departing  has  left  its  deep
traces  behind.

Be  the  third  night  of  the  Ides  now  arrived,  then  forthwith
you  will  see  that  the  keeper  of  the  Bear41  has  put  forth  his
two  feet.  Among  the  Hamadryads42  and  Diana  the  thrower
of  the  javelin,  Callisto  was  one  of  the  sacred  company.
Laying  her  hand  on  the  bow43  of  the  Goddess,  she  says,  "  Be
this  bow  which  I  touch  the  witness  of  my  vow  of  virginity."
Cynthia  praised  her,  and  said, "  only  keep  thy  pledged  contract,
and  then  thou  shalt  be  the  chief  of  my  companions."  Had
she  not  been  beautiful,  she  would  have  kept  her  compact.
She  was  on  her  guard  against  mortals  ;  from  Jove  it  is  that
she  incurred  her  guilt.  Having  hunted  in  the  woods  a  thou-
sand beasts  of  chase,  Phoebe  was  on  her  return,  while  the
sun  was  in  its  midday  course,  or  still  further  advanced.  When
she  reached  the  sacred  grove — (the  grove  was  thick  with  many
an  holm-oak,  and  in  the  midst  there  was  a  pond  of  ice  cold
water).  "  In  this  wood,"  said  she,  "  maid  of  Tegeaea,44  let  us
bathe."  At  the  untrue  name  of  'maid*  the  other  blushed.
She  said  the  same  also  to  her  Nymphs ;  whereon  the  Nymphs
put  off  their  garments.  Callisto  is  ashamed,  and  gives  un-
happy proofs  of  a  purposed  tardiness  and  delay.  She  had
stripped  off  her  robes  ;  convicted  by  the  size  of  her  person,
she  is  betrayed  by  the  evidence  of  her  burden.  To  whom,  the
Goddess,  "  Forsworn  daughter  of  Lycaon!  quit  the  virgin  troop
and  defile  not  these  chaste  waters."  Ten  times  had  the  moon
completed  her  orb  between  her  horns,  and  she,  who  had  been

41  Keeper  of  the  Bear.'] — Ver.  153.  The  achronycal  rising  of  Bootes
on  the  llth  of  February.  Bootes,  or  Arctophylax,  the  Bearward,  was  the
constellation  into  which  Areas,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Callisto,  as  here
mentioned,  was  changed.

42  Hamadryads  J] — Ver.  155.  These  were  nymphs  who  presided  over
individual  trees,  with  which  they  were  said  to  live  and  die.  Their  name
was  derived  from  the  Greek  lifia,  'together,'  and  dpvg,  'an  oak/

43  On  the  bow.~\ — Ver.  157.  With  the  ancients  it  was  the  usage  to
touch  any  thing  they  swore  by.  Thus  Hannibal  touched  the  altar  when  he
vowed  eternal  enmity  against  Rome.  See  Livy,  book  21,  c.  1;  and  Cor-
nelius Nepos,  in  his  Life  of  Hannibal.

44  Maid  of  Tegeaa.'] — Ver.  167.  Callisto  being  the  daughter  of  Lycaon,
king  of  Arcadia,  of  which  country  Tegesea  was  a  town.


B.  II.  176—202.]         OR,    CALEKDAK   OF   OVID.  55

supposed  a  maid,  was  now  a  mother.  Offended  Juno  is  filled
with  rage,  and  changes  the  form  of  the  damsel.  Goddess  !
what  art  thou  doing  ?  It  was  with  reluctant  spirit  that  she
received  the  embrace  of  Jupiter.  And  when  she  beheld  the
hideous  face  of  a  wild  beast  in  the  former  favourite,  "  Let
Jupiter,"  says  she,  "now  rush  into  her  embraces."  A
frightful  she-bear,  she  roamed  along  the  wild  mountains,  she
who  had  lately  been  an  object  of  love  to  almighty  Jove.  Just
three  times  five  years  had  the  boy,  conceived  in  secret,  now
passed,  when  the  mother  was  thrown  in  the  way  of  her  son.
Infatuated  she  stood  still,  as  though  she  would  recognize  him,
and  moaned  :  that  moan  was  the  address  of  a  parent.  The
boy  unknowing  would  have  pierced  her  with  his  sharp  javelin,
had  not  each  been  snatched  away  to  the  mansions  above.  As
neighbouring  Constellations  they  now  shine ;  the  first  one
is  she  whom  we  call  the  '  Bear  ; '  the  '  Bear- ward '  has  the
attitude  of  one  following  her  behind.  Still  is  the  daughter
of  Saturn  incensed,  and  requests  the  hoary  Tethys45  not  to
lave  the  Msenalian  Bear  by  the  contact  of  the  waters*.

On  the  Ides  the  altars  of  the  rustic  Faunus46  smoke,  here
where  the  island  breaks  the  parted  waters.  This  was  that
day  on  which,  on  the  plains  of  Veii,  three  hundred  and  six
Fabii47  fell.  One  house  had  taken  upon  itself  the  strength
and  burden  of  the  whole  city ;  the  hands  of  one  family  take
up  arms  volunteered  by  them  ;  each  goes  forth  a  high-born
soldier  from  that  camp  out  of  which  each  one  was  fitted  to  go
forth  a  general.  The  nearest  route  is  by  the  right-hand  side
passage48  of  the  gate  of  Carmenta.    Whoever  you  are,  pass

45  Tethys. 1 — Ver.  191.  Tethys  was  one  of  the  most  ancient  deities.
She  was  the  wife  of  Oceanus,  daughter  of  Ccelus  and  Vesta,  and  the  foster-
mother  of  Juno.

46  Faunus.']—  Ver.  193.  The  'Insula  sacra,'  on  the  Tiber,  contained  the
temple  of  Faunus,  as  also  those  of  Jupiter  and  iEsculapius.  It  was  built
by  the^Ediles,  a.u.c.  509.

47  Fabii.']—  Ver.  196.  Ovid  places  this  event  on  the  15th  of  February.
Livy,  book  6,  c.  1,  places  it  on  the  18th  of  July.

43  Right-hand  side  passage.] — Ver.  201.  'Dextro — Jano.'  It  has  been
already  mentioned,  that  the  janus  was  the  arched  or  covered  passage  of  a
gateway.  Many  of  those  at  Rome  had  two  passages  for  the  convenience
of  people  passing  each  way— similar  to  the  plan  of  our  Thames  Tunnel.
After  this  day  no  one  went  out  by  the  passage  through  which  the  Fabii
had  passed.  The  way  was  called  the  'via  scelerata,'  or  'infelix,'  the  'ac-
cursed,' or  'unlucky  way.'


56  THE   FASTI  ;  .       [b.  ii.  202—233.

not  through  it ;  it  has  an  evil  omen.  Tradition  says,  that  by
that  gate  the  three  hundred  Fabii  went  forth.  The  gate  is  free
from  blame,  but  yet  it  has  a  had  omen.  When  with  rapid  step
they  reached  the  swiftly  rolling  Cremera,49  (it  was  flowing
swollen  by  the  rains  of  the  winter)  ;  they  pitch  their  camp  on
the  plain  ;  they  themselves,  with  drawn  swords,  rush  through
the  Tuscan  lines  with  vigorous  onset.  Just  as  when,  from  the
Libyan50  crag,  the  lions  rush  upon  the  flocks  scattered  through-
out the  wide  fields.  The  enemy  fly  in  all  directions,  and  on  their
backs  receive  disgraceful  wounds  ;  the  earth- is  reddened  with
Etrurian  blood.  Once  more,  and  again  they  fall.  When  it  is
not  possible  for  them  to  conquer  in  open  fight,  they  prepare
a  stratagem,  and  the  resources  of  ambush.  There  was  a  plain  ;
hills,  and  a  forest  well  fitted  to  harbour  the  wild  beasts  of
the  mountain,  shut  in  the  extremities  of  it.  In  the  midst  of
this  plain  they  leave  a  few  men,  and  the  herds  scattered  here
and  there  ;  the  rest  of  the  troops  lie  hid,  concealed  in  the  un-
derwood. Lo !  as  a  torrent,  swollen  by  a  deluge  of  rain,  or
by  the  snow  which  flows  melted  by  the  warmth  of  the  Zephyr,
is  borne  over  the  sown  fields  and  the  highways,  and  no  longer,
as  it  was  wont,  confines  its  current  bounded  by  the  margin  of
its  banks  ;  so  do  the  Fabii  fill  the  valley  with  their  straggling
sallies,  aiidthe  few  they  see  they  despise  ;  they  have  no  appre-
hension from  any  other  quarter.  Whither  rush  ye,  noble
house  ?  It  is  unsafe  to  trust  a  foe,  unsuspecting  nobles,
beware  of  the  weapons  of  treachery — valour  perishes  by  strat-
agem ;  from  every  part  the  enemy  springs  forth  into  the  open
plain,  and  encompasses  every  side.  What  can  a  few  brave
men  do  against  so  many  thousands  ?  or  what  expedient  have
they  that  they  can  avail  themselves  of  in  the  moment  of  dis-
tress? As  the  wild  boar  chased  in  the  Laurentine51  woods
afar  scatters  with  his  tusk  like  the  lightning  the  swift
hounds,  yet  soon  he  dies   himself;  so  do  they  perish,  but

49  Cremera.]—  Ver.  205.  A  Tuscan  river,  falling  into  the  Tiber  a  little
to  the  north  of  Rome,  and  not  far  from  Veii.

50  Libyan.'] — Ver.  209.  Mauritania,  a  district  of  Libya,  in  Africa,  was
remarkable  for  the  fierceness  and  voracity  of  its  lions.

51  Laurentine.'] — Ver.  231.  Laurentum  was  a  town  of  Latium,  supposed
to  be  the  residence  of  the  ancient  kings,  Picus,  Faunus,  and  Latinus.  Its
name  was  derived  from  a  grove  of  bay-trees,  'lauri,'  between  Ostia  and  An-
tium.     It  was  remarkable  for  its  breed  of  boars.


b.  ii.  233—258.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OTID.  53

not  unavenged  ;  and  they  deal  and  suffer  wounds  with  mutual
blows.

One  day  had  sent  forth  to  battle  all  the  Fabii ;  one  day  cut
off  those  sent,  yet  it  is  worthy  of  belief  that  the  Gods  them-
selves provided  that  there  should  survive  some  seed  of  the
house  of  Hercules.52  For  a  boy  of  tender  years53  and  unser-
viceable for  war  alone  of  the  Fabian  house  had  been  left  be-
hind ;  doubtless  to  the  end  that  thou  Fabius  Maximus54  mightest
in  future  times  be  born  ;  by  whom,  through  procrastination,
the  republic  might  be  preserved.

Contiguous  in  position  are  three  Constellations,55  the  Raven,
and  the  Snake,  and  the  Goblet,  that  lies  between  them  both.
On  the  Ides  they  are  hidden,  they  rise  on  the  following  night ;
I  will  sing  why  the  three  are  thus  connected  together.

It  happened  that  Phoebus  was  preparing  a  solemn  festival
for  Jupiter  (my  story  shall  cause  no  very  long  delay).  "  Go,
my  bird," 56  said  he,  ' '  that  nothing  may  retard  my  rites  of  duty,
and  bring  a  little  water  from  the  gushing  fountains."  The  raven
lifts  with  his  hooked  claws  a  gilded  goblet,57  and  wings  on
high  his  aerial  route.  There  stood  a  fig-tree  loaded  with  fruit,
still  hard  and  unripe.  He  tries  it  with  his  beak — the  fruit
was  not  fit  to  be  gathered.  Heedless  of  his  commands,  he  is
said  to  have  sat  down  beneath  that  tree,  until  in  the  slowly
passing  lapse  of  time  the  fruit  became  sweet.  And  at
last,  having  satiated  his  appetite,  he  seizes  in  his  black  claws  a
long  water-snake,  and  then  returns  to  his  master  and  makes  a

52  Hercules.~\ — Ver.  237.  It  was  a  tradition,  that  the  Fabii  were  de-
scended from  Hercules,  by  a  daughter  of  Evander.

53  Of  tender  years.'] — Ver.  239.  Niebuhr,  in  his  Roman  History,  book  2,
says  that  the  Fabius  who  remained  at  home  must  have  then  been  a  grown
man.     He  gives  a  political  solution  of  the  whole  story.

54  Fabius  Maocimus.] — Ver.  241.  From  the  single  survivor  sprang
Q.  Fabius  Maximus,  who,  in  the  second  Punic  war,  after  the  defeat  of  the
consul  Flaminius  at  Lake  Thrasymenus,  was  appointed  pro-dictator.  By
counter-marches  and  ambuscades  he  harassed  and  weakened  the  army  of
Hannibal,  and  eventually  saved  Rome.  Hence  he  was  called  'the  Delayer,'
'  Cunctator.'

55  Three  Constellations.'] — Ver.  243.  He  gives  the  achronycal  rising  of
these  three  constellations  on  the  14th  of  February.

55  My  bird.] — Ver.  249.     The   poets  considered  the   crow   sacred  to
Apollo  on  account  of  its  supposed  efficacy  in  augury  and  divination.
67  A  gilded  goblet.] — Ver.  251-2.     Gower  translates  these  lines  thus —
1  The  golden  tanker  in  his  claws  the  crow
Takes,  and  through  air  with  waving  wings  doth  row.'


58  THE   FASTI;  [b.  n.  258— 282.

feigned  excuse.  "  This  creature  was  the  cause  of  my  delay,
watching  at  the  running  stream ;  'tis  he  that  withheld  the
waters  and  the  fulfilment  of  my  task."  Phoebus  answers,
"  Dost  thou  add  to  thy  fault  a  lie,  and  darest  thou  by  thy
stories  to  attempt  to  impose  upon  the  God  of  oracles  1
And  now  so  long  as  the  green  fig  shall  be  firm58  on  the  tree,
be  no  cooling  water  drunk  by  thee  from  any  spring."  He
spoke,  and  as  a  lasting  memorial  of  this  ancient  affair,  the
Snake,  the  Bird,  and  the  Goblet  glitter  as  contiguous  Constel-
lations.

The  third  dawn  after  the  Ides  beholds  the  naked  Luperci,
and  the  sacred  rites  of  the  two-horned  Faunus59  will  pro-
ceed. Tell,  ye  Pierian  maids,  what  is  the  origin  of  these  rites,
and  whence  derived  they  reached  the  abodes  of  Latium.  The
ancient  Arcadians  are  said  to  have  worshipped  Pan  as  God  of
cattle  ;  he  most  frequents  the  Arcadian  mountains.  Pholoe60
will  attest  it,  the  streams  of  Stymphalus,  and  Ladon,  which
with  rapid  current  flows  into  the  sea,  will  attest  it,  and
the  ridges  of  the  forest  of  Nonacris  encircled  with  groves
of  pine,  and  the  lofty  Cyllene  and  the  snows  of  Parrhasia.
Pan  was  the  guardian  of  the  herd,  Pan,  the  God  of  the
mares  ;  he  used  to  receive  offerings  for  the  preservation  of  the
sheep.  Evander  brought  over  with  him  the  woodland  divinities.
Here,  where  now  the  City  stands,  was  then  but  the  city's
site.  Thence  do  we  reverence  this  God,  and  the  rites  imported
from  the  Pelasgians.61     By  ancient  usage  the  Flamen  Dialis

58  Shall  be  firm.'] — Ver.  263.  'Lactens'  is  literally  'waxing  full  of
milk.'  'Lac/  'milk,'  was  the  name  given  to  the  juice  of  the  unripe  fig,
while  it  is  yet  in  a  hard  state.

39  Faunus.] — Ver.  267.  He  was  one  of  the  ancient  kings  of  Latium,
and  being  deified,  in  time  became  confounded  with  the  Arcadian  deity  Pan.
As  Pan  was  attended  by  numerous  minor  Pans,  so  there  were  numerous
Fauni.

60  Pholoe.] — Ver.  273.  'Pholoe/  and  the  several  places  here  men-
tioned, were  in  Arcadia.  Pholoe  was  a  mountain ;  Stymphalus  was  the  name
of  a  city  and  a  lake  there,  whence  Hercules,  as  his  sixth  labour,  chased
the  Stymphalian  birds,  and  slew  them.  The  river  Ladon  falls  into  the
Alpheus,  and  not  into  the  sea ;  it  was  remarkable  for  the  excellent
quality  of  its  water.  Nonacris  was  a  town  of  Arcadia,  near  which  was
the  river  Styx,  whose  waters  were  so  pestilential  that  they  could  be  carried
in  no  vessel  whatever,  except  one  made  of  the  hoof  of  a  mule.  Cyllene
was  a  mountain  of  Arcadia.    Parrhasia  was  a  town  of  the  same  countiy.

61  Pelasgians.] — Ver.  281.  The  Arcadians  were  generally  deemed  to  be
of  the  Pelasgian  race,  who  seem  to  have  been  the  aborigines  of  Greece.


b.  ii.  282—308.]         OK,    CALE^DAE   OF   OYID.  59

attended  these  sacrifices.  You  ask,  then,  why  they  run  and
why  (for  thus  to  run  is  their  practice,)  they  have  their  bodies
naked,  having  stripped  off  their  garments.  The  fleet  God
himself  loves  to  run  at  large  on  the  lofty  hills,  and  starts  on  a
sudden  the  scared  wild  beasts.  The  God,  naked  himself,  com-
mands his  attendants62  to  go  naked ;  for  dress  was  not  very
convenient  for  running.  The  Arcadians  are  said  to  have
tenanted  the  earth  before  the  birth  of  Jupiter,  and  that  nation
existed  before  the  moon.  Their  mode  of  life  was  like  that  of
the  beasts  of  the  field,  spent  amid  no  comforts  ;  they  were  still  a
multitude  unskilled  in  arts  and  uncivilized .  For  habitations,  they
knew  of  the  boughs  of  trees  alone,  for  corn  the  blades  of
grass  ;  water  taken  up  with  their  two  palms  was  nectar  to  them.
No  steer  then  panted  under  the  crooked  plough ;  no  land
was  then  under  the  control  of  the  husbandmen.  As  yet
the  use  of  the  horse63  was  not  known ;  each  one  carried
himself ;  the  sheep  then  used  to  go  clothed  with  its  own
fleece.  They  dwelt  in  the  open  air,  and  had  their  bodies
naked,  taught  to  endure  the  heavy  showers  and  the  southern
blasts.  Still  do  the  naked  priests  recall  to  mind  the  vestiges
of  ancient  usage,64  and  testify  the  humble  resources  of  olden
times.  But  there  is  a  story  told,  full  of  old-fashioned  hu-
mour, why  Faunus  has  a  particular  aversion  to  garments.
It  chanced  that  the  Tirynthian  youth  was  travelling  in  the
company  of  his  mistress,65  Omphale.  Faunus,  from  a  lofty
hill-top,  saw  them  both.  He  saw,  and  caught  the  flame — cye
mountain  Goddesses,'  said  he,  ' farewell;  this  lady  shall  hence-

62  Commands  his  attendants.] — Ver.  287.     Gower  gives  this  version,

1  The  god  self-naked,  naked  makes  his  frie ;
Clothes  are  a  hindrance  to  agility.'

63  Use  of  the  horse.'] — Ver.  297.  Bellerophon  is  said  to  have  been  the
first  to  teach  mankind  the  use  of  the  horse.

64  Ancient  usage.] — Ver.  301-2.     Gower  translates  these  lines,

1  Therefore  they  naked  run,  in  sign  and  honor
Of  hardiness,  and  that  old  bare-skinn'd  manner.'

65  His  mistress.] — Ver.  305.  Hercules  had  been  sold  by  Mercury,  to  serve
as  a  slave  for  three  years,  to  Omphale,  queen  of  Lydia  or  Masonia,  in  order
that  the  purchase-money  might  be  paid  to  Eurytus,as  a  compensation  for  the
loss  of  Iphytus,  his  son,  who  had  been  slain  by  Hercules.  That  he  was
taken  into  the  especial  favour  of  Omphale  we  may  perceive  from  this  story.


60  THE  PASTI ;  [b.  ii.  308—330.

forth  be  my  love. "66  The  Maeonian  queen  was  walking  on-
ward, distinguished  by  her  gold  embroidered  vestment,  her
perfumed  tresses  flowing  over  her  shoulders.  A  golden  screen
repelled  the  scorching  sunbeams,  which  yet  the  hands  of
Hercules,  strong  as  they  were,  supported.  And  now  had
she  reached  the  grove  of  Bacchus,  the  vineyards  of  Tmolus,
and  the  dewy  Hesperus  was  running  his  course  on  his
dusky  steed.67  She  enters  a  grotto  whose  roof  was  fretted
with  porous  pebbles,  and  the  natural  pumice  stone  ;  at  its
entrance  ran  a  bubbling  streamlet.  And  now  while  the  at-
tendants are  preparing  the  repast,  and  the  wine  for  them  to
quaff,  she  arrays  Alcides  in  her  own  attire.  She  gives  him
her  fine  wrought  gown,  dyed  with  Gsetulian  purple  ;  she  gives
him  the  net-work  zone,  with  which  just  now  she  had  been  girt.
The  zone  is  too  small  for  his  girth ;  she  unlooses  the  laces
of  the  gown,  that  he  may  get  his  huge  hands  through.  Her
armlets  he  had  already  broken,  not  made  for  such  arms  as
those.  His  big  feet68  were  bursting  asunder  the  scanty  ties  of
her  sandals.  She  herself  takes  the  ponderous  club,  and  the
spoil  of  the  lion,  and  his  lesser  weapons  stored  in  their  quiver.
In  this  dress  they  partake  of  the  repast ;  in  this  dress  they
resign  their  bodies  to  sleep,  and  lie  apart  upon  couches  placed
closed  to  one  another.  The  reason  was,  that  they  were  about
to  prepare  a  pious  sacrifice  to  the  discoverer  of  the  vine,  which
they  ought  to  perform  in  a  state  of  purity69  when  the  day  had

66  Be  my  love.'] — Ver.  307-8.  The  quaint  translation  given  by  Gower
of  these  two  lines  is,

'  He  eyes  and  fries,  and  "country  lasses"  cries,
None  for  my  diet ;  here  my  Cupid  lies/

67  Dusky  steed.~\ — Ver.  314.  He  has  a  dusky  steed  assigned  him,  as  the
sky  on  his  approach  becomes  darker.  For  the  opposite  reason  a  white  horse
is  assigned  to  Lucifer,  the  morning  star.

68  His  big  feet. ~] — Ver.  324.     Gower's  version  of  this  line  is,

'  His  huge  plaice-foot  her  pretty  sandals  rent/

The  Gaetulian,  or  African  purple,  mentioned  a  few  lines  before,  was  proba-
bly of  inferior  quality.  Alcides  was  one  of  the  epithets  of  Hercules,  from
the  Greek  word  aXicrj,  ' strength.'

69  In  a  state  of  purity.] — Ver.  330.  The  sacrifice  was  to  be  to  Bacchus,
god  of  the  vine.  Sacrifices  to  the  gods  were  expected  to  be  performed  by
the  attendant  devotees  in  a  state  of  perfect  purity,  and  uncontaminated  by
a  breach  of  chastity.  Gower' s  version  of  this  and  the  preceding  hue  is —

'  Because,  next  day,  some  rites  to  Jove's  wine  son
They  should  perform,  which  must  be  purely  done.'


B.  ii.  330—357.]  OB,    CALENDAR    OF    OYID.  f)l

dawned.  'Twas  midnight.  What  does  not  unscrupulous
passion  dare  ?  Amid  the  shades  of  the  night,  Faunus  comes  to
the  dewy  grotto,  and  when  he  sees  the  attendants  relaxed  with
sleep  and  wine,  he  conceives  hopes  that  in  their  master  and  mis-
tress there  is  the  same  drowsiness.  He  enters,  and  the  daring
ravisher  wanders  to  this  side  and  that,  and  stretches  forth  his
cautious  hands  and  follows  their  direction.  And  now  he  had
come  to  the  bedding  of  a  spread  couch  which  he  had  found  by
groping,  and  as  he  thought,  was  about  to  be  successful  in  his  first
venture.  When  he  touched  the  hide  of  the  tawny  lion  all
shaggy  with  its  coarse  hair,  he  was  alarmed  and  withdrew  his
hand,  and  terrified  he  shuddered  with  fear ;  as  oft  the  tra-
veller has  withdrawn  his  startled  foot  on  seeing  a  serpent.
He  next  feels  the  soft  coverings  of  the  couch  which  was
close  by,  and  is  deceived  by  the  false  indication.  He  climbs
the  bed,  and  lies  down  on  the  side  nearest  to  him.  His
passions  are  at  the  highest  pitch — meantime  he  draws  up  the
bed-clothes  from  the  bottom  ;  the  legs  he  finds  are  all  brist-
ling, rough  with  thick  hair.  The  Tyrinthian  hero  flings  him
back70  with  his  arm^'i^  as  he  is  making  further  attempts  ;  he
tumbles  from  the  top  of  the  couch.  An  uproar  is  the  con-
sequence, the  Mseonian  queen  summons  her  attendants  aloud,
and  calls  for  lights  ;71  the  lights  being  brought,  the  transac-
tion is  discovered.  Faunus  is  groaning  aloud,  tumbled  vio-
lently from  the  lofty  couch,  and  with  difficulty  he  raises  his
limbs  from  the  hard  ground.  Both  Alcides  laughs,  and  those
who  see  him  lie  sprawling ;  the  Lydian  damsel  laughs  too  at
her  gallant.     The  God,  thus  deceived  through  a  dress,  thence-

70  Flings  him  back.'] — Ver.  349-50.  Gower  translates  this  and  the  fol-
lowing lines —

*  Attempting  more,  Alcides  from  the  couch
Throws  him  quite  off.     Down  lumps  the  lustful  slouch.
Maeonia  at  the  noise  for  lights  doth  cry,
Which,  brought  there,  make  a  strange  discovery.
He,  with  his  fall  much  bruised,  grones  and  mones,
And,  much  ado,  heaves  up  his  heavy  bones.
Alcides  laugh' d,  and  all  at  that  night-rover,
And  Omphale  laughs  at  her  goodly  lover/

71  Calls  for  lights.'] — Ver.  351.  The  servants,  who  slept  just  outside  of
the  chamber  of  their  master  or  mistress,  usually  kept  a  lamp  burning ;
therefore  the  light  was  brought  even  before  Faunus  could  rise  from  the
floor.


62  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  357—381.

forth  hates  garments  that  impose  upon  the  sight,  and  sum-
mons his  officials  to  his  rites  in  a  state  of  nakedness.  To
these  causes  imported  from  afar,  add,  my  Muse,  the  Latin  ones,
and  let  my  courser  now  pace  his  native  dust.

A  she-goat  being  slain,  according  to  custom,  to  the  horny-
footed  Faunus,  a  crowd  came  by  invitation  to  the  scanty
repast,  and  while  the  priests  were  making  ready  the  entrails
transfixed  with  spits  of  willow,  the  sun  now  reaching  his  mid
course,  Romulus  and  his  brother,  and  the  shepherd  youth,
were  exposing  their  naked  bodies  to  the  sun  and  the  dust  of
the  plain.72  They  gave  exercise  to  their  arms  in  sport  with
the  boxing-gloves,73  and  the  javelin,  and  the  weight  of  the  cast-
ing stone.  A  shepherd  from  an  eminence  exclaimed — "  Romu-
lus !  the  robbers  are  driving  away  the  oxen  through  the
sequestered  fields  ;  to  the  rescue  !"  'Twould  take  too  long  a
time  to  put  on  arms  ;  each  rushes  forth  in  a  different  direc-
tion :  by  the  spear  of  Remus  the  spoil  was  recovered.  As
soon  as  he  returned,  he  takes  off  from  the  spits  the  hissing
entrails,  and  says,  "  These,  in  truth,  none  but  a  conqueror
shall  eat."  As  he  says  he  does,  and  so  do  the  Fabii.  Ro-
mulus arrives  there  too  late,  and  sees  nothing  but  the  board
and  the  picked  bones.  He  smiled,  but  was  annoyed  that  the
Fabii  and  Remus  had  been  able  to  gain  a  victory,  and  that  his
own  Quinctilii74  could  not.  The  fame  of  the  transaction  still
abides  with  us ;  they  still  run  without  a  garment,  and  be-
cause the  result  was  favourable,  it  has  a  lasting  celebrity.

Perhaps  too,  you  may  ask,  why  that  place  is  called  the

72  The  'plain.'] — Ver.  366.  Probably  the  'Campus  Martius/  or  '  field
of  Mars,'  which  was  a  plain  of  great  extent,  near  the  Tiber,  where  the
Romans  used  to  exercise.  It  was  the  private  property  of  the  Tarquins,
and  on  their  expulsion  was  consecrated  to  Mars,  as  the  patron  of  warlike
exercises.

75  The  boxing-gloves.'] — Ver.  367.  This  is  the  nearest  translation  that
can  be  given  to  the  word  '  caestus,'  which  were  coverings  of  leather  for  the
hand,  with  lead  or  iron  sewed  on  them  to  render  the  weight  of  the  blow
more  effective.  On  the  other  hand,  with  us,  the  boxing-glove  is  used  for
the  opposite  purpose,  to  diminish  the  weight  of  the  blow.  The  casting-
stone  was  thrown  either  from  the  hand  or  the  sling.  It  does  not  appear
which,  in  this  instance.

74  His  own  Quinctilii.] — Ver.  378.  The  Fabii  are  said  to  have  been
the  companions  of  Remus,  and  the  Quinctilii,  the  associates  of  Romulus.
The  Fabii  were  of  Sabine  origin,  while  the  Quinctilii  were  a  Roman
family.


b.  u.  381—398.1         OE,    CALENDAR  OE   OYID.  63

'  Lupercal,'  or  what  reason  marks  the  day  with  a  similar
name.  The  Yestal  Ilia75  had  given  birth  to  her  heavenly
progeny,  while  her  uncle  held  the  sovereign  sway.  He  orders
the  children  to  be  taken  away  and  to  be  drowned  in  the  river.
What  art  thou  doing  ?  one  or  other  of  these  will  be  Romulus
hereafter.  His  servants  with  reluctance  perform  his  cruel
commands  :  they  weep  and  bear  the  twins  to  the  commanded
place.  Albula,76  that  stream,  whose  name,  Tiberinus  drowned
in  its  waters,  changed  into  that  of  Tiber,  by  chance  was  swollen
by  the  floods  of  winter.  Here,  where  the  market-places77  now
are,  you  might  see  boats  wandering  about ;  where,  too,  thy
valley  now  lies,  0  Circus  Maximus.78  When  they  had  come
hither,  and  could  advance  no  further,  first  one  and  then  the
other  of  them  says,  "  And  see  how  like  they  are  !  and  how
lovely  is  each !  yet  of  the  two  that  one  has  more  life  in  him.
If  origin  is  to  be  indicated  by  looks,  if  the  likeness  deceives  me
not,  I  suspect  some  God  (whom,  I  know  not)  to  be  your  father.

75  The  vestal  Ilia. — Ver.  383.  Ilia,  or  Rhea  Silvia,  whose  story  is  told
more  at  length  in  the  next  book,  was  the  daughter  of  Numitor,  king  of
Alba  Longa.  In  order  that  she  might  not,  by  becoming  a  mother,  endanger
the  sovereignty  of  Amulius,  her  uncle,  who  had  usurped  the  throne  and
banished  his  brother,  he  devoted  her  to  the  service  of  Vesta,  and,  in  con-
sequence, to  perpetual  chastity.  Mars  having  become  enamoured  of  her,
she  conceived  twins  by  him,  whose  history  is  here  told,  and  is  repeated  in
the  next  book.  She  was  buried  alive;  the  punishment  invariably  inflicted
on  Vestal  virgins  when  convicted  of  a  violation  of  their  vow  of  chastity.

76  Albula.'] — Ver.  389.  This  was  anciently  the  name  of  the  Tiber.
'Albus'  is  the  Latin  for  '  white/  and  the  river  was  so  called  from  the  white-
ness of  its  waters.  It  was  called  Tiber  after  Tiberinus  Sylvius,  the  suc-
cessor of  Capetius,  king  of  Alba,  and  who  was  drowned  in  its  stream.

77  Market-places. ~\ — Ver.  391.  There  were  two  kinds  of  '  fora'  at
Rome — the  '  forum'  for  litigation  and  process  at  law,  and  the  '  forum/  or
'market-place/  such  as  the  'forum  boarum/  or ' cattle-market ; '  'piscarium/
or  '  fish-market ; '  'olitorium/  or  'herb-market ; '  'suarium/  or  'pig-market/

78  O  Circus  Maximus. ,] — Ver.  392.  This,  '  the  Greatest  Circus/  was
originally  built  by  Tarquinius  Priscus,  and  was  situate  in  a  prolonged
valley  between  the  Palatine  and  Aventine  Hills;  It  was  a  mile  in  circum-
ference, and  received  great  improvements  from  Julius  Csesar.  It  was  able
to  contain  at  least  150,000  persons  ;  Pliny  says  250,000  ;  perhaps  the  former
number  when  sitting,  the  latter  when  standing.  There  the  public  games
and  shews  were  celebrated,  which  formed  the  favourite  recreation  of  the
Romans  of  all  classes.  It  was  called  '  Maximus/  '  greatest/  because  there
were  several  other  '  circi'  at  Rome,  as  the  Circus  Flaminius,  Circus  Vati-
canus,  and  others  were  built  in  later  times  by  Nero,  Caracalla,  and  other
emperors.


64  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  399—422.

But  if  any  God  really  was  the  author  of  your  birth,  he  would
surely  bring  you  aid  at  so  perilous  a  moment.  Your  mother
for  certain  would  bring  you  aid,  were  she  not  herself  in  need
of  help,  who  in  one  day  has  become  a  mother  and  has  been
made  childless.  Babes  !  born  together,  together  to  die  !  sink
together  beneath  the  waters."  He  had  ceased  speaking,  and
laid  them  down,  having  frst  taken  them  from  his  bosom.  The
infants  screamed  with  a  similar  cry  ;  you  would  imagine  that
they  were  conscious  of  their  fate.  With  tearful  cheeks  the
servants  return  to  their  homes.  A  hollowed  ark78  bears  them
placed  therein  on  the  surface  of  the  stream,  Ah  !  what  a  weight
of  destiny  did  that  one  slight  plank  support !  The  ark  driven
by  the  breeze  into  the  shady  woods  settles  in  the  slime  as  the
river  subsides  by  degrees.  There  was  a  tree,  the  remains  of
n  are  still  in  existence  ;  and  that  which  is  now  called  the
Ruminal,79  was  once  the  Romulan  fig-tree.  Wondrous  to  relate,
a  she-wolf  that  had  just  brought  forth  came  to  the  twins  thus
exposed  ;  who  would  believe  that  the  wild  beast  did  not  hurt
the  babes  ?  To  do  them  no  injury  is  not  enough  for  her,
she  even  aids  them ;  and  those,  whom  a  she-wolf  is  nourish-
ing, the  hands  of  a  relation  could  brook  to  destroy.  She
stands  still,  and  with  her  tail  she  fawns  upon  her  tender  foster-
lings, and  with  her  tongue  forms  their  two  bodies  into  shape.
You  might  know  that  they  were  begotten  by  Mars  ;  they  have
no  fear ;  they  draw  her  udder,  and  are  nourished  by  the  aid
of  milk  not  destined  for  them  by  nature.  She  gave  a  name  to
the  place — the  place80  to  the  Luperci.     The  nurse  has  a  high

78  A  hollowed  ar&.]— Ver.  407.  '  Alveus'  is  'a  hollow  wooden  vessel/
or  *  a  tub.'  It  may  here  mean  an  ark  which  the  servant  had  provided  for
the  purpose ;  or  more  probably  the  wooden  cradle  in  which  the  children
had  been  laid,  and  which,  with  the  view  of  giving  them  a  chance  of  safety,
he  purposely  set  afloat,  instead  of  drowning  them,  as  he  had  been  ordered.

"9  Ruminal. .] — Ver.  412.  The  author  supposes  this  word  to  be  a  cor-
ruption from  '  Romula,'  which  derivation  is  unworthy  of  attention.  It  is,
with  much  more  probability,  supposed  to  have  been  so  named  from
'rumis,'  or  'ruma/  the  ancient  name  for  the  breast,  from  the  infants
having  been  there  suckled  by  the  wolf.  According  to  some,  it  took  its
name  from  '  rumen/  the  '  throat/  because  under  this  tree  the  cattle  used
to  chew  the  cud,  or  ruminate.  Tacitus  tells  us  that  the  tree,  in  his  time,
was  still  standing  in  the  Comitium.  Others  say  that  the  tree  referred  to
by  him  was  planted  by  Attius  Nsevius.  Perhaps  it  was  propagated  from
the  one  under  which  the  infants  were  said  to  have  been  found.

80  The  place.'] — Ver.  421.     The  Lupercal,  where  Pan  was  worshipped,


B,  II.  422—447.]  OX,    CALENDAR    OF    OYTD.  65

reward  for  the  milk  she  gave.     What  prevents  that  the  Lu-
perci  should  derive  their  name  from  the  Arcadian  mountain  ?

The  Lycsean  Faunus  has  his  temple  in  Arcadia.  Bride  newly
made,  what  dost  thou  await  ?  not  by  potent  herbs,  not  by
prayers,  not  by  the  magic  incantation — wilt  thou  become  a
mother ;  with  patience  await  the  blows  of  the  right  hand  that
fructifies  ;  soon  shall  thy  father-in-law  have  the  wished-for
epithet  of  grandfather.81  For  it  was  that  period,  when  by  a
cruel  fate  the  matrons  were  affording  but  few  pledges  of  their
fruitfulness.  "  What  avails  it  me,"  exclaimed  Romulus,  "  to
have  carried  off  the  Sabine  women  (this  took  place  while  he
held  the  sceptre)  if  my  violence  has  produced  for  me,  not
strength,  but  only  war  in  return ;  it  had  been  better  for  me  to
have  had  no  daughters-in-law  at  such  a  price.  At  the  base  of
the  Esquilian  hill,  there  was  a  grove,  uncut  for  many  a  year,
and  called  by  the  name  of  the  mighty  Juno.  When  they
came  thither,  both  the  matrons  and  the  men  with  bent  knees
prostrated  themselves  in  supplication.  Then  lo  !  suddenly
the  tops  of  the  shaken  wood  trembled,  and  the  Goddess  uttered
these  wondrous  words  through  her  sacred  grove,  "Let  a  sacred
he-goat  have  access  to  the  Italian  matrons."  The  multitude,
alarmed  by  this  ambiguous  oracle,  was  confounded.  There  was
an  augur,  whose  name  has  been  lost  in  the  lengthened  lapse
of  years  ;  he  had  lately  come  an  exile  from  the  Etrurian  soil. "
He  sacrifices  a  he-goat.  The  matrons  at  his  bidding  sub-
mitted their  backs  to  be  smitten  by  the  hide  that  had  been
cut  into  thongs.      The  moon  was  resuming  her  new  horns

the  author  here  says  was  so  called  from  '  lupa/  a  she-wolf/  and  gave  its
name  to  the  '  Luperci,'  the  priests  of  Pan.  It  was  a  cave  in  the  Palatine
Hill,  and  is  said  to  have  been  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  Pan  by
Evander.  He  also  suggests  that  the  Lupercal  may  have  been  so  called
from  the  name  ;  Lycseus/  which  Pan  derived  from  Mount  Lycaeum,  in
Arcadia,  which  name  being  Avkcuov,  meaning  'of,'  or  '  infested  by  wolves,'
would  be  rendered  in  Latin  by  '  Lupercum,'  a  word  of  similar  import.  Per-
haps the  festival  was  so  called  from  the  words  '  luo/  to  sacrifice  or  l  expiate/
and  '  caper/  a  '  he-goat/  as  a  goat  was  sacrificed  to  Pan  on  this  occasion.
81  Grandfather.'] — Ver.  427-8.     Gower's  version  of  these  lines  is —

1  Take  patiently  stripes  from  the  fruitful  hand  ;
Thy  father  then  shall  be  a  father  grand/

ffi  The  Etrurian  soil.] — Ver.  444.  Etruria  was  the  country  which  sup-
plied Rome  both  with  rites  and  priests  in  the  earlier  ages,  and  was  espe-
cially renowned  for  its  skill  in  the  arts  of  augury  and  divination.

P


82


66  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  II.  447—465.

in  her  tenth  course  from  that  time,  and  suddenly  the  husband
became  a  father,  the  wife  a  mother.  Thanks  were  given  to
Lucina  ;83  this  epithet  the  grove  gave  to  thee,  0  Goddess  ;  or  it
was  because  thou  hast  under  thy  care  our  introduction  to  the
light.  Spare,  I  pray,  gentle  Lucina,  the  pregnant  females,  and
without  pain  bring  forth  from  the  womb  its  matured  burden.

The  next  day  has  now  dawned  ;  do  thou  cease  to  rely  on  the
winds  ;  the  gales  at  this  season  of  the  year  are  not  to  be  trusted.
The  breezes  are  unsteady  ;  and  for  six  days  the  loosened  gate
of  the  prison  of  iEolus64  all  unbolted  stands  wide  open.

Now,  lightened  of  his  burden,  the  Waterbearer  has  sunk
on  his  knee,  with  his  urn  obliquely  sloped ;  be  thou,  the  Fish,
the  next  to  receive  the  heavenly  steeds.  They  say  that
thou  and  thy  brother85  (for  ye  glitter  as  contiguous  con-
stellations) bore  on  your  backs  two  gods.  Once  on  a  time,
Dione86  flying  from  the  frightful  Typhon,  at  that  period  when
Jupiter  bore  arms  in  defence  of  heaven,  accompanied  by  the
infant  Cupid,  came  to  the  Euphrates,  and  sat  on  the  margin
of  the  river  of  Palestine  .87  The  poplar  and  the  reeds  clothed
the  top  of  the  banks,   and  the  willows  afforded  a  hope  that

JwVCO

83  Lucina.']—  Ver.  449.  A  title  of  iSiaia,  as  presiding  over  the  birth  of
mortals,  derived  from  the  Latin  '  lux/  lucis,  '  light,'  or  from  « lucus,'  '  a
grove,'  the  place  of  her  worship,  as  the  poet  explains  in  this  and  the  next
line.

84  Prison  of  jEoIus.] — Ver.  456.  JEolus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and
Acesta,  or  Sergesta,  daughter  of  Hippotas,  a  Trojan.  He  was  king  of
Lipara  and  the  adjacent  islands  (called  from  him  iEolian),  near  Italy  and
Sicily.  Strongyle,  now  Stromboli,  was  one  of  these.  It  was  a  volcanic
mountain,  and,  as  it  was  believed  that  the  inhabitants  could  tell  from  its
smoke,  three  days  before,  what  wind  would  blow,  the  fable  became  current
that  iEolus  was  the  god  of  the  winds,  and  that  he  held  them  imprisoned  in
his  dominions.

85  Thy  brother.'] — Ver.  458.  The  one  looking  towards  the  north  was
called  '  Boreus,'  and  was  situated  under  the  arm  of  Andromeda.  The  one
looking  towards  the  south  was  called  '  Notius,'  and  was  below  the  shoulder
of  the  constellation  Equus.

86  Dione.] — Ver.  461.  According  to  Homer,  this  goddess  was  the
mother  of  Venus  ;  but  the  poet,  by  here  introducing  her  in  company  with
Cupid,  evidently  confounds  her  with  that  goddess.  Typhon,  or  Typhaeus,
has  been  noticed  in  the  note  to  line  523  of  the  first  book.  According  to
Hyginus,  Typhon  did  present  himself,  whereon  Venus  and  her  son  were
turned  into  fishes.

8'  Palestine.]  —  Ver.  464.  Palestine  was  only  a  small  portion  of  Syria,
of  which  the  river  Euphrates  formed  the  eastern  boundary.


B.  II.  465—489.]         OB,    CALENDAR   QT   OTID.  67

by  them  they  might  be  concealed.  While  she  is  in  her  place
of  concealment,  the  grove  roars  with  the  blast;  she  turns
pale  with  terror,  and  fancies  that  the  forces  of  the  enemy88  are
at  hand.  And  as  she  clasps  her  son  to  her  bosom,  she  says,
"Assist,  ye  nymphs,  and  give  aid  to  us  two  Divinities."  Im-
mediately, she  plunged  into  the  stream.  Two  fishes  bore
them  up  ;  for  which  they  now  have  Constellations  as  a  merited
reward.  In  consequence,  the  superstitious  Syrians  deem  it
impious  to  place  this  kind  of  animal  on  their  tables,  nor  do
they  profane  their  lips  with  fish.S9

The  next  day  is  without  any  mark  of  distinction  ;  but  the
one  after  it  has  been  consecrated  to  Quirinus.  He  who  now
bears  this  name  was  formerly  Romulus  ;  either  because  by  the
ancient  Sabines  a  spear  was  called  6  curis '  (from  his  spear
the  warrior  God  came  to  the  stars),  or  because  the  Quirites
gave  their  own  name  to  their  king,  or  because  he  had  joined
the  Curians90  to  the  Roman  people.  For  his  father  that
bears  sway  over  all  arms,  after  he  beheld  the  new  walls,  and
many  a  war  finished  by  the  hand  of  Romulus,  said,  "0  Jupiter,
the  Roman  power  has  strength  of  its  own,  and  needs  not  the
service  of  my  offspring.  Restore  the  son  to  the  father;
though  one  is  cut  off,  he  that  remains  shall  be  to  me  in  place
of  Remus  and  himself.  Thou  didst  tell  me  that  there  shall
be  one,  whom  thou  wilt  raise  to  the  azure  vault  of  heaven :
let  the  words  of  Jove  be  fulfilled."  Jupiter  nodded  assent ;

88  Forces  of  the  enemy. ,] — Ver.  468.  '  Hostiles  maims'  may  mean  either
the  troops  or  forces  of  the  giants,  who  were  aiding  their  kinsman  in  the
giant  war,  or  'the  hands  of  her  enemy'  himself.  In  the  latter  case  the  trans-
lation would  he, '  fancies  that  the  hands  of  her  enemy  are  even  now  upon  her.'

89  Profane  their  lips.~\ — Ver.  473-4.  The  Syrians  had  a  notion  that
swelling  of  the  body  and  ulceration  would  he  the  consequence  of  eating
fish,  and  this  was  perhaps  the  true  reason  of  their  abstinence  from  that
diet.  They  offered  either  fish  or  representations  of  them  in  metal  to  the
goddess,  Atergatis,  who  was  their  deity  corresponding  to  Venus.  Gower
thus  translates  these  lines —

1  Hence  Syrians  hate  to  eat  that  kind  of  fishes  ;
Nor  is  it  fit  to  make  their  gods  their  dishes.'

90  The  Curians.'] — Ver.  480.  When  Romulus  agreed  with  Tatius,
king  of  the  town  of  Cures,  to  incorporate  his  subjects  into  the  Roman
state,  it  was  settled  that  the  Romans  should  be  called  '  Curites,'  or
*  Quirites,'  in  honour  of  their  new  associates,  the  Curites  or  Curians,  as
well  as  '  Romani,'  from  the  name  of  Romulus.

3T2


68  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  489—505.

at  his  nod  either  pole  was  shaken,  and  Atlas91  felt  the  press-
ing  weight  of  the  heavens.  There  is  a  place  ;  the  people  of
old  called  it  the  fen  of  Caprea  ;92  it  chanced  that  there,  0
Romulus,  thou  wast  dispensing  justice  to  thy  subjects.  The
sun  vanishes,  the  intervening  clouds  conceal  the  sky,  and
the  heavy  shower  descends  with  pouring  torrents.  It  thun-
ders, and  the  heavens  are  rent  asunder  with  the  sent  forth
lightnings.  The  people  disperse  in  flight,  the  while  the  mo-
narch on  the  steeds  of  his  sire  is  speeding  to  the  stars.
There  was  mourning,  and  the  senate  was  under  a  charge  of
murder  falsely  imputed  to  it:  and  possibly  that  persuasion
might  have  remained  fixed  in  the  minds  of  men.  But  Julius
Proculus93  was  on  his  way  from  Alba  Longa  ;94  the  moon  was
shining,  and  there  was  no  need  of  a  torch,  when,  with  a  sudden
peal,  the  clouds  thundered  on  his  left  hand.  He  started  back,
and  his  hair  stood  on  an  end  with  terror.95  Romulus,  graceful,
and  larger  than  the  human  size,  arrayed  too  in  his  kingly
robe,  seemed  to  stand  before  him  in  the  middle  of  the  way,
and  at  the  same  time  to  say,  "  Forbid  the  Quirites  to  lament,

91  Atlas."] — Ver.  490.  He  was  the  son  of  Jupiter,  and  was  the  father  of
the  Pleiades,  who  were  placed  by  Jupiter  among  the  constellations.  He  is
also  said  to  have  been  the  father  of  the  Hyades,  who  received  a  similar
honour.  Atlas  was  the  name  of  a  mountain  in  the  country  of  Mauritania,
in  Africa,  so  high  that  its  summit  was  not  visible;  hence  the  fable,  that  a
king  of  that  region  supported  the  heavens.  The  most  probable  solution  of
the  fable,  is  that  he  was  an  astronomer  of  Libya,  who  frequented  that
mountain  for  the  purpose  of  making  astronomical  observations.

92  The  fen  of  Caprea'] — Ver.  491.  This  '  fen  of  Caprea,'  or  '  Capra,'
the  i  she-goat,'  was  a  marsh  near  Rome,  in  the  Campus  Martius.  Romulus
is  said  to  have  been  promulgating  the  laws  or  reviewing  his  army  here
when  he  was  translated.  Some  accounts  represent  him  as  having  been
assassinated  while  holding  the  senate  in  the  Temple  of  Vulcan.

93  Julius  Proculus.] — Ver.  499.  Dionysius  says  that  he  was  a  citizen
cf  Alba  Longa.

94  Alba  Longa.] — Ver.  499.  This  was  originally  a  colony  from  Lavi-
nium,  in  Latium,  and  was  founded  by  Ascanius,  the  son  of  iEneas,  at  the
foot  of  the  Alban  Mount.  It  was  so  named  from  the  discovery  in  that
spot,  of  a  white  sow  and  her  litter,  as  obscurely  foretold  by  Helenus  in
his  prophecy,  mentioned  in  the  iEneid,  Book  3, 1.  389.  From  its  length
it  was  called  Longa.  It  was  destroyed,  with  the  exception  of  its  temple,
by  Tuilus  Hostilius,  who  removed  its  inhabitants  to  Rome.

95  With  terror.] — Ver.  501-2.     Gower's  translation  of  this  passage  is,

'  Lo !  suddenly  the  left-hand  hedges  quake  ;
He  with  his  hairs  turned  bolt  upright  starts  back/


B.  II.  506—527.]         OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  69

and  let  them  not  offend  my  Godhead  with  their  tears.  Let
them  offer  me  frankincense,  and  let  the  pious  multitude  pay
adoration  to  Quirinus,  their  new  God,  and  let  them  practise  my
father's  arts  and  warfare."  He  gave  these  commands,  and
vanished  into  the  thin  air.  Proculus  calls  the  two  peoples
together,  and  reports  to  them  the  words  enjoined  upon  him.
A  temple  is  raised  to  the  Divinity ;  the  hill  too96  is  named
from  him,  and  appointed  days97  bring  back  the  religious
services  of  the  Roman  father.

Why  the  same  day  is  also  called  the  festival  of  fools,98  now
learn ;  a  reason,  trilling  indeed,  but  still  appropriate,  is  sug-
gested. The  earth  in  ancient  times  had  no  experienced  hus-
bandmen ;  the  toils  of  war  used  to  weary  the  active  men  of  those
days.  There  was  more  of  glory  in  the  use  of  the  sword  than  of
the  curved  plough  ;  neglected  by  its  owner,  the  fields  used,  to
bear  but  little.  Yet  did  the  ancients  sow  the  spelt,  and  reaped
it,  and  gave  the  same  when  cut  down,  to  Ceres  as  the  first-fruits.
Taught  by  experience  they  exposed  it  to  the  flames  to  be  parched,
and  by  their  mistakes  they  suffered  many  a  loss.  For  sometimes,
they  used  to  sweep  up  smutty  ashes  instead  of  grain  ;  some-
times the  flames  set  fire  to  their  cottages.  Fornax,  the  Goddess
of  the  Kiln, 99  was  deified  ;  pleased  with  Fornax  as  a  Goddess,
the  husbandmen  pray  that  she  will  moderate  the  heat  to  the
grain  while  parching.     Still  does  the  chief  Curio1  appoint  the

95  The  hill  too.']—  Ver.  511.  The  Quirinal  hill.  But  Festus  supposes
it  to  have  derived  its  name  from  the  Sabines  of  the  town  of  Cures,  who
settled  there  and  on  the  Capitoline  hill.  Niebuhr  thinks  there  was  a  town
on  it  called  'Quirium,'  whence  the  name  'Quirites,'  at  first  peculiar  to
the  Sabine  people.

97  Appointed  days.] — Ver.  512.  The  Quirinalia  were  stativse,  or  'set'
festivals.

98  The  festival  of  fools.]— Yer.  513.  'Stultorum  festa/  or  'Ferias.'  This
was  another  name  of  the  Quirinalia,  because  those  who  from  want  of  time,
or  being  on  a  journey,  or,  as  the  poet  says  further  on,  who  were  unable  to
learn  the  time  when  their  own  Curia  performed  the  rites,  and  had  not  sacri-
ficed with  the  rest  of  the  people  on  the  Fornacalia,  did  so  on  the  Quiri-
nalia, which  was  the  last  day  for  that  purpose.

99  Goddess  of  the  Kiln.]— Yer.  525.  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  Book  18)  says
that  Numa  deified  the  goddess  Fornax.  He  says,  'Numa  taught  his  people
to  propitiate  the  gods  with  the  produce  of  the  earth,  to  offer  the  salt  cakes,
and  to  parch  the  spelt,  as  when  parched  it  was  more  wholesome  for  food.
He  also  instituted  the  Fornacalia.'

1  Curio.] — Ver.  527.  Romulus  divided  the  people  into  three  tribes,  and
each  tribe  into  ten  'curise.'     Each  'curia*  had  a  temple  of  its  own  for  the


rO  THE   FASTI;  [b.  n.  528— 544.

festivals  of  Fornax  in  form  prescribed  by  law,  but  offers  no
sacrifices  at  a  fixed  period  :  and  in  the  Forum,  where  many  a
tablet2  is  suspended  around,  each  ward  is  denoted  by  a  certain
mark.  The  foolish  part  of  the  people  do  not  know  which  is
their  own  ward,  but  perform  a  repetition  of  the  sacrifice  on
the  last  day.

Honour  also  is  paid  to  the  graves3  of  the  dead.  Appease
the  spirits  of  your  forefathers,  and  offer  small  presents  on  the
pyres  that  are  long  since  cold.4  The  shades  of  the  dead5  ask
but  humble  offerings  :  affection  rather  than  a  costly  gift  is
pleasing  to  them;  Styx  below  has  no  greedy  Divinities.  Enough
for  them  is  the  covering  of  their  tomb  overshadowed  with  the
chaplets  laid  there,  and  the  scattered  fruits  and  the  little  grain
of  salt ;  and  corn  soaked  in  wine,  and  violets  loosened  from
the  stem ;  these  gifts  let  a  jar  contain,  left  in  the  middle  of
the  way.  I  do  not  forbid  more  costly  offerings,  but  by  these
the  shade  may  be  appeased ;  add  prayers  and  suitable  words,
the  altars  being  first  erected.  This  custom  did  iEneas,  no  un-
suitable teacher  of  the  duties  of  affection,   introduce  into  thy

performance  of  the  sacred  rites,  and  was  presided  over  by  its  own  'curio,'
so  called  because  lie  took  care  of  ('curabat')  the  sacred  rites.  Over  them  all
presided  the  'curio  maximus,'  or  chief  curio.  Down  to  a.u.c.  544,  he  was
chosen  from  the  patricians ;  after  that  period,  from  the  plebeians.

2  Many  a  tablet.] — Ver.  529.  In  the  Forum  the  names  of  the  curias
were  written  on  tablets,  which  stated  when  and  where  they  were  about
to  perform  such  rites  as  were  not  of  the  class  of  'stativae,'  or  set  feasts,  but
'imperative,'  appointed  by  order  of  the  Consul,  the  Praetor,  or  Pontifex
Maximus.

3  Paid  to  the  graves.] — Ver.  533.  The  'Feralia,'  in  honour  of  the  dead,
were  celebrated  on  the  19th  of  February,  as  it  was  formerly  the  last  month
of  the  year.  Offerings  were  then  made  to  propitiate  the  manes  or  shades  of
the  dead.  Festus  derives  the  word  from  'fero,'  'to  bear,'  because  they  'bear
offerings;'  or  from  'ferio,'  'to  slay,'  because  sheep  were  slain  for  sacrifice.
Varro  derives  it  from  'inferi,'  'the  inhabitants  of  the  infernal  regions,'  'the
dead.5,

4  Long  since  cold.] — Ver.  534.  Literally,  'extinguished.'  The  pile,
before  being  lighted,  was  called  '  pyrus ;'  when  lighted  for  burning  the  dead,
'rogus;'  when  extinguished,  'bustum.'

5  Shades  of  the  dead.] — Ver.  535.  Literally,  'Manes.'  According  to
some  writers,  the  souls  of  the  good,  after  death,  became  '  Lares;'  those  of  the
wicked  'Lemures,'  or  'Larvae;'  and  the  '  Manes'  were  those  whose  state  was
as  yet  uncertain.  The  name  is  also  applied  to  the  two  Genii,  Good  and
Evil,  who  were  supposed  ever  to  attend  each  individual,  and  to  inhabit  his
tomb  after  death.  By  others  the  'Manes'  are  considered  to  have  been  the
deities  of  the  infernal  regions.


b.  II.  544 — 566.J         OR,    CALENDAR   OF    OTID.  71

lands,  0  just  Latinus.  He  used  to  offer  the  annual  gifts  to
the  Genius  of  his  father  :  hence  did  the  adjoining  nations
learn  the  affectionate  ceremonial.  But  at  one  time,  while  they
were  engaged  in  a  lengthened  war  with  contentious  arms,
they  neglected  the  Parental  days.6  It  was  not  with  impunity
that  they  did  so;  for,  by  reason  of  that  cause  of  ill  omen,
Rome  is  said  to  have  felt  the  heat  of  the  funeral  fires  in  the
suburbs.7  For  my  part  I  scarcely  believe  it,  bat  their  dead
forefathers  are  said  to  have  come  forth  from  their  tombs,  and
to  have  uttered  their  complaints  in  the  hours  of  the  still  night;
and  they  say  that  appalhng  ghosts,  a  phantom  crowd,  howled
through  the  streets  of  the  city  and  the  fields  of  Latium.
Afterwards,  the  omitted  honours  were  paid  at  the  graves,  and
there  came  an  end  of  these  portentous  sights,  and  of  the
mortality  as  well.  But  while  these  rites  are  being  per-
formed, remain  unwedded,  ye  damsels  ;  let  the  torch  of  pine
wood  await  auspicious  days.  And  let  not  the  curved  spear8
part  thy  virgin  ringlets,  maiden,  who  appearest  to  thy  im-
patient mother  already  of  marriageable  years.  Conceal  thy
torches,  Hymenseus,9  and  remove  them  afar  from  these  dismal
fires,  the  gloomy  tombs  have  other  torches  than  these.  Let
the  Divinities  too  be  concealed,10  with  the  doors  of  their  temples
closed ;  be  the  altars  without  incense,  and  let  the  hearths
stand  without  fire.  Now  phantom  spirits  wander  abroad,  and
bodies  that  have  been  committed  to  the  tombs  ;  now  does  the

6  Parental  days.'] — Ver.  548.  So  called  from  'parens/  'a  parent/  'an-
cestor,' or  'relation,'  on  behalf  of  the  spirits  of  whom  sacrifice  was  made
on  these  days.

'  In  the  suburbs.'] — Ver.  550.  It  was  forbidden  by  law  to  burn  the
dead  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  that  the  priests  might  not  be  defiled  by
any  casual  contact  with  them,  and  that  the  houses  might  not  be  endan-
gered by  the  flames  of  the  funeral  piles.

J  The  curved  spear.] — Ver.  560.  The  hair  of  the  bride  was  adjusted
by  the  husband  into  six  locks,  with  the  point  of  a  needle  made  into  the
shape  of  a  spear,  or,  as  some  suppose,  with  the  point  of  an  actual  spear.  Fes-
tus  says,  that  this  ceremony  was  typical  of  the  guardianship  of  the  matrons
by  'Juno  Curitis,'  or  Juno  'of  the  lance/  Perhaps  it  may  have  been  typi-
cal of  the  dominion  intended  by  the  husband  to  be  exercised  over  his  wife.

9  Hymenaus.] — Ver.  561.  Hymen,  or  Hymenaeus,  was  the  tutelar  deity
of  marriage.  He  was  son  of  Bacchus  and  Venus,  or  of  Apollo  and  Calliope,
Urania,  or  Clio.     By  some  he  is  said  to  have  been  the  son  of  Magnes.

10  Be  concealed.]— -V er.  564.  Let  the  doors  be  closed,  that  the  deities
may  not  see  any  inauspicious  sights,  such  as  funerals,  which  were  especially
objects  of  aversion  to  the  gods.


72  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  566—586.

ghost  feed  upon11  the  viands  left  for  it.  But  yet  these  rites
are  to  last  no  longer,  than  to  allow  that  there  should  remain
of  the  month  as  many  days  as  my  verses  have  feet.11*  This
day,  because  on  it  they  perform  the  due  offerings  to  the  dead,
they  have  called  '  the  Feralia  ;'  it  is  the  last  day  for  appeasing
the  shades.

See,  an  old  woman  stricken  in  years,  sitting  in  the  midst  of
the  girls,  is  performing  the  sacred  rites  of  Tacita,12  yet  she  is
not  quite  silent  herself:13  with  three  fingers  she  places  three
cloves  of  frankincense  under  the  threshold,  where  the  little
mouse  has  made  for  himself  a  hidden  way :  then  she  binds
the  enchanted  threads  with  the  dark  coloured  spindle  ;  then
she  roasts  on  the  fire  the  sewed-up  head  of  a  pilchard14  which
she  has  first  sealed  up  with  pitch,  and  pierced  with  a  brazen
needle.  Wine  too  she  drops  on  it ;  whatever  of  the  wine  is
left,  she  either  drinks  it  herself,  or  her  attendants,  yet  she
herself  takes  the  greater  part.  "  We  have  tied  up  the  tongues
of  our  foes,  and  the  mouths  of  our  enemies,"  says  she,  in  the
act  of  going  out,  and  then  the  drunken  hag  goes  forth.  You
will  at  once  ask  of  me,  who  is  the  silent  Goddess  ?  learn  what  is
known  to  me  through  the  men  of  old  times.  Jupiter,  smitten
by  an  unconquerable  passion  for  Juturna,  endured  many  things

11  The  ghost  feed  upon."] — Ver.  566.  At  this  period,  viands  were  placed
near  the  tombs,  on  which  the  Manes  were  supposed  to  feed.  It  was  sup-
posed that  they  delighted  in  blood,  and  in  consequence,  animals  were  fre-
quently slain  at  the  funeral  pile.

n*  Verses  have  feet.] — Ver.  568.  There  are  eleven  feet  in  an  Hexa-
meter and  Pentameter  couplet,  and  as  the  Feralia  were  held  on  the  12th  of
the  calends  of  March,  there  would  be  only  eleven  days  left  in  the  month;
the  poet  means,  that  the  Feralia  must  begin  and  end  on  the  12th  of  the
calends  of  March.

12  Tacita.'] — Ver.  572.  Tacita  was  also  worshipped  under  the  name  of
Mania  or  Muta,  besides  the  name  Lara,  here  mentioned.  Neapolis,  an  old
commentator  on  this  author,  thinks  that  these  rites  accompanied  the  Feralia,
as  expressive  of  the  maxim,  'De  mortuis  nil  nisi  bonum/  'Be  silent  over
the  faults  of  the  dead.'  The  rites  here  described  are  evidently  of  magical
tendency,  but  are  replete  with  absurdity.  Some  writers  say  that  Numa
worshipped  one  of  the  Muses  under  this  name.

13  Quite  silent  herself.] — Ver.  572.  The  editor  of  the  Delphin  edition
most  ungallantly  remarks  on  this  passage,  'An  old  woman  be  silent?  She
could  just  as  soon  hold  a  red  hot  coal  in  her  mouth !'

14  A  pilchard.] — Ver.  578.  The  'mama'  was  a  small  sea-fish  of  little
value,  which  was  eaten  salted  by  the  poorer  classes.  It  was  perhaps
sacrificed  to  the  goddess  because  its  name  resembled  her  name,  Mania.  Its
mouth  being  sewed  up  was  typical  of  silence.


B.  II.  586—615.]         OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OTID.  73

that  ought  not  to  have  been  endured  by  so  great  a  God.  At  one
time  she  used  to  lie  hid  in  the  wood  among  the  hazel  copses,  at
another  time  she  used  to  plunge  into  the  kindred  streams.  He
calls  together  the  Nymphs,  which  then  frequented  Latium,  and
utters  such  words  as  these  in  the  midst  of  their  company.
"  This  sister  of  yours  is  only  spiting  herself,  and  shuns  that
which  is  for  her  good,  to  lock  herself  in  the  embrace  of  the
highest  God.  Consult  ye  for  us  both ;  for  that  which  will  be  my
highest  pleasure,  the  same  shall  prove  the  great  advantage  of
your  sister.  Prevent  her,  at  the  very  brink,  as  she  flies,  in  order
that  she  may  not  plunge  her  body  beneath  the  waters  of  the
stream.'5  He  had  said;  all  the  water  Nymphs  of  the  Tiber  nodded
their  assent,  and  those  who  dwell  in  thy  chambers,15  0  Goddess
Ilia.  It  chanced  there  was  a  Naiad  Nymph,  Lara  by  name  ;
but  her  ancient  name  was  the  first  syllable  twice  repeated, 16
given  to  her  for  her  infirmity  of  talkativeness.  Many  a  time  had
Almo17  said  to  her,  "Daughter,  do  hold  your  tongue;"  but
she  did  not  hold  it.  She,  soon  as  she  reached  the  lake  of
her  sister  Juturna,  says,  "Avoid  the  banks/'  and  repeats  the
words  of  Jupiter.  She  also  went  to  Juno,  and  expressing  pity
for  her  as  a  wife,  says,  "That  husband  of  thine  is  now
smitten  by  the  Naiad  Juturna."  Jupiter  was  furious  ;  he  de-
prived her  of  the  tongue  which  she  had  used  with  so  little
caution,  and  charged  Mercury,18  "Take  her  to  the  shades  below;
it  is  a  proper  place  for  the  silent ;  a  Nymph  she  is,  but  a  Nymph
of  the  infernal  lake  shall  she  be."  The  commands  of  Jove  are
now  being  executed ;  a  grove  receives  them  on  the  road ;  she  is
said  to  have  taken  the  fancy  of  the  God  who  conducted  her.  He
prepares  to  offer  violence  ;  with  her  looks  in  the  place  of
words  she  intreats  him,  and  in  vain  with  her  voiceless  mouth  does
she  struggle  to  speak.     She  becomes  pregnant,  and  gives  birth

15  Thy  chambers.'] — Ver.  598.  Ilia,  when  buried  alive  on  the  banks  of
the  Tiber,  was  fabled  to  have  become  wedded  to  the  god  of  the  river.

16  Twice  repeated.] — Ver.  599.  This  name  was  'Lala/  from  the  Greek
XaXelp,  'to  talk/  Ho  chatter/     Another  of  her  names  Was  Larunda.

V  Almo.] — Ver.  601.  The  father  of  Lara,  a  rivulet  in  the  Roman  ter-
ritory, running  from  the  Appian  way.  into  the  Tiber  near  the  city.

18  Mercury.] — Ver.  608.  The  son  of  Jupiter  and  Maia,  and  the  mes-
senger of  the  gods.  His  name  was  probably  derived  from  'merx/  'mer-
chandize,' as  he  was  the  god  of  trade  and  gain.  He  was  represented  with
winged  cap  and  winged  sandals.


74  THE   FASTI;  [b.  n.  615— 630.

to  twins,  the  Lares,19  who  guard  the  cross  ways,  and  ever  keep
their  watch  in  our  houses.

The  kinsfolk,  full  of  affection,  have  named  the  next  day  the
"Caristia,"  20  and  the  company  of  relations  assemble  at  the
family  feast.  In  good  truth,  it  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  turn  our
attention  from  the  tombs  and  our  relatives  who  are  dead,  to
those  who  survive ;  and  after  so  many  are  lost,  to  see  all  that
remains  of  our  family,  and  to  reckon  the  degrees  of  relation-
ship. Let  the  guiltless  come ;  far,  far  hence  be  the  unna-
tural brother,  and  the  mother  cruel  to  her  own  offspring ;  the
son  for  whom  the  father  is  too  long-lived,  and  he  who  counts
his  mother's  years;  the  cruel  mother-in-law,  too,  who  hates  and
oppresses  her  daughter-in-law.  Far  hence  be  the  brothers21
the  descendants  of  Tantalus,  and  the  wife  of  Jason,  and  she
who  gave  to  the  husbandman  the  parched  seed-corn  j22  Progne
too,  and  her  sister,23  and  Tereus,  cruel  to  them  both  ;  and

19  The  Lares.'] — Ver.  616.  These  deities  were  divided  into  the  public
and  private  Lares.  The  private,  or  familiars,  are  by  some  supposed  to  have
been  the  same  with  the  'Manes'  or  'shades'  of  the  ancestors  of  the  family-
occupying  the  house.  The  public  ' Lares'  were,  the  'urbani,'  presiding  over
cities;  'rustici,'  over  the  country;  '  compitales,'  over  cross-roads;  'marini,'
over  the  sea.     Lar  is  an  Etrurian  word,  signifying  'lord,'  or  'noble.'

20  Caristia.] — Ver.  617.  From  'cams,'  'dear,'  as  these  festivals  were
for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  family  love,  and  of  healing  misunderstand-
ings by  meeting  again.

21  The  brothers.]  —Ver.  627.  Atreus  and  Thyestes,  sons  of  Pelops  and
Hippodamia,  killed  their  half-brother  Chrysippus.  Thyestes  having  seduced
Aerope,  the  wife  of  Atreus,  sent  Pleisthenes,  the  son  of  Atreus,  whom  he
had  brought  up,  to  murder  his  father.  Atreus,  supposing  him  to  be  the
son  of  Thyestes,  slew  him.  According  to  another  version  of  the  story,
Atreus,  feigning  a  reconciliation,  invited  Thyestes  to  his  kingdom,  and  killed
and  dressed  the  bodies  of  Tantalus  and  Pleisthenes,  the  sons  of  Thyestes ;
and  while  the  latter  was  enjoying  the  meal,  Atreus  had  their  hands  and
heads  brought  in  and  shown  to  the  father,  on  which  Thyestes  fled  to  the
court  of  Thesprotus.     Medea,  the  wife  of  Jason,  slew  her  own  children.

22  The  parched  seed-corn.] — Ver.  628.  Ino,  daughter  of  Cadmus,  mar-
ried Athamas,  who  had  Phrixus  and  Helle  by  a  former  marriage.  These
Ino  resolved  to  destroy.  She  persuaded  the  women  to  parch  the  seed-corn,
unknown  to  their  husbands.  The  crop  failing,  the  oracle  at  Delphi  was
consulted  how  consequent  famine  might  be  averted.  Ino  persuaded  the
messengers  to  say  that  Apollo  directed  Phrixus  to  be  sacrificed  to  Jupiter.
By  celestial  interference  Phrixus  was  saved,  and  Athamas  becoming  mad,
Ino  rushed  into  the  sea,  and  was  made  a  sea-goddess  under  the  name  of
Leucothea.

23  Progne.] — Ver.  629.  Tereus,  king  of  Thrace,  married  Progne,  and
at  her  request  went  to  Athens  to  bring  Philomela  to  see  her  sister,  and,


».  II.  630—650.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OP    OVID.  75

whoever  increases  his  wealth  by  the  perpetration  of  crime.
Offer  the  frankincense  to  the  propitious  Gods  of  the  family :
Concord  is  said  on  this  day  to  be  present  with  extreme  be-
nignity ;  offer,  too,  a  share  of  the  viands,  that  the  presented
platter,  testimony  of  the  pleasing  honour,  may  feed  the  well-
girt  Lares.24  And  now  when  night,  far  advanced,  shall  invite
you  to  balmy  slumbers,  when  ye  are  about  to  pray,  take  wine  in
abundance  in  your  hand,  and  say,  "  Well  may  it  be  with  us,  and
well  with  thee,  most  excellent  Caesar,  father  of  thy  country," 26
the  wine  being  poured  forth  as  you  repeat  the  holy  words.

When  the  night  shall  have  passed  away,  let  the  God,  who
by  his  landmark  divides  the  fields,  be  worshipped  with  the
accustomed  honours.  Terminus,26  whether  thou  art  a  stone,
or  whether  a  stock  sunk  deep  in  the  field  by  the  ancients,
yet  even  in  this  form  thou  dost  possess  divinity.  Thee,  the
two  owners  of  the  fields  crown  with  chaplets  from  their  op-
posite sides,  and  present  with  two  garlands  and  two  cakes.
An  altar  is  erected ;  to  this  the  female  peasant  herself  brings
in  a  broken27  pan  the  fire  taken  from  the  burning  hearths.
An  old  man  cuts  up  the  firewood,  and  piles  it  on  high  when
chopped,  and  strives  hard  to  drive  the  branches  into  the
resisting  ground.  While  he  is  exciting  the  kindling  blaze
with  dried  bark,  a  boy28  stands  by  and  holds  in  his  hands  a

having  ravished  her  by  the  way,  he  cut  out  her  tongue.  Of  this  Progne
was  informed  by  a  robe  which  Philomela  sent  her,  on  which  was  described
the  conduct  of  Tereus.  Progne,  on  this,  killed  Itys,  the  son  of  Tereus,
and  served  him  up  to  his  father.  Tereus  would  have  slain  her,  but  the
gods  changed  him  into  a  hoopoe,  Progne  into  a  swallow,  and  Philomela
into  a  nightingale.

24  Well-girt  Lares.'] — Ver.  634.  The  Lares  were  represented  in  the  Ga-
binean  habit,  which  covered  the  left  shoulder,  leaving  the  right  bare.  The
'patella/,  or  platter,  was  a  broad  vessel  or  dish,  used  in  sacrifices.

25  Father  of  thy  country.'] — Ver.  637.  The  health  of  Augustus  was
always  given  at  private  and  public  entertainments,  according  to  a  decree
of  the  senate  to  that  effect.

26  Terminus.'] — Ver.  641.  This  god  was  represented  by  a  stone  or
stump,  and  not  with  human  features.  Lactantius  says  he  was  the  stone
which  Saturn  swallowed,  mistaking  him  for  Jupiter.  His  worship  was
ordained  by  Numa,  and  his  emblems  were  crowned  with  wreaths  of
flowers  on  his  yearly  festivals.

V  In  a  broken.] — Ver.  645.  'Curta.'  It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  the
word  'curtus'  means,  ' broken/  or  ' small/  here.  Perhaps  the  former,  as
being  a  mark  of  the  poverty  of  the  person  sacrificing.

38  A  boy.] — Ver.  650.     Boys  and  girls,  called  'camilli/  and  'camillae/


/  6  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  650—670.

broad  basket.  Out  of  this,  when  he  has  thrice  thrown  the
produce  of  the  earth  into  the  midst  of  the  flames,  his  little
daughter  offers  the  sliced  honeycombs.  Others  hold  wine ;
a  portion  of  each  thing  is  thrown  into  the  fire ;  the  crowd,
all  arrayed  in  white,  look  on,  and  maintain  religious  silence.
The  common  landmark  also  is  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of
a  slain  lamb ;  he  makes,  too,  no  complaint  when  a  sucking-
pig  is  offered  to  him.  The  neighbours  meet  in  supplication,
and  they  celebrate  the  feast  and  sing  thy  praises,  holy  Ter-
minus. It  is  thou  that  dost  set  the  limits  to  nations,  and
cities,  and  mighty  kingdoms ;  without  thee  all  the  country
would  be  steeped  in  litigation.  In  thee  there  is  no  ambi-
tion— by  no  gold  art  thou  bribed ;  mayst  thou  with  law
and  integrity  preserve  the  fields  committed  to  thy  care.
Hadst  thou  in  times  of  old  marked  out  the  land  of  Thyrea,29
then  three  hundred  persons  would  not  have  been  consigned
to  death,  and  then,  the  name  of  Othryades  would  not  have
been  read  on  the  piled-up  armour.  Ah  !  how  much  of  his
blood  did  he  expend  in  his  country's  cause !  What,  too,  hap-
pened when  the  new  Capitol  was  building  ?  This,  namely ;  the
whole  multitude  of  Divinities  withdrew,30  and  gave  place  to
Jupiter.  Terminus,  as  the  ancients  tell,  being  there  found,  re-
mained in  his  shrine,  and  still  possesses  the  temple  in  common

assisted  at  the  Roman  sacrifices.  They  were  required  to  be  sound  in  health,
perfect  in  limb,  free  born,  and  with  both  parents  living.  Some  suppose
that  they  corresponded  with  the  Kadfii\oi  of  the  Curetes  and  Corybantes,
others  with  Cadmilus,  one  of  the  Cabin  of  Samothrace.  Others  again  sup-
pose that  'camillus'  was  merely  an  old  Etrurian  word,  signifying  'a  boy/

29  Thyrea.] — Ver.  663.  Thyrea  was  a  town  on  the  confines  of  Laconia
and  Argolis.  It  was  consequently  claimed  by  the  people  of  both  countries,
and  they  agreed  to  decide  the  claim  by  the  sword.  Three  hundred  men
were  chosen  as  champions  on  each  side.  Of  these  only  three  survived.  The
two  surviving  Argives  hastened  home  triumphantly  to  announce  their  suc-
cess ;  but  Othryades,  the  Spartan  leader,  who  was  still  living,  arose  from
the  ground,  and  erected  a  trophy  of  arms,  and,  according  to  Statius,  in-
scribed it  with  his  own  name,  written  in  his  own  blood,  in  honour  of  Jupi-
ter Tropceuchus,  'the  possessor  of  trophies;'  and  then  slew  himself.  Each
party  claimed  the  victory,  and  hostilities  being  renewed,  the  Spartans
ultimately  prevailed.  The  poet  mentions  three  hundred,  but  the  story  is,
that  six  hundred  men  were  engaged  in  the  conflict.

30  Divinities  withdrew.'] — Ver.  668.  They  were  consulted  by  Tarqui-
nius  Superbus,  by  auguries,  and  all  but  Terminus  consented  to  be  removed,
which  circumstance  was  regarded  as  an  omen  of  the  future  stability  of  the
Roman  empire.


B.  ii.  670—695.]        OB,    CALENDAR   OP   OVID.  77

with  mighty  Jove.  Now,  too,  that  he  may  see  nothing  but
the  stars  above  him,  the  roof  of  his  temple  has  a  little  opening.
After  that  circumstance,  Terminus,  no  inconstancy  was  per-
mitted thee  ;  in  whatever  situation  thou  hast  been  placed,
there  abide,  and  do  not  yield  one  jot  to  any  neighbour  asking
thee ;  that  thou  mayst  not  appear  to  favour  a  mortal  rather
than  Jove.  And  whether  thou  shalt  be  struck  by  the  plough-
shares, or  whether  by  the  harrows,  cry  aloud,  "This  is  my  field,31
that  is  yours."  There  is  a  road  which  leads  the  citizens  to
the  fields  of  the  Laurentines,  realms  once  sought  by  the  Dar-
danian  chief.  On  that  road,  the  sixth  mile-stone  from  the
city  is  accustomed  to  witness  the  sacrifices  made  to  thee,  0
Terminus,  with  the  entrails  of  a  sheep.  To  other  nations,  land
has  been  allotted  with  some  fixed  limits ;  the  extent  of  the
Roman  City  and  of  the  earth  is  the  same.

Now  must  I  tell  of  the  banishment32  of  the  king  Tarquinius.
From  that  event  the  sixth  day  from  the  end  of  the  month  has
derived  its  name.  Tarquinius  was  the  last  that  held  sove-
reign sway  over  the  Roman  people,  a  wicked  man,33  but  brave
in  arms.  Some  cities  he  had  taken,  others  he  had  rased  to
the  ground,  and  Gabiiu  he  had  made  his  own  by  a  dis-
graceful stratagem.  For  the  youngest  of  his  three  sons,
plainly  the  offspring35  of  Superbus,  came  in  the  silence  of  the
night  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy.  On  the  moment,  they  un-
sheathed their  swords,  "  Strike,"  said  he,  "an  unarmed  man  ;
this,  my  brothers36  and  my  father  Tarquinius  would  wish ;  he

31  This  is  my  field.'] — Ver.  677-8.     Gower  translates  these  lines  thus —

1  And  maugre  thou  art  scratched  with  rake  and  plow,
Cry,  this  is  yours,  and  this  belongs  to  you.'

32  The  banishment.] — Ver.  685.  This  festival  was  called  the  Regifugium,
or  '  Royal  flight.'

33  A  wicked  man."] — Ver.  688.  He  had  murdered  his  father-in-law,
Servius  Tullius,  and  then  usurped  his  throne.  He  had  been  successful
against  the  Volsci,  and  had  taken  Suessa  Pometia,  their  principal  town.

34  Gabii.~\ — Ver.  690.  This  was  a  town  of  Latium,  nearly  half  way
between  Rome  and  Prseneste.

35  Plainly  the  offspring.'] — Ver.  691.  Showing  himself  to  be  so  by
his  unprincipled  conduct.  Gower  translates  this  and  the  following  line
thus —

*  For  lo!  his  young  son,  and  his  own  son  right,
Came  into  their  foes'  garrison  by  night.'

36  My  brothers.] — Ver.  694.  Titus  and  Aruns.  Sextus  was  the
youngest.    Dionysius,  however,  makes  Sextus  to  have  been  the  eldest.


78  THE  PASTI ;  [b.  ii.  695—717.

who  has  mangled  my  back  with  the  cruel  lash."  That  he
might  be  enabled  to  say  this,  he  had  submitted  to  stripes.  It
was  moonlight,  they  look  upon  the  youth  and  sheathe  their
swords  ;  and,  having  drawn  his  dress  on  one  side,  they  see
his  back  all  covered  with  weals.  They  go  so  far  as  to  weep,
and  they  beg  that  he  will  superintend  the  management  of  the
war;  he,  in  his  cunning,  concurs  with  these  unsuspecting
men.  And  now  grown  powerful,  he  sends  a  friend,  and  asks
his  father  what  means  he  could  point  out  to  him  for  betraying
Gabii.  There  is  near  at  hand  a  garden  well  stocked  with
sweet-scented  plants,  having  its  soil  divided  by  a  gently  mur-
muring streamlet  of  water.  There  Tarquinius  receives  the
secret  despatches  of  his  son,  and  with  a  staff  he  knocks  off  the
heads  of  the  tallest  lilies.  When  the  messenger  returns  and
mentions  to  him  the  striking  down  of  the  lilies,37  the  son  says,
"  I  understand  what  are  the  orders  of  my  father."  There  is
no  delay  ;  the  principal  men  of  the  town  of  Gabii  being  first
slain,  the  walls,  deprived  of  their  chiefs,  are  delivered  up.
Lo !  dreadful  to  be  seen !  a  serpent  issues  forth  from  the
midst  of  the  altars,  and  drags  the  entrails  from  the  extin-
guished flames.  Phoebus  is  consulted.38  An  oracular  response
is  returned  in  these  words  : — "He  shall  be  the  conqueror  who
first  shall  kiss  his  mother."  Then  hastened  they  each  man  to
kiss39  his  mother,  a  set  who  put  faith  in  the  Deity  whom  really
they  did  not  understand.      Brutus40  was  a  wise  man,  who

&  The  lilies.']— Ver.  707.  Herodotus  (book  5.  c.  92.)  tells  us  that
Thrasybulus,  tyrant  of  Miletus,  employed  the  same  mode  of  giving. counsel
to  Periander  of  Corinth.  Gower  translates  this  and  the  next  line  in  the
following  manner: —

1  The  scout  brings  word  he  cropt  the  highest  lilies  :
"  I  know,"  saith  Sextus,  il  what  my  father's  will  is."  '

Livy  says  that  the  heads  of  the  highest  poppies,  '  summa  papaverum/  were
struck  off.

33  Phcebus  is  consulted.'] — Ver.  710.  Titus  and  Aruns  went  to  Delphi  for
this  purpose,  and  at  the  same  time  they  enquired  who  should  succeed  their
father  as  ruler  of  Rome.  The  poet  does  not  allude  to  this  query;  but  to
it  was  given  the  answer  mentioned  in  the  text.

39  Each  man  to  kiss.] — Ver.  715.  Dionysius  says,  that  they  agreed  to
conceal  the  oracle,  and  that,  kissing  their  parent  at  the  same  time,  they
should  reign  jointly.  Livy  states,  that  they  left  it  to  chance,  by  drawing
lots  which  should  salute  his  parent  first.

40  Brutus.']— Ver.  717.     His  father,  M.  Junius,  and  his  elder  brother,


B.  II.  717—741.]         OE,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  79

feigned  the  part  of  a  fool,  in  order  that  he  might  be  in  safety
from  thy  machinations,  0  cruel  Superbus !  He,  falling  on
his  face,  kissed  his  mother  earth,  while  he  was  supposed  to
have  fallen  down  by  reason  of  his  foot  stumbling.  In  the
mean  time  Ardea41  is  being  beleaguered  by  the  standards  of
Rome,  and,  under  blockade,  endures  tedious  delay.  While
they  are  unoccupied,  and  the  enemy  fears  to  join  battle,  they
amuse  themselves  in  camp,  and  the  soldier  spends  his  time  in
idleness.  The  young  Tarquinius  entertains  his  comrades
with  feasting  and  wine,  and  the  son  of  the  king  says  to  them,
"  While  this  stubborn  Ardea  detains  us  by  its  tedious  war,
and  permits  us  not  to  carry  back  our  arms  to  the  Gods  of  our
country,  think  you,  are  the  partners  of  our  beds  faithful  to  us  ?
and  are  we  objects  of  reciprocal  love  to  our  wives?"  They
extol,  each  man  his  own  wife  ;  the  dispute  increases  with  their
earnestness,  and  both  tongue  and  affection  wax  warm  with
much  wine.  He,  to  whom  Collatia42  had  given  an  honoured
name,  rises.  "  There  is  no  occasion  for  words,"  says  he  ;
"  put  faith  in  facts  alone.  Abundance  of  the  night  remains,
let  us  mount  our  horses,  and  make  for  the  city ." 43  His  words
meet  with  their  approval,  and  their  horses  are  bridled.  These
had  now  borne  their  masters  to  the  end  of  the  journey.  Forth-
with they  repaired  to  the  royal  abode  ;  there  was  no  sentinel  at
the  door.44  Behold !  they  find  the  daughter-in-law  of  the  king
sitting  up  and  spending  the  night  with  wine  before  her ;  the
chaplets  having  fallen  down45  on  her  neck.    Going  thence  with

were  slain  by  Tarquin  to  obtain  their  wealth.  To  escape  a  similar  fate,
L.  J.  Brutus  counterfeited  idiotcy,  and  was  retained  by  Tarquin  in  his
court  for  the  amusement  of  his  sons.

41  Ardea."] — Ver.  721.  A  town  of  Latium,  twenty-three  miles  distant
from  Rome,  so  called  either  from  '  ardea/  '  a  heron/  from  an  augury  taken
therefrom ;  or  from  '  ardeo/  '  to  be  hot/  on  account  of  the  extreme  heat
of  the  country.  Tarquin  besieged  it,  on  the  pretext  that  it  was  conspiring
to  effect  the  return  of  certain  Roman  exiles.

42  Collatia.'] — Ver.  733.  A  Sabine  town,  situated  on  an  eminence
about  four  miles  to  the  east  of  Rome.  Tarquinius  was  called  Collatinus,
as  his  father  Egerius  had  been  appointed  governor  of  Collatia,  when  cap-
tured by  his  uncle  Tarquinius  Priscus.

43  For  the  city.] — Ver.  735.  After  that,  they  would  have  to  ride  some
miles  to  Collatia,  where  the  abode  of  Collatinus  was.

44  No  sentinel  at  the  door.] — Ver.  738.  Meaning  that  all  neglected  their
duties  by  reason  of  the  neglect  and  inebriety  of  their  mistress.

45  Having  fallen  down.] — Ver.  739.    It  was- not  deemed  consistent  with


80  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  ii.  741—770.

rapid  pace,  Lucretia  is  visited.  She  was  employed  in  spinning  ;
before  her  bed  were  the  work-baskets  and  the  soft  wool.  By
the  lamp's  dim  light  her  handmaids  were  spinning  their  as-
signed tasks,  among  whom  she  thus  spoke  with  gentle  voice  :
—  "With  all  speed  there  must  be  sent  to  your  master  a  cloak46
made  with  our  hands  ;  now,  at  this  moment,  hasten  on,  my
girls.  But  what  news  have  ye  heard?  for  you  are  in  the  way
of  hearing  more  than  I;  how  much  of  the  war  do  they  say
still  remains  ?  Soon  shalt  thou  be  conquered,  and  fall,  vexa-
tious Ardea ;  thou  art  resisting  better  men,  while  thus  com-
pelling our  husbands  to  be  from  home  ;  only  may  they  return
in  safety.  But  rash  is  that  husband  of  mine,  and  recklessly  he
rushes  on  when  the  sword  is  drawn.  My  senses  fail  me,  and
I  faint,  oft  as  the  image  of  him  engaged  in  battle  occurs  to  my
mind ;  and  a  chilling  coldness  pervades  my  breast."  She  ends
in  tears,  and  drops  the  tight-drawn  threads,  and  hides  her
face  in  her  bosom.  Even  this  became  her ;  her  tears  became
a  woman  so  chaste,  and  her  countenance  was  worthy  of,  and
suited  to,  her  nature.  "  Lay  aside  your  fears ;  I  am  here,"
said  her  husband.  She  revived,  and  hung,  a  sweet  burden,
upon  her  husband's  neck.  Meanwhile  the  royal  youth  con-
ceives a  frantic  passion,  and,  hurried  onwards  by  blind  desire,
loses  all  control  of  himself.  Her  figure  charms  him,  her
complexion,  white  as  snow,  her  auburn  hair,  and  the  grace
which  atttends  her,  adorned  by  no  art.  Her  words  charm
him,  her  voice,  and  her  very  chastity ;  and  the  less  hope  there
is,  the  more  intensely  does  he  desire.  And  now  the  bird,  the
harbinger  of  dawn,  had  sent  forth  his  note,  when  the  young
men  are  on  their  return  to  the  camp.  His  wonder-stricken
feelings  are  preyed  on  by  the  image  of  her  absent,  and  as  he
recalls  her  to  his  mind,   more   charms  are  discovered,  and

female  delicacy  to  wear  chaplets  at  all ;  but  it  was  a  plain  proof  of  inebriety
when  they  had  fallen  from  the  head  on  to  the  neck.  It  is  to  be  observed,
that  this  demirep  had  '  merum/  '  pure  wine,'  and,  undiluted,  before
her.

46  A  cloak.'] — Ver.  746.  By  this  line  we  may  see  that  both  industry
and  economy  were  Lucretia' s  virtues.  The  '  lacerna'  was  a  military  cloak
of  thick  texture,  worn  over  the  '  toga,'  or  tunic,  open  in  front,  and
fastened  with  clasps.  Gower  thus  translates  this  and  the  preceding
line —

1  Maids,  you  must  make  (plie,  plie  your  bus'ness  faster)
A  coat  to  send  in  haste  unto  your  master/


b.  ii.  770— SOL]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  81

the  more  they  engage  him.  Thus  it  was  she  sat,  thus  was  she
attired,  thus  did  she  spin  the  warp,  thus  lay  on  her  neck  her
neglected  tresses.  These  were  her  features,  these  were  her
words  ;  this  her  expression,  this  her  make,  this  the  complexion
of  her  face.  As  the  billow  is  wont  to  abate  after  a  great
storm,  but  yet  from  the  wind  that  has  raged  the  waves  swell
on ;  so,  though  the  presence  of  her  charming  form  was
wanting,  the  passion  still  remained,  which  that  form  when
present  had  inspired.  He  burns,  and,  urged  on  by  the  goads
of  unlawful  desire,  he  plans  violence  and  treachery  against  a  bed
undeserving  of  it.  "  The  result  is  doubtful — we  will  dare  the
utmost, "  said  he.  "Be  it  chance,  or  be  it  a  providence  that
aids  the  bold,  let  him  see  to  it.  It  was  by  daring,  too,  that
Gabii  we  won."  Thus  having  said,  he  girds  his  side  with  his
sword,  and  presses  the  back  of  his  steed.  Collatia  receives
the  youth  within  her  brass-barred  portal  just  as  the  sun  is
preparing  to  hide  his  disk.  An  enemy,47  in  the  guise  of  a  guest,
he  enters  the  house  of  Collatinus ;  he  is  kindly  received,  for
he  was  connected  by  blood.  What  ignorance  is  there  in  the
minds  of  mortals  !  She,  hapless  one,  unsuspicious  of  the  world,
makes  ready  the  entertainment  for  her  enemy.  He  had  now
finished  the  repast,  and  slumber  demands  its  hour.  It  was  night,
and  there  were  no  lights48  in  the  whole  house.  He  arises,  and
draws  from  its  sheath  the  golden-hilted  sword,  and  he  comes
to  thy  chamber,  virtuous  matron ;  and  when  he  now  presses
the  bed,  he  says,  "  I  have  my  sword  here  with  me,  Lucre tia  ;
'tis  I,  Tarquinius,49  the  son  of  the  king,  who  address  thee."
She  answers  not,  for  she  has  no  voice,  no  power  of  speech,  or
any  sense  left  in  her  breast.  But  she  trembles,  as  when
sometime  the  little  lambkin,  seized  upon  after  it  has  left  the
fold,  lies  under  the  wolf,  its  deadly  foe.    What  can  she  do  ?  Can

47  An  enemy.'] — Ver.  787.  The  words  are,  l  Hostis  ut  hospes,'  '  an
enemy  as  a  guest.'  There  is  evidently  a  play  upon  the  similar  sound  of
the  two  words.     Livy  also  employs  the  same  collocation  of  these  words.

48  No  lights.'] — Ver.  792.  This  shews  the  confidence  that  Lucretia  had
in  the  propriety  of  her  guest's  conduct,  and  her  own  unsuspecting  and  in-
nocent nature,  as  it  was  generally  the  custom  for  a  servant  near  the  cham-
ber to  keep  a  lamp  burning.

49  'Tis  /,  Tarquinius.] — Ver.  796.  Gower  translates  this  and  the  pre-
ceding line  :

*  Laid  on  the  bed.     Lucretia,  no  denial ;
Here  is  my  sword  ;  I'm  Tarquine  of  blood  royall.'

G


82  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  n.  801—857.

she  resist?  A  woman,  in  the  contest  she  will  surely  he  over-
come. Cry  out  ?  But  in  his  right  hand  there  is  the  sword  to
slay  her.  Fly  1  Her  breast  is  held  down  by  his  hands  placed
on  it ;  a  breast  now  for  the  first  time  touched  by  the  hand  of  a
stranger.  Her  foe,  inflamed  with  passion,  urges  her  with  entrea-
ties, with  bribes,  and  with  threats.  By  entreaties,  by  bribes,  by
threats,  he  moves  her  not.  "  Thou  dost  avail  nothing,"  he  said  ;
"  I  will  take  thy  life  for  the  purpose  of  criminating  thee.  I,  an
adulterer,  will  be  the  false  witness  of  thy  adultery.  I  will  slay
the  servant,  in  whose  company  thou  shalt  be  said  to  have  been
detected."  The  matron  yielded,  overcome  by  fear  for  her
good  fame.  Why,  conqueror,  dost  thou  exult  ?  This  victory
shall  prove  thy  destruction.  Ah !  what  a  price  did  that  one
night  cost  to  thy  sovereignty !  And  now  the  day  had  dawned  ;
she  sits  with  her  hair  dishevelled,  just  as  a  mother  is  wont  to  do
when  about  to  go  to  the  funeral  pile  of  her  son ;  she  summons
from  the  camp  her  aged  father,  with  her  faithful  husband;  and
without  any  delay  they  both  come.  And  when  they  see  the
state  of  her  attire,  they  ask  what  is  the  cause  of  her  mourning,
whose  obsequies  it  is  that  she  is  preparing,  or  with  what
calamity  she  is  afflicted.  For  a  long  time  she  is  silent,  and,
filled  with  shame,  she  conceals  her  face  with  her  dress.  Her
tears  flow  like  an  everspringing  stream.  On  one  side,  her
father,  on  the  other,  her  husband  console  her  tears,  and
entreat  of  her  to  tell  them  ;  and  they  weep  and  feel  alarm  with
an  undefined  dread.  Thrice  did  she  attempt  to  speak,  thrice
did  she  fail,  and  again  a  fourth  time  did  she  attempt  it,  and
even  then  she  raised  not  her  eyes.  "  Shall  I  owe  this  dis-
grace too  to  Tarquinius  ?  I  will  speak  out,"  says  she ;  "  I,
wretched  that  I  am,  will  speak  out  my  own  disgrace."  And
what  she  can,  she  relates.  The  conclusion  remained  untold;  she
wept,  and  the  cheeks  of  the  matron  were  suffused  with  crim-
son. Her  father  and  her  husband  excuse  her  as  the  victim  of
compulsion.  "  That  pardon  which  ye  give,"  she  said,  "  do  I
deny  to  myself."  There  is  no  pause  :  with  a  poniard  that
she  had  concealed  she  pierces  her  breast,  and,  streaming  with
blood,  she  falls  at  her  father's  feet.  And  even  then,  in  the
moment  of  death,  she  uses  caution  that  she  may  fall  in  no
unseemly  manner, — this  was  her  care  even  as  she  fell.

Behold  !  over  her  body,  forgetful  of  their  dignity,  lie  both  her
husband  and  her  father,  bewailing  their  common  loss.    Brutus


B   II.  857-861.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF    OVID.  83

is  there,  and  now  at  last  by  his  spirit  falsifies50  his  name,  and
snatches  from  her  dying  body  the  piercing  blade  ;  then  holding
the  knife  dripping  with  noble  blood,  with  threatening  lips  he
utters  these  fearless  words  :  "By  this  noble  and  chaste  blood,
I  swear  to  thee,  and  by  thy  spirit  which  shall  be  to  me  a  deity,
that  Tarquinius,  with  his  exiled  house,  shall  pay  the  penalty  of
this  ;  now  long  enough  has  the  energy  of  my  mind  lain  con-
cealed." She,  as  she  lay,  at  this  exclamation,  turned  her
eyes,  void  of  the  light  of  life,  and  seemed,  by  shaking  her
locks,  to  express  her  approval  of  his  words.  This  matron
of  heroic  mind  is  borne  to  her  burial,  and  carries  with  her
tears  and  popular  indignation.  The  gash,  all  gaping  wide,  is
exposed  to  view.  Brutus,  with  loud  voice,  arouses  the  Quirites,
and  recounts  the  dreadful  crimes  of  the  king.  Tarquinius
flies,  with  his  children.51  The  Consul52  undertakes  the  annual
jurisdiction.     This  was  the  last  day  of  royalty.

Am  I  deceived,  or  is  the  swallow  come,  the  harbinger  of
spring  ?  and  does  she  fear  lest  perchance  returning  winter  may
retrace  his  course  ?  Yet  ofttimes,  Progne,  wilt  thou  complain
that  thou  didst  make  too  great  haste,  and  thy  husband  Tereus
shall  be  gladdened53  by  thy  shivering  in  the  cold.

And  now  two  nights  of  the  second  month  are  remaining,  and
Mars  with  harnessed  chariot  drives  his  swift  steeds.  The  name
of  Equina,54  derived  from  fact,  has  adhered  to  the  games,  which
the  God  himself  witnesses  on  his  own  plain.  Rightly,  Gradivus>55

50  Falsifies."] — Ver.  837.  The  name  Brutus  was  given  to  him  from
his  supposed  idiotcy.  He  now  shows  his  real  character  as  a  hero,  a  pa-
triot, and  a  man  of  feeling.  The  father  of  Lucretia  was  Spurius  Lucretius
Tricipitinus.

51  With  his  children.'] — Ver.  851.  Titus  and  Aruns  retired  with  their
father  to  Caere,  in  Etruria.  Sextus  returned  to  Gabii,  where  he  was  put
to  death  in  return  for  his  treachery  and  numerous  acts  of  cruelty.

52  The  Consul.] — Ver.  851.  The  kings  being  expelled  a.u.c.  244,  two
yearly  officers,  with  an  equal  degree  of  authority,  were  appointed,  called
consuls.  Brutus  and  Collatinus  were  the  first  persons  named  to  that  office.

53  Be  gladdened.] — Ver.  856.  On  account  of  his  old  enmity  to  Progne.
See  the  note  to  line  629  of  this  book.

54  'Equina.'] — Ver.  859.  These  were  chariot  races,  instituted  by
Romulus  in  honour  of  Mars.  They  were  celebrated  on  the  third  of  the
calends  of  March,  on  the  Campus  Martius ;  or  if  that  place  was  flooded,  as
was  sometimes  the  case  at  that  season,  then  on  a  part  of  the  Caelian  Hill,
called  by  Catullus  '  Campus  Minor,'  '  the  lesser  plain/

55  Rightly,  Gradivus] — Ver.  861.     Because  the  poet  is  about  to  com-

Gr    2


84  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  ii.  861—864.

dost  thou  come  ;  thy  season  demands  its  place,  and  the  month,
marked  by  thy  name,  is  at  hand.  We  have  now  reached  the
harbour,  our  book  being  concluded  with  the  month  ;  next,  it  is
upon  other  waters  that  my  bark  must  sail.

mence  the  month  of  March,  which  was  dedicated  to  him.  Mars  was
called  Gradivus  from  i  gradior,'  '  to  go/  or  '  march '  to  the  battle,  or  from
the  Greek  word  KpaSaiva),  '  to  shake/  because  he  shakes  the  lance ;  or  from
1  gramen,'  because  he  was  said  to  have  been  produced  by  the  agency  of  a
herb  through  the  aid  of  Flora.  According  to  Servius,  in  his  Commentary
on  the  iEneid,  book  L,  1.  296,  he  was  called  Quirinus,  when  peaceable,  but
Gradivus,  when  unappeased ;  he  therefore  had  two  temples,  one  within  the
city,  as  its  protector  in  peace ;  the  other  without,  on  the  Appian  road,  as
its  defender  in  war.


B.  in.  1—5.]  OB,    C1LEKDAB   OF   OYID.  85


BOOK  THE  THIRD.


CONTENTS.


The  invocation  of  Mars,  ver.  1 — 8.  The  history  of  Romulus  and
Remus,  from  their  birth  to  the  foundation  of  the  city ;  the  worship
of  Mars  ;  the  origin  of  the  name  of  March,  9—86.  The  position  of
this  month  in  the  calendars  of  other  nations,  87 — 98.  The  number
of  the  Roman  months  before  the  time  of  Numa,  and  his  addition  to
that  number  ;  the  institution  of  the  solar  year  by  Caesar,  99 — 104.  The
Matronalia  described ;  the  rape  of  the  Sabine  women ;  the  beauties
of  the  spring,  167 — 258.  The  origin  and  festival  of  the  Salii ;  the
descent  from  heaven  of  the  Ancile,  259 — 398.  The  setting  of  the  second
Fish,  399 — 402.  The  setting  of  Arctophylax,  and  the  rising  of  the  Vin-
tager, 403—414.  The  sacred  rites  of  Vesta,  and  the  Pontificate  of
Augustus,  415—428.  The  Temple  of  Vejovis  dedicated,  429—448.
The  neck  of  Pegasus  rises,  449 — 458.  The  rising  of  the  Crown,  and  the
story  of  Theseus  and  Ariadne,  459 — 516.  The  second  Equiria,  517 —
522.  The  sacred  rites  of  Anna  Perenna ;  the  story  of  Dido  and  Anna,
with  the  arrival  of  the  latter  in  Latium ;  and  the  secession  of  the  Roman
commonalty,  523—696.  The  death  of  Julius  Caesar,  697—710.  The
Scorpion  partly  sets,  711-712.  The  origin  and  description  of  the
Liberalia ;  the  time  for  assuming  the  Toga  virilis ;  the  praises  of
Bacchus,  713 — 790.  The  procession  to  the  Argei,  791-2.  The  origin
of  the  Constellation  of  the  Kite,  and  the  battle  of  the  Giants,  793—808.
The  Quinquatria,  or  five-day  festival  of  Minerva,  809 — 850.  The  sun
enters  the  Ram ;  the  story  of  Helle  and  Phryxus,  851 — 876.  The
vernal  ^Equinox,  877-8.  The  festival  of  Janus,  Health,  Concord,  and
Peace,  879—882.     The  worship  of  the  Moon  on  the  Aventine  Hill,  883.

Maes,  thou  warlike  God,  awhile  laying  aside  thy  shield  and
spear,  approach,  and  from  the  helmet's  pressure  liberate  thy
glossy  hair.  Perchance  thou  mayst  ask  what  a  poet  has  to
do1  with  Mars ;  my  answer  is,  the  month  which  is  now  being
celebrated  by  me,  derives  from  thee  its  name.     Thou  thyself

1  Has  to  do.'] — Ver.  3-4.     Gower's  translation  of  these  lines  is —

1  Perchance  thou'lt  say,  with  Mars,  what  make  the  Muses  ?
This  month  we  sing  his  name  from  thee  deduces.'


S6  THE  FASTI;  [b.  in.  5—30.

seeest  that  fierce  battles  are  waged  by  the  hand  of  Minerva ;
has  she  on  that  account  less  leisure  for  the  liberal  arts?
After  the  example  of  Pallas,  do  thou  take  an  opportunity
for  laying  aside  thy  lance ;  even  when  unarmed  thou  wilt
find  somewhat  for  thee  to  do.  Then,  too,  wast  thou  un-
armed when  the  Roman  priestess2  captivated  thee,  that  thou
mightst  provide  for  this  city  an  origin  worthy  of  it.  Silvia,
the  Vestal  maid — for  what  forbids  me  to  commence  from  that
point, — early  in  the  morning,  was  fetching  water  with  which
to  wash3  the  sacred  utensils.  She  had  now  reached  the  bank
sloping  with  a  path  easy  of  descent,  and  her  earthen  pitcher
is  set  down  from  off  her  head.  Wearied,  she  has  now  seated
herself  on  the  ground,  and  with  her  bosom  open  she  admits
the  breeze,  and  re-arranges  her  disordered  tresses.  While
she  sits,  the  shading  willows,  the  songs  of  the  birds,  and  the
gentle  murmuring  of  the  stream,  invite  slumber.  Soft  sleep
stealthily  creeps  upon  her  overpowered  eyes,  and  her  hand,
become  powerless,  falls  from  her  side.  Mars  sees  her,  seeing
he  desires,  desiring  he  enjoys  he?°;  and  then  by  his  divine
power  he  conceals  the  stealthy  deed.  Sleep  departs  ;  she
lies  there,  now  pregnant ;  for  now,  founder  of  the  Roman
city,  thou  wast  within  her  womb !  She  rises  languid,  nor
knows  she  why  thus  languid  she  rises  ;  and  leaning  against  a
tree,  she  utters  such  words  as  these  :  "  May  that  prove  favour-
able and  fortunate,  I  pray,  which  in  a  vision  of  my  slumbers
I  have  beheld !  or  was  it  too  distinct  for  a  vision  ?  I  was
standing  near  the  Ilian  fires,4  when  the  woollen  fillet  drop-

2  The  Roman  priestess.] — Ver.  9.  Heinsius  suggests  '  Trojana,'  inas-
much as  Rome  was  not  then  founded,  and  she  was  a  native  of  Alba  Longa.
The  poet,  however,  may  mean  to  say  that  in  her  progeny  she  became  en-
titled to  the  epithet  '  Romana/  Her  name  is  sometimes  Ilia,  sometimes
Rhea  Silvia ;  in  poetry  the  first  is  most  frequently  used.  Ovid,  however,
makes  use  of  both  names.

3  To  wash.'] — Ver.  11 — 13.  One  of  the  duties  of  the  Vestals  was  to
draw  water,  with  which  to  wash  and  sprinkle  the  temple,  and  cleanse  the
sacred  vessels.  Among  these  were  the  '  acerra/  or  '  thuribulum,'  a  censer
for  holding  the  incense,  '  simpulum/  '  capis,'  or  '  capedo,'  '  guttus,'  and
1  patera,'  used  in  libations  ;  '  ollse/  pots  of  various  descriptions ;  the  tripods,
&c     Gower's  version  is —

1  Now,  Sylvia,  (here  our  sail  we  hoise,)  something
To  wash  i'th'  morning  went  unto  the  spring.
Now  when  she  came  unto  the  wriggling  brook/

4  The  llian  fires.] — Ver.  29.  Having  been  originally  brought  from
Ilium  or  Troy  by  iEneas.


B.  Ill,  30—49.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OP   OVID.  37

ping  from  off  my  hair,  fell  down5  before  the  sacred  heath.
Thence,  wondrous  to  be  seen,  two  palm-trees  shoot  up  toge-
ther •  of  these,  one  was  greater  than  the  other,  and  with  its
heavy  branches  it  overshadowed  the  whole  earth,  and  with  its
new  grown  foliage  reached  the  highest  stars.  And  noiv,  lo !
my  uncle  brandishes  the  axe6  against  them  ;  I  shudder  at
the  recollection,  and  my  heart  palpitates  with  dread.  A  wood-
pecker,7 bird  of  Mars,  and  a  she-wolf  fight  in  defence  of  the  two
trees  ;  by  means  of  these  both  the  palm-trees  are  preserved
in  safety."  She  spoke  ;  and  with  faltering  strength  she
raised  the  pitcher ;  she  had  filled  it  while  relating  her  vision.
Meantime,  as  Remus  grew,  as  Quirinus  grew,  her  womb  was
heavy  with  the  celestial  burden.  There  now  remained  to  the
God  of  light  but  two  signs8  for  him  to  traverse  ere  the  year
should  take  its  departure,  its  course  being  duly  performed.
Silvia  becomes  a  mother ;  the  images  of  Vesta y  are  said  at
that  time  to  have  placed  their  virgin  hands  b' fore  their  eyes.
Assuredly,  the  altar  of  the  Goddess  trembler'  Vr  priestess
brought  forth,   and  the  flame  affrighted  r  beneath

its  ashes. lu     When  Amulius,  the  despisr  arned

5  Fell  down.]— Vex.   30.     The  Vestals   used   t

'  infulae', '  bands,'  and  '  vitta?,'  ■  fillets.'  As,  on  the  dt^
for  breaking  her  vows  of  virginity,  the  sacred  fillet  was  *
head  by  the  Pontifex  Maxiraus,    this  dream  was  ominous  Ox     -
ing  fate.     The  dream  of  Astyages,  mentioned  by  Herodotus  .
book  1,  c.  4,  portending  the  birth  of  Cyrus,  was,  in  its  circumstaru
similar.

6  Brandishes  the  axe.] — Ver.  35-6.     Gower's  translation  is —

1  When  lo  !  my  uncle  fain  would  have  them  cropt,
Smit  at  the  sight,  my  heart  for  terror  hopt.'

7  A  woodpecker.] — Ver.  37.  According  to  Pliny  the  Elder,  this  bird
received  his  name,  *  picus,'  from  the  father  of  Faunus,  who  was  so
called,  and  was  transformed  into  that  bird  by  Circe.  Plutarch  agrees  with
Ovid  in  representing  that  the  infants  were  fed  by  a  wolf  and  a  woodpecker.

8  But  two  signs.] — Ver.  44.  This  sentence  is  a  periphrasis  for  *  ten
months.'

9  The  images  of  Vesta.] — Ver.  45.  There  were  no  images  of  this
goddess  in  her  temples,  and  in  the  sixth  book,  1.  277,  the  poet  acknow-
ledges his  error.  She  was  the  guardian  of  houses,  and  there  were  paint-
ings of  her  usually  in  every  dwelling.  On  the  exterior,  however,  of  her
temple  at  Rome  there  was  a  statue  of  her,  which  form,  together  with
her  symbols,  is  still  to  be  seen  upon  some  Roman  coins.

10  Beneath  its  ashes.] — Ver.  48.     The  extinction  of  the  sacred  fire  was


88  THE   FA3TI ;  [b.  hi.  49—63.

these  things,  (for  he,  victorious,  kept  possession  of  the  power
which  he  had  torn  from  his  brother),  he  orders  the  twins  to
be  drowned  in  the  river.  The  water  shrinks  back  from  the
crime  :  the  children  are  left  on  the  dry  ground.  Who  does
not  know11  how  the  infants  thrived  on  the  milk  of  a  wild
beast,  and  how,  many  a  time  did  the  woodpecker  bear  food
to  them  thus  exposed.  I  would  not  pass  by  thee  in  silence,
Larentia,12  nurse  of  so  mighty  a  race,  nor  would  I  be  silent  of
thy  humble  circumstances,  0  poor  Faustulus.  Thy  praises
will  come  when  I  shall  tell  of  the  Larentalia ;  December,  a
month  dear  to  the  Gods  of  enjoyment,13  holds  these.  The  sons
of  Mars  had  noio  grown  up  to  the  age  of  thrice  six  years,  and
the  first  beard  was  now  appearing  beneath  their  yellow  locks.
The  brothers,  the  sons  of  Ilia,  were  distributing  justice,  at  their
request,  to  all  the  husbandmen  and  those  who  tended  the
herds.     Ofttimes  do  they  come  home  exulting  in  the  blood  of

an  event  regarded  with  the  greatest  horror,  as  being  a  presage  of  great
national  misfortunes.  The  Vestal  under  whose  charge  the  fire  was,  when
it  was  suffered  to  go  out,  was  stripped  and  flogged  most  severely  by  the
Pontifex  Maximus,  and  the  flame  was  rekindled  by  the  friction  of  two
pieces  of  wood  from  the  '  felix  arbor  ; '  according  to  some  authors,  it  was
rekindled  from  the  rays  of  the  sun  by  a  hollow  conical  reflector.

11  Who  does  not  know.'] — Ver.  53.  This  story  was  related  in  the  works
of  Ennias,  one  of  the  olden  poets,  and  it  was  well  known  by  tradition  ;
and  perhaps,  in  the  mouths  of  the  common  people,  it  occupied  much  the
same  position  as  '  the  story  of  King  Arthur'  or  '  the  Seven  Champions  of
Christendom'  does  with  us.

13  Larentia.] — Ver.  55.  Larentia,  or  Laurentia,  was  the  wife  of  Faus-
tulus, and  the  nurse  of  Romulus  and  Remus.  Being,  as  it  is  supposed,  a
woman  of  no  good  repute,  the  story  is  said  by  some  writers  to  have
arisen  from  that  circumstance,  that  the  children  were  suckled  by  a  wolf ;
'  lupa'  being  the  Latin  for  both  a  '  she-wolf'  and  a  female  of  unchaste
character.  The  festival  of  Larentia,  the  Larentalia,  was  celebrated  in
December,  though  some  think  that  it  was  in  honour  of  a  different  per-
son.    Faustulus  was  the  shepherd  of  Amulius.

13  The  gods  of  enjoyment.] — Ver.  58.  '  Genii.'  The  '  Genii'  were
tutelary  deities,  each  having  charge  of  an  individual  up  to  the  time  of  his
death.  They  were  supposed  to  be  propitiated  with  wine  and  sacrifices,
and  hence  the  notion  arose  that  they  took  pleasure  in  revelry  and  feasting.
The  poet  alludes  here  to  the  Saturnalia,  which  took  place  some  days  before
the  Larentalia,  and  which  professedly  lasted  but  three  days ;  but  the  fes-
tival, extending  its  influence  over  the  remaining  part  of  the  month,  it
naturally  imparted  a  tone  of  festivity  to  the  Larentalia.  At  this  season  all
were  engaged  in  mirth  and  revelry ;  presents  were  interchanged,  and
slaves  were,  for  the  time,  elevated  to  a  level  with  their  masters.


B.  in.  63—82.]  OR,    CALENDAE   OF   OVID.  89

the  plunderers,  and  bring  back  into  their  own  fields  the
oxen  that  had  been  carried  off.  When  now  they  learn  their
origin,  the  discovery  of  their  father  increases  their  courage,
and  they  feel  ashamed  to  have  renown  but  in  a  few  cottages.
And  now  Amulius  falls  pierced  by  the  sword  of  Romulus,  and
the  sovereignty  is  restored  to  their  aged  grandsire.14  City
walls  are  built,  which,  low  as  they  were,  it  ill-betimed  Remus
to  leap  over  them.  Now,  in  the  spot  where  lately  there  had
been  but  forests  and  the  retreats  of  the  cattle,  there  was  a  city
sprung  up,  when  the  father  of  that  eternal  city  says,  "  Ruler
of  arms,  of  whose  blood  I  am  believed  to  be  born,  (and  that  I
may  be  with  good  reason  so  believed,  I  will  give  sure  pledges),
from  thee  do  we  derive  a  commencement  for  the  Roman  year.
Henceforth,  let  the  first  month  pass  on  its  course  called  after
the  name  of  my  sire.  His  word  is  ratified,  and  he  calls  the
month  from  his  father's  name  ;  this  act  of  duty  is  said  to
have  been  pleasing  to  the  Divinity.15  And  yet  the  Latian
people  of  ancient  times  worshipped  Mars  before  all  the  Gods;
the  warlike  multitude  had  made  this  worship  the  object  of  their
zealous  attention.  The  people  of  Cecrops  venerate  Pallas;16
Crete,  the  land  of  Minos,  Diana ;  the  land  of  Hypsipyle,17  adores

14  Aged  grandsire] — Ver.  68.  Numitor,  the  father  of  Ilia,  who  had
been  deposed  by  Amulius.

15  Pleasing  to  the  divinity.'] — Ver.  77-8.  Gower's  translation  of  these
two  lines  runs  thus — -

1  His  word's  made  good,  this  month  he  thus  did  call,
And  pleas'd  his  father  very  well  withall/

16  Venerate  P 'alias. ,] — Ver  81.  This  was  the  name  under  which  the
Athenians  or  Cecropidae  worshipped  Minerva,  the  goddess  of  war  and  of
the  fine  arts.  Cecrops  was  the  first  king  of  the  Athenians,  and  founder  of
the  colony,  whence  the  epithet  here  given.  The  people  of  Crete,  now
the  Isle  of  Candia,  are  called  '  Minoi'an/  from  Minos,  its  king  and  law-
giver, who  was  promoted  to  the  latter  distinction  in  the  Infernal  regions.
Diana  was  worshipped  by  the  Cretans  under  the  name  of  Dictynna,  from
Mount  Dicte,  where  her  sacrifices  were  performed  with  great  solemnity  ;
or  from  Siktvc,  'a  hunting-net/

17  Land  of  Hypsipyle.] — Ver.  82.  Lemnos,  an  island  in  the  iEgean
Sea,  is  thus  called  from  Hypsipyle,  daughter  of  its  king,  Thoas.  The
women  of  Lemnos  conspiring  to  put  the  men  to  death,  she  saved  her
father,  and  had  him  conveyed  secretly  to  Chios.  Vulcan  having  been
hurled  from  heaven  by  Jupiter,  or,  as  some  say,  by  his  mother  Juno,  on
account  of  his  deformity,  after  a  descent  of  an  entire  day,  alighted  in
Lemnos.     Sparta  was   a  city  of  Laconia,  in  Peloponnesus,  founded  by


$0  THE   FASTI;  [b.  hi.  82— 104.

Vulcan ;  Sparta,  and  Mycenae  the  Pelopian  city,  Juno ;  the  dis-
trict of  Maenalus,  the  pine-wreathed  head  of  Faunus.  Mars  was
a  deserving  object  of  worship  to  Latium,  because  he  presides
over  arms  :  'twas  arms  that  gave  both  power  and  glory  to
that  fierce  people.  But  if  you  happen  to  have  leisure,  examine
the  Calendars  of  other  states  of  Italy;  in  these  also  there  will
be  a  month  called  after  the  name  of  Mars,  It  was  the  third
month  among  the  Albans ;  the  fifth  with  the  Falisci ;  the
sixth  among  thy  clans,  Hernician  land.18  There  is  an  agree-
ment in  the  Alban  order  of  reckoning  the  months,  with  that  of
the  people  of  Aricia,  and  the  lofty  walls  built  by  the  hand  of
Telegonus.  The  Laurentes  reckon  this  the  fifth  month,  the
fierce  iEquicolus  the  tenth,  the  people  of  Cures  the  first  after
the  third,  and  thou,  warrior  of  Pelignum,  coincidest  with  thy
ancestors,  the  Sabines  ;  with  each  people  this  God  is  fourth
in  the  order  of  the  months.  Romulus,  that  he  might  surpass
all  these,  in  his  arrangement  at  least,  dedicated  the  first  month
to  the  author  of  his  birth.

Nor  did  the  ancients  have  as  many  Calends19  as  there  now
are;  their  year  was  shorter  by  a  couple  of  months.  Not  yet
had  Greece,  a  people  more  eloquent  than  brave,20  imparted  to
the  conquerors  the  arts  of  the  conquered.  The  man  who
fought  well,  he  was  acquainted  with  the  arts  of  Rome  ;  who-
ever  could    hurl    the  javelin,   he  was   eloquent.      Who,  in

Spartus,  grandson  of  Inachus.  Mycenae  was  a  town  of  Argos,  in  Pelopon-
nesus. Pelops  never  lived  there,  but  it  afterwards  became  one  of  the
principal  possessions  of  his  descendants,  whence  its  epithet  here.

18  Hernician  land.] — Ver.  90.  The  Hernici  occupies  a  hilly  district
between  the  Volsci  and  the  iEqui.  Aricia  was  a  town  of  Latium.  Tuscu-
lum  was  situated  on  a  high  hill,  twelve  miles  from  Rome  ;  it  was  built  by
Telegonus,  the  son  of  Ulysses  and  Circe.  Laurentium  was  the  capital  of
Latium.  The  ^Equi  or  iEquicoli  were  a  people  located  between  the  Marsi
and  the  Hernici.  The  Peligni  were  a  people  of  Italy,  beyond  the  Marsi,
and  near  the  Adriatic  Sea.  According  to  Festus  they  were  a  colony
from  Illyria,  and  not  descended  from  the  Sabines,  as  Ovid  here  says  they
were.  They  were  a  warlike  race,  whence  the  epithet  '  miles,'  a  warrior.
Niebuhr,  in  his  Roman  History,  gives  an  account  of  these  various  nations.

19  Calends.] — Ver.  99.  Consequently  months,  as  the  '  calendar '  were
the  first  day  in  every  month.

20  More  eloquent  than  brave.] — Ver.  102.  He  alludes,  not  to  the  time
when  their  valour  supplied  the  want  of  numbers,  in  their  struggles
against  the  Persian  power ;  but  to  a  much  later  period,  when,  buried
in  sloth  and  effeminacy,  they  fell  an  easy  prey  to  the  Roman  passion  for
conquest.


B.  III.  104—115.]         OB,    CALENDAR   OP    OVID.  91

those  days,  had  marked  the  Hyades  or  the  Pleiades,  daughters
of  Atlas,  or  had  noticed  that  there  were  two  poles  under  the
canopy21  of  the  heavens  ?  or  that  there  were  two  Bears,22  one  of
which,  the  Cynosure,  was  watched  by  the  men  of  Sidon,
while  the  Grecian  bark  is  observing  Helice,  the  other  ?  And
who  had  remarked  that  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  which  the
brother  traverses  in  the  space  of  a  year,  the  sister's  steeds23
pass  through  in  a  single  month  ?  Left  to  themselves  and  un-
watched,  the  stars  ran  their  course  through  the  year;  but  yet
it  was  universally  agreed  that  the  Gods  do  exist.24  They  med-
dled not  with  the  signs  that  roll  along  the  heavens,  but  then-
own  standards ;25  to  lose  which  was  a  great  crime.26  These  were

21  Under  the  canopy. .] — Ver.  106.  '  Sub  axe/  Literally  l  under  the
axis,'  meaning  at  the  extremities  of  the  imaginary  axis  on  which  the  earth
moves,  at  which  extremities  are  the  Arctic  and  Antarctic  poles.

22  Two  Bears.] — Ver.  107.  The  i  Ursa  major  '  and  the  '  Ursa  minor/
The  ■  Ursa  major/  or  '  Greater  bear/  was  the  constellation,  whose  story-
is  mentioned  at  length  in  the  second  book.  It  was  called  also  Helice.
from  the  Greek  eXivo-u),  '  to  revolve/  because  it  revolves  round  the
Pole.  The  lesser  bear  was  also  called  '  Cynosura/  from  kwoq  ovpd,  '  dog's
tail/  the  stars,  in  their  sequence,  being  fancifully  thought  to  resemble
that  object.  Cynosyra  was  said  to  have  been  a  nymph,  who  nursed  Jupiter
on  Mount  Ida,  and  for  that  service  was  raised  to  the  stars.  The  Phoeni-
cians, who  inhabited  Sidon,  took  their  observations  from  this  constel-
lation, while  the  Greeks,  for  that  purpose,  used  the  former.

23  The  sister's  steeds.'] — Ver.  110.  The  poet  means  to  say,  that  the
sun,  l  the  brother/  remains  for  a  month  in  each  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  while
the  moon  passes  through  them  all  in  the  space  of  one  month.

u  Thai  the  Gods  do  exist.] — Ver.  112.  He  appears  to  mean,  that,  igno-
rant as  they  were  of  astronomical  subjects,  they  were  still  convinced  of  the
existence  of  the  gods.  Burmann  and  Gierig  would  read  it  as  though  to
be  translated  thus,  '  but  it  wras  agreed  that  they  [the  stars]  are  gods;'
that,  in  fact,  they  had  come  to  that  opinion  about  them,  but  had  never
noticed  them  with  the  ken  of  the  astronomer.  The  former  seems  to  be
most  probably  the  author's  meaning.

25  But  their  own  standards.'] — Ver.  114.  The  author  here  plays  upon
the  different  meanings  of  the  word  '  signa/  which  signifies  either '  con-
stellations/ or  'standards/  according  to  the  context.  They  did  not  trouble
themselves  about  the  '  signa'  of  the  sky,  they  only  moved  their  own
*  signa.'  To  give  effect  to  his  pun,  he  seems  to  be  guilty  of  some  harsh-
ness in  speaking  of  mortals  '  moving  the  constellations/  The  expression
is,  however,  not  without  precedent  in  other  Latin  wrriters.

26  A  great  crime.] — Ver.  114.  For  any  of  the  soldiers,  and  especially
the  standard  bearer,  to  lose  the  standard  was  highly  dishonourable,  and
sometimes  it  was  a  capital  offence.    Among  other  punishments  were,  short


92  THE   FASTI;  [b.  in.  115— 124.

of  hay  indeed ;  but  there  was  as  much  respect  paid  to  that
hay  as  at  the  present  day  you  see  your  eagles  receive.  A  long
pole  used  to  bear  the  elevated  wisps,  from  which  circumstance
the  manipular  soldier  derives  his  name.27

In  consequence,  those  untutored  minds,  as  yet  deficient  in
powers  of  calculation,  observed  their  five  yearly  lustra,28  too  short
by  ten  months.  When  the  moon  had  completed  her  tenth  revolu-
tion, it  was  a  year;  this  number  was  then  in  great  esteem.  Either,
because  so  many  are  the  fingers,  by  the  help  of  which  we  are
wont  to  reckon,  or  because  in  the  tenth  month  woman  brings

commons  on  barley  bread,  decimation,  being  stripped  in  sight  of  the
whole  army,  being  clad  in  female  vesture,  being  driven  into  the  enemy's
quarters,  being  left  among  the  baggage  with  the  prisoners,  and  being  severely
whipped.

Ti  Derives  his  name.] — Ver.  117-18.  The  author  here  tells  us,  that
in  early  times  a  bundle  of  hay  on  the  end  of  a  pole  served  that  purpose.
The  army  of  Romulus  being  mostly  composed  of  peasants,  this  was  not  at
all  improbable.  To  every  troop  of  one  hundred  men,  a  '  manipulus,'  or
wisp  of  hay  (so  called  from  *  manum  implere,'  to  '  fill  the  hand/  as  being
1  a  handful'),  was  assigned  as  a  standard,  and  hence  in  time  the  company
itself  obtained  the  name  of  *  manipulus,'  and  the  soldier,  a  member  of
it,  was  called,  '  manipularis.'  The  omen  derived  from  the  flight  of  the  eagle
was  deemed  the  most  auspicious.  Hence  the  figure  of  that  bird  was  after-
wards adopted  as  the  standard  in  preference  to  those  of  other  animals,
which,  before  the  time  of  Marius,  were  sometimes  used  for  that  purpose.
Gower's  version  is —

*  They  hung  in  bottles  on  a  pole  huge  tall,
From  whence  our  soldiers  by  that  name  we  call/

We  may  here  observe  parenthetically,  that  the  expression  '  to  look  for  a
needle  in  a  bottle  of  hay,'  is  still  sometimes  quoted  as  a  proverb,  though
few  perhaps  now  know  the  origin  of  the  term  '  bottle.'  It  comes  from  an
old  French  word,  '  bostel,'  with  the  's'  silent.  From  this  word,  too,  is
derived  the  name  of  an  article  of  female  dress,  which  is  worn  at  the  pre-
sent day,  or,  if  not,  was  so  at  a  very  recent  period.

23  Five  yearly  lustra.] — Ver.  120.  As  a  '  lustrum'  consisted  of  five
years,  it  would  in  those  times  contain  but  fifty  months,  and  be  ten  months
shorter  than  a  modern  l  lustrum'  of  five  years  of  twelve  months.  For  the
purposes  of  revenue,  Servius  Tullius  instituted  the  '  census'  at  the  end  of
each  five  years.  When  it  had  been  completed,  atonement  was  made  for
the  people  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  sow,  a  sheep,  and  a  bull,  and  when  this
had  been  done,  the  people  were  said  to  be  cleansed,  '  lustrari.'  This
word  comes  from  '  luo,'  '  to  pay,'  because,  in  those  days,  the  taxes  were
paid  to  the  censors  at  these  periods  ;  this  having  been  done  every  fifth
year,  the  word  '  lustrum'  came  into  use,  as  signifying  the  intermediate
space  between  the  five  yearly  periods.


b.  in.  124—134.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  93

forth ;  or  because  we  arrive  so  far  as  ten,  the  number  in-
creasing ;  and  from  that  point  the  commencement  of  a  new
reckoning29  is  made.  For  that  reason  did  Romulus  set  apart
a  hundred  men  of  equal  standing  for  each  of  the  ten  compa-
nies,30 and  appointed  the  ten  companies  of  Hastati,  and  so  many
men  had  the  Princeps,  and  so  many  the  Pilanus,31  and  he  who
served  on  horse-back  as  required  by  law.32  He  also  assigned  as
many  subdivisions33  to  the  Titian  tribe,  and  to  those  whom  they
call  the  Rhanmes,  and  to  the  Luceres.  For  that  reason  he  ob-
served the  usual  numbers  in  the.  formation  of  the  year  ;  during
this  length  of  time  does  the  sorrowing  wife  mourn  her  husband.

29  A  new  reckoning.] — Ver.  126.  He  alludes  to  the  system  of  decimal
notation.

30  The  ten  companies.'] — Ver.  127.  That  is,  one  hundred  men  for  each
of  the  ten  companies  of  *  Hastati ; '  one  hundred  for  each  of  the  ten  com-
panies of  '  Principes ; '  and  one  hundred  for  each  of  the  ten  companies  of
'  Pilani/-or  '  Triarii,'  which  together  formed  a  legion.  The  first  were  the
younger  soldiers,  and  formed  the  front  rank,  as  light-armed  troops,  armed
with  J  hastae,'  or  lances.  The  second  were  men  of  the  middle  age,  and
from  that  circumstance  had  their  name,  as  evincing  their  superiority  in
strength;  these  foimed  the  second  rank.  The  third  rank  was  formed
of  the  veterans,  who  were  called  from  that  circumstance  *  Triarii,'  and
from  the  use  of  the  *  pilum,'  or  '  javelin,' i  Pilani,'    The  poet  calls  them

equals,  because  the  three  divisions  were  made  according  to  age.

31  The  Pilanus.'] — Ver.  129.  The  word  here  means  the  officer  com-
manding the  ten  centuries  of  the  '  Pilani,'  or  '  Triarii.'

32  Required  by  law.]— Ver.  130.  In  each  legion  there  were  three
hundred  'equites,'  'knights,'  or  cavalry.  Romulus  selected  them  from  the
most  respectable  and  deserving  of  his  followers,  as  his  body  guard.  Those
in  each  legion  were  divided  into  ten  'turmae,'  or  'squadrons,'  of  thirty  men
each.  The  meaning  of  the  poet,  then,  seems  to  be,  that  Romulus  still
kept  in  mind  the  number  ten,  by  dividing  the  'equites'  into  ten  companies;
although  they  did  not  consist  of  one  hundred  men  each.  The  privileges  of
the  'equites'  were,  a  horse  supplied  at  the  public  expense,  hence  called
'legitimus,'  'required  by  law;'  a  gold  ring;  a  separate  seat  at  the  public
spectacles,  and  the  'tunica  angusticulavia,'  a  tunic  with  two  narrow  purple
stripes  running  from  each  shoulder  down  the  front  to  the  bottom  of  the

jvdress.     The  force  of  each  legion  was  3000  foot  and  300  horse,  besides  a
strTL  larger  number  of  auxiliaries.

33  As  many  subdivisions.] — Ver.  131.  Romulus  divided  his  subjects  into
three  tribes,  and  subdivided  each  of  them  into  ten  '  Curiae.'  The  Ramnenses
were  the  original  Romans,  so  called,  it  is  supposed,  from  Romulus :  these
formed  one  tribe.  The  second  tribe  was  that  of  the  Tatienses,  or  Sabines,
so  called  from  Titus  Tatius,  their  king.  The  third  was  called  the '  Luceres,'
either  from  those  vagrants  who  had  taken  refuge  in  the  'lucus.'  or  grove
of  the  asylum,  or  because  they  came  from  Etruria  to  aid  Romulus,  under
a  'lucumo,'  or  noble  chieftain,  named  Hostus  Hostilius.    ,


94  THE   FASTI;  [b.  in.  135— 151.

And  that  you  may  have  no  doubt  but  that  the  Calends  of
March  were  formerly  the  first  in  the  year,  you  may  turn
your  attention  to  these  proofs.  The  laurel  branch,  which
has  lasted  the  whole  year,  is  now  removed  by  the  Flamens,
and  fresh  boughs  are  raised  to  the  dignity.  At  this  time  the
gate  of  the  king  of  the  sacrifices  is  green  with  the  tree  of
Phoebus  fixed  there  ;  before  thy  doors,  0  ancient  Court-house,34
the  same  thing  is  done.  That  Vesta,  too,  may  appear  grace-
ful, wreathed  with  new  foliage,  the  faded  laurel  is  removed  from
the  Ilian  hearths.  Add  to  this,  that  in  her  secret  shrine35  a  new
fire  is  said  to  be  now  kindled,  and  the  flame  refreshed  re-
ceives strength.  And  the  fact  is  no  small  proof  to  me  that  the
years  of  old  commenced  from  this  period,  that  it  was  in  this
month  that  Anna  Perenna36  began  to  be  worshipped.  From
this  time,  too,  the  ancient  honours37  are  said  to  have  been  en-
tered upon,  up  to  the  period  of  the  war  with  thee,  0  perfidious
Carthaginian.38  Lastly,  the  fifth  from  this  was  the  month
Quintilis,  and  from  that  point  commences  each  month,  which  has
its  name  from  its  order.     Pompilius,  invited  to  Rome39  from

34  Ancient  Court-house .] — Ver.  140.  The  four  *  curia? '  which  still  sur-
vived, out  of  the  thirty  originally  built  by  Romulus  for  the  use  of  the  '  curiae '
of  the  citizens,  were  distinguished  by  the  title  'veteres,'  It  is  supposed
that  in  lapse  of  time  all  the  '  curiae '  were  used  for  civil  purposes.

35  Her  secret  shrine. .] — Ver.  143.  Because,  not  only  was  it  closed
against  the  male  sex,  but  against  all  females  as  well,  except  the  Vestals,  or
perhaps  the  chief  of  the  Vestals.

36  Anna  Perenna.] — Ver.  146.  For  her  story  see  line  523  of  this  Book,
where  it  commences.

37  The  ancient  honours.'] — Ver.  147.  The  author  is  guilty  of  a  slight
inaccuracy  here,  as  the  first  Consuls  took  office  on  the  23d  day  of  February;
and  the  time  fluctuated  till  a.u.c  600,  the  end  of  the  third  Punic  war,
when  the  calends  of  January  were  fixed  for  that  purpose.

38  Perfidious  Carthaginian.] — Ver.  148.  He  alludes  to  Hannibal,  to
whom,  in  common  with  his  countrymen,  he  was  too  ready  to  apply  an
epithet  of  abuse.  According  to  the  Roman  accounts,  the  people  of  Car-
thage were  noted  for  their  treachery,  whence  the  term  'Punic  faith,'  be-
came a  by-word  for  dishonourable  conduct.  We  have  no  native  records  of
the  Carthaginians  left,  and  are  consequently  ignorant  of  their  opinion  of  the
Romans.  Had  Hannibal  been  properly  supported,  Rome  would  most  pro-
bably have  fallen,  leaving  no  native  records  of  her  existence,  and  to  Car-
thage alone  and  its  writers  would  posterity  have  had  to  look  for  the  cha-
racter of  its  Italian  rival.

39  Invited  to  Rome.'] — Ver.  151.  Numa  was  the  fourth  son  of  Pompo-
nius,  an  eminent  Sabine.     'Deductus'  implies  the  ceremony  with  which


B.  III.  151—164.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  95

the  olive-bearing  fields,  was  the  first  to  perceive  that  two
months  were  wanting ;  whether  so  taught  by  the  Samian
sage*0  who  considers  that  we  may  be  born  again,  or  whe-
ther by  the  admonition  of  his  own  Egeria.  But  even  then
were  the  divisions  of  time  inaccurate,  until  amid  many  others,
this  too,  was  a  care  of  Caesar's.41  He,  though  a  God  and
the  father  of  such  a  mighty  progeny,  did  not  think  this  a
task  too  humble  for  his  attention  ;  he  wished  to  know  before-
hand the  heaven  that  was  promised  him,  and  not,  when  deified,
to  enter  as  a  stranger  into  an  unknown  mansion.  He  is  said,
by  accurate  observations,  to  have  arranged  the  periods  of  the
sun,  in  which  he  should  return  to  his  due  signs  in  rotation.
He  added  ten  times  six,  and  the  fourth  part  of  one  whole  day

he  was  invited  and  brought  to  Rome  to  reign  there.  The  Sabine  land  was
famous  for  its  olive  trees.  From  his  communion  with  the  goddess  Egeria,
he  is  said  to  have  obtained  an  insight,  almost  supernatural,  into  things  both
human  and  divine.

40  The  Samian  sage.~\ — Ver.  153.  Pythagoras  was  born  in  the  isle  of
Samos,  opposite  to  Ephesus.  He  was  a  pupil  of  the  philosopher  Phere-
cydes,  of  Scyros,  and  studied  philosophy  in  Egypt  and  among  the  Babylo-
nian astrologers.  He  then  travelled  into  Crete  and  visited  Sparta,  to
examine  the  laws  of  Minos  and  Lycurgus.  He  afterwards  visited  the  colony
of  Magna  Graecia,  in  the  south  of  Italy,  and  promulgated  his  doctrines  at
Crotona,  Tarentum,  and  other  towns.  Numa  is  generally  supposed  not  to
have  been  a  cotemporary  of  Pythagoras.  Livy  says  that  the  philosopher
came  into  Italy  in  the  reign  of  Servius  Tullius,  which  was  136  years  after
the  elevation  of  Numa  to  the  throne.  Dionysius  also  says  that  Numa
reigned  120  years  before  the  time  of  Pythagoras.  Plutarch  says  that
Numa  received  assistance  in  the  compilation  of  his  laws  from  another
Pythagoras,  a  Spartan,  who  visited  Italy.  The  chief  doctrine  of  Pythagoras
was  the  'metempsychosis/  or  transmigration  of  the  soul  into  another
body  after  death.  Some  of  his  tenets  were  similar  to  those  of  Numa.
They  would  allow  of  no  images  of  the  deity,  whom  they  considered  pos-
sible to  be  comprehended  in  the  mind  only.  They  did  not  permit  blood
to  enter  into  their  sacrifices,  but  used  only  flour  and  wine  for  that  purpose.
It  did  not  require  a  Pythagoras  to  show  Numa  that  a  year  consists  of
more  than  ten  months,  as  he  might  easily  perceive  that  fact  from  the
irregularity  with  which  the  seasons  would  come  on,  each  season  in  every
year  being  two  months  earlier  than  on  that  preceding.

41  A  care  of  Ccesar,s.~\ — Ver.  186.  The  year  having  fallen  into  great
confusion,  and  the  festivals  frequently  happening  at  the  wrong  seasons  of
the  year,  Julius  Caesar,  then  being  the  Pontifex  Maximus,  with  the  aid  of
Sosigines  and  Marcus  Flavins,  altered  it  so  that  it  might,  similarly  to  the
year  of  the  ^Egyptians,  correspond  with  the  course  of  the  sun.  See  the
*  Introduction.'


96  THE   FASTI;  [b.  III.  164— 191.

to  the  three  hundred  and  fire  days.  This  is  the  complement
of  the  year.  To  each  lustrum  there  ought  to  be  added  one
day,  which  is  made  up  of  these  fractions.42

If  it  be  allowed  to  poets  to  hear  the  private  intimations  of
the  Deities,  as  report,  at  least,  thinks  they  may,  tell  me  why  it
is,  0  Gradivus,  that  while  thou  art  suited  to  the  pursuit
of  men  only,  the  matrons  observe  thy  festival.43  Thus  said
I,  and  thus  Mavors  replied  to  me,  having  laid  aside  his  helmet ;
but  there  was  in  his  right  hand  a  missile  spear.  "  Now,  for
the  first  time,  am  I  a  Deity,  useful  to  the  profession  of  arms,
summoned  to  the  pursuits  of  peace,  and  I  direct  my  march
to  a  strange  camp.  Nor  do  I  repent  of  my  undertaking ;
on  this  department,  too,  I  am  delighted  to  dwell;  that  Minerva
may  not  suppose  that  she  alone  can  do  this.  Learn,  thou  poet
engaged  upon  the  Latin  days,  what  thou  askest,  and  mark
my  words  in  thy  mindful  breast.  Rome,  if  thou  wouldst  but
call  back  to  mind  her  first  elements,  was  small ;  yet  in  her
thus  small,  was  the  promise  of  the  present  city.  And  now
stood  raised  the  walls  of  defence,  too  narrow  for  the  future
population,  but  in  those  days  supposed  to  be  too  spacious44  for
their  own  multitude.  If  thou  askest  what  was  the  palace  of
my  son ;  behold  his  house  of  reeds  and  straw.45  On  a  bed
of  stubble  he  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  calm  slumber,  and
yet  from  that  bed  came  he  to  the  stars.  And  already  had
the  Roman  a  renown  greater  than  his  home,  and  yet  nor
wife,  nor  father-in-law  had  he.  The  rich  neighbours  had
a  contempt  for  poor  sons-in-law,  and  hardly  was  I  be-
lieved to  be  the  author  of  their  race.      To  have  dwelt  under

42  Of  these  fractions. ,] — Ver.  166.  The  fourth  part  which  he  mentions
made  up  a  complete  day,  which  was  added  to  every  fourth  year  as  an  ad-
ditional day.  When  he  speaks  of  a  lustrum  'here/  he  means  a  full  term
of  four  years,  and  just  the  commencement  of  a  fifth  year,  and  no  more.

43  Observe  thy  festival.'] — Ver.  170*  On  the  calends  of  March  the
Matronalia  were  celebrated  by  the  matrons  in  honour  of  Juno,  when  they
sent  presents  to  each  other,  and  received  them  from  their  husbands.

44  Too  spacious.] — Ver.  181-2.     Gower's  version  is,

'  Rome's  elements  were  at  the  first  but  small,
Yet  has  that  small  great  hopes  of  this  great  wall/

45  Of  reeds  and  straw.] — Ver.  184.  They  still  pointed  out,  in  the  time
of  Ovid,  a  straw-roofed  hut  on  the  Palatine  hill,  which  was  said  to  have
been  the  abode  of  Romulus.


B.  in.  191—212.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OE   OYID.  97

the  herdsman's  roof,  and  to  have  tended  oxen,  and  now  to
be  masters  of  but«  a  few  acres  of  uncultivated  soil,  was  a  re-
proach to  them.  The  fowls  of  the  air  and  the  wild  beasts
pair,  each  of  them  with  its  mate ;  the  snake  too  has  its  female,
from  which  to  propagate  its  kind.  Intermarriages  are  granted
to  the  remotest  tribes  ;  but  there  was  no  woman  who  was
willing  to  marry  a  man  of  Borne.  I  was  grieved,  and  I  com-
municated to  thee,  0  Eomulus,  thy  father's  mind.  "  Cease
thy  prayers,"  I  said,  "what  thou  dost  want,  arms  will  supply.
Prepare  a  festival  to  Consus.46  Consus  will  tell  thee  the  rest
that  is  to  be  done,  on  the  day  on  which  thou  shalt  be  chaunting
the  sacred  songs  to  him."  The  people  of  Cures47  grew  wroth,
and  all  those  whom  the  same  resentment  affected.  Then,  for
the  first  time,  did  the  father-in-law  bear  arms  against  his  son-
in-law.  And  now  nearly  all  the  ravished  women  were  bearing
the  name  of  mother  as  well,  and  the  wars  of  states  thus  neigh-
bouring were  protracted  by  lengthened  duration ;  the  wives
met  together  in  an  appointed  temple,  that  of  Juno ;  among
whom  my  daughter-in-law48  thus  began  to  speak — "  Ye  that
together  with  myself  have  been  thus  carried  away,  since  this
character  in  common  we  hold,  no  longer  can  we  with  tardi-
ness be  dutiful.  The  lines  of  battle  are  formed,  but  for
which  side  the  Gods  are  to  be  entreated,  choose  ye  ;  on  one
side,  the  husband,  on  the  other,  the  father  is  in  arms  ;  we
must  decide  whether  we  would  be  widows  or  orphans.     I  will

46  Festival  to  Consus.'] — Ver.  199.  Consus  was  the  god  of  silence  and
of  secrets.  By  some  he  has  been  confounded  with  the  Roman  god  Neptune.
It  is  said  that  the  true  name  of  this  divinity  was  not  allowed  to  be  di-
vulged, and  that  his  name  of  '  Consus '  was  derived  from  ( conso/  an  old
form  of  'consulo/  'to  give  counsel,'  such  being  one  of  his  attributes.  He
had  a  subterranean  altar  in  the  Circus,  uncovered  only  at  the  'Consualia,'
and  said  to  have  been  discovered  there  by  Romulus,  having  been  closed
since  the  time  of  Evander.  The  '  Consualia/  or  festival  of  Consus,  as  ap-
pears from  the  text,  was  being  celebrated  when  the  rape  of  the  Sabine
women  took  place.

47  People  of  Cures.] — Ver.  201.  Namely,  the  Sabines ;  but  before
they  took  up  arms,  the  Caminenses,  Antemnates,  and  Crustumini  had
marched  against  Rome,  to  revenge  the  insult  which  had  been  inflicted  on
them  in  common  with  the  Sabines.  They  were,  however,  repulsed,  and
then  the  Sabines  took  the  field,  with  the  result  mentioned  in  the  text=

48  My  daughter-in-law .] — Yer.  206.  This  was  Hersilia,  one  of  the
Sabine  women,  whom  Romulus  had  married.  After  her  death  she  was
deified  and  worshipped  under  the  name  of  Hora,  as  the  goddess  of  youth.


98  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  hi.  212—242.

give  you  advice,  which  is  both  energetic  and  dutiful."  She
had  noiv  given  her  advice ;  they  obey,  and  unloose  their  tresses,
and  with  funereal  garb  array  their  sorrowing  persons.  The
lines  of  battle  now  stood  prepared  for  the  sword  and  for  death,
and  the  clarion  was  on  the  point  of  giving  the  signal  for  the
combat,  when  the  women  who  had  been  ravished  rush  between
their  fathers  and  their  husbands,  and  carry  in  their  bosoms
their  babes,  those  dear  pledges.  When  they  had  reached  the
middle  of  the  plain,  with  their  dishevelled  locks  they  fell  upon
the  earth  with  bended  knee ;  and  as  though  they  had  con-
sciousness, the  grandchildren,  with  soothing  cry,  stretched
their  little  arms  towards  their  grandsires.  The  child  that  was
able,  called  on  his  grandfather  then  seen  for  the  first  time  ;
and  he  who  scarcely  was  able,  was  forced  by  his  mother  to
make  an  effort.49  The  arms  and  the  fury  of  the  warriors  fall
together,  and,  their  swords  now  laid  aside,  the  fathers-in-law
give  their  hands  to  their  sons-in-law,  and  receive  theirs  in  re-
turn.  They  praise  their  daughters,  and  embrace  them ;  and
on  his  buckler  the  grandsire  carries  the  grandchild  :  this
was  a  more  pleasing  use  for  their  shields.  From  that  cir-
cumstance the  (Ebalian  mothers  hold  it  no  unimportant  duty  to
celebrate  my  Calends,  the  day  which  is  first.  Is  it  not  either
because,  daring  to  trust  themselves  to  the  drawn  swords,  they
had  terminated  by  their  tears  the  wars  of  Mars  ?  Or  is  it
because  by  me,  with  happy  results,  Ilia  became  a  mother,
that  the  matrons  duly  observe  my  sacred  rites  and  my  holi-
day ?  And  why  besides  ?  It  is  because  now,  at  length,  the
winter,  enwrapped  in  ice,  gives  way,  and  the  snows  disap-
pear, overcome  by  the  warmth  of  the  sun.  The  foliage  that
had  been  shorn  by  the  frost  returns  to  the  trees,  and  the  bud
full  of  life  sprouts  from  the  tender  shoot ;  the  fruitful  blade
too,  which  has  long  lain  hid,  now  finds  a  hidden  path,  whereby
to  raise  itself  to  the  breezes  of  heaven.  Now  is  the  field
teeming  ;  now  is  the  season  for  breeding  the  cattle  ;  now  does

49  To  make  an  effort.~\ — Ver.  224.  Literally,  'was  obliged  to  be  able/
In  all  probability  the  meaning  is,  that  the  elder  children  were  able  to  cry
out  '  ave/  \  grandfather/  and  the  younger  ones  were  obliged  to  join  in  the
general  clamour,  their  mothers  forcing  them.  Taubner  thinks  that  the
latter  were  forced  by  the  pinches  of  their  mothers  to  scream  out  '  ah!  vee  ! '
(something  like  our  *  oh !  oh  !  )  whkh  sounding  like  '  aye,  they  were
thus  compelled  perforce  to  address  their  grandsires.  The  suggestion  is
redolent  of  more  trifling  ingenuity  than  probability.


B.  III.  242—264.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  99

the  bird  on  the  bough  prepare  a  shelter  and  a  home.  With
reason  do  the  Latian  mothers,  whose  toils  and  dearest  longings
the  bearing  of  their  progeny  occupies,  observe  this  prolific
season.  Add,  too,  that  where,  by  his  soldiery,  the  Roman
king  was  keeping  watch  and  ward,  the  hill  has  now  the  name
of  Esquiliae.50  There,  if  I  rightly  remember,  was  a  temple
consecrated  to  Juno  for  the  public  use  by  the  Latian  ma-
trons on  this  day.  Why  do  I  delay  and  burden  thy  memory
with  various  reasons  ?  See,  what  thou  dost  ask  is  plain  before
thine  eyes ;  Juno,  my  mother,  favours  the  married  women  :
hence  the  crowd  of  the  matrons  resorts  to  me ;  this  reason
so  duteous  particularly  becomes  me.

Bring  flowers  to  the  Goddess  :  this  Goddess  takes  delight  in
blossoming  plants  ;  with  tender  flowrets  wreathe  your  heads.
Say  ye  :  "  Thou,  Lucina,  did'st^ms^  give  us  the  light."  Say;
"  Do  thou  favour  the  prayers  of  her  who  is  in  travail ;"  and  if
any  woman  is  pregnant,  let  her  pray  with  her  tresses  untied,
that  the  Goddess  may  gently  facilitate  her  labour.

Who,  now,  will  tell  me  why  the  Salii  bear  the  heavenly
arms51  of  Mars,  and  chaunt  Mamurius?  Tell  me,  Nymph,
thou  that  wast  wont  to  minister  to  the  grove  and  the  lake  of
Diana ;  Nymph,  wife  of  Numa,  come  to  thy  own  festival.
There  is  a  lake  in  the  valley  of  Aricia, 52  inclosed  by  a  dark

50  Esquilice.] — Ver.  246.  Ovid  seems  to  hint  that  this  name  was  de-
rived from  the  '  excubiae/  or  *  watch,'  mentioned  in  the  line  before ;  which
would  seem  to  be  a  very  far-fetched  derivation.  Perhaps  these  watches
were  set  there  to  keep  an  eye  upon  the  Sabines,  at  the  time  when  they
had  been  but  newly  received  into  the  number  of  the  citizens.  According  to
some  authors,  this  hill  derived  its  name  from  the  word  '  excultae,'  '  culti-
vated,' and  was  added  to  the  city  and  brought  into  cultivation  by  Servius
Tullius.  Varro  says  that  the  spot  had  its  plural  appellation  from  its  con-
sisting of  two  ridges — the  Cispian  and  the  Oppian  Hills.

51  Heavenly  arms.'] — Ver.  259.  The  *  ancile,'  the  story  of  which  is
told  in  the  text ;  as  also  that  of  the  meritorious  deeds  of  Mamurius.  The
ancilia  were  borne  through  the  city  by  the  Salii  on  the  calends  of  March.
These  were  priests  of  Mars,  an  order  instituted  by  Numa  to  keep  the  sacred
shields;  they  received  their  name  from  '  salio,' '  to  leap,'  or  '  dance,'  because
in  the  procession  round  the  city  they  danced  with  the  shields  suspended
from  their  necks.  Some  writers  say  that  they  received  their  name  from
1  Salius,'  an  Arcadian,  a  companion  of  iEneas,  who  taught  the  Italian  youths
to  dance  in  armour.  After  the  processions  had  lasted  some  days,  the
shields  were  replaced  in  the  temple  of  Mars.

52  Valley  of  Aricia.']— Ver.  263.  Aricia  and  its  grove  were  situate  at
the  foot  of  the  Alban  Mount.     Orestes,  pursued  by  the  Furies  for  the

h2


100  THE  FASTI  ;  [b.  m.  264— 273.

wood,  sanctified  by  ancient  religious  awe.  Here  lies  concealed
Hippolytus, 53  torn  asunder  by  the  madness  of  bis  steeds  ;  for
which  reason  that  grove  is  entered  by  no  horses.  There  the
threads54  hang  down,  veiling  the  long  hedge-rows,  and  many
a  tablet  has  been  placed  to  the  Goddess  found  to  be  deserving
of  it.  Ofttimes,  the  woman  having  gained  her  wish, 55  her
forehead  wreathed  with  chaplets,  bears  thither  from  the  city
the  blazing  torches.  Those  with  daring  hand  and  fleet  of
foot56  hold  there  the  sway ;  and  each  one  perishes  in  suc-
cession,  after    the    example    he    has    set.     With    indistinct

murder  of  his  mother,  consulted  the  oracle  at  Delphi  how  he  might  escape
their  pursuit ;  he  was  ordered  to  bring  away  the  image  of  Diana  from
the  Tauric  Chersonnesus.  Thoas  was  the  king,  and  by  his  order  all
strangers  that  were  caught  were  immolated.  Orestes  and  his  friend,
Pylades,  were  seized  and  condemned  to  death ;  on  which,  Iphigenia,  the
sister  of  Orestes,  wmo  was  then  the  priestess  of  Diana,  offered  to  spare  one
of  them  if  he  would  convey  letters  to  Greece  for  her.  A  contest  of  friend-
ship arose  as  to  which  should  save  the  other  by  his  death.  Pylades  at  length
yielded,  and  consented  to  carry  the  letter,  which,  he  found,  was  directed  to
Orestes  himself.  On  this  discovery  of  her  brother,  Iphigenia  joined  in
their  flight,  Thoas  being  first  slain ;  and,  according  to  Ovid  and  other
writers,  they  brought  the  image  of  Diana,  and  instituted  her  worship  in
the  Arician  grove.

53  Hippolytus.] — Ver.  265.  He  was  falsely  charged  by  his  step-mother,
Phcedra,  with  a  crime,  to  commit  which,  she  had,  without  success,  solicited
him.  Theseus,  his  father,  uttering  imprecations  against  him,  Neptune  sent
a  sea  monster,  which  frightened  the  horses  of  Hippolytus ;  and  they,  run-
ning away,  dashed  him  against  the  rocks  and  killed  him.  Being  restored
to  life  by  the  art  of  iEsculapius,  he  fled  to  Italy  under  the  name  of  Virbius,
and  was  sheltered  by  Diana  in  the  Arician  grove.

54  The  threads."] — Ver.  267.  The  'licia/  or  '  threads,'  were  used  for
suspending  the  gifts  and  votive  offerings  of  the  worshippers.  In  Catholic
countries,  and  in  some  parts  of  England,  this  practice  prevails  at  the  present
day,  in  honour  of  the  patron  saint  of  an  adjoining  spring  or  well.

55  Gained  her  wish.] — Ver.  269.  Women,  whose  prayers  to  Diana  had
been  heard,  especially  in  love  matters,  used  to  carry  lighted  torches  from
the  city  to  the  grove  of  Aricia.

6  Fleet  of  foot."] — Ver.  271.  To  commemorate  the  flight  of  Orestes,
a  runaway  slave  was  always  appointed  to  be  her  high-priest  in  the  grove  of
Aricia,  who  was  called  \  Rex  Nemorensis,'  *  the  king  of  the  woodland.'
The  term  '  with  daring  hand'  alludes  to  the  fact  that  the  priest  might,
according  to  the  usual  custom,  at  any  time  be  murdered  by  another  desirous
to  occupy  his  place,  and  hence  the  necessity  arose  of  his  always  going
armed  to  protect  himself  from  such  attacks.  This  and  the  cruelties  prac-
tised in  the  worship  of  the  Tauric  Diana,  perhaps  led  to  the  belief  that
Egeria  was  identical  with  the  deity.


B.  in.  273— 299.]         OB,    CALENDAR   OF    OYLD.  101

murmur  glides  a  pebbly  stream :  ofttimes,  but  in  scanty
draughts,  have  I  drunk  thence.  It  is  Egeria  who  supplies
the  water ;  a  Goddess  pleasing  to  the  Muses  ;  she  was  the
wife  and  the  counsellor  of  Numa.  In  the  first  place,  it  seemed
good  to  her  that  the  Quirites,  too  ready  for  war,  should  be
softened  by  justice  and  the  fear  of  the  Gods.  For  that  reason
laws  were  given,  that  the  strongest  might  not  obtain  supreme
power ;  and  the  holy  rites  delivered  to  the  people  then  began
to  be  religiously  observed.  Their  savage  nature  is  now  laid
aside,  right  is  more  powerful  than  arms,  and  it  is  considered
disgraceful  to  engage  in  civil  strife ;  many  a  person,  but
just  now  violent,  is  now  changed  in  character  on  seeing  the
altar,  and  offers  the  wine  and  the  salt  spelt  cake  on  the  glow-
ing hearths.  Lo  !  the  father  of  the  Gods  is  scattering  his  flash-
ing lightnings  through  the  clouds,  and  drains  the  heavens  by
deluging  showers  :  on  no  other  occasion  have  the  hurled  bolts
of  fire  fallen  more  thickly.  The  king  is  alarmed,  and  terror
takes  possession  of  the  breasts  of  the  multitude.  To  him  the
Goddess  says  :  "  Be  not  unreasonably  dismayed  !  the  lightning
is  to  be  averted  by  atonement,  and  the  wrath  of  the  angry
Jove  is  easily  appeased ;  but  Picus  and  Faunus57  will  be  able
to  reveal  the  ceremony  of  expiation,  each  of  them  a  Divinity
of  the  Roman  soil ;  but  they  will  not  inform  thee  without  force  :
apply  chains  when  thou  hast  caught  them.5'  And  thus  does
she  instruct  Numa  by  what  means  they  may  be  taken.  There
was  at  the  foot  of  the  Aventine  hill58  a  grove,  dark  with  the
shade  of  the  holm-oak,  on  seeing  which  you  might  readily
say,  " Surely  a  Divinity  dwells  here!"  In  the  centre  was  a
grassy  plot,  and,  covered  over  with  green  moss,  a  constant
stream  of  water  trickled  from  the  rock.     From  this  stream

57  Picus  and  Faunus.} — Ver.  291.  These  were  ancient  deities  of
Latium.  They  have  been  mentioned  before,  both  in  the  text  and  in  the
notes.

58  Of  the  Aventine  hill.]—Vvc.  295.  This  was  one  of  the  hills  to  which
Rome  extended  in  the  later  times.  It  is  supposed  that  its  name  was
either  derived  from  Aventinus,  son  of  Romulus  Silvius,  king  of  Alba  Longa,
who  was  buried  there. or  from  'aves,'  'birds,'  which  used  to  flock  there.
Varro  says  that  it  was  so  called  because  there  was  a  ferry  across  the
marshes  which  separated  it  from  the  rest  of  Rome,  by  which  the  pas-
sengers were  carried,  '  Advehebantur. '  Servius,  on  the  iEneid  (Book  7,
1.  651),  mentions  a  tradition  that  it  was  so  called  by  the  Sabines,  from
1  Avens/  a  river  in  their  own  territorv.


102  THE   F^STI;  [b.  hi.  299— 327.

Faunus  and  Picus  were  wont  generally  to  drink  alone.  Hither
comes  king  Numa,  and  sacrifices  a  sheep  to  the  fountain ;  he
then  places  for  the  Gods  cups  fall  of  fragrant  wine ;  and  with
his  train  lies  hid,  concealing  himself  in  a  grotto.  The
forest  Gods  come  to  their  accustomed  streams,  and  refresh
their  parched  spirits  with  copious  draughts  of  wine  : 59  sleep  is
the  consequence  of  their  debauch  ;  Numa  issues  forth  from
the  cool  grotto,  and  puts  the  hands  of  them,  thus  buried  in
slumber,  in  tight  manacles.  When  sleep  has  now  departed,
they  strive  by  struggling  to  burst  the  bonds  ;  as  they
struggle,  the  more  tightly  do  they  hold  them.  ♦Then  Numa
says  :  "  Gods  of  the  groves,  forgive  my  deed  !  inasmuch  as
ye  know  that  impiety  is  far  from  my  nature  ;  and  point  out
the  way  in  which  the  lightning  may  be  averted."  Thus
Numa  spoke,  and  thus  Faunus  replied,  shaking  his  horns  :m
"  Thou  inquirest  on  a  matter  of  great  difficulty,  and  which  it
is  against  the  law  of  heaven  for  thee  to  learn  by  our  instruc-
tion ;  our  privileges  as  Deities  have  their  limits.  We  are  the
Gods  of  the  country,  and  have  our  sway  on  the  lofty  moun-
tains ;  Jove  has  full  power  over  his  own  weapons.  Of  thyself
thou  wilt  not  be  enabled  to  bring  him  down  from  heaven  ;  but
perhaps,  by  availing  thyself  of  our  aid,  thou  wilt."  Faunus
had  thus  spoken  :  the  opinion  expressed  by  Picus  is  the  same.
"  But  take  from  us  these  bonds,"  says  Picus  ;  "  Jove  shall
come  hither,  brought  down  from  his  topmost  height ;  the
vaporous  Styx  shall  attest  my  promise."  What  they  do,  when
released  from  their  bonds,  what  incantations  they  repeat,  and
by  what  art  they  bring  down  Jove  from  his  habitations  above,
it  is  not  allowed  by  heaven  for  man  to  know;  let  things
permitted  be  the  only  subjects  of  my  song,  and  whatever  may
be  repeated  by  the  hps  of  the  poet,  without  incurring  guilt.
They  bring  thee  down,61  0  Jupiter,  from  the  skies  ;  in  conse-

59  Draughts  of  wine.] — Ver.  303-4.     Gower's  version  is —

1  The  wood-gods  to  their  old  wont  came,  the  bowls
They  turn'd  off  blithe,  and  quench'd  their  thirsty  souls/

60  Shaking  his  horns.'] — Ver.  312.  To  show  that  it  was  a  matter  not
to  be  settled  in  a  moment,  but  requiring  much  deliberation.

61  They  bring  thee  down.'] — Ver.  327.  It  is  thought  by  some  that
Numa  discovered  the  art  of  conducting  the  lightning,  and  rendering  it  in-
nocuous in  its  effects  ;  and  the  death  of  Tullus  Hostilius,  the  third  king  of
Rome,  is  supposed  by  them  to  have  been  owing  to  his  ignorance  of  the
proper  mode  of  conducting  the  electric  fluid.


B.  ill.  327— 353.]  OH,    CALENDAR   OF    OYII).  103

quence  of  which  posterity  still  celebrates  thee,  and  names
thee  Elicius.62  It  is  agreed  that  the  tops  of  the  Aventine
forest  then  trembled,  and  the  earth  yielded  beneath  the  pres-
sure of  the  weight  of  Jove.  The  heart  of  the  king  palpitates  ;
from  the  whole  of  his  breast  the  blood  has  lied,  and  his  brist-
ling hair  stands  on  end.  When  his  senses  have  returned,  he
says  :  "0  thou,  both  King  and  Father  of  the  Gods  on  high  !
teach  me  the  assured  expiations  of  thy  lightnings  ;  if,  with
guileless  hands,  I  have  touched  thy  altars  ;  if  too,  my  tongue,
with  true  piety,  asks  this  which  is  now  entreated  of  thee."  Jove
nodded  assent  to  his  prayer ;  but,  without  using  any  circumlo-
cution, he  concealed  the  truth,  and  by  his  equivocal  expres-
sions struck  the  hero  with  alarm.  "  Cut  oif  a  head,"  says  he.
To  whom  the  king  says  :  "  We  will  obey  :  an  onion,  pulled  up
in  my  garden,  must  be  cut  off."63  "Of  a  man/'  adds  the
God.  "Yes,  the  topmost  hairs,"  answers  the  other.  The  God
demands  "  a  life  ;"  to  whom  Numa  says  :  "  Yes,  of  a  fish."
The  God  laughed  and  said,  "  See  to  it  then,  that  with  these
thou  dost  propitiate  my  weapons,  0  man,  not  to  be  re-
pulsed from  a  conference  with  the  Gods.  But  to  thee,  when
to-morrow's  sun  shall  have  raised  his  full  disk,  I  will  give  the
sure  pledge  of  empire."  He  spoke ;  with  loud  thunderings
he  is  borne  above  the  trembling  firmament,  and  leaves  Numa
in  the  attitude  of  worship.  Joyful  he  returns,  and  tells  the
Quirites  what  had  occurred ;  credence  was  given  to  his
■words,  tardy,  and  extorted  with  difficulty.  "  But  surely,"
says  he,  "  I  shall  be  believed  if  the  result  follow  my  words.
See  now,  hear  ye,  every  one  present,  what  will  happen  on  the
morrow.     When  to-morrow's  sun  shall  have  raised  his  full

62  EliciusJ] — Ver.  328.  From  '  elicio,'  to  '  entice,'  l  allure,'  or  '  bring-
out.'

63  Must  be  cut  Qfr.~\ — Ver.  340.  Meaning,  'It  must  have  its  "bulb"  or
"head"  taken  off.'  The  conversation  seems  to  have  been  intended  by  Ju-
piter as  a  test  of  Numa's  ready  wit  and  humane  disposition.  He  bids
Numa  '  Cut  off  a  head.'  Numa  says,  '  Yes,  I  will ;  the  head  of  an  onion.'
'  Of  a  man,'  says  Jupiter.  '  Yes,  the  topmost  hair,'  says  Numa,  implying
obedience  to  the  original  command,  as  to  the  cutting  off  of  the  head ;  but
dexterously  substituting  '  capilli,'  '  the  hair,'  for  'caput,'  '  the  head,'  which
were  often  used  synonymously.  The  god,  detecting  the  pun,  presses  him
closer,  and  demands  a  life  ;  on  which  Numa  says,  '  Yes,  you  shall  have  a
life,  but  it  must  be. that  of  a  fish.'  Plutarch  says  the  fish  was  the  '  maena,'
a  kind  of  pilchard,  which  seems  to  have  been  a  favourite  ingredient  in
the  '  materiel'  of  incantation.     See  Book  2,  1.  578.


104  THE  FASTI;  [b.  in.  353— 381.

disk,  Jupiter  will  give  the  sure  pledge  of  empire."  They  re-
tire in  doubt ;  his  promise  seemed  likely  to  be  of  slow  per-
formance, and  their  belief  depends  on  the  approaching  day.

The  earth  was  still  soft,  and  bedewed  with  the  hoar-frost  of
the  morning ;  the  people  are  present  before  the  threshold  of
their  king.  He  comes  forth  and  seats  himself  in  the  midst  on
a  throne  of  maple-wood;64  around  him  stand  the  men  in
countless  numbers,  and  hold  their  peace.  Phoebus  had  now
but  risen  with  his  upper  edge  ;  their  anxious  minds  are  in  a
state  of  agitation  through  hope  and  fear.  He  stands,  and  his
head  veiled65  with  a  snow-white  robe,  he  raises  his  hands  al-
ready not  unfamiliar  hi  worship  to  the  Gods;  and  thus  he  speaks
— "  The  time  of  the  promised  favour  is  drawing  nigh ;  confer,
0  Jupiter,  upon  thy  words  the  promised  fulfilment.55  While
he  was  speaking,  the  sun  had  just  raised  from  the  deep  his
entire  disk,  and  from  the  pole  of  heaven  there  came  a  heavy
peal ;  thrice  did  the  God  thunder  without  a  cloud ;  thrice
did  he  dart  his  lightnings.  Believe  what  I  tell ;  I  speak
of  things  wondrous,  but  realities.  The  heavens  began  to
open  in  the  midst ;  the  multitude,  with  their  monarch,
cast  down  their  eyes.  Behold!  there  falls  a  shield,  gently
poised  on  the  lightsome  breeze ;  a  shout  from  the  people
ascends  to  the  stars.  The  king  raises  the  gift  from  the
ground,  having  first  offered  a  heifer,  which  had  never  yielded
his  neck  to  be  pressed  by  the  yoke.  He  entitles  it  '  ancile,5
because  it  is  pared  away66  at  every  point,  and  whichever
way  you  look  at  it,  every  corner  is  off.  Then,  mindful  that
the  destiny  of  empire  depends  upon  this,  he  forms  a  plan  of
much  cunning.  He  orders  several67  to  be  made,  engraved  of  a

64  Throne  of  maple  wood."] — Ver.  359.  The  wood  of  the  maple  was
held  by  the  ancients  in  the  highest  esteem,  next  to  that  of  the  cedar,  on
account  of  its  hardness  and  the  closeness  of  its  grain.

65  His  head  veiled.] — Ver.  363.  The  Romans  covered  their  heads  when
praying  or  performing  any  religious  lite,  in  order  that  nothing  of  ill  omen
should  present  itself  to  the  view  of  the  devotee.  See  iEneid,  bookiii.  1.  405.

66  Because  it  is  pared  away. .] — Ver.  375.  In  the  old  Latin,  'ancisus,'  or
'  arncisus,'  means  '  having  the  edges  cut  off.'  Ovid  means  to  say,  that
from  this  word,  the  shield  received  the  name  of  'ancile/  Its  shape,  as  repre-
sented on  a  gem  in  the  Florentine  cabinet,  was  oblong,  each  of  the  two  sides
receding  inwards,  with  an  even  curvature,  so  as  to  make  it  broader  at  the
ends  than  in  the  middle,  and  thus  it  presented  a  curved  edge  on  every  side.

67  He  orders  several.] — Ver.  381.  Ovid  says,  several.  Dionysius  says,
very  many.     Other  writers  say  eleven,  and  that  Mamurius  made  them  so


B.  in.  381—397.]         OR,    CALE1STDAR   OF   OY1D.  105

similar  shape,  that  a  deception  may  meet  the  eyes  of  those
plotting  to  steal  it,  Mamurius,  whether  more  distinguished
for  his  probity  or  for  his  skill  as  a  workman,  it  is  hard
for  one  to  say,  completed  that  task.  To  him  the  munifi-
cent Numa  said,  "  Ask  thy  own  reward  for  thy  work ;  as  my
truthfulness  is  well  known,  thou  shalt  ask  for  nothing  in
Vain/5  Already  had  he  given  to  the  Salii  (from  their  dancing
do  they  derive  their  name)  both  arms,68  and  words  to  be  sung
to  certain  measures.  Then  thus  Mamurius  says,  "  Let  fame
be  given  to  me  as  my  reward,  and  let  my  name  be  mentioned
at  the  end  of  their  strain."  From  that  circumstance  do  the
priests  pay  the  reward  promised  for  the  ancient  workmanship,
and  call  upon  Mamurius.69

If  by  any  chance  you  should  desire  to  marry,  though
both  of  you  should  be  impatient,  postpone  it;70  a  short
delay  has  its  great  advantages.  Arms  stir  up  the  fight — the
fight  is  unsuited  to  the  newly  wedded ;  when  arms  shall
have  been  laid  by,  there  will  be  a  more  suitable  omen.  On
these   days,    too,    ought  the   wife    of   the   mitred71   Dialis,

skilfully,  that  Numa  was  unable  to  perceive  the  difference.     Plutarch  says
that  Numa  left  the  work  of  imitation  to  be  a  subject  of  competition  among
all  the  Roman  artists.     Gower's  version  of  this  passage  is : —
'  Of  shields  like  shap'd  he  bids  to  make  a  dozen,
That  so  an  error  might  the  couzener  couzen/

68  Both  arms.] — Ver.  388.  The  dress  of  the  Salii  was  an  embroidered
tunic,  with  a  brazen  belt,  the  *  trabea'  and  l  apex,'  or  tufted  conical  cap ;
each  had  a  sword  by  his  side,  and  a  spear  or  staff  in  his  hand.  They  car-
ried the  '  ancilia'  in  the  left  hand,  or  suspended  from  their  shoulders,
and,  while  dancing,  struck  them  with  their  rods  or  swords,  keeping  time
with  their  voices  and  the  movements  of  the  dance.  Their  verses  con-
tained, it  is  supposed,  a  kind  of  rude  theogony  or  history  of  the  Gods,
with  the  exception  of  Venus,  who  was  omitted  from  their  praises.

69  Mamurius.] — Ver.  392.  Some  regard  this  story  as  utterly  fabulous,
and  Varro  believes  their  mention  of  'Veturius  Mamurius7  to  be  only  an  ap-
peal to  '  vetus  memoria,'  '  ancient  tradition/

70  Postpone  it.] — Ver.  394.  As  the  •  ancilia/  which  were  emblems  of
war,  were  carried  about  on  the  Ides  of  March,  it  was  not  considered  auspi-
cious to  marry,  or  to  commence  a  journey,  or  indeed,  any  matter  of  import-
ance on  that  day.

1  Of  the  mitred.] — Ver.  397.  '  Apicati/  literally  wearing  the  *  apex.
This  was  a  cap  worn  by  the  Flam  ens  and  the  Salii.  The  name  properly
belonged  to  a  pointed  piece  of  olive  wood,  the  base  whereof  was  surrounded
with  wool.  This  was  held  on  the  head  by  fillets,  or  by  a  cap,  which  was
fastened  by  two  bands,  called  l  apicula/  or  *  offendices/     The  cap  was  of


106  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  hi.  397—420.

clad  in  her  flame-coloured  gown,  to  wear  her  hair  all  un-
braided.

When  the  third  night  rising  from  the  deep  shall  have  raised
its  fires,  one  of  the  two  Fishes  will  be  concealed.  For  there  are
two — the  one  near  to  the  southern,  the  other  to  the  northern
winds  ;  each  takes  its  name  from  its  neighbouring  wind.

When  the  bride  of  Tithomis,  with  rosy  cheeks,  shall  have
begun  to  shed  her  dews,  and  shall  urge  on  the  hours  of  the
fifth  day,  whether  that  Constellation  is  styled  Arctophylax,  or
whether  the  lazy  Bootes,  he  shall  be  plunged  in  the  deep,  and
shall  elude  your  view.

But  not  so  the  Vintager.  It  is  but  a  trifling  delay  to  relate
whence  this  Constellation  derives  its  origin.  Bacchus  is  said,
among  the  heights  of  Ismarus,  to  have  loved  the  long-haired
Ampelos,72  offspring  of  the  Satyrs  and  of  a  Nymph.  To  him  he
gave,  pendant  from  the  foliage  of  an  elm,  a  vine,  which  still
has  its  name  from  that  of  the  youth.  While  he  is  heedlessly
gathering  the  blushing  grapes  on  a  branch,  he  falls  ;  him  thus
lost  to  earth,  Bacchus  conveys  among  the  stars.

When  the  sixth  Sun  from  the  ocean  climbs  the  steep  of
Olympus,  and  on  his  winged  steeds  traverses  the  skies,  who-
ever thou  be  that  art  present,  and  art  paying  homage  to  the
shrines  of  hoary  Vesta,  place  both  the  goblet  and  the  incense
on  the  Ilian  hearth.     To  the  countless  titles  of  Caesar  was

a  conical  form,  and  was  generally  made  of  sheep-skin,  with  the  wool  on ;
and  from  the  '  apex,'  on  its  summit,  it  at  last  acquired  that  name  also.
The  Flaminica,  or  wife  of  the  Flamen  Dialis,  wore  a  scarlet  or  flame-co-
loured robe,  called  '  venenatum/  from  '  venerium/  '  dye/  and  also  the
1  rica/  or  crimson  hood,  a  square  cloak,  with  a  border,  to  which  was  at-
tached a  slip,  cut  from  a  '  felix  arbor.'  On  certain  days  she  was  not  al-
lowed to  cut  her  nails,  or  comb  her  hair,  to  which  fact  the  poet  here
makes  allusion.

72  Ampelos.'] — Ver.  409.  The  story  of  Ampelos  is  differently  told  by
other  writers.  According  to  them,  Ampelos  was  a  youth,  the  companion
of  Bacchus.  Contrary  to  the  advice  of  that  god,  he  persisted  in  sporting
with  the  wild  beasts.  Ate,  the  goddess  of  revenge,  persuaded  him  to
torment  a  bull;  and  doing  so,  he  provoked  the  moon,  who,  in  her  anger,  sent
a  gad-fly  to  sting  the  bull,  when  Ampelos  fell  and  broke  his  neck.  Bacchus
appealed  to  the  '  Parcae/  or  Fates,  and  Atropos  promised  to  restore  Ampelos
to  him  in  another  form.  Forthwith  a  vine,  d/j.7re\oc,  was  produced,  laden
with  grapes  ;  Bacchus  and  the  Satyrs  discovered  the  invention  of  wine,  and,
in  their  exultation,  became  intoxicated.  Ismarus  was  a  mountain  of
Thrace,  near  the  river  Hebrus.


B.  in.  420—444.]  OB,    CALEKDAE.   OY   OYID.  107

added  on  this  day  the  honour  which  he  most  desired  to  merit73
— that  of  the  Pontificate.  Over  the  eternal  fires  presides  the
divinity  of  the  immortal  Csesar ;  thou  here  beholdest  the
united  pledges  of  the  empire's  safety.  From  the  ashes  of  an-
cient Troy  came  the  most  worthy  relic,  laden  with  which,  iEneas
was  safe  from  the  foe.  A  priest  descended  from  iEneas
claims  an  alliance  with  thy  Deity ;  Vesta,  do  thou  preserve
his  kindred  person.74  Well  do  ye  thrive,  ye  fires,  which  with
sacred  hand  he  tends ;  undying,  live  on,  both  thou  sacred
flame,  and  thou  Prince,  I  pray.

There  is  one  distinction  for  the  Nones  of  March,  that  on
them  they  believe  that  the  temple  of  Vejovis,  before  you
reach  the  two  groves,75  was  consecrated,  when  Romulus  sur-
rounded the  grove  with  a  high  stone  wall.  "  Hither  fly,  who-
ever you  are,"  says  he,  "  and  you  shall  be  in  safety."  Oh  !
from  how  low  an  origin  has  the  Roman  grown  !  How  little
an  object  of  envy  was  that  ancient  multitude  !

Lest,  however,  the  strangeness  of  the  name  be  an  obstacle
to  you  in  your  ignorance,  learn  who  this  Deity  is,  and  why  he
is  so  called.  He  is  the  youthful  Jupiter  ;  mark  his  youthful
aspect :  mark,  too,  his  hand ;  it  wields  no  thunder-bolts.
The  thunder-bolt  was  assumed  by  Jupiter  after  the  attempt  of
the  giants  to  attain  to  the  skies ;  in  early  times  he  was  un-
armed. Ossa  blazed  with  new  flames,  and  Pelion  higher  than
Ossa,  and  Olympus  rooted  in  the  solid  earth.  A  she  goat
stands,76  too,  beside  him ;  the  nymphs  of  Crete  are  said  to

~3  Most  desired  to  merit.} — Ver.  419.  Augustus  desired  this  dignity,
that  he  might  appear  to  stand  high  in  the  favour  of  the  gods.  He  was
appointed  Pontifex  Maximus,  a.u.c.  740,  in  the  place  of  Lepidus.  This
officer  lived  in  a  house  at  the  public  expense,  called  the  '  Regia,'  or
*  palace.'     Augustus  gave  this  up,  in  his  Pontificate,  to  the  Vestal  Virgins.

?4  His  kindred  person.} — Ver.  426.  This  passage  has  puzzled  many  of
the  commentators ;  hut  it  does  not  appear  very  clearly  where  the  diffi-
culty lies.  The  poet  repeatedly  calls  the  fire  of  Vesta  the  i  Ilian,'  or
Trojan  fires.  He  also  addresses  Augustus,  the  adopted  son  of  Julius  Caesar,
as  descended  from  iEneas ;  and  he  seems  here  only  to  allude  to  the  fact
of  both  being  able  to  trace  back  their  origin  to  the  city  of  Troy.

'5  The  two  groves.} — Ver.  430.  The  space  between  the  Arx  and  the
Capitolium,  where  the  Asylum  and  the  temple  of  Vejovis  were,  was  called,
according  to  Livy,  booki.  c.  viii.,  and  Dionysius, '  Inter  duos  lucos,'  '  Be-
tween the  two  groves/

76  A  she  goat  stands.] — Ver.  443.  This  fact  goes  far  to  confirm  the
poet's  opinion  that  '  Vejovis'  means  *  the  young  Jove  ;s  as  Jupiter  in  his


108  THE    FASTI;  [b.  in.  444— 157.

have  nurtured  him  ;  a  she-goat  furnished  milk  for  the  in-
fant Jove.  Now  I  am  called  upon  to  explain  the  name  ;  the
country-women  call  wheat,  which  has  grown  up  but  indiffer-
ently, "  vegrandia,"  and  when  small  in  the  grain,  they  style
it  "  vesca."77  If  that  is  the  force  of  the  word,  "  ve,"  why
should  I  not  imagine  that  the  temple  of  Vejovis  is  the
temple  of  the  little  Jupiter  ?

And  now,  when  the  stars  shall  bespangle  the  azure  sky,
look  upwards,  and  you  shall  see  the  neck  of  the  Gorgon
steed.78  He  is  believed  to  have  sprung  forth,  his  mane  be-
sprinkled with  blood,  from  the  teeming  neck  of  the  slain
Medusa.  With  him,  as  he  soared  above  the  clouds  and  be-
neath the  stars,  the  heavens  were  as  the  ground,  his  wings
were  in  place  of  feet.  And  now  had  he  taken  the  strange  curb
in  his  fretting  mouth,  when  his  lightsome  hoof  struck  forth
the  Aonian  fountains.79    Now  does  he  enjoy  that  heaven  which

infancy  was  suckled  by  the  goat  Amalthea.  He  also  attempts  to  prove  it
from  the  circumstance,  that  there  Jupiter  is  represented  at  a  time  -when
he  had  not  yet  learned  to  wield  his  thunderbolts,  and  that  '  ve'  was  an
old  Latin  word,  in  all  cases  found  to  express  diminutiveness.  Some  suppose
that  '  ve'  is  here  applied  to  the  name  of  Jupiter  in  a  bad  sense,  as  '  the
evil'  or  '  the  incensed'  Jove,  on  which  account  his  statue  was  armed
with  arrows,  for  the  purposes  of  mischief,  Mr.  Keightly,  in  his  Mytho-
logy of  Greece  and  Italy,  thinks  that  '  Vejovis'  and  '  Vedius'  mean  the
same  deity,  their  name  meaning  the  i injurious  Jupiter,'  and  that  he  was  a
god  of  the  world  below.  Vedius,  however,  would  appear  to  bear  the  same
relation  to  Pluto,  'Dis,'  that  Vejovis  does  to  Jupiter,  whatever  that  relation
may  have  been.

V  '  Vesca.'~\ — Ver.  446.  From  '  ve'  '  not,'  and  '  esca'  '  food,'  as  af-
fording but  little  nourishment.  '  Vegrandis'  is,  according  to  the  poet's
etymology,  from  '  ve,'  '  not,'  '  grandis,'  '  large,'  or  '  of  full  growth.'

'8  The  Gorgon  steed.) — Ver.  450*  The  poet  describes  the  Heliacal
rising  of  Pegasus  on  the.  nones.  He  was  so  called  from  Trnyi),  'a
fountain,'  as  having  been  born  near  the  springs  of  the  ocean.  Medusa,
one  of  the  Gorgon  sisters,  was  pregnant  by  Neptune,  and  when  Perseus
slew  her  and  cut  off  her  head,  Pegasus  sprung  from  the  blood  ;  hence  the
poet's  expression,  '  the  teeming  neck.'  He  was  tamed  and  presented  to
Bellerophon  to  assist  him  in  the  conquest  of  the  Chimaera.  Ovid,  Metarn.,
4,  785,  says  that  Perseus  was  mounted  on  Pegasus  when  he  slew  the  sea-
monster  to  which  Andromeda  was  exposed.  Minerva,  in  her  vengeance
against  Medusa,  who  had  been  previously  remarkable  for  the  beauty  of
her  hair,  changed  it  into  serpents,  and  doomed  all  who  looked  on  her  face
to  the  penalty  of  being  turned  into  stone.  Perseus,  with  the  aid  of  the
gods,  destroyed  her  while  sleeping.

79  The  Aonian  fountains .] — Ver.  456.     Pegasus  was  caught  and  tamed


b.  in.  457— 475  ]         OH,    CALENDAR   OF   OTID.  109

formerly  lie  sought  by  his  wings,  and  he  glitters,  refulgent  with
fifteen  stars.

Forthwith  on  the  succeeding  night  you  will  see  the  Gnossian
crown  ;so  by  reason  of  the  crime  of  Theseus81  was  Ariadne
made  a  Goddess.  Already  had  the  damsel,  to  her  advantage,
obtained  Bacchus  in  exchange  for  her  foresworn  spouse,  she
who  had  given  to  her  ungrateful  husband  the  clue  to  be  re-
traced. Exulting  at  the  good  fortune  of  her  marriage,  she
said,  "  What  was  I  mourning  for,  like  a  country  lass  as  I
was  ?  It  was  a  good  thing  for  me  that  he  was  faithless/'
In  the  mean  time,  Bacchus,82  with  his  well-trimmed  locks,  con-
quers the  Indians,83  and  returns  enriched  from  the  Eastern
world  ;  among  the  captive  maidens  of  distinguished  beauty,
the  daughter  of  the  king  was  too  pleasing  to  Bacchus.  His
loving  wife  indulged  in  weeping,  and  as  she  paced  the  winding
shore,  with  her  hair  all  loose,  she  uttered  such  words  as
these  : — "  Lo  now  a  second  time,  ye  billows,  hear  a  like  com-
plaint !  Lo  !  a  second  time,  ye  sands,  receive  my  tears  as
they  fall,  I  used  to  cry,  I  remember,  '  Foresworn  and  faith-
less Theseus  !'  He  is  gone ;  Bacchus  now  incurs  the  like
guilt.    '  Now,  too,'  will  I  exclaim,  '  let  woman  put  no  trust  in

by  Bellerophon,  -who  was  thrown  off  from  him  by  Jupiter,  and,  falling  in
Cilicia,  was  struck  with  blindness.  By  striking  with  his  hoof  Mount
Helicon,  in  Aonia,  a  part  of  Bceotia,  the  fountain  called  Hippocrene,
\ttitov  Kprjvrj,  or  'the  horse  fountain,'  was  opened.

80  Gnossian  crown.~\ — Ver.  460.  Minos,  the  father  of  Ariadne,  reigned
at  Gnossus,  in  the  isle  of  Crete.

81  Theseus.'] — Ver.  460.  He  was  the  son  of  iEthra  and  iEgeus,  and  was
sent  from  Athens  to  Crete,  as  one  of  the  seven  chosen  youths  to  be  devoured
by  the  Minotaur.  By  the  aid  of  Ariadne,  he  tracked  the  Labyrinth  where  the
monster  had  his  abode,  and  slew  him.  He  sailed  from  Crete  with  his  com-
panions and  with  Ariadne  and  seven  other  damsels ;  but  he  cruelly  aban-
doned her  to  whom  he  was  indebted  for  his  life,  on  the  island  of  Naxos.

82  Bacchus*] — Ver.  465.  Here  called  '  Liber.'  This  name  was  given
him  either  from  '  libo/  '  to  make  a  libation/  or  from  '  libero/  '  to  set  free/
because  he  liberates  the  mind  from  cares,  or  from  the  Greek  words  Xvsiv
fiaprj,  i  to  loosen  the  weights/  i.  e.  of  care  and  despondency.  He  is  called
1  Depexus/  '  combed  down/  or  '  well-trimmed/  in  allusion  either  to  his
youth  or  the  effeminacy  of  his  character.

83  The  Indians.] — Ver.  465.  The  conquests  of  Bacchus  in  the  east
are  said  to  have  extended  to  the  river  Ganges.  His  army  consisted  of
a  troop  of  Bacchanals,  his  conquests  were  without  blood,  and  he  taught
the  conquered  nations  the  use  of  the  vine,  the  art  of  tilling  the  earth,  and
of  preparing  honey  for  food.  He  was  accompanied  on  this  expedition  by
Silenus  and  Lusus.


110  THE   FASTI;  [b.  in.  475— 500.

man  ; '  change  but  the  name,  and  my  case  has  been  repeated.
0,  would  that  my  destiny  had  kept  on  the  course  on  which  it
had  before  commenced,  and  that  now,  at  this  moment,  I  had
been  no  more !  Why,  Bacchus,  didst  thou  preserve  me  when
about  to  die  on  the  lonely  sands  1  I  could  then  have  ended
my  sorrows  at  once.  Ah  !  Bacchus,  thou  unstable  one !  yes,
more  unstable  even  than  the  leaves  that  encircle  thy  temples  ;
Bacchus,  known  to  my  sorrow,  didst  thou  dare,  by  bringing
thy  paramour  before  my  very  eyes,  to  disturb  a  union  before
so  harmonious.  Alas!  where  is  thy  plighted  faith?84
Where  all  that  thou  wast  wont  to  swear  ?  Ah !  wretched
me  !  How  often  do  I  repeat  these  words.  Thou  wast  wont
to  blame  Theseus,  and  thou  thyself  didst  use  to  call  him
a  deceiver ;  by  thy  own  judgment  thou  art  guilty  of  a  greater
crime.  May  no  man  know  this,  and  by  secret  anguish
may  I  be  consumed,  lest  I  may  be  supposed  to  have  deserved
to  be  thus  often  beguiled.  Above  all,  I  would  wish  it  to  be
concealed  from  Theseus,  lest  he  should  rejoice  that  thou  art
a  partaker  of  his  guilt.  But,  I  suppose,  a  paramour  of
fair  complexion85  was  preferred  to  me,  because  of  my  swarthy
hue  ;  be  then  that  colour  the  lot  of  my  enemy.  But  what
matters  that  ?  She  is  the  more  pleasing  to  thee,  from
this  very  defect.  What  art  thou  doing  ?  She  contaminates
thy  very  embrace.  Bacchus,  fulfil  thy  pledge,  and  prefer
no  woman  before  the  love  of  a  wife,  one  who  was
ever  accustomed  to  love  her  husband.  The  horns  of  a
handsome  bull  captivated  my  mother ;  thy  horns,  me  ; S6
they   commend    me ;    the    other    was     a    disgraceful    pas-

84  Thy  'plighted  faith.'] — Ver.  485-6.     Gower's  version  is —
*  Ah !  where's  thy  faith  ?     Those  solemn  vows  indented.

Ah  me  !  how  oft  have  I  these  dirges  vented/

85  Of  fair  complexion. — Ver.  493.  This  is  meant  ironically,  as  Bacchus
would  not  be  very  likely  to  meet  with  a  '  Candida  pellex'  in  his  Indian
excursion,  unless,  indeed,  he  took  Georgia  or  Circassia  in  his  road.

86  Thy  horns ,  me.'] — Ver.  500.  Bacchus  was  frequently  represented
with  horns.  He  seems  to  have  been  worshipped  by  the  Thracians  and  the
Phrygians  under  the  name  of  Sabazius  and  in  the  form  of  an  ox. — Keight-
ley's  Mythology  of  Greece  and  Rome,  p.  168.  Neptune  gave  Minos  a
bull,  which,  on  account  of  its  beauty,  he  refused  to  sacrifice  to  the  god.  On
this,  Neptune  inspired  Pasiphae,  the  daughter  of  Minos,  with  love  for  the
animal,  and  the  Minotaur,  half  man  and  half  beast,  was  the  fruit  of  this
passion.  Perhaps  the  truth  is,  that  Pasiphae  had  an  intrigue  with  a
person  named  Taurus  (which  also  signifies  in  Latin  '  a  bull'),  and  had
twins  by  him,  whom  she  named  Minos  and  Taurus.


B.  in.  501— 520.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OP   OVID.  Ill

siou.  Let  not  my  love  prove  an  injury  to  me ;  for,
Bacchus,  it  was  no  harm  to  thee  that  thou  thyself  didst  con-
fess thy  love.  And,,  indeed,  thou  dost  nothing  strange  in
kindling  a  flame s7  in  me  :  in  fire  thou  art  said  to  have  been
born,ss  and  from  fire  to  have  been  snatched,  by  the  hand  of
thy  father.  I  am  she  to  whom  thou  wast  wont  to  promise
heaven  ;  Ah,  me  !  instead  of  heaven,  what  kind  of  gifts  am  I
now  receiving  V  She  had  said  ;  for  a  long  time  had  Bacchus
been  listening89  to  her  words  while  thus  complaining,  as
by  chance  he  had  been  following  after  her.  He  clasps  her
in  his  embraces,  and,  with  kisses,  dries  away  her  tears,  and
he  says,  "  Together,  let  us  seek  the  heights  of  heaven  ;"
united  to  me  in  wedlock,  thou  shalt  take  a  united  epithet.90
Henceforth,  thy  name  altered  shall  be  Libera.  I  will  cause,
too,  that  with  thee  there  shall  be  a  memorial  of  thy  crown,
which  Vulcan  gave  to  Venus,  she  to  thee.  He  keeps  his
word,  and  transforms  its  nine  jewels  into  stars  ;  by  means  of
nine  stars  it  still  glitters  in  its  golden  radiance.

When  he  who  bears  the  purple  day  upon  his  rapid  car  shall
have  completed  six  risings,  and  as  many  settings  of  his  orb,
then  shall  you  behold  the  second  Equiria  on  the  grassy  plain
which  Tiber  bounds  on  its  verge  with  its  winding  waters.

37  Kindling  aflame.'] — Ver.  503.  There  is  a  play  here  upon  the  word
'  uro/  '  to  burn/  which  also  means,  in  a  figurative  sense,  *  to  inflame  with
passion/

88  To  have  been  born.'] — Ver.  504.  Semele,  the  mother  of  Bacchus,  at
the  instigation  of  Juno,  bound  Jupiter  by  an  oath  to  grant  her  request,
and  then  desired  that  he  would  present  himself  to  her,  accompanied  by
his  lightnings  and  celestial  effulgence.  Unable  to  endure  his  presence,  she
was  consumed  in  the  flames,  and  Bacchus,  with  whom  she  was  then  eight
months  pregnant,  was  snatched  by  the  nymph  Dirce  from  the  flames,
and  placed  in  the  thigh  of  Jupiter  until  the  remaining  month  was  accom-
plished.

9  Was  Bacchus  listening.] — Ver.  508-9.  Gower's  version  of  these
lines  is —

i  She  ended.     Bacchus  all  the  while  did  mind  her
Lamenting,  as,  by  chance,  he  came  behind  her.
He  clips  her  waste,  and  tears  with  kisses  dries/

90  A  united  epithet.]— Ver.  511.  Ovid  is  the  only  writer  that  identifies
Ariadne  with  the  goddess  *  Libera/  Cicero  and  other  Latin  authors  make
her  to  be  the  same  with  Proserpine.  Perhaps  she  was  originally  a  distinct
deity ;  but,  in  consequence  of  the  similarity  of  their  offices  and  of  their
ceremonials,  in  lapse  of  time  they  became  confounded.


112  THE  FASTI  ;  [b.  hi.  521—  534.

But  if  perchance  this  shall  be  covered  by  the  flooding  wave,
then  let  the  dusty  Cselian  plain91  receive  the  steeds.

On  the  Ides  is  the  mirthful  festival  of  Anna  Perenna,  not
far  from  thy  banks,  thou  Tiber,92  that  flowest  from  afar.  The
common  people  assemble,  and  carouse  scattered  in  every  quar-
ter on  the  green  grass  ; 93  each  with  his  sweetheart  is  there
reclining.  Some  spend  their  time  in  the  open  air,  some  pitch
their  tents  ;  by  some  a  leafy  bower  is  formed  of  branches.
Some,  when  they  have  fixed  up  reeds  there  in  the  stead  of  solid
columns,  place  over  them  their  garments  spread  out.  Yet,94
with  the  sun  and  the  wine,  do  they  wax  warm ;  they  pray  for
years  as  many  in  number  as  the  cups  they  quaff,  and  reckon
on  as  they  drink.  There  you  will  meet  with  the  man  who
can  drink  off  the  years  of   Nestor ; 95    the  woman  who  be-

91  Dusty  Ccelian  plain.'] — Ver.  522.  We  have  already  observed  that
when  the  Tiber  overflowed  the  Campus  Martius,  the  races  were  run  upon
a  spot  which  formed  part  of  the  Caelian  hill.  It  was  originally  called
*  Querquetulanus/  from  its  oaks,  '  quercus,'  with  which  trees  it  abounded.
Its  later  name  was  derived  from  Cselus  Vibennius,  an  Etrurian,  who
assisted  Romulus  against  the  Sabines,  and  received  this  piece  of  ground  as
his  reward.

92  Thou  Tiber."] — Ver.  524.  This  spot  was  called  the  grove  of  Anna
Perenna,  and  was  between  the  Milvian  bridge  and  the  point  of  confluence
of  the  Tiber  and  the  river  Anio.  He  calls  the  Tiber,  fadvena/
1  stranger/  (here  rendered,  '  flowing  from  afar,)  because  it  took  its  rise  in
the  Apennines,  which,  at  the  time  when  Rome  was  founded,  formed  almost
the  central  part  of  Etruria.

93  On  the  green  grass.] — Ver.  525-6.  This  festival,  in  its  excess  of
revelry  and  many  other  characteristics,  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of
Roman  Greenwich  Fair.  '  Cum  pare  sua'  is  literally  '  with  his  equal/  or
'  his  mate/  It  is  as  likely  to  mean  'a  sweetheart'  as  'a  wife/  perhaps,
from  the  nature  of  the  carousals,  a  little  more  so.  Gower  translates
these  two  lines  thus —

'  All  sorts  together  flock ;  and  on  the  ground
Displaid,  each  marrow  by  her  make  drinks  round/

The  word  '  marrow'  is  still  used  in  the  north  of  England,  to  signify  *  an
equal/  or  '  one  of  a  pair/     *  Make/  is  the  old  form  of  the  word,  i  mate.'

94  Yet.] — Ver.  531.  That  is  to  say,  *  in  spite  of  the  exposure  of  most
of  them  to  the  open  air/  or,  as  Mr.  Stanford  suggests,  '  notwithstanding
the  shade  they  had  formed  by  extending  their  cloaks  upon  the  upright
reeds,  and  their  reclining  beneath  them.'

95  The  years  of  Nestor.] — Ver.  533.  He  speaks  with  a  fair  allow-
ance of  poetic  license  when  he  says  that  some  are  to  be  seen  who
can  quaff  as  many  cups  (cyathi)  as  Nestor  had  years.  Nestor  was  the
son  of  Eleus,    and   was  king  of  Pylos.     He   assisted  Pirithoiis  against


b.  in.  534— 542.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  113

comes  old  as  the  Sibyl  by  the  number  of  lier  cups.  There,
too,  they  sing  whatever  snatches  they  have  picked  up  at  the
theatres,  and  move  their  pliant  arms96  in  time  to  their  words.
And  now,  having  laid  aside  the  bowl,  they  trip97  the  uncouth
dance,  and  many  a  gaily  dressed  wench  skips  about  with  her
locks  flowing.  When  they  return  to  their  seats,  they  stagger,
and  are  a  gazing  sight  for  the  mob,  and  the  multitude  that
meets  them  pronounces  them  to  be  glorious  souls.  I  myself
met  them  lately ;  the  procession  seemed  to  me  one  that  was
worthy  to  be  mentioned  again.  A  drunken  old  hag  was  drag-
ging after  her  a  drunken  old  man.93

the  Centaur,  and  afterwards  shared  in  the  Grecian  expedition  against
Troy.  The  poets  say  that  he  was  then  in  his  two  hundredth  year,  as  being
in  the  third  generation,  ykvea.  This  is  an  error,  as  that  term  signified  but
thirty  years:  consequently  we  may  allow  him  ninety  years,  which  number
must  have  pretty  well  taken  up  the  day  of  the  drinker.  It  must,  however,
be  remembered,  that  the  'cyathus'  was  a  definite  measure,  being  one-twelfth
part  of  a  sextarius,  which  was  not  quite  a  pint,  and  that  it  was  conse-
quently less  than  one-third  of  our  common  gill.  Pliny,  in  his  Natural
History,  Book  xiv.  c.  22,  s.  26,  speaks  of  Noveilus  Torquatus  Mediolanensis,
who  obtained  the  cognomen  of  'Tricongius,'  from  his  drinking  three  'congii7
of  wine  at  one  sitting.  The  '  congius ?  held  six  '  sextarii/  or  nearly  six
pints.  It  is  a  matter  in  dispute  among  antiquarians,  whether  the  vessel
called  'cyathus'  means  the  cup  from  which  the  Romans  drank,  or  the  ladle
with  which  the  cups  were  filled  from  the  bowl,  corresponding  with  our
punch-ladle,  or  rather,  in  capacity,  with  the  toddy-ladles  of  the  Scotch.
'Bibere  ad  numerum,'  'to  drink  their  number,'  would  seem  most  probably
to  refer  to  the  number  of  ladlefuls  that  were  placed  at  one  sitting  in  the
drinking-glass,  or  cup,  of  each  person.

96  Move  their  pliant  arms.] — Ver.  536.  In  all  ages  it  seems  to  be  a
prevalent  notion  with  the  unrefined,  that  the  dance  cannot  be  graceful  or
complete  without  the  continual  and  independent  action  of  the  arms  and
elbows.  As  a  proof,  witness  a  Highlander  dancing  a  fling,  an  Irishman  a
jig,  or  a  Northumbrian  peasant  a  reel.

97  They  trip."] — Yer.  539.     Gower's  version  is  as  follows  :

'  Bowk  set  aside,  each  with  his  trickt-up  lass,
Whose  hairs  are  loosened,  trips  it  on  the  grass/

98  A  drunken  old  man.] — Ver.  542.  Heinsius,  Burmann,  and  other
commentators,  think  that  some  lines  are  wanting  after  this,  as  the  poet
seems  by  his  words  to  promise  a  longer  story.  Burmann  supposes  that
the  monkish  transcribers  omitted  them  on  account  of  their  indelicacy.  Why
they  should  all  have  agreed  to  make  this  omission  in  the  numerous  manu-
scripts which  still  exist,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive,  as  no  such  fastidiousness
seems  to  have  actuated  them  in  transcribing  the  works  of  Juvenal,  Martial,
or  Ausonius,  writers  of  far  more  gross  diction  than  Ovid.  There  appears
no  occasion  for  such  a  supposition,  as  the  sense  seems  complete  without

I


114  THE   FASTI;  [b.  hi.  542—559.

But  as  to  the  question  who  this  Goddess  is,  since  there  is  a
wide  difference  between  the  accounts,  no  one  of  the  stories
shall  be  unnoticed  according  to  my  purpose.  The  wretched
Dido89  had  been  consumed  by  her  love  for  iEneas  ;  she  had
been  consumed  also  on  the  funeral  pile  which  she  had  built
up  for  her  own  destruction :  her  ashes,  too,  had  been  col-
lected, and  on  the  marble  tablet  of  her  tomb  was  this  brief
epitaph,  which  she  herself  left  when  dying  : — "  iEneas  fur-
nished both  the  cause  of  death  and  the  weapon ;  Dido  fell  by
her  own  hand."  Forthwith  the  Numidians  invade  the  realm,
now  without  a  defender.  The  Moor  Iarba  possesses  himself
of  the  captured  palace  ;  and  remembering  how  he  had  been
rejected,  he  cries,  "  Only  see,  how  I,  whom  she  so  often  re-
pulsed, am  now  enjoying  the  chamber  of  Elissa!"  The
Tyrians  fly  in  different  directions,  wherever  each  in  his  wan-
derings is  led,  as  when  at  times  the  bees  stray  about  unsettled,
having  lost  their  king.  Thrice  had  the  threshing  floor  re-
ceived the  harvest  to  be  beaten  out,  and  thrice  had  the  must
been  poured  into  the  hollow  vats.1     Anna  is  driven  from  her

having  recourse  to  it.  The  poet  appears  to  mean,  that  they  put  aside  their
drinking,  and  stand  up,  perhaps  at  some  distance,  for  a  dance ;  that,  after  the
excitement  of  the  dance,  combined  with  the  wine,  has  made  them  dizzy,  they
return  to  their  places  where  they  were  sitting  before,  and  as  they  can  hardly
stand  up,  their  companions  call  them  merry  souls.  He  then  seems  to  say
that  he  was  one  day  walking  in  this  Greenwich  Park  of  Rome,  and  he  per-
haps heard  some  shouting,  and  saw  a  crowd.  He  stopped  to  see  what  it
was.  He  found  that  it  was  a  troop  of  people  running  along  in  company  with
a  drunken  old  woman,  who  had  hold  of  a  drunken  old  man  (probably  her
husband),  and  who  from  the  dance  were  reeling  back  to  their  seats,  per-
haps within  the  'tentorial  This  mob,  then,  was  the  'porapa,'  and  the  rich-
ness of  the  scene — this  much  ado  about  nothing — made  it  'digna  relatu,'
4 worthy  of  mention.'  'Pompa'  means  literally  'a  troop  in  procession,
escorting  or  attending  upon  some  other  person  or  object,'  and  he  may  use
it  here  in  an  ironical  sense.

99  Dido.~\ — Ver.  545.  The  story  of  Dido  and  iEneas  is  recounted  at
length  in  the  iEneid  of  Virgil,  from  his  kind  reception  by  her  in  the  First
Book,  to  his  base  betrayal  and  desertion  of  her  in  the  Fourth  Book.  Virgil,
however,  does  not  seem  to  think  that  by  his  acts  in  this  matter  he  at  all
forfeited  his  claim  to  the  title  of  'pius  iEneas.'  Elissa  was  her  original
name:  she  was  called  'Dido'  after  her  death.  In  the  Punic  tongue  the  latter
word  signified  'the  bold  woman.'

1  The  hollow  vats.} — Ver.  558-.  'Lacus'  means  literally  'ponds,'  or
'lakes.'  This  was  the  name  given  to  all  tubs  or  casks  for  liquor,  especially
the  vat  into  which  the  wine  flowed  when  pressed.  The  'must,'  'mustum,'
wau  the  juice  of  the  grape  when  just  pressed  out.


B.  III.  559— 576.]         OK,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  115

home,  and  creeps  as  she  leaves  her  sister's  walls  ;  yet  first  she
performs  the  funereal  offices  for  her  sister.  The  light  ashes
soak  up  the  perfumes 2  mixed  with  her  tears,  and  receive  the
locks  cut  from  her  head  as  an  offering.  Thrice,  too,  did  she
say,  "Farewell;"  thrice  did  she  press  the  ashes  brought
close  to  her  lips,  and  in  them  her  sister  seemed  to  be  present.
Having  found  a  bark,3  and  a  companion  of  her  flight,  she  sails
along  straight  before  the  wind,4  as  she  looks  back  upon  those
walls,  the  loved  work  of  her  sister.  Near  to  the  barren  Cosyra
is  the  fruitful  isle  of  Melite,5  which  the  billow  of  the  Libyan
sea  dashes  against.  For  this  isle  she  makes,  relying  upon  her
former  terms  of  friendship6  with  the  king ;  Battus,  her  friend,
abounding  in  wealth,  was  the  ruler  there.  After  he  had
learned  the  misfortunes  of  each  of  the  two  sisters,  he  says,
"  This  land,  such  as,  small  as  it  is,  thou  mayst  find  it  to  be,  is
thine."  And,  in  fact,  he  would,  to  the  very  last,  have  observed
the  duties  of  hospitality,  had  he  not  feared  the  great  power
of  Pygmalion.7  Twice  had  the  sun  revisited  his  Constella-
tions ;  the  third  year  was  speeding  onward,  and  a  new  land


2  Soak  up  the  perfumes.'] — Ver.  561.  The  ancients  were  accustomed
to  pour  wine  and  oils  of  great  value  on  the  ashes  of  the  dead.  They  also
cut  from  the  head  handfuls  of  hair,  which  they  threw  on  the  funeral  pile.

3  Having  found  a  bark.] — Ver.  565.  Some  accounts  state,  that  Anna
was  obliged  to  fly  instantly  upon  her  sister's  death  from  the  wrath  of
Iarbas:  and  that  Dido  put  herself  to  death  to  escape  his  vengeance,
excited  by  her  determined  refusal  of  an  alliance  with  him.

4  Straight  before  the  wind.] — Ver.  565.  Or,  as  the  sailors  say,  'with  the
wind  right  aft.'  The  'pes'  here  mentioned  was  the  'halser/  or  'rope/  sus-
pended from  the  lower  angles  of  the  sail,  by  which  it  might  be  hauled  to
the  wind,  or  hauled  in  or  veered  out  at  pleasure.  The  expression  is  lite-
rally, 'with  the  halser  on  a  level/  probably  with  the  deck,  from  which
position  the  wind  blowing  on  either  side  would  cause  it  to  swerve.

5  Melite.] — Ver.  567.  This  is  the  island  o£  Malta,  in  the  Mediterranean.
There  was  also  an  island  of  that  name  in  the  Adriatic  sea,  which  is  now
called  Melida.  Cosyra,  now  called  Gozzo,  is  a  barren,  rocky  island,  be-
tween Sicily  and  the  coast  of  Africa,  about  seven  leagues  in  length.

6  Terms  of  friendship.] — Ver.  569.  Melita  had  been  colonized  by  the
Phoenicians.  Battus  was  the  son  of  Polymnestus  and  Phronime.  His  name
was  Aristoteles,  but  he  was  called  Battus  from  having  an  impediment  in
his  speech.

7  Pygmalion.] — Ver.  574.  He  was  the  son  of  Pygmalius,  and  brother
of  Dido  and  Anna.  According  to  others,  he  was  the  son  of  Belus,  He
murdered  Sichseus,  the  husband  of  Dido,  to  obtain  his  wealth,  on  which
Dido  and  Anna  fled  from  Tyre,  where  he  reigned.

12


116  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  hi  576—604.

must  be  sought  by  the  exiles.  "  Thy  brother  is  at  hand,  and
assails  us  in  war/'  says  the  king,  who  detested  arms  ;  "  we
are  not  prepared  for  warfare  ;  fly  and  preserve  thyself."  At
his  bidding  she  flies,  and  to  wind  and  waves  she  trusts  her
bark ;  her  brother  was  more  cruel  than  any  sea.  Near  to
the  fishy  streams  of  the  craggy  Crathis,8  there  is  a  little  spot ;
the  people  that  inhabit  it  call  it  Camere.  Thither  was  her
course  directed ;  and  now  she  was  not  further  oif  from  it  than
the  distance  which  at  nine  casts  a  sling  might  throw.  The
sails  fall  first,  and  are  flapped  to  and  fro  by  the  fitful  gale.
"  Cleave  the  waters  with  your  oars !"  cries  the  pilot ;  and  while
they  are  preparing  to  furl  their  canvass  with  the  twisted  tackle,
the  crooked  poop  is  struck  by  a  violent  blast  from  the  south ;
the  ship  is  borne  out  into  the  open  sea,  and  the  land  which
they  had  seen,  now  retreats  from  their  eyes.  The  billows
dash  against  them,  the  ocean  is  upturned  from  its  lowest
depths,  and  the  hold  of  the  vessel  ships  the  foaming  seas.  Skill
is  baffled  by  the  winds ;  the  steersman  now  foregoes9  the  use
of  the  helm ;  but  he,  as  well  as  the  others,  asks  help  in  prayer.
The  exile  of  Phoenicia  is  tossed  over  the  swelling  billows,  and
with  her  garments  held  close  she  covers  her  tearful  eyes.
Then  for  the  first  time  was  Dido  pronounced  happy  by  her
sister,  and  whoever  in  death  has  pressed  with  his  body  any
spot  of  land.  By  a  heavy  blast,  the  vessel  is  dashed  upon  the
Laurentine  shore,  and  all  having  disembarked  in  time,  it
perishes,  engulfed  in  the  ocean.

Already  had  the  pious  iEneas  been  blessed  with  the  throne
and  the  daughter  of  Latinus,  and  had  blended  the  two  nations.9*
While  along  the  shore,  which  he  had  gained  as  a  dowry,
attended  by  Achates  alone,  with  naked  foot10  he  treads  the

8  The  craggy  Crathis.] — Ver.  581.  This  was  a  river  of  Magna  Grsecia,
now  Calabria.  It  waters  Consentia,  now  Cozenza,  the  capital  of  the  Brut-
tii,  and  falls  into  the  Gulf  of  Tarentum.  Its  present  name  is  '  Crate.'  It
rises  in  the  crags  of  the  Apennines,  hence  its  epithet  here.

9  The  steersman  now  foregoes.] — Ver.  593-4.     Gower's  translation  is,

1  Up  start  the  waves,  and  upside  down  they  wallow:
The  leaking  keel  the  foaming  streams  doth  swallow ;
Winds  non-plus  art/
9*  The  two  nations.'] — "Ver.  602.     Namely,  the  Trojans  and  the  Latins,
the  original  inhabitants.     How  iEneas  gained  the  hand  of  Lavinia,  and
conquered  Turnus,  is  the  subject  of  the  latter  books  of  the  iEneid.

10  With  naked  foot.] — Ver.  604.     This  would  seem  to  imply  that  he  was


b.  in.  604— 634.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OP   OYI.D.  117

solitary  path,  he  beholds  her  as  she  wanders  along,  nor  can  he
bring  himself  to  believe  that  it  is  Anna.  Why  should  she
come  to  the  Latian  land  ?  While  iEneas  thus  debates  within
himself,  "  It  is  Anna!"  cries  Achates.  At  the  name  she  raised
her  eyes.  Whither  is  she  to  fly?  What  is  she  to  do?  What
chasms  of  the  earth  is  she  to  seek  ?  Before  her  eyes  is  the
fate  of  her  wretched  sister.  The  heroic  son  of  Cytherea
divines  her  thoughts,  and  thus  he  addresses  her  in  her  agita-
tion ;  he  weeps,  however,  Elissa,  at  the  recollection  of  thy
death.  (i  Anna,  by  this  land  I  swear,  which,  formerly  thou
wast  wont  to  hear,  was  bestowed  on  me  by  a  happier  destiny,
and.  by  the  Gods  who  have  accompanied11  my  wandei'ings,
lately  settled  in  this  their  home,  that  many  a  time  did  they
chide  my  loitering.  And  yet  did  I  have  no  apprehension  of  her
death ;  that  fear  was  far  from  my  mind.  Ah,  me !  more
determined  was  she  than  could  have  been  possibly  imagined.
Tell  not  the  tale  ;  I  beheld  in  that  breast  the  wounds  that  ill
beseemed  it,  when  I  dared  to  visit  the  abodes  of  Tartarus.12
But  thou,  whether  thy  choice,  or  whether  fortune  has  driven
thee  to  my  shores,  do  thou  avail  thyself  of  the  resources  of
my  kingdom ;  I  am  still  mindful  that  T  owe  much  to  thee,
and  everything  to  Elissa ;  on  thy  own  account,  on  the  account
of  thy  sister,  shalt  thou  be  dear  to  me."  She  believed  him  as
he  spoke,  for  now  no  other  hope  remained ;  and  then  she  de-
tailed her  wanderings.  And  when  she  now  enters  his  house,
arrayed  in  her  Tyrian  attire,  iEneas  thus  begins,  ivhile  the
rest  are  all  silent;  "Lavinia,  my  wife,  there  is  a  reason,
prompted  by  duty,  why  I  should  introduce  to  thee  this  lady.
When  shipwrecked,  I  partook  of  her  bounty.  Sprung  from
Tyre,  she  possessed  a  realm  on  the  Libyan  shore ;  and  I  beg
that  as  a  dear  sister  thou  wilt  love  her."  Lavinia  makes  every
engagement,  and  hides  the  causeless  wound  of  jealousy  in  her
secret  soul,    and,  though   indignant,    disguises   her  feelings.

merely  sauntering  along,  and  that  he  was  not  proceeding  on  any  business
of  emergency,  which  might  require  dispatch  and  the  use  of  sandals.

11  The  Gods  who  have  accompanied.'} — Ver.  615.  The  Penates  that  he
brought  with  him  from  Troy.

12  The  abodes  of  Tartarus."] — Ver.  620.  His  descent  to  Tartarus,  or
the  infernal  regions,  and  his  meeting  with  the  spirit  of  Dido,  are  narrated
in  the  sixth  Book  of  the  iEneid.  Cytherea  was  an  appellation  of  Venus,
the  mother  ofiEneas,  from  the  island  of  Cythera,  on  the  coast  of  Laconia
which  was  dedicated  to  her  worship.


118  THE  FASTI;  [b.  in.  635— 656.

And  now,  when  she  sees  many  presents  made  openly  before
her  eyes,  and  suspects  that  many,  too,  are  given  secretly —
and  yet  it  is  not  certain  what  she  is  to  do ;  she  hates  her  to
a  degree  of  frenzy,  and  plans  her  secret  plots,  and  longs  to
die,  having  wreaked  her  vengeance.  It  was  night ;  before  the
bed  of  her  sister,  Dido  seemed  to  stand,  bloodstained,  with  her
hair  dishevelled,  and  to  say,  "  Fly !  pause  not !  fly  from  this
direful  house."  Just  at  the  word,  the  breeze  shakes  the  creaking
doors,  she  leaps  from  the  bed,  and  swiftly  she  flings  her-
self from  a  low  window  upon  the  plain.  Her  very  fear  had  made
her  bold,  and  clad  with  her  robe  untied,13  she  runs,  whither
by  her  terrors  she  is  hurried,  as  the  deer  when  frightened  on
hearing  the  wolves,  The  horned  Numicius14  is  believed  to
have  snatched  her  away  in  his  amorous  streams,  and  to  have
concealed  her  in  his  pools.  In  the  meantime,  the  Sidonian15
is  sought  along  the  fields  with  loud  shouts  ;  there  appear  her
traces  and  the  marks  of  her  feet.  They  had  reached  the  banks
of  the  river;  the  impress  of  her  feet  was  upon  them ;  the
conscious  river  stayed  his  noiseless  stream.  She  herself  ap-
peared to  say,  "  I  am  a  Nymph  of  the  gently  flowing  Numi-
cius  ;  concealed  in  the  stream  with  constant  tide,  I  am  named
Anna  Perenna."16  Forthwith,  in  their  joy  they  feast  in  the
fields  they  had  wandered  over,  and  they  do  honour  to  them-
selves17 and  to  the  day  with  a  profusion  of  wine.

13  With  her  robe  untied.'] — Ver.  645-6.     Gower's  translation  is,

'  And  wing'd  with  terror  in  her  tuck'd-up  coat,
Runs  like  a  roe  that  hears  the  wolf's  hoarse  note/

14  The  horned  Numicius.] — Ver.  647.  This  river  was  between  Lauren-
turn  and  Lavinium.  'Corniger,'  'horn  bearing,' is  an  epithet  frequently-
given  to  rivers  by  the  poets,  from  the  windings  of  their  stream,  and  the
roaring  of  their  eddies.

15  The  Sidonian.] — Ver.  649.  Sidon  was  a  city  of  Phoenicia,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Tyre,  and  its  rival  in  maritime  pursuits.  '  Sidonian'
here  means  simply  'Phoenician.'

16  Anna  Perenna.] — Ver.  653-4.     Gower's  translation  is,

'  She  seemed  to  speak:  Numicius  nymph,  I  live  here;
Perennall  Anne  of  this  Perennall  river.'

The  poet  seems  here  to  imply,  that  she  took  her  name  from  'amnisperen-
nis,'  'the  ever-flowing  river.'

V  Do  honour  to  themselves.] — Ver.  656.  Some  commentators  would
translate  'se'  by  'Genium,'  'they  honour  the  festival  and  their  own  per-
sonal Genius  at  the  same  time.'     Perhaps  it  simply  means,  'they  honour


b.  in.  657—674.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OTID.  119

There  are  some  who  look  upon  this  Goddess  as  the  moon,
because  with  her  months  she  fills  up  the  measure  of  the  year ;
some  think  her  Themis;15  others  the  Inachian  cow.  Thou
wilt  find,  Anna,  some  ivko  say  that  thou  art  a  Nymph,  a
daughter  of  Atlas,  and  others  ivho  say  that  thou  didst  give  to
Jove  his  first  food.  This  story,  too,  which  I  am  going  to
relate,  has  come  to  my  ears,  and  it  is  not  at  variance  with
probability.  The  commonalty  of  olden  time,  as  yet  unpro-
tected by  their  Tribunes,  had  fled,  and  taken  refuge  on  the  top
of  the  sacred  Mount.19  And  now,  the  provisions  which  they
had  brought  with  them  had  failed  ;  their  bread  corn,  too,
suited  to  the  use  of  man.  There  was  one  Anna,  born  at
Bovillae,-0  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city,  a  poor  old  woman,  but  a
person  of  great  industry.  She,  having  her  grey  locks  bound
with  a  light  turban,  used  to  make  her  country  cakes  with
shaking  hand;21  and  so,  early  in  the  morning,  she  used  to
distribute  them  smoking  hot  among  the  people ;  to  them
this  supply  was  welcome.  Peace  being  now  established  at
home,  they  erected  a  statue  to  Perenna,22  because  in  their  state

the  day,  and  pay  a  compliment  to  themselves  for  the  pains  they  have  taken
in  seeking  her.'

18  Themis.'] — Ver.  658.  Hyginus  says,  that  she  was  the  daughter  of
^Ether  or  Jupiter,  and  Terra.  She  had  a  temple  near  the  river  Cephisus,
in  Boeotia,  and  she  was  the  instructor  of  mankind  in  the  principles  of  piety
and  justice.

19  The  sacred  Mount.] — Ver.  664.  This  was  the  'Mons  sacer,'  to  which
the  commonalty  at  Rome,  at  the  instigation  of  Sicinius  retired,  on  their
secession  from  the  Patricians,  a.u.c  250.  It  was  beyond  the  Anio,  three
miles  distant  from  the  city.  On  this  occasion  they  enforced  their  right  to
elect  magistrates  of  their  own,  whom  they  called  'Tribuni,'  either  because
elected  by  the  suffrages  of  the  tribes,  or  selected  from  the  military  tribunes.
It  was  on  the  occasion  of  this  secession  that  Menenius  Agrippa  related  the
now  well-known  fable  of  the  'Belly  and  the  Members.'

20  Bovillce.] — Ver.  667.  This  was  a  town  of  Latium,  on  the  Appian
way.  It  was  so  called  from  'bos,'  'an  ox/  which  in  early  times  had
escaped  from  an  altar  on  the  Alban  Mount,  and  was  caught  upon  the  site
of  the  town.  He  speaks  of  it  as  being  'suburbana,'  to  distinguish  it  from
another  town  of  the  same  name  in  Campania,  near  Sinuessa.

21  With  shaking  hand.] — Ver.  669-70.  Gower  translates  these  lines
thus: —

'  She  in  a  hood  her  gray  hairs  having  dress'd,
Made  country  cymnels  with  her  palsie  fist.'

In  Shropshire  they  still  make  'simnel  cakes.'

22  Statue  to  Perenna.] — Ver.  673.     This  account  gives  but  a  very  silly


120  THE  FASTI;  [b.  in.  674—702.

of  destitution  she  had  brought  them  relief.  Now  it  re-
mains for  me  to  say,  why  at  this  time  the  girls  sing  inde-
cent songs ;  for  they  assemble  and  repeat  by  rote  indelicate  abuse.
She  had  been  lately  deified ;  Mars  Gradivus  comes  to  Anna,
and  taking  her  aside,  he  utters  some  such  words  as  these  : —
"  Thou  art  worshipped  in  my  month ;  I  have  shared  my  period
of  the  year  with  thee  ;  on  thy  services  depends  a  great  hope
of  mine.  I,  a  warrior  myself,  am  inflamed,  consuming  with
the  love  of  Minerva,  the  warrior  Goddess;  and  long  have  I
cherished  this  passion.  Provide  that  we,  who  are  Deities,
similar  in  our  pursuits,  should  come  together ;  this  office
befits  thee,  thou  good-natured  old  lady."  He  had  said  ;  she
trifles  with  the  God  with  a  false  promise,  and  in  the  delays  of
doubt  spins  out  his  silly  expectations.  As  he  presses  her
more  frequently,  she  says  to  him,  "  I  have  executed  thy  in-
structions, she  yielded  to  my  solicitations ;  but  with  difficulty
has  she  given  her  hand/'  The  lover  is  delighted,  and  makes
ready  the  bridal  chamber ;  thither  is  Anna  conducted,  veiling
her  face  as  a  bride.  Mars,  just  as  he  is  about  to  snatch  a
kiss,  suddenly  catches  sight  of  Anna's  face  ;  first,  shame,  then
rage  influences  the  baffledGod.  The  newly -made  Goddess  laughs
at  the  lover  of  his  dear  Minerva,  and  there  was  no  circumstance
more  pleasing  to  Venus  than  this.  It  is  by  reason  of  this
occurrence  that  old-fashioned  jokes  and  indelicate  sayings  are
sung,  and  delight  is  manifested  that  she  thus  imposed  on  the
mighty  God.

I  was  on  the  point  of  omitting  to  mention  the  daggers  that
pierced  our  prince,  when  from  her  unpolluted  shrine  thus
Vesta  spoke  : — "  Hesitate  not  to  record  it — he  was  my  priest;23
the  sacrilegious  hands  assailed  me  with  their  weapons.  I
myself  bore  away  the  hero,  and  I  left  but  a  mere  semblance

origin  to  the  worship  of  the  Goddess,  as  he  makes  her  name  to  be  derived
from  this  old  woman,  either  because  her  name  was  'Anna/  or  because  she
was  an  old  woman,  'anus/  The  name  was  most  probably  derived  from
'annus/  'a  year/  for  some  reason  now  unknown,  and  had  nothing  to  do
with  Dido's  sister,  whose  story,  very  probably,  the  poet  adapted  to  his
ideas  of  etymology.

23  He  was  my  priest.] — Ver.  699.  Being 'Pontifex  Maximus/  it  was
incumbent  on  him  to  take  charge  of  the  sacrifices  to  Vesta.  Julius  Caesar
was  assassinated  on  the  ides  of  March,  a.tj.c.  709.  The  senate  decreed
that  this  day  should  in  future  be  called '  Parricidium/  and  that  they  should
hold  no  sittings  on  it.


B.  ill.  702—721.]  OE,   CALENDAR   OP    OTID.  121

of  him  ;  that  which  fell  by  the  steel  was  but  the  phantom  of
Csesar.  He,  indeed,  enthroned  in  heaven,  has  gone  to  tenant
the  halls  of  Jove,  and  owns  a  temple  consecrated  to  him  in
the  gret  t  Forum.24  But  every  one  of  those,  who,  daring  this
crime,  despite  of  the  will  of  the  Gods,  assailed  the  life  of
a  Pontiff,  now  lies  still  in  the  death  so  well  merited.25  Witness
it,  Philippi,20  and  ye,  with  whose  scattered  bones  the  ground
is  whitened.  This  was  the  labour,  this  was  the  task  of?  duty,
this  was  the  first  lesson  of  Caesar,  in  just  warfare  to  avenge
his  father.1'

When  the  next  morning  shall  have  refreshed  the  tender
herbage,  the  Scorpion27  will  be  visible  in  his  fore  part  only.

The  third  day  after  the  Ides  is  a  day  universally  observed
in  honour  of  Bacchus.  Bacchus,  while  I  sing  thy  festival,
favour  the  poet.  I  will  not  tell  of  Semele  ;  to  whom  had  not
Jove  brought  with  him  his  thunderbolts,  unarmed  he  was  reck-
oned by  her  a  paltry  object ;  nor  will  I  tell  now  how  the  burden
of  thy  mother  was  matured  in  thy  father's  body,  in  order  that
thou,  a  babe,  mightst  be  born  in  due  time.  'Twere  tedious
to  recount  the  Sithonian23  and  the  Scythian  triumphs,  and  the
conquests  of  thy  nations,  thou  Indian  laden  with  frankincense.
Thou  also,  unhappy  prey  of  thy  Theban  mother,29  shalt  remain

24  The  great  Forum. ,] — Ver.  704.  This  was  the  chief  'Forum'  in  the
city.  It  was  called  either 'the  Roman/  'great,'  or 'old  Forum.'  Three
years  after  his  death  a  temple  was  built  here,  and  consecrated  to  Caesar.

25  Death  so  well  merited.]— ^  tx.  707.  History  tells  us  that  every  per-
son who  took  any  part  in  the  assassination  of  Julius  Caesar  perished
within  three  years  after  his  death.

26  Philippi.] — Yer.  707.  This  was  a  city  of  Macedonia,  near  the
Thracian  territory,  and  close  to  the  iEgean  sea.  It  was  formerly  called
Datos,  but  king  Philip  fortifying  it,  it  received  its  new  name  from  him.
Here  Brutus  and  Cassius  were  defeated  by  Augustus  and  Antony,  on
which  Cassius  was,  at  his  own  request,  killed  by  one  of  his  freedmen,  and
Brutus  fell  by  his  own  hand.

27  The  Scorpion.'] — Ver.  712.  On  the  17th  of  the  calends  of  April
is  the  cosmical  rising  of  the  middle  of  the  Scorpion.  Hyginus  tells  us  that
Orion,  boasting  of  his  skill  as  a  hunter,  Tellus  sent  a  scorpion  which
killed  him  by  its  sting.  Jupiter  raised  the  Scorpion  among  the  stars  as  a
reward  for  the  lesson  which  it  had  taught  to  human  vanity.  At  the  re-
quest of  Diana,  a  like  honour  was  paid  to  Orion,  on  the  condition  that
when  the  Scorpion  rose,  Orion,  as  a  mark  of  his  fear,  should  set.

28  The  Sithonians.] — Yer.  719.  These  were  a  people  of  Thrace,  who,
with  the  Scythians,  were  subdued  by  Bacchus.

29  Thy  Theban  mother.'] — Yer.  721.     Agave  tore  in  pieces  Pentheus,


122  THE   FASTI;  [b.  in.  721— 741.

unmentionecl ;  thou,  too,  Lycurgus,  impelled  by  madness  to
assail  thy  own  knee.  Behold!  'twould  please  me  much  to
tell  of  the  Fishes,30  works  of  sudden  transformation,  and  the
Etrurian  miracles  ;  but  it  is  not  the  province  of  this  My  poem.
The  province  of  this  my  song  is  now  to  relate  the  reasons  why
the  mean  old  woman  invites  the  citizens  to  her  cakes.31  Before
thy  birth,  0  Bacchus,  the  altars  were  without  sacrifice,  and
the  grass  was  found  on  the  cold  hearths.  They  tell  how,
having  subdued  the  Ganges  and  all  the  East,  thou  didst  set
apart  the  first  fruits  for  the  mighty  Jove.  Thou  wast  the  first
to  make  offering  of  cinnamon  and  frankincense,  produce  of
thy  capture,  and  the  roasted  entrails  of  the  ox,  emblem  of  thy
triumph.  From  the  name  of  their  institutor,  the  initial  offer-
ings take  their  name32  of  "  Libaniina"  and  of  "  Liba,"  because
from  them  a  part  is  offered  up  on  the  holy  hearths.  Cakes
are  offered  to  the  God  because  he  takes  delight  in  sweets ;
they  say  that  honey,  too,  was  discovered  by  Bacchus.  He
was  journeying  from  the  sandy  Hebrus,33  attended  by  the
Satyrs  (my  tale  contains  no  unpleasing  humour)  ;  and  they  had
now  reached  Rhodope  and  the  flowery  Pangeeum.  The  cymbal-
bearing  hands  of  his  attendants  join  in  united  clash.  Behold,
winged  insects,  till  then  unknown,  flock  together  at  the  tink-

king  of  Thebes,  her  son  by  Echion,  because  he  forbade  the  celebration  of
the  orgies  of  Bacchus.  Lycurgus,  king  of  Thrace,  denied  the  divinity  of
Bacchus,  and  being  punished  with  insanity,  killed  his  wife  and  child,  and
cut  off  his  own  legs,  mistaking  them  for  vine  branches.  He  was  murdered
by  his  own  subjects,  who  were  forbidden  by  an  oracle  to  taste  wine  till  he
had  been  despatched.  Another  account  is,  that  he  was  slain  by  panthers
sacred  to  Bacchus.

30  To  tell  of  the  Fishes.]— Ver.  723.  This  story  is,  that  some  sailors,
finding  Bacchus  asleep  with  intoxication,  carried  him  off  to  sell  him  as  a
slave.  When  sober,  he  requested  them  to  steer  towards  the  isle  of  Naxos ;
which  they  failing  to  do,  he  turned  them  into  dolphins.

31  To  her  cakes.] — Ver.  726.  Varro  says  that  '  the  feast  of  the  Liberalia
was  so  called  because  on  that  day,  throughout  the  whole  city,  the
priestesses  of  Bacchus,  old  women  crowned  with  ivy,  sit  with  their  cakes
and  chafing-dishes,  and  perform  sacrifice  for  such  as  will  pay  them/

33  Take  their  name.] — Ver.  733.  It  is  much  more  likely,  as  we  have
before  observed,  that  Bacchus  obtained  his  name  of  '  Liber/  from
•  libo,'  in  Greek  \eif3w,  '  to  pour  out,'  which  is  the  root  of  the  word  '  li-
bamen/  signifying  'that  which  is  poured  out  in  sacrifice.'  Ovid  is
frequentlv  more  ingenious  than  correct  in  his  etymology.

33  Hebrus.]—  Ver.  737.  This  was  a  river  of  Thrace,  falling  into  the
iEgean  sea.     Pangaeum  and  Rhodope  were  mountains  of  that  country*


B.  III.  741— 767.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OE   OYID.  123

ling,  and  on  whichever  side  the  brass  sends  forth  its  sounds
the  bees  follow.  Bacchus  collects  them  as  they  wander,  and
shuts  them  in  a  hollow  tree  ;  and  he  enjoys  the  reward  of  the
discovery  of  honey.  Soon  as  the  Satyrs,  and  Silenns,  the
bald-headed  old  man,  tasted  its  flavour,  they  were  seeking
through  the  whole  grove  for  the  yellow  honeycombs.  The
old  man  hears  the  buzzing  of  a  swarm  in  a  decayed  elm  ;  he
spies,  too,  the  combs,  but  declares  that  he  has  made  no  such
discovery.34  And  as  he  is  lazily  lolling  on  the  back  of  his
bending  ass,  he  guides  him  close  to  the  elm  and  its  hollow
bark ;  he  himself,  then,  stands  up  above  his  ass,  resting  on
the  branchy  trunk,  and  now  is  engaged  in  greedily  seeking
the  honey  hoarded  in  the  trunk.  Thousands  of  hornets  fly
together,  and  fix  deep  their  stings  in  his  bare  pate,  and  mark
the  surface35  of  his  countenance.  He  tumbles  headlong,  and
is  struck  by  the  hoof  of  the  ass  ; 36  and  then  he  calls  aloud  on
his  companions,  and  entreats  assistance.  The  Satyrs  run  to
the  spot,  and  laugh  at  the  swollen  face  of  their  parent;  he
limps  about  from  the  blow  on  his  knee.  The  God  himself
laughs  too,  and  teaches  him  how  to  apply  mud  to  the  stings  ;
he  follows  his  advice,  and  with  mud  bedaubs  his  face.  The
father  enjoys  the  honey,  and  with  justice  do  we  offer  to
its  discoverer  the  white  honey  poured  over  the  warm  cake.
Why  a  woman  presides  over  them  is  not  a  matter  of  difficult
discovery.  It  is  he  who  with  his  wreathed  spear  arouses  the
choirs  of  the  women.  Why  it  is  an  old  woman  that  does
this  ?  you  ask.  It  is  this  period  of  life  which  is  more  ad-
dicted to  wine,  and  is  fond  of  the  gifts  of  the  loaded  vine.
You  ask  why  she  is  wreathed  with  the  ivy  ?     The  ivy  is  most

34  Declares  that  he  has  made  no  such  discovery. ~\ — Ver.  748.  Literally,
*  he  dissembles/  that  is  to  say,  he  pretends,  either  by  his  words  or  by  his
conduct,  that  he  has  not  found  any  honey.  '  Simulo'  is  '  to  pretend  that
that  is,  which  is  not ;'  '  dissimulo'  is  '  to  pretend  that  that  is  not,  which  is.'
It  was  not  the  case  that  he  had  made  no  discovery,  but  he  pretended  that
such  was  the  fact.

35  The  surface.'] — Ver.  754.  Perhaps  '  summa'  may  here  be  trans-
lated '  the  projecting  parts'  of  his  countenance,  as  his  nose  and  long  ears.

36  The  hoof  of  the  ass.] — Ver.  755 — 6.     Grower's  translation  is —

1  Down  tumbles  he ;  his  asse  about  him  laid
His  heels  ;  there  lies  he  yawling  out  for  aid.
The  Satyrs  flock  and  laugh,  their  sire  to  see
"With  face  swollen  up.     He  halts  on's  asse-kick'd  knee.'


124  THE  fifem;  [b.  in.  767—  787.

pleasing  to  Bacchus,  and  why  this  is  the  case,  it  will  take  no
length  of  time  to  tell.  The  Nymphs  of  Nysa,37  when  his  step-
mother sought  the  boy,  covered  his  newly-made  cradle  with
this  leaf.  It  remains  for  me  to  discover  why  the  gown  of
freedom38  is  given  to  the  youths  upon  thy  day,  fair  Bacchus  ;
whether  it  is  that  thou  thyself  always  seemest  to  be  both  a  boy
and  a  young  man,  and  thy  age  is  midway  between  the  two  ;  or
that  because  thou  art  a  father,  fathers  commit  their  sons,  their
pledges,  to  thy  care  and  providence  ;  or  that  because  thou  art
"Liber,55  the  "vestis  libera'5  [the  chess  of 'freedom']  is  assumed
under  thy  patronage,  and  the  course  of  a  life  of  more  liberty
is  commenced;  or  perhaps  it  is,  because,  when  the  ancients  cul-
tivated the  fields  with  more  attention,  and  the  senator  on  the
farm  of  his  forefathers  followed  up  the  business  of  agriculture,
and  the  consul  received  the  fasces  coming  from  the  crooked
plough,  and  it  was  no  imputation  on  one's  character  to  have
hard-skinned  hands,  then  the  rustic  population  used  to  come
to  the  games  into  the  city ;  but  that  compliment  was  paid  to
the  Gods,  and  not  to  their  own  private  inclination.  The  dis-
coverer of  the  grape  used  to  hold  the  games  on  his  own
holiday,  which  now  he  holds  in  common  with  the  torch-
bearing  Goddess.39     That  therefore  the  multitude  might  do

37  The  nymphs  of  Nysa.~\ — Ver.  769.  There  was  a  Nysa  in  Thrace,
Boeotia,  India,  and  Arabia.  The  poet  probably  means  the  last,  where
Bacchus  was  entrusted  to  the  nymphs,  that  he  might  be  concealed  from
the  search  of  Juno,  who  was  wishful,  by  his  death,  to  avenge  herself  for
the  infidelity  of  Jupiter.     Gowerthus  translates  lines  765-6 —

'  But  why  old  wives  ?     That  age  most  bouzie  proves,
And  most  of  all  the  pleasing  vine-juyce  loves.'*

38  The  gown  of  freedom. .] — Ver.  771.  The  '  toga  libera'  was  one  of
the  titles  of  the  '  toga  virilis,'  or  '  robe  of  manhood,'  which  was  assumed
on  the  '  Liberalia,'  or  feast  of  Bacchus,  by  the  young  men  who  had  then
arrived  at  the  age  of  seventeen  years,  and  who  then  laid  aside  the  '  toga
praetexta.'  The  '  toga'  was  changed  with  solemnity,  in  presence  of  the
Lares,  and  they  then  went  to  the  Capitol  or  some  other  temple  to  pray  to  the
gods.  It  was  called '  libera,'  because  when  it  was  assumed,  they  were  free
from  the  restraint  of  masters.  The  similarity  between  '  liber,'  as  an
epithet  of  Bacchus,  and  '  liber,'  '  free,'  as  the  poet  suggests  for  his  third
reason,  was  perhaps  the  ground  on  which  this  day  was  chosen  for  the
solemnity.

39  The  torch-bearing  Goddess.'] — Ver.  786.  Geres,  who  is  thus  repre-
sented in  her  statues.  She  carried  a  torch  while  seeking  her  daughter,
Proserpine,  when  she  had  been  carried  off  by  Pluto.


b.  in.  787— 812.]         OE,  CALEKDAB   OP   OTID.  125

honour  to  the  youth  commencing  man,  the  day  seemed  not
unsuitable  for  conferring  the  gown  of  freedom.  Hither,  0
Father,  mayst  thou  turn  thy  head  and  thy  horns  with  mild  in-
tent, and  grant  to  my  powers  a  sail  swelling  with  the  prosperous
gale.  On  this  day  and  the  day  before,  if  I  remember  aright,
is  the  procession  to  the  Argei.40  What  they  are,  their  own
history41  will  tell.

The  star  of  the  Kite42  slopes  downwards  towards  the  Bear,
the  daughter  of  Lycaon ;  this  becomes  visible  on  this  night.
If  you  would  wish  to  know  what  it  was  that  gave  heaven  to
this  bird ;  Saturn  had  been  expelled  from  his  realm  by  Jove  ;
in  his  wrath  he  excites  the  powerful  Titans  to  arms,  and
demands  that  assistance  which  was  due  to  him  from  the
Fates.  There  was  a  bull,  a  strange  monster,  born  of  his
mother  Earth,  a  serpent  in  his  hinder  parts.  Him,  by  the
advice  of  the  three  Fates,  the  fierce  Styx  had  with  triple
wall  shut  in  the  gloomy  groves.  Whoever  should  give  the
entrails  of  the  bull  to  be  consumed  by  the  flames,  it  was
fated  that  he  should  be  enabled  to  conquer  the  eternal  Gods.
With  axe  made  of  adamant,  Briareus  slays  him,  and  is  now
just  on  the  very  point  of  giving  the  entrails  to  the  flames.
Jupiter  commands  the  birds  to  snatch  them  away ;  the  kite
brings  them  to  him,  and  by  its  services  finds  its  way  to  the
stars.

One  day  intervenes,  and  the  festival  of  Minerva  takes  place,
which  has  its  name  from  the  union  of  five  days.43  The  first
day  is  free  from  blood,  and  it  is  not  allowable  then  to  contend
with  the  steel ;  the  reason  is,  that  on  this  day  Minerva  was

,40  The  Argei.~] — Ver.  791.  These  were  certain  places  in  Rome,  sup-
posed to  have  been  so  called  from  the  burial  there  of  certain  Argives  who
had  come  over  with  Hercules.  According  to  Livy,  these  spots  were  con-
secrated by  Numa.  Some  writers  think  that  the  Argei  was  the  temple  of
Castor  and  Pollux,  Spartan  divinities.

41  Their  own  history. .] — Ver.  791.  Most  probably  this  alludes  to  some
topographical  history  of  the  places  then  extant,  and  well  known  to
every  one  at  that  day.

42  The  Kite.]— Ver.  794.  On  the  16th  of  the  calends  of  April  the  Kite  rises
achronycally.  It  is  not  known  whence  Ovid  borrowed  'this  story  of  the
Kite,  This  constellation,  according  to  Krebs,  is  not  alluded  to  by  any
Greek  writer  on  astronomy  before  the  time  of  Ovid.

43  Union  of  Jive  days.]— Ver.  810,  This  was  the  Quinquatrus,  Quin-
quatres,  or  Quinquatria,  from  '  quinque/  « five/  a  festival  of  Minerva,  com-
mencing on  the  14th  of  the  calends  of  April,


126  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  hi.  812—831.

born.  The  next44  and  the  three  succeeding  are  celebrated  on
the  sand  strewed  in  the  Amphitheatre ;  then  the  warlike
Goddess  is  delighted  with  the  drawn  swords.  Now,  ye  youths
and  tender  damsels,  celebrate  Pallas  ;  he  who  pays  homage  to
Pallas  will  be  learned.  Girls,  when  you  shall  have  propitiated
Pallas,  then  comb  your  wool ;  learn,  by  winding,  to  take  the
load  off  the  distaff,  when  now  it  is  full.  She  teaches  us
also  with  shuttle  to  cross  the  standing  warps,  and  with  the
sley  she  closes  the  open  work.  Worship  her,  thou,  whose  art  it  is
to  remove  the  stains  from  the  damaged  garments ;  worship
her,  thou,  who  preparest  the  dyeing  vessels  for  the  fleeces.
Nor  will  any  one  be  able  to  make  neatly  the  sandals  for  the
foot  if  Pallas  is  unpropitious,  even  though  he  were  more
skilful  than  Tychius ; 45  and  even  if,  compared  with  ancient
Epeus,  he  should  excel  him  in  handicraft;  yet  if  Pallas  is  dis-
pleased, he  will  be  but  a  bungler.  You,  too,  who  drive  away  dis-
ease by  Apollo's  art,  offer  from  your  fees  a  few  gifts  to  the  God-
dess. And  do  not  you,  teachers,  a  set  generally  robbed  of  your
pay,46  despise  her;  she  will  bring  you  new  pupils:  and  thou  who
guidest  the  graving  tool,47  and  thou  who  dost  enamel  the  slab

44  The  next."] — Ver.  813.  On  the  second  day  of  the  festival  commenced
the  gladiatorial  combats  in  the  amphitheatre,  in  honour  of  the  goddess.
The  place  where  they  fought,  was  called  the  '  arena/  it  being  sprinkled  with
sand  or  sawdust,  to  absorb  the  blood  and  to  prevent  slipping.  By  some
the  Quinquatria  are  supposed  to  have  been  identical  with  the  Panathensea,
a  festival  instituted  at  Athens  by  Orpheus  or  Erectheus  in  honour  of
Minerva.  Similar  license  is  said  to  have  been  allowed  to  the  slaves  on  the
Quinquatria  to  that  which  prevailed  on  the  Saturnalia,  and  friends  then
interchanged  presents.

45  Tychius.'] — Ver.  824.  He  was  a  celebrated  artificer  of  Boeotia,  and,
according  to  Homer,  the  maker  of  the  shield  of  Ajax ;  though,  as  Mr.
Stanford  remarks,  Homer's  eulogy  of  him  is  only  in  the  character  of  a
cobbler.  Epeus  was  the  builder  of  the  wooden  horse  by  means  of  which
Troy  was  taken.

46  Bobbed  of  you?*  pay.] — Ver.  829.  This  line  has  occasioned  much
perplexity  ;  but  it  seems  to  imply  pretty  clearly  that  the  schoolmaster  was
an  ill-paid  drudge,  and  that  he  was  obliged  to  look  rather  to  numbers,  for
a  living,  than  to  the  individual  honesty  of  his  employers.  Possibly,  like
the  physicians  and  barristers  of  the  present  day,  he  wras  not  able  to  sue
for  his  fees  at  law;  and  having  to  trust  solely  to  the  honour  of  his  employ-
ers, he  not  unfrequently,  or  indeed,  very  frequently,  found  that  he  had
built  his  expectations  on  the  sand.  His  fee  was  called  the  *  Minerval/  and
an  image  of  the  goddess  Minerva  stood  over  the  school  door.

47  The  graving -tool.] — Ver.  831.  '  Caelum/  This  was  the  tool  used  in
carving  or  graving — a  '  burin/  or  '  chisel.'


B.  ill.  831—853.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OP   OYID.  12/

with  colours,  thou,  too,  who  fashionest  the  soft  stones  with
skilful  hand.  She  is  the  Goddess  of  a  thousand  crafts  ;  doubt-
less she  is  the  Goddess  of  song.  If  I  am  deserving,  may  she
be  present,  a  friend  to  my  pursuits.

Where  the  Caelian  Hill  slopes  from  its  elevation  to  the  plains,
here,  where  the  way  is  not  quite  level,  but  nearly  so,  you  may
see  a  small  temple  of  Minerva  "  Capta,"  which  the  Goddess
began  to  possess  on  her  natal  day.  The  cause  of  the  name  is
doubtful.  We  entitle  a  skilful  genius  "  Capitale,"48  [shrewd]  ;
she  is  a  Goddess  full  of  genius.  Or  is  it  because  she  is  said,
without  a  mother,  to  have  leaped  forth  with  her  shield  from
the  crown  of  her  father's  head?  Or  is  it  because  she  came
to  us  a  captive  when  Falisci  was  subdued  ?  And  this  very  fact
the  ancient  records  tell.  Or  is  it  because  she  has  a  law,  that
thieves  who  are  detected  in  that  place,  should  suffer  capital
punishment  ?  From  whatever  cause  thou  derivest  thy  titles,
O  Pallas,  ever  do  thou  hold  thy  iEgis49  before  our  chiefs.  The
last  day  of  the  five,  commands  us  to  purify  the  sounding  trum-
pets,50 and  to  sacrifice  to  the  bold  Goddess.  Now,  you  can
say,  having  raised  your  eyes  to  the  sun,  "  He  yesterday  weighed
down  the  fleece  of  the  sheep  of  Phrixus.5'51

By  the  deceit  of  the  accursed  step-mother,  the  seed-corn

48  Capitale.] — Ver.  838-9.  We  have  a  vulgar  expression  somewhat
similar  to  this  at  the  present  day.  If  a  person  is  clever  and  shrewd,  it  is
common  to  say  of  him  that  '  he  has  a  good  head-piece.'  So  '  capitalist
from  '  caput/  the  '  head/  will  mean  l  with  a  head,  or  '  relating  to  the
head.'     Gower  translates  this  and  the  following  lines  thus —

1  The  reason's  doubtfull :  She's  the  minerall
Of  wit,  which  quick  is  called  capitall.
Or  else,  because  her  father's  aching  head
She,  arm'd  with  shield,  sans  help  of  wife,  did  shed.'

49  jEgis.'] — Ver.  813.  This  was  the  shield  of  Minerva,  and  it  was  so
called  because  it  was  covered  with  a  goat  skin,  aiyig,  that  of  the  goat
Amalthea,  that  suckled  Jupiter.  In  it  too  was  set  the  head  of  the  Gor-
gon Medusa,  which  turned  the  beholder  into  stone.

50  The  sounding  trumpets.'] — Ver.  849.  This  was  the  feast  ,of  the
'  Tubilustrium/  or  'purification  of  trumpets,'  on  the  10th  of  the  calends
of  April.  Varro  and  Festus  inform  us  that  the  trumpets  used  in  the
sacred  rites  were  purified  ia  the  'Atrium  Sutorium/  or  'Shoemakers'  Hall.'
Its  locality  is  not  known.

51  Phrixus.'] — Ver.  852.  The  story  of  Ino,  and  her  device  to  destroy
her  step-children,  has  been  in  part  related  in  a  note  to  the  second  Book.
The  story  is  here  completed.    It  is  again  referred  to  by  the  Poet.


128  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  in.  853— 876.

being  parched,  the  blade  had  not  raised  the  ear,  as  it  is  wont
to  do.  A  person  is  sent  to  the  oracular'02  tripod,  that  he  may-
bring  back,  by  an  infallible  answer,  what  remedy  the  Delphic
God  gives  out  for  the  unproductive  soil.  He,  corrupted  too,
as  well  as  the  seed,  brings  word,  that,  by  the  oracle,  the  death
of  Helle  and  of  the  youthful  Phrixus  was  required.  The
citizens,  the  unfavourable  season,  and  Ino,  drove  the  king,
while  still  resisting,  to  submit  to  the  direful  command.  And
now,  his  sister  and  Phrixus  having  their  temples  wreathed  with
boughs,  stand  together  before  the  altar,  and  bewail  their
common  destiny.  Their  mother,  as  by  chance  she  is  float-
ing53 in  the  air,  sees  them,  and,  in  dismay,  strikes  her  naked
breast  with  her  hand  ;  and  then,  with  clouds  in  her  train,  she
leaps  down  into  the  city  of  those  descended  from  the  dragon,54
and  snatches  away  her  children ;  and  that  they  may  take
flight,  a  ram,  most  resplendent  with  gold,  is  given  them.  He
bears  the  two  through  the  long  channel  of  the  Hellespont.
The  damsel  is  said  to  have  been  holding  his  horn  with  a  feeble
left  hand,  when  from  herself  she  imparts  a  name55  to  that
tract  of  water.  Her  brother  almost  perishes  together  with
her,  while  he  is  endeavouring  to  assist  her  as  she  falls,  and
extends  afar  his  outstretched  hands.  He  weeps  as  though  the
partner  of  the  twofold  danger  were  lost,  not  knowing  that  now
she  was  the  bride  of  the  azure  Deity.  Having  arrived  at  the
shore,  the  ram  is  made  a  Constellation ;  but  his  golden  fleece
reaches  the  Colchian  palace.56

52  The  oracular  tripod.] — Ver.  855.  This  was  a  seat  or  table  with
three  legs,  on  which  the  priestess  sat,  while  delivering  the  oracles  of
Apollo  in  the  Delphian  temple.  Some  suppose  that  it  was  pierced,  and
that  through  it  the  priestess  inhaled  certain  mephitic  fumes,  which  were
productive  of  a  kind  of  madness  or  frenzy,  which  was  mistaken  for
prophetic  inspiration.

53  She  is  floating. .] — Ver.  863.  '  Pependerat.'  'Floating/  or  'hover-
ing,' is  an  apt  term  for  '  Nephele/  their  mother,  who  had  been  changed
into  a  cloud,  vs<ps\r}.

54  Descended  from  the  dragon.~\ — Ver.  865.  Thebes  was  founded  by
Cadmus,  who  killed  a  dragon,  which  had  slain  his  companions,  and  then
sowing  the  teeth,  a  crop  of  armed  men  was  raised ;  these  killing  each
other  till  their  number  was  reduced  to  five,  with  their  assistance  he  built
the  city,  whence  the  present  epithet.

55  Imparted  a  name.] — Ver.  870.  That  of  Hellespont,  '  the  sea  of
Helle.'

56  The  Colchian  palace.'] — Ver.  876.     Phrixus  bringing  the  fleece  to


B.  in.  877— 884.]  OS,    CALENDAR    OF    OTID.  129

When  the  approaching  dawn  shall  have  sent  before  it  three
light  bearing  days,  you  shall  have  the  hours  of  day  equal57
with  those  of  night.  When  from  this  period  the  shepherd
shall  have  four  times  penned  his  well-fed  kids,  four  times  the
grass  been  white  with  dew  fresh  fallen,  Janus  will  require  to
be  adored,  and  with  him  mild  Concord,  and  the  Health  of
Rome,58  and  the  altar  of  Peace.

The  Moon  governs  the  months ;  the  worship  of  the  Moon
on  the  Aventine  Hill59  terminates  the  period  of  this  month.

Colchis,  iEetes,  the  king,  gave  him  his  daughter,  Chalciope,  in  marriage,
and  then,  to  secure  possession  of  the  fleece,  he  put  Phryxus  to  death.  To
recover  it,  the  Argonautic  expedition,  under  Jason,  was  formed.

57  Hours  of  day  equal."] — Ver.  878.  The  vernal  equinox  on  the  8th  of
the  calends  of  April,  or  the  25th  of  March.

58  Health  of  Rome.}— Ver.  882.  *  Salus/  'Health/  was  the  daughter
of  iEsculapius  :  her  temple  was  built  on  the  Quirinal  hill  by  C.  Junius
Bubulcus.

59  The  Aventine  hill.'] — Yer.  884.  Seivius  Tullius  built  a  temple  in
honour  of  Diana  on  the  Aventine  hill.


130  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  iv.  1—2.


BOOK  THE  FOURTH.


CONTENTS.


The  invocation  of  Venus,  Ver.  1 — 18.  The  noble  origin  of  Germanicus,
and  his  descent  from  Venus  through  iEneas ;  with  the  reason  why  April
was  formerly  the  second  month,  19 — 60.  The  different  opinions  on  the
origin  of  the  name :  the  power  of  Venus,  61 — 132.  The  festival  of
Venus  and  Fortuna  Virilis  ;  Venus  Verticordia,  133 — 162.  The  setting
of  the  Scorpion,  163-4.  The  setting  of  the  Pleiades,  and  their  number,
165 — 178.  The  Megalesia:  the  mythological  history  of  the  Mother  of
the  Gods,  and  her  arrival  at  Rome  fromPhrygia,  179 — 372.  The  dedi-
cation of  the  temple  to  Fortuna  Publica :  the  victory  of  Csesar  over
Juba:  the  setting  of  Libra  and  Orion:  the  rainy  season,  373 — 388.
The  games  of  Ceres,  and  her  praises  :  the  rape  of  Proserpine,  389—620.
The  dedication  of  the  temple  to  Jupiter  Victor,  and  to  Liberty,  621 —
624.  The  hailstorms,  and  the  victory  of  Caesar  at  Mutina,  625 — 628.
The  festival  of  the  Fordicidia,  or  sacrifice  of  the  pregnant  cow :  the  insti-
tution of  that  ceremonial  by  Numa,  629 — 672.  Augustus  proclaimed
Imperator,  673 — 676.  The  setting  of  the  Hyades,  677-8.  The  setting
fire  to  the  foxes,  in  the  Circensian  games,  679 — 712.  The  passing  of
the  Lion  from  the  constellation  of  the  Ram  to  the  Bull,  713 — 720.  The
Palilia,  or  festival  of  Pales,  721 — 806.  The  foundation  of  the  city  and
the  death  of  Remus,  807 — 862.  The  Vinalia :  the  alliance  of  Mezen-
tius  with  Turnus,  863 — 900.  The  middle  of  Spring  :  the  setting  of  the
Ram  ;  the  showery  season;  and  the  rising  of  the  Dog-star,  901 — 904.
The  Robi^alia,  905 — 942.  The  Floralia ;  and  the  reception  of  Vesta
into  the  Palatium,  943—954.

"  Fayour  the  poet,"1  I  said,   "  thou  genial  mother  of  the
twin  loves  ;"2  towards  the  poet,  she  turned  her  countenance.

1  Favour  the  poet.'] — Ver.  1-2.     Gower's  whimsical  translation  is,

*  "  Alme,  queen  of  payring  love,  assist,"  1  cried :
To  me  she  streight  her  chearful  eye  applied.'

2  Of  the  twin  loves.'] — Ver.  1.  Cicero  mentions  three  Loves  or  Cupids,
(On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,  Book  iii.  c.  23,)  the  first,  the  son  of  Diana
and  Mercury;  the  second,  of  Venus  and  Mercury;  and  the  third,  Anteros.
Other  writers  mention  two  only — the  celestial,  the  son  of  Jupiter  and
Venus ;  and  the  terrestrial,  the  son  of  Nox  and  Erebus.  These  are  some-
times distingushed  as  the  honourable  and  the  sensual  Loves.


B.  i\:.  3— 21.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OP   OYID.  131

"  What  wilt  thou  of  me?"  she  said.  "  Surely  thou  wast  but
just  now  in  the  habit  of  singing  of  mightier  subjects;3  hast
thou  still  in  thy  tender  bosom  the  old  wound?4  By  this  time,
Goddess,  I  replied,  thou  hast  heard  enough  of  my  wound."
She  smiled,  and  immediately  in  that  direction  the  sky  was
without  a  cloud.  "  Wounded  or  whole,  have  I  ever  been  guilty
of  deserting  thy  standards  ?5  Thou  wast  ever  the  object  of
my  purpose,  the  cause  of  my  toil.  Free  from  all  blame,  in
my  early  years,  I  have  sported  in  scenes  that  became  my  age  ;
now  a  more  extensive  range6  is  trodden  by  my  steeds.  I  sing
of  the  festivals  with  their  reasons,  as  they  are  extracted  from
the  ancient  annals,  and  of  the  Constellations  as  they  sink  be-
neath the  earth  and  rise  again.  I  have  now  arrived  at  the
fourth  month,  in  which  of  all  thou  art  the  most  extolled.
Thou  knowest,  Venus,  that  both  the  poet  and  the  month  are
devoted  to  thee."  Influenced  by  my  address,  she  lightly
touched  my  temples  with  a  sprig  of  Cythersean  myrtle,7  and
said,  "  Accomplish  the  work  which  thou  hast  undertaken."
I  was  sensible  of  her  power,  and  suddenly  the  peculiar
reasons  for  the  days  of  remark  became  evident ;  Let  my
bark  speed  onward  while  thus  it  may,  and  while  the  fa-
vouring breezes  blow.  Yet,  if  any  part  of  my  Calendar
ought  to  affect  thee,  it  is  in  April  thou  findest  that  by  which
thy  attention  ought  to  be  detained.     This  month,  through  an

3  Mightier  subjects,'] — Ver.  3.  Namely,  the  preceding  books  of  the
1  Fasti,'  which  treat  of  more  serious  subjects  than  love,  the  theme  of  many
of  his  former  poems.

4  The  old  wound.] — Ver.  4.  Alluding  to  the  'Amores,'  one  of  his  pre-
vious compositions,  in  which  he  had  complained  of  the  pains  and  disap-
pointments attendant  on  love.

5  Deserting  thy  standards.] — Ver.  7.  This  figure  is  taken  from  the  rigid
rules  of  military  discipline  among  the  Romans.  The  poets  were  fond  of
comparing  the  pains  of  the  lover  to  the  toils  of  the  soldier  in  active  service.
Gower  thus  translates  this  and  the  following  line —

'  Or  sound  or  sore,  I  ne'er  forsook  thy  tent ;
Thou  art  my  daily  task,  my  ornament.'

6  A  more  extensive  range.] — Ver.  10.  'Area.'  This  figure  is  derived
from  the  games  in  the  Circus.

7  Cythercean  myrtle.] — Ver.  15.  The  myrtle  was  the  favourite  plant  of
Venus.  Servius  (on  the  Georgics  of  Virgil,  Book  ii.  1.  64)  says,  that  Venus
chose  this  plant  because  it  flourished  near  the  sea,  whence  she  sprung ;
and  because  it  was  esteemed  for  its  medicinal  qualities  in  female  diseases.

k2


132  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  21— 41.

illustrious  line,  descends  to  thee,  and  becomes  peculiarly
thine  by  the  nobility,  which  is  thy  lot  by  adoption.  This  did
our  father,  offspring  of  Ilia,  perceive,  when  he  planned  out  the
lengthy  year,  and  himself  celebrated  his  ancestors.  And  as,
to  fierce  Mars  he  gave  the  first  place  in  the  succession,  because
he  had  been  the  immediate  cause  of  his  being  ;  so  did  he  desire
that  Venus,8  found  in  the  line  of  his  extraction  through  many
generations,  should  have  the  place  of  the  second  month.  And
while  seeking  the  origin  of  his  race,  and  the  generations  as
they  were  traced  upwards,  he  went  even  as  far  back  as  to  the
Gods  themselves  in  the  line  of  his  kindred.  Could  he  be  igno-
rant, forsooth,  that  Dardanus9  was  born  of  Electra,  the  daugh-
ter of  Atlas  ?  And  that  Electra  shared  the  bed  of  Jove  ?  His
son  was  Ericthonius  ;  from  himTros  sprung  :  he  was  the  father
of  Assaracus,  Assaracus  of  Capys.  This  last  begot  Anchises,
with  whom,  Venus  did  not  disdain  to  hold  the  name  of  parent
in  common.  Hence  was  born  iEneas  ;  his  piety  well  proved,
bore  the  sacred  relics  and  his  father  sitting  on  his  shoulders,
a  second  pious  charge,  through  the  flames  of  Troy.  At  length
we  have  arrived  at  the  blessed  name  of  lulus,10  from  which
point  the  Julian  house  is  connected  with  its  Trojan  ancestors.11
His  son  was  Postumus,12  who,  because  he  was  born  in  the  deep

s  Venus."] — Ver.  27 — 30.     Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

'  So  Venus  many  ranks  before  his  mother,
He  mistress  made  of  this  next  following  other ;
And  turning  o'er  Time's  rolls  to  find  the  ground
Of  his  descent,  the  gods  his  parents  found.'

9  Dardanus. ] — Ver.  31.  Dardanus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter  and  Electra,
the  daughter  of  Atlas.  He  was  the  founder  of  Troy,  and  by  his  wife
Astioche,  or  Batis,  he  became  the  father  of  Ericthonius.  The  poet  pro-
ceeds to  recount  the  ancestry  of  iEneas  from  Dardanus,  and  then  the  de-
scent of  the  Alban  kings  from  iEneas  down  to  Romulus.

10  Blessed  name  of  lulus.] — Ver.  39.  lulus  was  one  of  the  names  oi
Ascanius,  the  son  of  iEneas.  He  calls  that  name  'felix,'  or  'blessed,'  as  it
was  (in  a  more  modern  form)  the  family  name  of  the  Julii,  of  which  house
Julius  Caesar  was  by  birth  a  member;  and  Augustus,  Tiberius,  and  Germa-
nicus  became  so  by  adoption.

11  Trojan  ancestors."] — Ver.  40.  'Teucros.'  This  name  seems  to  have
been  applied  to  the  Trojans  almost  exclusively  by  the  Latin  poets.  Homer
and  the  older  Greek  writers  never  use  it :  the  later  ones  but  very  rarely.

12  His  son  was  Postumus.] — Ver.  41.  Or  the  passage  will  admit  of  this
translation — '  Postumus  succeeded  him  ;'  for  Virgil  says  that  Postumus  was
the  son  of  iEneas ;  and  Dionysius  tells  us,  that  on  the  death  of  iEneas,


vi.  41—50.]


OK,    CAXEKDAE,    OF    OVID.


133


sylvan  shades,  was  called  Silvius,  among  the  Latian  nation*
And  he,  'Latinus,  is  thy  sire  ; 13  Alba  succeeds  Latinus,  Epytus
succeeds  to  thy  dignity,  0  Alba.  He  gave  to  Capys  the  re-
vived name  of  Troy ; 14  he,  too,  became  thy  grandsire,  0
Calpetus.  And  while,  in  succession  to  him,  Tiberinus  was  oc-
cupying the  throne  of  his  father,  he  is  said  to  have  been
drowned  in  the  eddy  of  the  Etrurian  stream.  And  yet  he  had
lived  to  see  Agrippa,  his  son,  and  Eemulus,15  his  grandson.

Lavinia,  being  pregnant,  fled  into  the  woods  through  fear  of  lulus,  and
there  produced  Postumus,  who  derived  one  of  his  names  from  his  post-
humous birth,  and  his  other  name  (Sylvius)  from  his  birth  in  the  woocU.

13  Latinus  is  thy  sire  J] — Ver.  43.  According  to  Virgil  and  other
writers,  Latinus  was  the  son  of  iEneas  Sylvius,  and  grandson  of  Sylvius
Posthumus ;  hence,  some  writers  have  concluded  that  a  couplet  has  been
lost  here.  Livy,  Dionysius,  and  Eusebius  have  also  given  lists  of  the
Alban  kings,  which  differ  but  little  from  that  here  given  by  Ovid.  The
difference,  such  as  it  is,  will  be  seen  from  a  comparison  of  the  following
lists.

Livy.  Dionysius.

iEneas.  iEneas.

Ascanius.  Ascanius.

Sylvius.  Sylvius.

iEneas.  iEneas  Sylvius.

Latinus.  Latinus  Sylvius.

Alba.  Albas  Sylvius.

Atis.  Capetus  Sylvius.

Capys.  Capys  Sylvius.

Capetus.  Calpetus  Sylvius.

Tiberinus.  Tiberinus  Sylvius.

Agrippa.  Agrippas  Sylvius.

Romulus.  Allades  Sylvius.

Aventinus.  Aventinus  Sylvius.

Proca.  Procas  Sylvius.

Amulius.  Amulius  Sylvius.

Ovid  gives  a  list  of  the  Alban  kings  in  the  fourteenth  Book  of  the  Meta-
morphoses, 1.  609,  where  he  calls  Calpetus,  Capetus,  and  Agrippa  by  the
name  of  Agrota.  This  line  of  the  Alban  kings  is  universally  considered  by
historians  as  a  fiction  of  the  later  times  of  the  Roman  republic.  See
Niebuhr's  Roman  History,  i.  202.

14  Revived  name  of  Troy.'] — Ver.  45.  That  is,  he  restored  the  use  of
a  name  or  epithet  that  had  been  in  use  at  Troy.  Capys  was  the  name  of
the  father  of  Anchises,  and  of  one  of  the  companions  of  iEneas.  iEneid,
Book  i.  1.  183.

15  Remulus,"]  —Ver.  50.  He  is  called  by  Livy  'Romulus.'  Either  name
is  a  diminutive  for  'Remus,'  or  'Romus.'  Ovid,  in  his  Metamorphoses,
Book  xiv.  1.  616,  represents  him  as  incurring  the  vengeance  of  heaven  by
imitating  lightning,  and  affecting  to  be  a  divinity.


Eusebius.

Ovid.

iEneas.

iEneas.

Ascanius.

Ascanius.

Sylvius.
iEneas.

Sylvius.

Latinus.

Latinus.

Alba.

Alba.

Sylvius  Athis.
Capys.
Calpetus.
Tiberinus.

Epitus.
Capys.
Calpetus.
Tiberinus.

Agrippa.
Remulus.
Aventinus.

Remulus.
Agrippa.
Aventinus.

Procas.

Proca.

Amulius.

Numitor.

134  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  50— 68.

They  say  that  against  Remulus  the  thunderbolts  were  hurled.
After  these  came  Aventinus,  from  whom  the  place  and  the
hill,  too,  derived  its  name.  After  him  the  sovereignty
passed  to  Procas  ;  him  Numitor  followed,  the  brother  of  the
cruel  Amulius ;  Ilia  and  Lausus16  were  the  children  of  Nu-
mitor. Lausus  falls  by  his  uncle's  sword  ;  Ilia  is  beloved  by
Mars,  and  produces  thee,  Quirinus,  with  Remus,  thy  twin-
brother.  He  ever  boasted  that  his  lineage  was  from  Mars  and
Venus,  and  ivell  did  he  entitle  himself  to  gain  credit  for  the
assertion.  And,  that  generations  to  come  might  not  be  igno-
rant of  this,  to  the  Gods  of  his  race  he  consecrated  the  months
in  succession.  But  I  conjecture  that  the  month  of  Venus  re-
ceived its  name  '  Aprilis9  from  the  Greek  language  ; 17  the
Goddess  obtained  her  name,  c  Aphrodite ■/  from  the  foam  of  the
sea.  But  you  must  not  wonder  that  any  thing  is  called  by  a
name  from  the  Grecian  tongue  ;  for  the  Italian  land  was  the
Greater  Grsecia.18  Evander  arrived  there  with  a  fleet,  manned  by
his  fellow  countrymen ;  Alcides,  too,  came  thither;  each  of  them
of  Grecian  extraction.  The  Club-bearer,  as  a  stranger  fed  h'is
herd  on  the  pasturage  of  Aventine,  and  Albula19  afforded  drink

16  Lausus."] — Ver.  54.  The  brother  of  Ilia  is  called  iEgestus  by  Diony-
sius,  and  by  Plutarch,  Ainitus.  He  was  treacherously  slain  by  his  uncle
while  hunting.  Plutarch  says  that  Numitor  did  reign  for  some  time  be-
fore he  wTas  deposed  by  Amulius.

17  From  the  Greek  language.'] — Ver,  61.  According  to  Macrobius,
Romulus  called  the  month  Aprilis  by  that  name  in  honour  of  Venus,  who
was  called  by  the  Greeks  'Aphrodite/  from  a<ppoe,  'the  foam  of  the
sea.'  Ovid  prefers  this  derivation  (in  flattery  to  the  Julian  house)  to
that  from  'aperio/  'to  open/  which  has  by  far  the  greater  probability  of
being  the  correct  etymology.  Scaliger  would  derive  the  name  of  this
month  from  'aper/  'a  boar/  because  that  animal  was  a  customary  sacri-
fice at  this  season.

18  The  Greater  Grcecia.] — Ver.  64.  Commentators  have  been  much  at
a  loss  to  tell  why  Italy  received  this  name  from  the  Grsecian  settlers,  if  it
is  intended  to  apply  to  the  whole  of  Italy,  and  not  the  southern  part,
which  in  later  times  was  known  as  Magna  Graecia.  Mr.  Thynne  appears
to  suggest  the  true  reason  for  the  name ;  because,  in  fact,  the  Greeks  found
Italy  a  much  more  spacious  country  than  the  limited  region  which  thev
had  left.

19  Albula.'] — Ver.  68.  This  was  the  early  name  of  the  river  Tiber.
Gower  thus  renders  this  and  the  following  line —

4  That  clubbed  pilgrime  did  his  club  display
On  Aventine,  and  drank  of  Albula/


B.  iv,  6S  —  77.]  OR,   CALENDAB   OF   OVID.  135

to  a  God  so  mighty.  The  chief,  too,  from  Neritos20  came
thither;  the  Lestrygonians  attest  it,21  and  that  shore  which  still
bears  the  name  of  Circe.22  And  now  were  the  walls  of
Telegonus23  erected,  and  the  city  of  the  watery  Tibur,24  which
Grecian  hands  had  built.  Halesus,25  too,  had  arrived,  driven
away  by  the  death  of  the  son  of  Atreus,  from  whom  the  Falis-
can  land  believes  that  it  received  its  name.26  Add  Antenor27
as  well,  the  adviser  of  peace  at  Troy,  and,  Apulian  Daunus,
thy  son-in-law,   the   grandson   of  (Eneus.27*     At  a  later  pe-

20  Neritos.] — Ver.  69.  Servius  tells  us  that  this  was  a  mountain  of
Ithaca.  Virgil  (iEneid,  Book  iii.  1.  270)  and  Pomponius  Mela,  the
geographer,  seem  to  consider  it  as  a  distinct  island  in  the  vicinity  of  Ithaca.

21  Attest  it.] — Ver.  69.  Attest  the  arrival  of  Ulysses  in  Italy;  for,  being
a  race  of  cannibals,  they  caught  and  devoured  some  of  his  companions,  as
we  learn  in  the  tenth  Book  of  the  Odyssey.  They  lived  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Formiae,  in  Campania.

22  Name  of  Circe.'] — Ver.  70.  This  was  the  promontory  of  Circaeum,
in  Latium,  supposed  once  to  have  formed  the  island  of  '  iEsea.'  Circe  in-
habited it.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Helius,  or  the  sun,  and  Persa,  and
by  her  magic  art  changed  all  intruders  upon  her  island  into  swine.  By
the  aid  of  Mercury,  Ulysses  escaped  the  exercise  of  her  terrific  power
upon  himself,  and  obtained  the  restoration  of  his  companions,  who  had
been  transformed  by  her,  to  their  original  form.

23  Walls  of  Telegonus.] — Ver.  71.  Telegonus  was  the  son  of  Ulysses
and  Circe.  He  went  to  Ithaca  to  seek  his  father,  and  accidentally  killed
him.  On  his  return  to  Italy,  he  founded  Tusculum,  in  Latium,  north  of
Alba  Longa.

24  Watery  Tibur. ,] — Ver.  71.  This  was  a  town  of  Latium,  on  the  river
Anio,  whence  its  epithet  here,  'udi/  'watery.'  It  was  founded  by
Tiburnus,  Catillus,  and  Coras,  three  brothers,  who  led  thither  a  colony
from  Argos.     Its  site  is  now  occupied  by  the  town  of  Tivoli.

25  Halesus. ~] — Ver.  73.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  son  of  Aga-
memnon, who  conspired  with  Clytemnestra  to  slay  his  father,  after  whose
murder  he  fled  to  Italy,  where  he  founded  the  town  of  Falisci,  and  intro-
duced the  worship  of  Juno.

26  Received  its  name.] — Ver.  74.  F  and  H  were  sounded  by  the
ancient  Digamma,  and  were  therefore  confused  in  sound.  According  to
Cicero  and  Quintilian,  S  was  changed  into  R  in  many  instances.

27  Antenor.] — Ver.  75.  Antenor,  according  to  Homer,  always  advo-
cated peaceful  measures  in  the  Trojan  councils.  The  Greeks  are  said  to
have  permitted  him  to  leave  Troy  with  a  colony  of  the  Heneti  from  Asia
Minor,  on  which  he  came  into  Italy,  and  founded  Patavium,  now  Padua.
By  the  Heneti,  or  Veneti,  the  city  of  Venice  is  supposed  to  have  been
founded.

2T*  Grandson  of  (Eneus.] — Ver.  75.  Diomedes,  the  grandson  of
(Eneus,   king  of  iEtolia,   on  his  return  from  Troy,   being  driven   from


136  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  iv.  77— 91.

riod,28  and  after  Antenor,  did  iEneas  bring  his  Gods  from  the
flames  of  Troy  to  our  regions.  Solymus  from  Phrygian  Ida  was
one  of  his  companions,  from  whom  the  city  of  Sulmo  derives
its  name.  Cold  Sulmo,29  Germanicus,  my  native  place  !  Ah  !
wretched  me  !  How  distant  is  it  from  the  Scythian  soil !
Shall  I  then,  so  far  ?30 — but  suppress  thy  complaints,  my  Muse;
sacred  subjects  must  not  be  sung  to  a  desponding  lyre.  To
what  point  will  not  envy  proceed  ?  There  are  some,  0  Venus,31
who  would  rob  thee  of  the  honour  of  a  month,  and  who  be-
grudge it  thee.  For,  because  the  spring  at  that  time  is  opening
every  thing,  and  the  contracted  ruggedness  of  the  frost  is
yielding,  and  the  prolific  earth  is  teeming,  they  say  that  April
is  so  called  from  the  aperient  season ;  that  month,  which
Venus,  having  laid  her  hand  upon  it,  claims  as  her  own.    She

his  own  country  by  the  infidelity  and  intrigues  of  his  wife,  came  to
Apulia,  married  the  daughter  of  Daunus,  the  king,  and  founded  Argyripa,
or  Argi,  in  that  country.

28  At  a  later  period.] — Ver.  77.  iEneas  did  not  arrive  in  Italy  till
after  the  other  settlers  that  have  been  mentioned.  According  to  Virgil,
his  wanderings  lasted  seven  years.

29  Cold  Sulmo.] — Ver.  81.  Solymus  was  the  reputed  founder  of
Sulmo,  the  birth-place  of  Ovid,  which  was  a  small  town  of  the  Peligni,
between  Aquila  and  Venafrum.  The  country  of  the  Peligni  was  remark-
able for  its  coldness,  as  is  attested  by  Horace,  Odes,  Book  iii.  Ode  19, 1.  28.
There  is  something  very  affecting  in  the  repetition  by  the  exiled  poet  of
the  name  of  his  dear  Sulmo,  his  reminding  Germanicus  that  it  was  his
native  place,  and  his  allusion  to  the  immense  distance  that  then  separated
him  from  it.

30  Shall  I  then,  so  far  ?]— Ver.  83.  The  poet  suddenly  checks  himself
in  his  complaints.  This  is  a  very  graceful  instance  of  the  figure  Aposio-
pesis  ;  he  appears  as  if  about  to  say,  •  Shall  I,  then,  be  allowed,  so  far
from  my  native  Sulmo,  to  draw  my  last  breath  ?"  or  to  that  effect.

31  O  Venus.] — Ver.  86.  The  expressions  here  used  are  obviously  em-
ployed to  flatter  the  ambition  of  the  Julian  family  to  be  regarded  as  the
descendants  of  Venus.  Macrobius  tells  us  that  both  Aphrodite  and  Venus
were  names  unknown  to  Rome  under  the  kings ;  and  it  is  very  probable
that  the  name  of  Venus  was  introduced  at  a  much  later  period.  Some  phi-
lologists have  supposed  her  to  have  been  a  Syrian  goddess,  worshipped
under  the  name  of  Benoth  as  well  as  Astarte  ;  and  in  the  books  of  the  Old
Testament  we  more  than  once  find  mention  made  of  a  place  called  Succoth
Benoth,  which  is  supposed  to  mean  '  the  tents  of  Venus/  as  being,  per-
haps, the  especial  seat  of  her  worship.  If  this  conjecture  is  well  grounded,
the  probability  is  that  the  Romans  received  the  name  of  Venus  either
through  their  intercourse  with  Carthage,  which  was  a  Phoenician  colony,  or
that  it  arrived  at  Rome  by  the  way  of  Greece  and  Sicily.


b    iv.  91— 120. J  OR,    CALEITOAE   OF   OTTD.  137

indeed  most  worthily  holds  sway  over  the  whole  circle  of  the
year ;  she  owns  a  sovereignty  inferior  to  that  of  no  Deity.
^She  rules  the  heaven,  the  earth,  and  the  waves  that  gave  her
X)irth  ;  and  by  the  power  of  her  embraces  she  holds  sway  over
every  kind.  She  it  was  who  created  all  the  Gods  ;  'twould  be
a  tedious  task  to  enumerate  them  ;  she  furnished  the  primary
causes  for  the  plants  and  the  trees.  She  it  was  that  brought
together  the  untaught  minds  of  men,  and  instructed  them  to
unite,  each  one  with  his  mate.  What  is  it  but  alluring  delights
that  creates  the  whole  race  of  the  birds  of  the  air  ?  If  gentle
love  is  away,  then  do  the  flocks  refuse  to  pair.  With  another
male  the  furious  ram  fights  with  his  horn,  but  the  forehead  of
his  beloved  ewe32  he  is  careful  not  to  hurt.  The  bull,  at
whom  all  the  pastures  and  all  the  wood  tremble,  follows
the  heifer,  divested  of  his  fierceness.  The  same  influence  pre*
serves  whatever  it  is  that  has  life  beneath  the  wide  ocean,  and
it  fills  the  waters  with  fishes  innumerable.  It  was  she  that  first
divested  man  of  his  savage  habits  of  life  ;  from  her  were  de-
rived the  arts  of  dress,  and  the  careful  attention  to  the  person.
The  lover  is  said  at  first  to  have  chaunted  his  serenade  at  the
closed  doors  of  his  mistress  throughout  the  livelong  night  that
was  denied  to  him ;  then,  it  was  an  effort  of  oratory  to  prevail
upon  the  cruel  maid,  and  each  man  was  eloquent,  he  pleading
for  himself  his  own  cause.  By  means  of  her  were  a  thousand
arts  first  touched  upon,  and  through  the  desire  of  pleasing,
many  things  were  discovered,  which  before  lay  concealed.
Can  any  one  be  found  to  dare  to  deprive  this  Goddess  of  the
privilege  of  giving  her  name  to  the  second  month?33  Far  from
me  be  such  madness.  What  ?  Is  it  only  because  she  is  every
where  powerful,  and  honoured  by  many  a  temple,  that  the
Goddess  has  a  peculiar  claim  to  honour  in  our  city  ?  0,  man
of  Rome,  it  was  in  defence  of  thy  ancestral  Troy  that  Venus
was  wielding  arms,  when,  mangled  by  the  spear34  on   her

32  Beloved  ewe.'] — Ver.  101-2.     Gower  thus  renders  these  two  lines-—

1  The  surly  ram  will  with  a  ram  knock  horns  ;
But  yet  to  hurt  his  lovely  ewe  he  scorns.'

33  Second  month.] — Ver.  115;  That  Is  to  say,  the  second  month  in  the
original  year  of  Romulus.

'6i  Mangled  by  the  spear,] — Ver.  120.  Namely,  in  the  combat  between
Diomedes  and  iEneas,  where  she  interfered  in  favour  of  her  son. — Iliad ,
Book  iii.  1.  535.


138  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  121— 138.

tender  wrist,  she  lamented  aloud.  By  the  decision,  too,  of  a
Trojan  she  overcame  two  of  the  daughters  of  heaven.35  Ah !
would  that  the  defeated  Goddesses  had  failed  to  remember
this !  And  doubtless,  she  was  called  the  daughter-in-law  of
Assaracus,  that,  in  fact,  in  future  times  the  great  Csesar
might  have  ancestors  sprung  from  the  line  of  lulus,  her  de-
scendant. And  no  season  was  there  more  becoming  for
Venus  than  the  spring  ;  in  spring  the  earth  is  beauteous  ;  in
spring  the  soil  is  unbound  :  then  does  the  herbage  raise  its
head,  having  burst  the  ground ;  then  from  the  swelling  bark
does  the  shoot  push  forth  the  bud ;  and  the  lovely  Venus  is
deserving  of  the  lovely  season,  and,  as  is  her  wont,  she  is  in
close  conjunction  with  her  own  dear  Mars.  In  spring  she  bids
the  curved  ships36  to  go  on  their  way  along  the  deep  that  gave
her  birth,  and  no  longer  to  dread  the  blustering  of  the  winter.
Properly,  ye  Latian  matrons  and  ye  maidens,  do  ye  wor-
ship the  goddess,  and  ye  who  are  without  the  fillets37  and
the  garment  with  lengthened  train.  Untie  the  golden  neck-
laces from  her  neck  of  marble  ;  remove  her  jewels  :  the  God-
dess must  be  laved  all  over.38  Restore  her  golden  necklaces39
to  her  neck  when  dried :  then  must  other  flowers,  then  must

35  Daughters  of  heaven.'] — Ver.  121-2.     Gower's  version  is —
*  She  put  two  ladies  down  (a  Trojane  judge).
Ah  !  may  those  twaine  not  think  of  that  old  grudge.'
This  is  an  allusion  to  her  contest  with  Juno  and  Minerva  for  the  golden
apple.

33  The  curved  ships.] — Ver.  131.  From  the  third  of  the  ides  of  Novem-
ber to  the  sixth  of  the  ides  of  March  the  sea  was  not  deemed  navigable.
The  ships  were  then  laid  up  on  shore.  In  spring  they  were  launched  for
the  season  by  the  agency  of  rollers  placed  under  them.  To  this  Horace
makes  allusion,  Odes,  Book  i.  Ode  4,  1.  3.

37  Without  the  fillets. ~\ — Ver.  134.  The  women  of  light  character  at
Home  were  not  allowed  to  wear  the  'vittae,'  or  'fillets/  which  were
restricted  to  the  priestesses ;  or  the  '  stola,'  or  long  garment  with  a  deep
'instita,'  or  '  flounce/  which  was  worn  by  women  of  character  only;  on
the  contrary,  they  were  restricted  to  wearing  the  'toga/

38  Laved  all  over.'] — Ver.  136.  The  washings  of  the  statues  of  the
various  divinities  were  common  among  both  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans.
It  is  conjectured  that  only  the  women  of  the  lowest  rank  took  part  in  the
washing  of  the  Goddess  on  this  occasion.

39  Golden  necklaces.] — Ver.  137.  '  Redimicula.'  This  word  generally
signifies  the  strings  or  ribbons  which  fell  on  the  shoulders  from  the
'mitra,'  or  head-dress,  and  were  probably  used  for  the  purpose  of  tying  it
under  the  chin.     Here,  however,  it  seems  to  mean  '  necklaces.'


B.  iv.  138—159.]  OR,    CALEMAR   OF   OTTD.  139

a  fresh  rose  be  given  to  her.  You  women,  too,  she  bids  to  bathe,
wearing  chaplets  of  the  green  myrtle  ;  and  why  she  does  so,
learn  now,  for  a  cause  exists.  All  naked,  she  was  drying  her
dripping  tresses  on  the  sea-shore  ;  the  Satyrs,  a  wanton  set,  be-
held the  goddess.  She  perceived  it,  and  concealed  her  person
by  an  intervening  myrtle  tree  ;  she  was  saved  by  so  doing,  and
she  desires  you  to  commemorate  the  circumstance.

Learn  now,  why  ye  offer  the  incense  to  Fortuna  Yirilis  ;40
in  that  place  which  is  all  moist  with  the  application  of
warm  water.  That  place  beholds  you  all  with  your  gar-
ments laid  aside,  and  every  imperfection  of  your  naked
person  is  exposed.  To  conceal  these,  and  to  hide  them  from
your  husbands,  does  Fortuna  Virilis  engage  ;  and  this  she
does,  if  requested  so  to  do,  with  the  offering  of  a  little  frankin-
cense. And  be  not  reluctant  to  take  the  poppy  bruised  with
the  snow-white  milk,  and  the  honey41  trickling  from  the
squeezed  combs.  When  first  Venus  was  led  home  by  her
eager  husband,  she  drank  of  this ;  from  that  time  she  was  a
wife.  With  suppliant  words  appease  her  ;  under  her  protec-
tion abide  both  beauty,  good  morals,  and  fair  fame.  Rome
had,  in  lapse  of  time,  degenerated  from  the  virtue  of  its  an-
cestors ;  then,  men  of  the  olden  time,  did  ye  consult  the
Cumaean  Sibyl.42     She    commanded   a    temple  to  be  erect-

40  Fortuna  Virilis.'] — Ver.  145.  Plutarch,  in  one  instance,  says  that  a
temple  was  erected  to  the  Goddess,  Male  Fortune,  (or  rather,  Fortune  of
the  Males),  by  Ancus  Martius ;  in  another  place  he  refers  the  building
of  it  to  Servius  Tullius,  in  which  statement  he  is  supported  by  Dionysius.
The  temple  contained  a  wooden  statue  of  Servius  Tullius.  Gower  thus
renders  this  and  the  next  line —

'  Male  Fortune,  pleas'd  with  but  a  little  spice,
Hides  from  your  husbands  all  deformities/
It  must  be  remembered  that  Fortuna  Virilis  was  not  a  God,  but  a  Goddess,
to  whom  were  entrusted  the  fortunes  of  the  male  sex.

41  And  the  honey. ,] — Ver.  152.  A  drink  made  of  milk,  honey,  and
bruised  poppies,  was  given  to  the  bride  on  the  day  of  her  nuptials,  as  we
are  informed  by  Puny,  Nat.  Hist.  Book  xix.  c.  8.    It  was  called  'cocetum.'

42  The  Cumcean  Sibyl.] — Ver.  158.  Sibylla  is  a  name  given  by  the
ancient  writers  to  several  mysterious  personages  of  antiquity ;  Pliny
mentions  three,  Plato  one,  iElian  four,  and  Varro  ten.  The  Sibyl  alluded
to  in  the  text,  and  mentioned  in  the  third  Book,  1.  534,  with  reference  to
her  great  age,  resided  at  Cumae,  in  Italy.  Erythrea  was  her  name,  though
she  is  sometimes  called  Herophile,  Daphne,  Deiphobe,  Manto,  &c.  Apollo
granted  her  a  life  to  equal  in  the  years  of  its  duration  the  grains  con-
tained in  a  handful  of  sand.     Forgetting  to  add  to  her  request  the  enjoy-


140  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  159— 169

ed43  to  Venus :  this  being  duly  performed  on  that  occasion,  Venus
obtained  the  name  of  "  Verticordia"  from  the  change  of  the
heart.  Ever  do  thou,  most  beauteous  Goddess,  look  upon  the
descendants  of  iEneas  with  pleased  aspect,  and  do  thou  protect
so  many  of  thy  daughters-in-law.

Whilst  I  am  speaking,  the  Scorpion,  formidable  for  the  sting
of  his  elevated  tail,  plunges  headlong44  into  the  green  waves.

When  the  night  shall  have  passed  away,  and  the  sky  shall
first  begin  to  blush,  and  the  birds,  touched  by  the  dewdrops,
shall  complain;  and  the  traveller  shall  now  throw  aside  his  half-
consumed  torch  after  watching  out  the  night,  and  the  swain
shall  proceed  to  his  wonted  toil ;   then  do  the  Pleiades  begin45

ment  of  health  and  strength,  decrepitude  and  infirmity  became  her  lot  as
her  years  advanced.  When  iEneas.  requested  her  aid  in  his  descent  to  the
infernal  regions,  seven  hundred  years  of  her  life  had  elapsed.  There
was  another  Sibyl  of  Cumaea,  in  JMia,  who  is  represented  as  being
a  different  personage  from  the  former.  One  of  the  Sibyls  offered  Tar-
quinius  Priscus,  or,  as  some  say,  Superbus,  nine  books  for  a  sum  of  money ;
on  being  twice  refused,  she  each  time  burned  three,  and  the  king  then
purchased  the  remaining  three  for  the  original  price.  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.
Book  xiii.  c.  13)  says  there  were  but  three  books  originally,  of  which  she
burned  two.  They  were  carefully  preserved  in  the  Capitolium,  in  a  stone
chest,  deposited  in  a  vault  underground.  They  were  supposed  to  shadow
forth  the  destinies  of  Rome,  and  were  consulted  on  great  emergencies :
two  men,  called  the  'Duumviri  Sacrorum,'  were  appointed  for  that  especial
purpose.

43  To  be  erected.] — Ver.  159.  In  the  year  a.u.c.  639,  in  the  con-
sulship of  Acilius  Balbus  and  Porcius  Cato,  Elvia,  the  maiden  daughter
of  Elvius,  a  man  of  equestrian  rank,  was  struck  with  lightning  while
on  horseback,  returning  with  her  father  to  Apulia  from  the  plays  at
Home.  Her  clothes  were  torn,  her  tongue  forced  out,  and  the  trappings
of  the  horse  wrenched  from  his  body.  On  this,  the  augurs  declared  that
the  occurrence  portended  infamy  to  the  knights  and  the  Vestals  of  Rome.
A  female  slave  gave  information  that  iEmilia,  Licinia,  and  Martia,  three
Vestals,  were  carrying  on  an  intrigue  with  some  of  the  Equites.  By  the
direction  of  the  Sibylline  books,  two  Greeks  and  two  Gauls  were  buried
alive  to  propitiate  some  foreign  deities,  and  a  statue  was  erected  to  Venus
Verticordia,  '  the  changer  of  hearts/  that  she  might  turn  the  hearts  of  the
females  from  iniquity.  Sulpicia,  the  wife  of  Fulvius  Flaccus,  was  selected,
by  reason  of  the  purity  of  her  character,  to  dedicate  the  statue.

44  Plunges  headlong.]— Ver.  164.  The  cosmical  setting  of  the  constel-
lation Scorpio  on  the  calends  of  April.

45  The  Pleiades  begin.'} — Ver.  169.  The  heliacal  setting  of  the  Pleiades
on  the  fourth  day  of  the  nones  of  April.  They  were  the  daughters  of
Atlas,  who  was  said  to  support  the  world  on  his  shoulders  ;  and,  as  in  their
setting,  the  weight  of  the  heavens  was  supposed  to  be  decreased,  they  were
said  thereby  to  ease  his  shoulders  of  a  part  of  his  burden


b.  iv.  169—18/.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  141

to  relieve  the  shoulders  of  their  father  Atlas :  the  Pleiades,
which  are  wont  to  be  called  seven,  but  which  really  are  but
six  in  number.  Either  it  is  because  but  six  of  them  came
into  the  embraces  of  the  Gods ;  for  they  say  that  Sterope
shared  the  bed  of  Mars  ;  Hdcyone,  that  of  Neptune  ;  and  you,
beautiful  Celseno,  Maia,  Electra,  and  Taygete,  that  of  Jupiter.
Merope,  the  seventh,  was  married  to  a  mortal,  to  thee,  0
Sisyphus.4®  She  repents  of  this,  and  in  solitude  lies  concealed,
through  shame  of  what  she  did.  Or  it  is,  because  Electra
could  not  endure  to  look  on  the  ruins  of  Troy,47  and  placed
her  hand  before  her  eyes.

Three  times  let  the  heavens  roll  round  on  their  revolving
axle  ;  three  times  let  Titan  yoke  and  unyoke  his  steeds.  Forth-
with the  Berecynthian  flute48  shall  blow,  together  with  the
crooked  horn,  and  the  festival  of  the  Idaean  mother  shall  take
place.  Her  eunuch  priests  shall  walk  in  procession,  and  shall
beat  the  hollow  tambourines,  and  the  cymbals,  struck  by  the
cymbals,  shall  send  forth  their  tinklings.  She  herself  shall
be  borne,  seated  on  the  eifeminate  shoulders  of  her  companions,49
carried  with  loud  howlings  through  the  middle  of  the  streets.
The  theatre  is  resounding,50  and  the  games  are  now  summoning

46  Sisyphus.'] — Ver.  175.  He  was  the  son  of  JEolus,  and  the  founder
of  Corinth.  He  was  notorious  for  his  robberies  and  frauds,  and  was  con-
demned to  roll  a  stone  up  a  hill  in  the  infernal  regions,  which,  soon  as  it
reached  the  summit,  rolling  down  again,  caused  a  never-ending  toil.

47  The  ruins  of  Troy.'] — Ver.  177.  She  was  the  mother  of  Dardanus,
the  first  of  the  Trojan  kings,  and  hence  is  supposed  to  have  felt  interest  in
the  fate  of  Troy.

48  Berecynthian  .flute.] — Ver.  181.  Berecynthia  was  a  mountain  in
Phrygia,  sacred  to  Cybele,  whence  the  present  epithet.  Midas  is  said  to
have  invented  the  flute  or  pipe  here  mentioned,  which  was  expanded  into
a  curve  all  round  at  the  end,  for  the  purpose  of  emitting  a  deeper  sound.
The  body  of  the  pipe  was  usually  of  box-wood,  or  of  Libyan  lotus  wood.
The  end  was  made  of  brass  or  horn.  The  sacred  rites  of  Cybele  were
performed  on  Mount  Ida,  in  Phrygia.

49  Her  companions.] — Ver.  185.  '  Comitum'  is  properly  used  here,  as
the  Goddess  was  carried  by  a  Phrygian  man  and  woman  through  the
streets.  The  other  names  of  Cybele,  besides  'the  Mother/  or  'Parent  of
the  Gods,'  were  Ops,  Rhea,  Magna  Mater,  (or  '  the  Great  Mother,')  and
Dindymene.  It  would  appear  that  Rhea  was  originally  a  Grecian  deity,
Ops,  an  Italian  Goddess,  and  Cybele,  a  Phrygian  divinity,  which  in  time
became  amalgamated  into  one  object  of  worship.

50  The  theatre  is  resounding.] — Ver.  187.  On  the  occasion  of  the
Megalesian  games,  plays  were  performed  in  the  theatre.     The  day  was


142  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  187— 205.

us  ;  attend  the  spectacle,  Quirites,  and  let  the  litigious  courts
be  rid  of  their  strife.  I  wish  to  ask  many  a  question :  but
the  noise  of  the  clashing  brass  quite  frightens  me,  and  the
curved  lotos  pipe  with  its  terrific  sound.  Send,  Cybelean
Goddess,  thy  grand-daughters,51  skilled  in  learning,  of  whom  I
may  inquire  what  I  wish  to  know.  She  hears  my  prayer,  and
desires  them  to  be  present  at  my  request.  "  Disclose  to  me,
mindful  of  her  command,  ye  daughters  of  Helicon,  why  the
great  Goddess  takes  pleasure  in  a  perpetual  noise?"  Thus  I
spoke.  Thus  Erato  answered  me  (the  month  of  Cytherea  fell
to  her  lot,  because  she  bears  the  name  of  tender  Love62),
"This  oracular  answer  was  returned  to  Saturn,  (  Best  of
kings,  by  thy  son  shalt  thou  be  hurled  from  thy  sovereignty.'  "
He,  fearing  his  own  offspring,  devours  each  of  them  as  each
is  born,  and  keeps  them,  thus  swallowed,53  in  his  entrails.
Often  did  Rhea  complain,  so  often  pregnant,  and  never  yet  a
mother  ;  and  she  grieved  at  her  own  fruitfulness.  Jupiter  was
born ;  antiquity  obtains  credit  as  a  witness  of  importance  ;
hesitate  before  questioning  the  received  belief.  A  stone  con-
cealed in  a  garment  lay  swallowed  in  the  throat  of  the  God  ;

1  nefastus/  or  one  on  which  no  work  was  allowed  to  be  done,  which  will
account  for  the  reference  to  the  Forums.  Gower's  translation  of  this  and
the  preceding  lines  is  very  quaint —

'  Thrice  more  let  heaven  on  const ant  axles  course.

Let  Sol  thrice  harness  and  knock  off  his  horse

Then  straight  the  Phrygian  hornpipe  doth  resound;

The  Idaean  granddame's  feast  is  now  renown'd.

Her  eunuchs  marching  beat  their  tabrets  hollow ;

From  brasse  knock'd  brasse  a  noise  a  noise  doth  follow.

She,  carry'd  on  her  servant's  neck,  in  pride

About  the  streets  is  whooted  to,  and  cri'd.

Resort,  ye  nobles ;  scenes  and  shews  do  call :

Now  in  the  court  be  there  no  suits  at  all/

51  Thy  grand-daughters.'] — Ver.  191.  The  Muses  were  the  daughters
of  Jupiter ;  and  Cybele,  being  identified  with  Rhea,  the  wife  of  Chronos,
or  Saturn,  and  the  mother  of  Jupiter,  they  would  be  her  grandchildren.
The  Goddess  derived  her  name  from  Mount  Cybele,  in  Phrygia.

52  Name  of  tender  Love."]—  Ver.  196.  The  name  of  Erato  comes  from
the  Greek  word  epwc*  '  love.'

58  Thus  swallowed.] — Ver.  199-200.  Gower's  most  comical  translation
is  to  the  following  effect —

*  He,  fearing  this,  devoureth  every  child
As  it  came  forth,  and  in  his  g — ts  it  killed. '


b   iv.  206—229.]  OR,    CALENDAR  OF   OYID.  143

thus  by  the  Destinies  was  the  father  doomed  to  be  deceived.
And  now  the  lofty  heights  of  Ida  are  resounding  with  the  tink-
lings,  that  the  babe  may  cry54  in  safety  with  his  infant  voice.
Some,  with  clubs  are  beating  the  shields,  some,  are  rattling
the  empty  helmets ;  in  this  work  are  engaged  the  Curetes
and  the  Corybantes.55  The  truth  was  concealed  from  the
father ;  and,  as  an  imitation  of  what  was  done  in  the  olden
time,  the  attendants  of  the  Goddess  still  beat  the  brass  and  the
hoarse  sounding  hides.  Cymbals  they  strike  in  place  of  the
helmets,  tambourines  for  the  shields  ;  the  pipe,  just  as  it  did
formerly,  yielded  its  Phrygian  notes.56  She  had  ended  ;  I  be-
gan, "  Why,  to  her,  does  the  fierce  race  of  the  lions  afford  for
the  bent  yoke  their  manes,  not  used  to  that  duty?"  I  had
ended ;  she  then  began,  "  Their  savage  nature  is  supposed  to
have  been  tamed  by  her  :  this  by  her  chariot  has  she  attested."
"  But  why  is  her  head  adorned  with  a  crown  of  turrets  ?  Was
it  she  that  gave  their  towers  to  the  earliest  cities  ?"  She  nodded
assent.  "  Whence  arose,"  said  I,  "  the  madness  in  her  priests
of  mutilating  their  own  members  ?"  Soon  as  I  was  silent,  the
maid  of  Pieria  began  to  speak.  "  Attis,  a  Phrygian  boy,  re-
markable for  his  beauty,  in  the  woods  attached  the  turret-
crowned  Goddess  to  him  by  the  ties  of  a  pure  love.  Him  she
desired  to  be  devoted  to  herself,  to  be  the  keeper  of  her  tem-
ples ;  and  she  said,  '  See  that  thou  always  keep  thyself  in
chastity.'  He  pledged  his  faith  to  her  commands,  and  said,
'  If  I  prove  false,  may  that  passion  by  which  I  commit  the
sin  be  my  last.'     He  sins,  and  in  his  passion  for  the  Nymph

54  The  babe  may  cry.~\ — Ver.  207 — 212,     Gower's  translation  is —

'  Long  had  a  tink^'ng  rung  in  Ida  tall,
That  so  the  infant  might  in  safety  brail.
The  Corybantes  and  Curetes,  some
On  ringing  helmets,  some  on  bucklers  drum.
The  child's  conceal' d.     In  signe  of  this,  therefore,
Her  followers  make  their  brasse  and  parchments  rore/

55  The  Corybantes.'] — Ver.  210.  The  Curetes  were  those  who,  accord-
ing to  the  legend,  danced  the  Pyrrhic  dance,  which  was  performed  in
armour  around  the  cradle  of  Jupiter.  They  were  also  called  '  Dactyli.'
The  Corybantes  were  the  priests  of  Cybele,  and  were  said  to  have  been
three  in  number,  Damnameneus,  Acmon,  and  Selmo.

56  Phrygian  notes.! — Ver.  214.  The  Phrygian  measure  was  that  used
in  the  musical  part  of  religious  ceremonies,  and  was  invented  by  Marsyas,
a  Phrygian.     We  are  told  by  Aristotle  that  it  was  deficient  in  modulation.


144  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  229— 262.

Sagaritis  lie  ceases  to  be  that  which  he  was  before ;   on  this
account  the  wrath  of  the  Goddess  exacts  vengeance.     She  de-
stroys the  Nymph  by  means  of  wounds  inflicted  upon  a  tree  ;
she  dies  ;  that  tree  formed  the  destiny  of  the  Naiad.     He  is
furious  ;   and  believing  that  the  ceiling  of  his  chamber   is
falling,   he  takes  to   flight,  and  in  his    course  reaches    the
heights  of  Dindymus.     And  at  one  moment  he  screams  out,
c Away  with    those    torches!5    at    another,   ( Away  with    the
scourges ! '  Ofttimes  he  declares  that  the  Goddesses  of  Paleeste58
are  nigh  at  hand.     He  mangled  his  body,  too,  with  a  sharp
stone,  and  his  long  hair  was  dragged  in  the  foul  dust.     His
cry  was,  s  Such  are  my  deserts  :  with  my  blood  I  am  paying
the  deserved  penalty ;  perish  those  which  in  me  have  been
the  sinning  parts  !  perish  they!'   again  said  he.     He  emascu-
lated himself,  and  in  a  moment  no  traces  of  manhood  were  left
to  him.     His  madness  became  a  precedent,  and  the  effeminate
priests  still  mutilate  themselves  as  they  toss  their  hair."     In
such  words,  by  the  eloquent  lips  of  the  Aonian  Muse,  was  the
cause  revealed  to  me  of  the  madness  about  which  I  had  made
this  inquiry.     "  Guide  of  my  task,  tell  me  this  also,  I  pray;
whence  was  she  brought,  when  she  first  arrived  here  ;  or  was
she  always  in  our  City?"   "The  Mother,"  said  she,  "was  ever
attached  to  Dindymus,  and  Cybele,  and  Ida,  pleasant  with  its
fountains,  and  the  realms  of  IHum.     When  iEneas  was  carry-
ing Troy  to  the  fields  of  Italy,  the  Goddess  was  on  the  point
of  following  the  ships  with  their  sacred  freights.  But  she  had
perceived,  that  not  as  yet  was  her  Divinity  invited  to  Latium
by  the  Destinies,  and  she  had  stopped  in  her  native  abodes.
Afterwards,  when  Rome,  powerful  in  her  resources,  beheld  fi\e
centuries  pass  over,  and  raised  her  head  aloft  from  the  con-
quest of  the  world,  the  priest  examined  the  words  of  destiny
in  the  Eubcean  prophecies.     They  say  that  on  examination
there  were  found  these  words  :  '  The  Mother  is  far  away  ;   I
command  thee,   man  of  Rome,  that    thou  fetch  hither  the
Mother  ;  when  she  comes  she  must  be  received  by  the  hand
of  chastity/      The  senate  is  perplexed  by  the  obscure  terms
of  the  mysterious  oracle  as  to  who  the  parent  is  that  is  away,

53  Goddesses  of  Palcsste.'] — Ver.  236.  From  the  mention  of  the  torches
and  whips  it  is  clear  that  the  Furies  are  meant.  They  had  a  temple  in
Epirus,  of  which  Paleeste  was  one  of  the  principal  cities.


b.  iv.  262—277.  OB,    CALENDAR   OF  OYID.  145

or  in  what  spot  she  must  be  sought.  Paean59  is  consulted,
and  he  answers,  "  Send  for  the  Mother  of  the  Gods  ;  she  is
to  be  found  on  the  heights  of  Ida."  Men  of  noble  rank60  are
sent  on  the  mission.  Attalus  was  then  swaying  the  sceptre  of
Phrygia ;  he  refuses  their  request61  to  the  men  of  Ausonia.
Of  miracles  will  I  sing  ;  the  earth  shook  with  a  prolonged
murmuring,  and  thus  chd  the  Goddess  speak  from  her  shrines :
"  I  myself  desired  to  be  sent  for.  Let  there  be  no  de-
lay ;  send  me  away,  thus  willing  to  depart.  Rome  is  a
place  worthy  to  be  the  retreat  of  every  Divinity/5  He,
struck  with  terror  at  the  sound,  said,  "  Depart ;  thou  wilt
still  be  ours ;  Rome  traces  her  ancestry  to  Phrygian  fore-
fathers." Forthwith,  axes  without  number  are  felling  the
forests  of  pine,  the  same  which  JEneas,  the  pious  Phrygian,
had  made  use  of  in  his  flight.  A  thousand  hands  unite  in
the  toil ;  and  the  hollow  bark,  ornamented  with  enamelled
colours,62  bears  the  Mother  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven.  She
is  carried  in  perfect  safety  over  the  waters  of  her  son  Neptune,

59  Pcean.~\ — Ver.  263.  This  was  an  epithet  of  Apollo,  from  the  Greek
ira'uo, l  to  strike,'  either  in  allusion  to  his  having  slain  the  serpent  Python,
or  from  the  same  word  in  the  sense  of  '  to  cure/  from  his  being  the  God
of  medicine.

b0  Men  of  noble  rank.] — Ver.  265.  They  were  five  in  number,  accord-
ing to  Livy  (Book  xxix.  c.  11)  : — M.  Valerius  Laevinus,  of  consular  rank  ;
M.  Cascilius  Metellus,  a  former  praetor ;  Sulpicius  Galba,  who  had  been
an  iEdile ;  and  Cneius  Tremellius  Flaccus  and  M.  Valerius  Falto.  Livy
says  that  Attalus,  king  of  Pergamus,  readily  consented  to  the  request  of
the  Senate,  being  in  alliance  with  the  Romans  against  Philip,  their  common
enemy.  Attalus  was  so  renowned  for  his  immense  wealth,  that  his  name
passed  into  a  proverb.  Having  no  male  offspring  by  Berenice,  his  wife,  he
bequeathed  all  his  possessions  to  the  Roman  people.

61  He  refuses  their  request.] — Ver.  266.  Livy  says  the  contrary,  and
that  he  forthwith  *  gave  them  the  sacred  stone,  which  they  said  was  the
mother  of  the  Gods,  and  bade  them  carry  it  to  Rome.'  Arnobius  tells  us
that  this  stone  was  but  small,  and  could  easily  be  carried  by  one  man  ;
that  it  was  black  and  tawny  in  colour,  of  irregular  form,  with  prominent
corners.  Mr.  Keightley,  on  very  good  grounds,  as  it  would  appear,  con-
siders that  it  was  an  aerolithe.  Livy  says  that  she  was  sent  for,  as  the
Sibylline  books  prophecied  the  invasion  of  a  foreign  people,  and  their
repulse  from  Italy  by  her  assistance,  if  brought  to  Rome.

62  Enamelled  colours.'] — Ver.  275.  Perhaps  more  properly  "  colours
subjected  to  fire."  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  Book  xxxv.  c.  41)  says  that  melted
wax  mixed  with  colours  was  laid  on  with  a  brush,  and  that  it  was  much
used  for  ornamenting  ships,  as  being  proof  against  the  action  of  the  sun
and  salt  water.


146  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  273— 300.

and  she  reaches  the  long  straits  of  the  sister  of  Phryxus ; 63
she  passes  the  destructive  Rhcetean  Sea,  the  shore  of  Sigseum,
Tenedos,  and  the  ancient  realms  of  Eetion.  The  Cyclades
receive  her,  Lesbos  being  left  behind,  and  the  spot  when  the
tide  breaks  on  the  shallows  of  Carystum.  She  passes,  too,
over  the  Icarian  Sea,  where  Icarus  lost  his  wings  that  fell  off,
and  he  thereby  gave  a  name  to  that  extensive  tract  of  water.
Then  she  leaves  Crete  on  her  left,  on  her  right,  the  waters  of
Pelops  ;  and  she  comes  to  Cythera,  sacred  to  Yenus.  Hence
she  enters  the  Trinacrian  Sea,64  in  which  Brontes,  Steropes,  and
Acmonides,65  are  wont  to  dip  the  steel  when  at  a  white  heat :
she  sails  over  the  sea  of  Africa,  and  beholds,  over  the  oars,  on
the  left  side,  the  realms  of  Sardinia ;  and  noiv  she  makes
Ausonia.  She  had  arrived  at  Ostia,  where  the  river  Tiber
empties  itself  by  its  two  mouths  into  the  deep,  and  flows  in  a
space  of  greater  extent.  All  those  of  the  Equestrian  order,  and
the  dignified  Senate,  intermingled  with  those  of  Plebeian  rank,
come  to  meet  her  at  the  mouths  of  the  Etrurian  river.  Then
go  forth  together  both  mothers  and  daughters,  and  brides
newly  become  daughters-in-law,  and  those  who  tend  the  sacred
altars  in  the  virgin  state.  The  men  weary  their  labour-
ing arms  with  the  rope  tightly  stretched ;  scarcely  does  the
stranger  bark  make  way  against  the  stream.  Long  time  had
the  land  been  parched  ;  the  drought  had  burnt  up  the  grass.
The  keel,  overpowered  by  the  burden  of  the  freight,  rests  on

63  Sister  of  Phryxus'] — Ver.  278.  Helle,  who  gave  name  to  the
Hellespont.  The  places  here  mentioned  in  succession  are,  the  Hellespont,
the  Rhoetean  Sea  washing  Rhceteuni  and  Sigaeum,  towns  of  Troy;  Tenedos,
an  island  within  sight  of  Troy,  famous  for  its  earthenware  ;  Thebes,  near
Adramyttium,  the  residence  of  Eetion,  the  father  of  Andromache ;  the
Cyclades  and  Lesbos,  Islands  of  the  JEgean  Sea,  near  Delos  ;  Caristus,  in
Euboea,  opposite  the  isle  of  Andros  •,  the  Icarian  Sea,  near  Samos,  into
which  Icarus  fell,  when  soaring  on  his  wings  with  his  father  Daedalus  ;
the  isle  of  Crete,  now  Candia  ;  the  coast  of  the  Peloponnesus  ;  the  isle  of
Cythera,  on  the  coast  of  Laconia ;  the  Sicilian  Sea ;  the  coast  of  Africa ;
the  island  of  Sardinia.

64  The  Trinacrian  Sea.] — Ver.  287.  Trinacriawas  the  Grecian  name  of
Sicily,  from  its  three  corners  or  promontories  Pachynus,  Pelorus,  and  Lily-
baeum.  ^Etna,  its  volcano,  was  sacred  to  Vulcan,  and  its  eruptions  were
supposed  to  be  caused  by  the  Cyclops  working  at  the  forge.

65  Acmonides.] — Ver.  288.  Virgil  calls  him  Pyracmon.  Brontes  is
from  fipovTrj,  '  thunder;'  Steropes  from  (Trtpoirn,  *  lightning;'  and  Ac-
monides from  atcpuv,  c  an  anvil/


B.  iv.  300— 318.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  14/

the  shoal  covered  with  mud.  Whoever  assists  at  the  work  is
labouring  even  beyond  his  strength,  and  by  the  sound  of  his
voice66  gives  aid  in  keeping  time  to  the  power  of  his  arms.
The  vessel  settles  there  just  like  an  island,  immoveable  in  the
midst  of  the  ocean.  Claudia  Quinta  traced  her  descent  from
the  noble  Clausus  ; 67  and  her  beauty  was  not  inferior  to  her
noble  birth.  Chaste,  in  truth,  was  she  ;  but  she  had  not  the
credit  of  being  so  ;  unjust  slander  had  done  her  an  injury,  and
she  was  charged  on  a  false  accusation.  Her  style  of  dress,68
and  her  having  appeared  in  public  with  her  hair  fancifully
adorned,  together  with  the  readiness  of  her  replies  to  the
austerity  of  old  age,69  had  done  her  this  injury.  Her  mind,
conscious  of  her  integrity,  laughed  to  scorn  the  falsehoods  of
report ;  but  we  are,  all  of  us,  a  set  too  ready  to  believe  ill.
After  she  had  stepped  forward  from  the  train  of  the  chaste
matrons,  she  took  up  with  her  hands  some  pure  water  of  the
stream,  and  thrice  did  she  sprinkle  her  head,  and  thrice  did
she  raise  her  hands  to  the  heavens.  Those  who  behold  her,
think  that  she  is  deprived  of  her  senses.  And  now,  with
bending  knee,  she  fixes  her  looks  on  the  image  of  the  Goddess,
and  with  her  hair  all   dishevelled70  she  utters  these  words,

^  By  the  sound  of  his  voice, ,] — Ver.  302.  This  seems  to  have,  been,
and  still  is,  a  habit  peculiar  to  sailors  of  all  ages  and  all  countries.  Mar-
tial calls  the  word  given  to  the  rowers  by  the  '  pausarius,'  or  '  horta-
tor,'  (the  'timekeeper'),  '  celeusma,'  'the  command/  from  the  Greek
KsKsvu),  'to  order.'  Strabo  tells  us,  that  it  was  dangerous  for  ves-
sels, when  laden,  to  pass  the  bar  of  the  Tiber,  and  that  they  usually  dis-
charged or  lightened  their  cargo  at  the  mouth.

67  The  noble  Clausus.'] — Ver.  305.  Atta  (or  Attus)  Clausus  migrated
from  Regillum,  a  Sabine  town,  to  Rome,  where  his  family  was  received
into  the  number  of  the  patricians,  five  years  after  the  expulsion  of  the
Tarquins ;  and  Attus  himself  was  called  Appius  Claudius.  The  Claudia
here  mentioned  was  the  grand-daughter  of  Appius  Claudius  Caecus.

68  Her  style  of  dress.] — Ver.  309-10.     Gower's  translation  is,

'  Her  habits  brave,  and  music  so  delicious,
And  spruce  attire,  did  make  her  more  suspicious.'

69  The  austerity  of  old  age.] — Ver.  310.  Perhaps  she  had  been  taken
to  task  for  her  gaiety  by  her  seniors,  and  had  told  them  to  mind  their  own
business,  which  did  not  improve  their  opinion  of  her.

70  Hair  all  dishevelled.] — Ver.  318.  Ornaments  were  not  permitted  to
be  worn  during  the  performance  of  religious  ceremonies.  Our  churches
at  the  present  day  bear  no  testimony  to  the  continued  observance  of  this
regulation.

L  2


148  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  319— 344.      j

"  Genial  Goddess,  thou  fruitful  parent  of  the  Gods,  receive
these  the  prayers  of  thy  supplicant  on  this  express  stipulation.
My  chastity  is  impugned.  If  thou  condenmest  me,  I  will
confess  that  I  have  deserved  it.  With  my  death  I  will  pay
the  penalty,  if  convicted,  a  Goddess  being  my  judge.  But  if
guilt  is  far  from  me,  thou  wilt  give  by  the  event  a  pledge  of
my  innocence,  and,  chaste  thyself,  thou  wilt  follow  my  chaste
hands."  She  said,  and  with  a  slight  effort  she  drew  the  rope.
That  which  I  tell  of  is  wondrous  ;  but  it  is  still  testified  by
the  representations  of  our  stage.71  The  Goddess  is  moved ;
she  follows  her  guide,  and,  by  following,  bestows  on  her  her
testimony  of  approbation.  A  shout,  the  sign  of  exultation,
rises  to  the  sky.  They  come  to  the  bending  of  the  river ;  the
ancients  call  that  place  Ostia,72  on  the  Tiber,  from  which  point
it  takes  its  course  to  the  left.  Night  had  come  ;  they  tie  the
cable  to  the  trunk  of  an  oak,  and  after  a  repast  they  consign
their  bodies  to  gentle  slumber.  The  morning  had  now  come  ;
they  loosen  the  cable  from  the  trunk  of  the  oak,  but  first  they
offer  frankincense  on  an  altar  which  they  had  erected ;,  before
the  poop  of  the  vessel,  crowned  with  flowers,  they  sacrifice  a
heifer,  without  spot,  that  had  neither  borne  the  yoke  nor  been
coupled  with  the  bull.  There  is  a  spot  where  the  rapid  Almo
flows  into  the  Tiber,  and  the  lesser  stream  loses  its  name  in
that  of  the  greater.  There  does  the  hoary  priest,  in  his  purple
vestments,  lave  the  lady  Goddess  and  her  sacred  utensils  in  the
waters  of  the  Almo.73  His  attendants  raise  on  high  the  howl,
the  maddening  pipe  is  blown,  and  their  effeminate  hands  strike
the  tightened  hides74  of  the  oxen.  Claudia  walks  in  front,  the
most  distinguished  by  the  joyousness  of  her  countenance,  with

71  Our  stage.] — Ver.  326.  Probably  this  was  one  of  the  stock  sub-
jects of  the  scenic  representations  in  the  theatre,  on  the  occasion  of  the
Megalesian  games.

72  Ostia.~\ — Ver.  330.  This  would  seem  to  be  the  name  of  the  spot
where  the  river  divided  itself,  at  some  distance  from  the  sea,  and  not  the
town  of  Ostia  at  its  mouth,  which  was  founded  by  Ancus  Martius,  and  was
celebrated  for  its  salt-pans — '  salinae  Ostienses.'

73  The  waters  of  the  Almo.'] — Ver.  340.  It  was  the  yearly  custom  to
wash  both  the  image  of  the  Goddess,  and  her  chariot,  in  the  waters  of  the
Almo.

74  The  tightened  hides.'] — Ver.  341-2.     Gower's  translation  is,

'  Her  followers  hollow.     Furious  pipes  resound ;
And  velome  thumpt  t'  her  eunuch's  hands  redound/


b.  iv.  344—357.]  OR.    CALENDAR   OP  OTK).  149

difficulty  now  at  last  believed  to  be  chaste  on  the  testimony  of
a  Goddess.  She  herself,  seated  in  a  car,  is  carried  through  the
Capenian  gate ; 75  the  yoked  oxen  are  strewed  with  flowers
newly  plucked.  Nasica76  receives  her;  though  at  that  time  the
builder  of  her  temple,  he  has  not  always  continued  so.  Augus-
tus has  now  that  character  ;  formerly  Metellus  was  its  builder."
Here  Erato  stopped.  She  paused,  to  see  if  I  should  make
further  inquiries.  "  Tell  me/'  said  I,  "  why  the  Goddess  col-
lects a  contribution77  in  a  few  worthless  coins  V  "  Because"
said  she,  <e  the  people  contributed  the  brass,  of  which  Metellus
formed  the  shrine  ;  thence  is  still  extant  the  custom  of  giving
the  trifling  coin."  I  inquired  why  people  at  that  time  in  par-
ticular frequent  the  banquets,  giving  them,  each  in  his  turn,73
and  spontaneously  attend  the  feasts  which  are  duly  proclaimed  ?
"  Because,"  said  she,  "  as  with  good  omen  did  Berecynthia
change  her  abode,  so  by  change  of  place  do  they  seek  for  a
similar  omen."     I  had  intended  to  ask  why  the  Megalesian

75  The  Capenian  gate.] — Ver.  345.  The  Porta  Capena  opened  out  on
the  Appian  Way.     The  Marcian  aqueduct  passed  over  it.

76  Nasica."]  — Ver.  347.  The  sacred  image  was  entrusted  to  P.  Corne-
lius Scipio  Nasica,  (the  son  of  Cneius  Scipio  who  had  been  slain  in  Spain,)
as  being  the  most  worthy  citizen.  He  received  her  at  first  into  his  own
house,  and  afterwards  she  was  placed  in  the  temple  of  Victory,  on  the
Palatine  hill.  Her  temple  was  contracted  for  by  Scipio,  but  was  not  dedi-
cated till  thirteen  years  afterwards,  when  stage-plays  were  first  acted  at
the  Megalesian  games,  though  both  had  been  introduced  into  the  city  be-
fore that  period.  Livy  says  that  the  temple  was  built  by  the  Censors  M.
Livius  and  C.  Claudius.  The  latter  being  the  father  of  the  virgin  Claudia,
Burmann  suggests  that  the  reading  of  the  line  is,  '  Templi  pater  extitit
auctor,'  '  Her  father  founded  the  temple.'  Metellus  afterwards  repaired
it,  and  Augustus  rebuilt  it  when  destroyed  by  fire.

77  Collects  a  contribution.] — Ver.  351.  During  the  festival,  while  the
image  was  being  carried  through  the  city,  a  Phrygian  man  and  woman
collected  alms  in  small  coins,  to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  worship  of  the
Deity.  These  persons,  from  this  practice,  were  called  by  the  Greeks
firjrpayvprai,  signifying  'collectors  for  the  mother.'  The  poet  seems
to  be  mistaken  in  his  statement  of  the  reason  for  the  collection.

78  Each  in  his  turn.] — Ver.  353.  It  was  usual  at  the  Megalesia  for
the  principal  families  to  give  mutual  entertainments,  which  were  duly
proclaimed,  < indicta,'  and  their  friends  attended  without  any  special  invi-
tation, and  then  gave  banquets  in  return.  This  was  called  '  mutitare,'  'to
give  and  take.'  The  poet  very  lamely  accounts  for  the  custom  and  the
origin  of  the  word,  by  saying  that  the  Goddess  at  that  season  '  changed/
1  mutabat,'  her  abode.


150  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  357— 376.

were  the  first  games79  m  our  city,  when  the  Goddess,  for  she
perceived  it,  said,  "  It  was  she  that  gave  birth  to  the  Gods.
The  others  gave  way  to  their  parent ;  and  their  Mother  has
the  first  place  in  the  honour  that  has  been  given  to  them."
"  Why,  then/'  said  I,  "  do  we  call  those  Galli,  who  have  muti-
lated themselves  ;  inasmuch  as  the  Gallic  region  is  at  so  great
a  distance  from  Phrygia."  She  said,  "  Between  the  green
Cybele  and  the  lofty  Celsenee80  there  flows  a  stream  with  mad-
dening waters,  Gallus  by  name.  The  person  who  drinks  of
it  goes  mad ;  depart  ye  afar  thence,  you  who  have  a  wish  for
a  sound  mind;  the  person  who  drinks  of  it  goes  mad."81
"  Does  it  not  seem  a  shame,"  said  I,  "to  place  the  salad  made
of  herbs82  on  the  table  of  the  lady  Goddess  ?  Or  does  there
exist  some  peculiar  cause  for  it  ?"  (e  The  ancients,"  she  re-
plied, "  are  said  to  have  used  but  simple  milk,  and  such
herbs  as  the  earth  spontaneously  produced.  The  white  cheese
is  mixed  up  with  the  bruised  herbs,  that  the  ancient  Goddess
in  them  may  recognize  the  ancient  diet."

When  the  next  Pallantias83  shall  have  shone,  the  stars  having
retreated  from  the  sky,  and  the  moon  shall  have  unyoked  her
snow-white  steeds,  that  person  who  shall  then  say,  "  Once,  on

79  The  first  games.] — Ver.  357-8.     Gower's  version  is —

'  Why,  then,  are  her  games  Megalesia,
By  Rome  kept  first  ?     To  this  my  Muse  did  say/

80  The  lofty  CeZcence.] — Ver.  362.  This  was  the  name  of  a  mountain
and  town  of  Phrygia,  near  Mount  Cybele,  and  once  the  chief  place  of  that
country.  The  river  Maeander  rose  on  its  summit,  and  the  Marsyas  in  its
neighbourhood.  Pliny,  in  his  Natural  History  (book  xxxi.  c.  2),  saysT
that  the  waters  of  the  river  Gallus  were  good  for  persons  afflicted  with
stone,  but  that  taken  in  excess  they  produced  madness.

81  Goes  mad.'] — Ver.  365-8.     Gower  thus  translates  these  lines  : —

'  It  causes  madnesse :  fly  it  all  in  sadnesse,
That  love  your  wits  :  The  water  wTorketh  madnesse.
Upon  her  table  'tis,  said  I,  in  season,
To  set  herb  puddings  :  Is  there  any  reason  ?'

82  The  salad  made  of  herbs.']—  Ver.  367'.  '  Moretum.'  This  mess,  if
it  can  be  called  a  salad,  was  a  mixture  of  garlic,  parsley,  rue,  coriander,
onions,  cheese,  oil  and  vinegar.  Virgil  composed  a  poem  under  this  name,
in  praise  of  the  mixture.

83  Pallantias.] — Ver.  373.  Aurora  is  so  called  from  being  the  cousin
of  Pallas,  who  was  one  of  the  Titans.


B.  iv.  370—390.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OT   OYID.  151

this  day,  was  Public  Fortune S4  installed  on  the  hill  of  Quirinus,,,
will  be  speaking  the  truth.

The  third  day,  I  remember,  was  appointed  for  the  games.
But  as  I  was  a  spectator,  an  old  man  who  sat  near  me,  said,
*f  This  was  the  day  on  which  Caesar,  in  the  Libyan  regions,
crushed  the  traitorous  arms  of  the  courageous  Juba.S5  Csesar
was  my  general ;  under  him  it  is  my  boast  to  have  served  as  a
Tribune ;  he  was  the  commander  in  my  time  of  active  ser-
vice. By  war  have  I  obtained  the  distinction  of  this  seat,  by
peace  hast  thou,*6  being  invested  with  office  in  the  number  of
the  twice  five  men."  About  to  continue  the  conversation,  we
were  separated  by  a  sudden  shower.S7  The  vibrating  Balance
was  urging  downwards  the  waters  of  the  sky.  But  before  the
last  day  puts  an  end  to  the  shows,  the  sword-girt  Orion  shall
be  plunged  into  the  deep.

When  the  next  dawn  shall  have  looked  upon  victorious
Rome,  and  the  stars,  put  to  flight,  shall  have  given  place  to  the

54  Public  Fortune.'] — Ver.  376.  The  temple  to  '  Public  Fortune/  or  the
'  Fortune  of  the  State/  was  vowed  a.u.c.  549,  by  the  consul  Sempronius,
on  the  eve  of  a  battle  with  Hannibal.

55  The  traitorous  Juba.] — Ver.  380.  After  the  defeat  of  Pompey  at
Pharsalia,  Cato  and  Scipio  fled  to  Juba  in  Numidia  for  assistance.  Caesar
defeated  them  with  immense  slaughter.  From  his  native  character  as  a
Numidian,  the  poet  calls  him  'perndus;'  or,  perhaps,  because  he  resisted
Caesar  in  his  career  of  conquest.  Being  defeated  at  Thapsus,  he  killed
himself,  which  act,  being  one  highly  approved  of  in  the  Roman  code  of
morals,  would  entitle  him  to  the  epithet  '  magnanimus.'

85  By  peace  hast  thou.] — Ver.  383.  There  were  fourteen  rows  in  the
theatre  set  apart  for  the  Equestrian  order,  in  which  the  poet  might,  as  a
member  of  that  order,  have  taken  his  seat.  It  seems  doubtful  if  the  Tri-
bune could  have  claimed  a  seat  there.  But,  as  a  public  officer,  or  rather
an  officer  of  the  Roman  army,  he  was  sitting  near  Ovid,  who  was  then
filling  the  office  of  a  Decemvir,  on  a  seat  most  probably  reserved  for  per-
sons bearing  office.  The  Decemviri  were  appointed  by  Augustus  to  assem-
ble the  judges,  and  generally  to  inspect  the  management  of  the  courts  of
law.

87  A  sudden  shower.'] — Ver.  385.  The  awning  over  the  theatres  was
only  fitted  to  modify  the  heat  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,  but  was  not  adapted
to  give  shelter  against  rain.  On  such  occasions  the  people  generally  took
refuge  in  the  porticoes  till  the  rain  was  over.  The  latter  part  of  the
speech  of  the  old  Tribune  is  thus  translated  by  Gower : —

i  I  served  a  Tribune  under  Caesar's  banner,
Lord  of  my  actions ;  wThich  I  count  my  honour.
My  warfare  me,  this  place  thy  gown  gave  thee  ;
Both  raised  to  the  "  office  of  Decemviri."  '


152  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  390—420.

Sun,  the  Circus  will  be  thronged  with  the  procession88  and  the
multitude  of  the  Gods;  and  the  first  palm  shall  be  contended  for
by  steeds  that  rival  the  winds  in  speed.  These  are  the  games
of  Ceres  ;  there  is  no  need  of  any  explanation  of  their  origin  ;
of  themselves,  both  the  office  and  the  merits  of  the  Goddess  are
plain  to  be  perceived.  To  the  first  mortals,  the  green  grass,
which  the  earth  yielded  without  the  urgent  demand  of  any
one,  was  in  the  place  of  the  harvest.  At  one  time  did  they
pluck  the  grass  from  the  green  sod ;  at  another  time  the  tree-
top,  with  its  tender  foliage,  was  their  repast.  Afterwards,  the
acorn  was  produced ;  well  was  it  with  them,  now  that  the
acorn  was  discovered ;  and  the  hard  oak  furnished  a  sumptuous
supply.  Ceres  was  the  first  to  change  the  acorn  for  a  more
nutritious  food,  by  inviting  mankind  to  a  better  kind  of  diet.
She  it  was  who  compelled  the  bulls  to  bend  their  necks  to  the
yoke ;  then  for  the  first  time  did  the  upturned  earth  see  the
light  of  the  sun.  Brass  became  valuable  ;  the  mass  of  iron
still  lay  hid ;  alas !  would  that  it  had  ever  remained  con-
cealed. Ceres  takes  delight  in  peace ;  and  do  you,  ye  hus-
bandmen, pray  that  peace  may  be  everlasting,  and  that  our
Prince  may  be  immortal.  Ye  may  offer  to  the  Goddess  the
spelt  and  the  tribute  of  the  crackling  grain  of  salt,  and  the
cloves  of  frankincense,  upon  her  ancient  hearths ;  and  if  ye
shall  be  without  frankincense,  then  set  fire  to  the  unctuous
torches.  Little  offerings  are  pleasing  to  the  good  Ceres,  if  they
are  only  pure.  Ye  aproned  attendants  of  the  priests,  remove
the  knives  afar  from  the  ox — the  ox  may  plough — sacrifice
rather  the  idle  swine.  A  neck  that  is  fitted  by  nature  for  the
yoke  ought  not  to  be  smitten  by  the  axe ;  let  him  live  rather,
and  many  a  time  may  he  labour  on  the  hard  soil.  This  oppor-
tunity now  calls  upon  me  to  tell  of  the  rape  of  the  Virgin.
The  greater  part  of  the  story  you  wili  recal  to  your  memory  .
on  a  few  points  you  will  require  to  be  informed.     The  Trinac.

88  Thronged  with  the  procession, ,"] — Ver.  391.  On  the  first  day  of  the
Ludi  Cereales,  there  was  a  'pompa'  or  procession,  from  the  Capitol,
through  the  Forum,  to  the  Circus  Maximus.  The  officers  of  state  preceded,
followed  by  the  men  of  age  for  military  service  on  foot  and  horseback.
Then  followed  the  chariots  with  four,  and  two  horses,  and  then  those  with
hut  one  horse  ;  musicians  and  dancers  followed,  and  the  procession  closed
with  the  images  of  numerous  Gods  earned  either  in  chariots  or  on  men's
shoulders.  The  palm-branch  was  given  to  the  conquerors  in  the  games  as
the  token  and  prize  of  victory.


b.  iv.  420— 439.]  OK,    CALEISDAE,   OF   OYID.  153

rian  land  juts  out  into  the  vast  ocean  with  three  rocks,  deriving
its  name  from  the  position  of  the  spot.  It  is  a  habitation
delightful  to  Ceres  ;  there  possesses  she  many  a  city,  among
which  is  the  fruitful  Henna,89  with  its  well-tilled  soil.  Cold
Arethusa  had  invited  the  matrons  of  the  inhabitants  of  heaven  ;
the  yellow-haired  Goddess,  too,  had  come  to  the  sacred  ban-
quet. Her  daughter,  attended  as  she  was  by  the  damsels,  her
constant  companions,  was  wandering  with  bare  foot  along
her  own  meadows.  There  was  a  spot  at  the  bottom  of  a  shady
vale,  watered  by  the  plenteous  spray  of  the  stream  that  falls
from  a  height.  There  were  as  many  tints  there  as  nature
possesses,  and  the  ground  was  beauteous,  decked  with  flowers
of  diversified  hue.  Soon  as  she  beheld  this  she  said,  "  Come,
my  companions,  and  together  with  me  fill  your  bosoms  with
the  flowers."  The  worthless  prize  delights  their  girlish  minds  ;
and,  in  their  earnestness,  the  toil  is  not  felt.  One  is  filling
baskets  woven  of  the  pliant  osier,  another  one  is  loading  her
lap,  another  the  bosom  of  her  dress  loosened  for  the  purpose.
One  is  gathering  marygolds,  to  another  the  beds  of  violets  are
an  object  of  search;  another,  with  her  nail,  is  cropping  the
blossom  of  the  poppy.    Some  thou  engagest,  0  hyacinth,90  some

89  Fruitful  Henna.'] — Ver.  422.  This  town,  called  also  Enna,  was,
from  its  central  situation,  called  the  '  navel*  of  Sicily.  It  had  a  sacred
grove  and  a  temple.  Sicily  was  of  proverbial  fertility,  whence  it  was  con-
sidered the  chosen  abode  of  Ceres.  She  had  a  temple  there,  founded  by
Gelon,  of  Syracuse,  containing  two  images  of  the  divinity,  one  in  marble,
the  other  in  brass.  Ovid  relates  this  story  at  some  length  in  the  fifth
Book  of  the  Metamorphoses.  Arethusa  was  the  nymph  of  a  fountain  at
Syracuse,  and  is  said  by  some  of  the  poets  to  have  been  privy  to  Pluto's
designs  against  Proserpine.  Homer  gives  Nysa,  in  Caria,  as  the  scene  of
her  abduction,  other  authors,  Attica,  Arcadia,  or  Crete.  Gower's  transla-
tion of  the  419th  and  420th  lines  will  oblige  us  to  give  a  rather  Hiber-
nian twang  to  the  end  of  the  first  line —

1  A  land  with  three  rocks  crowds  into  the  sea,
From  its  triangle  called  Trinacria.'

00  Hyacinth^ — Ver.  439.  Hyacinthus,  a  beauteous  youth,  having  been
accidentally  slain  by  Apollo,  was  changed  by  the  God  into  a  hyacinth,
which,  according  to  the  exuberant  fancy  of  the  poets,  bears  in  its  flowers
the  impress  of  the  letters  'At,  'At,  expressive,  in  the  Greek  language,  of
*  alas  !  alas  !  '  uttered  by  Apollo  in  his  grief.  The  same  flower  is  said  to
have  sprung  from  the  blood  of  Ajax  when  he  killed  himself,  bearing  the
above  letters,  expressive  either  of  grief,  or  as  denoting  the  first  two  letters
of  the  name  of  Ajax,  *Aiae,\


154  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  439— 4G9.

thou  detainest,  0  amaranth;  some  choose  the  thyme,  some  the
rosemary,  and  some  the  melilote  ;  many  a  rose  is  gathered,
and  many  a  nameless  flower  is  there.  She  herself  is  pluck-
ing the  delicate  crocuses  and  the  white  lilies.  In  her  eager-
ness to  gather  them,  the  distance  is  gradually  increased,  and
by  chance  none  of  her  companions  follow  their  mistress.
Her  uncle  espies  her,  and  having  seen  her,  in  haste  he  bears  her
away,  and  on  his  azure- coloured  steed  carries  her  to  his  own
realms.  She  indeed  cries  aloud,  "  Alas  !  my  dearest  mother !
I  am  being  carried  away  !"  and  with  her  own  hand  she  rends  her
garments  in  despair.  Meantime,  a  way  is  opened91  to  Pluto  ;
for  his  steeds,  unused  to  it,  can  scarcely  endure  the  light  of
day.  But  the  company  of  her  companions,  their  baskets
being  heaped  with  flowers,  cry  aloud,  "  Come,  Persephone,  to
thy  presents."  When  thus  called  on,  she  returns  not  an
answer;  they  fill  the  mountains  with  their  wailings,  and
with  sorrowing  hand  beat  their  naked  bosoms.  Ceres  was
amazed  at  the  lamentation ;  she  had  just  come  to  Henna,  and
straightway  she  exclaimed,  "  Woe  is  me !  my  daughter,  where
art  thou?"  In  distraction  she  is  hurried  along,  just  as  we
are  wont  to  hear  that  the  Thracian  Bacchanals,92  in  their
raving,  go  with  their  hair  all  dishevelled.  As  lows  the  mother
when  her  calf  has  been  torn  from  her  udder,  and  she  seeks  for
her  offspring  throughout  the  wood,  even  so  does  the  God-
dess ;  she  restrains  not  her  wailing,  and  is  swiftly  borne  on  her
course ;  and  she  begins  it  from  thy  plains,  0  Henna.  She
finds  the  marks  of  the  virgin's  foot  leading  thence,  and  sees
where  the  ground  has  been  imprinted  with  the  well-known
pressure.  Perhaps  that  would  have  been  the  last  day  of  her
wanderings,  had  not  the  swine  confused  the  traces  which  she
had  discovered.  And  now  in  her  course  she  passes  the  people
of  Leontium  and  the  streams  of  Amenanus,  and  thy  banks,
grassy  Acis.     She  passes,  too,  Cyane,  and  the  spring  of  the

91  A  way  is  opened."] — Ver.  449.  According  to  Cicero,  the  descent  was
through  a  lake  near  the  city  of  Syracuse ;  but  he  says  that  the  God  ,had
ascended  through  a  vast  cavern  near  Henna.

92  Bacchanals.'] — Ver.  458.  They  are  called  '  Maenades,'  from  the
Greek  fiaivopai,  '  to  rave  in  madness/  as  their  frantic  gestures  formed  part
of  their  worship.     Gower  thus  translates  this  and  the  preceding  line, —

*  About  she  hurries,  in  a  dead  distraction,
Like  shrews  of  Bacchus  in  their  frantic  action/


B.  iv.  460—500.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OP    OYID.  155

gently  flowing  Anapus,  and  thee,  0  Gela,  not  to  be  approached
by  reason  of  thy  eddies.  She  had  noiv  left  behind  Ortygia,
and  Megara,  and  Pantagias,  and  the  spot  where  the  ocean
receives  the  waters  of  Symsethus,  and  the  caves  of  the  Cyclops,
burned  up  by  the  forges  which  had  been  erected  there,  and
the  place  which  has  the  name  of  the  curved  sickle,  and  Hi-
mera,  and  Didyme,  and  Agrigentum,  and  Tauromenus,  and
Mela,  the  joyful  pasture  of  the  sacred  oxen.93  Hence  she
goes  to  Camerina,  and  Thapsos,  and  the  glens  of  the  Helorus,
and  the  spot  where  Eryx,  ever  exposed,  lies  open  to  the  breeze
of  the  Zephyr.  And  now  had  she  visited  the  mountain  of
Pelorus,  and  Lilybeeum,  and  Pachynus,  the  three  headlands
of  her  island.  Wherever  she  comes,  she  rills  every  place  with
her  pitiable  complaints,  just  as  when  the  bird  is  bewailing  her
lost  Itys.  In  turns,  she  exclaims  at  one  time,  "Persephone  !"
at  another,  "  My  daughter  !"  and,  in  alternate  cries,  she  calls
on  her  by  either  appellation.  But  neither  did  Persephone
hear  Ceres,  nor  the  daughter  her  mother ;  and,  in  their  turn,
each  appellation  fell  dead  on  her  ear.  And  if  Ceres  saw  a
shepherd  or  any  one  tilling  the  fields,  this  was  her  one  speech,
"Has  any  girl  passed  this  way?"  And  now  the  world  has
but  one  hue,  and  all  things  are  enwrapped  in  darkness  ;  even
the  watchful  dogs  have  now  ceased  their  barking.  The  lofty
iEtna  lies  on  the  face  of  the  gigantic  Typhosus,  with  whose
blazes,  emitted  by  his  pan  tings,  the  ground  is  on  fire.  Then
she  lights  two  pines  for  a  torch  :  from  this  circumstance,  even
to  this  day,  the  torch  is  used  in  the  sacred  rites  of  Ceres.
There  is  a  cave,  rough  with  the  erected  piles  of  the  excavated
pumice-stone,  a  place  to  be  approached  neither  by  man  nor
by  wild  beast.  As  soon  as  she  arrives  thither,  she  joins  the
harnessed  dragons  to  her  car,  and,  untouched  by  the  waters,
she  traverses  the  waves  of  the  ocean.  She  escapes  the  Syrtes,
and  thee,  0  Zanclsean  Charybdis,94  and  you,  dogs  of  the  daughter

93  The  sacred  oxen.~\ — Ver.  475-6.      Gower  thus  renders  these  lines,—

4  Then  Himere,  Didym,  Agrigentum,  and
Tauromenus  :  thence  to  Mela's  Holy-ox-land. '

The  curved  sickle  is  mentioned  a  few  lines  above,  in  allusion  to  the  old
name  of  Messina,  which  was  Zancle,  meaning,  in  the  Sicilian  language,
4  a  sickle,'  from  a  fancied  resemblance  to  that  implement  in  the  form  of
the  spot.

94  Charybdis.} — Yer.  499.     This  was  a  violent  and  dangerous  whirlpool


lo6  THE    FASTI;  [b.  IV.  500—519.

of  Nisus,  monsters  boding  shipwreck,  and  tlie  Adriatic,  ex-
tending far  and  wide,  and  Corinth,  situate  on  two  seas  ;  and
thus  she  arrives  at  thy  harbours,  land  of  Attica.  Here,  for  the
first  time,  immersed  in  sorrow,  she  took  rest  on  a  cold  rock, —
that  rock  even  to  the  present  day,  the  people  of  Cecrops  call  the
Rock  of  Sorrow.95  Unshaken  in  her  purpose,  she  remained
unsheltered  from  the  weather  for  many  a  day,  exposing  her-
self to  the  rays  of  the  moon  and  the  drenching  shower.  Each
place  has  its  own  destiny ;  where  now  is  Eleusis  of  Ceres,  is
said  to  have  been  the  farm  of  the  old  man  Celeus.97  He  was
carrying  home  acorns  and  blackberries  shaken  down  from  the
bramble  thickets,  and  dry  logs  for  the  hearth,  to  be  lighted
there.  His  little  daughter  was  driving  homeward  two  goats
from  the  crag,  and  his  infant  son  was  lying  sick  in  the  cradle.
4f  Mother/'  says  the  damsel,  (the  Goddess  was  moved  at  the
name  of  mother,)  "  what  art  thou  doing,  thus  unattended,  in
these  lonely  hills  V9  The  old  man,  too,  stops,  though  heavy
is  his  burden,  and  begs  of  her  to  come  under  the  roof  of  his
cottage,  humble  though  it  be.  She  declines;  she  had  as-
sumed the  form  of  an  old  woman,  and  had  confined  her  locks
with  a  turban.  When  he  has  renewed  his  invitation,  she  then
replies,  "  Unharmed  mayst  thou  be,  and  a  parent  mayst
thou  ever  remain.     My  daughter  has  been  taken  away  from

in  the  straits  of  Messina.  Scylla  was  another  whirlpool  in  its  neighbour-
hood. Scylla,  the  daughter  of  Phorcus  and  Chretheis,  was  beloved  by
Glaucus ;  Circe,  in  a  fit  of  jealousy,  poisoned  the  stream  in  which  she
bathed,  on  which  she  became  transformed  into  a  monster  begirt  with  bark-
ing dogs,  and,  casting  herself  into  the  sea,  she  was  changed  into  a  rock
surrounded  with  a  howling  whirlpool.  The  poet  here  confounds  her  with
Scylla,  the  daughter  of  Nisus,  king  of  Crete,  who  betrayed  her  father  to
Minos,  by  cutting  off  his  lock  of  purple  hair,  on  which  his  safety  depended.
The  places  previously  mentioned  are  all  towns,  mountains,  or  rivers  of
ancient  Sicily.

95  The  Rook  of  Son*ow.^ — Ver.  504.  This  rock,  on  which  the  Goddess
first  seated  herself  on  her  arrival  in  Greece,  was  called  ayeXacrrog  warpa,
'  the  rock  of  mourning.'

96  Eleusis.'] — Ver.  507.  Eleusis  was  a  maritime  town  of  Attica,  on  the
western  side  of  the  Cephisus.  It  was  so  named  from  'EXsvviz,  '  an  arrival/
because  Ceres  arrived  there  on  her  first  entrance  into  Greece.  Her  worship,
attended  with  the  secret  and  far-famed  Eleusinian  mysteries,  prevailed  there.

9?  Celeus. ~\ — Ver.  508.  Instead  of  being  a  poor  old  man,  as  here  repre-
sented, Homer  and  other  writers  represent  him  as  being  the  king  of
Eleusis,  which,  in  fact,  had  been  built  by  Ogyges  400  years  before  this
period.


B.  iv.  519  — 551.]  OB.    CALE3DAU   OF    OVID.  157

me.  Alas  !  how  much  happier  is  thy  lot  than  mine  !"  She
spoke,  and  a  crystal  drop,  like  a  tear  (for  the  Gods  do  not
shed  tears, 9S)  fell  upon  her  bosom  made  warm  thereby.  Kind
in  disposition,  the  damsel  and  her  aged  father  vied  in  weeping
with  her,  and  these  were  the  words  of  the  good  old  man,
"J  pray  that  thy  lost  daughter  whom  thou  art  seeking
may  return  safe  to  thee  ;  but  arise,  and  do  not  despise  the
shelter  of  my  humble  cottage."  To  him  the  Goddess  an-
swered, "  Lead  on,  thou  knowest  the  art  of  persuading  me  ;"
and  so  saying,  she  arises  from  the  rock  and  follows  after  the
old  man.  Her  guide  tells  his  companion  how  that  his  son  is
ill  and  enjoys  no  repose,  but  is  kept  awake  by  his  malady.
As  she  is  about  to  enter  the  humble  abode,  she  gathers  the
soporiferous  poppy  from  the  soil  of  the  field.  While  she  is
gathering  it,  she  is  said  to  have  tasted  it  with  forgetful  palate,
and  thoughtlessly  to  have  broken  her  lengthened  fast.  In-
asmuch as  she  put  an  end  to  her  fasting  in  the  beginning  of
the  night,  those  who  are  initiated"  choose  the  time  of  the
stars  appearing  as  the  hour  for  breaking  their  fast.  When
she  enters  the  threshold  she  sees  all  things  pervaded  by  mourn-
ing :  there  was  now  no  hope  of  recovery  in  the  child.  Having
saluted  the  mother,  (her  name  was  Metanira,)  she  deigns  to
touch  the  mouth  of  the  boy  with  her  own.  His  paleness  of
colour  departs,  and  sudden  vigour  waxes  strong  in  his  body —
such  a  degree  of  strength  was  it  that  passed  from  the  celestial
lips.  The  whole  house  is  joyful,  that  is  to  say,  the  father,
the  mother,  and  the  daughter ;  these  three  formed  the  whole
household.  Presently  they  serve  up  the  -repast,  curds  dis-
solved in  milk,  and  apples,  and  the  golden  honey  in  its  fresh
combs.  The  genial  Ceres  fasts,  and  gives  to  thee,  0  boy,
poppies,  the  promoters  of  sleep,  to  be  drunk  infused  in  warm
milk.  JTwas  midnight,  and  there  was  now  the  stillness  of  tran-
quil slumber;  she  raised  Triptolemus1  in  her  lap,  and  thrice

98  Do  not  shed  tears.'] — Ver.  521.  As  the  Gods  did  not  live  on  mortal
food,  but  on  ambrosia  and  nectar,  nor  shed  blood  when  wounded,  but  a
peculiar  fluid,  called  '*  Ichor,'  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  did  not  secrete
tears  similar  to  those  of  mortals.

99  Those  who  are  initiated.] — Ver.  536.  '  Mystae/  Those  who  were
initiated  in  '  the  Eleusinian  mysteries'  fasted  until  the  evening,  in  imitation,
it  was  supposed,  of  the  conduct  of  Ceres  on  the  present  occasion.

1  Triptolemus.'] — Ver.  550.  In  the  Homeric  poem,  which  has  come
down  to  us  on  this  subject,  the  son  of  Celeus  is  called  Deraophoon,  while


158  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  551— 570.

with  her  hand  did  she  stroke  him,  three  verses  did  she  utter,
verses  not  to  be  repeated  by  mortal  voice  ;  and  on  the  hearth
she  covered  the  body  of  the  boy  with  the  live  embers,  that  the
fire  might  purge  away  that  burden,  mortality,  the  common  lot
of  man.  The  mother,  unwisely  affectionate,  is  roused  from
her  slumbers,  and  distracted,  she  cries  out,  "  What  art  thou
doing?"  and  snatches  his  limbs  from  the  fire.  To  whom  the
Goddess  said,  "  While  in  intention  thou  art  not,  yet  in  fact
thou  hast  proved  a  cruel  parent ;  by  the  fears  of  a  mother  are
my  gifts  rendered  worthless.  Mortal,  indeed,  shall  he  now
remain,  but  yet  he  shall  be  the  first  to  plough,  and  to  sow,
and  to  bear  away  the  rewards  of  his  labour  from  the  ground
that  he  has  tilled."  Ceres  thus  speaks,  and  as  she  goes  forth,
she  carries  a  cloud  that  envelopes  her,  and  now  she  betakes  her-
self to  her  dragon  steeds,2  and  is  borne  on  her  winged  chariot.
She  leaves  behind  her  the  unsheltered  Sunium,  and  Piraeus2*
secure  with  its  winding  harbour,  and  the  coast  which  is  situate
on  its  right  side.  Thence  she  enters  on  the  iEgean  sea,  in
which  she  beholds  all  the  Cyclades,  and  she  passes  over  the
destructive  Ionian  and  the  Icarian  sea ;  through  the  cities
of  Asia  she  seeks  the  long  Hellespont,  and  soaring  on  high,
she  wends  her  varied  way  through  different  spots.  For  now
she  is  looking  down  upon  the  Arabs  that  collect  the  frank-
incense, and  now,  upon  the  Indians;  afterwards,  the  Libyan
lands,  then  Meroe,  and  then  the  land  of  Drought3  is  beneath

Apollodorus  represents  Triptolemus  as  the  elder  son.  Ovid  represents  the
facts  recited  as  being  the  occurrences  of  a  single  night.  Other  writers
represent  Ceres  as  nightly  burning  out  the  gross  and  mortal  parts  of  the
child,  and  by  day  restoring  the  loss,  by  rubbing  in  ambrosia,  until  inter-
rupted by  the  mother,  when  she  gave  up  her  intention  of  conferring  immor-
tality, but  committed  to  him  the  guardianship  of  her  mysteries,  with  a
promise  of  immortal  fame.

2  Her  dragon  steeds,'] — Ver.  561-2.     Gower  thus  writes  these  lines —

*  Thus  forth  she  goes,  and  with  a  cloud  attended,
Her  winged-dragon  mounted  coach  ascended. '
2*  Sunium  and  PirausJ] — Yer.  563.     The  former  was  a  promontory
of  Attica ;  the  latter  was  the  sea-port  of  Athens,  consisting  of  three  natural
inlets,  Pirseus,  properly  so  called,  Cantharon,  and  Zea.

3  The  land  of  Drought.'] — Ver.  570.  This  was  ^Ethiopia.  Meroe  was
an  island  of  that  country,  formed  by  the  Nile.  Josephus  says  that  its  ori-
ginal name  was  Saba,  but  that  Cambyses  called  it  Meroe,  after  his  wife  or
sister  who  died  there.  As  Mr.  Thynne  justly  remarks,  Ovid  does  not
observe  any  topographical  order,  but  characterises  the  wildness  of  the
Goddess  by  the  fact  of  her  rushing  indiscriminately  from  place  to  place.


b.  iv.  570—601.]  OE,    CALEISDAB   OF   OVID.  1.5D

her.  And  now  she  reaches  the  Hesperian  streams,  the
Rhine,  the  Rhone,  and  the  Po,  and  thee,  0  Tiber,  destined  to
be  the  parent  of  a  mighty  stream.  Whither  am  I  borne  ?
'twere  an  unlimited  task  to  tell  the  lands  that  she  wandered
over — no  spot  in  the  world  was  left  unvisited  by  Ceres.  She
wanders,  too,  along  the  sky,  and  she  addresses  those  Constel-
lations nearest  to  the  icy  Pole,  that  are  exempt  from  immersion
in  the  watery  ocean.  "  Stars  of  Parrhasia,  for  ye  are  able  to
know  all  things,  since  never  do  ye  set  beneath  the  billows  of
the  sea,  discover  my  daughter  Persephone  to  her  wretched
mother."  She  had  thus  said;  and  thus  to  her  did  Helice4
reply  :  "  The  night  is  free  from  blame  ;  question  the  Sun  about
the  stealing  of  the  damsel,  who  far  and  wide  beholds  what  is
done  in  the  light  of  the  day."  The  Sun,  being  visited,  says,
"  Labour  not  in  vain ;  she  whom  thou  art  seeking,  now  the
bride  of  the  brother  of  Jove,  is  the  mistress  of  the  third  em-
pire." Long  having  complained  to  herself,  she  thus  addressed
the  Thunderer,  and  deep  were  the  traces  of  grief  on  her  coun-
tenance. "  If  thou  bearest  in  mind  by  whom  Persephone
was  born  to  me,  she  ought  to  have  an  equal  share  of  thy
regard.  Having  wandered  over  the  whole  world,  the  law-
lessness of  the  deed  alone  is  discovered  by  me ;  the  ravisher
still  holds  the  reward  of  his  crime.  But  neither  is  Persephone
deserving  of  a  ravisher  for  her  husband,  nor  should  a  son-in-
law  have  been  provided  for  thee  and  me  after  such  a  fashion
as  this.  What  greater  misfortune  could  I  have  endured,  as  a
captive,  had  Gyges5  been  victorious,  than  I  have  now  borne,
while  thou  art  holding  the  sceptre  of  heaven.  But  let  him  have
carried  her  away  with  impunity,  and  let  me  bear  these  things
unavenged ;  only  let  him  restore  her,  and  let  him  make
amends  for  his  former  deeds  by  his  recent  ones."  Jupiter
mollifies  her,  and  excuses  the  act  on  the  plea  of  passion,
and  says,  "  He  is  not  a  son-in-law  for  us  to  be  ashamed
of.  I  myself  am  not  of  more  noble  birth  ;  my  realm  is  situate
in  the  heavens  ;  one  of  my  brothers  sways  the  waters  ;  another
the  vacant  realms  of  Chaos.     But  if  perchance  thy  resolution

4  Helice.] — Ver.  580.  The  Constellation  of  the  Greater  Bear ;  see
Book  iii.  ver.  108.     Parrhasia  was  one  of  the  names  of  Arcadia.

5  GygesJ] — Ver.  593.  He  was  one  of  the  hundred-handed  giants  who
warred  with  Jupiter  for  the  dominion  of  the  heavens,  being  the  brother
of  Briareus.


160  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  601—613.

is  unchangeable,  and  it  is  thy  determination  to  dissolve  the
bonds  of  wedlock  when  once  united,  this  that  thou  desirest  we
will  assay,  if  it  is  the  fact  that  she  has  continued  fasting ; 6  if
not,  the  wife  of  the  monarch  of  the  infernal  regions  she  shall
be.  The  God,  bearer  of  the  Caduceus,  departs  to  Tartarus,
having  assumed  his  wings,  and,  returning  sooner  than  is
hoped  for,  reports  the  ascertained  result  of  his  visit.  "  The
damsel  that  has  been  carried  off,"  says  he,  "  has  broken  her
fast  with  three  of  the  grains  which  the  pomegranate  conceals
beneath  its  thin  rind."  The  wretched  mother  grieved,  in  no
less  degree  than  if  her  daughter  had  that  moment  been  carried
away,  and  scarcely,  by  the  lapse  of  time,  did  she  recover.  And
thus  did  she  say  :  "  The  heavens  are  not  to  be  inhabited  by  me  :
command  that  I,  as  well,  may  receive  admittance  into  the  valley
of  Tsenarus."7  And  she  would  have  done  so,  had  not  Jupiter
made  the  stipulation  that  Persephone  should  be  for  twice  three
months  in  each  year  in  heaven.  Then,  at  length,  did  Ceres
recover  her  former  looks  and  her  spirits,  and  placed  upon  her
locks  the  garlands  of  wheat.  Plenteously,  too,  did  the  harvest
spring  up  in  the  fields,  whbse  produce  had  been  interrupted,
and  hardly  did  the  threshing  floor  suffice  to  hold  the  stores

6  Continued  fasting.'] — Ver.  603.  The  poets  in  general  represent  it  as
a  rule  that  no  one  could  return  from  Erebus  who  had  once  eaten  there.
In  the  Homeric  Hymn,  Pluto  purposely  induces  Proserpine  to  eat  the
pomegranate  grains,  that  he  may  avail  himself  of  this  law.  Gower  gives
a  quaint  translation  of  this  and  the  nine  succeeding  lines  : —

'  We'll  try  this  means  ;  sh'  is  thine,  if  meat  sh'  abstein  ;
If  not,  sh'  must  th'  infernall  bride  remain.
Caduceus  sails  to  Styx  on  nimble  wings,
And  quick  as  thought  eye-witness'd  tidings  brings.
She  had  her  stomach  staid  with  kernels  three
Of  th'  apple  pluck'd  from  the  pomegranate  tree.
She  mourns  as  much  as  if  herself  had  now
Been  forc'd  away,  and  scarce  could  grief  outgrow  :
And  there  she  cries,  Youy  heaven  to  me  is  hateful ;
Let  me  go  to  live  in  Tartary  more  gratefull.'

The  inhabitants  of  the  Tartary  of  our  day  would  not  feel  nattered  by  this
adaptation  of  the  name  of  their  country,  if  they  heard  it.

7  The  valley  of  Tcenarus.~\ — Ver.  612.  Taenarus  was  a  promontory  of  La-
conia,  now  Cape  Matapan.  In  a  vale,  or  in  its  vicinity,  was  a  cave,  sacred
to  Neptune,  which  was  said  to  be  the  entrance  to  the  infernal  regions,  through
which  Hercules  dragged  Cerberus  to  the  upper  world.  '  Chaos/  is  used,  a
few  lines  preceding,  by  poetical  license,  to  signify  'the  infernal  regions.'


B.  iv.  618— 639.]         OE,    CALENDAR  OE   OYID.  161

piled  up  there.  Things  which  are  white  are  befitting  Ceres  :
on  the  feast  of  Ceres  put  on  white  garments ;  at  this  season
the  wearing  of  woollen  robes  of  dark  colour  is  not  allowed.

Jupiter,  surnanied  Victor,8  takes  to  himself  the  Ides  of  April ;
on  this  day  was  a  temple  dedicated  to  him.  On  this  day,  too,
if  I  mistake  not,  did  Liberty,  most  worthy  of  our  race,  begin
to  possess  her  own  mansions.

On  the  following  day,  do  thou,  sailor,  repair  to  safe  har-
bours ;  a  gale,  mingled  with  hail,  will  come  from  the  west.
In  good  truth,  be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  the  fact,  that  on
this  day,  in  such  a  storm,  did  Caesar  and  his  troops  conquer
the  arms  of  the  enemy  at  Mutina.9  When  now  the  third
day  of  the  Ides  of  the  month  of  Venus  shall  have  dawned,
perform  the  sacrifice  with  a  cow  that  is  pregnant.  A
cow,  that  is  bearing  and  with  young,  is  called  "forda,"10  from
' '  fero,"  [to  bear]  ;  from  this  word,  too,  it  is  believed  that
the  foetus  derives  its  name.  Now  are  the  cattle  pregnant ;
the  earth  is  teeming  with  the  seed ;  to  the  pregnant  earth  a
pregnant  victim  is  offered.  Some  are  slain  in  the  Capitol,  the
heights  of  Jove.  The  court-houses11  receive  thrice  ten  heifers,
and  become  wet,  besprinkled  with  the  streams  of  blood.  But
when  the  attendants  of  the  priests  have  snatched  the  calves
from  the  womb,  and  have  consigned  the  entrails,  when  cut  out,
to  the  smoking  altars,  she  who  is  by  birth  the  oldest  of  the

8  Victor. ] — Ver.  621.  In  a  war  with  the  Samnites,  a.u.c.  457,  Q.
Fabius  Maximus  vowed  to  erect  a  temple  to  Jupiter  Victor.  The  temple
of  Liberty  was  dedicated  on  Mount  Aventine,  in  the  second  Punic  war,
by  the  father  of  the  Gracchi.  It  was  repaired  a.u.c.  559,  by  the  Censors,
and  rebuilt  by  Asinius  Pollio,  in  the  reign  of  Augustus.  To  this  last  circum-
stance the  poet  seems  here  to  refer.

9  Mutina.'] — Ver.  627.  The  battle  of  Mutina  was  fought  against
Antony  by  the  Consuls  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  and  the  propraetor  Octavianus
(afterwards  Augustus  Caesar),  a.u.c.  710,  and  ended  in  the  defeat  of
Antony.  The  two  Consuls  died  of  their  wounds,  and  Augustus  was
thereby  enabled  to  appropriate  the  glory  of  the  victory  to  himself.  The
poet,  in  his  flattery,  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  hailstorm  was  of
Augustus's  own  special  brewing  for  the  occasion.

10  Is  called  'forda.']— Ver.  630.  Varro,  on  Rustic  Matters,  Book  ii.
c.  5,  calls  this  word  '  horda,'  and  the  festival  '  Hordicidia,'  or  '  Hordicalia;'
originating  in  the  digamma,  the  H  and  the  F  of  the  ancients  often  be-
tokened convertible  sounds.

11  The  court-houses.] — Ver.  635.  '  Curia/  The  singular  is  here  used
for  the  plural.  One  cow  was  sacrificed  in  the  l  curia,'  or  i  court-house,'  of
each  of  the  thirty  '  curiae.'

M


162  THE  FASTI;  [b.  iv.  639— 670.

Vestal  Virgins  burns  the  calves  with  fire,  that,  on  the  festival  of
Pales,  those  ashes  may  purify  the  people.  When  Numa  was
king,  the  crops  not  repaying  the  labour  expended  on  them,  the
wishes  of  the  disappointed  husbandman  remained  ungratified.
For,  at  one  time,  the  year  was  suffering  from  drought  through
the  cold  northern  blasts,  at  another  time  the  soil  became  too
luxuriant  from  constant  showers.  Often  did  the  corn  disap-
point the  owner,  while  in  the  rising  blade,  and  the  barren  wild
oat  stood  on  the  soil  choked  up  with  it.  The  cattle,  too,
before  their  time,  used  to  yield  immature  births,  and  oft  did
the  lamb,  at  its  yeaning,  prove  the  death  of  the  ewe.  There
stood  an  ancient  grove,  which  had  for  many  a  year  remained
inviolate  by  the  axe,  left  as  sacred  to  the  Meenalian  deity.  He
used  to  give  responses  in  the  stilly  night12  to  the  soul  when  at
rest ;  here  does  the  King  Numa  offer  two  sheep  in  sacrifice.
The  first  is  offered  to  Faunus,  the  next  to  gentle  Sleep ;  the
fleece  of  each  is  spread  upon  the  hard  ground.  Twice  is  his
unshorn  head  sprinkled  with  water  of  the  fountain;  twice
does  he  wreathe  his  temples  with  the  beechen  bough.  The
joys  of  love  are  forbidden ;  it  is  not  allowed  to  place  animal
food  on  the  table,  and  no  ring  is  left  upon  the  finger.  Clad
in  a  coarse  garment,  he  places  the  fresh  fleeces  upon  his
person,  having  worshipped  the  Deity  in  an  address  in  the  form
prescribed.  In  the  meantime  the  night  comes,  her  gen-
tle brow  crowned  with  the  poppy,  and,  with  her,  escorts  the
shadowy  dreams.  Faunus  comes,  and  with  his  hard  foot
pressing  the  fleeces  of  the  sheep,  he  utters  such  words  as
these  from  the  right  side  of  the  couch  : 13  f c  0  king,  thou  must
appease  the  earth  by  the  sacrifice  of  two  cows ;  let  the  death
of  one  yield  two  lives  to  the  sacrifice."  His  rest  is  broken  by
terror ;  Numa  ponders  over  his  vision,  and  reflects  within
himself  on  these  dark  sayings  and  the  hidden  injunctions.
His  wife,  to  the  grove  most  dear,  relieves  him  in  his  per-
plexity, and  says,  "  Thou  art  asked  for  the  entrails  of  a  preg-

12  In  the  stilly  night. ] — Ver.  651.  The  peculiar  name  of  the  sleep  of
divination  or  prophecy  with  the  Romans  was  '  incubatio,'  and  among  the
Greeks,  kvKoifirjaic.  It  is  possible  that  from  this  superstition  may  be  de-
rived the  not  uncommon  saying  among  us,  '  I  will  sleep  on  it,'  used  by  a
person  who  intends  to  give  a  matter  all  due  consideration.

13  Right  side  of  the  couch.} — Ver.  664.  This  boded  an  auspicious  visit
of  the  Deity.


b.  iv.  670—687.]  OB,    CALEKDAE   OF   OVID.  163

nant  cow."  The  entrails  of  a  pregnant  cow  are  offered,  a
year  more  happy  ensues,  and  the  earth  and  the  cattle  bring
forth  their  increase.  This  day,  too,  did  Venus  once  com-
mand to  press  on  its  course  with  greater  haste,  and  downwards
she  urged  the  steeds  of  the  heavens ;  that,  with  the  utmost
speed,  on  the  following  day,  success  in  war  might  confer  the
title  of  empire14  on  the  young  Augustus.

But  now,  when  the  fourth  light-bearing  day  looks  back  on
the  by-gone  Ides,  on  this  night  do  the  Hyades  visit  Doris.15

When  the  third  moon  shall  have  dawned,  after  the  departure
of  the  Hyades,  the  Circus  shall  receive  the  steeds  started  from
the  goal.16  I  must  teach  the  reason  why  the  she-foxes  let  go,
have  their  tails  burning  with  fire-brands17  fastened  to  them.
Cold  was  the  land  at  Carseoli,18  and  not  fit  for  the  production
of  the  olive,  but  a  soil  naturally  fertile  in  corn.  By  this  way,
was  I  journeying  to  the  land  of  the  Peligni,  the  country  of  my
birth,  small,  but  ever  watered  by  the  constant  rains.  I  en-
tered the  well-known  abode  of  an  old  friend  of  mine  ;  Phcebus

u  The  title  of  empire.']—  Ver.  676.  On  the  ]6th  of  the  Calends  of
May,  a.u.c.  724,  Augustus  Caesar  was  first  saluted  by  the  senate  with  the
title  of  '  Imperator,'  on  account  of  his  victories.  This  honour,  according
to  Tacitus  and  Dio  Cassius,  was  conferred  on  him  twenty-one  times.  It
appears  to  have  been  distinguished  from  the  word  '  imperator,'  signifying
4  emperor,'  by  being  placed  after  the  name  of  the  person,  whereas  the  title
of  the  emperor  was  placed  before  it.  The  nearest  English  translation  of
the  word  seems  to  have  been  '  successful  leader/

15  Hyades  visit  Doris.'] — Ver.  679.  On  the  15th  of  the  Calends  of
May,  the  Hyades  set  acronychally.  Doris  was  the  daughter  of  Oceanus,
the  wife  of  Nereus,  and  the  mother  of  the  Nereides  ;  her  name  is  here
used  to  signify  '  the  sea/

16  The  steeds  started  from  the  goal.] — Ver.  680.  *  Carcere  partitas/
The  '  career'  was  the  place  where  the  horses  stood,  with  a  cord  stretched
before  them,  on  the  dropping  of  which  they  started.  '  Partitus'  means
literally  '  divided,'  that  is  '  from  the  course,'  by  the  cord  just  mentioned.

17  Burning  with  fire-brands.] — Ver.  681-2.  Gower  thus  renders  these
lines, —

'  Here  let  one  tell,  why  foxes  on  the  rails
Run  loose  with  fire-links  at  their  backs  and  tails/

18  Carseoli.] — Ver.  683.  This  was  a  town  of  the  iEqui,  situate  near  the
river  Anio.  Ovid  seems  to  relate  a  custom  that  prevailed  at  Rome,  and  which
had  been  borrowed  from  a  rustic  ceremony  at  Carseoli,  of  which  he  here
narrates  the  origin.  The  reader  cannot  fail  to  call  to  mind  how  the  idea
of  doing  mischief  to  his  enemies  by  a  similar  contrivance  came  to  the
mind  of  the  unfortunate  but  wrong-headed  Nazarite,  Samson.

M  2


164


THE   FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  687—712.


had  already  taken  the  yoke  from  off  his  exhausted  steeds.19
He  was  wont  to  tell  me  many  other  things,  and  this  story  as
well,  by  which  my  present  work  might  be  furnished  with  in-
formation. "  In  this  plain,"  said  he,  pointing  to  the  plain,
"  a  frugal  peasant  woman,  with  her  hardy  husband,  used  to
own  a  little  bit  of  land.  He  used  to  work  it  himself,  whether
there  was  occasion  for  the  use  of  the  plough,  or  the  curved
sickle,  or  the  spade.  She  sometimes  used  to  sweep  out  the
cottage  supported  on  the  buttress,20  and  sometimes  used  to
set  the  eggs  to  be  hatched  by  the  plumage  of  the  parent  bird ;
or  now  she  is  collecting  the  green  mallows,  or  the  white  mush-
room, or  makes  warm  their  humble  hearth  with  the  cheer-
ful fire.  And  yet  she  finds  time  and  employs  her  arms  at  the
web  constantly  plied  by  her,  and  thereby,  she  prepares  a  defence
against  the  menaces  of  the  winter.  She  had  a  son,  sportive  in
the  dawn  of  life ;  he  had  added  two  years  to  two  '  lustra.5
He  catches  a  fox  in  a  sloping  corner  at  the  end  of  the  willow
grove :  she  had  carried  off  many  a  bird  from  their  poultry
yard.21  He  wraps  the  captive  in  stubble  and  hay,  and  sets  fire
to  her ;  she  escapes  from  his  hands,  as  he  is  applying  the  fire.
Wherever  she  flies,  she  sets  in  a  blaze  the  fields,  at  that  time
clothed  with  the  harvest ;  the  breeze  gave  strength  to  the
all-consuming  flames.  The  occurrence  has  long  since  passed
away:  the  recollection  of  it  still  remains;  for,  even  to  this  day,
does  the  law  of  Carseoli  forbid  a  she-fox  when  caught  to  be
suffered  to  live  ;  and  that  this  tribe  may  atone  for  their  fault,
they  are  set  on  fire  on  the  festival  of  Ceres,  and  perish  in  the

19  His  exhausted  steeds. — Ver.  687-8.   Gower's  translation  is  curious, —

*  Into  an  old  acquaintance-house  I  turned,

Just  as  Sol's  coach-horse  had  their  day's  task  journeyed/

Does  he  mean  to  say  that  his  old  acquaintance  and  '  Sol's  coach-horse'  had

journeyed  together,  or  that  the  house  and  the  coach-horse  had  travelled  in

company  ?    It  is  not  clear  why  he  limits  the  sun  to  one  horse  on  this  day.

20  On  the  buttress.] — Ver.  695.  '  Tibicine.''  This  was  a  prop  or
buttress  placed  at  the  side  of  a  house  to  prevent  it  from  falling.  It
evidently  implies  here  the  decayed  and  humble  nature  of  the  building.

21  Their  poultry-yard.] — Ver.  704.  '  Cohortis.'  Cato  tells  us  that  the
cohors  was  round,  and,  from  what  Varro  says,  it  appears  to  have  been
covered  over.  On  Rustic  Affairs,  Book  hi.,  c.  3,  s.  6, — '  There  were  two
('  cohortes/  or)  receptacles  for  poultry ;  one  level  with  the  ground,  where
cocks  and  hens  were  fed ;  the  other  aloft,  in  which  pigeons  inhabited
turrets  or  the  tops  of  a  house. '  Perhaps  the  turrets  and  the  house  were
mimic  ones,  such  as  may  be  seen  at  the  present  day  in  fancifully  built
dovecotes.


B.  iv.  712 728.]        OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  165

very  manner  in  which  the  one  that  I  have  mentioned  destroyed
the  standing  corn.

When  next  the  saffron-coloured  mother  of  Memnon  shall
have  come,  upon  her  rosy-coloured  steeds,  to  visit  the  broad
earth,  then  passes  away  the  light  of  the  sun  from  the  leader
of  the  wool-bearing  nock,  him  who  betrayed  Helle.  As  he  de-
parts, a  larger  animal™  oft  used  as  a  victim,  is  at  hand.  Whe-
ther it  be  a  cow  or  a  bull  it  is  not  easy  to  know  ;  the  fore
parts  appear,  the  hinder  parts  are  concealed.  But  whether
this  Constellation  is  a  bull  or  whether  a  cow,  against  the  will
of  Juno,23  it  enjoys  the  reward  of  love.

The  night  has  passed  away,  and  morning  dawns.  I  am
called  to  the  Palilia  ;24  and  I  am  not  called  in  vain,  if  genial
Pales  favours  me.  Genial  Pales,  do  thou  favour  the  poet  who
celebrates  thy  shepherd  rites ;  if  with  pious  attention  I  describe
thy  festival.  Many  a  time,  in  truth,  have  I  carried  in  my  full
hand  the  ashes  of  the  calf  and  the  bean  stalks,  the  holy  pur-
gatives. Often,  in  truth,  have  I  leaped  over  the  fires  placed  in
three  rows,  and  the  dripping  bough  of  laurel25  has  flung  the

32  A  larger  animal.'] — Ver.  716.  As  Mr.  Keightley  justly  observes,
this  is  a  bad  periphrasis,  as  being  very  awkwardly  worded.  He  says,
that  now  the  sun  leaves  the  Constellation  of  the  Ram,  but  enters  that  of
a  larger  animal,  in  common  use  as  a  victim,  namely,  the  Bull.

23  Against  the  will  of  Juno.] — Ver.  720.  Whether  it  was  the  bull
which  carried  off  Europa,  or  the  cow  into  which  Io  had  been  changed,  it
was,  by  reason  of  the  infidelity  of  Jupiter,  equally  an  object  of  aversion  to
Juno.  The  fore  part  only  of  this  Constellation  is  represented  in  the  signs
of  the  Zodiac  when  depicted.

24  The  Palilia.]—Ver.  721.  On  the  11th  of  the  calends  of  May,  the
anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  the  city,  the  festival  of  Pales,  the  God-
dess of  the  shepherds,  was  held.  Some  writers  considered  Pales  as  being
originally  a  male  deity,  the  servant  and  bailiif  of  Jupiter.  The  festival  is
also  by  some  authors  called  '  Parilia,'  as  being  from  '  pario,'  '  to  bring
forth/

25  Bough  of  laurel.] — Ver.  728.  The  olive,  laurel,  rosemary,  or  pine,
were  usually  employed  to  disperse  the  lustral  water.  Gower  thus  trans-
lates this  and  the  three  preceding  lines, —

*  I  oft  calves'  ashes  and  bean-straws  have  held,
With  burn'd  purgations  in  a  hand  well  fill'd ;
Oft  ore  the  bone-fires  have  I.  tane  three  hops,
And  dew'd  myself  with  holy-water-drops/
These  rites  doubtlessly  originated  in  the  universally  received  notion  of  the
purifying  power  of  fire.     Dionysius  says,  that  while. building  the  city,
Romulus  had  fires  kindled,  and  made  his  people  jump  through  them  for
the  purposes  of  expiation.


166  THE   FASTI;  [b.  iv.  728—755.

sprinkled  waters.  Lo  !  the  Goddess  has  been  moved,  and  she
grants  success  to  my  undertaking.  My  bark  leaves  the  dock,
my  sails  now  have  favoring  breezes.  Proceed,  you  multi-
tude, and  take  the  fumigation  from  the  Vestal  altar — Vesta
will  grant  it ;  by  the  gift  of  Vesta  you  will  be  cleansed.  The
blood  of  a  horse26  will  be  the  fumigation,  and  the  ashes  of  a
calf ;  and  the  third  ingredient  will  be  the  stripped  stalk  of  the
hard  bean.  Shepherd,  purify  the  full  sheep  at  the  beginning
of  twilight ;  let  the  water  first  sprinkle  them,  and  let  the
broom,  made  of  twigs,  sweep  the  ground.  Let  the  sheep-
folds,  too,  be  decorated  with  leaves  and  branches  fastened  up,
and  let  the  long  garland  shade  the  ornamented  doors.  Let  a
blue  smoke  arise  from  the  native  sulphur,  and  let  the  ewe
bleat  aloud  while  rubbed  with  the  brimstone  as  it  smokes.
Barn,  too,  rosemary,  and  the  pitch  tree,  and  the  Sabine  herbs,
and  let  the  burnt  laurel  crackle  in  the  midst  of  the  hearth.
Let  the  basket  of  millet  accompany  the  cakes  of  millet ;  this
rustic  Goddess  takes  especial  pleasure  in  this  kind  of  food.
Bring  on,  too,  the  banquet  and  the  milk-pail,  peculiarly  her
own ;  and  when  the  banquet  has  been  removed,  appease
Pales,  the  inhabitant  of  the  woods,  with  warm  milk,  and  say,
"  Protect  thou,  alike,  the  cattle  and  those  who  tend  the  cattle,
and  let  all  harm  fly  afar,  repelled  from  my  stalls,  Whether
I  have  fed  them  on  holy  ground,  or  whether  I  have  seated  my-
self beneath  a  sacred  tree,  or  whether  any  ewe  of  mine,  unknown
to  me,  has  browsed  on  the  grass  growing  over  the  graves,
or  whether  I  have  trespassed  on  a  grove  forbidden  to  be  en-
tered, or  whether  the  Nymphs  have  been  scared  away  by  my
gaze,  or  whether  the  God,  half  goat  in  form,  or  whether  my
knife  has  despoiled  a  sacred  grove  of  its  shady  bough,  from
which,  the  bundle  of  leaves  has  been  given  by  me  to  my  ailing
ewe,  do  thou  grant  pardon  to  my  error ;  nor  be  it  a  cause  of

26  The  blood  of  a  horse.'] — Ver.  733.  The  ashes  of  the  calf  had  been
reserved  as  a  '  februa,'  or  purgative,  from  the  Fordicidia,  mentioned  be-
fore in  line  639.  Festus  tells  us  that  the  horse,  whose  blood  was  most
probably  now  used,  was  slain  in  October.  '  A  horse,  called  the  "  equus
October,"  or  "  October  horse,"  was  slain  in  the  month  of  October  on  the
Campus  Martius,  in  honour  of  Mars,  the  tail  of  which,  streaming  with
blood,  was  carried  with  all  possible  speed  to  the  "  Regia."  '  This  '  Regia,'
or  '  palace/  was  most  probably  the  temple  of  Vesta,  and  the  blood  was
preserved  there  to  be  used  with  the  ashes  of  the  calf  and  the  bean-stalks
on  the  Palilia.


B.  iv.  755—779.]        OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  167

evil  to  me,  if,  while  the  hail  was  pouring  down,  I  have  sheltered
my  flock  within  the  rustic  fane  ;  nor  be  it  a  cause  of  harm  to
me  that  I  have  disturbed  the  waters  of  the  ponds.  Pardon
me,  ye  Nymphs,  if  at  any  time  the  motion  of  the  hoof  has
rendered  turbid  the  streams.  Do  thou,  Goddess,  for  me,  ap-
pease the  fountains  and  the  Deities  of  the  fountains  ;  do  thou
propitiate  the  Gods  that  are  dispersed  throughout  all  the
groves.  Far  be  it  from  us  to  look  upon  the  Dryades,  or  to
behold  the  bathing  places  of  Diana,27  or  Faunus,  while  at  mid-
day he  treads  the  fields.  Drive  disease  afar ;  let  both  men
and  flocks  enjoy  the  blessing  of  health  ;  let,  too,  the  dogs
enjoy  health,  that  watchful  race.  Let  me  not  drive  home  my
sheep  fewer  than  they  were  in  the  morning  ;  nor  let  me  grieve
as  I  bring  home  the  fleeces  which  alone  I  have  recovered  from
the  wolf.  Let  evil  hunger  be  afar ;  let  grass  and  leaves  be  in
abundance,  and  water,  both  to  lave  the  limbs  and  to  serve  for
the  purpose  of  drinking.  May  it  be  my  lot  to  press  the  full
udders  ;  may  my  cheeses  bring  me  money  home,  and  may  the
twigs,  as  they  lie  far  apart  in  the  sieve,  give  a  passage  to  the
liquid  whey ;  may  the  ram  prove  a  good  tup,  may  his  mate
return  the  seed  when  conceived,  and  may  there  be  many  a
lamb  in  my  sheep-folds  :  may  wool,  too,  be  produced  that
will  hurt  none  of  my  damsels,  soft,  and  suited  to  even  the  ten-
derest  hands.  Let  that  happen  which  I  pray  for,  and  may  we,
at  the  close  of  the  year,  offer  cakes  of  goodly  size  to  Pales,  the
mistress  of  the  shepherds.  With  these  words  must  the  God-
dess be  propitiated :  turning  to  the  east  do  you  repeat  these
words  three  times,  and  in  the  running  stream  thoroughly  wash
your  hands.  Then  you  may  drink  the  snow-white  milk  and
the  purple  must,  with  the  milk-bowl28  set  on  in  the  place  of

27  Bathing  places  of  Diana.~\ — Ver.  761.  It  was  a  belief  that  those
who  had  the  misfortune  to  come  where  the  Nymphs  or  Goddesses  of  the
fountains  were  bathing  were  immediately  deprived  of  their  reason.  Gower
thus  translates  this  and  the  next  line, —

*  Nor  nymphs,  nor  Cynthia,  in  her  cistern  play,
Let  us  not  see,  nor  Pan  in  fields  all  day/

28  With  the  milk  bowl.] — Ver.  779.  Camella.  This  was  a  wooden
bowl  used  in  the  country.  It  is  by  some  supposed  to  have  been  so  called
from  the  Greek  Ka[j,7rTio,  l  to  bend,'  as  being  of  a  curved  form,  either  on
the  top  or  on  the  sides.  The  '  sapa,'  which  is  here  rendered  '  must/  as
there  is  no  word  in  English  adapted  to  its  meaning,  really  was  the  must


168  THE  FASTI;  [b.  iv.  779— 8G0.

the  goblet ;  and  afterwards  with  active  foot  fling  your  strong
limbs  across  the  burning  heaps  of  the  crackling  stubble.  The
ceremonial  has  now  been  told  by  me;  the  origin  of  that
custom  still  remains  for  me  to  mention.  The  great  number  of
the  causes  alleged  makes  me  doubtful,  and  delays  my  under-
taking. Devouring  flame  is  the  purifier  of  all  things,  and
melts  the  dross  from  out  of  the  metals,  therefore  is  it  used  for
purifying  the  ewes  with  the  leader  of  the  flock.  Or  is  it,  be-
cause there  are  two  opposing  principles  in  all  things,  fire  and
water,  the  discordant  Deities,  that  our  forefathers  united  these
elements,  and  deemed  it  to  be  fitting  to  touch  the  body  with  the
fire  and  the  sprinkled  water  ?  or  is  it,  because  in  these  is  the
origin  of  life  ;  the  exile  has  lost29  his  right  to  enjoy  these  ;  by
these  the  bride  is  wedded;30  that  these  two  things  they  think
of  primary  importance?  For  my  part  I  hardly  believe  it.
Some  there  are,  who  think  that  Phaeton31  is  represented,
and  the  deluging  waters  of  Deucalion.  Some,  too,  say  that
while  the  shepherds  were  rubbing  stone  against  stone,  a  spark
suddenly  leaped  forth.  The  first  indeed  was  lost ;  but  the
second  was  caught  on  some  straw.  The  fire  of  Pales  has  this
for  its  alleged  cause  ;  or  did  the  piety  of  iEneas  rather  give
rise  to  this  custom,  to  whom,  when  conquered,  the  fire  gave  a

or  new  wine,  boiled  down  to  one-third  of  its  original  quantity.  This  is
Pliny's  account.  Varro  says  that  it  was  boiled  down  to  one-half,  which
Pliny,  however,  calls  '  de^utum.'  The  mixture  of  milk  and  *  sapa,'  Festus
calls  '  burranica  potio,'  i  red  drink/  probably  from  the  Greek  word  7rupp6c,
1  red/

29  The  exile  has  lost.~\ — Ver.  791.  Banishment,  as  a  punishment,  was
not  known  to  the  Romans,  but  the  same  effect  was  produced  by  the  inter-
diction of  fire  and  water;  by  reason  whereof,  for  the  purpose  of  supporting
life,  a  man  was  obliged  to  leave  his  country.

30  Bride  is  wedded.']  —Ver.  792.  Fire  and  water  were  placed  at  the  door
by  which  the  newly-married  pair  entered,  and  were  touched  by  the  bride
and  her  husband  on  entering.

31  Phaeton.'] — Ver.  793.  He  was  the  son  of  Apollo  and  Clymene ;
being  taunted  with  not  being  really  the  offspring  of  the  sun,  he  requested
the  loan  of  his  father's  chariot  for  one  day,  which  being  unwillingly  granted,
he  lost  his  control  over  the  horses,  and,  to  prevent  a  general  conflagration,
Jupiter  struck  him  to  earth  with  his  lightnings.  Deucalion  was  the  son  of
Prometheus ;  when  Jupiter  sent  a  deluge  to  destroy  mankind,  he  and  his
wife  Pyrrha  took  refuge  on  Mount  Parnassus,  or,  according  to  Hyginus,
on  Mount  iEtna,  and  escaping,  re-peopled  the  earth  by  throwing  stones
behind  them,  of  which,  those  thrown  by  Deucalion  became  men,  those  by
his  wife,  women.


b.  iv.  800— 832.]         OE,    CALEKDAE   OF   OVID.  169

harmless  passage  ?  This,  however,  is  nearer  to  probability,
that  when  Rome  was  built,  the  Lares  were  ordered  to  be  trans-
ferred to  new  abodes,  and  that  when  changing  their  home
they  set  fire  to  their  rustic  habitations  and  the  cottage  now  no
longer  to  be  used  ;  and  that  through  the  flames  leaped  the
cattle  and  the  swains,  as  is  still  done  upon  thy  natal  day,  0
Rome.  The  very  occasion  itself  calls  for  an  account  of  its
origin  from  the  poet.  The  beginning  of  the  City  we  have  now
arrived  at ;  be  thou  present,  great  Quirinus,  at  the  recital  of
thy  deeds.  Now  had  the  brother  of  Numitor  paid  the  penalty,
and  all  the  shepherd  people  were  under  the  government  of  the
two  chieftains.  They  agreed  to  call  together  the  shepherds,
and  to  build  a  city  ;  a  question  of  doubt  arises,  which  of  the
two  should  lay  the  foundations.  "  There  is  no  need/'  said
Romulus,  "  of  any  dispute.  Great  is  the  truthfulness  of
birds  ;  let  us  make  trial  of  the  omen  of  the  birds."  The  thing
proposed  pleases  ;  the  one  goes  among  the  crags  of  the  woody
Palatine,  the  other  in  the  morning  ascends  the  heights  of  the
Aventine.  Remus  sees  six  birds  in  succession,  his  brother
twelve ;  they  abide  by  their  agreement ;  and  Romulus  has
the  direction  of  the  city.  A  suitable  day  is  chosen,  on  which
he  may  trace  out  the  plan  for  the  walls  with  the  plough.  The
festival  of  Pales  was  at  hand ;  from  that  time  the  work  is
commenced  upon.  A  trench  is  dug32  down  to  the  firm  clay ;
fruits  are  thrown  into  the  bottom  of  it,  and  some  earth  fetched
from  the  neighbouring  soil.  The  trench  is  filled  again  with
the  earth,  and,  when  filled,  an  altar  is  built  over  it ;  and  the
hearth,  but  newly  erected,  is  graced  with  the  kindled  fire.
After  that,  pressing  the  tail  of  the  plough,  he  traces  out  the
walls  with  a  furrow  ;  a  white  cow  with  a  snow-white  bull
bears  the  yoke.  These  were  the  words  of  the  king  :  "  Do
thou,  Jupiter,  aid  me  as  I  found  this  city;  and  Mavors
my  father  and  mother  Vesta,  and  all  other,  ye  Deities,  whom
it  is  a  religious  duty  to  invoke,  attend;  let  this  work  of
mine  rise  under  your  auspices.  Long  may  be  its  duration,
may  its  sway  be  that  of  an  all-ruling  land ;  and  under  it  may

32  A  trench  is  dug."] — Ver.  821.  The  ceremony  here  mentioned  was
performed  according  to  the  ritual  prescribed  by  the  superstitions  of  Etru-
ria.  This  trench  or  pit  was  filled  up  again,  and  it  must  not  be  confounded
with  the  furrow  made  by  the  plough.  It  was  called  *  mundus/  and  was
supposed  to  form  a  passage  to  the  infernal  regions.


1 70  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  832—860.

be  both  the  rising  and  the  setting  of  the  day."  Thus  he
prayed  ;  Jupiter  gave  an  omen  by  a  peal  of  thunder  on  the
left  hand,  and  from  the  heavens  on  the  left  the  lightnings
were  hurled.  Rejoicing  in  the  omen,  the  citizens  laid  the
foundations,  and  in  a  short  space  of  time  there  stood  the  new
wall.  Celer  urged  on  the  work,  whom  Romulus  himself  had
called,  and  had  said  to  him,  "  Celer,  be  this  the  task  of  thy
care,  that  no  one  pass  over  the  walls  or  the  furrow  that  has
been  made  with  the  plough :  him  who  dares  to  do  so,  put  to
death/'  Remus,  in  ignorance  of  this,  begins  to  scoff  at  walls
so  lowly,  and  to  say,  "  Shall  the  people  receive  any  protection
from  these  ?"  And  without  pausing,  he  leaps  over  them.
Celer  strikes  him  down33  with  a  pick-axe  for  his  daring ;
streaming  with  blood  he  presses  the  hard  ground.  When
the  King  is  informed  of  this,  he  swallows  down  the  tears
that  inwardly  arise,  and  keeps  his  sorrow  shut  up  with-
in his  breast.  He  is  unwilling  openly  to  weep,  and  is  care-
ful to  set  an  example  of  fortitude,  and  "  With  like  results,"
says  he,  "may  the  foe  pass  over  my  walls."  Yet  he  performs
his  obsequies ;  he  then  is  no  longer  able  to  restrain  his
tears,  and  the  affliction  which  he  had  concealed  becomes  mani-
fest. He  imprints  the  last  kisses  on  him  laid  out  on  the  bier,
and  he  cries,  "  Farewell,  my  brother !  snatched  from  me  by
no  will  of  mine."  And  then  he  anointed  the  corpse  about  to
be  committed  to  the  flames ;  what  he  did,  the  same  did
Faustulus  and  Acca  with  her  sad  locks  dishevelled.  Then  did
the  Quirites  (though  not  yet  become  entitled  to  that  name)
bewail  the  youth  ;  and  the  last  fire  was  applied  amid  laments
to  the  funeral  pile.34  A  city  arises,  (who  then  could  have
believed  this  tale  from  any  one  ?)  destined  one  day  to  place
her  conquering  foot  upon  all  lands.  Mayst  thou  hold  sway
over  the  universe,  and  mayst  thou  ever  be  under  the  rule  of
mighty  Caesar ;  still  continue  to  have  more  and  more  chiefs

33  Strikes  him  down.'] — Ver.  843.  Eusebius  says  that  Remus  was  killed
by  Fabius,  an  officer  under  Romulus.  Other  writers  represent  that  he
was  killed  by  Romulus  himself,  while  some  say  that  he  was  slain  in  a  po-
pular tumult.

34  The  funeral  pile."] — Ver.  856.  Remus  was  buried  in  a  spot  called
Remuria,  on  the  Palatine  Hill,  where  he  had  taken  his  augury.  It  is  said
that  there  was  a  dispute  among  the  citizens  whether  the  city  should  be
called  Roma,  Rem  a,  or  Remura.  The  Romans  were  not  called  by  the
name  of  Quirites  till  after  they  had  been  united  with  the  Sabines.


B.  IV.  860— 873.]         OK,    CALENDAR   OP    OTID.  171

of  that  name,  and  oft  as,  in  the  subdued  world,  thou  shalt  stand
erect,  may  all  realms  be  lower  than  thy  shoulders.

Pales  has  been  sung  by  me.  I,  too,  shall  now  sing  of  the
Vinalia:35  but  between  the  two  festivals  one  day  intervenes.
Do,  ye  damsels  of  the  town,  worship  the  deity  of  Venus ;  very
favourable  is  Venus  to  the  gains  of  the  prostitutes.36  Pray,
with  an  offering  of  frankincense,  for  beauty  and  the  public
favour :  pray  for  the  arts  of  allurement,  and  for  words  well
suited  to  merriment :  offer  to  your  mistress  the  pleasing  spear-
mint, with  her  own  myrtle,  and  the  chaplets  of  bulrushes
woven  with  the  enwreathed  roses.  Now  it  is  proper  that  the
temple  adjoining  to  the  Collinian  gate  should  be  resorted  to.
From  the  hill  of  Sicily37  does  it  derive  its  name.     And  when

35  The  Vinalia.'] — Ver.  863.  There  has  been  considerable  discussion
among  the  critics  whether  this  festival  was  celebrated  in  honour  of  Jupiter
or  Venus  alone.  The  truth  seems  to  he  that  it  was  in  honour  of  both
Deities,  as  Plutarch  says  (Rom.  Quest.  45),  that  wine  was  on  this  day-
poured  forth  in  honour  of  Venus,  whence  the  festival  received  the  name  of
Veneralia,  and  among  the  Greeks  of  atypo  Siena.  Ovid,  too,  says  (in  lines
898-9)  that  Jupiter  claims  it  as  his  festival,  Varro  says  that  the  Vinalia
was  celebrated  in  honour  of  Jupiter,  and  not  Venus.  But  there  was  a
festival  called  the  ■  Vinalia  rustica/  or  '  rural  Vinalia/  celebrated  on  the
19th  of  August,  and  it  is  of  that  that  Varro,  in  all  probability,  speaks.
Ovid  may  have  possibly  confused  the  characteristics  of  the  two  festivals.
The  Vinalia  were  so  called  from  '  vinum/  '  wine/

36  Gains  of  p7*ostitutes-~\ — Ver.  866.  '  Professarum/  When  a  woman
at  Rome  intended  to  adopt  the  calling  of  a  prostitute,  she  professed,  or
declared,  her  intention  of  so  doing  before  the  sediles.  She  was  then  en-
tered among  the  '  Togatae,'  or  wearers  of  the  '  toga,'  and  was  no  longer
allowed  to  wear  the  '  stola/  or  long  robe  of  the  matrons,  and  became  ex-
empt from  the  laws  against  adultery.  Females  of  patrician  and  equestrian
rank  were  not  allowed  to  enter  in  the  ranks  of  the  '  Professse,'  even  if  they
had  the  inclination  to  attain  a  distinction  of  so  unenviable  a  nature.  This
method  of  enrolment  and  supervision,  as  business-like  as  it  is  unbecoming,
prevails  in  France,  Belgium,  and  other  countries  on  the  continent  even  to
the  present  day.

37  The  hill  of  Sicily.]— -V er.  872.  That  is,  Mount  Eryx,  from  which
Venus  derived  her  epithet  of  '  Erycina/  The  temple  at  the  Collinian  gate
was  dedicated  a.u.c.  571.  Syracuse  was  not  taken  by  M.  Claudius  Mar-
cellus  till  thirty-one  years  afterwards ;  so  that  the  poet  is  guilty  of  an
anachronism  in  attributing  the  dedication  to  that  event.  But  there  was
another  temple  to  Venus  Erycina,  built  on  the  Capitoline  Hill  by  the
direction  of  the  Sibylline  books,  three  years  after  the  taking  of  Syracuse ;
and  it  is  most  probably  to  that,  that  the  poet  intended  to  make  allusion.
Mount  Eryx  was  near  Drepanum,  on  the  west  coast  of  Sicily.  On  it,  there
was  a  splendid  tern  pie  of  Venus,  the  foundation  of  which  was  attributed
to  iEneas  and  his  followers.


1 72  THE  FASTI ;  [b.  iv.  873—900.

Claudius38  gained  possession  of  the  Syracuse  of  Arethusa,  thee
too,  0  Eryx,  he  conquered  in  war.  Venus  was  transferred
thence,  according  to  the  verse  of  the  long-lived  Sibyl,  and  pre-
ferred to  be  worshipped  in  the  city  of  her  descendants.  Why,
then,  they  call  the  feast  of  Venus  by  the  name  of  Vinalia,  you
now  ask  ;  and  why  that  day  is  sacred  to  Jove  ?  There  was  a
war  to  decide  the  question  whether  Turnus  or  iEneas  should  be
the  son-in-law  of  the  Latian  Amata.39  Turnus  solicited  the  aid
of  Etruria.  Mezentius  was  famed,  and  fierce  when  once  he  had
taken  up  arms :  mighty  as  he  was  on  horseback,40  even
mightier  was  he  on  foot.  Him,  the  Eutulians  and  Turnus  en-
deavoured to  unite  to  their  side.  On  the  other  hand,  thus  the
Etrurian  chieftain  replied :  "  My  bravery  costs  me  no  small
price,  I  call  these  scars  of  mine  to  witness  ;  this  armour,  too,
which  oft  have  I  had  sprinkled  with  my  own  blood.  Do
thou  who  seekest  my  aid  divide  with  me  the  next  new
wine  from  thy  vats — no  very  great  reward.  I  delay  not  to
give  my  aid.  For  you  it  is  to  pay;  to  conquer  is  my  part.
How  would  iEneas  wish  that  this  price  had  been  refused
to  me?"  The  Rutulians  assented:  Mezentius  puts  on  his
armour ;  iEneas  arms  too,  and  addresses  Jove  in  prayer :
"The  vintage  of  my  foe  has  been  promised  to  the  Etru-
rian king,  0  Jove !  Thou  shalt  quaff  the  new  wine  from
the  branch  of  the  Latian  vine  !"  The  better  vow  prevails;  the
huge  Mezentius  falls,  and  beats  the  ground  with  his  scornful
breast;  autumn  arrives,  stained  with  the  trodden  grapes;
the  wine  owed  to  him  is  given  to  Jupiter,  well  deserving  of  it.
Hence  the  day  is  called  Vinalia.     Jupiter  claims  it  as  his  own,

38  Claudius.'] — Ver.  874.  M.  Claudius  Marcellus  was  the  first  Roman
general  that  defeated  Hannibal.  He  besieged  Syracuse,  in  Sicily,  and  took
it  while  the  inhabitants  were  celebrating  the  festival  of  Diana  in  the  night
time.  Again  engaging  with  Hannibal,  he  was  killed  in  an  ambuscade  in
his  sixtieth  year,  and  his  fifth  consulship.  He  was  the  third  person
who  governed  the  *  Spolia  Opima,'  having,  after  the  first  Punic  war,  de-
feated the  Gauls,  and  slain,  with  his  own  hand,  their  king  Viridomarus,
a.u.c.  530.

39  The  Latian  Amata."] — Ver.  879.  She  was  the  wife  of  Latinus,  king
of  Latium,  and  the  mother  of  Lavinia,  whom  iEneas  married  after  his  con-
quest of  Turnus.  This  war,  including  the  alliance  of  Turnus  and  Mezen-
tius, the  King  of  Etruria,  and  the  death  of  them  both,  forms  the  subject
of  the  last  six  books  of  the  ^neid  of  Virgil.

40  On  horseback.] — Ver.  882.  The  passage,  l  Et  vel  equo  magnus,  vel
pede  major  erat,'  will  either  admit  of  the  translation  above  given,  or  it
may  mean  '  powerful  was  he  in  horse,  and  still  more  so  in  foot.'


B.  iv.  900— 916.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  173

and  takes  pleasure  in  its  being  in  the  number  of  his  festi-
vals.

When  April  shall  have  but  six  days  to  remain,  the  season  of
the  spring  will  be  in  the  midst  of  its  course  ;  and  in  vain  will
you  look  for  the  Earn  of  Helle,  daughter  of  Athamas ;  the
rains  now  show  themselves ;  the  Dog,  too,  rises.41  On  this
day,  as  I  was  returning  to  Rome  from  Nomentum,42  a  proces-
sion, all  arrayed  in  white,  met  me  in  the  middle  of  the  way.
The  Flamen  was  going  to  the  sacred  grove  of  the  ancient  God-
dess Rubigo,43  about  to  offer  in  the  flames  the  entrails  of  a
dog  and  those  of  a  sheep.  Forthwith  I  approached  him,  that  I
might  not  be  unacquainted  with  this  ceremonial :  and  thy
Flamen,  0  Quirinus,  gave  utterance  to  these  words  :  "  Corrod-
ing44 Robigo,  do  thou  spare  the  blade  of  the  corn,  and  let  the
smooth  top  quiver  on  the  surface  of  the  ground.  Do  thou
permit  the  crops,  nourished  by  the  favoring  seasons  of  the
heavens,  to  grow  apace  until  they  are  ready  for  the  sickle.
Thy  power  is  not  harmless  in  its  exercise.  The  grain  which
thou  hast  marked  as  thine  own,  the  sorrowing  husbandman

41  The  Dog,  too,  rises. ,] — Ver.  904.  This  is  not  the  fact,  as  the  Constel-
lation Canis  sets  on  the  7th  of  the  Calends  of  May.  One  Manuscript
reads,  '  Occidit  atque  Canis/  *  And  the  Dog  sets,'  which  would  be  correct.
On  this  day  was  the  acronychal  setting  of  the  Ram.

42  Nomentum.] — Ver.  905.  This  was  a  town  of  the  Sabine  country,
to  the  east  of  Rome  ;  the  road  to  it  lay  through  the  Viminal  gate.

43  Ancient  Goddess  Rubigo.'] — Ver.  907.  Rubigo,  or  Robigo,  was  a
Goddess,  whose  name  signifies  '  rust,'  or  '  mildew.  Her  festival  was  the
*  Robigalia,'  here  mentioned.  It  was  celebrated  by  Numa,  to  propitiate
her  at  this  season  in  favour  of  the  growing  crops,  to  ensure  their  protec-
tion against  blight,  smut,  and  mildew.  Some  writers  call  the  Divinity,
Robigus,  making  him  a  God.  The  temple  was  in  the  Via  Nomentana,
near  the  Porta  Catularia.  Gower  thus  renders  this  and  the  following  line: —

'  A  flamen  into  Rust's  old  grove  did  hie,
The  entrails  of  a  dog  and  sheep  to  frie/

Festus  says,  that  at  the  '  Porta  Catularia,'  or  *  Dog's  Gate,'  (through
which  the  Nomentan  road  ran),  '  they  used  to  propitiate  the  Dog-star,
which  is  injurious  to  corn,  with  the  sacrifice  of  rusty-coloured  or  tawny
dogs,  in  order  that  the  corn  might  ripen  free  from  disease.'  He,  perhaps
means  to  say  that  at  the  setting  of  the  Dog-star  this  sacrifice  took  place,
as  in  another  passage  he  himself  tells  us  that  the  sacrifice  was  made  to  the
God  Robigus.

44  Corroding.] — Ver.  911.  *  Robigo/  mildew,  or  properly  meal-dew,
infects  corn  in  the  shape  of  a  red  powder,  of  a  glutinous  nature,  which,
eating  into  it,  gives  it  a  rough,  leprous  appearance.


174  THE  FASTI;  [b.  iv.  916— 944.

reckons  in  the  number  of  the  lost.  Not  so  injurious  to  the
corn  are  the  winds  or  the  showers ;  nor  is  it  so  pallid  when
consumed  by  the  frost,  rigid  as  marble,  as,  when  with  his
warmth,  the  sun  makes  hot  the  moistened  stalks  ;  in  such
case,  dread  Goddess,  is  thy  wrath  exercised.  Spare,  I  pray
thee,  and  keep  thy  rough  hands  from  the  crops  ;  injure  not
our  fields  :  to  possess  the  power  of  inflicting  injury  is  enough  :
seize  not  in  thy  embrace  the  tender  crops,  but  rather  the  hard
iron,  and  do  thou  first  destroy  that  which  has  the  power  of
destroying  others.  More  to  our  benefit  wilt  thou  corrode  the
swords  and  the  hurtful  weapons ;  them  we  want  not :  the
world  is  at  peace.  Let  the  rakes  and  the  hardy  mattocks,  and
the  crooked  ploughshare,  the  implements  of  the  country,  be
furbished  :  let  rust  stain  arms  ;  and  let  some  one  as  he  strives
to  draw  his  sword  from  the  scabbard,  find  that  it  has  become
fast  by  the  lapse  of  time.  But  hurt  not  the  corn,  and  let  the
husbandman  be  ever  enabled  to  pay  his  vows  to  thee,  keep-
ing thyself  afar."  He  had  spoken ;  in  his  right  hand  hung  a
towel,  with  a  loose  nap,  and  there  was  a  censer  of  frankincense,
with  a  bowl  of  wine.  The  frankincense  and  wine  he  placed
on  the  altars,  and  the  vitals  of  a  sheep ;  the  filty  entrails,  too
(of  this  I  was  a  witness),  of  an  unclean  dog .  Then  the
Flamen  says  to  me,  "  You  ask,"  for,  in  fact,  I  had  asked,
"  why  so  strange  a  victim  is  offered  in  sacrifice  ?  understand
the  reason  ;  there  is  a  Dog  ;45  they  call  him  the  Icarian,  and
as  his  Constellation  rises,  the  parched  earth  is  athirst,  and  the
corn  is  burnt  up,  Instead  of  the  dog  of  the  Constellation,  this
dog  is  placed  on  the  altar,  and  it  has  no  other  reason  than  its
name  why  it  should  thus  be  put  to  death?"

When  the  sister  of  Titan,  having  left  the  brother  of  the
Phrygian  Assaracus,46  has  thrice  raised47  her  beams  over  the

45  There  is  a  dog.~] — Ver.  939.  Icarus,  the  father  of  Erigone,  being
slain  by  some  intoxicated  shepherds,  his  dog  Mssra,  returning  home,  drew
his  daughter  by  her  robe  to  where  her  father  lay;  She  died  of  grief,  and
the  dog  perished  of  hunger.  In  compassion,  Bacchus  raised  him  to  the
skies,  calling  Icarius  by  the  name  of  Bootes,  Erigone  the  Virgin,  and
Maera,  Canicula,  '  the  Dog-star,'  or  Procyon.

46  Brother  of  the  Phrygian  Assaracus.'] — Ver.  943.  The  poet  alludes
to  Tithonus,  the  husband  of  ^urora,  but  by  mistake  he  has  put  Assaracus
in  the  place  of  Priam,  as  Priam  was  the  brother  of  Tithonus,  and  Assa-
racus was  their  great  uncle.

47  Has  thrice  raised,} — Ver.  944.  The  Floralia  began  on  the  fourth  of
the  Calends  of  May.


1.  IV.  944— 954.]        OS,    CAXE5TDAB   OP   OTID.  175

boundless  world,  the  Goddess  comes,  wreathed  with  the  varie-
gated chaplets  of  a  thousand  flowers  :  the  stage,  then,  admits
the  practice  of  a  looser  merriment.  The  festival  of  Flora  ends
on  the  Calends  of  May  ;  then  will  I  return  to  it :  at  this  time  a
greater  work  engages  me.

Yesta  claims  a  day  ;  on  this  day  Vesta  was  received  within
a  kindred  threshold.48  Thus  did  the  just  Senators  appoint.
Phoebus49  has  a  part ;  to  Vesta  was  yielded  a  second  part.
What  remains  from  them,  Augustus  himself  possesses.  Last
for  ever,  ye  laurels  of  the  Palatium,50  and  long  may  the
house  stand,  its  front  garlanded  with  oak.  Three  everlast-
ing Gods  does  this  one  house  contain.

43  A  kindred  threshold.'] — Ver.  949.  The  Pontifex  Maximus  being  re-
quired to  live  in  a  public  building,  and  Augustus  filling  that  office,  he  gave
a  part  of  the  Palatium,  where  he  resided,  to  the  service  of  the  Goddess,
and  on  this  day,  by  a  decree  of  the  Senate,  her  sacred  fire  was  removed
thither.  The  threshold  is  called  kindred,  in  the  same  sense  in  which
we  have  before  seen  the  poet,  in  his  flattery,  finding  some  affinity  between
Vesta,  a  Trojan  deity,  and  the  Julii  (among  whom  Augustus  was  adopted)
descended  from  ^Eneas.

49  Phoebus.] — Ver.  951.  A  temple  was  dedicated  to  Apollo  by  Au-
gustus, probably  on  this  day,  on  the  Palatine  Hill.  It  contained  a 'public
library,  where  the  poets  used  to  recite  their  compositions,  and  where  the
works  of  the  Roman  authors  were  preserved.

50  The  Palatium.] — Ver.  953.  The  poet  alludes  to  the  civic  crown  of
oak-leaves,  which,  as  has  been  before  stated,  the  Senate  ordered  to  be
suspended  before  the  palace  of  Augustus  between  two  branches  of  laurel,
symbolical  of  the  preservation  of  the  lives  of  the  people  by  Augustus,  and
of  his  triumphs  over  his  enemies.


1/6  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  v.  1—5.


BOOK  THE  FIFTH.


CONTENTS.


The  three  conflicting  opinions  on  the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  month  of
May,  Ver.  1—110.  The  rising  of  the  Constellation  of  the  Goat,  and
its  history,  111 — 128.  The  Lares  Praestites,  and  the  erection  of  their
altar,  129—146.  The  temple  of  Bona  Dea,  147—158.  The  wind
Argestes,  and  the  rising  of  the  Hyades,  with  their  history,  159 — 182.
The  Floral  games,  their  origin,  and  the  worship  of  the  Goddess  Flora,  at
Rome,  with  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Mars,  183—371.  The  rising  of
the  Constellation  of  the  Centaur,  and  the  story  of  Charon,  379 — 414.
The  rising  of  the  Lyre  and  the  Scorpion,  415 — 418.  The  nocturnal
celebration  of  the  Lemuria,  and  the  burial  of  Remus,  419 — 492.  The
setting  of  Orion,  his  birth  and  translation  to  heaven,  493—544.  The
temple  of  Mars  Ultor ;  the  slaughter  of  Crassus ;  and  the  recovery
from  the  Parthians  of  the  Roman  standards,  545—598.  The  rising
of  the  Pleiades,  and  the  beginning  of  summer,  599—602.  The  rising
of  the  Constellation  of  the  Bull,  with  its  origin,  603—620.  Figures
made  of  rushes  are  thrown  in  the  river  Tiber ;  the  arrival  of  Hercules
in  Latium,  621—662.  The  hymn  to  Mercury ;  his  festival ;  the  trades-
man's prayer  to  him,  663—692.  The  Sun  enters  the  Constellation
Gemini ;  its  origin ;  the  combat  of  Castor  and  Pollux  with  Lynceus,
693—720.  The  Agonalia  repeated ;  the  setting  of  the  Dog  Star,  721—
724.  The  Tubilustria,  or  purification  of  the  trumpets,  725,  726.  The
four  initials  in  the  Calendar,  727,  728.  The  temple  of  Fortuna  Publica,
729—732.  The  setting  of  Bootes,  and  the  rising  of  the  Hyades,
733—734.

You  inquire  for  what  reason  I  suppose  that  its  name  was
given  to  the  month  of  May.  My  answer  is,  the  cause  has
not  been  quite  clearly  ascertained  by  me.1  Just  as  the  tra-
veller comes  to  a  stand,  and,  in  his  uncertainty,  knows  not
which  way  to  go  when  he  sees  a  road  in  every  direction ;  so,

1  Ascertained  by  me.] — Ver.  1,  2.  Gower  thus  translates  these  lines, —

'  You  ask  me  whence  this  month  is  called  May.
I  know  not  well  what  reason  down  to  lay.*


b.  v.  5— 23.]  OB,    CALENDAR   OF   OYXD.  177

because  it  is  in  my  power  to  assign  different  reasons,  I  know
not  in  which  direction  to  turn,  and  the  very  abundance  of
them  is  a  difficulty  to  me.  Tell  me,  ye  who  hold  possession
of  the  springs  of  Aganippian  Hippocrene,2  the  pleasing  track
of  the  steed  of  Medusa.3  The  Goddesses  differed  on  the  point.
Polyhymnia4  begins,  the  first  of  them  to  speak ;  the  others
keep  silence,  and  mark  her  sayings  in  their  minds.  After  the
state  of  Chaos,  when  first  the  three  elements5  were  given  to
the  world,  and  the  whole  universe  receded  into  new  forms,
the  earth,  by  its  own  weight,  tended  downwards,  and  drew
after  it  the  seas  ;  whereas  its  lightness  buoyed  up  the  eether
to  the  highest  position.  Thou  too,  0  Sun,  together  with  the
stars,  weighed  down  by  no  gravity,  and  you,  ye  steeds  of  the
Moon,  sprung  forth  in  a  direction  upward.  But  neither  did
the  earth  for  any  length  of  time  yield  to  the  heaven,  nor  the
rest  of  the  stars  to  the  sun  ;  there  was  an  equality  of  honour
among  them.  Ofttimes  did  any  one  of  the  lower  class  of  the
Deities  dare  to  sit  on  the  throne,  which  thou,  0  Saturn,  was
wont  to  occupy  :  then  any  stranger  God  reclined  side  by  side
with  Ocean,  and  Tethys  was  received  many  a  time  in  the
lowest  place  ;6  until,  at  length,  Honour  and  Reverence,  with

2  Aganippian  Hippocrene."] — Ver.  7.  The  author  seems  here  to  confuse
the  streams  of  Aganippe  and  Hippocrene,  which  were  distinct  fountains  near
Mount  Helicon,  in  Boeotia.  Pausanias  tells  us  that  Aganippe  was  on  the
left  of  the  ascent  to  the  grove  of  the  Muses,  on  Mount  Helicon,  and  that
Hippocrene  was  situate  twenty  stadia  beyond  the  grove.  As  the  poet  dis-
tinguishes them  in  the  fifth  Book  of  his  Metamorphoses,  1.  132,  we  may
presume  that  he  here  gives  the  epithet  to  the  one  from  the  other,  on  ac-
count of  their  contiguity.

3  Steed  of  Medusa.]^-Yer.  8.  Pegasus  ;  who  was  fabled  to  have  sprung
from  the  blood  of  Medusa,  when  slain  by  Perseus.  These  fountains
were  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  ground  when  struck  by  the  hoof  of
Pegasus.

4  Polyhymnia.'] — Ver.  9.  She  was  the  muse  of  lyric  poetry.  All  the
Greek  poets  call  her  lioXv/ivia,  or  *  Polumnia,'  meaning  '  she  of  the  many
songs.'     Ovid  and  Horace  introduce  the  additional  letters  into  her  name.

5  The  three  elements.] — Ver.  11.  In  the  first  Book,  1.  103,  and  in  the
Metamorphoses,  be  mentions  four  elements.  Here  he  looks  upon  aether
and  air  as  together  constituting  but  one  element.

6  The  lowest  place.     Ver.  21,  22.     Gower  thus  renders  these  lines, —

*  Each  noteless  deity  would  by  Ocean  old
Sit  cheek  by  joul.     Oft  Tethys  was  controll'd.'

Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  seats,  or  rather  the  couches,  on  which  the


1 78  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  v.  23—48.

mild  aspect,  placed  their  bodies  on  the  nuptial  couch,  sanc-
tioned by  the  laws.  Hence  did  Majesty  spring,  she  who  rules
the  universe,  and  of  fall  growth  was  she  on  the  very  day  on
which  she  was  produced.  She  delayed  not;  she  took  her  seat
on  high  in  the  midst  of  Olympus,  resplendent  with  gold,  and
conspicuous  with  purple  plaited  robe.  Together  with  her  sit
Modesty  and  Awe  ;  you  might  behold  every  Deity  assuming
an  aspect  in  conformity  with  hers.  Forthwith  respect  for
high  rank  take  possession  of  their  minds ;  dignity  is  now
valued,  and  each  is  no  longer  occupied  by  self-complaisance.
This  state  of  things  remained  in  heaven  for  many  years,  until,
by  the  decree  of  the  Fates,  the  oldest  of  the  Gods  was  removed
from,  the  topmost  place  of  heaven.  The  Earth  brought  forth
her  savage  offspring,  huge  monsters,  giants,  who  would  dare
to  attempt  an  entrance  into  the  palace  of  Jove.  A  thousand
hands  she  gave  to  them,  and  serpents  in  place  of  legs ;  and
she  said,  "  Take  up  your  arms  against  the  great  Gods."
These  were  preparing  to  pile  up  the  mountains  to  the  highest
stars,  and  to  provoke  the  mighty  Jupiter  to  battle.  Jove,
hurling  his  thunderbolts  from  the  heights  of  heaven,  over-
turned the  vast  piles  on  those  who  had  formed  them.7  De-
fended by  these  arms  the  Majesty  of  the  Gods  still  remains,
and  from  that  time  abides  in  security.  Next  to  Jove  she  sits  ;
she  is  his  most  trusty  guardian,  and  without  violence  she  se-
cures the  sceptre  to  his  sway.  She  came  on  earth,  too ;
Homulus  and  Numa8  worshipped  her ;  afterwards  the  others,

ancients  reclined,  when  taking  their  meals.  The  lowest  was  esteemed  the
least  honourable  place,

7  Those  who  had  formed  them.] — Ver.  41,  42.  The  poet  here  refers  to
the  war  of  the  giants  against  the  Gods  of  heaven.  This  story  has  been
thought  by  some  to  have  been  the  corruption  of  a  tradition  of  the  fall  of
the  angels  from  their  blessed  state ;  by  others,  it  is  supposed  to  bear  refe-
rence to  the  heaping  pile  upon  pile  in  the  construction  of  the  tower  of
Babel.     Gower  thus  translates  these  lines, —

*  He  from  his  tower  discharged  his  thunder  straight,
And  on  th'  invaders'  pates  whelm'd  that  vast  weight.'

8  Romulus  and  Numa.] — Ver.  48.  The  poet  means  merely  to  assign
as  the  first  reason  for  the  name  of  May,  '  Maius/  that  it  was  derived  from
this  goddess,  *  Majestas/  whose  name  in  the  early  days  of  the  Latin  tongue
would  be  spelt  and  written  '  Maiestas.'  The  beauty  of  the  story  is  worthy
of  far  more  commendation  than  the  ingenuity  of  the  suggestion  founded
on  it.


b.  v.  48—76.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  1 79

each  in  his  own  day.  She  invests  fathers  and  mothers  with
dutiful  respect ;  she  is  the  companion  of  boys  and  maidens.
She  adds  dignity  to  the  fasces  when  granted,  and  to  the  curule
chair  of  ivory ;  she  triumphs,  standing  aloft,9  the  horses
wreathed  with  garlands."  Polyhymnia  had  ended  her  words  ;
Clio  and  Thalia,  skilled  at  the  sounding  lyre,  approved  of
what  she  said.  Urania10  took  up  the  discourse ;  all  kept
silence,  and  no  voice,  save  hers,  could  be  heard.  In  days  of
yore,  great  was  the  respect  of  the  hoary  head,  and  the  wrinkles
of  old  age  were  honoured.  The  youths  undertook  the  toils  of
Mars  and  the  undaunted  warfare  ;  and  in  defence  of  their
Gods,  they  remained  at  their  posts.  That  age,  which  was
feebler  in  strength  and  useless  in  bearing  arms,  often  by  its
counsel  assisted  its  country.  Nor  then  was  the  Senate-house
open  to  a  citizen  but  in  his  latter  years,  and  the  Senate  was
the  placid  synonyme  of  old  age.  The  old  man  gave  ordinances
to  the  people,  and  by  definite  laws  the  age  was  fixed  at  which
this  honour  should  be  obtained.  In  those  days  the  old  man
walked  between  the  youths,11  they  not  denying  him  the  honour;
and  if  he  had  but  one  companion,  he  took  the  inner  place.
Who  in  those  days,  in  the  presence  of  an  old  man,  would  dare
to  utter  words  worthy  of  a  blush  ?  Old  age  conferred  the
right  to  reprimand.  Romulus  saw  this,  and  he  called  the
selected  persons,  (  Fathers.'  To  these  was  referred  the  govern-
ment of  the  new-built  city.  From  this  circumstance  I  am  in-
clined to  think  that  the  elders  gave  their  name  to  May,  and
consulted  the  honour  of  their  old  age.  It  is  possible,  too,  that
Numitor  may  have  said,  "  Grant,  Romulus,  this  month  to  the
aged,"  and  that  the  grandson  did  not  refuse  his  grandsire.

9  Standing  aloft.'] — Ver.  52.  The  meaning  is,  that  she  attends  the  ge-
neral in  his  triumph,  when  he  stands  aloft  in  his  chariot  drawn  by  horses
crowned  with  garlands.

10  Urania.] — Ver.  55.  Clio  presided  over  history;  Thalia  was  the
patroness  of  comedy ;  and  Urania  was  the  muse  of  astronomy.  She  gives
it  as  her  opinion  that  as  June  was  so  called  from  the  'juniores,7  the
younger  men,  so  May  received  its  name  from  the  *  majores,'  or  '  maiores,'
the  aged.

11  Between  the  youths.] — Ver.  67.  The  middle  was  deemed  the  most
honourable  place  in.  walking,  the  persons  on  either  side  being  said  '  claudere
latera,'  *  to  shut  in  the  sides.'  Maturity  of  years  was  at  an  early  period
considered  as  an  indispensable  qualification  for  office.  By  the  law  of
Villius,  the  age  for  the  Qusestorship  was  31 ;  for  the  iEdileship,  37  ;  the
Prsetorship,  40  ;  and  the  Consulship,  43  years.

k2


180  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  v.  77—101.

June,  too,  is  at  hand,  so  called  from  the  name  of  the  Juniors,
the  successor  of  this  month,  and  no  small  guarantee  for  the
honours  of  the  month  before  it."  Then  did  Calliope,  first  of
her  party,12  thus  begin,  her  careless  tresses  wreathed  in  ivy,
"  In  former  times,  Ocean  had  wedded  Tethys,13  daughter  of
Titan,  who  encircles  the  earth  whichever  way  it  extends,  with
her  flowing  waters.  Pleione,  born  of  this  marriage,  is  united
to  Atlas,  supporter  of  the  skies,  and  becomes  the  mother  of
the  Pleiades.  Of  these,  Maia  is  said  to  have  surpassed  her
sisters  in  beauty,  and  to  have  been  embraced  by  the  mighty
Jove.  She  brought  forth  on  the  brow  of  Cyllene,  clad  with
the  cypress,  him  who  with  his  winged  feet  cleaves  through
the  aethereal  path.  Him  the  Arcadians,  and  the  rapidly
flowing  Ladon,  and  the  mighty  Msenalus  duly  worship,  a  land
believed  to  be  more  ancient14  than  the  moon.  Evauder,  an
exile  from  Arcadia,  had  come  to  the  fields  of  Latium,  and  had
brought  the  Gods  which  he  had  placed  on  board  his  ships.
Here,  where  now  is  Rome,  the  capital  of  the  world,  there
were  then  but  trees  and  grass,  and  a  few  sheep,  and  a  cottage
here  and  there.  When  they  had  come  hither,  "  Stop,"  cried
his  prophetic  mother,  "  for  this  spot  of  country  shall  one  day
be  the  site  of  an  empire."15  The  Nonacrian  hero  obeys  his
mother  and  prophetess,  and,  a  stranger,  he  paused  on  a
foreign  soil.  Many  sacred  rites  indeed  did  she  teach  these
nations,  but  first  the  ceremonial  of  the  horned  Faunus  and  of
the  God  of  the  winged  foot.16  Faunus,  half-goat  in  form,  thou

12  Calliope %first  of  her  party,'] — Ver.  80.  Calliope,  or  Calliopea,  was
the  muse  that  presided  over  epic  poetry.  The  mention  here  made,  of  her
beginning,  as  the  first  of  her  party,  may  either  mean  that  she  began  to
speak,  the  first  of  those  that  were  of  the  opinion  expressed  by  her,  or  that
she  was  the  first  of  those  who  had  not  yet  spoken,  to  break  silence.

13  Had  wedded  Tethys. ,] — Ver.  81.  Ocean  was  the  brother  of  Tethys,
and  they  were  of  the  Titan  race.  Pleione  was  their  daughter,  who  married
Atlas,  son  of  her  uncle  Iapetus,  and  brought  forth  the  Pleiades,  on  Mount
Cylene.     Maia  was  one  of  them,  and  she  bore  Mercury  to  Jupiter.

14  To  be  more  ancient.] — Ver.  90.  See  note  to  Book  i.  line  469,  on
the  antiquity  of  the  Arcadians.

15  Site  of  an  empire.] — Ver.  95,  96.     Gower  thus  renders  these  lines;

1  Here  sailing,  Hold,  his  learned  mother  cried ;
For  on  those  fields  a  kingdom's  plat  I've  spied/

16  God  of  the  winged  foot.] — Ver.  99,  100.  Gower  gives  this  trans-
lation of  these  lines ; —

1  He  taught  these  nations  many  services,
Both  horn-hoofed  Pans,  and  winged  Mercuries.'


B.  v.  101— 120.]         OK,    CALE]ST)AE   OF   OYID.  181

art  worshipped  by  the  aproned  Luperci,  at  the  time  when  the
hides  cut  in  thongs  purify  the  thronged  ways.  But  to  this
month  hast  thou  given  the  name  of  thy  mother,  thou  inventor
of  the  curved  lyre,  patron  of  the  thieves.17  And  this  was  not
thy  first  act  of  duty ;  thou  art  believed  to  have  given  to  the
lyre  the  seven  strings,  as  being  the  number  of  the  Pleiades."
She,  too,  had  ended,  and  was  applauded  by  the  voice  of  her
sisters.  What  am  I  to  do  ?  Each  part  of  the  choir  has  the
same  weight  with  me.  Let  the  favours  of  the  Pierian  train  be
equally  bestowed  on  me,  and  let  no  one  of  them  be  praised
by  me  more  or  less  than  her  sisters.

From  Jove  let  my  work  commence.  On  the  first  night
is  to  be  seen  the  starls  that  tended  the  cradle  of  Jove.  The
rainy  Constellation  of  the  Olenian  she-goat19  rises ;  she
enjoys  heaven  as  the  reward  of  the  milk  which  she  afforded.
The  Naiad  Amalthea,  noble  on  the  Cretan  Ida,  is  said  to  have
concealed  Jupiter  in  the  woods.  To  her  belonged  a  beautiful
goat,  the  dam  of  two  kids,  with  horns  towering,  and  bending
over  her  back,  and  with  an  udder,  such  as  by  right  the  nurse

17  Patron  of  the  thieves.'] — Ver.  103,  104.  The  poet  gives,  as  the  third
origin  of  the  title  of  the  month,  the  name  of  Maia,  the  mother  of  Mercury,
who  (through  the  medium  of  his  son  Evander)  called  it '  Maius,'  in  honour
of  her.     Gower  thus  renders  these  and  the  two  following  lines —

1  But  witty  shirking  Mercury  who  framed
The  harp,  this  month  from  his  fair  mother  named.
Nor  was  't  his  first  good  deed,  for  he  made  even
His  harp-strings  number  with  the  Pleiads  seven/

13  To  be  seen  the  star."] — Ver.  112.  On  the  Calends  of  May  is  the
heliacal  rising  of  the  star  '  Capella,'  '  the  She-goat/  It  is  on  the  right
shoulder  of  Heniochus,  '  the  Charioteer,'  a  Constellation  on  the  north  side
of  the  Milky  Way.

19  The  Olenian  she-goat.~] — Ver.  113.  Olenus  was  a  town  of  Achaia,
in  the  Peloponnesus,  situated  on  the  river  Melas.  There  was  also  a  towsi
in  Bceotia  of  that  name.  Lactantius  tells  us  that  Jupiter  was  nursed  by
Amalthea  and  Melissa,  daughters  of  Melisseus,  king  of  Crete,  upon  goats'
milk  and  honey.  Amalthea,  the  daughter  of  Olenus,  is  said  by  some
writers,  among  others  by  Musseus,  as  quoted  by  Eratosthenes,  to  have
owned  the  goat  that  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  to  have  given  Jupiter
to  be  suckled  by  it  when  he  was  delivered  to  her  from  Rhea  by  the  hands
of  Themis.  According  to  other  accounts,  the  names  of  the  daughters  of
Melisseus  were  Adrastea  and  Ida,  who  committed  the  infant  to  be  suckled
by  the  goat  Amalthea.  Who  can  look  for  uniformity  in  a  story  whose
very  existence  depended  on  the  fertility  of  the  imagination  ?  Ovid  does
not  say,  or  even  seem  to  imply,  that  the  name  of  the  goat  was  Amalthea.


182  THE   FASTI;  [b.  v.  120— 140.

of  Jove  ought  to  have.  She  gave  milk  to  the  God ;  but
against  a  tree  she  broke  her  horn,  and  thus  was  mutilated  of
half  of  her  beauty.  This  the  Nymph  took  up,  and  wreathed
it  with  fresh  gathered  herbs,  and  then  raised  it,  filled  with
fruits,  to  the  mouth  of  Jupiter.  He,  when  he  held  the
sovereignty  of  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  throne  of  his  father,
and  when  there  was  no  one  greater  than  the  uncon-
quered  Jove,  changed  his  nurse,  and  her  fruit-bearing  horn
into  Constellations,  which  last  still  retains  the  name  of  its
owner.

The  Calends  of  May  beheld  the  altar  erected  to  the  guardian
Lares,20  and  the  little  statues  of  the  Gods.  These  Curius21
vowed;  but  the  great  length  of  time  is  fast  destroying  them,  and
extreme  age  is  wearing  away22  the  stone.  However,  the  cause
of  the  title  which  is  applied  to  them  is,  that  they  stand  in
guard  over  all  things  kept  in  safety  under  their  eyes.  They
stand  in  guard  over  us,  too,  and  they  guard  the  fortifications
of  the  city ;  they  are  ever  at  hand,  and  are  giving  us  their  as-
sistance. But  before  their  feet  there  used  to  stand  a  dog,  hewn
out  of  the  same  stone.  What  was  the  reason  of  its  so  standing
with  the  Lar  ?  It  is,  because  each  of  them  guards  the  house  ;
each,  too,  is  faithful  to  his  owner.     The  cross  roads23  are

20  Guardian  Lares."} — Ver.  130.  On  the  Calends  of  May,  public  sacri-
fice was  offered  to  the  Lares.  Augustus  directed  them  to  be  publicly
worshipped  twice  in  the  year.

21  Curius.] — Ver.  131.  Manius  Curius  Dentatus  held  the  consulship
with  P.  Cornelius  Rufinus.  He  enabled  the  Romans  to  withstand  Pyrrhus,
and  triumphed  over  the  Samnites.  "When  their  ambassadors  came  with
the  intention  of  bribing  him,  they  found  him  at  work  in  his  field,  and  in
answer  to  their  solicitations,  he  told  them  that  he  would  rather  be  the
ruler  of  the  rich  than  be  rich  himself,  and  that  invincible  in  the  field,  he
could  not  be  conquered  by  money.  He  was  not,  however,  the  first  to
introduce  the  worship  of  the  Lares  into  Rome,  as  Varro  tells  us  that  Titus
Tatius,  the  Sabine,  raised  a  shrine  to  the  Lares  ;  and  Dionysius  says,  that
Servius  Tullius  first  instituted  the  Compitalia.

22  Is  wearing  awayj] — Ver.  131.  The  poet  says  that  Curius  erected  a
statue  to  the  '  Lares  Prsestites,'  or  *  Protectors/  and  that  it  represented
them  (probably  in  their  usual  loose  Gabinian  garb)  with  a  dog,  the  emblem
of  watchfulness,  at  their  feet ;  but  he  says  that  from  length  of  time  (the
lapse  of  about  400  years)  the  statues  had  gone  to  decay.

23  The  cross  roads.'] — Ver.  140.  The  Lares  were,  perhaps,  originally
only  represented  by  the  statues  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  the  shrine  of
Tatius.  But  at  the  time  when  the  poet  wrote,  we  learn  from  the  Scho-
liast on  Horace,  Sat.  book  ii.  Sat.  3. 1.  281,    that  Augustus  had  set  up


B    v.  140—148.]  OE,    CALENDAR   OF    OYID.  183

pleasing  to  the  God ;  pleasing,  too,  to  the  dog.24  Both  the
Lar  and  the  tribe  of  Diana  scare  away  the  thieves  ;  both  the
Lares  and  the  dogs  keep  their  watch  throughout  the  night.
I  was  inquiring  after  the  statues  of  the  twin-brother  Gods  that
had  fallen  down  under  the  power  of  lengthened  years.  A
thousand  Lares  does  our  city  contain,  and  the  Genius  of  the
chief,25  who  confided  them  to  our  care;  and  to  the  three  Deities
do  the  streets  pay  homage.  Whither  am  I  hurried  away  ?
The  month  of  August  will  give  me  a  right  opportunity  for
this  strain,  meanwhile  the  good  Goddess26  must  be  sung  by  me.

Lares,  or  Penates,  at  the  'Compita/  which  were  places  where  two  or  more
roads  met,  and  that  he  instituted  an  order  of  priests  to  attend  to  their
worship,  taken  from  the  Libertini,  and  called  Augustales.  This  accounts
for  the  'mille/  or  thousand  Lares  mentioned  in  the  text  below.  Varro
says  that  there  were  265  stations  for  the  Lares  at  the  corners  of  the  streets
at  Rome.  Probably,  this  custom  first  suggested  the  idea  of  setting  up  the
images  of  the  Virgin  and  Saints  at  the  corners  of  the  streets,  which  are
still  to  be  seen  in  Catholic  countries  at  the  present  day.

24  Pleasing,  too,  to  the  dog.] — Ver.  140.  Probably,  because  the  offals  of
the  neighbouring  nouses  were  thrown  there.  As,  in  towns,  the  idlers  of
the  human  race  generally  select  the  corner  of  a  street  for  the  purposes  of
gossip  and  warming  their  hands  in  their  pockets,  surely  the  canine  race
may  be  allowed  at  a  humble  distance  to  follow  their  example  in  choosing
such  a  locality,  especially  when  for  a  much  more  legitimate  and  practical
purpose — that  of  satisfying  their  hunger.  Dogs  were  sacred  to  Diana,  as
the  Goddess  of  the  chase.  This  and  the  previous  line  are  thus  translated
by  Gower —

'  Both  lov'd  of  masters,  both  the  house  defend ;
Both  god  and  dog  the  three  leet  ways  do  tend/

25  Genius  of  the  chief '.] — Ver.  145.  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  image  of
Augustus,  which,  by  his  order,  was  erected  at  the  corners  of  the  streets,
in  company  with  the  Lares  or  Penates.  Some  have  supposed  that  Mercury,
the  father  of  the  Lares,  is  here  signified,  but  the  expression  '  qui  tradidit
illos/  '  who  confided  them/  seems  especially  to  point  to  Augustus.

26  The  good  Goddess.-] — Ver.  148.  According  to  Macrobius,  '  Bona
Dea/  '  the  good  Goddess/  was  Fauna,  or  Fatua,  the  daughter  of  Faunus,
who  was  so  modest  that  she  never  left  the  woman's  apartment,  and  never
set  eyes  on  a  man,  or  was  seen  by  one,  and  her  name  was  never  mentioned
in  public.  Other  accounts  make  her  the  wife  of  Faunus,  who  flogged  her
to  death  for  drunkenness,  while  others  make  her  a  Phrygian,  the  mother
of  Midas.  Others  take  her  for  either  Ops,  Juno,  Mala,  Cybele,  or
Tellus.  Men  were  forbidden  to  enter  her  temple,  or  to  be  present  at  her
sacrifices,  which  were  performed  by  the  women  in  secret.  It  was  her  rites
that  Clodius  profaned  by  his  presence  in  disguise,  when  enamoured  of
Pompeia,  the  second  wife  of  Julius  Caesar,  who  was  one  of  the  priestesses
of  the  Goddess.


184  THE   FASTI;  [b.  v.  149— 165.

There  is  a  natural  rock  ;  the  reality  of  the  fact  gave  its  name
to  the  place.  They  call  it  "  The  Crags  ;"  it  is  a  large  part
of  the  hill.  On  this  spot27  had  Remus  stood,  to  no  pur-
pose, at  the  time  when  you,  ye  birds  of  the  Palatine,  gave
the  commencing  sovereignty  to  his  brother.  There  did  the
Senators  erect,  on  the  gently  sloping  hill,  the  temple  that  utterly
abhors  the  gaze  of  males.  The  heiress  of  the  ancient  name  of
the  Clausi28  dedicated  this  ;  one  who  never  submitted  her  vir-
gin person  to  the  embrace  of  man.  Livia  restored  it,  that  she
might  not  fail  to  imitate  her  husband,  and  that  in  every  point
she  might  follow  in  his  footsteps.

When  the  next  dawn,  the  daughter  of  Hyperion,  raises  on
the  steeds  of  the  morning  her  rosy  light,  the  stars  being  driven
away,  the  cold  north-western  wind29  will  gently  bend  the
tops  of  the  ears  of  corn,  and  the  white  canvass  will  be  set
from  the  Calabrian  waves ;  and  soon  as  the  darkening
twilight  ushers  in  the  night,  no  one  of  all  the  train  of  the
Hyades30  lies  concealed.  The  face  of  the  Bull  glitters,  radiant

27  On  this  spot.'] — Ver.  150.  That  is,  the  ATentine  Hill,  or  Mount;
on  which  was  located  the  temple  of  '  Bona  Dea.'  which  the  poet  proceeds
to  mention.

28  Name  of  the  Clausi.]— Ver.  155.  This  was  probably  Claudia  Quinta.
mentioned  in  the  fourth  book,  1.  305  ;  and  the  more  so,  as  the  poet  does
not  think  it  necessary  here  to  mention  her  name,  which,  if  he  had  not  al-
ready given  it,  he  would  most  probably  now  have  done.  The  temple  of
Bona  Dea  was  built  by  this  lady,  and  was  restored  by  Livia,  the  wife  of
Augustus.

25  North-western  wind.] — Ver.  161.  Argestes.  This  wind  was  fabled
to  be  the  son  of  Aurora,  and  was  called  by  the  Greeks  '  Iapyx.'  It  was
a  favourable  wind  for  persons  sailing  from  Calabria,  in  the  south  of  Italy,
for  Greece ;  the  passage  to  which  country  was  usually  taken  from  Brundi-
sium,  a  city  on  the  Calabrian  coast.

30  The  Hyades.] — Ver.  164.  The  poet  says  that  the  Hyades  rise  acro-
nychally  on  the  sixth  of  the  Nones  of  May ;  whereas  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.
Book  xviii.  c.  66)  says  that  they  rise  cosmically  on  that  day.  Some  au-
thorities, differing  from  Ovid,  say  that  these  stars  were  originally  Nymphs
of  Dodona  in  Epirus,  and  the  nurses  of  Bacchus  ;  and  that,  dreading  the
resentment  of  Juno,  they  were  translated  by  Jupiter  to  the  skies.  Three
derivations  of  this  name  are  mentioned  by  ancient  writers ;  the  first  from  veiv,
pronounced  by  the  Latins,  hyein,  '  to  rain  ;'  the  second,  from  the  Greek
letter  ^r,  l  upsilon/  which  the  Constellation  was  thought  to  resemble  in
figure  ;  and  the  third,  from  vg, '  a  pig/  for  some  fanciful  reason  unknown  to
us.  Cicero  says  that  his  own  countrymen,  supposing  this  to  have  been  the
origin  of  the  name,  thence  called  the  Constellation  by  the  name  of  *  Suculae/
*  the  little  pigs,'  derived  from  the  Latin  word  '  sus,'  '  a  pig  :'  he  adopts
the  first  derivation.     On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,  Book  ii.  c.  43.


b.  v.  155— 195.]         OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  185

with  seven  flaming  stars,  which  the  Grecian  mariner  calls
Hyades,  from  rain.  Some  think  that  they  nursed  Bacchus  ;
some  have  supposed  that  they  were  the  granddaughters  of
Tethys  and  of  old  Ocean.  Not  as  yet  was  Atlas  standing,  bear-
ing on  his  shoulders  the  burden  of  Olympus,  when  Hyas
was  born,  distinguished  for  his  beauty.  Him  and  the  Nymphs,
did  iEthra,  daughter  of  Ocean,  bring  forth  with  timely
throes ;  but  Hyas  was  the  elder  born.  While  the  down  of
his  cheek  is  still  young,  with  the  net  beset  with  variegated
feathers,31  he  scares  the  timid  deer ;  and  the  hare  proves  to
him  an  abundant  prey.  But  when  his  manliness  ripened  with
his  years,  he  dared  to  attack  even  the  wild  boars  and  the
shaggy  beasts  of  prey ;  and  now  while  he  was  seeking  the
lair  and  the  cubs  of  a  lioness  that  had  just  brought  forth,  he
himself  became  the  bloodstained  prey  of  the  Libyan  wild  beast.
His  mother  and  his  sorrowing  sisters  bewailed  Hyas ;  Atlas
too,  destined  to  support  with  his  neck  the  burden  of  the  skies,
bewailed  him.  Yet  were  both  of  the  parents  surpassed  by  the
affection  of  the  sisters  ;  that  affection  raised  them  to  the  sky ;
Hyas  gave  them  their  name.

"  Come  hither,  thou  mother  of  the  flowers,  to  be  honoured  by
mirthful  sports  ;  in  a  former  month  I  had  deferred  the  recital  of
what  related  to  thee.  In  April  thou  dost  begin  ;  thou  passest  on
to  the  days  of  May.  The  one  month  at  its  departure  receives  thee ;
the  other  as  it  comes.  Since  the  limits  of  the  two  months  are
thine,  and  make  place  for  thee,  either  this  one  or  that  is  suitable
for  thy  praises.  In  this  month,  end  the  games  of  the  Circus,32
and  the  award  of  the  prizes  with  the  applause  of  the  theatres  :
with  this  performance  of  the  Circus  let  my  strain  proceed.
Teach  me  thyself  who  thou  art.  The  opinions  of  men  are
fallible ;  thou  wilt  be  the  best  instructor  as  to  thine  own
name.5'  Thus  I  spoke  ;  thus  replied  the  Goddess  to  my  re-
quest ;  while  she  was  speaking,  she  breathed  forth  the  vernal
roses  from  her  mouth.     "  I,  who  now  am  called  Flora,  was

31  Variegated  feathers."] — Ver.  173.  '  Formidine/  The  '  formido'  was
a  toil,  or  net,  covered  with  feathers  of  different  colours,  for  the  purpose  of
scaring  birds  and  wild  beasts.  According  to  some  authors,  Hyas  met  his
death  by  the  sting  of  an  adder.

32  The  Circus.'] — Ver.  189.  This  was  the  Circus  of  Flora,  in  the  sixth
region  of  the  city.  The  Floralia  commenced  on  the  28th  of  April,  and
finished  on  the  3rd  of  May.


186  THE   FASTI;  [b.  v.  195— 217.

once  called  Chloris.33  The  Greek  spelling  of  my  name  became
corrupted  by  the  Latin  pronunciation.  I  was  Chloris,  a
Nymph  of  the  blessed  plains,  where,  as  thou  hast  heard,  was
formerly  the  abode  of  the  blessed  men.  How  great  was  my
beauty  it  is  irksome  to  one  of  my  modesty  to  tell ;  but  it  pro-
cured a  God  as  a  son-in-law  for  my  mother.  'Twas  spring  ;  I
was  roaming  about :  Zephyrus  beheld  me.  I  walked  on  ;  he
followed  me  :  Ified  ;  he  proved  the  stronger.  Boreas34  too  had
given  to  his  brother  a  Ml  precedent  for  violence,  when  he
dared  to  bear  off  his  prize  from  the  house  of  Erectheus.  Yet
he  made  amends  for  his  violence  by  giving  me  the  name  of
wife,  and  in  my  married  state  I  have  no  ground  for  complaint.
I  enjoy  perpetual  spring  ;  to  me  the  year  is  always  most
beauteous ;  the  tree  always  bears  its  foliage ;  the  earth  its
herbage.  A  fruitful  garden  in  the  fields  of  my  dowry  is
mine  ;  the  breeze  cherishes  it ;  it  is  irrigated  by  a  spring  of
trickling  water.  This  my  husband  has  filled  with  flowers  of
the  choicest  kinds,  and  he  says,  e  Do  thou,  Goddess,  rule  the
empire  of  the  flowers.'  Ofttimes  have  I  desired  to  reckon  the
tints  as  they  were  arranged,  and  I  could  not :  their  multitude
exceeded  all  number.  When  first  the  dewy  rime  has  been
dashed  from  the  leaves,  and  the  variegated  flowers  warm  in  the
beams  of  the  sun,  the  Seasons35  arrayed  in  painted  robes  as-

33  Chloris.'] — Ver.  194.  This  name  is  derived  from  the  Greek  adjective
X^copoQ,  '  green/  and  similarly,  the  word  Flora  is  from  '  flores,'  '  flowers.'
Though  they  are  kindred  terms,  it  could  only  arise  from  the  exuberance
of  the  poet's  fancy  to  imagine  that  one  word  was  a  corruption  of  the  other.
There  is  little  doubt  that  the  story  of  Chloris,  now  lost  to  us,  was  a  fiction
of  purely  Greek  origin ;  and  that  Flora  was  essentially  an  Italian  deity.  She
was  worshipped  by  the  Sabines,  and  Titus  Tatius  erected  a  temple  to  her
in  Rome.  Lactantius  and  Plutarch  tell  a  very  business-like  and  matter-of-
fact  story  that  she  was  a  courtezan,  who  left  her  wealth  to  the  Roman
people,  on  the  condition  that  her  birth-day  should  be  always  celebrated  by
a  festival,  to  be  called  the  *  Floralia,'  and  that  the  Senate,  out  of  shame,
took  upon  themselves  to  feign  that  she  was  the  Goddess  of  Flowers.

34  Boreas.] — Ver.  203.  This  was  the  name  of  the  north  wind.  He
was  fabled  to  have  carried  off  Orithyia,  the  daughter  of  Erectheus,  as  she
was  dancing  on  the  banks  of  the  Ilissus.  Mr.  Keightley  justly  observes,
that  the  name  of  Orithyia,  signifying  in  Greek  '  mountain  rusher,'  was  a
very  good  name  for  the  spouse  of  the  north  wind.

35  The  Seasons.] — Ver.  217.  They  were  the  daughters  of  Jupiter  and
Themis,  and  were  represented  in  embroidered  robes.  The  Charites,  or
Graces,  were  also  the  children  of  Jupiter,  and  three  in  number,  Aglaia,
Thalia,  and  Euphrosyne.     Some  say  that  they  were  the  daughters  of  Bac-


R.  v.  217— 235.1  OK,    CALEOTAB   OF   OVID.  187

senible,  and  gather  my  presents  into  their  light  baskets.
Forthwith,  to  them  are  added  the  Graces,  and  they  plait  the
chaplets,  and  the  garlands,  destined  to  bind  their  heavenly
locks.  I  was  the  first  to  spread  the  new  seed  throughout  the
unlimited  nations  ;  before  then  the  earth  was  of  but  one  tint.
I  was  the  first  to  create  the  flower  of  the  Therapnsean36  blood,
and  the  complaint  still  remains  that  is  written  on  its  leaf.
Thou  too,  Narcissus,37  hast  a  name  throughout  the  cultivated
gardens — unhappy  in  thy  fate,  that  thou  didst  not  in  thy  own
person  form  two  individuals  !  Why  should  I  tell  of  Crocus38
or  Attis,  or  the  son  of  Cinyras,39  from  whose  blood  by  my  art
their  fame  arises  in  the  shape  of  a  flower  ?  Mars,40  too,  if  thou
art  ignorant  of  the  fact,  was  born  by  my  art :  that  Jove  may
still  remain  in  ignorance  of  it  is  my  constant  prayer.  The
sacred  Juno,  when,  without  a  mother,  Minerva  was  born,  was
grieved  that  Jupiter  had  not  needed  her  aid.  She  was  on  her
way,  that  she  might  complain  to  Ocean  of  the  deeds  of  her
husband ;  wearied  with  her  toil,  she  stopped  at  my  doors.41
Soon  as  I  saw  her,  I  said,   '  Daughter  of  Saturn,  what  has

chus  and  Venus ;  very  unlikely  parties,  one  would  think,  to  be  the  full
sisters  of  Priapus.  In  early  days  they  were  represented  clothed,  in  later
times  naked.     The  Spartans  reckoned  but  two,  Clita  and  Phoena.

36  Therapnccan.] — Ver.  223.  Therapnse  was  a  town  of  Laconia.
Hyacinthus  was  born  at  Amyclse,  in  its  vicinity.  Reference  has  been
made  to  him  in  a  former  page.

37  Narcissus.'] — Ver.  225.  He  was  the  son  of  the  river  Cephisus,  and
the  nymph  Liriope.  "While  he  was  at  a  fountain  he  became  enamoured
of  his  own  person,  and  pined  away  into  the  flower  that  still  bears  his
name.

38  Crocus.] — Ver.  227.  He  was  enamoured  of  the  nymph  Smilax,  and
pined  away  into  the  flower  that  bears  his  name,  while  the  Nymph  was
converted  into  a  yew  tree.  Attis  has  been  already  mentioned  (see  book
ii.  1.  223.)     Arnobius  says  that  the  violet  sprang  from  his  blood.

39  The  son  of  Cinyras.] — Ver.  227.  Adonis  was  the  son  of  Cinyras,
king  of  Cyprus,  by  his  daughter  Myrrha,  or,  according  to  others,  he  was
the  son  of  Thoas  and  Myrrha.  Hesiod  makes  him  the  son  of  Phoenix
and  Alphesibsea.  Being  killed  by  a  wild  boar,  he  was  changed  by
Venus  into  an  anemone.  He  was  worshipped  in  Syria  under  the  name
of  Thammuz,  to  which  worship  allusion  is  several  times  made  in  the  writings
of  the  prophets  in  the  Old  Testament.

40  Mars.] — Ver.  229.  Ovid  is  the  only  ancient  writer  that  narrates  this
story  of  the  birth  of  Mars  by  the  aid  of  Flora.

41  Stopped  at  my  doors.] — Ver.  233-4.  Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

Comes  to  old  Ocean  for  to  make  her  mone,
And  at  our  gate  quite  tired  sits  her  down/


188  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  v.  235—257.

brought  thee  here?'  She  tells  me  the  place  to  which  she  is
going  :  she  adds,  too,  the  reason.  I  consoled  her  with  words
of  friendship.  c  My  care,'  said  she,  '  cannot  be  alleviated
by  words.  If  Jove  has  become  a  father,  having  neglected
the  instrumentality  of  his  wife,  and  if  he  in  his  own  person
possesses  the  title  of  both  husband  and  ivife,  why  should  I
despair  of  becoming  a  mother  without  the  aid  of  my  husband,
and,  keeping  myself  chaste,  of  bringing  forth,  untouched  by
any  man  ?  All  the  drugs  in  the  wide  world  I  will  try.  I  will
search  both  the  seas  and  the  abysses  of  Tartarus.' 42  She  was  in
the  middle  of  her  speech:43  I  appeared  to  have  the  look  of
one  in  consideration.  (  Thou  seemest,  Nymph,'  she  said,
c  to  have  some  influence  in  such  matters.'  Thrice  did  I  in-
tend to  promise  her  my  assistance — thrice  was  my  tongue
stayed.  The  wrath  of  Supreme  Jove  was  the  cause  of  my
alarm.  c  Give  me,  I  pray,  thy  aid,'  she  said  ;  f  my  adviser
shall  not  be  disclosed  : '  and  she  then  calls  to  witness  the
Deity  of  the  Stygian  stream.  '  What  thou  seekest,'  said  I,
'  a  flower  sent  to  me  from  the  Olenian  fields  will  give  to  thee  ;
the  one  in  my  garden  is  the  only  plant.  He  who  made  me
a  present  of  it  said,  '  Touch,  with  this,  a  sterile  cow  ;  she
shall  become  a  dam.'  I  touched  one ;  forthwith  she  did  become
a  dam.  Straightway,  with  my  thumb,  I  plucked  the  flower  as
it  adhered  to  the  stem;  she  was  touched  by  me ;  and  when
touched,  she  conceived  in  her  womb.  And  now,  pregnant,  she
enters  Thrace  and  the  regions  on  the  left  of  the  Propontis.44

42  Abysses  of  Tartarus."] — Ver.  243-4.  Gower  renders  these  lines  in
the  following  quaint  manner  ; —

1  All  charms  and  mixtures,  both  in  land  and  seas,
I'll  search  and  trie,  and  grope  the  Stygian  lees/

43  She  was  in  the  middle  of  her  speech."] — Ver.  245.  l  Vox  erat  in
cursu.'*  Literally, '  her  voice  was  in  the  course.'  It  is  absolutely  the  fact,
that  one  critic  takes  the  meaning  of  this  to  be,  '  Juno  spoke  as  she  ran/
Well  may  Mr.  Keightley  express  his  astonishment.  In  such  case  we  must
suppose  Flora  to  be  'keeping  pace'  with  her,  to  listen  to  her  story;  which
Juno  could  not,  in  civility,  have  permitted,  especially  as  she  was  a  very
punctilious  deity.

44  Propontis.] — Ver.  257.  This  sea,  which  is  now  called  the  Sea  of
Marmora,  was  so  called  from  being  Trpb,  'before,'  the  Euxine,  or  Black
Sea.  It  was  a  part  of  the  eastern  boundary  of  Thrace,  where  Mars  was
especially  venerated,  on  account  of  the  hardy  and  warlike  character  of  the
people.


b.  v.  25S— 282.]  OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  189

She  gains  her  wish,  and  Mars  is  born.  He,  mindful  that  by
means  of  me  he  had  received  his  birth,  said,  '  Do  thou  occupy
a  place,  too,  in  the  city  of  Romulus.'  Perhaps  thou  mayst
imagine  that  my  sway  is  only  over  the  delicate  chaplets  ;  but
my  divine  power  extends  to  the  fields  as  ivell.  If  the  corn-
fields have  blossomed  well,  then  will  the  threshing  floor  be
rich ;  if  the  vineyards  have  blossomed  well,  there  will  be
plenteous  wine  ;  if  the  olives  have  blossomed  well,  most  shining
with  ozYwill  the  year  prove  ;  the  pomes  as  well  enjoy  the  in-
crease of  this  season.  When  the  blossom  has  once  been
injured,  the  vetches  and  the  beans  perish,  and  thy  lentiles,  0
Nile,  river  that  flowest  from  afar.  The  wine,  too,  carefully
stowed  away  in  the  spacious  cellars,  flowers,45  and  the  scum
covers  the  surface  of  the  casks,  Honey,  too,  is  my  province.
I  invite  the  winged  insects  that  will  yield  the  honey,  to  the
violet,  the  cytisus,  and  the  hoary  thyme.  The  same  thing  do
I  when  the  spirits  abound  in  the  years  of  youth,  and  the
body  is  now  in  strength."  As  she  said  these  things  I  re-
garded her  with  silent  astonishment.  But  she  said,  "  Thou
hast  the  privilege  of  learning,  if  there  be  any  thing  that  thou
seekest  to  know."  "  Tell  me,  0  Goddess,"  I  answered,  "  what
was  the  origin  of  the  games."  Scarcely  had  I  fully  con-
cluded, when  she  answered  me.  The  other  appliances  cf
luxury  were  not  yet  in  full  operation  :  the  man  who  was  rich
possessed  either  cattle  or  a  wide  tract  of  land.  From  this
circumstance,  too,  it  was  that  the  rich  man  was  called
"  locuples,"46  and  that  money  had  the  name  of  ((  pecunia."
But  now  at  length  each  was  acquiring  wealth  by  forbidden

45  In  the  cellars  flowers."] — Ver.  270.  The  poet  is  considered  to  be  going
rather  too  far  here,  when  he  places  the  scum  of  wine  under  the  care  of
Vesta,  because,  when  it  rises,  the  wine  is  said  'florere,'  Ho  flower,'  by  virtue
of  a  figurative  adaptation  of  the  word.  The  term  is  generally  supposed  to
apply  merely  to  the  scum  or  effervescence  of  new  wine.  Might  it  not  possibly
apply  to  the  mouldiness  that  would  supervene  upon  that  scum  if  left  long
standing,  and  which  we  know  to  be  a  vegetable  subtance,  or  'lichen?'

46  Was  called  'locuples*] — Ver.  281.  That  is  to  say,  the  man  who
had  much  land  was 'loci  plenus,'  'full  of  land.'  'Pecunia,'  'money,'  ac-
cording to  the  poet,  derives  its  name  from  'pecus,  'cattle,'  because  origi-
nally the  greatest  part  of  a  person's  wealth  consisted  of  cattle  and  flocks ;
as  in  those  times  cattle  formed  the  most  convenient  medium  of  exchange,
money,  as  its  substitute,  received  its  appellation  from  it.  The  firstmoney
that  was  used  had  figures  of  cattle  stamped  upon  it ;  and,  according  to
some,  it  was  made  out  of  the  hides  of  cattle  in  a  tanned  state.


190  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  v.  282—300.

means.  It  had  become  a  custom  to  depasture  the  lands  of
the  people  ;47  and  long  was  that  permitted,  and  there  was  no
penalty  for  so  doing.  The  people  kept  their  public  places  in
the  guardianship  of  no  one  :  and  to  pasture  on  his  own  private
property  was  deemed  the  act  of  a  simpleton.  Such  irregulari-
ties as  these  were  reported  to  the  iEdiies,  the  Publicii : 48
spirit  before  was  wanting  in  these  men,  The  people  took
cognizance  of  the  matter :  the  offenders  suffered  the  penalty
of  a  fine  ;  to  its  guardians  the  care  of  the  public  was  a  theme
of  praise.  In  part,  the  price  was  granted  to  me ;  and  with
great  applause  did  the  JEdiles,  victorious  in  the  contest,  insti-
tute new  games.  With  the  other  part  they  made,  by  contract,
the  carriage-road,49  which  then  was  a  steep  precipice ;  now
it  is  a  useful  way,  and  they  style  it  the  Publician.  I  had
before  supposed  that  annual  spectacles  were  instituted  ;  she
told  me,  not  so,  and  added  to  her  expressions  these  words  :
"  Honour  influences  us  too  :  in  festivals  and  altars  do  we  take
pleasure,  and  we  that  inhabit  the  heavens  are  an  ambitious
set.  Often,  by  his  sin,  has  some  mortal  made  the  Gods  en-
raged, and  the  victim  has  been  a  soothing  sacrifice  for  his

47  The  lands  of  the  people.'] — Ver.  283.  These  lands  were  called
'pascua,'  and  a  rent  was  paid  for  the  liberty  of  grazing  thereon,  which
went  into  the  public  funds,  and  was  called  'scriptura,'  as  Mr.  Thynne
suggests,  probably  as  being  paid  for  the  permission  to  enter  one's  name
in  the  roll  of  those  admitted  to  the  advantage.  The  poet  tells  us  that
this  payment  was  evaded  to  a  great  extent,  till  the  iEdiles  put  a  stop  to
the  practice,  who,  then,  no  longer  allowed  interest  or  favour  to  screen
those  guilty  of  these  malpractices.

48  The  Publicii.'] — Ver.  288.  These  were  Lucius  and  Marcius  Publicius
Malleolus,  who  were  iEdiles  of  the  people,  a.u.c.  513.  By  the  Licinian
law  no  one  person  was  allowed  to  stint  more  than  100  head  of  cattle  or
500  sheep  on  the  public  pastures.  Besides  instituting  the  Floral  games,
a  temple,  which  is  not  mentioned  by  the  poet,  was  built  in  honour  of
Flora,  out  of  the  fines ;  this  was  afterwards  repaired  by  Tiberius,  as  we
learn  from  Tacitus,  Annals,  Book  ii.  c.  49.

49  The  carriage  road.] — Ver.  293.  i  Locant,'  '  they  let  out  to  contract/
Varro  and  Festus  confirm  this  account.  Festus  says,  *  they  made  a  road  so
that  carriages  could  come  up  the  Aventine  hill  to  Velia :'  Velia  being  one
part,  perhaps  the  highest,  of  the  hill.  Gower  thus  renders  the  four  lines
beginning  from  line  283, —

'  The  custom  was  to  feed  the  people's  commons
Without  controlment  ?  they  long  time  were  no  man's.
Some  law  the  people  did  their  commons  keep,
He  was  a  churl  that  by  himself  fed  sheep/


b.  v.  300— 324.]  OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OVID.  191

crimes.  Oftthnes  have  I  seen  Jove,50  when  he  was  just
about  to  hurl  his  thunderbolts,  withhold  his  hand  on  the
offering  of  some  frankincense.  But  if  we  are  slighted,  the
wrong  is  atoned  for  with  weighty  penalties,  and  our  wrath
proceeds  beyond  moderate  bounds.  Look  at  the  grandson  of
Thestius ; 51  with  flames,  at  a  far  distance,  did  he  burn  :  the
reason  was,  because  the  altar  of  Diana  was  without  its  fire.
Look  at  the  descendant  of  Tantalus  ;52  the  same  Goddess  with-
held from  him  the  power  of  setting  sail.  A  Virgin  indeed  she
is,  and  yet  twice  has  she  avenged  her  altars  when  subjected  to
a  slight.  Hapless  Hippolytus,  thou  couldst  wish  that  thou
hadst  paid  homage  to  Dione,  when  thou  wast  torn  in  pieces  by
thy  frightened  steeds.  'Twere  a  tedious  task  to  recount  the
slights  that  have  been  chastised  by  calamity.  Me,  too,  the
Roman  fathers  neglected.  What  could  I  do?  By  what
means  could  I  give  symptoms  of  my  displeasure?  What
penalty  could  I  inflict  for  this  my  disgrace?  My  wonted
duties  were  forgotten  by  me  in  my  sorrow.  No  longer  I
guarded  the  fields  :  no  longer  was  the  fruitful  garden  valued
by  me.  The  lilies  faded ;  you  might  see  the  violets  parched  ;
and  the  filaments  of  the  ruddy  crocus  become  flaccid.  Many
a  time  did  Zephyrus  say  to  me,  '  Do  not,  thyself,  destroy  thy
own  dowry.'  Worthless  to  me  was  my  dowry.  The  olive
trees  were  in  bloom  ;  the  wanton  blasts  nipped  them.  The
corn-fields  were  in  blossom ;  the  corn  was  injured  by  hail-
storms. The  vine  as  yet  gives  a  ground  for  hope  ;  the  heaven
blackens  in  the  quarter  of  the  south  wind,  and  the  leaves  are

50  Have  I  seen  Jove.~\ — Ver.  300-1.  Gower's  version  of  these  lines
runs  thus, —

i  Oft  have  I  seen  Jove  hurling  his  fire  storm,
At  sight  of  incense  hold  his  threat'ning  arm/

51  Grandson  of  Thestius.] — Ver.  305.  Meleager,  son  of  iEneus  and
Althea,  daughter  of  Thestius.  His  mother,  on  his  birth,  was  informed
by  the  Fates  that  he  would  live  till  a  log  of  wood,  then  burning  on  the
fire,  was  consumed.  On  this,  she  removed  it,  and  carefully  preserved  it.
Meleager  killed  the  Calydonian  boar  sent  by  Diana  in  revenge  for  the
neglect  of  her  worship ;  and  he  gave  its  skin  to  Atalanta,  who  had  first
wounded  it.  His  mother's  brothers  attempting  to  deprive  her  of  it,  Meleager
slew  them  ;  on  which,  in  revenge,  his  mother  threw  the  log  on  the  fire,
and  he  expired,  when  the  flames,  thus  at  a  distance  from  him,  had  burnt
out.     Althea  killed  herself  through  grief.

53  Descendant  of  Tantalus.'] — Ver,  307.  Agamemnon ;  descended  from
Tantalus,  through  his  son,  Pelops.     See  Book  i.  1.  387.


192  THE   FASTI ;  [b.  v.  324—343.

stripped  off  by  the  sudden  shower.  I  did  not  wish  all  this  to
happen,  for  I  am  not  cruel  in  my  wrath ;  but  I  took  no  care
to  repel  the  evil.  The  Senators  assembled;53  and  if  the  year
should  blossom  well,  they  vowed  to  my  Godhead  an  annual
festival.  I  assented  to  the  vow.  Lsenas,  the  Consul,  with  his
colleague  Posthumius,  in  discharge  of  their  promise,  insti-
tuted in  my  honour  these  games/'  I  was  preparing  to  in-
quire why  there  was  in  these  games  a  greater  license,54  and
more  freedom  in  merriment.  But  it  occurred  to  me  that  she
was  no  austere  Deity,  and  that  she  had  functions  suited  for
the  enjoyment  of  pleasure.  Her  temples  are  entirely  surrounded
with  the  wreaths  of  flowers55  sewed  together,  and  the  gorgeous
board  is  concealed  by  the  roses  showered  down  upon  it.  The
drunken  reveller  dances  with  his  hair  wreathed  with  the  bark
of  the  linden-tree,  and  scarcely  knowing  what  he  does,  is
whirled  along  by  the  influence  of  the  wine.  In  his  drunken
fit,  the  lover  sings  at  the  cruel  threshold  of  his  beauteous  mis-
tress ;  his  perfumed  locks  support  the  delicate  garlands.  No
grave  matters  are  transacted  with  a  brow  enriched  with  the
garland :  and  limpid  water  is  not  the  beverage  of  those
wreathed  with  flowers.     As  long  as  thou  wast  mixed,   Ach-

53  The  Senators  assembled.'] — Ver.  327.  In  the  consulship  of  L.  Post-
humius Albinus  and  M.  Popilius  Lamas,  a.u.c.  580,  directions  were  given
that  the  Floral  games  should  be  celebrated  annually.

54  A  greater  license.'] — Ver.  331.  The  greatest  license  was  permitted
at  these  games  ;  and  to  the  sound  of  music,  lewd  women  danced  in  a  state
of  nudity.  The  story  is  told,  that  when  Cato  of  Utica  once  appeared  at
the  games,  the  spectators  would  not  call  on  the  dancers  to  strip,  being
overawed  by  his  presence,  on  which  he  retired,  that  he  might  not  interfere
with  their  amusement,  and  was  loudly  applauded  for  so  doing.  This  would
appear  very  like  an  encouragement  of  the  practice  on  his  part ;  and  he,
probably,  did  not  think  of  the  maxim,  as  good  in  ethics  as  it  is  in  law, —
1  Qui  facit  per  alium,  facit  per  se.'

55  Wreaths  of  flowers.] — Ver.  335.  The  poet  here  describes,  not  the
Floral  games,  but  the  gaiety  of  life  that  the  Goddess  was  wont  to  promote.
This  and  the  next  seven  hues  are  thus  translated  by  Gower —

1  Brows  are  embroidered  with  spruce  garlands  sew'd,
And  tables  cover'd  with  fresh  roses  strew' d.
The  bouzy  guest,  deck'd  with  a  film  flower  crown,
In  drunken  garb  there  dances  up  and  down :
And's  head  with  ovl  and  flow'rs  and  wine  well-lin'd,
He  catches  sings  at's  sweet-heart's  door  unkind.
Crown'd  temples  meddle  with  no  serious  matter ;
Nor  are  flow'rs  us'd  in  drinking  of  fair  water.'


B.   V.  343—363.]      OK,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  193

loiis,56  with  the  juice  of  no  clusters,  there  was  no  pleasure  in
assuming  the  rose.  Bacchus  loves  the  flowers ;  you  may
know  that  the  garland  is  pleasing  to  Bacchus,  from  the  Con-
stellation of  Ariadne.  A  merry  stage  becomes  this  Goddess  ;
she  is  not,  believe  me,  she  is  not  to  be  reckoned  in  the  num-
ber of  the  tragic  Goddesses*.57  And  why  the  multitude  of  the
courtezans  throng  to  these  games,  the  reason,  when  sought  for,
is  not  difficult  to  be  ascertained.  She  is  none  of  the  morose
ones,  nor  is  she  one  of  the  great  boasters  :  she  wishes  that
her  festival  should  be  open  to  the  Plebeian  multitude.  She
teaches  us,  too,  to  make  use  of  the  beauty  of  our  youth,  while
it  is  still  in  bloom ;  and  that  the  thorn  is  slighted  when  the
roses  have  faded.  But  why,  whereas  white  garments  are  worn
on  the  festival  of  Ceres,  is  this  Goddess  gay  with  habits  of
various  colours  ?  Is  it  because  the  harvest  grows  white  with
its  ripened  ears,  but  every  hue  and  tint  is  to  be  found  in
flowers  ?"  She  nodded  her  assent,  and,  as  she  shook  her  hair,
the  flowers  fell,  just  as  the  rose,  when  dropped,  is  wont  to  fall58
on  the  festive  board.  There  still  remained  the  torches,59  the
origin  of  which  was  concealed  from  me ;  when  thus  she  re-
moved my  uncertainty,     "  It  is  either  because  the  fields  are

56  Thou  wast  mioct,  Acheloiis.] — Ver.  343.  It  seems  to  have  been  a
general  notion  with  the  Latin  poets  that  the  waters  of  the  Acheloiis  were
the  first  that  were  used  for  the  purpose  of  tempering  wine.  Virgil  (Georgics,
Book  i.  1.  9)  speaks  of  mixing  the  waters  of  the  Acheloiis  with  the  juice
of  the  newly-discovered  grape.  Hyginus,  Fable  274,  tells  us  that  Cerasns,
the  iEtolian,  was  one  of  the  first  who  taught  men  to  mix  water  with  their
wine,  and  recommended  them  to  use  the  waters  of  the  river  Acheloiis  for
that  purpose.

57  Tragic  Goddesses,] — Ver.  348.  *  Cothurnatas.,  Literally, '  buskined
Goddesses/  The  '  cothurnus '  was  a  high  shoe  or  buskin,  worn  by  actors
in  tragedy,  with  the  view  of  thereby  rendering  the  figure  more  stately  and
elevated.  Its  introduction  on  the  stage  is  sometimes  ascribed  to  Sophocles,
but  more  generally  to  iEschylus.  This  appellation  was  often  given  to
Diana  and  Minerva.

58  Is  wont  to  fall.']— Ver.  360.  Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  custom  at
the  feasts  of  the  ancients  of  showering  down  flowers,  and  especially  roses,
from  the  ceiling.  At  their  potations,  garlands  of  roses  were  often  hung
from  the  ceiling ;  from  this  circumstance,  whatever  secrets  were  imparted
in  the  freedom  of  postprandial  conversation,  were  said  to  be  *  sub  rosa/
'under  the  rose/  and  it  was  considered  a  breach  of  good  faith  and  of  po-
liteness to  divulge  anything  that  might  transpire  upon  such  occasions.

59  The  torches.]— Ver.  361.  Torches  were  used  at  the  Floralia,  as  the
rites  were  protracted  to  a  verv  late  hour  of  the  might.


194  THE  EASTI;  [b.  v.  363—388.

resplendent  with  purple  flowers,  that  lights  appear  to  be
becoming  to  my  festival,  or  because  neither  the  flower  nor
flame  is  of  a  dull  colour,  and  the  brightness  of  each  attracts
our  attention,  or  because  the  licence  of  the  night  is  suited  to
my  pleasures.  The  third  reason  is  derived  from  fact.  "There
is  still  a  little  matter,"  I  said,  "  about  which  it  remains  for
me  to  inquire,  if  I  may  be  allowed."  She  said,  "  I  permit
thee."  "  Why,  in  honour  of  thee,  are  the  feeble  roes  and
the  timid  hares60  enclosed  in  the  net  in  place  of  the  Libyan
lionesses  ?"  She  replied  that  the  woods  were  not  her  domain,
but  the  gardens  and  the  fields  not  to  be  approached  by  the
savage  beast  of  prey.  She  had  concluded  her  speech  ;  and  she
vanished  into  empty  air.  A  sweet  perfume  remained ;  you
might  know  that  she  was  a  Goddess.  That  the  song  of  Naso
may  flourish  throughout  all  times,  diffuse,  I  pray,  0  Goddess,
thy  gifts  in  my  breast.

On  the  night  before  the  fourth  from  the  Calends,  shall
Chiron61  raise  his  star,  half-man,  and  half-formed  of  the
body  of  a  yellow  steed.  Pelion  is  a  mountain  of  Haemonia,
facing  the  south  ;  its  summit  is  green  with  pine ;  the  oak
covers  the  other  part  The  son  of  Phillyra  inhabited  it.  The
cave  is  still  extant  in  the  ancient  rock  which  they  say  was  the
abode  of  the  worthy  old  man.  He  is  believed  to  have  occu-
pied with  the  strains  of  the  lyre  those  hands  that  were  destined
in  future  times  to  effect  the  death  of  Hector.  Alcides  had
come,  a  part  of  his  task  performed,  and  now  almost  the  last62

60  The  timid  hares.'] — Ver.  372.  The  animals  that  were  generally
hunted  in  the  Circus  were  of  the  fiercer  kind ;  but  at  the  Floralia,  deer
and  hares  were  brought  in  nets,  and  let  loose  then  for  the  purpose  of
chasing  them.  Very  probably,  one  reason  for  then  hunting  the  hare  was,
the  fact  that  these  animals  are  very  destructive  to  flowers,  and  have  an  es-
pecial liking  for  pinks  and  carnations.

61  Chiron.]—  Ver.  379.  On  the  5th  of  the  Nones  of  May,  the  Centaur
rises.  Chiron  was  the  son  of  Saturn  and  Phillyra,  and  was  celebrated  for
his  skill  in  medicines.  He  was  a  Centaur,  half-man  and  half-herse,  and
was  the  great  grandfather  of  Achilles,  whom  he  educated.  He  was  also
said  to  have  nursed  ^Esculapius.  Hercules  conquered  Troy  in  the  reign
of  King  Laomedon;  Achilles  slew  Hector,  its  bulwark,  in  the  Trojan
war.  Ovid  seems  to  have  derived  this  story  from  Homer's  Iliad,  the  Ar-
gonautic  poem  of  Orpheus  and  Callimachus.

62  Almost  the  last.] — Ver.  388.  Apollodorus  says,  that  so  far  from  its
being  at  the  time  of  almost  the  last  of  the  labours  of  Hercules,  this  acci-
dent happened  to  Chiron  when  he  was  engaged  on  his  fourth  task.     Pliny


B.  v.  388—421.]        OR,    CALENDAR   OP   OYID.  195

of  the  labours  enjoined  on  him,  remained  for  the  hero.  You
might  see  the  two  destined  for  the  destruction  of  Troy,  by
chance,  standing  together.  On  the  one  side  was  the  boy,  the
son  of  iEacus  ;  on  the  other  side  was  the  son  of  Jove.  The
hero,  the  son  of  Phillyra,  receives  the  youth  with  hospitality,
and  asks  him  the  cause  of  his  coming ;  the  other  one  informs
him.  Meanwhile  he  examines  his  club  and  the  spoil  of  the
lion,  and  he  says,  "  Hero  worthy  of  these  arms,  and  arms
worthy  of  the  hero  !"  Nor  could  the  hands  of  Achilles  refrain
from  daring  to  touch  the  hide  bristling  with  its  shaggy  hair.
While  the  old  man  is  handling  the  arrows,  tipped  with  poison,
one  falls,  and  the  barb  is  fixed  in  his  left  foot.  Chiron  groans
aloud,  and  draws  the  steel  from  the  wound ;  Alcides  weeps,
and  so  does  the  Hsemonian  boy.  Yet  he  himself  prepares  the
herbs  collected  on  the  hills  of  Pagasee,  and  soothes  the  wounds
with  various  remedies.  The  eating  venom  was  too  powerful
for  a  remedy,  and  the  pestilence  was  entirely  absorbed  in  his
bones  and  throughout  his  whole  body.  The  blood  of  the
Hydra  of  Lerna  mingling  with  the  blood  of  the  Centaur  gave  no
time  for  aid.  Achilles  stood  bedewed  with  tears,  as  though
before  his  father ;  thus  was  Pelias  to  be  mourned  had  he
then  died.  Often  did  he  chafe  the  hands  of  the  patient
with  his  affectionate  hands  :  the  teacher  then  received  the  ad-
vantages of  that'  disposition  of  which  he  had  had  the  train-
ing, Often  did  he  kiss  him  ;  often,  too,  did  he  say  to  him  as  he
lay,  "Live  on,  I  pray;  leave  me  not,  my  dear  father!"  The
ninth  day  had  come,  when  thou,  most  righteous  Chiron,  hadst
thy  body  girt  with  twice  seven  stars.

Him  the  curving  Lyre 63  would  desire  to  follow  ;  but  not  yet
is  the  path  in  readiness ;  the  third  night  will  be  a  suitable
time.  At  the  hour,  when  on  the  morrow,  we  say,  that  now  the
Nones  are  dawning,  the  Scorpion  shall  be  marked  in  the  sky
from  its  middle.

When  thrice  from  this  time  the  Star  of  the  Evening  shall
have  raised  his  beauteous  disk,  and  thrice  the  conquered  stars
shall  have  made  way  for  the  Sun,  then  will  be  the  rites  of  your

(Nat.  Hist,  book  xxv.  c.  6)  says  that  Chiron  recovered  by  the  application
of  the  herb  centaury,  which  received  its  appellation  from  the  Centaur.

63  The  curving  Lyre.~\—  Ver.  415.  On  the  3d  of  the  Nones  of  May,  the
Lyre  rises  acronychally.  On  the  day  before  the  Nones,  half  of  the  Scorpion
sets  cosmically.

o  2


196  THE   FASTI;  [b.  v.  421—437.

ancient  ceremonial,  feast  of  the  Lemures  ;  this  feast  will  pre-
sent the  offerings  to  the  silent  shades. 64  Their  year  was
shorter,  and  not  as  yet  had  they  been  taught  to  employ,  for
purification,  the  affectionate  Februa,  and  not  yet  wast  thou  the
leader  of  the  months,  0  Janus !  thou  of  the  double  form.  Yet
already  did  they  offer  their  peculiar  gifts  to  the  ashes  of  the
dead,  and  the  grandson  performed  the  rites  at  the  tomb  of  his
buried  grandsire.  The  month  was  called  Maius,  from  the
name  of  the  "  majores,"  [their  ancestors,]  which  even  now  re-
tains a  part  of  the  ancient  custom.  When  midnight  now  is
come,  and  affords  silence  for  sleep,  and  ye  dogs,  and  birds
with  your  various  tints,  are  still ;  at  that  hour  rises  the  person
who  bears  in  mind  the  ancieut  ceremonial,  and  stands  in  awe
of  the  Gods  :  his  two  feet  have  no  sandals 65  on  them,  and  he
makes  a  noise  with  his  fingers  clasped  in  each  other  with  his
thumb  in  the  middle,66  for  fear  lest  the  aerial  spectre  should
meet  him  if  silent.  After  he  has  washed  his  hands  clean  in
the  water  of  the  spring,  he  turns  round,  and  first  he  takes  up
the  black  beans  ; 67  with  his  face  turned  away,  he  flings  them  ;

64  The  silent  shades.]— Ver.  422.  *  Tacitis  Manibus.'  Literally,  '  the
silent  Manes.'  As  Mr.  Keightley  observes,  the  Manes  were,  according  to
this  description  of  them,  what  we  term,  disturbed  spirits.

65  Have  no  sandals.'] — Ver.  432.  On  performing  magical  incantations,
it  was  always  deemed  necessary  to  have  the  feet  bare  for  that  purpose.

65  His  thumb  in  the  middle.] — Ver.  433.  There  is  some  difficulty  in
understanding  from  the  context  how  the  sound  here  described  was  to  be
produced.  Neapolis  thinks  it  means  merely  a  snapping  of  the  thumb  and
finger.  Mr.  Thynne  and  Mr.  Stanford  seem  to  be  of  the  same  opinion.
Mr.  Keightley  thinks  that  it  may  have  been  done  by  locking  the  fingers
in  one  another,  whereby  the  thumbs  were  joined  in  the  middle,  and  then
making  a  noise  by  bringing  the  hands  smartly  together.  If  'medius  pol-
lex '  here  means  the  middle  finger,  a  signification  which  Ovid  gives  else-
where to  'pollex,'  then  it  may  mean  that  he  closes  the  fingers  in  the  fist
of  the  left  hand,  and  makes  a  snapping  noise  on  them  thus  joined,  with  the
middle  finger  of  the  right,  which  is  very  easily  done,  by  smartly  striking
the  space  between  two  adjoining  fingers.

6'  The  black  bea?is.] — Ver.  431 — 6.  Gower  gives  the  following  trans-
lation of  these  lines —

*  The  rite-rememb'ring,  ghost-abhorring  sunne,
Arises  gently,  and  no  shoes  puts  on ;
Then  points  with  his  clos'd  fingers,  and  his  thumb
Put  in  the  midst,  lest  ghosts  should  near  him  come  ;
Then  in  spring-water  he  his  hands  doth  cleanse,
But  first  doth  roll  about  his  mouth  blue  beans.'
We  are  told  by  Festus,  that  the  bean  was  particularly  used  in  the  rites


B.  v.  437—461.]  OK,    CALE1ST)AE   OF   OYID.  197

but  while  he  flings  them,  he  says  "  I  offer  these  ;  with  these
beans  do  I  ransom  myself  and  mine."  Nine  times  does  he  say
this,  and  looks  not  behind  him.68  The  ghost  is  believed  to
gather  them,  and  to  follow  behind  if  no  one  is  looking  on.  A
second  time  he  touches  the  water  and  tinkles  the  copper  of
Temesa,69  and  begs  the  ghost  to  leave  his  house.  When  nine
times  he  has  repeated,  "  Shades  of  my  father !  depart/'  he
looks  back,  and  believes  that  his  rites  are  duly  performed.
Whence  the  day  was  called,  or  what  is  the  origin  of  the  name,
is  unknown  to  me  ;  from  some  God  it  must  be  learned.  Thou
son  of  the  Pleiad,  worthy  of  veneration  from  thy  potent  wand,
do  thou  instruct  me  ;  ofttimes  has  the  palace  of  the  Stygian
Jove  been  visited  by  thee.  The  wand-bearing  God  comes  at
my  prayer.  Hear  now  the  reason  of  the  name ;  the  reason
was  learned  from  the  God  himself.  When  Romulus  consigned
to  the  tomb  the  remains  of  his  brother,  and  the  obsequies  of
Remus,  unhappily  too  active,  were  duly  performed,  woe-
stricken  Faustulus,  and  Acca  with  her  dishevelled  locks,  were
■sprinkling  his  burnt  bones  with  their  tears.  Afterwards,  in
their  sorrow,  they  returned  home,  about  the  beginning  of
twilight,  and  threw  themselves  down  to  rest  on  their  couch,
hard  as  it  was.  The  blood-stained  ghost  of  Remus  seemed  to
be  standing  by  the  bed,  and,  with  a  subdued  gibbering,  to
utter  these  words,  "  Behold  me,  the  half,  the  equal  part,  of  all
your  prayers !  Behold  of  what  nature  1  now  am !  and  of
what  nature  but  a  little  while  ago  I  was  !     I,  who  so  short  a

performed  to  the  ghosts  or  Lemures,  and  at  the  Parentalia ;  and  that  the
Flamen  Dialis  was  forbidden,  not  only  to  eat  that  pulse,  hut  even
to  name  it,  because  it  was  dedicated  to  the  dead.  Pythagoras  forbade  his
disciples  to  eat  this  pulse,  as  it  was  supposed  that  the  souls  of  men  in
the  first  stage  of  the  metempsychosis  were  transferred  into  the  interior
of  the  bean.  This  fiction,  which  perhaps  was  the  key  to  some  more
mysterious  doctrine,  was  probably  borrowed  by  him  from  the  priests  of
Egypt.

68  Looks  not  behind  him.]—  Ver.  439.  Mr.  Keightley  justly  remarks,
tbat  this  superstition  reminds  one  of  that  of  sowing  the  hemp-seed  on
All-hallows  Eve,  and  refers  to  Burns's  Hallowe'en,  st.  16-20.  The  nine
times,  as  mentioned,  was  perhaps  of  magic  efficacy,  for  Virgil,  Eel.  viii.
1.  75,  tells  us  that  the  Gods  take  pleasure  in  uneven  numbers.  So  with
us,  the  vulgar  notion  is,  that  there  is  <  luck  in  odd  numbers.'

69  Copper  of  Temesa.]— Ver.  441.  Temesa,  called  also  Tempsa  by  the
Latins,  was  a  town  of  Bruttium,  in  Calabria.  There  was  also  a  place  in
the  isle  of  Cyprus  called  Temesa,  or  Temsa,  famous  for  its  copper  mines.


198  THE   FASTI;  [b.  v.  461—488.

time  since,  if  I  had  obtained  the  omens  conferring  on  me  the

sovereign  sway,  might  have  been  the  chief  among  my  people.

Even  now  have  I  glided  from  the  flames  of  the  funeral  pile,

and  am  a  phantom  of  air.70     This  shape  is  all  that  is  left  of

that  which  was  Kemus.     Alas  !  where  is  Mars,  my  father  ?    If

ye  did  but  speak  the  truth,  and  if  it  was  he  that  gave  to  us,

when  outcasts,    the  udder  of  the  wild  beasts.     Me  has  the

rash  hand  of  a  fellow  citizen  destroyed — me,  the  very  man

whom  a  she-wolf  preserved — of  the  two,  how  much  the  more

humane  was  she.     Ah,  cruel  Celer,  mayst  thou  yield  up  thy

remorseless  soul  through  wounds,  and  mayst  thou  pass  under

the  earth  all  stained  with  gore,   as  I  have  done.      My  brother

willed  not  this ;  his  brotherly  affection  is  equal  to  my  own.

'Twas  all  he  could  do  ;  he  expended  his  tears  on  my  doom.

Entreat  him  by  those  tears,   by  the  nourishment  you  afforded

him,  to  appoint  a  day  to  be  celebrated  in  my  honour/'    As  he

gives  them  these  commands,  they  long  to  embrace  him,  and

extend  their  arms  :  the  gliding  phantom  escapes  their  hands  as

they  grasp  at  him.     As  the  ghost  in  its  flight  deprived  them

of  their  slumber,  they  both  of  them  reported  to  the  king  the

words  of  his  brother.     Romulus  obeyed,  and  he  called  that

day  on  which  the  prescribed  rites  are  performed  in  favour  of

the  buried  dead,   "  Remuria."     The  harsh  letter71  which  was

the  first  in  the  entire  name,  in  lapse  of  time  was  changed

into  one  of  softer  articulation.     Afterwards,  they  called  the

ghosts  of  the  silent  shades  the    "  Lemures :"  this  was  the

meaning   of  the  word;  this   the  import   of  the  expression.

Yet,  on  those  days,  the  ancients  shut  their  temples  as  you  now

see  them  shut  at  the  festival  of  the  Feralia.     That  time,  too,

was  not  auspicious  for  the  marriage  torches  of  the  widow  or  of

the  virgin.     She  who  married  then  did  not  long  remain72  a

70  A  phantom  of  air.'] — Ver.  463-4.     Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

1  Now  is  your  Remus  but  a  dream  of  air,
A  fitting  relique  of  the  piles  impair. '

71  The  harsh  letter.] — Ver.  481.  He  says  that  the  feast  in  honour  of
the  shade  of  Remus  was  originally  called,  Remuria,  hut  that  in  lapse  of
time  the  first  letter  was  changed  into  the  letter  L,  and  that  eventually  all
spirits  of  the  dead  obtained  the  appellation  of  *  Lemures/ — a  very  impro-
bable story.

72  Bid  not  long  remain.] — Ver.  488.  He  means  to  say  that  such  wives,
either  by  their  shrewishness,  or  for  worse  reasons,  soon  create  a  necessity
for  a  divorce  on  the  part  of  their  husbands.


B.  v.  488—515.]        OB,    CALEKDAE  OF   OVTD.  199

wife.  For  this  reason,  too,  if  proverbs  have  any  weight  with
you,  the  common  people  say  that  "  bad  prove  the  wives  that
are  married  in  May."

But  these  three  festivals,  I  should  observe,  are  at  the  same
season,  but  continued  on  no  one  of  the  days  intervening n
between  them.  On  the  middle  one  of  these  days  if  you  seek
for  the  Boeotian  Orion,74  you  will  be  disappointed.  The  origin
of  this  Constellation  must  now  be  sung  by  me.  Jupiter  and
his  brother,  who  rules  over  the  wide  ocean,  together  with
Mercury,  were  on  their  travels.  It  was  the  hour  when
ploughs  turned  over  on  the  yoke  are  carried  homeward,  and
the  lamb  drinks  the  milk  of  the  ewe  as  it  downward  presses
the  udder.  By  chance,  the  old  man,  Hyrieus,  the  cultivator
of  a  scanty  farm,  catches  sight  of  them  while  he  is  standing
before  his  humble  cottage,  and  thus  he  accosts  them, — "Long
is  the  road,  and  but  little  of  the  day  now  remains  ;  my  door,
too,  is  ever  open  to  the  stranger."  He  adds  looks  to  his
words  which  fully  confirm  them  :  they  comply  with  his  invita-
tion, and  conceal  their  divine  nature.  They  come  beneath  the
roof  of  the  old  man,  soiled  with  the  blackening  smoke  ;  there
is  a  little  fire  remaining75  in  the  log  that  had  been  laid  on
the  day  before.  He,  himself,  on  his  knees,  kindles  the  blaze
with  his  breath,  and  then  brings  out  and  breaks  up  the  split
firewood.  The  pipkins  stand  on  the  table;  the  smaller  of
them  contains  beans ;  the  other  herbs  ;  and  each  of  them,
covered  with  its  lid,  sends  forth  its  steam.  While  there  is  a
a  pause,  he  presents  with  his  shaking  right  hand  the  blushing
wine.  The  God  of  the  Ocean  receives  the  first  cup.  When
he  has  drunk  off  the  contents,  he  says,  "  Pour  out  some  more,
that  Jupiter,  in  his  turn,  may  drink."  At  hearing  the  name
of  Jupiter,  the  man  turns  pale.     As  soon  as  his  self-posses-

73  Days  intervening  7] — Ver.  492.  The  Lemuria  were  held  on  three
alternate  days,  the  7th,  5th,  and  3rd  of  the  Ides  of  May,  answering  to
May  9th,  11th,  and  13th.

?4  Orion.']—  Ver.  493.  The  Constellation  of  Orion  sets  on  the  5th  of
the  Ides  of  May.  Hesiod  says  that  he  was  the  son  of  Neptune  by  Euryale,
daughter  of  Minos.  Pindar  makes  the  Isle  of  Chios  to  have  been  his
birth-place,  and  not  Boeotia.

75  A  little  fire  remaining] — Ver.  506.  Allusion  is  here  made  to  the  block
which  was  kept  on  the  hearth  smouldering  from  day  to  day,  to  be  in  rea-
diness for  cooking  the  principal  meal  of  the  day,  for  which  service  only,
fire  would  probably  be  required  by  poor  people,  in  a  warm  climate.


200  THE  FASTI;  [b.  v.  535—542.

sion  returns,  he  sacrifices  the  ox,  the  tiller  of  his  humble  farm,
roasting  him  on  a  large  fire,  and  he  draws  the  wine  which  he
had  racked  in  his  early  years,76  when  stored  in  a  smoky  cask.
He  admits  of  no  delay  ;  now  they  reclined  on  couches  that
concealed  under  the  linen  cover  the  sedge  of  the  river,  and
even  with  that  addition,  by  no  means  lofty  ones.  Now  was
the  board  graced  with  viands,77  and  with  the  wine  placed  upon
it.  The  bowl  was  of  red  clay ;  the  cups  of  beech  wood.
These  were  the  words  of  Jove, — "If  thy  inclination  leads
thee  to  desire  anything,  wish  for  it:  thou  shalt  receive  any-
thing." These  were  the  words  of  the  mild  old  man, — "  I
once  had  a  dear  wife,  known  as  the  choice  of  my  early  youth.  L
You  ask  where  she  is  now :  the  urn  covers  her.  To  her  did
I  swear  this,  having  called  yourselves  as  witnesses  of  my  vow,
thou  alone  shalt  enjoy  wedlock  with  me.  I  swore  it,  and
keep  my  oath  ;  but  now  I  have  desires  that  are  not  compatible
with  each  other  ;  I  do  not  wish  to  be  a  husband  ;  but  I  desire
to  be  a  father."  They  assented  to  Ms  desire;  they  all
stood  round  the  hide  of  the  bull.  Modesty  forbids  me  to  tell
the  rest.  Then  did  they  cover  the  soaking  hide  with  earth
heaped  upon  it.  And  now  ten  months  had  passed,  and  a  boy
was  born;  him  Hirieus  calls  Urion,  because  he  was  thus
begotten ;  the  first  letter  has  now  lost  the  ancient  sound.
He  had  grown  to  a  huge  size  ;  the  Goddess  of  Delos  took  him
as  her  companion ;  he  was  the  protector  and  the  attendant
of  the  Goddess.  His  unguarded  words  excited  the  anger  of
the  Gods.  "'There  is  no  wild  beast,"  said  he,  "  that  I  am
unable  to  conquer."    The  earth  sent  a  scorpion  ;78  it  attempted

76  In  his  early  years.] — Ver.  517-18.     Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

1  Then  broach'd  a  hogshead  of  his  special  sack,
Which  in  his  young  days  he  himself  did  make.'

The  '  amphorae,'  or  '  cadi,'  '  casks,'  were  exposed  purposely  to  the  action
of  smoke,  as  it  was  supposed  to  mellow  the  wine.

77  Graced  with  viands.} — Ver.  521-2.   Gower  thus  renders  these  lines —

1  Now  braves  his  board  with  dainty  cakes  and  liquors,
In  earthen  dishes,  and  in  beech-tree  beakers/

78  A  scorpion.'] — Ver.  541.  Horace  does  not  represent  him  as  being
killed  by  the  sting  of  a  scorpion,  but  as  being  slain  by  the  shafts  of  Diana,
when  he  had  made  an  attempt  on  her  chastity.  Other  writers,  however,
with  Ovid,  represent  him  as  the  favourite  and  protector  of  that  Goddess,
and  like  her,  excelling  in  the  chase.


b.  v.   542—567.]         OR,    CALENDAR   OF   OYID.  201

to  fasten  its  crooked  claws  in  the  Goddess,  the  mother  of  the
twins  ;  Orion  opposed  it.  Latona  added  him  to  the  number
of  the  radiant  stars,  and  said,  "Enjoy  the  reward  of  thy
deserts/'

But  why  do  both  Orion  and  the  other  stars  hasten  to  leave
the  sky  ?  and  why  does  Night  contract  her  path  ?  Why,  more
swiftly  than  usual,  does  the  fair  day  raise  its  beams  from  the
watery  deep,  the  morning  star  preceding  ?  Am  I  mistaken  ?
or  do  arms  now  clash  ?  I  am  not  deceived  :  it  was  the  clash
of  arms.  Mars  is  approaching,79  and,  as  he  comes,  he  gives  the
indications  of  war.  The  Avenger  himself  comes  down  from
heaven  to  his  own  honours,  and  to  the  temple  conspicuous  in
the  Forum  of  Augustus.  Mighty  is  the  God,  and  so  is  the  work ;
in  no  other  fashion  ought  Mars  to  have  his  habitation  in  the
city  of  his  offspring.  These  shrines  are  worthy  of  the  trophies
won  from  the  giants  ;  it  becomes  Gradivus  from  this  spot  to
give  an  impulse  to  the  cruel  warfare ;  whether  it  be  that  any
one  shall  assail  us  from  the  eastern  world,  or  whether,  under
the  western  Sun,  the  enemy  will  have  to  be  subdued.  He,  all-
powerful  in  arms,  surveys  the  pinnacles  of  the  highest  part  of
the  building,  and  considers  it  right  that  the  unconquered  Gods
should  possess  its  summit.  He  surveys,  on  the  portals,  the
weapons  of  various  forms,80  and  the  arms  of  the  world  con-
quered by  his  own  soldiers.  On  one  side,  he  beholds  iEneas
laden  with  the  burden  of  affection,  and  so  many  progenitors
of  the  noble  house  of  lulus :  on  another  side  he  beholds  the
son  of  Ilia81  bearing  on  his  shoulders  the  armour  of  the  chief-
tain, and  their  illustrious  deeds  written  on  the  base  beneath
the  heroes  ranged  in  order.     He  sees,  too,  the  temple  adorned

79  Mars  is  approaching. ] — Ver.  550.  On  the  4th  of  the  Ides  there
were  sports  in  the  Circus  in  honour  of  Mars  Ultor,  or  '  the  Avenger/  At
the  battle  of  Philippi,  Augustus  had  vowed  a  temple  to  Mars.  When
peace  was  restored,  he  built  the  Augustan  Forum,  at  an  immense  expense,
and  there  erected  a  temple  to  Mars,  of  surpassing  magnificence.  On  the
4th  of  the  Ides  of  May  he  consecrated  it.

80  The  weapons  of  various  forms.'} — Ver.  561.  Suetonius  tells  us,  that
on  the  huilding  of  this  temple  the  successful  generals  of  the  time  were
ordered  to  erect  their  trophies  therein  ;  and  Pliny  (Nat.  Hist.  Book  xxxv.
c.  10)  says  that  Augustus  erected  in  his  own  Forum  (probably  in  the
temple  of  Mars)  two  pictures,  representing  a  battle  and  a  triumph.

81  The  son  of  Ilia.'} — Ver.  565.  Romulus  ;  bearing  the  <  spolia  opima,'
the  armour  of  Acron,  king  of  the  Cseninenses,  whom  he  had  slain  with  his
own  hand.


202  THE  FASTI;  [b.  v.   567—593.

with  the  name  of  Augustus ;  and  as  he  reads  the  name  of
Caesar,  the  work  appears  still  greater.  This,  when  a  young
man,  he  had  vowed,  at  the  time  when  he  took  up  the  arms  of
duty ;  from  such  acts  as  these  ought  a  Prince  to  commence
his  career  of  command.  He,  stretching  forth  his  hands,  as,  on
one  side,  stood  his  avenging  army,  on  the  other,  the  conspira-
tors, thus  spake  : — "  If  the  father  of  warfare,  and  the  priestess
of  Vesta,  are  the  founders  of  my  race,  and  I  am  preparing  to
avenge  either  of  these  [Divinities,  do  thou,  Mars,  come  hither
and  satiate  thy  sword  in  the  accursed  blood,  and  let  thy  favour
abide  by  the  better  cause.  Thou  shalt  receive  a  temple,  and
when  I  am  victorious  '  The  Avenger'  shall  be  thy  title."  He
had  uttered  his  vow,  and  returned,  exulting,  from  the  routed
foe.  Nor  is  it  enough  for  Mars  once  to  have  merited  this  epi-
thet :  he  pursues  the  standards  detained  in  the  hands  of  the
Parthian.  This  was  a  nation  protected  both  by  their  plains,
their  horses,  and  their  arrows,  and  inaccessible  from  the  rivers
that  surrounded  them.  The  slaughter  of  the  Crassi82  had
given  daring  to  the  nation,  when  soldier,  general,  and  stand-
ards were  lost  together.  The  Parthian  was  in  possession  of
the  Roman  standards,  the  token  of  honour  in  warfare  ;  and  an
enemy  was  the  bearer  of  the  Eoman  eagle.  And  still  would
that  disgrace  have  been  remaining,  had  not  the  empire  of  Au-
sonia  been  protected  by  the  valiant  armies  of  Caesar.83  'Twas
he,  that  removed  the  ancient  stains,  and  the  disgrace  of  so  long
duration ;  the  standards,  when  recovered,  recognized  their
friends.  What,  then,  thou  Parthian,  availed  thee  the  arrows
wont  to  be  discharged  behind  thy  bach?  What,  thy  inaccessible
places  ?  What,  the  management  of  thy  fleet  steed  ?  Parthian  !
thou  restorest  the  eagles  !  thy  conquered  bows,84  too,  thou  ex-

82  The  Crassi.'] — Ver.  583.  Both  M.  Licinius  Crassus,  the  father,  and
his  son,  P.  L.  Crassus,  with  eleven  Roman  legions,  were  cut  to  pieces  by
the  Parthians  on  this  occasion.  Flaccus  (Book  hi.  c-  2.)  says,  that  at  the
time  of  his  surprise  '  he  was  gaping  after/  *  inhiabat,'  the  Parthian  gold.
It  is  said  that  the  Parthians,  in  ridicule  of  his  known  weakness,  cut  off  his
head,  and  poured  melted  gold  down  his  throat.

83  Arms  of  C<£sar.~]— Ver.  588.  Phraates,  the  Parthian  leader,  had
agreed  to  restore  to  Caesar  the  standards  which  his  countrymen  had  taken
from  Crassus,  and  afterwards  from  Antony ;  but  he  hesitated  to  fulfil  his
engagement  until  he  heard  that  Augustus  was  preparing  an  expedition  to
enforce  compliance  with  his  demand.

84  Thy  conquered  bows.] — Ver.  593.     Some  of  the  Roman  coins  of  this


B.  v.  593—620.]  OB,    CALEISDAB  OF   OYID.  203

tendest !  Now,  not  any  pledges  of  our  disgrace  hast  thou.
Well  was  the  temple  and  the  name  given  to  the  Deity  who
twice  avenged  us,  and  the  deserved  honour  acquits  us  of  the
obligation  undertaken  by  our  vows.  Celebrate,  ye  Quirites,
these  solemn  games  in  the  Circus ;  the  theatre  does  not  seem
to  be  befitting  the  God  of  valour.

When  one  night  shall  be  remaining  before  the  Ides,  you  shall
see  all  the  Pleiades,85  and  the  whole  company  of  the  sisters.  At
that  time,  according  to  no  mean  authority,  as  I  think,  the  summer
commences,  and  the  season  of  the  mild  spring  comes  to  a  close.

The  day  before  the  Ides  shows  the  Bull86  raising  his  face
bespangled  with  stars  ;  a  well-known  story  is  attached  to  this
Constellation.  Jupiter,  in  the  form  of  a  bull,  offered  his  back
to  the  Tyrian  maid,87  and  bore  horns  on  an  assumed  forehead.
She,  with  her  right  hand,  held  by  his  mane,  and  with  her  left
she  held  her  dress  ;  and  her  very  alarm  was  a  source  of  addi-
tional grace.  The  breeze  swells  her  flowing  robes  ;  her  auburn
hair  floats  along  the  wind.  In  such  guise,  Sidonian  maid,
it  was  befitting  that  Jove  should  behold  thee.  Full  oft  did
she  raise  her  maiden  feet  from  the  water  of  the  ocean,  and
dread  the  splash  of  the  dashing  wave;  often  did  the  God
purposely  sink  deeper  in  the  waves,  that  she  might  the  more
tightly  cling  to  his  neck.  The  shore  now  reached,  Jove  stood
without  horns,  and  from  a  bull  was  changed  into  a  God.  The
bull  enters  the  heavens ;  thee,  maid  of  Sidon,  Jupiter  em-
braces, and  a  third  part  of  the  earth  bears  thy  name.  Others
have  said  that  this  Constellation  is  the  cow  of  Pharos,88  which,
from  a  human  being,  was  made  a  cow,  from  a  cow,  a  Goddess.

period  are  still  in  existence,  which  represent  a  Parthian  on  his  bended
knee,  extending  towards  Augustus  the  standards,  and  a  how  and  arrows.

85  All  the  Pleiades.]— Ver.  599.  On  the  3rd  of  the  Ides  of  May,  the
Pleiades  rise  acronychally,  and  the  summer  begins.  The  ancients  generally
regulated  their  agricultural  operations  by  the  rising  and  setting  of  the
Pleiades.

86  Shows  the  Bull']—  Ver.  603.  On  the  day  before  the  Ides,  the  14th
of  May,  the  head  of  the  Bull  rises  cosmically.

87  The  Tyrian  maid.] — Ver.  605-6.  Europa,  the  daughter  of  Agenor,
king  of  Phoenicia.  The  following  is  Gower's  comical  translation  of  these
lines, —

1  Once  Jove,  well  horn'd  and  turned  to  a  bull,
Pack'd  up  the  Tyrian  virgin  by  the  gull/

88  The  cow  of  Pharos.]— Ver.  619.  Io,  or  Isis ;  thus  called  from
Pharos,  an  island  of  Egypt,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Nile.


204  THE   FASTI  ;  [b.  v.   621—634.

On  this  day,  too,  the  Vestal  virgin  is  wont  to  throw  from
the  oak-built  bridge  the  images  of  the  ancient  men,  platted  in
rushes.89  He  who  has  formed  a  belief  that  aged  men,  after  their
sixtieth  year,  were  put  to  death  by  them,  charged  our  ancestors
with  wanton  cruelty.90  The  tradition  is  an  old  one:  at  the  time
when  this  was  called  the  Saturnian  land,  these  were  the  words
of  the  prophetic  God  : — "  Ye  nations,  throw  two  bodies  in
sacrifice  to  the  sickle-bearing  aged  God,  to  be  caught  by  the  Etru-
rian stream."  Until  the  Tirynthian  came  to  these  fields,  each
year  was  the  cruel  sacrifice  performed  with  theLeucadian  rites.91
They  say  that  he  was  the  first*  to  throw  into  the  stream  citi-
zens made  of  bundles  of  straw ;  and  that,  after  the  example
of  Hercules,  fictitious  bodies  are  still  so  thrown.  Some  think
that,  with  the  view  that  they  alone  might  enjoy  the  right  of
suffrage,  the  youths  did  fling92  from  the  bridges  the  infirm  old

89  Platted  in  rushes.'] — Ver.  622.  On  the  'Ides  of  May,  or,  as  Ovid
seems  to  say,  on  the  day  hefore,  the  Vestals,  attended  by  the  Pontifices  and
Praetors,  used  to  throw  from  the  Sublician  bridge  thirty  images  of  old  men,
stuffed  with  bulrushes.  These  were  called  Argei ;  and  the  poet  proceeds  to
inquire  into  the  origin  of  a  custom  so  remarkable.  The  Sublician  bridge,
from  which  they  were  thrown,  was  so  called  from  the  '  sublicae,'  or  piles
on  which  it  was  built :  it  was  the  original  bridge  of  Rome,  and,  from  its
having  been  the  duty  of  the  priests  to  keep  it  in  repair,  they  received  the
name  of  '  pontifex,'  or  l  bridge-maker/  which  is  the  literal  signification  of
the  word.     It  was  rebuilt  of  stone  by  iEmilius  Lepidus.

90  With  wanton  cruelty.] — Ver.  624.  The  poet  rejects  the  first  opinion,
that  it  was  done  to  commemorate  a  time  when  the  ancient  Romans  used
to  throw  the  aged  men  into  the  Tiber  and  drown  them.

91  With  the  Leucadian  rites.] — Ver.  630.  The  poet  says  that  the  second
opinion  on  its  origin  was,  that  it  commemorated  a  time  when  human  sacri-
fices were  offered  at  Rome.  Leucas,  now  Santa  Maura,  was  anciently  a
peninsula  of  Acarnania  ;  now  it  is  an  island.  The  custom  alluded  to  was
that  of  throwing  a  criminal,  on  the  festival  of  Apollo,  from  the  heights  into
the  sea,  wings  and  a  multitude  of  birds  being  first  attached  to  him  to  break
his  fall.  Persons  in  small  boats  waited  below  to  catch  him  in  his  descent,
and  to  carry  him  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  country.  This  comparatively
merciful  dealing  with  a  criminal  would  hardly  justify  the  poet  in  applying
the  epithet  '  Leucadian,'  to  the  horrid  custom  of  human  sacrifice.  Perhaps
it  ought  to  be  translated  rigidly  '  after  the  Leucadian  manner/  in  allusion
merely  to  the  'mode'  of  treatment  in  both  cases ;  throwing  from  a  height
being  the  method  adopted,  though  with  intentions,  and  probably,  results,  of
so  different  a  nature.  Disappointed  lovers  and  persons  in  distress  used  to
throw  themselves  from  the  Leucadian  rock,  whence  it  obtained  the  name
of  '  the  Lover's  Leap/

92  The  youths  did  fling.] — Ver.  634.     The  poet  here  states  the  third


B.  v.  634—659.]  OB,    CALE1SDAK   OP   OYID.  205

men.  Tiber,  teach  me  the  truth  ;  thy  bank  is  of  higher  an-
tiquity than  the  City;  thou  hast  the  opportunity  of  well
knowing  the  origin  of  the  ceremony.  Tiber  raises  his  head
crowned  with  reeds  from  the  midst  of  his  channel,  and  in  such
accents  opens  his  hoarse  mouth  : — "  I  have  beheld  this  place,
a  lonely  piece  of  pasture  land,  without  walls  ;  each  of  my  banks
used  to  feed  the  straggling  cattle  ;  and  I,  that  Tiber  which  all
nations  now  know  and  hold  in  dread,  then  was  an  object,  even
to  the  flocks,  unworthy  of  notice.  The  name  of  Arcadian
Evander  is  ofttimes  mentioned  to  thee ;  he,  as  a  stranger,
dashed  my  waters  with  his  oars.  There  came,  too,  Alcides,
attended  by  a  Grecian  multitude.  Then,  if  I  remember  aright,
Albula  was  my  name.  The  hero  of  Pallantium93  receives  the
youth  with  hospitality,  and  the  punishment  which  was  his  due
falls  at  length  upon  Cacus.  The  conqueror  departs,  and  with
him  carries  away  the  kine,  the  booty  of  Erythea ;  but  his  fol-
lowers refuse  to  proceed  any  further ;  a  great  part  of  them
had  come  having  left  Argos  behind  ;  in  these  mountains  they
establish  their  hopes  and  their  home.  Yet  many  a  time  are
they  influenced  by  sweet  love  of  their  father-land,  and  as  he
dies,  oft  does  some  one  of  them  enjoin  this  slight  task — " Throw
my  body  into  the  Tiber,  that,  carried  by  the  waves  of  the  river,
I,  become  lifeless  dust,  may  go  to  the  Inachian  shore."94  The
care  of  providing  such  a  tomb  as  he  enjoined  displeases  his
heir ;  the  corpse  of  the  stranger  is  buried  in  Ausonian  ground  ;
a  rush-made  image  is  thrown  into  the  Tiber  instead  of  the

opinion.  Festus  explains  this  story  on  the  ground  of  a  singular  misconcep-
tion ;  that  the  aged  men  being  free  from  the  burden  of  public  duties,  but
still  retaining  their  right  of  voting,  the  younger  ones  became  jealous  of
their  retention  of  this  right,  and  that,  on  their  going  over  the  '  pons/  or
4  plank,'  to  record  their  votes,  the  young  men  used  to  cry  out,  *  that  they
ought  to  be  thrown  from  the  '  pons,'  (which  word  also  means  ;  a  bridge'),
or,  in  other  words,  that  they  ought  to  lose  the  right  of  voting.  The  poet
seems  to  say  that  the  young  men  actually  had  the  ill  manners  to  push
the  older  ones  off  the  'pontes.'  If  so,  it  is  a  very  early  specimen  of  an
election  row.

93  The  hero  of  Pallantium. — Ver.  647.  Pallantium,  a  town  of  Arcadia,
was  the  native  place  of  Evander.  The  arrival  of  Evander  and  Hercules  in
Italy  are  referred  to  in  the  first  Book.

94  The  Inachian  shore.'] — Ver.  656.  The  Inachus  was  a  river  of  Argos.
The  only  ground  on  which  the  story  is  based  seems  to  be  the  similarity  of
the  name,  '  Argei,'  by  which  these  images  were  called,  and  the  name  of
the  Argives  in  their  own  language,  'Apysioi.


206  THE  FASTI;  [b.  v.  659—676.

master  of  the  family,  that  over  the  wide  seas  it  may  return  to
a  Grecian  home."  Thus  much  he  said ;  when  he  descended
into  his  grottoes,  dripping  from  the  natural  rock,  you,  ye
lightly  flowing  streams,  withheld  your  current.

Illustrious  grandson  of  Atlas  !  come  hither.  Thou  whom
once,  on  the  Arcadian  mountains,  one  of  the  Pleiades  brought
forth  to  Jove :  thou  minister  of  peace  and  war  to  the  Gods
above,  and  the  Gods  below  :  thou  who  wendest  thy  way  with
winged  foot ; 95  thou  exulting  in  the  touch  of  the  Lyre ;  ex-
ulting, too,  in  the  Palaestra  shining  with  oil,96  under  the
patronage  of  whom  the  tongue  learned  to  speak  with  ele-
gance !  On  the  Ides  did  their  fathers  erect  for  thee  a  temple
looking  towards  the  Circus.  From  that  time  is  this  a  day  de-
voted to  thee.  Whoever  make  a  business  of  selling  their
wares,  having  first  offered  thee  the  frankincense,  beg  of  thee
that  thou  wilt  grant  them  profit.  The  fountain  of  Mercury97
is  near  the  Capenian  gate  :  if  we  may  believe  those  who  have
experienced  it,  it  has  a  divine  efficacy.  Hither  comes  the
tradesman,  having  a  girdle98  round  his  robes,  and,  in  a  state  of

95  With  winged  foot.'] — Ver.  663 — 6.  Gower  thus  renders  these  lines, —

'  Brave  lad  of  Atlas,  whom  of  Joviall  seed
Fair  Maia  on  th'  Arcadian  hill  did  breed :
Thou  wing-foot  arbiter  between  the  gods
Of  heaven  and  hell,  in  friendship  and  at  ods.'

On  the  Ides  of  May,  a.u.c.  497,  a  temple  was  dedicated  to  Mercury,  as
the  patron  of  traders,  near  the  Circus  Maximus.  His  name,  no  doubt,  came
from  the  Latin  word  '  merx,'  '  merchandize ;'  and  when,  in  later  times,  he
was  identified  with  the  Grecian  deity,  Hermes