# Isis Unveiled Vol 1 & 2 (Blavatsky, 1877)

*Extracted from archive.org PDF | 1434 pages in source*

---

This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.
https://books.google.com

---PAGE BREAK---

►

---PAGE BREAK---

ISlS UNVElLED: /r
A MASTER-KEY
TO THE
Mysteries of Ancient and Modern
SCIENCE AND THEOLOGY.
BY
H. P. J^LAVATSKY,
CORRESPONDING SECRETARY OFTHETHEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY.
"CecyestunlivredebonneFoy."—Montaigne.
Vol. I.—SCIENCE.
NEW YORK:
J# W. BOUTON, 706 BROADWAY.
LONDON : BERNARD QUARITCH.
1877-

---PAGE BREAK---

COPTRIOHT,BT
J. W. BOUTON.
1877.
Sfol
,17
877
v.
COf
Trow's
Printing and Boorrinding Co.,
printers and roorrindrrs,
205-213 East liti St.,
NEW yORK.

---PAGE BREAK---

THE AUTHOR
Debicatcc t \) e g c llolnmcs
TOtHE
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY,
WHICH WAS FOUNDED AT NEW YORK, A.D. 1875,
ToStudythbSubjectsonwhichthbyTreat.

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

THE AUTHOR
Debicatcc t \) e g c llolnmcs
TOtHE
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY,
WHICH WAS FOUNDED AT NEW YORK, A.D. 1875,
ToStudythbSubjectsonwhichthbyTreat.

---PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE.
THE work now submitted to public judgment is the fruit of a some
what intimate acquaintance withEastern adeptsandstudyof their
science. It is offered to such as are willing to accept truth wherever it
may be found, and to defend it, even looking popular prejudice straight
in the face. It is an attempt to aid the student to detect the vitalprinci
ples which underlie the philosophical systems of old.
The book is written in all sincerity. It is meant to do even justice,
and to speak the truth alike without malice or prejudice. But it shows
neither mercy for enthroned error, nor reverence for usurped authority.
It demands for a spoliated past, that credit for its achievements which
has been too long withheld. It callsfor a restitution of borrowed robes,
and the vindication of calumniated but glorious reputations. Toward
no form of worship, no religious faith, no scientific hypothesis has its
criticism been directed in any other spirit. Men and parties, sects and
schools are but the mere ephemera of the world's day. Truth, high-
seatedupon its rock of adamant, is alone eternal and supreme.
We believein no Magic which transcends the scope and capacity of
the human mind, nor in "miracle," whether divine or diabolical, if such
imply a transgression of the laws of nature instituted from all eternity.
Nevertheless, we accept the saying of the gifted author of Festus, that
the human heart has not yet fully uttered itself, and that we have never
attained or even understood the extent of its powers. Is it too much to
believe that man should be developing new sensibilities and a closer rela
tion with nature? The logic ofevolution must teach as much, if carried
to its legitimate conclusions. If, somewhere, inthe line of ascent from
vegetable or ascidian to the noblest man a soul was evolved, gifted with
intellectual qualities, itcannot be unreasonable to infer and believe that
a faculty of perception is also growing in man, enabling him to descry
facts and truths even beyond our ordinary ken. Yet we do not hesitace
to accept the assertion of Biffe, that " the essential is forever the same.
Whether we cut away the marble inward that hides the statue in the---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

VI PREFACE.
block, or pile stone upon stone outward till the temple is completed,
our new result is only an oldidea. The latest of all the eternities will
find its destined other half-soul in the earliest."
When, years ago, we firsttravelled over the East, exploring the pene
tralia of its deserted Sanctuaries, two saddening and ever-recurring ques
tions oppressed our thoughts: Where, who, what is GOD ? Who
ever saw the immortal SPIRIT of man, so as to be able to assure
himself of man's immortality?
It was while most anxious tosolve these perplexing problems that we
came into contact with certain men, endowed with such mysterious
powers and such profound knowledge that we may truly designate them
as the sages of the Orient. To their instructions we lent a ready ear.
Theyshowed us that bycombining science with religion, the existence of
God and immortalityof man's spiritmay be demonstrated like a problem
of Euclid. For the first time we receivedtheassurance thatthe Oriental
philosophy has room for no other faith than an absolute and immovable
faith in the omnipotence of man's own immortal self. We were taught
that this omnipotence comes from the kinship of man's spirit with the
Universal Soul—God ! Thelatter, they said, cannever bedemonstrated
but by the former. Man-spirit proves God-spirit, as the one drop of
water proves a source from which it must have come. Tell onewhohad
never seen water, that there is an ocean of water, and he must accept it
on faith or reject it altogether. Butlet one drop fall upon his hand, and
he then has the fact from which all the rest may be inferred. After that
he could by degrees understand that a boundless and fathomless ocean
of water existed. Blind faith would no longer be necessary ; he would
have supplanted it with knowledge. When one sees mortal man dis
playing tremendous capabilities, controlling the forces of nature and
opening up to view the world ofspirit,the reflective mind isoverwhelmed
with the conviction that ifone man's spiritual Ego can do this much, the
capabilities of the Father Spirit must be relatively as much vaster as
the whole ocean surpasses the single drop in volume and potency. Ex
nihilo nihilfit ; prove thesoul ofman by itswondrous powers—you have
proved God !
In our studies, mysteries were shown to be no mysteries. Names
and places that to the Western.mind have only a significance derived
from Eastern fable, were shown to be realities. Reverently we stepped
in spirit within the temple of Isis ; to lift aside the veil of "the one
that is and was and shall be" at Sais ; to look through the rent curtain
of the Sanctum Sanctorum at Jerusalem ; and even to interrogate with
in the crypts which once existed beneath the sacred edifice, the myste
rious Bath-Kol. The Filia Vocis—the daughter of the divine voice—---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

PREFACE. Vll
responded from the mercy-seat within the veil,* and science, theology,
every human hypothesis and conception born of imperfect knowledge,
lost forever their authoritative character in our sight. The one-living
God had spoken through his oracle—man, and we were satisfied. Such
knowledge is priceless ; and it has been hidden only from those who
overlooked it, derided it, or denied its existence.
From such as these we apprehend criticism, censure, and perhaps
hostility, although the obstacles in our way neither spring from the
validity of proof, the authenticated facts of history, nor the lack ofcom
mon sense among the public whom we address. The drift of modern
thought is palpably in the direction of liberalism in religion as well as
science. Each day brings the reactionists nearer to the pointwhere they
must surrender the despotic authority over the public conscience, which
they have so long enjoyed and exercised. When the Pope can go to the
extreme of fulminating anathemas against all who maintain the liberty
of the Press and of speech, or who insist that in the conflict of laws,
civil and ecclesiastical, the civil law should prevail, or that any method
of instruction solely secular, may be approved; f and Mr. Tyndall, as
themouth-pieceofnineteenthcenturyscience, says, "... the impregnable
position of science may be stated in a few words : we claim, and we
shall wrest from theology, the entire domain of cosmological theory " J
—the end is notdifficult to foresee.
Centuries of subjection have not quite congealed the life-blood of
men into crystals around the nucleus of blind faith ; and the nineteenth
is witnessing the struggles of the giant as he shakes off the Liliputian
cordage and rises to his feet. Even the Protestant communion of Eng
land and America, now engaged in the revision of the text of its Oracles,
will be compelled to show the origin and merits of the text itself.
The day of domineering over men with dogmas has reached its gloam
ing.
Our work, then, is a plea for the recognition ofthe Hermetic philoso
phy, the anciently universal Wisdom Religion, as the only possible key
to the Absolute in science and theology. To show that we do not at all
conceal from ourselves the gravity ofour undertaking, we may say in ad
vance that it would not be strange if the following classes should array
themselves against us :
* Lightfoot assuresusthat thisvoice, which hadbeen used intimespast for a testi
monyfromheaven, "wasindeedperformed by magicart"(vol. ii.,p. 128). Thislatter
term isused asasuperciliousexpression,just becauseit was and isstill misunderstood.
It isthe object of this work to correct the erroneous opinions concerning " magic
art."
fEncyclical of 1864. \"FragmentsofScience."---PAGE BREAK---

Vlll PREFACE.
The Christians, who will see that we question the evidences of the
genuineness oftheir faith.
The Scientists, who will find their pretensions placedin the samebun
dle with those of the Roman Catholic Church for infallibility, and, in
certain particulars, the sages and philosophers of the ancient world
classed higher than they.
Pseudo-Scientists will, ofcourse, denounce us furiously.
Broad Churchmen and Freethinkers will find that we do not accept
whatthey do, but demand the recognition ofthe whole truth.
Men of letters and various authorities, who hide their real belief
in deference to popular prejudices.
The mercenaries and parasites of the Press, who prostitute its more
than royal power, and dishonor a noble profession, will find it easy to
mock at things too wonderful for them to understand; for to them the
price of a paragraph is more than the value of sincerity. From many
willcome honest criticism ; frommany—cant. But we look to the future.
The contest now going on between the party of public conscience
and the partyofreaction,has alreadydevelopedahealthiertoneofthought.
It will hardly fail to result ultimately in the overthrow of error and the
triumph of Truth. We repeat again—we are laboring for the brighter
morrow.
And yet, when we consider the bitter opposition that we are called
upon to face, who is better entitled than we upon entering the arena to
write upon our shield the hail of the Roman gladiator to Caesar :
MORITURUS TE SaLUTAT !
New York, September, 1877.

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL.
yoan.—Advanceourwavingcolorsonthewalls!—KingHenry VI. ActIV.
"Mylifehasbeendevotedtothestudyofman,hisdestinyandhishappiness."
—J. R. Buchanan,M.D., OutlinesofLecturesonAnthropology.
IT is nineteen centuries since, as we are told, thenight of Heathenism
and Paganism was first dispelled by the divine light of Christian
ity; and two-and-a-halfcenturies sincethebrightlampof Modern Science
began to shine on the darkness of the ignorance of the ages. Within
these respective epochs, we are required to believe, the true moral and
intellectual progress ofthe race has occurred. Theancient philosophers
were well enough for their respective generations, but they were illiterate
as compared with modern men of science. The ethics ofPaganism per
haps met the wants ofthe uncultivated people of antiquity, but not until
the advent of the luminous "Star of Bethlehem," was the true road to
moral perfection and the way to salvation made plain. Of old, brutish-
ness was the rule, virtue and spiritualitythe exception. Now, the dullest
may read the will of God in His revealed word ; men have every incen
tive to be good, and are constantly becoming better.
This is the assumption ; what are the facts? On the one hand an
unspiritual, dogmatic, too often debauched clergy ; a host of sects, and
three warring great religions; discord instead of union, dogmas without
proofs, sensation-loving preachers, and wealth and pleasure-seeking par
ishioners' hypocrisy and bigotry, begotten by the tyrannical exigencies
ofrespectability, the rule ofthe day, sincerity and real piety exceptional.
On the other hand, scientific hypotheses built on sand ; no accord upon a
single question ; rancorous quarrelsandjealousy; a generaldrift into ma
terialism. A death-grapple of Science with Theology for infallibility—
"a conflict ofages."
At Rome, the self-styled seat of Christianity, the putative successor
to the chair of Peter is undermining social order with his invisible but
omnipresentnet-workof bigoted agents, and incites them to revolutionize
Europe for his temporal as well as spiritual supremacy. We see him
whocallshimselfthe "VicarofChrist,"fraternizingwith theanti-Christian
Moslem against another Christian nation, publicly invoking the blessing
of God upon the arms of those who have for centuries withstood, with---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

X BEFORE THE VEIL.
fire and sword, the pretensions of his Christ to Godhood ! At Berlin'—
one ofthe great seats of learning—professors of modern exact sciences,
turning theirbacks on the boasted results of enlightenment of the post-
Galileonian period, are quietly snuffingout the candleofthegreatFloren
tine ; seeking, in short, to prove the heliocentric system, and even the
earth's rotation, but the dreams of deluded scientists, Newton a vision
ary, and all past and present astronomers but clever calculators of un-
verifiable problems. *
Between these two conflicting Titans—Science and Theology—is a
bewildered public, fast losing all beliefin man's personal immortality, in
a deity ofany kind, and rapidlydescending to the level ofa mere animal
existence. Such is thepicture ofthe hour, illumined by the brightnoon
day sun ofthis Christian and scientific era !
Would it be strict justice to condemn to critical lapidation the most
humble and modest of authors for entirely rejecting the authority of both
these combatants? Are we not bound rather to take asthetrueaphorism
of this century, the declaration of Horace Greeley : "I accept unre
servedly the views of no man, living or dea1" ? f Such, at all events,
will be our motto, and we mean that principle to be our constant guide
throughout this work.
Among the many phenomenal outgrowths of our century, the strange
creed of the so-called Spiritualists has arisen amid the tottering ruins
of self-styled revealed religions and materialistic philosophies; and yet it
alone offers a possible last refuge ofcompromisebetween the two. That
this unexpected ghost of pre-Christian days finds poor welcome from
our sober and positive century, is not surprising. Times have strangely
changed ; and it is but recently that a well-known Brooklyn preacher
pointedly remarked in a sermon, that could Jesus come back and behave
in the streets ofNewYork, as hedid in those ofJerusalem, he would find
himselfconfined in the prison of the Tombs.J What sort ofwelcome,
then, could Spiritualism ever expect ? Trueenough, the weird stranger
seems neither attractive nor promising at first sight. Shapeless and un
couth, like an infant attended by seven nurses, it is coming out of its
teenslame and mutilated. The name of itsenemies is legion; itsfriends
and protectors are a handful. But what ofthat? When was ever truth
acceptedapriori? Because the champions of Spiritualism have in their
fanaticism magnified its qualities, and remained blindtoitsimperfections,
that gives no excuse to doubt its reality. A forgery is impossible when
we have no model to forge after. Thefanaticism ofSpiritualistsis itself
* See thelast chapterofthisvolume, p. 622.
f "Recollectionsofa Busy Life," p. 147. \Henry Ward Beecher.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XJ
a proofof the genuineness and possibility of their phenomena. They
give us facts that we may investigate, not assertions that we must believe
without proof. Millions of reasonable men and women do not so easily
succumb to collective hallucination. And so, while the clergy, following
their own interpretations oftheBible, and science its self-made Codex of
possibilities in nature, refuse it a fair hearing, real science and true re
ligion are silent, and gravely wait further developments.
The whole question ofphenomena rests on thecorrectcomprehension
ofold philosophies. Whither, then, shouldwe turn, in our perplexity, but
to the ancient sages, since, on the pretext of superstition, we are refused
an explanation by the modern? Let us ask them what they know of
genuine science and religion ; not in the matter of mere details, but in
all the broad conception ofthese twin truths—so strong in their unity, so
weak when divided. Besides, we may find our profit in comparing this
boasted modern science with ancient ignorance ; this improved modern
theology with the "Secret doctrines" of the ancient universal religion.
Perhaps we may thus discover a neutral ground whence we can reach
and profit by both.
It is the Platonic philosophy, the most elaborate compend of the
abstruse systems ofold India, thatcan alone affordus this middleground.
Although twenty-two and a quarter centuries have elapsed since the
death ot Plato, the great minds of the world are still occupied with his
writings. He was, in the fullest sense of the word, the world's inter
preter. And the greatest philosopher of the pre-Christian era mirrored
faithfully in hisworks thespiritualism ofthe Vedic philosophers who lived
thousandsofyearsbeforehimself,and itsmetaphysical expression. Vyasa,
Djeminy, Kapila, Vrihaspati, Sumati, and so many others, will be found
to have transmitted their indelible imprint through the intervening cen
turies upon Plato and his school. Thus is warranted the inference that
to Plato andtheancient Hindu sages wasalikerevealed the same wisdom.
So surviving the shock of time, what can this wisdom be but divine and
eternal?
Plato taught justice as subsisting in the soul of its possessor and his
greatest good. " Men, in proportion to their intellect,have admitted his
transcendent claims." Yet his commentators, almost with one consent,
shrink from every passage which implies that his metaphysics are based
on a solid foundation, and not on ideal conceptions.
But Platocould not accept a philosophy destitute of spiritual aspira
tions; the two were at one with him. For the old Grecian sage there
was a single object of attainment : real knowledge. He considered
those only to be genuine philosophers, or students of truth, who possess
the knowledge ofthe really-existing, in opposition to the mere seeing; of---PAGE BREAK---Xll BEFORE THE VEIL. the always-existing, in opposition to the transitory; and of that which
exists permanently, in opposition to that which waxes, wanes, and is
developed and destroyed alternately. "Beyond all finite existences and
secondarycauses,all laws,ideas, and principles,there is an intelligence
or mind \yo\K, nous, the spirit], the first principle of all principles, the
Supreme Idea on which all other ideas are grounded; the Monarch and
Lawgiver of the universe ; the ultimate substance from which all things
derive their being and essence, the first and efficient Cause of all the
order, and harmony, and beauty, and excellency, and goodness, which
pervades the universe—who is called, by way of preeminence and
excellence, the Supreme Good, the God (6 Otos) ' the God over all'
(6 «ri iraxri 0e6s)."* He is not the truth nor the intelligence, but " the
father ofit." Though this eternal essence of things may not be percep
tibleby our physical senses, it may be apprehended by the mind of those
who are not wilfully obtuse. "To you," said Jesus to his elect disciples,
"it is given to know the mysteries ofthe Kingdom ofGod, but to them
[the TroXXot] it is not given; . . . therefore speak I to them in parables
[or allegories] ; because they seeing, see not, and hearing, they hear not,
neitherdo they understand." f
The philosophy of Plato, we are assured by Porphyry, of the Neo-
platonic School was taught and illustrated in the mysteries. Many
have questioned and even denied this ; and Lobeck, in his Aglao-
phomus, has gone to the extreme of representing the sacred orgies as
little more than an empty show to captivate the imagination. As
though Athens and Greece would for twenty centuries and more have
repaired every fifth year to Eleusis to witness a solemn religious farce ! Augustine, the papa-bishop of Hippo, has resolved such assertions.---PAGE BREAK---

As
though Athens and Greece would for twenty centuries and more have
repaired every fifth year to Eleusis to witness a solemn religious farce ! Augustine, the papa-bishop of Hippo, has resolved such assertions. He
declares that the doctrines of the Alexandrian Platonists were the
original esoteric doctrines of the first followers of Plato, and describes
Plotinus as a Plato resuscitated. He also explains the motives of the
great philosopher for veiling the interior sense of what he taught.J
* Cocker: "Christianityand Greek Philosophy," xi., p. 377. fGospelaccording to Matthew, xiiL II, 13. %"Theaccusationsofatheism,theintroducingofforeigndeities,andcorruptingofthe
Athenian youth, which were made against Socrates, afforded ample justification for
Plato to conceal thearcanepreachmgof hisdoctrines. Doubtlessthe peculiardiction
or 'jargon' ofthealchemists wasemployed for a like purpose. The dungeon, the
rack, and the fagot wereemployedwithout scruple by Christians of every shade, the
Roman Catholicsespecially,against allwhotaughteven naturalsciencecontrary to the
theoriesentertained by theChurch. Pope Gregory the Great even inhibited thegram
matical useofLatinasheathenish. The offense of Socrates consisted in unfolding to
his disciples the arcane doctrine concerning the gods, which was taught in the Mys
teriesand wasa capitalcrime. He also was charged by Aristophanes with introdu

---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xm
Astothemyths,Platodeclaresin the Gorgiasand thePhadonthatthey
were the vehicles ofgreat truthswellworth the seeking. Butcommenta
tors are so little en rapport with thegreat philosopheras to be compelled
to acknowledge that they are ignorant where "the doctrinal ends, and
the mythical begins." Plato put to flight the popular superstition con
cerning magic and daemons, and developed the exaggerated notions of
the time into rational theories and metaphysical conceptions. Perhaps
these would notquite stand the inductivemethodofreasoning established
by Aristotle; nevertheless they are satisfactory in the highest degree to
those who apprehend the existence ofthat higher faculty of insight or in
tuition, as affording a criterion for ascertaining truth.
Basing all his doctrines upon the presence of the Supreme Mind,
Plato taught that the nous, spirit, or rational soul of man, being "gen
erated by the Divine Father," possessed a nature kindred, or even homo
geneous, with the Divinity, and was capable of beholding the eternal
realities. This facultyofcontemplatingrealityin adirect and immediate
manner belongs to God alone ; the aspiration for this knowledge consti
tutes what is really meant byphilosophy—the love of wisdom. The love
of truth is inherently the love ofgood ; and so predominating over every
desire ofthe soul, purifying it and assimilating it to the divine, thus gov
erning every act of the individual, it raises man to a participation and
communion with Divinity, and restores him to the likeness of God.
"This flight," says Plato in the Theatetus, "consists in becoming like
God, and this assimilation is the becomingjust and holy with wisdom."
Thebasisofthis assimilation is alwaysasserted to be the preexistence
ofthe spirit or nous. In the allegory of the chariot and winged steeds,
given inthePhadrus, he represents thepsychicalnature ascompositeand
two-fold ; the thumos, or epithumetie part, formed from the substances
ofthe world ofphenomena ; and the OvpotiSts,thumoeides, the essence of
which is linked to the eternal world. The present earth-life is a fall and
punishment. The soul dwells in " the grave which we call the body,"
and in its incorporate state, and previous to the discipline of education,
the noeticor spiritual element is "asleep." Life is thus a dream, rather
than a reality. Like the captives in the subterranean cave, described in
The Republic, the back is turned to the light, we perceive only the
shadows of objects, and think them the actual realities. Is not this
cing the newgod Dinosinto therepublicas thedemiurgosorartificer, and the lord of
thesolaruniverse. The Heliocentricsystem wasalsoadoctrineofthe Mysteries; and
hence, when Aristarchusthe Pythagorean taught it openly, Cleanthes declared that the
Greeksought tohavecalledhim to account andcondemned him forblasphemyagainst
the gods,"—("Plutarch"). But Socrates hadneverbeen initiated, andhencedivulged
nothingwhich had everbeenimparted tohim.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XIV BEFORE THE VEIL.
the idea of Maya, or the illusion of the senses in physical life, which
is so marked a feature in Buddhistical philosophy? But these shadows,
if we have not given ourselves up absolutely to the sensuous nature,
arouse in usthereminiscenceofthat higher world thatwe once inhabited.
"The interior spirit has some dim and shadowy recollection of its ante
natal state of bliss, and some instinctive and proleptic yearnings for its
return." It is the province of the discipline of philosophy to disinthrall
it from the bondage of sense, and raise it into the empyrean of pure
thought, to the vision of eternal truth, goodness, and beauty. "The
soul," says Plato, in the Theatetus, "cannot come into the form of a
man ifit has never seen the truth. This is a recollection of those things
which our soul formerly saw when journeying with Deity, despising
the things which we now say are, and looking up to that which really
is. Wherefore the nous, or spirit, of the philosopher (or student of the
higher truth) alone is furnishedwithwings ; because he, to the best ofhis
ability, keeps these things in mind, of which the contemplation renders
even Deity itselfdivine. By makingthe right use ofthesethings remem
bered from theformer life, by constantlyperfecting himselfin the perfect
mysteries, a man becomes truly perfect—an initiate into the diviner
wisdom."
Hence we mayunderstand why the sublimer scenes in the Mysteries
were always in the night. The life of the interior spirit is the death of
the external nature; and the night of the physical world denotes the day
ofthe spiritual. Dionysus, the night-sun, is, therefore, worshipped rather
than Helios, orb of day. In the Mysteries were symbolized the precx-
istent condition of the spirit and soul, and the lapse of the latter into
earth-life and Hades, the miseries ofthat life, the purification ofthe soul,
and its restoration to divine bliss, or reunion with spirit. Theon, of
Smyrna, aptly compares the philosophical discipline to the mystic rites :
" Philosophy," says he, "may be called the initiation into the true ar
cana, andthe instruction in the genuine Mysteries. There are five parts
ofthis initiation : I., the previous purification ; II., theadmission to par
ticipation in the arcane rites ; III., the epoptic revelation ; IV., the in
vestiture or enthroning; V.—the fifth, which is produced from all these,
is friendship and interior communion with God, and the enjoyment of
thatfelicity which arises from intimate converse with divine beings. . . .
Plato denominates the epopteia, or personal view, the perfect con
templation ofthings which are apprehended intuitively, absolute truths
and ideas. He also considers the binding of the head and crown
ing as analogous to the authority which any one receives from his
instructors, of leading others into the same contemplation. The fifth
gradation is the most perfect felicity arising from hence, and, according---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XV
to Plato, an assimilation to divinity as far as is possible to human
beings." *
Such is Platonism. " Out of Plato," says Ralph Waldo Emerson,
"come all things that are still written and debated among men of
thought." He absorbed the learning of his times—of Greece from Phi-
lolausto Socrates; then ofPythagoras in Italy; then what he could pro
cure from Egypt and the East. He was so broad that all philosophy,
European and Asiatic, was in his doctrines; and to culture and contem
plation he added the nature and qualities of the poet.
The followers of Plato generally adhered strictly to his psychological
theories. Several, however, like Xenocrates, ventured into bolder specu
lations. Speusippus, the nephewand successor ofthe greatphilosopher,
was the author ofthe NumericalAnalysis, a treatise on the Pythagorean
numbers. Some of his speculations are not found in the written Dia
logues; but as he was a listener to the unwritten lectures ofPlato, the
judgment of Enfield is doubtless correct, that he did not differ from his
master. He was evidently, though not named, the antagonist whom
Aristotle criticised, when professing to cite the argumentofPlato against
the doctrine of Pythagoras, that all things were in themselves numbers,
or rather, inseparable from the idea of numbers. He especially endea
vored to show that the Platonic doctrine ofideas differed essentiallyfrom
the Pythagorean, in that it presupposed numbers and magnitudes to exist
apart from things. He also asserted that Plato taught that there could
be no real knowledge, if the object of that knowledge was not carried
beyond or above the sensible.
But Aristotle was no trustworthy witness. He misrepresented Plato,
andhe almostcaricatured the doctrines ofPythagoras. There is a canon
of interpretation, which should guide us in our examinations of every
'philosophical opinion : "The human mind has, under the necessary
operation of its own laws, been compelled to entertain the same funda
mental ideas, and the human heart to cherish the same feelings in all
ages." It is certain that Pythagoras awakened the deepest intellectual
sympathy of his age, and that his doctrines exerted a powerful influence
upon the mind ofPlato. His cardinal idea was that there existed a per
manent principle of unity beneath the forms, changes, and other pheno
mena of the universe. Aristotle asserted that he taught that "numbers
are the first principles of all entities." Ritter has expressed the opinion
that the formula of Pythagoras should be taken symbolically, which is
doubtless correct. Aristotle goes on to associate these numbers with the
"forms" and "ideas" of Plato. He even declares that Plato said:
*See ThomasTaylor: "Eleusinianand Bacchic Mysteries," p. 47. New York:
J. W. Bouton, 1875.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XVI BEFORE THE VEIL.
"forms are numbers," and that " ideas are substantial existences—real
beings." Yet Plato did not so teach. He declared that the final cause
was the Supreme Goodness—to ayaOov. "Ideas are objects of pure
conception for the human reason, and they are attributes of the Divine
Reason." * Nor did he ever say that "forms are numbers." What he
did say may be found in the Timaus: " God formed things as they first
arose according to forms and numbers."
It is recognized by modern science that all the higher laws of nature
assume the form of quantitative statement. This is perhaps a fuller
elaboration or more explicit affirmation of the Pythagorean doctrine.
Numbers were regarded as the best representations ofthe laws of har
mony which pervade the cosmos. We know too that in chemistry the
doctrine of atoms and the laws of combination are actually and, as it
were, arbitrarily defined by numbers. As Mr. W. Archer Butler has
expressed it: "The world is, then, through all its departments, a living
arithmetic in its development, a realized geometry in its repose."
The key to the Pythagorean dogmas is the general formula of unity
in multiplicity, the one evolving the many and pervading the many.
This is the ancient doctrine of emanation in few words. Even the
apostle Paul accepted it as true. "Efavrov, k<u &' currou, xai as outo*
Ta iravra"—Out of him and through him and in him all tilings are.
This, as we can see by the following quotation, is purely Hindu and
Brahmanical :
" When the dissolution—Pralaya—had arrived at its term, the great
Being—Para-Atma or Para-Purusha—the Lord existing through him
self, out ofwhom and through whom all things were, and are and will be
. . . resolved to emanate from his own substance thevarious creatures"
(Manava-Dharma-Sastra, book i., slokas 6 and 7).
The mystic Decad 1+2+3+4=10 is a way of expressing this idea.
The One is God, the Two, matter; the Three, combining Monad and
Duad, and partakingofthe nature ofboth, is the phenomenal world; the
Tetrad, or form of perfection, expresses the emptiness of all ; and the
Decad, or sum of all, involves the entire cosmos. The universe is the
combination of a thousand elements, and yet the expression of a single
'spirit—a chaos to the sense, a cosmos to the reason.
The whole of this combination of the progression of numbers in the
idea of creation is Hindu. The Being existing through himself, Sway-
ambhu or Swayainbhuva, as he is called by some, is one. He emanates
from himself the creativefaculty, Brahma or Purusha (the divine male),
and the one becomes Two; out of this Duad, union of the purely intel-
*Cousin: " HistoryofPhilosophy," I., ix.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xvn
lectual principle with the principle of matter, evolves a third, which is
Viradj, the phenomenal world. It is out of this invisible and incompre
hensible trinity, the Brahmanic Trimurty, that evolves the second triad
which represents the three faculties—the creative, the conservative, and
the transforming. These are typified by Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, but
are again and ever blended into one. Unity, Brahma, or as the Vedas
called him, Tridandi, is the god triply manifested, which gave rise to the
symbolical Aum or the abbreviated Trimurty. It is but under this trini
ty, ever active and tangible to all our senses, that the invisible and
unknown Monas can manifest itself to the world of mortals. When he
becomes Sarira, or he who puts on a visible form, he typifies all the
principles of matter, all the germs of life, he is Purusha, the god of the
three visages, or triple power, the essence of the Vedic triad. " Let the
Brahmas know the sacred Syllable (Aum), the three words of the Savitri,
and read the Vedas daily" (Afanu, book iv., sloka 125).
"After having produced the universe, He whose power is incompre
hensible vanished again, absorbed in the Supreme Soul. . . . Having
retired into the primitive darkness, the great Soul remains within the un
known, and is void ofall form. . . .
"When having again reunited the subtile elementary principles, it
introduces itselfinto either a vegetableor animal seed, it assumes ateach
a new form."
" It is thus that, by an alternative waking andrest, the Immutable Be
ing causes to revive and die eternally all the existing creatures, active
and inert" (Afanu, book i., sloka 50, and others).
He who has studied Pythagoras and his speculations on the Monad,
which, after having emanated the Dtiad retires into silence and darkness,
andthus creates the Triad can realize whence came thephilosophyofthe
great Samian Sage, and after him thatofSocrates and Plato.
Speusippus seems to have taught that the psychical or thumetic soul
was immortal as well as the spirit or rational soul, and further on we will
show his reasons. He also—like Philolaus and Aristotle, in his disquisi
tionsupon the soul—makes ofnether an element ; so that there were five
principal elementstocorrespond withthefive regular figuresin Geometry.
This became also a doctrine of the Alexandrian school. * Indeed, there
was much in the doctrines of the Philaletheans which did not appear in
the works of the older Platonists, but was doubtless taught in substance
by the philosopher himself, but with his usual reticence was not commit
ted to writing as being too arcane for promiscuous publication. Speu
sippus and Xenocrates after him, held, like their great master, that the
* "Theol. Arithme.,"p. 62: "On Pythag. Numbers."---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

xviii BEEORE THE VEIL.
anima mundi, or world-soul, was not the Deity, but a manifestation.
Those philosophers never conceived of the One as an animate nature.*
The original One did not exist, as we understand the term. Not till he
had united with the many—emanated existence (the monad and duad)
was a being produced. The ti/iuov. honored—the something manifested,
dwells in the centre as in the circumference, but it is only the reflection
ofthe Deity—the World-Soul, f In this doctrine we find the spirit of
esoteric Buddhism.
A man's idea ofGod, is that image ofblinding light that he sees re
flected in the concave mirror of his own soul, and yet thisis not, in very
truth, God, but only His reflection. His gloryis there, but, itis the light
ofhis own Spirit that the man sees, andit isallhecan bear to lookupon.
The clearer the mirror, the brighter willbe the divine image. But the
external world cannot be witnessed in it at the same moment. In the
ecstatic Yogin, in the illuminated Seer, the spirit will shine like the noon
daysun; in thedebasedvictim ofearthlyattraction, the radiancehasdisap
peared, for the mirror is obscured with the stains of matter. Such men
deny their God, andwouldwillinglydeprive humanityofsoul atone blow.
No God, No Soul? Dreadful, annihilatingthought ! Themadden
ing nightmare of a lunatic—Atheist ; presenting before his fevered vis
ion, a hideous, ceaseless procession of sparks of cosmic matter created
by no one; self-appearing, self-existent, and self-developing ; this Self
no Self, for it is nothing andnobody; floatingonward from nowhencc, it is
propelled by no Cause, for there is none, and it rushes nowhither. And
this in a circle of Eternity blind, inert, and—causeless. What is even
the erroneous conception oftheBuddhisticNirvanain comparison ! The
Nirvana is preceded by numberless spiritual transformations and me
tempsychoses, during which the entity loses not fora second the sense of
itsown individuality, and which may last for millions of ages before the
FinalAfo-Thing is reached.
Though some have considered Speusippus as inferior to Aristotle, the
worldis nevertheless indebted to him for defining and expounding many
thingsthatPlato had leftobscurein his doctrine ofthe Sensible and Ideal.
His maxim was "TheImmaterial isknown bymeans ofscientificthought,
the Material by scientific perception."J
Xenocrates expounded many of the unwritten theories and teachings
ofhis master. He too held the Pythagorean doctrine, and his system of
numerals and mathematics in the highest estimation. Recognizing but
three degreesofknowledge—Thought, Perception, and Envisagement(or
knowledge by Intuition), he made the former busy itself with all that
* Plato: "Parmenid.," 141 E. f See Stoboeus' "Eel.," i.,862.
% Sextus : " Math.," vii. 145.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xix
whichisbeyondthe heavens; Perception with things in the heavens; In
tuition with the heavens themselves.
We find again these theories, and nearly in the same language in the
Manava-Dharma-Sastra, when speaking of the creation of man : " He
(the Supreme) drew from his own essence the immortal breath which
perisheth not in the being, and to this soul ofthebeing he gave the Ahan-
cara (conscience of the ego) sovereign guide." Then he gave to that
soul ofthe being (man) the intellect formed ofthethree qualities, and the
five organs ofthe outward perception."
These three qualities are Intelligence, Conscience, and Will ; answer
ing to the Thought, Perception, and Envisagement ofXenocrates. The
relation ofnumbers to Ideas was developed by him further than bySpeu-
sippus, and he surpassed Plato in his definitionof the doctrine of Invisi
ble Magnitudes. Reducing them to their ideal primary elements, he
demonstrated that every figureand form originated outofthe smallestin
divisible line. That Xenocrates held the same theories as Plato in rela
tion to the human soul (supposed to be a number) is evident, though
Aristotle contradicts this, like every other teaching of this philosopher. *
This is conclusive evidence that many of Plato's doctrinesweredelivered
orally, even were it shown that Xenocrates and not Plato was the first
to originate the theory of indivisible magnitudes. He derives the Soul
' from the first Duad, and calls it a self-moved number,f Theophrastus
remarks that he entered and eliminated this Soul-theory more than any
other Platonist. He built upon it the cosmological doctrine, and proved
the necessary existence in every part of the universal space of a succes
sive and progressive series ofanimated and thinking though spiritual be
ings. \ The Human Soul with him is a compound of the most spiritual
properties ofthe Monad and the Duad, possessing the highest principles
ofboth. If, like Plato and Prodicus, he refers to the Elements as to
Divine Powers, and calls them gods, neitherhimselfnorothers connected
any anthropomorphic ideawith the appellation. Krische remarks that
he called them gods only that theseelementary powersshouldnot becon
founded with the daemons of the nether world § (the Elementary Spirits).
As the Soul ofthe World permeates the whole Cosmos, even beastsmust
have in them something divine. || This, also, is the doctrine of Bud
dhists and the Hermetists, and Manu endows with a living soul even
the plants and the tiniest blade ofgrass.
The daemons, according to this theory, are intermediate beings be-
* "Metaph.,"407, a. 3. \Appendix to "Timseus."
% Stob. : "Eel.," i., 62. §Krische: "Forsch.,"p. 322, etc
IClem. : "Alex. Stro.,"v., 590.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XX BEFORE THE VEIL.
tween the divine perfection and human sinfulness,* and he divides them
into classes, each subdivided in many others. But he states expressly
that the individual or personal soul is the leading guardian daemon of
everyman, and that no daemon has more power over us than our own.
Thus the Daimonion of Socrates is the god or Divine Entity which in
spired him all his life. It depends on man either to open or close his
perceptions to the Divine voice. Like Speusippus he ascribed immor
tality to the i/t^xVi psychical body, or irrational soul. But some Herme
tic philosophers have taught that the soul has a separate continued
existence only so long as in its passage through the spheres any material
or earthly particles remain incorporated in it ; and that when absolutely
purified, the latter are annihilated, and the quintessenceofthe soul alone
becomes blended with its divine spirit (the Rational), and the two are
thenceforth one.
Zeller states that Xenocrates forbade the eating of animal food, not
because he saw in beasts something akin to man, as he ascribed to them
a dim consciousness of God, but, "for the opposite reason, lest the irra
tionality of animal souls might thereby obtain a certain influence over
us."f But we believe that it was rather because, like Pythagoras, he had
had the Hindu sages for his masters and models. Cicero depicted Xen
ocrates utterly despising everything except the highest virtue;J and de
scribes the stainlessness and severe austerityofhis character.§ "To free
ourselves from the subjection of sensuous existence, to conquer the Ti
tanic elements in our terrestrial nature through the Divine one, is our
problem." Zeller makes him say :|| "Purity, even in the secret longings
of our heart, is the greatest duty, and only philosophy and the initiation
into the Mysteries help toward the attainment of this object."
Crantor, another philosopher associated with the earliest days of
Plato's Academy, conceived the human soul as formed out of the primary
substance of all things, the Monad or One, and the Duad or the Two.
Plutarch speaks at length of this philosopher, who like his master be
lieved in souls being distributed in earthly bodies as an exile and punish
ment.
Herakleides, thoughsome critics do notbelieve himto havestrictlyad
hered to Plato's primal philosophy,^ taught the same ethics. Zeller pre
sents him to us imparting, like Hicetas and Ecphantus, the Pythagorean
doctrine ofthe diurnal rotation of the earth and the immobility of the
fixed stars, but adds that he was ignorant of the annual revolution of the
* Plutarch: "Delsid," chap. 25, p. 360. \ "Platounddie Alt. Akademie."
% "Tusa,"v., 18, 51. § Ibid. Cf. p. 550.
] "Plato unddie Alt. Akademie." J Ed. Zeller: "Philos. der Griech.'---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXI
eartharound the sun, andofthe heliocentric system.* Butwehave good
evidence thatthelattersystemwastaughtin the Mysteries, and thatSocra
tesdiedforatheism,i.c, fordivulging thissacredknowledge. Herakleides
adopted fully the Pythagorean and Platonic views of the human soul, its
faculties and its capabilities. He describes it as a luminous, highly ethe
real essence. He affirms that souls inhabit the milky way before de
scending "into generation" or sublunary existence. His daemons or
spirits are airy and vaporous bodies.
In the Epinomis is fully stated the doctrine of the Pythagorean num
bers in relation to created things. As a true Platonist, its author
maintains that wisdom can only be attained by a thorough inquiry into
the occult nature of the creation; it alone assures us an existence of
bliss after death. The immortality ofthe soul is greatly speculated upon
in this treatise ; but its author adds that we can attain to this knowledge
onlythrough a complete comprehension of the numbers; for the man,
unable to distinguish the straight line from a curved one will never have
wisdom enough to secure a mathematical demonstration of the invisible,
i. e., we mustassure ourselves ofthe objective existenceofoursoul (astral
body) before we learn that we are in possession ofa divine and immortal
spirit. Iamblichus says the same thing; adding, moreover, that it is a
secret belonging to the highest initiation. The Divine Power, he says,
always felt indignant with those "who rendered manifest the composition
of the icostagonus," viz., who delivered the method of inscribing in a
sphere the dodecahedron.f
The idea that "numbers" possessing the greatest virtue, produce al
ways what is good and never what is evil, refers to justice, equanimity of
temper, and everything that is harmonious. When the author speaks
ofeverystaras an individual soul, he only meanswhatthe Hindu initiates
and the Hermetists taught before and after him,viz.: that everystar is an
independentplanet, which, likeourearth,hasasoulofitsown, everyatom
of matter being impregnated with the divine influx of the soul of the
world. It breathes and lives; it feels and suffers as well as enjoys life
in its way. What naturalist is prepared to dispute it on good evidence?
Therefore, we must consider the celestial bodies as the images of gods;
as partaking of the divine powers in their substance; and though they
are not immortal in their soul-entity, their agency in the economy of the
universe is entitled to divine honors, such aswe paytominor gods. The
idea isplain,andonemustbemalevolentindeed tomisrepresentit. Ifthe
authorofEpinomisplacesthese fierygods higher than theanimals, plants,
and even mankind, all ofwhich, as earthlycreatures, are assigned by him
* "Platound dieAlt. Akademie." f Oneofthefivesolid figuresin Geometry.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

xxil ' BEFORE THE VEIL.
a lower place, who can prove him wholly wrong? One must needs go
deep indeed into the profundity of the abstract metaphysics of the old
philosophies, who would understand that their various embodiments of
their conceptions are, after all, based upon an identical apprehension of
the nature ofthe First Cause, its attributes and method.
Again when theauthor ofEpinomislocates between these highest and
lowest gods (embodied souls) three classes of daemons, and peoples the
universe with invisible beings,he is more rational than our modern scien
tists, who make between the two extremes one vast hiatus of being, the
playground of blind forces. Of these three classes the first two are in
visible; their bodies are pure ether and fire (planetary spirits); the
daemons of the third class are clothed with vapory bodies; they are
usually invisible, but sometimes making themselves concrete become
visible for a few seconds. These are the earthly spirits, or our astral
souls.
It is these doctrines, which, studied analogically, and on the principle
of correspondence, led the ancient, and may now lead the modern Phi-
laletheian step by step toward the solution of the greatest mysteries.
On the brink ofthe dark chasm separating the spiritual from the physical
world stands modern science, with eyes closed and head averted, pro
nouncing the gulf impassable and bottomless, though she holds in her
hand a torch which she need only lower into the depths to show her her
mistake. But across this chasm, the patient student of Hermetic philos
ophyhas constructed a bridge.
In his Fragments of Science Tyndall makes the following sad confes
sion : "Ifyou ask me whether science has solved, or is likely in our day
to solve the problem of this universe, I must shake my head in doubt."
If moved by an afterthought, he corrects himself later, and assures his
audience that experimental evidence has helped him to discover, in the
opprobrium-covered matter, the "promise and potency of every quality
of life," he only jokes. It would be asdifficult for Professor Tyndall to
offer any ultimate and irrefutable proofs of what he asserts, as it was for
Job to insert a hook into the nose ofthe leviathan.
Toavoid confusion that mighteasilyarise by the frequentemployment
of certain terms in a sense different from that familiar to the reader, a
few explanations will be timely. We desire to leave no pretext either for
misunderstanding or misrepresentation. Magic may have one significa
tion toone classofreadersandanother to another class. We shall giveit
the meaning which it has in the minds of its Oriental students and prac
titioners. And so with the words Hermetic Science, Occultism, Hiero-
phant, Adept, Sorcerer,etc. ; there has been little agreementoflate as to
their meaning. Though the distinctions between the terms areveryoften---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXlll
insignificant—merely ethnic—still, itmay be useful to the general reader
to knowjustwhat that is. We give a few alphabetically.
.i42throbacy, is the Greek name for walking or being lifted in the
air; levitation, so called, among modern spiritualists. It may be either
conscious or unconscious; in the one case, it is magic ; in the other,
either disease or a power which requires a few words ofelucidation.
A symbolical explanation of aethrobacy is given in an old Syriac
manuscript which was translated in the fifteenth century by one Mal-
chus, an alchemist. In connection with the case of Simon Magus, one
passage reads thus :
"Simon, laying his face upon the ground, whispered in her ear, 'O
mother Earth, give me, I pray thee, some of thy breath; and I will give
thee mine ; let me loose, O mother, that I may carry thy words to the
stars, and I will return faithfully to thee after a while.' And the Earth
strengthening her status, none to her detriment, sent her genius to
breathe of her breath on Simon, while he breathedon her; and the stars
rejoiced to be visited by the mighty One."
The starting-point here is the recognized electro-chemical principle
that bodies similarly electrified repel each other, while those differently
electrified mutually attract. "The most elementary knowledge of
chemistry," says Professor Cooke, "shows that, while radicals of oppo
site natures combine most eagerly together, two metals, or two closely-
allied metalloids, show but little affinity for each other."
The earth is a magnetic body; in fact, as some scientists have
found, it is one vast magnet, as Paracelsus affirmed some 300 years ago.
It is charged with one form of electricity—let us call it positive—which
it evolves continuously by spontaneous action, in its interior or centre
of motion. Human bodies, in common with all other forms of matter,
are charged with the opposite form of electricity—negative. That is to
say, organic or inorganic bodies, if left to themselves will constantly and
involuntarily charge themselves with, and evolve the form of electricity
opposed to that of the earth itself. Now, what is weight? Simply
the attraction of the earth. "Without the attractions of the earth
you would have no weight," says Professor Stewart; * "and if you
had an earth twice as heavy as this, you would have double the
attraction." How then, can we get rid of this attraction? According
to the electrical law above stated, there is an attraction between our
planet and the organisms upon it, which holds them upon the surface of
the ground. But the law of gravitation has been counteracted in many
instances, by levitations of persons and inanimate objects; how account
*"The Sunand the Earth."---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXIV BEFORE THE VEIL.
for this? The condition of our physical systems, say theurgic philoso
phers, is largely dependent upon the action of our will. If. well-regu
lated, it can produce " miracles ; " among others a change of this elec
trical polarity from negative to positive; the man's relations with the
earth-magnet would then become repellent, and "gravity" for him
would have ceased to exist. It would then be as natural for him to
rush into the air until the repellent force had exhausted itself, as, before,
it had been for him to remain upon the ground. The altitude of his
levitation would be measured by his ability, greater or less, to charge
his body with positive electricity. This control over the physical forces
once obtained, alteration of his levity or gravity would be as easy as
breathing.
The study of nervous diseases has established that even in ordinary
somnambulism, as well as in mesmerized somnambulists, the weight of
the body seems to be diminished. Professor Perty mentions a somnam
bulist, Koehler, who when in the water could not sink, but floated. The
seeress of Prevorst rose to the surface of the bath and could not be
kept seated in it. He speaks of Anna Fleisher, who being subject to
epileptic fits, was often seen by the Superintendent to rise in the air;
and was once, in the presence of two trustworthy witnesses (two deans)
and others, raised two and a half yards from her bed in a horizontal
position. The similar case of Margaret Rule is cited by Upham in his
History of Salem Witchcraft. " In ecstatic subjects," adds Professor
Perty, "the rising in the air occurs much more frequently than with
somnambulists. We are so accustomed to consider gravitation as being
a something absolute and unalterable, that the idea of a complete or
partial rising in opposition to it seems inadmissible; nevertheless, there
are phenomena in which, by means of material forces, gravitation is
overcome. In several diseases—as, for instance, nervous fever—the
weight of the human body seems to be increased, but in all ecstatic con
ditions to be diminished. And there may, likewise, be other forces than
material ones which can counteract this power."
A Madrid journal, El Criterio Espiritista, of a recent date, reports
the case of a young peasant girl near Santiago, which possesses a pecu
liar interest in this connection. "Two bars of magnetized iron held
over her horizontally, half a metre distant, was sufficient to suspend her
bodyin the air."
Were our physicians to experiment on such levitated subjects, it
would be found that they are strongly charged with a similar form of
electricity to that of the spot, which, according to the law of gravita
tion, ought to attract them, or rather prevent their levitation. And, if
some physical nervous disorder, as well as spiritual ecstasy produce---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXV
unconsciously to the subject the same effects, it proves that if this force
in nature were properly studied, it could be regulated at will.
Alchemists.—From Al and Chemi, fire, or the god and patriarch,
Kham, also, the name of Egypt. The Rosicrucians of the middle ages,
such as Robertus de Fluctibus (Robert Fludd), Paracelsus, Thomas
Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes), Van Helmont, and others, were all
alchemists, who sought for the hidden spirit in every inorganic matter.
Some people—nay, the great majority—have accused alchemists ofchar
latanry and false pretending. Surelysuch menas Roger Bacon, Agrippa,
Henry Kunrath, and the Arabian Geber (the first to introduce into
Europe some ofthe secretsofchemistry), can hardly be treated as impos
tors—least of all as fools. Scientists who are reforming the science of
physics upon the basis of the atomic theory of Demokritus, as restated
by John Dalton, conveniently forget that Demokritus, of Abdera, was an
alchemist, and that the mind that was capable of penetrating so far into
the secret operations of nature in one direction must have had good rea
sons to study and become a Hermetic philosopher. Olaus Borrichias
says, that the cradle ofalchemy is to be sought in the most distant times.
Astral Light.—The same as the sidereallight of Paracelsus and
other Hermetic philosophers. Physically, it is the ether of modern sci
ence. Metaphysically, and in its spiritual, or occult sense, ether is a
great deal more than is oftenimagined. In occult physics, and alchemy,
it is well demonstrated to enclose within its shoreless waves not only
Mr. Tyndall's "promise and potency of every quality of life," but also
the realization ofthe potency ofevery qualityof spirit. Alchemists and
Herinetists believe thattheir astral, or sidereal ether, besides the above
properties of sulphur, and white and red magnesia, or magnes, is the
anima mundi, the workshop ofNature and of all the cosmos, spiritually,
as well as physically. The "grand magisterium" asserts itself in the
phenomenon of mesmerism, in the "levitation" of human and inert ob
jects ; and may be called the ether fromits spiritual aspect.
The designation astralis ancient, and was used by some of the Neo-
platonists. Porphyry describes the celestial body which is always joined
with the soul as "immortal, luminous, and star-like." The root of this
word may be found, perhaps, in the Scythic aist-aer—which means
star, or the Assyrian Istar, which, according to Burnouf has the same
sense. As the Rosicrucians regarded the real, as the direct oppo
site of the apparent, and taught that what seems light to matter, is
darkness to spirit, they searched for the latter in the astral ocean of
invisible fire which encompasses the world; andclaim to have tracedthe
equally invisible divine spirit, which overshadows every man and is erro
neously called soul, to the very throne of the Invisible and Unknown---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXVI BEFORE THE VEIL.
God. As the greatcausemust alwaysremaininvisibleandimponderable,
they could prove their assertions merely by demonstration of its effects
in this world of matter, by calling them forth from the unknowable down
into the knowable universe of effects. That this astral light permeates
the whole cosmos, lurking in its latent state even in the minutest particle
of rock, they demonstrate by the phenomenon of the spark from Aim
and from every other stone, whose spirit when forcibly disturbed springs
to sight spark-like, and immediately disappears in the realms of the
unknowable.
Paracelsus named it the sidereallight, taking thetermfromthe Latin.
He regarded the starry host (our earth included) as the condensed por
tions of the astral light which " fell down into generation and matter,"
but whose magnetic or spiritual emanations kept constantly a never-
ceasing intercommunication between themselves and the parent-fount of
all—the astral light. " The stars attract from us to themselves, and we
again from them to us," he says. The body is wood and the life is fire,
which comes like the light from the stars and from heaven. "Magic is
the philosophyofalchemy," he says again.* Everythingpertainingto the
spiritual world must cotne to us through the stars, and if weareinfriend
ship with them, we may attain the greatest magicaleffects.
"As fire passes through an iron stove, so do the stars pass through
man with all their properties and go into him as the rain into the earth,
which gives fruit out of that same rain. Now observe that the stars sur
roundthe whole earth, as a shell does the egg; through the shell comes
the air, and penetrates to the centre of the world." The human body is
subjectedas well as the earth, and planets, and stars, to a double law; it
attracts and repels, for it is saturated through with double magnetism,
the influx of the astral light. Everything is double in nature; magnet
ism is positive and negative, active and passive, male and female.
Night rests humanity from the day's activity, and restorestheequilibrium
of human as well as of cosmic nature. When the mesmerizer will have
learned the grand secret of polarizing the action and endowing his fluid
with a bisexual force he will have become the greatest magician living.
Thus the astral light is androgyne, for equilibrium is the resultant of two
opposing forces eternally reacting upon each other. The result ofthisis
Life. When the twoforces are expandedandremain solong inactive,
as to equalone another and so come to a complete rest, the condition is
Death. A human being can blow either a hot or a cold breath ; and
can absorb either cold or hot air. Every child knows how to regulate
* "De Ente Spirituali,"lib. iv.; "deEnteAstroruin," bookt ; andoperaomnia,
vol. i., pp. 634and699.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXVll
the temperature of his breath; but how to protect one's self from either
hot orcold air, nophysiologist has yetlearned with certainty. Theastral
light alone, as the chief agent in magic, can discover to us all secrets
of nature. The astral light is identical with the Hindu akdsa, a word
which we will now explain.
Akasa.—Literally the word means in Sanscrit sky, but in its mystic
sense it signifies the invisible sky; or, as the Brahmans term it in the
Soma-sacrifice (the GyotishtomaAgnishtoma), the god Akasa, or god Sky.
The language of the Vedas shows that the Hindus of fifty centuries ago
ascribed to it the same properties as do the Thibetan lamas of the pres
ent day; that they regarded it as the source of life, the reservoir of all
energy, and the propeller of every change of matter. In its latent state
it tallies exactly with our idea of the universal ether; in its active state
it became the Akasa, the all-directing and omnipotent god. In the
Brahmanical sacrificial mysteries it plays the part of Sadasya, or super
intendent over the magical effects of the religious performance, and it
had its own appointed Hotar (or priest), who took its name. In India,
as in other countries in ancient times, the priests are the representatives
on earth of different gods; each taking the name of the deity in whole
name he acts.
The Akasa is the indispensable agent of every Kritya (magical
performance) either religious or profane. The Brahmanical expression
"to stir up the Brahma"—Brahma jinvati—means to stir up the
power which lies latent at the bottom of every such magical oper
ation, for the Vedic sacrifices are but ceremonial magic. This power
is the Akasa or the occult electricity ; the alkahest of the alchemists in
one sense, or the universal solvent, the same anima mundl as the astral
light. At the moment of the sacrifice, the latter becomes imbued with
the spirit of Brahma, and so for the time being is Brahma himself. This
is the evident origin of the Christian dogma of transubstantiation. As
to the most general effects of the Akasa, the author of one of the most
modern works on the occult philosophy, Art-Magic, gives for the first
time to the world a most intelligible and interesting explanation of the
Akasa in connection with the phenomena attributed to its influence by
the fakirs and lamas.
Anthropology—the science of man ; embracing among other
things :
Physiology, or that branch of natural science which discloses the
mysteries of the organs and their functionsin men, animals, and plants ;
and also, and especially,
Psychology, or the great, and in our days, so neglectedscience ofthe---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXVlll BEFORE THE VEIL.
soul, both as an entity distinct from the spirit and in its relations with
the spirit and body. In modern science, psychology relates only or
principally to conditions of the nervous system, and almost absolutely
ignores the psychical essence and nature. Physicians denominate the
science of insanity psychology, and name the lunatic chair in medical
colleges by that designation.
Chaldeans, or Kasdim.—At first a tribe, then a caste of learned
kabalists. They were the savants, the magians ofBabylonia, astrologers
and diviners. The famous Hillel, the precursor of Jesus in philosophy
and in ethics, wasa Chaldean. Franckin hisKabbala pointsto theclose
resemblance of the "secret doctrine" found in the Avesta and the reli
gious metaphysics of the Chaldees.
Dactyls (daktulos, a finger).—Anamegiven to thepriestsattachedto
the worship of Kybel'e (Cybele). Some archaeologists derive the name
from SdjcnAos, finger, because they were ten, the same in number as the
fingers of the hand. But we do not believe the latter hypothesis is the
correct one.
Daemons.—A name given by the ancient people, and especially the
philosophers of the Alexandrian school, to all kinds of spirits, whether
good or bad, human or otherwise. The appellation is often synonymous
with that of gods or angels. But some philosophers tried, with good
reason, to make ajust distinction between the many classes.
Demiurgos, or Demiurge.—Artificer; the Supernal Power which
built the universe. Freemasons derive from this word their phrase of
"Supreme Architect." The chief magistrates of certain Greek cities
bore the title.
Dervishes, or the "whirling charmers," as they are called. Apart
from the austerities of life, prayer and contemplation, the Mahom
etan devotee presents but little similarity with the Hindu fakir. The
latter may become a sannyasi, or saint and holy mendicant ; the
former will neverreach beyond his secondclass of occult manifestations.
Thedervishmayalso be a strong mesmerizer, buthewill nevervoluntarily
submit to the abominable and almostincredibleself-punishment which the
fakir invents for himself with an ever increasing avidity, until nature
succumbs and he dies in slow and excruciating tortures. The most
dreadful operations, such as flaying the limbs alive ; cutting off the toes,
feet, and legs ; tearing out the eyes ; and causing one's self to be buried
aliveup tothe chin in the earth,and passingwhole monthsin thisposture,
seem child's play to them. One of the most common tortures is that
of Tshiddy-Parvady.* It consists in suspending the fakir to one of the
*Ormorecommonlych&rkh puja.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xxix
mobile arms of a kind of gallows to be seen in the vicinity of many of
the temples. At the end of each of these arms is fixed a pulley over
which passes a rope terminated by an iron hook. This hook is inserted
into the bare back of the fakir, who inundating the soil with blood is
hoisted up in the air and then whirled round the gallows. From the
first moment of this cruel operation until he is either unhooked or the
flesh of his back tears out under the weight of the body and the fakir is
hurled down on the heads of the crowd, not a muscle of his face will
move. He remainscalm and serious and as composed as if taking a
refreshing bath. The fakir will laugh to scorn every imaginable tor
ture, persuaded that the more his outer body is mortified, the brighter
and holier becomes his inner, spiritual body. But the Dervish, neither
in India, nor in other Mahometan lands, will ever submit to such
operations.
Druids.—A sacerdotal caste which flourished in Britain and Gaul.
Elemental Spirits.—The creatures evolved in the fourkingdoms of
earth, air, fire, and water, and called by the kabalists gnomes, sylphs,
salamanders, and undines. They may be termed the forces of nature,
and will either operateeffects as the servile agents ofgeneral law, or may
be employed by the disembodied spirits—whether p'ure or impure—and
by living adepts of magic and sorcery, to produce desired phenomenal
results. Such beings never become men.*
Under thegeneral designation offairies, and fays, these spirits ofthe
elements appear in the myth, fable, tradition, or poetry of all nations,
ancient and modern. Theirnamesarelegion—peris, devs, djins, sylvans,
satyrs, fauns, elves,dwarfs, trolls, norns. nisses, kobolds, brownies, necks,
stromkarls, undines, nixies, salamanders, goblins, ponkes, banshees, kel
pies, pixies, moss people, good people, good neighbors, wild women, men
ofpeace, white ladies—and many more. They have been seen, feared,
blessed, banned, and invoked in,every quarter ofthe globe and in every
age. Shall we then concede that all who have met them were halluci
nated ?
*Personswho believeintheclairvoyant power,butaredisposedtodiscredittheexist
enceofanyotherspiritsin nature thandisembodied humanspirits, will beinterested in
anaccount ofcertainclairvoyant observationswhich appeared in the London Spirit-
ualist of June 29, 1877. A thunder-storm approaching, the seeress saw "a bright
spirit emergefrom a dark cloud and passwith lightningspeed across the sky, and, a
fewminutesafter, adiagonal line ofdarkspiritsin theclouds." These arethe Mantts
ofthe "Vedas" (See Max Miiller's " Rig-Veda Sanhita").
The well-known and respected lecturer, authcr, andclairvoyant, Mrs. Emma Hard-
inge Britten, haspublishedaccountsof herfrequent experiences with these elemental
spirits.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXX BEFORE THE VEIL.
These elementals are the principal agents of disembodied but never
visible spirits at seances, and the producers ofall the phenomena except
the subjective.
Elementary Spirits.—Properly, the disembodied souls of the de
praved; these souls having at some time prior to death separated from
themselves their divine spirits, and so lost their chance for immortality.
Eliphas Levi and some other kabalists make little distinction between
elementary spirits who have been men, and those beings which people
the elements, and are the blind forces of nature. Once divorced from
their bodies, these souls (also called " astral bodies") of purely material
istic persons, are irresistibly attracted to the earth, where they live a
temporary and finite life amid elements congenial to their gross natures.
From having never, during theirnatural lives, cultivated their spirituality,
but subordinated it to the material and gross, they are now unfitted for
the lofty career of the pure, disembodied being, for whom the atmos
phere ofearthis stifling and mephitic, and whose attractions are all away
from it. After a more or less prolonged period of time these material
souls will begin to disintegrate, and finally, like a column of mist, be
dissolved, atom by atom, in the surrounding elements.
Essenes—from 'Asa, a healer. A sect of Jews said by Pliny to have
lived near the Dead Sea "permillia saculorum"—for thousandsofages.
Some have supposed them to be extreme Pharisees; and others—which
may be the true theory—the descendants of the Benimnabim of the
Bible, and think they were "Kenites" and "Nazarites." They had
manyBuddhisticideasand practices; andit is noteworthythat the priests
ofthe GreatMother at Ephesus, Diana-Bhavani with many breasts, were
alsosodenominated. Eusebius, andafterhim De Quincey, declared them
to be the same as the early Christians, which is more than probable.
The title "brother," used in the early Church, was Essenean : they were
a fraternity, or a koinobion or communitylike 'the early converts. It is
noticeable that only the Sadducees, or Zadokites, the priest-caste and
their partisans, persecuted the Christians; the Pharisees were generally
scholastic and mild, and often sided with the latter. James the Just was
a Pharisee till his death; but Paul or Aher was esteemed a schismatic.
Evolution.—The development of higher orders of animals from the
lower. Modern, or so-called exact science, holds but to a one-sided
physical evolution, prudently avoiding and ignoring the higher or spirit
ual evolution, which wouldforce ourcontemporaries to confess the superi
orityoftheancient philosophersandpsychologists over themselves. The
ancient sages, ascending to the unknowable, made their starting-point
from the firstmanifestation of the unseen, the unavoidable, and from a
strict logical reasoning, the absolutely necessary creative Being, the---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXXI
Demiurgos of the universe. Evolution began with them from pure
spirit, which descending lower and lower down, assumed at last a visible
and comprehensible form, and became matter. Arrived at this point,
they speculated in the Darwinian method, but on a far more large and
comprehensive basis.
In the Rig-Veda-Sanhita, the oldest book of the World* (to which
even our most prudent Indiologists and Sanscrit scholars assign an anti
quity of between two and three thousand years B.C.), in the first book,
" Hymns to the Maruts," itis said:
"Not-being and Being are in the highest heaven, in the birthplace
ofDaksha, in the lap ofAditi" {Mandala, i., Sdkta 166).
" In the first age of the gods, Being (the comprehensible Deity) was
born from Not-being (whom no intellect can.comprehend); after itwere
born the Regions (the invisible), from them Uttanapada."
"From Uttanapad the Earth was born, the Regions (those that are
visible) were born from the Earth. Daksha was born ofAditi, and Aditi
from Daksha" (Ibid.).
Aditi is the Infinite, and Daksha is daksha-pitarah, literally meaning
thefather of gods, but understood by Max Miiller and Roth to mean
thefathers of strength, "preserving, possessing, granting faculties."
Therefore, it iseasyto see that "Daksha, born of Aditi and Aditi from
Daksha," means what the moderns understand by "correlation of
forces;" the more so as we find in this passage (translated by Prof.
Miiller) :
" I place Agni, the source ofall beings, the father of strength" (iii.,
27, 2), a clear and identical ideawhich prevailedso much inthe doctrines
of the Zoroastrians, the Magians, and the mediaeval fire-philosophers.
Agni is god offire, of the Spiritual Ether, the verysubstance ofthe divine
essence of the Invisible God present in every atom of His creation and
called by the Rosicrucians the "Celestial Fire." If we only carefully
compare the verses from this Mandala, one ofwhich runs thus: "The
Sky is your father, the Earthyour mother, Soma your brother, Aditi your
sister" (i., 191, 6),f with the inscription on the Smaragdine Tablet of
Hermes, we will find the same substratum of metaphysical philosophy,
the identical doctrines !
"As all things were produced by the mediation of one being, so all
things were produced from this one thing by adaptation: 'Its father is
the sun; its mother is the moon' . . . etc. Separate theearthfromthe
* Translated by Max MUUer, Professorof Comparative Philologyat the Oxford
University, England.
f "Dyarlhvahpita, prithivimatasomanbhrata aditihsvasa."---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXXll BEFORE THE VEIL.
fire, the subtilefrom thegross. . . . What I had to say about the opera
tion ofthe sun is completed" (Smaragdine Tablet). *
Professor Max MUller sees in this Mandate "at last, something like
a theogony, though full of contradictions."f The alchemists, kabalists,
and students of mystic philosophy will find therein a perfectly defined
system ofEvolution in the Cosmogony ofa people who lived a score of
thousands ofyears before our era. They will find in it, moreover, a per
fect identity ofthought and even doctrine with the Hermetic philosophy,
and also that ofPythagoras and Plato.
In Evolution, as it is now beginning to be understood, there is sup
posed to be in all matter an impulse to take on ahigherform—asupposi
tion clearly expressed by Manu and other Hindu philosophers of the
highest antiquity. The philosopher's tree illustrates it in the case ofthe
zinc solution. The controversy between the followers of this school
and the Emanationists may be brieflystatedthus: The Evolutionist stops
all inquiry at the borders of "the Unknowable;" the Emanationist be
lieves that nothing can be evolved—-or, as the word means, unwombed
or born—except it has first been involved, thus indicating that life is
from a spiritual potency above the whole.
Fakirs.—Religious devotees in East India. They are generally at
tached to Brahmanical pagodas and follow the laws ofManu. A strictly
religious fakir will go absolutely naked, with the exception of a small
piece oflinen called dhoti, around his loins. They wear their hair long,
and it serves them as a pocket, as they stick in it various objects—such
as a pipe, a small flute called vagudah, the sounds of which throw the
serpents into a cataleptic torpor, and sometimes their bamboo-stick
(about one foot long) with the seven mysticalknots on it. This magical
sticlf, or rather rod, the fakir receives from his guru on the dayof his in
itiation, together with the three mantrams, which are communicated to
him "mouth to ear." No fakir will be seenwithoutthispowerfuladjunct
ofhis calling. Itis, as theyall claim, the divining rod, the cause of every
occult phenomenon producedbythem.J The Brahmanicalfakir isentire-
* As theperfect identity of the philosophical and religious doctrines ofantiquity
will be fully treated upon in subsequent chapters, we limitourexplanations for the
present.
f " Rig-Veda-Anhita," p. 234.
%Philostratus assures us that theBrahminswereable, in histime, to perform the
most wonderful cures by merely pronouncing certain magical words. "The Indian
Brahmanscarryastaff and a ring, bymeansofwhich theyare able todoalmost any
thing." Origenes states the same ("Contra Celsum"). But if a strong mesmeric
fluid—say projected from the eye, and without any other contact—isnotadded, no
magical words would beefficacious.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xxxiii
ly distinct from the Mussulman mendicantof India, also called fakirs in
some parts ofthe British territory.
Hermetist.—From Hermes, the god of Wisdom, known in Egypt,
Syria, and PhoeniciaasThoth, Tat, Adad, Seth, and Sat-an (the latter not
to be taken in the sense applied to it by Moslems and Christians), and
in Greece as Kadmus. The kabalists identifyhim with Adam Kadmon,
thefirst manifestationofthe Divine Power, andwith Enoch. There were
two Hermes : theelderwasthe Trismegistus, andthesecondan emanation,
or"permutation" ofhimself; thefriend and instructor of Isis andOsiris.
Hermes is the god ofthe priestly wisdom, like Mazeus.
Hierophant.—Discloser of sacred learning. The Old Man, the
Chief of the Adepts at the initiations, who explained the arcane
knowledge to the neophytes, bore this title. In Hebrew and Chaldaic
the term was Peter, or opener, discloser; hence, the Pope, as the suc
cessor of the hierophant of the ancient Mysteries, sits in the Pagan chair
of "St. Peter." The vindictiveness of the Catholic Church toward the
alchemists, and to arcane and astronomical science, is explained by the
fact that such knowledge was the ancient prerogative of the hierophant,
or representative of Peter, who kept the mysteries of life and death.
Men like Bruno, Galileo, and Kepler, therefore, and even Cagliostro,
trespassed on the preserves of the Church, and were accordingly mur
dered.
Every nation had its Mysteries and hierophants. Even the Jews
had their Peter—Tanaim or Rabbin, like Hillel, Akiba,* and other
famous kabalists, who alone could impart the awful knowledge con
tained in the Merkaba. In India, there was in ancient times one, and
now there are several hierophants scattered about the country, attached
to the principal pagodas, who are known as the Brahma-atmas. In
Thibet the chief hierophant is the Dalay, or Taley-Lama of Lha-ssa.f
Among Christian nations, the Catholics alone have preserved this
"heathen" custom, in the person of their Pope, albeit they have sadly
disfigured its majesty and the dignity ofthe sacred office.
Initiates.—In times of antiquity, those who had been initiated into
the arcane knowledge taught by the hierophants of the Mysteries ; and
in our modern days those who have been initiated by the adepts of mys
tic lore into the mysterious knowledge, which, notwithstanding the lapse
ofages, has yet a few real votaries on earth.
*Akibawasafriend ofAher, said tohavebeen the Apostle PaulofChristianstory.
Botharedepictedashavingvisited Paradise. Aher tookbranchesfrom the Tree of
Knowledge, and so fell from the true (Jewish) religion. Akibacame awayinpeace.
See2d Epistle to theCorinthians, chapterxii.
fTaley meansoceanorsea.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXXIV BEFORE THE VEIL.
Kabalist, from rf>ap, Kabala ; an unwritten or oral tradition. The
kabalist is a student of " secret science," one who interprets the hidden
meaning of the Scriptures with the help of the symbolical Kabala, and
explains the real one by these means. The Tanaim were the first
kabalists among the Jews; they appeared at Jerusalem about the begin
ning of the third century before the Christian era. The Books of Ese-
kiel, Daniel, Henoch, and the Revelation of St. John, are purely kabal-
istical. This secretdoctrine is identical with that of the Chaldeans, and
includes at the same time much ofthe Persian wisdom, or "magic."
Lamas.—Buddhist monks belonging to the Lamaic religion of
Thibet, as, for instance, friars are the monks belonging to the Popish or
Roman Catholic religion. Every lama is subject to the grand Taley-
Lama, the Buddhist pope ofThibet, who holds his residence at Lha-ssa,
and is a remcarnation ofBuddha.
Mage, or Magian ; from Mag or Maha. The word is the root of
the word magician. The Maha-atma (the great Soul or Spirit) in India
had its priests in the pre-Vedic times. The Magians were priests of the
fire-god ; we find them among the Assyrians and Babylonians, as well as
among the Persian fire-worshippers. The three magi, also denominated
kings, that are said to have made gifts ofgold, incense, and myrrh to the
infant Jesus, were fire-worshippers like the rest, and astrologers ; for
they saw his star. The high priest of the Parsis, at Surat, is called
Mooed, others derived the word from Megh; Meh-ab signifying some
thing grand and noble. Zoroaster's disciples were called Meghestom,
according to Kleuker.
Magician.—This term, once a title of renown and distinction, has
come to be wholly perverted from its true meaning. Once the synonym
of all that was honorable and reverent, of a possessor of learning and
wisdom, it has become degraded into an epithet todesignate one who isa
pretender and a juggler; a charlatan, in short, or one who has "sold his
soul totheEvilOne ;" who misuses his knowledge, andemploysitforlow
and dangerous uses, according to the teachings of the clergy, and a mass
of superstitious fools who believe the magician a sorcerer and an en
chanter. But Christians forget,'apparently, that Moses was also a ma
gician, and Daniel, "Master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans,
and soothsayers" (Daniel, v. n).
Theword magicianthen, scientifically speaking, isderivedfromMagh,
Man, Hindu or Sanscrit Maha—great ; a man well versed in the secret
or esoteric knowledge ; properly a sacerdote.
Manticism,ormanticfrenzy. Duringthisstate was developed thegift
ofprophecy. Thetwo wordsarenearlysynonymous. One wasashonored
as the other. Pythagoras and Plato heldit in high esteem, and Socrates---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXXV
advised his disciples to study Manticism. The Church Fathers, who
condemned so severely the manticfrenzy in Pagan priests and Pythiae,
were not above applying it to their own uses. The Montanists, who
took their name from Montanus, a bishopof Phrygia, whowasconsidered
divinely inspired, rivalled with thepdvTcK; (manteis) or prophets. "Ter-
tullian, Augustine, and the martyrs of Carthage, were of the number,"
says the author of Prophecy, Ancient and Modern. "The Montanists
seem to have resembled the Bacchantes in the wild enthusiasm that
characterized their orgies," he adds. There is a diversity of opinion as
to the origin of the word Manticism. There was the famous Mantis the
Sear, in the days of Melampus and Prcetus, King of Argos ; and there
was Manto, the daughter of the prophet ofThebes, herselfa prophetess.
Cicero describesprophecyandmanticfrenzy by saying that "in the inner
recesses of the mind is divine prophecy hidden and confined, a divine
impulse, which when it burns more vividly is called furor" (frenzy,
madness).
But there is still another etymology possible for the word mantis, and
towhich we doubt ifthe attentionofthe philologists waseverdrawn. The
mantic frenzy may, perchance, have astill earlier origin. The two sacri
ficial cups of the Soma-mystery used during the religious rites, and
generally known as grahas, are respectively called Sukra and Manti.*
It is in the latter manti or manthi cup that Brahma is said to be
"stirred up." While the initiate drinks (albeit sparingly) of this sacred
soma-juice, the Brahma, or rather his "spirit," personified by the god
Soma, enters into the man and takespossession ofhim. Hence, ecstatic
vision, clairvoyance, and the gift of prophecy. Both kinds of divination
—the natural and the artificial—are aroused bythe Soma. The Sukra-
cup awakens that which is given to everyman by nature. It unites both
spirit and soul, and these, from their own nature and essence, which are
divine, have a foreknowledge of future things, as dreams, unexpected
visions, and presentiments, well prove. The contents ofthe other cup,
the manti, which "stirs the Brahma," put thereby the soul in communi
cation not onlywith the minorgods—thewell-informed'but notomniscient
spirits—but actually with the highest divine essence itself. The soul
receives a direct illumination from thepresence of its "god ;" but as it
is not allowed to remember certain things, well known only in heaven,
the initiated person is generally seized with a kind of sacred frenzy,
and upon recovering from it, only remembers that which is allowed
tohim. As to the other kind of seers and diviners—those who make a
*See "Aytareya Brahmanan," 3, I.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXXVI BEFORE THE VEIL.
profession ofand a living by it—theyare usuallyheld to be possessed by
agandharva, a deity which is nowhere so little honored as in India.
*Mantra.—A Sanskritword conveying the same idea as the " Ineffa
ble Name." Some mantras, when pronounced according to magical
formula taught in the Atharva-Veda, produce an instantaneous and won
derful effect. In its general sense, though, a mantra is either simply a
prayer to the gods and powers of heaven, as taught by the Brahmanical
books, and especially Manu, or else a magical charm. In its esoteric
sense, the "word" ofthe mantra, or mystic speech, is called by the Brah-
mans Vdch. It resides in the mantra, which literally means those parts
of the sacred- books which are considered as the Sruti, or direct divine
revelation.
Marabut.—A Mahometan pilgrim who hasbeen to Mekka; a saint,
after whose death his body is placed in an open sepulchre built on
the surface,like otherbuildings,butin the middleofthestreetsandpublic
places ofpopulatedcities. Placed inside the small and only room ofthe
tomb (and several such public sarcophagi of brick and mortar may be
seen to this day in the streets and squares of Cairo), the devotion of the
wayfarers keeps a lamp ever burning at his head. The tombs of some
of these marabuts have a great fame for the miracles they are alleged
to perform.
Materialization.—A word employed by spiritualists to indicate the
phenomenonof"a spirit clothing himselfwith a material form." The far
less objectionable term, "form-manifestation," has been recently sug
gested by Mr. Stainton-Moses, of London. When the real nature of
these apparitions is better comprehended, a still more appropriate name
will doubtless be adopted. To call them materialized spirits is inadmis
sible, for they are not spirits but animated portrait-statues.
Mazdeans, from (Ahura) Mazda. (See Spiegel's Yasna, xl.) They
were the ancient Persian nobles who worshipped Ormazd, and, rejecting
images, inspired the Jewswith the same horror for every concrete repre
sentation ofthe Deity. "They seem in Herodotns's time to have been
superseded by the Magian religionists. The Parsis and Ghebers (e-nas
geberim, mighty men, of Genesis vi. and x. 8) appear to be Magian
religionists. ... By a curious muddling of ideas, Zoro-Aster (Zero, a
circle, ason orpriest, Aster, Ishtar, orAstarte—in Aryan dialect, a star),
the title ofthe head ofthe Magians and fire-worshippers, or Surya-ishtara,
the sun-worshipper, is often confounded in moderntimes withZara-tustra,
the reputed Mazdean apostle" (Zoroaster).
Metempsychosis.—The progress of the soul from one stage ofexist
ence toanother. Symbolizedandvulgarly believedtoberebirths in animal
bodies. A termgenerally misunderstood by everyclass of European and---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xxxvn
American society, including many scientists. The kabalistic axiom,
"A stone becomes a plant, a plant an animal, an animal a man, aman a
spirit, and aspirit a god," receives an explanation in Manu's Manava-
Dharma-Sastra, and other Brahmanical books.
Mysteries.—Greek teletai, or finishings, as analogous to tekuteia or
death. They were observances, generally kept secret from the profane
and uninitiated, in which were taught by dramatic representation and
other methods, the origin of things, the nature of thehuman spirit, its
relations to the body, and the method of its purification and restoration
to higher life. Physical science, medicine, the laws ofmusic, divination,
were all taught in the same manner. The Hippocratic oath was but a
mystic obligation. Hippocrates was a priest of Asklepios, some of
whose writings chanced to become public. But the Asklepiades were
initiates of the ^Esculapian serpent-worship, as the Bacchantes were of
the Dionysia; and both rites were eventually incorporated with the
Eleusinia. We will treat of the Mysteries fully in the subsequent
chapters.
Mystics.—Those initiated. But in the mediaeval and later periods
the term was applied to men like Boehmen the Theosophist, Molinos the
Quietist, Nicholas of Basle, and others who believed in a direct interior
communion with God, analogousto the inspiration ofthe prophets.
Nabia.—Seership, soothsaying. This oldest and most respected of
mystic phenomena, is the name given to prophecy in the Bible, and is
correctly included among the spiritual powers, such as divination, clair
voyant visions, trance-conditions, and oracles. But while enchanters,
diviners,andeven astrologers are strictly condemnedin theMosaicbooks,
prophecy, seership, and nabia appear as the special gifts of heaven. In
early ages they were all termed Epoptai, the Greek word for seers, clair
voyants ; after which they were designated as Nebim, "the plural of
Nebo, the Babylonian god of wisdom." The kabalist distinguishes be
tween the seer and the magician; one is passive, the other active ; Nebi-
rah, is one who looks into futurity and a clairvoyant; Nebi-pocl,he who
possesses magicpowers. We notice that Elijah and Apollonius resorted
to the same means to isolate themselves from the disturbing influences
of the outer world, viz. : wrapping their heads entirely in a woolen
mantle : from its being an electric non-conductor we must suppose.
Occultist.—One whostudiesthevarious branches ofoccult science.
The term is used by the French kabalists (See Eliphas Levi's works).
Occultism embraces the whole range of psychological, physiological,
cosmical, physical, and spiritual phenomena. From the word occult,
hidden orsecret; applyingthereforeto thestudyoftheKabala, astrology,
alchemy, and all arcane sciences.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

XXXVIU BEFORE THE VEIL.
Pagan Gods.—This term gods is erroneously understood by most of
the reading public, to mean idols. The idea attached to them is not
that of something objective or anthropomorphical. With the exception
ofoccasionswhen "gods" meaneither divine planetary entities (angels),
or disembodied spirits of pure men, the term simply conveys to the
mind of the mystic—whether Hindu Hotar, Mazdean Mage, Egyptian
hierophant, or disciple of the Greek philosophers—the idea of a visible
or cognized manifestation of an invisible potency of nature. And such
occult potencies are invoked under the appellation of various gods, who,
for the time being, are personatingthese powers. Thus every one ofthe
numberless deities of the Hindu, Greek, and Egyptian Pantheons, are
simplyPowersofthe "Unseen Universe." When theofficiatingBrahman
invokes Aditya—who, in her cosmic character, is the goddess-sun—he
simply commands that potency (personified in some god), which, as he
asserts, "resides in the Mantra, as the sacred Vdch" These god-powers
are allegorically regarded as the divine Hotars of the Supreme One;
while the priest (Brahman) is the human Hotar who officiates on earth,
and representingthat particularPowerbecomes, ambassador-like, invested
with thevery potency which he personates.
Pitris.—It is generally believed that the Hindu term Pitris means
the spirits of our direct ancestors; of disembodied people. Hence the
argument of some spiritualists that fakirs, and other Eastern wonder
workers, are mediums; that they themselves confess to being unable to
produce anything without the help of the Pitris, of whom they are the
obedient instruments. This is in more than one sense erroneous. The
Pitris are not the ancestors of the present living men, but those of the
human kind or Adamic race; the spirits ot human races which, on the
great scale of descending evolution, preceded our races of men, and
were physically, as well as spiritually, far superior to our modern pig
mies. In Manava-Dharma-Sastra they are called the Lunarancestors.
Pythia, or Pythoness.—Webster dismisses the word very briefly by
saying that it was the name of one who delivered the oracles at the
Temple of Delphi, and "any female supposed to have the spirit of
divination in her—a witch" which is neither complimentary, exact, nor
just. A Pythia, upon the authority of Plutarch, Iamblichus, Lamprias,
and others, was a nervous sensitive; she was chosen from among the
poorest class, young and pure. Attached to the temple, within whose
precincts she had a room, secluded from every other, and to which no
one but the priest, or seer, had admittance, she had no communications
with the outside world, and her life was more strict and ascetic than that
of a Catholic nun. Sitting on a tripod of brass placed over a fissure in
the ground, through which arose intoxicating vapors, these subterranean---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. XXXIX
exhalations penetrating her whole system produced the prophetic mania.
In this abnormal state she delivered oracles. She was sometimes called
ventriloqua vates,* the ventriloquist-prophetess.
Theancients placed the astralsoul ofman, tyuw or his self-conscious
ness, in the pit of the stomach. The Brahmans shared this beliefwith
Plato and other philosophers. Thus we find in the fourth verse of the
second NQbhdnedishtha Hymn it is said : "Hear, O sons of the gods
(spirits) one who speaks through his navel (nabha) for he hails you in
your dwellings! "
Many of the Sanscrit scholars agree that this belief is one of the
most ancient among the Hindus. The modern fakirs, as well as the an
cient gymnosophists, unite themselves with their Atman and the Deity
by remaining motionless in contemplation and concentrating theirwhole
thought on their navel. As in modern somnambulic phenomena, the
navel was regarded as " the circle ofthe sun," the seat ofinternal divine
light.f Is the fact ofa number of modern somnambulists being enabled
to read letters, hear, smell, and see, through that part of their body to
be regarded again as a simple " coincidence," or shall we admit at last
that the old sages knew something more ofphysiological and psycholo
gical mysteries than our modern Academicians? In modern Persia,
when a "magician" (often simply a mesmerizer) is consulted upon oc
casions oftheft and other puzzling occurrences, he makes his manipu
lations over the pit of his stomach, and so brings himself into a state of
clairvoyance. Among the modern Parsis, remarks a translator of the
Rig-vedas, there exists a belief up to the present day that their adepts
have a flame in their navel, which enlightens to them all darkness and
discloses the spiritual world, as well as all things unseen, or at a dis
tance. They call it the lampof the Deshtur, or high priest; the light
of the Dikshita (the initiate), and otherwise designate it by many other
names.
Samothraces.—A designation ofthe Fane-gods worshipped at Samo-
thracia in the Mysteries. They are considered as identical with the Ka-
beiri, Dioskuri, and Korybantes. Their names were mystical—denoting
Pluto, Ceres or Proserpina, Bacchus, and ^Esculapius or Hermes.
Shamans, or Samaneans.—An order ofBuddhists among the Tartars,
especially those of Siberia. They are possibly akin to the philosophers
* See Pantheon: "Myths," p. 31; also Aristophanesin "Voestas," i., reg. 28.
f The oracleofApollowasat Delphos,the cityof the Stkfvs, womborabdomen;
theplace of the temple was denominated the omphalos or navel. The symholsare
female and lunary; reminding us that the ArcadianswerecalledProseleni, pre-Helle-
nic or more ancient than the period when Ionian and Olympian lunar worship was
introduced.---PAGE BREAK------PAGE BREAK---

xl BEFORE THE VEIL.
anciently known as Brachmancs, mistaken sometimes for Brahmans.*
They are all magicians, or rather sensitives or mediums artificially devel
oped. At present those who act as priests among the Tartars are gen
erally very ignorant, and far below the fakirs in knowledge and educa
tion. Both men and women may be Shamans.
Soma.—This Hindu sacred beverage answers to the Greek ambrosia
or nectar, drunk by the gods of Olympus. A cup of kykeaikwas also
quaffed by the mysta at the Eleusinian initiation. He who drinks it
easily reaches Bradhna, or place of splendor (Heaven). The soma-
drink known to Europeans is not the genuine beverage, but its substi
tute ; for the initiated priests alone can taste of the real soma; and
even kings and rajas, when sacrificing, receive the substitute. Haug
shows by his own confession, in his Aytareya Brahmanan, that itwasnot
the Soma that he tasted and found nasty, but the juice from the roots of
the Nyagradha, a plant or bush which grows on the hills of Poona. We
were positively informed that the majority of the sacrificial priests of the
Dekkan have lost the secret of the true soma. It can be found neither
in the ritual books nor through oral information. The true followers of
the primitiveVedic religion are veryfew ; these are the alleged descend
ants from the Rishis, the real Agnihotris, the initiates of the great
Mysteries. The soma-drink is also commemorated in the Hindu Pan
theon, for it is called the King-Soma. He who drinks of it is made to
participate in the heavenly king, because he becomes filled with it, as
the Christian apostles and their converts became filled with the Holy
Ghost, and purified of their sins. The soma makes a new man of the
initiate ; he is reborn and transformed, and his spiritual nature over
comes the physical ; it gives the divine power of inspiration, and devel
ops the clairvoyant faculty to the utmost. According to the exoterir
explanation the soma is a plant, but, at the same time it is an angel.
It forcibly connects the inner, highest "spirit" ofman, which spirit is an
angel like the mystical soma, with his "irrational soul," or astralbody,
and thus united by the power of the magic drink, they soar together
above physical nature, and participate during life in the beatitude and
ineffable glories of Heaven.
Thus the Hindu soma is mystically, and in all respects the same that
the Eucharistic supper is to the Christian. The idea is similar. By
* From theaccountsofStrabo and Megasthenes, whovisited Palibothras, it would
seem that the persons termed byhim Samanean, or Brachmane priests, were simply
Buddhists. "Thesingularlysubtilerepliesof the Samaneanor Brahman philosophers,
in their interviewwith the conqueror, will be found tocontain the spirit ofthe Bud
dhist doctrine," remarks Upham. (See the "History and Doctrine of Buddhism;"
and Hale's "Chronology," vol. ill., p. 238.)---PAGE BREAK---

BEFORE THE VEIL. xli
means of the sacrificial prayers—the mantra

*[1434 pages in source — text truncated at 100000 characters]*