ROLL


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Microfilm Publication M887


RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES
NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)
NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUGUST 20, 1947

Roll 2

Transcript Volumes (English Version)

Volumes 1-3 '

Nov. 21, 1946-Jan. 6, 1947


THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION


WASHINGTON: 1974


INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced
the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings, prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.

The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the '
tribunal.


The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the
transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,
1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as .the


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IMTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crimes Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before
several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of


Occupation

in Germany against

officials or citizens

of the Third

Reich, as

follows:

—

No. of

Case No.

United States v.

Popular Name

Defendants

1

Karl Brandt et al.

Medical Case

23

2

Erhard Milch

Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)

1

3

Josef Altstcetter
et al.

Justice Case

16

4

Oswald Pohl et al.

Pohl Case (SS)

18

5

Friedrich Flick
et al.

Flick Case
(Industrialist)

6

6

Carl Krauch et al.

I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)

24

•

7

Vilhelm List et al.

Hostage Case

12

8

Ulrich Greifelt
et al.

RuSHA Case (SS)

14

9

Otto Ohlendorf
et al.

Einsatzgruppen

Case (SS)

24

10

Al fried Krupp
et al.

Krupp Case
(Industrialist)

12

11

Ernst von
Weizsaecker et al.

Ministries Case

21

12

Wilhelm von Leeb
et al.

High Command Case

. 14


Authority for the proceedings of the International Military
Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,

1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stemmed mainly from
Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7 and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24, 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The crimes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the m urder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and*skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.

The following medical experiments were conducted:

1. High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure
on persons. .

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extcmely low
temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature
of the disease.

4. Mustard gas: part of a general research program in gas
warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
muscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.

7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the
disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.

9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.

11. Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus
bums.

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these
experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive
by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass
extermination camps.

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration
camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments
of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: ^Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskotanissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reich Commissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the Reichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).

Kurt Blome: Deputy [of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei .

(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef des Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des\
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chi<^f
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Policed.

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager —
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zwcckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer^in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts.der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

•

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehx'er
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Waldemar Hoven: Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Maffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Army), and Chef des Kehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).


O

j


V


Hermann Becker-Freyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe. .

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtnedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).

5


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Army, and Amtschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Reich Conanissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetswcsens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation.

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokomy: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged
participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.

The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of-defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blone, Pokomy, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Weltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Hand loser. Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Obcrhcuser, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬
ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11538. The German-
langyage transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-117S6. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus letter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunaT.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reichegeeetzblatt (the
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number


6


NATIONAL A R C H I \ KS MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits
is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are Followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:


Exhibit No.

Doc. No.

Exhibit No.

Doc. No

301

NO-1314

410

NO-158

307

NO-120

441

NO-1730

309

NO-131

443

NO-890

310

NO-132

451

NO-732

357

1696 PS

462

NO-1424

362

628 PS

507

NO-365

368

. NO-817

546

N0-3347

403

616 PS

\

\


\

No certificate is attached to several exhibits, including
exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by 519a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper
clippings, reports, personnel records, Reiohegeeetzblatt ex ccrpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.

The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numhors, biased
descriptions,“and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
pleas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


scheme. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies
to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few German-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filmed key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these documents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These documents are followed by the transcript covers giving
such information as name and number of case, volume numbers,
language, page numbers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit number and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which' can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case are closely related to other
microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;

NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, Til 19; N'G (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M895.

In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major War Criminals
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Triale of War Criminals Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Council Law No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.

8


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory remarks and arranged
the records for microfilming in collaboration with George Chalou.


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 2
Target 1

Volume 1

Nov. 21-Dec. 12, 1946


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


CASE No. 1 TRIBUNAL I
U.S. vi KARL BRANDT et al
VOLUME 1


TRANSCRIPTS

(English)


21 November-12 December 1946 pp. 01-039,1-364


OFFICIAL T-TAWCiilFT OF THE UILI7.J1Y TPIBOH..L

nr ns r-.T“za of the uhitzo 6t..tes of aasac*

AGAIBST 5L.RL 3ru»}<DT ST .A, K5FSFD..HTS,
SIT2HG -T OS'JO.Hi, OK 21 M0VEKR3

19*16, 1000-1110, JUSTICE BE.VLS KS5IDIHG.


21 S'v-r-OSS-Bc«J"*
Cfnrt 1.


c'.uao now jending bef re this.Tribunal. <.s the nanos f tho defendants
urc os Had oach defondant will stand, and will remain standing until
trld tr bo soated. Mr. Secretary Oonorol of tho Tribunal will oall
tho roll of tho defendants. . r

(The Soorotarv Genoralj Kn.iL BILJfDT, SH!GF2I$D IL-NDLCSEk, PAUL
P06TCCK, OSKAP SCHPCEDE;*, k.-vL GENZKEN, KAPL GEBEAWr/ KlUfT BLCItE,
HUDOLF BA.t v D7, JOACHIM KJSJGCHSKY, HEIKUT POPFEKUIC*'. *70X7.lull SIEVERS,
OEPHAI© HOSE, SIEGFRIED PUFF, HaKS VOLFGaXG IKZSBSiG, VICTOR Biu.CK,
FEtS'j.K!! BEC5CE'C-FIEiSSKG, OEOPG AUGUST TEUZ, KOir_.D SCHuEFSt, VOLDEMAR
ROVSK, HILSSJJ! BEIGISBCECK, ..rOLF P03C0UH*, KESTA 0BE2HEU8EP, FMTZ
FISCHZ't.

7HZ SECPET..:a CElCL.Li Th? H n-rcblo Tribunal, plonso, all of tho

dof'ndnnts are in the d cfc. r\

| )

THE P.\ SIDEHTi Tho defendants will be seated. &


T5ki c unsol f'r tho Pr-c-'cuti n will aw ;>r«.*cood with the r.rraign-
nont f t‘o defendants.


GENERAL T..iL0;:i Th*. United States f Ancrloa, by the undorsipned
To 1 ford Taylor, Chief f C unsol f r "ir Crinos, duly opj-ointod t-
roj ros nt s i'’ G -.^rnnent in tho ; r'socuti-n f war criminals, charges
that thr defendants heroin participated in o C m n 'Xisign ,r Cen-
spirocy t e mit on. 4 , did emit Tar Crlrrs an-' Crinos against Humanity,
ns 'ofined in Control C ur.cil Lew Ho. 10, duly enacted by tho allied


C ntr 1 Cmnoil n 20 December 1945. Th.sa crimes includo nurdors.


brutalitiis, cruoltios, t rturos


tr cities, nd ither inhumno acts


end Throe f this Indictment. Certain


charge*' with membership in Criminal Organ


ers ns. accused cs guilty of these crir. *s and accordingly


ts/n this cause arcs


01 -


■- 2


21 Hovonbe r-l!-PSS -1-2-Beard
Court H-'i 1»


K/,^L 3:jjPDT - Pors n.nl hvslcien to ,:ud If ^itlcr, Gru'penfuohror
in tho SS «n* Gonornllcutnant in the Taffon SS; Reich C'-raissienor fer
her. 1th aw! Sanitation; and cazzbat of tho Reich Resoarch Counoil.

SIEGFRIED P.d'DLQSEK - Gonoral .borstebserrt; I'odical Insiwetcr :f tho

..rnv; an'’ Chiof rf tho Modicol Services of tho Arnod Forces.

^ •

PAUL .CSTCKX - Chief Surgeon of tho Surcicol Clinic in Berlin;
Surgical ,.dvia r to the Amy; and Chief :f tho Office for 1'odicnl
Scionco and Roscarch under the defendant j>rl Brandt, Aoioh Cntnissi 'nor
f r Hoalth and Sanitati.n.

OSKi»:; SCR..CEIS:{ - Goneralcborstobsnrxt; Chief of Staff of tho I n -
siGcUmto cf tho I'odicol Sorvico f tho Loftvnffo; nnd Chief f tho
Medico! Scrvica . f tho Luftwnffq.

K...iL G2 ZKENt- Gruj ;.onfu«.hror in tho SS nnd Gonornlloutnant in tho
•Voffen SS nnd Chi-.f f the !' dioal Oosartrxmt f the VToffor SS.

KJu<L G?.BH.J:DT - Gnr ; .’cnfuohrcr in tho SS ond Gonornlloutnant in
tho "inffon SS; Tars- n-’l v^yslcian t' RcichsfUchror SS Hinrelor; Chiof
Surge - n >f tha Staff of tho Reich Physician SS end P< lieo; and
sidont rf tho Gom-.n Red Cross.

KURT BLa*2 - Doputy .Raich Health Lcodor; nnd Plenipotentiary
Concor ‘.tosoorch in tho Roioh Research C uncil.

RUDOLF B uiKDT - Stnndnrtcnfuohror in tho /.llgonoino SS; Tors >nnl
dni ni s t r n t i vo Officor t Rciclisfuohrcr S^ Hirrr.lor; nnd Rinistoriol
C inscllor and Chief f tho Tinistorial Office in tho Roich Ministry f
the In tori’ r.

ja.CPI?' MiJ!Ga.*SKY - Gbcrfuchror in the T.bffon SS; Chief Hygienist
f the Raich Physicicr SS an J 1 1 .lice; and Chiof • f tho Itygionic In¬
stitute f tho TTaffon SS. .

FEU*CT rOFrpDICK - Oborfuchror in tho SS and Chief f the rcrscnol
Staff f ^ Reich Physician SS '.nd ?-licc.

OLPRAV SIZr/RRS - Standartenfuchrer in tho SS; lei eh’'mager f the
"Ahnonorbo" S:ciety and Direct r cf its Institute f r * ilifcry Scientific
•• search; nd Deputy Chsirrm f the Pnnaging B'nrd 'f Direct rs of the
\ ich -.0search C uncil.


- 02 -


21 H-’T-I!-G2S-1-3-2c=7*
C'urt V». 1.


GBSHnSD ?.OSS - Gcneralcrrt of the Luftwaffe; Vico rrosi'*ont, Chiof
„f tho Dorertrent f r Tropical ’Indicia), hd i r. foss r of tho A.'bort K»‘ch
Institute; and Hygienic ..dviacr for Trricnl ’lodicino t-' the Chiof ..f tho
y dionl Service f the luftwoffo.

SEGFTJSD "3JFF - Direct.r cf tho Department for Aviati.-.n Medicine at

?£

tho Gcraan Ex; oriental Institute for aviation.

7OTTG..NG r.CKBSnG - D. cter n tho Staff f tho Dopnrtmont f^r
;.viati n KcdScino ot th' Gerncr. 2x;orinont» 1 Inatituto for yavioti^n.

"ICTOE E.-.CK - Obcrfuohrcr in tho SS ond Stumbannftiohror in tho
7nffon SS; and Chief odainiatrr.tivo Officor in tho Chancellory •'f the
Fuehrer « f tho NSDAP.

HETJIAHN BECKS’.:-FES TSENG - Stnbsnrit in tho Luftwaffe; and Chiof 'f

% • •

tho Doprtmnt f r Avinti n V'-dicino of tho Chiof f tho Mj-lioal Sorvico
rf tho Luftwnffo.

GSOSG ..UGUS? TLTZ - Oborfoldartt in tho Luftwffo; ond Chiof «»f

^—»— m. W

thf Inatituto f<r Arioti n l odicino in Lunich.

Jtour-J) SCF..EFET. - D. cter n tho Stnff f tha ‘nstitutc f->r Aviation

^cdicino in Berlin.

'T.tLDB.lL. » MO’S- HeuptatumlXiohror in tho "nffon SS; and Chief


l - ^uj’mumiucnror in wiu .uj av.i og, \/4»

Deotor of tlw Buchonwnld C-ncontroti n Con;. ^. |J

TILHEL' BSIGLS3CECK - C naullinr rhyeioion to tha Luftwnffo.. \y


i.DOLF ro.cxa.n - rhyaicicn, Specialist in Skin orfi V ncrol Diaonaca.
HT.'.T.. 03EI;HEUSS:. - Physician at tho Ar.vcnsbruck C ncontroti n Cum; ;
nd assistant Physician t. tho dofondnnt Gobhnrdt at the Hospital ot
v b-'nlvch n.

FIITZ FISCKS*. - Stur-ibnnnrti hrer in tho ..hffon SS; and Assistant
Physicinn t • th defendant Gobhr.rdt at th- H■ s; itr.l at Hchi-nlyohon.

COOUT 0!S - THE CG’/OK DESIGN Oi COiCS: Il’u.CY
1. B^twcon Spotenbor 1939 end April 1945 all -f tho defendants horo-
in f noting .ursuant t . e rr., n design, unlawfully, wilfully, and knowing¬
ly did c ia, iro and ngreo t gothor and with oach thor and with divers
thor ; rs ns, t c nit . ir Crimes an-’ Crises against Humanity, is 1o-
finad in C ntr 1 C uncil Law Kr. 10, .'.rticlo II.


21 N ov-li-GSS-l-i,- re a r d


(.*?) •

2. Throughout the period covered by this Indictment a11 of the

defendants bore in, ~ctirg in concert with <-r.ch other and with others,

" ' • 0 *
unlawfully, -.liliuliy, and knowingly were rinciaals in, ccess.rios to,

r ‘ur«i., abetted, took c emsontinr part in, an! wore connected tiith
pl-ns and ^ntor'riscs involving the c~missian f Vftir Crimes nd Crimes
against Humanity,

3. ;J1 of thu defendants heroin, acting in concert with others for
whose acts the defendants are responsible unl-wfully, wilfully-, an’
knowing participate , as loaders, organizers, instigators, an. -ccomp-
licos in tho formulation and execution ;f the said cocor>n dosi,n, con¬
spiracy, plans and enterprises to co-rait, mi. which involve*, tho com¬
mission of, Ver Crimes and Crimes igainst Hum'nity.

4. It was a. part of tho said cocnon design, conspiracy, plans and
enterprises to perform radical experiments upon c.ncuntratijn camp
inrv'tus and othor living human subjects, without thoir consent, in the
course -f vihich experiments tho defendants c nmitted. tho murders,
brutalities, cruelties, tortures, an! other inhumane acts, taorc fully
■doscribod in Counts Two and Throe f the Indictment.

5. Tho said cxraon design , conspiracy, plans and ontorprisos
embraced the comission of War Crimes an.' Crimes against Humanity, as
sot forth in Counts Two an! Throe >t this In'ictnont, in that the
defendants unlawfully, w ilfully, .and knowingly onc-mragod, aided,
abettod, and participated in tho subjoct of thousands of pors>n3,
including civilians, an:’ members f the .armo’* forces of nations then
•at war with thu German Re*ich, t. murders, brutalities, cruelties,
tortures, .atrocities, ~nd. other inhumane rets. c


21 f.'r-J'-JP-Gr 88-2-1- (GSS)

Coirt H-. 1*

COUHT TT.'O - TwI t CAIISS .

6. Bo twoon September 1939 and April 1945 all * f the dofendonts hero¬
in unlawfully, wilfully, and kn-win*lv ccenittod ".'or Crimes, os dofinod
Y" ,j*ticlc II f C- ntr 1 C. unoil Law «. . 10, in that thoy woro principals,
in, occoss' rio6 t , ' rdcrod, abottod, tork n c-nsonting ,ert in, and were
o nnuctcd with pl h n« and enterprises involving nodical experiments with-
ut thj subjoct'a c.-naont, upon civilians and nonbora f tho ormod forces
,-f natims thon ot war with tho German .toich and who woro in tho custody
f the Garmon Itoich in oxorciso f bclligoront control, in tho c urso of
which ex;orinonts tho dolbwients ccrcittod murders, brutnlitioa, cruoltioa,
t-rtudos, atr cities, and th r inhureno acts. Such experiments includod,
but vrero n't lisiitod to, the following:

(a) HIGH ..LTITTiDE £XI7.:.IlS?frS . Fr n ebrut larch 1942 t ab *ut August
1942 ox. orirwnts u. ro o nductort nt tho Dachau C noontrati n Cnnp for tho
bonofit - f tho Goman Air Forco t investigate tho limits f human ondur-
nco nn<* oxistor.co at oxtrcnolv high altitudes. Tho oxporinvntB woro
enrriod ut in i lew-prossuro ch nbor in whioh tho ntr. aphorio c-'nditi:na
and pres sums ;rovniling nt high cltitu?lo (u; t' 68,000 foot) c uld bo
dufHooted. The experimental aubjoots woro placed in tho 1
chnnbor and thoronftcr the simulated cltitudo therein was rnisod.
victim died as a result f those uxj orinonts nnd thor sufforod gravo in¬
jury, t rture, end ill treatment. Thu dofbndnnts Krrl Brandt, Kandlooer,
Schr oder, Gcbhnrdt, ftid.'lf Brandt, Lrug wsky, Foppondiefc, Sievors, :{uff,

... nb-rg, Bcckor-Froyacng, ondiTdltr aro eh: rged with siociol rasicn6ibility
fer and participation in those crir.os.

(3) FISEZING 2X1E..IIGKTS . Fr m cb-.vt ..ugust 19<:2 t- about Hay 1943
ux;orirvnts wore c nduoted ot the Dachau C ncontrnti< n Cnnp jrinurily f r
tho benefit cf tho Goman -iir Force t investigate tho m st offoctivo
n-jans f tracking ; orsens wh had bcon severely chilled r fr. zon. In *nc
sorios rf experiments the subjects wore forced t< renuin in n tank >f ico
wntor f r peri ids up tr threo hurs. Sxtrcrc rigor dovolopod in o sh rt
tin-:. Jhimr us victims died in tho c< urso f these experiments. After tho
sur~iv-'rs were severely chilled, roweming w^s attonptud by vnri us moons.
In -.r.'ther series of experiments.


05 -


21 Nov-M-Jr-2-2-Gross (GSS)
C urt K°» 1.


tho subject woro leapt nnkon rutdoora f .r many h.urs ot tenporeturcs bo ldm
freezing. Tho victims screamed with gein 3 * ports of thoir b^dios fr jzo.
Th- *c fondants Karl Erendt, E~nd loser, Schrxxlor, Gcbhnrdt, Ihidolf Brandt,
Hnignwsky, Foppondick, Siovors, Bcckor-'Frcysong, and 77oltz arc charged
.with a;oeial rosn'nsibility for and participation in thoso crimes.

(C) E.L.ItL. SKTZliIliZyrS Fren ab-ut February 1942 to nbmt April
1045 experiments w^-rc conducted at the Dachau Cone ntrntion Camp in order
tr investigate irounization for and trootmont of celaria. Hoolthy oon-
cnntrnti ,, n camp inmatos w ro infoctod by rusquitros or by injeoti.ns. of
oxtrnots f the acus glands nf nesquitoes. Aftor having contraoted
malaria the subjects wero treotod with vnri us drugs t tost thoir roln-
tivo officnoy. Over 1,000 inv. luntary subjocte vr re usod in exporimonts.


Honv "f tho victims diod on* others sufforod sovero join and jormnnont dis¬
ability. The defendants Karl Brandt, Hnndlcscr, dostcck,, Gobhnrdt, Blcne,
*Jud If Brandt, Urug wsky, rnppondiok, and Siovoro oro oWpid with oj»oniol
responsibility f• r and participation in thoso critaos.

(D) LCST (MDST^.S) GAS EXT 5. DENTS . At vari us tines botwoon Sopt-
onber 1939 and. April 1945 experiments woro c. nductcd at Snehsonhnuson/^
Motzwoilor, and -thcr concentration carq ^ fer tho benefit 1 f tho Gornj»^i Jy
Armed Fircos t> investigate tho most effective trontnont of w.-unds enupod


by L* at pas. Lost i'rrg\iscn gas which is ccrw'nly kn wn ns Mustard gas.

V. inds doliborutoly inflictod <-fc the subjects wore infoctod with Lrst.

S mo *f tho subjects died o 6 a rosult f theso ox;orirwnts ond -thors

sufforod intense join and injury. Tho defendants Karl Brandt, Hondlosor,

•

31«nc, aoatrok, Gobhardt, l.Mdclf Brr.ndt, and Siovors oro charged with
special responsibility f r and participation in theso crimes.

(E) SULFAKILJTEE EXTE.J!T.?TS . Fr>-n ab-ut July 1942 t> ob'ut Sopt-
cnhi r 1943 experiments t' investigate th; effectiveness <■? sulfanilamide
wore c m’uctod ot tho lirvonsbruck C ncontr.iti n C'-ng f r tho bonofit f
the Gormn Arnod F rcos. *•» unds doliboratoly inflicted n tho experimental
subjects were infoctod with bacteria such ns strc. t.c- ecus, gas gnngrono,
and totenus. Circuloti n f bl<- d was interrupted by tying off blood
v-sscls at b' th onls f


- 06 -


21 N^v-M-JT-Or. ss 2-3- (G3S)
C-urt » . 1. '


tho w und to create a condition sinilar t that .-f a bnttlcfiuld n -und.
Infocti m was aggravated by forcing wood shavings and gr und glass into
thf w unde. Tho infection ins treated with sulfnnilanido and other dhlgfi
t ‘ct-rnino thair effectiveness. S-wac subjects died ns n result of those
experiment* and -thers sufforod sorius injury end intense agony. Tho de¬
fendants Knrl Brandt, Handlosor, ucst ck, Schroodor, Gonskon, Gobhnrdt,
Blow, itudclf Brnndt, llrugewskv, Toppondick, Bcckor-Froysong, Oborhousor,
end Fischer arc charged with speoial responsibility for and participation
in those crimes.


(F) BONE, ?iUSCIZ, AND XSAVE .SGSHSLiATIOF ,,IO 30NS Tlt/.ftSPLAHTATIOK


EXrs:;PSWTS . Fr n obout Scp.tonbcr 1942 t tfb ut Docombor 19-13 oxpcrlncnto
wore c.niuotod at the «av onsbnick Concentration Conn for tho bonofit of
the Gor-nn Armed Forces t study bone, muscle, and norvo rogonoratiyn,
and b no transplantation fr n no parson t. on-thcr. Socti_ns of bones,
nusclcs, and norvos woro ron rod frnfto subjocts. As a rosult rf tho so
pcrati'ns, many victims suffered intonso agony, mutilation, and pornnnunt
dlsobility. 4 ho do fondants Karl Brandt, Hnndlosor, Rostock, Gobhardt,


fad.-lf Brnn-'t, Oborhausor, and Fischor oro chorgod with spooial res


ponsibility for and participation in thoso crimes.

(G) SEA'YmSK EXM-lrtllCKTS . ' Fran about July 1944 to about Soptombor


19-M experiments woro c.nduotod at tho Baohnu Cancontrnti-n Cunp for tho
• •

bonofit of tho Gorrnn Air Forco and Kavy t study vari us nothcris f
making soowntor rtrinknblo. Tho subjects woro doprivod of all foed and
given •nly chemically processed seawater. Such oxporiments causod groat
pain end suffering and resulted in sorltus bodily injury to tho viotims.
Tho dofcndant3 Earl 3ran!t, Handlesor, •••'stock, Schrcodor, Gobhardt,

• 4 ' Brandt, llrugowsky, Foppcndick, Sievers, Bcckcr-Froysong, Sohoofor,
:ir/ Bciglobock aro chargod with spooial responsibility f-r and partici¬


pation in thoso crimes.


-• IEE?!IC J,. T JhTICS 3LI 5r.I? l SH l TS . Fr n obout Juno 1943 t- about
January 19*15 experiments were conducted at the Snehsonhuuson and Natt-
woilor Concentration Camps for tho bonofit of the German Armed Forces to
investigate tho causes of, and in-culoti ns against, cp-idonic jaundico.
Exporlrwntal subjocts were


- 07 -


21 Scr _K_JP_3-4_C-tcs« (FlC)
Court I


deliberately infected with epidemic Jhundice, seme of whom died as a
result» and othere vert caused gfeat pain an*' Suffering. The defendant
Karl Brandt, Handloeer, Boetock, Schtcedor, Gebhardt; Rudolf Brandt,
Mrugovskyi Pcppondick, Sievers, Boeei and Bccker-Freyseng are charged
with special responsibility for ahd participation in theee crimes.

(I) STi^E 11! NATICK IXfh&IMUTS. From about March 19*1 to about
January 19*5 sterilization experiments ve-e conducted at the Auschwitz
and Bavettsbruck Concentration Ca-ps, and other places. The purpose of
thcoe experiments -as to develop a method of sterilization which voulb
be suitable for sterilising millions of pooplo with a minimus of time
and offort. These experiments were conducted by means of X-Bay, sur¬
gery, and various drugs. Thousands of victims were otorlllzed. and
thereby suffered groat mental and physical anguish. The defendants
Karl Brandt, Gebhardt, Budolf Brandt, Mrugovsky, Poppendick, Brack,
Pokorny, and Cborhausor aro charged with special responsibility
participation in those crimes.

(J) SPOTTED IkYUt V XP aiMkaiTS. From about December 19*1 to

Fobruary 19*5 oxporlaents were conducted at the Buchcnvold and b'atzvoller

•

Concentration Casco for the boneflt of the German Armed Forces to In¬
vestigate the effectiveness of spotted favor and other vaccines. At

•

Buchonwnld numerous healthy lnsatcs were deliberately lnfoctod with
spotted fever virus in order to keep the virus alive; over 90$ of the
victims died as s result. Other healthy inmates were used tc dotonnino
the effectiveness of different spotted fever vaccines and of various
chemical substances. In the course of these experiments 7S/t of the
selected number of Inmates were vaccinated with one "f the vaccines
or nourished with one of the chemical substances and, after a rcrlod of
three to four weeks, wc-e Infected with spotted- fever gems. T^e remain¬
ing 25* were Infected without previous protection'in order to compare the

effectiveness of the vaccines and the chemical substances. Ao a result,

%

hundred.3 of the persons experimented upon died. BxperiEcnts with yellow

fever, smallpox, typhus, para typhus A and 3, cholera, and diphtheria

were alao conducted.. Similar experiments with like results were con¬
ducted at Batxvellcr 09


21 Sot -K-J?-2-4_Ctcss (F.lC)
Court I


*


deliberately Infected with cpldealc jaundice, seme of whoa died aa a
result, and others were caused gfeat pain an* suffering. The defendant
Karl arandt, Hendlcser, Rostock, Schtoeder, GebhaTdtj Hudolf 3randt,
•*rugovsky, Fcppondiek, Sicvers, Rosei and 3ccker-Irey 8 eng are charged
with special responsibility for and participation In thes6 crimes.


(I)


From about March 19*1 to about


January 19*5 sterilisation experiments wc-e conducted at the Auschwitz
and Ravensbruck Concentration Camps, and other places. The purpose of
these experiments was to develop a method of sterilisation which woulb


be suitable for sterilising millions of peoplo with a minimum of time
and effort. Those experiments wore conducted by moans of X-Ray, sur¬
gery, and raVldna drugs. Thousands of victims were sterilised and
thereby suffered groat mantel and physical anguish. The defendants
Karl Brandt, Gcbhardt, Rudolf Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendlck, Brock,


Pokorny, and Oborhausor oro charged with special responsibility
participation In these crises.

(J) SFOTM) lhVkR V XP KRr.lKSTS. From about Docoaber 19*1 to bbcu£
Fobrunry 19*5 oxporlments wero conducted, at the Buchcnwold and Hat«w©ller
Concentration Carnes for the benefit of the C-orman Armed Forces to In¬
vestigate the effectiveness of spotted fevor and other vaccineo. At
Buchenwold numerous healthy Inmates were deliberately lnfoctcd with
spotted fever virus In order to keep the virus alive; over 90 /> of the
victims died as a result. Other healthy Inmates were used to detormlno
the effectiveness of different spotted fever vaccines and of various
chemical substances. In the course of these experiments 75,* of the
selected number of Inmates were veccinatcd with one of the vaccines
or nourished with one of the chemical substances and, after a rcriod of
throe to foir-weeks, we-e infected with spotted, fover germs, ^hc remain¬
ing 25^ we*- c Infected without previous protection'In ord.er to compare the
effectiveness of the vaccines and the chemical substances. A 3 a result,
hundreds of the persona experimented upon died. Bxperlmtr.tc with yellow
fever, smallpox, typhus, para typhus A and 3, cholera, and diphtheria


were also conducted. Similar experiments with like results were con¬
ducted at Katrwcller 06


21 I. jv-ii- J?-Gr o ss-2- 5-


Conoentr'-tion C'cr*. The defendants K-rl Brandt, Hrr. loser, Rostock,

*

Schr-edor, Genzkon, Gobhardt, Rudolf Brandt Hrugowsky, Pappon.'ick>
_iuv_rs, ?. .so, J-ckur-Freysung, and Hovcn ".r\> ch rcod with apocial
ruor- risibility far and participation in thosu crimes*

(X) ^P- .^'jL' j TS uTTH FOI33:: . In or about December 1943 end in or
about October 1944 experiments were conducted at the Bucherrwald Con¬


centration Crap to investigate the affect Of various poisons upon human
beings* The poisons wore secretly administered to experimental subjects
in their food. The victims died as a result of the poison or wore killed
immediately in order to permit autopsies. In or about September 1944
expcrla-ntal subjects won- shot with poiacn bullets and suffered torture
ard death. Tho defendants Genzken, Gebhardt, Lrugcwsky, and Poppondick
are charged with special responsibility for and participation in those
crimes.

•

(L) INCaM ilARY B0i3 RXP£RI1L3.TS . Frcra about Novorabor 1943 to about
January 1944 oxporimonts werv conducted at the Buchenwald Concentration
Comp to test tho effect of various phamacoutical preparations on
phosphorus burns. Those burns wore inflicted on toq>orimuntnl subjocts
with phosphorus matter taken fraa incendiary txnbs, and caused aovuro
p\in, suffering, and aorious bodily injury. The defendants Gonzkan,
Gobhardt, lirugowsky, and Poppcr.diclc are charged with fecial
responsibility fer and participation in these crimes. O


<7


09


21 Scv-H_GLS-3-l-Pcldt. (PJC)
Court 2


7. Between June 1943 and September 1&4* tho defendants Rudolf
Brandt and Sievers unlawfully, wilfully, and knowingly cornit ted War
Crimea, a* defined by Article II of Control Council Law ¥ 0 . 10, In that
they wort principal* In, accessories to; ordered, abetted, took a con¬
senting part In, and wore connected with plans and enterprises Involving
the aurdor of civilians and members of the araed forces of nations then
at war with the German Helch and who were in the custody of the German
Belch in exercise of belligerent control. One Hundred twelve Jews were
selected for the purpose of completing a skeleton collection for the Belch
University of Strasbourg. Their photographs and anthropological aeasuro-
sents were taken. Then they wero killed. Thereafter, cospurieon tests,
anatomical research, a*udlos regarding race, pathological foaturoo of the
bedy, form and oi*c of tho brain,, and other tests, were made. The bcdlos
wero sent to Strasbourg and dcflcshcd.


8. Between Hay 1942 ar.d January 1943 the defendants Blorac and Ru¬
dolf Brandt unlawfully, wilfully, and knowingly committed War Crloos, as
defined by Article II of Control Council Lpw Mo. 10, In that they wero
principals In, accossorlos to, ordorod, abetted, took a consenting part
In, and wore connoctod with plans and enterprises Involving the aurdor


and mistreatment of tons of thousands of Polish nationals who woro civi¬
lian and mentors of th© armed forces of a nation thon at war with tho
Gorman Rolch and who were In the custody of .the Goman Belch In exorcise


cf belligerent control. Those people wore allogod to be Infected with
lncursbl6 tuberculosis. On the group of Insuring the health and wolfaro
of Germans in Poland, many tubercular Poles-vere ruthlessly exterminated
while others wort isolated in death camps with Inadequate mcdical^atU-
tioo.

9. Between September 1939 and April 19^5 the defendants Kar^BrofSt


Bloc*, 3rack, and Heven unlawfully, wilfully, and knowingly committed War
Grimes, as defined by Article II of Control Council Low So.-10, In that
they were principals In, accessories to, ordered, abetted, took a consent¬


ing part In, and were connected with piano and enterprises involving the
execution of the so-called "euthanasia" program of the C-erman Reich In •


010


* v < course of which the


21 Nov-L'-GCS-3-2-Felct. (pkp)


defendants heroin murdered hundreds of thousands of human beings,
including nationals of German-occupied countries. This program involved
the systematic ard secret -xecution of the aged, insane, incurably ill,
if deforced children, end other persons, by *es, lethal injections, and
divers other -cans in nursing heems, hospitals, end asylums. Such norsons
wore regarded ns "useless eaters" end a burden to tho German war
machine. The rolntivos of these victims were informed that they died
from natural causes, such as heart failure. German doctors involved in
tho "outhanasia" >rograa wore also aunt to tho Eastern occupied countries
to assist in tho nrss oxteraiir.tion of Jews.

10. Tho said .'ex Crimes constitute violrti: ns of international con-
vontions, particularly of Articles 4,5,6,7, 'no 46 of the Haguo Regu¬
lations, 1907, nd of Articles 2,3, and 4 of tho ? r is oner-of-wrx Conv¬
ention (Gen-va, 1929), th» Laws and customs of war, tho gcrmrnl principles
of criminal law as derived from the criminal Laws of all civilized
nations, the internal penal lews of the countries in which such crimos
wor- committed, and pf Articlo II of Control Council Law Ho. 10.


11. &twoon Soptoeber 1939 c«S April 1945 11 of tho dofendants
herein unlawfully, \dlfully, and knowingly ccamittod Crimes -gainst
Humanity, as defied by Article II of Control Council Law No. 10, $T
that they were principals in, accessories to, ordurud, abutted, tdk a
cons-nting .x.rt in, and were connected with pi-ns erri enterprises involv¬
ing nodical experiments, without the s objects' consent, upon German
civilians and nationals of other countrios, in ttu course of which ex¬
periments defondants committed murders, brutalities, cruelties,
tortures, atrocities, rii other inhumane .acts. Thu particuLars concern¬
ing such expurixxnts -n» set forth in paragraph 6 of Count Two of this
Indictment and arc incorporated\»roin by reference.

12. Betncon June 1943 ^-nd September 1944 the defendants Rudolf
Brardt and Sivers unLr.cfully, wilfully, ‘nd knowingly comitt.d Crim-s
against Humanity, as d.fiixd by Article II of Control Council Law No.
iO, in that they wore principals in, -ccossories to, ordered, abetted,

9

took a consenting arrt


21 Bbv-K-GES-3-3-J®ldt (PJC)

Court I - *


la, and were connected with plans and enterprises Involving the nurdor
of German civilians and nationals of.other countries. The particular
concerning such rurders are set f'orth in Paragraph 7 of Count Tvo of
this Indictaont and are incorporated herein by reference.

13. Between Kay 1942 and January 1943 the defendants 31one and
Budclf Brandt unlawfully, wilfully, and knowingly connited Crimea against
Humanity, as defined by Article II of Control Council Law So. 10 , in
that they were principals in, accessories to, ordered, abetted took a
consenting port in, and. were connected with plans end enterprises involv¬
ing the murder and nic treat*) nt of tens of thousand of Folloh nationals.
7hc Particular# concerning such nurder and inhumane treatment are 00 t
forth in Paragraph 8 of the Count two of this Indictaont and are incor¬
porated herein by rcfercnco. "

14. Botween Septeobor 1939 and April 1945 the defendants J

Brandt, Bloao, Brack, Hovcn unlawfully, wilfully, and knowingly committed
Crinco against Humanity, 00 defined by Article II of Countrol Council Law
ir °* 10 * lc thM * wor * P^ncipalo in. occos.orloo to, ordered, abetted
took a consenting part in, and were connected with plans and enterprises
Involving the execution of the so-called "euthanasia" program of the
German Reich, in the course of which the defendants heroin murdered hund¬
reds of thousand, of human beings, including German civilians, ns well as
civilians of other nations. The particulars concerning such murders arc
act forth in Paragraph 9 of Count IWo of this Indictment and arc incor¬
porated herein by reference.

is. The !■!' Crl-es against Hasanltjr constltuc violation.-of Inter¬
national conventions, inducing Article 46 of the Hague Regulations, 160?,
the we nne caste of v«r, the genera! principle, of critical lav as

a

derived from the criminal lavo of all civil!, nations, the internal
renal lavs of the countries in which such cries were committed, and of
Article II of Control Council Lav So. 10 .

C "’ JOT FCUE — '—'3LP.SKIP Io CSLMISAL CRC-AJISATICN

16. The defendants Karl Brandt, Gtntkan, C-ebhardt, Rudolf Brandt,

*rugcw sky , Poppendick. Sierra. Brack. Hovon. and Ilschcr are guilty of

0*2


21 !tov-E-G3-3-VFcldt. ( : *p)


membership in an organization duel-red to b. criain-1 by the International
Military Trlburrl in CS»« Hoi 1 in th't each of the- said defendants was
- auober of DE SCHUT2STAFFELN DER !iA7I0!CAL SOZIALISTISCHBR DEUTSCHE
ARB2TK&-PART2I co.xionly known ns the "SS" after 1 September 1939. Such
cuabershiD is In vioLation of Paragraph I (a) Article II of Control
Council Law Ho. 10,

.horefor,, this Irxlicta-nt is filed with the Secretary General of tho

Military Tribunals “nd the charges herein ar.do against the above named

defendants are hereby presented to MILITARY TRIBUNAL NO. I.

TELFORD TAYLOR
3rigr.dior General, USA
Chief of Counsel for ‘jor Crimes
Acting on Behalf of tho United States of America.

Numberg, 25 October, 1916.

PRESIDING JUDOS *-ALTER B. BEALS: I shall now c~ll upon tho de¬
forciants to plead guilty or not. guilty to tho charges against than.

Zach defendant, as his noe* is c-alled, will stand and speak into tho
nicrophorcj. At this time there will be no -rguraents, Reechos, or
discussion of any kind. Each defendant will simply plead either guilty
or rot guilty to the offenses uith which he is charged by tho indictnont.
Karl Brandt.

DR. PELC;g:.HN: ::r. Ctoirar-n, before th; defendant pleads guilty or •
not guilty, ar.y I ask to soy a word? I am the defonso counsol for tho
IXofend-.r* Schaefer, Humber 18.

PRESIDIUM JUDGE .ALTER 3. 3EALS: For which defendant?

DR. PELCK.EK": Sc hr. e for, Humber 18.

•PRESIDIO JUDGE ‘.'ALTER B. BEALS: Vfo r.r^ now rocoiving tho plea of fc l.o
Defendant Karl Brandt. You do not represent him as counsel, do you?

DR. PELCK..J'—: Ho.

PRZSlbi: G JUDGE ELER B. BEALS: Thon I See no reason for counsel for
•another defor.d-nt u king any r-marks at this tis*,.

DR. FBLCCStliK: May I - sk to spook before the Defendant Schaefer
speaks? A forcrl objection.

RtZSIDI:£ JUDGE ALTER 3. SEALS: ‘..Tior. the r. me of the* Defend' nt
Schaefer is called, you may address the Court.

013


21 j C_3_S-Jeldt

Court I.


Sari 3rendt, arc you represented by counsel in the proceeding T~'

ISTX5DA5T EAP.L BRAMIff: Tee.

a *

PHlSIDiro JUTX& VJlL'T 3. BAALS* Sow do you pload to the charges
srj » specifications end each thorof act forth ifa the indictnent against
you, guilty ofr net guilty?

nnjrtMLST EAPL BRAHDTI Mot guilty.

tHLSlDhiC- JUtC-A HALTi? 9. BAALS: 3c eented.

Siegfried Handlosor, arc you represented by counsel in this cauno?

BTAMDAMf SIICIRIAD HAMELOSAR: Ho, I have no.counsel fret..

FRiSIDIMG JUIGA MALT1R B. BAALS: Do you desire that the Tribunal
appoint counsel for you?

SAtalUfiT SIAC-JRIAD KAHDLCSA?: I hope that today or tonorrow 1 nay
receive an affirnative answer frou a defense counsel.

PRASIDI.IC- JUICS MALTA? B. BAALS: Are you at this tine roady to pload
to the indlctsont, guilty or not guilty?

EJASDACT SILGFRIAD HAHDLCSlit: Yes.

FRASIDIHO JUIC*A MALTAR 3. BAALS: How do you plead to the char goo and
opociflcationo an#* each thoreof set forth in tho indictnent against you,
guilty or not guilty?

EFAMEiM? SIIGRIAD KAMDLOS1K: Mot guilty.

FRASIDIUG JUIX-A MAL71R 3. BAA L S: Be soated.

Paul Rostock, are you represented by counsol in thi6 cause?

nm.jiwn’ paul rcstcck: Yob.

PRISIDI-Xr JUIGA WALTiil 3. BA a LS: How do yov pload to the charges
end specifications and each thereof set forth in the indictnent against
you, guilty or not guiltv?

ISPSHIIHT PAUL RCSTOCE: 2 an not guilty.

FRASIDIJC JUIC-A MALTU. 3. BAALS: 3e seated.

Cskar Schroeder, are you represented by counsol in this proceeding?

KTirDA-rT OSKAR SCKRCAEAR: Yes.

PRiSIDIi." JCIGA 3. BAALS: How do you plead to the charges

and speciflcatlcno and each thereof set forth in the indictment against
you, guilty


014


Court 1


or not guilty?

Defeolant Oskar SCSB03D2: ?rot Guilty.

BKIDtSfe JUIX3 'OL73J D. 32iLS: Bo seated.

Karl Gennken, aro you represented by c-unsol in this proceed¬
ing?

D2?aBAKT K.CLL 52D3i: Yos.

PB3SDING JUDG3 '.*1LTJT. 3. S31IS: Ha. do you plead to the
charges and specifications and oach the::oof sat forth in the indict¬
ment against you, cpillty or not guilty?

DHPSND.tHT KJ3L 0JSK3H: Hot guilty.

ra25lDi:S JU)3J Jl;2R D BiHC: Lari Cofiordt, aro you re¬
presented ,y counsel in this proceeding? •

D^ziuiv ran ' yoo.

RLEXDT^ rjy i M ’S B XiiLS: Lou do ;vu plead to the charge
ore! specifications an ' oach they oof sot forth in tho ir.dictuont acAlnot
you, guilty or not ui !>*?

D Z?3V\"' :: .*3. ' Z2XIJ2: Hot guilty.

. : '.d"?? .j: 3X£>: Hurt _lo.», aro ~ou rapro-
souted by counsel lr. tko i'ocoodiiv.?

D2T :r-y: 3ir. yos.

rp.n^rv Jfcv ; VX-i: 3 -lU-t: Hou do y-u ploed to tho
c liar go 3 and specifications and each thereof sat forth in tha lndict-
.ant acalnat you, w ullty or not guilty?

D3?XD.UT i.VrJ Li 3: Not _uilt 5 %^

VR 2 S 1 - DJ - - yyy-1 7J J. 3 . XX3: 3b A a- , 2udolf irondt, are
you ro.^-osontoi by ecu. ol in this prcc»edl:<^

0

D3:*3D.vT 3JJIL Yes.

PP.33JI j: r..xrJ'. : -103: Ho- Ca you lead to tho
charges a-id specifica-i sat torch in the in*let .>:t against you *.:d
to oach oja the. oof, nil;:* 07 Jnot _uilty?


n

v,/


\


V3DXV . 'Li.' .’*3 s .utity.

JP33I3I- r ' y:: : 'I'iS: £e seated. .Ir. Sabring, -..ill


you continue?


015


JUDGE HaROLD L. S^ffilNG; Joachia Urugcwsky, are you represented by
counsel?

DEFENDANT JOACHIM yP.UGO.SEY: YeSi

JUDGE HAROLD L. SEERIKS: You have heard thj cfrrgcs contained in tho
indictoont -gainst you* How do you plecd, guilty or not guilty?

DEFEND A: ;T JOACHLi URUG&iSKYi I on not suilty.

JUDGE HAT.OLD L. c.-.ERING: Helnut Poppendick, r. re you represented
b7 counsel bofaro this Tribunal?

DEFENDANT H2MJT PCPPaiDICK: Yus.

JUDGE HAROLD L. 07JRING: You h*v« hoard th- charges contained in
the indietcunt against you. How do you plua.d, guilty or n>t guilty?

DEFENDANT KHIilUT POPPJOICK: Not guilty.

JUDGE HAROID L:* SEEKING: 9e seated.


r

K* 4


•-I-


Ole.


21 Sot eS-fi-l-UG-Jitzgereld (TJC)
Court I


JUEGl SLBF.XSGt Wolfraa Slevers ars you represented by Counsel
before this Tribunal?

tfollIUH SliVXPSl Tea.

JUIC-l SMRIaG! You have heard the charges contained In the lndlct-
aent no« pending against you. Eo« do you plead, gultly or not guilty?

VOURAM 6IIWS: Not guilty.

JTTDGS SIRRING: Gerhard Rose.

Gerhard Rose, are you represented by Counsel before this Tribunal?

C-SPHAPD R0S1: Tee.

JUTGX SlBPIilG: You have heerd the charges contained in tho indict¬
ment filed by the Prosocutlon. How do you plead, guilty or not guilty?

C-ISHABD ROSL: Not guilty.

JOTC-L SI3?.IiG: 3e seatod.


Siegfried Ruff.

Slog^ricd Ruff, are you represented by Counsel beforo this Tribunal?
SI1GIRI1D RUTi : • Tos.

JUIGx. SIRRING: Tou hare heard the charges contained In the Indict¬
ment filed before this Tribunal. Kov do you pload, guilty or not guilty?
SIK-JBIM) BUT: Not guilty.


JUXGi. SLBRIaGi Hnna Wolfgang Roaborg. Dofcndant, arc you roprooontod
by Counsel? *

HASS WOLFGANG FOKBEBG: Tes. '{ }]

JUIC-i SIS IX-: You have heard the charged in tho lndictmnt now
rending before this Tribunal. Ho~ do you plead, guilty or not guilty?


HANS VCUC-ANG °d*3ERQ: Sot guilty.

JUSGl SL3FIJG: Yicktor Brack. Arc you roprosonted by Counsol before
tMs Tribunal. 0

VICNTQR 33*CK: Tea.

JUD3R S13?I.iG: You have heard the charges contained in tho indict¬
ment filed by tho Frosccutlon. How do you plead, guilty or net guilty?
7IZTC? 3RACZ: iot guilty.


J'.TCl Sis- IS6: Hermann Becker-Jreyacng.

"re you represented.by Couneel?

017


31 ior 46-tt-UC--r-2-Jit*gereie (IjC)
Court I


giSUATC SECGB-IRETSEK*': Tee.

JUKE SBBBZK&: You have heard thi Charges in the indictment now
pondlfig hefofe this Tribunal. Sov do 70U plead, guilty or not guilty?

fiUBUBr 3E<23R_JP.XYSSL r G: Sot guilty.

JUDGE SE3RX3C-: Be seated.

PRESIDING JUKE SEALS: Judge Crawford* will yoh proceed with the
arrairarent of the defendants?

JUK-E CRAXFCRD: Georg August Veit*.

Are you represented by Counsel before this Tribunal?

GKBC ATOUSf VELTZ: Tcs.

JUICE CRAXTORD: How do you plead to the charges sot forth in tho
indictment against you? Do you plead guilty or not guilty?

GEOEC- AUGUST VILTZ: Sot guilty. . ^

JUKI CRAXF'RD: Be seated.

Konrad. Schaefer.

ZR. PELCEKA&t: Your Honor, say 1 ash to speak7

PRESIDING JUTGfc B E ALS: 'Jhat is the purpooo of tho ronarko you doslrt
to mako?

IR. PELCEIAK.: I should llko to object to tho indictment. I should
like to say t v at In ry opinion, as far as Schaofor is concerned, tho In¬
dictment docs not confora to Article YU. I can explain that.

PriSIDIiC* JUKE BEALS: “ow much time do you desire to present your
argument j

m. FSLCP'AIQT: Three mihufes. ({ \

\ /

PRESIDING JUKE SEALS: Y$u ray croceed. First, have you filed in
thr proceeding any written notice of the objection to tho indictment and
served it upon tho Prosecutor?

IB. FELCE'JLi.: I *av« net had the indictment long enough. I have
Just had tho written material for two days. X*at I hero to say 1 could
submit in writing later. Because of the brief tine, I ask to be allowed
to make a brief statement now.

PRESIDING JUKE BEALS: You aay make a brief statement and submit
*

argument in support of your objection within five days.

01S


31 Scr -6-tt-UG^--*!ttgerfi!rt (TjC)

Court I

IE. FHCDUI4: 7ery -ell. Hay 1 no* My soaothing7

PELS I DISC- JUDGE BEALS: You nay JJfoeeed for three minutes!

IEi PLLCEMJJQi! Ordinance VII- la Article 4a prescribes the follow¬
ing adeordlng to the' English texti "The Indlctaent shall etato the charges
plainly, conoisely with sufficient particulars to inform the Defendant of
the offense charged* Schaefer is charged only on one count, Count II-C-.
Experiments with sea-water in Dachau arc charged against 12 iefendante.

In two sentences, the Indictment goes on to oay that the 12 poreone who
are then named are charged with special responsibility for these crimes
and participation in the*. I am of the opinion that this dooa not con¬
tain sufficient particulars. "Bepsoneibillty" and "participation* aro
legal concepts. There is no evidence of "oufficlcnt particulars" which
implies details.

The Indlctaent, in ay opinion, nuet give facts to indicate how and
why oach one of those 12 defendants who, ostensibly, participated in
t v cso experiments, is responsible and participated. My client'cannot toll
what the nature of hie participation lo supposed to have boon.

The Indlctaent says, on Count I, *o. 2, that all dofondanto wore
principals in, accessories to, ordored, abottod, took a coneontlng port
in, and were connected with plans and enterprises involving, the commis¬
sion of *ar Crises and Crimes against Huaanlty. Thcco only lo-

gal concepts. (jf

PBESIHlfG JUICE BEALS: You may file a written britff in‘support of
your position.

IE. PLLCKXAHli: I should like to edd, without tho knowledge of the
Indictment, ay client is not ready to answer the question ns to whether
he is guilty or not guilty.

PRESIDING- JinC-X BEALS: You will serve a copy of your brief upon
tho Prosecution and file it with the Secretary-General.

IB. PLLCtMAK.-is Very well, Your Honor.

FP28IDI2JG JUDOS SEALS: In connection with this ratter, General
Tpylor, do you desire tc sake any remarks or suggestions?

BRIGADIER C-l-3LBAL 7XUCSD TAYLCB: Your Honor, needless to niy, we
have no objection to the raking of this action or the filing of


019


31 Sot 46-K-U&-4-4-JitgMald (PjC)
Coart I


this brief. It is needless to 887 , al* 0 | ve think the Indictment quite
edepuately Specifics the date| place ftftd type of experiment charged.

• - w

The befsndSfliU cohnodtion -ith it is better known to the Defendant then
to ahyohe el«ei There is no reason why he should not enter hie plea at
this tine.

JU3CS 5S33IH6: That would not go to the jurisdictional-aspect of
the Indictment, hut it would go to the question of particulars. The
consideration is whether or not upon the showing of the aotion, aoro
particulars os to the charges specified, should he included. ^0 you
understand ay point!

BBIGaDISS GUIBaL t-UCBD TAYLCH: I aa sorry, sir, I cannot hear

s

from hero. It 1 B not qulto loud enough.

JU3XJ1. SLB3ISG: It would he =7 Ylew that thlo aotion could not, in
any particular, ho considered as going to the Jurledictlon olthor of tho
chargo or of the right of the Tribunal to ontortain tho chargo. This
matter is, in osaondo, aaotlon for a hotter Bill of Particulars as to
tho specific charge.

BBIGADILB C-EttHAL 2.U0RD TAYLCB: Yes, Your Honor. That is what
I understood. The Prosecution will consider the Mtlon, and. if nood ho
submit particulars, although wo think the lndictncnt is adequate onough.
Vc think thore is not challenge of t^ jurisdiction. Tho Defendant
ohoul<* bo roqulrcd to properly pica.

jurc-l CRAVFCRD: How do you plead to the chargoe against you?


f«l£nt yo-

KOHHAHD SCEAiTIB: Hot guilty. fj \

PBBSIDISC- JOTC-I 31ALS: Be oeeted. . ^_ jf

His plea is reccired without prejudice to any righto tho Defendant


nay have.


JUIGi. CHAtfFCBD: Veldemar Eoven. Are you represented by Counsel?
VAXJ&UB HCYU: Yes.

JUDT-L CHAHJCSB: Eow do you plead to thi charges against you?

WaLSHAB HOYMT: Sot guilty.

J’JDGB CBATCCBD: Be seated.

Vilhelm Beiglhoeck. Are you represented by Counsel before tho Tribunal?


020


21 Sot 46-K-IJ1-4-&Jit rgeraid (7jC)

Court I

VT T PITM StIC-LBOiCZ: Sot yet. I have a defease counsel, hut he
has not appeared:

JUIGi CB--WCRE: 7ery well* Bov do you plead to the charges filed
sgsiaat yent

VILHUH BIEGL30XCE: Hot guilty.

JUICE CEiSTORD: You nay ho seated.

Adolf Pokorsy.

Arc you represented hy Counsel?

AXOU POKORST: Tcs.

JUICE CPAWTCRD: How do you plead?

•

ALOU POIOBST: Sot guilty.

JUKI CBAHTCBD: Be seated.

Hortn Oherhauser.

Aro you represented hy Counsel heforo this Tribunal?

• HEHTA OBlSHaUSlB: Yes.

JVIGE CFAHTOSD: How do you pload to the charges and spocif icatlono?
HhRTA OBHIEATJSai: Hot guilty.

JUICE CBAHTCBD: You cay he soated.

Jritt Pischor.

Arc you represented hy Counsol heforo this TribunalI

ram JISCKEB: Yos.

JUICE CBJOTORD: How do you pload to the charges sot forth in the
Indictment eralnet you, guilty or not guilty?
ram TXSCHSB: Hot guilty.

JUICE CRAWOHD: You nay he seated.

FSESIDIHC- JUTOL BEALS: The Tribunal sets Monday, Eoceoher 9, 1946,
'sis the date of the Trial upon the Indictment now pending heforo the
Tribunal.

m. SES7ATIUS: Sorvatlus for the Defendant Karl Brandt. Your
Honor, aay I sake an application regarding the suhniB6lon of docunon’s
hy the Prosecution?

PRESIDES JUICE S E A LS: You ray state your application.

IB. SSEYaTIUS: Your Honor, I ask the Tribunal to instruct tho

Prosecution that the documents he suhnitted to the Defense in tine, the

081


31 Hot 46-X-DIG--^6-ritrgerald (TjC)

Court I

docusents on which the charge le based* This would sake the proceedings
easier and give the Defense an opportunity to examine the documents In
tl=*» end to obtain coUnterproof 4

It the first trial before the International Military Tribunal, we
were given a list of documents with the Indictment; although those
documents were not enclosed, e could look at then and we could work
on them. Up to now we have nothin on which wo can build our dofenso. In
other words, on the 9th of December, wo will hove proceeded no further
t^an today, end we will not be able to advise our clients.

PRESIDIUG JUDGE BEALS: Tou nay be seated and wo will hear fron
the Prosecution, Brigadier General Telford Taylor


21 Sor O-JkGte-S-luGaylord (TJC)
Court I


fcSlQABIlfi 0L2i?AL felfOBl) iATLCfii Your Honor, the counsel for the
defense that hae Ju«l Spoken la thoroughly faalliar with the procoduro
used In the prior case. The prosecution In this case plans to follow tho
sose procedures and give the defense counsel the sane opportunities and,

If possible, norc. The Defendant's Inforaetlon Ctnter, which is the place
vhore the documents have In the post been node available; will be supplied
In advance with copies of the documents on which our evldenco Is baeod. I
would suggest, Your Honor, that after all counsel for the defenao are
here that It would be cost useful 1 f there bo a netting betwoen represen¬
tatives of the prosecution and the defense aothftt these procedures can
be developed. But at the nonont only half of the oounsel for tho dofenee
arc hero and it. would be econoaicol If these natters could be arranged
aftor thceo natters could bo arranged oftor they aro all prosont.

m. RCBiRT ShEViTIUS: Your Honor, nay I ask ono queotion? Hoy 1 add
dno thing, that the docuaonts bo given to us In Gorman. In the previous
trial, th*re wao difficulty at tho beginning bocauso wo got then to
you in English.

JUIGL B IMS: I bollcvo If counaol for the dofenoo will rofor to hlo
rulos pronulgatcd. by this Tribunal on Hovonber 2, 1946, you will boo that
a requlroaent is nado that all such natters be subaittod in a languago
that lo understood by oach of tho dofondanto.

ra. ROBERT SEH7ATIUS: Yes, but for technical reasons tha* wao not
always done. There wore groat difficulties. Iho conference with the
prosocution win aake that possible to ollalnato the difficulties. If
It Is not possible, I will address the Court again. \\

JUIC-j. SEALS: Do you have anything furthor, General Taylor?^

GEMXB &L TAYLOR: Your Honor, the prosecution nercly wishes to note
*hat it has filed with the Secretary General a notion to oaend the In¬
dict nent In Paragraph 8 of Count 2, Paragraph 13 of Count 3, by changing
1943 to 1944. The s»tion has been filed with tho Secretary General and.
copies of the notion ano in C-ercan and are In the hands of the defense
counsel.

.TCj. BSALS: Eow many of the defendants aro concerned with the

eocndaent to the indlctnen? Hy point Is that If the — ,

033


21 TTorm-caS^^x-lo^- (!j)

Court 1

' " ' • c

::<ST T Sr: It the Tribunal yleaso, the a;:9nd::ent occurs

first In Para: - a^h 8 on I-a^a 14 of the indictment aafl It affect only t\»

of the defendants; na.tely, 3lcoe and 2udolf 3raadt. The argali :ent is al-

so node in Paragraph 15 becauce the sane facts ere there charged as a

crime against humanity. IaParayaph 15 only tho sa~o two defendants era

involved; that is, defendant 3 looe and r.udolf hraoit.

JUDG3 BlitS: '..'hat are ha particulars cf Ere aanrtaant?

•’3. ICcflJKf: The only chan_e -ado by du a-en&aant is So say tho

date January 1944 for the date January 1S43; in other ordi., it o: to.*I.

the period covered by-tho crloa for cuo year. _ 3 dato 1945 was insert ad

by mistake in the indictabut as filed with the i.unal.

JTIX3 3iX5: A-b tiioco two defondan ter ro . e:.ont»d by counsel

hero presont this ..orai ?

• * •

IP.. K«TA-W: I think that audoir Droadt o.cuorod «Yor.". And al-

00 Kurt Blorao anavoYod ith, yos, Your Honor.

JUXJ DdU': "aa this ..otion boon oorvod u 0 :: counsol for thoao

two defendants?

3. HUIAI'TY: Your Honor, ay undorctan'.in in that tho motion for

t

arandnont. woe filol ith tho Sorretciy-Conoral. If *. o vndorct tho rules
corroctly, the Gee rota y Oonoral then so- 70 s it v.-o:i too dofondants.

JUDC: DHL*:: I ucj Just afckia. for infor.^i a v/hother thoy .had
recoivod copie? of tho notion.

131 !C«A2I3Y: That I don't know. Yes, t’.o cour.col for those defia-

dants say " yes'.

JIDC^ 3iiLC: Do 03 coiu3el for defendant blo^e raiso any objec¬
tion to the amendment of .ho indict, .out?

03. F373 bhUT-T.: Ho. fi

jg~

03. rUITr’r, Kaufftcann for Yucclf fra. I~YTavo no objec-

i

tion to the chany.


JUDC-3 hddlA: You re resaut Yudoif 2rar.lt?


21-florJ:-G$-5-3-Garlor: (1J)

Court 1


jury>3 SZU.-3: 7ell, the oth r dofendan affects is defendant

»

3 lcr», I understand. Ir la roTrosantod. hare?

O?.. 7nnz ZXC'T: Dr. Sauter for thj -ofon-ar.- 2lono. 7o do not

have an” objection. _

JUX’ 32.U-": Tho indictment will be a on'ed in accordance with
the notice.

Is it a^rojablo to counsel for these two clafondants that t'ie
arraifciment as to then u.mon this oount uhich ha? Just boon a .ended bo
considered ac .sloas to tho count as a^onciod-flcn;—their ileas of •''Mot


Guilty."


DR. rH7Z Yoo. •

DR. KiDrr.U."*: Yos.


0 '


JUSTICE &&03: TiiOso .-attors will a^.’sar in tho records of tho
Tribunal. Tho ploas of -Go dofondants will all bj entered in the ninutos
of tho Tribunal.


Court will nx adjourn and roconvono at 1000 hours, 9 Docoubo:.


1946.


025


/fVfc

6 DoC-M-G2S-1-1-Beard
C -urt H.'. 1.


C0CJJC.IE3 co?y


Offioial Transcript of the American Military
Tribunal in thu ^ottor of tho United Statos
of jjaorica, against Karl Brandt, et ol,
defendants, sitting et Kuraborg, Gerrony, an
5 Docoabor 19-i6, 1015-1200 h^urs, Justico
Boal presiding.


THE F3BSZre«> labors of Uilitnry Tribunal Ho. 1 meet this corning
inf raolly in chnnbcrs to hoar arguments upon tho nation of cortnin do-
fenso counsel for a contiruanco of caso N.. 1 jonding boforo tho Tribunal.
Ccunsol will be allowed thirty minutes, -n oeoh sido, to proaont thoir

arguments. Two c< unsols for the dofondnnts *ey orguo upon tho motion.

o

Tho rtofonso consol will open and close tho arguments, and tho dofondnnts

*

nay divido thoir thirty minutes botwoon the aning nnd closing as thoy
pinnae. X u ney proceed with tho ergursents upon tho action,

DU. SEUV.'.TItEi Tho c unsol horo f r r tho dofondants prosonts on
orpUcotirn for the postpnnonont of tho tx-ginnlng of tho trial, Thoy oro
tho counsel wh-' happened t c bo present r.t tho timo, who drew up tho
application, and I on c< nvincod that most of rry calloaguos wht "ro Mfej.
prosor.t alar approve, fif V

Thore oro jte^'mical rena. ns which lend to this npplicoti. n. iV-i*-'-'
the c >ncorn which we hnvo ns defonso c< unsol that ur witnossos cannot bo
horo in tino since wo oro n->t oblo to *oko jur npplienti n soon on.ugh
t have tho witnossos brought horo. ?ho ron*..n for this is that tho
mntorir.l which can giro ua occasion to call a witness hnvo net boon in our
h°nds l^ng on ugh so that wo can work .n it. Only cn Saturday oftornocn
woro d euaonts availoblo, and others ccso in tho noxt few days. Per
mny f the dofonso o^unsol it is n*t j^ssiblo with thoso few documonta.
in a ah 1 rt tin», t; spoak t<- nil of tho ''ofondnnts. Espooiolly wo still
lock a list f tho documents so thnt wo oen bo ablo t scloct which
dcunonts_iro significant far ooch individual. Thrroforo, wo havo t


^ th-j c r.scqi

S—*a. s

* -- —

• 'J:: v vCy\0\


ts themselves V determine which cro important;
ng this tirw other dofonso c. unsol, of c-Tirse,
n ab«.ut these d-.'cumjnts. In ny application I
5f this condition.


- 026 -


5 Deo-*-33&-1^2-3eard (30

Court To, 1


la order to get a witness hero we would need several weeks. I ae defense
counsel for the first defendant oust expect to have ay witnesses called
to the stead here first.

General Taylor has been kind enough to say that he ns suae e that the
Prosecution* s case will take two or three weeks. That would oean, if
one includes the Christage recess, that I aust be ready by the beginning
of January. According to the experience in the previous trial it will
hardly be possible to get ay witnesses here in that tine since I do not
know where soae of th«c are. 7 here is the tree difficulty with the
experts. T hey K>uld have to be here fros the beginning of the trial.
Whoever is inclined to nopear as an expert and who is possible ns an
oXpert for the individual oase aust be dlocuesod cnrofully. The court is
supposed to be represented by the experts; tho saae goes for the vltnossee.
I do not want to cell witnesses who will jrove to be useless. It is ay
endeavor through sworn statonents to replcce the testiuony of a nunber
of witnessee and shorten the proooedlnce. That took a groat deal of^Sft^X
la tho prevloue trial; os for rs I rdcall it took m average of two(f t

nonthe until aeworn etetoaent was eveilnble here. Then I can not anko
cy application yet, it will be unavlodable. In January there will be a

e

porlod after the Prosecution hes finished its case - that is thero would
be an interruption which should bo avoided not only in thelifetereftt of
the defense but in the interest of ell. T his interruption would bo
better at the be-lnnin. I ask for three wceka, considering the possible

one week Christens holiday, that would in effect bt two weeks, Perhaps

• %

there will be one week recess ft Christart, and that wopld be a delay
of two weeks, and in this three weeks, I belfcre it would be possible

%

to .*et the witnesses here. I do not want to ro into all the alnor
iifftrencea which exist for the defense. I do not think this is the
right place to present such ratters. I have finished ay stetenont.


5 >o .-»:-ATD-l-2-Bum* (3t)

Court To. 1


IHZ FFSSXDEFTj Counsel for the Prosecution.

3ZT2SA. TAFIfiS: The Prosecution believes that this notion Is entirely

without foundation - without lsgltlsate foundation. One of the prlnclpel

points which appears to be nede here Is that sobe'^no-hundred docuaents

have been nsds available to the defense end thr.t m additional 1$0 have

not been aads avellable. This notion was written Deeacber 3rd rod was

received by ne yesterday afternoon. I checited with the docunent rooa

and the Defendants' Xnfomatlon Center the noaent I received thlo and

was told that sone 240 docuaente were already In the Defendants' Inforn®-

tlon Center. I an told that there Is a liot of 296 docuamts vhidh has
• • f \
been furnished to the Defendants* Information Center. It ippears, thero^

fore, there was soac 50 aleritw so we put a special staff on-last nli&t
end after this -aornln,; 2SU docunents are In the Defendant*' I a fornatlon
Center. So far as I know there Is no rule or requlrenent that vo furnish
theso docuaents. Ve are indeed bound $y custca here to rive then all
docunents 24 hours In advenoe 4 their uec. ? hey have received those
docuaents nearly r week In advmee of the trial and it is Just a privilege
which wo extend because we are In a position to do so and think It will
noslst the trial and Is a natter for tho rights of the defendmts. It
Is dlscoura.*la<; to ccc our attenpt *to extend this prlvlle.-e as extonsiv-
tly nc we can, carrlod Into an attenpt to put the trial off. Purthoiw-^
aoro, these docxfcents In the Defendants' Inforaatlon Center aro all lif
Gorcon, 0 laagua,* which counsel understands ad I. ayself, In preparing
this cose have been unable to .jet aost of the doauaonts because It is
difficult to fret then translated intc SarllsH for ne to use then. In
that respect the defense Is In a such bettor position thm the Prosecu¬
tion. The point about location of wit.-esses which Dr. ^prvetlus =e*eo
is worthless and unspecified in his notion. V 0 are not told that there
Is any particular witness he wants; that It Is difficult to locate.

?ron his experience In Case Fo. 1 - I cust point out thlo case is
‘iffereat froa Case Fo. 1 The subject le ecre defined and the problems
will be such easier and solve thesselves. Until soce substmtlal defense
13 brought to the Court's attention with respect to proeureoent of


Court So. 1


cultiea. ' The ease, I tMak eropltee -to tixt, of #XP vhieh

the defenee hae raised. IX does eeen, and surely they he" t fci»c
to look into that setter fully. ?he Iadictnent give* them the ixu
foreetion ae to %fe*t kind of expert they vnnt to have here end if
they hwe difficulty in getting hin here hy Deceaher ?th a trimacript
will be eerred and infora the expert st/what wao going on. It scene

• f

to us there hae teen sufficient tine for th*?a to gt-t experts.


■


J •


9 “


5 Deo—li— ADT-^-ri-Hayna b- AY


Some point is made this motion about the rooms which
have boon furnished, Ve have dene our best on that. Certain
rooms were made available to Defense Counsel, and they
found them unsatisfactory. As a result of their request,
other rooms which are better have been made available as
of yesterday and are set up, and working conditions are
possible there. '

As far as typewriters are concerned, it is difficult
to procure Gorman typewriters. * r o are today putting into
t’nl room a selection of English and German typewriters
and are doing all we can to aid Counsel to perform their
duties. In many respects, beoausu of the language situation
In this trial, I think their difficulties are no greater'
than our own on the Prosecution side.

I must finally point out that a postpon«aont of this

•

trial moans a postponement of other trials whloh are to
follow thl6 one. Under ordinance Number 7 , this is a con¬
tinuing program, and if this trial does not start as sched¬
ule it will result in postponement of those whloh
follow. ' ’ • 8 J

I think that is all I have to say, Your Honor.

T.LS TRIBUNAL: (Judge Scbrlng); General Taylor, are

•

you in-i position to say now how many documents will be used .
in the prosecution in its case in chief?

CkLuSUL TAYLOR: In its case in chief? It will come
very close to the figure 'OO, Your Honor.- I think Hr.-
LlcHaney can answer In more detail than I can.

KR.. HcHANdY: If Your Honor please, we have made an
effort to giver, them documents which we definitely plan
to use. In other words, we have-not sent to the Defendants 1
Information Center a mass of documents which we do not think
that we will use. Vo have not sent them all of the documents


5 Da o-M- ADT- 1- H^yn j a- AK


which ve ■-•Ian to use for two reasons;

Firstly, we have obtained a rather substantial numbejj—

of affidavits from certain of the defendants. Thoa; dooum-

• * . *•/ »

ents have.not been made Available In the Defendant's
Information Conter, and we do not plan to make thorn
available until ap.roxomately 24 hours prior to the time
that they will b e use d In court.

i

In the same category falls a number of charts shoving
the organization of various offices with which the Court
will be dealing, such as the Hedioal Servioe of the Luft¬
waffe, the iiedioal Service of the Vfabmaoht, tho


-O 'Ca -


Court So. 1

5 Dec 46-H-AIS-5-»-Eayces (SSO


Medical Service of the SS, and ao forth. Thoae charts have not been nade
available to then. They shall on Saturday norning, since -e clan to use


then on Monday in our presentation here.-

There are naturally other docuuente which will be used in the course
of the trial in the case in chief which have not been sent to the Defen¬
dants' Information Center as yet. I think that there are sane docunente
dealing with euthanasia which will be the last natter taken up In the
case in chief which have not been sent down because we have not as yet
had the tine to decide definitely which of thoee docunente ve plan to use.
There are a rather subotantial number of then, and we wlyh to select only
those few that we would use here.

• •

There are also, of course, thoae instances in which we will find
documents in Berlin or in other ©laces which we do not now have, which,
of course, aro not in-the Defendants' Inforaation Center, but a few in¬


stances will cone up where ve will find docunonts that wo will want to
uso, but by and largo I think that the POO which we cado^vallable will
pretty well cover the case in chief. ■/ v

THE TRIBUNE (Judge Sobring): By 300 docuacnto, that

those docunonts will also cooorohcnd the affidavits?

HR, KC HANZT: So, we have now givon the® 280-odd out bf tho total

I #

of 294. Those argali photoetatic copies of the original German docu-
cents. Now, in addition to that, I would say that we havo, oh, In the


neighborhood of 25 affidavits taken froa the defendants. Additionally,
ve havo at least an ocual nuaber of affidavits token from witness.

t f

THL TP-CUSAL (Judge Sobring): Shat eoual nunbor7
.iR. hC HASH: I say ve oust have at least 25 affidavits also,
taken fron witnesses, that is, people other than the defendants.

TEE TRIBUNAL (Judge Sebring): Jo that, perhaps, you hevo 50 affi¬


davits, altogether?

XF.. ~C EASffiY; I should think so.

TEL TRIBUNAL (Judge Sebring): Can you say at this tine how nuch
tine w«ii be taken in the introduction of docuaents, as you anticipate it?
HE. .iC HaXLT: You neen to out in our casu in chief?

031 l _ - --a- J


Coart Ho. I

5 Dec 46-A-AH>-S-^Heyna ■


" • ■ ~ / \

THi TEEBUHiL (Jud^e Sabring) i • So ouch of It a« ie coeprahended'^by


the docucenta.


COl-e.


Court Ho. 1

5 Dec 46-M-ATD-3-3-Eayne■ ^SEX)


MR. MC KARST: Yell, that la difficult to say, The manner In »*ich
vo will present the ease Is more or less on a topical basis. In accordance
with the order that ve have set up in the Indictment. In other vorde,
after the opening statement and certain procedural natters are taken care
of, vo vlll start introducing documentary evidence'consisting of affi¬
davits by the defendants and German documents on the high altitude exoeri-
neate.

More or less at the conclusion of the introduction of documentary
evidonce on that topic, ve vlll call cortaln vitneeees to the stand to
testify vith respect to theso nattors. Ye vlll then proceed to the next
exporlaent, »lch is the froesii experiment.

In tho high/altitude ernerlaent ve have, roughly, 40 or 45 docunonte
dialing vith thaiaattor. As far as I rocall, vo have only tWo vitnessos.


\


I should think that it vould probably toke us in excots of a depr to jxit
in those docuaents. Of course, the examination of vitncusce nay provo to
bo a rather tino-consuming natter because thero are quito a number of
dofonso counsel horo, and roughly half of then, I think, aro chargod vith
tho high altitude experiments, and I assume that thero vlll be consider¬
able cross examination.

TKZ PRaSIDtSTj Defenso counsel nay oroceod vl ti^T^ sing argu¬
ment. Tventy-tvo minutes remain.

DR. SLRV.»TIUSi I vnntod to reply auite brlofly to the argument
mado ty General Taylor. It is a natter of course that as far as tho
claim, is concerned, ve have none for tho presentation of such documents.

In practice, tho situation is different. It is such thel during tho pro-

\ *

coodlngs vc vlll hove to moke our amplications. I nust bo in a position
to prosent ny ovidonce and the sooner the prosecution gives no these
docuaonts the soonor I shall be ready.- The tmrpose is merely to avoid
an interruption of the oroceedings, and I don't \«nt to cone in vith
continuous notions during the proceedings. It vculd be better if vo
could postoono the oroceedings in tho beginning so as to be able to go
ahead aftcrvnrds.

As far as the practical uae.Pf the documents is eonoernod, I shwild


Court *o. 1

6 Dec 46-#-AED-3-3-Eaynes (IQi)

like to point out that there le no list o-f * events so that. In practico,
this pile of docuaents Is of no uso to =e. I should hare to look


£33-A


5 IX- c-Ji-C.iS-3-ln-Hr.y®o s-FL
Court No. 1


through each individual do cun cat in order to ascertain what it contninos,
and everjrt>ody olse would have to do tho sane, so I should like.to ask
th. Tribunal :o conviqc- th-ao^lvos just how difficult it will bo to


carry this out in practice. In practice, wo do not Irvc tho documentt in
our hnds, nd no can not use thus. If wo h“d a list, w- could have

shared the* out, and each Defense Counsel coeld hove Ird 20 documents

%

"copied, which wo would have h'd at our disposal.

I .-a convinced tlr.t th. Prosecution is coing everything to holn us,
but the situation is that- eVen thia »brnin'. wu do not have a doom in
which to work. In arctic-, wo ar. art tho docirxnta, wo are short
of the typewriters. I did not want to out this to th. Tribunal because
I did not think t ..at this was r suit'-ble )Laco, but th>t is tho situation.
Wtt do not have tho things.

I should liko to put the eap.hoaia on the Pertinent difficulties; nr.-

.•m-lc/, that wit.x-sses .and exerts enn not bo brought hero in practice in

tiou., end the oostpoiv^nt which I r.a rocu-tting is in practice no more
• •

than a fortnight's delay. It would be to everybody's burtfit, .ao subso-


tuently wo would be .able to go ahead with tho proc~-dir* a at a gro.atur
speed, wh-rcas, theso are practical questions which c^nofe^ou over¬
looked. * y

TK.: THDUrV.L (Judge Sebring): Kay I ask Counsel a question, please?
I rtte that in your notion for a continuance, you say thrt it is


necessary to h ve exa-rt wi trust present during tho entire course of
th; Prosecution'3 case in chief. C-n yvi t.ll no what there is in tho Pro¬
secution's case that would require the pr-Sence of your export witnesses
throughout that >Vse of the Prosecution?


DR. SBSV.-.TIUS: According to German lega 1 procedure, tho export ought
to be present during the entire procuedirvis, and tho expert, in particu¬
lar, ought to be in a position to judge from Ms own expert knowledge
wlvt the ia>lic'tion is and what tho accusations -Xe. Durin*; the oroccodings


5 IXc-M-<3S-3-L--E-.^»-FL
Coart Ko. 1

docjn-r.ts, too, will bo presented end rise wit.ossus will b- appearing
and the expert will certainly hr.vw questions to put to the witnesses -
probably ~ . <


5 Do c-M-0£S->2=-d' yrx: s-FL
Court Kb. 1


Vv,ry relevant end import-nt on«s. It is for that reason that it would
bo suitable, in ay opinion, and also in accordance with Gernr.n law if
the expert were. hero in good time, but , then, in particular, it would
bo difficult to obtain a suitable expert in tiao.

TKZ l!tl BUBAL-(Judge Sebring): Tou have a-rely said in your notion
that you intend to produce certain witnesses — an expert to whr.t facts
or phr.se of knowledge?


DR. 021VATIUS: As to Just what point the experts will have to speak,

• . ■ 4 I .

that will differ in the cas- of .each individual defendant, and we in
our caoacity of Dclonso Coun^l will have to agree which expert will
cover the Largest territory on the strer^th of his knowledge so th-t wo


do not produce L'rco nu.ibers of experts here. Many exports today .aro not

-llowed to practice since they i» longer hold th,ir professorships or

• *

.are not appointed by university. Others are busy and can not got away,
-and it will oe necessary to and see .them and .ask them if they aro
able \nd willin, to .appear,

TIE TRDi 1 . .X (Judge g oring); I do not believe you understood ny
question. You - re proposing to call oeperts in what, field, the Held of
medicine ar*S research?

DH. SiiV..TI , JS: Y-s, that is right.

TRS TRL : :Ui-.J. (Judge Sobring): Dc vou knot whore'potential exo-rt
witnesses are living or residing? Do you have ‘flat information?

DR. SEIVATIUS: I have not dealt with th't problem myself. JJy collca-
gue, Dr, Helte, will prob-bly tx, able to .* aswer that question.


f> Dec -i XEo -L-l-Gr - s c

*


c urt:: . 1.


S2LZL : Gentlcacn of the Tribunal, with reference tr vihat :.y
c.llonjuc, Dr. Scrv tins, has sai' I sh u •' like to ad', tie f llot.ln,., and
:1s ac a reply f- vdvat i. s oocn sai.' earlier, nuxly, that the .'iificultleo
Te hr..* r~ of a figurativ. nature nr. rare set .f a concrete nature.

hay I •'lease point ut t ynx tlsr.t \ the 26th »f !Jovor.!bor I had already
gu’.ndttcd application, to which ove.i t "ay I rj still rdturut a reply. In
'iw'.t apijlicati'in, dated 2oth of devrober, J ha:* naacd six experts and wit¬
nesses whe arc of .onoral and t?c :.t Lipertancc tc this trial. In c nsJricr-
ativn f tlx fact that Ue trial iru acho-hilod tv start as early 03 9 th rf
Docc'il-r I ha! requested to be {liven Uw* possibility cf calling theso dec tors
t ?1 reside in HoMclhcr;;, rurtsborr;, C^lc-ir , end as far ns 1 knew, Ihcbingcn,

t /

and t!r.t I 1 .t be liven the oppovtunitj tc visit thoi*o. I still havci not

ree.ivirt a reply tc this anplioatiui tc.'ay. 2 i. vc not boon able to visit

these important vd.try.ssoc and I believe tlvat tho r .n' ci the points which

.*r -sootttir.il have sutadtted in to lay' a lottor conn t 1 npllcablu +. c :4y cflC0>

7ae. state that tie Def<-nso had had nrplo Moo in .r. r t. call experts. Tt

-d;ht have been possible t visit the..: lectors in the. c re ' t.do wok,

if c.oplicntli- n *atcd 26th of !i veaber had receive! ai. early •colsi^.-u

•

I, ala:, ~n tlx. 2nd :f Doccnbcr sv:‘-.ri.*.to ' an applicati a .. Hljv
Tribunal in v.-hich I reforrod t five experts capable of leal in .» only with

r:noml nodical quest!-ns but also .dta tivc Units and divi-SUv. .Iks of what
d ht bo c noidextod loyal arv' ; sc die ally sound in *ach indivi.' u o'-ru/y or
not pcmiasiblo.


"Kite fter. it v uld be p ssiblo that' tf j decision cot. • . ;nri© . A. i* _

referanco to the application os early as to'a; . Tihat I rta *j±nc to «xprose
was Use tine which vc, the Defense, Jjed at cur •'icpcsal c soilcroc" fr::; tiio
;oint v»i vi>.v f advancing the proceedings and tho p int f view f pre-
•varati n I.t' been utilised by yru rlthcvji c-ul In* - nd tiix and cir-

cuustanccs, as tJcy have beer, cscr.'.'ed >y .;y c> 11. i., f. r/atius, and

present that. I h^o tlv-.t this High Trlbunol -111 bwlinvo us, the Defense
c unscls, whoa we say that over/thah,; tc . .. re apply for will


5 Doc---GLS-!i-2-Gr:ss
Gcurt Ho. 1.


be raised in th- connection that vith it an:' threuyh it xtc act in ;cncral
best interest, net nly of :ursalvv.s but the Tribunal and Frcsocutitn,- since
it is cur air. an: our a^jiti a to assist in the free, test passible clarifica-
ti n the real circus tone os or.' atoriol thr~u/£cut this ease. It is f-r
t .at re as n that the bjecti'n rais-d by tho ir-sccuti n, namely, that there i
n lc-al ry;ul't. n .'xc rin; t ttijch t-ho d cujxnts an.’ any other notarial

9

s:. il be subaitte, in ->d ti:x is n -, tliink, quite applicable in cur

" " " ^ - — — -- - | .

c.osc, boenuac bath the rresocut n as roll as tho Defense, have the nutnal
uty t .c. ntribute everything no can in r.-^r t elucidate and investigate the
circus-stoncus ter u heut and place at .iur diepositi'n, yur lien r, :v\torial

^ t • • •

c-.rpl.te an’, ca necessary t fiairv tab truth.

' '1... THIKRUL (Judfcu B. als): 71. •;-urt has a qu^sti n U. propiunl upon
to .r -cut', .n. I urv niton ’ ’ .-.it msul f r Defonse, Dr. Servatius, I

.1 . , i; • ml: th t vltacu.-h .any -f th-oe cl^cuncnts are now in tho Defonso

*

Jr t.n C.ntor, yet tacro is no list of tho d'-curxmts and fren i/hich thoy
can verJ: adequately. Can yv-a advise tic C-urt at -ut that,' sr?


(EKIL.L T.JLCR: I'raxuti n furnirbo too Inf r.at - n Center with a list

f these L curvnt* In nm^rical rder. Th. list loos not brack tho Uncuixnts

*

x by : t| but • l list th cu:vntn oy nuab-rs. ..s far

I :u th. re is n r-.is n hy tho Defence C'uncels could net hayo lividod
l - <\. h- s-lv .j oh d Alt th. i or un a. th^se applicable in each caeo
n u] . cor.c into the tends of tho Ia-,iyor In that particular part cf the ease,
duel) a list was f rworded to the InforaatUn Center, fhrthomrro, I stopped
by theru n y my t Court and ver curs.ry lorkc-l ar-und an saw tho dc cu-


•aattt file in a drawer in nu-ericol rd.r.


I so;* that hesitantly bepaus-e it


'*» a cursory lc;k but that is -.hat appeared ta i» to be.

DP.. SSUV..TIUS.: Vs. Presi lent, :u-.y I answer briefly. There*

9

f cuaaits, yet — but it does not correspond to what we ha* fcmcrly. It
is nly a list cf nunbers and reads 001, 00>, 200. I see tho nuubor* >ut I

n & laiovr what thoy uean. I can't select what is f i » re nee t. r ac but I
:dyht sco "Letter to Ki-nler". That i. 1 j u.nt U m. I see only 005.


5 DoO~- u

Crurt ifo. 1 .

•joc that on the C. ctrxr.ts. -. 1 : nunbers is useless t; :ic. It is

*y : t -no persooi in char o f t. . cu~. nts as ho kn.vs which decu-

.ion *.3 \ r:i«rc. I can t cxchan^o vitl j. c-llciqucs bccrusc I u n t know

portent ' c-ixnv. I U-ii .vl ii__thclribun .1 ui. investigate

the q» a tb*. 'xuttjnts are -. r tad. in shert, in -.in: thPiuch than on

Saturday . itt. . assistance : /t. C ret*. 1 chock..- thaa. It t-.k an Jvur

«

an-.', a half tc v.r . tx fc ti»e '.c .i...ts — nb rut cno hunlro.* documents. As

lorifi' as I was wr!ri*r; there no one olsa cculii use than In practice thoy aro
.*rt really available to us.

T..*fLCR: I believe r. . rvatiua has sail ccm'irns what I

at ttw 11 t. fta A cbocl list. m certainly, I Jtollovo,

iii. i n • ill at. . x iv rtf. 'ofenso C ujboIb an index fr«<a which thoy can

4

'otdr«lnc a 0 cunoit's Isporcan • ... iT- i;. r *vu crui srvo fcneo fron work

4

• i.. t ttir u h an'. woo wide-, document relates t o.ach part cf the cao
- e . a iin the p.ro in a wrv .me. b-ttor position to review bcc.auso they _
can un.'cratani then. TJic do not, have t deal with trnnslatrrs. Soaotirvos
if is vcr. late when they arc translated. I havo ha.’ .access t
docuuonte.

*A" I take a c&ccunt while .at the pnJioa ab ut Zr. -I It.'u ,).lnt abrut
/ ^

vxj srt witnesses. I Jo n't knew n circuit ... n cncvrnin.: ta/o particular
requests fr experts th\t he J. a i* i.-l.ne/.. ..11 thrsc roquosts ceiio to the

i'r occution re. I . J ' in .v-.r. erne, except two, wo have in.’lcatod

\

a ;-.r >v 1. e havo tx. bjccti r. tc requests an. sent back to tho Inferostion
Center. Th s.. tw rr three cases whore w> have not givrih consent was boc.auso
awaiting call rf 7 ritness froa London, laris, or sonc distant point. In all
cases vc have sai we fr. • no bjcctien to calling cf witnesses in Qomany.

I cami .t believe any -.bjccti n by *'rcsccuti :n has been put in frea securing
witnesses fr a Bjiiclbcrj, C lo~nc, cr elsewhere.

•f:L. TMBUXi (JOcV:o Beals): T.x .drshall trill ci.ar ti:c -m-t while
ihc Jubjos c ao tc a tecisioa of t!ds action. ..11 persons rc.uain at attention
urn J. su;vcn.^l intc tho ^ourt Rcoa.

0*1


5 IX-c-X-ziTO-l-S-P-rriD-FL
Court Ko.-l


THi PR-* Ti Th*. court tea c .naidereo • n. fci »r j«Ud In connoc-
tie; with t.ila tt-r no Lfie s&ir *nt of counsel; the Tribun 1 ruLui
tir.t the action for|»\«ontir^|nce will bo ri.-nied without prejudice-, how¬
ever, t th. ; i tea if th^ defendant* to nr« i nt ?j\y ipprr.prlatc notions
during th- c^ur»j of th- trial for nr.t n-oer.* ry rctaonr.ble rococo.


lth-r to o-cie- o v Art witneao-a or eor.auitnnta to bo pro*

f


th. course of the • froa-cuti-a'a an* in r..t i; » t - a euro other './it -
neso-s or documents. The Tribunal * 1U attiapt to.diaooac of nil no-

v\ £ A *

tiona or r.;>.olicntl^»^*fr the prvn-occ of witnesses or production of i o-

• • •

cuo.nts no l-.t.r than to-orro*. .ill thw .counsel for the Prosecution,
step to the podina? Th- Tribunal is intor-otod, General, in .hetbur or

not you coaid oop;»U.-.-nt tiii# list o 1 documents which has boon filed so

-, .]

thr.t rs to tech document which i: list i, there ni.ht bo, in connection

therewith,’ft short . -n-r -1 stotuauit as to th. subject at ter of
dee intent.


U


CZ'Z R-iL T4fLQR: I .dll "sk Jfr. UcHon y to answer that question.

}!R. Uc.Hftiuif: lx four Honor, pices-, would it bo nocosasry th-t this
descriptive list of documents be translated into German? I think thr.t
possibly we could set up such a list without too ouch difficulty in En¬
glish, but our translation facilities at the present tiau crc cxtroaoly
burdoivd; and if possible. w*. would like to bo relieved of the task of
having this translated into German; or if Defense Counsel would also
take considerable .uorc time, n. could provide it to them in English with¬
in, 24 hours or 46 hours, I should think, r.t least.

THE PR£SIu2Hl: It is not the idea of the Tribunal that the statement
should be very long. 1 know nothing of your translation facilities. I
would assume that if ft brief stctc=ur.t in English wer- filed, it would
probably .aatori-11/ assist the counsel for the defendants, just to givo
e-ch one a bri.f notice of th- contents and the nature of the document so
th t the defendants who are interested in certain specifications under


£38


O' (

5 IX.c-X-Al^-L-J*-Pi-rrir>-FL


Court Ho.-l


THi PH JTD:t T: The court tea o .nalden-u -d in connec-

tior. *ith t.da tt-r no the xgustent. of couns-lj tnu Tribunal rules

thrt the action for o'continuance will bu denied without prejudice-, hou-

k • 1 %

t»^r, to th. ri hta of th s di.fv.ndmt* to invt.r.t =ny ipproprlatc notions
•hiring th- c.ur*j o« tl). trirl for on/ r. OeR& ry re aonr.bU. rococo,

\ f V _

either to &-ciu». J' Art witneac-a or consultants to be luvs-nt iurlng
th. course o L the . h-oaecution'a ca«e in .r to a-curo other wit -

neaa.a or docuxinea. I>.o Tribunal wlllottuapt to.diaoooc of .*>11 no-

GV C- ^ *

tions or r.p.o II c.-tlAo».*<r th. ores-ncc of witn.oaea or protection o 1 < o-

cua.ntfl no LaUr t: n toaorroj*. ill thw counsel for the Pros-cutton

atop to the podiaa? The Tribunal ia interested, General, in .facth.r or

•

not you could supply ent t .ia liat ol JocjccntR which has boon filed ao
that rs to encli document which i; liat.d, thorc nicht bo, in connection

therewith, a short . wnor*l stat-cent '.a to the subject ar.tter of
document, (f

GSKERaL Ta”L 3R: I will -ak Mr. IIcRan y to answer th-t queation.N^ ;
!R. UcH/deof: Ii Your Honor, plena., voold it bo necessary th-t thia
descriptive liat of c'ocuaenta be tr'nalateri into German? I think tir.t
possibly we could j.t up auch a liat without too much difficulty in En¬
glish, but our translation faciliti-s at tlx. present tine are oxtroiauly
burdoixd; and if possible, we would Ilk- to oc relieved of the task of
having thia translated into Xra-.n; or if Do fens. Counsel would also
take considerable /-ore ti-a., we could provide it to them in aiplish with¬
in, 24 hours or U 6 hours, I should think, at least.

THE PRESIuiTT: It is not th. idea of the Tribunal that the str.toaent
should be very long. I know nothing of your translation facilities. I
would assume th-t if a brief statement in ahglish wer. filed, it would
probably sntori.-lly assist the Cvxins.1 for the defendants, just to give
e.-^h one - brief notice of the contents and the nature of the document so
th-t the defendants who an. interested in cert-in specifications undor


5 Doc-*rATD-l-6-?orrin-FL

Court No, 1


thv chcrgo » 0 ”ld know Iroa th?.t that docu-aont did r did not concern
thus*


Ifc. Uc&JEI: Tos, indeed, wo shell do that


5 DoC-Jf-ATD-l-7-Price-FL
Court No. 1


JUDGE BX'-LS: I would like to ask Defense Counsel a question. Do
you think* Counsol, that the filing of - briof statenont in English would

0

b- of jctux^rl assistance to you and would Insufficient until possibly
a Gorman translation could be provided?

LR. So.'VATIUS: It would bo of groat assistance to us. If a number
of Dofenao Couna-1 Save difficulties, wc would be ablo to holp each
other. would be very glad to sot it soon, ttiy I ask about the number
of documents, if we could h'vo twenty-three list* one for each defendant?
Th.ro are t;:onty-throo def-nd-ants, if wc could have twonty-throo copies.

JUDG3 SEALS: I would ask Course 1 fa* the Prosecution to furnish
thr.t if possible. You are excused.

JUDGE S33UNG: General Taylor, is it mechanically possiblo to do

thot?

GENERAL TAYLCE: Yes, Your
it.

JI&G3 63tRINGt V'ithin what

C222R.X T«.YI£U: Veil, we will do our'best to h ve it in within

•

twenty-four houis. Until I chuck with the clerical facilities I an a little
reluctant to e-y d-finitely that we can do it in twenty-four hours,
but wc will shoot for that and I think wo will certainly bo able to have
it in forty-eight.


JUDGE 3XXS: This informal session of the Tribunal will now adjourn.
(The TrifcunaL ad jourxv-d until 9 December 1946, at 1000 hours.)


9 Dcc-L-JP-l^-l-F atcr (kp)

Court No. 1


Off id-* 1 Transcript t the American liilitnry
+ Tribun 1 in th. natter „f the United States

, of Ao-rlca, gainst Karl Br.’ndt, «t al,

defendants, sitting *.t NurnHerg, Geraony on
9 x.cosbar 1946, 1000-1700, Justice 3eal3 presiding.

THE ILiRSHfcL: Military Tribunal No. 1 is ns* in sessirn.

^ *

s-Ye tiic United States of nn-ricr. 'nd this honorable Tribun-Tho|
will bo rdur in the Court. -

THE PR2SI0ANT: Tho Secretary Gonral will ascertain t hat all tho
defendants are T-sent.

THE U.JISH.X: Th- Secretary Gcnorr.l will c* 11 tho roll of the
defen -nts.

(Thj Secretary Gen.rol: K~rl Brandt, Sie -fried Hnndlosor, Paul
Restock, Oskrr ochroodcr, Karl Genzk-n, Karl 3 eghardt, Kurt Blrue,

Ru.’olf Ir-n t, Joachia Ib-ugowsky, Helnut Poppcndick, Wolfram Sievcr^,
GeVhcja Rose, Siegfried Ruff, Hans ff.ofg.ang Roaberg,-Vidor Brack, Hermann
a-ck-r-Freyaong, Geor Q ..ugust \eltz, Konrod Schdofer, l.nlduiaar H>von, ^
hilheln Boi lbuck, Adolf Porkorny, Hortr. Obcrhaus-r, Fritz Fischer.)

THc. SoC.lX.F.Y GditiL.L: .U1 of th^d^ fund ants are -resent .and
occounted Tea*. r t •

TH£ PRSSrL.r’T: The Secretary Genurr.l -fill n>to for the record tho
presence ef tho defendants.

I h*vo two questions nvw to propound to the defendants. As the nrmo
of etch defendant is called ho J?u rise in his place and proccod to tho
center in front of the adcrophor* nd answer tho questions w hich 1 ah 11

v

^rpound to hla. Krrl Br.andt. Your nano is Karl Brandt?

KARL BRAIDT: Yes.'

THE PRESIDENT: Have y^i received-and had an opportunity to road th Q
indictnent filed a gainst you?

KARLJRAI-DT: I have read the indictcont, yes.

A ' t '' Vu yJU '- nUr ''- yjur plea of Not Guilty to this

indietaunt and new Not Guilty?

KnRL ffLJDT: yf* s, I run not guilty.


1


9 Doc-fc-JP-l-2-Fostcr
Coirt Ho. 1


(k?)


THE FBESIDJfT: You ney be so c tell Paul Rostock* la your name Paul
Rostock?

P-JJL ROSTOCK: Yus.

- f

THE PRESTO i’T: Have you received and hove you had an opportunity
to ivad the irr'ictacnt filed agpinst you?

R»UL ROSTOCK: I hove reccl the indictment,

THB rRESTOCirT: Have you entered your ploa of Not Guilty and do you
new plead not Guilty to the indie taunt?

?-UL ROSTOCK: I am Not Guilty.

THE PRESTO A*!T: You nay bo seated. Oakor Schrouder.

•f

OSKAR SC KRONER: Yes.

THE PRESTO-ATT 2 Have you r-ceivod rn had bn opportunity to road tho

• ^

indictment filed against you? f

OSJUR SJHROiDER: Yus.

THE FRESIuJ.T: Havu you entered yoOr pica of Not Guilty to this

indictment and do jax now plead Not Guilty?

* /•

OSK-Ji SC)2tQJiZx: Yus.

THE PRESI£/Si.T: You .or.y be runted. Karl Gunzkon. Is your namo

Karl Genskun? . . — - --

KARL GENZKSN: Yes.

TK3 PRESIDE: HtvV-you received an have you had a n opportunity
to road the irr'lctmont filed a gainst you?

KARL GENZKSN: Yes.

THE prSSIDHi'T: Have you entered your plea of Not Guilty to this
indictment -nd do* you row plead Not Guilty to the indictment?

K.RL GENZKSN: Not Guilty.

THd PRESTO E2T: You may b« s-ated. Karl Gebhardt. Is your namo
Karl Gebhardt?

K.vRL G23KAHDT: Yes.

THE PRESTO AT: Have you received mC have you had .an opportunity
to runt* the indictment filed against you?

K« RL G5SHARDT: Yus.


2


THE PRESID J.T; Have ycu entered your plua of Not Guilty to this
irxSictoont 2 nd* da you now plead Nbtf Guilty to the iixfictnunt?


THE PRESIDENT: Have you received and have you had an opportunity


to rued th> indictoont filed a giinat ycu?


TpE PRESIDENT:. Haro you veered your pl«i of Not Guilty to this
inlictn^nt red do you new plead Not Guilty to the indictment?

KURT BLO E: 4* Guilty.'


THE {RESIDENT: You =cy bw state-:. Rudolf Brandt. la your nrroo

Rudolf Brmdtf r\ •


RUDOLF BLJDT: Yos


THE PRESIDENT: Have you received and havo yju hod an opportunity
to read tho indictncnt filed against you?

RUDOLF ER.JDT: Yos.


1HE PRESIDENT: Have yeu entered y^ur oloa f Not Guilty to this


indictment ax' do you nj« plead Not Guilty to tho indictment ?


RUDOLF BR.EDT: Yos


THE PRESIDENT: Siegfried Hand loser. Is your am Siegfried
Hard loser?

SIEGFRIED H/JDL0S2R: Yus.


TH: PRESIDENT: Have you received and have you had an opportunity
to rued tho indictment filed n^inst you?


SIEGFRIED HENDLOSBR: Yos


THE PRESIDENT: Have you ontorvd your plea of Not Guilty to this
indictment ant do you n^i plead Not Guilty to the indictment?
SIEGFRIED K.I3L0S2P.: Not Guilty.'


THE PRESIDENT: You x y be sjotod. Joachim llru^owsky. Is your namo
Joachia Urugouaky?


JOACHBi -PUGO SKY: Yes


9 DeC-lfr-JM-A-Fost.r • (okp)

Court Kol 1


J


THE HLSSUKCTi Hcva yju received and h'Ve you had an opportunity
to ryad the indi^toiot^ftlod against-^otf?

JO^CHH :3uia0 SKI: I fcatu r«od it.

TIE PRESI- -!T: Have you entered your plfar. of Hot Guilty to this
inllctnent \nd do you no.i plead Not Guilty to this indictment?

JG..CHH! IltUGO SKI: I pl*od Not Guilty.

THE PRESIDENT: HoLaut Poppendick. Is your acne Helmut P^tendick?

HiUflTT :\)PP2NDICKx YoB.

THE PRESIDENT: Have you received end h-vo you had ar^o^portunity
to ru-.d the indie taunt filud in this c-Se against you?

KEU.TJT POPPENDICK: Yes. --\


THE EftaSIDJI.T: Have you onto rod your pled of Not Guilty to this
in-’.ictiLnt “nd do you $ow plead Not Guilty to this indictnx-nt?

12L!IUT POPP JDICK: Ye s.

THE PPESID l.’T: You any be a-ated. Wo If r on Siuvers. Is your naoo
Wolfrra Siuvurs?

‘.OLFUdi SLIVERS: Yes.

THE HIESIDEET: Hr.v«. you received nc. Iv vu


Q


opportunity


to road.tfu in.'.ictaunt fiL-d against you ?


•.0LFR.ll SLIVERS: Yes.

THE FRSSIdENT: Ka.vu you entered your plea of Not Guilty to tils
indicant and do you non piled Not Guilty to this indictment?


‘.OLFRAU SliV.RS: Ye s.

THE FRESIDEIIT: You any seated. Curb* re! Rose. Is your naiao
Gerhard Rose?

GJRJLJiD RQ- I: Yus.

. THE PFcESIiEIiT: Ifevu you xvcieVed n-' have you hod nn opportunity
to Ried th. in’.ictnvjnt filed -gainst you?

GERHARD ROSE: Yus.

THE FRESlEEiT: Havu you entered your plea of Not Guilty'to this
indictment and do you now plead Not Guilty to this iniictcv.nt?


U


THE PBESOSST: T« aay to eeetedi Siegfried *uff


SIE3JSIZ3 PUTT: fee


TEE KIZSniXST: Have yew received and have you had an onoortunity
to read theindlctnent filed in thle ceee agalnat you?


SliGlHIiJ) RU77: Tee


TEE PEiSnaHT: Have you entered your plea of Hot Oullty to "thi
lndlctaent and do you now plead Sot Oullty to thie lndlctaent?


SUOmiSD HU 77: Tee, Hot Oullty.


THE PSSSHBRt EaneV-Volfgang Bocherg. Ie your naao Hane Wolfgang
Roaterg ? . '■


HASS VOUTOASO RCKBE.-.0: Tee


THE PriSIDIST: Havo you ontered your plea of Sot Oullty to thle
lndlctaent end do you now plead Sot Oullty to thle lndlctaent?


HASS WCLTSASO HCHEIEOj Sot Oullty


THE PHXSIDEHIi You nay to eeatod. Viktor


nano Viktor


Brack?


VIZTCE BHACiC Te


THE PRESIDEHT: Have you rocoived and have you had an opportunity
to road the lndlctaentfilod agelne.t you?

VHTOR BBACX: Tee. . •

THE_PRESIDES!: Have you entered your plea* of Sot Oullty to thle

v •

lndlctaent and do you-now nload Hot Oullty to thle lndictaont?
VDCTQH BRACK : I plead Hot Guilty.

TEE PRESIDES!: You nay ho seated. Hemann rucker-Preyseng. Ie yo
nrne Heraann Beckor-Freyeeng?

BXBKASS BEQCLH-KSYSEHO: Toe.


you received and have you had an opportunity to


road tho lndlctaent filed agalnat you?


0 Dec 46-4^7P-l-€-Io»ter

Court So. 1


'tficniw BXC3CLE-J5STSEW: Tea.

TES PRESIDENT: Have you entered your plea of Hot Guilty to thle
lxdlctment ad do you now plead Sot Guilty to this Indictment?

HSdUSS RICKER *J SET SESG: Tea.

TEX fSESIDEST: You nay be seated. Georg August Welt*. Is your nane
Georg August Welts?

GEORG AUGUST VELTZ: T#s.

\ .

THE PRESIDE’.!: Have you reoelved andhove you had an om'irtunlty to
road the Indictment filed against you?


OOEP.O AUOUST VELTZ: Yes. ,

THE PRESIDENT: Have you entered your pice of Hot Guilty to this
indictment and do you now plead Sot Guilty to this lndlctnent?
OQEaO AUGUST * ELTZi Sot Guilty. »

THE PRESIDENT: You say he seated. Konrad Schaefer. Is your nano

s (5^.

tfnnrari Srhnofnr? • i V


Konrad Schaofor?

KONRAD SCHAEFER: Yes.


V


THE PRESIDENT: Have you received and have you had an oonortunity to
road tho indictment filed against you?

KONRAD SCHAEFER: Yes.

THE KiZSIDENT: Have y^u entered your ploa of Not Guilty to this
Indictment and do you now plead Sot Guilty to thle Indictment?

KOfiRAD SCHAEFER: I plead Not Guilty

THE PRESIDENT: Waldemar Hovon. Is your acne Veldonar Hovon?

VALBEHAR HOVEH: Yoe. ^

* • ^

THE PRESIDED: H P ve you received andhove you had an oomortunlty to
road the Indictment filed against you?

VALDSKAE EOVZS: Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Have you entered your oloa of Sot Guilty to this
Indictment and do you now pit ad Sot Guilty to this Indictment?

VALIEKAR EOYES: Yes.

THE PRESIDENT: You nay he seated. Vilhelm Beiglhock; Is ycur nane

* »

Wilhelm Belglhocic? ,


9 Doc -G-JB-l-7-Foetor (ST)
Court Ho. 1


iXIHSKi ESIQISCCKj Teal

THE PRESIDENT t £ave you reed, vod and havo you had an opportunity to

/

' road the indictaent filed against you?

TI2EU! EEIGIBOCK: Too.

THE PRESIDENT t Havo you onto rod yourploa of Hot Guilty to this
indictoont and do you near plead Hot Guilty to this indictoont?


TflLHEUi BEIGIBOCK: I plead Hot Guilty


THE PRESIDENT* Adolf Pokorny, Is your nano Adolf Pokomy?

P-DOLF POXCRHTi Tos. ~

THE HUS IDEM!: Have you received and have ycu had an opportunity
to rood tho indictoont filod against you?

* I

. •

-DOLF POKORHT: Tos..


THE RESIDENT* Have you ontorod your ploa of Hot Guilty to this
indictoont ard do you nor pload Hot Guilty to this indictoont?
ADCLF POKORNY: Hot Guilty.

THE PRESIDENT* Horta Ctoorhausor. Is your nano Horta Oborhausor?

HSRE1 OBERHAUSER* Tos. . r

THE HIES ID ENT: Havo you rocoivod and havo you had an opportunity

to read ti» indictoont filod against you? f

HERTA 03ERH-.15 R* Tos. vy

• •

t:E PRESIDEHT* Havo you onto rod your ploa of Hot Guilty to this
Indiotnorrt and do you nowpload dot Guilty to this indictoont?
HERTA 03LR H».USER * Hot Guilty. '

THE PRESIDENT: Tou nay bo soatod. Fritz Gischor. Is your nrno
Frotz Fischer?

FRITZ FISCIER* Yes.

TiE PRESIDENT* Havo you reccivcdoid havo you had an opportunity
to read tho indictoont filod against you?

FPJTZ FISCIfiR* Tos.

PRESIDENT* Havo you ont-red your ploa of Hot Guilty to this

• •

indictoont and do you nowpload '.lot Guilty to this indictoont?


7


FRITZ FISCHER s Yes, not g*llt»

IHE FRESIEEKT : The Secretary General will -note the
questions end answers propounded to the defendants.


.


j


/


THE PRESIDENT: I have a wfeich I desire to aako for the

benefit of tho prosecution, dof oifcanta, /and nil corccrnod* Bo fore o;
inc tho trial of Caso Ib» 1, tho United i^ifcxtes of 'America against
Karl Brandt, ct al, there are certain natters /which the Tribunal
dcsiftbs to call to tho attention of thocounsol for tho prosooution


1. Tho prosecution my bo allowed, for tho pur peso of mking tho
opening statenont in this caso, tino not to oxcocd one trial day.This


tino my bo allocated by tho chiof prosecutor, botrroori hireolf and
ary of his assistants, as ho desires.

2 . Tfhon tho prosooution has rootod' its caso, dofonso counsol will
bo nllowod tre trial days which, to nako thoir opning statononts,
and which vd 11 conprchond tho ontiro thoory of thoir respective
dofonsos. Tho tino allocotod will be dividod botwoon tha difforont
dofonso counsol, as thoy my thousolvcs agree. In tho ovont tho
clofonso counsel cannot ogreo, tho Tribunal will allocate tho tino, not

to oxooed thirty ninutos to each dofondant.

4

3. Tho prosooution shill, not loss thantnortty-four hours, boforo it
dosiros to offer ary record or docuncnt or writing in ovidonco, as pa rt

I

of its caso in chief, filo with tho dofonso infomation contcr not
loss than ono copy’ of such record', ’ docunont or writing for oach of
tho counsol for dofondants, oich oopios to bo in tho Goman'language.

Tho prosecution shall also deliver to tho ddfonso infomation ctrfft


at loast four copiosthoroof in tho Englidi languago. ^

l- ’fnon tho prosecution or any dofondant offers a record, docunopt
cr any othor writing or a copy thereof in e vidonco there shall bo
dolivorOd to tho Secretary Gonoral in.'edition to tho original docunont
or othor instrument in writing so offorod for adnisdon ovidonco, six
erfpios of tho docunont. If tho documnt is written or printed in. a

languago other than'English, thcro shall also bo filed -.1th tho copies

• ‘ • ^

of the docuncnt oabovo referred to , six copies of an English trans¬
lation of the docuncnt. If such docuncnt is offorod by any defendant


Court No. 1


(SI)


suitablo facilities for procuring Ehgli* translations of that
docunont shall be node available to the dofondanta.


> 9 Dco-l«HS-2-2-Board (SV)
Court No. 1 t.


5. At 1 aat twonty^four hours boforo a witness iscallcd to tho stand,
either by tho prosocution or by any deforciant, tho party who doslros to
interrogate tto ritnoss mall deliver to tho Socrotary Goncral an orig¬
inal and aixcopiea of a nenarandun rtiioh shall disclose* 1* Tho nar» of

* • •

tho witnosa. 2. Hiarvttonality, 3* His rcsi.donee or station. U« His
official rank or position. 5. 'Thothor ho is call od as an oxport tritnoss
or as a witness to testify to facts, and if tho’lattor, a prepared
atatoaont of tho subjoct natter on ihich tho witness will bo intorrogatod.
^hon tho prosocution properoo such a statonont in connection with tho
witness who it dosiroa to call, at tho tino of tto Uling of this
■tatouon^, two additional copios thoroof shall bo delivorod to tho
dofonso information contor. Tfhon a dofondant proper os such a state¬
ment concerning anltnoss who it dooiros to call, tho doforclmt shall

at tho «bo tino tho copiosaro f ilod with tho Socrotary Gonoral, dolivor

ono additional copy to tho prosocution.

6 . ’.fhon oithor tho prosocution or a dofondant dosiros tho Tribunal -to

tako judicial notico of any official Oovornaont docunonts or reports

of the Uni tod Nations, including ary action, ruling or regulation of

any Oomittoo, Board, or Counso, hcrotoforo oatablistod by or in th>

Alliod Nations for tho investigation of ifar Crlnos or any record mado

by or tho findings of any Military or othor /fGbuhsl, this Tribunal

0

osy rofuso to tako judicial notico of Such docuoonts, rules, or

0

regulations, unless tho party proposing, ask this Tribunal to judic¬
ially notico such docunonts, rulos, or regulations, place a c£py '
tlicroof in writing boforo tho Tribunal, * \\

This Tribunal has loomed with s atisfaction of tho procoduro adopted
by tho prosocution rith tho intontion to furnish to the dofonso counsol
infomation concorning tho writings or docunonts which tho prosocution
oxpocts to offer in ovidonco for the purposo of affording to tho
dofonso counsol information to holp then prepare thoir rcspoctivo
dofonso to tho indictnonts. The dosLro of tho Tribunal is that this bo

nado available to tho dofondants so as to aid then in tho rroschtation

ID


9 Doo -JJ-GE5-2-2-Board (ST7)
Court Ho. 1


of their reapcctivo defenso.

The United States of Aoorica having established this’illitary
Tribunal One, pursuant to lan, through properly onpoworod Military
authorities, and the


10(A)


9 Dec-*WES-2->Board(S7)
Court - Ho. 1


./


defendants havin,; boon brought •» before Military ''Tibunal Ore, pursuant

• • •

to iulidtnants filed Docenber 5th, 19U6, in the Offico \of the Socro-

I

iy General of tho Military Tribunal at Numborg, Germany,- by an

•

officor of tho United Statos .'jny, regularly designated as Chief of

% M

Counsel for 'Tar Criaos, acting on behalf otho Unitod States of America,
pursuant to appropriate Military authority, and tho indietaonts having
boon served upon each defendant for aoro than thirty days prior to

• • 4

this dato, and a copy of tho indictoonts in tho Go roan language) having
boon furnished to o ach do fondant, and having boon in his possession
for noro than thirty days, and oach defends! having had anplo opport¬
unity to road tho indictoonts, and having regularly entered his ploa
of not guilty to the indictoonts, tho Tribunal is ready to procood with
tho trial.

This Tribunal *t 11 conduct tho trial in accordance with controlling

lavra, ruloa, and regulations, and with duo regard to appropriate pro-

codcnco in a sincoro ondoavor to insuro both to tho prosecution and

to oaoh and ovory doforxlant an opportunity to prosont all oviJonco

of an appropriate valuo bearing upon tho issuos boforo tho Tribunal;

to this ond, that undor law and ponding regulations topirtetri'lco

nay bo acconplishod. v

Tho trial, of course, will bo a public trial, not ono bohitfd clo3od
•

doors; but bocauso of 1initod facilities availablo tho Tribunal oust
insist that tho nunbor of spectators bo linited to tho seating capac¬
ity of tho court rooa. Passes wifi thcroforo bo issuod by tho approp¬
riate authorities to thoso wbo nay enter tho court room. The Tribunal
will insist that good oreor bo at all tines maintained, and approp-
riato measures vail be taken to sco that this rule is strictly onforcod.

For tho inforoation of all concornod, tho Tribunal announcos that
hearings will bo had oach day this week coxxoncing at 9.30 o'clock
through Friday. The Tribunal will rcconvono at 9.30 o'clock, Monday
Dcconbor 16, 19U6, and will hold sessionsevery day cf that weak includ¬
ing S-turday, on which day, however, tho Tribunal willrccossuntil

11


9 Doc-H-ATD-3-1 (FL)
Court No. 1


I should have stated that on Saturday of next week the
Tribunal will recess at 12i3C o'clock.

The Prosecution may now commence its opening statement.
TEuFURD TAYLOR . The defendants in thi6 case

are charged with murders, tortures, and other atrocities

*

cemitted in the name of medical science. The victims of
these crimes -are numbered-in the hundred of thousands. A

T %

handlUl only are st-lll alive j a few of the survivors will
appear in this courtroom. But most of these miserable victims

,  * A * f

were slaughtered-outright or died in the cours of the tor¬
tures to which they were subjected.

4 For the most part they arc nameless dead. To .their mur¬
derers, thw-sc wr^-t^hed people were not individuals at all.
They came in whosnle lots and were treated worse than nni-


.ial8. Th<.y were 2CC Jews in good physical condition, 50
Gypsies, 5CG tubercular Foies, or 1,000 Russians. The vic¬
tims of thesds crimes are numbered among the anonymous mil¬
lions who met death at the hands of the Nazis and whose'"' 1
f"te is a hideous blot on the page of modern history, (•, ^S)

The charge-s against these defendants arc brought in
the name of the United States of America. They are being
tried- by q court of American.judges. The responsibilities
thus imposed upon the representatives of the United States,
prccccutors and judges alike, are grave and unusual. They
"re owed not cnly to th.. victims, and to the parents and
children of the victims, that just punishment be imposed
».n thu guilty, and not only tc the defendants, that they be
'-ccorded  fair herring ^nd decision. Such responsibilities

t

-re the ordinary burden of any tribunal. Far wider are the
duties which w w must fulfill here.

Th*_so larger obligations run tc the peoples and races


X


- 12


9 Dec-I!-.»TD-3-l (FL)

Court lie. 1

>•

cn whoa the scourge of these crimes wee laid. The morc^ <
pur.ishacnt of the defendants, or even of thousands of ethers
equally guilty, can never redress the terrible injuries
which the Nazis visited on these unfeijtun^tc peoples. For
the a it is far aore important that these incredible events
be- established by clear »nd public proof, so that no one can
over doubt that they woro fact end not fable, and that this

"" ( J* - --- _ , .

Court, as the agent cf the United States and as the'voice of
humanity, st-'.-p these acts, "nd the ideas which engendered
then, as barbarous and criminal.

v/e. have still other responsibilities her^ The defendants
in the dock arc charged with murder, but this is no mere
aurdor trial. We cannot rest content •


9 Dec-::-.vTD-3-2-Blokely (FL)
Court No. 1


when we have shown that crimes were committed and that cer¬
tain p^F&Jns committed then. To kill, to maim, and to tor-

* ' i

fare is criminal under ell aodern systems cf law. Those de¬
fendants did net kill in not blood, nor for personal enrich
s^ient. So .jo cf them nay be sedists, who killed and tortured
for sport, but they are not all perverts. They arc not
ignorant cun. Host of them are trained physicians and some
cf then are distinguished scientists. Yet these defendants,

all cf wh„a wore 'fully able to comprehend the nature of

• / •

their acts, and most of whom were exceptionally qualified

%

to form a moral end professional judgment in this respect,
are responsible for%holesale murder and unspeakably cruel
'tortures.

. It is our deep obligation to all peoples of the world
to show why and how these things happened. It is incumbent
upon us to set forth with conspicuous clarity the ideas wid
motives which moved these defendants to treat their fellow
men as less than beasts. The pervers- thoughts and distorted
concepts which brought about these savageries arc,not dead.
They cannot be killed by force of arms. They musvnot be¬
come a. spreading cancer in the breast of humanity. They •

.jj&t be cut out *nd exposed, for the reason so well stated
by Mr. Justice J-ckscr. in this courtroom a year ago : %


y


"The wrongs which-we seek to condemn and ^

punish have been so calculated, sc malignant, and -
sc devastating that civilization cannot tolerate
their being ignored because it cannot survive
their being repented."

To the German people we ow^ a special responsibility
.in these proceedings. Under .the leadership cf the Nazis and
their war lords, t..e Gorman nation spreda. death *-nd devas¬
tation throughout Europe. This the Germans new know, so,

tj.c, uo th».y kn-w the consequences to Germany. Defeat, ruin,

• •

prostration, ana utter demoralization. Most German children

- 13 -


9 DcC-:i-.'»Ti>-3-2-51el:ely (PL)

Court No. 1

will never, sc long r.s they live, see an undamaged German
city. *

Tc what cause will these children ascribe the defeat
„f the German nation end the devastation that surrounds
them ? •/ill they attribute it to the overwhelming weight of
numbers and resources that was eventually leagued against
the-: ? '..Ill they point tc the ingenuity cf enemy scientists?
./ill they perhaps blame their plight cn strategic and mili¬
tary blunders by their generals ?

If the Germans embrace those reasons as the true cause

f

cf their disaster, it will be sad and fatal thing for Ger-
many and for the world. lion who have never seen a German
city intact will be callous about falttoning English or
.’onericon or Russian cities. They ary not even realize that
they are destroying anything worth-


- 13 a -


9 iXc-Li-.vTD-3-3-3lekely (=L)

\

Court N 94 1 S


/

while, for lack of a npraol s^nse of values. To recstilish
the greatness cf Germany, they .arc likely tc pin their faith
.n improved military techniques. Such views will lead the
Germans straight into the arcs of the Prussian militarists
to whoa defect is only a glorious opportunity to start a
new rr game. "Next tiac it will be different.2 We Know
*11 toe well what that will aean.

This case, and ethers which will be tried in this build¬
ing offer a signal opportunity to lay before the German ,
people the true cause cf their present misery. The walls
?nd towers and churches of Number were, indeed, reduced
to rubble by Allied buabs, but in p deeper sense Nurnberg
had been destroyed a decade earlier, when it became tho seat
cf the annual Nazi Party rallies, a focal point for tho rao-
rrl disintegration in Germany, and the private domain of
Julius Streicher. The insane and malignant deettines that
Nurnbcrg spewed f. rth account alike fer the crimes of theso


defendants and for the terrible fate of Germany under tyfie ^
Third R“ich. kJ

A nation which deliberately infects itself with poison
will inuvitably sicken and die. These defendants and others
turned Germany into an infernal ccmbinaticn of a lunatic
asylum and a charnel house. Neither science, nor industry,
nor the arts could flourish in such a foul medium. The coun¬
try Cwuld -ndt~iive at peace and was fatally handicapped for

•

war. I do not think the Gerara-pecple have as yet any con¬
ception of hew deeply the criminal felly that was Nazism
bit int^ every phase of German life, or cf how utterly rnvag-
ing th»- consequences were. It will be cur task to make these
things clear.

These arc the high purposes which justify the establish


a^nt of extraordinary courts to hear and determine this case

- 14 -


3 Dec-Ii-ATD-3-3-31ekely (=L)
Ccurt N$4 1


while, for leek of a normal sense of values. To reestablish

Ls -* -

the greatness of Germany, they are .likely to pin their faith
wn improved military techniques. Such views will lead tho
Gc^-nans straight into the arns of the Prussian militarists
to whea defeat is only a glorious opportunity to start a

new w^r game. "Next time it will be different.2 We know

•

all too well what that will nc*n.^

This ca sc, and others which will be tried in this build¬
ing offer a signal opportunity to lay before the German
people- the true cause cf their present misery. The walls
?nd towers and church v s of Nucriber were, indeed, reduced
to rubble by Allied b-mbs, but in a deeper sense Nurnberg
had boon destroyed a decade earlier, when it became the seat
cf the annual Nazi Party rallies, a focal point for tho mo-
rrl disintegration in Gpraany, and the private domain of
Julius Streicher. The insane and malignant dcctfines that
Nurnberg spewed f rth account alike for tho crimes of theso
defendants and for the terrible fate of Gernsny under
Third R~ich.


)


* netion which deliberately infects itself with poison
will inevitably sicken and die. These defendants and others
turned Germany into an infernal combination of a lunatic
asylum and a charnel house. Neither science, nor industry,
nor tho arts could flourish in such a foul nedium. Tho coun¬


try c^ulu -ntt live at peace and was fatally handicapped for
wcr. I do net think the Gerarn-pecple have ns yet any con¬
ception of hew deeply the criminal felly that was Nazism
bit intv- every phase cf Gorman life, or cf hew utterly rnvag-
ing the consequences were. It will be cur task to make these
■things clear.

These arc the high purposes which justify the establish


•^.nt cf extraordinary courts to hear end determine this case

- 14 -


9 Dec-H-ATD-3-3-Blakely (FL)


Court No. 1

%

and ether* of comparable importance. That carder should be
punished gees without the saying, tat the full performance
cf our task requires more* than the just sentencing of these
^defendants. Their crimes were the inevitable result of the
ni 6 t^r doctrines which they espoused, end these sane doc-

i :

trines sealed the fate cf Germany, shattered Europe, and

•

left the w-rld in dergient. Wherever those doctrines may
emerge and prevail, the 6 aae terrible consequences will follow.
That is why a bold and lucid consummation of these procee¬
dings is of vital importance to all nations. That is why
the United States has constituted this Tribunal.


- 14


9 Doo-M-^TD-^-^Blaialoy- (<JC)
Court No. 1


THE ST.iTE MEDICAL SERVICES OF THE THIRD REICH
I pass now to the facts of the case in hand. There are
twenty-three defendants In the box. *11 but three of them
— Rudolf Brandt, Slevere, and 3raok — are doctors, of
tho twenty-dootors'. Of the twenty-dootors, all but one—

%

Pkorny—held positions In tho medical services of tho Third
Roidh. To understand this oase, It.Is necessary to undor-
stand the general structure of those state medical services,
and how thoso services fitted into the over-all organl^fttr
lori of the Nail State. '{

To assist tho Court in this regard, tho prosoout'i-on,^
has propared a shert expository brief, which is already In
tho hnnds of tho Court and whloh has been made available
to dofonse counsol In Gorman and English. Tho brief In-,
cludos a glossary of themoro froquont Gorman words or ex¬
pressions which will occur In this trial-most of them tho
vocabulary of-military, nodical, or governmental affairs.

• It also lnoludes a tablo of equivalent ranks betwoen the

Amorloan Army and the German iirmy and the S3 and of tho
• •

medloal ranks uaod In tho Oerman armed foroes and tho SS,


Finally, It lnoludos a chart showing tho subordination of
tho several Oerman nodical sorvloes within the general
framework cf the German state. This ohart has boon enlarged
and Is displayed at the front of the courtroom.

Following thlp opening statement, Mr. HcHaney will
in opening the presentation of ovldenoe on behalf of tte

prosecution, offer in evidence a aeries of detailed charts

v

of the various German medical services, which have boon
certified as accurato by tho defendants Handloser, Schroe-
der, Karl Brandt, Hrugowsky, and Brack. The chart which I
am now directing to theattentlon of the Tribunal is a


9 Doo-14-«Ii>-*-4-31nkeley-U»X)
Court No. 1.


composite chart based upon thoao which nr. MoHanoy will
offer In evidence. Tbo chart in the front of the courtroom
to which I now referring will not be offered in evidence;
it la intended 'merely as a convenient guide to the Court
and to ddfense oounsel to enable them to follow tho opening
statement and to comprehend the over-all structur of the
Gorman medical sorvicoa.

All power in the Third RBlch derived from Adolf

Hitler, who as at one and tho same tine the head of tho

% % _ # _ _ _

government, the loador oT tho Nazi P'irty, and the comman¬
der-in-chief of the armed forces. His title as head of tho
government was Reich Chanoellor. Ho was the "Fuehrer" of
tho Nazi party, and the "Supreme Commander-In-Chief" of
the Wohrnacht. Immediately subordinate to Hitler were the .
ohlafs of tho armod foroos, tho principal cabinet minis-
torsion tho government, and the loading officials of tho
Party. The only defendant in the dook who was


9 Dcc-L-A7D-3-5-3lakely- (3J)-
Court No. 1

directly responsible to Hitler himself is tne dofendant Karl Brandt

The Court will observe that the defendants fall into three main
groups. Sight of then were members of the medical service of the German
Air Force. Seven of them were ncabers of the medical service of the SS.
The remaining eight include the defendants Karl Brandt and Handles or,
who occupied top positions in the medical hierarchy; it includes the
three defendants who arc not doctors; the defendant Rostock, who was
an immediate subordinate of Karl Brandt; the defendant Blome, a medical
official of the Nasi Party; and thi defendant Pokomy, whcen we have grou¬
ped under the SS for reasons which will appear later.

* • * , •

I will deal first with thi. military side of the case. Hitler,
as Supreme Cocmandcr-in-chief of the German armed forces, cxcercised
his authority through a staff called the Supreme Command of the Armed
Forces, better known by its German initials, OK7 (for Oberkoomando dor
•Ychrnacht). The Chiof of this staff, through-out the period with which
this case will concern itself, was Field ..arshal rtilholn Koitcl.

Under the OKrf cane the Supreme Commands of the three branches
of the rfchrnacht the Navy (OKI.), the Army (OKH), and the Air Forco(OKL).


16


? Dec-..-ATD-h-l-3urns -(oj)_

Court No. 1

Grand Admiral Eric Raider was the Cc&uander^ in-Chief of the German Navy


until 19h3j when he was succeeded by Grand Adairal Karl Docnitz. Prior
to the outbreak of the war, the Cocnander-in-Chief of the German A ray
was Field ..arshal von Erauchitsch; in December 19U1, Brauchitsch was
relieved and hitler himself took this position. Hermann Gocring was the
Cocr^ndcr-in-Chlcf of the Geraan Air Force with the rank of Reichsmar-
shall, until thu very last month of the war.


Each of the three branches of the rfchraacht had its own medi¬
cal service. For purpoic of this case, the medical service of the Navy
is not of much imper tance. During cost of the war the defendant Handlo-
ser was the chief of the medical service of the “eraan Array ; in 19luli


he was succeeded in this capacity by Dr. /either. The chief of thu nodi-
cal service of tho German Air Force until 19b3 was Dr. Erich Hippkej
from January, 19Mu until thu end of the war, it was tho defendant Schroe-


dcr. Subordinate to the defendant Schroedcr ar_ soven other defendants
from the Air Fore*, medical service, whose functions I willdes¬
cribe later on. • \

I turn now to the second principal group of defendant# those
affiliated with the SS. The SS was noainally a part of the Nazi Party,
and cane under hitler in his capacity as Fuehrer of the N5DAP. In fact.


during thu years of the Nazi regime, the SS expanded into a vast complex
of military, police, and intelligence organizations. Th- head of this


extraordinary combine was hein rich Himmler, with of ^cichsfuehrer SS._

• e

Thu SS had its own medical service, beaded'by Grawitz, who bore th. title
R-ich Physician SC.

The SS, in turn ra3 divided into many departments, of which one
of the most important was the Ara-d or .taff.n SS. Th. rxabers of tlie /af-

--- A

f.n oS Were trairv-d and quipp-d as rv ular troops, wer forced into regu¬
lar military-formations, and fought at th. -rent sid. vith the troops oi
the /ehraacht . By Uk end of the iar there wr. soa-thirty SS Divisions
in tlie line. The head of the medical services of tn- ..alien SS vas tho


• f* ndant i-na: oj.


17


/


9 Dec.-^-ATD-ii-l-Bums-(GJ)-

v

.Court No* 1

Six other defendants were members of the SS medical Service


end therefore subordinated to Grawitz.

The German civilian medical services derived their authority
both from the German government and from the Nazi Party. The medical .


chief on the civilian sido was Dr. Leonardo Conti


Part;

,2o


in October 19U5• Dr. Conti occupied the position of Secretary of State


oomitted suicide


for Health in the Ruich Kinistry of the Interior. In


17-a


9 Dec-M-ATD-4-2-Burns^(AX)

Court No. 1

‘ ~ ~ ~)

this oopacity, Conti was a subordinate of the Minister of

tho Interior, Dr. Wilhelm Frick, until 194"* and there¬
after to Heinrich Himmler, who assumed the additional
duties of Minister of the Interior in that year.

Conti also held the title in the Natl party of Reich
Health Leader. His doputy in this capacity was tho defen¬
dant Blomo. as Reich Hoalth Leader, Conti was subordinate
to tho Nazi Party Chancellery, the chief of which was^
Martin Bormann. fj? |

us the Court will see from the chart, the thre&.
principal people in tho hierarchy of German state health
and medicine are tho defendants Karl Brandt and Handlosor,
and tho deooased Dr. Conti. In July 1942, Hitler issued
a decree,‘ a copy of whloh will later bo road boforo tho
Court, which established tho defondant Handlosor as ohlof
of tho inodlcal services of tho Wohrmaoht. Shown on tho
chart here Handlosor's nano appears in this capacity^
Handlosor was glvon supervisory and professional authority
ovor tho medical sorvicos cf all throe br inches of tho
Wohrmaoht. Inasmuch as tno Waffer. SS oaao to constitute
an important part of tho armod forcos.-Handlosor*-a supor-
vleery authority also extended to the defendant Genzken,
Chief of the Medloal Services of tho Vaffon SS. In this
position n andloser was charged with the coordination of
all common tasks of the medical Borvloos of tho Wohrmacht
and the Waffon 33. Ho thus became tho principal figure
in j^rm^n t^llltary medicine. Just as Dr. Conti was tho
control figure in the field of civilian medicine.

Handlosor, and Conti, as will be seen from the chart
wore not directly responsible to Hitler hlmsolf. Handlbser 1


r,


responsibility ran to Hitler through the OXtf and Conti's

- 18 - *


9 Deo-M-<*TI>-4-2~Burn&- (AK)
Court No. 1


through the Ministry of the interior and the Chief of the
Natl Party Chancery.

•

In 1S42 Hitler for the first tine established a
nodical and health official under his direct control. This
official was the defendant Rarl Brandt. A Hitler decree of
July 1942 gave Brandt the title plenipotentiary for Health
and Medical sorvloes, and empowered him to carry out spec¬
ial tasks and negotiations with roferonce to the requirem¬
ents for doctors, hospitals, medical suppllos, etc,,
botwoen the military and civilian sectors of the health and
sanitation aystoms. Brandt's role, therefore, w*\s to coor¬
dinate the requirements of the military and olvlllan agon-
olos in the flols of modiolno and public health.


6 ^QC-M--xTI>-4-.V-Burn»- ()
Court No, 1


Dr. Karl 3randt had boon thp personal physician to
Hitler sinoo 19*4. Ho was only *8 yoara old at tho tlrao
ho assumed the Important duties conferred by tho 1942
decree. Hie rise continued.

In Soptonber 194*, Hitler Issued another decree whloh
gave Brandt tho title of General Commissioner for Sanit¬
ation and Health and empowered him to coordinate and direct
the probloms and activities of the entire administration
for sanitation and health. This authority was expllolty
extonded to tho field of nodical soienoo and research.

• *••••. • \ v

Finally, In August 1944, Hitler appointed Dr. Brandt
Roiohkommlsaar for Sanitation and Hoalth, and otated that
in this capacity Brandt*s offloo ranked as tho "hlghust

%

Roloh authority*. Brandt was authorltod to laauo Instruc¬


tions to tho Medical off loos and organl rations of the


government,


to the party, and tho.arraod forces,


flold of sanitation and hoaltb.

Karl Brandt, as tho supremo nodical authority in tho

Reich, appointed tho defendant Paul R.otok aa his Immediate

•j •


subordinate to head the Offico for Scientific and Hodtal


Roriunroh. Rostock 1 8 position reached Into tho activities


of the nodical societies, tho medical colleges, and tho
Reich Researoh Council. 3randt also appointed .ULmlral
Flokent8chor, who had theretofore been tlj'o, chief modlcal
officer of the German Navy, as his subordinate to head


the Office for Planning and Production. In this field,
Flckentscher dealt with tho principal labor authorities,
the Ministry of Economics, and the Ministry for .armament
and Var Production.

*

As chief of tho medical service of the German Air

Forces, the defendant Schroeder also held one of the most

- 19 -


9 Deo-H-.iTl>-4—‘'-Burris -(.£)

L-^- Court No* 1

/ '\jy

inportant positions in the German modi cal hierarchy. He
and the defendant Handloser both held the rank of Genoral-


oberstabsartz the highest rank In the Bernan medical ser¬
vice and taie equivalent i :ioutonant General in the
..nerloAa army- I. .do not propose to go into detail concer¬
ning the positions held by the beven defendants who were
under Schroodor, inasmuch as Mr. MoHAnoy will introduce*

I • 0

charts which show in groat detail the structure of the
German .dr Forco Medical Service., vh'.oh have been Au¬
thenticated by the isfondant dohroelor hlmsolf. The

f * •. S • _ • ■

' defondant Ro»e ild -t hlghrank in the ’Air Force medical

• \ *

amrviaJ equlvAlont to that of drlgadlor Oonoral in tho


American Army and was


/


V


- 19a -


SS physicians who were 3h'own on the chart as the subordinate::


9 Ex c. -aTL- u-li- _ urns-( G J) -


Court Ko,l . \ ^ y

appointed special adviser to Schroeder* on natters pVriainina to tropical
medicine, held a chair at one of the most important Grrma^ .-rAdical, in¬
stitutes, and is one of the nost distinguished s cientists in tnfc-.aock.
The defendant iecker-rreyseng headed Schroeder'S
tion Medicine, at Munich. The defendant felts was
te for Aviation Ledlcine at kunich. The particular functions of the
defendants Puff, Pooberg, Schaefer, and Beiglcock will appear as we
proceed with the presentation of the evidence.

T will HVwrina rv»«wnvAr v»-v hri’lv t.hf- detailed functions of

the six

of Grawitz. detailed charts of the SC medical service, authenticated by
the defendat uugowsky, ’will shortly be introduced in evidence. The
defendant Gebhardt wa^. hinaler's p rsonal physician ar.d he held a rank
A the SS equivalent to that of a .ajor general in the Axorican Array.

-re became the Freident of the German Ped Cross . Ke was t)w chied sur-
~--g«on bn'Tirawitz's staff, and also headed tho hospital at hohonlychon,
in which Capacity the defendants Obcrheuser and •ischer


were


tar.ts. The doiendant roppondick was the chief of drawittz's

r ' ''y

staff. The defendant .umgowsky was Grawitz*s chiof hygienist
headed the hygienic Institute ol Uie af.-en SS. The defendant
the Chief doctor of the 3uchenwald concentration camp.

The defendant r okomy is a private physician who had no official connec¬
tion with the government .;edical service. .ft have shown hin on the chart
underneath^the group of S3 physicians for reasons which will appear in

tij? course of presenting the evidence concerr.in, sterilization experiments
\ / •

(paragraph 6 ( 1 ) of the indict ont.

The three defendants who are not doctors arc shown in the top
righthand corner of the chart. Two of tnec~ udol‘ randt and “rack—are

administrative officers, kudoi* randt had the rank of Colonel in the SC,

*• . /

as sort of Deraonai adiutant, and held an administrative officerboth ir.

ind the .inistiy of the Interior. Viktor “rack wa3 the chief ad-
-.n.strative officer in .Hitler's personal chancery, tna head of which
nas Fhillip Eouhler. •


20


9 _ ec. -4.-ATD-5-1-C ook-( uj> -

The defendant Sievers, who held the rank of colonel in the SS
^ a special case, .-e was a direct subordinate of Heinrich Himnler in
*;.e latter 1 s capacity as President of the so-called "Ahnenerbe" Society.
:n ® naa ® o£ ttos society literally means " ancestral heritage," and it
■asoriginally devoted to scientific and psudo-scientific researches con¬
cerning the anthropological and cultural history of the German race. Later


on, an Institute for Military Scientific Research was set up .

Ahnenerbe Society. Sievers was the manger of the Society and the^c&oc-


tor of the Institute for Military Scientific"Researcn.


This concludes the general description of the German state medi-

f %


cal services under the .'lazi regime, and of the positions which the de¬
fendants occupied in the scheme of things. It is convenient at this point


tore for fcfi. Count Four of the Indictment, which charges that ten of the


\ lj defendants were members of an organisation declared to be criminal by
% the -n t6rnat ^ onal Military Tribunal, and that such membership is in vio¬


lation of paragraph 1 (d) of Article II of Control Council Law No. 1C.


The organization in question is the SS.

This Count concerns tSo defendant Karl Brandt, sijc of the defon¬
dants who were affiliated with ‘the medical service of. the SS, and three
defendants who are not doctors. It does no^concern any of the nino de¬
fendants on the military side, nor the defendants, Rostock, Blooe, $£r-\

housor, or'Pokorny. c - %

. ' J?'

The International Military Tribunals declaration of criminality

applies to all persons who had been officially accepted as infers of any

branch of th«. SS, and who remained corners after September 1, 193P. ?he

prosecution vail show that all tan defendants charged in Count Four were

officially accepted as members of the SS-and remained so after that date.

* hu dtfcnd “ts, Karl Frandt, Gcnzken, and Gebhardt^eldranks in both the

general Allgemeiny SS and the naffon SS equivalent to that of a major

* i •

utnural in the African Amy. The- defendants, Lrugosvky, Hov.n, Poppendick,
* nC • ischor a11 i*ld officer rank in tao SS, or Saffen SS, and all four
tram, together with the defendants Genzken and Gebhardt, held position
m thv 53 nodical service. The d-iondant Rudolf Brandt hold the rank of


21


k . >

9 Dc$« -i'- -ATD-5-1-C ook-(GJ)-

ieloaei in the general (Allgemeinc) SS, and was a personal assistant to
-ixulor in Kiaaler's capacity as «*ichsfuehrer S3. The defendant Brack
held officer rank in both the SS and the TTaffcn SS. T h e defendant Siovers
s.ld the rank of Colonel in the SS, and was nanagor of the Ahncnorbc .
Socioty, which was attached to the SS Kain Office.

The declaration of crininality by the International Military
Tribunal does not apply when it appears that a nenber of the SS was draf¬
ted into fteabership in

2D-A


«* •

•' \


t


9 Dcc.-M-ATD-5^2-Cook -(GJ)- ^

such a way as to give him no cfcoicc in the matter. Nor do-s apply
if it appears that the. menhir bad 'no knowledge that the organization
w?.s tfcin used for the commission of cricinal acts, ror purpose of this
case, these :ucgtions, the prosecution-believes, will be academic All
of the defendants charged in Count Fourtheld officer rank in the SS,

a •

and most of thee hold senior rank. They w-.r- moving spirits and personal
participants in murder and torture on a large scale, and in e variety
of other crim-s. In this connection, w„ respectfully invite thi Tribunal's
attention to two statements by the International Military tribunal which,
und.r Article X of Jrdinanco No. ?, constitute proof in the abscnco of
substantial ne evidence to the contrary. In Sotting forth the criminal
acts committed by the 3S, tho International Military Tribunal stated
( pp. 16952-53 of the Official Transcript):

''Also, attached to the SS Main Offices was a research
foundation known as th, experiments Ahnenerbe. The
sciontists attached to this organization aru statod to
have been mainly honorary Combers of the SS. During
th- war an institute for military scientific research
become attached to tho Ahnenerb. which* conducted cx-
U-nsivo oxp-riments involving the use of living human
beings."

• •

And again tho Tribunal stated (p. 16955 of the Transcript):

. In connection with the administration of tho concen¬

tration camps, tho SS embarked on a series of experiments
on human boih^s which i*.rc performed on prisoners of war
or concentration camps ineaUs. These experiments includ¬
ed freezing to death, and killing by boison bullets.

. The 35 was able to obtain an allocation-of Government
fund3 for this kind research on the grounds tljat they
had access to human material not availably to. other
agencies. 1 ' . '

C!>LiES,Cttj T TT£D IN W GUIS? 0? SCIENTIT-TC R^SEAXH \ J

(Counts Two and Three, Paragraph 6,7,11 and 12)

I now turn to the main part of the Indictment and will outline
tkia point the Prosecution's case relating to those crimed alleged
hav. been committed in the name of radical opscientific research. The
-•'■ rges with respect to ’'euthanasia" and the slaughter of tub-rcular Poles
obviously have no r» let ion to researc.- or experimentation and 7d.ll be dealt
later, what I will cover now comprehends all the experiments charged
~ 3 var crimes in Paragraph 6 of the indictment and as crimes against


22


9 Doc . —ATD-5-2 -C ook- (G J ) -

humanity in Paragraph 11 of the I n dictaent, and the murders ccranitted
for so-called anthropological purposes which arc- charged as war crimes

in paragraph 7 and as crimes against humanity in Paragraph 12 of the In

— * ^ - \ • *

dictocnt*


9 Dcc.----ATD-5-3-Cock-(GJ)-


Bcforv taking up these experiments one by one-, let us look at

them as a whole. Are they a heterogeneous list of horros, or is there a

p cr~-o n denominator for the whole group¬
ie / *

A sort of rough pattern is apparent on the face of the Indict-

iiit. Experiments concerning high altitude, the effect of cold, and the

C. | /_, .

potability of processed sea-water have an obvious relation to acrcnau-

.tical and naval ccohat and rescue probleas. The custard gas and phospho¬
rous bum experiments, as well as those relating to the healing value
of sulfanilinide for wounds, can be related to air-raid and battlefield
c-dical problems. It Is well known that malaria, epidemic jaundice, and
typhus (spotted fever) were among the principal diseases which had to bo
caabattcd by thejicraan oraed forces and by German authorities in oc¬
cupied countries.

To saac degree, the therapeutic pattern outlined above is undoubt¬
edly a valid one, and explains why the ffohraacht, and especially the
German Air Forco s, participated in thoe~ experiments, fanatically bent
upon conquest, utterly ruthless as to tho moans or instruments to bo used
in achieving victory, and callous to the Bufferings of people whom they

'-X

regarded as inferior, the Goman militarists-were willing to gathoa*
what ever scientific fruit these experiments clgnt yield.

But our proof will show that a quite different and even more si¬
nister objective runs like a red thread through these hideous researches.
7. will show that, in see* instances, the true object of thtso experi-


, nents vns not how to rescue or to-cure, but how to destroy and kill. The
sterilization experiments wore, it is clear, purely destructive in purpo¬
se. T w c prisoners at Buchcnwala who were shot with’poisoned bullets were
not guinea pigs to test an antidote for the- poison; their murderers real¬
ly wanted to know how quickly the poison-would kill. This destructive
objective is not superficially as apparent in the other experiments, but
we will show that it was often there.

j-ankind has not h-rc tofore felt tho need of a word to deneninat
the scie-nce of how oust rapidly to kill prisoners and subjugat* d people
ir. large numbers. This case and these defendants have created this grue-


9 Dcc.-.«-A7D-5-3-Cook-(GJ)-

0

saac question for tho lexicographer, poT'-ihojaaoent, we will christen
*hia^6acabrc science "thanatology," tht'science of producing death.

The then.', to logical knowledge, derived in part free these exporironts,
supplied the techniques for genocide, a policy of the Third Reich
exu^jlified in the a euthanasia" program and in the widosspread slaughter
of Jews, gypsies, Poles and Russians. This policy of anss examina¬
tion could not havo been so effectively carried out without tho acti- ,
ve perticipation of Goman nodical scientists.


2 3-A


■c i


G


I


■ 9 Bcc.-*-ATD-5-l-Cook-(GJ)-

I will now take up the experiments themselves. Two or three of
. then I will describe sore fully, but mo3t of then will be treated in
sumary fashion, as Hr. kc haney will be pr^s nting detailed proof of
^ch of them.

iJcxt is sub-paragraph °A", High altitude experiment^.

The experiments known as"high altitude? or "low pressure 11 , <J)tpc-
riments wore carried out at.the Dachau concentration camp in 1912.' Accor-
ding to the proof, the original proposal that such -xperiments be'parried
out on human brings originated in the spring of 19U wither Dr. Si


Raschur. Fascher was at that tine a captain in t^s^ijeal^Syrvic.i of the

* .

German Air Force, and he also held officer rb*Sc in the SS. Ho is bolila-


vod now to be death.


r


r ?

:h Rasch


Th or^in of tlu. idea is revealed in a letter which^Raschor wrote
to Himmler in key 1911 at which tin- Rascr.er was taking a course in avia-

m •

tion medicine at a German Air Force Headquaters in uuoich. According to
U 10 letter, this course included r-scarches into high altitudo flying

and - su

"considerable regret was expressed at the fact that no
tests with human tutorial had yet been possible for ua, as
such experiments are v-ry dangerous and nobody volunteers for

tfccn."

Rasch-r, in this lotter, went on to ask Himler to put subjects at his
disposal and badly stated that the experiments night result in death
to the subjects, but that the tests therefore made with monkeys had not
b-en satisfactory.

Raschor's letter was answered by Hinllcr's adjutant, the dofen-

/!r\

d-.r.t, Rudolf Brandt, who inforaed Raschcr that:


U


"Prisoners will, of cours-, gladly bo made available for
high flight researches." -

Subsequently, Raschcr wrote dirvctly to Rudolf Brandt esking for
p rcission to carry out the experiments at the *>achau concentration camp,
and he oention-d that the German Air ^orcc had provided a " movable pres¬
sure chamber" in which the experiments might be made. Pland for carrying
out th- -xperic-nts were developed at a conference lat- in 1911 or early
in 1912 attended by Dr. Raschcr and by the defendant “Veits, Romberg, one

21


9 Dc c . -d-ATD-5-k-C oolc- ( G J) -

Buff, all of whcc were cenbors of the Daman Air Force nodical Service.

• •

Th_ testa themselves were carried out in the spring and sunder o'f 19U2,
using t lb, pressure chamber which the German Air Force had provided

ft I «•

• • *

j>-c vie tins were locked in the low pressure chaster, which was an air
tight ba ll l ik e caapartacnt, and then the pressure in the chamber was
altered to simulate the atmosphere conditions prevailing a* extremely
high altitudes. The pressure in:the chamber could b- varied with great
rapidity, which permitted the defendants to


o Dcc-:^.-TD-5-5-Ocok (1!J)

Court 1


tr duplicate the atmospheric conditions vhich an aviator night civ-
c valor in falling groat distances through space without a para- *
chuto and-vlthout oxygon.

The reports, conclusions, and C'truants on theso exponents,

Which wore introduced hero and carefully jocordod, dononstrato cmrploto
disro ;ard for hunan life end callousness to suffering and pain.

?;sc3o documents revoal at cno and tho sane tino tlio nodical rosults

of tho oxperinents, and the degradation of tie physicians who per-

t •

fjr-jed then. The first roport by Rsdehor vras .-ado in April, l?l£, and

contains a description of tho effect of the lev preasuro chaa’-or on a

• ►

37-yo ar old Jerr. I quoto:

"Tho third experiment of tills typo tock such an extra¬
ordinary course that I called an SS physician of tho car.p as
witness, since I had worked on t^utse oxperinents all ' y jy-
soIf. It vas a continuous oxporLiont without oxygon at a
hoight of 12 kn conducted on a 37-yoar ofl J <r.: in gord general
condition. Breathing continuod up to 30 ninutos. .’.ftor <1?
ninutes tho oxporlnontal su'.Joct began to prospiro end trigglo
his head, aftor 5 ninutos era.:a occurod, botvo.n 6 and 10 _
ninutos breathing incroasod in speed and the oxporijwntal suN-
joct bee one unconscious; froa 11 tc 30 iinutes brcatliin
alrwod'down to tlirco breath per vinato, finally stoppin “Itr-
gethor.

"Saverest cyanosis developed in Iiotwocn and foan appoar-
od at the south.

"At fivo ainuto intervals elec tree ardiograna froa 3 loads
*«-oro rritton. After breathing had stoppod EI<g (oloctr SOardia; ran)
v/as continovsly written until the acti.n of the heart had co :xt
to a coaploto standstill. Aboutl/2 hour aftor broatliin. had
stoppod, dissoction was started.

O


» $


9 Deo-?WSS-6-l-Q=ylor: („TD)
C.^irt Sc* 1


p.-schor's report also c-r.tcins the followin' reccr-. of tho "autopsy":

“When the cavity of tho chost vas opened; tho port car liun
wss flllo;! ti fatly. Upon opening of the pericar 'iuy, 60 ccn
of dear yellowish liquid rushad forth. The acnont tho tcaponale
had stepped, the light auricle of the heart boj an to boat
hoavily, at first at the rate at 60 actions per anute, thon pro-
rassivdy slower. Twenty n inutes after tho perloardiun had boon
opjno l, tho right auricle traseponod by -xmeturin; it. For about
15 rdnutos, a thin stroaa of bicod spurted forth. Thcreaftor,
do- pin'- of tho puncture wound in tho aurido by oor.-ulation of
the blood anrl renewed a ccoloration of tho action of tho ri;-ht
aurido occurrod.

"Ono hour after broathin had stopped, tho spinal narrow
was cocplotoly sovarod and the brain renevod. Thereupon, tho
action of tho auricle of tho heart stopped for 1*0 secon’s. It
then ronowod its action, cc.dn to a conpluto standstill eirht
nlnutoa later. A hoavy subarchnoid o-’ona was found in tho brain.

In the ruins and arteries of the brain, a c.nsidorablo quantity
of air was discovorod. Furthomero, tho blood vossda in tho
hoart and livor ware enoraously obstructed by oabolianu"

* m m .

After sooin this roport, 31 ml or ironically ordered that if a sub-

Joct should bo bror-ht bad to lifo after eniurin such an oxporirunt, ho

shoul I bo "perdoned" to lifo ispri3omont in a concentration canp.

Raqchor's roply to this lottor, dated 20 Octobor-19U2, reveals that up to

the tine the victims of thoso oxporinonts had all boon Polos and Russians,

that soao of thon had boon corr’.oanod to ’oath, an ' ''nschor inquirol

hothor Hi’tier's boni n norcy ox ton.lod to Polos and Russians. A tolo-

/?od roply fron tho dofontont, Ruolf Branit, confimod P.aschor'3 bolirof

tluit Pol03 an’ Russians woro beyond the pale and should bo ',ivon no .

annosty cf any-kini. \ jl

Tho uttor-brutality of tho cri-ios corrdtted in conductin'- thieX^_/

*

sories of wqj^ri-nonte is rofloctod in all tho locunonts. A report written
*2. Hay 19li2 rofi.cts that certain of those tosts woro carried out on
persons 'escribed thuroin as -'Jewish professional crindnals." In fact,
thoso Jews had boon condoorad. for what tte Y&zis called "Rasscnschan lu",
•hich literally aecns racial s’nano". The crino consisted of orrlago or

i-.t.rc'-urso botwoon Aryans an ’ norv-.\ryans. The nur ’.or an’ torturo of thoso

•

'•'rf .rtunate Jons is dlcquontly rofioctud in the followin',- report:

(A recess was takon for 15 ninutos)


G2:^R«L " .TIC?.: I was about t. quote fr-r. a roport written in Hay 19li2


9 Doo^X!5-6-2-Gaylord ("J)
Court 1


dcscribin, one of thoso hich altitude tests on a Jen ash subject.


rocccdinj tdth the quotation:


"Sere of the oxporimntol subjects died during a con¬
tinued high altitude oxporimnt; for instance .-after on-
half hour at a height of 12 kilanpter*»—If tor tty skull
had boon opened under wator, an anplo anount of air oribolisn
v.*as found in tho brain vossols and, in part, froc "air in tho
brain ventricles.

•• • I

"In order to find out wtothor tho sovoro physical and
paycldcal offocts, as Hontionocl vndor !lo. 3, arc due to tto
fcniation of onbolisn, tho follovin" vais dono: ,-f tor rolativo
recuperation free such a pcmc;Tutc - dcsccnuin^'t©st had ta!.*on
placo, however beforo regain in" consciousness, so no oxrporimn-
tal subjocts woro kopt undor wator until they died. Iton tho
skull and cavitios of tho breast and of tho abdouen were opon-
cd undor water, an onomous amount of air orabolisn was found in
tho vossols of tho brain, tho coronary vossols, and tho vossola
of tho livor and tho intestines. 11

Tho victim wto did not die in the courso of such oxporinents,
suroly tlshcd that thoy had. A Ion" report t/ritton in July 19Ji2 by
Reactor and by tho do fondants, Ruff and Roeborg, doscribos an on-
porluont on a fornor dolicatosscn clerk, ho tras - ivon ml on;"*on
rask and raisod in the ctoitoor to an ataosphorio olovation of ovor li7>
WC feet, at t/tiich point the cask was roaovod and a parachute doacont
•:s olnulatcd. Tho roport doscribos tho vie tin’a roactions—
"sparjodic convulsions", "ajonal convulsivo breathing ", "clonic convul¬
sions, ^roaninc", "yells aloud", "convulses eras and lo;;s ', "'.riracoa,


*itos :xis ton^-uo", "does not respond to spooch", "pives tho
jf 3 one one who is conplotoly out of his iri-nd.-

Tto ovidonco which wo trill prcduco trill establish that tto do-' J
fondants, Ruff and Ronberp, personally participated with Raschor ir.
ouperirijnts resulting in death and torture; tlr.t tto dcfdcdant, Sievors,


Ltprossinn.


•ratetod tto experiments for an ontiro day and redo an oral report tc
•li . 1-r cn his observations; that tto defendant Rudolf Brandt, tos tto
vent of Himlcr in providing tto hruon subjects for these exparinents
and in rekinc naiy other facilities available to Raschor and rondoring
hii: general assistance; and that tho dofenfant, oltz/ in hi o official
capacity, repeatedly insisted on supervision ver and full responsibi¬
lity and credit for tto cipcrimsxnts. Tto higher authorities both


- 27 -


Court !fc>.


awdlabilHy of tha lew pressure chamber which tba Goman Air Forco fui*-
niaho'! at Dochou, an 1 concerning tho availability* of Taschor, who was an
fflcor in tha Air F^rco M odi cal Service, tc conduct oxperimonts.
-.Cowrie dyo of, participation-: in, am', responsibility for those atrocious
cri .ja on tho part of tho defendants hero charged will bo doo.rly shown
by tho ovi ’cnco.

B. Froozln Experiments

The deep interest of the Goman ..ir Fcrco in c.-pitalizin on tho
availability of inrates of concentration can pa for experimental purposes
is oven noro apparent in tho case of-the freozin ; experinonts. Thoso,
too, were conductor! at Dachau; they began isneHataly after the high
rlti.tu.lo experiments woro coriplotod *nd they continued until tho sprlnn
of 19^3. Hero n;;air., the dofonlant, TVoltz, was dirootly in chargo of thi
oxporLtints with Raschor as his assistant, as is stown in a lottor
vfritton in :'ay 19h2fay Wolt*. : Marshal Erhard !!ilch, the. Inspoctor Qonoral
of tho Osman /dr Forco, to SS Obor.Tuppcnfuohror ‘ Olfff, who is ono of
Heinrich Hlanlor's principal suborirmtos, and this lottor spocifically
roquostod on behalf of tho Goman Air Fcrco thit tho froozln,'; oxporinonts
bo carried out at Dachau under »oltz*s supervision,

Tho purposo of thoso oxporimonts wasto dote mi no tho nost offoctivo
w «y of roncralnr- Goman aviators who woro forcod to parachute into tho
dorth Soc. Tho ovidonee will show that in the courso of thoso oxporinont^
tl-o victims were forcod to roooin outdoors without dothin; in froozin
woathor from nino to fourteen hours. In other cases, thoy woro forcod
to remain in a tank of icod water for throo hours at a timo. Tho water


experiments aro described in a report by Rascher written in Au ust 19U2,


I quote*


C


V\


"Electrical rxiasurenonts gave low tampersturo roadints of \
26.U in the storech aix! 26.5T in tho rectum. Fatalities •
occurred only when the brain stem and the back of tho hoad
wore also chillod. Autopsies of such fatal casos always
revealod lar^o aacunts of free blood, up to \ litor, in the
cranial cavity. The hoart invariably showed axtrcaoj dila¬
tion of the right chamber, As soon as tho temperature in
thoso experiments rocchod 28°, tho oxporimontal subjects*
io-1 invariably, despite all attempts at resuscitation,"


28


Otter -'.ccu-xmts sot forth that frcn tir.o to ttno the tanpcratura of
tha water would oa 1 wared by 10° Centigrade and c quart of blood wcul«
bo taken frors cn artery in the subjoct*s throat for analysis.

-r'-ans of the vie tins


9 Dcc-k-GS^-fe-Gaylcrd (:-J)
Court 1


• . diod - ore extracted and sent t. tho . thal-,ical Institute vl unich,
BtfjnraInj of ttx subjects -.-as ette; ted by various icnas, : c v o- :f -
..-.nl" and successfully In a very hot bath. In 6c?te-*or, .& ler arspn-
d3y ordered that rcrarnin;; by the -.-rr-^i . f himn Wi^-s alas *c atW.
ted, and thw inhuman.-♦illains - he conducted these cxpcrvicnts n* -tly
.reduced four Gypsy rccon fro thodtavcns'-rck C neentratian Cap. Vhon
the roaon arrlbod, r ena mi ng tras attciyted by placin’- th. chill ed vic¬
tim bct:.-con too naked coacn.

A Tsluutnrur: report on th, free a in e pcri.sr.ts conducted in tanks
of ice rater :/rittcn in October 1 ?Jj2 contains th. fr Herring:

"If the oxpcrincntal subject troro placed in tho irator voider
narcosis, one ofcccrvcd a cortain arcusin^' effect. The subject
bo;;an to ryoan and node sonc defensive aoveuents,. In a fc eases
a stato of oxcitation developed. This iras especially sovoro in
tho coolin'.; of the head and nock. Out never nas a c>rploto cessa¬
tion of the narcosis obs-rvored. Tho defensive aovcrwnts ceased
aftor about five rdnutes. There follsvcd e pro^rossibo ri or,

•.rliich dovelcpod especially stronl-- in tlx an; nusculaturo; t’.-.o
ana rorc stron-;ly Hexed and pressed to the body. Tho ri or in¬
creased vrith tho continuation of tho coolin-, r.or and thor. intor-
ru.^od by tonic-clonic trritchinjo. ith still aero :iarl:od cinl:- „„
incof tho body t c:rp oraturc, it suddenly ceased, Thoso era os /
ondod fatally, trithout any successful results froo rosuocitaticT-
offorts.


"ExporL'x;nta i/ithcut narcosis chef of :r. cssont.ir.1 diffurcncos
in tho course of cooling. U/cn entr int- the rater, a o-vero
cold 3huddcriny apucarod. Tlx c- .-lin: of the nock and Vek tho
herd ras felt as oapocially painful, but alroady aftor fiv tc ton
-.-.inv.tcs, a si piifleant roalxninp of tho pain sensation ran rbsorv-
ablo. Ri~or developed aftor this ti ._ in the aano ;imnor co un-
dor narc-sis, likc-.-iso the tcnic-c? :.±c tr-itchinps. .,t this pint
3.jcech beexw difficult because the ri r aIs: of fee to.' the
spoach ousculaturo.

••Simultaneously rith the ri .r, a severe difficulty in br-athinj
act in -..-ith cr • ithout narcosis, at ta-s ro.vrtcd that, s- to
speak, an iron rinp ras placed a' out tho chest, Objectively, al¬
ready at the bo lnninp of this breathing difficulty, a :r.r!:cd di¬
lation of the nostrils occurr-d. The expriatirn vas r lenyod and
visibly difficult. This difficulty passed '-/or int ' a rattlin;
and sn-rinc breathing. 1 '

burinr the printer of 19U2 t-. 19! >3, experiments r-ith -dry 1 cold
-re also conducted. find Raschcr ro. crtcd n ttoso in another letter-
t.i.-. Oort


"Up to nor, I have coolod eff a ut 30 pic stri pod in


(


9 Doo^W2S-6J>-Oayl:rd (\'J)
Court 1


tivs open air during nin_ to fourteen hours at 27o to 2?o.

--ter a ti-K, corraspcndiiv- to a trip 'of one hour, I put thoao
subjects in a hot'ttath. Op to no-.-, every single pr.tiont vac
completely vaizxd up vith in ono hour at Dost’ although after
then had their hands and fo-t frozen rhitc."


-29


The responsibility among the defendants from the frce 2
izg experiments is substantially Vne same as for the high
altitude tests. The results were, if anything, even acre
widely known in German medical circles. In October 19$2,
a medical conference took place here in Nurnberg at the
Deutschcr Hof Hotel, at vdiich one cf the authors of tho re¬
port from which I have just quoted spoke cn the subject


•Joltz, spoke on the subject "Warning up «fter Freezing to
the danger Point." Humorous dccunwnts which we will intro¬
duce ehcyr'tyu, widespread responsibility among the defendants

X V _

/ g I

and in^hcl hipest quarters of the Gernr.n Air Force, for .
the so sickening criucs


Court Sc. 1


C. Ilalaric Dxperiaants

..Bother sari os -f experi-rents ccrrioi ut at the Dachau Concentration

V a; crncjrned inoin£ration for and troataant of nalaria. Over 1,200 inmtos,

; _ractlcally every nationality, woro orperi-Tentoi upon. !fcny persons who

p-rttici j* te I in these oxporinonts have already bo^n trio-.! before a rcnoral

ilitary court hoi I at Dachau, and tho fin ings of that court will bo laii

before this Tribunal. Tho nalaria experiments wore carriol out un lor tho

anorr.l supervision of a Dr. Schilling, with when tho 'ofonlant Siovors

s,' others in tho box collaborctoTho oviiunco -.Till show that healthy

purser* woro infects by n^squitoos or by injections from tho -lands of

•

asoquitoes. Catholic uriosts w-ra .-_>oa- the subjects. Tho dofuniant Oobhar.lt
Jcj:>t Hi-nler inform! of tho progress of tho so or ; -risxnts. Rose fumishol
SchilUn with fly o ;a for than, an’, otbors '.f tho '*.of<mtants participator!
ir. varicus .rays which tho ovi ’enco '.dll .’or'onatrato.

..fW tho Victi a ha:! boan infecto’., thoy woro variously treated with
quinino, r.^.-srlvarsan, .yrc i/lon, antipyrin, an’ sovoral conbinations of

/

tluso ’ru-s. I any "oaths occurred fron oxcossivo losos of noo-anlvarsan an!
y/reridon. ;.ccor dn to tho fin "in' s of the Dachau court, nalaria was tho
iruct causo of 30 \xiths an". 300 to 1«00 othors ioi! as tho rosu^t,,^ lotor
subsequent conplicationa.

B. b ustard C-as Exporiixmts

Tho ax ; xjri.onts concernin «siar:! 's wore con 110401 at Sachsenhnuson,
'litrwaHor, an’ other concentration ©anus an’ exton’o’, ovor tho untiro
. . ri f the ar. -un a wore laliborately inflictod on tho vie tins, and
Vij -.r un ’s wore then infecte ’. -rith -ustar’. -as. Other oubjocts v/ u ro force!

V: Inhale tho as, or to take it internally in liquid for.;, anLstill
--'-rs w.ro injoct.d rith tho as. report f thoso oxpori:.vjnt3 written
•t tl. ji* 193? ‘escribe I certain cases in which -• un 's wore inflictod
a both aras of the hur.on uinoa pi s an! tten infoctod antho report
states*

•

"Tho arcs in mst of the cases aro ba !ly swollen an’, pains aro
onora us. 1 * Tin alle -a" purpose f these experiiients »ras to
’isc voc an-effective


31


Court fc>* 1


*rosa


treatment for tha burn* ecus o’ by :ai^tax*:l --as. In 19UU, the oxpcrirxnts
nors coordinated with a reneral pro ran for research into r-as warfare. A
•ocroo issi^d by Hitler in March 19UU ordered, the defendant Sari Brandt to


th rjaa varl


push no leal research in connection with gas warfare. The defendant Hu talf

grandfc sont copiosof this decree to tho '.ofonlant Siovcrs, to Grawitx and

others, an’, transrjittod Hitler's request that they confer soon with the

defendant Sari Brandt "on account of tha urgency of tho order pi von hin by

tho Fuehrer*" Subsequently Sievors, who was thoroushly faniliar with tho
rnatard ~aa oxporirvnts bain* carried on in tho concentration canps, reported

tho lotails of thoso exporirants to the dofon'snt Karl Brandt*

E and F* Ravonsbruck Experiments concernin' Sulfanilanido and
Other Dru;:sj Bone, !!usclo, and Korvo
Roperoration and Bone Transplantation*

Tho oxpcriconts conducted principally on the fo^lo irratos of
Ravonsbruck Concentration Carp wore perhaps tho nost barbaric of all. These
.concerned bono, iwsclo, end norvo ro onaration an 1 bone transplantation, ani
oxparlnonta with sulfanilanido and othor drurs. They wore carriod out by tho
defendants Fischor and Oborhauaor undor tb; Iroction of tho defendant-
Oohhardt, 'd

In ono s,t of oxporifronts, Incisions wore vrdo in tho lores of sov-sral
of tho can? innatos for tho purposo of sinulatin battlo-causod infootions.

A bacterial culturo, or frapnonta of w jod shavin-3, or tiny piocos of -lass
woro forced into tho woun’. i.ftor sovoral toys, tho wounds woro troato'.with
sulfanilanido* Grawitx, tho ha- ’ -f the SS Ho 'deal Service, visited Tlavons-
bruck and receivea ra;f;rt on those oxporinonts directly fron tho defend¬
ant Fischor. Grarrita thereupon ireotod 6hot tho wounds inflictoJ on tho

♦

flubjocts should bo avon noro sovoro so that conditions rvoro ccnplotaly
similar to thoso provailir.; at tho front linos v'xil ’ bo nore conplotely

r

siittaatoil*

Hullot wounds were simile ted on the subjects by tyir.: rff tha blood

vo ?al at both ends of tho incision. .an-rart-pr: hicin culturo was

\

--a placed in tho wounds. Sovoro infection rusultod within twonty-feur-

32 W


32 -k


& Dcc-::-J?-7-3-Gt.£s (?L)

C-urt No. 1


subjects wore w-uncled p.nd Inf octod^bot woro n t given sul-
f?nilin?< 2 a, so as tc compare thoir reactions with these
who received treatment.

Bene transplantation from one person to another and the
reaener''tion of nerves, muscles, and bones wore also tried
cut on the women at Ravensbruck. The defendant Gebhardt
p^rs'.nally ordered that beno transplantation experiments be
carried out, and in one case the ecapule of an innate at Ro-
vonsbruck was removed and taken tc Kohohlychon Hospital and
there transplanted. Ue will show that the defendants did
net even hove any substantial scientific objective. These
expori-icnts were senseless, sadistic, and utterly savage.

The defendant Oberhausor's duties at Ravensbruck in

Connection with the experiments woro tc select ycung and

healthy inmates f.r the experiments, to be present at ell

-f the surgical operations, and to give the experimental

subjects pcst-oporativo C'-re. We will 6how that this care
%

consisted chiefly of utter neglect of nursing requirements,
nnd cruel end abusive treatment of the miserable victims.

Other experiments in this category were conducted

Dachau tc discover a method of bringing .-bout cosgulattfeh J-

cf the blood. Concentration camp innates were actually fired

.:pon, or were injured in sene ether fashion in order to

cpusc sc.nothing similar tc a battlefield wound. Those- wounds

were then treated with a drug known as polygrl in erder tc

%

test its capacity to coagulate the bleed. Several inmates

killed. Sul fanili aide was rl6o administered to some-
ar - d withheld fre- cthc-r inei-t^s who h pc t-cn infected with
the pus free r. phleguondiseased person. Bleed poisoning
S-nor-ily ensued. ..fter infection, the victims were left
Jntr^fte-d for thro- cr four days, after which various drugs


- 33 -


9 IXc-:i-JP-7-3-Givss (FL)
Court No. 1


o


experimentally cr experimental surgical
porf-rmod. Polish Catholic priests were
ds»-o fer those tests. Uftny died and ethers became invalids.

As a result nf nil. cf these senseless and barbaric ex-

I /

periaents, the defendants are responsible fer manifold mur¬
ders and untold cmelty and torture. / ^ —

* G. Seawater Experiments

For the seawater experiments we return to Dachau. They
were conducted


- 33 a -


9 3ec-H-J?-7-4-Grb6&-l«X)
Court No.l


in 1944 at the behest of the Goman «lr Force and the German
Havy In order to develop ^method cf rendering seawater
drinkable. Meetings tc 4^ecusa this problem wore held In
Hay 1944, attended by representatives of the Luftwaffe,
the Navy, and I.G. Farbon. The defendants Becker-Freysong
and Schaefer were among the participants. It was agreed
to conduct a series of experiments in which the subjects,
fed only with ship-wreck emergency rations, would be
divided into four groups. One group woul \ receivo no water

at all; the seccn 1 would drink ordinary seawater; the third

«* • . *

would drink seawater processed by the so-called "Berka"
method, which concealed tho taste but lid not alter the
saline content; the fourth bad to drink seawater treated
sc as to remove tho salt.

Since it was expected that the subjects would
dio, or, at least, suffer severe impairment of health, it
was decided at the meeting in May 1944 that only persons
furnished by Himmler could be used. Thereafter in June
1944 the defondant Schroeder set the program in motlo^;^^
by writing to Himmler and I qjoto from his letter: / |

"Sarller you made it possible for the Luftwaffe''
tc settle urgent medical matters through experiments on
human beings. Today I again 6tand before a deolslon, which,
after numerous experiments on animals and also on voluntary
human subjects, demands final res lutlon: The Luftwaffe has
simultaneously by a Medical Officer, removes the salt from
the seawater and transforms l.t into real drinking water;
the second method, suggested by an engineer, only removes
the unpleasant taa- ** oor.w^tor. The latter method,

in contrast to 10,2 first,• requires no critical raw material.
From the rpe«ilcal point of view this method must be viewed
critically, as'-the administration of concentrated salt sol¬
utions can produce severe symptoms of polsdnlng.


".ts the experiments on human beings could thus far
only be carried out fer a period cf four- days, and as prac¬
tical domande reqxlre a remedy for those who are in distress
.it sea up to 12 days appropriate experiments are necessary.

"Required are 40 healthy test subjects, who must be
available for 4 whole weeks. it is known from previous

*4 ^


9 Deo-M-JP-7—'
Court Kc; 1


experiments, that necessary laboratories exist in tho ooh-
centrr.ticn camp Dachau, this oaap would bo vary suitable.

•Due to the enormous lnportance which a solution
of his question has for soldiers of the Luftwaffe and
Navy who bavo become shipwrecked, I would be greatly
obllgol to you, my dear Reich Minister, if you would
decide to comply with my request."


Himmler passed this letter to Grawltt who con-
suited Oobhardt and other SS officials, .i typical and


nauseating Natl discussion of racial question


■*4a


9 DcC-Ti-JP-7-5»Grcss (FL)
Court Nc. 1 t


ensued* One SS man suggested using quarantined prisoners '•na
Jews • "nether suggested Gypsies. Grnwitz doubted that ex¬
periments on Gypsies would yield results which were scicntir
fically '’pplicable to Germans. Hionler finally directed
that Gypsies be.used with three ethers as a check.

The tests were actually begun in July 1944. The.defen¬
dant Beiglback supervised the experiments, in the course
of which the Gypsy subjects underwent terrible suffering,
became deliriums or developed convulsions, and seme died.


5 Dec-II-GES-8 - 1-Ka rr ow (FL)

Court No. 1

^ H*• Epidemic Jaundice .

Th_ epidemic jaundice cxpcri.3dr.ts, which took olac^Tjyt
.'.ehcSvnh'uscn and No.tzwciler concentration camps, wore ins


tigated hy the defendant Karl Brandt. A letter written in

ID; 3 by Grawitz stresses the cn.raous ailitrry iaportanco '

cf developing an inoculation against epidemic jaundice,

which had spread extensively in the 'ipffe-n SS and the German

.^ray, particularly in Se*uth_m Russia. In sene companies,

up tc 60 % casualties from epidemic jaundice h-'d occurred.

Grawitz further informed Himmler that, and I quote :

'♦The Goner'll Kommissnr cf tho fuehrer, SS Bri¬
gade-fuehrer Prof. Dr. ER\!*DT h--s approached me
with tho request to help him obtain prisoners
tc bo used in connection with his research on
the causes of Epidemic Jrtindice which has been
furthered to a large dc-grae by his efforts.' "

In order tc enlarge our knowledge, so far based
only on inoculation of .*nim-ls with germs t"kcn
from human beings, it wculd not be necessary to
reverse tho procedure and inoculate human beings
with g-rmo cultivated in animals. Casualties
(Todesfallc) oust be anticipated."

Grawitz rl s-.h'.d been J-ing research on this problem
with the assistance of a Dr. D-hnen, a^edical officer at¬
tached tc the Army Medical Inspectorate. Himmler made tho
following reply to the Grawitz letter :

"Approve the 8 criminals condemned in Auschwitz
(8 Jews of the Polish resistance movement con- ft
demned to death) should be used for these ex- $
periaents." *

Oth.r evidence will indicate th-t the sc'.pe cf these


experiments was subsequently enlarged .^nc that murder,
t.rture, and cc”th resulted fr-n then.

I. steri 1 izati : n Ex;;criments
In the sterilization experiments c nducted by tho de¬
fendants at Auschwitz, Rivcnsbruck, and ether concentration
c- ips, the destructive nature cf the Nazi medical pr-grflo
c . s .ut st f-rcibly. The Nazis were Searching for ne-
t.-.-ds -f extermination, b.th by Harder and sterilization,


C


- U6 -


5 DeC-!t-GSS-8-l-Karrcw (FL)
C.urt No- 1


cf large population groups, by the nost scientific and

it*

* _-'St c-r.spicu«us aeans- They were developing a new branch
_f i-diccl science which would give then the scientific
tocl6 for the planning and practice of genocide. The., prime-
ry purpose was to discover an inexpensive, unobtrusive,
and rapid method of sterilization which cculd be used to
wipe cut Russians, Poles, Jews and other people. Surgical
sterilization was thought to be too slow and expensive to
be used on a nass scale.


r


- 36 a -


9 3eo-M-02S-o»3-Sarrow« (AX)

Court No. 1 .

A method to bring about an unnoticed sterilization was
thought desirable.

Medicinal sterilizations were therefore carried out.

Dr. Madaus had stated that cala-dlum seguinum, a drug
obtained from a north American plant, if taken orally or by
injection, would bring about sterilization, in 1941, the
defendant Pokorny called this to Himmler's attention, and
suggested that it should be developed and used against
Russian prisoners of war. I quote one paragraph from

Pokorny '8 letter written at th t time;

• . •

■If, on the basis of his research, it wore posolblo to
produce a drug which after a relatively short time,
offocte an Imperceptible oterllizatlon on human bolngo
then wo would have a powrful new weapon at our dispo¬
sal. The thought alone that the * million 3olchovika,
who aro at present German prisoners, could bo steriliz¬
ed so that they could be used as laborers but be proven
tod from reproduction, opens the most far-reaching
perspectives. ■

as a result of Pokorny's suggestion, experiments wero
conductod on concentration camp inmates to tost the effect¬
iveness of the drug. At the samo time of forts we're'made tc

\

grow the plant on a large scale in hothouses.

.it the ..uschwltz concentration camp storllization
experiments wore also conductod on a largo scale by a Dr.

Karl Clouberg, who had developed a method of sterilizing
women, based on the injection of an irritating solution..
Several thousand Jewesses and Gypsies were steriliz
.lusohwitz by this aethod.

Conversely, surgical operatlonsvere performed
sexually abnormal inmates at Buchenwald in order to deter¬
mine whether their virility could be increased by tho trans¬
plantation of glands. Out of fourteen subjects of these ex¬
periments, at least two died. 1


9 Do©-M-G£S-S~2-Xarrow-(AlO

Court Nc. 1


The defondant Gebhardt also personally conducted ster¬
ilisations at Ravensbruck by surgical operation. The defon-^/
iant Viktor 3rack in Haroh, 1941, submittod to Himmler a
report on the progross and state of X-ray sterilisation with
powerful X-rays could toe accomplished and that oastratlon
would then result. The danger of this X-ray method lay in
the faot that other parts of the body, if they were not prot¬
ected with load, wore also seriowely affected, in ordor to
provont tho victims from roallslng that thoy wore bolng


castrated,


0


C\


*


O'


- ,T7 a -


Z'


9 De c-lf-GaS-C—3-Karrcii
Court No. 1 -(AX)


Brack mode tho following fantastic suggestion In hl8' , lottor
written In 194^ to Himalbr from which I quote;

i

"One way to carry out these experiments In practice,
would bo to have those people who are to bo treated.lino
up before a counter. There they would be questioned land
a form would be given them to be filled out, .the whole
process t -king two or throe minutes. Tho cfflolnl atten¬
dant who sits behind the counter can operate the appara¬
tus In suoh a manner that he works a switch will start
both tubes togother (as the rays have to come from both
sides). With one such Installation with two tubes about
150 to 200Dersons could be sterilized daily, while 20
installations would take care of of a ,000 to 4,000
persons dally. In ay opinion the number of dally depor¬
tations will not exceed this figure.■

In thisaame report tho defendant Brack related that,

I quote ^ ' v '^ r £x' 1

". the latest X-ray teohnlque and research make It

easily possible to carry out mass sterilization by moans
of X-Rays. However, It appears to be Impossible to take
theso measures without having these who were so treated
finding out sooner or liter that they definitely had
been olthor sterilized or had been castratod by X-rays."

.inother letter from Brack to Himmler In June, 1942, laid

the basis for X-ray experiments which were subsequently

carried out at ..uschwltz. The sooond paragraph of this letter


foras a fitting conclusion to this account of Nazi depravity,

t ^

and I quote:

".ci ng ton ullllons of Jos, in Europe there are,

I figure,»at least two to three million of men and
women who are fit enough to work. Considering the ex¬
traordinary difficulties to labor problem presents us
with, I hold the view that these two to three millions
shoulu be speolally selected an preserved. This can,
however, only be done if at the same tine they are
rendored Incapable to propagate. About a year ago I
reported to you that agents of mine have completed the
experiments necessary for tnls purpose. I would like
t^ reoall these facts onoo more. Sterilization, as nor¬
mally performed on persons with hereditary diseases,

16 here out cf the quostlon because it takes too long
and is too expensive. Castration by X-rays, however,

Is not only relatively cheap but can also bo performed
on many thousands In the. shortest time. I think that
at this time it is already irrelevant whether tho people,
in question beoome aware of having been castrated after
some weeks cr months once they feel the effects."-
•

J. Typhus (Fleckfleber) and Related iScporlnonts.

From December, 1941, until near the end of the war, a
largo program of nodical experimentation wns carried out


- *8 -


9 D 80-4WSS-S-3-SerroK
Court No. 1.- (;»K)


upon concentration camps inmates at 3uchenvald and Natz-
wollar to investigate the value of various vaccines. This
research involved a variety of diseases — typhus, yellow
fever, small pox, paratyphoid A and 3, cholera, and dlp-
theria. .i dozen or more cf the defendants were Involved
in theso experiments, which were characterized by the most

cynical disregard of human life. Hundreds of persons died.

- ^ ^

The experiments


7


/


v


i

A,


O v


- *8a -


9 Doc-* :-G'S-W*-Karrcn7 (IiJ)
Court 1


* ‘


* /


cancomine typhuj, known in Germany as Flcckfiobcr cr spot Cover, but
-y I )

is not y be confusod with Aaorican spottod favor, were particularly

a.oallimc.

Tbo typhus experiments at Hatnrcilcr. tfcro corfcuotflj by Dr. ,.t.


/ ^ .-

_Hca-on, an officer in tho Air Force ncdioal sorvied an . r >?

\ ~ V)

the Univorsity of Strasbourg. -In tho ffll of 1 : u. . o~

forxiant Siovora, Hoar on 'M \>' , e^p .ris_,n ors for

or;cri,onu .••.. '<,<•» ’•••'« •• . ivnirod acre prisoners ;ur-

'>». rfu-x or of 19U*. Thoso exponents c

• | f , ^ •

.-j '-aonj tho prisoners^ •

Tho pcnorol pat torn -if thur» • . ;rL nt ...

/. ,z*oup -of CMnoontr.atl'n.ov.p In. tec, no Ke tort fr .i th. Jx.rJ .iior ones

;-ha had oor> resistance to dlaoaso, ita-a lnjoctod :ith an ant i-t; phis

vaccirx>; *ho o ft jsy of which V03 to be to« . Thereafter, all t)»o

* i ' ,;na ihc Tot V "“W bo infoctc. with typhus. At tto aa-u tlx,

other iautoa i;ho had not boon vaccinaWd rr.ro also infoo tod for pur-

? eaGa of conparisorv—tliOeo ujivaoolnat victim wore callod tJw 'control"

;r • :>. Dut porhapa the rx»t ricked am! iairdorous circumstance in this

•

*

"” 0 ^ 0 °"-° c ^ fc bat still other inmates roro tloliborately infoctod rrith

ty.Viius '. 1 th tho solo purposo of koopinf tho typhus virus alivo rati (i -

• . '/ ‘u

jonorally available in tho blood-stream of tho inmtos.


C )

Tho typhus murders at Buchonmald wore carried out in 19U2 and "—^


-?rj undo r tho dirocticn of tho dofondants Go ns Icon and Jru e';s^-. no -
quests for tit human guinea pips wore turned ovor tc and filled by tho
defendant Koven. Tho bulk of the actual vork vas done by an infamous
p.-ysicicn kncrni as Dr. Dinj, '.-ho coaittod suicide after tho rnr. But
•Jr. Ding's professional diary has survivod.

Tac iirst entry in Ding's diary, for Dccorfccr 19, 19'J, reveals
hero again tha impetus for these murderous researchers ermo from
•ohrcccjit. This entry describes a conference spcnscrod by t!c defendant
ilandlosor and Dr. Conti, rcspcctivo\hoads of tho military and civilian


J Dcc-:i<SS-8-ii-Cirr^r (m)
Court 1


^==1 aorricoa of tho Boich, nhlch ,os ola^attoniod »y the dofoiw
d^it Itu-oraly. Typhus had boon aalcLn- sorious inroads on tfrX^

OoA=n troops fi^tine In Ruaalo. -Tho recount oj thla conference
rclatos that, and I quotoi 'V'*r , /

r - ' Wf


.r 1


•V


: Q>


A'


u


c


"V,


c


\


? Doc-t >-GtS-3*-5-Ssrror (vj)
Court 1

i


"Since testa on animals ore not of'sufficient valuo, tests

•

on human beings mist bo carried out."

entries in the Dine diary quoted bclor aro topical of
□ado ovor a period of threo years, and yivc sorx: idea of tto
ivjrtality fiiione the victims.

"IQ Jan,~~U2 ; Preliminary tost E: Preliminary test to cstab-
/ lisK c suro noons of infection: Tiich as in snail pox vaccina-
J tion, 5 porsons roro infected -,-ith virus torcu^h 2 superficial
and 2 deepor cuts in fchb uppor am. All of tho hunans used
for this tost fell ill frith truo typhus. Incubation poriod up
. to 6 days. * *

20 ?ob, h2. Chart of the caso history of tho preliminary tests
t: ostablish a suro oodha of infoction rorc sont to Eorlin. 1
~^doath out of J> sick.

17 liar, U2: Visit of Prof. OILDiI.137L?. and Prof. ROSE (Dcprrt-
:ant head for tropical acdicinc of the Robert Koch Instituto) at tho
oxporinontal station. All pors ns oxpori_.jp ntod on foil sic!:*
with typlma, oxcopt tiro, rrho, tho fact rras established lator,
alroady had be on sick with typhus during an opldmiic at tlx:
polico prison in Borlin,

• •

9 Jan. U3: By ordor of tho aurr;oon sonord of tho ’.'offon SS,
liS-Crupponfuchrcr and !iaf. Gen. of tho faffon SS, Dr. aHE"
tlw hitherto oxistinc typhus rcsoarch station ct tho concentration

coup Buchonrald bocor»s tho Dop'rtrent for typhus and virus ro-
aoarch. Tho head of tho dopaTtoont vill be SS Strurhannfuchror
Dr. Din^. During his absonco, the station nodical officor of
tho ",'affon SS, .‘EHfJ*., SS-HauptsturrJuohror HOVEH Trill suporviso
tlio production of vaccines.


9 Dec. -fc-ATD-9-l-Kuppcrs to ifl* (G J ) -
Coart No. 1

13 md li* April 13 rUnit of SS-Sturcbannfuchrcr Dr. Ding ordered to
I 0 Farbcn-industric A.Q. Bocchst. Conference with Prof. LAUT£NSCj4aGLR,

Dr. EBEB, and Dr. FUSSGAEfIGER about the experimental -series 1 Akridin
Granulat and Rutcnol 1 in tho concentration camp Buch</nwald. "Visit to
Geheinrat Otto and Prof . PRICEE in the institute for experimental

jm m ^

^

therapeutics', in FrankfUrt-on-Main.

2l* April 191*3: Therapeutic experiments Aicridin^pranulat (A-GR 2)
and Rutonol (R-2). To carry out the therapuctic experiments Akridin-
^ranulat and fcitonol, 30 persons (15 each) and 9 persons were infected
by Intravenous inaction of 2 cc oach of itoeh blootf of a typhus sick ^
person. All experimental persons got very serious typhus.

1 June 191*3: Charts of caso history coaplctod. Tho experimental
aeries was concluded with 21 deaths; of these, 8 wore in Buchenwald, 8
at Rut one 1 end 5 control.

7 September 191*3: Chart and ease history completed. The experi-
acntal acrloa was concluded with 53 deaths.

18 March 1912: It la suggested by Colonel for tho air-corps, J/

Prof. ROSE, tho vacclno 'Kopenhahagen' produced fToa mouso liver by tho
national serum institute in Kopenhagen, bo tested for its ccnpatibility
on humans. 20 persons were vaccinod for lenuniration by intramuscular
injection. 1(> persons wore contemplated for control and comparison.

16 April 1911: Tho remaining experimental persons wore infec¬
ted on 16 April by substaivaous injection of 1/20 cc typhus sick fresh
blood. The following fool sick: 17 persons immunized: -9 medium, 8 serious-
ly. 9 persona froc the control: 2 medium, 7 seriously.

13 June 1911: Chart and ease history completed a.d sent to Ber¬
lin. 6 deaths (3 'Kopenhagen') (3 control)

1* November 1911: Chart and ease history completed. 21* deaths.

Copies of each of Dr. Dial's official reports wont to tho defen¬
dants hrugowsky and Poppondick as wjl^ as to the I.G. Parben laboratories
Hoechst. Now here will the evidence in this case reveal a more wicked
lnd aurdcrois course of conduct by non who claimed to practice the tealing
than in the entries of Dr. Ding's diary relating to tho typhia experiment;


9 Ccc.-i!-ATD-?-2-Kupperstcin-(GJ)- -

X. Ptfison Experiments

Here igctn the defendants were studying how to kiH, and the
scone is 3uchcmrald. Poisons were administrated to Russian prisoners-
of-war in their food and Goman doctors stood behind a curtain to watch
the reactions of the prisoners. Sosa of the Russians died immediately,
and the survisora wero killed in order to permit the autopsies.

The defondant itrbgcwsky, in a letter written in September 19lxJi,
has provided us with a record of another experiment in whixh the victims
wero shot with p poisons bullets, and I quote :

• j

"In the presence of SS-Stumbannfuehrer Dr. Ding, Dr. DING, Dri.
WDMHN and the undersigned, experiments with Aconitin nitrate projec¬
tiles wero conducted on 11 September 19U* on 5 persons who had been

condemned to death. The projectiles in question wero qf a 7.65*= call-

*

ber, fillod with crystallizod poison. The experimental subject, in a lying
position, were each shot in tho upper part of the left high. The tighs


of two of then wero cleanly shot through. Afterwards, no'cffoct of tho


poison was to ba observed. These two experimental subjocts were therefore
oxcaptod. r’ ' u

"During tho first hour of tho experiment the pupils dia-nqt^how
any changes. After 78 minutes tho pupils of all three showud a nodium
dilation, togothcr with a retarded light roaction. Simultaneously,
maximum respiration with heavy breathing inhalations set in. This sub- ^
sided after a few ninutos. The pupils contracted again their
reaction Improved. After 65 ninutos the patellar and achillcs tendon
reflexes of tho poisoood subjocts wore also negative. After approximately
90 ninutes, one of tho subjocts again started breathing heavily; this
vras accompanied by an incroasin motor unrest. Then tho hoavy breath¬
ing changed into a flat, accoleratod respiration, accompanied by
extreme nausoc. One of tho poisoned persons try in vain to vomit.

To do so ho introduced four fingers of his hand up to the knucklos into
his troat, but nevertheless could not vaait. His face was flushed.


"The other two experimental subjocts had already early shown a
pale face. T^c other syeptass wore the same. The motor unrest increased
sc much that tho persons flung themselves up and then down, rolled
their eyes and cade meaningless motions with their hands and arms,
’•inally, the agitation subsided, the pupils dilated to tho maximum,
and the condemned lay motionless. Death occurcd 121, 123, md 129
minutes after entfy of the projectiles."

1 now turn to the charges in paragraphs 7 and 11 of *i$ic indictment.


L. Incendiary JJomb Experiments.

THE PRESIDENT: At this time we'll take our noon recess and recon-


v -r. t at 1:30 o'clock, p.s.


9 ^IJ-LJG-10-l-Lc s sc r
Cnirt »'i !•


CO : ZC7ZD c<


»P TKfflO«,S


cSt-L ?.*.


iLOr.l I c-*nc n-^» tc Chiracs stated in Fnragraihs 7


. - 11 f th- Xndietaont. Those ero torho-a the r. at utterly repulsive

ca T.yo in the ontiro Xndictaont. They c-r.ccm tho dcfondnnta^CJudolf
• ^ ^

Brar/t nn . Slavers. Siovcrs on J hia nsacciotos in tho -hnenorbo Socioty

v -i c Tijletcly eb^aaed by oil the vicicua end rclignont tfasi raoicl

th rioa. Ihoy c weeivod tho n:tiv.n f applying thoao nouaocua thoorioe

ir. th. rial'* :f anthropology. TJhot onauod was rurdor -ua folly.

In February 1942, Siovora subnittod to Himlor, through liud^lf

Brondt, o roport iY-n *hioh the- f 11 owing ia un extract!

o hnvu a noroly o «i loto c'llocti n *f skulls «f nil

r?eoa end people* at cur disposal. Of the Jewish race, h--wovor,

nly vorv fow specimens cf akulla ore available with tho roault

thnt it ia inpossiblc to arriYc at prociac o:naluaT*nB fr-nr

uxnaining then. The »r in th: Bast n«w prosonts ua with tho

f • • •

• p; rtunity t vorc -nc.fhia defioioncy. By procuring tho akulla/'

>'f tho Jewish-Bdehovik C miaacra, wh reproaont tho frotaty yy

f tho roj ulaivc, but oharr.otorlstio subhuman, wo h"vo tho'

chonco n w t btain a palpable, aoientific doouaont.

"Tho boat, proctloal rathe! f .r ’btaining and collecting thia

•

chill rrtorial c uld bo handled by directing the fohmocht to
turn olivo all captured Jowish-Bolshovik C missara t<* £ho
Flo 1 Folico. They in turn aro t to given special dirootivos
t inf m r. certain « ffico at rogulnr intervals f th- nunbar and
pinco f '•otonti n f these captured Jews and t nivo then
special close ettenti n and enru until ' spec in l.’c lorn to arrives.


'hia social dolegato, wh will bu in charge of securing tho


o J

S • ’ •-


J' has the i.'b • f taking a sorioa f ; rovi usly ^

m u

/ I - 43 -


■


9-12-46 - A - 10-2 - UQ - I*es


ser


rr. thropological ueoauronents, and In addition has to
determine, as far as possible, the background, date of
birth, end other personal data of t£e prisoner. Pol-
lowing the subsequently induced death of the Jew, whose


- f


herd should not be drmagod, the delegate will separate
the head from tho body and will forward it to its proper
point of destination in a hermetically seclod tin can,

*# i ' *

especially producod for this purpca^“and filled with a
conserving gluid.

paving -nrlvady-t the laboratory, tho comparison
toots and anatonlcillriac-nch on the skull, as woll ns
determination of the race moraborship of pathological
Teaturos of tho skull form, the form and size of tho
brain, etc., can procood. The basis of thoso studios
will bo tho photos, noasuromonts, and othor data suppliod
on the head and finally tho tosts of tho skull it coif."
-ftor oxtensivo corrospondenco botwoon Kinmlor c.nd tho


dofondar.ts Siovors and -udolf Jrandt, it was docidod to pro¬
cure tho skulls from inu.tos of tho -uachwitz concentration

%

c:np lnstoad of at tho front. Tho hideous program was

- ctually carriod out, ..s is

written in Juno 1943, which’ statos in part:

" I wish to inform you that our associato. Dr.

Sogor, who was in cliargo of tho abovo spocial projoct,

has interrupted his oxporinor.ts in tho Concentration

Ccmp -uschwitz boeax^so of tho oxisting dungor of opidomics

•

j.ltogothor 115 persons wore workod on. 7S wore Jows,

30 wore Jcwossos, 2 woro Polos, end 4 woro Asiatics. At
tho prosont timo thoso pri3onors aro cogrog..tod by sox
:r.d aro undor quarantine in tho two hospital buildings
of -.uschwitz. 1 '

*.ftGr tho doatl. of those wretched Jews hat 1 boon "inducod,"
-hoir corpso3 wore sent to Strasbourg.


year olapsed, :.nd


9-1 2-16 - A - 10-3 - LX-loasor (S)

Court Ho. 1


t bo Allied araiea were racing across Franco ani wero nearing Strasbourg
■here this nonatrous exhibit of the culture of the master. race reposed,
iloraod, 6 lovers sent 4 tolcgrac to Rudolf Brandt inSoptcnber 19UU,
free which I quote:

■According to the propoaiof February 9, 191*2, and your ap¬
proval of Fobruary 23, 191*2, Frofcssor Dr. Hirt has assenblod a
skeleton collection which has novor boon in oxistorco boforo.

Because of tho vast amount of sciontific research that is con¬
nected with this project, ths jab of reducing the corpses t<?
skolotons has not yet been completed.. Sinco it night require
saoo tin to process 30 corpses, Hirt requested q decision por¬
tal ning to tho troatojnt of tho collection stored in tho roorguo
of tho Anatcoic, in ease Strasbourg should bo endangered. Tho
collection can bo do-floshod and rondcrod unrecognisable. This,
howovor, would noan that tho whole rr rk had boon dono for nothing —
at loest in part — and that this singular collection wa.uld bo
lost to scionco, since it would bo in possible to nako plaster
casts aftorwards. Tho skeleton collection, as suoh, is incon-

f

spicuous. Tho flesh ports could bo doclarod as having toon loft
by tho French at tho tino wo took ov-r tho Anatonic and would bo
tumod ovor for croaating. Plcaco advise do which of tho follow¬
ing three proposals is to bo carried outi

1) Tho collection as a wholo is to bo prosorved.

2 ) Tho collection is to bo dissolved in port.

3) Tho collection is to bo cccplotely dissolved."

The final chapter of this barbaric enterprise is found in a

note in Hixnlor's files addressed to Rudolf Brandt stating that:

"During his’ visit at tho 'Operational Headquarters on 21 No ven¬


ter l?Ui, Siovors told oc that the collection in Strasbourg had boon
tcnplctely dissolved in confornanco


9/l?A6-A-10-*r-U;-Le s ser-UJ-FL


■ith the Cii active riven him at the time. He is of the opinion
that thia arrar^e .ert is for the best in view of the whole situation."

Those ntn, however, reckoned without, the hard of fate. The bodies
of those un/ortunat*. people were not conoietel- disposed of, and thia
Tribunal -dll hear the testimony of witnesses and see pictorial exhi¬
bits der icting the chamal house which was the Anatoqy Institute of

^ A

the Reich University of Strasbourg.

I have now completed the sketch of some of the foul cri--.es which
there defendants comriittcd in the name of research. The horrible record
a. thoir degradation noeda rro underlining. But German nodical soioncp
• " aa , P a8t vears » honored throughout tho world, and many of the -lost
illustrious na as in a:dical research are German. How did tho so things
coao to pass? I will outline briefly tho listorical ovidunco which *
will offer and which, I believe, will show that thoso crimes -or-


logical and inevitable
under tho Jiazis.


for the prostitution of Gorman .xjdicir.o


German llobical Organization Before 1933.


f


TVio yuars after the re institution of the German Reich, in 1071,
tho German .judical Association’( Do ut sc r~r Aerztoverroinsbund) was crea¬
ted, which tied together the older local -edicoi associations. This
Society existed until it was abolished by tte'^zi Goverment. Its
structure was democratic, and its inter.sts included problems of hy- *


.’jazi Government. Its


structure was democratic, and its interests included problems of hy- ‘
^iejv^afid public health, and to an increasing extent, socio-medical
problems especially in the field of sickness and'disability insuranco.

Bismarck's 1c islation of 1 frl established compulsory sickness
iaaaranco for workmen. In the course of tho ensuing years, tho vast
tulk of the workmen wore insured, and consequently most of the ordinary
physician's -ati.,its came to be insured 3 tients. There woro lists of
Physicians auty'oxyized to treat insured patients, and it was a natter cf
vital moment. Sp


- 46 -


9/l2/43-A-lC-5-UG“LC850>-jp.

tc every prcet.cinc physician tc be on ta .t list. 2o protest their
iatorosts witjTrcspact to listing, fees and ctacr such proolajs, the
Serna doctors founded a voluntary associutin for tho defense of
t.'.cir cconxiic interests Xnoas the Kajtuann 3und.

yaosti-ens of professional ethics, uedicul uulpractice, otoi Iftxro


hoadlod in


in two.distinct sets of nodical boards or "Court*.


aZ entirely unofficial ..od voluntary system was established by tfco

/ v .

in :;odicnl ^ssccidtion. The other, which v_,c endowed with oeai-
offlciol st.tus, w^s called the Aeich Chuibor of *Physicians. ifcsao
ChjJbor* wore oloctcd by rote of the ua.bors und were supported by cn
uisossnont.

• - • - " •’ »

In addition to these or anitutionc, there oidstod dn /( >t»rviuay puro¬
ly professional socioties of doctors, whore puporc concerning scienti¬
fic and “>r.'CtlCal problems wore red and discussed, ..:\t which ostcblioh-
cd connections with eiuil-r soclotics CSbroud.


o


o Sec-A'-fT—ll-l-ileehan.

The Gernan Govemnant agencies *.diich supervised the certification and

licensing of physicians as wall as their professional activities -.rare

'C

•he llinistry of Education and the Reich Health Office (Reichsgesmdheitsant)
ir. the Ministry of the Interior. The latter supervised nodical practice and

licensin'- through the channels of tlie Ministries of the Interior of tho varioie

. « | %

Seram states, although licensing s a federal function rather then a state
function. 9 \_J

edical education and training '.rcs.rather.standardized but good. TJie
students s;:«nt five or sir. years at one f\r sovoral of the nodical univor-
aitica, they took a final exam nation covering their clinical studios and
l^yT at an an thort iod hos'ital — :'.er supervision. Thoroaftor

tho internes were licensed, -an- pen’ivted to establish a practice. After

\ • ' •  • ^ •

Nro- noro years they' bacr_-o eligible to treat insurance nationt3, rnd, aftor

avbn'.tting a thesis, cofld obtain the tlegrc- of doctor from a univeroitv.

1 Tho Irnodiato lapsct of h’asisr.

. on Goman .'mlicinc

In tho :’oars in-ediatcly proeodijig the TKird Reich, physicians' or-

./nisatlons dove tod to part” politico sprang up. One of thoso was tho

'V.tion-liat Socialist rhysiciens* Jccicty, founded in 1929, in which Conti

l-.y J.a leading rolo. There was a rival Association of Social Donocrctic

rrysioians, and a Socialist Society of Thysicians. Thoso sociotios propoeed

caafiidr.tos 'or olection to tho Rqrsicians' Charters, and thus tho National

Socin'ist :hysicicn3' Society nnc tJw Socialist associations croc to compete

with each othor. /f

v j

April, 1,1933, tho notorious "boycott day" in Berlin, was a day of -'?___ <€'

dic-Tr.co for Gertaan oodicine. lioabere of tho national-Socialist Ihy3icians'

locioty, n-ho knew the r.cr.bcrship lisas of tho socialist sociotios and the

iist3 c£. Jewish physicians, brolas into tho apartaants of thoir socialist

• fefish colloaguos in tho orxly .uoming hours, pulled then nut of thoir

is, boat than and brought thoa to tho exhibition aroa near the Berlin

if&rtor Station. There, all of thou, including aen un to 70 years old, were

• •

crc^l to run around the garden, as in a hippodrono, and they rorc shot
* ~-th pistols or beaten with 3tic!:s. These they had to stay for several


9 \


9 3oc-^-E7-il-2-kwjh an


dry* wSthaut *if ficlcnt fool, and thin were handed over to thw S., which
carried par* if Uxa to th, Cwliars at th. Hodc-'-nnstrussc jail f r further
t.r^urus.

. Thorcrjtor, the cetera of tlx Socialist Society of Rjyijcioaa ..xrc
b'.rr-d free: ell insurance pr'etive because of B C«—uniat cod 3ubv_rsivc
•.ctivitiea." In uhe subsequent listings A physicians issuod by the insurance
the Jewish physicians ucr~ inclined in a separate list hc-dod
“Ea-oics f th- State or Jews.a Sxn, the insx-nco coopanies, even private
oca, .fere no 1 ngcr pertiitted to >ay foos t the Jcuitfi physioians. LzoeOr
diataly thereafter, Jewish phyaici'.na *rer«. exclu-Xd ft- ..ell prolessi-nal
ond acientific societies. ..t -first, thoc. who were \r.r v.t.r ns were
no-dnolly r.lloucd U cr-rry .n their insurance practice, but pr.tiwnta *10
kept ing t- the- were threatened and exposed t- “11 ain'.s f unplvaa .ntnwss
:n the pr.rt f the insurancw officials,

i-ftcr thw tror b-g-.n, certification nod licensing w:s

^ m

.*11 Jewish phyaicir.no and they eorc degraded tv the status' of lay therapists.'
These physicians -ore fm- to wear a blue shield with tl.e ht-.r of Dr.vid

• i

'•nd h*x to add a riddle nxx such as "Sarah" or "Israel." Their prescriptions
UJcwrtac hr., to bear thw Star of D.vi., t.hich exposed their patients to '11

m “ \ •

kinda jf unplw'.s .rfcncao »hon filling t^ea r.t phr.r. .“.ci.a, a. at f which had

• • •

si-na in their wind ws re _ing "Jews not wanted."

..t firot, the ..ryon phyaioiana were -.11 wed t • treat Jw iah patients,
but finally they were prohibitwd fr - d;ing so, Hospitals refuaod aleission

t a

t. Jewish p tiwnta, apart fr_- x few c uragesus _n-s who ndlttcd thc.i in
defiance it the law. Jews were admitted to aont-al inatitutiona in separate
‘■'r.’.s, but usually were quichiy transported elsewhere for exterodnation.

I.i the arrly sieix.r of 1943, Conti instigated -nd directed .a wholesale

»

P^ro.cution of d ctora who wcr-. either froigraors -r pers.ns of so-called
-ixed jlood .and those related by mxriage t. Jews. ..t first, thwy Were
r ' —v-’d fro,u their practice and sent off to p.sts undwr inforior party
d-ct rs. In 1946, C.nti «cnt -a step farther .xv. f-rbadw these piiysici-.ns
t- practice. They were drafted into thw SpwwT organiz -tion, in they


9 Dcc-..-i3r-ll“3’*fe«ihan


*re s.l^ljr at casual labor, their living conditions bei^ little

better than those f concentration c.aqp icaatcs. i

Tho Prostitution of Gor.r.n Le.'icino
under Ifc.tioir.1 Socialiaa\

The tot-.ll tor in structure of tte Ifcsi state Iconic 1 fund-uxrtfSi^
subordination of 'll principles of ecdicine to notional-socialist population
poUcy and racial concepts. The .ost e^hntlc and repelling express!n of
those njw alas aal goals cajc fr.~ th_ Jiasi Director _f Public Health in
th. lliniatry _f the Interior, Dr. drtfcur Guett, wto t -k office in 1933.

In a b ole ouolishcJ in 1935, entitled-, "1, Structure f Public Health in
the Third Reich", o5tt announced that “the ill-cncciv-d *lov- of thy
neighbor* has to disappear, especially in relation t- inferi-r ,r asocial
c p oaturos. It is the supreae duty f a national state t. grant life ml
livelihood only t- tho healthy and hereditarily sain: portion -f th- pooplo
in rder t. secure the -nintcnr.ncc of a hereditarily sun! and racially
pur. foil; for 'll eternity. Th- life of an individual has waning only
in th- li^it of that ultimate ftiu; that is, in the light of
t. his f.viiy nd to nis national state•*>

Hx. entire public health policy f Uc Thir.. Reich i«r.s
.dth this pr:n.uncc.-uit .£ principles. T..e minister .f th- Int-ri r,
rrlck, reorganised th- Health Departie.it in his Iliniatxy hi ouch a way
that police, public health, welfare ad.olnistrati .. and social services
<cr_ 'll c. _r dim tod in pursuit >f these goals. The b. ;inn.‘n;;s i this
re rga.iis.ation started already in th- su .tr f 1933, an: wre substantially
co.plcte^ b; 1936. ..LI these activities .*.r- conccntr .ted un'.-r Dr. Gutt,

>i s thus enabled t coordinat- t.c practical application f Ids policy

•

uta his theoretical principles. Even psychi.trie seci l service agencies,

• ic.. did th rough end xull-orr anised .j_rk pri-r t. 1933, were zv_uce-
t ere scr--ning stations f r .oer-ditary an”, racial selection.

.21 g v-mxnt-c-pl-ycd physicians had t. take a special n.ir c ur3c
1 .sting 15 tenths and had ta c- part;- a. .doers. Hie Gcr-ian He.’. Cr-Ss n as
iik-uiac dr -.si into the orbit of the 24azi party and th- SS, in vi-;t ef


50


9


Dr. Grv-iitz' app-intacnt cb Prcaidont of the Red Cr-ss, In 1945, aftor
Sxrrdts 1 suicide, the -ofaolant Gobhsrdb succeeded bin.

Thn Third Reich al as c^plctcly roerganiaos! the jr-feBsi-xva asiioal
axictiefl. The Ccrii'Ji UeJlcnl .’jjsocir.tiui ard the H -rt-nnn Bund were abolish.
J1 3cr*£a physicians »oi\, reorganized through an organization derived frxj
the Reich Physician's Qinobor. Bile fctional Physicians'


9 Pcc.46--*-ll—1-keefcoa-J?

* w s ,lcced diroct l7 « - ~«*icol -yuciror- with tho title '
r.cicaacorrtofuehror. This ?MiU M v.* j s0 bold by Conti. *11
dretcr. client these on active nilitlry duty voro subordinate to bin.
a« rc-ianal d«nuties wer. solcctod freu tbo r_nks of active njtir.aal
a^ioliBts -bo terrorised tbo district breach societies. Qioio dopu-
tic«, uh: mOljr strutted about la Sa or SS uniforms, wore recruited
au-aly fra: tho e*rly i.u.bsrs of tne Hatianul Sooiclist Hedic..l *ns>-
elation. It w..s their Job to brio.; pressure oa physicians to Join end
*.J:c part ia v rious P-rt or, T jiirations, such -s tho Sa and SS.

A.car:and performance, esTwCi.vlly for youarcr physlcl.tns, -as
attoud.-noo at the so-called ?uobro>-Scb.-ol of 5er..an Physicians, r.t
iltrhosc in KoeldonbuTG, wulch had boon or,-.mi sod by tho defendant
ilaao. /..ore physicians worv indoctrinated in tao national socialist
p$nt of view -nd way of life. Tho so-c-llod coaradoly ^soci .ti :n and
«?3rts activity were ncroly window dressia; for oolltic-l spyiiv;. Jhcno
courses fiacllr bccoio cct-Duloory and t. A to bo attondod for sever.1
noaths annually,

The ;;unor.l respect in waicn doctors wore hold ounh in view of
tho dccronsiu; level of ,;enor J oduc_tion und jollity of tho doctors,
u.is p.rtly duo to tho constant occi^ation of the physicians* timo
-it:. v.vtr functions, cspoci-lly'tho tiuo-consuacd In party formations
lurches which node it imoossiblv for voun£ physicianc to develop
icioatlfic iatoroste, so th-t rocont radu-tion increasingly lost
u-V.orst.bdia-;; and inclin_tion for serious sciontific study and loag*-


r.o research.


hcdical School and nodical Training


under tho Huzis


({ \

vy


On pepOr, ..odical tr-ining under tao husis differed littlo.frai
th..t of t.:o pro-Ha si or-. However, its fun d-a ent.il spirit was ruinously
-istsrted and aodioul standards suffered a disaal dcclino.

nodical students h.ai to bo ■Aryan", and wore roquired to belong
*• t c Lctirnal Socialist Students' Loaguo. .Ihw student's


9


cstiro cc'Tio of stale6 v_. const .ntly interrupted by too *«*, of

V ri -‘ * ^Sani^tion. t- watch toe* were forced to belong
* %

* 5tudcot ^« c ta0Vl0 ^ c 3f r_cial theories and lumber,; laws
“ 5t ««*«ciant would f_il his -edlc_l tthainntionsi
Coders in the universities vers filled in uany cases by Nazi sen-
celled professor.- who ui^fat or .il*t not have c scientific background.
2:o true scientific societies under tne Natl Hegiue bocoue loss and loss
_ctivc, 33d too Nazi professors in too universities devoted ..ore tino
•"* interest to their S» or SS organizations than to tho toaehin,-; of
aodeino. iese Nasi professors would don their brown s« or birds SS
unif:i-as on all possible occasions, Q z cho n ,~ln^ tne.. proudly for their
sc.dajic ftovna at all ucada.ic colobratioas and nootinjs.

r.'.o worst hast 'loliticians, like Stroichor, wore dvon tho froo
run of taivorsity clinics, such -s at Uiun/.on. *i. sucoissivonco to
lo;- olltlcinns led to a ,;on«r 1 doclino of rospcct for won>;ji ooadaiic
uudiclno .iit only ,n tno ix.rt A their iwn puolic and abroad, but
wven on tno part of tho very uue politicians before *h» they kovtovod.
ftiis vent so f r that Stroichor, whon addrossin.-: n full faculty uootlnc
..t *.: o Uivorsity of hrlan.;cn in 1936, c .died too ..ssaoblod prolocoom
"c.'.-ploto idiots" tc their f .cos. This w^s by no uoans un isolated'
xcnr.nce.

p.nticul. rly doplorablo w..s tno dhjmd ;tloa f psychiatry.

Psychiatric university to^hirv; docliacd to tho level of a j.oro rohnsl>-
1,v of t - i0  Qrn ’°°rfl: and sterilization laws. Tho uodora tochniquoe of
psychothor-py had been r~


53


9 Doc-H-Jr—11-7-i.oeh^a-j?
Court I


* 4534 triUttQnt ^tcrioratod to ?<*> t.dks full of huxi indoo-

:1 °' '^ CUiU ‘ * thr « > -coder thht these methods bec-
firec a lost the best Interests of tne Ger-iaa v_r offert which they '■

vere lishly intended to serve* ». lack of proper underst-odin; end
treatment of «r^_n soldiers who derelop contort fatigue or neurosis, .on
uc part of their own uedicJ personnel, drove uaoy of tha. to ourrondor
to the cnary, effort, to robabilit-to that and restore tua. to duty
verc frustrated oy tnc ruinous infusion of Hud doctrine.

Suuiary

Jho onor.J doclino of ionu -odic J conduct and tho poisoning

of C-orucn nodical ethics which the *.si. brou.ht about, laid .tao basis

for tho atrocious o^jcrUents of wnica tno defendants aro uccusod. •

P!UJSID2.S: 1*111 you kindly slow down you roadin cl

GJ.-lLhi rjlOHj kuny of those wore expori-.ents In not.o only; wo

will oliow thai to have boon scnsoloas _ad clumsy cad of no roal valuo

to uodioiao cs n ho^in,-. „rt. She Veil nodical world w u o flooded with

proponterous cad wickod notions about superior and inferior mco. cuid

dcvolcrjod ?. porvoryed cor_I outlook in which cruelty to oubju«:utod rncoo

•

.jorjlos was pr.lsovorthy. Training in S- and SS fomationa was
fc-rdly c lculatod to develop physicians who could comprehend ovon
the b .ro ol ejects of tho dcctox^poticnt relationship. In this noxious
• rdoa of 11 os, tho goods of tho experiments were planted. In tho
clihcto of 1'nsi Gor_aay, they r;row with horriolo rq>idity.

cai«-i or kss JCdH.iSAfia.':

■anJu^I*" «2) 2KJ kCffljB
0? POLlSn lijflprsis

Troa tho prcachin,; of C-utt and others spran,; the notions which'
uaccrly tho cri.-.es to w..ich wo will new turn. Hero wo leave behind cl 1


54


lat-Jrll-* (W)


itilcnoo, however, ficitious, of science cad research. . Under

iheso teachings, life and livelihood boccue the birthright of

no. 2 ho wecJc end the physically hondicoppod ore ia''tho way cad

sat be puahod aaido. Inferior peoples aro bom to bo oxtor±inatc<i

by tho Ecrronvolk. ^_)

2 ho charges in porcgrqjhs 8 und 13 of tho Indictnont concora
1 _ S'

tho defendants «lcco cad Rodolf Brandt. Iho original L.potus for
this torriblo aass curdor ettio free a fiend nscod Oroioor, who
tho Goman Governor of tho northwest portion* of Poland, which had
•'boon. nbsolvoA into tho Reich undor tho n^no ■Varthol.-tnd.■ Borly in
1962, Groisor was In tho procoss of oxtomia_tiag thoueonds of Jowe
In his torrltory, and he docidod to turn his attention noxt to Polos
infootod with tuborculosle. I call tho Tribunal spocial attontion
tc tho Goman .word ■ Son&orbofcandlun. * In tho noxt Docu^ont, as trill
bo shown, it occurs frequently in Rati corrotpondeneo and was uood by
then to noon extermination. In Key 1944, Oroioor wroto to Hiiulor
a follcwoi


9 I>Co-*r-l &-l—Ar-u i nubuc k-J?


f2:c Bpocid trcutcost", uad the Oor~an word is SertorbchuadluzK, "of
- bout t0rritory ^ district <pprov« by yotrin

* rcaJC ”' ? ith ? iof °* the aeich-ii* in-Security Off ice, SS-Obci-
r ^ cr-uaircr o_TL-JCE, can bo completed within the next two to throe
i.ontna. I as* yco for pciaissiia to rescue tuo dUtrict iia.odlatoly
" 5cr “Z 0 • 0c '- 8 ,'"f* Qr0 tcJc<n us-dnst the Jews, frojj a ..onuco, which is
incrcna wee* by woelc, and to uso tho existing and efficient special
cuiicndos for taut puzposo.

There arc about 23C.000 ?cc*>lo of Polish nationality in ny district,

- J uoro ^htosod to suffer fra-, tuberculosis. Tho amber of persons
infected vita open Tuberculosis is ©sti-.atod at about 35,000. 'iM a fact
h.-s lod in cr. Iner«usih£ fri^itsain,’ ncasure to the infection of Gordons,
*.o cnao to tho •.artbe f ;au perfectly healthy. In particular; r.oortn are
recoivod with ovor iacrousinc effect cf Gcr.iun childror. in dan,;or of
infection, a considerable number of well known leading; non, especially
of the polico, hare bo^n infected lately and are not available for the
war effort bocausc of tho noccssary ..cdlcal treatment. tto ovor incror.s-
in; risks wore also recognized and i. ■ >rw:i..t.d tho deputy of tho Reich
Icedur for Public Houlth (acichs,.-esundhvl*^fuc..rer) Coar^do Profoosor
Dr. 3LQ.2 as well ,j by the Lcudor of year JnS. jy battalion SS Stenderton-
fuchror Professor Dr. HOHULLDER.

■Thou^i in «i’UU 5 jr proper it is not possible to tako ^proprluto draoonic
•tops QC*.inst this public plcw.uo, i tr.ink I could toko responsibility
for y su^.cstion to have c.ses of open T3 extoruiuatod mow; tho Polish
raco noro la tho V«*rtho, .u. Of course only a Pole should bo handod ovor
to such aa action, who it m only sufforir if. trxx crpon tuberculosis, but
v.-.oto incurability is ircrod and cortifled oy « public houlth officor,

■Consider!the ur.;oncy cf this project l ..ok for your approval in
prirclplo ns scon us possible. Ihio v uld onaolo us to nako tho pro¬
portions wit., nil nocoss^ry nroc .utions n:w to „ct tho action gainst
tho Polos sufforin^ fro: open tuberculosis under w.-y, vnilo titer action
c.r-iust the Jova is in its cicala; st.^-os.

Groisorto Proposal was supoortod in a lottor frou ono, Xoppo, thp

_ ST

SS and pclico loador ia th .t region, to the dofoudant Rudolf 3randt, to
Wiicl'. 3ruadt ropliod ■ t^tin^that tho riattor was undor considoroticn <tnd
t'-nt tho final docision would rest with Hitlor. La to in Juno, Kiuilor
•ont a *favcrablo reply to Groisor Cautioning hiu, howevor, that tho
ext cram..ti:cs should bo carried out inconspicuously. Thereoftor, con¬
sult .tions as to h:w to Curry out t-.o ac-sur,. occurred between Groisor,

D”. Kcklfeldor, and the def -ai.oit 31 cue. ifco views of nlcuc nro co-
todied in a lottor frca'hk. to Greiaor wrltton ia L'ova.bor 1942. This
letter contains an indcscrib.-.oly jrutal an.dysis of tnc situation, in
vaich 31cuo expresses a,;rca.cnt with the view th_t extermination of tho
V-i.-crculariPclos is tho si-plost and ~:st lo,~ical aoluti%V* and anprosscs
- v -bt as to its desirability only in that it would bo difficult to kocp
sid*. widespread sinister 30 crot, and th_t Kitlor ni.;fat think think
tr - c prcGra: politically inexpedient if the f_cts should ever ccuc out.


56


X quote free the letter cf iLfondant Bloru :

■ It was calculated that in 1939 there w-re anon. the ?ol-s about
35,000 persons suffering fron cp-n tuberculosis and, be aides this

1?0 ' 0a ° cthcr consunptivo.s in need of tru^trwnt.

*»

■ -it the »jttl.runt of G-mans in all parts of the Gnu nn enomous
-. -r has arisen for tv-n. nu,er of cases of infection of settled
children apd adults occurs I’-iT-,

• • I

“Therefore? Scythia: baric av-st ho 'one soon. One mist decide
the tost efficient way ir. which this can bo d.on_. Th-re -rv throe
;rr/s to be taken into cor.si' , or-.ti6n :


1. Special troatnont ( Son ’erbehcndluni; ) of th- seriously
111 persona,

2 . "ost re onous isolation of the seriously ill persons,

3. Creation of a reservation for all 73-p.atior.ts.

" 'or the pl-nnin , attention :ust bo paid to dJLffJrunt points ""
cf view of a practical, political an:' psycholo^crl nature. Considering
it :icst soKerly, the sisnl-st way would be th- follouinr :

.Xtr' by the X-ray battalion ( kq-nt'vn StnmVnn ) wo could roach-
tho ontir- population, Gjrnm and . olish, of the G-u durin th,
first half cf 19b3» --a te tlk» eraans, the troatnont and isolation
Is to be prepared an* coir .led cut oc cor din to tiv- reflations for
Tuerculosis belief ( Tu’ .rkulo:. lilf _ ) .


" The Approximate 1:* 35,0:0 . 0 L .3 nho are incurable and infectious
will ’ e ‘specially tested* ( 3ondarbehandalt). -ill oth-r Polish
oonsunptivija will be subjected to nn appropriate cure in order to savo
t!v,n for work rw* to avoid their cousin, contagion.

" ..ccordinq tc your request I rvde arran, erunts with t've offices
ir. question, in ordor to startin' carry out this radical procedure
•.rithin half a year. You told n-, that the corpetont office agreed
■•ith ;-ou cs to this spocial troafcaont and praised support, before wo
-finitely start the pro^rar, X think it would be correct if you
•fivl.’ nako s'ire once raoru that tho r Uehrur a.111 really a~rue to ouch
n solution.


" There can b, no doubt of the intended pro_r.ar.'s bein', th- uoct
oir^lo a:id nkt radical solution. If nboluto secr-cy could be
y.tarmteed nil scruples — re arcloss of what nature coni ’, be overcoivj.
’ut I C'.n3i"er 3ir:ply r.aintainin s-ervy 1possible, ixp-rienc- has
ta-yht us that this assumption i3 true, bhuuld. those sick p-rsons,
h .vln. beer brought, ?s plaavid, to th- old Heich supposedly to bo
tr-at-d or healed, and th-.' actually never return, t»>e relatives ~f
those sick persons La spit- of tv, reat-s secrecy wonl-’ s<ru c’ny
notice • that son- thin itrs not quite rijht '.

■ Therefore, I think it r.-oessary to -xplpin all th-ise points of
ri-w to the fu-hr.r bo for- un *—-r.'rin th- proyra’, as, in :ny opinion he is
*- only arve a’-l- to view th- -r.tir- c -plex an’ to con- to a ’ecision.''

Th- rrcsecuti ~n will intruduoo -vi.er.ee to show that the projraa was
fact enrri-d cut at th- end. . 19h2 and the bu-'innin; cf 19li3, end. that ns
'r-z J.t cf the suggestions na’o by Elcatt and. Groiser, rvany Poles ncro ruthless]
-•-•r-.'.r.at-d and that others wer- fcakar. to insol ate H enrps, utterly lacking
- leal f-cilities, whore thousands of th-n died.


57


9. I*c.


12 - . .0-3“


Klnabcc3c

Euthanasia


C Indicktnant, prrayraphs 9 and Hi)

Cfc Soptarfccr 1, 1939,-the very day of ttw G-rron attack ; -n Polar.’, end
after a roat doal of ’iscussian between Dr. Karl Brandt, Dr. Leonardo
Conti, KiiHip 3cuhlir, the Chief of the private Chancery of tho Fuehrer,
aV. others. Hitler issue:’, the following authority to tho defendant Karl
3randt :

■ Jlwichslcitor BOPHIifft and


Dr. TWDT, !'.D.

aro charred with thb rosp-'naibility of enlari.inr the authority of
certain physicians to bo dosi; noted by nano in such a nanner that
persons, *o, acccrdin,; tc hunan jud'T>jnt, arc incurable, con, upon
a nost caref tiI dia n^sis of their condition of sickxx.ss, be accorded
a :ercy death.

•' siensd .

.-DOLF HITL-21 "


*


( .


>8


3 -'ac-JrZ?-12-l- Klnabuck* (i£)

Court &• I

Arzar tho receipt o: this order, an organization was
4 »t up to execute this program. Sari Brandt headed the
zjiical section and Phillip Scuhler the administrative
section. The defendant Hoven, as Chief s rgeon of the
3uchenwald Concentration Camp, took part in the pro/jraa
*nd personally ordered the transfer of at least 'OC to
4C Jewish ino-tes of different nationalities, mostly nor>-
Jeman, to their*death In the euthanasia station at Bernberg.

Tr.e defendants Brack and rloie participated- in their oapao-
itlos as assist .nts to Souhler and Conti.

Questionnaire a were forwarded to the Ministry of
Interior from the various Institutes and were then sub-
sltted to Sari Brandt and hla st<*.f. for an export opinion
in oraor to determine the status of each patient. Then
o<\oh of those experts Indicated his opinion as to the even-
teal alspositlon of the patient; that is, whether or not
tr.o patient should be transferred to a billing station.

The questionnaires were supposedly returned to the Ministry
of the Interior, which, in turn, sent lists cf the doomed
patients to the different insane asylums, ordering the
directors of the asylums to hand over the patients to a ^

•ning called the General Transport Corporation for trans¬
fer tc the particular stations where the killings took
rlaco. This Transport Corporation .was not a real orgor.iz^C ^
I'-ior,, but one of the code names used to die .-uise the true
■•‘ uro activities. The patients were then transferred

the station where they were immediately killed. This
entire procedure toe* place vithout the consent of the r el-
:.l .*es i but the relatives did receive a death certificate
on which the cause of the death was falsified.

Tr.o euthanasia program was an open secret in top
,vizl circles. However, .every possible -effort had been
-ale to keep it - 69 -


s De o- A- £T- 12-1-NInabucic- AX


from the public In order to avoid Intervention by the
ohurches. In spite of all these precautions, it became

*

ocsncnly known in Germany as early as the summer of 1940
that these killings were go^ng on and church authorities,
as wall as various legal officials, tried in vain to stop
the hillings.

Typical of the letters reaching the lilniater of
juatloo and the Unlater of Interior is the following;

Addressed to "The Reich minister of Justice;

* I have a aohlsophronec aon In 'furttomberglan men¬
tal institution. I am shocked about the following absolute¬
ly reliable Information.


*


- 5Sa -


9 3« .-A-X*-l2-»-5i:iabuck (ac

•csrt 5o. i


•Siac* sone week* insane persons ere being taken fron the institu¬
tions allegedly on the around* of nilitery evacuation. The director*
of the institution* are enjoined to absolute secrecy. Shortly after-
verd* th* relative* are inforsed that the tick person ha* died of
gacephaliti. The ashes ere available if *o desired. This i plain
enrder Just a* in the concentration canps. T hi* see sure uniformly
ecenate* froa the SS in 3erlin. The institutions dare not in fore the
authorities. In^iire at once at Hottensuenster, Schassenrted, V Inter-
tal, all in V urteeberg. Eave the lists of two nonths a^o exenlncd
aod suheitted to you, check upon the innate* who are thero now end
aik whers the rdssing persons vent to. Tor seven years now this gang
of surdersrs defiled the Oerran nme. If =y son is nvxdered, wool I
■V-i tsks care that these crinas will he published in all foreign news¬
papers. The SS nay deny it as they always do. I shall deuend prosecu¬
tion by the public prosecutor.


■I can not give ny aa=* nor th* institution where uy son is, other¬
wise I, too. won't live such longer.


If this prog ran had stayed within
letter to Earl Bnnit, it would have


Hell Hitler
Oberregierungsrat IT.*

the bound* set forth in Hitler's
been bad enough. Vo nay pass over


re qilte irrelevant any such question as whether nercy killings nay
not In soso circunstanee* be desirable, and whother e statute author-
1 tin.' nercy killings under proper safeguard* would be valid.

S uch questions Bay b# debatable, bug they do not confront u* her*.
3o Osrstn law mthorisiag nercy killings was ever adopted. Hitler's
nesorendua to 3raadt and 3ouhler was not a low, not cron a HatJ law.


It was not intondod to be a law or regardod as such even by the top

•

faxi officials. That is why the prograc was carried out with the ut-
30 it secrecy. The prorric v» known to be utterly illegal by those

s

who were la char.-c of it; they know it vre nothing but curder.

Thts.i-teoukht out vty clearly in a letter from Hlnaler
fit* 2reck in Decenber 19hc»

* 3rr.cki

*1 hy-r there.!# .Treat exc'tcnent on the Alb because of
tion Srafeneck.

The populatdoa reco^iixes the gray autonoblle of the o3 end think
‘-hey know what is *oinr on et the constantly asokin: crsna.toryl V hat
br-.pena there is a secret and yet is no long- * hue th worst

feeling bi arisen there and in ny opinion there renpins only one
‘•bln?, to discontinue the ue of the institution in thl place end In
*ny event diaeeuiarte lnfomatioa in r. clever and sensible nenner by
5 —“in.T notion pictures oa the subject of inherited end ner.tpl diseaee*
Jnct that locality.

I ask for a report as to how the difficult problod was solved.*


to the defend-


the inetitu-


-12-3-riM^ei (ar)


9 s.c.-*-ir

Coart Ja. 1


3at there are sore fundamental matters here, T he jrorr*c did not stry


eren vithin the bounds of the secret El tier authority.


/


- & a-


I


? 5ec.^W?*l>l-^ctv <2K)

C cart Jo, 1


2 uthanasis becaae merely a polite word for the systematic .laughter
of Jews end =eny other cate^ries of persons useless oi- unfriendly to
the Sr.rl redo*. The evidence before the International Military Tribun-
al proved thli dearly,. and the Jud^ent states and I quote fro* the
transcript, pp. IS 9 I&- 17 , 170 C 7 t

* 2 *ference ebould also he ar.de to the policy which vre In existence la
Oen=Aay hy the suaaer of 1°1 jC, under which all need, insane rad Incurable
people, ’useless eeters', were transferred to special lmtituilons where
they were hilled, end their relatives lnfovaed that they had died froa
natural causes. " he vlctlas were not confined to Ger=a.n citizens, hut
Included foreUx laborers, rf.o were no lonrer able to work, pnd were
therefore useless to the Geram war aachlne, It has been estlcnted tha.t
at least soae 275,CCC people were hilled In this canner la nursing hones,
hospitals and asyluas, which were under the Jurisdiction of the defend-
rnt*THck la his ccondty as minister of the Interior. Eov ac»y
foreign vorhers were Included _|n th is total It has been qilte^lapossible
to determine."

I vote one aore parrkrnph froc the decision, po. 17CC7*

■During the war nursing hoaes, hospitals, and rayluas In tfilch
euthanasia was practised as described elsewhere In this Jud.tnent, caao
under Trick’s Jurisdiction. Ee had knowled.-e thrt insane, sick and
aaod people, ’useless saters’ were beln* systeaatlcally put to death.
Cceplrt nts of these aurders reached hln, but ho did nothin,- to stop
then. A report of the Csechoslovnklnn Crlnes Cozr.lsolon estlsrted
that 275,CCC centally deficient and nzt d people, for whose welfare ho
wr.o responsible, fell victla to it.*

As statod In the Indictaent, the defendants Involved In the euthanasia
oro.-rrr. sent their subordinates to the eastern occupied territories So
resist In the aase examination of Jews. This will be town bv abund¬
ant evidence, including the following oxcerpt fror. a letter fre^ the
iefendent Brack to Hinder In I 9 U 2 froa wr_ch I quote a parr ^rnphi

"tfn the 1 instructions of fi'-eich-Leeder 3ouhler I placed sozc of ay
ccn at the dlspolal of Bri-adefuehrer Globocnik So execute his special
clEslon. Or. his renewed request I hove now transferred additional
personal. On this occasion Sri'ndefuehrer Olobccknik.

r '

% ,


*


- 61 -


’sort Mo, 1

statod his opinion that tto whole Je»-«*tion should be ccr-pleted as
quickly as possible so that one would not ’et caught in tho rdddlc - -
of it ono ijr il sone difficulties should cake a stoppage of tho
a ction necessary. You y curs elf, Reichsfuehrer, have already expressed
your view, that work sivmld progress quickly for reasons of camou¬
flage alone."

?rtasting the lawless slaughter which oven Hlrrler sought to "camouflage",

ft

tho Bishop of Lirburg in 19Ui foresaw that such insane carnage spelled the down¬
fall of the Third Raich. Ho wrotei

"And if anybody says that Go many cannot win the war, if there is yot
a just God, these expressions are not tho result of lack of lovo for
the Fatborlani but of a deep concern for our pooplo. High athority
as a coral concept has suffered a sovoro shock as a result of those
happenings."

I have outlinod tho particular charges against the defendants under Counts

0 •

Two, Throe, an-'. Four of tho 7-viictcont, and I havo sketchod the general nature of

tho ovidonoo which wo will present. But wo cust not overlook that tho nodical

oxporlnunts wore not an assortnant of urrclatod crinoa. On tho contrary', they cory-

stitutod a roll—inWjmtod crininal pro.Tan in which tho defendants planned and

collaborntod^*Oonc w thonsolvcs *pA with others. ^

*o havo hero, in other words, a conspiracy and a conaon design, as is chargot

In Count Ono of tho Indictr-ant, to ccnait tho criminal experiments sot forth in

paragraphs 6 and 11 thnroof. Thoro was a ccrroon design to discovor, or Inflow,.

ranious nodical toclniquos. Thore was a oocrson losign to utilizo for this, purpose

tho umsual rooourcos which the defendants had at their disposal, consisting of

•

nunborlosa unfortunate victd.as of Nazi conquost and Nazi idoolo.-y. Tho d of on dan to
oon3pirod and ayrood together to utilizo thoso hunan resources for nefarious and
curdorous purposes, an! proceeded to put thotr crininal dosirn into oxocution.
Nunhorod anon tho countless victi.-a of the conqoiracy and the crinos aro Gomans,

it.’, nationals of countries ovorrun by G^many, an!-Gypsies, and prisoners-of-war

*

±n! Jcrws of nany nationalities. All tho oloaonts of a conspiracy to coo-dt the
crl-oscharged in paragraphs 6 and il aro present and all will be dourly aatnbllsh-
od by tho pr: of.

Thore woro nany co-ccnspiratox-s who are not in tho dock. Anonglthe planners
•n: loaders of this plot were Conti and Grawitz, and Hipgko whoso wharoaboute is
uric neon. Ar»n; thu actual executioners. Dr. Dinr is dead an! Raschor is thought to
\ dead. Thero Wu-ro nary othors.

(


62


~:urt Bo. 1


Final Judgment as to the relative degross of guilt aaonr those in the lock

rust await the presontation of the proof in detail, nevertheless, before the intro-

action of evi .ones, it will be helpfwl to*.look again at the. defendant a and thoir

_:.rt in the conspiracy. TTbnt comer of can are they, and what was their najer role:

The twenty physicians in the dock ranr.o froa leaders of Geman scientific

r* Heine, with excellent international reputations, down to tho dregs of the

3-raan nodical profess ion. All of than have in conaon a callous fiack of consider-

>.tion and hunan regard for, air! an unprincipled willingnoas to abuse their power

over, the poor, unfortunate, defenseless creatures who had been deprived of thoir

rights by a ruthless and criminal .-overrtoont. All of then violated the Hippocratic
• • •

cemandncnta which they ha.', solc::nly sworn to uphold and abide by, including tho
fun 'anontal principle never to do hair. — "prlnua non nocoro."

Outstanding con of scionoo, distinguished for thoir scientific ability in
Ocirnny and aborad, cro ths dofondanta Rostock and Rose. Both oxtf-pUfy, in thoir
training and practice alike, tho hi host traditions of Geftvrn nodicino. Rostock
hovlod tho Dopartaont of Surj sry at tho University of


9 Dcc-r.-Z^-13-Er

Court ifc. 1.


Borlir. an*! served aa dean cf its Todiccl schccl. Rose studied under tho fancu:
sur;;caa, Sndorlon, at Heiddberc and tlxn bocarx a disti.v^ishc ' specialist
-* the fields cf public health an’, tr pical diseases.

irnloser and Schrcoder arc outstanding nodical cdcinlstratere. 3otSi cf then
radc their carocrs in cilitar/ rcdicinc anircachoi the per.’.: their
profession. Five ocrc defen’ants aro aacl: y-unfor nen who are novcrthclcas
already knam as t’t possessors f considerable scientific ability, or capacity
in Medical aduinistrati x\. Those include tho <defendants Karl Brandt, Ruff,


rcirlboc!:, Schaefer and Bcckcr-Frcys.uv.


>


.. meber f the there such as lUxabcrp end Fischer, aro well-trained,
rnd several of then attained hi^i professional position. Cut anon? the re¬
minder few were known as outstan’in; scientific nen. .jomv; thou at tJlc. fcot
cf the list is Blooc rhe has aublishc.’. his r.utcbir-'.raphy entitle! "Inbattlcd,
Deeter" in which he sets f rti tint ho eventually docidoi t bocruo a doctor 1 \
boca’iso a nedical career vculd enable hie tc bccc.ac "Master ver life nrel

*■' ' O'

Tl.o part that each cf th.se twenty physicians and their throe lay
aoccipliooa played in t:ic c-.nopiracy ml its execution coiroajxjn's closoly to
is professional interests ah*, his place in the hierarchy cf tic Third Reich
•s si.awn in the chart. The notivatirx: s.urcc for this conspiracy cane fr-'n
t,; " principal o cure os. Hiiuilcr, as head’ <f the SS, a ucot terrible cn/,ino
od oppress! n with va3t resources, could provide uxbarloss vie tins for^tho
axparinents. 9y doinc sc, ho enhanced the prett^o :f his or/jeniaatien and was
“-Me t- five free ruin t: the Kaai racial theories cf which he was a ldadinr:
.rta_;ni3t an’ tc develop new techiiqucs for the nasj oxters dilations which

h *

•• r- 'dear to his heart. The Qc-ritfe Ldlitaxy leaders, as the otli?r min .iriviix;
re., aaujtt up the cpportuiity which 11 viler presented fix. with and nith-
capitalized n Himlcr's hidccus overtures in ar. endoaver tc strengthen
-•-*r .dlitary Machine.

:xv‘ cc the infernal dram as ployed just as it had bo-.rt c nccivcd in tto
i .!s the authors, fecial problOns which confrcntod tho German rdlitaiy or
civilian authorities, were, on tho orders of tho mil cal loaders, subedited for


0 Doc. lj6-*-<SS-i3-2b (lTD)

Court No. 1


solution in tba concentration caaps. Thus vo find Sari Brandt stirulating
tho :pi:'.cric Jaundice exp.riaents, Schroodor doaandi^ n U) health tost
subjects'- for tho seawater ox^riaents, Bsndlossr provi/inr-tho lnpotus
for nine is foarful typhus researches, and TXlch and Hippke at tho root
of tho froozing tests. Under RlmV rig autfbrity, the nodical loaders of
tha SS-Orawiti, Oonzkon, Gobherdt an*, others — sot tho wheels in notion,
Thoy arranged for tho procuraajnt of viettna through etter branches of
tlw SS, an.' cevo directions to their un&rlin;:s in the SS judical s.rvico
such as Hover, an*. Fischor. HL-rsloris a.blnist native assistants,-Siovara
an' Rudolf Brandt, passed on tho HLnlcr orders, ~avo a push h-ro an’, a
shovo there, an* kept tho mchinory oiled. Blooo and Brack assisted froio
tho sido of tho civilian and po*ty auttorltios.

Tho r ohmach't provided supervision and technical as sis tone o for
thoso oap^rirents in which it was mstvintarosto *. low .-.ressuro
chonbor was furnished for tho hi h altitude tests, the s.rricos of
oltt, Ruff, Ronborc; and Rancher for tho altitudo and frooting
oxporinonts on’ tocso of Bee or-Freysonf;; Schaofor, and Boilbock for
soawator. In the inportont but cinistor typhus researches, the oninont
Dr. Rose appeared for tho Luftemffo to ivo expert -uidnneo to Ding.

Tho projxr stops woro tck.n to insuro that thu results woro mdo
ivailcblo to thoso who necdod to knew. ..nhual -Joetin s of tho consulting
physidan of tho * ohr-acht hold und~r Han loser's 'irection wore favorod


lth lectures on soru of the oxporixnts. Thu rop.rt on tho hi h altitudo
tost was scr.t to Field Marshal Jttlch, end a rovin- picturo about thon ves


shown at the ;Ar ’Inistry ir. Berlin. • oltz spoke on the offsets of
fr-ozin at a radical conforor.co in tombere, tho sano synpjsiun at
•hich Rasohor and others passed or. thair -'ovilish krewledno, .

Thera could, wo 3ubnit, bo no cloarer proof of conspiracy. This was
too no leal service ef the Third Reich at work, £mnf» th„ '.ofcnlants in


too box sit the
Tribunal to


survivin'; loaders of that scrvico.


o will ja\z the


65


C Ico.-i-GS3-15-3b-Putti-(Gv')

Court So. 1

(lateralno that nalt bar scientific osinence nor superficial r.spoottnbility
•tell shield then e^cinat tho fearful consequence-a of the ordera thov

I Intend to poaa very briofly or«r natters of nedicr.l othioa, auoh as
tho conditions under which a pl^-aioian lawfully perforn rf acdicrl
(^periaont upon e person who hea voluntarily aubjeotoc' hinsalf to it,
or whether experianta ncy lawfully be p;rforood upon orleincla who hovo
boon condensed to doath. This orao does n^t oroaont such problems. Be

9 9

rofined quoatiens confront ua hero.

; _j£j ••

V


66


9 ^o.^.-KX-l-l4-?rioc-(OJ)-

V « 'I

None af tho Tictics cf atrocities perpetrated by ttoso defendants

».r<J volunteers, and thia i-ruo regardless of whet these unfortunate
pooplo my hfrVo Kid or signed before tboir tortures bogon. feat of tho
vloti-.a "rai not been oorfennod to doatb, and thoao who had boon wore ori-
uinsla, unless »t b y* crir» to be b Jew, o r a Polo, or' a Gypsy, or r.
Russian priaonor of-war. —I

HhotoTor bo^k or treatise on rxdical ethics wo »y examine, end what¬
ever export cn forensic aodioino wo cry wo any quoation, will say that
that it la a fundr.nontal oed inosc-pablo oli-ctior. of every physician
under -ny known ayat.n of law not to perforn r dar.roroua exponent without
the sub'oot'a oensont. In tho tyranny that was Vftti Gormny, no ono
could -ivo such a consent to tho wed leal n'go.nt of tho State, everyone
lived-in fear acted ikdor duroa. 1 fervently hope that n-no of ua hero in
tho oourt rcoa will have to suffer in silence while it la said on tho
rprt r those doforranta that tho wrotahod and holplcsa r. 0 -,plo when thoy
froso and drowned end burnod and noisonod wore voluntoora. If auoh •
ahnreloas lio is spoken horo, wo rood only roaonbor the four oirla who
woro taken froa tho Rrvonabruook oonoontration omp and rr.do to lio n«kod
with the fr.xon and all but dead Jews who eurvivod .t. Rnaohor's tank of
ioo water. Ono of thoao wowm. rhrso hair and oyoa and firurj woro plot.ain B
to It. kaaoher, whon asked by hi- why she hod voluntoorod for auoh b task,
ropliodi 1 ’ rcthor half n yoor in a brothel then a half e yor.r in a 0 on-
oontrrtion onap."

•oro it noooasery, ono oculd rr.ko a log list of tte. fbaocroh of tho
roapoota in which tho oxocrimnts which those ’’ofondmta porfornid do-
rartod fren bvory known atendard of mdia-l othioa. Lut tho pulf bo twin, n
^ho«o atrocities and aorious roaooroh in tfc» hoalinc 'rt la ao
auoh a tabulation would be eynio"!.

T.o r.ood leek nc further then tho law which tho Katia thonsolvoa
on tho 2t*th of "ovozfcor 1£33 for tho nrctocti-n cf anirtls. This i-w st-.t-
oa oxplicity that it is designed to prevent cruolty and incifforonce of
non toward aninals and to awaken end


o Uo.-A-7?:-2-l4-Frloc-(GJ)-

dovolop and undorstrndins for anlaals a. one of tho highest ’ 1

ncr*l T'luos of r P oiT P k. Tho soul of tbo Gorrrr. people should abhor t}»
prlnoiplo of arro utility without consideration of the «*>ral -speo’ts. Tho
irw strtos further thet ell operations or treatrsnt. whloh r.ro assoolato'd
with pair, or Injury, ospcoielly exponents involvin' tho uso of cold,
fcert. or 1 afootions, oro rrohibitod, and can bo pernitted only under spooial
exceptional olrcuast-noes. Sooloel written authorisntl.^n by the hand of
tho donertaont 1. nooossery la every o-.se, and experiments *ro prohlbitod
free performin' oxpari azt.tr aooord>nr to their own froe JuS^nt. 2xpori-
aonts for tho purpose of toaohlnr aust bo roduood to e olnlawa. Jfadioo-

lojsl tests, r*.coinatior.s, t^wrowel of bleed for.diopnostlo purpose,
end trial of vcocinos propped ooooddinr to woll-established solentiflo
prlnoiplos ero peralttod, but tho nnir*.la h-vo tr bo Id lice laddie, toly
end poinlosaly after suoh ox.oeriaonts. Indivi-u«l phyaioiena n ro not
pornitted to uso io Z a to lnoroosa thoir sur C loM skill by suoh Waotioos.
Kstloncl Sooiollaa rorards It as a . Q orod duty of Scran science to koop
down b nuabor of painful nnlaol s-xpei lojnts to c nlniaun.

If tho "rinolples anneunood In this law had boon followed for huan
bolnsa as woll> this lndiotaont would oor-r havo boon fi'.od. It Is perhaps
tho doopost sh-.no of the dofondonts thet It probably novor evon -oourod
to thon thnt human beings should bo tr^otod with at lor.st equal humnlty. .

This o-so is ono of tho sirplost and cloorost of-th'-so that will bo trlod

in this building. It Is also ono of tho n?st ir*> rtnnt. It is truo that

thoVofor. ents in t>v* bex woro w . u . % .

. orrn~ th? highest lor Sots r :t tho Third

Roioh, They ero not tho war lords who r.sjonblod and d rovo tho 3erw.n
Military machino, n^r the Industrial bnrens who nedo the parts, nor
“ politicians who dob-.s^d end brutalized'tho minds cf the Gorarn
pocplo. 3ut this Q3S0, perh-ps noro than any other wo will try,
tos Tczl th-.u'ht -nc tho Kr.ti way of lifo, booruso these dofoadants pursue
tho s vr.ro promises of £a*i th\u$ht so for.


; >


Tha thir.75 that these defendants did, like so mny other things ttet
happened under tit third Reich, wero tit result of tho ftxicus -iorjor

* «-=“ amtari " “• «“ "Ol*! oblMtiT®.. -o *11 tho rosulto
cf tti* :_rsor in nn^ otfcr ilnld, of C-or^n lifo, »e »_o it horo in tho
field cf :udlciiij.

Gorc^ surrendered herself to this foul conjunction cf evil
forces. Tho nation foil victln to tho Kazi scour, 7 o because its leaders
lackod tho uisdos to forosoo the c-nscquoncos and the course to stand
fi« in tho face of threats. Th.lr failure was tho inovit,blo outcaao of
that sinister un Urcurror.t of Goman philosophy nJdch proaches tho
suprano Inportanco cf tit stato an *. tho ccnploto subor ‘ination of tho
In-ivi *ual. A nation in which tho in Ivi-binl scans nothin rill fin;’, fow
loa-lcra courageous and ablo onoa h to.servo its bast interests.

individual Gomans did indeed :ivo wamin =f what was in storo,
ca * Oortxa !3Ct0 ” rnd scientists wJrw ittfcorod anon? tho courageous
fm. At a nootinr of Bavarian psychiatrists hold in ?unich in 1931,
vhen the poisonous J cctrine, of tho Sasls wore nlroa.fr swoopin' Qomany,
th.ro me a discussion of rcy killin' s and storilixaticn, an tho Kazi
viows on thoso matters, with which -o aro itow fniiliar, r.ro advanced.

A Oomnn professor ruu-nd Oswald Bunko roso and node a reply i*>ro oloquont

ar. 1 prophotio than anyone could havo possibly roalizod at tho tirvo. Ho
30i.ll

? I 5houlJ - Uk0 ° additional roaerks. On of the:: is,

pleaoo for God's sake loavo our present financial noo J s out of
all tiioso considerations. This is a problon which concerns tho
entire future of our people, in’.ood, or*. ;ay say without bedn”^"^
ovo*«aotlonal about it, tbo entire future of hunardty. Or.o \V J
should approach this .vroblaj neither fro:i tho .-oint cf view cf
our present scionti'ic opinion ncr fron the point of view of'tho
' 3 ‘ lil c P^ral econoaic crisis. If by sterilization wo oan
prevent tho occurrence of :Lr.tal disease then 'e steul’ certainly

b li ' in ori:T *> »noy for tha -ovam-r.t but booause

ovary coso cf rental ’iseaso sjftns infinitq sufferin' to the patient

6 ?


“ to his relatives. But to lntrc.iwo economic points of rio*
is not only Inappropriate but outright daxr-ercus because tho
'lrloal consequent of tho thought tout for financial reasons
ai! thoso hunan b^irvjs *ho call-' bo Sspcnsoi with for tho
□oojnt should bo oxtorrdnatoJ, is a quito r^nstrous lc^oal
conclusion i wo would than hero to pot to loath not only tho
run tally sick an-.' the psychopathic personalities but all tho
oripplo 4 inclu-in: tho disabled veterans, all old nai !s who do
not work, nil widows whoso ehildpon hero ccqplatcd their'
o-iucation, ani all thoso who live bn their incono or :!rar pensions.
That would certainly save a lot of ixnoy but tho probabiUty is ^
that wo will not -So it.


9 Doc-A-iScha-l-Ib-Price (?S)


_ * 9

■Tho second point of advic_ is to use utmost restraint, at
xvr.st tmtil tho political -atmosphere bare in this country shell have '
Improved, and scientific theories concerning hereditary end race can
no longer be abused for political purpose#. Because, if tho discus¬
sion about sterilisation Is carried into tho arena of political con¬
testation pretty soon wu will no longer h.-ar about tte mentily sick
but, instead, about Aryans and non-Aryans, about tbo blonde Germanic
race and aoout inferior people with round skulls. That anything uso-
ful could coco freo that is certainly improbable; but science in
general and genealogy and eugenics in particular would suffer an in¬
jury "hich could not easily be repaired again."

I said at the outset of this statement that tha Third Roich
diod of its own poison. This caso iq a striking demonstration not
only of tho tremendous degradation of g*r=an medical ethics which Nasi
doctrine brought about, but of tho undoraining of tho radical art
thwarting of tha techniques which tho defendants sought to employ.

Tho Nazis have, to a certain oxtont, succoodcd in convincing tho peo¬
ples of tho world that tto Nazi system, although ruthless, was absol¬
utely cfficior.t; that although savage, it was ecoplotcly sciontlfic;
that although ontircly dovoid of humanity, it was highly systematic —
that "it got things done." Tho ovidcnco which this Tribunal Td.ll hoar
will oxplodo this nyth. Tho Nazi -athods of investigation wore inef¬
ficient and unsciontific, and thoir techniques of research wore un¬
systematic. j-% "" 7*\

Those experiments revealed nothin^j/hich civilizod nodicino
can uso. It was, indeed, ascertained that phonol or gasoline injoctod
intravenously will kill a can inoxfxmsivoly and within sixty seconds.

This and a few other "advancos" arc all in tha fiold of "thanatology."

•

Thoro is no doubt that a number of these now methods may be usoful to
criminals ovcrywiioro and there is no doubt that they may bo usoful to


a criminal state. Certain advance in destructive methodology wo can¬
not deny, and indeed freo Hic r lor»s st-.ndpoint this nay woll have bee*"
the principal objoctivo.

f ’ V

Apart fraa thosu dofcdiy fruits, the c^x-ri^ents were aat only
criminal but a scientific failure. It is indeed as if a just deity had
shrouded the solutions which they attempted to reach with murderous
means. The moral shortcomings of tho defondants and the precipitous

case with which they decided to ccccit murder

■

- 71 -


la quoet of 'leitctlile r«ioll«» , dulled also that seiontifie
hesitant, that thorough thlnking-through, that responsible wei£>-
Izg of ©very single atop which alone can insure scientifically valid
results, Jrea if they had cerely been forced to pay as little as two
dollars for humn experlneatal subjects, such aft *:erle<c investiga¬
tors ncy have to pay for a cat, they night have thought twice bafore
wasting unnecessary msbers, and thought of slimier and bettor ways
to solve their problen*. Tho foot that those InvostlgatSrs had froo
and unroatrlcrted nee ess to henan beings to bo ezporluontod upon ais¬
led thoc to tho dingoroua and fallacious conclusion that tho rosults
would thus bo bettor and nore quickly obtainable than if thoy hod
(*ono through tho labor of preparation, thinking, and uotleulous pro-
invoetlgatlon,

A particularly striking oxeaplo Is tho soawatcr cxyorlnont.

I bdiovo that throo of tho accused — Schaofor, Bockor-Froysong,
and BoiglbuocJo— will today odnit that this problen could havo boon
solvod tolvod siaply and definitively within tho gpaco of one aftojv
noon. On May 20, 1944, when theso acouaod convonod to discuss tho

probla:,. a thinking chaiist could have solvod it right in tho.prc*-

•

sonco of tho assanbly within tho spaco of a fow hours by tho uso of
nothing uoro gruosoce than a pioco of jolly, a saiipomoablo
and a salt solution, and tho Ooraan Akuod Forces 'culd boro had tho
answer on Key 21, 1944. But what happened ins toad? Tho vast araios
of tho disonfranchesod slaves wore at tho bock and Cull of this sin-

0

istor assembly; and lnstood of thlnklzv;, thoy sinply roliod on' tholr
powor ovor huuan beings rendered rightless by a crininj stutonid i'flv-
onriont. V hat tine, effort, end staff did it toko to got that
machinery in notiohj Lotters hod to be wrftton, physicians, of whon
diro short c^o existed in the 0 or_tc «raod Jorcos whose soldiers went
poorly attended, had to bo taken out of hospital positions and die-
patchod hundrods of uilos a w ay to obtain tho answer which shtuld have
been daewn In a fow hours, but which.


0 Doo-*-,i3eflO-3-l+-Price (kj)


thus did not boccas available to the Gercan .arced forces until after
the cccplotion of the gruescce show, and until 42 poople had been
subjootod to the tortures of the daoned, the very tortures which
Greek mythology had reserved for Tantalus.

In short, this conspiracy was a ghastly failure as well as a
hideous orice. She creeping paralysis of Sail supersitioa spread
through the Gercan nedicsl profession and, Just as it destroyed
character and corals, it dulled tho clod.

G uilt for the oppressions and oricos of tho Third 3eioh'is
widespread, but it le the guilt of the leaders that le deepest and
cost culpable. * kfco could Oeruen aediclno look to to ktep tho
profession true to. its traditions and protect it frou the ravaging
Inroads of Sail pseude-scloccef Shis wtf^tbo supreuo responsibili¬


ty of the leaders of Oeruon uedlclno——non


/


Sostock and Soso end


■ ■ o


73


9 IXc ri dc

Oxirt Ho t 1«


Schroedcr an d Kaodloser, That is ihy their guilt is grater th:.n that „f .any
of the ether defendants in the d_ck. They ire the .en who utterly X ile_ theip
country -nd their profession* iho showed neither c.urage n r vis:,-^ n-r the
v-stijes of o$rol diameter. It is their failure, together idtfc the failure .,f
the leaders -f Ooroinjr in other *.rolks ef life, that deb :uched Gcr-i'.qj’ and
U: t her defeat. It is because jf tit-o r.r\l oth-r liicc the* that re all live 1
in z stricken world.

JWCZ 22.03: The Presccuti-n has nn; consuttd 11 f the U x allocated

• » t

it for its opening stateoont. Is tho Frosccutien prepare, to prveoed with
the introduction f any evidence this aftom-on?

GEHB&X T..YUR: Y:ur Bettor, the Ixueent book f r Kr. UeBano^s first
part of the evidence u-.s not ready until ye fterday, ihich w.e r. Sunday, end
if agreeable t. the Tribunal, it u uld be norc convenient f r us, and I think
f r the defendants, t, reso-e t.asrr w urning .hen we have had ti..c
to 1 -ok at it. 4 ' ~ ‘ ,

JUX2 L.J3: THo Tribunal -.fill recess until 900 o'cl cl: t-norr-w a-rning.
iTlic Tribunal adj,um_d until 10 Decenbcr 1946, at 9:30 hours)


• 74


/f*4>

XO Deo-*-GSS-l-l~roate^-( .£)

Court No.. X

jo.---r.cx 3 :cty

Official Transcript of the .cerlcan Kllltarv
Tribunal In the matter of the Unite! States’
of >morlca, against Karl Brandt, at al,
defendants, sitting at Numbers. Germany, on
10 December 1946, OS^l-i^, Justice Seale,
presiding.

m

TH£ H.tRSHAL: The honorable Judges of Military
Tribunal 1. Military Tribunal 1 la now in session. God
save tho Unltod States of doerica and this K°nrablo
Tribunal. There will be order In the court-room.

TH£ ?RSSIDS:.'T: fill the Marshal ascertain If the
defendants are all present.


THo H^RS H iL: May it please y ur Honor, all
defendants are present in the c .urtrooa.

THJ PftiSIDUIiT: Secretory-Goner a, will you note


for the reoerd the presonoo of the defendants In the
oourtroou. *

The prosecution nay prccoel. v.

- - 'X

HR. KCK.i2f£f: May it please the Tribunal:

3oforo any ovllenoo lo presented it la ay purpose


to show the process whereby d^cum-nta have been procurod

and processed In crier to be presented In ovllonce 'ov tho

•

United States. I shall also loscrlbe and Illustrate the
plan of presenting documents to be followel by the
proaeoution In this case.

iVlien the United States .o-ny entered Gorman
territory It has specialized military personnel whoes
duties were to capture and ,reserve eneay docuaents,


records, end archives. .

3uch docuaents were assembled in temporary docu-

LEonV-^ptacrs. Later each ^rmy established fixed document

centera'dr. the U.3. Z01- of Occupation where there
i | cof

were assembled and tho slow process of Indexing


-Gcumensi


,<$;->Alogulng was begun. Certain of these documents


- 75


10 Doo-K-GI^-l-l-Foat3i^(«£)
Court No. 1.


centers In tbs U.3. Zono of Occupation have since been
closed and the documents assessed there sent to Icounent
centers.

Vhen the International !'llit-jy' Tribunal wis
aet up, flold teaaa unlor the direction of Major yiIlian
H. Coogan were organized and sent out to the various
icouaont centers. Great aaasea cf German lccuaents and
reocrls were screened and exaninlod. These solacted
were sent tc Nurnberg to be processed.


■ n


- 75a -


10 Deo-HiGi^l-a-roaSexMAK)
Court So. 1.


Those original documents were then given trial Identific¬
ation nuabera in one of five series designated bv the
letters: "PS", "L". ■R B ."C" , and BC, Indicating the
means of acquisition of the documents. VIthin each series,
documents were Hated numerically.

The prosecution In this case shall have occasion

to introduce In evidence documents processed under the

direction of i.ajor \2oogan. Soae of these documents were

Introduced In evidence oefore the I.-.T and soae were not.

a 8 to these which were, this Tribunal la required by

article IX of Ordinance Ho. 7 to tafce Judicial notice

thoreof. However, ir. order to slnplify the procedure, wo

will introduce photoatatic copies of doounonts used in

Case No. 1 bofore the IHT to which will be attached a
oortlficate by Hr. Fred Kiebergall, the Chief of our
Document Control Branch, certifying that such decunent
was Introduced In ovldonce before the I XT and that lo
a true and oorroct copy thereof. Suoh documents have been-


and will be nado available to defendants Just as In the

as to those documents processed under the dlrec-


case of any other document-.


tlon of Major Coogmwhich wore not used in the case before
the IHT, they are authenticated by the affidavit of fcajor
Coogan dated 12 Novoabjr 1945. This affidavit served as


the basis of authentication of substantially all documents
used by the Office of Chief of Counsel before the IHT.

It was Introduced in that trial as U.S. a. Exhibit 1 . Since

wo will use certain documents processed for the IMT trial,

1

I* would not liao to Introduce as Prosecution Exhibit 1 the

Coogan affidavit, lr. order to authenticate such documents.

This affidavit explains the manner in and means by which

captured German documents were processed for use In war

- 75 -


10 uoo->MJ2S-l-2-Fo8tcr- (*&)
Court No. 1.


crieda trials. I shall not ourden the court with reading

it as it is substantially tho same os the affidavit of
- /
rtr. Nloborgall to which I shall coco in a torrent.

I have thus far explained tho tanner of authen¬
ticating documents to bo used in this case which wore
processed undor tho direction of Xajor Coogan. I now come

to tho authentication of documents processed not for tho

A I

L.7 trial, but for subsequent trials such as this one.
These documents aru nuthontlooted


V

10 Deo-K-GES-l-3-fostar-r.D
Court So. 1

by cne o' - iipvlt of Mr. Jileber.all w. lcfa I offer In evidence
as ?roaeoutlon Exhibit 2. Since this affidavit explains
the -rocsdure of orocesslng docuaents by the office of
Chief of Counsel for war crises, I qholl reed It In full:

"I, FRED NIJ3.2RGALL, *.3.0. 15-150535, of the Office of
Cnief of Counsel for Var Crises, do hereby certify ne
follows:

1. I was asnoir.tod Chief of the Dcouaent Control 3r-nth,
Evidence Division, Offloo of Chief of Coun6ol for tor .Crises
(hereinafter referred to as "0CC“) on 2 October 13.6.

2. I have a ; rv-d In tne U.o. *ricy for sore than 5 years,
being discharged as a let Lieutenant, Infantry, on 29
October 19-6. I as now o roaerve of.lcar with the ranh of
1st Llcuten. nt, In the *ray of the J.5. of /inorlca.

Based rton ay oxporlonce as a U.6 t «roy Officer, I os
faalll-r with the operation of the U.$. nray In connection
with seizing ar. processing captured cneay docuaent6. I
sarvod re Chief of Tranelotlona for OCC fr*a 23 July 15-5
unt:.l Detacher 13.5, when I was appointed liaison officer
between Defense Counsel • r.d Translation Division of CCC
-a -a latent to the executive officer of the Translation
Division* In ay capacity as Cnlef of the Docunont Control
Branch, Evidence Division, CCC, I an foalllor with th
>roc 08 sln_, filing, tron slat Ion, and -notoet"tin u of J
?.oou..;ontnry evldanc- for the -nitea States Chief of Counsel.

a

3. ns the «r~y overran G-oraon ocou led territory zn&
•:.*.on -Jer.-aany itself certain specialised personnel seized
:r.way d.cuaenta, records ona area Ives. Such docuaents were
usseabled la :a_ jorary centers. Ester fixed doouaent
,ce:.t^rs were astrelished in oersany rr.^tustrin where tHese
i.cuiu3nts were esse^bled rnd the slow -.rocess of indexing

r.:. c t-lo^aln-. w-.b be d un. Certain of these document

?7


10 3e C-&-GE6-1-3- Fo s t a r-HD
Court Ho. 1


Centers have 6 lace been cloaed end the documents asaecbled
there sent to other docuser.t contora.

•j. Ir. preparing the trial before the International
kllltcry Tribunal (hereinafter referred to ae B IKT") a
greet nuab^r of original docuaents, photOBtata, and
aicrofllaa were collected at Surnberg, Ooranny. ifc.Jor
Slogan's affidavit of 19 liovenber 1915 doacrlbes the
pr^ooduros fulloved, Upon ay


77 a


10 i)eo-I4-0£3-l-r ;-?oater-H3
Court SO- 1.


tt

^ X<-^

aopolntaent as Chief of the Ooc-^nt Control Branch, evidence
Division* CCC, I received custody. In the course of official
o siness, of all these documents excect dec ones wnich were
•n.r duced into evidence lr. the I.'.T tri.'l er.a are now in the
IaT Boouaent Aoom In Hurnboru. ocac h.-ve been screened,
r-ceased, end registered In accordance with Kajor noo^an's


r.ffldavit. The unregistered doousvunts renolnln- have been
screened, oroces;ed, and registered for -a ln trials before
Kill Cary Tribunals substantially lr. the sace way as doecrlbed
below. - *

5. In preiarln,. for trials subsequent to the IKT trial

* • ••

.drsonnel thor«u c hly ^onv-raant wltn the Gerann lan-u’jO

were jlvan the tr.sk of searching for ar.d selootinv cn-tured

-nor/ documents which disclosed lnforurtlon relating to cne

.roooc.’tl.n of axIs .war crinin: le. Lawyers and xtaaeoroh

Analysts were :laced on dut; at various document oencers .

aid -Iso disoatched or. individual ole-Ions to obtain 'J

orl lr.'l docuaents or certified photostats tr.creof. Tho

I'.oumcnts were screened by Oeru^n ooeohin. analysts to

■’ec-rclne whether or not they ml.ht be valuable ns evidence.

•

Jv.otcatatlc co*les were t.-.en cade of the orl-lnsl doouaaflts
d t o '.rl^inol doc . 2 ;ntJ returned to the files In the
doc sent oenters. These photogtptlc copies were certified
the. analysts t- be true and correct cobles of the
original aocua r.ts.’ German spenkln 3 analysts either rt the
« on.-~nt center or lr. hurnber ttl tner. prcbhr.d a eu_ecry
of the document witn poroprlcte references to cersoncillties
..v lyei, inaex neadln^6, lnforanti.r. as to tao source of
v.:e cV.c-aaent, ?nd enc itsoprtence

T| " ' V ^ ^ w ~

. rtioular division of OCC.

5. Hext, the origin"! doc-cer.t or certified „.otoasaclc
c .• • '.■i forw"rded to th« ^ocucent C ncrol Branch, ^vicenoe


c: tr.o docuser.te to a


n

V J


78 .


I

10 Deo-H-0£S-l- .-foster-HJ
Court Ko. 1.

Division, OCC. Upon receipt of these documents, tr.ey were
duly recorded end Indexed and given identification numbers ' I
r. *.ne of sir series designated by the letters: *HC",

■NM“, “SOlOf", “NO 0 , and “NP“, indicating the particular
Division of OCC which sight be sost interested in the
.ndivldual documents, "ithin each series documents were
list 3d numerically.

7. In the case of the reocipt of original docuaents,
hotostatio copies *ere made. Upon return from the
Photostat Room the original dcousonts were


O


■


f


10 Deo-5t-0E8-l-6-?oater-HD
Court KG. 1.


laoed in envelope a in flreprcc’f 3pfes inutile ^ocuaent. Rooa.
In :h* c?se cf the receipt of certified photostitic copies
of documents, the certified phctostatic copies wars treated
m the e?-.e manner as original docuaents.

2. All original docuaenta or certified photesta tic copies
troat-d p.8 originals are now located in aafea in t.:e iXcunont
R'j .j where they will be secured until they are presented
the Prosecution to c court durln; the progress of a trial.
5 - Therefore, I certify in ay official capacity aa unrein
•’hove states, thrt all docuaentrry evidence relied upon by
CCC la in the sose condition '*s when oaptured by -illltary
f .rc--s under tne ooataand of the ouprone Colander, Allied
o.t: dltlonary Forces; that they h ve been translated by
c -.patent qualified ti’ar.elotersj txv>t all photosta.tic copies
?ro true and oorrect copies of the criminals, and that they
'v.vo boon correctly filed, nuatured, and processed as
above outlined,.

51 - nod: FRED >‘EI3£30 aLL ■.


Court No. 1.


-ha Nlebergall affidavit is in*, substance the same a6
the Cc^gon affidavit which was accepted by the International
iiilltary Tribunal as sufficient authentication of documents
uo d ir. Case NO. 1. However, in addition to these affidavits
the prosecution in this cpso will eteach to eoch document
submitted in ovldence, other than self-proving documents such
as pfflimits signed by the defendants, c cartlflo to ai.n-d
'ay cn employee of the Evidence division of t^te Offlco of
Chief of Counsel for .'nr Crimes, reading, for example, as
follows:


•

■I, Don-ld Spencor, the Evidence Dlrlolcn of.

* y • • » ^ r r* • • * *

the Office of the Chief of Counsel frr w r

Crimea, hereby certify tnat the attached document, conclst-
ln_ of one photostated pa-,o‘rnd untitled, ‘Letter from John
Coe to Richard Hud, dated 19 Juno 1S;3‘ is the original of a
document wr.lon vna delivered to me in ny above capacity, in
the sual course of official bualnoes, os o true copy of a
document found in Ourmrn archives, records and files co.pturod


by military forces under the commend of the Supremo Commander,

11* a —_.1 . _ _•*_ ^


4k


llljd Expeditionary Eorcea.


8


To the best of my hnowledge, information nn«'. belief', /
the original document is ry t the 3crlin Document Center".

S' much for the authentication of documents to bo
a counted in this trial. I turn now briefly to the distribu¬
tion of dooum-nttf whici. we will use. Thu prosecution made
avail'bio to the Defendants' Information Center approximately
r w.jv.h ago three pnoto6tatlc copies of the v roat b_lh of the


-.jc m.nts which will bo U60d in our Ci-so-ln-chlef. Ihcso
• •
documents rre of course in Cerman. In. addition, tha

rosecution has prepared document booh6 in both German and
-n_llsh which- c .ntcin, for the most onrt, mlneo-rcphed
c i-s jf the documents, -’Trended substantially in the order


eo


lO-Dec-I'—G£5-2il-Hay-HD
Court Bo. 1


in the- will *: .resented In thla coart. Each doouacnt

;oo'£ contains en Index eivin* the .document nusber, descrip-
nd o.~ t e nunier. spree is rlao provided for vrlt-
in_. In the index nuaber.

Twelve offlclol copies of the German document hocfcs
vlll u filed in the Jofendant's Inforortlon Center at lw£9t
2 . fcour e prior Co tee tine that par dealer material will do
introduced in court. In addition, defer.ee coanecl


10-Dec-:4-C-IS— ;—2—Ray—HD
Court Ho. 1


Si
*

vlll receive seven so-called unofficial German document books
vnlc a will contain alaeoe,rapn copies prepared primarily for
the German Press. Five official copies of the German docu-
nont books will be presented to the tribunal — that part
should reed 6, your Honor — one for eaoh of the Justices
on the bench and one for the Secretary Generel. Two of
such document books will oontnin photostatic copies In order
thr.t the Tribunal aay from time to time refer to tho original.
Document books will also be made available to the Gorman
interpreters ana court reporters.

Che Hn^lish document books will contain certified trans¬
lations of the documents in the German document books. '^ZhiT~

' doo. ’Dent e will be numbered nnd Indexed identically in both
the In^lish nnd German versions. The Defendants' Infornuv-
tion Center will receive four copies of tho Hn^lish dooumunt
books at the same time tho corresponding German aocujor.t
book Is dellvored. ^ representative ^roup of the dofonso
attorneys hove agreed that four of the 2n;,llsh document
books is sufficient to meet their needs.

Tho Tribunal will receive elx 2n*li8h document books

•

:nd suf. lclcnt copies will also be made .'vall&blo to the
interpreters and court reporters. Copies* of all documents
Introduced In evidence will thereafter be cade available'"
to the Press. ;

.V_y -

The prosecution will sometimes have occasion to U 30
documents wr.icr. have just been discovered ond are not In
document books. In suer, ccses ve will try to hcv. copies
in the Defendants' Information Center a reasonable tlce in
advance of tliolr use m court." Nov, I must point out to
:r ri»nors, and I do so without r-ny embarrassment, that

i m t

' :r ~ v;111 surely be soao Instances during the course, of the
:rla! x'hen the "prosecution falls zo comply with ono or Che

.81


10 Doo~*~G£S-2-2-il y-HD
Court So. 1


A


ottii^r of the o.art's rullin. 3 In view or che f-*ct £fcnt few
of ur jorsorxnel were here to obtain experience add training
in ch technics11ties in the course o. C. se do. 1 before
-- . International military Tribunal, bit be that aa it ary,
va 6h. ll constantly andoaverTo present our case as fairly,
rs wlearly -nl ee expeditiously ns Is hunonly xieelble.

Ihe -roaecutlun, wnen presenting c docu^p.t In court,
will hyaloilly hend the original, cr c. -tlfled photostatlo
c •• serving as the orUlrt«l,


10 Doc-it-GE3-3— 3—Hay—HD
Court So. 1


-— —

Co the cleric of the Tribunal, and give tho docuaent a
Prosecution Exhibit nuaber.

0

In t-ie IHT trial, the usual practice, to which there
were aany exceptions, was that only those documents or
portions of documents wr.lor, hud been read aloud In court
were considered to be In evidence and p rt of the record.

How this ves due to the fact tret the IliT trial was conducted
in fpur (.) lnncUCids.ond only through thet cethod wore
translations In oil four U) languages ordinarily available.
However, theIMT Tribunal ruled several tiaes, for example
on 1? Dccanber IS.5, in th original English docuaent at
pttgos 155-i end 15C5 that docua^nta which nad beer. translated
into -11 four lnngua.ee «nd aade available to iefenso

v

c uneel In tho Defendants' Information Center were

admissible in avldenco without boln Q read in full.

Tho prosecution believed that, under the clrouastancea

cf this trial, which will bo conducted In Gertsen and

Jn„lle cnly, and with oil the prosecution's docuconto

trsnelr.tod into German, It will be both expodltlouc and

fair co dispense with the reading In full of all documents

•

cr ortions of do cue sets. The prosecution will road some
deevnonta lr. full, particularly in the early stages of thu
crl:l, but will ondeaver to expedite zattors by summarizing
chounionta when ossicle, or otherwise callln^ the


82


lo-Jec-:>GE--3-l-=02rc (=L)
Coart Ho. 1.


o


attention of the Tribunal to such passages therein as are
ceeaed important and relevant.

'iith respect to the order of trial, the prosecution in¬
tends to follow, to e large degree, the order in which tho
various experiments are set forth in the Indictment. There
will be some exceptions to that, for inster.ee, we will present
the Tea 'Jeter Experiments, the proof of Tee *.ater Experiments
following the Tlalaria Experiments, which will be third in
order, and in time we v.ill move to the proof of reading the
i-ost Gas Experimentp because of the overlapping of tho
testimony of certain witnesses.,In. so far as posrile, we will
endeavor to present all of the evidence relating to a parti¬
cular ex. e.*i :ent at the same time. This rill be inpossitle,
cl course, where the testimony of a witness overlaps eevorel
experiments.

: eform proceeding to tha introduction of evidence on the
substantive crimes charged in the Indictment, the prosecution
wo-ld like to aonit proof on the positions ho Id by the defen¬
dants. For this purpose we have secured affidavits from the
defendants giving their personal histories. During the course
cf the presentation of thee-, affidavits, there will be occa¬
sion 0 discuss the organizations within which certain of
tne defendants vere active, each as tfc* medical ser/ics of. V; '
tne - a ' forces, the huftv/effe, or the St. In order thot \ */'

T^itu.nel mry more ^asily comprehend these rather conplicat-
-- or ar.irrtic.ns we have h'd c'.^rts prepared and sigaec oy
Certain of tne defendants who held an isportsnt office with-
in tll£ particular organization. These charts nave teen
•Jniar,td for in^He^Urt room and with the Tribunal's
I ^mission they vill he placed at the appropriate time on
‘he screen behind the witness box. One of them is nor • there.

Th ; court room charts ere reproductions of tha charts which


lo-Dec-:!-G3a

Court Ho. 1.


-1-Board {7Lj


rill be a:blitted in evidence er.c^t that they go not Show
the certification by the defendants or any notes which ^ay
be on the criminal. This natter is, of course, included in
translations, v;”nich your Honor, has been received. Hr Horlic
Hockweld, one of our associate pro6ecuters, will assist'in
the pretentation by using a pointer to indicate the parti¬
cular part cf the chart under discussion. I shall discuss
together these of the defendants who '..-ere active in the ssae
organization end the chart of that


o

Xj


lo-I>ic-::-G15-3-2-Hoard (FL)
Court 'Jo. 1.


organization will then be before the Tribunal.

4

I wcu-3 first like to take up the defendants Karl

Brandt end Restock who worked together in the Office of the

*

.v.-icn :cmis£i.r.ir for Health and T? 31 cal 3orvlc:fl. I offer
Document :?o. 155, rs .rosscution Exhibit 3, which is the
' chart of ergmizetior. of the Office of the Reich Commissioner
and he has drawn thi3 ch^rt for us.

7HZ i'R..: -1'r . Has the Prosecution offered ir. eviden¬
ce the two dccuucnts which he refers to ?.s Coogan and :;io-
berg*Ii ?

J3Y Yes, sir- , the Coogrri affidavit went,
in as . rosecutior.'s Exhibit 1 , which authenticates all
^ccuuants.


-HL . iE. >ZIjZ'T . 3o I uniarotand it has besr. formally
offeree ir. evidence ?

:3. YenYes, sir-, the procedure is th«t I will
give the ,^-rticulpr evidence ar. identification number such
«6 t.»e or.e I Juct called out, which is document number
:.o. 5-*5. I'.v't is the identification number which v”s jven
this document in the Document Control Ir r.ch. : thc-n c«il
off this as Prosecution’s Exhibit fuch-*nd-such.


T L j.C.IDin; 1 understood you to refer to them fry
ii-r.tificaticr. numbers tut I did not remember thet th«y^' , ‘^
had been formally offered in evidence. t v )j

.IcrlfTi;. Yes, sir, we certainly intended to do


t;.?t, both the Coo.g-n e~ fidavit and the hieberjall affi¬
davit •


cr,


T Z . I assume, as in any court, they must


be idnittud by'the c.urt in eyjdshcu—Th»y haya U.„n -
offered bat not remitted, is that correct?

::R. rcl.f.lY. Thit is very correct, your_noxxox-. How-


over, t..e procedure has normally been that in offering


- £4 -


* v ^

lo-Dcc-::-GZS-3-2-Bosrd (7L)
court :;o. i.


then, iialc.es there is r.o objection raised at that tine they


will b_ considered to be admitted. In other words, at least,


before the Intern?tional 'lilitery Tribunal, the Tribunal
■-id net .«ftke e foranl ruling on the ?dalssi'oility of each
jccuueni •• it wait in.


*>:& rtCS-Z DluT. Thet is a new procedure to ae.
iut liCH CSY; 5ir, tha* is r* new procedure rs far as I
ea concerned tut it -.:*8 so during the last tine. In the
prosecution's identification, if my defendant has my ob¬
jection to the p.daission of documents in evidence, th*t


84 a


1G -ifcc .'-G3S-3-3 -Boa pM FL)
Court No. 1.


'-he obi-action pay be stated at that time. If no defendant
registers any objection to the admission of r. document in
evidence it will be assumed that there is no objection.

-alV.iTHTSi -lr. President, in the trial before the
international lilitery Tribunal such a procedure was used
as the re .reeeatativo zf the rrosecution has b-sp s?yi: g.

It ii*»8 1-d to so.ee difficulties beca-sc nobody kn .v? when
n n objection should be r^^sed to r document such 's No-645,
which has now been presented ra Exhibit 3. I hrye no ob¬
jections to r*isc egrinst it now, but I do not know when
I should raise thee. « . •

* .AlaJu.T. ,. 6 Will first dispose of Exhibits 1 and
2, Coog^n nr.d iTic-tergall affidavits, which have not yst
been admitted in -vidence. Is there my objection on »ny
• art of the defendrnts to ‘dmitting in evidence Exhibits 1
*nd 2 ?


(Ko objection raised)

Tild ..3&1ZDSNT. If t.-.^re is no objection, exhibit 1 nr.d
2 will be receive in evidence. Now, you ere Offering in¬
hibit 3 -i .

'3. 'Ic.uNaY. 7ec, Your Honor, .md, tc say c few -ords
on this point for the ^roscc-ticn -- Tho Prosecution will
h-vu no objection *dirtsoever tc rny Defense Counsel coming
in at *r.y tin: “no objecting to the ''dnissibility of my


oocuscnt which we will hero present. In other words, I am
r.ot inclined tc t?.:t the position th*“t “ny Dsfcnst Counsel


w-ves his right to obj.ct to -ny of our documents simply
bec'UBe ha does not do so at the tine it is offered. \


i 2 £ U£rTi I under tni tht, but it might be


J


•or. ,*5ier fer the Tribunal if the objections‘were arrued


*ke time the documents were off.i^d rather than go beck
hour or tvo hours and pick out some document which has


Court h*c. 1.


been passed.

'.Li. ::c_. Yes, sir, I understand, Your -ioncr. I
thinkhowever, ve will find that relatively few objections
v/iil be raised, certainly ?s to the authenticity of the do¬
cuments, which in my opinion, is the substnr.tipi point.

.»ny other otyection would run to the merirlity of the do¬
cuments as against r narticulrr dcfer.dr.nt.

THE x^HSCIOS'Ti The objections •'re, of course, equally
isportr-nt as t'o


Court 10.


the authenticity?

.\Z F -- - HT: Yes, indeed; as to that. Your Honor, I think ve will
hare tc proceed and learn free experience.

JWS 5ZERIS3: Vhen you are about to offer ar. exhibit in evidence,
you Radicate as such to the counsel for the defendants?

-.2. .iC HAIoY: Yes, of ccurte, which, at that tine, will bo the
-IssaI for thee to interpose such objections they say have, if any.

13* PRISIBiJE* Then the court say rule on that, an- I think ve will


have a sore orderly record.

HR. itC KAX27: Very veil, Your Honor.


We have offered without objection froa the dofense counsel Document
SC-646 as Prosocution's ixhiblt 2, which le the chart of the organisation
cf the Office of the Cffioial Cossission for the Foalth and Kedlcal Ser-


vices.


Da. SLHVxrrESJ hr. President, I sust raise an objection s^ainnt tho
presentation of this document, at least to tho extent that it is only a
United admissibility. Ckie chart has beon sworn to only to a lisltod
ertont by the defondact Zarl Hrsndt. He has crosoed out tJ>t this w ft a a
tatlo of organ!sstier., and he has stated on the plan that it only shown
the worScin* procedure; that is, it describes -hich of the offices the
connection was maintained. 7 or examold, it is obviously incorrect as an
organization chart because it does not show any Chief of Ivillan System
of Health, Doctor Conti, and such an lndlvi jil doos not exist; that the
subordination of the Chief of,the .--edical Services, Fandloeer, subordina¬
tion of the Reich Services below Handloser had not existed either. This
plan is composed of two other plans, end the statement of tho defendant
iarl Srandt, the only reference to the fact that It is a co-DOsitior., end
his affidavit states:

'I, Professor Herl Srandt, h;~ing been duly sworn, herewith steja...,
that I was 'ie-crel Commissioner and Reich Commissioner for the ( V


aedical and Health Service."


Otherwise no other statement has been rtiven. 2, therefore, would

like to avoid the impression, as this ulan show*, the subordination, and

. 86


Court So. 1

10 Dec-K-GSS-£-4-5eari


thereby would show the supervisory duties which the de^gdant Karl Brandt
would hare under the clrcuastances. This is =y statement.


85-A


Court So. 1

10 Dec 46-K“ft-l-LJS-31akley (lit)

0

1-S. hC HAD1Y: If Your Honors please, if I nay answer Dr. Servatius'
objection at this tine before the next gentleman speaks, I think that his
remarks run soro to the meaning or Interpretation to_ be given this charge,
rather than to its admissibility. At the tine of hie objection we had
not yet proceeded to explain hov ve interpret this chert end vfcat it means,
but as to its admissibility it *as dravn and signed by the defendant Karl
"randt upon a translation which is now before the Tribunal. As I stated,
they did net appear uooa the large courtroom chart because'there is not

sufficient rcon, and ye did n * consider it desirable to pot then on the

•

large courtroom charts which are not in evldonce themselves. They are

$ • %

simply being used to make the presentation a bit aoro clear.

IB. EADS PEI2ILLA: Attorney Pribllia for Profosaor Rostock. I also
have to object against that chart. To a large extent it is a correct
picture, but it only covers a limited oeriod of time. I boliovo such
charts are very dangerous. They make a certain suggestion and it is
believed that things heva boen that voy during tho whole time about which
the whole tried centers for tho tine being. This chart can be
acknowledged if at the same tine bosides tboso names tho d? .e could be

shown. Yesterday the prosecution said that ryofeesor r.jstcofc was a

• •

serious and competent scientist, the head of the University Clinic at

3crlin.

Professor Rostock did maintain that uosition until 4 .o end of tho
war. Pirst ho was in charge of a very important e:.d lpr.-e surgical
clinic. Iroc this ciurt it appears as if the defendant had only been a
collaborator of Kerl Srendt. In addition to this the indictment deals
with his crimes which cover a period of time from 1S2? until 1945. :>
objection is this chert can only be at the same time,
caa 6ce before our eyes that the defendant Rostock, for


Court So. X

10 Dec 46-*-4-2-Lv'G-3lakley (Si)


example, during the whole time was head of one of the largest clinics In *
Gernanp, and at the sane tiae, though, that only since February, 1544, he
has entered this office of rrofeseor Brandt.

E-3. fSlSIHIT; Specie sore elovly.

D?.. P B I3I L L A: There Is not very such for me to add. I only would

r

like to ask the Tribunal to consider that and besides this picture to know
that Bostook was only a collaborator since 1944. In 1S4^ the ver bed
already progressed to such a stage in Germany that no unlforn order

existed any sore, and that it can be very veil imagined that not every-

•

thing that happened in other offices cano at eXl to the knowledge of this
ofrico.


hC HAB3Y: If Your Honors’uleaso, I as objecting to this admissi¬
bility. * * - ’ .

T£e. ?3i.SII£KT: *Tho objection to the adsissibility of this exhibit ,
Vlll be overruled. It will be admitted in 6videnco. If at any tiao in
the future defendants desire to, they ore not bound by this otatenent in
tho exhibit as the exhibit for the prosecution, ar.d they sav nuko any
shoving they like, either by cross examination or vhon thoir case
op-nod. Procoed.

I

MB. KC HAISY: -he next remark that I v*s about to make boforo these
objections were raised ves that this dher‘ shows the organization as it
existed in the latter pert of 1942. It does not purport to show the
organization as it existed orior to that tlse. Office of tho Belch Cos-
ciseioner for Health and hedical Services develcpod as a gradual thing.


and it did not start out in 1S42 &6 shown by this chart, Those things
will fc6 made perfectly clear during the coursoNof^cur presentation.

This chart is relatively simple. In tho center, occupying tho key posi¬
tion, is the defendant lari Brandt. To tho left is tho defendant


Handloser, Chief of the Hedical Services of the Vchrmacht. To the


83


"curt So. 1

10 Dec 46--4-3i*&-BXaklsy (X^)


rigfct it Conti, Belch Health Leader pad Chief of the Civilian Medical
Services, who, as General Taylor told you yesterday, cccnlttei suicide in
the Kuernberg Jail lest year. Above is the defendant Ho stock, Chief of
the Office for Medical Science and Besearch. And belov is Adniral
Fikontscfcor, Chief of the Office for Planning and Production.

It was the power and responsibility of the defendant Karl Brandt to
coordinate and direct through these subordinates the activities of the
entire neelth and Hedicel Senices of tho Gernan Hcicfc. He vaa the
Juehrer of the Goruen nodical world. It should be aade clear that wo do
not taka the position that the Chief of the ^dical Services of the Vchr-
aacht, under Kandloser. and tho Office of the Belch Health Leader, under
Conti, were subordinate to Sfandt for all purposes. As Karl Brandt says
in his explanatory note on the chart vhicfc is before Your Honors, the
Office for Kodlcal Science and Hcsoarck, undor Hostock, t.-.d tho Office
for .icdlcal Planning and neoaeny, under TU.ptschor, were. ocrsonally
rosponeible to hia. . . J

We do take tho position, howver, that Kandloser and C^nti were
tucordinates to Karl Brandt insofar os nedicnl and scientific resoorch
ie concerned, and : think that tho decrees which I win introduce in a
nocont win nefcc that anply deer.

Before discussing the chart in any norc detail, I should like to

I

introduce and road the affidavit of Karl Brandt. This is Document 2»G-
475 and is offered es Prosecution Exhibit 4. on C of

English docunont book before the Court.

Dr. Karl Franz Friedrich Brandt, oeing duly *vern, deoosa and

state:


Court So. 1

10 Dec 46-H—4—4-£J&-£lakl«jr (ZX)


Oerwuy. I studied =edicine et Jena, Freiburg, Xonicfc, and Berlin, and
peeeed =y state exaolnation In Freiburg in 1928. Thereafter, I becaae en
assistant at the Ber^annshoil Ec.pital in Sechua, later at the Surgical
Clinic of the University of Berlin.

n 2. I becaae a nenber of the National Socialist Party in January,
1922. Xy Party nuaber vae 1,009,617. I becaae a nenbor of the SA in
1933. In the suaaer of 1934 I became Hitler's personal physician and on
29 July 1934 I becaae a neaber of the General (Allgeaelno) SS. Uy
nunber was 260,369. I did not hold office either in the General SS or,
later, in the Vaffen SS.

"3. I vns appointed Unter stum fuehrer in the General SS on 29 July
1934 and Cberstumfuehrer la the General SS on 1 January ?936. I
recoived ay ailitary training with the rop’ c.ceaer.t bettalip* (nrsatr-
batoillon) of the 12th Infantry Regiment at Blankonburg/Karr. Later I
too* part in ailitnry nonouvors at tray hospitals in tho nilitary dis¬
trict of Berlin. On 11 Kay 1936 I v 0 s tho recipient of tho "Death Hoad
Ring". That, Your Honors, is o ring givon by the SS.

"4. In 1938 I vee deferred so that in case of var I r'ght serve
on tho staff of the Reich Chancellory in Hitler's heedour-rters. After
the outbreak of ver in 1939 I visited all fronts oxcopt tho Balkan,

Norway, Africa, Holland, and Dennark. •

"5. On 20 April 1939 I was promoted to tho rank of Oberstumbann-
fuehrer of tho General SS. By the Fuehrer Order of 1 September 193? I,
in conjunction vith F.oichsleiter Philips Bouhlcr, vas charged by Adolf
Hitlor rith extending the authority of certain physicians so that, after
-ost critical examination, tk.y were able to accord a acrcy death to
certain incurably ill persons. I vp 6 transferred froa tU SS Central
Office (SS Kaupttat) i s B^rlim to the Vaffen SS.

U

- * •


- —

Court Ho, 1

10 Dec.-^6-::-LJG-eiAklcy h-6 Or)

1 * P 0 * 1540 - “ Personal physician to the Fuehrer roaained unchanged.

* status in the Aragr (Oterstebsarct) was not affected fejr

the transfer.

■6. By order of the Fuehrer Decree dated 28 July 19h2, I was
appointed General Caamissioner for Health and Sanitation (G norol-
kcrcissar dcs Fuehrers fucr das Saniteats und Gosundheit.Trcs.n). In
this position I was directly responsible to the Fuehrer ;.dolf Hitler.

I was simultaneously proto ted to the rank of Standartenfuchrer in

the Yfeffcn SS. On 20 January 191-3, I was promoted to Brigadefuohror

. Waff on ss.

"7. On Soptccbcr 5, 19U3, by “Fuehrer .Occrco ay responsibilities as
General Cccnisaloner wore enlargod. I refer to the contents of this
dcoroo. On 20 April 19&, I wr.s procotcd to Gruppcnfuchrcr of tho
Waff on SS.“ That, Tour Honors, is equivalent to tho rank of I&Jor
General in the United States Aray.

,, 3. Cn 25 August, 19AA, by docrop df tho Fuehrer, I was appointed

P.oich Ccrcise loner for Health and Sanitation (Hcichskoraniesar fucr

d-s Sanitoots- und Gesundhoitswjson) and as such was authorized to

irsuc instructions, within ay sphere of duties, to all organizations

of tho State, Party, and Araod Forces -in all natters concur nod with

the probloas of sanitation and health. TI.j docreo did not .-ocone

fully operative because a planned decree for a "Chief of Public Health"

•

(Chef ck.o rivilon Geeundhcitsvrescr.s) was not issued cue
tivo delay.

I bccaao Dr. Paul ?.ostock»s superior in 191,3 after the
Fuehrer Ifccrco of 5 Scptenber 191,3, but only in regard to the cdninictra-
tion of the Office of Science and Rnse-’rch (Act Hissonschaft und For-
schung). Rostock did not start his activities until IShU, rhen he re¬
took over the office Berlitz. That was about February or :larch. (The *
givcr ‘ ^tos.wore confined to be (Signed) Karl 3rmdt.»


- 91 -


)


10 Dec.
Court So. 1


(ATD)


32SVATICS: :ir. President, ..ttornoy Sorvatius, for lafendant
Carl Brandt. Because of a nistako in tlx translation, Presi’cnt, I

■ t

— turnin'- to you. Carl Brandt says tbit ho had boon escort physician.

*• *

It has boor, translate’ as personal physician. Is far as I knew Brandt

was net the .arsenal physician but ha had to bo roa^ to accaapoiy

.. olf Hitler whanovor ho drove away in his car. Thus, he minly had

to wait. Ho ha nothin, to Jo with the .sedical troato&nt of Adolf

Hitlor. This difference nay bo of importance to the dofonso. That is

fiho roason why I want to tlroct the attention cf the President to the
- •
fact..

TIE FTZSIIENTj Dr. Sarvatius, will you pleaso point out in tho
dominant itself whoro you say that 'iscropancy occurs?

TT+ S “HVATIUSt It is under Point 2 in tho thirl lino. Lator on tho
(expression occurs a~ain "escort physician." However, I havo net
followod it on*. I an re t sayin what translations v:ro cboson.

3Y JU d7 , B?Id~: .jo you r-forrin to that portion of Paragraph *2
which roa Isi "In the surnor of 193U I tooeno Hitler's personal
physician?"

DH. S71V..TIDS* I os.

BY JJBJS SZSHI't): And you say that-

’- , !,.^S~>V..TTUSi Ho was only tho physician who had to accoupnny hia,
bocauso ho was r. t tho physician who had to ivo to&cal troatnont.

BI JV T-~ SEBHIJC-i You :nko tho distinction then botwoan "personal
physician" and "oso- rt physician?"

Dd. S' V.HUSi I cannot ivo an ostination as tc tho correct/^’’ ‘A,

En lish translation. Dr. ” rrall was his personal physician.

'" • ' C : LAv.T: If 7-ur Honor please, I a_: not incline * tc quibble

about this translation. Vo translated it "personal physician.’ If ho

*

want 3 tc. anko it "csc'.rt vhysician" that's ail ri-;ht with us.


BY 7 * JSPCKT: That will be o r ’oro h

'C'lAVis do, of course, *. not accept his remrka that Harl


- 92 -


"a?


10 Dec. !*^W.7!>.5-l-0um3 (AID)
Court !fc. 1


Brandt In afreet was sane sort of chauffeur. Thus, wo hare in tho
dafwdnnt Xarl Brandt a nan wh= was a ’tajor General in the SS, the
osccrt physician to a tier aa! Reich Co-niasionor of the Health and
He ileal Services. As to Brandt's position as Reich


r\


-92c


10 3tfC.-H-AID-5-2-3urne (5Z)
Court He. 1


Ccradssior-or, I would new like to introduce three decrees of the
Fuehrer showing the evolution of this office. They ere t-icn fros
the Rcichscosatzblatt, which was an official Geraan Goveran; nt publisa-
tion com p arable to the Congressional Record. The first of these three
decrees is Document H0-08C and wo offer it as Prosecution Exhibit Ho.

5. This is a Fuehrer decree of 28 July 192*2 concerning Medical add
Health acttera. It reads as follows*

"1. For the Vfehraacht I comiss on the Medical Inspector of tho

9

/avy, in addition to his present duties, with the coordination of all.
tasks coanoft to tho Medical Services of tha Ifolimacht, the Waffon SS

ond the organizations and units subordinate or attached to the Tic hr-

• . • (

aaoht, as C'niof of the Hddlcal Services of tte Ti’ohraacht.

"Thu Chief of the radical Sorvicos of ,th: Sfcbroacht is -o -.-e present
tho Wuhrraacht bofore the civilian authorities in all ca_ or. medical
problems arising in the various branches of the Tfohnaacht, tho ’..'affon
SS and organisations and units subordinate or attached to tho Tfotav
macht, and will protect tho interests of tho Wohmacht in all nodical
measures takon by tho civilian authorities.

/

"For tho purposo of coordinated treatment of those problems a

nodical officer of the Havy end a codioal officer of the Luftrraffo

• .

will- be assigned to work undor him, tho latter in tho oapacity of
Chief of Staff.* Fundamental problems p-rtaining to the nodical
sorvico of the ri>ffcn SS will bj worked out in
•tedical Inspectorate of the Waffon SS."

Ml. IEHAJEYj I have just completed tho duties of the Office of
iandloser which you see on tho left on tho chart. This is croc covers
work to be done by the defendant Handloser, by tho defer.:ant Karl
Brandt and by the deceased D-. Conti. The second paragraph deals with
Conti arxi it reads as follows |

"In the i>eld of Civilian Health Acrdnistratior. State Score tar-/,
in the Ministry of Interior end Reich Chief for Public Health, Dr.
Conti, is responsible for coordinated measures. For this purposo


(3S)


V


ho has at hia disposal tho cccMtoct departncnts of the highest Reich
authorities and their subordinate offices."

1R. 'EHliGI: lad hero sooe tore to Karl 3randt.

"I aapoifur Prof. Dr. Karl Brandt, subordinate only to ac personally
and -recoiving hi* .instructions directly fren sa, to carry out special
tasks and negoti-


10 Doc.-iWJD->-3-3ur..s (SX) “T .

Court So. 1


v_v

-•.ions to readjust the requircaents for doctors, hospitals, oedical
supplies, otc. tfctwiiea the military end the civilian sectors of the
Health and Lfcdical Services.

4

"5« '-Si plenipotentiary for Health and .fcdical Services is to bo
kept inforaed about the fundaaontal ovcr.ts in the Medical Service of
the Tiohrnacht and in tho Civilian Health Service. He is authorized
to intervene in a responsible aanx»r."

l 'R. JCHAKZIi That last paragraph is, of course, discussing Karl
Brmdt and it states he is to bo kept between the defendant Handle so r
and botwaor. the deceased Doctor Conti and it also states that ho is

» • a* . .

authorized to intervene in what is described as a "respci -iblo Banner."
Signed by Adolf Hitler and Xcitol. The s^.ond doerxe of tho Fuehrer
which I of for at this tiao is Docucont HO-C61&S Prosecution E'hibit 6,
This is fre© tho Rcichsgcectablatt, found on page 533- The second

• a

Fuchror D©crcc concerned tho Ibdlcal and Health Services, 5 Soptonbcr
19L3.

"In application of oy docroc concerning thv Lcdical and Health

Sorvicos of 23 July 19u2" - which I have just road - "I orders Tho

plenipotentiary for the ’aoical and Health Services, General Coiraission-

•

or Professor Dr. fc:d. Brandt is charged with contrally coordinating
and directing the problems rad activities of the entire '«*<Ucal and
Health Service according tc instructions^-'In tkds so.-.se this order
applies also the field of nodical scionco end research as well as with
the organizational institutions concerned with -the manufacture and
distribution of raedicol an to rial.

"The plenipotentiary for tl» lidical am Health Services is author¬
ized to appoint and ccrrissicn special deputies for his spheres of
action." Signed by the Fuehrer and the Reich .’sinister end Chiof of
the Reich Choicellery. Dr. Lamers."

a. HCaaET: How Dr. Brandt will tell us that his Job was simply to
allocate doctors and aedical supplies cs batween the military and heal th


in . -? -ATD-^-3-Eurzn • '

Court Ko. 1


s-rvicos. *.:c do not dony that this r4s om of his functions but U;o
fccr ^ I hrva just read very explicitly states that his porvr and
responsibility extended to ajdicd. science and research*

It .-as cr. the occasion of this second docroe that tte defendant
Rostock appointed by Karl Brandt to too position as head of his
office for Cdical Scionca and Research. The t^ird and final docroe
is Docirxnt »;0-052 which we offer as Prosocution Exhibit 7. This io
froc tho 1914 Roichsgesctsblatt Frrt 1, page 185. Fuehrer


10 Doc.— >-i.7I>-5-u—curre (ATD)
Court Bo. 1


Decree Concornin the appointment of a P.oich Comissioncr for ■*»
an * rfcaith Services, 25 August 19Ui.

m ' .

* • •• * •

"I teroby appoint the General Co.~nls signer for Ifaiicalarid Health

:'atters, Frofosscr Dr, Brandt, Roich Coacissioiwr for Sanitation and
Health a a well, for the duration of this war. In this capacity his
office ranks as the highest Reich authority.

"The Reich Corrdssionor for Modical an ’ Health Services is
authorised tc issue instruction to the offices and organizations of
tho State, Tarty an’, "ohrnacht which are concerned with the problems
of tho ISodLcd an! Hoalth Survicos." Si^nod by the Fuehrer, Er. Lamers,
tho Diroctor of tho Chancellory of. tho Party, J'nrtin Boraam and tho
Chiof of tho OB’, Koitol.

IT?. ! ’CH...VTY i This kxsrco proootod too do fen.'ant Karl Brandt to a
rank equivalent to thrt of a Hoich tdnistor. I turn now to tho affidavit
of tho .tofondant R. stock, whioh is Docuncnt Ho. 676 an! which wo off or
cs Prosocution Zxhibit 0.

"I, Dr. Paul Luhri; Tmat Rostock, bein': "uly swern, deposo on! v


statodi -

1. “I *cs born January 16, 1092 at Krr.nz, district cf Toseritz,
Oornoiy, I studiod aodicino ct the FJrAv.rsitios cf Groifswr.l ’. and
Jena. In 1921 I rocoivcd ny ‘-ctorato and was appointed ..ssistnnt
Sur oon at tho Fur i cal Clinic of Jana. Fron 1927 until 1933 I was
Chiof Sur- n at the 3--*r -mannshail Clinic of Jona.

2, "In 1533 I w=s appointo I Chiof Sur„-ocn at the Surgical Clinic in
3erlin. Profossor ' a nus, who was 3ur;:oor—in-Chiof at tho Clinic,
wont in 1936 to :Munich ar.' I was appointed do;uty Sur'son-in-Chi.af and
chared with tho hitits cf Fur: ecr«-in-Chiaf. In 19hl I was officially
appointed Chiof of tho clinic..

"3* I joined the KSIX.r in 1938 or 1539, an ’ rccoiv..' tho rank of

J ^ - • — w —

• s •

Tonarnlarzt in the reserve."

- 95 -


s


10 Dec, i*6-iK-TT>-5-^-Burns (AH))
COTt SO. 1


MR. *ESDSET: If jmit Sonora please, thit« 3 rather purely written.
It .fcosr.ia :aan that he received the rank of Genoralarzt in the I-azi
Party. It norely nears that he was a General in the Kolical Service
in the Hos-rve of the Arty.

"Trca 1939 until the ca’. of the war I was consul tin- Surgeon to
the Arty a»*. subcrlinato to the Military Ho-'Acal Acadsqy in Berlin,
Dr. Kandlosar was zy superior.


10 Dco-iUr»TO-=-5-cums-J?
Court I


■U. la V.intor rf lSt*3 X wes a orointod Chief of the Offioo f r
lio-’iccl Soionoo and Hasoaroh. This doportaor.t bolon-od to the rffioo
of P r. furl Brandt, E«ioh Cccnissicner fcr Health and Sanitation. I
roncinod in this position until tho end of the war." Signed
"Paul Rcitook,"

1ft. ko Hirer I Thus Hostook was, until the latter part of a
oonsulting surgeon to the erny under the d ofendant ifcndloser. After
that tine he took the position ir.der Karl 3rondt as Chief c£ the
Office for Uediool Soienoe acd rosoeroh. It was Ms job, an»c other
things, to see to it that the soiontifio fa oilities of Gornnny woro
usofully osployod and that there was nc duplication- of rosoeroh work.
This, of oour so, roquired that ho have a dotailod ltnowlodgo of nodical
and soiontifio rosoaroh in Geranny. On tho ohcrt bofcro tho Tribunol *
no aoo tone of tho soiontifio jro ups ovor whioh ho ted supervisory
oontrol in n far as rosoeroh was oonoornod. Thoso inoludod tho
Roioh P.osooroh Counsol, rb ut whioh tho Tribinnl will hoar Boro
shortly.

IK. P3£3IL£XTi At this tiro tho Tribunal will bo in roooss


for 15 ninutes


10 3<x>-*-C7S -S-l-Ceok (kj)
Oeurt I


3T 3?, h c Ea H ZT: 2o clear up the question of the a&xi»sibility of
the documents which vc have thus far offered this a oral:,- I would like
to state that tho Prosecution understands that if no objections is
raised by defense counsel at the tine that the doc-xient is offered, ton
it is to be casuncd that the docunont is in fact ainittod into tho re¬
cord.

312 PRlBXDBS^ It is our understanding that the dofenoe coun¬
sel understands that very veil.

KH. keHahTf; So nuch for the offico of tho Reich C oaniesionor
for Hoclth and Medical service.

I would like to turn now to Docunont Ho. 2082, which will bo
Prosecution Inhibit So. 9. ?hio io u chart by tho dofsndunt H audios dot
and shows tho organisation of tho nodical corvico of tho Vehraacht.

7 his abort io now before tho Court in an calargod fom on a frao bo-
hind tho witnoss box.

B cforo diccussing tho chart X will read the affid.vit of Eand-
losocr, which is docunont So.443, and this will bo P roc cation 2xhi~
bit So. 10, and tho chart is So.2082.

" I , Dr. Sicfgriod Kandlossor, being duly owom, depooo end ; V


otntoi


4


1. I was born in Eonstant (Badon) in 1885. I bogun ny nodical
studios in tho year 1903 as a otudont at tho Eoleor VUholn da*-. I
pnnsod uy Jraiedic .1 examination at tho U nivorsity of Borlin in tho
yonr 1910. I n 1910 I wao assigned to tho Military Hospital and tho 14th
7 iold Artillory ut Strosobourg, and in 1912 I booano Chief Modiod

0 fficor of tho Artship Bet tat ions 1 and 2, which woro stutionod in 3or^-
lin, and in this capacity I directed research work for tho observation
ef tho hnnoglobln level at various altitudes. I also boc-uc a cortifiod
free balloon pilot.

2. In 1914 I be cane first lieutenant (Kodic.il) oz. the ctuff of


physicians of tho Guard Corps, and after tne outbreak of tno first Uorld
* or I served on tho Western Front in the Guard Eeginont, as veil as tho
Guard Corps Headquarters. I n 1916*1 boccno Cc tr - infll sg Officer of a di-


ip 2cc-::-GL~-6-2-Cc:3c
(5 urt 'e. 1.


3. Ft 1920 until 1923 I rra attached to tho -cdical Jlisiic of ah:'
-niversit-/ ;f Gi~esai rr training ns a a;-cellist fir intern ;1 diseases.

. 1923 until 1929 I ras Chief llccical aCfisor of carps area V at Ul;j, an.’
fr~: 1928 until 1932 I was attached tc the Chiwf cf Ifcdicd Lxvicc, CSH, as
*±-- - -te division fer .lilit-ary liospitals r.ni patients. In 1932 I becruic
Gfciof .—Ileal Officer at the errps area Stuttgart. Fra 1935 until 1938 I ras
Clxicf :^±cc.l Officer with ..n- Grevp C^canG 3. In 1538 I be-ca.;.. Chief
IL’icai Officer of tl~ German fcrc-s in ,.ustrla under General List, rh: later
bac:-~ Fid' ~arriu-.ll.

!. On 1 September 1939 I boca ~ Chi_f ll.lccl Offic-r f tl;o lhth Ocrrr.n
nnd ncciymicd this amfr which rra c .-an’cd l v G»n.r 1 List, Curing
the ..lish campaign. I a_rv.l as Chief .^ical Officer -f the 12th Oerr.-n
.x v tori nr the canpcir;n in Frsaos . Cn 6 ibvesaber 19liO I b_cr. . Deputy ..rr.iy
ifcCicnl Inspect-r, rcplaoiic -feT-toana.

5. Cn 1 January l?kl I va; appointed '..nldrann's successor because the
L-.tdr rra ^-in:. ..t this ti^o (1 Janurx; 19lil) G»n-rrl Ott tea Chief ;:cdical
Officer cf the Flcl *. ?--rc.s. In February 19M Ott r-si-ncO, and I ouLSOsiod,
t>~ toe .iedicel H.part.vjits, nancOy tie .x..y he lical In* >cct:ratc, vhich
•" * v.a'.r tit c-ntr.l f the C.Z., an/ eh. cffico f the Chief Ifcdicsl Officer
nl. a 1/ be united. Since the rrinci.lc^f the independent autinrity -f cctncnd.
•= in h-x.ny with the independent c utr.l by the OKI!, I vas rd.ercd to
n ! _';- *J:c tv ffic:s tentatively-. In ..,.rii 19hl I received tlu. official
vXlcs*. n t k..v b th peaititns. r sat 1 uts asked t retain .re departments
':icl. were separated fr u each -*thr. . „ .

/ V ,y VI


* 6. s 7 decree of the fuehrer of 28 July 19 U 2 * - which I have
rireeiiy rtr.d - "X becane her 1 ! of the Vehmecht Medical Services pad

besides nr Inclined both physiclras at the CE^ - if Tour Honor

w

nlee.ee, that should rerd OE rather than 02V - *3r. Eerl 3raadt,
General Coeclssloncr for Medical and Eerlth sattere, vac zy
leaedtrte superior is aedlcel affeira,

■7. Be decree of the fuehrer of 28 Juae 1«U2, which referred to
Medical aad Health natters, I wae eoaaieeloaed to supervise ell
phases of the Medical Service of the Vefcrcaeht rad of ell organisrv-
tioae subordinated or attached to the Vehiaacht, including the
WTfen SS.

■8. On 1 Scpteaber 19^, the pi reoaal union between the Ar=y

Mediae! Inspector rnd the herd of the Vehroreht Medical Service

v-s repealed V decree of the fuehrer, I kept ny position ns

Chief of the Ychrsacht Medical Service red General Valter vr.s

appointed to take over ay two positions in the OE."

v Si gaads "Dr. Hrndlosor"

Thus, the defendant, Kradloscr, occupied n dual capccity over

cost of the period in which vt are interested. Troo the latter

prrt of igUo until Septecber loUU, Erndloacr wrs Chief of the Amy

Kedicr.1 Inspectorate; while froa July lqUs until the end of the wrr,

•

he wrs also Chief of the Kedlonl Services of the Arsed forces or
Vchraacht. The chart before the Tribunal ohewo on the left side,
prrt of the or-mnisrtion of the Amy Medical Inspectorate. (I
take It It wes on the left side in the saall chrxt which the Court
hrs on its desk. They arr.arently tavo sonevtnt phrased the setup
due to the specs on the lar^ chart now on the screen.)

i

3 Uric* the course of the trial, you will herr nentioa arde of %
the Military Medical Accdeoy in Berlin, of the Typhus Institute
of the OE under Dr. Zyer, and also in connection with the freeling
cxi or Inert of the Institute at St. Johann. Sow ill of those
or-rnizetlons - Military Medical Aca.deay, the Typhus Institute of

99


o


10 DwC->:-JP-7-2-Oylv.rJ (FL)
CSurt So. 1


b.l-v the .» r-y the .*&ay Uedical Inspects rote on the Ch^rt, wc
h-.v. a breakdown of the organization of the niitary "cc'icfil
.c?_„cy. Till a .iccee-^y hvld etc tings “t least once a year
v/hich were attended by'the ferooest doctors In Scraany, in¬
cluding o number of the defendants in the doc 1 :. The preef
wiU s-.cw that et cne cf these nestings, reports wer? gi¬
ven cn the typhus and sulfaniliaide experiments cn concen¬
tration ernp injptcs.

..8 Chief of the ie«ical Cervices cf the Arned Forces,
Handle ae-r had subordinated to hie:, -’ll .f the aedical ser¬
vices 6hwUn rcress the top If this chart; the .uuy, the
I.'rvy, the Luftwaffe, the M*.ffen S5, the Organisation.Tctlt,

nd the Reich bb^r Front. Thus, Srich Rippkcn, Chief of
the Luftwaffe Hectical Inspectorate, his subordinate, the
defendant, 5chr.cd».r, a.s well rs the defendant, Ger.zker.,
r.s Chief#of eho Kedlcal Service of the '-’offer., oi, wore all
subordinated t- H^ndl.ecr. K^ndl.ser liaits his jurisdic-
ti n ever the ’/nfftn 3S t fr nt-linc troop? and it is inter¬
esting to n_to that :n the chart, he specifically states
that the Institute f r Typhus ’~nd virus Research at the
Sucnenwp.ld Concentration Onp was not subject to his cssrrnd.
TJ-.e Typhus Institute “t Fuchenw»ld is shewn cn the chart
tefer, the Court under tho VSfTsn SS. (I think it is the '
1 -w.r b_x.)

\ ,

In liotc 5 _n the clv»rt, which was drown and certified
ky the defendant, Honultscr, and which was brought intc
-vidcnce, n_ states the following: (and I quote).

“hether ther. was ~n exchange of letters between
th^ Typhus Institute -f the C23 under Dr Sycr".~ which
os on the left port cf the chain,--" and the Typhus Insti¬
tute of the jfiffen S3, how octir.sively and thr.ugh which

channels it was carried ,n, is net known to ae. inyw*",

- -IOC -


10 Dec-::-J?-7-2-3»ylira (7L)
C- art :;c - l


if tnsro wcs each *n jtchrngc, it did n-t jwss through ay

The report cn the pr:caction cf spotted fever v-ccine
in Jr. dyer's Institute, went to the Arny Vcdic^l Ir.spec-
t.r'te. .lt», 9 repair oner t cf the ' ehxw.cht branches were
r_-ort&d t. thrt office. The dletriVuti'n ws ndo fre-s n
cor.tr-i point which ecccrdod priority tc ertters cf urgency.”

mis is clecrly the defensive nrguaent .f * -vc *toc
str.ngly susp-cts thr-t the precccuti.n hs found proof cf
the c. aplicity which ho knows to


- IOC G -


T-, ” • ---- - -

10 Dcc-lI-JP-7-3-Gaylord (7L)
C-urt No. 1


uxist -f cfficee directly subordinate tc him In the nuder-
cu3 typhus experiments p.t Buchcaw^ld.

B.f.rc passing :n, I went tc introduce Decuaont NO-227
»rs rrcsecu icn Exhibit 11.

THS TRIHJN7.L (JUDGE S3-RING) . !!r. T'cHanoy, before
passing cn tc the next one, It aey tc that I h*»va the wrong
chrrt here ?


"a. .{cHANZY . .*icfc number is tJv't, Your Honor ?

T:.3 TflIEUN.»L (J'JDGL E33R2NG) ; Pat in y_ur 3trtc3cnts
be fere, the Tritu--.nl, youkj^>t reading, ppyev nt iy from this
8t?tw-..nt of Dr. Handleser rWS tr.iking about typhus. :*y
translation here talks rtcut the Spotted Fever institute.

•®* TcHi'e.'EY . '•ell, Your Honor, th-t i3 si ply a ques-
ti-n of translation. I think that yea -..ill find in r number
-f our documents that the German ver<3 "Flockficbcr" hrs boon
translated "Spotted fever". That is n t tc be ccr.flised vith
the disease which is coaeon ir. the Unite! st-tes— at least


-r. the './ea* t Const-- known »6 "Reeky '!our.t-in Spotted Fever".
,c prc r * ct tars charging the defendants with having export-
entfedwith Rocky ’fountain Spotted Favor, cut rather with
"Flockfiebor" or typhus, which i6 so.netiflGs known in ,- tJ x 1
-ur c-untry as "Spotted ?«ver". ( \

I vrs just offering f.r •'•pittance into evidence,' do-^
cuav.nt i:c-227 r.3 Irccecution Exhibit 11. This is a decree
by Hiti.r cr.d ~n .r--r by Keitel restoring the responsibi-
-itc.s <-f :-'r.ai-s.r ~s Chief of the *:«.dicri. Services of


tr,c i«cht. It wps ,a the ccrsi.n of this d.cr^o that
H-nd loser surrendered his post -s Chiof of the :.rny radical


Inspcct-rntn, '“.nd t.iure-'tft.r, hu occupied simply th. posi¬
tion of Cui-f .f the ::edi«a Services of the /efcraccht.


- 1C1 -


10 Dec-:I-JP-7- 3 -Gx-ord (?L)
Court ;:c. 1


I * . • *

I weal- like to rend p»rts cf this exhibit. This is
deted 7 aigust 19M.‘

"The Fuehrer end Sup re x Ccrnn^r.dcr . f the* Vehraacht :

.a

"It wbt? in/better cc nccRtrcti.n of pewors in the- field
-- ”x.tic'’l Service cf the '.'ehrcacht, I order in actor, eirn
:t ay decree of 28 July 1942

"First . Thu Chief of the 'tedicni Service cf the Vchr-
n-cht will


-v

- 101 e -


10 S eo-ti-JP-T-Gayl o rd. (MJ)
0 o^irt 1^'


Airoct, cm far as the spociul field is concerned, the Modi cal Services
cf the ” ehxuacht oadto organisations and services installed vithin the
hone work of the Veh m acht.—vhlch fcould probable read * fr^eworkMIo
is cuthorisod to lame orders *thin the special field of his Jurisdic¬


tion.

B S econdi I improve the service regulation for the Chief of the
Kediecl S ervice of the Vetroocht Issued by the 0 hiof of the High 0o&-
naad of the V afcrcaeht. It will replace the one of 20 J uly 1942, whioh
was in effect to now.

■Third* S he personnel union of the Chief of Medical Sorvices of
the V ehruoeht and tho Chief of the Medical Sorviceo of the *ruy is here¬
with cancelled as of Septecbor 1944."

How, the S onrlde Regulation issued by loitol is also part of thic
seno doeuuont, and is on tho noxt pugo. It is also dated 7 *uguot 1944
and is entitled ■ Sorivo Regulation for tho Chief of tho Modicol Borvioo
of tho Uohiuaaht.■ The first orticlo deals with "B ubordination end
?oworo."

0 nej Tho Chlof of the Medical Sorvices of tho Vahrcacht will lJ
dlroctly under tho Chief of the High Ctcaund of tho ¥ ofcraucht. Ho will
h..ro tho position of an 0 fflco C hlof, and tho disciplinary powor, nc-
oording to Parcgrcph 18 of tho ¥ ehmucht Regulation for Disciplinary
action end the other powore of a Can: an ding Oonoral/

n T wot He had authority according to So. 1 of tho fuehrer Docroo
ovor the followingi

(a) Eie Chief of ^ Medical Service, tho Chiof of Buvy Xod&O^S^
S orvico, tho Ctief of the Medical Service of the Luftwoffo, the CSiiof
of tho Medical Service of the Waff on SS, and the Medical C hiefs of tho
organisations and sorvicoe employed within tho franovork of tho Vehniaoht
'cile the;* are acting in the area of cancond of the Wehrnucht.

(3) scientific nadicul institutes, acadmies and other uodlchl
institutions of the services of the‘Wohxcucht and of the ¥ offen SS. *


10 Dcc-"-GSS-a-lGrrss

Court Sc. 1

“II. Duties.

1. The Cnicf -f th- He died Services cf the Wohruacht
is the adviser cf the'Chi-f the High Coaa&nd -f the. /ehr-
ancht in all questions c-r.ccrning the Kedical Services of
the •..ehrar.cht ani of its health suidpr.ee.

2. The Chief of the Pedicel Services cf the Vehrnacht
vill direct t c total ::cdic?l Services cf the •tfehraocht ps
far a8 the sp-cinl field is concerned, with rcgr.r^>:r the
nilitary instructions -f the Chief cf thu High Ccer.nnd cf

the Tlilitary Service -ad the general rules cf the Cernaiosion-r
cp General f-r Hedical'and Health Depart lents.” (The refe¬
rence is to the defendant, Karl Brandt).

"3. The Chief of the Hediccl Sendees of the ’Vehraacht
will inform the Fuehrer's Ccu-iiasi vr.er General rb/ut basic
*v<.r.ts in the fi.ld cf the ".cdical services of the ’.’ehrarcht.

Kw will r^prc&wr.t the Wchr-oacht tc the civilian autho-
ritios in -11 raituol oedicel affairs and hv, will'protect
t'.wir interests in connection with the health .oeaeercs of
the civilian cduinistrativc authorities.

He will represent the Hcdicnl Services cf the Vohraacht
tc the : lode cal Services of foreign pewors.

4. Other duties ef the Chief cf the Hc-dicd Services cf
the h'ehraacht vill he ;

r) in tin. uococai-scientific field -

0

t?r.ifvra -.e"seres in th. fluid .f he-lth
s^ren, end the ccabctting ef ocif-eics and '11 ncdic*l
-.£»sur».s -hich requir. r unlf :rr. ruling a^ng the ’chr^cht.

Evaluation of ucdicrl exoorionc-s.

llu-ical a-tt-rs ~f the recruiting systen, -f the v:»l-
f"ro ?nd zr intur.-r.ee snJ cf the pris r.ers ef war.


- 103 -


10 JcC-;:-Gi5-8-l-cr>ss
Court ,io. 1

Hw 16 the president of the scientific eenrte cl’ the
r.'odiecl Services cf the vehrap.cht."

IB dc?ls with crgrifizction rafl training systea, which I will
n~t reed).

(I not- ng'in froa ..rticli III, which is Specirl Powers,
pr-ge 22, cf the English Dccujcr.t Book).


- 103 a -


10 o ~K - 6 ZS-a-3-»ro«. («j)

Oourt 1

•

tl. 2 he chief of the Medical Sorvlcos of the Yehmacht in entitlod
to request free the service* all records-necosscry for the porfor-
neneo of his assigaronts. •

2 . Ho is entitled to express tie viev on the appointment of no¬
dical officer* or medical leadors in the Yohroacht end also in tho
anits of the Vsffon SS which are subordinated to tho Ycfaicocht if the
position is that of a Ocneralarst or higher position. Beforo filling
thoso positions his opinion has to be heard.

3. Bo is entitled to inspect the nodical service, tho nodioal
unito, the nodical troops, and Installations of the V tfcmacht efter
having inforuod tho High Camand of tho Service c once mod or tho hoad-
quartors of tho onits condorned. Ho is ontitlCd to give orders on tho
■pot in the flold of nodical eorvico, if those aro aro nocoseary for t
the rarovnl ov cuorgerxloe and do not dlsagroo with fund^ontal ordorn
of tho Sorvlcos. Ko hut to infom tho High Coaacnds of the sorvlcos
concerned about tho results of tho inspections and ubout the lsouco
orders.

4. I undcnental changes in the organisation of ths kodic.l S o^-
vioo, in tho subordiantion of uedlcJ. offlcors, no>-camiiseionod offio-
oro, end enlisted men and of tho officials and aj?loyoos of tho Kodir-
Cd Scrvico requiro tho conson. of tho Chief of tho Kodlcul Sorvicoo of
tho Yohmacht.

5. T ho Deputy of tho Chi of of tho kcdicul S orvicos of tho '..'ohiv
macht shell bo a senior kedied Inspoctor or tho kodied Chiof of ono
of tho oorviccs. Tz o Chiof of Staff will <xt as his deputy for routino
dutioo." (S ix deals with tho title which tho Chief of tho kodieal
Scrvicoo chrll uso when issuing orders.)

7. Tor the C hief of tho Hodic.l S orvicos of the Vahxuocht tho
new table of organization of 1 *>ril 194, is taking effect.

Zho necessary personnel has to be token free the Services, ito.,
ccovo ell free their Kodieol Inspectorates or 0 fficos.

Signed; leitol*

( It o-.= bo , 00 = frm Its. dooroo. «bich I duvo rood, do. brood =nd o*.


tezsivo


wore the powers, responsibilities, and duties of the defendant, Hand-
i-ser, aa Chief of th« Medical Serrlee of the Amed loree?.

We cose no' to the gre^ of luftveffe defendants. These are
Schrcedar, Hose, 3fceker-Jreyseng, Weltr, Hcaborg, 3elglboeck,

and Schaefer. Before reading the affidavits giving the personal
histories of these defendants I would like to introduce Wo charts,
signed by the defendant Schroader, shoving the organiration of tho
Medical Service of the C-ersan Air lorce. Ifccuscr.t i»o. 418, which
will he froeeeutlon inhibit 12, gives the organlteticn aa It was fron
1941 until the end of 1943. So* I had hoped that at this tlae *« v 0 uld
have charts slallsr to the one before the Court which would show tho
organisation of the Luftwaffe. However, due to sochanical and supplv
difficulties «« '•ere unable to get the charts prepared and, acoo/dlng-
ly, win have to use the saallsr charts which the Court now has. I
think it would be helpful In prcssntatlon If I now lntroduco tho se¬
cond LafWaffe chart which shows the organ*.stlon following December
1943. If the Court could have these two charts open b'bforo thea during
the prcssntatlon I vlirtry to indicate the positions Of the defendants
on each of the Wo charts as it aay have changed.

JUXGL S13SIMJ: 'hat is tho nuaber of tho last exhibit to which
you refer?

:E. :«SAiai: The last exhibit I have not as yet shown as eulw ^
Bitted Is Ebcunent -^419, end will be Iroiecutlon Exhibit 13. Thir

\ if

chart, as T said, tivcrs the period fron 31 >jcenbcr 1?43 until tho *' _ jy
end cf the *er. -"V.uc charts a-e very cosplicstcd, rs the Court nay
act, but w t .hell discuss then only to the extent ncc^saarv to bring
Into clear focus tho volitions of the defendants in tnc deck. Cn the .
umer right hand side of both charts, w, find the position of Karl
Brandt, Bcstcck, and Handloscr in rolation to the Medical Service of
t v r InfWaffc. 'he crosa-hetched, dealing no- with SO-418, line lead¬
ing to Kiunke and Schroeder, fron the office of Karl Srandt an-* Boatock
sad Handloscr — this cross hatched-line, represents the channel of

ccsr/rn In technical or atdloal nattors. Tou will note on the chart,

105


10 Dae 47-X_C-i>S-P—4 -Gt oss (FjC)
Court X


sf 1c*■ 1943: SQ-419, to the right that Ecstock by 1944 had a direct

11ns cf ccnsar.d (represented by the unbroken line) over Schroedor aa to

i

Science end B«search.

X ehall refer to the charts aa I read the affidavits of the de¬
fendants, the first of which Is that of Schroeder, Ms loc. SC-666
and Is offered as Prosecution Inhibit 14,

■l, Ik. Cakar Schroeder, being duly sworn, depose end states

1. X was bcrn on 6 February ie91 at Hannover, Germany. I

•

attended school In Hannover and, from 1910 until 1914, was a student at
Ealscr Vilhelm Acadcuy of Unitary Medical education. During the first
World War (1914-1930) I was a nodical ©ffleer with the rank of First
lieutenant.

3. Iron 1930 to 1935 I received specialised training as an her,
iloso, and Threat doctor at Eocnlgobtrg and Vucrrburg. Fron October

* s

1935 until 31 Eacenber 193C X waa Chief Medical Officer of tfco Aar, Hose,
and throat 2 partrxnt of the garrison hospital at Hannover. During this
period I was also stdical officer of a number of nllltary units.'

3. Fron 1 January 1931 until 31 August 1935 I w 0 s asslgnod to
tfc* Office of the Surgeon General of the Army as consultant to hospital
-ttrs and therapeutics with the rank of Major.

4. Until the end of 1935 my old friend and classmate, Brig. Con.
Elrnkc, aoked oc to beconc Chief of Staff in the newly formed Medical

f

Ifcoprtncnt cf the Belch Ministry of Arletlon. X retained this pooitlon
until 31 January 19*0. Xn 1937 Hlppke waa =rdi Chief of the Medical
ScrTlcc of the luf --nffe. Trcn 1 February 1940 until 31 December 19^3
I -as a physlciar. r»r Air Fleet II and held the rack cf Major Gonoral.*
(the position cf Kippkc Is shewn on the firot chert - about in
the center of the chart. He was the predecessor of ochroedcr and hlo
title at that tlse was Inspector of the Medical Services of the I*ift-
wpffc. This office WPS abbreviated L. In. 14) (Iwftvsffe Ir^otcrate
1-, which was Medical Service. )


10 Eoo^-GSS-6-5->'««

ft: art I


The Tribmal will hr/ro fcto oocBsian to see tho ncm -if HiprJco in

L. In. lU. In that oonneotion It sh>uld bo reaorberod thot tho

defendant Sofrnodor wr.* vaitil Pebruery l$kO Chi of cf Staff to Hippko

*

ond theroaftor uitil D 0 oe=ber 31, I 9 U 3 , ho was Chiof Phyaioian to Air
Ploot No. II. Tho lattor positi-a is shown ca tho first ohert to tho
loft. It la rather hard to find, yevr Honcr. Dc you find itt It io
to tho left fTox tho oontar in a nunbar of boxes ir. which aro sh^wn
positions of tho Air Fleot in Goranny, ono Air Ploot No. II of whioh
Sohrcodor was -hiof Phyaioian.) .


10 Doo*U-j;-9-l-Heynoa (OX)
Ccurt Mo. 1


Ourinr; this whclo period, Schrooder was tho hifjicst ranking offi¬
cer in tho Medical Servico of tho Luftwaffe, next to HippJcc, I con¬
tinue new reading Schroder's affidavit. .aragraph 5:

"On 1 January 1944 1 was appointed to auccood Hi'ppko end became
Chiof of tho ! Cedi eel Service of tho Luftwaffe. I wca proootod to the
rank of Lieutenant General (Ganorcloboratabaarzt), and hold this pcai-
ticn until the end of the Second World bar. /Signed/ Dr. Oskar Schrooder.

Sohroedcr'a position aa Chief of tho Medical Service of the Luft¬
waffe is shewn in the middle of tho second chart which tho Court hca

rocoivcd.

I turn now to the Dofondant Rose, and I road hia affidavit, rtiich
is Document NC-673 ia offerod as Prosecution Exhibit 15. It ia on
pego 27 of the English Document Bc<*i

"I Dr. Gerhard August Heinrich .iosc, being duly aworn, dopoao

and atatoi

■1. I 3 born November 30, 1896 in Danzig. I atudiod modicino
at Borlin rnd Brcalau Universities and passed cy atsto cxaninr.tion in /&•
Octcbor 1921.

S'

"2. During the letter part of, 1921 and tho first pert of 1922 1
intemod at the Hygicno Institute of Brealcu University, tho liodiccl
»olydinic, and the Pathological Inatituto of tho bcntzcrl-4Irncko Hos¬
pital in Brcalau. Froa May until ..urust 1922 I was an naaiatant on
tho staff of tho Inatituto for Contagious Disoaecs cf tho Robert Koch
Institute in Berlin. From ..urust 1922 until February 1923 I was assist¬
ant on tho staff of tho Hygienic Institute of Basle University. From
March 1923 until September 1925 I was assistant on.the staff cf tho
Inatituto for ^natccy in Heidelberg. Free October 1925 until February
1926 I was c member of the staff cf the Surgical Clinic cf Heidelberg

— j — - 1 —-- :

University. (Free March 1926 until Key 1929 I ongc^od in tho pilveto
pmctico of medicine in Heidelberg.) .

* •

*3. .In 1929 I wont to China, end from ..ugust 1929 until September
1936 was Chiof cf the Institute for .ublic Health (Lend os east alt fucr


10 ucc-iWI-9-l-iir.7nca (DJG)

Court He# 1

• •

Gc*undhcitovcaen) in Chtfci anc , in Kn&chcu, Chine. During this time
l ( *ne oloo r/’.viscr in public he,-1th inttcrs tc the Ulnistiy ef the
Interior of Chekiang. In 1933, while in Chino, I Joined the .


r


103 -»


10 D-c-riW.'-^-a-Hcynca (DJG)
Court Kc. 1


"4. In 1936 I returned tc 4cirny rnd bccr.cc pref-saer rod head
cf tho .iepertaent fer Ire pie -1 Medicine rt th- Re'ert Koch Institute
in Berlin. In 1942 I fcecroc Vic-- Trcaii'mt cf the Institute but
ret: ined u? prof-sacrahip f*a£ peaitirn rs herd cf the 0 - ertaent fer

Trople-1 iiedidno, Or. Gildcneiatcr vs rresident of tho Robert
Keen Institute.

•

"5. Or. ..urust 26, 1939 I Joined the Luftwaffe with th- renk of
Ob-rerzt (1st Licutcn-nt) in tho X^’decl Cerpa. I rcso tc the irnk
cf Gcn-rrlrrzt (General) in tho Reserve. 1 wns Consulting .'lediccl
Offioer cn Hygiene rod Tvcp&erl Medicine to tho Chief of the nodical
Services -f th- Luft.rffc (Chef dcr Sroitr-tares cna lea Luft.rffo.)

I rOfSinod in this siticn until the end tf the war. .ty su>rlcr woa
Dr. lii >, . -ft-.r J.'nu*ry 1 , 1944, Dr. Schrccdcr.

" 6 . Fre-; 1944 until the end cf the ' <r I w.o aciic:! Ci.ault’ nt
tc ■'r. Htndlrtcr, Chi-f ef the Icdicrl Service cf th- ..ro: d "crcca
(Chef :oa ' ohmachtaroitAotawcacma). I was rlac nedic-l r’viaor to
<r. C'.nei ir. natters pertaining tc tn ic^l diseases. I it 1 auberUin-
*to t- id., in capacity cf veri r cf the Robert Koch Institute,


sin<;u he .-a til- CiAcf -f th- Civilian Itcdioal Service, loin Under- ...

f


r-crot -r~ cf St*tc, /Signed/ Dr. Gorhrrl Kcao."

Tho position cf R.ac vr.o consulting hygi-niat t: the Luftnnffo
is aii. 1 ; rr. tl. left aid- cf . *th cle-rta. He w -8 cn exp-rt on trcpiorl
diseases, including, •» ng ethers, arl/rla, 7 -lien foyer -a tyyhua.

I a~H -4<1 . ■ rentfaelicnlly h-re th t the TrT.untL shell hoer cf
he so gr.rticul.rl* h.rc in ocnn-cti.n -dth the typhus e;? -ri v-nta by
jt. Hcft.ea cf the University cf 3trr^ebcurg in' by r . jii it -he
Buchcjr<* 1:1 Ccnceatrc.tirn Get.. Eaarea ia shown cn lath charts, rnd it
- y ’ " little liificult f:r y u i fir.!. I un -.ft-rid ytu A iit hrve
cc raider* le iifficulty in firkin - it. There is r. hex, just tc the left
f the - d ie, \ n below which ia entitled "University r * Strrssbcurg,
.- fosse r Her gen." He rs a consulting hy 1 -nist to tho ..ir 71* et
hoi eh. Ear. -n ill • subat-Jitit-'l g.rrt f his experlicntrl . rk -t

the tz-. -iler Ccr.coatrr-i-n Caup, . hieh ora quite clcs. tc Strcsslourg.

J


.


Tcu .ill rcecnbcr thrt the t>7hua Institute r.t 3uchcnrcrl'.' r.rs shorn
cn the chart ’r m by H-ndlcscr. It will else b«» an tho SS cherts, to
Thick ne •-'ill eerie in ' o.'uont.

I turn xv • tc the rffi-irvit cf dofcndnnt 3ock>a>-Frcyaens, thich is
:.ccu.-~at He. uC-66?. ..ft or signing this ticeucant, Bcckcrw’r-yscnr; de¬
sired tc aria rn cncr.±icnt, end this is a±cdic*i in Uocuracnt i_.o. 790.

I suhnit both vf these documents »s 7 rcsccutirn Sxhi’ it 16 .

"I ”r. Her--nn Sccirer-?rcys^n?, sv.t, depose on! stc.toj

"1. I * s ’em cn 18 July 1910 in Ludwinshefen/kheir., G-rrny, I
stutied ;*edicinc -t the .Univ-rsitics cf Heidelberg, Innsbruck -ad Berlin
-n-’ . .sat ’. -- stvt. excainati.n in 1935 in 3crlin.

• • m

"2, Until 193? I >ms assist nt physician at the clinic for intcr-
n*l r.c’.'.cl... 't t... he ert Kceh Hespibri in Berlin. Froi 1936 until
1965 I 1-3 scientific -.8 sis tent ct the Helical Research Institute for
r.virti. n ir. 3erlin.

"3. In 1933 I inod th. HS0- . In I960 I w o 1rafted into tho
LuftveXi. -n! in 1963 1 '<<'0 r.a t.d t; the rank cf Stabacxzt. Frc.a
Jul; until l^ccrh^r I960 I was .’hysidm rt the rvintex oxr.lncticn pest,
5cat-r r-Vh 11'ni. Frea Joccosbor I960 until Fc.rufry 19/1
tl._ .Hit ry i.c*iet in Cctsu.

"6. Frrr February 1961 until —vat 19tl 1 »na nasi nai to the
1st .lr.tc.n ftr lex* pressure ch/abar tests :f the Luftwaffe, tMeh was
tu,»crir41y st*ti:n-d in 7u.or.nLr, ily tr.sk chi-fly c.nsioted Li rseict^-
in^ the o.nxtr ticn f instructi n -1 exoriet-its, •. ish inoludod a test
- f tho : 'cti n i fi -htcr ere- s at altitudes -f 12. OX* neters.

■5. Freu ..u.-uat 1961 until January 1966 I ws fcV.nchcd tc br.

—.theny o resistant ocnaultmt (Kilfar-forent) in to. ’..p'Xtewafc for
..vi.nl n ldn« in th. office cf In:*;deter cf the I^’lcinc S.ryicc cf
the Luft -ffo, Dr. EippkO.^fr^a Jenu ry 1966, when .tr. Csk-r Sckrccklur
cc-ixe criaf cf the ..cdic?l Service :f the Luftvaffc, until the -a! cf the
• rr I -5 c- nsult-nt fer ..vl-ti n I-ficine in his (Schrco 'er) office.

"c. urir. the ^cricf fre. 19^5 until 1936 £ continu'd jy erk


at the


Kedical Research Ine'.ittffco for Aviation la 2Ua. I carried out^ro^
sj^ct vor’.c indooaadonvly, oa tho ada;>'-c'.lllX of llotc ia kiji ai:i-
-jlos, tholr rooc';loa to tho lack of ary^aa, ani a-v.^-a poiaoninp.

Tfei^d/ Dr. Horeonu 3ockar-?::oyson_. n
Tha to 'ala affidavit, -hich it. a-bodioi iaDocu:on'w

Tf0*790, la ois fallows:

"la aira^ra - 5 _y affidavit of 13 "ova bar 1946 tho follouin.

correction ha* to bj :n£oi

r\7 titlo frai Au.-at 1941 to about 1C ..a: 1944 .:* Assistant C>>-
sultar-t (Zilfsrofa aut) unlor Dr. Anthony ia ; - '.o 'crt iont (Rofo: at)
for Aviation r.ofiloira in tha Cffioo of t>~lna .*-cr cf tha bodied
Sorvlco, lotor U tho offico of tho Chiof c. f'-’.'.odical Sorvlco of

Luftwaffo.

"Only frou about lSVtay 1S44 to thu jn' -f thi .a 1 '-a* Consul¬
tant (Raforont) la tho a’.ovo aaationod offico."

Tho chorda that '.o la safcln. U that ia ’.-.Is flvet affidavit :»
atatod thav bo bjeao tho consult-nt for A' la-loaoaleloo to Schvoodor
on January 1,1944, uhllo hia ar-ondajnfc otat* thot ho, in fact, loou
tl:- chiof Consultant only on lSllay 1944.

TcJ. _ 7> fT > .? A?o tho ujoiklijnt au' iho affidavit ottachod uo-

goth ort

13. -ST: A’.tach^ to what?

HZ 7 ?.£XU‘:i A^--4chol one to tha ©fcha?, tha <vi Inal affidavit

and tho a-wnl a::'?

:u. foa. They o in -O ,ua c. a. - i ' ■* c r ‘" ; *


j or hi bit suiabor.

Z'JS ~ ja ': : I vndo: otooi that, ' •.* if o; a o not attaej

toother, tharo d JrS bo sar» difficult i avi.. tao Auhibit/^' u.

•

If ihoy ora attaohod togathor, one arked as iohibit 16 is sufficient.


If they arc not att chad to^ethix, one ccuV ba *. uked exhibit lc a .id
the athar 16 (2).


rHAIo": I thi Ic t:.£t is the prepor sugieaUen.


- HI -


10 Dcc.^W.7T>-10-4-Karrov (AID)

Court So. 1


%

03. :LJTC (Counsel for defendant Bockor-Froysm-): In the chart
7»hich Counsol fer tbo Prosecution has suhdttod it says, with rcforonco
to Or. “ockor - this can bo found approximately in the center of this
chart - it says bo was the liaison aan botrf^on Schroc A--r and I can
hardly road tho noxt pert.... Thin it a ys Dr. 3ockor-Troyson:;,

Liaison '.bn botwcon Schroedor and Goorgii. I should liko to runork in
that connection that Dr. Bockor was only the consulting physician in
tho depart *nt two vrittout any authority to si'n an' without any
responsibility, sc that the nr« "liaison ian" is not Justified in any
way whatsoever. In addition, I should roctify another niatakoi Dr.

Bockor was aotive in th: Robert Koch Hospital an: not in tho Robert
Koch Instituto.

H'. ‘KHAISYt If tho Tribunal please, I think that the remark about
tho povror of tho defendant Bockor^Froysonr. to si n orders is noro a
mttor f ar unant than an objootion to tho chart which we havo offorod.
I also think that if tho tofonr - cconsol for Bockor-Froysong till
consult with'Ms client that ho will fin-' that tho position put on


this chart showing n relationship of liaicon ,rn fron Schrooicr to

anothe r lopartnont hia-.'.od by a atn nered Ooorgii was ontiroly separato

an ’ istinct fren hi3 position as assistant consultant to Y. Anthony

•

in thi Dopextoint fer aviation *'j Ticino. Bo lat_r booano, of course.


th- Chief p . tho Dopartvont for Aviation J'odicino which ho statoc was
on 15 Ifcy V/Ju ..s t> his power to sign orders and thin- s of that^u
n-turc *re rdll cono to that in duo course.


i


THE PTSSIEEHTt The exhibit nay bo aidttod. Explanations nay bo


vale Later as to tho powers of the lofondant.

CHuSYl Thus, Beckot^Freysem was an important fi uro in tho

fiel cf .aviation nodicina. „s I un ‘nrstond it, aviation no Ticino

include s oil radical problems incident to tho onoration of air cragt.^_

for cxmplo, th. effect f hi h altitude ->n the human botfr and questions

cf v.iocitv and rd ht-vision. -roblervs f coll and sea rescue, also foil

- 112 - *


w


Froysona a consultant on aviation rx; ’iclno.

BocScei'-Froyseiv’ appoars on both tbo charts# On the one showing; tho
organisation as it axis tod up until Doocabor, 19U3* ho is shown under
,'vnthsny in tto roforat or iopartoont for aviation noiicino. On tho

ri^ht, ho is shown as chief of tho department for aviation sadicino#

•

That is to say, cn tho la tor ctart# Ho also appears as liaison botwoon
Schroodor and tho Offico of Resoarch (tai<fcnco in tho Ministry of

..vlation und.r Goor^ii. That is tho box which tho Jofonso counsol for

•

BacJco^-Froyscng called tz tho Court*s attention. To put it succinctly,
Bocko^froysonr; was thu chief advisor to Schroodur on questions of


nodical research.

:hilo Bockoi^-Ftvyson.': was primarily intorostod in aviation :»dicino #
it is also truo that rr.ny, if not ell, nodical research assi-^nonts
by tho ! Ip deal Sorvico of thj Luftwnffo wore aado through his offioo.
Thus, ro shall soo ttrt tho re soar eh vrk of Bw;:on on typhus
ar.sipnod by thj Departr.ont for ..viction Ito-tLoino. A

o turn non to th- dofondant olts and his affidavit io Docunont


tt>677, which will bo Prosecution Exhibit 17.:

"I, Dr. -oorc August .oltz, bed*: duly swem, depose and stafcoi
-1. I -.ms born 16 "arch 1889, at Ludwigshafon on Rhine * I studied
vj icino at tho Univjrsitios of Jom, Xiol, Kooni. obor -, and Munich and
rnssod ny steto oxaainr.tion in 1913#

"2. Durin tho First arid ar, I s-rvod in the !todical Offico.


hi host rank was that '-f ..ssistant physician, that is to say,
Assistensarst* Durin tho ocrly part if orld * ar I, I was for a wholo
;.riod with a field aviation Division, Durin 1919 an: 1920, I

vs'.s ?.n assistant physician at tho "odical and Sur leal Clinic in liinich.
Fivu 1921 until 1936, I practiced in !!unich, socializin' in roont enclo^r.


10 Dec.-^.?D^O w 3w*arrcw (AID) ,

Court So, 1 _ \

I

■3* Free 1936 until 19u5j I laoturod on Aviation ^odicino at tho
University cf Munich* At tho saao tine, I, in connection with Professor
Preeaaer, did research mr'x in tto- field of x-ray nathods and aviation
aidioinj, at tho physlolo leal Institute of the University of Itunich.

flT, I Joined the ;:.S.D,..,P., in 1937* I was also a nonber of tho
National Socialist Physician*® Association anc! National Socialist

Lecturers* Association and NSFd. In August 1939, I was called into tho

& %

Luftwnffo, In the eourso of the war, I roso to tho rank of Oborfbldarst,
oquivolont rark of lioutorvmt Colorvil, Durin; this ti-o I also oporatod
a Pilots * Physical Examination Offico inWoublborg and worked at tho
poroanont Examination Bcnrd He, U in Wmich, whoro I whs concomod
rainly with tho physical onduranco a-»'. roaotions of pilots at hi;{h
eltltudoa,

"5, In 191il ~ division of the Physiological Institute at .Arnich
University, ttoro I was cln research w^rk, was takon over by tho
Luftwaffe and ronarod tho Ins -ituto for ..viation i'o.licino, I was aado
Chiof of this Instituto mvl rcraalnod in that position until tho ond of
tho war, Tho Hold of rosoarch on a.od in at tho Instituto includod
physical rcaotions cf tto pilot nt hL; h altitados, reciprocity of
respirations and circulation, coolin , collnpeo, and rovival cf tho
pilot. In 19Uli I was appointed Kcn-ostabllshod Profossor at tho
'diversity of ‘funlch, (Si-nod) DR. OSD S3 AUGUST '7£LTZ,"

Tho Instituto for Aviation 'toilcino at :.*unich undor ’alts is shown
on both of our charts. On tho earlier ohart, that is, showing tho
cr satiation prior to 19UU, tho Tribunal will find tho naao of Dr.
Raschor in a box beneath *'oltz. Vase.or was a Captain in tho luftwaffo
and an Important fi uro in nest of tho nodical experiments parfomod at
tho Dachsu Concentration Cary, which was approadaatoly 12 alios fron
''anich. iXirinA part cf those experiments, tho Prosocution contends ttet
Raschor was a Luftwaffe Sector attached to the institute of ’oltz. That
fact does net appear on this chart and we do nit contend that it decs.


10 Doe^W.T3-10-3-*-rr~Tr (AID)
Ccirrt He. 1


Two cf Rudur's co-workers in the frostily experiments woro

Holxlaohacr arvl Finko, both Luftwaffe doctors. Those noises also
•

appoar cn the chart shcnii\j tha oarlior period. Ifelslochner co>aaittod

suicide before his capture and thj whorcabouts of Finka is unknown.

\io turn now to tho defendant Ruff. His affidavit is Decunont

yJO-638 and will bo Prosecution Exhibit 18.

"1. I was born on 19 Fobruary 1907 at Friadershoin on Niodorrhoin,
Germany. I fraduatod frea hi. h school in 3orlin in 1926, and conaoncod
tha study of aodicinc. I studiod at tho Universities cf Berlin and Bonn
an’, passod my stato axrainaticn in Bom at tha bo;innin~ cf 1932. From
19J2 until Janaary 193!;, I was an intorno and assistant at tho clinics
cf Bonn University.

"2. In January 193U, I .ms assigned, to th- G-man cxparlaantal
lnstituto for aviation, in erdor to establish a dopertcunt for Aviation
!lo tlcino. I be or jo chlof of this depertnont, which was later ro named,
tho Institute f:r Aviation Hodioino. I rctxdnod in this position until
tha and of tho war. I$r chief a.-iste..*. was Dr. Hans '•Volfcrane ROJ'BERO,
wb:, towards the ond of tha var, attained tha position of a deportment
hoed at the institute. I was a rvo-rvo officor in tho Luftwaffo with
tho rank of First Lieutenant."

Onco tho defendant RTBERO was an assistant to RUFF, I shall road his
affidavit boforo indicating thoir positions on tho charts. Tills, his
affidavit, is ’ccunont HO-£38, an:* will bo Proaocutlcn Exhibit 19.

•I, Dr. Bans clf.an- Arthir Bombard fOI'BERO, bo in .July
sworn, dopes a and statoi

“1. I was bom on Kay 1$, 1911 in 3orlin. From 1929 until
1935# I studiod nodicino at tha tJnivursitios cf Borlin nnd^’
Innsbruck, I passod ray stato examination in 1935.

"2. I Joined tho I3DAP in Itey 1933. From . k pril 1936 until
1936, I interred end vas assistant physician at tho Xrankenhaus
of Frei ’richshain, a Borlin frapltel. Durin; 1937, I served in
tho Goman air f-rco f .r tnc aanths.

"3. On 1 January 1938, I Joined the staff cf tho G-man
Experimental lnstituto fr ..viaticn in Berlin, as an associate
scientist. I remained in this ,*sition until the -nd cf tho war.

I'y superi. r was always Dr. Siofrfriod ?.UFF. In this position I was
cor.comr ’, aaen other things, with problems of altitude and
velocity.- Tho Garmon Ibcpcrinontol Institute far Aviation, in which

- 115 -


O


10 Doe—!n>-H-iiuppsrafcoin (AID)
Court So* X


the fcfondanta, ?.U?? and 33S-BEFG, r.oro activo, aro Bh^n on
both of cur charts as beln suboxN-inated as far as aviation
•jodioal rosoarch is concemel to, first, HIFP5E, and thereafter -


to SCHSDZ!2?.. The nancs of both HOFF and iC*:3SSj appear in tho

*

box iniodlatoly boaide this Departuont for Aviation ttsdicino*
thoso tiro ^ anti era n who aro array od with RASCH53 In carrying


out tho hi ,h altitude experiments at


Dachau in the spring and surcer of 19li2. oo-operation was

secured, as we shall demonstrate, through tht good offices of the dofen


aor.ts to Bake seawater drinkable. a SGIJZH OKS 1 » affidavit is document


S0-67h, which bccoaes Prosecution Exhibit 20, It reads as follows:


1". Dr. ilhols Franz Joseph Boiglbrocck, boing duly sworn


Lower


Austria. I studied ncdicine at the University of Vienna and passed ay
state exanination in 1931.


“2. I joinud tho fCDAP In 1933, but received ay party nuabor


after the annexation of Austria. I Joined the SA in 193b. *y last


rank in the SA was that Obersturo bannfuchror of tho -.edical Service


I was also a oxaber of tho association of .<azi physicians and tho as


S'ciatlon of N’azi academic lecturers


3 U . r ran 1931 to 1933, I was an assistant pnysician on the


staff of the Third nodical Clinic in Vienna, free 1931 until the end


of the *ar, I was associated with the first hospital in Vienna, in
1939 becooing chief physician, I qualifiod as an academic lecturer f/*
and, in 19Ui, qualified as extraordinary professor.

"b. In .‘Ay, 19 hi, I Joined the -eroan air force, where I roso


to tho nink of Captain in tho xudical Services. *roo August 19bl, until


December 19bl, I was stationed in u - air force hospital in .iuls, Upper


Austria.^ Proa Deejnb-r 19bl until ^ay 19b2, I was stationed at tho air
force hospital at Vienna, where I worked in tho department for tho treat-


nont of internal disease


•’S. rroa .'lay 19b2 until July 19b2, I attended thv war school

•

in E^er, and in July 19b2 until November 19b3, I *as assigned to the
notorized medical detachment where I was in charge of the e'epartaent for
Internal Disease. Free Jov^cbor 19b3 until 19Lb, I was stationed at tne


10 Dec.-»-ATD-ll-3-Xupperstein (GJ)

Court No. 1 O

hoeplt.1 at Praunschwdg, *icre I was Deputy epartaent Head of the
Department for Internal Disease*« Pros early 1944 until, the ond
cf the ''ar, except for approximately a six-week period, 1 wag station¬


ed at the hospital for pafatroopers at Tarvis, Northern Italy, whero
I was chief physician for the Department of Internal Diseases.

“6. Porn approximately 1 July 1944, while stationed at Tarvis
Italy, I was ordered by Br. Eecker-Preyseng to report to Dachau. I
remained at Bachau for a period of approximately eight weeks, whore I
assisted in the expiximanta pertaining to the SCnV.LFIR and P RKA methods

_ t

of rendering seawater potato.’•

5.1 JLBROSCES's position is not shown on either the two charts, ho
was recalled from service in Italy to conduct the seawater experiments,
having boon rccooaendcd to one Dr. Hans ..ppinger, who was a consultant
to tho Luftwaffe. ..ppingor recently took his lifo in Vienna.

Docuaont XO-685, which will bo Prosecution Exhibit 21, is
the affidavit of SCHASFR.


C urt U-. 1^ - -

10 i-ec. ^5-h-ll-h-IJG Duikerstein

"I, hr. Konrad -ilhela Phili p Schaefer, being duly sworn,
depose and state:

1. "I was bom on January 7, 1911, at *uenlhausen, Aluatia,
Germany. I studied aedAcine at the Universities of umich, Berlin,
Innsbruck and Heidelberg. I passed sy state exaaination in Heidelberg
in Deceobcr 1935.

"2. In the beginning of 1936, I worked as a nedical interne^
at the H«ildelb«rg University, Ch*ao Therapeutic Clinic in Berlin. A
little later, in 1936, I becaae affiliated with the firn of SCHERIN3,
A.G. in 3erlln, as an assistant to Dr. Poldt in the thorapeutic lhfcorc-
-tory. I worked part tine in SCHERIW, A.G. In 1936 I had to leave


the clinic because I was not a
SCH.-mi until Koveaber 19lil.


r of the HSDAP. I remained with


"3. In Sovenber 19U1, I was drafted into the Luftwaffe and
received ay basic aedical training in Baden, near Vienna, Austria. In
irch 19L2, I was transforred to the Luftwaffo replocencnt depot in
Saylo, ahd from there to the Luftwaffe base at rrankfurt on the Oder.

r, L. In tho ousaer of 1JU2, . mis transferred to Berlin, and’


arsigned to the tnff of the Hesearch Institute for Aviation -odicino.

a

SiaulUneouoly, I received ay position in the Research Department of
the Cheaotherapeutic Uboratory of GCH-.KI C, ,.0. l.y chief assignment
at the institute was to do research work on the problems of sea emer¬


gency for the Luftwaffe. This included research on various methods to


render sea water potable. I remained in' these positions until tho ond:


of the


The position of SCKaEF R and the Research Institute for Aviation Medi¬
cine appear on both of the ci^rts.

D°- FLICK: .-Jf ; I have an objection to the adaissibility of
l -oth the charts, with reference to the defendant SChAEFIS.


u


ch.r-3 ~ro to give you :.n optical inproasion with r^feronco

to the organiautlona i.s they :.ro oxpL\ir.ed in the .affidavit,

- /

x£ in pritlcular, with reforoheo to tho position of tfco defend-
:JX t in that organization. 'ite ch-rt uoos not give you the
correct optical impression which should ho soon v.-hon reading

■ • i (

ti.o .i*fid..vit zrdo by £CE---2RTR. SCIL-ErjR v. s ono of tho
collaborators in tho at:.ff of tho ..viation Instituto for ^
.-edicine. If tlx Tribunal would like to look at th'o chart, it
wi'M^soo^tliat under t*.x iwitc of this instituto, end its lordor,
Professor SKcUOIlOII), there is .. snail box on which it s ys,

;, Dr. SCK--DFRK.'' Icno. th tl t, tfcoro ..ro other boxos, which aro
subordinated co Dr. SCC-2TST. ;.nd Dr. STRUGhOID. n*.5^ Vox,

Dr. SCF_ Uma, tlcruforo, gives you a \ir ong lnpression which
is noithur in compliance with tho testimony* of SCI*
fcaa just been r-;.d, nor with'tho st .tomont of Professor
SCKROZDRR, >i.icl. w s ro; d boforo t'xit. SCTb RF3ii M..o tioroly a
collabor.tor and he w..s assigned to hie duties as suol. and w-s
only one of 30 to 40 coll..bor..tors in this inatitutu. llowovor,
vhon looking at t*. o cl .rt, .avi that is uy objeotlon :.a to ltn
.d_isalbiiity, it ..ppe..rs as if ho were fcko aocond u .n &&&%


rz2 which


STRUCK OK;. V,

''.clb.lGY: Your Honor will qjprociato tho f..ct that

it is impossible on . piuco of paper the oizo of tl o oK.rts

nd ovory individual who


tl .t we h .ve subilttvd to show o~cb
v\.s 1 rxubor of tl esu v rious institutes which woxhj subordinatot


to tho aodic..l service of tl o Luftwaffo. It nappens -rat w<
v.r u interested in SCT-ZTSR. TTo ..re not interested in tho

t this Institute. -Iso, I would like to


other 3c students
^nir.t cut that wo do not t. he tho position t . 11 that


fter


th t the Porc.cution las z..id -nyt..ing to lewa zi.o
counsel for tils deferaiant to tc-kc th..t position. In ;ny
ev.ht, I do not think that his remarks go to an objection

-115 -


Court Ho. 1

10 Dec 46 IS - 11-6 UG- Hup;x.rstoin

A

.gainst tlx. ..didaaibility of this docunont, concodin^ fcfc.-.t
the docuitcnt la wrong, fco nzy point out Q-.cso fr.cte to tho
Court ..t tho tlno ho presonta his cr.°_. Dio docunont v.\.a
dr.'.wn for uao by tho dofcndcuit SCHEOZDSR, .nd purports to bo
: .n ..ccur. to eh— rt cf tho org..ni action of tho nodicc.l aorviooa
of tho Luftwr-ffo. ». .

T£5 Pi£SH>EHT: Objoction of counaol ovcrrulud, till wo
undorat;.nd vl—t tho charts woro :udo for, -nd subject to
oxplc.ru.tion :.a tho evidence pro^roasos. ’bo Court \dll now tnko
its noon rocoae.

( rococa v^a t.lroa until v^q)


10
Ccurt S


12-1-Lehrhardt


co&scro con
.^?srjiootr ssssior

(7H3 SZ63ISG 3-CC37SS2D 1330. HCU7.S, 9 ^3C33ZT. 1CS6)

T53 w —hSE/.Li Tors ns in tho o.urt r c- my find seats. "indly nil

• * . _/

iriso whilo tho judges ocmo ir..

(Tho Jud.^os ontor)

TIE JL.rSH/.ti "ho Hilitcry Tribunal is a^iin in scssi n.

KcE.lETi «o hr-w.- e n;l' ted ur irosonteti ncit- tho defendants

that woro eetiv-i within the f*ntac-w rk f th<; Luftwnff . .ad, next, wo

can consider tho j aiti' ns hold by th: defendants in the block within the
*

fretx--w rk f the SS, nn ^r ;anir.->ti• n nhioh wna f-und t be criniml by

Th: Intornnti nnl rilitrry Tribunal.

* • t ® • •

The lofondants Korl Brendt, Genikon, Gebh*. rdt, hud if Bran’t, Uruy ~y-
»icy, Beirut roppoediok, Vikter Bn ok, F'.tj r. nn' Fritt Fiochor, w:ro oil
rrr.hors f tho SS eftor 1 S;eteabor 1939, nnf ert s ch:r,‘od in C -unt •!
f tho Indictaont.


.0 hnvo already boo no foailinr with tho t sitl n f t'rl Brandt.

Sof re turning t tho coreors f the '.thor SS defendants, . thl.i it w uld
bo holjful f r the Tribunal t presort in ovi'onoo tho eh . '.i eh.win,; the
r-dical 'r,7»r.Tz“ti n • th SS.

The next d eusont is FO-416, whioh will bo : r socuti n Exhibit . 2?.,
it oorrios thr rgcnisati n --f tho "SS pri- r t 31 ;.u ust 1M3.

Tho see n ' Chf rt is 0 cur.ont E0-U7, which will be !r cueutl n Ex¬
hibit •* . 23, an- 4 it c vrs th no ’leal rfanizot* n f thr SS r.ftor tho_
a 1 st f ;.u,-ust 19d3.


n


B th f those eh rts were ai.a-d. by the dofendrnt m •• rraky, ..c'Jh
ain h.jnil t h these ehrrts rcpre-’uccd ir. larccr scale f r use in


* ti n
dac; e hr. rts


hr.s pr red ir.~ sriblo.

thj SS, including the Kcdletl T'.jcrtr.- nt

f th* SS, Heinrich Hi-nl-r. Th?
t the !>dieal S-rvioo f th* SS,
iXloteinistor f th H nl* nr/ S'.ni-
Sarrics f the »hraacht -r. r-h-wr. in

linos.


- 121 —


ID Dco^(ZiS-12-2-Lchnhardt.
Court ::o. 1.


indicate direct control, iillc t,;e oth*r one. concerns itself ttith front lino
troops.

foil trill fin* rithin the broken lines the Cots on’ dasfaoe running fron
that of •'•enJloscr to that of Genskon. o shell refer to tho ch-rts in ndre
Cctr.il .as wp consider the affidavits of tho SS defendants. ih- first of theso
is the affidavit of Gonzkcn. i>ocun-nt !?o. U39, «h-ch trill be *ro3ocution
Inhibit 2lx:

(Coaling) “I, Zr. Xrrl Clear . ~u ust tCNZKS:.', being duly sWorn, deposo,
and state:

- - _ 9

1. I was torn ti 8 June 1885 at *r^cts (Holstein) near Kiel In 1906

I graduated fron the Gycnnsiu:: • In .'rjt'sbock, ahd in 1908 passod py "physicim"
at the University of uarturg. 7rcu 1?11 to August 1922, I intomcl at the
i'launcn hospital.

2. In august 1912, I entered the Comm Wavy as a Havel ihysician with
tlu rank of Ontcrnrzt and fron ..ugust 1S12 until Hoveub-r 1919 was on activo
’.uty rriti: the (k.rean Navy. I servo C as IvjUioel Officer on various U boats
and on the Cruiser "Haelure" hirln • the first orli .ar. During tho years of •
1915 to 1917, I vorked on thoorganiz tion of tfx. U Boat lia ’ical Sorvicc.

During tho years 1918 and 1919, I sorvod in tho shipyard hospital in.

/P

•ilhclushavon.

3. Fra: Hov*x:bcr 1918 until October 193b, I practicod nodlciifc. inj
ho.:c torei of rrcota, an-', in October 193li -ntcred tho Qctcan Navy for tho occon
tir». I bocr.-vc Reserve Officer in th. .helical Departrent of tho Dwfenso
..inistry. Beginning in I-cbruary 193b, I served as an investigating doctor

of tiie Sick Benefit Sy3tca of Gross-? _rlin.

I-. In July 1926, I Joined aha party rxsborship nunber being


39,913. In 1932, I entorod tho Association of national Socialist Doctors.

5. Pn harch 1, 1936, I entered th-e .affen-SS as TturcbarsifuJircr. liy
racb^r '-.-cs 20795k. I was assigred to tho lio&cal Office of the SS-Spccial
Service Troops as adviser on health cures and depentant's care. I also 3 erved
as a field doctor in tix Signal Dctachjxnt of the SS "Icibstandarto". I was


- 122 -


10 D- c^XZS-12-3-Lohnhard't
Court ..Cm !•


subsequently appointed chief r-hysicicui of tie ncrly established W SS Hospital"
Berlin. I also directed ttc Sanitats-Sckule (Training School for soldiers
of the i.-dical C 017 - 3 ) attached to the B SS Hospital".

m

"In the Spring of 1937, along '-"ith the central expansion of theSS, the
Ov—£dicel Office ms enlarged an* split into two departments. -y department
*“•5 charged rrith the supply of nodical .qui_rv.nt an 1 thj supervision of
aedic*l personnel in the concentration cnn,s. Er. Grairitz, then SS Cforfuchr
and Chief of the S3 Isodicrl Office nas ry iiaicdiatc superior. In this capa¬
city, I was also the -.cdical Officer of “ickc, the caaui der of all conccn-
tra.ion carps. 1 acted in this capacity until the bcpinrdi'- of the var. .it}
tho outbreak of nor in SP.tearner 1939, I ms replaced by Dr. O-r.uitzcl."

In Sy>t_nh-r 1939, 2 w-j charge.* trlttr the activation of the 3rd Vo.'icol
Battalion of trt 3rI .r.nz_r Oronadicr Divis'.on in H^ilbroon, ..uonsiiipcn cm!
Xorbach. In iday l?LO, I was a. .minted Chief of tte dfc. Meal Office of the
.affon-63 Office VII, in thv S3 Operational Kwa.dqu'rtcrs at Seri in and was
prorated to thcrank of SS-Oberfuehrer. ..t the er.'. of 1912, 1 t«as appointed
Chief of the kcdical Service of the .affen-GS, Divis en D in the S3 Operation
Headquarters rrith the rank of DrigadcfuJ.rer." •

The position held by Ocnzfcen fro.: .'.ay i'9l'0 until 31 .'.ucu'kL 19ii3 shewn

on tli- Chart which fives tho ^rrjsaisation 0 tlie S3 he’leal Service until

..ugust 1913 . lou will see the lock containing .is rvaie as Division D i.c ’lea!

Service of the .'affen-SS. That of ice was attached to the so-called Hcaiptoca;

r tile Operational Lain Office o', tde S3 under Juttnor. ..21 o; l ho Meeks

'n'.^r Stonier such as the one dti Ju.n r's nano in it, r^pr-3c.it Use SS Jiaii

* •

Offices and there rare 12 in nai>j. ~ sutor ination of the various nodical
officos that are listed under one r the other of these uain olficcs are, of
ccurs., not -11 of the departments in dh.so SS nain offices. _ show on this
chart sia.ly the Q-dicnl offices.

— stated by Gcnzkcn in paragraph 6, ho left his job as nc ’deal officer
for the cor^cntratien c-r:-> in 1939. Sen, the chart which ir now before tlio
court shows this position as being held bp Dr. Lolling undr ,-ohl in the


323 -


jO Dcc^.-<ES-I 2 -L—Lchahardt.
Court No • * 1 • -


v

Zccnadc sad ActilnistrAtlTO I bin Office of the £S. By early 1?!;2 -the. YH’.,
(•.'iich arc tb. Genian irdtials for the £5 Ilain Office c.n^. dndstrativo
Office) ha*! caiplctc a £Axds trativc control ever nil concentration carps.

*»iia SS liain Office unf.er - ohl, tI<o ..Til., vas one of the . rincipal points
srcuixl id eh the con:on icslgn or conspiracy ch.nrgv in tte Irvlictient
operator, for it vas there that Lhc hteean ctpcriixntcl subjects v re obtninod.


•O-*


Court Ho. 1

10 Doc 46 - A - 13-1 - LJG - lessor


I continue to road from the Genzken -affidavit, Paragraph 8:

n 8. °n September 1, 1943, the radical Sorvice of the
'.fcffen-S 1 * was reorganized. I bad been promoted to the rank
of Qrupponfuhrer on 30 January 1943. During ny sorvice as '
head of the V/affen-SS -Medical Service, my lmnodlato medical
auporior was Dr. Grawitz, Peich Physician S and Police, arc!
when Grawitz was away from 3erlin, I vc.s in many evonts his
deputy in the -Nodical Service of t^?££.

. "9. Throughout the war, modioal field units of tho
Waffen woro subordinated to the --odical Sorvice of tho
Army, which was suporvised by Dr. Kcrdlosor. Sy Puhror
Docreo of July 28, IE 42, Dr. Eondlosor wr.a ppointed Chiof
of the ‘^odical Servlco of the V/ohrmnoht. ..s c result of
this reorganization, 1-andlosor c.lso be com o ny laaodiato
suporlor as far as aiodic..l me.ttors a ro cor.cornod.

"10. Prca tho fall of 1940 until Soptonbor 1, 1943,
Dr. :trugowsk7, vho w as load of the Hygiene Of rice in tho
'./cffon-SS -odical Offlco, was subordinate to mo. -ftor
Soptonbor 1, 1943, Dr. krugowaky was plucod diroctly under
Dr. Grawitz and was subordinate to him.

(signed) Hurl Oonzkon." jtf


«r. item to no to boro is tho shift in direct command ‘ over
tho Defendant -rugowsky and derivatively through ^rugowsky
over tho Typhus and Virus Institute at tho 3uchonwald Concen¬
tration Camp. Prior to 31 August 1943, Gunzken was in
coatcand of ia-ugowsky; thereafter Grawitz, who no longor is
living, was in command cf limgonsky. o Tribunal should not

assume that .onzken, a3 a result of this reorganization, was
nc longor intarustod in t.#. llygieno Institute and research
at Juchonwald. As Chief d tho - odical Sci-nicoa cf tj.o


ffcn-S w his interest in .odical research


ained tho suno .


So,- with tho Do ford ant Kcndlosor, both of thoao men woro
vitaxiy concerned with typhus rotoarch as - rosult cf opidonics

- 225 -


Court No. 1

10 Doc 46 - A 13-2 - LJ5 - lessor


-none troops fighting ir. tho 2rst against Hus si--. Iho IWfjunal
sl--.ll, at a later point in the trial, hoar a groat doal about
tho o-porinonfcs conductor at tho inatlfcuto^ in “Ucfcorr.'ald both
boforo and after this reorganisation within th. SS that I Ir. vo

Ju3t discussod.

Ito Defondant Gofchardt lias givon us an affidavit, which
is document No. 11^-671 and which I off or as Prosecution
2shibit 250 Oils is on Pago 44 of tl o English jjoc«r.ont Dock.

"I, *^-rl Oc'oh.-rdt, being duly sworn, doposo .md

state:.


"1. I was born on 23 Hovoabor 1897 Ea«.g, Germany.

^ I -ttended school in Ecx.3, - Munich, .iosonhoira, and Lr.ndshut,

rjid in 1916 I Joined tho Gorman ..r^. 1 £ool: part in

i

^ the fighting on the .'oetorn Front. ron 1217 to 1219
1 I was -a prironcr of war in Norland. In 1920 I was a


number of tho Munich Studont Co ipany during tho fighting
undor tho leadorship of tho thon ^inictor of tho Int^yj^or
ilooko in the skinaiahos In the “uhr 'ibrritory. ^ *

"2. In 1919 I continued ny medical 3tudios- h^J


Unlvorsity of unich. during 1922 I ir.tcmod at tho City
hospital in kmdshut end at ti 0 P. tho logical Ir.etituto . .fc
Munich, .nd bocamo an assist, nt rosidor.t physician without
p..y thoro in tho fwll of 1922.

•

On 9 Novo, her 1923 I took part in tie N_zi putsch
in i ami eh -e .. number, of tho roo Corps :, iund Oborlund."
in l v _24 I c-ocaae an asrist-r.fc ..c tho Munich University


lurgiCw.l Ciir.ic undor Gwhoihr..t Sauorbruch until 1926, thon


undor Gohoimrat kjxer until 1933. In 1232 I boc;jao

instructor ir. surgery ►t 'unich University.

°4. I Joined tho Nazi -v.rfcy on 1 -- y 1233, ny

nimibcr being 1,723,317. I joined the General-SS on

•

20 -pril 1235, ny number being 265,894. I ultimately roso

- ,26 -


10 Doc A6-*-l»LJ0~Lcs3er(DJG)
Court Be. 1


tc the rank of SS Gruppcnfuchrcr in the G-ncral-SS end to the ran
cf G«crtl-LoutoCnt or Ifejor General in the Hcservc of the '^ffen-SS.

"5. In 1933 I assigned to the hospital it Hohonlychcn as
Chief Physician. I rcaeinod In this position until the end of the war.
£t the sane tiae I bis consulting physician to the Reich Sport Leader¬
ship and Chief of the ticdieal.^Iw^itutc cf the Reich .Academy for Physi¬
cal Sxcrcisc in Berlin. In 1935 I bccrac horvoriry University Professor
ind in 1937 regular Professor rt tho University of Berlin. IXiring 1935
and tho suanvr of 1936 I bis Fhysicirn-in-Chief at the Olympic Graes.

r-r •

In 193C I bccroo e physician ct. Hitler's Headquarters. I was also
persocrl physician to Himlcr rnd his frally.

"6. In 1940 I bcccjw surgical advisor to the h'affen-SS and
visited the frent line divisienr. Sinco 1935 1 hrd boon surgicrl
advisor to the Organization Tedt, at first fer the Reich ..utobrhns
end since 1940 for tho host i.all verk. Sinco 1940 I Baa also in
charge of the convalescent hcoe Kulobach of the Organization Todt,

"7. In August 1940..."

I think' that is rn incorrect translation. I think it should read
August 1943. . (P

..."I created and tock ovs,r the position of Chief Clinical _^

Officer of the Reichsarzt SS end Pelizei. I had this position
until tho end of the war. Dr. Grewitz bcs ay superior. From February
1943- until the spring of 1944 I was personal physician to Albert Spoer.
I'treated hin at Hohonlychcn end then acccopanicd hin to Italy. Lith
tho invasion in 1944 I also bccaae Hcorcsgruppenrrzt of the ..ray Group
Oberrhoin and in 1945 of tho Group \<oichscil, ay services being
required -t the front, in the defense areas, end at hone. On 23 «Fril
1945 I becaac


127


10 Dec 3-4-UG-L»3scr (DJI)

Court Mo. 1


President cf the German Red Cross.

(signed Kcrl Gebhardt."

The naac cf Gebhardt is shorn on the Chert of the Organization

following ..ugust, 19^*3, where he hold the position of Chief Surgeon

00

in the cffico of Grrwitz. It is shewn in one of the boxos r.t the left
or Grr.witz* nrnc on the chert. Thus we have in the deck the vorthy
succossor of Grrwitz as the President of the Genaan Rod Cross, C-rawitz,
the Rcichs Fhysicicn cf the SS, who took his cwn life in tho last drys
of ths. war#

Gebhardt was, without question, one cf the closest acdicrl advisors
to Himlvjr and, cs he states in Fr.rcgra-h 5 cf hit affidavit, he \ .a
Hi3nl.nls personal physician. It can be said, I think, that Gebh'rdt 1 s
position vis-c-vis Kiaslcr wrs about the sen- as Krl Brandt vis-.-vis
Hitler. Gebh-rdt wrs, -s he stated, rlso personal physician to albert
Speer, a ‘-fendant before the Gebhardt worked f« r .rny years

as tho Chi-f Surgeon -t the Hospital ct Hchenlychcn. During the

•

perticul r tixsc during which we arc here interested, he was asoisted
by the Dofendents.Fischer and Cberhousor, who, together, performed
the uxperiaents on Polish wcacn in tho Rrvensbruck Concentration Cenp
in connection with the sulfanila-sidc experinents and this Tribunal
will be rccerdcd tho opportunity cf observing in p-rsen the pitiful
results of theso criminal operations perferaed by Gebhardt rnd his
partnors-in-driac.

I till new read the affidavit cf Frits Fischer which is Document
He. ?J0—559 end will be Prcs-cution Exhibit 26.


12S


10 Dwc-i-JxVlii-Wfeohan (3K)
Court So. 1


“I, Dr. Fritz Ernst Albert Fischer, being duly sworn, depose and state*

I was born October 5, 1912 in Berlin. I- ; 1931 I correrccd the study
of aedicinc and attended the universities of Berlin, Hnnburg, Liipdg
and Bonn, I recoivcd cy doctorate in Kaaburg in 193S.

2 . I joined the NSDAP in 1939, ay nuaJx,r being l*,9h5,298. I joined
t.* SS on February 1, 1931, ay nueber boing 203, 578. I rose to tho
rank of Sturabcnnfuehrar in tha Waffen SS. .n Novoabor 2939 3 was in¬
ducted into tho Waff on SS and \.:s assigned to tho SS unit of the Hospit¬
al at Hotanlychon as. a physician. I reminod at Hohenlychtn until June
30, 19U1. Dr. Karl Gobhardt res ay superior. *

3. O' Juno 30, 191*1 I was transferred to tho Bodyguard Adolf Hitlor,

*:.d on Dccoijbur 20, 19lil was ro-traneforred to Hoh;nlyclion as Assistant
Physician to Dr. Karl Gobhardt. I remlnod there until ."ay 10, 191*3.

I was then transferred to the 10th SS Division as Chief Surgoon of a
: °dical Ccr.ip.any assigned to tho 10th fcmscr Rcgiacnt on the Y.ostom Front.
Ir. Wovcnbor 19l*3 I was transferred with tho sane unit to th. Russian
Front. In Juno 19i*L I was sent to the testern Fncnt in Fw.co, wjx.ro I
sar action until Ajigust 19W*.

. La .Uigur t 1911 I was wounded and rotumod to tho Hohonlychcn
i.rjpital os n patient. In IX»conb:r 1911 I was transferre ’ to t-lac
University oi Berlin an.-, ms assigned .as n^ sician to th. Chrrlty
Hospital in Berlin. I, April 1 e5 I r uimod to Hohonlychon as Assistont
Physician to Dr. Karl Gobhardt. I rooalxad at HohciOychen until tlw and
of tho war." (Signed) Dr. Fritz Fischer.


FiGcter we 3 in the sulphnniiinide experiments at RavensbraeJe, tho
willing tool of his chief, the Defendant Gobhardt.

Yext, wo turn to tho Defendant Oberheusor; While she was not a
of t‘ o S, she worked within tho SS -todicol Scrvico. First, as a doctor
*• Ravensbruck Concentration C-r.p ar.d then as assistant to tho

Sifondar* Gobhardt in the Hospital at Ktfwnlychon. Her affidavit is
Docic-ont So. HD-663, which r.ill bo Prosecution Exhibit .”o-27.


- 129 -


10 Doc • -A-JMii-l-Keehan (BE)
Court Wo. 1


■I, Berta Ofctrh«u*«r, fcoin$ duly worn, da peso and stator
1. I »u born on Yny 15, 1911 In Cologno-oa-the-fthi»j, Gomany.


studied


1C Doc .-4-JWW-Jbehaa (BK)
Court So. 1


aidicino at' *-hc Ebiversitlcs of Bona and Duo 8 scldorf end received ry
Dccocfate In 193>.

_ ^

2. Freo 1937 until Decenber 19l*0 I was employed as an assistant
piysician at the Ifedical Clinic in Duesacldorf, and at the Skin Clinic
in -he saac city.

3. I Joined the Jeague of Osman Girls in 1935 and hold the rank of
Block Leader. In Uy 1937 I bccaso a amber of the fcui prrty. I was
rlso a ncabor of the Association of Nasi Physicians.

1. Fron Docccbcr 1910 until Juno 191*3 I "os a skin specialist and
craxp physician at the Ravens brook Concentration Camp. Vy superior until
191*2 was Dr. Sonntag and thereafter Dr. Schicdlr.uaky.

5. Free June 191*3 until the, end of tho war I was assistant physician
at tho hospital in Holxinlychen. !(y superior was Dr. Karl Ocbhardt."
(Signed) Horta Obdrhouier.

Dociuaint No. 589, which will be Prosecution Exhibit No. 23, glvoo tho


personal history of the IX>for.dcnt, Rudolf Brandti

"I Rudolf Hornann 3r«ndt, being duly sworn, depose and at' tot

1. I was born on 2 Juno 1909 at FrankfUrt/odur, Ooraary, and studiod
law at tho Universities of Berlin and Jona. I Joined tho Nasi party in
1932, ny party nunbor being 1, 331,536.’ In October 1933 T boccr-c a
renbar of tho SS and was assigned tho mn.be..- 12«, 771. In N^.-onbor,

1935 I was car.isa onod an Unt-rstunuuohror (Second Lieutenant)
ultiar.toly rose to tho rank of Stondartcnfuohror (Colonol).

2. On 11 Docaaber 1933 I bocrao a cosber.of tho Staff of tie RoichS^
fuehrer S& Rider in tho capacity of clerk. In 1936 I boccne Chief

of th. PorKjnal Staff of the Roichsfnclavr SS. I renal nod in this posi¬
tion witil the ond of tho war. In 1938 or 1939 I bocsce Hinder*s
liaison officer to th« ’finis try of the Interior and particularly' to
the Office Secretary of the Interior. In 191*3 when Hinder beceao
.‘Inis tor of tho Interior, I was appointed Chief of toe ‘.tinisterir.l Offico
ir. the Roich Ministry of the Interior.

3. I was a ix-nbcr of the Ahnep-orbe Socioty. Kinder was President of
th*. Ahnenorba Society. On account of =y position, I was liaison cfficor


r


10 Doc-4rWB-lb-3-ifc®l*n (3K)
Court !fo. 1


to the Raich Secretary of the Society, Eolfraa Sicvcrs.

(ft «iy sboent fros Hirder , fl office free 30 ifcrch,: 19]il, to .

11 ?'ny 19hl. During this tfcxs I fought wit' the Artillery Raginaat of
•ho Adolf Hitler bo<fc'guard division in the Campaign against Qrcecc."
(Signed) Rudolf Brndt.

The position of Rudolf Brandt is shown on both charts in tho same box


with Hianlor. By virtue of his position, as acfeainistrative assistant
to Hiaalcr, Rudolf Brandt played a very significant role in practically
all of tho crlrus with which this ease is concerned.

’.c turn now to tho affidavit of tho Dof ndant Joachln ::rugcw8ky,
Docuamt Ho. 723, which will be Prosecution Exhibit 29*

"I, Dr. Joachin Krugowsky, being ciQy swim, depose and state:

1. I was born on IS August IS05 at Rathenow/Havul, Gernany, I
finlshod High School at Ratherww/Havol in 1923. FK*- 1 April 1923 till


th- jnd of Novurher 1923, I was a c us torn cr.ployco at Rathoncw-Gtontsch
;war Schreibus, Fren 1 Dacoubor 1923 to October 1925, I ' rved as an
apprcntico at tho teth.now Bank Aerociaticr In thu vint.- * 1925,

I caracncod thj stud;/ of »udici;u> at the University of Halle/Saalc

^ * *

and finished with tfv. State oxxdnation in 1931. During th- tino I


(f


'.3 studor.t at tha Univoraity of Hslld/flsslo, I w: head of Uw Nad.
Student Group free Novonber 1930 to Juno 1931.

2. 1,1930 I Joined tho NSDAP. Hy party manber was 210,Ctj9. OrfC
15 November 1931 I Joinod the SS, ny nunber being 25,611. Daring ' —
1931 and 1932 I interned at tha Xuostrin City Hospital .and on 1 January
1933 became an Assistant at tlw Hygionj Instituto of tho University of


Fello/Saalo. FXon 1933 to 1935 I worked in tho SD Sector 18 in Halle.

3. On 1 January 1937 I vns croaotcd to tho rank of lajor and attached


to tho r/offen-SS as a nodical officer on active duty. On 1 August
i?37 I beccne battalion physicim or too 1st battalion of tho bodyguard
..--•elf Hitler in Berlin. In October 1933 I becane a nenixr of too Staff


-f tSu. SS ^dical Office of the offoa SS iBerlin in 4ho capacity


cf hygienist.


-131-


10 Dcc-MMi*-3-«teehan (SK) •
Court So. 1


-It, thc^boginnirg of 1939 I founded the hygienic-bacteriological


jxr-irvrtton circle of thb'sS in Berlin.’ purpose of thie institute


tre tc


- 131 a -


10 (JTD)

Court Sc. 1


c: -x.t epi'. calcs which broto out in - ho 53 -trriscn txpops of thb “afffen SS.

!?r. October 1939 t- !bvtd«r 19uG, I was active irith the 2nd : lotted Conpany.

of tfcs SS 7-Divisicn of tho : affon-SS on the estorn Front. In Ncvccbcr 19h0

•

:*.rr.s trcndforroi tc 3orlin to ai I in the oc-abattin. of ppiDottcs by tho ovor

0

T*rin; '?affei>n5S, ttader :y irecti.cn, tho hy ~iurdo-hac teriol- -lc-1 axnni-
nr.tion circle waserflnr^ed end roneapd the lone Institute of tho "'affon
SS'. 11)00300 Chief of the Above naned institute an' raaainod in that po¬
sition until the oni of hostilities. Dr. Xarl Oenskon was tho Chief of
•iviaion D In the SS 0 to rational nein .ffico en* ny instituto was attnohol
tc Department XVI of Division D. In aprll 19’1 I "rasT;rootb 1 to Lt Colnnol
in the SS and in Juno l%2to t: ran 1 : f Colonol in tho SS.

5. On 1 Soptxfcor 1?U3 the 5*y lone Instituto of tho ”affon-5S, cf rhioh
I roaainod chiof, was traceforr of to tho Offico -f tho Relevant SS on I
Folico, Dr. Dr net Om-.rita. T rl«j bocoo tho Chiof of Offico 111 and was
iron tho titlo Chiof icnist. -.ft or 1 Sr.terror lfu3 tho Hy iono Ineti-
t:to :f the .'affon SS was no ler. -or attache *. t DoTOrtoant JO-c^ DiYioi'n

D of thu SS operational rr.in .ffico. *

6. Duritv tho period frra 19U. to 19Uh I ’c.s clso !{y i.. o’ Consultant

tho hlnistr/ for Das torn ..f fairs an 1 . I cbllabcrato’. in the iasuonoo of

Sjy.ral ocrooe o.ncornin tho oohnttin ,f ‘.iooaso in tho oocupio! torri-

•

vrios In tho hast. Furthonioro, I was a i-nb.r _f tho Gosnlttoci For
iTinkla- ?ntjr Supply an’ A ; pcrctus. In hpril 19U: I rrs .r site-’ t) Siticr.
nol in tho SS." (Si -no:*.), JoacMn IS-tt-arsky. * £ *}.

Thu position cf :&ru carsky is shown in thj chart tc th lift, r ir&h>£S^
1 thi chart Ivin tho or aniaatior. prior.t .uunt of 1>I^, un’-jr tho
'fonVint C-cnzkor. as chiof of t’t) Hyi-na Instituto f tho faff on SS. Tho
- ::ituto far Typtas an*. Virus rjsorrch at the uch-rarol *. Soncontrati->n

~3 ttroctiy ffib:r "inate to ' rur-Tusky thr ai hout tho rholo p^riol with
■•ioh to aru concumjTho DoT-ata.r.t for Sp-.tte. "cv r an Virus nsoarch
• luchowal * isj |fixm on tho first ohart un'jr tho :au cf ru-T.fsky.


10 Doo^7-^<5I3-a5^«ln=budc (AID)
Court Ho. 1


Dr. ntrr -Hr,* Schiller, who ms Chief -f tha Institute at Bucheranli

ernitta' suid la follcwin hia capture by the «llioA Forcoa. Fortunetaly,

jvr.-aT-r, seviral affidavito were oWainei ft-- W* T4hf mf/he ^s aTai “

»

loft ua a rerfcor of !rcunonts, indu-lins a lory covorin- tho pari: 1 fr'-n
19lil until 19U5g and thoao iecunanta *111 pravi ’.o the Tribunal with a !o-
* liar* kn-vrloi'o of tho happcnin~s 'urir.~ the typ^ns axparinants at ftichon-*

P

vrl\

0

Iku awaky's interests wero nuch bran lar than t-plxc r-anarch, h«ever,
ml the Tribune! frill fin' hia neno carmoctoi with other ratters, not tho
least '•C which wore tha -oLz :r. bullet oxperironts te 'otjiudne hnr lonp it

m •

took t*. kill a run tilth poison ballots.

,.s I hc.vo . reti usly -xplflno l in ■lacusBin- tho lofcn lant Oonakun, tha
ionic Institute -Z tho ^affon SS tras subar Slmtod in AUfuat of 19k3 to
Ormriti, an! this chon o ia shown -n tho soconl chart,

.'o cone near to tho lof or.-ant PoppavUck, mother SC doctor. Hia affi-
lavit ia D- cur-int .>672, hlch vill bo Praccuticn Exhibit 30.

"I, Dr. Holrut Popp-nlck, bdr. hOy awern, lop so an J atatoi
"1. I r.us b:rn on Jarunry 6, 1902, at Hu Ij, Ooxyrmy. Frc-t 1921 to
1925, I stu lio l .w»Hcino at tiro Universities f Go-vtln or., \unich anl
•lin. I pnuaoi ,y atnto oxednetion in Dccor.bor 1926.

"2. I join. *. tho ”.S.D.on llcrch 1, 1932, ay mi: r b In- 998607.

I juino l th# SS or. July 1, 1932, y ^anbor In' 363U5. I raso to the rank
f Lieutenant C lon.1 (Oborstcr .nnnft:- xer) in fro Allo ra :dn SS., an! to
•- o rank f S^ni r 0 . lrnol (Cb it fuehrer) in thu a'fan 3;. I \xta ala^cr^ ^
f SS Physidana ..rsadatian ( r . c .. Arstjbunl),

'3. Curin 1933 aal 1931, I was Chief Fhysicirm(Ob irarst) at the Vlr&n*
:: a it 1 in "-rlin. ?r,:\ tho bodnain- f 1935 until ..u -ust, 1935# I waa a
> r f the staff of tha rxisar^ilhdln i.6a!«r in 'arlin. In ..u-unt 1935,
" a-ca to ! an appoint :^nt as Phyaidon dth th- lain HCoa ar. Sottlor.b nt
*lco (acssa uni Si a Hun a'vxptantjin Berlin. I res a .dnto' Chief T'hyai-
d-n (Laiton’er. .xzt) of the fficj in 19U, an! rai'in, ! in that -osition
until the ni of tho var,“

. 133


12 D.;c-u-<S: c -l5-2-Sln.'iruck

Court Nc» 1.


This position of loppcndick is £houn on both charts nnlcr the Rr.c; and

b.-ttlcxnt Office of th-_ S.S., rhica is another one of the twelve nnin SS
4 ~^* / ’*'•• •
offices. Jicnr, while ro.^cndick -'as directly subordinated to the Cliicf of

that nalr. office, Grawitz had the authority to issue orders concerning nedien’

liattcro, end this is shown by tic broken line nr.r.inc froa Grarit* to

. oupcrvlicU. (Continues reading).

*'•. On ..uguat 2?, 1939, 1 tea c“llod into xhc ..pay as r. G.cond

Licut-nant (..ssistcnsarxt) in the .x-dicrl Corps, and was proix>te»’. to the rank

i * - * M

ol Cb_rarzt. I vrs on active duty vitn 18th Gernan ..niy until 19hi, at


•fcick tine I was sent bade to -_rlin to resuno 'jy duty in eh- ..ain Kaco and
Sattlcnont Cffico (Rassc und Sicdlungshnuptant.)


"5. In 19U3, I was appointed Cliiof of the Personal Staff of tho. Jtoich

ihysiciana SS and . olico (Chef dcs . crsocnlichcn Stabes dca R.ichsarztos SS

vs*,.’ .olizci) unlvT Or- Grawitz. I reonined in this position until tho end

of tiki war, at the sruso tine retaining n y position as Chief .hysician

(Leitender ..rzt) in the -*ain Race and Stttlcaent Uffico (Rassc und

Cioilungshau,.teat) until about autism l?hl. u It pays 'hi. I think that laust

be incorrect. In any event, folloidn^ 19li? he still retailed hie position in

tii. ..ain Race and Settlorxnt Office, although at the sate tiac he res sub-

•

or inn to;’ to Dr. Qrawitz anl was head o. tiu i\, rsonal Staff in that offico.

at the tiac of the rcorga. iz* tion of tl*> S.S. '.iodiccl Dojartvont in

August, l?h3, Poppcndick tool: his Job as Chief of the ‘'orsone.l Staff/df'

•

Grawitz, ani as such, he held a position which I think is quite coup or able ;
to that held by Rudolf Brandt. In Otha - .words, Rudolf ‘tt-jvlt was the Chief
of the r .rsonri Staff or rarsonci Adjutant to liaOer, while '.o;pondiok hold
f. coepcrable position to Cr. 3rr.witz, and as such, he also, as in the ease of
iaa.elf Irandt, had a unique opportunity to see what w-s going on curing the
v^periti-ntations on huunn "xinsz in the concentration crape.

The defendant Sieves was cr.c cf t!ve Y^j figures in oriuinal cacpcriaenta-
alon, rltikjugh he is one of th- few lafcndants in the dock rtho wrr not a
physician. Be has giver, us a very short affid-vit which har-iy Justifies his


10 Doc-^-G5S-l5-3-KL-cbuck
Court Mo. 1.


LTOrtaacc, czit this is Docur.-nt :»-670, and it -.ill be *'rosccution Exhibit
31.

. - *•••' ... 9 . . . : . '

"I, olfren Sicvers, being duly s-/om, dc-.xcc, cad state:

"1. I was born -t Kildcsheiij, Cxrjcny, on 10 July 1905. I .1oino<l the
“•'•si i2Tt ? in -t th- beeiimiiie of 1931 I resigned. I joined again cr T l

in 1933. Iy ^Jty nueber was luh,?a3. I joined the S.S. in 1935, ry rnnbcr
being 275,325. :ty last rank wrr Stcndartcnfuchrortho equivalent rank
being -olorwl in the United States ..ray.

:, 2. O; i July 1935, I bccaac a n-ab-r of Mimic r'a ,-j-*cnal staff and
Cenj-1 Secretary (Generalsckrotar) of the —hnenerbe. I served in thx.

. osiaion until tho end of tho irar. The ..hnenerbe was charged with certain
tasks of scientific (g-iateowisscjischaftliciicn) research by of .lor of tho ’

Re icha fuehrer SS.

"3. In June 19h3 I was a;:/ointo<! Deputy to to. Hoad of tho Managing
3o?rd c: Directors of tho Reich ?.“scarc:. Council. .y superior in t i is capa¬
city was Dr. Hentzel, Hoad of th- -r re-re’, of Directors of /fcich Rosonre

'ouncil. 1 * Signed, Siovors.

’.T.l .-hnenerbe Society, of hieM Siov.rc was tho Reich Business ..onager,
nil bo fr-qucntly naitioncd luring he c. rsc of this trial, ^-t is shorm on
th- lo‘.;.r righthand side of both of tie- charts non before the Tribunal and his


r.sponsitility extended directly to ..cinrich HLril^r, who, incidentally was
President o l the -hnenorbo Society.

I txwld li^o to introduce at tlds .mint Document WO-303, as l^osecu^on
dahibit 32 which giv^s the to/, oschclcn cf the .'Jincncrbc and a description*
of its fur.ctions. This document oha's in a sort of snail c!r.rt at tho top
30k Mining of the organization of tho .Juicnerbc Society. This docuncnt is not
I surp-ct that it shows the organization as it existed non. or 1^33
trooad 1532. ..t tho toy ;e see the .resident, tho Boichsittohrcr-SS, HcLirich
d.^r. Under hir as the Trustee is Dr. .'either .uost, and to tho right is
‘..loicb Ducir^ss .--nag.r, MolfTcn Sieves. So far as I Utictt wo arc not
. artic.-Iarly interested in ary of th_ ucn *.iio are 1 if tod is j-. c P_ich Puniness
ilbcarcr, the statement in this ecu Dent as to the teak and

- 135 —


■ -


10 I>-c-C^GLJ-l>-i i ->;i.-v'buck
Court Ko. 1*


imposes of tho -hacacrbo, I think, is rat.Vr interesting, and it roods as
fc liars:

¥

°7ba task of the R“scorch rx»' Instruction Group "The dhncnja*bo£ is in- -
vestigotien of spccc, spirit, ac ccnplisJuuuits and heritage of tho Indogemanic
peoples of nordie race, th; vivifieatlon of tisc results of their research- and
th-ir transmission to the people." Then it lists down below a nunber of
things which they should do.

Tb. -hnenerbo Foundation was apparently scathing in the connection of a
separate c<r oration, so to spec!:, which Li effect collected donations fron
various people and supported tho .iu»norbo Society with these donati ons.

ifow, it n=y strike the .Tribunal ns strange th-.fc this organisation, .iich
ras concerned with the research as to the capacity, spirit, occajplishaents,
h-ritago of nordic racial Jhdogcmanisn should bccc^. Involved. ii: crinlnr.l ox-
p_risento on living bcint i. However, :i -h tho advent of -.rrr Jiisulcr's intcro:
In glorifying Use groat G_rarn norv'ic mco was to a certain extent, at least,
subliuated by tie desire to nako available for ailltary licdical rcsoarch sono
of tho thousands of non-nordic iniat-s of ccnccntrntlon coops who, as he put
it, in a CocucsJit which will b_ aufedttod to th» Court, “deserve only to -lio".
Thus, in July of 1912 Siev.rs eos ordered tc establish an instituto for the
HLLiiary Scientific Research within the ;.hncn_rbe and as \voot of that, 3 now
offer "ccuexnt 1.0-122, -hieh will be *'rosecution Exhibit 33.

Tl’is docu:-«.nt is dated 7 July 1912 rev! cones free tho Operofci&al Head¬
quarters, sent by th- aoichfucijor SG Hinder. It Is headed: "Sccrol:

%

••

-o t: '*- Boichsnoncgcr of the ":Jmoncrbc B S3 C5>_rstur:.-’nnnfu.hrcr Sievors. I
r.^uest the “.Jmenerbe" 1. to establish on dstitut. for lilitary Scientific
-c.arch; 2. to support in ev-r ; ojciblc way the ixocord carried cut by
- J Hauptoturnfuehrer . rofesaer Sr. .'Iirt end to prcaoto ell corresponding
rclcardi rev unlcrtokings; 3. to ocko available the required sipexatus,
q-ii^twn* accessories end assistants, cr to procure then; l. to mice use of
•- facilities available in Dachau; 5. to contact tic Chi>-f of the SS
.coxalie an-d .idainistrativc -*ain Office • tirtschrj’tevcxwnltungshauptciit)

-136-


»


10 Dec—-wX-lS-S-Kinebuck
Court He* 1.


rdth rc^Tj.j to the costs which can nornc by the affen SS." .jy’. the
signature is the initials of Heinrich UlrrQer. Co;5y anilo.l to the
Chi-f 'of the Econccdc anl —trials tretivc - : oin Office which itts headed u;> by
03 ChcrcrMi^jenfuehrcr *CKL with a request to take note, by the crier of
Cranit; that is ihiolf Brandt, SS Cfccrs fcurnbamfUchrcr.


a


- 137 -


y


'•r. McHaney contiming)


previously told the Court that the Economic and AdninistretiVe Main Office had
ojtrSPfrfvr cdrcaitration fcanps'fOXatfiny.^ho oafty* part'of* 1&2 J^Uo'tfieao ordora
rill constantly bo brought to the attention of this Eccncrdc and AdnirrLatrativo Main
fficoj and as you soo haro, they were also to defray the coots of supporting this
ilitary s oientlfic Institute for roaoarch, As tha proof dovelops, the significance
:f the reference cade in this doounont to the rosoarch of Dr* Hirth will becono
:rjstal dear to the Tribunal* Ho was the distinguished scientist who, nnong othor
•Jdrg% infeoted 11 vine hunan beings with ?4ustard gas, who an lnoorod with tha
usistanae of Si avers the selection and oxocution of 113 Jews for a skoloton colleot-.
I:n at the University of Strasbourg*

I sufcdt at this point for Judicial notico by tho Tribunal, the findings of the >
[stemationol Military Tribunal with roapoot to tho ..hnonerbo Sooioty. Since this
ns quoted by Qenorol Taylor in his oponing address, it is urnocossary for no to
r.poat it hero. I think. Your Honor, that this doounont probably should not tako an
ottblt rwnbor inasnuch as tho Trial ml is required by ;j*ticlo 9 of Ord, No, 7 to
Skd Judicial notic., and wo are hjr rith oaaplying with the roquost with a writton
:py of it, and it is cortifiod by Colonol John E. Ray, who is tho Socrotary General
:f tho International Military Tribunal, and who is still in Nurnborj, to bo a truo
a 4 , correct oxoorpt freo tho offiolol English transcript of tho Judgnont, and this
^oarod of pogos 16,952 and 53, Your Honor will rocall free General Taylor's state*
«t that tho Ahnororbo wa3 competed with oxtonsivo oxporlauntfl involving tho uao
f living hunan boin.~s, and it also holds tint attached to this institute was Dr.
U'.hor about whan w© will hoar more in a few accounts; and that the /.hnonorbo was
Aaidizod by Roichsfuohror SS who was a trust*.o of tho Foundation,^

Wa turn new to tho personal affidavit of tho defondant Brack, which is Doounont
■“■''0 end will bo Prosecution Exhibit 3U,

■1, Victor Hersann Brock, bo in,- duly sworn, deposo and state*

"1, I was bom in Hoaren, Gormny, on Noveebor 9, 190li, In 1923 after ry rradu-
or. free High School, I studied ocononic scienoe at tho ’Technische Hochschulo —
‘*?t ia, I an sun, technical high school — "in Munich whore I graduated in 1923

* . - 133 -


10 D0c.-«A^*«TD-i6-2“Perrln
Court Ife. 1


rlth a iiplcca in Scoiwsdc Science# 1923-1927 ncrbor of artillery unit of tha SA
fegfcMBt in ’iinich.

"2. In Doc a* or 1929, I Joinod tha JSD.-P and at thi aar» ti: the SS. My party

'■ • ..— .... V:'*V t-

arbor wnal73,388 end cy SS lumber 19W>. “In the suincr of PhiXxip fftuTflcry"

•A:n Reich ’’usinoss MnrA-cr of the KB DA? appointed no to full tine aorvica in tho

.=rown House* in Munich. During 1933, I actod asadjutant with tho titlo of Stabs-

iglter to Bouhlor, who was Reich Business ’tamper of the IBBAP in Munich. In 193h

lilchsloitor Bouhler was appointed Chief of tho Chancellory of tha Fuchror of tho

5D/.P in Berlin, my I was transferred with hi i.

■3. In 1936 I was placed in charyo of Offico 2 in tho Ch-.ncory of the Fuehrer
In Borlin with tho title of Roichsaatalaitor. Offico 2 examined complaints which
gaae fron nil soctions of tto ;x»pulation an' concornjd all possible problems. Bator,

I rocoivod tho rark of Obor'Ionstlcitor# I also noted as Bouhlor*s deputy in Ant II.

In this oapcdty ay lutioa wero of an odnlnictrativo nature since I was -.vrsonnol .

•

wjroaantr.tlvo of Bouhlor# I nado various sorvico trips for him and took oaro of all •
of Bouhlor*a spocial tasks. Thoso consisted, anorvj other thin-a, of subsequent axru4-
wtlons in tha Oauaj ttoso oubaoquont oxard.nations were indoponrtc-.t of tho inspect¬
ions made by Bomnn'i offico. All <iurin« this porio J fren Deca*or 1929, I ma
votive in tho SS. On 30 Jure 193fc, I rocoivod the »Doath Head On; * SS. On 7 Janu¬
ary 1935, I waapronotod to Sturrkannfuohror and on 20 April 1936 to C-aratunabonn-
fuuhrer. On 12 September 1937, I vasprcootod to tho xr.ric of atnrv’nrtonfuuhror; and on
1 Bovontoor 1937, I was transforrod to tho Staff of tho !!ain Offico of 11

SmOber 1910, I waaprotetod to tho rank of Ob rfuchror.

. v jy

"1*. By reason of this position and because of ry personal contact with Bouhler,

I obtained far ro-.cMn; knowledge of the activities in which Bouhlor and varlouo
rthor personal!ties participate'!. Fron time to tine, I had discussions with Bouhlor
tni othjr poraons concerned with activities which ay offico was conoomod. I road
Tist -mount of ccrrc3pon'.onco ad ires sod to Bouhlor, received orders froo hin and in
aaiorouoinstances I personally- handled, on ry own initiative, various details of tho


"articular nattors involved.


art *• 1


■5. In September 1939, a tier issued too tEuthanasia* order to Bouhler and
-att'.t, chorjin, then with tbo responsibility of enlarging the authority of diffur-
ttj&ty. ^jonafclephysicians to the end tJulcerGln incufib?bT^fSbhs

ht bo accorded a sorcy death, I bocarxj Bouhler*s liaison nan to the doctors in-
red in too Euthanasia pro^ran. Those included Dr* Linden, Prof, Haydo, and
Hietache, .’.Iso in ny capacity, as chief of Dapcrteunt 2 of Bouhl-r's office,!
j ordered to carry out the adainistretivo details of the 'Euthanasia* prorran,

•pity was Wornor Blankcnburj who later booaao ry successor." Signed Victor Brack.

It say bo s^on fron this affidavit that Brack was primarily a Hazi Party
urctionary in the Chancery of the Fuohrorj and his activities in connection with
Euthanasia and sterilization axporlojnts, that will concern us aost hero. His
awdiftto superior, Phillip Bouhler, who, with Karl Brandt, was ohargod by Hitler
rtth carrying out the Euthanasia prev-ren, oaxdttod suicido shortly after the orv!
f tho war,

Th> Inst of too klofondants in t\o SS group is Hovon. His affidavit is Docunont
C-591 which will bo Prosocution Exhibit 35.

■I, Dr, Faldemr Hovun, being ’uly sworn, doposo and statoi
"1, I was bom in February 1903 at Fivibur , Oora-.ny, and attended school in
rcis K au. Free 1919 until 1921 I visitod in Dorr-ark an-* Sweden. Lr.to in 1921 I wont
o the Uidtsd Strtos of Aaorlca, wh^ro I stayed for thro- years. In 192a I rotumod
c Oonv.ny an' workod as ry fathor’s secretary at his sanntoriun until 1930, In 1930
vent to Paris where I worked for two years as secretary to a corrospon ont of the
iarst Proas, Baron do tlayor.

"2. In 1933 I returned to Gcraany. I ccopletwl =y hi -h sohool studios at tho
-'o.of 32 and carvjnced the. stu-ty of :licino. In 1939 I ccncludod ny nodical studios
•* the University of JfurtLoh as was imo'.lately inducted into tho I’affon SS,

"3. I Joined toe Kati party in 1937. I do not rcnoribcr qy npaber. I Joined tho
2 lr. 193 u, ry nurber boix%- 99559h. I rose to toe raric cf Hauptstunafuohrcr
’Captain) in the Faffcn SS.


- ito -


Mrt *>• 1


■ 4 . In October 1939* after I had ccnploted ny training in the Tfaffon SS, I was
-rdsrod to report to the SuebeanO-' 1 . Concentration Cnap. Froc tho bo’innin,'; of 19ul
totD Wj Ufe it tho.4s -- at Btidherml-*,

■.a 1 , fror. »^ily 19U2 until September 19U3 I was Chiof Physician at tho prison caisp in
jjchawaldi" Sijnoi* Walicc-ar Hoveiw

Hovon's position is not shown on tho chart because ho ms a concentration camp
isetor and obviously it is possible to'includc any re pros 0 nta tivo number of those,

3fell hoar of his activities prixorily in connection with tho typhus exporl-.vnta
it Puchcnwald and in connection with the Euthanasia Prof-ram.

The clofondant Pofcomy should bo considered in connection with tho SS although
M wasnot a njrier of that or oniaction. Ho was the nan who had the brilliant idea
sf sterilisin', by no ana of dru^ s, nilliona of Russian priaonorsof war in ordor, as
bo put it, that tho ervioy be not only ccoquero.’ ’/ut dostroyo !. This proposal was
m'o by Porkomy to Hirnlor, and th> Prosecution will prove that intonsivo offort*

b

* 0 ro nedo to accoaplish this Monstrous plan. Tha affidavit of Porkorny is Docunont
*>-770 which will bo Prosocution Exhibit 36, and it roads as fellows 1


i


- ia -


10 Doc L7-v.— j 3S-i7-iUPatty (..rn)
Court 3s« 1


m

o> • -I

t

"I, Tr* Adolf Rudolf Pokorny, bcdn -!uly srore, ’oposo an ’ stats:

1. I was born 26 Jul^ 1895 in Tioana. In 1915 I enters:! tho Austrian

.jq? an: rose tc tho rank of Sanitnots-^rutncnt, a Lieutenant in the* ‘Sotiesl

* " •-»»•• .... . r . • • v , * -ij

Service* In 1916 I oonienco! the stu^r of . Icino at tho 0 nan University

ifc ?ra no. I rcceirei S’ 'act-.- .to in 1922 an! bocano a ae i>.r of the staff

4 U . 11

f the Oorran Skin & spited. ir. ?ra uo. In 1921, I ctraaenood privnto practioo
of nd'idne in Xonotau. I spec ia lize.! in tho troatsont cf skin an’ venoroal

diseases*

2. In 19U2 I was inductsinto the Obrien Aray an*, .-.ssi no! tc the
Reserve Hospital with tho rank of Oborarzt. In 19Uu I waa plnco! in charro
of the hospital for vonor^il Isoaso in Bobenstoin-Cmstthal an! prenotoi to
the rank of Str^oarct. I rrviino! until fourteen !eys before the on l of tho
ncr, an' then I was transferred tc Liohtonatuin in Saxony in tho sane
capacity, where I roaaino! until Wo on * cf the war."

This oonplatoo tho prosontation -as to tho positions of tho SS !ofon 1-
ants with a for/ ’qf or.darts such ns Obarhausor and Pokorny -.-ho voro not
ibors, but who rroro in sc:o r.r.y oonaocte.'. with thou* Last, but cortainly
rat least, is tho Dof or. !cnt, Rluio. Hia off '-.vit is Docu:

,111 ba Prosooua.cn Exhibit 37. It roa a as follows*

"I, r.urt Sloao, bain \il:' sworn, V,oso an! state*

1. I w-sb:m in 31 -ternary 1991; in 3ioluf.il-', Goman;y, In 1912 I vns
ra Oiato! fro a lertaun' an3*v 'iol o'. Icir.j -1 C-ootlin or.. In 191U ny

v ifl

sv- los woro intarmpto: by * orl T.r I, 'out I returned to :iy no Icrl
stu ies in 1919 and finished. these at the lost ck 'Jniv.rsity in 1920. "urin~
tho jr-r I servo ’ in tho Tiolcr.l Corps of‘the G:r-.an -ray. The hi-host rank
I attains! was that of a lioratenant. 5

2. Fr-a 1920 until 192U I was an assistant on the no !ical faculty at I

- rt;ck University. Fr.r 1921 until J.93U I on-crod in the rlrte practioo

i E

f -I’icino in Restock.

. 3. I joined tha H3D.d? in 1931 - sr hoi! c rank f 8 L ' o'ical I

: i«nfaihror. In 19U3 I was awrr'.o*. tho r -:l'en art;- RcV-o.


After severe! y rs rf rivats notice I as dlls'. * Berlin in

lii2


10 Dec i*7— .-C-3-S.7-2-P.it ty („ID)
Court So. 1


193L by Dr. Gerber. "a nor, laioh 'loeltfa Loa lor vhoro I was cctivo as adju-
tar.t In the- Centre! Cfiica of tho aatsssa lo ' Cr ss. In 1?35 I boron ny -cin
vfu»k, rtc-a igsg ifcc tha • Parson 'Ajt oal S bwaticatl. System

* * 4 * *  ' ^ ^ ^ ■* *r » » ■ »< ■

5. In 193o, In conjunction'-.rith sgr 'utios as a'Jutant lr. the Vain
Office f tfco Ooraan Rod Cross, I ms also nppointod business rena »r of tho
«*» Physicians hssodaticn. I hoi l this ; osition until tha on! of tho war.

6. In 1933 I bocr-no Praai lont of tho.Buroau of tho Adedeny for In tor-
ratio ml ", leal n-'oioo.tion. In 1939 I booms 'oputy to Dr. Loonar'.o Conti,

ichs osun'-hsitsfuohxMrs or Raids rionlth loa lor an! sucoossor to Dr.
a'nor. I roprosuntai Dr. Conti in his capacities as*


a) Loafer of tto Salehs JYsiciaas ..ss 'elation,

b) Sfonindly as hoc-l of tho "-“in Cffido for Public Xonlth of the Party.

c) tordjially as l-obr of tho .ati:nel Socialist P’yKLcirns .’.ssooiation.

7. Pr-r about 19ul until tho n*. of tho war I was r. :scnbcr of th: *b,ich

Roso-rch Council, in 19U3 ' ms a; .-:into'. Hcnipotontlary fer Concur ^scorch
./isich was allio '. vith tho rosoarch Cr.rission f r -r.toction erainst Bide-

I

ical warfare. I hoi’ thoso positions until I »cs tekon prlonor by tho
.^Orleans.

(si nod) ZfP.? '

It is a. arjnt frxs re-. in trio Amiavit that Sloao was an
’azi fr-a an early cxio*. ..s ho st-too, c m cf hi3 sain tasks'™ to
r anizo the Oorsan no! cal o-fuentioorO. syston. Tt&a affor*.ad idn the -ip' r-
tunity to inculcate in such y.ur.~ roical stu fonts as tho Dafan’nnt, H: 7 ji,

-^scrarto:’ *:ctrina that tho ill-concaivol Ivo cf thy r..l -hVr has V
isa. 4 <>ir, especially i:. relation t- inforf .r ar cirl cr;- sros. Such


’octrlms :oro taurht at tho ?U iror Soh'l f tho Oorv.n physicians at

.iltrhoso in ' ocklonbur rhidh ms ar 'nizui by tho Dofan'rnt, "lor.-.

-ttanP.inco at this 3chocl bocaro canpuisory an* hr.*, to -o attonloi for

ssvnral wseks annually fer fivc-yo-x ; ri. s. Certainly it i3 n't strsn-u

v fin* a -an >f such baliofs --acietof with the axtorination of peoples

•

a "licty. with tu jrculosio ar. sc-calla’ a»ntal illnosros.


-* oh ul ala bo r.-.tjf that -lorn was business vuv- cr of th.- loiohs


Coart 1.


HgrsicianB ..ssociation and that ho represented Conti in his capacity as the

• » • »
Fuehrer of this sedation. .J1 physicians in Germany except those cm

*

«:r» subordinate to leader p'.^ho Raichs .nysicians

.^sedation.


Is it not clear that a mn with the influential position of Blcno could
have lone cuch to prevent tho criminal activities of the Oenen physicians
and scientists about which this caso is concerned. Ihj Prosecution will prove
that it tits not lack of knowledge of those oxpcriccnts which explains tho
inertia of Blax. Indeed, the proof dll show tJuat he octivclv participated


in several c^Jerlccnts, not to nention tho unspeakable examination of pars or
affile tod with tuberculosis: •’'is activities in the field of biological rarfor


undor tho cover nace "Cancer Research" dll also bo brought to thy. retest ion
of tho Tribunal. tf y ^

In closing tnis part of tho ;.svaantction, I think it would bo appropriate
to introduce several dccuuonfcs with respect to the Reich Rosonrch Cornell.


Of t:» dofen ‘ants In the dock, JCorl Traixlt, Blaic am' Siovers r»,rc nenbors of
thu Reich Research Council. Roe tick acted as an alternate to ICcrl Brandt, ami
you will rorxtsbcr that in the chart shewing the organisation of tho Rcichs
Couiissicnor for ifcalth atvl Js^icrl Services that tho Reich Research Council
was one of the institutes ovor rtiich the Defendant, Rostock, hod control by
virtue of his pcsition as head of •‘orl Bromlt'a office for scicnco and re¬
search. *«hat kind of an erganis .tier. tttj this Reich Research Council? '..hat
w-ro its purposes? First, lot's look at Docuaont H0-$9b *hick will bo Pro¬
secution Exhibit 36. This is the Fuehrer's Decree of 15 Junu 19lj2 concerning
the Reich Research Cornell, and is token frou th: Rcichsgosottblntt, Part I,
19h2, Par. Ho. 6h, the Decree of Uc Fuehrer on tho Reich Research Council
of 9 June 19ii2:

"The ncc-ssity to expand all available forces to highest efficiency in
the interest of the state requires, not only In peace tine but also, and
:sp^ially, in war tine, the concentrated effort of scientific research and
it cnanncllisation toward the goal tc be rspirod.

-1U;-


10 Dco-a^ZS-17-io-i utty
Ccurt »©• 1*


■Th-rcfcrc, I ccmissicn the Reich Ihrshal Hernarn Qcx_rin~ tr establish
za rx. independent entity a Reich R^aoarch Council, chigh is t c s-rve- this pur-
poso, to take over its chaimansiiip hiasclf and to give it a charter.

"Leading of science above all, are t. nakc r-saarcl. fruitful for
uyfarc by writing together in -heir special fields. Tha hitherte existing
Reich Research Council which uas under the Raich _inistx for Science am.
Iducation is tc be absorbed by the nee organization.

•The acana ncodod for research purposes, arc to be established in the
Roich buagot as far as they will not bo raised fron cc ntributims (for
research) of circles interest in research.

Fuohror Headquarters, 9 Juno 191*2."

signod by the Fuehrer, ;.dotf Hitter, and by the Reich _inistcr and Chiof of
the Reich Chancellory, i)r. Icxnurs.

In order to axplify sonewhat the crfcvizaticn of the ItoJeh Research
Cornell, vu have secure:' an affidavit fr-'-i cnc cf the non-'efen ant aenbors of
that organization, an’. I refer to the affidavit cf .orncr Os-nberc «hich is
3ocun*nt FO-897 and which will bo * reaction inhibit 39.

“I, vomer ftKnberg, being ’.uly swrn, depose an state: —


10 !>ec-*-<25~18-;-i’ricc (DJG)
Court He* 1


v

Dr.* SZJ.V.slIUS: Mr, ?r*aid f- *fc,-& a . - -i. ltn .- n a Cau^o^ia .it present

located here in the prison rnd could be herrd orally. The presentr.tion

of an affidavit is probably not appropriate in n ease when r. witness

can be celled in person. On thrt besis, I object to the present;ticn

of the dccuacnt. The reason for this is that wo night b- able to take

•

tho witness into the cress examination and we can not do that if the
t-stittsrg' is given in the fora of an affidavit.

IKS PRESIDENT: TTo will hoax froa the prosecution.

Si. UcH*JET: If tho Tribunrl please. It is true th;t Osenborg

_ a a * | * , •

• *• | • . •

is now in the Numberg Jail. However, the cvrilr.bility of c ;dthcss

docs not necessarily determine rt rll, under Ordinance No, 7, the

rdoissibility of affidavits. This affidavit is rather perfunctory.

It explains very generally the functions of the Reich Research Council;

with certain appendages attached to it, it gives the Tribunrl sone idea

of the natters with which this organii-tion wrs dealing, md I think

that it is not necessary ncr appropriate to take up tho tino of the

Tribunal in calling a witness of this chrrector.

TO;; PRESIDENT: On what page of the voluac that you hrndod us

•

is this affidavit found?

«. UcH-.NET: Page 70, or 72 perhaps.

TOI (RESIDENT: Page 70, I see.

Si. iWUET: If the Dofense desires to cell Osonberg to ratify
upon such r^nrrks rs he arJccs in this affidavit, they arc quite rt
liberty to do so.

THE FR1&E2NT: The Tribunal '-ill take its afternoon recess end
announce its decision when we return.

(,. recess was teicen)


HE PBL8I327: The Trlbur.-l is cf the opinion thrt the objection


if the eifiervit should be -daitted in evidence rnd the iefcnd:.nts


thereby deprived cf r.. opportunity tc crcsa-cxncinc the *itness, it
sill be cxtrccely unfe.ir. The nffid-vit aeruly str.tea in sc-x.*Tlf ces
art ter* of opinion in wy -vent, end the Tribune! is of the opinion thrt
it would hr.ve very little prebrtive v~lue in rny event. The objection

M

as to th- omission of the rffidrvit is sustrined.

.it. UcF—'iLY: Your Henor, no till not call th>- nitn-os Oscnl-rg
to tho strnd. If thv dcfcnso.eishcs tc cell hio fnd a-Jee hia n defense


ritness t«>c* rre 't liberty tc do so. 1 vill, "therefore, proceed to
Dccuacnt 002-FS which will be Prosecution Exhibit 39.


KZ , :ZSiZU.ni ;.h t is the nxirer cf th t decuraent? Ifc- book


is unbound. I cannot find sene of these dccunents


,R, ;:cK.lEYs Th* t should be cn p*-c 76 cf the Document 3cok
It is <X2-?S. Th t is the list r r.c of the docuacnt.


TK- .l-SLL.T: Describe th't dccune/.t .'coin, if you will
iCt.XcH.h~Yi Dccunent C»2-?3. . Sr"

, • i

TrZ IDECT* rf*c 76? • *

lit. .-CrLJCY: ?r*c 76, by edst-lcc in poor trrnsl
docuoe.it it r: s included in the English Docuuait Bock before the Court,
rnd re i aid likw to gutait fer inolusicn new dccuuont.book nev, the
ecrr-cted trrnsl-ticn cf Dccuaait «X!2-rS. nd this ill bo Fivsccuticn's


n of this


it j?. ’ c h-ve been disoussin"' the Reich's R^sorrch Council,
s-wa riut kind cf :n erg-nit:ti n this vs froa the ?u'ubrer's


th>- ccntrrlisr.tien cf


10 Dee u6n.-19-l-US-n.-T (3JG)

Court Ho. 1


Court Bo. 1

10 Doc 46 - - 12-2 - U3 - xir.y

4

several excorpta fro." 002- *S. ' Jao documents show the t tfco

• oicij?. ;i~r;_rcl-.Council .?pi-oved «> of r-onuy to fcU*-.

-wdic.-l f.o?vico of the SC OR the ground K*.t tlx SS had ox-
porL.uat. j ...tori-.l, a-JK.ly ccesvrtr-.tior c :.:p In:', too thick
was net r.o ro..dlly :.v .il~:lo to 6tl-r i\s. r cl. org.rlar.tions.
If your Honors rill loo!: on :c 8 of tie ;w* cocuaont, v/Moh
l..Te 'o. on h;.ndod I uruld like re..d p..rt& x ; this letter
whf.c’l la d..tcd 19 Decider 1242. It Is fro the wicks:'.in la¬
ter of . lanco directed to tic Acids ..-search* Ocvr,’‘>il to tlio
a* t-ntion of Ainiaterl-.l Director, Professor Dr. .!cn. ;3l, v v -o,i,
you will recall, \r a the direct superior of tl«o defend, nt,
Siovers, in tie Actclx Acao-rcl Council. I ill point out,
however, ti. t Cievorn, ..c I rocnll, did not boco;iO r. :.o.:tcr
of tl.o ..oicl a rcli Council until Juno 1243, vl crone tl.o
lot tor which I .v. no -a re-'diny. is d ted IS luce :bor 1242.

*1 u letter re:xlc ..a fcllora in y.rta:

"The .voick ~:;aici .n SS nd -'olico ! :.a roquurtod

•

SS kc; poaitiona (r .tir .38 C3 to C8) for the nett org’.nica¬
tion of fcls office. -Vo cr^mzaticn 1 pl.ii shows tV .t
not only apoci 1 consult ncs for : r.ae. rci* u in the pla.ruu.
Cout ic. .1 end cho::ic..l, tie donia.l \.nd the clinic:.1 fields
d a apoci. 1 de*~.rt...ont for scientific service . ro con¬
sidered for the stiff cf t! e hoicks Physician SS and
-'olico itself but ost. blish.lonta -ro ..lao roquostod for
a group of institutes die!, likewise aro oasonti-lly
on' .cod in roac.-rcl tasks.


X*£0


10 Dcc-»—GES-19-ls-P.ay
C:urt Ik. 1.


letter thtn enumerates tlk, institutes which have been asked by
Granitz, the Raichs ihysician'SS. 7.*, :va:t ^ara~rah rocdo:

•• “In. the budget diacuasi-as te~ fact yci r„Xarr,d-i-o, c-tcklis.liwits . .|
f:r research Institute ns 'f the .affer. SS can cnly be -rente-', if the rcs-arch
teaks starts by th: Reich .hysiciar. CS aro net ir. .’.erteken by ether indepen’.cn
institutes or the Universities 'r belong under thee. .x cording te the plan
available te nc the Hygiene Instituto c arrises seven ’.epartoents."

-r.; th-n the letter lists th- seven «*epartnonts which I shell nrt read. ,

■..s te oth§ institutes I still leek re cur etc inf :rzr.ti_n. I hr.vc past-
;>oncd the decision cn this c her ter ef the budget. R_fcrrirc te the decree
cf the Fuehrer of 9 June 192*2 and the ruccscity stressod therein te ccncontrnt
the offerts ; f scientific rcooerch I ask ycu to give dc y ur o. inicn iiroo 'intc
ly. Signed Dr. Bender, R-lchViaistry ef Finance, rdniatorial Chancellery."

In other w r!s, the budget dcpcvU.mt hra here nddrossod a Utter te Dr.
.lens cl as kin; hlxi wheth-r or n.-t cth-r research inatltut.s in Govumy arc
carrying cut research tasks fer which the d-iciis .hysician Graritz is now
aakin-; hie for uoney.  A

:o turn then to pego 6, iridch is th, r,pl; v tho letter f 19 Decanbcy,
and although it appcrontly is not si' nod, it presumably was writton ty U.n»el
the Head cf the Executive C uncil of th, .1,1 eh Research C,unoil, cn *. it was
directed to the R,ich minister of Finance.

"In y:ur letter of 19 December concerning the taking eva- of research
tasks by tte Reich * hysician SS and .•'lice you cstex! fer the pcaiticns cf
the ffcich Rosearch Ccurcil in this natter. Since, f'r the present, the
activities cf the P.eich Research Council htaro teen concentrated -n the ama-
.iont sector proper I was n;t in a positi.n te clear up the problem connected
with the aedical sector. 3ut I shall ’} this in the near future and I be- J_

lieve I on abl, te say alrea# tir.t th, lxr-r part of the now institutes

»

requested by the Reich Physician SS ml . lice will be unnecessary since athr
institutes will be able to take cv.o- th, tasks planned. Ir. the near future
I si-11 bar; a talk with th, Raich ihysicim sS and .cliao ta discuss details

149


10 Dc<>^.-<2b~19-2*-a-'y (5JG)

Court !ic# 1


of the rcrfc plmn.d end I shell inf cm you cf ay finrl position in due
tiacT TherxierTY"would like to surest tc defer decision on the .orttcr.
In this connection I should like to Sty th-*1 the Reich Chief fer Tublic
Ho*lth, St;tc Secret cry Centi, hrs cpprorchcd the ?resident oi the Reich
Research Council requesting funds for the estcblishn.nt of c. Reich In¬
stitute fer Virus Rcsc-rch in Fr>nkfurt/:>in. Checks up tens’.) could-
ver: veil he ccrricd cut in the Kris-r ilhoio Institute nt Serlin-
Dchlca rit in the Institute for itdicrl Rcs-crch of the Univcrgit^ci;

Strrssburg." g

lie- , I c -11 the court's prrticulo -ttwyticn to the reT^enc^o
the institute rt Strrssfcurg. Th t is Dr. Hodgson, subordin-ec of the
defendant, Schrccdcr, th. exn who r-ccived orders fr-n the def-ndrnt.

Beck -r-r reysenfi, who crxricd cut the decisions of the. Fuehrer uhich w. s
net onU* eon- rt Strossburg, -*-ut '.t-the close by Cenc-ntrrticn Crap of
N tsuciler. &^Ttoxits with virus kill-d nafc.r of concentreticn
crop imaetes there. Continuing brxk to ;vge 5 we find - letter frea
!b.nsel to SS-OruppenfU-hrer ?rcfc*sor Doctor Gr.vdtx st-tir.. in eff-ct
th) t The-rtach iftitistcr cf Pinencc Vs infcrr.ed oe th t y-u re-.u.st
acney for these 53 key positions U -nur office," *e sees on to strto
thr.t °..fter th- Reich l^rshrl of the Gr-ct-r Gemrn R-ich hrs, s i resi¬
dent of the Reich Rcse-rch Council, teken over the -ntir- Gcr-acn scienti¬
fic research directives hove been issued '7 M* to th- uffoct thrt, in
connection with th- crrryin E out of rr iaport-nt scientific.to.sho the
rv.-ilrhlc institutes, including cquipn-nt *nd n.rwcnn- 1 , >e utilized to
cepe city fer r-rs-n of hccessrr> cccncqy of effort. Th- estrblishro-nt
cf nee institutes therefore is to be centered only insef r s there


rre re suitcbl- institutes rveil'ile for th- crrr-.ing out of vrr iaper-
trnt res- rch tesirs. ycur int^tions rr- not known to -u md sii.cv
I cr.nnct set - elerr picture freu the Ust cf institutions vi<TV r-
pl:nnod to be n-wly established, *iv-n by the R-ich .‘tLdster of Fin.-n.c-,
I should be er. tcful tc ycu if you further ocplrinid your -nd

int-nticas. I -..ill ^-dly be -v,el'bl- to anyone cf your co-voters for
o discussi-n -nd would rise be «:illint tc ell cn you in person.


\ V\m rni


+cnRxi£.n aacuii trkc pi ca


COX


io oco^.-css-i^Jo-a^y (iwg)

Court Sc. 1


This letter is doted — I don't ace * iu on it. In nr -Tent it v.es
■ muaS tfee c»riy pert of 1943, .ai^wuli Sw pg^ tbcticcfl; th-t .'

Hcnael oexile h*vw htd no necessity cf Triting this letter to Grr.itz
tc find cut thia infcrar.tion if t tht tine the dcfcnd:nt, Schrccdcr,
hrd net be* hia aubordinr.tc, but th t occurred n few nonth3 l;.tc end
ac ?*o hrvo Ucneel hiving tc get thia infenvticn frea Grr.nitz hiasclf.

Bo. ding free: • letter which ia on i>*.-e 2 of the trrnslntioa, dr ted 20
Februrry 1943 frea the Reich ?hysici-n SS end i-clice it r-fera tc the
previcua letter of Februrry 19, 1943, -nd io U> the He-.d of the Executive
Ccuncil of the Reich Rcacrch Council, dinistcri-l Director iv->tz^.

• »:• derr ULniatcri-l Director In f.dtho'lodgaait. of your let\r_*^'

i of 19 Fetrurr/ 1943 I rn rble to reply the following tody. Thz -ppro-
prirticn for the 53 key poaiticra for ry office -hich you arde ihe beam
cf your acncrmdua w a rcturUy r. pl«»h fer pcrcc tinea, The ayecirl
institutes of the SS ihich prrtly -re to tc at ffed threu.yi thia rppre-
pri-Uon -rerte serve the purpose of eaUbliahin* r*! a-ke rccosaitlc for
thw entire field cf scientific research, the p rUcul r poeaibUitiea
cf reacrch only poas^acd by the SS. L. view of the former dcvelop-
aenta of thia ''r I Jvve, however, 'lrcr.dy postponed thia pi n icr the
tine being on th*. ccc-aien of tho negeti-tiena vith the A-ich lUnistry
cf Finance lrat year, ac th-t nr uthorized personnel nra reduced to 25
key -caitiona. Of th-ao pcciticna only 5 rxc filled 't present. Under
these drcuostoncoa yeur iiiagivings with regard to ™ iaprv;ticrblc
duplication cf .ork cf acientific institute will c.rt inly V- invrlid
for the duration of th- ~r. I nilgledly be ->t your dis-carl Ct any
tine to eiocuaa the p-rticul'r r~s. rch rid* within the fv newerk of
the SS, which upon the direction cf the i dchafuchrcr SS, I tould like
tc brLi_ u eftcr the wtr. Besides I -ttr.ch inpcrtrncc to the feet thrt
those r-a-'rcr. tasks, once their rcrlixr.ticn is passible, -.in bo c.rried
cut in dose connection --dth the ether pertinent r-a-rxch .iia. Heping
tc hrvo been cf a-rvicc tc you by this provisional ocpcciticn, 1 ravin
v±th best rep-rds Moil Hitler, leurs. Sigxwd Gr-dtz.“


151


13= has been resolved. Ho has found out both by these letters an wrhaps uy por-
: - r -i contact wj.th Grawitz that his request for rmef frea the :inistcr of Karnes

r .* •

• s aaro than Justified. So, as head of the Socurlty Counsclj he x directs this letter
f 2 $ »fcrch 19U3 to the ft-ich .‘Inister of Finance:

"In ro-T-rd to your correspondence of the 19th of I>eccr£>or to which I fjavo you a
rellrdnary c<rx:unication on tho 19th of February, I finally take tho follow!np


osltioni

"Tho Surgeon Gonjral-SS an'. Polico, in e _rsanal .liscussion, told no that tho
aicet claia which ho looks after is usod primarily in the .aito military sector of

ho ffaffon S% Sinco it is established on a snallor scale for tho enlargin' cf s

• • a • •

ciontifio research possibilities, thoy pertain thoroforo exclusively to such affairs
tot aro carried out with tho mtorinl which Is only acoosBible to tho Wcffo^SS and
ro thoroforo not to bo un-‘ortaken for any othor experimental purpose. & 1 \j

"I cannot object thoroforo on tho . art of tho Roichs Pjq-orincntal Counsel—^
ilnst tho buV.ot claims of tho Sur.;oon General, SS an' Polico" f nod Montzol.

If your Honor, ploasos, this is ono of tho research cr,*anizatlons which tho
ofuntont Karl Zlran’.t with his alternate Paul Rostock, 'oforpdant Siovors, tho do-
av’nnt I^lorxi, occupioc! important jositions. .ji' wo fin' that infomation has brought
la In a very ’iroct nannor to than as to ths < roster research possibilities which
ro avail-.’ lo to tho SS. I also wish to stross tho point that this document indicates
h*.t tha P.cich Roso-arch Counccl ms consulted - an export or -nlzation whore infor-
-.tlcn caul’ bo obtained by radical an’ scientific rosoarch in Go many an a whole,
s’ 1 also Tfouli. Uko to renin. the Tribunal that cn tha chart, organization of the
•flea of tho rtoich Cc-_d3slcnor for Health and Judical Services, tho Roich Ro3oaroh

scientific and medical


‘.urs.,1 is onu of tho or. animations evor which Rostock ha
uris'Action. In further rofi.rv.nco to tho Reich Tosoarch Counsel, I 'lah to call to
'v. Tribunal’s attention a fin’in in tha Jud nont of tho International ’'ilitary
rlbuml in r.w. 1. This xc^r:t has bean ins rted as -jin truo an*, corroct


cx>r, appears on pare 85 In the English dcoussnt book* It is the last document in
tha took. It reads asfollows* .

"In cannc-ction with the administration of tho concentration casps, tho S3 <3>-
irked on a series of experiments on h u nr . n beings which were performed, on prisoners
f war or ocncontration canp inrnto3. Those oxperiaents included froozing to 'loath.


r.l killing by poison bullets# Tho SS was able to obtain an allocation of Gcvomaont
*xis for this kind of research on tho grounds that they had accoss to hunan naterial


•et available to other agencies."

Your Ifonor, please, this is bain sulrdttod in order that you nay tiko judicial
•atico of it unrtor Articlo 9, Ordinance Jtobor 7# The dccuunt 002-^s was tho --proof
xA. ovidonco which underlies tho finding which I havo just road you.

If it pleases tho Tribunal, wo havo no: ccnpl> to’ our presentation on tho por-
oaol historioa and tho positions hold by the defendants in tho document, "o fool


that wo lai-’ the foundation in order that wo rwy now procood to tl- proof on the


ubacquont crimes thinsolvos. An.’., I thoroforo, cone to thu presentation of ovidonco
s tho hi h Altitude Sxperinonto carried out in tho Dachau Concentration Canp in
tbs spring an*’ susrwr ol 19U2.

This is tho first oxporinants an! tho list of thaso ohar;od in tho Indietnont.

. / • •

list, under Paragraph 6, ur.’or f ar Crinos, a#d also un'er Paragraph 11,


Criii-a nrainst Bmanity.

Boforu jh*^roeoec Pwd^jattec in this beck of. * .'
cuaatt » ttat dccuncnt 032 -is is iadndad on p^oa 75 to 80 inclusive.
Tnon tlx cxccrpt that y_u aaiticcol, signed Ty Colwxl P.-y, is cn pago 85 .

•;rw, are thcr- cny poecs nittod frou this co.y cr is it a conplctc atatcncnt
t:i=t frm P&50 00 to 8£. It aa not be inportaat, but I wculd like to
be satisfied on this point. 7

U':. lEK.’EI: les, izv^iod, your lienor, I want to lx suro y..u have receive


e full copy cf the dccurxnt.


7 K. . HESIDEtfT: The


pft£0 80.


.......

isewunt is included. in 7 pages, fre-a ;»;$ 7h to ’

^ ‘ • . .. .


ICK.JH IT: ell, your Honor, has been supplied with the ccrroct En.jlis

translation of 002-;s.

11 L i RESIDENT: Then those peges were not includod. I to* ccnfusc! with
tie non-conaecutiv. nurherin- cf the pagos, but that probably la unluportont,
XK.JCT: That nay very roll h-.ve occurred, y*ur Honcr.

TIC .edSIEC.T: Veiy roll, proceed.

ICH.-C1: The .of endon ts, Earl Brandt, H-ndlosor, Schooodcr, Oebhardt..

..’j’olf 2rondt, lu-urcTraky, ?e^e:i/io!;, tHovu-3, Huff, Rodxxf;, DcclJur-Fruysonft
m: '..bits, arc charged r.ith special roc.cnsibility for and participation in th.
. i-h -dtituclo Sapcrioents at Dachau.

If ycur Honors Till obtain Cecu-xr.t boc^ Ilucbx 2, you will fin', that

• 'f* •

contains th: English translatt® oi tX *.;<rnxntfl which ifill be intro.heed
uiklor this part cf tho ease.

TIC .'RESIDENT: o *.0 not se^a to hare that 'icuixnt beck hire.
iTl. 1 £H.JCEI: I cr. a-brioed by '.cr. Hardy that he dclivorel tbj Ertlish
ccuncnt books.

TIE B 2 S I EC B T: They wore delivered but they were net brought tc the
-ach. c have the: in tho other rooand vs can get then.

ICHJCT: ..Olid you care t; adj urn fer a fer ncrxnts or slicul ’. I


. roc-cd.?


10 D=c-u-<3S-2C-2a-3.ard

Court He. 1»


TSB I.TTSIDE.T: Jo shall have then in r. ncrxjit.

(The dscuccnto w^rc delivered to Th'c * resident.)

” V ^ a- . — -W. ^ • . ■ K - t -

.SESIBCiT: rrccocd, ;lcas_.. r X

:CH.iCr: I woull like tc intru>icc first decucont *»■ . JO-^76, . re¬
action's exhibit lX). This is on affidavit signed by the defer, ant Rcatorg,
and it reeds es follows: ^

"I, Bens Jolfgnng itebexg, being duly suern, tepose end. state:" \_ ^

.c ftra * paragraph, y.-ur Honor, I mil not real since it cinply presHnte
tto poracnrl history, which evidence has all ready been obtained, fire the
earlier statosxnt. The second paraerarph.

"Free about the first part of ‘March 191:2 to abcut tho end uf -ay 19li2
experinento were conducted at tho Dachau Concentration C:r.? tc deter.:ino tho
effects cl extrax hi^h altitudes on the huaan body. These exporlixnts were
acnductcd fer the bonefit of ttw Luft-wifro. Dr. .fuff ms first approached
-"-Int ir th. M l. Ititulc c^eriixnts at Dachau by Dr. 0.... Volte, Chief
ef the Institute far ..viati n -odicine in -mdch. This ms in Doccabur 191:1
or January 191:2. Dr. ..cite advised Ruff tliat _r. Sinnund Sascher, dec tor in
tho Uiftonffc and. els a a rxab-r cf tho S3, ms to pcrfrr.-i the iii^h altltudo

experinento. .at z wantal an cx;*crt to rr r!: with Raschcr on theso cxpcrirxnto.

•

3. In J.-ruery or February 191*2 .cite, Ruff, UaschcAaxi 2 had a rxeting

at .oltz'3 Institute in Munich to discuss orraivrcrxnts fer the or «r iron to.

dr. ..-Its intrrduccd Ra.sc.tor to us at that tlx. .. few days later a second

n atdng was hold in the Dachau Concentration C-zp an! this vs r.ttcndod by

-cits, Ru;f, Rosetor an I rysclf as rOl ns.llerkfnTski, -.ho was the canp

cccuaador, an! Schnitaler, rha ras on the staff of the Rcichsfuohrurr-SC.

%

iUrthor airan.'erxnto were nndc at this tine fer carrying cut the oxperiixnts.

1*. .. lew pressure chamber was sent fren the DVL in Berlin." ,jrd, if
: insert caph'.ti colly, yoir Hon r, that is the institute in rftich Dectcrs

•:u:f an*, ‘taberg vro wrkinc. Ruff tr trie Chief of the Oopartotent f.x
..viatien to 'iciix in DVL.

"•* *•’ i'fossure chactor was sent fra a tlx- DVL in -crlin first tc '.‘cltz's
institute in Munich and fra th^rc to Dachau. This choctor c.uld dcnlicatc


-* >)■


155


10 D'_c-.-C2£-20-3c-3card
Ccurt i*


atmospheric conditions aol pressures prevailing at high altitudes. It c n-
3iat3g of tn- parts, onc^pf ^.ihla-. was used for slow ascensions an dcsccnsi ns
ait could oocenodate as nany as tnolvc. popple at a tirx., mile tho ether w-.s


used far cplosive lecx-prcssicn an,', c.uld. acccnodatc cnly -no or tee pee pic.
This low pressure ctrxfccr was sot up in one cf the blocks at tho Concentration
Carp on*’, the c^jorinenla wer-x inducted on C cnee at rati ~n Cairp i mates. The
oxporioents actually started around the first part cf liar eh end the initial
oxporinenta wore conducted on fcrolyo prisoners, '.hen prise nor a ire re requastod,
wo aakod that thoy bo in a physical condition which ccrparod with cumbers of
the Luftwaffe. Ihc oxporiacntal subjects were tested in oithcr the largo or
snail part cf the chanter, usually one at a tine, and their roactions tp high
altitudes were chocked with an oloctrccardiocra; h. Four aeries of oxporLionta
uoro conducted:

a. Sit*? doocont without co^gcn.

b. Slew descent with exygen.

c. Felling without oxygen. :

d. Falling with oxygen.

Tho latter twe tests w_rc dosigned to shiulate a froo fall fren an airplano
boforo the parachute opens. Several tests ware frou tire to tirxs conducted on
tho sane oxporincntal subject.

"5* Tho oxpcrlncnts lasted until apphadnatelj' tho end of liny. During this
tins I was living at Dachau and, with the cxcoption of several trips to Borlin,
I was in Dachau for tho whole ccurso of the cjq>crii*:ntr. On ny trips to Berlin
I repea*tod to Dr. Ruff as to the progress of the oxporinents. I rononbor that

jr. Ruff visited Dachau on at least trro rcccsions when ho ebservod the oxperi-

•

acutai Dr. Ruff and I workod at the usperinental station at Dachau ns represen¬
tatives of tho Gernan Exporlnantal Instituto far ..viation (DVL)".


.


156


10 Dac,-»*W l TD-21-J.-Elakv3le7
Court No# 1


•’6. I wi trussed tte death of throe of Dr, Rnscter’s hunan experimental subjects
•*uring tho exports on ta. The first death occurrei ia the latter part of April# On

this particular occasion ~f was studying tho electrocardiograph of, >exports

0 ^ ...

aontol subjoct than boinr tested# After the death of this human experimental sub¬
ject, I raised objections to Raschor an' also informed Ruff concemiix; the natter.
Thereafter two other deaths occurred on different days in May I also reported these
to Dr. Huff. I know that otter exports on tal subjects wore killed while I was not
prosant, and would ostirate that they totalled botaroen five an’, ton#

"7. After a hur.an exporinental subject died as a result of tho low prossuro

I • •

experiments, on autopey was performed# Tho purposo of this was to doterrdno tho
exact causo of doathl Onco to rj kncwlodgo tho autopey wnsj -irforood undor water in
order to obsorvo tho air bubbles which «lght have forced in various parts of tho
he van oxporinontal subjoct*s body# I hnvo boon shown pioturos (mrborod 1 , 2, and
3 ), whioh stew an open soction of tho brain of tho body and also a dissoctod portion
of tho breast. Autopsies of this character woro perforc-.od in Dachau on oxporiaontol


subjects who diod during tho low prossuro exporinontsj and I assuoo^that thoso
picture* aro ptetopraphs acute of such subjects. I know that photo$*aphs woro nado
of tho autopeios at Dachau. '*—■ v;


"8. I havo boon shown a sorios of othor picturos which show porsons undorcoinc
ttperixoonto in a low prossuro oharbor. Of thoso I roco "nlto tho pictures nunborod
U., 2-.'., 3-A, and U as bain; photographs nado durln,; tho course of tho low prossurc
cx;»rinonta conducted in Dachau# I su.-poso that tho othor picturos runborod 5, 6, 7,
3, 9, 10, 11, 12, and so on consocutivoly through 37, an’. U$ woro also nado at

Dachau, altteu h I '.o not kiww. I o not know of any low prossuro axporlnonts on con-

contra tion caz%- i react os othor than thosu nado at Dachau. After tho low prossuro
oxpjrisaonts wore conplota.’.. Dr. Raschor and I nado a report which wasapprovod by
Buff and si-nod by tho three of us. This was circulated to all intorostod officos in
the Luftwaffe# In ny opinion. Dr. Anthoty of tho Medical Service of tho Luftwaffo
awt also havo roceivod a of this report. I do not raxnbor if Bockor-Froyson,-
«C3 frith tho Magical Inspectorate at that tinoj but if he wvs, he certainly krnwr
that thoso experlr-ints wera bein'; conducted# Volf ran Sicvers of tho "ahnenerbo"


157


10 !-3Iakeley

Court No* 1


ei'.GT of t& was also faidliar with these experiments and ^ras'Jn Dachau several


-iaos when they were beta; conductor I tyself saw hin thoro onco at tho axpox
- - . . .. ,- >*» v -

station. Hiloh an ’ Hippke wsro also ouito f3.ad.ll ?j with these oxpcrLaaits. Dr. Oskar


Schroed^r was tho socond hi .host rankir,; nedical officer in the Luftwaffo in 191*2;
zrf ho also proha 1 ly taw of those sxpntttDtB, although I never personally talked
to hin about then. ^

"10. No ono In the Luft'affo over mdo any objection concern!^ those cxp-rl-
centa. Dr. *-Its certainly never expressed any *»oral scruples a’cdnst theso hi h
iltitudo tosts sinco it was ho who originally a skod Dr. Ruff an-’ no to assist Dr.
’•jehor. (Signed) Dr. Hcchar; ."

I havo no canent to -ako on this affidavit cxcc,.>t .rith rosuoct to tho position
of tho dofondant Dockor-Froysanc at this tiaoj an'. I -.Till rtrdrv.' tho Court that
no affidavit of Bockor-Froysonr su'.ndttod this nomin shn»a that ho was as oarly
s autunn of 191*1 a subordinate of Dr, Anthony in tho Departnont for Aviation dludi-
■Ino in the .Hodical Inspectorate cf tho Luftwaffo.

I would also point out that oxptrinants of this typo, nanoly, tho study of
• - a hi h altitu’.os on tho hunnn body, is a subject which fits in with tho work
«in ’ona by tho Dopftrtajnt for ..viation !!oicino. It is n problea of avia#m
.cino.

If your Honors'loaao, I would now llko to intro uco a a.-ries of picturoe arhlch

r. included in Docunont ’XV6l0j and wo offer ttoj.-o Prosecution Rxhii.it 1*1. Theso

r. V * pictures anon* which tho dofondnnt Rccbar has definitely idontifiod picture*

r:or. l-Vi, 2-.., 3—-, an’ U* Those appear, your Honor, on Pa.;o 8 of your docunont

I-'kOB 8, 9, 10, an’. 11; an’ you can soo in those pictures, not only the3o

w it in ths others, the el^ctrocajdlo. raph a ttactaonts on tho wrist of tho

T-jrLnintal 3u*.Joct who is, in tho case of Picture 1-.., suspended by a parachute

rrcssfxrn the’roof of the low pressure charbor,

!<-, it 90 happens that these pictures wora taken frm a continuous strip of

*= v hich Tn3 found anon tho .personal possessions of Dr, Itaschcr; end wo subnit

•’ i ’-entity of Pictures 1-.’., 2-%., 3-^., and 1* conclusively show that all of

. icturoe included as Doounent :C-6lO are in offoct pictures takon d.urir.* tho

irs : of tho hi h altitude experinanta conduoted at Dachau and char;:od in tho in-

150


10 Dec*WW.:D-21-3-51akeley
Court So. 1


I wctl* like,


Lrrlctaent*

I will not take up the tine of tho Tribunal in oin,- over each of thoso thirty-
e^rht sr »ro piI wc^al like, hcwvor,to SollVour j^Qiular cttGntlonto~'
the vary jhastly picture* on pages 5, 6, end 7 of your iocuaent book; and those
pictures wore identified in Pani-^raph 7 of Iceberg's affidavit, in which ho states
that ho knows that autepsloe wore porforaod in Dachau; that he had soon these throe
pioturoej and that he knows that auto pel os of this character wore porfonued at
Dachau on subjects who dial durin; tho courso of tho axperinents tharo.

Wo will ccno at a later point in tho trial, either this afternoon or oarly to-
aorrow norrdn.;, to a report uado by Dr* Rnschor, in which tho Court will bo vory
easily onablo to rolato thoso pioturos showing tho autopsy on tho bo^ to tho oxpori-
nents conrluotod in Dachau,

DR. SIEOPRIED miSs Dr. ..'illo, counsollor for tho dofondant Woltz. I should
liko further liko to a ak tho roprosonto.tivo of tho prosecution how he can provo tho
authenticity of these picturos. It cannot bo socn fron tho doounOnts who it actually
ns that took thoao photographs; end I should liko to ask hin to clarify how those
photo-flupha wore taken and who took thee*

THE PRESIDENTi You are procooding too fast*

DR* WILLS* Should I repeat it? I should liko to repoat, fron tho docunon* it
r.nnot bo soon who it was that took thoso picturos, *o cannot rocorjdto tho authen¬
ticity of thoso pictures; ani wc docand an explanation; and I thoroforo a3k tho
roprosontetLvo of tho prosocution to toll us how ho cano to possoss-thoso picturos


rl


•al who took thas,

HR. KHUCIt Would you like to hoar froa tho prosocution now? j?

TRB PHESHENTi Yds. -

'B. MCS/JCT* There are two questions involved in this objoction; firstly, a*

V5 ‘ho adnissibility of tho docuaents thcosolvos. Thoso picturos, as I stetod, havo
 printed free a strip of fils which was captured by tha .Jliod Arry* I an advised
- J ’• -liova that it was taken with a nunbor of other personal possessions of tho now
Xbiaad Cr. Ra3cher, This file now rosidos in tha docunont rocen hore at Jhimburg
a - v s rocoivod in thj cffioi.il courso of business and has boon duly ccrtifiod as


I

I


i


) Dec.-w^TD*£l-^-6lAkalc'?
urt Ho* 1


ithcntio by tha affidavit of Mr. Maborgall an? by the certificate which is attached
to tha exhibit whiclf I have Ju?t now put in, which is Exhibit Ul.

~m ITOSHBRs ■Jharo la that certificate, Ilr. !fc3unoy? I don’t find it in this


15 3ec.-^-*TD-22-i-5urn3

Coart !fc>. 1 ,

:«• MCEiJEIi Exhibit la. If your Honor please, if I nay be perrittod to con-
tftMa ry observations, the first question is whether this is on authentic docunont.

' rr-U that Its been authonticatoi in tho sano nannar that any other captur *

:jrr.-Ji locuuont is in this case, nenely, by tho affidavit of llajor Googan, by tho
affidavit of !tr. Me lb er rail an! by the affidavit which is attached to these pictures
y * the second question is what natorioOity these pictures have to this oaso.
jrcro that we have subrittod thaeo pictures to the dsfonlant Romberg and ho has
ilontifiod vary iofinitoly, a a stnW in his affidavit, pictures la, 2 a, 3a and h
ihich are oontainod in a continuous strip of file. I submit, therefore, that our
<*entlfica felon of those pictures as boin,. soae of a scries token at Dachau is por-
factly sound and rood.

EP., -tt.tti reply to that* I havo not raa J that thoso photographs havo

boon tokon free a series of filns. I ea boinr; confirmed by ny colloasuo. I havo
cone to tho results that the statun.nt re ardin, the authenticity of thoso docunont
MK1 ot bo appliod to the fila an! I slwul ', ttor-.foro, liku to csk tho prosooution
to provo that wo are really concomod with pboto raphs dealing vrltli tho axporirwr.ts
of Ruff, Ronbcre an’. Raschcr in Dachau.

I THE PRES DENT i The objection interposed by counsel will bo ovorrulqKani t^ho

dibit adaittod.

:EHAIEYI I ccc- down to tho affidavit 'of the ’ofon'ant Ruff, 'dx> was, in
.ct, tho -superior of Rcrtosrs for tho purpose of thoso experiments and a solontlst
f considoroblo roputntion'ln tho field of aviation nodicino. Tho affidavit is
ccw-nt ?fo. U37 and will bo Prosooution Exhibit U2, Tho affidavit roads as followsi

m %

■I, Siot-frlod Ruff, boin; duly sirirn, -do pc so an' stater

1, "I was bom in Prinorshrin/Kiedorrhain, Germany, on February 19, 1907. I
itx^od kg Heine at 3onn and Berlin Univorsities and was a doctor in the Univorslty
tapiVil at Bonn until January 193U, when I Joined the staff of the Gorman Expori-
fcfctcl Institute for Aviation, hereinafter called DVL at Berlin-..dlorshof. It was ry
h- to ootablish a Departacnt for Aviation Hodicinc in tho DVL, which I UA. I was
Hth the DVL until tho end of tho wr-r. I was an officer in tho reserve of tho
kfcr.ffa until the end of tho war, and attained tho rank of Assistant physician
p-utenant). I Joined the ?3D.J> in 1938.


161


19

Court No, 1


2. "late in 19kl, I believe Docceber, Dr. G. A; »eltx of tho Institute for
.riation *£rdicino at Ifunich told se that Dr. Si-=ual Rase her was to rake certain
low-pressure coepuriaenta at the Dachau Concentration Cany. It was considered do-
sirc.dxJ^o haio oxpjrtw i»-6his field jfcst i» the ixporinonts .end -far..tiir>- -j^|on
.elti had contacted ne. I took tho natter up with Dr. Hippke, Chief of tho Luftwaffe
Xbs pec torn to and ho‘agreed that Dr. Rcaburg of =y staff should collaborate with
anchor in theao oxperin-nta.

3; "Early in 19l*2, about January or February, a conference was held in Dachau
in which Dr. *oltz, Dr. Raschor, Dr. Rcnborj, tro officors who were apparently of
the concentration ennp staff, an. 1 . I took part. 7o discussed tho arran jononta for
conducting the cocperinonts. It was understood that concentration c rap inoatas who
had been condu.uiod to loath would bo uaod in the oxpirinonts and that as a conpon-

•

satlon they wero to hare thuir s entonco cocnutod to life inprisomont.

I*. "In duo C'.uroo, a aovablu Icw-prossuro oharixar was taken frea tho DVL in
rorlin to -funlch. It was token to Ganich instead of directly to Dachau so that tho
'river would rot loam of its final doatinntion. I bcliuvo that tho keys of tho
•.ruck woro turned over to Xelta arw! hu handod than ovor to tho SS non who drovo thu
: tardier on to Daohau.

"5. Tho axporlncnts woro actually ooniuctod in Dachau durin- tho sprin or
su.-ror of 19U2. Thoy Instil frews 2 to 3 ronths. Dr, Ronborp stayed tha'wholo tino in
Dachau with tho uxcoption of 0 for.* short trips tc Borlin to report to ne. I yisltod
Itechau onco while tho oxporinonts wore conducted there;

"6. Dr. 'oltz was infonsrd about those aeparinonts ns woro n nun’.'or of doctors
in the Madiool Servico of tho Luftwr.ffo. .. notion picturo of tho axpxirirvjnts was
shrwmin the Raich Ilnlstr/ of Aviation. Dr. Volta certainly novel told no that ho
esnoiderad tho oxporirBnts imornl or criidnal or that his superiors thou ht so,

.Iter all, he ca~n to no with tho offer that Ro-ibarc and I; as oxports in low-
jTcssuro ro3oarch, participate ir. tho jxpyrinontsjrith Raschcr, sinco ho im3 not
c.'nsiiierod an expert. Personally, I would not consider those cxporirxints as imoral
specially in Var Tine;" Siprod "Siogfriod Ruff."

:r. HJTI.CTi Now, if your Horor, please, -hora is an ar*ndnont to the affidavit

f Siopfroi Ruff carryir. the snna lecuaent Turbcr, M>-i*37 and it alsc has boon

162


.•sitted along with tha affidavit I have Just read a a Prooocution Exhibit U2 and I
*ouI J now liko tonr&ad this vary short azundsont which Dr. Ruff tea added as a •
jop*:loaont to hia affidavit of 18 October 19U6t

"Postscript Paragraph* These ccndcened to lonf: ye^r^ of prison woro said to
;ot a reduction of punlsteont or dispensation of jxinishaent. Noaoo for tho exporl-


rwnta should bo ontored voluntarily* The above cco plo tion is do no in ny own hand-
writing* Number;., 25 October 19U6."

MR. MCHUETt As the proof in this oaao proceeds an', indood upon tho atato of


the proof asit new exists, I think it isperhaps n bit strange that the defendant


Ruff should state positively in his statenant that ho lid n>t conaldor those oxpori-
anta inaoral especially in war tine.

THE PTGSIEENTt Mr. MeH.'.noy, aro thoflo to exhibits attached togothor

JCl* ICKANSYi Yes, sir. That*s on page li9| yjur Honor. I cono nor to an nffi-
bvit signod by tho lofondant Rudolf Brandt, who as th. Court will rocall, was
•.'Jutant to tho Roic ha fuehrer SS Hlcraler and who had a vory rcaar..a lo opportunity
lo participate in and rain saw informtion about tho natters about which wo aro
here concorood. This affidavit is Docuamt NO* 191 and we offor it as Prooocution
fichiblt U3 and it is on Pago 50 of tho English Document Book.


"I, Rudolf Bail Horoann Brandt, bain*; duly srom ioposo and statoi"

THE PRESIDENT! ffow Ion-* will this affidavit that you aro about to road tako?


robablytvko flvo or ton raiixitos. It is


’dJR-NEYl -.foil, your Stoiwr, it will


aiout throo pa^os long


ID D«c--*T!>33-i-Coefc

Court So. 1


I

'' 1 . I was born on 2 June 1909 at Frorkfurt/Odor, Goraany, and wus educated for
*0 law In toLvarsity in 3erlin and Jora. I Joinsd the Kazl Party in 1932 and ny
rty s»>.r is 3^331,516.. In Octobor-1933 I'beoaa-a.nfc». + «:_• fch the- ->
2±ur 129,771* On Bovecfcer 9, 1935* I was cocnissionod an Untorstunafuuhrer
j^ooni Lisutenant) and ultimately roeo to tho rank of Standartonf^iohrcr (Colonol).
n 1936 or 1937 I bocano an Adjutant to Heinrich Riml^r, Reichsfuohror of tho SS.
his position was of an a drd.nistrc.tivo naturo ns personal assistant to Himlor.

■2, By reason of ny position ad Adjutant to Wmlor, I was ablo to obtain con-
idorablo kxwwlodco of'tho do tails of nany activities in which HLnlor and various
5 personal!tios participated* This knowlodgo 0 » through discussions with Himlor
ad othor porsons concomod and through conferences, correspondence and tho liko. I
>vd r.nl answorod a ;:roat deal of corrosporvienoo addressod to Himlor, and on ny own
ri tic tiro I handled various abdnistrotiva dotal Is pertaining; to wolfaro oasos, for
hich tho Rciiotofuohror-SS had sot down fundaiiontal rofulations.

"3# Eooauso of ny position and uxporionco outlined above I also gainod on in-


■hfi into nodical ocporinontetlon on human bein'* and I an ablo to sacks this .state-


on that subjoot*


• • f ,

The Low "Tea sure Sxr-ori-.onts _ \v

r h. I first »ward of tho plan to oxparinont on human boirv* in "May 191*1. Tho


lot ori lnatod with Dr, 5i<jaund Rascher, Stcbsarxt dor Luftwaffo and later
lUptfrarnfuohrcr S3, At that tino Raschar was attendin’ a courso in aviation medicino
• tho Loftgaukoraanrto VII in Purdah. Ho wroto Himlor su;-.:o 8 tin-; that concentration

sp ionatoa bo plated at his disposal for experimentation to dotonaine tho cffocts

J

’ jxtrero hairht on the human body. Volunteers could not bo oxpoctod as tho ux-
riaar-til sub Joe ta rd -ht die. Rascher statod furthor that tho oxaad.nc.tion oontor for
foots of altitude, of which Dr. G. ... ./oltc was tho director, would be prepared to
JTy out such jxporirvinte.

*5, Himlor had no answer this latter fro= Rascher, infomin;' him that prisoners

f. • 0

: «1 J - bo node available for tho research. La tor or., in July, 191*1, HLiclor authorized
*. *eltz, Dr. Rascher and Dr. Xottcnhoff to carry on the low ro3Suro experiments
' the Dachau Concentration Cnap.


3 Dec^*--»E)-23-2-Cook
sort So# 1


"6. Tbo experiments did not get under way until about ? torch 1912. In tto nean-
•1*1 tto necessary technical arrarv csa-nta were handled by Dr. ffclts. Dr. Kott aihoff
ra farJBfcrrwl tc-toido, but tbo ^cperfrretf^L ♦^^rj^t.r^-thprwd by Dr^^uff,^^

:'rector of the Luftfahrtforacton-flaustelt Berlin A:'lorshof, and hia assistant. Dr.
War - Thoso non, tocottor with Volts and Rasctor, told a conference in Dachau in
_aich technical arran-ronto woro nado with the Coaaaniant of Dachau Concentration
Piorkawaki, and the ’.funich adjutant to th*. Raichsfuehrers, Schnitzler.

T, tfolt* a rood to supply the necessary orders for a*, Rasctor as far as the Luft-
»affo wasconoomod#

it7. instructions were ~ivon by the Roichsfuehrer SS that Rosohor should por-
•cnally tako part in all mporLxjntatior. on hunan in*a at Dachau# Thus, in !torch
:ft2, I wrote tc Slovers that tho cxporlneDt* had boon approved so len; asRaschor
participated#' This was ossontlally an oxporli.ont by tho Luftwaffe and Rasohor was
thj only SS doctor of tto roup# This was done at tto requost of Hrs. Icosohur who
fat that other nonbars, particularly Dr. 'Jolts, wanted to retain all control and re-
•pcnsibility for the oxporinants an' to put Reactor aside. Sho wanted Rose her
•.tachod to tho Luftfahrtfcrschun sanstclt ScrlirW.dlershof, in "rdor to nake it
Inpsssiblo for "olts to transfer Ydn olsowhoro. Oonorolstabsarzt Profoseor Dr.

Slppko was roquosto*. 'y Hlnalor's offioo to'transfor Itaschjr, and ho axtondod tho
;r*!rs attachin Rasctor to • oltz'a organisation in tfunldh.

"8. Raschar sent a prclidnory report to HLanler in April 19U2 on tto prorross.
f tho oxporlnonts. Tho report stated that tho exporinonts w^ro oonc'.uctod to find
TCt tow Ion.: huaan boin.a aro ablo to livo if oxposod to conditions existing at
rmt hoirhto (lack of oxy-;an, low pressure). !tony of tto -xp rinonte ondod in tho

eath of tho person oxporiaentod upon, Raschor noted in a cover lottor that Slavers

/

| to! own sonu of the experiments#

"9. RLmlor, after readin- tto report, rbquostei Raschor to contir&c_«to oxperi-
xtts on additional people Son tone od to tooth. If the subjoct ox; erinonted upon livod
Urcu,"h tho test, his scnter.co was to ’ a ccenitoc! Vo life inrrisorucr.t. Himlcr also
-‘aquosttri Raschar to invito Dr. Fohrerfcnrr to his ex-orinents. In tho noantixu. *' v. ra
to! roportod tc Idi-rlor about his visit to Dachau and his knowlpd-c of an partici-

ration i- tto lew pressure experiments. For volunt^rs tho tern of inpri3onn_nt

%

»toui' bo reduced.


10 Ooc *-»»-•> H'' 0 ’ ^ CC *


r-ur*


« x


■10, Later on Roscher inquired whether Polos and the Russians wte) survived
-.he eXForinoatawere also to have thair death sontuncos comutc-d. I repliod to
.•arstumfuehror Schnltzlcr, by order of tho Reichsfujhror-SS, that Polqs aivi
Asians wore not to hove their death sentencee cctraitod.


■11* There isrw dcuLt that numerous nishaps occurred durinc tho course of those
xporlaonts. I reneefcer that :/rs. Rascfcer wrote to so askinc for pe mission to tike
nlcr photographs of recently 4issooted subjeotej peraission for this was granted.

■12, Ganeralf^liaarshall E. *aich" — that should, road. Your Boner - "qnri
rjfessor Kipko, the 'Inspectour dos Sanitaotsvosons dor Luftwaffe* had full krow-
)dC« ot tho low-prossuro experioonts. Indeed, tlx.- exporinnnts could not havo boon
onduotod without tho knowlod^o ant consent of thoso :ian booauso thoy ward conducted
>r tho bonofit of tho Luftwaffe and tho exporimntors worq for th> :iost ;>art


aftwaffo doctors, Haschor was also a aaibor of tho SS and it was for this reason
v.t Hinnlor insistod on full ; articipation by tescterWn tho oxporlrvmts - he wanted
w S3 to rocoivo credit for this work, Karl r olff acted as liaison botiroon Hlmlor


i! ilch in oonnoction v.ith low-prossuro exporiaonts andalso the freocin;; coeporinonts
rooenbor tho corrospon onco botwoon ‘tilch and Hlmlor In whioh !!iloh adnittod
At&nj tho raperts of liaschar and ihxibor.. !totJ >n pictures of tho cxpcrlnonts woro
rm to tho .dr Mnistry (Hi) I also know that Hlmlor wroto "llch in an effort
'Obtain dvaschor's release from the Luftwaffe - so that ho would bo subordinate only
the SS, This was finally acconplishod throuh Hippko's office,"

* 4

|Si~nod) Hu lolph Brandt, S

FTESIDWTi Vj will rocoss until tooorrow aomin-.

?:E duTiSKiXi Tho Tribunal will rocoss until nino-* thirty teworrow rorninc.

(Tho Tribunal a^Journo! until 11 Doocrtbor l9ijo at 0930 hours)


Official Transcript of the American VilitTy
Tribunal in the matter of the United States
of America, p gainst Karl Brandt, et pi,
defendants, sitting at Uornberg, Germany, on
il-December 1966 , , . nnVUS oSC, Justice Beals,
presiding.


TFS ”tRSI.»Ls The Honorable Judges of ?!ilitpry Tribu
nftl 1. llilitery Tribunal 1 is now in session. God save


the United States of A.ie-rica and this Honorable Tribunal


aefondanta


THE ’LvHSHAL. 2>y it please Your Honor, all of the de


fendants nre present in the courtroom.

r.i£ Pll-ID-IIT; The Secretary General will note for tho
record tho presence of the defendants in the* courtroom.

The prosecution will proceed.


MB. !IOcLJ.*3Y» If tho Tribunal lease, ot the end of


yesterday 1 s session wo had proceeded through the introduction
cf tho affidavits of the defendant Romberg with rospe*ct
to the high altitude experiments at the >chau concentra¬
tion camp in the spring end summer of 1&42. \'e had also ln-
t.-vwuced Prosecution's Sxhibit 41 which consists of some


i- pictures taken during the course of the high altitude
x eri.uents. v/e h?d also introduced the affidavit of the


uadant Buff and the deicndan- lidolf Brandt. I would like


at t,»i6 time to offer Document No. 1302-13 P6 prosecution 1 6


er from the deceased Doctor Hrecher


hanks for your cordial wishes °nd
f ay second son; This tine, too, it
h he has con.. 3 weeks too early. I


Court Ko 1

11 r— • - II - 1-1 -UG - Foster (FL)


will perait oyaelf to send you a picture of both children
et an opportune eaoaent-


o


- 167 a -


tv.st-conditions


I h.po sinccriy, highly ist;c .etf Helensxuer.rer «*,
in spite of the isucnsw burden of vork you carry, you ng^.. ,
in the best of hoeith. S'

*.,ith my heartiest wishes, I ?- with Hell Hitler ywj
^rctcfolly devote'- Oig^und Hcsohor.”

:;ov, whet, Your Honor, is the p-rUculrr significance
of this exhibit aside frou the feet thrt it indicates to us
th. origin of the idea for hunan expariaentetion in a low
. - - sc.e chamber. There ere two things I w>ul<5 lik« to


11 Dec 46 - H - 1-2 - UG - Former (?L)


ct -11 tc your particular attention, and in doling so I rofar
fc-cic to the effidevit which we sutcitted signed by the de¬


fendant ’--oltz

• r* W • * 1- •*#%%•« I • • • > * * • «•- J ■ • ' • 1

* ? —. r •? • • - . 4


- 168 a -


Court So 1

11 Due 46 - H - 1-3 - UG - Fester


•fcich is Prosecution's Exhibit 17. You will recall thr.t in
th 6 lot Ur I U-vo just roul tc you Si^-und Ruachor st~.tod thr.t
tho experiments :-ro nrdo <.t Ptxuraiunt buftwe-fTo TU'etfta? St:.*itfrt
fr r ..ltltudo Roserreh. Tfco Ooxuun words fer thr.t, to tho
boat cf ability cf prencuncic.tion, vxo 3cdonat-cndigo
Pruefatollo fuer Hcehonforachung dor Uif twi-ffo. In th.o c.ffi-
d.vit signed by tho defendert *.k>ltr, ho at. toa tL:t in tho
courao c f the vrjf nI rose to tho r:.nk cf Oborfoldrjzt. Imring
tub time I i.lso cpur. tod .. -'Hoto Phyaior.l Exrninr.tlon Offico
..t Heubiborg .nd worked :.t the jMKJiont Ex.xsiK.tlon 3o rd No. 4,
Bcuonat;.ondi 3 c Pruofst-llc IV, in Munich." In'ahort, Ycur Honor,
tho dcfond;jit .olts rr.a -.t tlx a--* ^uftu.-ffo inat;.llc.tien in
•Junich cn 15 iky 1941 thr.t the docor.eod Dr. Rcsohor wr.s «.t
tho ti j.w ho wreto tl.ia letter end u do the sugf-oation tlu.t
hi.'^. i.ltltulo exporii-onts bo o-rriod cut cn living 1 unui
beings.

.1 c.iao cj. 11 ycur retention totfco-f:.et th.t Dector Rfiaohor
in thla very intoroetlnj lot Ur a.ya, -nd 1 queto: "I h'.vo

UA r. very confldontlcl tr.lk with c. ropruaontr.tivo cf tho -ir
Forces Curgoon who nricoa thuao oxpurimonta," txd x.eu3gost to
tlx Tribun .1 thr.t thr.t Linn w;.e tho dufor.dr.nfc h'oltz.

I proceed new to Document Ho. 1C82-PS, which will bo
Prosecution*a Ibd.ibit 45, rnd is r. letter free the defon^ftt
Rudolf dr:xdt to Sl^awd Stacker in-reply to tho lattoig V
directed by Rj-aohor to hitler which I hr.vo juat roed. Tlio'
letter is undated :sA ro-da: Dr. Efaclicr: Pertly bo-

fere flying to Oalc, tho PoicfcsfUehrer S5 g.-vo mu your letter

f 15 ily 1941, fer ? rti.-.l reply.

' I c;ri inform you tl.t prisoners will cf courao be gl:dly

,A6 :.v..ilr.ble fc« tlo hirh-flight reaorj-chea. I l.:.vo inferred

the Chief cf tho Security Police rf this ..greoaont - f tho

Ruichsfuohror S^-, ;.nd requ atod t: t tho ccuputont off lei:. 1

1-9


Court 1

11 Doc 46 - 21 - 1-4 - LJG - ?oator


bo instructed tc got in touch with you.

. * sm r ^ t5 ; sr. met

to ycu on the birth cf yiur son.

I sl—ll refer ne soon cs possible tc the socond p..rt of
ycur letter. i . ,

Hoil hitler

By cr-ior (initials) R Br"

/.wl incidont:.! 17 , '/ ur I>n r r :vy bo interested ir. locking
:.t tJo phxtcst..tlc copy ef this G-xru.r. 2' oiteont rjyl cbsorvlng
f-'r yturaelf tl.o peculiar chrrc.ct oris tic -f tho initials :f
tlo deforest Itudolf ?r.ndt boor.uso you will find th:.t thoy
c.ppo:.r on ccnaidor .ble nuber a' oxd.ibits xrhich v;ill bo intro¬
duced here.


170


11 Doc-. .HilS-S-l-Gaylord
Court.Uo* 1.


So tjc <jjx! that the wheels arc partially In notion, at least the consent
t^cca—benk tcoa«ibfr t£ap .the. ^l^hsJ^ctocr

.It thoso cxpcrlncnts cn concentration cenp irret-.s and Reach cr is rrJdng his
errar<jOix*t5 for the cxpcriixerts with the representative of th; l.c-'lical
Inspectorate of the Loftaruffo at tre institute in Turdoh, tiiich was the
Institute of the defendant Volts*

I cck now to "ocuaont 1&-217, vfcich will l^jjfosecuticn Vxhibit 16.

This is another letter freo Raschor to the defendant Ifcidolf Brandt* *t is
uaSatod; howeve r , its context t/oild a ecu to indicate that it probably precodod
t.'iu lettor which I have Just read., since it poses again tlv. question as to
ehothor or not pernission will ba 'ivco for the high altitude a:.xrincnts.
it reads as foil errs:

"y dear toctor Srendt:

*T.'o regretted tKoy suoh that tjc w.rc unable to suo /ou and to talk to
you. 2 ..111 still b. here toaorrw.: and shell call up the Relchsl\ichrang, at
aa; rate cnee ncrc before ny doparturc, perhaps I can greet ,cu at least


shortly over the tel .phono*

• %

"Yesterday 1 gave to Haupto turufU.tear . cino a aattvr ccnctr.dng ‘.xa.
.oiler, owner of the fim The— and Oerfs. I ask you cordially to report
bcnev-.lcntly cn tils natter to tix. RcichsftGhrcr-SS, since it tculd be a pity
if the natter should be decided negatively and tha business ruined. 2 con¬
sidered fer a leng tio= as to whether 1 night approach, you in this natter, but


3 ^


cl


I also ask that you ^raiit seen the perhaps possible pernisriton fer
carrying cut the cxrcr Irenes (high altitude-pressure) (reported to Hauptatunn-

' ;hr:r laclschl-in) within the ea$ of' ifcchau itsOf. I forgot to acntlonAo

• • - — • — ~^*

Uaa tattorefuthrer Fa^lschlein that a acvablo pressure chirb-a- hrs teen pro-


• f'l* this purpose cut of the Ju. Search Tcitl of the Uii.

u ..y -..ife -aJoyed very nuch tooting year wife, and -x both arc lceking
icr.urd with pleasure to the honor of your visit in January".

; 171


11 Dcc-iX^2-2-2-Oi7lori
Court .io« 1 .


w | • • I . •

A his letter dees not odd v«ry isuch -xccpt that it do^s in d icate a rather


• —* y-f Mp to th^ dcfoalant r^Jolf Brandt c.i th^ part cf


Reseller.


~nd r.O'T oc cenc tc a nest interesting ocnorandun written by the rife of
the dcceaaod Dr. Baschor, directed to Hirclcr’s office. This is ^ccuncnt
.'10-263 anti will be Prosecution Eahihlt U7. H is dated, iiunich, 21* February
l?h2. It is directed to the SS-Saprcco Ccoocnd, which will bo the office of th
.To ichs fuchrcr-SS in whl$Hhc defendant Rud o lf Brandt was an adninistratiro


cf fleer.

"In reply to the co r v i in io nt W cf 17 Fetruaxy 19U2, signed by CS-
i’auptsturafbchrer. Fcelschlein, ny husband has raked n : to subnit ttao follcwing
infer—.tin: Jn Sundry, 22 Fcfcrc&iy, th- following co'auinication went to SS-
Cbcrs turufuchrer Schnitsler on the mvbj.ct of the experinants involved:

"Thv Ruichsfuohror-SS authorixod the oxpcrin.nts on 21* July" — end I nay
3" v prrc.ithotieally that that nay vary well bo the letter 'iiich vo hevo already
rend into the record — "at the.: iiac for jt. Reaefcor, Dr. Kottonhoff, and Dr.
.-Its. Dr. SottcahofX was appointed ir Gau Physician fer Rucanih in -ugust


art thereby ras oxcludod fron the grcxip. Dr. .oltt was to initiato the

technical cx^cuti ~n of the c ;?_r locate. * j he was afraid of cbstaclcs on the

part of th. -ir Fore- nodical Inspector, Goncrdoborstabsarit Dr. Hippke, who

'‘vocrlbod axperinents of this Jdrvl as caord, holt* continued postponing the

bcci.L-dnc f the oxpcri/KJits, althr.r.h he ras thoroughly acquainted with their-

inportcnco. In Dcccri-' of 19hl, he ashed the Beard cf Directors of the -dr

"Oreo :ie3carch Institute Scrlin-.-dl-.-shof, if *he h-ad thor., Zr. -Aiff and Dr.

^elKjg cuile undvjt.ke the experia-nts with Dr. Poacher. ctu of *i\

issodiatcl? accepted, delivered f - lo:*-.>rcssurc chaabor end cr.no A^ ; .

locussi cn took place in Dachau bct?7ccn e'xr sum fuehrer Florkouski, Cberstum-

fuehrer Sciaiitzl-r, Cberstabsarzi Dr. JU, r. .taschor, Dr. Ro-b-rg andrCr.

: --f. £ t *.ras cl-arly dotemined trnt va. - jvriocnos ^re only to tx. authorise
/

i-- c Llaboratien rith Dr. Rasch-r. '.cltz gave the assurance chat he waild take

care of the corresponding authorisation of Dr. Bascher. He was only able,

172


II Dce^s-<ES-2-3-Geylcrd
Court 2z, 1.


houovcr, to obtain cx authorizaticn chich enabled Raschcr to carry. tut the
pre; r ry work at Dachau, aivd stated in^oply tq * subject ^

by ir. fafientr; "The authorisation era be oxteniod at 'ay ttao 1 .

"On . odnesday, 18 February, after raschcr had carried cut all the pre¬
paratory rork, ..'cits oado the follouing 3tatcaxnt: 'Now that yew hsvo renoved
all obctaclos fren the path of : kd>irg ■' th the SS, the authorization oust bo
.andlod differently'.

“As the result thar-cf, Raschcr conferred with Oberstumfuahrar
Schnitzlor cn 19.

■Zxperirents of Rcnb-rg-ftasch-T began at Dachau, a cl_ar pr'ncwnccsxnt bj
both, that '.fells was not needed ary uor«. Rcjb_rg was els surprised that
Roe char was net tc be boo tod out in spite of his fire agrccocnts. Obersturn-
fuchror Schnitaler has for tho tiao being stepped the continuation of tho cx-
perij vents without Rrechor until the decision of the Relchsfuehrer has bc>.n
obtained- '-to»ro tun-fuehrer Schnitxlcr has boon asked by Reseller to obtain an
i-acdlato authorization, oithcr free tho Cldaf of Staff LIN lii, or Staff ilcdi-
cad Officer Dr. Seteidt, likewise LZU lh. If tit cxivriacnts at Dachau than
prcocod ure’er a of ini to czithoriz'.ti'r., th-n Raschcr has t;.a jos3ibility at all
tines ci carrying cut hie accimlr.tlnc ~fB-Cxpcrlnont« Sch'.ngau.

"P.aschcr tes asked Cba*stunifuahrcr Schnitxlcr to infen.. ti.c '.'.oichsfuchrt
f what has happened and sinultanorusly tc rojerk that Rnschor would, under all
circunstances, liks. tc participate scientifically in tho erporinents as a nmbe
cf tho '-hnonerbo'.


■As statod above — this notice was r calved by -J*. Sciinitslar — ho
tishod to report xi it to the .tcicJji'uaia'or. lie notification has boon received
a3 yet.

•‘*0 tr._ riv_antui», ay hus-and ha3 again gene to Schonjpu and
iarirttcticrs theTw."

This exhibit indicates that Lr. iUschor, in collaboration with Dr. * elts
at the .dr Forces Installation in laudch, conceived tho idea of carrying fer-


a-aaits


•••ard these cxpcrlacr.ts cn living huucr. beings; that Raschcr, being at tho sauo

173


U Dcc-^ZS-2 -h-Gaylcrd
Court iJc« 1.


dev. s Luster :f the SS as tr.11 as a Sector in th. Leftraffo, undo suggests ns


.,ni za the natron lie states, .Iiee;ler on the part ef the SS, authorized the
.rpji.ae.nta on tfco 2u cf July tc be carried ait t£’ Ranch or, Kattonhoff, and
cltx. It further appears th t ..‘oitz cas tc rhaps afraid that his superiors in
the Luftwaffe night net Hit the idea of these cxpcrlaxmts being carriod out
r.ri consequently re had c stcxufcat considerable delay until t.» first part of
l?o2 before the oxpcrlnaita actually get under way. But it oc_rra saxhew that
the dofendmt .'cits was a.blo te'ovcrc rve uv.tcvcr resistance ho had not with ir.
the .-died Service cf tlx *uftnaffo, a. id pm is 3 ion hat 1 , been rccurod fer the
carrying cut of these c^.rlucnta.

I suggest thr.t the c gey Dr. eitz, far reasons ifcicb frero undoubtedly

• •

sufficient f-r hie, did net hie elf participate actively in the actual por-
fcr-rncc of the cep errors, tut h~ .ns ti.- sordid procurer cf the assistants
tc Hasc.i-r, ufco.vos no expert on altitude research. It v.lU appear, at a
Ir.t r point, that cits tried to fl^c.c ecao -rpartn tj v?rk filth Dr. Raachcr
in :.ia eon Institute in Uunlchj naxlf, Drs. Lutz anl.odnt... Thoeo acntlcncn
ad hoard cf xirt >. Dree her naa up tc in j.chau and refused thus genoroun
ffer cn the part cf Dr. cltx. Ittl’cs this .xaareadun points cut, and as
th; affidavit uf the defendants “cilxrg cad -tuff state, .'cltx then rent to
*:rlin and secure the o p~rt assistance there; candy, the defendants iiiff
an' Bra ib jg. 'V, apparently got into a littlo trouble with Rancher, ranted to
;naticipatc perhaps sw;«.vhr.t iiorc actively in tho cxpericcnts, an.* insistod
that Rasefcer report U hin.


17)i


"I rofor to your inquiry of !fcrch 9, 19U2 concernin'' Dr. Iteschor.

. • • . _

iljfenaaco is na-'a to thi au .-ctaosphoric pressure exporirsinta which are N»inr


carried cut on conc-ntration c^a Imatoa in t^ Dachau oasp by the -dr Force.
Th: Hcichafuihror - SS has approved tn.Bc oxu-rinanta unior the condition that
Sf. - 2nd Li 6u tenant Dr. Roacher vho ia oryhow a cedi cal 1st Ltoutonant of the
/J.r Forco takes ,crt in tlx:u. I ca suro that Dr. Roschor -..-ill ho ablo to five
you fhrthrr details. (This last s onto no o ia crosso.l out an’, xoploood by ono in


Cfcmon shorthan'.)


To reconstruct thj pioturo a littlo hit - in tho n.noranhm fran Wini
Anchor you will rorxabor that she stotos that Cr. Rcachor would ho only too


happy to vicric in th- frcojvork of tho .bnonurto. few Says later t;o cone to
this lottor frea :m ’olf Brandt 'v.ck to Slavers in reoponoc to r.n earlier inquiry


'jy Sicvcrs sayin-j soyin "Tea, aschor ia authorized to carry out tho oxporl-
n.nto," Apparently Slavers was inturcjtai in procurin'- the aorvicoa of Dr.
Taachor on tho staff of tho Ifinorur' o. TTv. rcaaifc th't th- oxperfckonta had boon


approved under tho conditions that toschar -participate in th a is easily under-

•

standhblo* Rase her, ho in- in c .ual .xjsition, of narbor of SS whil- at aim ti.no
nmher of Luftwaffo, ras authorised to participate an-’ ti» Itolchsfuohrer in¬
sisted cn hia participation haoenso ainc^ a ne.&or of the SS they could aocuro
■ substantial oaount of credit which was supposed to cooo forward free tMMW


OD.ri^nta.

• > £

Tha next documnt ia l c '71~o-FS and will bo Prosecution Exhibit l?,. Thia is
frer. Siopaund ‘‘lachor to tho F-i hly osteccod P.oibhafa.hror, and dated April 8 ;


U r«o.-^T!V3-2-Gro93
Court So. 1


'XTcrirr.nte soul’ be daoonstratod to bin. SS-O’^rsturrtannfuehrer Slavers took
- diy off to witch 8co 3 of tho intorastin,- standard cxperini-nts and nay

report. T^efi^W^.art*8l^as J

* t

--ou would be uxtraor 'lnaril7 inter os tod lr. those experiments. Ia it not poasi -•
that on tte occasion of a trip to southern Oormnj* you have boms of the oxpori-
aentt dessnetretod to you? If tho results so obtained by tho oxForiaonta are
confined by further sxForinentation, entirely new data mil bo oocured for
acioncej sl-mltanoously entirely w* aspects will bo opens- to the Luftwaffo.

I hope that, thanks to tta intondeft efferte f SS Obaretursi»nnfuohror
Clovers, the Luftwaffe *iU nrko no difficulties fron nrr on. I an vary ruch
indebted to Ob«retun£xunfuehror Sievors as he Us rh-wn a vary active interest
in ay «crfc in ov^ry reboot,

I thru* you rospoctf illy, hi -hly ostossed r.eichafuehrer, for the sonorous
realisation of ay proposition to conduct such experinonta in tho concentration
can?.

7 . 1 th ay bast mshss for yiur per: onal -.JoU-bUn •, I an

Or:, to fully yours,

(si-nad) S. ILasohor"

Attached to this fetter an' part of th. sar~ Exhibit is too Interim Itopoht
nontionod in tho letter.

■ 1 . Tha ob. 1 oct is to solvo tho problea of whether too theoretically osta'^
listed norns pertalAnp to toe lonjth of life of hunan boin^-s broathinc air r%t\
only a snail proportion of oxygon air*, subjected to low prossux-o correspond rrith
the results obtained by practical experiments. It has ’ con asserted that a
parachutist, *hr. jvrvs froa.a hoi ht of 12 kn woul« suffer very severe injurios.
- prcbobly even -io —, on account of the lack af -xy. en. Practical oocpsrl-
S»nts on this subject havo oluaya toon disccntimoi after r. naxi^un of 53
seconds, since vory severe boa s cccurroi.

2. 2 xporfamte testing too lerv.th of life -f a huron bain? above tho normal
brtatMa & Units (U, 5, 6 *m) have not bo--n conducted at all, sinoo it has been
r. fore; one conclusion that tt* hur-n expericantol subject would suffer ‘-oath.


u >c.-*^7^-3-3-Groas
Court So. 1


Th. experia-nts conducted by rtfself ar.-* Dr. Torfcor? proved the following

Sxperl»jnta on parachute Jumps proved that tha lack of oxygen an’, tho lent

aVu: did not cause death. .Uterether 15;

%•

oxtr^no oxiMrlaents were carried out in which none of the VP died.".-*


V? asans test persona, your Honor.

■Very sova re bends together with unconsciousness occurred, but completely noroal
functiona of the senses returned when a height of 7 to was roochod on descent.


2lectrocardicpre=3 ro isterin'- durixy tho exporir.unts did show certain lrrorru-


larltlcflj but ’ y the ti'io tho exporiaenta wero over tho curves had roturnod to
TOroal and they did not indicate any obncraal oV-rt’cs ’urine tha following days.
The extent to which deterioration of th. orr-nisn nay occur ’ue to continuously
repeated axp^riewnts can only oataMiahod at th: cr.d of tho acrloa of axpori-
rwnta. Tho oxtreac, fatal uxporinente will bo carried out on specially soloctcd

VPs, .othorviso it would not be t .OMlXfl* to oxurciso th. ri-id control so extra-

•

or.innrily lnpertant for practical purposes."...

I would like to say ..cronthotically, your Honors, that it is quite obvious
in that little sontsneo that ovon in this typo of ox^rite-nt wo have to have a
so-called control gnu? - the y-ooplo who wr o roing to bo killed, tho pooplo
upon wton tho oxporiircnt wao ccntimod until he led. That was tho very purpose
of tto axporinont in tboso casos - to detorrlno Just whftt it took to kill thoso
pooplo. Only in that way does he steto con ho exercise tho ri-id control so
r.xeosary*

%

I con*inuo to reads V

"Tho VPs w-ro breurht to a hoi ht of 8 to under oxyim and had to nako 5

•

knoObends with an* without oxygon, After a certain lapso of tino, nodorato to
serero bends occurrol esi' tho VPs bocaao unconscl- us. However, after a certain
r riod of'accUsfctxdn theasclvos to the hoidit of 3 to, aU tho VPs recuperate l
and regain thuir consciousness and the nom-1 functions cf thoir aonsos.

Only continuous exporinunta at altitudes hi ;h-*r than 10.5 to resulted in
JsctJu Tboso oxp rlnonts shewed, that brc-athla. stopped after about 30 rlnutas,
while in 2 cases the dactrccardiOvTcphiaalJy charted action of tho heart con-


ttafcd fer another 20 ±imutes.


11 Dec.-iWTTV-3-U-Gross


Tho third experiaent of this type took such an extraordinary course that I
called an SS physician of the carp as witness, sines I had woriced on theso
Etporinanta all by nyself. It was a contimous experiment without oxygon at a
Ivi-hT of’ l/icTconducCecl 5 tt'Jr «»r in -£ood~re-nerel conditions - r . .• -v-

=roatida; ccntimiod up to 30 ninutes. After U rlmtos the VP bevan to porspire

zn’ to wifcjlo his head, after 5 ninutes creeps occurred, botwoon 6 and 10 nin-

•

utes ’ renthln" increased in speed and tho VP bee are unconscious, after 11 to 3>'
cinutos breathin; slowed down to three breaths per ninute, finally stopping alto-
gothsr.

Sj vorest cyanosis developed in -otw.en and foar. epo-j.-red at tho pouth."... ^

Cyanosis, if the Tribunal please, noons that a very doop blua color of the
lips sot in, characteristic of pro-collapsc.

"At flvo nlnuto intervals el«otrocar.'.io;rana free 3 loads woro writton.

..ftop breathing ha-’ atcp:od EKO was continuously written until tho action of
the toart had cono to a caapluto stan J still. ..bout 1/2 hour aftor breathing had


steppod, dissootion was started."...

And row coxes tho autopoy report and I 1.111 rcrlnd tho Tri unal of Exhibit
Ul, thiMo pictures of which you recall shciroi an autopsy of a porson, cno of
which whjre th-y hab opened up tho breast of tha sublet, and anothor whore


tho akull had ban operod an.* thi brain ox. osod clc-.n in tho picture.

•'.'hsn th: cavity of th; chsst was opened tho ericardlun was filled tiphtty.”
Psricardiua is tho tissue around th, heart. Sort of a collcphano liVod^ ,r '*^
tissue. * * \J

"Upon opening of the perienrdiun 60 ccn of clear yjUr-ish liquid .cushod
f:rth. Tho noaunt tho tanpor.ado hr.i stopped, tho ri-ht auriclo bopan to boat


heavily, at first at th?nto of 60 actions par nlnuto, then pro.-rQsrivcly
slower. 20 rdnutos aftor the . oricar iun had to.n r -ro d, thj ri ht auriclo was
o’enod by ;uncturin- it. Per about 15 ninuteo a thin strean of blood spurted


ftrth. Thereafter dcf in cf tho puncture wount in the auriclo by coarulation
if the blood an* renewed acceleration if the action of the ri ht auricle
occurred.


173 •


Court Jfo. 1


ODQ hour after breathl rt' had step-pad, the spinal narrow was caspictoly severed
wtl tJ» brain renovod. Th. ruupor. the action of the aurido 3topped for UO
ascends. It toon renewed its action ccrlnr to a ccnplcto standstill. 6 rdnutoa
lator. heavy subarchnaid edoda was fduftd in-the 'rain; In' tKa' veins and
arteries of tho train a considerable quantity of air was discovcrod. Furtheraor
the bicod vessola in the heart and liver wsro enomously^structoi v y


l.l ,4,


etftollaa.


Subnrchnoi , if your Honors * ploose, as I understand it is tho tissue around
tto brain mch as peri car iu= is tho tissue around th. heart. S-boliw hoinr an
o’-struotion other than fluid U oOi»

"Tfw ana ted cal preparations will la preserved sc I'll be able to uvaluntb
thon later.

Tho last nontionol case is to ry knowledge tho first one cf this typo ovor
observed on nan. Tho above doscrlbod tonrt actions will rain particular sclcrw
tific interest since they roro written down with E5G to the very end.

Tho uxperi-oonts will bo continued and extended, ijvothor intoria roport will
follow aftor new resulto havo boon obtained.

(sItvkI) Dr. Taschor"


o


1 ??


U Dec-M-GES-4-l-Haynes (3JG)
Court Ho. 1


-v, ,


TTiE P R ESID5IT: Have you offered this interia report as a part
of the Exhibit *9? .. . . v ... j

_ _ * i - ,--- d- —- «. • —. . -

HR. MeHAKEY: That is correct. Your Honor. They both carry the
sane identification muster, naaely 1971-C-PS.

The next exhibit will be Document 1971-C-PS, which will be
Prosecution Exhibit 50.

JUDGE SEBBXNGt Let ae understand, Mr. McHaney. You said "D-PS"
or "C-PS"?

UR. IfcHANTY: "C-PS, 1971-C-PS. This is on a short piece of papor,
Your Honor. You are probably locking over at the next document. It is
page 63 of the English docunent book. This is a letter dated 13 April
1942, again froa the defendant Rudolf Brandt, to his "Dear Comrade Dr.

Hascher."

"Your report of April 5, 1942 has been seen by the Reichsfuehrer-
SS today. The testa on which SS-Oberaturtabannfuehrer Siovers gavo a
brief report interested hin vary such.

"For the further toots I wish you continuation of tho success you
have had so far.

"Best regards also to your wife'.

"Heil Hitler I /signed/ Rudolf Brandt".

The next exhibit is document 1971b-PS, jmd this will be Prosecution
Exhibit 51.


t


THE PRESIDES: Your Exhibit 50 reads "Yours, B. Brandt". Was

S I

that intended for "R. 3randt"?


UR. UcKAUZTt That I an sure, is "R. Brandt", Your Honor.

JUDGE SEBRIKO: Hew does it appear?

Iff*. UcHANEf: How can you tell. Sir? Do you have a copy of tho
German document bock? That is Exhibit 50. As a matter of fact, I am not
sure that — Well, this was the reason that I suggested in the beginning
that Your Honor perhaps have a look at his initials. The first initial
looks very, very much like a "B". I would like to have this exhibit

e

passed up to the Court

100


w

VI


11 Deo-U-GrS-l-2-naynes (DJG)
Court Bo. 1


so that you may see it. The rank is noted as SS Stunnbannfuehrer", this
. being in. 19 >;?. th-^w^jpcUot *~#dt. *M not prcraoted to the ratfrof

Standartenfuehrer until a later date. You will also note. Your Honor,
that the letter cooes free the Fuehrer Headquarters, and I havo never
heard of any Brandt other than our defendant Brandt in the Fuehrer's
Headquarters.

I have Just offered Docusent 1971b-PS as Prosecution Exhibit 51,
which is a. letter fro® Heinrich Himler to Dr. Rancher, consenting on
tho first Interin report on the high altitudo experiments. It is datod
13 April 1912 and statest .

_ 0

"Dear Dr. Raachors

"I want to answer your letter with which you sent me your reports.

"Especially the latest discoveries aado in your experiments hevo
Interested ao. May I ask you now tho following:

"1. This experiment is to bo repeated on other mon condemned to
doath. .

"2. I would like Dr. Fahrenkaap to bo taken into consultation on
these experiments.

"3« Considering the long continued action of tho heart, tho exper¬
iments should be specifically exploited in such o manner as to ddtorraino
whether these men could be recalled to lifo. Should such an experiment
succeed, then of course, tho person condemned to doath shall be pardoned
to concentration camp for lifo.

"Please keop me further informed on the experiments.

"Kind regards and Heil Hitler, Yours, H. Hinder,"

A copy going to the Chief of the Security Folice and SD, and on-
other copy to the S3 Brigadcfuchror Gluocks. Gluocks was the Chief of
Amt D, in the nVHA; that is to sey, tho Economic end Administrative Main
Office of the SS, the chief of which was Pohl, and Your Honors will recall
that I stated th t Oswald Fchl had jurisdiction over concentration caraps
from the first port of 1912 until tho end of the war, hence, a copy of
this letter being sent to the


u Dcc-i .-£dS-k-3 -Haync 5
C-ypt Ks. l f


inistxctivc headquarters of tho ccncontrnticn crrape, or, rather, tc his


/


^^.^■ .g vOwr^to f ^nocta. Sou rill n to that here v.-^Vv.

■ T. n ccur cr. the bsttcj cf the letter. Chat is SS-Sturriixin.'ruchrcr Rudclf


r


)


Prnedt*

ifcw, this letter is^quito interesting* It is tho first instanco in which
oc hoar about anyone being pardoned, as the. put it, to life-'-sn^ concent ration
c^rn should tho;* survivo the ox?-r;Lianta. In ether words, certain of the
dofo.Vhnta nill try t- convince tho Cort that they wero taking experimental
subjects nho were c ndta.rn.-l tc death. They went up tc thou and o:q>lainod to
tJxc tlr.t they were s ix t: run these experiments eff, that they inv.lvcd seno
danger, that if they would ccao fermr'.* and volunteer, " lh<, ro are - big sports.
If ycu livo thr ugh it, r„ will lot yea stay in a concent ration caup tho rest
ef y:ur life."

lie*-, this is near!} a oonth an.’ a half after the c.v-rir.eit3 start, and

it is the first tine that -nyw= a.*vthiug rbcut ptreV-nLug '-V'nc ccn-
* ^

denned tc loath if they survive these arp.ririents, as yru will bo told by the
•efen-aats * cltx, Kcab.rg, and tiff, ittfc need is tho-.. fbr tho ?.oichsfuehror
r. ir to write Dr. acachur an 13 -pril — a month and a half after the cxjxri-
—ata had boen geix -a — an: to stato, "Cfc, yes, den't forget tc turn thou

p

locoo"? This has b~n tho first ti.ic that any acrurty or cxnutation has bcin
aenticrvxl.

Th- scccnd point tc bri;.g f errari3, Hen; liberal a rale is tho Reichs-

fia-rcr sotting up h-re? He is referring to tho cxrcrin^nts which Kcschcr

had described in his first intcrin report, viierc yuu had the lox-contimod

t-art action after th; :vm was apparently dead, after they had dissected liin

•--.d removed the liquid which *.<as f.Tning a prcesuiv cr. tiv .heart am: an tho

train. That is she cx?_rir*.nt tJet :.isr-l^r refers tc, rnd h- srys, "If ycu can

//*’

recall any of theso sen tc life, tlmn ;cu ay J»t thoa havo life-long,£cncon-
tratiea eery instead cf d_ath." ~ '•

It is rather like the old at. rv ties we h"vc ncarc ir. tho law about the .
ran :r..z is sentenced to be hexed, and they cckc hin out to th_ scaffeld and

jt + 1£2


11 Dec-H-GES-^-Kayr.ca(DJG)

Court Mo. 1

say the last rites, end he drops through the trap door, and tho rope
bft&k&V -M-thereto® always. shouldn't hang

hla again, aal I think that is precisely what Hinder is suggesting hero -
that iX you kill those non but you can bring thee back, then you do not
have to kill then again.

But the rule was not oven that liberal, lour Honors, and this is
revealed by Document 1981A-FS, which will be Exhibit 52. This is dated
20 October 19L2 rnd is a teletype froa Haschor to tho defendant Rudolf
Brandt:

"Highly catcentd Cboroturafccnnfuohrcr:

"Kill you ploaso cirri fy tho following enso with tho Roichsfuohror
SS as soon as possible.

"In coaamicrticn Hcichs fuehrer SS of B-4-42 under S3 it is ordered
that if prisoners in Dcchcu condoanod to doeth live through experiments,
which have drtnngercd thoir lives, they should bo pardoned. As up to now
only Poles and Russians were available, soac of whom had bo«i ^condorenod
to death, it is not quite clear to ao yet as to whether the abovo men¬
tioned paragraph also applies to then, and whother they may bo pardonod
to concentration camp for life dfter having lived through several very
sovoro experiments.

"Pleaso answer to teletype vir Adjutant 1 s Offico, Ridchsfueh
SS, Munich.

"Obedient Greetings, Hell Hitler, Ycurs, /signed/ S. Raschvr."

Sow, this indicates tc us the nationality of some of tho oxperimont-

ni subjects which were boing used,, which is an important consideration.

Your Honor, ca betreen a crime against humanity rr.d a war crime in tho

Indictment. ,c havo here noo-Gcrqan nationals being experimented on.

/ •

I also want to call your attention to the feet that only some of
these people had bean condemned to death; in other words, thoy wero not
limiting their experiments on the subjects, all of whoa had been con¬
demned to death. Hero he asks whether the amnesty rule apolios to Polos


This la a tola type to SS Cfeerpturafuchrar Bcbnitsler in Hinichi
"Pi®® 90 inforo SS Untersturafuehrer IJr. Reach or with regard to
hie. teletype inquiry thrt the instruction given scoe time ago by the
Reich*fuehrer


11 DooHaynes
Ccwrt Sc* 1


SS concerning aancaty of tost persons doca net apply to Poles and .russians.
/si5»d/ Erandt, SS Cfccrsturrijannfucfcrcr."

t

;.'w, lour Honor, at a later point no nil! crzsc to the hijh altitude_

report, rreporod b7 tho defendants Ruff, -Iceberg, and the docoasoc! Dr.

■* ’ , __

jtscfcsr, and I will call yeur at ter. tier, to a statement in this report that

•he one 'iod during the ccurso of those oxperi^nts. Hera no havo already
x.‘ in proof hero which clearly in-'lea ted that they had a x mnfaor of deaths.

tho next deounent, which is l58lo-rS, which rill bo — .'arden ccj
that is l58L-b-?S, rtxich vill bo Prosecution Exhibit %. It also ltv-icatoa
that they haro had a rnffidont msabor of deaths during the ccurso cf these
oxporiixnta. It is a lotter eatoc 13 ..prll 19U2, written to tho defendant
Rudolf Brandt*


r


11 Dec Z^-M-5-l-LJG-Earrow (DJG)
Court So. 1


"Kf huebeixl take you to got him tho permission, if poaaiblo of

_ ___ ^ t 7T .

the Reichsfuohror to tsJtc isnediate colored photos of his own prepara¬
tion*.‘ - '.-

• / r '

and I give you tho German word after "preparetiona" and in parenthoaia
the English meaning of "persons Just disaectod".

,..."la a rulo only black-white photographing io permitted in tho coop.
At ho wants to oveluato U*e preparations lator on, thoao photoa would
be very important for his work. May I ask you for a abort oarly answer?
This letter is forwarded by courier.

"Kith tho boat rogarda and many thanks I roauin with

"Hoil Hitlerl
"Touts roapoctful
"Mini Raachor"

There la a noto on tho bottom!

• k

"Did the letter with tho report Cramor-Klott arrivo?"

Tho meaning of that note is not particularly dear. However, during tho
frooting experiments wo will boo tho naao of Cronor mentioned and, as
I rocnll, it will dovdop that Cromor is an arcy doctor attachod to tho
Institute at St. Johann which you will recall was on inatituto which was
under the Jurisdiction of the dofondant Handlosor in hia capacity oa
Army Modical Inspoctor.

Document No. 1581 c PS, which will bo Prosecution Exhibit 55, la
tho tologram in answer to the request for permission to take colorod
photographs of tho autopsies by Nini Res eh or. It is from SS Brigado-
fuohror Gluocks wheo, you will recall, is head of tho Amt in WVHA of tho
concentration coops. Tho telegrea is to Gluocks from the dofondant
Rudolf Brandt. '

"The Reichsfuchrer-SS has permitted SS 2nd Lieutenant Dr. Raschor,
who conducts tho experiments in Dachau, to also make colorod photographs
ih connection with his experiments.


185


Court He. 1

11 ->oc 46 11 - 5-2 - UO - Scxrc


"-111 you pl4£jo^b&o stops ^.-.cccrdingly.

signed 3r:-ndt"

Hew, like tho ,:ccd r.nd cbodlont solontlst tfcr.t to wi-.s.

Dr. Rc.ectcr hooded tLo doslros cf tho Ruichefuofcror in ro-
po. ting Closo oxporluonta in which tho prolonged bor.ting rf
the Luc.rt wr.s Vbaorvod :.ftor r.ppr.ront duc.th -nd wo find his
report c« the centime.tion cf thoso oxpcrlnonts in Deouuont
HO-218, ’-I.ich will be Prosecution Exhibit 56. This is de.tod
16 ..pril 1642:

"Highly estoouod Hoiohsfuhrcr: „

"c-7 1 thcjik ycu for your letter of IS April. I hr.vo
boon doii'hted with tho gror.t intorest r/hich ycu, highly
oatuonod Roichsfuohror, .~ro t’.Icing in tho oxporirjonts r.nd
their roaults. I th.jdc you fir tho inspirations ycu hr.vo
given :w in ycur let tor.

"Tho experiment doccri’ood in tho ropert cf 4 ..pril wr.a
rope.-.too 4 times, etch timo with tho roaults. V.hon
AV-gner, tl.o l.at teat person, hrd stepped brea thing I lo t hiu
ooiio b ck to life by inoroc.slng prossure. Sinco Tost Porson
(who is gnor) ... "w.-s . ssignod for r. toxcincl... 11
("Tomincl 55 uocning doc.th-rosuiting in this cr.so),.. "oxporiuont
held nc prospect fer now roaults, s.nd sinco X lu:d not boon
in possession cf ycur letter c.; thx.t time, I subsoquontly
strxrtod caotfcor exporiixint through which Tost ‘’orcon
die' net livw . —Iso in this cr.so tho results obt;.inod by
oloctrcccrdicgr-phic registrr.tlcn woro oxtrr.crdinr.ry.

"In c.cc, rd.r.co with y-*ur rdors, I tried t' ccntr.ct
Dr, P.lron *<^:p inoodirtoly upon rocoipt cf ycur 1-ttcr,
hrvcvor, I could net sporJc to hi:, sinco ho is lc.yod up \.ith
rjicinc.. In - fov dr.ys I shr.ll r.sk r.gr.in if Dr. Frhron Kenp is
- v. ih.bh .

"idjrjwhllo, ..t wii.es tcgotl-cr with Dr. He, berg I cr.rrlod


Court Be. 1

11 D“c 46-H-6-3 -UG - Kerrow


out fr.lling oxporinonta free holghta of freu 16 to 20 kilo-
uotora. ^Ecro, contrary tfT'thacro'sitfn f.aau>4>#tt)nB,“lfc^w , .a «<
proved tfant felling threug*. apr.co eftcr Jumping freu r.n
nirpluno in tfc- atr-toaphorc la qulto pcaeiblo, oa nf tor
aoTuro unccnaci'uer.oas tho Teat ?cracn rey-ined ccuploto
consciousness in onch cnao, e.t botuoon 7 .-.nd 8 kilcuotora
holght whon tho pr.rc.ohuto lovor, inatellod in tho chnr.bor,
we. a pullod. '


■T7itfcin tho n*.xt fow d:.ya I ab-11 ropurt r.t longth on
thcao experiments ca t/oll ;.a cn tho r.be.vo nontionod Toat
Porson \i- gn«r.

"X elau Lr.vo c. roquoat tc urlcc: It'*/ I t.Oco. picturoa cf
tho vmrlcua diaaocticn preparations in tho dissecting rooti
cf tho oonoontretl' n crup tc urlcc c. rooerd rf tho atrengo
fcrur.tiona of cir onbolia::. In thia ccmnoction, ny vilfo hr.a
tlrondy Litton tc SS Stumb'nnf uohror Dr. 3“r.ndt.

"Highly oa tool .od Roiohaf uohror, el lew ;.o tc clcao by
r.aauring yeu thr.t y<ur ectivo intoroat in thcao oxporinonta
hr a r. tror.ondoua influence cn one's working c.-.pr.city end


initic.tivo.


"I x; with dove tod grootinga rxKhHcii Hitler

Ycurs gr;.tofully dove tod \\.


inga -Tu «

fours gr;.tofully dove tod
(signed) Si^jund Rr.echor"


Horo gr.in-i w. nt tc atrocs tho peine thr.t tho -oat Person
■-r.gnor v-a n nsn ccncoixi-d to doi.th; tfc-.t ho w us eubj^ctod to
:n o::porir.ont cnd;nguring hia life; th-.t bo w:.s brought br.ck
tc lifo, r-s Sr.acLor putt it, rnd 701, 'hewing boon nasignod
fer u "torcincil 11 oxpuriuont ho wr.s thororftor subjected to
..netthor oxpoririont end killed. Ai& indie, eoo qulto conclusive¬
ly thr.t thoro vi a nc understanding botwoon tho dofondr.nts
Huff, *«c"borg rxxi R-.scLor rnd Heinrich Hinulor and tho con¬
centration c:x:p pooplo' that ccndoimud uon trculd bo givon


cane sty and pardoned to life long imprisonment. It is per¬
fectly apparent that these men were simply assigned to

e*p6«4^rfits and tff they did not.live through them, —
all right, and if they did and had been sentenced to dc»th
they still got th^ir death.

.vfl the Tribunal h*6 seen from the memo by Mini Raecher
and by referer.co in one or two of the other exhibits,
there apparently was a bit of friction between Volts end
Rcachcr — and apparently some difficulty about making sure
that Raschor was permitted to etey in Dachau and continue
th«se experiments. .Document 2(0-318 deals with this subject
and ’./ill be Frosecution No. Exhibit 57. It is dated 16
..pril 1940, to the Oiicf of Th- Medical rervico of the Luft-
woffc and, as I hrvo tcld Your Honors, the initials "Lin
14" indicate the office in the Mr Ministry which woe the
Medical Office of the Luftwaffo. The Chief, of course,
was Gonercioa rsttbsarzt Frcfessor Dr. Hippkc, predecessor
of irofeseor Ochroodor. The lutter concerns the prolonga¬
tion of the comacnd of utabserzt Rnschcr:

"The Stabscrzt Dr. Reschcr was commanded for special
experiment8, the uxecution of Which together with the ex¬
perimental establishment for .,ir Navigation was rendered
possible by the Reich Fuehrer GO at Dachau, to the experi^
mental estebllshment for ..viction, Branch Office Dachau
from March 16th till .pril 16th, 1942. The results obtain-
.d till now require a continuation of the experiments, par¬
ticularly as they cannot be completely terminated in the
tine provided as the procuring cf a few technical appli¬
ances caused difficulties Which ccn only be removed du-
ring noct week. In the interest of the guarantee of a
successful conclusion to the experiments, it is therefore


requested to order the continuation of the authorization
provisionally for four more weeks till the termination of
the experiments* Place of command; gstabllshnent'fer—


11 Decembar 46-«-^-5-LJG-* arrow (DJG)
Court No. 1


experiments for Aviation, Branch Office Dachau.'

<»Th« special, research carrxe-Vout, or actually taking place 'at *“
's'chor.gauVlfTba individually executed together with the ^perimenta
at Dachau by Stab sent Dr. Rcacher aa has boon done so far." Tho
signature is tho initial "K" which undoubtedly, lour Honors, is Karl
Volff who, at that time, was SS-ObcrgruppenfUohrer and who was, at
that time. Chief of the Personal Staff of the Reich Fuehrer SS.

How, it appears that Rascher's orders detaching him to Dachau
for carrying out those experiments were about to expire on 16 April.

A number of experiments had been carried out up until that time. The

defendants Romberg has admitted that he had observed deaths prior to

/

this tiao and now we have this lettor from a member *f the staff of
the Reich Fuehrer SS caking the Chief of the Kodical Sorvice of tho
Luftwaffe to extend his command. Thoso deaths that tho defendant Ronborg
hod obsorved woro roported to tho defendant Ruff and, of courso, it
ia (fiit? dear that those men could very easily have boon in touch with
Oborstabsarzt Dr. Kippko and thero is no doubt that thoao aattors woro
reportod to him and yet wo find that the orders woro continued and that
tho defendants Ruff and Rcefcorg continued their collaboration after
doeths wero obsorved by th^m. fchat better opportunity could hovo'bcon
afforded non who had been seduced into an experiment without knowing
what they woroVgotting into, as dof undents Ruff And R cob erg will undoubt¬
edly toll you? \.hat totter opportunity could havo boon afforded thorn

•

and their compatriots in the Luftwaffo to have terminated those murderous
experiments in Dachau in collaboration with Rcacher at the expiration
of the orders detaching him there in 1912? That is not what happonod.

The orders wero extended end tho defendants Ruff end Remberg continued
their collaboration as wo shall see.

ft

%


U Deo 46'M i 6 LJG*K arrow (DJG)

Court Bo, 1

*

%

Docuaent So. IK-296, which will be Prosocution Exhibit 58, is
V". *7.5W® to the letter I have Just read frae Wolff. It

cones from the Office of the Chief of the Medical Service of the Luft¬
waffe to the Reich Leader SS and Chief of tho Personal Staff who, at
that tine, was called Wolff:

■I hsvo received jour, rocoapendation concerning Stabsarzt (Rosorve)
Dr. Raacher. The recooaendaticn was forwarded by mo to the Air Gau
Physician VII with the requost to extend the Caaaand,

■ Hail Hitler I
■a/ HIPPKB" .

Docuaent SO-219 will be Prosocution Exhibit 59. This is a lottor
initiated by the defendant Rudolf Brandt directed to Dr. Raacher, datod .
27 April 1942: I .

■Dear Cc*srado Dr. R-scher:

"The Reichsfuehrer has aeon your lottor .of 16 April 1942. Ho
has shown tho scao interest in this report as in the one you sent
recently. He would like ;'ou to aakc up for hia an overall roport on
the experinenta carried cut to date, which ho would like to prosent
personally to Gen oral Fiuldnarshal Milch.

"Kind regards to your wife and yoursolf,

•Hell Hitlerl
"Tours

- "Rudolf Brandt."

If your Honors rculd care, you can again observo tho initials
of R. B. on this doci cent end cccpare it to tho previous one.

(The docuaent was shown to the Tribunel.)


19 *


I


Coart Bo. 1


Tbs letter referred to in here by Rudolf Brandt whit* "the Reichs-
fuehrer ha* aeon, t I recall, is the letter which I read, lour Honors,
on the four extrema death cases which Raschar conducted after discovering
this long continued heart action of a porson who had apparently diod.

THE PRESIDENT: At . this tine the Tribunal will take a rocess for
fifteen nrfnuteo.

(a recess was taken)

THE MARSHAL: Tho Military Tribunal is again in session.

• * ^

m. McHJJGSXl If the Tribunal pleese, at this time 1 would like to
ask that the witness Wolfgang Lut* be called to the stand to testify.

TJOLTCANG LUTZ, a witness, took the stand.

DR. ROBERT SERV/.7IUS (Counsel for defendant Karl Brandt): Mr.
President, wo were to be told 24 hours in advance if a witness was to bo
callod to the stand, but we wero not told. V«'o are not in a position to
croas-exeaino this witnoss; at least, we havo not had an opportunity to
talk to our clients. Considering the great extont of the Material, an
announcement is absolutely essential, Thoroforo, 1 objoct to tho exam¬
ination of the witness at this time. %

THE PRESIDENT: We will now hoar from the prosocution. \

• • v, | j y

W. UcHANZT: May it pi ease tho Tribunal, we filed yesterday morning,

•

as I rocall, a notice that wo would call Wolfgang Lut* to tostify with
rospoot to the high altitudo experiments conducted at Dachau, as tho rules
of the court so provide, I roceivcd o rotum of sorvico from tho See ret¬
tery Ccneral of tho Tribunal. New I cannot soy that this notice was in
fact deliverod to the Defer.dants( Information Center; that I do not know.

If it has not boon dene and Tour Honors feel that the eauso of Juctico
requires, wo can, without considerable inconvenienco, postpone tho testi¬
mony of this witnoss until either later this afternoon or tomorrow morning.
I do not wish to take any unfair advantage of the defense.

The testimony. I might add, which this witnoss is expoctod to glvo,
de-ds with a rather i^ortant point, but at the scmo time a <*ilto limitod
one, and it of: jts primarily the defendant Kelt*.

191


11 Dcc-iX£S-^-2-0anlO3
Court -o. 1.


P^SHEtf: I wild aa'_ the rcproa»-ntttivc of the ffioo of the
Socrataxy General if the notice serred, tlth return of scrrice, u=y be pro-
. ciecd hero.

i would uk comscl fee the dofcaiant ..olts if ho has rcccivod a copy
of this notice that the uitoose would be y-llod .

La. -IU£ (Counsel for defendant cits): I did not rcc.ivo a ay
an-iouncouont, and, if 1 cay, I should like to support the su^osticn of ny
col l oo g uo. Dr. ecrratiuaj thet th« axal n a t ion of tho i/ifcpss bo postponod
until tccorrow.

THS PiUBlLBff: \*o oro oralting a report fren the Office of thw Socrctary
General aa to what happonsd with this notice. Rather than further delay tho
proceeding*, tho Tribunal will rale tlut Uxj iltnoss x.y not bo placed upon the
stand at thia tiae. It should ha seen to today that the def-numts rocoivo a
CJpy cf thia notice tint the ltnos will be called tonorrew nornlx« at 3coo
tisc nhich you asy specify. ..t uhai tin. tomorrow Trill you Josiro to plaoo
thy tritoon upon the stand?

He H. JET: ’nil, it .light depend a little bit upon uhat stago of the
c-ao vro adjourn at tills afternoon. Cfttoa!, I see no reason nh/ xto could sot
brin^ hia to the stand tho first thiiig tpuerrwir ncniing.

i"C fRZSH&frs I assia*. tix.t trill bo sntisfactory to evur body, if tho

(hfcrxlanta get tholr notice. 'V\

a' k

13, HcH.'JC s I osaucc they arc now on notice.

TH: HIESXDUT: I cfan't knot- Aother ti;c notice should give southing of
tho facta as to vhich the witness nil testify. That is thj only point.

:3. ..cK»JCT: If Tour Honor please, on the point about tho facts as to
«ich he will tostify, I take it thet tho Tosccirtion is not required to do noro
ttan to indicate the general subject about Aich h, will tastily.

r&olDSU: Tho witness is fcstiiyiBg as an expert or witness to tho
l :cts * and I think semz slight indication of vhr.t facts is the rule.


•e ^iU proceed near with tho introduction of tho documents, and the ,

I?2


Court -lo. !•


LR- tteEuIGT: If lour Boner plsaso, the witness Luts in being called
tc testify with rospoot to the fsets only. H_ war, acccreins to our infoma
tion, an assoc 1 a tc of Ltr. clti in .da institute at i ami eh during th^>prlod
with which '-k aro hero ecnc.rnod, nandly* .’ur ng l?liTand 19U2. I will ask


IX P!£SH£riTi Defenoa counsol ..ill take notlco of tho stat- .<.nt of tJx


(ILc -itrijss -olfgang Luts retired)


u Deo.^.TD-7-l-Lehnfcardt
Court Ho. 1


MR. JCHJETl ha-'


to Dociraent Ho.~26L, which Kill bo Prosecution 60,


rblch appears on Fa^e 73 in tivi g n.- J. l ah docunant bock.

,jx J . It la :u»th,r njnerania lict-ted by :*rs. Stschor to an offiolal in
thj S3. It la boadad aa a "File note for SS- Oberstumfuohror SC'DUTZLE?,."
(3oBilxc) "fiS RISC S3 was hire today in the office and stated the

\

fell ewiryf to no for you in a few woriai

Oborsta'aarst Dr. TSLZ still Insists on participation in the exptrindnts
and full responal ility. If not, the aaai-roent of Dr. T-SCHD.i to tho Institute

el» oust bo changed. ~cls personally ia not interested in thoao experiments.

•

<L‘* asks Oberatabsartt Dr. ol», how Ion* tho uxp«rlaents will la at and

./tothor It la Justifiable to'detail a nodical officer for so lonp a time. RLM

•ctnitfa fr*a :YLZ an opinion on tho cxporicunts which ho, horovor, cannot

iro, unless ho ia fully lnfomed about them. V. ill -<> in Berlin with

Oorv.ralobjratabaarxt HirTKE on Friday. .’gLZ doaanda a ct-te.-v.nt by Friday

aa to whether ha should consider hinaolf aa still participating in tho oxporl-

%

cants, or whother It is roquoatod ttet to should not participate in tho
axperincnfca.

Ito aaslrm-nt of Dr. Il^CIEn must iinadiotcly be chary-cd to "»aei,’rmont

• •

tn Aviation Tost Inatituto Berlin-A J.crabof, ..U3aonatollo Daoh-.u" (not Inetltut.
JzLZ), beoauao Kelt - aa ho stated - Intends to cancel tho aaci.rnaont imodi-
atoly, if ho ia not tc yc.rticipate in it."

3T. ’CH~KST« «ol thjn thoro is a notor


(Toadin ) "For personal confidential Information: V*


Dr. ’3LZ ccnfi ’.ontiaily inforeod Dr. Raschur that there ia :;root mistrust
against him in thj 3LH because of the oxpori^nts: (SS-eauborship) ttere is
also animosity in the air fcrco n.bainistrativo comair* (Luft .au) 'unich for
this reason*."

151 XffiJEIi It ia da tod* llunich, 23 April 1?1*2" and its ori.in ia IMnich. Thia
"mxran’un un J oubtedly went to the personal atqff of tho -jiehsfuwhror of the
S3 ahd ttore ia a report by Krs. Taachor on the perhaps atran & relationship
existing between Dr. rSLZ who ia net p-raittad by l?r±-o'r~ end Pr-schor to partl-
cipr.to to the extent which he aould like in these experiments at Dachau, .jvd


Deo-H-ATD-?-2-Lehnhar<it-AJC


Court NO. 1


wa sea that Molt apparently had the power with Generklober-
stabaartt (Dr. Hlppke) to aay whether or not the experiments
ehould be continued. In other word*,-here, again we rind,

p

an opportunity given to terminate these murderous experlmenta,
and, yet, they oontlnue throughout the month of June and
a part of July. ^

The noxt document le No. 220a and 220b and theso will be
Proaeoutlon Exhibit 61, (Reading) "File note for S3-0ber-
aturmfuehrer 3CHNIJZL2R". That will be Proaeoutlon Exhibit
No. 61.

% A' ^ * • 90 m

Your Honor* might be lnteroetod In looking at the oovor

I , i

letter, *diloh I am about to,road; I oall attention to tho
hoavy pencil on tho ~Taoe of tho dooaoent. You will see on
tho faoo of tho documont the initials of Holnrloh Hlmolor,
wrltton apparently In orayon or hoavy penoll on tho faoo
of the documont.

HR. MCHnNEY: (addressing tho Sooretary) will you paee
that up, (hording gontloman doouoont) for Just a moment,
Mr. Tavls? . •

MR. MCHANSf: (continuing) Tho first part of this exhibit
is a oovor lotter to the further roport on tho Dachau exper¬
iments, to oovor tho lotters of 11 May 1942. It lo from
SIGMUND RASCHSR, to his "Highly estoeood Rolohafuehrer:■

(Roadlng) "Enclosed I am forwarding a short summary on
tho principal experiments oonductod up to date. A dotallod
roport on tho practical as well as the thuoritloal results
will take somo more time. I shall hurry. Since the matorlal
has to be processed the exploitation of the pathologloal £ \

preparatlona will take about 1/2 year thru the Kauser . \_ ^

Vilhelm Instltue for 3raln Researoh. ■

worn we*


Court Mo- 1


MR. HCHANEf: Mol That should read:

(Reading) "- though the laieor Vilhelm instltuta for
Brain Research will help us, I hope."

•Tonight I succeeded in seeing Dr. Fehronkaap who has
relatively recovered. He appeared to bo very interested and
I think there will be a fine and fruitful cooperation.

Dr. Fehronkamp who has an enormous knovledgo most amiably
promised to help me in everything His oplnlon'on ay heart
experiments he will give to you himself. From our conversat¬
ion I have had the Impression that a groat field of work
will opon up to me yet. I thank you, highly esteemed Roiohe-
fuehror, for having oponod thoso opportunities to mo to suoh
an omtent.


195a


11 DseH*^TO-7-3-Lehnbardt
Coart Ho. 1


"Cafcrtunstoly the extension of ry aasi-ixaant has not been settled yotj in
accordance with the . resent regulations =y asaipment will be toxrdnatod on

Jtyi5. _ . __

T h a nking you again I na with nost obedLant (roctings and

toll Hitler
Tours gratofully,

/•/ S. .Taachor." (End of quote)

• '^HflEYl It Bay be observed, ason~ other thinrs, thxt thso dotnlled axiwrl-
nonts at Dachau hod b»in extended free the 15 April to the 16 April in tho sane
aonth. ~o will soo, in a few rx«jite, ttat it was extended a.’aln. Tho report
attached to this letter is also dated “11 !by 19fc2",

(Reading) "Socrot Report*

"Based on results ,'f exporiaents which up to now various scientists had
conducted on ani-xils only, tho exporinonts in Dachau wore to prove whether
tho so results would maintain their validity on buaan beings.

"1. The first experiments woro tc show whether tho human being can
gradually adapt himself to hi hsr altltu'.oo. Soao ten tests showed that a slow„r
aocont without oxygon tc.ld.n_- free six to oi ht heurs kept tho functions of tho
sons »s of tho various to s tod persons (hunan exporinjntal su v Jocts) fully normal
up to a height of 8,CC0 ajtors. Vi thin 8 {oiht) hours sovoral tostod porsone
had roaohed a hoifht of 9*5 kilometers without OXTCBN when bends ocourrod
widonly. « |

"2. formally it is lxqposstblo to stay without oxygon at altitudes hi$*rJ^
then six kHonetore. Exporirwnts showed howovoy that after ascent to 8000 netora
without oxyron, 'on's caa'inod with unconsci-nisnoss lasted only about 25 ninut .s,
After this period the tested persons had costly become accustcnod to that alti¬
tudes corbel us r. os a returned, thsy could make kneebonds, showel a no mol electro¬
cardiograph and wore able to work (60 to 70t of tho cases examined*)

"3. Descending t:sts on paructatos (suspended) without oxygen.

Those expcrijftjnts proved that free U* kilomters on down severest bonds
occurred which remained until the fjrcual was reached. The detrimental effects

caused by those experiments manifested thensolves at the be.imri.ru: as uncoxv-

196 • V.


k - .


. _


11 D.c -H-.»TD-7-4-Lehnhar5t
Ccurt No. 1


scicuanees end subsequently as spasmic end limp paralysis,

entotooy, stereotypy, and as retrograde amnesia lasting

• •* ,

several hours. ..beat one hoar efter the end of the experi¬
ment the tasted persons for the most part were still dis¬
oriented es to tine end locality. The blood picture often

showed a shift to the left i albumen end red and white

* * ' .. ..

blood corpuscles were regularly found in the urine after

the experiment j cylinders were sometimes found. :.fter seve¬
ral hours or days the blood and urine returned to normal.

•The changes of tho electrocardiograph were reversible.

"Contrary to descendin g teats on parachutes without
oxygen, descending tests with oxygen were carried out from
h.ights up to 16 kilooeterr. It • as proven thot on tho ove-
rage the tested persons regained the normal function of
their ser.eea at 12 to 13 kilometers. Ho 'disturbances of
general conditions occurred during any of theso experiments,
tri^f unccr.ecicunness et the beginning of the experiment
c*..s<.d no lasting disturbances. Urine -nd blood showed on¬
ly a slight change.

4. .’.a the long time of d.scbr.t of parachutes, undor
ccturl conditions, w-uld cause severe freezing even if no
detrimental effects were caused by l^cfc of oxygon, tested
persons r.era brought by sadeen decreases in pressure with
cutting torch from 5 to 20 kilometers, simulating tho do-\^
mage to the pressure machine of the high altitude airplane,
.ftsr s waiting perico cf 1 C seconds, corresponding to stopp¬
ing out of the machine, tho t.rtcd persons were m-da to fall
from this height rith oxygon to a height where breathing is
'cseiblo. The tosted persons aroke between 10 and 12 kilo¬
meters end pt cheat 8 kilometers pulled the pprachuto lover.


- 197


11 Dec«-iw*»-6^1-l«a»sr

Court Ho. 1


"$• In experiments of f'-llinr from the a-.:*? hulzht without oxygon the
test porscns rorainei DOSBSl function of thair sens38 only between two

and flro kilcaetoru.

"6. Sxpsriaents teatin: the effect of Ferritin on the orpanijn during
parachute Juaps, .roved tiut the soicro after-effects, as oentioned under


to. 3,


considerably milder. The ability tc withstand the conditions


at hi -h altitudes was only sli.htly labored, while the bends."

The translation is a littlo garbled there. I thirk it shruld read*

...•while the bends occurred suddenly due to the restr.-.int-ljcsoninc

effects of Ferritin.

"7. Or. Klichos, Karls-Dnivarsity in :rc.-uo, reprrta in the publi¬
cation of tho "kiich 'osoarch Council i >'y prelonged broathin;: of
oxygon, hurv-n »oin-a should thoorotically bo kept fully fit up to 13
’<ilc-otors. Prootically tho limit is around 11 kilorx-ters.*

"2xp-ri:;cnt3 which I carried out in this oonrKCtlcn provod that
with pure -rxy wn no lowering of th» raasurr>lo raw onory
nrticootle up to 13.3 fcilonctora. Tho tost porsorj do roly bocr.no
uxsrilliiv since pains of the Vo<^' cavitios ^row too severe, due to
the lcwerin; of .-rossuro bofc*oon bo.V end thin dr. "hen pur® oxyren
was inhale-1 bonds occurro.’. in all 25 -cAsee only at hei hts abovo U ..2
Icilxaotors.

";*■ practical result of tlv. xaore than 200 experin;nts con J uoted
at Dachau tho foiloxin. can be assucedi if

"Flying in altitudes hi hor than 12 kilmxtcrs without vrosauro-\
cabin or pressure-suit is infeasible amn rhilj \ ran thin? pure
ox7'cn. If the airpl^no rossure loachins is damped at altitudes
of 13 klloiMters cn* hi. hor tho crew will not be able to bail
out cf tha dvoarod piano thaosolves since at that boi-ht tho bends
app-iar rather su .'only. It must ' o roqcosto' that tho cruw should


.be roared automatically free tho piano, for inut.anca, % y catapulting
tho seats v y rxsans of c^apreased air. Descendin' with eponod ^>ara—
Chute without oxy on would cause severe injuries hxe to tho lack

. ise


U Doc«-iWTT>-&-2-Lesaor

Coart So# 1


of aqrpan besides causing severs freo s in,j consciousness uouli not* be
regained until the ,-rour.i was roaches# Therefore tho follow!nc is to
b« requested* 1. -b .aracisxto vith barcootricaJiy controlled openin’.
2# 1 portable oxygon ajrcratus for tha junp.

Tor t‘v followin' oxporin. nts Jewish professional crixdnals who
had enssittc«£i»recV«Ut f . 1 ^

which noons rac- pollution

...wure used Tho question of fchs fonittion of nsbolisn was invcstl-
ap .ted In 10 eosos..,."

Snboliar, your Honors will recall, is a blockage of tha blood circulation,
..."Scao of the tost parsons died faring a continued nigh altitude
sxpcrincntj for instance, after onu-half hour at a height of 12
kilcentors. Aftor the skull had boon ope no! under wotor an tapis
cnount ^f air cnbclisa was found in tho brr.in vessels and, in port,
fruo air in tho brain vcntricloo.

"To find out whethor the scv;ro physical offuots, as mentioned
under Ho. 3, *.ra duo to tV. fcnction of o^olisn, tho following
was ^noi ,.ft«,r rclr.tivo rocuperr ticif frea such a ; ar-.chuto uo-
scondin* tost had taken plcoo, however bofore r reinin'- of corv-

e

sciouancss, scoo test persons w>.rc kopt un'jr water until they
died# '“hon the skull an’ tho oavitios cf thj breast and of tho
ohdcnsn had boon opened under water, an onomru3 araount cf air
cabollsn was four*’, in the vessels of tho bruin, the coronary
vessels, md tho vosnals of tho liver nnd the in to stines, otc#

"That proves tret air ^’'olisn, so far consiterad as absolutely
fatal, is not fatal at all. but that it is reversible as shown by

the return to norral conditions cf all tho othar tost persons#

•

"It was also jroved by exp-riatnts that air cCbolisn occurs
ir. -Tactically all vessels oven while pure :ry~ca is !k>1«v inhaled.
'im test person was cade to braatho pure r xy on for t.rc and ono-
half hours before the oxpjrinent atcjrto\ After six alnotes at n
haiffht of 20 tilo r otcra ha died at dissection also showed '-*V.

IS?


11 Deo^WTD-S->U*a«r
Court Ho* 1

v ';* _ .. ■ • /

air csioolisn ns ttos the case in all othar oxperinenta,

■It sudden docrvaaea In pressure and subsequent iaaeUatb fall*
to halphts wtk.ro Lreathiiv* is possible, no deep reaching danafoe
‘no tc Air vobclisa could bo noted. Tb- f srmtion of air unV-olian
always nee do a certain amount of tino. (Sifnad) Dr. jUSCHEU"

I thiric this ’.oeur^>nt requires to ry little cia.nt but I would like tc say
that it indicates neat clearly tho typo of so-ccllol orl a l na la which these non
were axperiewntin’ upon. They were not crliinals, sentenced by a court and
ccapotont Jurisdiction for a criaw which is known to any civilizod socioty.

Ttey wore non who wuro narked for death — certainly not condennoi to
death — corked for daath, I say, bocauso th. ;criioular Jem had had inter¬
course with an Aryan or rico versa. That was tyo type of criainal that had
been arjfrod fer death ani which tbsao defondente felt that it was norclly
Justifiable tc uso in exporinente of this type.

I core tkh to Docuaont 3U>o-P3, which will bo rrosocution Exhibit 62 ,

— , *

This loiter indicator, if the Tribunal .lease, th.*. knrwlodr;o and participation
in those crlninal orpari».nts reecho’. into tho Tory top echolono of tho
Luftwaffe. Vo have horo a letter fren Erhard lilch. Secretary of State for . ir,
to ’Dear 7olffy" which is a reference to Karl "olff, who was Chief of tho
Porsonol Staff of !fr inrich RLaalor at thia tlau. ..s will appear frea tho docu-
cent, Karl *olff was acting as tho liaison officer botwoon Heinrich Hlmlor
and -rterd :ilch in tfvso '.rperirventa conducted for
Luftwaffo. This lottor is d^.tel 20 !>.y 19U2i
■Deer -olffyj

"In reference to ycur tjlorr'-a of 12 -ay, cur nodi cal in¬
spector reports to ik. that the altitude experiments carried out
b7 tin SS and Luftraffo at Dachau have been finish:.!. t J& ccn-
tirsiation ?f these uxp^ria;nts s.uss essentially unreasonable.

•fyravor, th. earryin* out of jxr>eri=?nta of scce oth-.r kind, in
refsrd tc p_rila on M-zh seas, w-ili be inpertent. Those havo

v qo r. zrerarei in iaavlluto agreement with thj proper officesj

2CO


11 Deo^K-0-3-J^-Lo98cr

Court !fo, 1


Q'x.rstahsarzt elt* rill bo charged with the execution and Stabsorst
2aschor will bo ofi'o av r . ll a M c until further crier in addition to
his duties within tl» "uilocl Carps of the Luftwaffe, .. change of
Uv.se suoaurea does not epp*ar nacessary and an enlarponont of the
task is net considered ,-roeaIn:; at this tiae,

"Tty*, low-FToasure choebor would net be needed for these low-
tenporaturw experiments, It Is urgently nooioJ at anrthor plaoo
and therefore can no loa-wr ronain in Dachau.

■I convoy the 3700 ini tharice from tho su;r«,T* comnndcr of
tfvi Luftwaffe to tho SS for their exteneivo corporation*

■I r?rr-ln with boot wishes for-y~u In ^oc J ccwiioehlp and
with


f )

V. ✓


fc.il Hitler 1
-lw-vyo yours

(si, nod) Z. :ilch -
Hero a.~ain is a reference to tto lonpth of tie. which lasohor will be de¬
tached to Dachau for the purposes of conduotirv tho low-pro 3 suro oxporlnonte
onl as indicated h-ro, :01ch is of thb opinion thf.t ttoy had boon concluded,
Hcroror, wo shell sou in a noau.nt that this Judna-nt at this tino suLsoquuntl;.
changed and that Tasob-r continued hie expurgate in cooperation with 'duff ar.
Rcnbarg for another 30 lays. This also irv’ioctofl that tho Luftwaffo was in¬
terested in hunar. cxperli-ntation cn freezing prolans. Ko r.akce tho roforonoo
"oxT^rickinte in ru.~-.rd to perils et hi h seas" with roforonco to thu occasion
upon whioh Oorx-r. aviators wore foreto roriohate into tho Hcrth Sea
and wore for axtondoi periods of tine subjected to tho cold water.

They wore interested in tryin~ to detominc th» nost offoctivo noons cf
reviving such puoplo. This letter also inbicatoi, I think, rinoo it is
stated that Cfoars tabs art t oltz will be charted with thj execution of the
fr?ozirv-; aperients an* Stobsarzt Snschar will bo no lo available until
durthor nctico, I s-ay it sours to nc that this Indicates that oltz and
I^ochar woro still in close relationship at this tir* an’, that ‘*eltz waa,

ir. fact, the superior of laschor,
r 2C1


11 DeoWK.TD-a-S-UMer
Court !*o# 1


The naxt docwsnt ia Ho. JO-261 which'will te Prosecution Exhibit 63.
s I stated a nxunt no, we here find tf» proof th’-t SLppke and Jdllch agreed
to 1st the low-pressure ctarfcor rocain-at Dachau for a further period of tine.


letter is dated U June 191*2, froc tho State Secretary of Aviation and
Xaspoctor General of tha Luftwaffe, rrbo is Erhard ’Olch, and it is addressed
W Drr Ho^Hlppke, wfc> was Ohief of tho Hr'ical Inspsctorcto of the Luftwaffe,


and at* tooi ^

•Acccrdin? to tto n Toenant with tho “^ichsfuhror SS, tho

%i

low-pros sure air ebraber for experirants in thetitai h-orhood of
•jinich is still to ' o avallcMe for two aooths len or.

'Vcroover, thj Sto’ scrst Dri -ascl^r is. In addition to his
tests in the Luftwaffe, to bo on duty for the present for tho
purpotoe of tho TViichefUhrtr SS.

Kdl Hitler 1 ■

This ia in fact & copy of tto letter which was sunt to Hippko by IJilch
and this otpy was forwar ’V. \y JUlch to SS Ober.ru ponfuhror and Oonoral of
the .r.ffcn-SS olff for his info nation an 4 his wao a\-*o ra in writinr at
tta. bottor of tha latter.


11 Doc^i>CF- 9 -l Ikchaa


.c nrv cxc tc Tscttxnt 2SU, Wv. *dll be Ir'sccutirn Exhibit 65 -
-ardca ac that la irococution Zxhibit 6L. '.his is a letter presumably f*on
>a^-lT grarv-t, alth'.u£h I cannot ache rut his initials cn the D-cua-nt, it
is siTW.: "Ycurs - SS GfceratumTu-.'rcr" and it ccnsa froa the ^ficc cf Hinnlor.

I, reads as felloes

■Dear Dr. Readier: Tour lotter :f 5 June 1?U2 to Eci chapter cr-SS eas

m

j^adod SS-Ctcrgruppenfuchrcr'JOTF, Chief -i Roldufochror-SS rcrs.nal Staff,

for ftrthor octien, rn t.oao btfialf I to iafcm you that in keeping rith

aa -rr'QT cf Fid£:arahal IIICH the lew-prossuro chacbor is to Kanin available

an aikiticaal too mntha fer experiments. Hioldrfrshal 1 IXH also erdorod that

la addition jo your oxpcrinoita fer the Iaftoaffo, also you are to ccntlnto

rrrlring until Airthcr notice for the nurpesos cf RcichsfuJiror-6S«

■It is truly very doplorablo that during your abscnco Iron Schengen

the staff of yeur nodical office teis poruo&tod by so many minis tors. Cen-

soquontly the ifichsA;^rcxvSS .\>jroroo cf your seine for ab.ut a fortnight

•to SoheiQBtt - after tho period cf evaluation in Berlin, for tho appropriate

initiation there cf Unterarat Dr. 32S.Z3

Noe, Tpor Honor, Mil recall that urinf, tho p^-sentetien yesterday morning

Jurlnc tho proicntatd.cn cf tho dcfo.x anta and the argsaUatioca in ihich thoy

rera active, we submitted as .Ycsccution -rhiVit No. 33, Dromcat He. U22,

rrijich rac the lotter tc Sievers, ordering him to establish an Institute fer

•

military Scientific licsearcfc within the ..hr.cncrbc. I prcrf.cc ! tho Txd'-unal at

—

Slot tine that the references .redo during that Uno rould bo clearer

to

he proc-ntation sf the evidence.

Thus far, to have given coac inform tier, ac to tho oxpcrlucnte
lie tod at Dachau. X-u -ill recall that in .this letter, by w£or of Heinrich
aimlor, RicharA 2rarr*t ms telling SS Ctcrsterrf>an=fuJ-.ror Glovers to establish
this Institute and take us> cf tho facilities available! in O'cl.au. ’ o havo
also soon fr-xi the exhibits, nhich havo gone in this morning, that tho Defen-
fcnt Gievors had witnessed experiment* in Paefcau and reported on then to tho
Sfcichsfuehrer SS ani Utre ms seoo talk cf takin g r.aschor into tho .hnenerbo
t- serk under ita' auspices. 'Go shall see in fact teat that is *.biat r.appcnod,

203

• ^

♦


fl

H J


ccn-


II Dco-ii-^-5->i.o<fcu»-J?


Jo sov ca.o te D'.cusoat 1607-* ?S , which will be Prbaocutioa 3ski-
hit 65. 2 hi* i« c letter, writtca by -Uechcr, to tho DofoM.Jit 2udolf
ar.sdt cad if the irlbuaul will obaorvo et tho toy of the letter, you
will eoo tX-t the lottorhoad reuda -Stsbearst* Dr. Saacher.

TOC-- SSslSdi kr. hcHnsoy; ^e-ria^ is tala Docuaant book, after ‘
JTo. 2&‘ ia c Dccuuoni So 422, entitled ■(fcjorationol Hcsdaucrtora - 7 July
194 2? ■

Ua. .icHaJSTi Tea, your Honor.

JuDGZ S23aii»0j Vua this Document to bo introduced out of ordor, or
is too o-urao of inhibit 54 1

;,a. KcHaSSTi Z tried to espial n, Tour Honor, but Q-narcntly I
did act ncho uyaolf clc.;r. Document So. 422 vea introduced yoator&y
uorain^ na Proaocutiai Exhibit Jo. 33. Z included tho D ecus or. t in this
book rather Ss.-s huwo it is soeoao&t 3ook Jo. 1.

c

JJ39I S3?f2 9: Ttu nous th..t you ueroly h-wo it thoro ae a raforonco
of a -av3sio..co!

HE, HcEaJSTi 5k.;*. la ri ;kt, yoa air. I waa ra-uifclw; that la

IPc\siQat 1607-a ?S, whloh ia *roaocutlos 2thioit 65, tho lottorhond roods

■Stabanrit* rr. Slacker - ■^s«^o^bo■ HT-SS, ao wc boo that by 20 July
• •

1.3 the notorious Dr. Ksscher waa n i:a;bor of, tho Inotltuto for Hill tray .
Scientific He#oarch withm tho ahaoaorbo Socloty, which w a i launchod
by the defendant Siovora. Tho letter ia to tho Defendant, Jhidolf 3rnndt»

■Hxloacd, .ilosao find a cooy of tho werk of ayaolf and Dr.

• Priori.onto f :r rcacuo frx. si ts .-tltudoa.r"

•Oa 1-1 July, 19«.r, I w_a ordered by the Hcichafuohror SS to
ycv. tso oboYO-r.cutl sod report. 2ko Bolchafudiror*tftata that ropert
to bo forverdod t*. Oonorul Hold :..^hd l.llch, ujeaponiod by a lottor
fr.c hit, sskis,; ..Uch to rocoiwe acr.cor .7 aad ::o for c lecturo. I
bcliovo to have understood corroctly, th_t tso Holchafuohror thou^it, .
yor. would aubuit. to his c letter to th.t effoct for hit ai.^-turo.

■I was vosy gL* to hoar th-t tho Hcichsfuchrcr waa a.tiafiel with •
the result of tho work at Daoseu and with tho file, cad th.:t ho ordorod
as iateneivo o -sinaatisn of the work ia th.t field.

<a

204


-9-3. Loohan.


"I rccc wv a nr to' Dr. Smbcr^ fer tho Jar .hrit Cross, on the request cf
55 Gethf. 5levers. SS 8tandf. Dr. ->u-st rrdcrcd nc te notify you hero of.

" '.fc- Rclcaofuchrcr decided furthemoro, eo Ik July 19c2, that tho prisoner
Scleta cad the tea prisoners the mrh In tho rlssoctlrn raxx in Datdmu should
bo released end transferred to the jrcup "Dir 1 c cr*. The exact nai.es arc in

;o3sossioa cf S3 Oattf. Cievers. The iloichsfudjor has als > issue*.' an order

• ...... • a • I

to'that orfoct tc 1 nj er 3uchanock.

■I thank yea cor dally for e v er y th in.', and regain.*

(Signature) Dr. S. Dasefcor

I rdsh tc renork that you Bill hoar free certain cf the defendants
that parsons rhe volunteered for those axporlucnt* veto perhaps precised
thoir frcocl-n. This letter indicates that those priseners the crusontcd
to rxx-k with .tarchcr in his esxr.'.cr >ja activities, the trek psrt in tJio dissootion
cf x.'re bodios 'f tho unf-rtunato vietdra, wre perhaps t* to fiver ccuc favors
bocauro of their kin! assistance tc hiu. Here he sjitiens tixco such prisoners
ahe vero to to released and transferred tc tie yeup "Dirlc'fan^ca-". Tire court
cipht bo interested in knenin; tfcat ras an S3 military unit, *.hich *,as recruited
exclusively cr alncst exclusively a.; * at least in larrc noosuron fren concen¬


tration caiips. r.ioy uatorteek a recruiting yro'yea and tried to obtain sota
people -rtiai tlwy thought vul! eporato very uoll in such a jrcup ac tho "Dirlo-


Traacar B ras.

./o rwrr oava t-t Decw»nt ».*o. UK, rhich Till be rr-secuti.-n Sxfciblt No.66.
Hiir, your Kenrr, consists cf a ctvurlflC letter for tiv final report nado by
t?.c Defendants Rcnboig on*, .tiff and the dccoascd Dr. Raschcr en
-ltitucte Qrperinarts at Dachau. Tho covering letter ij date! 2?

1912, addressed te the Eoichofbohror-6^. It is fra. tie Goman
Station f->r iriatioa Inc., 5^rlii>wlcrshcf. This, ycur ‘Honor, rill recall tos
' l doparUnnt fer ..vi-tden ^odicine, chi eh ras in char 0 3 cf tlx Deferent Ruff.


3-e previous letter, which I road freu itaclvr tc Rudolf Brandt str.tos that
fcc ic one losing s final copy cf tho tejS: dene bj hinsclf and Br. f.aSchor. .il
'il nc* find the report t; that letter, instead ro f'-ur.d it rith Uic letter here.


‘•hich is i, - fcofrrc the ccurt rj rrcsoeutloa Sahicit 66 . 1 his letter is signed


by • uicrj --Td Huff. It simply states: *

205


mtxc 3ZCZ-JS v do a tan. written r.rtc :r\=: in the csrnor, atetine ‘hat
:x>crt 3 vaa received 2 SfovaAcr V/ ole vers.

I acv cctc to the rop-rt itself. It lc loi>: cad I ’.c net think it would
be worth rtdlc f r :» to roe.I it in Its entirety. I an sure that ycur Honors
T.lli wish t: study it c-utai-Jc of the c -urt race, aa it rives a very do tailed


j^xtancwion cr rnat to* ex no end hoc it ras dene, exclusive, of course, .-f
the retails on the r.urlora and tortures -hich have been proved by the Dr-
euixnta t’xr far suiaittod. I rvol'l liko to road c few excerpts fret, this
Document botanic* on rago 63 of tha ,4v.lish Docunoit Bade* It tho top
it states:


~ report la tc.be aadc >a oxporiuent* in hier. U*c possibility cf

t»

reacuo fr. a hich altitudes in t o low prasauro chanbor is studied, beporiaonto

wore at parccfcuto slnkin; apoou: to 15 Ir.., (*.7,000 ft.), v&thcut

ovjcn end up to 10 Jo. (59,OCX) ft.;, -.1th _y:on taraatinj aa :cll as fulling

axpcrlncnte spools up to 21 k::., (69,000 ftl), altitude with and without

•

C5 9 r ^ciu The results with practical o5.;aificanoo i/ill bo discuscod bclotT."


11 Zie«4»M0«l-aiac^!E

Court -To. 1


^hon thy „iv- it index to th. to jrt. -£un nVthe lottos, si;;nin3
f-r tho JLV Instituto i» tho defendant .-.iff. Th. author* o«o noted aa
-fcsohor and Stebsarst -or Uiftwnffo, z t'.iink, probably re-fora to

.icacbcr. -cohere nano c-ipoars bclcr that. fhen the cctc in tho betton

m/I

states that* "These studies »re carried Wt in conjunction with tL re scare!

-natructi n association 'baa -hnoaerbo". That i* the erraniration of whio
t.V ^ fondant Sicrors wrj aoich business l*e»cor. Tho r»purt is dated 20 July
1 . 12 .

Turvinc to the next vr^o, J tMrh it aijht he useful just to read the
intreduoti n ~nl & little f thj nroc. \uro of the ex orirost ti sake it a
littlo .xro clear ..roolsoly -skat tlxao or. v.ro trying t.- tie nr..’ h<w they
wero ©cine to do it.

"I. Intro duction and 3txt.-cat of tho .’rc'-len. It is theoretically
puasiblo ft r nna t. reach as hijh an altitudo as >*. aay wish in au aircraft
oith a ar.ssuro oah'in. ~c-..vvcr, tlu c xstiaa amt he settled as ho vdir.t results
r of oots tlx do struct! a f th. -r.ssv.rc or.Mn i.ill have upon tho l.uann heir.;,
alu. la sue!; oases is on.j sod In a Tea- soc..nda t, t2io lew air prj.-isuro and
thereby > lack of -tyjja v&Loh i.. characteristic rf hi^h -altitude. Of
.'Xtiuv.ifj practical interest is tht. question fr what altitudoa and by what
.-.cans ••- safest rescue _f tho orcr. can la :;adt. In the wt-rl: a*’, hand, a ru rt
lo ;r-seated cn experiments in which w.re studied tho various pcssibilitioo of
rcce'M ur-lor a xoial expert xtttr.1 o-.biti' c. “U'-Oo th» urjoncy f tho solution
o; the pjvblcu was .ridont, it t-.s ncooasary, copsi-dly un ic-r t: o ..Iver. o.nditi.
f tho c::pori-ont, t- for j, for tho time lieir.3 ‘he thor u^f cl- r
purely scientific questi ns.

C T . .r.coduro of the ;lx..'rL -at. Tht -X'orL- enta wuro carried
• ^

p;rt:.jlo lew pressure chamber witl oqid^-jcrt f r -xpl„siro coovr-pr-aai-a. Tho
3vrf.-r.raco f this avparctus limited the :d;ho#t altitude attainable t. ab ut
--,000 r—tors or G9,000 fc-t.

"In this ex- crircnt&l- series, i-aich was to'Clarify the ;ossibiHtias f

^ *

riacuo fror. hi^h altitudoe, the c::‘ari. uves, ainulatin^ actual c-r.liticna, were
carried -ut iu such a way that r»jcu„ 1th prx'aJxute unf.ldod (desi.rated as

-:o.. din^ experiments) -aid with parachute' frldcd (dcsi r.atod as falling
• ; ;-jriijonts) w.ro studied snotices with rnd s.nctin-s without

207


It Oei-1Q“Mlnabubk-4K
Court No. 1.

oxygon breathing. Since the altitude or posture of tho body
la of essential significance for the demands made by the laok
of oxygen on tha circulation, the experiments were oarrlod
out In elttlng and prone positions;'and, In doaoondlng exper¬
iments, in a suspended position in a parachute harnosa cor¬
responding to tho actual position."

The Court will reoall that in the pictures which we havo
submitted as Proeeoutlon Sxhlblt dl you oan aoo In a groat
number of plcturos the oxporlmontal subject being suspended
In-a parachute harness.

■For tho purposes of demonstration certain of the exper¬
iments wore recorded on film. 21 octrocardiogram b wore mado
of several experiments in tho experimental serloa. Oxygon
was breathed, out of the ouatoen-iry low prossuro apparatus
with continuous flow at altitudes ovor ton kllonotors,

*2,800 feet. The following oxporlmontal soquonou was ohoeon:
1. Descending exporlmonts without oxygon broathlng;*2.
Descending exporlmonts with oxygon broathlng; *. Falling
experiments without oxygon broathlng; 4. Falling oxporlmonto
with oxygon breathing."

Now. on tho following pages the Court is glvon tho

roeults of tho experiments In rather toohnloal languago

and I think It would probibly not be holpful to havo mo

road that in this language hero. Accordingly, I would like

to havo tho Tribunal turn to pago 88 of tho Snglleh Doouoont

Book which la noted as page 1* of tho original Oorman, and

I would like to road a running dosorlptlon whloh Is there

given of thereaction of one of thoso miserable oxporlmontal

subjects. It states that: "Descending oxporimonts were undo

in larger numbers from 15 kllometora altitude, sinoo It

became evident that at this altitude the approximate limits

208 f


11 De©-H-HK-2-10-Minabuck-AX
Court Ko* 1*


for what was possible In emergencies had already bean roaohod
essentially surpassed. After an ascent made as rapidly ae
possible, using oxygen apparatuawlth free flow tho mask
was removed Immediately upon attaining 15 kilometers, whloh
Is 47,200 feet, altitudo and the descent was begun. Slnoo •
the results of these descending experiments were very typical
and ospoolally impressive it Is necessary to present one of
thoso experiments In detail. Tho protocol of an experiment
will bo roprosentod ns follows; '

■At 47,800 foot, tho subjeot lots tho mask fall, sevore
altitude sickness, spasmodoic convulsions. At 45,580 foot __

t m • 0 §

Opisthotonus.r whloh, If your Honors

• •

• «


.xfn-'


11 3cc-4>«MO»S-l =cucW?

Court l

pi ecuo, 20 oas th© reaction of the splno which 1* t;picolly associate
with tot-jsus or loekjaw. ’*t 44,920 foot, arcs strctchoi stiffly forward;
•its in liko a do,?. Ions spread stiffly «s>*rt. 44,950 foot, suspeadod la
cnlstkotcans. t 43.510 feet, ;-’oasl convulsive brojtain.-.. *t 40,^50,
dyr’hoa, hoac» 11-?. 33,520 foot, uhco ordinal od nova-cats with tho extre¬
mities. 19,590 feet, clonic convulsions and -:rooninc. 18,060 foot, yells

aloud. 9,520 foot, still yolls o^avulscs ar.is oad lc^s, hoed sinks forwrrd.

/

8,660 foot to scro fcot, yolls spasmodic ally, ,;riaacos, bitos his toa,.uo,
doos not resp-nd tc spooch, .“ivos *. e isprossioa of sa-oonc *io is com¬
pletely out of his alad. 6 alcutes nftor rc^chir,-; ,ground level, ro.iots

for tho first tine to vocal s'tfcMl .tioa. 7 r.iautos attests upon ccuacad

• « •

to ru-isa, srys in storootypod Ansnorf » Ho, plcaso". 9 ainutos, nt..nds
up on ccaar.dj sovoro at Jticj ansvors tc all questions: "Just a ninuto*,
Tries CJos^^c^Ur t-> rccai his birth duto. 10 uinutos, typicrl ste¬
reotypes * r.ttitudc and nova.oat; audios nuabor to himself. 11 ainutos,
holdo his head turuod convulsively to tho rl^ht; trios ropo.itodly to
aaswor t^o first question coccoraia,; his birth dato. 12 aiautos, quo*-
Uons V* t-O'subject« •Ha/ I slice so-otai zt* (0. la civilian

work ho vcm a ilolic-tossor. slork) "Itry 1 pant, will it bo sllri,-Jit If
I iahalot" Srouthes .-ooply. than say. "-airi.^t, thank you very uuch, 1
15 minutes, 3h boixv; :rdorcd to walk, slops forward oad soys: "hll rl^t
thank you very :;uch«. 17 cinutes, ^ivos hie a^o; suys ho was born in

1928 (bora 1 I'ov^bor 1900). 2r>-raan»or ark.: “\hurc7 "Soiothina
1928". ■ProfosiisS ■28-1928>. 18 l.inutos, Hey I inhalo:■ •roB^"'

■T co teat vita tr e£ -autos, ©till tho question continuosi^


see. a,thin.


his ac."0 and: pl.«o of birth, Tfcca bci-


-f *.UJ lu.-s; stur.r c ati-acs; c._---v -v
•hot. Dark oojocts Jo still a t discerned;

Is awaro f brl.it li'itj his profosslo


ii soo-u-a>-icKy-n

Cairt I


C-aBiall7 Utorlcetod. 37 rlmtca, ro.xts to paia otfcioll. 40 nlautos,

• V

_ :tza tc /Cicrvo dlff orcccoo, f _lls ccotlcuUlr iato Ms prwl oi
■p-ifili itorootypc. 50 -inutCB, gpucl«lly orloatoC 75 kinutos,

•till dlBsriaitod la t L- c; rot ro«Tr entire unac«la ovor throo days.

3i boars, aiBicl c -adit loo a. via attained; hu no recelloction of
the arjorl—ont itsolf. 1

-ad •- Is tao dcoorlpti ,c of tho torturos which tfao«o oxporlJ:oatcl


ribjocts


i


4-iriacCueWP


w©ro f :rcod t: endure, those who nann.~cd- to live threuftb tho ojc>orl;eat

itsolf,

On "c-u 91 it tho i^lieh D~-cincnt 3o*fc, union la on par.es 16 rad
17 zt tho original, vc flat*, a . cst interesting description of tho
arcria.xos whion teo defendant aoabors i'- J . the doeoosod Dr. Bnschor
tad la an c:;>erfc-cot upon tna:solvee In this low pressure chx.boranf thoy
have icon «xiu.£ tojctail this la report. It roads ca follows*

■la aplto cf the rolatiwoly lor.:c uunbor of aapori-.oata, tho actual
c.iiac of tho severe i;oat.J. dieturbeacot and bodily f-lluroa (paralysis,
olindnoaa, et cotor«) attendant \^>^n ncst-hypcxc-lc tvillf&t st.-.to
rcncins occothla* of a riddle. It jp;cared often as thsw* tho pba.o-
stxir. of pro ouro drop alckaosa (acrocabolisu) hod c-ahlnod with tho
results of severe ^xy.-ca l.xk. In this concoction, tho subjective
uac^uats undo by tho authors In tvo experiments oach worolatorestInc.

In the caso of ex... "who, year Honors, is Boibor,•;....■ during a l»olf
h.ur st.-y nt 13 klla;otors with oay.con, only tho usual pains attendant
w'.th bonds .occurred.


rs


210


lWfco-TKJJ - 11-1 Prioo

Court Uo. 1

■ In a further expurirvnt with a stay'of’ho rdnutea duration
rt :n altitude of botneon 13 and 13.5 kilorutors, there developed
vorr gradually a condition of mjakn-sg coriiir-sri with a pjculior
hjodnche, which than lod to a c r nsl dorcble slackening of strength
in tte sxrm end hmds. j a result of . this, 7-criwr- could no longer
hoi’’ the breathin'. nouthpi^cu ( for social reasons in those experi¬
ments, lerberc had to breathe with a nouthpioce and nose clivjp)
so that it slid out of his nout’u -ill of thc»e phenomena wjto still
dearly observed by Hori>erg. r.aach:r returns’, thy -»outhpioce to
Rente rg. However at this point ?xd>or failed rather auitenly with
paleness, strong cyanosis of th. lipc and c<-Mpluto unconsciousnoso.
.yter laiborg had nj-ainu' 1 cle.tr couacioucness through 'Vjscent and


sufficient axy..on broathin^, he (’ot~r..rinaJ, tho existence-in hlnsolf

oi a co tpleto paralysis of th- logs, w-akruss of the -rra and sovaro

-'is turban cu of vision. Thes^ s-rious disturbances dcvuloped although*

the tirn of oxygon lack and unconsciousness had lasted only about '{ A

fivo succnds. FollowinG ckiscent soon after this to 0 kilouters, tho\_?>'

paralysis of tte lo.s continued for about fivo ninutes none end tho vory
severe rioual ’ 1 st urban cos only doored up after two hours. 'folio this
episode of ./xieorc's occurrod in cn erporimnt nt special aKitu&J, the
disturbances occurred in hnscher at cn altitucVe tetnoon 12 and 12.^ kilo¬
meters ( that is, up to Ul, 01 o foot ) while ho was breathing sufficient
cocygxm with a nask end c'ntinuous flow into tho circuit. -Jhxir ton ninutes
stay at this dtitu*to, pains ’w^cn on the right sido with a spasticparalytic
condition of the right le;; which in ervesud continually as thou, h Teacher's
whole right side w-ro bein’ crushed ’.^treon tuo'pr-sso?. :.t the sb.xj tixw

there Were rnst seven. headach-s as thou. h the skull w»i\j be ini; burst apart.

t»

7aj pains hecarie continually nare s-vero so that at 1 -st the discontinuation
of tte enperirvmt boca.\e necessary. -v pains hGappeared when ;;round level
•r.s reacted while to-- disturbances of the right log continued about flvu
.-i nates uorc, •

Shortly beferu to. seeaxd eapcriixsnt, Bascfaur took two tablets of

211


11-IfcoJWDfcll- 2 - Prloo

c

•^ntinjurcJ/icn • ( a coal tor durivatite) and two tablets of Fervitin.

Ir. the course of tfcj experirunts tVr. occurod only licht prins In the
ri’it nm by ' lor, nederato hoadac&e, but a very b-v^iv uncontrollable
ur> to ecu h, actually less aevuro difficultly than in th_ foro^olnc
_x*».rl:»-nt, althcurh this oru was ::o3e at 1000 rvitors hi£h-r.

He :'—r: experienced ’istur-nne-s which in quality roserfcled tlw rorero
distort-noes in tivi 15 JCilcojtur sinkin: exporiront, rlthoujh th- foyroe
of exy,un lad. in tills experiment ttts xu liable in comparison to the
15 'Hir«. t^r oxpjrlmnt, s • that tie idea of a extinction cf pressure
'rop lwnaena with the phonocuna of oxy.en lack is definitely suxostod*"

*i would life, tc oay, lour "oiem, that this report on the subjective
reaction of thj EVifendants HoriMri and Haadv-r sliould put at rest any
clairs by any of th->ro -wfendciAs that these hich altitude experiments
wore net painful. It very aloarly states i " Ocher's whole ri'jht side
folt as if it w-ro belty. emsiwd tetireon two p rosso a; his skull felt ns
if it w-ro bolnc burst apart.*

It should also be pintod out that tiw pains beccrvi continually ao
sovuro so that at Inst ti>c disc mtinuanc. of the expiriront becaro
aiooasar.'. Twiro is no kncun ease in which th-ro experimenters discontimwd
an -xp-ri.unt on tboir unfortunate victims cause they tfero sufferine pain.

On Faye of the IVocurunt looh, I would just like to moke one co-runt,
tott will note that these experiments voxfc testinc the possibilities of
roscu- fro:: a d*jm.ed airplane at e:Ar-:uly hi# altitudes and. they noro
stud; in too effects of a parachute jump Xr» hi# altitudes, both with
tJvj opening of tlie parachute very hurriedly and with the prachute folded
with a Ion: free fall. I just would lit- to a*', by way of ocmwnt, that
rdiilu acne of tlwse experiments w-ro extended to heights in axcoss of
50,000 feet, there were, ir. fact, in tlve Onitort States .Sr Force very few
rce rded juiipc ir. excess if 1/,000 foot.

I wish also to point out the conclusion on p^u 97. The report reads :

■ in conclusion, ro rust :x*e it particularly clear that , in view

of t:u extreme experimental ccrv'ltiona in this whole expertrvntal jwrios,

no fault? an* nn lastir. injur;; due to asy..a» lcck occurred.*

222


U, 3oo^#-^G-n-5-? rl c o^T?


That, cf c:urso, In on entirely f also st..tcccat, us tho proof has
Indicate*.

Tour &;avi nl^ht noto, while wo u rc still » this report, cn pc£0
99 nt tho bitter., where too bibloo-rrtpjy is ^lvon ®d the noaos Luts
and "ondt, this Ls toe s.ao M Dlf.-_n,- Lots who wus ocllod to tostlf;' this
aofcuaf: wk too will ^Ivo his testimony teccrrew r.ornla^. Hie coll.-.bo-
r-.tor in to .t report, Vend*, and Luts, woro both associ.tod with tho
defeudeat Volts at tho isstltuto In i.unloh.

I ceao now to Dxxv.ont 1607,

r Z£Z ?2V6X3ES3i I vxit to ash you, in connection with this report,

Is th.-.t r. portion of Ixhlblt 66?

12* HcZL-STl tout Is th-t, Sir? 2£o blbloo.-.r^-hyt

2E3 ??_£SI3iaTi to, this rcoart to which yru h.~ro .lust reforrod,
document Vo. ipO-492.

iJt. KclcST* Tos, sir, th-*- ls opart of Exhibit.66. Stnibit 06
Includes too c-vor lottor fn. 3iff .ad RotJber^ to tho
plus tho report.

?K~ PRLSILSi^i I wjatod to ho sure.

• H2. KcHoaVTi 2 oso a-w t- D’CUioat 1607-b-PS, which will ho
?ro»ocv.tloas Inhibit 67. It is d..tod 25 -.ust 19-.2. I* Is a lottor
frer. Eolnrich Sioulor to Gonor.l 71 old harshul XUch.

■Doar Ulchi axl'.sod plouso find a ro ort about ospcrlnonts for rosauo
fr-t. hi.^h altitudes, wuich havo boon curriod out by Stnbsorst Dr. S.
B.-achor end Dr. H.V. Hftihcr.-. I s w ,» ilia preduco*. by Dr. Raschor. I
c * adder tho results f theca experiments as s* Lr;ort_r.t for tho Luft¬
waffe, that I bo,* y*u t receive Dr. 2uschor -ad Dr. honbor,; ire.
lecture and too prcsor.t_ti .a -f toe flln. I a. c nvlncod tout, nftor
h.vria,-; seen too fill., y u will -Jit ref-r the -nttor t? too Heich
Lnrshal, boc.uao of Its h-p :rt._xow» 2 ho rcfcrcaco, 7-ur Em rs, ls
to C-=orin.-*„ »I w .uld bo ohll.:^ if y?u could lot ;:o hn-v y .ur opinion
la duo ti e. Tricndly 1 :rcctin.-8, Hell Eltlcr. aoinriob Hitler.*

Jho ro'-rt which Hinder scat to ..Hot bda-, “f course, tho ro.crt which


213


11 Soo 3-Prtc<X?


w.-i prc*catc£ ci 3&iblt 66.

•Jo n*,v cxo to Hoovioct JO-221, wi-lci vlll bo ?r socution'i Exhibit
Jo. 68. Zhli li a lottor trx. Sicvon to *Do^r Cairodo 3rundt% Eio
lcttcrho.d li "tho Jmo&orbo, 2-o 2eich Boilcoia Locdor. Dor. Hatcher
vrltoi ::oj


P


213 (a)


11 Dcc-i 4-P rl c o-J?


tqJ 1-; Jul7 tho Boict Fuehrer SS ordered uo to scad the report on low
prossura chccbor exponents to Oboraturabunefuehror Dr. 3rundt end at
the eeao tixo to raiind hln of the f£t that tho Boich Fuehrer ordored
this report to other with tho Belch Lo^dor's oovorin,; lettor to ho sent

^ "Jb 1 i ^ ^ %

to Tlold '..urahcl hilch statin,- that i.ilch, Boxborg sad uysolf wore
rooucatod to report to hU in order to BUJiit this lr-foraatlon. I
executed this ordor cn 20 July, a* I have heard nothin,; nhout it i*> to
now end w-.B also n't ordored to report t* i.ilch nor to Gonorulstnbsarzt
Prof. Dr* Hippko, I presume th-t tho uuttor Vos reportod with-out no.

Cor. you find out? 1 do not shcro this prcswptioa of Baschor, for
who olso would hnvo givoa the report except Raschor end Xwbcrgt I
taho it for panted that you sent the report to Tlold 'A&rah J. Hllch,
hut th t Fiold Marshal Milch h .s hud not tino so far to op on tho
report. Kovo you hoard anythin.-: relative to this? Purtheraoro, Ur.
Bnschor roquostc tho t^rproval for tho publication of tho purely
scientific results. I shell inquire of Dr. Raschcr in %*-t fom nnd to
uhftt extent he conceives thoso ptfolic-tl -ns. I believo that ho can
agroo to it in tho event of publication boiag aado in tao correspond¬
ing fo». lours vary truly, Soil Hitlor. Yours (sifinod) 6lovors."
Boro wo soo tho Roi«£ Business Londor Slcvors onoothlrv: tho way

end tahi:*’ erre of his sciontifio aisoci-tes in tho Instituto for

P

Military Scientific Bcsoarch, one of whoa was Dr. Bosch or.

Eh PShSIDS-": Tho Tribunal will now rocoss until H30 o'clock.
(- roecss was t Jeer, until 1360 hours)


21-i


(Tho heorinr rcc-nronoi ot 1330 h-eirs, 11 Dopenbor 1S-1G.)

?M K/CSEi'.L* The Ecnercblo Judaea of tto Kilitary Tribunal. Tho


ilitrrv Triburr-1 is n-wr in aoaalon


K 1 . F-ilDfi May it plocac tho Tribunal, Hr. HcBonoy hna intreduood


D cunent NO-221, referring t tfca cerrosjendor .00 if Siovorf tc Brandt in
3nsohor'a


'■itl n on Mi reports tc Field lirahcl Milch


regard t

will nwr l--ok tr'tho *aquoneo of oventa in this regard. 'To will intr


€9. Thia is o natter fr a


Rudolf Sr'-n-’t to tho Do fondant Siovora


"SS Ontoraturafu^hror Dr. hcechor'a aurp.oaiticn ie n't ccrroot. Tho


lottor of tho .toichsfuohror SS by which ho tmnanittod tho report to
Gonorol Field Korahnl Hi lob area nly slgno-’ an* aunt -ff a fow dny» ago
I aaavno that the General Fiold lirahnl Milch will f hiaoolf ,'ivc tho


noooaaarv erdora end then e nfino hiaaclf t eonding-e briof aaawor to


the itoiohafUohror SS


"I cncloaa o c py -f the-aoiohefuohror SS’e lottor dstod 26 August
1942 f-r y ur inf< rnrti r.." •

N w in answer t* thia lottor wo h-'.vo Milch writing t a. inrioh
rimlor ookn.win< 2 t *in 5 rcocipt f tho report. Thia ia b ovront 3'13-b-iS
and Fresooutirn Exhibit No. 70. *his lotto, la do to-’ 51 toguet 1942 .n


the atatl-nAry f Fiold Marshal J'ilch.

"Door l'r. Rirwlorl I thank yiu very such f r y ur letter f tho
25 Aufus t. I hiw read with front interest tho reports f ?r. Moachor
and Dr. “ nV.-rg. I an Inf.rmA “b ut th; current axj crloantc. I shall
r.ak tho tw gor.tloncn t giro a lecture c nhined with tho eh win .7


"Frying that i t will bo yessiblo feme t aoc y u nt tho rccesi
t^i^iCQiQrtora I ronair. with'V.st rogarde and Roll


full cocporr.ti n • f the Luftwaffe Fiol«I


This lottor indiooto
Marshal Milch in his hide


experiments.

t -JO-223 which will bo i'r accuti n Exhibit 71


tho Aoiohs


- 215


11 Dec-A-IT-12-2 Futty 1

Coart * 0 . 1

fuehrer SS 'a office addressed to Dr, Roachcr.
■Dear Ccnrade Dr. jfcacher.


Field Marshal )*tlch has answered, in the noontime> the letter of the
p.eichafuchrer SS of 25th of .vugust, 19U2. He writes that he In ten da to suix.on
you and Dr. Rccberg Tar a report In the near future."

A copy of thla letter was lllqprlae aent to thi SS Obersturrh-nnfuchrcr

Sicvers.

Document No. :»-289, Frooccution Fxhibit No. 72, a letter from Professor


Dr. Hippke, Professor Dr. Hippke was a Ixdical Inspector, Chief of the edical
Inspectorate, of the Uif twoffr. This letter la addressed to rt cinrich Kidler,
Rcichafu«hrcr S3, the subject of the letter — referring to the letter of the
25th it August, 19U2, to Secretary of State Jllch concerning experinonta for
the rescue from great heists.

■Very Honored Herr R^ichsfuehrer SS,

In the none of the Geman research on aviatlorwoodlcal problems, I beg
to thank you vory obediently for the great help and all tho interest shewn
in the Dachau experiments; these experiments form a supplenent which is for
us of great value and importance.

•The fact that an atmosphere with so little oxygen can be endured at all
for soac time is cost ecouraging far further rosearch.

"It is true that no conclusions as to the practice of■ parachuting can bo


drawn fer the tine being, os a very i; poriant factor, vis. cold, ias so far


not yot been taken into consideration; it places an extraordinary excess
burden on the entire body and Its vital noveoents, so that the results in


actual practice will very likely prove to be far norc unfavorable than iiy Vs


tr.r present experiments.

"In the meantime, the suppler.entory tasks required new have been begun;


in part they will have to be finished only after conolction of tho new Research
Institute for aviation Lkdicine of the Reich Air Unis try, whose low pressure


chamber will include all cold generating apparatus and also an installation
for producing conditions up to a height of 30 to.

"Sub-freeling experiments in another direction are, in part, still being


aide at Dachau.


- 216 -


11 Dee-A-fr-12#3 Putty

Cc«rt Bo. 1

•Then the work will need once aore your sympathetic assistance, may I bo

allowed to get in touch with you again through Stabsarzt Dr. Raschcr. 11

This letter purely indicates the Medical Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe"'-

is receiring reports and took a very active part in this work of Roacher's

0

at Dachau.

Te now turn to Document 1610 -PS, Prosecution Fxhibit No. 73. ’‘his ia
another iateria report by Raschcr to Reichsfuchrer SS, dated 9 October 19L2. ^

"Lost Honorable Reichaf\irhrer,

•I ask for leave to submit to you the second interim report concerning

the freeling experiments.

"At the sane tine I report that I hive boon erderod to the Luftwaffe
conference on freezing, which Is going to take place on October 26th to
28th.

“as in the interest of his cientiflc renown. Professor Holtloehnor decline*'
to carry out the scientific utilization of the experiments (experiments nade
on human beings: for shame) 1 shall take ever the exploitation of thre through
the University Institute of SS Oberstunafui-hrcr Profossor Dr. Pfannonsticl
at Asrburg. _ ...

"The report to General FirId i-arshal ililch was not delivered. Kilch V

• , * X -

ordored on to hin on the 11th of September at 10 a.n. On ay arrival I was
akked to start the projection of tho film: the State's Secretary, so I was
toll, would appear then. No precautions had been taken in order that only
certain persons could gain admittance to that film. About 20 gcntlrocn wnro
present. The cnly way in which the whole affair was organized was by runors
which went around in the different departments of the finistry of Air (RU!)
that"somethin interesting is going to take place at 11 a.m." To ny^gi^t
I only heard about that later on.

A

"As at the end of the filn the State's Secretary had not yet appeared,
State's Secretary Field marshal mch, and as none of tho Generals present
had taken the presidency and nobody explained under what conditions this
file was nade. I felt induced, after a short conversation with Obcrst Oallap,
chief of the film roan of the MU, to get up and in accordance with the order
of thc~ Reichsfuehrer SS p int out that the filn a nilitary secret. Soon
•after the projection Rczherg and I were told thi*,thc State's Secretary would


- 217 -


11 Dse-A-*7-12-fe. Putty r .

Court Ko. 1

♦

not com am we were asked to start the verbal report.

■I pointed out that I was charged by you, most Honorable Rrichsfothrer, to
report only to 3 ei» ralf eidnarschall iillch, and declined to give a report as
no representative of the State's Secretary had been designated to receive it.

"ly report >o you, aost Honorable Reichsfuehrer, cases so late for this
reason: SS-Obcrsturnfuehror Slevers wanted to report directly to you and
asked Rcnbcrg, as a neutral (neither biftwaffe nor SS) to give hie on the
11 th of Septeetoer an oral report at the station, an . invited him to ‘'rite
this roport down and to send it t4 hin at once. Dr. Rcmbcrg has not yet
started this report, apparently because he fears that it nught hurt bis
connections with the HI2I.

-On the account of the ill-fated re port-ceding at State's Secretary
Milch's, they took it for granted at the RHI that tty research involving the
low-pressure chamber was na longer necessary. There ate, horever, so cany
unsolved problems that I nust ask you to ;ivc nr the possibility to continuo
ny work with the lew-pressure chaabcr. It has been understood with SS-Oboi^
sturnbannfuchrer Dr. Pfannenstiel that after these questions fiill bo clcarod,
I shall work on this subject as professor with Professor Pfannenstiel.

■„t the sar.e tine nay I request of you that institutes ivhlch arc not
working at full capacity place such apparatus at ny disposal as arc necessary
f- r the chccical detcmiivation of the various factors, as it is rcgrottablo
that nowadays the ambitiousness of certain persons can suedoed in proventing
an outsider like myself fror. also working in this problem. For instance,
the Institute TTelt* docs not want to place apparatus at ny disposal, simply
b-.douse U 107 are afraid that ny experinents or. hunan beings night lead to
quicker anl better results than were possible during nany y^ars of. experi- -
nrnts on aninils.


_> v


- 21D -


Court Ho 1

11 Doc 46 A - 13-1 - UG - Perrin

"Holtz, lnatood of new adalttlng, that wo roochod cur goal
ru.ro quickly in the fr oozing problem thrcu^i oxporinonts on
hunon bolngs, nakoa tho oxcuao that ho noods tho apporatur,
alnco at tho proaont tlno ho la conducting frooring oxpori-
centa on shewed cat a. Through tho OICV Holtz la trying to got
captures Russians aa aubjocta for hla oxpjrlnonta-' Hunan ox-
porlnonta ccnductod cutaido a c;np do not aoon oxpodiont to
no,

"Tho final ropert concerning th„ froorlng oxporinonts, idfch
all tho chart a, will bo roady in .'.bout 6 days ana will bo aont
at caco to Berlin. .

"Tho oxporlnonta of renaming by body ho at, which woro

ordorod, will bo carriod out aa accn aa tho wonon nocoaaary for

•

this uxporinont arrlvo, in abcut 2 day a. I shall ropert tho
rosulta of this oxporiuont aop-rotoly.

"Slnco, In an cral ropert, I can on tho ono hand always
oxpoct ccnplotoly non end oxcollont suggoationo fron you, and
can on tho other hand proaont a nueh ncro graphic plcturo cf
tho rosulta cbtalnod, I neat roapo^tfully bog you, If you can
apa.ro a uouont, tc grant no an appointnont for an cral roport.

4

T/itfc boat wlahoa and Koll Eltlor, I ruur.in your neat rbodlont
Slgnund Ruschor," •

How, In this report, It boars out tho socrot nannor in
which thoso oxporinonts woro conductod, that tho air Minis try
cnly runcrod about tho oxporinonts which woro tc t:ko
It alac boors out tho griovoncos that ovontuolly oxiatod
botwoon Woltr and Kaachor in thoir clash for glory. ‘Volt?,
roalislng that Raachor tad* so to spook, odgod hln cut at this
tine was criticizing .^ascLor^ work in noking an attonpt to
got Russia prisoners for his Gxporlnont a ..

Tfo turn new to tho answer ;cf Raschor's ropert by Rudolf
Brandt. This is a letter dated October 13, 1942, fror: tho


- 219 -


Court Ho 1

11 Doc 46 A - 13-1 - UO - Perrin

"V.'eltz, instead of new adraitting, that wo reached cur goal
nx.ro quickly in tho froozing problan throu^ oxporinonts on
hunan boings, uakos tho oxcuso that ho noods tho apparatur,
sinco at tho proaont tino ho is conducting froozing oxpori-
nonts on-shewed cats. Through tho OO T/oltz is trying to got
capturea Russians as subjocts for his oxpjrlnonts. Hunan ^x-
perinonts ccnductod cutsido a cenp do net soor. oxpodiont to
no.

"Tho final ropert concoming thv froozing oxporir.onts, wfch
all tho ch-.rta, will bo roady in about 6 days and will bo aont
at coco to Berlin.

“Tho oxporinonta of roweirning by body boat, which woro
ordorod, will bo carriod out as seen as tho wonon nocossary for
this exporinont arrivo, in about 2 days. I shall roport tho
rosulta of this oxporinont sop^ratoly.

"Sinco, In an cral ropert^ I can on tho ono hand always
oxpoct completely now and oxcollont Mggostiono fron you, and
can on tho cthor hand prosont a ixich ncro graphic picturo cf
tho rosuits cbtalnod, I acst rospootfully bog you, if yru can
aparo a nouont, to grrnt no an appeintnont for an oral report.
\71tfc host wishos and Koil Hltlor, I ruor.in your nest cbodlont
Signund Ruschor."

Now, in this roport, it boars out tho socrot nannor in
which thoso oxporir.onts wore conductod, that tho air uinis try
cnly runorod about tho oxporinonts which wore tc telco
It alsc boars out tho griovanco3 that ovontually oxistod
botwoon Holtz and Reactor in thoir clash for glory. V.olt^
realizing that Raschor x ad, so. to spoak, odgod bin. cut at this
tiuo was criticizing x-ascLor's work in making an attempt to
get Russicn prisoners fer his oxporinonts..

vfo turn new to tho answer .cf Rasebor's ropert by Rudolf
Brandt. This is a letter d; cod October 13, 1942, frer: tho

* - 219 - *


Court N :. 1

11 Doc 46 A - 13-2 - UG- Porrin


field headquarters cf Heinrich Hiuilor. It is docunont nnnbcr
170 - 293, which is Prcsocution Exhibit meber 74.

"• Doer Cenredo Roachor, I havo rocoivod y«.ur lot tor cf
3 Octcbor 1942. I gethor frea It, that you lntond to roport
in person tc the Roiehsfuohror SS concorning tho Dachau
oxporinonts. Ibis is not possible, as tto Roiehsfuohror SS
is new in taly end strrts iarxdiatoly of tor his visit on a
souowha t long duty-jcurnoy. I preposo accordingly to you
that you subnit tho report in writing as seen as posslblo,
so that I con ennd it to tho Roiehsfuohror SS by courior.

"The Roiehsfuohror SS has read tho lottor cf thanks cf
tho feruor priaonor Hoff.

"~t tho ncuent it is net pcssiblo to rondor - decision cn
tho prooont steto cf tho high altitudo oxporlnonta, cn which
ynu rroro, unfertunatoly, net ablo to roport to Fiold Uarahnl
Jilch. j.s socn as tho hoichafuohror S^ ccaoa b-ck frea Ids
Jcuraoy, * will oak 1.1a what lx> erdora in this roe poet. Ho 11
liitlori Ycurs.... " signod with tho initials " R Dr ", aocn-
lng RudeIf Brandt.

Tho dofundxne Siovors on tlxso saao linos in connoction
with tho importing to Fiold ‘‘orshal llilch wreto c lottor
dc.tod 21 Octcbor 1942, Docinont 710-226, and it is efforod
C8 Prcsocution Inhibit nua'oer 75. 3ko lottor ho .id soya,

"jJ-.no nor bo, frou tlx Roich '.hnagor", addrosaod tc
£r_ndt.

"I>or.r Cenrudo 3randt, In ccnnoctlcn with tho ropert uado

in fiold koadqu-rtors concorning tho high altitude flight

experiments, a roport was to bo node tc Field licrshd. lillch,

tee. Tho dato cf 11 S>.ptoabor was chcsv-n. La ycu will soo

fr.n tlx attacl.ud file nato of Dr. Rcaborg, tLis report fc. s

n-t boor, a^do, -nd indood t Im whole thing has- -ono wrong, so

tc say. i*t any rate, - tho attitude c-f tho gontlanon of tho

-22 c -


Court Bo. 1


11 Doc 46 A - 13-3 - U0- Perrin


Hodlod Inspectorate of tho Luftwnffo Lea r.ltorod considerably
since tint d:.to. '-let would ycu think if I wore tc write

- lottcr to tho '.odici.l Inapoctor GGnorclcburst:bs..rzt Dr.
Klppkc, thr.t Rc.schor w~s only r.ufcfcrri.od tc report in porsen
tc Field Kjal r.l diet, sad thr.t, c.ccordlr.gly, to - r.a well f.a
Dr. Romberg - Led but o£oycd cn rrdor cf tho Roiohafuohror,
rl.on they did net do r. report cn Septes-.bor 11th. ?orfcapa
tl.la would puraiudo the highly insulted gontlunon tc corporate
c-gr.in.

"U.c deep freezing uxpu rhonts r.re tor.:ln:.tod now, ao

tl.:.t the ocntinur.ticn of the &&L .Mtitudo flying experiments,

r.a doairod by tl.o RcicLsfuohror S~, cm new begin. In thla

ccnnocticn, wo nowd cnee mere tl o lew pnoaauro chijibor, but

ttia with dlfforcntl: 1 pumps, r.a cthurviao liJgo-ac.-.lo c.ltltudo

toat o.Mii't bo ccjrivd cut. 3 o new or.porinonts will r.lao servo

t- conoludo tl.o Lx.biUt .tion thqsie of linxhor. n.o putting

:.t our diapeac.1 cf tl.e low pressure cix^bor, hewovor, will bo

peeaiblo t‘. on only, if th<r ncichafuehror SS writes in poraon

tc Field IvTahr-l Wloh concerning this. I Inoludo tho drnft

•

of auch . letter." Signed by tlx. dofendont Slovora.

This drnft rf tho lot tor ia r.lao r. p..rt f Exhibit
nuribor 75, Docuuont HO-226. It ia *. drr.ft to Field lUrfrc.1 \
liilch, Secretary cf St:.to l'.ilcl., 3orlin.

"Subject: Low pro8oure cl-nber for high :.ltitudo froozing

oxporinente."

"In connection with tho roport —" prxdon no, tho aubjoot
is "Lew proasure clumber frr hif* altitude flying experiments."

"In connection with the report I bed subnittod to no hero
by St;.bs..rzt Dr. Ih-scber end Dr. Ro-'bory concerning tho carry¬
ing cut cf high c.ltitixio flying experiments, I h-d dosired
trot r. ainil-r report bo submitted tc ycu, toe. Although it
hr.s n.t boon possible fer ycu tc prjticipr.to in tho conforonco

- 221 -


Ceurt 1

11 D'-c 46 -15-4 -UG - Perrin

' J. '

c f utL Sopto:abor 1942 md convince yourself cf tho rosuits,
up to new, cf-tho-oxporiiionts, I bog ycu cnco^ncro to-day, to
put at cur dlspcs..l tl:o low pressuro chenbor, through tho
..viaticn 2xpv-rlaontr.l Institute. I.a tlo experiments ;ro to
bo oxtorxlod tc groc.tor r.ltitudos, this ti:x> difforonticl puups
would :.lsc L:.vo tc bo supplied.

n i.s I t :J"o r. groat int^rost In the continuation of tho
r.ltitudo flight experiments suapondod In June last, r.nd r.s I
bellcvo that no c:n still ml lovo vory ccnaidor:.blo rosults,

I wculd bo grateful to you If you ut uld havo tho lor pressuro
chcxfcor end tho dlfforontlr.l puaps brought tc Drcliau yory
seen, cjA If, at tho a(zio tie, Dr. Heitors woro bgAo avr.il-
r.blo ag..in for tin ccntiriur.tion of tho oxporinonts.


D


ll Doc-«-*G-i4-i-aAy-(AK)
Court Ho. 1


HR. HARDY: We now turn to Document No. 50-224,
Prosecution' a achlbit No. 76. which you.win find on pago
166 of your Doounent 3ook, your Honor.

THS PRESIDENT: What number did you glvo for

Ko. 226 ?

HR. HaRDY: No.. 226 la Prosecution’ a Exhibit
No. 75. Wo 'dll now turn to Doounent No. 224. This la
a abort report concerning the report to be submitted to
Sooretary of State Xllch on Soptoabor 11.

■On Soptenbor 11th 1942, at 9.45 o'clook
Stabarzt Dr. Raaohor and Dr. Ronberg net, according to
telephonic and oral agreements with Colonel Pendolo,

In tho antechanbor of the Secretary of Stato. We wore
lnforned that tho Secretary of Stato had ordored this
oonforenoo at tho present stage, In the course of whloh
a report on exporlnonta concerning "roaoue from great
heights" was to bo nada, and the motion plot’ ro concur
nlng those oxporlnonta waa to bo ohown. The gontlemon
waiting in the antechamber of tno secretary of State and
In tho corridor (moat of thorn from tho experimental staff)
wero informed that provloua to tho conferenco a motion
plcturo was to bo shown, so that all wont to the motion
picture room on the '5th floor. Hero quite a largo number
of pooplo wero already present, so that thirty to forty
persons wero thoro In all. Among them wore - wo know
some of them personally - soao officers, medical and
engineer officers, whoso presence surprised us in view
of the top secret nature of the motion ploture and of
tho oxperlmeats. No ohooking of the persona present was
done, nor was there an attendance list. As, after a short
time of waiting, the Secretary of State had not come tho


22 * -


11 Dao-^-rtO-14-1- Ray-1AZ)
Court No. 1


action picture was shown, without giving us an opportun¬
ity for preliminary or explanatory recarks. During the
Intermission between the two parts of the notion ploture
Dr. Rasoher referred once taore to the strict obligation
of secrecy ordored by tho Rolohefuehrer SS. After
completion of the showing of the notion ploture - the
Socrotary of State had not cose, ns ho had boon summonod
to tho Reich Marshall - the porspns present still talked
a llttlo while about the notion ploturo, on wh.oh oooas-
lon loss Interest was shown in the subjoct *.taolf than In
tho plaoo of the oxporlbonta and tho Individual who had
boon experimented on. After this period of tlmo, during
whloh we;* were r.olthor called upon to make any statonents
whatsoever, nor woro we, considering tho groat forum
and tho absonoo oftho Secretary of State,


- 223a -


4


11 Do o- A- A>-14-2- Raj-
Court Ho. 1


&


lnollned to glv'3 any reports, the greatest part of these
present vent back to the development conference while
Oborstorrt Vuerflor, OboratArzt Professor Xolk, Staborst
Bruehl and Government Councillor Benringer asked us for a
report In a small medical circle, -vs, howovor, the Socret-
ary of 3tato had prohibited any report provlouo to the
fixing of distribution, wo refusod to. disclose the reculta
of tho exporl onts. Oberstarrt Xolk stated that he was
willing to report to the Secretary of State our wishes
concerning the fixing of distribution and the continuation
of the experiments. The motion plcturo film was handed
to Colonel Vorwald.

\e3cordlns to the oonforonoe with Oberaturmbanr.fuehrer

Slevera, I tried to get the film b'.ok on tho sane da:/, but

Colonel Vorwald was still at tho dovelopmont conference.

7hon I tolephonod tho next day and requostod that tho film

be handel back, Colonel Vorwald declared, that ho would
•

like to keep the film until after Sunday, tho 1’th of
Soptombor, olnco cn this day tho Reich lfarshal was oomln'
and nlgtat perhaps desire to see the motion picture, Accor¬
dingly, I let Colonel Vorwald -keep tho motion picture for
that day. On the 14th of Soptombor. I wont to fetch tho
motion picture from Colonel Vorwald, and was Informed that
It had not been shown. On the same day I spoke with Sto^^^v
sarst Bruehl, who informed me that Oborstarrt Xolk had(f
transmitted, still on September 11th, our wishes oonoornlnX'
distribution and oontinuatlon of the experiments to tho
Secretary of State. The Secretary of State had approved
distribution schedule, and said that a continuation of the
experiments was not urgent. A few days later, the dlstrl^>-
utlon schedule, accopted by the Secretary of State, was sent
to the DVL by Colonel Pendelo, and tho report was accordin¬
gly transmitted by the DVL to tho offices conoorned.


11 Doo-A-^3-l4-2“Hay-(^)

Court No. 1

Since that tine I have not received any nova, neither oor>-

f.-

earning the notion plotura nor concerning the report. (Sig¬
nature) DR. R0M3ZRG, ■

This docucent la fully understandable on Its
face, but duo to the difficulty of being unable to contaot
Milch and receive any word frea hla aa to the ultimate
results of their exporla'ents In November 1942, - this la
D-o uaent 1617-P3, Prosecution's £chiblt 77 - Heinrich

I ■ i

Hlnnler, the Rolchfuohrer 3S, directed a letter to Fiold
Marshal Milch whloh reads as follows;

, "Dear Comrade Milch :


224a -


i


11 Doo -Jr.A- 14-‘V-Hfly-(AX)
Court HO. 1.


You will recall that through soneral Volff I
particularly recommended to you for your consideration tho
work cf a oertaln S3 Fuehrer, Dr. Rascrror, who la a phyalclan
i-f the air xorce on leavo.

These researches which deal with the behavior
or tho human organism at gre-t heights, as well as with man¬
ifestations caused by prolonged cooling of tho human body In
cold water, and similar problems which are of vital lmpor-

2 * ■ « s

tanoo to tho air force In particular, can be performed by
ua with particular efficiency booaueo I personally aasumod
tho responsibility for supplying asocial Individuals and
criminals who dosorva only to die from concentration oanpa
for these experiments.

0 ■ “ %

Unfortunately you had no tine rooontly when
Dr. Raaoher wanted to report on the experiments at tho Minis¬
try for Aviation. I had put great hopes In that r port, bec¬
ause I believed that In tills way tho difficulties basod
mainly on religious objects, whioh oposo *)-•• Rasoher's exper¬
iments - for which 1 assumed responsibility - oculd be elim¬
inated. The difficulties are a till the anmo no before.

In those "Christian medical circles" the standpoint Is being
taicon that It gees without saying that a young Gorman aviator
should be allowod to risk his life but that the life of a
criminal - who Is not drafted Into military service - is too
saored for this purpoao and one should not stain onosolf with
this guilt; at the 3amo tine It Is interesting to note
crodlt Is taken for the rosulta of the oxperlaonts w'r.l
eluding the scientist who performed them..

I personally have Inspected tho experiments, and
have - I can say this without exagemtlon - participated In
every phase of this scientific work In a helpful and Inspiring


- 225 • -


11 3e o- .t- ifl- 1 4- Raj - ( )

Court Ho. 1

aeiinor.

He twc should not got Angry About thoao diffioul-

• #» *

tloe. Itwill tako at least anothor ton years until con
gat aucb narrow-nindnes a out of our pooplo. 3ut thla should
not affoot the roaoarch work which ia necessary for cur

70 ung and aplar.did soldiers and aviators,-.

o

X bag you to release Dr. ixascher, Stabartt in reserve,
fron the air foroo and to transfer him to ne to the 7«\ffoh
-S3. I would thon assume the sole responsibility for having
these experiments cade in this field, and would put the
results, of whloh we in the S3 noed only a part for the


225a


11 DeC.-*-AG-lWx-aay-(GJ)-


Ccurt Kc.l


fi\'8t luxuries In the East, entirely at tl~ disprsul cf the air farce.
However, in this connection I suggest thet with liaison oct*. _n you end

1 - * I • *

“clff a " nen-Chriatdan B phyaician should r . charged, who s hould be at the
aao tine honorable as a scientist and not prone tc intellectual theft


and who could be infonaod of the results.. This physician should also have
good contacts with the administrative authorities, so that the results
would really obtain a hearing.

I believe that this solution - to transfer Dr. Raschcr to the SS,
so that ho could carry out the experiments under of respona ibility end
und-r uy orders - is the best way. Th. exp. riser, to should not bo stopped;
we ovo that to our aun. If Dr. fcaacbor r_cained with the air fore*., there
would certainly be uuch anoyance; because then 1 would have to bring
a series of unpleasant details te you, because of thcjrroganco and a-sum-
tion wtiiah Prefesaer Dr. Kolzlochner has displayed in the pest of Dachau -
vho is under ey ccct-and - about a- in utterances delivered to Si Colonel

Si.vers. In ord.r bo save both of us this trouble, I su, 't again that

*• +

Dr. Raschvr should b. transf rred to tiw .l'fcn SS t' r -y as possible.

1 tr.jld be grateful to you if you will give the erder to pub- the
low pressure chamber at -ur disposal again, together with step-up pumps,
because the experiments should be extended tc include even greater al¬
titudes. -Cordial greetings and ‘■•oil nitlor.’-

This fabulous docur.nt indeed conveys to the Kancrable Tribunal

tii*. cental attitude cf J^inrich Hltalcr arl th_ c:st of his ^ollcatra.

%

It also conveys to us in their str-tir* that in these "Christian u^dicol
ci-rclos the standpoint is being taken that it get* without saying that
; young Geraon aviator 3hould be allcved to risk his life but that the
life of a criminal "indicate* t.. -as the position in ^hich all of th-sc
followers of idrsrler store. . I?

now rill tum tc Dccun.nt Y2-269 to offer as Prosecution's V.—
Exhibit ::ucbv.r ?c. This is dated 26 ,?cvc=bcr 192x2. It io from Ob.rsturn

f » •

bznnlbchrcr fclff, p.rsonr.el dir_ctor of I- cr.j :f the . - - under ! e-in-
rich r-.lmlcr.


226


11. Dtc-A-AS-lL-^-Hay-(GJ)-
Ccta-t »c. 1

, *

n :llghly csteased Gcncralfclcfcarahall, Dear Party »-ecbur uilch.
You will r c acebvr that I, by order of the ^oichafuchrvr SS> recaariend^d
tc you the work of an SS officer. Dr. Saschcr, who la a ocdical officer
of the Loft-


U Ccc.-A-4C}-Uj-5-Say-(GJ)-

Ccurt So. 1
-affe cn ica7c.

This work on tfca influence of hig* altitudes cn tic. huaan orga¬
nise, '-ad cn the cooling of the buses body during prolonged stay in a old
water end similar questions, deals with prcblons which arc cf the utmost
int-roat for the luftwaffo. We arc able to porfon; this work with special
effect, because tho Reichsfuehrer SS ascuaed personal responsibility
for these cxpericents on associals and criminals cosenring death free
Concentration Coops.

It is a pity that ycu had not time, when Dr. Racher recently
wanted tc lecture at the Air l^niatiy. The Roic he fuehrer SS expoctod
vuiy auch of it, because being personally informed, ycu certainly vrill
have taken action to rcaovu the oany difficulties of Dr. Raschor's work.

These difficulties are always the sane, luftwaffe nodical officers
are of the opinion that a young German air-can nay risk his life, but
that the lifo of a crlalnal who is not called up is to sucred for that,
had that they dc. not want to tx. blaned for such experts.-*s. Still,
the results of the experiments arc used while tho scionti* who carried
thoa cut 1 s eliminated.

The Re ichs fuehrer SS himself has scon the -experiments and - I
can state that without exngoratlng-holped fad stimulated in <-very pha¬


se of these experiment*.

How, ho does not want that ycu and he get angry about tho dovc-
lcpoont. In his opinion, it will at least take another tan years until


cur people get rid of such narrow cindnass. But tlx. research nccos-ary

for our young and faultless soldiers and air-cun nust net te >ianper^>^ n ' v ^

by this. . &

- V_v

The ReichsfUahror SS ther j fere requests you to release the Stabs-

arzt cf to. reserve. Dr. Raschcr fTen the Luftwaffe and to transfer hie

tc tho 7affcn SS. The Raichsfttahrer SS will then have all theso experi¬


ments carried cut on his sole r.spcasibility and the -xp_ -iaents which
We only partly used ir.^thc SS ro.rarding fr ->t bites in th-. - ot, will
be loft entirely tc the Luftw-i.fc. Her. be sugge3t that a c-potent


227


n


11 Doc,-A.-*G-lii-5-asy-(0J)-

Court So. 1 . ' v -—

physician will be nccinat-d 09 a liaison between ycu and cysclf, who

has the opportunity tc report to ycu continuously .bout the research

work


227-i.


o


>


lWbo-.WJ>-3L-6 - Ray

^rurt ro. 1.

Tho ?-3ichafttJhn>r boliowos that this solution is th-< bast way, that
is t? sry to transfer Dr. ILasehor to the SS so that he can per fern his
axperiioents un'or his responsibility end un-Vi r his on Vers. The oxnorfjents


nost under no cl r c uns tanooa be discontinued, we owe that tc our <un. If
3 r. ftaachur would ren»in with the Luftwaffe, c l-*t cf trcublj certainly
ucold ariso, because in that ceae -he Itcichsfujhrer SS would have to brine


t your kncwlo'V'O quite accu unfortunate details which will certainly occur


in the future too, considering the execution cf the cx-vrirunts up tc new.


It is especially Professor Hol^lo-anefc who plays his part.

- r*


- 22 &-


n Dcc-^v-fflt-1 5^1-ectrt {h-)(wo)
Court Mo. 1


L •

"In order to save you and himself a lot of trouble, tho Ruichs-
fuehrer SS bogs to transfer Dr. Raacher u (flick as possible to tho
Uaffen SS.

■The Roichsfuchrcr SS would appreciate it very ouch if you would

give tho order that the lew pressure chamber is to bo put at our dis-
• *
posal again, together with gra dua l eggregato pumps, beenuso experiments

arc to be extendod to still higher eltitudos.

"Best regards and Hoil Hitler! Signed Wolff."

Copies of this letter wont to tho SS Unin Personal Office; Raichs-

/

s.-rzt Dr. Gr-.wltx; SS Obf. Dr. *..uest; SS Stef. Sievers. Copies forwardod
roquosting attention ty order and signed by Brandt, SS Oborflturnbann-
fuohrer. /.s a natter of fact, tho results of this corrospondonco was
that Raschcr, in duo course, wis tranr.orrod tc tho SS for tho continu¬
ation of his work rt Dachau.

Vo now turn to Dccuaont HO. 1612-rS, Prosecution's Exhibit No. 79,
pogo 122, lour Honor, in the Document Bock. This is a lettor of Rudolf
Brandt addressed to Dector Raschor, Nodical Cfficor in tho SS Fuohrunas-
hauptast, Borlin, and to SS Obergruppenfuchror Fohl of tho l.VHn, and to
tho ;hncncrbc Society*

"Enclosed I an sending you a letter of tho Roichsfuchrcr SS r.ith
an order for SS Hauptsturmfuchrcr Dr. Raschcr.

"You arc requested to duly noto and accord needed assistance to
HauptstumfuQhror Dr. Raschcr in tho carrying threugh cf his oxporimonts.

"SS Hauptsturmfuchrcr Dr. Raschor is being assigned by mo to
through the following experiments:

"l) Lew pressure chamber experiments — tc be carriod cut
conditions corresponding tc these actu-lly prevailing under normal
operating conditions — for rescue from high rnd extremely high altitudes.
Determination cf changes in chemical equilibrium, as well cs gas
equilibrium of human tody. Experiments aro tc bo repeat od until a
scientifically


229


U D6©--a-15-l-3o^rc (FL)
Court No. 1


iacont«*=blu beets lor iirZin^a ia wstcbliibkL Testing of pressure
■roof protection ;-nxnts for the highest cltitwLs to be oerriod out with
the cssistenco of a-nul-cturcrs o. sixh protective suite.

■2) Tests for ro^nrrtins surath after tot-.l chili zip of tho hu-i'.n
bedy -


- 229 *


11 Dco-i>ttW5-2-Bcrrd-K

Court Ho. i.

recording all changes of chemical and gas charqctcristies - aro-tobbo

further continual until cccpletd clarificati-n of doibtfUl quosti-ns.

I attach [articular value to conditions for experiments couing as closo *

to actual conditions as possible, quite particularly as regards reia-

partation of warmth. Sauna equ i pme n t available in Dachau should be

used in cxuiootion with oxpcriccrfcs on reimportation of warnth.

"3) Experiments on removal of offocts due ta fracking of

parts of human syatoa ospuoiallr the tatreaities, to bo carriod t'.

thruigh in suitable fora (c.g^ applications with Gastcin water).

"t) Experiments concerned with adaptation to freezing cold in

snow huts (Igloos) to be carried out urelcr varyiny diets in order to

establish nhothcr adaptation to cold ard resistance iaercaso against

f re eking is possible. These experiments arc t. bo carried cut dn the
• •

sito of JS-Berghaua Sudolfold.

"5) The procurencnt of tho apparatus nc<~da f-»r all the axperi-

•

oonts should bo discussed in detail with tho offices of tho Roichsarzt-
SS, Lain Office for Econvdcs and Adalnistrction and with ttho Ahnonorbo.
The necessary eh cal cal products, nodical supplies and glass \r. re will
be tr.de available >y tho SS Uodioal Offico, Berlin.

"6) Publication of remits btainod in such teats sublet to
ry approval, only".

Digned "H. Himnlor".

ire rro now at the end of the presentation of docuocitary
ovidcnco n the High ..ltitudc Exp.rinjnt3. . .to will, of cairsc, have
a witnoss on thj High Altitude Experiments, and who will tx called
tomorrow turning.

How, lfc. VcHsnoj -.dll jroocod with tit presentation ctf
Freezing Deperinents.

10 *. IICH/JEf! flour Honors should have before you English
Decuaent Book Ro. 3, which contains substantially all the Exhibits which
«c will present on the Freezing Experiments carried out at the Dachau

- 230 *-


11 03O-..-«W5-2a-3cinl-PU
durt Ko. 1«


Concentration dtp in tho Phil r-nd .dntcr r£ 1942, and during part of


11 Dcc.-n-K.-3-lS-3eurd-(G,i)-
Ccurt Sc. 1

"It Radcl? E n ll Herein Brarvdt, being duly srorn, depose and


state: »


"1. I an the same Rudolf Brvndt who has heretofore srem to an
affidavit cn the 30th day of August, 191*6, ccnc.ming cert .in lor nrcs-

surc wxpi.riru.nts performed on human beings at the Dacnau Concentration

£

Case.

*2. For the si-x reason set forth ir. paragraph 1,2, and 3, cf uy
affidavit of 30 August, 191*6, I able tc cake this statement concerning
fr-.cxing experiments performed .n human beings.

" FKLR2I.‘C SyP-RLX.TS


0 3. In the laU) spring of 191*2, Field ’iarshcll :lilch cf the
Luftwaffe in a lttcr to SS Ctocrgruppcnfuchrcr K?rl ..'olff (Chief of the
Pero-nal Staff cf the Rcichsfuchrer S3), authorized the freezing oxp-ri-
nonta cn human -beings. Ctocratabsarzt a.G. ..'eltz was ordered to cake the¬
se experiments and Raschwr was tc assist hi:;, xilch expressed his thanks
tc the SS for thuir corporation with the Supr-uo Ccjmand cf th<- Luft¬
waffe in conducting the lor pressure axp-ricents. To tho best ef ny
recollection, Rtsch-r wrote Klrml* r a few r.ucka later to th. effect that
General Ob-rstabsarzt ?ref. Dr. Hippku hac requested fretting oxpori-

conts to bo carried out on concentration canp inratos ct Dachau.

•

Rascher requested that Kian?.*r apprevo the pardon f several in¬
mates at Dachau who had assisted him in performing autopsies on guinea
pigs she were killed during the courso cf the lor pressuro experi-ontc.

"ii. The Luftwaffe -as inter.stod in having th- cooling experiments


conducted because of tlx fact that a number cf German aviaters ivurc for-
ced tc parachute Late the Korth Sea and consequently were sunotia-s
subjected to.extreme ccld fer extended perioas of tine. The purp sc


f the freezing experiments ms tc learn the must effective ray cf rc^^s.
-•arming such aviators, thereby 'saving their liv^s. (f \

" The freezing exrcriBOnta w~re begun in August 191*2 and W
Rase her surhitted ~ preliminary report in September 191*2. The test-per¬


sons were partially submerged in ice water t; lewer their body tempera-


V


11 Doc.-A-ffi-3-15-5c.'xd-(C-J)-
Ccurt K-. 1

tort. This report sta*.,d that scab cf th^ experimental aubj-cta were
JciUcd aa a result ef the experiments. Baachcr ittjsptud t: revive the
fr«-ier. subjects by rapid reworaiog with het -er.ter. He. stated that
r-xaming by acind. heat had net yet be.n utilised but that h»


theught it txculd be tee alra.


231-A


n


11 Doc-i—Z j-l5*^i-3card (3X)
Court Kb. 1


■J. HLsrL-r acknowledged receipt o' this report late in Septenbur end
Ordurod .Z-seixsr to c*>lore th_ effectiveness of rermitg by eninr.l
boat. cop;,- of this letter was sent to Sicrors with a r-qcost for
Odsnovlodg^nt*

*7. .is nresult of HLjZ.r's request that oni.nl werath bo used ns
oru- of til. -methods of rcvai-An.- in the course of t!i_ e;ax’r invents.

Rose lx-r r-'do a request that a nu:b(.r of i'o_er. be supplied for this

pircofK.. I '.moo that »cc-n rrcro supplied to Reschor and tlio.t they

•

von. used to revarr. the 6xporl-v_:.tal subjects wr.o had boon frozen.

"C. In October i9-'*2 arschor -uh ittod the final report on tho
frooting expor leant* perforewd at Dachau. This rc-F?rt did not cen¬
tal n tlu. results of a series of oxporlaiwr.ts with dr ups and with
ordml body heat which vor- then still b. in; conducted. It vr.s also
noUd that the report dLd n't contain th- ilcroscopic jntholo ic.-l
uxrriinatlona of the brrin tissues o£ th. deeoasod. This report was
nod by firof. Dr. 1. Hbli r. Dr. Si~und Hasohor end Or; . .
Pinko. D-ta woro sub.dtUd cor.ccndns a cuabur ol subjects v.i.o Word
frozen to death.

" 9 . ; ki:l ,r .acknowledge receipt cf tills rop-rtj a co;y of the
latter be in, sent to Karl i.olff. Ik st ifcod th.t a copy cf tin. report
hr.d fcuci. sent to Field Harehal ilch cf the Laftwaffo and went on to
state .that ho ejected reports regarding ^ ;f anil ' rl h - : ' t in
roviving th: froson subjects. further askvd Sr.scner to cub: it
narxs cf p_ople whe veru .* xs-d to ;xjxri:xnts on hur.an bain* s
and s-.- ted that such people vore to -ho considered es traitors. Lafc*r
:n I'J'-z -ler had a eerier, rco tith i.scivr concerning tin. exjxriixnts
and during Sbvcrfcor he visited Dnchrai in’erdor to dbaorve p-rc ml#'" 1

J

. thJ cx>rirxnts. w

»iO. : It should be nctod tv: sax ;-:l:ssy arcs, non; .taaefcor rn3"
his cell.-., raters as a r. ru.lt w t:~ lc*. pr.ssur. and freezing -xperi-
ats. Si van n that rZlzltvhrxr vac atfce :pting to

r.c-iv-j credit fer th. cold cxpal-xnts and that tip s=ao had Veur. _


- 232 -


11 3oc-„-H::-15-l-3~-rd (35)
Court Vo. 1


I

dcao by Dr .'Huff with regard to the ler pressure expcrirxnts. ?cr
this reason, Sicv~rs sugseatod t o :iil.r that it *ould be irisest
if Rase her were taken over entirely into the SS and away free the
Luftwaffe ac that his work car. be carried out under the sol^ nuspicas
cf the Personal Staff cf the Rcichsfuehrcr SS end the .JinanCcbc
Institute. Is a

* c r>


232 a


11 Doc-l->:«-5-X5-Board (3E)

Court HO- 1


•vault of this, Hi3=l_r wrote a letter to Field nrshal I>lch in
iicveriur l?ll, requesting that Raschcr be discharged fra: t’.*j left—

■ 9 •

woffo and transferred to the Vaffen SS. .Tinnier stated that he would
asai.e also reapsnaibility for cxreriix:ntati;n n hunr.n beings.

■li. In the late fall of 1912, Rasebor caked fer per.iissijn to carry
out teats .n habituation to cold at the !fcdical Research Station for
! fountain Treope-r.t St. Jo hem and at t'.u S& : fountain K use in


Bayrisch Zoll whoro conccntr tion coup ixnatos would be available
for oxperionts. Tiie purposc^f those oxpcriivnta waa to have peoplo


live in igloos and to test various typos of diet and clothing.

<■

"12. iliml-r wrote tc SS CbergrupponTuehror Oswald Fohl, Chivf of
the VHl, regarding his visit to Dachau in KeVo toer 19la2 at which


tiixj ho had observed the freeing cxpariixnts. Ho infor.vd Fohl
that he had ordered that suitable nanon be set aside for tho


purpose of warring up the ©xporiucntal subjects.

•

"U. Rase her had still net be^n released fr.es the Luftwaffe as
late cs Janvnry 19U3 and no i answer had been received freo HI eh in
reply tc the forur 1 repeat node by Himl er in !'ove:*or 1912.
Siov.rc io.o concerned at ut this delay because R-.schor was planning
to mke cortain experiments on the effect of dry cold cn lunar,
beings and since it wan thought that those could not be started
prior to Rasch^r's transfer, Sievors was b-ccoring concerned least
the transfer bo delayed beyond the cold season. I knuw that
dievera was in touch


n


- 233


11

Coart Jfo. 1

C

»ith -.'olff on several occasion* and urjod Ma to expedite the transfer. T?olff
iras sorrily as the liaison between Rimler and Milch in this natter.

"11|, Hircler had asked Rascher to sufcoit a short raeaorandua of advicoto
soldiers as to the beat method of rowamirv- after a savero chillin'’. This norao-
rurtia was sutdtted to Reichsarzt SS Gruppenfuehrer Grawitzj and ho listed
certain objections on the ground that Rascher’s resoarches were based only on
exposure to wot cold end not to dry cold. Therefore, Grawitz reco.-aaendod further
experimentation upon tho effects of rewarsinc by hot water persons subjected to
dry cold. Siarera beenso very cxcitod at the intervention of Dr. Grawitz and
immediately raised Ejections against his painin’ control of tho experiments.
Silvers .ma also lnchnaed by a report of a conference between Grawitz, Rascher,
and Obers tunsbannfuo hrer Pop,-e radicle, in which Rascher quoted Grawitz as having
said that it was an untonablo state of affairs that a non-physician such as
Clovers should havo Jurisdiction over nodical natters.

"15. Slewsrs oontiruod his offorts to havo Rascher trensforrod fron tho

luftwaffo and suggested that Hlnmlcr tevo ibtscber attached to

• * . ^' • 0 ~

fuehrer Dr. Pf«nuenotiol«s Deportment in Harhirp.

" 16 . In February 1?U3, Raachor submitted his report on oxporiaonts
animal heat. In tho sane lottor, ho stated that ho had carriod out intonso
chi 111 rv; experioonte on 30 human boil’s by loaving then outdoors naked from 9
to 1U hours, Taschor su>"osted that further oxp;rlrwnts with dry cold bo trans¬
ferred to ..uschwitz because it was colder there and tho .-xoator extent of opon
country within tho camp would nako tho experiments loss- conspicuous as tho
experimental subjects screamed with pain when save roly frozen. Tho report on
the rewarding of intensely chilled human bo in? by animal warnth statod that tho
experimental subjects were cooled until they all lost consoiousnoss. The tost
persons were then placed bet*son two naked wenen in a spaoious bed. It was
noted that several of the subjects revived sufficiently to perform sexual inter¬
course.

"17. I wrote Rascher ackncwledring receipt of the aforementioned report and
statad that further experiments with diy cold should be made at ;.usch«ltz or
lublin. h copy of this letter was sent to Phhl, who was to order the carrying

out of the experixsmts at Lublin or .'.uschwitz.

-23b-


u «T!>-l6-2-5lakle7

Court So, 1


■IS, The efforts to release Rascher from the Luftwaffe were intensified.

& pke had apparently heard the criticise of the SS that Rascher had not been
Siren full cooperation by tho Luftwaffe; and he defended himself against the
cccusatlon that he had rot enthusiastical l y supported the experiments performed
on human bein^. He indicated that he would be willing to approve of Rascher’q
release fran the Luftwaffe if Rascher himself made the request. Hippke pointed
out that tha difficulties about which there was sqae cccplaint wore caused not
because of any disapproval of experiments on hhmn beincs, but because of the
personal vanities of toe various doctors involved, in that each one apparently

wanted to tako personal credit. Baschor hirsolf was criticized in that respect.

0

"19, Raschor defended hiss elf in a letter to no against this slur of
Hippko»s and added that he had redo furtoar toets on the resuscitation of human
beings who wore frozon ’jy dry cold during a period of heavy frost. The cocperl-
zental sublets wore v kopt naked outdoors for XU hours at freozlnp tenporaturos.

A ccoploto report on this subject was sent to Hiwaler in ..pril 19U3. I acknow¬
ledged receipt of this roport in a lottor to Rascher and according to orders ad-
visod hin to got in touch with Prof. Oebhardt at Bohonlychon, to whom Himlor
had sent the aforesaid roport. Raschor was also diroctod to send a oopy of tho
roport to Orawitz,.

8 8

"(Signed) R. Brandt." . J'J

• *

This rather Ion,’ and dotalled affidavit, your Honors, tenia to (*vo you a
rather full picture in one plaoo of the experiments conducted on froozinr at
Dachau. You will see in tho exhibits which will coos in lator a -treat mny of
tho documents which ore referred to in too affidavit of Rudolf Brandt.

The next document will be Document NO-W8, an! is Prosecution Exhibit 8li
This is an affidavit si-jned by tho defendant Bockor-Froysenr J and your Honors
will recall that Beckcr-Freyse: was fro the latter part of 1?U1 until the
and of tho war attached to the Department for Aviation ??edicino in tho Rodioal

Sorvico of toe Ijiftwaffe.

Tho affidavit reads as follows!

"I, Hermann Becter-Freyscnr, being duly swore, depose and state!


11 Dc-H-*TD»l6->-5lakl«y
Court !fo. 1


“1. I was born on 18 July 1910 in Ludwigshafen. I studied nodi cine at the
Universities of Heidelberg, Innsbruck, and Berlin. In the surrcr of 19uO I
joined the Luftwaffe. At first I was an Dntorarxt with a Flyer Selection Group.
"2. In August 19U1 I was transferred to Berlin and becano an assistant to


Anthony who was Chief of the Referat, Aviation Hediclxa. This doprrt.-aknt dealt
with all questions concerning aviation nedicine an! reported to the Chiof of
the Medical Sorvico of the Luftwaffe. ‘7o consulted with scientists about avi¬
ation nodical prebleas and saw to it that the results of their work :wero applie
to a practical use. *Ve received reports fraa such scientists, flight surreonq,
instigates, and consulting surjocrj and doctors of the Luftwaffe. I saw reports
free Dr. Eugon Haagen, Oborstabsarzt of tho Luftwaffe, although he was working
primarily for the Hygieno Referat under Dr. Siegfried Atnor. Gencrdarxt
Gorhnrdt Rose was perhaps th> sost important figure in the Jlc-llcal Service of
tho Luftwaffe as far as faygUnio problems wore concerned.

"3. Tho Aviation :fedicino Referat had the letter designation "2 II B" when
I was attached to that office in August 19U1. This dosi'nation stood for
"Abteiluaj 2, Gruppe II, Roforot B." In tho winter of 19!i2-Ji3, tho letter dosin-
nation of tho Aviation Modicino Roforat was changed to "2F", as I recall. It


ronainod "2 F" until about January 19Ua when it bocano known as "2 II A". Tho
work of tho offico was tho sane durirv; all of thio tine) and tho chango in
letter ''esinvation norely reflected reorganisation Of the Modioc^Scrvice of th
Luftwaffo."

Mow, your Honors na 7 wonder what the si nificanco of those latter desig¬
nations of tho Officor for ..viation Modicino in the Medical Sorvioe of tho


-1 S-rvic.

lotted d


Luftwaffe isj but you will see on acce of the •’ocumonts to bo introduced at a
lafcor starve in the trial that those lotters, those letter designations, will
apponr or. 3 coj of the documents and they will have considerable significance
with regard to the case against Beckor-Freyseng and also !*r. Schroodor because
they will indioato tint this office, the Office for Aviation Medicine, was con¬
cerned with particular natters stated in that letter.


- 236 -


11 D»o^--4T!>-l6J>-5laJtIy
Court So. 1

*


I Just would Ilka to sue apt When we see tha letter designation "2 II B"
cf ’’2 ?■ or "2 II A," we knew that it-is referring to the Department of Aviation
Ibdicine in the Ite-llcal Service of the Luftwaffe and that it is in effect tha
sene department that Becker-Treysenc was attached to through the whole period
in which we are interested, succeedin' in May, he says, of 19 hh as chief of the


iercrtosnt arvi prior to that tine as chief assistant to .mtteny.

"J. Hten I first Joined tho Luftwaffo, Htypke was Chief of the Inspootorat


of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe (Inspekteur des Luftwaffo Sanitaots-
woajns). Soteoedor, at that time, was Chief Medical Officer of /dr Fleet 2 and


hold tho rank of Oenerals tabs Ant. Schroeder held the highest rank in tho
Hedical Service of tho Luftwaffo other than Hippke. Sohrcodor bocane Chi of of
the ?Iodical Sorvico of tho Luftwaffo in January 19UU

At the Nurnberg Confer®noe hold in October 19U2, Dr. telzloohnor pave
a roport on tte froeeing oxporinents conducted et Daohau in cooperation with
Dr. Mascher. Antteny was Chairmn of tho sooting. As a result of telzloohnor*s
report ate others riven at tho ccnferonoe, wo issued instructions to Flight
Surgocno that tte wars bath netted was to bo used in reviving aviators who had
boon sorerely chilled. I know that prior to tho Nurnborg Conforcnco Holzoohnor


was axporinmting with Rascter in Dachau on free ring problons. I also kn^w
that Ruff ate Rooberg had coteuoted certain low pressure experiments at Dachau


in cooperation with Raschor. It was fairly woil known that thoso non were <
exporinontinr on concentration can? irrvites. Dr. Kalk told no that ho had soon
Raschor In Uilch's office at tho RI2I, ate we wore both vary surprised at this."

Dr. Salk, your tenors, as you will probably not recall, appeared on tho
chart which we suboltted in evidence stewing tho organization of tho Medical
Service of tho Luftwaffe. He was a consulting physician or hygienist, as I

f %

call. ft

"6. After Dr. Rostock took his position under Dr. Karl Bratet'J hejfts


possibly the highest authority on science and research in Germany. -01 branchep
of the arced forces reported experiments ate research to him and he surprized


the reports ate gave then tc Bratet for approval. Handlosar, as Chief of the
Medical Services of the Armed Forces, also ted to be entirely familiar with the


-237-


11 Io # --%.TO-l&-£-aialcle7
Court So. 1


research work which was being conducted by the Am, Navy, and Luftwaffe. T«e
were ordered to report to these aen all research assicnnents of aoientlata
working for ua so that duplication of work could be oliainitod.

■(Signed) Heraann Beckex^-Treysene."

I nay say that the defendant Becker-Freyseng was certainly In a position
to know whereof ha speaks since it was tho Departn^nt for Aviation Medicine
which assigned a great nucber of the research tasks in the Luftwaffe.

tow, your tonors, the next .’.ccunents appearing on Pages 10 and 11 of tho
docunent bcok are siaply insortod as a natter of oonverdont roferonco for the
Tribunal. The docunent on Pngo 11# y'u will renenbor, wossubcdtted this
ncmlngj and it is tho 1 otter free 3tileh to Dr. 'tolff, statin- that "Major
7/olti will be charged with tho execution and Captain Raacher will bo nado avail¬
able until further orders" to oarry out the free ring oxperlnents at Dachau.

JUDGE SSP ; HIW3i Mr. McHarwy, can you toll no quickly what oxhlbit that is?

•

JCL ICH-.NETj That is Exhibit 62, your Honor.

JUDGE SEBTUNGi Thank you. <’hich one, Mr. Hclfcnay, is 62?

JO. !CH.tETi That is tho second lottor, datod 'lay 20, 19U2. If your Honor
r leaso, both of those docuaento wero originally rotate rod a s 3U3-FS. TYe
change' tho registration to 3U3—PS and 3U33-PS in order that wo could split
then up aal subnit thor. at difforent points in tho trial bocauso wo thought
tho presentation was benefited by that process.


- 238 -


11 DKj^r^H^L6-5-BlAlclay
Court So. 1

•

research nor* which was being condttetod the Ar^r, Navy, and Luftwaffe. TTo
were ordered to report to these cen all research assigmenta of scientists
working for us so that duplication of work oould be aliainated.

"(Signed) Heraann Becken-Freyseng."

I r®y say that the defendant 3ecke^-Freyseng was certainly in a position
to know whereof ha speaks since it was the Departaant for Aviation Medicine
which assigned a great aster of the reeearoh tasks in the Luftwaffe.

Now, your Jfcnora, the next Iccunents appearing on Pages 10 and 11 of the
documnt book are sinply ins or tod as a mttor of convenient reference for the
Tribunal. The document on Page 11* y'u will renenbor, wassuhrdtted this
norningj and it is the lotter frees JtUch to IS. *olff, statin that "Major
Yfoltz will be charged with the execution and Captain Raschor will bo cade avail¬
able until further orders" to carry out the freoxlng axp.'rirwnts at Dachau.

JUEOS SEBRDCt Mr. HcHarwy, can you tell no quickly what exhibit that is?

HR. ICH..NST i That is Exhibit 62, your Honor,

JUTOE SSBRINOs Thank you. 'hich one, Mr. McHmc 7, is 62?

H3. ICR.*ET» Thnt is tho second lottor, datod !by 20, 19U2. If your Honor
pleaso, both of those docunents wore ori ; ;inally ro-Tlstorod as 3U3-FS. T»o
change' tho registration to 3U3..-PS anl 3U33-PS in erdor that wo could split
tton up and subedt thors at different points in tho trial booause we thought
the presentation was benefit! by that process.


/

'1

*


- 238 -


Ccurt Me. 1

11 D 0 c *16 L - 17-1 - LJQ —-urns


f


:a. "cH.j: 2Y: Bo next exhibit will bo Dteunent HO. 283
end this is Prcsecuticn Hxl lblt 82. The Tribunal ru'.y xrlsi¬
te aoo this dccur.ont. It is tho first pr.go if c letter—
this is Pis s^cutim Exhibit 82. 2ho Tribunal rx.y v.*ish tc
lc r k r.t tho exhibit. Its tho first pr .30 .f n lottor r.pp:-rontly
written by Dr. Rcachor tc Heinrich Hitler. Tho oxhlblt itaolf

cent*ins cnly tho first pr. 30 . Tto dc net fcr.vo tho ftllowing

■ ■•

pegos cr tho pngu ccntr.inin 3 tho oirncturo of Reactor. Ect/-

ovor, r.a yiu cr.n soo on tho tr:nslr.tion tho. first p:.go decs

c^nt.-in tho l^ttorhor.d "Dr. odicino Sijy;und Rr.schor. to

lottor is Jf.tod 15 Jun-‘ 19*12.

• •

"Estoorjod Roichafuohror 1

"A fow dr.ys :.gc I •a.-.a 'lvlcrod to .. ccnfcrunco with. tho
Inspoctcr cf tho Luftw ffo '-Iodic .1 Servico Oenorr.loborstr.bsr.rzt,
Prefoseer Jr. Hippko. 'ilion I trid hiu thr.t yi u hrxl net yot
roccivod tho rop*.rt ccncorning tho oxporinonts r.a c. v;hclo,

.-nil thr.t yru still hhd tc 3 IV 0 pv-ruisslcn fer tho rop-rting
of tho results, ho did n.'t r.sk fer rny report. Tho Inspoctcr
wc.s uxtrr.crdine.rlly kind nnd r.skod cjo, i.s lir.ison errn with tho
SS, tc exproes to ycu, osteonod Roichafuohror, his privr.to
thx.nka fer tho oxporiuonts.

:l ht tho a..r:o tiuo, ho r.skod fer pomission tc c.-.riy out
tho ccltl rnd wr.eor oxperinonta in D.chr.u, rod c.al:od thr.t tho
following bo ong.-god in thoso oxporiuonta:

"Profoaccr Lr. Jr. riacli, of tho Univorsity cf'/ V A
Innsbruck,

"Profess:r Dr. Eclzlcohnor, rf Hlul, r.s woll r.s tho
Ui f twr.f f o - pnthclo '1 a t

t

"Profess, r Dr. S i n g o r , cf Schw:.bing Erspiti.l.

(I bner 7 rcfo 3 s. r Singor poracm.lly very woll). Tho inspector
designated the- exporinonts r.s ..xtrr.crdinr.rily inportent, r.s
we uuei ccunt cn -nothor winter in tho Beat.


- 233 -


Court Me. 1

11 Doc -iS L 17-2 - U G - Burns


"-c.tur luring the discussii n I w .a r.skod tc inqv.iro . f
y u, eat jei:oU iCoichsfuchxvr, \:1 *.ti.er the Go8t .pt cm investi-
g:.co Whothor tlx ..bovo-isonticnod gontlonon er- ptlitic-lly
ur.oxceptlcnr.blo.

“*t wr.s r.lac docidod thr.t tho Inap-cter would issue t rdors
tc :.e :.t ;.ll tiixs during tbo oxporir.onta. Iha Inspect* r sr.id

4

thr.t lo r^uld prefer to epprevo Icnj-ter-; r.ssigir:onts r*thor

thnn tc free ::o frem the Luf tvr.ffo, c.a ho noodod r.o.

"ILu vr-tcr oxp-rij.iontc c..n bo atr.rtod L-’.udi.-toly,...

?!R. UcHi’.HgT; ijA -hero tho trmrlrti-n discontinue a

bo cm sc wo don't the following pngc «f tho * letter. ur\

into rooting thing to r.* to in c , ...octi-r. with this letter, is

firstly, tho ’..,te 15 Juno 1C-.2 c.t witch tlmo tho 1 w-proesuro

oxp-riaents ‘..t Dr.chcu wore still in pr cocc. You \.lll recr.ll

fcfcct the fir.o.l x\.p. rt 1 r. tho l-.w-proaeuro oxporimonts vr.o

dr.tod 28 July 13-.2 end it is :.iat interesting tc

R.-ochor'a porstncl cmferenco with l.'ipplro, Chief

!!odlcc.l Service «f tlo luftwuTfo. Hew, there ia

r.y . iind thr.t .. consider .bio nurdjer, if n t .11 rf tho Luftwnffo

• •

o dofur/imte ir. this c:.so, wMlbell the fribunr.l th~t this w;.s

si.-.ply ..n SS :..ttei*. The oxporii.ontc p-rlv.pa ocourrod but thoy

•

Were under tho jurisdicti-:: of tho doichsfuehrer Sc Heinrich
Kir*_J.jr rnd K..t ho w .s r. . . n - f such gr&.t p- vvr thr.t thoy
c-uld r..isc nr vice r.g .ir.ot hie. I thin 1 : it h. G be’on c.vply
f.ou-r.ctrc.Wl rJ.Vof.dy ti. t this is n t tho c.so; such ns thoy
will d03cribo it: thr.t thesu experiments were tho result of
c r 1 purr.tlen butr/con tlx SS und the M>ftvr ffo ex.d thr.t thoy would
: vu n t b.er. p* roible without such C'cpor..ti:r., but horo wo
s-w tlw.t n.-'.scher hr.c pcrscn.-l ccriforonce with Hippkc o.rd
uontiens tho nemos f 3'v.o of his cclli.bcr..tcrs Drs. J..riscl:,

% w

H*. lzlcohnor end Singer whe c.ctur.lly did c'cll..btr..tu in tho
experiments which bogm cn the 15 -’.ugust 19-12. Vie coi.u nor to


—Zli C—


Court S c 1

11 Dgc 46 A - 17-3 UG- 3urns


N


Decunont HO 234 which will bo Prrsocuticn Exhibit 83. Tfco
lottor .. 3 :-In frcn Rr.schor to Soinriofc Kirt-lor Jc tod 10 Sopton-
bor It42 end it Indicutos tir.fc the oxporlnonts hud r.lro.-xly
at .rtod ;.nd attached tc it is r. ropert, :ji Internedlata Rope rt
cn tho Intonso Chilling Exporluionts in Dachau, st;j*tod cn
15 ..ugust 1942. Ho, your Honors, I cn in orrer thoro'. Bvo
Ropert will go in undor r. sopnreto oxhibit nunbor. Lettor
ur.tod 10 Soptoubor 1942:

"Ily dour Ruichsfuohror:

n-*-y 1 aubuit in tho onclcsuro tho first intomodir.ry
ropert r.bcut tl.o freOzing oxporlnonts.

"In tho beginning f Cctobor c. nooting cn tto subject f
froozing oxporlnonts is tc t:.!:o place. ?rrf u ocor Dr. Krlz-
lrohnor, participating in our D..chr.u oxporlnonts on bohr.lf cf
tho LuftYK.ffu, wants t; givo on this 'ccusfcnT.n uccrunt cf
tho roaults «f cur cxporinor.ts. SS Oberaturr.bunnruohror
SILVERS, who surveyed tho oxporlnonts in Dcchau lust wook,
boliovod tint if any rep rt vr.a to bo undo c.t u aooting, I
skculd bo c;.llod uppn tc aubnlt tho repr-rt. A discussion
with othor oxports cn froozing oxporlnonts would suroly bo
vor 7 vc.lur.blc, I t.orofcro roquost yvur decision. / j

"1.) Cun c rop-rt bo i«.do olsowhoro bofero tlo oral
ropert tea boon subnittud tc ycu, uy Roichsloodor,

" 2 .) Is ny participation in'tho ccnforonco cn tho sub¬
ject f tho froozing oxporlnonts cf tho uiftwuffo, "rdorod
by ycu, ny Roichalo.dor?

"I will tc.ko euro thr.t tho ropert is subnit tod in tho
upprepri-to nrnr.or duo tc r. top Socrot nr.ttor." Signod
"Rcscl-or."

in. licK AHB Y: Iho noxt dccinonfc 1618 ?S is tho ir.torrwdic.tb
r.'p rt nonti nod ir. tlo Tcsocuticn«s lb-dibit 83. 1618 *S rill


-2J^h-


11 Doo-^-3*-lT-4-Dunu

Court 3o«l

bo Prosecution Exhibit 84i

■Intv-modiate report cn Intense ^hillinc Experiments
in tho Dachau Concentration Casp, startod on 15 Au;ust

1942.

I

Sxporlnontal prooedure,

"The oxporiaontal subjects wore placed in the water, dressed in ocnplcto
flyinc unifera, ’^rtor or suaacr coabinati.n, and with on aviator's heloot.

iix*o jacket nake A rubber or kapok \.ns to prevent sOter^inc. Tho experiments
woro carriod out at water temperatures varying fren 2.5.dogroos to 12 do^rocs
oontierndo. In ono experimental series, CCCI.UT and brain atom protuded abevo
tho w r tcr, while, in oaothor series -f experiments tho OCCI.’DT, (brain atom)
and back of the hood wero sub^or-cd i.. wator.

"Eltcotriocl measurements ^ava low temporaturo roadin;.* cf 26. i do (TO os
in tho stosnok and 26.5 do^rccs in tho rectum. Fntalitios oocurrod only whon
tho brain stca and tho baok A tho head woro also ohillod. Autopsies of suoh
fatal coses alwr.ys revealed lor"o amounts of froo bleed, up to l /2 Litor,
in the oranlol cavity. The heart invarird>lc sh-.wod extrono diction of tho
ri^ht choabor. Ac soon as tho temporaturo in those oxporimonts roaohod 28
deeroed, tho experimental subjects died invariable, dospito all attaints at
rosuscitation. Tho above discussed atuopsy finding o.nolusivoly proved tho
importance -f a w twain,; protective device’ f«-r head end CCC1. UT vtfion dosichinc
tho planned preteotivo clcthin,; of tho foam typo.

"Ofchor important findings# c -tntn in all experiments, to bo mentioned.
UfiMcud increase A the viscosity of the blood, marked incroaso cf he:i- L lobin,
rn approtirr.to fivo-feld inorcaso A tho leukocytes, invariable rise of blocd
sujar to twice its normal value, Aric«lcr fibrillation undo its appenrnneo •
regularly at 30 do^rros. a $

'During attempts to save severely ohillod poroons, it was shCWv-^iat rapid
rc-vmrainG was in all eases profomblo to slew ro-waminj, because aftor
removal fr„r. the c.ld water, the body temperature continued to siud rapidly.

I think that f.r this reason we can dispense with tho attempt to savo intensely
ohillod subjects by means of animal heat.


-21x2-


Court Do. 1 .

“.ic-roming by p.rri^l werath-rninr.! b.dios or w-ncn's bodica-would bo
toe slew* As auxiliary measures for the prevention of intense chilling, in-
rovexats in the clothing of aviators eerie alone into caaidcrntlen. ^he fcan

•

»uit with Mi table nook protootor which ia being proper Oil by tho Goman
Institution for Textilo itoscarch, lioich-Glodbach, deserves first priority
in this connection. The experiments havo shown that phamacoutical measures
arc probably unnecessary if tho flier is atill olive at the tiuo of roscuo.

; u „ UCKAlSYs Ifarc again, your IL ©nors, in this sot of oxpori»$nte to t * iat
thoy aro continued until cortain of the aubjoots iliod. The document itaolf
cloarly rovoala that a nuabor of pera na wero billed in tho early atagoa of
tho experimenta.

TIX . .£.^I*>2ITi Tho tribunal will bo recessed.

"A roooaa w.s takon)


-2U>


16 - 1 Cook

Coart I • “*£»

V* s ,V>

ITS :r. Sfl.L t Ttvj Trlb«e%l8e,'cin in session.

H. r‘cHane7 ; Hi ha-* con.- to docunent loll ?S which will be Prosecution
Jxhibit &3.

4> •

THJ TX'SmyjT I It is 85.

H. : fciJUI s Too nro ri;,ht, '.bur lienor, - 65. This is n letter fro.u

3j inrich t*l-r to Dr. Itascher, dBto * 22 Septor&er, 191:2 ;

•

" I'bcvu received the int-r vxlieto revert on the subcoclin;: expo ri:vjnts
in Coup Dochcu."

That refers to the report which I have. Just rot! an'*, which is Prosecution
exhibit 81*. I will continue.

" Tispito owerythinc* I woul' sc- errruvo the experinmta that all possi¬
bilities, prerpt wamin ., -idicino, b-dy warning will bo bxocufcod in positive
experiment oners.

/ w

Staled s H. Hi’nerl.^ j »

That lrat paragraph is perhaps a little ;.nrblod, Hour ‘Lnors, but
.-jdn; is quit- cloar. You will roc.-ll that in tho intunudiato report
anchor hat! --ado tlx: state-vint that lie thought th-*t they could dispense
with the nttoupt t snv- intensely chilled subjects by iienns of mind heat.

If 01 ' in t’jis letter which i3 rr secuticn '.xhibit 85 Him la r is in offoct ordering
hoacher to exhaust all posibilitius of rc-*./nj—in;, including body warning,
as he puts it, cf -niml heat. copy of tliis letter, it can bo soon,
rent to SLavors, with e xvquost f x acIavmle'V.oroont, and there apparently nro
a t initials cn that. Horovor it indicated Lieutenant Colonel, and presuiably
thj letter was forwarded to Rudolf Crandt in the of floe of Heinrich IILt-lor,
car’ tho Court -dll recall tcc that about this time Dr. Hnschor was attached
ti the eirv-nerbo Society, which 13 an Institute for Scientific Bosearch, am’,
c .Tisoquently a copy of this letter, irhich in effect was an or\--r to toucher,
was sent to his superior, tho <e Cendant Sievers.

Th- next docirunt is Ko. 285, i-’hich will be Prosecution Exhi’jit 86. It
is -Is a letter fron Rascher tc todOlf Erandt. The letter is ndressed to
" 'S*. Ignored ^herstunijaanfu-hrer ■, and is not adresaid by none to tho
'efetti'ant, Tludolf Brandt. The Prcceoti-n ta!o_s the position that the letter was
in : act addressed to tlu defendant, BudoTf 3rondt. His title at that tine
'* s aa 3£ Q.erstuirbannfuehi\a*, tiiich is an equivalent rank of Lieutenant


-2^-


- cook

Colonel. The letter is da tod 3 Q:to'x.r, 19U2 s

■ First of all I want to thank you very :tich for 3 the Glass Ooaan."

That apparently refers to a pointing. “ -y rifo and rysolT arc very happy
to possess now a ccnplato sot of tlx.se hooka.* It «u not a painting, 0 I

h»vo already read the b*5c with Croat interest.

* m • s •

t 7.i- ^ichsfuohrjr-S 6 wants to l o inforrx-c’. of the state of the oxparirunts.
I can onnounoj that tt» experin;nte have been oanbludcd, rith the exception
of thes- on wtrrdn,; with body heat. The final report till bo rendy in about
5 d?yo, Pr:foss-r i*olzl''chivjr, for reasons that I cannot fathon, does not
hi self want to nako tt*3 rupnrfc to tlvj hoichsfmhrer and has asked '_u to at ten
to it. This report :rust bp nedo hofore 2o Cctoo-r, became thj ;.reat Uift-
waffo conference on freezing takes /loco in Nujmbero on 2$ October. The im¬
port oil ttv; results of our research nust be ra.’c there, to p.s*ire that tlwy
can ’w used in tine for the troops, "ay I ask you tc arrange for a decision
fraa tlw .Toichsfwjhror recordin'; tho find report to liin, nnd tic submission
tc him of th- relevant natorial ?

" Today I fewivod your latter of 22 Sopturiber U2, in which the
toichsfuehrer ortors that tho erveri-ents cn warrlrv: through bx'y heat
ixist absolutely be conducted."

That is thi letter nhidi has cox. in as Pros-cut ion Exhibit 85.

" Because - f inconploto address it u-as delayed. To*ry I asked aer-
3tur.fcarxfujhrer Sievers to send a t-1- .ran to the carp onw'ur irrvdiately,
t<- tl\j effect that U rypsy wr.cn bo procured at onoe frnj anoth-'r caip."

•f.-ur Honors nould appreciate tic fact that tho concentration c*ip Daclrou

rr-s reserved almost exclusively for uen.

• *; c roovcr, I asked sS Q>ei%-stuiribarfnfuohrer Sievers to take steps
to have the lor*-prassuro cha’is^r rea-^ f r use.

“ Tne re pert to Gei^rol Fluid Marshal TIUch planned, for 11 September
could not to rade, -5 you have discovered, because ha was prevented frm
attending, or.: no representative iras cersoissiorwd to receive it. .‘.s tlw Iloichs
fuehrer hi■’ n't erpowored ;v to report to anyone in the Soldi -ir I inis try,

I abstained fren naJdr .3 tho report, which ratter nettled tho gontlcaon of
the ledicol Inspectorate. I irr-.edinwly itfornad Oberstunibannfuahrar Sievers.


- 2 ^-


n-Dtc-:-- l x-x3-5-co*k (bk)

Ccnrt V.Cm 1


• •

For tb- *-? p~ boir.g the report is being bold as a 'tilltary Secret at the

Garaan Experimental Institute fer „viation together with a distribution
list prep-rod by the Reich Air : 'iristry. Tho distribution of tho
copies, however, has net yut teken place, because, as I said, tho report
has not y.t been mde to lilch. I a some that you were inferaeu of

m

this whole business long ago. ’.hat shall we dc now?

"I wish to onclcse a letter of thanks to the Raichsfuohror fro;-, tho

for or priserKir Neff. At tho saru timo I should like tc thank you very

•

•awh for your offerts; and let oa beg you, should opportunity offer,

to convey to the Reichafuchror y rost sincere thanks for !iis granting

•

of this request. I did not vrito tc tho Rolchsfuohrcr in parson, in
ordwr net to rnkc d tff turC~r dr rn ds on his valuable tino.


'..’ith bast Tdshes and

. . Hail Hitler l

Yourr r.ost sincerely,


S. rfaschar#"

Your Honors are particularly ccnc:mod about whoth-r or not this
letter too addressed tc the defendant, Rudolf Brandt, which I as ratf.ur
sura he would not deny. You nay rofor to paragraph 6 and 7 of his
-ffidr.vit, which his gene in ~s Exhibit Ho. 80, and he theroin states
substantially tho facts which arc: evualdd in this lottor. I vM2d
rl30 liko to point cut in roferrin; back to tl;j high altitude axpori-
ixnts that tha next to the last paragraph in this letter coals with


that subject, and of particular interest is th- language stating t.iat


fer th- tl_ bjir.g the revert is b-ir.g: held as a military socrot at

tho a. nan Saporlrjntal I xtitutc fer Asiatic n, and that institute,

/

f course, was the cn-. to • hick d-f-r.dants Ruff and Rorb-rj roro #


attached*


Year .idiiors will recall th-.fr when they presented the TSxl report cn

Ax hi-’- altitude- experiments it was feunf 'dth th.. letter fry. Ruff

and S--±org that Hirr.l^r sends firoo co.ias, two, throo nhd four. Now

•

that is significant, because as it states here tlx distribution list
—3 purred by the Reich Air Y± .stry, which indicates that these


ll-Occ.-^.-tX-lS-3-Cccic (3X)
Court Sc. 1


c*porl»nt8 were well known cn t&j highest level cf the aodicnl scrvico
of tlx; Luftwnffe, including 2rl>nrdt


IU-Oco-Ca'M&J^. Cock .
r~t ?t 1

Illch him-If, Secretary cf State for ~ir.

ThLi rofuxonco to tb; forrer prisan-r i\j£f is to onu of the
:ocoontration carp iirirtes, who vas en activ- assistant to Rasch&r
Curin' th. low pressure ant’, free sine cacpaiironta, an-’, it ourtainlr
•lojfl not rofor to any concentration coup ironies who was thu subject
of the *3 experiunta. Consequently, it is n't to bo c'-nstruot' ns any

A * *

oTi.Vnco of anvjsty to an oxpcrlrentcl subject.

♦

Deemonfc 1619 PS will bo * rose cut ion Exhibit 87 an<*. is a tolunrajj
fra: the Rolchssichuxhu i tshnuptn;:t, which is walit m* nor:tally crll
the RSI'., m.\ th- Oustapo w -3 a part .t that err anlzation. The tolDjm
is sienu *, « b'oiss ", who apparently was t'.K Cajp CoriranCant at Dachau.

The tolo: ran is r Mrasecx! to SS Cfcorsturr bannfuuhzvr Ru.’olf Brarelt,

■"* • - * ^ •’ . §

rcul ttrtoa that tho C^naKUmt of the Concentration Cn:p Dachau asks
to instruct tho ..*its;rurxmchof SS Crira.lufuuhn-r Cliocks, to soni fren
Raven struck to Dacha: thj four •'on-n tanto'l by Stabsnr 8 t Dr. Roschor
fer his oxperirunts, r.cc'r.’ire to inm-rucUcns „lvon b/ t\u Roichafuihror
SS.

Revonbruck, Your Honors, rrs n concentration canp which tcnsinoi’
nicest exclusively faerie imotos.


I


-21:7-


Cwrt la. 1

11 5eo^-3(-W-l-0«7lord (^)


The next exhibit 1 b Bocuasnt lolS-PS pad vlll be Prosecution Exhibit
88. I p- tr. error, Your Honors, both the telcgrr— which I have Ju6t reed
and tho teletype lch follows are included as Document 1S610-PS end both
have gone Into the record as inhibit 87.

nils Is a teletype to SS-Srlgadofuehrvr Gluecks, Orpnienburg. It
states: "88-Stumbeanfuehrer Dr. Brandt asks you to give iaetructlons
for tho four woeen ordered b7 the Reichefuohrer-SS to be out at the dis¬
posal of Dr. Heacher to be sent froa Eavecabruck to Dachau.*

If Your Honor oleese, tho n:rt document in the English document books
la on pege 21. It * a Eocunont HO-295 and !• in fact the sane as the second
telcgren In DocunentlolO-PS, consaauently, it will cot bo put in. It's
tlnply a case of the sane docunent being nicked un at two difforent
sources and being registered with two different nunberc hero in Euornberg.
It is, in foot, the ooao docuncnt.

Vo con- now to a very interesting letter, which is Document l'^-28b
end this vlll be rrocccutlon Exhibit 66. This letter is fros Anthony of
tho Dopnrtnont for Aviation .lodical Service of tho Luftwaffe. It is
directed to the Eoichsfuvhror-SS, Koinrich Klaalor, and it lnforr.a hia
about a Luff-off o netting of doctors which Is to to hold in October in
Nuornborg, and that nuostions concerning freezing are to bo diocusood

thwro.

It is important here to lock rt the letter designations opoooring in
tho first port of this letter, an! I will ask Your Honors to recil-1 tho
pff id: vlt of the defendant SeeVc-r-Treysong in that reg'rd. You vlll
reno-ibcr that h* stated, when he first -cat into tho Dopcrtr.ont for Avi-
ption hodlcina in the Luftwaffe in 194r, that it carried tho lottor
desigrxtions and or p.niration designation of 2 II B, and that shortly
so-.ctino th-rop-fter, it changed to 2 ? end then tc 2 I! A, be occ h-ro
the let: r isignrtiin 2 II 3 after th« letters L.I. 14, which is luftvrffa
Inspectorr:e 14, wfcich is a nedicel service of the Luf
"Subject: Research order on freezing.

“Reference:"-

Then follows e series of letters, the neaning of ail of which I do

248


Cm rt So. 1

U Dec-A-H>.-19-1-icy 1 or4 (IEX)


cot 'at ov* It eeys "D.fi.d.L." I don't Scow the =eanta£ of that.
oqcob *and Cb.d.L." That cc-aas Cberkcnsrndo der Luftwaffe. Then


Then


24&-A


XO. 1

11 3c c-Ar-E.-.-19-2-Geylor d (i-i)


Ch.d.Luftvcffon i.In. 14, I think, neans Chief of the.Luftvaffo
Inspectorate 14, ho et that tire vat Irlch Eippke. ‘hen imediatoly
under that you tee again the letter charactera "2 II B", vhlch refere to
the Department for Aviation nediclne, the chief of which vat Anthony, the
author of this letter, and hit chief i.siatent vat the defendant 3ecker-
Ireyacng. The letter readt:

■Tho Inspectorate of the hed^cal Service of the.Luft-affo has given
en order for research to the Stebaarzt professor Dr. Eolzloohncr,
reference above, dated 24 February 194 , for work or. the folloving prob-
lta: 'The effect of freezing on vara-blocded subjects'."

Kov I'd like to peuee again. Tour Honort, and onphotite the running
of that abort paragraph. It atetea that the order hae been given for
reaeerch to Eolzloohncr, who collaborated with Raschur in these freezing
oxocrlnonta. "h.forcncc above" — and tho raferer.ee la to rofaronce Ko.

1 dated 24 February 42, aa thero carrlod in tho roferonco, rad the
Dcptrt.uest for Aviation t.edicino 2 II 3 appears very clearly, indicating
that that laoear^h or.Ur ccn. through the Dependent for Aviation ModI=
cine rr.i tl^ tv d’.fj..t’enL i-ekor-Frcysong vae In that office at that


tine. .»

"At the proposal cf Stntaarzt Lr. Eaachcr aooroprlat* cxaninatlona
vxro nadw of human belnga, and in rgro*3«n.t -with the P.olchafuohror-SS
euitable SS fncilitlea wore used for the evoclnatione.

"In order to carry out th3oe oraain'i-.ns, a rocearch group 'Hard-

✓

ohl-6 nt S.-.v v-.r ict txt, coor.istlcg of ?*.feeaor Dr. Holzloehner aa \
lender mi '• iT-mbor *-rd Dr. s' nke.

"The lc der -: r thx? : 'b^rrch group n.roj^jd tha. the exminations
hrvo been concluood.

"It la intended to diaeolve the research group at tho latest by 15


October 1942.

"The research documents end cn extensive rcoort -ill be orosentod to

the r.eicr.sfuchrer-SS by Stcbsarzt Dr. Eeechor. It ia recueated that tho

^'..'nSTC: erodes of the report and of the documents bo nut at tho diB-

ooad -f the Inspectorate of tho kedleel Service of the Luft-rffe.

24 ;


Coart I>. 1

11 ro-EX-l»-£-G*yUrd (IX)


“It it intended to nak* the results, la the iorz of an extract,
accaesibla to experts at a conference which will toko placo in Suornborg
on 36 and 27 Cet-obor 1942.


249-A


Court Ho. 1


The daily •chcdulo of the conference is enclosed*

• V /

"Tho SS Central Office, licdical Dopajtacnt ha* boon invitod to thia dis¬
cussion by letter, datod SO Soptoabor 19-12", /

I would liko to stato in that connection that if cy nenory sorvoa ao
oorrootly that tho—I boc your pardon, tho roforoncc aust bo there tc tho
dopartnent run by I>r. Grawit*. 1 uaa ab.ut to say that tho defendant G cnxkcn ‘
however— hi* offioc, a* I recall, was -.ttachod to the SS Fuchrun_ohauptont,
T7hioh ia tho operational hoodquarcora of. tho \affon SS, and tho roforonco horo
ia to tho SS Central Off ioo to whioh Gravitt* Gffioo was attachod,

"It ia further requeatod to abstain from ferwordinj tho docunonta and the
roport to other non-ocdical .fficoa".

It ia thoro ai jiodi "Dy order /ullon. Tnio copy", 3ijmturoi "Anthony".

Tho roat of tho lottor ainply ;ivca tho dato ad placo of tfcj mooting,
which waa hold in tho Doutaoho Eof in Murabor- on tho 2G and 27 of Ootebor
19-12, and it alao jivoa the ogonda of tho meeting. And Your H 0 nor will aoo
that it oa dealing oxcluairoly with problem of oold,

I oall your attontion to ?ogo 2-1 of tho Dooment Dook to tho noto that
Oborstobsarzt Dr* wolts is alao to apoak oa frooting problcna at the sono
mooting.

-Tho next oxhibit will bo Ouounont jtf-225 ahich will bo Proaooution Exhibit
69, This is a letter from Siskind naaohor’ to I&mlor datod Octobor 16,1942,


"Vory honored ^ichafuohrori

"Dy order of tho c hiof of LIK 14 of tho Roich Mr Uiniatry, I have boon


you Tory honored Itcichafuchror SS,

V* J7


"Since your tine does not porait it, I herewith roquoat meat obediently
that you approve tho roloaso of tho rosults of thoao oxporiaoato,

"At the Done time I bee Y™ kindly to lot tho Adjutant's Offtco, Hoichfc-
fuchror-SS in Munich, have a decision concerning the nattor, by tclotypc,
as tho report ia to be utilized on the occasion of the Luftwaffo conference
of 25 October '-12 deling with cold experiments. This dato ia urgont, for tho
reason that eountoracaaurca noat be taken against freezing of airmen, Signod:

•% a

Raachcr",


-25o-


11 Uc.-X-3^1cJi-arylord-(3J)-
*jurt Ko. 1

Socueont I 9 I 6 -PS will bo Prosocution 2xhibit co. This also is a latter
fron Lr. Resoher, the Roichsfuohror dr.tod 16 October '1*2.

~vt> "Porait to submit the attr.chod fin'l roport on tho supor-coolinr ox per-
icent por formed ct fcoohnu. This report doos not eontein tho oourso and
results of c sorias of oxporisents with dru^s r.s woll ns experiments with
anion 1 body host whioh ero now belay. corduotod. Likowiso, this report
doos not oontnin the cioroscopic pathological axaoinatior.s of tho brain
tissuos of *ho doconcod. I wee surprisod nt tho oxtrr.ordirmry nicrosoo-
nio findings in this fiold. I will onrry ovt exp-.rimonts boforo tho start
of tho oonforonoc in whioh tho offocts of oooliny will bo disoussod and
I hopo to bo able to prosont furthor rosults by that time-.

two oo-workors loft lootau ebout ciyht days n*o.

"In tho hopo that you, highly ostoomod Roiohsfuohror, till bo "bio to
sporo 0 quertor of nr. hour to listen to an oral ro«ort, I rent" in, “'ith
tho aost obdiont record rod Hell Hitler:.Yours rospootfully, Resoher".


11 Dee «6-A-AD-20-l-Gross (i«)


Vo ecce now to the final report on tho cooling experiments on living
human parson* at Dachau. This i> Document SO-428 and it will bo Prosecu¬
tion Exhibit 91.

This report is rather long, Tour-Honors, and while ! do Wish to read
a number of axeorpts from it, there ere several things which I,think wo
can omit, although I an sure that you will with to study the report in

full.

On page 29 they give the problem of the experiment and I think it
would be well for ae to here read that exowpt, as well as the general
procedure of the cxpcrlaent, and also sees excerpts on their clinical
findings. And X also call ycau* attention to a certain exhibit, or a


cortoln appendix attached to the report.


■Up to the present tine thore has boon no basis for tho treatment of
shipwrecked porsone *d:o have been exposed for long periods of tine to low
water tc: poraturos. These uncertainties extendod to the possiblo physical
and pharmacological methods of attack. !t was not clear, for exanplo,
whether those who hrd been rescued should be warned quickly or slowly.
According to tho current Instructions for treating frozen people, a slow
warning up sconcd to be indicated. Certain thoorotlcal considerations
could bo adduced for a slow warming. Vcjl-fcunded suggestions wero nlsslng


for a promising sediclnal therapy.


r\


■


■All tbeoo uncertaintiee rested in tho lest analysis upon the Abeoncq»

» * ^ --

of well-founded concepts concerning the ccuse of death bo* cold in human
beings. In tho meantJne, in ort.r t clarify this cucstion, a series of
animal experiments were c -anted. And,. indeed, those officials who wishod
to make definite suggaatlons to the doctors in the sea rescue servico had
to as sune a great doel of responsibility if it come to a oucstlon of con¬
vincing and consistent results in these anlnal exporlnents. At this pai'*


• -

ticular ooint it is especially difficult to carry the findings in animals

ever into the human field. In the varn-blooded one finds a varied degreo

of development In the heat regulating mechanisa. Sesides thie, tho pro-

cescos in the skin of the pelted animals cannot bo carrlod over to aan f

252


The of feet of water tonpuraturea of 2°, 3°, to 12° CRro iavosti^atod.

tank 2 x 2 z 2 n • served na m experimental basin. The water temperature
waa attoijvcd by ad-'iticn of ico, ant! regained constant durlnc tho experiment.
Tho orwrlivntal aubjocta were rorerelly dressed in oqiripnont such as ths
flyor wears, conaiatirc of unrtjrdothiix:, unlfarr., a ono pioca simir or
winter protective suit, h-lnot ox! aviators fur linod boots. In addition
they wore a llfoproaervur cf rubber cr kapok. Tho of feet of additional
protective clothing arninst water-cold was tested in a special aerios of
.xperirents, on' In another series the coolixv. c£ the unclothed person was
studied.

The bodily womth was measured thenxolectricnlly. Fill win; preliminary
exporirenta in which ;;astric toc?\n*aturos wero rxmaurod, by a Thorriic sound,
we adopted tho procedure <*f continually re-isterinr roc tally the body
tonp-rature. Parallel with this the record in;: of the skin tenperaturus was
undortaiun. The point cf •cnaurerunt was the akin of tho back at tho level
->( tho fith thoracic vertebral process. Tho tferaooloctrical runaurerents
were controlled before, fbirinc, md after tho exporinonts by thumcnotric
teat of the cheek and rectal tor^xircturo.

In sow,re ca'lin;;, checkin - of the jxd.se is difficult, ^ho pulse 'eocenes
weaker, th4 nusculaturu hjecne stiff, and shivering sots in. Auscultation
durin. the cxpjrii*jnt by rx»cns of a tube stethoscope fastened ovor tho tip
cf the heart proved effective. The tubeo w-ro led out of tho unifora and
nado possible th- ccntinu >ua listening te tho heart drains the
water.

d lo ct roc or dlocrophi c ontrola w-ro net possible in tho water,
renovd fror tho water thjy wero possible only in these coses in which a too
severe nuscle shivering did not disturb tho electrocardiograph records.

The following ch-rdcal studies were carried out s followin' up of the
tl'od su-or picture; the s-diua chloride picture in tho aerun; tho non-protoin
nitrogen; the alkali reserve; tho alkali rooervo of the venous and arterial
blood .•and sudirwntaticn rate ( bef-ro end after the oxparirent). B-sides

0

this the .-enaral blord e-Haitian and viscosity were followed during tho

-253-


2 c—3* Or-sa — '

Court Ho. 1

exporirunt, sad before and ofter tho oxperlmnt tho rest is tan cu of too
rod blood colls anl to- protein content cf to: blood plasna wore lucsuod.

The followin' urinalyses were taado regularly : sodirunfc, alburun, sircar,
sodiun chloride, acetone, acetic odd, os wall « qualitative album n
Jetorrdnation* ;

In part of to axporirunt lurbar and subccipital punctrurus wore node
as well as ccrrosponinc spinal fluid stidios.

.jionc Physical and thornroutic m-suron to f-llowin- wero tested t

k ~-

a) Rapid warnin’ ty rwana of a hot bath,

b) "amine by mens cf n li';ht cradle,

c) 'laming in n heated aloopinc -ac»

d) Vicoroua nassAce'of the whole body,
o) l .±oppine in coTors,

f) Di "thorny of to heart," •••

On tho followinc two pa;;o3, your Honors, oertain charts and appendices
have boon in a propriotely inserted in tho niddlo of this docurwnt. They
really bo lone at to back. Tho context cf to docio>nt ccntinuoa on paffJ
3li of to Srvrliah Docunent boqjc.

" in addition to following dxu* a were :£von » Strophnntoin i.v.j
Cardiatol i.v. rev*, i.c.; I»bolin end Coronin i.v. and i.c.. In othor
oxporirwnta alcohol or crap) ourvr waa c*von.

A nart of to exportonts wero bo;un under narcoaia ( 8 cc. Svipnn i.v.).".
Only port w^ru dene mAir narcosis.

The clinical picture of cooling I think worthwhile to rea-' ainco it ie

clearly stated there was ccnsi'orablo pain and suffering dur,in:,.to counso

f 'a


of to so oxporironts.

" III. The clinical picture of cool


Tho clinical picture as well as the behavior of too body tunp-raturo
shewed certain regularities in the m rural course; the ti;u of appearance of
certain phonccuna was, however, subjoct to very , jaat individual variations.
As one rdcht expect, a coed ^»rd physical Condition delayed, the ccolinc
and to conccnitant phonctuna. Furtor differences were conditioned by tho
position cf to sublet in the water end tho mnner of clothing. Furthcrooro,

-25ii-


I Conrt Ho. 1

£ifforcnaas shewed up between experiments in which tho sublet lay horizontally
in tha wator so th"t tho nape of th- nock ant! tho back of tho bone'. wore
splashed with water, -nd others in which neck wid hear', protruded freely out
of tfVj water*

Peculiarly, tho actual water terperatures boti^on 2° C and 12° C, ha', no*

ixionstrnble effect upon tho rate of tho cooling, H-’turally such m offoct

oast exist* But since besiodos tho alroady nonticned individual Oifferoncos and

those due to oxperiinntal eontitions, the various sublets coolod cn different

days at chfforont rates of spaed, th. offoct of tho actual water tonroratures
o

botwoon 2° and 12 disoppaars behind such variations.

If tho oxperlrontal sublet wero placed in tho wator under narefcsis, one
otaorvod a certain arousin'; offoct. The subject bojjan to i;roon and node smo
'tffonsivu novorwnts. In a fow cases a state of excitation dovulopod. This was
oapjcinlly sovoro in the coolin of bond and nock. But never was a complete
cessation fo tho nircosis observed. The defensive novenents ceased after
about 5 ninutos. There foUowad a progressive rl^or, which dovolopod espjcially
strongly in the am nusculature; th- arns were strongly fluxed and pressed
to the body. Tho rlcor increased with tho continuation of tha coolin,;, now and
thon interrupted by tonicclonic twitchings. '.'ith still po^n arko d s inkin' of
thobody terperatuxu it suddenly ceased. Theso coses ended fatally, without
«ny successful results free resuscitation offorts.

In tho coruso of tho narcosis exporinonts the ovipan offoct in a fow cases

wont directly over into a cold narcosis; in other casos one could dotoraino

a tr-nsitory rotur 'if ccnsciousiwss, iireadintoly followin'; the awakening effect

already doscribod; at any rate, tho oxporinantal subjects won. ditzy. 'f 4

Cold pain wns not expressed. vy

•

S 3 porirwnts without narcosis shewed no essential difforenoos in the courso
of cooling. Upon ontry into tho water a servero cold shuddering oppoc.roc’. .

The cooling of tho nock w*’. bacl: -f the head was felt as especially painful,
but already after 5 to lo ninutos a significant msakeninc of the pain sensation
was ctorvablc. Ri^or developed after this tin. in tho sare namer a3 under
narcosis, likewise tho tcnicclonic twitching. ..t this point speech becan.
difficult because th. ri.or also affected the speech nuscultturo.


-255-


t


1W)co^10-2o-5 - Q res*

Court So, 1

Simltaajcusly with tho rijor a sov.ro difficulty in bronthinr sot in
with or without narcosis. It was reported that, so to speak, on iron rinc
«&s plaood about the clost. Objectively, nlroady at tho ba-innin- of
this broathinc difficulty, a nertod clilaUticn r* tho nostril occurred.

Tho expiration was prolong an’ visibly difficult. This difficulty pas sod
over into a rattlir,; and snoring broathinr. Hewovor tho breathin'.: at this
point wrj not o socially A>op as in Kussnrail'a troathin;: n r wore any Choynu-

f "

Stokos broathin" cr Biot's broathir.; to *s>rvod. Hot in all subjects,
but in n yroat nurbor, n sinultanocus hindorinc durln this broathin;:
throuch very profusi socrotion of t-cous couldbo established, Under those
conditions sere tires i whlto, firv-bubMed form appeared at tho r»uth which
reednttod ano of on Incipient lun" cdonn. Though it was n->t possible to
dotornino this synpton with oortaJrty by clinical auscultnUon; only
n sharpered. unclean breath soimd was auciblo. This form nlcht occur oarly,
that is, at rectal tonpurnturoa of 32° C to 35° C. Ho special sicnifienneu
was to bo attributed, t* this ro^nrdin^ ttw cutemo of tho ox^rirent, vhich
is t!iO opposite of tho do scribed relaxation of riror. Tho. rate of
broathinc increased at the bo~inninj of tho oxjxirL-wnt, but after about
2 o rinutos it docroasod to sorothinc liko 2 h por ninute with slight
variation*•

*


-256-


IUDoo-.>10-21- 1 ~ Haynes

Court Bo. 1


■ In general a definite chill In of consciousness occurred at tho dropping
at the tody torporatuxo to 31 depress Centigrade rectal tonporature. Hoxt,
the aiii^cts still responded to sp-och but finally answered very sleepily.

The pupils dilated mrko'!ly. Tho contraction under light be can; inerwosin ly
soaker. The vase was diroctod ovorhood with r convulsive fixation, .ftor

^rithdrrsrcl from tho water an incrorso in tho reflexes was evident in spite

V

• I

of the riar, and ro;ularly a very icriaid drawing up of tho tosticlos occur rod
which practically disTpjxjnrad into tho aid.onen. larly in thj oxperinjnt tho
face was palu, After liO to 50 ulr.ut.s cyanosis appeared. Iftth this tl»o face
appeared xeddor, tho nocoua nmbrane bluish-rod.

Tho skin veins wuro not nwdaally collapsod an 1 were virtually always pjnotrabl

■ The heart activity showed a constant chan;o indejundont of all other
individual variations, which was ncticoablo in all subjects. Upon introduction
into tho water with narcotized subjects ns well as non-narcotiaed subjocts,
tho ho art rate wont suddenly to about 120 par ninute. At a rectal body

9 •

torpornturo of about 3h do;;ruas Conti,.Tado, it then bogan to hoc ore increasing¬
ly slower rod t- sink ccntinucusly to.about 50. per ninyto.

u The bradycardia at a b:dy toivoraturo >t about 29 to 30 ^roos Centi¬
grade changed suddenly ta an arrythein parpottfator, as the case nay be, to ft to-
tal irregularity, and this ’w an with a slow forr. f about 50 beats por
ninuto; this slow fern if irregularity could be transf-. rrvd into a faster one.
The tronsfdmation to th; faster forn was riot ro unfavorable sign regarding
life.

" ’ihen an ulectrccariOLraphic central after the oxjerlrunt was
it regularly showu 1 a Vorhofflatter. L-t it *r<i anticipated that t
irregularity could continue to exist after the cessation of tho c
a recovery of tho body tenpercturo to 33 ar 3U do,-roes Centigrade ono rod
a half to two hours after r-»novnl fren tho water, but then custonarily
changed cf itself axv* without therapeutic aids into a coordinated heart
activity. In the sarw way, let it bo anticipated that in all cases with a
lcthcl terninatiro, a sudden oessation Cf the heart boat ensued upon an

S /

irre.jularity of the slow type.


-257-


KsjtUB

■ .. check of the bleed pressure ^ns attor^jted, bat was in no cosa
satisfactory since an exact oaasurerent was not possible in tho decisive
state of tha oxrurirunt because -f tta severe ri^or an’. nusclo fobrl 11 a-
tion »

■ Rafbrcnco has already boon nrtto to individual differences in the
behavior of thi rectal ter^'oraturvs. Fi-ixo U fives an oxanplu which
includes four uxp-rirents, in which feur different ojqxjrlnuntal subjects

V

»jro ocolud at identical water toj^raturos air’ with indontical clothinc.

It was shown that in water at li«5 do re sa Centigrade tv-nperaturu tho
ti ja required for reaching a rectal torvorature f about 29.5 dorr 003
Contirrado varies betwjon 70 and 90 : d mite a. But nevertheless tho dincron
shows taht in splto of those individual differences, it is obsorvoMo that
tho progress or tho rectal torVJraturo procoods nccordinj to rule. Thu body

tenpomturo begins to sink aore -Tepidly fror. about 35 depress Contiprado."

•

I'll skip thj ra-xt pra-reph, and cn poco 39, tho rdd'llo of tho pogo, it
statos i

" in our exporinjntol series, th: lewrust rectal tenp-ratures which

c-uld bo survived varied individually just as did tho progress of the

• •

tonforaturo '’rep. In . one ml, ( in six cases) death occurred with a drop in
tonperature t- values between 2lj.2 and. 25.7 ito;ruoa Contipra-ta. In ono
caao, however, a dj»rp to 25.2 do;roes Ccntiprado was 'survive''. Thi3 expori-
rent foil outside tho typical picture insofar as after 90 ninutes at 26.6 •
dc_rco8 Contlrrada a virtually stationary condition of the rectal tonporaturo
had bocooo established for 85 rdnut.i, 1J6 will corn back stain t; this
s-wcirl oxporinont.

Thin I shall skip to pa;;o UO at thi bottca of the pao* :

" In order to follow up tho a*foot of isolated cooling of tho nock
and bock of tho hoad on conscicusnoss, body bonporaturo and circulation, this
was undertaken in threo spocial oxperiuents. Tho oxperirwntel subject lry
horizontal; tho bake of tho hoot’, tho reck were dipped into a receptacle
through which water of corrospcndr.^ tenperature was continuously run.

In an oxporirent of throe hours' duration there occurred snail tcr^xraturo
drops cf not no re than 0.6 dj^rcos Centigrade. The water torqwrature was
1 to 2 dojreos Contitrado. In -job case after 50 ninute3 a narked sleepiness


- 25 &-


n-Doo^ViVl- 21“ 3 - Haynes _

Court Mo. 1

occurred which chan; Qd ovor into a dob^ narcosis. The heat activity was

variable, air 1 , obvious bradycardia could net bo observed. Irrocularity never

* •

developed. Chances wure not scon in the electrocardiograph. On tho othor

•

hunt!, in all throe subjects tho spin -1 fluid pros sun: was mrkodly increased
aftor tho online of the oxporimnt to naxinal values of 300 m. After the
axperirent, ataxia an 4 , definito lenborc phenax-na wjro Aaorvod, as noil as
on axa'_.oration i: * the namol roflexes; pathological reflexes wore absent."

Tho next section, I v . ’oals with Blood, spinal fluid, and urine .'.urine
freezing and I shall not take those up hero.

Section V also deals with reccvory after co^lin.. and its depondonco upon
physio-thorapoutic naaauros.

Section VI on pace $0 I think perhaps I should read, since its title
is ■ Death aftor Coolinr; in J/ntor; Practical and. Theoretical Considerations:"

» Roports to th: offoct that those nho have boon rescuod at soa are
inporillod for a c-nsidornblo tirw aftor rescue havo are-used special
attention* It has boon roportot especially that sudden cases of death occurred
as nuch as twenty rdnutos to ninety ninutoa after rescue, ant’, that in
nass catostophios these su*dsn ’.oaths could mount to mssdyinf (rescw
collapso). Tho so oborsvations have sot off forereachinj*. discussiono. Blooding
in tlw ro-wamin periphery, .vroak.’cms of nor.al and hunorol correlations
and. sinilar ideas have '-oon brought up. ^ ^


■ In centrist to this, our exp-rirents ^ivo al relatively sinplo _ ^

explanation of coirt-doatb under thoso condition. «.'lth tho exception cf a

t »

single case, a t'.tol irro; ularity of th: heart chanbor could bo definitely
douonotratod in all cases of coolinc uiv’or 3e fcjreos Cent ter a do ($o
oxporinonts), when to rectal tonporaturo reached 29 decrees Centigrade
and usually already at a cooling of 31 decrees Centigrade. Tho oxcoption

w

was on experinont on an intoxicated subject, which is to bo gono 0010
fully below.

" Furthorrcre, a heart-death was ’established clinically in all cases
of death observed by us. In two cases tagruathlnG ceased siaultnnaously with
the heart activity. These were cases in which it was specially noted that
ttw reck and the back of thj head. lay deep in the water. In all re mining


lW&e-'/%fl4Wi - Tbftun

f'Htrfc !Ic. 1

eases breathin' OQtlastu' the clinical dvrfrox-cosantion by .is mch
ns twenty minutes. In part this iras •lunnl, noQh-rVjcoloratod bremthin^ 1 ,
in part an anconal tom ^capin-. . j aliu.ady rofon\3c*. to, n Voj-hoff-
luttor coul'" bo -tor^mstratec! cardie rnhicnlly <'.urin tho irregularity.

■ In cases in iiich a special cesUn . of n-ck rav. back f hoad hre*.'
j sis to * before r’uith, tifc autopsy shr.ro ' a ri’.rxu ’ brain oton, a
tl'jht fillin '‘f ti» t \irvoml brain cavity ( Himjefaesw), bl«-■>*’ in tho
spinel fluid as well as bl'V. in tho Ilicheelisrhcnloid ( Hauten rute)

" The h-art fin ■’.in s warrant vs* tricin' n curtain attitu'o t-nrar’ tJv
qcesti n of xvscixi coll t,:-I s 'i ure 5 an~ws, ‘oath occurred rolativuly
quickluy aftor removal frr the '.Tier, which x.ybo o^crc-' with rescue.

-ho 1 n est interval inv-lvj-*. .ras t ruteor. minutes. It is to ’ j nctod, how¬
ever, n the first place, t.ic.t driest certdrJy a much layer luoler of
•aath w uld have !eon b serve if "r. active heat therapy had n»t nlr.cat
roularly ’ eon c up-l • 'irvectly rlth t!o c r' -ti n f the experiment; in tho
soccn ; lnou, that in such cnoes th.r- v uld have ’-oon very much len or
intervals. ie have alruv'y oalleattention rapoatodly to tho after-ccolin.-
followin. tho orqvriivnt. In -v-ry cano, rhor. tills had proceeded to 0
certain point, ccunteruisuros trlcor., oinoo tlve experiments rroro never
j-lonno. tc on, in -’oath. Csv, ray vil in in, h w\-var, that in nrss catotro-
phos, in which • nln-at exclusively re3cue collapse has herut'f-'ro boon
’osex-i’ed, t’*o therapeutic ’ir r-t w-ro c nfir.cd to m un'rosciiy m
ryin eff 'f tho rescued, to other :*it r. subsequent irrrppln; in cavers,
"ndor tlvosc cat it! ns, after *'r 73 af tv- at rr. nitu Vo an’. In: ’ureter, worn
t Tm -ex-octe'’. In tho c urno - t:*in ’olryuc’ fall ir. tor^or^tuM a heart
‘'loath rl.ht -ccur r3 in -ur ox;vrircntc.

n .e rh ul-’ like to Ji^-hasico the f.ie irro -ul-xllty per so i3 nit to
' - roj-rlc'’ in 'ur o^erl^w.ts as a syr;t a f lanpor t life any more
the ir. the clinic, '*ut rather, as a siy. d liroct heart rla-v\\», rnich
incre -ses c ntinuously with furt'v-r fcllin-; ff of turyerature, until
finlly th- heart fails. If the tun; eraturo. clrop is aixcstof’, the slew
f.rr. r .f irre ailarity jcs3Js ever int- a rs, id fen. Thi3 transition
is a favorable sijn for survival; for this irxv ailarity virtually fZrr;*s


-2o>.


U^co*.^G-2L-$~ S^v.8

peases error of Itself after a ti=c ararapinc zto^tj ninutes into noroal
ac-iviuj. U c-ntiax^s i.’WR).’ ro fer t lav tire after the bbrfy
tor^^-aturo has already risen nM-isOy. .. daaror to tho circulatory syston
c ul - net ^ iencnstrnte • at this atoeb. In three cases the return of tho
-r nctl - 1 t nom-xl occurro ’ in spite cf sinultanacus ei,r.dtic physical
» rJc*»


%


—2c 3^


Court So. 1

11 Ifco-A-HS-22-l-iarrov (xii)


Tfco report continues by uakicg scientific observations about death result¬
ing free cold. It also discusses cseparative results they obtained with
those obtained In aalaal experimentation. I would coll your attention to
scco of the la n guage on the top of page 55 vhorc it states:

■The Idea that oold death In wator deponds upon failure of tho heart,
accompanied or unaccompanied by breathing, is subject to llnlration.

Ona experiment aaong fifty-seven vse typical.*

I Just wanted to point out the words "fifty-seven* 3o that the Court
nay gain soee idea of the extent of those experiments.

Port 71I on page 57 doale with the Influence of oharnacology and
the ouestion of alcohol which I think we cay oait reading here.

Pert 71IX on page 61 deals with orevpntlve neosuras. They tested
the effect of various types of orotoctlve clothing including a so-called
"foan suit" which i» swathing ! inagine Tour honors are fanlllar with.

It Is c type of cn'wlcsl that gonorotos boat when it bocomes wot.

Part zr. la concerning life Jackets in Milch thoy sake cortoln rocco-
nondntlons about i-rp.-cving thv design of llfo Jackets In order they thoy
nay Iterates t .> Buoy a«y v.u protect tho *ea e< of tho head .and nock.

I think I Bight r«*A e.vrt 7 which if a summary, on cage 69:

"1.. The curve ol rectal tcr’>erature of bncan beings chilled in
water of 2°0 to 12°C shows a gradual drop to about 35°C, aftor which tho
drop bocccos rauld. Death no;/ occur at rectal tonporature below 30°C.

"2. To?ih results froo heart failure. Tho direct daargo to tho
heart «.c ...j r idir. free tho tetri irr.gularity observed In all cases,
sotting ir. v; a:.>vc.. a. this cvtlloo HaDagJ is duo to over¬
loading of .ho h«fl, routed by jaarrw* erd regal. - ircroaso In the

viscosity of the cl cod. ec «<U by the narked throttling of largo
peripheral vascular areas; oosidcs, c direct injury to the heart by
cold is also probeble.

"3. If tho neck if rlso chilled, the lowering of the
is more rapid... This is due to interference with the temperaturo-regu-
letirg and vascular centers; c-rebr - odenr also -.ekes its rnocaranco.

"4. The blood sugar rises as the temperature fells, and the blood

sugrr


262


llbCc-_^:2j-22-2-Ar.rraw

t*

Court Uc.l.

Zccb net drop ocnin a* 1-^vj a* the body t-rncraturo o_atinucs to foil. T hia
fact lucresto an intoroeliary disturbance -f notabclisa.

■5. •‘cspira’ti'jn of the chilled cudjoot ia rendered difficult duo t: the
rijor -f the respirat-ry raiseulaturo,

" 6 * ftcr rcnovnl f rou the water the jo&y tenperatrue uay o.ntinuc'to
fallfor 15 irEnutc* r lender. *hi« nay ho an~ exploration of deaths wfctch
occur after successful rcsouc f-m the sea.

■7. Intensive r-wnrninc novor injures the severely chillod person.

“8. Strophantin treatment was not observed to have boon succosful.

"" " ^ «

J ho quooticn of the u«o of stroyhontin recoins open, however, •‘cncdics

which influence the peripheral oirov.latiwn oro definitely lot adyisablo.

" 0 . 4 ho oost effective thorapeutio Measure is rapid and intensive heat

troatsxnt, bost appliod by i;txrtl-n in a hot bath.

"10. 3y neons of s >ocial protootivo olothin,, the survival tine after

inao.-siin in odd sntor oould be extended t- double the survival tiao of

au-Jeots wJv. were imersed without protective clothin-.

■11. Certain proposals for ieproveaent of lifo-^ookots oro boinc

undo.

"C noluoied -n 10 -etober 19d2.

3ijmd. *rof. Dr. Itoltlooimor
Dr. liasohor
Dr. Finko".

I would like t_ call the Ccurt*s attention to scvoral of the tippondiocs
whio.. arc attached, £o the orijinal GoXmn d^cuacnt. You nay porhapa have
to ref or to then in or dor to jet a clear picture of what is shown. For-
example, ? ijuro 2 ... I t.iink yov. ai>t probably have s .no difficulty findinc
it there now, your Honors. You :-xy ^ro.a-ly with to refer to it in your offio.
Jho point I wonted to sake is chat n 'i uro 2 -f the Appendices it shews
tho teap raturo,' pulse"and respiration at death, and f i.uro 5 is a very
iotercstinj dtcuaont which jives in a chart fora the exporinont uur.<bor,
the water toap craturc, the body teuperature cn rcaovcl frea water, tho
body temperature at death, tho tine in water and tho tine of death. T hcro
aro sores such eases ^ivon. Surely this is the shortest and aost succinct


-26>


11 joc-^-S-:-22~-Xarrov- (,£)

Court No. 1

roport of murders In the history of erininalogy.

If tho Tribunal please, you will noto that tho naxt
two documents appearing In tho document book ara pictures

numbered Docunont no-853. These pictures will not be

•

introduced this afternoon booauso wo will oall on Hr.

Gcorgo Tauber to tho stand tomorrow.

THE PRESIDENT: Nhat page are they on?

MR. MoHaNIT; Between Pages 76 and 77. They're llttlo
photoatntlo copies,

THE PRESIDENT: The document nuaber Is what?

HR. XoHaNET: Nuaber 855. It Is In the upper left hand
corner. 'fo will hare tho authontloato and have those doo-
unonts adaJttod through tho tostlaony of George Tauber
tomorrjv. Ho irj. j, as lc will be revealed, an Innate at
Danbeu ar.d jia.1 a-; opportunity to draw these pictures.

'Ti-J ,v/.t dc'-Muont Will be 16C9-PS which is Prosooutlon
iM '.Mt ; '.«? i. .» »e.v T.tod Kelrrleh Hlaolor to Ras-
ohe: aated - . ' ».ih'-r

“Dear Ro'j.-ho’-.

■I acknowledge the xooc lpt or ycur lotto: of tho 9th and
10th <m'i both oorrospondonooa of 15 Octobor 1942.

"I have read your roport rega-dlrg cooling experiments
on l.u • o .lth -r.-.at Interact. :*'J liajor Siocors should
r: .t . ; t? -.t .

or . conn«(.?-.l a*

i c£ht« poopje ao Lig>. end nr. Vi

vhc, still coJay, rojaot thno experiments «r. humans and
would instead le- sturdy Gorman soldiers i‘o as a result
of these cooling methods. I shall not hesitate to report
those men to the Offices concerned. I empower you to pako
uy opinion, on this, known to the oona-rned offices.


:r jt5 tut os vhlo)> "

v_

.."Lfi t’raitors .


I invito you to a porsonal confer-nco in November as

- 264 -


11 Dac-«-HK-32-.^-Sarrcv-( tt X)
Court Ho. 1,


I cannot mako It soonor despite my groat interest.

■SS-Lt.Gon.lfolff will caco ;ot in touoh with

Gonoral Fiold Marshall Kiloh. You arc empowered to mako
a report to tbo General Field Kara hall Miloh and, of cour-
so, to the Reiohs Marshall of thcao who are net doctors.

■I think that oovors, which have heat packots or som¬
ething similar sowed in their linings, are the host for
tho waral of thoeo who wore stranded at


• 264a -


11 ^ocmX^-EU-2 2 * 4 -£nrrow

Court Ho.l

sea and wcro picked ‘up in boats -r small Teasels end whore there is no
Possibility of placing Jboto chilled people In n hot bath. 1 take it for
jraated that you know of these heat packets whioh wo also havo in the SS
azd wtioh were used l>y tho -ms si ana a jreat deal. They consist of a nass
whioh dorolcps a warmth cf 70 to GO® upon addition of rater and retains it

for hours • -

■I ca Tory ouri.us as tc the cx..crircnts with' body warrith. I 4 .wrs-nally
take it that these experiments will-pro -ably brin- the boat and lasting r-sult
Hatumlly, I could be rdstaken.

"Kopp nc informed on tho fclluvinj findings. W Bourse we will soc oach
ethor in SwToaber.

Y^ur

(signal) ll. !X2*LEh a .

Tho see.nd c-py -*as sent to Kcrl .folff with a "request for ao!asowIc('n7icn1
and return since tho *v-ioh ruc'.iror CS in lomloh wants these copies notin'!.
Si^end -rondt - that is, the defendant “udolf brand.

(The Tribunal adjourn©.: .til 12 -oconbor 16 at 0930 hours).


- 265 -


C-*wrt X.


Official Transcript of tho Atsrioen Military Tri¬
bunal in the aottor f tho Uni tod Str.tos f
America, o^cinst Kr-rl Brandt, ot cl., defendants,
sitting rt Tornborc, Gcroany, n 12 Dooonbor 1946,
0930-1630, Justice Be :1s, presiding.

THE X42SHA Tbc h n-roblo Ju\*oa f Military Tribunal J. military
Tribunal 1 ia n-w in session. G. d sere the Hnitod St.'tos cf America -


and this K r.-nblo TribuJBl. '

T«3 F.ESfTEWTi TTill the Marshal nsoertoin if tho defendants nro
r.ll present.

THE &!5?7.Lt liny it please y ur G n r, all dcftm’.onts aro j rosont
in th' c urtr 'x.

T!S FT2S!D2hTi The Secretary General will n to fthe roo'rd tho
proaonoo • f th dofondants.

• k # * •* •

Tho pr socuti n will ?r oeod.

1C.. KolLKSYi Mey it .loaro tho Tribunal, I will risk tint tho wit-
nass “I’lfgong Lutt bo o<-Hod t tho stand.

'iOUC-ro LUTZ, a witness,' t ok tho stand on<* tosti filed an f.ilowsi

TPS •T.ESirET'i ^Judro Sobrinr will ndninistor tho oath to tho vritnoss,
BY JUDGT! SaB.JVGi

T. H 1 Id u; ;• ur right hand and re;oat th- <cth aft or mo.

• •

I swear by God, tho Alnirhty on! O-nisciont, thrt I will spook tho
;ur». truth an-! will withh 1 * nr.d odd n thinr.

(*ho witness rcr.cntod tho oth)

TPS rBSSXDSPTi Yew my sit d'wn.


Tr.JCT 5LJ-I1I..TX0F


3Y rKcEuSBx I


Q. x ur nrno ie " lffnn^ Lutt? •


h. rati ml? v

i-u nor f war held at Cacj ’’arcus rr near


cssectzd cori


- 266 -


12 Dco-!!-OSS-l-2-?c9tor
C'Mrt Kr. 1.


A. ICS.


k. '•(hm on?'. where wero y u hern?

•». In Linz* '>n tho 3otuu -n the 27th f toy 1913.
Ha*.-o y u studied aodicino?


axT* when?

1931 to 1937 in Vienna and Innsbruck.

«1. That branch -f ncdicino have yv srcsiclltod in?
Internal aodicic-.

k. Toro y*u n nonocr . f th-Lufvnuffo during thv war?


'-hon did y u J ' ir\?

On tho eth f I’ny 1939.

!hvt rank did v u attain during thu war?

*»• -t tho ond I w»e Stebsarzt.

1. That la n eoytoin ir. tho Vnitod St:too ..my?

«. Yes.

Q. "ore ~ u stnti ned in Vunich 'hiring the war?

... Yes.

<• T yeti Jcti w rf n Luftwaffe installeti n ctllod B'/cnstnor.'liro
ruofatollo i\icr H ehcnf raohung *or Luftw.ff in Munich? ,
Inatitut' fr wiitl n-swdioino.’ycs.

*>. t wra that instoiloti n, what did it da? ^

7 carry ut aciontific w rk in the field .'f aviati-n nodlcino.


b. D • y u kn. w G' rg August ~oltt?


Q. •h'tw's Ms relit: n3hi, t th t institute ?
... Ho w-is th. hen' f t*». institute.


f I


Q» Di *. tho n=p>e f this institute f which .’oltx w" 3 thu c mind In;

a

fficcr l.tor change?

7h.* institute resulted fr a cn rffico f r iC'OSti gating hi*h


267


I


altitude effects. To that extent the reuse was chided.

.Q. To what vs it ctwLngcd?

• The nano first was Hoscarcb Offico for Air Fleet 3 end aftenrards

• #

Institute for Aviation oxUolng, iimich.

'• -nd yew say that ..cits v=s the ccaxxmiing officer of that institute?

A. Xcs.

< 1 . cro you attached to .oltx's institute during the war?

. Yes.

s , . hen and for how lo.^?

• 4 . I caoc to oltx in February 1 9l£> and renained thoro until tho
end of tho war.

Q. Did you do any high altitude research thoro?

. Yea.

Q. -ith whcu.did 70 U work in t'.da high altitude research?

A. iTirexrily alone.

Q. Did you ever work with a scientist at tta, Ablt* institute by tho
nax of V.ondt?

“• Yea. I nrotc a scientific treatise with hie, togothcr T.lth hin.
r ‘- ’..cro you considered th bo scac thing of an expert in high altitude
roscarch?

• •

“• Yes, I understand tho question. I believe so, yos.

And is the sane true of .'endt who collaborated with you on this

paper?

Not in that fom I believe.

*i, uo you knew doctor itaschcr, vdtnoss?

». Yes.

3* ..hen and whero did you first ncct hie?

• “. At the institute. I believe in the socorel half of 19/il.

And it was the institute of belts that you rofer to?

• Yos.

/

Did ‘.cits ever offer you the opportunity to do high altitude res cm

on hutrtn beings in the Dachau ccnccntrcticn c cup?

268


• '..hy did jrou refuse?

“• I pcraoaally jriaaril:- because I did not consider qysolf robust


enough to conduct such ospcrfjxnta


q. Hi'*, y.n ka-.-w that Or. Ifcsehor wcs c’ing to rcko thoso high


sltitu-'o oxporlBont* in Itaobcu?


s discussod


Q. Xu *sn that it wrs kn- to by v»ri.uo ronbors of .olti’s


:*soho r?

A.'- it w*s discussed in tho Institute, whether ouch oxporinonta
wore useful — ware expedient.

* tat T caked veu if it >n* taewn in the Institute th t Itosohor


wns going to oerrv out thoso oxjorincnta


' «. I VliOTO SOJ VOS.

Q. .a', y u str.to that y«u refused t»w effor cf uolti, towr
cr hur.on beings in Dnoheu beo-'uso y u woro n-t ruthless on<*jghj is


t^t right?


q. I tako it th t this noans that y:u knew thot brutality nnd
ruthlvssntss would bo roq uirod f do tho w rk in Daohnu?

... I os, I span on ox;oriaont involving o oorta>n danger f«-r tho
.wh4n«ta r.f nmrio. t^ r. oorV>in oxtont, ruthloss, shall


K'w "Titnciss, d.' y-u rocoll whon this rffor woo nado t. y.u


by “ToIts?


I conn t soy exactly. ' ^ 3^

Mr*-—-r-rr-r boo Staff, end d'- y u knew a non by tho mno -f
was tto herd f tho Deja rta-r.t f r Aviation Ljjdioinc in tho


IT/L in Berlin — Siegfried Itaff?


f Hans u Ifgcng li'-nborg?


noa in Tolts'3 Institute in Munich?


Court N 0 . l

12 Doc 46 i! - 2-2 - UG- Kupporstoin


Q. i/111 you dcacrlbc to tho “Tribunal tho cccaci : -n
rf-.lch you saw tlcso two uon thorc?

A. A short tirx} aft or so had rcfusod to conduct tho oxpor
lnonta, RUPP and ROIIBSRO appcaroi at tho Instil to. ".END?
and I woro in TJELTZ'a roon, and .7ELTZ aa!:od us to luavo tho
rood.

Q. \7aa it unusual for iGLTZ tc rofueo you and i-ENDT
adnittanco to conforor.coa at tho ^nstituto?

A. Yes. That was sonothin? unusual.

Q. Do you knon what was diacuasod botwoon 'jELTZ and
RUFF and R0IG2RG, on tho occasion of tholr visit tp ’.VELTZ's
Instituto?

No; so woro net infoxv.od.

Q. Do you !cnow that RUPP and F.O'.XERG lator worked in
Dachau on those high altltudo oxporinonta with Dr. Rr.achor?

... V/o know that; yoa.

Q. Now I will ask you, witness, if you attondod a cortain
conforonco on Aviation •‘odicino hold in tho city of Numborg
on tho 26th and 27th of October, 19*.2?

A. Yoa.

Q. Do ycu rononbor, on tho occasion of that nooting,
that a paper was road by a zan by tho nar.:o of liOLZLOEHirdR?

A. K0LZL02KK2R — yoa, I rorjoKbor that.'

Q. ijri wha t w*.a tho subject cf tho papor which
KOLZLOSHNER road?

0

A. -l:o subject of tho papor was oxporinonts — rathor,
oxporioncos -- rado on pooplo whoso body touporaturo had boon
groatly reduced by putting thoxa in cold \7atcr.

Q. It was aaclo cloar at this conforonco by EOLZLOEUNER
thit oxporinonts to study tho offocta of froozlng had boon
r-ado bn living hurx-n boingst

... Not tho offocts of froozing, but of gcnoral cooling,

271


Coirt Ho. 1

12 Doc 46 II -


2-3 -UG- ^upporstoin


n .. Oil Raecher aleo have something to a ay at this ncot-

inc-T ' .

L0LZL02EH2E'a report did net indicate that tho oxpor-
liionta 1-ad boon conducted on concentration cccp inuatos, and
IU-acKcr tlion rcao end utturod a fog aontonc os w hich ind icated

tt».t ttx oxpwrlaonta Led boon instigated a t tho apocial aug-

% • *

•

goation cf Hiiiilor.

Q. * -nd what did tho atatomont that thoai/oxporinonta had
bo^n uado with tho aupport of tko Roichafuohror SS Einnlor,
aoan to you?

A . Tbcfc ia difficult to say. X boliovo thet thoao
proaont, on tho whole, x/oro quito iapr^aacd by thia inforca-
tion.

• s

Q. I will i .sk you if it wr.a not undoratood i.t thio
uootlng that tloao oxporinonta had, in f:.ct, boon oonduotod on


concentration coup inuatos? #

A. I cannot juigv that r/ith groat certainty, but I bo¬
liovo that nuat have boon clour for neat of thon.

Q. V/as it not alao undo clour, by t)*o talks of H0L2L0ERHBR
and Raachor, that a nu/jbor of tlo experimental subjocta^fod \


\\

KJ


boon killed during the courso of thoao exporinents? W >>

A. One cduld at l^aot asaxdo that that had boon tlxo caab,

. bocauao HOLZLOZEHZT. nontionud cortain observations of heart
failure cnong tho oxpcrii.cntal subjects.

Q. Vfcsn't an important part.cf tho clinical picture
givon to you and the rust of tto mooting by KOLZLOSHKER, con¬
cerned with tho causes of doath frcn cold?

A. I ccnnot recall that.

Q. 3ut ycu dc state that it cculd havo boon Vasily
assumed that people havo died during tho gevrao of tho so
experiments?


Yos.


272


Court *?o. 1

12 Doc *16 IT -2-4 - UG ; l^upp^rEtcin


f>. Wcv, witness, I will eat you If, at r. tiix :.ft-r this
:.odtlng, you Ir.d .. discussion with a certain orcy cfflcor,
concorning tlx f roc zing cxporironta In Dachau?

• *oa. . * ' *

0 rt\ xi\ rtlrl thl ^ owrv M cni* toll vru?

A . Bio nan vialtod no at our Ir.atltuto In Ihmlch, and
wo dlacuaaod aor.o ruaulta of cninal oxporinonts which I hod
conducted, end ho told no that It nuat bo airdlar, or tlat It
wna alnil-r with hunon beings. lion X asked hln hew ho knov/
that, ho told :k> tla.t ho lied boon In D chau end that Read or
had doaonstrated soro oxporinonts during that vlait and
had shown l:lu what freezing to (loath lookod llko in huOOxi
boInga.

In oci or words. It tad boon doacnatratod to this
orny.offloor at D-ohau, how pocplo diod fron cold?

L. That was tho lnprussion that I had; yes.

Q. Do you ronojibor tho ncoa cf this aruy off!cor?


Q. How, witnoaa, I will as!: you If you havo had a dis¬
cussion with Dockor-Truyaong alnco tho ond of tho war, concern¬
ing tho hi.^l: altitudo oxporinonts in Dachc.u?

A. No.


273


12 Dsc-T!>0-l-B«ard
Court Mo. 1


Q. Did you ixat on one occasion soc Beekor-Freyscnx in a prisoner of mr


camp?

A* I nit hin in Sibling yes.

q. ;jxi t dlo he tell you that Erhardt Iftich knew all about the High Altitude

Experiments conducted by Doctor Itoschor in Dachau?

/

A. Becfcor-Froysonc told ae that the Ifcdieal Inspectorate, that is, his
office. In dealing with concentration carrp exporinonts was by passodj ani •
that tho nodical Inspectorate frequently had to try to prevent 'disaster.

Q. Did rot Beckor-Proysone toll y-*u that Erhardt Milch knew about the
High Altitude Exporinonts at Dachau?

A* I cannot renoafcor that exactly.

*

Q, Did ho say anythin about Erhardt Idlch?


A. Yes, air.


Q. Tftvit did ho say?

That Milch had negotiated directly with Hinalcr ror.r.r Ang tho oxecuii n
of such exporinonts without consulting tho Medical Inspootorato.

Q. I will ask your witness whothor or not High Altitude problow nro a
sattor which concerns a department for tho Aviation Helical Inspoctomto


of the Luftwaffo. That is an aviation nodieino prcblaa, is it rot?


A. Tho High Altifcudo Exporinonts, yos, cortainly.


Q. Is tho sane thing true of freezing problons?
A. Yes, certainly.


MR. MCH/ifCTi I havo ro further questions at this tine, your Honor.


THE PRESIDENT* Tho defense nay cross examine tho witness.

MOSS EXAMINATION


BY TO. WIUZl

GentL-nen of the Tribunal, nay I request, in eonnection with this-cross
examination, that I nay put a few questions to this witness within the frr.no
work of the subject whieh has been opened up by the proaecution agaiwt


27U


Professor neltz.


*


12 >.c-I'-A?!>-3-2-eacrd (CSS)
Cvrt V . 1.


Q. "Titnoss, D, et'r Inti, any I oak yu t answer e few quoati no cf
=lco which I w u! J lUco t ' jut in erdor t auyplonont and c ntrodict the
atetonenta -f tha rr-socuti n. Flo-ec onawor thaao quoati na truthfully—*
a few quoati ns of a n re pors^nol xxturo* Y n wore n.-t nly a oclln-
h rater • f .r-fbsa r T.'eltr in his Institute f r ,.vinti n lic’iciso, hut

ala' at tho sr.ru tir» an assistant nodical .'fficor with hin n cortoin .

*

corai na. You hevo assisted hia in hia X-rny activities in Munioh, hnvo
vu c-*tT


a. Yoa.

h. Voy I n nr r U t this quoati. n t yu. In c.nnccti n with IYu-

• a

fcaa^r Volt*’a views nb ut tho n.dioel y.r'fuaai n, ooc v<m ju’-o it
i^onorallyT I Dean t' aay, f-r instance, thiei ;.ro y.u nwaro .f r r.»-
foaacr Taltt’a nonornl attitude in roapeot t hit jt. foeai<vij hia t\ irlt
*f huscRitarioniani tho c naldorati-n which ho ijcnerallv ahwod hia
fotionta; can y u.briefly r’crl with that. In othor wards, hia n°noral
human ld.oac. Di'* y u hr70 say c r.tnot with hir. when y u w. rkod f r
Tr foaa- r 7oltt?

A. rnrtinlly, yea, certainly.

NCHAHETi !toy it ploaac tho c urt, 1 cam t aco that thia.
quottion ia nr.toriol, an.' I w uW like t nit » an ebjooti n t it.
-■hothor nut Drct-r TTalts exhibited a hurr. niter in r. attitude t ward hia
fstionta has nbs lutcly n thin; t rt.- %ith thia c. sc, end I su’nit the
*'nawer < f thia witness will n-t be mtoric 1 t- tho case.

TIE ri£3IC6VTi The bjocti-n will ba vorrulod. Tho c un«ol n&y
.r -coad. „. *


Q. Toll rv. what ro.utoti n Ir-.fcaa r Its hid with hia c IIjqjuos,
the ottor ox. ert •*■ ct rs in !\mich? Lot n: jut it thia way, first f all
"ith the d ct-rs f Kunieh? ..a an X-ray ox.ort he mat how had hia
c.sea Oaaifncd t. hir. fr c thcr d ot rs. In tbar w nla, h. rust hovo
been r nan wh , -'ay • ftor dey, I w uK nlr. st boy, rust haro been in
" nstant t ueh with -11 the ; otira in llunich. D y u kn w h -# he wee
ludged by thor.T I *• net Q;on hia quolificati ns oa a Bci'jcti8t, tut hia
r°rs nal manners; hia hunon qualitioa and his quclitioa t«s r.n individual
r rv:dic'l fficor. "Till y u answer ny questi n, "loose.


12 D©o|^vnV.3-3-e*ard
Court So. 1


Professor Salt* had a very Isko practice in llunich. I do not know in
ary way that his reputation was not excellent.

Q. Even in his capacity as a doctor and also fron a hunan point of view,
do you Boanf

1. Certainly,

q. Now, I have a question hero, which in a ccrt'in sons,, ic v..\ .

you know free whoa the plans originated to carry out tho hunan being expori-
nente in Dachau?

A. I do not know, but certainly not fron Doctor -ltz. I an certain it was

Rascher*s idea.

Q. In that case I can foil w with this question: Can you say whether
Professor v- 0 ltz cooperated in tho creation of this plan? Did ho advnnco It
in any way? To what extent did ho participate in Rcachcr boing all/'od to '*c
this? Was ho responsible for it? Did ho in any way talk to tho Uodical Insti¬
tute authorities to get Raschor to this job?

A, I cannot answer that bocauso in all this paper work I was not initi a l,
I do not know how Raschor cane to our Institute or when ho cano,

Q, In that caso I have this quostion to put to you: Do you knew whothor
Profossor *eltz had overhoard of Raachur being attachod to the Institute?

A. I cannot say that oithor.

q. Thon this following quostion is connected with this problua. Aro you
aware whothor Kottenhof had anything to do with Raschor boing attachod to the
Institute in any way?

A. That is quite possible.

q. You ic not know ary details about that, do you?

A. Porhaps, if you ask ae about thca*

Q. Do you know whether Doctor Kottenhof, later or uarlior, had boon con¬
nected with the so-called monkey experiments which ho wa3caup?osod to have
carried out together with Rase her?

A f I know te conducted experiments on norkeys. I do not know that he worked
with Raschor.

q. Do you know whethor that was the reason for the fact that Kotteshcf

recoccended Raaehar’s transfer to the Aviation Institute, and aimed at that?

276


12 Boo-y-J.TO-3 -seer<*

Curt " . 1.

»• *hnt nijht bo, vo».

K w, then, n fow queati .'ns r'.^r 'in^ ‘r'fi'M r Tolts's attitude
t m.rt Dqehau, D jr< u kn.^ -- incidontnlly the previous oxnainati-<n has
ah' n thia quito clearly — d yu taw hew rr'foaa-r "oltz, roncrallv
■penkin-, rcnctod t tho r»ctin-8, the r.ta^a.hore in Dachau, nad tho
oxporiaonta which wore cr.rriod ut there in c. nnocti.*n with hi fc oltitudo
aad froetin.pt Vhet wns hia r,oxwral attitude t these ox^erim-nta ut
DachauT

At thr.t tine, when the aubjeot of r-.chau caoo u; f-r the firat
tirvn, wo, th t ia, oltc, "or.’.t end !, < J iacuaac«‘ thc;r bier. braionllys
thr.t ia, we aeauntd that csaentiol ox.orirr.nts f r ; art f tho wnr wore
boin,- un^ortejeen nod tho roa'ulta r f which wo h pc'd t save tha lives f
a li'iora; on 1 ' thet thoao ox; orinenta vta-a bcir.r. c nductod n orininola
wh- hod boon o ndqnncd t death by n rofuler o urt, <n<*. wh.- w:ro -Ivor, un

nrtunitv t- bo ;r.rd-nod by portlci; -tlaf, ij i thoao ox; oritxnta. 7io

• ■

discussed this hack nn«l f rth, but wo did net o no tv nny eloor docieicn.


9


277


• .


Crurt Bo. 1

12 Doc 46 - 4-1 -LJG lessor

• r

r -> ;^u tnen cr lo y u knew t! ;.t on tLc occasion cf

.. visit ci' Professor Lippku In tL^. spring cf 1942, tlxi quoation
Ci^o up whether and tc o!u.t extont oxpwrlr.xnts cn human boings
li.1 to bo oada on bdkalf of tho ..lr Torco :n d thon that
quoation wc.a discussed In groat dotc.ll, not In on official
dlacuaalon but in w private conforonco or dlacuesion? And la
it known to you tfcr.t ? rcfoaaor l.'oltz on tfcct occasion — as,
incldontally, ho had cxproaaod hi::aolf to you r.t tho Inatituto,
ca you said youraolf--oxpreasod hla attitude clearly with rofor-
onco to oxpcririonts cn hicu-T. beings? Con you toll mo undor
what conditions Professrr. Volts approved oxp.rii.onts on human
beings?

I boliovo that .“cits, and Ifcff end Romberg lator,
f.aauiod the condition which I Just mentioned, nanoly th.it tho
experiments wore to bo conducted only on criminals, I might

to

almost ec.y they, wore be Inc Acno a f..vor.

0„ '..c.e thoro net one other prorcqulsito-- , ..’oltz doiiandod

cloarly that those criminals should voluntoor and that a cort;l n
.-mount of eraoa should b e granted in compensation.

A. Hat was tho tacit condition for our discussion,
wero quito 3urprisod afterwards tint at loast in tho lator
3tagos of tho experiments, as far as I know now, this 'quostion
did not co mo up.

Q. Did Professor V/oltz toil you ;.t any tiuo or did you
have any cluo that Professor Volts i-as afraid to try thoso
experiments in D..chau, or that ho had turned down tho vholo
idoa bccauso ho on his p_rt was afraid cf objections on tho
part of tho hcdical Inspectorate? Did ycu think that that
-s tS:o reason why holts was objecting to Eschar's oxperinonts
— because ho w_8 afr.-id that his department heads would object?

Doctor, ccuid ycu repeat that? I did not understand
it.


275


12 Doc '6 :: - U0 - Lessor d-2
Court He, 1


Q. Yes, I rtll repeat it-again. D.id you l-.vo any clue

••

indicating tlc.t tho r^c.son why Tk>ltz objoctod to tho oxpori-
aonts In Lcl:au was that he was afraid of objections fron his
superior department, tho Medical Inspect ore. to, so to say?

Or 'on 1 1 you foci, .run't you conscious of tho fact that *ho
on his pr.rt was enorgoticc.lly rofusln 3 to carry out thoao
oxperinonta?

A. I bollcvo that ''oltz was net at Dachau.

Q. I was Just going to ask you. Do you lmow whothor or

*

hou often V.oltz has boon to Dachau?

. >«r • • . . m

A. I dc net know anything about that. Of courso I was
not Woltz' guardian angol, I was not inforuod about ovcrythli

* - ^ 4

ho did, but I did not hoar about it.

Q. Dut novur-tho-loss, 70 U, as Stabsarzt, and as his
adjutant and collaborator, you :aist havo boon woll inforriod
about practically everything that Y/oltz was touching
caso of aviation ocdiclno?

A. In gonoral, yoa.

Q. Therefore you a»st have had lmowlodgo of any visits
Volts aado to Dachau?

A. Y os , I probably would have had to know about It.

Q. Can ycu give no furthor dotails about tho conditionr
undor which this joint work of Duff and Rouborg cn ono part
and Raachor cn tho othor, was brought about?

A. I know nothing about that, nothing inportant, I
boliuvo.

Q. Did Prefossor ’.Volts not roport to you about it? Di
ho net tell you that on ,tb* occasion of a Hooting at Adlorsh
noar 3orlin, ho talkod to Ruff and Rouborg and thr. t ho infoj
thou he was approaching then with a view to forming a joint
w orking ccraiittoo with thou?

A. I had to assumo so when I saw Ruff and Ronborg at our

27?


offico


Q* aro ycu also aware of tho conditions for such a collab
orr.tlon and ooro thoy told you by Profoasor V.'oltz oithor at


Q. Do you now know that thoao aontlonon, Ruff and Ronborg
b. aod thoir work on tlx auppoaltlon that oxporinonta which
woro tc bo corriod .out woro f irat cf all to bo carriod out on


thoir own pcrabna ao that tho danger, r.a auch, wr.a oxcludod
by that noons? Didn’t you ho’rj about that? Didn’t Profosscr
V/oltz roport that to you?

Plcaao, it ia possible, but I can’t rononbor at tlio

nor.ont.


Q. C. n't ycu roaoabor that Prcfoaaor Y.oltz aoid with
roforonco tc Rcachor’a qualities as a doctor and a ooiontiat
orel as to his character that ho akewod tho groatost poaaiblo


distrust and that bccauao of that ho w


aatlaflod to find that for tloso oxporlnonta In Dachau Rcachor
cano uixlor tho contro} of a rollablo aclontiat?


I an convinced of that


But you youraolf did not actur.lly hoar about that frou


Vfoltz?


;.s to tho sciontiflo and othor qualitioa of Rasclior


thcro la no uao talking about that


Q. I an extraordinarily interested in that question and
your anawor. May I follow it up with this question? You nust
havo discussod thoao natters onengst ycuraolvos at loast, all
of you. Kow did evorybody Judgo tho sciontific qualitioa shown
by Raachor?

«. Ihorq weren't any.

Q. Did you know that Prefosao r Woltz aha rod that opinion?

... I knew for sure that V.'oltz did not havo a high opinion


Court Wo. 1

12 Doc 46 II - 4-4 - UG josser


Q. Uoll thon, let rx> return tc a previous quoaticn.

Do you considor 1£ pc a si bio under thoso circuuatancos, possible
-1 ell, — would ycu credit Profosscr Holtz vlth having told ~jc
end Dr. -Tfendt to Ccllaborato with n nodical officer, with a
doctor whoi*. you yourself havo already statod
failuro end who, in ycur opinion also lnforlor. Could you
havo roaacn to caaunc that such a collaborator to you could have
boon iaoant sorlously?

\ UR. HcH-NEY: If Your Honors ploaso, I uust objoct to that
quostlon. I noon ho la asking this nan for his opinion as to
whether or not ho bolloyos it la pooaiblo that Dr. Holtz could
hr.vo collaborated with Rascl.or In any roapoct. That la tho
aonao I got frerx hia question and I cmnot aoo that this r.ian '3
opinion on that subject is Tr.torial or has rny prcbatlvo valuo
It is a quoaticn of fact whothor cr net Holtz did
collaborate with Rr.achor axx it la roally net a nattor cf opinl
to bo paasod by thia witnoaa. lJcw ho can toatify as to whothor
or not ho knows whothor or not Holtz did In fact collabor^o
with bln but clo..rly, putting tho quostlon In tho forn^ifl* un
opinion as to whothor ho thinks it la poasiblo th.-t'
havu dono so, I Just don't think la at all prob. tlvo

DR. HILLS: Hay I dofir.o lay attitulo In regard to thatft_.v
I think. Your Honors, that wo are hero ooncomod with a vory
aoricua st;.tonont of- f..ct which only this witnoaa can aacortain
Ho clono mist know whothor urdor such clrcuustoncos as I havo
provlcualy doacribod, tho question could havo boon takon
sorlously by Prefosser Holtz at all. As far as that is etneorn
no arc dofinitoly ccnccrnod with tho statcuont of a fact which

cm only be node by this vitnoss. I thoroforo bog you to adnit

•

this question > s rclovant and as adnisslblo.

7EZ PHESHJEHT: In this crcss-oxaninaticn tho witness

✓

will bo allcwod ccnsidorablo latitudo. Ho objoct ion will bo

281


sclontiflc


vrhatsoovor


Holtz co


12 Doc 46 II - 4-5 - LJG - lessor
Court Nc. 1


cvorruled.

BY DR. •..'ILLE:

Q. I£r«y I ask the witness then to r.nawcr tills quostion?

A. ifultz, la the way In which ho form la tod tho quostion,
lot It bo aeon that ho ^xpoctod that wo would rofWco. "o
called ua In end ho naked ua " Do you went to conduct tho so
exporinonts In Dachau?" -nd ho continued to no: "Si*, hutz,

I do net bcliovo that you went to dc tl-.t bee. uec I lenow you
nro rathor religious." Bicao wore Ilia exact words, sc thc.t ho
neither fcrcod ua or urged us to agroo. Ratkor, on tho ccntrar;
ho nc.do refusal ouay fer ua.

Q. ?hon I hr.vo a furthor question to put tc you which la
diroctly ccnnufitud with tho Inatltuto. Can you toil no if tho
progreu for exporinonts end that worl: corriod out by th .t
Institute had previously boon diacuaaod with r.ll officials
of that Inatltuto ao that Professor V.oltz, if ho hod aorloualy
won tod 70 u to cclh.bcr:.to in thoso^oxporinonts would, according
to cuaton, hr.vo diacuaaod tho ontiSto pregr;.*: of cx.:ori:’.onts
with r.ll hia collaborator a to have then apprrvo it?

a. It was gonor.'.ny usual that in jrint discussions wo


sottlod our furthor we rk.

e. Sc that in this or.so tee, acccrding tc the custcr.
which you just cenfimod, a writton statonont rog .rding tho
plan would ha vo la.d tc t.J:o plr.ca in the ro Cords of tho
Institute bccauao apparently thoso rosclutions which ytu pr.saod
these working pregrons, w^ro put devm in writing,
they?

A. Yes, that was what wo usually did.

Q. An* that didn't happen in this case, did it?

I can't say. Ho prc;;r;_r was discussed.

Q. But after all, tho exocuticn of working progr:ii 3 was
up fer discus 3 icn. If .Professor V.'oltz did ru.ko suggestions tc


Court Ho. 1

12 Deo 46 li - 4-6 - UG _ lessor


ycu tir.t ycu should ccllr.bor.\to, surely a discussion nust h:.vo

t:J:on placo as to ut..t. this work should deal xrith?

• •

... He, it s net dlscussod. 'To cf ccurso know fron
the wholo background what it w:.s about but nc working prograi.
was sot up.

Q. .. further quosticn which doals with Rcschqr*s appoint-

• u

nont, his bolng attacked, shell wo say? • Do you know that
Raschor, in the spring if 1942, at any rato boforo the 16th
of Uerch 1*J42, showod 'Jolts a tologran fron Hiimlor, according
to which oxporinonts woro to bo kopt socrot fron ovorybody,
including T/oltz? Did 70 U have knowlodgo cf that tologran?

Thoro nust V-vo boon socothing ef thr.t sort, I boliov
I recall that thoro wore diffioultios botwoon V’oltz and Rasefroj
end this tolcgran soons senohew to bo tho cliaax cf Ui oso
difficultios.


13-OooW-AG-S-l- Ifeohan

Court 1 U-

Q Did you perhaps :;ain knowledge of the fact that Professor Tfeltz,
subsequent to that infomation ho in: received re;;arlin: the Himlcr tolo;;rnn
md, I aeon sli:sequent to Dr. Raseter's refusal to continue with thJ oxorl-
asnts in Dachau, 'fcltz im; 'lately subsjquent tc these events ha !iin
transferred away fron his institute, which was sccethin_ he applied for
to his superior at Dachau. Do you knew my stalls about that ?

A Not really, as I ha<l nothin;, to do with those natters.

Q lot re put to you a question dealin; with the subsequent duvoloprunts
of thoso oxpjrinents in Dachau. Do you havo any knowle \]0 of the fact that
the institute of *ltz, or Professor Acltz pcrs:nalle, did at any tiro ctoal
with the details of thoso cxporttunts in rep cases of death to tho

mo tine in Nuronbor,-; ?

A Impossible, tho *h“'lu thin w had nothin;- to do with us at all.

Q But was it safe to msvctj that Profess or Milts bocarw acquointod
with tto suhjoct whon he was asked to bo a collaborator ?

A Ho was not asked this.

Q At any rate, he put it to y-u thet ho know of th^so shattering
revelations rorjnnlin; tho deaths.

A ‘\hat deaths ?

Q Thu <toaths rorardiix tho oxporironts in Dachau.

A Personally I knew nothin: about that uvon now.

q Now then, do you have ary clues shewin-. that Professor b'oltz nic;ht
havo triod to c^t ahold of this expo rental work which iiaschur nado
afterword, that hj trie'! to ruplaco Rcscter at Dachau when Raschor hinsolf
and his wife star tot to cor^lain ? T.’ould 7 vu consider that a possibility
or a prcbatilty ?

A That Volts wantod tc put Rasciwr cut ?

q Ye3, you know that was cloi-’t'' by Irs. Pinscher,
o

A I havo no reason to believo so.

q I an through, !$* Lord.

DR. FRITZ S..UISR FOR lEFENH'-FT DR. RUFF.


BY DR. S.JJTER :


12 Doc^-AG-5-2^oohan

Court So. 1 j

1 "it noss, on bohalf of Dr. Buff, I should like to put a few
quest inns to you. '.ihen did you moot the defendant, Dr. Ruff, for
the first tlco? When?

A I bolieve in Prance in 1940.

0 In 1940:

4 Yos, in 1940 - excuse no, I naan in 1941.

» <’.'3 thr.t before these experiments wore conducted et Dachau?

A Yes.

•1 In that case it oust bo 1941.

A Yea.

How did it happen that you act tho dofondart, Dr. Ruff? Did you
noot hia often? Did you noko hia acquaintance vary well or just pro¬
fessionally?

•*. X should like tc any professionally and officially rjul wo
spoko to ofteh other occasionally outside of business.

•. Sector, is it truo tc say that there wore profossinol con¬
tacts? Do you understand what I noan?

A Yos, I do.

" That that oonsisted of working in a sub-pressure ch-.-abor and
for four or five weeks you wore together with Jr. Ruff working in
Franco?

A Yes.

C So that tho re was a low pressure chaabor, which was nobilo
2 nd which was constructed very stellar to that ono which in 1942 was
constructed ir. DftChau for tho high altitude oxperinents?

A I do not know tho chanbor in Dachau, but tho charier .

•- The charier, which you oporatod, together with Jr, Ruff in
France, that sorvod for alt it u Jo experiments for tho air forco,did it

net?

A Yos.

1 How long wore you together with .r. Ruff in Franco?

A I b_licvo for two or throe weeks.

But, Jr. Ruff says for four weeks.


285


"ell, I bolicvo ~ir. JSuff cano a llttlo later, ho crjac a littlo
Ister. ' _ . £

2 At tsar rato, It was a fcm nooks?

A Toa

C Yiu already said that on that occasion you did not only noot on
duty, but *2so off duty ^crscnally on social occasions?


f


\


285 A


12-Dbc-:W£-5-3-!4A,han (BX)

C-urt S:. 1


A Tos.

q -all, then, »hit did Dr. Ruff toll you at that tir*, regrrdinc his
attitude toward experiments on lurr-n brings, in particular with
rcforenco to the experiments which were carried cut with your prcssuro

chogfeor?

A V hat chnabor?

Q Tho pressure cbeaber, which you had then..

A At that tins in France there were not experiments of tho type cor»-
duotod in Dachau. Then, was no qucatic-n of such experiments.

q Tbcro was net question ci it?

A So.

Q Then you did noko oxperioonts? • ' >.

A They were net even scientific oxporinonts, they w^ro only investiga¬
tions and oxx-inaticna on pilots.

•*

q Sur-ly that adds up to tlk» sane thing?

A Ho, out if ycu say so y-s. Pilots wore tested for thoir suitability
and after* scoo tire wo gathered oortedn oxporionoos.

q D. you know that at that tine, when you were together with Dr. Ruff
in Franco, Dr. Ruff hiiosolf wus aloe caking experiments,, that is to say
oxporinents in the charter on his cwn porson?

A Tos, I bolloYS so.

q Did ho on those experiments on hirsolf nakc tho sano denands on

0

his own body, which later on ha nado on tho experimental persons - that
is to soy tho pil»ts Wiich were pickod up?

A On the t.sts with the pilots, doctors wore in tho chnctocr with
the pilots during the tests.

q quite. How, those experim-nts eh Dr. Ruff nedo on himself wore
perfectly, ir order and orderly nr4 t'.v-so t-sts on the pilots, they wore
supposed to be pretty t.u^h?

A Tos, certainly*.

q ? r instance, it is supposed to have happened that during one .»f
ta,so experiments, the defendant. Dr. Ruff sufforod paralysis cf erw am?


Court Ho. 1


(33)


A To6, that is right.

Q So that he hiaself, if I understand your answer correctly, was
not exactly taking it easy?


«•


o


- 285 a -


?bohftn

C-urt 1


A So, ho did net.

Q Did you also discuss political cironstanoes with Dr* Ruff ?

I mean tc say, if I nqr yx-pllrvait qy question s'nowhat, did you talk
-Lout . '-litical cm 'iti“ns to such nn .extent or sc rwch that you nnna^od
to other a fair inprossim of the political attitude of Dr. Huff ? For
instance, with record to thp National Socialist Party and particularly
tl« SS ?

1 I hoi thu in. russion that Dr. Ruff was a very unpolitical persm.

0 Then, how lid ho uzpiuss hinsolf in rocard to tho SS ? Doctor,

I on putting that question you know boenuso Dr. Ruff told re that in
particular clout tho SS md that ho had talked to you on tho occasion of
that stay in Franco quite frequently. That is why I want to knew from you

4

Just how Dr. Ruff did talk ab ut tho SS at that tine ?

A I an sorry, but I Nee to hr.vo forgotten all about it.

I m really sorry I camot romenbor it.

Q lhat (lid ho say about the .iarty ? Fur instonou, about Hitler, otc.?

A Tho only thin; that I can soy is that I did n t c-noidor hin n

fanatical Nazi, Vat I cann-t rvaonbor any specific dotails.

q During t!w four nooks - nn.’. this is somethin; I want to ask at the
ond - durlnc tho three or fear nooks, which you spout with Dr. Ruff in Franco,
what did you loam about his ritnra c&cut nodical u'..hica ? live conooption ho
had cf his profession, what inprocsicn did you ;:dther about that ? T/ould
you say that ho would 'oo capable of cnrdttin, crimes or was your inprosslon
’.efferent ?

A I bee your pord.cn. I had m absolute correct inprossion of Dr. Ruff
qnd I never thought anythin; unfavorable of hin.

Q Thank you vciy such* In that co»o, Hr. President, I have no further
questions. Thank yru.

DP.. MJ1X FOR T3Z DoFSHB-jJ? 33CK51 FRZXSBXl.

v_y

3Y DR. ”.ull »

Q tJitneos, a little earlier tho subject -tf a conversation cam up

thich you had with Dr. Seeker Fxuyaonj at Siblinc ?

287.


.Ty- rr. that occasion, Dr.. lector Froysonc had told yea that. fc-V


radical inspectorate had frequently toen b^-possodj that /->r

yield. : tar shall :&lch hart nocotiatod directly with tto SS, ..r tto cennanc.

of tto SS, with reference to quastirns which really conoon>.d avi.nti Cu

natters ?

A ioa,

(] Do you rucolloct that ?

A Yos, I do*

X Q Tton, to cceplninod. Yhon Dr. Doctor rla- told you screthiny
on that occasion about a filn shewin;- which wont urony, r fill? ahsuixe

which Dr. Doctor Froyaorv; was .film t* 3^« ::ilch - ,,oalt ' Tith tho

gtvxty na 'o at Dachau, Do you r&wabor that occasion ? It was to haijpon ix»
Soptonbor of 19U1 -ton Uasetor in Berlin an-! tto :iiniatry wun. supposed
to show tho filn to Field liar shall lilch pewnelly and Filch did not show
up. Boctor Freysen- hart not known anything about this and had not boon
infonad unUl tto filn was already in preparation; in fact until the charily
was to start ? Do you know anything about that ?

A Yos, I can't rorvrvbor, but it soons quito plruslblo.
q Then, you can't rownfcor ? ■•oil, then I have another quoati-nV
Ttoro was a n ootin.; in Humborj -hen acne oi-yhty advisory radical ren,
consultin'. nodical nm f hich nidicel reputation were present, who rwru
holdin^ hi w h positions. Do you rer-crbor ?


Court So. 1


L I can not give any exact information, but that can doubtless bo
feuai out*


Q Of course wo hm the record*

A Y->u can doubtless find out. 1 ai sure t h ere wore uony people of
tbo nodical profession present.

Q Tee , tta nit tor, of course wna p l a n n od under tho hooding of Son
and Viator Distress. Then Volts end Profossor H-jiloohnor were on tho
list, woron't they?

A Yes.

q 7;hct did Professor Holzl cchnor say rogrxding thj question of cool¬
ing of tho froozing experiments, bocausc tho way it is put in this

i • c • *

rocord, you soo, is indicating that ho oxjrossad hinsolf very, voxy
carefully?

A Yus.

Q So that onu c-uld not drew tho c nclusien that h- was gotting out
those cxporirvjnUpnrticulr.rly in tho concentration oaaps?

A That's true. As for Holsloohnor's statonont one c-uld not gather
fr.n thuj that they wors cxpcrla-ntoin oencontrati n ca-ipe. H-lzloohr*or
apparently, in ordor to disguise tho mttcr, had speto-n of rescued

p-rsona, persons who wen, roscuod fray distress at eon.

©

Q Do yep aeon rescued frai tho water? That's what it soys ir. tho
record, doesn't it? rs


A Yes, that's how it was. - ^

q.. Tes, How, trz-z rVofos&or Holzloohiur's stitcroont one c. uld not draw
tho conclusion, therefore, that wo were ccnccm,d With oxporinonts in
Dachau or my other c.nccrtrati n cs*pe?

A Ho.

q I see. And y u stated previously that Boschor str.-ncrcd, didn't


you?

“ XeS.

q So that his spc-ch wasn't very convincing, was it, because ifv -
sere one stau-rs and stutters, then you say it hat he isn't very

- 289 -


»


Crurt S). 1


effective surely cr thr.t he night even n^ka rinseIf ridiculous?
—4. 1-3. yea.


12 -O D O'IW, 0 » 64 * Wnabuck

Court Bo* 1


lea, I see. So that you wait to scy, den't you, that Dr. Ilaschor's
* V

statcoont cc^hara boon rocardod aoro as a natter of wanting to nato hlrwoL
look i^ertant ? -

That rd'ht be, tot the sublet is a little ticklish
Q 3 t wasn't it possihlo to either the inpr^ssion that to wanted to
she* off his connections to Hixnlcr ?

•'* y ° 3 » onu always had that impression with hin, yos, certainly.

Q Of course you see, I weuld like to point out to ycu t ha t Baachor,
shortly before this nootiiy;, had written to Himlur and in that lottor to
oxprossly pointed out that ho wanted permission to doal with this natter
as top socrct; in other woit^, that to did not wish to-comunicato to tto
assent ly what to was really c*icumod with. Surely ono could not intend that
r ny other way; top secret was tto word ?

A Yos, certainly.

DCt. IL'JCC i Yos, I see. In that case I have no further questions to put t

this witness.

DR. SERV..TIUS i Attorney Sorvr.tius for tho absent colloajjuo. Dr. Nolto
cn 'ohnlf of Dofondont HaixUcsor*

CRCSS EXAi 3KA7ICN


BY DR. SZRVATIUS i

Q I only want to put a voxy brief question, witness, as I rorvrixsr,
u l x,n a question put by the rrosocutor, whether after this rootlnt in Nurnborj;,
you hat* talked to sav officers rornrdjjv; oxporirxjnts on aninals which were
supposod to bo transferred to hurvn boincs, that you h«i answered , " Yos, I
had spoken tc an of floor." *icw, ry question, was that an officor fron tho
.lodical Inspectorate or Sorts ottor officer ?

A I cannot say. * .

Ef!. SSKV.JIUS: I have not furttor questions.

ER. VCRJSRX s Attorney Vcrwork for Dr. Rccberc.


BY DR. TCBJEiK :


CROSS SL'iUHATICM


/


0 Witness, ycu had rationed that you know Deforciant Dr. Ronborj;.
Do you sco hin in this courtrocn ?


12 Doo-i>-_G-6-5-Ll>i^Vuclc
foUTt I


— Jot.

Z» Uaoro is hct
— (Indicating).

Z. la *lch row1

j. Z'.io forth frx. the loft in tho b_xk row.

Bid yea ooaffidcr that those altitude ooporiuenta, soon fra: tho
print of view of tao -ir Jorco, ware roolly essential?

*, I was of tho cplnica th„t tho cxncriaonta cave ,;cnor il insifht
late cortnia questions, that thoj c uli ivo inai'Jit.

Am Siitfit I railed you that _t th.it tiso tao type of airerr/t ct
the disposal of tho Gordon ^ir Force wont out of date and at that tlroo
tho *lr Torco particularly voro trying to dovolop now typos, »ttd lot ::o
thon ropa.t tho quosti-n. Io it jour conviction that ..t that tl:.o thoso
csporLionts wore essential s-oa fro., the ^ir ?orco»'o point of view?

a. • I believe that tho axporiuects wero lrroortcat.

• •

Zm But you do not odopt tho view th .t they wero absolutely essen¬
tial?

wou, I can’t — that la « queation th..t «oot beyond ay cci>-
pctonco horc.

Z. ‘c'hoa did you sco Suf.or{; for tho first tlaot

^ f.-X as I cun roc ell, tor.othcr with huff when vo wore la

Franco.

z. ' u "hon Was that, *U-t your?

«vl.

How Ion: w v ru you tovicthor Hon-ar,: at that tiuc!
a* - few weeks; ai ut throo weeks.

d. Vhr.t wore you dcirv: at tnc tii.c durln: th.-.t Jcurnoy tar.ou h
Franco?

^ Uo worv c nducting tests on fliors, a- ut their rcsiBt.nco to
altitudes*

Z. ^’ith c pressure ca.,uJOr t s, I tako itT

291


n


12 Pog-tt-40 6-3-glr.nTmaW?
Cccrt I


-i. To*.

■ - y?. • f •

'Jho v:j ia chjsO of the»j tecta?

As I boll ore the roponibilit7 wj divided into ailitary cr.d
acdlcol rooposaibility. 3io latter boluvced to Ruff.


291 (c)


Court Nok 1

Q


Did you ever oxpcrlcncc it that Rcoberc, during the so


tjsts, -"3 nrccoodin_ or acting recklessly ?

A No, not at all.

Q Di' 1 you met with ary oxperloncos with his politic'll attitude ?
Did you discuss that with bin ? *


A I to know Her? ore quite woII. I believe the acre is true of

“ ■— ^ — —~w # - - ■» — _^ ^ _

hia as of Ruff. Hu wos in no way, l~t re say, a prcn~uncod National Socialist
Q _ -Jhat I want to know is was he a Nazi at all; not pronounce-'., was
ho c Krai ?

A I did net have that irvrosaion.

»

Q lou didn't havj the irrros3ien ?

A That he was a National Socialist.


Q Did you hrru an inpMssi&n to thO contrary about hin ?

A I believe that I oon answer that question with yes.

Q Tfould ycu be surprised if you new to road lr. the press to X'
that Rccixjrc was a proairvjnt Nazi ?

A Yes, that waul' 1 , not bo truo.

Q If I understood you corroctly then y- u said that both i'refoonor
•f 0 lU, aa well as you yourself, shared the view that Raschor was wither,
accoirlin^-to character or knowl*xl.o, in any position to carry out these
altitude oxporinents on his own. "riofly put, theiufow, he was a chc^atan
in your oyos, wasn't he; is that approxier.toly tho truth ? / ^

A Zas, that'3 truo,

0 \hon did R'Tfoorj first'see T^sclwr at that tine; *o you know that ?


A I do not krvwr.

q Then I will toll y.u. He serr '.laschur for the first tine in tho

•

office of tho Rosearch Institute of uoltz shortly after you, as you say —

ISUlfclWBYi If the Cojirt please, I think that if tho attorney for
the Defendant Rerberj wishes tc, testify, that he should take the star.’.

Du. 7K5SRX : This last hint vhich I was -^vinc.

7K2 nesnEl^T : Ejection of counsel for the prosecution is 3 ustaiwd
to that question.

292


- Hinttraek


Court Ho* 1 ' - *

CROSS SX.J3t.Jiai ( Continued)

3T XB. VuUXtK:

^ •

q If yru held t!w view then tint P-asclor was a charlatan, wcult’ it

not hero boon your duty cr .'cltz's duty to draw JlrnUiry's attention to that

• ’ * . .

feet bofero he bo;;an his oxpjrirtnta ?

A That is hard to say.

Q Did you u-ror state to Jiccfeci*. at any tiro that you too had boon

asked to carry cut these uxporimnt*, but that ycu had refused ?

o

A Ho, I don't know.

q But you woro vory soil acquainted with Rcctoor,", weren't you ? T/ouldn'*
it have boon the duty of a ccrxaVj, since ycu wore beth sorvin;; In the Air¬
force, wouldn't it have boon tha duty of a colleague anonjst doctors to
'lscuss that subject ?

A 'toll, it was a subject tdiich rkiitho'r”of us liked to talk about,
q VJhat you want to say was that in your opinion Ponberc too wasn't
happy trldnj on this Job, if I mdorstand. you richt; that's what ycu want


to say ?

A

q

A

0

scientist
was toll’.


4 v


I an convinced of that.

•Aj 11 , why do you believe that ho took it on at all ?

I don't believe I can rnsor that question., but —

It isn't known to you that I^schcr rar. Vftarioud na an excellent
to Probe iy ? Pon’.-or: node inquiries, jou knew, and that's whet lw
Did you know cbout that ?


No.


Ycu know it the first tine you cam hin then ?

That's quite possible.

But at that tin- it was your an;'. ..'eltz's view that Paschor was a


charlatan, wasn't it ? *

A If other that was oru opinion at that tire, I can't say, I saw

basclor only once at that tin:. The opiniro that he — fron tfrj first nrnont

on he. nado a very poor inpressicn or. r», but that ho was such a ctxx.'loto zero

I learned cnly in the course of tiro.

293


12 roo4i-^J-5-6-*ai=«icckK. T ?
Court I


5. Vhy did you belioTO th..t in connect! a-with those osperinoats >

jocplo caly wore t; be used who -had bees sentenced to do nth provi'usly?

*

— It vas'GscuasOd in that f-om.

ifr whao?

u. Veil, that vaa the geaord opinion.

Tou «.-5- f’oeerd opinion, so that, if I uudoretnad you correctly
it uas tho cpiaioa ct the tine vheu you, for tuo firet tiuo, wore
Up roach ad la tho nutter?

Toe.

, 0

Z* Do ?:« alec knew whothcr P.nubcr.; wee of tho opinion?

— In. euro.

• 2 ut thoa ttie oo;>rosi'.a ■gohcrd epiaioa" w u s then'art oadfld
beyond t-o oirdo of tho people who woro Lsuedletoly concornod? la
other tfor^o, was that the oplzl-a of dl tho nodical officore of tho
Ocn:aa uir Jorcos?

^ Ifcay :mow nothin*. about it, but it wai doubtless tho opinion
of dl ia lnfoir.od circles; that ie, of anyoao who knew anything about
it.

Scschor, too?

Hr.echor w.s doubtless tho evil spirit ir. thin nettor. I don«t
know uhr.t ho thought.

0„. 3ut you uro firuly ccavincod that Sbhborg bus red that viou,
aro you?

u- Toe.

Vrjj tuo Ticw ,j?o attachod f t_.t opinion at tho tine, c cun oct¬
al vith it, that the oxpGri::ont 1 persons weren't only :olac to bo

cri.-iads sontanced to :'.c,.th hut ih-t vuld lo* have to vcluntoor?

• .

h. Tos, I oolicro CO. Of c urcc, I did not, but cf coureo, that
redly ic included.

*

Veil, if I oa-.orstnad y-u correctly then, you woro c nvinced
at tho ii-.0 that tho victL .3 of the caycd-cnts voTi only .:oia/; tc he
yCcplo 3c.,tcncod to death beeauto they n_d ccunittod cri .cs; and occcndly

294


12 3e^4r-^>-6-6—-lzuJaci>J?
Ccsrt Z


*

♦


?C3jlo wl;: wocld volunteer la order to Ci>oa£o_J&eir c*.e & th scsteaoo to
?rieoc ce.'.tcaco?


29 * (a)


7


12-Doo-iWi-6»7- Kinn v «dc

Ccurt K04 1


X Tea, that wna r^r opinion*

»1 - •' furtharaoxu, you arc convinced that Dr. iicobor" shared

that view, cto you ?

■A Tea.

D?.« V'l-'EL’C : Thmk you.

TiE . a s n SHT : At this tirvj the Trihmal will rocoss for

15 rimitoa.

( A rocuaa waa talon.)


12 Doo-J>-Ji-7-Werria->I?
Court I


SEE Il-SSH-Li Toko your seats, please, The Tribunal la a/;ain la

session.

.?23S TaBff i• Have you finished with the croaa oxanination of

the vituess?.

3Y Z3 J8I3EL* (jud.~o Sobrin.';)

'• Ur. Lut*, tho Tribunal understood, you to sojr on direct ouasino-
tior., in eubst.acc, th_t you attended a conforenco In Vurnbor.-; ca

4

October 26 cad 27, 19*2, at *ilch the oner .2 subjoct, "the effoct of
frooting on varo-Vloodod subjects", v_* discussed, Is that corroct?

- Tos.

• Q. Hov low; vero jrpC ir - attendance . ; t th.it cor.for-.xo7

.da • *

— j f r (.1 I raiaiber, fro:: the beginning until tho ond.
c :« Do you rocolloot at this tixio tho mnec of any uaabors of

tho nodical profession vac ettondod that c.nfcrcnco?

-• Ho, Thoro it a list la oxistonco, I think.

Do you intend to toy th..t you ettondod tbut conforonoo for

tv? dry* cad do act recollect any of the ua.bora of tco nodical prefoo-
olon who woro thorct

_ Cortcinly I should bo ablo to reueabor, but apart fron thoco
that actually spako, it is vary hard for no to nano an;' no.

Can you say vhothor cr not any porsoas who aro nsv sootod in
t.:o <lofondcnts' deck vero present at that cocforonco?

a, Too, Volt* vas thoro; otherwiso, I cannot eoo anyone oloc,

0„ Do ;:u knew ;21 of tho n^icr cf tho '.ofaa&nite v£r, >r ult 1;*
the dof ndents' d.cckT
a, VO,

q, Lot uc rood thex; t* you. V-rl 3r-uidt, did he uttond that
ccnfurcncol

Vo, I don't knov hin*

SlOGfrlo^ Hasdlosert
I don't fca-v h lr. .

296


i.


12 3cc-»:-^S-?-l-?crriD-JP
C»rt I

Z* ?sul ?xs«;c£?

I ioz't ir.cv.

?«• 0»i.-x Schroodor.


296 (a)


12 Dco-i
C.*ort I


v*


S.


4.


i-^>7-3-?orr 1»JP

*

I only knew hie by his nano.

<as* 6C3 you rocolloct whother or n ;t ho ettoniod th^t ::ootic£?

0

io, i ien't think ho ftlft. It is not knows to ac.

* oll, E^rl Sonxkoal
I don't Jcntw hie,

Snrl So'chardt?

I don't know hia oither.
lurt SLocef
I don't know hin.

fcdolf jr-adtl *

Ho is unknown to no.

Joec/ie i.nv;owaki?

I don't know hie.

Eolxsut P.OTnosdick?

I don't know hie cither,
b'olfrcu Siovora!

Ho.

Do you know Volfras Siovcrol
Ho.

Gorhoxd Rosot
I know bin by his atno.

Do you recollect vhothor or not ho ttondod that nootin£?


*• to.


> •*


Sio /rial Ruff, did ho attc
^ r ;^- j W his, 'cut I cinnot s.y vhothor ho-attended th..t couforanco.

Did lloabor.- attend?

.» I cannot r a; caber.

Q. Brecht

«. I dxi't know bin.

C. Her scan Bcckcjvjrcysor.-;?

_ I know kin, but I don't know whether he wan#resent or nit.


297


12 Dac.-tt.*'

Court Be. 1


D


Q» You say Dr. Its did attenl?

A. Tea, certainly, ba wu there with ce. -
Q. Konrad Schaefer?

A. I don't krow his.

Q. Wftldo*ir ftoven?

A. I don't know hia..

Q. TUlhela Baielbock?

A. I know Beiglbock, tut I don't think ho was there.

Q..Adolf Pokorny?

A. I don't know hln.

Q. Horta Oberhauaor?

V" • v * ' * •

A. She lsunkiwwn to no.

Q. FTits Fischer?

A. I don't know hln.

Q. Then nest of the defondants who now eit in the dock woro unknown to
you at that tine, le that corroct?

A. Toe.

- IF- 1C HANEY: If the Tribunal, plo&eo — pardon no.

BY THE PSESIDHITl

Q. I would ask the witness, he roforrbd to the thought that any of those

V . •

oxporinonta wore to be porforaod upon non c las sod as crlalnals. I would ask
what ho noant by "originals".

A. Under the word "original", I understood that a nan who was condemned
an ordinary court in tho Third Raich, that is, a crininel who was condottnod
by a court before tho Third Reich. YVhat ~l nean is, it isn't absolutely noccs
ary for a court to have set bofore tho Third Reich cane into power, but it
is a nan who was condemned to death by an ordinary courtj a nan who actually


ccenitted sene thine which, according to general opinion, can be considered a


crine.


298


12 Doc-iS-ffiJ-e-l-Occiela


Court Ho.l

Q Do you aeon (mother sdlitaery court, or a Gcraan civil court ?

A I was a-.jcokinc cf o oiril court,

yt JOXS SLDiOHOi __ • , .

- • __ (

o ..ould you include within the 'err. "court" the People's c ourt ?

A I ’.mow very little about . ccplo's c ourt.

<1 -hat was that T

A I know vory littlo about the .ooplo's u ourt,

.iSLHEYi If tho Tribunal ploaso, I have a number of quostiona I would
liko’ to out to this witnosa. However, boforo I do so, I would liko tho rocord
to show that tho witnosa proporly identified the defendant iJoabor^ when bo
was oallod upon'to point out his position in tho defondant's dock,

THE .liBSIDBITi .ould you repoat that statement, ploaao ?

‘.Li. IlolIAHEYi Tho counsel ter thfc defomiant UodSorg asked this vritnoss to
idontlfy him In tho defendant's Cook. I want tho record to show that ho did
proporly idontlfy itonborg, Of oourso, that 'ocs not'nyw appoor in the rooord,

Ho just said "He is tho fourth nan fr ;i tho loft", and that doesn't show my
nreper identification. Ho is, in act, the fourth nan fron tho left, and'I-would
liko the rcoord to so show,

JbDGE SL.iJNGi lir. ii corotary- c on ml, lot tho rcoord show that the dofondnnt
.koberg ia sitting in tho prisoner's dock at the plaeo

. '.dir “Cl SZ.UlKtfllH.

zy iicu.asr«

» '..itness, the Tribunal has asked you -.dint you noont by using the word
"orialnol". *>o I understand your answer to aeon that you do not includo ns
criminals those inmates in a cor.cov.traticn crap who wero put thoro purely for
political roas.ns ?

A Yes, yeu understood m o.rrcctly,

ila-r, witness, you w.fj askod a nunbor of questions by c-unscl for the
defendants about tho political be iefs of various cf the defendants such as Huff,
‘‘eo-org, and Dockor-rreysenj. J c you r-;xnbcr that ?

Yes,

^ I recall, they asked you whothor th^y were ar.ti-Haris; ia that correct ?


designated witness,

n

vy


.. Yes


299


12 Detail Hntlcls


C-urt Ec. 1

0 Your answer was that they were not ardent “axis.

A Yes, that ia correct*

n You would not jo sc gar as to say that they were conspirators in tho
20th of July plot against 3itler, would you 7

A Hot in that sense, but it would bo poasiblo that thoso very sane people
could have taken part in the plot on the 20th of July.

(l You c- uidor that a possibility* Eow, the nono of Kottonhof wr.s mentioned
in ccnnootion with tho attaching of Jr. .;aachor tc ..'oltx'a Inatituto in Hunioh.
«o you renenbor Dr. bottonhof 7
A Yes.

n J 0 you roncuber when Dr. Eottcnhuf left Munich 7

A I cannot say that exactly, but it was approximately at the tine with
Trhioh wo arc oeneorned, * *

Q Dr. Kot onhof went to iUiBonla, did ho not, beforo these experiments
woru carried out—the hiji altitu.lo experinonts 7
A Yob j yes, he was transferred.


Q .bad the defondant ••’cite *fus then the o«xsandin<j officer ovor .bxschor
in his Institute, was he not ?

A That I don't ’enow; I don't knew anyt'.iinc r.l* at tl« relations botwocn


••cits and dascher.

*7 -.ell, at least Kottonhof -was no longer in the picture, was ho 7


A !lo, Hottonhof ros a^t there at nil.

^ And if Teacher sr.a a subordinate if iltr's, "oltx oculd have had hin
oranoforred out if iii* Institute, ceuld he net 7
A I an not quite clear ab-ut your quostion.


'1 You have atac< d h- ‘. you du not \ticw the rclaticnship botwocn -hscher
and ••oltc.


A Yos.

r ; i ask you to r.anio: that ••cschor -a attached tc ..cltz'3 Incl^itutc.

If .hschor was attached to Icltz's Inatituto, then .'oltt could have hod hin
transferred to sene other place, could ho net 7

A If i(anchor was subordinate to .’cltr then of courso, certainly, -oltt
had the possibility of having .toschcr transferred if the superior office —
uhich was superior tc -clti—true ir. a^rocnent with hit..


12 Deo>!E>8-S-D:ri.la

J curt Ec. 1

Q dew, do you rc=o*.bcr when the low-jrcseuro chanbcr was brought free
. “orlin to -cltr'a Institute in Ueiich in th_ early part of 19-i2 ?

A “O, I don't rnrii er ab.ut any auoh nrcasur. ohenber being br.ught

"‘tharo*

••

0 -Alright, then isn't it also true that you cannot toll this Tribunal
;hnt cite did not hiosolf nalv trips to Dachau while theso,cxpcr incuts were
in progress ?

- I arid that I coould --ot recollcot whether Volts -..'as in Dachaifpors anally
or not. liowuvor, if ho was active extensively there, I nuat have joined knowledge
about it.

a I didn't put the question to you whoth.r or not he had beer, thero extensi¬
vely. iiaschcr ms not regarded as rn expert in high altitudo research, was ho 7
A Bo. ’

A- A her.fore, if these high altitudo oxpcrixunts were to bo curried out in
Dachau, it was ncoossory that spue exporto work with -Caschor, was it not ?

A Yes; it was desirable, at least.

(\ And that was th roason tJir.t ■•cits os!ud you and -ndt to collaborate
with lta«chcr, was it not ?

A Cortai.ily, I would have token over the port vf the exports.

0 Mow you stated, as I rocall, on or- ss-cxmuiiatior, that it soonod to yoU

•*

.croups that ..'olta expected you to turn this Job Jrwn Ig that corroct
A Yes.

Q And isn't the reas-n you say that bcoaUso y.u knew tliat .bits considorod
y-u to be tov Soft for this job 7

A Mo; that would riean that \V.ltx d.sirod a specially brutal procedure
to be adopted tkcr.., and I don't chink that was the cage*

Q lit: sorry, will you repeat that 7 I didn't get the answer.

A I did not quite jet y:ur question in tr-nslation. "o^d you repeat y^ur
question ?

j I was dealing with the incident when you wore -eked by Volts to collaborate
*ith uaachor in u _chau. '~c -id ash you end .emit to collaborate with iiaschor in
,t!id he net ?


n ICS*


3d


:


12 r©o-;^^S-4-DaalelB-J?
Court I


«U you refused, did you not? •*

A. Tec.

%. -ad Uendt refused, didn't he?
a. VendtJ Tes.

*rA haven't you already told this Tribunal that the reason you
refused van because you were not ruthless enough?

A. Tea, because ! believed that I w_* not robust enough to carry
out err^oriaonts on hunan beings.

Q. I would like the interpreter to translate the word "robust ”

I would liiee to ask the witness; . bfcat do you uoan b: tho word "robust".?

that I ceun is this. It is even difficult to cxperi4ont *.^>on
a dog which looks at you and which soece to havo scao jcind of a soul;

It io even difficult to do that with a dog.


v. Out Is wait I usdorstood you to ceun. and Volts know that vuo
your attitude, didn't ho?

a. *o know that uendt end I rojectcd this procedure.

and after you rejoctod it ho went to &uff and r.ooborg, didn't
he?

a. I auat aosunc that, I don't knov It.

*r.d, ae I recall, you told ono of tho counoel for defense that


you, as o naabor of Volts's Xnrtituto, wore told about all of tho oxpt>-
rinonto that wero curriod out under tho auspicos of Volte's Inotituto.

Yoa,

v* and you did not participate in tho conference betwoon Veits and
Saff a;;d r.xfoorg la tho lattor port of 1941,. did you?


a. Vo, I did not take part in it.

Vow, 30voral of tho defease co _nael have as<od you questions
about pilot onoBinaticns carried out in lov-pressuro oxoeriocntB. Do


you recall that?


Court Ho. 1 ..

12 Dec 46 !! - 9-1 - UG - Putty

Q* Do you roccll that?

4,. Yos.

Q. Can you in any sor.so cf the word conparo £S pilot 'z
« t.-: t nation and a lov'-proaauro oxporinont in a lou-prosauro
chanbor with tho oxporinont3 carriod out in Dachau?

A. Euncn exporinonta, as I havo to aasuno wore carried
out in Dachau, wore alao carried out by aciontista on their
own poraona.

Q. I oa not suggesting tc ;:cu that cortain aciontlata in

Go many, including Ruff end Roriborg thonaolvoa, did not fron

tiwe to tino got into a lou-prosauro chamber thonaolvoa. I

an caking you whothor a pilot'a oxenination aa carriod out in

§

tho Oorr-an -ir Porco in a low-proaauro cfcanbor could in any
aonao cf tho word bo ccr.parcd with tho altitudo oxporiuonta
carriod out at Dachau.

Ho doubt thoro woro cortain difforoncoo.

Q. . nd thoao difforoncoa noro that thoy took tho non in
Dachau to a uuch higher altitudo, ian't It?

A. About tho roaulta of tho exporinonta ir. Daohau I
know nothing.

Q. I will cak you if a pilot '3 oxanlnntion in a low-
proaauro chrzibor ia ovor carriod aa high aa tv:onty-ono thouaanu
notors.

A. No, not a pilot's oxrxiination. I don't think 30 .
n. How, Td-tnoac, let's go bach a ninuto to tho conforonco
hold in Hurnborg in Octobor, 1S42. I a ah ;*cu again was it not
cloar after tho at..tor.onta, aftor tho papor had boon road by
Kclzloohnor, that deaths had occurrod during tho courao of hia
oxporlnonts.

... Excuse no. Do you noon whothor it boenno clear
tho cor.foronco that during tho courao cf thoao oxporlnonts tho

death cf tho cxporiuontal subject had occurrod?

303


12 Doo-t-—U0-9-3-Pu* ty-J?
Court I


Tee.

_ :a tho report of Eolzlochncr it stated tn_t heart falluro,
that ls T death, was observed in nosy c^sca, but oefora hasener sic'.zc,
it could be essused that it “as is tho subsequent death cf person xnich
wore rescued free the sea.

C. Jut after Stschcr suoko, It Uos clear to ;ou uad to tao rest
of the persons at tite noetiag thJt the exovrisents hod not, in f _ct, been
conducted oa people rescued fr«. tac se_ but uj on persons furnished by

* rv

tho Hoichsfvehrcr SS, isn't th-t trie, witness?
a. Vos, it vus cloar to cc,

0„ .aid wasn't there sone constPraatioa at tais aoofaj eu tho
part of souo of the scientists presont uftor aoltloehner and tusc&or
had spohon?

-w Tos.

C,. Did you sco noltlochncr at any ti o of tor tho occasion of t .in
tooting in l.urnberg?

A. Too.

That ikipresoion did you cot of holsloehncr oa t;.:. occasion

of that co.tinc, th-t is to cay, too oocti after the oao in jferaborrf

•

-a 'fhat Was not a conference. I uot Eolzloohnor in 1 .unieh. to
approached ao cad said, *1 can well iuaglao wh»t you tr.ink of ao now,
but I c<m assure you I v u s orderod to c^rr; out this order ; or tao only
reason 1 . order to avoid unnecessary victics.”

v. Eo t:as ordered 6>‘ tho Luftw^ff.* to n... r~ ents «?or aoatn,

Was ho uot?

a. tos, it uust bo so. I an not s .rt about that.

Didn't you cot thlHCry distinct ianrespien-ttr-t Holsloahaar

vac vovy ouch disturbed about vh_t ho had done is JnChauT

• •

r


304


12 Dec -16 il - 9-3 - UG - Putty
Court Ho. 1


.... He.. I Lad the hiproaclon that ho bcliovod to havo

9

c-ctod correctly but tla.t he fo;irciT"to^bc niourxl or stood.

Q, You mean to aay that he foorod thr.t hia roputation waa
teor .god boeauso ho lx.d help to carry out tho oxpcrlnonta In
Dachau?

... Xu a.


Q.

aulcldo?


Do 70 U know thr.t Eolsloohnor aubaoquontly comittod

X


A. I heard it lioro.

How you hr.vo told this Tribune. 1 that you thought it
wr.a gonorclly unloratocd by tho sclontlata who know about
tho low-proeauro uxporliwnta thr.t they woro going to bo conduct
on criminal a, la. that right?

A, Yea.


Do you know whether or not tho. oxporimonts woro, in
feet, porforudef upon criminals, r.a you dofino tho word n crimin¬
al a"?


A. ho way it was cbvicualy uono I only found out after
tho oni of the war.

Q. Tlion you ccnnot say thr.t, in fact, tho oxporlnonta
woro carriod out on criminals, ia that rifcjit?

A. Ho. I, naturally, cannot confirm tlr. t bocauro I had
no possibility to chock it.

Q. And you also cannot aay that tho exporinonta woro only
cr.rriod cut on voluntoors, crx. you?

A. I cannot ai.y that.

Q. Hew, witness, is it or is it
and moral sciontist to uotermino for himsolf what tho conditions
of tho oxp-rimonts aro which ho carrios out raid wh.othor or not
tho persons upon whon ho is experimenting aro voluntoors?


A. Under nonaal circumstancos it had to bo cxpoctod,
certainly, but 1, naturally, am not acquainted with tho miliou
which was in tho concentration camp of Dachau at tlx> tiuo.


12 Deo-^-UC-S-^-Putty-vT*
Court I


Severer, : know free =y ova experience due a c*=p has a system of its

ova, and it cue affect you, and tno barbed vire vith vhich you ore

•

surrounded lias a tendonc y to change c u nan beings and has a tend one: - to
enaage your c-mr-xtcr, and I think vhon entering a ca-p, you are c.^-
tiv_tcd by certain conditions and a certain nusber of your principles


3H. rask the i'ri'ounul not to adait tap testimony bqcouspj

first of all, the witness it still too young, and ho hies-If is not
enough of a-^i^icntlst in ordor to be uolo to onsvor t.-iis question. In
tap soco:js piece, this question nay bo a lo^disg question.

PPaSI^ST: 2io rribunal pexaitted tho Defendant's counsel
a vory liberal croso-oxrci nation. Ifcb Prosecution will oe allowed ecuo
liberality ia its red 1 roct-oxnsination, fho objection is overruled.

ID, KeSiuZr* I think that's all I wish to ask tho vltacoo, Voux
Honor,


3«6


12 Dcc-JOJ-lO-l-horrin
Ccurt 3ci 1


7.Z . .kZSIjEHTi Is thoro any further o„rss exanination by defenso cc/unacl ?
u... IIJIS i-u»X (ccunsol for the Def enda n t Dccker- f ’rcyscns) i l-ay it ploaso
the Tribunal, there is one :iorc question which I would like to address t. She
witness.

jy da. zand iiaaxi

Q "itness, it is q question cf your fcnowl.J-o cf the political attitude
of Dr, Decker, At one tine you were together in Hanburj with Dr. Seeker, and •
that was a short tino bef-ra yeur prc::otiai to Stabsorzt (Captain) in the
nodical scrvico. At that tino, had< y.u joined the impression -f a political
attitude of Dr. Decker ?

A Can you jive nc any norc details ?'l cannot roaenber at the ncoont.
r : '.fell, Dr. Cooker olains that -u. the evoninj in question, you had str.yod
ovorr.i jht in -no hotel roon.

A Yes, that is correct.

Q And on that occasion, you hadt-Id hin that your wife was half Jewish,
is that corroot ?

Q Can it not bo concluded frea tills that Decker had your full confidence ?
A Certainly. I had no reason todistrust hin.

0 hell, soacthinc of this kind ora only bo entrusted t.. a nan who io

politically discreet, an .1 you :ust have been sure of his political discretion.
A Yes.

0 .hat was your opinion aj.ut the philosophical attitudo of Dr, Docker ?

A he had no ardent '•‘ati-nnl-Stcialists in our oirclc, and D co j :or i n no
nay cnphasiiod this way of thinking.

Q Tbs. Under tills oirclc, you understand the Luftwaf.'c as so wholo.


or only the nodical offices ?

A Especially the nodical of .‘ices.
0 Yes.


—1.AHS .—dli fhrnk you very nuch, I have no further question.


b... DUdilLAIb VC.t.IkiKi


-kirinc the experistnts at Dachau, did you talk with Dr, Hoibcrj ?
A Yes, we talked occasi-cially,

0 bid ‘‘cobcrij bell you anythin- about the cxpcrinontal subjects ?

3 C?


Covrt -U-- ——W —- . 1 ^ >PIPPW|IWiPIB.Uf 13

, ^,0 «& a r > W -j-. " — ■“

x ^r , or I had the U~hcr G . — »"» ^ “’ Wi " B -

had Oi^d, been c nrried «-cu^; « of . opinion *» «-?
.object. We accord to the Prere^ito. *ich bed been di.ou.ced In «.

cirolo*

a feu .aid thot you hod the tap-ion. Don't you too. if that — net-
80 ?

i To., certainly, that wo. the eoac. I me that E-bor C -a. convinced
of it.

0. -..hat t wanted to®» in. if ituberc .toted to you that then erpor:'
tal lubjeeta were in accordance Vith'tho prercqui.lte. which we havcje.t
di.oui.od or if they -re not in accordance with the proroqui.ito. t
A Could you please repeat your quo»tion ?

„ X want to know if heoher, etated to you that the.e orporlnontal .1
.each -ere uaed for the.e exnerincnt. were in accordance with the prere,
which you hare Ju.t dUcuc.cd or if they -re net in ac.crdanco with the

prerequisites which you hr.yo Just discussed ? .

iV that tino. a. far a. I remnber. , wo did net U.'ou.. thl. nett,
in cuch detail, but I did hawe the'-tapre.ion, the very certain lnprc.
that Upbore wa. of the opinicn that .one of hi. o^crlncntal .abject, n
least wore actually pardoned.

n You hod thi. inpr-.ion. ire you eonvinced cf that , -'we you o.,.*
alee that ho=bor C -I n.nn now during the e^erinent— al.=
inprcanl n T Jj

L Yob.

TBS ..dJSIDEBTi Is there an, further cross cxaninatlon of the «itnos-

•

not, the witness will be excused.

nUldtWn. If tte Tribunal, ploa.e, ,we had oonoluded ye.terday>. .

withtho introduotion of Kecuaent 1609-PS, a. rrc.eeutien Exhibit 92, W.

on -.-ace V of the &*li.h Uceuncnt beck, end tto oeurt will recall tha

wn. a letter dated 2d October 194* fr« Iftoieh Hitler to -t*=hcr, nc

mo receipt of .everal letter, and ctatins that he had read hi. report

cool oxporlncnt. or. htrv-ut.'and that Sicvnr. .hould arrant for the

308


12 D c c-BJI2>-10-5*?crric * v

Court Ho.l

f the rc3ult« of these experiments at institutes which arc connected with

the 28; end ho had further stated that ho had regarded th sc pc. Lo ns trni fc

who still today reject these experiments on humens and would instead let

*

sturdy Goman soldiers ’lo as a r.sult -f these c^olinj nothods.

he now 30 cn to Jocuacnt 401 which will bo . r«.scoution 2xhibit 93; and this,

if the Tribunal, please, is tho rcp.rt on the ncctinG in.&rnbcr;; on the 26

and 27 of October 1942, on aedioal problems arising fr;n distress at son on*.

wintor hardship. A his is the report a tho acctinG prioh your Iionors have hoard

discuJssod at sono length this aorain,. Cn tho b tton of tho first pace you

will see that tho ncctinc was sponso.cd by the Inspector of Eodioal Service of

tho Luft.-affc, and that tho chnimrn r.f the c.nfercnco was Stobsnrzt .“rofossor

Dr. A.J. /nthony; owl the Tribunal wil recall that Jr. Anthony was ohiof of

tho doportewnt for Aviation ‘fedloino in the aolior.l servioo of tho Luftwaffe,

end that tho dofondant 3ockor-*'rcyscnc was his insistent in tint doportsnont

fren the latter part of 1942 until oarly in 1944, when tho defendant Dcckor-

freysonG boocnc ohiof of tho dc^irtaent f-r Aviation l»odlcino, ^ ^

Cn the next pn^o, that is to say, pace 00 of tho English Document Jo '.If., ^

you will sco an index of the contents of the report, and it "ivoo tho nones

of tho doctors who lectured at this conference together withtho subjeot which

thoy discussed. Yju will bjo that Jr. Anthony G ttVC tho openly spooch and

the chart shows that he was chaimsn cf this occtin-j. It was a report mccti. ;

-n Aviation licdical problem. I call tho Tribunals attention to tho nape

jf Jarisch under item IV ir. the Table cT °.nt.nts; and the Tribunal will rec-l

that he alonr with ..'cits ar.d -aschcr, at aenUonod in tho memorandum \rr itton

by i'ini Aoschor-that is a mi stake, your Ilonor,-- the nano Jarisch was montionoi

in a letter which, as I recall, is c- ne in already, in vhich llippko had

rccossoendcd t. '.'.aschcr tho nr_ 3 i 3 of Jarisah and -incor and onoofchor GontKmnn

whose nn,T I forget at this nvaont, who ucrc to collaborate irith him in the

freezing exeriaents. ‘hat is Document number 2JO-283 thatrent in as irosoouion

Exhibit 62. 1 his was a letter fr.n r.„sohor t. tho.Ecichsfuchrcr in which he

reported a talk he had had with Jlippkc and Hippke had asked that tho followinc
be encaged in these cxpcrisxmts. .r-f.ssor -*r. J arisch was one of then, alone
with bolzlcchncr and ^inecr. Isaodiately under the nmje of Jarisch in theso r
Table of Contents is that^. 1 ' the acme of the defendant .„ltz, who read a paper
on rewarainG after lif*-cndanccrinc f rc,zin . nalzlcehnor javc his talk on tno
prevention and treataaont of freezing ia ^tcr, which, of ceurso, was a rep rt
on tho experiments carried out in Jachnu.


12 3cc-%r-aSchi>-l-ll—llal oy-J?
^Court I


Vo cccc dova to Itcc 6 and we see tho n^ao Schacffor acntionod

ua reporting oa thirst and the results to cccb_t ia case of sea distress.

•

I cannot fiad the sea Scaaoffcr identified noro particularly la
this report, but Z suggest to the Tribunal th_t tho Schaoffcr now 3it~
ting in the Box was cortoinly concerned with thirst problea and problems
of sea distress. 3ic Tribunal will hoar proof at a later ste^c in tills
trial that it voi tho def^nd-nt Schaeffer who p_rticipatod in a conferen¬
ce in 194-., tiiorc it v„s agreed that cxpcriacuts to test tho photo'oility
of ooa water by this cethod and oy a aothod of other norma *'ould bo
carriod out on living hunan beings ia Dachau; and horc two years earlier
vo find a non with the gxe nano reporting on tho s.oo subject in
anothor conference which presonted a report on c^uriacnts carried out
on living hiuou boings.

ac tho vitnoss Lutz testified thorow.s no quostion anong tho
participating uaabers .x to whore tho expurinents had been carriod
out Mid a* to tfcnt hod h.ppoacd to soce of the uafortiuu.to vietine.

I want to also call the Court's attention to Itcu 7, to tho
nmo of Hild«ccnn, wno gave a t.lk or. practical cold problooa in tho
Ait;*. I chjuld think that tho defend Jit Hundlosor sight h^ve ooor.
intovosfcod in the njixo subject,since at tnis tiao ho was tho ana;•
nodical Inspector..to, as woll as Chief of the i.odical Service of tho
^rmod forces.

I olso point out tc tno Tribunal tao .ux:o 3rnuch, Ho. 6,

Itca VII, vho gave C talk or. Viator oxpcricnco of tho air fleet. Ho
was attcchd to too air force as Professor and Cborstabsorst of Luft-
flotConorzt 1. It was true ho was one of tho subordinates of tho _
dof.ad.int Schrocdor, was at that tiuo was connected with ^ir Ploot
So. 2, but wo shell so« th„t wo had a very very brood representation
of Luftwaffe doctors at tnis uc-tiag, and it would be ctrango indoed
that none of tho

, 310


12 Doc.-^-iSchQ-2-ll-ita.07
Court Ho. 1

happenings and the reports rede at this nccting did not roach the second
highest ranking nodical officer in the Luftwaffe.

I now ask the Tribunal to turn to the list of participants in
tho ccnfcrupco. This gives us a list of 95 doctors who attended
this nooting. Tho Tribunal evidenced sceo interest in nhethor or
net any of tho defendants in this dock were thorc besides Iroltz, and
you can see fren this list that r. snail group of then *.:crc present,
nanoly tho do fondant Be eke r-l-Ycyseng, being iistod ’.s Ho. 7. The vit-
r.oss who has Just to 3t if led. Lutz, is shown as tho Ho. 50. Tho Uo fen .ant
Rose, tho groat expert on tropical ncdiclno dropped into this freezing
conference hiasolf, being Ho. 67 on this list. Tl;o defendant Ruff,

Ho. 69, the do fondant Schaeffer, Ho. 71, and tho defendant ’..'olts Ho. 80.

How, this list is very intcrcrting for other reasons. Tho Tribunal
will recall that tho chart docs not have tho dofundent Handlosor Iistod
as ono of tho defendants subordinated to hin as tho Amy Modi cal Inspec¬
torate of tho fountain I Codicil Sc!v>ol of tho Arry at St. Jonchin, and
I call tho Tribunal's attention to tho nano Boiko, Itoa Ho. 3 on this
list, who was representative fren this fountain Uodical School undor
tho Jurisdiction of tho defendant HarvUosor.

I also call the Tribunal's attention to the jvujo Croraor, I ton Ho.

16 , being attached to tho sneo institution under tho defendant Hand-
losor, and the Tribunal will hear Later on the neno of Cronor nentiened
in a letter fro.n Rascher to Hiarilcr, as wishing to collaborate with
i.ia on froozing probl.ns,

Iten Ho. 33, Q non b. the nano of Mil :iann, .also out at tho
Jfcuntain itcdicai School cf th. .Tny at 3t. Joachin. As to Schroodcr
wo soo Huobnor's rrr.c contionod, Iton Ho. 35, and * hj Tribuinal will
hoar tho name- cf Huebner mentioned in connect ion with soa water cx-
pjrinents in 194L, a consulting physician tc tho defendant Schroedor.


12 Eoo-«- i( ScI=i-3-U-j~J.or , J?
Cocrt I


Itai Vo. 41, Oborarit Xooaig, Laboratory Plcto-D of O.Z.V. rith
Haallosor, tho Chic? of tho Vodic-1 Services o? tho O.Z. J., cad r^-f.n
TCr V interesting with roapoct to H^ndlotor is the nr^o Liack, h’o. 4E,
L-i---o-.:, who vua attached to the ac_dcey o? i.ilitnxy kuiicino andor
ti-o dcfcadr.it Kncdloaor.

Vo find the a.co of nciatcr, ,>o, 52, siothcr dr fl.ct phjrsioicui,

Ur noot Vo, 4, So thnt the*- naitcra vero not hq>t froh t-o air floot
physiclean.

rho Vcff(S>-SS ia reproaeatodj Xtcu ho. 55, rfo find th^ a,jao hurthua,
Oboutuiiibriufuckrcr, of the Hygioao Iaatltuto of tho Vi/fca-SS, uador
tac d of codon t l.rugowaky nad Genzkoa.

.* t ^ • • •

Vo, 59, Poteraos, Hmptatuxufuuhrjr, of the S3 i.odic 1 Offico 3orlin,


O'


12 loo-iWaH.o-ll-s.cloy-JP
Co.'st I


-nothor rcpr-svnt.vtivo on tho .tf. 4 ct.- 3 r of .-.‘lifc.ry i.odicir.c for
^•’.ndlasor u • Shake, Oborfoldarst, Professor und loctor, i:o. €3. ii.8C-.or,
SqEv, r-sd 1 0 . 66, --nnborg. I tn net sure : aontioned 3o-oorg o.xlicr.

Ihu defendant hoahorg was th^ro.

ind of grout interest is Ho. 76, Schreifcer, Cboraturst, Profocao?
and Doctor of nodical habilitatlon, Physiological Instituto Soottingen.

Dr. ochrcibcr is prccincntl}* shewn os the chart drrwn for us by
Handles or, na tho ccuuandiug officor of the j.ilitaxy -chdajy in 3crlir.,

-ad Ms ncho horo or. the eh st.

Vo find another air floot phyaicica, Air 7lcot Ho. 3, Dr. Stcllo,
Str.banrzt, Luftflottccarrt. • .

I t-lrJ: the Pribusnl will find a direct study of the purtlcipcnto
nt this corforosco ..ost interesting.

I occo sow to tho next p^.-a, wr.ich glv.o us tho cxtr.xt frsi this
report, w:lch is a sutti.ay of tso t-lk givon by Eolsloctsor, and
baforo ecalsg to tn .t I would lino to road tho introduction which coys,
*2ho report of tho hooting of 7/-,3, ■ wr.ich is sot n rofo: uoo to n dr.to.
This nesting was 26-27 October, 19<2, It s yi "tho r«aorc jf tho mooting
represents tho siss.:,. 7 y of tho results of the sciontific iuvostig..tions

cf ucdicrl aensures in the ease of distress at son, end the winter

o -

hardships. 2 ho natcrlal in question is not u sorvico regulation, Tho


rosulting prnctlc 1 doductiono will bo worked over :;:d erdored cry tho
c-rootcnt offices."


How, I think th..t is of jo.o interest to Tour honor, bee -.*0 it
i-co us so. .c indication of h w these ..Vi at ion uodic.J. auttorc wore


•i


hnndlod in the Soman air f orcoo. Sics- problems so of tremendous
importnaco. 2 hc ucdlcul sorvico of t-'ie S-r-aU air f rrco fra. ti:.o to
tt.c issued sorvico regulr.ti jus wnich governed the aanner in which
uvirtorc were to be -.rented under ccrt_in circumstances, md it cover a
th wholo field cf acdic.l treatment. Sore the* wore, c nccrr.od r.ocut
tho problem :f freezing, -hat is nn air


12 3oc-
Court I


floot or surgoon or aou rescue scrvic- to do wn^a tee;- fich c

Den o t of tho l orte Sou?, arc they to v u ru then in blankets or vein
then in a crcdlo, or give tea- wniskey or put then in a hot bed or
trout the; irith diathorsy of the hoert. ?haso era of gr. ;t interest,
icy do not issue tecco regulations w.lce -tetrol tho setters without
complete end proper authority, 2h*.t is precisely vh.it co says here,

I would think it would be r..ther difficult for any defendant ir.
this does to ^ct up and 17 ■! kaon aothing about these setters bo cruse
they u.ro istoroated is uodic..l eviction problcns. " 2fc oy hud diocucsioh
c'oout it. Sorvlcc regulations controlling these things wer- not issued
without tho haovledgc and ifoprcv.J. of ouch sen us Chief of the ..cdicnl
Aviation Scp.-lsont undor :r^-soag, without knov:lodgo of rich pcoplo
as Schroodor, tho second highest r nklng nodical officer in tho I/aft-
waffo, ..id air fleet surgeon,

r_h ?r_s:h'-.7: The Tribunal will now toko t .o noon recces,
until 1:30.


S14


yf + b

12 Deo -%'^SEi .12-Wlafcloy(ew)
Court lk>m 1 _


AFTSSOOS SESSION

(THE HEARIH5 BECOWEED AT 1330 hours, 12 DSCH3EH 1916)

THE UABSHU.I The Tribunal uill nonbe in order,

IR- IfcHlNET* If the Tribunolplcaso, the prcsocution beforo the noon

•

re coca had just introduced Document HO-ljOl as Prosecution Exhibit 93#
w h ich iatbc report on the Mumberg njetinc in October, 19h2, on frocz—
inc problcna#

I rood fron Pago 85 of the English docurrnt book on tho lower port of
the page, dich is tho opening oedressgivon by Anthony I
“During tho lo3t yonrssaldiors of all acrvicoa, especially a consid¬
erable nuebor of fliora, could bo rcscuod fron 3oa distress by tho
Soa Diotross Sorvico (Soonotdionst) of tho Luftraffo. A year ago, by

* • • i t , |

ordor of the Chiof of tho Itodical Sorvico of tho Iuftvraffo (inopektour
dcs Sanitcotar-ocons dor Lufteaffo), Oonoraloborstahsarzt HippJx had
a discussion with snail drclo about nodical cxporioncca at tho Soa
Diatross Sorvico. Tho results of this confcrcnco arosummed up in a

0 0

report. Tho conclusion was, ruong others, that exact examinations of^
tho phoncccna at gonoral freezings aro nccoosaxy to enable us to
diagrxso and treat thoso cases prcporly.

"During tho winter campaign in tho oast, tho I rood ng problom re¬
appeared in another forn.

"In tho aoantino, systematic oxaninations concerning thoso .)rot>-


lons have been nado at various placos. "fco first day of our mooting


shall show us the results of thoso Dominations and thuagivo us
idoa of tho state of our knowledge of freezing in gonoral.


1


‘ On tho accord day thoro dll to rc.> rts on flirt her rodicalccpcr-
ioncos of tho Sea Distress Service and of experiences during tho


.Vy


Sac tern c:


that specific scientific problems vrill bo
iportar.ee for rescues from distress at rca and


Aiscy^^TOch^areS^^ortanao for rescues from distress at -ca and
•*f :rj lcc«l prwjjp'.i r. against cold.

It I » \ ► - |

Cj>-tfca folioring day. tha participants Trill also havo tho opportunity
to attend, proceedings of/tho Dermatological Society (Dcrmatologischo
Gosollsc?rv£t-<). iav'^orzburg, dealing with local freezing injuries.

-' - 315


«•


12 Doc-^-<£S-12-2-3laklcy
Court Bo, 1.


• "

■The problems to be discussed curing the session should help to clarify
tr.o peritnent proxies. Tho results will enable tie coapctcnt offices to issue
the necessary medical ordora and instructions. The measures which havo to bo
token at ones because of the approach lag winter have olr.ady boon fu ndam ental!:
outline;', for nine months and have also been earriod out in tho aroy."

1 centime to read on the next page, which is that portico of tho report

) &

do voted to a synopsis of tho paper roaefc* by Or. Holzlochncr, *.Sio earriod out
th_ freezing expert -nts in DaobOU in cooperation with Dr. FinkOj also of the
Luftwaffe, and Dr. Roschor,

"Prophylaxis and 7r»-.toenb-©f- Frocsing in Water.

"Observations by the Sea Pietros a S-rvico havo shvron that tho reduction
in body teaperatun. proceeds vary rapidly in the ease of parsons in distress
at sea subjected to water toeperature bolorr 1 $ dogroos. ..a unconcciousnoss or
even death can occur already after half an hour, the possibility of using
planes end boats is greatly decreased, '-oreover, observations of mass cctoa-
trphes (tho sinking of transports or war ships) rovoolod that evon a rather
long tino after the rescue danger to life still exists. Thus, su<klon deaths
were observed twenty minutes to one an* one-half hours after the roscuo, which
until now have remained unexplained.

"FTcozing experiments on animals have been conducted hitherto predominant

ly to observe reflex regulations of a vasewotor and chemical nature.

experiments with low temperatures of water coiTC3ponc'-ing to the range

tcemcraturo of practical importance ir. t-i*e See. Distress Service wore

Inforuativc investigations were conducted by Or. fichus tor. Tlicso showed that

• * %
cnrOl animals could only resist froczi.-\, In water of below 10 .’.ogress for a

short tine. If rate, for instance, to. decline of whoso rectal tcaporaturo

;r?a being recorded, swim about in water of h to 9 degreos, too possibility of

an effective reflex regulation will already be exhausted after two to three

• inutes. Then the body tempera tore drops sharply and almost striight dorm,

then to approach more slowly the temperature of the freezing water. Only

during the first brief period docs, the organism behave noticeable differently


- 316 -


12 Dec-.c-5JS-12- , -3la>el7;^t

Gourt Xo. 1.

froa a physical noaell The aUn ooly of the curve, especial -
ly the steep drop, greatly resembles tho course of freezing .
of a a call .araffln-couted bulb oi corresponding volume
filled with water at x>dy temperature.

•Tho larger the animala the alo-er the reduction In
temperature, corresponding to the greater amount of w-ter
and the relatively small surface. On the other hand, the
phase of larger animals, such as cats and dogs, during
which the straight "iodol-Uke“ decline Is dolayod, la not
prolonged correspondingly. Thus, for Instance, with a dog
weighing thirteen kilograms subjected to the freezing effoct
of four to five degree water, the straight decline begins
already after two and a half mlnutoa. This does not mean,
of course, that the reflex regulations end horo but that they
grow less effective and are outweighed by the strong reduc¬
tion of temperature.

-Thus, the question of tho orltloal temperature of tho
freezing water, below vhloh people are endangered particu¬
larly rapidly, cannot be finally'answered on the basis of
experiments on animals. In the casoof water temperature
under 15 degrees, of Interest to the Sea Distress Service,
all reflex regulation appears only slightly in the usual
test animals. The freezing curves to a great extent rosom-^
ble those of a physical model which can only be comp ^od f
with many reservations to human ourvos because of their V.
different measurements and differing constant temperature,
rut the critical body tosperaturo, also, of man and test
animals are apparently very different. Rats, for instance,
can survive a rectal temperature of twenty degrees for
several hours.

“The blood count, as woll as the changes in the blood

* 1 ?


12

Court Ho. 1.


\nalyala, wore ^lso teflted m auoh severe freezing. There
investigations yielded few r.ew results; and they correspond
to the results of slow freezing or the results determined
from local freezing, .vaong these ohangee, the oonslderablo
rise in viscosity In dogs and oats la of practical importan¬
ce. Of interest besides are those oh<mgos whloh »olnt to
disorders of the intermediary metabolism. These aro dlmln-
utlon of the alkali reserves and tb- rise of the pH. j%b
the question arose, whether a considerable toxlo Increase
in the potassium level of the


■'ITa


12 Deo-.W-SS-12-4-aiakl,*/-.^

p

Court Ho. 1.


blood Could occur along with the known decllno In resistance
of orythi*ooytes In the cold (Jarlsch), and which the incipient
hemolysis frequently observed, the potassium and calcium le¬
vels of the blood were determined. The potassium content had
only risen a trifling amount.

regards rewamlng, we had the same experiences as
Dr. Veltz. Just as the tomper-.ture Is reduoed more quickly
by cold vatjr than by cold air, so an Increase in temper¬
ature la better attained by warm water than by warm air.

We found most successful the effect of so-called ultra--jhort
waves in rewaralng. While a rat, with Its critical body tom-
parature of nineteen degrees, recovora totally In thermostat¬
ically controlled temperature of forty-two degrees In about
three-quartor8 of an hours, It can, subjected to auoh low
frequency alternating currents (Versoblcbestroome), appoar
almost ontlroly normal In its motor and sensory reactions af¬
ter two to three mlnutoa. The observation that In a hot sand
bath the rewaralng occurs as rapidly as In a hot water bath
seems to be of uraotloal lmportanoo. In tho Son Dlstross
3orvlco, 6and and bran baths are more easily transported In
planes and boats than are hot water baths.


12 Dec-.v-JJ-l^-l-Karrov-.JC
Court No. 1.

■Under the practical points of vie-* mentioned above.

It was disappointing, but nevertheless of special Importance
for the problems of animal experiments, that after removal
from the water sudden death, which could be compared to
the collapse after rescue In humans, was never observed
within a corresponding period of time. Therefore, It la to
be assumed that conditions occur In human beings In corresp¬
onding circumstances of freezing which the animal experlraento
does not include.

■It has now been possible to conduct a series of Inves¬
tigations of human beings who were rescued after having been
in cold water for a long time. Tho relevant statements we owe
to tne cooperation of itabarzt Dr. aasoher and 3tabarzt Dr.
Flnke. They refer to a stay In water of 2 to 12 degrees."

I would like to soy parenthetically before I contlnuo
to road this report that vhllo nothing has been said up to
now to definitely indicate that these experiments wore being
performed on living human beings — that Is to say, It might
have been construed that tne examinations were made on people

*7

who had In fact boon rescued after accidentally being subjec¬
ted to freezing In water— now the 'fitness Lutz has told us
that it wa6 made perfectly clear that these vero In fact ,/
experiments. That Is to say that people were subjected to
freezing water to determine their reaotlon. 3ut this Is also
apparent from tho remaining part of the report, and the reason
that It is apparent Is because that it would have been
physically impossible for any scientist to make the detailed
clinical report which Is contained In here on the oasis of
isolated rescues oonAictea at 6ea. I corrtlnue to read from

the paper read by Dr. Holzloehner:

"*19


12 Dao-^.^rl^-l-K.'UTOv-.iX
Court No. 1


■The rapidity of which numbness occurs Is remarkable.

It was determined that alreidy 5 to 10 minutes after falling

m, on ..dvuiclng n^or of the skeletal muscles sets In, which

•

renders the movement of the arms especially increasingly
difficult. This affects resplr-.tlon olsp: inspiration is
deepened and expiration la delayed. Besides this, heavy
_uous secretions oocur. Those factors have to be taken into
consideration in planning .and developing roscueequlpmont.
Thus, for lnst.inoe, it is certainly extremely difficult
even at the boginning of numbness to climb into a rubbor
raft, to blow up a rubber r \ft for one person, or to make
use of instruments or to signal or call. Tho rigor is a
conditioned reflex and not, ns many persons apparently


T l9a


12-0CO-.W&-13 -2 - *arre»

Court Ko« 1

think, a cca Taction of ho ccrre snorrl z*_- nusclos 'h»c to cold. it c r^os
sp-^ntanecusly -t death. ?ra-. this it follows that peraens soeninply Coad
who still jvince a ’- 'inito ri cr offer hops - revival.

rith a -’rp .'f th- rec*ai ten e nature to 31 decrees, a daufin of
c ...scicusress occurs, which passes t a deep ocl'-induood anethesia if the
dudine reaches , »le‘w 30 'c rees, TTith freezin;. within the ran.o of tonpereturo
renti-.n- the ccld-in-'uco d anethesia car. appear after 30 rmnutos to eno and.
a half h :rsj a sharp increase af cpinal fluid pressure and reflexes eppoer
ru -ularly epair.

" Vor/ inp-ortant is the cursor* .tioh that with a rectal to-rperaturo cf

’■ etrjoon 29 an. 3-> 'o tooc orrhythnia pxrpatua occurs rcpularly and that

it re-sains for on- an*, a half .to two h~urs rfrer the purs .n is removed. frrn .

the water. It can pass ever to a arcirrl hjart activity cf its <*rr. accord, an’.

« •

without therapeutic ai !. 2ut, if the rectal terpcratire has dropped .olcw

27 do rocs sudden death -f heart failure can -d>relop fr tz the arrhytriin.

?roatJiinp; c. ntintiu after the ceocation of tho heart cctivit, as slew

oapinp ’reathih.; for up t* half on henr.

" .. ’.ep.or.’once "f th. rapidity with which the rectal Umporature

'“reps cn wat~r tenpjraturi * etreer. 2 to 12 do. reus vns not determined rith

wy certainty. Thj known fact tli-Ta^eH-fod ~nd strciv: pjrc‘no freeze rvro

slowly ir. water w- 3 c'nfi r s>‘. It is certain that the rapidity of the drop

•

cf tanpuvature increases when the neclc and -cciput are washed, 'y water.

" t Is rf particular i-r. ;rtarc~ that t’.n drop >f toiqwraturu car. icntinuo
r-r 20 t, 10 ninutes after relieve frai water if the r-scue • porsen, ruV od
-y am’. vra: ' in wan ’ lanlcets, is loft alcre. Su.soquont 'feline f reCtnl
terrporature f ntre thw. 1* dc_roos --V dccur. If this subsequent drop in u
*-nperaturo passes M'.i; a rectal te-^rature cf 26 decrees sudden death /

*y heart failure car. occur. *•,_

" It. the ’ Icecf severely frezer. rers -ns th- nun’ er .f red '.lead corpuscles
is iTcrcas--' to 2c", The increase in leuk cytus is -v-en renter: 25,000

9

*: 27,000 arc * *e found, pr m 3. The -ulti; licaticn rf the erythrocytes
* ire spends ta m increase in he:;- I-' in <f f r-n 10 to 20 Niticoa-le and
i~ ertantJ is a -rent increase in viscosity cf up to 7.8 -


- 32o -


12. Doo- 1-- Sorrow- AX

Court Ho. 1


This inorease appears very early, that is, already vitn
a body t0B P eraturfl_0f^5 degrees. Those increases are great¬
er than those found in animal experiments. VIth dogs, for
instance, an increase of aore than 6.2 was never observed
under corresponding clroucstancos. rurtheracre, the blood
sugar could be determined. Regular increases of blood sugar
were ooserved, which, with low rectal tenporatures, can
reach 10Q*.

■True, that-irregularity, which indicates a sorlous
das ago to the heart, is certainly found in experiments with
animals. But, there it seems to appear only at lower temper¬
atures. Consequently tho heart of human beings, -*ho wore
froion in wator, aeons to bo aero oxposed to danger than
tho heart of experimental animals. Tho damago to tho heart li
to be traced baok to the following circumstances;

“1. The strong increase in viscosity nocossltatcs a
more intense functioning of the heart.

■2. Tha throttling of tho peripheric regions of tho
vesols induces a repletion of the-contral parts. All records
on autopsies concerning death by freezing ln-wator after
distress at sea, uniformly show a strong repletion of the
right heart. Thera are even symptoms proving that not only
the blood circulation in the skin and in the skeletal mus-
oles is being throttled by stron* and rapid freezing, but i
that, contrary to the Dnstre-Korat Law, a reduction of tho
blood circulation of the kidneys and intestines and even a
strong contraction of tho spleen take place.

«AL1 this will increase the oower of resistance In the
entire circulation and increase the rush of blood to the
heart.

be expected that, under the influence cf
*21


■*. It is to


12 Dec-.r-^G-l’^-‘ , -:<arrow-.J<

Court No. 1

the low blood temperaturej thd h'ea^t ltaelf becomes highly
hypodyn unlc. Experiments with animals hive proved long ago
that by overloading and freezing of the isolated heart a
fluttering of the ventricles can be produced.

■Besides physical damage to the heart muscles by cold,
damage by pathologioal proauots of metabolism must of course
be taken into consideration. The high increase of blood
sugar may, at first sight be brought in connection with
increased secretion of adrenalin. The constancy of this
Increase of blood sugar during the fall of temperature,
however. 1 s noteworthy. I oan be


"* 21 a


I


12 Do c- .'r* 1 ■*- -i-Xarrow-.JC

Ccurt rio»l

presumed that, with the - fall of temper ituro continuing,
the secretion of adrenalin will sometime come to a stand¬
still. vt the sane tine a rapid decrease of the blood sugar
ought to take place, if the phenomena of oxidation would
take their course without disturbances; apparently this la
not the case.

■The conditions of the heart tllow in opinion to be
formed on the problem of collapse -.fter resoue. This col--
lapse can result either when a drop below a critical value
1 8 caused by subsequent decrease if the body tomperaturo as
set out above, or olao, when the freezing was preceded by
supreme physical strain. It oust be polntel out In this con¬
nection that oollapae lifter rescue particularly appeared
at mass catastrophes, In the course of which pooplo had to
swim to a certain spot during a long time partly without
being equipped with the neoossary moans of buoyancy, as
life Jacket, etc. In this case, a heart, the damage to and
overloading of which Is indicated by the fluttering of th^X’"^
vuntrJCLss, may suddenly fill after resoue. ^ ^

■The aspoct of Illness In the case of rapid freezing

I — —. — 9

la therefore the negative of a collapse, In the course of
wmch a hemorrhage Into the periphery takes ;l:co. Up to
now such * collapse was dre -.dod during rewarming and there¬
fore ofton a slow rewarnlng has been recommended or pres¬
cribed. The sudden death after warming had boon tr-ood
back to such a hemorrhage Into the .>orlphery. Since It has
been shown that here tod, the direct dam».ge to the heart
is the main cause, those theoretical doubts can bo done
away with. The good results with quick warning obtained In
experiments with animals encouraged i corresponding proced-

with human beings. Those experiments showed that baths

■*22


ure


■


m - • m ~_

12 DdC-i-^l'*-4-Sarrow-.JC
Court No* 1

with a water tenperature of 40 0 not only accelerate the
return to nornal tonpcrature and absorb tho sudden dan¬
gerous falls of tenperature after rescue, but nay also be
of 11 ffr-saving effect should the heartbeats begin to stop.
Danger to persons treated In such a nay was never observed.


^22a


12-DooO-:i>-la-l^ Cc-k
Court 1


m Th- troatmnt with oloctic arcs or hot air is less uffictivo. But thi3

tn>eta;nt nust prcfferred to sii^le end quick dryir,; .-it' subsequent wroppinc

into ’ lanlwts. Bub‘ ir,, also has c favorable effect if a superficial

mmia^ up of the akin I 7 r»ans cf a hct ‘.ath or an electric arc hcs procodod,

which has increase ! the capacity t r the epiiendc vessels.

$

" The fabera’.lc effect of an inronsivo sup. ly f warnth nay Sj explained,
si'art fren the raf i! rc-osta* lishnent cf tho ’o 'y tenporatun;, r the prevention
cf n au.sequent fall 6f tcrr.wraturo by easin; tho pressure on the heart. In a
way it is a sort of bleed-letting into the periphery. Under those circis'-sinncos
it seans illogical frori tho vary to-jinninc -0 a-’riniater anslcptifca to persons
cufferinp fror ri'cr which waUL* increase the tenus of the voss-ls in tho
periphery, Jarisch has ovenfour. ' out th.t such malptika pivon in othar-
wiso adrdsaiblo doaos my have a toxic 'cffoct in c xporirunts with minals.

This does not shew with bora beings. Svon strophanthin cm bo tolerated without

V

hwin- on tho ether hind a VnonstraTOy -'cvora’lo affoct. '’oreever, all thirapou-
tical intorforunco srhich ni ;ht !elny a rapiactive supply of vrarnth is to to
iv^ctod,

" Preventive rwasures a 'ins: rri. free sin,; in water proscribe' in this

case, that person who fill inta th. -n.er keep their clotJwo on. Tho othJrwioo

insulating air Ictwxm tm clothe.. . oto lost, hewovor, '<y thoir feeing soaked,

rv-vurtliolncs persons freeze n:tu slowly in their clothes Vecnuso thj water

•

-'rv\ by tho b. y /vTuroo for a lonjer period to tho s'jrfaco of the body
(decrease cf thj convection). Pr tectivo suits were ^jvulopod which 30
r.ook rooonorr.to an', retain tha escaping (dr without bo in* nixvproof.

n Tills is “ndded underwear, t!o t’lru&dr of which aro cheiiically prepared,
a corporative*. steady fom is forme! which adhere 3 to tho cloth lop nco it is
'ranched. By tha us: rF . sue* safety-suits froocin. ripht be dolayo' for 1-1/2 to
three hours. The chances for planes end ’ onto in tl» Sea, Distress Itoscuo Sor-
?ico nr- considerably increase ' Ty this device,"

~»ro fellows this extract frer. the vapor, n synopsis cn the paper road
V -i-lzlcolmer, a synopsis :f the discussion of the paper m'.o ly various
ii’i-'oals rr.;! att^n-’.ir.ts at the motinp, I thir. it would serve no useful
pa-p.se for :>e to road all of theso, Hprevor, - would like to call tho


- 323 -


l2-Ooo-;,r%J>.U-2- Cook
Court 1

Court's attention to tha stotoa-nt sodo by iiaschar*

" Saprlerenting th_- statornnts cf Holylochnor thoro is a report on
obeonmtion according to which cooling in tha ration of the nock only,
cron if it lasts for sovurol hours, causes rerely n lew sinking ( up to
1 do;.c) of the '-cdy tosforoturo without eh online the bl ood-Sugar-lc ’/o 1 or
tho heart function. Chockinc of tho rectal tcrpjrature was carried cut by
taidne tho tor-xjrature in tha stccrch and shewed ccc^lato agreement. After
to kin _ alcohol, body temperature docreosos at a quicker pace. Aftor taking


-'axtropur the decrease is slowr than with the oxporirents in both sebor
and alcoholic condition. Hot infusions ( 10% ctoxtro solution, physidog, Table
saltsolution, tutofusin, physiolc;;. Table salt-solution with pancortox) wuro
successful only for a tire."

Now I think it is ongly cloar frcei reading this report on its^fnoo that
it nr. 3 node noro than clear at this coo tin- that oxpurirents had boon carried
cut or. livinc hunan beings ant’, that this is in a clinical report given on
people whe had in fact evidently boon sub joe ted to freezing water. Tho report
and clinical picture is considerably too detailed for such an explanation
to bo accoptod, i*ich, of course, is a ratter of no ir^iortonou, oxcopt in oo


far 03 it indicates that tho other ran in attendance at this root in" wore
clearly givon to un-'orstand that oxixjrironts cn hunan beings had taken place,
proof of which tm have already put in, arid nhich shews clearly, of course,


that the oxporirents did take placo. Tho ir^ortant thin' hero is that a report^
an a very plain report was ^ivon at a very largo ( pxitinc, at a conference

nxiting cf doctors fr<n all four airs of thj nnad forces in Gorrnny.

(

Tho ohly othjr natter in this report which I wish to call to tho Tribunal's
attonti-n is n pngo 97, in which a ronark is nade by Grosso Drockhcff, and


it reals as follows :


" The paper pro ©anted by Pref. Holzlcchnor reopons the question - to what
-xtcr.t vo arc Justified to apply to hupon beings tho experiences gained by
-xporirer.ts on aninals. Hnruvor, it is obvious that there is a far reaching
similarity,although there are nicer quantitivo differences, not one fundarantal
'ifforonco was duranstreted. Tfc toliovo, that also in the case of hunan beings
tho diminution of tha senscriun of the vital centres in tho nodualla oblongata


- 321*-


12 Dea-A^O-U-3-Coelr (ST')
Court He. 1


aal in tko heart are the decisive causes of death. Theso changes in the
sonscriua ere rendered obvious from the sleetreenocophalcgrcua presented
by Mr. Pel-s."

f

The only reason I as bringing that up isthat it see- 3 to be e statement
node by a man who perhaps was objecting at this meeting to *at hed been
done, statingin effeot, we have made theso very fundamental experiments
on 1W eg human boinga, audit is a question of whether or not thoy aro
Justified or whether experiments on winds would servo tho same purpose,
end ho points out why thero ere quantitive differences, but that there
are not fu-dooontal quantltivo differences, and while, of courso, this
is n rcthcr nild ecoaont, it is not to bo expectod In a report of this
character distributed by the Luftrcffc. Thoy ore putting in verbatim
everything which -is said end dcr.o at this mooting. So much for tho
report cc tho Nuronbcrg notting.

I proceed now to Docunont Ho. 323 , which will bo Prosecution Exhibit
94- T hc tribunal rill recall that wc have dreedy put into cvidonco tho
letter from Himmler to fl aach«r, tcllinghin that ho stould carry out
tho reforming experiments with onlnal holt, '•o htvo also put in docu¬
ments which show requoat of c letter free Resch-r steting thtt Silvers
should dc everything noccssory in obtaining the t>ur wanon, end that wo
hevo two tclogrcms in the record which sont forverd tho requo'ts to
G lucks thet tho four wceor. be transferred free Rvonsbruck to Xtacbcu,
and wi new ccco beck to the subject of re--arming by oninol rernth,


er.d that is whet this r.cco by Tr. Reoch-.r 3ccm 3 to be. Tt is dated 5


• 'evoeber , 19 & 2 i
■Subjecti

‘Requested report on concentration
• _

"For the resuscitation experiments


carp prostitutes.

by animal rermtl. eftcr freezing


cs ordered* by the Rcichwfuohrcr SS 1 hed four wanen assigned to me free
the 5 oaen , s concent ret ice ctcp Revcnsbrucck.

*Cne of the assigned women shore unobjoctiorebly I’ordic racial cfcar-


c‘


12 Deo4-ifi-U-3-0cck '»«) - ^

Court 5o. 1

^ %
bctoriatieai blood heir, bluo oyoa, ®rresponding heed end body

I ' >

structure, 21 3/4 yeera of age. I queatloced the girl, why ahe had
volunteered for the brothel. I r&: aired the onat6ri 'To got out of the
eccoentretlco carp. Tor we were precis od thet ell thoao who would
volunteer for the brothel for helf o y«r would thee bo released free
tho octc ont retire cecp.' To =y objection thet It esa a greet ahtr* to
volunteer es e prostitute I rea toldi "Rethcr helf


325(e)


12 Dwc-A-3d*U-la-Cock (SW)
Cart No. 1


e y®®r. In the brothel than half a yeer In the concentration camp'. Then
followed on account of c number of most peculiar conditions et

caap R. Most of reported cccditicee were confirmed by tho Ur co
prostitutes erd by the female warden =ho feed c coacpenied then free
Savons brutek.

"It hurts my racial feelings to expose t girl es e prostitute,
to recielly inferior concentration camp dements, who has tho
epparanco of a pure Ncrdic end who could perheps by assignments of
proper cork be put on the right roed.

"Thereforo, I refused to use this girl for ny experimental purpaics
errt gave tho edoquetc roperts to the camp ccrmsr.dcr tr.d the ndjuttnt
of tho ^oichsfuohrer Sh. -

(Signed) °r. S. Rtseh-r*.

T his , if your Honors plce.-c. Is the atmosphere in which the sc-
cdled scientific experiments cere eerried out.

T ho neat document la Io 288, which in frosccutlon Exhibit 95. This
la l signed noto of tho defendant, Sievers, end corrioo the Jotter
heed of the Atanoncrfcc, to tho Roich Business Vowgcr:

*Notc.

■Subjocti Transfer of tho Staff physicicr., Dr. Btschar, to tho
w offen - 3S.

■Tho vcricua oxperimonts conducted by Dr. Reschcr in Dachau ir.
oonnoctior. with tho •Ahnentrbe* show thcti

1) the fact that he has to be dotalled from tho Luftwaffe in
instanco

2) tho feet that, in addition, tfco assistonco of tho Luftwaffe
to be requested.

ccuso increasing dit'f iculties. It con really be called e regular tug-
of-war, through »hich* it is true, we hove so far always succeeded ir.
carrying out the experiments ordered b7 the Rcichsfuehrer SS. decent
developments show, however, th6t this situation is iabcurcblc, end it
ir'.'ct .rs more ar.dmore that tho cccpetont offices of the Luftwaffe do not
like tho experiments, the importance of which is at or.ee obvious, to

326


22 Doc -A- 3*-li-lc-Ccck (S3)
Court Mo« 1


bo carried out by the 3 3. This ettitudo eppeera clorrly in the
letter of 10/19/k2 fro= tho Chief of tho *Jcdical 3ervico of tho
Luftreffo, Prof- Dr. Hippke. to tho Hdchsfuehrer 3-S. FVirtter
evidencei during the confer.nco, 'Hershipa of the See end Winter,' of
26 erf 27 October 19i2 In Nuroberg the report rca dilivcraS a inly by
the 3tebsirti of tho luftteffe, Prof, Dr. Holzleohncr, uho *cs V
ebsjlutoly opposedtowers ox?f.rinesta, but »hc


326 (*)


Cc*jrt ik.l


t. .lata f-r Mata* «* f - r «“ »

■Iho chief ,f the ®on*n Cqvcrtacatal Imtitutc for -'.vintloa -cccrch

>ntatn ». ta. CUW ~ ".<» « «* 0ltit “ ! ° C "-'" 3 ^
^ German ^ for tataticn --.ccrch. on S Cta~.- W. •*» *»"“


,ta «re not ~cr. -.rtta ~«T ^ ' i3 "* * ^

* K


for the .oor r-.ert ct"> at Gc~rnl flcli -tr^l

■ oca MMnM. no VM c «*» fr » the eminent.

5 „rioS .* - M ~=T■■ -"■«• *■“ ' f * “> 2= int -' rCSt "
fir., of the o-nhuot -f tho oor. enG then of the nation- health In fenoml.

in ,ro>r to carry ,ut ^rta«U free fro. all tafluonce.. it «*K

he U.t to tiTcufer Stch.nr-.t or. Ifctatar ta ita ..tffcn-GS. ta -ut hta in tho

Staff Dooartncnt the ..'offon-SS vi«H the -er,nal Staff -f the heich-fnchror

JS , t. an.lj hta to tho ta.titi.ta f r illitncry Scientific h.-oaroh of

the hhnencri..., for tho continent!-r. of hi. oxnertaapt.".


12 "ec «^-15-l-U>Danicla
Court Vo. 1


It is of coureo to be Been free this n»nci^nfllc4 *hlob res diroatad
to the P.raonal Staff of the Rcichafuehrar 9 s * that the defendoht
Siovcra hardly hod the : olftra of hia notion or>d tho <»nduct of the
rror ot heart.

T he next exhibit -111 be 961 tahidh la document NO-319. This la c
a oca r cRdua by Dr. ^cacher to tho Pci's one 1 Stcff of tho Reichsfue , ..rer
33, on which the defendant Rudolf Brandt wr.s active* It la drted 6


•lorccbcr 1942.

"Moaoronduru Concerning* Cooper*tion of S3 phyaicicna of tho
^ur.tain Troops.

tho aeaaioQ 'Distress ct See end Winter Cold’, ell four brcnchoa
of tho *ohrnecht wero roprcaostod. For t>c "ray th ro res, onor.g
others, Cteeratobacrzt Or. Crooner, Chief of tho Rcsocrch Stetion
ct tho Medical' Corps Training School of tho Mcur.teir. Troops, St,
Johann. Dr, ^rconxr roquested no to cak you, detr Roichsfuohrcr, if
it were ret poaoiblo for tho nodical units of tho Si Mountcin Troops
respectively, tho responsible phyaloions of tin so units, to oooporoto


officioily with tho Research Station’et tho ModlotZ Corps Training
School of tho Mcuntcin Troops. Dp to nov only hero end thes*o SS physic ions
bed <DDO to St. Johenn unofficially to profit by tho experiences of
tho physicians of tho Mountain Infentry which bed beon gclnod during


cony yeers. Since there res axticllont cooper* tion of both units
ct the front, it rculd bo dcsirablo if tho S3 physicians could
utilize tho cxptrioncos of tho physicians cf the Mountc in Troops which
hed boon gained during rxny yeers". Since there was excellent cooper¬
ation of both unit s ct tho front, it would bo desirable if tho SS


phyd don* could utilizo tho exp ricr-ccs cf tho physi cions of th©
Mcuntcin Troops which bed been reined during amy years.-
'Dr. Creerxr war sc onthuaiMtio about tho r.sults I reportod that
ho caked ao for permission to see tbo cctucl expcrlnonts. Aprrt from
scientific ccopcratior. ho requested and cMch has tc be set out
ipertia:ler — ho asked ao to obtain c decision regarding tho


s


32s


12 *cc 46 — 15-1-Ua-Zfcil0l« (SI)
Court So. 1


ccopcrctlon ua outlined ‘erawe.*

5!gr.od» °r. Reach cr", with e ater.c«rephic coU-tico *by


ft


Court SO i

12 Dec 46 h - 15-2 - US - Denials


erdtr to Grawitz."

New this is a very interesting document. "Ye have heard
the witness Lutz testify this morning that he had had an
army officer talk to hia after this meeting in Numbers
and that this aray officer told hia that he hpd been to
Dachau and Raschor had been good enough to demonstrate to

_’_ • a

hia there how people could be killed by freezing water. I
suggest that it is not without the reala of possibility that
is was Dr. Creeaer with whoa he had this discussion, Dr.

Crcoacr who wr.e chief of the Corps Training school of the
fountain Troops at at- Johann, which school was under the
direction of and subordinated to the defendant Her.dloeer
as .;nay Uedical Inspectorate, end which he so graphically

has drown for us on tho chart aitcitted in evidence before

• •

this Tribunal.

•*e ccac now to docuacnt No. 1579-P5, which will bo
Prosecution Exhibit 97. Here again is o follow-up meaoran-
dun doted the sacs day as the one which I have just read,
end it deals with the 6ome subject, which is : "Joint rc-
S'.erch work of Dr. 3a sen or end Medical Research Station for
Mountain Hedical Trocps." It is directed to tha Fersonal
Staff of the Rvichsfuehror SS :

"uberstebsarzt Dr. Craeaer caked whether there were
possibility of collaborating with me.

"The aost urgent problem to’be solved is the adoptabi¬
lity of the troops to winter cold end the diet best suited
for it. Since the solution of this problem is ^Iso of great

4 m

importance tc the 35 trocps..1 hove reached tho following
conclusion after careful consideration ;

"Since there arc concentration camp inmates in the re¬
gion of the SS mountain house near Bayrischzell, it should


- 329 -


Court l.'o. 1

12 Dec 46 A - 15-2 - US - Daniels (FL)

s

be possible to carry out the adaptability tests in that re¬
gion, which can be isolated to a certain degree. The aost -
realistic adaptation would have tc be carried out in.igloo,
in ordinary trcop


f


- 329 a -


12 Doc 46 - - 15-3 - UG Drnicis


clotl-ing. *■—

"Tc be tried ~rc: (:.) diet rich in fat; (b) vitnuin-
rict, ix.:.tiess diet ; (c) uoat-fnt diet cf tho inla.bit:nts rf
the ^rctic regions.

"dftor tLo adaptability tosts it would bo import: nt to
investig.-to tdvothor injurioa tc the extronotios due tc froozing
have r. botfcor prognosis in persona accustomed tc cold than
in persons unaccustomed tc ccld.

n Iho reasons for this idea cf adaptability :.ro:

"1. That by testa in Dcchnu I could provo that individ¬
uals accustomed to coll live from throo tc feur ti;zos longor
undor the suno conditions cf ir.tcnao cooling ..a persona
unaccustcmod to ccld.

”2, Th..t nountain troops who hnvo boon in the oontral
aoctor from the beginning hevo boon fighting r.t ninus ferty
dogroos Contigrado In ordinary clothing without suffering
fren froat.injuries, whoroaa r.a many as 50 pv.rcont cf tho
unhabituated rosorvo treeps drawn from V.ostoro, r^mneo auccuribod


to tho cold while cn their way tc tho front.

"Tho proposals for carrying rut tho :.bcvo mentioned
sorios of t^sts soon tlnroforo justified.

!, I roquost tla t this matter be locked into and that I
rocoivo proper instructions.’'

m

Signed, "Dr. Kc.schor.”

Of ccurso, tho two reasons that ho gives for finding a


m


bottor prognesis in persons r.ccustcmod to ccld vogr clearly
ir.dlcato tlx.t Dr. R^schor prccoodcd to kill individuals, somo
cf whom had boon accustomed to ccld .nd scr.o of when had not.


because only in that way cculd ho :iako tho statorzont that ho
had prevod that irvli vidua Is accustomed to ccld livo fren
threo tc feur times loc or undor tho semo conditions cf intenso
ccid as persons unaccustomed tc ccld.


Tho next will bo dccirzont- KO-314, which is Prcsocution

- 33o -


Ccurt He. 1

12 Due 46 - L - 15-4 - UG - Dm!els


Exhibit 99, .\nl at this p int the doforx'ant Gobliardt ontors
zi£, picture. This is a letter freu the dofendant Rudolf
Brandt tc "Dorr 3rigadofuohror Oobhardt 0 c.t E-hunlychon.

It is dr.tod 11 Hi veriior 1942:

"Ito Stabsorzt cf tho Roaorvo of tfco Luftwr.ffo, Dr.
Rasokor, olio is at tho aco:o tiuo Eauptetumfuoliror of tho
.-ligonoino S£, will probably aeon bo transforrod to tho
V.'uffon SC. Eu has already conducted Important oxporinonta ir.
D-clu.u, with tho asslstanco t f tho Ruichafuohror SS, which
concern tlx froozing of pocplo who have rorainod in wator a
Ions tino. BuaiJoa thoao, high altitudo oxporiuonts roro
conducted.

"..cccrding to instructions freu tho Itoichsfuohror SS,

SS “auptaturufliohror Dr. Rr.achor — as soon as hi a transfer to
tho W.-ffon SS has boon offuctod — will contact you in rrdor
tc ba inferred f ti*o dato .n which ho orn roport to you.

’’In tlx xx. ar future, experi-onto will bo ccnductod with
rogaru tc froozing.

"Ifco Roichsfuohror SS r.aha that on your visit tc Finland
you ask scuo appropriate Finn what tho Finns w.uld dc to
ccubc.t freezing."

Initialod, RudeIf 3renit.

I will recall to tho Tribunal that on tho two SS charts—
tlu-.t is tc say, tho charts shewing tho organisation of tho
uodicnl sorvico cf tho SS— tho chart showing tho organization
prior tc 31 ..ugust 1543 did net contain thu naiiw of tho dofon-
dant Gobhar.lt, but I assurod tho Tribunal at thr.t tino that
that should net bo construed as nooning that Gobhr.rdt was not
an important figure in tho .radical service cf tho SS prior
tr tho reorganization a..to in August 1943. As this letter
Cloarly points up, Gobhrrdt was oxtronoly clcso tc tho Roichs-
fuohrcr SS ana n.s turned to. for advice on modi cal uatters.


- 331 -


Court Nc # 1

12 Doc *16 - A - 15-5 - UG - Drnlols


;Sil la Loro told tU.t Reactor, as sun r.a his transfer cut cf
tto Luftvuffo Is cffuctod, will report to Oobharlt.

I ccuo new tc dccuuont NO-431, which will ho Prcsocutlon
Exhibit 99. Phis L ttor is tie.tod 12 Nevonber 1942; It ie
uddroaso- to Oborat..ba:.rzt Dr. Craonor r.f tl-o Roaor.rch Brunch
cf tho Ilcuntain Hodleal Treopa r.t St. Jchi-nn. Tho lottor
la net aignod; it obviously la a filo copy. Thoro is no
doubt that the lottor was freu Slo^Aind Rschor, bocuuao cf
tic d. to givon, and “Hunteh, 56 Thogoratr.-aao." If tho Court
will rofor tc any cno.cf tho uuny iottora which ocno fren
Ruachor during this poried cf tiuo, ycu will aoo that that la
tho addroaa frou which thoy oriunatod.

"Dour ^boratubac.rzt:

"Yesterday I ruportod tc tho Rolchafuohror SS ml, na
agrood upen, I auggoatod cooporaticn cf doctors cf S§ ucuntuin
trocca with ncuntuin doctors cf tho artxy units. Tho Roichs-
fuchror SS -grood to his a operation and baa ulroady issued
lnrtructlona tc tho Roichaarzt SS, GrupponfUohror Prefosaor
Dr. Qruwltz.

o

"I havo alao reported tc tho Rolchafuohror SS r.bout tho
oxporiuonta concerning udjuatnont to ccld in Igloos. Tho
Rolchafuohror SS fully ugrood to this oorloa ff tosts ten, and
ha a chr.r 3 od no with thoir conduct. Tho Rolchafuohror SS
apprevod cf tho teats with various feedstuffa; I havo boon
clurgod with tho conduct and organization r.f thrso oxporinor.ta
L suitable locality, 1100 uotura abovo sou lcvol In tho noun-
tuina, la also uvullablo.

"In cuao ycu uro lntorostod, nay I ask ycu tc contact no.

"Kell Hitler. n

- 332 -


12 :ec-*.-GES-l6-l-Ga; lord
:ocrt Ho. 1 .


The next la ^ocucent KO-2S7, --lien wall be Prosecution .cvibit lOO,

His is a letter froa the defendant Radolf frandt to SS-Obeix.ruppei'J'aehrer Pohl,
:.o as Your Honors will rcoio'i was the adm i nistrative chief of tho cencen-
tralion corps. It is dated 2C 2iV«bor 1/L2. -

* ✓ t .

“The ifcichs fuehrer-Si roqpoots tliat S^HauptsturcfucSiror pr. Raachor
T.iic3o transfcr'fro: the Luftwaffe tc tk,o SS is vorkod on ri^.t jvovr, is to bo
as a is tod as ouch as possible in his experimentation at Dachau.

■Bucher suggested to tho P^ichsOdchrcr-nS tc adjust tho heating pads in
both pockots of tho groat coals, t«cn ono pod between tho treuser band and tho
.^dot-bondage, and during sevorc cold, to put one pad in each hollow of tho
!.uco of roldicrs detoilod for guard duties to keep tivj groatr blood-vcacolr
ora, and then obevo all, to put socks fillod vlth heating .interim! between tho
30 I 0 of the leather boots and t:u sola cf the folt boot to prevent the foot
.roa fronting who: getting wet.


"bill ym ploaao give orders t'r.t iho clothing plant in Dachau assist
• ;-Iauptsturofuohror Dr. Rucker, by producing the nocoosary oxoerlxxntal
clothing." i

tritK a ccpy suit to ur. 'tosc3*cr. ^_ S

0 .

do cccc no-.- to Docurc at JO-236 to be Prosecution bddbit 101. This ir u
1 iter dated 12 January 19c3 IToii Dievurs of the -inanorbe Society to fbor-


> uppcnfuohrcV and General cf tho *7affcn-bS clff, core "Transfer of E5-

■ptaturnfuchrcr Stabsorzi Or. 2aie*.icr to the ' a/fun-SS.

Pxifcroncc is "Your letter 19 October — but ^hich probably should

r.od 191*. * V\

“CS-Iiuptsturr»fuotoror Starsorst f.r. r.aschcr reported to Jay that according
. _ confidential cccxnwdmation of 11 January 19U3, he had been r-lcasod freu
: dittos in th*. •■nti->drc:-aft .lrtill cry Ichrol S=ko%au me! u.c. been plac-d
• i e.ic di3pcsal of the luftgav. -.-dical baportoant VII in lirnic:.. hr. fttschor
to be prepared to be sent at any -ixaxit tc serve at a stall air base. In
•• ~i the rt.ll known attitude of tho superior antiiorities towards Dr. Roschcr's
-rinento. this noasuro lids certainly a'definite background. In case that


12 Doc-* .-<ES-16-2-Gaylord
Court Ho. i.


l

the transfer of Dr. Raachcr tc tho T.'affon-SS, as requested by Cicnoral Field
: jrshal Hilch in his letter of tho beginning of Kovenber l?Ji2, is not possible
in the near future, it would bo highly desirable that Dr. Bnschor should be
granted a leave by the Luftwaffo until the above mentioned transfer is completed
Seforc that ho will not be ablo to start with his resoarcu r.'orl: in accordance


with orders by th. Rcichsfeohrar-SS of December 12, 1912.

"Since froozing exporir—nts depend on the season, procicus tiix will bo lost
if Dr. Raachor is not available, it is theroforc -again requestod that the chief
of tho Luftwaffe ucdical Service, Goneralobocrstabsorzt Froiosscr Dr. Hippo, be
ashed to grant a leave cf absence to Stafcaarxt Dr. Raschor, independent of his
application for transfer."

Signod: “Sievors. u

Hero wo see the defendant Si ever s getting very nuch concerned about a
possible transfer of Or. Roschcr away fron the vicinity of Dachau Concentration
Coup, which of course, would not ;rdx possible the dry freezing erperirents,
Uiich wo 3 .'-~ 11 sco inrc carried out; and that ic tho reference to — that ths
freezing exp^rirento depend on th_ coason, bccauso it 30s~ia quit* clear that
tl» wot freosing oxporirxnis could be carried cut at airiest any coason of tho
} .-or since th: enter tenp-rature me obtained by the addition of ice.

l.c cclo nerr to Docuujnt i'O-237, tc be Prosecution exhibit 102. And
tile is a ceaorandua fron Hockcrstollor, who '^3 on tho staff cf — vho


apparently was an assistant tc - clff, a.tu ho is writing this ;xi.iorandun to Uic
at-c.ition of Richter in tho Heidi -ir inis try. It refers to the letter fron
3d-0bor&ruppcnfuchrcr .biff of 21*Hovaabcr te hilch, which 'four Honors will


recall, was a letter recosting the transfer of Raschor to tho \faffen-SSy
"iiy dear ministerial Councillor:

".Referring tc cur telephone conversation, I venture te remind you of tho

l.tt:r addressed tc General Field Lrrshol kilch by Obcrgruppcnfuohrcr "olff

! -pon request of the Rcichs fuehrer -S3. It referred tc tho Dr. Raschor affair.

*

or cover SS^argrupponfuchror olff has learned recently that Dr.

Reseller was node available for a nor assignment.

* - 33U -


12 Doo-.'--(2S -16-3-Giylar d
Court So. 1.


“The Ctocrgruppcnfuchror cc Id be very aaeb obligod to you if you would
fv': General Field ilsrshal liilch for his early decision in this natter."

Signed: ■Reckonsteller."

Next is Doaincnt H0-320 vhich is Prosecution Exhibit 103, and this gives
an insignt into the Jealousies aueng the SS nen who \,tr- indicated in this
affair. It's a letter frea tie defendant Sievers tc the defendant Rudolf Brandt
dated 26 January 19h3.


"Dear ccctrado Brandt:

• ■ * * | •

"1 sufccit to you onclocod . docuucntary note of Dr. Jtas chcr on his
discussion with the Reich Physician 35 of> 13 January 19li3. I would be nuch
obliged to you if ycu could advise us ’as to uhr.t Attitude no or Dr# Rischcr arc
‘•o take in the future. I aa slig.tl astonished about the c use of tho dis¬
cussion, fer the JTders cf tho Rcichsfuolrcr-SC wire especially to the offoct
that to— that is the ^.hnc.lcrbc , — mktc to take Dr. .lasciier'3 t.\rk mdor our
caro. Tix. argument of SS-Gnippcnfuchrcr Graritr that it enstitutod an an-

bearable situation to have a nor.-physicicn f^vc, lnfor.iati a: on radical rottoro

• *

is not pertinent. I hav. »sever claiiacd to bo a JuJgo of nodical oattors, nor
•*o 1 c .a eider it no cno cf ty dutios. Hy duty ncrcly consists Sr. suoothing
We way for thu research nen and seeing that tho tacks or’crju by Wo Roicho-
fJolircr*SS aro carried cut in the quickest pcssiblo way. On one thing I cer¬
tainly can fern an opinio; that is, on rho is doll*: the quickest job.

"If things aro to go on in the future as SG-CrupponfUchr^r Graidtz
.'os ires, I 3.1 efrair. thr.t Dr. Rasebor's wor!: will not continue to advance as


fa3t and unhampered as horctofcro.

•n.'ith ccjradoly greetings cad .’ioil Hitler, Yours, Sievers.*

I.’ov of course the Tribunal sill net be astonished when the defendant
Silvers takes tho stand and tolls us that he had nothin t: do with those


• ing3j that the ..hneaerbo was siuply an adjunct of tho Reich Fest Offico; that
.-nil was cnanndoc thxcujh his office cal ho passed it alcn:. tc the proper


-•itritics; that that is the .nly reason that his n-rv. appears in this whelo
sf-air.


-335-


12 Dec-..-Gi5-16-* -Gaylord (fl)
Coart No. 1


report referred to in the letter is attached and
is part of the ease exhibit 1C3, "nd it gives as r running
account of the'discussion between Dr. Grevrit*} end who
should tc there but our defendant Dr. Pcppendick, and Dr.
Rrscher. foie is on the 13th of January 1943.

^J'Rsschers 3cpcrt6 on freezing experi .rents with water
end eaphasizes th n t they have been concluded practically,
but not in theory.

"Grawitz. ^iestion ebeut the ncaor-ndua : ’/bother
Rascher believes this to be absolutely founded for dry
freezings, too ? *

•'Rascher ; No, a lot of theoretical work is still tc
bo done, primarily ae.ny practical experimentc heva still
to be oonductwd.

"Grawitz . That is ay opinion. Wo cannot distribute a
acaornndun to the troops, abolishing rll foraer views,
if this is not entirely well founded, cs othervdsi. uncer¬
tainties will erise ->aong the troops. I sh«ll write to
0bcr6turabann fuehrer Dr. Brandt that I sra p.6kin7 the Rcichs-
fUwhror-55 not to distribute the aeraor'ndjm, before a well
founded method of treatment of dry frozen persons has
estsblished."

Vfo have got th-t aooorar.dua cooing in somewhere,

recall, and the Court will appreciate then precisely whot

•

they are talking stout. Rascher had conducted son; experi¬
ments on the eff-cts of dry cold and the proper method cf
rewording people who had b t :r. subjected tc dry cold ?s coa-
. rred to wet cold i end Grawitz is here questioning the
r^comcendntions Jhat Rs.scher a~do in this memorandum and
is insisting that perhaps he hasn't conducted enough expe¬
riments vrith dry cold to justify his conclusion that the

hot bath method is the proper way for returning.


- 336 -


12 Dec-:.-G£3-16-5-C-rylord (FL)
Court Ho. 1


Re sexier continues:

"Very well, that is the way the Reichsfeehrer gave me

the order of 13 D-ceaber 1942. ait I urgently w?nt to cm-

• ® •

phrtsize thrt the results of the freezing experiments with
writer have been established and are well founded.

"Grawitz; Veil now, this hod to be a c-at i ©hod in the
letter to Errr.dt so that you are not blamed in any way. You
sec, from ay foraer ectivities (mention of seme hospital)

I know so much ebcut aetebolisa thr.t I ~a almost n specia¬
list in this field -nd can help you enormously.


n


12 Doc—..-G25-1-5-Gaylord-.£

Court Nci 1*

"Rascher: ns I understood, Gruppenfuehrer, that's why
I am to turn to your office for glass anterials, chemicals,
and so forth.

"Orawlt; Ho, Hot only for that. You have to turn
to md In all medical matters, since After All, I am Reich 0
Physician 33 and all medical affairs are subordinate to me..
It la absolutely necessary that all medical matters destined
for the Relohsfuehrer go through my cfflce.

■Raachor; I don't Jtnow, Gruppenfuehrer, if this
was the Intention. I or b under the direct order of thi
Relchafuehrer-S3 and I have always reported directly to
him. I have never received orders to another effect.

"Orawlt; You certainly will be transferred to the


V/affen 33?


12-JXkv.W-IT-X- Ores 3

Court lie. 1.


* Rnschor s Yus, I hope sc, The transfer is under ray.

Oravitz : T horo 7cu are. Thun you Trill o under sjf orders as a physician
*- any rate md all natters Till have to jrc through ry offtea r cthon rihe
the situation w^uld bo unbearable.

Iiaschor : But i m \r.icr tlu orders of the u dhnartrbo .n I to report
to ycu, too, what I have to report to tha n AhnOnerfco ■?

Gr=wit= * Certainly. :.t least a copy cn all radical natters has to be sunt
to re far ny infomatirn* For i is cn unbaara* lu situation to h me a
nen-physicier., such a3 Stan^artonfuahror Sievers, inf~m m on jwdiccl
natters if he ’’ms r.ct hva> the adequate s_v;ci~l no-'leal education. 3
lvavo no thine gainst Sieve rs.— .'oil, yea, I knew yu ore of tho 0 Ahnsnuxty".
I don’t say anything o. joins t ycur werk f :r tha " Ahnonoxt©", but.I went you
to work -ith th; " Ahnunorfco " fer the rtoich ihyaician. I shall also write
to 3randt i this natter....

♦

Finally rcy.sjrviick ots a word in.

* lop.pondick r ’./ll, I already had V ask Stondnrtonftf»hror Siovers several
tines to ccne to ru to rooaivu inf mat ion. In the Ion;; run all nodical


ratioro wind up with us an;way.

Orawitz : You s-this is tho point, '.hen the lieichefoohror-S* does not
under star.' n netted natter dearly he hrr.’s the natter ever t do anyway,
Piaaohor J Of cccroa, I m ratoful for evexy ki.-v’ c£ help, ’ ut 1 toliovo
that I an primrilu ir. far tha c Vers of tha " hnarxir'eo

_ «. fr i

Qranitz s Certainly not when you ‘re a norfoor of tf>. l/affcn-S 3 . I an J
all- to r«.ko you prefit very such ’ey ry knowle<\>e and I shall infoir. v ~—^
rsn.lt to that effoot. It isr.'t that I ‘-ear a jrudro a ainst you cr your
war!;, ‘.ut all thin s havu to follow thoir way. Don't he afraid, scientific
thjfts don't '‘oo’jr with us, .j I knew, you havu to acquire the ripht of
jivir.p lee to 8 at univorsiti >c as a quciifiid Reader! c teacher • ndcr

Iftnnotjti- .hi• .jtl y'u -.rill nee supp - rt. Dr ycu nan* to v o supp rtod by ru ?

• •

‘ ischcr : ff cvirr., I think -ycu ms* obediently. Uhjra 1 nood support.


I pladiy accept it,’

Qrsnitz : '.fall, wo shall wait th-r. with thu rurcr-in<lan ur.‘41 you have a
feu r.un ’r-ed cases, tb-i. rr> l.all c-ntin* . n course, I voul-' not liko

- - - 336 -


12-Occ-w. .0-17-2- Gr^«8
Court S3. 1

tho Tic icfcsfuehre r-SS to baHow that I want to locate you. But if serothin-
h-s net yet teen prove'*, to a jroot extent, ms can not distribute mything
to the troops that ni^rt spread uncertainty arson;; the responsible authorities.
Everythin;; nay true fer freezing bey water, but wo don't have theso in
titi 7affon-SS. 3a ycu aproo to wait with the distribution of the nenorondun.
.asc!x,r s Orupponfuahror, it is anyway ontiroly your affair, whothor tho
nonorresdur. is issued non, as you cro icspsnsiMo for it. I conposcd
the rcncraiwhin cn the ’Asia of theses fow cases of dry froezin.;, because
tho .toichsfuohror S3 pmssod for it's publicaticn. In cenposinp the runoran-
dun, I was fully nraro of tto necessity that reny osqorinonts still hod to
bo carried out, and I .also subedited this view on tho occasion of a discussioi
with tho lioichsfuhorwr SS in Dachau.. Eut tbo ^ichsfuohrur son tho sosults
in Dachau an' Just wnntinj to hoi;, tho troops ordered tho ronofandin to ’jo
’’nra up.

Grawitz i in cassia;: a ncaoros iin or ir. any other scientific work you
should not lot resybo'V press you, not oven the i'oichafuuhnjr, that novor
uill do i Tfoll now, you'll sorel DO a copy of all your radical corrospondonco
with tho ■ .’Juttnurto ", you'll no lcn.er writ* directly to tho Ptoichsfuohror
in radical rr.tters but write to no, as it ccras to ns anyway, rill you do/v-'

that ? \

liaschor : I'll have to disousa tho natter with Standartonfuohror Siovora

first, this cones too nuch as a surprise.

Grrodtz : Tfjll, I shall send you a copy of ny letter to Dr. 3ran ‘.t so that
ycu can ct a clo.ar picture. I havu boon very ploasod, ti have ostablishod
3uch a close contact with you.’’

I would like to say, with rospset to the ’.e.fondant Pop-ondick, that if this
lottor docs nothin;: jIso it clearly points cut.t’w fact that In was in
reality su* ordinate to Dr. Orodts ( .acids Physician SS) in nodical natters.
I have no doubt that h, will ur_e upon the Tri’ unal that at this tines,

T-hich is prior to the roorpwasation of 31 -ujust 19^3, that was subordin¬
ate to Dr. jrawits, ficich Physician 3S in axlicnl natters. I have no doubt
that ho -dll urjo upon tho Tribunal that at this tins, which is prior to tho
recrrprdsaticn on 31 -u^ust 3?li3, _that he was subordinated ti Chief of Ctffioo


- 339 -


f


12,Cco-:*-.;G- 17-3 - Gross


Court Ho. 1


ter A&oo rod ScttlorEr.t in S . 0? course,' it is a fact that ha was subordin¬
ated to that office- for OJrtain rat tors. That was tho SS Cffico to which


ho urs officially attache-’. Htwovor, shewn upon tho chart -’rarm 'y us tho

• • •

Chief Dr- Gruwitz, as Iteich Physician S3, had authority over frppendick- in
radical natters. and this no no ran ion places hin at a asotin;; with Gr&dts
on'’. Haschor in °*arruyo 19U3 they fully explored the past experiences on
freezing cxporlncnts it Dachau end Grswitz insisted at rroat length that
further cxpcrlnonts had to ho carried cut.

::o c :rt now to Doc. HO-238 which is ire so cut ion Exhibit 10k. This tokos
us bake to the pull in;, natch ootrx-on the Luftwaffo and thj S3 ever tho
valuable sorvicos of Dr. ilaschjr. This luaonm’.un is from Siovors and it
pivos note3 cn thj corrospon-’encj. fren th: S5 to thJ Luftwaffe, about con-
voroatior. with dasch-r in Munich 26 Januaro 19k3, «td conversation with Rudolf
Drandt on 29 J-nuaro 19k3, ftjxl it toads ns follows s

n Tho Chiof of thi Luftwnffo I’odicnl Sjrvlco Ou ns rolo^oratabsnrzt Professor
Dr- 'ii .ko asked tho 53-Hai^tsturcTuehror Dr. Raschur through his superior,
Cborfoldnrzt Dr- Doniol for an inac.’iate report at -xit what ha' 1 , teon ho
werkin cn since ho hr ' Swn rvu’o -vail?: It. for njw nssicnrwnt (Z.D.).

Tho O urfoldarzt Dr. D.-yii-»l permitted SS-^-auptsturnfuohror Dr. Ilaachor to
continue his oxporirents in Da.chnv. I suj.-ostod that SS-'Ktuptstuxrifuohror


—

Dr- Dcncher jivo a report apnrosinately like thin :


11 I m ccntinuin; the or.wrlwnts which w-rc assigned to :-o ly tho ^

lujiclisf'johrur 5 s . I considoxud ry 'Z.D' position as the first stop

tc the transfer to tte faffon-SS which was -discussed by the

Jloichsfuohror-SS and General Field JLcrshal !!ilch."

•

..s I learned ( Dr. liaschar kr.c*?3 nothin- about this ) Gjtu rolotorstabscrzi
I r~f, 'iinpko said r/or the tolophoro ( so that ho jrctokly could not to
I inrod down ) when rjquJ3tin tho report : " I'ascher 's exporircnt3 oupht

- do 3toppu<’. new. It is impossible t £0 "T. like that. K*tt we will ronovo
hi: vory quickly te the East n . A3 SS-Hauptstunofuehror Dr. Raschor cannot
::ntinuj his cx.\>r fronts at D.ichr.u fer the tin.- ’vin; for rvll known reasons
was cproud that h-; should a or. 7 Tebruare 191:3 to SS-Sturufuehror Prof.
Dr, iTarnonsfciul in liaiturj. Djo to ,>Iw interference of £kinJralobcrstfC'Pfirzt


- 3lo -


12 Doo-.r-.w>»l?-4-Grosa-.^
Court ho. 1.


Prof. Dr. Hippke the process of admittance has become doubt-


(Signed) Slevera*

One copy wont to the record. The second copy went to 3S-
Oboraturmbahn fuehrer Dr. Rudolf Brandt.

" 1 th the request that measures bo taken on the basis of
the situation described in ay letter of 12 January 194*. "

How the Tribunal heard the cross examination of tte
witness Lutz this mornlhg In which certain of the defense
counsels tried to draw out that Romberg and Ruff know -
everyone else connected with this clearly understood -
they were volunteers, that the ..azls wore giving them a
bl 0 - break, they were condensed to doath, given life if
they survived the experiment. Ti'oy ta/.o the position that
that should happen. If that line has .any truth At all, why
Is Dr, Hlppr.o, ao stated m this memorandum, upset by
curt.iln of Rascher's experiments, If those people were con¬
demned to do.th, If tre-ted In a goo<tO nd ':lnd way, why fa
the reason to bo ashamed about then. The reason la perfect¬
ly obvious. The high officials of the Luftwaffe realized f . .n-.*

vuxy well what had gone on. There Is no doubt there were .

% <

there along tne way twinges of consciousness expressed In
the document which they wrote- it chit time but never were
they so conscious stricken th-it they stopped tho experiments
they conducted from the time Raschor started early In 1942,
through the freezing experiments, which require passage
through low pressure chamber, or through thd sea water expe¬
riments at Dachau.

Rocess was taken.


- *41 -


13 -tfceori:G^,>:.O.l 8 -I» Hayma
Cwrt He. 1


r.E llJBF.i : The Tribunal is a pain in sossion.

?:;.::c!!aa-y: !£ay it please tiv Tribunal, the r*xt cecir^nt will to Docurcnt
I'l6-P5. This will ’-a Prosecution -shi-it 10$.

I wish to pint out tb th> Tribunal In this connection that 1616 IS-ns it
appears in your docuamt book on pajo 120 is noted ns heinj c- ntiniud. Thnt is
a report cn t '^^rewaivlr.j 'ry pilr-al iramth. Slininatod fren the Zn^lish
’.ocunont bo k ly ri stake wa a ccrurinp letter, to which tho ro-waminj report
was ottachod. Bath the c.-veriiyj lotter end tho attached report ere Document
l6l6-^S, on'.’, both ore offered cm irosocuticn Exhibit 105. The Goman dominant
'•oaks, which wont to toh Gemnn Ccunsol, did contain both tho letter and
tto report, au! the mission of this 3n lish trarol-tion w as sirr/ly a Mistake
when tho dccxcxmt bock was emmblod.

•to _ot sore indication that ux^vrixxmts with ’ry cold, as distinguished
fren or.crirvjr.ts with.wot or water cold, ''-re carried, out in Dachau fron one
f tte previous exhibits which jsve-us a transcript of the discussion between
rmachor, Growits an’. Por : ondiok. This letter describes in a little ncro detail
. rocisoly what they did in those dry cold oxporioints. This is a letter datod^

17 ?e" runry 19b3 fre:: P.aschar t: his " Itoor r<jichsf\nhror " : |

n 2ndc BO ' 1 I present to you in condensed fr-n a memory of tho result vy
C the oxporirvjnts un’a in ap;lyin- minol wamth to people who have boon inton-
ti:ndly chilled. IZJit now I an ettorytinj to p.n-vo through oxpjrirDntS on hurvu.
loin jo that it is pcssibol t> nan up pooplo chilled by exposure to dry cold,
just os fast as people *r. were chilled by norms of continued imorsion in cold
-.rater. The toichs Physician GS Gruppcnfichror Dr. Grnwit z doubted vory nxch
wtothor tiiat would !-o possible an.’, said that I w.nid haw to prove it first
•y -i* hundred oxporin-'nts. Up to the present, I havo darriod out intenos
chillinj oxjcrironts -'n thirty hunan boinjs by leavir.j then outdoors noted
fron 0900 to UjOO hrurs. tterOby roducin; thoir * <x*y terr,vratuxo to 2? do too s
Contijrcr’o to 29 de toc 3 Co«ti»jradi..—Ctor an inWr/al which was supposed
* c-.rros -.nd to th: period of traisportaticn lastinj «t*s hour, I havo placed
these oxT-crinents up to th> pxvsc.at, all subjects, bs ite tho fact '-t hands
r - - foot were partly fr son white, were, successfully ro-w»mod within Another h<"


\


Sayres

Court Ho* 1

O-J^ snxf au Jects showed slight lassitude, with slight rise 'S temperature,
or. the day following the oxnorinent. Ko fatalities occurred as a result of
this extraordinarily rapid retfeod cf re-wandifc.

* '-nfertunatoly I could net jot carry out the re-warninj by noens of Sauna,
cs was ordered by you, ny doer Hoichsfuohrer. The weather during Dacerircr
 ! Jamer 7 w too warn for such* oxperironts outdoors, and at pro son t
the carp is qusrantiiwd on account cf typhus, so that I was not emitted
to brine tho oxporirvmtal sublets into the SS Sauna. I havo had nyrclf
Inoculated several tines, and I an ccntindnc those oxporirunts in spite
f tho presence of typhus in the car^.

■ 7* boat thine would bo if I and Hoff, as seta as I n transferred

r • I tr • *

to tho ..affon SS, could -o to Auschwitz Vrere I could clear tp tho question
of r-~wrrniiyp pooplu frozen on *y lend in a lar^o sorial ox.^rinont. Auschwitz
ia, in ovoxy way, nore suitable for such a lvflo serial ox.wriaont than Dachau
acauo ° it is colder there ant', tha jrer.ter extent cf opon country within

thj 0K V TOuM r '* ko *ho oxporlrcnts loss conspicuous. Tho oxporfrwntal sub Jo o to
jull rhon they froozo severely,

" If is i rnur intention, Hjphly Honored Hoichsfrehror, to carry cut with
ho utnoot apood thoso ox^rfaonto which ore so important for tto any fi^tinn
:n lend in -uischwitz or Iublin or another concentration can;, in tlw fast, I ^ y
Aodiontly jivu n. tho nccossaiy orders so that thj remlninr; winter cold
can still -o utilized.

" With swat obedient jrectinps an *. sincere pratitude, an.’. Soil Hitler,
your vary devoted I'.aachjr."

Did ycur Honors roccivu a copy of this ?

TZ JSESUESTi Ho.

HAHSIi If "r. Travis will pass then up to y u
21s lottor should Vo inserted ir. the itocuoant book Just in front of p*GO 120.

T,Z n£SHBH7 : This letter will *jo page 119-,..

VC H.J3Y: Tht reference in this ocunont to ’'Sauna ■ refers to a bath.
SS-3auna roost to to n bath house ir. Dachau.

report which was attached to this letter and which is part of this
aocuti-r. dxhi' it lo$ is nest interesting. *fo havo already put in tho decurfints

- 313 -


12 Dec-.\—w-18-3 - Haynes
Court Ho. 1

O —

ir. which the four women were requested for the purpose of
rs-wj raieg by animal wnmth, and we now get this report on
that subject. It is entitled . "Experiments for re-warming
of intensely chilled human beings by animal warmth.

" .. The purpose of the experiment : To ascertein whether

*

th- rc-worming of Intensely chilled human beings by animal
warmth, for example, the warmth of animals or human beings,
i6 as good or tetter then re-wanning by physical or medical
aecns.

"o. lethod of the experiments : The experimental sub¬
ject were cooled in the usurl way, cl«o or unclad, in ccld
water of temp-ratures varying between Car degrees centigra¬
de and nine degrees Centigrade. The rectal temperature of
sjvery experimental subject was recorded thermo-el.ectricclly.

The ruduction of temperature occurred within the usual span

i

of tiue, varying ir. nccordcnce with the general condition
of the body of the- experimental subject ana the temperature
of the water. The experimental subjects wore, removed from
the water When their rectal temperature reached 30 degrees
Centigrade, .»t this time the experimental subjects hod all
lest consciousness. In eight cases the experimental subjects
were then placed between two naked women in a spacious bed.
The womerf were supposed to nestle -*s closely as possible to
the chilled person. Th-n all three persons were covered with
blankets. The speeding up of row-raing by light cradles or
by medicin.s was net attempted.


- 34-* -


12 Doo^-J*> 13 -l-iarro»

Court 3c.1

"C. Iloiultat

• ft

1. hen the tcs^craturc of tho experimental subjects was recorded it ires
xtri kinc that an aftcr-drep of temperature up to 3°C occurred, which is a

f

creator oftor-drep than that seen vith any othor method cf rewarninc. It was
oba;rvcd, however, that consciousness returned at an earlier point, that is
a lcw.r body temperature than with other methods cf rexamine- °noo the
subjects routined ocnsoi.usncss they ad not lcao it a-d n, but very qiickly
grasped the situation and sau^jlcd up ta the naked fenolc bodies. Tho rise of
body tenp jature then occurrod at ab.ut tho anro spood as in experimental
s-'.joats who had boonrow-used by naoSdn z in blankets, exceptions wore four
experimental su'.jcots who, at body tcr-vcraturcs between 30°C end 32°C, por-
fon*d tho act cf sexual interseursa. I n theso experimental subjocts the tcrqmc-
raturc roso very rapidly after soxual intcroourso, vhioh could bo compered with
tho npoedy rise in tesporaturo in a hot bath.

" 2 ^’jiothor sot of experiments c .noernod the rcwrvrninj of intensely ohillcd
persons by .no wonan. In all those oases rewaralnc va* sl^iflcontly qrickor
than oculd bo nco.rxplishod by two wonon. The cause of this oocas to no that
in warning by cno w,aan nly, personal inhibitions arc renored, and tho wonan
nostlos up to the ohillcd individual uch norc lntlnatoly. .Uso in those oasoa,
t!»o return ef ocnploto c-nsoicusaoas w:x strikingly rapid, only ono experimental
cubjoot did not return to c.nsoicuan.ss and the warning effoct v.-cs .nly slight.
This person died with synpt ns a —ostin^; ocrcbral hemorrhnee, ne was cinfimcd


Coirrminr experiments of intensely chillod oxpcrincntal subjoots demonstrates

•

tint revamir.- with ar.inal warmth -ras very sics.-. >nly such cx/fcrmcntal subjocto
^iv.so physical c.nditicn permitted soxual intcrccur30 renamed ttsolvcs
ra-nrhobly quickly, end sh-ued an equally atrikinely rapid return uf ccaploto
physical nell-bcin£. Since excessively lone oxposuro of the body to low
temperatures implies dancer of central dn:a{jo, that method must bo chosen for
rewandnr; which juarmtccs tho quickest relief from dolorously low temperatures,
-his method, aoc.rdinc to cur experiences, is massive and rapid supply cf warmth
by means of a het bath. _ -- _


12 Doo-^3.10-2-Eairow.

Court Soil

■itocrrrLnc of intensely onillod kuoan beings by hu&an or aninni w arath

'M

oaa thar-foro bo rcoa=s=-ndod only in such oases in which other possibilities
for rewarainc cr: act available, -r in oases of specially tcnlorr. individuals
oix: possibly say net bo able to stand-cpiassivc and rapid supply of warmth.

-bs f.r cxouplo, I ra thinking of intensely chilled snail sohildrcn, .The ore
best reemreod by the body cf their nothers, with the old of hot wator
bottles.

"Dachau, 12 February 1045,

(signed) d«{.s. itASCim.;"

Tluj Court will soc on the follouinj pa^cs of this well nigh unbolievablo
dccumont oherts whieh -;mphioally shew the r-varcinc cf these f rozca victims
by v aen. That is to say, by two tt-uca. They £Lvc an average fi-uro for
dif orent rorcmin^a in widoh ttey eonparo revarsdns by pnokinc in blankets,
rcvar:.dnj with two u^acn, ro-.^rrlnj with one v :xa, and rewarainj with ouo
wcaan where sexual intcroourso uocurrcd.

.e aove now to Decuajnt tfo. 1.X3-2GC -.il.ioh will bo drosooution Exhibit 106.
This is a letter frcii Dr. Idppko who, acoordinc to the infomation fumishod
by the defendant Sievers in his nceiorandun end lottors, was ■ off or in" s;no
tln^o cf o.nsoicnoc bcccisc of tho c^ifcriu-nts at Dachau and ho horo is writinj
to the iiciohsfuchr.r on tho 10th of Fobruary 1513. I wont to ask the ‘•ourt
to observo tho file nunber on this dcoiewnt vhcro it U. 11 soo tho code letters
2 tl D, and I oall to your attention a coin that refors to the Department
for Aviation -edioino which was, as tliat tino, he axled by Dr. «othcny with
his assistant, the defendant Doeker-Preysoas.

"Hciohsfuchrcr" i

•

“The experiments o.nduotcd in wac’.iau c..xcminc protective tonsures acainot
the effects of freezing on the hu.s*n b.dy by imorsicn in cold water hr.vo
lead tc results of practical use. The. were ctnductcd by.the Stabsaerrto of
the Luftr.affo Professor Dr.l.olslochncr, Dr. I-ink-- and hr. TCaschor in coorpcrat-
ian with the 3S, and arc not/finiihed. ?hc result was reported ppan by tfaoso
,,;r - worked sn then during a cunforcaoo jn nedioal prcblons arising fr-sa distres.
at sea re id winter hardships cn 26 and 27 October 10uZ in Ifurenb-T". The
datailed report on the- c.nforcncc -is a pr-sent in state of prepantion.


- 3 13 -


-


12 Dec-«-HM-13-3-Ear rov-HD
Court Ho. 1


■I thank you most gratefully for the greet assistance
that cocporatlon of the 3S has scant for us lr. conducting
the experiments, and beg you to express our thanksj too,
to the commander of the Dachau esmp.

■Hell Hitler]


Prof. Dr. Hlppke"

The Court will have occasion* whon we come to the intro¬
duction of evidence on the sea water experiments, to read a
letter written and signed by the defendant Schroeder which
he wrote to Himsler in the middle of 19:; again asking, on
behalf of the Luftwaffe, for human experimental subjects In
order that the experiments to render sea water drlnkrblo
could be carried out and In thnt letter, as your Honors will
eeo, will a pear l-ngurge somewhat similar to that used by
Dr. Hlpzke in this letter, and, In addition, the defendant
Sohrooder stated that Kinaler had been most helpful on
similar occasions, obviously referring to those experiments


carried out In Dnohau.

”o turn now to Document NO 1580-rd which will bo Prosocu-
tion Exhibit 107. If your Honors jloaso, tho translation
appearing In your doc-onent book ot Pago 123 contains two
letters. We are not here concerned with tho letter at tho
bottom carrying _the date Kay 2, 19:1. In looking at that


letter yo^ will reoomber that It went Into evidence under
the proof on the low-pressure experiments ■'nd It oarrled f/' ^

the document No. 1562-PS. I do not recall the Exhibit W J
number. In any event, It Is Just an instance of the same
document being registered ander two numbers and here they


h ve could up two documents under 158C-FS. Actually


gbln^ into evidence Is the letter of 25 February 13-13. 3o,

If you will aimoly strike out the translation at the bottom

of F.^e 12S and on 129 then your book will be aocurate.

3-i7


l2-Deo™Hit-19-3-2arrow
Court No. 1


The bottom letter, I am Informed, went In qb Prosecution

Exhibit :6. ' * ~ ~

This Is n latter from Heinrich Himmler to Rasoher
dr.ted 23 February 1913: •

■Deer Rascher:

3eat thanks for your letter of 17 February with report
on warming-up experiments. I agree to experiments being
nado at *uechwitz or Ixiblln,• although, I believe that the
time for the ooj ling-off and var=in--up tests under natural
conditions of oold weather has nearly passed for this
winter. >’’* •

■I an sending this letter at the acme tlmo to 35
Obarnruppenfuehrer Pohl, "


3-i7a


i


12 Joo*M^I2S»13-4-^arrcv
Court Ec,l

.\.cc I rc^uoat fc. order the execution of your experiarnta at Lublin or AueoJartts.

•Hind croctiac* cj*I Hcil Hitler I Your lUrclcr".
rh.« letter la in aesponso tj the •-rartain^-up re;, rt which I read into ovidettoo
'»-=' Ircecoutic Exhibit 105, and you will note that Break r ia ciriroaain^ the
asjae fear that * found in the defendant Clever a a few nencata ajo in atatinc
that it was felt that haaoher's experiment a would bo delayed beyond the proper
tine of oold weather ao that he could not carry out hie dry o:ld ojqicrinonta.

.c arc ccninc to a docut^ntin a few n-aoata uhich will indicate that neither tho
dcoocaod I 'i. Il i ml cr or tho defendant Si ever a rrcro diaapp.-.intod in that rcopcot.

•c o <xio now to document i»-2G2 whioJi will be . roacoution Exhibit 100, and
hero &eain that tho real difficulty bctwvjcn the Luftwaffe and tho SS over

tho valuable aorvicca cf Jr. iJaschor voa not bconuac of the feeling «>a the port
cf tho buftvoffo that thoac experirventa tfnuld njt hove boon carriod out on livini
hucan boinja, but xhat.it woa eiaply a nattor cf profoeoional Joalouay botwoon
tho pcoplo whe wcTiccd cn theao experinonta rnd a problcn of wldch organisation
waa to roooivo oredit for theao valuable exporinanta. Thia lctt;:- ia f ron i'rofea-
oor Dr, HippJco, Chief cf the radical Service of ttio Luftwoffo, datod. 6 Haroh 19i3,
ad-rc.tacd to "Dear Cbor^ruppenfuohror ’Jolff" -..-hem yiur Hencra rill rooall rr.a
the liaison fficcr botwcon tho S3 and tho Luftwaffo with rcap'-ot to dnaohcr'o
oxperia-nts,


- 3 !:£ -


12 Doo-A-HIS-SO-l-Xuppcrstcin
Court K_.l

"The State Secretary Ililch has „ir.-n a: y.ur letter -f 21 tfevenber of the
lost year - Diary L'o.’ 1426/42 top scorct - regarding the rclwasc of the Stabs-
arzt of the Luftwaffe, Dr. itascher to the ..affeu-SS,.

■I nn precored to rolooso the Stabsnrzt Dr. ilaschor frea the Luftwoffo, even
nft-r the iioioh .hiaicinn of the SS, SS-Gruppcnfuchrcr Dr. Grmritt, explained

t. no that he could not find any substitute* I shall put hin at the disposal

'$

of the .‘offen- 3 if iiaachcr hinsolf desires this release. I shall ask hin about
that*

"Your conception that I, os the responsible dircotor of all liodioal-aoicnti-
fio roafiaroh work, Wwuld have been opposed tc the chilling experiments on hunnn
’joints, and so retarded their development is cr onoous. I iacvodiatcly ogrcod to
the experiments boo a use cur -wn prcvi-us work oxporiaonts on largo animals \roro
o-noluddd end sup'Kacutary w v rk was ncoossary. It is else highly improbable that
I, in that I an responsible for the dovolopoxnt of all types of possibilities for
rescuing our flyers would not do everything possible tc furthor such works,
hon .loseher in his tiao explained hi* wishes to nc, I agrood irith hin innidiatclj


Tho difficulties, 1'x. ..olff, lie in an entirely different ephero: it is a questio:
of vcaity cn tho part f individual scientists, every one of idiom poro-nally wontr
to bring out new research results, and very often it is only with greaf offort


that tdicy oan bo lod to work unsolfishly for. the otcan good. 1,0110 of then -W"'' v '^
without guilt in this respect* .Fischer is not either. * V 1 ,

"If ilasohor wants to build up his own rcsoareh institute within the framework


of tho '..*affcn-S3, - have not objection. All research work uithin the fiold of *
aviation acdicino - that is, al'.itudo - aorccvcr, is under ny ooivntifio superv¬
ision in ry capacity as diroctor .f Oornaa-aviati.n rvdicino. This instituto


would then bo under tho suporrioion of the Acich Thysicion of the SS, SS-Grup-
•pc-.ifuohror Dr. Grmrits.

"ikncntarlly, however, this w-rk cannot bo carried on beenuso its continuation
'•‘-■eld require a lew pressure chamber, in which' not > ily the altitude of tho


stratosphere, out also tho stratospheric tes^craturu can be established, but there
-2 nc such chanbor' availablo in Go many as yots It is just being guilt as n < genore
e' an.or In tho f rose-work cf the new ..escarch institute f-*r Aviation itodicinc of
irlin, and I hope I shall be iilo t~ liaye.it ccnplotcd in the ccurso cf this


- 3U9'-


12 Doc-«-r-i4-2C-2“Kupp3r3teln-HD
Court So. 1.


year. If Rascher, on the other hand, wishes to conduct

other experiments, not concevned .with altitude and chilling

problems, theae would not be under sueervlaion (aviation

Kedlclne) but under the supervision of military medicine,

whom he would have to contact.

"I am oing to talk over ell those problems with

Rascher in old comradeship, -nd I shall a.-aln notify you”.

■'Jlth kind rognrij^and
Hell’ HltlerT*

■Hippke■.

Nov, there are at loa.at two Interesting points nbout
thio letter, one of whloh io Hlp-'ho’s cx lanctlon of tho
apparent diffloultlec between cortoln members of tho
Luftwaffe nodical 3orvi.ee and Dr. Rascher, and Hippke hlm-
aolf xits it on the ground of profosalonal Jealousy. May I
8 U au ofit to the Court that that is certainly a sufficient
ex lanation of tho difficulties whloh Dr. Veits, tho defen¬
dant in this dock, will hnvo you bsllovo existed botwoon him
and Roscher, and that is the explanation of those dlffioul-

tlos, r; tnur than any compunction on tho part of the dofon-

/^ u

dent ‘felts, os to these experiments.

ft

Secondly, Klo:ke here indicates that any problems

concerning aviation medicine come within the Jurisdiction

%

of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffo. He states that
if Rascher wishes to conduct e*perlmcnts not concerned with
eviction medicine, then he cones under the Jurisdiction of
military medicine, and the German words there are given,
"Haeressanitaetsins 7 ektion a whloh, if Your Honor pleaso^
refers to the -ositlen oocuplcd by the defendant Hrndloser
c? this time. He was Chief of the «rmy Medical Inspectorate.

I turn now to document 1615-?:;, which will oe
rrosecutien Exhibit 109. This is a letter written by the


Deo 12 -a-KX-20 - 2-Ku opera t e ln-HD
Court So. 1

•

defendant Rudolf 3randt to Dr. irawitz on S -'-arch 191-3.

"Deer Oruppenfuehrer: I wish to Infora you very
briefly, that Relohfuehrer So on February 25, 1913 authorized
o= Captain Dr. Rascher to aafco warming experiments In
^uachwltz or Lublin. Of course, considering the warm
weather, the time for coolin fc and vr.rming experiments under
n. t.-.rnl teoperr.cure conditions would not be Doeslblo In
that ^rooortlon."

T .Is letter, of ojaree, re^rs baok to the conference
had .etween Dr. Rascher on the one hand and irawltz nnd
She defendant PoooBndldc on the other, 3rr.ndt


350 a


12-Dec- A-HK-2C-3-Kuoper6teip-HD
Court So. 1


Is hero advising his th/>t jrtfcer dry cold 3xperlnents will
take; place as requested by DrawltE and his assistant,

Pop .endlck.

The next document Is NO-270, which will bo Prosecution
Exhibit 110. This oonalsts of a cover letter from Dr.


P-oachor to the defendant Rudolf 3randt, enclosing n running *
account of a talk Pascher nad with Kip he. Tne letter is
dated li March 19d3.

"Dear Oberaturmbar.r.fuehrer, on 12 March I was ordered

I

Co v conference with Deneraloberatabsarzt Prof. Dr. Klppko.
The inspector was extremely friendly. I hnd the lspros6lon
that t.-.e whole affair was painful to his. For your lnfot\nn-
ion I enclose e short description of the conversation.

This description Is by no aeons r ccsoleto or.o dosplto the
foot the t I took down notes 1 —-edlatcly after the confer¬
ence. I would like to esohaslze the Inspector's unusunl


oclcblllty and caution In all expressions concerning the o5.

■Hay I respectfully ask you to inform the Seiche-

*

fuehrer rf of the retort In so far as this p 'iflnre necossary


• u.


"M?y I also a6k ;ou, If you v-o not r.lr.d, to Inform
Ka’OtBturmfuehrer Keckenstoller 6inoe r s far as I r.now ho
•;orked on cy transfer by order of O'oor^r utpenf uehrer *olf.
Signed Pascher.■

The retort is -rt of the epao exhibit, nd Is dated


c


Id karoh 19 i‘.

"Report or- th-- conference between C/er.e ralobero cab ;.rzt
Prof. Dr. Hi; ke and Stabsarzt Jr. Paecher on 12 tfnrch
12-3 in Perlln. The c.urse of the discussion car. be roe-
tribed in Its meaning only, not literal!” since the confer¬
ence lasted for 3/-1 of an nour.

"Very friendly welcome by Prof. Rippke. Immediately


551


12 Dec-*-HM-20-3-Kup?eretein-HD

Court Ho* 1. •>

after that the question, vhc desired the transfer to the
Vaffen-53, and who suggested it.

■Hascher, suggested and desired by the .lelchsfuehi'er
55 as v;ell as by ayself. I; too,'haye submitted a transfer
request through the offiolal Luftwaffe channels.

■Hip-rite: 3o then it is true. Vny do you really want
to leave the Luftwaffe? I ’gave you every opportunity to
work in the scientific field, and with us you will be backed
by the solidarity of tho entire aedloal officers' corps of
the Luftwaffe. Besides, we have the necessary experience
in treating oedioal probleaa connected with aviators. The
SS oennot posstb^y be interested in these questions.


351a


12 Dec. L T-.-cd 4-20-4^nv £ -; rs to in (..TD)
Covert Sc. 1


"Sascheri But tho Raichs fuehrer SS does net le sire at all to lave these tasks
carrie cut for the benefit of the SS alone, he oppressed bins elf to that
effect that tho tasks shall bo acccrplishod and tho results shall bo really
nado available to all interested agencies on the cost rapid way.

"i&ppko: 'o can naintain this connection with tho S3 alsr if you stay r.lth
tho iJif traffo. I hereby requoot ycu to stay with tho no 'leal corps of tho
Luftwaffe.


"Haschert I boc; to subnit respectfully that in as far as I an concomo!, the
decision about this has already boon taken.

’TUprko: But in this case ycu rust ro-lizu that tho nodical offioor's corps

of tho Luftwaffe will no longer solidly back you up and that ycu have to

• • .

oxpoct scientific orrdtles an.’ porhapa oven a bitter fi'<ht in the scientific
fiol’ with ln-’ivl-hinl ontlonon, ospo dally reservists, who brought alonr
fron prlvato life thoir sdontiflc nanrwrs. But oven If you no lonror belcnr
to ray of floors, you will al.rays hnvo ay lull support. I wish that ovon la tor
on wo continue to work tojothor. For instanco, I would liko to soo that ycu
carry out to :othor with Ronbor" tho roscuo fror. hi;;host altitudes an! that
ycu r.o ovon hi "her than 21.000 rotors. For this caao saw two-staro lovice
shcul! be pro carol 3 x 10 way for tho loir rossuro cox. Furthor, I afoul 1
dosiro that in ycur ojporinonts on huren beings, you would conbino tho alti¬
tude exporinonts with tho cold oaporinonts.

"Raschor: I proposo this to you alroadjr in July of last year an! tho Reichs-
fuohror SS for his part has also subalttod this proposal to Marshal :tllch.
Unfortunatoly nothin" resulted fror. intorvontion so far.


"Hippkoi How onbarrassin this question raist havo escaped r$* notico at that
ti:n (ho takes doom sere notes) as alroa y said ycu seo thoro aro nunorous
problons an’. y~u aro oin to be really evorburdenod with sciontific nattors,
1 .'J ret lot ycu ~o rea ily and this I emphasize apdn. /ould ycu not
thirk it ever aain for four «eks. n


o


- 352 -


12 Deo (--ID)

Court So, 1


"?_3CH2Rt For this it -was too late, I asked for ry part too to be

transferra"*,

"HIPFE* This cculd bo oanceUod, I call your attontion to the fact
that with tho Luftwaffe I oan offer you very ;ooi possibilities for your

promotion. You Vo not yet know y<*ir a .vnncecent with tho SS, 'o you

r-- r

alroa V kn-w in Vhich cayedty y^ are 'cir. tc bo ta!:en ovor? You nro now
Hauptaturnfuohrer, X bu.-.xjso? ~

"HASCXDD: I do not to; how J an -.in • t> bo talcon over, but I have
full confidence in cy future with the SS vhero efficiency is whit natters,
"HEFrXEs But this is cortainly tho case with us too, think it.ovor
whother you • c, I-roquost you ajain to stay h>ro".

« • 1 * • *• 9 9

Vlhon I toli Ripples during tho furt*v>r courso of tho conversation how tho
work is do no at ny place, ho was vory surpriso! an*, sal'., "if oil, you
build up an independent lnstituto for ycursolf end so you aro loa lor of
tho instituto",

RLppko nonttoned also that Grupponfuehrer Grawitz ’id not want to
furnish a substitute for no, no, nobody at all, not to spocl: of a no lie'll
cfficor trained in sciontyic nattorj, In conclusion Profossor Doctor
Hlppko said, well, if you persist in your decision I ask you then to
roport to no bo fore loavin - whan you are transferred, ‘bat frionUy lis~
rdssal. Postscript: Profo3sor ’iippko Dffarod to tho ( ossibility of
publiahin- tho rosulta hithorto obtained, in a Lttftwaffo periodical. It
was certainly not cloar ufcothor tho S3 could toko accossiblo to no a
periodical in which I could publish. Ho was afrri 1 I could suffer fron tho
co ipotitior. botaoon physicians of tho Luftwaffo and SS physicians, I woull
iiko to nontion that in comoction with tho hostility to bo expoctod on the
. art of genuine Luftwr.ffo physicians Professor Hi.pko said "in this caso you
have of course tho SS behind you - and this is a powerful factorJ" Tho court
ill soo that tho defendant Ttonbor - is arain nentionsd in connection with
Rancher at this lato data whon Hippko su;;estai that ids subor inato, Berber,-:,
in the Institute of DVL, cooperate still further in tho rcurdorcus oxporinjnts

Cf

conducted at Dachau.

^-


Cars* Ho. 1


Tba next Doeunent la Bo. 292 which will bo Prosecution' 3 Exhibit Bo. 111.

» •

This is a lattor fren Eascher to defendant Rudolf Brandt. It is a lottor dated
lx ^?rll 19h3.

■ jjch ostoemd -Oherstarri onnfuuhror l


* Indosod you will find- ackncwrlodperwr.t of tte receipt of the letter - —

•

of such m' such a date — " eocrot. I n tho rvantiru ycu havo perhaps had
tho oprertunity of jXacinj over thx note cor.ccmin; thu .bnschor-i{i^ko conforonoo
Tho conference dsscrl'ed in it toot plsou approxinetoly as Oenuralcborstolsarst
Dr. Hippleo ctxtlinoi it in his lottor to 5S <Jxjr Tupjx>nfuohr\Jr T7olff. Thore is
only one. thinj that I repudiate : tho reproach of scientific vanity. I will
jlrfly and lmodiatoly put tho results of ry research at tho disposal of
any person wh" cm uso then in r. propor way. As IS to bo soon in tho report
about tho ocnforoncc, I clearly cxnunic.atod this to ovon boforo I had

kopwlodco of tho lottor which I have just roooivod. If, hewovor, oortr.in
,-y> ntolaorv-withcut naJdn sure beforehand— would like to present ry results as
unlioly, that is thoir luairvss,

.Mao Oru-.^onfuehrur Dr. Grnwita doubtod only tho possibility of force:' quiok
warning, of freson persons—though h- could easily havo ha', tho opportunity to
verify thu corroctndss of ry statxrwnt.l

■ Iho question of thu savin, ox poepL, froren in tho opun air has in tho
rv-ntli* Loon claaiv up, sinco, thank "oodnosa theru w-s onoo a-join a period
of heavy Treat to other in Dachau. Certain poefcio wore in thu open cir fa* llx
hours at -6° Canticrado, rose ho.’ rr. internal t-jirwraturu of 2$ doproos Cantierado
Tfitli pori-.iwral freezing, an’, cc-iltl all bo savu ’ by c hot bath. ..s 2 said,
it is or.sy to contradict 1 Dut ’ . afore sorw.ono dews so, ho should cooo and soo.
’ic-roovor, a report about froozin_ in tiw open rlr will bo sent to tho .loichs-


fuchrdr in tha next few days.
" v/ith host wishes "


Si<n*;d B S.Easchor. n


Doanont Xo.*£lxO will he Ire 30 cat ion's Exhibit No. 112. .^ain, it i3 a
letter fren i’-aschar. This tin-; to Hixnlor, end is dated 11 April 19*x3.


*


" Door Rjichsfuohrcr 1

n Encloeud I bor tc subnit a brief report c'xicominj fnxiiin,; exporiamta


Court Ho. 1

&

on barn boirps cx-osod to tixi open air.


■ Early ir. l’-aj I hope to ' o in a position, dear foichsf-xhror, to sulnlt
to 70 U ny facilitation thesis. SS C orsturrLannfuehi'-r, Profossor Dr.
Ifrainanfftlal of .'-arturj is -roparoti to uso and ocoopt it as secret thosls
of ha'-ilitntion.

■ Do you want re to son;’ copy of tho ondosid roport to t!>j hoich
rhysicion S3 ?

B ,‘ith nest devoted (;routin v s raid foil Hitlor I en always your
obodlont and protoful - s. laschor."

s

Unfertunntoly wo do not have a copy of this freozin_ report \rhidi is

nantiorud in tho lotto r.

• •

.'0 cere now tc Docurxmt Mo. 22d, which Trill ’x> iVosooutien's exhibit
NO. 113. The letter is date ’. l£ ..pill 1*3. It Is addrossod tc " Doar
Cenrat’o Itascher," by the defendant Rudolf Sranrit.

■ Tho foichs fuehrer '.ms received tha report cono-mln:; tho freezing
or,eri'f>nta *.n hunrai toinpa oxpesod to tho open air, wid thanks you for .
tr^is sitting s,-rv).

* Kindly contact S3 Grupponfuahror • rofossor Gohhnrdt irho roocivod fron
roi<*sft»hrur SS your roport for study. Ploaso ask SS-Grupponfiohror
Gohhnrdt personally at HcJvinlychon wion 7cur visit would suit hin.

" .Jsr* o^n copy of tho report to tho ..oich physician SS.

" 7 trJoj tho opportunity of ccnfimin;: receipt of your letter of April

U, 19h3.

“ Cordial jrootinps and foil Hitlor 1

" Yours

Ihxdolf Brand."

• l en.- apaih wj see th- nra» of GJehardt rwnti-ned, as it nrpoara ovon ’.of or
that of Itoich physician Doctor Granite.

Tho ri-xt Dccvror.t is IJ 322, "hi eh nill Vo I r 000 cut ion's Exhibit No# Uli.
This letter is Vy Ilascher to SS C-erstum’ amfuohrer Keinta, who was tho
c omen-’.or of tiu Sack; ns hausen Ccncxrntrticn Crap near Oranion’xirc which
is just above Bo3-in.


- 355 -


Ccurt Ho. 1


* <X erst err?-am fuehrer .»

- ■ fy crir of tba Roichaftt)hrar S3, I hare boon conducting froosin-
^xperlnonts cn Huron toin_s in tie Dachru Concentration Cenp for norc than
a 70 ar. T e-lay I learned frer. an oxperii»ntal sul ject that I was not tho
only oca conducting these oxperironts, but that, on thu contrary, already
in QctoboivHoroctbor, 1936 similar exporironta .had boon conducted in tho
Sachacnhauson Ccneontrcticn Caro. SS-^aiptstumfixjhror Dr. Saronstran" ia
anid to have frown expo rim ntol subjects - that ia prisoners - in cold
wator, md aubaoqixsntly rorivod thac by aocna of warn water or hot ccaprossop.
. j I was to work out md have worlod cut a proscription for tto Uaffon SS
for thJ i\) 5 uacitation cf frown porama ( for th- carpal^n in tho 3aa.t),
knowlndco of rll prolininary oxporirvants in ny field of work ia of jroat
importance for re. I thoroforo njquest th-t if po 8 aitlo you let ro know
what kind of expo rim r.ts wen) conducted in your ounp, are!, if poasiblo,
what results worn o v tairvad in connection with thoso ox^rironts,

" j you nipht not know anythin.. o’ out no, plonao r.-Oco inquiries about
ro, if necessary, either at the -erson.-l Staff of thu Toichafuohror SS
( ^.erBturrf.'annfwhrer n^mert ) or fren thu CaxvuuUr of tho Dachau
Concentration Crnp, SS-Sturru arafuahror Holla •

“ fours sir.coroly . 0

How, wo codj to Docuront Ho. 23C, which will »k> FroaucuUon's Exhibit
Ho* 115. -nd, thia is, in fact, a s£ort statoront of tho work porf crowd
by Doctor ^achjr, are! it was opparoutly prepared by hin to aid in his
habilitation cf needoriic loaders.

T7S KSSIDEOT : !'r. HcHmoy, I will .-ak you to read that slcwly bocauao
our photostatic copy tom is in a very bad condition.

137 ”2 JUSSI : los, sir,

Thin documnt is dated 17 ll V 19U3. 7™ hcr.din. at it is : ■


radical Training ■

“ .'vfter iv state exeninr.ticn I ieceiv voluntary assistant at tho surpicpl
linic cf tho rur.ich University free: 1935-36
1 ?r -n 1936-39 I was an unpaid assistant in tto surgical dapartnent of
tho Schwabinp Hospital in Ifunich.

- 356 -


12 Deo (173)

Coart ». 1


"Since 'ay 1939 till today I have boon in -dlitary service Kith the

.-ir Force*

"Frcr. 1939 till Docanbar 19U2, I :ns attached to tho Bureau af the
~r.ti aircraft artillory school IV, Durin; the whole sunner 19hl I was !o-
tachod to "Trane *rrc 1 ' with the front cccranstation Benina-Doma.

"Subsequently I ropoatedly hell prolonro'. eossuide abroad, (Scandi¬
navia, Italy),

"Fron 1939 till February 19U2 I ro ulr.rly actol as an ..ssistant sur-o^n
and ropoatcc’ly hold the position of ,-n in ’.open '.ent chief physician of
hospitals.

"Fron 1933 till 1938 (up t tho invasion cf tho 8u 'ontolnnafter
which -to to I on tore! tho military sorvico) I.roricod, v-ith tho assistance
of the Ener ;oncy Scdoty for ®St-Y3I Scionce, an’ in coop oration with tho
Univoralty Profoscar Dr. Trurrp in tho Patholo;-ical In3tLtuto of Vunich Uni-
7orsity, on tho subject: ‘Is it possiblo to influonco difforont no.lla of
crystallisation by a.Vition of .r ~.nio conpounis to such a \tyrroo, tJmt tho


t!ws obtainol chan >s can bo utilisod for 'ia-no3tic .rurposoo?'

Fr-n this crljicatod the followin' treatises: '.’.ttoy't of a crystal-
lo'Taphic la nosis of pro nancy; oxr;iination of S. Pfui un*3 stotenant


about tho possibility ofa crystnllcrrc phic cancer ’ia no3is, publisho^""“'V
in tho :\mich !!o!icnl eokly Journal 1936, an:! 'Provisional report on


attaipts of a crystalto-rnphic Can cor- inn scs', irnich "a deal Voukly
Journal 1933. Tho rosoarch werk of Lioso an•, Hackul. D. Pfei un and oth. rs,


who w.iro ablo to show tho influence on tho crystallisation by neons "f


a' lition cf organic cxr>Ajn-!s, iafucod '.o to conduct thoso oxporlaonts. The

fact that tho turor tlrsue durin its rorth stcrotos hatoror-onous albunon

into tho boV flui’s, which is ono of tba causes “or cachexia, in Hicoi no

to investigate whether those al'ouaens were also in a position to pro luce a

•

typical affect on th: crystallization in a saturatod solution (o.". copper
sulfate). In fact in toe furthar cour3o of these investi- ations typical
c’-anpos in the cryst liizntion po'.rc-shich s oono to justify furthar
researches in this ftol 3xperi=cnts to influence toe crystallisation rith
r—1 losa os - 1 to 1/lC edHi^rais - of the diffarent aninc rcid3 ha ! a

- 357 -


12 Dec '-22-1- oohan (..TD)

Court 5o. 1


■By rllitary or.’or, I aterte ' in 1939 In cooperation ..1th tho Uni¬
versity Pr.foasor Dr. G. 3. Fischer,,ilardxir , to to rk out a “Jeficel method
of saloctin" soilors fit for atorooscopic vision" (Solcction of rar.pe-fin lor
operators).

"The rosults of tils research woric can be found in a socrot military
document, aa wall as in an aviation ro.ulatien (aoo also tho plastic
instructions) film on tho trainin r ran-o-?indor operators, published by
tho Goxran .dr '■finistry). 3asiirj on this raothol, tho ran'-o-findor operators
of tho optical systoc are bain' aoloctod at tl» Anti-aircraft Artillery


School IV for tho dr forco, tho affon-SS, tho arry and also in part for
%

tho navy. In tho yonra 1910-1*1 I hold locturos on t ho cubjoct "Soloction of
raivjo-fin ’er oporctors" in tho anti-aircraft artillery school of tho navy ani
oon&cto! also ro-jularly soloction courses rfith locturos at tho anti-aircraft
artUlory school", ’ '

^ l


I suppose ia IV - yoa.


"Sinco February 191*2 I'havo boon conlictin- oxporinonts in thoTtachau %


Concentration Co.rv* first. By order of tho <V_‘ich3fuohr<.r-SS and tho Surroon
Gonoral (Oonoral boratabsarzt) Prof, Dr. Rippko, I oonductod "Exp-irinonts
with Dr. m U hnbil. S. Huff an * Dr. Ronborr of tho Ooriian 3>QX>rinontal
Institute for Aviation (D L) Berlin. Tho rsjults of thooo experiments are
dose rib oi in a socrot rllitary ’xunont an! in two Mr; oxporinontal filna.
Socan!, By order of tho dcichsfuohro-SS an-’ tho Survoon General (Oonoral-
bbor3tabsaret) Prof. Dr. Ki.pko, I^eonducto-’ "Bxporinents for tho roscuo of
frozen porsons (started on 15 ..trust 191*2) In cooperation - for four ninths
with tho University Prof. Dr. Helrdoehncr, Kiel and Dr. Finko of tho Kid


University.'

"Since the rosults f cur co.T.on researches partly duo to the lack of
tine, wore net oxhaustivo onou h, and sine a the newly acquired scientific

fir-fin: s were not utilized, I continue to werk with four or five choniats

I

or. tho solution of the physioio - i calhard cal problems tdth re,Tar 1 to

frozen persons. Emnirod were amongst other tho changes of tho heart action,

tho blood status, tho non-protein nitre pen, the !W blood level, tho bl. !

- 359 - *


12 Dec {.. 79 )

Court S:, 1


sugar, the lactic ad.’, tho lOpor* «T® and 002 (arterially an' vomuSy),'
the plasaa and acruc viscosity, the bsziolysis, the speed of tbj blend
circulation, an’, tho site of the blood corpuscles. Still conOatoly ’dssin-
?xo -tho exploration of tho chp.nros cf the respiration capacity (bocauso
of the lack.cf an appropriate instruaont, the Xrogh


12 »o^;r-K14-2«i-2-MdvJnan-4^


Court Mo. 1


spirometer), the graphio record of the change of the blood
pressure (beoauao of tha lack of a hycograph, as veil as
tho proper Instruments for a surgical method for taking the
blood pressure), and the examination of the adrenaline ohan-
gus in tho blood (for this purpose are missing; a Pulfrloh
photometer, a Kanau quartr-lamp for analysis vlth darf liter,
a nixing bovl, Schott glass filter C-G14 and a Sohott glass
filter GOl?).

■The Relohafuehrer—3S ordered that on basis of one
of theso two researches I should apply for admission as a
quailflod academic teaoher. The total completion and tho
cntioal evaluation of the observations vlth rogard to
froten human beings will take about four to flvo months
more. In order to conduct theso experiments, It Is absolu¬
tely neoosaary that the Instruments mentioned In the previous
par-^raph be plaoed at my disposal.

■For tho tine being, the staff of co-vorkoro at ray
disposal, Is sufficient,

■-»fter conclusion of this research vork I Intend, as
agreed upon, to return to the University Insltute for
.ivlation ;.edlclno and Hygiene (Prof. Dr. Pfannonstlel,
Marburg) for cy further scientific training. *flth Prof.

Dr. Pfannonstlel a sohedule as to further resoarch In his
Institute has already been worked cut. The resoarch vork,


win oh I personally chase, conoexms;
1) High altitude


Oil


2 ) elucidation of .freezing Injuries In the scopo of
critical research.

■I am Chief of Department of the ■.ihnenerbe" and

In this capacity I have been conducting my scientific

research werk until now; the '^hnenerbe' has always assisted

- ‘*60 -


12 Deo-.^Hrt-2^£-Hejnw«*

Court Ho. i

ao In every raspect.-*

"■(Signature) SIGMUND RICHER.

The next document is NO.2*1. vhloh vlll bo Proaooutlon
Exhibit 116 wd hero was get a little further ln8lght Into
tho activities of the defondant Gobhardt. This letter la
from Sigmund Rascher to the defendant Slevors aa Reich
Business Hanger of tho dhnenorba Society from Dachau,
Dr. Raschor la still working there. The dato la 17 Hay
194 ■<.

•Dear Standartonfuehror; Tho following contains a
short account of my report to S3-Gruppenfuehror Prof.

Dr. GSBS.wRDr.

"On 1» Hay 194 I reported to SS-Grupoenfuehrer
Prof. Dr. Gabbardt it Hohenlychon. I had hardly arrived,
when S3-Grupponfuohrer Prof. Dr, Gobbardt


* 60 a -


■BJK


12 Dec—A-HM-22-2-Ifeehan (14J)
Court 1


Dear Standartenfuehrer: The following contains a short account
of ay report to SS-Gruppenfuehrer Prof. Dr. GEBHARDT.

■On 14 May 1943 I reported to SS-Gruppenfuehrer Prof. Gebhardt
at HohenlydSen. I had hardly arrived, when SS-Gruppenfuehrcr Prof,

Dr. Gebhard,t asked me to account in a very loud voice, how 1 dared
to su bo it epecialist nodical reports directly to the Heichsfuehrer
SS (he w»s referring to the treatise on 'The Cooling of Human Beings
Cutdco|jfe'). I actually did not even get a chance to speak and,
practically, couldn't reply anything. Then, when 1 tried to reply,

Fro.Y. Dr. Gebhardt said that, if I wanted to defy him, ay train
wc.uld bo leaving for Berlin at 3 o'clock. When I was.finally given
opportunity to spoak, I could point out to Prof. Dr. Gebhardt that

l« •

tho report in guostion was not noa.it to be a strictly scientific work,
but simply was r. short informat for the Kcichsfuehrcr SS on tho ro-
dults of tho experiments conductod up to now. Prof. Dr. Gebhardt
had taken the view that the report was unsciontific and if a student
of tho second tenn dared to sutedt a treatise of that kind, ho would
threw hin out. Lator on 1 could t :11 hin that of courso all the
physiological-chemical oxpexinents that could be carried out.in Dachau l
with tho available tnstrunents had indood been conductod. Wioro upon
Prof. Dr. Gebhardt replied* I can inaginc that you did a lot of work,
one can toll it from this Job. If I had not bolievod that you did c
lot of work, I would not hr.vo askee you to coao ct all.

"In addition. Prof. 'Jr. Gebhardt said thrt h6 intended to norgo
all the groups of physicims working independently within tho S3,
since that would suit tho Heichsfuehrer SS ouch better than indivi¬
dual people working cr. th<dr own. Besides that, I socchow ought to

learn university acthcds by working senehow, since very likely I did

•

not yet havo the proper training. SS-Gruppenfuehrer Prof. Dr. Gebhardt
suggested that it was necessary for ac to got cut of Dachau, since
there I was quite left to .^-sclf and had no guidance whatsoever cnee
I intended to enter upon a university career, I would by all means


12 Dac-l-HH-£2-2a-:^shan-LJi
Court I


have to ccoplete the training of a university assistant first. Ha
further said that all those SS-physicians, who are qualified to enter
upon a university career, had the duty to do so. Upon cy reply that
for that roason I was already in touch with Professor Pf anno nation.
Professor Oebhard replied these setters ought to be processed by
a centralised agency. In future it would not do that I send any ro-
porta directly to the P-eichs fuehrer S3, but further reports to serve
their purpose would have to be transaitted through him to the Rolchs-
fuehror. If tho report had reached a suitable stage, he would first
infora the Reichafuehrer S3, go and sec the Roichsfuehrer SS, together
with use. Finally Professor Dr. QffifUPOT asked -» to glvo hln data


Court I *

12 Dec-Si - Hi - 22-la - Meehan - LJ3

*

cn ay personal and scientific career, to enable hia to make further
orrangenants. He requested as tc call a-ain in the afternoon. When I

called in the afternoon, I was, as already in the nrrning, accompanied

* •

by SS-Hauptatumfuehror Dr. FISCHER."

I would liko to sa/ hypothotically, Tour Honor, that it is tho
defoaiant Fischer, but since I an not sura of it, I will not say it.

“This tiaa. Prof. Dr. OSBKARDT was oxtroaoly aciablo. Ho asked mo

" * - — • •

whotnor I now agrood with his arrangeaontsj it would bo by far tho boot
I ccuid do, if I Joined bin. I should not worry, but just continue my
work in Dachau, until I had finished ay Jobs. Intjr one would soo what
was to be dono for too future. Upon my quotion, what it was all about,
ind who was ay superior, whether tho fteichsarrt S3, . SS-Orupponfuohrer
Dr. GPJL.ITZ, who had ccoo for an inspection several days ago, tho Roichs-
fuehror SS, as he personally hod proaiaod no, or tho 'Ahnonerbo', of
which I had boon a xeobor for yoors, Prof. Dr. 0E8HARDT suggested, all


that will bo straightened out. Just trust it to do. But I'll nood
ycur currlculim vitae socn, sinco I have tc report to tho Roichofuohj-ur.
SS on 23 toy. 'I

Uay I ask you, Standartonfuohror, undor *tioo I on actually v/orking^


Undor tho Rolchsfuohror S3, tho Ahnoiwrbo, tho Roich Physician or Prof.
Dr. OfflKARDT? FTof. Dr. 0-2HARD? has already asked no why I was not a


nwshor of tho Waffon-SS. Upon cy answer that Dr. HIPiKE doos not liko


to lot D6 go, ho declared, ycu aro too ablo for hia to lot you go,

S f andartcnfuohror l If the sor. tug of war starts in tho Waff on SS as
has boon going on butwoon tho Luftrraffo and S3, I'd rather do without
a transfer to tno Waffon-SS. I was prooisod, that I would continuo to
work under tho Soichsfuohrer SS, under tho 'Ahnonorbo'. But I canr.ot


serve several aastors at tho sc-j) ti-o. Of course, I an convinced that
SS Irupponfuohrer Frof. Dr. Gcbbardt had the best of intentions. Hia


assistants aro onthusiostic about hie; If I an compelled to ask Prof.
Dr. Gcbhardt'3 advice each ti^ic I an going tc start a new exp-rinont,

I "•111 g_t 3c such involved ir. tho academical routine that I won't evon


362


*


Court So. I

12 Doc-r - Kf. - 22-Jia-*feehan-LJ3

A

bo allowed to experiment such a method as rapid resuscitation that
overthrows all the established clinical expurioncos, because thoy con¬
tradict Prof. Dr. GfflKiLPDT's Methods, which era based upon centuries
old cHelical experiences. Also too cooperation with Frof. v. Luotzel-
burg would thus coao to on ord, as these experiments are frea the very
start contradictory


- 362a


*


12 Joo-^Z>22-5-i:ocnQn.;


Court 5c. «1

to the hither to rccojnired clinical orporicrocs. I think, this arranjorient
would stop ovorythinj that no ally cujht to bo experinented.


*1 pray y-u with all uy heart, Standartcnfuohrorr to handle this affair
in such a way that ?rof« Dr. GXdL-d/T, rfii ia a Tory close frioad of t o
..oioha fuehrer SS docs not turn ry oaoay. 1 think that . rof . Dr. GSdlhud/T can
and i/ill bo an oxtrenoly dlsajrocablo adversary. 2 ro 1 jet into troublo with
hin, I would rather rosijn uy job and ask fir an lnncdiato transfor ti tho
Luftmffo for o.abat aonrioo. I, therefore oak you a join to doal with hhia

I

affair with aa ouch circur-spcotion as it actually roquiroa, boor, uao in addttli
I cci cunroncod that »rof. Dr. GSJ.d«CT (apart frisi hie poraonal oiahitivn)

• 4 > * •

really has joed intentions".-

Thoro arci -ao inaorta noted hero* \


"NEFF, who, M you knew, is a faru aanajor by trado, asked no whothor
thoro was no possibility for hia to return to Ida old Job.Jr.rinj boon
proniacd lost yoar by tho uoiohsfuohror SS on the oooaaioa of his inspection
i.f tho experimental atati .n in L'aohau . n 1 Hay, that ho oiuld return to hia old
Job aftor a tiuo of pribation, I think that I oan roocaoond JEFF's requoat for
jiving hin a chsncc tv r.tum to Ids old Job aa c.foru nanqjor. Thoro oro many
33 frraa, whero a t ;.od nanajer, /he really imdorstanda hia Job ic badly noodod.


I hiiovo that o nsidorinc tho proaont situati.n, I do such bottor to roloaao


ISfi’ to hio Job as a faruor, ra^pr tJum kooplne hin hero for tho caly reason

f *

.f ’-orjdicj' one ; oro worker. IZFF ia a joodanc’ industrious wtrkor, but I an
o nriucod that he is n»ro officiant as a fomor, booausc ho »7ill be hoort
and soul in hia Job. 1 cnco had a talk with Herr LIiVEiff* Daohc.u iodioinnl
•I’lont Gordo:;, cb. ut iT*. , Lipport said that specialists liko I37FF were lookod
f-r liko pins In a hay ataok. did net have no but plenty ef oponin^i for
form nmacora, whore ho c- uld p)aoo iZ^F imodiatoly. I certainly rojrot
to let }EF7 "o, because I d n*t know, whetter I will find orain auch an
hcncat and. activo assistant for jonoral tasks, but on the otlicr hand, I can
soo the ijqiortanco of- agriculture and t’.scr-foro 1 an koopinc DEFF ready for
t.ac purptso. Floaao think it .vor, whether onythinj can bo d no in this
natto-r” .


(Signature) S. i—SbhSk,


12 Doo-i-^?!22-6-ifccn^n

Court i.o.1


L copy was scat to the defendant Si errors.

%

This letter don oas trates very ooll, I thick, the oxtroao power of the
dofoadant 0 Q bhnrdt, ~s a sattor cf feet, it can be seen that iiaochcr ilso w-s
afraid of hi^ end ho uns ready to jo to the front as r. firhtor for tho Luft-
waffo. It rjorooror i»iioatos that tho defendant Oobhardt ras at htis tine
anxious to aoac-o all the £roup of physioiras working inlopocdantly with tho SS.
1 will rcoill to tho Tribunal that tho reorganisation of tho nodioal servioo
of tho '..affen-SS ^oourred ir. dozjust ef 1983 and tJ is lottor is datod 17 Hay, 1941

T-Z LilBKDEKTi Tho o.urt willcov roooss until 9,50 tenerrow corninc*

4

(The Tribunal adjournod until 15 ‘'occaber 19dG, at

0950 hours).

» • <i - -— —


3S-1


Roll 2


Target 2


Voluae 2


Dec. 13-19, 1946


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNrTEe STAJfc^MlLITARY TRIBUNALS


No; 1 TRIBUNAL I
U-S,_v*KARl BRANDT «t ol
7 VOLUME 2


TRANSCRIPTS


13-19 D»c»mb«rl946 pp. 365-799


Court So. 1

13 Deo 46 - V, - 1-1 - LJO - Foster (ea)

CJBRSC7SD COPY

Official Transcript of the Aaerican Military
Tribunal In the setter of the United States
of 4 carice, egair.st Karl Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting et Burnberg, Gemany, or.

13 Decenter 1946, 09>0-1430, Justioe Seals,
presiding.

THS MARSHAL I The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal 1.
Military Tribunal 1 is now In session. God save 'ho Uaitod States
of icerlce end this Honorable Tribunal. There will be order ir tho
courtroom.

^ i

T'E PRSbEElT': The .‘(arshol *111 ascortair. if the dofandcnta
oro prosont.

TrS MARSHAL* May it please Your Honor, all the dofond jMo cro
orjsoct in tho courtroom.

THS iHESIDS.vr: Thu Secrotary Gor.orul -rill n^to for the ruoord
tho Drosonco of the dofondnnts in tho courtrooo.

,R. RARD/i ’k.7 it plot so tho Tribunal, tho urosocution ruspoot-
fully rwjoists a 15 ninuto roo.ss duo to tho feet wo hn*o hed oochnni-
ad dlffioultijs with tfr. safe in which w. hc.vo tlw exhibits seourod.
,i rjcur- you wo '•ill .bj roady in rnoth.r 15 sinutos.

TIC PRSSID27TI The Tribun-1 will bo in rooc^o until v>o cro
inforaod tb. loch'jilcU difficulties hr.vo boon ov-rcoai.

R. HARDYi Thank you.

(A rooosa wca tr.hon.)


i


- 365 -


Court Ho. 1

13 Doooabor 46 N - 2-1 - UG - Hicabock (ea)

TH3 l24PSHALi Parsons in tho courtroom will find their scats.

Tha Tribunal is cgein in session.

'R. HoHUETi Itaj it ploasc the Tribunal, at tho rjooss yostorday
owaning, wo had coaplotod tho introduction of Docusoct riO-231 c3 Prose
oution Exhibit 116, which tho Tribunal will recall was tha lottcr by
Dr. Rcsehor to tha Dofosdcnt Si -ora discussing a conf.roneo which ho
had h.d with the Defendant Gotoerdt.

I core not* to Document KC-267 which -ill bo Prosocatlon Exhibit
117. This is r. latter fron tha Defendant Siuroro to the Defendant
Rudolf Brendt, dat.d I try 22, 1943.

THS KCSDBWj Tha 1 wit exhibit I have nested is 116. Did I
siss one/

•Cv. KOHdETi Tha next exhibit • ill be Prosecution Exhibit 117 '
116, your Honor, was introduced l.et yjsterd-y sv.ning nd nee D^cu-
oont KO-231. Prosecution Sxhihit 117 is or. page 149 of tho English
Document Book. It concerns th. report of S5 R .upstumf'uiirer Dr.
Si^nuad R-schcr to SS GruDDor.fu.hrcr rrof.scor Dr. Gebirrdt.

•Oa-r Conrr.do Brandt, on .fry 17, 1943, I receive Ml urgent
all free: SS Hruptsturaiojhr.r Dr. Eascher -ho insstod to five no an
account of his conversation nritfc S8 Qrupponfuc'ircr Dr. Gjbhrxdt. Tho
contents of th-.t r.bcrt induced a to request Dr. Rnscherto subalt
tha rsport in -ritin?. I an Bonding you her./.* ith that report nd
-.ok you to let uo loo-; whether th- Hoiebsfuehrer x> has given any
dofir.ito directive to 3S Grupr-nfuehrer PrafesGor Dr. Gebhrxdt in
i\. v nr3 to Dr. R-rcher's sphere of action end work. I entrust you
-ith this --fair ’.nd .ek yen particul rly to usu it only for your
strictly personal inferential so that Dr. Rnschor dous not encounter
.ry difficulties ith oj Gruppunfeihrar Prof.ssor Dr. Gsbhnrdt. In
th- n= ntiac Dr. Rischer hr.3 sutcitt.i his


Court 5o. 1

13 Dec 46 - H - 2-2 - UG - Nine buck (or)


poraood end scientific curricular vitno to SS Grupponfojhrpr Profes¬
sor Dr. Gebherdt in r.ecord-nco with request. Hell Hitler. Year
Sievors".

The letter, of course, refers to tho report which wo hove nlre-.dy

offered in ovidonoo. Oh, I b_g your pardon, it reicrs to l repjrt

' 0

which is given in Proscoutioc Exhibit 116, rnd ngnin it aho *3 thut
tho Dofondent Gcbhrxdt occupied r, v.ry Influentlnl nnd powerful posi¬
tion within tho ILdiod Service of'the SS. Both the DofOpdaat eiov^rs
end Rnachor -ore very such rfreid to do earthing thr.t night upset tho
Dofoadent Gobhrxdt, -nd of course, the curriculum vitnu which is re¬
ferred to in thr.t letter hr.s else been introduced in .viderce no
Prosecution Exhibit 115.

ho. co no now to Dccuncnt NO-229 vhich ic c. lott.r of 27 oeptenber
1943 by the Dofoivlnnt Siov.ro to ♦.*» Dufondi.nt Ruiolf Breadt. It
concerns the r.poointnont of S3 Knuptotumfuc-hrer Dr. Richer .a r,
lecturer. Dr. Rnachor, no tho Court trill ooe, froa oono of these
exhibits, was nasigned to be .appointed os lecturer to one of the
universities in Cornnny.

•Do'X ocarndo Brmdt! I hnve trice n up tho or.ttcr of the r.p-
pointoont of Dr. Rnachor ns locturor. I nvsolf brought together
Dr. Rnachor with Trifcssor Dr. Bloao ca well ra with Ss-Grup oeafuhror
liontxol. The procedure rod tho possibilities rare thoroughly dis¬
cussed. >ofe 33 or Bloxo tulle ,d with Prof.scor Pfunnsnstlo] nt
H-rburg. So thnt th. pr.th townrd ocf.ctinr this .ppolntsont, which
is to be c 'secret ~ptoir.t5.nt' ('G-bjinhnbilitr.eion') rod therefore
onuses 30 qj difficulty, is smoothed. Kind regrrds nd Hull rlitlor'

O

. Yours, Sievurs."

Ani here wo sou tho Dofondnnt Slone entering th- picture for

the first tit*, in our exhibits, r.t lonst. The Court trill recr.ll

thr.t tho Defondnnt Blot*, ncs, frou 1941,- c noober of thr.t nugust

body, the Reich Re so ef eh Council, rod without -J 17 question the

- 367-


Court So. 1

13 Dcs 46 - H - 2-2 - LJG - Hinsb«iclc (on)


Dofoalcjit Slovors, who by this tiao, *rrJ hir - s o lf


-


- 367 4 -


r * . \ .

Court No, 1

13 Doc 46 - 21 - UG -Hlnabuck - 2-3

c mombor of tho Roich Roaoc-rch Council, waa In contact through
that agency with tho Doforriant 21onc.

You aoo horo mentioned also SS Jrlgadofuohror hontzol,
and 70 U will rooall that Kontzol was aomothing In tho nature
of a chairman of tho Heading Cocmittoo of tho Rolch Roaoarch
Council, ..rel Slov^rs wc.a doputy to Uontzol. And horo In thla
letter wo aqu tint tho Dofondant 31oa>u hr. a been contactod In
ui of fort to qualify Raachor aa cm ..codomlc^locturor on tho
br.aia of hia- roau.rch In D„chau or. high i.ltitudo probloma :rid
froozing probloma.


r\


- 368 -


Tha next dooaaoat la NO-432 and will bo Prosecution Zxhlbit


119, and this latter, too, aaleas a :»st Interesting reference to

the Reich Roroarch Council on which the Defendant PIobj ras aotivo

* ,
the defendant Kerl Qra-rit w-a active, tho dofurdar.t 3lev.,re ns3

active, or»l also tha defendant Rostock as alternate for the d-.fen¬


rol tor 2foff who sms tikj innate assistant to Dr. Rase her in Dachau
and helped hia very materially with the high altitudo, froosinf,
and other cxporlaentc carried out-there by Rase her on concentra¬
tion camp iudatos. Tho lctt»r roada as follows.


"Doer Neff* lour letter dated 11.10 reached aj hero on thu


15.10. First of all aany thank* for your docisicn to write such
a dotallod lottor. I really was very plcasod ah>ut it. To cone
right away to thj affair cor.oern;d: I ca very sorry to hoar that
you cro being bullied, especially as there exist:, no reason at all
for it., PI,cao let ne knurr the na»e, max, ord ddror.s of 7o;r
cor’vjrfir.g -fficor, bqdausc I soet certainly will trice the natter
up. Thare is no purpose at all in your getting stuck ther.. rin-
dly I too kco” hor the gjcerol ccniition of your health had K^n,
■lo n you 'Toro still h<rve, and I alaoaa able to judre thet you


cruiot 90 through a Ik .vy infantry training. I a glc' that vou

b.canc also accustomed to tha ideals of tfco olr^pe.<1-is;-'PM.'-,.

• r —■>'*

vinc-d that you nould be gisd to -o to the front. Put nevertheless:


On tha other band, I b li-vc th-.t I need vou roro ur-.


Court Ho. 1

13 Dec 46 - H - 3-2 - LJG - Perrin

reliable nan, acquainted with tho material, and that is you in
thin cr.so. Z will go in tho next few dr.ys with Siovora to
tho *Uohror'a headquarter and report thero in this aonso and
will lot you know innediatoly. v

"I r*iCoivod a copy of a lottor according to which you havo
to roly on * frally alloucnco during tho ti-io of your mobiliza¬
tion. If tho amount of money you rocoivo ia conaidorably lower
thru tho pay you drew up to now, I will bo 3 lrd to givo you or
your wlfo 50 n-.rka monthly out of ay pockot. You oan t.lco it
without being ashauod; 1 con ..fford it, and I an glad to do it.
;.a a ra.tter of fact, * do not liko to sou you gotting into
dlfficultioa. I aal: you, of course, to rognrd that aa a conrodo.
liko private r-.ttor betuoon tho two of ua. You knov; no too
woll to fool :.ah:jaod. I expoct your frank anawor to thia
nr.ttor without :.ny inconvonioncc. !5y wifo and uyaolf aro
alright. Tho la at air r..id slightly drxiagod only tho light¬
giving applicncoa and tho walla, that ia to say, tho bulba
woro anaahod.

"I expect your notico 8oon, and ror-ain until tlion with
aincoroat co irr.do-liko regards, your old chief, aignaturo,
Raacl-or."

In addition to sewing fron thia la tter whr.t tho doceacod.
Dr. Rc.achor -- in addition to hia othor fino characteristics -
bo was also n oxtraordir.ary sonorous individual. -But tho impor
tent thing to note ia th-.t Raschor states loro that ho hr.s
rocoivod an assignaont frou tho Roicha Rosearch Council to
continue his dry freozing oxpcrir.onta. Now, I call tho Tribu¬
nal's attention to tho date on thia 1 ttor from Hoff which ia
21 October 1143, and ask you to compare it with tho data on

Prosecution Exhibit 118, which is 27 Soptenbor 1C43; and from

* -l— • • ■ T “ — * • - ■ — - ^ ■ »

thia Prosecution Exhibit 118, tho Tribunal will soo thr.t tho

deceased, Raschor, l:ad boon in touch with Dr. Rlono, a nonber

- 37 0-


Court Ho. 1

13 Doc 46 - H - 3-3 - UG 4 Perrin

of tho Roich Roeourch Council; and r. nrt;or of throo wooka

- * J f ,

Ir.tor, bo roports thr.t ho hr.s roceivod en eaaignnont from tho

Roiefca Roaoarch Council. And I suggost tLr.t tint is not a
net tor of alxiplo coincidonco. For-unrtoly, howovor, tho Proso-
oution doos not Lr.vo to roly upon this reasoncblo doduction
fron tho docunonta. Docaiont N0-6S0 —

wK

TEE P.tSSIDSLT: Just'e nomont, counaol. I notico thr.t tho
dr.to cf tho lottor for Exhibit 119 on thia copy, at lor.et,
ie 21 October 1946.

• I

UR. UcEANSY: l*ou ..to right, Your Honor. Ono moment,

plocao, I cxi sure thrt thr.t ia r. pi a telco. -t. Trr.vta will

• I

you peas tho Exhibit up to tho 'frlbunel? Ihia ia tho docinont
3 ©ing into evidence, Your Honor, c.s Proaocution Exhibit 119, rind •
tho dr.to ia 1943 end not 1946, which ia : niateko on trrnalo.tion.

As 1 wea obaorving, wo noed not roly upon thia roeaonr.blo
doduction to provo that tho dofondent 31 o.jo wr.s instrunontr.l
in aocuring thia frooring assignment from that great roaor.rch
body in Ooir-.ny, tho Roicha Rosonrch Council.

~nd I offer Docujont N0-690 as Proaocution Exhibit 120,
end thia. Your “onora, ia a card t.kon from tho filoa of tho
Roicha Roaor.rch Council which shows tho to aoerch essignononta
boing workod on under tho euspicoa of Profoaaor Dr. It, Dlomo,
who ia tho dofondrnt Slono in thia dock; end I cell your
p.'rtln;l'.r attention to tho roaor.rch nsaisnaont llstod third
in order on p-'go 154 of tho ikiglish bocumont Book, lhoro you
will soo tlx.t tho priority number which is listed r.s tho SS
number ia 0328, roquestod by Rr.schor, Lunich; topic: Rowerning

,

ftor genorel frooring of tho htnen body, ho..ling eftor pertiel
freezings, adjustment of tho huaen body to low tonporeturoa.

Thon couos tho rogiatretion nuubor 1879/15. Phis ia nctod ee
workod cn by Profoaaor Dr. K. 3louo with Lia doputy boing Dr.
-^x-ouor; end I aubult thr.t thia document conclusively provoa


- 371 -


Court Ho. 1

I •

13 Doc 46 - I! - 3-4 - LJG _ Porrin


tfcr.t tho dofondant Kurt Clouo was also Implicated In tho horrlblo
oxpcrlnonta thr.t took placo in D-cbau. As long .'.s wo are on
this docunor.t —

TKE TRI3DNAL (Jud go Sobring): Will you point that out
again, sir, thr,t statonoht fron which you draw that inforonco?

J3t. UaHAKET:' Tho research iton is notod on Pago 154 of
tho English Docunout Book, rnd you will soc that tho third
rose arch assigraiont undor tho auspices of tho dofond ant 31ono
is listod as K„schor; Rowaruing r.ftor gonoral froozing of tho
human body, hwallnc after partial froozlnga, adjustment of tho ,
human body to low tonporaturos. I construo that. Your honor,
to bo a continuation under tho auspicos of tho Roich Rosoarch

i /. •

Council of tho froozing oxporii-ionts in Dachau; and, of courso,

that is corroborated by Prosecution Exhibit 119, tho lottor

to Hoff in which Raschor is calling Hoff to roturn to kin in

order to assist to carry out this rosoarch assignment from tho
*

Roicha Rosoarch Council.

IKS TRIBUNAL (Judgo Sobring): I thought you urow sono
Inforonco and ta do 3oa>o statonont to tho Tribun.'.1 that tho
doemont tozfciod to shew that Dr. Blono had workod upon tho
matter, is that correct?

UR. UcKAifEY: Yfoll, I wouldn’t go so frr as to say that ho
actually exporinontod with Pasclior. Tho burdon of ny argunont
is that tho dofendent Blouo socurod an assignuont by tho Roichs
Rosoarch Council for tho dccoasod Haschor in ordor that ho cculd
continuo l ie experiments under thoir.auspicos and with thoir.
support, -:hich provos a number cf things. Your Honor, in addi¬
tion to tho f ct that tho dofondar.t 31omo has new bocouo in-
plicatod in tho dry froozing oxporlmonts at loast. It also
shows that tho Roich Aosoarch Council as a wholo has boccrco
involvod in criminal exporinonts upon living huaan boings and
to further support tiat, I call your attention to tho rosoarch

- 372 -


Court No. 1 . •

13 Doc 46 - * - 3-5 - LTG- ? errin

• ^

cesignnont ianodictoly under tho Ruschor assignment which roods:
!, SS aunbor 0329, Hint, Strassburg." Tho topic is "Chongos in
tho living organise undor tho influonce of poison gr.soa." And
ti.-.t, if Your Honor ploaso, is r. roforonco to tho -ustnrd gas
oxporinonts to which wo will cone at a Inter point in tho
trir.l and thoao oxporlnonts again will bo proved to huvo boon
cdrriod out upon living hiricn beings in ccncontratlon crxipa;
c.rd thoso two .word carried out undor thw auspicos o\ Kurt Blouo
in tho Roich Rosearcli Council.

Wo couo now to ‘'ocunont NO-290 which will bo Prosocutlon
Exhibit 121. This lo t tor again.cakes rcforonco to tho offorta
of Raachor to obtain adulttunco as a locturor to a univoralty,
fhia lotttor la froti tho doforxlar.t Siovors to tho doforalnnt
Rudolf 'Brandt, dutod 21 U\roh 19-14.

"Do. j* C 0 .^rado Urandt, Sly last letter to you on this subjoot

was writton cn 27 Novonbor 1S-13. In spito cf tho intervention

of SS 3rig:.dofuohror Profossor Dr. Siontzol and tho doputy

Roichsaorztofuohror (Chiof of tho Roich physicians loaguo),

Profosaor Dr, Bioao, of which I inforuod you at tl» ti::o, adnis-

aion to tho faculty with Profosscr Pfnnnonstiol r.t -iarburg was

not pcaaiblo. On tho 30th of Ncvoubor, Pfannonatlol v/roto to

Prr feasor lono cn tho subject as follows: "I triod to pave

tho way for adnission to tho faculty horo rirco it was cloar

from porscnal discussions with Dr. ftasohor that our sphoros: cf

work ran p.arollol tc a groat oxtont. Tho fact tlat Iff-.sohor's

activitios have to bo kopt socrofl ru-.kes tho affair very difficult

to hnndlo. In those circur.st noos 1 was unabio to porsuaao tft>

'-..rburg uodicul faculty to adait Rasebor. ( Profosscr Pfannon-

stiol thon roccixjonds that an attonpt bo uado to have hin ad-

ait.tod to the faculty in Frankfurt or Ilunich). I op gonuinoly
sorry that I cannot fulfill as I originally hopod to do. Dr,
Raschcr 1 s Justifiable dosiro to gain adnission t© tho faculty
in “arburg on tho basis of his sciontific work with which I an


Court So. 1

13 Dec 46 - - 3-6 - LJ'i * Perrin (ca)

aequdntod, and I ask hia to co- aider ny oth,r proposds on the,
subject. To uaiortako such cn ettenot inHiMeh ^-ould sorv. no
ourposo, sinco, cs you too*, n sidLar attonpt v 3 already avic
-,1th rvjgctiv- results. 7ho director of the Institute for Aviation
•ledioino in Frankfurt, Oborstabaarzt Dr. Bohringhofon, srho drody
considered to tnko prart in the orosontr.ticn of the thesis i:i Harburg,
would cost cc.rtr.inly have been irducod to favor .adaission tc the
faculty in FWnkfurt. Howov.r, owing to the rued for socrecy
would bare boon expose’. to the sc*.- difficulties with the aedied
faculty in Frankfurt.

"A discission .ith 33 3auptstur*fcohror Dr. Ilixt, who is
thoroughly f.^iltrr nlth Dr. anchor's wk, rov-nlod that the
easiest thins would be to V.re hi« daittol to the itrassb-urg
faculty. Here it is possitl. to have th. work uxar-in xi by S3
fuehrer's only “iid aduissior. to tho f.acdty c rrio-i out in sac:vcy."

Tour Tjoaor, the next tiro o.^os of tiv> Docunont Be ok have bvon
rov.raad. The letter continues on oago 15? — rather, 153 cf V.\o
U^jlish D)C<i».r.t Dock. ?-?j 15? in J» .attachaent to th, letter
itself. The letter continues •-'ith th. luting of the SJ Trof-s-
S ot- .t Straps burg ©S’M help k.sohtr g'in r. J aitt.r.co, ..nl

these to:

■1.) Tho Dorn of the sedied faculty, Profossor Dr. Stein.

"2.) 7r*J ..ssist^-.t Dean, Pref^saor Dr. Kirt.

*3.) Professor -f rhysiologic 1 Chcnlstry, rrof-ssor Dr.

D.*ch-rhoff.

"4.) The .rofessor of Ph.ara.cology, Dr. S.bhrxt.

"It "odd b. ..dvisr.ble for you to for.- xi a letter to the Deien
of tfcj roiio 1 faculty in odor to initiate th~ procodur. in the
crop r aannor. I .ncloso - draft. Plcaso infom a- when the
’ -letter h s bboc .UsnsttShwi, so that Dr. Eaachor any sutoit ala
••crk. Si-r*i Sicvers."

- 374 -


13 Doc 46 . H - 3-7 - UO - Perrin .

Court Ho. 1

Artl tho draft of tho lot tor is on pago 157 of tho English
Docisaont 3ook. It is cddrossod to tho Profossor Dr, Hens
Stein, Doan of tho rtodioal faculty of tho University of
Stra«f,burg,


- 375 -


"Wjr dear Professor* By order of tte Raichs fuehrer SS, the department
head in the Institute for Military Scientific Research of the waffen-SS,

SS ftwptaturmfuehrer Dr, Raschor has carried out experiments dealing with the
freeling of the human body which are important for the conduct of war. Since
the Roichsfuehrer SS wishes Dr, Rascher to obtain admission to tho faqulty,

the latter intends to do so by subediting his thesis on "Experimental tests

‘ # _ - * •

on phenomena occurring during the freezing of the human body." Tho Roichs-

fuchrer SS is willing to agree to this, but considers it necessary that tho
aocrocy regulations laid down for such experiments also bo complied vdth in
carrying out the admission to the faculty. Professor Dr. Hirt, further-more,
is familiar with the da tails of Dr. Raschor's work. The RoichsfUehror S.3
therefore requests the.t tho work bo examined by conpotont ambers of your
radical faculty end » dooiaion be made whothor the admission to tho faculty
can bo carried out.'

This document yhora us that tho University of Strassburg was, in fact, an
SS university, and »o willsoothat, amor., others, the Dofcrvdant Karl Brondt
had scoo rolatior/»hlp with mosbor s of tho faculty in Strassburg.

I come now *,o —

THE PnssiDTJJTi I would liko to return a moment to your Exhibit 120 re¬
ferring to Dr. BJcmo.

XU HCHfcMrr* les, sir.

THE FRS/AEB.T* I rotice in that exhibit, on pago 1 %, Professor Blorvi
is describe -1 twico in connection with cancor research.

HR. VJHANEY t That is ri:ht,yes, sir.

THE F32SIDENT: And on tho next page, 155, he if. also described trice as
Coccissjoncr for Cancor lesoarch.

M.U * Cft.NET: Tos, sir.

THE IRESKEKT: Ifow I do not understar.' dearly the moaning of the fore of


this letter. Is it your assumption or opinion that Dr. Blooo was also in
charge of those other five items which are listed on page 15U?


1* De o-H- AT3- 4- 2->rlC o- AX
Court No. 1


HR. ::CHiul2f; That is certainly the contention of the
Proaeoutlon, Your Honor, if Mr. Tmvls will paaa me that

exhibit; It la 120. The Reich Research Council, Your Honor,

■ •

oonalated of a number of 8o-callod leading 8Clentl8ta in
Germany who wore working there and who had a research organ¬
ization under them ao to apeak, it waa a rather looee ro*«
search organization; that la to aay they might be dealing
with a number of different aclentl3ta who had no relation
one to the other. How Kurt Slomo waa Known aa the plenipoten¬
tiary for Cancer Research and waa appointed to that position
in tha Reich Research Council, theoretically, by Hermann
Goerlng. So that was his title; he -'as tho plenlpotonlary
for Cancor Research.

T.G PRJSID3RT: Does It appear who prepared these docum-
ontc 120? Do they bear the signature of Kurt Blomo?

HR. HCHjtNZYj Thoy do not, air.

THi PRESIDENT: I notlco at the head of this column It
says: "Requested by;■ «nd then "Schwarz, Seol, Rasohor, Hlrt,
*Von Boratoll", and then below that "Cancor Roaoarch", worked
on by; Blome," and the same on th* next pago.

HR. iiCHAiJ2Y: /oil, sir, the boat explanation of that Is
that this hand-writ ton note up here, I ao quite sure, wna writ¬
ten on this document after It was captured. This la. In fact,

a research cord taken from the files of tho Rolch Research

•

Council, a largo number of which were captured. Now there la
a hand-written note up on the left hand aide of the translat¬
ion which says; "taken out of the file after being requested,"

. and although the translation doesn't ah:w it, that Is dated
June 10, 1945, and it quite apparently refers to a roaueet
cade by someone who was interested In picking up this partic¬
ular research card and waa pulled out, undoubtedly, by some

V?7


1' Deo-H-A7D-4-a~Prloe^*A

%

Court No* 1


o-


Geraan worker who was familiar with these files and who was
retained after the end of the war. The card ltsolf Is a
oard whloh givesthe research assignments under the Bearbelter,
who is Professor Dr. Bloco. His namo appears on the exhibit
up here at the top and under here they describe the research
asslgnuents which are being carried out under the ausplcoe
of the Defendant 31one.

TttS pa^dXDi:;?: I would llko to know the basis for that
assumption.


• T 77a


13 De-H-^T3-4-3-Price (ec)
Court Jfo. 1


«. M ^nam ri Well, sir, perhaps if I passed up this exhibit it
would be a little clearer what I aean. I take this card to cean that
all assignsants on this sheet are under the Defendant Bloae, since
it carries the ■•ords! ^Worked on by«" and then proceeds to list
asA describe research assiznosnts under that.

ER. iAUTSR: Hr. President —

?HS ?RS3ID3I.Ti jjuot a aoornt, Counsel, until w fcaviMxS on
opportunity to examine this exhibit, j.oj'ill hear you in Just a
!X>aont after wc have had an opportunity to oxooiru this exhibit.
(Ruining docueout.}

X1E PHS3ID2«.Ti The Tribunal will ho^r froa Counool.
wi. SAUT2R: Hr. President, I would lik- to sake e request to
taka.a look at tho photostats. It -ou’d cake, things easier for xo
boeauao ottorwiso I will hevo to roquost tho photostat through ny
office and it would bo easier if I could soo it non at this ti«0.

T S PRS3 iXSHT x Cortainly.

DR. 3A0I5RI Thank you very ouch. I only ranted to soo if

this photostat bears any signature and that do:; not s.-m to bj

the ccao; thorc is no signature. ‘Thank you very r.-.ch.

!?.. .'cKA.NET: If "our ifenor ©louse, of course th- discussion

was to th-. weight to be. :iv_n to this doouner.t. Tbit io to soy

it is only of probative wa*uo ;xd do_s of course not $0 to the

cdnisslbility. He never, in connection with its probative v .luo,

•

I -o ld like to «c.kc clc^r eg-ln that this docua-nt . scoured
from th., file at th- trlrls in Kmnkfurt M it reprosontu c
filo cord ? is ted under tb; neo- Kurt 31one; -nr. to- f-3-> 3hr " 3

that Xart ’’lor , cs chief or ?3. nipot-ntiary for 3..nc-r Hosotrch,

’ - •

these research os sigma atr undar his ns noted.

T'C PHZSIDK.": Tha exhibit -'ill be adnittud in -viior.co r or

rhet it is -orth, subject to argaa-nt at any tiao.

- 373 -


130cc-=:-aG-51-1- ?otty (on)
Court Ho. 1


: 'cHA!ET: to ooau nor to Document 242 i ?-Po which -ill to
prosecution Inhibit 122 , end this is - deposition taken Tror o»
too lUdoutky b7 tto fer Crises Branch at Dachau. It was t&ton in-
aodiatoly foil or ini; the — or at loust shortly follovin? tho litora-
tion of that caao by tto Aac r loan Forces. This is listed in tho
Docent Took as. e translation of Docusjnt 2423-Pb rhich is a .
nistrkc because this ii — tho original deposition token in
English, and tho Court will notico that tho/ s/oro in an inter¬
preter toforo iaiucting tto questioning of Loo okloveky. to had
hopjd to be able to brine F .ttor i.Jdousky tore to testify toc.uso
to is one of tho for livihg survivors of tto \a.tcr-:'roizln" exoori-
nont? in Dachau, Unfortunately no have toun unable to 1'catc hLs,
nd so .1 offer instead this deposition.

lx' tto Tribunal clous j, I j infora/d that they do n -t have
that docuncut ready to offer at thin *. 1 bj, but it .'111 to dovn
shortly fron thu docun-.nt roor., so I -ill o.xs this .nd off^r —

DR. PELCXMAMlt ’l.y I r.quest tto Tribunal - Attorney P-lckmniui
for tto Defendant Schr.-f v. IVy I request tho Tribunal to have tto
English original of this testioory road to you. In tho docuaont
roon for tto International Military Triburul several days go on
the occasion of xottor t.etirany I have ruchockod til-* slpa lures,

-nd I h-v. not tocn able to find any. I tov» onlv seen tto noto
of thj A3oric_u offici .1 *7ho Wa3 interrogating tto • itnaso to tho

effect that It rj rx not possible for hir. to proc>ire tto niinessoB

•

toe-.us- ttoy hcv- toen .toent in the n-.oitia-, .-.nd -s a ror.ult
Of this no sign turjs coaid to procured. It is possible that
t.hi3 is tto case also «ith this -iIncas.

TrE ??_13tEIK: Tho docuKr.b is not -.t this tiru lr. court.
Discussion "n tto admissibility of th document rill be r-s-rved
until thc-docua. nt is brought in.

«?.. UcHASST: I noru tton to Jocua-nt dO-533 vhich iU bo


DofsrvJcnt 3iivers. ZxhibLt 122 consists of t>» first six contha
of this diery, and it is c very interesting docoxnt on r. greet


nurbor of points. 1 could like to rood c.i this tioo a tav of tho
oxc-rots. '*fc vill hate occasion to refer to this dociawnt ct other
point-. ir. tho trie! si no- it tecra upon r. mater of


- .379 k -


r

13-Doc-:'-^>5-2- Fatty (oa)

Cou-t Ho. 1


different expurioente. The entry of 12 January 1943 re .'.is -3 follows:
■ 33 Haaptstamfoohrer 3tebs«-zt Dr. R-.c eber:

Item 1. (r.) -dviscs tect ho has hsep, pat in the rosorv- lir.bl-. to
roe .11 r.t cny tin. * tho Luftwaffe.

(b) Necoescry that he be given leuvs until his transfer.

(c) Instigation of noocssnry notions.

2. (a).Proouruaoi»t of nocosarTy apnemti and instruix-r.ts fx*on

Selland.

(b)~Instructions to S3 Ofcorstumfu.hr..r Dr. Schneider.

3. Prvcur\oo.nt of usOmndr. on reaction of troops to cJCtr^-x)
c-'l 1.

4. Discussion of the until no-.; n^ljctcd r suits of the uso

of ft. .stein water. 3ontir.u-.tinn -culd not pay.

.* • • •

5. Procurenc.-it of oteoreMr. on tto conference) conooming tho
•jffoots of coin in Buorahorg.*

The n&t entry oc tho solve d_to is:

“1. S3 Untorcctorfuohr.r linnon, !‘r. .lUr of tho Econo.nic
* Adeinistretivo Der-Ttr-nt concerning pro=ar--.i..nt cf
c.on.jrti for Dr. Reactor's research."

Tho r-xt ontry ro-d-.x " Continuation of discussions *ith
ItuotstorafiMbrer Dr. P-rsetor." 4a -ntry on tto 15 January 1943
is: " 2. 3S il.uptstursfiuhror Schnltilor: ( r,.) Continuation "f
•■eric by S3 Kr.unt8tumf-u.hr- r D-. Rancher."

Your Honors sill recall thr.t 5chni*ri-r r o nr. official .t
tto Dachau Concentration C no.

« 16 J-nu-ry 1943. S3 a-.ttptsturnfu.hrer Dr. R. octor reports on
tto r.ault-e of his disousoion with tho toicto .rzt-ov."

Your Hw»rc •..■ill ree l! th.t -o have put in s -.n oxtoioit .
r-port of that dlecuacioc. >x tto neat p cf the 4;:,2ich Doc-.i-
..nt Book, th-.t is, o.«o 163, iter. 2 under 27 J-nu.ry 1943 r-r.isx
1 ~ .c .’JSC th> c van is toapor-Jili* clos-d, Dr. Resetor io to -or!:
with 33 K iytsturc.bxrfuchr-r Prof-ssor Dr. ?f uuwnntiel, • I-rburg ,

,r.i nrocc-J to 3tra33bnv." tfrdor 2 " Jenu.uy 1.43 ( r 'o find n it.n
st.tir.-i thr.t "SS lir.uptsturcfo-hr-r Jr. ?.--so:v.r. Tto G.n-r-1 L-.-
■jpoc* :r of Sanitation f or tto Luft-r f fo has dod.rod n'-isolf on¬
to-sod •o tho c-ntir-j ticn of Reactor's -ork. Altitude Vo b. * ato.n,"
.and r . h.ro road int ■ *to r.cord a Ltt r fi»a ii-v ’•r.ich
tiolifi-c »n th .t thought. Dr. 29 J nu .ry 1943: ' »•> Db.rjtumibrxn-
fu.hr.r Dr. °r- r.-it: P^oort on r.ttituio of professor Dr. iippMe
tor r6 ?. ccacr'e rose rch -ork." *f.vnx * *rs. .“ schor (’ey
t.lophano). - -risO. on tto r.-a:rt o .rotos-.r 7r. 3i-pto.

1 F. brum'19.’?. Do'vrtrcnt of Sr.-.-1.at ion of tto ) f *- -r.-o j ,

--ri- d.fuolircr Dr. Blower.abhor. i*r:.euroi an -.rati- lr.-
3tr-r-o.itr, tool3 rvd chm-icals for .xn.rixnts “/ ^ a.uotntura-
ii-Iir-r Dr. R-tutor.*


- yo -


13-Doc-N-JG - 5-2-Putty (o=)
C'urt 5c. 1


I -ill c~.ll to tha Court's attention that tha Chief of tho
Department of Sanitation of tl» Kaffon-SS rca tha Defendant
G&na’.cer*., atS Elu^nru utter «cb one of his subordinilos in tx.t
c-x-clty. Cfc 12 February 1943* * 3S Httuptsturefaa'jor Dr.
P.-.achvr roperts by telephone on tho successful outcoas of ne¬
gotiation* rith SS Obcrsturnbcnnfuuhror Professor Dr. rf.juv.n-
stiul, K-j-burp." On 18 Fotrunrv 190 concerning Si Heuptrturn-
fuohrcr Dr. R.sciwi "1. Gharged with oocicution of expcriiunts
Tith an cr.ilvble olnnt-oxtract to euro can cor.

o


f


13 -Dcoo=bjr-M-AS- 5 - 3 -S , utty (~n)
Court So. 1


2 Position to be taken in th- oroce-dings instituted r.g.’irut Rnscaer.
3! Transfer to E ffsn-3S. fcscbor is Iso to rrite an application .f
his ora. •

4. Record of fr-osiac exnorirv.ntn with c ni a - . l h_ct.


lod -/1th respect to the adjutant's Office, R.ichafuehr-r SS;

•X. S3- fcnptsturefoehror Schnitzlcr: Insertion e£ SS Court into
proceedings instituted against So H-aptsturcTu-hror Dr.

Rnaetor b7 the Lafttfrffa Court."

It :.onc ro fro- th.se entries which I have just rend t,/.t ov.verc
fvr one w..s _ry .such concerned that R schor bo c>urt-u*.rU 2-d by
thu Luftceffo ns a result of this tug -f war ov.r his o-.rvioeo. Thia,
f course, did not, in f-.ct, occur.

On f.a rv xt jxego the entry for the 12 lfcrefc 1943:


■ S3 lleuptotumfuehror Dr. Rnacber:

1. Transfer froa the Luftonffo to R £C cu-io tjcs approved txlr.y ~R

accord-.nee with Vt'ra.l Advice fron GoneV l 'b^rstnto-.rzt JTuos-
3>r Dr. Kinpke. _

2. Report -on status >f ,htso*>rk.

3. Serur. production, in accord nco with 1-tt.r o / ..aren.

4 rod drvn at the hott-or of the rage on 6 J.oril 1943 concerning
SS a-uptst'xmftteJxrur Dr. R rc.Tor:


“ 1.

2 .

3.


i: ff, who hr.e -*;in be... decl rod cl.gi *. 0 f'r
service, rill V.v- t b. cade r. ao'eber >. tho pol.'co Oreo.
DiacuK'ior of .fippVc's letter to »S Ob-rrrupponfu.hror -.olif.
S'uist::.nt of SS 0bursturabnnnfUJhror Dr. Kuohr. of th. Ur
Sc'noric 3 -.xd in tb, Reich Research Council in the -oroevro-
nor.t of .to- rati."


And I ten 3 under 6 April 1943 indiottes that they ’-ore still at


this tiroc continuing certain lou-pr ssuro chanber coqo>ria.r.t'i.

Itca No. 1C xsys that • Assignment to tho Rvichanrzt ^ does n t
alter r.tt.-.chaont to jA noc.salty of reporting t> tho .»hnencrbo."
I ur H.n-.ro -..ill ruc..U_tn t there flnr Uy;»as vao difficulty


betreon R-acbor and Gmvitc about torn-a h. r.s t; report tvl .n
to -bother r not bo should c ntinur to work under the euspie-s


•f the ..hn cerbe.

I drop d urn t> ..n itoc under 7 April 1943, it-h 15:

« ;ssi^sunt of Dr. Rnsdsor i Reicoo_rzt-i3. R." — 'hi is
Rnachor —

« re-..ins undor c an rd of * - iSineaorb. _nd roust b. tr .nsf erred
t . it."

D -T. ct the btt r. if the o , 17 !l“jr 1943, i-- 1


- 3 5 1 -


l>Dc«c:V.r-::-J>5-3-Putty (e=)
3iurt S:. 1


• S3 H-aptstanibaanfashrcr Dr. Reschor (by t^luphono); Report
-in disoussioa with S3 Grupronfuohror .rvf J53>r Dr. OebbarSt.*

Document 354&-P3 is zv:xt tpi nill to ’’rjee entire Exhibit —

Tffi PSSSUBST* it this tiaj the O-urt trill roetss ftr f If toon

rdnutos.

U re<xss was tjc^n.)


1 v

.

u


- 3?1 - -


Court I .

13 Dec-: - K.' - 6-1 - Ray - LJ3

rS TpgOTngff: The Tribunal is new ir. session.

k?.. ifcHMEf* If the Tribunal please, rre would now like tw offer
Document 35U6-FS as Prosecution's exhibit 123. This is the S levers
Diary for If Hi. The Docua&nt mich went in as Prosecution's Exhibit
122 was the Sievors Diary fer the first six Booths of 19u3, and un-
fortunately we have not found the regaining part of the diary for the
last six Bonths of 19U3, but ~q do have here toe full ciiary lor the
year 19UL and that is Prosocution's Exhibit 123. I .would like to read
Just a very few excerpts free this doc leant since it is new covering
the year 19Wi. Thoso do not havo eany references to freezing problems.

The first oxcorpt i: free- or. entry gate on 6 .January, iUc 2 (c) whore
it statba*

"Writing P.oichsfuehror-SS to SS Cb-r^ruppenfuohror Pohl concorn-
ing support oi scientific rossarch work."

Iton (d) is "Space for oxocution cf freezing oxpjrhnonts."

And then wo skip to an entry --ado on ll* January wboro *.o see tho
entry RPR which is an abbreviation for tho Reich Rosoarch Council. Tho
lernan word for Reich kcsoarch Council is Relcheforschungsrat. It statesi

■RFR, fraong others, Engineer Bocker ro securing of apparati for
firuu^hor and Dr. aschor, SS Stursbannfiahror lolling bf telephone re
.ralaria control, Auschwi'.s."

Tho next it©» is an entry jade on 15 January. Tnr.t '.gain rolor3
to the Reich Rosoarch Council, Dr. Qrauo.

"(1) Securing cf .petals for Dr. Rasclur's wsrk.

(2) Authorisation for building cf exporiBontatton plant by
Borchers Brothers, A. u."

An entry un 21 January, i-an 8, ra:-ds:

"SS Oi ureaurcannfuohror ,-lnfstry Council, .Dr. 3r'ndt." That is
a rafururco to tan D°fendaiit Rudolf Brandt whd was Minister Counsel
cf Interior under Heinrich Kic;l~r. Iton S reads:

"Freezing oxp<-rir»nts, Dr. Rascker, premises, SS Cfcorsturscuahrcr
3er? and SS Hauptstumfuehrer Heine, discussion of current natters.


- 382 -


Court I

13 Dec-4 - Hi: - 5-2 - ilay - LJ3


£cong others Bygdoo, freezing experiments. Thaerigen."

And then I aid.? to an entry on p^e 171 of the &.glioh Dccicont
Bock. An entry nado cn tho 22r.d cf liarch which roads* -

■33 Eauptsturafuahrar Dr. Haschori Business discussion, among

other things pol^al production. Results of experiments with agar

•

capsules. Propsrations for freeting axjx.rL-'.onts during the winter
conth 19UU and U5. Demand for prisoner caseand fer Schltchters."

The roforormo to pclygal production rill boccens clear to tho court
at a later stage ir. tho trial, and I think those arc the only antrios
dealing with freezing oxperir.onts, but, ns I have stated, Ke will mako
continual roforcr.es to .thOou. diaries cf tho Dofendant Sievers which very
very clearly points cut that Sievurs was ccnnoctod with practically all
of tho criminal experiments with which this case is concerned. I would
liko to of for into evidoaco Doc a er.t HO fJi? which is not ir. Your Honors'
Document 3ook, but we h-.vo translations hero to hand up. This docunont
has beer, coda available to tho Defendant's Inforaoticn Conter for tho
roquiaico vsonty-feur heurs, and this will bo Prosecution's Exhibit 12b.

I ask tr.o court to iiaort it in tho fraozing docunont book which you
new have before you. This" is a n "to nado by tho Defondur.t SloVers and
dated 16 Decoder 19u2, tad Itwr Honors rill recall tr. t a nu bor cf
the frouzin., experiments took ol'.co, particularly dry freezing expori-
cents, after tho date h-rc mentioned. Too subject of this moncranduii
is “Dooporation with t--<o Hy^iono Institute of tho ..affon-SS and Ycur
Honors will rorxebor that, this institute was under the c.rruand of tho
Defendant ^xugovsky rhe ir. turn at this ti;o was subordinate. t. tho
Defendant Qoiakon. The roar- izati^n cf tho medical 3-r ice cf tho SS
occurred in Ac \3t 1>L3, ofner tho dato of this instrument, and it was
only on tho occasion of the reorganization that the Hygiene Inotituto
cf the .ioffcr.-SS van transferred ie tho deceased, Dr. C-rawitz. Tho
rwawendua roads :s folio* 3:

■uith ruforcnco tc -y Letter of 9 Juno 19ii2, regarding ver-in con¬
trol, a . acting to_k place first on 21 October 19h2, with the pcrticipa-


Court I

13 Dec-H - HU -6-3 - UO - Ray

tion of SS Standar to fuehrer nr. ;trug<7wsky and SS Ur.torsturaifuehror Dr.
Scharlau, Knesobockstr., U3-U*. Order discussion ns iho cooperation
not only in the field of verain control, but also in the research-sphere
ef Raschor c.zd with regard tc the use of Oastoin water in cases of
freezing, os well as in various operational fields of the Hygiene Insti¬
tute, as had already boon laid down in the interview with SS Untorsturm-
fuchror Dr. ichorlau on 6 Novell or 19-Ul (X-Enterprisoj reloaso.cf the
archeologist Hundt.

K further rioting tjck place then nt the Hygiene Institute of tho
•ioffon-SS on 20 Severer 1?U2 in which SS Standortonfuehror Dr. Krugowsky,

I » • 9

SS Standortonfuehror 3iow>rs and- lecturer Dr. llay took part. Dr, May
praisod.on that sccasion to send in hio research plan." /—


•N


-381


13-Oeo-4t-ATr7-l Sc\W (Sb)

Court Ko. 1

I would like to say at this nee tin-, first mentioned here on 21
October 1912, and at least froo that date, the defendant llrugowski was
in contact with the defendant Sievers, arc it was understood thrt -he
Hygiene Institute of the 'feffen SS would cooperate with Use deceased
Doctor Ha ocher in his Dachau experiments. Ii you ~ill also recall, one
of the entries in Sievers diary, stated that they were securing, apparatus
frea Doctor Bluoer.reiter who was a subordinate of defendant Karl Oenzken,
for the purpose of the RaeoLwr experiments.

The second pere of document ho. 64,7 reads as follows:

' "SS-Cfcerstrurnbanrifuchrcr Dr. Irugowsfcy of t!.e Kedipal Office of
the OS, Chariotterburg, Knesebacicstr. 4.3/U, is Moridnf. on behalf of the
Belch Eastern Ministry IRoichacinistcriun 0st4 x>n fever nosquito control
in tho aroas in the East occupied by us.

" The fever auaquito control,in the Lkraine has b-on handled in
peace timo by the Tropical Institute in uoscow and several slations for
that purpose have been established in the various districts. Those
control stations are now being rc-orgnnized in the various districts
under the s.p« rvision of the SS.

" SS-Obcrstonjt-amfuchor Dr. Mrugousky ia coin'" do * n t».ere within
the next few days in order to determine where tho control measures are
nest urgent. It is to be aimed at, that at leant the main road to
fciew ar.d one of th»* great ore nines, wJieru ore is being ninod by us,
on: protected against lalnrla.

DR. PIBT'Dr,: I contest the authenticity of tho document that was

last read into evidence. On the second ^ago of tho document, 64.7 there

%

is no date nor signature. Cn tb photostatic copy in front of t» there
can bo found neither a dnte nor a signature.

jg», iJcHAyET: If the Tribunal picas-s, the observation nadc by the
defense counsel for Jrugowsky is quite correct in so for as the second
poec of this document contains no signature, however, it seams a-jporent
to nc that both of these documents wore -found together. Thu original
is certified p.s being located in the Berlin Document Center. 7no first
pace of the document is signed by th* defendant Siovers, and I do not see*
that lack of a si-jnature* * 385


1? Dao-H-^&^-a-Beard-oX
Court No. 1


O


on the second page necessarily shows that the document Is not
a genuine authentic copy of a document captured, of course,
in military operations.

DR. FL2GIINO; I should like to ask that the counsel for
the Proseoution submit a report regarding the capture of
this document, <%a far as I can see from this photostatic
oopy, different typewriters were used in writing this doe-
unont — No. 64?. The type on the first and second page
differ, as far as I oan dee. Thoreforo, it oannot bo said that
these documents belong, togethor.

MA. HoHANSY: May It please the Tribunal, In order to
simplify the natter and to remove any ground for controver¬
sy, I suggest that we romovo the second p igo of the document
which we have offored as Prosecution's Exhibit 124, and
simply put in the first page which is signed by the defen¬
dant 31evors, and which boars a date, and which thoro lo
not controversy about the authenticity. In this case you
car. simply romovo from your Dooumont Book the second page
of the translation of Document .Jo. 647, and if wo care to
Investigate the source of this document, and then reintrod¬
uce It we can do so at a later date.

T.Z PRSSTDSiIT: Tho second pago of Prosecution's Sxhlblt
l«s4 may be removed without prejudice to tho page being
offered at some later date. Sxhlblt 124 will consist of one
page only.

MR. rtC.-UHY: And, now, I would like to return to the
deposition of Leo iflchaloweki, which Is Document No. 2428VPS,
page 159 of the Sngllsh Document Book; and I now offer this
as Prosecution's Sxhlblt 125. Tho defense counsel for
Schaefer, I think, was about to make seme objection to the
introduction of this document. I think It Is admlssable on

any one of a number of grounds.

*86


1* Dec-H-.Jr-7-a-3eard-A:<
Court Ho. 1


firstly, I think the document is admissible because It
vas accepted into evidence before the International Etlltary
Tribunal as an exhibit by Great Britain. I an told by i-lr.
Hardy that this note is with the original document before
Judge 3ebnng now.

Seoona, this deposition was contalnod in u report mado
by an official comnitteo of the United States Arm' on the
Concentration Camp Dachau. The --ray set up a number of In¬
vestigating committee which, after the capture


■*86a


13-Doo ^O »7-3 - Board

Court tfb* 1

-f various ooiocntmtion cenps, iasodiatcly coxiueW. very extensive i»-
restigations, nalfing a groat rnBbor of written siatorents fron the innates
of thise concentration ca=ps, and this is such a document. In fact, it is
sicnly ob. statorent fren a very volicinous report on the Dachau Concent
Crop, th- whole of the report being 2li2$-PS.


ration


13-Ooc-l~AG-8-l-Hcerd :


Court o. 1

t£ rTLCfTA!'*': Dr. Pelctasanr., counsel Tor the defendant Schaefer.

I should like to atke ooce remarks or. that matter. There is sou-, thing
■hich I found out in connection .with the investigation of this docuncnt.

Zu counsel for the prosecution co* s not contest that the document bears
no signature. This docuncnt, r5-2128, consist of tixeu volv.ee. f n t
the end of Celurx 3 the ran in clierge- of the investigation states that a
nurfcvr of witnesses, who allegedly hid cade atateccnts, wuru not to be
reached ant that, therefore, they could not sign their statements. ..nor.g
those people is t: is teatirony of the father, which was subeditt4 here.

If this docuncnt were to bo admittod because of other reasons, namely,
because it is part of a report of the Aourican ..ray or other American
authorities, then the entire report would have- to be submitted.

I'Mucvcr, l doubt t’.yt the Tribunal will recognise this report is an
off'clsl r«-nort in the s nee of th-._Chr.rter il it takes into considerrtion
that the biggest number of the a tat-cent or. which tlds report in based
bear no signature whatsoever. In addition, 1 I don't believe that this is
a r-port which car. b« conaide <d to bo a r«. o t of -ho Government author¬
ity in the sense of th. Cv rtor. It is rxrcly cn investigation of the
Investigation Cwci' t which had put thia report on in thr'bc volum. s.

r

Kft I'c’Ue’nT*: If the Tribunal pl.nse, I observe once more, that this
document which ic now being offered was intruduccd buforu the I.I.T.:
and under Article 9 of Ordinance !*urt>tr 7, thia Court shell tab: Judicial
notice of official Government documents and reports of the Lnited Kationa,
including the act? end documents of the comittces Set up in th- varicun
Alll.d co-entries for the investigation of war crimes fnd tnc record end
findings ol military or oth-x tribunal’s of any of the United 1-ntic.ns.

The docemt new fc-fore the Court is part cl* the records of th«- Intor-
nr Li car 1 ::il t ry Tribunal and i* cl. arly admissible under «rtlclu 9.
ilor-ov- r, the document nou before th- Court is signed by Cf.pt- in L. <*alktr,
Clyde L. 'fclker, an Lnvcstigator-cw-ranor; and while t ; is cop;- is apparont-
1;. not signed by the deponent liichalowski, c^rtr.inly in any cv-.nt this docu¬
ncnt is admissible. t

388


*


*


Court lo. 1 '

£F. BLCTIAKH: I contest that ti» doeaxmt was sifcnittod in its ontiroty
beforo tix) International Military Tribunal. I want to ask the counsel fca-

*

thJ prosecution when this doc ire nt was sutcittod in its entirety. According

to ry recollection, only excerpts fron this doocunt were subnit tod. I coroly

%

wish to joint out that at tho end of this particular state runt it can bo
aoon Tory clearly that thoro is not signature of tho witnosf available;
and I should again Him to ask. tho Tribunal to refer to Vcluio 3> whjro the
invest:.gating official hinaolf states that ho could not obtain signatures.

*5;. ’toHIHBT: I should like to soy that it is certainly true that this
full docurcnt was not introduced, at least in its English version hofero ths

I.’’.?. That was done for the xooacn that they were not lnt-roirtod in tho full

0 0

otatemnt of ’‘ichalorski. Thjnjfcre, they introduced oxcorpts fron this
stoterent; but doarly if thu oxcorpts wor« dardssiblo, tho statonwt as
a whole is adaiasibL;. ad as for putting In all of 2U28-PS, it is, of
course, a ridiculous narortion because it \e a very largo voluno ei‘
docrants; end «j fov oao are interested in none of then exoept this ono,

I can't biliovo that the dofonsj cooisjI fer Schaefer is intorusloc*

• +

in any of tha rest if tho a, either. As a natter of fact, this docunont, as

far oa I can soo, dxs not run against tho defendant Schaofor. Thcroftro, I

can't quite undersUnd tho ^roat ccntrovor ry toiug raised about the

admissibility of this docununt cn f.vj part if his counsel.

•

DR. ISICCAMf i ‘ith roferunco to ay List fcmal objoction, I havo ccco

forward to reply. Th- defondant Schaofor is also chargod with cor5piracy;

and this extorr.J to all facts. Tho other arsortion of counsel for

prosecution, ixjly, that because oxcorpts r-ro odrdtted into tho l.M.T.

thereby a s:x cticn is n-du fer this Tribunal I bultevo is a ccaplotoly

incorroct sta.toa>nt. If this High Tribunal ihould find that admission of

evidence tc fSx I.: .',', hftd boon carried out jrronoously; that Judicial
V '

procedure had net t».n carried cut, th-n I bviievc that this Tribunal has
a perfect right to s :y and has a.jurfoct ri^ht to stata that it wvila not
ddnit this docuicnt,

THS KESIIRT : Tho fact that fron tho siatenonts before tho Tribunal

this Dee uni nt wasadnittod in ovidonco before Ui International Military

389 •


13 - !Xjo- 1W0- I- 3 - Slakloy _

Court So, 1

Tribunal is not necessarily binding. It uay have boon ecbittcd without ob¬
jection as far ns this Tribunal knewrs.

Th. obj-ction of counsel for the defense to the offer cf this docurcnt

C * __ ——————

sill bj sustained without prejudice tc its being offered again if other
supporting evid-nco nay be procured.

I?., Yell' JET* This corplotos th. presentation of docuruntory ovidenoo
on the freezing expcrlnants conducted at Dachau; and Ur. H ardy will continue
new with tho introduction of testimony and proof on tha nnlarla Experiments
HARDY i lay it please tho Tribunal, the prosecution charges in tho
indictoer.t tho defendants Karl Brandt, Handler, Rostock, Gebhardt, Blono,

Rudolf Brandt, "rugowsky, Poppondick, end Siovors, in Count Two, Paragraph 6,
Sub-paragraph C, and in Count Three, Paragraph 11, with special responsibility
for and participation in the nnloria -xperinents,

;.s will bo shown ir. the course of this presentation, thoso oxporinants
were also conducted at the Dachtu Concuntratien Carp; and in this connection
s ’.iilitary Govurnnant Court of tho United States of -rvirica sentenced Karl
Schilling to doath by hanging ir. the case of the United States versus Woiss,
Support, at nl.

..t this tin. tivj pr^cation respectfully requests that tho Honorable Tribunal
call the witness August ‘^c inrich Vi*m,g to tiu witness stand. Dik) notice hofl
been filed with the office cf tho Secretary Qancral; and tho do form a counsel
h rve b-cn duly nitfiod that this stress has boon sicnonud to appoar bo faro
this Tribunal to testify tc facts concerning the oxporirents at tho Dachau
Concentration C-»'ip.

THE rReSnEIu i The witness will tcd= tho stand. Mr. Prosecutor ?
a-JWT : los, sir.

TH2 HSSHEIT : Is this am a Gonaan national ?

!5s. H_T)T : This n~n is a Goran national, yos sir. *

?p..:z apT.SG , a witness, took the stand and testified ns fellows :

TKI ?. : ZS:EEHT : Vfit:*ss, y~u dll stand at your plac« in the witness box,
h ll up your right hand, and bo sworn, repeat after ru r

I K^ar by God, the -.lnighty'end Credscient, that I will spook tho pure


truth and -..illwithhold wd add nothing
( -he witness repeated the octh.)


39C


1 3^_iuic-e-i.-Biakitr too)

Court Vo. 1

1 YL FSSneUT: ^rocc<-d.

DT3JCT FXAilE.’ATI'T

S v !!?.. “AP-DY:

Q Titn-ss, what is your full r.anc?

1 Franz Riitwcg

Q ~ , Itne8a,.*hcn w where were you born?

A I was bom in Luc urn on the 10th of April, 1907.

Q ”r.*.t is your occupation?

A I an a physician.

Q "itr...3s, will you kindly tell th Tribunal wher your prosent
place of abode is?

A At the rxent I nc. in priosn in «n iaUrw-At canp in Hanne-

borRe.

C ^111 you kindly 1 .11 U* Trib-.r.'l for what r~i son ;ou are n
prison' r in the internment ccap?

A I was an CT'. rsturrbannfuchrcr in t*> 'Jaffen SS.

Q ^icn *iviv you at Uachau -?

:n HA.DY: Pardon rx, your Honor, this witness is apparently
tho wrong witx ss.

It ’<buld you kindly repat your full n-uac again, please?

A Rict.wcg.

Q Kow do you spell that, r. 'itn.ss?

A H-i-c-t->-e—g.

••R KA-D'f: I*b sorry, your Honor, the Marshall has called up the
wronr witness es«Vfc ncg. I l*vc called up August Heinrich Viewer,.
r-XpriSDE-'T: 7!:e wit.Trss wi\l-st're naide.


13 Dec 45 !' - 9-1 - UG - Cock
Court So* 1


mr. EAPDY: If Your Honors plo;.so, I will proceed with
the presentation of the nalaria experiments and when the
ritness arrives, we can uso him at that tine.

•BS2 PRESIDEST: You nay go cfcoad.

UR. TARDY: At this tine. Your Honors, the Prosecution
respectfully requests the Tribunal to take judicial notice
of tfco official review of the procoodlngs in the Dachau
trial, under finance 7, Article 9. In accjgjanco with tie
rules of the Tribunal I si all introduce the entire findings
cf fact contained in the official review of tho trial with
rospoct tc nalaria oxporiuonts. Thoso particular facts have
boon given Dccunont Sc. 856, rad have boon translated into
tho oomnn language and undo available to tho defense counsol
U,is Gocvr-ont is also efforod as Prosecution Exhibit No. 125.
I shall read freu tho documont. This is cont-lnod on pago
1 of lour Honors' Docunont 3ool:. Do you lava tho nalaria
documents with you?

THE PRESIDENT: Ho, I havo net soon then.

;jr. TAIDY: They woro dolivored two days ago to tho

Conoral Socrotary.

ayo PRESaJEK-’ They havo net roachod tho Tribunal.
vr. EAIBY: Your Honors, I suggest that wo eond tho
Gcnor. 1 Secretary after tic copies. Tho> should bu in tho

Qcnoral Secretary's offico.

(Tho docur.ent3 ...a procurod)

iR. LAiDY: I shall proceed tc rad Docucont No. 656,

"sjcsiacts fro:: txz ssnsu op proceeds gs op ex szxerll

1ILITARY COURT IS THE C..SE OP UVIHD STATES VS. “SISS, SUP¬
PORT, E? .'.L, hXID AT DACHAU, GZIcAdlY.

• EE/DO.UiRTSRS

FIED US ijear AND EAST5EH TULITP-Tf DISfeCT
Offico 'f Judgo Advooato.

REVIEW OP PROCEEDINGS OP GT2'. I-U.L lALIT.P.Y COURT Til EX C/.SE
0? UITITED ST. TPS VS. WEISS, SCE5SRT, n a* I ^-11 net road


Court Nc. 1

13 Doc 46 - I£ - 9-2 - UQ - Cook


tho roat of tho nr.no a.

"TO: Cocanandlng Gonoral, Third United States -rny and Ecat-

orn Military District, ..?0 403, Unitod St^.toa Arny; n

Now, if Your Honors will pic:.so turn to page 2, para¬
graph 2 :

"Sorios of oxporinonts concorning tho troatnont cf
caloric wore cor.ductod undor tho supervision of tho cccusod.
Dr. S chilling. 300 to 400 persons diod cs a result. *Tho
fnots olicitod with rospect to thos^exporir-onts cro sot out
in detail ir.frr in ccnnootion with Dr. Schilling."

V/o now prococd tc Section a C" of tho Roviow, Paragraph

• - — *
15, which concoms the f cts against tho individual dof oxidant,

I * #"

Dr. Klaus Kc.rl Schilling.

— - ' — — - —

112 -'RESIDENT: What exhibit nufcor did you assign to
this exhibit?

HR. i.-'DY: I assigned tho nurfoor 125.

32 PRESIDENT: This exhibit is a rovlcw by tho roviow-
ing authorities of tlo findings?

HR. HARDY: It is by tho reviewing authorities on tho
findings In tho trial held at Dachau, Gomony, in tho cr.so
cf United Statos vs. "foiss, Ruppert, ot cl.

IKS PRESIDENT: Docs this exhibit contain tho findings
of the Court:

HR. H.JDY: Shis exhibit contains tho findings of tho

Court at tho end and this is rn official review rf tho trial

and tho only publication as a rosult of tlo trial.

UTS TRESIDSiiT: It contains the findings thon which aro

r.oroly quotations fron the scr.tonccs of tho Court?

IZl. H-JIDY: If you will turn tc pago 8 in Your Honors*

Uociciont Book, second par .graph, there is statod tho Court's

s-ntonccs in this particular case, in r«-g..rd to Schilling,

and thon it is affirued by tl o Roviowing Authorities, :;f tor

393 *


Court Ho. 1

13 Doc 46 - 1! - 9- 3 - UG - Cook


having boon scnfc-on to be rovioirod, and signod by Lieutenant
General, L. K. Truscott.

USE PRESIDENT: Doos this also contain what you porcoivo
to bo pertinont documents and docur.ents upon which tho
sontoncos woro based or not?

!3. HARDY: Tills contains, Ycur Boners, tiro facts
lntrcducod free the -rgxconts of the Prosecution, as woll
as tic Dofenso, and then tho statouont of the Roviowing
Auth« ritioc cf the C curt:

ITS PRESIDENT: Vo w as I urdorst..nd it, you aro r.skirg
this Tribunal to take judicial notico cf tho ontlrc procood-
lr.gs which oulrdnc.tod in this judgr.ont, is that correct?

m. K..EDY: I asking.the c ourt to take judicial notico
of tho particular section portaining tr tho nnlaria oxporirjonts
In tho caco of Dr. Schilling at this tireo.

IE3 PHESIDEI.T: Is tho tostineny upon which thoao find-

o ♦

lngo were based available so that this Tribunal will havo
tlo opportunity, if it cares to do 3 c, to oxaninc this
tostineny?

I!R HARDY: Yes, th .t tostineny can bo nado ayt.ilr.blo,

Ycur Honors. There are liuitod ccpios on filo with tho Judgo
Advecato in V/oiabaden, .nd I an certain 1 can prcduco copios
for Your Honors* consideration.

JZ PRESIDE:-’!: I suggest ycu _;iyo tr nsidoration to that.
As I undorstand it, this is n.t a copy diroctly cf tho
findings «.f tho ccurt-.a.rtial tr nilit.ary ccr.t.is3icn or whet-
over it was that tried tho -Cofondent, but it is a copy cf
tlo _ction cf.thc reviowing ..uthcritios up:n tlioso findings?

•31. _1lDY: That is correct, Ycur Honor. Nj

S3 PRESIDENT: It nay bo adnittod, taken in view cf
fc'-e st^tOLiont of the Prosecution that tho cvidonco upon whigh

the judgment f tho Court was 'oasod, nay bo uado availablo.

3 9k


Court No. 1

J -

13 Dec 46 II - 9-4 - UG - Cool:


:H. E.'.DDY: I ahull prcoood on pc.go 2, Your Honors, of

• *

tfco dccuiront book, tho lest paragraph, cntitlod paragraph 15:

"15. Dr. ^laus ^arl Schilling. special oxpurinontal

• ~ m ^ •

section hud boon sot aaido in tho hospital fer tho oorf.orncnco

, i

of nalurift oxperinonts undor tho supervision of tho nccusod.

Dr. Schilling. Schilling pcrfcrr.od his research for tho

purpoao of doto’rcininc irrxunizc.tion fer end troataont of

nnlaria. Roquosts for prisonors vr-ro oado by S6hilling. Ono

such roquost, which was aduittod into ovidonco, str.tod that

Polish prisenors woro roquoatod. A liat •'f Innetoe was'-

■pjopr.rod in tho crap physician's cffico, tho iniiatos boing

of ell nationalities which woro roprosontod in tho conp, and

was sont tc tho labor cffico which undo a copy, cf tho list.

Thoro tho list wr.s ccnflr.ud by tho Sch.utzhr.ftl^gorfuohror"

- tint ia tho SS Caup Couumdent- "who sonotlaoa J.u.do r. fow

chcngoa lntho list. H.oso lists appo;.rod about rnco ovory

nontl; 3inco about 1943. Neno cf tho 1200 aolo'ctoos over

consontod or voluntoorod. Priests woro ofton soloctod for

thoso wxporiuont3. An ire.to, r. priest n.j:od Fathor Koch,

•

rolr.tod hi3 oxporionco in that connection. 1* 0 wr.s first
X-rc.yotl and tlion sont to tb* _r.lr.ric. station. JIo was put
intc iittlo re oil nhoro ho rocoivod a box with nosquitoos
which ho hud t.- held in Ms hrnds for about lu.If :n hour.

Ihat recurred every day fer cno. vfook. Evory aftornoon
r.ncther box .of ursquitc os was put in Dot wo on Ills logs whllo
ho was in bod. Dr eh rurning a blued snoi.r was takon frea
r.is oar and his tonporaturo was ::oasurod oach day and night.


395


13 Dce-l'-W-lO-l-Dcnlols

Court l.o. 1

"He ks given quinine. In about 17 da; a he li ft the hospital. After
fc. ir.g rclcas.d fro- the hospital he had to resort back every Satud-.y.
bight nonths lat^r he had an attack of nalaria, wr.ich recurred, pre¬
cisely every thr-c weeks for six nonths. The synptoas he felt were high
fever, chills and pains in the joints. Koch did not volunteer for the
^ irlaants, nor did thi other prisoners who 'ler*. neatly Foies end
hussinr.3, who underwent the treatment with hie.

"The prisoners wore- infected with calf.ria by the injections of r.os-

—v

quitocs themselves or the- injections of extracts of the nucais rj.nr.es of
the nosquitoe. . AfUr he vine contracted malaria, the prisoners
treated in different wa;s. Sccc, as rath.r Koch, »«ro F.iven quinine.

Others yore given nco-salvarsen, pyrrrddo. antipyrin, a drug nunV-.r -d
. 92516 , end several coebinetions of these. 3or.e p» ople die-d bo ft result
of these .ixpcrin r.ts. Schilling was present vhun autopsies were per¬
form on son*, o: ties, persons, ’hinever anyone died who hfcd>ecn in¬
ject d with cnlaria, a ru-*>rt of thrt death wrs c’-de to the accused Schil¬
ling rr.d the chief doctor. S one of the victims di-d fron the intoxicat¬
ion of noo-salvarsAn ard pyramidon, for =nn; individuals could not with-
snnd hr doses or these drugs. Fron the autopsy it could ho «!etcr-
nined ti.nt - patient di.d ef nco-salvarsnn sine t».u reactions were s*mi-
lrr to ars nic. In th beginning of 19U three deaths resulted from the
use of pyronidon. These people wen. brought directly frsn the nrlarif.
wan! to the autopsy roon. Two rang hussinn boys who wore trftisferred
fron the Unlrrle ward to the ge.w r .-l r.odic'l ward died within n ± . after
their arriv-*l beceuso of overdoses of pyrwnidor.. They h<d been sent to
»>, yn,r-.i ward so tut the cffical causo of death whic h wot Id bo atr.ted
wculd not he ml rir fymridon has toxis influence on tho blood corpuscles
tt-ich onuses tr.ea to disintergratw. KnL-.rir nns the direct Cft-.se of
thirty deaths md, ?s n result, of qpnplic tions, 3C0 to LOO ncre aiea.
?, C 'ie ho • C di d directs fro- nfilari-.. h-d co.*x- straight fron the
r-i- ri-. ward, -.nil, the 3 J 0 tc ftOO others hre ur.der gonc the nftlnrin ex¬
periment. T use people who hrd be.n subjected to nalrria nay later have
died ef tuberculosis, pneunojila, or dys<sitcry. Sort of ti.c patients wr.on
Tr. Schillir.- used hrd had tuberculosis before undergoing the exporiner.ts.

m & t


:>_c -I'-’-* MD-l-Danicls (EDD)


Court to, 1

r-vtr tjp diaceaea hnv*. adverse effects on tuberculosis. An index of
the E«L*ria d_'soP3_d pcopij- wr.s kept in the hospit-.l office.

"Schilling received various visitors such p.s u r. ebit, who was a
Heieh SS physicor. at Oranicnburg.


396A


IS Dc«s-^-n>10-2-i)®iol8
Court 5c .1


a A ro-trtal affidavit of tho accused' Schilling executed in his ora hand- .
•-rit-ng on 30 October 1945 boforo 2nd Lieutenant Horner C on n ra3 adnittod into

9

evidence. This states, cat reads in pertinent part and in translation ns ffllovra;

"Ilf acne is frofessor Dr. Klaus Schilling. I havo already worlcod on tropioal
diseases £or 45 years. I cane to tho c.tpcrinoutal station in Dachau in Fobruary
1942. I judgo that I innoculated between 900 and 1,000 pri^nors. Thoso woro
nostly innoculated for protootion, ffcoso pooplo, however, woro not voluntoers.

Tho inmates when I 0 aTu protective iunocolations roro not examined by no but
by tho pr.sent easy doctor. Buforo tho iiuioculcfcion< there was usually an'
observation of several days. The Iasi ocean ;'.oc*<jr was Cr. Hintonnoir. As woll
as I con xTftcobor, in throo years there wore 49 patients tho died outside
tho nclrxla station. The patients wore r.l./ays roloasod by no as oured only
oftor ono year.

'A* resudy I use.! quinine, atabrir.o, cud nco-solvarson. I know for suro
of six oasos whero I used pyraad.'.on tablets to hold down tho fovor",

i turn now to Section V of the Review of Trir.l^^wMoh is "Dvldonoo for
tho Dofonso", parc.grc.ph 15, .n rofe. s-nco to Dr. Kurt Klaus BohUlingi

"Tho accused Docotr Sch. lling -'lccv^d t testify and na'u the follor/ing
vnsrorn statoaentj It was 7u y-ars old, .-rxrlod, had >m®.scn, and was a
physician. v ha spcoiclir >1 in tropical disocses, particularly raolarla, oinco
1C98, Dr. 3ch'.llin~ (>tn.icd undor Trofonsor Koch of ^orliu, an*'. *raducted;Yom
'- ; ‘eh :.a a physiol ui u 1994, Co did roacoroh work in Africa on rularia,
slow'd eg oic'uc/.r, an". taotao fly .'.is ..sc-. Jr. Schilling .xorkod for tho Rooko*-
follcr Faunthtio;. in ?.jrliu, roocivinj r. rroi.t :n 191- for t)w study of various
'is '-a .j -ud i*o’- c trip to Fa-.?, . ' In Xifly, -> r , Schilling not Dr. Conti,

--Oie’-. r hy-‘c c.i le.a-.'.ui • it..; luvit i-ei i? sc: Hlrolor. Schilling .rent to
: I .. . -a ii - o- r r l'.,:. tu c : tiCUo hi a atudreo at Dachau. Sc^il-

-iu - ha' cel.cn.d DocL.au o.'er.uso It . .s Ms birthplace. Tho question of usinj

A v

• r scr.cr- ' .• ox; -ria^r.ts was act .'iccusced. I-. v ru..ry 1912 Schilling went to

° 2 '• •• 'V 'iX.liRg only cccoptol this Cannes;on at D chio) because hhu League

, c. which lie was a nc; .cr, told -iLa of tnc i£?ortaj:co of curing tho

5 " ./ilien 1 -oTT- OTJ43 of iisuJia, it o-li-ved it was Me duty to

"• t;. -hj * ver hicano a a—±er of the CS or tho hazi Forty, He vas a 'froo

' v 3??


13 Doc-^-HH-lO-3-Dasiuls
Court So.l

independent, research nan'«


“Dr. Schilling infected thousands of prisoners 'with nalaria ’Benign Tortiar. 1
*idoh is not f tol. Th© purpose for this was to find a vaccination against rnla-
ria* a»! today tiioro is no vaccination against solaria oxcopt tho ono discovered
by Schilling. Dr. Schilling used icosquitocs aid blood transfusions to infoot tho
-.lati-nis and rebelvod patients already infected. The patients wore dividad into
groups andwsro consCtntly watched, one group or^the porposo of hooping up tho
serein and anothor for irmmisation purposes. Tho latter were injected ropoatodly
to step up their i=;unity. Schilling reinfooted about 400 to 530 patients and
usod quinino, atabrinc, and noo-salvarsan, and a dyo nunber 2516, which nndo tho
patients iesunu. To provo this, ^»o had-® test by infocting than again.

"Dr. Schilling could not work with fvninala booauso thoy arc not rccoptivo
to nalaria, and non aro used throughout tho world. He aosuaod that Adairal Stipp
and ‘-ark B oyd, two aalcria avcthofcl'-lcs, usod hur-nas in thoir oxporiaants. Infoctod
oalaria has bcon used to euro paralysis,

"Only about four or fivo of tho nations refusod to bo i. muni tod, but thoy
consented aftor Schilling explained tho inportonco of tho work. The flotations
of tho : ationts were nado as follows! B 0 rlin allo’fod hin thirty pationts a nonth
and ho would request theca through the coap pliysioion fron the co.\nandnnt who i
o tooted tho In.or loador. Tho lottor s.lootod healthy prisoners and Schilling's
assistants ohoso th_ fir-al nr-es and sent th. to Sorli wlwr.. tho oclootlon
•proved, “lose pati-ints x«r. csr.f.'ly inspected and could not borefusod
by Schilling to order *.f Hi:dor,

"Tho 'os a cf r.eo-oalvarsan wore 1,54 gro-u* and at tino fai lod. o usod

pyranidon to lover tho boy tcr^cr.-.iuro althcu>;h the Iruj has a bad affect on tho

ol-vod cosnusclv-r., .*k> usod f:us drug only in fLit.'cn cas.'C art found that two

*

i --V- not hai-rtj*. ?Mi —.s iarrrrt-nt *r the bo^ o&jld react rithout fovor.
lio-ody i .d f re., pyro. Lido-., -.Mur in das be-.n use I to cute syphlllit, .aid nco-
I'drursar canstroy parasites in a fovor.

Jr- SchiMint* never dealt W.th L-r. ^lchr. on any autopsies involving r.oo-
*ilVaraan a: is cuing, -.ischargsa patients irero told tb report t.rfc if thoy felt

- .rio .ic checks •.xro rr-.o „f uhcr. and any patient was rcocivod brtk if tboro

• r - r.j:,3 of rclnaso. If ^oh_ling were asked to rosuno his work, ho would do

s -iy Yolvntcars. 395


13 Doo-U-2l-10-4-Daai*Js
Court Ss.l


"Dr. Schilling was withdrawn ns a witness ct this point, hut rosunod tho
stood Inter an d testified aa follcsra: In death thwrugh neo-salvarson all
ergon* arc affected. Blood cells any but nothing like this happoned in

;.ia cases. It is impossible to dotc;-.iino death by nalaria by a cere autopsy with
out a microscope* especially wharo there nay bo other complications. Pyramidon
is rarely the causo of death. - .

"Out of the 100 pcopld infeoto'. by* Dr. Soldi ling with malaria, not a ainglb
one of theu died of uncomplicated malaria.

^ight of the patients during experiments inoroasod. Additional food was
. 70 a an'. r-oplo ■offering fro:: go : tr„ioua disoaso would bo ioolatod. Dr. Schil¬
ling aoror stated the wrong or,v.so of death.

Dr. Schilling stated hJ o \'_J«t cxperkicot on hixJolf because he had had
rial aria in 193e and mer. like : 5 - or-, not be rcinfcctod in moot oasos, although
malaria is a reourring !isoas-.. If there is chronic nalorin, tho hoort nusclos
•./ill suffor as in ail ohronic diseases. gloria will increase tho ic.tory nubstano
in the blood and the brain wi: suffor undor obroaio nalaria, Chronio rwlnrio
will weaken tho body tosako it ouscoptiolo to other diseason a nd ono any dio

of mother -'disaaso whilo hcriaj unlaria. ' *

_ Vs

Schilling hod 3S doctors helping hie cr. \ or-rcinc 1 all patients personally

:n supervised tho records. Schilling rocojiitcd Prosooutior.'s Exhibit Ko.131,

•

wi ll eh stated that nineteen casos Voro tr-ated with pyradldon ,thrco of whom
'led. Ec dcolaied thoso patients vor suffering fron typhus and wore romovod
from tho word*

"Although there was a typhus cpide :ic in -<‘ovcr.b?r 1544 aid ho Imow that
pcoplo were dying, he continued his .xporiments. Everyone /ho vas iraiooulntcd
r„-. lined at the station. On*. • .vi.rf: l as * ,'ootod tnro, tines and labor diod of
typhus, 'de vas given nco-salvnrhan, aiaorinc, and quinine.


13 Dcc«:.-«.TDll-l-Oaylcrd
Court He. 1


■Pyranidon doses of three grans per day for five successive days were
riven. Dr. 3laha did not inforn Schilling of the deaths due topyrahidon
poisoninp. If Schilling had boon notified he would hive stopped the
experirent. ;.n Italian naned Calvcroni was infected with blood and raipht
have gotten typhus,

"If a nan is suffering free salnutrition, a big dose of neo-
salvarsan is not advisable. If it would save his life. Schilling would
give it to hieu It riependod on the ; hysiccl condition of the nan and
of what ho was suffering! yot, Schilling gave the drug to Father Ylicki
?/ho only weighed $0 IcUos, but Sc h i l l i ng says that bicki was not a

3 over case." — /. kilo is approximately taro pounds .—Schilling gave

--* 1 -.

three grams of ncc-salvarsan in fivo 10.-3, which was the largest doso
ho ever gave ever that period of tino. Ho does net rononfcer giving drugs
to sufforors of dysonteiy,

"Schillin,; did not renostor specific cases whoro ho did not
uso caution. Ho recalled tho priest Stachowski who died, tut doosn't
renonbor that ho died from noo-salvarsan.

"Dr. Schilling was not under tho control of tho SS, Ho hoard
runors about bcatir^.o, but did not concorn hiaself with 'things that
-.fore not ay business', /.ll his rocords had boon burnoi. Schilling doniod
all accusations against hin other than what ho atoittel as a part of his
duty, Hu declared thr.t his work was unfinishod and that tho court should
Vs what it could to help hia finish his experiments for the bonofit of
scionco and to rehabilitate hicsolf, .

"Ilrs. Hub nor, who know Professor Schilling for thirty yoars,
stated that sho often saw hin in Italy and in Goraary and has known
Mb to be cf good reputation and of ood voracity. Ho told her his only
Mb was to cure malaria. Sho believed his intentions at Dachau were good.

"Frau Durck, the wife of a university professor of tho anato-

nical pathology who was interested in mlnria research, knew Professor

PoMUirg since 1921 u Schilling wasalway* regarded in his field as a

IxCO


13 Dcc-i:-:.TD-ll-2-Gcylord-Hl
Court So. 1#


serious scientist. She knew *#iqt he w3B Coin’ at Dachau, tut her
husband touII n-t tave Cone it,

"Dr. Eisonbcr^cr, a la;iycr for 52 years, .knew Dr. Sc hillin g
for 30 yoars, Ho considered Schilling highly respectable and reliable, • :
and sail Schilling k*.s seeking to benefit science and Mould never do
anything wrong,

"Heinrich St -rr, a .r.le nurse at £k*chau, testified it vc.3 known

0

that Schilling wa-ked on orders frets Kinalor. The caop's physician

s

and Sc hi lL in d* ? Assistants examined tho patients prior to tho
expixiiwntation Dr. Brachtcl, an So doctor and assistant to Schilling
also performed atabrino experiments. If a patient had a re lap so froa
■nlarla, he mo treated by Dr. Schlllir^. Cthsrs were givon quinine
by ao..ic of the hoepital staff,

"jinx Kroncnfcldcr worked in the unlaria station under Schilling froa
February 1941 to June 1943. Ho know about a Dr. Brachtcl vho also ;ndo
private cxrorirxnts zn .solaria with cut the knowledge of Dr. Schillir^.
Xrcnonfcldcr took blood shears and performed .iinor dotails such as
cleaning up. Brachtel experimented ..1th patients who had tubercolosis,
being holpod by a -r.n named ..da_’s. .Vda-i was often in the morgue rlth
Dr. Blah a,

"Father Bupieper had been subject to the talarir. cxperi'xrt, in
..u asst 1942. Other priests skio wero also sutjjctod \roro Petar Dowor,

Gustav Spitzick, .ison Burkhardt, Fritz Keller and Kasinemor Gasijxr
Rikofsky."

k. not; turn to Section VI, iJiich in Prosecution Jtebuttnl Evidcnco,

pr.ra~ra.ph 15, ref err in'; to Klaus Karl Sdi illing.

" iicn nc of Dr. Schilling's patients died, there wero orders to

report that fact to the mlaria. staticn, even th.ugh the can had died

in anothor sccti-n f the hospital. 7otr-rd tho end -f 1942, Professor

Sea. ill in" res personally present at the autopsy ■£ a roan who died £

neesalvarsan and he roquesUd the brain, liver, kidneys, spleen and a

• •

pioco of stomach. In tnat case. Dr, Sc hi 11 in- diet--, ted part of the findings


13 Dac^^TI>-U-3-C-.lcri
Court >te. 1


-■ 1 th respect to t:» cause of 'oath, "hen the first throe patients -.’led

•

free py r ari lon in February 19U5, a rxsrbor iron the nalaria station and
"r. Hintorrcy-r wore presont. Dr, 3lahn st-to?. tjiat in his experience as
a physician, tho average patient could receive 3.3 ; hranidon a day, and


that tte ierrest Jose would ho 2


r—3


*• i


course assuned


that tho in'lvi’ual was healthy end strong. In Dr. Blaha's Judgment, the
prison iirates could not bo given sore than one and a half to two prana
for a few days. If these people wore to receive throe gramo por day for
throe successive days, si-ms of poisoning would bo revoalod.


"Dr. 3laha statod that cn autopsy revealed that death from
pyranidon was tho result' of su • 'an suffocation, which was not true In
tho oaso of typhus. Death froa typhus ccul! bo tlotertdnod by cortoin
in'icia without a dcroscopo.

"Dr. Slaha explained that tho ,r 'inary !&'!& tablet contained .3
-hrenidon and that it is sold orjr tho opjn counter. If takon in aodornte
doaoa, it will not havo any ill offocWl

"a leaflet of I. G. Farbon, Indiana, which hoi' 1 tho noo-salvaraan,
contained thj followin instructional 'In between the individual in¬
fections, spaces ;f tiso should bo porcdHeb to olapso, fron three to
3ovoxr-l lays'. Ttose waro instructions for sjrphlllis. In paragraph five
ir. tha leaflet it roc*, in part, 'Such caution in the uso of noo-salvnrian
is recocnandod for undern urished an- sovero anenic pationts, tuberculosis,
diseases of tho lun.-s, heart, kilnoya, liver and intestines

?o turn tn w to Section X of tte review: Merits ctvl Dofonso, Para-
graph 1?, Dr. Klaus Karl Sc h i l l i ng.

"Dr. Schillin , at tho call of HL-nler, boron conducting his
nalaria experiments at '-achr.u in February l?li2. Bo continued those oxpori-
rcints until liberation of the cmp. It was un J isruted that tho irmtos
upon when Dr. Schillin used in his --ark wero net volunteers. Dr.
Schilling's rusacrch wasporforaid for the pufcx>so of dotorrdninr taini-
zation for and troataent of a il ar la. Ws requests for imatea were made

about every nonth. These lists wero prepared in the cac? physician's

i» to


1


13 Dac,-^iTD-ll4*-Gayl3rd
Court S3. 1


office art’ then sent to the cor?, ccasanier an* labor office. About 1200
solccteos acre thus chosen for subjection. Many of then were priests. The
nunber of people who died free the malaria or frees-tugs such as Rrranidon
or neo-sc-lvarsan is not known. Certainly some died. It is reasonable to
infer that the deaths of reny of the irraatos froa tuberculosis, dysentery,
typhus, and other -*isoases were caused in paxjp'by the fact that those
people had been subject to malaria. Although Dr. Schilling's native my
have been simply and purely a scientific one, his activities oxonplifled
the Nazi scheme which existed at Dachau. Tho part he playod in that schene
is clear."

Section XIV, Sentonoos.

"In many respects, tho accusod Schilling was the no at r a pro ho ns 1-
blo. Ho voluntarily caao to Dcchau fully co.-nizant of the nature of tho
work ho intonlo' to perform. Being educated ani learnod person that ho
was. Sc hi 111 rv. undoubtedly most have realized the manner in which his work
suitod the neo Is of the Nazis. Although his personal mtives nay havo
stomed free his d os ire to aid humanity, ho porrittod himself to utilize
Nazi mothtds in contrast to other osdnont Goman artists and scientists
y*\o oithor fled or rofUsod to Bake themselves a part of the Nazi syaton.

It is bolioved that tho sentence of the court, who was aware of Schilling's
position in tho aciontific world, should bo approved."

Section SVI, Actions.

"A form of action designed to carry tho foregoing roconmendations
into effect, should they neotiwith your approval, is submitted herewith.
Charles E. Cheever, Colonel, Staff Jiiro advocate."

And the last page, which I will not road, is a confirmation of tho
Sentences by Lieutenant Genaral L. K. Truscott, Jr., 0. S. urry, Coraanding,

I call to the attention of tho Tribunal that tho Dachau Board

found as a fact that Dr. Schilling received his cccnission v to carry out

his criminal experiments free the Aeichsfuehrer-SS, Heinrich Himmler. j,a

is shown in all fields of this fiendish experimental program in fiazl

Gcraaiy, the defendants charged with malaria experiments likewise had full

U03


-5-

13 Dec.-H-*TD-llw -Gaylord

Cotfrt !fo. 1 (Z .

knowledge of Sc h il l i n g'a work, as he reported to thee, conferred with
then, received vital materials fren then, and in seao instancos, they
actively collaborated with the deceased Dr. Schilling.

At this tine, I present to the Court, Document Ho, H>721 which
is offered as Prosecution Exhibit Ho. 126. This is a memorandum signed by
the defendant Sievers. It reads asfollowsi
"Hoccrandun.

?Rei Consultation with Dr. Maya t Munich on 1 April 19U2.

"1. A doctor and zoologist, Dr. Hilt, is at disposal.

"2. An ontaaologist, Dr. Braun.

"Both, however, are not presently employed in thkir specialities

with tho Whhraacht, and would have to be assigned or roloasod.

"3. Of the objects offered, the nost favorablo to date is a

farahouso at Holzkirchon. It is sltuatod in the iaaodiato vicinity of tho

railroad station near the Autobahn. Tho price ie 7?,0C0 Reichnark. It

would have to be rebuilt for our purposes. To date, it has beon usod for

tho housing of soldiors. Tho Hehmacht is interested in buying it in

ordor, possibly, to uso it as a food-stuffs factory. Tho fact that thfcro

are a sufficient min')or of living quarters psoaks well for Holzkirchon.

•

"li» In this connection, I am wondering whothor tho experiments
could not bo started most quickly if the required spaco woro provided nt
the Camp Dachau. The excellent medical arraivements thore could bo usod
for the examinations and furthermore tho experiments would bo considerably
easier if observations could be sadp on prisoners.

"Another aattor in favor of Dachau is the fact that Profossor
Schlink is carryin out hi3 anopheles exaninations there with regard to
tropical nalarla,"—Professor Schlink is a nano similar to that of S
Schilling.

"5. At present, an extensive program is being preparod in Greece

for the combatting of anopheles larvae.- The luftwaffe is participating with

tho Air Defense Dolt which is providing airplanes. The combatting is beiiy"*

UOii


13 Dec- ^/n>-H-6-C-arlord (DJ3)

Court :*o. 1

carried e. t vith arsenic preparcticns. The program i3 in the hands of
Special Leader Dr. Dauberscheddt. The Last ministry has manifested its
interest. It would be necessary that we join in by sending Dr.JIf.y,
Service Pass and Travel Permit are requested.

"Signature: Sievers. SS Obcrsturnbannfuehrer."

It is obvious frea this docu ae nt, '.k>lfran Sievers at this
point on 1 April 1942 or thereabouts was faadliar with the *. erk of Dr.
Schilling at Dachau. This letter is t proposal for further experiments

O > ^

vhith are to be planned, which obviously shows that the distinguished
Kolfren Sievers, in his capacity as Keich Manager of the Ahnenorbt, hed
his finger in all these pies.

. In order to substantiate the pc3iticn cf the d©fwv.rnt Sievers
and his cultural society, the Ahncnorbe, I will now ask the Tribunal
to turn to Document NC. —

V •

THE F ESlDH-iTt „t this time, the Tribunal will have a
recess until 1:30 o'clock.

(■• recess was takon until 1330 hours.)


r


404-A


CCcUECTU) COPY


/f*

13 Dec-A-A-D-12-I-Gross
Coort "o. I.


' AFTIIEIOCS 5SSSI0H

(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 13 Decertoor 19U6.)

IS. KARST: !fay it please tiie Tribunal, in order t-o substantiate
tre position of the defendant Slevers and his concern with the Ahnerorbo,

I iwk ask the Tribunal to turn to cage 12 in the Document Book, which i3
Doc. 3516-PS which has been previously introduced by hr. tfcHaney as
exhibit 123. I have put this document in the Docuaont Book for the con¬
venience of the Tribunal, the translation into English.

\fo will turn to pago lii of tho Docuaont Book under "22 Fobruary,

1330 hours to 1500 hours. Article 2, "Ccnfcronco with Dr. Knbil. 3d. May,
b) Collaboration with Dr. Plootror and irof. Schilling."

TIG TRE’JDAL (Judgo Sobring) Just a nonont, sir. I haven't located
it. Will you repeat that again, sir.

)R, HARDY: Under dr.to of 22 Fobruary, pago 1U.

THE TftT3'IiAL: (Judge Scoring) h'o.'.o the page.

‘•R. HAIQY: lit of your Honor's Docunont Book. At tho bottoo of tho
pace under tho date of 22 Fobrury - two linos up fron tho bottom, mchor
2, "Conference '-1th Dr. Habil. vi. Jzy, b) Collabontion with Dr. Plootnor
and Prof. Schilling."... ploot:er*is ono of tho doctors who assisted
Schilling in his work at Dachau, act.: turn to pogo 19 of you- Honor's Docu¬
ment Book. Under tho date of 31 Kay wo cco "SS Hauptctimafuohror Dr.
Plootror. 1. Decree of Roichsnrzt S^ concoming collaboration '.1th Prof.
Schilling.".., Which indicatos that not only Hirrler personally was in¬
terested in Schilling's works, but boro Dr. Grawite docrooe that all shall
collaborate with Prof. Schilling. Turn--to the next page - top of tho pago.

Discussion about limiting SS Hauptaturw-
afV.r his ifrnnsfur to tho AS"... Which is
all tho uontion t:.at is made to malaria ox-
1 -lu. and those important bits of evidence
in umy .-.urdurs of hindrods in experiments

hC$


13 Dec.^\TD-12-2-Grcss

Court Ito. 1 •

*

A few day 3 a x» Prosocution pointed out the TVHu - that is Economic
an J Administrative Division under Oswald Tohl — also played a loading
roll in this experimental plant in that they supplied fortunate victims
placed at the disposal of various physicians an J scientists conducting
experiments at variousconcentration camps 0

I now introduce document H>-065 which is an affidavit of Oswald
Tohl and is offered in evidence as exhibit 127.

THE fi&BUMALi (Judge Sobring) On what pace is that?
id. H.JOT* That is page 26 of your Honor's Document Book,, This
affidavit refers to sovernl experiments which*© will doal with its presen¬
tation. At this time I will read, the affidavit.

"Medical Experiments

Gonoral

Medical experiments were conducted \y order of Hlmlcr. Tloprosenta-

tivos


13 Dec.^A-57-12- .. Gross
Coart 'So. 1

of the nodi eel profession -ho knew how to sell him a nodical iroblcn
os oxtrcncly important or had S ood friends to intervene for then,"...

!R. "...U HCF7. ..Mi: (Counsel for the defendant Pokorny) Hr. President,'

I object to the reading of this affidavit as far as it has to do with ny
client. client is nentioned in so far cs experiments of ladaus are
concerned. Pohl is here in the fcirnberg prison and is available at all times
for testimony. His t-stisony on tha subject of the experiments which concern
=y client is so unclear that I would like to cross examine him urdcr all
circumstances. I, therefore, revest that this document be not read.

^ the Tribunal please, I would like very vigorously to
object to his motion to exclude the affidavit secured from Oswald Pohl.

In the friat place Ordnance No. 7 cleiarly provides that affidavits are
permissible before this Tribunal and the availability of the witnesses not
set up as a rule for detcraination of it. It is true that Pohl is non in
the liirnberg Jail. However, this man will bo indicted and tried in this

sane Court. Prosecution docs not wish to call bin as * witness.

•

If the Defence attorney wishes to call Pohl for cross examination to the
extent he dcsir s r-garding the statement made hereby shown, that is his
privilege, "c .-.ay at a later stage of the trial bring pohl to the stand
to t-stify on other natters of a ivjrc gen ral nature than set forth in
this affidavit. Harover, we aro not. prepared to call his at this time
•irsl I -.ould request th. over-rule of this oojection on tho grounds of
his availability hero.


13 Dec-il-<3S-12-a-Gros3
Court He. 1.


«

They ran call Pohl for cross examination if they so wish as to ary statement
:ade in the affidavit but I do not see that runs against the admissibility of
our document.

DR. HARL HCFF1&N: (Counpci for tho defendant rokorry): Hr* ^resident,
if Pohl is available at another t?ic t'.ton 2 wi?_l take back ay motion.

IP.. UcHAlET: If the Tribunal _>loasc I do not wish to be understood as
asking any hard and fast coaaittaent that tre will or will not call Tohl as a
witness for tho ^rosocuticn. .o ^ay ib so but wo have not finally decided that
natter. Any way the witness l'oiil *111 be available for crces examination as to
any cattor contained in this affidavit at any tlco and If wo do not call him
then, of courso, tho Defense Attorney for tho c'efon'ant Pokorny nay avail hin-
sclf of the right to call Pohl to the stand.

DR. K..RL HOFFVAH (Counsol for tho defendant Pokorry): !ir. ir sid.cnt, it

-.rill depend on tho testimony of ?ohl whothcr it con bo ascertained that

experiments wen cade with tho Dc^icacont which ia charged to ny client or not.

fou rrill find in tho document that . ohl docs not oxpross hi.nsclf clearly.

H;us I shall need Pohl in any circumstances and I shall tako back qy motion
•

only if I have tho ritfit to call him as a witness at a later date.


- U07-A -


13-D3o^-:^>- 13-1- Haynes

Court Ko. 1


^—


TH2 792SHSKT : The objection to tbo admission of tba affidavit at this
tlnJ is overruled. It will bo understood, according to the stateront by the
Prosecution, that Pcfcl will bo available to h, called as a witness by the
dof-ndant.

1 R. H JDY x I shall read tte affidavit :

" General, radical oxpoxinents »-ro conducted by order.6f HlxrJor.
Itopresontativos of the nodical profession who know hew to soil bin a
radical prcblon as extroooly irpertant cr who h»d good friends to intervom
for then, could easily arouso hia intorost, though Hixxurlor hlnsolf did not
possoss any noro mdical knew lodge than my educated laynan. Ho had, hewover,
an w-plo opportunity to talk cbout thoso nrcblens with the doctors on his
staff and in his imudiato onvircnmnt, and hi probnlbly did so. ( Growitz,
tebhardt, Brandt, Conti and others).

" ’/ton he was into re 3 ted in a project ho did all within his pewor to aid
tho mdical cun axxi kept in clcao contact with tho problems and pjrsonally
watchod the progress of tho projoct.

■ ihon prisoners wore providod for an experiment, tho order usually
was sent to tho Inspection doportn::*, later also to no. But I don't think
it impossible that, in addition to tho above, orders were sent directly

to tho canp comandors, othorwiso I would have known of noro experiments
than thoso doscribed below.

■ .Jtor I pro to st od in 19Ua against tho delivery of prisoners for this
purposo as this provontod their use fa- work, Kimlor nado Orawitz his
roprosontativo for tho execution of mdical experiments.

■ From this tim on it was Orawitz' duty to supervise all tho oxporimnts
ordered by Hinaler and to report about then, but this (kws not man that
Hlaalor roducod his personal participation.

" Special. Thu following oxperis-nts because known t m in tho period
fren :.pril 19U2 until tte end of 19UU, tho tin* when tho Inspection dopartirc
belonged to the TJVHA.

0 1. Schilling : These projects arc probably known for quite a while
through t hi trial of Schilling. Turing ana of ry visits in Dachau, Schilling
*ha I had not known boforo, had shown m his ustablishmnt and told m all

‘IOC


Court Ho, 1

sorts of things about m l a r ia end aalaria aoseuitoos. I think this was tho

Isrgost o*pcrir»nt. It was also nn this occasion that I docided to send r$r

protest to Kinder, bo cause Schilling continuously asked for prisoners. *

I can not say the exact nurtocr that woro sent to hin.

•

■ 2 . Haschor ; I becart aware of these experiments through tho writton

orders of H i Til er to ru. The prisoners wero sent to Dachau. Tho experiments

also took place there. On tho occasion of cm of his visits to Tunich,

Himlor took rt with hin to watch one of thJse oxporirunts.

sir on airplane cockpit and ovontuolly a prisomr sat In it. Thun tho

ccckpit was put undjr tho dininisfwd air prossur and Raschor observed this

through a glass window. .'.ftorwards the person axperinantod upon was brought

•

to Raschor's study whore hi was asked questions by Rasctor. Tho prisoner
answered tho«o first questions as if in a stupor until aftor a certain tlra
his full sonsos of perception woro restored. I did not boo any other oxporl-

onta of Raschor. No 1th or did I soloct tho prostitutes for his cooling

0

uxporinonts. Thoy probably cane fren Ravonsbruck.

" 3. Klaiborg ( or Glauborg ). I rv»t hin at a dinner in tho Fvwhrorhaus
in ..uschwitz. Ho was Introduced to r», but I did net speak with hin about
his oxporinonts. I was not pruoont at tho organization of his oxporlmnts,
but I had hoard previously fror. Gluccks that Xlauburg was working on
sterilization.■

Gluccks was a subordinate of Oswald ?ohl.

" I declined Xlavtoorg's invitation to see his experin-nts.

"L. Siovors C .hnenorbo ). I hoard for tho first tire about it in Borlin
cn occasion of Siovors' visit with ua. evidently at that tiro the oxporinonts
wiro finished. Siovors cone to find out free rv -bout tho possibilities for
o'umfocturlng of r> Mil elm. I oanti .nad the Deutsche Hoilrdttol G1IEH ( Gcroan
•Sidical Corporation, ltd.) in Prag which belong-d to tho Goman plants, manage
by Cborfuchrer Baior of ny staff. I r-corrended Siovors to go to hin. Tho
nidi cine had boon manufactured later in Schlacht~rs f Black Forest )• Siovors
told no tho following : Tho '.'Jimnorborhoso manager was Siovors, had
teTolopod in Dcchau a mdicino which quickly brought coagulation of blood.

It —a er.omously inport ant for our ar^y because it prevented continual bloodi


«9


13-Oco-A-AG-13-3- Haynes
Court Ko. 1

rr.s tbj result of oxporicunts in Dachau dring which a prisoner was
fired upon. A prlso&ir in Dachau, a specialist in the field, took or.
i-pertant part in the discovery of this nedicinc.

• $• Hassneyer* .in Cborarzt ( head physician ) in the nodical
institution in Hohunlychcn, received fren Hinder permission to carry
out experinents with tuberculoses. I sent hin to Gluecks who put tho
ascesscry persons to experiment upon at his disposal. He received about
ten orphan chi l dren who prcbally came fron Auschwitz. The experiments took
place in Ncuengame. I«ter I saw a paper on these experiments which was
written far Himlor. But it was written in such a scientific way that I
did not understand a thing.

« 6. Uadaua. Worked in Radeboul on a sterilization drug. Tho Schwoigrohr
plant was nee (ted for its preparation. As this plant groc/s minly in North
.rtfricc, Himlor charged re to arrange for Its cultivation in Germany. Hicnlor
ovedently meant the nedical plants division of tho Hurt Gordon in Dachau,
which belonged to =y adalnistration.

■ The contract with Uadaus was node through the doctor at Lolling'o
Inspection doportnont.

» Tadaus, assisted by Dr. Koch, considered Dachau unsultablo; thoroforo,
ho invitod us to visit Radoboul and .to start the cultivation ttoro. During
this visit wo wore shewn the promises and experiments with animals in tho
1 Moratory. I an not sure that tho so wore exporironts with the Schwoigrohr
medicine, but I presum that this wr.s the caso. A hothouse was needed for
thu cultivation of this plant in Radoboul, and therefore Dr. Koch asked
for ry help in getting it. I premisod -him to report this business to
Himlor, who granted his roq-^st.

" To what extent they woro successful with the cultivation of the
plant aai whether it resulted in tho ness production of the nedicine
and to cxpjricer.ts wirth human beings, I d<*'t know, especially because
frron tten on ell further details were taken care of by Lolling al*>o.

- ?. Lest. I can't reneefcer whether experiments took place in this

case at all, because also, other offices wore participating in such

experiments. It is, of course, possiblo. I don't knew either whether tho

410


I>Jteo-A-AG-13-i; - Haynes

Court He. 1

--'-3 which I saw during ry visit in the I.G. Per ten ( Chemical Trust)
factory Byrrenfurt rear Breslau ( I was invited ttere by Dr. ,j-br \»3 '

■ere filled with gas made out of Lost.

" Conclusion : I have taken pains to do ryrtest to describe what has
stuck in my nunory. I did not have ary direct infornation about nost of the
experiments. The prisorwra who wire set asido ( abgestellt ) for tho
experiments appeared in the monthly reports fren Lolling*s office as one
nurbor, and they were divided anong UO different uxporirents.

I ffcund this out in 19UU through Lolling. If 1 an not -dstakon, tho nunbor
;f priscrers set aside for this purpose totalled about 350-!i00. I tried
tire and again to noko this nunbor lower; in the first place, I adnit,
becauso I wanted to use tho prisoners for work. This brought about a
personal intervention by Hirrlor who porsonnlly ordorod tte presentation
of tto prisoners, e.g., in tho case of Schilling.

* Hy personal attitude toward tho nidi col oxperl onts with living
hunan beings is the sare as cf any moral porson. But I hovu not soon
clearly the dirensions of tteso exporirents — and being an outsidor,

I could not soo tho extent of their dangor. In rtf heart I was against
tho ret hod of Himler.

DR. SSHV..TIUS 9 Counsel for dofondant Karl Brand ) s

!ir. President, I can not see if tho docurent has been sworn to •

Tha phototstatic copy which I have recoivod Just now dcuo not contain any
note either that it has toun sworn to. IXtor Pohl 's signature there is
a nunter, "1ii/7" which I understand to re an lii July. In tho copy has boon
added " Sworn to and sijied 23. Jund." Perhaps tho Prosecutor could
explain this to us* If tte cocimnt has not boon swern to, then I ask that
it bo withdrawn.

H.—DY: I can fully explain tho condition. Your Honor. This document

was written by Oswald ?ohl in his coll in his own handwriting, and when

h. finished writing it, it was U: June. Then, after ho had written tho

docurent, te waited several days before he was called for an interrogation,

asd at the tine he was called fer the interrogation he pro son tod tho document

to Walter Rrpp, Chief of cur Evidence Division, and at that tire Hr. Rapp

ill


Ill


>-*-A£>-13-5- Haynes

So. 1

da oath and had the docircnt sworn to.

DR. S3H7/JI0S « Hr. President, I boliovo that this is a ads take'.

Ha has aignsd it in July, and suppers dly he has sworn to it in Juno.
Tajreforo, thare Boat bo a typographical error.

!S. H1HDIJ Pardon no. I did not notice that discrepance. It is
abvicusly a typographical error. It was sworn to in July, the sore da to it
was written. The reason for the difference between tho Uith and 23rd was the
tino he was called fren his coll.

Eft. S3EV..TIUS i Then, nay I request that tho original bo prosontod.


13 Dec—A-SWA-l-Tarro* (E>D)
Court !'c. 1


jTirr. SEPHIin: Is it your Assertion that the words "Scorn to and
sign-td b-.forc nc this 23rd of June 1?46 in Numberg, li onaany" Sioud rend
23rd of July? . . v •

IS KAEDTt To cocply with the- actual affidavit, y C s, sir. 23rd of
July.

Tt'L FHSSIDrJT: The original docucent as submitted to the Tribunal
shoes no jurat.

lffi. HA?£Y: !fcy I see the docuncnt, your Honor?

Obviously, your Honor, the jumt ian* t on the document and I re¬
adiest that wo will retain the docuxr.t and hrvo it suom ic at a later
d?tc.

THE PrESIDE-T: Thu offer of ;tho exhibit will bo withdrawn at this
tirx.

!*R HARD!: The question aros« this norning - the defense counsel
crossed Kr. L’cHanoy' s pr« saltation of the ndodssion of bocun..nt 2A28-PS.

At this tiie I have rnot) . r section of that docuncnt to present to the
Tribunal which is the t*stir.ony of Kiri on Doorowski and at this tic.o I
wish to pr-.ser.t to the Tribunal the actual docur* nta thcexolves wldch
Ver preser.* -c in evidence to the IITT as Gr-rt Britain inhibit 382. I
~;st request that the Tribunal return thoC ln»:dint< ly as thoy are p:\rt
of th. original record of ETT and arc being sent to the Libnry of C 0 r.-
areas r.r.d 1 have signed for then only to be returned this evening.

4 I

ibis is, you will see, an official report which has a cover shoot
'Confidential Report of the Atrocities Corritt e- at the Dachau Concen-
•tr-.tion Cano 0 . It is in tt.rvo vclurts - two of then were upstfdrs and
•• re- obviously put into evidence. These vclusres art* nurbe-red 23 to 2?

r.d was c report of *ar ^rines 1- .-estigation Tewa l“f£Z}. tliis tine I
wish to cell...

TFT r fCSlE2.T: Just r- accent. In connection with tl.ia exhibit which
hrs just b.e offered. It nay he Addtted if a photostatic copy of the
’ rtLner.t p--rts, including the confidoitial cover, will be substituted

pronptly’. e-


.TDHB SSI-TB: Counsel, car. you point out in these docuacnt books
• rc the affidavits an. that you now Jv-ve.


13 Dcc-A-SMi-l-*arrow (BED)

Court So. 1 •

MR HARDT: Its, sir. Just a coornt.

JCDGE SBSZHC: (fill you hand up the other book, plca.se?

DR JURKITO (defense counsel for tno defendant ISrusowsky): I h&VG boon
infomod that those are Voluxs 2 and 3 ane that there still is n ^oluao


is Doc-A-El-14-2-!laiTcnr

I _

Court So.l

it is stated in the introduction be* the coasission carriod out those intorro-

•T-ticrj end how it was organised. This Voluno 1 is, h owe Tor, not availablo

esysoro to the Tribunal, I an therefore of tho opinion that without tho proeus

tat ion of Voluno 1 - without tho possibility of dote raining how tho commission

was organised which carriod out the so interrogations and what was tho oeaignnt

of tho cct=i«aion it oonnot bo deter, enod any r»rc if tho affidavits oontainod.

in those two ooluncs can bo regarded as documents in accordanoo with tho Char'.

•

In addition to this, a largo part of chs documents havo not boon signod booau:

thoso who woro to havo signod then were uncblo to si (71 tho documents,

IZ!. .ABDYi tlay it plcaso tho Tribunal. In this connection obviously tho

dofenso counsol knows what has hap cnod to . 1 , 1 sent up to tho 1 L 1 Dooumon*

Soon and a shod thoa to sond down this oxldbit. This is what they sont, I didn

know ’■ 1 was not tho ro. howovor, at t.ia tine I am only as’dng tho Tribunal

to take Judioial notice of this document and not admit it as an oxhibit,

Artiolo 9 of Ordnance 7 statosi “Tho tribimals shall not roquiro proof of

facts of coesaon knovlogo but s’.inll toko judical notioo thereof, Thoy shall al

tako judicial notico of offioial government -1 documents and reports of any of

tho united Nations, including tho -.to an*, documents of tho oonsaittoos sot up

iu tho various Alliod oountrios for tho investigation of war crimes, and tho

records and findings of militscry or ether tribunals of any of tho United

•

Hations", This says that "the tribunals shall, Mow, this particular report
is an official report of an army investigation teas for war orincs and I
submit that to tho Tribunal for consideration.

D;:. FLSi&uHGi If tho roport is the roport of an officially rccognirod
comittoo it could nnly be dotomined if Volume 1 was available, Volume 1
sovoral days ago doos not exist, ffhon Attorney Pelclcmnn v.Tmtod to look at i'
it was not rv 7 ailablo oithor, aowever, he !cxttb that tho-three volumes, as ho
informed oe, woro rwvor sut xAt tod in their -atiroty before tho HIT. I thorof
request tho Tribunal to also examine .this quostionj If the throo volumes
wore not sucoittod in their entirety to tie L : .T these two itoluxos, in my
opinion, cannot bo used without ^oiuao 1 at this tine,

in. HARDYt Your honors, may - joint out Hint it is ny opinion in answor


the accusation that this Js not ra-of-'icial coadtto I fcol vory strongly

did


is Dcc«A-a*- 14 - 3 -Karrow

OOurt So.i


that the United States Aray is an official organisation and thoy sot put these
investigation touu particularly for cede purpose. Thoao volumes arc the result
3 f theirwork, If you will read tho top sootion of the affidavit you will sec
tho mount of work that thoy went through to procuro those affidavits and tho
caution they took. I also sub nit tho foot that this has boon introduced boforo
tho £17, ia in tho ovidonco of IlE, and a record of IliT, and umlor A rtiolo IX I
ask that tho T r ibunal toko Judicial notico of thoso documents,

THE ?H2SID3rr« Objoctlon will bo overruled. The oortified cooicwiay bo filoi
boforo tho Tribunal, Tho cortifiod copies should oarofully show tho volumo and
pago of oach oxhibit and also refex- to tho doeuxiont book by eppropriato nunbor.

US. HARDYi T hank you, you Honor, la hue course I shall submit oortifliod
eopios,

V

At this tine I wish you would rofor to Pago 31 of your Honor's doounont book
in connoction with this affidavit. This is an '.ffidnvit of “arion Dobrowski.


/


•115


l3-Oeo-wr-AO“i5-l - KUpperstein

Court Sol

rfi. P T?*iT TJG : les. Tour Honor. •

•

JUDCE S3KBO : As I u n de r stand It the affidavit appearing on page 29,
is a true nultigxaphed copy of an cxcorpt taken fron tl» confidential report
of th: .’.trccities Coaaittoe at the Dacha: Concentration Canp : is that true ?

12. HARDY : That is correct. Tour Honor, .'-nd certified by tic Chief
_-f cur docurent center.

JUXZ SSBRDiQ : That appoars there as Exhibit 32, is that not correct ?
JR. HARDY » Hot, it is Great Britain Exhibit llo. 562, Tour Honor,

Groat Britain Exhibit 562.

JUDGE SEEKING : I do not noan the exhibit bolero the International Trk-
bun?l, but tto exhibit as it now appoars on the front of tho docunent book.

!R. F—EDY : Nunbor 52; that's correct, sir.

THE PfESIDSNT i Tho Tribunal directs that It will take Judicial notico

of tho exhibit as you had it cn tho first pec^ this Doming. After that it

will bo sufficient to take it in our notes.

MR. H.JDY : Thank you, sir. 1 lay I r-ad the soction in this testinony

of u arion D a bror.ski that I wont you to take particular notico of. Your Honor '

On page 29, you will find that this is tho testimony of “arion Dabrowski, tata.

at Dachau, Gomany 13 Hay 1915. Question nunbor 1; Marion Dabrowski was asked

• •

his nsm, and his answer — ho was a Catholic priest. I now request tho

•

Tribunal tu turn to pogo 31, tho sccon question t

q. rfero you forood to sutrdt to tho nalaria oxp>rir*nt while you woro
a prisomr at Dachau ? A. Yes, throe tines by nosquitoos and onco by an
injection of blood free a nalaria pationt.

q. Did you voluntoor or offor yourself in this oxperimnt ?

A. Never

Q How did it happen that tba^J expjrircr.tr twig porfcored upon you ?

A It happened through the canp secretary's tffico. At that station,

prisoners who were cornunists woro told to present the najx-s of 100 prisoners

for the nalaria injections. Those erruunists sdi*i that thj priests aro tho

nost useless anong th; prisoners, sc we priests were told that 100 of us had

tc go forward to get tho nalaria injections. The hundred n-ojs wore finally

chosen fren anongst tho priests by alphabet.

-ilS


13-Deo-A-A&-l$-2- Kopporstein
Court Bo* 1


'! ' 1|?rQ 100 Cath'-lic priests forced to suboit to tho aslaria oxpariaonts?

A loa

Q Tfcro you given an opportunity to pretest your tains sub^ctod t.
this casxrinjnt ?

•* - ;t beginning a protest rrruld have boon like a death sentence.

lhoro was a suddon change at the end of tta yoar 191:3 in cur general troat-

aait. They wore not officially allowed to lodge a protest. It was easier

to have a word, and protest against further uxperinents.

Q Did the protest do any good ? S*

A In own ease, and that cf cm of ry fallow pri.sts, the pretest

was successful, and I oscapcd a fifth induction, after tho fourth I had.

I know, however, in mny eases, a protest was usoloss uvon at that tirw.

Q Vhat result did this nalnria inaction have upon you/ and tho other

priests who wore subjected to nalaria injections ?

A At first we got a fovor for about throe hours. .Star throo hours,

*3 folt oxtroaoly cold and started shaking with cold. Then tho fovor strxt

again, and tho whole process continued sxntires for ns nany as nine days.

IV cwn brother, who is also a Polish priost, and is till in this camp, had,

for nino days, daily highor tyvur, as high as hi or U2 contigrado.

Orally they woiu in a very bad state of health and there wjjxj sovorol

•

cases of death.

Q Over what period of tin; wjro 7cu subjected tc thoso feur oxporfrwnts ?
•* Ttay bogen the uxpurlrwnt cn re in Deconbor 19h2 and tho last was back
in June of 19U3.

Q TTho porferred those _xpjrin:nts upon you and tho other priosts ?

•* That was SS ^orgn^ponfuchrer, Profosscr Schilling.

Q Did Dr. Schilling over toll you by wh^so order ho was naking these
ox?jrin-nt3 ?

•• : ' r > he never said anything to us. Ho treated us like dogs, ’toon I

pretested to Dr. Schilling in person, I tried, at first, to talk French to

air., because ta krew that language; and it is easier fer rw than to trli:

&-rran. Ho told ac, in fact, ha.stopped re at once, and said, " In this ennp

7,0 8 P CQ k in Goman 1 » When, after that, I protested in G-man language

417


13-Oooeabor-.>.lO-l5-3 - Kopperstoin
Court No. 1

against further oxperirents cn qy bc<Jy, hi said, " You haro no right to
pretest, you are a pri sorer lure, and I shall report you to the Cccsaannir
of this carp for your protest, and you will see how hard thJ consequences
*111 bo for you. Hovortholcss, I fe>pt cn protesting. I had an order free the
Carp Ccreandor later cn that, ovory tire Dr. Schilling wanted re at the
hospital, I had to appear without fail at the hospital at his disposal.

I have witnesses that the facts I Just related are exact."

I will not road any ncre fraa this dccurent, Tour Honor. I rerely intro-
duca this to show that those nan subjected to those oxporlrents wore by
no reans criminals or volunteers. At this tire, I respectfully request tho
Tribunal to call tto witress August Heinrich Viewag to the witness stand.

AUGUST ZE INRICH VIE.EG, a witness, took tho stand and testified

_ • •

as follows i

BY JUDGE SS3RING i

q \&11 you repeat this oath afterre :

I swoar by .God, tho -lrdghty and taiiscicnt, that I will speak tho pure
truth and will withhold and add nothing.

( Tho witress repeatod tho oath.)

DIRECT EXAldHATICK

BY !?R. HAHDT :

Q Tfitnose, your mr» is August Heinrich Viowog, is it not ?

A Yes.

Q T/hon end whore wire you born ?

A Cn tho 17th or Soptonbor, 1895, at Horn over.

Q -That is your occupation ?

A Ian a.book printer

Q Uitress, will you kindly toll tho Tribunal whore you are presontly
o

living ?

A At the tin;, I an living at Bcrf»rg.

Q T/itnoss, at this tine — arc-, you new a prisoner in one of tho
rilitary governrent prison ?

A For the tire being, Ina prisoner.

Q Tfould you kindly tell tch Tribunal why you arc now imprisoned ?

Free the Easborg prison, I have been brought hero in order to heard as


a witness.


1 > 0 b conte n-d*-AG-l5- U - Suppurateir.

Court Wo. 1

•) witness, you do not understand re, ’.jhy are you , or why were you.

In ti» 3a=borg priaco ? For what reason have yen boon placed or put Into
the 3 ~ri>org prison ?

A I have not jet boon sentenced, 2 an in pro-trial confinement in the
Saborg prison.

Q For *iat roaaon are you in pro-trial confinJbont ?

A Tho 3exborg police have accusod no of engaging in bl*:k mrket
activities and bocauao of sorioua nischiof.

Q Thaik you, witness. TIhen were you first arrosted by the Naxia
and placed in a concentration carsp ?

A I was arrosted in !iay 19U0 and taten to tho concentration carp

« » * • . • •

at Sachaonh/uaaon.

Q T/hon iro you transformed to tho Dachau Concentration Cn?ep?

A I was sent to the concentration carp at tho 16 th of Octobor
19l*0, ccrdng fren Nouengarre.

Q "Ihilo you *wro an innate at tho ooifocntration carp, did ycu over
undorge any nodical experiments ?

A Tho concentration canpfat Dachau; I was used for naloria oxporirunto
by Profosacr Dachfinnoy.

Q How aany tires wuro you aujoctod to tho nalarla uxporinmts by
Dr. Schilling ?

A On fivo occasions I rocolvod fivo cubic con tire tor a of nalarlr*-bug
infbetivo and later, —

Q TJould you kindly toll thfc: Tribunal what offoct thflso. experiments
had on you; that is , did you have high fovor, serious illness, and ao
forth ?

Q Quite often I ran a very high tjnporaturo. I roached a very oxhmatod
condition, aid after tho infection 1 received largo doses •'f oediccl drugs,
quinine, ephedrlnc, and aany othtors. I was in bed for weeks, and after cno
certain treatment in tho courso of 19U3, 19Ui, 19U5, and 19U6, thoro woro 20
tc 26 occasions when I had nalaria attacks, sc that, for a long tine I r/as
unable to work.


/


•:is


l>Ooo^a-l5-5 - Jtapparatoin

Court %Cm 1 /

q ;.t the present tix», do ycu hfive ro-occurrence a of this nalarla

- *

fever ?

A In this last year, I *as in hospital free August 1st to l5th,


again with ml aria attacks.


13-0o&-A-A0*l6»l- Iehnhardt
Court So* 1

q Hew nany rccurretoas of naldria hare you endured since you were
expsrioaatod on by Dr- Sc hil l in g ?

A After qy treatoints in the oxperircntal stati n had boon concluded,

I stayed with Dr. Schilling, and there wore twenty occasions when I was
treated for recurrences.

q Are you ccnplotoly curod new, witness ?

1 No.

q .'Star you h'-d mdergona tt^ various oxperinents at Ijho hands of
Dr. Schilling, did you then bocorw a worker in Dr. Schillings' lob rat ary ?

..ftcr qy first -so-called irnunization troatnont had boon concludod,
t>» Chiof 'fedical Officer of that Dopartojnt sont ru over to Dr. Schilling's
dopartrunt for labrat>ry duties.

q • Ch what date did ycu assxioo those duties ?

A Im afraid I can't tell you that exactly, but it nust have boon
on or about .jjgust of 19U2.

q ’.hat were 7cur duties in Dr. Schilling's oxperlaintal station ?

A In Dr. Schilling's Dopartront I was in charge of animls. In
ether nerds, I cultivated aninals : white alee and. canaries; in fact,

I was in charge of that dopartnDnt.

q Did you h/rvu any ottor or additional duties, such ns file
clerk or typist, witness ?

A For a certain period, I substituted for the Clork and I was in

direct contact with Dr. Schilling on various occasions. 1 hod a certain

amount of contact with tho Chonistry Itepartront purchases from D*chau,

and also I was in commd of battle fiolds in the surrounding district

•

of Dachau; and I dealt with work dona by tho comondor.

q TJhilo with Dr. Schilling, did ycu have tho opportunity to road

any fo Dr. Schilling's correspondence ?

A I hat froqrcnt occasions to see tho reports which Dr. Schilling
sent in every three months, and sonct irt?s I saw ttv answers which Dr.
Schilling received fron Berlin, as well as ocoe ether chordcd smufactuor.
q T 7 itress, can you recoil the rficn those reports wre sent, in

-i21


3 erlin ?


l>Oco-A-..G^l6-2- Ichnhardt
Court He* 1
Berlin ?

The so quarterly reports which Dr* Schilling used to prepare, wont to
the Grurponfuohror or (fcergrupponfuchrer, the Reich Zfcdical Officer: Dr.
Grawitz.

q You have referred to the fact, today, that you saw sore of the
ansicra Dr. Sch illi ng received frea Berlin ; who was the originator of those
letters that Dr. Sc h i llin g received frea Berlin ?

A .’.3 far as I can recollect, th.se replies cans to Prof. Schilling ^
frea Dr. Grar.lte.

q Do you know where Dr. Sch i lli n g received his na to rial to be used
in this research, that is injected blood, in tlw nalaria Bxporirents, ily
eggs, aid so forth ?

0

A I can renonbur that Dr. Schilling r-coivud nftlaria fly ogga, so
-called eggs, fron which ho bred to ether flies, fren Duesseldorf; thiy
core fren an in anno asylun, but I cant rereebor the nare, and sore fron
Rene redical institute at Rcre that used to roreivo ogga. In fact, hio
natcriol used to core fren Berlin. According to ry rwnory, it care fron
Pref. Roso, and also fron Athans; but I m afraid I can not recollect the
non. there.

q Do you know whether Prof. P.csc hnd ary correspcndonce vrith Dr.
Schilling ? .

A I rononbor in connection with the previous breeding we were net to.»
successful, end subsaqrently a nunber of letters given to a stenojrapJwr
by Dr. Schilling core before no, and they wuro addrussod to Prof. Rose. He
was n-kirv, certain explanations in ti, regarding certain types of insects,
in correction with which ny none was used. I an rertain it went to Berlin
and I ar certain that-answers were received on nureroua occasions.

q Did Dr. Schilling over send any reports of thjse oxpjrirents to
Pref. Rcse, to your knowledge ?

A whether i*j sent reports about Italarla patients, I dca't know. At
any rr-tc, 30 far as about there fly breeding oxpvrirents are conrerncd, ho had
sent reports. I know that for certain.


*122


13-tfco-.WJ>-l6*}- Lohnhardt
Coart No. 1


Q -itooss, during the tinj yob wore with Dr. Schilling's Labratory
Doptrtrcnfc, wsro there ary visits fron distinguished visitors fron Berlin
or other places ?

A I reaenter for certain only this : Der. Grawitz, be cane tc sea
us on about three occasions, coning frai Berlin. He caru to sea us first.

.. nuabor of other visitors also core to see us, tut I can not rurenter the
details.


Q Can you roaonber ary of tto narus of tto visitors that care to visit


Dr. Schilling^ axporioantal station ?

A. Unforunately, I an unable to r-renter then. I only know tliat ono
of ry assistants, a certain Dr. r«rt Plcottner, received visits fron
Standart-nfiuhror Siovors, arid. to carried out negotiations with bin. This
san, Sievers had talwn the so-called Blvc!: No. 3» Mo hvi t room in our '


Djpartrunt, rturo ho carriod on his writings; am? Standartonfinhrer Sievors
visited hin serural tirus and to visited our toportrent and wont through
it. j far as any ottor visitors who visited cur departoont are conwmed,

I don not rcrunber any.

Q Doctor — I/itruss — lb trill now tum to £:«*>.• rinents on Sea !7ctor.

• •

Do you knew anything about oxperinonts at Dachau with soa water ?


DR. FBZCXK.NN; Kay I raise an objection, please ? I bog not to adsdt
that this witruss should be uxorutod about soa water experiment questions.
Undoubtedly, wc knew about this witness for the last 2h hours. Tho docurunt


book of tho prosecution on soa water exporironts howuvor has only roachod


73 five honr3 ago.

On tho basis of tto affidavits which axv cent lrud in that docurunt book,

I shall hare tc put certain points to this witness, in erdor to oxanino,
*huth-r his staterunt is correct; because these affidavits which nro contained


in that document book aie coning fron people also who hrvu seen s ecu tiling
in connection ;.-ith these sea water experiments. -Jid it is possible, that
certain contradictions nay be node tore, regarding this.

I rust as!:, therefore, that the questioning of this witness in reference
to sea water oxpcrizur.ts should be postpcrucl until I have hrri an opportunity
to see tto documents in Dooboont Dec:: No. 5, and exacine then together with


!Hfco-.WG-l6-ij * Iebnhqrdt,

Quart Ho# -

ifcfondant Schaefer, .‘aid, I should consider it os particularly sutiablo
if tre examination of this witness would not taka placw until the prosecution,
too, hero sutrdttod the affidavits frer-. this docunint book. Otherwise, you see,
I should havo to wait until after tho presentation of these affidavits from
Document Book Ho. 5, vid then ask that this witness shall be callod again.

So that I could prove contradictions on tho bails of this affidavit.

H. H.J'DTt Hay it please tho Tribunal, I have several answers to IX)fence

9

Counsel# ?irst of all, wo filod General Socrotary Uocurunt Books on sea wator
cxp.rinir.ts within the njquiroaonts cf the Tribunal; that is, twenty four
heurs within wliich wo wishod to present the docunint books on soa water.

This should have boon placed in the .holds of Ajfons-- counsel yesterday, so I
prusuno it w.-s delivered to t ha-Dofonoo Counsel Inf emotion Centro.

Socondjy, as wo explained in thi procedure the first day of tho trial,
to said it would not bo possiblo — pardon m — we salt! it would bo necessary
cn mYural occasions for tostineny of witnesses to over-lapi That is, when
wu called a witness on Malaria, that at tho sa no tin, this witrwss can testify
ns to tho oca wator and other experiments.

It was necossary for us at that tin. for convenience and in order to
save the Tribunal's tinj hero. Wb can not call the witnesses back daily as we
arrive at oach uxpjrimnt.

JBDGE SdBRING : !!ay I ask th: 3ccretary-Oon>ral's office if he has a
record which shows when these docuwnt: books wjxu placed in tho Defense
Counsel Information Center ? I haven't received it.

H..PDT s Thj Socnitary-Conerr-l has the daemuft bocks in his hand
new, your Honor.

D?. JSICnUIN: Hry I say acmthing, your Honor ? !?y colleagues and
I nyself rocoivcd th-- docunOnt book with the so throe affidavits at lo:30 n.n.
tc day.


13 Dce-A-a-17-l-Lcscr

Court So.l


12. .IARDY: *o-r Honor, at this tine I -.mat to impress upon the Tribunal
tint it will be next to inpossiblo for tho prosocution to call witnossos, as
I sail boforo, to testify from one exporimont to on other and only call then
after we have presented tho documents on a particular experinont. I n that case
we would have to wait and hold tho witnesses until the pros .dotation of all
docuaonta and evidence has been conplotcd bocausc each witness that wo will call
con testify to sore than one oxocricont. 'urthoriioro, wo have oonpliod with tho
rcgulrtiona of tho Tribunal and filed tho Document Booh, Eewovor, as t o what
tho witness can testify to now, I foci that the position tho dofenao takes,
that thoy have not had the document book, is imatorial at this tine. Thoso
document*books are placed in tho Dofenao Information Centor in boxoa containing
tho defonso oou.'.solo' nemos, If they .'id not go to the Dofonco Information
Contor of tor recess lestovoaing, thon naturally they would not havo the «py
until this ovoning.

THE PHESOEirri Con you say chat they wore in tic boxes at that tlno ?

:*> HAEDYi I oan not say that. Your ,5onor, inr.a :aioh as it is r.ot our djrty
to uollovcr thon to tho Dofcnso Couasol.

7i2 PRESIDENT* I undorstwvl that, but you can't say that, oan you ?

.3. HARDYi Ho, I oan't, ycur -ionor.

DH. PSCLM/Jttt This norr.ing, after ,-^st of r.y colloaguos had already ontcrod
tlsis courtroon to prxticipatc in tho session, I received this doouxaont book
at 10,30. Tho docupont books for 'die other ootloaguus ha just arrived. They
wero not ir. the shelves for tho defonso.

%

ulZ PRESIDED'!: ^xanination of the witness nay proooed at thic ttno concerning
joa-wr.tcr experiments but tho -.dtnesc ;iay be recalled at sone later date soon,
possibly ifenday, for cross-cxnni nation upon thoso letters by th- defendants.

3Y DR. 1L‘>5DT i


"»'i toe as, do you know about tho experiments conducted at Daohau with sea

water ?


A In the year 19-14, I do not n act &or tho exact month any :»rc, a department
M 3 created intho so-called Block 3, Stage .. 1, idsich provioucly had boon occupiod
by :.alaria patients. A his department was prepared for so-called soa water expert.non*

•*crty to sixty, I do not rcocsbbr the exact number any more, gypsios wore confinod

-125


15 Doc-A-E!l-17-2—Lessor
Court Ho*l

thoro and tho door waa locked. There was a nurse in this to rd \tho had proviousl
boon a curse with us, I can't recall-his name any moro, ond»roral Luftwnffo
.fleers apooared, also soco non-coiziissicned officers, and thoy took ovor tho
aar.:-_-~nt of tho whole project. This department in itself was isolatodj nono
of us woro allowed to mtor thoro. Ko-vrer, fron ay sootion I was very well abl
to observe this department. Those caticnts wero confined thoroj thoy woroalso
allot/o.: to toko sono oxerciso In the yard duriaj the first initial Tow days
end then they told us that they wore being nourishoi'. with Luftwaffe rations. As
for as I can roaoober, this ration was concinuod for two wo^ks and then this
nouriahnnnt was withdrawn. AoooiV.ing to tho stories re heard, btoauso, aftor
all, wo aantod to know what was C oing on thoro, wo ircro told that thesopooplo
had been dividod into throe or four sections and that v arious not hods of
traatnent woro si vox. to then. Ono par- jf thee was to bo given only pure aoa-
watcrj another part was to got distillod soa water; and tho third croup was to l
Given son water aixod to pother with sene tablots. I oon onlyrononbor this boonu
wo wero told about it. But I havo soon tho fcllowinc: that in this ward a cortr
mount of unrost boson to dovolop. I mutiny nlr>oBt broko nut thoro at ono tlno.
i’hcy boat up thoir nurso. Ononurso then was role .sod by other porsonnol. I oan
ronenber that fron this ward on various occasions pooplo woro oarriod out on
•trotohors who socnod to bo in a very axcitod condition. In part thoy woro
t;-.on brought to bthor soctlons in order to bo troatod thoro. '.7hat hap. onsd
to them thcro I do not know. Or. two or throo occasions, I boliovo to bo a bio
to rcacabcr to a cortainty, a stretcher was carried out by tho nursos with a ol<
and a blankot ovor it and thoso strotchoro woro oarriod to tho so-callod aorguo,
Tho whole oxporiaont , as for as 1 can rencribor, lasted npproxiuately 8 wooks
end then tho whole soction was lcoarod out n^ain.

TI2 I’RESIDSjfT: Tho Tribunal wil take a races = for 15 uinutee.

( A rccoss was taken).

*126


15 Doc-A-»-18*l-Uooh:ic
Court Ho,l


?GL. O.mG :'JX£SS f

THS MARSHALLt Tho T r ibunai is at tin in session.


JY ICt. H/Ut/fi


DIRECT EXAIHKATIOH (Continued)


f> •Titness, boforo the roooss your woro describing in detail sea wator
oxpoi-iiionts. Do you havo any aoro details to add 7
A Ho ,

Q TTitness, they ocruluotod hhoco soo.. wntor oxporinonts in ouo of the
ro'jas in tho snlaria station, is that oorroct 7

A Mo, this rocex officially bciongod to the hoppital, ho^ovor, wo had

ocoupiod this roon with our patients raid then hr.: to cloar this roon in order

• .* • . • . •

to cnr.blo tho soa wntor oxpurinonts Vc bo carried through.

T '.foro you over in that roon wlu..*a they woro donduoting tho soa wntor
oxperiu. nts 7
A Mo,

Q witness, you stated to tho Tribunal that you obsorvod various pooplo
being carriod out of this roon on’a strotchor covorod with a shoot and a blank.
Can you toll tho Tribunal what position you woro into observe thoso pcoplo
boirg carriod out on a atrotoher 7

A I could go about tho hospital ns fcoly ns I liked, boor.uso wo had tho
patients in a few barracks and tho Lr.bcrntoriun wore in anothor barraoks oloso


n . ?hon y° u personally saw these pooplo being carriod out of tho roan in w",
Che son wator experiments were- icbLr plooo 7 '.fitness, did you hoar tho qu«ati<
A Yos, thoso pcoplo were carriod out* ofthe roon whoro tho con wator oxporl
neats wero conducted through t!ic Corridor and through tho streat, which led frv
one barracks tc nnothor,

n '..'ould you 3ay, fron your observatiff::, that th.so pooplo being carriod
out on tho stretcher fron the roon in which tho son water oxporiaents had taken
?-"co - that these pooplo wore sciously ill or were thoy dead, aitnooa ?

A According to ay recollection, sons cf then woro very oxlir.ustod and woro
carriod out of the soa water experimental cliarsbcr to other departments of tho
hospital. In two or threo cases, I can say with cortainty that thoy woro oorric

A27 "__ -v *_IB .Ms


Court So»l


to the so-called hospital morgue,

Q TTitness, you also stated that you ir-ow about tho dotails of tho
oxporiaonts that you know of tho typo of water givon to tho prisoners. Could
you kin d l y toll tho Tribunal how you raiaod that knowlcdgo ?

A Tbs kno wo lodge ro gar ding tbeso dot_.ia I gained fron conversations,
eftor tho conclusion of those experiments, union wore carriod on with tho nu»
and aonc of tho surviving patients,

q That is tho nurses whe worked in tho rocn where tho aoa nator experir
wore taking plaoo, witnoaa ?

A Yea.

Q h'itnosa, nhat nationality woro the inaatos that .* oro used for thooo 4
soa rator oxportaontsZ

A That I oannot any r Ofcly gypsios *° ro uaod for ^thoso xporinonts, oominj
fr;*i various c-ncontrotion oasps, Duohcnwald, etc,

0 ••itnoce, wo willgo book tc tho ixilaria oxporinonts for tho nonont. T7he
was tho nationality of tho pooplo uaod for the axl aria experiments, what typ
of pooplo were thoy ?

A Tho biggostpart, approximately two hundred patients, used for tho
nalaria oxporiaonts woro Germane, mother jig part wore Polish clorgymon and
tho rest ncro partly Russians, oo:.o Yugoslovians and aono Polos,

q “oro any prisoners of .or uiod mthoso oxporiaonts ?

A 4eong tho Russians, a gror.t part of then whro Prisonore of War.

Q What wos the total nunbor of pooplo uood in these sialarin oxporimonts
fron^our IcnowlodgC ?

A According to ay knowledge, during the nalaria oxporiaonts 1,084
orKTinontal subjocta wo^o used.

0

0 Will you kindly toll us, witness, horr aany of theoo subjects *..uaod
in tho nalaria oxporinents diod as a result of the experiments ?

A According to ny knowledge there died directly at thosr.larla station •
eithor directjy or because of the treatment with drugs, seven or eight, I
can doscribo the dotails if you like. The first case was on Austrian who aft
•;ards boocaeill because of those :mlaria experiments. Tho assistant at that
tine. Dr, Braoktol, who was at tbo itas ti:x. tho deputy physician at tho


13 j a o-^-a>-18-5-Mochca

Ccurt 2*o,l

ho spit cl, aade a liver puncture ctjI at that tine ho blod to death.

Q Tfitnsss, then you state frea y..vr knoi.lc^o that seven or oigiit diod
frea tho oxperiaents. Of that nuaber who were dca'., was that in tho noloria
station itself that thoy diod T

A ‘his was tho nunber of dead, who wore not transferred by us to onothor
iejartuont, but who diod at our station or a few hours aftor thoy had boon tran
forred to mother station,

Q Have you tiny knowlcdgo as to what happonodto seno of tho othor exporinoi

who '.*ore transferred to soso other station aftor thoy uoro oxporinontod on ? *h

•

is, did seno othors dio aftor thoy wero osperinentod on t

A Pros our pationts, during the tour so of the yoarj since v;o had thorn oono
to us or observation, I can rocollost that mother sixty patients died, TJhothoi
thoy diod of solaria or othor conecquor.cos ns a result of tho ©xporimonts, I oar
not say with oortainty,

0 . "itnoss, I want to back-track a bit and ask you why you -.toro sontonood
to tho concentration canp or wliy you '/ere laced in the concentration crunp
by the S asis ? *or what reason ?

A lh spooial reasons hr.vo boon ^ivun tc so. I was r.skod to apponr at tho
Eorlin Pclico station, I was thorr for xevorM wooks and aftor that J was
transferred to S^chsonhnuson,

q .ihat was yuur classification whilo you woro in tho oonoontration orunp,
’diet of political prisoner or what 7

A I case -.a a porson that had tc bo safo-iyiardod by tho polioo end ns
s..o',; was trmsforrod to tho oonoontration erz^),

Q, You have no idoa why you wore arr stpd by the Ilatia and c oat to a concen¬
tration coop?

•’* nothing was told to no,

Q Ahon were you roloaood free the- c.ucontration crop ?

A Aftor the liberation by the Ar„» icons, 1 ronainod for ar.othor few
weeks at the concentrations can? si;xc there wero a nuaber of aalaria^pationts
-t the oaicentration cesp. Then oa the 15th or 19th of July 1944 I loft whon all
~*hor antionaiitics wero transported away frea Dachau,


429


13 Dcc-A-HM-19-l-3urns
Court Ho.l

Q bitncsa, let us go oni Do you havo any other dotaila to tell tho
Tribunal about other sxporimonts that wero conducted at Dachau T

A I acn testify sonothing about tho experiments whichlore c.jv:
out at tho Aviation Instituto with roforcnco to this Ahaenorbo ocr.co I ofbon
jaw this Institute uysolf.

Q •/ould you kindly explain to tho Tribunal what you saw. at this

•

Institxfcoof tho Luftwaffe in the Concentration camp Dachau ?

A In February 1942 si.-ultancously with thcoponlng of tho Ualorin
Station at Block 5, a few blocks ncro openod for a series of oxporiaonts with
rcforonco to . altitudo. Ton iamatoa, so-called drone con, which had boon soloo-
tod for tho mlaria experiments by the ^enp Administration woro then trana-
forrod to this dopartnont. Later a co-oal’lod pressure ohonbor arrivod anti thooo
ton patient# woro oxporirented upon with high-altitudo oxporinonto. I first
gainod knowlodgo about this at tho tine whon I was yot in tho hospital. On tho
socond of April, 1942, I personally mo transferred to tho hospital for nalarla
eases end tho word where I was lying bordered .-n to tho room where to ohorV r
xna, I con say that ttK minute tho motors of this chamber stortod to rotnto. ihoro
was a doath-liko silonco in the hospital sinco it had often hapjonod that
patioats or TOVea nursos, id\o at tho tiao of tho oxperinout, could bo noon in i.
tho corridors of tho hospital, and woro inoodlately takon to tho ..laco of
thoso oxporiaonts. Theao ten patloots olio acre to bo tho offioial oxporinontnl
subjects wore really -.roll-nourished, received snokos and as for as wo know
were tho so-callod exhibition patients but besides these ten r.tionta a groat
number of pcoplo wore chosen at rrnica from the crap and they woro i always
brought tothis high-altitude experimental instituto. ^urthor, within tho frame¬
work of this natter I r.member that Oik-ng others a bljck-loartcr who cs far as
I knew was sent into the hospital—I think he hd pneumonia-vos olo°taken to
this experimental station and a few days later was brought tc tho norruo. In
ur department where malaria patients were, ono day a patient whofer none
r. eecr. had no no dif for once with the Comp Lead or Zill, was takon to this
oxporiruntol station tho following day. It was said at tho ciao that lw vms
trannferred but next day I found him in the &arB9>* By runor I found out that

a airier or on when o=_.c.im-nts wero conducted died and ’.'ere eent to

doO


V


13 Doc-A-H*-19-2Burna
Court Sc.l


;_orguo. Following thcso highalticudo cxnoriccntsi at tho rear ohcabor of
*hi« re ex: a water basic was installed and thcro Is where tho wat-jr
«--o carried through. I personally saw this uoportaont. I saw tho water rr.”* -
1 talked with the nurses and the ahead cal personnel who was employed there
and whatever I know abcut it I farad out frea thee. I did not soc ono such
oxicrinont aysclf, but at ono tiao Dr. Hascher told no on tho oocasicn of a visit
r.t that tine I had to doliver a awosaco fron Prof. S c h lling—nnd ho askod no
whether I f-lt tho dosiro to take a cold bath. That was tiao they had brought
. xubor cf wo=x.n free the Concentration Ccr.p Ravonsbruck to that plaoo. By
hearsay I know that tho frotc.i patients wc;\ to bo waraod by thoso womon. Evon

with reforor.ee to thoso oxporiuents I know partly fron thoso who participated

«*• • . . *

rad tartly fron tho nurses that four patients had diod. I was told by a ohonist
u o was working thoro-ho said that one day Dr. Raachor cono along and ordorod
that cortain of tho nc n Vvre to bo takon along. Tho porsonnol was afraid that
ho was coin- to carry on tho oxporiaonts on thoir porsons. Ho further said
that ho went with thoso non who tend to thoso canp and thoy took hoi.' of a °Vit
poo^lo at his desk am*, wontout to the croaatoriwa and at that tine out thoru
tried thoso ton drugs on thoso -crso.is and then dotornined whether thoso ten
had a doadly offoot on the porsons. Lator this dopartnont was turned ovor to
our Assistant Doctor Kurt Ploottnor and as far as I ren-nber coagulating drugs
wore producod at D a chau. these drugs wro criod out in tho hospital at
dachau by surgeons but I don't know uhat suoooss they had. Dr. Kurt Ploottnor,
a few tenths boforo the lib.ration of tho canp with 25 innatos and '.Tith tho
files of .-hnenerbe fled to the noun tain* whoro thoy wanted to produoo this
dru; j:i n large scale,

0. Witness, are th-r. r-py othor oxporinonts thr.t you !o>ow about at

6

Saohau ?

4 I knew that at B lock 1 ir. tho hospital—that was tho co-callod
Sur_ical Block—a aviator of bielojioal o^crinent. were carriol cut. That U.
a cortain nunbor of Polish chlorgyncn were infected with phlojpaoncs in order
to treat then biologically. 4 mnbe of theso experimental patients ico as
a result and others survived la the hopeital but with anputaticnc.

q Do you recall Who oonductcd tho phlcgnonos oxportnents ?


13 Dcc-A-afr-19-3-3urns

Court Kc.l

A I ooncot «oy that exactly. I only know that a cortain Oborsturabann
fuehrer Dr. Schuctx, who worked with the oreip dootor Dr. HoffBann cad I roncqbe.

the froquont ccccsions he caac to tho hospital and had carriod on oxpori-
xent* froo that department. I was present when Dr. Schutr had a discussion
with Dr. Eraoht< 1 nb. ut one such oxperiaont vith roforonoo to gonorrhoa drug#.

Q '.I'itnoaa, in all these various experiments you haro listod hero

o

today, how wore tho pooplo or prisoners ohosen for those cpxorinonte 7

A Tho jrtionts for the oxporinonts noro ohoson by tho SS

Ccr.p Administration .'al were transferred to ft-of. Schilling at his requost.

U t; the othor patients for Ahnonorbo and oto. woro solcotod, I Jont know.

I boliovo, ho-rovor, that Dr. ^cachor o" Ids ooployoos choso those pooplo in
tho canp on their own initiatiTO,

°- ^oro any of thoso pooplo theson for tho malarial oxporinonts or
tho othor oxporiaonts, volunteers 7


O. "ore any of thosjpooplo froed after thoy had ondu rod tho oxporimont

A No#

1 How did you happon to be picked fer tho anlarial oxporinonts ?

.. In docwibor of the year 1961, tho coop personnel had to r.ppoor

outcido of tho ajurtyard and Dr. Hof .'Bonn/ tho Caap bailor, choso two or throo
hundred pooplo froa the ranks of tho pooplo thoro. io wore tho first pationtn.

r i Tcu noon, witness, that you ero ®Jroly selotod at random ?

A Yes. I don't know what tho directives woro at tho tino but I think
jthat the Canp Administration settled that question among thcacolvco. I rumurfcor
at the end of 1943 a dkteotivo onme froa Borlin that only Russians and Polos
were to be used for the mclrxial experiments.

P. "hen you woro solctcd for chcsc experiments did you consent to bo
experimented on ?

A Ho. 17a didn't know i/hat \:>j were solotcd for. 'to «v cro soloctod in
“ece.ior and a card index was made -f jut names. d'e wore not allowod to leave
’■a* clock and then from February 1942 onward. we were sent to tho ilalarinl

^tetion and it was only then wo knew Why wo were soloctod in Dccbq-


♦


15 Doc-i-24-20-X-iial=y
Court Ho.l


Dr.3*JjTTZHi Dr. Souter, counsel for defendants Blew) and Ruff.

CROSS RXALIKAIIOK.

BY OR. SADTZRi

Q T/itiu-as, you havo to answer a fair quest!c-ns for no, bedauao fron
ycur arawora ao far I ca not quito clear about your position. I sho uld liko
to rental you that the answers which you arc string now ore Given under oath. You
•ro clear about that, aren't ycu 7
A Yoa.

0 . ditnesa, you hove stated that yz u were brought into o concentration
oanp in tho year of 1940 T
A ’ Yoa.

Q 'tv! up to tho,—on- up to the capitulation in 1945 ycu rcaainod
in tho oenp 7

A Yoa.

Q C'.unaol for prosocution has alrcddy oakod you ropoatodly why you
woro aont to the concentration eecp 7
A Yoa.

a

Q ‘<il then I hoard you a ay that you luul no idoo whatoooVor why
ycu wuro aont to tho concentration o'«p ?

A Yoa.

q And if understood rightly ycu chon ooid "ncthine waa tjld no",-
is that ri : ht 7
A Yea.

q But you oust knew why you '-ore in that concentration ctssp 7

A I don't know it. :!_thirj has been to’ld no. I was called to tho

Berlin .dice “oodquortors. X reunited there for aovoral woks. 1 waa interroca-
-cd, cad I was cnly interrocated about zy pcrsoonl Cota and chon alter aovoral
Vecks cue day together with a ovuval. ether i*;r. who was in prison there to I was
transferred to Sac ha cnhr.ua on.

q .litness, Havcn!t you ever received anything in writing na to why
y.u were sent tc tho concentration coin) 7

A Hethirr in writing has boon Given te no.

q Kew, you say thot under oath, .ritncaa.

455 ^ _■ -


13 Deo-A-EK-20-2-Hal oy
Court 16.1


gothing in writing has been given ~c as tc why I waa sent to the con-
castration caap«

Q And you assert mdor oath at thia aorsont you can’t atato vhy y u
--ro sent tc that ouncontratioa emp ?

A I don’t know.

'1 ‘hen you stated that you wero regarded by tho police ns a aar. under
ioIIco cuatodyj hew do you know that ?

A Bocauao that wna written on ay card index which I received in Dachau,
which waa writton cn tho PS7. It.ia in Oerneny poliioilioh eichorhoitavcrw .hrtor,
and than under pdiao cuatody,

Q And beforo your arroat in the year 1940 wero you never puniahod ?


0 Porhops you will toll tho tribunal why you wero puniahod and what
nuaiahaont you rccoivod and '.'non it waa t Undor oath, I renind you, under oath.

A I n tho yoar 1934 I was puniahod and undor thia puniahjont I wna
orroatod, and wr.a then aont to tbo o r.o.ntration conp.

Q in 193*. ?

A Id 1934, yoa.

Q Aro you auro you said tho right thing, 1934 ?

A Yoa, 193*.

Q And how long did you rerain in tho coop!

A 'Jo,— I waa aontoncod in 1934.
n . .ihy, I cn caking you ?

A In 1934 I waa acnctnood to G ycara orison booause of falsification of

0

dociaicnta and because of treason.

1 • 6 yoaca?

A Yoa, 6 years prison,
a C? to 1940 ?

A Yee, up to 19-10 .

nd after this sentence you wore went to n concentration ccap ?

I was to bo pardoned and released , and I was told t hat—

The INTSRPHSTIh'.: T.ill you cc.-dc a ltttlo dower, and make acme pauses, so
-He translator c-n catch up.


13


Court ITo.l

A (continued onsiror) ftor scrying =y sentence I was released, but
shortly before ay roleaso -as again arrostod by tho police and wont ovor
to Borlin end thoro it was said that I had to roceive atao lossons, odudationa
lessons in Berlin, and then in tho ‘'olico iloadquortcra at S 0 rlin I had ono
interrogation, cad then I was told '’you aro going to bo rolcascd now". At tho
^coasicn of thie interrogation ay personal dates were established rad I hoard

• • . N

• #1 ♦ L

nothing furthor until one day I was trrasfcrrod to S a chscnhauscn.

Q '.I'itnoss,—TTitnoss, in tiw sontonoc, on tho stronght of wliich you

wero conriotod to 6 years, did you at thr.t tine say you wore acroly undor
polico security ?

A Yes.

Q has that a so-oallcd protective custody ?

■ • . _

A S«nco it had often occurred that po-plc who woro roloasod fron tho
prison jroro sent to a conccntr .ti-a canp. A little whilo boforo ny rcloaso
fron tho prison I wont to tho J hiof .'roosccutor in Borlin and askod hin what
i-y situation was. He then wret- no sa;'iug that ono ny sontonoc v.t.b sorvod,

I tliink it was tho 3d of Hoy, 19*10, I would bo rolooscJ and ovorytiincwould
bo ovor and <Ano with,

Q I an sure that wao not nhat was written In that lottor.

A Yos, I roc'.ivod* that lottor.

n i ca sure that was not tho o utonts of tho lottor. Witness, I an
an cx:oriCncod lowyor, and I know that sene such a thing could not hawo boon
in that lottor ?

A This was the entoats of the lottor.

^—

The Intorprooorx Speak a little slonor. Speak Just as slow as you snoko
whoa the prosecutor was oxoaining.

IS.HdRDYx I object to dcf.nso c.ur.sol stating his opinion as to
what wr.s in the lotto.*. The quostion is to tho witnoss as to what was in tho
lottor, end out tho dofense counsel.

THE i'.iESIDidfT: Dofenso coisyxol nay proceed.

• » i

fj Witness, woro those 6 years of prison tho only sentence you

t

received boforo being sentenced tc the concentration canp, or did you bof-ro
133*1 receive any othor seatenco ?

• ess


is Dcc^a*-20-4«fcloy

Court &.1

A I cannot rcncnbor that at the accent.

0. So you cannot recover. In that caso I shot*! liko you to refresh

your nca-ry. You are here under cath*

A I cannot rcncnbor at tho nooent to what extent I was sonteneod bofo
193 /. tc any punish=*nt. I can only say at tho occasion of this scntcnco in 193
I i.*aa not put undor protective custody/end in 19'X> I was to bo roltmsod, to

bo rolcascd frun tho prison.

q And what was the date of /our scntcnco 7
Uoy 193',

Q nJ what was tho ne^c cf tho Court 7
A it vras in Uorlin.

0. -hat kind of a Court ?

I was sentenced by a spocial c-urt. That was in l«y 193d.

0 . tod what if the files xroro brought here and you would find a

lumber of other sentence which had boon inposed on you2

A .Jolli you could tell no that cnco you had tho files, hut at tho
-xnont I cannot render. I can say that imdor oath.

0 . .fitness, with roferonco to your testinony today you have boon

interrogated bofore. haven't ypu 7

A .1 was interroQ^d -nee bc—ro.

0 . ..hen wan that 7

t

A A few days o£o*

ft A few days aco, *.id ycu say the vory sane thine at tho tine, tho

very sojio thine as today ?

.» I bolievo I said the very sene thine.

Ia that « you ha; r. very ;ooJ nencry . 1 th l o.'crcnco to tho

thine* you tostifiod today ?

A In 19-10 I was in a very sick state, and was ^nt frontho etneen -
trontion .a, to Dachau. so that I .con -nly ««*«• the oroviou.


tiao if you refresh ny acaory.—

Cl Bo, you have to do that yourself, on tho 'oasis of your oath, and
I think I an tel line you that for the third tiao. - J

.. You cannot force uo to u=ta any stato=»t. If I cannot rouo»hor.


-sfcioy


C urt Is.l

During the oxporinents, — Tilth rcfomec© t; the vn '.-acnt3 you
-itscasod in D.chtrn, had you ao.n a ohya_c.on. Dr. 3uf.', Jr a tho Luftwaffe ? •
That 1 cannot say. I saw isany physicians ccac fron tho Luftwaffo. Uy
roco 11 action isn't str-HQ cn;u-h tc- aoniion any nancs.

Q How about a physician. Dr. “l-.uo ?

I can _nly ren-rbor these ernes I have r^nti.nod here, nly.


c r r nti
quosti i


DS. 0 .JJTES 1 Ij. that easo i have xv. furthor auosti. ns. Thank ycu,

DR. YCd ..has Dr. v orwort, o cvr a ol f ar ?. JtbflfG*

31 3.:. VOSt. JlKi

n .'itness, what kind f crporin-nts in the concentration ewap of
Paohau were, accord in t- y.ur lautTlcd.jc, tho first nos t- so carriod through/

. In Fobriary 19*2 the .nalrria excrinents started, and at tho somo

• • . / • •.*■ * *

• • * « - —

tino the hi;h altitude oxprolaonts vf the Luftwaffe.

n Y-u used tlvs expression "esdiibitica patients" '.'hat d yju mean
by that 7

/. I jG-n tho very first -.-ac.. v -<nts -..he p-rtioi a tod, 1*6 were

used in tho hijh altitude oxx-r unts. fhby lived in r. specially selected ro n

%

and th-y vxrc ..all nourish..Tiwy received eijarettos. They woro always
ra , v.ro ::co introduced t. hi rlcr at the oecasi a f hit visit,
sdor node bi£ pr-nisas t- that in case they our-. , . then

t!~y trculd be relcasod, -..so -n. -nd, in addition to those 10 patients a
lor-o lumber—

1 was nly nskizv y.u 'o ut id-so 10 pati.nto. Did you sot into
cent act with these 10 pati-nts, did y*u a>.:ak to then ?

.. I %-iBited th«*» a sOVW 1 occasions.

•as there a p.ssibili-y :'r the other car^> innate 3 tfl £ct into
c.ntact with th_so 10 iavntes 7

B_t for the tho i..-r.tcs, La; f.r such ;ers ns vh: wore ..rhin^

’ -tho hospital.

n s-_ those 10 pcoplo t.Id xu rdxmu aisxsiur's visit; lo you knew thoso
10 people wore actually ut t xriici ate in experiments ?

Yes, they rors.

n But th.n y.u probably 0 . he t these pors.ns ab.ut the experiments 7

'


2Z Doc-^-HB-20-6-Hcloy
Court So.l


- 1-8. Shill I tell you Berthing about that ?

Q Yea, if you rill.

.. These pciylo told —these pccplo toldxao that thoy went into

this high altitude chanbor with a ac-collod protective installation. That

0

ahoy were ploood under observation undor 10 , 120 13 and 14 thousand nctorsj
that toy ’rcre vory exhausted, but as far as I renenber thoy all survived.

o Did you spook tc then ab^ut tho porsens who were conducting tho
jr;oriaonts ? ^

.. Ho, os for os I hnaw Dr. Roschcr hinsolf was tho cnc who conductod

then,

q Do you know another anyone' besides Dr. Raschor partioipr.tod ?

* ® *■ •• • &

h I sow hew during tho first few rooks , during tho hi£h altitudo
or -rinents, o nunbor of ffioors of tho Luftwaffo, or at any rato thoy woro
in Luftwaffo uni Torn were pr-aent there,

(1 You probably don't rcu-abor tho nsaos T
L Uo, I don't

Q .'culd you rooo<piito thoso porsens if you did soc than, today ?

I hardly think so. I t was too lone tino ago.

*1 './ould you try to rcoejnixc sccaotnc in the dofondants dook ?

I tried that bofora, but it is impossible,
h You said that th.so 10 pcoplo wore "exhibition patientsj" boyond
that you said that other oxporinental subjects were usod in tho lor/ prossuro
c.m&ors, but do ycu know anything positivo ab.ut who oxpori.cntod upon thoso
porco.ji ? • y

Yos, Dr. Acschcr.

1 Except these 10 experimental subjects, did you disauss thoso
oxporiiwnU with then ?

•• Do, I cornet member.

1 w idnt you speak t ray.uc ;»h- saw youj didn t you speak to nnyono


*1


er.c.;t these 10 pccplo ?


23 Doc^-S*-20-i-iiaoy O

Court Sc.-1

k I spoke to a nusbo. of the 10 pooplo that I aot..

Q But other than that you didn*t speak with ruiyono 7

•1 Ho*

Q *hon hew do you know tfcorc tioro ^ther oxporincntal subjects in
addition to the 10 pooplo you nentionod 7

A B-causc cn rtrious occasions I saw that pationts woro load to this


station#-


13-D2 o-A-A&-21^-1- Ninaiuck

Ccurt No, 1


q How do you ccoo to that conclusion ? Hon could you conclude
that these patients were used for those high altitude exporinants ? Did you
actually sec then led into the chacbor ?

X No, I only arrived at that conclusion became at that period

of tirw no other experiments ware carried on,

q If I understood you correctly you did not observe that other
experiEental subjects wore used in this checbor in addition to these ten
pcoplt! ? I

X Ho, I did not sie that,
q .'eid nctoody told you about it ?

A Yoa, on ropoatod occasions I was told about it,

. f

q 7orc you also told who the am was that was carrying on thoso
Sxporijcnta ? I an spoaking of the others, not of the ton pooplo.

X loa, tto very acoi Dr. Rascher who had th.se ton pationts.
q Do you know whether, in addition to Dr. Raacter, there was anyono
else who participated in thiso oxporirunta ?

X I have already said as far as I roneiibor thoru wore two physicians

cf thJ Luftwaffo who were active there,

q I should like to ask you to difforontiato exactly betwoon tho
Sxporirvmts with tfc. so-called exhibition patients, to uso your words, and
the oxporiicntal subjects, who'did not bolong to th.se exhibition pationts,
and I non an speaking about those persons who wuxu not such exhibition
pationts. '..Tic was ths ono who carried cn those oxporinents ?

A Thoy wore conducted by Dr. Raschcr. I con only roly upon hoarsoy
because I neither saw tho oxporinents on tho ten parsons nor on the others.
I only hoard about this since we discussed tho natter in the hospital.

q You hoard about it ? Then, if I understood you correctly, all tho
ten persons, after tte conclusion of those oxporinents, woro still living ?
A As far as I rononber, yes.

n How often were you sentenced cy a court in your life ?

That 1 cannot tell you exactly
q Hew often approxiaatoly ?

In 193U I was sentenced,

* -14r


Court No. 1

Q You havo already told that to the High Tribunal. I new ask you ho
often you wore sentenced ?

A I »as sentenced to six years in prison;

q I an now asking you whotter you want to answer ay question or not ?
A Yos, I havo now answered ycair question.

Q So you aro still saying that you do not renacber how often you
were sontonood by a court ?

A I cannot rorenter what hapoonod before 193b;

DR. V0H7ERK : Thank you.

DR. FBLCELNN i Dr. McVsann counsel for Defendant Schaofor.


CRCSS EX.VIlJf.TICW


BY DR. reiCJQ'lHN l


Q Uitnoss, you said that in tte yoar of 193U you «ro not sontonood
to protective custody ?


Q Was a protective custody applied for by the Prosecutor at that tin-?

t $

A No, tte re was no talk about protective custody at all.

q You have said before that a social court sontonood you; is that
correct ?

A Yos, a special fast court sontoncod rx>. I was arrested. About ten
days later I can) into tho courtroco end was than oontoncod to nix yearn
prison. Ratter, I was first sentenced to four yooro and tten to six years.

q According to our practico of law thoro aro sjx>cial courts »Jt up
fer political c rices, but you stated that ycu uoro sontoncod because of
falsifying dccuaonts and fraud ? -

A Xos, becauso of falsifying documents and bocau» of comitting
fraud, I was oontoncod in a special court, tut tten tho natter was brought
up again end tten subsequently an ordinary court sentenced re to six yuars.

Q But that was not political court ?

A No, it was not political court.

q New, witross, how does tte Prosecutor who exanindd you previously
knew — how does ho knew about your oxporfonoes in tho concentration canp ?

■y,i


1 &-UAL5-2 1-3- Ninabuck


Court Ko. 1

A Because I was intarrogated about it at ere tine .

Q Tie 11 , hew could ho know that you had suah experiences in tho
concentration canp i Didn't you toll anyone about it previously ?

V. -

A I don't quite understand that.

Q At the corent you arc in P-aiSjerg in confinement, did you in
3anborc toll tho police or tho prosecutor who was prosecuting th.ru, did you
tell hin anything about your experiences in tho concentration canp ?

A *cs, I talked about it.

Q And did you subsoquontly report to anyone because you could
toll s ore thing about there cruoltios ? Did you report that to anyone ?


about it.


Yos, yvt i reported about, that. I wanted to nako statononts


Tfton was that ?


A I cannot say that exactly.

Q 7 ol 2 , approximately whon was it ?

A '/oil, it was sore tire age, a few nooks '-orhaps.

Q You have stated that for tho first tire you told tho prosecutor--

you spoko tc the pro so outor about four days ago ?

A Yos, a fow days ago. I was interrogated horo a few days ago.

• «

Q And bo fore that you gave an indication that you could toll

scrething about cruoltios ccmittod in concentration canps; is that correct ?

< •

A Yes


Q .evd approxinatoly when was that ?

A That was a few reeks ago.

0 Since when, Witness, are you in confinement in Bnnborg ?

A Ever since tho Uith of Juno.

Q In that care I can assure that your report that you krew
3 'ruthiix, at cut end tie s was only rvada at the tire you were in ccnfinorent ?

A Yes, but I hove spoken about that a long tire before.that,
but I only officially reported that I knew scrething about there cruoltios,
cnly 3 incc I was in confinement.

Q You were in ccnfirerent since Jure; not before that ?


13— Da o-.> AG-21-k - Kinatuck
Court So. 1


Q Did you road newspapers before that, and did you listen to the
radio 7 — —i_.

A las.

Q Did you know that hero in the trial and cm the part of the proaecutitc
such cruelties were discussed and brought into the courtroom ?

A Yes.

q . There was the International Military Tribunal here that discussed
th;so cruelties ?

A "os.

q And at that tlrxi you were a free war. ?

A Yes. __

Q .eid you didn't put yourself at thoir disposal ?

I

A Tos, I was continuously availablo at the courtroom in Dachau. I
trar.sforrod all thj material of tlw Dachau itnlaria Station which I could
salvago and put it at tho dismal of the court in Dachau.

Q 9ut ycu said that you only nado a report regarding'your knowlodgo a
few weeks sgo ? »

A Yes, in this matter, because I now road that there was a trial
ag&inst S3 physicians awl so on, and this is why I put aysolf at your disposal
in order to testify.

q And whon you wore still a free nan who was it that you gave this
rate rial to and when ?

That was a year ago in Dachau.

Q And whoa did you report to ?

A 'toll., those were tho investigation authorities in tte Dachau

Concentration Camps. T hore was an ..rerican Lieutenant Dauer or Lieutenant

Cent, and at that tire I gave than that natorial.

*

q Tfcru you, twoatod as a political innate in tho carp or as a criminal
innate ? '

A Tfcll, tho troatrent — woll, how do you noan that ?

Q Tfcll, did you have a green triangle or a rod triangle 7

A I hsd^a green triangle.

Da. FSLCKH/iiH : Mr. Presidant, I should like to ask srrae more technical
questions to the witress tomorrow so that I could have some nor opportunity


1>-Cb C-.WJ3-2L-5- Sinabuclc

Ccurt Ho# 1

to study the dociaaont book. AH I wanted to avoid now was that the witness -
could prepare hia aslf tc an suer the questions which I had wanted to put now,
mi Gila is why I put ttea£ questions new.

THZ PRES I U P fr * You may centime the cross oxanination tonorrow naming,
Pardon oc, tha adjournment will bo until Konday narninj.


13 Dee -A-AC—22-1-Price
Court Ho.' I.

DR. ; .3ISGSRS2Rs Dr, Ifcisgerber, cbraaol for the Defendant Slovers.

31 DR. WL2SQ2CJHU

Q . Witness, -hero were you bom?

A Hanover*

Q It is correct that you Truro sentorcod because of fraud and falsifying
docuaoat?

Hi. liAHDED: Your Honor, I object strenuously to any continuation of
questions of this type. They havo ashed tho witnoss questions of this typo
several tiajs. I think thoy'vc get their ansra.-rs now.

THE PRESIDENT: The sano question should not bo asked noro than once
but I do not know it this is tho sano lino of inquiry. You nay proceed.

BY DR. X2S0ER3SRI ^

Q ore you sor.toncod before that tiro for fraud and falsifying
docunonte?

A That I don»t know at tho rxoont.

Q At tlio o^porinonb-J. station of Dr* Schilling you oxnorloncod quito
a nurber of exroriconts?

A Yos.

Q A;xl you can not roaaibor tho wot cf tlw visitors?

A Ho.

Q Hot did Standartonfuonror Dr. Siovorc coro to your attuntio-nV*

A Only because of his negotiations with Dr. Plootnor. At that tii.o
Dr. ilcotnor v.-.c to go fren t)n nalarla‘station to tho Ahnonurbo and it was
cn this at tor that Dr. Slavers r-s th.ro on a fov occasions and had »otjq
negotiations with Dr. Fleeter. This *is \hy I rotauber Dr. Siovura and
clearly recollect his nano.

•i Ko '~s to be included in-tho — did Ahnenurbe havo anything to do
•I'-!: nloxin exportrents?

A The Ahnonorbe had nothing tatejevor to do vrith •alarla oxx>rincnt3.
It v-- only Dr. Ploctr^r that continued to work on these matters.

< Sireo you are so >--11 infortasd about the contonts of tho discussion


-'■t.:- r. Siovors and Dr. Pioctncr, do you perhaps also know that at that tino
were pectin experiments in Dachau?


Prfco

Court *o» 1

Xjs, that is correct, I fonectoor tho n«ao pectin*

Q And who was charged to conduct those pactin experiments ?

I rcnorfcer, I think, that was Dr# Sunzengruber, a physician who
ms later released# 7

0 Did Dr# Plootner hare anything to do with tteso matters ?

\ Yos. I assure that at tho tiru Dr. Ploetrwr took ever the Ahnenorbo
ires carrying out pectin oxporir»nts.

n md Stovers have any discussions with Dr. Schilling ?

. A. I ’.mow that ho went to Ft. Schilling on two occasions.

q 'fcro these just personal visits or wero they business visits ?

X I can not say bmcaine I did not attend thjso visits,
q But since you were in a position to observe anything so well, you

• 1 > 1 * v *

nay rorhaps toll rw sore thing about tho duration of those visits ?

A I think they wore short visits

Q And do you kn w whothar thoro a corrospondonco, an oxchango of lottors
between Siovors and Schilling ?

I only know that ti>o Botch physician wrohj to Professor Schilling
stating that Dr. Plootr^r was leaving us and was transferring to tho ..hnonorbo
an 1 that Stcndartonfuohrer Slow 3 w mid settle tho natter.

0 Can you state the >r>ar e^rccdMXtoly^?

.. That nust have been at thm br.d of 19h3 or th; beginning of 19hh} I
con not ruru:: v or exactly.

q -.foil, thnt is tho tire uton Silvers visited Ploetnor ?

A Yjs, that is right.

q *;Oro so-called exhibition patients presented to Siovors ?

X I only knew that cn various occasions they wont to tho hospital but

I don't know where ttey irant to.

^ n Did they no roly pass through the corridor or did Dr. Ploetnor aid
Siovors actually ronain in the hospital for any lonfith of tint ?

A At the office of Dr. Pl*ti»r, an office which then belonged to the
aloria;station, ttoy had ccnforoncos occasionally and I thin subsequently
they went to the station ..hiwwrbo, but I c® not xuaastoer that in detail.

1-iS


1 >0-' ccnber-A-AG- 22-> Price
Caret No. 1


Q So if I unierstand you correctly. Dr. Plootxwr and Siovors only
wjnt through the hoaptal when leaving the office of Dr. Ploetncr and going
to another-part of the carp ?

A No, another part of the hospital, the so-called Ahnenerbo station.

Q As far aa you know, did Siovors havo anything to do with nalarin
research ?


A Sievers had nothing to do with us*

Q Do you know whothor Sievors in a physician ?

A I don't know that.

Q Now I aa interested in how you feund out about the nam of
Siovora ?


A I found that cut because of thi correspondence to Profossor
Schilling' fron Borlin, and it always was mid that, for instance, today Standar-
tonfuohnir Dr. Siovora would arrive, the one who is responsible for Ahnonortw,
and then we saw Dr. Siovora ohsn ho arrived.


Q If you did not know the -narcs x«f nany ether vial tors, i.t is
ratljor runarkablo that you Just xvrorix..* tho nano of Siovors.


A Botwoen Profossor Schilling and Dr. Plcotnor, who wan assigned
to Dr. Schilling as an assistant free Berlin, botwoon those two thoro was a
strained roaltionship, and because Dr. Plcotnor wanted to loavo one way or a
another, wo wore into rested in tho cat tor, and when finally tho notice cano
fran Berlin that Dr. Plootnor was to bo ronavod, the narc Siovors was
cuntidnod in that connection; and that is the reason why I rorenbor tho nano.

Q i/aa Siovors pivsont during any of tho cxporlronts ?

A That I don't know.

DR. ’.EISGEHBCRj I havo not furttvr questions to thi witnoss.

E3 FRESIDBKT : At this tiaa tho Tribunal will xccos3 until 9:30
o'clock Hcnday coming.

( The Tribunal adjourned until lii Dooorfcer 19U6, at 930 hours.)


VJl


Court 1


C03TO53 MPT '

Official Trauscripl of the jeoricau iiilitory
Tribunal ia the naltor of the United Statco
of morion, against Karl 3rendt, ot el,
dof cadets, sitting at SUmberg, Gojsnay , on
16 Docasbor 1946, C930-1630, Justico Beuls,
prodding.

E3 V.^SLa L: Tho Kilitory Tribunal ia now in aoseion. God save
tho United States of ^oorica end this Honorable Tribunal.

Ihore will bo order in the court.

2H3 PRZSnCTT: Tho Harshal will aaoortnin if tho dofondunta aro
prcaont.

T33 Ua3Si*L: Hay it ploaao Tour Honora, all dofondnnta aro pre¬
sent, in the court this noraing.

2E3 PB3SX3B:?: Bo Socrotury-Ocncrel will ao rocord.

Dofondenta' counsel wjll proceed with tho croao-oxaoination of
the vitaoaa.

\

jDGUST VISES —Hcauad
C30SS SS-.XU«TICai— Continued
3T Dj. STZIlBaLTR (Counaol for dofondaut Bolglboek):

q . Uitaoaa, this ia a question diroctod to your personal data.
Thou onactly woro you bom; what day and what yoart
A. On tho 17th of Sopttnbor, 1895.


v In Eanovor?
a • Too in Eaaorcr.

q. on Pridey you told us that you woro the Xapo of tho Profosaor
S chilling nalcria cjpcriacnts.

a. ao, I wua nowor a Zapo acting at tho Malaria Station of Dr.

Schilling*

q» Didn*t you have a position which w a s aiuilnr to tho ono of


Zepo?


i:i tho laboratory of Dr. Schilling.

you wore J)lo to watch tho procoedirgc
your barracks. Ie that right?

wore carried into tho courtyard in
you, can you toll us why these pcoplo
courtyard?


15 ^cc-A-CHS-1-2-Daniels
Court Vc. 1.


... On various occasions I saw people being carried into tho courtyard.

*

%

,:~t of these people wore sent into the '--arracks cf the hospital because they

.re exhausted. In tve or three eases I saw how these peeplo, who were carried

or. the stretchers in that nervier —

f l. (Interposing) -c will talk ab ut that later, .c aro going to say

s'.ucthine about the ccrguo; wo will coic to that later.

• ‘

Cn that cccasicn, didn't you see a phot-egraphor fiho \ras taking pictures?

~. I saw one in tho courtyard botwocn the laboratory and the oxp-rimcntol

sta-lcn, end I was able to natch photographs being taken on nuncrcuc occasions.

‘i. Hew m:ro tho lijht conditions in those barracks? ere thoy sufficient*

ly equipped for photographic *.rcrk?

•*. I can Inrdly Judgo tlratj the photographs which I saw wero taken in tho-

. ’ .

courtyard. '

‘J. You told us sbcub a quarrel between a nurse and one experimental

f

subject. I cn as kin.-; you, was that at the beginning or at tho end of the

*

experiment with sea water?

... I think it was at tho boginning of tho orp-rlacnt. I new renoober tho
rr.se of that nurse. The firs- none vas Ilax. There wore servo difforoncos cf
pinion, and thty fought it .ut in the courtyard. After that tho nurso would —
T. (interposing) Very woll. Can 70 . rc:«cnhcr tJio nationality of this

f w.

.‘x? "osn't ho an Austrian, ccriing f r~r Styria?

... Yur, I think ha was an Austrian, and he caao frail Styric. I think
b- was even a Qy pay.
s. r.iark you.

Can you not rcnccfccr, perhaps, whether Lax ras deling out the rati'.ns to

M _

the people justly?

... I can't say that, but I think tiiat the quarrel concerned this dis-
tribution cf rati-ns.

k. .’ere y-u able to wail: freely around tho hospital?

... Y^. J

:.. ..nd ycu had an oopcrtu.iezy daily tc speak to tho mroza and the
• hh9


expcria octal subjects, is that right?

-J. T03.

Z» Didr.*t thoy tell you about inportant hq?pcninge thcro, and not
cnly tho dot rile *hich you hcva elroody nontionod to us on Priday? --

*• sftor tho early days of tho soc water cjporinonts thoso 1 met on
did hot Iocto thojr roons, so that wo woro unable to talk to thm.

®. • Bu* you did hevo an opportunity to find out sccothlng about
wfcr.t was goios-on thoroT

a, Yoa; wo tclkod about various nattors, but X cannot renenbor
coy doteilo.

Z» How, tho nost lnportant thins; did you hoar that thoro woro rny
doed tharo, pooplo who had diod becauso of the experinonts? V

A • I only rcccxjbor free ay own observations, that I saw how
persons woro carrlod down to tho norguo frontfcat station.

Z» But you did not havo a posltlvo report that senobody diod?-

Ju I cannot say that undor oath. X cannot rcnajbor that o»-
• •

cctly cow,

Z» Do you also rcuasbor that ucdlcal otudonto woro 1 Ivins no*t
door to tho barracks who woro iccntos too?

A . i*oxt to tho barrack#, as far as I reoenbor, thoro was this
chrnbor, '-hieh X bcllovo was foraonly tho pathological nusoun.

Z . Didn*t you sco c ny nodical studonts there, walking about in
their wliito robos?

A , an nursos, yes.

Q. Do you know the nurso who was on ixsjjto too? Ihc nano is
Piolvoil.

U Yes, I rcnoibor that nano. He was a young, strong nan, ccuing
freu TIosiq,

Yes, I think so.

Slow lot us return to tho carrying out of tho dead. Did Pi elwoil
ever toll you that cny fatclities occurred?

A . I er.uaot scy that now.

^ . Ir it posciblo that tho bodies which woro carried in tho dlneo-


16 ^-X33S-l*l^~anicls
Ccert !•


of the hospital acidic w>ro pcrhcps carried to the X-ray station c r a

laboratory?

A> The r<--ad to the a~rguc Trent across the ccurtycr ’.j the ’.ray to the
"-ray station nas in an entirely different direction.

D... SGEIBMEB: I have n further questions.

IIJ1DY: 'Jay it please tisc Tribunal; cur boaibhenas era dead, .'c
c^l'n't hear the last two cr Circa quest! ns ver; ’..-ell. I surest that we
rjscentinu- until tic phenoe arc put int c.'.nditien.*

T.T :lSSSZZ.17s It is reverted that se:o cf the tarphcnce arc not
veridflff. 'H'-.t hoc hotter be irrv^sti'ated.


Court He. 1

16 I'oc 46 II - 2-1 - UG - Putty


3Y DR. LJOI: (Counsol for tie Defondnnt bockor-Froyseng)

2. Uitnoss, ycu spoko ..bout u A 'uftw:_ffo Instltuto in
Dachau. I cn nrt; asking you -id * u soo scr.e kind of a
placard cr a lottorl.uxd wl oro such a na.*> cculd bo soon?

L. He.

Q. T/oll, thon, how did you find out about that nniio?

... This noao war aontionod —eng ti:e inra.tos bocauso
tho oxporiuonts that woro carried cut thoro \»oro allegedly
for tho benofit c f tho Luftwuffo.

Q. Did you it that ti;:o soo anythin" about Dr. Raachor,
and at tlo ti:^o Dr. Doislbcock ccx.o thoro , was daschor thoro
vl.on Dr. 3oiglboock c.'.io fr was ho not? Did yoy'know about
Dr. Iu.acl.or?

Yus, I know ab ut hi-:. I raw hix: daily.

Q. Dili ycu soo any connoction botwoon Uaschor ..nd
Roiglboock cr had .tr.schor ni^o.-dy loft wl.on Dr. doiglbcock
errivod in Dachau?

i.. I cannct say anything about tl r.t.

Q. rtoll, I thought ycu lo.d such seed powers of obsorva-

ticn.

... Tto succocrcr rf Dr. Kaschor v. s Dr. Kurt Blootnor.

C. Did ycu ,.t any ti^.o soo a Luftwr.ffo efficor tolkirg
to Dr. -aschor? Did ycu ovor see tlon talking tc

». Xos.

Q. C..n ycu duscribo tl.ou? Can you toll us eonothing
.-.bout tl.oir rank cr how thoy iookod?

a. I ronorbor h..vin 0 - soon two gontloixm frou tie luft-
w. ffc thcro. One was tall and slincnd tho other was sonowhat
stouter. Kowovor, I do not rmroubur thoir rank.

’.Toro they uodical officers?

/.. He. 5koy wore Luftwaffo officers.

Q. Can ycu differontiato? G-n you difforor.tiato?
t- ^52


Ccurt 2fo. 1

16 Doc 46 I: - 2 -2 - LJG - Putty

... Yes, according to thoir unifbxnsi

C. Boll, did tl oy have this yoilou si^n? Shut did
do Luftvr.fi o effloor leek liko?

L. I cannot toll you that ox^ctly. './o had boon tcld

tfcat this was :ir. " So-and-so, n and tho otl or ono l:ad enothor
jw.o, but wo woro nover told what rank they had, :.nc\ I cannot
roaoiibor tl ..t.

Zi -ut you c.ru euro tl:. t tl.oy wore eff lcors? You nrs
suru tl >.t thoy were cf floors ef tl o Luf tv.affo and nnt nodical
officers?

A. I cennct s..y that. It had boon said tint ho was a
profosscr or seaothinij liko that. I ar: n't sure about it.

C. Did yeu kn^tr that Dr. I. sol or w..s in ccnnooticn with
t \j) Institute for Military Scionco in connection with Ahnonorbo?
And is tl.oro any .;cssibilit7 thr.t you interpreted that insti¬
tution as a Luftwaffo institution? Is t3 . t poseiblo?

A. I’oa, tl..t 18 possible.

C. Co ..t that tiuo tl oro was no nano ef Luftwaffo
Institute in Dachau, but what youvantod tc say was tint ”1
was ef tio cpinicn that tl.oro oeuld bo such on instituto, but
I cr. net soro ..bout it, B and you rcroly dro\/ a conclusion,
is that njl.t, bscauso if such oxporir.onto woro carrlod out

tl oro? Is that a corroct stx.toaont? _„

-os, that is correct, .nd I did net want to oxjrocs
aysolf with rofv,ronco to tho hasCl or Institute as 'Luf tw..ffo
Instituto. ;l

?„ Yos. Ifc_t was .e roly your way "f thinking tl. t this
r .s a Luftwr.ffo Instituto. ;i

• m

A. Yes.

Q. Cut if yeu woro tc b« tcld tlat possibly it was not
a Luftwaffo Institute, tfcon yeu would still lo..vo ti-.t question
epon, wouldn't yeu? k53


16 Doc 46 - 2 - 3 - U3 - Putty

Court Nc . I

r'

Roll, I know that tho Heaohor Inatituto wr.s cdlod

c x. Inatituto fcr 'Mlitery Scionco, ;.nd functioned c.s sick.

• *

Q. '.roll, that is wli.t I wnntod tc knew. Cm y.^u any
whon you ac.w neachor fcr tl.o leat tino? Can ycu toll ua
tint appro xiu c^oly?

I cannot toll ycu th—t oxeotly. Kewover; I ceauio
it was r.t tin ond cf 1C43, r.t tho ond of 1C43. I think it
wr.a in tho Pall cf 1S43. I cermet renor.bor exactly.

C\. YcukJ.i 1 bofero tint ycu had diacuaaions with thoao
oxpohinohtd aubjocta. In what lcn;m;.go did ycu havo thoao
diaci-.aeiona?

U .They uoro in tho Goruen language.

Roll, did thoao gypalua knew Cwnun?

Tho gypaloa thct woro vaod in tin aoa-wc.tor oxporl-
nonta could apock Gonan.

C. Sc yen ooiild apo:J: to thoi: in Oorran, ycu and tho
gypaioe?

A. Yea. That la c<rroct.

Q. .aid whon did you h. vo tloso conversations with
thou, bofero tho oxporir.wnta tr oftor tho oxporir.onta?

A Portly cf tor tho ox.Jorir.onts end pertly durlnr tho
first day a of tl.o oxperinonta wlnn thoy v/oro still loclcod rut

4. Sc wt at ycu went tc s;y is thct ytu 3pcko to then
during tho tiao whon thoy woro actually being oxporinontod
upon? '7o hevo tc difforontiato botwoon verious tinea horo,
first, tlx tiro whon tho poopio rocoivou thoir full r. tion
and thon .Ytor thoao oight daya th.oro woro tho rod or.pori-
uonts, end I an rof^rring to tho ti»o of tin real oxperironta
Could ycu spork to thon, to ay of tho oxporir.ontd subjects
at that tino?

A. No.

Q. Dut ycu just add thc.t ycu apoko tc then during tho
oxperinonta. Vfr.on was that?

IS*


Court Nc 1

16 Doc 46 - 15 - 2-4 - LJG - Putty


Thr.t wt.a during tlio first few d..ys vfr.on thoy rocuivod
Iuftwoffo rations.

Q. Did tLoy cc.-nplc.in c.t all? Didn't oriycno ccnplain
about this? Yr ,u s..id bofcro thoy woro lockod out, but ycu
cc.nnot ar.y that tLoy woro lcckod cut — bow do ycu arrivo
ct that oxprossion, 11 locked out"?

3oc;-.uso tho so pooplo wero soparntod from tho cthor
lnur.tcs In a spocir.l room end cculd r.r.ly eponk to us partly
through tho window.

Q. V/r.s tl.oro nc suporvlscry porsennoi thoro?

... Net during 6ho first day. ..t that tino whon• thoy
roron't boing oxporinontod upon yot, thoso things woron't
tr.kon so soricusly.

I still won tod tc ask you lew cun ycu steto tbr.t
tl.oso experimental subjects ..t tl.o tino thoy rocoivod thoir
full nourishment cculd make any complaints towards you?

•i. Jocauso cf tho uncertainty *.s tc tho pxirposo thoy
woro boing usod fer, end thoy wore afraid cn that accrunt,

o

end thoy moroly woro ..fr..id bocr.uso thoy didn't knew vkat
thoir f..to was tc bo. *

Q. T.’oll, if I urvlorstecd ycu ccrroctly thoy tc: rod
because thoy wore in uncort..inty, ;nd that was why thoy spclco
tc ye v. thr. u h tho window, !!r. Viowog?

Y os.

DI*. b.RX: Thank you vory much. I hr.vo no
furtS:cr questions.

St DR.. .’ILLE: (Counsel for tl.o Dofoixiant —ugust Goorg V/oltz)

I la-vo tho following questions to ycu, witnose: in
connection with tho experiments cf the Luftw^ffo in D,chau,

-id ycu over ke>.r tho nano cf Pr.fosscr Joltz non tit nod?

Can you roaonbor tl-_t?

.fc tho uenent, nc. I cannot renoubor.

‘ ISS


Court Ho« 1

16 D 0 c 46 - I: - 2-5 -UG- Putty


I

Q. You, thoroforo, novur saw this gontlonan tkoro?'

I con noittor dony ncr offiru that.

Hc novor boon pointod cut tc u by other innatos?
—. I cennct s;.y that r.t tfco ccnont sinco uy rocolloc-

w

tlcn is a little worJs bocr.uao cf tfcfcor oxperinonta tricing .
pi..co at t:_ t tiuo.

Q. Con you rocognizo tin? Is ho fcoro cziong tho dofond-

ontst

L, It is vory difficult for uo sinco tho gontlouon who
uoro tlxro wero r.ll in unifrru, =nd I would net liko t< say
anything which I cannot say with* cortainfcy.

Q. ’.oil, as a rosult, I c 4i ccncluCo tl x.t yr u novor
hoard tho ncxia cf -refoas*-r Holtz uonticnod?

That I would net say.


15b


16 Dcc-:>G3S-3-l-?utty
Court Kc. 1.


But at any rate, ym cannot a ay anything t the c ntrary; y<u comet
sa; that yru heard the nano aonticcsd?

I can neither say that, naturally,
i*. .avl y u can neither say —

L3. .ILIE: .oil, tlmt is .sufficient.

BY E?.. F.UIZ: (Ccunsol fer the Jefor. ant Rcso)

I have a for questions t. the witness. Witness, n lYidoy yu shewed
cc. knrrlcdgc with reference t. certain malaria qucsti.ns, vi usly :n the
.-asis f knowledge Wilch y.u gained with l-rcfcssar Schilling. I en n w asking
. .u tc answer the f'Hewing questions which refer t.* sc.tc very Important
details. Curin': y ur examination fcy tho *rcsediting ^omsel yu sptko nf seno
re rcttablo’incidents taring uhich people ;‘urinr the c ur 3 e -f the ualaria
c:nerlrant 3 conducted hy .r;foss r Schilling had died. ..t that tino yu
nentianed about soven eases, but y.u only speke ah-ut ana casv in detail, wh¬
in alditi n to nalaria ha. ; cllotr fever and then bccr.uso f a liver puncture

•

Me., t death. I an nrr aslcin. yu tc tell no s-ncthin-j ah rut the reopens for
the doati -f the -th.r six parseno, tiio ether six patients.

"he .-thcr six patients v\.re the s:-called oodicaicnt death cases.

One pati.nt led as a result of tho solve, son druq. Tho other ant diod as a
result f tile 3 --called .'criphero c^.erincr.t, an! tlx. f .ur last • r.ces disd as
a result f a ,'^rani \~n ex -ri-xnt.

re the patients wha aJt.r Ixiny released frvu tho station nf
Schillin; and ti:a receive * relapses after that, were they sent baok-to

• rleaser Schilling's static?

... . If they reportod ucc!: t_ us, tS;oy were taxon bad: t the station.

.. In that case- sxo there any patients — did any patients .!io in

* -• i’oss.T Sahillinr'3 icrr.ru-mt who later »n had malaria or rola.acs?

... fetients who were in any c.re!iticn that caused fwr that they raay !io
transferred V another state, n.

Cc y u r.cc±a- tlir.t the solaria ticrciania is net aa iUncss -hich


causes death?


uS7


1$ Dcc-:VCr3-3-2-FQtt“ te»)
Court Ho. 1.


.'.i --3 far 23 I kn:w, nobody with us dies because of r ajnrir. tier-

ciania, but as a result :f the drucs'died of ths side diseases which

aprearod because of the lealario. exporinents.

r :. Did Professor Sch il l in g say scccthLv: to you *.iitk reference

•to tic30 death eases who icrc under his rcsponsibilit;* and u.x'er his ob-
0 0

servatien, end if so, how?

• • •

... In the first cases, thirJdn- of the patient whe died as a result

of the liver puncture and the next patient who died because • f the sal-
.

vasan injection. Dr. Schilling rc w Tcttod t’ncsc eases very dooply, and

• *

he tried tc prevent such natters as auch as possible, but the last four

cases, referring tc the .“yrredden oxporiraont, he \r.z told that those peti-

c.ita *.iorc in a very bed condition. In spite of that, he insisted.that

t:»y ccntinuc to receive tie Pyrariden druys — I thin!: it was three crans

per day — end when these patients caix into a C'.adit ion whoro they

at:xtod to have dcliriu., they wore transfers' fra: cur station sh-rtly

• •

bo fere their death.

Q. -a.*, now sccotainc clso: On Friday ‘you testified that Dachau
received -noptolcs c~s fra'. Dr. Rose's instituc end that there was an
oach-nyo cf correspondence :iith reference to the diff: cidities wlvich you
hat*. La the brcod in,', of these Of.^s. Do you know Dr. Rone worked,

c.a which institute? . •

... I think that those letters uc re addressed to the iTobort Koch
Institute in 3crlin.

U. Do you knew fro.:, this correspondence whet:-or these roplics wore
redo by D r . Rosa personally cr by ..is assistant?

... That I cannot say by neaory ~ frer. ay Conory. 1 rcixnbcr
that at*n<~ others, there ;ns a reply frxe a lady who *. —3 ?ji char.ao of
the brcod in- of these c--s in Berlin.

Q. This is probably an assistant who had wsr-d. dth Rose f.r nany
years.

* r • 0

... IC3, but Professer SchiliLa I think, ferst ti-rard to Profes¬
sor Rose an: the replies probably primarily ca;« fra- .rofebsor Rose.

Q. Can y;u rOiOCuber the na.oc of the lady?

453


... Mo


-3-3-Pctt;


Court Ko, 1.

Q. Do you knew wfce Dr. Schilling dealt -with crv*. la: correspondence
with in addition to D P# Grawitz and Dr. a^c? «SL

A, I cannot say that free ny ocaory, and I could Only say that lie
:r.d a correspondence with an institution in Dussoldorf called C-rcc-
fenrsd or scccthin- that, and he asked for the breedny of these
c"s there, and w: received flie a fra: there, livLv: -"id s.

•

Q. Do you rcrenbor t!e nano ’Rose" fr-n bsf re, r.- did you only
start re call La- his rax when you were first examined?


A. :io. Tho ncao •'Rose'' recoined in ny roc-Uectics: because i, ny-

sclf, was inflictod with nalaria which was called 'nose", lfc had these

*

various inanizatloR ^rcups, the so-called .ualaria ainc:; ::lv.ch had

various different neoos, and I ir.s with a nr,up xr/J.cs. was infected with

c so-called Rose Culture. . r . •

Q. - You have testified bof re that you received, cy.-c fren Reno.

ilowever, ;-u could n, t rc.jo.dxr t;« nar» of this perhaps 1 'rofossor
V'asiroli, Dr. Rosni or ^r. Rap:cell?

A. I tiiin!c it was Viosiroli.

n .. Did you also receive thos. c —n fr-n Hcnbirj?

... fc received nc 0 .3 fr . the Tropical Xnstituto in Uav.bur;;,
but Professor Sc hill.,. had corrcspcodcncc with t.. - iustituto,

r :. Can ycu renoaSor in what year y u received t'.vsoo o~s fr .1
Robert Koch Xnstituto, rather frou Profess r Pose?

A. That was in fcho mn -r Months ef the year IV 2.
n .. You have told us about a lumber of c.-.-s — a r.uter ef theso
flics which y u had to breed in tho vicinity of Dachau, ‘.ere you
present?

A. There was one ouch detail who had to dr that, r.-d aoonc tlvcn

- ere was an SS nan and 0:1c or two iauatco. That ha. cue ’. An the 3 wa::po

svrreun-'iny Dachau duriny the sunaor aor.ths. There were various water
*

easts be in uede, and accordin' f. the doerco f these s:iaips by order
Dr. Sc hi UHi • those waters Rrc infected with a ±A'V 0 ef piy food.
a:a : r. tlv. winter oonf.ia this detail was sent — wen'- arovcv’ cb- ccllcrs
/.u Dac'.iau Car.? and xr rked on chat :attcr. These - a :^lcs flies rero

- ..1 crawdncd by our Irbsrat cries


15 .oc*M-GSS- 3 -U-. utty
Court Mo. li

an-’, were used by it for breeding ‘:urpocas. •

Can yai soy oxyihing about the quantities that rare.caught?

It varied in the winter; S 3 aati.-<os they, brought ten", sonatinas


thirty to fifty and soactines ni^ty.


16 Dec.-11- JUB-^l-Lohrirarit (Pil)
C-urt 3*. 1


Q: Die y or tUpnrto-nt in Dr.cfciu -’Oliver my such t. other --

p-rtrents?

A: Cfc aai jcc‘si.n we deliv-r-i such eggs, but I oinn-t reautper

where.

Q: Inu cue- to th, question -f j.L'rin culture. Wh-re flit* Prof.

Schilling rcooiv- hie .vL-.rt~ cultur-s frees?
o

A: I CTnot sny that ocr.ctly. I kr.:n th"t he rec-iv-C! a'lrri,*.

culture fr za Athen an f fr-c Berlin, That .'.lrwc'y hr.05N.1wtf in February 19 '' •

r.t the tine when I wrt n>t at th- at-.tin yet. I rea-rixr that mo h-* 12

different nr.L-ri*'. cultures. 1 kn.v thrt prof. Schilling us-tf n.; r.

'not^r m use’ ;ne, I think his n'tw w s Flu??; in -r hr t. tflv - -rw^

• * * . .. *

such culture the nefw* >f "Flu": ".

Q: Cm 7-« rca.tfxj th- n r—t f the ttor cultures?

«: * hr/ the cult u'e _L ' J SIZ; the cultur- IOSKaU; the culture

FIKM-JD: I cm. t roo-rb-r ay thro. - h twelve differ-nt culturvc.

I c-nnjt woodier their r. rxs in :>t ii.

Q: Kbit kind of erL-.ria cultur- fiii y u -rk -vith; w*n it

a naiCL^A? ( '

At It it s HBTCIaKA.

r.s I Tf'r.t to tell y.u s.a-thing rb.ut - few acre n'.?..n if culture r t
o-e if yu cm xvnt tter any a-re: "JeJliG-.X-.R"?

«: Ho. .

C 4 : Vic nr-t?

A: H:.

Q: H-rten?

«! Ho.

B J.*rk.s n ?

A: Ho.

Q: "Roe"?

A: H:.

» • % -

Sicily?


U1


»


16 Ifc^-b<.TT>-t»2-iehnharr.t
Court Ho. 1

•

A He*

Q Sardinia?

A Ho.

Q Ocrania?

A Ns.

Q Dusseldorf?

A No.

Q Tropica Faperode?

A Ho.

q 'tLllons?

A Ns.

Q Charite?

A No. i

q Sc hill inf ?

A No.

q Did Prcf. Schilling say scoothir^ to you about tho roculinritioa
of tho culturos with which ho worked in Dachau and that ho could rocopnito
than froa hla previous oxperionoo7

A Partly, yos.

q At tho tlao you wero there. wore patients lnfectod with flioa in
hospitals which woro out3ido your departnont in Dachau?

A In ay tloo, no.

q In ordor to pain a new culture for tho 4 opartoont?

A Ns, not at cy tiae.

T But you can no doubt ronosfcor ml*ria beinj; used in nentftl insti-
tutions on 4 hospitals for the treatment of various conditions) &d Prof.
Schillin- use infected nalarla blood, or did ho send out any lnfooted
-olarin blood?

A I can't rozx^aher that) I do not thirk so.

q Ycu, yourself, suffjrod fron mlaria?

A Yes.

L62


16 Ogc .-44-.ITD-4-3—L-inhcrdt (FV)
C.urt No. 1.


Q: bon were. yxi at the stati -n as pationt?

On the s-c.nd of April, 1942, I was s.nt to that atatip..

Q: And sine. when wore y*i active in tho breeding of th. t'li.s?

«: I atftjud at the stati.® f.r approximately 110 days. I \rs then
r.lu-».J, -nd £ few days after, I was recalled into the hoapitni.'Vnl

Jut tj '- rk ct ttet station. But thon th. chief physician cftllod m
t. hLa, on the basis of Dr. Schilling's wish, that I «•* to be k.pt at
that st ti on as an assistant in tho l'b oratory. •

Q: How ue® it that yu received th.se nal'ria cultures froa the oub-
sii> since you could hcvu us.d your flics r. patients in Dachau?

a: Tb-s. various cultures wore only received frua the outsido'ct tho

I

beginning. Irtcr, w. u^d "An-phalos- which w. h'd bred oursolv.s; :tr' wo
inf.cted or own patients with that.

‘it The L-jt questi n: H.w did th.se as 1’ri~ cultures g.t t. you
lr<j the -utai 'e; were they in bl <d, ».r. they in dry powder, or \:or«
tfcy flies?

Partly, th»r. w's infected blo^d; partly infected flies.

Dr. Frit*: Th-nk you, I h vt no furth-r questions.

TK2 PR-SEoKNT: .,ny cr,ss-exaain“tion of this witness on the •vart cf
’ay -f th- '.’efonso counsel?

(no response)

nr. PIZoE/ENT: H*s the Pr.^cution 'ny P.e- ’ir.ct oc-min-tion?

IS\. H.J1DY: Ye s, your honor.

RlDIFJiCT ZX.JCK-.nON

BY IE. HaRDY:

* itn-ss, do I un.erst'rr’ you t say tfrt Rascher, Dr. K“acher,

’•s not at Dr.ciru at tf tiae ,f the su* water experio-nts?

(N> n.spon»-)

■

®. F.JiDY: I will repeat ay oixstion:

C: itn.ss, d I und.rsta.nJ you to s'y that Dr. Rasch-r <~c not *t

D‘ch* -t the tile \i th. s.' »-ter experiments?


463


16 D^.-4WHWr-4-U*hnh:rdt (?M)

C-UTt Mo. 1


I don't rcatabcr anything. So:* thins isn't functi ning right.

(testing of -pp-rataa)

IKS UlKSSSt Y- wohl„

. BY 1C 5 .. HiBDT:

Q: .<ita,3E, during the c «rsc of the high •'ltitude oepwrioenta, die
yiu Sec Luftw'flo uitLf roa r.t D-ch'u?

A: If I "n not deceived by ay roc-Uecti^r., 7C8.

Qs Witness, during th- cours- A th_ freezing experiments at Dachau,
die you 8^ personnel ir. Luftwaffe urdf-r=e?

. A: I cannot rec^ober thot in dot-il.

Q* '.'itn-ss, during the c-urs- f the Se- :i*t-r ocpeyistr.ts, 1 . y >u
see p^rs^mvl tearing tuffcioife ■ihif"iraa ‘ot J-chiU?

Th- a-". >rt*-r op^rin-rts wernj£ c.nuct-i! by Luftu-.f . p.rs'n-
n-1. I an - nunbwi of unif-.::o3 th,r.; -fficers 'nd n.-n-c <aaia&i:nu*.
-fficors rnd - Serse-nt whj ;nly h* J iiasi n t. this r -a.

Qs '..itnise, you kindly t-U this High THourr 1, wh“t color .the
Luftweffo unifora ia?

A: The iniforaa I a w th-re, ' cc rding tj =y r-c Unction, ’icre Cork

blue unil •ms; but it is lap <osible f->r n. n* t. i-scribe the eX-ct

ordf ra nd r-nk inrigni. «t th?t tin., it w-.s ertter ,t chtco fa* \.

•

'lacuna thus- vrrloua experiments, -nd I t'o't think ay cwairy in de¬
ceiving ci. wivn I s~i-' th*t tb.»- se- w~t-r ou>uri:xnts were ^niy carried
ut by th. Lultwf'ffe. Th- SS physici'.na fr-i the Comp :i<‘ n.t p-.rtiaip- —,
n r di * ny thcr o-ic'l officers.

i.s .itness, you hr.vo stated h«re Ihrt Stondortcnfuehrer Sicvura
visited D-chr.u one that SiwVers hod n thing t d. with M rio research,
i. v_ y.xir not?

I .nly !:nr.: -f ST-JOWiTJirUBBRSF. Si~v_rs b-c'use f hie n*n- an’

L: -'--r .ncc, ua*in the nog ;tis Hons about the transfer ,f ur rssist-
r.ts t. Lr. Bl--tr.vr*s Institut- _A -.HK-iifiE.


Court Ko. 1

* Do you kno- wtothor or not . ‘TJi-JS32Z Silvers.

h i knowlol.'o of too o:l ri; rosorch work of Prof. Schilling

th.-.r is » ;i - y° u 0V3r sac Dr. Sievers viaitinj Prof. Schillin
1 'bore t cry?

« I s*" 37«;."D-MiT Z' USR^R Sievors in connection with
Dr. flootnor, nd I 3 : w kid rt Professor Schilling's lcbc-
r-tory. But vhethor questions of ir.lrir. ros.rrcn, or quos- *
ti .as war a Ilscussud with rofcronco to tho tr r.afor of per¬
sonnel of Dr. Plootcor, I don't know, since I w.-s not
pr-soct derm, the no jotir.ti ons.

^ l-o.., witness, you h:vo told this. Tribunal in ;ror.t

flotril bout tho various ox^ori.^nts at tho D.-chnu crap,

* • •

an: that you hed, yourself, boon subjocto.' to .iolnrir experi¬
ments fivo ti.es; is th t correct'

« Yes.

'.'itnoss, can you toll t.iis Tribunal, ;.h-.t type of
records, t:.-t is, c-.so histories, wore kopt ef o eh victi.a,

..t Schillin j's .c irri- stations'

.. ..t Prof. Schillin j's st. tion, ovory victi.; h s c sc
history nd - favor ohrrt. Kis toc-por turo v. s bein ; tr kJn
avury throo hours, nd his ontiro condition wns noted down
00 th t fover eh. rt.


465


16 Dec . -4>JF-5-1-Blakley
Ourt Sc.l


Prof. Sc h i llin g hirself hal two records; he worked on these fever charts
dnily; an-', there were Uo ferus of car:', indexes where the fever, tte treat, ent
of drugs, an- rrius otter appe-rancas were noted cowr. in detail. Ther- ras
o- otter cas. histor; in addition tc that; .v.t becaus. of the current f_v„r
chart ad. tte card in'axes, for inst-nco, wo had a rod and a ye lit'.' car' index;
and luring the first year we had two records. 3ut tn”t is sonathln,, which
woul start later cn.

Q. :itrujss, I shall ask nt' iaentify for tho Tribunal those two car-’a.

I'R. If the Tribunal please, I h-.vo put on ycur bench tecun-nt

Nuabor NO.-933. This is an in.lish translrticn cf tte car 's in front of the
witness at this tii-.

... Thcso cards tl tno orl.inal cards freu our red cur-.', index syateu,

Q. This is tho cast histor* of y.ur own c-s., hitnoos?

... Tos, this is tho cas. history cf ny cwn aalnria innuntration.

Q. cult you kirn ly toll tte Tri xinr.l hew you o.taincthose two cards?

Tte::. two car-’s—I -.ust tell you r. eut th~t at ic.vth. In or.rly

• I ». . 4 '

..pril of tte year of 1915 tte or’cr coot fr- terlin thr uh 0 vr^rupp-niochror

jlu.cks to dissolve tho aalaria station; end .all written an’, ether material

which c ul’ m any way te i’ontifie .rith tte oxporirsents wore to bo ..strayed.

"ten by .r 'or of the chief physician wo V ’ to ostrey .11 written or.torir.l;

looks, c-r-‘ indexes, fever charts, everything wr.s pr.cko-* end wne partly c-nt

to the cro; at riua wv* partly ms buro-d in tho tex stove of our hospital.

But. sine., wo still had a nunter of o'tieots in the hospital and -also
at-et two hur/red patients in tho entire crop, wh. had .nly bc.n intecte. f<r
a shert ti o, m. k.io able to p-rV^ 'tte chief physician, Do- Winter .yur,

.J continue keeping the rocor s, Just re xvin, tte placards am; oifr.s in front
cf ur '“, v ra ca r z;vin. ev.rythire which an any wa; c ul ’ be idoireiil-d vi th
sal-rla with inly th. exception of t.u. curin„ f the patients, .'c- wanted to
cur. then iron the cjaaoqucnccs of te- iseas-.

3tur_ibannfucbrer Hint_ra-y*.r p_rjitte . us t dt that; an ' w. c ntinued

»- aerk. In irdcr te unable us tr sake s v- kin ef sel~cti;n .f tte patients,

r ter, - Hr- t: keep this re err’ in \.x s, as te detonine tho nr—s cl'

L66


16 Dec—Wr-5-2 -Baxley
S art Toil


such petionts riuB *2 wanted to cntinuj treatin'. Ihis trc-ateunt cr itinu-’
until ohrrtlj a. for- the arrival and also 'urin., th- arrivl of the li -rating
jurican troopa. «o "cr_ in that nonn-r abL. to &av- this card in’.x fxv>a
ext ndnation, in ad.'iticn to a nucl^r ox otn-r -irt-rials.

3- it:jo5s, will yiu look at the card- : ain am’ tell sc tn the third
line 'her- It so>8 in parenth-aes in Gendin "Subkutan H-sc", what that refers
to, wita-sa?

... That xena that -n the 2nd of ..pril, 19u2, there was a patient by the
{mc c .f ? cckor, and five cubic contir-etera ;f tlx- fr.u hi? veins nor.
inJcCtt - *. int- ny akin in em-ath :iy cheat.

Thf nfi«c "rfoao's culture" noana. that true jlyo,’ c . os fr.a a patient wi.- was.
infeetc ' with the aLorin culeur- tf loOe.

Q. .itnosa, I re-.lize y u are not e e ic-.l ean; tut cm y. u *>180 ..vint
out t this car * =.ins in total; that ia, car. yeu read thu ditoa ef tha
enr-' an:', explain tc the Tribunal what or.ch entry ai.nifi.c?

.. Yos. Co the 2n'* of ..pril I wr.t, infoctxd with olecd for the firat
tlt.0. On th- 12th of ..pril, that is, ten -'ays Lat.r, f r Ihi first tiri- I
hi'’ this so-called pulannary fev-r; m-’ ay ter.p-ratun. was 37.1x. idne- I

’ to r. s.-cr.lle'* iinunizati«.-n rcup, 'x\up Nun^r it, I receive-’ n nur.-
b-r of -’ru.bj -h“e is, they tried t.. prevent fialrri' c rain,, t 2 ncr.' in \y
case. On the 13th ..f -pril, I recolvod 2 r=~s f quinine. On th- luth f
•pril, I receive’ anther 2 .rams ef quinix. >n tft. f r. i '101 s. I hr. ’ no
f-vor until th- 21ct ;f -pril. On tk~ 21-t 'A -pril I recoivod nn.th-r injec¬
tion of /ivc cu’.ic Centiliters .f ole--’ fr. r v-ry ill patient with tfco
nise cf Sahn. -pproxirvit_ly t-n '’ays lat-r 1 r-ceiv-d a quinine inj-ctian nf
-a- riou

Q. -itn^rs, I don't think th-r- is v.j n.cetsit., A y nr c nti.n«in. n
tnc r-at of the entries. In wh -s- han writia w-r- th se entri-s on-to an that
C'-rd? _ u know froa y ur experience A th- -vl~ria station?

... Th: iirst entries were za V by .ur cl~rk. That was an -ustrian law:or

•7 t.ie a-.*' of ?r-nz ^’ichta. I think that was in the fu-ar-r j nths, in -u-.ust

u67


IS 2cc- -JP-5-3-3l=kl£7


Court 1

o

19&2, he :na re lee get* by D r . Schilling; a»* tten tlxx *xrc various

• •

otter clerks. This on e ntry, the v ~ n :x*.x infection", was aritton by
Dr Schilling hinsclf. ?rc< tlx 19 th of °cccrbcr, 1%3 arcard, the entries

0 ®

-.crt: ;,v’c by our clcr!:, xfic xs a xxdiccl student fre . Irexabourg, by

0 • •

t'x name of Su^or. Ost; end ho, d think, .cdo these entrioa until the very
end.

•

Q. fitness, turn to the second card, the be.c!: side, end it says on

• •’ +

the ri ;ht-hrjv'. sJe'e of tin card, ".Valeria laboratory, Dacian 3*". Is
that the title of Schllllny's research laboratory?

Yos.

0 * • #

.2 !LJ®Ys I have no furthcr questions, your "o, pardon no,

■ • • * • _ •

sir. ”t this ti e I ohcvl’ like to intre '.ucc these tuo carets as Pro-
3 .cutler. Exhibit Kivfttr 127. * ni ht paw the;i up 00 ;<vr JSonor so that
:-u can oco the ordinal exhibit. Dr. Servatius inf or. 3 .» that \ro have
•an another C cu-cnfc c inhibit S*irSSor 127. In order to nVoid con¬
fusion, will y:u change that exhibit "\\r»r to ^jdiibitf IV.ixr 123?

: -vc n further • r_ct exa Ja~ti ,;jrr!kn:r.

7K2 : SSZDSiT: Irocec • ‘’Ho ss is oxcuscd.

-top don fr;- the st.vh

v

:S.:LJ®Y: :',ay it please tho Tribunal, the prosecution char ts in
fx indictment—

’ t 1 iiltfJT: «t this tie- •-!* Trl'unal will r-c-ss f r fifU-n aim-

ws,

roC-ss was taken.)


Court I

16 Dec t-A ID-6-1-8 urns - LJG


reE F GSIDENT i The Tribunal is azain in session.

• HARDY* May it ploasu tho Tribunal, tho prosecution chargos
in the Inticteent that tho defendants Karl Brindt, Handloser, Rostock,

Sc hr cedar, Gebhardt, Rudolf Brandt, rirugoasky, Sievers, Schaefer, Bockor-
Freysung and Boiglbock are charged with special responsibility for and
participation in the sea-wator oxperirvjnts set forth in Count 2, Para¬
graph 6, sib-paragraph G and Count 3, Paragraph 11. Those experiments
xero also conducted at tho Dachau Concentration Caap during tho Sumer
and Fall of 19Ui. I shall turn now to Document No. UR2, which io on
pigo ono of Your Honor's Docirsont Book, which has boon previously
offered as Prosecution Exhibit Mo.33. Pardon ao a accent, sirs. Chango

9

that exhibit number, lour Honor, to Exhibit Nc. 129. This is an affi¬
davit of tho dofondant Rudolf Brandt. Z shall rood tho affidavit.

"I, Rudolf Enil Brandt, being duly sworn, doposo and atatoj
■1) I aa tho sico RudeIX Br .ndt who already cn 30 August 19U6
swero to an affidavit concerning tho lo.t-proaauro oxoorimonts which
hivu boon conducted on huc'n boi.nga at tho Dachau concentration camp.
Furth-rnoro, I swero cortain other affidavits roforring to medical
1 -xp-jri.nonta on huam sublets.

" 2 ) I esa abla for tl.o soma reasons sot forth in paragraphs 1 , 2
ind 3 of ny affidavit of tho 3C Au;.ust 19R6, to state tho following
with rof jronco to oeperlmonts conducted cn hur.-n beings.

E:cp-rli Vj:Ks tc r^r.dor Saa-w:.t-r Drinkable
"3) Tho experiments with s.a-watur woru conducted for tho bonofit
cf tho Iuftwuffe during tho sumur of 19Ui at tho Dachau concentration
cep. Gurnan flyers cor- 5ax>?dr -a forced dewn at Sea and wero thon
without drinkirv, water for ccnsidorablo periods of tioo. The Luftwaffe
had at its disposal two ajth.ds to ruko soa-wat^r orinkablo, ono of
thee was oxtroooly dangarous. Consequently General jehrooder, Chief
f tho .odiccl Service of tho Luftwaffo, requested Himl-r to placo
experimental subjects at tho disposal of tho Luftwaffo at Dachau.


- U69 -


16 Dec-iwTD-^-S-Burns
Coart *>« 1


»U) Himlei* approved Schroedwrts request QiV. the expcrinente were
oarrlel out. It was expected that scoe of the prisoners would dio as a
result of the experiments, but I do not rveenber whether deaths occurred.
Schrceitr and his colleague in the Luftwaffe, free Milch down roust have
known — according to ay opinion — that these experiments as well as tho
lew-pressure and freejin* experiaents, have not been conducted on volun¬
teers only."


Court I

16 Dec U6-M - 7-1 - LJG - Cook - UG


HR. HARDY: And new I respectfully request the Tribunal to turn to
page 3 of ycur Dcciraent Book. This is Docmant No. UU9, offered as
Prosecution Exhibit No. 130. This is an affidavit of the defendant
Schroedor:

■I, Oskar Schroedor, boing duly sworn, depose and state:

■1. I was born in Hannover on 6 February 1891. In 1910 I entorod
the Kaisor-nilhola Acadocy in Borlin to prepare for an army caroor in
the Medical Corps. At the outbreak of the first world war, I was a
rwr.-comissionod radical officor and in 1916 after passing the stato
nadicol ux-vri.nation, I bocaoo socond Uoutonant in the swdical corps.
Daring iho first world war I werkod as a radical .'Ificer in tho infantry,
and after getting wcundod,I bocnas adjutant to the corps nodical officor.
I continued to servo in tho any' after tho war. During tho years 1920
to 1925, I roedvod spocialixod training in Xoonigsborg and Wuerzburg.

On 1 January, 1931, I "os transferre:! to tho offico of the aodical
inspector of tho arry and worked os a physician. I also worked on
sdlitiry hospital and administrative setters. In May, 1935, rry old
friend arxl follow studont, Hippku, aoked no to boccao his Chiof of Staff
in the newly established nodical department of tho Reich Ministry for
Aviation. I ronained as Chiof of Staff to Hippke; who in 1937 boenno
known under tho title of Inspector of tho Modical Service of tho Uift-
waffo. Ir. Fob ru ary 19l*0, I was appointed physician for Air Floot II.

In this position I had tho rank of a Major General in tho Medical
Services. On 1 January 19fcJ*, I was appointed Hippko's successor and
thus became Chiof of the '•fcdical Servico of tho Uiftwaffo. Sinultano-
cusly, I was prcoctod tc tho rank ~f Uoutonant General in tho Modical
Service.

»2i- Tho offico cf tho Modical Servico of tho Luftwaffe was con¬
tinuously occupied with various kinds cf scientific experiaer.ts. This
scientific rosearch included high altitude.


- 1*71


Ccurt 1

16 Dt-c 46 - *! - 7-2-UG- Ccok


froozing end aoc.wr.tor oxpcrinonts which wuro conducted ot
th.o Dc.cl.c.u Concentration Ccnp. To this cntogcry bolcng tho
oxpcrinonts tlx.t Dr. Haagon ccnductod with typl.ua and rtl or
v .ccinos.

n 3. Uxporinonta t-- nnko soawntor drinkrblo noro con¬
ductor! in bnchnu durin.: tl.o sumcor cf 1C44. Tho Luftwr.ffo
wr.o lntoroatod In dovolcpinj u cothrd i f u. king soi.wctor
drinka .lo aiaco filers had tc usko f rcod landings on tlx
high sous. Tl.o navy was also In to roc tod in thia prcblora.

Wo had two noth.da cf Making eur.nator drinlcablo; cno lind

boon dovoloped b Konrad Schnofor, tho thor was an invon-

/ • • . .

ticn cf Dorl:c.. ,:

I ni^:t add paronthctior.lly, Y. ur llcnorc, th.o tho 3orka
notlv<d was one wlich cauuofiryod tl o t .sto <-f auc.wr.tor but
n. t ita toxicity, in which aug-.r -nd .. fad oxtr..ct wr.o
addod, atx’. in tho Schaofur nothed r. cliomic. 1 prrccas wr.o
uecd, which aopr.rc.tod tho aalycilrtca fron tho wator.

“Scfcr.of or 1 a uothrd had aovorr.1 disadvantages which ro-
aultod freu tho bulk f tlo nocoaaary cqvipnont c.nd frrn tho
lr.ck of n*odod cl onicr.lc. Horofero tlx Inepoctrrato cf tho

Ilvx'ior.l Service if tlo Luftwr.ffo c.a woll as tl.o Tochnicr.l
bureau cf tl o Roick : iniatry for ..vl.-.tion diacuaaod tho p^a-
aibility cf cuplrying tho berkr. nothed;

"... Dr. Ven *>irony, r. Luftv/rffo jfcyaicinn in

Vionna fcud ccnductod cortr.in v r.porinonts cn hur-.n boinga

with s-aw.,tor vl icfc l:ad boon procosscd ..carding to tho

Ixrka :othcd. d uso -r.porincnts indie-tod that tlx uao of

borkr.tin c usod Dirrrhoc.. Vho consulting expert on ..vlr.tion

dodicino, Bockbr-Pfoyaing^h^' boon ny subordinate ainco

J -nucry, 1944, (pri. r to this tirw bockor-IVoyacns had boon

assistant tc intheny wh*. was chief under r.ippko) took tlx

position that tho oxpcrinonts cenduotod by Sirany woro n t

conclusive since tho conditions vor- net ra difficult r.a

*


i: a£ 6 - - - 7-3 - w» - =« (2>D >


Court 1

M those on the hl^i seas. ?rcfosscr ^ppic cr as xkZI as irofccocr
Koc-.ncr insisted that t:* Berta rxthpd bo dovclop=d v=ta it could He


VSCC.

««5. Ttarcforc, c. .satin';. tics called in -<Sy lvV:, in or.cr to dis-
c ., 33 further stcpo should be taker.. Becker Prc;-3c.-j nad ^chaoffcr
attended tbt cctir- cs repraaentrtivo of rj office, -a c result of tl»
.sotir -3 It -a» decided to coquet furthor cxporu>entc or hu an toi«; s cup¬
ped by the doichafuehror SS, Hinder. Bsckcr-kroysens €*?■’ U P c letter
•y.dch rrn sent to Hi_.der. In this letter, wUch i si^ cd, 7 asked
•irdcr for tost subjects. N: latter consented to fs. e:xcutior. of

0

f.ess cxpcrixr.ts, rs* -hoy ”=rc then conducted ia “actaa under the
direction of Spar's assistant, Dr. Bcicolboock, 4» serviced the o:c-
xmixjonta for the U^t-effo. if I ri.toVr ccrreotl;, ""psic■ who hr.d
•xcr. sc.-tcncod to death ;-orc used cs test subjects.

"6. Dr -ucen Haacen froa the University of -tesaibers conducted
certain scientific investigations which included the dcvc?x?rxnt of
t-hus vr.eeinos. Lufwmff r Scnitcrian, Briber Sacral, lx*. Corps,
Gorier' Rase auperriaed fe-pm'a rooosxoh nor. *«w ■■ on =11


■.-ionic problem on order or tha Uu'uctro, a toll » « SU ™ Ini¬
tiative^ Heso hr/, to V inter Of nil retire- tori: rtioh conaultont
--doniota’ ouch =. :&a 3 », conductor: b, order of - - I*-rt'.:=fro. BcoKor-

-royaon- « =1.0 troika --'ith « oxjorlncnta. * c =bovc uootioood

cooaultinr V^ooiota or «•!«»» “ 6 *“ ' Jy


the U-.ftic.fic.

■ 7 . S^n « = .tabor ot too Soi=h 5 »= *" :0WiO
prior to bin =ppoin,:=nt » profo.«r of the Onivor.it- of Str=a«bur C .

. -aaiat-nt or.. Dr. Mu. *. M- * « M

o; the Icftonffo for intone! -nioito. Dr ^ ""■*


U73


?' ;wSeisn. D r. Boochncr is


i_ Dec ue - 7-3 - ^ - cock (sdd)

Court 1

“3 these or. the hi;n seas. brefoaser ~ppir. cr os well cs Irofcascr
•oobnor insisted that the Berta method be dovolopcd until it coulc'. bo

coed.

• •

'5. Therefore, r. -eotin- was celled in -cy 1SV:, in order to dia-

evss rrhat furtbor atepo should be taker., Becker Froraor.j and °c‘mcffcr
-•tended tb: cctir/- m representative of try office, -a a result of the
sectir." it r -ns decided to caiduct further cxpcriiicnic a* lurran tciirs sup¬
plied by the Scichafuchror SS, Hiriolor. ^ackcr-iroyacng drew up e letter
•/.dch eoa sent to Kt-.lcr. In this letter, n'.lch i ai".cd, I naked

Kinler for test subjects. The latter consented to 1':- erreution of
♦

t css c:^crLxr.t3, v.d -boy 'f= re then conducted in Ur.c!tf*.a under the

direction of -rpinrer's assistant, Dr. asi^oltooch, -Jaq saporviccd th: o:;-

• •

.omtoonta for the Urffr.ffc. If I re.tribe r correct!; , if-paics who hr.d

been sentence-- to death -.-ere used c# test subjects.

"6. Dr -u-cr Header, frea the University of -'irenab.tr- conductod

ccrt-in scientific i-.vcati-ctiona which included the development of

• a < • •

t :T hua vrccin-3. Uiftsnff: Sanitcrion, Bri^dior Grnornl, Ixd. Corps,
Gerhard Rose oupervioed Her son'a research work. Pose :;cr!ccd on all
r-ricnic problw-3 on order of th; luftuafito, as *jc.U an or: his cmn ini¬
tiative. Pose had to be infor^d of all research, vor!: W^ch consultant

•

genista, such as Knocpn, conducted by order of tl* Uift-.raffo. Bcckcr-
Preyaen- was also fnr.Uiar with those cxporiixnts. * o above uontionod
coasultinr ’’y^icniai?: of tlx fuftsaffc „ero paid on a. ;ai'-ti.tf bas.a by
thfc laftwcffo.

•

"7. Hca^n uua a .'c^cr of tbo Soich Office fer -ublic Health
prior to his appoinuxnt as professor of the fnivorar.tr of Strnssbur C .

-aaiat-nt nos Dr. DotOtn. Dr. Heins Salk was cc-arliin;: pnysician
0 ; tiK Icftwoffo for internal oedicinc. Dr Kalk nan ilch's ettemiav
P' rsici-n. °r. Bocchnor i3


2.73


Ccufit He. 1

16 Dee 46 - H - 7-4 - UG - Cock

prefosa r of pr.thclegy nnd vt.a director of tl o Pathological

Inatltuto cf tho Luft^ffo in Froiburg, end w;. a senior

ptyaici^n for prc.ctlcc .1 pathological roso:.rch cf the Luft-

^o* Dr * -ZuchachWt was profosacr cf aur-ery ;;t Stress-

burg and consulting surgoon cf ~ir Ploot III. Dr. E 3 bort

Xrlint was uy Chief cf Staff. His prodocosacr was V/ullon.

"3. Karl 3r.ndt, Hcndlcsor ^nd itostock wore ^iforaod

cf tho nodical rosoorch work conductod ’07 tho 'Duf twaffo. '

handles or was Cfciof cf tho Kodical Sorvlco of tl* ..nuod Forcos,

and ny superior in nodical nattora. tested: was Chiof cf tho

Offico frr Scionco and .toao-rch undor Karl Tr ndt who first

wc.a CcLi’.i 3 sicn^r Oonoral cf tho *‘on 1 th. Sorvlco and lator

Reich Commissioner.. It w..a Rcatock's duty tc a veld dupllec-

ticn in the distribution rf asalgnmonts in tho sphoro rf

nodical roaoarch. ^erefore, all distribution of assignments

had to. pass through *k>atock's office. If, for instance, I

asai nod Koch or Kaagen some resoarch work, a copy would go
• •

to hostock to inform him of the nature of the work. Then
*”‘0stook could toll whether that particular Job had already been
worked on by someone else or'whether it could lead to worth¬
while results. Copies of orders for research work also went
to Handloser."

I now continue to peg® 6 of Your Honors' e'oeument look,
which is document No. 474, and will be offered as Prosecution
Exhibit Ho. 131. I shall read the affidavit:

I, *onrod Schaefer, being duly sworn, depose and state:
“!• I ®as bom on 7 ^mr-try 1911 at Iluehlhausen, Alsace.

1 studied at the Universities-of ‘^mich, Keidolborg, Berlin
and Innsbruck. I took ny abate medical examination in December
1S55, at Heidelberg.

‘2. In November 1-41 I w: s drafted into the Ujftwaffe,

and ultimately obtained the r.nk of Asaistenzarzt (2rvi Lieuten-

. h7U


Court No 1

16 Dec 46 - H - 7-5 - UG - Cook


ant Ilodioal Servioe.) Ifce following year I was assigned to

tie Reich Instituto for «via tion Ilodicine in ~erlir.. ISy

principal vorlc was aedicul roseorch on soc emergencies, which

included research for a nethod to make so at.*:, ter potable. I

0

worked out the theory of c. procoas to make seawater pot..ble,
which was chemically developed hy I. 0. Parben., Tlero was,
however, another process under consideration by the Luft¬
waffe, called the dorka nethod.

“3. In uay 1944 1 was ordered by the Office of the
Chief of tho Radical Sorvice of the Luftvc.ffo to attend n
coating called for ti e purpose of aansidorlng furthor roseorch
on making noawater potablo. ?roaont wero L^clcor-Froysong,
rosoorch odviaor to Scl.roeder, Chief of tho Rodical Sorvico
of tfc o Luftwaffo, Chriatonson of tho Technical Luroau of
the koich Ilinistry of ..vlation, and o niubor of othor poraona,
including roprosontativos of tho Navy. It.was dooidod at
this nooting to conduct oxporinonts on concentration cr.mp
inmates with the dorkc process, although it was ronorally
admitted that tho Jerk-tit soawator process seriously impairs
the health after 7 days, and causua death eftor 12 days at
tho latest. It was furtlor docidod that tho human o/poriir.cn -
tal subjects wore to be fod only s-awator, procossod by tho
forkc nothod, for a poriod of twolvo days. A coxmittoo com¬
posed of Professor Lppingor' who, by tho w. y, rocontiy
ccumlttod suioide, 51 Dr. Pockor-freysond, a roprosuntativo of
tho Technical buroau and a rjprosontativo cf tho * J avy, was
appointod for tho purpose of deciding tho conditions undor
which tho oxporimonts would bo carriod out.

"4. Seawater procossod by the Sorka nothod had already
boon tested on huian boings by Dr. von Sirany r.t Vipnnr. in
the Spring of 1944. On erdore of the offico of tho Chief of
tho Radical Services I looked ever Sir any's oxporimonts


Court -'o. 1

16 Doc 46 - ll - 7-5 - UG- Cook


with Jorkatit, and pointed out that the porsona upon whom
Sirq»y experimented ahowod diarrhea symptoms. I personally
S* vo Jockor-I’royaong r. copy of ny report which was no^nt for
Sc! roodor, ard therefore D 0 c!:cr-rroyaong end Schroodor nuat
have known that tho Borka Ilothod was vory dangerous. Jockor-
Froyaor.g and 1 woro of tho opinion that Sirany'a oxporimonts
wore not consiaxmtod ainco thoy did not simulato actual
conditiona cf a oya omorgoncy.

"5. ioforo tho experiments woro started at Dchau,
another conforonco took placo in which among others, Prof.
Kuebner, Prof. Sppingor, Joc!ccr--royaons, Dorka and I took
pr.rt, This conforonco w;.a hold in June, 1C44. Houbnor and
Zppinjor woro of tho opinion that it w..c Impossible to Judgo
tho valuo of tho dork:, nothod in advance, and that experimen¬
tation v/aa necessary.

!, 6. 'Iho oxperimonts vroro c..rrlod out at tho Dachau
concentration ca--p by Dr. loiglbock, in tho aux,s.:or of 1944.

In Octobor 1C44, beiglbock roportod on those experiments at
a meeting v/hich took pL'.co in a bunkor near tho Zoological
Gardena in iorlin. Schxcodor, Jockor-Proyaony and 1 woro
prosont. It is poasiblo that Dr. Schuster, an -ir Forco
ph.slcic.n who workod at tho Luftw. ffo ilodioal hoedomy in
Preguo, was also prosont. 3oiglbock ahowod thoao prosont nt
tho mooting numorous charts of ..nalysos cf tho urine and
blood of tho experimental objects w! o woro given only
3v.rk.atit to drink. Photographs ani films woro also proaontod
and various groups cf experiments woro discussed. On the
basis cf this report I estimated that 20 to 40 persons woro
used for these experiments, which woro c-rriod out during a
period of so von to twelve days. Dr. BSIDLbOCh. also roportod
that tho experiments bad resulted inswolling of tho liver and
nervous symptoms. Duliriua and uontal diaturbancoa also
appeared, a rosult of this meeting, it ma decided that


Court He. 1

15 Doc 45 - l! 7 - LJG 1 Cook


tfco Dorka procoaa wa8 absolutoly of no uao to tbo buftwaffo.

"7. t/aa on open socrot in tbo hi^boat nodical
circloa that tho 3orka oothod was used on innatoa of omcon-
tration cacpa. Itwca aiao known that aoawator procossod
j tho -3-rka uothod was aub8tantially tbo aaiao aa soav/ator
Ca.d oaa, thoroforo, oxcoodingly dangoroua. I waa alweyfl of
thia .opinion, and poraonally adviaod Schroodor, 3oc!:or-Froyaong,
«ntbony, t,yjiatcnBon, -~rka and Schlcklor of thia, ny opinion."


1 ice- ’-G3 ;-2-l-?ricc (—jD)

Ccurt Ho. 1.

This affidavit afr/iously, Tour Honors, sho*.js t *. *. conplptc knowlcdyc
o’ t:-. Defendant Schaefer in corvee ti-a with the scKr.icr errperiuenta end
i licatcs that he participated ir. the conferences prior co the actual
erperi^ntatien, that at that tine he contribute itf.e little bit to each
rxt cf the conferences rad later still, after the c::«ori.icaU-.tion had
b:cn coaplctcd, bv listened to tho report and the rcsvl.a by the Defen¬
dant Bciclbccck. rh: d.ocuxntcry evidence irhich I will pnasent in a no-
aont shall mil establish the arran^-onts and eonfcror.ees which took

t 1 t.cc in order to formulate the necessary plans for L!i~ subsequent ex-

• •

yurircr.ts on the inrr.tcs at Dachau concentration cacp.

I nw ask tho Hod.orablo Tribunal, to turn to pa o 9 of the sea*.r.ter

document book. *his ic Document Vo. VC-12J, -nd is offered as Prose-

* «

cution Exhibit ’’o. 133. ‘‘-la is a letter — pardon •«, Verr •‘•onora,

f t is Prosecution Exhibit Vo. 132. This is a latter fro tho Technical
-vr.au of ‘-.o ."il to Hi-. J.cr throe h Rudolf Srea&t. I will read, the
oc-.rxsnt. This doer«ft in »*-. -crct" and Iva on f..o top >.11
:ccipt 3taap of Pcrior-iol Staff of -cinhafushror S';"; on tte lattcr-
cf Reich fin si-.- of ..viatica end 3 U pr « Cavrjv.-r of the uftltaffr*'-
;r: the totaled Offico. .pother note "(Pleas' jx~ V. your ans-.rer to
fa above reference, date an-.* short sugary." oli * cct: "i~..--r*n 4i
Sv^r.ter potable". dressed to the itoichsfuchror X aA* Chief of tho
-or .-4i Police, Personnel Staff, Berlin. "With rofCronco to the inter¬
office conference bctwcon Colonel En-pnocr Christcnccn and Jtouptsfcuxvo-
froljror Enyixwcr Do'.Oc, royarxtin- the above osntioacd setter, it is an¬
a-need t’.at two processes havo bedr. worked out b; -ix office to render

• •

se-vr.tcr potable: 1.) The I.G. -ethod, usir.. add? silver nitrate,
for this process quite a Ir.r p plant needs tc be set up, W.dch would rc-
uiro about 2CC tone of iron and cost about 250,00) ill. onovsxt of
c product needed by the LufWfo end Navy, requires 2.5 to 3 ton of
• re silver a oath. Besides, the ~r «*ich is rp dcrod stable by
i is -rcenrati n has to be sucked through a filter, i_: order to avoid
■*’ sorbtioQ rf precipitated cbcaicals. Those facts application


Court ’Jo. 1.

Practical!:- iapossib]-. 2) The second process tftich -:as *orJ:ed out is
 "W* -‘-cccrdirc to this no&od the salts pre-
sert la too oeofator arc net nrcci dtatod, but are so tror^od fat in
drirlin,, they are not disajreoafclo to the taste. Ihcr pass through
f.o bo*r -Ithout ever saturating it 1 th salts end without causing m
u-. V c - —3 • ~o 3po<ttal plants arc nocossar- for producin': pro-

— -4® •»

.'^rations aoodod for tills -recess; nor do tho procurations tiwi-solvos
oorJist of scarco natoricls. It can bo jeos-.red that this rothod trill
bo introduced in tho luCteraffo tr.d too llavy in a short tiae. JJ an tltot
Cointan -ochrtcnl scioncc has actucT;- succoodod in rondorin* som/ntor
potablo for pooplo ir. distress at sea, in occordanco if. tho above,
: ' vw;lc ^ 0 M 40 *»tr .foreign oorntrics intend to solvo tlds pro-

t • •. » . * •

blcn is no longer a rii;- inportonoo. laturali- the offico is voir
mtcls intcrostod in ascertain'.-- hr.r above all f.JO United 3tatos has
3lvcd fds probler., r.nd it is regueste'- that this inferration bo
S'.- pht, -dthout, ho- -over cor. vo. loirr. arc* vrson or «v offico too
v * : - Should tbs offico there bo ir..-;- a I o horlra-'ethod, let
. •'.-?! 53 can then bo dolirorod. fto cubo di ’is -.tot a

vopr-ratlon to rondrn- sc rrabor -otrj'.o, bvt a nU 2 : cubo such as is al-
- :w ''l* Miliar to the offices. 0 The oigrcf.rro of this letter is il~

-lo for translation purposes. .

Iho doctriont, 3©<r«aat I;o. IS-17?, .rhich is offored as >*c-
oscution Inhibit 133, ‘is a decuncnt which, certains the -oports on tr.ro

f

tings to ’Ian Kio oosrater roncrr-ch, fds deevnont is datod 23 lay
'•» Technic.*. 1 ‘ffico, end there appears or. eh- front v.'-o of t>ie docu

• or.t a han.rittor. note: "Just receive. for rending given tc roiclia-

f-ajhrer", end tljon the initials ".. 3r., rearing ludolf arendt; then

ar. error in a point referring to the hoichsarz*. 13 — that is tho

: -—cc cf Crauits. 71" 3 docisacr.t 13 tho minutes of tho conforonco in

•

r *‘ , ar t u.o A-w.-a iwr cakin' so^ait r Irinka tie, confer nee .n 20 ..ay
’’rt'.Sc'.t:

g*

-. "iniotor'al Councillor ISocfco, high Convmd of the I&wyj *
fir.- tenant folonol Dr. Licscho, high Corrvu-..’ of tho liar.';

• ) qnedroa rirsicicn Dr. Hclpao, Ugh Conran.! of tlio Havy

h!9


lc Duc-r-c.ss-a-3-pricc- (a»)

3^urt -*'o. jU

U.) Captain-jrav;- Dr. Laurens, Ainiral of tho Submarines;

5.) Lieutenant Coewnde r i*choffl£nd. High Conxnd of the-Navy;

. 6.) Lieutenant Schceafald, High Cocraand of the Havy;

7.) Councilor ochuls. High Cornand of the Havy;

•) Coe=f.nder Kugolcann, High Cooaand of the Navy;

9.) Councilor Haustcir., Hi,* Cooormd of the Havy;

10. ) Colonel Eng. Christensen, Gurnnn «ir liinistry;

11. ) Captain Eng. Dr. Schicklor, PU!|

12. ) Captain Berk*, E-"m, of Vienna;

13. ) Captain D r . Bockoi^roising, Chief Hodicul ^crvico, Luftwaffe;
U.) ICO Dr. Schufcr, Nodical Res. -rch Institute for "rintion.

"On 19 Kay 1944 a prolininr.ry discussion was hold at tho Gorman
Air Ministry. Present were the following personas Colonel Christenson,
Captain Dr. Schicklcr, Captain Boricn, l^jor Jcwerrox, Chief of tho licdi-
c-.l S,.rr .cc, Captain Dr. Sockir-Freising, u r. Schaefer and a Mr Pahl.

"At this nt« ting Captain Dr. Bockor-Proising reported on tho
clinic'.! experiments conducted by Colonel Lr. von Sirany, and oano to
t v . fin'.l conclusion that he did not consider then as being unobjection¬
able and conclusive though for a final docision. The Chief of tho Ledi-
d S. rvico at tr.it, timo, Defendant Schroodcr, is convinced that, if tho

’or • method is used, damage to health has to be expected not later than

•

6 cvys after taking Berk-tit, which dpargo will result in permanent inju-

4

Ti -1 to health - r.d - nccordinr to the opinion of M.C.O. Dr. ii chncfer —
will finally result ir. death - ftor not Inter thwt 12 days."

I :y insert : ro that D. f .j.d-v.t Schroder and Dcfonlant Schao-v.
f- r hr.a tiX: rcs3ud nn opinion, prior to the tine tl at such experiments
* r ‘ carried cut that such ocwrlccnts would be dangerous to tho health
-f tho subjects used. Schr-ofcr went so far -as to say "will finally result
ir. dv-.t: after not. 1- tor than 12 days". I will continue to rend the. docu-

a-Rt.

"External symptor-s are tc bo expected such ns drainage, diarr-
• •

- a, convulsions, hallucinations, -and finally death. «s a result of tho

“tv limin' tz


480


It D*c-r-r.-5-P-4»-Pricc (ED)

Court Fc. i.

dl3CM * 100 U ° fr - ct to ««»>*• o™ seric. of oj.rlo.t. of ohort
durr-tioo. P. co^iooior. -,.s to ho dot up for the arrwgcoaot of those
sort, s of ooorlncnos. Thfs corridao n st.ould ho sot up toother -it!, the

9

dgh Cocnrind of the Kavy at the conforatco on 2D Hay 19a.

I.,; a) Persons, to be giv«i scr. mter processed with the Berica oothod
h) Persona, to bo given ordinary irlnking water

c) Persons, without any drinking water r.t all

d) Persons, given to drink according to the present nethod
(0.71 of drinking water for 4 persons and 4 days)

During tho duration of the weporfamts all persons receive only an
emergency sen diet such ns provided for persons in distress At sea.

Duration of experiments: Itaximn 6 days.
lr. addition to these experiments r. further oxpcrladht should bo conducted
folltm,t Tcrcons nourished with sea water and Btricatit, end ns diet
-1.-0 to er.orgor.cy sea rations.

Durrtion of experiments: 12 days

Sine 1 in tho opinion of tho Chief of the kcdic.al S.rvicu ponaonent

ir. ’uri a to health, that is, to death of the experimental subjects has to

l< x-.ct. d, 13 experimental subjects such person a should be used as will

he y.t at the dispel l of Kcichsft ohrr SS.

" r Pnhl reports that duo to the latest improvements in tho I. G.

IP-.rd concern} method smaller quantities of iren needed for tho const-

r.ction of the manufacturing cquipAent, than were originally provided

'r/. estiof .d by I. 0. Hr Paid reports further that if tho Tofatit oquip-

r ' r *‘ M h'.ch haa to be constructed could r.ot bo used lnt^r for the mnnufac-

•' rix^ of th.. sea water preparation another use would bo quite possible."

•

I will turn to page 15, n continuation of tho sane document. This
• c Professor Krplngcr of Vltmr , representative cf the Chief of the-Uedi-

c 1 Service of the «ir Force, representative of ti e Go man n ir Kinlstry,

? rr-ser.tativo of the High Ccor.-nd of the fairy.


It Dt.c-^r-^E5-a-5-Pricc (ELD)
Court fto. 1.


"Captain W. Beciicz^Froislng is being conticpUtec -a repr?n.^t-tivc
of the Chief of the i-cdicnl ^ervico. Captain *r. Schicklcr nnd ^nptnin
Berta ns ruprosentetivts of G.L. and Professor Ore-Achc-waki '•» represen-
t’tivc of the High Coav-nd of the Hwy, It wos decided that horlin, ^er-

4

rr.r. Air Ministry should be the seeting pi cc of the cormission. ('^ho ori¬
ginally -rcrosod netting plr.ee wno chrngcd fnc Munich to H*rlin after a
tolcphoiv call of L r. Eocko^-Freisinf 1 s); nnd thnt tine of the meeting
should he 25 !!ny 19/., 10:03 All. It was decided that Dnehnu wns to be
tho pi* ce whoro the cxptrinvnts were coridoCtod.

"Captain D r . Becker-* mising would nvitc Professor Eppingor nnd
would get in toed 1 , with tho RcichsfUehrcr SS. The High Coccnnd of the
K.-.vy weld Invite Tofosscr' Orsichowski."


16 Dec-ij-*Sc hti-9-KJcylcr d
Court So. 1

■distribution: HLjh Co~i ' c r *L of tho Uz vj^-dodical Dopcrttxnt. Hijh Cot-nnd
cf tho Navy—Deportment for Rosoarch, Inventions and Patents* Ros».irch Qpura-
tlon of tho Reich iinistrh for aviation and Supra-o CaXiSnU of the luftwnffo.

than we have haro "For Informtion of: "—I didn't notico this, four Honor,
until Just new. I obiously have had Pajo 15 of this Document Book and Pa,;c 16
-ro in tho wrenc order. Pa£0 15 should follow Paco 16 whero I have Just roc.d,

■Tho cor-mission idiich has to determine tho conditions for tho series of expuri-
utnts still to be conducted is cexposod as folliwrs: "—.'.nd on the top of pejo
15 it starts with tho Commission.

pc^o U of tho original Ger_an Docuc-ont, ihich is Paco 17 of Your Honors'
Document Book, jives tho distribution list of tho roperts of those i-ootir^s.

It's quite intorostine, Tour Honors.

■domical Ibcperlmuitction end Instruction Division of tho .'dr Fcrco Juotorbog."
This lour H onors will rci.er.bur was tho ss.-o Sc ha afar who was listed in Bxuuent
MD-102 which was offorod es Prosocution Bchibit 93 tho other day by Ur. IfcKanoy
as tho place frem which tho defendant Schaefer coma; also, tho defendant 3chr.ofor
is listed in this report, and now on tho distribution list is his organisation,
which by tho way wes olsd U« scu-o organisation that Holtlochnv-r of tho ft-oosinc
experiments ca_o. This ai^ht indicato tho reason for Schaefer boing jroaont at
tho fruoxinj acporlmonts ccnvercnco at Nuernberg.

„'o also turn to the next on tho distribution list, "Instituto for Aviation
Uodicino, D.V.L., Berlin-.kdlorshof." That is Ruff's Ir.stituto— dofondant Ruff's
Instituto.

Jo turn also—it joes down to tho Roichsfuchror-SS, *nd the Technical .'.ccdotQr
in Vienna, wnich wes the orjonisation of Professor ^pinjur. You will noto tnia
document was signed by C. Christenson, and' ia*>dir.tely und-r that is a handwrit¬
ten note, which isn't quito cloor. It, howovor, indicates that the defendant
Geb hirdt ca~es into our picture in the son water oxparii— *it3. It shows tho
note "„- n and then tho "aSHA," which is tho Reich Lain Security Offico. .Jtd
then a note, "Ihrouth asocial jypsios," and tho nrmo -Gobhardt." And tho none
Gc-fchardt underlined.

eo now turn to Document No. N0-1B5 of Your Honors' fccuccnt Bock, which is

1*83


16 Doc-i>iSchu-9-2-Gcylcr d

Cc-ort So. 1 O

offer od as Prosecution Inhibit Ho. 134. This is e lctt-r from the defendant
Schrccidor to Hoiarich Hi /d or requesting axperimtntcl subjocts. This letter is
dotocl 7 Juno 1944. you noted in the defendant Schrooder's affidavit, he said
that this letter was jr-pared also by Bocker-Freysonc and signed by himself-.

"To the Reich Liniat-r of the Interior and Roichsfuahrcr-SS. Through tho
Roichsarzt-SS and Police.

"Highly r-spec tod Roich lliniatur:

"Sirlicr already, you uxde it possible for tho Luftwaffo to sot tie urgent
nodical matters through experiments on huuin beings. Today I again stand before
a decision, which, sftcr numerous cxporirxnts on animals and also on voluntary
huoan subjocts, douinds final r-solution: "—I ni^ht call to tho attention of
the Tribunal tho words "voluntary hucan subjocts," tfiich indicate that they
bavo cccplctod thoir werk cs f ar as possiblo on voluntocra and now mat rosert
to core entrat ion ccnp inuatos.— "Tho Luftwaffo has simultaneously dovolopod
two methods for tnkin.^ soc water potable. The one method, dovolopod by n nodical
Officor, r«*xvos tho salt trui tho sea water and tro.isf»..j it into real drin¬
king water; tho second method, suggested by an esvgiaoor, loaves tho salt content
unchanged, and only rct»ves tho unpleasant taste from tho sea water. The latter
method, in contrast to the first, requires no critical raw nr.torial. From tho
nodical pint of view, this motned must bo viowod critically, a a tho auoinistrn-
tion of concentrated salt solutions can produce severe syrptons of poisoning.

"*s the oxporix-vnts on huenn beings could thus far only be carried out for a
purled of four days"—obviously boenuso they w jto wcrkij\. on volunteers at that
*.imo—"ai»i cs practical deenreis roquiro a remexjy for thaso who are in distress
at job up to 12 days, appropriate experiments aro nocoesary.

"Required ore U) hoalthy tost subjects, who uis t bo available for 4 whole
socks. «a it is know free previous experiments, that nocosscry laboratories
exist in tho corcantrnticn coup D_chau, this coup wuld bo very suifcnblo.

"Direction of the experiments shall be taken over by Stabscryt lecturer
>. Beiglbock, civilian profession: Chi of Physician of tho godicol University
Clinic in Vienna (Professor Dc. Eppin^-r). After receipt of tho basic approval,
I shall li3t by name tho other physicians who aro to participate in tho

U64


experiments.


Ifi Doc-L-«Sc no->-3-Gcy lcr d
Court No. 1

"Duo to tho oncrccus icportanco which a solution of this jrcbloc has for
seniors of tho Luftwaffo and Navy who havo bocaao shipwrockod, I would bo
;r~-.tly obliged to you, cy door Raioh linistcr, if you would docido to ccxply
with ry roquet. Si^vitiro: Sc hr coder."

This letter obviously indicates tho position end steni of tho defendant
Schrcodcr who at this tjiio was tho Chief of tho Lodicol Services of tho Luft¬
waffe. Haro ho is askinc Hi x. x J.ur fer exporix^ntal subjocts cnl obviously realises
that the ultiuato result is death,

I turn new to Pr^o 20 of lour H on or a' Document Book which is NO-179 offered

0

cs Prosocution Exhibit 135. This is a letter frcti tho Roichsorzt-SS, tt*. Ernst
Grewitz, to Heinrich HixxJur, datod 28 Juno 1944, concerning experiments in tho
concentration ccxxp instigated by tho Chief of tho Nodical Scrvico of the Lult-
weffo, addrossod to tho Roichsfuahrcx-SS Hoinrich HixxJor, Fiold Cco-and Post.
Obviously, tho Kcichsfuohrur-SS was on a trip at this tixxo.

"Top Secret (iJlitary)

■Roichsfuehrur:

"Tho Chief of tho xudical Survico of tho Luftwaffe roquosts in tho top sucrot
(ailitary) lot tor, mdosod herewith, that coporit»nts bo porferned on prisoners '
in order to tost two sluplo cot hods which soeti to proedso succoss ter son water
potable.

"In occordcnco with your ordar of 15 Lay 1944, RoichafUuhr*r, I havo ro-

•

quustud tho opinion of SS-Oruppenfuohr«r Professor IT. Gobherdt, SS-Gruppor>-
fuuhror Gluveka and SS-Grupp«nfuohr«r Note. They road as follows: "—You uay
turn back. Tour Honors, ct this tico where Gobherdt was Chi of Surgaion undor
tho Raichsarzt-SS and thcro ms cn order existing that before any programs of
exporinaitation took place, they oust got the opinion of Profosscr Dr. Gobhordt.
SS-Gruppenfuohrv-r Gluocks was in tho TVH« undor Oswald Pohl and SS-Gruppenfuchror
Hebe was Chief of tho Roich Crimi n al Pclico.

"1.) SG-GrupponfUohrcr Professor Dr. Gobhordt:

•I deal it absolutely right to support the Luftwaffo in overy wiy and to
place% gourd physician of the VStffon-SS at disposal to supertiso tho axperi-

485 •


ents.


Il6 Doc-ii-^Scfio-9-,-Oftylix d
-urt Mo. 1

*2.) SS-GruppJafUviu-vr Gluocks:

'Referring to tho abovo lnttcr, wo roport that we havo no objections
*r/.tscevcr to tho cotpuricunts requested by tho Chief of tho Nodical Servico cf
•he tuftwaffs to be conducted at tho expo rim*«td station Rase her in tho con-
extratien camp Dachau. If possiblo, Jews or prisoners hold in quarantine aro to
be usod.*

«3. S3-Grupp-nfuohrcr Nobo:

•I agroo with tho proposal to conduct experiments on prisonora of con¬
centration caapa in erdar to ovolvo a method fer ^nkinc sea weter potable. 1
propose taking for this purpose tho csocial gypsy half broods. Thoro are pooplo
atone thee-, who, although hod thy, are out of tho question as r-gards labor
ccemittx-xt. Regarding those gypsi^, I shall shortly mako a special proposal
to tho Reichafu^u-ur, but I think it rioht to soloct from aeons those pooplo
the necessary number of tost mibjecta.

"Should tho Reichsfuehrva* ogroo to this, I shall list by name tho persons to
bo used.

’To tho propood of tho SS-Grupponfuahror Nebo to uso gypsioa for the cxpiri-

a<nt, I b-„ to raiso on objection; to wit, that tho gypsios bains of somewhat

dif.-eroit racial cu-positicn might possibly provido uxporimuntd results, which

eight not apply entiroly to our con. It would, thoroforo bo dosirablo, if such

prisoners could bo usod for thoso experiments, as aro rcoially comparr.blo to

• •

European peoples.

"I request moot humbly bains grantod your approval in order to start with
tho experiments.

"Hoii H itlorl" Signed: "Grawitz."

;nd there is a handwritten noto: "Gypsios end for control throo othars."

Initialed: "HH"—initials of H cinrich Himmler. •

You will noto hare the opinion of Grawitz when ho states that "the gypsios
being of somewhat different racid composition eight possibly provide experi¬
ments. results, which might not apply entirely to our men." It's int-rosting
to noto ttet they feel that experimentation on gypsies might not be tho same

as experimentation on the healthy European peoples, which mi^ht bo comparable

U86


to the Nordic race.


i6.*Xc.-t-L£-10-l-<i-o33
Court to.l


“•HiRDT: -,fc ncTT tum to Document to. NO-183 'Such is ^esccution exhibit
1^6 - a letter iron tho defendant Rudolf Brandt to Dr. Gravitz.

■ To the

Roichsarzt - 53 end Police
3S Ob.rgrupponfuchrcr It. Grawitz,

Berlin

Subjocts 2xpcria:nt3 by the Chief of the lfcdical Service of tlr Luftwaffe.
Reference: Your letter of June 28th 1944.

Ob-rgruppa nfuehrer1

The Rcichsfuchrer-SS decided, that according to suggestion of
3^-Grupp-iifuehror Hobo gypsies should be used for tto experiments. In addition
threo other prisoners shell bo node available.

Hcil Hitler 1
aign-d: Brandt

• . Sb-Star. dart cn fuohrj*"

So now tho I«ft'Offo have experimental subjects available to continued their

re 3 _ar eh on soawai_r. This next document, your Hono: 3 , pc go 23 of your Docu-

oint Book, is lfc>-182 end Is offored as Prosecution exhibit 137. Just tho first

alcnt of tho defendant Sieves entoring this picturo - this la a lottor fron

th. co fondant Sic vers to Granite. Also a copy to S3-Otcndcrtwnfuohrar Dr. D.'an tit

•

for inforaction. .Vldrotsod:

"To tte •


SS-Gborgruf^xnfuchrer


Reich-Arzt-3S end Polica


Cb.Grcwitz,

Subject: Sxpjriacnts or. the salubrity of scavst.r.

• £

Aefor: Your letter of July 11th 44.

Du:r Ob-rgruppcnfuohru-1

I cant to infom you about ry talks idth SS-Hauptstumfuohrcr Dr.Flootncr
cr.d Chief Fnysician It-; Beiglboock in Dachau on 20 July. Thwre will be employed:
1 p*.; air. in charge, 3 rxxlical chemists, 1 female assistant, 3 r?nk3 for super¬
vision. Prospective tico: 3 weeks.In our research station only the 40 exporinen-

*-al parsons can be accoirodatcd, otherwise th-rc is absolutely insufficient rod®

1x67


16. Doc .-lMK-lO-2-Gross
Court So.l


sinco tho section Ploctr^r is fully occupied and work can't bo interrupted.

Our laboratory is insufficiently equipped, since scce -ssantial equipment is
•..•anting. In spite of serious difficulties the following agreement it as arrived
at:

1 . ) in th. section Ploctncr a desk will bo reserved (in the laboratory).

2. ) tie regaining nxtis rdll be f la cod at our disposal in our Entomological
Institute for the tiao of three weeks, '.suiting equipment oust bo provided by
the Luftwaffe, Thus it will be assured that the funic assistants can vork
^ Dachau too, because the Entomological Institute is located outsido tho
concentration canp.

3. ) Billots oust be arrangod between tit Chiof Phzsician rr.B-iglboock and tho
Ko;nsndcntura, since '.*> have no billots at our disposal.

A.) bS-Hauptsturnfuchr-r Dr. Ploctrwr -.ill giv« his assistance, help and advico
Ko was, however, not sol-ct-d for intcrnistic guidance, because that 1 s boing
do no by tho Luftwaffe Physicians thacsvlv^s.

The experiments arc to begin on Juliy 23rd, if until then v-xp-riscntal
persons are available rnd the canp coacftnder is in possession of tlw, order
of tho Roichsfuohror 3b, h- needs. Or. Bciglboock hlns.lf -.ertted to got in
touch with 3S-H.upisturrefuohrcr Fro wain, Adjutant of the Roich-Arzt-SS on this
subject.

I hope that this aiva.%ea.nt nay p.rgit a successful conduct of tho ox-
.wrlxnts. Mien thi results are roport.d at the proper tins, ploaso arrange
to point out the participation rosp. assistanco of tto Rcichsfuohrcr SS.

Vlith b.st rogfxds and

Roll Hitler J
sigrod: Sicvers

andart enf uehrer "

This letter indicates that tho defendant Sievers is hero now nokoing all
qrrangoaonts for oquiyait, disks, everythin? to sake it as easy as possible
to conduct these experiments at Dachau.

This earning it vas r.ot.d the witness Vievag said that he thought thj Luft¬
waffe had an institute there. This is obviously tho explanation fbr it.


16. Ooc. -iHE -ic-3-Cros s
Court Ho.l


Tho Hilitary Institute tiiich >08 at Dachau was under th. control of Sic war 3,
Here Si*-vers ia setting apart a portion of that institute for use by the
Luftwaffe to conaict those seawater experiments.

I now turn to Itocumc.it no. !JO-910 which is Prosecution exhibit 138.

Tho next three exhibits, your Honor* .arc affidavits. Those affidavits wero
obtained by our Document Chief free tho Police Files in Vienna, Austria.

They waro sent to us as pert of the Polico Piles end tavc been duly authenti¬
cated by our Etocument Chief. Uc have anticipated due to the fact that no cer¬
tificate appears thoy ;ould be questioned by defense counsel. They wore re-,
ccivcd in due courso of business rnd wo offer then as true extracts of tho
Vi-nna Polic. fil~=.

ER.3TSIHBAIC;: I e .j-c- C strongly to tho r.adin,. of docuront 910. In order

to save tie. object at uio sere tine to the reading of documents 9U onl 912 .

article ID, of the Ord^r 7 — ovon though Order 7, Article ID, establishes ttur.

tho Tribmtl is not bound to any specific order of ovidcnco, rcvorttolcss the

sane article gives certain diroctivos for tha ovidcnco. Such documents as this

c n b. accepted in cvid-nco, including affidavits. If you look at tho index

of ontents of Etocua.nt Book V you will see that all throo documents aro

listce as affidavito. Then if you look at tho documentc thcos.lvos yop >dll

3 .3 that neither 910 or 9U indicates far whoa these affidavits wero given.

On. was taken down in Vienna and the- other in Klagcnfurt at different tiros.

Thu least oro could ask would be that there should bo son. mention of tho

•

authority or son- warning to toll th- truth to tho person who is testifying
hero. This is not the ease in any of tit sc throo documents. Tho last document,
912, is h-aded "Polico liain Office, Vienna, St a to Police Dopnrtront 3". It is
true that in Article 7 or Order 7 rJeords of interrogations can bo accepted ns
evidence if thoy aro givoi before an authority of one of the Unittd Nations.

’.y country, Austria, unfortunately dots not belong to the United Nations. I
aa an Austrian lawyer aid know-Austrian laws. 2viu.nco cannot bo accepted tako;
t.foro cn adainist. ativo authority but only ovid-nco taken befero judicial
authorities..Therefore, there is no obligation for th.se persons to toll tho
truth end net even any request to tell th. truth. Tho Tdtnoss Pill wo in *to

189


Court Nc.l

■ast t to last one uas testod i*or-sts no c;:pccially. If the Tribunal
®uld only seed these so-called Affidavits I, as defense counsel, tould not
hevo tho right to cross oxralnc on the aost irportart points. I Ir.vc applied
for Pill»oia as a vdtncss before this Court. I, therofero, ask that all throe
of th-so so-cnllod affldarits not bo admitted in cvidcnco.

JUDGS SaRD.'G: Ur. Secretary General, will you pass out the original
docicc^ 8 *


L90


16 !)oc TTVH—l-Baynes
Court Ko. 1


H'* ’EH..JET: If the Tribunal please) it appears that each tine the
. rcsecutijn wishes to intrc hica an affidavit we will be faced with tills
sa=» question. I would like to say a few words generally first on that s
subjeot before getting down to the three affidavits new in question.

tte are aak&nr every effort to bein' before this Tribunal witnesses
to testify with respect to facta that they know of their own knowledge.
However, we carrot brine before this Tribunal all the witnesses whom we
have available to us. V.’e have new exam ined, as I recall, two witnesses
before this Tribunal. The witness viewed consumed approximately four to
six tours of the Tribunals tiao, as I recall, and was cross examined
by six or eight of the Dofense Couimol. We propose to bring before this
Tribunal between 15 and 20 witnossos: Wo also proposo to ask this
Tribunal to a J nlt in evidotyy* a substantial meter sf affidavits that have
boon taken from persons who woro in a position to know tho facts statod
in the affidavits.

As to these three particular affidavits, you havo hoard tho rdtnoss
viewed testify concernin' tho sea-wrator experiments. We also had topod
to present at tho conclusion of this portion of tho caso a no tho r wltnoss,
Heinrich Star, who will tostify about tho soaiwatcr oxporlhonts. Wo will,
therefore, have had two witnesses before the Tribunal rogardinc: the son-
vrator oxporiaents. At tho same tine, w 0 ask adnission of throo affidavits
•.toch are, in effect, cumulative evidonco as to what the witnossos viewed
an.1 Stor have already testified cr will t<»ttl* to bofore this Court.

Obviously we carrot call into this Tribunal every person who has
given an affidavit, and I submit that when tho evidence given in the affi¬
davit is cumulative, there is no reason whatsoevertto refuse admission of
tto affidavit.

«fcw, as to the three particularly in qiostion here, I think that it

would bo advantageous for us took at the*-and sec precisely what tho

u91

c .bjecticn is.


Court So. 1


O'


Hon, Defense Counsel is apparently objecting that theso affidavits
no ret sworn toj that is, that there is re notarisation on the affi¬
davits. How, ttait is quite true. There is no notarisation on then B '.Whether
tint is cistonary under Austrian law, I do not know. In our own country,
affidavits, are, of course, generally excluded because they are hearsay.
fl*y are excluded because, firstly, it doprivos the opponent of the right
of cross-examination, and, secondly, bocaase they are extra-judicial state¬
ments rot given under oath.

Now, unfortunately, wo hero have an affidavit which is subjoot to
both of those objections. Horcally our affidavits aro undor oath. Tho
reason theso are rot is because they wore obtained, ® Hr. Hardy explained,
fron tho police files of tho Austrian police, and the reason for that is

becauso tho defendant Deiglboeck was, as I understand it, at one tine in

^ •

tho custody of tho Austrian polioo. Thoy conducted a very oxtonsivo in¬
vestigation of this nan, in th» course of which they took tho throo state¬
ments which wo now subedt to tho Court for admission.

Now, tho only questions is whether thoso affidavits aro adniasiblo
before this Court. Tho probative value of then is southing for Tour
ftnors to decide, but I rospootfully subnit that thoy are certainly ad¬
missible under Ordinance SMnbor 7, irrespoctlvo of the faot that they are
not notarisc-l or sworn to, an extra-judicial slatent not under oath. Tho
defendant wall not have the right to oross-oxaaire that nan, but Article
No. 7 clearly sfatoe that affidavits aro admissible. I take it that it docs
ret nako ary difference that both of the noraal objections to hearsay are
present in this case, while noraally only one objection, tho lack of tho

right of crc33-axad nation, is present.

*o got these affidavits only seven days ago, after oonsidorablo
difficulty. *e had re opportunity to ary further into this natter, and so
far as I can see -a do ret wish to call thoso three people hore to testify
because of the lack of tine, and wo > ret thir that it is necessary in ,
view of the fact that we will have two witnesses testify to the sector

U92

experiments.


16 Doc.-H-AfD-ll-3- i Hayae3
Coart !fc. 1


JUDGE SE UlDC t what preliminary proof has been offered to this Tri¬
bunal that Document 910, pur.-ortedly signed by I. Bauer, is in truth and
in fact the statenant of I. Bauer?

lf>. L E HANEYi ell. Year Honor, there is no proof of that at all, and
I subnit that there would be very littlo acre proof of it if wo add an
attestation to the bottc* of then* It would noraally be , iven by a Notary
Publio in Austria, about which, of courso, this Tribunal and cysolf would
havo no knowledge at all, so unless he attached scea certificate of somo
sort previne 'who he was, I would assure that wo would be no furthor aloiv*
even if there wore an a tteatation on it.

JUEQE SEB?.INji Chat preliminary proof is there ihr.t this in faco
was a stateaent taken by the police of Vienna?

JC. !EHAHETi Tho only thing that we would call proof on that would
bo the cortificato that is attached to the original document now beforo
tho Court, certifying that It was takon froo tho file of tho pollco deport-
cont in Vionnaj throu h thoCIC dotachnont in Austria, in Vionna, we so-
cured two filoe fraa tho Austrian pollco force. Wo havo tho cco J J.eto files.
Frcr: those wo removed thoso throo statenonts.

JUTGE SEBUJOi Do you stato now that ycu havo thoso files in your
possossicn officially?

ICH.NET t Indeed wo do. They woro sent to us by the CIC in Vionna.

JUDGE ssanimi They aro now in the possesion of tho Ires ecu tl on?

fft. JCHvNEYi Sir?

JUTGE SEUUNDi They are now in th. possession of tho Frosccution?

!CU HCHAKET: They are. I understand that tho Vionna pollco have
requested that thoy be returned. I do not thirk they have been rotumed.

JUDGE SE3! IN3: Could you produce then before tho Tribunal?

1CV JCHANEI* I think we could. Your Honor.

THE sTESEENTt Tho Tribunal will reserve its rulin,- untU ary such
n?cord has been produced boforo the Tribunal.

•a. MC&KIt It isnow Just a few dnutos before tho noon adjournoer.t,
and I would like tc raise only one other ;»int that tie Tribunal nay wish

•S3

to rule upon*


IkK^-^TIVll-^-Bayrea

Court So* 1


TTo now havo In the fenbftrg jail a nan by the Dane of -alter Neff, and
tbo Tribunal probably has heard nenticn of his nine in connection with none
cf the dccunenta, particularly in connection with the altitude and
freezing experiments. Walter Noff was first a prison assistant to Dr.

Paschor and was in Sept«b«r 19U2 pardoned by Heinrich Hinder and oventual-
ly put in a police reserve unit. We think that it would bo desirable for
the Tribunal to hear the testimony of Walter Neff in connection with the
experiments of which ho has knowledge in Dachau.

The Prosecution has duly served notice of the calling of Walter Neff
on the Dofense Counsel on last Saturday, about 12 o'clock. The Prosecution,
however, is reluctant to call Walter Neff asits own witness. The reason *e
feel that way la because Neff ray very well be indicted an! tried in this
courthouse for his participation in the experiments at Dachau, and wo would
not wish to ba bound by what he sl*ht tostify to iu this Court, particu¬
larly with respect to what ho nl;;ht have to say about his cwn participation
in those experiments..

On the other hand, ho has aoro knowlcd'o about what went on in Dachau*

I think, than any othor living man, anl I think It night bo very desirable
for the Tribunal to hoar what ho has to say. I request, therefore, that

Neff bo ciliai as a Court witnessj thit is, the witnoso of tho Tribunal,

%

and in that way tho Prosecution would jo free to exanino Ido to any extent
that rd ;ht bo necessary and also, if nocessary, to in caoh hioj but, oven
acre important, if ho is later trio*., we would not bo in tho position of
having relied on his to at loony before this Tribunal and then proceed to try
bin and perhaps submit proof at variance with what he had to soy here, ea-
pedally with respect to himself. I would ask tho Tribunal to make * ruling
on that.

I do not knew whan it would be convenient for us to call Neff—possibly
late today or sene tine this week. In any event, we havo four Polish witness*
es in Nurnberr nrw, -e have two witnesses free Strasbourg. I w_uld like for
the- to be able to testify this week sc they would not havo to stay in


1 6 Dea*-»^TD-lI-5-»vn«®

Court ito; l

BQrnbare over ttc rocoas. It ai-ht be thot wo would delay Neff's tostincry,
possibly until even after Chris tags.

JUCCS SE3TIJC: Woald it be y:ur purpose, !!r. !!cHaney, in the event
this witness was called to the stand and was required to tostify. to use
such testinony as sight be elicited free the witness stand against the
witness Neff in a subwoquent prosecution?

MU yCH-JETi Well, that doee not cencern so quite sc nuch.na the
possibility that ho will take a defensive attitude as to his own partici¬
pation in these expcrlnenta. I think that at that point his testinony nay
case int~ doui t. I think it would be fair if ho wore warned before he
testified that arythinr he night say hero could be used against hin. It
is Just difficult to foresee what we rdtfht want to do with roepoct to his
testiarny at a lator dato.

THE irSSItCNTi Tho Tribunal will now rocoss until 1:30.


)A recess was token until 13:30 hours.)


16 Dsda-MHiTB-li-o-feynee

Court So, 1

Nuraborc ovor tbo r ocoas. It rd.^ht bo th.it wo would delay Noff's testimony,
possibly until even after Christmas,

JUCGS SffiQlOt tfoold it be y jut purpose, >lr. 15c Haney, in the event
this witness was called to the stand and was roqulred to tostify, to use
such testimony as night be elicited free the witness stard against the
witnoss Neff in a subsequent prosecution?

Ml, MCBnlBIi Well, that doee not concern ne quite so nich.ns the
possibility that he will tako a defensive attitude aa to his own partici¬
pation in these experiments. I thiric that at that point his testimony may
cone into doutt. I think it would be fair if ho were warned beforo he
testified that anythinf he night say hero could bo usod against him. It
Is Just difficult to foresee whet we night want to do with rospoct to his
testimony at a lator date.

THE I.TESIDEffTi Tho Tribunal will now recess until Ii30.

)& recess was tokon until 13»30 hours.)


U95


16 Deo-A-C?-3-i:>l-£arrc«
Court So. 1


C035ZSTSD copy
aFTSRSOOM SBSSIOS

(The hearing reconvened at 1850 hour*, 16 Dececfcer 1946)

THS UARSHAL: The Tribunal is again in session.

2E. UoHA5ETt If the Tribunal please, we wore disousaing, boforo the
lunohaoa reoess, the admission of documents Nos. £0-010,911 and 912. I as
prepared now to submit, for the inspection of the Tribunal, the files sent
us by the polios in Vienna, and I have narked in these files the plaoea at
which the original affidavits appear. If these affidavits oan be admitted
provisionally at this tine, tl.s preseoution will endeavor to secure, fron the
Jhisf of polios or ths official in charge of the Vienna ..olico, an affidavit
giving ths circumstances undsr whioh thes' statements were c.tained.

LS PH2SIDS!;T: Ths Trii-nal will examine the files ycu >»ve Just
passed up.

The Tribunal is of the opinion that theso documents maybe reoeivsd in
oridsr.ee subject to sees later proof of ths authenticity of the documents by
oxhibit of proof from some offioial In Vienna. Ir. view of that ruling, dees
any of the Dofenas Counsel dosire to bs heard In regard to the provisional
adclssion of those documents?

DR. FRITT. 3AUER (Counsol for defendant Ruff)i If it pleaso tho Tribunal,
! should liko to ask that ths name "affidavit" should bs oorreotsd. JTo are
r.«re oonoernod, according to what the Prosooutlon has said so far, witn ex¬
tracts from a police interrogation and wo are not cor.corr.ed with an affidavit.

I therefore ask that the Dofonse be given tho possibility to examine the
icuronts in order to enablo them to tost tho authenticity and oorreotness
of the statements sot forth therein.

%

I?.. UciiAinrfi I an not suro that I understood all t >c remarks node by
V‘.<j Dwfonso Counsel* -.sfibLsiiall, of course, bo quite rind to afford him the
opportunity A^^Spoct tMsM%£eacmts in t:ie original. As to vrnother they


Should be fcaJYod affidavits or reports, I do r.ot see that that is a matter of
5 r,, *‘t materiality. They are r.cc called anything in the doouoont book itself.
T.-.ey are listed as affidavits in the index, but, of course, that is not a

\ . • \/

V. H i ‘ y ' \S -

- 496 -


16 Deo-A-CSS-12-2-Sorrow
Court Bo. 1


part of the record of thoao proceedings, rut we shall be glad to let hia
see the original reports.

THE PRES IDE’..*: i As far as Exhibits 137 and 138 are ooocornod, they are
sickly what purports to be copies of signed statenor.ts aade by oortoin per¬
sons whoso naaus arc signed to then. The last exhibit contains sooo sort of
a oopy of the certification that was taken boforo ios officer, I would
suggest that the oattor be held in abeyance and tho defendant's counsel be
permitted to oxanir.e the records you have.


Id i-eo-A-SSS-I3-l-£upporatoin
Court Bo. 1


At the same tlau see what you can do toward suppleoJnting those records ^
•j:less the present records before the Tribunal arc satisfactory to the
defendant's counsel.

UR. UoHiUEYi Well, do you suggest then that we do net now offer those
as exhibits?

TB3 PRESIDENT: I suggest the statements bo offered at this tine; that
their adcission in evidence be not ruled upon until defendant's counsel has
had a chance to examine the doouaonta which are new prosonted by the prose-
cutIon.

1 ®. MoHAHSYt For purposes of the reoerd, would it i pernisaiblo for
Ur. Hardy to offer theso and read thoc int the record at this time and thon
have the formal rulin’, perhaps tomorrow? .of o our so, wo won't te able t o so-
curo all affl, rits free the Vienna police that sor.n.

7.E PRESIDE!": TToll, is it your purp. so ir. caking that suggestion
singly to have a oonsocutivo record?

UR. KoKlUST: Yob.

T 3 rRESIDEIT: I think we aignt bo allcsrod to r-ad the* in the reoord
subject to objootior. arid la ter ruling of the court, whether they should re-
eain in the r.cord or whother they should bo stricken froa the record.

UR. HARDY* will all turn to pago 25 of Your Honor's dooununt book.

Tills is HO-910, whloh is offered as Prosecution Exhibit Ho* 135, provisionally.
This Is entitled "Ignat Sauer, Wahringorstrasse 162, bon: on 2 Juno 19C8,
intirnod in the Dnohau^Goncentraticn Casp from Juno 1944 .to Juno 1945, Prison
f73059, Vienna, 16 Hurch 1946."

Entitled "REPORT, Sxperlwnts of the '.iftwaffo porforr - under the
direction of the academic lecturer Dr. 93IGI2CC?. in the Dachau Prisoners'
Hospital Barracks in Susnsr 1944."

" In sucxr 1944, shortly after ay transfer to Dachau from u French prison
: worked in the infirmary of the Li^ht Station where 1 did physical thoroapy
Vih cade electrocardiograms.

"I t.iinic that about the end o! July a sick-rooc. for exporter, tal


- 498 -


16 Dec-A«G£S-X3-2-Xuppe rate in

Court Ko. ;

purposes was cade available to the Luftwaffe. Several series of experiments
■ere carried out forcibly, each one on about 15 gypsies. Their experiments
■ere carried out in such a way that for 4 to 6 days tfypre people did not get
anything to drink or to eat oxcept sect saltwater (seawater.)

"Prcn the socond experimental scries or., I had, apart freo soac
electrocardiograms, to test the electric oxcitability of muscles and nerves
of the patients and, therefore, had the opportunity to > fitch part of what
was happening and to draw ny own conclusions.

"The purpose of these experiments was:

■1. To find out how long it trices until a healthy human specirwn
without water and food, who at most is given acne seawater, will
fall in agony.

.* • • .

" 2 . to study thoroughly tho synptons of'lying of hunger and of

thirst.

"3. to tost tho effects of c sorun, the composition of which
is unknown to no, on too oxperirxmtnl subjocts who ». ro already dying.
"In the courso of these hungor .and thi -at experiments, tho patients
iroro oubjoctod to nunsrous t^ s, a:;-: .3 others doily bloodletting and liver
punctures wore made. This war repeated frequently.

"Synptons of death by hunger and thirst which wore oioo perceptible to
the laynan were:

"Visible deterioration of tho patients, nervousness, agitation which,
in scr.o cases, counted to,tho .oint of Badness. (Tho roving people wore tied
to thoir bods.) Scoo of tho patients shewed signs of apathy end unconscious-
n os. In many instances, weakness of tho heart could bo absorvod.

"Subjectively, tho patients suffered from gnawing hunger and, above all,
ften terrible thirst, which, through tha drinking of saltwater, became oven
more painful. The thirst was so terrible- that sod: patients did not hosltato
a: drink dirty water used for washing the floor. I saw one of these peer
■*ils falling on his kneos, bogging in vain for water, doctor -Joigolbcck
~c pitiless. One youth, who succored in g.tting oaao '.“-tor to drink, was
bound to his bed


- U99 -


is - &- e-A-SS-13-3-nuppcrstoiJi
Court Kc. 1

for punishtiont (whether by 3oigel:x>ck or rz -thcr, I unfortur tcly do not now
r*

vqv-w; ir. any ease, oeigolbcck, as chi.f of this division, w.-.s responsible),
"To all these bodily torment^ wa3 added the constant' fear of death,
for they knew that in other cxpcrirxjnts at the real research station, tho
sadistic pseudoscientific curiosity of the SS had do; ended constant sacrifice
of lives. For this reason thoy all feared the sano fate.

"■.."hon the patients lay, one by one, at tho point of death, the afore¬
mentioned sc run was injected, whoroupon thoy recovered, ait whether tSioy be¬
etle completely well again after all th_so bodily sufferings and mantel tor¬
tures, I do not know, for I did not get to see those people any nore. It is
truo that it is not known to ne whothor, ir. tho course of ev.r.ts, 1 -sting
injuries or deaths occurred, but I considor this r.uitc possible. To these
.nfeoblod people, each "transport," each hard lr.!»r r*.ant sure death, oven
•'-ugh thoy received supplcnentary nourishment two or throo days before aid
aftor the experiments. Everyone, including Or. Tcigulboc., w .aware of the
fact that the nourietaent in ths c-::; was absolutely inn fficicnt, that the
and ton.x) of the work won rairdorous, and that tho h;gicnic conditions and
the conditions in the dorrdt rics were beyond description.

»*,loro these exporlmnts so important and so valuable for mankind ir.
general that one ir.s permitted to place human life at stake? ..side from tho
fact that ono is ret permitted tc rvlco harmful oxp-rinonts on human beings
against thoir will, as was done here, thuso cxpjrincr.tr, served only the war¬
like alms of the German Luftuaffo.

"3e3idos this, thu3c experiments could have b-er. carried cut just ao
wall if animals had boon used for the pirpeso. Tho findings would pjraaps
have be on oven acre accurate, but to th-so unscrupulous representations of
t»w master race tho "nub-humans" ir. the concentration camps wore cheaper
ar.d were more worthless than guinea pigs or dogs.

"1 would only like to add that one day I cut Professor Springer ir. the
Lrfir.ary in Dachau; h cv.c free tho direction cf the aviation cx>rira.nt

station, uher. he saw to it fcbt he ws well infora~d by Ids pupil »J
assistant, Teigulbock, about the status of his experiments." Signed


"I. 3auor."


16 Dcc-A-G^-13-4-Kuppcrstcin
Court Ho. 1

•»e now turn to document KO-9U, which is Prosecy tier. Exhibit 139. Tills
la a st.'.tOBcnt of Joseph Tschofenig, Xiosstnlcr Street 23, Klagcnfurt,

Austria.

"IQigonfurt, 7 February 1946.

“.uesticned with regard to the o c c u r r e n ces at the- Luftwaffe S^orifluitn- .
•ion Station of jachau Concentration --mp, under the direction of _t-.bar.rzt
r. 3JICZLB0C , I rrJco the following assort ions:

"I can no longer establish the exact dr.to, but during the sumer cf
■ ?44 the absvo-nviod carried out experiments in which a 1 -rgc r.univ.r of
prisoners had to drink soa. inter in order to dotomino h.lci.£ thoy could
stand this. Previously th^r. had already been .a _uftir ff. xporioentation
• ion at 3ach-u, which was headed by the Lunich doctor, jr.

• , V

Xniiunumblc deaths resulted fron ths.se uxp-ri-^nts. It was cr.u cf tho'noat

feared experimentation at*.tiers in the carp. Ir. 1944/ "• charge in the

direction of tJvj oxperi.’^nt .tior. station was soing on; _r. .lilinan Sd

doctor who had fonvrly boon actiro in the - n, boenno Dr.

•-..SCKHR's succoascr. .. rarber cf highly placed persons visited this station,

-;v,ng others the .loich Chief cf Physicians, CCl.TI, .loicnafu-hrer C~ KL . l . LJt ,

-r>l. In 1944, the Vienna Univu.sity Professor -L'.^.GE.t, in none was kupt
secret but whn was rcc-gnizcd by a Viennese radical student by the n-j.v- of

_.a_lSC0aG22 who was a prisoner th,r_. -d--.tr.Al could not help talking with

air., tried to convince hin f the high, purpose af Lati nal Jocialisr. and

•

■xpr-ssed surprise tlr.t tors to be f uivl arong th-Je criminals. — I'Z'. d—.
x eked the experiment,- tier station over -nd an ngreunont aas reached ritl.

Dr. ?. C..iTU2H to open a now experimentation station, -fie.* t. a /lessor's
Ijparture orders ucr. s^r. nc ive-d t make rcor. ir. the f rimers' infimary
Ter the net; station and arrangements wer- Sr.ue that thes- experiments cculd
-gin shortly. 60 gypsi-s, brau.-;.t frcn -achsonhausen Sancontraticn damp
-specially fer this pur.*oce, were selected for th.se experiments. Prof.

A IG2.XC:: c-e'e with a staff of three -ultwaffo assistants, -nd t!x
-xp.rirx.nts began. ..s far .as 1 knew ir. various n-thode; starvation diets
*. begin With, 3e-. water and salt di-ts, c-it injections, -ad s or- The
* -rtureS led tc oaf-obling of trx, body which r.culted in less of c.nsci-us-


- 501 -


16 Zcc-A-G£S-13-5-£upporstein
Ccurt No. 1


and, as far '.s I knew, in one duath.

"..Von if occasionally the diet was ixvroted, the pc pi. c uldn't ©at
it. Scoo of the exp riaontal subjects had crarsps "nd mnic attacks.

SIGEL90CK delivered these so-called trouble.-,’.kers t~ the oS, which treated
then in the miner custucrry in the can?, Through these measures of f rco

be r.s successful, in that th. experimental subjects actually drank th. salt
rator. It was known that the experimental subjects hurled themselves ->n tho
fleer rags used by the hospital attendants and sucked the dirty rater out of
then and tried in overy conceivable manner te secure pat.ablc water. ..s in
all tho experiment at icn stations, it was ZId.L3«XK 1 a practice too to send
these prisoners uniemined by the exp. rime at s to the rerjul .r infirmary in

order to conceal the nunber cf deaths .arung the uxxrin.nt.al subjects.

* # * « . |

Vt * s i •

The frequent lotting of blood and the inefficiency with which this »r s A-no,

• ’ /

•Is: led to severe dacr.gu. The cxperixxnts 1 stod about six nooks. During
* .3e oxporir._r.ts other scientists alsc c-y: tc Jaclvav jeeasi 'really. It was
known to us prisoners that only these people participated in these experi-

•

aunts who, .as provon National Socialists, h-.J th- e nfih.: - cf Himlor's
.aost imodiatu staff, f r th. additional sufferings of. the ; tionts created
in c: nnuctlon with thj expjriixnts were so obvi us as not t be roe ncilablo
with - physician's conscience.

O

"On account of :iy position as responsible prisoner .at the X-ray 3t’tion
;f the prioenors' infirmary, 1 was in opposition to gain Insight into the

exporlswntation station which, however, could only bo superficial 3irco tldo
experiaontal station was kept sopar.atod and especially guarded within the
prisoners' infirmary. Just to give one example:

Gotten political prisoner, a jr.ti.nt in th. infirmary, vbaorvod

frci: the window the occurrences at the low pressur. ch-mb.r which was

6

st-nding in the courtyard. Ho was taken ut by St absarzt P-wCHa?., pot
is.t- th. chamber, and a few h urs later his body was in t.ie morgue.

"The experiments in Dachau :«er y carried out there because no cnc was
•-.-Id r se nsible f r thu injury r duath f the available ,eople. Iv.iy
■*.tv<npt by prior rxrs to .avoid the vx>rirxr.ts -Is: r.suited ir. death.


i6 J-- c-. -Z=S-l3-6-V.uvz _ rstc in
S-.urt No. 1


Therefore, cvon i r. the cases which did net r.sult in pcrr.-j>cnt injuries,
rs • natter of exploiting the hepoless position of the prise ivors to
c~rry out these crirdml expor icents."

"(Sign-.turc) JCSS? TSCHCF3-IG''


o


503


Court Ho. 1 i

16 Doc 46 - A - 14-1 - UG- Lohnb_.rdt

Pollco —r.in Offico, ioma
Str.to Pollco, Dop, III
I, Doutachmoisterplc.tz

Yionna, 13 Ifcrch 1946

Protocol w

Ro: Sur.wc.tur Roaoarch

^r. Fritz Pillvoin, born 11 *ay 1919 In Vienna, a citizen
of Vienna, ainglo, no r-liglon, atudont, residence: jcungaaao
31/10, Vionna, status as follows:

Concerning the senator roaoarcb at thu luftvrcffo
Exporlnontal Stc.tion at Dachau, I c:n say the following:

Tho experimentation a tat ion vr.a in -lock 5; hov/ovor,
tho pationta belonging tc this atatlonvoro in alock 1 / 1 .

Iho S oad of thia uxpuri-ontation at. tion. Dr. Scigolboclc,

W..S known to no from /ionna, G. I ru: ombor that gypaioa of
different nation lities fro..: otl^r concontr..tion oaiapa woro
uaod for thoao oxp-rimunts. Porty-fiVv of tl.uso woro uaod
directly in the experiments. besides Dr. 3eigeloock, an
Unterarzt of North Gen.: n aoacont, throo chomlata, as well
ao one French, 2 Alaati..n, and one cr two Spanish priaonera
ae laboratory assistants, nor* prosont c.t tlo so oxporimonta.
Tho uxp-rir-onta woro carried out from tho middle of ..ugust
until tl o ond of September, 1944. • I, .ay self, car.:o to tho
at tion as a nurao .bout 10 day a after tho uglnnin^ of tho

experiments end remained fcloro until tho end of aano. at

•

tho sa.so timo 1 w-s able to bring a second prlsonur with mo
into tfc e experimental at..tion as an assist. nt nurse. Hia
r-jx, is Joseph '••orlicck and lives at tho preaont tiuo in
Vienna, 16, Geyi.iullerg-.aae 2 4. himself will surely bo
•'.bio to sivo further details ./.out the exporintents.

I cannot renumber tL-t thero were any kind of visits
iroci prominent personalities at tho at tion at the timo of
®7 activity as nurse.


-5Cii -


Court Mo. 1

16 ljsjC 46 a* — 14-2 - UG - I^ohnh^i'dt


7ho experiments thonsolvos voro errriod out In tho fol¬
lowing wr.y: in the first three dc.ys tho uxporlnontcl subjects
rocoived sea dlatross enro, consisting of one coco coir, loaf,
some Dextropur, Sovor. 1 pieces of Zwcib..ck (about 10-12 llttlo

pieces). From tho first to t: o lest day, tho p rticipants

__

wore given, bosidos this, a:.lt wr.tor 4-5 tines a day. In a
total .-mount of 1/2 to 1 litor. Tho 44 pooplu woro sub-dividod
into 5 or 6 groups. Two groups received pure so.. w..tur, 2
othor groups puru sua water with an added s..lt preparation,

9

the rouaininf group roceivod distilled sor. wr.tor without
addition. from tho beginning, daily s. mplus of blood tests
wore tele on fron tho participants. T/lth individual pationta,
tho attacks of woaknoas ~nd especially tho thirst producod
such crass offocts t: ».t they could not loc.vo thoir bods
.fter only sovoral days; I can romomber ono who broko into
convulsive scr^alng. On acvor..l occasions those pationta
dr.nk dirty w..tor out of tho p. ila of tie ationdants, r.s
well as taking it in unguardod r.onents fron tho pails placed
in tho halls for air raids. Yhilo tho floors wore boing
w: shod, aovt,r..l p.tionts sucked up tho w. ter that had boon
poured out on tho floor. I had to weigh tho participants
daily . nd est..blishod the f..ct th. t ti e daily loss in weight
• mounted to ~s nuch as ono kilo. -.fter Dr. 3oigulbock dotor-
ninod ono day that several patients h .d drunk other liquids,
tho attendant nurse (a pnsonor also) was* put out of tho
infirmary. (This was a Jugoslavian who wae doln.'c night duty
at the tino).

V3.cn the peoplo were chosen for those oxperimonts, thoy
were also promised bettor c.ro for qcco tirao. In reality,
shis c..rc w..s only accorded patients in tho first group; f.21
tho others received w..tur and skinmod milk for two d'.ys aft or
tl o end of the experiment and ..bout tlo third day woro pis cod
on tho normal camp'diet. Tho first group rocoived somo sausage.


Court Hoi 1

15 hoc 46 -A - 14-3 - LJG - *-ohnh_rdt


broud, butter, choose, nrra..lado, md 2 cigrrutts for 4 or
5 drys. I rcaoabor thrt disryrooucnts arose botuoon tho
orep .-dulxUatration and tho co:ipotont authorities of tho
Luftw..ffo alnco tho Luftwuffo did not rvrlto sufficient pro-
vlalona cyc.llr.blo for tl.o dlot. Tho onoa who boro the brunt
of this wore ncfcv.xv.lly tho participants.

V/o priaonora ell know that wo would be ueod for such
experiments rlao, just liko other c.nln..ls, for by such
oxp.rincnta tho .authorities rt that tlno ehowod tl.c.t th.oy
consldorod hunen bolnga ct lor.at on tho scuo lovol :.a mijnuls.

I know fron } orrery fron other oxpcrinontal atc.tlona
thet nuny 3ccrlfieta of lifo wore couple.lived of. In nost
ersoa, tho following uw.auroa wore pr..ctlcod: the p tlonta
wero put beck Into tho roguli r infira.ry, in u very weekonod
cd dcjirgod condition, uhoro thoy diod aftor .. short tluo.
further inforurtior. c n be jlvun on this by fonaor fellow
prlaoner, Hoinrich Stohr (Sudoton-Gerrv. n) who, to tho best
of ny knowledge, hc.s already boon taken to tho J urnborg
court.

re .d, approved & rifled (V.g.g.)"

IS. IL. EY: Signed by tho interrogator. rt thi3 tino,
wo hi. vo couple tod the proaontr.tion of ao.- water experiments.

On mothor occc.aion, rt a 1 tor d; to, wo will rak pori’ission
to call witness Iritz Pillvoin. * t presont ho is not available
wo h vl boen inforr.ed tl:;.t ho la in Munich, in d thc.t ho will
bo hero in c. fow d.-.ya.

IS. UcRmKRI: la tho Triounr.l prcp.a'od at this tluo to

uuko a ruling with respect to the tosti.iony of tho witness
V'Cltor NSP?. It night bo oxpodiont to call hln rt this tir.o,

PKS PISSIDEOT: ito Tribunal is not pr^p. red to rulo
upon tho question of tho tostinony of tho witness W^-LISR N3FP
~t this tino. ^


Court Mo. 1

16 Dec 46 L - 14-4 - UO •Lontordt


<


•*R. IIcH-HZT: If the Tribunal plo. :j, wo will at this
tlco turn to tho sterilization oxperlnor-ts, which r.ro ch.j'god
in Sub - ?; xagraph 6, "I* of Count 2, p..r. .graph 11 j anl r.t
Count 3 those who arc ch ar god with special responsibility
for participation in tho sterilization -xporiuonts aro tho
dofondants K..rl Rr.zidt, Oobl.Jdt, Rudolph Br.ndt, '.Irugowsky,
Poppondick, Brack, Pokorny and Oborhousor.

Tho docunonto which will bo produced r.t this tiuo c.ro

%

contained in Docunont -ook No. 6, before tho Tribunal now.

I would like to udeo cloar’r.t tho outsot of this presen¬
tation, thc.t wo r.ro hero concornod with storilizations which
woro carried out pursuant to (k.mr n pr-ctico on that aubjoct.
It is truo, that in .ornr.ny, a Statuto did oxist which poruit-
tod sterilizations of cortcln persona under cortr.in circun-
stancos: p: rticularly, those persons infoctod with inheritable
diao .scs. So.so sue! statutes oxist in othor countrioc, aa I
understand it, and, indood, in sever. 1 si; tos of the Unitod
Statos. ..t tho ond of tho proof on th'o storilizr tion o xpori-
.ionts, t; ore will bo no doibt in tho Court's nirxl thc.t tho
sterilizations with which wo .-.ro non concernod h.d nothing
whatsoever to do with tho Soman -V.ctico. Iroao storlliza-
tiens wore carried out .g.inst so-cr.llod "ononies 11 of tho
C-ur. ._n S ir to, ospooi- lly Jewish, :.nd people of tho Eastern
countrios. Tto ror.pon of storiliz.-tion was in f..ct usod
to perrait tho Cri.ao of GonicidO, which is tho uc:as extomim-
tlor. of ..n onony pooplc; and thr.t was tho purpose of tho
sterilizations with which vo are toro concernod.

Iho first document will bo Mo. <30 — no, pardon ao —

f

‘No. 440, which will be Prosecution Exhibit No. 141. This is
affidavit by tho defendant Rudolf Br. ndt, and it ro.-ds as
follows:

(Roading) S I, Rudolf Rail K«n.'.rnn Br.ndt, duly sworn ko


Court Ho. 1

16 Doc 46-A - 145 - L3G - I«£ahcjdt


dopoao end stc.to:

1. I m the s.~_o Rudolf T who already on 30 August

1946 furnlshod affidavit concerning low pressure oxporinonts
which were conducted upon concerning Ion proaauro

experiments which wore conducted upon ina tos of tho Dcchr.u
concentration ccap. I further furnished cort;.ln other affi¬
davits concoming nodical experinoxta upon hunrn bo In s.

2. For tho sr.-io ro-.aona, act forth In p. r.. graph 1, 2
end 3 of uy ffid. vlt of 30 -uguat 1946, I on In 4 position
to draw up this of fid. vit concerning exoerinonts on huiV.n
boings.

. Sterilization Iixporlr.:onta &

3. vxt e;:trjuoly interested in the duvolopuont
of x choc.p and r-pid sterilization i»thod which could bo usod
against onotiios of Gonu-ny, such wS tho ••uaslr.ns, Toloa tn <\

v ,

Jowa. One hoped, thereby not only to dofor.t tho onouy but
to oxterainato hlr.. Shq c:.p..city for work of the atorillzod
persons could bo exploited by Oon^ny, while tho dinger of
propr.gc.tion would bo clinin. .ted. This rr.ar stcril izi.tion
wc.a pert df Hl-joler'a x-.ci .1 theory; particular tiXao nd c..rc
woro devoted - to th.oao storilizr.tior uxpori'ionts.

4. iurgic :1 sterilization n. ? of course known in Gome. r.y

;nd applied* l*his lncludos ci.str -tion. ”or t. sa .pplicrtion,
however, this procedure w..a considorod sa too slow . nd too
expensive. It w xs further desired that procedure bo found
which would result in sterilization was not luaudixtoly

noticor.blo. odic-1 storilizr.tion experiments were tJ crcforo
conduotod. Dr. Ib-D.-US h*4 discovored th..t tho drug •or.lxdiun
seguinun" extracted froti x Kortlwnorlcnn plant (Schwoigrohr)
whon t;Jcon or injected producod stcrilizr.tion. Dr. --doIf
POXORNY in lr.te 1941 drew Hioalor's r.ttontion to this scientific
resoxrcfc and suggostod that it bo perfected end applied ng.‘in
Russian prisoners of war.

' , r . 1 — _


-508 -


Court «‘o. 1

1 € £>co 4G - - 14-S - UG - Lchnh.rdt


5. -.a n roault of POKOIOJY'a eug^cation, oxporl:^onta
w_ro conductod upon concentration c:_:p prisoners in ordor to
toet the offoct of tbo drug. Simultaneously, nil offorts
w.ro undo to cultivi.to tl.o plnnt in l.rgo cucj ititioa. ^av/:.ld
POHL, chief of tbo -conouic :.nd .Ub-4nlatrv.tlvc :inin Offico
(WVHiv) took poraon.il intoroat in this ur.ttor. Kothousea
woru uaod , with n cortr.in .jiount of auccoas, to cultivc.to
this pint, ra d tho oxpcrluonta uero continuod. I don't
boliovo, however, tfcr.t it we. a poaaibl to produco aufficiont

qunntltioa of this dn\j to unko i.rgo-ecc.lo .\pplic..tion

y « , n •

poaaiblo.

3. Dr. 0U.U22T.0 ’.ovo loped further .. . otl.oi for tho
atorilizntion of trcuon. Bale ixithod vr..a b.-.aod upon tho
infection of c.n irritating solution into tho vt„rua. QLfU.rSUG
conducted widoopro: d oxpcrinor.ta or. Joniah voi on ..nd gypaioo
in tho -uaohwitz concontrntion c:j.p. Sovor .1 thouannd wcr.on
wore atorlllzud 07 OL..0KEO in -uaohwitz. Dr. le.rl 0E31. RDT
Lp /crontly corductoa surgic. l s turilizr.^J on in Shu n.-.voncbruock


coup.


Court Ho. X

16 Dec-A - GSS -l5-l-I*s3sr-LJS


07. Sterilisation experiments were likewise conducted Vth X-rays.
sCHTLASi: applied this procedure in Aischrits and sterilised a

nusfcer z£ aer..

■a. Dr. Karl BJUnDT, Heich Physician SS Dr. G?ATiI?2 and Dr.

( 28 HAHDT certainly were feniliar with this sterilization -aiUor.
BLOaaBUr:®, WPISKaCX, and HRWCS - nrcoably had knowledge of

it also. '

" (SI.«;ed) fctSGlF KUKW" •

This affidavit of the Defendant hiiolf Brandt gives ua a short
statement as to the bread scope of the program and wo n:w proceed to
the German decunant which fire us oore detailed information cencomire
it. Kext will be Document Kosher 2 : 0 - 03 $ which will be Prosecution
Exhibit 1 12. This is a letter aont by the Defendant MKCRMf in Oetcfcer .
19 U to Heinrich HimLer. It is odiressed to the Heich -*c asionor
for t'o Consolidation of German Folkd^n, S 3 Ki"-l«r, Chiul f Police,


Berlin:

-I bog you to turn your atunti,.: *Uowlai argunents.

have requested Professor Hoohn to for:*.- this letter to you.
chosen this direct way to you in order to ™ld *• •"" P™* 53
through channels and the poesibility ef an indiscretion in regard to
the eventually enormous inpcrtaacq of the ideas prosentod.

"Led by the idea that the eat* »»t not only be conquered but
destroyed, I felt bilged to present tc you, a* ^ «• Cctsaissionor


f:r the Consolidation of Oman *OUft)B, he t Hewingi

-Dr. nodans published the r .sul s f his research on a Vicinal
sterilisation (both articles eraenclosnd). as*n« these articlus,

t» l^ M » luportv. U«I» ««— « OUr P4 ° Pl *

cccurmd tc AT. on W ft th* r*««h, « » » _»>• to
pre- « « dm* radch »tta * * rt «», -STec « » >*-

»ptH. -> » * -« 3 " ^

M rupon .» cor oicposol. B» =“  *“ 3 rfUi “

mlEhcviis, .t "ruEOnt Gow c old oc e- -rili~d » «=* <*V


- 5 ic -


lS-2-I«sser - L J 2


Court Ho. I
16 Bac-A - :•


could c <i used as liberars but bo prevantsd fror reproduction, opens
the 3:3* far reachir.g perspectives.

'.-iflAus found that the sap ' the Scevoigrehr (Culadiur s-guinuc),
■hen taken by south nr given as injection to aolo out else t. fenalo
aniaals, aftor a certain tin a produces pertar.-nt sterility. The
illustrations accatpaxlyins the scientific article are convincing.

"If «y ideas auet your approval the following course ah uld ba
taken:

«1) Dr. .-.adsus coat not polish any r-re such articles.

(The onoay listens l)

■2) .Cultiplyin-. t e plant (oasily cultiv .ted in greenhouses l)

"3) I'mediate rossareh oft-hOi.vw >tdr.,s (c rial nr. Is l) in or:«r

to do torsi ns t.10 doao cad length of the treataont.

• •

»U) goick r-suarch of the constitutional forsola of the effective
cho.deal substance in jrdor to

« 5 ) froduco it synthetically if possible.

"Ac Goman physician and Chief physician cf the reserves of tho
3 .rear. Ifehroacht, retired, I undort.-.!:o to koop ScC-ot ths purp so ns


suggested b> aa ir. tliis loti-r."

Hell Hitler \

. (Sign d) Dr. Pokoray

v Specialist ‘ r skin and

venereal sotsos."

The Defendant Fckomoy will toll this Uurt a strange tale indoed
with respect to this letter. I very tach o ubt that ho will dory hav¬
ing ritun it and he, f coarse, enm.-t deny Utu subsotfxunt ptoof t-nt
icti.r. .ms taken pursuant to his suggestion. He will, instead, insist
that hi wus, ir. effect, coinv the .Russian prison-rs :f w x and the Jews
■ho were to bo subjected to tbaso Bboz its, a good turn,

that ha had t.cn told b : * SS oen tir.t -so Scssians and those &«» rera
to ba extorcinatdd and killed and that ho, ut f tho g: dness dC his

hturt, c.ncoivod ths idoa of saying their livos. Instead f being
*

annihilated they would bo sterilized s~ thr.t they could no Ion:or
produce children, be permitted to work in Cn.r-.ary *.nd live out

- 511 -


CciTt So. I

16 Doc-A-iS - l5-3-Less<sr - 1 Jj

their lives, That, in effect, will constitute the defense . f P>'kornoy.

I think if *3 put in no ore evidence thr.t surely the Dofonsc could
net gut up end say that we aro concern d ir. this case Kith st-rilisations
carried out pursuant to valid G.rr.on Statute. But what happontd as a
result of this luttur b the Defendant, P kcmyi The subsequ-nt decu-
ifcnts jiva us an insight int that natter, loxt -ill be Document Sio-
bur S0-O36, which will ba Prosecution exhibit 113. This is a letter
froa Heinrich Kinnlor to Oswald Pohl, dated 10 March 1912. Of course,
as we have explained tc the Tribunal, it is -.n-rally necessary to got
in touch with Dear P:hl bacauso he, af*^r all was administratively in
charge of the concentration c.t:pa; and sr Hiarler writes him this letterj
■Dear Fchlt .' •

"1 road Dr. Pck rcgr*s very interestin' nor:randua and Dr. 'indaus's
publications on sudicinal sterilization. I woild ask y-u to got
in t uch with Dr. ^daua and to inf or.- his, cn iy bahalf, tho.t
ho should n t publish -ything clso n thezo questieswof nodiciniil
sterilization, asd offor hiu possibilities of doing research —
in cooperation with'the hoich t-ysician 3S, on criminals, v*o
would have to bo storilizod in any case.

"The intended.^lan of research is, hr,ever, to be submitted to
r* by the office engaged on the subject."

"Keil Mitier \

lours \

(sir;n:d) H. HD, LiP." \

A copy is cent to 09IBIB and taro *0 ace too first st.p taken

in lino rtth Fokony's sug.osUon, first, t at Mm »•■■»« »-

not to polish any »n nrticiss and second, that rasusre.. should bogin

arh exp jrir^r.ts be carried o t cn cri * nais.

tie nova along tc Document Tu^er HWUS, *>ich will bu h-,socu-
tion Exhibit liih. This is a letter dated 20 April 1^12 from a -<erber
cf Himmler 1 s personal staff, the signature is illegible. It is to .
the Reich Ph- siciar. SS, car-, cf SS C arsturmfuehrer Dr. SCHGPK*,
Purlin:


- 512 -


Cc-^rt ,:o. I

15 - c-A - - 5 15-u-Less^r-I JG


■Sear Hubert:

*

■After a lcr -i s^arcl-. 1 finally fo fie particular; you desired.
Since —s "tter is still being dealt iti by another office 1 can
eril? tall yot la '.-hitch journals Dr. adaus's articles appeared.

•* , Knal fcr the Act: re _L: . . ental . edicine,* special
print fro Volu 109, 1st na -6 . will find.an article '2:vri-
rwntal Studies or. Animals on the ieaasntal St riliaation.i

toother article headed '. a$ic Plants in ti-.o Lipht of hXjttri-.or.tal Ee-
aetrch* appeared in tho «it:schau,' rt, vol. 25 cf 21 SejJteicor

19U. Tea will certainly jot those Journals i:. Berlin.

lil:a this place cut hors v«r; nuch and have alroat * -acovorod
froa tr.o ter 11 n hardships." . -

. "?j5t regards,

"Hail Hitler V

Bere n.;.x is Doeiuont Xu n_r *-0-0L7, hich sill ou Irosocutlon
exhibit wSf latter c. u«d 23 A f ril i i;2, a .air. free. the personal stiff
, .if- Security POlioa, and tree

Socurit.- S^r-.ice, 3S-C: -r s re pjnfuo.rer UO .lC’i, .rlins

".iTclcsod I an tranoaittin; err- c> a rapert on ibo stud; ea
of «Xy-ri.:o:.ts cn onirala r.-arcinf: ‘he question of aterilisation
th tho request trut it te duly not-d.°

Sara cfc zuJ t. at lie kr's Office Forconal Staff ia rritlnc these
letters t: various or .r cfi.-. cs within thu SJ, advising thor S t.-.o
•rj- ri.... • tn jj earn »d Tit.

-in i. ;ct Docuwr.t, Ku_c r XO-03T, will b- fc-o-ccuticr c hi’eit

: .r *r. : udeIf Brandt, datud 20 A ril

I'/iZ, ; -ich ftysician SS, ■-rii:..

randua by Dr,

. • :

“Dr. -5» pubUcatl :

^xicinal Sterilization of Anir s* aj .ir.-i ir. the «Journal


- 523 -


Court SB. I

li D:c-A--j-3— 15-5-I-SS-r - LJG


'or Sr.tire -x, -ri'-ontal Medicine,* special reprint fr«*r
7oiaiJ 2-39, book 1, vv.il> the article ^ic flints ir. the Licit
of ftcpcrissental Sesearch 1 was .-rinted in the 'tfrschau' (Review)
cf 1'rankfurt, 25th ,tar, Book 35 of 21 Sjptccb.r 1912
. a 5y order

"(si iv-d) 3.R."

c V

Tr.ose -Tu the initials of Rudolf jra.xlt.

The next document also still adaus lie at ions.

7nis is Docuaont Ku^r ::0-j3? and Till frcsecution Exhibit li;7.

Tho data on this letter is Just given as Jitie 1912. This also ia
frou the defendant Rudolf Brandt to 53 .torgruppenfttfthrtr Fohl, . i...
"Dear Cborgru:ponf;.'vhrjr* _ .

"On 10 .-arch 19u2 ;ho Rcichafuchrcr-S3 s.-.t yea a ouaorandus
written by Dr. Fokorrr end the publicatic n of Dr. -.dauc on
-dical sterilisation. Ih cooperation ith the Reich 1 hysiciar.-SO
jxpcrlaonts woro to be aado accordingly.

"T .a .‘.jichsfuuhrar-SS inquired today as to hew th- thir.-s ‘.fore
standing. I would appreciate gutting informtioi ."

■Hell Sitier
Tcur

3. Brandt. 1 ]


- 51L -


Court No. 1

16 Dec 46 * - 16-1 - UG - Ueloy


H.o noxt docxuiont is lio. N0-046 ... rnd will bo prosocu-
tlon Exhibit No. 143, r.nd this gives vs-Pohl's roport on
rfcr.t is boin^ done. It is d. tod Juno 3, 1942, fron O aT /r.ld
?ohl to Eiia-ior, Subject ; Storilizr.tion by ::o;ns of Drags."’

!t sr.ys, "Ro: Your letter of 3 October 1942.“ Your Honor,
tbr.t obviously i^uas. bo 1941. It should re..d Il-.rch 10, 1942.
0 tho Roichfuohror SS. “Do-.r Hoichfuehror: *n roforonco
tc tho -:»vo a.ttor I 1 .d l convors-tion tod..y with tho
director of the biologic..1 Instituto of Dr. US & Co.,
c.t Rudobeul/Droadon, Dr. phil. ot uod. Dr. E. XOCK.

I -dvised hi;:, of your doairo to h. vo public tions on
this subjoct discontinued fer tho tlxio boing. Dr. KOCK will
co-iply with your roquost.

Purthor::orc, oxperiuonta 3-.vo ror.chod do. d point
tocr.uao tho :, Schwoigrohr :; ;;i*oua only in North .norlcr.

;jxl during tho w..r c.nnot be oxportod in .doqvuto qurntitios.
Dr. IIOCH's uttor.pt to grow this plunt fron sood cultiv.-tod
In hd thou so s k.vo boon succosoful, it is truo; but tl*> procoss
is very slow .nd tho yiold is not sufficient to pornlt
c:.rx*ying on oxpcrhjonts on r. 1 : rgo sc; lo.

Dr. IttCE is hopeful ti ;.t this will bo renouiod if it
were possible for us to obt..in por.:ission l'or hi.-, to build r.
l.jgor hothouse. I promsod hiu this. Tor tho tx;.o boing
this is tho first .nd only pr.'.ctic.l stop to pronoto tho
project.

I shull continue reports periodically.

Hoil Kitlor 1
/ . a/ ?ohl. a

JUDGE SEX.rNG- Hr. ilcH.-noy, will you refer .vwin to
the d. to3 in your letter or uccur.or.t you h.-vo just ro:d?

.'K. HcEAiOY: The d .to, r.a I t.dco it, is Ilnch 10.

SEEDING: 1342?


-515 -


Court Ho. 1

16 Doc 46 -A - 16-2-UG- 11.loy

UR. IicE~NDY: Sfcat is right, yos, sir.

JDGS SEEKING: Then it refors to your lottor of August
3, 1942; isn't that rathor m lnposslblo situation?

!iH. McKANEY: I didn't undorstand tho last, Your Honor.

JIDG2 SEBRDiG: You sc.y tho lottor is detod ilurch 10,

1942?_

:0?. KcHAHBY: Ho, Your Honor, this lottor is d. tod Juno
3, 1942.

JUDGE SE-3RIKG: You say tho corroct d: to is 10 iic.rch

1942?

.2*. HcIL’-HEY: Ho, tho dr.to I w r.s corrocting is cont: inod

in tho yoforonco within tho lottor itsolf. It •a’iginnlly

ror.d "Your luttor of 3 October 1542." Do you find that, sir?

JUDGE S2BRIN0: Ihon it is tlio back of tho lottor, at

tho tir.o it was rocoivod, 3 Juno 1942; is that corroct?

UR. ilcHANEY: Shat is corroct, sir. This letter, of

course, indieat od that difficulties ..ro bolng oxporioncod,

uvl as wo shall seo happily enough tho difficulties continued;

but it doos indicate ti oy huvo boon able to cultivato tho

plr.nt on r. srx.ll scalo in hothousos, and th..t, in fact, thoy

h-vo cr.rriod out exporiuonts, although, as stated, not on a

largo scalo. And tho subsequent docua.onSTsl cw us thoy oxtaidotf

their efforts to closo this plant by getting L rgor hothousos

%

and thoy thoy nulo efforts to produce tho offoctivo ingredients
sciontifically.

Tho next docuuont. Ho. NO-046 b, will bo prcsocutlon
Exhibit No. 149. Shis is lottor frou tho personal s toff
of Kitulor. dv.tod 11 Juno 1942. Tho translation notes tho
slgnaturo of sondor illogiblo. It was sont to Oborgruppon-
fuchror ?ohl. I think tho letter is frot; -cudolf Zr:i\ dt, since
ho was °borstumbrxinfuohror on tho staff of lILmlor, and tlB I

Court will also soo his f;ailiar initial 3 ?. B on this ^curiont.


16 Doc 46 - A - 16-3 - UO - licloy
Court No 1


Your Honors any wish to look at this docuuont, which concorns
nodical sterilization.

"Door (Jborgruppenfuohror:

. "I havo infomod tho Kolch Loador SS of your lottor of
3 Juno 1942. Ko cal;a you to soc to it without fr.il that u
largo hot-houao ia sot up ns soon 2a possible for Dr. KOCH.

Ho considora tho oxpcriaiont oxtroaoly important.

"The Roich ^ador S$ caks ycu to continue to a end in
furthor reports.

• %

Hoil Hitlor”

1 V —^ k* 4 . • •

end tho algnaturo is illogiblo.

/

Tho r.oxt exhibit. Ho. N0-044, which will bo ?£osocutlon
Exhibit Ho. 150. This ia a fllo aonc writton by dofondant
Rudolf Drrndt, dated 22 Juno 1942. It is hiadod "Docunont
roforonco."

"During a consult .tion of tho V/onolsburg on 19 Juno 1942
with S^-^borgrupponfuohror POHL, I r.ontionod, anong othor
thlngo, tho dosiro of tho Roichsfuohrer to investigate still
more thoroughly what tho ingrodients :.ro of tho Ariorican
plant SCH’/EIGHOHR which may bo considorod for 3torilization.
Tho Roichafuol-rcr SS wishod It to bo dotorr.inod if similar
offoctivo ingrodionts aro containod in tho plants which r.ro
to bo fourd hero or in any rroc accoesiblo to us in Europo.

"Tho prosont support of tho work of Dr. KOCH of tho
:!AD„US Instituto shall bo continued to tho fullost oxtont.

" Tho Roichsfuchror SS also roquosts that t/ith the
ingrodionts of this plant on hand sterilisation oxporinonts
should now in rny'cs so bo carried out in tho concentration
crx:ps.

SS Oborgrupponfuohror POHL agreed to t^.ko tho nocossary
stops at onco. n

Signod "Drandt. B ^


Court So. 1


16 Doc 46 A-16-4 - UG - Ualoy

• «

^.o noxt docunont will bo Ho. 050. It Is Prosooutlon

Exhibit No. 151. Ibis is lot tor writton by a i*an nrcod

Piscl:or, who is net the dofondont Fiachor in tho dock. It

is writton to tho Reich lioin Security Offi co , that is tho
♦

R 8 EA > and is diroctod particularly - IV B 4, Attontion of
SS-Sturnbannfuohror Guenther, datod July 4, 1£42

"With roforonco to our tolophono conversation of 1 July
1S42, 1 au tronsuitting to you tho onclosod photostats «f
Dr. :UJ)/.US' work. Ray I roquoat you to work in closost
collaboration with tho agency of sC-Oborgrupponfuohror POHL
in this tx.ttor."

Signed "Fiachor."-

I would liko to c:Jl the Court's attontion to tho

• •

charaotors IV 3 4. That rofura to tho attontion of the

•

dop. rtnont within tho RSKA v/hich was tho Roich -^.in Security

Offico, tho Chiof, which ct that tino was Eoydrich, who was

assassinated in 1043 in Csochslovokia. This particular dopnrt-

uont, IV 1 4 was loadod up tho ;irsing Adolf -ichnann.

Blohannn, in this dopartaont having to do with tho so-called

Jewish quoation, which noant-tho oxtomin..tion of tho Jowiafc

population in Europo. Ihis ran Gorlcnd, to wbou tho lottor

was addressod, ono of tho ao-cnllbd subordinates in tho doport-

r.ont. Iho reasen it was addressod to hi», this nothod cf
%

sterilization would bo a solution to tho Jewish question.

Tho noxt docuzaont, No. G51* which is Prosocutlon Exhibit
Ho. 152, is da tod tho sex;o d^tu, 4 July 1C 42, and is also a
letter frou Fischer to tho defendant Rudolf 3rrndt in tho hoed-
quortors of thw Fuohror.

"I aoi sending you tho cnclosod copy of ny lottor to SS
Stumbannfuohror Guonthor of 4 July 1C42 for your attontion.-
Iho noxt docunont No. 03S, which will bo Prosecution

Exhibit No. 153, and wo soo that approximately 9 nonths after

-', 16 -


Court Bo. I

16 Doc L6-A - 1S-5-T..C—.^lo7-LJ-3


• • •.
tha data cf Pokomy's letter su-;^sUd this plannin g of icdicinal

sterilisation, t,.ut another aan by the r-a. e of Garland has gotten

tr.u sa.a idoa and is now translating it to Hinder. This letter

is fro the Deputy Gauleiter of the Lotot Danube, who i3 K. Garland.

lour Honor will find his nano translated at the urh cf the docuaont

on Page 16 cl tne doca or.t booh, as Z. Gund. That is obviously a

alst&ke, as you will sea fror the next doovnnt that will go in,

shich ras a reply fron Rudolf Grand tc the letter I an about to r^ad,

and which id addressed to T;, -.rland.

Prosecution Exhibit . 0 . 153 roods as follows 1

2U August 191*2

« • ^ •


f


- 519 -


16 Dec ,-A-#i7I>-17-l“*feehar.
Cctrt Sc. 1


"Sir, At the ardor of Gauleiter Dr, JITtf, his staff have hitherto
busied ttenaelves to a particular extent with previous of -population and
racial policy and prcbless of anti-<ccil eleac-nts. Since the prevention cf
reproduction by the congeni tally unfit and racially inferior belongs araon#s
the duties cf our national Socialist racial and do too graphic policy, the
present Director of the District for Racial Policy, Gaunauptstollonloitor
Dr. FEK1DBER, has exaninad the question of sterilization and found that
the methods so far available, castration and sterilization, are not suf¬
ficient in themselves to aeot expectations. Consequently, tho obvious ques¬
tion occurred to hie whether penital incapacity and sterility could not
also bo pr -*ucod in both nan oni woman by the administration of nodicino or
injootions. So ho care to-tho studios of tho Biological Institute of Dr.
MADAUS in Dadebeul-Dree-Son on arriaal experiments for medicinal sterilization,
which bocaae ace ess i' lo to him through the’.Hadaus Annual Roport, IVth year,
191*0, and aro of the hiirhost interest for our dorographic policy. MADDUS and
KOCH found th*t caladiue aoquinei usod in hcnaor.;Athle doses, that is,
adalnistored in infinitesimal quantities, favorably affocts ponital powor,
storility and fripidity (sexual indifferonco), sc that clinical and
r^iicinal research should not proceed without regard to this fact. It was
established by an extensivo sorica of experiments "n rnt3, rabbits and dops
that in tho adninistration cr injection of ccladiun extract aalo aninala
became go rtf tally unfit and focales unrocoptive and it could thereby bo
ioteminod what differences wero manifest in th. effects rf tho various
nothrds of imwculntion. Frcu tbs animal axporinonts it scons that a
permanent storility is liable to result in male animals and a more temporary

one in footles. k

"It is clear that these observations could be of tremendous importance

if alterations of genital power of fecundity could also be successfully
brought about in human beings by the adninistration of Schw„igrohr extract.
Research on human beings themselves would, of course, be necessary for this.
Accordingly, the director of ry Racial-Political Office points out that the
the necessary research and human experiments could be undertaken by an


16 Dec .-..-MD-l 7-2~Mee ban
Court fcl 1 - .

appropriately selected radical staff basin? their work on tho Uadaus animal
experiments in cooperation with too pharmacological institute of the
Faculty of Medicine of Vienna, on the persons of the inmatos of the gypsy
Casf of Lackenbach in the lower Damfco.

■It is quite dear that such research oust bo handled as a nationally
important secret ratter of the rost dangerous charactor, bocause encry
propaganda could work trcaondoua hart: all over the world by the knewlodge
of such research, should it ccne by such knowledge,

"Sinco these considerations are oiuy a thaory, the fundamental accuracy
of which has alroctfy been established by anlrnl experiments and tho possi¬
bility of the application of which to human beings is highly probable, a
rare Indication can only bo given of tho prospects of the possibility of
the storili*ation of jraotically unlisdtod nunbors of .vsoplo in the shortest
tino and in tho simplest ray conceivable.

"In this connection, I ray perhaps point out that it would surely bo
worth while U study the scionco, of tho old cults and of thoir priostly
castoa boaring on tho praaotion and provontion of tho huaan gonital faculty
and focundity. Priedtivo, prinoval populations which are eloso to naturo
also had and still havo a very oxtonoivo krowledgo of this subjoct without
t*»ao things boine krown to Scionco, It is known, for instanco, -that tho
natives of South .j»rica attested* to bring the j>owor of their enemies to
extinction by administering Schweigrohr (caladium sominun) to then.

"I should bo . articularly thank fW to y u if you would give mo y>ur
opinion in this respect when tho occasion arises, or oven order a ccncroto

working plan to be submitted to you. Gauleiter Dr. MCI would personally

•

have approached you with hisplan wore he not at present away on a vacation.
Hell Ritlerl Tours faithfully" (Signed) X. Gund.

I think it is marvelous to rote that two people so widely separatod as
:tr. Gerland and Pckorny cane up with such identical ideas.

The next Dccuront is So. 0- that will bo Prosecution Exhibit 15U.
This is dated 2? August 19i*2 and is a reply by the defendant Rudolf Brandt
to the letter, which I have just road. It is to tho Deputy Gauleiter in

521


Lower Danube t


16 Ifcc.-.WTD-17->-*feehan
Ccrn*t Sa. 1


Cear Siri On account of the absence cf the ?.aichfuehrer SS 3 who at
present urv’ert^koa a Ion? official trip in the .iltriich, I an acknowledging
yvjr lotter of 2h August. I can infora you that the subject of your inquiry
addressed to the naichfuehror has already boon known since last March aryl
daalt -rith.

SS^O’-r TU'-punfUJhror XHL arvl S5-Gruppenfuehrer Dr. GlA'.flTZ ase
attending to it.

"There aro difficulties insofar Re tho plant in question grows only
in forth .jaorica and on account cf the war isn: obtainable in sufficient
quantities. The growing in hot houses it a very tedious process and tho
yiold does rv;t seen sufficient tc carry out tho plannod oxporinwnto on a
larnor scalo.

"I woul-* bo vary thcrkful if you could lnforn no, whother the plant in
quootion is pcssi.ly at tho disposal of Dr. FElT-IfCES arvl what ha considers
tho possibility cf obtaining it.

"On tho return of tho Roichfuohror SS I shall sulnit your poply to¬
gether with your letter, a copy of which I have alroady forwarded to tho
SS-Oborgrupp«rvf\iohrer FOHL arvi SS-Grupjxmf\iohr!r Dr. OltAYaTZ. Hoil HitlorJ
by orior of (Signed) Brandt."

Ho sonds a copy to Pohl aid Orawitt and a third copy for information
as wo boo on tho next pago.

THE rSSIDEhTi The Tribunal will now stanl in roeoss for fifteon .
ninutoo.


Court 1

Ze c. lc—---S— 11-1-errir.-.O


T-.Z .-Uils.-Jtl: The Irioun 1 Is - . n In lr. easel.n.

.<R. .'.C-U.SI": If the Trl3un-:1, please, ..a .. d retched
uitent £0-045, vnicn 'will :e rr>sacutlon £• iolt 15o. This
ir - l3tter d.~tc,d 7 =ecteaT>er 19=2 fr - Oewr.ld - chi i
•erlcr.d, rnd la .-leo lr. reepor.ee tv copy of lwiier
v 1 V-- •ri&in lly wer.t to hlu iar and whioh 1 = nr
?r sec-;ti r. ixr.loit 153.

"Oe r C*.=rrl.e lerlrr.d, I received today copy of the
litter yf .C August 1942 of the Horstn«l =t'ff :> ,\\x
vj -r.V-.n- oldiun.

•I c a infers ;/ i th-1 i e^.^atl n the Hcioh
la der 33 t.oi up this ero’dlaa * ny months : = v. o:.noe

tlae • e hr vs been oo-oooracin intensely vitfc *>r.
dr as lr. Eresder.-Ha-.ebaul, to wh. - the Helen Larder iavo
Cde oxset order t., continue t.' experiments with c lr.dlua
re apecl°l order rni to abstain fr. a any ju.llo-tl. n .

.-.til cna conclusion of these ex3erliu.j.'.to end -na e:a*ot
results -re on u»nd.

“I ayeelf .wo ;erson-*ll.- instituted the no c . 51; tione
vet.: the director of the 3ioic* d ic’l Institute .. d-oe, Hr.

.‘sc ., ind ^leo e.roervlaa Che ex-erlsonta pere a 11/,

ther n 1 th the physician of ii'ln Detnrtosnt, cr- 0 ’:er~
curab«nnf uehror Or. Lollint.

"Only -lest Tuesday I wti with him -vreon*lly lr.
-ndebeul, -hera re hove informed -.•urselves of tnedwee of
:.o experiments

n I ’38110ra t.vt cm- .--.tear is ovntlr.uin. veil, from
mv -joint tf -/law -leo. If ca *ra interested I esll
-’urc ;-ju from Cima to time. hail Hitler, -ouvs, --v.’.-",
-£h a copy to the defendant Rudolf Brpr.dt and c to


s lector vae lr. reference to Prosaoutl.3 ir-lalt


.r-rltz.


Court 1

3so. 16-a— 0£S-18—1-^ e r r ln-KD*

155. This Is e letter from Oswald Pohl to the defendant
Pud-'If BrrT.it, dr tel 7 September 1942.

■X.y deer Brrr.dt; I hesten to transmit to you r. copy
of :y letter to the Jeputy Gauleiter In Jiiederdonau, SS-
Obsrfuehrcr X. Garland.


525-a


16 Dec.-i.-GE5-13-2-Perrin-HD
Court 1

"Please Inform the Raich Looder of 55 troops that I
-i.r6 nally went to Radeboul lo.6t Tuesday to be convinced
,f the state of affairs. The natter la running saoothy.

I huvo now Interested 95-Obersturab-nnfuchror LoUlng.,

”o have agreed with Madous t transfer the experiments to
ur o noontrntl n comp as soon as possible. I have sont a
copy of this letter t, the Rule' doctor 55 end police 35-
Grupponfuohror rr fosa-r Dr. Cirawltr. With beat regards,
hell Hitler, Youre Pohl."

The next oxnlblt will be Dooucunt K0-043, whloh will bo
Pr sc action -xhlblt 157. This Is a letter again from .Gor-
l-r.6. t" the defendant Rud-lf Rrondt, dated 14 October 1942.

"Dear Comrade Br-ndt: 33-Oborgruppcnfuohror Pohl has
Informed me that the doctor of his .'.-'In Office Is alroody
collaborating »flth the kadaus Biological Inctltuto fur
rcooarci* r. the effects of caladlua aoguinuc, 30 that tho
r /gostl n of my District Ho in Office Under, Dr. Fohrlngor,
bcc -os obs loto. I have today suggested to tho Oborgruopon-
fiehrer, that Dr. Fehrlngor bo allowed to try to produco n
synthetic onlndlum eogalnun in*oollcborati n with an
mp.vtnnt Vienna biologist.

*Vnfortunatoly, I must give a negative reply to your
question e to whether Dr. Fehrlngcr has tho plnnt In
q c »tl r r. vnliable. He considers the procurement of oala4
Hum seg lnum possible by chchlcrl moans.

"It Is also conceivable that -no or the other of tho
Ht-h.usoa wr.ich -re located Ir. our climatically proforablo
Istrlct culd be used for experimental purposes in ordor
- bo nolo to cultivate the plants at le-at t" a auf.'lclont

xtoht for exoerlm-r.tr'1 purposes.

’I sh aid be grateful If I c.uld obtain the opinion of
the - ich Leader In this matter «nd suggest that Dr. Fehrln-or


524


15 Dco-«-GE5-ia-2-Porrln-HD
Court 1


collrborato with SS-Obersturcbannfuohrer Dr. Lolling.

Hell Hitler, Yours, X. Gerland.■

Tho next doouaent la NO-C 48 . It Is a letter from the
defendant Rudolf Brandt to S8-Obergruoponfuehrer Pohl, datod
25 Ootobcr 1942.

■Dear Obergrupoenfuehrer, I as sending you the copy of a
letter of S3 Oborfuehrer Gerlond and a carbon copy of my
r.nswor*


524a


lo -eo-.T-jiS-Is-^-Porrln-(.’iX)
Court No. 1.


* I couldn't aaX the f.slohafuobrer 53 but aa convin¬
ced that he will certainly welcome the ex-erlcents to *'
produce oalaUum asgulnum synthetically.

"I -'ould be grateful to you ifvou see to it that
S3~Obera?urnbar.nfuahror 3r. Lolling contacts Dr. Fehrlngor
in this •natter."

Document .JD-04S which will be prosecution 160 — yes,
169. It is a letter signed by Rudolf Brandt to Gerlond, and
It is the one undoubtedly referred to in Ruiolf's letter
to ?ohl. It la anted the 25 October 1942.

"Dear Ocerfuohrer, *he neiohafuehrer SS Is \t present
aw.«y on official business. Therefore I oannot lnfora h;a
of the oontonto of your letter which you wrote on 14 October
1942, I Know however that he would agree to a collaboration
of Dr. Fehrlnger with 33 Obersturnbannfuehror Dr. Lolling*

"I have forwarded a copy of your letter-to Oburgru}>-
uohrur roh» with request to act nccordln;ly, You will
certainly obtain a reply from his office within the next
days. Signed -auiolf Brandt.*

This oonpletes the documents on the medicinal strll-
izatlon Ph-se of the case. The Tribunal will find that In '
the affidavit of the lefendant .a dolf Brandt, which lo Pros¬
ecution -.uriblt 1 * 1 , he states ‘hat experiments on concen-
-r.tion camp Inmates were actually car.’lod out with Cala.’lun
segulnun. The Prosecution very frankly concedes that It has
no »^roof that this drug was effective In sterilizing people,
'e have found nc cne who was actually st-rlllzed with It.

- submit that It 16 without question a crime In any uvont.

I very earnestly hope that the iru; did not produce a >jrma-
r,ant sterilization, and we can all be happy that if It did
shoy verv net able ap.arently to oroduce the plant from


15 Joo- J T-j_5-16-‘ T —Perrin-(AX)

-curt So. 1

which they obtained this drug on a very large scale.

I turn now to the documents dealing with X-ray ster¬
ilisation. Iha first of which Is a rather Ion.- affidavit
by the defendant Viktor Brack, and that is Document NO-426.

r "r* \ < -

DA. 3£tV£nU3 (Counsel for defendant Xarl Brandt):
lir. President, I object to the reading of this document,
according to the doldon aulo of


525a


Oourt No, 1


«


evidence, only th- teat evidence can bo brought here.

t

Here the witness Is a defendant In the courtroom himself.

-ha statement which ha has -ado baa boon established of
leaser value. For my client I have considerable objections
a;alnst this document. I could not cross examine the
witness If the document is road now anl later examination
of thj iefondar.t Sraok, If he 3hould come to th: witness
3tand, would not vlpo out the impression which this
document will nok« on the Court now. For that reason,

I object.

«R. XoH.J»5f: If the.-tribunal please, the document
which we had Just oome to deals with the question of
-.utn.masla as well as X-ray aterlllration. It was my plan
to read this affidavit lr. full because I think that Is
necessary In order to underat*nd the part on X-ray
sterilization.

,»u to the objection, as to its aUlsalblllty at this
tine, It see os to me quite clear that this affidavit made
'ey a defendant is aimlsalble on any one of a number of
r unis. *o certainly admitted Into the record already a
jubstar.tia’ number of affidavits by various defendants in
the dock, vhloh, cf course, not only contained admissions
Against tiiat particular defendant, but also ajalnst, perhaps
some of hi a co-wcr hers, .»s to the rl.$ht of cross examination
I cannot soy — Brack la a ioiendant'here and he mav take
the stand, and I certainly assume that the counsel for Karl
5 ran It car. call him as a vitness and cress examine him as
to the mutters r.ere stated; and I assume that he may do so
at the ccnci-slcn of the realm.: cf this affidavit If ho
as desires. However. I do not thine that It la l..cumbent
■ipcr. the Prosecution If tney wish to introduce a stato^e-itt


53c


16 Jeo-i-^3-ia-4-?arrlrv-(.JO
Court No. 1


saaa by a defendant vhloh contains admissions against him
primarily, they don't have to call him to the stand to do
so. I submit that the document should be admitted now.


52c a


16 E60^-J?-19-1*.Moo
Court So. I

TEE ?R25SD3i7i Tbo objection to tha adaission of tho docunont
fit this tine is overruled.

k. =. MoH^'SYi This docieseat NO-U26 will ba Prosaoution Exhibit

16Q.

"I, Vilctor Eeraonn Brook, boing d«ily sworn, dopose ond stotoi

l. I was born in Haeren, Gernany, on Ilovenber 9, 190k °nd studiod
Soonoaio Soionoo froa 1923 mtil 1928. In Deoeraber 1939 I Joinod tha
KSb.-P ond ct tha sene ti-e tho SS. My party nusbor is 173388 and ay

S3 nisaber is 1$J*0. Ir. tho straor of 1932, Phillip Bouhlor, then Roioh
kanagor of tho SSDiJ, oppointod no to tho "Brown Houso" in f'wiioh. In
1934, whan Roiohsleitor Bouhlor was oppointod Chiof of tho Chanoollojy
oC tt>. P\wihr*r of tha ::SDA?, I w: a oppointod his Chiof of Stcff ond
lotor. In 1936, Chiof of Donartnent II of this offioo, looatod in
Borlin. In ocoordanco with ay position, I hold tho titlo of Roiohsomts-
loitor. Eventually, I rocoivod tho rank of Obordionstloitor. In this
oopcoity, ay duties woro of on odninistrotivo nature os oorsonol repre¬
sentative to Bouhlor 03 far os Loportoont II wos oonoornod,

2. By rocsor. of this position ond boocuso of ay porsonol o^taot
with Bouhlor, I obtoinod ccplo kr.owledgo of tho dotails of stony of tho
aotlYitios in whioh Bouhlor ond various other high ranking personalitios
portioipatod, Fror. ti-« to tiao, I h?4 disoussions with Bouhlor and
other porsons participating in cotivities with which this office wan
cor.oomod. In ay position I wns nblo to rood c vast anoint of corres-

pondonc.< addressed to Bouhlor, received ordors froo hio, and in nu-
norous ins ten cos I personally handled, or. ry own initiative, v rlous
details of tho pcrtioular cr.ttors involved.

3. Duo to pry position, I p/.ined oonploto krowlodgo of tho Euthanasia
Frogran (iloroy Killing Frogran). Thorofore, 1 to nblo to sake tho
following st tcaont on this sifcject*

7HZ 5-TH.^:ASL. FRGG3.1I *

1*. Ihi Sufchnnnsir. Frogran w s initiated in tho sinnor of 1939
Hitler issued _ saarat order to Profossor Dr. &rl Brandt, Roioh


l6 Eeo-L-CP-1 5-1 -Pri co
Court So. I

Cocrissiocor for -odict.1 cr.d Syclth Kctters, r-r.d nt tint t: v personal
rhyfioinh to the Fuehrer, cr.d to Phillip oouhlcr, oh-rginr the- with
responsibility for the


527 (<*)


16 Doo-»-C?-19-2-Prico
C6'jt Ko; i—

jdllir.- of h'.TV-r. beings who ware not oblo to live, thvt is. ' '.o =cording

of o •eroy death to incurably insane persons. Prior to tha is-uar.oe
of this secret order, Bouhlor had a conference with Dr. Brtndt and Dr.
Leonard# Conti, the Roioh Cniof for P*>Uo Health rnc Socr-tary of St'to

in tb« Ministry of interior. On tho basis of this order of Hitlor,

A*

Bouhlor end Brandt wore to soleot doctors to otrry out this progron.
Zatsnuoh os tho insane asyluas and other institutions w Jr e functions
of the Ministry of Interior, Dr. Herbert Lindor. booano tho reprosontatlvo
cf tho Ministry of Interior. Dr. Karl 3rr*dt and Phillir Bouhlor appoint¬
ed Frofessor Dr. Bayde and Frofdssor Dr. L'iotschc along with several
othor nodical aer. to dio in the exeoution of this Euthanasia Progrnn.

5, ’ Prcfossor Dr. KcrJ Brand* wes ir. charge .of the nodioal seotior.
of the Euthanasia Frogrer. In this oepeoity, • s shown in the chart 1
have drawn dated 12 Soptonbor 19*6, Dr. Brandt ^pointed as his
doputles Frofossor noyde and Frofossor Xlotsoho. In ohnrf/ cf the
r.dninl itrative off loo undor Errndt was first Ur. Boteo and tor Ur.
filers, throo different nones woro used by Brandt's soatlon ir. order
to disguise the activities of the organisation. Tho naoos Of the

organisation wore as follows:

Eoioh ..ssoolaticr, - Hospital and Kursing Ssfcablisteer.ts

Charitatlo Foundation for Institutional Cr.ro
lan oral Patient ran sport Corpor* '.ion

6. ir. the early stages of this ? rogrr S , Dr. Karl Brar.dt visited
-Phillip Bouhlor md di sous sod with hin nary dotrils of tr'n progr-n.

,.s natter of fact, after such votings between -r'ndt ^r.d Bouhlor,

I received irony orders, noro often fro-. Souhlor then fron Brandt directly.

7. In cl* oapeoity as Chief of C-fice II of Bouhlor'= Chancellory,

I w-:s ordered tc carry out tha administrative details cf the Euthanasia
Progron.. My doouty was uorr^r Blor.konburg, who oventu- Uy boc-TO try
successor, that is. La the beginning of !«* Khun I iolnod * .o *affon S3
Von. oegoner, He tab. Yorborg, and Dr. Hov..lr:nn war. nerbors f try sir-ff.

6. In tho Ministry of Interior, Dr. Linden was La charge of the


526


iS reo-^-vT-lS-J-Frise
C ourt So. 1

Suthraasir. Progrea end 'si. deputy vr.. Councillor Trrnhe. ’ha Depart-
sent for Public He- 1 th of the Ministry of Interior had authority over
nil in sene *f tttcHBftidV

rs veil /-a the offico of Dr. 3rmdt bad close liaison in order to e'
efficiently operate this SBitbannsi* Prograr..

tel pgocsrras

5 . 3 y order of Dr. Linden, the Dirac* .rs of Ml intone rsyluae in
the Belch hr.d to fill out questions ires for each patient vithin their
Institutions. These questionnaires were drafted by 3auhler, Hcyde,
Sietsche end others in scverrl of their nrny conferences. Then the
questionnaires wsr. forvrrded to the Ministry of Interior to be
distributed to the various Insane nsyluns red sinilrr institutions.
Theoretic'lly Dr. Linden's office had the questionnaires returned end
then forvrrded then to the rdninlstrative section of the offico of Dr.
3rntdt.

The progrna was —■

I ra sorry. Tour Honors, there rre nbout two or three words there
that I c-n't reed.

■ — the photostats of each ouestionnrl re were to be cent to the

office of Dr. Bread*, to detemino the status of each patient. Tho
penal of experts consisted of about 10 to 15 doctors. I don't rcaeaber
the nrnes of all the neebers of this penal but Dr. Pfrnnnuellcr, Dr.
Scbucann, Dr. Prlthauscr. and Dr. Rcr.r.aux are fresh in ay nenory ir.
this connection. Sr ch of these experts indie* ted by aahing n certain
coanent in the Questionnaire whether or not the patient could be
transferred to an observation institution rad eventuMy hilled. Then
the oiestionnrlrt) was forwarded to a chief ox-art. According to the
regulation, the chief expert va. only entitled to order the transfer
of the patient when Ml four experts voted for the transfer. This
chief expert also arrhed the questionnaire and then subal*. d it to
Dr. Linden who ordered the insane rsylua to transfer tho patient to one
of the observation institutions. Off-hand I can reaeaber. nnong others


529


lo 2 ec-A-J?- 19 ->?rlce (2T)

Caurt !'o. 1

the r.-zea of the following ebservrtioa Institutions: S^lflnc-Hrrr,
Ssnpten, Jea*. Bueh, Arasterg.


lb Teo-Ar-J?-—Price (3£)


10. At those institutions the jrtients were under the observation
of the doctor in charge for r period of fron one to three rontho. The
physician bed the right to exeapt the patient fron the prog, a if he
decided that the petient we* not incurable. If he r.-;reed with the
opinion of the chief expert, the petient vr.s trmsferred to a so-crllcd
Scthannsla Institution. I cen recell the nraes of these 3uthrop.sir
Institutioasi Grpreneck, under Dr. Schunrnn; 3rr>r.denburg, under Dr.
Eennecke; Herthein, under Dr. Henncux; Sesuenstein, under Dr. Schnplen-
bech; Erdraar — I do not reneeber unde: whose leadership — 3err.burg,
under Dr. Bshnks or Dr. Seeker.

In these Institutions the patient w-s killed by urns of gr.s by the
doctor in charge. To the best of ay knowledge, rbout fifty to sixty
thousand persons were killed in this wry in the period fron rutuan
1939 -o the suaner of 19 M.

11. The order issued by the Fuehrer to 3rmdt md Bouhler wrs secret
end never published. The Suthanrsln Progrm itself wrs kept i*s oecrct
ps possible, rad for this rerson relptlves of persons kill* J in the
course of the progrfe were never told the rerl cm so of dbpth. Tho
derth certificates issued to the relatives errried fictitious onuses

of depth such ns herrt frllure. All persons subject to the Zuthpnnsin
Progrrn did not have nr. opportunity to decide whether they wanted r.
cercy depth, nor their relntivea contrcted for rpprovnl or disppprovr.l.
The decision was purely within the disc otion of the doctors'. The
Progrra wrs not restricted to these onsss in which the person wrs
'In ext reals*.

12. Hitler's ultiante reason for the estrbliohacnt of the Suthnnnoin
Progrm in Gcmmy vpb to oliainrte these people confined to lnsrne
pB/luas Pnd siailrr institutions who could no longer be of any uso to
the Reich. They were considered useless enters rad Hitler felt thrt

by exterainating these so-called useless enters, it would be possible
to relieve aore doctors, sple end fenale nurses, and other prconnel,
hospital beds md other frcilitles for the use of the Arced "orces.


530


16 Doc-A-w—19-5-rric e
Court Ko. 1


REJCE COMLTTTSS FCd RESE A R CH Of HSREDHAHf
DISEASES A:D CGJ1S7 IT ' 7I0&AL SUSCEPTIBILITY
TC SEVERS DJSEASiS. _._

13. This cocnitteo, which ms also a function of tho Euthanasia
Program, was an organization fcr the killing of children who were born
ncntdly deficient or bodily deforced. All physicians assisting ab
births, nidwivos, and natomity hospitals noro ordered by tho iiinistry
of Interior to report such cases to tho office of Dr. Linden in tho
Ministry of Interior. Then oxperts in tho nodical section of Dr. Brcndt's
offico wuro ordered to give their opinions in oach case. As a natter of
fact, tho caapleto filo on oach caeo was sent to tho office- of Bouhlor
and Dr. Brandt in order to obtain thoir opinions and to docido tho fate
of oach child involved. In cany cases those children r^ro to bo ojgratod
upon in such a Ba nn er that tho result was wither conploto recovery or
doath. Death rosuited in a majority of thoso oases. Tho progr-c was
inaugurated in tho surr--or of 193?. Bouhlor told ao that Dr. Linden had
tho order to ask for tho consont of tho aronts of oach child concomod.

I do not know how long this program continued sinco I .ioined tho Yfnffon-
SS in 19L2.

TIE COHHSCTIOei B-TKZEN TIE ztthaiiasia
rRCGRAM AI.T) SS BRICADEFUSHReR GKBCCMZ

li,. In 1911, I rocoivod an oral order to discontinue tho Eutlumasia
Program. I rucoivad this order oithor freo Bouhlor or fron Dr. Brandt.

In crd;r to preserve tho personnel rolievod of those dutioc and to havo
tho opportunity of starting a now Euthanasia Program aftor ho ..ar, Bouhlor
roquos jd I think after a conferonco with Hi.-=oior, that I Bx. i this person-
nol to Lublin nd put it at tho disposal of SS 3rig-.dofuohrcr Glebocnik.

I thon hed tho impression that thoso people w u ro to be used in tho exten¬
sive Jewish Labor e mps run by Globocnik. Later, howev.r, nt tho end of
19L2 cr tho beginning of 1>L3, I found out th-t they wore used to assist
ir. tho aasc extermination of tho Jews, which was them already ccnraon know¬
ledge in higher party circles.

15. Among the doctors who assisted ir. tho Jewish extermination
pregr-ca wore Eherle arxi Schumann. ScouEam. performed nodical oxir-rinents

531 ^


16 Dcc-A-J?-19-6-?ricQ
Court So. 1.


or. prisoners in Auschwitz. it vould have boon impossible for* thcs.. non to
participate in such things without the personal knowledge and consent of
Earl Brandt. The order to send the so non to the East could have boon
given only, by Hinder to Brandt, possibly through Souilcr.

THE STERILIZATICh* rftCGRAH

16 . In 19Ulj it was an ‘open secret* in high pnrty circles that the
powers that ho intended to oxperimnt tho entire Jewish population of
Go many and the occupied countrios. I and ny collaborators, oopocially Dr.
Hevelaanc and Dlankenfcurg, considered this intention of tho party loadors
not worthy of tho Gorn-n nation and aanki.-xi in general. Therefore, wo doci-

dod to find another solution to tho Jewish jroblon which would terd to bo loss

• * • —--—•- -

radical than conploto oxteroimtion cf a raco. Tlo devolopod tho idoa to doport
all Jons ton far-off placo and I can recall that Dr. Howlnann suggested tho.
island of tadngascar for thia purpose. In uy office, wo drafted such a plan
and s’lbaittod it to Bouhlor. Ctovionsly, this plan was not ncooptcblo, so
we roue! ;d tho conclusion that sterilisation would bo tho an: _r to tho
Jewish probloc. Sinco sterilisation would be a conplox program, wo thought
of sterilization by noans of X-Rays. In 19li, I proposed tho sterilization
cf dona by uoans cf X-Rays to Bouhlor, but it was not accepted. Bouhlor
told re that such a pregr-an of sterilisation by noans of X-Rays would not bo
feasible as Kitlor was against it. I continuod to work on this program and
eventually outoittod a now project to t?io Roichsfuohrer SS, Hoinrich Himlor.
Dr. ffcvalmnn submitted a report which indicated that tho sterilization of
hir.an brings by roans cf X-Rays was radically irpcssiblo. Sovcral norths Later
Dr. Schumann received tho order to carry out experiments on liman b-ings to
dot.n-.ino the effocts of X-Ifcys for si rilization purposes. Hiaslur requested
that th_ nano of" a suitable doctor should bo given to his to carry out theco
exparizsnts. I 60 not think that I suggested Dr. Schmann, who ^r.s expert
in tho Sithanasin Program and Director of a Euthanasia Institution, to Himlor.
As far s I rervrbor. Dr. Schxzaann submitted a report on his ^xrinents to
cc or directly to Bouhler. I do not know -bother the sterilization of tho

532


16 Eec - 6 -A-T?-1 Q -’’-Ft ice (FjC)
C-urt I


Jc-vs wpt actually carried 'u. hec»usc, r I said Were, I Joined
the tfaffen SS pat* had n' farther dealings vith this natter. Signed,
7Uct--r Brack, -nrn v crg, 14 October 1946."

The reason I here reed this affidavit in fall at this tine is
becaaaa it gives the C-art *n ldoa h'.v the Butharnsla Pr gran fitted
in with the oxters!nation cf the Jevs as veil as the aterllisati n
of the ocvn and other so-called enenics -f the Belch. This affidavit
npJecs it very clear that the -cn vh- were trained 'ver the period
1939 t 1941 ir. the extern ina.ti'-n inatituti ne hero in C-ernar.y on
ins*r.e pers'ns were transferred than t the Bast and v'-rked lr. c^lla-
v -rati'n vith C-loVcnlk and "thcra in the externinatl'n Of the Jev«
there; and we also find that a pr'nioent nenher 'f the Buthanaaia
Pr gran,. Tr. Schaarnn, va 0 active vith X_Bay sterilisation in the
concentration c«=p at Auachvit*. *c, of c-urso, vill h«.vc 'ccasi n
t rofer hack to this d-ennent vhen v< c'n* t th«t portion of the
c«oc dealing in dotall with the Buthanasia Pr'gran.


533


16 Dee.-A-AT!>-2C-l-5urn3 .

Court *•>- l'~ _

*

HCKANEJ: We \am now to Docuaent Ho. 203 and which will be Pro¬
secution Exhibit l6l. This is a letter fr*-a the defendant 2rack to the
Raichfuahrer. It's dated 26 Harch 19U1.

"Dear ^eichafuehrori

Enclosed herewith for your informtioo is the result of the
investigations into thi possibility of sterilization or castration respect-
iTOly by moans of X-rays. I request your instructions as to what further
theoretical or practical steps, if nny, are to bo token in this mattor.

Hoil HITLSRI
"BRACK"

HI. CHANET 1 On the next pago of the English Docunent Bo< we find
tho report referred to in the hover letter. This is part of the sane docu-
ssont and is, * f courso, p<rt of Exhibit 161.

"Report on Ecprin-nts concerning X-ray Castration "The ox port-
aonta in this field are concluded. Tho following result can bo con¬
sidered as ostahlished air’ adequately based on scientific rosonreh.

"If any oorsens are to ‘>0 storilltod pomanonUy, this result

can only bo attained by applying X-rays in a dosago high enough to

produce castration with all its consoquoncos, since high X-ray losarcs

dostroy tho internal 20c rot ion of thj ovary, or of tho testicles

respectively. Lower dosagos would only temporarily oralyco tho pro-

creative capacity. Tho consoqu jifces in question are for oxanplo tho

•

-•lea. penrc.noa of rojnstruation, cliaatoric phonendna, ohangos in tho
capillary ?rcwth, modification of ojtabolisn, etc. In ary case,
attention =ust be drawn to these .disadvantages.

"Th? actual dosago can be given in various ways, and the irradi-
ation c-an take place quite imperceptibly. The necessary local dosago
for sen is tpp to 600 r, for women 300 to 350 r. In general, an
irradiation period of 2 ninutes for non, 3 ninutos for weraen, with tho
highest voltage, a thin filter and at a short distance, ought to bo
- sufficient. There is however, a disadvantage that has to bo put up with:
?.3 it is inpossible unnoticeably to cover the rest of the ’ r*y with

53U


lfiDcc^-A7T>-^>-2^Xxm3
Court No. 1


laad, the other tissues of the \o*y will be Injured., and radiologic
nalaiae, the so-callei "rcentsorkatcr", will ensue. If the X-ray
intensity is too Irish, those parts of the skin which the rays have
reached will exhibit synptaaa of burns - varying in severity in
individual casos - in the oourse of the following days or woeks.

"One practical vny of proceedim would be, for instance, to let
the persons to be treated approach a counter, whero thoy would be
asktf tc answer ease questions or to fill in forms, which would taka
tten 2 or 3 sdnutos. The official sitting behind tho counter could
operate the installation in such a way as to turn a switch which
would activeto the two valvoe sinultarwously, since tho irradiation
has to op*:rate froa both si^es. VI th a two-valvc installation about
150 to 200 pursons c-uld th-r. bo sterilized per day, and thoreforu,
with 20 such installations as many as 3000 to UOOO persons par day.

In cy ostimtlon a lar^or daily nunbor could not in any case bo aont
away for this purpose. ;.s to tho ox pons as for such a two-vnlvo system,
I can only vivo a rou-h ostLmato of aprroxlactoly 20 , 000 - 30,000 SM.
Additionally, howover, thora would bo tho cost of tho
a new buil'linp, oca use adequately oxtonsivo protective installations
would havo t^ bo ^rovidod for the officials on duty.

"In tumary it nay bo said that, ha vine regard to tho present
state of rftdiolofdoal technique and research, mss sterilizations by
neans of T.-rays can bo carried out without difficulty. Howover, it
scoos to bo infeasible to do this in such a way that tho parsons con¬
cerned do not sooner or later roalito with certainty that they have
boon sterilized or castrated by X-rays." Sirned "Brack".

Ml. KC&lEIs I think this docuront is so clear and complete
that any ccaoent by ac would be entirely out of place. Ho turn now to
Document K>-2CU which will be Prosecution Exhibit 162. This is a
letter free tho personal staff cf H Lx i l er to Victor Brack and this is
dated 31 Decccbor 19U1—no, I an sorry, ycur Honor, that*3 dated

535


16 Tec.-^-ATTVaCu^Durns
Court Ho* 1


12 !ty 19U1. Thcro*s sore handwritten fi~ure3 on the top which referred
to ft later late. However, the date of the letter is 12 riay 19U1 and it is -
addressed to the d e fo rc ia n t Viktor Brack.

■A little while before his departure to Greece by plana the Tteichs-
fUohrexvSS ’ave no the order to thank you very such for your report about
the X-ray castration oxperiaanta forwarded to us with your letter of 23
Harch 19U1, Ho has road tho report with interest an! will discuss this
question with you the first opportunity.

IT.. ICHANSf: k copy was sent; to tho Chief of the Security Tolico and
of the Security Service SS Hajor-Goneral Hoyirich. The next document will
bo KJ-205 and will be Ircsecution Exhibit 163. It's again from the dofond-
aad Viktor Brack to the Heiohsfuehrer datod 23 May 19b2.

"Dear Toichefuehrer,

"On the Instructions of Belch-Loader Bouhlor I placed aono of my non -
already seno tioo ago - at tho dis;osal of Bri-adefuehrer OLODOCNIX to
execute his spocial-aission. On hie renewed requost I now transferred
additional porsonnol. On this occasion 3rlgadofuohror GLOBOCBTX statod his
opinion that the whole Jow-actlon should be coc.lotod ns quiokly asposalblo
os that ono would not got caught in the aiddlo of it one day if some diffi¬
culties should oako a stoppage of tho action necessary. T u yrursolf,

Roichs fuehrer, &avo alroady expressed y>ur view, that work should progress
quickly for roasons of cosouflage alone. 3oth points which in priciplo
arrivo at the sano result are nore than Justified os far as ay own oxpor-
ierco poos j nevertheless would you kindly allow ne to subnit the following
argument!

■Ado nr tc Millions of Jews, in Europe are, I figure, at least 2-3
' Mill ions of Czn and wcaox, who aro fit cnourh for work. Considering tho
extraordinary 'ifficultios, tto labor problem presents us with I hold the
vi_w that ttesa 2-3 nillions should be specially selected and preserved.
Thi3 can however only be done, if at the sane tine they are rendered in¬
capable to propagate. About a year ar;o I reported tc you that apents of

=ir» have completed the experiments necessary for this purpose. I wculd

. 536


16 ^-^TD-ZO-ii-Lorrj

r-V Jr ~- jh. •' r,~-

like to recall those facts once sore. Sterilisation ai Tv- m-.n y porfcreed
or. rersons of heriditary '.iseasod, is h.re out of the question, because it
takes too lone and is to expensive. Castration by x-rays however is rot
only relatively cheap, but can also bo porf creed on nany thousands in the
shortest tine. I thirk, that-at this tine it is already irrelevant whether
the :«opl« in question becaae aware of havinc been castrated after sree
wooks or nonthe cnco they feel the effocts.

"Should you, ^eichsfuehrer, decide to choose this way in the interest
of the preservation of labor, then Heichsleiter BOUHISl would be prepared
to place all physicians and othor personnel needed for this work at your
disposal. Likewise he request®', no to infora you, that then I would have
to order tho apparatus so urgently needed with the createst speed.

Heil KITL^il

. Yours

- Viktor BTACK"

iO. XHaNETi Tour toners will recall that I a to tod that wo-aro rot
hero concerned with sterilisation carried out on persons pursuant to tho
Goman statuto dealing with horoditary diseases an* tho sarao statonent is
aado In this letter in Juno 19U2 by tho defendant Brack. It saysi
"Sterilisation, as coreally performed on \ orsone with hereditary diseases
is hero out of the question because it takes too Ion.-.'' They wore rot

usinp sterilisation hero as a way to elirdnate hereditary diseases. They

•

wore using sterilisation to ccmit tho orino of conccido.


537


16 Deer--ATD-21-l~arrc«

Cou rV lfe. 1 —__


The next dccurwnt will be »-206, which is Prosecution Exhibit lfilu
This is a letter free BAnrich Hinder, dated 11 August 19h2, to -rear

Crack":

"It is *nly today that I have the opportunity to acknowledco the
receipt cf your letter cf 23 June. I an positively interested in seeing
that the sterilisation by X-rays is tried out at least once in ono canp
in a series of experiments.

"I will be very such obligod te the Ifelehleador Bouhler if, to begin
with, he would place the expert physic if ns for the aeries of experiments
at our disposal.

"I will nail a copy of this lottor to tho Reich Physician SS and to
the coapetont Chief of tho Main Offico for Concentration Canps.

Hail Hitlori
Tcurw H. Hirmlor"

A copy to Fohl and a copy to Orawitr "For inforaction. By order" and the
fonlliar initians E.?„, boiiv: tho dofendant Rudolf Brandt.

Jfcw wo turn to Docuaont JD-207 which will be Prosecution Exhibit 165.
This lottor is doted Hi August 19U2 and it is froa Rlankonburg who, your
Honors will rocall, was mentioned in tho Brack Affidavit as his doputy and
it is wrltton to*

"Dear Roichsfuehrer:

"3y order of So id or Colonel Brack, who in tho noantino has boon trans¬
ferred to the SS-Oivision Prinx Bugen, I acknowledge receipt of your
letter of 11 August 19 L2 concerning s tor ill ratio ns. „s poraanent deputy of
Oborfuehrer Brack, I shall ircodiately take tho necessary measures and get
in touch with the Chief of the !toin Offices for the Concentration Camps.

Boil Hitlori

Tours very respectrfflly

Blankenburg."

The next document is H>-20Q which will be Prosecution Exhibit 166. This

is another letter froa Blaricenburg/ dated 29 April 19Ui, to his "Doar

533


Reichsfuehrer:"


a 3y order of Hcich Deader 3-nihler I suhait to yu as an ea-
t a work of Dr. Horst Schunann on the influence of X-rays on


ha»a genital glands. _

■Prc-Ti'ualy y-u have asked Scr.irr Colonel Brack to perfora this
work, and y'U reported it by providing the adequate aa.terial in the
Concentration Cc=p juucbritx. 1 point especially to the second part
-f this w-rk, which shows that hy these acar.s a castration f sales
is alsost i=p-sel''le or requires an effrt which d-cs not pay. -
have convinced nysclf, the operative castration requires not n.rc
than 6 t' 7 clnutcs, ar.d therefore can he porforned aore rolla''ly and

culckcr than the castration by X-rays.

>» • • •

"So-n I shall >e a>>lo to su'-sit a c'-ntlmiati'n of this work to


y-u.

Hell Hitler!

four -uch devoted Blankcnhurg."
And attached ....I thught we had the report v ut apparently wo don't.
But at this tine I would ask the Tribunal to call to the otsnd the
witness, Chain Baiittkl. *c hr.vo /nly this n-ming at ah ut 9:30 put
in the defendants' inf'nation ccnur tho required r. tico of tho
calling of this witnoss. If there is any .bjcctior. *r any showing "f
inconvenience on the part -f the’Defenst C-auiocI why, of course, wo
Will postoac his exaninati'n until t«a rrw a-rnlng. H-vover, if there
is n such rejection it would fit in bettor into.tho rconrd at this


p n lnt, I think.

TBS FBBSXXS5T: Is there any object!'n o n the part of tho Defense
Counsel t' calling the witnesr, Chain Balitskl, at this tire?


I hear n-r.c. The witness win >c called


CBiXlt BaLI-ZKI, a witness t"k the stand and testified as follows:


^ lo your nan* Chain BalltskiT


^ I win ®d = inister the o*th. H'ld up yur right hand and


16 Dec * 6 ;J. kTT> 2 L-1~I*:tcv (JJC)

I-


I Bvepr that the erri<*ccc« I ehall tire vlll >e the truth, the
vh^le truth, n< n^thia^ hut the truth, 9 * help ae Goi*.


539 *


16 5<.cTD-21-3-S rr *

Z urt j'. 1


.. I swosr that I will t^ll the truth an’, th- full truth, s
h-lr Ocd.

7-L .-ZSZ JJT: Sit d wn.

DE3CT ELJGJUIBW

x ms, scEJirr

i I-ur none is Chela Bnlitzki?

« Yss •

Q when and where wer- y'M I'm?

A Dzlal szyei, r lan.', Z,b FJ ruary 1920.

4 leu art a citizen f 4 lan '?

- Yea. ’

• . * " •

4 *r- y.u Jewish?

. A I-a. ’

••

4 Chat ia ycur ;j, -s-nt ad r-ss?

.. C ns lane c n Lake C- nstnncc.

4 .hr.t la the atr *ct nun^r there in ease.

i. echiefvratr'ssv., 2C.

<1 ..ill y u iv> the 'irl' unal t ah rt atat.n-nt f y ur lifv

hiat'iy?

.i Yes. Should I inswercqtfesti na r shall I tell th-st. ry

nyaelf?

Just n and tell st.ry f y ur lif- hist ry in y ur

jrn * r a.

.. Yea. First, I sh ul. lik- t ask the Cturt that ty non-
sh ul* n t ' - iTvn t tbw . r-ss an- n- ictur-s tc the press. I v lur.- ^
t-ir. as a witness, -hat is eh- first ^hin , end nw I will t-11 ay
lif..

-y arents had a st- r. at D-c r vr.. I attun e, th- he v row
1 cn hi-h sc. .. In 193> the -.mans e r_ - ha! tc .* rc.


1- r. ! i. rkw' in = c-rnc-rn in c- zin in a laun ry si . “ t-r, I was

§ •

:ut in a gh.tt an thv 1st f -%u ust 1 3, there ms a transfer, a
r-s-ttlecent ani I ns sent t «usc..oitz. -n 1 9h2 ay .ar-rats tr^r- r-sett-
1-’ t ether with ay y uner v r th-r. Th.y are n 1 n.-_r livin', .cy t r

5U0


16 C_c-..-..TD-21-3-fcrr.-w-<GJ)-
O urt 1

aiatcra wcr*. ala- ^ut int^ laVr cac/s .n‘ they arc livin- . They ar«-
with sx.


5


16 ^-c-.-.iTD-21-L-Knrr w-(aJ)-
Ccurt 1

I arrive:! in -uschwltx. I ras there in quarentir.. f * r f. ur

weJes. -fter the quarantine, I *as put in can? 3 tj * rit f r rrad bull-

•

in s. I was in aap 3 f r f ur weeks. Then the hi ck secretary t.l_
us that twenty rxn, are.'*, ta-nty t twenty-f ur healthy pcaple, h:.l t,
r«... rt f - r w rk. I r!i«^ri't rep rt. I was a little sus.ici us U cc".use they
sai "twnety t twenty-f ur years al_." They w_re taken away. Later they
cane '-ack. dr n- knew what hn « happeO-1 t then. They iir'n't want t
tell us. Tr.ey were afrai'. They ha.' t - ’ack t w rk iaxrtiately. -
few lays later, th-y .’.id n t call l r volunteers hut, acc riiir tr the
ai^uhot, they t k S»c.le— a . rcu;. I twenty ccn a ,'ie=e. '-cause zy
nan. starts with n B~, I was ne f the ' rst. e ver. tak-n U the wenen's
c.-cp at Biric-nau. . waite ’ abrut an h ur r tra h ura. .. Luftwaffe *ffi-
c.r cat- — a tall nan — :n a c t.rcjclt. h. t k uo t a aachin- snJ

ft "™

sterilised us. H t k a’ ut fifteen r twenty ninut.s. That hurt, an:'.

rwar’j we I to pat ir cl this • r, an.: - ri ht 'ack t - rk. -
h- t w rk v-i 7 har'. S-r. cl us after tw r three *.ys — a': us 'serin
t f-ra. They ha .’ tc w rk anyh w until they fell .rwn cn.‘ then were
taken t a h a; ital -.nl 1 ’ n. t '.eli.v. my f then are : live n w.

>■ ft-r t*r. weeks aft.r th_ st-riliziti n a r‘u f ay e nrartes
l »r 1 “• tak-n n f.- t — we had t~' walk t ..uschwitzl, an-* *. w-re
iv.n an inj-ctl n an: .ut n the erati ntnlle. fe ware t ld nthin .

•- v r - rTMl t et n the ta’1., The porati n was xrf me '. ..y

testicles were r.crve

*

.. -itnesa, !: mt'. afrai'.

« .lca3e -xcua: n» i r crjin .

I W-S t: re t:r-. .eks i. the «uschritz h spitnl. Then there
-a a r.l.cti n* n 6C f ur 1 t w_re tniiim t N. ass- . -ft. r~» .r 'c

• • l

I was afrai:'. an I left the h s ital wi..n I tr.s still sick :n* w.nt ’-.ack
t w rk. Z was put t w rk. I ha t w rk v.ry har an’ I ras ' eaten

••-ry ouch. I i.vnt thr u h a a in an ' 1 was lucky I . t thr u h it.

-Jt.rrar ’s, I was there until the loth f January 19L5-


511


16 Dec -A-;.7D-21-5-E 2 rro-x (sw)

Ccurt Ncl .

On the leth cf January 1S45, the Russians wore to arrive.

\’e had to evacuate. \'e ver.t on foot - a group of o fo yi thou

send people. A few thousand were shot on tho vay. ■ hoovjr c

c uld net hoop up was shot, v;© ware chased, wo wora boaton.

"o h”d tc carry tho guords' baggsgo although vo i oro very

”snk end • o ceno tc Grcss-Roson. Free thoro vo wore

.vocu«tod cenin to Dachau. In D^ohnu I arrived on the 26th

Febru ry J.945. I was th-ro four wooks. !To v/cro jut in

n block — Block 1?. Cn .no side w s Block 17 cr.o on tho

thor side, 21. ?h-ro *.v,ro sio!: pocplo th-ro — Fronch, lolos

r.r.d Russir.ns — thoy hid typhoid fov.r. "6 w„ro put in

bofaon sc wo wculd g.t sick toe but that had no effect _nd,

'ft ir four wooks, '-o ;oro jut in *..'sldlag.r n- r ..^.pfing.

Th-'t is ob ut 60 kilon-t rs free. _»r.ohnu and wo wore , ut tc

••’•ork tharo . "o woro in tho weeds; thoro woro no barracks.

Thero r/.ro big ditches with c vn-odor. roof on top. That is

vhoro ro slopt ell renter. Vo war. very cold. Three e-on

trd a tern blank at. I h'd very little to „at. I hod to work ’

• *

vary hard. ”o fcrd to c rry bogs of conont to tho construct-

•

icn site, ~o h'd tc run; wo v/oro beaten \-ry rr.uch. «v«ry dey
full car lo'-d cf dead poeple *./aro tnkon back fren the
e"cp.

'. '-itn.ss, I v;lll osk ycu a few c*-.sti ns no- which I
■-ill r~r.t y u to ?.a3v* r.

11:380. r -C Cho-d.

This first tins tfc t "cu vero sterilized v/ s in ecteb.r,

1943?

Augurt, Soptocb .r — tfc-t is right?

•

. ind th*t res dteo by nosns of nn X-ray nnchino?

Th t r-s done by rays. I do not know vh.t kind of roys.
i ”C net n dcctcr — I only cy what I know. „ Luftwaffe


542


' 16 Dec 46-A-ATD-21-5-5ferrow
Court No. 1


cffic-r - q tall nan — did that. Th-t is vth t I scv;. I
d n't knew rrh't kind cf rays they wero.

Did tho? protect your thighs vith any sort if 1-cd
sheeting rr cthor c'terinl?

A. v -s, plctos. Two plat-8 wjro put botvoon tho legs.

In splta cf this protocting c t-riel did y u recoivo
burns on your thighs?


16 Doc-..-.?J-£i-5 -K rre- (S' ?
C urt No. 1


<?

.. ^os, I ?c still burned to _y. You con still soo it
tCv'.-7. It is still block.

\ ad tfcon, *s I uni-rst-ond your tosticony, •,,j.rtx-

• “ tolv t~tJ wooks Inter you had ur tosticl s rot-ovod?

... ^ 33 .

’. Do ”C-u knc-* tTfcr tfc't «v“S dcno?

"e. E'.C’uso I ic r. Jow - I knov tfc t cuol*.

Do -^u kncT' nnv cf the d ottrs cr ether .cijlb in

r'*o c- r v»yc did tVaro tMncs to ycu?

• •

. re, but I 'Skid rt ..use: vitz: ""ic dt-s those t-ings?"
I b.-rd cno n r.o. ?ho n.ro cf.Dr. SohUrernn 'r.c. I ronor-borod
th t nocc rnd I roror.bjr it until t .cy but I (i. net know
th?t i rs n nysolf.

. >o r:-»n~ ethor b-’-s vK.ro subjootud t th*sd rays with
•• u tho first tir.o?

... I per tjd on ’-xth cc • -j t'ooty *.oiplo, but tr-nsp-rts

* oro -rrived -11 t?-o tir.o -- ovary fov* days, every fov;
-realcs. ! n" tr'nspcrts arrived.

*. Did .hoy tattoo a nuebor cn yutr firocn vr.ilo ycu
oro in tho o*r.p'

. "'is. I htvo cs nur.bor 132E66.

'. "ill vtu s.ho-• that tc tho Tribunal ,y lot so?

.. ”33. (Indicating t-“.tco to Tr-ibunrl)

~. Do “.u kno' vrhethor cr net any c-f tho th-r boys v.’ho
•yiro sterilized -rith - u diod -s z result tf t j st.ril-
i'.at ion?

.. Fre a t:-e stprilizr.tibn, no. But lat.r may •> jro gos3ud
Tory fov; ro still alivo.

'. Did veu have ; icturos r.:do cf ycu -'lor. u wore hero
ir. "urnborg sovor-1 • ooks :go?

... "her.? In Nurnbqrg? v _s.


16 Dao-A-03&-23-L-S«slaV (*J)
Court I


Z . I vlll show to tho witness pictures which are documents HO.

819 and I ask you If these arc pictures a ado of you ia Hurnborg six
weeks ago?

1 . ?o«.

ljr. XcHa S ST; If the Iribund. please, I offer those pictures ao
Prosecution ftshlblt 167.

JUZXri SZahl-G: I would surest, kr. kcBuney, that thoy bo offored
os 167-, B, 0, D, and 2 If you are offering all of tha;. >

iI3« keE«HIYj You aro quito corroct, Your Honor; I shall.

BY MB* krfUHZT:

-* • *

$ . Vltnocs, you stoto you ere now living in Zonetoaco?

*u Yob.

^ . Aro you living thoro with your sisters?

a . Ycs| cy sisters aro in Xonstunco In a ccununity hauo. Thoy aro
with uc.

0 , . Do thoy know of your condition?


and that is tho roasoa you ..dkod tho Tribunal not to por.ilt
tl.o publishing cf your na:o or plcturoo of you?

A. Yos, that is tho reason. Tho reason is that I huvo uany
friends and I an very unch asi:..ucd. I usk onco aoro that uy nrsjc not
bo published in any vay.

K 2 . HcEaHTI:* I have no further questions—if the dofenso has no
questions to ask.

2nh P.'iSISSft: It is tho order • f tho Tribunal that no photographs
of this witness bo takon and published und no roferonco to his tootlaony
be publlshod by oithor tho accbors of the pross or anyone olso. Do any
t- tho defense counsel desire to cross-oxcclne this witness? Tho Court
will nev rocoss until a*no-thirty tcuorrow a-rning. I wont to aako an

I

fiuaourceuout before we recess. Ia the aorning tho Tribunal will announoo
tao ruling on the witness 'Joff whether ha should bo colled and the natter
*111 be discussed by the - »


-- f£ V-


7

17 3«o-J>-G£LVl-2^FoaWrw(j;)


Court ..’o. 1


Official transcript of the daerloan Military
'tribunal in tha natter of tha Uni tel states
of ..z-rica, against Karl Srandt, ot all.,
aefandants, sitting at Hurnberg, Germany, on
17 Doceaber 1946, 0& , '0-16 , *0, Justice Baa's,
presiding.

T.-_i The Honorable Judges of military

Tribunals.

..liltary Tribunal 2 is nov in. ucaslpn.

Gel save the United States of .eserlca and this
Honorable Tribunal.

There vlll be order in the court.

TH3 TA33ID3.T: Marshal, will you ascertain whether
or not the defendants are all Present.

TAS I.«HSHaL: ..ay it please Your Honor, all the def¬
endants are present In the court.

T J .Ai3IJ3.iT: The Secretary-General will note that
fact for the record.

The Tribunal win now announce its rulln-; In the

natter of the proposed witness Hoff. Tho rulln of the

court will be pronouncod by Judge dobring.

Jil&OiS 32SRXNQ: Gontlenon of tho oroaeoutlon .and the

-efenso, during tho course of tho trial session hell yestor-

Joy afternoon the prosecution node »n oral notion before

the Tribunal th.it one Valter Huff be called to the witness

stand as a court witness. As the Tribunal understands the

•

assertions of the prosecution, they are that tha said Valter
* cf * la believed to have been an eye witness to many of the
allowedly orp^l&al nodical experiments for which the lefen-

^ 8 th * t ho 13 ond ° r thd fjw jyo wit “

ri-Vne 'rosecutlon; that he is being
Peraof.&j held In physical custody by the occupational
authorities-upon suspicion of having been an active

\ v / 5,0


A—- ^ /

-


17 Deo-.J-iiS-l-’-Foater-t-eC)

Court ::o. i

•

participant In auoh ox^erlcents; that he Eay in eorme
subsequent proceeding be indictjd f-r auoh ra-’t‘ oipatlcn
In such experiments and be triad as a war criminal, which
fact la <ncvn to hln; that for this reason the prosecution
la of the belief that the witness may rove to be a hostile
1 tress and consequently, the prosecution does r t care
to call 'hits kb its own witness


5*.ca


17 Jeo-h-:*JS-1-&-?© s te iv (.£)


Court "o. 1

/mi thus vouch for this voracity or credibility. I’ov, on

thj cthw*r hand, doe3 It want to take an unfair advantage

oi the witness by requiring hln to aame statenonto nder

life compulsion of an oath when such statements nay bo used

-;aln8t-'Mn In a subsequent crlnlr.al proceeding.

%

The Tribunal is concerned, cf course, with learning
the whole truth about the charges now -oondin.q a'alnot the
defendants In the doc.:. ..t the same tine, it is -lually
concerned -nth ,/rotoctlru; the rly.ts of ,/orocns who may
oe subsequently brought to trial cn charges of crlnlnallty.

*lth these considerations in mind, the Tribunal naa
cone to the followln.; conclusions:

1. The witness ’/alter Hoff will to called to the
witness stand and placed under -nth as, a court witness
under which statue both the prosecution and thv dofondants
will bo penalttod to examine hln ns though he ••'ere buln.;
Interrogated on cro o examination.

2. In orior adequately to rotect the rights of the wit¬
ness, however, the Tribunal new advises tho prosecution that
whon the said Valter Neff Is-brought to the witness ctar.l

•ml placed ur.ier oath, but before he has given any aater-
l<il testimony, the Tribunal Intends to warn hlr *nat bec¬
ause of possible active participation by hln In c- .'tain


medical experiments conducted at D-.chau concentration
coup cn human subjects, the Aaorltan authorities nav
decide t - file cr-nlr.al charges against hin \r.i try hln as a
war crlE-nal, In which event my state mts n-i-lo b- hln
under oath can «ni -.ay be used ,;oinst hln in such rc-
secution; that c .r.sequently ho any refuse to answer any
questions ^ut to hln which lr. his opinion tend to inori'a-
fr.atc hln.

57


1? juo-.4- Fc3ter-(.«£)

Court Ko. 1

•V- _

If the prosecution vhlahes the defendant called under
:he conditions prescribed by the Tribunal, the Tribunal
vlll have him called as a court vitnoss.

T:.- =.1£3IDifJ?: Tho rosecutlon mav proceed.
l.\. MoH.jfe!f: If the Tribunal please, the ruling made
by the oourt with respect to the witness ’.falter ifoff Is
satisfactory to the prosecution and we would UKo to have
him oailed today following'the testimony of the witness


*


5*?a


17 J a c-::- li*3- 1- 7o 31; r- Li>: )

court :;o. i.


HJI-.'RICH S-CJ-ei. .*t the present tine I would llko to
ask that the witnesJ Robert Levy be called to th* stand
to testify vitr. respect to atjrlllt*.tion.

DA. AJAVuTIliS: (Counsel for the lefendant .*3L 2H--DT)
Ar. .-resident, before the witness ocsea aay I ash a ques¬
tion .bcut the fora of the affidavit -'h: ch the defense
con a-bmlt.

T r.z ??..5iDi:T: Does counsel ao«n a summary of the
nature cf the testimony which the witness •-•111 jive?

DA. 33AV..TIU3: No, .'r. ?r.3lient. *fnat I aeon is
the following, the svern statements, written 3tatotents,
Vsi'Ob wq want to brln..; in place of the witness In orler
to shorten the >rcceedinxo fer other reasons, and In whit
:crm must wo submit tne:; who con take this testimony. In

•

the procoe ilr.jc before the International I illtary Tr.bunal,
a German notary, or lr. certain cases the attorney himself,
could oertlfy those affidavits. In the further course
ol tne ^recoelln^s waen the organizations were --n f > tried
It wis decided that only an allied of.leer c-eula ... ke
such a certification.

How. I -a:, I believe in the name of ny colleagues
as well, for a decision cf the court «c to the form In
which vu can submit such statements now. .ccordln^ to
airman Law it can be jlvcn cnly before a Ju'lfio, so that a
sworn statement lr. the form In which it Is oub-.lttel un:er
Jnuish and ..meric.an Law cannot be .;lven In G. r.aar.;.'. Jiyono
car. make an affidavit w. ich Is binding -and un or the sl,*-
nnfturescertify. That was the. proceeding which v*8 at first
ap-roved by the lr.t.rr.atlonal -tilltar*/ Tribunal. Later a
:,-ar..:e ---as m.-do In the case cf th. orionizations. The
witnesses In most cases were mostly In carps ••'her- there


17 bac—.-.-GiS-l-'Wostor— ( w<)

Court }Io. 1

v /16 an allies coop officer on hand to certify the statements
U $ot a nu:.b~r of letters and documents which ' cannct
submit without seme st^te-ont as to whether tr.ey are sworn,
certified, whether they actually coma from the author.

We as/. the court for a decision.

T.-iJ PRJSIIfcLir: Counsel will submit in writing a
state_er.t of tr.e place in which they desire the Tribunal
to rule upon. It will be considered and an answer will be
given as soon as possible.


o-x&a


17 Ceo-: _G_i>-l---- Foster- (
Court So- 1.


JL'DQC S&B3JKG: Doctor, I *3 not so auro t- t I '/.nov
rkj full Import of your question. Is It tins, that you are
concerned when It comes tine fcr'dofelvge counsel to .-resent
the oases or. behalf of choir clients, to Know what the
tribunal vill require as a certification or a Jurat to
such affidavits as vill bo submitted by the defendants?

Is that the Import of your inquiry, sir?

DA. &21VATI13: Yes. .o have no affidavit in the
Cn;lloh sense, only a statement in lieu of it vhlohMs not
made before a notary or any authority but which anyone

can saho In handvritln- at any ti.j. Only the si .-nature

9 ' •

• • * & •

r.vst bo certified. Under the deman Lav the certification

of the signature is not required but that la how it v vs

ordered in the first trial.

JU30J SC5AISG: Can you state at this time from vhat

» »• • • %

sources those affidavits or ot .tv.oento -'111 be obi. in d
generally?

Da. 3C.-vV.JIUS: I did not quite understand.

JUDGJ S35RIHG: .e>. I understand, you nev are looking
Into the fut-re with the purpose of determining, perhaps
luring tie court recess, the ty; ; of affidavit or statem¬
ents you vi!l prepare when the time coa-53 that the dofen-
.ants meet the charges of the uroseoutlon. Is that true?


17 1*00 46 - - 2-1 - LJG - 31.Ido"


JXGS ET3R1UQ: C.n you £..y t^TT v: ore j-r...rally those
officlc-vits will jo obtained? 'That is, will they ba obtainod
frot*. perrons who .ro in tho — oric.n Zen o, lot us say?

If.:. S2RV..7IUS: Bio 7 will be witnesses froa ..11 zenos.

I } r va rucolvod nctico 3 frc:t Gorlin fror. tho British -"no;

T yy\ 1 should liko to subnit thou as affidavits. I should
like to t. vo - ruling of tho Court .3 tc tho fora in which
they will bo ..cco jtod.

J'vbG- S22.1IHG: Tho Court h..s boon giving solo cw sidorr.-
cicr. to tho possibility of a court-..ppointod official, perhaps
a ccuniaaior.or, v/hc will have pr ./or .oithor to approvo forus
or to certify* affidavits or pcrhr.ps to bo present ;.t tho
tiiw statononts ..ro t.kan. If ho is app int-d, you understand
ihat ho will bo nsworablo orly to tho Tribun. .: and will
a ,.nd as a dlsir.tv.ros tod aid tipr.r.ir.l court official r.o
b»tv,oon tho pro so cut ion on tl:o ono land and tho iofondants
on tho ctl or.

Gut, as tie presiding judge lr.s suggostod, if you c©ntlo-
;.ur. rill good uncugl. to proparo tho nc.turu >:f your inquiry
in writing ..nd pi..co it bofero the tribunal, tho Tribunal
thon, I think, will bo in . bottor poaition to rulo.

Dj.. SGRV^nUS: I will subioit it in writing.

Z:. y.cE.i'ZY: I will ask that .tho witness Robort -ovy
bo c.-llod to tho stand.

2ES PKSSXK2IT: T3 o Garsbr.l will suKnon tho wintoae
Hebert -ovy.

DR. .;:J32RT LTVY, nenoss, took tho s-r/1 r.nl tostifiod
is follows.

37 IRE PRESIDES?:

Z. hill thv. c. th bo ..dziinistorod to this witness in
- ronch cr in Goman?

A. Fror.ch.

. - “50 -


Court Bo. 1

17 Loc 45 - 2! - 2-2 - Ufl - BLikloy


Q. Hold up your right Lend. You pill roper.t tho cr.th
after :io:

X svoor tc spoak without fear cr f..vcr, to ac.y tho truth,
:.ll tlio truth, end only tho truth. I swear it.

(2ic witness ropoatod tho oath.)

22 FALSDEL?: Sit down, plor.ao.

direct sx-jskatiox

3Y !!R. ItcEAHEY:

• Q. Your nnr» la “obort Xovyf

A. Y u a air.

C-. You ere a Fronch citizon?

... I c Wench citizon.

Q. You epoch both Frond: end Gon_n?

Yo 3 sir.

Q. But y:u profor to bo intorrcg..tod in Fronch?

I ahculd profor to be intorregatod in Fronch.

*1. You wero born L. y 20, 1334, in Dctwoilor-aux-ldiino,
Franco?

/.« Dotwoilcr.

Q. .?,.X is your .r.sont roaidonco ed'lrooa?

... I living ..t tho prosuni ti;:o in Straaabourg.

r .. ..nd what is tho stroot c.ddross there in ceso wo
should ever wish tc find you eg..in?

... 13 i*uo du Gv.reral Gouranc).

Thank jrcr. .. re you .. doctor by profos3ion, 'Vitnoss?

... Ia: t. doctor end 3 urgoon in Stressbourg.

Q. ’Till you pic..so toil tho Tribunal wfcon end whoro
ycu rocoivod your .:ouicei education?

I ..eie ::y j cdicel studios cA tho Faculty of Strass-
bcurg freu 19 ic to 1320. I apocielizod fron 1020 to 1924 in
Strasbourg else.

And did you practico in tho Suryicel Clinic of tl.o
“tressocurg University?


Court Ho. 1

17 Doc 45 - II - 2-3 - UO - Binkley

... i apocicliaod in tlx Surgic.-.l Clinic cf tho Fr.culty
of Strr.aabourg,

C». You took your stcto oxe.iAnution in nodicino in 1920?
L, Yoa air.

Q.. Did you obtr.in tho dogroo of Doctor of ^odicino nt
tl.o Struaabourg University in 1922?

'4a air.

Q. Did you pr.xtico in°Puria?

... I studied uy apoclr.l brunch in Puri a aubsoquontly.

Q. Will you uoacribo your prr.otico following 1924; thr.t
ia to say, xhnt you did?

Fro:: 1.24 to 1*39 1 we.a r. 3 poci:-.liat in Strus3bourg.
Q. \»'oro you r.ttr.cliod to a c::o.^hospitrl thoro?

I was clinical aurgoon r.t tho Surgical Clinic in

\

Straecbourg.


Q. tJhr.t did you uo frou li39 on?


17 3 eo-:^J2S-*-l«r-31Jcicy (hj)
Oo&t I


A . In 1929 I wo* mobilized.

If ere yen an officer in the Trench Kedic.l Coxps?
a . I was a Captain in the 3escrvo, a ::cdic_l cytein in the 2 c-
serro cf the Trench ruy.

r, *Jhorc did you serve during the w u r as a nodical officor?

Daring tho war free the 1 st of bqpttnbor, 1939, I was nobil-ized
in the Any*

But I s^r, shore did you practico .lodi’cino?

I was chief ucdical officor of a fomiution in tho Hiv.inot Lino.

Jnd cpprcxiantoly how r.any p„tie..ts did you have uador your
rcpo.-vision, Sector?

t?>. to 1940 I should my I uttondod to about ton thousiuu't sick
or wounded*

^ . Vcro you c ; pturod by tho Oonier.: in Juno of 1940T
h . I was Ci?>turod oy the O.r. aat on tho 15th of Juno, 1940.

$. that did you do following th.it tino?

a . t?p to tho 1 st of Hovoaber 1940, in a Staloc in Tranco, and
then I V n sont gw y, I was discharged becauo© of ny aodic.i knota-
edgej and th»n I was da.obilizod ot Linogos, in Tranco.

^ . ^nd did you than ,70 to tho'occupiod zoao in Tranco?

— I wont to that non-occupied region of Tranco nour Liaogon. I
va-i nicilizcd oaco norc as a obtain in the Hodic.l Corps.

Q, . Did you coatixrio to practice acdicinc and surgery - ore?
a. Yea, I continued to bo a surgeon.

C . Doctor, did thvro ever cccio . tino when you woro an inuato at
tkv inechvitz Coxxontration Cc;p?

.« I was u prisoner at tho cu?, tho ^xschwitz Concentr ition 0 ;up
frm Scpttnbor 1943. * ,

. Sow long did you stay in schvitz?
a . I routined frcxi tho 4th of Scpter.ber, 1943*. until tno 18th of
Jenu .-y 19-.6.


t


17 3eo-i:-GZ&-2-2c-51caey (XJ)

Oourt I

^ . VU1 you toll the Tribunal why you wore <rrestel and inprico^-
ed in A uachvits?

a. I was arrested at Llno^cs by the Gest<gio in September, 1943,
for individual reasons and I believe on political counts afterwards.

I was in tho Liiioges Prison until July, 1943, afterwards at a cacp
freu tho 22nd of July to August, 1943—eftorwards for o few days in
&a? Drascey noar Paris; and freo there, on tho 2nd of Soptocbor, 1943,
I was deported.

That is, deported to auschvitrV

A . So, to Birkenau.

a ad will you toll^the Tribunal what Birkonau ie?

A . Birkenau Is another tern which was also callod ^nochvitz 2
or Juschwits 3. It was a cci.-p whoro tho ^ao chcsibors aid tho cranr-
toria woro. That is whoro on arrival thoso pocplo woro brou«£t who
woro to bo sassod or olso thoso who after soloction woro dcotiaod to
bo pissed. Birkenau is noar -uschwitt or at the coups which derpondod
fren ^nschwit* and Birkenau. It was oop -dolly thoso pooplo who c;ao
froi tho cod nines in tho district.

In other words, you would deocribo Birkenau cs an oxtor-iino-
tion crop', tfitnoss?

a. It was an extermination ca.p.

Q. How, if X uey go back a ..cucnt, when did you st.to that you
vero cvroated by th« Gestapo?

A . Yos sir.


-554-


17 Dec-M-. chc3-H:eehTr.( sw)
Court Nr, 1


C. I any, wbr.t w a the dr to gmn-JBTC arrested?

A. On 12 Hay, 1%3.

A. You state that you wore not picked up in n mas arrest, but
rnth.cr tte t ‘ust you no nn individunl were r,rested?

A. I was’ nrrestod ns nn individunl.

r . Can yeu toll tho Tribunal n little core expressly why yiu were
nrrosted?

A. I do not knew. I was never told. I w^s given to understand thr.t
it wps for political rvi- ns, but I was never interreguted.

Q. Are yen Jewish, witness?

A. I no* n Jew.

Q. ?fow, H;en yeu got t.> Blrktnru, did you hr.ve r. nunfcer tattoed
ir. y ur nrc?

a. Number 145, 920 is UXU <d cn ey foro-nm.

C ; . 'Itnoss, will yeu sh-n the Tribunal, plcrso?

». Yos sir.

(The witness Shows his t-.ttced fircrra to the Tribunal).

r. Thank y u , witness. Vcm, y>.u sto.tc that y.ur nunfccr wns 145,920?

Yes sir.

C. Yeu nrrivtd nt Birkenau cn °cpt«±'cr 2nd, 1943?

a. , i n th-. 4th cf ^pta±er, I left Dmney on tho 2nd, but I
rrrivod r. the 4th.

r . Thnnk yu. ?4w, can r-« tell frer. J ur number nnd froe the date
when ;-.u - rrived nt Birirennu when a inn with the nusber of 132, 206
probably ent.rod Pirkonnu r ..uschwitz?

A. I oh uld say the end of July r the beginning cf August, because
I ted s.c friends in Paris, w*.o arrived n the 3rd of July nnd they
had the numbers if 130,000.

. Ttenk ycc. New, will you describe t. the Tribunal in sene dotr.il
»h t x rk yeu wer* deing in Birkcncu?

A, “b.-.r. I -rrived nt Birkcnr.u, I was placed with the dect. rs and
dentists, wh were plnccd .apart in seper-te barracks. They did n< t wtrk

555ft •


17 Ceo-i£-^cha-3-l Mediae
Court 1


outside lilco other people vfco :,«j; us. .e had to fin the rations,
to o ee.- cut the block and to clean the aaroundin^s of the barracks unt ^.1
the i? - end that -is about


n ya^iaeiBr-y&Z&ban

{hurt 1

, . -us ift-r v» arrived - when a Polish doctor ;avo us a short and sifj;le
gpekv.ti n to soe if wc really were doctors, I thought at the lx^sx t. I W)

to jo to the central infin-ary, which is tho Xrtskenbnu. I wont thoro on
Cctch-r 5th, 1%3. ~t first, I wa a surjiccl assistant in the blocirfor aurjicnl
c-jos. Cco conth Liter, us tho bond ror^-on of tho surgical block, wo hod tc
j^ie -fter all the sick who caz-e in, liv.se j^ierally v-*o people, who :md either
s.ptic wounds, carbuncles, fractures or -jund shot Wound*.

q .yproxL-ntcJy how urny patients did you havo under your cure at Birkcnr.u?

S

a (>t thr.t ti_o I had frm cne hundred to cno hundred rnd twenty sick under
iy c -^. apparently l't r on, when I was senior doctor in chare® cf a laryoblock,

I had fren dCC to 6CO cases at tho 3.-„c tine.

• m understand that yep became a chi.f surjocn in ono of the w.rds?

A I bocaa-o Chief surjoen and also a ne-ical t’-cctcr of the block. Thcro woro
Oise people, who had internal diseases in that block.

q a r-suit cf your »--rk in Birkenau, did you have occasion ever to obaorvo

any innate* at Birkenau who hail been sterilized?

.. /Jt-r four or five weeks, there w s a selection, which teek frou 60,1 to
W f ry c-.a_s awry, in that wry I could not say thr.t l achieved any r-aults
la lo.idiij aft -r thtii,

vill c__j te that lat-r, Doctor. I want tc no!: zo a r-sule of y-ur

s.rk if y-p hr.d any cccasion to observe any incites at Birkonnu who had been
Jt-rilizod?

1 saw pee pie wn. w-re sterilize in Birkonnu. I crxie in Soptu-ter. I knew
tfi'.t people had arrived about one hundred ycunj, pccplo riero selected and tl.ey
• re P.iea fro- t..e eistrict of Auschwitz. Tn-oa peoplo arrived a short tiiou
irfero our arrival. .A1 selected w-re young wall built people in tho best of .
...:1th. at thr.t tiic We aid not knew whit ocperizs-r.tc tr.jiie y unj people We;*0
ejected te. AeC^beT on or perhaps in January, soco of th-sa .-ouno popplo
-r. t. i._ r.3 exp-rio-itul parsons in ty dcparUoait. They reported sick,

icy j-dd saturation in the lnuacl reji.n and of ti.eir inside surface of they
- t... t;J_p. 3 . Owirt to the era sticr-s I -sae than, I Ceuid 0 ati.er that thoso
7-cn; ; .en had been treated in ths conth cf S.pWd>u-, 19d3,by xr^ys rne four week
1 --r 3e of thee, were pp«ratod on, TL*y had had either ono testicle ruoovod cr

~ 556 -


17 £<c-_-«Scfs>-3-3--.G0vv
Court 1‘


l^jrhapa both of thos, Those people showed signs cf ulcorations, which wo »on
icontified on account of tho typical aspects, as radiodanaatitis. These wero
ulcerations thet showed r» toodoncy whatsoever to cot bett-r, ospociolly as wo
rad so few scientific advantages at our disposal. Uo ucnegod, hew ever, to look
aftjr scfco of thee, but ooot of thee disappeared as a result of tho periodical
ext ruinations. I saw ono young tan, Wio aanrgod'to s rvivo to tho end until
tr.v cx*p was evneuatod, that was in January of i%5 end ho followed us when wo'
»era ovneuatod to llauthauson. I did not see hia rhai wo arrived at Uautheusen
zni I do not think that young -an, owing to tho state in which ho was, night
have jetton as far as iiuthausen. Possibly, ho ;es killed as w-ro ell the
others, who wvro found killed with gun-shot wounds in the nock. They were found

t • • «

.n uass gravos.

q I w„uld like to go back for Just a ueor.t. You stated that in tho latter
pert of 1%3 you had approximately ono hundred young Polish Jows under your
care at B irkonnu?

A They w-ro net ail Jewish Polos. Th.ro wero pooplo who belonged to nil
nations and nationalities and thoy wv.ro not all Jows. Th«ro woro scoo Jewish,
•coo Russians, soco Frcnchnon end Prisoners of ‘Jrx who hr.d given troublo. I
had tho sick belonging to all nationalities.

Q «nj you ocacinwd these l.«i - thySe boys - end you found that thoy had boon
subject to xray and that soc-o also had their t os tides r^ovod - athur ono
cr both?

•*_Yv3 sir..

q ^ i un-urstand, you found thet tho sorctua end inner thighs of octio of
the bo be/3 had boon 3* b Joe ted to xray burns or poisoning?

.. Yes, they a-re extensively ulcerated and hr.d radiodornatiti3.

q any of theao patients dio under your c-.ro?

.i :.’e, they ad not dio of rsdlodarnstitlos. They diod bexausc thoy woro
5-1-ct.-: fx j us sing.

' iww, upon your observations -s a doctor, can you oive this Tril^al

an cpicden cj tc whether those xray bums or ulcers, which you have described,
could bw cured.

. 157 -


17

Coart 1


1 to not boll-vo so. I do not think that that sort of ulcor is curablo.
it prosunt tii-c thcro is no certain conns of hoalinfc such wounds. C*i tho
cj-.'ary, very often thoao ulc-rations boccco transfcrcoo into radio cancer.


17 Deo *^7?>-c-l-Cook

Court So* 1


1 -s a doctor caa you tell tte Tribunal why these aen waro castrate!,
after havin' been sterilized by x-rey?

A ~e supposed that these - or at least I 8Q|'xnad personally that
the tostido was ivsrxrvid in order to sake rdcroscopic oxanlnation in order
to dutorrd.no the result of the x-ray treatment. I suppose that they sub¬
jected the people to various tensity of x-ray radiation in order to find
what was required for tfvi purposes desired,

3 Jtew will you desorlb# to the Tribunal what effect these sterili¬
sations had on those b'.ys, that is to say* what psycholorical disturbances
fallowed, if any?

.. Those ’ cys who ha 1 boon sterilised wore ianu'ei physically and
.syoholo ically also. liysicolly they wero sufferin' fren the orwrmous
pains cat radial ’or.ua titis is an extrcccly painful affection. Apart fron
that they woro psychologically iisinishod, They were no loncor non, Thoy
roro Just hur-an wrecks.

q How Ion- '1! you have enny of these cases cf sterilisation under
your troatnont, boo tor?

A I observed durin the y«>ar 19Ui, the last I saw after I quit or
was cvaouatol, wont with us to Jtatbnuson.

Q Jl'-r, *xtor, you have statod in an earlier oint that you woro obi.
to o’-sorv. tha sol action of prisoners for sassin- in Eiriconau?

.. Vvry fton*

1 ere executions carried out on a lar £0 scale?

A Executions were operated on an inssnso scale, ofcoourso, noro • -
loss rc ailarly this occurred and tho Chief of the Can,., Lr orarzt, in the
last days cf tha car. , ho rr.do all of tho .atiuntc act out of tho beds and
h ratio then file >ast entirely nakc’., looking especially at their state
f thinness an' 'y raisin- a finger on ono si!o or tho other, ho indicated
the vie tins, and their serial nusbar was imeliutcly written down *y the
rrra r.r.' fourteen hours l^tor thoy lift naked in lorries in tho direction


17 Dec.-!K.T2-l-2-Cook
Court So. 1


Q Can you -ire ary ostimte cf the nun' er of people who were oxterni-
nrtod In 31rk nau Curin' the period that ycu wore thero?

A Sc, durin.- the entire tine I cculdr^t evaluate tho nun’ or, ’.Ait
in January, 1?1^- it was panerally admitted that about four and a half
-dillor. 7ictina had dlpd 0

Q Tho fi-urc, four and a half rdllior., ^hich ycu have Ivor, us, is,
of course- a fi-mre which covers tho whole period of tho rar?

A Yes, it covers the period te~innittv in 19*0 and 19U1 rith tho


q Sow as I understand it, footer, certain of those people who were
axtjrrdnato' In "irkenau wore'.physically selactc ! in -the wards whore you
.vor*co’, is. that oerroct?


Toe, hut thoro tr-ru also so » rho waro soloctodaos soon as they
.rrivoat Birkon.au. There were ontiro train leads who novor cano into tlw
carv Fro; :r, ar.i especially it was so in l?Ui, fron Jun-, 19^4, onwards
when there roro larjo arrivals frea Hunary. r»ss arrivals in Juno 19l*li,
and in tronty-four hears twonty-t*o thousand hurvin Voin c woro octoraLnatod,

q Row. doctor, ’o I understand that thoro was included for axtorrd.-
nation people unaMo to work?

A I don't understand your quoslion,

q :cs it a .olicy at irkenau tc extorcdr.ito thoao people rho woro
ur.a‘ le tc werk?

A .iny* o-!y who could not work an-’ those who lacked rather thin-^fvl
-ho sooEe-i to ’ e noro r losscick was axtorninato 'hen there woro n.ry
,i>oplo ir. tho can; thoro wr.3 a let ef cxtoraLnntions oin on. And when
tho caa* was net so full tho rata of ext urination ras si -wor.

Q ”ov H * they include as a policy oeplo who -..are suffering fron
tuVerculcois fer act: rni nation?

A For coESUZptivoc the : rccass was very sir.-,-la. ..ry’.ody rho ha! e


o .u \i3 ».r tu' ercular -eras in his s.aztun cr who soeaad noro cr loss ill
.as sent into tho l; -as chanLors©


1? Dec.- '-.. -W.-3-Cock (ATS)
court :«'c. i


In other words, anyone with tuberculosis was oxternlnated?

A Ir. Tractica, yes.

-j Ar-d ware ary of these tubercular patients *hc ware exterdnatod
fror. Feland?

A Tea, Poles and Russians, those in enaral they were Jots, that
is at the tioe when I was thore.

Itow, doctor, can you state whether forein workers wore inclu od
ir. -his extorainntion cotton?

::c, I lave r.ot scon rtsorvars of .<ar >'clor.in-r tc other countries.

I saw a fa* French and Russian >ri-cr.ors of war but they died cf odoaa

• • • « •

• • ► * *

or 'er.oral a tar rati on.

. Doctor, I don't thirl: you quito un’.aratoo \ the quostion. I '.ns
aside- wS»thar or not pocplo who, that is, foroi noro who had boon
•corted to Oor-.any vr work, that is forcod laborers, wero subsequently
oxjcutoi at Sirkonau fcecauso they were no lcr. :or able to work?

A IJc> I ddr.' * see ary.

, ?:ow, Doctor, ycu statoi that you loft Blrkonau in January, 19U5?

e

A Tec sir.

q And ycu then went to ‘•aihauson Concentration Canp?

A To Ahthauaen.

1 And whan were yea freed fro.: rathaueem?

a n «re liberated by tl>. A orican ar.- on the ?th cf l?.y, 1?U5/
ml m wero ovacuatad to Franco on too 17th ' /, 19U5*

i Ar.-I That have you boon 'oin. si-nco foot tine. Doctor?

A After -T -orival in Fr-.nco I vas eo ill I was quito unable to
->rk for "lx enths an* in Sorsabar, 19U5, I stortod to work at Stra3s-
t.ar nr.I tiyo once xro ostcblishoi c practice as bofero the war and
r.-r: I na practidn thoro.

. 'CHA’KIt : h.’.va r.o furthor act dnatdon’ at this tine.

1*33 XVZXZXI Has lafor-sa counsol ary cross axadnation cf thic


17 :*c ,-^73-W^Cook

Court No. 1


The witness will be axcuaod.

!C.. r , £H..N r T: The Prosecution will contimo now with the presentation
cf iocunontiry evidence on the charges of sterilization in the indictment,
7e hare cove rod up to this point rsdicinal sterilization as pronul.atod ' y
the defendant Pcriccmy- Wo have also covered to sene extent sterilization
carried cut by naans of x-ray and surgical operations as.:reacted In .-art ' y
the defendant Toschor and others of the defendants. 7a now turn to docu¬
ments rhich 1 with the sterilization of w--aen by the so-called Clauberp
nothoU.. which, as I understand, it was sterilization rocultirv fre a in¬
jections of the irritatin' solution in the uterus 'uriiv' an ordinary
routine ynocolo ical examination, The first •docunont now on this sub Joe t
whloh wo havo to offer is docunent No, 21U> This will bo ProPocuUon
bxM 1 it !fa. 168 a

• •

THE P'SSIDE:»T i On what of y.ur ‘ccuaont book is that found?

KU That ison p*£0 Jl, lour Boner.

This is a 1-ttor dated 30 liay, 1?U1, froc tho decease’, Dr„ Orawitz,
tho ''.oich .hysiclan SS to tho Botch Fuehrer of tho SSj that is to say,
his personal staff, and in the uppor ripht hand corner of that document
7-u will soo tho nano "Wolff handwritten. That apparently is Karl Wolff,
*bc was on the personal staff of Heinrich Rimlor This is a tvjno in ropard
to tho trootoent of tho sterility of wcoon, Heforonco: iteporfc to tho
Itoich Fuohror S5 on 27 May, 19U.I


-5o2 -


17 C«MW?-5-*l-0aaiel8 -RT-
Court Sc. 1.


"In the following I sv.-.at - list of the specialists in charge
of the treatment of sterility of -.jooen according to the method of Professor
Cl^uberg:

"1. Professor Clauberg, Hospital of the Society of orkaen.

"2. Coionel S3 Professor Dr. von ,,'olff.

"3. 1^-Jor SS Professor Ur. Guenther K.F. Schultce, University
Clinic for .oren."

Signed, "Gra-.dtz".

The next document is *.’0-211, .nick .till be Prosecution Exhibit
So. 165. Tho into on this lottor ap/oars on page 54 of the English document
book; it io 30 key 1 942. It Is a Latter free Professor Dr. Clauberg,

I

Chief Physician of the synoco logic.il Clinic of the Kncppschaft Hospital and
of the St. hod ig Kospitrl. It is to tho Roichsfuchrer SS Hialcr:

"Doer jaichsfuohrar:

"In answer to my lottor of > Juno 1942 concerning tho Research
Ir.stituto for Biological propagation, I rccoivcd at that time by return
sail tho ans'.'cr of ycur porsonal adjutant, SS Sturcfcannfuohrcr Brandt, dated
19 Juno 1942, saying that you, Rcichsfuchror, would cone back to ay expose
as soon as possible. jithout any dbubt tho far more important ovents of
the »ar hlch happened shortly after srds provontcQ this.

"If I cay remind you briofly, the continuation of qy -./orb had
huon rondored impossible because of the problem of c .rrying cut the
procurement of fccnlo concentration camp inmates. At the occasion -f
. scientific discussion with the Stabsfuchrcr of your office horc, S3
^ersturmbrnnfuohrcr pr. .ait, I also happened to speak about if research
^•-iTitics in the field of biological propagation. Ur. n rlt told at thon that
*• one pv.rsjr. *n Germany today .ho ;oulc be particularly interested in
;:.ojr ratters and who rrould be able as help me would be you, most honorable
8 ‘Phsfuahrcr. In his capacity as a nearer of the S3 and Jtabsfuchrcr of yout
office here, I tr.cn told him briofly that I had already submitted this matter
w you.


B After this discussion, I cost obediently fake the liberty of askiry


17 E:c-?-J^-5-2-i^-niol3
Court Nc.l


you to make it possi le for c to carry out thcso t-sks h.ro in Upper Silesia.

»

"In order to explain what wiul '» necessary at the moment— that is,
n least for the ti e bein b —the two ust ur^en- quc-sti<.ns and fundamental
fre -lees should ‘x stated briefly once ucro:

"A. In tho qiostiun of the positive populati n p-licy, the eventual
r Tost ore able L^p'-rt-.ncc of a riculiur-, for the finale capioitylor propa¬
gation dj^uiids cl -rificction.

".;ith rafvrei.ee t. B"—which is, ei c urs-, the no .itivc population
p)licy~" sterilisation with ejxrati.n.

"1. Occasional special iUc^ f-r five to tun wonen—sin.lo .
r as or n m f r two fersmcr-corrospcndin.. to the, conditions :i sick rooms.

"2. Special X-itoy apparatus with lactallnti ;n and accessories.

"3» Scalier outfit f isjtnixnta and Materiel.

ichafuehrers ith ut wisiln t. anticipate your decision, I am

tekin. tiu. liberty of pr-p-sin that the .xpuriioonts ntcussary for A and B
carried t at the .vuschwitx c ncontrr.tian c-.p end that the facilities thor
o used, .is I already t Id y u in the Course ol cur ml ccnvorsati n, I would
v ry nuch pleased t w.rk un J er y u “S head ~l on oxporin.ntal institute,

Jir ct. ’ exclusively ,y you. I ollovc that in view of the prxsuruu-nt of
the land, the i-cesscry animals, the -tto.xin pors nnol, and the human
natorinl t- bo pr vide-i, an annox to y ur cai:p lr Upper Silesia w uld offer
the .cat fr.ciiitios. Cash w.uld u ' only for the procurement _fj

"•.ith reference tw li

"1. animal mtcrial.

"2. i'aUrial fer th. anjaals■ stables and shelters.

"3« •» c< nrcimtious w.rxin^ person to attend these,
r-feronco to 3»

"I. Special accccr. diti ns l’.r five to t_n f.calo cam) inmates
-■ '-r J in experiments.

"5. -vjntualij a special X-Ray installation." -Jid lastly,

"6. Smaller utfit .f instra.vjnts and material.


17 ^c-JWP-5->oani«ls
Court li>- 1

-f&ichafuehrer: The er:'.--nations and dispositions nude here are
rel.ted to tha feet th-jfc the :_os‘_ r—c-soury end cost urgent .^e ns for the
solution oi. this problua should or.ee created and set in action. )^r
su- esc ions re -bsolutely ai.phid to the present tige .nd thoept to acct
the circumstances. ..u one probio- arises -roc the other, or, I should
Tithe- say> OMy further problem .-iso fra- one -nd frac there new ones

4

./ill aviso, the ideal pattern of such o i?.o3oarch Institution of the
3sic..fuehrer 53 for Biological iropr ,ation«, tho cataul i sh a o n t of uhich'
is to be .onsidcred, would pro sent it at 31 as an entity, on the or.o hand
far ,ru ter •.. scope, on tho cth- h.nJ cor* conccntr. ted and clos-ly knit

, » , 4 •

in scope. .'i.closeu a short dcOtch is ad-cc as a su- .estion for that
,ur.o:e. Blls suj^uetion is to dcionotiv.tu tho possibility oi realization
of I tho thoughts discussed and mix: it to- to you.

»::oil Hitler.

“Your nost obedient, .roi.soor CiuubcrR."

I third, it is unnocosa. t re i this draft of tho acoourch

iMiUcts for Biological Irop lion. It repeats in largo part ..hat ho has

i.j ty stated, _rd it outlinos a Ain hat ./ill Sc nooded for his groat and

•

or:.. .rejact cf learning ho. to cost actively sterilize helpless ,/oi.ion
ir. ce/iccaarntion carps. And it is s>st int-reeling to note ho-.; ho ..tto^ta
•j riaoi . eh. ..oichsluchror by statin tut he ..ill found tliis biological
lr-iti.:&c a nuca it itav th. haicl.s.aohrer SS, and .*.at j.oct things it is

S&Ifi, CD wO. *

- turn no-; to uocuocnt hb- 21 a, ..hick .till be rrosecut-on exhibit
i~. T - slid .uor nil - Ju-f 1942. It is signo by tho dofond-

---t .• f Jr ndt. Note: "To. 3icrct-<.

"Or. July, 7, 1942, a diocuwion cook place cot.jeer, tho Rcichsfuehrcr
, fuehrer Froi-s or jr. Dor., rdt, SS Briga&fuoh.vr Gluccks and

V h. - - Uaubert, hoani sauc-.o. Topic of the discussion was the

r-l_u ...» CI Je.;wS3c3. Esc —chain-, rar S3 has ixseuscO £ arisadc-
.,3..saor Klaub.rg th t th- ..use.: J.fc« c eventration c.xp .ill b-


-5S5-


17 D-c 48-2'-Jr-5-4D-niols SW
C:urt lie. 1

fur. '-.rontsl oi, riiin.s ethod should bo f-uad v;-ich
-,-c;ld la d u stenli-ftti r. -f jorstas v/.tLout their know¬
ledge. The R^ichafuehrer SS Hinted to gst mother report is
socr* is the rosult of theso ox, -rixionts v.vula b.ctce
>-f.vn, st th: t the steriliz' ti- n of Jov;esses ctuld then bo
c'rriod cut ir. actuality.

••It shculd also bo examined, irofor' i .bly in o-cpor-ticn
with irefossor Dr. Serifellor, end X-Ray specialist in ,
Oerr'-ny, in rh-t -*cy sterilization of non ctuld bo nohievod
by Mc° treatnont.,.: .

•Tho Roichsfuehrcr SS celled the spcci-l attention of
-11 '•ontlocon prosor.t to tho f'.ct th.-.t tho r.attur ir.volvod
vrs r-st secret »*nd sh uld be di3cuscod only v/ith tho
tffioers in ch-irgo, nnd that tho p-rsens irwsont ut tho
oxvor'conts ir di.-oussions h~d to >lodgo sjorooy."

Signed, "3rcndt H .

?' is’dccv: ont v^ry clearly indie tes tho purposo boi.ind
b*-jeo ct.rilizati n ox;-n:.er,ts. v.~ro hunting for
* j r -st effective, f r tl u <J o i-Ost, •. ;y to wipe tut
t? i 7iv;i3h rico by corns ~f ctenlie: tion. It invelvod
t- o enco of genocide, end not sicply tho cnr.o ol-storil-
iir.ticn.

Th: iRJSIJST: ..t this tir.c tho Tribunal will rocoss for
fiftoon minutes.

!. rocoss vis tekon)


556


17 Doc-J'-..3chw-6-l-G£-ylcrd
Court Kc. 1

0

Trz V -RST..L: The Tribunal i3 again in session.

:? ■D .yi'vT STILISH: Y.ur Eonors, the attorneys * or the
prosecution are unexpectedly delayed for e few minutes. I

sc sure they will be here in a moment or tv.-c.

§ ’

KCF..N3T: If the Tribune 1 plecso, the nqxt document
is IT-213, which will bo Prosecution Exhibit 171. That is
a letter from the dofonoent Rudolf Brandt to irofossor
Clauberg. It’s dated 10 July 1542:

"Dv‘r Irofossor:

"To • y >-ith the Rjichnfuotror -SS cl rgod mo v.ith trans¬
mitting on his wish thatyou go to Revonsbruck aftor you hevo
b-d another talk with SS-Cbergrup, onfuohror I-ohl end the
Camp thvsioian of tho womon’s concor.tration oamp Ravens-
bruok, in order to perform there tho storilizotion of tho
Jewess s according to your mothod.

r, 3oforo you stert your job, tho Roichsfuohrer-SS would
bo interostod to locrn from you how long it would tako to
storilizo o thousand Jewesses. Tho Jcwosscs thomsolvos
should not know cnything ebout it. ..o tho Reichsfuohror
SC un^orstnnds it, vuu could givo tho ajjr-priato injoct-
icn3 during o gon^rel .oxcninction.

"Thor ugh oxpjrlmonts should bo conducted to invostigoto
tho offoct of tho storilizstim largely in a way, th-t
you find out efter c certain time, which you would hevo
to fix, p-rhrps by X-Rcys, what kind cf changes hovo takon
placo. In tho no or the cthor case,a practical oxp^rimont
right ba .arranged by locking up a Jowoss end a Jew togot-
hcr for a oortr.in period and to soo thon whet results aro
“.chioyod thereby.

•

"I ask you to lot mo know yiur opinion about my lottor

f°r the information-of the Rclchefuehrer-oS.

"Kell Hitler’


567


17 Deo-I£-*3chw-5-l-Gav
Oeurt So. 1


■Signed: Brand, SS-Obersturnbare-.f uehrer. n '

Bio second copy or this letter went to SS-Oborgrupeer.-
fuohrer Pohl In Berlin with the request to acknowledge. SS-
Obereturncennfuehrer Koggel also got a copy for the lnforii-
ation of the Canp Physician. Kbreover, the Relch-Phy6lciai>-
S3 -end the Reich Main Security Office go t a copy.

The third copy.went to SS-Obergruppenfuehrer Orawltz,
the Reich Physician S3.

A fourth ccoy, to Kocgel In the ’TVIU; and the
Fifth copy to -the Reich Main Security Office for again
5 3-Stuttfflbannfuehrer Guenther in Office IV B w .lch is noted
as the Departoent for Jaws. .


17 Dcc~J —.'u3chr-6-2-Gaylcrd
Court jc. 1.


And .a handwritten r.Ao SS-Grupconfuahrer Huollcr, who is -Iso.in the Roich
;;*in Security Office, with the initial 3r. which is the defendant Brandt.

This letter again indie-tea the true purpose* cf these sterilization cx-
p_r!ents, md hire the defendant Rudolf Brandt is suggesting that they carry
out ex orii-jnta on a thousand Jewesses to sec just how long it would taijo bo-
for- the ncthod was applied on a largo scrlo to wipe cut the .Jewish raco. And
be oven geos further and rvikos the nboninablo suggestion that in ord,r to do-
•^ruiae the off-ctivorxss cf the sterilisation upon tte unsuspecting JcYrcss,
that she and another Jew be put together in a roco to sec what offcci thin
sterilization aothed had upon her,

I turn now to Document NO-215 which is another file note. This is

»•* * • _ • •

dat.d 11 July 19U2. There is no signature on the docvrer.t; howovor, I think
without question, that it was written by the defendant Rudolf Brandt, and
too tho typod initials under the date in tho lover left hand corner, "3rn/
Dr," which very likely norms Dr. Brandt —the defondant Rudolf Vrancfcbeing
c-.llcd a doctor of law. This docwiont will bo PToaocut U»it 172.

"On 3 July 19 U 2 , tho Roichafuehrer-SS, had a conversation with SS Drigado-
fti,;ir.r Oluoc’ca, SS-Brigadoftwhror Oobhnrdt and Profossrr Cl'/fc-rg.

"The subject of this convorsation was the sterilization of Jowosces in
c:acar.tr-ti'n caipe on -a largo seal*. * It was agra.d that tho ..use witz ccap
ill hj .nit at tho disposal cf Prof-SBur Clauhorg as an exporinentel station.
i:t r ti:o initial oxperinonts, th. Reiclafuahrer-SS d.sixvs to have a report
f r tix cr ctic-1 re liz tion of sterilizations on a larger scale.

"Ihroovor, tho eventual consultation of Professor Hohlfolder s an >Ray-
6^cl-list to try sterilization f u.n by X-Rny tr.at.-xnt was discussed.

"Altogether tho Roichafuchror-SS agro.s that all r^ccssary natorial vrill
i, av-.ilable t; Professor Clauborg, for all cxperl-xr.ts he intends to


Th_ Ccurt rill note that this rTosccuti on Exhibit T?L is ;uito siedlar
: file note which wc p-A in undor Prosecution Exhibit 170, th, —_o. of

blfalcLr as tin -X-Ray specialist who rill turn up again in the roof cn tho
—-mimtioc of tho tubercular Pole. Th_ Court shruld not ccncludo that fce-
- u .f tho kind f X-ray rxnticnod ir. so=e -f those dccurxnts dealing vfith

the CLauberc raothod. but his wrs a sterilization by r^ans cf X-iby* I think tho ffet

568 _ •


17

Co nr* *'o. 1


is thr-t fcis Botf-rfi of storilisaticn was through tho in'oction of lt»
gi> rt cf solution into the utorus; and frequently in order tr dotomino
hew frr tho scluticc hed nenotretod, X-Hr.ys waro taken.


Court Sc. 1

17 Doc 46 - H - 7-1 - MG'- -


rico

IV

Tho noxt dccunont is NO-212, which will bo Prcsocution
Exhibit 173, end boro the good Dr. Clr.uburg is finally re¬
porting on how long it trios to sterilize c. tlious:xal Jewossos.
H-.ia is c. lottor by Clcuborg to Eimlor. It is d*.tod 7 J uno
19-.3. ‘Doer* Koichsfuohror: ltdr.y 2 raj fulfilling ny obliga¬
tion tc report to you frcri tiixt to tino ubout tho st:\to <f
!.y r-so;.rch work. In doing this I cn — c .a boforo — .dhcring
to ny prccoduro to report only if tho ix.ttor is oasontinl.

Tho f..ct :hut — uft-r r-y nee t rocont intorviow in July 1C42
— I could not do sc boforo todr.y, is duo to toi.:por:.ry rtiffi-
cultios in dot :.11 .\gf Inst which I nysolf vr.s pov.orloss, r.nd
with which I could net bethor ycu, Roichafuohrcr. I nontlon
r.s ..n ox -vlo thc.t enly sinco Pobru-jy 1£*.3 rx; I in possession
of c.n X-ruy inatU.lr.tion, which is of gfo. t v..luo to cy
apociel reso..rcl.. In apito of tho short porlod of c.ctuclly
only 4 months, it is Urordy toduy posaiblo to roper t to you,
iioichafuohror, tho following: Tho nothod I contrivod, to
..chiovo ti e 3torilizr.tlon of tl o fot^.lo crgr.nisn without
:.ny operation, is r.s gc-cd c-s porfoctod. It ern b o performed
by r. slrvlo injection -do fret, thu ontrmco of tho utorus
in tho course oT the uauc.l cu3to.r ry gynr.ocolo'.ic oxrxiinntion
c.s known to ovory physicicn. If I s..y thr.t tho rootled is
•r.s good r.s itrfoctod', this noens: 1.) Still to bo werkod
out :.rw only niner i_:provor:onts.ef tho nothod. 2 .) -ilrordy
todr.y it cculu bo put to pr..cticr.l uso in. tho ccurso of our
ro^ul; r eugenic storilizr.tions c.rxi could thus ropl-.co tho
c;.r ticn. -s to tho qjestion which you, Roich.sfuohror,
cskod ::o ulricrt on- yor.r . go, tbut is to sr.y, hew nuch tino
would prcbr.bly bu roquirod to sterilize 1000 vcaon by using
this rw tired, tedey I cm mswor you with rog.\rd to tho futuro
r.s fellers: If ny reaocrchos continue to hr.vc tho s.—o results
us up tc now — _nd thoro is no reason tc doubt thr.t —

then tho nenont is no longer fer off wh.cn 1 cr.n sr.y: 'by ono

- 57Q -


Court Ho. 1

17 Dec 46 - !I - 7-2 - £JG - Prlco


/ *

adequately tsv.inod physician in ono adoquatoly oquippod placo
with pork-.pa 10 assistants (tho number of assistants in con-
fornity with tho dosirod acceleration) nost likely sovoral
hundrod — if not oven 1000 por day'. ?lv..ac pornlt r:o to
postpone ty report -bout tho othor part r .f ny roaor-rchoa
(positive population policy) because it will t:.ko aot:o tico
until aonothing ossontial cor. bo a:.id in this flold. Ztoichs-
fuohrori d.e :;ain reason for ny reporting tc you Just today
(that i^cjib shortly boforo tho possibility of ovon noro final
results) la tho following: I know that tho aottloi.:ont of tho
last part cf this pi.rticul- r coup lex of probloua — in contrast
to tin external forces which dotorninei tho pregrosa so far --
doponds no;, lirat ontiroly on i;o. In this a nnoction, s ovoral
nlncr but nevertheless fund.'ucntr.l chanson would bo nocossaiy
which only you, :.ry dear Hoichsfuohror, c n personally diroct
nd erdor. I had hoped tliat I would bo r.blo to givo you
personally r. al.crt description of -hoao roquiror.onts in tho
ovont cf a visit to Oborscklosion. Sinco I did not hc.vo this
opportunity until now, I .u ..siting you -cd y for your docision.

In 'ilitlrn I should liko to urJco r. further roquost. It was
SS-3rigr.uofueh.ror Do. Jlixionroutor who finally nanagod to got
-:o the cne auitable X-ray Installation. I cn in urgent nood

x

of another installation of tho anno kind and ho infornod r.o
in "obiriary that ho had such another ono ctorod in Dorlin.

He was ready tc dolivor it to uc if ^ would socure ycur approval
•ay I :.3k you, HelchsfV.ohror, for this approval? Koil Hitlor."

Signed: Clr.ubcrg.

••-•ro wo see, although ho has undo littlo or nr prorross
or. his positivo population policy, which w. s tho study of

its effect upon propegatien, ho has :-.do ccnsldoraolc
prt gross in his r.eg..tivo population policy or the policy of
gunocido, and he is kero able to report that fren 20 ,J to cvm
- tl .‘usand hcvfossos could : >o sterilized in one day by his

-571-


Court Nc. i

17 joc 46 - H - 7-5- LJG- trice


uothod.

I turn n:w to i*ocuuunt SO-210, which will bo Prcswcution
Exhibit 174. -his is let tor fron "rofosacr Clr.uborg to
tfco defendant, huiolf 3r;-ndt. It la dated 6 August 1945.

,t Dour Obwraturr.b; nnfuohrcr: Enclosed you will find a
roc-ipt for your letter tc :.o of 1C Jur.o 1 C43, in rosponso to
r-uindor referring tc it d..ocd 22’July 1043. I b- vo -tc beg
jf ur p.rdon for the dolayod aondln ; in cf this recoipt; I
ivurlocked ttu slip, which wr.o attached tc the innur side i f
tl.o onvolr.pu, and tl urofrrp it ronrinod. unnoticed - a conoo-
quonce pf :sy 1. ck of u^^orionco. With roforonoo to ycur lottor
19 Juno *43, I went to tlsank you very i:uc\ for it. Since
tho hoichafuul ror fcs.a not yot boon hero, 1 should like to ro-
„..rk the followings I racily do noud tl.o aoccnd "-ray instal¬
lation — 1 c.n ivo ycu tie explanation only ’ey word rf
.outl . ..t any r'.tu, tie probability oxista tfcr.t ovon rxyo <f

tie installations will be needed 1 tor cn (it depends cn the
kind of c.pplio.'.tio'n cf ny results the icrxint tloso rro fixed).
Per 1 c .n :^ot tho ir.rt .llr.tion without further difficulties,
t!i.t is, it is ’•.."itins* Cor «:o — re .lly I h vo got it already I

I Ld the opportunity to require « no ::ytolf and I quickly

•

laid lends on it. .\nd the installation is set up-for so:.io
weeks. Dut what I tx.ru fc r i3 the following: I urgently

Shir inaCc.lls.tion hero in K;enigshuette for ay contrary
(p_3.tivu) rese.rch. iJLt A csemot apo.ro it in -uschwitz
"ntil 1 rec a socci.-d inat:.llo.ticn frou the -Vc.ffon SS. If 1

‘ceil ycu scathing bucwoen ourselves — the fact is that

• • •

* will bo ..hie tc replace this ..y own existing in3tr.llaticn
pi- vidud the ICoichefuohror £*- will >vo uo kin .-pprovnl for
it, .r x: okays it. I jcuL- not bother eittor hin or ycu with
d is uhlecs it t* uld be ror.lly noccsarry. Shore is anothor

ir.t • In -uschwits cloy jet used during i.y s.bccncu tc using

- ^72 -


17 Doo^6-4I-LJ3-7-i*-Prico-JP
Court I

the ri-inol installation f r thcr pirposca, too. -It- uy.h I d'n't
like t*,!s I otnnrt blanc the rontlonur there because tho X-ray inat“llo-
ti a there is in bad oenditicn. I cannot toll you tho wholo story by
Tritir.r rad I also ask y:u to rojrrd this lottor of aino r.s purely yor-

5.sr.l. it any rate, I w.uld bo oxtroroly obligod to you — and .. ou

- ■ .

rosily would fia-thsr the coed or.uso — if ycu wruld help no to rot tho
'crrisaier for tha second installation (which, as I rent!^nod boferohand,
already exia^^. I would be thankful if you would answer soon. I ask
you to clro ray nest cbodior.t rorrrds to tho Ro iohsf uolo-.r SS ! Tho
tost regards to y ursolf '. Koil Hitlor I Your obodiert Professor
Clruborc,"

*t is quite apparent rty ho doesn't toll the defendant Rudolf
2 rr.it tho full story in this lot'er. Ir. tho first place, it is quito
t-prront that the defendant Rudclf brc-r.it already Vnaw th whelo st ry
and nood not hrvo it repoat^d in t Is lotto-. It is quite o; jar thr.t ho
w s usinj this X-ray lrst'llrti n in ..uaohxits to further tho atorili-
rntl n of Jewesses thoro and ho storks of wantin': tho soo t/ X-roy ir.s-
t'llnV. r. for -is -csltive roscarah In oi-ntrost t tho no w tiro rosorroh
fcoing done at ..usohwiti, ar.d he - to his friond and influential
assistant, tc Hoinrioh Himlor, and asks hl-a tr> nrrengo for th-tj that
la V s r y, tho dofondcat Rudolf jrsadt.

This, Yea- H n' rs, c.-'-.plotos the prosont'tien rf -roof m tho
■*--rilisaticn ox-ori or.ts at thistino. 1 think th ire will be 'oonwlan
at a 1 st -r st'.Ro in tho trial f-r the C urt t- either hear testiu-:.y
fr r tho stand cr by way of i ffidsTits deal inr with sterilitsti rs
c r.duotod r, w-.on ir. the Rrvensbruo’-' o noontr'tier o-.rp by tho Clauborg
e.tfcod, but r.t this ti o ro would like t otll to tho et-.nd the witnoss
t. nrioh St -hr, who will testify, an n- rthjr things, with r sy.ct
t« tho phlac=ono eXpor’ onto at L-oh.au as Well cs the sor » t.r OXporiBontS.


Court I

THE PRESIDE?* Marshal, oe.il tho witness Heinrich Stoohr.

HSIHHICH STOSHRj a witnoss, took tho stand end tostifiod as follows«


31 JUL5E SSaiHOi

Q, Do you aeswor to tho nano of Heinrioh “-'ilholm St^bhr?

A. Tos.

Cl, Tou will hold up your ri£ht hand and be sworn on oath as a
witness. Repoct uftor cc.

I swocr by God, tho jisijhty and Chnissiont, that » will sponk
tho puro truth and will Withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witnoss repontod tho oath.)

• • • •

J3D0B SEBRU Gi 3o sootod,

direct 3Li!r:..nai

BY VR.

Ct. iiitnoss, yrur nwo is heinrioh Mlhuln Stoohr, is it not?

A. Tos • —

C». Hhon and whoro woro you bern?

On tho 12th of Soptosbor, 1$04 in Woissonbur^ Bavaria.

Q. tthat is y:ur oocupation?

i no on osployoo at tho Go n orr.l Insurance Company in Middlo

Fronoonia.

Ci, At tho present ti-o oro you o nonbor of tho lorislstivo
body of Ba-rnria?

A. Tos.

W. rthat politiool party do you roprosont?

A. I bclonr to tho Social Doncomtio Party of G-.raony.

Q. witnoss, what is ycur prosont addross?

A. Ttoissonburg, Bavaria, Stoinlinsfvxth, 26.

C., witness, when were you first errostod by tho Vntim


- -


17 D:o
octrt HO. I


A. In tho taring of 193^.

<*. uitr.css, kindly toll tho High Tribunal why you woro arrostod
by the Basis ir. 1954?

A. Socn after the soizuro of powor by Hitlor I put rr'solf ot
tho disposal of =y party in ardor to carry : ut tho illegal work, and
I ssugglod illegal r-owapapors into Sorrnny from Czechoslovakia. ..ftor
a ahert ti-u I was arrostod by tho nolioo.

Q. i-ftor being arrested frr this illegal aotivity og-inat tho
Seal party, wero you sontenood tc prison?

A. I was aontoncod t five and o half yoara ir. tho penitontiary

» • 4

ly tho Ponal Sourt in Uir.ioh.

c.. Lid ycu fulfill th: t prison torr of five and t half yonra?

, y It

A. TOS.

^ %

li. Thon woro yru ro-arrostod by tho llazist

A. I was not rcloraod and icaodintoly aftor leaving tho po-
Bitentiory 1 was tr'nsforrod int tho o;noontr-tUn omp tf Laohnu.

W. «t tho tl7<> th't you were sont to tho o-rnoontr- tion oanp
D'. oh.au, woro yau tcld tho ronsen "hi* y^u woro sont thoro?

A. Ko.

C,. i.hilo in oust dy r.t Lcohru, woro you porscoutod as a political
pris r.cr?

A. los.

i.hon did y u first arrivo at tho o.rcont: aticn or.np Laohau?

A. Ihct nuat have boon in ..pril l^*^.

W. nh-n woro yu rolossod fraa tho L'ohr.u o.-ncontroti r oawp?

... I was liboratod by tho French and 1 waa at th-* ti o
sltu't.d ir. a sido c'c? of tho -win oanp Lachau.


- 57 5 —


•i


i


I


17 Deo U6-X- LJS-7-7-?rico-JP
Court Sc. 1

Q. Witness, you have told us that you arrived at Osofaeu ir. the
jj-rir-c of 19 ^ 0 . What dutios wore cssi^iod to you ir. tho ooncentf.etion

«F ?

A. For a fotr weeks I worked at a £=rr.£o end I was thon trr.nsfor-
rod t tto hospital cs a nelo nurse.

C*-. You say thet you boeano a nalc nurso at tho Dcotaau oonoontrn-

Cion cr.mp hospital?

A, Yos.

k. i»hat ti~o, wh't data did you bocesao n rrlo r.wso?

A. tit prbbrtly wr.s in ..\^ust or Septor.bor, l$Uo.

4 • • j •

Q, Did y u retain this position cs ealc nurso in tho ounp
a:«pital until the liberation?

tbtil ap-r xinrtoly six wooks before tho libor t‘ n.
k. Thor.j is I wtiorst-ad y u corrootly, y u woro o nurso in tho
8-,-p hospital frn tho sitter of 1S*° »til -oril of l&V

A. Oh til fobruary, I 9 U 5 in Dr.ohau and 1 was then transferred
V another <rnp • utsido &pohpr.-% In erdor to osoaao tho fate of «*y
oenrados * swore there at that tine and rrh- wore put ir.t 33 *ifam
and sent towards tho front, in order to. osoaoo th't fete 1 wont into
dco thor oasp.


17 De c-k-GZS-6-l-c- yrx; s
Court Sc. 1.


q T)id you at cro tire tine bee coo tho chief nurse in the surgical doDart-r
■sot of the canp hospital?

A. At tho and of 19U1 I bocaas tho chief station nurse at tho Bur¬
gle *1 station.

Q Witness, in tte course of your dutioe, did you acquire any know¬
ledge of oodlcnl experiments on iaaates cf Dachau oanp?

A Yes.

Q Ik) you-knew about tho see water exp;i'iax»nts conducted in Dachau?

A Yes, 1 learned about tbeu.

%

Q Whan wore these experinonts conductod?

A If I rcoonbor correctly, it was in tho suvxir of 19U):.

Q Tforo thoso so a water ojq»ri.:ont3 oarriod out in tho amo block in
■hich you woro working?

A Yos.

Q Hew did you gain your knerlodgo of tho sea-water orpcrlnonto? ‘hat
is, witnoss, through oorsonal observation, froa other jxirsonnol working on
tto experiments, or purely fron hoarsoy?

A I saw the pr.tionts who wore living there. I saw tlvw daily in tho
courtyard, and I received knowledge and I was told about then by nurses whe
«*ro working thoro. •

Q Witnoss, will you kindly toll tho Tribunal in your own words tho
do tells of tho sca-watvr exp-rin-nts as j»n '.aic-w than?

A I learned tfwt those pr.tionts roc jived nothing to oat for many days
and I still r_ icabor vory cioarly that .thoso patio nt B - there r.ro approximat¬
ely 50 Vuj far as I know c^x. froa the concentration coop Auschwitz nt
Dachau especially for that purpose — I xvrv,:i»or that one day thjy attacked
Up nurse because they could no longer stand thoir hunger. Tho nvirso who
thus attached was transferred froa tho station, and another cno was cubstitutod.

H H.w sany people or prisoners woro used for thoso experiments?

A I think thoro were approximately 50 jKcplo who woro usod.

Ci ~Tcro tJjcso priserers Gypeios?

- 57? -


17 Dec-I^-3e 8—3-2-Ecynea-HD
Oourt 1.

A. Yoe.

... I understand you to 8«sy Cert these prisoners wore
-„t selected fr n the Dachau innates but caao froa *uschwltz.
Witness, Is ta*-c correct?

I Id'.mod nt that tine that they wore o*p-ci?.lly
szr.t tv Dachau froa ^uschwitz for that purpose.

1. Who ©-.inducted tncee eeo-wator ejporlBdnts, witness?

/v. f-r ~e I reaeaccr, they were officers *.nd
:crsonnol of the Luftwaffe.

... Vh -1 effect did t..eso sea-water exoerlaonta hc.vo
,r. the viotlas used? &

V

... i do not anew that, since I did not work In that
r on. I think tli't It wr.a neatly st^rv-'tlor. from nich tnose
;ooale wore suffering.

Did you -t any tine over hear want h'oponed to
those 50 vlo used In these experiments?

a. . Ho.

S. Do you know whether o:- not any of these people
vc o ccrl.usly Injur-d ae n result of these experiments?

A. I don't know that.

”ltnos6| did y u over h?~r of the seo3ls or
"alec one experiments at Dachnu concentration ermo?

ic“, these ex;eria-nts were c:nductcd at my station.
Kov did you 5 - in your knowledic of tneso ;nl.e^h^
ox:erlaer.ta? "ere you ,-.n oceer/«_r? Were you an assisting
or by vi-t ■: !•» you grin the .tnovlri£fl y.u have

-•* --eu- .diiigactw :r urlucnts?

A. I was t.-.e nurse nt — -'15S&'

17 was in the 1 -tc summer and fall of 1943 - a certain
at..vebrnr.fuchrer Schuotz cane to no and also a Standnrton-
- -hror vita the name of Lauo or Lcuer; I an not quite sure
-ch - *nd Inspected £he.s uruicnl department. He was shewn


578


17 Dec. -H-G2S-S—2-Haynea-KD.
Court 1 „_-


a nusber of p tlonts; thr.t Is, we rv. d to tska their bcnoafeC6
off, r.nd ho ox".aln-d their vround6. That Is, he Just looked
t; thoa very superficially. After that, the chief physician
of the concentration cnap Dachau, Dr. Volda, was called


- 576a


17 Dec-i>-5£5-8- 3-Kr.y no s -HD
Cc at 1


end he received the order to sea t. It that the patients
received bloc he deal tre-^taent for some time.

VItnees, will you kindly explain to the Tribunal lr.

•:h : manner these phlogaoa: experiments wore conducted; that
Is, the dote 11 s of the experiments? Vh?t did they do to
the victim'?

A. Mainly ^falogcan® v no treated. It was very general
In the crap. That Is, . r -l igen ne. was the typical canp
dl6o?.ee. The Blo.-chealcal treatment was carried out In the
in tho following aannor:

Three similar cases wore oboorved. One of these cases was
allopathic; the other one wes bly-chcclcal, and tho third
one rocolvcd only ordinary curgical treatment. That Is,
tho third one reoclv-d no drugs wn-tsoever, r.nd whore tho
v: und was tro ced ordinarily with bondages nr.d so on. These
voro the directives of the physlclrr.o who wore there. Vo
saw that on c .ny occasions the patient was cured much faster
who h"d received no drugs or injections.

Experiments of that kind were conducted for many wooks,
r.nd If I ary aoia.layaankQ'fcc jsjJudS5^nt,rI nust.say*thitotho

physiclpns, according to =y observations, were not satis¬
fied with these oxperlacnts.

Ir. addition, I h-ve to emphasize that not only wounds
wore treated according to tacs: aatnods, but Internal
diseases, too. They :rlcd to find whether —e-chemical
troctaor.t was suitable for trcctlr. 6 the thirct for water
which was so frequent in the caap. Vo saw tint the bio-
chc.ncal drugs and no Influence whatsoever -s to the cause
of this Illness.

I emphasize that I oa specking as c layman and that all
-hesc are ay observations.

during the fall, this Sturatannfuehrer Dr. Schuctz told


Court 1

Cec 17-K-G23-8- 5-nnyn e s-HD

*

?ho ccax doctor by the nan- of Bcbor to infect a number of
-oolo with pus. «o ns nurses were told nothing about
2 , 1 - c, and we did not know what it concerned. The so
cr*eric-nts were oonductei on a -.roup of non, and they
extended over a period of approximately six to sovon weeks.


?73a


Dec. 17-&-G£3-3~4-H"ynoa^BD
Court 1

Firstly, a group of Gomans wore infectedwith pus,
wo nurses h-d no idee about the cause of that illness', and
■:o ;.ava the patients those drugs that were ordered by the
ohyslcinno. I enprrslre again thnt h-'lf of those pooplo
received allop thlc and the other half blo-ohenlcal treat¬
ment. «s nurses, we oould see the following things:


583


17 D_c-%;-Jl'-9-l-Bcms
Ccurt Sc. 1

Tv- 17 . -ati.nt wh rcc^iVw.l ill fhatical tr.ata.nt wcfc cur- 1

*

=uca quick.r, that is, if th-y lay ay p'Wcr f resistance, with refe¬
rence t their illness hut the patients whe had v t-ke these path 1 -
. ic-.l tail ta, if I rcs.cn' r c rrcctly, died with the exception of one
' w rs n. There w-rc a;, rxiaatcly 20 ,..rs:ns whr, at that tine, were in-
f-ct-d. The second xrup consisted f liO clcry-yn-n bdenrin? t- all
r.xti ns wh w-rc at that tin. in the r*u and frat.rnity brothers. These
tienta 1 ter. Selected, in the hi ck sh_rc all cler ynen lived. They were
s-lected by the Chief .hyalcian Dr. H ldcr anl were sent V the r...cra¬
ti nal r & Dr. 3ahr f the ococcatgsitlca::p«hau *»d vrerc operated
n ' y Ur*. Schuctz an Dr. Xicsclr-ttor. I think that was his nano, and
thvSC .x v .ria>nta Were conducts* n tten. .. nun' r -f nurses and als^

the . -ra r.r—1 A tnc pyratin r s nd I saw h w they were inj-cted

• •

in that eanr.-r. <c wer- atndin. In the ante-re a f tho -r .tin
r .a.

Q *itn_sa, rill y- r. 3 In t the Tribunal what phi-m no

— ■ ^ ft

. tnc.* ill >-u -x. lain t the Tri unal wh:.t th- w r! •» phlons no’* means?
« .hie. a r_, nr far as a layman e x. answer that questi n—

. 1 , no Beans an iml.in-.ti n f tlx tissues wd .in vhe ca.apoofiflochnu
*■ ae ;1- t n- w r r«ry r.un.r us b-c .us. the ;cv.le there were a stly
Sent t th- hospital t - lcte. The phle n-.n.c, as far as 2 knew, that
’he ty ic-.l c-xjn phlx otv arc a crns.qu-nce .f the era*;. ..11 such
. .re as r.ceive.: phi - r.-s wh suffer 2 frea lack f mtir.

. ..itneSJ, id y u say that : cates were v:« 1 J.r jcp.riaonts
ir. which they w.rc ir.i.-t ' with pus?

T.c.

: Cii y s>ee •x.-.se ir.^-cti ns f pus s.:r. atainistcrcd?

<> Tcs.

0 1 ir.r. the ixtt.s t e use.! f r these experiments Se-

1-CVv '.?

- I idr.'t quite un’erstan.: y ur question.


5&1


17 £k.c-iS-Jr~?-l-Iurr.s-(GJ)-
Ccort 3.*. 1


In what aann-r lii th_y s-lcct the 1 nor.tea tr be used
f r thc3C ex.:_ricints which dealt with thv inj.cti n of ;xis? In :thcr
r»r’a, hew :‘id they select? ..hat *.y,o priaowr? .T-.at were, their
nati-rulitics, etc.?


561


*


17 Dec- «-v'r-9-2-Bums
Court So.l -

... Tfcjy ».r. LC- persons ccsdn. fr-c: the so-called clorgyaen block.

Q. .ore the3. irentes used f r those «.xp_ri^:nts Kith inj-cti-n _f pus
healthy inaotes?

A, Casplotoly ho-.lthy and atrsn^ aon.

j, Now, y-u ha vo trie* us th-.t they hrd civ. ;.r up, the first tt roup, cf


tea G-rtena. How ..any diod in that jroup? _

I bclievo that tho first (iroup consisted of ten pccplo of rth .-a, ns
far as I ro-:-r.xr, seven dic J .

3. New, y u have t. Id us of r. second r up i f rty cler^jrrwn. Hvw nany
'le' 1 in that ..r-up?

... I h*vu so-n a list of th. surviv rs and r.cc rdin: t: that list 12
clcr yren r r-.tl-.-r tr-t.mity .rcthers nust :»p.vj died.

3. ..ere any pris n^rs f vur ua,..: in those uep-rizaente? Would y:u ploase
repeat y ur anerer, witnoas?

K. I d n't knew sh.th.r they w^r- prir. n.rs f war or n t. ..0 c ul<l
n t differentiate in the con; f Drehnu end s~ rhothor they were pris-iwrs
f r.ar r n t. At lo-at I c uldn't.

;. .r.. the victims used in thoco ox.v-ri:x>ni.a treated Jy nodical doctors

after th-y hr. - been injoctod with pus?

... Yes, they iotw treated by physicians. Yea, the por-.tivo werk woro
c.ar'o y hyoicL'-is.

5. ’.tli, -after they had aon infected with rus what kin<* ot treatment
*-.s ivjn t then?

... .J'tor the inj-cti n Sturrbhnnfuahrcr Schuots ,.-vu tho d.iroctivo t. thi

•

nurses instruct!* th*x that R- hall -f the: sh.uld receive cllopathicnl and
in th.r-.olf 1 lo.ic-.l treata-.t. I ixsphr.site that thw r-up wnic.i rocoivad.
all oh-tic'1 treat.oat had social Iru s, the s -c-llod sulfanilamide tru^a •
r th-.t is called. e h-.d tho L pressi n th-.t ti*. physicians wanted tc prove
... .t the irl ic-.l ’ru*;s wore n t suit- le t cure such a severe disu-se.

Tien y-a say, witness, th-; fi/t : p-rccnt wore'treated with sulfnni-
loaii. .-ad tho t.^r fifty percent with -i 1. ic“l cedic-nts?

... Yos*


- 532 -


17 £otu-+:-?-9-3-ira E -OJ (W)

Court I

Z • Sow, cfter these Injections with pus did abseesses devcl-
o?o on tho inaat'esl

A . *ko biggest port of those who wore trooted biologically,
that is, n part of then developed abseesses and very doop abccosooc.
part Of the porsons who rccoivod all apathicol and prophylucticel
treatment with eulfanilccide has no abscesses.

4

4 . D id tho inactes who hod endured this troatnont suffer pai.;?

i. Tos.

Z . Scvoro pain?

A . Ao far aa I know I think that the pains wore, vory aevoro.

Z • Sow, witness, who kept tho rocords about tho dovolopuout
of tho fovor and tho synptocs of occh of thoso lsnatoo during tho
course of tho c^porincnto?

i. 2 very pationt in tho coup of Dachau had his fover chart.

? ho tccncraturo of evory pationt was uouturod twico daily, ^hat
sr'licd to ovory pationt; those who woro in tho operational station
and others, too.

Z . V oro you in a position to know whether or not roporto voro
nado out on tho results of thoso oxporiaonts?

A. Cano historios wore writton.

Z* Voro thoso—1

A. Ivory patient was obsorvod carefully by tho nursoo cr.d tho
3 tnabmnfuckrer Schuctt, who visited the pationt on frequent occcr-
oir.-j an: nodo a short caso history and in addition evory operation
wen noted down in that ease history, that i3 tho oporating physician
during tho operation gavo no tho data necessary. Ho dietatod tho
condition of the patient to no and also tho nennor of the operation.

«11 thoso natters woro noted down in tho case histoiy. In addition
photoc wore tekon of tho c’ososscs.

Z. V ere any of theso reports, case hictoricc, photos otc. sor.t


to Sorlir.T


17 D-c-T-v. - 9 - 3 --urns-( G J) -
C'urt 1


.. I have r.a kn c f that. Stunaamfuchrcr Schuctz tock
11 ,-f th-se fever charts as well as the cas- hist ri-s with hin. Bcsiics
that, at ana tine there was a visit -:f a nuaber cf pcrplu who allu’^odly
caac fr'C

583-v


i


n Dcc-*-Jr-9^-Suma-0P
Ccurt I

Berlin and wh visited these patients, ..a fir ca I reronbor I think It
wr.s tbo n«iohar.rt Gr~wit or -h^tever fcla nor- la.

(*. Sew, witness, in retard t' tho treatraont by biclo E ioal notheda,
voro thero odditlcncl ox-oricocta omduotod on riotina who hnd previously
boon used cc cnlaria oxcorincnta by Pref. Schilling?

A. Yob.

v,. Toll us cb-ut thoao oxycrinanta.

1 hr.vo already oeytaeaixod th-.t in addition tc tho phlcpv.no,
intorncl di.oaaoa voro troatod. Anc»e others 16 woro cxcorimontod

upon cr rather wore o'.orvod in', ardor tc .00 whether biclogiocl troot-
wnt was.suitable f r the oura of n«*eria. Sixteen non wore a'ont to
ny at-tier, who hod boon infootod with nalorln by Prof. Sohillin C and
wo ebaorvod whether biolofioflj tf v r.t wuld hr.vo any auoooaa cr not, :

ho sow thet oven with roforo'Sico t th. ocuso ef tho nclario illnoaa thoao . «

drura had r. lr.fluor.oo wtots^ovor and thcao n-tior.ta after aix or sovon
atteoks roculvod tho uauol dru E s, quinlr.o, oto., o^alnat anlario .


17 Deo-K-RX-lC-l-Earrcw-J?
Coart Ho. I


Ci. How. witnoas, dc you have any toiowlodgo about tho work of
Prefoaacr Schilling at the solaria atuticn?

A, I kr.ow Professor Schilling bat I did not work at tho solaria
at'tion. That ia, at ono tiro I had tc d- night duty thoro for two or
■threo dtya ar.d ttko tenporeturea. 1 Vn-.w that Profoaacr Sohilling infoot-

od evor 1,000 p.vjlo with nalrrio. I olao Vr * th-t iwnj of thcao pouplo
had t Buffer uinpocktobly. Yeu nuat r.ot f rgot that thoao oxnorinonta
woro n t oerriod ut n pe-plo wht won afcysioally atreng and hoolthy
but they wor- r stly oorduotod or mdcraouriahod pooplo who, for thr.t
very roaaoc alone, hr.d t auffor d ubly. *»ith ny wr. eyoa I aaw a pationt
lio, wh .apparently woa p>ia n«*d with noc-aftlTaarm end was thorofero
weak wider tho terrible poiaen affoota. Hu waa praotionlly a living
wrook. 1 think tho physician, r wh'- ovor it waa that govo tho injoo-
tien had a no Biafortwsn and there nuat hr.vo boor, smoothing wrong with
tho kind of injootlcr..

<%. u itnoaa, wr a it ores. -aly kr.t.wh in the Z onoontroti.n Cnwn Daohau
that Fr-foas r Sohilling wr.a ourying out auoh aalnrio oxpurinonta?

A. Toa.

(*. D y u boppon to Vn w ntay victlra dlod na n ruault of tho
calario oxperi c cr.ta by Profuaa:r Schilling?

... I ornnet give thrt.

<«. » uli y u a.y th-t s*co diod?

A. I buli jvo that thoro woro n t -oly Q fow. Thoro wore quito
a r.*bor f tr.cn,

i*. K w, witnoas, was it o rc-nly known in tho Dnohau C-ncontmtion
Orp th t n oort-in Dr. Rnashor waa o nduotinc oxporinanta with ioo
O'Id water?

A. Yos.-

W. H w did you • -’- your kr.owlodgo of thoso frooting oxporinonta
’ey Dr. Rasohor?

... I cr.lv know that free hearsay, that it was generally known.

e

Zrjry-na know about thoao' oxporinonta .


17 D«o*4MI5-10-l-Xfirrcw-«JP

C -xt fa. I

C,. Did y u kn-w er did y:u lsern that insataa hat' to atay
.wtiido in tha oild fcr xn»Vera cf h urat
A. That waa ape icon of.


585 (*)


17.Dec.-iH2-2i«-Karro» . .

Court Ko,l

Q. In other words, Vfitness, your krowledgo of the freezing experiments is
entirely hearsay, it is not?

A. Tea.

Cj. Did you jvot hoer whether or ncfc people died as a result of these two
types of freezing oxporiiiiRts?

A. I mat aasuno that bo cause I often saw that nurses or assistants '.ore
carrying doad persona fro- Raschor's station - Block 5 - into the morgue. I or
certain for that rocson since ny station was vary close to the morgue. Iishoul
like to point out that during the early days wo \xrro always told that uhonovor
d.ad people wore carried over th, court yards from Sasciur's station that all
doors afothor stations hod to be closed so that no ono saw That ;<as happening,

Q. Witness, uaa it cosconly tan-.n in the Ihchau Concentration Conp that
ineatus wuro boing used for high altitude experiments?

A. Xos.

Q. Did you your so If over soo any of th: oquiprxnt used by 2r. Raschor 01 ,
hi a colleagues in tho high altitudo experiments?

A. It took soma tine, for soqj tino tho so-callod low prosauro chuabcr was
in Blocks 3 end 3. Those wore big chambers.

Q. You sat; that chf-ubcr yourself, Witness?

A. Xus, I saw the chamber there aya-lf.

Q. I know this may at: ain you a bit, Witno-s, but con you rcmcobvX how
long that chmdnr r or Kilned in Dachau?

A. It is vary hard for ao to answer that today. I aa quite certain that
this chamber •.as thoro for over four aides. It cay have bean longa*.

Q» You roally don't know how long tho chcabor was thoro thon, Witmoo?

A. .’to.

.. Do you know -bother people died as a result of those high altitudo
experiments?

A. I know that .oopla died, but I only know that from hearsay.

Now, .iitnoss, in the time that you »jire an innate in tin Dachau
Concentration Cocp did you over hoar whether Roachcr worked -.dth a drug for
th. ccadulation of blood?

-5G6-


*


17 *> 3 o.-::-r-i&- 3 -r.arraf ( rt :t)

Court ?5c. 1


u Dr. Rascher tried to produce t’i t dra . That is. Dr. Raschcr v.-G3
in char go o' tho entire rettor an* introduced it. Dut, according to uy
knowledge, dnrir. - tho tir.o he ires con’.act ing the work he was arrested.

Do you rff-.-s-.be r fv> new of the Irv at ’ r. Raschor *^s using? *>

A At tho be;,irxdr. this Iru *.ras celled poly; el. La tar, when it
was prefaced in a liquil for.3 it was celled styptharal, if I a® not *’
rlatahoc.

t Did Dr. Raschor, ir. order to teat this dru , deliberately
inflict % rrii. Is cr. 1 rentes of tho otip?

A 1 lvavo net soon .that but Z .xtrr eoeuV-it.-As far r.s I know
•ixperlaonte were co n ducted ir. thi cr inatrriun, but I *apha3iBo again
that I only hoard that,

*1 *.Jbat id ycu hear t ok placo ir. tho ermatoriua? hat type of
sounds did Dr. Kcsohor inflict upon tie lcsctefl of tho oanp in or dor to
test this -Vug?

A I only hoard that these peoplo v-ra inflicted with wounds. I

I

cannot say kind cf aim's they ro.

I Did you ever hear whether or ret anyons 'led ir a result of
• •

‘•hose unpcrl'ur.ts for bloc ’, cat illation*

t! at oxparinenta waro 6 tod in tho oroaatorluBj
or.o has to ssri-.- that those persons 'lei because nobody cano alive from
ro. Othjrwiao* I don*t kr.c." of anyone havin' died as a rosult of
those or; riiionte,

Q Ir. eocnootion -ith those blood coagulation axperin-onts did you
••v,*r hear tho nczia of tho druo called polyyal?


A Tea.

a fo y-u knowledge id Dr, teacher also iroric with the drug
L- -1 ir. these blood coagulation arrorinonts?


3 *A iteess, rras thara also an ax >-rl.i;ntcl station in Dachau
reulnr eases? “hat is, *d ‘ i.v?7 oxperi .cat on tho tubercular


i--"t:3?


- 537 -


j


17 D®c.^:-3-0/>4.-^arraiT (AID)

Court R>, 1


O

A I don't know whether we are concerned with oxpori-aents hero,
but I know that in a pproxirsa toly 191x2, or it aay have aven be on earlier,
a so-called experimental station vas built in Block 5. a certain !!r.
von “.'cihcrr. who, as far as I know was a homeopathic physician, was in
chargo of one ijpartaent and there was also a certain Dr, Prachtol there,

Q Do you know what went on in this e.rperinjr.tal station? Con you
toll the Tribunal about the work in this oxporlnontal station of Dr,
Brcchtd and Jr* von ?foihom?

A ''oil, as far as I hoard it was tho part of Dr, Brachtol to
prove that his not hod was far ooro suitablo than tho mothod of
’It. von "'aihorn, that is, to euro tuberculosis disoasos. At that tino
I loarnod fro-, nurses that thoso notfco.’s of euro voro not usod
corroctly. I loarrvid that ivory ono of thoso rontlcmon triod to ,rovo
that his nothod was tho ri^ht ono an.’ I think that I car. concludo from
what I hoard that thoso gontljaon woro choatinj ono another. I also
hoard at that time that, -mainly at tho dcpr.rtoont of which Dr, Brachtol
xus ir. chargo, thi load woro so-oallod raaovod in order to provo
that thero woro nc doad* That is, tho patients rr.ro renovod shortly
bofero 'oath uccurrol ah! »vro axc^an^od for other patients wlio had
similar disoasos art', logically th.ro -r.ro not doad at that station, I
•rphaoiao that I hoard that from nur3os, I nysolf only workad ct tho
mr-ical lopertaent.


- 588 -


17 Dec-K-AScha-lL-l-lTuppersteln (3T)

Court "So. 1 ,

^ Yitness, wi there an epldenic of jaundice spreading la the con¬
centration ceap Drchru, soaetlae la 19^2 or I 9 U 3 I

A T*e.

% Do you reaeaber whether or aot any experiments were coaducted la
connection with thle epidealo Jaundice?

A Tee.

^ V ho coaducted theee exje rlnente?

A Dr. Brrchtel.

$ Vhrt did he do In the couree of theee experlaents? Vhnt nerns
did he use to conduct the experlaeate? V ill you tell the Tribunal
vhr.t he did rt that tioe.

A I era really «ry rery little rbout thle kfnd of exporloent, but
I do '<nov that Dr. 3rrchtel wre conducting the s^-crlled "liver
punctures" on n number of petlents. I erw, with ay ova eyoe, after
hiving been present la the operating rotxj for cany dry* where ay
prtlcnts were open* ted; how Dr. Bfnchtel wre carrying out thle liver
puncture.

^ V ere theee liver puncturee ardo by Dr. Brnchtel very painful for
the prtients? —

* I oust reeuae eo; yet. Here v e are concerned with rn operation
which only lasts for n fow eecoade, ^it, jud^n: fron the deaeenor

\

of the patient, w C could see that we weren't concerned with any
•■rifles. This operation auet brve been pcipful.

% Sow, witness, do you reneaber the station of Dr. Hrscher in
Dachr.u? Do you reneaber vtrt this strtion was called? V hrt vns the
~-nc of the ctrtion rt Drch.-'u - Erscher's experimental station?

a Tes; we aurses icnew that this strtion wr.s part of the sc-cnlled
Institute of ■ihaeatrbt", or somethin 5 Uto that.

\ Do you rtaeaber who wrs the ernn^er of this station nt that tine?

A I often heard the none of Slevers aentloned la that connection.

\ Do you hnov whether or not Slevers visited Dr. Erscber r.t this
station nt Drchru?


5«9


1" D«c.-4>AScb3-:i-l-rCTT>ereteSa (BE)
Court To. 1


A Certclaly. Siever* vr» In Dachau. V hether he vlalted
Hrscfcer penonrlly, I don’t teov, hut Sievere 1 riiit vr»« announced
very frecruontly.


589 o


17 1---..3c hm-ll-2-Kuppor stain
Court !»-• 1


2id you, yours-lf, over seo Siuvers cn oao cf his frequent visits to

aeisa? - s-j

n . I think; I don't knew SiuVers and I never vori-iod about his visit, but
tfc.ro wero r.u—erous visits at Blade 5* .uaon£ others. Hinder, Pohl and others,
sar.tovcr their noaos cay be. They very frequently ermo to the Station b>

3. Do you ru-ccber ‘any other distinjuishod visitors thr.6 caao to Dachau,
other than H i-d-r, Pohl end Sieva-s?

... Cn numerous occasions, Cr. Lollin^, Grawita, end I cncu hoard tho name
cf Centi. I don't kn^r whether it was redly ho. Thoso visits wuro coroly announc¬
ed and we nurses had to keep the station in -rdur on thcao days-

In thu course of those visits by Dr.-Grcwitz, Loilinc, Pohl, Silvers and
H im-lur, lid they visit tho jtpcrimer.tal stations f Schilling, Raschur and so
forth?

... Yes; Certainly. I uapj-asize the Schilling station; at loaut the part v/iicro
\u lrdwrat-ries wer- always received high visiters.

Did y.u, at any time, See Luftwaffe fficors visitin^ Dr.c!d»u Concentration

D* Cn *hat occasions did you happen to see thorn, other than in con.action with
the seawater jeporim-nts as you havo told us previously?

n. Th-t Suipponed euring tho tino when Dr. Rascher was ccnductin.j his oxpori-
a-nta in thu lew jr.asuro chomfcer,

;. !Lw, witness, in all cf these various axparii.-r.to that you have just
enuajrat-ei to the Tribunal, can ycu t_ll us whether or r.ot the inaotus U3e-<1 for
ttaSe _cpj-li.j-.t3 Were volunteers?

... They couldn't have boon volunteer3.

1* Die you ev_r hear cf any prisoner being freed from tho concentration cco_p
havirva beer, subjected to eOo cf tr.osc m-eicri experiments?

... I heart, that s-nothin,; like that was premised to then, but I think it rr.s
■ -r-r roaliaod.

.. La ..hat ways w-re those pri-cn.rs ch-s-n for the exp-riments? ’./ere ti.ay
-• 3 -‘ • ut f lir.e, at random, or w_re t:.ey choo_n 'ey Cape's, -r .v.Aile you

explain to us in what .banner th_y wj-e chosen?

- 590 -


17 3<x -l>.'-3c fcc-U-3-Xupper st oin
Court So. 1


If I rccccbcr corroctly, for instanco, whenever a*. Schilling noodod sono
plo, they w«jo roquostod by the ccwvinri post. Tho cooniand post, tho ad¬
ministration of tho coup, then approved the nuefcer of poo pie which wero needed.
I don't knew each a bout tho further developments of things, since all those

V"

matters w«_nt ov-r tho to tho adciaistration and wo roolly had very little to do

^ •

with thou, wo nurses. I only knew that, cainly with rofcrenco to tho pooplo
svl-ctvx. by Professor Sc hi 11 fay;, they wore costly axettnod by the physicians

wi» w>re attached to Ik*. Schilling as his assistants.I often witnessed tho

0

examinations, whenever I was in tho x-ray rocn or in tho surgical clinic, sinco
I aixqys too to carry a nuebor of patients.

Then, you would soy, witness, that scco of thoso prison or s worn crimin a l
prisoners; actio were political prisoners; and so forth?

... “hoy w-ro incites of all typos. In tho early days, thoro wore tho so-
called ".’.-social" alcc-nts; la tor th-ro wore pooplo ccdng from all nations,
..ooplo with all different views, including clergymen.

IK. KaRDT: I have nc further questions.

IKS PfcSXiSNIt The Tribunal will rocoss until 1.30 o'clock.

(.. rocoss was trJeon until 13.30 hours.)


17 Dec-.WT 2 -i 2 -:-Lenhardt (C)
Court Ho. 1.


CCf-TXT 3 CCPT

jgraicai session

(The hearing reconvened at 2330 hours, 13 December 19lt6.)

TH! I33SXDBKTt Do any of the defenso counsol dosiro to crose-
etninc tho witness on the stand?

DR. CZS0Z8BSR (Counsel for the defendant Sievors)

CRCSS .ILVE AIKN

3! DR. T32SC 2SZR* -

^ You have said this aoming that Siovors was in Dachau, and
that you know hln not personally; is that right?

A Yes. : '*

Q Now,' I on interested to know f ron what source you lonrnod
that Siovors was at tho station of Professor Schilling, too?

A I havo not said that Siovcrs has boon with Schilling; but,
jorv.r-.lly, all visitors at tho Dachau Concentration Caap visltod os-
aentially Station "A* and "B° and they wore tho clo-.nost of all and
these two stations wore open to all of tho visitors.

Q And who took those visitors to tho so stations?

A &c. mot lues the Kanp Koanndant who 2iad protective custody
oS tho Crap, sonotluos, tbo doctor in charge*

* Can you say if Siovors was also taken around the Crjap in
this manner.

A I do not know that.

4 Can you tell ce Whether or not Siovors had anything to do
■ith tho ezporlaonts?

A That I do not know.


about itotino or Pectin usod in those

to do with those experiments?
usod for these experiments is not
was used?

type that was tested at Dachau?

- 592 -


c-rr:ct


17 Dec-A-GaS-12-2-Ionhardt (IS)
Cc'jsrt No. 1.


A Too, in the last six oonthsj a certain Dr. 3lootnar lad to
produce such a Go 1fttine or pectine.

Q Do you know whore Dr. Bloottnor worked?

A Be worked there] at first ho was an assistant to Dr. Schil¬
ling, as far as I know; and afterward Dr. Raschor left, Dr. Bloottnor
cane to work in Dr. Raseher 1 a section.

Q Do you know whether Dr. Bloottnor had anything to do with
Fectine oxpariaents?

A Ho conducted tho oxporlaonts with poctine at Dachau, ho
triod to uao poctine.

rr.. TdSCL2flHR: I haru no aoro questions.

rn. GUSTAV STEINBAUER (Counsol for defendant Prcf. Wilholc
&jig3lbouck) I havo only one littlo question to p-at to you.

BT DR. G'ISTAV STSIN3AUCR:

Q Pi-1 you ovor hoar tho nano Profossor Eppingor in tho coop?

A No-

Q Do you know a mrre nanod Pillwoin"?

A los.

Q Do you know whothor ho was in Dachau at tl«o tin tho fight
between priaonors and nurses that you dosoribod, took pIaco?

A Toa.

Q Before that?

A Cf course, ho was a prisoner. I nssurv. so. tillwoin was
u txtzo. Ho nust havo been in tho canp bcfox*c tho exp-u-i-enta,

Q No. I ooan whether ho was already a nurso in tho hospital
*L»r. this fight took place?

A I do not know that. I baliovo Pillwcin only returned bo-

for-j that tiro.

Q Do you know a nurse whose first nano was "I-ax"?

A Yos; he was to take care of tho fifty gypsies. Ho was tho
nan that was bo ate n up by the gypsies.


17 Doc-Ar-JP-13-X-Ioasor (15)
Court Sc. !•


"ALT.il ::~V, a witness, took the strand and testified as follc.73 :

31IHL KCSUBart

fitness, the Tribunal is now about to put certain questions to
jtu before you are sworn as a -witness in this case. v

Q Do you answer to the nano of Valter Neff?

A Tos.

Q Tfhere do you now live?

A In Dachau, Kufstoinerstmsso, No. 2.

Q Aro you a Geraan National?

A Tos.

Q Very well, hold up your right hand and repeat after no tho

oath:

I T.nzr by God, tho Alnighty and Cttnisciont, that I will
speak tho puro truth and will withhold and add nothing.

(Tho witness reported thp cath.)

TIE P&LSmCJ.T: Tou nay sit down.

Witness, before you aro brought to tho witnoss stand, tho
prosocuting authorities advisod this Tribunal that you aro now being
held in custody by tho Asa rican authorities, upon suspicion of having
actively participated in cor tain allegedly orixdnal nedicAl oxporiw>nts
held at Dcchau Concentration Crrnp prior to liberation, for which you
my possibly bo prosecuted as a war criainal. In view of this stato-
mnt rado by tho .rosocution to tho Tribunal, tho Tribunal now wishos
*-: caution you that although ycu arc now boing ori lod as a \ritnoss and
will be orr.polled to answer questions under oath, tint any statoronts
~.dc by you as a witness can and nay bo used as evidence against you
in th. ovont of such a prosecution; and that, consequently, you nay re¬
fuse to nnsuor such questions put to you as nay, in your honest opinion,
t.rd to inarininato you. Do you understand?

* Tos.

T ; .7JSJDuTi: Tho Prosocuti-n nay proceed with tho exanination.


- 595 -


17 >c-A-J?-i3-2-leaser (!B)
Court No. 1»


DEEC7 SXAItnKTICB

♦

ST 12- 'oHAKSI:

Q Tour mu is Halter Neff?

A Tes. .

Q Tou wore born on February 22, 19C£ at Augsburg, Co many?

A Yoa.

Q Aro you a Goman citizen?

A Yoa.

Q You are presently hold as a civilian internoo at Nuraborfc?

A Yoa.

Q Now, witness, I na going to put n ninbe-r of quostiona to
you are! I want you to tell the ocaplcto truth and to give ua tho full
story a a you know it. First, I would lifco to ask you a fow quo at ions
about your background and how you happonod to go to Dachau, ^fooro
wore you living and what wore you doing prior to 1939?

A in 1932: I was in Drugg-on-dor-i-ur. There I loomed that
an ottaok was planned on an Austrian Gondarrorio Post. 1 reported
thi* to tho Austrian polico but boforo tho dood was ccooittod I arrest¬
ed the two foraons roaponaiblc nysolf and turnod then over to tl>o polico.
Th> two pco.-lo wore condecnod to death by tho Austrian Courta and I
ippoircd as vltnoss before tho Court. In 1937 I oaao to Gernany &nd
I worked ir. tho Aninal Brooding Socioty in Kissau. On tho 16 th of
February 1933 I was arrostedj I wr.a taken to tho Goatapo at Munich,

llittolabachor Palais, and after U rooks I ytoa takon to tho Dachau Con-

•

contention C-uap.

-i You wore takon to Dachau as a political or a crirdnal

prisoner?

•* I was takon to Dachau as a political prisoner.

Q Aid was tho reason given for taking you thcro because you
•v.d informed cn the bo-b plotters ir. I93i> in Austria?

 Yos.

Q fere these berb plsttcrs in Austria, Nazis?


- 596 -


17 Jtec-i-JP-13-2-lesser (Jfi)

Co'«xt So. 1*


X Those boob plotters were two SS non.

Q -fitness, have you ever been convicted of a crias?
k Ho.


- 596 *


Court !.o. 1.


Q New you went to Dachau In Itarch 193S, is that correct?

A Tea.

Q Non will you explain briefly what work you did in Dachau—
■br.t duties *rerc assigned to you?

A Ufcen I rms taken to the emp, according to the law 1 had
x yocr protective custody. This was 3 months in the old bunker in
chains, 6 souths ir. the bunker and then 3 months in tha penal company.

if ter release free the penal company I was in various labor ccraaands,

•

such as settlement barracks construction and in a plantation. In
I 9 K 1 O I be cam tto night watchman in the hospital. In January 19U1 I
*.ook sick and after ay recovery I was made a nurso in the tuberculosis

fe f * A * • • *

■ard 5 but I nust emphasize that I know nothing about the nursing of
tuberculosis.

Q Now ir. 19ljl then you be cam a nurse, in tho oarly part of
ljia, n nurso in tho tuborculosis ward in tho hospital at Dachau, is
that correct?

A Yes.

4 And how long did you remain in that job?

A Until 22 February 19U2, vhon tho oxpcrirjontal station,

■bun Dr. ;lncchor's oxporinontal station ifoe oponod.

Q And that was February 22, lfU2?

A On 22 February 19U2, tlx. oxxrinonts on low-pressure chan¬
ters wore bopun.

Q Now how did it oap n, that you were 3cloctcd to assist Or.

raschor?

A I crust object io tho tors “assistant 0 of Dr. Raschor. I
tis revor Dr. Raschor's assistant ard I was never called that. Tho
ur,: was used only after the Americans had arrived and I was accused
-f co-responsibility. I was assigned to Dr. Raschor because the
Saschar Station was in Block 5 in the tuberculosis section whore I
• as already a nurse.

3 i-iow is it not true, witness, that you wore pardoned in Sep-


.7 D-jc-:.-^-13-3-less«r

Court I'o. !•


tidier 15 U 2 ?

A The Hoiehsfuehrer Si* ordcrod thr.t I wr.s to be freed, with

u 4

tte obligation of working in the Zntccolocical Station until the end
of tho w.-r.


- 597 A -


17 Dec-A-J?-13-l-Lc33or (»3)
Court rfo. I.


Scvertbolesa, in.-ed lately after ny roloaao, I had to. work for Dr.

•teacher. The Jntccx?logical Station was not in the caap and, as far

2 . i know, had nothing to do with experiments on hican beings.

Q Vhat was your status after So-kosher 19U2?

A After ny release ay type of activity changed very little.

. o work, oa such, was sore or less tho sane.

Q TTore you, after September 19h2, a oivilian eaployoc of tho

• •

2 .-vonorbo Institute?

A Yes, I was a civilian onployoo cf tho Institute. But in
liovoabor 19U2 I was drafted into tho Police Roaorvo and I had to ap¬
pear in tho canp ia unifora. ‘

Q This was in Hovecbcr l?ii2 that you bocoao a ro servo In tho
SS Polico?

A In th> Police Reserve.

Q Now you continued to stay in Dachau, howover, after you bo-
cane a nonbor of tho Police Roacrvc, is that not truo?

A Yes.

Q And whon did you first loavo Dachau?

A i ^ aont to tho Russian Front for anti-partisan activity
in August or Suptcubor of 19U3 and I was called back in January 19W*.

Q -'oil now, isn't it true that you loft Dachau in August,
191x3, and took sore training in a polico carp?

A Yob.

Q And it was not mV.l !k)vcabcr or so of 19lx3 that you actu¬
ally wont to tho Russiar. ixoxt?

A No, it could not hevo boon to fora Novonbor 1?U3-

Arxi you case back to Dachau in January 19Ux, is that cor¬
rect?

A Yea.

• »

Q Kcnr, witness, why is it that you were put in the Polico

Reserve?

A I was not allowed to enter tho canp in civilian clothes

- 598 -


17 Doc-A-Jr-13-ii-^sser (13)

Cc'^rt Bo. !•

-r.y longer. I vaa originally to bo drafted into the S3 but then I was
it in th a Police Reserve stationod at Dachau.


o


- 593 A -


17 Dec-*-J?-i3-5-Ie3ser (JS)

Court Kc. 1.

Q All right, now, aft_r you canptback tq Dachau in Janu-xy
*M'» how long were you then in Dachau?

A In April i9ili the expc-risantal station, which wp.a no longer
under Dr. Haschcr, was acred to Schlachtora near Lindau and I went to
Schlachtors near Lindau with ny ccr ire ados. I worked partly in Dechau
t portly in Schlachters until October 19U:. In October 19Ui, be¬
cause of aiding the escape of the jrisonor, 3oris Krontz, Haupfcsturo-
ru hrar Dr. 31oottnar had =o excluded fraa tho hospital and I was no
longer allowod to ontor tho chap.


-599 -


17 Dcc-A-ASchD-li:-i-f<aloy (13)
Cotrt 1.


After that I ;ra3 sent to tha Western Front, also in a police unit, and
stayed there until th* beginning of March 19li5* In Earch 19h5 I vent
back to Dachau. Before the Aaoricans arrived about 60 prisoners, — I
liberated about $0 prisoners and kept then in the houses that wero
tbera for then. About too 28th of April they r.ado an uprising in
:hr.u. The purpose of the uprising was to pro vent the defense of
the area of the crap and to prevent evacuation of tho cacp, and this
pvrpoeo was fulfillod. •

Q You assisted then in tto liberation cf the concentration
caap at Dachau?

A Yus.

Q Now, whan you loft Dachau in April 19UU to go to Schlachtors,
that was for tho purpose of engaging in the production of this Blut-
stillungsaittol, coagulant drug. Now, witness, lot's go back and tako
up tho anttors, tho things which occurred in Dachau in chronological
cr<kr; as I recall, in tho beginning of 19U. you bo ease a nurso in tho
ward for tuberculosis pationts, is that corroct?

A Yes.

Q Does Action lit F 13 or Action 13 uosn anything to you, wit¬
ness?

A Yos.

$

Q Will you explain to tho Tribunal what that action is?

A In tho crap, ospecially in tho hospital, so-called invalid

actions wore carried out. On tho desk of tho coop ward I once was

able to road a socrct letter vhich said "Subjoct^F 13." Tte« contents

were to the effect that tho invalids of tho crap wore- to bo gat ho red

tegettor. That is how I retxnfccrcd tho expression r 13* T Tho invalid

action was introduced in the crap by tho announcement that all invalids

had to report and they would get oasior work and would bo put in a

different crap. Only when these invalids wore taken away did we

realise that it could not be a different living dotail, because the

pcoplo had to turn in their crutches and whatever else they had, and

- 600 -


17 Doc-X-AScha-lii-l-jfcloy (IB)

Court Vo. 1.

they wire taken awry by tho hundreds. . \io could follow thuir route
only aa far aa Lina, but tho death reports which erre in and thoix
clothing which esao back told us that tho pooolo had been liquidated.
This invalid action was followed by a series of periodic other actions
For tho hospital it was as follows:


17 Doc -1-ASc ho-lW-Laloy
Court No; 1


The canp doctor went through the wards and indicctod this one, this one,
that cno, who was to bo listed for tho invalid action, I r-nccbcr that wholo
blocks, for rn. - a. pl c Block 7, was cccplctoly evacuated in cno action without
any distinction of the state of health of the Individual patients, Tho tuber¬
culosis ward was an exception in that it was en cxpcrir.^tal ward, but this

aifoctod only thjso patients who were given the nano "ocpis-incntal patients. 1 !

v

All ether patiajts with tuberculosis, —there w-ro so uxny boenuso they wero
sent to Dachau free: all tho coups—for tho uost part were included ir. tills
action. This action also included that tho x-ray pictures wore taken pariodi-
cally of every cno in the cacp, and those who had tuberculosis waro sooner
or la tor put on the invalid transp^-ts. The period between tho listing and tho
rccovalwas about six weeks, and ovcrjrono who was put en tho list vos ocaninod
orx>o tore, not by c doctor this tlxao, but as we know by a Gestapo official.

Tho official usually asked three questions - wero ycu in tho World war?
muTo ycu Woundod? Why oro ycu in tho canp? Then tho slip was signed and put
in tho files. Wo knew that this signature was a doath scntonco, For us nursoo
it was probably difficult for this ruason, when there us invalid action and
tho cro-p doctor was selecting pooplo, there was danger that the wholo block,
without consideration for individuals, tould bo put on the invalid transport
list. I cwu it to tr. Brachtols that 1 was frequently warned that on invalid
action was coning up; in that way it was possiblo to help very uany patients
ir -no way or another by transferring the*- to tho coup during the pariod
of dangsr and returning thcci to tho hospital Inter, or placing thcti under tno
protection of tho exporixzaital station. But the terrible thing about it was
that cno oould help part of those pooplo, but had tc leave the ethers to
their fata. And then there was another action, that was tho so-called "tooth'l
acti-n. .11 prisoners had to go to the hospital for cannination and troctiiunt

0 . •

of thoir tooth. In r -ality it was dctorclncd vhothor tl *2 prisoner had gold

/I

in his f^cuth or net. If iv* had gold in his nouth ha was registered carefully,
and oi’t-r ho died ho had to pay tho gold fron his ucuth for tho last tributo
for the fight against National Secialisc.,

Witness, can you tell us appruxicAtely ha; nnny people Were included in

-601-


1? Doc-A-ASc'r:-Ui-3-^loy (}fi)

Court Ho, 1.

those invalid transports during the period that you wore in tho hospital
«ard, end I toko that to be free 19U1, tho beginning of 19U1 until
February 19fc2?

A Fraa tho hospital I know that in the course of tho year of
19U1, and tho beginning of 19U2 a littlo over 2,1,00 were sent on in¬
valid transports, I know that so accurately because I always noted
down tho date and tho figures, and tho list is in the hands of tho
Court in Dachau, and also in tho Inf orrv-tion flontor, Dachau, by
Xlaiaheiaorstr. 90.

Q t.'oro paoplo included in theso invalid transports othor than
iron tho hospital wards fron which tlsoso 2,000 you have nontionod oano?

A Those no doubt lncludo tho ones who were roloasod froa tho
hospital to tho caap, but at tho tiao of tho liatii* wore sick in tho
hospital, Thoy noro also sont on tho inv-lid transport oven aftor thoy


had recovered.


17 Dcc-WP-l!;-la-i4aloy (IB)
Court Mo. 1.


V

Q Mow, does this figure of 2,000 cov^r sinply the period in
19ul "hen you kopt tho files or doos it covor tho whole period from
the boginning of 1911 until February 1912?

A If I mdoratood tho question ccrToctly, whothor tho in¬
valid notion we.a finished in 19l*2 or whothor there wore only tho
pntionts who ikjto registered.

Q Mo, witness, I aa trying to find out cloarly what this
2 ,OCO figuro covers; now, as I understand it, for sono five months' in
19lil you kopt cortoin files on tho hospital, did you not?

A los, I uroto them dotm four or five norths of courso, not
officially.

Q Nov, you con say because of having kopt those figuros that
a certain nunbor of pooplo were sont on ttaso invalid transports?

A By naao?

Q No, tho nuabor; and you have nontionod tho nunbor 2,000,
new is that 2,000 tho nuabor of pooplo who woro sont for tho period
of b or 5 norths when you have kopt tho filos or does tho 2,000 figure
ccvor tho whole of 191*1?

No, not tho wholo year 191*1. As far as I recall I ob3orvod
-.rd registered this list carefully 5 or 6 aonths. Lator I didn't hare
tho tl^n to do this and I did not continue to write them dram.

Q And can you give us tho ostixr.to of what the total figuto
for tho yoar 19l*l?

A Tho total figure for the yoar 191*1, tho hospital including
the canp, was a littlo over 5,000.

^ How, do you know whothor or not those invalid transports

• •

C’ntinuod after you loft the hospital in February 19l*2?

A ” In 191*2 I an sure tfcro woro invalid transports, but how
-- r *€ they wort on I do not knev exactly.

Q Now, witness, wore non-Goman Nationals included in t lie so
invalid transports?


- 603 -


*


17 Dcc-A-JT-lL-la-’iiloy (!S)
Court 'fo. 1.


A Anong the invalids thoro waa a largo percentage of non-
Gcracne* At that tinw the casp had a such higher percentage of -ria-
orily people fre® the East.

Q That la to say Hussiana and Polos?


17 Doc-A-JP-1U-2a-? r aloy (1C)
Court No , 1 .


A Russians, Poles, Czechs, Tugo Slavs, prioarlly.

Q Did you, while you wore a nolo nurso in the tuberculosis
ward, have to yourself select ac ra? of those tuberculosis patients to
bo included on sono of those transports? #

A Tho order to select theso pooplo was navor given to no. It
was liito this. Dr. 3rachtels told no "thoro is an invalid action, from
your tuberculosis ward, you will have to report at loast 50 pationts.

If you do not do that, tho crop doctor will soicct then. You can

4

isagino how nany rill bo left thon*. I have always said it was ter¬
ribly difficult for such nurses to. uakc a decision, to decldo whotlvar
the selection of 50 was tho lessor of two ovils, or wbothor wo should
loavo it to tho chief doctor to select the invalids. Affcor tho chiof
surg-on, Dr. Holtor, in ono invalid action had put the wholo block
with tho exception of tho oxperLontr.l pationts, on tho invalid list
in tho second invalid action 1 selected and roportod tho patients
who wore confined to bad and who could not be transferred to sono otter
block, or sonowhorc oloo.


17 Dec L6-A-15-1-W3-Sfae ban (!3)

Court No. 1

Q Now, you state that you -to sure that these people woro
transported to a place near Lins end then oxtc mint tod?

A Tho prisoners were of course inUrost-d in knowing whore
there comedos v_re being sent. HO could follow tho route only ns far
as Linz, tho return of the clothes and the doath announccfa-nts of tho
Goman ixlaonors. Thj announcoatnt ire road in tho cnap papers proved to
us and made it known tc us. The e&th anncuncojcnts always said they had
died in Dachau.

Q Witness, wore you ever told what tho purpose of those invalid
transports was? *>. . . \

A «b read in tto Papjr "Cesaoa" at tho end of 19 »j 0 or beginning

of 19U1 an article by Prof. Buttorsack. -In this artiolo of Prof. Butter-

sack cf Ooppingon it stated that it was necessary to havo sick parsons,

»hc wore usoloss oators, eliminated as nature doos. As an oxruplo, ho

gave tho rat end ho continued by s~ying that it was designated against

•r.ti-social people, against people who woro ononios of tho Third Roich

•ad th.so who woro political criminals anc they woro to bo treated in

•

the same way. Uo roalitod then what was boing doiw and what vt.s planned,
-o also know that tho Bishcp cf Oalon Khd taken up a stand against this
action. That was thi cnly way that I can explain it.

U And all of this - those invalid transports - wore what you
as Action F-13?

A Tcs. '

Q Dc you knew of any rc frea Serlin, any important figures,
that wore interested in this Action F-13? Per «x-xiplc, was Centi sup¬
porting this action, according to your knowledge*

A I don't know if Conti had anything to dc »dth this action.


Q Did Conti ever visit Dachau?


17 Dec l^-A-lS-2-UG-lfeehan (!£)
Court Ko. 1


A Yos, Conti was in the Concentration Cmp Dachau several
tiaos. Ho visited the tuberculosis ward twice and as far as I knew
he was in the concentration caap once cr twice before.

Q New, in the tuberculosis ward did they, in fact, conduct
certain experiments on the bettor nethods of treating tubercular
patients? For example by Biochemical naans?

A Tba experimental station for tifcorculosia was organised
as follows: Thoro was a Hooeopcthic station and a Ifodical section,
iach section had the same nuebor of pcitionts with about tho same cose
history end they miro proving which of the two types of treatment led
to quickor cure. Tho Hoooopothic section was directed by Hanno von
Wyhorn and the radical section fron 1 April 19U1 by Dr. Brachtol. I •
am convinced frvm the facts that tto persons received additional rations,
nilk, otc., in tho oxpcriaontal station and this did tho tubercular
patients ococ goad*

*4 Let us move on now to Fobruary of l$lj2. Whon did tho high
altitude experiments begin in Dachau?

A Tho first high altitude oxporimonts wore on 22 February
19U2• Tho so-called low pressure cars had boon brought in owlior and
dismounted. The oxact time whon tho care ccra I don't know.

Q i'hy do you rcaonbor the date whon tho first experiments
"era made in tho low pressure ctercbors so Will?

A Tho 22nd of February is ay birthday and tho tubercular #
pitionts cv.dc a celebration for vo. On that date tho ejpori^tnts
started and that is why I rozwaber the dr.to.


17 Dec li6-A-15-2-UG-Jfeehan (!£)

Court Bo. 1

A Yos, Conti was in the Concentration Camp Dachau several
tioos. He visited the tuberculosis ward twice and as far as I know
he was in tho concentration caap once cr twice before.

Q Now, in the tuberculosis ward did they, in fact, conduct
certain experiments on tho bettor nothods of treating tubercular
pationts7 Por exanple by Biochemical moans?

A The experimental station for tifcorculosia was organised
as follows: Thoro was a Hooeopcthic station and a Ifadical soction.
tach soction had tho sazao nmbor of pationts with about tho sano case
history and they wore proving which of tho two typos of troatnont led
to quicker cure. Tho Hooeopcthic soction was directed by Hanno von
Nyhorn and the nodical section fren 1 April 19Ul by Dr. Brachtcl. I •
an convinced five the facts that tho persons received additional rations,
nilk, otc., in tho oxpcrirantal station and this did tho tubercular
patients scoo good*

Q Let us novo on new to Fobruary of l$h2. Whon did the high
altitude Gxporincnts begin in Dachau?

A Tho first high altitude oxjx-riaonts wore on 22 February
19U2. Tho so-called low pressure cars had boon brought in onrlior and

w

discounted. The oxact tine whon tho care caaa I don't know.

Q why do you renoabor the date whon tho first experiments
woro nede in tho low pressure chrabor3 so well?

A Tho 22nd of February is ny birthcL-y and tho tubercular
patients nr.de a eolobratien for uj. On that date tho experiments
started and that is why I reccnbor the dato.


- 6c6 -


37 3cc—CES-15-ln-ifcrhan
C".'.rt 1.


*-'o you readier iiu.t the let: pr. ssun. chuobcr arrived in Dachau
•Mi eye bofere 22 Pabrutry 1915?

-- T-s.


i': j. i -a bClr .3 to Jnva
Ljzs? t:d.a xa a b:ck entitle*’,
.*/. -Ml’JiCf, cell tirr. :i >.5ul


V~ck r 'yl to ym nut’, 'f th-j Tribunal
jrun-'risj e’er LuftfrlirtnoSizin'’ by S. Huff

I su :5tefcr ’.ho v_tn-ci :o le-»y *.t, i ^


.;i .vvo 29 em! ;i .o • l vibu..rl J HI -\r pTSpsu:o chnnbor, -.fhich
-_e j.i ? .-hen, iu sLiL-r t- - n- shan i'i this picicro.

• (tk: m^ess is .«sjr.: '.Li


• fc ’ ■ Y * 3 - ' ’ • . .

- ; -y it please r:> te.ibur i, n-t -r.ro U of for th* beck in
cv?. icnec.; hraever, I bctlcvw j u irf; :t 111:.- to 3o k rt fcbo picture and get
m U - f tir. ch-.nh.jr, s thet I a - *.skin£ that it bo pa&aoC u;.


(th ? ok is siur.: m


i- .iln;a», rr.j -i*s xr‘ .z.‘lc Vo - iVos.vrw c .■caber?
••. Tea.


2. fits. T/he brought tire ab.v-hc;.- _oxo. % Oechau? Dc -*v Iain.'?

It rj brought into th„ cr. *p by a sorA truck n‘ Jr. .(cntvrr. cauo
■ it', it ane he C“ v - the ;r;ors for t!fc nueufcliu^ car* cu*W»vt.

•. itnc3s, <3c you knew •'■ctJ'-r;;?

... Y.j.

2c- ;ca scv hie ir vhc c’C-.i rnt : s bo:?

. lea

-ill f'u tell the c.urt -v.oro be is r'ttir? in tiv. :!eijndant'a box?
•. "He IVurth nan in th~ nrc nl r.j.

.. Tnc f uriii aar. ir.-a Uu. far end cl' the oux ;r:_ y«, i-itnes??

1.3.

I w_ll ask the rce-r'l show that tkr defendant '.laiberi vrrs properlj
- eralfiod by th_ ■^iir-xjs.


-- 2 PS .SUSKT: Tire raccrx*. r~y sr rherr.


-6a*-


17 Dec—<F£-l5-*?a-ikchsn.
—C"urt 1.


^z.trs:

.. Do ycu !(DW c cy the nrre: of Siegfried Ruff, witness?

•. OUjfricd Rufl um present cn the first day cf the exp-rinents
21’r^I. I believe that I cm roccgnizc huff.

•

,~ny tines h^vc veu seen Huff?


- 604 -


17. Doc. -A-Jff-16-i-Perrin
Court Ko.l


A. I can only recall having seen Ruff once, with certainty.

Q. Eb you see a nan than you recognize to be Ruff in the defendants' dock?
A. I an not quite certain whether it is the second nan in the second row.
Q. Of all the people sitting in the defendants' dock, you find that the
second nan froa the far end frors you appears to you to be Ruff?

A. Tea.

MR. McHANEY: I vdll ask that the record show that the defendant Ruff has
been properly identified by the witness.

THE PRESIDENT: The record will so show.

a %

BY MR. MC HANEY:

Q. Witness, do you know a nan by tho nano of Georg August Weltz?

A. Yea.

Q. Do you see hia in the Defendants' dock? ‘

A. Yes

Q. Where is ho sitting?

A. He is tho sixth can in the second row.

MR.He HANEY: I will ask that tho record show that tho defendant Ifoltz has
boon properly identified by iho witness.

THE PRESIDENT: Tha rocord wil^ so shir.

BY MR. He HANEY: 1 /

3. Can you soe the full box '9roiz whore you aro sLt> f i.ing, witnoss?

A. Yos. *, 'f

Q. Da you know a nan by the nano of Kolfrsa Siovs 17, J
A. Yos. V

Q. Do you see hin in tho defendants' dock?

A. Yos.

Q. Whero is ho sitting?

A. The first nan in the first row nearest to no.

MR. HcHANSY: I will ask that the record show that the deford ant Sievoro

has been properly identified by the witnoss.

THE PRESIDENT: The rocord will 90 show.

-#fh


17.Dec.-A-MK-l 6 - 2 -Perrin
Court Nc.l
BY IB. McHANZY:

Q. How, witness, I will ask that you carefully look at all of the defen¬
dants in the dock and indicate which of tho people there you have seen befor-

A. I recognize only one nan that I saw in the ccp,

Q. What oan is that, witness?

A. The first can in the first row, the fart her ost one fron me.

C. .'nd can you recall when you saw this nan in Dachau?

A. Ho. Possibly in 1941 or '42, but I don't know on that occasion.

0. How do you rccrcber that you have seen vhis nan? Do you know his nano?

A. Ho.

Q. You just roccll his face?

A. Yes. •' ; - •

q. Da you renenbor whether on tho occasion that you saw him that he was
inspecting tho oxporirtcntal stations in Dachau?

A. It nust have boon on tho occasion of a visit, but whother it was an
inspection of tho experimental station, I don't know.

Q. Witness, I will ask you if Siovcrs was wearing a b^ard when you know
him in Dachau?

No.

q. Dsos tho none Kurt Blono noon anything to you, witnoss?

A. Fron Dr.Raachcr I frequently hoard tho nano Blooa in connection with
tho blood coagulant drug and in connection with Robert Veichs. I onco road
a docisncnt which was a sort of judgeent of racial characteristics of Robert
Voichs which had bean written and signed by Blono.

Q. Why was Blono interstod in Robert Veichs?

i. Whother Blono ?«as intorostod or whether Raseher had asked Blono to take
an inter oat in Veich3, I don't know. I as sun?, however, that Rase her wont to
aiocne with Veichs because of tho blood coagulating drug or because of racial
oat tors which played a big role in the Voichs affair since Veichs ind been
brought to the caap as a jew and under difficult circuastances.

Q. Well, did you understand fcton that Blono was perhaps interested in


-6lo-


17 Dec. -A-4K-l6-3~PoiTin

Court to.l

racial questions in Gcrrany?

A. I hoard free Rascher that Blooe was working on a section for racial
questions*

Q. How cany tires did you boo Blcno, if at all?

A. I saw Blocc onco in Hunich on tho occasion of a visit of Rebert Voichs
to Blone, that is, Robert Voicho had to return c radio which IT. Raschor
had had repaired to Blo n e. On this occasion I saw ET. Blooe.

Q. I will ask you to again look at tho defendants', dock and carefully
search tho faco of oach ran there ani sco if you can recall having soon any
of those non on tho occasion of your contact with Blore?

A* Ho.

Q. Now, lot's go back to the high altitudo experiments. Hill you toll the
Tribunal who worked on thoso exporireit-s?

A. ThJ experiments woro conducted by ET. Raschor and Dr.Raschor and Dr.

Roborg. Ton prisorers wore solcctcd and woro taken to the station os porraancr

experimental subjocts; and thoy mro told that nothing *w>uld hnppon to thorn.

In tho boginning, tho first threo weeks, tho experiments wont off without)

incidont. One day, howevor, Raschor told no tho njxt day ho was going to

sake c sorious experiment and that ho would nood sixteen Russians who had

boon condemned to death, oml ho rocoivod thoso Russians. Thon I told

Raschor that 1 would not holp, and 1 actually got Raschor to sorri mo away

to tho tubercular ward. On that day I know for certain that Raschor'a SS-Han-

Endros or other SS-ton conducted thoso experiments. Dr. Romberg wa3 not thorc

that day. I Ye SS-ilan-Endrcs took thu Russian prisoners of war to Raschor and

in tho ovoning tho parties wore taken out. On tfo next day when I returned

to the station, Bidro3 was already thuro and ho said that twj rrcro, t»*> Jow3

would bo killed. I an quoting *iat ho said. I loft tie station again, tut I

watchod to soe nto rculd bo taken far tho exporlrents. I saw tho first ore

got ting into tie cat. I could only see his profile. It socood familial' to no.

I know that man -.forked in tie hospital as a taller. I tried to find out if ii

was really that an. I went to tho place whore he werked, and I was told that

- 611 -


17 Dcc-A-LX-lo-la-ftjrrin (M3)
Ccurt Sc- 1


Entires had just taken the can array* The first person that I informed

iras Dr. Rcuberg whoa I t in tto Corridor. I told Rodbort that this

was net a person who had been condemned to death, that this was a

clear case of uurdor on the responsibility of Endros. Rcrbort want

with co to see Raschor to clear the, matter up, but it was discovered

that Endres had put this can in the experimental car- because he had

refused to make a civilian suit for the SS man. Raschor sont the can

back; Endros went with hin; and remarked: "Well, then you will get

an injection today." I oust say that Raschor enterferred once more

and put the can in safety into the bunker. In the meantime, Endros

had brought a second nan up, a Czech, whoa I knew very well. Again

it was Roaborg togothor with oe who talkod to Raschor to stop this

experiment or to inquire why a can like ndros was simply taking

4

people who had never been condemned to death. Raschor went to tho
camp cottcndant, Pirkowsky, who personally cam to tho station and
End res was transferred to Lublin txxidiatoly.

And now I can to tho subject: it was actually tho day on
■hich ay co,arodc ard I roachod tho decision that under all circunstnncos,
no natter what happened, I would rc.tain at this —

Q Now, witness, lot uo interrupt you just a ninutc. Wo will
cono back end you can tell tho full story then.

T1K PRESIDGKr: «o will tako a fiXtc«.n-uinuto rccoss.

(A recess was tak en.)


• - 612 -


I

17 Doc-A-A.Schw.-l8—l-Saslaw (®)

Ccnart No. 1.

THZ PRESIDENT: I will ask the Secretary General to -turn this
book over to counsel for the prosecution and dofonsc counsol nay oX-
snino thj book.

3Y HP.. 1C HA3EY:

Q Now, witness, before tho recess, you had been telling the
Tribunal about the high altitude oxporioonts which you stated began on
February 22, 191*2, and you had related how early in Uarch Raschor had
experimented upon s<x» fifteen Russians who wjrc killed and you stated
that neithar you nor the dofondant Roiaborg wore proso/it on that occasion
and you than had goru on to relate tto introduction when the SS nan in
Dachau ncacd Endrcs had brought in tho tailor at tho crap end wanted
hin to be expo rinon tod upon and how you recognized thj tailor and in¬
terceded with Rtxnborg and had this nan returned.

Now, beforo you continue with your story, 1 would liko to put
Soso spocific questions to you. It is tnu, is it not, that concent¬
ration canp irtiatcs voro experinantod on during those hlgh-altitudo
test experiments?

A Yos.

Q About hew mny concentration caap inaatos wen, subjoctod to
theso high-altitude experiments?

a Thoro were 180 to 2CO imatos who wore subjected to tho
high-altitude oxporiaonts.

Q No*/, whon, to tho best of your recollection, did tho high-
-.ltitudo experi-o nts ond?

n Tho incident of tho dead — I a afraid I didn't quite get
ycur question. Will you repeat it.

Q I an asking you, witness, whon the high altitude, experiments
ended: that is, when they wore completed?

A During tho course of June — oaybe the beginning of July,
th. low-pressure charters wery transported away. I do n 't recollect
the exact date, hewover.

Q .'aid you statu that between February 22, 19li2 and th: end of

-613 -


17 Doc-A-A.5chw.-l8—1-Saslaw (!fi)
Court No. 1.


Juno, or the beginning cf July 19li2, approxia'.Uly 180 tc 200 con¬
centration canp inpates were experinonted on?

A' Xos.

Q Son, what nationalities woro cxporioontal subjocts?


- 613 A -


17 Dec-A-ASchw-l8-2-Sasl2w (SB)
Court No. 1.


u I cannot say that with certainty but I think that approx¬
imately all nations were represented there; that is, all nations that
were in the caap, costly Russians, Polos, Gemans, Jews belonging to
any nation. I don't racccber any other nationalities being represented
there.

Q Wore any of these experimental subjects prisoners of war?

A los.

Q What nationalities wore they; do you recall?

A They wero Russians.

Q Mow, *d 11 you tell the Tribunal how those experimental sub¬
jects were selected?

A The oxoeritontal subjects who had to bo subjected to suvoro
oxporirxmts, oxperLajnts that would end in doath, wore requested by
Rasch-r from the cenp adninistra.tion and than furnished by the SS;
howover, this procedure differed with the so-callod scries of oxpori-
=bnts and a number of otter oxporimnts. On thoso oxporinonts, tho
pcoplu were brought into tho oxporlaontnl station straight from tho
cap, that is, free tho blocks.

Q How, did thoy, to your knowledge, nako any offort in tho
coop to socuro voluntoors for these'experiments?

A There wore cert'in volunteers for those experiments. That
was bocauso Rase her preoisod curtain persons that they would bo re¬
leased fron tho cenp if thoy undorwent thoso experiments. He sometimes
pronised tten that they would bo dotailod to ucro favorable work.

Q How, about how any of such volunteers would you say thoru
■on, for tha high-altitude experiments?

A I don't know tho exact numb-r. It is not too high; approx-
iiv.tc.ly ten in a a tos volm toured for that purpose.

Q Hew, did thoso volunteers ccua one at a tine or did they
couc. in a body or just how did thoy present thcasolves to tho oxpuri-
a;ntal stations?

A Raseter coved around tte ecu? quite a lot and on that oc-

. * - 61k -


17 Dcc-A-ASchw-l8-2-Sa5law OB)
Court So. 1.


casion tbe inactua spoke to hla.

Q In other words, tte caap officials and Raschor and Roubcrg
cade no effort to find volunteers, did they?


4 *


614-A


17 Ds.c-A-A'.Solar. lo-3-Sa sLaw (W)
Court 'Jo. 1.


A I don't knew, but I shouldn't think so. I shouldn't think
trc they oado groat efforts to sot volunt^ors.

Q Hc-r, ottor than those np.-r0xirr.t-.l7 t.n person:: vho ycu
?V*to presuntod thiosclves cs volunteers, Kr. all *hi rest it tfcj
subjects siaaiy picked out aid brought in and oxp it--

a.no.d on?

* Ics.

‘•ore ary of those prisonjrs oxporiricntod upon released fzva
tltt concentration canp because thy cniemmt thu exporinorr. s?

' Thoro iu only q:v. nai u-u* rwio.ia-.d after tno high-rltit-
udt r^jori'wants,

c» And who was that?

“ An innate with the nruo ef Zopota ( 7 )

4 And lid ‘ior«>a assist P.asohcr in his Qxp_rL*.ont:.l v/or'.i other
than sUply aiocrr/irg U*o experiment? Su to sooothing in tko nature
:f an as/iatant tc kasetor?

- h'c. Zjbotn was c no of those pro-as vto had t» ondor go
a.st cf tho oxporiaonts and on was alee, usjd on ..no ^xpcrixorit. uhich
'•ic conducted ir. tho presence cf the Ho:caaf>ihror S 3 . On that 00-
coai-'r. ho '".8 .asked by tho RoJchsfunirrw-' ho*. long no had ocen in the
In the. canp anu ho procisod bin that ho would bo released, to «*a
V.tor sent io the Group ru-rlownngor and conaittod there.

Q Tfaa it considered -a pririlojc to bo roloasod to tho Group
Inorlutrangor?

A Bo. Tho inoates who later .roru ‘forced bj transfor to
~ii t .c Tuorlsrangnr thought th~t this was tho verso thing that could
happen to thou.

C> *»fill you t-.ll th. Tribtev-i j_st xr.t thu Group Tucrlowangor
*:s end So Division who received ttoir education in Oranienburg and
wore us^d for special purpose:. At ono tine 200 Goman political
iJr.atcs in this ^roup, were incidentally transferred to tho Russians
all the por 3 >R 3 who were .forced to Jcin this group were vury dis-

-615-


- 615 A -


:


Q. Was tho Tuarlewangor a special caxnndo group?

A* los, it was a social cotxando group and ics cooxittod at tho cost


dangerous spots. How over, I only knew that froc coo-ados to *icc I havo
spelean about this natter after tho liberation.

Q. New, other than tho prisner lopeta w^rc there any othor concentration
oacp locates released as a result cf under join*, tho High Altitudo Expcriaents'i

A. I knew of no case except Zepota.

Q. Do ycu knew of any cases whuro a prisoner coredocnoU to death had his
sentence ccaautod to life iijprisonaont bocauso ho underwent tho High Altitudo
Exparixionts?

A. No.

Q. '.fitness, were any political prisenors used in this High Altitude Ex¬
ports: onts?

Yes, thero were political prisoners who wero usod in this oxporiuont.

All foreigners wero ccnsiderod as political prisoners,

q. Witness, toll tho Tribunal hew ono con toll tho dlfforonco botwoon
a poUtical and a crininal prisoner in a concentration caop?

A. Tho inaatos had certain squaros and nurjurs, tho political inoatoa,
tho Guroan inaates had a red squaro; tho Polos had a red square with a "P"
cnrkod on it; Russia had an "R"; and, all nationalities could bo idontifiod
with tho first lottcr of thair country. Tho rod square with a yellow star
was tho Jaw. Tho groan squaro was tho sign of tho so-caUod professional
criminal. Hero it has to bo said that thuro wore quite a nuebur of people
who had those green squares, and *ho did not fall under tho classification
of professional crininals, but who wore sent to the cacp with that squaro
since the Go3tapo could find no oxcuso to send thee into tho canp as political
prisenors.

3. Now, was this squaro really a squaro cr a triangle?

«. It was really a triangle with tho hood of tho triangle pointod down to
the earth. If it pointed upward, it was a nexaber of tho Kohroacht who was
3 ont to tho cacp for punisheent.

Q. New, to sue up tho:, the political prisoners ware a rod triangle, tho

- 616 -


17 I-x-A-i^cto-19-a-B oard
Court Kw. 1


criminal prisoners «x« a green triangle, and the Jewish prisoners wore a
rod triangle with a yellcw star superinposod upon it; is that right?

That is right, yes.

Q, 1L, w, Td.tr.oas, were these badges warn on tho prisoner's uniform nhero
any cne could sco thco’

A. Yos.

Do ycu knew whether tho deTondant Reeberg know What these aablccs aoent?

... I an quito sure Reeberg know what tboso signs noant.

Q. Njw, witnoss, this Tribunal hrs received in ovidohee certain pictures
of concentration camp inmates under going tho High Altitude rrperiiaents in

Etchcu. Mow, 1 want ycu to leek at t.-wso picturos and I *dll then ask you a

• . . •

quostion about, thus.

(Tho picturos w_re hcrvlvid to tho witness.)

/

‘Witness, I will ask ycu whethvj you see any trianglos on Iho uniforns shown
cf thoso prisoners undergoing tho experiments thoro?

A. No,

'1. Con you explain to the Tribunal why no such emblems oro on those uniforns?

A. Tos.

Q. Shat is the reason?

A. whenever tho experiments wero pyrfcriiud, innr.too roebivod a civilian
suit and no ono could tell they wero inr-atos. !fo aro hero concornod with
photographs, and I knew that inmates, whenever thoy woro photographod, ro-
coivod a civilian suit in a gooc condition, and it had no onbluns on it
whatsoever. That is tho reason r .hy thoy ere not on tho photog-aphs. You could
doV.ruine what triangle ocs rr by tno eotporioontol subject.

Q. 3 ut, idtnojs, ycu have seen ir. sene cf the photographs, that tho
lraatcs had cn tho usual striped priscnur'3 garb. Can you explain why no
apparr on tho prisoners uniform in these pictures?

.. Tnc clothes which tho inmates received wero ooetly very dirty because
-'•'-ry inmate had _nly one suit fer himself, which ha could only exchange or.co
- year, .evi, it is natural that whtn Rase her wanted photographs ftr bins elf
he would give thou a suit, a striped suit, which was clean. Since every inmato


17 D«.c-;.-AScha-19--3-5enrd
Court Ifc. 1

who r.coivod a suit had to suit on his triangle .end his nunbes* hicaolf, it con
bu understood why there was no triaaglo on this suit.

*}• Thank you.

THE PRSIuE^T: 1>. Uc Haney, cay we sea the photographs, please.

■?.. liHUSY: I'os, Sir; this is Document Sc. 610, your Hcccr, and I an Just
Irving tho Exhibit neater checked. This is Prosecution's Exhibit 41, your
• Air. and it coexists of between thirty-five and forty pictures.

How, witness, were any jews exporloontod on in these High Altitude
i-uric unto 9

A. Yos,

Now, tell the Tribunal cpprcoicntcly ,vm txrj prisoners were killed
during tho course of the High jltitudo Exporintents?

v

A. EUrlng. the High ,‘J.titudo cS^ericoits seventy to eighty persons wero
killed.

<}. Did they cocporiojrt on j<ri®n.rs other than those eonduanod to death?

A. Yes.

0 ., Wwre any of those prisoners whe had n-t boon condoanod to death kill—,
during the courao of tho High .Ititude Scporincnts?

A. Yes.

Dc you have any idea how cany cay have boon killed?

... Thore could hnvo boon appracitnloly forty porsona,

Q. That is. forty persons wore killed, tho bad not boon condennod to death,
out of a total of seventy, did you say?

... Yes,

It i-w, Were Stuo of a ’.Dlud, political prisoners?

A. Yes.

Q. Is thoru any way of tailing whet or cr net a priuenor had been condemned
to death, that ic, rhen -ho experimental sutjoct arrival in the pressure
chmber, was there any way to knew whether ho hod boon condoonod to death?

.. once tho experimental subject coma free tho Bunker, that is, as soon
".3 tile ss to.k thee out, wo ebuid always tell they were pris-nors who had boon
cor.Iccned to deaths When tho inmates were sent by the canp leader, and wero
brought there by hie, thu wo could also tell thoy wero persons who coco free

c_ . -613-


17 oec -«.-ASchc-i9-A-3oard
Court Hj. 1


tho canp, and that these mro not persons who fcad boon ccodconad to death.

0- Sow, could Rccberg tell this just as you did?

; , Hj could cr.ly know it if he tried to find out about it, bocauso ho

•{

could hardly diffcrcr.tiata and tell whether tho person concerned caco froa
tho Bunker or car. - frc« tho ccr.ps-

Q. B at, you could toll that yourself?
k- Yos.

Bid Rcebarg over ask you whether or net thoso capcritental subjects had
- <n condemned to death?

• •

A. I do net readier Rccfcarg over asking n.. .-.-cut that.

Q* Woro records ( kopt in tho concentration cao.o which showed whether cr
not a an had boon condocnttf -to doath? . .. .

A. Yoa. •

1 - Do you know whether Rocfcorj over chockod those records?

a

k. I do not knew that.

Q, You do not knew if ho ovu* ch.ckod thaa, is that right?

«. .Vo

Can you roaccbor, apjroxinatoly, hew arny doaths Rooburg witnossod during
these High Altitudo Ewerioonts, if any?

A. I can rcaoebor five casus whuro Rcoborg was pro Sent during cosos of
ior.th; wheth.r ho wis jr.sent on othc- occasions, I do r.ot know, it is poosiblo
but I aa not sure cf it.

,Q. You era suro ef only fivu cases?

- <• ‘ ( *

’»• *&'- Hoclv-r 0 ever t • ■ y objections concerning theso doaths?

... I do not knew about having ;*do any protests against it. •

»• He did net enko lry protest in your presence?

... Only at tho tino when we wore concerned with tho incidont, which I
reported about earlier.I uc not know anything cbout anything else.

.. 'ire incident cbout the tailor?

<• 'km, did tnoy porfoac autopsies on any of theso bodies, tho bodies of

*hg persons who were killoti during tho High Altitude Experiaunts?

-Si?-


17 Dec-.;-iSefco-19-5-9«anl -!-

Court Be. 1

* *

A. I do net understand your expression, autopsies?

fi, gy autopsies, I noan, did they dissect tho bodies of tho persons who
■ere killed in tho Hi^h .J.titude Experiments?

^ 4

... Curing the experiments, one autopsy was perfcrmol, and that wa3 at ton
thouanni motors; otherwise, tho iar/ost number of tho experimental subjocts
wh_ lied wuro autopsiwd in tho morgue.

q. Kjw, you say they actually p-rferuod ono autopsy in tho low pressuro
cnacb'jr r.t ten thousand meters?

km TwS.

C„ '.hy was that done?

rt . I m to little of an export in order to oxprosa my so If proporly. I
only knjw that it was said that gas or curtain air in tho b rain "tileh resulted

• * ~ • a

at high altitudes, and they wanted to dutornino how tho prisoner would react
in thia high altitude.


V—


- 620 -


17 ic.—--A.Schn-20-l- loiacy
Court So. 1

o Did "oab-rg assist in this particular autopsy in th_ lor pressure


csabor?


A *cs.


^as this nan deliberately hilled in the leaf pressure, chanbor?


A -'3*


a Do you j»an to state that h. was killed bo erase they ranter, to soo
ulfwCt tnatw .articular press es ..ad on his body; that is, ho long
tbu-hti to coat lave the pressure until ho died?


.. Ion


f> uu t .ay at pcrtcra mtopsios or dissections undor —.tor:


1 re" do r.ot r oekor that they perrorard dissections undor -rtcr?
loo don't rc:.icjb:r that?

I ar. suit that ras not done in Dachau; and it vould realty have
been impossible considering thu si=o of tho experirontal roos.

<\ D 0 :-ou ivxubcr my eases of disaoction whore the hoart continued

toatin -uter the breast had been o. -ned?

. k Y-s. -Mrin: on_ -ntopsy it tra found after tho breast had b-on
opened a,r’ wi\.n after tho haart had b-cn openod that the heart tras otilu.
bcatin . i h t that -or.etly bccaur. \ brought the Ben apparatus V4o the
err-: w A then recordod this b.r.tinb hoart on tho F:g. This osqxirfacnt
caused any ens-s o’ death bocausw can-. ,aoiv oxporinonts tad re aada 5n ordor
tc see ht»* lony t;o hv-rt of a nor. could beat who ras thus autopsied. I than
h d f,- task cf carrying the rolls of tie Uc E apparatus fror. tho dark room
to C'-j "in'or of tire norjue.

Die --o.-bor. r-itness any of these eases -"hero the hoart continued
bcatin- afUr th- breast had boon o;roncd?

•4 Xs)5 •

1 b« ao particularly intor05tod in that pawnee...non?

I don't law* that since i rasn't actually in the ror uer hut I
-A-ivr -rent there frer. tie X-ray roo.* to the window.

» -r, rrer- any of those dissections performed ihilu tho victim was


s'-ill alive?


-sa-


17

Court Bo. 1


Tlailcy


Vo, because you cannot consider tho beating heart as still being


aliro. f

-a, as far as you recall, there wore no instances in rhich too ox-
per* subject had simply lost consciousness but hail not yet lied •.'.•or. thoy

porforuod an autopsy?

f

Jt i*0«

n Bon, you recall that the defendant &iff *.ms in e'Sehau?

A i r^nxJxsr that cn tho first day of the beginning of this o:.;x.ri=*-nt'
Ruff ins present during the exx-fimant. I did not sc- hln on my other
zeeasiona.


! "or- experiments ixrforacd that first day?
A Tea. . . .

1 -id an;- duath-s occur that day?


q TTo", you have stated that thora rcrc certain voluntcero for tacso
high altitude e:q-riixnts; and you have al3o stated that the first c.xporL-ncnto
•nre carried ,ait on ten subject?. "ore any of those first ten subjects
volur.tev.rc?

.. he first ten o bjecta »-ore net volunteers; and they did not VC ain
at tliw station only at tie bejiimin-:; but tlioy stayod then- durin* 'he or.tiro
per Lei, that Is, for tho ontir- p-rioe that t'x. lor pressure c'icuhor van
th-rt. very ok. of taesa cxpcrlacatal subjects experienced twenty to U.irty
co-i-i-oiLs.

, .itn-ss, bared upon -i.at you observed and hoard at ;achau, can

you say fiat thes- : .xp-rim-nts ircrc conducted for tho benefit of the 'uft-
uaffo? . '

A Xca«

a Jc you roacAor seeing any officers of tho T-uftnaffo visit Uio
exxri-.tr.tal station in Dachau?

* «

.. :crt-i,xly. VVr frequently hi-Ji officers of the juftiraffo, af the
*.r,i of tlw .chr-cclit visited the jsparis-ctal station. Jowover, a c: -^
inly ros-'ber th. hn-.e of the loading SS nen vho rore there; and !m no
.au .; aaj, •uftusffa officer -no visited the experimental station.

\ h-t are the ota 4 of the SS ; xopl« that you rcneAor?

-622-


*


17 Dec.-A-A.Sciw.20-3-Blakloy (IB)
Court ho. i.


A CtxjrgrupponfuohnJr Pehl, Roichsfuohrcr SS Ctoergruppjnfuohrcr
c'v f. Dc« Grawit*, Dr. Barnadorf, end .djutant Schnitsler.

i & was free Munich, Schnitslar?

4 loB.

i ffcs Siuvors in the oxpari.untr.] station often?

A I don't rascobcr that Sievors was present during the oxporl-
r*»pto at thi experimental station.

U You ,x>ar. you do not recall that on any occasion Sievors
.vie'ted fcht experimental station while tho hi^i altitude oxjxrirxnts
wore gvinp 01.7

A I knew that Sievers was then: to visit the block >r. tho
time ^/hon tho station was first plannod and the crunoers arrived; but
X»c-euwt tdl you nor whether at that time the cxpuriiaents wore oleoady
being conducted.

& Dc you recall when it was that Koacher bocamo too head of a
dcpartoor.t in too .uhnonorbG?

“ That tho oxy>.ir>;ital station wr.o subordinated to tho '/J»-
.vinjrbo 1 had startod, as far as I know, at t‘v- tiou cf tho beginning
f th. freezing oxporinonts. Tihothor that had already happanod at nn
jarli-.r date or net I don't know.

0 .jxS you boc.am: a civilian cuploye- of tho "Ahnenurbe 1 -’ in
A?wjb-r, l?l<2, is that right?

A Yes.

Q how, '-itness, did you over near th_ naao of Srhardt iiilch
motioned in connoetion with thos^ liigli altitude orporinonts?

A I.s.

Q On what occasion?

A I had tho impression that Soiixrg tried intentionally to
Tithdrair fren these experiments. He was ill on numorcus occasions;

-ad he !r.d efton left on trips. Of course, the nogativo thing in that
c.-a lection *r.s that Raschjr had to work all the more.

I spoke to Rooberg himself and I asked hia how long the low

- 623 -


17 Dec-A-A.Schw.20-3-Blakloy ( 13 )

Court Ho. 1.


pressure should reicin; and ho said that /iilch was going tc uso th_n,
end hi would try to do everything to send thui gaaj as quickly as
possioio, That happened approximately tha niddle or the crei af " ,y.

I r-i-*±or that Accuse this o:ant the tine for as to try to naku this
c trJts.r hornless.


17 Doc-A-ASchw-20-U-Blakl*7 C B)
Court Ko. 1.


I usad scxao glass filas and started filing on the high* altit¬
ude apparatus. During the next experiment it araushad to bits. Hoji-
borg sonaged to get saao substitute certs within fourteen days so
that the cnanbur was still being used for about another throe w.icks
in spito of that.

Q How, Witness, if I understand you correctly, jo", have
stttod that you got tho iapression that maybe noeberg wanted to with-
ir'cu fro- the so experiments and that upon asKing you wore told that
t’.*i chosbc? wild rocnLi in Dachau throe :anrc weeks and that you thon
attempted to sabotogo tho low prossuro charbev. Is that correct?

A Yos.

Q Ard did you think thro if you succoedod in sabotaging the
etaator that totborfc would vso that as an oxcuso to discontinue tho
experiments?

A I hopod for it, naturally; ‘.rri I hoped that this sorics of
cxjtrisunto would bo intorruf*cd; and I didn't think that ha would eet
hold of spire parts as quickly as ho did.

Q Thon I take it that Rocbcrg disappointod you in hot taking
that opportunity to discontinue the* oxpa-iaents? Is that right?

* Tus.

Q Whoro did ha go to got the spare parts?

A Ho runt to 3orlin.

Q How long did it toko hia before th_ chaabor was again in

order?

A As far as I know, it took fourteen days to throe weeks.

That was the tiro that Reesberg was away.

Q YThon did this occur? .

A At tbs end of Ifcy.

Q Mow, I understand you to t / that tho exporin-nts continued
'-ftc-r the- chaabe-r had been fixed again?

A Yes.

Q Hew nuch longer did they last?

— 621 * —


17 Doc-A-ASch-»-20-4i-31akley ('©)
Court So. 1.


A I*a sure it lasted another three reeks.

Q Wore experimental subjects killed during the last throe

riles?

A Tos. Rascher killed fire parsons on the last day.

Q bv, did the defendant Rorberg witness any of thoso doaths
that occurrod during the last three or four vooks?


I


- (ah a -

(


17 Dec-A-Schw.-2G-3-31akloy (:B) (
Court Ho, 1 .


A I don't reocster that exactly,

Q Ml, now. Witness, if Rooborg nod gons to such ©cArorus
to get tnis lew pressure ehftcbcr repaired and it was repaired, it soon*
A- that no would hare stayed around and observed tho oxporments
ior ths Last feu nocks. Didn't ho do that?

A Rcrbcrg sufforod free .a gall-bLadder d< sor.so air: ,ra e wry
.ften oray front ho oxporinental station; and it is quite possible
that te. nas.i't present at that' tino.

Q You nave statod, as I understand it, that Ronberg wltnossod

at ln.a3t five deaths. Is that correct?

• . _ • •

A Tub.

Q Was ha infornod about tho other deaths that occurred?

• •

A As to how far I.r. Raocher informed Rodaurg regarding tho
n«±cr of toi death cases, I don’t know.

Q Well, didn't r.oaccrg over ask you? Wasn't ho into res tod
in knowing what wont on while ho happonjd to b'. awry?

A I cannot rononber Peeborg's haviig askod personally
what Rancher had dono in tho Quantise. It really is the caso that
Procter was a Stabs Physician of tho* Luftwaffe; and I was, rfUr all,
nly :r. imeto.


^ Can you resenfcor cnly five cases of death which Rouboig ob-


r.rvjd?


A lea.

Q New, let's go back to sabotaging tte prossure chanter. How

long before- that had deaths occurred? Do you recall?

A Fren th_ beg Lining of Kerch up to the transporting awry of

*b:so chanters, it variod. Rarterg rv.co a series of experiments during

"t: day and rostly loft at approximately 6:00 o'clock, in tho ovoring.

’-tea .Raseher continued to work by himself. Sc there wore cases of deaths

a.arl;,- every day. What I want to say is that because of the fact that

' - tv death experiments were only carried through by Raschcr during tho

%

vv.rii.ig, it can bo cxplaiixjd that Ronberg wasn't present.

- 625 -


7


17 Dec .A-ASerw.-2 0 - 5 - 31 .-* ley (!B) f
Court No. 1. ^


Q But you have stated that Rcuborg has witnessed five deaths,

« it's net true that all the death experiments were carried cut during

ths ui«£it, is it?

A Ho. certainly net.

Q toll, that was the impression I got from your answer just a
•yaaut ago that all tha doath exponents occurred at night. That's
net tree, is it?

A No*


- 625 A -


17 Dec. -A-KX-23/J.-Buma
Court Bo. 1

* - V.

Q. All right, no, lot 's expla i n to the Tribunal just ho you
canagod to sabot ago the low-pressuro chcstocr. What did you do to iot?

A. Tho high-alt it ixio measuring apparatus was built into a separate
charixjr: There's a glass tube there which is connected with a glass bottle.
The Bsreuru i ngidn this tubo risos up, depending upon the amount of pressuro
appli»-d and whrt I thought was the aarcury would rise aid the glass would
not bo able to stand tho pre-suro and would thoroforc have to burst and in
that aanner one evening I used a glass fil»- and started to file the back
wall of this caso. Just as I ,-xpoctwd at th- next experiment the entiro
apparatus smashed to bits. TIu thin„ that surprised no, however, was that
not only tho glass guago burst but also the entiro bottle whore tho ncrcury
was had burst too. I can only explain it that the mercury caused the other
pert of tho glass to burst too.

Q. Bow, how wero you ablo'to file this glass? Wasn't it quite hard?

A. As I stated beforo, I usod a glass filo. Iuscd ton glass files
for that purpose; files which wo had in tho hospital in ordor to saw veins
with then.

Q. Now, wo havo been ovor tlx. low-prcssuro experiments and you have
given us quite a lot of figures. Is there anything also which you fool that

A

you should toll us about those high-altitudo experiments?

A. No.

q. All right, lot's cove on to tbo'frcezing exporiasnts. When did tho
froozing oxporixxnts start?

A. During August or at tho end of July tho first frcozing cxporlannts
started. They wero corxiuctod by Prof. Holzloohncr, ft-. Finke and Dr. Rasetor
The froozing experiments can bo divided into tv© soparato departments.

One a series of Holzloohncr-Finko which wore Into? excluded and then a
series whore ft-. Raschcr made those experiments himself.

Q. Ail right; suppose you describe the experimental basin.

A. The experimental basin was built of wood. It was tv© meters long and

two rasters high. It vaa about 50 cent ice tors above tto floor and it was in

3iock No.5. Thoro wore found in the experimental chamber aid basin many

-626-


17 Doc.-ArlflWi-a-Burns

Coart Bo.l C

lighting instruments and other apparatus itoich were used in order to carry
cut Mzisurcrcnta.

Q. Jfow, you havo stated that you can divide the freezing exponents
into two groups; one wtuirc HolzlDotor end Pinto were working *th Rcschcr
and then the period after Holzlochner aid Finkc had loft?

A. los. , .

Q. ifow, will you tell the Tribunal approximately how persons wore used

over the whole period? That is, including both groups that you havo mntionod

A. 200 to 3CO experimental subjocts u.ro usod for those frooting oxfori-

omts. There woro really 36 O to 400 oxpcrimaits that wore conducted sinco .

=any experimental subjocts experienced aoro than ono such cxporinnnt.

"• • • » * *

Sonetiaos even throo.

Q. Now, out of th. total of 2J» or 300 pri*>n<rs usod approximately how
naiy of thorn diod?

A. ~a a result of theso freezing experiments approximately 60* to 90
*

subjocts died.

Q. Mow, how many experimental subjects do you rosnabci that they used

in the Holilocnncr-Finkc-Raschor experiments?

A. During that period of time approximately 50 to 60 subjects wero

usod for experimental purposes. .

Q. Did cny of theso experimental subjects dio?

A. Yes. During that period of time there were about 15, maybe ovoi
18 cos-s of death.

Q. When wos that experimental series concluded?

A. It was conclude ?n tho nonth of Oclbb-r. I think it was at the
o«i of October. At that tire *>L;lochiwr and Kinkc discontinued those
<^pcrW.s giving the reason that they had accomplished their ourpooc and
that it ios useless to carry out further experiments of that kind.

Q. And then Rase her continue u experiments on his own?

A. los. Then Reseller conducted th.se exports giving tho reasons that
ho had to build a scientific basis for them and ho prepared a lccturo for th


University iicrburg on that subject.


17 Dec . -A-MX-21-3-Eurna
Court Ho.l


s~


Q. How long died Raacher continue to experiment *.rLth freezing by cold


wator? s

A* Until May 1943. £

/ Q. Now, woro tho expo r lanital aubjocts forthc froozing experiments


aoloctod in tho sere «oy as for the high-altitude experiment s?

A. Ho. Hero Raachcr turned'to thj carp administration and told'thorn
that he needed so end ao aary experimental subjocts. Thon th; political

V * 4

dopartaont of the camp eoloctcd ton inoatos by naoo. That list was salt

> • /

to .th; Coriander and was si*^iod by tho Coop Corrancior ard they woro
then sort to Raachar's station and the subjocts on that list had to bo

* . f

experimented on. Tho original list I could use as ovidcnco material fiTSK)
*

first Dachau trial as ovidcnco.


- 623 -


17 Dec. -A-4Q£-22-ir-Cock
Court Ho.l


f

Q. How do I under stand than that the experimental subjects used in the
freezing experiments wore political prisoners?

A. Thero woro certainly a raster of political prisoners and also a mnber
of foreigners, but certainly there wore also prlsorars fb war and also
inmates who had boon condemned to death.

Q. Those parsons woro not voluntooers wore thoy?

A. Ho.

Q. How suppose you describe to tho ITitunal exactly how these froozing
experiment 3 woro carried out, chat is what tests thoy nado, how thoy ncasurod
tto toeperaturo end how who tooporaturo of tho iator was lowered ini tho baai
md so forth?

A. Ttieso basins wo filled rith water and ico was addod until tho wator
aoasurod throo dc^rooo, and tho experimental subjocts wjro either dressed
in a flying suit or wo placod into tho ico water in a naked stato. ftrlng
tho poriod wtvon Holzloehnor and Finkc we active cost experiments woro
conductod under norcotiocs while during tho Rnachcr poriod ho hod always
ro joe tod narcotics bocanso ho maintained that you could not find tho oxact
condition of tho blood, and that you would oxcludo tho will power of tho
oxp-riaontol subject if ho was under anosthotic. How whenever tho experiment
subjocts woro conscious it took ooaotimo until ao-ccllod froozing narcosis so
in. Tho teeporaturo was ooasurod root ally and through tho stomach through
tho GL'.vmxQjtor apparatus. Tho sinking down of the Unporaturo until 32 do-
gross was a terrible plight for tho experimental subjoct. At 32 dcgroca tho

experimental subjoct lost consciousness. Tho so persons wro frozen down to

•

25 dogroes body temperature, and now in ordor to enable you to understand
this problem, I should like to toll you something about the Holzloohncr and
Finkc period. During tho poriod whon Holzloohnar aid Finko wore active no
experimental subjoct was actually killed in tho watc. . Tho death cases only
occurred at that time during -ho re vial or rather during tho ro-warming. Tho
teeporaturo was further ccolod down which caused tho heart failure, ard this
also occurred bccauso of the flight therapy so that in contrast to tho low
pressure chamber experiments, it has to be said horo that tho death victims o:

- 629 -


17 Doc »-A-4QC-22-2-Cook


Court Ifc.l

the Fimko-Hcizlcchnor poriod woro not in tho basin having their full
consciousnoas, whilo in tho air proaauro chaabor each death case cannot
bo oonsidorod ca an accidcit, tut as a willful nirdcr. Howovor,it waa
different vfcon Raachor personally took over theso experiments. At that

a largo number of tho persons involved woro kopt in thi wqter for 33 1
long a tino until thoy woro dead.

Q. Mow, witness, you hare identified tho defendant '.eltz in tho defendant
dock. On what occasion did you rest ifcltz?

A. I mt Woltz in Munich. I saw his there onco. According to ay rocollec¬
tion it waa in Luftgau Dopertccnt 7, Prlnzro 6 cntcn straaso Ho.2, aid I atw
hin spoak thoro to Raactor ad at a later da to Raachor told no thnt waa
Professor Woltz. I rcronbor this incident oapocially ainco Raachor often
discussed Woltz ana his animal experiments which ho carried out with rofo-.
rcnco to froozing nattora. 1 novor saw Profoaacr \foltz in Dachau or nnywhort
in tho camp. w

Q. Do you know Witiwss whothor Raachor and Woltz exchanged inf creation
on froozing problcaa?

A. I don't kre>w that. I stould assuaj it ainco Raachor diaeuxsod Profooac
Woltz'a experiments, end ho certainly must havo had ooaa exchange of idoaa _
with Woltz regarding tfcit enttor. Howovor, I know of no corroapondoi co with

Woltz. ■ : •

Q. Eb you recall tho occasion whon tw> Russian officers woro experiments

upon in tho froozing experiments?

A. las.

Q. Will you rolato that incident to tho Tribunal?

A. Yos. It isia tho lorst oxperiaont which was ovor cariiod out. From
tie bunker two Russian officers waro carried out. Wo wore forbiddon to
apeak to thorn. They arrived in tho afternoon at approxinantoly U o'cclock. ,
Raachor had then urdreased ad thoy had to go iito tho basin in a nakod
3tato. Hour after hour passed and when usually after a. short tiao, 60
ainutoa tfc freezing would had sot in, thoso two Russians wore still cons¬
cious even after two. hours. All of our appeals ro Raachor asking him to

-630-


17 DocHL-MM2-3-Cook (13)
Court So. lm


c


173 ttra-=n injection wss without purpose. Approximately ir. tho third
rt one Russian said to the other, "Ccorado, toll that officer, that
a ry shoot us." Then the other one r-plied, "Don't expect any norcy
irx* this e'acist dog." Then both shook hands and they 3aid, "Goodbye,
CoarcdD." And how can ora inagine that wo inaates also had to to wit*—
nesses of such a doath, and could do nothing against it. then you can
r ally cstiantc how torriblo it Is to bo conceunod to work ir. such or.
07porijnontrJ. station. After these wards, which were translated to
Rustics by a young Pole in a sonowhat different Torn, Rasch-r wont back
into his office, ?ho young Polo irnodiatcly tried to givo then on
onustnotic with chiorofcm, tut Rascter returned isnod lately. Ho
threatened us with a pistol, and he said "Don't dare intorforo ana ap¬
proach those victins." The cxycrircnt lasted at least five hours until
death cot in. Bath corpocs wore sent to 1 Munich for autopsy in the
Schwabischoa Hospital ttoro.

0 Witness, how long did it normally take to kill a person in
these freering oxpcrlncmts?

A Tixj length of the oxpori;x>nt varied, according to tho in¬
dividual coso. It always varied cchsidarir; tho fact whothor t>o sub¬
ject was clothed or unclothed. If his physical construction was weak
".rvi if in addition to that ho wr.s naked, death often set in «lroady
aftor 80 ninutos. But thoro wore a nunber of eases "tore tho oxpori--
cantal subject lived up to three hours, and remained that way in the
water until finally doath set in.

T'Z niSSIDEhTs Tho Tribunal will rccoss until 9:30 tomorrow.


c


CORRECTION SHEET
for

CORRECTED TRANSCRIPT
18 December 1946


Pago 644 in the attached transcript is non-existant.


nf*

18 >c-iWES-l-l-«alcy
Court bo. 1


CCFY


Official Transcript of the American '.lilitazy
Tribunal in the natter of the United states
of Aaerica, against liar! Brandt, et al,
defendants, sitting at Nurnborg, Germany cn
Dccerfcer 18, 1946, Justice *5eals, presiding.


THE P73SIDE3U: The YAl ltary Tribunal is nou in session. God save
the United States of ..aeriea and this Honorablo Tribunal.

There will be order in the court.

THE P*fSlD2 T: The Iinrshal will ascertain if the doferui nts are
present.

THE llUtSKAL: iiay it ploaso TourUonor, ell defendants are present
in court this rorning.

THE ^A33I32cT: Tho Secretary General will note in the r.dnutos tho

prosenco of trio defendants in Court.

Tho prosecution :r.; proceed.

LATER 2C?r — Rcsuaod

DIRECT EXhIlK.;TICIi — Continuod

3v. ;n». ;SdL a JQET: (Counsel for tho prosecution)

. fitness, at tho end of the socsicr. yestorday wo wore discussing

•

tho freezing oxporixzmts, tho water froozins,exporironts, and you had
described to tto Tribunal the death of the tS*o Russian officers; 1
would liko to a3k you a few noro ,-uostions with raspoct to those frooz-
ing exporiaarts. ’rill you describo to.the Tribunal the not..od used for

renaming the victims of thu freezing experiments?

During that period -.rhen Raschcr and HolzLoehner were there tho
re warning at the beginning was carried out by naasage and portly by

of drugs affecting the heart, and also by moms of
cal heaters-and partly by r.cans of a warn bath.

./. ach occasiorAh (body temperature v 3 that of the- experimental sub-

'Al *

‘.ct, Xt the orei of /the Kolzloc'.uvjr period the l»ot -Pte-r renaming

was intr^uu^; 1 and that was carried out at the end of tho rovtam-

L’X >lr to.d afc frjfthe exception of a f-w special -xp-rim rts with animal


632


13 _>cc-L r -<F.s-i- 2 - iaicy
Court Ko. 1


C


IV

Baxcth. Tot this wamth about 10 ucron free the concent ration canro r.t
jfcvcnsbruck were ordered to report tc Dachau ar.d were forced to press
thcosolvos naked against the body of th; froson person in order to re-
v.m hin ir. that runer. These arc the methods which were employed in
order to rowans the frozen body.

Mow, it IK; ss, did I understand you to say that tta hot water
bath net hod of r.mn±ig was not adopted until after Kclzloohivr and
Finko had left?

A. .Stev Holzloehncr and FinJehaU left the station hot water re¬
in raing was also carriod out.

„. Do veu recall receiving orders in September 19W fron Sievprs
to take thq hearts and lungs of 5 innates who had boon killed to Pro¬
fessor Hirth in Strassbourg for further scientific 3tudy?

A. It is correct that I had to t:I:o spccinons fron the norGUo
barging to 5 persons who diod duriiig experiments that hr.d to be taken
to Strasbourg to Hirth. I nyrelf, of course, have never carried out an
reduction and therefore tv.vo not prepared these specimens. Sievurs
at that tin. gave the ordor that I should hove to go to Strassbourg and
there deliver the glasses to Professor Hirth, together irith an acccnpany-
ing letter. This was the ond of Scp‘tcnbur or fcho beginning of October.

The travel warrant had been rr.do out by Sievurs and likewise the bodies 1
-•xponse was bom by Ahnenerbe.

% Had the 5 uxpirioontal subjects boon killed shortly c fore you
left fer otrassbaurg.

A, I cannot r^.uabur with absolute certainty whether the specimens
v'jru fresh or whether they originated fror. earlier death cases. I do
know that amongst the spocin.r.s there was one from a Dutchman. The ether
-:tr I cannot recollect for certain tc r y which nationality they wore.

. Did you iolivor thesa hearts and lungs tc Professor Hirth ir.
dtj-ssbeurg?

A. I delivered then in Strassbourg, not directly to Professor Hirth,
re-. I ha I to hand then over to th. 1 boratoiy at tho University there.

633


1C &.c-4W2S-l-3-<fcl05’

Court Ko. 1


C


7iw letter tc Professor Hirth I honied to hie personally, And he wanted
to return aixi see hin in the afternoon, since ho hod to give some¬
thin*: to ao to take tc Dachau. He gave do a closed letter to Dr. Raschor
and a parcel which I handed Raschor for hie to give
to Sister r'ia.

r. Kow, Professor Hirth was also a aenbor, in fact the head of
tho Department of the Ahsenorbe Society, wr.s ho nefc?

A. "o know that Professor Hirth was also making exp-rinents and
belonged to tho Ahnorcrlx. Socioty.

Toll co just what you knew about those experiments itflich Professor
Hirth was carrying out?

A. r can only repeat what I have heard. Aaongst us in tlto canp
there was a rucor that Professor Hirth was also caking fru-aing experi¬
ments with comrades free tho concentration can? at llntzwoilor, but I
h vo not hoard any confirmation of this.

Did you hear what sort of experiments those were?

A. I only heard about freezing experiments, what type or any
details I do not know.

Q. I suggest to you that Profess r Hirth was carrying out mustard
and Lost gas experiments; did you over hear of that?

A. Ho.

As I recall you having stated Slavers mdo cort-ain visits to
the experimental station when the freezing experiments wore being car¬
ried cut?

•

A. Tes, Sieves visited tho experimental station quite frequently.

He ins present a f-w times during experiments, but I do net recollect
•Aoth-r he was present during expcrincr.ts which resulted 1 . loath.

. 3idn*t Raschor rrJco written reports to wix \vr? as being tho
xich rr.r.agcr of the Ahnenarbe Society?

... lh.ro were monthly reports at th. first of tho month and quart-
rly r.. 6 .monthly reports, which were detail_e reports to the Ahnenorbo
l:ci_ty. They wre the working reports, following ir. detail exactly

631


13 Do o-H—. .Schn-I-la-i lalcy
Ccurt l»o. 1


wr.-.t types of experiments and how aany cxperixas wore carrio! out,

I also know at the <x.d of those reports that the nunber of deaths were
stated. I hare deposited a copy of the reports with the Tribunal in


r .. Haw, 'fitness, didn't Raschcr a Isa onto reports to th_ Luft-
gA.u J.o. 7 in Dachau?

... In Dachau t- :.ir District Ho. 7 anJ the Sanitary Dup-rtnant
of K . 7 final reports. These wore reparts which'wore handled .as top
secret, and ttey were sent to the Reichsfuohrer-SS, Siovers and to trt
Sanitary Dopa-taont of the Air District.

Q. Toll tho Tribunal, ‘/itnoss, *fhr.t -this Luftg.au Bo. 7 in Munich

Tr.s?

A. That I camot explain. I only knew that tho designation Luft-
gnu Snnitaotsajst No. 7 oxistod, and that thj i fficos w-ro in the ?rinz
aegontenstr., and that Raschcr w.s receiving instruction free there too.
To'whoa tho reports were handed directly and to wheu they wore passed
or., is southing I do not knew.

Q. 3ut you do know that Luftgau No. 7 w s a nodical installation
of tho Luftwaffe, isn't that so?

... Yos.

;. And was it not on tho occasion of tho dolivery of no cf then-
r-p-rts whor. y -u wont with Raschcr to Luftgau No. 7 .and on thao occa-
3i.i. that you saw the defend art lfoltz?

A. t,-bother it wa3 on that occasion vhr. a rep.rt was dolivored
r s other cccsi-n, since Racchor visited Luftgau No. 7 quite
-- uontly,io soauthing I cannot r-collect .xr.ctl;*. 1 don't want tc
3t .te that it was Just the day w!~r, a t p secret r. tier was handed over.

,. »as ?.-3ch.r well known in Luftgau No. 7 in Munich?

... Yes, be-cauSu before Rascher was th_- head of the experimental
-taticr. in Dachau he 1; d -r. „x? rimxntal station -.kialinj with "s" measures

a ochcngau, -also casing ur. -r Luftgau Ko. 7.

.. now, I’itn-ss, let's sa ve along to th. dry freezing experiments;


635


18 Doc-K5cfc-l-2e-JfclO?
C-urt 2to. 1


C


when wore thoy first conducted, do you lonw?

... ..ccording to rjy recollect i n the air freezing cx>ri; ents vcrc
carried out in January, February nd iiarch 1943. * First of -.11 one
.xperin-nt ir.s rr.da when the prissnor was placed or. a stretcher at
night and put outside the block. Kc w-.s covered with a linen s\ cct,
but bucket of cold vntor was pruxxxi over hin h-rurly. That exo^ri-
rcr.tal subject rorr.ijttd there under these conditions until naming
~j*l thJ tenperaturx of that oxpcriixntal subject w-.s taker. irith a
thenKtioter. Later rfcscfcer said that it had beer, a nist.-.kc to cover
the person with a linen cloth and peur water over hin since that had
produced wr:ng results as the air c-aUd-nat got.at the body «-f th.
person, nd therefore in the future experiment.-.! subjects wore net
-.1 lowed to be covered up any lender, Ylso n.xt oxpcrL r K.nt w-.s a n-.ss
.xpcrirxnt when 10 prisoners were .-.Iso put -.ut-ide n-.ked r.t niji.t. The
tenpurature f «t of thjv r.s aoasured with -. galvancootor, the t)~rc_
with .-v thornu-.otor.

Snachur wr.s present during approximately eighteen to * . »nty ex¬
periments of th-.t type, but I cannot renuafcjr oxr.ctly h w many deaths
ccurro ’ ard if deaths occurred in connection with those experiments.

I rr uld like to say with certain roiorvati ns that approximately thre-o
deaths ccurred during th-.t period.

Cr. one of tho subsequent days, ^r. ?.~.schor tciop*vnod rw.uid said
that ,Jr. Crawitz was h-ru -nd ho w-.s dor -nding that at least ono liundrod
..cperin.nts of that typo should bo carried cut. Ho gave cxi tho order
that ter. exp-rir.cnts hod t' bo c.arriod'out th-.t night by no. 1 told
elr, thr.t this w.s ar inpossibility since 1 did n t h-.vc tho material
t. carry out the experin nts. I tried t. step it. Jr. Cr.A/itz^thun
t d: over th- pli r— and he raid I si.-uld rt-'t try to nake excuses, but
sh uli carry -ut the experiments. I said I w aid try t c rr;* thoa out.
I w.r.t back to th. block and ui3cuss-d tlx i. sttor with •.;* c-.nr-.Jor.

-»• c _rvie3 said they truant it w uld ix ixtt.r t carry ut tho ox-
; rin5rt3 without P.ascher being ?r-scr.t, f >r if .l-.schcr was r-3unt,
it • uld bj trr- darg-rous.


636


18 Dao-JMGKML-ifcchan
Court Bo. 1


C


' o gave .'x. ovipan anaesthetic tc tvn prisoners. Cno dctciinoo whs ,xit
-.ut until ten o’clock in tlx, aoming. ..t night, r.t ton s’olcc':, it
was said no one c.uld cnt_r the canp. If it should be cn‘ '-d, it
w-uld be -X. SJ nan or 3r# Px.schcr rxl vc^ would be warned because
the Chap x uld be 111 unin'.ted with - red lamp, the sign frr the
guards, as u~ one was allowed to r.svc in the coxy.

Toward six o’clock we four..’. the patients b*cic -.utsid-, but wo tool:
a careful record indicating th'.t t*.n oxpurin-nts wer., rr.do. That
is why in the re cor.', of the cxperirv_ntc carried ut by dr. Haschor
it is stated that cxporirxnfcal sublets had reaaiajd fr«a the even¬
ing in utsido temperature free three to ten degrees below freezing
without anything happening to thus and th*t a hot bath put then back
r. their f»-ot. .x ~xp~rt would say inaadiately this was r. psssibil-
ity that cam t bo exact. It was in that manner in thoory wo carried
ut :’.e hundr- ! ex>rii*xts, but in practise there wore only twenty,
x want t- emphasize in these oxperii-nto, there wore neither cas-n
f illn-ss or death. If .luring these experiments nny d.tr.ln* jo
suff-roJ in any nay, I w.uld bo fully responsible for then. knew
as a c nrvlo, 1 ir.s c»rv re sensible to jqr c nrados than these who
iwl not beth-r thoir conscience wit'h this affair.

Q. 1 understood you tc say seething about approximately threo
deaths a few ra:nonts ago. ’..hat did ;- u have ref^rur.cu to then?

... Tlv.se doaths were duo to th- f'ct that during tho initial
of these air freezing experiments, which 3ccurr,d when dr.

.. .sch-r w-.s present when, r f c urs-, it was possible to put the
r-eiplj inside tiiu cell or bl cks, that they died -f the ccr.sequonco3
cr dial during tho freezing.

T. Hrw long wer- these people kept utdc©r3?

.. The 1 ng.st jx-ri abut which I knew lasto 1 '. fra six P. .

* alive the following .-emir,g. It was a err. Maschur Cept ut-
-i f r experimental purposes..

. How lew did their t. p-ratureS ir .?


13 jcc-t^£-2-2-£kohan

Court lio. 1


C


A. Tho lowest temperature, which - can r-c-lloct hiring the
-pen air freezing experiments ms twenty/ivc degr-.s body tmap,nature.

a. It dee it that these ocperlnontal subjects suffered quite
- It, Is th-.t true?

A. Yes, because at the beginning .Yaschcr had pr-hibiecd that
those uxpeMamts were to be carried out undvr anaesthetic, but the
exporlauntal subjects screened tc such nn extent it was inpossiblu
f r Rr.schar t< carry eut the experiments with-ut anaesthetic, so
ho wrote s', report tc th- ?xichsfuehrer-SS in which he gave -.-.asona
and rr.Jc the surest ior. that these cx?-riixnta in the future ». uld
r. t be carried or. in Dachau, ‘but in ..uschwitz or serv. other ervp,

Kew, were these ocacrinu.ntal subjects selected in th- sene
rrnr.er s these for the Wet freezing and high altitude experinuita?

A. Yes.

r. ir> othor words, soau of the cr -rtnental subjects were
political prisoners, sorvj were original prisoners and not all of
tho: had beon condecned t- death; that corr.ct:

A. Of the exporinentai subj-cts oubjectud to '-ir c. oling ex¬
periments, none Were, people uho wore sentenced, tv death. They were
oris n_rs < f various xr.ti nalitica. lh-re Weis, als Canaan p litleal
pris nurs * rd "gruer." prisoners.


633


18 Ifcc.-«-MK-2~3-l3=faan-:


Court Jfo.l


Q. these prissnora had not volunfconrod? Had they?


A. Mo.

Q. ffcw, witness, toll ua to the beat of your ability, tell ua how long
Dr. Raachcr waa a accbcr of the If.'-leal Service of the Luft.nffo?

A. I can only aay that up until tho ond of 1943 Raachcr appoarod in
tto SS unifona. On tho other hand, I knew that as oarly aa tho boginninc
of tho ao freezing oxporieonta, they wore carried out by tho Ahnenorbo In¬
stitute ond tto finances of tho Ahnenorbo Inatituto paid tho expenses.

Q. How do you know that they paid tho oxponaco?

A. I know that fron tho corroapondonco, idiich Raachor had with tho

Ahnenorbo Inatituto since tho cleric working in tho offico was tolling ua

• • • * • •

currently about zest important natters. Ho, too, you know, was a prisoner.

q. But, Raacter did up until tho end of 1943 '•oar tho unifona of a.
Luftwaffo offieny? a that carroct?

A. Toe.

Q. So that all charing tto high altitudo experiments, the freezing experi¬
ments in water and tho air freezing experiments, Raachcr was wearing tho
uniform of a Luftuaffo officor; s that right?

A. loa, ho waa a captain or staff n-cliccl officor of the Luftwaffo.

Q .Alright, idtnocs. Lot una noru on to a different natter. You romnher
that you worked with Robert Woichs, Pacholok and Raachor in connection rlth
blood coagulation drugs?

A. Yes, but pa c hol ok did not arrivo at tho station until tho beginning
cf 1942, whoroca flebort Woichs caw in Uay of 1943. May I, with tho poncisc
of this High Tribunal, explain in detail tho circumstances under which thhac
drugs woro worked on, parallel with tho tioo tho air freezing experiments and
tho wator freezing experiments woro going on? Nor Rrachtf vas trying to deve¬
lop a r.ow type of froozing axporicont by uso of dixoct blood procure dlvico
and 'no was looking for machinery *iich wsuld enable hin to take bleed prossui
directly after. It -•as impossible to teko it diroctly on tho cxporincitoos
onco thoy roachod bottom lcv_l. This would causo a non lot of experiments and
wo wore co to rained to stop Raachcr at all coats in rose woy or another from

639


13 Doc.-4Mtt-2-Wfcchcn


f

Court Ho.l.

taking on thi« typo of experiments. I was sort, out to find a chemical assi¬
stant. Ho noodod scccono for tho laboratory vould bo able to help as

scccono would have to bo tfero for this work on the prisoners themselves,
'i.'oichs was introduced to no, but ho rofusod to try Raschor's experiments and
ho said ho would not work in tta laboratory. Ho said ho was a-ctenist aw? th
only thing he would bo ablo to cako was a coagulation which would bo used
in powder fere. After chocking with ny coeradcs, m decided wo mist haro thir
nan at tho station at any costs and noybe it would be possiblo to stop Ra-
schor fron caking rhoso -jperirenta in order to make hin carry out hamloss
^xporlronta. Raachor turrwd n> nnwoy on tK> occasions, but tho third tiro
he followed ny suggestions. .

I, rysolf, wont tc li\lchs« relatives to discuss tho nnttor with him and
told hla end his lawyer that I was pursuing tho plan to dotain Raachor, whom
I know was a blood-tound col thus to bring i/cichs into tho station in order
to bring out an oasior type of oxperiront, as good hunan Judpnont was net
causing tho experiments.


1 B Dec 46-H-/.Schw. >1-Purrln( sw)
Court ! r o. 1


There was nr. a -gre«oer.t on the lawyer's oart and also or. Veichs' part and

>v

thus Veichs cflie to our station. «t the beginning of Hay, Rnscher went
or. leave and ir. the amntlxK Veichs had started with the production of
coagulant tsilets. Rasehcr returned towards the end of .lay end .a aothod
was developed which would enable us to test the effectiveness of those
tablets. This was a well-known clinical r.ethod. Froc a vein sooe b^ood
« !, s extracted by ntnns of r. fiypodorcic shringe and the drops of blood
were placed on a glass pinto, and then by auuis of a anr.il gloss tick
they wen. stirred in ordor to find out : ow soon they would got solid.
Thor, -ho person in question would take one or two tablets, f r.d then every
five, ten and fifteen ainutes co:% blood was extracted in drops in
ordor to teat its dualities. Likewise, these tablets wore sent to
tho dentist strtion rnd to tho operating theater. Right up until I was
transferred to tho front — or rather until I bocaco ill ir. tho ur.d of

• t

,'ur.e or the beginning of «uly, I .-.over observed n single occasion
when anyone .-night have suffered throug! theso experiments. "hen I crrcc
b'ck froc t'e front they had reached tho stage where Raschur was
Intending to b.gin tho production of those coagulant tablets which
w-s to take pla.co ir. Luchennu (?) near the Swiss border.

. ’ oil, witness, I und< rst'nd that they cade those linical tests or.
these blood coagulant drugs, but don't you nlco know that hnsaher
ihct people end created wounds or. their body to tost this blrod
•oagul tior. drug under rare realistic cor.d tior.s?
i. nl; after the • rrivr.l of the Aw-rican troops, I honi runors to
t effect free a conrado, tfvt th'ngs like th’t wore supposed to have
-t that tine.

. •ell, but, witness, suppose you sow certain doc*oaonts all written

•

by T>\id Pofcl to Raschor rnd you * lot of Raschor's nail in which
took Ranch r to task for having oentionod in ,*u» article thst
• xperiments ware ir.de cn cqncer.tr-tion vp inmates, would you suppose
t those oxoorinents were the sL~.pl- clinical tests which you

6a


IB Dec CMS-A-Schw-Perrin(S7}
Court He. 1


C


tours cnTitioned? . _

A. A written report 1 roe Er.scher to Pohl is known to ne. Tho
situation was this: Rsschor wts asking a nusbor of iaportnnt written
reports by -rlting thee at hcae, r.ct in the station. If such n report
is in existence then it


6U(o)


18 lee . -M. 5 cbw. rr Is ( AS )

Court So. 1

certainly wasn't written in the station's of'ice bacnueo I have no knovlodeo

. a • ■ m ■ •• - - —

ef any ilcllnr report! Turtbercoro, vs cuet consider thisi fron Juns 1943
Bcti January 1944 I was absent frcn the station.

q. Tou do not recall having soon a lettor then fron vswnld ?ohl tc
Ir. Eascfcor tolling his that ho oust not nation in any roport th'it he b~s
tc?n oxpariAntin^ on concentration casp inn-toe with rasojet to pcly-ral
or this blood coagulation drug!

A. -'o. I knew nothin* of such a rcoort.

q. jut you 61 ?. hoar aftor you returned fron tHo Bussian front th"t
Snschor had in fact craatod wounds nrtifically on orison a i.. order to
test this blood coagulation dru*. di 4 you not?

a. ?or all naaesf"ry hattors, I only hoard - not nftnr ay roturn fron
•ho Busslna frent - but earlier and altar aftor th njrival of tho Asoricnno.

q. You vero novor pxvsont in the cron-toriun with Taschor whrn ho
dlasootod a body and usod tha bloo' coagulant to o.'o if it would staunch
tht flow of blood?

A: So, I n>v»r saw that.

q. "oil n», witness* you ruc-nb-r bavin* soon Prrfeo cr Bloa.- on
cu occasion, don't you?

... I saw ^rofossor ?loa» oaao flo-tin*ly in .’unich at a tjxw when
Voices h-d to roturn a r-dio sot to I'Iodo. but I never saw - Ion nt tho
ot-.tion.

q. I didn't ask you if you had -cm hin at tho station, but I aak you
-cv if ho hrd a custacho when you s-w hio?

I didn't pay oncu*h attention: the- Jero I can't aa? /hothar ho
was wearing a mietach or not.

q. .ow, 41 4 ycu hoar ?r. Haschor nontion blono's ana > on occ-.olons?

A: Tos, that is ccrroct to s»y that anscher scok* of lon< quito
fr*ci->r.tly, not so raich to us thouch but when visitors woro thtre, such
tc Stir.iartcafuohrcr Slovers or other visitors fron thj 3 s , thon Blcoio "fls

* t-lk.-d about.

a. .ij was nontion.- 4 in connection with tho coru-ul-tioa dmee and oleo
in co'...ctiCa with Yoichs.

q. -id you understand that ^lon wae iatorostod in the o-epjrlncnts
icinc conducted, on polyenl?


542


18 Dee.-C W-3o‘.ur«—3-5-?errin (AB)}
Court So. 1


C


I can only as sun:, I can*t state for certain.

3 ' -i~ 1 , lot ae road you a few excerpts iron a diary kept by
SUrors art! s-o if these cculd refresh yuu* rocolloction in any -.-.717
w «., ^,nno»‘' -OK r^t-vroa TiofoBtor Block, and !». Raschor.


1R. Xa.'CTl I an referring to Document 35k6'FS, Your Sonora, and
[ read free pago 170 the English Document Book Nuabor 3. Tha first
try I would like to call your attention to is rurfcor throe. It soysi


"SS-Bauptsturnfuchror Dr. Raschor supplied questions freu production
of polysil oxporirwnts. Proforsor Blau — polypnl report to SS- 0 ruppor>-
fUhror Professor Goble rdt. SS-Unterstumfuchror £bbon as manager of
poly .ul promotion. Color material cheaist for L works, tost roport on
pclyvnl."

Br:n. ;mx7i


Q Sow, what do yew understand all of that to moan, witnoss? Horo
find Professor Blqoo'a mas mntiorud In connoctior. with Tcschor'n,
6 p 7 .aror.tly relatins to the polygal oxperiaonts. Can you threw any light
or. that sue Joe* J

I know that tha leadership of tbo 3S was vory =uch ir.torostod
ir. ; olysal. Cf too color oxperiaonts which you have mentioned, I know
urtl-dn j and it is to bo assunod that 31oac was intorostod in polyqal
Z iZj othondso It would havo boor, impossible that Raschor could havo
•pokon.ao often of Blono and I know that ho of tor. visitod . 1 th ldn.

*] ‘.'hero did Raschor visit with Blaae?


At unich.

Did you understand that Blo:x lived in \irich?


hothcr ho lived at "unich or *.;hothor he ha J his offico thoro,
- n*t know, but I assume that that was whero ha had his cffico.

1 Hot far i3 Zurich fren Dachau?

.» 18. kil coiter s.


1 • another iton in this diary of Siovors says, "Irofocsor

• -

~ by tilephono aivisod or Redchsfuehrer CS order comerrin, his work

-* b'.'-inu an;, collaboration with Raschor.Do you knew what that naans?

613


18 Dec^JWScbp.-3—3-Porrin (ATO)
Court !fo« 1


C


/

A I bog your per don, but I heve not exactly understood what was said*
Q This Is an ontry in Siovors* diary raado on tho 25th of February


S


19kU Tou had >ist recontly gotten back fren the front and therefore this
a*-tor should have been fresh in your id_nd. Tha entry reads,"Professor
3lco3 by


1C Dec -*!i - -•3chw. - 3 - 4 - Perrin "(IB)

Coert Ho. 1

• •

.; 3 ophcoo advised of HcichJftxJhrcr S3 order concerning his ’.:sr?c at Dachau
collaboration with Saseter." In other words, Sievors uas tclophoninc
r-afossor 31on> end told hiH rb^ut the Hoichs fuehrer. S3 order concerning
'Icfr's work at Dachau and his collaboration with deader. Hou, don't you
jayjw eoocthinc about that ?

I know nothing about this telephone conversation. It vee difficult

frea ell these facte to know precisely what tho ryuc xrzo bccauso on the ono

Haschcr said to Ycichs onco if Pohl coaos to this station and if you

0

fiaa.-ncar .*«! it tee to be through the window, don't let Pohl coo you bc-
cauao i« tdll shoot you doim. I never know and ncithor :id Voichs whet the

0

bc-.Cl-round of t te story tea of that, whothor it re a an intr.V.uo of Anchor

a; -.(hotter ?*hl had aooothina acein Ycichs. v eichs did r.ot recall that ho

over ted any controversy '.dth Pohl. To cock back to tte tolophono convorsa-
0

ti«, it nay tewo boon so that on tte part of tte ..hnonerbo Society and on

-•c port of tho Roichsfuohror there was a creat .fcal of fr-occuro for tte

-ro'uction and r»r.ufacturo of ttet coaculaticn drur- i/ that it what it
•

refers to.


6i»5


18 Dec .--G-4-l-Pricd-( AS )

Court So. 1

Q. I don't want to pres* thie oolnt too far, tut the entry very
clearly a ay a that Bloae le to collatorate with Raaeher, and I an asking
you if that vaan't a faat and don’t you know it to have teen a fact
that 3loco did collatorate with Rascher?

A. I only know that 31oa« frequently aentioned Haeeher - excuse no -
that Haeeher often aooke about Blot* and that Blone frequently visited

ty

Haacher that it always applied to the rase of V’eichs and the coagulation
drug, that alao cloar to ne. I hake atill to eay that I nyeolf have never
■e«n Blcce at the atation.

Q. I want to read you one other entry in thla dian--. It is dated
the 3rd of ^rch 194’-. It aaya: "Conferenoi, Bloae, Haeeher, Rau, at
Profeaaor Thioesen'e. L-quoationa." I aak you if you don't know .that
the phrase “D-queation neane Lost queatione, oustnrd gaa quostione?

A. So, that is not known th so.

K2. KCHAlTSY: ?hia waa Proeocution Exhibit 123, Your Honora.

3T I(B. KCHalT T:

Do you know whothor Raachor ever ro<*eived any roeenrch aceignmonta
fros the Holch Roacnrch Council?

A. Yea. Yhn nanignaonta for i-xonriaenta enmo fron Siovora end I nnsuno
that Siovora rocaivod thoao naaignsnnta tho Hoich Hoaenrch -ouncll.
direct aaoiennonto froa tho Roich R.jaonrch Council did not coao to ny
knowlodgo. At loaat ! do not know of any corroeoondenen wbioh eight ho.vq
ccao directly free the Roich Roaoarch ''ouncll that wont over tho ohn'n-
rbo Society; that is to any, vi" Si.ivrs.

"ell, you will rocnll that you cot n lottor fron Rnochor in tho
letter onrt of l c 43 in which h* vry gunorouely offorod to <ivo your wife
fifty Roichaaorke n north to holp eupoort her while you wore in polico
training. £en't you ren^-bor that letter?

a. Yos.I wroto to Raachor froa tho front and I wrot- hin that ha
should boo to it that sy wifo should cot aoai euooort.Sho r-coivcd noithor
any support fron the Ahnonbrbo Society nor froa anybody oleo while I woe
front .Upon that Raachor aneworod that hr would see to it and thrt of


course


646


18 0 *c.-H-KE-^-~-Prl ee (3T) --

C ourt 5o. 1

v, hl=Belf was ready to Bend fifty fcnrks per nonth to ay wife. My wife
sever received anythin*; she never received a penny fron Dr. Baseher.

i Don'*t you recall also, In the uoe letter, that he told you he had
received e research asBlcoent fron the HelCh Beserrch Council?

A I knov, hut whether I have that knowledge fron letters fron Beecher
or fron letters which case fron Dr. Bunxeasruber I can not say for sure.
There was sone correspondence about the fact that an r.ssi*nncnt existed
for experlnents, to tht effect that In the count* ns freezing rad high
altitude experlnents should bo carried out and that for that he would
like to call ne back fron the front. I ary ri so giro sont explanation
on this point. It Is far fron ee to praise itself and it would be below
ny dimity to do so. If Ha.scher praised oe, if he tried to - and that
applied to nil his esployees - if he tried to recruit tboso fron former
Innate*, there was a good reason for that, becaise they * ro In hie
hands completely rnd he knew that froe that side there would never any
darker occur; because what would it have neant If any statsuent r-yiinot
It would have cone free, r forcer Innate? I think thr-t was the reason
vhy R etcher rlwrys recruited fron the lnsrtes for his sorvlco. It Is
Indeed true that I fulfilled every private wish that Batcher had, I
had ny definite reasons for that. I reaaaber once Rnscher brou.;ht shoco
that had to be soled ond the shoenaker told oe: "Tes, for you I will
do It but not for Hatcher." V hen Batcher wanted to call for the shoes
I told hln it wasn't possible for ne to act n shoenaJccr, that he should
he patient. It was about five o'clock in the evening; he was still in
his err. Ee lot out of his car and snidi "Tow if you won't do any¬
thin-* for ne, then I do not have to be concerned about you." He took
a ran for an experinent and he conducted a very scan experiment. 'That
tmfet ne that It vr.s better to fulfill /il his private -ishes than not
to do it. At the station there was a tailor, n radio secbenlc, a
furrier, a cproenter, who only worked for the private interests and
private wishes of Bascher, and fron that it cm be explrincd that
Bucher prMsed ae in sone reports. I da not deny this and I do not


547


IS Dec^lUtt-U-^-Prlc. (ST)
Court So. 1


,C

?e r. y that in soce respects Hescher had crept confidence In ne,

^ Sow, Vltneu, you try Rlercrs w» e aeaber of the Reich Research
Council?

A Yes, I eren essured that Slerers vn§ vice-president of the Reich
Research Council. At any rate, Rescher said so. •


13.IX.c-: A8olr>-4-la-Prlco (2.)
Court ro.l


Oi ..'asn't 3lccc also a acsber^of tlic Reich Research Counoil ?

: k i That lorn only assuac, I could not say that with oortaieV* T do
not Izvnt it fer sure.

i: foil, how could you assuac it ? ->.at infomation do you hatoc which lends
you to believe that he night be ?

I assuac it because Raschor on-. Clone, also Birth end all those with

wheo :t oaohcr was in dircot contact, all those worked togothor withthc

Ahncaorbc Society end also with the Reich Research Council,

it Tioll, you don't exclude the .possibility then,-do you, “itneos, that

this resoorch assignment that Rascher received fren the Roioh Roscaroh

Council ca^*> froa b 1otjo rather than Silvers, do you ?

;.i Are you now asking concerning the eor.„ulcticn' drug ?

• • _ •

(it !'o. I on asking you about drooling order which he told you about,
that is Raschor told you about in the letter ho wrote you whilo you were
in training for the polico.

An answer to that would only bo on assumption. It nay bo possible,

but I could not say with cortninty whether it was so or net.

j: Do you have any inforaation as to whether or not Dlono knew about tho
fre-zing ur^jcrincnts which were carried out by Haschor in Dachau ? IHd ho
knew about those ?

A: ^ory definitely i oould not. say of courso. 1 could noithcr ooo that
fre:. any correspondence nor fron any Other source. I know, however, that
at tliat ti.ic Rascher was in oontnot with D1o:jc and he oonoiderod it always
tebo very dangerous when Rascher went on trips and suddenly oanc back with
r. new idea ar.d introduced O/nothing new into tliosc c-cpcri&Knt,
q, you noon h- caac back with ‘sane of these ideas after he had unde a
visit to Dlono ?

A: *hia i/ould be saying too nuch, after he erne baok fron fl louc. But
that group of doctors with whoa h- was in Contact was n seuroo for instruct¬
ions, that is to say, for new iiloas; about that I have no doubt.

Let's skip on to your knowledge about these poison experiments that
Haaoljer carried out in Dachau, “hat can you tell us about those ?


648


1? Toe—;'-ASckm-4-2a-rricc (:!B)

Court No.l

A. The poison experiments which Haschor carried out in
Dachau were .conducted very secretly by him. \!o only saw
that ho manufactured drugs, that he took cyanide and that
he left with these drug3. Prom people from the crematorium
and from the bunker v;e heard that he used these drugs there;
that is, he told the inmates they hr,d to take these tablets.
They s v/ allowed them and 3ono of them perished under very
bad pains. I have never seen these things neither did
Has cher ever speak about thi3 kind of experiments in our
presence. But I know that they distributed at least 60 to
80 of these tablets, or rather that ho manufactured at
least 60 to 80 of theso tablets every day and took them
along with him. He always went to the crematorium or to
the bunkor and that is whore ho conducted theso experi¬
ments /'Any moro definite details are not known to me. It

was almost proverbial aaong ouraolvoo to say: "They aro

•

making some sort of a drug now so that they can disappear
quickly when things go wrong."

Q. About when did those poison experiments take placo?

A. January, Fcbrucry and I^xch '44.

Q. Now can you toll thq Tribunal very briofly - I

don't want you to go into nucl; detail-just what

happened to Dr. Raochor?


649


IE 3cc-.:-G3S-c-l-Xarrcw (2i)
Court ::o.i


it Yes. In --arch 194-i, our attention was celled to the foot, by a
notice in the news oncer, that a child ‘.■•ad been stolen in Munich and the
description of the wonan supposed tohavo dene it fitted to '.ns.^nsoher,

a

It was clear to us, especially since t'. o for coat was. doscribod which had

boon Jtnufccturcd at the station. It eras .also ror.-nrkr.ble that when this

happened I was called to ..unich by telephone. 2 nrrvicd at cloven o'olock

at hacker opartuont and saw the -.ma-n who had been brought fror. the air raid

shelter who was given alcohol and also saw the child. A ho ohild was >alo and

hardly had the appearance cf a net.* -om child, '.hen the notice appeared

the tetrspopor it uoi oloor t. us that sc jothing had gone wrong, xroror,

about air. days later th.ro was another notice ir. the. newspaper saying

that the ohild .hod boon returned, r looked f-r - reason and an excuoo to

50 to ..unich agtin with acirsesdo 'to ‘tjclwr 1 : apartaont to see if the

child wci there. I saw a ohild and cor that it was a different oriG and I

•

naked the mid what had honponad to the ohild I saw before 8 ho said tJ»o chil
mas see’-, “beut throe days letter* ks.Unsoher a d Dr.Rasohor v re arVootod,
Dr.*toohor was sent to itunioh rod, on tJ» »vc:ui£ when ho was sent to Munich,
call rd no up by tolophoao :nd told ::c to o his aportaent. I erne

t 0 .. at nd found that evoryt in, had been dor.oTlshv.cl and Raaclicr

was in :io bed. Rsaehor told ao that !ui .rife Ivu' been arrosted; that
110 children had beer, carried away, a !tat his •••'ife was aoousod of Jiving
stolon r. child rid that Ik 'ms confined to his house. He gave rtc the
for the safe end asked ue to br..^, hi;i certain lteas. At that ti ...,

1 os; cl*. epportnunity to rc.iove oov rr.l very i.aportant documents and,
iu /ovwihcr 191-;, I buried then. Later, 1 was frequently questioned by
the criminal police ef .-unich about tlir.t Udrooping and I have found out
froa eke pulico that .^s.Raschcr d.d :-,.t oily kidnap that one ohild but
all four c.' then and I was trying to f ind f. notice for that. I could not
- 7 . lain to yself hew c. wenan could kidnap four children and I was told
• the -Icichafuohrcr had prohibit-J n.-.sohor free narrying that wonan
becaijc she cculd not have any children, -ftc’r she had giver. Raooher two
children ir. this way, ho had given hi- the paraission to nnrry her. It was.


550


13 D cc-lWES-5-2 -Sorrow
Court Ho. 1.


C


however, very interns tine that Raschcr, ir- spite cf ell these things, abcut
four weeks after his arrost ires released again and so was his 'dfc. I was
very auch worried ays elf that Raschcr wcxild get after U3 again. Raschcr
telephoned ac that I should ccuc to hie 1 m od i ste ly. I uont tc Munich and
Roschor told ex I should sake inquiries as to whether .echoic* was in the
caap. In the ncantlnc Pacholck had fled. Raschcr said that am could bo very
omgereus to him He had war*' carelessly discussed several things rrith hin
and he would see to it to prevent that nan froa Baking ary statements.
Thereafter I went to tho ca;^ and inferaed Rase her that the non was not in

the coup. I then wont to the origi nal police in itunich in ardor to tell thaa

* • . • . .

that Raschcr intended to do era. uith tin witness. Tharoupen Raschcr was
arrested again, togctSicr with ids \rl fc. Tree that accent on I have not sot
oyoa on Raschcr again nor hoar' ab'Ut hia. Only rhon tho ..nor icons had
arrived did I hear about hin again.

y. Let's go book for just a few questions to the high cltitAdo experi-
ocata. ..‘net did «k*dxrg usually 'o while the exp-rinents were being oonductod
Rcoborc watchod the cvporl^ -nts, tock notes, took tho cardlogruns,
lie too alac in the experinont van with several sub Joe to to ocasurc the pulse
Mew, ycu say that on occasion ho ran tho oloctrocardicgran?

Yes.

Q. Tell the Tribunal nfcat an cloctrocardiogron is and That it shows.

*•. The IKQ i3 an elec tree ar’lo gr ai which, in a photographic way, shows
the activity of tho heart and froa Which can bo scon how tho heart roacts in
such altitudos.

Can you tell, when ycu w_rc running that olcctrocardiogran, vhon an
experimental subject in the chancer was about to dio?

for thco^erts it is certainly possible, if the enpariaont has boon
.-ushad to tho extent that tiva naa dies. In these lor prosrorc vans, hew over,
r--"pl^ ware trcnbling and, of course, that troubling shewod on aany of tho
c.-rdiegrars, but fnr a looter it uusi have been possinic to determine whether
--th tbuld occur or not.


1G £tc-L-<rS-5->-Jtcrro*>

Court Bo. 1.


C


IB. MCHAier: I have no further qiostions at this tino. '
i;E rTCSTDSKT: Coos tho defense counsel hare any questions to ack the
Prosecutions’s witness on cress ami i n ation?

Prior to the opening of the cross ox n a i n ation the C(«rt will be in
rocoss fer fifteen ainutos.

(a recess was tqkai)


18 Dec-SKIi^l-Scard
Court ffc.l


THb r.iZSIEE'lTj Toe Tribunal is a_rdn in session.

CROSS eXDillCiXIOH

3T DR. SfiiV-JIUS:

}• Witness, y-u wore asked prowl usly whether Doctor Raechcr recoivod
:r'ors fr=a th~ R^ich Research C-uncil were you net? Y u answered. tint
question with, yasi and, you a.'.’od tfcjt Siovors ^avo those orders coning fron
the •■hnonc-rbo. Dc y;u kn w what pcsitt r. Siovers held?

u. lector Rr.seher told =c that Siovgrs was the Vice-prosi *ent :f tho
iuich Roscarch Council. That Is the rcas n why I caue t- tho lo .leal c nclusi- •
that every r or c eir^ fr n Siovors else cr^z fr :n tho Reich Rosoarch Ccuncl

Q. i.oll, that wr.s z c nclusi . n, wr.s it net?

Yos.

Q. N-w, if I was t' toll y.u th-.t Siovors was the . nnc: cr f the ..hntnGrtx
w uld yjM still retain y urc nclusi n?

u. If it was t V. wr n thr.t Siovors wr.s the Vice-president f tho
Reich Roscarch C.uncil, thun ay c nclusi.n .-us bo orr.no us.

Q. Witness, it was both — ho was thw Deputy jumper « f tho Reich
Research Council and also the ur.nr.ar of tho .hnonorbo. D-. y u still rotein
y ur ccnclusi-nt

... If ho was both, then, I still renain at ry ossuapti .nj namoly, that
the orders which cr=o fra Siovors also wont ov„r ti tho Reich P.osorrch
C.uncil.

Q. Witness, yosterday y u 3t?tcd that y u au» tho do fondant, wh. is tho
first .rv, in the first rew, in tnc C'ncontrr.ticn Canp at Dachau, then was th-

um It was durin„ tho tic«, fr^c 19hl until tho end of 19li2. I c.uld net
J ctorainc tho exact date.

Q. Witness, where did y .u see hiu?

— It was in the C ncentr ti.n Ca^p of Dachau, and within tho hospital
at Dachau.

Q. r.h«. was he acc. rpanied jj ?


I do n.t knew


- 653 -


lfl Dso-M-JI - 6 - 2 -Beird


C- a -

Court R.,1

<3- Whca did ha speak to?

I nart-ly lovw that he c.aae with a nuaixr ~i officers, and I only
n^aaaior it jc cause ho was — I rcncxbor Mxj because ho was with high SS
efficors,

Q. Did jru, at that tine, knew what position he held?

A, K‘, I dc n*t knew that new.

'.as that discuss.-’ at that tio? \ra it n t sai*. that he had n
special p.siticn?

"o imates naturally discussod .ur visit, rs as tc whe they wore. In
this ease I did n t loam wh this son was — this nan wh<- was visiting us,

Q. • -uld y.u have n tf und ut that he «as tho csc:rt physician cf tho
Fuohror? ul ’ that n t havo ! xxn c ns^icu-ua cn.ut.h f r every u n- t« knew
aUut it?

k» You havo t c iksi.'or that wo imatos —

3. (InWp.sin..) itness, will you enswor that quosti n, yes rr nc?
After that y u c~n luiko oxplsnaticns,

/». '*>111 y u then repeat tho question?

Q. ould it n„t havu bocxjc kn wn in the ca.’p that th_ oserrt physician
• •

f tho Fuohror wns tho visit/ r tho re?

A, Nc, it decs net nocoss.arily follow because wo inaatos cnly got to
kn.w tho nrjaos of the visit rs if wv. listened t tho c. nversati. nc, and if,
aria' tho c nversati.ns, a na_v was -lonti.nod, we knew that . nc pors-n cone
f' r a visit,

Q. has his naao ccnti nc '.?

... Nc, I d- n.t rtn.n>ar his nano '_vin. enti nod in that c.nnocticn.
They wore visit rs, and they inspect*,.' the h:spitrl with ut speak in.;- tc any
.tte,

3. '.'ell, h-w c ul' y u rcce^niru the defendant here in the 'cck?

n,

A. I sh.uld like tc say xscauso ho has a very rcaarkchlo face,

3« Did y u sew pictures in th- newspapers a> ut this trial before this


ate?


- 651 -


18 Dec-*J-Jf-6-3-53-«-rd
Court Jfc.l


km I saw e descripti n in Dachau — I think it war the S;uthcrn Gonvui
newspaper, but I did net sue « picture.

Q. Did you see that nan f:r any length cf tine in that coup or v r.a it
just teop'-rnrily?

Um Only toupcrarlly.

Q. The defendant c ntest ever havin. boon there, Is it n t possible
that y u are aletaken?

l.m I try to bo truthful in all f ay t-stir ,rry.

Q. Floaso answor, yes r no?

L. Ho.

Q« Y u roe .nils tho dof-a/ant Si-Yura a oin?

I* I sou SioYors s often and I spoke tc hi: so wften tlr.t it is impos¬
sible tc cc-ivo r.ysclf sb ut hia.

Q. Did ho, at that tino, lock as he d:os iuw?

ism . Ho.

DR. SEH7..TIUS» I hart n a re questions.


by d;<. Sr3tv.jire


IB Dec- 4 l-G? 3 - 6 -la-=can;.

Court Ho. 1

v . C • .»!

i: Witness, you vcrc just rskcti hon you were able to 1 acegnlw the,
defendant 3r~ndt. He is the first person in the first ro.r. I Miould now
like to a el: you to look at tho second nan sitting in the second row: that i

m 4 , ^ ' _» 1

the cfcfenfant &iff. How do you recognise hia? Does he have such -n out-
st nding f -cc, too? Just look t hia dad, I should like to leuinl you,

before giving your newer thr.t according to your own ttetizxciy of yesterdsy

\

you recognised that out, and you arid thr.t you had only se_n U.: far one sini
ti—, an! that -ns fiv- yw'rs go. .ell, how do you recognize tint nan?

A: Th-t .3 the tine when the erpcriu.nts started, nd I should like to
say tir.t it v s completely no*.. period for Ruff, in addition to that,

• ^ uniforu — at le.-at; tf;e a-, ,fco .cc-^ani.d Doctor Rato erg xs in
unifora.

.ltneos, . should lila. tc point cut to you that this 'em, .hon yoi
recomized gain or who-, you s'.i you recognized sain, Doctor Ruff, nd he
aid .lot .vr • unifor- t nil. hit you h*v- just 3-id, najy, thr.t you
r-cognizai this a.n tkcausw of has uaiior.., is obviously untrue, and I au
going to prov. tir.t to you.

I did not s *.y thr.t 1 recognized tlx. .an because of his unifonu, but

fh-t I said ./as th*t hw u a L; uaiXoiu.

• •

1 * Ho, 1 put it to_you tir.t he we not in uniforn. I found out about
th-.t -c>ci lly, axil th.t ,w>ul.. h Vv been the next c.u-stion my way -—to
fixvl out .It-bh^r this ..n ;.e n u.ufo». or not. .In-, non, 1 sic you to
..is er -y emotion, finally. Ho-, ad your-cognize the defendant Ruff?

The s-co.xl n in the Secorxl ro... ho.; ..o.you recognize hi-- again? Because
of his unifor- or b-cause of his outstanding fae. or siy do ;ou recognize hi

\ J|

If you place yourself in the position of n innate, ju 3 t Lv.sinc
officer- .-riving in unifora - ad starting .ith the exjxrUento. Ko.c^rg,
yiot s f. sch-r, v.ry often discuosU Rtdf, md th- factf that. Hull always
•a* g. .tec-.- .od with Rorto-r: this vi.ai.ion ocp-rie-nt -as greatly liscuf

i—, diret visit, t.v.t i£, t the beginning of tn_ avxatiai _xp_riiamt |

i-..*-- _-r.tL~~n rriv-., an'. X s- -_d th.t Siff’^as at that tl


- 656 -


c


IS Dcc-ti-GES-6-2a-Bcard
Court 'Jc. 1.

/

that first day — Scabcrg will have to confiro this; he will have to confirn
that on that day not only he and Doctor Raschor wore present, but also a
third person. *

<1. I should like to put sceailiins else to you: Doctor Itcebcrg trill
tell you, under oath, that he, on tho 22nd of February 19li2, the date you
acnticncd yesterday, was not present. And, ho knows that o.'xctly for the
fell erring reason, and I o»: telling ytxi this in order to enable you to rofresh
year ucxiory: The faally .conberj ’vu. ejected the birth cf a child on tho
9tli of Ilarch, and fer that reason <>:ctor Rooborg stayod at hone until the
9th of -arch with his rife. And, if was only on the 10th of -arch 191*2 that
ho went to. Dcchau. And, cn that occasion Doctor Ruff said he ties not pre¬
sent, ar«! I an soon goiif; to tell you wheo Doctor Ruff arrived at the sccno
for tho first tlno. ..ni now, I an again asking you to ans-.rcr that question.
Arc you still saying, today, in spite of *.«hat I put to you, tint Doctor
Ruff was present on th . 22r.d cf February 191*2; that is, on tho first day,
'urine theso experinents at Aacliau?


... I raintain that on the 22nd of IVd^ary <nq»ri-ents vero conducto;'.
You the first tino; aad I saintalr. that f-anberg ras there'll Pachac
that day; and I know it exactly bocauso in the reen wtioro Hoobsr'; and


-•achcr :ro thoro was a table whore gifts ware laid; and it was vary
anberrassinc to no that the gentlcaon thrived on that particular day.
IT I hero to correct t^solf in ®y -.ny, it could only bo that on that


day it .ran not .luff but another Luftraffo officer; but I ar. quito

auro that Roaborg and .Taschor uoro in Dcohau'on the 22nd of Fobi^uary.

. Jr-

I an not tho onl* witness for that. Thoro are cmy noro witnossos.


0., I cr. nainly interoatend in the defondant Ruff, tho second nan sitting
in tho second r«r; bat I nuat agtin revort to the question which you
hcv: not yot anr.rorod, naroly, how you horo in this courtroom rocogni -
so?', tho defendant ."hifC. Co ahead and answer.

... Sow do you rccognizo tho aan?


'I. Don't os!c no any questions. Just ana-.-or tho question which I just
put to you.

A - 1 Just rocognizo Ida.

Before you 3poko about a unifor.:. Tho nan isn't roaring tho uni-
*% ^ \ •
fora at ell. You apoke about tho outstanding foaturos of tho dofondant.

ill you porhaps maintain that Dr..luff has any outstanding featuro

end that -as tho roason why you rocognisod hir? You only saw hir. onco

•

in yourlifo?

A. Yo3.

.. .Oil, how did you rocognizo Mo?


If you meet pocplo under thoso circunsiancos, thon you do rccog -


ni=o then again;and if you akk ao about details, I cannot toll you
my. I an noroly saying that I rocognizcd tho nan again.

. Sut you cannot tell us h art 7

*

-- I rocognized- hir goncrall»- bccauso of his face bocauso that i3
'■<*" fou generally redognizo a man. •

And hoc about this question of t-jc uniform in order to conclude
’-hat point? ..re you still saying that this ran wore a unifera? •


I said that the nan who cane *d.th lonbcrg and Yjacher on the 22nd


-.650 -


Court So. 1


r


February waro a unifort;. If Ruff Inter arrived thoro in civilian clothes end
was present, I have already stated tfcct that wca possiblo; but I did soo
Er. Ruft at the beginning of the oxpericjits.

5. Did you speak to Hr. Ruff at all?

A. Ifc.

Q. lou did not sp&ak to hit.?
s A. So.

Q. Didn't be introduce hixaself?

&

A. It msn't custcanry thet an officer introduced hiuself to on incato.

Q. Well, I Just wan tod to establish that ho didn't introduce h i / isul f .

A. Mo.

Q. And you weren't introduced to hixi tithor?

A. Mo.

Q. You novor spoke to hit.?

A. No.

Q. But you did rocogniye hie huro again?

A. Y os.

Q. Did you know tfrt this Ik-, Ruff v-.s a defendant hero and that ho was
sitting in tho dofondents' dock? Did you know that yoaterday whon you ontorod
this ccurtroco?

A. I approximately know tho rvu.es of tho pur sens who w*ro indicted from tho
newspaper.

<1. Did you know that froa that newspaper, tho Southern Germany nowspopia-,

• * a

where the picturos of thoso defendants wore corriod?

A* Mo.


Q. Are you sure about that?

A. No, I aa quito sure that tho odition that I rood did not carry any

• 0

photographs.

i. .nd you did not receive a picture of tho dofcnda/its' dock?


A. Mo. I was at the Bunker in Ihchau.

CJ. 3 ut with reference to your testimony of yesterday and today you had boor
interrogated about it previously?


A. Yes..


- o59 -


18 Doc-M-*Sc ho-7-3-Blakley
Court Bo. 1


Q. H<r* in Jfcrnbsrg?

k. Yea.‘

Q. Shoo for the last time?

a. IXir in£ the course of the last six days.

Q. Tho last six days repeatedly?

A. Yea, repeatedly.

Q. About tho subject to which you tostified hero?

A. los.

Q. Witnoas, I havo another question. You knew that this low pressure charier

• • 0

with which the hieh altitudo experiments woro cenduetod—you knew that this lov.
pressure chamber was romovod from Dachau after a fow months?

. A. Yea. , . _ ._|_

Q. Do you know that your chief, Ik*. Has char, ropoctodiy tried tho fdlowir.
nonths to &ot this lew jrossuro chamber back from tho Luftwaffe?

A. Yoa, I knew that.

• 4

Q. Do you knew that it ms for that ruason that Ik*. Roschur, for instance,
turned to Sta.'xlartonfuohror Si overs, whom you rocognisodj that ho turnod to
3S-Ob«jrjrupponfuchr-r 'Jolff; and to tho Ruichsfuuhrc«*-SS?

A. Yes.

Q. And do you kruw that thoso contlomen whcc I Just mentioned to you wroto
to tho Luftwaffo, that is, £. Hippke, tho chiof of tho liodical Sorvicos of the
Luftwaffo, and to General Kidd Marshal Uiloh, askinc thoato return this low
prossura chamber to Dachau? Do ycu knew about that?

A. I know thr.t Rascher triod to c«rt this am back to Ettchau and fer that
roason ho turnod to tho Roichsfuohrcr Copoatodly,

T» Ropoatodly?

A. Yos.

Q. Ed you know that tho low pressure chambers wero net returnod in spite o.
that; and do you know why?

<». No.

Q. Did Dr, Raschur tell you anything about that?

A. Ho only said that "I shall be able to persuado tho Reichsfuehrur that thi


cbathers be carrivd back to Dachau,"


18 Dec-fc-AS^W-^Blakley (S3*
C ourt 3o 1


* V Iter is, you told us yesterday that during the first three week*
a.pnroxlnately the experiment» with' the low pressure chamber were Con¬
ducted without ejy accident*?

X Ye*.

\ And then one day Dr. Rascher told you tix*t he was .-olng to carry
out erlou experl sent a, rnd for thrt reason he *r.w to It th-t r
certrlc j^ber of Russians vere put at hie disposal? la that rl*t?

X Ye*.

You further told u* that theee experlaent* were conducted at
nl^ht aYter Dr. » onb<rs, who 1* the fourth gentleman sitting In the
••cond row, bad left?

* So.

^ You *nld that yesterday.

A So, these flrt experlaent were conducted durlnc the whole day;
but R onbers wn* not present that day.

$ Do you know vhrt theae crlou experlnent* conlted of? How could
you differentiate the rlou* experlaent* froa the othor experlnent*
during which Ronber* wn* present?

A Rnschar referred to the *o-c‘lled sudden decrease of pressure. I
h-ve to express nyself n* a lryann. The exporinentrl subject was
placed Into o aall chaaber and was plnccd into a hi, altitude of
npproxiantely flv* to cl*t thousand aeters. S uddenly this altltudo
wfj increased to on altitude of sixteen thousand t nd hi.-.her; and this
sudden increase, this sudden chan--e of pressure, caused death. This
is how Raschcr killed most of the experinentrl subjects.

^ But he only sterted with theso experlnents about two weeks after
tho harmless experlnents?

A According to :y recollection, yes. VRcther cuch sudden decrease
or Increase of pressure experlnents were conducted before that I don’t
know.

^ And Raecher started with these serious experlnents at the tine
when Dr. Romberg was not present?


A Yes


I

18 DeoiK^ch»-7-5-B iafclfty (IX) C

Court So J.

THE PHESHEtfri Counsel for the 'defense, you will please refrain fren
propbuxxUna your questions qyitc so quickly zr.X ^ve the witness a chance to
answer and fjifre tin translator an opportunity to ocnplet-? the translation.

Q. Durinc the earlier experiments where no incidents occurred anti nhich
only lasted approximately thre: wo:Jcs, you stated yesterday that ton i mates
wore selected as th; official experimental subjects. Is that rieht?

A.yes.

Q.l.'orc they criminal imate 3 ?

. ‘ ...Yes.

Q.They ••wre ell cirniaals?

• •

«t # Yos«

q.Do you taV3*r whether those ton criminal oxp>rincnt4l subjects wore
expeciolly woll treated?

.Toe.

q.Thoy received bettor nourishment? Ia that rieht?


Q.Thcy recoivod ci^arottos?

A.Ye 3 .

Q. tod tho ritTCM «m: told ua for you that they «cro otron; roo - i»

that ri^t? That i3 Viorels expression, “strong non 1 '?

... I an* they Tr; r .- pcoplo of a body conation, notion phyolooi

construction.

q.«t»o„ yo-u told u 3 yoat-.rday ho. y» oabota.od tho oonUmln, of tho
orporlzxnto; fur I»t»», tho P «»-ro Cantor,. Do you roneCor that!

u«l03»

V you told that yta took a little fllo and you «■ ^

.(here the rercury rises and falls?

.v'fec.


- 662 -


Court No. 1 '

18 Doc 46 - M - 8-1 - UG - Kinabuck


Q. You further told ua that ao aoon as the pressure was
Increased, the.dancged tube could not stand the pressure and.
then burst as a result; is that correct?

A. Yes. • • */">'

Q. ••itness, do you really went to maintain. that?

A. Yos.

Q. '‘.'itness. Just consider the following point. You
nede a til stake In your way of thinking, cni you thought that.
7ou could improve ycur situation by telling us that. .The
higher tho airplano rlsos tho lower is tLo prossuro. Tho
nurcury tubo dooa not riao when tho airplc.no rises but falls
down, prossuro decroasos and you cade this nistuko. Aftor I
put that to you, do you stillnont to maintain your orronooun
doseription undor oath?

A. Yos.

s* And thon I shall put mother point to you whoro you
code c nirtoko. You told us yostorday that on this glass
tubo wi.oro tho aorcury risos and falls thoro was a llttlo
glass vossol which also burst whon tho measuring apparatus
burst, and this little vessol at tho bottom, wl oro tho mercury
was, also burst. Ivon that statement of yours is orronoous
and untruo for this glass vossol about which you told tho
Tribunal yostorday, in reality consists of motel, and now I
an asking you again, uro you.still maintaining your obviously
untruo stntocont of yostord..y about this pcir.t, in spito of
your oath?

A. Yos. }

DR. S..CTSR: *n that caso, I hevo no i'urthor quostions,

•r. ’rosidont.

CROSS EXAIIMATIOir

3Y DR, VOR ZRK: Ootonso ccunsol for Ronborg)

%. '■.itnoss, assuming you woro in a position to givo us

- 063 -


Court Ko»l

13 Dec 45 - U - 8-3 - LJG - {Jlncbuck

exact details, I ccn only say Give us a a ex., art opinion about
nodical -letters, I should like to find out about your uediool
c rocr. Did you receive any no died education?

S

A; Kq, in no way at all.

• *

o.You had no nodical education whatsoever?

A: Ho. '

• *

C^: Do you think that a nan who received no nodical edu-
cation at all could adopt on attitude towards the quo St ions,

0

viiich you did yesterday, in an oxcct and true ..minor?

A: As for os I “*vc ny answers yesterday I always

onphesized that this wss-an opinion. To.'iut axtont it is

on export judguont I- cannot dcoido, and this has to bo loft

to tho exports.

• #

Ken , if I understand you oorroctly, you wont to any
that you do not consider yoursolf caupotont for an export
opinion oa medical questions?

* Yos.

Ct: You just told Dr. Sautcr that you voro interrogated

on this subject hero in KuornborG for approximately six days.

wore those the only interrogations about that subjoct, or

wore you interrseated at an earlier <1 to?

A; i was interrogated about those matters at an earlier
0

stage, also.

.r.ion \—z that?

A: fliat -was Jun^, July and August, 1945.

Do-s 7 our testimony of June and July, 45 tally with*
the testimonies that you made before tiw .8 high Tribunal hero
y eat ere ay aac' today? .

During t'aeso months I w. s not interrogated about tho
.manor i; which the experiments wore conducted, but mainly
about radical .tatters as fai? as I remembered the:;.

I ordr --tan with reference to tho questions which


- 664 -


Court ITo.l - ,

18 Dec 45 - L - 5-3 - LJG- llfjiabuck-CA

-..■are put to you at that ti-.c and ndC, does your testimony

tally?

A: la ell : y stetexpenta I try to tread on a oorroct
road and any the caiplotc truth, end I think that tho answers


that I pave at that tine have to tally with tho answers I a:
Giving today.

•c: 3ut you don't knc*/’that exactly, do you?

A: i’cII^ I don't kna: exactly what cjxc3tLo'is wore put
to no at that tine.


^; So if i mcnorizo your answer, you ..re saying that
r.a far as you rcuoubor your testimony of Juno-July, 1945,
tellies with tho testimony that you node before this Tribunal?


A: Yes.


Uo., I should like to draw your attention once .:oro
to the hi h altitude exporinants, -/hen did you see D r . Roaborf;
for the first tino?

^tftcr the vans arrived. Th.t was at tho and of
beginning

January or ///of ? 0 bruary. Reuberg ry.vo us dirootivos hew tho a*

0

vans were to be installed, and I then saw hi" on tho 22nd of


February, 1C42.

Did he ;ivc you these dirootives?

A: Thore veto crc.fta.cn there who ‘'ore exposed of
iivr.tcs a J. th*y - cro tho onos who received these directives.
*: .Tien t> 3 thet?

A; Th-t v: s at the ore! of January or the boginninrp of
February.

'P: ;oll, t that ti.ee you s \. Dr. Ronberp for the firet
ti..c?

A: Yes.

Had you kno’.'n Dr. Rnscher before that?

A: ~o, I had ..et Raschor in tho cae; on tr. o or three
occasi>ee I really .~-t hi., for the first ti.ao at the


- 665 -


Court So. 1 • . (

10 Doc (S!) ^

aviation experlaental • tat Ion.

Q, Vail, when did you toe naachey fcr the ftret tlae In the ea=pt

A. It la T«ry bard to any that. Thai vaa during 1941,

Q* Did you rtlll fcnov about Raacher'e activity, *fcat he <^id In

the ea=p, when you aav bin for the fir at tlae?

A. I knew that he vaa collecting blocd of cancer diseased persona
In order to conduct experiments.

Q, Did Haacher toll you vfao had cooslaalonod Mb to conduct high
eltltuda experlsanta!

» Ho

Q, Did you later learn froo Dr. £aecher or cose body clco under
vhoao order a Dr. Saacher vaa conducting theae experimental

A. I did not laarn that directly fron olther of ttaoso tvo gentlc-
con aa to who exactly gave tho order for theae experlnenta.

Q. In your testimony of yeeterday you differentiated clearly, and
I soon within the frasework of theae high-altitude exporlmonte, botvoon
certain aorlea of axocrlscata. Tor lnatancc, you atatod that for tho
flrat acrloa of oxoertnonta,tho noroal aorloa, ton lnaetee wero placod
at tho dlapoaolT

A. That'a right.

<u And then theae eubjccte vero oxpcriBontcd upon. Tou atatod
that thoae ton Inaatoa were crlslnal lnsnteaT

A. Toa.

tu Tou further state that beyond that Dr. Rnsoher, after the con¬
clusion of the exporlncnta with the ton Inaatoa, wra conducting further
cxperlaants with other lnaatee In addition to tho ton!

A,. It really yuan't the caee thet only theae ter. exoorlacntel
subjects woro uaed r but that a auaber of other ineatce


666


Court no. 1 - Q

18 Doc 46 - H - 8-5 - UG - llinabuck


woro t.Jcon fct- the experimental atation to bo oxperinontod
upon.

Q. But do you know wix.t tfco aim was tLr.t waa thought
to bu c.cl.iovod by currying out tl.oso oxporimenta?

A. Ho.

q. Do you know that c. roport waa nado with roforonco to
tlcao oxp^rirjonta?

A. I only 3<ncw that after tl.o concluaion of tho oxpori-
iionta nr.achor at:.tod tl at now thoao experiments w..ro to bo
exploited aciontiflo..lly and that Pu.aohor wont to Hunich. I
knew nc dot:.ila about -ny contonta of such r. roport.

Q. Do you knew whothor those experimenta woro actually
concluded? Since a rupert t/ca nado tlx outaidor would n .turall;
think that thoao oxporiuonts wore concluded. Do you know
anything about tl at?

L. Ho, I only know Rr.schor said tlx.t y.oro waa a .let to
bo done yet and ho waa going to try to koop tho vena thoro.


13 Dec-k'-A.Sch».9-1-5 ook (»)

Court Ko. I.


Q There is s one thing Rot very clear about that. It is hard to
underotani that a pgpprt was v^e about those oxjcrinentB and on the

• ' • I

other hand it is h-*d to understand that Hasoher triQd to koep those
chambers in the concentration canp of Dachau or to got thee tack.

Really, it se.TC to no If tho oxporiaanta were concluded thon why did

Rsscher want it sent back? Can you clarify that?

A I can «»nly give ay opinion about that, which is that Rnschor
was a wry acfcitious un anl ho wanted to^ntir.ua those oxporirents
on his own initiative. Furttaraaro, during tho experiments in which
Dr, Rontarg was not present IT. Rrschor oxforimontod on his own init¬
iative and ho wanted to prevent Kceb-rg free Jarring about it, other¬
wise ho wouldn't have conducted thoso oxporinonts during tho night
whan Robbarg was absont.

Q How if I understand you correctly, tho van was originally
brought to Dachau to porforn a cortain sorioa of oxporinonts and that
Rascl-ir only conceived tho idea later to porfera tho further ox,x>ri-
cor.ts which wont boyord tho original sorioa of oxporinonts, are you of
that opinion?

A Yes, I share that opinion although I think it is plain that
considering the ton ones who wore sclcotod originally for tho oxpori-
uonti ttay wore given tho assuranco that nothing would happon to thcea.

Q Who gavo then that assuranco?

A. Rasctar, ho gave {his assuranco to thoso ton comrade*.

Q Ho njntionod that to you?

A ./oil he didn't have to eontion it to ao. Howov r, I had to

undergo a nunbor of oxporinonts, but this assuranco was not givon to no*

d In the beginning of the experiments wasn't it obvious to you

that considering tho talks which Rose tar and Roaborg had that no ono

but tho ton rroro to bo usod wasn't that quite obvious to you?

/ /

A At the be-ginning?

Q At the beginning of the experiments, yos that is what I a:
asking you, wasn't that obvious to you?


663


18 Dec--A.Scr.-9-l-Coolc (M3)
Court No* 1«


A At tho beginning of the experinonts it could ba assumed that
only tho ton oxperiaentees wore to bo usod.

Q jjo y 0 u icnow that on the part of tho cacp administration a
directive


663A


ic 3ec- r-. -Schw-9-2-C cck (DJG)
Court He. 1


went to .he inmates stating that the; cculd volunteer fer those experi¬
ments, end cculd then expect tc be released, or at any rate receive
mcro favorable treatment?

A It ia not knew, to me that this was in any way publicised 8y
the camp administration.

i 3ut you did state yesterday that a number cf the experimental
subjects did volunteer?

It vos only possible; that the man ccncorned approached Dr.
iiaschor directly, which was difficult, and Dr. Raacher wes frccucntly

asked and uite eft^ an inmate who hed been ’ssigned tc hard work and

“ • 9 *

• • • * • *

knowing that he »*;uld get better treatment somewhere else vculd put

himself ct the disposal of these experiments, and in addition at tho
time the ..eichsfuehrer visited the camp it v.s promised tc the inmates.

Q i.ho promisod that to then? Did ycu hear that? -

Yes.

£} Do ycu knew tho words he used?

A Cn the visit cf Jay 5th experiments were conducted in tho
presence of the I.cichsfuehror and ct that time the Rcichsfuehrcr acid
these people who cro undergoing experiments, if they survive they can
bo role. sod.

; You said that it was do r tc ycu or cbvicus to you ct tho
beginning of these experiments that only those t-n p.rsons were to be
used. ..cccrdi.ig to your opinion, wculdn*t that have- been obvious to
Dr. Kcrisrg too?

k Yes.

3 Sc you acer. thrt Dr. Rcmbv.rt participated in this aeries of
-•xp-rim„n*.3 ’ith the intention of experimenting on these ten persons?

.. Yes.

1 «-nd in addition ycu s*y that Rascher thr_e wo.ka later wrs
ccnducting certain experiments, cxp.riaents which went boyend the original
intention. Sc far it hrs not become cbvicus what the purpose of these
exp -iim-'ts ves. It appears tc th;t thi purpose ves to determine how


669


c


1C 3cc-.>.5el»-9-2-Ccok (3JS)

Ccurt Jo. 1

the -lee- ccrrr'ierr; h rcccr-Jcd th'. rfyiag rson's he; rt re. cfcicn,
e - -ou nr; atucthin* cbout th t ith r-fertr.ee to th- nui-.-osc Which
:.-5Cl:-r nlc4 to achi-vc -ith txCe.-^c- to hi* _xpcrla-.Vwr, I cr.
tii- or-:iaeats, tihich »c..t beyond the t-a p-rsens?


669-A


lo.-}t-;..Sc!or.-9-3-Cock (iff)


C

... KIs purpose was to use the electrocardiograph on dying persons, it ^ras
obvious, and I refer to the tiao -./hen the clectrocardio- 7 -aph vrac used on
persona whose heart was still beating, but I don't knrr.r what purpose Dr.Raschor
— in alJvU I hadn't known in the case of th? first oir, an 1 no elcctrocardio-
roph recordings wore cade.

Q. Who -.7aa present iiring these tines?

... It was Dr.Bhaoher, Hauptscharfuchrer Endes and an SS r *. who tras

v

unknown to ne,

Q« Didh't yew receive kncwlo.dgo later what purpose Dr.Raschor wanted
to achieve with tho further experiments? Did he intend to conduct a certain

0

series of oxperiaonts or were they individual exprinnts, or didn't ho know
perhaps exactly what he wanted or did.he rant to kill people?

... The lurposo of these current killin j by Rasclv r is not known to no.

..t that tiao I was cccplotoly new to tho entiro aphon-- and it was impossible

0

for no to cafe any observation. I cannot state anything in that rogerd,

Q. The purpose of t!ic experiments which were ordcrod by tho Uiftv.nffo
Sosoarch Institute, where they -..-ore originated, and if I shall toll you that
if the report which was sutr-itto/. to tho High Tribunal whero it was stated
popple can bo savod frees hi_h altitude , or rathor fren tho 'angora aris.inj
fren hit altitude, an! at that tioo Dr.Raschrr and Dr.Rocborc conducted
th.so oeporiivnts on these ton or other imates, according your opinion,

’ is It necessary in order to tc 3 t th.- possibility of saving pov.'lc fron
hi .h altitude, was it nocc-ssary to kill people for tnat jurpose?

A. No, wo were told, or rathor I was told by Dr.Rancher that those
oxpcrlfionto were be in- conducted because during th. parachute lan’in ;s at
Crete rsugr Goman parachutists landed in a dead condition, and that iras the
reason for the series of Mxptrlaon&o.

.. So you stau it was not necessary to conduct those experiments to
kill people for that purpose? Did experimental subjects .'io .during tho day?
la the report which was subeittc' to tho Tribunal by the lro3' cution, it was
during these high altitude ejqtrin nts there was no los 3 of life,
know whether these experimental subjects lost thoir lives?


*•• - knesr that a number, of persons lost their lives chiring the experiments

*hich rejx conducted in the day tim., but it is possible these experiments


c


13 Dco-a-rf^ch»-9-^Ccck (DJ3)

Court He. 1

xere net included in the report, but I re sure there were vie tins
during the day.

Q ' e previously ncrely diif.rcr.tii.tcd between the series of

•

aaeperinents >hich Rent erg rnd Rascher conducted by order of the luft-
l.cffe Res- rch Institute end such otpcrincr.ts which iioacher conducted
because of his own interest or by p.r^npl order of Kiaulcr. 'Ac* did
teacher cnly conduct these lrtcr experiments during the ni Jit or dso
during the day?

i. He else conducted then durinp the dcy.


IB Doc . -U-ia-lD-l-Des±o Is

Cowt So.l

Q. Was it possible tear you at that tiro to doternino Wiich exporinunt3
mre conductod by order of the Luftwaffe Re soar eh Institute, by Rasdxcr and
Beeborg, end wtiich ©xperioBnts woro conductod by Raschcr personally on his
own initiative or by order of Hlsdor?

A. It la lapoauibJc for no to differentiate horc as to just »*io ordered

thoso individual o:qxcltt.Rts.

• • o

Q. How if, in this ropert about tho experiments which woro ordirod by tie
Luftwaffo Research Council, it ras n-ntionod that pooplo did not lose their
lives during theso exporirtri a, wuld you say that was a lie, or would you
say that this sorios of experiments which woro soloctod for that ropert was
roroly with rofcrcnco to-tho ncrnal experiments uhoro tho ton persons woro
used? •

Boforo you roply, I should like to point out to you that at that tin)
thuro was no .roaaon to state in a report that experimental subjects did not
dio, if they actually did, tx^auso nobody would hr.vo prooocutcd tho pooplo
concarnod anyway.

A . If in that roport on tlx, experiments which you havo mentioned thcro

was no raontion of any-ease of death, thjn in sy opinion tho nunbor of do nth

casos was wilfully kopt out of tho roport. During tto tiro tho roport was acu

•

the por»ns who node that roport kaiw clearly that thoro woro a nunbor of

doath eases darinc tho course of thoso axporimnts.

Q. Xou do not diffaraitiatc sufficiontly. Please think very carefully,

I spoke about tiK> kinds of experiments: I spoko about tho op on »hich woro

conductod by Roeborg and Raachor by order of tho Luftraffo Roscarch Institute

and secondly, I spoko about tho oxporiccnts rtiich Raschor conductod v,lthor

bocauso of his lust for murder or bocauso of HLxilcr's order. Would it not h-

bcon possible that all casos of doath occtnrcd in tho latter sorios of cx~

porimmts, and that for that reason this sorios of cxporlmrts was excluded

free tho ropert to tho Luftwaffo Rcsoarch Instituto?

A. In fact, tho position was that Roaberg was present dvring soso expori-

;: onts which resulted in d,ath. I cannot differontiato as to whore tho orders

for tie individual cxporia-nta cano free, <r rather, in wit sc interests thoy

- 672 -

... . w


18 Doc. -M-MS-IO-2-Daaicla
Court No.l


C


war© cado; it ia impossible fcr ao to doddo that, tiovovcr, when making tho
report, it must havo been that these death eases waro intentionally emit tod
free tha roport to tho Luftwaffe.

Q. Tou stated that out of sovcii-y to eighty death eases you rocall five
cases "hero Reeborg was present. According to that, ho was not prosoit durii\
3 >et of tto death caaos.

A. Tea.

Q. Who was present during thj ether doath eases, during tho sixty-five
or sovonty-fivc cases?

A. Mostly on SS can free, tho cfcp administration, either tho camp comanda
detail coarnndcr, or block cocamndor, and Raschcr. Even the carp coencoder
was proaont dxrlng su:h cxporijxrfcs which rosultod in death.

Q. The so oxpori-uits whuro sixty-flvo to sov^nty-fivo persons dlod, noro

* •

they similar to tho ones during ihich Rcchcrg was present, or iwjto th>y nek,?

*

.jid tho experiments which rosultod in death end 'hero Rezberg was proaent,

wero they similar to tho oros which -ero conducted on the original ten person*
• •

A. 1 must say, according to ry laynon opinion, that every death caso in
tto oir-proasuro chamber was brought about wilfully' and intentionally.

Q. And whoso *411 was that?

A. Tho will of tho person who conducting thoso experiments.

Q. And who was conducting those oxporiixnts?

A. Raschor erd Ronb-rg. Exactly who had thz ordco*f, »ho had tho directive
and roforring to tho oxporlnants »boro Romberg »ns present, I don't know.

Q. But it is ralbhor peculiar that in sixty-fivo to soventy-fivo cas-s
Raschor toro tho responsibility alono'on his ovn should-rs, wiiilo in fivo
eases both of then carried on this experiment, end boro tho responsibility,

Kas your presence voluntary during these experiments?

A. No.

Q. Why didn't you leave?

A. There was martial law in th- camp. It was said that rtiocvo- did not oboj
-n order given by an SS man would bo shot. Secondly, after the inciderfc which
I have already told about — I mean tho tailor incident — if had loft that

- 673 -


18 J)cc .-:WLr-lC^>«eniela <JK).

Court Mo-1 Q

station another person :ould have cone in to ny place. Ho person \:ouli have
fccen kept out of to:so experiments and not one victim would have been save.’.

3 . Its, but you would not have b.cn present; another person irould have
bean present,

km 7CS.

'I. Tou say that it was impossible not to be present. Is that ri'iit,
without too greatest of darker?

ki I have to say — and I m fully aware.of the consequ* .s—it was not
only to- martial law. It was ret only -ear of las eh or that cOTi;xllod no to
atari that situation, tut it axas ^y Hity to stay there an’ to present overy-
th inc that could possibly bo prevents.

Q, ..ccording to your opinion, would it have teen possible for Roabera to

* « 0 ' | «

refuse to appear during those ccr.crLv.nt3? Tou haw sfcetoc', arid I l-crairv' you

0

of it, that most of toe exjcrirvnta, or be normal experiments, wn«o con ucto d
.y Hector and Ra-dior and that Her in the e voninj, after HorLer- had loft,
lascher contim --1 to contact c:rpcrlaonta ; die. further, tort .Rancher con uet d
particularly daryvrous cxperil-nta her. Rawer: v.-so not pavn nt. Oil you have
too impression that Ronbcr.j, or. his as n initiative, liked to watch those
oxporincntr?
km Ifo.

Q. Do you tx-liov-j that heeler,, if* he had had tho opportunity, vtnK have
prof, rrc-d to he absent urine those five oxprinente?

...I to askin'- nysclf what really could hnv happerod to Ror.'cr;; if he said
he • -nV.C to l«av-, an’, if he did not want to be present.

i. lou think there was no -’anjor for Rord-or;- ha! ho not ’xsan presont?

'.ihat was laschcr's porror ir. toe coup?

... Raster's nowrr in the cam? had no limit, tut not at too ^-laninc.
Laschcr's power increas'd periodically, * i- towards the on\ ho a so
stron tout no one coull intnCrrc rito: .'in in the- esnp.

yhs Laschcr a t*sfc?r cf too d, at tta: bc^innin. of tho experiments?

... I onl- hoari th-t over sine- 153U, -= - **« »•- OC3t ->’ 0


15 Dec -*JI - :x - 10 - u - Ifcniola (US)

coopt - o. i r

- 'tea h> a rertoer of tho 3S at the beginning of the cxpcriiacnts ?

• «

IMcn'fc know that.

n if you take ttore natters into consideration, nouKn't you say tliat
’■csctxjr'o position was far norc powerful than Hoefcerc's ?

- &s -.

n .«*■ furtteraoro — and I an re pea tine this question — don't you be-

0

licro that, Judging free hia entire txfcavior, Ronbore nould have preferred

not to bo present during those five eases ?

* * •

I have already emphasized, yesterday, that I had the impression that

0

:<ci)or- xxntod to withdrew there things, are*. I should not lilco to deny that
r^nborC, ure'.or tho clrcucstancos, had wmtod to withdraw froa those five >
uterc death occurred. - k>thcr ho did not'do that because of Lack of sufficient
eourecp or for other reasons and yet remained tho re, I do not know.

.■» 3ut it wes not'possible for you to find out "bother tl» -.dll to con¬
duct the so experiments originated froo Rcschcr or not ?

.. It is very hard for co to say yc-> or no; I can only express ny foolinco
ru'. ny foolinga ere that tin initiator of there things vr.s Haschor.

- Tou kU that ,c, prerent florin; there five ooportaont. irhioh

nnOtod Hi flenth. Do you recoil tho flotoiln of there five o-tporirent. 1
Purely tho details —

0

0. (Interposing) 1 rean, with reference to all fivo.


675


Coqrt Ho.l -

10 Doc 46 - H - 11-1 - UO^ Lesser (HD)

A. I cannot make any detailed statoacnt as to what
happened in the individual experiments.

Q. Do you remember exactly who was present during the
other 65 or 75 experiments which resulted in death?

A. Whether the Commander of the Camp or the Detail
Commandant was present or whether anybody was present, I
do not know, that is, with reference to the individual
cases.

t

‘q. Well, how is it that y^u just remember that with

reference to these 5 experiments?

A. Especially ir. the or.se of Romberg, of whom I had
the impression that ho.tried.to keep away from these
things, it is very clear and obviou.that I remember exact¬
ly when he was presont.

Q. You said that tnc *irst exporimor.t took placo
approximately 3 wooka lator. That was aftor tho orderly
experiments had already started?

A. Yes.

Q. At that time you further stated that Romberg was not

proaont?

6

A. No.

Q. When Romberg cano back did you toll him that in
tho meantime doath had occurred during those experiments?

A. No. ' .

Q. -/hen did Romberg for the first time have to recogniso

that ho was concerned with experiments which could re- .

suit in death?

A. He must have recognised that for tho first tine
when it was tried to persuade Rascher to desist from con-

t

ducting those experiments which could result in death; and
it is then that Romberg for -die first time had the certain¬
ty that experiments wore conducted which could result
in death.

Q. That did you tell hLa? Do you remember what yw told

-675-


A. I know that I net him in the corridor of the hospi¬


tal and that he was just about to go to tho X-ray Station.
I cannot give you the exact words but approximately I
told hia: "Doctor, murder is happening back there. An SS-
rr-n took a can there. Eaechcr wants to conduct an experi¬
ment which will result in death and I an sure thi3 man


was not conde mne d to death," 1 told hin, "Come along
with co", and he went along with ce to Hascher'a room,
where those natters wore discussed. That is uy recollection.
Q. How ofton did you approach Romberg on that matter?

A. Only with reforonco to thesq 2 cases which happened

-* • • , _ m *

on the same day.

Q. And in both oases Boaberg successfully prevented
those experiments being carried through?

A. Yos.

Q. Why didn't you later r; .-roach Ronborg since you
had 3uch good successes af cor your original conversation


with Romberg?

A. In this cr.so tho SS can who workod thoro in the
hospital took on oxperiaontrl3ubjoct thoro and I know ho
had never recoived an order to do that by tho Camp Admini¬
stration. However, if the Camp Administration or rather
people on the staff of tho Camp Administration had people
brought to these experiments, I, as an inmate, could not
interfere in any way at all.

0, Could Romberg have prevented it had ho wanted to?

A. If the man came from the Camp Administration,
Romberg could not have prevented it.

Q. Arc you of the conviction that if it had depended
on Romberg alone there would not have Been any death
i-xperiiaents during these high altitude experiments?


- 677 -


18 Dec 46 - K - 11-3- LJG - Lesser -CA


A: I a- Of the conviction (that if ?.o.:berg bad bad the
order to conduct these experiments alone, without Rcscher,
there would have been no d6c.th cases.

No'* let us turn to this one experiment where you
told us about the autopsy at the altitude of 10.000 meters.

\*ere you at that tine in the low-pressure chaVocr?

A: No. •

rue re did you observe this fro??

A: /ran the corridor where there ware 2 windows I 4
was in a _oaition to observe.

Did you soo th.*t Romberg become air sic!:? •

A: Yea.

T.io conducted the autopsy?

It . s conducted by 2 in..atos who cmx iron the
nor .uo ui • ho v ere yrosont in the low-, ressuro 6 lumber.

: Did ho. Vo or-; .articipatc in tho autopsy?

A: Ko.

,*oro you over actually present in the lov-pr-ssuro
chewier duri- ex. ori..u.-Tts?

A: Yea.

Did you over ho..r, as Dr. Raborp aintains, that

during one cm.'eriao at when ho was present nad hud not Una.n

that it tea on experiment which was to result in C oath, aftor

sou the hie: (cloctroccrdiocran) he told Da 3 oh or that ho

hed to a to .*11 citcumstrncos bcc.uee there \,.s on

1-modiato d.m yrt Did you over ho..r anythin about that?

•

Did you hoar that Raibcr said such things to Raschcr'

I ca’t re..<w.*oar having hoard hi. moho such statements

. tore cro ym durian thee-, ox arimonts? .’ere you
close' to- th-..?

Do. ,tl e3 I was near the motor but ..03tly I v;. 3 in
the d r . re a. with the hi;- strip.


-67S -


IS Dec -6-^ .<
Ccart !fc. 1


-li-i-Lesscr (DJG)


c


5 But it is quite possible brut Ebflberg =de such stetaaents
to Dr. I^scher vithout your being in e position to hear it?

.. Yes.

; firing this high-eltitude experiment cculd you not &serve,
durin - the sutopey, I mean, that os performed ft 10,0X utter, altitude,
thr.t Ecu erg a?de any signs to Dr. iUschtr asking him to iscor.tinuc
the experiment?

« 1 reucuber that >fter luxi-rg bcc«.ue unconscious anthe
pressure • ts considerably decreased until ha-berg regained conscious¬
ness, th. t he vrnt-xl tc discontinue the exp-rinont end th t ho nvecio
a cotiv.. to ..aschcr indicating th t he v.tr.tcd tc gc ou • ; then

iiaschor ordered thet the altitude be incrotsed amm.

Tit* 1!£3!J£<T: It is tima for the Tribunal to rcccsa until
1:30 o'clock.

{/. rocoss ups ttkvn until 1330 h'.urc.)


679


'f

18 Dec-A-UB~12-i-Lehnhardt

Court No* I.


CCRRiETED


COPY


szssicx


(The hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 13 Dec. 19U6)

7E The Military Tribunal is again in session.

VJ3ZR JSFF — Resumed
CROSS-EX.J ;T: L.TIGK - Continued

Bf DR* V0RKE8X: (Comoel for defendant Roctoerg) Mr. President, I have no
further questions to put to the witness.

DR. itxRX: (Counsel for defendant Frof. Dr. Schroeder):

Q When, cn the 22nd of February 19U2, the car with the charter arrived,


were the Luftwaffe personnel with It?

A Ho, I did not eee any personnel with tho car.

«* • • • • i •

Q You spoke, when you vore examined, that several tines high Lultvraffe
officors visited the station. Now, I ask you did you know any of those office
visited the stAtion. How, I ask you did you know any of those officers by nanr
A Ho.


Q Kero thoso officors fron tho Lunich Luftgau district?
A I do not know.


Q You speak of groat differences botwocn Dr. Raschor and Prof. Holz-
loehner; what was tho causo of this, and what observation did you make?

A Prof. Holiloehnor wantod to conduct tho experiments under ancsthotici
Dr. Raschor opposed this. I knot, that in this respect he irroto o report to
the P.oichsf'.ahrer criticising Raschor and Pinko for not lotting hin work,
becauso ho wantod to conduct tho experiments under anosthetics.

Q '..'as it net so that Prof. Holzloohnor quarreled with ftasclior on
other ports too? .»nd he wanted to avoid a fatal outcome of tho oxporinants,
urrior all circuastancos?


prof. Holzlochner did not have any deaths in connoction
water. The deaths took place in the reviving, in
but TThothor tharo was any quarrel between
Holzlochncir in this respect I do not know*
rather abrupt, or were there several differences
what was the occasion for the final elimination of


Eoleloehner?


- 680 -


Coart Ko. 1
// ffmc • ¥4-A -W-/Z-Z

A The e l ini n ation of Holzloehnj^ and the substitution of Finke cano

V. .

about, 'do cause in the hot water baths they had found, or had sought to find,
an aid to tbo people. A final report was dictated which all throe gcntloraen
signed, Holsloehner and Finke, and Sasebor later on.

Q 3ut it was so, was it not, that Prof. Holsloehner wanted to have the
exparinontal subjects treated as painlessly as possible, and Reactor opiosod
it, and said that the people unconscious to the ico water?

A Yes.

Q Do you know whether thoro ana any order or assignment from Luftgau-

-st 7?

A I do not know wtotber there we an order from the Luft^au-Ant 7, *

or not.

Q '•fell, did Rascher tton report to" this Iuftgcu-.er.t 7<

A *cb,

Q Did you yourself auo those reports?

A The secretary of the station, to rtion theso reports wore dictated,
had to aako throe or four copies of ttoso reports, .md, as Top Secret, those
reports were sent to tto Stardartcnfuchrer Dr. Siorora and to tho Luftgcu-.jnt 7 *
Hon long tho Luftgnu todical Offico received tho so reports, I do not know.

• bother they received then until tto ond of tho experiments, I do not know.

Q You woro speaking of a Utftgr.u L die al Offico, but ttorc was no ouch
offico; isn't that too Luftgau-phyaioian?

.v lio. "Luftgau Office" or "Luftgau bdical offico; Tho Luftgnu Jfadicil
Offico 7", -umich I think.

Q Thon, there was a distribution list on those reports?

A Yes.

Q was it always tho saao?

- I don't know#

Q Was it changed, free place to place?

A 1 don't know.

Q Did those reports refer to both to the high altitude oxpori~»nts

and to tho cold sdcporiaonts, or only to tto latter?

A I know then only with reference to tto latter.

-651-


18 Dec hnhordt

Court Xo. 1.


Q Were there any gentlca--n ftsjc thin Luftgcu todical Office Jiunich 7,
as you cell it; were any gentlaun pros-nt et the station, to your knowledge?

A Thero ware Luft-Qau-off Leers free the station, but whether they wore
froa the Gau Itodical Qffico car not, I do not knew.

Q Could one soo, froa any indications, whether they wore nodical officers
or whettor they were pure Luftgau officers; couldn't you ha/told whothor
thoy wore nodical officers; wouldn't you have boon able to concludo that, from
■hat they said7

A I know that officers with tto nodical staff wore then. The talks

i

wtro always in Rasetor's rocc, so tint I could not know anything about than,

Q Did you recognise the nodical insignia?

A Tea, I did.

DR. -AX: Then I hav_. no further questions to put to the. witness.

DR. .HIS: (Couns-l fer defendant Gcca-go August woltz.)

Q Witness, I have a few brief questions to put to you, to supplonont
your testinony of yesterday and todey: You hav^ stated, among other thinr-s,
that you did not sec Prof, ^eltz in Dachau, but, if I mny say so, that you
saw bin accidentally ono day talking to Dr. Rasetor in front of tho building

of tho Luftgr.u-i!oei---nd in "unich; tto question is: Do you renorber, approx-

•

laaUly what day? *

L Ko.

q Dot, forhnjB you can a?y, sinco you rcaunber tto 22nd of February so
well, was it tofore or after that tin., bofora or after your birthday.

A It was rather late. It was L-t-r. It could only have boon froia the
15 of Soot arbor, *U2, until Juno

Q That is, at a tine when Dr. Rancher tod already left LuTtgau-Airt 7
in Munich?

t

A Mo.

Q Dc you knor when he loft that position?

k I J aKnr that ho wore a Luftwaffe unifora, as far at I can recall, until
August 'L3.

q Tto fact in and of itself that ho were a Luftwaffe uniforo, would not
aaka it ru., ttot to w-.s assiga-d to Luftgau 7. Ko was originally at Sahongau.

-6S2-


18 Doc-A-?3-12-ii-Lohnhardt
Court Ho. 1

- • C

Sow, I ccm to the next question: In the nonthr of February rod Jiorch, *lj2,
ho was reaovcd froc Luftgau 7 and transferred way; did Dr. it* sober over
tell you that hi had boon t ransferred away frdtt Luftgau 7?

A Ho.

Q Ho rover said anything about it to you?

A Ho.

Q And didn't you know that in February, <y- in the beginning* of Ilarch,

r~

there wure serious difforoncea botroen rrof. Dr. V.altt and Dr. Rascharj
didn't 'n> say anything about that to you?

A During the course of several conversations >.hich I h-ard, Iks told
a. — well, hi didn't tell no, but I hoard it — that hj did not take Prof,
felt*' oxneriamts very seriously.

DR. .ILI2: That lnfor-r.ticn is very interesting and it brines no to ny
noxt question.

SY DR. *.niLIE!

- Q Tr. Raschor w:.a greatly Int-r-sfed in nr. Volte's aniir.l oxaori-
euntsj that is true, is It not?

A According to his statenents, yos.

Q Did you notice, or do you have cny indication, that Dr. Raschor,
and later Dr. Holxloehnor, -'hen hio oaporiuonts had begun, attempted to find
out xhat results .Vof. felt* had had x&t h his cnircl oxporironts?

A I do not !cncw about that.


- 583 -


Coart Ho. 1

18 Dsc 46-A-J?-13-l-?srrln (JM)


Q. Did Dr, Beecher perhaps teil^you that Professor Veits had the
aabltlon of taking over thsse eroerlments? Did Hatcher ever say any¬
thing like that to you?

A. So.

Q* But perhaps you know thet professor Eolsloehner on occasion
case to tee Dr. Veit* to compare hie experiments on hunen beings with
Professor Veits'• anlcal exoerlsents, but that Professor Veits rofusod?
Did you hear anything like that?

A. So, I newer heard that there was any exchange of opinion botween
Holsloehner and Veit*.

But you know that Professor Holsloehner at the JJuernberg mooting
on 16 October 1942 reported on human exoerlaents?

A. Tos.

you do not know that before that he had asked Professor
Volts to report to hla on Ms anisal experiments and that Professor
Volts refused to do so? ,

A. Ho.

Q, Sow, a little different subjoct. Do you know that at rbout tho
sene tine, thr.t Is, the eunaer or fall of *42, Profosoor Holslochnor
wanted to havo nposratus, a calorlnctor, froa Professor Veits and that
Volts told his, through his assistant, that ho refusod to turn ovor th6

s

moarntus?

A. Please tell so what e calorimeter Is.

Q. I can't doscrlbe It to you at the noaont. I ern only giro you
this explanation eftor consulting with Professor V e ltr, but at loaot you
can recognlso whether you vero ewer there and rskod for a oalorlnetor

A. So.

Q. Veil then, It is no.t necessary for no to describe the aooaratuo.

A. So.

Do you know free the fact that you wore constantly together
vith Dr. Saschor how he felt toward Professor v olts? Did not Kescher
*Vur speak socowhat ironically about the results of these animal eToerl-

oents?

664


18 Dec-A-JP-12—2-?errin( sw)
Court No. 1


A. Ha cher did not appreciate '•'eltz's aninal experiments I know,
• 4 . Concerning high altitude experiment a and the so-called severe


experiments and the serious experiments, I need not go into. They have
been asked you repeatedly today, but I should like to come back to one
cuestion, one statement of yours irfiich you cade today. You said that
once or several tines —I don't recenber exactly — you delivered
reports to the Luftgou Medical"Office and you said that these More "Top


Secrot" reports. You can cor.fins that thore was an express notice "Top *
Secrot" on these reports?


A. I recall one report exactly. It had a yellow stripe acro3s the
folder. It was sealed and I 'had to bring-’-nek a receipt, ’.’hi ther it was


Gohclao Reichs a achc or Gehcimo Kor ar.Oo scchc . I don 1 1 know but it
»rs one of the two. I dolivored it in the Luftgru Medical Office VII.
r. This terr. "Top icorct", does it ouan anything to you? Do you know


how far the obligation to keep such a document s ccrct went?

A. I know only that I was told 2 nust r.ot let it out of cy hands and
cast only give it to the person to i+cc it was addressed, If 1 understand
your question correctly.

r . Yes, you understood nu correctly; and to whoa was tills one docu¬
ment with the yellow stripe addressed?

A, I don't reaember.

0. You don't rencobur. Perhaps you can tell no ono thing, whether
th* prosenee of Profossor "eltz before the building of tho Luftgau
■'.cnrr.d in Munich had any connection with the delivery of this rc. ort?

A. Ho.

r :. Did you not consider it possible th*t it was purely ; c incidental
meting of Professor ’-’eltz ar.d Dr. Rnseh- r before this building?

A. Poacher took ae with hin in his car to Munich. He stopped in front
of the Luftgau Office. I stayed in the car and Hnschcr went into the
building on soac errand; and then downstairs I s->w hin peaking tc scr.it-
or.e and when wv. got into the car, ho said that was Professor .eltz.

685


IB Dec-A-v*P-13-3-?crrin(si»)
Court So. 1


C


r. Then you know Professor Welt* only free this one cecting?

A. Or.ly from that occasion, and I remeeber it only because hascher had
frccucntly aenticnod hin before thnt.

Q. Vory woll, and perhaps you can tell ne whether Professor "oltz was
■earing a military uniforr. at that' time or whether he was wearing civil¬
ian clothes?

A. I renc^^r he was in civilian clothes.

Q. Thank ycu, that* a enough. ■’

CROSS ITAKDf/.TIOH

V

3T DR. F8DE3CHHANH( counsel for the defendant Viktor Brack)

Q. ’.atnoss, I have only a few qu. ationa to put to ycu. You r.enti6ncd
"acxad'siona" which in 1941 and *42 visited tho camp of Dachau, ia
that correct?

A. Yea.

Q. Did those cceoissions include doctora?

A, There wor» oaaj visits froa doctors. To say in detail whether they
wru definitely nodical visits, it is impossible to say.

C. "hat was the purpose of the visits of th-so cooni;slops?

A. Host of the-ao visits wore to inspect tho hospital, and if it was
by doctors, the nodical installations,

r : . Then you don't know tho nrc* s of any doctora?

A, Aside from Dr. Grnwltx rnd Dr. Conti, I don't know the nanus.

%

r. Then you sooke of the regretnblo inv lid action in Dr.uhau, thnt
wa also in '41.

A. It began ir. tho niddle of '41.

C. The niddlo of '41. Did you know whr.t reasons there were wiiich
induoed the crap comr.ndant to c-*rry out this inhunan action?

A. After tho files hod been sent to Berlin, it was our opinion tlvt
it was r.ot the responsibility of the canp ooror noant but tfv t it wns
ordered fron above.

'. Than you said that the death notices did not givo tho plnco in which

686


18 D«c-.'.-JP-13-3-P«rrin( sw)
Court No. 1


this ir.ralid actually died, but gnve Dnch*u, that ..ea fr.lsificr.tion of
the document. Do you know or. whose instigation this fclse inforsntion
ins put into the announceeent?


68*(a)


q. 1 have no sore questions.

CHC6S XXAMIKAXXC8

FT IS. CETH (Counsel for tho defendant Sievora);

q, Witness, do you know that Hla=lor_prote^ted Stabeerit Dr.

Baacher particularly?

A. I know that Hra. Saachor vea a friend of Einnler. When Rascher
began the experlaeata, ha had little power, hut hla powers vere lncrenoed
In the courae of hla work.

q, Was Mrs. Baacher enployed In the eanp at Dachau?

A. Sho WI frequently In the adslnlatrntlon. Sho v- a net In tho
concentration caop Itaelf.

q, Was It poealhle to do arshin* against Dr. Baacher with Hlnnler,
to Influence Hlr^lar agnlnat Eaechor?

A. I cannot giva an opinion on that ouoatlon.

q. Did 70 U hrvo the isuresalon that Sievora wca brutal to*«rd tho
prlaonora, or did he take tho part of tho oriaoners?

A. It Is true that Slevcre waa correct in hla treat-ont of tho
prlaonora.

q, Vaa Slcvora lntoreatod nora lr^ tho huaan oxporlsonta or In tho
other dovolopnonta In the laboratories?

A. I so convinced that Slcvcra hrd tho aer.o lntoreat In tho other
eroorinenta as In the freetlcg exporlnonts.

q. In Sievora 1 dlcry It aeya on the 6th of April, '44, "Hoff:
Inatruetlona given, all v;rk to ho continued without Baacher until ny
arrive! on tho 14th of April, *44." Whet ->rk dooa that refer to?

A. Would you give ne the firat date again?

Q, The 6th of April, 1S44, after Baacher*a arroat auoarontly.

A. The trenafar of the station for tho oroduction of the blood
coagulant to Schlachter wra denned. In the neantine, Dr. Brachor was


667


errested. Slavers,


Court So. 1

16 r«c 46 -A-vT-l 3 -C-Porr 1 a (DO /"


S

red It v«a clso la our Interest, vested to jet to Scklechter. Saecher' e
trreat mi kept secret. With as SS escort and the five arisonere, I vont
to Schlachter. Whether this vne the period la cuestion I don't icn?v, hut
! BIIUT.O thet It refers to theee thisjs.


688


18 Doc-A-A3ch&-1A-1-Prico
Court 1


Q. IXirtng Raschxr'e arrest did you continuo Rascher's work on Siu.
instructions?

A. Vlhan Rase her was arrest ad I went to Berlin on tho next day to report to
Si ever s, and when I explained tho thing to him ho answered: "Well, yes."

Then I w_s told that Rascher would bo tho greatost fciluro of cy life. "What
doctor can wo entrust with the continuation of the work?" And I told hie that
It . Ploetner could bo trusted. I know that ho wxild never conduct inhumane
oxporlnaits. Then Si overs sent ue to Schlachtcr'a to continue tho werk on tho
production of tho blood coegulato drug.

%

Q. Yesterday you stotod that tho prisoners did not volunteer for the ca¬
per lm«nts. Do you knew that the prisoners told third persons that they had
voluntoarod? . .

A. I said 1 that there woro individuals «<io voluntoarod for tho experiment b,
for tho so-callod blood coagulate drug experiments. To had many voluntoors.

7 ho detail instructors consisted of five prisoners and rays-If and wo all

9

coluntoarod to conduct theso experiments on oursolves.

ER. ORTH: I thank you.

THE PRESIDENT: la thera any further croes oxaa in ation of this witnoas on
tho part cf Dofenso Counsel?

Tho Prosecution cay procood.

REDIRECT r^’-JR.TION

BY IR. McJUNET:

Q: Witness, would you describe Si overs as having boon a protty good friend
of Hinder?

A* Yo«,

Q. Did Siovors ever voice any objection in your pros one o to tho experiments
which resulted in tho murder of scco of tho experimental subjocts?

*»• ItOs

Q. Now, on the high altitude experiments, do you know whether Ruff or Rascho
w*s tho superior of Roobcrg?

A. No.

Q. Didn't you knew that Roobcrg was attached to tho Instituto in Borlin of

which Ruff was the chief of the medical deportment?

-689-


13 Dec-il- S-1L-2-Price
Court Ho. 1


C

A I 'a mv that Rccborg cae free fch; Teepolhef Rape.arch Institute cr

%

sooet h ing like tbit but that Huff ks Sosborg's superior I did not know,

5 You -liin't knew exactly chat Ruff's connection with tb> high -Ititud,
experiamts was then?

X No, I did not knar that.

4 Now, yen rolntod to this Tribunal tho incido:it where you intorcoded with
Bori»rg to pr-vent the execution of tho tailor in the low jrocsairo chanbor.

Do you rcoorobor that?

A tfith Rerborg, yes.

Q and Rbrbdrg had thj co urage on that- occasion to object to Paschor,

did ha not? _ __

a Yes, h- went to see Rasch.r irrudintoly and talked to hltt*

Q 3ut ho did not object on tho occasion of oth-r persona being killed,
did he?

A In tho cxrori-xsnta already nontionua, I do not know that ho raised any
objections or that ho opposed it.

Q 'noil, didn't tho fact that ho objected on ono occasion and didn't
objoot on others indicato to you go no thing of his attitude tor.-rd tho
doath ox.xjrirxints?

A I nust r-poat that I had tho ir^roasion that Rorberg would have
bc.n glad to disassociate hinself frou those ntUirs. I -.'id r..t hoar
any objection to those natters.

Q Now, lot's go back to th; sabotage of tho l<*r pa\>ssuro chanbor. I

t'ke it that so:ao of the Defense Counsel f<xl that this probably did not

occur and I quistiomd you at caio length yorturday with respect to that

*

natter. You still state that you did, in fact, file one of tho glass
►•vigos on this low ;rcssuru charter and in that way succeeded in haring
tu. c harbor damaged, is that right?

a The Dofonso Counsel nay be right that I do not know exactly when tho
njrcury ris.s, but it is c^rt-in that I knew th-t during tho oxcoriiount the
°eacury would rise and I also knew that when sonoone wont i:ieo thi car, the
car would lo.an a little to that side and that tho a-rcury had to rise. Every¬
thing -r.A. of «iiss in^this instrument was shattered. F.jotr*ir the .xircury

-690-


18 DoC“«--Scho-li*- 3 -Prico
Court Jfa. 1


f

V,

cootainor at the bottoo was of glass I don't know, but wh-iro tho c- s wont into
the uorcury container was certainly of glass bocause that is tfaere I fillocl
it.

Q. u wi whilo you aro not an ocpcrt on these natters, you do know that
consider chi o proasur. was axerted insido of that c hash or, do you not?

A. I did not understand tho question. What do you noan when you say
"pressure in th. chaster?"

Q. ..3 I understood one of tho Dofonso Counsel's questions, he was urging
to you that, os a natter of fact, apparently, there was not considorablo
pr.ssuro insido of tho chanhcr. and that, ther-fero, it is unlikely that this
Class gaugo broke. How I aa putting to you that you do know, as a natter of
fact, that there wns considerablo pressuro inside of this chanbar; isn't
that right? •

In tho chacher tho vacuun was withdrawn and tho air was thinnod. It was
to roproduco high altitude conditions, iha.t tho physical procoss is that it
takos tho ncrcury rise so that ono can read the altitudo free the hoight of
the mercury. When an-axporlflont was mdo with a closed parachuto, for insta.nco,
tho ncrcury colucn foil or it rose, ono of tho other; I don't know whether it,
rose or foil. I don't roaenbor exactly, but anyhow, I know that at ono tino
during tho oxporinont it rose.

q. New, Dofonso Counsol has attoaptod to differentiate botwoon tho uxperi-
aonts condirtod on tho original ton (separinontal subjocts and those which wuro
conductor on other axpcrinontal subjocts, and ho wggosts to you that Raabarg
hr.d responsibility only with respect to tho original ton subjocts. Is that
sv^jostion correct?

A. Etporixients «re conducted not only with thoso ton persons but, for
exaaplo, in a series of oeporiaonts wnich Roefcarg also conductod on c largo
nuLbor of other prisoners. Tho distinction which tho Dofonso Counsel trios to
cake between cxporiaoits included in tho report to the Uiftgau or of doath,
it is impossible for so to cake this distinction and to distinguish between
these which foil into one category or the other.

Q. Now, do you rocecbcr whether Rase her wait off with Rcofccrg aftor tho low


- 691 -


18 Doo-.W^cto-l/r-4-Pric •

Court !t>. 1 "

S

pressure experimaita wore concluded to assist hin in witing c report? Ito you


that?


A. I do not knew shore the report was node out our by whcc. n s far as I
could lexica, the report ir.s written up in Munich, but after the report was
sedo there were no core experiments since the chamber had already boon taken


-.way at that tine.

q. Rase her ever toll you that ho had rocoaoendod RoQborc for a nodal
b«ause of tho part ho played in those hi£h altitude experiments?

... Tos, but that was ouch Inter. Kaschor once mentioned that ho had
suggested Romberg for sc award to tho Rcichsfuo.,.*.

0. Now, you have stated, as I undcrstaxvl it, that iceberg -" o«>«
present when five cxpurimontal subjects were killed, is th. t correct?

• A. Yes. .

a. Now, you do not occlude the possibility that he was present when other

experimental subjects wore killed, do you?

That l. pcltt. but I can net icy I ccrtulnly do not tt.


- 692 -


18 ELc. -A-4a:-15-I-&rr«r
Court No. 1


C


q. I think taforc you lc-'vc tta stard, witness, th-.t it si. ht be null
for jou to djflcrib- '-o .Ufa Tribunal tta incidents wtan Krpos V'ywr and

Huttsrer "ore fciiL-d.

A. Y-s. In order to describe this incident : nd to give yu a true
picture of it please permit co briefly to -xplnin the devilish system
■hich wr.s erw ted by ploying ono prisoner -gainst ar.ottar by putting tho
orisorwra in various functions. It vae ns follows:

The block had ■* senior iracto for tta room end fer tta block. Tho
ezsp hod a senior insr.te for th; crap nd ttan then* were. kepos. Thoaa
p-rsor.s tad to k-op ord^r -.nd olecnlin-aa and seo that tta ord-rs given

by tta SS were carried out. If a prison was to bo punished, tho
fuiwtionary tad the duty of making a report on it. Itaro wore twenty-
five blows for rwfusing to make this report, if not worse. In this #tiy
tta orisonor was forced to denounce his ccor-ades to the SS but if he did
not report end if tta block loader found tta.t a tad was not mode
properly, ttat a knife was dirty, or southing lil» th- 1 , then the
functionary was th- first to be punistad nd only oftorwrrda th- o-rsor.
who was guilty. It was therefore easy to understnrd that ny a
functionary preferred to keep rds coaradeo in order by t «o - ttar ttan
to report thorn. On tta other hand, in th. o-8e of b-d bed a'kinr by
one person or two, the whole block got nothing to -at. «rd so it craw
that prisoners bert ottar prisoners. In Ixr.ctau there were, of course,
results of this syot-a. Prisoners in ttair burtality rf-r- oMotlauB
even worse ttan tho cS. The«w wero isolated cases in Dachau.

Ard non I coac to tta explanation’which you 'staid for. A Dutch clwr^joan
ti-s brought to the low pressure chamber /or an uxporio-nt. The senior
lna-.U of this block tad already told no that "n very d-c.nt prisoner
was caning for an eXfxria-nt. Keep your ey-s open." ' tan ta --o brov; ht
Lato the bloc!: Pa sc tar trltad to hla. I ae» a s-nior block inuato of tho
penal or of tho J-wish block looking out of the n-xt block -nd impulsively
said to teacher: "Take ttat fellow -nd let this poor one gj^Tta &
question was Robert Wagner. It is known of Robert l.agner, ta ev-ry
prison-r will confirm it, ttat ho beat tta orison-rs inhumanely. I

'.yself nad transferred twenty-six


- 693 -


:--ort So. 1

18 D*o-A-#E-15-2-Kerr3v (^:)

-«-pie to the panel blick because A an Invalid action In ^rder to keep
t>vc being sect- :n the invalid trensport to the hospital. He irr.e-
dlrtely betrayed then end these tveaty-six -ere sent on the trrneo'-rt.

In the victor he let the Jevs steed outdoors in the snov, berefort, in
•he uornlng end evening. ! do not feel guilty for having exchanged this
nan for a decent fellov. I take the responsibility on =yself.

The second case vhen I acted Independently and vhere soce oeople
accused so of having reached Jud^sent cysclf vas Rutterer. He vas notor¬
ious. Ee arrived with an Invalid transport froa Srosshausen. Vhen an
Invalid transport arrived, It vos taken to the bath. Kuraos hod to go
over to bathe, delouae and bandage the tick oeoole and take then to the
hospital. In this transport there vere a amber of cripples »*lth brokon
bones - not slople fractures, but very conpllcatcd onoo - tr.d the ono
who boat his ccerades vas thoru. E« vea also tick and tho sick pconle
aolnted hla out to us and said, *Ea broko our bones." These people could
not bo curod.

THE PHLSIIEriJ Tho vltnoas vill sneak coro elovly.

A. The oed vas the Invalid transport for thoso poople. I vent to
this Eapo and I said to hla, "I guarantee that you vill recover but you
will not boot anybody onysoro." Vhen ho. had recovorcd, I «ont nnd got
hla when Easchor told ae to go to tho adalnlstratlon and got a non for
a aorioua experlacnt.

That Is tvo tlsos I consciously Interfered. A third tlso - and tho
Court nay reallxe froa this hov hard It ie to naas «udgaont - the third
ceso vas a aan naaed Saaaedlngor. Eo vao in Dachau and vae a notorious
taco. Kis lost act vat that eight Dachau vonen, -ho hod rlvon tho
prisoners food, he betrayed these vonen and the •'OO-n vere In danger of
being locked up. I net hln cn the str^ot In the esap and sold to hla,

"If you ore In Dachau another veck, I vill cone or.d got you. You nay roly
on It." He reported for an outside detail for Setxveilcr. In I’otcveilcr
there is a road curve construction vherc Kano Sannodinger vae enployed as
tspo. This curve Is called Senaedinger Curve because on this road con¬
struction ho cripolcd very aany cqcredcs by bcetin.p then. Ac ve learned

-— * _ , .^ %

froa cur ccorades froa Sattveiler, he is responsible for

694


lo D6c---:Q-l5-3^'Jrcn.
Court So. 1


C

tte death of at least one hundred peonlo. In this connection I oay ask
-ysclf whether I would be accused for a third person for hr.vir.j brought hii
to the oxpsriixmt or for the hundred deaths which I did not prevent by lot¬
ting Saa-edingcr go. I aa ready to tako tho responsibility for anything ^
that hepponoc at tho oxpcrirfcnt-.l station vlth which I cot charge, I did
■ftatevor I could that was positive. I ac not -xaising cpoclS. I do not
want to any hor often I succeeded in saving the life of conradoc. Tho cco-
radca thousolvca can toll you that. But what I fool as a disgrace was tho
pnnnef of arrest to which I was submitted. To bo put in Dachau with tho
very pooplo who boat no and who aurd-red us as icy conradoc. Yfo arc lockod

up together with then. The people who oven today say: "If wo hed killed

• "* • .• •

you all we would at least not havo any witnosaoa." I was in jrotoctivo
cuatody for four and ono-holf years under worsu cory*itiou but it woe not
m difficult M tho bo six conth in Dachau.

KR. *>HeHET: That is all.

THE RESIDENT: la there any further intcrroG‘\tion of this witness de¬
sired? Thu witness will a tend asido. Tho Prosecution nay procood.

HI. UcHAlTBTi If tho Tribunal please, to will now procc d to tho presenta¬
tion of evidence on the Jewish skoloton collection. This crir.o la charged
in paragraph 7 of thj indictxxnt against th: defendants Rudolf Drandt and
Sievers. It is also included as a Cri-o Afc‘inst Humanity in jcrngrvh 12.

The docucrjnts on this portion of the case art not voluninous, but 1 think
that the Tribunal will find thua quite conclusive and wo aro here prcsontod
with perhaps the nost aboainablc criao which is charged in this indictnont.

I com first to Docuaunt SO. NO-035 which will bo Prosecution Exhibit
175. This, if your Honors ploaso, is in Prceocution Documnt Book No. 9. I
think it night be expedient if to remark this Prosecution Documnt Book #7
tod it will then bo in order. As I recall, tho last docunont bock was 06.

This is a letter free tho Defendant 5lovers to tho Defendant Rudolf
Brandt nnd it is dated 9 February 15U2. Attached to this letter is a report
written by Dr. Hirt and it is p-.rt of tho s-^c Documnt and part of Prosecu¬
tion Exhibit 5175. The letter reads as follows:


- 695 -


13 Doc-:.- fi-l5-U-£arrow
Court Ho. 1


C


■30 nr oemradQ Breedt:

■Tor th) re-son that Professor Dr. Hirt has, in tlx> meet ire, boccco
;j-iously ill, I regret that I hove been to sufccit any sooner Ur. Hint's
report which you requested in your letter ~Z 29 December I9il, Journal
So. .13/1:93/37 • He was stricken with pulaonary hemorrhages, ifco diagnosis
roa ‘Cystlungso at least it is not 73. In addition to that ho suffered
fret; circulatory asthenia, .it pro sent ha is still in the hospital bu£
hopes that the doctor will release hia soon so that ho can, at least to
a liritod.dugroj rosuno his work. Duo to th ose circumstances ft-ofossor
Kirt was able to furnish only a preliminary report *hich, howovor, I still
should like to subedt to your attention. Tho report concerns:

■ 1 . his rosenreh in tta f laid of microscopy of living tissues, tho
discovery of a now mthod of examination, end tho construction of a now
research nicroscojx).

"2. a proposal for sacuring skulls of Jo'.-ioh-3olshcvik Corrdssars
•j* a supplonont to report 1 sosc spoc'lal publications are attached; of
ulch the two articles froa tho 'Zeiss Nachrichton* #10 (Vol.il) and 1 -
5(Vol.IU) facilitate nost rapid guivaral orientation. Kh«,ors, othor
publications deal with difficult, individual scientific studies.

• Sincuroly yours


(signed) Siovors."


18 Dec.-A-ATD-lS-l-aeerd
Court So, 1


JG. Me HA NET i Sow, what sort of skull collection was being suggested
by Professor Hirt, and being passed on by the defendant Sievers to tho
defendant Rudolf Brandt, We see that on page 3 of the English Docunent Book:

"Subject i Securing skulls of Jewish-Bolshevik Cosnissars for tho
purpose of scientific research at the Strassburg Reich University,

■There exist extensive collections of skulls of almost all racos and
peoples. Of the Jewish race, however, only so vory few specimens of skulls
stand at the disposal of science that a study of then doos not permit pro-
ciso conclusions. The war in the East now presents us with the opportunity
to remedy this shortage. By procuring the skulls of tho Jewish Bolshevik
Cocdssars, wte personify a repulsive, yot characteristic subhumanity, wo
have tho opportunity of obtaining tangible, scientific ovidonco,

■Tte actual obtaining and colloctii^ of those skulls without diffi¬
culty could be beat accocylish&d by a diroctivo issued to the Wohraacht in
the futuro to lssaodLatdy turn ovor alivo all Jewish Bolshovik Coraaissars to
the field H.P. Tho field Military Polico in turn is to bo issued special
diroctivo a to continually infora a certain offico of tho mmbor and placo of
dotontion of theso captured Jews and to guard then well until tho arrival
of a special doputy. This special deputy, ccecisslonod with tho collection
of tho material (a Junior physician attachod to tho Wohraacht or evon tho
fiold Military police, or a nodical student oquipped with car and driver), is
to tako a prescribed series of photographs an! anthropological measurements,
and is to ascertain, in so far as is possible, tho origin, date of birth,
anrl other personal data of the prisoner. Following tte subsequently induood
death of tho Jew, whoso herd nust not be .damaged, ho will separate the hoad
from tho torso and will forward it to its point of destination in a preserva¬
tive fluid within a well-sealed tin container especially rado for this pur¬
pose. Or. this basis of tte photos, tho measurements and other data on tho
hoad and, finally, tte skull itself, the comparative anatomical research,
research on race combers hip, tte pathological features of tte skull fora, the
fom an! size of tte brain and many other things can begin.


18 Dec .-w-ATI>-l6-2-5eard
Court So. 1


f

"In accordance with its soope and tasks, the new Strassburg Reich
University would be the cost appropriate place for the collection of and
research upon these skulls thus aoquired."

According to Siovers testimony beforo the International Military
Tribunal, this collection was nothing but the usual anatonical collection
cade by ary university. Nothing strange about the thing at all — ho was
very unsuspecting about the whole thing. Of course, the report which we Just
road, which he sont along to Rudolf Brandt, very clearly states that those
Jaws woro to be taken alivo, thair bodies were to be neasured, and they were
to be executed for the purpose of an addition to the Anatonical research
at the Strassburg University.

nlso a part of this documont is ths secret report of Doctor Hirt, and
it doals with a now type of nic rose ope. While I reconnend it to the Tribunal's
attention, I do not think it is necossaxy that it be read at this tirao. I
Just want to call your attention to a short paragraph on pago 8 of this
report of Hirt. It gives you sooo indication of what use they ore making of
this sdcroscope. It saysi

"Tho observation of bacteria in the living organism, thoir behavior
thoro, and tho possibility of destroying then by corresponding chemical
agonts.

"Work on tha last-oontionod problems forcod itself upon ua, and tho
careful microscopic observation necessary in this not hod requires that at
least the docisive fundamental points of these questions be solved by anatomy.
It would therefore be wron, to stop becauso one had reached tho limits
drawn for the anatomist as such in his field, and to fail to sol*o the pro¬
blems which offer themselves" Signed, "Hirt".

I think that short paragraph will take on a new meaning whan the court
has heard the proof which wo shall present upon the application of mustard
gas and ether gases to living human beings, and the studios made of tho
effects of these gases upon living tissues, and how they hoped to bo able to

counteract to some extent the effect by tho use of various chemicals.

-696-


13 Dec. -A-A ID-16-3-Board
Court So. 1


c


I n cm turn to Document No. 090, which will bo Prosecution's Sxhibit

176. Thia is - letter frca defendant Rudolf Breait to the dofondant

Silvers in n.?ly to the letter which I have just road, and which is

Prosecution's Exhibit !?o. 175. This is dated 27 February 1942, to tho

Reich Business Eenagcr of Ahncnerbo, SS-Obersturobmnfuohrcr Siavcr3.

-

■Dtr.r Coarr.dc Sic vers? . 9

"I wes able today to infom tho Roichsfuohr«r-SS of tho reports of
Professor Dr. Hirt. As 1 hove told you before, the Reichsfuchror is very
such interested in Professor Dr. Hirt's work-. Perhaps you could call on
Hirt s oa-tiao soon and toll hla -gain that Ihs Rcichsfuehrcr-SS will
place at his disposal everything ho neodr..

"First’of_a11, no for our part ought to do everything that would aid

•

Professor Dr. Hilt in regaining his health. Please nrjte son- suggestions
as to how you and \i<. could b« helpful in this respect, perhaps .a sa‘ 11
shipaont of fruit '-ould also contribute osaonti lly to his recovery.

"After Professor Lr. Hirt's recovery, it would be best if * conference
with tb- Roichsfuohror-SS took plrco.

"On your r.ext visit which probbly will t- ke place in th- near futuro
you could report once acre on.ur. Hirt's work.

"Bebt Wishes

“Hell Hitler."

with the initials "R,B.»

The r.ext document -..ill be No. 086, which Prosecution'n Exhibit Ho.

177. It la a letter iroa Sievers to Rudolf Brandt, dated 2 Hovoober
19A2, on the letter rt&a.d of The Ahnen-rbe.

e •

"Dear Coorado Brandt:

"The Roichsfuehrer-SS onoe ordered, ~a you know, that SS Hauptstuns-
fuehrer Professor Dr. Hirt should be provided dth ."11 necessary srtorlal

for his research nork. I hav e "lrocdy r-ported to the Reichsfuehror-

SS that for sod- anthropological studies 150 skeletons of inaates of Jews

are neOd-d *nd should be provided by the concentration c'oip Auschnita. It

is only r^ccssary that the Reich Uain Security Office will now h. furnished

>ith m official

'


- 699 -


18 Dee.-A-ATD- 16 -Weard

Court Ho. 1


directive by the Raichsfuehrer-SSj by order of the Roichsfuehrer-SS, howevor,

you could advise so yourself,

>

"Sincerely yours,

"Hell Hitler
"Your

"Sievers,"

And, Sievers was thoughtful enough to enclose a draft of a lottor to
tho Reich Main Security Office,

He see here th»t the defendant Siev.rs was anything but an idealist in
his statement here on the skeloton collection. He has told the Reichsfuehrer-
SS that they need 150 skoletons for use and they are to ccoo from Auscfvritz.
And, tho only thing that need be doxxi to got the wheols moving is tho letter
or directive to tho RSHA, and wo soe that this was forthcoming in the next
document which is Ho. 116, and Prosecution’s Exhibit No. 178,

This lottor is dated 6 Novocbor 19U2, four days following tho receipt
of tho lottor of 2 November 19h2 fren Siovors to Brandt. This is a lottor to
tho Reich Main Security Offioo by Rudolf Prandt. Tho court will noto that it
is directed to tho Office IV 9 li, in care of SS Lioutomnt Colonel Eichnann.
As I rocall, I told tho court a fow days ago that this offico IV B h in tho
RSHA was tho one charge* with tho responsibility of the solution of tho
Jewish questi-'", which meant tho extermination of tho Jews, and that Eichmann
was b- G ° r that offico. It is vory clear why this lettor was sent to him
oocause they wanted some 150 Jews skeletons.

Tho lottor reads:

"RE: Establishment cf i collection cf skeletons at tho Anatomical
Institute in Strassburg. ' * *

''Tho Reichsfuohroi'-SS has ordered that o very thing Professor Dr. Hirt
Mods for his research work bo placed at his disposal. The director of tho
■o-atonical Institute in Strassburg, Professor Dr. Hirt is at the sano time
chief of a department of tho Institute for Military Scientific Rosearch in
tho Offico Ahenerte. 3y request of the Raichsfuehrer-SS I therofore ask that
-he cstablishojnt of the skeleton collection bo made possible, as to the
details SS Lieutenant Colonel Sieve rs will got in touch with you." The signa¬
ture is "Pr" or Rudolf Drandt* -700-


^ - ■ « <• ' - -

18 Deo.-A^TD-17-i-Blaicley
Court Ho* 1

Then this points out to us Dr. Hirt as well as Dr. Rancher were
aeabers of this Institute for Military Scientific Research in the
■Ahnoncrbo" and subordinates of the defendant Sievers.

THE rTESIDEJfT: At this Uao the Tribunal will recess for fifteen

-dnutes.

(A recess was taken.)


i'


- 791 -


13 Deo .-Ar-A TD-i 7-1-3 laicley
Court No. 1


r n

Then thia pointa out to ua Dr. Hirt as well aa Dr. Rascher were
severs of this Institute for Military Scientific Research in the
"Ahnonorbe" and subordinates of the defendant Sierers.

THE PRESIDES?: At thia tine the Tribunal will recess for fifteen
ainutee.

(A recess was taken.)


-m-


18 IX,-c-tt-I3-l8-l-jiinabuck
Court So. 1.


C


THE !uRSH&Lx Tho Tribunal is again in session.

:?-. ifeHuKZTs no had cctc to Document HX>-089, which is on pugo 13
of your Honors' docuwnt book, and this will bo ftosocution Exhibit 179.

This is a lottor which is identical to tho one which wont in under Pros¬
ecution Exhibit 178 with tho oxception that this letter shows at tho
botton that a copy wont to tho /hnenerbe. It is Just one of the instances
which soiiottaos occurs when wc find two copios of tho. sano lottcr at dif¬
ferent places. I rill therefore not read Prococutdon Exhibit 179*

Tho next docxsxmt is H0-C&2 rhich '/ill bo Proeocution Exhibit 180,

,/* » • • - '

and this is a lottor fren the Defendant Rudolf Brandt to tho Defendant
SiuYors of tho Ihnoojrbo. Tho letter is dated 3 Dcccrbor 19^2.

■Dear Co.a*ado SIEVERS: I have yo\ir note cf 3 Hovenbor 19lj2 beforo
no again today.

"I had a chance at that tiro to have r. short talk with SS-Ctoergruppon-
fuehrer Pohl. If ny nenory sorvus correctly 1» had also Bent vu word that
thoso c cm plaints *.rhich you outlinod, which, however, I did not report in
detail would be renodiod. I had rucoived your letter Just tho very .noming
I wont to soe SS-Ctwrgrupponfuohrvr -Pohl. Thoroforo I could not possibly
road it through before. I only rerweberod what you had told to orally. If
further intervention on ey part shcaild be accessary will you please lot no
know. Hell Hitler, Yours." with tho initials R.3.

Tha next docuuont is H0-O37 which '/111 be ft*osocutdon Exliibit 181. This
is a letter si^nod by th: Defendant Sievurs, addressed to tho Reich s'ain
Security Office, Office IV B U, to tho -attention of the notorious Eichuann.

"Subject: asscab ling of c colloction of skeletons.

■With roforenco to your letter of 2$ Sept-ebor 19U2"... aixl then
cone the filo nuabors ... "and tho personal talks which have taken placo
in thj coantiiio on tho .above natter, you aru inforrwd that the co-worker
in this office whe was charged with tho execution cf tho above-rantionod
sp.ci-1 task, SS-Hauptsturnfuohrcr nr. Bruno Beger, ended his work in tho
Auschwitz concentration caup on 15 Juivj 191*3 because of the existing danger


of infectious diseasos.


-7C2-


18 Dec-i-?S-18-2-r:ir-'.buck
Court So, 1.


C


■A total of 115 persons were worked on, 79 of when were Jews, 2 Poles,

1; Asiatics and 30 Jewesses, At prose:these prisoners are separated accord¬
ing to sex and each group is accastodated in a hospital building of the
..uschrits concentration caap and are in quarantine.

"For further processing of the selected persons an irradiate transfer
to the Katzweiler concentration caap is now imperative, which must be ac¬
celerated in view of the danger of infectious diseases in Auschwitz. En¬
closed is a list containing the names of the selected persons.

■It is Requested that tho necessary directives be issued.

■Since with the tranafor of the prisoners to Hatzweilor the danger of
spreading diseasos exists, it is requested that an innodi a to shipment of
disease-free and clean prisoners' clothing for 80 men and 30 women bo
ordered sent fro--: Satzweilor to.AuscIadtz.

"At tho eano time one must provide for tho accoraaodation of tho 30
women in tho Katz»wiler concentration caap for a short period."

Signed Sievors, SS-Standartonfuohror; carbon copies to SS-Hauptstum-

fuehror Dr. Begcr, SS-Hauptetumfuohror PTofossor Dr. Hlrt are! SS-Oborstura-

0

bannfuehrer Dr. Brandt, and this copy obviously was found in tho filos of

•

tho Roichsfuehror-SS and boars the stamp of tho Fursonal Staff of tho
Reichsfuohror S3 and therefore was tho copy sont to the Defendant Rudolf &*anri
Hero again we can set very clearly that tho Defendant Siovors played
a very active part in thu collection of the Jewish skeletons and was any¬
thing but a ardlbox, as he will have you believe. p

Before pcssing on to the iwxt document, I would liko to- cloar up a
problea in connection with Prosecution Exhibit 175 which was tho first
docunont to go in out of this book; that is, Document NO-085. Actually
the exhibit contains only the covering lotter from Sievers to Rudolf Brandt
plus that part of toe report dealing with tho Jewish skeleton collection.

The exhibit which is going into evidence does not contain that part of
Professor Dr. Hirt's report dealing with tho new microscope, and accordingly
ry raides with respect to- that portion of tho report of Hirt should bo
disregarded in the record at this tine. It may be that we will put in this


13 Dec-A-i B-l8-3-Ninabuek
Court No. 1.


additional portion of the report which was in twD parts at a later stato

tea*

of the trial.

I coca n cm to Doeuaont NO-068 which will be Prosecution Exhibit 182,
and this is a teletype froa Sieve re to the Dofendant Rudolf Brandt and it
is dated 5 Septc-i»r 19L4 and if your Honors will recall, tho invasion of
the continent by tlx) illios had alrerdy taken place and Strasbourg itself
was being endangered. Obviously tho collection of tho Jewish persons
taken to Natzwoilor had boon accoeplished and thoir bodies had boon de¬
livered to Strasbourg where they had boon kept, whore they had boon pro-
served, and wo now find in this tele typo that those non who wore partic-
ipiting in this diabolical criro wore now bocceing worriod lost ovidonco
cf their crirxi bo found at Strasbourg. This tolotypo contains aoioc

stenographic notes at tto top and as boat they could bo dociph-red, road

f

as follows!

"Sas diasolvod ontiroly in our plr.ee by nd stake according to foraor
order. In cose nothing has happened, solution for tho tine being until
official proposal for execution..." a bit garbled.


16 Dec. A-A^ctati-12-h-Minbaek

Coart No. 1

The body of tho toletypc reads cs folio:rs: _

"Subject: Collection of Jewish Skeletons.

■In conformity with the proposal of 9 Febru-.ry 1942 and with the
consent of 23 February 1942, SS-Sturnb?nnfuehrcr Professor Hirt pL-nrfed
the hitherto isissing collection of skeletons. Due to the detent of tho
scientific w<rk competed herewith, the preparation of the skeletons is
not yet concluded. Hirt* asks with respect to the tija; noedod for 80
special ns, and in ease th^ endangering of Strasbourg has to tc reckoned
with, hwi to proceed with the collection situated in tho dissecting rooa
of tho anatomical institute . Ho is bio to carry out the maceration end
thus render then irrecognizable. Then, however, p-.rt of tho entire work
would h“vo been partly done in vain, and it would bo a great scientific
loss for this unique collection, bccausj ...” there is n word hero I
can't make out..." casts could not bo .undo afterwards. The skeleton
collection cs such is not conspicuous. Viscera could be declared as
reonents of corpses, apparently loft in the anatomic '1 institute by the
French, nd ore’er-d to bv cremated. Decision on tho following proposals
is requested: l) collection can be preserved; 2) collection is to bo
partly dissolved; 3) wntire collection is to be dissolved.” Signed
Sicvers, SS-Standartenfuchrer.

Wo see hero that their pi-ns changed so-nwh-t frera the origin-1
proposal by Hirt which wns for a collection of skulls, ik. now boo that
thoy wore desirous of acking a collection of skeletons, -nd also in
connection with that, to tke pins tor cases, of the bodies of tho porsons'
before tho flesh was removed, and it is apparent fraa this letter* that
dcfloshing, if wo xy call it that, had not been completed.

..o pass on to Docuacnt 10-091 which is Prosecution Exhibit 183. This
is a notc signed by a man named Perg, an SS-Hauptstunafuchrer. It is
dated 15 October 1944, in other words a little norc. than thirty days
following the request of Sievcrs for inforsrtion as to what nas to be
done with the collection. This note roods:

THZ BBSPa W : What data did you read for that document, counsel?

1£R. liciWi-Y: This is on page 18 of your oocun-nt book.

THE RlBSnEjV: I know, but what date did you read in tho beginning of


3 - • ' C

13 Doc-i-: 3-lS-2a-3inabock
Court So, I,

JfcffidBI: This date is 15 October 19U-. This exhibit consists of
two notes. Ths one on the to? is 15 Gctcbor l?hu. It soys:

. "On 12 Cctobir 19ll I talked to &S-SterA-rtonfuchi\.r Siovors on the
tclophono and asked hin whe-tbor the skeleton collection at Strnssburg had
already been occplotoly broken up in accordance with instructions giver, by
SS-Standartcnfoehr>r Eairtrt, SS-Standartonfuciirer Sievers could not tell
bo anything about that, since ho had not yet received any riotailod nows
free. Profuse or Hirt, I told hin that, if the dissolution had not yet taken
placo, saic pert of the collection should still bo preserved. It had to
bo certain hoe-over, that the cccplx-to dissolution could bo rccon 'llshod _
pronptly if gtrasabourg should be erdangored because of the silit-ry situ¬
ation. . SS-Standrrtonfiuhrer aov ro prooiaod to have tho appropriate in-
restigetions .-ado and to report about than." Signod, 3ors.

.ex as ,xut of tho sac doc ice nt aal exhibit is a second note signed
by Borg which is.dated 26 tetobor and it s.^ys:

■During his prosonco at tho Field Co a and Post on 21 (fctobor 19l»Ji,
SS-Str.ndrxtcnfuehror Sicr-ra Laforo-d n that thj dissolution of tlx col¬
lection in Straseburg bad already been conpleted in conplinnco with tho
orders ,ivon forr*rly. Considering t2» rholo situation ho thinks that
this proc_''ur, tat tho best o:»." Signed, Dor.-., with the handwritten

initials Pi*, at tho bottau, which aro those of tho Defendant Rudolf Brandt.

*

I an sur . that tho dofordant Giovurs certainly does wish that tlx collec¬
tion had ir. fact been completely dostroyod, but as wo shall scj later

tide very afternoon, that in fact was not accaaplishod. •

• 1

I would non like to refer back and r ad a few oxc-rptr frou tho
Sievers diary which throws a little fvrthor light on this particular ob¬
ject. The first rtforonce is in Docircr.t PC-533 which went in as Prosocu-
tion Exhibit 122, :ni I would like to call the Court's attention to several
excerpts which appear on pares 2 and 5. Thus h_ nakes a note on 10 Feb¬
ruary 1?!;3»


-70 6-


15

/

Court No.l V.

Thus ho aakes a ncto of ID February, 1943, S3 Ha ijjt at unafuc hr or Dr. 3ogcr
and this Court end the Tribunal will recall ET. Bogor was tho Assistant in the
Ahnenorbo Instit\±c wto was actually doing the anthropological noasuroronts
in Auschwitz end Hatzwotier. This noto says: SS Hauptsturnfuchrcr - It.Bcgcr:
Anthropological work at Auschwitz mdo questionable duo to nilitary draft.

m 0

And on pago 5 wo find a note nadc on 21 Uay, 1943: SS HaujAstis-afuohrcr,

Dr. Begor, (by telephone) regarding survey of anthropological ox anim tions
at Auschwitz, end another rote: SS Hauptsturnfuchrcr, Er. Hirt (by tolophonc)
Execution of o xr n ln- .tions at Auscharitz.

Again on tto 2^vd of May, 1943, Sic vers enters in his diary a noto:

SS Kauptstumfuohrcr. Dr. Bogcr (by telephone) concerning cxnninationa at
Auschwitz. Again on tho 16th of Juno, 1943: SS Hau^stumfuohrcx Dr. Bogcr:
Roport on anthropological survoy at Ausclwitz. Oi the 23 rd of Juno, 1943J
S3 Kauptstumfuohrcr: Dr. Hirt, Strassbxrg (by tclophoro) Ro adaptation
of tho Auschwitz conclusions and executions of tho skull x-rays at Natzwoi-
lcr.

That was free tho Siovers diary for th* first half of 1943. Unfortunately,
we do rot have that portion covering tho last half of 1943, bxtf. wo do have
tho diary for ths full year of 1944, and this is document 3546-PS, which

was introduced cs Prosecution Exhibit 123, and on pago 3 of this diary wo

• • •

find on tho 2nd of February, 1944, rote No. 9, "hich covors tho discussions
with Hsuptsturafuoh: or Hirt, Ur.Si.vors nakus the following entry: "Casta
of oxaninod raco types. SS HoxptstumfUchrcr Bogor is to arrango for tie
sowing of tho roquirod arount of no go coll and positive-3ubstmco » that
(Praoparator) Bong can carry out the casting hdasclf end Gabel does not
havo to ccoc. Substance roquirod fer eighty pcr»ns. In tho evert tho aib-
stanco is rot available, shall tho casting be done with gypsun?" That noto
aako3 very clear that Professor Hirt in a conforonco with defiant Siovers
was coking arrangoronts so that tho plaster casts of the bodies of those
victins could bo rode before the bodies w=ro reducod to skeleton forn, and
that they wero hero talking about tho arount of natcrial required, and thoy


-7C7-


18 Doc.-A-^*-ie-2-Ccck

Court Ho.l ""

osnttonod tho nacx. of Bong and the Tribunal will hear aom ccntion nado of
Song in tho test in: ny of a wit nc as who will bo brought to the stand shortly*
Turning to page 6 of the Sic vers Diary for 194A, »ws find that on the
Zth of April, 1944, a note appears: SS Uschaf. Ik. Roger - Admisod discussion
with Professor Abel in regard to work by Dr. Trojan in prisoner-of war canp3
cn ifcn^la. Beger requests that his unit be a dviscel of his assigned* sinco
clarity does not exist on this subject, and that a request be nadc far his
being put on tho payroll as Sender fuehrer - that is a Special leader, end
this r»to iwlicatos perhaps that ho did anthropological studies goirx; on in
another sphere in prisonor-of-wor caaps on li»ngols.

I think thoso cro the only excerpts fren the diary deeding with tho

• • * » „ • *• •

* clot on collection, and I would at this tine liko to request that tho nit-
noss Herri H-nripiarro be called to tho staol to testify.

4

THZ rasSKWT: Tho !'nrshall will coll th= witness, Honri Henripiorro:
HEKil HEMtlPIZZYS; c idtncss toalc< tho stnnd and testified as follows:

3Y THd PRdUDJ.T:

Q. What is your none?

A* Honri Henripiorro .

Q. Will you repeat this oath aftor no:

I snoot* by Cod, tho Alnijtty and Ceniscicnt, that I will spoak ths
puro tho truth and ’.till withhold and add nothing.

( Tho witness repeated the oath)

THE PRESIDENT: You nay bo seated.

DEGCT ES.dlHl.TION

BY UR. IlcHnNET: * •

Q. Witness -
A. Yes

C. Tour nano is Honri Henripiorro?

... los sir.

C.. You are a citizen of Franco?

A. Tas, I am * French citizen.


- 708 -


c

13 Dec-A-?3-iO-3-CocIt
Court So. 1

•

Q When and where were you born?

A I was born in Liovrcs on tho 23rd of August 1905.

Q Tftnt was the rear in which you rare bom again, please?

A 19Q5. uJ

Q What is your present address? That is your hone address?

L :y •rusont address is lii Rue ?o lail, Strassbourg.

Q VTill you toll the Tribunal just a bit about your personal history,

■hat you have done and boon doing up to tho ti^js you cano to be a Clork ’
in the Anato m ical Instituto at Strassbourg?

A I should like first-of all to.saku it clear that I did not com lioro
with any foolings of hatred or vongoanco. I cano hero solely owing to a senti
oont of having to do ny duty and out of justico. I one this to tho 36 docto.
victims whoa wu received in tho noi.th of August, 19b3, I would, therefore, sq
before having to proceed with tho ir-.scrvr.tion of the 86 victi-s that 1 cado
at least 250 prosorvatioia of Russian and rolish prisoners i\ho died undor tho
ill treat--ent at aitzig. That is enough to shew you that I know how to nppro-
ciato ttv difference botwoon a violent doath and a natural doath.

Q Witness, let's find out Just a little bit about you boforo you

•

tell tho Court about what happened at the Ann tonic al Institute in Strass-
brurg under Dr. Ilirt. Now, wore- you over errootod by tho OunaJis?

A I was arrested by thu Gomans in Paris.

Q In Paris?

A I was arrested by tho Gomans in laris and was tak-.n to tl»o concontra*
tion crap at CccjJiogno, and it was ^ft- r tho intervention of Dr. Jhozvollo,
ny principal officer, that I was transferred to the concentration canp at
Coapiegne, and before being liberated frai that canp I passed, before a Cem-
adssion of High SS Officers, who told :xs that I would have to return to ny
country if I wished to have ny relatives spared, and it was on th, 6th of
Juno, 19 hZ, which was tte date I would have to leave P^-ris. It was as a
r.sult of that I was at Strassbourg.

THU PRSSHJ^ff: V'ili the witness speak aero slowly?


-709-


c

18 Dec. -A-UX-ID-A-Cook
Court Ko. 1

wrness: It was when i arrived there I tried to find eaploymcnt at the
hospital which .sight make uee of ay knowledge as a chemist's assistant
at the cheelst shop nd there was no further employment there, and at the
hospital they telephoned to Dr. Hirt end asked hio if ho still required
an -syee and ho answered ’’yes" and ct that moment.

7ffi PFESID2NT: The Tribunal is not rocoiving the'translation.

WITNESS: At that acaent I was taken on in Professor Hirt's Department,
and rrturally it was a principal anatomist who taught me to prepare
bodies for preservation.

BY 2t. HcHaNEY:

Q. 1 itness, just c ainuto. '.(hen was that when you took this job at
Strasbourg undor Dr. Hirt, what was the dato?

A. Tho dr.to of ay entrance was -round bout tho 20th of Juno, 1942.

Q. All right, who was your immediate suporior on this job that you
took?

A. Uy Linedinto chief was under Professor Hirt, then the principal
pruparntor Otto 3ong, who taught no horn to proparo bodies for prosorvrtion,
Q. And who nr.s thr.t?

A. Ho was a Gornen subject, Ur. Otto Bong, who c-ou with tho Professor
• •

to Strassbourg.

'. And hon do you a>U that nnne Bong?

A. Bo n g .

Q. <vll right, now lot's go back just a ainuto. You stated you wore
arrested in 1942 in P ris by tho Gestapo?

A. Yuc, that is right. *

Q. Why were you arrested?

,t. 1 do not know yot.

They did not tell you why you "ore arrested?

A. They did not toll me why, no sir.

Q. Anl then you wont to tho concentration caap at Ccapiogna?

A. Ye8, When I loft ttK concentration crop at Cocapiogne I remained
•a month in Paris and on the 6th of Jons I had to leave Paris.


-710-


18 Dec. -A-lE-10-5-Cook ^

Court No.l

r .. How you wont to Strasbourg then on the 6th of Juno, 1942?

«. Tea sir.

Q. And you took this job in Hirt'a institution?

A. On the 20th of June I took tho job.

Q. Arxl your task thoro was the conservation of corpses undo* the sup a-vi¬
sion -

/„ ^y coployrcnt uas to procood with the preservation of corpses, and to
pro pare for their lectures to studorts in tho auditoriun and I also lookod
aftor tho control heating and 1 also had to „o with tho car that bolongod
to tho soction to fetch tho corpsos of th- victims.

Q. And I bo lie to you statod that you had received about 250 to 300 corpsos
of Russian prisoners-of-war, i* that right? #

A. Russians end Poles, yes sir.

r i# How du you know wero prisoners -of-war?

A. B:cause overy corpse wr.s accoppaniod by n doath cortificato md fer
tho 86 victics uhich tio rcccivod in August there noro not papers at all.


13 Doc-4-:-5-2 C>-1—Danie la
Court Ho. i *


Q How, we will co~o to tho cighty-six victims in just a mcoentj lpt's
find out a little bit =ore about your job before then.

A I!y employment was principally to preserve the corpses, to fotch those
corpses at ISitzig, and also to prepare for tho lectures which wore givon to
tho students.

Q All right. How, did thoro cooo a tfcae in tho middle of 19ii3 when you
received sore ot!»r corpses? I think you havu been trying to toll us .abojjjg^'"
that. Hill you now relate the circucst^ncos of that?

A What circumstances do you nom, sir?

Q You had nontionocl the roccipt of sono eighty or eighty-six corpeos.
..ill you toll ua about that; when it happonod, what you saw, and what you did?

A In tho month of July, 191i3, Frofossor Hlrt roccived a visit from tho
sonior officer of tho SS. I thought t.vat ho was a sonior officor boenuso ho
c.ano in his own car, accompanied by his own driver. Sent, to havo a driver
and o car, you would nood to bo a senior officor.

This officor caao throo ticos in tho nonth of July, FTofosoor Hlrt
took hia and showed hia tho collars of tho laboratory, it fow days Inter,
lx. 8ong told ao tiiat ho would hove to proparc. tto- tanks to rccoivo a
hundred and treaty corpses. Ao preporod tlx> tanks. In those tanks thoro
were synthetic spirits of 55 degruoo.

The first convoy which >e rocoived t=»3 a convoy of thirty vouon. It was

supposed to .arrive at five o'clock in tho aorning, but it only arrivod at

seven. After having interrog ated the driver about thu delay, th» driver gave

-.ns-ser, "They gave us a lot of trouble.■ Thoso thirty corpses of v.onon wore

unloadod by tho driver and tro assistants, -ilso helped by Kr. Bong and lynolf.

•

Th; rr-servation cf these corpses started straight away. Tho corpses
arrivod when obey wore still l.v oyes wen: wido open and brilliant;

they sucred congested and red, and they woro popping out of the orbits. Thoro
wore traces of blood at the nose and at tho aouth, end there was ovidenco of
focal nafctor ceding out. There was no rigor uortis apparent. At that noaont
1 judged for ryself that it was a case of victim who, in ny opinion, had
boon poisoned or asphyxiated, because in tho case of no victin of any provic
preservation worv thjre presented the synptoos and signs that those victim


• - c

18 Dv.c-A-AScho-20-2-Dr.jiii.la
Court ?fc. 1

showed when they arrived. That ia why 1 made a note of the aorir.1 number a
thr.t the wcaon hed tattooed iji their left forearm. I medo a note of thorn
on r pieco of paper, and I kept thus in secret in ny house. The serial
nuabera consisted of fivu dibits.

A few days L.tor wo received a second convoy of thirty men. The so ar¬
rived exactly in the same state .r.a th; first, thr.t is, still warn, with
wide open eyos, congested, eye a hr i Hi ant, bleeding at the mouth end
blooding at tho nose, and also iooir,. -roir fecal mattor.

Thu preservation cf thesj thirty non was rlao proceeded with in-
aodi-tely, with one alight difference. The loft testicle in each ceso
wr.s reaovud, which was sent to tho Laboratory for «natotay Number 2.

Thct was a privato laboratory run by Professor Kirt.

Soac time Inter, thereupon, we re-ecivod r. third rnd last convoy,
rwnoly, of twcr.t^-six ncni'Thcy -‘.loo 'rrivod in.Uw saoo statu as tho
two privious ones.

I should liko to make it clear once more — and I say thin knewing it
to be true—.after the first convoy of women's bodies that wo received,
Professor Hirt, having a*.t oo at tho door of an Anatoaiccl Department,
told no leter-lly "Peter, if you don’t hold your mouth, you won't pot out
of this." That is word fer word wh.at Professor Hirt told ac.

no ther poculrity. Professor Hirt, scev; tiie before he received
those bodies, said, in the b.aseOent f an Anatomical Depart-nont, talking
ts Hr. Dong, "Th-y r- going to drop like flies."

All this Tir.3 a sign f-.ro. that it was literally a case of nu#dcr, I
therefore was rijit in be Having that those eighty-six victims which wo had

received had^ot died a natural (Lath.

Q. Vitness, *'hy do you assure, that?

A. I beg ysur pardon?

Q. ',hy do ycu -ssuae that these people were murdered? Did you . ot
any death certificates with thee, for ex <^ole, with the bodies?

... lihat-I xr.n is that havir^ mdo the preservation of the first
lots of corpses froa Mutzig Camp, there was rlvays a sh-ot with e.ach
o:dy, whereas in


18 Z»-c-A-ASc£aw2>-3-0~ nitolfl -
Court lio. 1


C

thu case of those eighty-six victims, there were no sheets at all;

^sid-s which, you should know cs util os I th t • nerson who di~s a
xrtur-J. death 6 —s not leave a corps, with shiny, glistening eyes lik„
those that I had soon nor in - state of corolete congest!*, or with
w blood flwtir.g out of oy-s and south rrA nos-. /.Iso, these bodies noru
still ware. Tben-foro, it cannot b_ a case /f natural death, so far as
I can judge*

Q. I s.o, :.'ow, I -a n-t sur- that you tola th- Tribunal wh.n the first
/

shipa-nt of bodies was received. ..ill /m tell us thtt n.., please?

A. The first lot of thirty wxt-n's corpses w-.s received around -'bout
the 10th of August, I cann>t state the date exactly, but wh-.t I do
raaoobcr precisely is U.efit was at the bogimdng of August, the 10th of
■ August, Ilbcliovo.

And you saw t:.-;.. bodies with y-ur own ey-c when th-y '«uru dwliverod?
*»• I was prosent ./self; I ays-If b-locd to unlvd t,hoa, nd therefore
I cannot b- oiatekun .

Q» And th-n you received -. s.core! shipe. nt of thirty bodies two weeks
later?

A. Y-3, I roc-ived r second lot of thirty bodioo, and : t’sird lot of
twenty-*ix bodies.

And what did you do vdth thus- bodies ft-r you had rucoiwd than?

«. Oncu tlv.ywc.ro pr-s-rv-d, the corpses were placed ir. the tanks,
about fifte-n to each tank. These bodies were -11 superb. The btt’ies >f
prisoners which I h t! previ usly seon -lore .11 uaaciatcd, whereas thco-
eighty-six corpses thrt I an talking of woro ergnif icont; finely .ausclod,

-nd did r.ot sh/w -ny signs of neglect. .«c only thing that was roaarkablo

s

was that there t;-rc a Certain nuabor f peculiar wrinkled in .he back.

Q. Do you know, ,dtr».ss, whether or not the people who sore Jllled
and delivered to you were Jens?

«. «t the tiao that I saw th.se bodies I did not kn.w -rhothor they
rwore Jens or r.-t. I jor-ly cu.sti rv-d l!r. Bong and I asked hie what ho
thought th. se people were. It was Jr. Bang wh* said, "Das aind a lies
Jud.n," "Th-7 -r- -ll Jews."


-711-


13 3*o-w5ei2>-2C-U->alel« (010) ,

Court 1 C


v -6v witness, *'111 you tell the Tribunra Just vhr.t hropencd to
thest bodies After they hrd been delivered to 70 U rnc hre been stored in
the brseatat or In the cellert

A Once the bodies hrd been preserved, they vero put into the treks.

They refined in the teaks re entire yecr without Anybody touching the:,
la the -oath of September, 19UU, the Allies were ndvreci n-~ red therefore,
et thft tine, Professor Sirt ordered Hr, 3oa^ red llr. Keier, the laboratory
essistrnts to cut up these eighty-six bodies rad to h-ve then crenrted in
the Strrssbour.- City Creartorlur.. The vork hrvinc been ncconolishod by Kr.
Bon.: rnd Kr. Keier in the ecturl rooa cr® these teaks were, I raked Kr.

3oc- the following aornin,; if he hrd cut up rll of the bodies. Eo replied,

■Vs wouldn't cut ther. rll up, it vra frr too such work. Ve left soae of
the bodies rt the bottou of the trnke." I then rsked 3onr, "Vore rll tho
sorpeee burned with their old teeth!* At thrt u>neat 3on,; replied, "The
old teeth tVt were rlrerdy found oa the Jes -er« hrndod over to Profoooor
Eirt by hr. Ktier.-

The re-yinin • corpecs thrt -ir- not nut into coffins — becruso thero
vortn't any coffins left — ^ere toseed brek into tho treks ‘-th the rerjAlnder
of th' others, co r-« to s'* ncoole who.would se/ then believe thrt they
wire the ram*Ine of rarto icrl defections.

\ Vert you in Strrssbour' when it w r s erntured by the Allies?

A I be your nr rdon!

\ I spy, lid you rearia ia Strrssbour,:, red were you there when it
vi a crptured by the Allies ia 1QU*| - ♦

A When Strrssbour wrs liberated by the Alli'6 I wr 6 still in th* t
nento-icol Depretucnt. It Is I who should hrve conveyed, in the err bolon.-
1- to the Department, Kr. rad l.rs. 3on , rnd r.6 Secritrry of thrt Dcpr.rtr.ent
I should clso hrve evpcurt6d then to th. other brnk of the Rhine. However,

I vrs not anxious to do thrt.

The dry before the Allies rrrivtd tht;* were rt thrt no neat rt Srmvnio,

I kr.cv It fron tho Allied wires. Therefore, the dry before, I •'cr.t ."round

715 •


18 5co~JrJJcfci>-2G-J»-3psiel» (BJO)
Court 5o. 1


to the .7i?.:e rad I er.bote«.-ed the err so it ^ould not-he able to ran. The

%

next -»min; the Allies rrrived, rad of course when ve vented to use the
e-r we couldn't. X considered It =y duty to do thrt.


715-A


c


^ £

M Dc c -1--3-2 O-5-Denicls
Court No. 1

3 Her, thasc bodice which you s-y wro not successfully dissected ~nd
burned, w.r. they found in the Institute at Strasbourg University?

A Tub

Q Dc you town whether pictures were taken of those bodies?

A I beg your oarden?

Q Do you know whether pictures wore taken of those bodies?

A Yes, photographs were taken of those bodies in several instances, and I
know it well because I had to help. I oaptied the tanks each tire there -.rere
photographs bo as to fird those bodies that had not been dissected at the
bottoe. The corpses and the numbers which were on their ar r. corresponded
exactly to the nunbers that I had noted oyself. Those corpses ere subjected
to post ^erten examination by Professor Sicons in ny presence, I assisted him.

Q All right. Kow, witness, I want to have handed to you a booklet
of pictures. And this, if the Tribunal please, ie docunont K04:53 •

A I did not hoar very well.

Q I say that I aa going to havo hand'. to you a book of pictures,
and 1 want you to tell the Tribunal if these aro pictures of the corpeos

• i—

which wore loft in Strasscourg.

A Yes, cort-> inly, thn photographs were takon at Strastbourg* Prof¬
essor Siaona -Ado up an albua T.-ith all the photographs, as well Cocnis-
sar CocAndant Jardin.

1 Will you look at this book of pictures, vhich is document nuiix>r
."O-I 183 , and rill you tell the Tribuivl if thoso arc pieties of the
corpses which .ere delivered to the Institute at the Stras; o rg Jniv-
ereity in Avgust of 15u3?

A Yos, sir.

(Documents re re etfocitted to ilie witness.)

A (continuing) Yes, that is ccrbect. Yos, very exact. I can thero-
fere say that these photographs are authentically true. I v.\-,s present
ayself when f.ese photographs raiv taken. They are exact. It is truo.

There is no doubt whatever about it.


716 -


19 Dec —A-nr-2I-l-Ie s s er (IS)
Court Ho. 1


Q Hbr, than, witness, I will ask that you be shown another booklet
of pictures, "his is Document iimbcr H0-807 and I will ask you to tell
the Tribunal if that booklet, that document, contains pictures of these
corFees at the Institute at Strasbourg University?

1 O’itress consenting as he looks at the pictures)> ."I those
corpses were in the Anatceical Deporteent of Strasabourg. 2 rajember
that corpse, for instance, Ireaccbor the face. I laid out the bodies
S/self so tliat the photographs could bo taken. I remember the remains
of legs and area wore laying in that tank-arcs on which tracos of serial
numbers re.coined had been cut of! so that serial numbers could bo removed.
Yos, this is emactr this is correct. T’: s one here is a body on which
wo made a post corton. Hero are photographs which wore taken during tho
post morten. For instanco, this one is a photograph that I described.

Q I think that will bo sufficient, witnoss. I tako it that you
have boon interrogated many tiros about this incident at Strassbourg,

Is that correct?

A Yes sir.

HR IfeHANSTt If Your Honor ploaso, I do not think I have any further
questions to direct to tho witness. I have had hin identif; those two
books of pictures which, unfcrtuiatcly, wo hove not duplicoto in your
document book. Hoviver, I havo not offered thaa at this tiao as Ex¬
hibits because wo also intord to offer the: undor certifications /ado

• •

by tit French V’ar Crimes Corals3ior, which apooar upon these documents
and which, irrespective of tho idor.tif Section by this witness, 'ov|Ld
■ake than adniasfoie under Crdinar.co Ho. ?.

JITX£ 5SB8IHG: Do you intend to duplicate then !ir. :3cilr-nwy?

IfcHAiEY: Iro are trying to duplicate tten now. Thoxv are Just
a delay in it. I wouxd like to go ahead, chough, and effer thon as ex¬
hibits, as soon as this witness has bocr. o::cusod, based f irst upon his
Identification arc secondly upon the cert if. cation attached tc each.

JUDGE SBBai&t *ith tit proviso that they will be duplicated.


12 Dec-A-vP-2 1-2-Lcssor (iS)
Coart no. 1


C


IB. IfcHAiiZI: I would liko, as soon as they aro offered, to have
theca passod up to tha Tribunal and I should think also that dofcnso
counsel for Sievers and Rudolf Brandt should be peraitted to soe then
and offer any objection if they wish,

JUDGE SE2RIM3: That can't bo done unless they are duplicatod.

H*. kcHAHSTj Tos, indeed, they should bo.

JIDGE SESREiG: Defense Counsel will bo offered the o,.ortunity to
objoct to those exhibits if they desire.

IP., hcH/Jir/: If there is no crost oxasination, vc can proooed.

JUDGE SE3RIXG: I did not know that you had rested.

IP.. UcHAKZT: Too, Sir.

JUDGE SJZRITG: Any cross oxauination of this r/itnoss by dofonso
counsol?

DR. IfBISQIPBSR (Counsol for the Defendant Siovers): I aa also
speaking in thj naao of =y collcaguo, Dr. Kaufnann. I should liko to
have tto opportunity to viow tho olbun which has Just boon subeittod
and it is only after that that I can state rhother cross oxanination
will bo nocossrxry or not.

THE IR2SIDSJT: Counsel for tho Irosocuticn will oxhibit thoro
albuss to tin dofenao counsel. Counsel, do you deslro a Tow ncoonts to
oxesdno those exhibits? Tho Tribunal will take a short rccocs if you
do sir. soxe tine to lock then over.

.DR. dSGSPHSRt Its.

THE RSSHOTi Tho Tribunal illl^bo in recess for 10 nimit^s.

(A recess w.*>s taken.)


13 3eo-A-S<±v-22-i-Keehan (3J0)
Coart Jo. 1


•HZ kAHSHALL: The Tribunal Is r.^rin la session.

THZ PHZSIHX2*T: Zs the defease counsel ready to proceed vitfc the i
cross exenlaetio-T

SS. VSIS&E33Z3: Kr. President, the defense counsel for Sievern rad
Brandt do not intend to cross exenine the witness.

THZ PB2SI3ZJT: Is there eny cross exnnlnrtloa of the witness to be
spde ty ray other defease counsel!

2R. TBITS (Counsel for the defendant Z>r. Hose): Hr. President, I
should llko to put four questions of the witness which heve nothin,-; to do
with the type of questions which we rxe dealing with now, but which ary be
isportrnt for the defendant >. Bose.

THZ PKSSIUSTT: The counsel will strte the questions so thr.t tho trl-
bunr.l ary rule on their probative value -nd whethor they should be rdnitted
at this ti e,

DB. TBITS: Kr. President, I should like to point out that I wrnt to
put n question to the witness because the wltncos happens to be here -t
the noncat.

THZ PJSSIDzrT: The counsel will st- te vh«t the questions rro.

DE. TBITS: The first question io whether the witness enn tostlfy,
whether the hy-lonlc Institute rt Strassbour.- was danaacd durlr.a ra rdr-
r“ld, cur in.? which a nunber of renbers of this institute lost their lives.

THE P2SSID2'": The counsel will st.-tc the other questions, which he .
desires to ask.

33. TBITS: la the event thrt the witness cannot recall the da.*i of
the -ir rrid, I should have pointed out to hi.u that we are concerned with
the s-_e rir raid durln.r which the wife and son of Professor Hirt were
billed in their Strassbourg flat.

A furtner question would be whether the witness knows thrt a'ter this
attack if work could be continued in the Eyxlenic Institute and whether tho
vark actually wr» continued.

next question would be to ask the witness whether he knows that after


this air fttrek the valuable itens were reaoved fron this Institute oeciuat
of dr raid precautionary reasons.


18 Dcc.-A-A.3c{=..-22-2-Meeh~n
Ccwrt No. 1

Hr. Prosit’cat, The Anatomical end Hyg^nic Institutes 'n \ ry close
to one another in ' trassbourg find it is quite oossibl- that the Y.itnoss
■ill fcc able to .* r.swer these quest! x\t.

THE PRESIDENT: It appears to the Tribunal that thes. questions might

■

oo p.rtinent if propounded by counsel for Defendants Diov-rs -nd Brandt,
but th- pertinency regarding Defendant * so is not rpprrant.

Did counncl for tixi appellant und-rs-’nd the statenc.nt by thi
Tribaicli

DC. mitls f. Resident.

TOE PR25ID.I >.ill restate it. It occurs to tk, Tribunal thet
then: questions .-ji^ht »«U b- purfcln-nt if prop-undod for Defendants
Siuvers nod Brandt, but th- Tribunal db-s n-t -nd-rstend the pertinency
of those questions on behalf of the Defendant Roa..

DR. FRITZ: Ur. President, I don't think that th- defense counsel
f or Si v-rs has any interest in these quostione. Thu quest! ..a are in con¬
nection with the mrk of ?r-f. Hacgon in Straseb.urg. t.’s are concornod
with hyjS-rthosis experiments.

TKS PRESIDE T: The Tribunal fails to understand the c.nacti *n ' nd
interest of lofend.-nt Roo- in these questions.

Hr. HcHnlST: IC-y it please th- Tri'oun-1, we have not yet coao to tho
pr-suntationa of the cr*. with which th- D-ierelrnt P.-c- is primarily con-
cerrv-c, that ^urls ootly with the exp-rin-ntc rolatii^ to typhus.

C-rtain f tF.oso -xperi-a-ntc, as charged in th. indict.*-nt, wore carried
«t by Pr *f. Karlen who was th- consulting ohysicirn of th- Typhus
-xperimjnts -nd ns such, b: the pros-cuti n says, was a subordinate of the
Defend-nt Rose. Ka.agen, it is alleged, •orked in th- Strasub.urg Univer¬
sity in th.e I'jrg-nit. Institute of the SCrrssb.urg University and .

, u t his aUugud’criminal exporia-nts in th* Kr.tzweiler concentr.ati*n ctnp.
lie are here concerned with a ■aitn-sc, wb was c-nc-rn-d with a -.art of
the experiments with which v« are concern--’ and he was w ,-r ' , uith _
b .th th- Anatomical n Hyg-nic Institute f the btr-.Esbxirg t.lversity.
The qu-sti r.s asked for the Defendant R;a- re t. tring certain
lnfowrtion which -r_Lht be of int-ivst -as to the activities f the

Hyg.nic Institute. The pros-cuti:r. do-s not rein- any sori-us object!x.s
to the sking of th-s- questions, exc-pt to point ut that it is Jxy-nd


th- sc a- of the


- 720 -


16 Doc-A-A-Scisr.-K-O-itechan (IB)
Court So, 1


C


direct examination and he 1 s thereby asking this witness his own witness
and he will bo so bound by the answers giver? in response to those ques¬
tions,

JUSTICE SZERLCs That is certainly true, :r. he Haney. Will this
witness, who is now available on tte stand bo available at ubsequont
date in this Tribunal so that counsel can call his. as a witnors?

vr. UcHAHETs The witness will not bo cal led by the prosecution
again at any tiro. Ho was called sorely far the purpose of questioning
hip on tho Strassbourg questions, Wo will send bin back to Strnssbourg
and wo will not call hlr again.

THE RESIDENT! I vsidcrstand that ; a do not have any objections
to tho counsel f cr Dr. Rose questioning hie as stated, so it will ap¬
pear in tha transcript of the proceedings that ho is being callod as n
witness for tho Dofosvdant Rose. With that understanding, tho Counsol
for Defendant Rose nay c.-il tho witness as a ritross for tho dofonco.

Tho record will show that tho wit no as is testifying for Defendant Roth,.

DR. FRITZ: (Counsel for Dr. Rosa). Witness, did you understand
tho questions .as I put then before?

THE WITNESS: No.

DR. FRITZ* I shell repeat tho questions.

VI DR. FRITZ: *

Q Can you giv_ bq tho date -..hen tho Hygienic Institute of tho
Univer sity in Strnssbourg was dcaagod by an air raid, during which a
nusbwr of twstoers of this institute lost their lives? ^

A Host I answer now in French or i <*eraan?

Q Eithor.

A At thi Anatomical Institute airing tho bonbarda-nte, tb:ro wen,
no victims whatsoever. There wuro two or throe victims at the .har-
aacolcsic.nl Institute, which rs situated behind tho Anatonical Instit¬
ute. IT. and lire. Hirt wore killed as *~s a laboratory assistant, whose
rase I do not kn^. Apart from that there war no other ease of boeb-rd-
amt of tho hospital#

- 721 -


18 Dec.-A-A.Sciwr.-22-ii-lfcehan (IB
Court !Jo. 1


we were not allowed to cocsunicato. I cennct ar^.jor that question as
I 'o not properly informed.

5 Witness you state that Strassbourg was hardly bcebcd. It is

• *r \

possible that you ro^aber when this air-raid took place and you could
rca:=tocr the date, just when the Isygonic Institute was damaged; what
year r.nd what dr.to?

A I an not a vory good head for exact dates. I know the- it was
bo abed, but when it ras exactly I carrot say.

Q In that ease, I have no further quostions to ask tte witness.
THE IRH8IDBOT: Does coiaiscl dosiro to ask any quostions of this
witness in tho aorning? If not, tho witness nay bo excused.

<.'o will recess until 9*30 in thj r .-ning.

(Aiwotnu&afT.)


/y*

19 Doc-If-GES-l-l-Fostar-FL
Court So. 1


CORRECTED con

Official Transcript of the American
Ifllitary Tribunal in tho uatUr of the
United States of America, against
K«'.rl 3randt, et al. f defendants, sit¬
ting at Hum berg, Germany, on 19 D©-
ctabv^l9^, 0930-1630, Justice Boals

£'

THE MARSHAL: The Honorable Judges of liilitary Tribunal.

Military Tribunal 1 is n.*w in session.

God save the United Status of America and this Honorable Tribunal.
There will be order in tto courtroom.

THE 7R2SIDE&T: The i&rshall wilL ascertain that th- dofendants


ore present..

THE MARSHAL: \*.y it please Your "onor, aU the defendants nro pre¬
sent in the courtroom.

THE PRSSUa'T: Tho Secretary General will note that fact for tlx*
record, that the defendants are present in the courtroom.


The. Prosecution will proceed.

Jfi. Me KA&Y: !toy it please th- Tribunal, at the end of tho session
yesterday tho aitnoaa Kenripiurre hsd identified Docum-nt NO-683 and
Document MD-L07 as containing' iru- arW corxvct copies of photographs .aado
of certain bodies which Were left in the Anatomical Institu^tT of tho
University of Strasbourg at tho end of tho war. Those documents have
also been Certified by appropriate authorities of tho French Government


and I should like before off-ring these doduaents to road those cer¬
tifications. Thao pertaining to Docu^-nt iO-f,83 is on page 19 of*Your
Honor's document book. The certification is on tho Utter toad of tho
!'Jni3try of Justice. Dir-ction of the Office of Investigation of onomy


Ear Crifflv« f •Wru^/^Jfi lie just, Paris (SlVIe), Fhono: KLEb«r: 16-6- to

-

l6-64iA>/


•A/

S)


CERTIFICATE


the undersigned, Georg-s RETKAU’J, magistrate of the French Of¬
fice of Inxestisptiort of tn-oy tar Cria-s, certify that the enclosed


i


723


19 De c-U-SS-1- 1-Po stcr-PL
Court So. 1


photographs art uxcct reproductions of thu trcat>:nt inflietod upon
political end racial deportee and others dotained at''the SUUJTHDF
c-sp (L‘borator7 for Apical


IS IV-c-Jf-GZS-l-2-Fostcr-? L

Court So. 1-


C


expuriaents.)

"These photographs illustrate the uxperictents carried out by
Dr. August 1CIRT end csaociatcs.

"I? Kurj *a«i iso-diatul af-r the liberation by the French Of-
fioe of Investigation of War Criwi.

Signed: ■RiYKAUD" *)

With the Sod: "Ministry of Justice, Office of Investigation of
oi.qy War Orimesj

- I,_fciX<refor~, olfer Docoatat NO-4S3 ns Prosecution Exhibit W,.

■ Docun-nt JD-fiO?, which nlno consists of pictures nado in tho Ana-
tooical Institute of the Urd- yrslty of Strasbourg icnodiately after
liberation, also has been citified by appropriate authorities and hero
is if four Honor please, I t hi rue that they have wrongly ass-nbled

a p

the translation which is '.r. our document book. Pago 20 is tho begin¬
ning of a deposition or do on a French :rcr crijainal or English mr cri-
nia-.l by tho nape of vyseph Krttaor. Page 20 really should bu .forked
pesge 23, end page 2* ic redly the first pert of the translation and it
is the certificr.tJrr. ;iven by the Str sbourg Police end it roads as
follows: It is o \ tno letter head of. the Regional Service of Ugnl
Strasbourg Polix>. “I, the undersigned, HdUFJ: Sugen-, principal Coa-

nissnry, Chi.'/ of the Sixteenth Jfobilo 3rignde of the legal Police of

• •

Strnstour-, certify th-'t the docuauats herein affixed on eight pages,
ir.cluc'lr^ ohotos Ko. 1 to 21 of bodies, .ad Ho. In to Sd of documents,
are photographs o' bcrii.s, and of French and G^r-uan authcnticsl dooAncnto
»ta.ch hr. vo be - n tak-n by th- Fr-nch Police Lao-di't-ly .after tho Li¬
bor-tior. of Strasbourg in the Anatooical Institute of th- University of
Strasbourg.

Thu original* ol th- docan-nts can bo found in tho recorrs of the
"ilitrry ft-iouhcl of Strasbourg, ana arc n-Cessary for other reasons.

Th- photographs her-by aflix-d are- exact and true photographs of
bodies or parts of bcoi-s found by ne in tbo -natcoy of Strasbourg .and

724


19 D*c- !VG3S-l-3-roat^r-FL
Court bo. 1 _

I

Dztod, Strasbourg, tfov-^bcr 16, 194c, Chief of the Sixteenth Uobilo
Brigade of legal police. Signed: H2UFEB.

A.-xl on the next page of the translation w> find short descriptions
of the oictcrws. 7-ius, picture So, 1 is alcohol containers for tto bo¬
dies Which w-iv use. for anatomic preparations. A few bodies of tho
eighty-six people assassinated in August 1943 in the Struthof gas cham¬
ber: sixteen oi those oodles lx*vu be-n found whole.

I might say, parenthetically. Your Honor, that STRUT!K>F, I thinlc
is a Fr-nch designation of the concentration ca.ap /,-trwoiler.

Picture do. 2, Bodies.of subjects which wuro likely Jewish, who

w-ro treated tho sajx way.

%

Picture »*o. 3, Body baring the nui&cr 107969 tatooed on the left
foreora.

Pictur- Vo. 4, body of younc and robust subject whose autopsy
has been ar.de by the e..p-rts. The r.aabvr tr.tooed on the left foronra
is not visible on tho photorreph.

There is no ca^nl on oictares five and six. Six says, "Other bo-
di-o cooing roi t-x gas ch-ober."

7 and 8 have no cco*.nt.

Picture ho. 9, Bodies of wcoen lying in a oont.-iner.

Picture No. 10, 0th. r robust wcc^n's bodies cooing from the gas
chamber.

11 and 12, r.o consent.

Picture «io. 13, Codies delleshed at the end of 194/. on or cr*of
th- G raan Proieaoor HKT, Dir.ctor of tho Ana tonic Instituto from 1941

s

to 1944. The nuab.r of each body, t-too-c’ on the left foronra, has b-en
r-ooved by order when the bodies were d.fleshed.


Court 1

Dec. lS-Iv-2-l-UG-Perrla-HD


The vital organs and the heads have been incinerated in the
Crane to r ion of ?trassbourg — act_ona vr.lofc vere meant to
prevent indentlfication of the bodies end to obstruct the


•renoh l^dlce-Legcl research.

■Picture 14 shove oa.rts of defleshed bodies. “


Plfteen is the ssme. Ko conaent on 16 .

Picture nusber 17 is snld to be c "body of c young
girl,'keelthy and robust, taken pt t.*e tine of the autopsy.
Notice 1 .*. the Incisions done of the body the layer of grease
w.iid aiovs execution shortly after the arrest. 0 Plctu.e


number 1 is r "body of t nan, likely Jewish. There is no

I

9lc,n of grease on the skin. Ploture Ko. 19, bodies of


inoatoa bearing on the b. oh 'n-serous wounds coming from
violent strikes received be^o.ve the exeoutlun In the ^r.s


on.-ib r.“ Picture Kumber 20 shows the "strikes received on


the buck." Picture Ko. 21 is the seas.

:*ov, hi 80 08 part of this exnlolt are certain docuaonto

or sieves of doo-nents, rnd they eve listed according to a

number and e letter, thus: 1A, 25, rnd 33 rre documents

•

f. nd in t e Struthof Coneen tret Ion Camp. "1a is n list of
- 3 b. n c and ere. 23 Is on extrect of ths monthly report from
: -i c a- doctor erying that experiments have been done on
sixteen -osies me that three dea th? he ve resulted. 33 is

an extract of vr.rloiis reports by the c ao dootor. 4C, 5C,

♦

5C, and TO, the notebook of the cS V luar.r from the
C . ndatur of the Katzveller-Struthof Concentration Jam?.

She t 71....° tnet is - note at the bottom.... "3he;t 71
bears c..e followin- mention 'gas of oy-nldrlc acid of
- : vofcs or .-.irt' (the cyr.nldrlc acid is • very strong poison,.

:h_ two others t,.e names of/Profeseor ^ar.gen and Biohen-
..c- a isev. Haa.er. rr._ 31okenb ck were cseocic-tes of Prof,
i t ; t. c otrpssbo-r- University; -nd the proof will enow


Court 1

Dec. 19-H- 2-2-LJO- P e r r In-HD


later date that Hacgen was also active In the medical experi¬
mentation on concentration camp Inmates at Netzveller, and
of course the same was true of Professor Klrt.

Sou, the next of the translation of Document lid-
007 Is a report on the Interrogation made of Joseph Xrnner.

It la stated here that Kramer was for several years tho
conuandor of tho Nctrwoller Concentr cion Camp. After he
left Hr.tzweller he finally went to 3ergen 3elson, ana ho
wc,s captured there by tho 3rltlsh Army of the Rhine, has
subsequently boon tried before a war crimes court of tho
3rltlsh Army and has boon oxeouted. This deposition Is. on
the letter head of tho French Republic, Permanent Military
Tribunal of the Tenth Mllltry Region In Strasbourg.

"In tho year 1946 on July twenty-sixth at fifteen hours,
appeared before mo, Major Jadln, Military Judge r.t tho Mill-
t ry Tribunal of the Tenth Region, assisted by Lieutenant
Jr. Hurtzog, stenographer r.t tho tfeme .-illlt ry Trlbunc.1,
also functioning..."

THE PRESIDENT: Prom what po^o of tho record book are
you reading?

ii R. i.C.vvNEY: It Is our new pa c o 23. You will recall
that I ask-d you to Transpose p & e 20 end 23.

"....assisted by Lieutenant Jr. H.rtzog, stenographer

at the same Alilt ry Tribunal, also functioning ns Interpreter

*

of German nd who was under oath according to th^ Artlolo

332 of the Criminal Investigation Code, In my office which

h~d been taker, to Celle, according to my verbal summons,

the witness named hereafter, *lch h^s utslde the presence

of tho > ihor witnesses, in tr.c presence of Major G. Dill

Jnlth of the English Service of Var Crimes, after having

shown the suraons fai«h was given to 'him tetr.hr via^. , -w

sworn t. say the entire truth ana nothing but the truth, :r.d

• 727


A


Court 1 ^

Dec 19-K- 2-3-LJ9—Perrin- HD Q


interrogated by U6 on mis sir nr.se, given name, o«e, status,
profession and deviling, if be is domestically related or
allied to the parties, ft v let degree:

■Ere answered tnst me ves named Xrcier, Joseph, Hr.up.t-
eturafv.ehrer 53, Thirty-nine years old, living in 3ergen-
Belsen.

“I used to be a bookkeeper in AU c eburg before 1932, the
yjcr i vhloa I n-ve vol-nteered in the 55 -nd I r.r.ve been
.shod to u-rd the inmates of concontr-tion c-mpe.

"Before the .•-oetllitles I have been as r. Lieutenant in
various c..-.centration opaps, especl-lly in Sstervegon,

Sr.oheanh-.Uaen, Dr.c.vu, Kruthrueen "nf Auschwitz.

■In April 1941 I h“ve been sent by the superior 55 author¬
ities Co Che Natrwellor-otruthof ns r. Lieutenant, adjutant
Co Buttlg, Cornu-nder-ln-a lef of the oamp.

"In October 1941 I have been named comm-nder of tho
cr.o in rerlrcoaent of the Commander Zlll..."

TKS BRSalDSLT: Counsel, this document reads October
&

1942.

.{R. :;oEAK£Y: Prrdbn mo, I am sorry, It is October 1942.

"... In October 1942 I have ^een named ooauandor of

t.w c mp :n reel'cement of the C-;mm'.ndar 2111 w.*.o h d

•

succeeded Buttlg. I nave commanded the camp until April
194:, d'te or. which I nrve been sent to Auschwitz and in
December 1944 to Belsen.

3 Durin c the month of <iu,ust 1943 I received from tho
Orar.ienburg C^mo, or r-tner from the Supreme 35 Com nd in
Berlin v.o sent i: to me, the order to receive about eight;*
'..'.mates coming from Auschwitz. In the letter vhloh *ent
. ith ibis order it was st“ted th«t I bd to c et lr. touch
1 -edirtaly with Profes or felrt of the hedlcal Facuic of
Strasbourg.


728


Court 1

Dec IS-H-2-4-LJG-?errln-HD


"I went to the Anatomical Institute of Strasbourg where

Kirt was. The letter told me that he knew of an inmate

oonvoy of Auschwitz for the Struthof. He told me that these

• •

persona were to he executed In the gas chamber of the Dtruthof
camp with asphyxiating gases "nd that their bodies were to
bo driven to the Anatomical Institute so that he could dispose
of them.

■After this conversation ho gave me a- bottle of about

3-fourth of a liter containing aalte vr.lch I thlnJt were
cyanhydrlquc salts.

"The professor told me ab ut the approximate doso that
I had to use to asphyxiate myself the inmates coming from
Auscnwltz of which I have sooken to you.

“In the beginning of august 1343 I received the eighty
Inmates who hrd to bo killed with tho gases thnt had boon
.-Ivon to me by Hlrt, and I started to H tsko to tno gas ohambor,
u n a ocrtaln ovonlng, at about nlnu o'clock, with a small
van, the first time, -‘.bout flfteor. women. I told those
women that they hod to go to the disinfection chamber and 1
did not tell them they wore going to bo aophylated.

"Helped by a few .35 I undressed thorn completely, and
I uushod them In the gas oh^ab-T when they wore completely


“Vhen I closed the door, they started to howl. I intro-

•

ducod, after h-vin e closed thj door, a certain amount of salt
In a funnel th:t was placed above and to the rl*ht to tho
observation window. Tnon I olosod the opening of the funnel
with a t-p which was adapted rt the bottom of thl6 funnel
with a motel tube on It. This metal tube drove tho salt and
- ;cr Ir.to the Inside opening of the chamber of which I have
spoken. I lit the insiao of tr.c chamber with a switch placed
near t. o funnel '.nd I observcdTS^r ugh the observation


w_nd'.w.


729


Court 1

Dec i3-i*-2-5-LJ&-Pdrritt-HD


C


wi-t r.fl going on inside of tne chrabsr. I hrve 6 cen that
these v.aer. hnve continued to breathe cbout nr If a alnute,

; in : 07 fell on the floor. When*I opened the door after
~ vln n~de »t cne sane tine fuctlvn the ventilation inside
of the c.lancy, I fo nd out th°t these woaen lrld without
life rnd tlvt they were full of excreaonts.

♦

“I ve t'14 two arlc nurses of the S3 to out t.hose


bodies in • anrll vrn the next corning, .»tx ut five~t -lvty,
so that they c.uld be trior, to the Anntonlcel Institute as
Profosaor Hirt h?.s osked ae to.

• • . • <x . . • . *

"A few days later', in the e-ae nbove-aentloned condition,
I h-ve S-ien ■'g'*ln to the g^s chaaber - certain quantity of
•• non who v er. aaonyxlrted in the e la w;y; then -.grin in a
fov; drye l"tor I h-ve toxon to the gns ohnaber, in two or
. .roe tiues, -b.ut fifty jr, nay be fifty-five, vno woro hill¬
ed rlwrys wltr. the calls alrt hod given as.


"On doaand: I l 6 norcd whet nlrt w^s going to do with
;.ie bo., its of these incites wnoa I h-ve asphyxlrted, on his
iildlo Cions, -t tne dtruthof. I did not tnlnx I h d to c.sl:


■Cr. dea.«*r.d: I ignored to what n-clonvllty belon 0 cv. the
fl 6 a.ssinr.ted ina't.s; I tnlnk they c ao froa the o^uthor. 6 t
t\oe, b:t I cannot dealg'ta the c ountry.
n "c present to the witness the photographic rlbun in
w 1 c -re iuturca of the .rs onraber.

"The witness: I rcco_nize on these 7 hoto_mons -no
-true: uf g-s oh-n'^er which was b^llt in t..e alddlo o: cho
. .-r 13-i:0 to ".sphyxiate the lncate 6 who were reserv e, for
.rofossor

a Cn iea->nd: I rizit th t a _re c percent"-e of /ronch
:o 1 . died in the cap. Ir. ay opinion they were intellectual
. j. pic who could not s.pport the heavy work which the; ..-d
to do in Che crap. 730


Court 1.

De<5 19-H-2-o-LJ&-?0rrln-HD


0


■On dea&nd: It la true that in the sand-pit situated


above the entrance of the caro, sose Innatea have beer, shot
by the S3 who were under ny ordera.


19-J>oo-»t-T-5-l-Prsoo (luj

Covrt I


"Or. domed t Professor 3iohanbeoh or.-*, several tinaa to tho
Struthof Caa^i to havo conforonooa with tho ce^j Dootora Xriogor or Blaokn
I do cot know if they hrvo dono any exporimnta but, novortholoaa, ho .
told m oco day thot ho had roooiTod tho ordor to d: oortoin oxporimnta
on inm to a . Ho did cot toll ro "hi oh oxporimnta thoao wore and, in
any oaao, ho wca bound to tho aoorot by tho SS Cemand.

On a oortoin day whon I mdo o roe.ml viait of tho oanp I saw, in
on lnfirmry, tor. inaitoa "ho had bandagoa on tho ora. It wna anmr-
od to m that thoao inrrtoa hod boon oxporirs.ntod upon (Biohonbaoh).

I aakod what woro tho oxpariror.ta boing dono, but ho rofuaod to givo m
any kccwlod 50 of thoa.

I do not knew tho nuebor of doatha whioh hnppor.od in tho oar*> dur-
ing =y atny. I rooognitod that tho food w aa inauffioior.t on<* tho
olineto was Tory hard nnd that, on anothor aido, tho work whioh tho
1 arc toa had to do was Tory hard. .

Quoatiom Tou hnTo apohon to ro boforo of tho o r.dlti'T.a in whioh

%

you havo oxooutod tho i cm to a with asphyxiating goe. In oaao thoao in-
rr.toa would not havo boon Wllod following tho introduction of gas dono
b;- ycu, w ould you havo killod thon-with a bullott

Anaaori I would havo triod to t -phyxlat* then again by promoting
in tho ohanbor a sooond gna doao. I havo not folt any orntion in doing
thoao cots booouaa • I had roooivod tho ordor to oxoouto thoao oighty
Inrntos aooording tc tho way I have a poton to you. Anyhow I havo
boon brought up that way. • f

After haring road, ho signs with m and cy atonegraphor
Signed, E. H ertcog, Joaof Krexxr , Godin,

I submit Dccumnt Nc. NO-fOT as Frcsecuticn Exhifcit-lC5.

7 H 3 PrTSIDSn: Do I icdc r ata»J, Comaol, that tho originals of
thoao photographs aro tc rocnin pormnontly as an exhibit boforo t hia
Tribunal or arc tho originals to bo rotumed to acmbodyl

Hr. UoH anoyi 5 o s ir. Thoao exhibits, tho originals whioh wo
have roooiwed free thoTronoh authorities, will bo topt as pertenont


•-xhibits hero


c


I


19 C5C-W?->-2-.rice. _( G j)_

Court So. 1

rSESHEST: I understand also that copies of these exhibits,
within a reasonable tie.-, -will be furnished to the Tribunal and the
Defendant' Counsel?


iR. KcHAiY: That is correct your Honors.- This your honors, com¬
pletes the presentation for the tine on the Jewish skeletoo collection
as charged against the Defendants Rudolf Brandt and Sicvers. «£r. Hardy
"ill continue at this tire »ith the presentation of evidence dealing
with clidcnic Jaundice experiments.

?.. HaPDY: The Prosecution charges in its indictment that tho
Defendants Xarl °randt, Handloscr, Rostock, Schrocdcr, obhardt, Rudolf
Brandt, nigcwsky, Poppcndifck, Siav„rs, Rose and r eckor-Fr<yncng are
chtrgid with special responsibility for and participation in the cpid-.tiic
Jaundice experiments. These exporiicnts "ere conducted at the Sachacnhau-
sen and Hatzwciler concentration car.,;s for tlx benefit of the Goman

Jk

nrced lorcws to lnvcstiy.at. th. cause of and innoculation against epidemic
jaundice. Exp.rin.ntal subj eto ur- delioeratdy iaf.ctod with epidonic
Jaundic., soc*. of "hca hav. died as a result and otners were caused great
pain and sufferln , or set forth in Count 2 , Subj»ara«(raph 0-h
of the indie torn t ^nd in Count 3, Paragraph 11, under Crimes against
Humanity.

%

I respectfully rcqu.3t the Tribunal to turn to Document Book Ho.8
page 1. This is Docur. nt Ho. JO-371, wnich *111 be ci’forod ss prosecution
Exhibit i-'o. 136.


DR. ^..VVnV - ..ttam-y Scrratins for :arl 3randt.

.r. rr.si ait, I object to the reading of this affid vit ?or tho
sor.. r.aacn ler ridch I hive previously protested against the presentation
of tftw affidavit of 'rack. In -ny cose, I request that the D-f^ndant Brandt
c- called is _ witness at the proper tine in ord-r that h. cay be intefro-
'.ted as to -he contents of this document. After all, the possibility
exists that *hu D.iendant Brarxit rill not b. called to the witm-os box


by his Defense Counsel.

T::D P.-’jSIDLKT: The objection will bo cv.rrulcd.


733

-■ .-— . . a. ...I


• c

15 Dcc-~-J?-3-2-Prlcc-(GJ)-
Court So. 1

art. HArDT: I-shell read the docuacnt.

■ I, Sod If Enil ik-raann Brandt, being duly sworn, d-pose and

state:

' 1. I au the sane Runolf Brandt who has heretofore sworn to an
affidavit

733-A


c

19 Dec.-J?-3-3-rrico-(<U)-

Courc Do. 1

on the 30th of August, 19L6 conc-rning low pressure C3q>cricent3 performed
on involuntary rmr.?n beings in the Dachau Concentration Carps and to certain'
ether affidavits concerning medical experiments cn ihv^aa^ryrtjur^rtaue-^ojts.

2. i or the sane reasons set forth in paragraph 1, 2, 3 of ay
affi avit of 30th August, 19li6, I as able to sake this statement concerning

exp-riaenta pe-iorned on hunan.bainjs.

r.xpcria-r.ta to determine thi. cause of epidemic jaundice (Hepatitis
•pldaaisc) 1 '.

I night say at this tine, free time to time in the documents you
will see in lieu of th. word "Jaundice", "hepatitis*', which is the Oenunn
word for jaundice. Cn soic occasions th. translator cerely stated “epidemic

9

hepatitis" without translating t. "Jau-ticc."

3. /.bout th- idddle of 19U3, Dr. Oruwitz, .icbsarz.t So, wrote
Hin a ler that Karl Brandt wished to obtain prison.rs for ./.pcricentutlon
on tne c*us-s of c J'.undicc epidemic. he had been doing research on this
problem with the assistance cf Lr. Dohn.n, a aedical officer attached ( '
to the -i ray '.e die el I-speCtcrite and the Hebert Koch Institute. hxp-rluents
had thus far disclosed that contagious Jaundice is tr nsforred by a virus

rvi human beings wcr-. desired for innoculatien .-ith g-naa which had beon
cultivated in 'niseis. Crawlta advised that d-ath of sodu of th- experimen¬
tal subjects must bo expected. Ha wanted to knew if Dr. Dohaen could be
permitted to carry cut the experiments at the Sachsenhauson Concentr .tion
G-mp, desired by Dr. » *rl Brandt.

i. Kirrel.r -ret. 3:-witz that Dr. Dohntn had nia ^mission to

♦

conduct the experiments at Sr.chsenhauscn and for that purpose h- had Oswald
Pool of the T/Ha Hoc at. a met - o risen, rs to be used as experimental

subjects. I know that these experiments w-re carried out and that some of
the prisoners died as * result.

5. Dr. Eugene Haagun, Oberstarst and consultant in hygiene for
the Luftwaffe, had also been doing research work at the Katzwcilcr Concen¬
tration C*mp in zn^ffort to discover an effective inncculation .gainst
-yideaic jaundice


731i


is Loo.-S-JP-3-^-Frico-(Gj)-


Court So. 1

As I recall, Dr. Lotoan collaborated Trith Han-on in 19* ft Katrwoilor and
experiments on involuntary hucar. boin;. wore oonduotod whioh rosultod in

deaths.

6. Those oxpjrisnnts wero cf oourso well' kn-^wn to Karl Brandt os ho
hrs personally. furthering thorn. ini’: sor one Sohroodor must olso hovo known
of them booouso Lohajn end Baa'on wore dootors in the Jtodioal Sorvioos of
tho Arm,- and tho Luftwaffo, r inactively. Gcnoralortt Paul Rostook also was
woll inferred on ell resoaroh work of this neturo." Siynod Rudolf Brondt.

I ai *ht point out rt this tiao that Lr. Lohrwn, bein.'. a nodloal offioor
attaohod to the *r=« “idled Inspoot'oroto at tho timo of thoso ox-orlmontsi-
whioh wos ibout tho middle of 19*5. «nd that at that tire tbu Lofondont
Hrndlosor was still ohlof of tha A r^ ediocl In snoot ore to and t«hnon wos
one of his subordinates.

be will turn now to document 1*. IX-010, »hioh will bo offorod as Prose¬
cution Schibit a. 167. This i» 0 Uttor from tho “oioh Fnysioion 31 Growitt
to diaalor dttoc 1 Jur.o 19b .

iutjooti 2*porioents to doturd.no the oou.o of infootious Jaundioo.

"Rolchsfuehrors

Tho 3onor-.l lewdssor of tho ?• oVror Sj cri-tdonfuohrer Profossor Lr.
Brandt, te. approached * with roqwst to hoi- him in tho rcsouroh on tho
causes of infootious Jcur.dico, which Ms boon to c lrr;o oxtont promntod
by hin. by olaoinc prisonors at his disposal. To date, research has boon
conduotod by r Stobsarrl; Lr. Dohcer. within tho Rosoarch Lsborotory of tho
*rry edical Inspectorate and 'with tho cocpor-.tion of tho RcSort Kooh
Institute. In conformity with rccults obtained by ohtor 5ornan scientists,
this research lod to the discovery that infectious ^undico is not caused
by bacteria but by a /lrus. In order to exteni our tabled : o. which to date
is based only cn inoculation of tniar.ls with -urns t ton from hun boil*.,
the roverso is new necessary, namely tho inoculation of human beings
with virus cultures. Cases of docth must bo anticipated,
ivaranoutic end nrophylcotic conclusions, in -articular, will to o front


19 Deo-*-^P-}-5-Price (3T)
Coart So. 1


extent depend on this final experimental step.

Il^kt prisoners condemned to death, youas If posoible, ere needed in
the prison hospital of the concentration eaap Sachsenhauacn.

I respectfully request your decision, Heichsfuehrer,

1 . to whether I may have the experiments started in the annnor
described.

2. As to whether the experiments may be conducted In the prison
hospital of the concentration carp Spchsenhausen by Stnbearst Dr. I
Dohren himself.

Although Dr. Dohmen-is not a cenber of the SS (he is rn SA-?uehror
end a Party Kecb«r), 1 would recosaend rn execution in thlo cose in
the interest of oontlr-a’ty of the erporlconts and thus the exoctnose
of the results.

The practical importance o i t.x ar«.cr in qieetlons for our troops,
especially in S outhern ?.-»>'«•, results froa the fact thnt this
diners* hre spread so omts:-.*lvel? durlnr the prst years, both rooikuus
in the Vaffta-SS and Po.-Jcc .*vd ’n the thnt up to oO i> casualties

for q period of up to sJx vet'-.s suffered in some conpanios. On the
other hand, howevor, this disease generally hr.s had a relatively
favorable pro-mosls wren treated quickly and properly. The possibility
of a prophylactic lmoculatlon would be of a ,roa.t tactical lcportnnco.
Si.xed, Crawlti.


mentation in hiaan beings, which wro closely knits together our conspirac
as we walk along and soo the Raichs fuehrer, the Reich Comaissar for Health


and Sanitation,-and wo will later see the civilian sector and also the


Wo turn now to Doeunent No. ID-Oll, which we offer as Prosecution
Exhibit No. 188. This is Hinder's answer to Orawitz's letter of


■Subjoct: Investigation of tho cause of - tho infectious Jaundice


"Referencei


"Reich Doctor SS and PoUco


"I acknowlodgo tho rocoipt of your lottor of 1 Juno 19U3.

"1. I approve that 8 crini mls condcanod in .Vusolsrltz (8 Jews
of tho Polish rosistanco novo&mt condonnod to doath) should bo ust


"2. I agree that Dr. Doto n should make thoso experiments in


Sachsonhauson.


"3. I agree with your opinion that a real fight against the


infectious Jaundice would be of unhoard valuo.

(signed) "Heinrich Hina!or" •

There is a note on tho bottoo addressed to "SS-Objrgrupponfuohror
POHL, Borlin, - Carbon copy forwarded with requost that you will duly note
The signature is illegible here, signed Just SS-Oberstun^xinnfuohrur. Ttw


is an initial on the '.ocuaant but wo havo boon unable to doolpher it.

Next we turn to Doeunent Nuraber ID-137, which is offorod as Prose¬


cution Exhibit No. 189. This is an application of Professor Dr. Haagon,
operating fro* Strassburg, to tte lector of the Reich University, Strossb
dated 7 October 19li3i 737


19 Dec.-^TD-4-2-tesser

Court So* 1


C


•I propose that tho BjrgienLc Institute should be recognisod as
a Military concern* The Instituw was charged with tho following
urgent resoarc' tasks, important for the * r efforts or respect¬
ively of Bilittry icportancei

■1.) : * ir -Inistry (?, L*v.) *nd Co^-nder^-in-ChW

<-ir Vcroe.

"Object: Icilow fever vaccine
"Order v^.luci 80G."

Or. t*v. zlin wo sou tho codo let cere 211? which sign^ios tho offico
:~ckor-7r_;-nerv .f tho Luftsr.ffo, Dop- '-toont i r Aviation Medicine, then
changed to 27 ani then again wo soo 2110a

Tho soconi assigrraant is also fron tho Nation'll Air Ministry (n.L.1’
and C—ir>-C Air Forcj, oriflnati^ iven the soao offico, Oockcr-Froyaongj
the subjoct, Spottod fever vaccine, appears in thi docunont as an orronooui
translation and should bo Tj'pbu.: «ovor.

Tho Third assigrrc'-t is mjoin another or dor fron tho National Air
Ministry (R.L.M.) and wc sew t'.*>so faniliar codo letters, 2nB, Subjoct
Influonaa*

"li.) The Reich ‘.arshal, ftoronnn Gouring), Reich Rosearoh Counsel -
socrot Reich aattor - u\?,Jncy dogroo DD, Sugjocti Typhuo. Ordor val
8 , 000 -

COde lottors follcw ani SS decree of urgency.

■5.) Tho Reich Jfcrshal - Roich research counsol - socrot Roich
Bettor -

■Subject! Hepatitis epltecica."

This noons Jaundice, epidemic ,'ansdieo* This again has DE dogree of urgono;
and SS deg^e of urgency.

"•o turn tho pago to ctix.T csel; rants, amtter one free the R.L.H., Subjoa*
Tellur fever vaccine, which e&e .n originates — you soe the faniliar lotto
2HB am also at thi oad of that line 2p,—the faniliar offico of Dr. Beck
Freysong, Drier Value 3,000 RH. Tran another ordor frean tho R.L.M., origi¬
nating frers the sane olaco, Subjoc;: Typhus vaccine. Older value Ji,000 RM,

733


19 Doe.-

Court So. 1


c


I


proposal 7 October 19U3. Then wo go on and w> have anothar ontry for
lcfluenaa and another entry for Typhus, and so on.

This Is Just to star the strength of the work, the application of
Haagen, of "hat he w .seeing in the various organlMtions of Ms Hygienic
Institute in Strasslxr an( at this time he is now applying to bo taken Is
30 that ho can h"va priority rating to obtain sufficient materials to con¬
tinue trU r:* 3 -i’:ch..

Tha next d'cuajnt, »*\r H>-299, wlCch Prosecution Exhibit 190, is
a lottcr from Froioss.r Haa.cn t-> Dr, Schreiber, who was Chief of the
Acadcsy of !&litary dicin' at orlin, under the Defendant Hondloaor. The
lottor is dated 12 Juno 19L-bajssod to Genorclarst Profosoor Dr.
Schrol'ier, Acedocy of Kilivrjr Jfodidm, Dorlin Nfi
"Honored Ginoralartt:

"Bnel-.se*. I aa son'ia you -y Hepatitis report for further uao.

..t thj sane tine I w i*. \ like t; uao this opportunity to ronow ny

Invitation to Stabsrrxt Dohror. S5mo Z do not know his prusont

•

ad.'rose, my I direct 'Ms invitation to you and suggost that ]Jr.
Dotiaun be ’.ssi rod to v-i for several »ooks so that wo nay discovor
and possibly work on questions we have in coonon. This would
probably bo thj quickest way to dotorra.no whether wo havo the sane
virus or not. 15 July would bo a satisfactory dato for Dohaon’s
visit to begii ..."

Now in that paragraph here is Dohswn w*r had obviously boon working
epiderdc Jaun '.ico at Stress* nrg under the dir-cticns of tho DofondAnt Katl
Brandt and hero row is Dr. r-vagon, wrrkin On tho sane project at Strassbui
University, requesting that Dchnon bo assigned to hin in ordor that thoy
nay collaborate an' Join thoir cocoon task. B*ro is nention as to whethor c
rot they arc using tro son virus, which indicates quite conclusively that
the virulent virus was used on the invites during the experimentation perio
Next paragraphs


739


19 !>®c»-H-AT!>-W*-L«5ser
Coart *fo. 1


■At the same tioe I should like to approach the subject of your
negotiations for alee. Ky supplies, and particularly ay culture*,
■ra so depleted that thsy absolutely =ust be re ju vena tod and
refillc l s Tcu told in Hohanlychen that It is possible for you
to a ©cure aic_, even in large nurbers.

Hay I ask you to endeavor to socuro for ko several thousand nice
->f both sexes, preferably only young ardnals.

Hia reforunco in that pgregraph to Itohenlychcn is undoubtedly the
Conference in '.by of 19U* — the yoarly nodical conference.

"Thirdly I would like to ask whether the Hepatitis Research will
bo carrio i on in future out of funds of tho P.oioh Research

+ . a

Council? :(y funds for this'branch are now exhausted and I an
flood with tho question asto whjthor to apply for further
*Ur.-'a to ay Helical Chi of of thj Luftwaffe or to you. I would
bo srntoful to you to bo lnfor»d about this shortly,

■T/ith kindest greetings ani ccnpllronts,

"foil Ritlorl

"Very dovotodly yours,

(prvsunably signed H/iAOEN)"

This is a letter which was found-in Haa jn«s file and it is custanary
usually not to si*n your file copies,

We now turn to Document Nunbor X-300, which is offorod as Prosocu
Exhibit 191, This is G-noralarxt Schreiber»s answer to Haagon datod 20 Jm

19ldit !

"Honcrcd Professor* * •

"Prof, Nauck of tho Troponins titet in Buburg has con too tod tho

Reich Research Council with regard to a possible toapornry assign-

sent for Frof, Schuoffnor, formerly of Ansterdara ivtw of HLlvursum*

One would like to do Prof. Schieffncr a pood turn and ranovo him

froa HUvursuB, *h?re ha ni^ht be hansel through tho exigencies of

war. It appears that Prof. Schueffttar insists that he will leave

Holland only if he ets a scientific ccsnission. Prof. .Nauck has

7U0


19 Dec.-#^llUi-5-leaser
Court Bo. 1


also spoken a ' out your Institute in this connection. I do not
'<no* whether Kauck has contacted you personally. I an therefore


asking whether you would have use for Schueffner in the
execution of scan scientific work and would take him on at your
Institute. The monetary side of this natter would be taken care
of by the Reich Research Council. I would bo very grateful to you


if you would advise no of your position in this matter as soon as

possible.


■The association botwoon you and DoJsaon ha a not boon established.

I will bring about Dotaon's assi^nnont. The discussion at Broalau
brought about scoo lucidity after all. Hr. Weineck appoarod to
no to bo the paltriest.


"With kindest greetings and
"Hell Hitlorl


■I remain

(signed) Schroibor."

Hero is Schroibor indicating that the Roich Research Council will
fully cooporeto with the work of Haagon. Wo soo now the military sido
entering into tho Haagon picture.‘Wo havu now the Roich Rosoarch Council,
the Office of Professor Dr. Karl Brandt, and the nan Dotaen coning in. W«
havo the Luftwaffe, all of then, now loining together, tho SS includod, it
this experiment Epidemic Jaunlico.

We now turn to Document ftobor W3-309, which will be offered as
Prosecution Exhibit 192, another letter free Jfeagcn to Generaiarzt
Schreiber, dated 2h \J<ir,z 19UUt
Tionorod Generalaratt

"Many thanksfor your friendly letter of 20 Juno 19Ui. I an vory

interested in tho matter of our honored Mr. Schueffner. Mr. Nauch

asked me quite seen tine ago whether I could -take Mr. Schueffner

in as a guest. I declared nysulf fundamentally agreeable to this

and would be very glad if I could offer Mr. Schueffner a place

71*


Mo now tors to Bocuseat IO-12U, which will he offered ae Proeecutlon
Zxhlblt 193. This la a letter free a geatleaen aased Outxelt. Outzeit
wee a subordinate to Schreiber la the chain of cosaand that went up
to the defendant Eaadloeer. He was Consulting Physician to the Chief
of the A ray Medical Scrrlce. The letter la addreaeed to "Dear
Colleague Haageni ,

»I greatly welcoae your invitation to Kr. Doheen. I have requested
Oeaerrlarat Schreiber to assign Dr. Dohsen to you re of 15 July, tor a
Halted period of tlce to begin with. 8 hould the Hepatitis Vlruo
questions apperr to require further collchoration, the assignment enn he
extended. In thisheonneetloa X have mother question, nanolyi In line
with ay statenents at the Joint Hepatitis discussions at Breslau I have
tried to sake prep-xations for experisents on hunan beings. Conditions
here at Breslau will shortly he appropriate. Ccrtrdn preerotione, which
X will not discuss In writing, will have to he observed however. As you
know, Dohaen lost all his arterial In 3erlin and ViWc'J rainal in-
occulrt'.ons with punctured liver natter also failed hccrose the anioale
died In transport of a contagious disease. At the nooent Dohsen haso-.Iy
only old froson arterial at his disposal, nevertheless we are going to
use this for the above described experisents. How I wanted to asfc-ycu
whether you could plr.ee sose of your virus n\terlrl at our disposal,
which wc could then use here in Breelau for sinultrneous inocculntion
experisents with Dohaen's arterial. X would adninlster the clinical 0
observations syself, Just as I win carry out the prelininrry oxraiiuy
tions with greatest care. Should 70 U ree, I wodld advise you procptly
if the conditions for lnocculntloas here in 3reslau pre established.'

"I have the following further request: the Oberarst of =y clinic rod
leader of the reserxoh group In the Hast has been working on the couoos
of wrr-nophritis. After sacy experisents with direct trnnsslsslon of the
excretions of nephritis patients to anisals, he hr.s been unsuccessful
In securing positive results. However, the experisents were not carried
out Variably aid consistently enough. paxtiaBy bessuec of a lack of the


7U3


19 Dao-K-OSS-S-l larrov (3)

Coart So. 1

aecasar-ry anlsala. EoV»rer, it has hsen poiei'ble to hrin* about
chragea in eose of the egg« vlth


7^3 r.


1$ >o-K-GXS-5-2-IerTOv (3E) /-

C ourt To. 1 ^

eye and south secretions of nephritis patients, which arouses the suspi¬
cion that a cultlvatable virus Is Involved, hut the question as to
whether this Is the nephritis virus remains open. Controlled experiments
with arterial free aephristls patients ere still to be snde. In order
to avoid an endless waste of tine and loss of material through accidents,
It is ay desire that Kr. E. deliver errs to an experienced virus
researcher so that the latter any undertake further Identification and
cultivation of the ante rial, that Is to say he ary work an mlaal
contagion, exhibition of elementary bodies, etc. I would be very crateful
to you If you would be prepared to take part In this experlnentatlon, and,
If you nsree, •hall Instruct E. to cake the material available to'you In a
v sulteble manner. I would be rnteful to you If you would express your
cplnlons with re^tri to these questions as soon ns:possible and If you
would advise ae whether you are prepared to enter Into ny proposals.

S l near sly,

Hell El tier!

Tour very devoted
Cuttolt" .

Kr. E. Is obviously Kr. Erik re ve will see In a moment.

Vc turn now to Docus.nt rO-125, Prosecution Exhibit I9U. It la ft
letter froc Hca.ren to Gutsclt. ?hl* is dated 21 June 19UU:

■Xy dear collfrruc Outxelti

"Kany thrnks for yo'ur letter of June 19^. I r.n -.lad that Kerr
Oohaen will cons here on 15 July. Ve shall then review all coraon
Hepatitis queetloa and perhaps r_lso set up the experiments to-^thor,

*1 can not r.t present definitely answer your Inquiry about human oxperl-
aeats. As you know, I no work in,- with Herr Erik, Herr Butchner and Horr
Zuckschwert. Katurally, I have A ready arranged with Herr Zr lk that ve
shall undertake thr.t type of experiment with our material. I 'must there¬
fore first determine the point of view of the others concerned,

"I shall be very .'lri to be.dn work on the ffepkrltls metcrirl from your


Oberstarst E.


With bcGt .treetlnr.B


19 Dec 46-K-C-io—5_3_Ifirrov
Court I


Hell Hitler
Tours

Professor Dr. S_ Haugen
Consulting Eyglcnlat with
Loftflettcnarst Reich."

We turn to Document HC-126, Prosecution Exhibit 195. Thla la
Dr. Haugen ilc-dlag a copy of a letter to Dr. Hoik, dated tho anno date
2* June 19*4:

•'Dear Herr Kalk:

"In the enclosure 1 send you a copy of a lettor froo C-utxoit and
ay reply . *e aut yrocoed *s goon m postl v lt with the experiments on
huaa’i v clngg. Those experiments of course should >o carried out In
Strasbourg or In ltg vicinity." (In the vicinity referring to tho near-
'oy Concentration Canp Vatcwellor.)

•Could you In your official pcaltlon take ti'.t noccggary step"
to obtain the required experimental subjects? I don't know wh«t wort
of subjects Gutxdt' had.%t his tt#pool,-«ii*hgrtMi«y *x<Kacl<iero or
other people.

■i ahall rpproclato a proapt reply.

With cordial greetlngg

Hell Hltl.r!

Yours

Chcrstabarxt Professor Dr. X. Haagcn.

Consulting Hygienist with Luftflcttonarxt

Reich."

♦

We hare here the documentary evidence which shewn all the
arrangements leadii^ up to the actual experimentation and -e have, as -e
n-'ted in the first document In the book, tho words of Rudolf Brandt
Btating as a fact that the experiments were carried out and that soao
of the prisoners died as a result. Ovlcusly, from theso documents,
Professor Dr. Eaagen and Hr. Dohnen and others has also carried out
experiments In Sachsenfcauscn. So we see collaboration in all parts

of the German medical world on this particular experiment.

?*5


19 Lee 4SJUJXS-5-3J>rrov
Cowt I


t

At this tine, Tour Honor, ve ar going to jirop n hit In tho
ecore of the lndlctoeat and go to the presentation of the evidence
on the exterclnatlon of


♦


’45 «


19 See < 6-X-G 1 3-5-4 - l arr c v
Court I


tubercular Polee. Thla la Docmcnt Book f9.

JUIC-i SX32ISZ-: Couneel, la thla all of the testimony you
hare to offer or all the evidence you have to offer on bch*V of/tho
charge epldealc Jaundice?

KB. rJSUT: That la arsplete, air.

""SI FBUHXUTi At thla tine the Tribunal will roceee for fif¬
teen alnutca.

(a receaa was taken.)


♦


7-6


19 Dec-lf-A.Sckw.-6-l-Beard (10 Vr
Court Ho, 1. ^

THE FH2SZDENT: The Tribune! is again in session,

KARST: The Prosecution charges under Count No. 2, para¬
graph 0, that the defendants Slone and Rudolf Brandt unlawfully, wil¬
fully, and knowingly cemitted nar Crises; and, in paragraph 13,

Count No. 3, cemitted crises against Huoanity, and that thoy wero
principals in, accessories to, oreared, cbottod, took a consenting
port in, and wore connected with plans and ontorprises involving tho
nurdor and sistroatcent of tons of thousands of Polish nationals v/ho
woro civilians and nonbers of tho arsed forces of a nation then at
war with tho Goman Reich and who wore in tho custody of tho Goman
Reich in exorcicso of a belligerent control. Thos^ people were al¬
leged to bo infocbad with incurable tuberculosis. On tho ground of
insuring tho health and welfare of Gomans in Poland, cany tuborculcr
Polos wore ruthlessly oxtercinatod while others wore isolated in
death caapo with inadequate nodical facilities.

r'o turn now to Document Book No. 9 which was previously nua-
borod No. 7 — Sxtoraiivation of 7B Polos, your Honor. la bogin tho
introduction of this ovidonco /.1th Docioaont No. 216, which will bo
offered as Prosocution's Exhibit No. 196, This is a letter from
Groiaor who wr.s tho Reich Governor of tho Rcichsgau ortholand, dated
1 Hay 19 12, addressed to ?a.ichsfi»-'iror SS Kcinrich Kisnler, Fuohrur-
Huadquartors.

■Roichsfuohror:

"Tho special troatcont (Soniorbchandlung)" — whic^i, your
honor, aoans examination a tern soooofcat sirilar to tho expression
used in America, "taking a nan for a rido".

"—of about IOC, COO Jews in tho territory of ay district
(Br.u), approved by you in agrecocnt with tho Chief of the Reich-ffain-
Sccurity Offico, SS Cborgrupponfuehrcr Hoydrich, can be completed
within t:m next 2-3 r»nths. I ask you for remission to rescue tho
district incdiatoly .after tho noasuru taken against the Jors, free
a nonace, which is increasing week by reek, and use tho existing and

7h7


19 Dcc-l'-A.Schw.O-l-Board (IE)
Court Ho. 1


C


officiant special cacnandos for that purposo.

« * k *

"Thoro are about 230,000 people of rolish nationality in oy
district, who wore diagnosed to suffer free T3. The meber of parsons
infoctod with open tuberculosis is estimated at about 35,000. This
fact has lod in an increasing freightoning noasuro to the infection
of Gormans, who case to the ¥art!iogau porfcctly hoalthy. In partic¬
ular reports aro rocoived with our


71*7 A


19 Dcc-!f—A.Scrar.-6-2-3eard (!©)
Court So. 1


C


increasing effect of Goman children in danger of infection. A con¬
siderable mahor of well knewrc loading son especially of the polico,
have bocn inf oc ted lately and arc not available for the war of fort
because of thj necessary nodical treatment. Tho over increasing
risks were also recognized and appreciated by tho deputy of tho Roich
Loader for Public Health (Reichsgcsundhuitsfuohrcr) Conrado Profossor
Dr. Blcco as well as by the Leader of your X-rays battalion SS St.and-
artonfuchror Professor Dr. Hohlfelder."

You will recall Vr. JfcHanoy called to your attention, dur¬
ing tho presentation of tho ovidonco on tho sterilization oxpsrinonts,
tho nano of Profossor Dr. Hohlfolder of tho X-r::y battalion. Wo soo¬
thes going into this particular action now.

"Though in Go many proper it is not possiblo to take ap¬
propriate draconic steps against this public plaguo. I think I could
take tho responsibility for ay suggestion to havo cases of open T3
oxtorcinatod -z»ng tho Polish raco boro in V.'artlwgau. Of course only
a Polo should bo handod over to such an action, who is not only suf¬
fering upon tuberculosis, but whoso incurability is proved and certi¬
fied by a public health officer.

•

"Considering tba urgency of tl:is projoct I ask for your
approv'd in principle as soon as possiblo. This would onablo us to
take tho preparations with all nocossary procautions now to got tho
action against the- Polos sufforing free open tuberculosis under wry,
while tho action against tho Jews is in its closing stagos. ^

"toil Hitler"1
"Groiser."

This letter indicates that upon tho completion of tho Jew-
ish action Gr-isor wants to use tho saix> equip iont and facilities for
tho examination of the Polos inflicted with tuberculosis.

uc turn now to Docurx;nt Ho. 21:7, which is offered as Pros¬
ecution* s Zxhibit Ho. 197. This is a loiter from Koppe tho SS and


«


Polico leader on the Staff of the Reich-Govomor in Posen, dated 3 !*ay

7U8


19 Dcc-!*-A.Sc!or.-6-2-3eard (iG)
Court Ho. 1


1912, to tho Roichsfuehrer SS, Itoraonal Staff, attention cf SS-Ober-
stur-baimfuehrer 3randt.

■Subject: Poles afiiictod with T3.

“Doer Ccrxado Brandt:

■VL-.7 I ask that you suhoit tho following r.attor to tho
Sfiichsfuohror SS:


<


7U6 A


19 Dec -'f-k.Sc rn».-o-3-3eird (jg)
Court So. 1


C


The Gauleiter *111 shortly ask tho aeichsfuehrcr SS for
p; mission to hare those Poles who hare boon shown to bo aff lie tod
with open T3 cdalttod to tho dotachaent Znngo for special treatment
(So nder be handlu ng). This request is estivated by tho Gauleiter's
serious and inderstandablo concorn for tho physical welfare of tho
Goman people hero. For there aro about 20-2500 poles in tho Gau who,
according to tho doctor's opinion, aro afflicted with incurablo TS and
who will not bo fir for assigmont to work again. In view of tho fact
that these Pblos live very closely crcmdcd togothor, particularly in
tho citios, and that, on tho otter hand, thoy ccsao in constant contact
with tho Goman population, thoy constituto a tronundous sourco of
contagion which aust bo cteckod as quickly as possible. If this is
not dono tho infection of nuacrous largo nuabors of Gomans and moot
serious physical damago to thu health of tho Goman population must .bo
oxpuctcd. Tod-*y Already tte numbar of eases of Gomans, rnong thon
also renters cf tho Police Fores, teconing infocted by Poluc xd com¬
ing down with 73 is increasing.

"Under those circumstances, I consider tho solution dosirod
by tho Gauloitor as tho only possible ono, and ask that you infora
the Roichsfuohror SS accordingly.

"With ccnradcly grootings and

“Hcil Hitli r
■Your

• "Tr. Koppo."

ITo tum now to Docuoont HO. 2U8, which is offored as I-ros-
ocutionfe Exhibit 198. This is Rudolf Brand's answer to Koppo, dated
U* Bay 19 U2.

"Doar CtoorgrupponTuohror:

■Jfeny thanks for ycur letter of 3 i ay 19h2. Meanwhilo I
have forwarded a copy of Gauleiter Greisers suggestion to tho Chief
-f the Security Police and askod for his opinion. The final docisior.
in this .-natter will rest with tho Fuehrer anyway. I presume that ho


19 Dec-M-A.Schw.-c—3-3o-'.rd (13 )
Court Kg. 1


C


will talk the natter ever with you and Cfoergruppanfuehrer Groisor at
tho SS-Gbergrup:xnfu3hrer and SS-Grupfcnfuehrcr noeting.

■Heil Hitler!

■by order yours

"R. 3r.

■SS-Cfooraturubannfuehror.


7U9 A


19 Dec-H-A■ Schir,-6-ii-3card (3)
Court Xc. 1


C


l«o turn new to Document lie, 2h$, which Is tffered as iVosocu-
tion«s Exhibit No, 199. It is a letter free the Chief of Security
Police in answer to a statecent nado in Rudolf 3randt's letter, dated
9 June 19 li2, the signature is illegible, and it is addressed to tho
Rcichsfuohror SS and Chief of the Geitcn Police, Fuehrer Headquarters.

"Ho: Special Treataont of Polos, afflicted with incurable
tuberculosis, within the Roichsgau Karthe land.

"I have no scruples against having the Protcctorato-ouibors
and statoless persons cf the Polish race, who arc ihring within the ter¬
ritory of tho Roichsgau Wart ho land, and who arc afflicted with open
tuberculosis, sufcnitted to the special treat*ent in the sense of tho
proposal of Oau-Icadcr Oroiscr, insofar as their ditease is incurable,
according to tho diagnosis of an official physician.

"Tho individual coosuros, though, will first havo to be dis¬
cussed thoroughly with tho Security Police, in order to carry out tho
oxocution with tho least possible attraction of attention.

T/o turn now to Dcctnont Ho. 252, another letter from Grcisor.
*ou will noUco. it is signed "Herbert", and addressed to "Dorr ftudi",
Docnim tho dofondant Rudolf Brandt. This dcctnont is offorud as rt-os-
ocuticn'e Exhibit Ho. 200.

"Handwritten noto with words in parenthesis tentatively trans¬
lated Xla/97 Infcm by phono that (gassing) under nay”. Tho initials
aro illogiblo. Tho letter is dated Berlin, 25 June 19W,

"Dear Rudi,

"Souo tiro ago, a top-sec rot report free the Roich Main Sec¬
urity Ciffico concerning special treatoont of 20CO T3 afflicted Polos
was forwarded# Tho report was addressed to ycur address. Since it
was top-sccret, SS Hnuptsturufuciinir'Faclschlcin signed fer it. I bo-
lievc that Faclschlein handed tho wbolo natter over to you without fur¬
ther ado.

"Since a decision of the Rcichsfuohror SS is to bu obtained
and since the interested dcpartrxir.t of the fixn is slowly getting on ny

750


19 DecSch*.-6-4i-Beard (»B)
Court So. 1


C


nerres through its constant inquiries, I beg you to lot .-no know if you
have the faintest


19 Dec-S#-A.Schr*-6r5-3eard (;Q)
Court No. 1


idea about tho whole natter.

■I greet you cordially


L'--'


“your

■llorbcrt.»


"Shorthand notes only partly legiblo. Acti >n being procossod
should be there already."

"Dear Rudi,

■I aasuno that you have this .... (rest ill-;giblo) now with
Cfaorsturnfuohror Paelachloin?) .........


751


19 D«o-*.ASch=>-?-1^3lajcley (x)
Court ro. 1


Sow the Docunent Sunber BJ- 2 UU la offered as Prosecution Snibit Kuaber
201. It is a letter free the Belchafuehrer himself, Eeinri;h Hinder,
addressed to Greiser, dated 27 June I 9 U 2 .

■Deer Cccrede 0r»iser:

■I ar sorry that I was not able until today to .*vc a definite answer
to yourlletter of 1 Kay I 9 U 2 .

■I have no objection to having protectorate people (Schutwngehoeri<wj
and stnteless persons of Polish orlain who live with the territory of

4 >

the Reichsgau (jrovince) Varthe.Teu and are infected with open tuberculosis
handed over for speoial treatment as you su-ytest as Ion*; as their
disease is incurable pc cord in-: to the dia-nosis of an official physician.

I would like to request, however, to discuss the individual nersuree
in detril with the Security Police first in order to assure inconspicuous
accomplishment of the task.

"Hell Eitier! (Sirned) Heinrich Hlmler.* Eote that coplos went to
SS-Obor<Tuppenfuehrer Eop^e and to the Reich Krln Security Office.

■Sutaitted in transcript to teke notice. By order: *with the si.mature
"3r.", meaning Rudolf Brandt, ■SS-Obersturnbranfuohrer.■ •May we now
have the full cooperation of Heinrich Binder in the completion of tho
task in an inconspicuous manner l *

V C now turn to Docunent Humber :X>-2l*9, which is offered as Prosecution
Exhibit 202. This it dated 21 'Jovenber 191 * 2 , a letter fron Oreiser to
Hicnler, which reeds as followsj

■Hcichsfuehrerj In your letter of 27 June 191 * 2 , Journal Humber 12^7/

U? Top Secret, you gave ne y .mission to -lve special treatnent to Poles
who are proved to bo infected with open and therefor* incurable pulmonary
tuberculosis. This special treatnent of the seriously sick cfn of course
only take plaoc after the whole population in the territory of my Gnu
hrs been exnninsd to find out who 1 $ curable and who is incurable. The
examinations are to start soon in accordance with the method of Prof. Dr.

Hohlfelder, who will be assigned to this Geu in p few weeke with hie
X-ray battalion. The first utilisation of this method is estimated to


752


o


13 D«»-K-jUch^-7-l-»la*ley (BT)

C ourt So. 1

. k


*• possible In epproxlately half a Sear.

■In thi* of the proceeding* Prof. Br. Blooe, in hie capacity

at


752 a


19 Dee-H-ASch*-7-2-Blakley (380

Court So. 1


Deputy Chief of the Pdblie Health Office of the ESDAP le raising eone
objection* a* to It* execution. As he state* In a letter of 18 November
these objection* are expressed only now although Dr. Slone m& Dr. KohU
felder rad ryself here spent souths of preliminary work on ensnlnatlon;
clarification and straightening out the whole procedure.

■I enclose a copy of 31o=e's letter of 18 Tovesber for your inf ox-nation
and ash that you particularly read paces 3. 3n »nd U m d then tell ne
whether you consider It necessary to lnfora the fuehrer of this phase of
the procedure and perhaps ask hlc if such action is to be refused.

"I personally don't think that »e have to consult the Fuehrer ag4n In
this natter, all the nor* since he told ae at the last interview concern¬
ing the Jews that I should net according to qy own Judgaent.

'Would you please let ae know yo*.’r opinion, Reichsfuehrer, in order to
ovoid unnecessary delay in startine the procedure.

■Eeil Hitler! Orel ter.'

Attached to this we have a letter of 31oae, .-Ivon a docuacnt nuabor !0-
250 and which will be offered as Prosecution Exhibit Kuabcr 203, I don't
believe ip the entire presentation of this cae« we will cone across such
a mans•(pisco of murderous intent as.this docusent is. This is dated
18 roveaber 19U2, f r on Dr. Zurt Bloae, Deputy Head of tho Main Office
for Public Health of the ESDAP, directed to the Belch Oovernor and OnulelUr
or Party Member Orelser In Posen.

■ Regards T uberculosie action in tho Varthegru.

■Dear Party Member Oreiscr, . #

•Today Z return to our various conversations concerning the fight
a.'itoet tuberculosis in your Oau; and I will ;ive you, ns agreed on the
oth of this aonth in Munich, a detailed picture of the situation ne it
appears to mex

•Conditions for qiickly getting hold of all consumptives in your 3nu
exist. The total population of your Op.u amounts to about four to five
million people, of which about 835,000 are Germans. According to
previous observations, the number of coneux^tives in the Varthe Oau is

753


lo 3ec.-K-A*c“r>-7-3-31rt:lejr (3 1) ^

Court ro. 1

far .Teeter then the ererose suaber la the old 2*1ch. It wna eplcultted
that la 1939 there were icons the Polee


75ra"


19 Coo-»UUSch3-7-3-aickloy(iU) C

Court I


ebout 55.000 per* ona Buffering froa open tuborouloais and bosidos

thia nusber about 120,000 otter oonauaptivoa in nood of trontmnt.

In thia oonr.ootion it Bust bo nonticned that in apito of the ovaoi*- *

ation of part of tho Polos furthor to tho oaat tho nurfcor of eiolc
poraona ia at loaat aa great as in 1939. Aa in eonaoquonoo of tho
war tho liring and foo«l oaaditiona haro dotorioretod atoadily, onomuat
expoot an oron highor njrbor.

""1th tho aottloront of Gormna in all par ta of tho 0 au, an
onornoua danger haa ariaon for thon. A nunbar of oaaoa of infootion
of aottlod ohildrcn and adulta oooura daily*

■»-'hnt goo a . for tho K ar tho Oau aust to a oortaln dogroo alao hold
truo for tho other anr-oxod torriturioa euoh aa DanaigJ»oat Pruaaia,
tho adcdnlatratiro diatriota of Xloohonau and Kattowitr. Thoro oro
oaaoa of Gorrana aottlod in tho W or tho Gnu who rofuao to havo thoir
fodlioa follow booauao of tho danger of infootion. If auoh bohavior
la initatod acd if our ooi^atriota aoo that noooaaary rronauroa fer
oenbatting tuborouloais asxng tho Polo* oro not oarriod out, it la to
bo oxpootod that tho nooosaary furthor irrdgration will oomo to a
halt. In a uoh a way tho aottlonont pro gran for tho Boat night ronoh
on wdoairod atato .

"Thoroforo, aomthlng baaio nuat bo dono eoon. Ono nuat dooldo tho

i

coat offloiont wny in whloh thia oan bo dono, Thoro oro thrao ways to
bo takon into oonaidcraticci

"1. Spooial troatront (Scnaorbohcndlung) of tho aorioualy* ill
peraens,

"2, Moat rigoroua isolati-n of tho aorioualy ill poraona.

"3. Croati.-n of a rcsurv.*,tion ■ for all TB potionta .

Tor tho planning, a'tonticn rruat bo pnid to difforont points of
•Ao*/ of a practical, politioa 1 and payohclogior^l no turo. Condi-
daring it neat a cborly, tho aisploat w ay wiuld bo tho followingi
Aidod by tho X-ray battalion wo oould roaoh tho ontiro pop ulation.


V


19 e? (xj)

Court I


c


Oojuan and Polish, of the Can during the first half of 1943. A o to the
Co;nons tae treataont and isolation is to be prop or ed and carried out ac¬
cording to the regulations of Tuberculosis Belief. 2he ^proxiBately
36,CXX) Poles vho are incurable and infoctions will be ■specially treated.
A 11 othor Polish conr^ptlvos will be subject to an appropriate cure in.
order to sere thto for work and to avoid their causing contagion.


- 754 ^-


19 £"- c ->t-A sc; -u-7-4-31-klcy-rL
Court Ko. 1


"Accordi^. to your ivquest I nado arrrngeojnts with tho olficcs
ir. question in order to start end curry out thin radical oroceduro with¬
in half r. juar. Toe told ae that the extent office agreed with you
ae to this special trontoent and promised support. Before definitely
start the program, I think it would he correct if you would naku sure
orce acre thrt tho Fuehrer will r~a lly agree to such a solution..

"I °culd incline that the Fuehrer, having saactino ego stopoed the
program ir. the insane asyluas, sight at this noo-nt consider « "special
troata-nt" of the incurably sick as unsuitable and irresponsible from a
politic'1 point of view. As regards tho Sathanasla Progroa, it was a .
question of peopU of German nation-1U 7 afflicted with hereditary di¬
seases. Now it is ft question of infected sick people of a aubjugnted
nation.

"Ther\; can x no doubt of the intended programa being the nost si,-
pie and aost radical solution. If absolute s-crecy could bo guaranteed,
all scrupleb, rogrrdluss of what nature, could be overcame. But I consi¬
der simply maintaining secrecy inpoaslble. Experience has taught tir.t
this assumption is true. Should those sick .orsons, having boon brought
::s planned to the old Reich supportdly to be treated or healed actually
n-v-r Teturr tlx relatives of thus- sick persons, in spite of tho 'jrect-
est Secrecy, would sav day notice "that saaetiiing was not quito right."
One must t ke into consideration that there are a-ry Polish workers in

•

the old Reich who will inquire as to the where r.bouts of their relatives;

•

th-t there are a curt’in nueber of Cor sons related to or allied by
aarriag- with Poles who could in this way learn of tlx transports-of the
sick. Very soor. non. definite .-whs of this rogr a would lurk out, which
would be taken up by -neny propaganda." The authanasia Program t- :.' ht in
which aojtnur this nos doau and which methods were us:d. This .cw pro¬
gram could be bettei used politic-lly as it concerns persons of a sub¬
jugated nation. The church will not remain silent either. Nor will pcc-
>le stop at discasein this progr-a. Certain interested circles will


19 D<- c-lt-AScha-7-/.—91akloy-FL

Court Ho. 1

sprcp-d the ruaor caonfr the people that siail-r aethods .*n -Iso to bo
uowd in the futur- on Gwracn consumptives. Tos, that one can count or,
ari or 1 ^° ^ incurably ill b^ins-dono tamj with in tho future. In
conr.octior. .dth this, I recall the r.curring recent for-i^n broadcasts
in connection with tfc. r.ppointa-nt of


*


• 755 a


19 Dco-tf-AaeIv>-7-5-2L'.kL. y-FL
Court No. 1


C


PS *


Prof. Brandt as C^aeissioncr GctEurnl, a or coding the news that ho was
o rdorod to attend as little as possible to the heeling of tho seriously
sick, instead ell tho aor- to the heeling of tho less sick. And thoro
aro .sort- then enough people who listen to illegal broadcasts.

■Purthoraoro, it is to be taken into consideration that tho plan nod
proceeding will provide excellent propaganda material for our cnoaios,
not only as rog'rda the Itnlirn physicians and scientists* but as
regards the entire Italian people in ccnsocjuenco of their strong Catholic
ties. It is -Iso beyond all doubt that tho cneay will mobilirc a.U tho
physicians of the world. And this will bo rll tho ooro easy as tho gene¬
ral, age-old' conception of nodical doings rnd activity is "to kc«.p alivo
tho poor and guiltless patient as long as poaaiblo and to allay hia
aufforinga."

"Therefore, I think it xvicwssary to -otpl-in all these points of
view to tne Fuehrer before undertaking tho program as, in ay opinion,
ho is tho only ono ablo to view tho ontiro ccoplox and to coao to a de¬
cision. • a

"Should tho Fuehrer doc lino tho rcdlcal solution, propemtiono

•

for another way mat be onde. An oxclusive scttloaont of all Polish con-
suaptives, both incurable and curable, would bo ono possibility of assur¬
ing an isol Mon of the infected. Ono could settle with thoa thoir iarao-
diate r-latives, if they ao d«sir*j, so th: t nursing and livdlihood would
be assured. As regards labor coauiV:s.r.t, besides -p^culturo cn<^ forostry
certain branches of industry could be developed in such territories, 1
cannot Judge whether you can conceive such c possibility within you Gnu.


*r


756


19 Dec.

Court Ho.l


■ I also could iuagiae the creation of a cornon area for the settlenent
of the consumptives of not only your Gau, but al30 of the Gaus of E&nzig/ 1 ..
Pruasia, of the administrative district of Ziechenau and of the jrovince o 1
Upper Silesia. In order to avoid unnecessary overtopping of the public Beta
of cootLfiication, the rooaval could be accomplished by walking. This would
a solution that tho u>rld propaganda could hardly use against us, aid one,
on tho other hand, that would not arouse ary of those stupid run»rs in out
o« country.

■ Another solution to be taken into consideration »(kild bo a strict isoi

* e

tion of all tho infectious and incurable consuaptivos, without oxcoption, .
nursing establishment a. This solutijn rould load to tl» comparatively r<pi
doath of the sick. ’.fith the recossary addition JC Polish doctors aid mral
personnel, tho character of a pure doath camp would bo soceWiat mitigated.

" Tho following Polish accooodation possibilitios aro at jrosuit avail;
In your Gau:


Nursing Mono Walrodo . /,00 bods

Nursing Hoao -Grote Wioso" .... 300 beds

sewillor establishments. 200 bods

Liobatadt barracks, district ..
of Loslnu

Total 3 ° f 1 ^ 1%3 . 1000 bods


■ghould tho radical solution, for cxoaplo, proposal No.l, bo out of quo
tho necessary conditions for proposals No .2 or 3 cast bo created.

"Wo oust koep in Bind that tho conditions of tho war deprive ua of the
possibility of arranging for a fairly adequate trcr.trait of tho curable
consumptives. To do go rould require 'procuring at least 10,000 # n»rc bods.
This figure, under tho condition that tho pro gran is to bo carriod out
half a « 7 ear.

n Aftor a proper ox r . -dn iatlon of all those considerations and circumsU
tho creation of a reservation, such as the reservations for lepers, seems i
bo tho 003 1 practicable solution* Such a reservation stould be able to be
created in thn shortest tire by means of tto necessary sot tic rent. Within
reservation one could easily set up conditions for tho strict isolation of

• 757


_ i? -kc . l.’l nirv-

Ko.l

tte. strongly contaciaua.


^ * •

■ 2v*n th. case of the Goraon ocnsuupti.es represent., an extrenejj dlffi
probl« for tho c*u. But this esn^t bo ovorcoer, unless the problea, of the
JbUsh consueptivos is solved st the sac* Urn. Hail Hitler, lours, sijod:
I. Bloc."

Ibis letter doosnd require snch cocuont by Quito obviously Dofcndan
he, accosted three mthod. of t*inc cm of th PoUsh situntlon. H.
hs, tiover voiced in hi, letter, enu anal objection. If » eon 4 , it in s ,
»loh -ill setisfir the PUohror and koop it quiot so that m -and hove any
frotosts iron the efcnrcbo. uni free. seen of tin.acral people In Gomany, mt
do it, is his opiulor.. Then ho sot, up another idea ..hero they can alio, the
people to bo sot aid, in nursing establishment, and uculd load to a coopara
tiv °ly rapid death of the sick.

That letter i a follow! by a letter of Hoinridi HiixOer to Groi.or, Mtld:
ia Itocuacnt HO-2$l offorod aa Proaocution 2*hiblt'204. Ma lottor ia dated
3 Ik con bo r 191.2, addi-coaod to Gretacr .

^ Ccer ‘‘ <toi, « r! 1 h “™ twnml jour lottor of 21 Kovcib
19W. 1, too, boii.ro that it mold bo hotter to tote into consideration the
niacivine. aot forth ty Pary-ucnbor Or. Bias.. In ny opinion it i, inpoasib:
to procoed 1 th the sick poroons in tho newer lntadod, eepoclally since, a,

you have inforojd no, it 111 ba pceiolo to exploit tho practical ron.lt. ,
tho toata only in sLx arnth.

" I merest you look for a suitable area to >hich th. incurable consul,
eon be sent. Beside tho incurables, otho.- patient. 1th loss sever, case, of
tuberculosis could quite mil bo put into this territory too. iJis oction 00 .
also, of course, hero to ho axplotod 1th tho appropriate for* of prepare.

■ Before critlng you thia letter I again thowufihly thought over .bother
orlgi^l idea could not in son. iy bo carried out. Hcovor, I «. eonlncod .
that It is bottor to proceed the othor eay. Hail Hitler,-Yours, H.Hinder.-
Ctopioa «re sent to SS-Oborgrupponfuchror Koppo^ Rum., the Reich gain
Security dffico,-Berlin.

"copy Kith request Tor reference, by order, and tta signature Br.“

• 75$


19 Doc. -u-m-S'

Court Ko.l


And here wo soo the Rcichsfuehcor has agreed with 31onc, number one thi
the radical solution nay not be the b_at; that thoy set ufc this rosorvati.
Ibay can loavo the Polos with few doctors and little nodical care, .wid n a
mrsos and can propagandiio it in a sufficient nennsr that ttoy can accon
their objective with that rot hod.

Sow «R3 have the key and the answer to the otiro situation. Your Honorc
you have toard oovcral witnesses testify here that in various concent rati
ccx^a tubercular ijsaates, of ifcon sene woro tubercular poles, were oxtorrv
tod and gasod. The uissing link as to how thoy continued and whothor or r
thoy exterminated any of those incurable tubercular patients is given to

0 •

by the following affidavit of Rudolf Branit, tocuxnt M>-441 which is Prx
cut ion Exhibit 205.

"I, Rudolf Hermann Brandt, being duly sworn, dopooo and stato:

• •

"1. I ca tho »aao Rutfalf Brondt, wt» already on JO August 1946 swore a.

affidavit concerning certain low-pro3suro oxporlomts which woro also con

with tost subjects of thi Dachau concentration crop, without tholr conom

"2. I aa entitled by tho sane reasons, as already onurrcratod in paragr

1,2 end 3 of nsy affidavit of 30 -moist 1946 to stato aa follows:

"3.1n tho nlddlo of 1942 tho Reich Statthaltor of th: Warthugau, Her be

Greiscr, sug^ostod to Hl a a lo r to bnnihilato Polos infected with incurable

0

tuberculosis." You idU recall that this particular docunort, has bocn re

^ •

into avidonee. "In subediting this suggestion Groisor gn'vc as a reason t.
tho G-mans in fblmd vculd bo exposed to this opidoaic. Dr. Kurt Blonu,

Doputy Chief of the Central Buroau for Public Health of the NS DAP, anl

0

radiologist Dr. Hohlfelder con£orrod with Groisor about this not tor. Dr.
BlontiKas free tine to time with H i gg l e r and supportud Groisor *s suggestii
"4. The High chief of the SS and of tho Polico and Chiof of the War tho
Koppo, further Mucllor of tho Office IV of tho Reich lipin Security Office
RSKA, and tho chief of the Ruich Main Security Office Hoydrich wuro invc
in this operation. At th: end of 1?42 atd tho boginning of 1943 Groisor - .

0

out the annihilation of the Jews in tho iiarthcgsu, raid the rounding up o.
tuberculous Polos was f ini shod at tho saao tin: as tho roundij\, up of the

• 759


19 DeC-!5-!Cv-6-4—Kinrbuck-FL
Court to. 1


C


As * result a' the siggcstions oadc by BLaao and Grelsor nustrous Poles
uurc cxteroln&tod, Many thousands of tuberculous Poles were taken to
isolation crops where they had to take car- of th«jasclvos."

tore no hr.vo cn affidavit which indicates, as a result, muio-
rous Poles were extor-dneted and o-ny thousands wor- -placed in isola¬
tion coops end :,iv«n absolutely no caro at oil, and they died like flics.

At this point uc have finish*! thu introduction or the presentation
of the prosecution cr.su in th_ exteraination of the tubercular Poles,

LR. SAUTER: Ifr. President, in the Last d cement which tbo Proao-
cution has Just read, which, I think, is 441, Prosecution Exhibit 205,

tho nffidr.vit of Defendant Rudolf Brandt, in paragraph 4 ths following

•

sentence was read. I will repeat, in paragraoh 4 —

THE PR££I.; .r?: 1 will r.sk couns-1 to repeat the first part of his
statuaent. It ease in v-ry indistinctly.

Da. SA17TET.: Kr. Prwsident, the Prosecution has Just re-d the last
document, Number 4/.1, Exhibit 205, an affidavit by the Defendant Rudolf
Sail Hvraann Brandt. In paragraph 4 of this affidavit the following son-
tencc was read, as far ns I can recall. "As a result of the suggestions
ando by 91uao And Cruiser between eigl.L and ten thousand Poles were oxter-
ninated." End of quotation.


13 Sec. U7-?WP-9-1—Daniels (..ID)
Court Ifo. 1


’tow I hear that in tho original of this affidavit th_re is supposed
to to sQathlr-', different, not tho words *b«ti.\»en ei~ht an.’ ton
thousand Beloa", tut 1 nitrous polos' 1 . Therefore, I ask that I bo
allowod to see tho original of this affi^vit of the defendant Brandt
so that it can be deter, dned vhnt tho correct text is.

!E. ".PDT: lour Honors, tie dofenso counsel i3 absolutely correct.

’• #hon defendant Brandt stoned this affidavit ho changed "fren
oi-ht to tor. thousand"j as ho said ho Couldn't specifically state, ho
ehavjod it to "rararous poles. • as ,;ivcn in tho .In lish translation.
Obviously, when tho Oer-ian text as cut on tho stencil, they didn't cut
out tho -'ords t to ton theusani* ar.d insert •'nurv.rous Poles"; thuy
cut it without tho correction. It has boon corroctod and initialod by
the defendant Brarvit, and tha dofenso counsol aay soo it.

D". SAtfi'iR* ! r r. Prusidont, I taro tho original of this affidavit
of tho defendant Rudolf Brandt, and I noto that in para.-raph U it
actually roads r ond I queto, "nurxirous 1-oles uoro oxtor.Tinatod". At first
it statod 'botWwcn ei;ht and ter. thousand Polos", and that apparently

V

corrocto’. by Brandt hi;: 3 elf to road "numerous Poles". Tho Oonaan dominant
book raist bo corroctod on this point, ‘hotter it has already boon ohaneod
in tho Z-X'lisb bsck I do not know, but of oourso it is wron;. in tho
Ooraon book,

* . .7C$IE3IT: Tho English ’.ocuijit book boforo tho Tribunal roads
'fttwrous Polos'. I assu.*. that counsel for the prosecution will soo that
ths Qcraan Jominont books arc corroctod to cenfom.

Jfi. H&DI: I will sirx


in. z: r. : O havo only tlx. Cor.ion docinxnt book, of course, and wo
cannot ascertain what the n lish docunont book says.

T'H T5SXDEST* o understand, counsel, p-rfoctly,

IT., St'.OTSR; Thar, this question is settled. Thank you.
rr PlaSIIlSKTt I ur. iarstca' fron th_ prosecution that it is sub ilttod
by the prosecution that the Err lish document book is tho correct translation.


19 Doc. Ii?-::4j>9-2-Daaicla (A7D)
Court Jfc. 1


rL.TDT: That Is a*sLtted, Tcwr ionor, yos, sir.

:r. :cajCT* If the Tribunal pl-aso, tho ;:rosocution would at this

tl - like to turn to th; re-sjr.tation of proof on the sulfanilaaido and

bona oxporinonts con 'uctod at "avansbrudc. I would like to ask if the

Tribunal ha3 bofere it the 'ocu ijit book ccreamed with these ;-ettors,

For 3ae reason wo seer. to have ha.’ considerable difficulty in ^ottir .3

♦

both tho English an.'. C*jrnn ’ocu.ent books hilivoro-'. Th.y v.-cro both
prepare*! last ni-ht. Th- Goman ’.ocuiiont books ra.ro deliver to roon
286 , which was tha ol defendants 1 information cantor, and they -ere than
taken back and oppcrantly forjotton an' not dolivor'dd to rosn 391, which
is now tha ’afondr^to' inform tion contor.

TIE PT.lSIfEYTt For my part, I havo not soon that book.

JUT" SuBHIfT-i !‘r. : eSanay, wore thoso dolivorod to tho Socrotary
Ooneral*s offioo?

»n. 'CF.’dfr'j I ca not proparod to atata ri lit nan, thir. ;s soon to bo
in such a stato of cc nibs ion; they rxra cort-inly supposed to hovo boon,

I rocoivod nine lest ni'>t, end tho arrans«.:jnt was that they would bo
delivered tha first thin;; this nomine

TK 7 . PnS S IDSCTi 'oil, is it your procoduro to dolivor it to the
Soorotary ^onoral's office, rtio, in turn, i.ill than s-o that it is
'alivorod in tho nppropri-.to places?

rr- rsHiKTft Tos.

I ”oul' su; -ost, if it .wets with tha convenience of the Tribunal,
that no have a short a ‘Jourrrwnt anc'. try to got it strai •htenod oul^ I
r.-.i -uro that tho lofonso counsel have net received the Goman docunent
book either,

is a matter f fact, I only wanted to rc r.i at this time taro !ocu-
-_r.V in tho ’ocuaar.t bade* Those are tha affidavits of th '.ofondants
Fischer an * Oberhouser. Th; rnly roan an I noul,’ like V.- read these beforo
prosorttine certain ..ltncs3os is in order that the Court aj’ obtain seta
back .Toun' of the broad picture beforo wo all certain Polish witnesses
”ho 'fcre in bavensbruck.


762


19 Doo. u6~.W?-9-«2-Danlala (AID)

COURT *to. 1


cs ?


Counsol for the .Tcsocution sssy folicrr tho procorturo


iiuxfd sdvisr.blo. The Court Trill be in rocoss for fiftoon rinutos.


T- "CFAlCTl Thnnk you.

(.. rocoss nr.3 taken)


763


_ 19-tee 1 WF.S-ja-l-'-l’! i-y S9 r _

Court v 0 . 1 f

THE PRESIDES!: Thn ?ribuor-l is Ag&in in session.

J'P.. McifrGT: 1 by it pi or. n the Court, I under stand you now h--.e

I

b^forn you thr. English docun--1 books of Sullanile.-d.dn oafcariaiinta.

This book includes t hr docun-n'^ which will be present., d on the Sulfa-
ni lard.de a d boo* ‘ccp ri-ent^ rt Ravmsbrueck. These dor.uoont books
» :fl re delivered to tr.e office of the S-cr .*- r Gen-rol this .-.ondog, I
an advised. The defense counsel have Just received copi*s of chn 2-,rcan
dccuc*nt fccoks. Howev- r, as I stated b-for- the i-.temis ion --
DP.. .TEIDL: Dr. eidl for th* d‘:fndent Grbh'rdt, r’isch.r end Ob< r-
hfusnr. Mr. Pr-sidn-.t, the ?ribu»*al has issued a ruling to thr effect
th't thn d f n 5 R is to bn giV|" th- locus'-:nt books rt least .X hours
before th- doeux. nts n* submitted i*. the Courtroon. The (tocun—t book
d rling with Sulfanilnaide xprria-nta *•. r ccivod only p quart'r of
an hour igo. In ord r ot to hold up the pr. tion of ovidonco
by thn prosreutio* I will dispense with 1 g'.l objections r- gar'll-u;
th- dlay i. th subnission of this doeuaent book. I ngr-u to th. sub-
r-ission of this dccun-K.t book at tlv pr ao*-t ti«o f But, in viuw of the
fact it to a v ry xtnnsivu book, — it h-s 1>0 pages ir, the fo.rr.tr, ttxt,

•ind sinen I h p v- ot y t h.-d ticn to look -.t tin bad: I ■ sk to bo allowed
to rnsnrv. th- right to-rdsn obj* ctlona to th* r toissibility of indiv¬
idual docua- nts lat- r.

Ti-fE P.- vSIDITT: The request of co.•'S-l to cc.s-.rv.. th-. right to obj-.ct
to thns*. docur,.'.ts .’t son- lat-r tinn will be gra-t d, providing the

objection flvn. urg-d at th- rli-'-st oossibl and c©«v* nient noo;n-

«

for couns- 1 .

Th. "TLT : "r. "■ lt« for Hr^dlos-r. *-r. President, th- stafco-it which
=f' collnagu. Dr. t-idl has Just ntdo u s nly for hinsnlf. On pri ciplr
I 1 liv- that thr d f«.*iso count,-i htild t‘ point of view th-t th ruling
of th- Tribunal is th-1 oocur.-nt books cruet b«i subni-t d 2 J. hours b-foro
v d sho.il ■* t- obs rv-d. ndc is iapeci«lly tru- wh» u th- com. nts of the
docun—it beck T of such sr- cix 1 sig-ificanc. , r.s in this case. T is
docu;*.nt book consists fron th- first to th 1-st docur--it, of affidavits,

? 6 *


•-he rffi; vies


Court 1

Dec. 19-:v-SE3-lC-2-;<aloy-HD.


replacing the testimony of witnesses here in the Courtroom.

*'o defense counsel must therefore h've an opportunity to
lerrn the contents of these affidavits before and in order to
ascertain whether in c certain c .ae the witness aust not bo
called to appear here personally. * brief examination of
this document book has s.oown that various nffidevits were
later corrected, l.ius from the defendant Fischer t .ore arc
r*.f.'ldr.vlts of the 19th November 1946 rnd the 1st of November
194S, rnd also of the 21st of Octo'o-r 194S, the document hO-
472. Then tnere is mother st tement by Fischer the 7th
of December 1946 :;0-904. T believe four Honors t t in .low
of the groat significance of this p'rtlc lrr document book
ou will not bo role to deviate fr-tn your ba6lo rulo of
rooodure without endangering tne interests of tnc defense,
and I therefore ask you oerh-os b- the examination of witnesses
which the prosecution wished to ;rm. to bridge tne period of
t ntil tomorrow oornln 0 until we h v. h d or. o roortunlty
t :c ;r.*o"rjd to coa..ent on this document.


755


Court 1
Deo


&U hcHANST: ifcy It please th. Tribunal, it _.oee without

saying that the Prosecution is extrenely sorry that those

♦

docuaant books vorc not delivered twenty four fc- rs prior
to the tise wo vis.', to rood certain Doounonta frox thorn,
however, it h?d been our intention, :nd I thought I ar.de
i; door before the lnterclasion, to read only two rtf fid. vits
froa Fritz Fischer and one rtffldavlt froa Horta Obarhruaor
b-fore we call certain Polish witnesses to testify. There
ore four of these witnesses. I would also Ilk- to 0-11
Dr* Alexander to testify, :s or. expert, as to a physical
cxoaln-tlon ho had mode of these witnesses. 1 a vs very
little doubt bet that tno testis, r.y of these witnesses v;ill
trie up rxo i of tr.c afternoon s. n, If not oil, therefore,
vc wo Id only :o presontln c -t t.iis tine throe Doou.jer.ts,
rll of which -re affidavits signed by .no or th* o;hor of
he defendants. I ■-* uito sure this would not work any
h rdshlp on the Defense Cuunsol, ’s it a*’y bo a a'• '.mod th t
there clients .rvu advised then wh t t ey h^vo rdiilctod
to the Prosaoutier..

T22 PAESID2NT: Ip view of th- atrtosuint by tno Pros'ooutlon
s the npooll-r.t'e counsel who objected to prooordin^
inaedirtely changed their slr.d?

HR. McHrth'ZT: The three Docua nts the Tribun 1 hr.8
reference to -re lio. .28, Ko. -147, and 487,

TH£ Prl£cID£I. : T: Does the Defense Counsel undorst r.d the
rryuaor.us made by the Court?

The Tribunal will now recess until. 1 two d'clock. That
11 allow counsel for the aopol.lr.nt8 an additional period
of tlxe to exaclnv. these few Documents to v.’.lcn tho
prosecution will be Halted to usin a t.-.is afternoon.

’.The Court recessed at 1230 Hours.)


19 Doc -A-GZS-12 -1-i inab uc k (!S)
Court So* 1.


CofiiSCTED COPT
AFTSttKSK SESSION

(The wiring rcconvorcd at UiCC hours, 19 Deconbor 1916.)

THE 'iAJiS.'LiL: The Tribmal is again in eons ion.

!5t. jfcHANSf: If tho Tribunal ploaso, the Prosecution would
like now to bog in tho presentation of evidence on tho sulfa nilrnido
exporinonts as ohargod in per graph 6 ( 2 ) of tho indie toont * -u tho bono,
a use la and norvo regeneration and be no transplantation experiments ns
charged in paragraph 6 (f) of tho indiotzwnt. Of aourso, those oxrori-
nonts nro also sot up as criaos against hxnanity in paragraph 11 of
tho Indictnont under Count 3*

With rcopoct to tho sulfanilaaidc oxporixents Defendants Karl
Brardt, Hnrdlosor, Rostock, Schroodor, f.-n*xon, Gobhardt, Blcuo, P.udolX
Brandt, Jinigorrsky, Poppondick , Bcckor-Froysong, Cfcorhiuscr and Fischer
are charged with special responsibility for and participation in tho
aulfanilarido o:q»riaonts.

* .

With rospoct to tho so-crlled bono, nusclo and norvo rogon-
o rat ion and boro transplantation oxpirixvints, tho Defendants iCnrl
Brandt, Hnndlooor, Restock, Gcbhrrdt, Rudolf Brandt, Oborheusor and
Fischer arc charged with special responsibility for and participation
in those oxperinonts.

The first dccicwnt which wo would liko to offor is .'IO-223,
which is tho first docuraont in tho English docuront bocks before ti>o
Tribunal, -ad this will bo rrosocution Exhibit 206 . This is an af¬
fidavit taken in tho English longuago and signed by the D_ fondant

•

Fritz Flschor. It reads as follows:

"I, Fritz Ernst Fischer, boiny first duly swem according to


/v

(£*/ ^• r «'L» v 5 ^ptor of nedicino, having boon graduated fren tho
diversity of Ra.X<»i and pissed cy State Exanination in 1936. On 13
.^Averber 1939 I was Arducted into tho i.’affon S5 and after having served
XithN ccobat diWsion as nodical officer, I was hospitalized and thon


.da pa so ard say:


f^Ir.iversity of


ith'i.coobat

V/vuv,^;


19 Doc-A-<ES-12-l-liimbuck (IB)

Court Mo* !•

C

Msigaxl to tho SS Hospital at Hohonlycbon, as Assistant Surgeon.

■In addition to cy nornal duties as surgeon at tho SS Hospital
at Hotvinlychon on or about 12 July 191*2, I was -ordered by Professor Bob-


hardt to


19 Doc-A-<«£S-12-2 -Ninab’jc k (IS)
Court Mo. 1.


begin nodical experiments in ny capc.city zs assistant surgeon to prof¬
essor T-bhardt. The purpose of the proposed experiments was to dotcr-
aine tho effectiveness of sulfanilaaido, which I was informed at that
tine was a natter of considerable inportarcc to nilitory nodical circles.

■According to the infomation rliich I received from Professor
Gobhardt, those experirv-nts woro directed initially by the Reichsfuohror
3S and the Rcichaarts, Dr. Grewit*.

"Frofossor Bebhardt instructed ne, before tho operations were
/

undortakon, on tto techniques to bo followed and tho nothods of
procedure to be enployod. The, persons vho ware to be tho subjects of
those experiments were inmates of tho concentration camp at Ravens-
bruck who had boon eondonnod to death.


"Tho administrative precoduro which was followed i '.Staining
tho subjoct for tho oxporinonts was ostnblishod by Profossor Gcbh&rdt
with the ccnp cou. r.ndsnt at Ravonsbruek. Aftor tho initial arrangoaonts
had been nado, it was tho gcnoral practico to inform tho nodical officer
at Ravonsbruek no to tho date on which a sorios of experiments was to
bo begun and tho nisabor of patients which Mould bo required, and thon


ho took the matter up with tho cccusndnnt of tte camp, by whoa tho
seloctions of subjects wore node. Boforu an oporation was undertaken,
tho persons who had bc:n scloctcd in occordenoo with this procedure,
received a nodical oxaaination by tho crop physician to determine their
suitability for tho oxporioents froa a nodical standpoint.

"Tho first of tho series of experiments involved five persons.
Tho gangrenous bacterial cultures for use in tho experiments worc^ob¬
tained frro the Hyglcniscfw,s Institute dor Weffen SS. Tho procedure
followed in the operations was as follows: tho subject rcc ived tho


conventional anacsthotic of norphino-atropiiw, then ovipan oJior. An

• 1

incis Lon was aado five to eight continotrcs in length and one to ono


and a h-lf centimetres in depth, on the outside of tho lower loj; in tho


area of tho poronaaus longus.


■The bacterial cultures w«r^ put in dextrose, and the resulting


-76-3-


19 Dcc-:.-OiS-12-2-Kiaibuck ('.«)
Court 3o. i.


C — '

cixturo was spread into the wound. The Ground was then clc. .d and tho
lids oner.sod in a cast which had be.n prupar-d which was lined on the
inside with cotton, so


u#-


-768-A-


c


19 Doc- J rGZ&-l&-3-Blaubacle-(KJ)

Court I

taat In the ©rent of availing of the affected amber, the result of tho
ejporinent vould not be influenced by a factor other than the infoctioa
itool*.

■2:e bacterial culturoe used on Ooch of the fivo pornons rariod
both aa to the type of bacteria usod und the cnount of culturo used.

n ^ftor tho initial operations bod boea perfonjod, I rotunicd
to Haronsbrudc each afternoon, to obsonro tho prog-roes of tho per¬
sona who had boon operotod on. Ko serious illaosses ronultod froa
, thoso initial oporations. I reported tho progross of tho pationts to
Professor Oobhardt oach night.

■ V hon the fivo persons who wore first oporatod on, woro curod,
anothor sorlos of fire was bogua. Tho surgical procoduro and bho
post-oporatiTO procoduro was tho tmo as in tho initial osporiaouto,
but tho bectoriol culturos woro -oro virulent. Tho rosults froa this
sorlcs woro substantially tho sane as la tho first and no sorlous
illnosaos ronultod.

* Sisco no lafloWation rosultod frau tho bactorial culturos
usod in tho first two sorlos of oporations, it was dotoraiaod, os o
rosult of oorrospond/ with Dr. Kuorowsky, tho Oil of of tho Hygion-
echos I nstttuto dor .Vuffoa SS, end conversation with his assistant,
to change tho typo of bactorial culturo in tho subsequent oporations.
Using tho now culturo, two uoro sorlos of oporations wore porfoxuod,
ouch involving fivo porsoas.

■ Eio dlfforoneo botwooa tho third and fourth sorlos wan in
tho bectorid cultures usod. She Hygienlschos Instituto dor Wnffon
SS proparol thee frac separate combinations of tho three or four gai>-
grone cultures which wore available. In the third and fourth sorics,
a uoro pronounced infection and inflammation was discernible at tho
Plcco of incision. Its characteristics were siuilar to a aomnl,
lovcl infection, with rodness, swallin.3 and pain. Tho circuuforonco
of tho infection was cccparable in site to a chostaut.. Upon tho coa-


-759-


i


Court I


C


plotioz of the fourth seriog tho ccep phyglciah icfornod no that the
ocep cccnaadazt had lngtructod bin that no locgor would calo pat 1 oatg
bo arallcblo for furthor ejporiugatg, but that it would bo nocogcary
to uao fecalo ircatog.


19 Dc c-A-<2S-12-4,-Hinabuc k-FL
Court No. 1

"Accordingly, *iv- wosen hr.d been prepared for tho operation, but
I did not operate on th_n. I reported the change of situation to Pro¬
fessor Gcbhnrdt end suggested that In view of these circumstances, it
would be desirable to stop tho experlnontal operations. Ho did not

0

-Jopt thio suggestion, hoover, nd pointed out that it was necessary,
ns cn officer, tfcr.t I ccrry out ^ duty, which had been noai-ned to >*,
"Thu orocrlc-nts, however, w^r- interrupted for a period of two
wocka, during w:ich Professor Gebhardt told no ho hr.d discussed tho nat¬
ter at Berlin nuS was instructed to carry or tho


770


19 IX c-A-ASc: e-13- 1-R rrin-FL
Cotirt 'So, 1


I


expo rinents, using Palish faoale prisonors who had been sentenced to
death. In addition, hu instructed no to increase the loops of expori-
.a-nts since the Roichsarzt, Dr. Grawitz, intended soon to go to Ra.vcns-
cruck to teat tho results of the experiments. Accordingly, I went to
R-vonsbruck and operated on the fonalo prisoners.

"Since the infections which resulted froa the first four series
of experiments H-rc not typical of battlefield gangrenous infections,

■c conaunicatcd wi;h Kygienisches Institute d,r Vaffen-SS to deter-
aine what stops could be taken aor- nearly to simulate battle-caused
infections. As ft result of this c >rx\.e ndontx end r. conference at
Hohonlycftor. presided over by Professor Gcbhardt, it wr.a decided to
tiny fraf73-r.ts o: vod sh avings to tho b'ct-rl-'i culturoe, which
would ai.su Late tho crust of dirt customarily f;und in battlefield wounds.

"As n result of this conference, tnree series of operations wero
perf-raod, each involving 'on persons, on- usir$ the bacterial culture

end frrga-r.ts of w.od, tno s-corni using bacterial culture am I fragments
of glass, and thu third using the culture plus glass and wood.

"About two WeuTco after thus- n-w ocries were bepon, Cr. Graidtz,
visit.d Ravcnsbnick. Professor Gebhrrdt introduced hio to a. rnd ur-
ol-in-d to hin tne general nature of the wrk. Professor Gubhardt then
loft, and I toq>laixv.d to Dr. Gr.-s»itz the dot ails of the operations and
their results. Dr. Grawitz, before I could ccopluto ray r-p^rt on thu
procedures us.< nnS the results obtain-d, brusqu-ly interrupted ru arxS
observ-d that the c nditions under which the eXp-rim-nts were performed
did r.;t sufficiently resuable c,nditi as .ireV-iling at tlx front. He
asked au liter-Lly, 'How rny de ths have th-r- been?'' *nd when I re-
o.rted that tixr- had not b__n any, he stated that that confirmed ids
-ssujpti-n that tho experiments had not be _n carried in .accordance with
his directi :ns.

i

"He said th t tfx. :per".ions w^re- a-r^ iL-abites and that since


771


19 Doc-A-AScha-13-lr-Pcrrir^FL

Court So. 1


C

tr.o our pose of tr_ work v.s to <bt>min^ the effectiveness oi sulfnni-
LoaiJc or. bullet Bounds it would be necessary to inflict cctur.1 bullet
w.unds on the p'tients. He ordered that the next series of ox^rloents
to be uixiertr.ken should be in


*


771 a


C Airt So. 1


>-l3-2-^rrin-FL


accordance nith those directions. Th-t sax. evening, I discussed these
orders ol Dr. Grnwiti with Pr-fuss^r Gebhnrct and »e both agreed thet
it was iaooasibL, to carry thea out, but that a procedure would bo
adopted which w.uld oooxv rtearly sisulatc battL-iicld conditions with¬
out actually shooting thu patients.

"The noroal result of all bullet w unds was a shattering f
tissue, which did iv -1 exist in the initial cxperiients. As a result of
thu injury, the normal flow of blood through the auscle is cut off.

Thu cusclo is nourished by the flow of blood froa either end. 'hen this
circulation is interrupted, the affected Tea b-c oes .a fertile field
for the growth of bacteria; the noraal rc.-ctivn f the tissuu against
thu bacteria is not possible without circub'ti.n.

"This intcrni »tion A circui.tion usu~ 1 in battle casualties

could be simulated by tying off th. bloodvessels -t either und of
the ousel*.

"Two SeiiuS l operations, each involving Un Persons, wore be¬
gun loll •win', this procedure. In the lirst f thesc, the uaae bacterial
cultures were used -3 were duVwl pod in the third -nrf f-urth series,

• • f

but th. u lr.as no' wood were fitted. In the th.r a.ries, streotococci
nti stanhloeocci c iltures w-re used. In t!». Series using the garyjv-
njus culture a SeVeTe infecti r. ir. the area ol the incision resulted
within PM h a*s.

"eight patients out A ten bec*.a. sick fr.a the .'angronous infec¬
tion. Cas..s v;Ach 3 h ved syaptaas of ac uas-eciiic -r spucilic i.i'la-o-

antion were .derated on in accord-*ncw with the d octrinc. 'n<! nanner ‘1

*. .

sentic surgery. The doctrine of Lexer lor -d the V sis I r the p? c«-
dure. Th. technique is tfrt n incision *r. the -re f the ^cn&ron ua
listers mrbb.d, and * solution 1 hydr<gen vr oxide was i urc.' ov-r
■ ... Th _ kflaiod .xtrealty w s inobiliacd in e cast. -.it., aost
ti.nts it cas o.sdble t> inprovo the aagrer. -js condition -f the -ntirc
infected area in this anner.


772


19 Dcc-A^ASc>o-l>2-?orrLi-PL
Cairt Ko t 1


■In the merits in which bar.-.I cultures if streptococci end stophLo-
cocci were ujtd, the severw resultant infocticn with accosonnTin? increase
ir. temporalore and rolling did tut occur until sevtnty-t-.»o hours later.
Pour pati-nts alvmoC a more serious picture 1 the disease. In the csso


! tft8 ° petiuita » tho norer .1 pr-fossioir.l technique of orthdox a-c'icine
was foll.Wed ns outlinod above, end the inflaa-d scaling so lit. Due to
the slight virulence of the


<


772 c


19 Dec-A-AScr«a-13-3--Porrin-FL

Court Hi. 1

c ~r

bcctvrin it uea oowlblb in the case of -U aatients -xccnt r.j to pre¬
vent the tror.tcnod deadly development if the disease*

"The Lieisi,. 3 wore vA, an the iow-r y rt .f t?w leg uly in .-11
series to acta; an njputati.n o ssible. It nas n.t rede or. the uooor
thigh oec use then n- nrea for eaputation would tuaain. itaw-vc;, in tlv
a-ries the i nf i a sj.tiao was so rapid th.ro was no ruu’y -nd n- a,aouta-
ti-ns »ere rede.

"Sine- after the tying up A th. circulation of the nuscL-s, a very
Severe c.ur3e of infecti-n ws to be exo-efcod, five cr-.ns .1 sulfnnila-
aide wire given intr v.n.usly in the aa -uut J .ne gr a . ach, bo^innin&
one h-ur after tho yi-i ti.n. Aft.r the w.uai was laid oen to oxpaso
r.U its corners, soilanij.-aide was ah.-ken int-^thc jitire 're-, and tho
arua w-s er-ined b; thick rubber tubes.

"The infect! n ri.rr.-Uy reached an :.cuU stag- >v_r a period of
three weeks during ohich tu, I ch-nged the b riagus C- ily. After tho
p-riod of three no-ka th- condition was n ra-lly Urt -f a a Lap l- ..'jure!
which yr.a dressed by tU caap physicians r-.th-r than by me.

"Th. pr:c-dor- ovoacrib-d f .r th- oost-operative tr.ta-nt oi the
patients w-.s to ^ive thea three tin.s -ach t- y <n- cc of n.rphlr.-, and
wh-n th- dressings were changed, to indue- an-sthesla by tne uo- A evi-
phn.


"In -U th. sori-s >f ex.o-rto-nts, -mc-ot the first, s • If - nila dd-
w-s used after th- £-:.-r-n.un infecti n -op-ar-cl. In o-.ch s-ries t n
pers ns wen. not giv-r. suli.ardi-.aido as a c rfcr 1 to det-roin. its ef-
f-ctiv rveC3. ; .r. sulfnil aid. -nr. tho

» 5 >,


773


19-Ds»-MM3-l«-«rri»-(MJ)

Court I

/*

bacteria culture* together introduced into the incision no iaflonation
resulted*

■ ifter the arrival of Doctor Stunpfcgger fran general hcedr-
quarters in the fall of 1942, Professor Cobhardt doclarcd boforo soao
of his co-work:on that he roceived ordors to continue -'itt the testa
at Pjrronsbrucck on a largor scale. In this connoctioa, quostions of
plastic surgery which would be of interest after t ho end of tho war
should bo elarlfiod. Doctor Stu^foggor was supposed to tost tho froo
transplantation of bones. Since Professor Gobherdt know that I had
workod in praparation for uy habilitatlon at tho univorsity on rogonor-
ation of tissuos, ho ordorod no to prepero a surgical plan for thoso
operations, vblchcftcr it had bocn approved ho diroctod no to carry
out issodiatoly. Koroovor, Doctor Kollor and Doctor Hoiosneyor voro
* ordered to porforn their own sorios of oaporiuonts. Profossor Gob-
hnrdt was also considering a plan to foro tho basis of an opomtivo
tochhiquo of rouobililotion of Joints. Bosidos tho abovo, Dootors
S chulzo end Schulzo-hogen participated in tfclo conforonco.

* Sicoo I know Havonsbruock I wosordorod to introduco the now
doctors oaiod ubovo to tho c^i? physlciun, X was osposiolly diroctod
to cscist Doctor Stu^pfoggor, slnco ho was physician in tho Art f of
ElxxJlor probably would bo ebsont f rai tine to tiyo.

"I had selected tho rogoacrotior. of nusolos for tho solo roason
booauso tho incision nocossory for this purposo wao fco slightost.

2ho operation was carrion out as follows:

■7Mpr.n and others wore used as an anosthotic, and o fivo efin-
tinctor longitudianl incision was node ut tho outor sido of tho uppor
lo.;. Subsequent to tho cutting through tho fcocian, a pioco of tho
irasclo was rcaovcd which was the siro of tho cup of the littlo fingor.
Z'.o fr.Bcinn and skin wore enclosed in accordance with tne aoruol tech-
nique of aseptic surgery. Afterwards a Cast was appliod. aftor ono
week tho skin wound was split under tho sane narootic conditions, and
tho part of the :.uscle around the aro a cut out was ramoved, after¬
wards tho fascian and the seved-up part of tho skin wore inaobilizod in


- 774 -


19 Dnc ,W?'-13-2a-Frri (sw)
Court v c. 1


C


ft Cdlt.

■Since Professor Gnbhurdt did not r.sk so ar«y longer i‘° r these oper¬
ations, I discontinu'd th*-a.

"Cnlr o'i f«oal* ptti- nt •. r.s opr W o-i whoso woinds honied und. r
nomftl r.asptic conditions.

"As r. disciple of Lex-r, Gnbhr.rdt hr.d * nlr -iidy plim-e'd long ’'go
n fro*, h-t roplr.stic trn-iapiB'-fttlon of bon... In spite cf the fnct
thr.t soce of his co-vork'rs did not r.gr*e, h- wp.s esolvnd to carry
out such in ©portion on th- prti-nt Lrdisch, who o shoulder joint
wna rnoovod becaus- of n srrcor.fi.

"I end ry on^icrl coll* rgu's urged profi ssionnl vod huna* objections
up until th evening b-for- th- op-r: tion was pi rforn- 1 but C- bh.'.rdt
ordered us to carry out thn op- mtio -s. Doctor Stuapfogg-.r, in whose
field of research this op-rations nr. a, w a supposed to p' rforra nvnovr.l
of the sen ul »t itnveoabni ci v.d Ik i ftlr*r.dy undo initial ftrt“»gr.-
r.ents th-r- foru. Kox- v-r, btcr.us' I-ofnssor G..bhnrdt required Doctor
Stuapf ggor to assist hin in th*. octunl trn-spli.nAtlon cf the shoulder
to thn patient L-disch, I wts ord* md to go to hr. v-nabrunck rnd prrfom
thn op -r tion of r*cov 1 o« Uv t -vining. I i sV."d Doctor Ctbhnrdt
and Schulte to describe -uo.ctly thi tochi<pi« which th*.;- wished no to
follow. Th - rrxt oor-d'-g I drove to vc-sbry* ck lifter I htvo nr.do ft
previous a pointr-nt b telephone. «t 1!oh--.nl:,-chi n I hnd ’lrorly nr.r.u
t.h no rail iiiti-'l prcp?r» tio-.s for in op* ration, ncaely, 'tc., surely
put on ay co-t, rnd i-it to it-v nsbrurck d niaovod th*. bone.

The eftrp physician who w-s Assisting m in thn operation continued

with it while I r-tur.rd to Hoh'ivlychnn its ouickly ns posfibl-. with

th bon- which w s to b* tr nspl-nt-d. In this a -n< r the period betw*. ,n

fction

r-rovnl e-d tr-.sclr- t/-* w-s shortened..At Hoh- nl^chen th- bon- ers
hind-id ov r to Prof-ssor G-bhrJt, and h- tra* splftut* d it, tog th r with

Doctor Schtlsc 1 nd Doctor otuspf* gg* r.

“Dubs cu nt to th* lor- going: st op' ration (g-.ngmoous infection)

* hnd iapr.ssed cn Professor G*>bhardt thr.t now wo hr i result which
Aould uatify their cessation. I c.-ns'-d to op-.r-t-, Pnd I t-r on I did

775


19 Drc-^-«?:-13-3a-P«rrin (sw)

Court "o. 1

C

not receive any order to continue with tfct operation. I did not c-rry
out .-noth, r orl* r /or Doctor Stunofoggnr, who was abso'-t p.t thr.t lice,
to co'.tlnun his work,

"}'y behavior towards "11 patients was very considerate, end I was
v-ry careful in the operatio s to follow standard profossio-»?.l
procedure.

"In Kay 19^.3 rt the occasion of th" fourth conference of thn con¬
sulting physicians of th- 'V-hrrvcht a report was ca-io by Professor
Gebhnrdt pnd cysnlf s to thes- operations. This n«dical commas
w - s. called by Professor Handlosnr who occupied the position of surgeon
f? r ner'1 of th . "ns-d forces, and wvs attended by a largo n .ibnr of
physicians, both nilit- ry r.*>d civilian.

"In ry lecture to th • n"ting I report- d the operations in mi open
wry, using charts which a«r.onstr.t d th- t'enniquo used, the rjr.ount
of sulfanil&sidu r.dcd'-lst-e* d, ft-d th* condition of th* prtionts.


c


IS-Ueo--j-Schw.-14-1-2rice (hj)

Court I

Zhis looturo was the center of the conference. Professor Gcbhcrdt
sooho about the fundonontols of the experiments, thoir porfoniancc,

Ond thoir results, end asked no then to descri'oo the techniquo. Eo
bogcn his lecture with the following words:

■I carry tho full human, surgical, and political rcsponoibilit;-
for theso experiments.*

Z'.is locturo was followed by a discussion. Bo criticise wac
raisod. I on convinced that all tho physicians prosont would hnvo
actod in tho stcic manner as I.

Subsoquont to ny rep oatod urgent requests I wont to tho front
os surgeon i;x,odiutcly after this conforenco. Only of tor I up. s.
wounded did I roturn as a petiont to Hohealyehon. I never ontorod tho
camp -cvoasbruck again. I protestod vigorously egainot thc-o experi¬
ments on human bologs , ondoavorod to prevent thou, and to Halt
thoir oxtor.sion uf tor thoy had boon ordorod. In ordor not to bo f oro-
od to pcrticiputo in those cxpori.ionts, I doclinod hubllitation r.t tho
U nivoraity of 3orlin bocuioo I fult that it night rosult in a;- boing
obiigod to carry on additional oxporinents at Envcnnbruck. Since I
succoodod in sclontific dlscovcrios of V.o highest practical iupor-
tnneo that is, tho solution of tho cuncor probl<*> and its thorc-ey, I
havo not coxunleatod this fact to Profosoor Oobhardt and havo not
puhlisl'-od this work in ordor not to bo ordered again to carry out cu?-
pcrlmcnts.■

Shis «a signod by Prit* Fischer. *ho translation—not tho
translation but the copy of tho original docunont which is in TOur
Eonors* docunont book does not show that it is signed, but tho o:l;.lunl,
which is going into ovidonce, is signod.

“Subscribed and cworn to Before no this 19th day of tfovembor 1945.
John J. Lonigen Jr., Kajor."

Of course this affidavit contains sono technical language but I
think it is pretty clear what the Defendants Oobhardt, Pischor and

9 * • •


- 777 -


19-De-i-.Schv.-14~l-rice (K)

Court X

r

Oberhausor were doing in tho Savoasbruch «oncaatratioa can?. is doe-
orl'ood in this affidavit, these oaperisonts bogon in the latter part
of 1942, end insofar as the Defendant. Tiecher is concernod, woro coi>-
eludad in Key 1943, *ho tribunal will recall that tiachor nedo a
rory fresh cad open atatecent to tho effect that


-777


19 Dec-.-... 3chw.-l4-2-*ricc ja
Court No. 1

a full report r.s givoi on these J^.nsbruck ocperlatnbs bwfdrc th~t '.uguot
tbody hs-dd? up by the Defcedent Kindloser; the Kilit-xy ^.-ic'l ..cr.du-y in
Berlin '.'.3 under his direct control. Tho f>cfcni=nt Rostock, 3 it so ftnp.'X.ncJ
presid-ci ov-r -.nX *~-s chairmen of the .x.teng -.t .hieh this .-.port w?.3 .-:dc,
since it .-a \iv.n to i section of the -ichdayr xr.ling *dth surjic'.l problems.
Sitting in the front row »\s the Defend-.-* K'-rl GObh xdt, on his right w.-.s
thw Defend fit Kwllos.r. These f'.cts will .ppnr in proof to b. »ibscqu_ntly
sub.iit.t_G, nd curiously -n-u©:, 't th. wy s:ux meeting in ii\y, 1943,’ *:t r.
section -.tt-n:^: by the specialists an fcysltre, - fi-port -.r.s giv-n by the
notorious Dr. Di-ig on the L.uxierous typ. us _xo_rk-_nt,3 -t 3ud:on.r.l«; "nd
the fcfugAflb Ros. dll 'Iso tell you tlr.t is. ttenl— tr.'.t tet:n . -nd not
only die he -.tun. it but h- jot up nag h'G - few ^ords to o ;• “pout the
experiments th.us.lv.*.

1 • .uld like no* to p-.ss cn t. th. s.corvl ".ffid'.vit of the J-fenJ ft
Fiscier. Tfei» is Dacouent WHi Lljbc Prosecution Befcibit 20?.

I think i ,rob oly itUe, in yrc.r.rkr. the JXetin miry *43

..t the Killthry U-io 1 ..c .. y, th t G. ..r.t vat the front row. Th t
w-.s .dot'd.; it wr.s Defend nt h~xl Br.ndt in th. -I die -f th. front rew;
on his rijit tna C-nti end on nio L-ft H-ui.i-s-r. Gebh’.rdt ..e speech,
together rdth the Duf-nAmt Fischer.

Pros-cuti^.j Exhibit 2C fj re ds -.3 folloaos

"I, Frit a Srr.at ..lb.rt Fiscr-r, o-ix duly mem, depoa. .id at t.:

1. I th. s-e Frits drr.st Fischer '.rho h .a h.retefore a. .rn -n

<

.ffid.vit cn tie 19th of Hovuab-r 1945 ~md on th. 2lst rf Octebe. 1946
cenceraid ulf.nil -1 - cxc.rights end b:r~ tr -ispl nt'.tii r ^>erion.ed
on in:: tes -f t... R'.v.nocruc.; Cencontr'.tion C—p*

2. For che s — r. .sons s.t -‘ere: n 1 of dfi-'. vit of 19 Nov-

• •

_b^r 1945, I .. fible t_ ii-Jee'ft so U*u.nt concerning the ctivitics end
p rticip oaon vf Dr. K-rt . Oovr..tus.r *n 1 Dr. Bern r. schiedl-usky in these
ur.3 d_ cic.'erincnts.

3. Dr. Idrt'. Oberh*M».r :~a n- of c _-p physicians -i th- cono.ntr-.-

L\ ;* sulfhiJl—i-w expo*i-_fits xd


:L:; c - T E"-ve:tsbruck. Shv helped


19 Dcc.-..-.>Schw.-l4“3-rrice pc
Court !!o. 1

in the- operations conn-ctcd a&th thxpcri__nts, xdcfc I already have


d- scribe in a affidavit of 19 Hbve-ber 1945 . .firing .all th- ti— I *as
c rrying out operations arc assisted _l, -.dth th- exception 3 a few leva of
her vac at in. Dr. Oberhauser :f-a in chnrgo of the po3t-ujxr .ti_n care for
the pati-.atc -nZ st.c rcgulnrly ivp:rt-d e- — hou the pati-nta a-r- getting
_n -.n lux. the ^cp-rLenta d-vdopcC. ..s a -att-r of ccura- oh- knew that oI»
of the ia'i-3 of pr.tients .-re operated on and inf-ct— but rot tr-at-d .dth
-sulf-.niivi.Co, in or-er to-ot-relrx. the effect of tne drug. Further, I believw
sho kne : that in other expertrial a-ri-a pieces of glass an! r-od Her-
inserted in the *,ukia of the victL-s on or-er t. intensity the lnfe^don
aZ tc create cht—ic;Jly situation i-.ich c-y -ccur t J a^L'i-rs in the field
and that for the a _- reason, in tlicr c-aea, circulation bl 1 .r.a inter¬
rupted b.< artificial serins.

4 . She assisted x in eVejy op-ration fr...- th- h-ginning t- the end,,
durlrv, all th- ti-x I "• exjx riii-nt lnj -./it. aulfanilauid- in p. vuiabruck.

In several cases ah- oanda j-.. th- prti-ntc aft-r the poration and v-aa ah/ay a
pres-nt when I drng-d the bandages of ‘die piti-nta, n- assist-.. hi this
duty-

5. Dr. OK.rtr.ua-r also reported t ~e that in certain c.ao.a luring the
last 3erie3 of expjh-nta th- e:iect ,S tlx l.X-ctien was cnch u>r- a-ri ma
than that nich ... -oa .-nr-- in pr-vioua c -a. Sh- lao infone . tie -b.«ut the
three cacu lti-a -hiCi occurred during tlx -x«xrir.*.:.t .ti-n, .as ah- t.-eK c .r-
of th- tlu*e- p-ti.nta .ho l.tcr di-d. i- r-pert-- t'> »x til at tli-a- people
.lice in c-na-qixnce -T th, infl -e-atien,

6. La spit- -f the fact that she did .ut lik- her v rk . oaop ,

physician aa sr.o was the -n*y teals _oceer in R'V-nsbruck, Dr. Cb-rhaua.r

•

nevor J>out ncr ;^rlidp -tlon the exjx-x*

7. I o-laev- th- aciectzrn f vict .jj f-r th- -xp-rLtrfcs were carried
.ut l-- tl Oiicf Doctor of the BavJhscnick C-ncentration C-d, Dr* 3 c.ii-il.ua-
r^, te>t: -r dth Dr. Cb-rt; user. Dr. Cbcn.-user to k p.rt :-a tx s-l-ction,
in * .xe. .a she /.n- i th- situate n l e- c f i-tter tn Li- - tli-r doctors
*a sli- -.3 c .40 physician. Lat-r, si- .-strnsf-rr— and o-cr_- n assistant
t- jr. 5-d- rIt xn Hohenlych-n, .-xd I pr-sux, th-r-for-, that six n*s Os-o


779


-—T :u>--


19 Dec.— .-.•6chwi-l4“4»Prico

Ccurt No. 1


r-.-ill-x vd.tn.th- bone transplantations vhicfc <t~rc c rrkd _ut by Jr. Geb-
har.'.t and Dr. Stuopf-gg-rt after I left Hohcnlychcn.

8. Dr. Schio-lnusky, the Chief Physician of Rnv-nsbruck concentration
c--_p, rwver nssistc- x, pera.nnily .hen I cxp-rkxntcJ idth sulT-jiiln llo.

He assisted _o, however, <rfxn I carried out tho b-n- transp Lontnt i ui a vr.ich

• Si

I described in oy affidavit of 15 ?k>vcobcr 1945, ns Dr. Cb-rlin.s-r uaa not
*. surgeon.

9. To the b-at of _y Sciot/lcdge, Dr. Schiedknuaky assisted Dr. Gebhardt
rfion h_ wxp-rkeitci -ith aulfnnik n aldo. Dr. Schi-dlnuaky r.a f'^rdii r idth
tho aulfa n i k- ddc experk xnta in’, idth -y task in the Ravuiabrud. concentra-
tlon cvp, and pm stated before, selected victims for the8%. -rxri-i-nta,"

Signed 1 Koveeh^r 1946, Frits Ernst dlbcrt Piaoher.

This affidavit then jiv-a ua aoex idea .{ tL jr.rt ,-l by the
Defendant Cb-rhaes-r in th.ac -xpori-enfcnl cp-rati-ns at R-.vonsoruck.

it cajo nos to the .ffiir.vitby the Defendant Oberh-.uaer hora-lf. Thin
ia Docucuit NO-487 attl «iU b. Prcsocutien Exhibit 208/

"I, Dr. Hot-. Chcrh'.uasj', duly aworn, depea.. and statet
1. I *.ro b-rn in CJlagn- on the Rhine in Gcr.-ny -n 15 U~y 1911,studied
xdiem. in frj.- 1931 to 1933 and thereafter in Dutsacl’orX till 1937*

I J.»kwd the liSlXJ in _ny 1937 "j>: vns since 1933 in the BD li. In thia -rgm-
Untlon I Ir.d thw rank of District Physician in Duo 8sel dorf. I \orked at the
-dical clinic in Jucs&elderf and at the D-ra. .tt logical clinic in DieS3el-
dorf, and e _l thereafter as Specialist an.I £a-p Physician ta the c.ncentra-
ti-n ca.^j ?.“ven3truck. L tw I r.s transferr— t- Jki.-nlyn.>r., t thw h-spital
-f the Red C.-’3s undor Professor X-rl Gei-Or.’t.

2. T.iraugn ay capacity aa c-op physician *nd sjxciolisi. at the
concentration canp R;v-nsbruck r. as assistant physician to > 1 * 01,33 ar
Dr. “leblvardt *.t tiie hospital in Hohenlycheu -.nd because of thw fact that 1
‘ -siat-d Jr. Xarl Gebhardt, Dr. Frits Fischer ark Jr. Stu-pfe^ert in tiieir
-?-r-.t'ions and uxperirunta, I ,v.v_ a detailed kn-vk-dge of tie- 3ulf jna-x. a»-
-xp,rk-,nt5 and bon tr-.nsplnnt-ati 3 r.s p.rferno- in RaVensbruck and HJ.enly-


' 780


.- ^ .


- 1:—T w


19 Dcc.-^-;.-Schw.-lfc-5-Pricc cn
Ccurt He. 1

C

cten. I an therefore able to =akc the following stiu-^nts rboxt these fhctsj

Sulfonamide Scpcrlexnts

3. T.i- sulfortanLk, cxp-riixuts u-rc carried out i r. tit. ti-.c between

.S'

•oigust a*! the eft: of 1942, for th- purpose of Jetendaihg tlx. effects of
sulfonamides.

The gpcriiwr^"-! subjects needed for those exp-ri^rts '<osv n'Jie.: to im
en a list fumiaho J by the camp administration, ml it was :y duty to examine
the condition of he'.lth of tc. proposed persons, -ainiy, 1 bad to -x-uuno their

4

ski r. r.rvl their hc .rt, Sc*x of the jropoa©: prisoners w-re '.la. X-r^ytd. Vihon
I considered rnc or th~ oth^r of the prisoners a not sufficiently healthy
for the porferoaoce of tho bporation, I notified the c up physici~n,. '.t that
ti^x Dr. Schiodlausky, by tclcphen-, an’. It. replaced hL- .At:, another one.

Chly perfectly h-althy Pollan nationals were use: f r tho experiments.


4


?81


19 D*o-A-OES-15-l-6‘-Apd (iv)
Court Wo. 1


"A. the operatic.s were prrforo<i_by Dri Frit: Flash* r* Sooetioes 1
h«lped #i -asisted at these op rations "id hr.d th- duty, to t ttend tho
patients aft* r the op*ration. Different scrips of -ocp-rijaeuts woro
conducted; in soee, gif aa or wood splinters r.od cloth fibers wore
forcibly breught i*to the wound, in order to cause gangrene. For this
purpose, » cut on th* crlf of fn approxiaato length of 10 cimtia-.tres
was usually aide. I don't recall cither, which ousel w*,s used for the
purpose oi th- axnrriaant.

"5. I cannot say, how rrny persona, oo whoa exparian-itH w*re con¬
ducted, oaXferod p.rn n- *.t injuries, "ut I kn*v th:.t three died as
viotias of those exp* rine-ts. I found that their heart fail' d. But
since I had examined these thm o rsons before the exp rlannts w;:re
co'Khictcd on th>o, it is V ry probable'th t they died b' cause of the
infection which was ca\is"d by the i-xperittents.

"6. ns f»r as I can rcwab'T, a total of AO persons ware usod fbr
these nxpc ria-ants,

Hone Tr nnplantatjoq

"7* The xp riaents with bone tr.nsplan- tions were carried out,as
far as I cn rtaxober, at th n»,d of 19A2 and b<.gi'uiing of 19A3 by
Dr. Stuapfggrt of Hohenlychc.. I helped r«l assist' d u r. Sturnp-
f'ggert in the ana* way, as I helped Ur, Fischer with th* sulfon-
•aide exp-, rlannts, and as I have described already in par graph 4 of
this "ffilrvit. £• Tore the operation I had to xaoirm, as in the oth r
ens* , th condition of th. h"lth of th* sol-ct* d p* rsons. The opor-
'tions consist.d in th rTx>vnl end transplantation of n piece of bone
fror. th tibia. Fifteen to twenty p rsons w rc used foj* those nxp r-
i Writs.

*41 *

"Th* p' rccns vcr.ssary for these exp ricents w- re r ouisitioi d by
Dr. Schidls.uslQr fron th caap ccecanler..

•8. Dr. Farl C- bh rdt w-s in charge of th* auifouanide • xpi.rimeetsVnd

bene transplantations. Tt is not known to a> , that h* hioself has pi r-

fora* d op rations of this t;"pi».But I kow, thrt ail th^s*. 'ixporiacnts

•" r< perforat'd under his direction and sup rvision fnd upon his i-.struct-

782


19 Dec -A-GES-l-3-B*?rd (sir)

Court 'b. 1


He «s a by tht. clmndy or.,tionf*i Dr. Fischrr nod Dr. Stunp-

frggert end Also by Dr. Sehidlzusky and Rosenthal.' / Iso for.these
' aD ’ riacnts, only healthy Poll prisoners w re us*M.

I can't rearsfeor, that a single o»c of th< used expertise-,tnl subjects
w * a P' rdonri after th«- conplrtion of the cxperixients.

Conditions in the Conce ntrati on Cagp ftnvensbruock
"9. During sy a rvic rt th- conc^ntr'ticn o«p Br vnnsbru*-ck I
observed that o.n of the physicians serving th'r , Dr. Son-teg,
severely adstr—ted prison-rs who rrported sick, by beating o«id
kicking

" 10 . It wrs no rr.rfty rt Ravensbruccic, that p rsons who w re already
npprorching death, w-r klllM by Injection. I cyanlf have given 5 or
6 such i Jrctions.

"nmrrfe rg, 1 Vovcb-r 1946, Sign-turn: Hertz Ch*-rh.niser",

This, your honor, I think, givrs n sufficir -tly bmd picture of

rtiat transpired r.t th' Rev nsbruack Conc-ntr tion Cnap, *,a ve

nubrdt tht this r.ffidMrit prob'bly contins ell th- arterial facts

%

to constitute a confession to th- crime charged »;ith the exception,
p rhr ps, of the voluntary chr.r*.ct r of th' am-rixx ,trl suLJucts used,
who w r op r.t:d on; And, that of course, rill be proved in r. fa

cinut-a.

/,Q to call th« first of r s-ri-s of four ritu-.ssus.

T 1 '’" PRiSIT": B 1 fore th witness is called the Tribu>^ 1 will take

~ fifteen cinutn recess. ^

(A r:crss ms taken)


19 Dec A-J?-l6-l-BleJclry<3w)
Court 'fc. 1 /


THE H/JZSHAL: The Tribunal is again In session.

HE. UCHAHET: Hay it please th: Tribunal, the pres*cution has brought

•

four Polish girls from Trrsaw; and ve will hr.vct thorn t-stify before thin

Tribu*-al, It is tho contention of the prosecution th't these witnesses

we;-o subjected to th” alleged criminal experiments ct‘Ravensbruock.

•

The condition of these witnesses is, of course, a nett f of n<vlicel

opinion. For tht reason »> have bed each of these four Polish girls oxin-

inrl by Dr. Alexander. have also had X-Hr.ys me do of their legs; -nd we

have also oa^c photograph -1 of these girls. The prosecution propos.-.s to

%

placo the first witness on th- stand, hav* her sworn and subjected to
direct exaain* tion and then cross tion. *‘« would like at that time

to have D r# Aloxcndnr tajee the.*t> <A before she lervoa; have hin-sworn

. • ^ ™ •

end qu'lifiid by th' prosecution; a--d then present to tho Tribunal his (

medical report on that’ p rticuUr witn ss. t tht time both witnesses

%

would r-tiro; th“ second firi wouli be brought t» th- st nd; and the swno
procedure follow- d. Of course Dr. Alexander would rv»in und-*r orth
during the whol. eours of his testimony.

s

If th-. Tribunal would find th t procedure sat is lact or;, * think it might
mrke for clarity rn (< for a sor*- consecutive r cord.

TIT PRFSI"E*T: Ta it th- theory of th'- prosecution th t "r. Alnx-ndur
would not bn cross exaxiin-d upon *w ch i .dividu' 1 case hut cross rjc-uained

• ft* r .11 th- witi* ssi s *hrd t->stifi--1?

!T.. UcH NTTY? ‘o, ini- -d sir. It is our thought th't th" drfcnsi. would

b* given th- op ertunity ef cross examining Dr. nl.\ and-.r while h is o-i
th- stand testifying with r* spuct to thi. wlt-.nso who is nlso th .n on
th*. stand. . |

THE PTSIDS'": That would b* tl» prepr.r r.-thod.

HeHa , 'HX: Irs, indeed,

THL TRESIDDT: "roceod.

«E. I'cHAITT: I :sk th't th* »dt..-uss Marin Br*. 1-Plnst-r b-. called to

78 /.


th* stand


19 D*c-A-JP-16-2-eicJcl'ry (aw)

Court ?*oi 1

r ‘

THT. PRESIDENTi Thn Hnrahftl will au=eoo th» witocsr Mr.rin Brool-
Plater .

IS, SCHOTT: If th Trlbury.l plr.asn, these witnesses will testify
in Polish. -

V RIA BRCEL-PL’.TTP- , a witness, took the stand a*.'i tasVifimt through
nn intrpret-r r a follows.

PT THF. PRESIDENT:

f

Q, '’itn'.ss, at to your nns*.

A, Karla Bro'l-Platwr.

. Holi up your right hrtri r.ry l bo sworn. Uo you anawor th't th»
evidence you shall give in this c*s- shall bo the. truth, th. whole
truth, nothing but rto truth, » help you God?

A. I swear.

THT PRSSr.LNT: I will j dainist>r th- o th ngr.io to th' witn'.sa nod
you will repeat it to her. itopr t the o'th to thr witness, Int-irprot. r.


THE IfTIPPRETiR: Yoa, In Polish.
P v THE PRESIDENT:


19 Dc-A-GES-l6-ln-81ckly{ sw)

Court No. 1


Q. Lo you swer that the ovil-nc you o 11 give shall bn th«
truth , the. whol £ truth, .v.d nothing but the truth, so help you God?

A. I UK..' rZ~^

(The witness repented oath.)

TrE PRTSirCVT: h ~s th* Interpreter been sworn, Hr. Prosecutor?

HR. HcH.jrj: I rather doubt that hr has, Your Ho-.or. I think for
purroaoa of thn record t.nat the Interpreter should slao bo sworn in
this ease.

' I

THE PR'.SIDENT: Its ’"t:rpritr will ris*.

r w ' ?i x R i jt-ijus r;jTKs

THT PRESIDE"! State your oa,

• * i • .

THE IWEPPRET7R* Dr. Julius Pnnk.

TT PRESIDENT: Piers- rpet this o»th after a.

I sol'enly swcr.r that I i*Hl pi-rfom qy duties'r.s interpreter to the
7ribu-.nl ecoordi g to th- be st of ny ability and skill .".d th'.t I will
faithfully k'. p secret 'll natters which cay con*- to ny knoul'dgn in
th* coursr of cy duti- s which is ot -opr-ssly aad*» public by the
Tribunal. So help no Con.

(The Interpreter reported th" oath.)

DIPXCT EXiaiIf-..TICJh

BY MR. UsH/.TT:

’'it— ss, yjur ’>w is Karin Bro-1-Plr.t- r?

A. Yea.

Q. Your l'st nr = « is spelled B-r~-o-l F-l—•-t—i-r?

A* To*. ^

C. You w- r bom on 18 Deceeb<>r 1913 in ’>rMW^

/.. Yes.

C. You r.re ’ citizen of Poland?

/-. Yns.

'. Hav coa ft.-r* voluntarily to t- sti fy in this proceeding*:

«. Yr.S,

”h-.t is ycur present u :nc c-Kress?

786 ^


19 *Mo -A-CLS-16-Ia-Blricl«y(»w)
Court fc>. 1


A, '>.rs>* f Groho'jska ^tr--«t, ftufeor 171, Flrt 9.
C, “’ltn-s« # w« you arrri'd?


7*6 r.


19 Doc A-GES-l6-2a-8l£kley (Si)
Court to; 1


C


A. to.

Aro your pr rents living?

A. Only ay nothor.

Q. r itncss, will you toll the Tribunal wh^t r.'fcicrtion you h vo r ceivrxi?
A. I finished high school and Junior college in BJola i’eglanska and
then the college of consorcc ->nd i .dustrirl college in ’.'cron*.

'lien were you graduated x’roa this school of cofm.-rcn r.r<d industry
in ’•*» rsaw?

A. In June, 1936.

f«. 'h t did you do rft r you finished school?

A. I wrmt to the hospital in PJrij n^.r Bug, near River Bug. eft r
six nontha of pr-ctico, I work d 's n bct riologist’ in th hospital.

/nd how long did you st t.y th«re? In other words, I want you to
toll us what whet you did until 1939.

A. Till th*< 11th of S.pr.rnbnr 1939, I worked in tho sane hospital as
bacteriologist.

0. I soc. h-t happened on the 11th of ^eptreber, 1939?

A. On tho 11th of ^ipt'ebor 1939, the hospitnl where I worked v^s

"VACurtwd. I got orders to go with the rest of the perso- nl cf tho

hospital, '.ft-r two weeks of trrv. iling, . • -rrived in Hungary. Thoro I

stcy* d elevn aonths And was intern'd in a c-*np..'-ft< rwnrds I was brought-

by C.,rr=An3 back to Poland. I irrvdi t« ly ert- red’ th*
x

I worked th-.r. until I was arnsted.

«. bon did you coou back to Poland froo Hungary?

On the li t of August, 1940.

You say th-*t you then entered the Polish underground?

A. Yes.

.• "hat work did you do i«, tho underground?

•. I was the chi f of c-sstne* rs.


787


19 3ec-*-A3chm-i7-l~I>enieli (ST}
C ourt So. 1


c


^ And what hapoeoed as a result of your working in the underground?

V ere you ultimately arreated ?

A I vat arreated by Gemma on 12 June I 9 U 1 .

^ Old you undergo any trial?

A Tea.

^ By what aort of ©urt were you tried, and what wno the reault of
the trial?

A I vaa aot tried by a court, but I vra only inveetigrted by the
Gcatapo, and during interrogation I wra Tory heavily berten.

Q a ni -hr.t V|>a th* reault of thia inveatigntlon? V hat did they do

with you after you were crreated?

• • •* •

A I stayed in priaon, and then I waa aent to the concentration camp
Hevenebrueck.

Q Tou noan you atryed ia oricon in Poland, ie that where you were kept?

A Tea, in Poland, in BJela Peglrvaeka, and in Lublin.

< A nd then when Mid y&4 go to the Ravenabrucck concentration caap?

A On 23 Scpteaber I 9 U 1 .

* And how were the living conditiona in Havenabrueck at that tiao?

A Livln.* conditiona in the concentration caap Pjwenabrucck were not
bad at that tiao, but n few nontha later they fcrsv vorae and worae.

Bach of ua had our own nuaber, and oy nuaber wna 7911. 3*cauec the
German a were then at the top of their power, they were very heu-dity md v
ve could not talk with then. Ve were not treated like hunra beinga,
bn*, like mnbera. Er.ch officer, or each SS-vouan, could bent ua ae nuch
88 ahe Wiahed. If you were auaooned to the hoanital or to the ^lock
rn were not allowed to put eny queationa. Living Conditiona were htrd
tecauae we had to work twelve houra a dry.

\ Vhet aort of work did you do ia the crap, vltneaa?

A I erxrled atonea in wheelbrrrova; then I worked in ahop work, where
«trrw Bhoea were produced. I braided atrav which wr.a put into water which
WRS nixed vith lyo. The lye ate off the akin of ay fingers. I worked
there until I vaa operated on.

' 3ov t before ve eon* to. that - Are you hard of hearing, witneaa?

- 788 -


els (3£)


Court Fo. 1

C

All— bard of hear! nr beoause of bea.tlngi received oa ay heed by
the Gestapo.

\ Tou stated thet you were operated on. V ill you tell the
Tribunal la your ova words Just when that happened and dl the circus-

t/—

stances surrounding it?

A T he operrtlons started to be p«rforned In the concentration eanp
awensbruedc oa the 1st of Au-tuet, 191. 3efore I vas operated on,
five of ay coomdes had been operated on before ne, and they died. Their
nones were Ectx>l, Eeroska, Prust, Papanovibsch, and Eretka.

I was trken to the hospital on the 18th of Soveaber, 19 U 2 . a police
vosan cane a n d brought a list with naaee of prisoners, and ny none vns
on this list. Ve all asked vh»re ve were going, but ve got no answer.

Ve were brought to the hosplta.1, so-called Revler. There ve waited
aseut one hour In the corridor. Ther "e were tricen to Dr. Oberhauoer,
who tc.Vd us to disrobe, who exa .lncd us and then sent us to be X-r/yed.

My breasts had been E-rtfed. Then I v<«s sent back to an ordinary
hospital roon, and I was put to bed.

* Vitness, was there anythin.; wrong with you that required an operation?

A Fo, I was entirely healthy, except for ny oars.

^ Were you asked if you would agree to undergo m expjriaentrl opera¬
tion?

A I was not askod, and none of us knew why vo were brought to the
hospital.

- Q

^ well, will you continue to describe what happened?

A Ve stayed in bed two days and our temperatures were trken. After
two days c German nurse arrived and shaved ny legs. T hen I started
ouspectin.: that I would go for an operation. I could not defend nysolf,
as none of -y comrades could, becroee the conditions were such that I
could not defend ayself; I was so ill-treated and I had had so nuch of ell
of this cnap life. V P were alvrys told, "Tou will never cone ba.ck to
Poland," and they said that we would not leave the can?.


- 789 -


19 B«c.-A-Ki:-lT-le-a* a i*l« ( 32 )
C ourt to. 1


C

allTB. Therefore 1 hoped that maybe I would die during this operation
md that it would be the end of ay suffering.

On the 23rd of Soveaber, 192, I got no food. About noon I vna given
en Injection, and I felt stunned after this Injection. In the after¬
noon I was pat on a «3all hospital cart and brought before the operat¬
ing room. 3efore the operating room Schldrovsky and Oberhnueer were
waiting for ae. Oberhauser asked ne whether I had artificial teeth.

Chen Schldrovsky gave me an Injection. After this injection I loot
coaaciouaneoa. I recovered conaclouaaeoa and noticed that I wee back
in the hoapltel rooa. Oberhruaer atood before ae and alnpoed ay fnce.

I ahlvered with cold. I vra curioue to aee how =y leg'was. The loft
leg waa not ope rated .on. The right leg vae completely nuab. I did not
notice any wound or bandage, Vat a f'v centiaetera beneath the kneo I
noticed a aaall hole, ra If it waa after a sting given by a pin or
needle. Around thla hole there wra eooothing like powder. 1 brushed
off the powder, tut I didn't aee anythin.;.

At night I developed a very high temperature. I had thla toaperature
for two daye. Ky le.- waa very swollen from the toeo up to tho hip. In
the neighborhood of the mkle ry leg wr.e quite dark and very swollen.

In the evening Oberhnueer cane with aoae other doctor. I did not know
thla doctor, and I don't remember hi a face.' He ezralned ny leg end oald,
In German, ■ far tig*. that le *11.

I wr.e then token to the operating roon for the aocond tioe. I don't
remember how I there, t hen I woke up after the operation I wa.e
a-gnin in cy bed. Hy leg wre bandaged fron the toe vp to the knee. T he
bendege wea triangular la shape. Ky leg pained ne; I felt* severe pain,
and blood flowed fron =y leg. At ni-ht we were ell clone, without any
care. I heard only the acreanln of ny fellow prisoners, md I hoard
also that they raked for water. T her# was nobody to rive us my water
or bed pane.

la the aornln.: Oberhcuser cant md *pve us injections; c German nurse
helped her in doing this work. I remember that there were great quantity

of Injections,Intravenous injections; a reat qumtlty.

- 790 -


19 D-c-Ar*-I >1-Jfe xt .w-r L
Court X 3 . 1


Thon I h- d a hi^h t-zsi-rcturo cad I c .old n;t roa^ab-r anything. A fen
'■-va later I was tr_\-n to th- basing r;^, Vhn th- dressing *3

A

ei.-ngtd I a&s out t sleep. After this changing >f dressing, pus drained
fr.a ay n ux> and ill the bondages sen. wet. A few d-ys lr.tcr I w-s t-.kan


Vin to the drcafdn. roM. In the are33in^ roars ks Oborh-.uoer, I
herrd her voice bcaftua- the bl/mfed nr 3 out over ay eyes. I felt that
soaebody took oil the bandogs. I nr s told to lift ay leg and keep it
like that. 9 cc-aso I felt a sever pain, I removed the blr.nkot froa jy
he--.d -nd ttx .irot thin: I &*.n »-s ay log. The leg a-.du - horrible ia-


pr-ssion on 3.. T t '--a on the flush, :.-ar ae stood Oborh-uscr -nd h a-n


in rn oper tin . . gleans nd was Londo. At that tiro,

I didn't kna* .-ho x -.“a. As .57 ler crilsed no fre-t pr.in I rtu-tei
shouting that "it poihs and t.“v» doctor cr y. nu-.r no -.nd told t!*
Cern-n auras to ,lv. .is. narcosis. I kept his face In ay nlnd. hhon I erne
back tg>ay .aan^-l roaa I ftili.d ay kLIov prisoners who* had performed
the oper'ti>n on o. -nd I described the f.-c- of the «nn. I was told by
other irisA.-ro that it z &t h*.Vt Ovun C^bhrxcts

Q.- ..It-, t.i .1 *.0 the A-n Gebh-.rdt in the defendant's dock


r.ow?


A.-

r

* •


.'irot ring.

-cd?


A.- In th- -irot rim..

IfcHA i'raa which -nd is sh- counting s_vvn? ’

THo I;.T_ >raa th- right. Th- nitness s-ys that she rs do-

talcen. The nintn rr. sitting in th- i+rax, rir. . It is very difilcul$ ior
'•'i’-n-so *-« ;--co: nice fiia b-c-us- he it c'.-n -d .-nd she is .iot Quito


: itiwss, just t-;- ;:-:r tiOJ and toll Which of tlx a-n
in th- dock you t Ink is th- a-r> you s : id was Cebh rdt, if you s— ny
3 «jch aon. II you can't, <hy ju^t t-11 us.


19 Dcc-A-i£':-i5-l-K rro*-FL
Court Ko. 1

c

Mu SSEVAHOS* Ur, President, aay I a-'kt aroqtnat? The witness
• not ayo gl d n^ in roliah but she la spooking Russian. I would bo very
grateful if aha would speak so loud aht wt could rll h«fy. nhet tho
int-rproUr ia euyir-€ to * u ~r =na »hat she r-plies to hia.


t


i


is


791 c


19 Dec -i-IC—1^2-Xrr r ai-FL


i ■

Court No. 1

C

THE The uitr~ss says that she recognizee Dr. Gobhardt

in the Seventh am sitting in tbs. first ring.

'S. ifclJ-HLY: I Irvw asktc you twice. You can count the seventh ram
froa oith-r this end of tho dock or thr't end of the dock, lion, which
arm is it?

THE Li73!P.-3T.Ii: The sun — whor- the a Lace is ertpty — tho Last
sen sitting in tho first ring.

If.. ifcH«: r .Y: './ill you have the witn-as cour.t froa thie end of tho
dock. Shie arys "in the first row." i.ill she count down the naaboE of
aen o-ra until she arrives at the one ah- says ic Gobhnrdt.

THE ?R -jB_I T: The Tribunal asks the witn-ss to stop down and pass
along the docl: rue" indicate Ux- jj,

(The witness stcooed down Jroa the stand, orssod along the dock,
and pointed to the defendant Gor.zken who stood up.)

IfeHA! .Is I suppose th-t the def —iSe counsel will wish that tho
r-coru show that she reoognited the d-fend-nt Gor.zken i s the ('-fondant
Gebhrdt.

THE tP.EeD J.T: The r-cord will so show.

'IcHA.'^T: mow, witness, trill you continue to tell your story.

A.- I .raa tolc by ay coar"des that this was Dr. Gobhardt and since
tfrt tiae I havm't s-en hia. r.te third change of ay dressing Lasted
a very Ion; tij and I w.-3 put to sleep .also. Ctocrteuser usee to visit
ut» each day tad give us injections. She always geve us injections hor-
Self. The Gormn nurse c-alled us by l-tt.rs and naubers and not by rvuai8.
I had the let*.rs PTfcl. Near ae was the orison.r DJiJown-. wi^h tho let¬
ters ?. Z. Her 1 ias hot -p.r led c...

£.- .’ltnors, when did you leave the hospital?

A.- Or. 15 J-.ur.rj 1?A3.

•

"or- r o~ .ell at that bii>? ‘./ere you cur-d?

A.- I was not cur-d at that tiae but alrc-s for other'people wore


792


19 Dtc-»-lC-lS-2-!txroB-FL
Court to, 1


C .

n-ed-d in th- r.nd therefore I was sent to the block.

What work did you do in tho block?

*•"1 i^y in bed bu cause 1 could not walk. Ir» spite of that I had

to b- on the roll call place each day. At the i.nd of Uay Oberhnuncr

told -11 o^-r-tod girls to coa- to the- hospital. Shi. looked -t our feet
arri told us that we


792


19 DeC-A-iS-lD-3-Xarrcw-FL -

* * *

Court Ho. 1

Z : * C

w.rt fit for soif% to wrk. 31cod flowed from ay 1 -g and it was very
difficult for ac to walk, but I tad to carry out the ord-r. i'o had to
work. I was put in Slock 15. In this block the chief of the block was
a Czech woom *io tried to hulp us. It occurred to her ttrt it would

be good to ck us as workers in knitting stockings on the block as it

•

was don- by elderly women. But ev«n this work w-.s very hard for mo. I

could not sit lone tia- because ay leg g.t numb. At the end of June

•

the scars on ay L-i ojx-ned again. Bloo^ and pus drained from ay wound
during one-week. It was not only ay case, but the legs of many coe-
rados also blod. I saw, in the wourda of ay fellcw prisoners, pieces
of wood, glass, and vV-n a thread with a brokui needle.

I


i


793


Court So. 1

19 Dec 4S-A-ASch=-19-l-Sa*law ehn

The doctor* -to u*ed to worie witi^Cberhaaser refused to help ue. s hey
told u* that they did sot vest to inprove things, by Cberhauser. I did
sot hear it syself hut this -a* reseated to ne hy ay coaradea -ho asked
for help froa the hotpltal doctor*.

* q, Sow, witness, -hen did your wound heal cosplately7
A. In the end of June.

q, June when, vfcet year?

A. 1943.

Q, acd 70 U -ere operated on in Xovesber 19-2, 1* that right?

A. Yo*.

q, Did you object to thl* operation?

A. I could not protest against tho operation hccau*o like condi¬
tion* in tho casp dido't allow it. We -ere not allowed to nay anythin*
and wore boaton for having aid ocoething. I -ont through thi boating
and troatsent. than tho like condition* in the casp changed, thon wo
orot eted bccouae the oooratione -«ro porforned constantly on poreono
who had been operated on before. Soso of then -ore operated on five and
alx tlaoa. In tho spring of 1943 -• decided to Protest n*nlnnt it. «#
preferred to die than to euffor again, but our protests gave no rooult
because the operation* wore carried on. At that tine the conn compandor
-a* Cboraufsohorln Langofcldt; and thon vc nade a orotoot in writing
agointt those oporatlon. Ve got no or.wcr. They tried to onorato on

• mo other of ny cceradee. Smo of then o*cat>ed and ran awny froa tho
hospital. Tho»o who wore weaker and could not uscooo hod to be ooorated
on again. For several norths there-vere no operation®. At that tlno
Lengofeldt was difsisoed end Bieni took her niece. Cn tho 15th of
August 19«3 cccc girl# were sus-oned to the hotpltal. ‘hoy %idn't want
to go. They know that they were going to be ouereted on. 3ionr

a

appeared on the sane day and told all the prisoners to get out of the
block. In thi. block lived ell girls who had been operated on before.

There were sixty girls after tho operation .and about a thousand -mod

$

-ho had not been operated on. All wonen in other blocks were not al-

lo-ed to loeve their blocks. J ien* cano end told ten girls to get out

794


Court 5c. 1

19 Dec 4*-k-A£ch=-19-l-Sasl«v (IEO


of the rick. She put thea before '-the block end asked then vhy they did
not foilov her order and did tot appear In the hospital.


t


794-A


Cwrt So. 1

19 3C 46-A-AScfc-19-3-S*#law <2X)


The tenant* aald that they kn*w why the? vera aurnoned and they did not
vast to be operated on egalc and that they preferred death to the opera¬
tion. riecs told then that there was no txieation of an operation and
geve then their vord of honor thet they would go for work outaido tho
eessp. She told thee to follow her because, ea aho said, she wanted to
show then a paper proving that they would be aent for work to the factory
out aide the cesp.

I forget to sentloc that people, vcoen belonging to tho Lublin trena-
port, were not allowed to work witaide the cenp. That la why ay fellow
prisoners did not believe Blent, txit thoy followed Blunt and atood boforo
her office. Bicat left thoa atanding befcre her office end mt «lono to
the ecntcos. Xn the canteen were Polish prisoners vho underatood Oaronn
vary veil, toeing those ten orla';nero atcndlng boforo tho cffico, rnd told
then thr.t Blaus aaked for SS non to holp to got tbon by forco to the hoa-
pital. "hen tho ccorado* ran awry and alxod with ua. Aftor a whllo,

Biar.s appeared with tho caap police and told theeo ton glrla to got out
of tho rink. Hobody followed tholr ordor. Than tho police woaon, who
knew very well the operated » an, drovo then out of tho rink, ncconponlod
by tho ecsp police, and they woro takon by Blent to tho bunkor. I know
that oporntl /an had been perforood cn ther. in tho bunkor bccauec tho girl*
»*ho hod ur.dorgono those opcrcticna told no that.

Q. Vna it clean in thi* bunker, witness? Vna It clean in tho
bunker; were the ce-nditlona hygienic?

A. The bunker wna a kind of orison. The cells were vory anall,
dirty, end dark.

Q. And they operated -n these ten Polish girls in this bunker?

A. Five of tbSQ were operated on in tho bunker.

Vhen did this happen?

A. r s the 15th if August 1942. They told u* thoy did not get food

f-r three days ea a punishaent that wonen froa thia block did not- betray

their c-erodes. The 6hutters vero closed rad we had to stay In the block

in darkness with ait food. After three days, vhen the d-.ors were opened,

tho aejorlty of the prisoners were lying on the floor - fainted. I know

795


Cctirt Sc; 1

IS Dec 46-A-ASch=-19-2-Sealev (»)


c

that the operation* had been performed In the bunker and in very bad con¬
dition* and that during the operation the


t


7S6-A


lc, -ec--A3ch=>-lS- T -3aslav -j£-

Court Ko. 1 C t>

♦

lege of the operated vossn were dirty and oovered with
aud. - *

Q- Hov do you know that, witness?

A. I Know It froa ay ooarades who case back and
told eo trvit.

Q. J.'ov, can you tell the Tribunal approxlr -.toly how
cany ?oll3h girls were operated on In Havensbruock,
experimental operations?
a. about seventy.


4


- 70S -


19 ^eo-A-A. 3cr.H-2G-l-Le38or-( AS)


Court BO. 1


Q. in d do you ino w whether any of thee died as a
result of these experimental operations?

a. Five persona, -hose names I gave at the beginning
cf my deposition.

And those five were only ones that you know died
as a reoult of these operations, Is that right?

A. 'fas, out I <naw also that five other girls who
had undergone operations had been shot do-n. One of thoa,
Oknonevska, was supposed to ee sot free, in 1945 I met her
or. here way back to Poland. I talked to her and she told

mo that she worked with a German peasant on his faro.

%

q. -'ore any cf -these girls who were operate*: on
released from the concentration camp because they under-
•or.t the operation?

A. No.

q. Do you still suffer any effects from this o el¬
ation?

A. Yes.

3 . That are they?

A. I have very often temperUure and xy leg causes
me sometimes very servere pain ‘so that I cannot walk.

q. Do you h.ve to wear special shoes?

A. Yes, I must wear shoes cn very low heals and very


light.


Q. That Ip that answer again please?

A. I mu3t wear vory light ahoec with vor$ 7 "-w


heels.


jo you have any limp --hen you walk bare-footed?

A. I limp, but not much.

Q. Have you received any operational tre ;tmont since


you left Ravensbrueck?


- 797 -


• • ^

19 ~'ec~ A-i-3chw.-20-l-Les90r- aX


C<-urt No. 1


3. I would like now to aibait to you T pictures.
-“' 3a - aro, if too Tribunal plaaaa, Document Number NO-
10c7, a, b, and c. They are not In your Honors' document
booica. They have Just baan recolvod. They vara talc an only
a few days ago and they ara not in the document book.

JUDGT 3£BRING: VU1 they ba, ::r. HcHaney?

MR. MoHA.'SY: '.fall, Your Honor, I don't know whether
wa will bo able to hava photographic duplications of all
of thasa or not. Ve can wjry easily make photostatlo ooplos
but thoy really do not show up vary well. I hava got


*


-797 Br-


1C ,-20-2-Leascr.

Ccurt Fc. 1

rn« *0'- here which I would lika to pass up to the Tribunal . -vr.

LY VR. MoHpFEYi

 * • li

k »itr.C53, will you leak et th-so phot orn-hs and toll tho Tribunal

if they oro pioturoa sodo of you horo in Kuornborc?

» Yea. • -s *

k 4 J -0 f*ll throo of thon pioturoa of you?
a Yus.

k Thrnk you. 1 auboit docunont nurbor Fo 107$r, b, end 0, aa ‘’roauou-
tion Exhibit 20$. Sow witness, 'ill you plotso r-aovo thu atookinp and
aheo fron tho lor which ycu wore oporctod?

(hitnoan prooo.ca to conply with request.)

JULCJS SSjRII'Oi $cw. sen you subnit.thos. ph to.-r-’"ha bo that *\ p-rmnont
rooerd rev bo. ntdo unless ycu cotunllv hr.vo tho original* end c oepy filed
with tho Jocrotrry SonokrlT

•R. MotU/SYi toll, Sir, we h:.vo original oopioa nr.do fr ■ tho norativoa
which tr- new in this exhibit folder nnd whl -,h has boon Exhib t nunber
20C. !.o will paaa th->t to tho So or o ter;’ Ccaorol end it is thon 0 part ->f
tho poraanont roc rd. 1 horo pf.ssod thoau up for Yaur honors' inapooti^n
end tho *ribun».l rr.y ':e<.p those.

t 0

JUL3S 3SBRIFC« L.i you h-.vo two «ota cf cooh of these piotur-a for tho
Secret* ry Sen- :1? <«e require tho Soorct ry Conor* 1 to Uocp nil of hi a
r-orrd in criwir.nl end duplior.to, 's you knew.

UR. UoF-TSYi I aoo. i.o will bo -1ft to provldo hin with n sot, yoa.

BY MR. Uori/^’SY:

k Y it no as, you h*vu rea- ved the, stockin’ and shoo fron your leg’
a Yoa. * 4

k -.ill you pi or. so at-r.d up end wclk sr uni to tho front -f tho witnoaa
box sc thet th-. Tribunal rey 50c? (..itr.-ss conplloa.) >: c,w will you turn
-round, plena-? Turn orcund Cf'.in, rcro slowly plonso, 'little, dctc, turn
rrounc just 0 bit ncro; new thon st'nd still thorc.(..itneas jc-plios.)
a 11 ri^ht, you any sit dewn new, plo so/ Hhon die ;ou lovo R vor.bruock.


witness’


19 -3cn.-20-3-L:sc.r.(Gj)-

Court So. 1 r ^

On the 23 -pril, 19*5.

^ »hft era you doinj ntfwt ¥

^ I ’•uric no» in tho Hod Gross in hrsen.

W Jicw, do you soo or.y one in tho dofond'-nta' dock you rooo^itc
to bo tho person Oborh^usor?

. « Yos.

W Is sbo r worr.n witaoss, I did rot ret the rrswor nlocae.
i. I rooo^nito h,r.

^R. SoHuJ'SYi Ho will oak thet the record she* tJv t tho witness hr.s
roooy.Uod tho loan in the dock f.s bair.r Ob.rhcuaor.

JUIGS SEBRIHGi Tho roccrd rcy so shew.

HR. ’loBtfEYi I think I.heve r.o furthor quoatiors ct thia tino, Your
Boner.

JUDGE 32i*fti:;Gi lo cny of defense oour.aol or.ro to or.'aa oxominc thia

s'

witr.osa in tho rvrninr whon court c >nvonos?

Ik. SSI LI (Cour.aol for lofond- r.ta Gcbhrrdt, Oboriuuaor ->nd Fischer):

I hr.vo th- intor.tion to eddroas sever 1 quostionn to tho witnoas tomorrow.
JUDOS SZLIRIUG: Thoro will bo quosti'-n» proenuaJed thon, I undoratr.nd?

t

DR. >21LL j Yoa Sir.

JUDGE 5S9RI! : G: ~r. Kcl* ncy, the witnoas will bo nroducod horo in tho
•ajrninj;, thon, for crcss-ox:.:inrtier...
kR. KoB.J’SYt Yes indood. Your Boner.

THE PREJIDSdTi Tho Tribunal will be rocoaaod until 9:30 to-mr-w
no rnin-.

(Tho Tribur. 1 tdheurnod until 20 Dcoerfc.r 19*6, ct 0$?' ’.ours.)


ONAt A IK III V t S MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


Roll 2
Target 3


Volume 3

Dec. 20, 1946-Jin. 6, 1947


*


NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS


OFFICIAL RECORD


UNITED STATES MILITARY TRIBUNALS

NURNBERG


TRANSCRIPTS

(EngKfty


20 D«<«mb«r 1946 - 6 January 1947 pp. 800-1166


Official transcript of the lacricnn Military Tribunal
in the natter of tho thited States of Aaarica against
Karl Brandt, ot al., dofendants, sitting at Numborgj
jonaany, on 20 Docoabor 19U6, 0930, Justice Beals
presiding.


God save tho Ifeitod States of Aoorica and this Honorable Tribunal


Tboro will bo order in tho courtroon


TOE FRESIDS.Ts Tho Marshal will ascertain that tho do fondants are


THE MARSHAL* May it ploaso your Honor, all tho dofendants aro


presont.


THE PRESIDENT: Tho Secretary Oonoral rill noto for tho record tho


prosonco of all tho defendants in tho courtroon.

MR. HARD!: May it pi on so tho Tribunal, duo to bobo unforsoen


circxnstancos tho arrival of tho witness has boon doloyod. If it reuld


bo possible to rccosa for ton or fiftoon ainutos ponding tho arrival of
tho witnossos it would bo very cuch appreciated.

THE PRESIDENT: Tho Tribunal will bo in recoss until wo aro notifiod


of tho arrival of tho nocossary witnossos.

(A recoss was takon.)

THE PRESIDENT: Tho witnossos having arrived, the Tribunal will


MARIA BRCEL-PlATrR - Rosunod


BY DR. SEIDL (Counsel for tho dofondants Oabhardt, Oborhausor, and


Court o.. 1 (

20 Doc 46 -U- 1-2 -LJO- Poator


Q. On the lat of ..ugust you roturnod to Poland, pid
you roturn to tint port of Poland which was doscribod as
tho gonor&l covornnont?

A. Yos.

ft

Q. r-hon did you join tho rosistanco novonont?

A. Ono nontfa after ny roturn to Poland.

0. In tho roaiatrjieo novonont you wore tho chiof of
group of noaaongorc?

A. Yoa.

Q. In thia capacity did you roceivo and pc.aa on to
loedora of tho roalatrnco uovenont— did you givo r.nd paaa ^
on ordora to thon?

A. Yoa, I ted ny own group r.nd I diroc tod thia group.

Q. It waa tie niu of tho roalatr.nco novonont to ronovo ^
tho Oorac-n rulo in tho gonoral govurnnont end, thoroforo,
you Joinod thon, ia that corroct?

a/ Yoa.

Q, Fraa your toatinony which you *y.vo yoatorday it
could net bo clearly auon whr.t kind—how tho trial wr.a
conductod to which jou woro eubjoctod. Mc.a It in that caso
a ao-cr.llod court narticl in tho gonorr.1 govornnont?

A. No.

Q. You otr.tod yoatordr.y th..t already on tho 1st of
Auguat 1941 oporations woro tricing plr.co, Aro you quito
suro of that? Aro you quito auro tbc.t you can oxr.ctly ronom-
bor that dato?

A. Bio oporationa started to bo porfornod in tho
concentration ccnp Ravonsbrucl: on 1st i-u^ust 1942 bocauso I
was arrostod in 1941.

Q. Ihat is not in 1941 but lh 1942.

A. Yos.

Q. You fcavo tostifiod yoatorday that several oxpurlnontai


Court Ho. 1

20 Doc 46 -li - 1-3 - UG- ^oator


aubjocta woro opori tod on on aovs-rrj. occr.alon8, .'.a ci rosult
of the prcvloua oper .t Iona did thoy h'.vo high fovor r.nd
aovoro pc-ina?

u. I u-a told by thon that thoy hod all great pains


and high fovor


20 Dac 4£- _^5-3-l-K«cfctt (WC)

Coart I

r

* VitBMS, you further tc.tlfled yesterday that the experimental

v

subjects were other prisoners in this block. Were all the people re¬
siding In this block sembera of tho resistance BOvement?

Ji I don't know.

H H a* many voacn of the resistance moveeont were all together
located In thle block?

1 I d>n't know.

«* Up until 1943, you hare Bade tone Tory general statements. Do
you know why thoee operation* wore carried out In the bunkor and not
In a well furnished operating room and who carried then out?

▲ The operations were carried-out In the bunker bccauae thlo was
that kind of furnishings and I don't know by whom they were performed.

H Tou also stated yesterday that It was a goncral conviction In
the camp that the sesbers of the roeistance movoment would not return
to Poland any botc and would no^ be able to.leave tho cacp allvo; was
this view elao expressed by nofibers of the cesp administration?

A Its, it was said by 3lns.

«i Tou also statod ycetorday that women wore being transported to
Lublin: these vonen who had been transferred to Lublin, were they also
Berbers of the resistance oovcrxnt.

A I did not say yeetord-y that transports of prisoners woro sont
to Lublin.

v* Then, I must have misunderstood tho testimony of tho wltnoon.
Cn tho 23rd of April, 1945, you had left tho camp; was thle done under
the auspices of tho Swodlsh Bed Cross? ^

A Ho.

H I.o not have any further questions.

3T ASTCEJ1T TLUCOK- ICE TEL XSJ1HTUET KWGWSIT:

S Hltncse, you stated that the operations In the Ravenabrucck
Casp began on August 1, 1942? '

A Tcs.

9C3


20 Sec <6-M-.Ci 3 _2-2- V e«hia (*JC)

Court X*

V* Do ycu neen by that tb* operations on «oaen?

▲ Tes.

^ Do you know that before operations were being carried out on
voxen that operatione were also carried out on sen?

A X did net hear it.

* X thank you rery such.

•s. FBASIXSSTj Xa there any further croee exaolnatlon for this

witness on the part of the Dcfeneo Counaol? If not, the proeocutlon

% •

nay proceed.

HS_DIRiC? XXiHIJATICV

BT K?.. MC HAJC.T:

Witness, were you ever naked to sign a paper in BaTonebrucck,
vhich would ahov that your lnjurioa to your leg had accurred for ron-
aena other than the operation, which you hare doacribed to thle Tribunal?

A I did not aign a peper, but I wna warned and told by Coasendor
Tuchrlng, who wanted sc to aign auch a papor. The contents of thle
paper vat 3 follows: *Tho undersigned, Hario Broel-flater, certifies
that tho scars, which I hare on sy logs, wore caused by an aocidont
at work.*

I haro no further questions to direct to the witness. I would llko
at thia tine, if there is no further croes-oxralnation, to call Dr.
Alexander to the stand and havo his giwo his export tacdical report on
this witness.

Tri PBhBIIIST: Is thtro any further crosa-exanlnatlon of this wit¬
ness on the part of any defense counsel? There being nonc,^you aay pro¬
ceed.

BT m PHiSIIfcWt

tfc Tho witness will state his nace?

A Leo Alexander.

*111 you repeat this oath after so:.

X swear that tho evidence I shall give shell be the truth, tho


whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help re God.


2Q Uo ^e-KJ>SS-2-S-Hect*a

Overt I *


(The witseii repeated the oath.)
ia raisinTo* »«y •» dova -


DS&CT ECAMISaTICS


ST MB. KC HaAT:


s Ton M=« !• L «° Alexander!


A Tee.

^ When and where were you born?

A X wao bom October 11th, 1905, In Vienna, Anetrla.

H arc you a cltiien of the United S t etce!

A I have boon . citl*en of the United State, eincc 1938.

H Koto you etudlod and practiced nedlclne?

* I h,.. .tndi.d -nd ja-.otl..d ■«»=>« *«■ 1932 *° 1934 , ' Dd

b

practised .lncc tho.

(< Vhat le your proeent occ^atlon.

j. H, nro.cnt ocenpntlon 1. that Of »«rolo,l.t »i

Joychiatrl.t in th. olt, of *.ton. * «. -no tU. I -

„ . rc.ccreh in *o.«o. «•« «-»»«• 1 - *" “ tM

of torlno. other prir.t. nnd pnblie taqlM* in *o.ton .nd it.

Ylclnity.


* lx. yon no. notln, .. - n>o='.l nonouitnnt to th. =ocrot.ry of


War!


A I har, now been appoints special expert con.ultant to tho
Socrotery of *ar.

k Sector. 1= neeri* * quo.tlono, -111 yon plcr.o pnu .0 for

. to. no..nf. .o thnt th. int.rpr.tor «. intorpret tho «—» into

4

Goman?

A Tc. .lr.

„ I vonld like to pnt . oorU. of qnc.tlon. to yon concern!* yonr
.duct ion end cdic.1 experience. Wd yon rco.lr. yonr d«roo in
Vienna, Austria In Juno of 1923?

A Tee sir.

* ix fro. 1923 to 1929 did r» .tndy «dlclno -t the Vnlrerolty
of Vienna Medicine School at Vienna, Austria!


20 fee 46 M.fiK.? 4-Meehan
Conrt I


(TJC)


f


I let. tlr.

^ led froa 1927 to 1928 did yon Intern In the Second fepartnent
of Medicine at tfcs University of Vienna Hospital*.


1 Tea. sir


i


Court Mo. 1


20 Doe 46-11- 3-1 - UG- Minrbuck


r. Did you r-coivo your 1!.D. dogroo fron tho University
of Vienna Audical School in July, 1929? -

... Yoa air.

Q, And fron 1929 to 1931 did you intern in nouro-
payehiatry nt tho Kouropaychiatric Dopartnont of tho U n ivor-
aity Hospital, Frankfurt?

Yoa air.

Q. ~nd fron 1-31 to 1932 woro you a roaidont in nouro-
psyehiatry, tho Nouropaychlatric Dopartnont of tho Unlvoraity
Hospital in frunkfurt? ~

*es air,

• Q. Hero you a locturor in psychiatry end nourology ct
Poiplng Union Aodical Hospital, Poiping, Chinn i n 1933?

A. y «le air.

Q. .*nd fror.; January, 1934 to Octobor, 1934, a cllnlca 1
assistant ct tho ‘.Torcoator St..to Hospital, </orcostor, tlaaaa-


ehuaottta?


A* Yoa air.

Q. .;nd fron 1934 to 1941 on instructor in nourolocy
at tho Harvard Hodlcal School?

• • ... Yoa sir,

'1*. «.r.d ovor. tho aauo period woro you nouro-pathologiat

at tho Boston City Hospital? 4

«. Yoa sir.

1. Free 1G5S to 1941 ; research associato at tho Boston
-Str to Hospital, Boston, “aasachuaottfl?

A* Yoa air.

$. And fcavo you also pr_cticod in'ot. or hospital* In
Boston?

A. Yoa air. •

Q, Are you now a neuber cf tho editorial board of tho
Journal of Nouro pathology and Ixporinontal Uourology?


Court Ko. 1 ^

20 Doc 46 -H - 3-2 -UG- Hinaburck


a, Yob air.

Cl. And Wurc you, fron 1941 to 1942, an aaaocir.to pro-
feocor of neuropsychiatry at Duko University Nodical School,
btrh&a, North Carolina?

Yus air. - • „ j

*, Es.vo you boon or.loa. - of abaonco fron Duko sinco
that tiuo?

Until ny roalgnr.tlon In January, ‘46.

Wore you, froa July 1942 to January, 1946, in tho
Nodical Corps of tho Unitod States Ar;iy?

... Yea air,

What runic did you attain. Doctor?

• A. ^ajor, .nd later appointed Lioutonr.nt Colonol In
tho Officers iuiaorvo Corps, Unitod Statoa ..rv.y.

C. Did you servo as ohiof of tho aoction of nuuropoyciu-
try, 65th General Hospital fron July, 1942 until Ur.y, 1945?

... Yob sir.

Q. And thr.t was tho Unitod Status ..my Oonoral Hospital
which ?orvod tin Ei ;hth Air Forco in England?

... Yus air.

“. ~nd woro you on dotc.chod aorvico with a 0-2 Specialist

a

s *

li-sk Fcrco, Sixth Aruy Group, in tho Auorican occuplod ifonos

_ T - r r|T -.V . . — - -• • — »r - - 'll

of Gdrany on special order3 fron Suprono Headquarters, Alliod
Expoditionary Tcrcos fron “ay, 1945 until Soptonbor, 1945?

A*. Yoa sir..

r .. A ou str.to you rosif.nod fron Duko Unlvoraity in
Jrnuary, 1946?

... *03 sir.


<1* Tthat have you dene sinco tl..t d; to?

«• I hayo returood to practico of nourology and psychia¬
try in Dos ton, ..nd I havo taken evor tho positions uentionod

at tho outsot of ny testimony; nacoly, thoso of Associate

306


Court Ho. 1

20 Doc -.6-11 - 3-3 -UG-HIn: buck


Director of Rosourch at the Boston St. to Hospital; Consulting

•

Neurologist and Psychiatrist to ti o Tashlngtoni:.n Hospital,
nd v rious ether public and private hospitals in Boston and

*

vicinity.

Hou, Doctor, aro you a uoabor of a nu. bor of nodical
associations?

... Ajs sir. X an also r. Diplouato ^nd foroor Exanlnor
on .the ..norican ~oard of-Psychic.try and Nourology.

C;, Could you rv.no just : fow of tboso nodical sociotios
of whicl you .to a uonbor?

huorlcrn Uodicr.l Association, .-aorican ilourologioal
Association, -ooriem ..ssociation of -'ouropatholo'jists,

/..eric, n ..asociation of ?sychopatholo 3 iata, Association for
ho search in Horvous .nd i«ontr.l Diseaso, Ki.rvoy Cushing

I

Sooiot;-, «.-iorlo:n Association of Pathologists and Brctoriolo-
giets, 3oston Society of Psychiatry and Hourology, How England
Psychiatric Association, and a number of otiors.

IV- nk you. Now, Dootor, Trhat oxporionco havo you
h- d with nodical leg. 1 work, if any?

. ... Cor.cidor .b3o , both in civilii-n pr .ctico, in univer¬
sity teaching, end in jnlitary praotioo.

Q. Couid you doscribo tl at oxporionco in Just a bit
ucro dotail? ^ .

... It ccns, stc in serving as an expert to courts, both
civili;n courts and nilitaxy courts and to.-ching i.ethods and
principles of ox.ninr.tion and tostiricsv to nodical studonts.

Q. 4. t oxporionco hr.vo you Lad with cr.scs of trcunia
or injia*y with or without subsequent infection?

A. Consider..bio, cspocir.lly during ray tine ..t tho 3oston
City Hospital end in tho .‘-ray.

-Vat experience have you had with tho roading of
X-rays? • 309


Ccurt Ko. 1 ^ %

20 Doc 45 -I! - 3-4* - U - Ninabuck


Likcwiso a groat deal. I served cr.ong others as

ex_leer in X-rnya of tho skull, spino ond, vorvous s^ston .

on tho juries* 3o.-.rd of Neurology end Psychiatry.

0., Hew, Doctor, I will ask you If you br.vo undo a
physical oxixination of Vrlf- Drool-Plater, tho troann sontod
to your right?

... 1 have • .

<1. .xd wore X-rr.ys of tho legs of this wo urn nodo undor
your supervision?

Yes, r.t tho 385th Station Hospital.

Doctor, I an having hnndod to you Docunont N0-1O88.

... Yos sir.

.. Hill you pleaso idontify for tho Tribunal whr.t this
docunont la? „ .•

* i + .

... This docuuont la an X-ray ex »d a print nado thoroof
of tho right log of tho witnoss,. Hiss 3rool-Pl..tor, which
was undo by Captain dorllch end his assistants r.t tho
385th Station Hospital, and which I studiod thoro with tho
Captain .ftor thoso woro driod and couplotod.

.xd this X-ray wr.s do undor your supervision?

... It w.s r.t uy roquost :nd undor ny # —*1 would say —

-. °ndor your direction?

... Yes, ..t uy direction. I have no supervisory function
at tho 383th Sa tion Hospital, but I directed thorn what to
t .ko and told thou what I w. ntod ;xd whr.t it was dosirod for.

*1. You watched thou ik.ko It, did you?

I did not watch thoo iaako it, but I askod thorn to
do it. Ytoon 1 returned to see it it was properly l.bolod,

l *

- d I h -vo no doubt that it actually, in effect. Is tho X-ray
of Hiss 3rool-Plater's logs.

”. .xd you identify it as_ such?

... I identify it as such.

^ .10 \


30 Tee 46_-_2JG_3_S-Sicnbudc (TJC)

Court I

>

M2. MC =A2ET: I would like to rffer Comment HC-1068 as Prosecu¬
tion i-xhibit 310. If your Honor* please, of course the original of

this exhibit 1* In fact, the negatlre. Hoverer, I under*tand they

•

are subject to the deterioration and I would therofore aek learo of
the Ccurt to submit, instead of the original, a print thereof.

TEL JUS I CUT: That procedure say be follo-cd.

31 M2. MC Hiai: £*

H Sow . Victor, I would appreciate It If you would simply proceed
to explain to the Court what you hare done In examining thie women and
what you haro to report on your examination. I would appreciate It if
you would do It In non-technlcal language insofar as possible and
where technical words are necessary, I wish that you would please ex¬
plain ther to the Court as well as you can,

A I will, sir. My task could be facilitated by asking the witnese
Miss 3roel-Pl*ter, to reaore her shoes and stockings, If that pleases
you and the Court.

<* And, Ifector, it might be well if she oored her chair around
to hor left.

A If sho aovod her chair here in front whero one could see hor,
it would then appear —

k Are you sure that chair is secure?

JUTC1 SE33I23}; Qjctor, si^ 0 * 0 X 00 Ju*t put the chair orer to tho

side.


A Thero io a special reason for that, sir, becauso you will see
hero that the right leg, at the calf, is rotated inward and drops %!ovn
to whore you see that rotation. That Is due to atrophy, the loss of
what is known as —


3T MB. MC

<* i'ow, Just a minute, Ifector. Tcu are not able to hoar?


30 Dec 4&Jt-ZJS-3-6--'lcabudr (TJC)


X I -ill stay hare. Thie la due to loaa of what la known as
the peronel Berra, of the peroaei narre, nerrouj peronaoue. The
Bueculatnro of the right calf which la applied by the percnel r.erre
la atrophic, as you will aea hare.


... ..a you soo h«r* there _ru two deep seers, one six inches lone ovur the
lateral *art of the ri^ht calf which you see hero, deep, rotroctod, and hard,
an 2 also painful; another ono four and a half inches lone, lateral to tho shin
Thore is - diminution of touch, p-ain end txap j*:ture sense in the distribution
f tho norvus cruris lateralis, i*ich is tho akin branch of tho puronea. Thank
you, disa Brcol-Plctor.

The X-rays sh .w as coin findine, thickoninc '-nd irregularity of tho niddlo
third cf tho shaft of tho fibula. This has tho appearance as a result of
uirect trauee to this area without fracture, includine ruaevnl of nuscular
attach- onts.

Q. Dcctir, ear. y-u shnr tfwt particular area you are talking about on tho
print so tho Tribunal uiy soo it? Hold it up and turn it aramd so that they
can aoo it.

... On tho ,rint, it is hero.

JUEGd SiSUNGi £ork it. Doctor, with tho lottor n ;. M .

... The tooihhin,; an - tho ond.

..nd how is it ycu described this oroc "A," Dxtor?

... .j tho area sh-wind irro^ailatiry of tho niddle third, or you nay call
it tho t-.ro than tho up.-ur port of the lower half cf tho shaft of tho fibula.

1 . :.nd ehr.t is that irregularity? Did you say it was a thickonlnj of tho
Jiono?

... Thickoninj, irrojularity with thick cnin, which c^uld bo —

THS PR 3ID3.T: ‘.fould you talk a littlo nearer tho nicrophono?

... Yes. r .hich is duo to trauaa without ccoploto fracturo.

JUCG- 32AIJC: Doc tor, nay I surest .thr.t tho aicrophono tha\ stands at thi
k~rshal*t. d-sk c-uld also be brought, over and you could stand on that side,
and I should think thon you w.nld at have quito so ouch difficulty. Thcro is
a card on it 40 feet lunj.

It is neat likely -ue to tho r^soval of tho taiscular attachaents in
this r«^on _f the r eronca, tho extensor hrllucis lon^us, extensor di^itorur
lunjus, tho lend ext-ns r of Uw too, tho flexor hrllucis lon^us. They insert
at tho point of abmroality, -<nd it is thoir function that is seriously
iepnirod in this patient; hepco it is probable that tho trauua to which this

613


ch*ag« Is duo consisted essentially to the reaoval or destruction of


"hat effect does this Injury which you hare described have upon
the witness now to your right?

A It Inpairs her function of gait and stance, eapecially, she can¬
not stand -nd maintain herself on her toes and the right leg le not an
useful as It would naturally otherwise bo. It is essentially the pic¬
ture of perocneal palsy which Is duo both to interference vith the
perooneal nerve which runs through the region In which this experiment
vss carried out as well as through necrosis or the removal of the nueclcs
themselves. It is a eonblncd picture of nervo and ausclo loss.

ii Then you would say that there was Injury to the bone, to tho
nusoles and to tho nerve?


A Tes. The thickening of the fibula at the pint shows that tho
percostuc In this region aust have rcactod to olthor trauma or tho
lnflaamatory procoss or In view of tho exact location


to tearing off

or Bluffing off of tho muscular attachments. At this point we soo tho
effoct of the scar without knowing exactly which of those throo procosoos
caused It. The oxact correspondence to tho muscular attachments suggests.*
that the Injury to tho bone and perooetua In this case occurod 'because
of tho neercsis or tho removal of' these muscles.

\ Do you have any further findings to report, Doctor?

A Jfo sir, oxccpt the ono, that psychologically the patient Is of
excellent cuallty, a woman of first rato Intelligence and ability as


well an character


*“• KC HAHATi I have no further questions, your Honor.

THk PHiSUkSfc Doos defense counsel have any questions to propound
to this witness on cross examination? So examination? Then tho vitntss
=ay step down.

XB. MC HAST: ?he Frostcution would like at this time to have the
witness Eerolcwska called to the stand.

IRISIEES’P: Pid I understand you to say that the witness Eladie-
lawa Harolevska be called.


I


20 Dec 46- K -A Sch a 4-3-Fwrln (FJC) .

Court I

• C

ZLATlSLArfA IA3CL*rfSSA, a witness, took the stand and testified as
follows:

5T TH* PttSIIMT:

«i As tfca witness her nese?

A Karolswska.

The witness will be sworn, ftj you solemly swear that the evi¬
dence which you shall give win be the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?

(The witness repeated the oath.)

90 FBZSII1ST: Be seated.


DIR1C? IXAKIaATXCS


BT MB. KC HAKT:


Qt Vhat Is your aaac, please?
A Kb: ilewska.

A-d that Is epcllod I-a-r-c
A Yes.


w -w-k a?


H w cro you born on 15 Kerch 1909 at Heronan ?

A I was born on 15th March 1909 in Ycronan.

<* You are a citlson of Poland?

A Yes, I ac a Polish citlxcn.

 *nd have you coao hero as a voluntary witness?

A Yes, I caac here as a voluntary wltnoss.

H Yhat Is your host address?

A Varsaw, Insynlorska Stroet, So. 9, flat mabor £5.

Arc you carried?

A So.


<4 Arc your parents living?
A So, ny parents arc dead.


20 Doe ♦6-X- CK - S -I-Prtcc (PJC)

Court I ..

T ^ C .

!»

4 Mill you tell the ?rlbunel whet education you havt. received?

A I finished clesentary school and training school for teacher*
and I finished It In 1939.

S, And what did you do between 1928 end the beginning of the war
in 1939?

A ! worked as a teacher in a child's school in Grudcnz.

Vfc And when did you leave that 3ob/

A I finished sy work in June 1939 and I went for cy holidays.

•

\ *nd did you go back to this position after your holidays?

A Ho, I didn't oo bo back because the war broke out and I stayed
In Lublin.

t* And what did you do while you wero In Lublin?

A I lived with ay sinter and I didn't work at all.

*t More you a seabor of the Polish Boslstancc Movement?

A Ti w, I was.

<1 And what did you do In the Polish Bcsistanco Korean*;?

A I was a sessonger.

And were you ever arrested for your activity in \h-- Boslstanco
Koveaont? .

A I was arrested on tho 13th of Fobruary 1941 by tho Oottapo.

 Mas your sis tor arrested with you?

a Two sisters and two brothers-in-law wore arrested with no on tho
sane day.

H hat kFpo=*d to you after you woro arrostod?

* I was taken to tho Gestapo. t

\ And what did tho Ocotapo do with you?

a "he firot day tho Gostapo took =y personal data and cent so to


the prison In Lublin.


S Ar? then what happened? Just gb on and tell tho eospjoti story
ebout shat -he Gaatapo did with you and vhuic you went7

A I stayed Wo weeks in the prison la Lublin Pni then I was taken
again to the Gestapo. ~ ere I wes interrogated and they wanted to force


se to


— 816 —


30 Dse 46-K-G*S_5-2_P ri et (TJC)
Court I


f ' .

V.

ecnfes* what kind of work I used to do in the Besletance Movement. The
Gestapo vented =* to fire then the wise* of persons with vhon I worked.

I did not vent to tell then the nases end therefore I ves beaten. I was
beaten by one Gestapo mb, with brief Intervals, for a very long tine.
%en I ves brought to a cell. TSro days leter at night I ves tekon again
to the Gestapo for interrogation. Thero L was beater.‘again 1 stayed
In the Gestapo office oer. week and. then. I was brought ngain back into
the prison in Lublin. I stayed in the prison till the 21st Septcaber
1941. The- I was transported with other prisoners to the concentration
easp Bavensbruock where I arrived on the 23rd Septcaber 1941.

k low, witness, bofore you continue, will you toll tho Tribunal
whether you wore evor tried by any court for tho criao of boing a aombor
of Beslstance Kovssontt

A I was only interrogated by the C^atapo and I think that the
sentoncc nust have betn passed not in .•& prosenco bosauso no eontonce

o •

havo ovor been road off to no.

^ right, *111 you toll tho Tribunal what happened to you at
Havonsbruock?

a At Havonsbruock our dreesos vero trken away froa us rnd wo ro-

sr

eelved tho regular prison drees. Chen I was sont to the blO'Jc und I

•

stayed in ouarantinc for three vcoks. After throe weeks vu vero takon
to work, ’ho work was hard ph-sical work. In tho opr lag V was gi/on
other work and I vac transferred to the work chop, which was callod in
Goman Bctrcib. The work done by sc was there also ve*y hard and I
had to work one week in the daytiac and the next at night. In thf spring
the living conditions in the caap grew worse and worse and hungor began
to reign in the ca=p. Tho food portions were saalltr. Jo care under¬
nourished, very exhaustod, and we had no strength to work. In the spring
of the sano year shoes and stockings v..re tekon away fron us ani we had
to walk barefoot The gravel in tho hurt our feet. Tjo no at
tiring work was so-c: ltd "roll cells whore had to stem eovoral

hours, scactiacs even four hours. If a prisoner wanted to put a piece of

017


30 Dee 4«-KJ3S-5_2-Priee (TJC)
Court X


paper underneath her feet ehe «u beaten end ill-treated In an inkman

^ey.


817 A


♦


20 Dee _JiS_5-3-Fr i ec (TJC)

Court I


Y c had to stand ob the roll call place at attention and vc woro not
•Hewed to nove our hips, because then wc were supposed to prey and


we woro not allowed to pray. .

H Sow, Vjtnoss, were you cpora.’.cd while you -eri in Bpvensbrucck
concentration c*=pT
A Tii, X was.

<t *hcn did tlat nappe n?

A On the 22nd July 1942, 75 prisoners froa our transport that came
froa Lublin were called, seasoned to the chief of the caap. He stood
before the emp office, ar.d present Eogcl, Handel and ono person which I
later rocognlxed Dr. Fischer. b'c were aftorwprdo sent back to tho
block and we were told to wait for further Instructions. On tho 35th of
July, all the wosen froa tho transport of Lublin woro suanoned by Mondcl,
who told us that wc were not allowed to work outsldo of the ensp. also,
f.TO woaen froa the transport that caao froa W arsaw were suaaonod with us
at the s^ae tize. He wore not allowed to work outside tho c^ap. The
noxt day 75 wo-cn were sua^oned again and wc had to stand boforo tho
hospital in tho casp. Present wero Schledlauskl, Oborhauscr, BosonthAl,
Eo^cl and the nan In when I recognised afterwards Dr. Fischor.

Sow, Witness, do you sco Obcrhausor In the Defendants' dock here?

TH1 ISTlRPRATiB: The witness ask for pcralsslon to go noor tho
dock and to bo able to sec thca.

HE. HC KAHkY: Ilease do.

(Witness walking to dock and pointing to Dr. Cbcrhauscr.)

HE. HC EASE?: And 1 lecher? f

(Witness pointing to Dr. Fischer)

HS. H r -aJLI: I will ask that the record show that tho witnceo
properly Identified the Defendants Oberhauser and Fischer.

T>2 PRLSII2JT: The record will show that the witness correctly
identified the Defendants Cbcrhauscr and Fischer.

I think at thio tine the Tribunal -ill take a recess for fiftoon


(A recess was taken.)

eiB


ninutes.


2C Dec *6-'<Z_&-l-SeslRv (WC)
Court I


P


c .

THi HJBSsiL: The Tribunal Is no- In session.

ST HB. HC aUi-T:

<i Vitaaii, you have told the Tribunal that In July 1942, sose
seventy-five •ollsh girls, who were In the transport froa Dublin, were
called before the ea=p doctor* In Bavcnsbrueek?

A To*.

% Bow, were any of these girls selected for an operation?

A Cn thle day we did no* know why wo:were called before the camp
doctors and on the sane day ten of twenty-five girls wore teken to the
hospital but wo did cot know why. lour of thus case back and six stayed
In the hospital. On the seat day six of thea caao back to the block
aftor having received soac Injection but we don't know what kind of In¬
jection. *c did not know what kind of lnjoction. On the 1st of August
thoso six ..Iris wore called again to the hospital; these girls who
received Injections, they were kept in the hospital but we could not got
la touch with then to hear froa thes why they wero put In tho hospital.

A few days la tor, ono of ay eoaradcs succeeded to got closo to tho hos¬
pital and learned froa one of the prisoners that all wore In bod and
tholr log* were In casts. On the 14th of August, the saae yorr, 1 was
called to the hospital and ay naae was writton on a plcco of papor. I
did not know why. Besides ac, eight other girls wore callod to tho hos¬
pital. *© wore called at a tl -o vhon usually executions took placo and
I was going to bo cxccutod bceauso beforo soao girls voro shot down. In
the hospital v C wero put to bed and the hospital roon In hlch vo stayed
vao locked. Be were not told what we wore to do in tho hospital and
whon one of ay ccaradee put the question she got no answer but who was
answered by an Ironical anile. Then a Gersan nurse errlvod and gave ae
sn injection In ay leg. After thin Injection I vosltted and I was put
on a hospital cot and they brought ae to the operating room. There, Dr.
Sehidlauski and Hcsenthal gave ae the second Intravenous injection in
ay arc. A while before, I noticed Dr. Fischer who wont out of the
operating room and had operating gloves on. Then I lost ay consciousness


819


a-i whan X revived I noticed that I vac In a regular hospital
recovered sj oonacioueneee for a


20 Dec
Court I


elav (IJC)


fT

Sv

while and I felt serere pels in sy leg. Then I loet cy consciousness
axelr. I reg-ined sy consciousness in the aorninf end then I noticed
that sy leg was in a cast frcn the adcle up to the knee and I felt a
rery strong pain in this leg and the high tseperrture. I noticed
alto that sy leg vaa swollen froa the toes up to the groin. The pain
vae Increasing and the tesperature, too, and the next day I noticed
that aose liquid was flowing froe ay leg. The third day I vaa put on
a hospital cart and taken to the dressing roos. Thor. I saw Dr. Tiocher
again. He had an operating gown and rubber glorc* on hie hands. A_
blanket was put o»er sy eyes and I did not know what was done with tny
leg but I felt great pain and I had the isprossion that oooething nuat
hare been cut out of sy leg.


20 Dec 46Jt-JF-7_Usard (7JC)

Coart I

,

These present veret Sehlldauskl, Hosentfcal, and Cberhauser. After the

changing the dre««lcg I vai put again In the regular hospital room.

•

Three day* later I van again taken to the dressing room, and the dress¬
ing was changed by Dr. Fischer with the assistance of the eamo doctor,
and I was blindfolded, too. I was then sent back to the rcgijlar hos¬
pital rocc The next dressingo wore aade by the camp doctors. Two
weeks lator we were all taken again to the operating rooa and put on
the operating tables. The bandage was reaoved, and that was the first
tire I saw ny leg. The Incision went so deep that I could sec tho bone.

Vc were told then that there was a doctor froa Hohenlychen, Ifcctor
C-obhardt, would coae and exaslno us. Wo wero waiting for his arrival
for three hours lying on-our tables. When he case a shoot was put ovor
our eyes, but they removed the sheet and I saw hlo for a short moment.
Chon, wo wore taken again to ovp regular rooos. On tho eight of Sept¬
ember I wao sont back to tho block. 1 could not walk. The puss was
draining froa =y leg; the log was swollen up and I could not walk. In
the block, I stayed In bod for one week; then I was called to the hoo-
pltal again. I could not walk am* I was carried by ay coaradon. In the
hospital I act soso of ny ccsredcs who wore thtro after tho operation.

f ♦

This tlac I was sure I was goi-g to bo executed boceuao I saw an aabulanco
standing before tho offico which was used by the Gomans to transport
peoplo Intended for execution. Then, wc wiro taken to tho dressing room
where Itoctor Oborhausor and Doctor Schldlauaki oxaalnod our- loge. W 0
wero put to bed again, and on the sano day, In the afternoon, I was taken
to the oporrtlng rooa and the second operation was perforaud on ay log.

I was put .1 sleep In the sane way as before, having rccolve^ an ln'oc-
tlon. lad, this tl-.c I saw again Itoctor Fischer. I woko up In the re¬
gular hospital rooa and I folt a strongor pain rnd hlghor temperature.


821


SC Ue 4 '_V_6lS_8-Ul*klcT, (MC)

Court X


?he svaotoae were the saae. The leg was swollen end the puna
flowed froa ay leg. After this operation, the dressings vero changed
vy p r> I * f cher every three days. More than ten days afterwards we wore
taken ai»aln to the operating rooa, put on the table; and we were told
that Dr. Gebhardt was going to cos* to oxaaine our legs. Mo waited for
a long tlao. Then he arrived and examined our legs while wt wore blind¬
folded. Tjiis tine other pcoplo arrived with Dr. Gebhardt; but I don't
know their nases; and I don't rcetsbor tholr faces. Then vo wore carried
on hospital cots back to our rooas. After this operation I felt still
worss; and X could not sore. M^ile X was In the hospital, cruelty from
Dr. Cberheusor was ptrforaed on ae.

Mhen I was In ay rooa X aadc the reaark to fellow prlsonors that
ws wore operated on lr. very bad conditions and left hero In this room and
that wo w.-c not given even the possibility to rcoover. This rcaark mist
have boon hoard by a Ocraan nurse who was sitting In the corridor bo-
causo tho door of our rooa loading to the corridor was oponod. Tho*
C-eraan nurso entered the rooa and told us to get up and dress. Mo ans-
worsd that wo could not follow her order because we had grort pains In
our logs and wo couldn't walk. Then the Gornan nurso came with Dr. Obor-
hausor into our rooa. Dr. Cbtrhnusor told us to dross and con© to the
drosoing rooa. Mo put on our dreisoe; and, being unablo to walk, wo
had to hop on one log going lr'o tho operating roon. Aftor one hop wo
had to rest. Dr. Cberhauacr did not allow anybody to help us. Mhon
wo arrived a.t tho operating rooa, quite exhausted, I>r. Oborhnusor appeor-
ed and told ua to gc back because tho change of dressing would not tnko
place that day. X could not walk, but sosebody, p prisoner Chose nano
I don't rcaoabcr, helped at to coac back to the rooa.

\ MVrese, you have told the Tribunal that you were oporatid on
the ecccnd tl-.c on the 16th of Scptoubor, 1942? I f that right?

A Tcs, I did.

 Mhen did you loarc the hospital pfter this second operation?

A After the second operation I left the hospital on the 6th of Cet.

H Mas your leg heplcd at that tinel
. 822


20 Dse 46J<-aS_a-2_3lai:l07 (TJC)
Court X


A Ky leg wap swollen up; caused os great pain; and the pus Brained


froa =7 l.f.


4 Here you able to work?

A I va« unable to work; and I had to stay In bed bccauoo I could


not walk.


* Do you rcaesber when you got up out of bod and vero able to walk?
A X stayed la bed sewers! weeks; and thon I got \%> and tried to


walk.

* How long was It until ycur log was healed?

a The pus was flowing free =y log till June, 1943; and at that
tine ay wound was hoalcd.

<< Here you operated on again.

A Tes, I was operated on »^aln In tho Bunker.

i* In the Bunkor? That is not in tho hospital?

A Hot in the hospital but in tho Bunker.

<4 y l ’ you explain to the Tribunal how that happened?

A Say I ask permission to toll sonothlng which happened in March,
1943, March or Tobruary 1943?

<4 All right.

A At tho end of Tchraury 1943, Dr. Cbtrhr.usor called us -nd said,

0 •

■Those f iris aro now guinea-pigs"; and wc woro vory well known under this
name in the camp. Then wo understood thrt wo wero pirsons intondod for
cxpcrlctnts and. we docidcd to protest against tho performance of thoso
operations on healthy people.

He drew up a protest in writing and wo went to tho camp commander..

r

Jot only those girle who had boon operated on beforo but other girls who
wore callod to the hospital cane to the offico. The operatod on girls
used crutches and they went without rny help.

I would like to tell the oententt of the petition oado by us. *t,
the und*.rri-ned, Polish political prisoners, ask Herr Commander -rhothir
he knew that since the year 1942 in the c-*t hospital experimental opera¬
tions have taken place under the name of guinea-pig (das sind Mecrochwcin-
chcn), as 923


30 Dec 46JU5LS-S-a-3lakl6y (*JC)


Court I


explaining tbe meaning of those operation#. V« ask whether we wore
operated on a# a rcanlt of #cntcnce# passed on us boeausc, as far a# wo
lf-cv, the International 1 m forbid# the ycrfornance of operation# oven
on political prisoner#.

Vo did not fut any aniwor; and we were not allowed to talk to the
cot—aider. On the 15th of August, 1943, a police woman c«ao and read off
the nano# of the ten new prisoner#. She told u# to follow her to tho
hospital. V# refused to go to the hospital, a# wo thought that wo woro
intended for a new operation. The police woman told us that wo were
going probably to be sent to the factory for work outsido tho camp. Vo
wanted to make sure whether the Arboltsant was open because it was Sun¬
day. The police woman told ue that wo had to go to the hospital rnd be
examined by a doctor before wo went to the factory.


20 See 46JUSLS-S-i-3lftkIcy OWC)
Cowt 1


explaining the aeanlng of thoee operations. W« eaic whether wo wore
operated oa *■« a result of acatcnees passed oa as because, pb far bb wo
teisw, the international lot forbids the ycrforaance of oporptlone cron
oa political prisoners.

Ve did aot get any answer; aad we were aot allowed to talk to the
cosroaeder. On the 15th of August, 1943, a police voaan c«ao and read off
tha naaea of the tea new prlaonera. She told ua to follow her to tho
hospital. W# rofuaed to fo to the hospital, as we thought that wo were


lntoaded for a aew operation. The police


d ua that wo were


going probably to be seat to the factory for work outside tho eaap. Wo
wpnted to sake aura whether the Arbcitaaat wat opon because It was Sun-
day. The police wooan told ua that wc had to go to the hospital and bo
oxaalned by a doctor before wo went to tho factory.


Court Ho. 1 ^

20 Doc 46 - I! - 9-1 - ~UG - Burns


v*o refused tc gp thon bocr.uso wo wero suro tint wo will bo

kept in tho hosi '.tel cm d opor..tod on r.gr.in, . All prlsonors
l

_r, tho or.:.p woro told to a icy in tho blocks. All of tho

reran whf livod in the s: :a c. m r!~ w>*o_ „ T 17 ;.a ’.-i - lulu ‘••0

• •
icevo tho bio z. —d juend in lino .‘oforo t't> ’lor': ton r.t r.

tloo . Then tho Wjr o r Bins r.p.jonrod rnd cr.llod out ton

\u.a ,j>u r:;on" fcj or u:.« uy neno. Wo wont out of tho lino

erd . trod boforo u 0 i inth blocit^in lino. Thon inz sr.id:

'' h- dc. ycu at rnd so in line r.a if you noru to bo oxocutod?"

,’c told hor ti .vi. of c rations woro worse for U3 thru oxocution3

.1 V: r.t wo would prof or to b- oxocutod rr.tbur thc.n to bo

op r Ud e . tin. Bias tuld us th..t sho ni<,ht glvo us work,

ti oro w .a r.- ouwstion of car bai:ig op err. tod on but wo woro

•oi. +K. 0 . sent f~r Move outside tho Ccup. t/o told lror thr.t

_ - "

wo ..uce laiov: tfci.fc prlsonors belonging to cur group r.ro not
. ll.woc to io vo tr.e c:up r d go outs. do tho crxip. Thon sho
told u. to follow hor a:to hor office, tiw.t sho would show
us r. pc.por proving ter. I v-.- . re going to o sent for work to
th. fr.ctory outaido tho crap. ”0 followed hor .nJ \to stood
before Ju*r office. Sho ontcrod 1 or office for r.wbilo ..ni
tr^n ’.rent cut nd want to tho c ntoon vhoro tho C.j p Cocnr.ndor
w.-.s. She Iv.d r. cor.foror.co with hin preb. bly sking hin whr.t
to do vitK us. 'lit stood bofero tho offico r. hr.If hour.

-n tie .*.cntlao one. ,\'o3lev-prisoner sho used to work in tho
c.ntcor Iked by us. Sho tcid ua th.t 3inz naked for holp
fxrr: SS :on to telco us *07 forco to the h.oapatnl. '•'> stood
:'or cwfcilo r.-.id then -inz c:\ao out of tho c.ntaon '.-.cuorupcniod
by ti o Crr.p Coeax-rdor. 7a.. Steed for r.wr.ilo norr the c~np
- to. io v<.ro nfre.id th t S£ non would ca.;0 to t -„<o un so

• s s-ixd aixud with other pooplo steading boforo tho

• * •

bu.-.ck. Be oh 3inz end ti o c;.;p police eppoerod. Ihoy drovo
;s :v3 trou cr.o lines by force. Sho told us theft sho put us


Court "o. 1 "■

*• * ; — — » . •

20 Doc 46 -I*. -9-2- LJG - Zurns

into tho bunkor- as punlshcontj that wo did not follow hor

ordors. In oach coll were put flvo prlsonors although ono

coll was lntondod only for ono person. Tho colls woro qulto

dr.rk; without lights. J/o s tayod in tho bunker tho wholo

nigbt long -nd tho next day. V/o slept on tho floor bocr.uao

thoro was only ono couch In tho cell. Tho noxt dr.y wo

woro givon .. breakfast consisting of black coffoo and a ploco

of dark bro:d, Ihon wo woro lockod again in this dark roon.

-To woro only troublod by pooplo walking in tho corridor of

tho bunker, Tho answor was givon us tho scaao day in tho

aftomoon. Tho watch-woaan fren tho bunk or unlockod our cpll

end go? no- out of tho ooll. I thought that I was thon to bo

intorrogated or bo: ton. They t6ok no and thoy wont down

tho corridor. Sho oponud* ono door and bohind tho door stood

SS raan Dr. Ironool. Uo told no to follow hin upstairs.

rhliowin" Dr. Tronnol I noticod thoro woro otior colls, and

the so colls woro with bod clothing. Uo put no in ono of

tho Colls. Thon ho a shod no whothor I would agroo to r. snail

•

oporation. I told hin that I did not agroo to it bocauso
I h..d unlorgono c. lro:.dy two operations. Ko told.no that
this w.-.a going to bo a/tfory snail oporation and that it will
not ham tv>. I told hin that I was a political priaonor
and tl..t tho oporation ccnnot bo porfomed on political
prisoners without thoir consent.


326

*


P'


30 Use /6-X-JT-10-l~2*nlels OJC)
Court I


He told ac to lie down on the bed; I refused to bo. Eo repeated It
twice. Then he want out of the cell and I followed him. He went
quickly dovnstaits and locked the door. Standing beforo the coll I
noticed a cell on the opposite side of the Staircase, e.nd I also noticed
eoae ntn i" operating gowns. There was also one German nurse ro-dy to
give an injection. Sear the staircase stood a stretcher. That made it
eloar to nc that I was going to be operated on again in the bunkor. I
decided to defend ayself to the last moment. In a moment Trommel cane
with two SS men. One of these SS son told ae to enter the coll. I re¬
fused to do it, so ho forced no into the coll and threw ne on tho bod.

Dr. Trommel took no by tho left wrist and pulled v arm back. With
his other hand he tried to gag bo, putting a piece of rag Into =y aouth,
because I shouted. Tho second SS man took ay right hand and strctchod it.
Two ether SS nen held nc by sp foct. In=©blll*od, I felt that somebody
was giving m an injection. I dofonded myself for a long time, but then
I grew weaker. The injection had its.offoct; I felt sleepy. I hoard
Troosol saying, "Da.s 1st fortlg", that Is all.

I regained consciousness again, but I don't knew when. Thon I no¬
ticed that a German nurso was taking off sy dreso, I then lost conscious¬
ness again: I regains* it in the morning, "hen I noticed that both my
lc-s were in iron splints and -ero bandaged from the tors to tho groin.

I felt a strong pain in my feet, and a tomperaturo.

In the afternoon of the *-ac day a German nurso cone and gave mo an
injection. Ip spite of ay protests; sho ga to me this injection on ny
thigh and told me that she had to do it.

t

Tour days after this optrati'.n a doctor froa Hohonlychcn arrived,
again gave nc an injection to put ao to sleep, and *e 1 prtosted he told
that he would change the drasing, I felt a higher t.apcrrturo and
strongor pain in ay legs.

H How, witness, when wrs it that you were rcaoved frea the bunker


e27


20 See 46 -X-JP-l<V- 2 -Denicl 9 (Wo)

*;; c

eftor thla operation?

1 Ten day* after the operation performed in the bunker I vee
taken — in the night-time — to the hoepital.

<t Veil, that must have baen around the latter part of August,
i* that right; August 1943?

A Tee it vae.

i* low, was another operation performed on you in September 1943?

A About the 15th of Septeeber 1943 X was again taken to the operat¬
ing room and a further operation was performed on ay left leg.

H So' , in the operation in the bunker they operated on both lego,

*

la that right?

A Teo in the bunker I vac operated in both lege.

<c Xn the bunker operation, were your lege dirty the next morning
after you woke up; that lo, following the operation?

A Vhen X woke up after the operation that I underwent in the bunkor,

X noticed that cy feet were dirty, covered with nud, that they had not
been vukod before the operation.

k *h> perforaed thla opor-tion around the 15th of Soptocbor 1943
in the casp hospital, do you know?

A “he doctor froa Hohonlychen nrrivod. I vae tekon to tho operat¬
ing room, I w«« given an injection, and an operation was performed on
ay loft leg. *

H Do you know the naae of the nan who perforaod the operation?

A A Ciman nurse told ze that thio was a doctor from Hohonlychen,
assistant to the Chief doctor, whose, naae was Kartmenn—Dr.gEartaann.
However, I don't know whether he actually pcrforccd tho operation.

<4 Did the nurao toll you that H*rtnonn was assistant to Dr. Gobhardt?
A She told sc only that this was a doctor, an assistant, froc Kohon-
ljrchcn.

^ All right, icy, after this operation on your left leg the mid¬
dle of Septcaber 1943, did they, euveral weeks later, eperatod on your
right leg?


e2 e


20 Dec 4&-X-A.Schw.-ll-l-Zerrcv (TJft)

Court I

. s'

V.

A 'vc weeks later a oocoud operation was performed on sy left log
although pui was draining froa qy forner wound, and a piece of shin
hone waa resored.

Sow, witness, I 1 a a little hit confuaed. I thou^it you aald

1

that on 15 Septeoher 1943 they operated again on your loft leg. I asked

T' «

you If two weeks lator they terforaed an operation on your right leg.

A C B 15 Septoaher 1943 sy right leg waa oporated on, In aplto of
the wound*, and two weeks later ay left leg was operated on.

H Sow, do you say, witness, that they rmoved a pieco of ahln hono
froa you leg* In tfceae oporatlona.

A Tea, I do.

Sow, how long were you In tho hospital after the*e oporatlona In
Septoaher 1943?

A I stayed In tho hoapltal six aontha. I wac In hod. I could not
atretch ay og*. I could not aero them. I could not walk cithor.

H ^hen woro you roaoved fron the hospital?

A At the end of Tohruary, 19M.
x Vero you able to walk then?

W •

A I tried to walk at that tine hut couldn 1 t walk.

*hat sort of work did you do then?

A *hcn 1 errived at the block X stayed in bed for a tin© and then
I uoad to work knitting stockings.

v* Hare yon received any t-catacnt to eithor of your logo olncc you
were llhcratod froa Bavenabrucck?

* *•

n So you still suffer aigr effects froa thoso operations?

A I'a weak, I have no atrength to work and ay lege got swollen up
▼cry easily.

rf l*neae, I am having handed to you two pictures, lhaoc arc
Docum-nts *os. 108 1A and 10® IB. Arc those pictures taken of you here
in j'urnberg?


A Its, thoy were.


829


H I subsit these picture, as Prosecution inhibit 211.

So . f witness, vill you please renovc the .hce. and stockings fro*
, 0 th of your legs. How, -ill you step out fro* behind the witness box
asd lot the -Court sec the scar, on your legs.

(Th c -itnCBe cccplicd.)

,c- -.cm .round one. pUU.. J U . !=• Kcni Th»nk you.


Sit down no#.

you cror ..hod to coniont to nny of then. ^or.tlon. "hid, you

underwent at Harcn.brueck?

X Ken.r.

How *ny tines did you soo Gobhardt?

X 'Twice.

* 1 -111 ..It y=u to .Up down ,nd .1* oror to tho dof.ndmt.'
d,cn .nd ... whethor on not you find the nnn C-.hh.rdt t. tho doch.

<1*. vltno.B cospiled nnd pointed to the Dofondmt O.WdO
Thank you. * Sit down.

I .111 .oh that tho rocord ,ho» that tho -ltnco. properly Identified
tbs defendant Gcbhardt.

- TO. mSIHW. The record .111 tho. that tho .Itn... Identified

tho dofer/.r-t Ghbhardt in the dock.

HE. KC HiX. 1 : I have no furthor questions at this tlao.

Trl lEhSIlMT: *ill Dr. Alexander be agin put on tho otond in

0

connection with tho exaaination of the witness?

SO. XE EAXLT: Tea. but if there is any cross-exanination we con

prcbably finish that beforo lunch.

TO. FKSIIEJ 7 : Do any of tho defense counsel desire to crosc-

cxminc this »ltncss?

IT.. Sim (Conn.nl for tho defendant. C-ehhardt. Oh.rhaucor end
Tiocher): .

I do not intend to cro.n-emslno thl. -Itno.a hut thl. do., not no.n
that ny client, adr.lt the eorroetnoa. of 11 at.tnnont. -do by thl.
witness.

930


20 Doe <SJO.Scfv.-U-2^»-7r^ l«C)

Cwffi i

/*

73 P2SSU5ST: Doc. any other of the defcn.c coon.cl do.iro to

oxaslso «* ''itae.e?

(So rcipcuc.)

>18. KC HAihY: Dr. Alexander can take the .trad no. I don’t kno
haw lon«.

-3 pBASiaa-Tt The Tribunal 111 no rcoe*. until 1:30.

(A reoet. *«• taken until 1330.)


all ariaa.

:fe31*d« .’ith the purnission of tho Tribunal, I would liko to
-Alt. Jour additional questions to this ultnoss boforo oal lin - Dr.
/Jacui'-'or to tho stand a join, if I xaay. Lot«s soo. (poruso docunont)

1..DISL. V. '.u.TGIT SKA (rosuiiod)


f» "fi trass, to sun up* Is it truo that yew voro operatod upon


aix tinoa .'hiLi at tho Concentration Coup Ravonabruck?


I '.uf nix tino* oporatod on at tho Co .no on t rati on Caop at


) Do y:u laiov, a, r vdi-atoly, hoir nany venon w&ro oporatod upon
uxi'-ri un tally?


1 T> " u kn_ - .. • /.oth«.r an;* cf thosojTKxxa .rho woro oporctod upon
rl-^ntdly, dod?

.. *fus, fivo woaun who have said no to oxparinuntal opJfcxtions,


1 A:.’ i‘. thoy io as t'.u result of those op-ratiora?


.. loc, thoy ,’iol after thoao oforations.

Q . r oTo you -vor told, that you wjro conixinod to loath|booau3o


r Poli -h resistance aotiTitios?


*t thin!: the; rust ’avij boon c-alonncl to doath by


20 3jc* u^-JI^-T-Lchidva-dt OJD)
rfc '-. i

the dostopo*

*T.. r.cRW.Tii I invo no further questions. I would liko, at this
ti , if th.ru is no cr :as-a ran inatlon on thoso additional questions,
to call Dr. -Icocorior to the stand*

r?: 3HEHTX Tho Tribunal has a question to put to th. witnoss.

£ FESUE-fTi

■j To ;■ u knew the nationality of thoso wcoon who died os a rosult
.* thoso o^-rations rr any of thee?

.. TIwso .ns ion w_ro cf Polish nationality, and oaao with tho sane
tTCDsport toflother with no.

7r~ ?: 5HBVTs Has the Dofonao ary cross-ocarination of this
witroas, in connection i.ith tho questions that wero propounded to hor?
(:to responao)

TH': P-GSIOCOTs THjro boin no questions, tho Prosecution nay
proceed* Cell Dr, .loxcndor*

Dr. aSLXttZX (rosu':od)

DrrxT el-xmion

3r . : vbl IET*

U . ^IT.L.!CCai ith tho permission of tho Court —

T. ' o.'UrTo t — .list a nbnont, Dootor, I think th. record should
that his is tho sano Dr. .’J-oxanfnr that tostiflod this i»rrdn;{,

■n' f ;t ho is still tmdor oath.

T'£ I’-DSEEJTi The record will show that tho witness who is now
th. sta. ' i3 tho sarv. Dr. ilaxr.ndcr -ho tostifiud thi3 f nornin.",
(i'drossirv th. ..Itnoss) Doc ter, ycu aro still undur oath*

rr- irCSSs Toe, sir.

. *-ciair; t

" Doe*, r, • j y u c.n luctj a physical -or.nlnation of the witnoss

:Caroi..raka?

Tos, sir.

- 832 -


VO c. UV>- - .-.VfcWcrdfc
Caari 2'. 1


/

3 /jvl nor- cartain 2-Rays of this witness nade undor your
'-_cticn?

4 Tos, sir,

t

3 T?-c r, I an hsvia handed to you 'ccunonts Ho. 1089 and 1090 —

1 — :~a, sir —

.0 ill 7-U 3to.to wtoth-r or not thoao aro X-Rays ncdo of tho
lo"S A tho witness XarolcwsJca?

1 Yes, sir, they aro,

.‘I. 'cll-'.mt I offer Doc u aoPt Ko, 1089 as a Pr osecution Exhibit
212, ..n* tocr. pit 1090 cs Prosecution Exhibit 213.

• (f % s * ’ • , . •

o 3Y T. TcJvJC/j Hr./, 3-ctor, rd.ll you procood to -lvo tho
r .■ , tho lriVv:'_-l, ths result cf y ur orudnation f this witnoss

i—•

: - • lccra~., :.r.' I wbui su ost that y -u hsvo h-r ::.vo hor chair around
an’, sit to ycur 1 -ft.

(“r. .l ::.-.T-r prcooods to uwo tdtooss chair as rtiroctod)

O’. .* .'L TT.! (To tho rdtnoss) '.'ill you ploaso?

(..t thl3 Jureturo Dr. .laxnn'ur tas tie chair arraiv od for tho
.3 an' baa hor soato.’ at Dr, blexniv , .or*s loft)

IX.. -J ..VDS*’.: (Tho 'dtnoas; continuinij) This X-Ray of tho tdtnoes

1. -sbr. shews three 'istinet ;mJor scars, which fit into two diffor<nt

♦

-s . ’ -x. i*i’._nt~tion3, Tho 'ono ahero, the ol .ost ono (indicating)
i' r. ri ht lcvj consists cf a doop rotractod scar over tho ri&ht

"•rs’lar Soloes,

(l-Vhussin ti;„ witness Xar linrska) .'ill you please otpnd up and

’-p v • :1 i.-ly, (Tho -dtnoss ’.os as diroctod) Just turn,

vitco3s turns) Juet turn ra.'uaily vory si wly. (Tho witness does

irectod) Tb- 1 r-r on! of this scar, t. r.urates thr.o an’ one half

s vj v. ankle j h-ro (in’lea tin), tho rholc scar noasuros

a. half inch .s an' is half an inch wi <a. This scar, cbvi^pply,

result f anu of tho infocticn -xp.rir.onts, an’ is roco-.nizod

scar StWl in tho Suixxr cf 19u2, TJw :th_r sot cf scars,

rar jt, and they aro both involvin' tho antarior part of tho

-833-


a • <-


20 Tec*>i-Jr^l2-&-Ichnhar--t ^

C urt Sc.l .

tibia —

TH2 »R£SnEJ?t —dressing .r. .-loxander) — will ycu spor.k c:ro
slowly »o fch-t the int.rpcwters'^afl jot It?

"il. 4IZX42iTSi* (The witness) Yos, sir.

(Ccntlmiin_) 3oth -f thceo anterior scars, ovur cither le , arc rtcop)
retractor 1 ., an; 1 . inv.lvo the >cno, '/hich fo-ls ra cc un 'arnoath th. scar,
a ra; o’. uncT-.nr.css, un*.or the seers, over which th. unevenness f the Vne
cm <c felt, toth A those scars fool warn t the .olputHin fin a of the

cxrein-r. The tcrain-tint . art .f the scar, which is higher, fells vrnvir,

*

in icatin an increase' 1 circulati n in the re ion. The scar -yer the left
lc-, involvin, tho medical part -f the tijia, is five inches In one*, is
>vi usly th- r.sir’uy . f th. no ox.~rL -nt. Tho .-w ver the ri.ht lee,

is Is fiv. inci.es 1 a , nn 3/flth f s«. inch wi:o There are tw. r throo
scars, l t-r'ily r-J-eent t this bi scar, riich can n l*n>r ,.n uU n vory
clearly. The <iain scar to the ri ht is syj otric; V th f these scars *ro
rymstric t. o-ch :thor. Bath inv lvo the inner ,.-rt f the iso-'inl lino
f the ti /loj n.t the antorl r; the crost f the ti .ia, that is, the innor
-r ao’iol aspect the tibia, vhich is inv-:lvcti«

B.th of these scars inv lvo t-ie o.cX-1 ;.-rt, which -n. ,-no tho inner
y-rt f tho ti.in. Tho crest f the tiVifi is n t involve J in tho scar.

The ersst ef tho intcri-r p-Tl cf the tibia is n t inv lvo* 1 . Both A thoso
scars are the result f the expo risen tat ions. The lower scar ,n tho t-p,
r. the left, is fiv- inches p'j vo tho ankle. That is, five inches. That
n th ri ht, f ur cr.<*. ne half inches nb.v. th. .ankle. Examination of tho
X-R-ys cenfiro this impress!-, n. . _


- 834 -


-Q _ .-.-3c :.>-13-l-Lea5or ^

.jtfft ;<• 1

1 -th v - ---rays of both le^a show an area of irregularity oeasuring 6 cer.ti-
---••> in lansth involving tha lower part of the upper half of the tihia. Tho
.'.-rays show tho following; At this area which in tho Echibit I have uarked
-- y-u car. 3-- that the margin of the tibial bone is not sharp but fluff}
.. .cH—LTf; Lector, this is Do cuuent K>-1039 to which you arc referring,
is it net?

•

X. .ZZl’.Z LX’.: TvJ, Docurijjt Huoixr .‘JO-1089. This fluffy edge of tho bono,
L.-ic .tin ti-t tho outer coapict lanolin of tho bono has boon ruaovod or is
•at, siu-./s dcc.aicificition to a depth of aboutr4 uillinoturs. I Ijavo jucrkod
t * r--. with _a B, outar doc h l c lfiod pert of the tibiae surroundod by lino
.nl ArkcC 3. You see the color is lighter thcro end in tho nagativo X-ray
it 1 j less d-.u. Undernoath that you seo an area uarkod C which goos inward
t half t:;-* thickness of tnc tibiae Lone ;;hcro there is an increased donsity,
ahitu !: tho X-ray nr. tiv-, black in tho photograph, t-arkod C, which indicate
ocl-r.sij of tho j.ojiv ..art of tho bono. This ontiro picture indicates that
L.te .raft h j .,.:i ra-ovod fron this region# Therefore tho outer dolinoatic

• X

f the Lone his bocouo indistinct. Tho cuter xxrjincl ,-art of tho bono ia Uo-
e-io- --- wl-.il- unoerncath tno decalcified part an croc of sclerosis has
; - r —.

JX-, SESUTJ3: Lector, r.ro you conversant with tho Geraan language?

Y-s, dir.

" “ 3.L..LJC: I wonder if we could save tL-o if you w-ro to oaka your

<

■ rt 1 uv.tion in English and than -axa it in Gercan for the benefit of...

V-ry well. Shall 1 repoct tho description of tho X-rays?
wJ.,GL S.Z- Z: Just as to tho description of tho X-rays. ^

- -L.IL. -Li: La Genvan, yes, (Dr, .J.cx.andor repeats tho description in


~I~ *: - ctor, you h vorepeatxl in Gerem the sane description of
- A “ r ~- 8 tte.t . - r-viJusly gave in English?

- - - —La free translation, not vj*batin# in conclusion, (additions.
: ia - -r -an). I r-p-st this in English—this indicates ruaaval of a

na rscwrtainxl by tho fact that no compact outsr zone has boon sub-
* lC3 “ 0 — -- that a sclerosis unucroor.th a decalcified outer part has


-S35-


t sc. l


Vhe other X-ray, narked aa Decuaunt No* :J0-1090, which is taken free
I.t-ral rl^nai free the sides, dee a not she« the bone defect, indicating
:bat the d«-f-ct is li,..itvc to the medial aspect of tho bene.

. . ciLS_T: Doctor, as a r^silt of yr-j examination can you wake..nny repo:
bent : ~ ct ractor of this wocm, h_r gsycholojr, otcoUrs?

. . .ise KaroiewsKa is n v_ry cblo woaan, of aup-rior intolli-

_;x-, who r a-I.- -lu-ct French, who is v-ry wall inforood, has a very doer
*- .-a-r of cx.rws a i.^n, and Lpr-ssos one as a wasnn of outstanding atojoina and
; ..r. lity asset j— in ov„ry way n highly usoful citizen, both in pence and
a acl.lr in tiao of war. She Impresses no as the typo of jioraon who is
n' -ur--Uy uoutla- to leadership in any cofxaunity, civilian aa well -ca oilitai
13. I think I have no further qu-stiens to put to Ur, .tlcxandor,

... .JddC. I would Ilk- to aay ah« is r. school toachcr by occupation.

. ... heib..'Y: I thiik that the witness, Karoloirskc, can atop down froa tho
star. t this point.

•r.'Xi S b'J.I.'TJ: >. ,J.exandor, what is your prognosis of this condition?

b . .XJl.‘ur*U ? h-Te is -no thing, af enurse, the stability of her tibiae

:. i b int-i-f--r-n with; .a cutdn c«ount of bono narrow has boon loot and

: c ,-jw t.’.- bc;.e narrow bain, the place rhu-o rod blood cello are aanuf.ac-

• •

- iu.ua ructions arc taking place, .any loco of bono i_?.rrow in, of

c e-3., a bkut.. .r _ic a,.. In addition oho has . .ain in r uLation to tho ecaro
’ -r soasitdjt, apo.a % inr.-r ber.e has cooo very close to tho akin. 7o
■^ew :ie is v-i-y ric.; in n-rvo au, .Jy, hv4jco r. certain auount of pain hoa to
l- /wck w ;wd with. .vt , r^Sent her blood count is .:zr,x-l :nd her blood picturo,
•i -rt fTi.a. h-r v_ry finer Irregularity 3ucn as 6 ooainopliiles, £aa remainod
nr.-al, •

. :. ‘iEJET: Doctor, can you expr ,«s any opinion cs’.to tho purpose of the
- . .* ti:n to which sno was subject, that is tl.o bono ruaovnl? ~

—• — I tliink it ^ust have boon cr.o of the «puriGcnta which air.e

’* .u.si . of r eg er.-ration of bon. er possible transplantation of bono,
...at tils ti-ial graft was either indicated in .another person or
• - --a Uvc.vnged which of course today, 3 years aft-r tho ax-


- 636 -


X :-..-.-3c -'-13->-Li38cr

Court ::c. i


C


. v

_ _ri_ xX, tr*cv of transplantation la loft in this individual. Cr if tho

ct wrs, jehtJ alleged in scco states-nts I havo soon, that tibial grafts
_r„ occhax^jod Lotwoun tho two lo^s, one aust concludo that the experiment wn:
- *.r._ because thoro is no evidence that a craft took. <J1 wu a bo now aro
the o..J-cu~.:c -3 of rccoval of a graft, ani tho craft had included tho ontiro
co_ act ; art of tho bone, otherwise tho repair would havo boon better. If aoru
,-rt .1 the ca.; act hed remained, tho pvriootouu »»uld havo jrbbr.bly rojonarat
od and t-iay, 3 yaars tft«r tho operation, no X-ray »/ould havo shown tho dcf.be
C I f-ol that r ' -r d.op jrafts weru taken thich »wni down into tho sponcib:

. rtwihu? anythin, was r-placed that later was doatroyod, I do not know,
ux .. t tho patient at'.toe that th-ro was a purploct diachrr^o, inuior.tinc that
tho waind ivtu boooua infect-d, ami her statccs.t cf a subsequent oporation,
ir. fact, if I “r. not mistaken, 2 su»oquent operations, in-icatos tho probabi¬
lity that tho ^r.'ft did net tnko and tnat they »jc removed nft-r infection
; :.vc<xje cbvicus.


- 837 -


Ccur: .-c. 1


C •

£t Loc -IS— - 14-1 - UQ -Putty

• * ,

%

• •

:3{. HoTL -CT: I have no further questions.

2*Z PhSSIDIET: Dees roiy Counsel for the Defense desire

t: crcss-oXw:ine Dr. alexandor in rogr.rds to his testimony

fer tile witixess?

*c such dosiro boing in dice, tod, the Doctor nay stand down.
IIcEAirff: X think that this witness, Knrolewska,
c r. bo excused at this tlxxe.

*5.Z 'LTSaDElTT: Ihoro boing no further quostions to bo
prop: undo' to this witnose, aarclewskr., tho witnoss my
loc.vo tho stand.

l-.itnoes oxcuscd)

cl.. .V: Zo Prococution roquosts that tho witnoss
Jadwign Dz j ,\j callod to tho stand.

‘•EE *.JTSIDIX T: 7to Prococution will call tl.o witnoss,

~ 'C. Dra-u. The interpreter levin;; alretdy boon sworn,

* •. 1-1 ad ir.istor tho octh to tl o witness.

I solc:.n_;* swocr tlat tho ovidonoo I shall givo shr.il
- tlx truth, tlo whole truth and nothing but tho truth, so

* 1? ;1o •* A.

i'.uo witness roper.tod the oath through tho Intorprotor)
LCZ.IT.I7: Tho witnoss will bo seated.

3Y .7.. L..n-*_': {-hreugh tho Intorprotor)

'• ' itr._?r, rhr.t is your full* nam? • r

^rdwiau Dzidc.

i ’ c *  * poll that J-o.-d-w-i-g-a, last n ^.0 rpollod
-a-i-d-O?

• •

^Cf.

-tr^rc/y-u ~oro born cn tlo 26th of J anuary, 1918?
— l'«r f

"1. L.u .a*,. a citiacn of Poland?

-1. f 1*JC.

-83?-


Cc. t :1


c 46 - ~ - 1.-2 - LJG - ?ut t7


•• i-cvo you cono koro to i'urnborg voluntarily to
- 'tiTy?

i.. y*s.

oald ycu kindly toll tl-c Tribun: 1 your present
1-".^ i.JLroae?

... k.rsr.tr, G.raoslonskr. 14 .

'Jit no as, :-.rc 70U txrriod?

... Ub.

.-ro your pc.ronts living?

V- r •

.1 ..t oCvc tion l..vu you rocoivod?

... - : -v- f ini shod tho olaaontr-ry school t.ni gyunnsiun

•-.rr..x . . ^ ; rtcd — in 1037 I started studying Phnrns-

c-lo y :.t t:« University in ttrscv.

• l>--: u .-rr.dur.to fror. tho ^nivorsityin Jr.rs;-.\?

... :rc.

: .i uid 7ou d_ :f tor you t.d yinishod school in tho
s.-v-rcity cT V.rcc.vi

— 1 studying ?L mr.Cology ;.t tho Univorsity,

’* '■ jn r *-- n * '“t c e tudying tl.o second yo.-.r, tho urr brook


.. '<»it did you do rftor the .nr brolto out.

... 103 ? 1 in.* working in r. Phi-mney during tho


-- "vf.


y •


~. ::$iJcc,r ci* the :«osi 3 tLnco Uovonont?


-63V-


. >.C ' 6- ,-^-lk-la-Putty (..
y. rt 1 * 0 . 1 .


In tha Aatusn of 19UU I entered tho Resistant Wider-round.

Q '.'hat 'll you do in tho Rosistonco T'ovenont? v

1 I was a nassowjor*

Th-n wore frou later captured by tho Gestapo and pin cod under

ar;*- at?

I -sa^ error to! by Gostapo on the 28th of J’arch 191x1.

1 let ha. .nod to you after your arrost by the Gestapo?

.. I raa intorr ate * by Oosta-.o in Lublin, Lukow, Itadsin.

TLu' lin, *»a 'zin.

T „n! -That happened rftor that?

.. Ir. Lu' lin I- was 'icaton while boin- nakod.
i ’>1' y .u than rocaivo any further tror.trxxnt fron tho Oostapo,
r wero yoi r leaso *? lfc# -

.. I stayob in Lublin six nooks in tho Under Troun J of tho
axil 'in of 'Tostapo.

~i T.wn were y-u sont to tho tavonsbrucck Concentration Car.rp?

On tho tvonty-thir ’ of Soptur&or, 19lilj I was transported to •

3 cencontrati- . c~.\, Ivons'.mock.

3 ore t ■! * why yai wor<- sent to tho concontrat-ion coop in

%

'vr :r ru^ckj

.. I •..?.? not told.

1 .1-: y*ai -v r ,iv«n a trial in zap Ger.aan court?

sint y t nrons’>xuock Concentration Coup?

. f

.. .11 ..ri' .is-rs ho * :ro in tiio .rison at Lu’ lin woro sont thoro,

’ I .font with than.

b ' ill y u toll the Court, Iss Dai Jo, in your own words what

* • •

re ‘ t . after y u arriveJ at Ravunsbruock?

hen I arrived in th„ concentration canp law;ns'.rueck, I thou. ht

r

t’. I oul e aMo to stay there till thu end of tho war. Tho life ccn-
av.-ns' rv'-ck — in th_ prison woro 3uch that wo ccul 3 not
liv. any lc. .-j. In tho cr_:_ sc had to work, tut in tho. canp it

-8U>-


7J2 ' c W.-T^-L.-ic-Putty (A®)

C art SO. X Q


1


res r_ . se 'Irty, end then- ”_rc not s: sany lico as used to bo in
the .risen*

n hat work *i ' ycu do in the carry, Witness?

.. I di . vsical work inside op out si-V) the crap.

1 ore y'u over operated on in the -tavonsbrueck Concentration


I ms operator! in Mevenber, 19li2.
n ‘ill y-u kindly oxplain the circumstances of this operation
•c t!u 7.4 uitl? ^

.. dr. 19UZ Tor.t huivor and terror roi^nci in tho ca.-op. Qarnans

* -r. at th. zenith of .tbeir power. y-u cculd soo on the faoo of every

«

j : -r. LaurhCLnoss and ?rido.' a ~ ro told occh Jay ovary Jay that .

--r- n' in- .ut nu • era, thrt .ro had to forgot that wo woro henan

* #

• An-s, ;h t c ha ! ac-body- «ho think of us — who thinks of us, that
*ra vl * r. v.r cc e ' ak to our country, that so ara slavos and that

.only *. .'ark. ‘ o uoro not allowod to srdlo, \r cry or to pray.


-ra net


to defend cursolvos rhor. ro wore boa ton. Thoro was


no hr o to — cf oind back to :;y country.

k , ' »oss, /id ycu say th-.t ycu roro opera tod on in tho
•' - ru^ck doncontraticn Crvip on JfcTarfcor 22, 19U2?

• 4 d*o3«

, r. Saw.: r 22, I9U2, tho ’ay of this operation, id.ll
i. tell th. iTi unal all that happorwd durin- that tino?

-• Ihr.t ’ay tho polio cjsouan, carip policsworan, cano with a pioco

r

- Jr vSnro ry nanc -ras sritton -down. t:*o .eHcema^an told us to
r. hen I asked her uhoro ro roro ;oin , she told ac that
•t '.ary. . Sho us to .he hospital. I A’n»t knar* what -,-oinf
to . it ni"ht have been an execution, transport fer work,

- rr. .1 :r^

r. jr" r a. oar o', and told o to un xoss and oxardnod no.

X—rayc . I stayed in tho hespital. :{y lrci33 »ras taken away
-.1 o -rr-t-d on the 22 "overier 19^2 in the namin'. A perron


20 Sc. ■W.-^-lS-l-'lina- uck (dTD)
::o. 1


nurao carlo, shaved -y lops on ; eve ao 3 one thin to drink. '/hen I
• sin * her whet sha was ,oin„ to do with ac sho didn't five no any
r. In the afternoon I was taken on a anall hospital car to tho
err -in rooc. I aiat hava boon very oxhaustod and tirod and that's
t !on*t romabsr whether I had sot an injection or whether a msk
d.w pnt on ny face. I didn't soo tho operatin': rocn.

!wn I carao back I reoenber that I had no wound on qy io£, but a
trr.co of a stir.Sinco that tirx> I don't reaorher anything till

Jot-.:- li^amod fron yjr ccnrcdos uho lived in tho sano roon that

« ^ . * . •

£' ’or: ’>«'I be i o'. rate', on. I r—ae±cr what was roing on in January,
an ' I krew that thj drossixvs had-boon charv»d"soreral tiaos,

0 itnos;, do y.u know -too perfoma d tho operation upon your ^
10L-7 . *

A I cYon'.t know.

0 "o: , yu say that you had dressing changed. “ho chanpod tho

•' ' --

rassin.a on yw lotf?

A Tho 'rosain a woro chan , :o v . by Or. Oborheuser, Rosenthal and
• • Xa-. aid.

0 Did y u suffer a :;roat oal while these dressings woro bedne

ctr. j\?

Tes, very reach.

itno_~, dll you stop down fTon t'.io witness box and walk over

tr*. r )ofor.' . s ck an.', soo if ycu can rocc~niso oryono in that

'xk as bain at dr 7cn3brucfc concentration can? durin; tho period and

• • r

aiir the ti-.a tha t yai rn.ro c; eratod on?

A ( itneac points).

'ill yu point to the xrsoa a-ain that you roco adzod,

-tncaa?

.. C itaoss points.)

; .a.', vho is that, itnoss?

- OVorhausor.

-• • 01* ’lay wo roquast that the rocor'. so show that tho

m


i': 6-CsS * •i^ranabuch (ATO)

C -3^ *»• 1 ---. _ —

^

M -• « • . •

■ •

I* ;o;3 has ilontiflod tho-Dafcn!ant Obcrbauacr?

HE I'TSSIDEHTx Tlio rccori *111 so show.

'* Do jju rcoo^ydso onycno olso in toot 'Jock, Witness?

>-

. Int out :iho olao you rcc«*«iao, . itnoaa?

.. ( itnoaa pointa)

n be ia thet, -Itnoss? x

„ Thia van I sow only cnco in tho ca^p*

~i Do you law* itso that uan is, itnosa?

I Icr-crr.

bo is that ren,' .itnoas? • *

A Sr. 71 \3T.

:r. rt.bOIi ill tho rocor*. ao shew that too witnoaa haa proporly
’ tifio.l t i ton ‘ant Ms char as boiny at tho ilqvcnsbandc concon-

tr-tion oaiy?

: : ITBEK-.Ti Tho roccr ’ will ao ahow.

1 it ocs, i you hc.v 3 any other '.oiails to tell N top Tribunal
. :t r r ; -ration?

; (lb anrror).

*1 itnoaa, hot, :nny tLics wore y^u op-rctoi on?

.. One .

:xn *'r. O’.wrbausjr attonJoi ycu, sue sho j-ontlo in hor

troa- oast toward yeu?

.. S ho vr.a r/ t bar!.

1 "itco. , br-.-j ywi ov_r hcari of a parson nancl 3inz in tho

'.'.rjn3 ruct cancor.trction ocap?

- I la-;.. h r very Troll.

%

1 b? y» rcnec or rbat ti=o your frier. *s iroro callo,’. to bo
a* .j* on in uuuat, of 19h3?

A loo.

il ;* u kir.ly toll tho Tribunal sax. of tho ’c tails tooro an!
— is if tlo persons who wore to bo operated on?

31*3


20 !>==. fcSvC5S^^O-Hin='.-acSc L.TD)

C^rrt 53. 1 C


A In the s.-.rin of 19li3 the operations wore stepped. r io thcu.rht
th.’ 6 wo ccul ’ lira like that till the cm, of the wr. On tho l$th of
..a ust a policawonan caxx) end orilioi ten : Iris, hen she rres askod
■;vt for, she answered that we Wv.ro roirr to ho sent to wort:, ilo know

- woll that all prisoners bolonlrv; to cur transport woro not
llowo ’. to work out si do the deep. Tho chicf-of tho block whore wo woro

livin was forbidlen under Capitol purdshaant to lot us outsido tho
c*.v.. That's why wo know that it was not true, .'e didn't want to let
our cccredcs out if tho block. The .olicoNo:xm cane, an! tho assist¬
ants, tho ov.rsoors an' with Dins, aware driven out of tho block
into th- str-et. o stood thcro in'line t~n rt a tine and Dins hon-
self roa' off the nr ^s of ton ^rls-. Tx;ri they rofusod to co bocauso
thoy wro af.-l' -f a rvnr opcrction an’ roro not willdn; to undergo

a new operation, sh- horsolf *avc hor word of horor that it ms not

b

oi. to b<j an o,.ration an’ sho told than to follow hor.

o roraiiwd sten.In; boforo tho block. Then scv-ral rlnutos

later our ccra-a'.cs ran to ua an ! told us that S3 non hivo boon oallod

• : a in r tor t. ourroun! then, Tho oanp polico arrived an ’ drove out

ur c: r '.os out of the line, .'o wore lockod in tho block. Tho shutter

•

’* cl oo’. 3 wuro throa days without .any food an! without ary fresh
J.r, 'a t r ra n.t iron parcels that errivod at that tino at tho oanp.
7‘w dirsf -y tho earn oorrvuvdant and Bins oauo an! redo a speech, Tho
cal. or:wander 3ai ! that there has never boon a revolt in tho canp
an that tils revolt .-ust ’.a punish!. Sho bollovad that po would
o rrcct cursives cn* that wo will n.v.r ropoat it. If it is coing

- happen cnee ;ia, 3h: has SS people .ith weapons. ’V cc-irado who

•'nan answered that wo wore not rovoltlm, that we didn't want
a o: -rat * .cause fire of us died after tho operation and because
"~t ‘ >en shot !cm after bavin sufforo'- so inich. Thjn Dins ropliodi

-ath is vict. re. You raist suffer for it and yu will never ;ot of
o •“ Throe 'zrs later wo loamod that our ccrya !os ha.! boon
-J* ’to ' in the ’unkar.

dhh


TNao. >%.-% ~-l6-A-?.rrin (AO)

C .

g !Jov, witness, how ierv wxion, approxir.-toly, wore opointed on
at ncvona’jr'-dc?

A At ?.a v_na': meek were operatod 7U wcsion. 'Cany cf than had undar—
one rnj operations.

1 t»t yen ^73 told us that fivo lod as a rosult of tho
derations, is that correct?

1 Tos.

0

r And ;.u fear six T^ro shot ’.own after the operation, is that

ccrroct?

A Tos.

' ’*•; you Jevr-rr wljjr thoso other six v_.ro shot, witnoss?

A I Vcn»t knov.

3 " itnoss, w-ro any of thoso victi;» askod to voluntoor for
*:ooo operations?

A Ka»

0

3 \ioro any of then precised free don if they wculd su’:nit to
oporr. ions?

.. ?fe.

1 Dii : , ' r. you were operated on, 1 ’ you otjodt?


r


8U5

%


20 Z>-


Li'-lW-Penln


Court Jfa.l

A. I could »fc.

Q. lfcy not?

A. I not allowed to talk and our question .crc not answered.

Do you still suffer ary effocta as a result of the operation, wit no 38?
A. lea.

\. ’.tore you ever asked sign ary papers with rospoct to the operation?

A. Mover. _

" 4 . When did you finally leave Rav^nsbruock?

’ A. On th. 27th of April, 1945.

% . Havo you over rocoivod an y txx-atnent since you havo loft Ravonsbrucck
in the last year? . .

A. Yes* • , *

C,. Toll uo hat troataunt you havo rocaivod.

A. ir. Gruzsn in Warsaw transplanted tendons on ay log.

Um ; .l-n did ho do that? -

A. *. tho 25tfc of Septecibor 1945.

Q. Do you havo tc ~ar any special shoos,now, tdtnoss?

A. Y.s, I aunt \jcot thca, but I can't afford to buy thoo.

.. hat a-o you no* doing, ItnwSP? Arc you irarking now, or v.-hat is your
•ecu. vticn?

A. 1 aa no*., continuing n$- studios idiich I stortod beforo tho war.

*. I s-v.. I -.dll ask tho witness to identify tho3o picturoo.

-R. HARDY: This la Document nuaber !*>-1082, a, b, and c. I will pass thoso

^ to the Tribunal for your perusal. • * r

•

BY UR.HARDY:

.. Haro th .so photographs takon of you in Ifurnoorg in tho last day cr two,

-it.*.. 33?

a. Y-3.

..ItnesG, you kindly take your stocking arri shoe off your light

- 1 Iceao, w- vi_i 3top out to tho sL«k> and show tho Tribunal tho results
«. tk«. operations at Ravonsbrucck? (Mtness corylios.)


3sc—>->- «sin

Court to.l


That’s all, -.itnoas, you nay sit com.

IfiJLADI: I bavo rc further question an direct examination, Your lfc>nor.
7.-3 P 7 - - .> m? rr: Is there any dcionsa counsel -i*) dosiros to crwss examine
this xitnese?

at.Se.721 (counsel for defondants Gobhardt, Obexhauser arxi Fisetor): I
-0 not «nt to cross examine the witness; however, I do not >it to oonfir
-itt =y diont all tho stateojnt Ydch havo boon made by the witrx be.

7HS H C S I DjtiT: Tho Tribunal >iil r.ow bo in rocoss for a few miniAos.


(A rocoss yas taken)


X Dec- - -3cr-.-10-l-i:3L-w

; art ft.. 1


C


THE —--SH..L: The Tribunal is e^ain in session.

.. . JL-iDT: IT th-ro is no cross ex. Tc iip.tion of this witness by the defun30
<v_uns-l, I propose ne» to call Dc. . J-uxandcr t o tflb witness stand.

rdESIHVI: I understood bofero w- rucossetl there was no cross oxanina-
ti.n ~f this witness by defense counsel. Is that correct? proceed.

_.U I1X ..LELJ&ai, a witness, was recalled to the stand and testiflod ns
-lows:

. rVx3ID.Dff: Lr. .daxar.dcr is ra-indod that ho is still under oath as
a vitr.esa in this Court.

Ot. T --7 -3: (.^-roasir^ Jadvl-a Dzido). Please tako off both shoos and
loth at ckirv.-s, if you will.

(Th- •.dtr.vss rceovcd h-r shoes and stockings.)

~L-X*r SCJJ:: .TIO:;-Continued

s

\MBit

“j. lr. .lexand^r, have you oxauinud hiss Dzido befero today?

... T-s, air, I did, on sev-ral occasions and during tho Last throo days.

.. Uxind /our cacwimtijn, did you havu x-rays nado of tho icticnt's

• Jl |

... Z ui’^f sir.

.... —IT : ..t tills ti»-o I will introduce docucont No. nO-lQyi which is

• s

of thu wito-ss, kiss Dzido. Wo will h c.ss two copies to thu Tribunal
v.>. no cc.y r .• tho Secretary General.

ST .... MiOTs r

3a. .1-xan—r, in the course w f your diajr-osis of those x-rays, will
1 ~.ly di-this x-ray in English and then r opent in Guroan for tho

• n-.lt ef the -T-lvits?

... Iuj, sir.

. ^-ct.r, =111 you identify that x-ray which carried No. NO-10917
... -s. This is tho x-ray which includoa tho ltr.icr two-thirds of tho thi^h

-- f«w* and tho kneo joint, and-

I --- -r thi3 x-ray as Prcsocution Exhibit No. 215.


ct;p.


it rcxi-jkablo finding Ip. lias Dticlo»a era a-is at first uarkod
in*

- t .U .-i ht ico, including thigh, log rr.-l foot, Will you plocsc

*. L u. v i-is Ik:id . (The witness stood). ln£ -..111 y u y dually slowly turn

r Y. u era euepere her j the twe le_s anu you notice the .-eirtfod atrophy.

•: u see th« :—ur tnis tone, .f this loj, as cceparod to the other. This

' ij • -'—tiaratly cr. thg calf tut also includes the L*er ,nrt of tho

t._ ... Kero, the tidji (indicatinj s cav-rod with the other eido. Tho

•tr .. v f tho thi .h is -ue to tho fact that tho lateral flexor jtouj, in-

the luuculus biceps, is absent wh.ch loaves tho Lateral cpiconiyluo

•

an. a-*. 1 t-ral r ruln«ncc .f the tibia without tho tuuUnous insertion. You

.... t.'.is r jnaon nere, str:a3 tendon is absent on this sido. Tho lower part

: tttu , including the enlieolar ration and the t'xrsuu of the* foot show

. :jc lor-ti . . i. _io\ti/vj int-rf-r^ico with tho circulation of tho log,

ne tc 1 as blood vessels. (Tho witness now fncod tho Judjos).

• •

-.ce. turo f the ri^ht foet, including tho tcua, are likewise
r .... . The ri ht i-j is fartiwuro uiafigur^. oy two ugly scars, ono horo


-r.«


: = 0r.o w 1 :a-o, l ater, for the sake of tho record,
-d.; her-. (Inlicatin;•) .

r

*: - but it inn ,_o into tho r-ccrd.


- . -- Take the lateral one and tr.o —dial ono. The lateral _nc

t.rce Inches above the knoe, above tho lateral opicendylus cf tho foaur
a; * • ,a ov - “-’.o lateral ,nrt of the calf untul two inches above tho
r- -sHudIus. lids scar is sixteen inches lan^,. The width of this scar

inch to er.o-h.alf inch. Tho lower part of this scar still
il-'-i-a tx sero-purulont discharge, indicating the jpgs one a

ao-a-lf inches uedially to this scar and parallel to it

-o\9-


i


2C ic. li&£-£?crvl -3-Srslnrr(J;.7D)

C-urt !fe. 1

is zn oqually bsfi urir. on: isasurln scv:n inchos in lor.jth in-*
-crtly three-quarters c. ; an inch in width. There ar^ four saall
r-ccr.t mat soart in ’icativu of havir fcoaloi by first intension
-v r the ri-ht foot an*, ankLi. Tioso aro incidental to treinsplan-
i .* ~r. c; tan’ans to correct a foot hop. It is referred to as

* V

' -1 hesns (?) which TC3 carried out *;y Dr. Gru/ia. There are a nuabor
cf r-jurolo ical Isturboncos in this location. The dorsiflexion of tho
f^ot is a olished..

y

(.. ’resain- ’as3 Dzi'a). eul ’ you try to lift up your foot liko
this? (Inbeatir. ). ..ltheuh they are present, in view of tho tendon
rapair, .there is r» Ion-or my foot Crop hut tho ,-ationt cannot lift
tho foit off f i T'rtuv’ to any si nifleant extent. Tho -jait is dis¬
turbed ’;y this loss of torsiflexion pf tho ri~ht foot an ’, lateral
r -tier, of th ri ht foot is llfcaaiso a': olio ho.’.

' rossir, *i33 Dsito). .ill you please try to do this, put
foot inner ’. an * oufcmr h Thoro is vary little lateral rotation
possible.

(;. r-ssir. riss Dsi to). oul! you liko to walk first? euld it
* j 'esi.ro :l to have the patient wilk?

Y u r.;tice that ‘urin; t'.v; -_ait the tees of the ri-ht foot
rer.in planted te tho round bocauso of tie inn toquacy of tho
liftir. ent cf th_ foot which is acconplishod by tho perineal

.■rv-.:, ^*,isc fin 'in 3 indicate paralysis, or lose rathor^in this
cas. * tho . .rincM nerve. The ri':ht knee joint is Ini & shod and
. ri ht ankl jerk is absent. Here you r*ot a very ood knoe jark
n: on tills i :.0 a loss active cik. You suo lv.ro vory marked atrophy
---se of tho loas cf tho •-’bplo fl»:cr uaailaturo. Thoro is a -coo:’.
... 1. jerk lure. I nov_r • as a*lo to retain one on tho ri ht. Sensory

:: in-ties shewed an anesthesia for fine touch >n the torsun of the

ri ■: foct, hi eh -veans the bade of tho foot. Tho . r<-ssuro i3 felt.

. 3i;.r tv .-thirds ‘ the mt:r o-lntorol nsopet of the ri-ht

-s oil s that art of th* lateral an* posterior aspect of tho


20 C. (:p)

Court 9s m 1 C


lz“ . '±cr. is lateral to an’ botu.on the tare scars — this part an.l
V.ds, .hich shows igrperesthcsia 'for pain. In thu no dal part of tho
calf h_ro sansaticn to touch is noraal.


65Ca


20 lwC-..-.Jcha-lW^S-Jl=»
Court X


fhaak you vary each.

q t j^w. Doctor, I niil ,;ivc you all those x-rays tocothor. There will bo
an tuition to the cno that ho has, JD 1092, !» 1093 *«I •» 10?/.. Vfould you
kindly identify these throe x-rays first. Doctor, so that wo can offer than

-a exhibits?

*4 1

... fi-c. In 1092 is tho x-ray of tho lo,;, including tho tibia anti fibula.
_li. ii.;:DY: That is offered at this tioo as Prosecution Exhibit No. 216,
tli. In 1093 i« an X-ray of the rijht foot.

.... ii-oGYs That is off-rod as Prosecution Exhibit No. 217.

Oil. .J£L£ D5l« .«nd in 1094 is another x-ray of tho rijit foot, with
i-artcular r.tt^ntion tc the uotatarsnl bonus.

-t. F.dilY: Docuwnt No. 1094 is offered as Prosecution Exhibit No. 218,

3Y ..t. KJOY:

Proceed, -Ktcr.

... Tho first of tho x-rays, thu picture of tho fctair, shows Uirkod ostoo-
r-ais of thv lateral opicondylus. This is duo to tho fact of thu ror^vnl
of uxaclo sod tu.-xien attachoonte. It is an oatoo-porosis of disuse boenuao
the ncrual .ull of the tuoc.cn has been r craved, froti t'nis opicondylus. Tho
opicondylus is tho big prominence of tho thi.jh bono adjacent to tho knoo
j int wh-r j tl>u lar^o fleecer uiscloa insert n.^ually. '.tore that insertion
. j u-en aacliahwi here, leaving tho opicondylus without soft anjor tendons.
This eat- -..rosis is the obvious r.sult of that, and narked ostoo-pprotic
prccinunce with an arrow in this picture.

r


-’•51-


20. :«*ichr.-I?-i-?o ari
Csart ao. 1


C

Q. Doctor, this- x-ray ~ou arc referring to no* is Ho. 1092?

... . -is is o. 1091. The arrc points to the osteoporotic atrophy

no tibia. • bor 1092 is the x-ray of the leg. It shoos the fibula rhlch
s* ilsr of the two Larger bones of the leg, about in the lidiQe betweo
ju: t mentioned under the bracket called "P". On the side, looking
r,r . t..: . is the c-teopcriostitis of the periosteum. This group of

ro particularly severe in the smaller area 'Men I h-.vo aorked with
tie br c' ct '..* indicates a smaller area of the shaft of the tibia id thin

• ‘ .r^r art*. <•; the disturbance narked as "B". This alteration is indicat'
$ dens Is ts c . c riinary inactive Coxa, rhich in view of the ostooporio-

pcrioc.itis of tho perlostoui was probably an osteomyelitis process. However,
t a rc nc cstto-;-0l3,tia at the proso.nt oxaaination of the right foot.
In yin’.urea 10?j and 109h, it shows arthritic chongos of tho cunlfcrn navicul:
?oi:its *lth rva^rcr-lit of th- Joint spaces and icrcased 'larginal sclorosis.

• 1- cn rd in the x-ray *dth en arrov pointing to t s o joint. Tho

r rl- re ho s.;io . '.o .Tints h-.vo como out too dark, hut it shows

jo I itio- c'.u rly in the fil:■

- r-via <: :uo to f c L- oblilization of th. right fn:>t. Socondnr;
. f'fc.. nnS ospeci .13 y tho paralysis of the purineal norvo. I» Is
vi . art. iritis of a- in chilization nature rhich ono scos also by
vC. a: r •-icr.ts foot.

. rr, ;-ou dctcrJ.no fro: i your examination —

. (~n*. :• : 9U, ~vc I mentioned it shows tho sr.jc as 1093 in

>i ! . * • ii;..: exposure. Tho mark; arc tho sa-o pointing to tho no3t

- - *t .r’ 1 -v. the cvnifor. navicular joints.

.. To;i or, a yc-- c nior., ^x. your oxo. ination of this ,x*Uont can


v r*s the pur oz r . of the cxporlacnt?

• in .1. c .ycrlre-t a hidtiy infectious rgent ms

• athoot the addition of a bacteria static a-ont such-as
*;.• that r.-sen do infection got out of hand and bcc-io


out oi


, -octor, it is hignly possible this patient could have

- o..w of tnc control groups?

• -’. 52 - 1


■ .


_0 joe. : S-:.^.5chr-15-^-r«cr a . C”>)

Corrt To. 1 *


- Ics, . r*a' ly orvo of tho control sroup. The two previous

aatients both oontionod -..diitc ponder wlsich has boon used in thoir
•

3j which was probably one of the sulfc nil a rn ’ .os, and whilo this
-ti r.t ns woll ns tho subsequent patient, know of no use of tho whito

e

•’oar. Therefore, I assuno that th:y nay ho of too control roup.

They have boon injected or inplantod tilth tho bacteria culturo without
•. .0 subsequent use of sulfa n i lnrri do. Free tho onc-ral appoarcnca, it
is su estiva of a Stroptococcus in this case. Tho way it is sproad
. ‘:.3 it likely, and the fact that tho s.road is mostly lonctiwiso.

n Oral ’ you say, Doctor, tho reason for the sproad in this caso
•r j booauso of tho lack' of troato^nt, where as tho cth.r patients had
boon treated after bain opera tod on, is that corroct?

.. Pr.s*: -ably. otlvjr atients rare sivon sulfanilarddo in tho
.auiv’a sc uti . aft..- the noun's woro mdoj presumably to tost tho
efficiency of tho uso of sulfanilanido on the ’cattle field such as wo
st rt. ’ to '*> it in tho Unltod Statos Amy.

q :kj , D-ator, y m, as a psychiatrist, can you say what
ohalo 1&.1 effect these o. eraUons ha 1 on tlu patents?

A I think th-t it ifs that of deop humiliation which was tho •
r. .arta* lo reaction ir. all those wenon. I would say it was
.-.tb-r a resentment c/ ainst huiliatioru Th: uso cf the nano " uinoa

— th jr arc 11 hi ft spirited -iris. Th ro aU acldLors. This
iris is f a su.-rior intollicence, a cW‘.cnt of pharnacy, a woman

f Cjlbir , an', s.-eaks very eod dr. iish hich eh. fools if not ^ood

to t.stify in it. T!iis ••'hole treat «nt causod„o '.aop humiliation,
*

an* n :b; oth r ban!, it also aroused a fi;htin spirit, an’ tho
r arkr: lc thin is ’bat this prisoner shared how she robcllod a-ainst

tills tr^at . . was crv. of a '.-roup which ;ras forcibly opera tod on.

-bre ‘ S wr-.iar. *o foe ht like a nil’, cat in a concentration camp

last this ‘r -♦-•v.nt, nr. ’, dio ha to bo hel d, down by two or nore SS


Tbark y-u Doctor


*


20 Doc. 1:6-..-,ic:* -19-3-3c^rV(„TD)

Court ”c. 1

:n. 'i.VJTt I have rv_ further questions to put to ^ctor
^ g a J er, at this tine. Your Ibnor.
r “S PIBSBCirr: Do axy of tho Cofenso counsol Jesire to cross
•. i • r *. ator ..le xa r.'-or?

exss zx^.-.-tiok

T; 1 . STDTLl- ,

n Only o for questions, Doctor .'.loxr.n'or. Are ycu flklo to
state osac«fty which seers caix; frsa th- transplantation in 1915 in
varsac?

Yos. In 19U5, tho operation involve! two thirv-s: Trcnsplorv- 1

^ ^ * % • . • •

t iou -f the ton ’ons. You can still roco;.ni*o thoso wounds boenuso
tissues - - . That vas feno to lift tho foot up. This '.irl

■r.s c .-.ricefoot Top, :»ro ttricoi that in tho first witnoss anr!

. , 2 c tci*o:. lift tho foot up, ana fixocl it in that .osition
(In ioatin ), In a • itdon, tho witness tol ’ -jo that tho upper onrl
cf tho scar h_ro was troatoA cosuotically. Tho rain scar fron tho
hr^o '07i o h.ro, t.r.s rr.t toucho an! s.rcifically tho open si to
■s not toucho ’•

I

-» 13 it ossi lo ttart the. ’ ic,ps is. lac’d n; Vacauso it -.ns

lr. this treplantation in arsaw*

.. I i- r«ri o’, tain that history. T can ask h,ro through tho
1 •. .•.rater.

. . g» ill y.-u pleCiso ash tlx; patient thoso questions:

. Do you fool this ton.’on her,, thecal/; ton’on on

fas a lb?

•nss r.ziroi :*«.

*> . „r YOls !br,>.

•- s 'Ziroi i,s.

. ;T."r — g->- :«or, on -his si to, you rew V,r .rhethor you
still . ’ this t_r.hr. v.ji Teeter C-rus.r op-rato*. on you in ’firsarf


- : ::


20 Dsc.
C'.urt So# 1


Cp)


X. ;j “X-'JOE?.: It Is vory unlikdly that one soul-1 use a bicop
t^r.’en for transplantation. It* is -*>rc likely that the ton ton was
sni; ad off torir. the acute st-to of the infoction.

n That is ycur assumption?

A los.-

n licit so.uathin: else, yea cro of tho opinion apparently that
».'.'s M sc' T on the hack of calf was necessary in ordor to
cc. lat th: rar.^rena surgically?

i Jq not know. Tha ease looks to » like streptococcus. Tho
-ay it i3 iistributod. — for ;asbran:! it is not ccnploto onou;:h. Of
e .urso it is Hfficult to distinuish that but tho next patient you
-, a - ty.ical is ’ acillus scar an’, it looks ’iff.rent than this ono.
Tills look# lik- streptococcus, but it is probably that ono or two
cuts ware :* to in 'r tor to control tho infoction surgically.

<\ Do you knew Doctor whether the .client was tror.tod with


”■ , tli- cniy thin is alw is on- of two pati-nts who did not
.ion white That is all I know.

^ . SaL Lt I have no further questions.

7 ,.;' ~^sr—ft :jv furtluj questions by the counsel for tho

‘-Tense? /

(.. .nrontly narw)

T‘ re bein' no furtiv.r questions tho »ritnoss is -xcuserU
•• . r..'Uti The .rosecution request that the witnosf 3Sofia
•.C-ee.i.rcsuk o call -1 to the rtan’. at this time.

TSIDTI”: The arshall will sunor. the witness ‘iaria


"ur iercT!!;


20 Dec. ! -30-MLakley (AID)

Court Ho. 1


T". F-SUEXTx I rwclnd the interpreter that he has been sworn
lr. this cause,

TIE IOT5HFHETSR* Yes.

0

TIE rSESTDEjrrx You will now adalnister the path to the witness,
VA IS TOStfr.RCZUK, a witness, took the stand and testified
tlvouih an interpreter as follows*

SI TIT". ITSSHEKTl a

q The witnoos will state hor rase,

A Maria Tusniorczuk*

Q Raise your right* hand and repeat* . .

I .r ear that tho evidanco I shall give shall be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but tlx truth. So holp no God.

(Tho witnoss repeated the oath),

TV ntHBOIT: Tho witness nay bo seated.

DIRECT 2XAI3!l\TI0K


--Y IkOOEtt

i ..111 you state ycur nano, ploase?

A ’'aria Yusrsiorcsuk.

q Ic.ur last nano is spelled r.- , i-o-o-i-o-i*-c-3>-u-k?

%

A Yes.

1 You wore born on 1 January/T^O, at Jagorndorf.

A Yes.

Q You are a citiacn of Poland? ^

A Yos I aa.

q lave you cobs hero voluntarily to testify?

A Yos.

0 'rhat is your present hone address?

„ Raciberska Street 1.

hat education have you received?

A :«ra finished the secondary schoolj and I as a 3tudent of

the University. _

656


.0 Doc. I^’.-JF-ao-Z-eiaklcy

C&' A o . I


q Have you studied aodtbino?

A Tes, I aa studying os dicing.

o rare you stu^ii^ nedicine at the University in Vilna before
tie *:&r broke out?

A Yes, I as in Vilna I was studying mthaaatics and nature
at tho University of Vilna.

q You are row studying nedicino at the University in Odansk?

A Tes.

q '/ere you working in tho underground aovonent in 19li0?

A Toe.

q here waslhis.

A. Zaneshtsh.

q ‘ ero you ultimately arrestod for your activity in tho

m _

undergrou- ?

A Yos.

1 'hat were you doing In the Polish underground?

.. I v,as nnrsongorj and I was assigned to tho chiof hoadquartors.

q Tore ;v: trlod by a court after you *oro arrosted?

I have nover boon tried by a court.

q -:xt raa done with you after your arrest?

A I was arrestod by the Gestapo and thon put into tho prison in
Jaooshtsh where I this for ton days. During tho3o ton days I was
interrogated by tho Gestapo. Thon I was put in the prison in Lublin,
'here I s'-ayod until the 23rd of October 1911. r

q -Hat happened thon?

A : : j?n I uas sont -o the concentration canp Ravonsbruock.

q '.'hat work did you do at '’avonsbruoclc?

A I did tho usual physical work. “hen I worked in tho workshop
pv in. soJcs on shoes. I worked in this workshop until I 'ms taken
•'or live operation.

3 .'Ten that?

857


1


20 Doc !^-J?-20-3-3!akley (ATCJ
Court 3c 1


A On the 7th of October, X92 jX»

Q 19ia or 19U27
A 1?!;2.

Q TTcre other girls taken with you at the sane tine to be
opcrf-ted on?

A Tea, In tte hospital it turned out that there were also other
-iris taker, at the sane tine. . *

Cj rrill you explain to the Tribunal how you case to bo selected
for this operation and what happened during tho course of it?

A On tho 7th of O'ctobar when I was sloping, I suddenly hoard
^ nano called, ay rurber callod. A police »®aan oaaoj took moj and


didnH tell =o fhcro I going. Foiling her, I cane


20 Doc. !j£-*-J^-2&-3-31aklo7 (AID)
Court Ito. 1


A On the 7th of October, 19fcl.

Q 19hl or 19U2?

A 191:2.

« ” •

Q Tore other girls taken with yew at the sane tire to be

operated on?

A Yes. In tte tospital it turned out that there were also other
3 ir 0 a taken at the saao tine.

q Will you explain to the Tribunal how you cane to be selected
for this operation and what happened during tho course of it?

On tho 7th of October whoa I *aa slumping, I suddenly hoard
qy nano called, ay raurfcor callod. A polico woaan canoj took noj and
didn*t toll =e fhcro I rup going. Foiling her, 1 cane.


4 >


*


858


20 "V :• ; fWv-C?S-20-Ia^eiakley
Cc-^-t Jo. 1


-o the hospital. I discovered in the hospital that there were eleven
other fir is who had to disrobe and were exa m ined by Dr. Oborhauser. After

xaaination *• fore put to bed. A German nurse shaved our right lo gs.
..iSire were given injections which stunned us. Then I roae^er that I
as put on a hospital cot and taken to the operating rooo. There I saw
2r. ' iodlaus'-d. mi Dr. Rosenthal, who gave no the second injoction. I

re^j her that I had to count to twelve; and then I don't remoaber any¬
thin'* else.

Then I roaortocr the zioaont when I '.as again in tho hospital roco.
au-ados .ore lyir\i in the sane roan. I felt that my log was bandaged
and I couldn't novo itj and f Tolt sovore pain. During tho next few
days I dorolopod a high teaporaturo. I roaoabor that ay log was bandaged.

T r :jrd>or in the first days that Oborhauser used to cooo oach day and
tivo n injections. Then ny log was bandaged. Thoy used to take mo to tho
ires sir. rooo. I ^as put up on a dressing tablo. A shoot was put over my
r/js. r felt only that tho bandago was rcaovod and I felt an inhuman pain.
T triad not to a: in order to soo t.hat happened to my log. 1 romombor
t • it'felt as if soajbody uould cut off something on my log.

*.:'0S3ing8 wore changed tuico a weak, if ny memory -sorvos mo well.

•

Purirv tho next changos of dressings rhon ay t^apuraturo was not no
1 h, I noticed that tho dressings fore rado by the doctor whoso namo,
r.s I loom i it afterwards, was Dr. ^schor. I knew also that for a long
l the ircs3ing voro aade by Dr. Fischor, bocausc whon pus drainod
fr .1 my leg and tho air was foul »lth odor, I asked that ip* dressings
Btf.ht bo changed) and I was told that I must wait until Dr. Fischor
arrived.

I r;s=bor alno thj fact that thive weeks after ny operation

l .

I and all my comrades woro taker, out of tho room and carried into tho

operatin room. Then I was lying in a separate room with tho bandago

n off on a hi^h tablo. ..fter two hours of my ling on this table and

-'-skiny at my log, that .ado a very deep impression on vu because I saw

in a flash even pi.cos of my bon;.


859


20 "'c c • i ^A-GSS-ZO^-Blakley
Coart Jo. 1


to the baspitai. I discovered in the hospital that there ware eleven

other rirls vho had to disrobe and wore examined by Dr. Oberhauser. After

can! nation re rare put to bed. A Gorman nurse shaved our right 3c gs.

0

•

. i n ve cere given injections rhich sturned us. Then I remember that I
as put on a hospital cot and taken to the operating roon. Thero I saw
Dr. - docEauski and Dr* Rosenthal, who gave mo the second injoction. I
rubber that I had to count to tnolvej and then I don't remember any¬
thing olso. —

Then I r ^norber the moment when I tras again in tho hospital roan,
'ourados ;oro lyiix; in the same roam. I felt that ay log was bandaged

u An . • . .

and I couldn't move itj and I felt severe pain. IXiring tho next few
Ivys I developed a high temporaturo. I romonber that ry log was bandaged.

I r.,xnbor in tho first days that Oborhausor used to cooo each day and
givo r.i injections. Then ay log was bandaged. Thoy usod to tako mo to tho
drossir. roon. I ms put up on a dressing tablo. A shoot was put over my
•r/jc. * fait only that tho bandago was rcaovod and I felt an inhuman pain.
I triad not to c. • in ordor to soo what happened to ny log. I roraombor
• t it'fait as if soriibody • ould cut off something on ay log.

JC sings vor- changod t’dca , uy* memory -servos mo woll.

During too naxt changes of dressings rhon my t_mpu raturo was not 30
hi'h, I noticed that tta dressings tore nado by tho doctor vrhoso nano,

-.r I lia-T: i it aft r ards, >ias Dr. Fischor. I kn.iw also that for a long
- the dressing wore made by Dr. Fischor, booau3o whon pus drainod
i\- n 37 leg and tha air was foul ’ 1 th odor, I asked that aj>drossings
si'.ht be changed) and I was told that I must, wait until Dr. Fischor
arrived. *

I rar^.ber also th- fact that throe cooks after ny operation

t

I and all —/ comrades wore taken out of tho roon and carriud into tho
op. rat in room. Than iffe lying in a separate room with tho bandago
-n off on a hi* tablo. After two hours of ny ling on this table and
-'okinj at tsj leg, *.!:at jade a very doo? inurossion on me because I saw
' 1 flash even pi.ces o Z ay bon:.

859


20 'fco. L6^0ES-2Oia-BlAklay(UTD)
Court I'-o. 1


Tto doctors cazu. In the front walked a doctor, very stout and
t-n, with spectacles. 3o took a haoaer-likc instmsent and tapped tho
ooae in sy leg. I .tried to look at this nan and keep his faco in my
Mrv’ I taw that this nan was Prof. Gebhardt.


* -


20 C:c.-«a^^!eo; ^ ^

Court Mo. 1

;.. i&tness, do you think that you aoulc r r.xA j this nan's face today?

A. I think oo, but I susi look before. _

.. ’.dll ;xu wla-sc got up end v.-alk over to tho defendant* dock and see
a rocc j’Azs- this tan G-bharce as b-ing there?

( . .. 53 •.. ui . ' d n g to dock.)

.. Uill ;cu point to hin; pleaso?

(’.d*.:u33 jointing to Defendant Gebhardt.)

.. Tr.mk you. Ind will you no« point out Obarhauscr?

(.Jlanssa pointing to Dufcncaxit Oberhausor.)

). Anc Flscha *

,u'itn.a= oL-h--:_ to Dofercant Pischar.)

.. Thank you . .1111 you sit down now.

n.IWUlf-: X ouid like for to. record to show that tho witness proporl;
-ttbiflad the Difandants Gcbhirdt, Oberhoisor *nd Fischer.

THa rRSjJXKT: Tho record will so shew.

ai. ;^l. iff:

.. Uc., ..ita.vs, hen did you 1- .vo tha hospital after this oporation on

. 7Lh Oe-ob-r 1?42?

... L; c-i --j so big that X had to stay in tho hospital about half a
. .. ..t • Lrlrnii^ ol tho mnth of ApAl 1743 I luft the hospital wear!'

crutches.

... your *.oune to not h-r-lou thon at that tixx»?
r.w r:. - . . . : a 1 you kindly repeat the oueotion?

.. Your a not h.alud then \i:cr. you left tho hospital?

... !v *--ur.d j not h.clod lhon I l~ft tho hospital.

.. -ere you “-bio to ork?

... I - r.-a aelo to -ork aid I was not able oven to walk. I stayed in
... . z lock till thesis; of 3. ..... .er 1943. Or. tho 1st of Septoibca* 1943 I
j. to ... hospital because pus was drainim froa ny wound and tho

not h aled yew. I stayed in tiv: hospital about half a year witoar


20 Doc. :S^.-ir-‘l-:-rri.ce (AID)
coxi i


C


q That was until aarly 19Ui tfcet you regained in tho hospital?

I loft tho hospital in February 19ulx. I don't rcaenfccr tho exact
dat.-j bat tho wound was not healed yet and there was a snail wound fren
. Idch uus -trained. On tho 15th of Sop tech or Dr. Troitel, to spoak of
t- healing of ay log, grafted the skin takon off ay thigh on to tho
ound. I stayed in tho hospital till February 19U* but when I rotumod
back to tha block I could not walk woll. 'Jy log was entirely healed at
the end of Juno 19Uli.

q Xar did this skin grafting operation tako place on Sopteatoor 15#
19U3? . .

A los.

q tier , poiii" beck to tho original oporation, when did you first
know that an operation was to bo jxrforaod on you?

'hen I vac jxit to bod and ay logs wore shaved, thon I thought
that I would undergo an oporation.

Q Did you ask thee what thoy voro goli^j to do to you?

A )k>, I didn't ask.

q not?

•A Eecauso it was inpossiblo .to ask anything in tho ooncontration
con?. used to got, os answers to our questions: "Halt'*. Haul" —

shut up.

q 7oro you in good health at tho tirvo of this operation?

A I iraa quite healthy, only undor-nourished and oxhauatod booauso
of hunger reigning in the canp, . *

q Did you cv-.r mko any proto3t against this operation?

•i I protested nrainst operations, but after ay oim operation when
livi:v-. conditions in canp allarod nj to do it.

1 ?h-y did rot ask you to consent to this operation boforo you wore
operated or., did they?

ft I was not asked anything by ary body. wton I was tak^n to tho

oepital I was sura that I was going to bo shot down, because I remen'toer

* at all ay conrados belonging to tho sane transport who had boon shot

861


c


20 33C. iS~A-X-21-3-?rico (AID)
Court So* 1 v


a


iavrr- wore taken out of tho blocks in tho same way.

q How, do you know approximately how aargr women wero oporatod
on oxporinjntally at Ravcnsbrucck while you wero thoro?

A Yes, I renesfeor quite well. Screnty-fivo Polish women wore
operated*

Q Arxi did any of than die as a result of those* operations?

A Too* I r-n-nb.r quite well that five of my cccradcs who had
b^n oporatod on died. After ny operation two of my comrades diod* Ono
•.as lying near no in tho hospital and tho second was in the sono room.
Th- run of first ;css Krokopaky Kasiairc, and tho socond Kotzol
Sofia* apsides diod Sruco Alsky, Evinov Itchinila and Kruska.

Q How, wore you woaon who wore subjected to these operations
known in thu camp as "guinea pigs"? •

A Yos, the very soil known nexus \kib "guinoa pigs" to doscribo us.

Q How Just boforo the ond of tho war, did th^y make — did tho
Qurrtno in Pnvonsbruock make nr$- effort to gather together all of you
sc-callud gui ;ca pigs?

.. Yea. At tho beginning of the year 19U1* all oporatod wonon- woro
put into one block* On the Uth of Fobruary 191*5 I ruoonbor that tho
,f o.‘ the -lock road off our naaas written down on the list. Ho told
us tint wo wjr. n-t Hared to lcr.vo the block tho noxt 4?.y. Wo know

f

that this proccduro on such a list .-want oxocution and wo know that wo
wo’-l probably b. executed because ro know that six of our xonrados had
b>^n shot down before, . r


20 Dec.-A-i*-C3^WJrnicls
Court Ifo.l

Tfe know also, for certain, that the Go irons would try not to lot any
. Itncas knew about the operations get out of the emp alive.

% Sell, vita: 33 , wore you girls able to avoid detection be can so of
the rroat confusion in tha carp in the last days of the war?

... 1-3, that Is ubat I sooted to scy.

Vg'.i, u_ro you ever precised freodoc if you c^rcod to undergo this

operation?

A. Sever, no.

.. Di- you sry at rny tix» that you would prefer to bo shot instoad of


operated on? • ... . . . J

— Xes.

.. :tow, jou caafcionod that six of thoso -..omen vjho "ore operated on

exi-jrt:A.x.t-' ... -v slot. Arc you tolling the Tribunal that the so six for-

%

sons -..-uro killed in addition to the five who diod as a result of the oporn

t l;n?


.. H-.vo you had c-r-ain pictures takon of you since you came to Kurnbar

• v -

P.. ::c:lJISX: I cri fcnding.to tie witness for identification sovon pic-

iuTv-s .xu , kca l, X~lDX, .. through G.”

(Itocuacn-s were sutcittou to tho rdtnoss)

.. Are thoss all pictures takon of you hero in Nurnborg ?

* •

A. Yjs.

IH. •loG._‘-7i: 7r.o Prosecution offers docuuit H 0 -ID 8 O, * through G, as

• » •

Pro- cut ion .iddit 215, A through G.

... Sow, _ n-aa, ill you please r-.no vc your stocking and shoo fron tho
1 -; on which operation was performed? Iior, will you stand up and step

9

to tho i ., cr* -ill you turn around slowly? lfl.ll you turn around age

px-wis-? (I!.- witness cocplied)

IT.. EcHUCT: You nay sit doua nov.

t

i. ‘.iitrv.33, you undergono any operational tr_atmr.t sinco you luft


20 D0C-»-at-22-M=oi-ilB


i


Court Ee.l

the Envoi staled; Concentration Cairo?


loa, I undort-ent an operation in »*arsar..


,x.c that? was the nature of that operation?

... This operation was porferned by.Profc-scc Gruxak.

• •

.. ^nd 'Sint did ho do?

72 v operation consist-.d of transpiration of a terrion rtiich would hold


the fr.llliK. foot.

Wao-thia operation successful?

This operation did rot succeed. Thero nra ooro infection in ny log that
caused tha tendon to fall out.

13. "7 I hr.vo no firthor quostion pt this tiro. Your Honors.

• o

Trl HLiSIDZrr: Have counaol fee th. dcf.alrnts my cross-exanination of


tils titnoas'

(So r.sponsc)

13. KcHJK?;: ‘.Jo-ten call Zr. Alexander to tho starri now, md 1 think per-
hv'3~i:o con aako a oto,rt on his report.

1 J .HS3IDJI: Vory veil.

1 ... LX I a witness, taring been previously sworn, took tho starri

rfl testified rs. follows.

Item ask that t tu record show that tt*. .JeJt-ndor is still
- oath -oxi is the 3 rro Dr. Alaxmeer tho has testified .arlier today.
r..-HXUT: 2x> Tribunal, re. Inc 3 the tdtnoss Dr. Alexander that ho is


still uroer cath.

CR. .ill?!'.: Yes, sir.


DIR XT SLiaSATICSi

aY if. X HJST:

. Ar. ,Xr;'. a-, have you rude an uxaaination of tho witness now on the
- nc; that is s y, Hiss Kuscicrczuk?


... I h:.v,. -

.. .a •r. 1 -ray naiund-r your dirction,of th> leg of this witness?


I-s, sir


20 Dec. l^-42&-22-3-*ardola (ATD)
Coart !to. 1


Q And is that th. I-rcy which you now hero in your hind, namely,
focaaont 'X—1095?

• •

A Yes, sir, it is.

1 ^. MCE.ItTT: I sulxdt dicuaont 10-1095 as Prosecution Exhibit 220.

q j fcw> (toctor, will you prococd to giro a report on your oxad-
ration of this woaan?

A This pationt«s right log is disfigurod by a dooply scarred
excavation (indicating), the botton of which is the lateral aspect of
the tibial borw (indicating) — this is hard tibial bone — froen which
th- entire porenoal and entorior tibial nusclo groups havo boon pooled
off or sloughed off.

If you look at tho other log, (indicating), what you soo hero is
tit tibial ad pcr-ixal ousel., nnt^tibinl and antopersonoql nnisclo
group. Froa this sido (indicating), one cannot fool tho bone dirootlyj
on this sido — (to tho witness), will you turn a round — thoro you
s.o the boro is corpl^toly darodod. All tHa is hard borw surface,

COTiird v. 7 ok in only. This (indicatirg) is tho bono directly, fibulr.r
-a sroli as tibial. You can fool both bo nos. This is tha fibular bono
and this is the tibial. You cannot normally fool those bonus horo
(indicatirg), bocauso thoy are cove rod by ai3clo. Tho ruscle his boon
peolod off, lottvinj tho bono at tho bottom of tho cavity.

The lateral sdcus susclo is likuwiso dostroyod. That is this
ms do h.ro (indicaUr^), which *ivos this very curious sharp drop
from tho calf. As you #*c, if you look at it in this wry, you soo horo
tho lateral sol.us aisdo, which givos tho calf its graceful curvo.

H.ro is the. nodial and hero is tho lateral. The lateral givo3 this
latord, graceful, norcal curve. Hero (indicating) you soo tho curvo \
x3 sharply interrupted by his angle, duo to tho fact that the .lateral
doua Made is gone as a whole.

T'-.o nuscl.s of tho upp-r calf, apart fro- th. lateral sol.us, aro
piuservod. Tho upp-r calf hero is preserved. This mutilating scar begins
two inches b’low th- lateral epicondylo—taro (indicating)tvand extends
ctemcard to th- litoral railodar region, including tho dorsun of tho
right foot, until 865


~ Is

lied


botfc (indicating).

..: Its u^ tL.c scar is hrOf ra inch wide. In tto niddlc of the lofi
rcrrcid -rcr. n-rsur-s two and throo quarter inchcs in width. Hero (indi-
6in; ). This is two rod three-quarter inch-s. In the lower half of the scar

^ 4 -

;_ii. I; .Ir-etly concrcsocnt with the pcrioato;r: of tho lctcr.il surfr.ee of
tibi-1 rad fifcular bones. This is bona (indicating).

Hew, the neuroio.icrJ. ox-rain-, t ion.

;to the vritn-38),: '.Xll you please try to d* this? '

(doe«.n*> ratir..:).

(Tho witness coevllod).

The pr.tiunt is unable to dtrslflox tho foot, which coons to olovatc the
feet upward,

(To the wit:’ jy to do it on th- ether cido, if you will,

(Th. -.dtneos cca. lice)

. do do i ith the other loj, if you will. Just show that you understn*

tide. Like this, (deaonstratinc).

(Tho witness cctrii-d).

tow try to do it hero (inaicatinc). -

-<jr ji'l ;tvjn ia ca;; lotoly con., Tha bi^ too cannot bo dorsifloxed uither.

(To tho int-nsrotor): Hill you try to tell her to dorsiflox tho bi£ too,

* •

to _ -_li bic too up?


;.v- ina x- rater cccpliod#.


-S66-


>: Doc. L--%.-^Scr&t22-L-.-Ocniols (i.TD)

Cod^t !fe. 1


You rotico this indicates that crong tho muscles of tho poroncnl
and anterior group, tJv extensor hallucis longus is likoniso missing;
that is, the extensor nusclo of tho big too, The a na ll toos can bo
-onowhrt dorsifloxcd and spread,

(To the ..-itnoss) j Try to vigglo the snail toos, if you will,

(T ho witness cor.pliod).

You notice that tho residual dorsifloxtion of tho snail toos of
the right foot involvos only the end phalanges—that means tho tips
only—indicating that this residual notion is entirely carried out by
•.lie snail muscles of tho foot, and that the extensor digitorun longus
is likewise rissi.'t;. All ‘ttaso.'disturbancos rovual thoasolvos in tho
gait of tho petiont.

(To the .itnoss-)i .'ill* you ploaso walk a little bit?

(The witness caapliod).

You will notico again that during gait tho right lug is not
oluvatod, but r;-ains gluod to tho ground, as it wore,

(To tho itneso)j *111 you ploaso do it again? Think you,

(Tho witness conpliod).

It rumins gluod to ttv, ground. It is soxwh-.t bott^r with shoos
on, wh-ro sen- support is given.

Knee Jerks aro aotive and equalj right ankle Jerk is prosont but

irinishad.'

Th knse Jerk is lxro (indicating); the ankle Jurk is very lively
tore, ?*s re is a little bit of it, indicating that tho gastrocnemius
tjndor. is still ttoro and tho nusclo barely functioning.

The sc-r itself and a snail area one and a half incho3 wide
laterally adjacent to its riddle part—hire (indicating), tho scar
itself is in thi3 area h^ro—-are anusthotic for touch and pain, rfowover,
.atdent describes painful paresthesias in the anus the tic part
i .-.ernlly adjacent to the riddle third of the scar. Here, apparently,
ah--re nay bo a snail nourana probably groring there from sono of tho
r. r.ar.ts of nerve tissue

•

Tix entire dorsur. of the right foot shows hypesttesia for pain,

867


20 D

Court So. , ^

Tho dorsun of tho right foot, the seer itself end tho s nai l aroa
laterally cdjacont to its rrfddle third aro anesthetic to fine touch
t-t feel coarse touch. The vibration sense over tho latoral nalleolus
is Uni shod. That of tho nodi el nalleolus i3 preserved. ;.s demonstrated
bafOra, gait is distributed by inability to dorsi—flex tho fight foot.

Q Doctor, can you briefly givo us your findings with rcspoct to
the x-ray picture?

Yos sir. Th;ro aro throo groups of findings. First of all,
arked 'V." on tho x-rays there is a bone dofoct, scni-circular in shapo,
involving tho lateral part of the tibia, 1.2 centicttors in dianotor,
located at the latoral -aspect of thw tibia centimeters abovo tho ankle
joi; . This cavltp is consistent >4th an infective procoss rrith a cavity -
resulting aithur fron an absorbed or ronoyod sequester, or fron removal
of port of torn, with subsoquor.t infeotion, surrounded by sclerosis of
tho bonoj i wediatoly proxiaal to this dafoot, uarkod "B"in tho x-ray
hstogzcphs, is a bory bridgo botwoon tho fibula and tibia. This ontiro
ioturo is characteristic of provious ostoaiyclitis.

Furthoroox\;, th> distal half o the ontiro fibular shaft over a
strotch indioatod by "C J on tto photograph, tho fibular shaft is
thickened with arkad thickenin' 1 of * Uv pariost.in, indicating repair
foblc-i.* ostoaeyelitis 1 repeat, h.ro is the osioonyulitis of tho
fibul (indicating). Koro is tho bone dofoct (indicating)* tho cystic
iafjct result!rv probably fron th- removal of socuostor or probably
r^to%-al of part of oonc rith subsequent infection; above it, narkod

’ho hole in tb oon. which is about hero roughly (indicating), and
shove it th. concrescence between fibula and Libia, to conponsato for
t-.w fja coning of support belo , or just pimply :cncr-sconco duo to tho
infectious russo3, producU.cn-of the poriostoar, inflanod periostoun
ich, in a 3togo of repair, *ill lay dovm newbona between; of course,
•hnomal bone.

Doctor, finally can ytxi givo us your opinion as to tho purpose

-f the operation which this waaan was sub jo c tod to?

866


20 Deo. !:6-,W^ch»»-23-2-SLsv*uoJf
Court :'c. 1 ^


(ATD) ’


The co-plctcness with which muscles fcavo sloughed off indicates
that this probably was on axperfront with gas bacillus, with ono of tho
3 as bacillus variety or ootfcra vOigmn variety, and again this pationt
did art Bastion any powder that was used in conjunction with tho original
inoculation. This patient did nor.tdon the formation of blisters which
:_<£o it li'rely that this was a ease of oodtna uolignur. experiment, a
r- 3 bacillus oxpcrir»nt, and that probably streptococci did not play a
rol, at least in the acuto stage. Tha sharp do creation to individual
Tisdo groups and tho co^plutonass of thoir destruction is iv>ro typical
of tho activity of the anaorobos. Tho anaerobes, is tho group to which
gaa br.cilli oolong#

K • ICR.NSTi I Ivivo no further questions, your Honor#

7.'' P!?DSlDSKrt Do counsel for tho dofendonts havo any questions to
proproni to th. -*tnoss, Dr. Aloxandor, on cross oxarination?

(Jfe response).

:: r ; /^Sing-r: Apparently there arc nono. Is counsel for tho
prosecution finished with tho vritneos.

>£?. XH/.hTf* Ho rcy bo excused as far as tho prosecution is
concerned, your Ho>.or.

7~. '."IT: NT: Th- vitnats ay bu excused and th» Polish witness

J 3 dso oxcusod. I think counsel for both parties understand that oono
ti , rro tho Tribunal announced that it would, to.Torrow at 12*30 o»clock,
adjourn until tho norring of Thursday, January 2. I supposo you can
•sac tka -erring. Hr. hcKeney, in reading records fron tho book?

;r. SBHMPI* Tos iadood, sir.

IT’. 'TSSTCTT: Tho Tribunal will raw rooos3 until 9*30 o'clock
tenerrow rxirnin..

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until 21 Daccrab-r 191*6 at 0930 hours.)


669


Court I Mf*

21 Dec-?'-G*5-l-l-?ost^ (LJG)


cusses


Q/K


Official transcript of the iarican military
Tribunal in tho act tar :£ tho United States cf
l_iirlca, against Karl 3rv.dt, ot al., defendants,
sitting at Numbcrg, GerjaDy, on 21 Decarier,
1&6, 0930-1230, Justice Beals, presiding*


?-§ AAHSHLLi Tno Honorable Judges of I-lilitary Tribunal IS


litary Tribunal I is now in s-ssion.


God save tho Uni tod States of A erica and this Honorable Tribunal.


There will bo order in the ccurtroo.i.

THE rRBSIDIfl/r: Hr. Marshal, ascertain if tho defendants are all


MiBSSkL: ifey it please lour Honor, all defendants arc prosont


in tcourtroom.

THE fflESIDZcT: Socrotary-Genoral, note t-. .t fact for tho record,
the defendants are all prosont in tho Court.

Tno prosecution any proceed.

HR. HARDY: ilay it pleaso Tour Honor, at this ti'c I shall intro¬
duce Dccuuont Aabpr NO-065 which had boon dlttod previously ponding
securing of tho Jurat on tho Pbhl affidavit. I will pass tho original
docunont up to you so tu t you .iay sae the Jurat that we have cbttAnod.

(The dccuuont was handed to tho Judge.)

If that is satisfactory, Tour Honor, I wish at this ti. o to offer
that as Prosecution Extioit No. 221. T.jat has not boon given a prosecu¬
tion rnrfcor prior t. this tire.

THE PRESIDENTt Tho Jurat ep^oers to bo in rdor. The document will
be admitted in evidonco.


MR. HAP0JT: Al3: at this ti c, T-ur Honor, in ccnnection^lth tho
Dachau report by the United St us Ary Investigating Teas, I introduced


in connection with tho relaria experiments, tosticeny of ano Korion

with tho ruling ~i the Tribunal I he .to had
Secretary :f EIT, certify this extract of that
I -ish t;- r >ass that up f:r Tour Honor*s

to Joe go.)

za«ts. with your Honor s requirements, at this tiuie
- S70-


I


Court I

21 Dc--iS-i-2-?:ater


I should like to offer it as' Frcs^uticnaxhibit Kc; 222 *

THE KtSU H B - T i The certificate ap oars t: be in order. The docu¬
ment n af be adrdttod.


R. HeE423f: If the Tribunal ploose, lour Honors will recall that
several weeks ago, in the early stages cf the trial, wo attempted to
introduce a deposition by Father Leo hiochalcwski. The deposition w c s
part cf the investigation report .-ado by e unit cf the Unitod States
kr-j investigating concentration caups. The deposition was refused ad¬
mission for the roasen that it was not signed by Father liiechalowski.

In the x»anti ui wo have located hi ’ and we will call hin to the stand to
testify this .-.orning os soon as ho arrives. Ha is net huro at the pres¬
ent tine but ho will bu in shortly. In the neantl * wo would liko to
continue with the introduction :f proof on the experiments csrriod out
at the Ravonsbruock concentration caap and cb'ut which tho court has
heard testimony fro..- fur victi m f t -so experiments. Those witnoosos
•hlcrt tho Court has hoard arc tho so-collod asocial and cri inal porsons
upon whoa tho defendants in tho dock fool that it is legal _nd noral to
oxp-ri. wnt upon.

I aa just aevised that fr.th-r lliochalovskl has .arrived and wo would
liko at this ti o to bavo fain sua onod to t'» witness stand.


T-B F.13SID2IT: -Hill t .o I-arshsl sUrion tho witness Loo liochalowski.
mil this witness testify ir. t!to Gor.ian language?

R. 'c.HaHET: Tos, sir.

LEO "IISCKAICiSXI, a witness, to 'c the stand and testified as follows:
BY THE EUSIBB/r*

Q. Tho witness will state his na.ja. * *

A. *£- nar:o is Iao :ii echo levs :i.

'<• r-o witness will be sworn. c.ld up y^ur right hand. Do you
3 -..\.ir that the evidence ycu shall give shall be the truth, tho *iole
truth, and nothin, but tho truth, s. help you led?

(Tho witness repeated the oath.)


- 8?1 -


Court I

21 Dec-H-(ES-l-3-?sstor

DIHiCT * £XA' B UHCK

BT S3. .‘cHiSZTi

Q. lour ncjje is Loo -Aechalowski?
a. las, sir.

Q. U&dr. and ifcore ware you bom, witness.

A. On tho 22nd of -arch, 1909, in Sabrxozno, Poland.
4. Are you a citizen of rcland?

A. Yea.

Q. Vast is your present address, vitn^oi?

A. Radorhorat, in tho district J indon, iestphalia.

Q. Arc you a Catholic priost, dtnoss?

A. Xus.


Q. _And you are new c chaplain cf tho polish r.ilitary Visa ion to
the hindquarters of tho British Amy of tho Rhine?

A. Xcs, and I au occ«|piod and active n w in tho DP canp.

Q. Will you toll tho Tribunal rtiat education y u havw r-coivod,

•itnoss.

A. I h. .vc attended end graduated frao too Huv.nistic Gyrmasiuu
ard afterward tho priost sonincry in Dublin near Dischau.

Q. What Wv,ro ycu doing froa 1933 until tho war br-.ko ,ut, father.
A. I was dnistor in Boland at that tiro.

|S

Q. Wore jMijar rested by tho Oortoans in 1939?

A. Tos.

Q. Will you explain to tho .'ribunai h.w th t care about?

A. It had boon announced that ovoryb cy had U report. If he

f iiled to do s it would bo punishod b death, t _t they w.uld have to

0

rop.rt tc too town najor«s office. I was convinced that this was a
registration and accordingly I wont tr.cro. I was i-rmediately, arrested
upon ry arrival thero. — - „

1. Did they tell ycu wfry y .u wore arrested, fath-r?

A. 5c, but later on I saw ry warrant cf arrest in prison.

<• Ard did it give you ary idea .f ^.fay ycu w u rc arrested?


I


- 372 -


Court I

21 Dec-*(-G35-l-3-?cstar LX


X. Only warrant cj arrest — it h-d toon written, underlined with


i n.d pencil, .inistor, priest


21 Dcc-L-CES-l-h-Fcctor
C ort^k• 1.


c


o. .j>d that is the cnly reason which ycu knew as tc ycu m re

• * " f—

arcs tod?

I wr.s nevur charged end never called to any trial cr any ether legal
orcccedincs.

cro ycu at tho tine cf your arrost toachinr school in Svriccic,

. olaad? -

1 . Wring the previous tine I had boon a c: nfossi-nal teacher in tho
cch. *ls in S\riocic.


- 873 -.


Ccurt I

21 iXic-j-: -:2-2 -i-otc^3-ljg


C

N~w, father, will y.u tell t.« Tribunal ifeat happ-nod to you
nft-r your arrest?

Xm uhen I was arrested I was first leapt in prison fer twe nonths
and fr-j tn.ro wo ware sent into a cloister and free there still other
priests wore r^saaolad until about nin-ty priests had bean esse'.iblod al-
t.g-thor, and fr;a there wo woro sent to Strutthof near Drnzig into the
concentration ca. p --hich was located there. And, fren there ?n tho fifth
•.r ninth i wfcruary no were transferred tc Sachsonhauscn-Orani.nburg
which is located noar Berlin. On tho 13th of Dacor-bor 19b0, we woro
transferred again tc D-chau. I was c nfir.od in D?chau until tho arrival
f tho X eric ana - until wo woro lib-rated - that was on tho 29 th of
April 19U5. 1

Q. New, father, woro ycu a political prisoner in D-chau?

A. TwS. I were a r-d insignia which all these wh> hr.d boon arrested
! r political reasons had to woar this insignia.

3* How, father, did f-.ro c<«tt c tiwi whon you woro oxporlnontod
:n tho cencontration enp ct Dachau?

A. Yes. ir.laria oxperi".onts and als on one cc:si;n we woro on-
S-god -in hish altitude oxporiaonts.

Q. Did y u say high altitude oxp-ri cats, Dect r?

a. No, I said aviation experiments.

And what do y.u ,»an by aviation -xocrloonts?

a. iioll, I havu said it becouso wo woro dressed in aviator’s
unif-ns and then wo wjro put int containers full cf wat-r -and ico,

Q. Now, fat. -r, will y.u tell, t-.. Tribun-1 just wh t happened whon
y-u w.ro uapsjijontod on with Malaria? That is, when it happened and
r. * y-u happened to be selected?

a. I m.\ s ti; t weak that I fell down on the road because everybody
3 hungry in tho canp. I wanted'. be transferred t n thj assignaent
- ‘-r on where wo g.t s: e broad t.' eat between -_als s ny health could
1-pram by the additional fe d. One -.van arrived and selected ab .ut
•-hirty people for sojo easy lab.r, I also wanted t- be sd.cted f;r this

w

ocig.T_nt and those whe had boon selected f r this w rk were led away.

•- wont ir. t.>e direction where tho ~.rh was 1. c ted and at the very last

. . , - -a7U-


C;crt I

21 Dec-W - IS- 2-2-Gr^ss-LJG


c

r _-_r.t instead f going to the pi -i f rrt wo w 0 ro. lead tr the crap
Capital. i.b did nat know wh t via g.ing t b« dene with us there. I
*h ught t. nysolf that perhaps this was suing t be scat detail far

work in tho hospital. Uo were tcld th .t we sh.-uld undress and
^ts.r »o hod undressed ourselves :ur minors w^ro taken djwn and then wo
asked xt w=s *>ing on and they tcld us, s:dlingly, 'his is f-r air
detail." But uo ware n.t told what was going t; be denc with us. Then
the duct r ccao and told us all to rojnin and th„t we wore to*be x-rayed.

I; x th t .uf rai-bors had already bean taken d.wn we wore auppesed to go
* - ur blocks. I sat for tw: days in tho olcck and afterwards I was
ogain called to tho hospital and t-.-ro I was given -claria in such a
fanner that th-ro woro little cages with infected cioaqultcea and I had
t put ay hand on on- of tho littlo cages and a icsqulto stung :ro ard
ifWrwards I was still in tho hospital fer five weeks. H.-wov^r, for tho

M.L bolng r.c symptoms of the disease ekur'a d tho.mselvos. Somewhat later,

%

I don't oxactly rocall, two or throe woo!s, I had my first malaria attack.
Such attactcrccu. red frequently and several edicines were given to us
for against malaria. I was given such undid no as noo-salvason. I was
given two injections of quinino. On ona occasion I was given atabrino
ard tne worst was that one ti jo when I had an attack, I *6s given ao-callod
perifer. I was given nino injections of that kind, on- every hour and
•. at every second day through tho seventh injection. All ol a 3udden my
htart felt like it was joing to bo torn out. I bucaoe insane. I com¬
pletely lost languago - my ability to speak. This lastod until

evening. In the evening a nurso arrived and wanted to give oe tho

*

eighth injoct.on. I was thon unable to spoak and I told the nurse about
all of the co iplications I had had and t at I did not want to receive
the injection. The nurse had already poured' out the injection and said
that ho would report this to Dr.- schilling After approximately ton
minutes another nurse arrived are he said that he would have to givo me
the injoction aftur all. Then I said the g.v*e thing again, that I was
not going to have the injection. Hcrjevcr, h» told me that he had to
carry out th«t order. Then I replied tint no matter whit ordor he had,

- would net be willing to canit

- 875 -


21 Doc L6-!-y?:-2-3-Orc53 (AID)
Car t So. 1


STjici6 c. Then ho went sway and returned once again after ten ainutes.

Ho told oe, “I knew you know what can happen if you don't accept tho

injection*" Then I said in spito of everything, "I refuse to rocoivo a

another injection and that I wou^d tell that -to the profossor. "I

requested that ho h iasd f know that I would not bo willing to rocoivo

tho injection. So that the nurso would not have any further difficulty

after twonty minutes Dr. Ploottnor ciaa with four imaato nursos and ho

talked to ny ccsrados. 'Th.ro is 'oinj to bo a big row hero. 11 Thon I

said, "If I hivo rosistod for such a long tlai I will continue to do

so." Dr. Ploottnor, howover, was very quiot. Ho only reached for ray

hand and ho chock ay jxilsru, then touched .ay hoed and asked no wKot

caapli cations I had had. I told hin what I had had after that injoctlon.

And then ho told thu nurso to fcivo two tablats in order.to ronovo

tho hcadacho anl tho pains in ray kidneys. Tien I had boon given that

Dr. Ploottnor was about to loavo and told thff nurses th~t they wore to

•

givo .uo tho rast of the injoctiona. Thon I arid, ’ffcuptstumfuehror,

I refuse to bo givon that injection.' Tho physician turned around aftor

I had said that and lookod at no and said, "I an responsible for your

life, not you. 4 Tlxn whon tx injoctlon ho told tho nurso — tho nurses

•

ccapliod with his onkr and it was thon they r-avo au this injection. It
vas tho OQ&e one to whoa I had previously told that I die! not rrant to
have another injoctlon. It was only strange that aftor tho oighth
injection no results happened as they had done proviously so that, in
7 opinion, I think that ttv. nurso gave r» son*. otter injoction. On tho
:xrning I was given tiw ninth inj-ction — when I noko up in tho
-orrdr« tho results were then as usual. I bocanc sick and I bogan to
f.el cold and I had high favor, ' J

Q Father, do I understand you to 3ay that you woro injoctod r.lth
ralaria in the nriddlo of 19U2?

A It was approjdnat -ly in the raiddlo of 1912 when I was infoctod
• 1th • alaria.


976


21 Doc. l»5-*MCt-2~3-Gro«je (AID)

Court So, 1


Q And you »-rc rot csted your consent to thi nalaria oxpirlaont?

A No. I *as not asked for ny consent.

I

Q And ycu did not volunteer for this os^rlaint?

A ffc. I »3s ta^cn in the sinner rhich I have Just dcscribod.


376a


Court Ho. 1 C.

21 Doc 46-'-- - 3-1 - UG- -'uttjr


Q. Did you oako any protest?

In 1942 it was vory diffioult in tho camp to lodgo

U

cny protost. When I protoetod with this eighth injection
which I was to bo givon, I cloarly realized that it would
havo tho most sorious ccnsoqvcncos for mo. "ator on such
things could bo risked, but in that yoar I still think that
I would hr.vo boon unablo to do that, :nd 1 don t think it
would havo boon to thy avail. j

Q. Now how aany pooplo woro or.porlmontod on with you,
that is, malaria oxporimonts? *

A. In tho hospital whon 1 h a d my attacks, thoro woro
approximately fifty to sixty pooplo; tho nuxabors chnngod.

Q. And do you know tho approximate tot..l nuuibor of
inn. tos oxporimontod on with malaria in bnchr.u?

A. Towards tho ond I ho.rd approximately ono
thousand two hundrod prisoners woro subjoctod to thoso
oxporimonts.

Do you know wkothor or not any of thuso inmatos
diod as a rosult of tho malaria oxporimonts?

A. Sovoral havo diod, but if this was tl:o diroct rosult
of malaria, * do not know. I know of ono case whon tho
pntiont diod aftor having boon Hivon -’oriforo injoctlons.

Thon I still know cnothor priost who died, but ; ftorwards

*

-- ard prior to his doatk ho was sont to anothor room.

3. 7#r.s it customary to transfor p tiontc out of tho

bicck in which thuy woro conducting the malaria oxporimonts
if It appeared that they might dio?

... It looked to no as if this p.tiont of whom I havo
just spokor. h..J boon nevod fer .'-he reason so it coul 0 not
bo 3ocr. that it happenod in the c.so ox’ malaria, hue A do
a t know if pooplo diod as a result of n. lari., boc. uso I
m not an oxport on tho subject,.

' - 877 -


Court Hq. i Q

21 Doc 46-H _ 3-2 -LJG- Putty

Hou cany rocurroncon of nelarir. fovor did you havo.

Father?

A. I cr.nnot givo you the oxact mar.bor my moro. How-
ovor, tboso cttacks rocurrod froquontly, 1 think about fivo
tiaos, end tfcon 1 still had troatmor.t in bod for aomo timo,
and then tLoro woro sovoral moro, and altogether I had ton
attacks, one evory day. Thon I roachod r. toroporaturo of
41.6.

Q. Do you still suffor my offocts frern tho malaria?

A. I still h. vc had ao»o after offocts, but I do not
know if this is only of malaria bocauao 1 was also subjoctod
to enothor oxporiwont.

Q. Well, will you new toll tho Tribunal about this
othor oxporiraont?

A. During those malaria attacks on ono occasion I
was «r.llod by Dr. Prachtol and 1 wan cxamir.od by a Polioh
physician, and Dr. Prachtol told mo, "If 1 hvo any uso

for you, 1 will call you." Howovor, I did not know what

was going tc bo dono with no. Sovor: 1 days lator, that was
on tho sovonth of D c tobcr, IS 42, a prisoner ormo and told
».:o that I was to roport to tl o hospital iunodiatoly. I
thought that I w..s going to be ox. .mined onco more, ;.rd I

was taken through tho malaria station tc block 5 in Dachau,

*

to tho fourth floor of block 3. -horo — the so-callad

eviction rocm, tho . viation experimental st tion was located

thoro, and thoro was a fonco, a woodon fonco so that nobody

ecu Id see what res insido, and I was led thoro, and thoro

wc.s r. basin with v tor :nd ico which flo. tod on tho r tor.

ihcro were two t.-blos, and thoro voro two apparatus ’on thoro

•'oxt to them t. oro was a heap of clothing that consisted

of uniforms, .nd Dr. Prachtol was there, twe officers in

air * r orco uniforms, ^owover, I do not know th.wir

-378-


ii .mjs •


Court l*o. 1

21 Doc 46-*I -3-3 - UG- ?utty

How X was told to undross. I undrossod nd 1 was oxaminod.

Tho physician then romarkod that ovorything w.s in ordor.

Hew wiroa l.A boon tapod to ny back, also in tho lonur roe turn,
Aftorwurds I had to woar ay shirt, ay drawors, birt thon after¬
wards 1 had to woar ono of tho uniforms which woro lying
thoro. *hon I also had to troar a long pair of boots with
cat's fur and ono aviator's combination. And oftorvards a
tubo was put around my nock and was filled with air. Ar.d
eftorwarda the wiroa which had boon connoctod with no —
tthoy woro connoctod to tho apparatus, ar.d thon I was thrown
into tho water. <.11 of a suddon 1 bocamo very cold, and I
begin to trcablo. I iiModi .toly turned to those two non and
asked than to pull no out of tho water cc.uso I would bo
unable tc stand it much longer. Howovur, they told no
laughingly, "Wo11, this will only last a vory short tine."

X sat in this wator, and X bad — and I was conscious for
ono hour end a half. I do not knevr oxactly because X did
not have .. watch, but that is tho .pproxii.v te tino I spent
thoro•

During this tino tho teeperaturo was lowered vory slowly

in tho beginning .nd afterwords noro rapidly, hhon I was

thrown into the wr.tor ny tenporaturo was lowered very slowly

in tho beginning and afterwards aoro rapidly. Thon I was

thrown into tho water ny tenporaturo was 37.6. Thon tho

temporaturo bocjjro iowor. Thon I only had 33 csd. thon as

low as 30, but thon I already bocamo somewhat unconscious

and ovory fiftoon ninut-s some blood was token fror my oar.

--ftur Ir ving sat in tho \/;.tor for about half .n hour, I was

offered a cigorotto, which, however, I did not want to smoko.

Kowovor, ono cf tUso uon approached me and gave .jo tho

cig-rottc, end tho nurse who stood near tho basin continued

to put this cigarotto' into my couth and pulled it out -.grin,

-679-


Court Ko. 1

21 Doc 46— -3-4- UG- ?Utty


i tv.nr.god tc 3uoko about fc-.1T of this ci^-rotto. Lator on
I was glvon a llttlo glass with Schnapa, and tfcon 1 wr.s
asked how I wr.a Tooling. Somewhat lator still I was glvon
ono cup of Grog. ‘Ihis Grog was net vory hot. It wr.a rr.thor
luko warm. I wr.a frouzlng vory uuch In thla wr.tor. Mow
my feet uoro becoming as rigid as iron, and tho souo thing
applied to my hands, and later on my breathing bocamo vory
short. I onco again bogan to troubio, or*l aftorwards cold
awoat appoenud on ny forohoad. Ifb'lt as If I waa just about
to dio, and then 1 waa at ill asking them to pull mo out
bocaueo I could not star*? this much longor.

Tfcon Dr. Prr.chtol camo and ho had a llttlo bottlo, an d
ho gr.vo no a fow drops of souo liquid out of this bottlo,

:r.d I did not know rnything aboyt this liquid. It had a
somewhat swootish tasto. Then * lost uy consciouanoss. I
do not know how much lon>r I xv . .ir.od in tho wr.tor bocauso
I waa unconscious, ■*. again rogc.inod conaciouanoas. It

wr.a approximately botuocn 3 nc 6:30 in tho ovoning. I was
lying on r. atrotchur covcrod nitt bl\nkote, :nd abovo mo thoi
was aono kind of .n applionco v.ith lamps which wuro wanning
mo.

A n tho room thoro xtt.s only Dr. Prachtol a.jd two prison-
0

ors. Ihon Dr. ?rdchtol asked mu how I was fooling. Ihon
I replied, 'Hrst of all, I feel very exhausted, rnS furthor-
moro I rxi also vory hungry." Dr. ?rnchtol had immediately
orcierod that 1 was to be givon better food . r.d that 1 wr.s
also to lio in bod. Ono prisoner r: i3cd me on tho strotchor
end ho took me uxvior his iti rnd he led mo through tho
corridor to his room, curing this tluo ho spoko to mo, and
ho told mo, :: t7oli, you do not :-n . wh. t you h; vo ovon suffor.
•-nd in tfco room the prisenor g-.vo no half a bottlo of milk,
one picco o^broad and'somo potatoes, but that ermo from


Court H>. 1

21 Doc 46 -U - 3-5 - UG - Putty


block 3, end thoro I rs put to bod, end tbo vory seme
evening n Polish priaonor — it ves n physician; his first
nnao wr.a Dr. Aden, but I do not ronosrtoor his other nemo --


- 581 -


21 Doc ^£-l-Sct>4i-l-Lchnhsrcrt
Court So. 1


C


S_ ctju cn official orders* "a told u.; 'Zvorythiiv: that has happened
to you is a ailitary secret■ Youao not to discuss it with anybody.

0 * .

If 70 a fail to do so, you know what the cor.soqU.ncGS will be for you.

You aro intelligent enough to know that." Of course, I fully roalisod
that I had to koop quiot about that.

On one occasion I had discussed these experiences with one of ry
comrades. Cne of the nurses found out about this and ho cane to 300 no

V I

and he askod ao if I was already tired of living, because I was talking

about such ratters. Put, in tlvi way these experiments were conductod, I
do not nood to add anything further to it.

Q 'Ant long was it before. you rocovorqd frem tho effects of those
freasing oxp riaonts?

A It took a lone tine. I also have lad several (pause) I have had
a rather weak h-ort and I i-.ra also had sev.ro headaches, and I also got
craapa in ay foot very often.

Q Do you 3 till suffer from t’.v. -ffocts of this experiment?

A I still have a wook hoart, For example, I an u re bio to walk
very quickly row, and I also havo to sweat very such. Exactly, thoso
are thj results, but in aery cases I liavo had thoso afflictions over
since,

Q '<-ro you in good physical condition bofore you woro subjected
to the JSclnria and Frcosingcqjorinents?

A Sinca tho tine of thi3 starvation I ruigh-d 57 kilogrpias in
Dachau. Vhon I caro to tro crap I weighed about on. hundred kilo; I
lest about or., half of ay weight. In the be; inning, I was weighed, and
I was in bod for about a nook* And then sy weight w c nt down to forty
se ver, kilo.

Q How rauch do you weigh nor:, father?

A I can net tell ytw exactly but 7 'i*ve not w oighed ays elf lately
but I thin!; at this tine I weigh fifty five kilo gran.

5 Do yyi know how you rero pra-^-arrod in these free tin- .•xp.rii .ertts?


21 Dec* u6-i*-AScbrxW-Lahiih» rdt (AID)

Court to* 1 * • C.


A I was tsrsod with thusc l3cpaj tut I hoard lator that people

sera rawaracd by weacn*

Q Do you know approx^.»~.toly how -cny inaatos lfero subjected to


the froesing experiments 2


21 Dce-lW.SchoIi-2-IohnhArdt
Court 3o« 1


c :

A * 1 cen 001 y rc any^ung about this, bocauso it was kopt so secret;
and bocauso I ins in thoro quite individual l y, and I was quite single during
this oxporiaent.

q. Do you know whothor anyone died as a result of this oxporirwnt?

I can not giro you any inforsetien about .that, oither. I havo not scon
-nybedy. But it was said in cop that r.uito a nunber of pooplo died there durin
this ej^eriror.t.

n -« ” c,w » ^thor, do you knew anything about the lew prsssuro oxperirents that
were carriod out in Dreheu?

(fcly that I hoard that such exp-riasnta .r_ro conducted out thsro with an
homotically soiled apparatus,

Q. You have no porsnnal Icurrlodgo about thoso things?

A, Mo, ffebedy was admitted thoro. It was also kopt very socrot.

.0, Mow, what about the dry free* In'; oxporiaants, father?

. lBO > those experiments, however, during this tine, occurred out thcro.

And 11 "» 3130 s -' lid that people wero loft lying thoro in tho frost and to
froezo; but as I havo "1 ready said, I havo net soon it, but 1 hoard of it.

&it all that Is alleged tr havo boon dens in tho sane Aviation Experimental
station.

Do you knew anything about the sc-csllod "Hilogncno" oxborlnents? At
Dr.chra?

A. Tos, tho Pflsgaono oxperinents, wore carriod out thoro,. bocauso I know
of ccurries who wore thore. Thcro :rcro approximately sixty pooplo, half cf trhor
dl»l, Thjro was also a certain other nunbor of casos that diod ad a result of
this oxporii&ait. . . A

Q. Father did ycu rccoive any preferontial tro-t nent in tho Cann bocauso y
had undergone tho Malaria aid * T rooxing oxporiaonts?

'*• ^ ono occasion when I uao in the hospital. Dr. Prachtcl told no bocauso
yrj h * T0 bchavod »o bravely in tho water, yru can ccas at all tires to tho
h:spit -1 f^r recuperation. That rrs a short tino beforo Chr'st^. 3ut whon I
lrft thcr; » 1 thought it woulu bo sfcanoful of no to try to got sene favors as c
result r£ this. I never node any use ef tho suggestion, by tho physician.

. - 303 -

■ . “ ; ? j


c


21 D;o^W.Scte4i-2-l«hnkardt
Court 'ic. 1

-• - can not toll y-'u anything about this, becauso it ns kept so secret;
and because I was in thoro quite individually, and I was quite singlo during
this oxporiaent.

9. Do yru knnr whethar anyone diod as a result- of this experiment?

... I can net giro you any infernrtion about that, either, I have not scon
*nybcd7. ^:t it was said ir. esap that cuito a nurbar of pooplo died thoro durin
this experime n t.

o. ”:.w, father, do you knew anything about the lrw pressure oxperirunts that
were carrlod out in D-chiu?

taly that I hoard that such extxrixrnts r_rj conducted out thrro with an
hermetically scaled apparatus.

0. Tcu have no pcrsrnal krxwlodgc about thoso things?

A. ?Jo. f.'obcdy was adnittod thoro# It was also !:opt very secret,

,Q. !iow, what about the dry freezing oxperinants, father?

/*V

" l80 > experiments, however, during this tiro, occurrod out thoro.

;jid it rrs also said that poople >cero loft lying thoro in tho front and to
frooao; but is I havo -1 roady said, I havo net soon it, but 1 hoard of it.

&j*. all that is alleged tr havo bear, ’one in tho sane Aviation Experimental
station.

c - 3© yru knew anything about tho s:-called "Hilogncno" experieonts? At
Dcchoi?

?flogxono oxpcrincqts, ware carried out thoro,. because I knew
of ccmrr.dos who wore thoro. Thoro zmro approximately sixty pooplo, half cf hhor
died. Thjro was alac r. corVin other neebor of cases that died at a result of
tWs oxpcriJKnt. * *

3. Father did you rccoivo any preferential tro.1 event in the Cann bocauso y
had undergone tho Malaria me! - rcoxing oxporlaonti?

... O. one occasion when I uns in.the hospital. Dr. Prachtcl told no bocauso

hive behaved so bravaly ir. tho water, yru can core at all tires to tha

•

hospital >r recuperation. That rras a short tine beforo Christens. But whon I
loft tie re, 1 thought it would bo shameful of no to try to got soae favors
resuit -f this. I never nndc any use of tho suggestion, by tho physician.


as r


21 Dao-4MS«fa»-b-3-Iehnhardt
Court So. 1


V


c

Q. Toll, they didn't shorten your stay at Dachau, or anything of that nature,
did they, becaiao you under-wont those experiments?

A. : i*. Prosecutor, I have not understood tho question; I do not know wliat you
naan by it.

3. They did not shorten your sentence in Dachau, did they, bccauso y-u under¬
went the so experiments?

V, o

I really do not quito understand this question. No. No. I said not until
the end; net until tho Aacricans c aa o to 11 bora to us.

o. Nor, father, will you toll tho Tribunal whether or not you .‘ere allowed
to otsorvo ycur rollgicn while you wero in Dachau ConcontrUi^n Oanp?

... "oil, this natter was treated differently; a chapel had boor, established
at Dachau, .uvd, as priests, wo woro oven given preferential troatoont. That is,
for a while, wo woro given ono quartor of n glass of liqu-r, and, fron tine to
tiro, also sot» boor. And then, also, our food was supposed U be bettor. But,
actually, wo wore generally ploasod that special privileges wore withdrawn;
bjeausa m> always hod to drink the wine, one, two, throo; this had to bo done
very quickly; but cnco or twico tho chips bogan to fly in tho air; and I also
raeorfccr that wo also at one tire had sono quarreling in tl. i streot by tho
innatos which had been separated fren tho rest. 9ut in tho carp ovorybedy know
that wo woro given preferential treatment; but it ms given to uo in ouch a
xxr.cr, it was not known to anybody. As to those visits, on one or two
rccasicna, wo were givon on extra piece of neat, later on, only a sign ranained

enthe Courtyard circlosthat it was for tho priests, #ut, in any caso, wo could

•

a t see ary difference in tho f ood. Chapol alsc was established^ and, first
r ‘ cno priost was able to hold tho Hoi;' l^ss there. All tJvcso privileges
Vstc'l ftr approximately ono half year. Then ms had to go to sloop daily, in
the trrnin.- and in tho afternoon. 7hi3, wr.s, again, scro sort of chicanory, bo-
cvisa efter wo slept wo had to construct soma bod3. And tho construction of tho
t-i3 in the Carp was rod ly soncthing tarriblo. Tho bods wr.rc tern down, fre-
quoTitly and -ro had to rake then liko little natch boxes, so that ultimately seno
refused tc go to sleep,and 3ore fire boxcsucro alsc given to us during
“- r -3 tine. L-.tor cn all of us were c-'-llcd, and the carp loader n • two other
--tcors arrived. .'.nd a typewriter was brought. And all cf us had tc fall in,

-88A-


21 Jr»-a-4; - Lohnhar dt

Ccurt So. 1


C


In tho barracks stroot, and tho fo Hiring quostlcns were? asked:

*l?ho of you Is a aitisen of tho Reich?" Of course, there wero several
Goman mswerers, and they stepped cut. The second quostion asked was:

The of you bolcsiga to. a Garran Ecliolcn group. I cant roneaber that anybody
stepped out. Thon thero was still another question. Tho of you considers hio-
solf a Goman and confesses hinsolf to the Goman Iddaology?" Nobody stoppod
out. Afterwards, tho oldest cf tho Carp caao to tho Carp loader and said,

•Tou could still ask thoe who of then spooks Gersm." Thon tho Carp leader
said, "Of course, if you knew elroedy what they are doing, all right;" and
he said, "Tree nrw, on, ycu aro losing all cf your privileges. And you aro to
bocono a gonerd labor blrckj" rnd then wo had to narch away.


- 885 -


21 Doc-it-^Scto-5-l-Haynes
Co(S-* Ho. 1


c


Generally we were grataful that we did not have tho special privileges
assort. Wo only regrettad that wo wcro not ndaittod to the chappel end that
cur rxayer books had been taken tuny frota us. However, we had a fooling of
honor that as Polish priests we had not broken down.

Later on, through ccuw-eship with the othor prisoners, the Geruan priests
were admitted to tho chap r ul, and later, on several occasions, we were also
able to exercise our ruligious dutios, but wo had to do this secretly. However,
we were given vary bad trontiiuit in tho crxap cs priests.

IS. >£HAKEY: I have no furthor questions. Your Honors.

THE PRZSHStfT: Have Defendants' Counsel any cress examination of this
witness?

Tturo being n<yie offers., tho witness may stand down.

(Tho witness ves excusod.)

ai. H.-IDY: day it ploaso the Tribunal, ct this tl^.o wo wish to continue
with tho iresuntation of tho sulfaniL i bido bono transplantation experiments.

THE radSIDarr: Bofuro prccoo..in<; with tho further introduction of tho
oxhiblts, tho Court has an announcot-ont to oako. I will csk JudfiO Sobrin;; to
road it.

JUDGE SSEtWS: It will no doubt bo recalls*! by tho Proeocution and Dofonso
Counsol tlr.t several "days ago Dr. Servatius undo seco inquiry of the Court
c-nc<rning what tho Court would consider to be c ^ropvr Torn to be used in
tho preparation of affidavits. *s I understood at that tico the purposo of tho
inquiry, it was that iX>fen»w Counsel wonted to ueot 3uch roquirojents os tho
Tribunal would insist upon and had hopod that tho Tribunal would give then
inf«.nr.ticn ,-rior to the holidays so that during tho holidays they could aako
sccw process in tho preparation of tho affidavits.

Tho Tribunal has giv-xi due c cos id-rati on to the type of form that it thinks
will sect its approval aix! has prepared cn infermation sheet which the Presi¬
ding Judge has requested that I, on behalf of tho Tribunal, have road into
thw rsjeord.

"Information tc Defense Counsel Concerning Foras to bo Used in the Prepara¬
tion of affidavits:

-S?4-


21 £^z-X-*Schzri~?-il-'-gr. as

Cent 1


c


/

■Such affidavits es Key be presented by Dofenss Counsel for roc option in
evidence by Military Tribunal I shell be in substantially tho following fora:

"1. In case tho witness whoso affidavit is taken resides in the country
C r in ft --■!! village, tho affidavit aay be oxocutod in tho prosenco of the
Iaonicrrnt, whe shall certify to tho saae.

"2. In enso tho witness whoso affidavit is taken r os ides in a s i. nl l town,
the affidavit nay bo oxocutod in tho .-.res one o of tho liny or, who shall certify
to tho sane. .

"3. In casa tho witness whoso affidavit is taken resitios in a larger city,
oith-r one :f threo alternatives will bo accoptablo; nanoly, (a) the affidavit
cay bo oxocutod in tho prosenco of tho First liycr, nh$ shall certify to tho
saco; (b) tho zf f i_zvit ^~zy bo <a ecu ted in the prosonco of tho Doputy Mayor,
who shall certify to tho snto; (c) tho affidavit cry bo executed in tho pre¬
sence of tho presiding Judgo of tho civil court, who shall certify to tho
sane.

"In all ovonts, any such affidavit cust also bo cartlfiod by the canpotont
ropr'osuntntivo of tho United States G-'Vorncent in tho plnco whuro tho affiant
is rosidont.

"Tho first prxr. graph of any such affidavit shall bo as follows:

"'I'—stating tho nrxto of the affiant—'stato herewith undor oath tho
following facts known to no by personal knowlodgo:'

"Following this ;r olid nary paragraph, the facts known to tho affiant
shall be stated cloarly. Tho affiurvit shall bo concluded as follows:

"'Having carefully road and personally countvxsignod each of tho preceding

__nuchcrod 1 to_, inclnsivo, and having crsonally cado tho

necessary corrections an . count-rsignud thou with cy initials, I herewith
CecLire under oath that all tho facts aubeittod by ao in this affidavit corre¬
spond, to tho best of cy kn-wledge and belief, to the f ull truth, /signed/—',
end then appears tho signature of tho affiant.

"The certificate to be signed by the Korean authority shall bo substantially
as follows: »

a, I Itwroby certify that I an—', stating the title of his office, 'having


- 887 -


21 Doc-M-^Scbo-5-3-Rsjn® ( 1

Court Sc. 1

w » . * *

boon dulu appointed to this office by the properly constituted authority, to
nit,—'. -*>- thoi fellows a stat<eent of tho authority by which or through yti a
the rfficur was appointed. Then will follow «cn«, and then will appear the
date of tho appointment. «I further certify that the fore^oint; affidavit was

amjm to and sijied bof<rc co this_*-7,' tho dato buin^ »to tod, «ct«, *nd

than will appear the naae of tho city, county or viUaci, and tho cortificato
will thon bo oidneS by tho Goroan official.

-The docleratico of tho ropresontativo of tho liUtary Govcrnucnt shall bo
in substantially tho following for

-'Sworn to and signed buforo no ;n_,d\tc in', end then will bu statod

the place. Signed, a«i then will appear tho noco of the iruprusontr.tivo, his
official titlo and rank.

-Tho translator's certificate, if tho affidavit is taken in a lnn^uaco oih
than 2 ht£ish, shall bs in the following

•'I', at. tin,. tho nemo, ' Onltu. St-tos civilian', and thon his nunbor,
'hereby cortify that I on thoroughly conversant with tho Ent^ish and Gurnan
languages and that tho above is a true end corroct translation,' and thon
tho sljnaturo.

"To the orvl thLt thoro coy bo no proctor confusion than is noccssary about
thw statvuent af tho Tribunal, it is the ardor of tho Tribunal to the Offico
of the Secretary General that sufficient copios of tho statuaent now rnado by
tho Tribunal shall bo preparod both in anjliah end in G-rcan so that oach
ilifonse Counsel will have at loast two copies of tho sU.tcrj^t, in Bv;li8h
and in German, end ooro copioe if ho so dosircs."

■it tho frosent time, tho Tribunal has two copios of thfa statement now tc
hand down to the Secrotary Gonoral to appear in tho minutes of tho Court, a
copy t her oof in English and in Guraan as information to tho Prosecution, and
copy cf tho statement in 5i.,lish ar.u in Gvr..'n r.o ini erection to Dofonse
Counsel at tho presort time, and I would surest, Ir. S«xrotary GenuraL, tha'
inasmuch as Dr. Survatius initially mace tho application, it be delivered to
hie.

THE PnZSID3fT: The Tribunal will bo in rocoss for 15 -inutos.

. (A recess wa» taken.)

- 688 -


21 Sac. LS-: >*AS c hw-6~l-Blakicy
Court So. 1


TIT. :A SHAL: The Wlbunal 13 again in session. *-
It;. :*JU?DIt The prosecution will rvcrr procoed with tho jroscntation
cf the ovidance of scl fanilaaddo bone transplantation experiments. Pago
22 in ycur Honors* Document book Dociuacnt Ihncbcr ID-858, I now offer
as frcsocution Exhibit Ifuabor 223. "his is a Deposition of T)r. ?x>lf
".oscnthal. Tho Tribunal will rooall that tho witnesses of tho last few
days ifho have experimented in Havcnsbruck frequently nontionod tho nano
cf tliis Dr. Rosonthsl. This contains tho jurat of Major Arthur ". lint,
British Ar^ of tho Thino Investigating Cfficor.

Tho second paragraph I will road: 'I Iiavo boon w-rned that this
statoaont rcy bo used in front of a court. I nako this stotoDoht
voluntarily without tto use of forco or viol.nco cr the throat of
violenco or thj prordso of a renr.-rd or a reward.

"1. I hoard for tho first ti;so that oxporloontal operations wero
ado at a to nob ruck Concentration Coup in sueiaor, 191*2. Dr.

Schi-dLausky said that he had had a confuronco with Prof, Cobhardt,
During this conforonco tho possibilities of such operations ncro dis¬
cus sod. In ny opinion, howovor, it had alroady boon ordo'rod boforo by

a higher authority in Berlin to carry out thoso oporations.

%

"2. Tho first uxporlmcntal oporations wero oarriod out in sum or,
19U2, at Pavonsbruck. I was present at nciy of those oporations. Tho
operations rare carriod out by Dr. Fischor,

Pref. Cobhardt was present and eottitinos had details of tiioao
operations producod. Th- first tlaj eight to trrelvo of tlfoso operations
aa oarriod out on fencL. prisoners. duty was to assist during
operations. I gava tho instnux-nts be Dr. Fischor. I or Dr.
Oberhcusar Rnd »-vti:«s one of tho nurses adainistorod tho.narcosis.

'’3. After theso operations the patients wore accomodated in
Separate recce in other departaents, of the infirmary. Sulphonaaid-
pr.paratos watt, a-tainls tor ed to them; and as far as I know thoso
patients ircro nursed exactly in the sa.:o way as ordinary patients. Gas
: : zn^raio cultures were Instilled into thj artificially caused wounds.

809


21 Dec. ii6-tMSebP^-2-31.-Jacy (ATD)

Court *5. 1 £

These cultures -re delivered by tho Hygicroinstitut of the ‘/affon-SS
in Berlin i/toro they had been cult ire tod.*

At this tl-to I wish to add parenthetically, tfx Triburr.l trill
roce.ll that in the introduction or the presentation of evidence as to
the organizational situation of too defendants, wo netod that tho

■ 9

Hygienainstitut up until August, 19U3, was under tho control of

Ocnzkpn, Donnott Dcnzkcn, 'and the dofondnnt "rugowsky. Aftor tho first

of Dccaior, the do fondant Irugorrsky assumed absolute control.

•'?h33o cultures voro inplan tod'into tho tunds with or without

foreign natter. I baliovo that tto foreign natter, which tos oithor

cloth or splinters of wood or perhaps oven (ilnss, was also dolivorod

by tho Kyrjieno Instituto of tho u affon-S3 at Berlin.

•U. Sc^j titios I have soon that Dr. Oberhousor adrdnistorod '

•

potrol-injcctions to tb. prisoners. Sho usod a syringe for ton cubic
conti vators and tho injootion was ac.dnistorad into th, vein of tho
an. Tho injection gave the laprossion of an acuto apoplexy, tho
K ttents reared up and thon suddenly collapsed. It lac tod botwoon throo
*o rivj -nutos fron th, tine thj injootion was administered until they
woro dead. Tho ts wo entirely conscious until tho last rio.unt.

It took approxixntoly fifteen to thirty seconds to administer the in¬
fection. Dr. Cber terser told w that toa prisonors who recoivod
1 trol injections we severely ill and could not bo cured.

'• - tV:v - C'tainistored an overdose of . 10 rpM.no to about twenty
to lldrty s.iv.rdy ill patients to camo tteir doath.*' *

At too -resent tir.c, your Honor, Dr. losonthol will not bo
vnilahlo hero as a witness bocause ho is now on trial at lavensbrucl:

" t:v - British Ar.sy, tte iritish ilitory Courts.

'e nill n:w turn to th, ooj& affidavit, -his is an affidavit
^J '-rod L/ccunont !D-506, which -.rill bo offered as Prosecution inhibit
J 22ij - 1“ coixsc oC reading this affidavit, your Honor, there
' c sections I "ixl onit inasnuch as tivy contain details of tho

c^rations as sono of too things that eight be of interest for you to

890


c


a Doc li6-*-ISch»-6-3-Biaklay (AH))

Court Ifo, 1

0

but 'iich I will net toko the tine tc road hire.# Dr. Schi-dkiusky
first was stationed :-t lav^nsbruck and inb~r wont to Buchomcld so in
his affidavit you "ill sco an overlap of evidenco as to th_ conditions
cf "'.avensbrude and tho3a of ^uchcrmald.

This is dated “Freising, 7 August, 19U5. I, Corhardt
Schiedlausky" —also, by the vay, ho is to bo placed on trial by tho
3ritish in the British foro — 'JO, Ilcuptstur.ifuehrer of the Fosorvo of
the ”affon-SS, doclaro tho following j

"I was drafted on tfco 28th October 1939. Fron tho 21st of March
to the end of Septo-ijor, 19bl, I '*>rkod os a doctor in the concentration
camp Jfciuthausor. as Trupporverzt and also in the prisoners* wards."That
obviously :'.aans Oruppnnret, Group TVoctor. ‘Fron that tiro I roncubor that
so-called Sedth frnoturos, fractures in the lower third of tho lower
arn, and Jaw fractures occurrod which could bo trncod back to tlu
roughness of thu prisoners, os pc dally to r.ny of the Capos who woro
notorious for their brutality. Sinco thorc >~s r. largo number of pro¬
fessional criminals, it c.s unavoidable that sene eases of unnatural doath

should occu. Tho wisoners auong thctisolvos ex^rcisod a hard end brutal

•

system of justice. Through the nost dire throats, thiovos, ospocially
thoso who stole broad, woro drivoh to suicide, which nostly took tho
fora of hanging. I ootirvito th-t in about twe oases they deliberately
ran into tho cljctric wire fonco. Thoro ware also n rcrios cf won who
voro shot in flight. At ono tiao attempted oocapes, ospocially when a
transport of Bitch Java arrived, increased so much that the dang or
axistod that a future incroaso in thaso suicidal flights would stir up
tho canp, Consequently, tfv< oanp headquarters arced husky prisoners with
clubs and placed then near the lino of guards and successfully within
o ahr.it tir.a stopped thoso attempts that had previously rccchod a toll ~
cf up to tirolvo doath daily. In ! autheusen I also witnessed punishment
by beatings which wore at that tine ndrlnistered by the b3ock loaders
after thj roquired for-ialitdos had ba_n not. Those anointed to up to


twonty-fivo lashes. Fren the noarty ca^>, , 'us on, I further renonbar that

891


21 tec j6-?>ASchK-6-C‘-3l^clcy (AID)

Coart !fo. 1

I

several cases of broken jaws occurred. During ry tino in h'r.uthauson

/

; ryvrfocr tho fclipping SS mfc.rs who 'forked in the JfodLcnl Dutacb-
a»ntt J

Those nraxs I will c:iLt reading - t this ti:x end prcoood on to
Pero -h of your Beners* document book, tho second paragraph.

■At tho bo ginning of Decolor, 19M, I rocoivcd orders to procood
to Ravonsbruck to raliovo Hauptsturnfuchror Dr. Sonntag as station
physician, Ttoro were throe ct.po* 1. Tho oaon's canp, which had
about six ttousend prisoners in tho beginning end which in August,

19li3, had oightoon thousand. I did not observe any cruoltios on tho
part of the SS p-rsomel or fa do guards although occasional dog bitos,
r.lrr-st always of a slid nature, cocurrcd due to th. ncgligonco of tho
•..•oaan guards or th. unpredictability of tto dogs. Cnsos of unnatural
death roro ’/cry rare. Cnee it us a '.ussian w*mnn who triod to os capo
cv-r tto .l_ctric fence an’ died in th; nttcaptj and there v.,ro novoral
oasds of suicide by hanging, perhaps two or throe. In 19li2 nnd 19li3
reLrs ca a frea tho Rcichsfuehrer SS that in the vtoaon'fl crap Revona-
bmocl: suitahlo voluntoors were to bo . ickod in jrdor to establish
brot h e l s in sc ex: of tho ren’s earn::. In :jy capacity as oazzp doctor I had
t? tako pert in choosing suitablo" girls fror. oaong tho applicants, Thoy
had to bo healthy, of ago, and previously engaged in prostitution. Thoso
•to vluntoorud voro xaostly Gonann prostitutes, also soiao Pcles ond ono
Goman gypsy half-brood. IXiring y Uno apprcdnntoly tho following oonpa
wro auppliod with prostdlutos* ' authauson or Ouson with sixtoon,
“uchcnrdd with feurtoor., .-"lossonburg with about ton. Dachau also
ruccivod saaoj bit in ry „sti mtion n;t i-re than two or four.

'"’ha xanishrent inflicted upon .ro^n in Ravcnsbrucck ica difforont
in that the. Ruichsfuehrer.SS had reserved for hieisolf alone the decision
to tova tlicso Cernan w- ,v.n flogged, at I_ast thoso rho as 'rives or widows
P soldiers had given thannolvos tc foreigners. In this case thoro woro
G.Gs' 2 a.~ up ta throe tinxs twenty-five blows under rest sovore con¬


ditions, that is, with a naked bohind,

892


r


7


21 Doc i o-::-ASch3-7-l-D^cl3 (A2J)
Court Jfc# 1


la the beginning, this ics done, by UGOon' guards} but lr.tv.-r exclusively

by fertile prisoners, depending on th. nuabor, Thi punishrxnt tool: place

/ ‘

cr.cc r twico a week end five tc eight wo eon were punished,

•Or. the -rdor th; Reichs fuehrer SS, ^ruppenfuchror Dr. Gebhardt
of johjnlychon carried out a sorios of exparinonts in 19U2 and l?li3. Tho
pr-blcn to bo solvod was the therapeutic offoct cf c raniaor of nodicinos
and possibly also surgary upon gangrcni. Polish vooon who &A boon
sentercod to death by c^irt martini end .rho rrera awaiting oxocution,

-ftor their s-ntorcos bed boon approved by tlx. Governor Gonorcl, woro
chcson aa subjects. Tho -xr>_rliV>nt procoodod as follows: A six to
eight conticotor lone, incision was nado is the loner calf. A cortaln
bacteria culture, ifcich vas sent especially for this purpose by tho
Hygiene Institute of the- S3, nr.s pla.cod deop in the calf uuaclo and
thun tho e!dn n&s rejoined, 4

I again call the atfcontion of tho Tribunal to tho faot that thoso
cultures wore sent by the Hygiono Institute of tho Waffon-SS undor tho
control of tho dofondanto Oensk.n and rug-jW#kyv

"As ca-p doctor, ny only responsibility -./as to sou that clinical
Hitters such as the -porcticn itself, nutrition and special nursing,
etc., were taker. oaro of to thu satisfaction cf Professor Oobliardt.

T.v. operation itself was jxrfoi-.uu by Sturrtbannfu^hror Dr. Stunpfoggor
rr.c IfcupteturnfWnror Dr. Fischer, Tho cane d-cter, lisa Obcriiauscr,
assisted tX .. I cstiato that about thirty to forty veoen wore used la¬
this oxperlaont with about ton t-e trrolva ct'in;. Oberarrt Dr. "oissauir,
-cai cf tho tuberculosis sanitoriun lohLnlychcn intended to conduct
■nothor stilus cf oxpjrtxnts l.ith prisoners, but those woro net approved
by too highur authoritios, ?!orc the -min interest wn 3 tuberculosis
ros-arch, te check the reaction cf.the patient t, incronsinj, burdens of
physical exertion,

J 2i Tlx eale canp Ravonabruook: This was purely a work canp for tho
davol paant f industry. Po cause of the peculiar working conditions the
rate .f illness was always rather high. As station doctor I had to supor-
v - ;o tho prisoners' hospital.


893


21 Deo. l£-»^eh^-7-2-Danicls (ATO)

Court *3. 1 ^

3. The young protection conp UcJcomerk: The fjoalo innr.tos woro
alaoat entirely Goroen girls, on id*an the of forts vf :rdincry rof.-rm-
tory education hes felled, who continued sociol activities, loafod
ground, and w-uld not lot theasclvcs bo inf l u en ced by their parents
and w old rut -bey then. Anon; then voro girls who, because cf inherit id
biological traits, wore considered inforior, partly because they ware
epileptics or the -.ffsprin; cf drunkards, aantal casoa or saxual
cniacs. Only fgw cf the prisoners wero girls who had cc nit tod sono
sort of crlne that would ordinarily land than in Ravonsbruock, but who
woro sent there becauso of thoir youth. Thoso wore nostly oases of
forbidden contact with foreigners, almost always sexual intercourse,

"As fir as hygienic conditions went in all three caaps, in tho
boginning there was sufficient spacs in tho onon»s canp, but duo to
the novnting nurbor of prisoners thcro vero not sufficiont bods to go

around, so that ,-ooplo working on day cm? night shifts had to alternate

•

in a bod* Ccnsocuantly scabioe and also so:io lico wero cbeorvod,"

I adll non onlt tho noxt two or tiirco paragraphs end will turn to
* *
tho last paragraph on pago 26 :

■In August 19 3 I was relieved f -y post by Hauptstandartonfbohror
Dr. 5«o lolling. Chief of A.it D fir. I<io roason was that sono disci¬
plinary action was taken --ainst PborsturafUohror Dr, Rosenthal. Hoi had
had a lovo affair with a r -oman prisoner nurso and porfor.iod an
aoerfior. on her. As his jo died suporior, I was accused of lcnc-.dng of
this affair, so I folt ryaclf forood to ask to bo roliovod cf ny duties,
especially since relations with tho oanp oo:render at tho tino,
•StuxRbanafUahror rritz Suhron, w.ro net of tho host I wr.3 sant to
: itr-.-ailor, to relievo Oborsturnfbohror Dr. von Bodiann thoro.

I spent fron about tho rdddlo of August to the rdddlo of Ootobor

irL3 in '.b.tzwcilar, than got criers free tho hoed of Ant D III to tako

• • /

cv;r tho duties cf Dr. ~<aldmr.r Hovon, who was under investigation, as
station doctor _f tho Waffon-SS, ">1nor, and first canp doctor of


BacbnKold. Aft«.r I turned zy own duties over to Stumbennfuchror Dr,

85U


21 Doc-IU^Scte-7-3-Daniol3

Court Sc. 1

tock error, there wore sufficient facilities in the prisoners* hospital to
handlo the volume of work. I gavo tho prisoners' solf-adsdnstration end
especially tho Capo, ^mst Basso, a froo hand. Ho picked out ward nurses,
rcloaood thoso not suitablo, md occasionally no tod out 3 one sort of punisb-
Bcnt. Tho assistant to Husso was Otto Kipp, vie a Capo. ?hcro were plenty of
doctors around. Soto of tho dopartmnts wero hondod by prisonors with long
yjnrsof experience. In tho hospital ttorc wore altogether fivo barracks for
the sick;- a sixth was added later. The dispensary of the little Clap had trro
barracks.

"At the tiro I started to werkj no experiments wero conducted at B-chcnwnld

La tor there wr.ro sovaral sorics ordered, as follows i

"1. Sxxsriajnt of Sturrtv.mfuehrer Dr. Veernot." As wo will aoo Inter in

this affidavit. Tour Honors, and later on during tho presentation of tho

ease in chief. Dr. Vaoroot was ordered by the defendant Poppendick to oxperi-

nent with honosoxuals at the Buchcnwr.ld concentration ccrp, and as a ro3ult

of thoso ordora two innatos died,

"2. Experiments of Oborsturnhu nfuchror Dr. Schnick,

"3* Htttrition experiments with S-onigrark, '

"!i, Investigations of Sturchoinfuohror Dr. Ellonbook.

•

"In roforonco to li Tho oxporiaents of Stumbmnfuchror Dr. Vaornct, a

Danish horoono oxpert, took placo about tho niddlo of 19 !j1j oh ordob of tho

ftoichsfv.ohror SS, who had diroctod tho Roich Physician of tho SS, Dr* Ornwita,

to have the experiments cerriod out in Suchenrald. Tho aim of the oxporinonts

was to chsngo homosexuals so they would again react no realty. My part in tho

experiments, which was detailed for do in written instructions fron ny

superior, Sturrbannfuohror Dr. Lolling, was only to see to it that the

accessary meter of hooosoxuals »rcro in tho camp. In a preliminary exanina-

tion, ^r, Vaemet picked out suitablo subjects, then inform. us by .tiro fror.

•

Prague on about what day ho would perform operrtions on tho four subjects.

Ho else desired to operate on six oorc prisoners, at a Later date, one of
whoe was to bo a eunuch end another an agod nm who was no longer capable of
sexual feeling*. In the operation itself, a two to three ccnti-rotor long

-895-


21 ioo^tCScha-7-U-DcrAels £

Court 'io* 1

incision was node in the abdomen under local anesthesia. T*on the crtlflcal
hcnccnc, which ho hod developed Mnsolf end which we. In the fern of n nemel
pin, woe lnsortcd Into the subcutaneous fatty tissues and the wound eleeed.

•In reference to 2: The experiments of Oborsturebmnfuehror Dr. Sehnick
mra concerned with the healing of belle and enaU earbunelee. Buchenwald
ra  the assignment to fumieh sick men a, subjects to teat thi. unthedl
■ The result* -ere positive; many bells could be healed each quicker this -ay.

. • .In reference to 3 . In the nutrition experiments with Saondpsark, an

■ additional fungus supposedly containing 50 percent albunon -a. adadnistored.

It was a by-eroduct rf the process of -thing unfinished eeUulose.to reneve
excess sulfites with lye solutions with which nothing can bo dene. It -
gri ned by a cenpliefttad procedure.

■ In referonee to U. The interests of Sturnbannfuohror Dr. H .-ns Dieter
EUcnbock lay in about the sere direction as these of the nutrition oxperi-
ncitts. His Job w-s, in the case of frequently occurring diseases or com-
o lain to about the eenditlens of the prisoners, to invesUgate and find the
cause. He was appointed bv the chief hygienist, SS OborfUehrer Professor
Dr. Uraccssky, to visit tho various situs -tore building and arnaeont. eon-
struction jobs ware to bo darriod out. Kmy'tines th.se plsco, -arc far
underground, hard nlnlng work hid to bo done, the distance to the place of
work was tee for and difficult shoos -ero impractical and unserviceable,
clothes net sufficient, so unnocossory cold, oeeurrod. Also, tho question of
inspection, the distribution end receiving of food, recreation and tine off
and shelter cone up. All these thing, nay be contriving factors te^rd, the
recurrence of a disease of a similar condition on a work detail. Experiments
With nutrition In regard to thi. problem were to bo started in Vhen-ad,
but then called eft in March 191,5 due to the progress of the war.

■Further exponent, with Van hoings . re carried on in block W, -hid
was affiliated with the Hygiene Institute of the eaffon-SS, Department for
Typhus and Virus Research. Its head was SturmbannfUehrcr Dr. Erwin Ding,

Ip. tor Schuler, wto did not work under ac."

I -ght explain to the Trlb^ «t this tine thr.t in tho further presen-

-S96-


' 21 Dcc-*W£cto-7-$-Daniols
C$urt Hoi 1

tation of this case in chief wo wi3>bc dealing a great deal with the name
•Dr. Ding, later Schuler." He carried the naae Ding until 19U3, and at that
tisc changed his naae to Schuler. H is stepfather's nano was Ding, so ho
bore tho rare Ding tho greater part of Ms life; aid thon, in 19U3, ho boro
tho nano of Ms own father, Schulor. So from time to tine you will soo re¬
ference to Ding and to Schulor, and it is one and the smo person.

<il trvjafcro never nixed qrsclf up in the Affairs of tho Institute. Inter
SS Sturobannfuohrcr Dr. Schuler roquestod bo to represent Mm during Ms
frequent absences from Buchonwald if a signature was urgently noodod. Of tho .
activities of tho Institute, I only knerrthat .'-'tor vaccinajipn with tho
various vaccines to bo tested, tho prisoners ware infected with typhus. Then
if a prisoner died, Ms case Mstory was not sont in to tho hospital, but
collected for scientific purposes. Oily a short notation was made on Ms card
that the nan had died in Blick U6. On ordor of tho Roich Physician SS, tho
caiso of death on tho prisoners' records was changed to something olso, such
as pneumonia, pleurisy, .or inflation of tho Jcidnoys.As far as choosing
the prisoners for tho experiments wont, I an acquainted with tho fret that
naiy prisoners, especially fros rjsong tho socurity prisonors, voluntoorod.


<•


0


*


- 897 -


21 Doc. fc64M-8^i-C»sscr '(ATT)
C:art So. 1


c


•'On order of Antsgruppe D, professional criminals woro transferred
froc.other ccxrpo end sent to tee oxporincntcl laboratory in Ruchcrwald.
I was asked by ss-6turnbannfuohrcr "r. Sc-nlor to help pick the victiras
because he did not choose to onter the liaa light. A n-n froa the
Cririnal Police Department of tee Reich, a Xrlrdnalrat Otto, appeared
for this purpose. Only such prisoners woro picked who had noro than 10
years In prison, wore undor UO years of ago, and who wuro ablo to noot
the physical roquirenonts of an SS nan. Such examinations took placo
two tines, each tire 20 to 30 prisoners woro picked. I very soldon had
a chanco to visit block li6, only whon thoro ua3 an inspoction in which
I took .art. Only twice was 1 thoro and within c few days in order to
observe patients. That was rhon, to ccoply with Dr. Schuler's roquest,

I wont to bsorvo tho offoctivoncss of his vaccine. Ho‘tht*n nskod no
to continue the tbsorvations because ho had to leave within tho next

w

ton days. I then did that. I cannot givo tho number of doaths among
oxp-riiaont patients, in block 1*6, but Z imagine that daring tho
beginning there wero asro deaths than towards tho end. I ostimato tho
rather of deaths rocordod during the tiaxj I worked in tho hospital
building to bo botwaon U) and 50,

"Another experitwjnt of SS-6Cur.ibannfuehror Dr. Schulor was with a
p i3on rhich the Russians supposedly usod against Goman3 in Russian
territory whjn they -.Tjttod to got rid f thc.u S3 Sturnbnnnfuohror Dr.
3-hulor, as far as I knc.j had orders from thy chiof SS hygienist,

SS Ob.rfuohrer Prof. Dr. Joachim rSrugcwsld, to study how this poison
takas effect and t use prisoners for tho uxporirxint. I don't know how
prisoners were chosen Ter this nor upon iheso orders. Ono clay ho asked
a to visit tho cractoriun uharo ihu oxporirxnt was to take placo.
T'^ro a.vro, as far as I r-Ouubcr, h t- 6 prisoners* “hen I got thoro
t!w poiso*. had already bogun to take effect ;n son:. This was visible
booausc the victims threw up, had stosach cramps, and their faces had
bw <?°n tc discclorj one was unconsciousj with the ethers thoro >cas loss
effect to bo observed.


598


c


21 Doc. h6-H-:2-8-2-ic33or (AID)

Court !fc. 1

“Since I had little tiiwj I.loft soon and sent a nodical !C0
i .T. 'hen SS Stur*annfuchrcr Dr. Schuler-had requested. How the cxporl-
;aSfc mutinied, I dcn«t Irnowj I only hiard later that all the prisoners
tod died. Aether responsibility of being canp doctor was everything
that had to (to with disinfection. The systen of having a ;un in charge
• ^sicro in each block was now to no. Their Job was to check cloanli-
r ^sa, haircuts, and twice a week to chock the nen for lice. There *oro
d* :r.ny fleas, which had bo-n inported by large transports of
••Tenclnoa, but th-y wore gotten rid of quickl; . Pugs wore inportod toward
th- end f 19 U., fron infestod barrack parts of canp Plassow, >hich was
bein', -'vacuatod at th- ti/.w. Infested barracks were imadiatoly disin-
foctcd and prisoners used for this porposo had to wash thcnsolvos
thDroughly over/ night. In spite of that, bugs wore later found in seno
of tho barracks."

H.w the rest ©T this affidavit, as I havo said, will bo of intorest
t; tho Tribunal but at this tiatf I will not road any noro fron it, it
erely givoa conditions, .saw T the situations existing in tho canp, now
arrivals of vari-uo transports, and other do tails. I will new ask tho
Tribunal to turn to Pago I 16 in your Itocirunt Bock. This is a deposition
of JADICA XAKDBKA, Docurnnt Nunbor i»-876.

DP.. Si.IDL* (Counsel for tho TO fondants Pischor, Cobhardt and
Ob or Jr us-r): Tho Prosecution is about to read 9 affidavits by fomor
inr.tos of the Concentration Co.? 'av-nsbru-ck. I object to tho ad¬
mission f those etoewoonto in ovidonco. I nak. tho followins^oxplanation

thi\ objection* ”irst, an* p.nal case is ruled by the principle of
iroct -•vidonce. This -nans that on principle witnesses :iust bo oxauinod
h_f.ro the C urt an 1 only in special cxcopti^nal cases can an affidavit
r -L-.33 ovidunco boforu thu court.- The Prosecution has already agroocT
t '.his .-rircipl- to the extent of calling Ji witnesses and oxa: lining
th_: _r. tin saw subject, that is, tin sulfa m l nn ido oxperirtnts. Those
witnesses and otter documnts which havo already boon 3ubnittod, haVo
ccenlctoly cleared up tin fact. The addsslon of 9 further affidavits

399


c


21 Dec. l£-lM«-8-3-ics3cr (AID)

Con* !fc. 1

T-.cld, in :y -pinion, not help the Ccurt in do tenoning tho truth.

Soecod, the contents wf the so affidavits, in part, go far beyond what
j U witrwssos have already testified to boro before tho Court J
ca^lotoly new statements arc aado in then. The Prosecution was per¬
fectly free to select those of tho 13 witrasses wtun they thought nost
-dtablo. Thjy solcctod tho U witnossos who wero oxaidnod and thus
indicated that they considered tho testineny - f these witnossos
.spoeially valuable. Othcnrisc, instead of those U witnossos they would
:*vo brought exporlwntal subjects before thl Ccurt fron when they now
intend tc subnit an affidavit. Third, tho contents of tho 9 affidavits
arc njt only in contrast tb port of the testineny nhich the U witnossos

•

gave boforo tho o-urt, mry of tho affidavits aro contradictory in
itcr*o lvosj ttay doviato considerably fron ono another and contain con¬
tradictions. If thoso contradictions are not doarod up thoro would not
only bo nothing gain 0 * 1 in tho dotondnation of tho truth but this task
w^ld bo :'.ado arch raro difficult. Fourth, several of tho witnossos who
taro given affidavits which aro now to bo submitted did not thansolvos
•xurtidpeto ln oxpcrlnonta and ttoir krawlodgo is only hearsay. In several

cases it is rat clear whether tiro witnosa is only expressing an assumption

•

cr vhothor she has -arsenal knowledge of the subjoct. Fifth, tho lr

witnesses previously exnnin.d testified ussontinlly to tho sane notarial.

The aidssion f 9 raro affidavits, as far as tho evidonco is m to rial

undrr tho Indictaont, would add nothin: to tlw ovidunco, it would bo

cumulative. And finally, for tho emission :f th^so affidavits in

cvi.ljnco thoro is all tho less causo sinco tho defendants accused of

sulftadlaaldo oxporirants at Havensbruock do net dory the so axperloonts.

Thj affidavits of the defendant Fischer -ado that quite cloarj further-

r., the Frjsocution has several affidavits fren thr Defendant Gobhardt,

rich alsc shaws this quito clearly. That i3 all.

)P. iRHDT* Ir. this regard, Xour Honor, I night add that I can see

a. reason f r tho nission of thoso affidavits as they contain further

information into the drcunstancos existing at Ravensbruack. These affi-

900


21 Doc. b5-«-:-t-£-i*-L033cr (AID) s'

-.art 1 ^ .

& r ~

^rLta --co obtained by tho British '-ar Invostignticn Toruus.

(fronsin translation not cordnr, through, l!r. Hardy is haltod.)

I Kill rup-at ttet I fell tint those affidavits add si^thir.3 to
tte presecutionis ease, not r^rOy cuaulativo evidence, and that they
art fully adrdssablo urrfor Ordinanoo No. 7 . The affidavits wore
btaimd in official course by probers of the British Amy of tho
PJdno. 1 oaist aiiit that they :aay bo dara^ing to tho dofonso and to #
tho dofonso oounsol • s dionts but I sac no reason why wo should oait
those affidavits at this tino. ~o have hero apyr odaatoly 9 or 10
affidavits. Zach tiro wo havo t: su'orit an affidavit wo have tho sano
vbjoction. H.w It is impossible for us to jot all those witnesses hero
to bo ojasdMd and cross^xa dnod, duo to too fact that transportation
facilities or® what to-y arc. Socao of tooao N0> «ro fren Norway,
franco, Poland, Bol^un, otcotora. 0 hero -'.ado ovary effort to sot
witnoasos hero and did brlns li to bo ebsorvod *\nd to bo axcaLt»& and
cr:ss-oxa:dn.rI a I foci tout this objootion should bo -vorrulod at this

tine.

JODCE SSB?I»t Do y:u ‘vivo thc.ro tho criminals?

HU SA'DI: Yes, I do. Sir. .

jurra ssaair-: .*ill you hand thai up, ploaso?


901

■ • V

t-


21 Dec c^9-W ! errln (AID)

0 curt So. 1

!". BA 2 JT* I night wall to tha TrlbamUs attention that thoso
criminals’ theeo arc copies - you -ill find aro certified by Major „

• lia tt -Bo has beer, horo vith us and. aro in varirus languages, French,
Ssoiish, Polish and sc forth* Ycur Honor -ill note that In each affi¬
davit ttoro is a certificate by Miss Radcliffo of the Itocunontation
'vision. That basis for that certificate is based upon a certificate
v.-hich she has In hsr hands nado by Major Arthur Kioth-Uant which
acconxmios each or® of those affidavits. And -hen the docuncnt is
adalttod into evidence horo, she natos cut a certificate showing -hero
she received fron a supposedly authentic copy. And -o have available the
certificates of '.fcjor Hunt if the. Tribunal wistos to soo then*

JOD02 S;M(T: T/culdn't -a savo tine in oach case -hon docunonts
cf this kind -ero handod up fer reception if thcro -as also onclosod
that certificate so that the Court night havo it bofero it.

10. HARDYi That is vary true Tour Honor. As -o pointod out in
tho first instance, 'ten in the presentation, ho- -o -culd follow our
prccoduro, -o stated that wo would uso thoso affidavits cartifiod by
tho clerk in tho Documentation Division. Ho-ovor, if y*x want tho original

certificate in oach caso, thoy can bo oroducodj but sono difficulty

dcos ariso duo tc the fact that it is, say for instanco, wo dolivorcd
threo, four or five affidavits fren cno scurco. will net roquiro
then to r.ako out a certificate for oach one. 'o will have thon oak© .on
accumulative certificate stating all four or five, and wo my put"thon
into evidonco at diff-rent tinos. #

JUXE SSB9XNG: los, bvt tint accumulative certificate, tho sovoral
affidavits rill cortcinly bo identified, '.-ill thoy not?

•r.. HARDI: Certainly, yes, sir.

C'F/jZ SaSRXtfC: I believe that proco&ire night expodito the case,

If?. HASDT: Ir. that case, -c will deliver then as soon as possible.
r:r: ’SSITS1IT: Sore is a document 8?U which does not show tho
signature of tta affiant that I sec. It roads, "Boforc nc, Arthur Kioth

2 lent." This copy doesn«t sh-u that tho affidavit was over signed.

• • 902


g TPy- lA^^ASd^^-g-Porrtn (ATO) .

Ccert &• 1

4

»?.. BIRD!: Could I soo the copy. Tour I-tonor?

Tou *111 note. Tour Honor, on the second page of this affidavit
It says, 'sworn by tte said deponent, a*. Sullfaaatski (?), voluntarily,
Stockholm, Sweden, July 2, 19^6." }fcw, this.is# as I stated, is a certi¬
fied copy by Itojdr Matt. I prosuuo in this case he only signed the
il inal deposition. This is a carbon copy as you will note, and Major
i - tt lias sworn to this and wo have it attachod here on tho document shoot*
Tlda cox)3 in tho official courso of business and so forth of the War
Criaos Soction of the British Ar^r cf tho Rhino.

THE PRESIDEHT* !^r point in oonneotion with this docunont was whilo
it is stated tc bo a oopy,' it doos not show tho signaturo of tho affiant.
Tho Tribunal will pernit tho roadinr. of tho ^.cunonts an:’ rosorvo tho
rulin:. on th. admissibility until latar.

JUDOS SSBRIND: It is understood, of courso, tho Prosecution is
—ir.;, to subctlt for tho inspocticn f tho Tribunal, the underlying
oorttflcato v.do by tho British Investigating Officor?

I?. HARD!: That is oorroct.

JUDGE SESRINC'X Tho Court thon will rosorvo its ruling until that

tl». . .

in. HAPDT: At this tin-, I uill road this docunont into tho rooord
and will givo it a Prosecution Exhibit Nunbor for tho purposo of con¬
venience and thon the ruling at a later da to can tako placo. This Docu-
rant is ID-876 which will bo Prosecution Exhibit Nc. 235 - 225, pardon
.... is I sic tod before this is an affidavit of Jadwiga Kanimka. This
ire taken in Brussels bof.ro ' ajcr liatt and states as follows:

1, Jadwiga Xaainslca, 2U Avenue do lTs-r, Brussels, aako oath and
sVito as follows

•I was arrested on IS ’larch 19U1 and arrirod in Ravonsbruck on 27
. i-i_r 19L1 an:’, left tho can? on tho 16 April 19U6.

'I ias trice operated on during ay stay in tho canp. Tho first tino
•as August 15, 19U2, in tI k socond group of prisoners tc bo ojwratod onj

903


a Dao :-ASch*-9-3-?c rrir. (AID)

- -s—^-—I---

-Vj rciio-.'L-ig »iro opera tod on with no: Kornanska, Zofia; "aninskaj
Zofiaj Sarclowska, Vladyslcva; Jurkowska, Aliciaj Kcrwaefc, Ursula;

Tcaaska, Yanina; Iwanska, Hrystyna; Zaresrenn, -Mria.

•In tho norning '-f the sane day -.ro w^rc opera tod cn rro vero all
sent to tho Ravi or tot Inwwirc -That was tc happen to us. Five of us
.re s out to one rooa end tho two Irarunska sis tors and Karwacka to
nc :tor. On arrival wo all had baths and ware given one 11 hospital
shirts and bl uses. Wo had no nodical oxoaination and were given nothing
» oat. ton they wore taking no to the operating theatre I fought to
koop out but was told down by the nurso Iricka and two ottor nursos in
the corridor whilst Dr. Rosonthal gavo ae an cnaosttotic by injection
in ay ora. Just bo for o I had tto injoetdon I saw Gobhardt in tho
corridor and I ala: rocogniso hin on to. 3 in tto group of photographs.

I also saw Dr. Cbarhcusor going into tho Operating ttoatro. '.‘'hon I camo
rtund, I found that all of us tod boon operatod on and that qy right lug
was in .blaster up to tto knoo, thrao days la tor I was takon to tho
Orossing Rocn an 4 :y faco was covered 'rtth a shoot so that I could not
s.o what was going zr. t I rooognizod tho voicos of Oborhausor, Rosonthal,
Schivlauski and there woro sovorcl ottor3 thoro wtoso voicos I did not
ro^ .Tlzo. I hoard another Doctor who I boliovo ronovod plaster ■'clc
for instruments.

"Irraidiatoly after the oporcticn I had a temperature of 39 dogroos,
the first weak after tto operation it variod botaroon 38 and 39. "'hon I
was sent back to ry block three weeks after tho cporction I still had
smo fover and folt very woa!:.

After tto first op-ration Gobhardt canj into tho roon wtoro I was
having ~j dressing changed with several other doctors and talked about
tto eporations and said ttoy were "jttlitary operations". I rocognisod'
Gobhardt when he cane into tto reen.

"Abrut a weak after ny first operation, Rosonthal cane into cur

r::n drenk. to asked him uqy wo had boon operatod on, ho answered "because

y*u aro young rirls an] Polish Patriots.- 1 Oborhausor was also askod tho

901 ;


a ^ i^-u-ASch»-9-b-Farrir. (AID)

C'UT& ^

s:r^ question* She anaworod that tha oporatlcn had boen ordered by tho e
Gestapo. Dr* Fischer advisod us to ask the Senior !>ector, Schidlausky,
wry tig 'aid beer, opera tod on, but after that wo never saw Schidicueky
cgpih.

•i I -rtas in great pc in after tho oporation, tho first Wo days wo
wP i off-rod a aodicine but refused tc take it after which wo wero
eff-rod nothing.

"About a weak after tho operation I first saw jty wound which was
about 10 cis. lorg and 5 0124 wido are', full cf green pus and very
inflamd. It is xnw 10 cos. long and a'xut 3cns in width.

"Three days after ry first drossing tho-second one was dono under-
siidlar circuMtancos as tho first, but I uonagod tc pull tho shoot
off ay faco for a few seconds and saw Dr. Fisohor who was doing ny
drossing.

"I was oporatod on the second ti n on 13 Sopteubor 19U2, with
fivo others whs woros -fojfcoskl, Vfondaj tikowska, Polagic; Gnas, Ibria,
Lvdnaka, Jadwignj r.arolouska, lOadislavn; Karwacka, Ursula.

"Tin day boforo tho operation I imj again put in tho Rovior and
had a bath and then salt ccnprcsscs wero put cn ny wcuul by tho nurso
Ericko and axnthcr rursa. Boforo tho socond operation I was civon sono-
thing to irink which aado no sloop and consequently know no dotails of
the operation.

"Than I carve to free this operation I had laich rxro fover than tho
firat tine; wo wero giver. thing to driric throo linos a day to^
ail , via to tho pcir. but it t. littlo offoct; in the evening, howovor,
Cbcrhnu3cr gave us rnrptdm injections, .'o *.nero net in plaster after
tin s^cor.1 operation. Tho first two tiers ry dressings were changed by
Dr. Fiscirr and afterwards by Schidlausky and Oberhauscr and also by SS
aursos.

. #

"After ry second oporation I stayed in tho Revier throo mnths,
firing all that tino I hid fover and fait vary woak and I was given no


earn.


90 $


21 Dec. u6-«-SctB-9-4;-Parrir. (;,7D)
Court So. 1


C

■Hfejil I loft tho Rovior thtco nenths after that operation ay :ovor
• •
had r.lrrat 30 no but ay wound was still op an. Baforo I left the Rovior

Gborhauscr had a look at ay r jund, and said I was fit to 3 c. In ’larch

19U3 ay leg rza still Ha charging pus.

■In February 1916’ the ertLr cans out h-t all sf us wh: had boon
operated on noro tc rcaain in our blocks. ”0 know this isoant wo voro to
bo liquidated.

"I wont to the juroeu end spofc; to Bins and Swarzhuberj thoy told
no that as we woro Still wock wo would bo transforrod to tho Grooroson
canp. I said that that was not truo but that we sh.uld bo allot in tho
can? without boinf. transferred. . .

'*1 doaondod ef S^jarxhubor that I saw Suhronj ho said it was
impossible. After a few days, h • rover, I saw Suhrer. and told hin that
wo would rnthor bo kj l lod In th- can? than at Gr ssroscn. Suhren said
ho would do otrorything ir. his power to savo us.

'Ifcr log is now hoalcd but 3013 tirod very quickly and during tho
Last throe tionths I have had intomittont fever 'Jhich ny doctor tolls
nc is duo to recurrence of infection in ny log and also tho glands in r^r
right groin havo bo conn swollen. Signed J* :b/iga Kaainska."


21 Doc. k6-W-HK-10-lf«Prlce (AH)) C
Dourt'^>. 1


At this tir~, Ycur F.or^rs, wo new to-ro all the original certificates
s l-r^d by "ajar ".ant. T!ty hare just boon brought down frou the document
recn, on’ in order to avoi J confusion at a lator date, at this tine I
-.dll suirdt the certificates for ycur examination.

(Ths Tribunal ojcednlnG certificates.)

UK. R JT*: All those certificates toko "the saao fora. Your Honors.

JUDGE SEBRUT-: D: ycu have one affidavit attached tc oach of tho
exhibits?

JR. HARDY: I have on. attached to oach exhibit, yos, sir. I believe
you have all tho affidavits boforo you now, Ycur Honors.

r.E PRESIDE??:: Tho ccrtifieatos by tho British officer, lfcjor Uant,
aro orijiml certificates an’. appoar to bo in ordor. Tho objection of
tho Defendants* Counsel to tho addssion cf tho affidavits is ovorrulod.
Ycu nay now rr.rk Docuaont No-376 as an admitted exhibit r

IP. HARDY: Thank y.u. Your :k>nor.

I now tom to >130 50 f Ycur "oners document book, Docuaont *D-873>
which is efforod as Pr.,socution Exhibit No. 226. This is a doposition
cf Zofia Sbkulska:

'I, Zefia Scfculska, cf Lund -Srodon, nakc oath and stato as follows:

I arrived in Ravonsbruock on tho 21st Soptenber 19U1 fron H’arsaw,
together with U50 othor prisoners. I loft tho camp on the first Swodish
Rod Dros 3 transport on April 33rd, 19U5. I had boon arrestod by tho
Ge3tapo or. JSay 8 th, 19hl, a3 I was an activo roc.'hor of tho Polish
Resistance !fcvcr.ont.

During ny stay in Ravonsbrucc!: I was cper-tod on experimentally on

tw occasions. T?voro wore another Wo attempts :ndo to opera to on no,

tick I tJsrvrtod. Cn tho 1 st of August 19h2, I was told tc ropert to

tho big Re vie r, with 9 other prisoners, by Kalina Bolin,, secrotary to

lar.dl. At tho Rc 7 ier :.o va.ro exndncd by Prauloin Doctor Oberhausor.

’-ftor a id 3 examination I v-s told I was too thin and was sent away. Tho

•

other 9-girls were subsequently operated on.


21 Doe. Prico (ATD)

Co^fc.l C

on September 21st, 19 .2 I was sent for again by Obcrhausor, boforo

wixo I across ad, end after a purely visual exanination she told no I

*as fit to be operated on. I told Obcrhausor that a fear weeks before I

had boon dismissed bocauso I was too thin and that I had a woak hoart.

•

To this Obcrhausor replied that it did not natter. I nay add that
botoocn thoso two ozard.nations by Obcrhausor I had had no other food
tho nomal canp diet. Oborhauscr then sont for a ooman intemoo
nurse, Gerda Quomhedn, who took no to roon !fc>, h in tho Grand RovLor.
Vfhon I arrirod at rocn No. h thoro wore already throo other relish
girls thcro who had already boon operated on and rroro oncasod in
piaster cast :f both legs fren the thighs to the foot. Tho nanos of
thoso girls aroi

Aniola Scbcloska, whe hr. alr^c. v be~n in th_rc two to throe wooks.
This 3irl was afterwards shetj

Kristina Dabskn, who had boon there about a wookj

Zofia Stofardak, r<ho had also boon thoro botwoon two and throo


wooks.

I was sent to tta. ba throes, an:' after .y rotum was told I would
bo opera tod on tho nort day. Boforo ny oporatior. SS nurso Frioda shavod
both sy legs, gavo no an injection in tho thigh and a glass of what I
inclined to bo norphinc, to drink. The following is a doscription of
S3 nurso Frioda: Sho ’.-as about 1.50 notros tall, ugly, fat, bow-loggod,
woro "lasses, brown hair stroakod with grey, agod about liO.

V

I was later taken to.-the operating theatre by Lenursc Frieda and
Fira Pautz. Prosent in the thoatru were, when I rocognizo hero: Doctors

Fischer, Obcrhausor and Icsonthal, There was also present an SS nurso

• •

nan- I do net knew. I do know, however, that she had boon in tho
canp only a start tine. Thoro was also present a 'octor ’/hose nano I do
not know, but I have soon hin ?n subsequent occasions are’ understand that
he was an assistant to Dr. Gebhardt.

•CT left log was flc^od fully at tho knee and held in this position


ry bandage encircling ry CLoxod knee joint. Dr. Cberhausor then put an

90?


a Doc. liS--»-L&-3*?rico (ATS)
Court &. 1


C


»


injection into a vein of ny cm and told no to count while doing so, I
counted up to 3 an! then rone iberod nc aero until I workc up the next
ir±.S in ny bod in roca No. U. I was told ny operation had taken 3
h.urs. fton I cane out of the anasthostic I felt sick, but suffered
toon no pnin or fuvor. loft log ms encased in a plaster cast fron
tivi foot to tto top of the thigh. Ob-rhauser later cane into P.oon No. li
and told x that ny operation had not been serious end that I should bo
-bio to walk in 11 days. Sight days lator ny plaster was renovod by
Doctors Oborhauser an-' Fischor. Doctor Schidlauski was present, but
merely os an onl -kor. 1J had a scar on ry left log on tho outer part,
back of tho shinbone, about 10 ca, long end curved backwards about 2 cm.
in its under portion. During this porlod after tho operation I had no
pain and no toaperaturo. when tho 'round was noarly tooled, tho plastor

ms r.rxvod. About tho 11th day aftor tho operation ny stitcho3 voro

• •

rxxvod one". I bogan to walk. I feun.' uy log was very weak, but about -
threo wooks later I was able to walk nor ally. ’hen I wr.3 ablo to walk
satisfactorily Oborhauser tolno I -aist start work again, and fron tho
21 st Oct-toor 19U2 until }larch 19U3 I '-orkod in tho Big Rovicr rolling
bandan-os.

On tho 2nd Deccnbor 19U2 Ob>rhausor told re I was to bo operated
or. a-ain. I askod her why, and she stated sho did not knew but it had
to bo ’one. For ny second operation Doctors Fischor and Obcrhqusor and
SS mrso Do re woro in tho thoatre. Oborhauser again gavo no anasthotic,
ar.d during the operation the wcun;’. frea'ty rovious opera fcicif was oponod
up. ''hen I cano rcund frsn tho anesthetic I found that this t&ao uy leg
■a' r.-t boon encased in plaster hut only bandaged. This second operation
't nine I was tol’ also took 3 hours. As after ny first operation, tho-
s-con ono ms followed by no pain or tcnpcrcturo. After 8 days Dr,
Cbcrhauscr reaevod ny bandago ar.d placed on a strip cf adhesive plaster.
Or. this day also I started to walk again. A week later I was sont back
t: ny block, which was Block 15.


9C8


21 Doc. fax
Court Ifc. 1


I should lito to add that durins =nd following both of qy operations
«o were siren no attention whatsoever. Tho dressings wore dirty whon
thoy woro cbanged, wo wore giron no washing facilities, and whoovor in
ti» wajdwas a:st aabular.t had to look after the sanitary arrangements
for the otters uho woro ioncbllo in tteir plaster casts.

At present, as a result of ny too operations, the only disability
I suffer is a rory wook loft anklo.


21 Dec WS chw-U-l-oa slaw (ATD)

Court !fc. 1


It. January 19U two Polish girls rho hod boon operated on woro shot,
rjjdr rnrcs w_re: GKAS, Ihria, aid PAJACZ3J SEA, Janina, SQhron hinsclf
n to roan !fc. U and told us that they .fore to bo sot froc. The
jirls woro vary surprised, bo cause their rounds woro not yot hoalod and
co one was allowed to leave the canp unless comparatively fit. A secro¬
tary of Langcnfcld later ease to roon h with a slip of papor booring
the. rases of tho 2 girls, an! also on tho paper was that they woro to
go to Lublin aftjr they had boon set free. A friend cf nine who workod
in tho Labor Office, called Kalina Strtclodca, later found a slip of
paper with tho so two girls* nanos on, both fell wed by a cross and a
ctaio and tho fact that they had died of heart failure. Another friend of
nlno who vforicod in tho Tovicr called Oetvr.--.fa Bioga looked through tho
book ccntainin: tho records c: all these who died in the canp, and
found thoso two girls* na_vjs followed by a fa to and tho fact that thoy
had diod from horrt failure, Ttth wo loam of that these tun girls had
dofinitoly boon shot, wo sont a protest te tho Canp Cemandar.t, Suhron,
tut received no reply fron hin.

•Ono day in liar eh, when arriving as usual for werk in tho Grand
Ha Tier, J. was told by Pina Pauts that Oborhausor wished to soo no again,
as I was to have a furthor operation. On hearing this 1 imodiotoly
wont fron tho Revior to ry bloc!:, n'vro I hid, and lator, whan
Obcr’.vtusor*s secretary ccu» to look fer no, ny block loador said sho
net know -.dv.ro I was. Following this, I triad to see Suhron
personally. In this I wua unsuccessful and was tck.n to Obcrha^tor '3
consulting re by the guard grvepf. In Oborhausor consulting roon
th ro wore ; resents Oborhausor, Schiclauski, and several girls who woro
working there, inclu ing frzyaanska, Jolantcj Schidlauski struck no
roughly anf askod jo vhy I had refused to cono an J bo cparr.tod on, as I
-as going te bo release •* after this next operation. Te this I replied
that this was not true and that I was gain , to bo eventually shat and I
would rather be shot before having another operation than after.


a Dec. !i6->i5c^I^-2"Sasla^ (AID)

Court to. 1 x-

k

Scfcidlnuski askad ac why i wos a prisoner in tto crap, to whioh
I replied*

•I lovo ay country, I an Polish, and. for that I an toro.« To
this ho 3\do no reply and I loft tho rocc. Two days lator Dr. Obci^-
toisar informed no that work in tho Itovicr was to coasc and I was aont
back to :ty block.

A

•3otweon 1 larch and August no further experimental operations wero
perferood in the canp. Experiments wore, howovor, carriod out on dogs,

•out about this I can giro no information. In August 19U3, ton of u3 woro
told tc report to tto Rovicr. '.s wo know wo tf-ro wantod for furthor
experiments, wo rofuaod to t o. Binx told us that it was no good
refusing, because if w> did sho would got SS aalo guards and dogs to
bring us along by force. In spito of this, wo attonpted to hido
amongst tho other inmates but Binx and the canp pclicowoncn caught us
an! lad us off tc tho bunkor. In tho bunkor, the ton of us woro
diTided into two oqurl groups end cr.ch group of fivo was placod in a
separato coll which was conplotoly dark and. had no furniture whatsoever,
o wero wittout fcod for forty-oight tours. After ferty-cight tours tho
window was o?or.d, so to had Some li^ht, an, wo w-ro also givon food.

The fivo sirls ir. tho other coll/ however, wero opera tod on by forco
the day after wo wero taken to tto burkor. Tho fivo girls "ho woro
operatod on woro: Helena Plasoclca, Joanna Saydtewska, Stofania
Sisklucka, VLadystawa Xarolovskr., the girl that tostifiod hero
yesterday, and Kalina Piotrewska. Theso who woro proson^dth no in
qjr coll, wto were net operated or., wero as follows* Zefia Xcroanska,
Brtunita Bonbinska, Pola^a I&chalik, Ursual Xrawacka. /iftor tho
other five had boon operated cn, a Dr. Klinck came in and. examined our
logs, Tto following is a description of Dr. JOimak: Agod 3h - 35f
height 1.80 metros, fair hair, palo faco and ?jroy eyes. Or. tho 11th clay
aft^r our internent in tho bunicer, Suhr. n himself cane -lovm and told
us vo were to bo r-leased from tho bunker, After tho last operations,
-rich were carried out in ..u^-ust and September 19!i3, the following girls
Tv.ro stott I'aria Ziolonka, Apolinia lakowska, .micla Sobolcwska, Rosalia


Bute;:


91C


21 Doc. Lfi-H-iScho-H-3-Sasl^'* (AID)

Court Be. 1 f

'I 'onvo soon Oborhauser sal-ct patients during the. tines I was in
bad following ny second ope ration. Those patients selected vara takon
to a «-«n r:cn in the F.ovier. later Oborhausor went into this roon
herself with either Garda Quornhoira or Hina Pautz. The woaon who had
bjjn selected and sent to this r;co wore never seen again. It was

generally thmght in the Sovior tbit they wero jivon lothal injoetdons

•

by Obc.rhr.usar. I personally have novor soon Oborhauser give thoso

injections, but I have helped carry down the boiios of tho pooplo

selected in coffins fren this race shortly after their soloction.

Tteso coffins wero placod in a car which took then- to the crcnatoriun.

•

"Rosonthal, ^uornhoia an.'. Pautz also gavo injections. This aotliod
of ext oral ratten coi:- ncod shortly after a visit to th^ ceap by Hi-mlor,
who is rile god to havo said that the inaatos of tho can? wore not
c^ing fast on-ugh.

‘I havo s-cn SchicOauski end ' , .:s>nthal porscnally boat pationts
■ith thoir fists, and also kicked then. I have personally soon tho
following boat up imates in tho car*:: Xowa, Xopka, Lohnan, ian:'3, Erich,
9ir.z, Brauning, Skorc (Sk^no was at one tino block loader of ny block
15, and oho constantly boat tho innatos), Opitt, Polaun, Haabo,
Schrcdttor, Schraiber, Dr. Sonntag' (Dr. Sonntag was a sediatj ho usod
to boat Id inrr.tes of tho carp, patients, and ho also boat his wifo,

•ho woricod in tho Rovior, bocauso sho drank. Zimor, 'inkolriann selected
3ov.ral th.usan pooplo for tho gas chanbor, nrlnly :!uring Fobruary
and ferch 19U5. Fron Soptenber 19H to April 19U2 the block^ loader in
charge of “lock 15, oallod Bondm Fubica, was oxtroaoly sadistic, end
boat the imatos umarci fully, Another block loader called Knoll, of
Block 21:, also used tc raltroat the iroatos and caused considerable
trouble by spyirr on th_a an.' sp?ca in;, false stcrios. On Fobruary
knurr thr.t rr^ro to bo executed, as the ardors cane that we voro
n.t tc leave cur black, and wore sent to rark outsi.o, tho oanp. o
rurinod in our black until the policcwcncn ca.t t f-tch us. After the
pcHcc'cc'-cr. cart far us wo loft the black and hid anang tho cthor innatos.

911


Court I _ . „ ,

21 Dec U6-a- A. Sch -114,-Sasla*


C^B)


This was easy, owing to a large increase of internees, due to the
evacuation from Auschwitz. We continued this existence until the
liberation of the camp. I recognize the following people froo the
photographs shown me: Pflaua, Fischer, Suhren, Blnz, Cberhauser,
Rosenthal, Stone, Mory, Gebhardt, Treite, Winkelmann. (Signed)

Zofia Sokulaka.*

Now turn to page 55 of your Honors* document books.

THE RtESIDE-VT: We will not proceed further with the admission of
documents this morning. I shall now read an announcement by the Tribu¬
nal. In order that there nay exist no confusion ip the minds of counsel
in the case now pending before this Tribunal concerning the status of
exhibits offered f*retofore by the prosecution. The Tribunal now states
that all exhibits heretofore offered by the prosecution, to ihich ejec¬
tions by defendants' counsel were not sustained or taken urder advisement
for future ruling, are addtted in evidenco, subject at final hearing
or at any other time when the matter becomes pertinent, to argument
b7 defendants' counsol concerning tho probative value of any exhibit
or any portion thereof. The Secretary General will record the admission
in evidonce of tho exhibits.

It is also understood that certain exhibits which consist ctf

official documents rtiich are new a part of the official records of

• _

any other proceeding or official file, may be withdrawn, and official
certified copies,whether photostats, photographs or any other appropri¬
ate form may be substituted for the originals. t

The Tribunal will new be in recess until January 2nd, 19b7.

(The Tribunal adjourned until 2 January 19U7, at 0930 hours.)


912


W7

^2 Z P-l-l-Tostcr (!3D)
Court Ho. 1


CCELTC9T3 U-7I

Official trcnacript of the .'asoricen lilitary
Tribune! in the ratter or tho United 3tatos
of Anorica, c^airat llarl brandt, _*t el
dofandant3, sitting ri Uurnborg, Terrany, on
2 January 19U6, 09 30 , Juotico Siala, proairin-.


7.1'. " .T./.L’-L: Tho Uonorcblo Judges of ! Ulitary Tribunal 1.

;llitcry Tribunal I is nov In session

Cod 3~vo tho United ftrt.s of Aserlcr. cr.d this "onorablo Tribunal.

• •

Teoro rill bo order in tho courtroom

T.r. . .‘.:ivr.Tt :i;rihal, ascertain if tho defendants ero.dl
present.

T.- I—TUTf.: All tho defendants aro present In the courtroor..

TIT! .-T.1I .UT: r.io >ecretei7^'onarel 'rill noto Tor t’.e rscord t*io
resenea of ell the dofondants in court.

7.-0 prosecution ;iay proceed.

1 cll-inr: :.t tho ond of tho se33i:n boforo tho Christrvs rocoso,
prosicv.tion traa in tho process of introducing evidonco concerning tluo
exporlnonts at tho Ravonsbrad: concentration can-. o lied ccrioted tho
introduction and reading of Docirvent K> 373, 'diich ..a» Prosecution
riiirit 226, and tho ne:t doc want rill bo VO 871, that is on pego 55
of tho English docunont book end rill bo rVosocution Inhibit 227. Tris
is an affidavit of ono Uofia 3a', and it roads as follow:

“Do coition on oath of f-'.J Sofia, fc .ala of 2li Ivonuo do l'l’sor, Drusaola.

t

' rr. before : e ’or . rthur "iV , ITf.T, .C. of tho cr Trice Investi¬

gation Unit at Dru33cls on 12 f.u ;x3i 19!’,6.


'I Uofia fa.i, 2J>. .’.vormo dc l*’f ear, Iru^saln, bcin;, duly ~ :orn, tie oso


■ad sa-.


■as .•§*ro3t!^V?« 7 febr ua ry 19!il, I cere to Pavansbruc!: on 23


\-£


-Tf «5 15hX and laf


cacp on 27 April 19h5.


c ?..-o anporlnontcl oobratlaQs "ore carried out on ns during — in-rison-


nt\^r. o^rs. Tho->irat on 3 !Io'"r

X*'tirnofei''V'


rbor


913 &


fourt Ho. 1


C

»Cr. too Cap of --- first operation a list or 10 nrrvjs including :ino

-jzs r-cd during the -orain; roll-call. o ..ent to the office and asked

Aufseherin langerfold nhat -ms “anted uith us. 3he acid she dicin' t !non,

jut shortly after, .re vere taker, to tho ?ovier (hospital). C-n ova- arrive!.

at tfco r.jvier re first ic*r Cfcsrfcaus -r uho nxarrijmd us rapidly in or’or

to rorif-' rfiethsr our heart and lungs • oro sound. .'.ftor toot, vo *. ont

to the .'l-.'lay dopertoont ttSvu-o our chests tore radio grapiod end out of

the ter. of us only fcro • *ero considerable to ? tend tho operation and livo

through it, i.a. itself and 2VZXZL "aria (Incrr. in tho canp as Ironc).

Tina Suita then locked us in tho *rard-roflc • ith "ovr -rothcr girls tto

•

had boon sclocted before and ttsto cnaiting the operation. The nrsos of
t’-sio girls are:

Hio tlioro liats the no:-os, four folish girls.

•

C !:icrtly after our arrival at tho rrd-roor, fine anno vith snail

-las-.js, 3lie said they -oro containing orphia end that o should drink

it. o refused to drink tho lien-1 d in tlio glasses, but Tine nent out

and cans bock T.lth 13 nurso 1TJ. and both to other forsod vs to drink

tho rnrpiia. After that, ro sVrtod fooling dlssy and sloop:' o

dewn, then “rika cano and gave us r. norViic inaction. Tho four girls

iw -ore rJroady t'»ro ’xd received thoso inactions f..*i o r. r.y 3inco

•

their arrival tiro cays beforo, and tcioy • o fooling vary sloo-y. If tor
tho ir/:ction, -.-o .:-ro ta!:on to fa brthrooa -zero '..o oro • reshod and
>i!» shaved our lo;.s, >-cn I cc » hoc!:, I "33 under tho effect of tho
:cr fda and lying in bod, realizing only Iron tine to tiao uh»t i»cs going
on around no. I s.-nr, her over, too girls coning back to too rogji nftor
-ic oiteration, hen tlioy cans to tciro vs to t-» operation roon, lackiol
raid I sercanod and struggled. floaenthal ut is hand o-.-or :y south and
I hit his hard.

“Cer a end fina cam ani put no by force on a rolling 3trotchor, I

'••■33 too dlssy to fight any longer. I urs taken trough the hall to

• *

the operation rco -, and through the open doer, I sn: ~t. G-Tll'I, ZT'-X'.


Court i'c. 1


c


rTY » n;:*. .-3 I 7703 l^ins on the etretcl-cr, nur:o savo 'to an

infection in tfc* an and pet a cask ever Taco. I t^rcr array the
■nsl: rnd then !>r. 7-oior.thal


*•


91hz


ra^V• oster

Court Ifc. 1


c - c cr .d vt ‘.di band over y south. Ifarso horr told re not tc o
afraid* -'or in a To-.' rdnutes I rould 3oc Zla.ro rs and hoar bolls. Thilo
l-.lrc on the stretcher, a an Ire . the ~olitical Depart* sent, ’.Those

I do ~-ot know, eras and tool: our nanss end. uxbors sivon to hia

»

Ian. It’ operation lasted Tor 2 hours !& rdnutc3. 7\is :ras noted
- t. by c r -o or :y friends -rho -res - forking in tho dental dcprrteent oS tho
lorlor.

“I rocovorod consciousn;33 la tor on in the ovor.in" and I noticed
t 1 could not :x>ve because ry lo s '^ro r. a ;*!. • t.

I ires suffering terribly and I screened -*ith .win, so that ’inn cane

and *.rvo :» another slass norphic. Thor. I .'oil asleep.

^ • _ • • •

■‘ .hen I 'folco up tho lolladn- orrJ n~ I was jiven norplda a^aln.

At 11 o'clock 373DL\UJ::i and CC 71 LICIT. visited us. Gberhausor touclvcd
~ latter east to ^ whothor it res uarr. md after that sho tov^d iy
tecs. 7.ds caused a bad pain in tho lo^s. I ashed hit \fay ry

lc; s hurt so vch. lie did not answer. C.er'.wusor as hod iiin tiftnt sho
co.Id do to relievo ry pains. Ho roll'd * on't operate on then and they
uon't suffer'. 7w*n ho loft tho root!.

c 3c:ddlous!d cane every -erninp at 11 o'clock "or tv.-o ooks and ho
'jrov“ht vs caiativo tabloids, • .on ho could not brinp t: on kirsJolT, ho
ordered nuroo 2 rnc to do it. !!o tel:- or, ho ver, not to a«y cirtkinj
rbeet it to Gborhauocr -.ho - -as obviously stv.d inc our ;ain sonoations.
Oborh-vser told vs ’erscl-T that she c’- lx* not five vs anything to relievo

• -he hoaling of our lo s. ’

for six weeks 7 lo^a ere radiosra'hcd ever:' t-,.-o x*ka.
c .\- .or _*o\’r tfo-jks tho lsster-cast as taken off by C onauser.

fho daiter-cast -.'as not sup osed to "o6 taken off so soon, but they "•*

•

to do so bccauso tkoro :cro little blca!: insects in tho wool filling
of tL:c lr iter-east. I s not aliened to . ovo after tho 'la -or-c *t
had boon rsreved.

‘I did not leave tho kevier bet :ccr. the first .and the second


operation*


tlso Ti;*3t radio j.^h v'lich dollop d the dint o xoreti -a,

Dr. icste told no that 5 c entire tor 3 or cc lort Toronov* '.cd boon ro oved

««i cbo^t *


V \


C


or 5 of tha jteownssi -Voout ?0 canti-otnra of porioatein o.

•

cth shinbones had »on acre;* and five hel-a had beer. nado ta doon
.. the narrow or. the rijht shinbones end sir on the loft o’inebeno,
elio r.o doc; “ 3 the arras.

u^rrin- the first si:: days after this ©poratior. I had over IsO Coyroa
:rr* end cfter-W* onl;* a ali.ht rarer fra- tiia to tor*. I else had
heart trouble end tie;' ere re forcniiio or it.

«7.io food ^.von to us ct t:» 7.3* i'-r a too ordinn r~ food of too
can?, flw frion a, ha-over, atolo cdditioncl ."cod -r va vvjr.ovar it
w: 3 oaaiblo. “Vine va sop osed to feria car® of ua, but aho aoroly
too:: put ternorotero, and another jirl e^sd ua '.rash up ad too!: ccro

• • • a

of va 'tone of us in that roon caald ove.

Hsumsav cna to aoe -i ct tvs or.d of 1 $ fc2, before Ciriat ?

=1 .:ad va to 3i.r0 hie all too totals and -reeds .vs t:«at thore vw 3 A
•* no roro o;orationa in too crar> and that ho vould 30 to Dorlin to

etc; all of this oCficUUy. &<> .* vo * vt '"*■ ot

food fra: tho TJ Idtchon, but tho ;.ufaehorinnon (?e rf.o fjurr.'a) didn't
err-- out this c- or. I hoard hin oay later on to c terxn inrr.to
called :i:,a '.chubort (ahe xaa too uHo of hitler* a adjutfot too \wA
boon rilTnd r; r. bod» at too :Vrich attc 7- in :? 3 < or 36), ho \raa
aid: at tho Savior, tort :» j>«W do arcr^in; to hr.vo t»ao oporaticno
stcr;od.

«:;• second o-;orction w« ccrri -d out on 23 Vt 0 . • - T *4

not ot •; ilneo Cirat c oration I :*s too tiorfs to resist.^ :acr.!:a eoab
into tho roon Tith J^OarObi before tho c oration cad r.a!nd *ia hat
trs -pic; to ho done. Ida onstnrsd fu* !» didr.* t understand an;*t:-dn3
about these operations and t rt ho did at approve of toon, ho toon a^»'-
*ati 4 a That had boon done rith no boforo and she told in *.fxt aho *.ad^
soon on tho radiojra; ’.i3.

j Tm second tine I was operated on *07 ’archer uho lied core out in *»
'.—11 to a oo if I vras the parson he .ranted to c para to on because the ;ool:
before, "ebn-arr 16, 19V3, I had beer, sent to the operation roon b;' rial he
and

916


c

2 J«v*WF4^7osfccr (TSD)

Court ITo. 1

rJtcr fisckcr had soon r», ho 3aid I nas not one of the ^arsons 3io was

-in- tc owcto on that da;-. :'acs!at told no lator on that Crrin-j this

-:cond operation ^ lags roro opened up again and that the ga'/3 botsreen

tho t:ro halves of tho pcrcncus had closed Ip about 1 centinoier. Turing

the operation an other piece was ranoved dr on’tho four cnt'3 of t'.c per-

onocs, but nothing uns dono to tho shinbones.. After that rr/ legs trero

■jen up again, but a curved needle cm 1 , about 20 centirotcrs of silk

fchraad uro loft in tho -round of ep loft lag. TAs gr.vo no terrible

pains later on and was rerevad bp. Troito- in febrvarp 1?V5. Treito - did

•

net ^rant to do it sa;-ing £«st he -..r.s not aliened to touch ay lags, but

%

than ho changed is raind ar.ri did it. I !xd t’is noedlo end tho thread

.’or a-..-! !: ;, but I lost then -rhon I loft Sayanabruefc.

“Tho a neat', otic -..■no - 4 . von to .x> t'.c soco-d tino nvreo DO?.*..

s Cno root: after t:o second oporution I -.-as told that I could trp to

•.tII:. ‘.s it '.“3 -.ot 'ossiblo, I •..•as given t.ro vaL*ins-sticks end on?”

5 onths lator could I •ralJ: .rlthout these :.-al!:ing-3ticks.

•

u \t presant, ay logs hurt-

1. ’-.on I 30 do-.m3tairs.

2. I err not run because ry toes 3?Ap.

• •

3. Inn I ut np foot in hot '.ater thoy contract and shn*:o.

B .’.t tho fovier I sc:: a Cjrran iroAar. *..iio had boon operated on bp

foecntial and “ .r>. oho v-as t en about C r-onths remnant. In tho
0 .-.'ration roon thap did so ethir.g to her -.r ich lulled tip ch-ild. As 3ho
- or. b.aring tie child the bod;* of tu: child felling into doco::-osition
or odor which nr.de it i ossible to s tap in tie roon. Tie.- then op-
iratcd on h.er tc trp to reno- c the both/ of tho child peico b” piece, but
~~ -» 'Eantiia she got tpptrs and ires transferred to blcc!: 11 •: ere she

’•iw.


517


2 Jan-li7-T 3-2-1 -Deard II (1DD)


Court !!o. 1

Rosenthal end G. rda often operated on prasoent oi»ni

"I also set Ho3cnthal cc « into t'io roon at ni^ht with the 3;Tin;jc
ir. ’.13 hand end the followinj romin- several persons had diod in a roon
of the lovior called “Stuobchcn 1 'rtioro P-osonthal lird tahen f.von and iven
then r- doauly injection.

■I srtr Cborheuscr boating up and throwing cut '.ream who had co:.x>
to have thoir le-s loohod rfter which had been 'jadly cut during thoir
work. "ho did not £-ve then any treats-ent.

“I roco 3 niao the picturos of TTT 2 ~7. f ~f! t CTTrr.'.'ITT., POmn/.L,

UK- and ~^2E a one tho >iooo;vc:.3 i/lch hevo boon shown to ro k
Ivon by the said deponent Tofia Taj voluntarily at bu33ols on 12 \\vyst
17W. Pcforo re, ha'or :.rthur ::oith Y:\Ti, ..:E, Investigation Cfficor
do tailed • be Coreandor in Chiof, ra-itio:. of the Uhino.®

Tho no::t documnt is alone tho se» lino, and is an affidavit by
another one of the vie tins of tho jo operations at 3cvonsbrv.ee!:, end t'ls
is -ocraont :'o. 387, utdeh will bo Prosecution's inhibit Ho. 223.

a Do-osition on oath of Janino trans’ai, foralo of 77 ‘"onuo a-rar.,
sworn beforo lajor '-trim JOTH lYfE, *.Vr Crino Investigation

Itait, ff OT., at Paris on"

And tho date appears at the end of tho Docunont - 2h Juno 19)i6.

"The witness he3 boon informed that oho can spook freely and nood
not answer the questions asked, as her otetenont sho- Id 'jo voluntary

and spontaneous. Tho ritr.oss bein'; duly s :om, de-osos and says:

0 • •-

n I arrived at tie .tnvens'jrvec!: cr;r» on 23 ~c*torbor 191:1 1th 7C--0
Polish *.roran. I had jeon arrested soccuso of partici -tion in Asiotanco
operations.

■Or. 15/9A 2 30 3 peri-vental operation \rz 3 carri d out on no in the

carp.

*

•'That emir.-, after roll-call, re A;d to f j> to t!» S’.o crs. ihurso
-blha save us a nor-hia injection. Dr. Cvcrhaus r -.ms then present at
the -tevior (hospital). I!ur>e Oort a ave -o tvipan. rie operation


c

2 Jaa^.7-: :;-2-l-Boerd i: (ISD)

Court !to. 1

•_—g oarri-.d on 07 Dr. C-ooherdt end Dr. .’ioc’ior. .‘.a I hed boor, given
an en= 3 tCsotic end cs I


913


2 ja»-G^-2-2-3ear*-l! C-3D)
Court Ho. 1


C


-f-g unconscious I did'not see Dr. Cebhardt in tho operation roors, but tlic
Tour ci=p ircatos <.Aouv hin -any out tho operation tcld » about it.

I also board Mb 137 Mnsdf later on that he had operated on uo, as
-ell as 9 other prisoners, of rf-.cn I shall speak lr.^r. I -ost cons¬
ciousness before bein'- taken to the operation roon. .hen I askod Dr.
ftorteusor ‘fhy I tras ^oins to bo operated on sho replied- that, sinco I
belonged to tho Polish resistance, it pave t:«j Oerr-ans a rirht to carry
cut c:::erirxsnts on no.

’■The Pi rat Pressing- of nyvound too!: ulacs V.:o -reo’.ca after tlw
operation Dr. Cebhardt did it. At that tiro I had about !*1 dosroo Contl-
yado Paver. :y I03 sea in a plaster cast iron hi? to anklo and I could
not r»vo. Hur e PrJka took caro of as and oT those rfno Hod boon oporc.tod

on r.t tho sane tiro. .

« 2 y ordor of Oborhausor, \ro :rero iven neither nodicino nor norphic..

At tho first dressing of -7 "©und Dr. Cobliardt, Tischor, Cborhnwscr and
Posonthal -.rcro present. Tho plcstoivcast -.ms ror ovod after an incision
anothor could soo a dco? holo in tho bono, about 20 continotcr lonj. Tho
•.round was very dirty and filled with pus. 7ao rf'-olo loc '«•» vcr T rod * 1
could .ot jcvo the kneo. In tho around I could soo a snail pioco of notnl
rfdch socred to bo -..va-pod in cloth. Dr. Gobhcrdt took it out and put it
in a basin. He cloanod cut tie -.found and ut TUvanal, rf-ito wrdor and
vasolino or. it. :y I 03 wi then ut ‘sac:: in tho plastor-cast u? to tho
Iseo -..4th an opening aroi-.sd t.*o ro nd,‘ so that tho vs -oulS flew out.

Aft cr this drossinc I had Tnss Pover Por so:* tiro, but a -ock later tho
fever rent up r.-ain. ‘too ut. 3 vory rach r. rollon am', f are ■roro lone
rod lines olonp rv thi^h, thcro -.m3 a h-oovy cisc'.irrjo of pus fror t!w
uovnd all the tiro.

•rphor. I asked Dr. Cfccrhav3cr to dress jy loc, sho refused. Put
after a Pr.r ays tho '.round looked so bad that she consented to dross it.

3ho closed the door of the Pad.or, renovod tho plaster-cast and cleaned
out tho -:curd, uttin~ only va3olino on it, then she put 'sack the old
plastor-cast. Durinc all this tine and despite ;y pains, I *.tcs yivon neither


2 Ja>-7-:-2-2-9'sr^:: (-33)

Zmrt ISo. 1

nor any other r.odicino to rolievo than.

-.-tor another onartLmtioD all the ^irla -5u> had boon operntod or.
at tho sano tii» cs I •..•oro 'lecod or. boc’a in a rco:i end covered up
*.dth shoots


c

2 Jan-' X - _'.-2-3-2o£rd ,

!k>urt Ho. 1

locrinc only tho Iocs froo. "»n about 1C or 12 physicians carso to
^ -g-^-ry. our loss one after tho. other. I could not und*rstand nu.ch of
rimt they •roro sarins bocauso •thoj-'.-oro rains nodical cervessions, but
I board Cebhurdt 3 ay to tho other ^lyaicinns that ho had operand on no
:dr.;olf, 'skvz tho physicians prosont *cro Dr. Cobhnrdt, Tiochor, Hoacnthal,
Cborhausor and Schidlausld. All tlio physicians onanined our loss and
Oberhausor gave aorso bind of a locturo abort nino. After tint, ay los
••as drossod a^ain."

"Shortly after Schidlauski told in tliat ho would iiavo to cut off

ny io 3 . I protostod and rofviod. !!o then otrotchod ny lo- which had

been 'cent so far and -laced a sandba- ovor rv knoo. Tho -laotor-cast

-cj rcovod and tho wound drossod. days la tor Oborhauior drossod tho

uound which was still suppurating and thofevor disappeared Gradually."

"I stayod at tho Hsvior for two nohths and was t‘.:on ssnt back tc
• •

rr blocl:. .Sr log -113 sUll suppurating tho -.round had not hoalod yot."

"In scw.or 19J-J ry lo- started to trroll n 3 ain and I nain had a
high fovor.


t


920


c


2 Jb»-: -JP-S-la-Ifcar* 1 (ISD)
Court !k>* 1


»I eskod Treito to oporeto on to. He refused saline that !» did

not -ant to carry out any dirty operations sad that Dr. Oobhrrdt could

do it IT ’.so liked to* Dr. Treito ho .-over, ;avo parnissicn to a r oman

fonalo doctor, Uho 'ms a prisoner, to oporcto on iy lc €- "ho cut 14 °?° n .

- 1 OT - tho old scar and found out that another -.round line- appeared underneath.

7 S» • rounds -.rare stuffed -.nth cotton inprosneted irith vrsolino. I stayed

rt tho Devoir Tor four 'rcola and Hurt drossod the -.rour.da ovry socond day.

'^tcr..irda I ras sent back to ny bloc!:, Iftsr t o ooks tho t-.» non

rounds ’.icd '.sealed, and only tho first -wad k Jas still o son.

"After I hadqsnt e rook in tho block t!io 'o or cera V.c'.: end I -.tea

sont to tho H-roy do.vrtcent to hr.ro ry chest exarinod. Thcro \ras

notUnc -Tone *./ith ny lun^. A Polish fendo doctor, "-ofis Iaczq, jr.vo

ro Traatcsdl injections which did not hoi? rny. I hod intorrlttont

fover ami .ms yivon -r/ra:ldon injections (usually pyre. 1 dor. is Ivon

•

throit-h tho . outh). Tho pyraiddon had boon sent by ny fathor tiho

learned that ar. o: :porlnontal operation ’.sad boon carriod out on no

and -./.so sont it concoalod in p&cko-os. 7,ils trentnont roduccd tho pain. 11

"In October 191-3 I a„ain hr.d‘ a v.*ry hijh fev-.r and my lo^ a^sin

shored si jut of inf action. Treito ordered rnd infra rod li ht trorfont.

Tor this tract.-ont, I had to to the : ‘evior fr./ico a icy, in tho -.loming

•

and in tho ovoninc. *Xtar tr.ro enths, I v»s sent bask to block.

n I stayed tlicro until U January 'M, tho day chosen for our

oxocution. ..'o !mo-.r that :o v- jo to be executed t r.t day, bocauso rll

the ;o -.-ho had boon operated on had boon yivon orders not to lor.vo tho _

block end to rcrcin at tho disposal of 'die ca ? ccrrxndor. Dr. Oobhardt .

'.sad. ylvon to tho political Section a list .1th our ncaos, statin- diet

-.ro rare to bo placed in the -as charfajr. Cnc of us succ.jehid in spon.in-

to Sulircn t*o told her that ho had nothin- to do rrith that, but thr.t

fehb.-rdt :iatl taken all tho decisions. Ho then hid in oth:r bloc!x> find

tcoh oth_r numbers. Three Trench wonon rnd t/o "orroyicn iroivsn accosted

*

voluntarily to replace us in the lot r/.ich *.rcs to 30 to tho yes charibor,

'921


c

2 Ja»-: -J^-2-la-roard (:3D)

Court Ho. 1

50 tl'.r.t •-*_ irouid bo XoTt c.s a yroot ox u!iet tho Currans he.', riono to U3.

I then succ—i‘~d in having 3"3clf *«<nt to an arrrenition -actory in
Itustad-Clob^r fror. nhich I crcarv_-d on 2C larch l?li5 and -nt to .’lechers,
nhcro


/


921 /.


c

2 j-rw?- 2 - 2 £>Ocard ( 3)

Court !Io. 1

: 3-id I *.x3 e T.rrainian end I vork-d or. a .'ct. ' V am had boon injured
,Vrir^ rry flight. Tho -..-otnvd had not -aeon drjssod for t::o \w£a rotdX it
-ot infected a«l ^ lo: also sliced siyns ° r infection e-air,. I was then
attended by a Corsan resale physician nbon 1 told that I :iad boon -founded
ir. Stettin.

"Gn 1 :ay 1 O'6 the British troops arrived at last.

“Dr. Oobhxrdt was assisted in Ids -orI: V/ a Polish prisoner. ."or
-.ms Hclina Gholnicka. "he used to .V-.oro tho o oration roon Tor
tho operations, she did not live in tho cnr. but in lohonlychon rad she ■

:- 3 c a loco friend of Cborharjor. Slolina rofosad to ornnino tho mis in
-• lc; bociiuso sho said it -ras too far-or ova.

“Dr. Rosenthal V&S very cruel d on ho.dressed rounds. Dr. "olddlava’.d

ucs also very cruol, ho used to lick tho patients.

• • •

"Joanna layoto-.ras!ca, 7 3ccn&&j Jrblin, Poland, --avo pictvros of
our leys and a ropert to a Dritish officer.

"Join •frys.-noi.-ste, Puyenia Woba, Isabella ‘itooinolx, Jath’rya .r.rlo.-s’si
*ro tho friends 1 A 0 stole Ito o.uantitics of vdicino for us.

"I rocoynixo tho v.otoyra-h of tho -an ”c. 3<pn tho rfcoto.yra.ph3
123- and 123-3, it is Cebh-rdt. Thocoyrcph i'o. 1 is Troito, ’o. 3 is
Pflr.ua. ;:o. 9 is Posonthcl end I'o. 1C is "<’.xno.

“Tho yroup of 9 prisoners to v>dch 3 belonged had 'aeon yivon special
Ituriborft after tho oparrticn. The first three had mcabor 71, 72, and 13 •• _

Tho follouiny had Tkl, 712, and 7!:3, *nd tho last had Bad, T~2 and Slatf.

1 *.iad 2fa3.“

Ginned

u I-..*anslx Janina 3

In this affidavit, the covrt nill recall that tho first a to . rationed

ir. Jrnu-ry 1?L5 was the day chosen for their elocutions; and you -.411

*l3o recall that the four Polish r.-itnssscs uho testified h.r: bofor: tho

Christ: as recess also testified co earning this day 'iicr. ax at to *.pt urn

•

~do to round up all of the so-called yvir-ca pigs in the carp; end, how


722


2 Jrjv-J 7-2~2c.~~.azri. (!33)
Conrt I'o. 1


t^cr nanr.^od to i'-cenc throu^i tho confusion end srcetl;- o .-crcro.'dod
condition, end --ere- thoroforc ablo to 2ivo throng it, end fruatrr.to
tho nttoopts of tho barrens to 'o easy -.Ath than.


2 Jan-U-DX-31-1-fe* ^ CFL)
Court So. I


C


I ccne ccr..- to Docuoxr.t No. ND-864 will bo Prosecution inhibit 229i
This is an affidavit of Helens Plasccka. ' Is is the second deposition
on oath of Helene Piosecka, fe.nl, of 77 Ave ksgrea, P-ris, amplifying

her previous deposition*

>•

"Sworn before, Major Arthur Keith Kent, RAUC, at Chao- Beni:, 41 ruo
C-^on, Paris on June 28, 1946*

"I have road the deposition of ay friend Jenin- Iwn.nakn, and can
confira whet she s-ys, although I was not with her all the time.

"On Sunday 14 August 1943# a list was brought into <ay block by Sk-no.

liy n-JX was on the list ard we wore told to go to-the Rtvior to bo or.-jidn-

kd by a doctor. There wore ten nsaos on the list."

She then gives tho rv'.ya of th^oe persons among whoa is Karolonska
■ho wps Mo. 4 and sh# was om of tbs Polish witnesses who testified l>-re*

Th. affidavit cantinas:

had an idea that it aight be for an operation so we d-cidcd not
to go. Sv-ntu-Ily e had to go a.nd w_ saw an SS doctor coiled Klinek and
Polish girl - ho worked in the RevUr called Si*..enoka Isabella, viho told
us that rocr.s were prewired there'for an op-ration, Klin-k told us that
we w-r- gain:- to work in a factory,* and »e told hin w- did not bcliovo
hin, -nd returned to our block. Sins then came and gave us h-r word that

•

•.ie wore not r-chaired lor operations, and a.sk_d us to go with Ivr to h-r
office that eh- aight reed us a. notice stating n- wer- going to work in
a factory. Then r» b--rd fren fella, orisor^rs that a <T<>up of^SS had
b—n ordered to surround our block and take us by force. ..‘e escaped Iron
Bias's office and hid. Bins foll^cd us and ordered US ter'eone out,~~nd~
when v. did not ob -7 she ordered sono SS to tale us by fore-, ihe then
told us that as \\. hr.d esca.p-d froa h-r office we »-n to lx- sent to the
Bunker as a punishment.

"Bir.z told the SS waaan who was in charge of the Bunker that were
to be out in cells, 5 by 5. The cells were dark, ’..e d-cidcd that if OO


- 923 -


2 j£i>-5t-DLG-3-l-Kirro« (FL)
Court Ko. I


C


i.-r« to tx- operated on we would fight and resist as ouch as wo could,
wt.ro given caifoo ard bread that evening end the n>xt nomine, and
d ocidod that if cc wore given no food at bsnch tie*. it would aoan that

wo wjrc to .


«*


- 923 a -


2 January -H-DJG-3-2 -£ arr cw
Court S3. 1


te operated on. had no lurch. At about lJiOO hours, SS Guards cane in
en j took away ay sister. I was vary anxious about her and asked to be taken
n-jxt so thst I could find out what had happened to hor* In the passage I
5 -,, trolleys of dressings and .aidical equipment and doctors in white coats.

? then saw Dr. TTcro^r who asked a; if I was willing to be operated on. I
said I was rct. Hie nurse Oorda then caao speaking nicely to rat r.nd said
sM would give ao an injection. I resisted and hit Tro w r in the face and
called him a bandit. Ho called sorse SS ntlo -iiards tr'rc throw raj on tlvu floor
and hold rc down while et'.icr t :s poured over my face. Thors was no tv»hh.

I fought and resisted until I loso consciousness. 1 vas ccnpletoly dressed
and l-? 8 *- r ® tiltny 'Hrty from walking in tha cajp. As far as I know
y le^s ware not washed. I saw ay sister «uring this tii-ie unconscious on a
stretcher, vonltting mucuous, •

*VThon I reccv.red consciousness I found I had a rw-tcl s.lint on my leg
fra; snklo to thigh. My leg was covered with dressings which ..oro covered
with blood. I was in great pain ami was riven no Morphine or rcdicino.

7h* noxt day I was given an injection cf orphino by t ic nurso larscholl.

I had no fever, .*ftor 3 days a Dr. 7iilnann carc to sea no. I wn3 told
by thu nurae alia that te had operated on ay log. Ho said th-.t ho was
X to put me tc sloop arjain. The dressings »‘9ro taken off lay lor, and
:. cs perfectly clean. I was given *inan and 3 hour? after I rocovurod
coarciousrcss; I tad a favor of Ul to 12 degrees. The SS in charge of the
Eunifcr rang through to the Soviar to -»sk what to do for ay fover and they


n.ro told it rras quite rcraal ac my leg had been infoctod. j was in v-;ry

not ain and *lvan nothing to all.viate it. Ky toaperatura was taken

uvary :a:rning and when tha irossin^s wero takon off I saw that the wound

on ry lop was v?ry dirty and runnim rith pus. Dr. Vi l l ia ann did my dress-

in..s. He was thin with aedivr- colored brown hair, round eyes, rejular

no glasses, about 1.7U nn tall and about 3k to 35 years old. Ho was

in S3 uniform. I believe ha ras an assistant doctor at Hoh- nlynchcn, and
*

as jdvon his doctor’s diplcra after having o^rated on us. I was told


this by tho nurse Gorda.


92k


2 January -M-DJG—3-3-Xsrrow
Court 1


C


six days in tte Bunker we were moved to the Ravier. Ha wore
all in a filthy condition as our clothes and bed clothes were not chanrcd.
Four women contracted scabies, but I did not.

"Ton days later Villsann case with two doctors whose na?oos I do not
to op:rate on ao a^ain* I was taken into the operating theater cons¬
cious, and saw that it was in a filthy condition. Pools of blood every¬
where - they had Jut finished operating on one of =y friends. I was given
:vipan and was about one hour under tho anaesthetic. Than I came around I
found ny leg was completely encased in plaster excopt for a hole over the
wound* I asked why ray log was in plaster and I was told that tho Tibia •
bone in ay log was broken. Throe days later the nurse Valla clone nnd
changed ny dressings, and ny log c tar ted to h-norrhafro. conrado asked
for an injoction to stop tho !uaorrha.70 and Dr. Treito told "'alia to give
tm one. I was also givon soae Medicine to drink which I boliove was tho
same stuff as ths injoction sdxod with storili.od water. I was fivon no
’•orphine, although I was in -ycat pe.in all the tio:. A comrade gave no
soTu pills which helped 10 , hut only for a short tine.

"The next few days tho blooding had stopped but tho plaster was filled
with blood and had to be changed. Treito caac to change tho plaster nnd

4

took r» to tSv. 1 drossin; thaator whjro a Russian wonan doctor chanrcd it.

'ty log was not straight in ttw plaster and tho plastor did not fit. I hnd
fuver for six woeks.

"Two weeks after ny last operation two other doctor assistants of
C-ebhardt's carjj and operated on ny right leg. The lig wa3 put i-f a splint
™ tho dressing changed twice a «58c. Tt suppurated badly and snolt very
t I stayed in bod until Christaas when Treito canc and told me to g-.t
u.. I foil and broke ay lc;. again. Several days later my log was X-rayed-
°y froite'3 orders. I did not soo the photos. Treito took the photos to
SS Revior and I was told that Trouser had said that it \.*33 tarriblo to
an operation like- that, and that ho did not understand ‘‘•or anyone could
alk with so little bsne loft to the leg. There was only 3 millimeters of
breadth of bone loft in tho Tibia* A Polish girl, Sicinska Isabella, h ard
lim say this. I started having fever again and snail pieces of bone started


925


c


2 3Z0ri (:TJ)

Court r.o. 1

CO: ini ’Ut of tho \-ovrA viich *r.3 alarr-s o cn end suppurating. ivary

nonfch ~ los -"s I-rayad b7 Treito.

“I ateynd in tha P.evi.r end in bloc!: 9 for 1 yaar. I then bo ;an

to ~Xz v-ry slightly. I usad ti/o ern-o but it '.rs v:ry difficult.-

"In .'ebrurry 19U5 'aro bone started c ortlr.~ cut of ly lei—also noro

■vij, end I otertod r. favor rpain. I stayad in bod f.n bloc!: 9 end -./as

ll vcn i.s 20 pills end 3 injactions of Calciutt by a Polish nuroo.

•

Troito :,*vo the ordors that I sho’ Id rocoivo thds tr: ataont.

or -J — tho Polish ilrls ".io bed ‘>con saloct.id to bo o-> r~tcd
o.i th-.-0 ora four -.iho had no oporctions, but only racoivod inactions.
Thoir lc:s -..-ara infoctod end thoy •.,'oro then treated l.th r. sans*. rf/dch
•ors a Careen invontior. celled Tibantina. This V03 x.t.s dark brc:m in
color rad •.■ary liko Prontosil.

"Ir. armor 19'Ji all bloc!: 32 ' ~a ore* rad to o to tho shcr::r3.
r.:ava tv) Tar nr. wean doctor hurt did ft ;yneacol©;icra ccanlnation of
toon oil. This dm probably to ba e. aaarch for :old end ,1a\-ols. "any
c - tbo jw .s suf: hoc»r.*h.-~o .-a e r of this."

If the Vrt.bun.-1 nloaso, in .*» :oub?dni tods docuaor.t bool: thoy loft
off t:-o * st y.io of this Document ho. PO^oh end I xrill liftyo s ffibiont
aopiia p-.33wd up.

paio continues:

tho bo^inr-ins of l?!i2 thara -.ra cn old 'A'r.an -;o:*cn of about
C-f pares, -..-aarin^ tl:c ~con trienplo or. r.er .-ro, in tha passa;? of tho
hc-ier. - The rsh*. Sr. Gborhrus >r for sosro -jlls ra aho vc3 ill and -crld
scarcoly novo, Cbcrhousar ashed "'nr vhy oho ires in tho ca :p. As sho

• :ot c aroausar '.dated o r. . 7x -..-orm loll to tho preund erdn^,

- xrhovsar laujhad and tcld kir to set up and so as:y, end pave her
“c -- -cine. I :r-.s in the pr.33--.so also, and ltnc33cd this.

•In Porcnbesvboceabar I9!il in ‘evi-r I, 7. sc,: r. A 0 nr.tcs :dc!dns

• J ttic C 3ick people ~-.o had : ,onc to t!:o uu.i r to set edie.'.no. I

*

*3o sc: or. .ehidleas h i do tin sere thirc. Tl-.ojsiel: people -ere t!iro-.r.


f

2 v'aa ( WC >

Court I


out of the E«Tier haring received ao oedieine. All these who had
late than 41 degrees


926 A


2 frncary-' -OJ3“3-5-fnrrar(~f)


c

Court "o. 1

o' .'ever •oro not acccytod ir. tho I'oTier.

•‘I r 2 co..*nlso tho smo v-ofcos .-3 J.-nina Ivanska orcoyt t'vt of

Ckeao.

tinned Helena hr.3cc!:a-'

The ivrot docinont in a affidavit of ~r. Hdnnka flodvbdqva-
Hojoda, rtf. eh is Docm\jnt Ho. I'0-G75 a; id -..111 bo Pro locution inhibit 230,

f

This is a do.osition or. oath of "ir. hdenka lodvodore-lbjodlc, foaelo
of Prr/jao nv fnotenova 1, s-.iorn before floutonant Victor 0?.uc!:, h.C.
of cr fri-noa Invostir. ation Unit at fravo, 3 "o;'tov.' or 1 9',3.

"1. I, Or. ■ donka I'o'.vbdo va-1 odla, caro to hrvonsbrvbc!:

Concontraion Gaap in a trnns-ort raft fro:j 'iviccin..

Osviccir,, ~cur oners, is tho iusc’.r.lts Concentration Carp, "...on
19 August 19 ! 3, rad I vrerkod in tho rovi :r as a xrtcr .risonor fron
aytar'ia? Vi 3 until 30 ’.lay 19Ji5. In tin boJ.n-.in- I verkid in tho »o;i«rt-
;*~ht for C- nt- Jovs iscass -t It: tion He. 1 and tho .'ribulatcry. Hosieba
Vila I w.s in ch-r^o of fuc’.oing "lock .fro-. tho fall of ?.9H; until 'ey 19'i5.

2. Of t!ic victim of 0 r^ori;cental operations I nursed ^ors'.nrfl;-
Holonr. llasocJx, rho vr.s suffering .fro.- c!ironic ostooryc litis after
coyiloto operation of both shin benes. It -.ran known to no tf.rt thoso
a orations oro sorforuod under Professor fob' -rdt's supervision 'r-

0

oetou Tiachcr nr.d a -eran octor Cbeuhovsor fror. tho ">S-’«aa:rott Ho’ onl/chcn,

but I do not know which or.o of then had operated on .iasccka. Tiio oporu-

ticr. r.s for forced in t'.w "bi rrbor', ca p <rlaon, •.* ro th.Jfo was not ovon
• : ost ..'Lit- -t-.-- end Q’-cr. loss -.sceptic m. ' or

T«:-rcl condition was 300 c', but Vie defoot in both bones rendered her
invalid, for lifo. fofero tho operation riasceka vs co:*plotoly healthy.

•3. ’-11 a pcrir.ontally cr»r*t.d voron vara I ced in -no block and

t-.o;* -ore ^morally blown as "rabbits 1 , sc* that I saw t'.io of bets vesvf.t-
-~C "ftor o -orations psrfomod, ir. those *jonon :d.o hd survived those
onOrations. In oach - use of abbreviation of lirbs ncscul r atr. xry of
‘-ho :d 3 ha 3 t dciTc-o -roving a grave injury of rervos during on;rations and

927


2 J^-avrr-' - _ JC->-3-5-^-'-rro-.- (13D)
Court Uo* 1


^ ia/rr.-n seers rJtor t:o?c nerts or rsclcs t/'t r.d rostered fr.rrr.
-!j. ,'ro:-. lc~ reports o- rursir.s ;srsonnol, '.It cut «T STecial
selaolias, I trlsd tc construct f:= sorts or e—ori on tel onarr.t5.ons:


r

1 %

/


727A


2 J&rx&r7-M-DJ3-3-&-X*rrow

Court 1

-a. culture of virulent geras - streptococci, staphylococci, naybe
jY , n tetanus and gas phlcgnen - were injected subcutaneously, intra-nuscul-
arly add even direct into benas. These were the attempts to produce cx-
parinsntally Ostcaey-litis. During the resulting sepsis the c-mrse of which
ins followad by svorjday examination of blood picture and urine the effect¬
iveness of row ’nedicaa.-r.ts of the BUfMddito group was being tested."


t


928


2 Jar. U7-* S-2T-- Jb-WJook (1SD)
Court Ho. 1


C


Hs) porta of long bones, as mch as 5 con tine ter a (fibulae ot tibiae,
•ja;-e being removed and in sone cases replaced by octal or left without
connection. These operations should probably have proved the inability
of bones to crow without periost.

n c ) High aaputations wore being preforasd for oranple even whole
am muscles (translators explanations: i.o. am with scapula and clavi-
cula) or leg :rith osilinca were separated. Those operations were porforrv-
cd rootly on insane wooer, who were irocc-iatol;: .".lied after the operation
by quickly injected Svipan. As proparatos gainoa by operations were
iiiediately carefully wrapped up in 3tori 1 gauzo and i ccdiatoly trans¬
ported to the 33-Lasaratt nearby, at Hohonnlychen, it' can be Judgod that
tliey roro to bo used in the attoapt to replace danagod body parts of wound¬
ed Goman soldiers.

!, 5. O.orations \ro ro porforaed on ono Yugoslav, 1 Csoch, 2 Ukraniajy*

2 Goman, and ebeut 18 Polish m, of whon six were operated w ilst
forco was usod in the bunker with the help of 33 non, 2 of then woro shot
of tor their operation wound® had honied. After operations no ono o:xopt
S3 nurses wore admitted to the operated persons, ^iole nights they laid
without assistance, and it was not porrdUod after oven the nost inten¬
sive post-oporational pains to administer sodativo. Of the operated
persons 11 died or were '.rilled and 71 roaained invalid for life.

°6, Hoport rontionod in paragraphs 3 to 5 was prepared on the basis
of ovidonco given to ae at Itrronsbruoc!: in the autuxn of 19)i3 by thoso
fellow prisoners •"

And she thr.ro lirjis win narioS of Polish wonsn; ?
ordt the reading of paragraph 7, tihich is not porti'ont to this caso.

Parajranh 8:

>3. I have seen gipsy nonon prisoners enter and leave tho X-ray
cabinos mere they wore sterilised 'ey a rothos which according to ;y in¬
formation lias been tested in Csviocin. s zaethod was based on injecting


929


2 -Jan Ii7-JV. 2 A-li-l-Cook
Court JJo. 1


r


of an Irritated solution in the uterus, nost probably ar"e.ntim nitricun
tocothcr rrith contrasting solution to cake possible an X-ray chock of the
performed operation. All sterilized moon -./ore imediately -"-rayed aftor
this operation. I exan-


929A


2 Jan U7-!wl\A-ii-2-C°ok (!SD)


C


Court Ho. 1

iscd these pictures with IB Dr. Nlada-Taufrova, and an, therefore, crsJr
- fi d to -jivo evidence that the najority of casos abovo nentioned arid
filling ponetratod into the ends of tubos (ovidact), in sovcral cacon
evtja as far as into abdominal cavity. This sterilisation was porfonsod
o-ren on gipsy girls about 10 years of age. Only about the last ton uaro
jivon a Kolon narcosis on the intervention of SS-nurso Gerda. 1 nvrsod
tleso children all night aftor tho operation. All theso girls \nsro
flooding fron tho gonital and wore suffering s*'ch pains, that I had to
Sivo than sodativo secretly. In tho morning btfero tho appoll I trans¬
ported with tho holp of girls wsrldrg in tho P.ovior thaso children to
thoir rcapoctive blocks."

I also osdt tho reaching of paragraphs 9, 10 and 31.

The affidavit is signed J Z. Kodvondeva-'.'ohodla."

1 would liko to ask tho court to recall soao of tho ovidonco 'fhich
,jo nrosontod on storilisation oxporizonta, and you will rononber ono
of tho methods which was called to your attontion uas called at tho tiro
tho lOauborg tothod of sterilisation, and I sutrdt that tho nothod bo-
ing dcscribod in paragraph 8 of this affidavit is the so-called laauborg
mthod, and tlio affiant had rocoivod information that this nothod tras
tested in Osviccin, and tho Tribunal will recall wo submitted reports
and lottcrs fron Hlauborg :roro shcr.rod very conclusively ho was -..orl^ng
in Csviocin*

Tho Tribunal will also recall that ono of tho lottcrs or nonorondun,

* •*

as I recall signed by the defendant, Hudolph Brandt, steto/it had boon
decreed by tho Rcichs Puohrcr that ' Klaubcrg 3hould tost his nothod at
Savonebruock, to soo how long it would take bin to sterilise ono thousand
Jbeosaos, and I subnit again that this paragraph 8 of this affidavit-
very clearly shows that Elaubcrg or one of his associctc3 did in fact
carry out sterilisation experiments in Ravensbruock.

\U> cone now to Document Ho. 865, which will be Prosecution Exhibit

231, affidavit of Gustawa h'inkowska, the second deposition or. oath of

•

C-ustara '.‘infer -ska, female', of Stoc’i-oln, Swoedon, sworn before liaj. Arthur

*9


930


2 Jen U7*4»-‘AA-Ji-2-Co°lc (!3D)
Ccart Ho. 1


Sjith, RAT.

Stock holn on 18 Sept. 19U6.


930 A


Court Bo* 1


I sh'll eliminate the reading the first two paragraphs, the second i-
j-s> r sentences, and will continue with the third oar-;raph:

"I hr.vO seen Rosenthal stru;.lc with a health;- young Okranian wenan who.-
t fcy «rt tryi-v to take tc U™ operating theatre by force. T.tc girl was
3 tru line and crying for halo. Roeoathul -.rith the help of Oerda <>ucrnhcin
-v: !t:r an anasthctic, sh- .r.s th.r. taken into tho operating tlioatra whore
,r.a cf her healthy lc? s was c-.xita^d, I believe, by Jr. Fischer, as I saw
sfn into the theatre before the struggle* I have just described. Imediate-
ly after the eporction £r. Fischer and another doctor whoc I did not rccogniz
left the theatre with a largo parcel ;■*& went straight into a waiting car
end it turned to Hohenlychon. I Unur ho cauo freo Hohcnlychen as the Revior
as air-; s warned before anyone cai.c fro c HoJxnlychon. I bclievd 1 the parcel
c-ntainod tho amputated log- *his occurred during tho tire that cmporlncntal
oporctiona were boing done on Telia., girls.

"The no an who had thia operation >rfonx<l on hur -.ms locked in the
Stuobchcn by the SS sister, a tiling -l.ich never happened boforc, and later
n xrs ..iven a lethal injection. The Sisters then put Uk; corpse into a
coffin, se ething also which had net happened before, and tie Sisters took
ca:« that uc did not open th- coffin as nc carried it to the car.

"..aria iiacanarcysk, an interne*. iurs- who had a key to t]»c Stuc'-chen
•rent i.r.o the Stuebchcn and sa. th-.c t!»c corpse had had a leg amputated
vevo tie knoa.

■'J::.‘.cr sJxiilai circiiastanccs another-Ukranian girl ha; 1 , honrtxni end
r .ealdor girdle reneved. She was also killed by injections.

“hx eriiicntal operations ’fc:v cariicd out in the coup bct\:c..n 19li2
Ij!i3 •. Polish ro: n. These operations -.-ere carried out by 'dr. Fischer
:.ce t frr thw dirst day, tho; were performed, on that day 'Jr. Gcbhsrclt did
-r tic-no. I sew* dr. Qdfcfcnrdt i.insclf go into tlx thcatn.* tbarhauscr
-■-Id us ..c :ost all leave the Hovio that day as Prof. Gc'.hardt -.ms carting to
“crate. Toe leys before .Tof. Gcbiiardt cano we all had to idee swobs r rcn
- for tin operations, noraally rly paper swabs were useir tlx* Revior.


vcr. roortooc 'jfrt old."

(oisn:d) "U3ta :c inouaHa."

a core no\- to tro affidavit# si-nod «r "°* ia " cca!sa » arx *- t ‘ 1 °

T-.-iV.T--a -.rill recall f-.at in several o’ tie affidavits -'Ich lavo
olroof -:o=n submitted ~*2U 3 nrnora nontionod as boin- one

of tlto prisoner assistant-, ir. tV.o 2m*Ut. Tho Tirst is Tocvc-ant IIo
CjI, -V.ch -.Jill jo rrocccvt.' n oca ent !!o. C32.


932


c


2 Ja>-:W3-5-a^3asl«r (!3D)

Court ”o. 1

bt hurqbr sceer and confirn b~ bjat&»r.txir 2 that I an statins onTy
-J 3 truth to the best o? v* !asowlo'po. (lic*»d) ?r - : - ' ofia *'

.cel cf British Consul at "todiioln. "«rn rt tho “ritish Consulate
tochboln this loth day of April 19U6, boforc no H. . laid, rrewn, ..
consul- 3eol ox 3riti3h Consular lection, Itocbholn.

“Information about tlw or.porinontal opdratior.3 rfxich too*.: lr.co in
arensbruc!: Concentration C.*np.

T!m operations *rore carried out in tho period botsoon tho aumov
of U?1.2 oixi th' ounaor of 19U3. Tho operations :re conducted in tho
c—> hospital, rft.ch was called Havicr, under tlw direction of Prof.
tv. # CcbJiardt, 13 Dripadofuoliror. Pro'. *ohhnrdt res tlw Head of tho
ITo’ionlychon lenstoriun rt llonhonlpchon (llc’Oonbrrs). Tap operations
•rrs conducted -rttlx tho help of hr. Isclwr, ho urns Prof, Cobhard.tt n
assistant. Thoro uas also motive:* assistant rhoso nano I do not ’avoir.

~*o follonins earn doctors participated in this natt:r: Dr. llerta
Chirbaaser, Dr. 3olf Itoaonthal, Dr. IcldOavsld, all 'oman sisters
.<’0 *;re orv.lo/ed there at tho tlw and also t.:o Oarran .rotoctivo
prisonors, Cerda “uorvhoin and Tina Tonis pave assistance. 'oHsh

•

political prote-.UTo prisoners fro.-tho transports iron arsa-.r and
!.vd>Un, llur.berin- ?U, .ere choson an victim. All thoso who ere chosen

• -re rounc, healthr end -sll built. :>ny or. coUogo or university

ale students. Tho roundest -.-as 1S "ears of a .o, tho oldest J*0 pears
el ;o. Tho operations ere to o carred out -or scientific purposes,
hut tie;-- had nothing tc do ith science. * Thor are carried ouf under
horrlblo conditions. The doctors and. tlia assistir.p personnel ' -ro
radically not trained properly. Conditions "era neither aseptic r.or
\ ildc. d^tur operations tho patipnts voro left in shocking roens „

• ithout nursing or sup vision. The dressings war- nado according to
tl-Qcf tho doctors -.rith unstorilisod instum.-nt3 and co:-prases.

r. hoscnthal *.:ho did Host of the dressiajo, uncoiled hinsclf in sedisa.
In the scsser of 19h3 the last operations ore carried out in the «hun3:er«
is the nano of the ho:*riblc prison in -he carep.


2 Jan-! rJ 3-5-2-oas law (1SD)
Court So. 1


Tictias wore taton there because they resisted and t'-.cro in a coll
their dirty loss ucro operated on. This was the 'scientific atoosphoro*
in ohich tho * scientific 1 operations -/ore carried out;

“All operations wore carried out on tho legs and all under anaes¬
thetic. Tho operations were divided into tare sain groups:
i. operations for infecting tho patdont. 2 . experimental asontic
operation.

"As to 1: The soft part of of tho calf cf tho logs was opened
and tho opon vrounds rroro infected with toctoria which wore introduced
into tho irounds. Tho following were usod: staphlococcus auorus, oodona
aaligmm, gas gangrono bacillus and tetanus. Veronika Xraska :ras in-
foctcd with tetanus. 3ho died after a feu days. Kazirdora Kurowsta.
vza infoctod with gas gangrono bacillus. >ho diod aftor a few uooks.

Tho following :roro infoctod with oodona r a i l gun: Aniola Lofanowicz,

Zofio Klocoly Alfroda Prus and i'-aric bsalsrcttic."

Tho Tribunal will recall that larla Kusmicrczuk testified horo.

"Tho first throo died after a fowd.-ys; ISaia Kusniorezuk got ovor
tho infection. 3ho lying ill for noro then a yecr and bocaao a
cripple, but sho lives and is a lining ovidcnco of tho orporinontc.
iostly pyogono stiaulant3 wore anployed. Tho wounds wore stitchod aftor
tlw infoction and serious illness began. Ifcny of tho patients wore
ill for sooths and aLwost all of then bocaao cripplos.

Thy did Prof. Ocbhardt, with his oducation, carry out thoso o:c-
porinents? To test tho nr.r drugs of tho C-ornan pharmaceutical industry;
neatly cibazol and albucid wore u3cd. ^von totanus *.ras treated in that
•.’ey.

■Tho results of tho treatoant were not checked, or if they wax 'o f
it ~3 done in such an inadequate and superficial Banner , that it was
of r.o value.

".*.s to 2: Tho asoptic, oxpcrlxxmtal operations consisted of:
bode experiments, isuscle experioents, nerve experiments.


2 Ja»OJ3-5-Saato (:3C)


c


Court NO, I

n 7ho bone oxporiEonts tjwo choc&cd by X-Roy photo.-'rarfcs, As \7pjd
att endan t I had to do all the X-Ray .iso to graphs. In this way I was
jiron tho opportunity of joining an insight in this rut tor. The follow-
ing *.»ro carried out: (a) bono breaking, (b) bo no transplantation,

(c) bono grafting.


*


93U A


2 jaa-iW^-5-3-33slar (:3D)


Court !io. 1

c Aj to (a): On the operation te hl o tho bones o' the loner part
c’ both le^s rore broken ii.to several pieces with a ha=nsr, lr.ter they
■.rorc coined with clips (for instance Janice Uarczcvska) or without clips
(Cor instance loonarda Sion) end "ore pvt into a plaster cast. Ibis was
rouovod after several days and tho 103 s regained without pi actor casts
until they healed.

J '.i to (b): Th^jtt'ansplantations were carried out in tho usual way,
e:iopt that rriiolo piocos of tho fibula i/oro cut out, once with poriostiun,
another tine without poriostiun. The Dost typical oporation of this ldnd

9 > 9* m • %

was carried out o:: Xrystina Dabslca.

•As to (c): Bono grafting. The so operations rero with tho school
of Prof. Cobharct. 'hiring tho preparatory operation two 00 no splints
jaro put on the ’ihio of both logs; during tho second operntion such bono
splir.to 'rorc cut out tocothor with tho attached bo nos and woro taken to
:io! onlychen. As n sup dcaont to tho bono splint operations such operations
irero carried out also or. two protcctivo prisoners who sufferod fron

• 0

deformation of bonos of octoor^'olitis typo. Those two .'oro not I*olos,
ono of tkoatres a Gernan from tho Jiho -ah' s witnesses group, I aria Xoiv-
nitechka end tho othor was an Ukrainian, iarin Urotschana. It woo intor-
qj ting for Prof. C-obhardt to soo how tiso diseased bonos would react to
such ar. oporation.

“Tho muscle o::poriaents consisted of nany operations, always on tho
sare spot, he upper or lover part of the’leg. On each further^operation
larger and larger pieces of nusclos "ero cut out. Once c snail picco of
bone was planted into a ru3cle (this happened to Babinska). Ihiring nervo
operations parts of nerves wore reroyod (for instance Barbara Pytleirska).

1 "hat problem did Prof. Gebhardt and Ids school wish to solve by
these cr-perirents?

’Tho problon of the regeneration o' bones, muscles and nerves,
as the thing carried out? Ho. It was not checked at all, or only


935


c


2 Jaa-iWP-5-3-Oaalor C3D)
Court !!o. 1


insufficiently. I do not laow irhat u?j done at I'.ohcnlychor. with those
riacos of bone, ruacle and nerves which T :or'* cut out and taken there.


2 (I5D)


C


Court Ho, 1

Tihat ttt-3 the fate of toe patients after they left the hospital?

Alajst all of the patients beeane cripples, and havo suffered very nuch
as a result of thoso operations. Evon nore sever was the noral torturo
inflicted on then as they lived under the conviction that thoy would

all be shot in order that thoy should not be evidence of these nurdcrou3

• •

operations. The easy authorities - Corxandant Suhren, Adjutant Braouning
aM Obcraufsehorin Bins - onsurod through thoir orders that the vie tins
should not forgot that they were condorausd to death. In the ooantino
six of the patients woro shot after surviving too operations."

She then gives an extended list of thoso wlio undorwont too operations,

•

-and f.s far as too could rononber then, together with rcnarlcs explaining
nhat the operation was, and I do not thinl: that it is nocossary for no to
road all of thoso nancs and concents; hotrovor, tho Tribunal will no to
that tho four Polish wor»n too testified horo aro listod: ihria Drool-
71 a tor, Jaih.l 3 a Dsido, lari a Kustiorczui, and on tho last pago lOadyalar.'a
Parole wska. Tho affidavit continues on pago oightoon of too English
document Book.

"If I an to givo an opinion of thoso operations, I nust any that
tho operations wore carried out bocauso it was in tho progran of national-
Socialist Gomany to nako oxporinonts on protoctivo prisoners in concen¬
tration carope and that thoso cxporinoni3 \roro carried out on tho level _
on -.rhich nodical scicnco and norals iroro prevailing in Go many sinco 1933-

"As a supplement to these operations I an subrdtti^ a description
of ‘spocial operations' */hich were carried out at toe sano tino.

■A few abromal protective prisoners (psychically ill) ‘.Tore choson
and brought to tho operating iablo and a:nutations of tho toolo leg (at
the hip joint) wore carried out, or on others, amputation of tho w.olo
on (with shoulder-blade) were carried out. Afterwards the victi.-^ if
...oy still lived .were killed by asans of evipan injections and tho log
or ar~ ms taken to ISohcnlychon and served too purposes lmown to Processor
f-etlardt. Tor. such operations, approxiiantoly, wore carried out.


936


937


c


2 jan-6MA-A ~J-i* bnhardt

Court !fo#


On the following page* a part of the sar* docunent and exhibit* are
given c ertein particulars of the affiant ZOFIA WIBSLAdA MACZXA, arid it is
-articularly of interest for us to know, that she is a footer of Medicine
sad on X-ray specialist.

Wo have a soccnd affidavit frcn the sane wonan. This, is Docunent No.-
87b, and will be prosocution aetdbit 233*

"Second Depositio* on- cath of Dr. Zofia Hacska, female, of 12 Drottninc-
honsvnogun, STDO.THDID/Swodan, amplifying hor previous deposition sworn boforc
Ifcjor Arthur Keith MAW, H. .. H. C., at STXXTOI2I on July 2nd, 19b6.

The X-ray apparatus in tUa-Ruviar was sufficient for general purposes,

tJ

beta- the usual rllitary pattern.

To tho best of ay knr*led;->, Dr, GE8&JDT hiasolf did not personally
porfero the uxpjriaontal operations. Ho was, however, rosponsiblo for tho
or^anitaticn and installation cf extra roquirenonts. I hivo heard him givo
ordoro rcnc.imla: tho operations to Doctors FISCHER, CBEREAUSER and ROSENTHAL.
I hoard this by listening through key-frloa and conorally spying during tho
Ur.o I wns at tho Rcvior. .vS I was ordered to do tho X-rnys by OBERHAUSER,
and about X-ray photographs that woro required by hor, I asked quostions
.-.bout what had boon done and shb refusod to tell no anytidn;:, but said that
I w\s to carry out Dr. QSBR&RDT'S orders.

Tho Gjmans would tolorato no now born children in tho orunp, anyway
frou the tint that I arrived to the 31st Doc 1912, are tc that date they wore
a 11 killed at birth. I personally saw Gorda QQERMHZIH strangle one newly
tom child and generally presur.o that sha has been rosponsiblo for tho other
deaths.

Kifu. PAUTZ was assistant to QBSRIBBDC. She was a Gcrran innate of tho

c-inp and was presuoad to bo In the caapfor Coenunieli activities. *hon

•

?iL?JiK 2 r: strangled tto chili I have nontionod abevo, she handed it through
the window to Fina P„07Z who thraF it into a bucket.

CJJZRHHBIH was in charge of the general cleanliness of the operation
theatre, but it is axfcreeely unlikely that she ever witnessed any oporqtion.


938


2 jMi,^-4WTT>^hnfcirdt
C=urt !fo* 1


C


Instruments were novor sterilized properly for the operations In the
Revier# Gerda QOEUi&DC was in charge an’, could not be bothered to take the
usual aseptic precautions*

The bacteriological cultures were brought fron H3HEMLYCHSN by Dr.
TlSCfflR*

I saw the drugs Cibazol and Alkuzid bo in” proscribed to the patients
after they had been operated on#

I do i»t krww who was specifically responsible for tho execution, of th.
6 girls# But Arriola SCEOIZ.7SXA had her oxocution postponed soveral nonths
so tfrit the necossary control X-rays could bo taken of her log# And
Rozalia 0UT2X was rot executed for a considerable period booauso she was not
roll enough to be novod#

Fron tha bo;.lnning of 1$|5, a dootor used to cone down froa BEPJ-IN and
porforn sterilisation operations on young GIPSY-g£rli. Tho apparatus ho used
n3 x high tonsion apparatus, but not X-cay. One oleotrodo was plncod over
tho abdcsdnal wall in tho region of the ovarios an* tho othor was placed
insido th> vartna. I learned those dotails direct fron tho girls on v.-hon
this was done. Tho only dosoription I can give of tho nan is that ho 1,75 m

a

in height. Ho was very fat, s trongly built and rod-fnood#

fro Czech nodical students who wore forced to vroric in tho laboratory,

03od to carry out tho bactoriolo /ioal examination on tho pus fron tho experi¬
mental t-wn, eithor officiany or surreptitiously. Thoir names aro ?!ila
Sr’EXTWA and Ir*a KATEOT.'.. They aro at prosont at HtAQUEy

I can only recorder tho nano of one girl who workod in the dispensary
who was a PoUsh girl Jadwiga TAwLO^KA who is not a nodical student at
rOZUAN#" ( Signed ) "Dr. Zofi i ACZKA".

!5i. KoHAKTt This docuaont’ls sworn to beforo Major Arthur Keith
SuNT, R. — M# C., at STOCK®!!!, on July 2nd, 19U6.

Tte nexe docusent in th? English Ztocuaont Book is a translation of a
iocuBant which was inlroducad in Caso No. 1 befero the I. !U T. and is USSR
EXH3IT Ifc. 1±06, and it consists, primarily, of photographs of the four


939


t ft^^3-«-TI>"Lfchnhagdt
Coart So* 1


C


Polish wcesn who testified in this case. And, since we'have alroady introduc

I

rteto graphs nado hare in Number;, I think it is unnecessary to introduce
those adltlonal ; )hoto.;raphs; However, the Court, under Ordinance No. 7, ip
-t liberty to take Judicial notico of this document, if they so choose.

I ccee, ttenj to Itociraent No. U72, which appears on pago 96 of tho
English Document Book, and this will be Prosecution Exhibit No. 2 3b.

This is an affidavit by the defendant FRITZ ER}IST FISCHER, and it deals,
ts * a shall see, with a report nale to a meeting of tho medical acadociy in
KUIN in 'lay of I9b3. The report of the mooting was aantioned in one of tfio
earlier affidavits of FRITZ EPJST FISCHER, which wo havo already introduood
in evidence. This affidavit survoe to amplify, and -jives additional details
on that neotin;. It reads as follows*

•'I, FRITZ ERNEST FISCHER, be in; duly sworn, depose and statoi

1. I am tho saao Fritz Ernost Fischer who has horotoforo sworn to an
Affidavit on tte 19th day of November 19U$, concornin; eulfaniliflddo and
otter experlMnts on hunrji boin s in tho Ravoiabruck Concentration Camp.

2. For tho sano reasons sot forth on pago 1 of vy Affidavit of 19
November 19U5 I aa able to make this statement concomin;; sulfanilamido
axperiaonte and ospoeiolly tho conforenco of "ay 19b3 sot forth on pa<jo 12 oi
zy Affidavit of 19 Itoventoor 19U5.

3. At tte oonferonce of Fay 19U3, which I described on page 12 of ny
affidavit (last pcra,3*aph) to tho boot of -y recollection, tho following
officials were pro sent* Dr, Paul Rostock as Chaimin of yio conference j Dr.
Siogfriod Handleser, who was then tho Chief of tho Medical Service of tho
German Armed Forces, who had sent the invitation for the nootingj Prof. Karl
rrandt, who sat in the center of the front rewj Dr. Leonardo D. Conti, tho
R»ich Health Loader; Prof. Dr. Sauorbruch; Dr. Froij and Prof. Heubonor. The
Meical Service of the Luftwaffe was represented by Dr. Hippke, who was the
Chief of the Medical Service of tte Luftwaffe; and by Dr. Oskar Schroodor. Th
Modical Service of the Waffen SS was re presen tod by its Chief, Dr. Karl
C-enzken. Furthermore, there was Dr. Helmut Poppendick, who was the Chief of

Staff of tho Reich Ptyaician SS and Police, Dr. Grawitz.

9U0


■( i -

Court )!o. 1


C


1, Aa I stated In sy former Affidavit no criticisms wore uttorod about
experimenta by any of thoso Doctors. Thera was a discussion following tho
lecture, in which Dr. Frei, Prof. Dr. Sauerbruch, and Professor Haubonor
aarti elected but also on their part there was no criticism voiced.

5. It was made perfectly dear during the speeches made by Dr. Gobhordt

and iyrsolf that the experiments were conducted on insatos of a concentration
canp# •

6. Six months after this, tho 10th Anniversary of tho Hospital at
fobsnlychon,was celebrated. As guests of this celebration, Dr. Karl Brandt,
Dr. Siocfriod Handles or. Dr. Leonardo D. Conti and Prof. Dr. Sauerbruch wero
prosent.

7. When the oulfenilagLde experiments started I was told by Professor
Oebhardt, sy military an nodical suporior, that thoso axporlnants woro
cirried out by ord^r of tho Chief of tho Medical Offioe of tho Wehrnacht m d
tho Chiof of tho Itodio&l Office of tho State, with tho initial ordor from
Kitlor, and I nost thoreforo carry out thoso orders,

8. Dr. Hortha Oborhauscr end Dr. Schiedlausky did assist no in tho
sulf&nUnnl 'o oxporiaonts.

9. «s a rosult of theso oxporfaents, throe peoplo diedU H

MR. •CH.-rSYi Si .nod "Frits Ernst Fischer" This affidavit provos, beyond
ary poradventuro of a doubt, that tho features of thoso criminal oxporinonts
were brought horo to tho loadors of tho Goman Medical ";orld. As Fritz
Fiachor clearly stated in hi? fomar affidavit, it was admitted by thoso
',’ofandants that tho oxporiaonts wore carried on at tho Concentration Canp,
and they knew Just exactly what it meant; tho Defendant Karl Brandt was
there; tho Defendant Siecfried handleser was there; Schroeder was tharo;

P-UL HOSiCCK was there; HIPPK5 was there; Poppcndick was thare; Fischor and

9

Gobfnrd, of course, were there. Thty cannot, nor, tako tho position that they

■ ro simply receiving information concerning an act which had already taken

■lace. They cannot, so easily escape their responsibility! This wa3 not

infestation concerning a original act which was beinr brought home to people

%

“ha ha! no interest in the matter!

9a


i -_. i -

Court ’jo. 1


C


1, ;.s I stated In cy forner Affidavit no criticisms were uttered about
experiments by any of these Dootors. Thera was a discussion following the
lecture, in which Dr. Frol, Prof. Dr. Sauerbruch, and Professor Heuboner
participated but also on their port there was no criticism voiced,

5, It was node perfectly clear during the speeches nade by Dr. Gobhardt
aai myself that the experiaenta wero conducted on imates of a concentration
ca=p.

6, Six months after this, the 10th Annivorsnry of tho Hospital at
B3f»nlychen,wns .celebrated, As fiesta of this celebration, Dr. Karl Brandt,
Dr. SiOt;frlo4 Han'Ho a or, Dr, Laonardo D. Conti and Prof. Dr. Sauerbruch wero
proesnt,

7, VVhcn the sulfa nilami de axporiaenta started I was told by Profossor
Osbhardt, my military an' nodical suporior, that thoso oxporinonta wore
carried out by order of tha Chief of tho Medical Office of tho Wohrnncht md
tho Chief of tho Itodical Offico of the Stcto, with the initial ordor from
Hitler, and I mst thoroforo carry out thoso orders.

8, Dr. Hortha Oborhauacr anti Dr. Schiecilausky did assist no in tho
sulfanilani ’o export non to.

9, aS a result of theso exporiaonts, three peoplo died."

:R. ’CH/.fEYi Si nod "Fritz Ernst Fischer" .This affidavit provos, beyond
ary ptradvonturo of a doubt, that tho foaturos of thoso criminal oxporlnonts
were brought hono to tho loaders of tho Oormn Hodical v .'orld. As Fritz

Fischer clearly stetod in his foncor affidavit, it was admitted by thoso

-A t

ofondants that the experiments wore carriwl on at tho Concentration Camp,
and they knew Just exactly what it seant; tho Defendant Karl Brandt was
thcroj the Defendant Siegfried Hondlcsor was there; Schroeder wa3 there;

P-'JL liOSTOCK was there; HIPPKE was there; Poppondick was there; Fischor and
Gsfchart, of courso, were there. They cannot, nor, tako tho position that they
•' fc 3imply receiving infomvtion concerning an act which had already taken
place. They cannot, so easily escape their responsibility! This was not
infonation concerning a criminal act which was beinr brought hone to people
~hc had no interest in the setter!

911


c


• /

* hnterdt

Coart No# 1

These people were In & position to clearly know a duty, and to know that
it oould not and should not happen!

C-

The contrary was, as the proofs on the positive experiaents will show,

f

at this sa»J aeetii^ Dr. DUC alias ■Schooler" was giving a report about the
Typfris oxperioents at Buobenwald. An1 tha Defendant Rose will got up and
toll you that he well knew that those experiments woro nothing nore nor loss
th« HOREERJ And he state* that ho eo deaeribod them in this moeting. But
that unfortunately his reports wero stricken fron the stenographic roport of
this noetingI

Be that as it nay, the fact that Professor Rose statos that ho did
objoot, aakos it cloar to this tribunal that thoso gentlonon know what wns
,~oing on in theso concentration caap experiments.

Tho noxt document —

IBB FRESIEENTi At this tiao the Tribunal will rftcoss for a fow ninutos.

4


r\


2 Jarw—T-l-tf-AID-Lessor

Ccurt Bo. 1


IS. ICHA’ET* 7t» next docuajnt in the Document Book is nuabor ND-619,
•rhich is on %ga 98 of tho English Doourunt Bock. This consists of an
alphabetical list of nanos. In oi*dor that we nay understand what this list
is, I think it would bo host if we put in first the l*th affidavit of
tho Defendant Frit’ Fischer which is document nunbor M>-90l and is on page
113 of tbo Znglish Document Book! That will be Prosecution Exhibit 235«

"I, Dr. Fritz Ernst Albert Fischer, being duly sworn,
depose and stntei

"1. I an tlfcj eano Fritz Fischer who has oxocutod an
affidavit on 8 Ho vor-bar'191*6 and I have boon duly warned that
this stntozkjnt nay be used against nj in court.

1SDICAL CONFERENCES

"2. It is ny ojilnion that in order to coordinate tho

activities of the various bronchos of tho ’./ohrnacht, tho SS, and

tho civilian nodical socfior, four conferences woro hold botwoon

tho years 19l*0 and 19UU Ttoso conforonccs wero ontitlod Mlcdicnl

Conforoncos of the Consulting Physicians of the '.'ohi-iacht. • Tho

first such conforonco was hold sonutino in 191*0. Tho second con-

•

foronco was hold soootirw botwoon tho date of tho first conforonco
and th. da to of tho thi>d oonforonce in May of 19U3. Inasmuch as I
was not in attendance at thoso first two conferences, I an unable
to furnish any details thereof.

"3. In ’lay of 19U3 the Third Conference of tho Consulting
Physicians of the “'ehnxicht was hold at tho Military Medical
Academy in 3urlin. The Fourth ’ledlcal Conference of tho Consulting
Fhysicians of the Vehj.-macht was held at Hohenlychon from the 16th
to the 18th cf ’lay 19U*.

These conferences were under the direction of Dr.
Siegfried Handioser, Chief of the Medical Services of the ifehmacht.
The conferences were divided up into sections, for aX2nplo, tho
Surgery Group, tho Pathology Grcup, the -{ygiene Group, etc. There
were about twelve to fourteen different groups. These conferences


91:3


2 Jan*-7-2-»-AT!>-I.«8ser
Court lio. 1


C


ware attended by three to four hundred interested nedical nen. These
persons were high .dlitary aedical officers, high state officials, etc.

■5- At the Third Conference in Hay of 19U3 held at the
I Military ‘todical Ac&detsy in Berlin, the Surgery Group 'ran presidod
over by Dr. Paul Rostock. I participated in this conforenco with Dr.
Gebhardt, in that I lectured on the results of our work with sulfanili-
:ido at the Ravonsbruck Concentration Canp. I have givan the ccmplete
details of the Third Medical Conference In ny affidavit of 21 October
1916, Docuaent No. H>-1*72.

"6. At the Fourth Conference in Jley of 1911 at Hohenlychon
the Surgery Group was presided over by Dr. Karl Behardt. As in the
case of all conferences this Fourth Conforenco was ordered by Dr.
Karvdloeor and all consultdn,. doctors of the TCehrnacht woro invitod.

There w:ro 321* ptysicians attending this conforenco. Thoso doctors
woro billeted in various hotels and villas at Jfohonlychon and sorao at
oetablishsunts in tho hospital. I think the list narked 'Document No.
:C-619' is a truo and oorroct list of tho physicians in attendance at
this Fourth Cenferonco, Tho first list, consisting of six pagos, is
a list of the Any physicians attending this ncoting. Tho second list,
consisting of nine pogos, contains ths nanoa of 321* physicions who
attended this conforonco, end al.o statos whoro they woro billotod. I
6a n recall that Buochnor was at tho Ctntral HotoJjRoossle was at tho
Krankonryt!| Ostortag was at the ft)tel Eichberg at Hirr^olpfort. I can also
recall that I personally saw a groat army of tho other doctors and that
I can verify their presenco.

"7. The lists narked 'Docuaont No. KJ-619' is probably a
representative list of those in attendance at all four of these con¬
ferences.

(signed) FRITZ FISCHER"

The list of naaes which begins on pa-e 98 is Docuraont N3-619 and it has
boon identified by the Defendant Fisc bar, in tho affidavit which I have Just
read, as a list of doctors who were in attendance at tho Fourth Medical Con-

91!


2 Jaru-7-3-B-AT!>-Los s er,

C=urt 1

foresee at Ifchcnlychen In )fcy of 19LU and I submit this document as Proso-
cution Exhibit 236. The list is quite long and it would servo no useful
purpose for ao to road it in its entirety. However, I think it night bo
useful to aontion a few nanss which appear fc-reon because, as Fischer has
told us, this list is representative of those persons who attended tho
Third Medical Conforenco at which we have seen and will also see lator on,
that reports were aade about those sedioal exporirunts on concentration camp
imatoa are! it is hero that wo find, in fa ct, tho very nucleus of our corv-
3piracy. We have a typical aeoting of conspirators. They cono together, the
rcot important nodical icon in Ooraany, and hear reports made by tho nen who
conbctod these nodical exporirvints in concentration caropa and they acoopt
those reports without auy objection and aiailar experiments, or perhaps tho
Sara ssrios of oxp-riaouts, continue after the so reports aro nado*

On pago 90 of Your Honors* docuaont book, item No. 6, wo aoo tho nano
ANTH3XY, Staba^.nt, Projfossor Dootor. The Tribunal will rooall that Ms
nano was nentionod in connootion with tho low-preflsuro and frooting oxporiraont
at tho Concentration Cai^ Dachau. Anthony was Chiof of tho Dopartmont for
Aviation Medicine, first under Hlpko are: thon for a very short time under tho
Defendant Schroodor, and tho chief subordinate of Anthony was tho defendant
Bockor-Freyscrt:, who cl*o was in attendance at this mooting at Hohcnlychon
in toy of 19Ua. His re appanrs as it<« No. 32. And was the SS-Gruppenfathror
Karl Broivit, tho Roioh Cocxilssionor for Health and Medical Services prosent?
Yes, indeed. He was iter lio. 9 hero, Brandt, SS-Grupponfuuhror, Professor,
Doctor. Boire- a high official in the SS, I assume that ho was a roost inportont
ft-are at this =»otin£ in an SS Hospital, mainly th?t at Hohonlychcn. And tho
docaesod Dr. Conti was thoro, C3 wo see by the naa: listed after 33, Conti,
nlso an SS-Oruppcnfuohrer, Un-'ei^ocrotary of State,' and a diroot superior of
the defendant Blcoa. On the next pepe, No. UO, we aoo tho notorious Dr.
fUauborg, famous by virtue of his uniquo ability to steriliro Jewish women.

>. 53, Stafcsarzt, Dr. Dotaen, whoa Your Honors will recall was important
ir. tho Epidordc Jaundice experiments, with which the defendant Karl Brandt
also showed more than usual concern. Dr. Dohnen, you will recall, was delc-

9U5


2 Jaji-7-4-M-*iTD-Leaaer
Court So#.1

5 c.ted b 7 the defendant Karl Brandt to perfona Jaundice experiments on thoso
Persons concerned to death at Auschwitz. The experinents were actually carrie
out at Sachacnhauson and Karl Braixlt had Dotoen do this for him. We drop
-■awn to ti* bottco of the pago and we find, as I ten No. 00, Dr. Grawitz,
Obar^rupfenfuehrer. Doctor. On the next page, Ito. 83, of course we find tho
Defendant Gebhardt, SS Gruppenfuehrer, and as Fischer statod, Gebhardt on
this occasion was chairman of the neoting of tho Surgeons* Section. The yoar
before the Defendant Rostock had held that position but I suppose that since
Gebhardt was in fact hood of the SS Sootion of this hospital, that ho was
permit tod to bo ohairoan of this particular neoting. Imodiatoly under
Gebhardt we find the naas Oinskan, SS Oruppenfuthror. No. 07, Gutzcit.

Butzoit was ono of the nrcy dootors under the dofondant Handlosor. Outzait,
as I rocall, was also nontionod in connection with the opidordc Jaundioo
experiajnts and his nane will also appoar in connoction with the typhus
wvportiw nte carried out by Dr. Ha.^on at Hntzwoilor.


9 li6


Ccurt Ho, 1. ' *

r

So. 101, Dr. Gross, SS-Cfcerstursbtnnfuehrer; Dr. Gross was the man
*p.o was coaiissicned to assist the defendant Blooe in his work concern¬
ing biological warfare and I think we shall find that that work was also
carried out with the assistance of helpless hunans by an incarceration
of concentration casps. Dr. $rpss was later or at the same time Blome's

assistant.

So. 103, the fa-mus Cborstabsarzt Dr, Haagtn, the consulting hy¬
gienist to the Luftwaffe, that is the air fie it. Dr. rtright,*as we
shall aoe, he was the atn who conducted the tyohus experiments at
Satzweiler.

So. 10U, Handloser, Goneraloberstabsarzt, p*r>fessor doctor. As we
already know by virtue of the chart drawn by the cofendant Handloser,
as well as frcw the affidavits of Fischer, Handloset* controlled the
ilitary . edical reader:/.

Ho, 107, Heuber, professor doctor. The Tribunal .fill recall Dr.
Heuber's nano was uentiono'd in connection with sea-watei* experiments
and as I recall he was consultant to the Luftwaffe. He a»jng othors
advisod that the tea-water oxpodnonta be carried out.

On the next page, 126, we see the naw of Joedlcko, oborstarat.

Tho Tribunal will recall that Joodicko was recoeaonded by IpVe to

•

Rascher as ono of his collaborators in the freezing experiments. Tho
fact io that Joedicko did not in fact ever collaborate with biz- and
that is tho only evidence we have, but Joodicke was an important figure
in tho Uiftw/iffa, and was in attendance at this meeting.

135, wo find tho ntaa of Cborstabsarzt folk, profoSsor doptc-r.

Tho Tribunal will recall that tho -onorandun written by Dr. Rcriborg,
after toe meeting on September 10, 19li2, when the motion picture of
the hi gh altitude experiments was shown in the Reichs linistry for
aviation, he stated in his mono that Dr. Carlus was there. I think tho
mo Darius was also oontioned in connection with the jaundice experi¬
ments and ho was also in attendance at this opting.

On the next pa^c, 179, the defendant Mrugowsky, SS-Cborfuehrer.


2 Jtn-ci-i-d-Z-^esien
Cccrt /o. 1 .


On the following page, 219, rocpt-ndick, SS-S tancar Unfuohrer.

.*c« 220 , Roatrcck, Generalorst, professor doctor.

22ii, Sose, Ooerstabsarat, professor doctor.

232, Schroedor, O-rteralcborstabsarst, doctor.

235, Schi^dt-Bruock.sr., Scknldt-Bniccken was, as I recall, chiof
■i staff fcr a tiae to thu def-ndant Handloser, chief of the nodical
services cf the kohr.incht.

236, Schroi'cor. Of course you will recall that Schroiber was a
very important figure in the Military -edical .icadeny and is shown in
a prominent position on the chart drawn by Handloser.

The sajo holds trua f-r Sauarbruch, 237.

I think that that ccnpletos the ivv^s to which I wish to call tho
Tribunal's particular attention, but by locking through here wo soo
that w. have a very r*.aarkablo representation of defendants at this
.ooting and I subait that those self saoo defendants wuro in attendance
at tho other aeotin^s of tho ilitary .'Judical rt cidocy and lnd reports
;,iv^n to thts. Sect of those reports w„re of ccurso fayilior to then
prior to tho tio that thoy wore let cut in these r>otin«s. In any
event, they rucoivud clear knowlod^o of what was goin.’ on in tho con-
contrntior. cau^ of Gerany. It is difficult to latino any -»ro
cloar and convincing proof to support the conspiracy count of tho in¬
die ijnent.

Tho second part of this Document, Ho. 619, that is beginning on
pa^e 106 , sir.ply 6 ives the list of amy doctoCs, who were ordered to
attend the aooting at Hohenlychon and since they are also includod in
tfij list of 32Ja names, which I have already doalt with, it (a unnocos-
sary to study then here.


2 Jan-d5n-6-2 -4eohan
Ccurt .< 0 . 1.


Ca the followin'? page, 219, rocpcndick, SS -S taneartonf uofaro r .
do. 220, Rostruck, Generalist, professor doctor.

22ii, Rose, Ooerstabsarzt, professor doctor.

232, Schrocdar, Oeneralcberstcbsarat, doctor.

235, SchaLdt-Brueckor., Sch-a'dt-BruuCken was, as I rocall, chiof

cf staff fer a tiao to the defendant Handloser, chief of the secical

•*

aorvicos cf the fcohr.iacht.

236, Schroi'cjr. Of course you will recall that Schroiber was a
very Important figure in the Hilitary Medical .tcaduny and is shown in
a prominent position on the chart drawn by Handloser.

The saj*a holds truo f»r Sauorbruch, 237.

I think that that completes the na;«cs to which 3 wish to call tho
Tribunal's particular attention, but by locking through horo wo soo
that w„ have a very re-arkablo representation of defendants at this
.looting and I suboit that those self soou defendants woro in attendance
at tho other xeotin^s of tho ilitary Medical rt cidory and had reports
.,iv«n to the*. Soex- of those reports w„re of course fea-lliar to then


prior to tho tiif.c that thoy woro lot cut in those mootings. In any
ovont, they recoivud clear knowlodgo of what was geisu: on in tho con¬
centration coups of Gor any. It is difficult to ina.:ino any -»ro
cloar and convincing roof to support the conspiracy count of tho in¬
die fcnont.

Tho second part of this Document, Ho. 619, that is boginning on
page 106 , simply 6 ives the List of ardoctors, who woro ordorod to
attend tho aueting at Hohenlychen and since they are also included in
tho list cf 32U nanos, which I have already doalt with, it is unnocos-
sary to study thon horo.


2 Jm U7^*aA-9-l-Hinabuck
Court No. 1


This, if the Tribunal please, complotcs the presentation of
proof at thia tiaa on tho oxporinonts conducted at the Ravcnsbruck con¬
centration camp, and Hr. Hardy will continue no* with ths presentation
of uT id - . nr-.‘ on tho blood coagulation and phlogoon experiments conduct¬
ed at Dachau.

THE ISESIDENT: Counsel, did you offer in evidence Document
KO-619? ' I didn't quite get that.

!5t. IfcHANEY: That was 236, your Honor.

THE Pft£SEENT: Thia is page 106.

V

IP.. xfcHAJEY: It 'a all prrt of the same docuaont.

TX .TSSJDSTCi Vi’aa that offorod in part?

IS. lijHAISYi I aoe what gives ria^ to thj confusion horo.

That ia ell part of Docent '0-619. A note on pago 102 and 103 fror
tho docimeat rocc, they havo inverted tho 6 and 1 and it coraos out NO-
619 but all of those nar.os are part of Docuaont NO-619 which is Pros¬
ecution Exhibit 236.

IR. HARDY: Thia ic Doexsaont Dook Nm*cr 11, your Honor,
blood coagulation. Tho Prosecution atatoa in its indie tew nt that nil
of the defendants aro charged with special responsibility for and part¬
icipation in nodical oxporirxnts without tho subjects' consont, and in
tho course of vhich oxporiaonts tho defendants cannittod murders, brut¬
alities, cruelties, tortures, atrocities ard other inhuman aots.

This noming Ur. IfcHanoy has cooplotcd tho presentation of
evidence in connection with tho oxporijaents involving sulfn n iL a nido
and bore transplantation at Ravonsbruck. Other experiments to dotcr-
nirv; tho efficacy of various drugs such as sulfanilamide upon wounds
which wore deliberately inflicted to create a condition similar to
that of a battlefield wound, wero conducted at Dachau.

At this tir*? the Prosecution shall present ovidonce in connec¬
tion with th. blood coagulation experiments vhich wore conducted at

•

Dachau. Tho purpose of these experiments vas to find a suitable drug
vhich -.rould stop tho flow of blood. Continually through this .irosont-


2 Jan 1.7 -£>! 'AA-9 -1-Xinab uc k
Court !fc». 1.


C


atlon I will refer to the drug called polygal. Poly gal is a pectin
derivative extracted free vegetable sources, especially apples and
sugar beets, which has a coagulant action upon blood.


2 Jen U7-K-XAA-9-3-Iinebuck (3)

C ourt So. 1 ‘


After the presentation of the evidence in connection with the blood
conciliation experinente the Tribunal ''ill note that thie docunent book
include* the evidence concerning the phiecoon experinente conducted nt


Dachau. As you vill recall, several wii


have previously testified


as to the phle<5*» experiaents and have Riven considerable details there-


AAt this tlae I reqi est you to turn to pace 1 of the docunent book.
This is Docucent Sober 5Q-0 65 which has b«en previously adaittod into
evidence es Prosecution Exhibit Bunber 221. for the purpose of theso
experiaents I reqiest the Court to turn to pace 2, paragraph nuaber 4,
laracraph 4 etatoei

■Slevere (Ahnenerbe). I heard.." thie is the affidavit of Oswald
Pohl, you will rscall... "I heard for the first tine about it lh Berlin
on occasion of Sievers' visit with ne. Evidently at that tine tho
experiaents vers finished. Slovere cane to find out fron ne about the
possibilities for nanufacturinc of nedicine. I nontlonsd tho Deutsche
Heilnlttel BK3K (Ocrnrn Medical Corporation.) in Prnc which belonged
to the Oeranr. plmta, nmjved by Oberfuehror Dnier of ny staff. I
roconaended Silvers to po to hla. The nedicine hr.d been nnnufacturod
later in Schlachtere (31ack Forest). S 1evors told no tho following!

The 'A hnenerbe*, whose ama^er was Sievers, had developed in Dachnu
a aeiicins which quickly brou.^»t coagulation of blood. It was enoraoue-
I 7 icportant for our amy because it prevented continual bleeding. It
was the result of experinente in Dachau during wich a prisoner was fired
upon. A prisoner in Dachau, a specialist (in the field) took an
ioportmt part in the discovery of thie nedicine.*

This specialist referred to here is undoubtedly Robert Feichs cention-
ed in the testicoay before this Tribunal of the witness, Valter Keff.
Also, the none Feichs will appear in the rest of the do cue eats in

evidence.

Here now we have established the fact, fror the teetlnony of flewcld
Pohl, that these experiaente to develop a cood blood coagulant were


950


950 a


2 Jas -9-3-axcbuck

Court He . 1


C


I turn new to Document Umber y£>-L73, :»£« l of year Honor's c.ccuner.t
-.U, -*!d.ch is offered as Prosecution Exhibit Hvsibtr 237. This is an
affidavit of Volf ran Slevers.

"I, Vclfran Siercra, lx?in^ duly s\torn, depose and state:

" 1 . I %-us brm on 10 July 1905 in Idldcshtin, a.ns-ny. I '.cccru. a
.x-fjer of tl_ 2 SD,.? in 1929 and Joined the SL in 1935. 1-7 party nuabor is
11^933 and ay SS mc&cr Is 275325. -t t;io end of the war I held the rank
;f 35 StandartcnfudiTwr. In 1935 I b~ca.x tlx Business *,ima:;or of tlx.

.hnjrvorl o Society. .

••• t • • * * . -*

"2. Iak to ry position in th. . rxncrba Sccioty and «y affiliations
vlth tlx. Roloh •k.searcn Ccuneil s a ranrwse..tativo of rrofessar lxntiol, I
have sene knowledge of th. activities of i)r. hurt Blooo.

“3. I cot Dr. Kurt Blc:o in f . niuflo of the year 1913. Dice. was
. ic.iinotcntiary for Cancer Research and had an Insiituto in osen, which was
sailed the "Reich Institute for Cancer Research". In con.nooi.ion with this
Cancer Itcoooreh .retail I attended r. conference in Borlin which was attondod
Sj Dlco , Professor Holx, Dr. vn luotxcl-ur,;, r.rvl Dr. Raschcr. •• lc..cthy
dir cess ion concominc cxpcriixntr with an extract fron an Alpine plant tock
. Lace. The extract frr;. this plant *.r_; to ' . used for ti»c euro of cancor.

..t that tine the question of axperinonti^; -n hunan boiiy s or on c.-nccr uice
.r .1 sous sod. Raschcr wanted te exp-rLient cn tiiu laiar. beings Laxdiatcly,
lie .rofessor Hols and PIjx rented t- wrxriucnt on a nlir.lw first and then
hunan Nin^s. ~t any rate Raachor had thd approval of llLe-lar tc conduct /
such urxrirants and \cs ordered •„ c - pcrr.tc with D1 no a arv cx-'crirxnts
c nc mine Cancer Rcsoarch. Dr. 21 visited with Raschcr ;n nany occasions,
ascucn that Raschcr and Dlctw had sxut tananty aaetinsc uhich took lace in
crlin, liinich, and Dacl.au.

n l. Diene, who ilid not see. tc -'ini tlx help riven by otiivT divisions
Sufficient fren the point of vicr of Lis ideas a* -<ut the ox-cuticn ef nis
sou.jht and received Killer's support.

"5. «t the end of 1913 I net Bla:a ar;a?n in Hiadcr's presence. I
recall tint durinc this c.isfcrcnca Diane asked Hiauilar that Rase her bo

951


. —-9-L—b'inabuck


C


2 Jan


assigned to bin for research work in 'iis institute at ilessclstadt. ..t this
c .ucrcncc it was decided that daschc: should work in clcst cecpcrati.n t/ith
Citvic. Kaschcr was elso tc assist Dlca. in the fi-ld of biclogical research.

n i>. t'ncn u as eh or was ordered t_ establish a dcparfcicnt for crnccr
research in the Bachau Cinccntrati n Ca.:.., Oswald i'ohl was or.lcrc tr. assist
:.ia in every possible way. This order tr .ohl cane li recti, frc:. Hinder.

..11 concentration carv' imntcs sufferin' fr.r. cancer were to be transferred t>
his dopartrxjnt and uxperlixata xiiich would. servo cancer research re re tt bo
conducted cn then. T.lcnc received reverts fret Rase her and visited hia
several tines at Dachau. I assunc that 21a tc had full knowledge of Haschcr's
ror!:«

"7. Plane also hpd full irvorlcd^e oi the Diced Coagulation experinento
at Dachau. He rccoivcb reports fro; Itaschor and should have a coiplote know¬
ledge of theso natters. (Sijrv. 1 ) ‘./olfr.n S levers"

In ccnnccti n with thw ':lo:i orr/ulation experine-nts tlu . rcsccuticr.,
'urine tht ccsulnatien of .<-J.t.r 'elf, referred tc the activities of the
cfundent Dloac in this record. Jc shall see in due course that Dlouc had a
substantial knowledge of theso o::x.riiients and ''iJ not jiaroly Icor of then in
casual ccnvorsaticn as he tdll try t: have us believe.

•«o nerr turn tc the next document t.hich is an affidavit, pa^c 7 of your
'bu r's d-’cu-icnt b'ck, Docirxnt S'k.' -r X>-li71, which 1 s .fferc '. at this tirjo
as .roeocutlon Exhibit Hunter 2)C. It is an affiiavit sf defendant Slone
cals rith various subjects, -t thic tine I will road tlx entire affi¬
davit.

"I, Kurt Bitux., Jwinc duV cucr... -’.epese and state:

"1. I ms tom cn 31 January l 8 ?t> in Bielefeld, Gonaany. In 1912 I
_rt. 'aatod frea scccndary school in DorUaind and studied medicine at Goettinror
Buc to the war, I ha-: t- interrupt studies in 191ij, but rcsicod :v nodical
itu'ics in 1919 and vassal the state c;:aainati«n in 192'J at tic university of

ilcstcc

"2. In 1931 I joined the .SHU and lator on I attain.:. chc rr-Oc of S..

iru. enfUrhrer of the :xiicai Service. In 19’ 3 the Gcldcn -arty 2ublcu was

952


c

2 Jan i:7-£-* i~-9-5-flinr sue 1c
CcuH* Kc. 1 . ^

•

I •

. :W nt;' rn nc. After nany years of private- nodical practice, I raa celled
-o Berlin in I93h by the Reich Chief f Physicians, Dr. Gerhard ‘..'aencr.

7,.^c I took over the position cf adjutant in the sain office of the Go man
Crnsa. FurtJior-^rc, it saa qy task fro:*. 1735 an to organize radical
higher education.

“3. In 1939 I hwc;i—a d_'nt> '-.u ih~ Soldi Chief of .ublic licelth, Dr.
Leonardo Conti, tho was i*. day.ar's a ecasocr. I represented Dr. Conti
n i.is- position as a) Chief of the .laic:-. . wdical Association, b) nc:dually
CMoi cf the ain Office cf .MhLLc Health of the I arty, a) .) iir.lly Chief

^ s _ . . * .

cf C LcJicol •‘saociation.

"i-. In consequence rf rv above _ic.iti.ncd positions I cm nblc to state
tv. foil-vine;:

"5. knorled-. of a jvvjxs. kill p.rsona nentaUy ill criminated

in runors. >x.i I hear! that sad*, a pr prar. vaa planned I discussed the

natter tdth Dr. Centi. Tie lattor rolled tc discuss any data:Is cf this

. •

;.ro.r.-_- . However, Crntl did state t* -1 it concerned a secret order plvcn to,
redder and Dr and*. no day I pet an invitation to a c-nforcnco in 19)i0 or

IVId. I cannot rcrxcf .r tho csstcV date A th. cenf jrcncc which trek piece
in ::u'iic)v. dr. C.nti inf cried sic that this conference had boon prevekoj by
i.L: r.v . that Dr. darl I rand t intom'-l t. . r.scnt details of tlu. Sutlianaois
.re ir... Viktor Crack represented Dr. :xrl Brandt at lids conference and
..roseate-: rn rOlcsc! Dutkanasia La aipned Hitler. Tula ra t. bee cue
effective and ‘jc published at the end af the war. Burin^ cho : aara 3939 to
i;«l the ixrcy killings were luv’xrtrkon 'n the basis of a se-ccOlcd secret
d v ulvich, however, ‘.air never published. In IS Id Hitler . r l.i'-ited c ntinu-
atLm :i the pxr-crsn. In side tcdical circles this progr -. vrr ccnsidurcd-
c nlrarp t* the existing norris cu*'. crstc.vs, and illegal.

M o. Ln l/'i3 I was appointed Co a.is3icivcr fer Cancer research. This
research ton conducted by th: doich Research Council ever wliicli Iknvann
Ccurin^ presided.

J ■. La 1?L3 a c nforencc to '.. place at D.rlin. The object of this cm-


f-r.nc^ rrj tc ascuss td;c pcsiibilitics cf esrjloyir.;, an al. Lae plant as a

953


c

2 J2a Ii7->D-.-?-6-Ki.»buck
Court 3c. 1

cancer cure. This cothod hail *joen preposod by a cousin of Ktaulcr, Dr. ven
Luetzelfcerg* Dr. v«n Luotzdburg, rrefesser Hclz, tfclfrsa Slavers, and Dr.
.Eschar orticipatcd in this conference.

■6 Dr. rtcschcr told uo that he had executed experiments c.i hr.on being!
at the Dachau concentration ca:Civ. ci tlicn served to dot.r.dnc tie effect
_-f poigg.ol on blood coagulation la t. care of wcunds incurred on the battle-
fiold and during rperatiens, etc. .1 .schcr showed sc laboratca*; studies con¬
cerning bit d coagulation. .clygal scene! to be of valuo tc our /.nacd Forces.

Ii-rc the defendant Blcuc lias referred to the fact tl«at Itaschcr showed hii
• * • . * • * , ,
laboratory studies, i’ou will seo throughout tli presentation tiir.t Blouc's

!ojc^lcd_c was c nsidcrably greater, i.u nay ixcll ask us to boliovo that these

laVrator.- studies. so to s.icaD, uora ucroly the results cf noodle pricks in

the end wf an insate's finger, followed by an application cf a coagulant drug,

:r sax such defense as that. I re.* * fr -.t the affidavit, paragraph 9.

"9. Dx rL'.exits n Kunsn Dedngs. I been o fully aixiro tiiat e:;crinontn
n hu.rn 'tin. s wore conducted in c-Tccntr-ti'n camps. Dr. teacher infmxd
■ ~ of c' dieted water oxpcrir.cnts and I rttx_.'< r that he stated, when asked,
that luring thoso one cas« of eatii !iad occurred. Uiiiilor discussed with ao
o.T ; trLvents cn hunan being’s v. riant Z r the war effort and stated tint
refus a l taut treat! on treason* Fer the ox.orixjonts, inly c : u criminals,
t'u. lad been sentenced tc death end who were to be .gran©.! amnesty under
certain circuiatancos after the cc^tcrlrunts , -were t - bo used. I discussed
"*ti. dander tlx. possibility ef, after the war, finding a legal nay for con-
'actin , such experiments for tho solution of the canoer prrbl.c. on a voluntary
’- .sis. (Signed) Kurt Diene. 51

li.ro, Kurt Blrn-j, 1 ui ;ht eenti a in pass in", .vJnits that the pr^ratis in

• t

ho -rrs involved in nodical oJpcrlucntation had no legal basis, ao he ant


D«l:r Wur; getting together tc doter Inc rhat could bo done tc find a legal
•. - r conducting such experiments after the end rf the .rar.


Court Ho. 1

2 Jan 47 - 10-1 - UG - Perrin


3o turn now to Page 10 of Your Honor's Documont look,
Documont Humber NO-611 which will bo offered ns Prosocution
Exhibit 239. This is a lottor from tho notorious n c schor to
'I'olfram Sicvors, d..tcd 15 Soptombor 1S43:

"Dear Stnndnrtonfuohror: For your information and furthor
action, I cm sending you in tho onclosuro two copios of tho
essay 'ixporinonts with a now honostst J ?oly 3 cl 10"', which is
in tablot form and is to bo administered orally.

"As alroady discuasod In Muftich, tho manuiacturine pf this
aodicino * Polyjcl 10 ' would bo quito possible in an establish¬
ment nor.r Drogonz, whoroby sono phaaos of tho manufacturing
process would bo carried out in othor oxiating ontorprisos.

In erdor to make it a prosporous ontorpriso, it would, of courso,
bo r.ocoaaary that tho petontoo, Korr Foix, personally soo to
the manufacturing possibilities in Protonz, otc. Conditio sino
qua non to this would bo tho roloaso of Foix. I would bo gruto-

C

ful to you If it were possible for you to contact SA-Gruppon-
fuohror Professor Dr. 31oko in this roflard, sinco It is roquislto
for r.n cvontual reloaso that ho bo reinstated to his former
state ar half-Aryan. Dr. 51ono has givon rao groat.hopes in
-h.s respoct. Iho roleaso of Foix would bo pos3lblo only if
t'.-o P.oichsfuohror SS, seoing tho rosults of our wcr^c, woud got
a somowhut difforont picturo of Foix's p.rs?n than ho rocolvod
from poop^o who were interested in r oix's dostruction. Tho
picturo of Foix resulting iron tho investigation of tho Gestapo,
is in any ease, as far as I know, favorable throughout. Only

- -cn't ooliovo that this report was submitted to tho 3'oichs-

^ *

f uq)J* or SS. Hith 'cost regards and Hoil Hitlor, Yours vory truly,
-ig.’aind ilcschor."

■lc noto in this le tter that cur doforelant 31omo new looms

-- a nighty important firuro as the man who vd ll got tho roloaso

-f Feix sc that Feix can continuo to work on tho Polygal prodic -

955


Court no. 1

2 Jan 47 - 10-2 - UG - Porrin :

cion. Ifco Tribunal will recall tho testimony of tho vitnoss

Viefcwog, which ia on pa go 431 of tho transcript, in regard to

tho oxporinonts © nductod at Dchau with coagulating drugs. I

also call to tho attontion of tho Court, tho testimony of tho -■

witness Stoerr on Pago 586 of the transcript. Tho witness

Steerr statod tlr.t blood coagulation oxporimonts woro carried

out in the crematorium and that ono had to assume (jftiht tho ox-
*

poriaontal subjects died oocauso nobody ovor cano out r.livo
from the cronatoriun. I .also.roquost tho Tribunal to refer to
tho testimony of tho witnoss '/alter .‘off on blood coagulation
which is contained orf pago 639 of tho transcript.

\Io turn now to Pago 12 of four Honor's Document Hook,
eocinor.t NO-436 which la offered as Prosocution Exhibit Number
240. This is a report by Raachor. Thu dato on thotop is a
marginal noto, handwritten to Dr. SchrJ, dolivorod 20 D 0 conbor
1943. That is not tho d..to of tho instrument. This roport is
from the Institute for Military Scientific no search (bepartmont
Lr. Ri.scl or), which, of courso, is part of tho Ahnonorbo Socjj ty.
r ‘?olyral 10", a h«most;.t to bo adainis torud orally, A homostat,
cf coi rso, is a blood coagulant or a blood stoppor ".3 wo Might
say. Ibis is by Dr. Signur.d Haschor, 'lunicb, and Dr. Ilodicino
H. H-ferkunp, ./altorshauson (Thuringia). ^

"A good hoMostr.t lias to hr.vo tho foiiowin- qualifications:

1. It must bo harnloas,

' 2 . it must 'bo administered oasily (orally),

"3. it must not have a b^dtasto,

''4. it must have a doop and long lasting effect on tho
■Ji-eding orel clotting ti^o,

'5. after tho effect wears off it must bo possiblo to

-'■a liras ter anothor do so without any dangor.

! -r.ostat nos for salo conuorcially moot those don_nds only .

partially. Zspeciallx unobjoctionnblo homos tat is known up

r„ —uni eh is in fora of tablets, durablo, unimpaired by cold j

— _---


2 Jen 47 - 10-3 - UG - -orrin
Court No. 1


toaperaturos end thereforo oc.sily transport-blo. 3ut it would
bo worthwhile to px*oduco such a preparation whoso application
would hr.vo tho following in port an t advantagos:

"1» It could bo givon prophylactically to tho combat
croops boforo an attack and to air crows boforo action. Too
groat a loss of blood could bo c.voidod that way whon tonding
co pounds is dolnyod; simllarily it could bo avoidod that tho
wourdod bocorao incupacit..tod by a delay of loss of blood.

" 2 . Uoforo operations in which groator aroal blooding ia
to bo oxpoctod it could x. used to koop tho oporationr.l rogion
cloar of intorforir.g blooding.

'3. -’ersons haying a high blood clotting tiuo could bene¬
fit inostimably from such a roaody in casos of tooth extraction,
etc.

"4. In sovuro casos of lung or stonach-hommorrhago which
c.nnot be treated surgically at onco, ouch a r<.nody could bo
lifo saving.

"..o boliovo to hr.vo such a romody in ' ?olyg*.l 10', d
propar-tion composed and tostod in our instituto, which doos
fulfill tho abovo roquiromontc. «?olygal 10 ' Is a drug composod
on a 'pictin* base; its now method, difforontiating it frcra
other homostats on a ?octin basis i3 to bo found in tho acti¬
vation of Poetin boforc composing it into tho homostat.

'Hoforo wo triod tho clinical U30 of tho drug and Ls it
probod, it was tosted on human boings by thorough oxporimontp
as to its influor.co on tho poriod of clotting and blooding,
ihc poriod of clottia' was occasionally established in short
intervals by 10 pnrallol dofinitions of frooflowing vonous blood
according to tho method of 3uorckor. Tho poriod of blooding
vc - 8 ^asurod by a stopwatch after a wound at tho oar had boon
inflicted by a Trankosebon Schncppor. *

Or. tho following graphic chart tho curvos of two oxpori-

957


c


2 Jan 47 - 10-4 - L'G - Perrin
Court No. 1

contal porsons arc displayed (experimental poraen nurnbors 200
and 207)...." which night lndlcr.to to Your Honor that thoy had
oxperinontod up to this tino up to 207 incatos with this
particular inaato ...." Iho dopth of doclino and tho duration
of offeet correspond to tho avorago. It Is to bo montionod
with roforonco to tho curves that various porsons woro always
usod for tho experiments in ordor to avoid a possiblo accumula¬
tion of offoct by the drug."

Tho first graphic chart wosoo shows tho uso of Polygal
on tho oxpurinontal subject Nutnbor 20 o and tho conditionc of
oxporimontal subject Hu^hor 207. "Prou .tho noxt graphic chart
(curve of oxporimontal subjoct Nuribor 96) it is ovidont tint
neither hard physical work nor tho absorption of noala arc able
to oxorciso a noticeable negative influence on tho offoct on
the drug." Dio Docemont contains that gr.phic chart ma-ibor 2
thcroin. Wo continuo with tho last paragraph of tho pago.

"Iho very low period of clotting c.nd blooding rison a
littlo and doclinos hoavily la tor at work; tho noal, consisting
of whito cabbago and potatoos, ccr.t.-inod according to tho
nalysis only tracos of Toctin, so that tho meal itsolf could
not play any part thoroat.

•'In itsolf tho prusont curvo is the idoal prosontat^on of
tho offoct of oral absorption of 'Polygal 10' or gonoralizlng,
oven tho ideal curvo of tho offoct of a honostat. It must bo
otrossod th. t this curvo doos not roprosont a singlo caso, but
*• at wo wero ablo to obtain from various oxperlnonts a largor
number of oquivalont curvos. It soous to bo ovidont frou thoso
curves that tho roo.uirononts of a honostat aro absolutely
realized by 'Polygal 10'.

'Iho eventual changos in tho composition of tho blood will

%

i to bo troatod thoroughly in anothor exposo. It is alrc.dy
pointed cut here, howover, that substantial chongos, transgross¬
ing the limits of mistakes in moa


suroi


could hot bo fouixi


Court H*. »

2 Jen 47 - 10-5 - UG - Porrln-

"Fron tho groat rnrbor of clinical casos, in which wo
•ore cblo to tost 'Polygal 10' until now, wo would liko to
chooao a few in order to dononatreto briofly tho cffoct in tho
aost variod operations and illnoasoa.

'Case Muzabor 1 ... " Ihoso clinical ccsos woro in th)
hospital at tho D-.chau Concontration Cenp... "Halo pationt,

40 years, amputation of tho right uppor thigh. Tho day boforo
tho operation a blood transfusion of 50 u contii.iotcrs was uado
in preparation of tho operation. Too day of tho oporation, tho
blood prossuro was 150/30. I el to fror: tho operational chart:

'It c s ovidont, ho\/ slightly tlo tiasuo bled. ..ftor tho first
provision of blocd Tor tho sjvor.1 blood vossols carriod out
In a stato of abaoluto bloodloacnoss, no furthor blooding
occurrod after tho divination of stagnation, so tha.t it v/as
r.ot nocoosax*y to put .ny ligatures on the surfaco of tho muaclos,
trd tho ediposo tissuo or tho subcutanoous cellular tissuo.'
During tho poriod of subsoquont troatnont tho stunp did not
bleed onynoro; boforo tho oporation, tho surgeon had no knowl¬
edge of tho uso of 'Polygal 10' \4iich had boon adninistorod
45 nimttos beforo tho operation startod.

'Caso number 2: 42 yor.r old mr.lo pationt, horniotomy on

both sidos. Blood prossuro boforo tho opor: tion 145/00. Forty
uinutos before tho boginning of tho opor..tion ono tablet of
,? olygal 10' was adninistorod. According to tho stafenont of
tto operating surgoon, tho drug agrood with tho pationt as
usuz.1, without causing any troublo. In particular, no disagroo-
-.bL. secondary offocts occurrod on tho pert of tho stomach ~

r *

‘narcosis). 31ooding was surprisingly slight. As in all
previous operations whoro 'Polygal 10' had boon adninistorod
‘-'--iro, it was also in thi3 caso only nocossary to ligato tho
bleeding from tho blood vossols, but this was nocossary only

’.cry fow points, namoly only whoro vossols had boon injured

959


Court Ho. 1

2 Jan 47 - 10-6 - UG - Porrin


by tho oporation. Ihus. tho favorable offoct of 'Polygal 10'
for operations dooa not only consist in tho fact that tho
bleeding is dlninishod and thus a greater loss of blood avoldod,
but 'Polygcl 10' nakoa also a considerably quickor oporation
possible, as tho application of clips and tho following liga¬
tures roquiro novortholoss a cortain tino, which can bo savod
by using 'Polygal 10'."

I t gooa on with caaos 3, 4, and 5, which aro in tho sano
thcuo uni which tho Tribunal nay road, but I won't road thon
horo. I continuo on p.go 17, tho noxt to tho last paragraph.

"Smnary: A ruport is aubnitted on a now henostat baaod
on Pectin and to bo cflnlniatorod orally which r.ftor a short tino
causes an oxtronoly strong and long-lasting rogular roduction
of tho blooding end blood clotting tino. l *ho practical tosto
of this nodicino, 'Polygal 10', ahowod undor tho noat variod
circuustancos no failures up to now. Mo contradictory indica¬
tions on tho -part of tho hoart or tho circulation could bo
fourd, too, as was to bo oxpoctod considering tho coripooition
of tho drug.

"Tho idea of this oxporlnont was to draw tho attontion of
a lx rgor circlo to this preparation and got rosults of e-xperi-
nonta fron othor clinics and hospitals. Snallor quantltios fer
oxporliaonts aro at disposal upon roqiost. Addross of author:

D cfcau 3 K." • *


c


2 _J7-l-'.-l-oard (' ID)

Court :*c. 1

I ceh the Tri'junal to abe no tic: o" the that i3 Daxheu,

S

3_; . ‘.ti'r-cs, Dachau, 3", i3 that -diich vltacas ¥i<£r.:o ; auctioned -o
tho :>i-rie Station,

She r.e:-t '’ocu ont, -h.ch is Docu -r.it ITo. j 12, and iiich I offer as
Pro":cation 1 s exhibit Ite. 22a, dated 29 •.:oyer»:r 19li3, e letter fror. t’.:o
d&faadcnt f.udolf Brandt to olfran Jicv rs.
u^Ccr Conradc Siovero:

-The r.:tt:r ;'ol;~_al IJo. 10 did not dmraloy s -vie!:!-/ as -*ov. end '.3
y-unpt3tvr:*fi»hror Dr. Hcschcr errweted;' t.\ o Dcichs-'uohrer 3" h:a tail¬
ed to 33 GrupyenTuahror Professor Dr. Cobhcr't. H; aUaxt 1 . '.d^JolT to

9 *

*oo convinced that or various reasons it is still noceisary to sake
thorough t sts at yohcnlychcn vhich are nroviously to he discussod by
3“. :'.assets turnfnohror Dr. rxachor 1th tho co:n:tont physician at
nohonlrchon and/or Gru ponfinhrsr LYofoasw J>r. Gobhardt p.reonall- .

T Shall also -..rito a fr: lln.s to that off.ctto 3'. Itov.pt s tvrr.Cuo:- cr
Dr. Baochar ant! I shall as!: Mrs ncr.r to ronain really ob<activo and
cool and not to «ct oncitod because thirds cannot ho dono a3 roichly ns
lie o:lfinally thought. 33 yauptstuni'vx-.r Dr. Dascher -.-ill furtl:;r.-.ora
he pi von tho opportunity to at in torch rith a content special in
Berlin, as ar as I :x.ow Professor ~eitr., in order to discuss t^

'hole problor: and possibly further orxsrincnts.

".toil Uitlorl /


Brandt

- Z e orsturribannf uchr or . a

.

:!erc is "eV.vrdt -orinp forward and apparently er-rcssins 1 lira eld
1-3 openly. The report indicat-3 to h:~. that further ir.v-sti-ation is
nacosadry. This dated 29 I'ovorfcer 19U3. * o soo the posit. on of t!io
defendant “ebhnrdt, and its connection -rith "i^eler. Use inr.etipation
pot into th-esa enparinonts, and it -as ou—est-d and rcconroncbd t!iat
• r errverinentation or any other action be ta'ccn, and which i3 a


considerable and important ft jure in tlsi3 whole Picture


2 J*r~wP-12r-2-3oard (!3D)


C


Coart :io. 1

V

To turn to tho next Document, which is Docunont N„. 758, and which is
to bo offer od as Prosecution'3 Inhibit i«. 2h2, da tod 10 Do cord) or 19’i3.

It is a tolotypo cddrcssod to tho dofondant SS Dtandartonfuolircr Sicvors.
"At prcsont at Tiold Corrvmd Offlco of Hcichafuchrcr 3"

“3tandartcnfuohrcr:

“Today I had to send tho following tolctTX) to 33 Obcrsturnkannfucliror
Dr. llomdorff:

“ 'Today I T7as advised that tho protocti-o-custody prisoner Boris
.Trajnc bom 25 Dcccribor 1913 in ^entrida, IJo. i 3255, is to bo released
in accorc'aroo rrith ’..xitin^ of 19 ifovoabar 19? 3 and to '» sont to Berlin
HEX. LV C 2. I continue lo uaruly roco^xxnd Imjae's roleasc, but ur-
"ontly request that Krajnc not *x» taken mray fr<Rao as aworkor sinco
ho is qy bost chcsdst and is in the cdcldlo of co-o work orderod by tlio
RaichsfuohrorSG. Krajnc is, as far as ho !-w.s, t’.w orly chordat hero
nho can carry tlio nork tiirou~h portinontly and corroctly. I thcoforo
ask that it bo arranged to hare Crajnc transferred te ui as a .civilian
worker. Ids ouploynont in zy division within Uio Society venQd

follow,

" "ay I rospoctfully request that tlds bo follwrcd through, sinco
othondso tho thooroctical part of tho polygal work nanv.t bo carriod
further because Xrajnc i3 ny only organic cherd3t,

" 'limy thanks, ^

" 'Hoil Id tier

" 'Very respectfully

" 1 (signature) S. Raschor, 1 n

"ds indicates tho position of defendant iiovers — tho importance
of . ou ho could retain ,*n to work on tho various projects.

'o tern now to tho next Document, wliich is Document Ho. 613, and
"ich i3 to bo offered as Prosecution's Exhibit J!o. 2U3- This ia a
docunont which has boon initialed with an B 2 a and follcr.red i 3i 11 , which
aro tlio initials of tho defendant Iiovers, and tho "3i" was later cros3od
ou -» it is addressed 962


c


2 Jajyl ~!?-il--3-3ocrd

Court llo,

to Dr. Grnuc, 1-ancgor of .'crtiao Dcono:ic Office ir. tho Reich Research
Council* 7!w letterhead is that of tlio Institute for Military Scientific
research,

Dachau 3 K.

"Pool* "3r. Grauoj

J referring to our conversation of today I boi to ansitor briefly your

aupstioffl concerning Polygal*

• *

■ 1 .) extracted slices of suger boot, r nlo-poctin as noil as Doxtroso •
as usof. as basic rate riel.

K b.) .'.in of Polygal, !ecstatic rci»dy in tr.blot fom o3pocially
uso.'Jl as «. prophylactic hocostyptic. Very inportont for air crons,
actions by shock troops otc. Briofly onprossed, advantagioue In creos
•/icro there is c long period of tino bet. con boing wounded and having
tho -.jour/, dressed.

"3.' Advantages that cannot bo socurcd bothsr honoatyptios aro
tho tablet Torn, (no Uronkablo copr.fes), very sinplo application: noroly
lot i-t ,clt in the r»cth and soolloir it alertly, lasting offoct, U - 6
0 hours non sonsitivity of tho rcasdy to tc.rporcturo char. os.

3 !.,) nio reaedy is absolutely »>on-to:dc and can therefore ’x> taken
frequently -.fithout risk of injury. (Absolutly no don-jn* tf throrbosis
or c bolis*.)

B 5.) Tho s-ico of tho rervedy produced on a lory -elo » ’:s out
cheaper than that of those horsost -ptics at tho eraser*. i tfc • varket,
tltus the prico ruo3ticn i3 of no co.iscquonco in practice,

• r lixh lend regards

J .'bil Hitlcrl

“hTdollcr.-ed by "3i» later crossed out')".

Eis docencnt indicate tho close contact betvecn tho Institute
•Mmonerbo and the Reich Research Council, end they all fit in togctlxjr.

Tho TTobions rr re discussed aueng tho uorbors of both organizations,
and tho continuation of further progress of these cxpcriicontations.


963


c


2 J-v!WMW-Bwd CSD)

Court !fo. 1

_. f

Tbc Doc cent on Pa~o 23 of your Honor's Docunont Dook, Docunont lio.
'1 S t rfiick is offered as Prosecution 1 s ^Inhibit !to. 2hh, is a r.oto
free tho dofondant Siovars, dated 10 Tobrurry 19li0.


963-1


c


2 Jan-‘-i-J?-ll-li-3card (:5D)

Court So. 1

"Koto

“Subject: Publication BfiSCEH !in the ISadch -radical *Soldy.»
This refers to a report I road a few ^o=cnt3 ago, which is Document
ik>. U6 .

"On tho occasion of sy presence in lamich at the beginning of January,

SS-ilauptsturnfuohrcr Dr. Rascher and Dr. !Iaforkarn infornod no about tho

TQblicction of an article which thoy wrote to-othcr and which they planned
• •

for tlio Ilnich Ifcdicel TTookly. Dr. Itaschcr rocoivcd tho .necessary

authorization fron no, as he had loft tl»c TAiftwaffo and had not yot boon

talan over by tho '*affon-53 end thus had to obtain tlve authorization

froc tho corjpctont offico naaoly tho "APnonerbe". Tho articlo planned

:cs also Ixotm to tho deputy Roichsaorstcfuohror, SA-Gruppo.nfuchror ?ro-

.'ossor Dr. 31 coo and had net with is approval."

On tho aargin you will note: "On 15 January I spoko about this to

Mono.

!, Dr. HaforJeanp declared th t ho did not nood an authorisation as ho

was loaving tho ' Tnf fon-3S. On 31 Janaary 19Ui, a discussion took place

betreen S3 Stendartonfuotarov Dr. Lolling, 3 Hauptsturnfuchrcr Dr. Haschor

and nysolf in tho coureo of which Dr. Ilaforkann was nentioned, Or. that

• •

occasion, it was discovorod that Dp. iiafcrkaiip had not yet loft and cor-
tai ly had to havo tho authorization of tho 3oichoarzt-SS for ‘ho publication.
TollowinT this discussion, I irrcdir.toly sent this tolo .yp> to tio Jhinich

Ibdical .’co’dy: 'Publication RA3Cl72ULi.’ ZC L -T nust by ro nenra tr.!:o

*

place a s I'JJTZCJuT id thou t prescribed authorization.'

"Cr. U February 19Ui, I was informed by 33-Hauptstunafuchror Dr,

Rancher that the publication had alroady taken place when ny tolotypo was
received.

"3S-S tar.dartonfuchror" .

Docirrnt ilo. 6li», which is o:‘iercd as Prosecution 1 '; I-diibit 'do. 21:5,

is a letter fron Dr. C-ravdta, who i3 co:iplaiiung about the publication

of this re ort. He severely opposed tlic publication of this roport as

he deers it very essential to !:ocn it a secret. This is addressed to:

9S4


Court Ho. 1


■111


°33—tocptstumfuchrcr Dr. Dascher.

'Ho.: Tour rrticlo in !Fo. 3A °* the lunieh 'cdiccl cokly of
29 January 19liU.

Tr. tho liinich 11-died Veok*.y Ho. 3 A of 23 January 19’Ji, there is
m articlo ‘Polygml l6* a haorostyptic to bo token per os b7 Dr. Daschor
cjxl Dr. 'laf o rtarp. ‘Dachau 3 S' is indice tod as tho address and hiuian

V

oxperiijental subjects arc mentioned in tho articlo.

“The publication of scientific troatisc3 i3 cvbject to tho ^ra.'.tinc
of tho authorisation to print by tho senior professional authority (for
jC-pijysiclans, tho Roich Rjysician S3 and ?olico) as :roll as by tho
ili^h Comand of tho Tchrnacht.

'T.iis subjoction to consorship is dso knonn to tho editorial offiooa
of professiond periodicals*.

"Tou are requested to let us knew rf.'.y you did not cp'ily for t-'xo
necessary consort for publication.

"toil latlerl

"signed: Crnrits.”

Vo turn now to tho noxt Doc unant, Docuasnt ITo. —

TIE mT3IT3ITs Tho Tribund will roccss.

(A recess tras token until 1330 hours.)


965


12-1-Lehnhardt. (:E)


C


Court So. 1.


coariBCTP copy

A5T2RNGCN SESSION

(Tt* hearing reconvened at 1330 hours, 2 January Hli7.)

THE rARSHALi All will rise.

13. HARDY: iiay it please the Tribunal, we turn now to Fage 26
of the English Document Book. This is document No. 615, which is of-
fered as Prosecution Exhibit No. 2U6. This is another letter regist¬
ering an objection to the Rascher Report; this letter was written by
SS-Cbergrup enfuehrer FORL, Chief of the Waffen-SS, addressed to
Rascher, and reads as follows!

"Dear Rascher,

In the Munich Medical Ifookly Journal of 28 January 19Uli, you
published an article about '-olisl 10.

I deoc it necessary that in future publications you avoid care¬
fully everything which could induce people who are faniliar with the
subject (and one raust always consider that such pooplo exist) to tho
conclusion that experiaonta on prisoners are involved.

This is possible from various passages in the above aontioned
article. It is /araaount that you-do not uso *Dachau 3 K» as the
authors address."

Heil HitlerJ


Tours

P (initial for PCHL) *

??.. ilARDY: Copy went to tho Defendant Rudolf Brandt and the
Defendant '..olfra.z Sievero. "ore, to see the unspeakable PCHL, woriy-


ccs of the ActI

Document lie. $56, on page 31 of your Docuaont

p

is offeree as Prosecution No. 2U7. This is
with FCLTGAL. Tho letter contains a
different origin. Cn the first page, 29, the
in regards to the assign^nt of S. RASCiZil ;D.

It has the date; 8 fcay 19Ui. Over to


c


2 Jan-A-G2S-12-1-Ichnfaar dt■ (IB)

Coart Mo. 1.

tt» left ap.ears •The Reichafuehrer-SS rwrsonal Staff Office •Ahnenerbe 1 ,
a«l in the center the word *SOSiAHI« and then the words: "SS-Haupt-
stursfuehrer S. RASGHER ID. was assigned the following research tasks
b7 the Raich Research Cornell:


2 Jan-A-<J3S-12-2“Iehnhardt. (13)
Coart So. i.


C


1.) CD Ii October 1&3 Journal Ko. rf 1157A3 g
Codeword: 'Rewarming Ham: 1
Research ordered: '

1. ) r-swamlrg after general freezing of the human body.

2. ) Recovery from partial freezing, especially of the extremities.

3. ) Adaptation to cold of the human body, variously nourished to
establish whether an increase of resistance against freezing can bo
attained.

Priority SS.

Jfehraacht order number: SS 1^91-0328 (l679/l5)-IIlA3
2.) On 23 Fobruary 19UU Journal Ho. rf 3717/U* g
Codeword: Polygal

Research task for the devdo .nont of production nothode for tho prep¬
aration of the huaostat Polygal."

iR. HARDY: Continuing on: "Priority SS/Ua

Wohrnacht ordor number SS iill8/039l/Ui Rf 2829

Point 11 as an addition to tho task

Procurement of supplies etc. has jl priority rating SS

1950 (Group 1). .

(Signature illegible)
SS-Obcrsturmf uehror' 1

R. HARDY: ?.« turn to tho next page. This is a letter written
by Or. KAKR, at Dachau, written in the Dachau Hospital, to RASCHER^
dated 10 Decciber 19Ji3, and tho subject "Administering 'Polygal'
upon amputation of the thigh of a 1:0 years old male patient. It is
addressed to:

•To: *

Stabsarzt Or. SASCHLR
Dachau " •

:R. 'iARDI: This is obviously the same one, referred to in the
report. (Reading) "On 10 December 19U3 the effectiveness of *Folygal»
ir. the case of tho amputation of th? thigh was tested. The drug

- 967 -


was


2J^>A-CS--12-3-lenhardt. (?e)
Court No« !•


c


dissolved. A blood-transfusion of 500 cob had been nado the previous
day in preparation for the operation. 3lood pressure on the day of
the operation was 130/80,

As regards the effectiveness cf 'Folygal* one can say that it
was .absolutely evident how little the tissues bled. After the first
rush of blood froB the vessels which had been cut when cooplotely
esptiod of blood, no aorc blooding occurred after this first issuing
of accumulated blood, so that it was not necessary to apply any liga¬
tures to the surface of the nusclcs and tho fatty tissues, or tho
subcutaneous tissuos, as had always boon tho caso with other anputa-
tions. Tho offoctivnnass of 'Rslygal* oust in this case bo described
as caaplcte." —

VR, HARDY: Signod by "The First Canp rtysician Concentration

Dachau.

Dr. Kahri"


>


(


- 963


2 Jubut -A-DJ>13-l-Cook

Court Nc. 1


C


HR. HaRDTi We turn tc the next page, 31, still the same docunent,

So. 656, which is another letter free 3r. Karr to Rascher. This letter
I w^r.*t bother to road. I -.111 norely aention it in passing, as it also
substantially contains the information in the report.

In order to conauocAte tho production of polygal various arrangements
are being nada by Stand^rtonfuohror Slevers, as we will see in document
So. 757, page 33 of your Honors 1 docunent book, which will be offerod
at this tine as Frosocuticn Exhibit No. 2U8. It is a letter from
Siovors to alter Neff, a.witness who has testified beforo this Tribunal,
dated tho 26. of Key, 19Ui»'

"I havo roceiTod nod road with interest your report on 15 May, 19Wi.

%

If wu can continue to work in tho Nicolodl factory until the end of August
or perhaps longer, that w^uld be the oust favorable solution.

■I ask that you ttko it a print to send a copy of all reports,
which you Coliovo it nocossary to send directly to po, to SS Haupta-
turnfuohror Dr. iootnor, who is th«. competent Dopart-’wnt hoad.

Hoil Hitler, . „
(signature) Siovers"

That was a lotter fr vj './altur Neff when he was up in tho Block

• •

Forost to establish a factory for the production of polygal.

Now wo cl.-.j tc pa-.e 3k of Tour ^nors' docuswnt book. This has boon
previously intro-ucod as Frcsocltion Exhibit No. 123, and is document
35ii6-F3, Slavers' Diary for 19ulu There ar» sens entries in hot% which
arc quite significant in this regard, and I wish to call to tho Tribunal's
att.onti n at this ti;.-j, and you will note cn page 31*, tho first entry of
5 January*

"SS Hstuf. Dr. -tischer an^ Dr. Haferkasp* TTcrk on Bigenblutbo-
handlung (Own blx<i treatment)"

This obviously referred tc p.ly^al in the report which has been
5r ritton by thase two gentlemen and which has been referred to previous¬
ly.

•a turn now tc the entry _f 9 January, apprexiaotely in the middle
of tho page. Or. the 9th of January we see entry Nc. 3i


2 ,fcnuaiy-A-DJ>13-2-Cock

Court lie. 1


■Report on cenferenco SS Ogruf. Fohl in correction with production
of polyol."

text we turn to page 35 of lour Honors' docunent book, at the top
of the .-age, entry So. 5* under da to 22 January, the very first entry
on the page i

■5* Generator car for production of polygal, Lustenau-Schlachtora."

tew we c.*3 to tho 28th of January, and I wish to note in passing,
the nenticn of the initials RFR, which are the intials for Roich Rusoarch
Council.

■1. Research Doportrent of the Eaffen SS

■2. Collaboration with Institute R (Rascher) Dauchau

% .

“‘Work on Raschor proposals f jt polygal production."

•

And wo turn rvj* it tho next day, 29 January, item No. 6i

"Reasuarch instruct! ns oncl top priority for pcly?al/.

■7. Nano of polypi.

■3, Supplies an' prerequisites for polygal productioni discussion
on tho basis -f RrSchor rep rt of 21 January.

“9. Roquisltin for tho producti n cf a pectin lotion by Dr.
rlootnor."

An! wo turn n~w to the next significant entry on tho 31 January,

No. 3i

■Stop collaboration with Jr. Haforkarp"

■Vacs refers to the iLcurwnt introduced, previously, and ontrfr No. 2, under
SS Stubaf. Faalschluin*

■2. Giving leave of absenco to prisoners fer polygal production."
which obviously rofors to leave of absence granted to prisoners such as
.•alter Naff and other pcrsomol needed fer the work in the Black Forest
c. nee min:* tho prcducti n of this blood coagulator.

And the nuxt vne:

"Giving leava of absonco to prisoners. Discussion in connection with
polygal production."

the next itoo on tho page for 1 February:


And another interesting it


■Reich Research Council (RFR) Dr. Grauo - Dr. Rascher:" which
has been referred to in the document I have Just presented.

■Prodwtion of poly gal as War Economy Industry of the Reich
Research Cowell. Discussion of necessary supplies. Top priority,
requisition foras, etc."

I thought wc night note in passing the item under 2 February,
or. pAgo 36, which doesn't have any connection with the pplygal prod¬
uction, but you will soo it is an itoa which is very interesting:

■Itot Professor Bickenbnck in Karlsruhe, and ho advisos that
he has put his research work- under the control of General Commission¬
er, Prof. Dr. Erandt," which clearly indicates that the so Commissioners
ware fully a.arc of all research problons in tho nodical world of
Gerwny, and again it is followed through on tho sane day by a dis¬
cussion with SS Hstuf. Hlrtj

"1. Prof. Dr. Bichonbach, without instructions from Hirt and
Prof. Stein, contacted General Ccamiscionor FTof. Dr. Brandt con¬
cerning tho phosgon experiments and was in Hatzwoiler with him. Con-
aiscion is to bo withdrawn, for our part Natzwoilor to bo closed."
which clearly indicates it was one of his projocts, and horo is Px-of-
cssor Karl Brandt visiting ifet*woilor concentration camp whero moat
of the o.xpcrinonts woro conducted.

Wo turn now to page 37 of Your Honors' document Book, on entry
under 22 Fobruary, following the top of the poga on down ♦til you
get to the item Ho. 3i

"SS Stabaf. Dr. Rase ho r - "
ard there aro several entries horui

"d. Supply questions for production of polygal."

The last entry is rather amusing in so far as ho notes Raschcr
took blood frees tho finger tips of inmates.

"o. Experiments Professor Blooo"
xnd thj next entry:

"f. Polygal report to SS GruFponfuchrar Prof. Dr. Gebhardt."

Tint has been mentioned in th: document I mentioned this morning.

-971 -


2 January-A-OJG-13-e-Cook 03)
Coart No. 1.


C


T


0


And tho next entry*

■g) SS Cctuf. Eben as manager of polygal manufacture."

And thj next two entries concern the work on List, and tho next
entry undur L:

•1) Success report on polygal."

And wo not-; the next entry, 2h February:

■personal Staff Ross:

»2. SS Stubaf. F. Elschloin:

ILss order of 18 February, thoroughly discussed for inforaation
SS Hstuf. Dr. Rancher and Prof. Blcoo."

Now'hare wo definitely have Professor Blono.

In tho next entry undor 25 February, the last item

"Prof. Blono (by tolophoro): Advised of HESS order concerning
hia work at Daclicu and collaboration rith Raschor," which soems to
indieato to so that his work was a little bit acre than a casual
visit and chat with the notorious Raschor, and again tho next ontry
of 23-February:

■Roich Boscorch Council: (RPR); Dr. Orauo nrrengod a dis¬
cussion with Prof. Thiosson, Prof. Blcoc, Dr. Raschor.

"Consaissioning of Dr. Raschor to do Research. Experimentation
plan forclwrs. Introduction of discussion of I. Rtsoarch."

And then tha last ontrj on tho page, under 9 March: Hero wo

have Neff reports on possibility to initiate polygal production

*

(’bout 3000 daily) at Hoofelaayer, bcnlachtors, if factory is coded
for four months.

Tic turn now to tho noxt pego. Your Honors', page 38, tho entry
under 22 March. Naturally, that is S3 Hstuf. Dr. Rase her*

"3-jsinoss discussion, among other things polygal production.
Results of experiments with agar capsule®. Preparations for freezing
experiments during thu winter months hljh5. TX.-n.and for prisorer coo-
=and for SchlacaUrs.


- turn now to ttv. ontry of 23 ! Torch, tho second paragraph,

- 972 -


2 j£BU3i7-A-0J:-i3-ii-Cook 03)
to-Jl No. 1.


unitor 20CO to 220C:

■Discussion with SS Hstuf. Dr. Hnschor, oaong other things
cacpilation of reports an success nth poiygal."


>


- 972


2 January -4-3J5-13-?-C;=k

Court 1


C


The next entry, the 2i*th of lfercht
"Arrival Luatenaui

Sera is Dr. R&schur if th_ Ahnonarbo Slavers concornir*- hivself with
the availability :f quarters 't'T places uf .-manufacture, and wo have the
next entry i

■Arrival Brogans»

which y u will recall o reforroi t. in one tf thu cocu unts presontod
this surniri, : *

"Suaing up conforonco with SS Hstuf. Dr. Rasch^r, Noff, Bran and
Folix, . . ' •

■/orange onts f.'r hwginnirv. un.'urtakiru: at Schlachtors nnJ final 'lo¬
ci Inin { ,.f Lustonr.u, Instruoti ns f r buying cf sUa- cnul'rrna and
nnchinos."

and we have an .ntry f 31 Harchi
"Roich Research C v.-c li

"i izoirottwecht -is*- r lioff dollvors histories f patients undor
, ly.al treat unt an . r. rt*.

■Is Schlachtora c : nr.' - ill x,'in li April 19U.

"2. SS Hstuf. Tr, ii ctiur con ttku ov„r c ntrcl oxpuri.cnts since
SS Hstuf. Cr. Raa cher is r. t .rosontiy in a positi n tc is bo.

"3. Building ii .■-rf»x.» at Schlachters n t necessary if .tally out-
ut f 2-30X* tar Is st will ouffico f r thu present."

:.o turn a - - a-xt ;c j, I or H r, rs', pa«;o 39, in tho ^ddlo

i tho .a* un'.r 1 1* i. .1 , Ictwcon th h urs ,f 1315-1500 -

station R'-sch-rr

« _

/ -


- 973 -


Ccort Be. 1.


C


■Station dcackcr:

Status cf werk. Future work. Orders fer ccntinuaticn to the

present. SS fruiptannnsturubarsifuchr or. Dr. Ploottncr instructed:

•

icst pres sine task: pol.~al tests. Instruct! ns re continue tic ns
of iunsoncruber work. Jfcff reperta that p:lycal Manufacture at
Schlacters Is assured fer tiiroc tenths. Fella roperts on
experience in Manufacture and n first results obtained at Schlacters.
Tou uicht note tfr.t under tho sa x: date the last entry: "."cicb Lcdical
-sscciaticn, l'rof. Or. Slaac: Ccntinuaticn cf research work with Lr. itnsch
“rc-errinc t cxporliar.ts with rad_iuu in connection with the cancor roscarc
c ixluctod uixlcr the auspices of Dr. Dlono. Turn to tho next paeo bO bee in-
nine'at tho te. of th, peso: "Houtrwi axperinents, irof. Dr. Dl^no." .to
have under the entry 26 ..pril 1700 hrurs, tta third paragraph under tho 26t
of -prill

u *rcf. Blc::c (by telephone)

“1. *ers:nol revert t. . J S requested :n neutron ox..'ari.x:nts.

2. iCBcihlo c-plcyixnt of .lecher in Ho3solstortt would first roquiro
r three tenth's stu.ly of bacterl lo^y."

■to turn now to the next, to the la t o:\try cn this pago under 10th of i!;
Vxich .oscarc- Council:

\ j r- urattbo: rrusfjr roe a-re. v fron Dr. Itaschar te ,r. iloottnc

ilcjccti n cf p lyal m .;-etin by Cmapc."

The next ontry:

"SS Kaupts turuhuiri\iehrcr Zr. llcoctncr (by iclopeono)" an* tho noxt
is "(b)":

".'•3 a result - f arrest of Felix pxvductic n at Schlchtcrs has te bo

stepped.

(c) .ureafar jaiat repert :t .Xichsarzt S3.“

'S d,c Tribunal rill turn to tho next pa^e you sou an ther entry:

$

°‘3 bay. S5 Bca^totunfcumfttohrcr Dr. .-ilccttncr:

•depart cn


- 974 -


2 Ja&*i-CiS-lL-2-ihiTO3

Court ik. 1.


Still under the sane date rro ubvo down to the niddlc of the peso and *.
see tho entry:

■Kc, 3. SS Sturnfcannfuchrcr Fclachloin:

Dcvdcpccnt ?clix-runacnc?ubor-C^ch or," the eontlcucn tisat \:rkod cn '
this production. Then w: tevc ujv'.cr 26 lay the nrxc of Jr. Grauc appear!.'
&& 1 H. "ioctin research." ./o have another entry;

“SS I^uptam:isturnbrjinf\ichrcr Dr, Ploottnor."

■ d. 2. lectin research at tho Institute for Genian D.-stem Jtoocarch,
;!ralcau«. ...

That .xscarch Instituti >:i vs under tho defendant HenJlosor that no ro-

4 9

forred V previ uffly in th. c .:rcc ' t..io presented n. Then the last entr
f.ur under .loettner:

"C;.rrv:o f nr..e f-hlc.:' c-r;,ulatinc material ft-cu pclyyil fcc atyptojal
er s*„yptcral. u


.Jid the last uitr/ is quite an illuaiiiatin,- bit of infonaatir.n, ytur


Honor:


“Tc icchau idth SS Kauptanns ainjbannfuohror jt. Ploottnor and SS
UnUracharlUchrcr Dbor.. • •

1. Instructions end initiation f SS dntorsharf\ichrer i-Tiar.

?. .rawer cf inquiry c'nc_rni.ic p.lyral fr n Prof, -lostock ty ordor of
t-.o :onut7 ^ th. Gin;r-a Cciissiencr f'.r Jbdical an.’. ! >ealth !Intto>
C viAjsly Karl Drai-’-t. .lore tan iras Xarl Prand's ..cdica^.Scrvico for
Science an.' .'.osearch h '.e ! *r- the tfendant destock appearing in an inquiry
concerning ? lyrjal in .-re luct a ini’icatirc dearly null to us that all in-
* r “*- n f these .attars c 1 ' * c w.-a jiadc available to tho (fries of
-feich Cr.zissi ncr f tali'i end .■odic ol .attars. TUrn to tho next
:-.c !i2, the cat*3 f 15 June:

"iS Cb<.rGnxpp»cfuchrcr * :al:

*roducti a f p ly al ant! settlement with Felix."

-:=n at th: ttru f the >- o I aipht shew in passing tharo cn the ont
C| Junc » H . 16, the visit cf the SS Cfcerjmpponfuehrcr Centi tc tho

/ - 975 -


c

2 J.-n-..-«H5-li4-3-3urna

Ccort mo« 1. .

Zatccclo'jical Institute. There's Centi app_;wine fcr EIcdo faniliarizinc
hinsclf with the surn. oleines concerning these crininnl experinents. Turn .
tc tho next page US in the nlckllo '£ tro page, liil5 to lolu hours, ./c note
another entry.

■lectin in connection with Glutc.'iin-<xid yields an unoquivocal cffoct/'
The Tribunal will please turn t: tJ>o next jage 'hk; at tho top of tho
pace the entry:

*2h July. xTef. Dlooc (by tdopheno)

3y effective substanco in. blood oca^ulatinc notorial: Dyckorhoff' s
viov ccafiirod, that not pectin alone tat acid la offcctivo."

The cr.tr;- under 11 4»U£ust:

“Special quus tie ns Zntcudocleal J.atitutc:

/

“Special tasks .ref. Diana Cc not j>cmit cf any curtaiLcnt."

Hint's an entry quito c nfUsin’:* ycur Honor, What doos that r.can?
■Spocial tasks rref. 31eoc t net .xnxit cf any curtailnonts."

Tho next entry:

■SS BrigadeIViohror Hunzcl rjrl *'rof. Dlooo.

-iscussicn tf socrot special ttisko."

/o turn now to tho entry :f 21; August of the sane page:

a 2l Auust. SS Hauptaumstur: ’.vinfuchror -r. ilocttncr:

Heticcable healing qualities of a now pectin powder cllnic.nl testing

to follow/ Itcu Me. U. m >

• •

.'loaso turn to tie noxt pace* ycur Honor, pare 15. •*> soc under tho

*d' lo cf tho pace the ontry cf 6 October.

• 0

“ilcich .^search Council," “S3 -r. iloOttncr."

*tm to Itc. il . 2 :

"Aegisor;- Stuctcral os trade rflrfc".

“rat's a new nacc they iiarc era-.ted far polycal*which is aar tc rccciv.
■ Ic aork. ftirn now to tho entry under 11 October under tho second

;:arr<^.-nfc 4

"1^0$ to I6io0. Lindenstrosso:


- 976 -


2 Jrn-»^XS-llH*-»m»

Court He• 1.


Cenferenoo ldth xref. Jr. Dlcoc:

li. Questions ccnccmi^X! vari us special research and osperincntal
natters."

21 October on the noxt pace, yew -oner, Xton So. 32 a^ain uentions tii
status cf the Stryptcrai central snrx^ 'ic turn now this tine — this cci>-
plctcs the presentation t the blood coagulation dccuncnts. I rant to call
the attention of the Tribun-.1 that have, here established by tho affidavi
of ?chl and tic statements :f the 'fitnesses that o^xjriuonts on hurnn bcinp
:urc carried ut and death f'Ucsiod os a natural result of the uso cf tho
,,ly;;al dru*;s, jr. Slcvers noil outlined and all of tho note rial in this

• • I • • •

diary indicates clonrly tho ontiro jrocraj- and tl*> interest cf all r f tho
parties ccnc.m:d: the chraacht, tho Xich ixscarch Council and tl.o SS.

;.t this tLc -u-. Shlllcr, ry ass^dr.to, will present tho dccuncntary evido.
of tix plilosaon c^ariTcnts.


2 Jan«— 15-i-A-» * TT>-£arrcw
Court !fc. 1


C


V

SR. SHILLER: The ao-callod Phlepaon Experiments wero conducted at

%

EQchau Concentration Canp in 19U2 and 19U3. The experlaentees were
Catholic clergyman who wore involuntarily exposed to these experiments

I now ask the Tribunal to turn to Page 1*8 of the document book.

This is Document JO-856 which was previously introduced as Prosccutiom
Exhibit 125. If the Tribunal will look at the last paragraph on Page
lid I shall now proceed to read it.

"A third type of experiment was the ao-callod phlognon experiments
which were conducted in 191*2 and 19U3 on orders of Waslcr."

The words "Waaler" and tho numbers, in parenthesis, 111, 181, 319,
havo boon inadvertently omitted in restenciling this document.

"Tho purpose was to prove that tho worst diseases oould bo treated
\

by biochaaioal no the is (Roeord 307). The first trial was performed
without a doctor (Roeord 307). Healthy people woro selootod and infected
with tho pus of a phflo'jaon Jisoased parson (Record 11*1, 30?). Phflognon.
which is a diseaso of tho tissuo, oausos inflamation, is puo-fominc niv
my stroy o rpms in the body (Rooord 11*1, 768). It is no t nooossarily
localizer! at tha plaoc of J.nfootion (Record 186). If tho infootion is too
strong or the orpenisn too woak, a general blood poisoning ensuoa (Roeord
111). Phfloepon causes grjet pain (Roeord 111). The prisoners utilizod
for this experiment i-orn primarily priests of all nationalities, none of
utoa had volunteer. (-crd 111, 303). AfV?r tho infection, the victims
were not treated for txroo or four days until tho infections had fornod
(Rooord 11*2). Tb j . x th.n iv n sulptanliadde injections, bo'.fcr,
chard cals (pills of cilci’u: ; ho a,, ha to) or subjected to surgical operations
(Record 1.2, 155, 3b?).. Many ‘led and others becaa? invalids, (fcoco^d 11*2,
375, 376), The »rrl t rtr r .re conducted from tho succor of 19U3 until
tho sprin of 19L1* ^Record 306)."

I now ask tho Tribunal to turn to Pago 57,

In passin , I also call tho attention of the Tribunal to tho testimony
cf the ritnessos Stoerr an' Yieisrog on Pages 1*31 and 578 respectively in
tho Transcript. The Hitnosscs Stoarr an! Viehweg wall established the fac


- 978 -


2 Jar^-d5-2-«;-iT!>-ClPra*

Court Ho. 1


that rtcaeroua deaths occurred as a direct result of those experiments. T
Witness eStoorr clearly stated that $0% of the phlegmon experimentees wer
treated with sulpharrilard.de and the other $ 0 % treated with bio-chemical
aeiicaaents. S'toerr*s testiaony with regard to the phlegwm experiments
say be found on pages 578 to 58U of the Transcript*

I row offer in evidence Document H>4j09 as Prosecution Exhibit 2h9. T
is a report from Growltz to the Reichsfuehrer Heinrich Himmler, dated ?9
August 19U2. lour Honors, there is a typographical mistake hero. It ohoi
not be 19u3 in the document but 19U2«

"Relchsfuohrori

"With regards to previous rosults of bio-chonical treatment of so pels
and other casos of lllnass I be,* to submit the following provisional
report.

”1. The foUewin/ 10 casos wrro treated with bid-chemical rtnodics lr
the SS hospital Dacbnu in tho ti» mentioned in the roport. Bos id os sopti
processes, such 'isoasos wore treated, whoro a decisivo ohango for tho
hotter should bo achiovod by joans of bio-chonistry.


"Fhlofcjonous-Purulont procossos...••••••..17

Sepsis. 8

Furr.uclos air*, abcossos... 2

Infoctcd operational incisions... 1

liilaria....... 5

Pleural or^hr.sia. 3

Septic Endocarditis.... ^

ifcphrosis.......••••••• 1

Chronical sciatica... •••••«• 1

Gall-stones........... 1


■Accor lixv to the indications of the bio-chemistry applied to the
iff .-rent casos wc used tho following reaedlos:

'Potassium phosphor!cun D 6


r error, phosphari


D 6 and D 12
- 979 -


c

2 Jan^-l5-3-w'.«ATt-Karrcr
Court So# 1


Silicas

D 6

Sodiua ttiraticua

D 6

Calcium phosphoricun

D 6

Sodium sulfuricun

D 6

Magnesium phosphoricun

D 6

Sodiun phosphoricun

D 6

Calciua fluoratus

D 6

"The cases of sepsis wore mostly artificially provokod.


"Up to no* «o found, that tho unfavorable courao of the aovoro caaao
could scarcely bo stopped by moans of bio-cheaical reaodies, All sepsis
oasos died* The *:falcria oasao ware not Influenced by it.

"The casco of oxtonded purulent processes, with development of absoor
tho plouralorpyoata, tho soptic oirlooardltis, tho Nophrosis, tho chronl
sciatica an* tte 71 II stones showod no dofinito influonco frora bio-ohani
treatment. In as for as th<^ were conducted with positivo results they d
not show a different rosult fron tho onos, where, according to nodical
oxporionco, patients wore ros trie tod to stay in bod without rood vine an;
special treatnont.

"Tho iaprossion of a favomblo offoot on rnorbid oasos of sicknoss by
jio-ctonical no are provod to bo satisfactory in 5 cases only, U of which
wore canparativdy sli-ht. Tho 5th oaso involvod a 17 days* old child
dth s overo furunculosis. In this case an improvement sot in only a fo
lays after treatment had boon appliod. However, an orre* occurred in tho
experimental proccAiro, for at the be-innlng of tho troatront a eulform¬
al do preparation, was used.

"Tho strong fereation of pus, cloarly noticeable in a fow oasos, is
perhaps duo to tho bio-chedcal remedies applied.

%

"Tho frequently . ivon doses of su-^r which nainly consist of pure rd>
arir in th:- fore f blo-ctv-rdcal tablets probably promoted tho affect.

"Exporirents for orientation are to bo made. In a case of a joint nou
the ar.tisoptic potassiua ptosphorioua D 6 was -iven as a propria ctic
because the incision of the operation was greatly endangered by infoctio:


- 920 -


2 jaru-!5-J*-^.TIWarrcw
Court !fo. 1

In s?it« of that the tesperaturc rose up to 39° on the folic wine day. r
fne bio-ctonioal treatoent could not prevent appearance or breaking out
an infection, although potasaiua phosphoricun D 6 was given imnoiiatcly
and intensively.

■It is also to be noted, that very soon all tho seriously ill cases
flatly refusod to take bio-chaaioal tablets, because it meant a torture t
•hen, to take t ho tablote every 5 minutes, even at night.

■Finally it rust be said, that from a total nurber of U> cases there i
1 positive case and U positive oaaofl with certain reservations, contrary
tc 35 failures of vhEoh 10 ended fatally.

■The experiments in Daohau are being continued.

"Besides tho hitherto axistin,; program sjeoial attention is dirootod «
resoorch of twin oases in similar conditions, of which one will recoivo ;
Allopathical, tho socc: a bio-chonical troatant.

"(1. nar:inal note road* Rnvonsbrueck 3-9-19U2 signaturoi X.
Cobhardt)."

Sfaro w 0 fine* tho Defendant Oobhardt fully cognisant of tho work boinp
conducted at Dnohnu on phlo-pon experiments.

"2. In tho concentration ooap'o£ Auaobrit* throe typical onsos of
sc. sis, which developed trm phlopaons, woro troatod - according to pro¬
scription - frith Potassiun phosphoricun D U. In nono of thoso casos a
therapeutical influence on tho progress of tho disease could bo obsorvod.

All 3 c-ases ended fatally. • . ►

%

"The experiments are boiiv osr.tinuod. . (

(Signature) Grawits"

If the Tribunal ploasc, wo will now pass on to the next ctocunont as
this lecunont is self-explanatory and seera to nood no consent.

Tho n.jxt document is Document M>Jj 08 which the Prosecution offers in
evidence as Prosecution Exhibit 250. This is a lottcr from one Thoodor
Latte, former Senator SS Standartenfuohrcr. This Theodor Iauo would socn
be tho sar:*i 5tanlart3nfUchror Lauo who is given in tho testimony of tho
Witness Stccrr on Pago 578 of tho Trcnsoript as a visitor at Dachau in tl


- 981 -


2 Jaxu-0.5-^-^TT>-CarrCTr
Court So. 1


late suseer or fall of 19U3 at which time Laue Inspected the surfTical
-leparteent, Inspected the phlegmon wounds and scene to have given order;
with respect to treatment,

TBS RtSSUEyTi Counsel, one of those doc uncut books furnished the
Tribunal appears to bo defective. It scene to lack this document on Page
60. It lacks several pages.

MR. SHIUZRi* Lacks Docuacnt H>4X)8, your Honor?

JUEGE SSBRIWi is horo, Coureel, but it is on Pago 65.

MR. SHILLER« Sorry, I <tL<*nU hear your Honor.

JUHS SEBRIJCi •C-JiOS is Moro but it ie at Pa70 65. What do you have
ahoad of Pago 65?

KR. SHILLER 1 I have Document !X>-«09, your Ifanor,

JUEOE SSBRTO* Porlape I oan stroighton it out. You may go rirht ahoa

)P. SHULER 1 This is a letter fToa Theodor Lauo to tho defendant
Rudolf Brandt dated 12 Soptcnbor 19W.

"Door Conrode Dr. Brandt* - *

"In cccpll&nco with your suggestion a conforonco took plaoo yostorday
with Gruppcnfbohror Profossor Dr. Crawlt*, which, liko all previous con¬
ferences, took a very satisfactory course.

"Tho treatment of dysontary in aid stations and dispensarios, no I hod
it in Bind, would, in the opinion of GruppenfUohror Dr. Crawltz, neither
servo the forcoe nor the scientific roeoarch work which wo arc carrying o
I cannot but fully endorse the reasons given by tho Gn^>onfUohror. It
has been planned now that casos of dysontary will be treated clinically a
with tho competent bio-c heal cal roue dies back homo. A practical oluddat
of this problen should thoroby be achieved soon.

"Furttaraero I would like to pass on. to you the following information.

"From tho berinirLn:-' tho Gnr-penfuehror and I shared tho opinion, that
tha jxpjriBentnl work, prectisod on an extraordinary largo scale at Dacha 1
“'ouli be handicapped to a considerable extent, duo to the absence of any
nodical attendance and observation on the part of a physician who is well

- 982 -


Coart »>• 1


rcrsod in iMd trostnont, ». thorefor. hare been on the ■-»»

for such a fhjslelan all the lias, ilnne «» l««W °' *” bl °",

glaWl pfralelu.. Dr. Wchtlng.r of »*'». bo oonridTod for

this task, o*log to his adrsnood ftga.


$


- 983 -


2 Jan-A-KP-lS-l-Losser (H3)
Court :h. 1*


C


■Grup^onfuohrer Dr. Grnwitc, who takes great interest in tho
ecc plot ion of tho oxporiaents, imediately took care of my suggestions,
to assign Dr. eiosswattcr to Dachau; he is tho bio-chemical physician
of lagdafcurg, who has applied bio-choadcd treatment exclusivoly since
lii years. Dr. Xicsswettor, to all probability, will take up dutios
at Dachau for 6 nooks, beginning 1 Getefcor, provided tho Jtdical
Charier will give Dr. Kiosswottcr tho necessary loave. Tho Gruppon-
fnehror told as that ho would uso his entire Influence with tho »bdi-
cal Oisabor in order to got Dr. Xicss.uttor for this Important re¬
search work.

"I think that a decision for further'stops to bo taken can
only be o'do after tho work of Dr. Klesswettor at Dachau is taking
full offoct. Tho fact satisfied me most, that, in view of certain
f-.ilures which were registered at Dachau lately, Grupponfuohrer Dr.
Qrwiti has determined to draw up things fre m a purely scientific basis,
In .dor to thrust a cleaver first of all into the' matter of tho
ain;ral salt thorapy. I am inclined to think that this idea will bo
accepted with gerwral satisfaction, bocauso thoiv could bo no bettor
opportunity to carry it through, than Just in Dachau.

"Having thus found tho key to tho problem, that is, tho co¬
oper-1 ion of a physician woll rerSod in this branch of knowlodgo, I
beliova that success is assured.

"I should bo much obliged to you if you would soa. times inform
the Rcichsfuchrcr about the state of affairs."

"Hoil Hitler
"Yours respectfully
■Signature! Th. lauc"


- 961 -


2 Jan-A-SKF-lS-2-Lesser (Ifl)
Coart So. I.


C


On pages 533 and 5SJ, of tho transcript tho witness Stoerr testi¬
fied that case histories end fUvw? charts had boon compiled et Dachau
on occh inaato subjected to those phlegmon experiments. Upon being

Cl

>.skod whore these case histories were now, ho said that ho did not
know but that they aight hero boon token to Berlin by different visit¬
ors to tho camp and that ono of tho visitors was Dr. Grawitz.

I now offer into evidence Document Nucfccr NO-991, as Prosecu¬
tion Exhibit 251. This begins on pege 63 of ay documont book. Your.

•

Honors. It should follow the previous docuajnt regardless of tho
pagination in your docinont book. This document was found by tho
Prosecution raong tho personal effects of Dr. Grawitz in his homo in
Berlin. It consists of a case history of ono Phlegmon experiments,
together with fwver charts. I shall now road this case history which
shows clearly what this ono ux^rimontoe undertints

■Diagnosis Artificial Abscoss on loft Thigh and Right Uppjr Arm.

■?!ntorski Stofan, born 21 January 1909, Sch P 30300

"Admission: 10 iioveobur 1>U2...."
lour Honors trill noto that on pogo 72 of this <tocurcnt book, that is
n.ar tho ond of the case history at $ho beginning of the fovor charts,
the last date is April 12, 19fc3, shnring the duration of tho suffer¬
ings of this orvj exporiaenteu.

"Case History:

■Giiildhcod diseases not rox.iorod. »

■19U1 Typhus.

"Findings:

"33-ye‘r old patient with reduc-d resistance.

(Led and reck; negative.

Casts no indication of any active specific pulmonary process.

I

Heart: negative.


2 JC3-A-FX?-lo-3-Lesscr (
Court Mo. I.


\

u

■AbdoBons soft, no sensitiveness.

Extrcaitios: negative

/

Tcnperr.turo: 35* 8, Pulse: 60

height: 51 kilograos. Height: 1.63 actors.

"C our so

11.11. L2 At 1800 one cubic centimeter pus is injected into the left

thigh rig lit next to tho abdretor channel; that pus, called

• #

1 Purolin' contain, as microscopically proven, a groat nun-

K

bor of streptococci chains.

Lats-r on in tho evening tho patient conplainod about severe
hoadnebos and a pulling pain'In the left thigh.

12.11. U2 Around the injoction on tho loft thigh a slight swelling,

. together with tontkrnoss, appears.

13.11. U2 Continued swelling on the loft thigh ospocially on tho in¬

side. Pains mainly whon ooving tho loft log; soootims
shocking pain in loft thigh oven if in quiot position.

Roddishnoss of tho injoction area in alzo of c pale.

1U.11.U2 No cir-ngo.

15.11. U2 The whole left thigh greatly swollen. ft*cssuro sensitive¬

ness and pain grew in extent. persisting hoadachoc.

16.11. L2 On the injoction area on the loft thigh o pustulo of tho

slxo of a pja appaaxx. Otherwise no changes on tho loft
thigh. rV.ticnt conplains about sovoro shoeing pains.

17.11. U2 The whole loft thigh roirins greatly swollen. On soao

small areas arouid th- injection area roddishnoss appears.

A ponqy-sisad, pus filled pustulo apjxarod over tho skin
puncture. Strong prossuro sonsitivenoss on the whole inside
of luft thigh.

13.11. U2 No changes.

19.U.U2 Superficially ix> narked changes on left thigh. Spelling grows

toward the kmx. The petient ccnplains of severe shocking

%

reins. Tte loft log to be Lsaobilizod today in the Volknann


- 936 -


2 Jan U7-A—-AA-lS-U-Le ssc r (SB)
“curt So- 1-


nncture on the left inside of the thigh brought- about 1_U
cubic ccntiaotcrs of syrury s, 3 cubic centiactcrs of
which wore iaxdiatcly injected in the right era intraven¬
ously.

2011 .U 2 Spelling and slight reddening of tho injection area on left
thigh retKimd. Patient fools strong, shocking pains.

21.11. U2 Pictures.

Slightly off niddlc, in tho Biddle of the loft thigh, wo
find a bumpy growth with naxcre.tion of tho opidomis cni
roddishnoss tho.size of a half dollar piece. Fron thj old
puncture syrupy pus oozes.

$

Tta left thigh is swollen in its entire circunforcnco.

Under othor anesthesia an incision is made in tho middle of
the inside of the thigh; firtter ponotr-.tion was porforaod
with a surgical instrument. Approximately. 250 cubic centi¬
meters of yellow syrupy pin was found. On tto back side of
the loft thigh a counter incision was made; both incisions
n-ro connected with rubbor cathotoro to enable a pus dr a in-
age. Afterwards dry dressing and Volkmnnn splint were appliod.

22.11. U2 Tho swelling on tha loft thigh receded slightly. Slight

drainage of brer-n pus mixed with blood oozc6 from the incis¬
ions. Pressure sonsitivorv-ss on tho loft thigh remains only
in the vicinity of tJSo incisions. Rigut


>


2 Jen 47-s—* jJL-lS-lK-Lossor

Court Ho. 1


lower am is swollen and pressure sensitive In the
lower half, ospecially on tho insido whoro it shows
slight re«.di shoes s too.

Therapy: Log bath, Riwcnol flushing, drnlnago, dry
drossing, Vollrxnn splint..

23.11.42 Continued slight roceding of tho swolling on left
thigh. The incisions emitted froely yollow-hrown
pus nixed with hlood. Necrotic tissue ia likewise
discharged. The right uppor r.rm ronnins swollen in

tho lower half; is slightly roddonod and prosnuro

0 \ . . . . • •

soncltlvo.

Thorapy cron previous'dry.

24.11.42 Suporf j dully no ohnngos on loft thigh. Slight dis-
cicrgo of oua fro.! t)o incisions. The pationt com¬
plains about prim 5.ii tho right upporVrin. Wot com-
pross is 'coin? appliod.

25.11.42 Slight swolling of loft thigh still porcoptiblo and
ro-chos down to tho knoo. On prossuro, thin,
yollou-groor. puirorcont pus discharges from tho in-
cision. S nr. 11 pr.rts of n erotic tiesuo r.ro ntlll
boin.g disclr.r' od likewise.

TScrrpy: Log brth, IUvmol flushing, drainrrro,
(iiuh*--:r cath.otors r.ro to bo shortonod today), dry
dressing, Vollmnnn splint.

26.11.42 The. incision on tho loft tJigl discharge sono pus.
Tho ri ' c u.j.v r am ror. mn srollon and roddonod.

Pit ctu..ticn is not yot tangible. Tot conprossos to
tho ri • t uppor a ri* still being applied; in

order to avoid deefc’*' 5u.a the pationt gofcs . rv.ssngo
of his V.ck with ’h). Ion in ointuent. T! o pationt

co pli ivp about ho dachos. Start of in torn: 1
tl- r py. Tho patient *ots today 6 grr -s T5>rtin


2 J:.n 47- < -*b/.-lS-2a-Lcssor
Court ro. 1


C

in travonoualy, fi grama Albutttd orrlly, 3x1 cubic
centi-.ot^rs C: rdiaxcl Syrtpr.tol aubcut.r.oously.

27.11.42 -x«ft tM^- and taco remain slightly swollon. Prcesui
sensitivity around the wound. Only sligl t, yollow-

. brown pussy disch; rgo from tb~ inciaicn. Ibe swell¬
ing cr. tho ri'oiit upper r.m rocodcd slightly; tho
patient feels loss pcin on tils spot. Gonoral
fuolirg'TJf tlu patient scorns to have inprovod in
the last couple of days, ut patlont conplains
about ihsorxlc. ..na *ios? of appetite.

• 7y.or.vr rs on previous day.

28.11.42 Supcri cif l“iy. nb .r.ar’.ccd changes of loft thigh, 'fair
lew-brctm pve dr ins iron incici'-rn. On tho lowor
or.d cf th%. ri'J t up;oi am .'n o*»" si sod strolling

• ppoars on the bonding aurfr.co; s''in ie roddonod,
id-1 t flueti*: ticn of the strolling is noticor.blo.
aider Cllor-oti’*l .nostfcosia inciaicn is being

i clo, S; ri;.v pus drains frooiy. Iodoforn gauto
strly nd rubber cat] otor .aro introduced; rftor-
n..rcls dry Ure; slag. Tho nl olo loft arm is i *v.o-

ii 1 ) a d. i>s.r ? 12 'gr as lib:-.tin lnfcr wonously,

G gr-ns . ibucld cr lly, nd 3 x 1 cubic contl.joturs
C. rdxc.se 1-Sy; v trl rubeutcnoously.

2S.H.42 ioft t>-i"l ar.txnucc to remain slightly swollen.

Slight disc] nr \ of r \m pus fre : th incision.

* r 1 '

. rvroiiir. -f tic right uppur r.r : receded slightly.
' , incision dr ir.s freoly 1 c. vy reddish b r0 r;n pus.
f. . cpidor.is of thv oiso of . p In is injocted
nromd the^ wound.

:h«.r py ?n th,. left thigh flushing of tho wound
vit? Hiv nol. drain:go, dry drosring, VoLVinn
splint. Intern ily as on previous day.

'-•u.42 c c' r- % crapy ..s cn previous days.


I


c


2 Jen 47-

Ccurt Ho.

1.12.42


2.12.42

3.12.42


A-”JL.-15-3a-Lea acr
1


Left thigh only alightly swollen but heavy drr.inr .30
of 3 ruun-yellow putrr.scent pus frop. tho incision.
Ki-bt upper r.m only slightly awollon. She wound
dieobargos but vory little thick yollou pus. Ho
P'ir.e, no pressure eor.sltivity.

P. tiont run. ins slightly worJeonod.

I* errpy: Externally? Loft thigh and right uppor
on r.c on provicua dry.

Int-mr. 117 : 12 -rr is Tib:.tin lntrr.vonously rad. 6

gr.iia i -1 'uoid orally, . .-

; o cl rage. Tt -rr.py : -a on proviouc dr.y.

Swelling on loft di.^ rorrlns. Tbo xnciaion on the
lr.sido dr.in'a after sounding with the Komrangc
ho.-.vil: dirty brawn, t)ln pus, uix^d rith blood
rnd of foul odor. Tho wound on tho right uppor
rr • dr-ins «til; slightly. For qulckor
opiti elir.^ .tion cod liver oil ointriont ia r.ppliod,
'ftor py: Ot} orrtieu r.a on previous dr.y.


-990 -


2 ; "Wk-JP-17-l-Groa e

Court No. 1


C


.5.1 2.12


6.12 *12


■7.12.1*2


8.12.12


Hoary 'rainaic of pus free the incisions on left thifh otherwise
no nark-’- changes.* Ri_ht Upper are shows still heavy injection
of the epiCursis in the vicinity of the incision.

Therapy: Ext*mslly« as cn previous Cay.

Internally: 6 l . Tibet in i.v. aivi 6 g. AlbuciC orally,

3 x 1 cc Carvliasol-Synpatol s.c.

During th. ni ht suICanly twavy bleeding frc« the incision of lof-

t •

thl?h. No «tcppr.> eouK booehiovc<* with rossinfis.

Th, wounl cn tte. an is without pus an' Crains only slightly.
Epith.li-.saticn sfrts fro- the el&cs.

Therapy, Int molly: 12 ". Ubuci'l orally, 3 x 1 cc
CorCintol-Sy or.tol s.c.

Ext-mclly* Tampons flushin of the wuncls, -’ry ’rossi

splint.

.^ain h.av> ’clce ln fro- tho incision on left thr h. Unrtor otho
anesthesia t’x v.nr. saphena -a. na is locate ' throu h the, ol-'
incision an*. ticC ??. Thu3 ato PP'‘ u of blc “ rtfV ' " CB 3chiowod -
af terwar 'a intro uctien of a -.'rain, partial tanpon.ation, Cry

rossinf, splint. .

0 ■ . •

Internal Therapy': on pr-vious clay.

linrke - swcllin of the left thi*h, in the ni-le, as conparoC to
yostjr’-y. The left tawo shows slipht swelling . No of ini to
iaprove^nt cl s^n-ral f^lin s . Little sl-ep, no appetite.

The wcun‘8 ... th. ri ht upper ara heal weU.

Therapy: Externally ina o, taaponation, 'ry Crossing,

Volksanr. spline.

Internally: .*s cn irovi us -'ay.

Externally nr changes on left thi-h. The roun* rn the insiCo sti.
open. Th_ patient explains about pains in tho loft knee, which
shews A strer. seollan'. The left calf is swollen likewise in it,


upper half.


- 991 -


! • ’


Therapy: Externally cn loft thi h, flushin. of the wound with

*

Rivjnol, drain?- c, toepenadon, dry drossin: .• As of today only
dry '‘ressir. to jo Applied cn ri,ht upper arx*

Internally: As on pr-vijus day.

9.12. U2 Slight pus dischf.r c frea thu frontal incision of loft thi^h.

The swell In zt thu loft Jcnco '‘isappeared 2 Laost completely; P»4n
in the knoo an' calf inprovod likewise.

Thorapy: Externally: cn previous day.

Int-mally 1 ..a cn previous day with 20 n;- Cortiron i.n.

10.12. U2 No external chon os on left thUh. Sli’ht pussy dischnree only

* . .* % . . • • •

froo incision.

Therapy: Externally: Flushin- of the wound with Rivnnol, dry
dressing, splint. Tha woun'a or- now without insertion.

Internally: 12 . Albuoid orrlly, Jx lee Cardicsol-Synpatol s.c

20 n.;. Cortiron i.n.

11.12. h2 No chanfco. Therapy ns on previous day.

12.12.1:2 No chan*-©. Tharepy rs on previous day.

13.12. U2 loft thi. h shews still ali. ht swollin- in tho ai "lo»

Little trclMt o today frea tho incision. Tho patient canpLalns
about all...it pci ns in loft lof directly below the knoo. Tho
woun"* cn the ri ht upper ara is ccopletcly hasLd. Tho prttiont
rconina woak. The tcjpxjroture reaains constant, nL-i-st normal;
pulse still irr~ ul.ar, ~n' at tires, incror.se' rate.

Therapy: . Extomnily: Dry .'rossih,: nn f splint on tho tft thiph.
Internally: 12 E - -l:ucid orally, 20 a Cortiron i.n.

U'-12.^ Tho incision cn left si !c drrinad today enly sli htly. Tho pation'
ain c ©.-.plains a ut sli ht pains oclow the knee. The knte it sol;
is sli htly swollen .n tba inside.

Thcrapjy: As on previous day.

35 * 12 -u 2 Ficturesi

T&> incisions of the loft thi'h show but snail sccivtions every


- 992 -


2 Jar^-JP-17-Xlro88
Ccurt Kc.l


C


15.I2.U2


20.12 ,U2


21 . 12 .u 2


day. Continue* opitlvjiiez-.tion an'* mco rcaolction on the edges

%

of the voraV Dry dressings are a pplied now only every other -’ay.
Therapy continues externally with dry dreasin a an* volknann aplin
Intornallyi 12 g. ^lbucid orally, 3 x 15 dr. Cardiatol, 20 ag.

CortIron i.n.

f •

.. alight swelling ia ncticoablo on t he loft leg; it atrotchoa
free han^-wi 'th cjovc the knee all the way d.^wn to tho ankle.

On the in -n’ outaiA. of tlio left thirh cbdut a hand-width above
tho knee, aU ht pressure Sonaitivity was felt. The incisions
on tho left thigfx are free cf pus. . ,

No epcSial cc-eplainta.

Therapy« on provi vua dry.

No changoa.

Therapyi ixt.rr.-llyt la on previous dry. Intornallyi 12 c»
.d^uci-* orally, 3 x 1 cc Cardiatol-Syapatol s.c., 20 ng. Crotiron
i.a y * .

Only vury sli ht swollin. noticeable on loft thi h. No

coaplainta. The incisions aro freo of pus, an aa of today, only

evory other dry droase with bcrlc acid cintount.

Tho volkaann splint ie to bo roaovo-*. Intomal therapy a a on

. •

pruvi .ua day.


l


- 993 -


2 jaD-fflH-17-la-Groa* (»)
Coart Uo. 1.


C


29.12.1*2


30.12.Is2


1.1.1*3


12 . 1 . 1*3


15 . 1 . 1*3


Daring the last couplu of days no narked changes wire noticed
on tho loft thigh. On the wounds, free of js, prolific
granulation is noticod. Tho patient still fools rather
weak. Ho followed during tho last couple of days thu ther¬
apy as outlined on 20 Docaabor 191*2. A slight tcnporcturu
incroaso was noticod during tho evoning hours of t'.a 26 ,

27, and 28.

Tho pationt is frc-e of fowor. Ho swelling in tho loft log.
Tho rounds of tho incisions a.ro clean and dry. Sooa parts
show prolific granulation. No special complaints. Tho pat¬
iont foe la rcsnrkably hotter.

Thorrpyi Internally* 20 g. Tibntin i. v., 20 ng Cortiron
i.a., 3 x 15 dr. Cardlazol.

No ohsngo.

Therapy* 10 g. Tibatin i.v., 20 ug Cortiron i.n., 3 x 15
dr. Cr.rdiatol.

During tho last 12 dry* the wounds on tho left thigh
hoalod ccaplotoly. Tho wound is without dressing. Ho
swelling noticeable on tho left log. Tho pationt Tools
well end spends a couplo of hours overy day out of bod.
Tuaporaturo and pulso oro fairly noxnal.

Tho status of tho pationt continues to improve ronarkably
during tho last couplo of drya. No ccnplaints nhatsoovor.

He is to bo released free tho hospital to light dutj^ as of
today.

Sumary

After injection with Furclin an abscess forac-d on tho loft
thigh. Likewise ‘foraod an abscess cn the right uprx.r ara
after an i.v. Purclin injection. Both abscesses were opanod.
On the loft thigh largo and doep-s-nted nocrcscs developed.
Blood vessels were destroyed. Tfcoro ware strong hcaorrhagus;
ligation of tho vena saphena negna had to be perfer* .ad to


- 991 * -


2 Jan-£3E-17-l£-2ros» (IB)

Court So* 1#


bring about a etopfcgc. Tt» wounds continued to dischargo
pea for soT3ral weeks. Internally large doats of Albucid


2J’0-3B-17«2a-OroM (Jfi)

Ca.xt Sc* 1«


C


13.2. U3

l*».2.!i3

23.2. U3
3.3.U3
15.3.10


30.3.10

6.UL3

12.1-.U3


it in nero adrinistcrcd. Tho c loaning cf the incisions pro¬
gressed coapontivoly quickly as ccnpnrod to thet of bio-
cbcnioally troatod >-tionts. The petiont recovered fully
and is again available, for w>rfc.


Sulfonnnidc « s given during the course of tho diseases as
follows;

Tibetin i»v« 121; g

Albucid orally 336 g


" Appendix

Several nocks after discharge tho patient was roadaittod.
Diagnosis; Dctcrus

Urinot Character opal, bilirubin; positive, sc*! loucocytes,
sooo opithclial cells, bact. /, aucin, oxalate /.

Bilirubin in blood so run 1.6 ag. %, Direct oxanination neg¬
ative.

Bilirubin in blood scrun 2.65 ng %•


Bilirubin in olood scrua 1.8 eg

Tclcata-Ara positive. Gross coapcreti™ reaction to T.A. //
Bilirubin in blood scrun lj.0 eg %. Thero is a distinct
swelling of tho liver without jrtssurc sonsitivonoss, and
strong yellowish discoloration on tho vholo body. Ho
special con paints. leap-rat urc and pulso remain steadily
nornal.

Bilirubin in blood so run 1.5 ng %, Takata-^ra /.

Bilirubin in -lood serpn 3.U5 as %• The patient gets insulin


glucose and is put on a diot.

The jellow discolcration cf the skin aiaost completely dis-

s

appears-^ There is but a slight discoloration of tho sclera,
f.cr rcl condition is good.■ ^

. SCHUlSt: T_it is the case hissory of a fortunato experi-


2 (*®)

Court So. la

mu&om nbo racororod, Hjr aeeoclato, Mr. Haxly,
TidoM- Of the LCST or nu*t-ord gaa oxporiaonts.


now prosont the


»


- 995 A -


2 to-fflB-17-3c-Groaa (B5)

Court Bo# 1.


f


MR. HARDY: It this tins the Triburcl should have Doeuomt
Book 13 in its possession. Hinbcr 12 deals with tho Typhus Expiri-
-cnts. TTo will deviate froa the noraal course and take this up at
this tiao.

Prosecution chdrgcs in its indictacnt defendants Karl Brandt,

Handlosor, Blocs, Rostock, Oobhardt, Rudolf Brandt, and Sievera with

• *

special responsibility for and participation in the I£ST oxporirtfnts.
These experiments woro conducted between Soptoabsr 1939 and April 19U5
at Snehsanhausen, Nnttwoilcr, and othor concontration canps for tho
benefit of tho Go man Anted Purees to investigate tho nost offoctivo
troatmnt of wounds caused by LCST gas. LCGT gas is a poisonous gas
coer.only known as uustord gas. Wo shall soo in a noaont that thoso
experiments, as aany of the ethers, wore tho diroct enuso of death.

I refer to page nuebor one.

THR HlSSIDnOT: Boforo wo jxocc-d with tho reading of these
document8 tho Tribunal will recess.


- 996 -


2 jor.-j.^ry-Jb-OCG-13-l-Ninabaclc (IB)

Court So, 1. _

.• c

D5U >»r-.v’.TTIB: Hr. Frosidont, tho dociraant NO-372, tho affid¬
avit, of Rudolf Brandt which ia to bo presented, has been sworn, liko
i series of other documents and affidavits, before a United States
civilian. It cannot be seen if that person is entitled to give an
oath. In the 3i» docuaent book, under NO-590, an affidavit has been
sworn to before a Canadian civilian, and the affidavit NO-531 has been
sworn to before a neutral civilian.

Now, it should be shown that all these persons are entitled to
Ki*> an oath because otherwise the oath is not properly administered.
Therefore, because of the lack of proper inforaation I object to tho
presentation of this docuaent.

IE. HARDY: Kay it please the Tribunal, in answer to this ob¬
jection, I wish to state that the problem exists here in that tho em¬
ployment of translators is one which requires employment of French
civilians, Swedish or Swiss civilians in ordor to havo our documents
properly translated.

In the first case I ea not familiar with tho nano Standring,
but I assume ho is one of the Swiss civilians working hore in the
translation section, and he is duly authoritod by tho Chief of the
Section, Hr. Hillard, to certify a translation.

Nov, it will be absolutely impossible for aryono, other than
the original translator to certify a German document or a French docu¬
ment, whichever tho case may bo, to be tho official translation, other
than tho translator hlaaelf. That caso exists throughout. Howevor,
to relieve Dr. Servatius, in connection with tho second docu-^nt ho
mentions, K0-590, the Prosecution will not read that hero at this
tine inasmuch as the witness, Ferdinand Boll, himself will take tho .
witness stand tomorrow. Ke have been able to bring him here to Num¬
bers and duo to that fact we will not read that affidavit into evidence.

However, tha others are substantially correct to satisfy tho
Director of the Language Division and are official employees of that
division. Hr. Favarger, in the last docuaent, is an employee of Uie


- 997 -


2 January -A-OX-13-l-Ninabuc!< (!3)
Court So. 1.


Prosecution, a French civilian, and he has conversant knew ledge of
the French and English languages.


2 January-A—D J;-l3-2-Kinabtick (Ifi)
Coart to. 1* (


THE HIZ3IDZVT: If I understand the objection of couneel, it is
not to the certification of the translation but to the person Who pur¬
ported to administer the oath to the witness. The first docinent,
Nicber 'JO-372, signed Rudolf Erandt, was apparently sworn to by Walter
H. Rapp, and no authority for li-. Rapp's administering an oath appears
on the document. If I understand counsel's objection, it is to that

.

point.

1!R. HARDY: Well, again on that point, air, wo have Walter H.
Rapp, Chief of the Evidence Division of Offico Chief of Counsel, duly
appointed to act in that capacity by tho Chiof of Counsel. Wo also
have, in that last affidavit, Eavarger, who is an enployee of tho Of¬
fico of Chier of Coutsel, a neutral civilian, who is authorised as an
lnvostlgator as well as a translator and research analyst to tako trips
on behalf of tin Office of Chiof of Counsel, and on such trip ho ob¬
tained this affidavit,

• TIE riGSIDE Ti In that connection, in tho first place, Ur.
Rapp's title does not appear after his naai whon ho adainistorod tho
oath, and in tho socond place tto Tribunal is not advised, so far as
I know, of the authority of one holding Ur. Rapp's position to admin¬
ister an oath. Certainly whon anyano signs an affidavit as having
been tho person administering tha oath, the title of his offico which
empowers him to acnir.ister that oath should appear upon the face of
the affidavit.

?3. HARDY: Tha- is qxitc correct, your Honor, if you ijfmt, I
will have those affidavits rectified to moot with your requost. How¬
ever, I don't believe we have followed that throughout in tho other
affidavits that wo havu presented. I am not sura, I think we have
followed this system rontinualvy ho re.

THE rHESIDEtfr: This is tlx first time the natter has boon
called to tto attention of the Tribunal by any objection on the port
of counsel for tho defense.

!fi. HATJTY: Well, as I say, I can have tie documents altered

- 993 -


2

Court


-Sinabuck (13)


So. 1.


r


by )tr. Rapp and -a*. Farerger if the Tribunal so requests.


TH2 FR


Have you 2 t^r other affidavits that arc proper¬


ly verified by -he person atfainiotcring the oath, which you can pro¬
ceed to read while


998 A -


2 J-Tir-ry*,.-: JG-l8->3inabuck
Ccurt Sic. 1


c


thcso are bclnc ccrrcctod?

KB. HA39T: Ko, I an sorry, 7 cur Ilcncr, I don't. This will interrupt
the continuity of this presentation, without rcodinc at this tine the affi-
avii of Hade If Brandt, and in tie .vor.t that the Tribunal so socs, we wcul
request an adjournment until tenerrov u rninj;.

T!H KESUZiT: I u aro prepare. <tj shew proper authcrity on tho part

rf one hldinc '-• Hnpp'a positi n and of the cthor pars ns vh • have adolni:

• •

crod dicsc oaths ta lawfully under tho Ales cf law coverninc the eporotierv

of tala Tribunal, oohiinistor an oath ta 3 person?

iU H.J1Z: I will have to investigate tho situation, ycur Honr. At

this tii’.o X an net prepared to answer.

.... E..17T—.: !tr. irasi lcnt, it is iv opinion that If any fficial cf

the Prcsocuticn is entitled to raoivo an affidavit f a witness and to

certify it, tiiea the sow priviic'o th uld also bo oxtondod to dofonso c<-unr.

an’ f r the further rcas n, ecauao ;cncmlly aftar all, it is boliovod that

tho defense is n t tc rccupy a -;crsc petition than the Prosecution.

I nako this surest! n r ta.- r. son that taday, u : >.n return free

•

ly Christens vacati n I have £ ur*/. a -alm^ cf tho Tribunal which . re!ere us

*

defense counsel, that . aro > h* - a idavits by \fitnc 33 cs certified cith.
by tie Londrat, that is the political facial in Germany, cr y a It cal
nny r if it is a ease f doali.i with a e-all cr city, or by the chiof uayar
if it si; ul 1 be a lar -r cie: r y tho president ef a civil crurt, or by
the c .oietant rcprcscata.tivc .f taie -nerican Military Govornuont.

>


2 J&nuary-A-CJC—19-1-Forrin (IS)
Coifft So. 1.


C


I will have to correct nysclf. It 4a oven stated in the ruling,
»and by the competent representative of the American Military Oovcrn-
*nt". Gentlemen, I state quite oponly that I an not able to carry
out this ruling; and I furthermore state that I shall not oven try to
do this bocauss with this I would nakc demands upon tho witnossos
with which I cannot burden tho witnesses. Your Honors, may I just
give you soqq brief reasons for this? It is not pleasant hero for a
Gernan. If lnAfc a trial he is called as a witness, tho witness
has to bo afraid that as a rttnoss he will be naacd through tho press
an* every Goran today is afraid that his nano will bo at all oontionod
in connection with such a trial. And this foar is not quite without
reason booauso in tlw first trial, tlD big Humborg trial, wo have
soon cases wtoro witnesses wore arrested after they had boon callod
tore as witnesses; and those c-sos have also been oontionod in tho
press. If any of the present dofonso counsel today conaunicato with
a German and request hia to submit an affidavit to us, in nine out
of ten eases we can count with certainty that ho will try to avoid
this, and he will answer, or ho can tell us oithcr "I do not knew
anythin about tho matter," or "I do not want to have anything to do
with the ret ton because I value cy liberty sere then tho ton or
twenty defendants." And perhaps if he is a polite man, then ho will
add, "1:111 you ploaso turn to tho colleague Ifcior or Huber, porhaps
he aay be in a better situation to know sodo thing about tho subject
than I an." . *

Sow, by virtur of th, riling of tho Court, we ask tho witness¬
es that first of all they arc to go to sooc high official of tho Ger¬
man authorities. Already that in itself in many cases, perhaps, re¬
quires a trio that nay talcJ hours and waiting for hours until tho can
can h- hoard, rihon ho has finally finished with that, then ho hr.s
to do a second thing bccau6c no m bo has to look for hours until ho.
con find tho ccontent official of IMlitaiy Gevernaont; and thon
perhaps as is eoa-.on practice, he can t>: Sunt from ono offico to the


- 1000 -


c


2 January-A-iWO-19-l-?errln(h3)

Court So. 1

othor and finally in the evening he cay finally know that
he has not found the competent official of Military Govern-

V

sent.

Gentlemen, I ac convinced that If I asK any Oorcan to bur¬
den himself with anything like that. If I request him to
fulfill these conditions, then I 'd 11 not bo able to obtain
ono single affidavit.


- 1000 * -


2 J rureary-A-D J3-19-2 -pcrri n (»3) /"

Covt No, 1, ^


Gcntlonon, lot ae put sysclf into his position. If any defonso
couisol in any cth~r trial would write to ao and would ask nc for an
affidavit, do you really boiicvc that 1 would perhaps run around hero
in Himb-rg for hours and would try to find sore body who would be in
tto position to sign ay affidavit? I would not do it. And anengst a
huidrod people to whee we- aay write perhaps 99 will refuse to do that
also. Your Honors, I would now requost you to consider thoso misgiY-
L-gs which I havw stated free thj oxp-rionccs of our practice and tho
expert one os of tho first trial, and I ask you to consider thoso points
oreo acre; and prxticularly with tho view to the faot if perhaps it
would not still be possible to find a noro simplified fora of obtain¬
ing affidavits.

I personally foci that the procedure in tho first Nuroborg

tew

trial has really prorod itself * worthwhile, nearly, that tho affidavits
arc certified by tho d: force counsol who has to presont it. Aftor all,
tto aiain purpose for sutoitting affidavits is that tho person who
8* v '- s it, that in thj witnuss, Imeus that he would be Jallod or In¬
prise red if ho-gftvo any false tostinony. It is wy opinion, Your
Honors, that if the defonso counsel who, by virtuo of his offico has
to work huru, has to certify the. signature with his own nano, this
p.rhaps should also s-iffico in tho pro sent trial Just as it sufficed
in th. first trial. Defense counsel naturally an. prepared to do
everything which the Tribunal .iay decide on in order to bring this
tri-.i to a 3nooth and fair conclusion, but'what is demanded fron us
nox » 3 for rjyself cannot cccply with it, and I doubt if the othor
■1-fonac counsel >'ill not finally occu;y tho sane point of view as I.

TK2 H’lSIDSl'Tr Tho Tribunal will recess until 9*30 o'clock
tomorrow naming at which tix counsel for tho Prosecution may present
• a. authority of tho officers who have tolccn the affidavit to ndnin-
~ 3 *" r oath, and tho natter suggested by counsel for tho defense.

Tricunal has no eLsire to place undue burden on counsel for tho
^f-ns. preparing their deforis- and that matter will be tak^n under ,
s^ious ccnsi on by th. ::


c


3 Jon-SSs- 1-1-fostcr (13D)
Court Ko. I


C GT.ZZTH ~C:-Y

Official transcript of tto Tricon Mi l ita r y
Tribunal in tho ratter or tho Uni tod States
of Africa, against Rcrl Srendt; ot al, •
defendants, sitting zt Iterators, G^raany,
on 3 January 19U7, 0930, Justice Boals
presiding.


TIC ITJEHIL: Tho Honorable Judges of I'ilitrry Tribunal 1.

•

Military Tribunal 1 is now in Session.

Ood savo tho United States of Anorlca and this Honorable

Tribunal.

Thero trill bo order in tho courtrocc.

TIC HCSIDENTt Aro tho defendants ell prosont in court?

TIC i'fjjUAL: All tho dofondants pro present in tho courtrooa.

TIC .■RC3UT: Tho Socrotary-Conaral trill note tho prosonco of all
tho dofondants in tho courtroon for tho record.

Tho Prosocution '.*11 procood.

IZl. I-'.IDT: i’ay it ploaso tho Tribunal, objoction Itas boon raised


by tho dofonso ccunsol as to tho admissibility of Document 1)0-372
which is an affidavit signed by tho dofondant Rudolf Brandt boforo TTcltor
H. Rapp. An attorrjt lias also boon ado to objoct to tho adrdssibility
of Ixs other affidavits sworn to by Ferdinand I loll and Rcno-Coloifcln Ungnor,
7.:eso aro documents H0-390 and (0-081 respectively. Tho objection to tho
admissibility — 1

TIC PUCIOTHi: Cn which pago of t!io document book aro thoso found?


i£ lTCST: Pages 58 end 62, Tour Iloncr. *

The objection to the admissibility of thoso two docurcnts is, of
cotirso, preonturo as they havo not beer, offered in cvldonco. As I under¬
stand it, tho to tho Rudolf Rraadt-effidavit raises tho quostion

of tho etthrtity of ?mpp to ad;e..;istor an oath. It is thoroforo

pertinent to inquire a stabsmt *ir'er oath is a preroquisito

to admissibility in thi? ihS^cr.co. If so, it will then bo r.ocossary to

/ 1002


3 JaiwlXEC-l-l-Fostor (ISD) .

Court I!o. I *

C

consider whether I!r. Rapp possessed authority to edTinistor an oath.

c suirit first that tho admissibility of the Rudolf Rrandt affidavit

• *

does not depend upon an oath. Article 7 of Ordinance Mo. 7, statos,
and I quo to, "Tho Tribu na ls shell rot :o bound by technical rules of
o7idonco. They shall adopt and o :ply to the jp-catost


>


1002 .’.


3 JaaMKI5-l-2-ro3tcr (15D)
Zcvrt So. I v


•«3 sib la ertcnt orpoditlon or. non-technic&l procedure and shell admit

y evidence sifcich they deen to ' .a e probative value. n

c aee, therefore, the cast of admissibility o’ ovidenco is iiethor

■r rot it has probative value. ISckt, tiio objection has boor, made to an

' fi'.rrit signed by c defendant. To subuit that a statement signed by

a -rson follcttSSg bis arrest l'.a3 substantial probative value, nhother

x;orr. or unsroro. This is very cl . nr ly an ad.dsslon against interest

Mc!l is entitled not only to be ad.ittcd ' ut is rorthy of considerable

wight. do have hod very little ti.o to t: rch ta volrudnous records

of eoao nubbor 1 dor the ET on this air.t, but -.re have found a nurtbor

of statononts signed by one or the other of the defendants which '.rcro

cilttod in evidence although «£n. rcr.t^ 'dti-out objection, it this

tine I hove co das f the so o dibits, ono *.ritb U& ‘bhibit ilo. 9 tf.ich

is on affidavit of Julius 'treichor, rrorn tc by Julius >troic!«or and

• •

approvod by rttomoy for tl» do fondant, •. larx. Another, Durant
2C3o-I5, IT,’, bflibit To. h, and affidavit by ::or an foorins, ettosted in
the sr-a annor, and so on. I have .era jo' iral such .•ffldavits that I
iriU pass up io the Tribunal for their «'.* sal.

(The pepors rare kandod to t!*o Tribunel.)
nr-1 fn?Tt ’ithout any .*cv N t, IV. end;', a stator ont signed
by r. defendant i3 admissible as against •" nr * cs an admission against
introst. L otntoamt concomir.;, ; cl: tji ffida.it invclvos tho ad-
is ;ion of such a statement as a .st oth*r o fondants. The so statononts
Tdiich *“ou havo ox'dbitsd to ta rribuiv , :o\ .ral of t‘ on at ’ cast, rroro
signed and evidently r.p.rorod by t o counsol -.or the party ^rho iv.no tho
stataxnt. It does not appear fTct- tho statement the me Ires vv.itinr tiioy
rcro offered siartiy as admissions « i.-.st ovifence by tho party who node

• V 4 *

t.-ca, in aii c h event, of course, the;* Tro -or cstly competent.

d -f d: do sub.it that n*>3t of those statements *..-oro si nad by
of on ;o 'oucsol as roll as defer, fant in tf is case c.f tie affidavit of
V.u.olf Trand.t it is like i3e, as ’four do:or ;a;*s, an affidavit to3ti-yin'


3 Jav*>G7>-W-?c3fcjr (I SB)

C-crt ito. I

C

ritxss ra "all as an adnissicn .ayainst inter.st shooing his conploto !:now-
lodgo and is tio-up with tho ontir: nr carers and hdrdssim of those

a •

o :;-riaont3. ''3 subdt, thor:fero, tie affidavit :f Budolf Brandt is

r.dniasibla • .-bother or not it ho regarded .-.a r. state’-wnt vendor oath. Tho

T-’oseaeticn, !vr-over, dees net wish to rest its -r 3 v.cn t on this narrow

Tvend. It is '.ur position that this -XCICf.it .:ns sworn to end 3 hould

bo considered by tho Tribunal ra a owern statoaont. Tho affidavit shows

cn its faco that it t?a allied and sworn to bofero .'alter II. Jlav>>. Itopp

is described in tho jurat as a U. civilian, identified by tho rtuntoor

‘•J.16387, and signed by tie Adjutant Con.r.al's Cffico of tlw '.’ra* Depart-
• * ••

•ant cf tlw Unit ,d Itat.s. This is certainly tho rv>st nr-cise idontifi-
c'.ti n we c uld >v.. lhrcu^h that nr.:>cr !io can bo idontifi d rhorc
thousands -f pers ns rnd-r tho jurisdictin Of t’.w 'ar Dopnrtnont. llou
wo can soo that tho jurat d.os n t dc3orl : o his pcsiti'n with tlw Office
-f Chief 'f Counsel for ar Crlnas end nay . erluans bo cri tired in that
respoct. 7;is has boon rooediod as I Vvo ha.d -It or II. ?.ay? with tlw
t’asdrinti n ef '.is pesiti-n end initialed it n tho original affidavit.


3 Jar. rSW-l-Deard (:3D)
lourt ITo. 1


C

Is ary ca:o, tho lacb or such description -'©o~ sot ho the documents ir.-

-' issi" lo. lo is, in l et, the Proctor O-' tho Ividanco Dii-isicn o“ t!ic

'--CO tho Chic- of Counsel .'or ar Crimes, duly £ -pointed V- tho

£cr or Conseol _'or Var Criros, SrlpnHar "enercl TelTord Ta*-lor; and,

l i eh, ho is charged with tho chit;* to aid. in tho production oi o/idonco,

fJrnatoC ith all tlio necessary o.-ars to .naail this duty, inclu-

t-in: the authority to administer oath. ^* tho srno tohon, ether orrplopocs

or C...C. -y.io era charjod -.rith tho duty in ci'in;; :rith tho production

c- ovionco aro invested with tho sm» am. inc’., tills situation
» •
is not ntr.r or straryo to tho dofonso ccicvsol; f t is tho dolonso covnsol

rc/rosontinc tiro defendants in case ’.'irbor 1 , a r» riser o.* r-Tfidrvits
-ere c 'nittod in oridonco VoToro tho ET -Y:o.*o tiro' oath Ixd boon ad¬
ministered bp r civilian crplopoo o? tho C.'.leo o': tho 3iio c? tounsol.

: a: Ca, I h.-vo h-aro in hand an r.'ih-vit vhlch \iz s 1 hi bit Uc. 92g
boToro tl« IIT, and .i ich Hrs si .nod tv' s.crn to b* ono “vrt 1 : 1 th bororo
octor Hobcrt :: 0 ncr, CCCj also, lr. ibit 'Jo. ho .'ore tho JIT

is so. a. It is noted that it .r.s iVneseed • tno civilirns. Tor

% •

'.la Tore oinc reasons, pour "oner, tho Prosocuticn states, at this tira,
•r*. ant llo, 3V2 is ad:ssiblo.


% 3fflV..TH6:

•-rial reel prccodara ■
_ve r .-sons .'or tho
rtts or v . s


Cor tho dofondar.t liarl ran t) Hr. President, t!>o
■.:• ch lias boon choson y tho .Vosocution, n orcor to
ndi-.tnont, is rap orted tc such ar. c:.-tent on aC'idn-
Tho doTondants rc -rerar.t . •- and co ld bo hoard in


-:o case. I hnvo objected to Vvj oraerotation or r.rch documents bocauso


* - r / viol.-to the so-called Tolcon Pvlo; V. t th s is :rct al ay^the ho 3 t

evidence to ho present:d. lor, ri.:dl;- it is discovered that tho Tribunal

' a-'oro has turned dam ~ objoctio.:. 'do.:, it is liscovorod that :t-rr* 0 r

;e arridavi.3 live boon ac-rrinistored h- c.-'icicl persons -ho cro not

-tied x carry out and edinister Vis oath. It is not a propriato,

•

-/ opinion, to l-'vo an c th ad-ini ; tir.d in such n valOahlo dccur-ont, vrhich
i= Tasantcd 07 tiro Pr-aecuU^n, -in such,.-, fern, According t- tho Ocrrvji
> - t is pcrcdssiblo to present such ovidonco

L005


3 Jrj>---M-2-3aei-d
y.\-rt Ro. i


«


C


to the Tribunal if the oath has ot been edniaist rod - the Jud;.a. Tiro
rre the persona oho iuavo a&ciniat rad the c- th — tier* rare just plain
civilians whoso qualifirations arc perfectly urfsona. Tfca ro-rasentativo
of tie jroscaution hr a previously present:d an affidavit or. which *.;«
3 : 0 m to by octor ’-ornor. /.a far ,-s I Truor, doctor loupecr is tho

Ctomoy V v iaor, who utj-IsxS in tho- rr.io ;-3 tri.J. .'or .'"sticc Jnc! 3 o:i;

--- ^ _ _ * _ _ *

ctl. In these eases, they '.'vo boon i-jhly rra?l?ioi persona. I r_-. af¬
raid th t t' 030 affidavits ef tlie dofondants ; rvo not boon ^.ven -ith -ho
necessary Judicial aoerrity -.fcieh ha o:q>o:tod. ;U the effidrvita

"•lich I a vo road over have :oon xaom to, and. tho person boforo o'ion

• . *
twy ^0 /worn to, thoroforo, lays c^or wart. I, thoroforo, consular

it nocoooary not only to identify tie persona who lu vo fdrinictarsd tho

* A

oath, but also th t tl'oir uali 'lections bo statd ao that wo can dotsr-
Ino to ufcet extent tho rttac.. -outs d^it o fuatifiod. tvery <«rist
'TO.* that statements which cro iron x the • « lico :t tion before a
.oilco o .Iicial can frcqrontly ho itached in -ourt, and tho criiinsl
r*ch©Io;y occupies itaolT irith tho so question® in detail. Tia is - chrjv.
tor ' .eh I do .»t nood to :r lain to tho Tribe :-1 cny loro n dot
: car- lent to . OiBt out -/ doubt tat 3rob a roce-'v . ho ohli -V. ft -r

all, it is an o .Tidal proccduro. 7.«itnossoa era hero end tTioy can ‘ 0
' cat' before She 7riovr.nl. loop ?0 who are ot -[uriet I "o net consi der
c- . \-.blo It;: tl:o procedure of sue! i:. ortcr.co as o pro having boro.

• -r *?• It xi.ll not ha ay opi-io ., paraonily, til t the ro-
sacetior. could call a defendant to tho stand end v.t har. on as a witness
'•'* hlo ccyu.nt, • 33 '.ic would C 3 ’: *0 t. 3 tiiy. Th.t cove A part of

*•' • objection raised ha r.octor .arvatius,

la t.'uud any furtl.^r arjrant on tho a:-t of t o dofenso counsel?
(Sppercntly none.)

Of course, if the rrosccution offers i3 state: rent, by e. defendant,

:h as this, it ..oi*ld clearly be athlssi.hlo r _.inat Iris. .‘.3 I t irJ: I
s. t:c veviov3ly this nomins, the question -..osilt ' o how Ter i'.ct irsuZd


1036


3 Jrn-TT!-2-3-3anrd (*SD)

C'^rt Ifc. I ^ ^ •

bo evidence ayinst other -defendants. I inquire cf tho Prosocutir-n if
this 'hdaibit, i.-hieh is under discussion, is oTf-:*od cnly as an adnLosion
in interest a-ainst tho defendant Ihidclf li-rndt cr •..•hosier it rill bo
the vcsucutlcn's desire t- c-nsidor it ns ovi’cnco against every > b fon¬
dant?

liil'JCI: IT tho Tribunal ilorses, ro certainly cfx'-r tliis docu-
rent --and ask tht it bo ccnsidcr-d n_rinot an' and rll of the dofondents
*.s to rhoc it nay contain -vidonco. It c.oss t- ao that tho fact in
qu stion is • bother ox- net this <Lcxr-ent has pr.bitiv. value. If that
fruostl-n is dstcrained in tho affirnativo, then I think it is actdaslblo
under Crdinanco H . 7. Ifcar/Tnasnuch as it dees contain edniasiens ,
against tho ran :*c signed t 2 :o affidavit, I sh-uld think tlr.t quite aside
frors its admissibility it -r-uld ;ivc -:c drcxi ont tro*endin'.a -,;ci-ht in
tJw rind cf tho Tribunal, This ran, in -rlrin- tills affidavit -..-as, liin
self, cddtting pertidpati r. in tho -particular onp;riront liiich la ccn-
coi-nod. t tlio sa.*» tiro, he pi-ccoods t: toll tho full st-ry as ho 'now
it; and, of c:\-rsc, ouch nldonco roadie* ctk.r dofoadants :r. tho dock,
limply booavso that is sc, 1 certainly sco nc- r-.-sor. to limit tho a;r.?i-

cab. lity cf tils d-curent, and certainly the Pl-osccuti'n dc s net off or

• f •

it simply as an aetdsoien against tlvo me defendant.

ZZ: ' 1 ~ITT*T: Tho Tribunal rill take a shert roco;3 and discuss
live at tor.

(' recess -ra3 taken.)


. >

pf


:


3 Jen !:7-- -

Zrrart Vo. 1


'*-SD)


c


Til'. SVW.VZtt T.'O Tribc n al is a^-cln in session,
n: TUJmafT: In regard to t:» ouostic-n befo-e tl:e Tribunal,
Tribunal 13 of the opinion that the stctenent signed br the defondcrt,
:n^>ir Srendt, coins n ooerent !SC-37?, nor offered in evidence as Prciociv.
~ cn '-"hibit 252, sho- Id not, in its nrosont Torn, bo rccoivod in ovidonco
cs c.ainst any dofondrnt other tan Vudolf !>andt. h-crovor, if t'.io Chief
0 - -OV 030 I lor the Prosecution can end Hill Pile -.ritb tho Tribunal a c:r-
tiliccto disclosing tint tho J U.3. Civilian Vbltor Panp", \tio is
ur ortod to Iiavo ad inistorod tho oath N to lido?- trand.t, uas authorised.

to do so, either as an officially d.sijnatod venbor of tho stall of

1 *

tio '.Vosocuti n or in so:o otiior co. potent official capacity, tho Tribunal

• * • * *

•.dll r.-.V-it tho signed str.tcnont of Rudolf hrar.dt end jive to it nrobativo
•.T)i ;jt ca t:» Tribunal .Tools it is ontitlod to havo. Tomd-ilo, if tho
losocution is rxr: ir. ;osition to rx&n tho assertion to tho Tribunal that
such a cortific'to can end rill bo file:*, by te Ofiico of Chi of of Counsel
t:» si^d State: sont, Tocr.wnt ’.!0-37f, dll nor bo roccivod in ovidonco
provisionally end c ruling cs to its a blssibility dll be reserved until

s;'oh tiro as sveh cortificrte is supplied,

• •

0 :: V: If tho Tribunal please, o aro prepared to sup. 2y t’w

•

corti.1cr.to *Mch is required by tho Ccuyt's ri'.'in; end, accordingly,

J’.r-.'l.d li!» at tie tiro tc I; to tho bv-ibit prevision?!! admitted end

w ‘- 11 -i* 0 necessary cortificato to soon as it can ho prspared.

mu.T: In viov of tho statement of tho Prosocr.tion, tiro

offered bid bit dll new bo rccoivod in ovidonco subject to tho state ent

nado by tho Tribunal. • *

•

Tho IVosocntion nay proceed.

. bib: T.is doer:wnt aprvoers or. .z c 1 of your honors' doeit sat
J00 ’:; /cavvcnt ;.T-372 -h.ich is offered provisionally as ahibit 2 J 2 .


10c:


3 Jan 1 0 --~ ff^6-2~&rroo 0T3D)
Court !T . I


-I, ixdolf '. il "orcann Srandfc, boizc duly s-.-om, rioposo and stalo:

"1. I cate saro budolf Drandt ehc h. 3 air?.-*'- jot to an
affidavit on tho 30th .upust concerning ties *'rr-pressuro ojqxjrir.or.i3

~'iek -cro carri-d cut at tho Dachau concentration carp, on persons,
scro of Tfhoa cUd not volunteer, as irelT as certain other affidavits
ccnceruinc “deal ar.-porirents ukich .roro also ccrriod out on sub'oets
•.&o did vjt volunteer.

“2. /or tho sane reasons explained in p ra*.Tahs 1, 2 rnd 3 of
r$r affidavit of t^o 3-th August 19Ji6, I an ablo to zivo this ovidbnee ’
cor.ccrxdng axporiaonts con due tod on h\tam subjocts,

• -*ts rrr.r -at


* 'variants .ith I/- »7 Clisterd) -.as.

• • • •

"3. To.-rrda tho end of tho year ?.?3? orperlaents tto conducted, at

the -ac/.sonlrav.son ccncontraticn cenp, on persons •..'ho ucre cortclrOy “ot

all volunteers, in order to escortain the officaacy of tho different

trortonts of voun/s Inflicted by Jest pea. lost la a poison \as -filch

traduces injurious offsets on tho epic's rris. I t:dn!: it is -onnr rh '■ •

la»3i cs raistcrd ;fj. Vinco was had broken out it •..•as doerrd necessary

•o dotordno tho best treatments for injuries cr.uscd by Lost ^cs in c.-.so

tlds fas i ;ht bo mod .v.ainst tho belch. ifcorjforo o:peri?v3hts -cro

•

conducted or. .relates of concentration ccnpo. ;.s far ae I ur.rtnrstood,,
the o rperir-er.ts consisted of inflictin- ■curds u x-n various parts of tho
‘x» i r s of the rpcrircntal subjects and infecting thon there.-fter rith
c£3t« Various asthpds of tr eV or.t -jero c.j lied in or :r to doter dno
the x*st of 'octivo ono.

4. jS-I'iuptsturriuohrer Pr. August I’drt, professor at thl Univorsity

cf res' o ri cr.d collaborator in the - finonorbo', had ho ore 19? £,

vr.iriahcn :;rperl er.‘„3 on host- injcrirs on tho ordors of tho cliraacht.

•«" tior.tion rzr. railed to firt'; re. erts in ntejlcr*s cffico. In the

•

'.inlf of 19 2 irt, to ath r rith Cbaraiit ‘r. farl icner Kio ser-
red in fj -.vffaffo, initiated


1019


3 Jan U7-: '-:--’--i-3-r^rrtBT (!TD)

Court "o. I


o^xriiaosts or. inort.s ol tlx> :>.tsrollar concentration carp, Tho innataa

‘or tboao ca roll na lor othar oansrircnta :rsrs si.-ply chosen by lWil*8

c ‘-icCf tho Icoao Ic and AifrdnistrGtivD lain Cffico Cin order to

o c^loyod lor T.-ch .jx'r 03 * 3 . Tho arporiconts on huocn ar.b'ect; ritfc

j£>?t 'za had om carried on during tio rars 19’3 a.-*i 19’Ji in t ',10 3ac!v-

ooohauson concentration car? go - -oil r. 3 in tho !!ctr.:silor cone artration
® •

cc. p. The reaclt T~s &. t ocoo of tla inratos di .1,

"5. ._In "arch !#& tho fuehrer ordered Si^ri-jaCoruaiiror h*. *xrl
Drandt, Co:ri33ior.;r .'or Ac'th end Jc.nit.tion, to oncovrr.-o odicnl
.-csjrrch ir. connection :rith jaa cttao!a. Srandt sent c con;- of tliia
dccreo to :i-jlL.r roqv'oatin, hdij to distrlbuto it to t’.io orvyjtont
persona in t:» *J3 end to : ndreo then to or.tor into corcunicr.ticn \.lth
Irradt. According , sinco it -gs n cpiestlon of erperlronts, I distri¬
buted coidsa’of Awfcror dooroo of J-Cn mTuahaon fra .Its,
lechsar-.t A Gad Toll*cl to ‘JVJtendsrtonfuohrcr ’ .'olfrai • liov ro of
the -hnener'jo" end jJ-'bar^n'o enluoliror :7na Jiottn^r, Jhia? of t:io
", .crctional "tin C lico. "“-Cbzrjinv.. cnTi-ahror .ohl of tlio Iconordc
cjxI iddntctrct . 'o .tie Offico rlto rocoi.od 0 copy of tlio docroo of
tho Tuairar.

j. .'wrou on ’ievora inforred *r. Drendt of tho detaila of ’.Art 1 a
ir.raati rations .Ith lost on Jnacn sub'oets, clti’.o-J^i I t' in!: it possible
Irandt, elrear^* in 19Jt2, nas, -onorrll;- aporfrin;, ocqualntod :1th
'Art's orh, r.a "randt in that par rr.a a*.vx>intod Corrlssionor for .. Mb
ardtation. "Art carri :d or. ii3 e.pcrinonta, or. hunan subjects vrith
i uri 3 r.us,d b * lost -,cs drlOQ tho ;tcr 19lu't. I rcamber that t5io
v.riaonto -joto zzelo in tho 'ach3calirvj :n concontrction ccn.

7. Ir::ato3 iio'vcro 3\«bJocted to o:r>:rircnta -.Itli .’oat end ot!ior
s _ro r. .rn;* caica not cl la:*, an nationality. lol_s --n 1
las lens as :oll co r^pnics and J--.rs :.*rro Ircquontly


3 Jen 2s 7-» ^ 1- 'j-6-h-TxjrrcJ
C*=rt !Te. I


c leycd. It is r. "ret tbr.t Hirr-Jcr' s"reciel prlicy required tho uso of
r, rv-Gorxm nr.ticnr.l3 except in ccsoa in rhich very srri vs prliticd er

eridnri. offenses hid boon cerrdttod.

• •

"3. 3osidos Errl Brandt md tiie ether r.bovo-ccnti:nod porsons,

"endloaor end JLstcck rise ant h*vo been cimro cf theso c::por:iaont3.

,'2so IVoCossor Hurt Dlcno, Deputy Reich KSclth Ly do r md Doputy Reich 7 or dor
f Ihysicions under Dr. C-nti, ant >_.va boon infemod cf these oxporiiwnts.

(signed*) RudeIf Brandt”

I not* request tho Tribunrl tc turn tc o U :f the d cvrient bool:.

This is Docaront "0-199 Thick is offered r.s Prosecuti n Inhibit 253. It
is e letter fren Orrs.itz to tlvo Reichsfuehrer SS pertrining to tlicao
3:'«rirJonts rith Lest end roferrin- to r. hcrody c*lL.d ? 1001, dr.ted 5 Jan-

^ s * » , •

* * ^

urry 191*0» •

".‘rclcscd pie mo find tho final rep rt of tho .ixpcrinent-.l studios
in tho ccncontreti n cap Sachsonhr.uson re roao<*y 7 1001.

->i;.nod b/ Gm/itz

SVDri^rdefuohr :r
The Reich Jliy3ician-38"
o turn nr.: tt tho njxt pr.-.o, Tho report c- ntr.iiud hero ifl also
>-rt -f Prcsccutia inhibit 253:

"22 December 1939, Orrnienburr

• •

"Finel report: ro^rxd tho 23 c-*: .s vrccinr.t:d *:ith L. rn 13 October

1:39.

"70 dry* rXter tho vr.ccinrti n tlw re-3 f vaccination cro, for tho
•rot .'~rt, h -led up. lie f the cm :3 treated sti^ll shea: scob3 mword-
ntply the else ;f r. ten pfennig piece. - f.n 3cr.b3 ferned .-belt r. fourtni^it

r-c end arc fixed very firnly. Up n ’iftin- then healthy -ranulatirn tissue

*

cm bo soon ben ath. Ir. the cthar ca^s the 3’in va? tho vaccinated rrons
l-s turned blvish-r.d, but is n -1 sensitive-tc touch. I nc c~z:3 evince
considerable itching end scratching upon enr>licati-n f c*ld. Tho

1011


: Jan n-.~:
Cocrt :Jo. I


rcrr (T3D)


c

jcn-rd condition or the scb'ccto vc.c~inr.tcd is not inTluonc d.

Ginned b;* Dr. "orntc;

31-Unt;ratvm:vnhrar n

a pcr.' turn to ccv nr.t ::c-19G, >-~c 6 of Vour onors* doc—ont

• •

’x>o::, o.Tored as Prosectuion tidbit 2:';. 7!ds is another letter Sbor.
r-rs.lts to tlw '-ichsrua'ir-r Z'., dated ? January l?JrC:

po ort Tron tba concentration ccap jechsenhrxson
on tlio a.» lication of the "ohenenn ‘’xjet- reredy is sr&dtted as
enc’osuro. Tran this it is evident tliat no arodorinant ir -ortanco
is -o bo attached to the rolsnonn roooC;*.


(Sieved) OreaLts"


• /.rfc > 1

fr

3 Jan 1*7 - 7-1 - M - UO - Leaser -

I road now the report, page 7:

"Cfcg, (Ordensburg), 22 Decoder 1939.

/

■.Velialnazy report,

ft* 8 cases of cauterization by 'Oil-O' and their treatment with ranedy
•H 1 or ’F 1001' with infection induced in 1* of the cases.

"technique:

Both arms are cauterized in order to have a relatively rido chance of
cerdng to a conclusion, while con*idcri:ig comparatively few caaoa. '011-0'
is spread upon a certain area of tho shin about tho size of a tiro mark coin
vith a platlnun loop; for about 30 minutes - is area id 11 bo driod by air
and tho aim then dressed with a pro toe -ins bondage). An infection is induced
in tho left arm on the third daj in cases 3 and I* and tlw fourth in
casos 7 and 8 by rubbing a mixod culture of Ctropto, Staphylo, and Pneumococci
into the area under the removed blisters or uridor the scabs that havo bocomo
loosoned during tho chango of dressin-js.

"Treatment:

This is applied to casos 1 to u by treating both arms with continuous
danp applications of needy *H», dilutod as ?rc3cribod, 1.9 to 1.12; whilo
in caso3 5 to 8 tho right arm is troatod idth >H' dilutod as proscribed and
th loft arm with •? 1001."

•text is a diogras of treatment showing tho various casos as troatod by
tho two remedies, 'F 1001' ani tho 'll' troataont.

"Luring the following 8 days bandages rill bo ohanged dpily and th or oaf ter
each second dy. Blisters and loose scabs rill be removed. If unctutus films
appear, thoy will bo brushed off with a 'Zcnhirol* solution.

■Course of experiment:

After cautorizatihn with 'Oil -O' cii-i.:/ rill take place in about 20 to
;0 nimtos without causing any pain at all. The skin above the cauterized
^cas is not changod in any way nor rii it not evidence any peculiarities
*ithin tljc next hours. After about 7 to 8 hours a reddish spot the size of


1013


3 Jan U7 - 7-2- K - UG - Lesser
Court Ho. 1


4


tho area of vaccination will appear. .»ith its appearance an ever increasing
inflaamatioc and itching set in. The area of the reddening will increase and
fade in its center, this causing the following situation after about 2U hours:

the center of the affected area an ana cede region can bo soon which cover?
..ere than the area originally cauterized and rtiich has at times assumed pro¬
portions of 18.7 con tine tors. This will be surrounded by a hyperanaanic area
of frosi 3 to 5 centimeters in exetent. In all eases tho formation of blisters
can bo observed after 2h hours. The blisters will always bo situated quite
characteristically at the edge of tho an.cdc region forming a whoal to
tho hyper ana cade region. In removing these blisters tho opidermis of tho
anaqrtc region will pool off in largo shrods and tho greatly oxtondod and
flattened papillao will lie expoood. Tho contonts of tho blisters will bo
of a JollylUcc, mcllagonous subatanco. As a rule tho aras will bo extremely
swollen and tho pain is extreme. Tho tissuoo will turn to a yollowish groy
color during tho following days. Tho suraaeos of tho wounds will frooly

exude and nocroecs will fora which adhoro vary firmly to thoir baso. letor,

littlo islos of gramlatlon tissuoo will apnoar which, honovor, vi 11 again
and aj^in disappear. In the eases observed the first permanent granulations
did not form before tho end of an approximately throe woek period. At
this time tho surreunding hyper a na oal a will have faded and a rather dark
brown pigmentation will havo appeared in its place. Non tho healing process •
begins, starting from tho odgos, and tho granulos 11 boccno cloan.

"Ihc infoctions induced in eases 1, 1;, and 7, by a nixed culture of Strop to,
Staphylo, and Pnoimxococci, will take sbnewhat different fonis. Caso 1 will
develop systems of a sepsis proixeing hi^ii temperatures, chills, swelling
cf regional glands and a distention of the spleen. In cases !>, 7, and 8,
axicrato tenpcraturcs dll bo observed. In all cases a strong influence on
‘he general condition of tho subjects results. Cocci were not to be demon¬
strated in the bloodstream. Scears were made after a period of 2 and lx week3.

£*’• all casos streptococci and staphylococci wore found, in ease 8 pneumococci

✓

'-Iso. There is less tendency for tho infected cauterized areas to heal.

1014


Court Ho. 1


3 Jan 17 - 7-3- - LJ3 - Losscr


•Suaaary:

■1. Rcaoy 'H* dooe not seen to bo a specific raaody for cauterizations

causod by '011-0.' -

■2. The application of raaody *H 1 does tot a oca to have a sufficient

J

bacteriocidal effect. Fraa 2 eases of inctucod infoction, ono ease developed
septic a yap tone. The healing tendency is rafccod in all eases.

•

"3. Tho impression is given that the cauterised areas treated with
ready H extended more than these treated according to the 'F 1001' dry
nothod." ^

(signed) "Dr. Sonntag."

"SS Cntcrs turxafuohrcr"

'his report evidences tho type of procedure used in this experiment
and it can bo noli imagined that tho in® tod suffered.

I turn non to document nushor HO-200, thich is offorod as Prosocution
Exhibit Ho. 255* This is a brief noto from Rudolf Brandt to Growitz, da tod
29 February 191*0, saying:

"nnclcsod I ca transmitting a letter of tho physician Dr. Frltjof
Dinand, Frankfurt n/4., Gaertnenfeg 16, of 23 February 191*0 idth
tho roquoot for notico and study." •

"By order of

(signature) Brandt"

t*ich shoes tho i^lication of Srandt in this ccnnoction. At.tho bottom
thcro is a notation: "Concerning: Raaody 'F 1001..

Tho next oxhibit and tho ono following.... tho next thre* exhibits,

*rc latte:s which deviate fraa Lost at tho ococnt but are necessary hero
in order to show the soqicnco of correspondence between the dofendant
Jievars aid Kirt.

The first is a letter from Siovors to Hirt dated 17 January 19 h2 and this is
in regard to research and combatting of insects having an effect on men.
"Dear canrade Hirt:


"For the cccbattirv; vondn-insccts which have an cffoct on non, as

1015


■ 3 Jan-tMES-7-i-Lesaer


aa mosquitoes, horde-fliss, lice, bed-tugs, fleas, etcetera, the Reich
Fuehrer S“ and Chief ctf the Goman Police, Heinrich HI rani or, has ordered
special measures to bo carried out with tho aic of preventing acre than
hitherto the spreading of the insects concornod, to extenninato than, and
to prepare effective counter agents on huaan beings thecselves.

■Tho Raich Fuehrer SS wants all ’.:nown methods of conbatting veruin and
these Thich will soon be developed by further resoarch work to bo put to
use hoforo the beginning of surocr for the bonefit of our soldiors in
the continuation of the operations.

■Tho extensive rcsourcos roquirod for such a purposo aro available. Any
eo-eorkors not available as yet, .dll bo secured. "In this matter * havo
oritton to all versin-ccotattins and resoarch institutes in question, but
I havo, with few exceptions, rccoivod unsatisfactory inf enaction.

".toe ailing our Stress burg discussions, I therefore turn to you vd th tho
inquiry os to whothcr yew see any possibility of collaborating in this
groat task; *hat I have in aLnd is ti-at you put at our disposal your
oxporiencos in tho fiold of vitaain-ingestion as a preventive noasuro. As
is !morn, aeny pcoplo arc not aolostod by tho parasltos at all, nhorcas
others aro doles tod badly. So perhaps thorc is c possibility of establish¬
ing general ircunity by Vaccination or by ordering certain drug3 to bo takon
by mouth.

should be very grc.tcful to you for an ansirer as soon as pocciclo, stating
whether you can collaborate yourself, or for a suggestion as to ifcat
sciontists knowr. to you could bo asked for holp - they nood not bo veruin
socialists »it all, - sine a the Reich 3 fuehrer SS has declared thA assignment
tc bo a v^-y urgent ono. With hind regards,

■Hoil Hitler J
— "Sievers

■SS-C^crsturctoanrfuchror."

This dccuacnt, Nicfoor NO-792, is cffc-od as Prosecution Exhibit Ho. 256,

lour iloner.

The rumet letter is Hirt's athis sequence of correspondence


- »Hr


3 Jan U7 - 7-5 - K - LJG - Lesser


bct»eon Sicrcrs and Hirt, rtiich is Docuscnt Nuafccr N.-792 and is offerod
as Prosecution Exhibit No. 2$7. This is dated 20 January 19li2, cdc'rcrsed
to "Deal- Ccscrade Sicrcrs « n

"I just rccoivai your L ttcr of 17 January regarding research on
and coobatting of insects afflicting huann beings, and hereby giro you
opinion in this respect. ,

"1. In principle I consider U.at rcsoarch on and combatting of
insects afflicting hunan boings should bo tede only by bacteriolo^ots and
hycicnists and also the industry. I do not thing that I an the right r.in
to achiorc anything useful in this field. I rcccrocnd, hen:over, to contact
Prof, rtoso ( not an SS neater), of ti.c Pobert Koch Institute, Uorlin,
rho as a tropical hygienist in Chin.', has ijany years of experience in this
fiold; lately ho


3 Jan-H-CES-7-la-T«33cr
Court Ho. 1.


^lao supervised ttv; transfer of the holhynia Ojrnans to Germany.

I can also recaaacnd SS Sturmbc-r-ifnohrer Prof. Pfannenstiel, Director
of the Hygiene Institute of the Giessen University as a corapotent
scientist.■

You see, here, that obviously Hirt has cceplcte kncsrl^dgu of tho reparation
of Profoa>r Ros.

■2. The question of immunising human beings against insect
bitos can, in ny opinion,'only bo trxkled by the manufacture of larco
quantities of insocticidos ns a manifold moans for activo and pro¬
phylactic ire uni ration.• The carrying out of tho Duthod proscribed is,
decidedly, a Job for t.>u bacteriologists and hygienists. In principle,
it My be possible that «*n active ixT-mnlntion of tho troops can bo
achieved in the sense o: a reduct, on of skin reaction to insect bites,
a siailar effect being loom, in the cast of cpiarists.

“3. I do not bolievo that -ho introduction of tho vita.jin
terapy into tho sffcuVt of treatment nwntionod, so to spook as anti¬
allergic ujj, any b, suste-ssfrl. Tractical experiments on human beings
without extensive cos> xv lion would have no sense, as the* would not
foru a basis for a definite opinion.

■U. rhe question of transmitting disoasos by insects and/or
parasites would have to bo approached by cur method of intravital
nicepscopy. It would be a condition that in this roapoct arrangements *
would have to be made for tho nocossary preventive measure^ to bo
taken in the labor oory. It wculd also bo necessary tc find ccapotent
collaborators; this is a probl_a which cannot easily bu solved within *
a short tiao.

"I regret that I a_a not rblt to give you a ;aoiv satisfactory
answer, and thus constitute ad'iticnal failure in ym«r search up to
new. But as natters stand, i can not, iu the fa*-sent case, prciiso more
than I aa aolo to do.*


*T.ith kind.st regards,
1018


3 Jar—H-JP-7-2 a-Lca

Court Bo. X


C


■Heil Hitlerl
"lours,

(Signature) 'a. HUB"

There is on illsgiblo stap on tho better--, and to. sign-.turo Siovore.

Mow the next lottor in tho sequence brings in tho work on Last. This
is doc went nunbor NO-793* which is offered ".s irosocution Exhibit No. 258.

This is a lottor frto Sievors to Hirt d-.t^d 9 ..pril 19U2. "Dear Conrado

V


Hirt."


3 Jenuary-fc-OJG-8-l-Mwohan

Court So. 1


■Doar Coortdc Hirtx *—•

■At Easter I was :t the Fuehrer's Herdruerters to sec tho Reichs-
fdehrer-SS. Re, of course, also discussed your research work. In the mean¬
time, the hcichsfuehrer-SS bad read your two essays on "Intravital Micro¬
scopy in Luminescent Light" end on "Luminescent Microscopy and its Signi¬
ficance for Medical Rose rch". Ho was very auch ii^rt-ssod rnd eg.-in charged
me to tell you that he oonsiders this research vork extr.nely important
end definitely worthy of his patron-gw. It is also his desire that your
research work be usvd in the fight eg. inst insects, especially in the

investigation of the effects of insect bites on tho tissuo.

0 0

"In the meantime the hwSvirch Institute for Entomology has been epp-

* • • • • *

roved and founded by tho Rwichsfuehrer SS. I would be very glad if wo
could havo an opportunity to discuss these natters in aero det.il.

"But, the hoichsfuchrer-SS would particul-rly like to get aoue de~
triled information froa you on your Lose experiments. i,o are sure to bo
In a position to put at your disposal for the lurthorancc of these uxpcrl- *
nents uniquo facilities in connection with special socrct experiments, which
we aro ct present conducting at Dachau. Could you not soaio day writo a
brief socrct report far the Lcichsfuehror-SS on your lost oxpcrlnwnts?

"But, you should by no means go to 3er!in for the tiao being, espec¬
ially since the lioichsfuehror-SS is staying percancntly at the Fuehrer's
Headquarter*. I, therefore, intend to pay you c visit -t Strassburg as
soon as possible. But, perhaps it would-be o.sicr for you U come to
Munich, whore 1 would have the opportunity of Introducing you to tho Cnief
of our Institute for Entomology and would be able to givo yju -q insight
into our secret experiments rt Dachau. 1 shell be in Bolzano until 23
April, on the 2Ath .nd tho 25th 1 shill bo in Munich. I wculd be glad to
see you in iamich, in case you rc*_lly f-el well enough to be ablo to travel
to Lunich without danger of a relapse. In th. t case, please write to tho
n Ahn;ncrbe' in Barlin; that office can always contact ac iaaadi'teiy at
Bolzano. Otherwise, I pl-n tw visit you in the beginning of x y in Strass-


turg.


1020


3 January - 3an

Sorrt !>• I

C

>1 rn orridaHj .lad to *-o la to tell you already today that
•ho -icichafuchror-lS has at ry su yetior. pronot.d you retrsastivaly to
- %Gbo? 3 b u r ig ’pohror end, effoctivo 20 .'.mil 19M, to »»-Kau-3tumhio':ror.

Ill ;ru plo-rso accept ry vost cordid congratulations. Tho official rcfcf.co
yil _*o?J.cr.; in duo tiro. Hoil EIT1 :i ith all good triahos an:! c ordial
;-cc tings." (Signed) UTTT>.

Tho i»nt latter is another letter from Defendant fiovore, tocuvotn Ifo.

• •

7 ^, r •hich ia offer d an frelocution .idxibit 259. It i3 adfrossod to
JJichard Brandt, dated 27 Juno 19’i2.

“3ubjoct; ’Jjo oT oastardp-gts ;or co:£>rttlng rats.

"llof.: Tow latter or 13 1 9i£ -'■ 12/95/191:2

/ t • i * 1

■Boar CoarOdo

Tn revest IS-Kanptsturrtfuohror ?rof. Or. ’.I.T, Strewburs tollo
re:

■:t3ts-rd-:t3 In a dilution o! 1:100 ia dangoroua -'or van if it cor.-
t-cts the ho*-V in an ode-unto amount. .‘.bovo all, sntnrd-gcs ia a till
tea are-3l" offocti-o on clothing nota&fi?., .*3 ia Wm, even in a vary
i-.-t dilution, osnodallr In eoRnaotton 1 th dci-ynrss. '.irsterd-gM brought
•e'er, tho 3*in in c dilution of 11:ICO still * rin- e about a rxldaning:
ftxwibly it cava:3 littlo c-sta -.lthcut effecting necrosis. Teat is, the
3 cct ia :uch •Jooh.r fun ith m vatsc&^c*. In spite of that,
bre vet upon tho clothes in sufficient raar.titioa, 0 specially ir. too rogionn
0 .* pcrspirntion,n3 tho ar.-pit, or tho ing u i n a l ration, it can have tho
•jcto Tfcct aa concontrr.tod nistard-gas. 'or this, only r trcco of it fro-
;• a.tfly 13 sufficient. Tiis I :: orloneoi. ip a laboratory ccci ’wjt -ith
atlaical a Wont, ..110 touched his nr -it rith one of tho rabbits only
Tor - -.cccnd and to :*by ensued a reddsains «Mch a nr 2nd over too or.tiro
bed- Kc following day, hcvc.cr, nithov.t having furto-r c omocpiancvs. In
opinion, only a place ubichccn In tarorcrily evacuat'd >* hu m i.to-j-
l -'-ts can bo u'.od for passing. Tho use cf rcratard-gas ir. tho vicini'y of
fee’ stores, especially whoa*. dunps, hrs to bo absolutely oocdncbd boceneo
ecc cannot ’~cr.r tc what orient tho rets arc carrying too austard-gas '-hero.


1021


3 Jaiffi^rr-W-DX—S-2-’.bchan
Court No. I


C

only a jaaalng of socrct rocciscs could bo possible in tho application
of tfcc rospoctivc aoasiros for precaution. 'kxr this rill


• 1021 A


3 Janurr7-I^3JG-3-3-Ife:han
Co-’rt Ho. 1


i


work out technically, I cannot, determine of courso proper experts trould
Ij-vc to Judgo on that. & t, probably the case nay bo the s ano as -.rith other
poisons used for extermination of rats (Ihosjiir-ar sonic, strychnine otc.)
that means ovary type of cccbat t* th poison has two sides. In spite of
tltis, your idea to try the extermination of vorsdn by rveans of poison
gas docs not sooe strange at all, but an expert or. poison .gas would hero
to doterrri.no, if tharo aro no other reins less harmful for human boings,

•ihich would !dll the rata.

•

m.th kind regards, Hoil Hitler; (Signed) 3HST.3E.

P.S. "I shall talk over this natter thoroughly oioof those days with TVof.
:3"\ and I want to boo which poison gas expert to right uso for tho solu¬
tion of that problon."

Horo, tho Reich Business Uanegor of tho Ahnonorbo SiOvors is, and
tiiia is page 20 of your Honor's Docuront Boo!:, Doc aent !to. 097, which
is offerod os Prosecution Exhibit 260, again writing to Rudolf Brrndt.

The datod is dated 2 Juno 19U2:

"Subjoct: SS-Hauptsumfuohrcr Profos3or Dr. A. !lirt, Strassburg,

"Dear Coar ado Drandtl

"Ericloood herewith is c short report - in two copies - on tho Lost

□xperinonts, ririch Is to to sutri.tt:d to tho Roichsfuohrcr-oS. I'drt

could prepare this report froa his minutes only, boenuso, ho hod sont away

nlrcacty ell his records for reasons of security. Professor i!irt lias in-

forr.’cd re that ho hop.* to bo ablo to resuno his laboratory ®rl:, at leant
• •

parti;', in about twowcoks. I, tb-oreforo, announced ry v^sit to him for
tho 16 th of Juno, in order to discus with hin norc intcrisivo^appllcation,
continuation and pronotdon of his research work, 03 desired by tho Hcichs-
fUohror-53. 171th best regards, Hoil "illicit Yours," (Signod) Siovers.

I i*oad tho report:

"Report or. the Lost e::p;riner.ts, conducted by order of tho ’chrancbt.

"The first series of experiments conducted during the short period

of uy absence fron cy field unit dealt utth tho‘treatment of Lost-injuries.

"Based upon the fact that tho Trypaflavin - an Acridine pigixnt, vdiich


1022


3 Jan bahcn

Court Ur. I

C :

I h-vc enployed fcr tho c'lcring of living colls, penetrates into tho
noicta, sad , if adrruatcly dosod, peralys -d coll-^jroliforation, I

^-rirod at tho idaa cf using this pignont for tho treatment of Icst-
ir^urcd tissu.s. Uy th ught ucs: Tho injur d colls 3 h uld bo charged
•.fitli tlM pignervt -nd this -.-.vld stop tho p-.tiicloGical syptc-a ~f their
di 3 int-r^roticn hich irturolly 0l.-r.73 destroy tho h.alt.y colls. The
healthy coHo, sinultr.noously charged -.ith tiia pipaent, -re put int r. state
- ' r - *t rad, after having discharged tho ni^ent, fill bo bio tocorncn-
sato tho tftvs ..ncurrod deficiency by incroos.d coll prcliforation. 1:>or-
L-nts ,» missis (pigs and rabbits) -..*000 node in Germany in ord-r to
c’otcrrino tho effocUvorv .33 cf Trypafla.vin in different concentrations ond
fenea; tr an aintaent, as r sc Inti .n ahd '•> damp opplicoticns. ‘.t tho
3orlin l eadocy, to trhich I vs assigned for throo -rocks, osperinants -.:oro
ern&Wtrd on fc.-c of fie ir candidates. T.\o roault shv.-ud th t tho proooso
ho .’line :a.s undoubtedly spoed-d un by or ley ent f danp applications,
living boon assigned Ter a liait-d tine -nly I era Id not finish th :sc
crpor-monts. hen stationed on tho ost all, I '.'.ad acaso of a laboratory
•ccidoBt of a pharnadat uhc injur.d his trad u.ri.usly vith Toot. I treat¬
ed Idn tilth drap applications and Tr vin in a c-ncor.trati n of 1:1000

©

and obtained not onlya good healing r suit but also a very satisfactory
cosr.otic rosult,aa I •• as ablo to ccnvinco r^rjolf “no year l“tor ’lion I
fast tho person inqueatirn in franco. ;*y suggest! n at that tine vaa to
tr.at tho patient, •..hen cautcri=-tion occurs, vith dairp a.pplicati:r.s of
Trypaflavin solution cf 1:1000 until tho first granulations appear .and
then to change to a oroakor ccnccntratim tf hivanel, ich is an .yridino
'iTvmt too. Only too.rrd th- ond cf this trectnont Is it scssiblo to
erntinue Ith Jintrcnt3 end dressings, llso tho treatment cf eyo injuries
'£ rabbits shewed a geed result in comparison -.a th tho rosults cf t’.io
thor nothocls orrployod at that tiro. AS I loamod lrtor, also dc tip a.ppli-
t".tic.as -ith hivanol were intrcducod.

In 'connection fcaraiith, I tried to observe tho offset f pciscn gas
•1 the living organisn. Cora tho oxaningtl n cf tho living subcutaneous
tissues


1023


3 Jan bohan

Coart I


C


. ' r.-ta injured by 1 -rt sh .rod tl; t tic inJ.T±os -re locat.d in tio
subcoteatK-ja ti3su_3 and that they l.d tc injuries f tho freo c orcicctivc
tissues, uhich -cc rdinj to previous a—tnr.ti no are f a particul \r ir>-
-wrteaico as vitarin c-rrios. Th.se cells proved tc bo incr.jv.blo of
rvlif-rati-r. end force ti ns :f-oils with 2, 3, U, -von 6 nuclei
recurred, cdiich npooarad r.3 Giant cells in th- subcutnno .us tissues. :'o
*<jyj Colls of r. siiilax ’ind in chx.nic in'ccti us dasons.s, tuberculosis

-ad s-.ratixe also in con.-v.cti n uith cwcor. Tt\ o furtwr c -.ntinuntion of

t v M

tap oxnrlrvtion of tho llrinc interior crerns sh -rod tie sur fildin g
phonononen .f a subsVnco, *..-hich :o •..•are r.: ltncar r.blo Vj analyze choni-
c-jjy .--id •'rich s.on thx~i*ch a flurresconco icrcsccpc .nittod a strene
li^it end filled asst ->f the cools f too liver. Especially tie star
shepod "Kupf.r“ c-lls Cuter lay.r f c:7!s 'n tho liv r v-asels, capa¬
ble cf -bs-rbinc all Idr-ds f sibstrnc-3 tie circulating blood),

•':ich are essential f:r CKTUvor -rod r.lsc ’-r tv- vitcrin r»t.-v:lian, -..-c-ro
chaxjed rith this lirdnras natter. .t tho snro tiio tho vitnuins, uhich
n roaUy ©an n od in tha liver by vans : ttv? nv rescenco nlcrooccpo^
had ninest c-pl-tcly disappeared. 7i».s ;iiav.:»non did net surprise uo any
longer sin~o t.-xj had bsorred sirllnr 4unencna n livars cf rico irhich liad
d- d cf career r ther sori-us infect! vs dis.-nses. I oral-in d theso
ihrunona. a.s a.result 'f - pcis-ning f tho liver, either caused by tho
cis-n itself r,* cdiich is n re prebntolo, by-fV'*' ‘ 3 - r tho taric
eatebolim. ?.io t:us croat_d lor.din: cf tto liver *.rrs n t yot analyzed
T.t cortainlr hetorejoneus substance onuses a. bloc'.Ans cf tjo ontiao
r-nn, vhich air.ady previously ri r cr-.-aic '* by vs ns an npartant
nceundator of Yitarins. Secondarily a. distrxhnnco -f tho entiro vitaain
-ol.-o.ura 1. er^ti =nd fcxtt* - «aXol.»r l '^r.Ud vira-in. >.Hoh
axe necessary for t:a interior re's irnti r. rf t._ cell3. f.apid disinto*,-
ra.ticr. results and death fella*. Dwebe erring the stransO rescrblnnco
'^t'oer, t’d.3 ?dv_r -.isuv.rtinon nw* t o heiv one *t ct-er soricv3 into..-
ientiens"caused partly b- bacteria, rxt^y ’■ -^cor, e avnronched tho
ccr.elvsicn ti-t in certain cases tho caxso f death for all these diseases
is tx 3and -ripinetes fr r. thj sorieu® *


3 Jan 47-M-EKH-6-6-Me«han
Court Sot 1


C


>

liver Injury.

■Oir previous researches in connection with vitamins had shown us
that particularly the vitamin A, more than the other vitamins, is accumu¬
lated in the very large quantities in the above-mentioned star-shaped
"Kupfer" cells, from where they aro transmitted to the cells of the livor,
Ne consequently tried to saturate these cells by charging then with a
quantity of vitamin A and thus to aoke an absorption of the products ef
toxic cr.tabolisa er vims impossible, in order to force the organism to
secrete thm through other excretory ergons, particularly through the kid-
noya. Accordingly we fed rats with vitamin A and subsequently infected "
thorn with Lost (rats are very sensitive to Lest and their death can be
expocted with certainty within 24 to 48 hours after application of a very
smell quantity of Lost on their beck), ho had auccotdod in keeping tho thus

treated rats alive for sevoral weeks. Tho lost rat of this series of ox-

»

periments was still elivo after ©no year. Tho examination of tho organs
of the animals which had diod aft.r 8 to 1 - days showod that tho liver
had accumulated anabundant amount of vit*min A end that only an insignifi¬
cant quantity of toxic products could be traced. I was not in a position
to conduct tho corresponding experiments on human beings bocauso I was
forcod by tho beginning of tho offensive rgainst Franco to return to my
unit, f roc whore I did not return until litrch 1941.

"I submitted at that time a report on those experiments with tho
accompanying illustrations to ay General-.rzt, who transnitted it to Berlin.
But I never hoard rnything further about this research worty

"Its practical application would be to observe first in another

experiment the further reaction of the liver, the kidneys, tho splean, etc.

of vitamin-saturated animals and then to investigate whether, after a

treatment of human beings with vitamin A, which if dosed correctly, can be

taken without any conccedtant symptom, a certain protection against Lost

can be achieved, that is, a protection against its fatal effect and further

by means of timely shift of vitamins, which would occur in connection with

this treatment, a change of the course of the cutaneous phenomena. Only a

1025


3 Jan 47-4W
Court %c. 1


7 If >han


-—- - — -- 0

direct experiment hould indicate to Act extent this is possible. As I
did not hear anything free the Military cca&tnd In Berlin as to-Aether
this experiment had been conducted, I cannot report, anything about the
result. For the reasons already mentioned I was not in the position to
carry on these experiments. Since I forwarded at that tine also the
illustrations to Berlin, 1 can give now only a Tory short suraary of ihe
experinmta conducted by us.* (Sipied) Prof. Hirt.


1026


3 Jo--v-*-J^9-l-XiiubucU

Court No. 1


C


This report indicates thrc we are casing on now to tho cx'x.riaen-
tition or. hunan ocings in this regard, as s tated by Rudolf Brandt in his affi-
davit in th- first instance;

Tho naxt page, psgo 25, ycur Honors, in the docuia-nt book is Document
Vas:er NO-196 which is offered as Prosocution Exhibit .Humber 261. This is a

M

lottor from the Ofiico of the Reicha.' uuhrar SS, obviously frow tlw office of
tho Defendant Rudolf 5mndt, tc one of his subordinates apparently, Gottlob
Borgcr, to the Chief of tho SS •tin Office, dated 2U August 19U2, addressed
to iS Grupporfuchror Borgor, ii.rlin.

"Hy dear TruppQixfttnfcrcr, LL Hauptaturafu-hr-r Professor Dr. A.Hirt,

■ * ™ _ 9 . ' • * || •

Stressburg, wno has played an important role in tho foundation of tho Institute
for :ilitary Scientific Cos-arch, would urgontly n--d Ob-rarst Dr. medical

habllitation Karl filansr for ths dov^lo^nt of this work. Dr. T imror has

••

boon tcaporarily assigned to tfco Anatomic Instituto of the University of
Sircssburg by tho Luftmff? Sanitary Training Itopart^nt 711, end is, therefore,
In a position to assist SC HauptstvnafUuhror Professor Hirt in a series of
oxocrinonts.

"It would bo important that through the aid of tf.o Schutrst-ff-1 this
posting to the Anatomic Instituto of Strassburg b- acintainod. If you would
intcrvv.iv. in this cattor, SS Oboraturn£ufchiMr Dr. Brandt would bo very obliged
to you.

■Enclosed I subait sco- essential personal data concorning Dr. Manor.

f

foil Ritlor, " and th- signature is illegible on this instruaent. There is
a pencilled notoi -Berger has written that he cannot do this^ and that he

has therefore asked Grawit* to do it."

Her- is a letter fror Sergor to th- Raichsfuehrer SS in the natter,

[>:cuo.nt f-ujfcer NO-197, which is offered as Prosecution Exhibit uraber 262.

This is dated 27 August 19U2, add reseed to th- Rcichsfuohr-r SS. The subject

is-Dr. a^d. habil. Karl •.!—r, aud is in rof-rcnco to th- previous letter.

■In consideration of eh- let, that on th- grounds of recently issued

re -ualtions c once min* the rdoasc of physicians, SS HauptsturraTu-hrer Prof.

1027


3 Jan-ifr-JP-9 “S^Hinatook


C


Coart Ho. 1

A. Kirt cannot be given any assistance in obtaining th. transfer of Dr. Winnor
to the T.-ii on SS, the S*> Medical Office had been requested, on the basis of the
-'cove, mentioned letter, to intervene in this natter, so that his ossignoont
y the Luftwaffe ^-dical Training Division VII continues to rcuain in force.
Signature, G. Bergor, SS Gjipponfuohrcr."

The next noto on tho subject is a file note of Slavers, obviously sunt
to Rudolf Brandt, Docunont tartar NG-093. It will be offered as Prosocutlon
Exhibit NxjEbor 263, <t-tod 3 November i9U2. ' e note a filing strap, at tho top
of tlv. letter, * Personal Staff R ichsfuohrcr SS", and a shorthand notation,

"filo under Sievurs". The subject ooro is "Research ordor SS Hauptsturnfuohroi
Profossor Dr. August Hirt, Strnasber , at the Institute for ilitary Scientific
Research of jjn.aorbo«"

"Tho ft-ichsfuorher S~ or do red in his letter of 13 July 1912 - Journal
;fuabor ARAQ/7A2 - tht Si. liaupt.-tumfuchrer Professor Dr. Hirt carry out

as *

tho rosoorch tasks assigned hLu, in conjunction with tlie concentration canp
Hrtzw.ilor. It was dot:xvined at aconfcror.co, for which I drove, along with
SS Hauptstcnsfixihror Profossor Dr. Hirt, to Natxweiler on th- 31 August I9li2,
that the hypothesis w-rc cslrblishcd at Nntcwcilor. I reported on this orally
or. 9 September 19U2 and cft.rwrrds in writing on 11 Scptoisoer 19U2 to SS Bri-
ptdjfu-hrjr Gluccks who agreed and prosised his full sup ort. In view of the
urgency of the*, rus-arch tasks, l -sked SS Hauptsturafuchror Profossor Dr.

Hirt to ag'.in go to Natswoilor beccus- until then no report on tho beginning
of tho work had ,rriv„d. SS Hauptsturafuohrer frof-ssor Dr. Hirt reported
tho following, waong other things, concerning this c cnfcronco whfch took plnco
pt Hatzwoilor on 1? October 19l*2: 'Tho conference was due to tho fact that
until now nothing besides tit detachment of Coorscharfuchrcr ‘ albert had boon
accompli shod. Nor had the install.' ticn of the IVoor tories been starter. to
date. It hoc row bo_r. decided to abort with the iabomterias this wcok.

It was further established that the protectiv. caer Schiroeck would

erect the sheds. Its Cooaonder fortunately is ready, as ho told us at once,

to pl-ce th. necessary people nt jut disjxjsal free of charge; while .Npttweiler,

1028


3 Ja>-: '-jfc-WSInt&acl:
'ovrt I!o. I


i.3" V not have boon in a position to do so due to the great inconvenient
dcnmd» of tho workers.


B « Vo were furthers) ro informed tv t tho prise nor 3 who would later
bo used for oxperinents, wowld havo to be paid .'or by us during tho period
that exocrine r.ts Yrerc being acc’o upon tb.es.

a « Ve aro to roeucst that tho prisoners of tho L-oxporinent rocoivo


full rations to onablo tho oxpsriner.ia to bo carriod out undor tiio sano


conditions as tho troops would bo under in a possiblo oncr-.ency. Vo

intend for tho ti;» being to tako ton prisoners as sublets for oxporinonts.

0 ••

 Hauntstumfuohrer Dr. Blanks said tirt ho was refused tho assis-

4

tanco of a second physician in sunorvisin z tho experiment* on netionts,
so that ho probably would not haro enough tiro to concorn hirjolf with tho
r.« risonts.

"t Tho ."-lay apparatus which I could procure hero, has not yot boon
lo finitely a 11 oca tod by Berlin. Vo rust sot it Lwnediatoly, otherwise


it nay hawpon that wo loso it.

w Tho installation of diroct cu rr e nt causes difficulties. Cno hoir-
over gets tljo innression that tho Vilding operators had not yet doc.lt with
this problcn at all. According to their opinion a trrnafonvjr 3 hov.ld bo
procured V.v ch is ablo to transform 220 volts alternating current into
direct current. Eels is rx>st likely quito i.-rprobablo ct this placo.

•*« To oouip the laboratory, 1 cvld ship tho neodod things (freosinc
•Icrotoro, incubators, etc.) from th: stocks of the Anatomical Instituto
to Hat*-.•oiler tiring tho next rook. Thayr serin of cour3o tho property of
tho Anatomical Instituto. The two prisonore trained in handling tho >
loro tone can then bo put to work. Acccruir- to Haupttturnftilsror Dr.

31cm! "e, both should bo proficient at it. 1

"CSi t!» basis of this report I -'.re the ispresoior. that not too nuch
V ; crest in cooperative work exists .at Ifcicroilcr. As such cooperation
is ordered by the loichsfuohror 53 and -s "*W 2 rl refuohror fluecks is -.rill-
ir.g, the wholo thing is not understandable to no. I -.-as vary nuch surprised
hy tho feet that the prisoners to o used fer experinents should bo paid for.


we use only


102?


3 JO^i»JB-Wanibuek (:db)

court :io. i

ten *ri sonora for one -xp-ftrent, rlphi under certain circumstances

jant ton tenths, torn costs -or too prisoners clone would total approximately
i :00 .'JJ. '.ion r think or our military research. *ork conducted at too con-

ror.tr-'tion can? Dachau, I list praiso .and call special attention to the
----0U3 end understaraiinG way in toich our work '.fas furthered thoro rod
to too cooperation i*o were siren. Pay-.vt of prison rs was never diocussod.
Zt 3ecne ca if at Uatzwail.r they civ trying to ncko as rch «noy aa poss¬
ible on this natter* \o ere not conducting to .3. rrporlxonto, ro e nattor
of -'act, -'or the sake of some fix.d scientific idee but to be practical

— - * ■ ■ ■ — — ■* - i —- , ...

‘.ujlp to tho in.d forces and beyond th.cn to tie P-mm people in a poss¬
ible e.orjjODcy. Tho budget of to- Institute -'ll! bo rot, according to

the order of tho loich Leader of to Id as already discussed by no

. • * •

in detail with 5*. standnrtonfuohr r Loomeu, ‘but of die funds of too Waffon^

SS.

“Under tlio su position that tl» prisonous.neodod for oxperirxmts aro
in tho pr escribed condiUon os r^rrda nourishment by tois ti:eo, too oxporl-
:cn;s could start approximately on ID Kovcubor 19.A2.

•Cnodal tr.dtnent in Dachau was ner.r too svdej-ct of special instruct¬
ions but utj understood to bo necessary and issu.d -rithout Turtoor ado.

toe occasion of his personal inspection of too oxporixunts ft Dachau,
tho loichafuchrer *33 appear-d ono day at Dachau to brvo a loo!: at too
o.rparinants thoro, this is •'ossiblo r.t latx.roil-r too. sica-turo, 3lovers.
1 .. To SSWJbar3turabannfuahr or Ur. R. TteonC.t to wad in rjferonco to our
'locussion of today end with tho u.<r'~et of help in conradoly fashion in
cettinc up toe r.eceosary conditions at '.Tatnvoilw . 1 And too initials, ‘ •

:*r. IfcHansy said earlior - pres -.tation of his ceso^in c.iiof,

details of t!d3 setter set forth !uu.-^jtos rrfy in die .-to Dievers -rrs not tho
tcec letter box as ve will hrve vs boliove. c turn now to tho next docu-
.nt, Document Irunb.r !X>- 93, wh: c.- wiU x, off ered as >osocrtion 2toiWt

.’ruber 2oU. This is a letter fror. 3ievcrs to Dudolf Drrodt, ‘ated. 22 April,

•

Cub; jet: Dr. rsed. I'abil. Sfcrl irrser, born 2k October 1910, Staff
’.r-eiciar. of toe Auftwnffc, coaaanded by Air feu Seysician 7, I unich, for

1030


service


3 Jaa^WB^-Klnobcck CDD)

Court :!o. I

C

-.ritii tho iatttaiiccl Instituo of tho Dtr.-ssbury University. Co-ror!:ar

t;vj Institutio Tor T’ilitaty "Scientific ?..search of tho Ahnanerbo Socioty,

• •

Ircrtnont 3S nauptstumfuehrer, Dr. hirt, otras3burg. ?~v lour lot tor

c,* 1Q.L2 Dicry Ho. A-VW7/U2, Cur lott_r or 2S.7.U2. Deer Corrcdo Brandt: ' '

. "estiva 1 isodiatoly, Dr. Tanner hra '.-cor. trmsfarrjd to tho 73 Air Corns,

A

-ai according to ir.forcr.tion yivon by tho. Air Gen Ldl»l Daparntnot 7
;ra to report today to tho Cborstabsarst Dr. Jco-cr, 3c:Hr^Tovpelkof,
linfrod von Dichthofcnstrasso 6/ll. As Jaogcr Is poin;? to bo absent untJO.

• _•»i Dj». amor rail h*vo to writ for c decision until that Cato. Tho
transfer of Dr. inner icins discontinuance of tho gas orcpcrLionts at 3 !at~
-rcil - m3 Strasbourg, as 11 ropAr.=-acnt cannot bo supplied duo to tho
necessary sp-cialic d knonlbd „, :?.) the rretieri Imarlodgo coined Dr.
Irrxjr through an .-tensive series of :cp:x*lnonts, cm only bo used by
hin, 3) on Dr. T7im>r»3 leaving " :iauptatumfUoJiror Professor Dr. Hirt
». 1 U V.-.va to tato over Ms lectures end rs Vo, considering his Jtato of
health, is d.*.cdr : or. ton overworked, bo can no Ion-or go on vlth
research '.nark. Inter!:, report on oxperirent-rosults up to notr '.HI follow
nosfc -.rock to be oubrdttod to tho Poic'.nCi'oVr.r " 3 . Tho intensification
of oxporinonta rnd research, r.s -..oil M tho continuation of tho uork at
rll, .-.a ordered by tho Rich Puohror DC on Che basis of our discussion
of 7 .V.«il, is o't of the question, if tho anil staff of co-v/orkors r.t
tho disposal of Professor Dr. :irt, uspocia-Uy Dr. inrver, is Tlthdrawn.

7.io problen to bo solved donmd co .str.nt?./ scientists Ttith lor.- years
of e ycrionco and specialised htosrlo’go. T >r. *i:or .rould nor xj otnloyod
only as troop doctor, which is totally vnocono.ical consider!^, his knou-
lodco and abilities, as his 3ervic.s as tre p doctor ;.ail never bo of vrcr-
Abiding i: ortanc., r!iile this cay noil bo said of his scientific activity,
’rtiovsly tho tecruitir." Office of tte affm •'» has, at that tino, con¬
tented itself xith the infomation of tlic Belch inis ter for aviation and
sapram Cc nanc.r cf tlie Goman Iaftucffo, -lihoi't concluding c dofinito
aye Lent. Dequest imediato steps for thi3 to bo reaediod; tho best-
•Quid be tc order Dr. Ulmer to tho


1031


3 Jaa4^nMN4-*!inrheck C^D)

Coot* Vo. I

' . C

• -;.3r. =t Ictst ratil 31.13.U2.=ad IT nocjjsar thrt tho .'oichscnt

oho .'Id aond ir. '.'d.3 'l“co troop doctor to tho TuTt.-T-Ifo ^for tho ti^xj
It. < vr ia corryndod to the '<'c.*_ 2 n 3>. '..'ith best rog^rda, si^nod
liarara. 0


*


1032


3 Januarj-^flO-l-Perria
Court So. 1


C


This latter deddely indicates that the experiments were underway and
the less of Warner caused the discontinuance thereof.

Noe, turn to Document number NO-194 which is offeredcAS Prosecution
Exhibit Number 265. It is a letter from Rudolf Bzandt to the SS-Medical
Office, regarding Dr. Wwmer, dated 27 May 1943.

■On 30 April 43 the SS-Central Office forwarded a letter of SS-Standart-
enfuehrer Sievera with the request to bring about the transfer of Dr. Warner
to the Waffen-SS, in agreement with the competent Luftwaffen-Inspectorate.

"In addition I a* forwarding another letter today of the 'Ahnenerbe'
society dated 14.5.43. I shall emphasise again that it is the.SS-Reicha-
fuehrer's explicit wish that the transfer be performed as soon as possible,
as it would be doubtful otherwise, whether the further war-important exper¬
iments of Professor Dr. Hirt, which, duo U« his state of health, can no

longer be carried out by him alone, and could be continued.

•

"I beg you to inform me without delay what has been done in the matter.

a -

3y order, signed Brandt."

The next letter ia a letter frem hudolf Brandt, Document NO-195, which
will be Proaecution Exhibit 266, dated 9 June 1943, and is addressed to
the "Personal Consultant (Referent) of the Reichsaarschall. Ministerial
Councillor Dr. Goemert."

"Dear party-tfcaber Goemert, Referring to our telephone conversation
of 3.6.1943, I request ycur support for a very quick re-tranafer of stall
surgeon Dr. med. habil. Karl Wooer who was transferred to the II Air Corps
frees the Luftwaffe Medical (Sanitation) .Training Department VJI at the
Anatomical Institute of the University of Strasbourg despite the understand¬
ing that he was to remain.

"Dr. hiaaer was at the disposal of Professor Dr. Hirt for his war-
ieportant gas experiments. Further details on the experiments could be
given to you by SS-Standartenfu.r.rer Si ewers, Bcrlin-Dahlon, Pueckler-
strasse 16.

"Steps are already being taken via the Medical Office to have Dr.

Winter transfoxTed to the Uaffen-SS. I should appreciate your expediting


ological Institute of the aaifcn-SS, in care of SS-Obcratumfuehrcr Schuo-


"Dear Cccrade Schuetruapf: 1 herewith confirm the tolegram which waa


sent t. you today. Technical fmale asaiatanta of Naischcnfeld for the
present aont again to Strasbourg to collect ecientific material. Arrival

e a » I § * *

at Cachau will be announced ijo due time. This ia, however, not to be ex¬
pected boforo 26 Sopt other 1944.

"Aa the evacuation of the Strasbourg office ia not yet concluded for
the tiae being and permanent »o...ing nttcrial will bo packed and nado ready
for transportation, both helpers will be employed lor the tiao being until
3.9.1944. Heil Hitler,..." and hero wc have handwritten initiala..."SS-
OborstuxmfuaKrer."

Tho next letter which le^a part of this document HO-492-PS, ia a letter
fra# Sievera, a certificate, dated 3 November 1943-

"Department H,..." department Hirt...-Strasbourg, of the institute for
Military Scientific Research, by order of the hwich Minister of tho interior,
Reichsfuehrer-SS Heinrich HlanUr and of the Reich Minister for Aviation
Suprcaa Conaandur of the Luftwaff;, President of the Reich Council for Re¬
search, Herman Geering, is carrying out research tasks of nilltary important,
for the accomplishment of which hedth-dtaaging poisons have to bo used.

"In the course of the researches the collaborators: Dr. t.lnmcr and
Frl. Schmitt have now contracted injuries to their health which according
to the opinion of an official doctor can only be removed through an increased
supply of fet and wilk. In order to prevent the loss of both assistants
‘-.'.rough further health disorders, persons which we cannot afford losing, a
preventative treatment of the occurred injuries is absolutely necessary.

For this a special ration of butter and unskinned milk is necessary without


3 Jaau^ry-tf-WO-lO-^Perrin
Court Be.1


c


cutting the rations of a^ft ani food-stuffs which ere due to them so far.
"In the interest of the defense of the country no indications can be


aade es to the nature of work which is to be carried out by the Institute
for Military Scientific Research. Signed Sicvers."

;.c turn new to Document MO-099 which is offered as Prosecution Exhibit
Hueb-r 268. This is a report free "Ihc Institute for Military Scientific
Research, Department H of the Research and Instruction Society "Ahnent-rbc",
Strasbourg, Anatomical Institute.

"Proposed IrontJWRt of poisoning Caused by Lost (9y Pi-ofcssor Dr. A.


Kirt and St-.ff Surgeon ol the Luftwaffe; Professor V Dozont) Dr. ..imner,
Strasbourg, 1944',.

"Gonoral Observations: The ei.cct of Lost as a poison gas is icaodiato
end, by causing other pathological reactions within th- cells and orgens,
it damages the ontiro efficiency of the individual cell as well as that of
the organs. The organism stands the best chcnce of absorbing the damage
c. usod by Lost, if th«r-; is c large vitamin r-strvo in the body. In admin¬
istering tho vitamin tr.j.Uaent el ter Lost dear.go hes been inflicted, ccro
ai3 1 be taken that the mediccmcnts ere not a<tainist-..rci indiserialnatcly.

The vitamin combinations (A.B co«plex,C) taken orally or vitamin Bi odmin-
ist-red intravoiously in glucose suspension have proved most effective.

Both methods aim at rrir.ing the resistance of the reticulo-ondothclial
systm, while simultaneously introducing therapeutic measures to protect thu
liv.r w!iieh can b-. further strengthens by food with a high c rbohydreto
and vit-ain content. Ahen definite d-mag- to the organs (liver, cardiac
susclcs, kidneys) manifests itself, vitamin treatment has to fco discontinued
and injections of glucose subsitutod, as th^ excretion of the surplus
quantity of vitamins results in e tosporary additional overst im ul a tion of
the cells of the excretory organs. In a diticn the interconnection between
the effect cf sulfonamide :nd vitamin 3 complex should bo noted. In the
c:se of pulmonary complications (bronchial pneumonia, pulmonary abscess)

*hich -re treated with sulfonamides, the administration of yeast is definitely


«*t indie-ted.


1035


3 J saw ry-#O*. T G-10-C.-Pcrrin
Court .No. 1


C


■The general trcatm-nt, :s act forth, especially the administration of
vitamin Bl glucose, ha* r. salutory effect Iso on the healing of cutaneous
nccroaia. In average and serious eases the length of the healing process
can be thereby be considerably decreased. Supporting measure s to be taken
arc bandaging the affected licb in splints until the appear; nee of clean
gr-nul'tion or placing th^ p tient in a suitable recumbent position as well
as vigorous, systematic psychotherapy. The psychological influencing of
the largoly op thotic Lost patient consitutes an essential part of the
treatment, duo to the possibility of thereby influencing the parasympathetic
system (circulation, circulatory system).

"Outline of Treatment: 1. All the directions given for the elimination
of the Lost poison aru to be followed carefully. Only after elimination
of the poison has resulted a*y Lost p tients bo treated and accommodated
together in closed rooms. (Initiation of Lost vapors.)

"2. Damp dressings with Rivalol (.1$ - .05%) anc1 Trypr-fl~vin (.1%)
have proved to bo •: successful treatment of the skin systoas (reddening,
swelling, blisters) of the lirst to fourth day. If necossary, ointment
dressings ( 10 * codliver oil-tannic ointment, boric acid ointment, ott.)

08 y bo opplied. V.ith the openi .5 of the blistors, tho exposed corium of
the skin becomes cxtrcooly sensitive to the drying reflex. Introductory
treatment; daily bathing with a potessiun pera?ngtna*e solution, constant
dr-mp dressings of Rivcnol-Tripaflavin solution; 1 ter on ointment dressings
(5% codliver oil-tannic ointment, boric acid ointment). ,.ith the* devel¬
opment of cutaneous necrosis end Increasing disinfection of th* affected
p-rts of tho skin, the damp dressings -re to bo substituted — if only for
nursing reasons— by ointment dressings '-fUr b thing with a potassium per¬
manganate solution at body temper: ture which are to bo eh ngod daily.

Usually -ftor too 17th day, the necrotic spots on the skin c:n bo done .way
with by drying them up or b-tt«r still by brushing them off (under n. rcosis
if necessary) with a pot-ssium permanganate solution. In this way the local
healing process is considerably shortened.


<*\ l


WJC-^l»3^»r3lxs;
art L'c. I

: C

ith tho boginaing of tho kntting of the s'.in granulation stimulating
intent dressings (alternately ccdlivor cil "intent, bcric acid oir.t-

9 *

rent, unguontino, ate. ora sufficient. lexer's codlivor intnont (only

2 hours painfull) cm nrevido a Strang st£:sulu3 oh -eld granulcti n ferrwt-

i,-n .*:rxti:n bo slcr.r end dreg itself out.

3. Goner-1 troutrant f average an.*' sert-us Lest drn-.'C bogi.n3

•ith r/dnistorlng a vitmin dxtiv: ccrr/rundod aa folia, n; Vitsin

(in tho fern ;f Vogano il (Vssancel) incrcaaing ?r n U tc ID drops

daily. Yi train C (Cmtm-Cobi in tablets) 2 tubl.ts 3 tines drily.

"crstso.'dr 3 toaapeons drily. One should consider '..'both r a vitamin

*

ccr- cund cf a«nlla.r proprrati n if na d bo ;rith tho ac’diti n of glucose
should bo produced ftr the combat tre pa. "uch r. ?<fri.cr nirtvro v-uld
haro tr be r.dinist.r ;d in incro-slng r.v.ntitiv.s us woll. In ull cusop
f absorb.d J/-st drra.go (liv^r dsrgo indicated by incroas30 socroti n rf


urcbi?inccon, in tiw urine, lr tor icteric s!in c-l-ring, cardiac nu.sclc
d-:v-;c irith tuchyc-rdics, kidney danago tdtb a.lbu:»n sec eti-n in tho
urine) tr.r.trnnt ^rith vit-run mixtures is V. bo disc- untinuod and tc ’ o sub¬
stitute by 5nJ -ctl'.ns rf vita-in 2 glvcoso. Irtfecti ns -re t bo g-V.on
sir *ly, sinco at fcsc height .f last da.v. c tho veins f tho ar.o incline
to throrbesis. In f:o latter c'so glvccs. bus tc bo adinistsr.d orally
-nd vitunin C 1 intramscul-rly. 7h-uo orists tho nsssibility, in .-veiy
c so f c nsidorablo Lost drur o, cf u sudden friluro cf circulr.ti n
Crer-sontly betroen tho 17th end lGth dr/) indicated *sy r. vxS: ros/snso
to heart rnd circulatory stimulants. Ileert stlrulmts (otrcpJrjttino coffoin,
digitalis) and dirculr.t ry stimulants, (ay rout 1, /rise 1, c^r.' -r, crud-


irs le), have th.a.f ro t 'so udnirdstcrcd --ith cere in sort .-s cases.

7iic tharaocutic r utiao valid fer all clinical treatment is particularly
•'lie' f r cases .f organic dangc.

lire is an thcr rap.rt tn pa go H3 cf yvr n r's d. errant b*cl:. It
is d.ccv. oht !f0 0S5, by \ugust Ilirt, -rich -.rill d at this tine as

r-aecirti.n Tecibit U . 269. I sugg at -at tho Tribunal road this,

•. r, I -..-ill n t r.al! it .at this ti-oe bi-t I d ish t- c-ll y.ur

r •


A


5


3 Jan 47 -tt-TJ C-ll-2- Soslaw
Court 3 d. 1


c

attention to the oenteaco on the top of pc&e 44 in connection with lost,
whero ho states that "During tho war I oxarlnol the effect of yollow-
crosa chacical wnrfaro ogont (Lost) on 11Ting tissue (not yet published)."
And ho outlines'hia Tarlous projocts in this report and his various

researches in flouroscont light and researches on normal functions of

• \ •

organs, livor, kldnoys, otc.

Tho noxt document on pego 47 of your Honor's document book No 012
will bo offorod as Prosecution Exhibit No. 270. It is a lottur fre^

Karl Brandt, Ifco Conoml Ccanlssloncr of tho Fuohror for Sanitation

and Health, to Hienler. This is dated 8 .‘larch 1944 and roads:

"Roich Fuohror: Snclosod ploase find the photostatic copy of an ordor
of tho Fuohror which shall only bo known to a very liaitod oxtont.

"Upon the instruction of tho Roich Marshal say I also request you
to sako this knocm to only tho absolutely ossontlal and loading person¬
alities ln-ycur aphoro of activity.

"I n.'solf would bo gratoful if you would induco thoso men on tholr
part to got In touch with so (Tol. 120050 oxtonsion 183) so that, duo
to tho urgoncy of tho givon ordor, 1 will bo able to sottlo tho sottor
with tho greatest oxpodloncy. Hoil Kitlorl (Signed) Karl Brandt
(Prof. Brandt), (handwritten marginal notation) For Ga Roich Logoi
Gozatto 'Ahnenorbo "Socioty."

Uafortunatoly, whon wo found this docuaont wo were unablo to find
tho attechod cqpy of tho ordor of tho Fuohror but with tho futuro documents
I Will introduco wo rill lndicato to tho Tribunal tho naturo of Fuohror
ordor. j

The noxt lottor is 4ocur.ont !I0 013, which is offorod os Prosecu¬
tion Exhibit Ho. 271. This is fraa Rudolf 3randt, dated 10 liarch 1944,
ad Crossed to Dr. Grawitz, Rolchsorzt SS and Polico SS Grupponfuohrcr.
'Enclosed I on sonding you a copy of a Fuehrer Docreo of 1 Harch 1944
for your- perusal and action. Tho Reicfcsfuohror SS roquosts you to got
in touch on your own initiative with Professor Brandt (Tel 120050,


extension 183) in regard to the urgency of the order given him by the

- 103 /-


3 Jan !:7-:;-7JC-113-'.-.3la:

“curt ”o. I

C

— * . •

ascfcror. Hell Hltlcrl (signature) Brandt. 3

Tha aa=Vlatter, '.peso Ij 9 f 7 nr cncr'3 dccuront bo7:, document He.

:r -013b, .-hicl: is irf.rod as ?ro«octuion Ha-doit !!e. 272 is alsc dated
10 "arch 19UL- It is a lottcr fron Rudolf ZS*andt to liov.rs in tho sono
regard. Ho says: J I tar Cenrado Hovers:

°I sent you in tho enclosed 007 * of an order of tho Tnohror of 1 : larch
19l*Ji, ith tho request to uHco note and act in tho ratter. Tho 'leioho-

• * ' • * M V

Tuohror 33 is roque sting 7 u tc contact Professor “randt (Tolophono:

120050, ort. 133) on account of tho 'v.cncy of tho instructions 1* on

liin by the ruohror. 'ioil Hitler . 1

?ho no:t is dccuruot !.'C-C13c, ’.’hich is eff-r.d at this tino as IYo-

socution .hdiibit Ho. 273. “vis is 10 "arch tho saao da to as tho other

letter, acklr esed tc Chief of tho ".3 Va'.r HeadWico 33 ObergrvvTien-

fuohi-or Juottner- “CborgrirncnffioJiror: Ilnclosod 2 an sending you a co;r-

;f a Tuolw r i'octoq f 1 He eh 19!iU 1th tho r-'v .st of y.avad and action.

'bil Hitlerl H. Errndt.' Hr'..*, the r.urr.r.r tc this letter, -f 10 arch

• •

19Ul, tc Hadolf Trandfc in tfds crnnectic.i. 'iho ne -t '.‘.ccvr'ont is ISO OUi,
Yeaecuti n Tidbit Hr. 27li, frer. tho 33 Grupponfuclir-r and Hoichsar-.t,
v. Cresritz, addressed to Rdd-lf Srendt. -I an confirrlos tho arrival to¬
e-ay of 7 ur letter cf 10 "arch !J», fi?a Ho. lCCC/Jih top secret, sont,
acccruinc tc tho recoist, cn U: : 'arch Id: 1th tho Aiohr.r's socrot or.or
r.tt'dx d, -r.d i radiately gat in tnsch ,1th Professor 2-andt."

0 turn nev V. d-cu-ent lb. IiO- 01 ?, nhr.ch cent: 1 ns th. soc.-ot corres-
v r/encc. i'ev, this document is introduced as eYaseevtien xhibit . 2J5;

and :.*ith the :dnoe ,rc>Vd c :py befsro 7 nr. Tenors, tho date a,t fho top io
M •nril 19li6, -huoh is cbvi usly a t. 707:7 ic -1 error trtiich should 1 x 5 _
char. :d \ 7 ril 12 , 1 ?U:. Thi3 is - "reseed tc Hud-lf Tranit by 1 lovers.

xecr.-ling to instruct! ns I contact.d 33 Zriyadefvohrcr, Prci . 3r. H~r.t.t
-r.: re-ert.d tc in n 31 arch 19U; at 'loclits abcut the reserreh -ctiritiep
13 "auptstrua fuahrer rr-f. Dr. Irt. Cn that -ccasicn, I ,avc bin the
1 -ns -..-a had cut -.ut


1039 .


3 wan ?i7-13-TJC-U-J*-3aslarr (1SD)

Coart ::o. i

C

by this tira by Prof. Ilirt .or trostoant against Ir-dhfoctions of irt-Acli
I enclose a copy so ycu can Skw it to the cichsfuohror-S3 if necessary.

"Prof. Brandt explained to :* that hu -:ou2d '?e in 3tras3bourg during
the first •.’oa!: in April and -could then discuss detrdlfl tilth Prof. !*irt and
jot in touch with no again aftorwrds. 7 allfill all.-ays koc? you inforood.
rail -Atlor J . u 3ievors a

Dow, *.:e arc beginning to 30 a tho light as to rhat t'As official do-
croc contained. This decree is a*docroo uhich gave Ctrl Brandt tho
authority to carry cut research in chehisal warfare. Thcrafbre, all th:co

- a- \

nttcra rrore of o:rtroc» intorost to ‘is and, os you see, Brandt Stated in

Ids letter that ho would be ir. Jtrassivr,: during tho fir -.t vcok in April

/ • • * •

and ho would then discuss the do tails -.dth frofossor Ilirt in rogord to
o.-rperinonts on huaan boings in Can? '.’atrailer that were being carrisd out
at that tine.

~iio nert is (tocunent !’o. IJO-O X£-\, which is off trod os Ibosocutlon
TnhiWt Ho. 276. This is detod 9 Juno ?-?Ui and is a letter fro-, tio
Ccvdssio^or-Cor.sral of the Tuohror on b-aclth end ..?dical natters, Ilarl
Brandt, ad'rossod to tlwi Toichsfuehrer S3, Berlin.

G .Toichefuehror: Prisoners ftro b -?lo~cd, dth boat results, in

*

several 7. factories and in lants producin' cho.dcal warfare protection

e •

reticles. I inspected tho ca ps on several occasions and was, on tho
■Stolo, favorably increased by then.

"In tills connection, ho -ov.-r, I -.ras often inforrcc’ of the difficulties
encountered -..'tor. cccorcofating nw prisonora. Tho accomodation and se¬
curity Treasures involvsd, c double or triple, y.Ttly olo<Jfcri:iod fonco,
quite .ftor. cause far-rceching difficulties and occasionally groat dolays.
’orId it bo possible to introduce, in tills connection, sene inprovoronts?

I world bo grateful if this question could ‘>0 cnarined b* one of -err c::-
;crts. Heil Hitlerl Tour (signature) 7a-l frandt. J

•lerc is Brandt and his interest as Tlcnipoter.tiar-/, so to \C~', on
the cteo icrl -.-rxfaro, asaaining tho factories producing w'-ssc .da:leal \:;r-
are reduction articlo3, suggesting in Ills official capacity to


3 Jan !:7^~JC-n-S-SaslCT
Court Ed. I


; ' • C

the Hoichafuahror that conditions 'ro renovated in t^:sc various can : >3.

To turn not? to document I!o. IIO-ClS-D, \di_ch is offered as
Prosocuticn iibit lie. 277. This is d ted Juno 1?, 19U;, fron defendant
•>v»ns ‘ ^nadtf eddrassad to C3- raid Pohl of the YHA. ‘Dear Oborsrup^an-
Juohror: I -.roxld ’xj jratoful IT you -rauld let no leimr your opinion on tho
roquart of 3: Orupponfuehror Prof. Dr. Drendt, boforo I inTorc t-»o Doiclis-
fuobror 33 of it. I enclose a co jf of t:o letter of S3 Qrupponfuchror
Prof. Jr. Drandt. (Si^ud) Hudolf Brandt.*

?}- 7 TI3TT: The Tribunal will non rocsss until ono-tliirty
o'clock.

..(A roc a ss was tclxn until ?J30 hours.)


tm

3 Jar.-A- 12-'-AZ>Ec-rd (FL)
Court Ivo. I


COTBZCTfl) COP T
AFT3RM00H S 2SSI0H

TrZ liAiwIAL: Thu Tribmcl is again in tession.

- • JfcliM-T: I fey it plxrsc Tribunal, w,_ will read Docu.aur.t
Ko. 016 (c) in our presentation, which is or. >-gc 55 of trv. English Do¬
cument Book, and .e oifor this Docaatnt r.a Prosecution's .Exhibit
Ho. 278. This is LtUr froq Oswald Pohl, Chief of the SS-JccasaLc
and Administrative Kain Office to tb. defendant Rudolf Brandt. It is
dated 22 Jure 1944, ard it is in re3pon*. to tbo letter written by tho
defendant Krrl ®r.u*dt with ro’spuct to hio inspection of Certain facto¬
ries uhich wr. manufacturing gas. T. letter roods cs follows:

"Over Corrr.de Dr. Brandt:

"Thu ueic -siivliTer SS gave a*, for further action, your letter of
June 9th 1944, concerning conditions of jrisjiv/ra -orking in o-v-rrl
K-factori-s."

I ai.iht s-y, vrvntheticnlly, K-fnctories neon ^s factories.

"Accoiaofati.n of prisoners is exclusively the t-ck of contr-ctors,
to tb. n-isor.re are allotted \ y us. On such occasions, definite
. obi' ations are olnced upon contractors. Security reasons an!- their
carrying out absolutely imperative.

■Thu dry before yesU-rd-y, I axked the hoichsfi^hrur SS, when I re¬
ported to him, '\.t;-r I could allow some iaprovuacnts in this cor.lection.
The heichujfueJirer SS -u.swervd in the iKgativw. >

"I aa ready, nofcJithat; ndirv, to discuss with contractor concerned


- 1042 -


3 Jnn-A-ATD-12-l-B-ard (PL)

Court Ho. I


f>


■K3. Grupoenfoohxvr Dr. Brtndt baa riot yet r^pli^d", on the "20 July
19AA", dth the. signature "Fauler.

This letter, along »ith tto othur orv froc th. deferent Sr.rl
Brandt indicate a to had, ct least, cxUcisiv- influence and pooor :?ith


respect to


«" -


- 1042 a -


3 Ja»-A-ATE—12-2-5eard (PL)
Coat So. I


C


ch art O il mrfare probloaa. And, this power uxxioubtedly arose out of fur¬
ther orders which ho receivod in March 1944 concerning gas warfare.

cooe on to Document .No. 005, which will be Prosecution's Exhibit
No. 279. This letter is to Heinrich Higgler, and it concerns a request
for concentration caap imates toe experimental purposes in connoction
with the gas knemn as S-substanco. The letter is dated 22 Hovaaber 1944,
and the originator of the letter has not been determined as the signature
is illegible. Iho subject of the letter is: "Experiments with N-substanco. 1 '

" Reforcnce: CKtor of Roich-Loader SS of 15 May 1944.

"To: Rcicb-Loador: Dear Leader:

"Thu Chiof of the Technical Office in the SS-Chiof Administrative
Office, SS-Grupponfuohror Schwab, has contacted no in Soptcrabor of this

f •

year with tho request to Airnish him with 2 doctors, who as oodical ex¬
ports wore to witness experiments with .S-substanco, which ho was carry¬
ing out at tho time by ordor of U» Kuorrur. This was above all a not tor
of th- clarification of tho question, if M-f hstiroe was to bo considered
for chuaical warfare or otherwise.

■For this purposo I have furnished my leading pathologist, SS-Haupt-
sturmbuohror University Teacher Dr. Sachs, as well as thu doctor working
on ancostrial hcritago —"

Which moans tho Ahnoncrbo Society.

"SS-HauptsturmfuBhror, University Toaclxr Dr. Ploetnor."

The Tribunal will recall, wo tavo boro Dr. Ploetnor who was mentioned
previously in connection with exporimonts at Dachau, more particularly
with the blood coagulation exporimonts there. And, Dr. Ploetnor was tho
head of Department in the Ahnoncrbo Society. The letter continuos:

"In accordance with these investigation experiments carried out on
25 September 1944, the necessity has now arisen to carry out several ax-
jxriments on hiran beings for the final clarification of the physiological
effect of S-substanco on an through tho huaaa skin. Five prisoners aro


. - 1043 -


3 Jan-12-3-A-A?D-Seard (DJG)
Court Me. 1


C


necessary for the execution of these experiments. It la highly inpro¬
bable that the experiment will cause any permanent damage.

■In accordance with your order of 15 May 1944, Reich-leader, I have
obtained the opinion of SS-Gruppmfuehrer Professor Gebhardt, SS-Gruppjn-
fuehrer duecka and SS-Oberfuehrer Panainger. They road as follows:

D SS-Grup oenfu ehrer Professor Dr. Gebhardt :

■I am certainly in agreement with the suggestion, and request that
the directions for the supervision of the carrying out be issuod directly
by the Reich Doctor-SS and the Police I

■2) SS-Qruroa nf uehrer Oluccka :

■I have received your.letter of 7 Uovcaber.1944 with regard to tho
procurement of five prisoners for tho experiments which ere to be carried
out with N-eubstsnco.

"For this purpose I have had five prisoners who have been conduced
to death in the Sachsonheuscn concentration camp placod in readiness, on
whom theso experiments can be carried out.


"From tho point of viow of the criminal police tho experiments
intendod th.re aro to to welcomed. Thercforo no misgivings oxist against
the handing over of prtsonors for inoculation.

■If political prisoners should be considered, tho Chief of Offico
LV, SS-Gruppcn fuehrer Mueller, would still hnvo to be consulted, but he
will certainly lilcowisc grant permission. 11

Tho lottsjT continues:

"I respectfully request tho trcnsaittel of the pcrnisAfor., so that
th- experiments can tc initiated.

"Hcil Hitlerl

"(illegible signature)"

T.e sec, however, from the letterhead which is the Reich Doctor SS end
Felice that this letter originated from tho office of Doctor Grawitz. Now
cf course, *c have several defendants in tho dock who were in the offico
of the Reich Doctor SS and Police; crcng those being the defavdanta
^r-gewsky


1044


3 *ni^2^A-^TD-Beerd
Coart So. 1


■ad Poppecriick. This letter is quitelnterostiog for soreral roasons* not
the lo*st # which is this order of 15 Say 19Ui, which is nontioned here on

page 56.


*


3 JaD-A-JP-13-l-BiAklej (PL)
Court So. I


C


Thu writor of this letter says: "In accordance with your erder,

■acardng K iml or's order of 15 May, 1944, "I have obtained the opinion
of SS-Grupponfuonror Prof. Gcbhardt , SS-Gruppenfushrer Gluocka, and
SS-Obtrfuehrer Pansingor." Now, it seems that there will bo little ques¬
tion but that this order in fact nesnt that medical experimentation cn

concentration caap inmates had to be cleared through ttosc three indi-

*

vidua la because in tho letter itself they are asking permission from
Heinrich Himmler to carry out thoso experiments.

Tho writor of the letter says. "In accordance with your letter of
15 Hay 1%4 I have gotton tho opinions of Gcbhardt, Gluocks and Panaingor."

And who is Gcbhardt? Ho is tho do fond ant in tho deck who was tho
chiof surgeon in tho office of the ctoconscd Dr. Grawits, rfho was Gluocla?
Gluocka was hoed of Amt D in tho Economic and Adainistrativo Office, Main
Office of tho SS, dch tad adnir^r-rat'v. control ovor concentration
caaps. Honco thoy tad to go to him and advioo him of nodical exporioonts
to bo carried out on concentration cacp inmates. Who is Pansingcr? Pon-
7 A ngur was one of tho chief officials in the criminal police; and ho is
being consulted in this instance because the suggestion is mrdo that thoy
will oxperiaunt on criminal prisonors. But it is Interesting to noto
that SS-Oborfushror Panringor says if*the political priwncra should bo
considorod, thon you must go to anotter agoncy; you nuct go to Gruppen-
fuehrer Uuollor, who was one of tho distingoishod gontlooon in tho Gos-
Upo. So wo soo in this one little document how thoso natters woro hand¬
led and doarod bofore thoy wro carried through.

The document also proves that contrary to using criminal prisonors
exclusively, tho letter itself shows that political prisoners can bo used;
but if you wanted them you had to go to Hue Her.

This coop lotos tho presentation of docmaunts cn the tost oxporimonts
for tho moment. I would liko to go back, however, and call tho Court's
attention again to the letter on page 52 of the English document book. That
is Document No-015 aid ms introduced as Prosecution Exhibit 275. Thon wo
submit

- 1046 -


3 Jsn-A-JP-13-2-BilcIr (PL)

Coart So. I . • V f I

that this iotter In and of itself brings .hoc* criminal infornetion to
cfco defendent Karl Brandt of the exporlcnr.ts which wero carried out with
lost gas on living hunan goings. You will recall that this Fuohror or dor
concerning chuaical warfare, idiich was received by the dofondant Karl
Brandt, was forwarded in copy to Himmler's offico, with the roquost that
it bo distributed to the necessary agoncios in the SS; and it is inte¬
resting to note who got the order.

One of tho first mod to got it was the famous Dr. Grawitz. One of

* ^ * * - • • — k

tto other gcntlcoon to get it was the dofendant Siovors, loader of the
Xhnenorbo Socioty and its Institute tar Military and Scientific Roscarch,
which h/wi by 1944 a considerably background of experience in experimen¬
tation on living subjects. Who else got it? The Fuohrungshauptcat, head¬
ed by H-tis Goottnor. hhy did he got it? Ho got it for tho reason that ho
was chief of the operational headquarters of tho Kaffen .SS. In other
words, it was his agency which directed the igr.ting troops of tho SS in
the fidld; and ns such he, of courso, was considerably intorostod in
problem of chemical wirfaro.

So I think it is important to note to whoa tho Roichsfuohror con¬
sidered it important to distribute this Karl Brandt Fuuhrer ordor. But,
casing back to Siovors' letter, which is Prosecution Exhibit 275, ho re¬
ports to Rudolf Brandt that bo has boon in touch with Krrl Brandt and
rep or tod to him in tho lattor part of 'larch, 1944, about tho research
activities of Prof. Hirt; and, of course, by this date a not inconsido-
rablo nunb^r of living human beings had boon experimented on and killed
by this tw Prof. Hirt arri his associates in tho concentration craps
of SachaonhBuaon and Katiwoilor. Sievors s*™ Karl Brandt the plans workod
cut by this time by Prof. Hirt for twnteent of Lost infection; and Prof.
Brandt, that is, Karl Brandt, o*plaiiwd trot he could be in Strasbourg
the first week in April end would t: an disease <fctails with Prof. Hirt.

Of course, tta Tribunal will recall that the University of Strasbourg _
was where Prof. Hirt was en^ged or supposed to be engaged in the teaching


- 1047 -


3 Jcn-A-JP-l>3-aiiklc7


Court Nc. 1 Q

cf students, radical student3; and it will be inter-sting tC nut the question
tc Karl '.r-r.dt, IT end when b- takes tb- stand in this ers-, ns to whether
b. did in fret go to Strr.as >.urg .md if sc whit he had t; s-y tc Prof. Hirt.

It sh.uld sis-, be r-r-ur,red that th- affidavit .f ho defendant RudeIf
Br-ndt c nc-raing oxper-x-nts with JJJtr.rd gis vory explicitly and clearly .
st‘tea tr. t wxperi unto n human b-in 6 s continued after tlx- into when Ksrl
Sr'wdt received the Fuehrer order c -ncarning cbaaic-sl wr.rfr.rc. I therefore
think tb. px\of ij clear that th. defendant Kiri Brandt bo-rs indeed a major
ah-r- -f r«sp;n*ibility in the crimes ufrich w-ru jx-rp-trated during the c urac
of those - xperi -onta.

I w uld lilt, -t this tire t. .rvw *bo witru-sa F-rdinmd Hell criled tc

• • « «

tlic st-nd.

TH- FRESHER* Th- rib-l ’.rill ju or. tho witness ? w rdinaiid Roll.
F-JlDI.lJfD HOLL, r. witness, tc.ic t.i. stand and testified rr fallowsj
JUDOE SL3Ri;JGi The witness will r els- his right band r.j* t?Joo tne oath,
repo-tin^, after coi

I sww-r by Qcd, tlv. .o-l-j.tj cm'. Omniscient, th-t I will speak tho puro
truth mC v-ill withh Id ar.’ r.dd. :i t:iin„.

(The witness repeated the <cth.)

JUDGE SE3RIHG: You -“7 sit down.

DIR XT B U' Lc.TiON


BT21. CrLuiETi

Q. \itrxi83, y nr na-v. is /erdinand Bril? *

a. Yos.

Q. I ur last nnu is ff.'Ollod E- -1-1 ?

A. Yoa, that'a c-rrcct.

Q. You were bom on 21 DoC'.wber 1900 it Landsrailc-r-Ro&jn, iireis
3ttw,iUr?

A. Th-.t is correct.

«• I u s >rrn citisen?


- 10ix3 -


3


Court No*l.


•Jtlyj


.v« I nr. a Gcrmn citi-^n*

Q a .ovd y^u -r. -t pr.Ss.nt d rdeii_d -t 6 Kilhc&strcsBv, in Landswoilerv

“■ I

Rciant

lea, 6 ViIho lostra3ac at Lanswoillcr-Rcdcn.

3« Vh-.t l* jrrur prifK-nt occup-.ticn, V.itoeSB?

A. I ar: n w * business -i-ji-'or.

Q. Did yu Siy_n business enn-'.^r?

a

A. Ics.

Q. '.fc-t business d: y u am-,., itn-ss?

A* I v. business in a clr-jia.

Q. Now, hare y.u alv-yr live.' in Gcraany, hitn.ss?

. • I *| ‘ • '

A. Until cy -.ni,r*.ti-n in 1935.

« ♦»-- — — —- ——w “ ■ ■ • —— ——— -

Q. ^nd to wh-t place lix* you » .iir-U, fitness?

A. I o.-i^r-Uid tc /r-nrj.

4* .Jid did y u o_\i y t*. fr r tiw Sa-r?

A. Yos.

q. Vhy did yvA: icav.. the S~ -r ir. 1935?

A* Sociujk. .-f p.liticai reasons*

Q. ‘.s it in th-.t yc-r th't *.iu. o -r rns roturnod to Ger.;any?

.v, Yos. th-t is ccrroct.

J. H » Ion*- did j-.u st-y in Prince?

.« Until the tlix. I was arrested oy the C. st-po d-rdoaux.

4

Q. .»nd wh_n was th'.t, .-l--SO, .itr>o337
A. Th-t was on the 11th f October, 19li0.

Q. Kill you pie-sett 11 the TriV.Jt-1 why ycu w.ro - -■^dsto:' by the Gestapo
.u In 1935 I went to ?r-iice -s - politic-1 teifr-nt bocauso I was an
I worked in Franco as a aetnl w rkcr until 1 ?UC» Then upon the

-O

:ccup-ti;n by Goraan troops I w-s arrested r.t beroe-ux by the. Gestipo. I t.is
t*„xn to COrr.iny into tiu ucA.uw-ld c oceatr - ti n cv:p.


'• then die ycu arrive. in 3uc'i.rr»ald?

- 101*9 -


3 Jin-A-JP-13-5-Slakley


C


Court No. 1

A. It sust Invo boon apcr.rd r.tjly in the tid-'lo oi Docoi*or, 19^0.

Q. *5ero yju * -psliticax or erlaml pria-wur in Buabcnw-ld?
la I was a political prisenor*

Q. Did you wc-r the rod triangle?
la I wore tha rod triangle.'"

Q. How lon^ did y-.u st*j in Ducharm-ld?

1, I rci.ai:i<jd in Buchomslc' ntil ~rch, 19 U2.

Q. h-t happened t? y u thu.a?

... In 19U2 - tmaspert wu.t tc 'latswcilcr in order t ■ c-.ietruct tn:.t

eeap*

Q. h-t work did } u perform in Natiwcilcr, Vdtnoas?

... In Natswwiltr I worked ,n at:nos fr th. stwv, pile for about two
wewks. Th-n I wont t t:v. .uapit-j.. I was th*n a ce-’ic-lretiat-.nt.


- 1C50 -


3 J»i>A-CZS-lli-l-Cock.

Court Sc. 1«


r

Q. Sew did you ever hear of the Ahnenerbe Institute or Ahnanerbe Station
at the Hatzveilor Concentration Ceap?

a. This AhDCDcxbe Station there was under ry supervision.

Q. kell now what do ycu naan by "it was under your supervision"? Do
you a.an to 5 y you ware all nurses i:. that part of the hospital under the
direction of the ahnenerbe?

a. In October, 19U2, Professor Dr. riirt cane into this cajp and in the
•' # •
block shich was the hospital, at that tine it was divided into two parte.

One section was considered as Ahnenerbe and the other one was further trotted

as a hospital for the inmates. I had this whole bl,ck with the Ahnenerbe

subordirv-te to me as too so-called Xapo or Capo of the Ahnenerbe.

*. In other words, you w„ro a ore thing in the nature of a chiof nurse
In tho Ahnenerbe?

A. l«a.

W. Now did you have any occasion ifclle you w_r« worldas a nurse in
the Ahnenerbe to witness any exporir.cnta curried out on living human beings?

*. lus, I personally was present.

4. till you plsaso oxplain to tho Tribunal exactly what you saw and
what happened?

». In the Middle of October when the Ahnenerbe hr.d finished its
preparations several i mates were selected of Professor Dr. Hirt who woro
still in good physicrl shapo and who still wure at least lookii^ hoalthy, and
hoy brought into this roaa. There w„re two rooms all iogothcr, and in
oach roosi fifteen aen wore billetted. Then first of all these poople wore
iiven 3S food for approximately tar weeks and then the exp orients were begun
h:n these people w^re taken to tho pathological department and thero the
first expertr^nts with liquid gas substance r c ro B'.de.

Q. ‘.ihcn was this liquid gas exp.ri-xnt made, witness?

A . It was imbdiately after the Ahnenerbe had been co-p luted.

Q. That would be in October or rieveeber, 19U2, then?

a. Yes, that is correct.


- 1051 -


3 Ja»--GES-lI-2-Cock
Court No. 1.


if

Q. And bcw mmsy persons wore used in this first liquid gas experiment?

a. as I have already previously wsntioned there wore tm to ora. and in
*ach rqca fifteen aen were billotted. Therefore, thoru wore thirty persona
all together.

*. Now, witness, were those persons concontration ca-ap inmates?

a. Oily.

W. Do you know whether or not theso concentration camp inmates volunteq
od to bo expert arnted upon?

A. Professor Hlrt before solocting these people gave thon a locturo and
told thua that if soc*. of then would volunteer he wauld apeak with Hirenlor
and seo that those people would be released. However, in tho ct.«p it had
bocooo ccoson knowledge that other oxperiraonts wero being corriod out in oth,
carps, so that nobody volunteered. Thon these people woro Just ccllod up.

Q. „ere political as woll as crirtnal prisoners among the experiments'
subjects?

a. Without oxception.

Q. And wore nationalities oth>r than — w,re porsons of nationalities
other than Oomana selected?

a. At that tino thore wore Russians, Polos, Czechs and Germans in the

car-p.

q. and wura so» of thos. o*her nationalities included among theso
ox{-,riBontal subjects?

loo. /

a. Now, win you tell th„ IVibunal in your own words about this firstj
Gxperinent carried cut with liquid gas, Just what you>*w happen, whethor or
not any of the experimental sxfcjecte died, whether they suffered any pain,
etc?

a. In the first expert lints, Professor n irt and the 3or.:an Luftwaffe
Officer who was carrying out tho expertaints had the prisoners completely
urairessed and they caa, Into the laboratory cne after the other and then I l.
tc hold their arms and they received ten centimeters abovo the lower arn aqii

there was o rus -rep of the fluid put upon that part of the an. Then tho

- 1052 -


3 Ju>^-«S-ll*-3-^ook.

Court So. 1.


C

people who had been treated in uch a way had to go into an adjoining roon.
They had to stand there for one hour with their arns sprayod. /vfter
approximately ton hours or it nay have perhaps been sonewhat longer, then
bums began to appear and froa then on they were spread over the whole body.
Who raver a drop of this gas touched the body there would bo burns. Even some
poopla tec ace partially blind. They suffered terriblo pains so that they
were hardly abla to bear them. It w^s a loos t inpossiblo to stay in the
vicinity of those people. Thon the patients wore photographed ovory day, th
is all the places whore buxns'appoared and approximUly on the 5th or 6th <
tiu had our first casualty or fatality. At that tine the fatalities ware stil
sont to Strossbourg because our caap did not have any crosstory. Hcwovor,
the coprso was again returned and it was dissected in tho Ahrwnerbe section.
The &>at part of the lungs and other organs had boon for tho moot part
dostroyod an then in the courso of the following day an additional seven
people died.. This trwotasnt lasted for a proxiaately two months until they
wore soswwhat more able to bo neved and then these peoplo wore sent to anotho
coop.

Q. witness thoro wor- about uight deaths among tho first thirty
peoplo ojqjoria-nted upon, is that right?

A. las, that is right.

*. Did they perferr. autopsies on any of tho people who had died?

I

a. les, I told ycu Lanadi&toly.

f

AtrJ you wore abla to obs-rvo es a result of the autopsy that tho g
had infected and destroyed tho lunge and other parts of tho body?

a. I alone had admission to this, ahnenorbo.

Q. ?,ill ycu rop-at that, ploasa? I did not understand it.

a. I alone had on try to this Ahnenerbo room.

Q. How, witness, you have explained to the Tribunal how ti-is first
series cf experiments was carried out on approximately thirty imotes of the
canp. rfas there a second series of experiments?

a. Yes, the exp.riaants in th gas charter.

- 1053 -


3 Jao-A-Ot^lWt-Cock

Coart Ho. 1.


/*

Q. Here these axperissnto with liquid gas like tht first ones?

*• Io3, they were liquid too. They were snail anpuloe of from one to
two cubic cjntiaoters each h a nd ed to the patients who were tc be taken to
the gas chaxter about 500 aotora distant free toe caj^, ant tve people elwnya
entered this gas chaster at to^ ssoe tiae. Tho gas charter was of course
locks -1 and then one of the prisoners hat to sntsn these aopul-s oral thus they
had to inhalos this gas «hich was escaping, ant then afterwards sosotioos,
of course, they Were unc.nscicus, an- they were brought back to consciousness
an- returned to the Ahnonortjo Doparbxnt and there the treat wnt continued am
the pre^ross of tho diso^ae waa ebs^-ved.


C urt Ho. 1

Q And what did you observe about tr* condition of these experimental
subjects who were forced to inhale tto fumes of this G m? Sbat hap. cned
to toes?

A The results were approximately the same as the results fra-, the liquid
Sc -* otlaoa 1 U8ed °Wm in order to get the breathing organs back to
work. Certain individuals suffered death through lack of air because wo wore
not successful in reviving then, but there was the same measure of burns as
in tho iirst coses. •

Q In other words, the lungs of Uses victims vero also dostroyod?

A Yoa. I have seen these, lungs, tlw lunga of these people -.*0 lad boon
dissected. They wore about the size of half an apple then. Tlioy wore oaten
away; full of pus.

i * * * ^ 1 1 1» • * • • • . •

Q Witness, can you tell the Tribunal approximately hen: many people died
in tliis second sorlos of exporimonts?

A ’.fnilo I was thoro, that is to say. until 19u3, which .scant about a year
dnrinc rfcich thoso experiments wore carried out, approximately 15,0 pcoplo wore
troatod in that tamer.

C Can you say approximately hotr -any of theso persons died as a result
of the experiments?

A That is soccthing which is difficult to ascertain. I can oscortcin
'.l.eso who diod in the can >, of course, but as soon as those nationts
T^ro .-Juost reedy for transport, the;* went to Auschwitz or to Bel sen or to
Lublin; to the various largo cams. Th :: I was ablo to ascortain later,
quite by accid-.nt, what happofled. A’naigJibor in uy village tos attending such
an experiment. Ho was living rhou he -risd one of those transports, but ho
diod later. *

3 .jc you telling us, Witness, that t-»co experimental subjects vho
3 tlioso experiments wore tra Tsyertcc* to other camps and exterminated?

a tfwt they wore doing with then in other ca^>s, that is something I
dc not laiow.

* i ‘ i ~ i tell the Tribunal, ap rcrinatoly, how many >orsons you know
■led in ilatzwcilcr, itself, out of this original figur. of lpO tho wero


-n.arisen ted upon?


- - 1055 -


L


3 Jon Ii7-^-:A*-lS-2-Fl-_xgcrald
Ccurt i*c. 1


A during the first experiments, I :xan the liquid oxpcriiscnts—there wore
four axporiaenta — tie average death toll was 7 to 8 poo>ic out of every
30. The gas experioents were sisilar. Later experiments were carriod out
by uoan a of injections. The people were taken to the crematory ri.iht aray.
There ecu a special reen attached to tho crematory, a so-called cick roco.
After that, those people were never seen again.

Q Do you know whet happened to thou, Witness?

A feu :car to those people who 'font to the crccatcry? r.icy 'rcro
imcdiatcly cremated when they wore dead.

Q Those people were those who had be .. Given injections?

A Tcs.

Q Thooo injoctions wore give,, by Dr. ,'lirt or under his supervision?

A' Undor his superrision.

Q Do you knor tho content-of the materia? ttiich was injected?

A That I do not know. !Io.

Q witness, you have told us about liquid 30 a experiments, and about
Zrj which '.-as inhaled, and about thoso injections, were there a try
otlor types of o^criccr.ts which you recall that were c endue tod under
Dr. Hirt's supervision? •

A 'fes. Ri-jht at th>. end, durln, the last couth I wa3 tl:oro, pooplo woro
givon oa.oti.ing to drink out of a cup. Dut during this ac^on, 1 tea rcliovcd.
i wr_ tranaforrod to another cam . what tho outcome was in that ease is •

00 , lotting I Jo net kr.ow.

*! Toe do net knew what kind of ‘iq.'Ad tl;is was?

A No. That I do not know eitt—r,

4 im snj you r.-cro transferred frc*. Hatxiroilor; rhen did that occur?

A That was before Christina, 19m3.

Q T.y ucro you transferred. Witness?

A It wls a punishaont.


k - Funiahaont for what?

•- Because I, as a medical orderly, ias supported those patients too ouch.

W Shore were you transferred to in the. last part of 193u?

- 1C56 -


3 Jan-A-2U-15->Fitigtreld (FL)

Court Ho. I

i> To Innoahcia near Raatatt.

Q.- Bcforo wg leave Nataroilor, I would like to make sure, that
tix. record ia clear about these gas experiments you have told us about
at Hatxwcilor. Ia ie correct that there wore four aeries of ejperimunta
with liquid gaa which were carriod out on oppreodaatoly 30 persons in
each exporincr.t?

A.- Tos. That ia quite correct.

Q.- That would bo a total of 130 persons approxinak.ly.who wero

oxporiountod on with liquid gaa?

A.- Right.

Q.- And out of each of wch e<-rioa, you say a round seven or eight
people died? v, *,

A.- Tea.

Q.- And with th» uxporlncnta with gas, in th. gaa chanb*r, thcro
were about throo sorioa of uxperinunta of 20 persona occh7 Is thr.t right?

A.- Yos. Thr.t ia alao correct. Thoao rooos wero always filled ccra-
ple tely.

%

Q-- Aa I understand you, you stated that approx irtuly tho scao nuo-
b.r of people died In the gas experLaunts ca died froa the liquid ox-
p -rL-aonte?

A.- Tos. It was approxioatoly tho senb. At that tinu, ono tied ao
amy dead in tho canp that it wca almost irpoasibL. to aac-rtain figuros.

Q.- You hive testified that th. oxporLaonta began around November,

•

19A2, and you loft tho caap to go to Imcshein in about Decosfccr, 19A3.

Ia that right?

A.- Yoa.

Q.- Hew far ia Innusheim froa Hatsmoil&r?

A.- That ia approximately 70 to 30 idloaeters.

Q.- Wore thiso gaa oxperioents still goins on at th. tino you left


KatiBeilor in tho latter part of 19A3?


te 1 COr °* 1 °° tilC8r OC3aa ^°n s that these cxpcrlncnta rtrrc

continued.

Q  lens «« they centime, do ^

A Outll the evacuation of the cm*, ifctmoller.

9 ' Ap.roxlmtoly .hen did chat occur?

■■ Upon tlx epr-rcoh „ ^ hurled., .rules W , ta , uilra .

The ect* 1( ~ —»W partly tc Dccha. aM partly to Sectary rear

'JUeWUlrg.

1 ;,ltnt “’ *“ y0U h ‘- J £ ^c yru vert in fcttWier , that
oaportaent. w&o carried «t on c-nccr.u-a.Un car* lnua.es nth
ty^hua?

A Injcctuna .ore carried out, yea, - r did not actually .to It

Id0n0t taar ’ h0thCr “ «■ «.-Ucd'/ovcr or t .ahold. A little
later on, afur these Injection, had boon Irfllctcd, half of tin urate. of

“* TOr€ • lek - <“ • W yatlant. uc there.

™ IBt0 * “' C Ixtoi-sm no uric-, c Jc enter or leave.

'I lot. neon to say t.Vra nr an opliulc of typhoid nnj Vphus In
fct-nrcilor?


- 1053 -


3 JcD-A-JB-16-l-Karrow

Co art So, 1


this?


. ikRd wbon


km That WT» 4 a early aa February, 19LL.

}• Now, ho* did you know that these typhus injections had boon made?
Did you ax those or did scat body tell you?


km I have told yoc that spotted fever injections wore or.de. No, I didn't
aay that. Correction. I only s“id that shortly after the injections, a spotted
fever end typhoid epidat-c broke out in the crap.

Q. Do you know whether, aside frea th_ epidemic, any rcopla died r.s a

result of the injections? _ _._ *

•

k» Tes. La I have already told you right in the beginning thoy wore

•

ianjdiatdly transf-rr-d to tXav .v'tory - to the sick room - and froo there,
after that, thoy weren't s«.on a>n. Thoy *-ra iaa.dir.t_ly crocatcd.

Q. '. oro thoso injections cri*ri_d out under the .auspices of the "..hnenurbt
station? —


km los, these injoctions intravenous weru carried out rt the "..hnunorbo"

at-tion.

Q. Whon were thysc injections aado? Did you scy thrt wes in the onrly
p-.rt of 19Lh?

km So, th. injections *s.r- giwn while I was still th_ru.

Q. Thrt was the latter pert of 1^3?
km Yos, corroct.

Q. So, those injections that you saw while you we re tlur_ you think
that thoso sight have bc_n typhus inj-ctions?
km Yos, it is possiol_ that thoy ware.

Q. IVero Luftwaffe doctors tn.rc? .Did! th_y observe- injections or

give ttaa?

... Say that again plsasw.

Q. I say .

km Yes, those war. axdical officers fran the Luftwaf.o Ao car iod that
out. *

Q. ;lcn, wit tv. ss, wero .any of these. cxperisvntal subjects released because

- 1CJ55 -


■


of having undergone the cxpertcants?

A. I beg your pardon. *kj, none of then were released.

q. witness, sru yrpu fcnilicr with Action 11* ? 13 or with ..ction F 13?

A. F 13?

Q. Are you f miliar with that action?

A. Yos, F 13, indoed.

3. Will you toll the Tribunal 'tnt th-.t auana.

A* F 13 was a coda word. It \tr.c carried out through tho crap doctors
on such prisoners who sa-- inv liia or rho could not produce any work. VhoTT*
the c~»p doctor in question nado '.da rounds all you h-ard was "? 13" • Either
th. war ri liquid!too by tho doctor, or he went with a tr nsport of invalids
to another caap - say Auschrltz or ocao such caap, for instance.

Q. Wxn did you first baccaa tsm liar with this ..ction F 13?

A. F 13 wra hsppc-.a'n.; ri Jxt fra. th~ beginning rn-n I was ip Nntzwullei
That is to s ay, Oborstumfuchrer von 3o<taann carrito it out.

A. How do you spoil thrt nix, ritr.oss?

A* von Bodaann.

q. Did this action continue up until tho tine you rare rcleasod 1 ron
th* concentration caap?

A* That went on right to the end, Yes.

q. ..nd wor ncn-C^re-n nati. rals .also included in this .action?

A. Every body.

Q. Did they have tuo-rculars - people suffering frea tuocrculoeis in
this r. ction?

A. Ir. tho carp at ’iitzwcilor there w.xo a pproxia-Vvely t.n percent of the
pooplo suiforing fro* tuberculosis.

3. How long did you stay In th .s caap Ippesheir which wr.s one of tho •
ST-'-llor craps *n the !iatzwoilcr cccplwx?

A. I was at Ippeshji* frcsr Christaas, 192x3, until January 15U5.

3. ..nd where did you -,o in Jsxmary 191*5?

- 1060 -


> J ^Wk--JF*-16—3~£ arrow
Court So. 1


c


!• I went to Kockarclz.

* And what did you do there? M? did you go thorc?<

- There, agcin, I was a Kdical orderly until th- end. I rua in charge
of a trznaport of .ick schedule to go to Dachau but the Anoricnn troops
overtook us and at Oatorburkur. on th. 3rd of ..pril wore liberated.

9. oNow, witneaa, *,ra tXr, iuft. .'fc doctors working in cooperation
with Dr. Hirt throughout all these orperi*:nts at H-.trroilor?

Ai_Ioo, Dr. Hirtalwys .-xrived together with an of H zzr of the
taftimffo and then thisc .aperients -.re c arried out in the pathological
dopirtaont of the ".hnenerbe".

Q. Ia the nns». "^inx-r" fa-ilinr to'you?

A. No.

VR. ,fcH.J/EYi I havw no further -questions at this t 4 i-o.
irr. .r;I£IDE.VTi Doos any o£ c.-unsol for the defendants desire to
croas-ex-j-dno this witrwaa?

CXSS EXA L’ATZCN

DR. VEISGRUBER (Counsel for dofondant Si.vers), -itnoss, your profession
is ednor, loa?

Yea, ainer.

1)111 >' ou *«“" ' n inr-.'.id sot. V you could no longer follow that
prof esc-ion?

V

-u No, I havo cheated ay profession.

*1. Ifajr.?

A. In 1935, in Frjria. ^

Did you ever carry out ary functions for the political party before
you •aai&r-'tod?

•u ..t that tine: I was a functionary of the ; tr.tus-quo.

’’ fthnt was the "status-quo"? Trill you uxpl'in to the Trirunalwhat the
uo-quo" sunt?

A. In 1935, the "st-tus-«qyo" was the .-ve* for the plebiscite. It re ant

- 1C61 -

r-


3 Jan-ii-JP-l6-li-Sarrc*r

Court Mo. 1


c


L


tha condition which existed - which »-s aint to r-sain perwmont in the
Saar. That is to s-.y, naitk-r to Pr nco or to Germany rith the Saar.

Q. It was therefore your vi_w that it would be rightful for the Saar
Ter-itory wither to Join /r-nce nor ^rruny?

-• At that tiwa, 70 a.

3. Did you not net in touch with any other politic."1 party about this
conception or Just on, political party and c oUaboratc with th_a?

A. Ho, it was n unity front.

1. Did you not at any trrli;r a tat,- base yourself on the grounds of
any of the socialist parties?

<u *hat do you scan by th-t?

. • t * • .

■ * • •

Q. Did you .»t, in connection with that progrw, find yourself br.Cjd
on tho arguments of on- of the socialir ; parties?

A. Do you ncan o political party?

Q. Yoa, a political socialist p~rty.

A. Yoa, I "*.« a o- b-r ol tho L.-D, the Couuuniat Party of lOuranny.

0- * uid / our tion - did that taka placo becaus- you v^r- interested

.i preserving the status quo or did it take place oocaus- it was your view
tlw-.t you, as ajnber of tho KID, oight suffer an unfortunate or unpleasant
fr.to if the Sear Territory w.re r-occupied by Geramy?

A. Bell, aft-r all, t.i- o/onts told us that.

3- So, thor-ioro, it tea tho ln ;tor.

*»• Yos, sy detention in a cor.'-ontr'tion esap crov-f that, didn't it?

3. Since wh-n were you a - Avr ef tV KFD?

A. Since 1918 wh-n I *oec?.ae .an official nenber of it.

3« You hive told us earlier c:i that you wore a Capo in the sick
quarter?

Yes#

3" ".hot Wore your tasks in that c-pr.city in th. Re-vi-r aick quarter?

A. To take car-- of ta_ .'tients.


- 10o2 -


3 Jan-A-JMd-5-€*rrow

Court X


c


3. Did you not h&vo certain supervisory teaks in th-.t connection?

A. Wall, it depends bow you look at it. It depends on whether you
were working on behalf of the SS or the detainees.

3- *y question was, you know, did you have supervisory tasks as a

%

.Ljrier Capo, and I diould like to hav,. a clear hnswor.

A. TTjon you should put your question core clear. Do you i aan on behalf

of tho So or the detainees?

3» r.itnoss, you rr\. uot ontitlod to put questions to lu;, you know. I
m asking you sgdn wbjt.hr you, =e a kcrior Capo, - s sick quarters superin-
tindent, had orders to supervise or to guard dotr.inoos?

A. V,ho was supposed to givo m that ordd^J ’.ho gayo 1.0 tho ordor, do
you think?

Q. Mtncss, I havw already told you ones before that those countur-
quostions t- superfluous.

A. But look hero, .attorney, I can't give you on answ.r on uncertain
questions.

DR. TJEISGRUBZai /tr. F*csidcnt, I bog y OU to instruct tho witnase that
it is his duty to insrer ay questions bocsuso in this manner cross oxsnirwtion
is being nado impossible.

THE ffiEblDEfTP: Thj ritrosc ;ill answer question* , ro r oundod to hin by
Ctuns .2 as near as huom.

.XX;£SSt Yes, but I s.cll chun have to b. dear as to shat the question

ro-n.

DR. FalSGRUSERt Vho a^intod you as RsvieT Capo?

Tho detainees in tho c~*p did-that.


3 Jan-2B3-17-l-LZSS£?.

Court Jfo. !•


C

q *ivi did thin happen without knowledge cf the c acp coman lan tour
or the deparbiont in charge?

a Co ,-cu in tho SS coasandant or the cetainaes 1 coroan: ant?

q I do net understand your answer. Is that meant to be another
counter question?

a Uo. There was an SS coauancant and tnon there was a ccmarx'ant
appointed by the prisoners in tho carp.

Q 1 *11 then, who appointed you as Revier Capc7

*. The prin^nur cc-^’in.antcur.

q and did this happen without the knowledge of the carp co.man<’an^-

cur?

* If you neon the SS cciaendeft^ur, they were agreeable. They
agrd to whatever the priaonor cotasm anteur suggested to thoa becauso
to../ ther^elvss were not in a position, they wore not cnpaole of running
a coip.

q Tho way you are picturing this, the priscntr-ccuian ant's offico
suggested you oe Revier Capo.

a first of ali as n odical orderly.

q Then, of whee .'id this prisons-cesnondont's offico ccnsist?

* At the tise it consists, of political -etiinoos.

q .id cro SS Coaaan.hntcur reCcgnizu then -s such?

« lea, they w u ro recognized as the prise rwr-conraandont's office.

Q Sc that It was not onl> ycur task to lot k .ifter tho patients in
toe oiok quarters but y.u w-.re also c -Trying cut cortuin supervisory
tasks?

a !.* :id not have any tasks -of a supervisory character.

q Veil then, who was responsible if one cf those detainers in the
sick quarters esc aped''

a Hone cf the patient* in the sick quarters could escape because
they w c re so sick when they ware transferred to the sick quarters they
could not novo any nore. That’way it w..s impossible to escape.

had told us earlier that tho oxp.-rinental subjects


q "fitness, yen


3 Jan-A-33K-17-2-Les aer (FL)
Court So. I


C


■-.-re first of all well looked after for li. days. Kcre they looked eftor
so well that they reached a condition where they were incapable of os-
copintf.

A.- I have also nentioned at tto saao tiae that this block ted boon
separated and was locked so that no one could g>t out, noix> of those
people, those experimental subjects, could get out.

Q.- So that you lent to say that an oscape attempt would havo boon
iapoasiblo right freo the word go? ~_ _

A.- Yos, in this Ahnonorbu deror taunt, escape was impossible.

Q.- ifhy was it impossible?

A.- Bocauso all the way arouta, diroctly next to tto Ahncrwrbo Do-
pvrtaent, thore was a watch tower. On top of that thoro was a guard who
had a eachino gun.

Q.- But then was it any different iron other parts of tto crap?

A.- Yos, it was the saoc in other parts of the amp except that this
rart was separately locked again.

Q.- You had told us oarlicr that you were prue-r.t during cortain ex¬
periments. You roforrod to a oortain part of your activities, mainly that
■ten you ted to hold up tho aras of the prisoners, when a certain liquid
■as applied to tho aras of those prisoners?

A.- No, it hod tepponod already. Aft-rwarda the prisoners ted to hold
<g> thoir aras - they tad to stand iiki this in l*ont of no. (Uitnoss do-
acostrating with eras outstrotetod.) I r-sod to bring the prisoners into
the rooa. Thon tho operation was carried out on ttoa. Then they wore
brought back to tho adjoining room and then they hod to stand like this
ate told thoir eras for about one tour.

Q.- Did jo ur work during these experiments consist exclusively of
your having to take prisoners into tto roaa in which experiments uoro car¬
ried out?

, a.- No, I had to look after ttaa afterwards, I had to talc, caro of
ttoa and ascertain the progress of tho diaiase. I ted to check it.

QDid you, during the actual experiments, not give the a a holping

- 1065 -


Court So. 1.

<k

. hand?

* Tbera was not anything of that nature to be '.one fcr then.

Q Did 7 -u not havo to boil syringes?

- No, that was not ay job.

r i • hetiu.r this was ycur w^rk cr not is rot whit I want to knew fn.n
you. I waht to knew whether yen did it.

a Re, no, I did net do it.

. *

0 lid you assist in the dressing of the wounds of the prisoners?

Yes, that was uy job.

1 Iaacvliatuly subsequent to the so-call.J exp-rL>onts, I take it?

.. les, ioB.diataly aft-r the experiments.

Q Did you consiwor this w;rk as a n.rzal nodical -xperL^nt, cr fit.
it strike you that this was seaothlng uiffcrsnt?

.i to wore not allcwsr to think In that ca*p.

0 ti truss, tnat is the sort of an answer which you cci cn<' will
save yourself in tho luturo. I bare aakou y.u, id y u consider thoso jx-
jeri-v-nts nora-.l nedical »xp^ri.a.nts, „r io y.u think tint they wore seno
toing nvr.-pvp-iasible?

.. hull, if rrofoss.r riirt ccngrutulatod tho cxpurf!*.ntin(, doct >rs
f ouch individual erso and sol , "Vo can congratulate v.uch ether fcr hav¬
ing succeeded with ur oxporiw*nts," then y.u wouldn't hav« tc think ler
t o ’ ng or toe hard tj figuro out what they were fcr.

1 ?.hat do y.u aaon by that?

a Ihe war industry, of c urse. It was fir that that thoso experi¬
ments w„ro carried cut. ^

r i be- that you c;ns)cored t,Jese experiments as being tho perrlssiblo
'-ctivity of a asdical officer witrnr. the ton.ts .f war Industr-,-?

.v all, per Itte. fr a 3orlan. It was oer-dtted within tho ..hnon-
-rbe Dopartrwnt, where they wore escribed as private xrporimonts for war
science,

i „nd what was y.ur owr. personal attitude tew iris theso expsrlr.jnts?

I was trying to save wbst could be saved.

- 1066 -


3 Jaa-A-Baf-17-^r-Leastr (FL)
Court Ho. I


C

r> -

Q-- Did you yourself consider tl^so experiments as permissible, or

rut?

_

A.- Thoy were net permitted as far as we were concerned, frea our
department.'

Q.- Thoy «ny did you raaain, why did you continue to stay with thoso
experiments for more than a yenr?

A.- Just in ordor to save pooplo, save what I could save, just as
I told you a ainuto ago.

Q.- F r oa whore does your knew ledge originate) that criminal and po¬
litical dotainocs were djtailed for exporim. ntal purposes?

A.- Each detainoo had a. marking and thoy differod according to co¬
lor, red, green, purple, pink, black, and so on. Gn.cn was criminal; rod
•tea political; and blhck was onti-oocial. Only thoso criminal and poli¬
tical prisoners uorc allowed to carry such ^rkinge in the ccap.

Q.- Aral both oriminal as noil -s poiit. : 1 prisoners wero used for
those experiments, I tako it?

A.- ffithout oxcoption, yes.

Q.- You have alrocdy earlier given tlx, san«, reply -7 "nithaut ox¬
coption." Tbjro is n^-hing such wu can do with that.

A.- All right, I will explain it to you in detail.

Q.- Ploaso do.

A.- In c block like Jiatzweilor, everything ind everybody was mlxod
together — political, anti-social and criminal prisonors were all to-

4 %

gother in ono block. If people were rx-odod for experiments the doctors

would go into the block. The people had to undress and then, of course,

*

nobody had any aerkings any more. Thon the healthiest were solcctcd and
they sure ooroly dotailed to go to tre Ahnonb-rt» Apartment for uxoori-
Mfital pur pesos.

. I bed to look after the*, nc. having bv.n in Uie caap as long as
all,that, I kruw tho individuals. I knew whether they were criminal, po-


- 1067 -


3 Jan-A-EEH-17-k-Los ser (FL)
Court Bo. I


litical, or anti-social, and I therefore knew who was a criminal prisonors
Lit 1 who was a political prisoner.

Q.- But thsa if these people isx to you without askings I can't
Laagine


- 1067 a -


3 JtI>*v-^-17-5-L«38Qr
Ccvrt »r'* 1.


C


on tha strength of what y.u could recognise whether they were crininal sr
political prisoners.

\ 9

" uU 1 for instance, that Miller was 'filler and that H.ffnan

was Hoffman, and I know that Millar was a crisinal prisoner and that Hoffman
was a political cru.

4 . Did ;.u kn.w ov jy imate of the carp?

■*. The oajority of thji I did, yes.

w. vni how did you know that?

• Bocmiso T yaclf w-_ there fren the beginnii« at that canp.

Q. But yr« .nly worked in tn- sis'- quarters, didn't you? Did evely one
in coup pass through sick quarters?

“• • ow ^^neoa failed to pos.» through sick quarters through one
disease or another.

e. Hjw cany people went to the crotaUry within the framework of tho
injection exp^rl^nts?

The injection experiments? Those peoplo, well, for instance today
there wore 6 that went to tho cresster/$ then tooorrow thero wero 2 and they
■ont to tho crematory, and so it wont on.

*• aj if 1 un-orstand jru correctly, the lnjocti ns Wwro carriod ;ut
in the ciofaat.ry itself?

N . tho, were carried .n in tho -vhnjnerbe Department and then for
further treatment tnosc pe plo want to the creaatory; there, as I have al-
r, ' aJy t lil yen, there was a 3 ^called sick ro:o, which had 2 bods, anu there
these people went f or further chocking f tho disease.

Q. Those people >*i3 wont to the c enat.ry, wore they subject to your
-urthar assistance and troatajnt?

A - K . they «ore ro^cred frsa =y care.

Q. hell, then, how did you knrw anything about the future fate of those

po.pla?

,k . The can wh created these pe-_pl6, the c-oratory attendant, was alsc
* prisoner himself, and he used te tell us each tine when these people were
* • - lcSo -


3 Jan-*-02S-17-6-Le«3cr
Court So. 1.


C


crwatod.

%. This croon tory attendant, did he alac l.ck after the people?

a. Me, he had nothing to do with the nedical care cf then.

4 . Did you also assist during dissections? During the dissecti .ns of
those people did you assist in any way?
los, I assisted.

H. 'ifaat did y-u havo to do?

u . noil, for instance, I used t bring individual parts cf the bodies
to the Fathol gical Institute, cr I usod t> har.: over knives or tweeters.

Q. How often did that happen?

*. Every corpse was dissected.

4. Sere y.u proeent during evory dissect*. >n? „

a. Tea, I was.

4. Earlljr yju have boon talking ab.ut typhus infoc-tUns.

a. los, I was.

*. -dcittodly y -Ai statod thnt y.u were not awru-o in tho enso of the
individual infections that thoy won, typhus lnf^ottns, Is that true?

A . os, co.ract.

Q. But y.u lav. w that during tho early umths f 19Ui an opideric was
prevailing in tho caep — typhus, or "Rhur" epidemic, cr typhoid OFidomic.

9 «ro you new drawing the conclusion cn the strength of this epidemic that tho
infections carriod nut on tho strength of certain expori-iontal prograns pro¬
dded typhus or that thoy were typhus infections and that they wore the cause
of the epidemic?

las, because beginning with that coat at that epidemic was apparent.

Q. Is there anyVdng kn:wn to you hrw typhus is transmitted?

a. lea.

<4. shat do ycu Lvw abait it.

a. Typhus can be passed on, f-r instance, thr ugh dirt, thr ugh
exc resents, as was the case there.

- 1 O 65 -


3 Jao—-G£S-17-7-Le*aer
Ccort Mo. 1.


0 Wat waa tht, color of the injection liquid?

*. I have told yeti that tha inaction was carried jut by the
individual aoctora upstairs in the -hnLnerbe Dapartoent and that aftenrards


the patients went to the


- 1070 -


3 Jan.-lS-a~‘.-AT!>-?fe©har.
Court So. 1


C


Q But you wore present during the injections; were you rot?

,. A So, Z was not present.

Q Did you not take the experimental subjects into the room?

A ZM.

Q But, ypn were not present during the actual injections?

A No.

THE FflESIDEiT* It is now tine for the Tribunal to recess.

(A RECESS T'nS I JEN.)

THS PRESIDENTi The Tribunal is again in session.

DR. W5ISQS12ER: :iay I proceed, *»r. President?

THE PRESIDENT: You a>y proceed with tho cross examination.

CROSS EX..HI NATION RSS0HE3

SY DR. rfKISGERBER:

Q Did the officor of the air corpa, when ho was making the injections
in tho crematory, sms this nodical officer tho sane one who was proaont
during the case experiments?

A I don't know what was in tho crematorium.

Q You said before that tho injeotions wore carried out in the rooms
of tho .vhnerbe?

A Yos, in the Ahnorbe,

*} Well, in that caao you would have to know whoa it was that con¬
ducted those experiments?

A Yes, the nodical officers of tho Air Porco.

Q *Vero they the very sane officers? ^

A During the respective experiments th? officers changed.

Q Do you merely wish to differentiate between Professor Hirt and tho
air force officer, which you have mentioned previously?

A I have said before Prof. Hirt was present during the experiments,
tot the experiments wore conducted by the air force officors*

Y Op until now you have merely spoken of one Luftwaffe officer?

i ✓ -

A I hAve said before the medical officer of the air force changed

toring the respective experiments.


- 1 C71 -


3 Jv-A-JLIS>-18“2-ife«han (FL) • ‘ ,

Court ?fo. I /"

Q.- Well, in that case there wore «ny air force officora?

A.- Too, there ■ere cany air force officers. •

Q«- How l>x.g did it take until human subjects received the injec¬
tion# and ware then brought into the crematorium?

A.- That differed. For instance, in the caap every incate had a
number. Tho crenatoriua was not large enough to accocnodntc currently
ril the dead from the entire caap and burn thca ttero. Tho dord wore thto
brought to the collar rooe, .-attached to th*» crcaatoriua and thon they
wore burned aubsocficntly, the nuabor of the inn-te wrs noted down. It
often occurred that soao doed were burned iaaediatoly and oth-rs stayed
there for eight or ten days. .

Q.- You did not quite understand ay question. The oxporLa-ntrl sub¬
jects, who rocoived these injections wore laaooiatcly after tho injoction
transferred into the erteatoriua? ,

A.- Yes, thoro was a roc® there at tto cramtoriua that was put at
this disposal,

Q.- Well, how long did it take for the*- pocplo to dio?

A.- About five or six days. It aay have been earlier. I havo al¬
ready said that tho dond wore all sent to the 'cellar.

Q.- Wo havo already hoard that. Wo don't havo to discuss tho poried
of tifl» when they wore burned. Wore tho experiment cl subjects, who wore
transferred to tho crcontoriua, wore they disw-cted?

A.- fto, thoy wore not diasoctod.

Q.- Did Ahnonorbc have anything to do with F-13?

A.- Tho Ahnonorbc had nothing to do with that.

Q._ you stated previously that tcrord tho end of 1913 / ou woro
transferred; is that correct?

A.- Yos.

Q.- Wore you transferred by thJ administration of tho camp?

A.- Yos, the caap adainistration ordered that. I was sont to Dr.


- 1072 -


3 Jaa-A-Am-lft-2-lfaahar. (FL)

Court Mo. I Q


Schicdlauski, who was the cesp physician ani hi was th. ono ro
deaounosd no befcsnit »qs a erfjninal as far” as I know and then


Hy, *ho

\

was


transferred to the caap at Iffeshoin.


I

3 *uu-0B-3-».-«ro- : .!&eban

Coart Ho. 1 /

V '

Q >'nyj what was hi3 denunciation?

A He said that I ras favoring the i spates too cuch.

Q And that was reported by the carp cosmaior to the SS Comarrior?

A Ios, to the cacp physician.

Q Then, subsequently you repeatedly accompanied transports from
Iff os heir to Natswsllor and then again fetched then fron Hattwoilorj is that
correct?

A Tea.

Q(>fco selected theso imates which you brought back to Natzwoiler?

A They wore always solocted by the canp adninistration.

Q Who wasthat?

. A That was ths cop aiainistration of the irrates, yos.

Q And now about tho selection of thj iranto subjcctsj thoso solocted
in Natzwollor, was thnt done by tho ca.-*> administration?

A Yos, that was also dono by tho aocp a'iainistration.

DR. - EISCERB2R: I have no further questions to put to tho witnoss, Hr.
Proeidont.


- 1073 -


3 Jarw-^-. -S-19-1-W rebuck
Court J«C. 1.


C

r^SIDEKT: ifly further cross examination of this witness of tho
part of any oth~r defense couns 1 ?

Has tho Prosecution any redirect examination 0 f this witness?

VR. '‘cft.HST: No redirect, your Vonor.

THE FTESIC3OT: Th_ witness is excused. You nay stand aside.

(^itnj3s excused)

’ ? ' CH " !,TT: :f th ~ Tribunal please, ro h'.vc oro additional >vitrv:ss

to testify with resect toitho mist^rd ?a cx^rfncnts at Uatzwsiler. Howov.r
It xdll not ho oxpediont for us to ca.. hlu until Monday *,rnini which wo
shall do at that tins.

I would like now to offer Docunent JC-881 which is on pa 2 e 62 of your
Honor's Docurwnt boo:, and I offer it. This is an affidavit taken from one,
Rono-Colaobin "‘agnur, and I offor It provisionally; that is to say, under tho
saao conditions under which t*w affidavit of Sudolf Bmndt was admitted this
eoming. The fact is that this affidavit was taken under an oath cdminlstort
by Guy Fnvergor, who is a rcsoarch analyst of tho Office of Chiof of Ccunsol
for ; ar Crlnos, and thoroforo I tako it that undur tho Court's ruling this
norninf; this affidavit also can bo offered provisionally and tlw cortificnto
which wo will obtain free General Taylor will cover, I hopo, all persms
attached to tho Offico of Chief of Counsel who aro autJorirod by hljr to
ad-dnistor oaths and to aid in tho production of ovidonco.

T’3 nsSITE"?. The affidavit will bo roc-.ived provisionally undor
tho same conditions as thit received ■ is corning.

!'cH/.NZY: ..n- this will bo Prosecution Exhibit 200. The affidavit
r?ada as follows: . ^

0

"I, th- undorslgnod, *agj»r, Hone-Colrabin, buire; duly sworn, depose
and stato:

"1. 1 was born on 30 July 1899 in C^rnay (Haut-lhin) France and 1 an

•

• French citiron. I hav„ attended tho prlnary superior school in Strasbourt
••ul house. I an a scientific draftsman and have worked for various doctors.

"2. On May 1, 19ul, I started to work for Professor Hirt as a scientifi
'ftsnan. Professor i!irt's chief was SS Stcndartenfbehror Wolfram Sievors,

- 1074 -


3 Jan*.-/3S-l?-2-Mneback
Court Ho. 1.


who was the general representative for scientific researches of tto 'Ahnono;
Sievors was cfton in Strasbourg and was well inforaed all about tho above-
re ntioned questions. Ha received regular reports on all the work ttat was
undertaken by Professor Kirt in the University of Strasbourg and by Hirt he
was inforaed of the work of Profossor Haagon. I have myself often seen
Siovors in Strasbourg in Hirt '3 offico whore I worked.

■3. My direct collaborators wore Hoyar, Bong, Miss Elisa Schmidt are
Mias Bonneaam. In tho Fr&nsoky Fort, in back of tho Huprechtsau in Stras¬
bourg, wo have re^t, scco experiments on animals and I know that tho results

ttesa oxporiaonts ware to be used for otter experiments on human beings in

•

tho Natxweilor Concentretiou-Csmp. I knew* the abovo-rentionod from conver¬
sations botwoon the Doctors Hirt, ifeagon, Viator, assistant of Hirt, and
othor doctors from tbs 'diversity and frea phono calls that I have receive-.

•

nysolf fren tte !ttzwwilur Concentration Camp. I add that I had to sign a
docurent, pledging aysolf to *>erocy on all that I saw and hoard, officially
or not, in tho University of Strasbourg. Tte breach of that prondse mwld h
reant death. This docurent, which I have* undersigned, was signed by Hirt
undor Hlrmlor's orders.

"h. During tte tiro that I w .s ojqjloyod by Professor Hirt, nooning
until tho end of tho war, I have soon documents and photostats from which i
io cortain that Hirt, Haagon and Dickorhof have cfcno so 00 oxporlrenta on hur.
bolngs. Those photostats vivo tho results of exporilents made with poison
gas and otter sinilar substances. /

"5- In ..upust 19iJ, ore oorning between 7 and 7:30, I saw tho unload¬
ing of vsmn'3 bodies. I touched those bodies and asccrtainod^Jhat they w.-r
still warn. They all presented signs of nose bleeds and I deduced that th«-y
ted very likely boon asphyxiatod or poisoned.

"6. In tte voKr of 19LU Bong and i-eycr received an order from Hirt
to dissect tte sc- bodies. I knen about that because I have soon Bong and :,'o:
at work. I have als- soon cases containing quarters of bodies that have bo.
sent to the municipal cremtcrium of Strasbourg.


- 1075 -


3 *U-19-3-Hlncbuck

Court So. 1.


C


■7. ..ftcr tfc, departure* of Hirt in ”ov«rb.r 1M, the forar -rochanic,

?uhlor, and qjrsclf hava discovered in the furnace of tho central Ratine

systoj, a grvat mobir of docuhents, in vhich I could read th-.t humn beings

wore used aa guinea pigs for pxporlnonts with ras (Loot),

Por Professor Haagon, I had to make a ch-.rt of about 2x1 motor

on which wore listed the various coubat gaaoa with thoir chemical formulas,

•

end which gave indications on t.a danr.ors that non could oncountor.* I hnvo
deducod that oxr.jrironts had boon redo on hmn balnea.

"9. I add thrt Professor 'trt had threatened su with death in case I
should open ry mouth to apeak about anythin*, .-apocialiy at the tine of tho
arrival of tho bodies of which I apoko under Ho. 5.

'10. :iias Bcnr.aiann orvl .ilss Schnidt w»,ro paid directly by tho "Person
Uchor Stab Roichsfuehrer SS Vcraaltunj" in Berlin. Signed C.R. agnur."

Tho Court will of courso sou th-.t thia affidavit duals not only with
tho Lost experiments undertaken by Hirt and Haagon and "iixjer, but also with

A

tho atrocious skeleton collection ab ut which th; Tosecution has already

/

presented c nsiderablo proof, a n\ you riU recall 1 * that connootion tho nanus

of Bone and Moyer, about whcc tho witaoss, Henri Piorro, to stifled horo.

Professor Haag on was also attached to tlw University of Strasbourg and it wa-

through tho good officoa of Hirt, as wo shall so* liter, that human oxpo.*i-

aontal subjocts were obtained for iiiagerds typhus experiments at Katzvreilor.

I would also Uko to point out that tho affiant, "ngner, states that

his direct collaborators wore Mayor, 3ong, :iiss Elise Schnidt and ’tiss

Forjvxiann, Ve shall have Hiss Scheldt hero to testify concerning tho activitio*

of Haagen at Strasbourg and Katrailer. ..nd this, with the exception of the

"itnoss to bo called on Monday morning, cceplotoe the Prosecution's pro so n-

V.tdoR Tilth respect to the sustard gas experiments,

I would like at this tine to t ini to the typhus experiments, and if the

Secretary General will pass up this document took, wo can proceed. Tho typhus

experiments are charged in Paragraph 6 (J) of the indictment as a war crino,

and in Paragraph 11 as a crime against humanity, I think it night he well to

- 1076 -


3 Juu-nWm-lW,-ainatuck

Court Sc. 1


read Paragraph 6 (J) of the Indic t —nt to sn—arise briefly tho faots which
the Prcoacut!on expects to prove.

TFron about Decoder 19Ul to about February 19U5 c^orinonts woro con-
duotod at the Buchamald and Katawoiler Concentration Conps for the bonofit
of the Goman Amed Forces to investigate the offoctivenoss of spotted fovor
and other vaccines. At Buchomald numerous healthy inmates were deliberately
infected with spotted fever virus in order to keep tho virus alivej over 90 ?.
of the vie tins died as a result. Other healthy inmates were used to dotonnino
the effectiveness of different spotted fever vaccines and of various choaicc
substancoa. In the course of these experiments 75 ? of the selected number of
lnaatoa were vaccinated with one of tho vaccines or nourished id th one of the

c herd cal substances and, after a period of thmo to four weoks, woro infected

to

with spottod fever gems. The rcsalning 25? wero infootod -.dthout Any pro-
vioua protection in order to ocepore tho offeotivenoss of the vaccines and *
the chcdcal substances. A a a rosult, hundreds of tho parsons wporimontod
upon died. Experiments with yollow fovor, smallpox, typhus, para typhus A and
B, cholera, and dlpthorla wore also conducted. Similar axporiixnte with liko
results wore conducted at ?iatzwoilor Concentration Camp. Tho dofondants Karl
Brandt, Handlesor, Rostock, Schroodor, Gonzkcn, Oebhirdt, Rudolf Brandt,
■'rugowsky, Poppendick, Siovors, Roso, Bockor-rrcr/sonj, and Hovon nro charged
with special responsibility for and participation in those crlnoo,"


3 J*n 1-7-k -Ml-20-l-P«rr±r.

Court So. 1

. C

The first document which I would like to submit ia Document MO-429,

'-nd tola is offered -provisionally as Piwsecution Exhibit 281, that is to
say, under the seac conditions which the affidavit of Rudolf Brandt was
sdnittwi this asming. v

THE PRESIDENT: Counsel, in the document book before ne this statement,
while signed by Dr. l.tlduear Hovcn, does not purport to be sworn to.by
anyone or witnessed. Excuse sw, I thought that was a translators certifi¬
cate, it is a verification by the US civilian; That is cerrcct.

kh. KcHAHST: Sell, apparently — there is, in fact, a Jurat on it.

It aay be improperly titled as r certificate of translation, 1 don't know.

THE PRESIDENT: I know there ia a certificate of translation. I did
net read the Jurat, I did not read the tltlo.

DR. GAhLIK: (Counsel fer tho defendant Hoven): I ahculd like to ask
that the affidavit of the defondant Dr. Hoven, the Document NO-429, be
rojectod for the following thr-.e reasons. Firstly, tho affidavit was sworn
to before a US civilian, de Vrios. It hr.a not been provod that Ur. do Vrios
haa the capability to accept such a statement.

Tho aecond rcaaon is as follows: The affidavit has not boen mide in
tho Goman language but in tho English langucgo. I should liko W draw
the attention wf the Tribunal to page 6 of the English Document Book.

Hoven ia a Genaan citizen. The defendant Dr. Hoven does not havo the neces¬
sary knowledge of tho English language in order to make such an affidavit in
its full -r.t-nt Ihe text of the affidavit was presented to the defendant
* ,r • Hoven in the English language. The discussion befero that, however,
took place in the German language. It. would have boen n*-€$3nry that an
interpreter should have been used who was placed under oath. This, however,
■^.s not done; and thnrcforo this is a wrong procedure.

Tho third reason. It is a recognized principle of procedural rule of

states that c person has to be informed in advance when he is to make

statements during the course of which he can incriminate himself. This is

ftot only a principle of the German judicial systaz but also of the English

*-nd American law. Kith reference to the English Judicial procedure, I beg

- 1078 -


3 Jan 47-A-F»-2V2-?trrin
Court So. 1


C


‘•o refer to Saction 18 of the 3vidonee Act of 1846. It is stated there
expressly in what fore such information has to follow. The wording is as
follows — I on translating free the Siglish text: "You are not obliged to
say anything unless you wish to do so. However, whatever you may say will
be noted down end can be used es evidential material against you in a Judi¬
cial procedure." This law wes binding in the high Military Tribunal I in tho
cese of the witness Heff. The witness Heff before his examination was told
sheet his right to refuse to testify. I beg you to refer to the protocol
of the 17th of Docaibor on page 640 of the German text. Tho defendant Dr.
Hcvcn, therefore, before this affidavit was taken, should have been told
about hio right tc refuse to give such a statement. This-, at that time,
w^o nat done, only after the indictment had been served the defendant Kcvcn
was notified about this right cf his. The affidavit, therefore, has been
made undor violation of procedural laws and principles and I theroforo ask
you not to admit it.

THE PhESIDENTs It is tho ruling of tho Tribunal at this time that tho
objections will be overruled and it will be admitted provisionally. Thoro -
is nothing on the affidavit that indicates that the defendant wr.s undor any
interrogation or was aaked any questions. If the defendant Hovcn did not
understand the English language, or if he was interrogated and tho matter
was not explained to him, he may later when on tho stand himself and attack
the affidavit, and if it eppoars to tho Tribunal that it was improperly
taken it will be stricken free the record. The admission now is without
prejudice to tho defondant Hovcn to attack tho affidn\it later.

DR. GAKLIK: It didn't cccc through in the German,^our Honor.

THE PF.2SIDE?iT: I am sorry 1 spoke too fast. It is the ruling of tho
Tribunal that at this time the affidevit will be admitted subject to object¬
ions by the defendant Hoven which ho nay make at some later tine. Tho affi¬
davit dees not show on its face that the defendant Hoven spoke in answer to
any question a whatsoever. If he was interrogated without being warned, he
can later state that cr. the witness stand on his own behalf. If he did not
understand English end the affidavit was not translated to him, he may also

- 1073 "


3 Jan 47-A-EHM-20-3-Perrin
Court So. 1


ex pla i n that, but et this time the affidavit will be admitted in evidence
provisionally without prejudice to the right of the counsel for defendant
Hoven to later attack its admissibility. Should it appear to the tribunal
that the affidavit should not be admitted into evidence, it will be stricken
from the record.

«R. UcHa!«EY: Document NO-429, then, has been conditionally admitted
as Prosecution Exhibit 281. It reads as folio-s:

■I, Raldemar Hoven, being duly sworn, depose and state:

1. I was bom in Freiburg iBraisgau on the 10th of February

1903. I attended high school but did not complete cy education until many

*

years later. Betwoen the years 1919 and 1933 I visited Denmark, Sweden,
United States, and Franco. In 1933 I returned to Freiburg and completed cy
high school course and then attend'd the Universities of Freiburg and Munich.
In 1939 I concluded cy medical studies and Joined the Waffen SS as a phyol-
cion. The lest rank I held in the Kaffen SS was Hauptstunafuohrer. In
1934 I hod Joined the Allgaseine SS.

2. In October 1939 I was assigned as on assistant nodical officer
in t he SS hespi tal in the Buchcnwald Concentration Camp and hold that poai-

et

tion until 1941 when I was appointed the Modicol Officor in charge of the
SS tro'pa stetiemd in the camp. At the tnd of 1941 I was transferred to
the Camp Hospital and became the Assistant “edical Officer therein. This
hospital wan for the inmates of the Buchcnwald Concentration Camp. In July
1942 I was elevated to the position sf Chief Physician and theroby had the
full responsibility for the inmate patients in the hospital. I held this
position until September 1943 "hen I was arrested by the SS Pclf£c Court of
Kassel and remained under arrest until the 15th of March 1945-

3. Due to ay various positions in the Buchcnwald Concentration
Cacp during this period of nearly four years I became acquainted with all
Fhasos of the medical activities therein and ea hereby able to make the fol¬
lowing statement:

Spotted Fever and Virus Experiments.

4. In the latter part of 1941 an experimental station was established
in the Buchcnwald Concentration .Camp in order to determine the effectiveness


- ’ 0*0 -


3 Jan 47-^-3ia-20-4-Perrln

Court So. 1


c


of various Spotted Fever vaccines. This department was called the "Spotted

Pever Experimental Station" and was under the direct supervision of Dr.

lin, alias Schuler. This expe r imental station was set up in Block 46 of

the camp. The Hygiene Institute of the Kaffen SS in Berlin, under the coo-

aar.d of Dr. Joachim Urugowsky, roceivod all the reports of these activities

and Dr. Ding took orders free Urugowsky. In the early days, that is,

botweon 19U and the succor of 1943, Dr. Ding had many meetings in Berlin

with Dr. Karl Gonzlcen concerning his work at Buchenwald in connection with
%

the Spotted Fever experiments. Dr. Ding told no that Dr. Genzkcn had a
special interest in these matters and that he sent him reports at various
times. Dr. Ding also said that Dr. Karl Gcnsksn was one of his superiors.
From my association with Dr. Ding I understood that the chain of command
in the supervision of tho Spotted Fevor Experimental Station was as follows:
Reichsarzt SS Grawitz, Gcnzkan, Urugcwsky, and Ding.

5. I can rocollect that Dr. Gonskon gave orders to Dr. Ding in
January 1943 to enlarge the experiment;! station. At this tiao Blopk 50
was cleaned out and aido into a station for tho production of tho various
vacclnoa to bo usod in tho exporinor.ts at Block 46. From this tiao on tho
experimental station was known ar "Department for Spotted Fevor and Virus
Research of the Hyglono Institute of tho Ttaffcn SS". Then in the summer *f
1943 Dr. Gcnzken turned all his duties ever'to Dr. Urugowsky and from that
time on Gcnzken no longer actively participated in these matteis. I can
recrll mooting Dr. Urugowsky in tho heme of Dr. Ding on one cf his visits
t> Burhenwald." . _ *'


- lOdl -


y~

x Jan 47— 21-1- Sasl aw- «X

COURT I

■6. Inasmuch as I was constantly associated with Dr. Ding
at Bucher.wald we beoane very friendly, r frequently dlecusoed
matters with Ding anil visited his experimental station from
time to tine. As a natter of faot, Dr. Ding had to go to
Berlin for discussions with Dr. Mrugowskl and others, nearly
x days out of every two weeKs, and cn such oooaalona I was
In charge or the Spotted Fever Instltue. However, when Ding
went to Berlin the experiments wore discontinued until he
returned. i

■7. The experiments at 31oclc 46 In the Buchenwald
Concentration Canp were conducted ao follows: One group of
viotlns were first vacolnatod with the spotted fever vacclno
and then Infected with the spotted fover vlruo. In order
to contrast the effectiveness of the vacclno another group
of Instates were merely infocted with tho spotted fever virus

without fnypcwious vaccln tlan.Botvoon tho Autumn of 19-12 and the

0

Summer of 194 about 500 inmates of tho Buohonwald Conoon-
tratlori>Camp wore used in these oxperlconts. During ay tlmo
about 10* of tho total nunbor of the Inmates used died as a
result. I heard that a largor number of tho viotlns died
aftor my time, that is about 20 *.

"8. Tho solootlon of Inmates to bo usod for the purposes
of cedi cal experiments in Blook 46 by tho "Instltuto for
Spotted Fever and Virus Research was as follows: ./henever
Dr. Ding needed human beings for his work roquost was
mado to the office of the Camp Commandant and referred to me
for action. Usually a man named 3chober, and S3 Hauptatum
fuehrer, notified me to select the necessary number of
Prisoners for these purposes. In accordance with this
request I selected various Inmates, at random, from the roster
of the camp. They wore placed on a list over my slgnaturo and


1082


3 J ps. 47- JU*- 21-1- 3a a 1 aw- AX C.

COURT I

returned to Sohober who often reaoved certain naaes froa
the Hat for polltloal reasons. In the event that particular
prisoners were reaoved fron the list I was requested to se¬
lect substitutes In order to provide Dr. Ding with the
desired nuabor of victims. Aftor I returned .the completed
list to Sohober It was given to Dr. Ding for approval. He
made a final ohook to aeoertaln, froa a medical point of
view, the phyeloal condition of tho soleoted mantes and to
determine whether or not they aet with hlarequirements.


1082 a


3 *e» k?-..-Afe_-Z 1-2-Syslar

Court Ifc. 1


C


■T?-_SSFSH OF IK!r.TZS TO TIL S3KTLC E

aa5K Jl.TI- H.


LSL. STATICS FCR


■9. I bccaac arorc in 19kl t:»at lh so-callod 'Euthanasia' prcgroa for
the extermination cf the ncntally and physically dcficiont war being carriod
out in Gcrnany. «t that tlae tac Can Cavaanticr, Ko^h, calic*. all the impor¬
tant 3S officials of the can? together an. inferred thaa that he lu.d received ;
secret order frcc.-R 1 nr.Icr to the effect that all ncntally and physically
icficiont inaatos of the carp should oc killed. The caop cotsiandor stated the


higher authorities free Berlin ortored that all Jewish inrntes of tho Buchcn-
uald Concentration Carp should be included in this cxtorrin-.t*on pregran. In
accordance with these orders 300 to U00 Jewish prisoners of different
nationalities wore sent to tha 'Euthanasia Station 1 at Barnbur" for exter-


rdnation. * few days later I received e list of tho naaos of thoao Jews who
core oxtominctod at Berriburg free tho conp casumder and was ordered to
issuo falsified statocxnts of death. I obeyed this order. This particular
action was ex ecu tod under the code nano «lii f 13'. I visited Bernburg on one
occasion to arrange for tho crcnotien of two irantes who diod in the
Uornigorodo Branch of tho Buohennald Co.Tco..tration C.-rrp.

■ TIE KILLIfrj OF IJt«TSS 3T . (BILL r.ttl 071IER 12AKS.


"10. In tho carp re had a Croat . any prisoners .<ho wore jealous of tho
positions he]d by a certain forr of t a in htes, that is, soco cf political
prisoners held key positions and .icn aiil: to get bettor living conditions
tiian the average. Hence, r«any of tivo prisoners enviod these positions and
i!=*lo every effort te discr-dit che nen xrhc held the koy positions. Such
traitorous actions ooccao known thr ugh the *' grape vino' to tho :icn in the
koy .jositiens and then such traitors i«crc 1 arcedLately killed. In each ease
I uas later notified in order to nake cut the death .statements a* tl.c
-risoners killed. Those state:aits did not indicate the actual cause of
death, bet were nadc out to indicate that the prisener diod of natural


causes.

♦ • *

"11. In sene instances I supervised the k i l l in c of these unworthy

L-xr.ics by inject lens of phoacl at the request of the innat^s. Theso

t 1083 - -


3 Jan U7--^.-21-3-Sasl="
Court Jo. 1


C


killings trek place in tfau carp hospital and I was assisted b„. scvoral in-
aates. Cn one occasion Dr. Ding cauc to the hospital to witness such killingf
with phoool aai said that I was not doing it correctly; therefore, ho pcrforn-
od a -mb cf the injections bias elf. At that tine thre inaatos wore killed
with phsncl Injections end they diod within a dnutc.

•15*. The total noeber cf traitors fcttlod was about 150, of when 60 were

£

killed b: phen -1 injections, either by t-ysolf or under :jy supervisien in the
cea.j hospital, end the rest wore I^llod by Vvjious naans, such as beatings
by tiic intv.tea. (Signed) Dr. Ualdouor Horen.* „ ^

'.ihile we arc now dealing in particular wit), the typhus cxpcrir.onts
conducted at Buchcnwald, the Court has seen-that this affidavit else covers in
part the Euthanasia progrer and wo hove just heard the witness Ferdinand Hell
testify ns to the acti-n “f-13* on 1 / rx will recall that the witnccs '..'niter
.Ibff alec testified to tnc action "1-13", uiich wore doscribwd in both
Instances as the Invalid trans >crto sor.t irai the oonccntra iion corps to tho
oxterrdnatien contcrs; and h re again wo find the dcfcnlanfr Haven explaining
be us the znaning of the code nci.c "lii-f-13 r •

It is '■ur posltl'n, of course, that the actions known tc i.'c r i and

Kordinand H:ll ■£ “f-13* wore x.i ofluct the scao as the ccti n *1) -f-13" and

•

•n liavo econ fr c. all those s cure os that through this action, rsc nc of all
natlanr.ilties nhc were c.nsidcrcd to bo invalids and unfit lar wirl: were
cater rdiwteJ under tho G-nnn Euthanasia Program. The other p; reion of the
affidavit dealing with natters other than the typhus cxpcrluor.ts, is H-.ivon's
■athsr pr.thatic description of the pari, ho p.rsnr.lly playufl'in the killing
-f nc ir nc htndrrd and fifty Inoatcs r-a ho Juts describe 1 a - traitors to tho
gacd imates of th«_ concentration c-vij.

Part of the aifidavit doaiiix uith typhus experiments at Buchcnwald gives
us a thunb-nail picture of thi tK-^iicrar ' this pr -graai and un-'.cr whoso
.jurisdiction it was carried out, that is, th i sxiictc jurisdiction. We saw
--•t it began in the letter part of lS'-l in Block u6 of the Ducheuwald Con-
centrti n C-np nod that at that tine it .rs directly under tho cu ex-vision of
D5n S wh- in tom was suberdipatoi tc .-rugous:? whe was tlio chief of the

- 1C6U -

* .


3 «fcn

Court Ic. 1

I^lcrc Institute of the Feffen SS in'Barlin, and that UmsyUky in turn was
subordinated to the defendant Genskon who was chief of the n odical Service of
tho Uaffen SS, pert of which was the itygicnc Institute of tho Haft on SS; and
tic tribunal will recall durlx; cur presentation on th. organisation of tto SS
that in august of 19U3 a shift in subc.-olination took place and at that tine
Lin^onsly and the Hygicno Institute of the Waffon SS wpro transferred under .
Dr. Grairlts wtu was the Roichsarst SS. However, free late 19ltl until 19U3

%

tie chain of ccniand as, as I described in the affidavit, first Gensken,
linkers’..- end then Ding. Hovon tolls us hew the inoatos were s elec tod, who
wore oloctcd first by hin aixt then screened by Schcbor and than passod on tr
Din", and ho rory oloarly states they wore scloctod at rand* and, cf courso,
noro therefore n t volunteers.

I pass now to docuocot 110 U2J \t.lch I offer conditionally as Prosecution

• t

Exhibit He. ?82.

DR. *PLci£-.ING: Counsel Floajin: for tho defendant '.rucoiro'.cy. I object

to the presentation cf this dccuaont fer two roasns. I should like to

ouphcsis& that ay objection may have tee s*-jc r.scrvati n about any future

docuccnt as it was rulod by iho Id-l* Tribunal with roforcnco to the provious

affidavit; I abject firstly beer so t. is affidavit has tho contents cf an

interrogation of the defendant : Inr;;nsl;* and at tho sauo tiro cf tho defendant

OcnsJton and it is suraarittn. both tlwso interrogations. I a. cf tho

opinion that such a cnccn interrogrti n cf two dofondant3 Iiao to bo taken down

on record and I think that it is not admissible to interrelate cno of these

a;o defendants and ask hin tt subnit an ai. idavi t about tho result cf those
%

intorr-fattens. In additicn, tic, dofendant iu-u-owsky neither curing this
c • a. n intcrrrjati n with Gonsken r.or befor^ .iaking the affidavit n^r before
signing that affidavit, was informed as tc that extent he had tiro right to
refuse nakir^, that testimony. Finally-, this affidavit was sw.rn tc in fr nt
of a civilian, sr that the saao statesxnts apply tr it that wore node
'-r^vi-uuly end repeatedly by the Hi;p Tribunal in ether eases.


- ic«5 -


» Jon 47 irTJO-22-2 Blaklwy
Court So. 1

BBDBff: Tho objection will "be overrule! uA *ho sffidc.vid
oSalttol provisionally, subjoct to the later attack on tho part of tho
dqferxlant’B counsel and subject to the proper certification appearing of
tno parson who purported to teJce tho oath of the wltnoss. Tho ruling of
tho Tribunal Is without prejullco to the right of counsol lator to ronew
his notion against tho affidavit.

JTSX52 SRURirCBT: Mr. HcHanoy, In Doc'xaont 423, affidavit of
dofondant Mrugowsky, tho cortlflcato of translation rofors to dofondant
Viktor Brack on Pago 9 of :sy document book.

McHAJTSTf: It rofors to what, your Honor?

JCDGZ S*riARi:JC2-T: It rofors to tho affidavit by Viktor Brack; tho

cortlflcata placod on this affidavit of ’Irugowaky rofors to tho affidavit

• * » * *

of Viktor Brack. ,

H*. UoHARTf: You oro oorroct, your Honor; and wo ahall also
roctlfy that. Obviously thore has boen a dstafco nodo thoro booeuoo ovon
tho dato of tho affidavit doos not o oaf ora to tho ono which wo voro
forcod to transloto, so we will chock beck and ascortaln who did in fact
tronslato this docucont and havo tho proper cortlflcato subatltutod.

TH3 H?3SID3f?r: This affidavit will also bo rocolved subjoot
to tho corroctlon on tho port of tho cortlflcato for translation.

is. UcIlATCY: This document is an affidavit takon from tho
defendant Urugowsfcy; and It reads as fellows:

"I, Joachim Albort Krugcwsky, bolng duly sworn, doposo and

state:

"1. I was born In Sathencw, Cor many, on August 15, :.900; and frera
1925 to 1931 stodlod aodiclno and natural sclopeo, ospeclaliy blolPgy,
at tho University of Hallo. In 1931 I passod ny state oxaoinotion. ?rca

4

1935 until the collapso of Goraany I was in octlvo sorvlco of modlcal

officer of tho TTaffon SS. I rose gradually tn the rrmks of tho ’faffon SS

and was pronotod to Oborfuoaror In 1943. In tho Waffon SS I w_s chiof of

tho Kyglona Institute of the faffon SS and chiof of the Offico XVI

"Hygiono" In tho operational main offico. On Soutccber 1, 1943, this

— 1036 —


3 Jan 47 A-FJC-22-2-Blo'cioy
Court ?b. 1


laatltuto aa ;it iaaodiatoly undor tho Hole fa Ifcyslclnn SS aal Pollco
Dr» i-not Orawitz; and I bocaco cfalof of office III on tho staff of tho
Holch Physician SS and Pollco. I onterod the .*HUT on llarcfa 1, 1930, a »i

tho 3S on 15 October 1931. 4(y party cunbor is Nucbor 210019 aal ny


nuaber is Jtasber 25611. I rocolTod cy doctor's degreo for Eyglono
and Bacteriology in 1937 at the University of Hallo. In 1939 I bocnao
a lecturer for this fiold of scionco at tho University in Berlin ai*i was
appointed professor of this university In 1944.

"2. By roason of ay position os Chief Hyglona Officor of tho
raff on SS and Cfalof of A= t XVI is the SS operational IJois Office and
later at tho Office III in tho staff of the Reich ppvsiclan SS and Pollco,
I obtained full knowledge of tho position and activities of Dr. Karl

s • • • .

Gonzken and of the position and work Of Dr. Siwin Ding, who was Chiof
of tho Doportseat for Spatted 7over and Virus Rosonrch at tho Hyglone
Institute of tho .Jeffon SS at the Buchoawold Concentration C*ap. Sovoral
tinea I rooolrod roports to which charts wjro attached frou Dr. Ding
indicating tho rosuits of the exporiaonts cakrlod out thoro; and I
roportod on thoso nattora to Or. Conzkon, an occceioa which shall bo
lose rl bed lator. Ivisltod tho abovo-noeod doportr^nt in tho Buchonwold
C:acontratioa Caap sovoral tiaos. Sujwrvislon of tho rosoorch aal tho
=anufacturo of spottod fovor vaccino carrlod out thoro was part of cy
scopo of dutios.

"3. Duo to sy position I golnod caaploto knxrlodge of tho official

ccanoctlon botwoon Dr. Oonzkon and Dr. Ding. Thorof-ro, I an Q blo to aoko
this statecont an that subject.

”4. Cenzker. was ny imodiato suporior fr<o 1940 until'Soptetbor
1, 1943. At that tiro a reorganization of tho SS Helical Sorvico was

i°d out and I was placed directly uador Dr. Crawitz, thon Reich

ician SS and Police. In the beginning of 1942 Dr. Gcazken ordered tho

'•ation of the Doper t&ent for Spotted Rover ar.d Virus Rosoorch at

Hygiono Institute of the Seffon SS in the Buchoawold COMentration


I


end appointed Dr. Ding as Chief of this de?art=iont. is I wrs at that
Chiof of -Hygiono- in tho SS Operational Main Office, I wrs

- 10C7--


Tax; 47 A-FJC-2a-3-31akley
Court So. 1

th* Iznodiat* superior of Or. Ding* Tte ceo of bis deportcont was chosen
i- order to =ako clear tha slnilor purposes of this lastftttto for the
Stffeo 35 and of the Institute for Spottod For or end Virus Hosoorch of
thi OS (Supraro ir=y Ocanepd) in Croc cat undor Dr. Major 3yer.

■5. Dr. Goszkon know, as a natter of courso, that tho Institute
■as fcunfled for tho purposo of providing the V.-ffta SS with an officiant
7«*coluo against soottod favor. In the Dop-rtaont for Spottod Fovor and
Virus Rosooroh at Bochanwald, nodical exporinonts on irentes cf tho
Buchormald Concentration C-ap woro carried out by Dr. Ding in ordor to
dotorrdnt tho offoct of various spottod fovor vaccijos.

"6. In April 1943 I cado on oral roport to" Dr. Conzkon on tho
rosults of oxporir«onts carriod out thus f'T. In this roport I gnvo tho
neaessary explanations and showed Dr. Conzkon scoo charts which woro ront
to no by Dr. Ding’s offieo end uhich indicated tha fovor and pulso
curvos, tho detos of tho vccclnatlon and artificial lnfocticn, tho doath
rates, c-wipllcatlon Nhlcharcso, otc. One of tho oxporlruatol sorioa
shown In tho charts w;a carriod out on pooplo who woro only lafeotod but
act vaccinated in ord^r to find out tho potency of tjo vaccines uood in
othor cesos.

"7. I uydo a cooploto roport to Dr. Conzkon; and it is, thoro-
foro, aboolutoly inprssiblo that Conzkon rs a doctor should havo boon
ign-rar.t of tho fact that husan beings wore used for thoso ozporinoats
and research.

■Signod, Dr. itrugowoky."

Ioiood, I think It car. safoly bo said that tho Institute at
Bjchonwold could havo hod r.o purooso othor th-t tho tooting of vaccinos
pricr to tho tiao that Block 50 was sot un oarly in 1943 bocauotP'lt was
*.bon at Block 50 that tho vaccines woro =nnufacturod. Prior to that tire

t *' c exporinonts wore carried out on innetos with vaceicos supplied free

:thor scurcos so of courso thoro was really no purposo nor functicn to

Sis spotted fever and virus at Buchoamld prior to 1943 other than tho

‘••atlng on hicen boings of various vaccines. In other words, it was not

• vaccipo nenufacturing institute; and this affidavit of tho defendant

r~:‘ v —^ =0^03 It Clear that tha dofondant Conzkon was in the direct

- 1080 —


ehr*±n of e


ctt-ai -ad h~d full iafcsa-.tlcn coicor.-ln^ tho crinia~l .rctivi-
tlos nt Puehors—ld, r.t loast Trier tc($opto=bor, 19^-S.

I exo aow to Docixjoat Ihrbor

33 JBVDS7TI To rill ocnsld-r ao o:ro docusoats tLla oTonlne.

Ac Tribunal doslros to fjiacuaso th.-.t it hrs und-i ccasidor-tion thi
vrttor si^soatod tho otfcor dry by ono of tho dofonsocounsol in coanoctioa
with tbo t-iiag of f/fId-Tits to bo usod ra ovUonco la tho c-so; and -n
-rxounoanoat will bo snA o by tho Trlbca -1 concoming tho notfcod to fco

follnwod- lr cnaaoctlon with such r sr.ttcr, probably Toad" nomine.

Tho Tribunal will now rocosa until 9:30 c'olook !(oad*\y nornlng.

. . 0

- » ^ •


N


— I0d9 -


Court No. 1
6 Jan 47 - H


er (AG)


CORRECTED COPY

Official transcript of the American Military
Tribunal In the matter of the United States
of jmerlca, against Karl Brandt, et al, de¬
fendants, sitting at Nurnberg, Germany, on
6 January 1947, 0930, Justice Beals, pre¬
siding.


THE MARSHAL: The Honorable Judges of Military Tribunal


Military Tribunal 1 is now In session.

God save the United States of America and
this Honorable Tribunal.

There will bo order' In the courtroom.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Marshal, ascertain that the de¬
fendants are all present in the court.

THE AARdHaL: May It please, your Honor, all defendants
are prosont in the courtroom.

THE PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General will note for the
rcoord tho fact that all the defendants are present In court.

This afternoon tho Tribunal will recess probably


at 3:30 o'clock In order to go into consultation to consider


the cotter suggested last week by several defense counsel
In oonnootlon with the matter of procuring affidavits and
depositions by tho defendants. The Tribunal desiroB af
that time that the prosecution be represented by one or two
of its staff and that the defendants counsel be also repre¬
sented. *s that natter was first suggested by Dr. Scrvatlus


and second by Dr. Sauter, those g^.itlenen will bo present
at the con^eretce. The defense counsel themselves will
her representative 0O that three of defense
will be present at that conference.

The prosecution nay proceed.

I • J

The conference will be held In the Judges' consul¬
tation rooc. rtt'tbls tine I would request the liarai^al that


1090


Court Ho. 1 *

6 Jan -.7 - K - 1-1 - LJO^ Foster (AG)


there are available for that oonference one Interpreter '
who lntororets froa Gernan Into English an- one In¬
terpreter to Interpret froa Owlish into Gernan.

HR. KcKaNEZ£: May It please the Tribunal, at the end
of the session on Friday we were considering evidence
with respect to the typhus experi-


- 1090-A -


Court No. 1

5 Jan 47 - X - 1-2 - LJG - Foatei* (aG)


cents carried out at the Buchenwalb Concentration Camp.

The prosecution wlahea to call at the earliest available
opportunity this corning the witness Henrl-Jean Grandjean
to testify with respect to the mustard gas experiments at
Natzweller. However, there will be an unavoidable delay
because of the difficulty of arranging for French lnterpre-
tatlon; however, I understand tnat that will be straightened
out rather shortly and I hopo that we will bo able to
present honsieur Grandjean at some tlae, at least shortly
after the aornlng recess. In the meantime, I should like
to continue with the presentation of proof on the typhus
experiments at Buchenwald und I now offer Document HO.

257 as prosecution Exhibit 283. This Is on pago 10 Of the
English document book.

DR. GaWLIK (For the defendant KOVSl): Tho Tribunal,

The Document NO. 257, I ask that It not be aunvlUod for
tho following reasons. I should like to coll tho attention
of the Tribunal to pa s o 12 of tho English Document Book.
Under the first signature, Dr. Schuler, It says, “This
statement was written by mo on three (3) pages on type¬
writer In Frelsln^, Germany, on the 20 July 1945 at 1400
hours, voluntarily and without force." Then It goes on,

■I swear by God, tho Almighty, that I will withhold
nothing. Dr. Erwin Schuler." Further, what follows,'Tlrst
Is the translation. Apparently only a written statement
was given that he was taking the oath but aside from
exceptional cases which are not the case hero, an oath
can be given orally and, furthermore, there Is no Indi¬
cation that tne oath wee administered by a person who
had the authority tc administer such oath. Thus there Is
no veal oath In this oase. Furthermore, I should like to


- 1091 -


Court .Ho. 1


6 Jan 47 - U - 1-2 - UG - Footer. (AG)

■

point out that the loot notation mom to on the 19tii of December

1945 Ding was already dead,

MR. UcHAUET. If the Tribunal pl*a&e, this is anoth-r case
wher- tne translation depart -nt has aitted to include the certi¬
fication ahlch appears on the original docu.*nt. It is unfortunate
the doeux lent . itigates egainat the ad issibility of this affidavit
awom to by Dr. Emin Schuler. The Tribunal will 8«u froa the orig¬
inal which I ha*_ before

f • *.v *


- 10 51-A -


Court fcc. X


6 «an U7 - * - 1-3 - LJO - Foster


that it is signed Erwin Scholar on the bottom, on the b“.ck of tho
docuasnt is tho translation — the transl -ion departnent obviously

didn't turn it over. There ap;-«ars again the signature of Erwin Schuler

0

and innodiately underneath that is "Subscribed and awaro to before me at
Freising, Gernany, this 20th day of July 19li5," signed O-orge P. Swanick,
Captain, Infantry, In rjstigating Officer. As I was arying, on the
original a certification docs appear by George P. Sw.«ick, and it roads i
"Subscribed and sworn to bofore no at Freising, Germany, this 20th day
of July 19U5." Signed, Giorgo P. Swanick, Captain, Infantry, Investigating
Officer.

As has been pointed cut by defense counsel, the certification which
appears on tiw translation deals with the translation of this documont.

It was translated by ent tarry Ilaon In the first instance. Ho was sworn
by one Fred 8. Hofstettyr, Captain, Infantry, at Dachau, Germany. That
doala with the translation, ‘.to oust a (fait that tho affidavit is in good
ordor and should bo adiltted.


TKX rfKPflBSSr? :>unael will exhibit the original affidavit to
dbfov* ...iv i rid thon pass it to tho Tribunal.


6 Jan 4-M-E-:M-2-l-oehan
Court So. 1


C


DR. G..1JIX: If the Tribunal please, I have seen that the original

contains a notation idiich is not included in the translation. Therefore, I

withdraw this reason for ay objection. My objection against the affidavit

I will explain as follows: The person who cade this affidavit is dead. VIn

1945 ho cossitted suicide. Everyone who cakes an affidavit can be crosa-

excalnod by the opposing body, in the first place in order to supplement the

affidavit and in the second place to check the credibility of the individual.

Only or. an affidavit in which the person concerned can be cross-examined is

there full evidential value and can therefore be considered as admissable.

This is not the case in tho case of this affidavit and I thereforo consider

the submission of this affidavit inadadssable for this reason.,

kR. McHaMEY: If tho Tribunal please, it occurs to mo that the fact

that the affiant is no lenger available is a vojy strong reason why the

Document should be admitted. I can nsour. tho Tribunal that if he were

living and available, ho would be sitting in the dock before the Tribunal,

•

but he is now dead and cannot be callod here either for direct or cross-
ex am i nation. Tho only ovidenco of his which we have left is contained in
this affidavit, which wc aro now presenting to tho Tribunal. I may also say
•hat the position of the dofonso counsel ooaas to work both ways. When wc
havo a living affiant and an objection is made to tho admissabllity of the
Document, tho witness can bo called before the Tribunal. On the other hand,
if the affiant is dead, wo urge that the Document be made admissablo because
ho cannot be called here. The Prosecution respectfully requests that this
Document, h.- .vi’ilssable. I may add that the statements mad«vJ*eroin by the
deceased Dr. Ding are amply sustained and substantiated by a considerable
amount of document evidence which will ccoe beforo the Tribunal.

THE PRESEJBiT: The objection of the defense counsel is overruled.,
what was the number of the exhibit?

MF.. )£ HaNZT: This is prosecution exhibit No. 283. It reads as fol¬
lows:


"As ordered I answer twe questions literally:


- 1093 -


Freising, 20 July 1945


6 Jan 47--5S-2-2-Meehan
Court So. i


■1. Witness at an SithanHJ with Phenol at Bucher.weld.

•At the end of 1942 I took pert et a conference in the Military
Doctors Academy in Berlin. The topic of discussion was the fatality of
gas burr, aerun on wounded.

"Attendants: General Dr. Prof. Schrcibcr, Mil. Acad any, Hygienist
SS Brig. Gen. Prof. Itrugowslcy, Hygienist
A cedical officer who was unknown to ce who was a surgeon
Myself ea soctlon loader of the Ctntralinstitution in Berlin for
fighting of epidemics.

■Killion and Mrugcwsky gave reports of soldiers who had rocoivcd Case
oedocasorua in high quantities (up to 1500 cc) and hours afterwards, out of
complete recuperation, died suddenly without any visible roason. iirugowsky
suapocted thet tho Phenol content brought about the fatal result of the con¬
solidation of the separate injections.

■In the presence of tho other gentlemen, Mrugowsky commanded mo to take
part in a Euthanasy with phenol in a concentration c/ucp and to describe tho
result in detail since neither I nor Mrugowsky ever saw a caso of death
through Phenol, krugowsky h imsel f could not take part in tho Euthanasy
bccauso of an urgent trip to tho Sa.itj on tho other hand tho affair was
important for tho fighting troops and tho publication of enothor circular
for tho troop doctors.

"Few days later I askod Dr. Hoven in Buchenwaid to notify no when ho
would perform anothor Euthanasy with Phenol. The next evening he asked mo
to tho hospital block in the prison building. Besides himself and anothor
doctor - probably Dr. Plata - only two other prison male nuraos, whoa I
cannot raatober, were present. rw

"I talked with the doctor about the composition of the Phenol injection
and, as far as I can remember, it consisted of undiluted raw phenol, which
was to be cininistorcdin 20 cc quantities.

"One by one 4 or 5 prisoners were ltd in. The upper part of tho body
was naked so that the nationality patch could net bo distinguished. The
condition of the bodies was bad and the age was high. I do hot remember a
diagnosis as to *y the Euthanasy should take place but probably did not ask


for one either.


- 1094 -


6 Jan 47-k-SKli-2-3-ke«har.
Court No. 1


<


•They sat down on a chair quietly, that is, without emotion, near a
light. „ sale nurse blocked the vein in the era and Dr. Hoven injected the
Phenol quickly. Still during the injection they died in a momentary total
crcap without anj sign of other pain. The time between the beginning of the
injection and the fatal result I estimate at about 1/2 second. For aecurity
reasons, the rest of the dose was injectod, although part of the injection
would have been enough for the fatal result (I estimate 5 cc.).

•The dead wore c.rriod into an adjoining room by the nurses the V&t

f

of ny presence end witness I estimate at 10 minutes. According tc ordoha I
reported to Berlin. 1 knew nothing further to say.

"2. Hoven's share in Block 46.

"In February 1942 tho order to conduct typhus experiments came threugh.

1 was chosen to carry cut these experiments. Since I h d^' office in Borlin,
a doputy had to bo appointed for ay absence in Buchenwald. For this post tho
Rdchaarzt SS Dr. Grewitz in agreement with the loading doctor of tho
Concentration Camps Lolling nonod the SS 1st Lt. Dr. Hoven as station
doctor at Buchenwald.

"Uy proaence in Buchenwald lasting always only a few days while tho
time of tho experiments and tho length of the typhus opidoaic lasted about
ten weeks.

"Dr. Hoven had tho order to get the prisoners (professional criminals
sontoncod to death), that hevo been released for tho experiments from the
Raich security office and the Chief of the Concentration Camps, ready fer
the vaccination or tho infection after an examination of thc^,physical
fitness.

"As deputy, he often order Dr. Plaza to take over the guard of Block
46. Dr. Plaza in addition continued to work independently under Capo
Dictzsch.

"For experiments that did not result in fatality, such as the compati¬
bility of fellow Fever Vaccine, 2-300 volunteers stood in readiness as I
knew from rosters that Dietzsch showed me once. Such experiments did not
only take place in the block but also, in a certain case, in the camp itself.


6 Jan 47-M-2Xf-2-4-Meehan
Court No. 1


C


For that experiatnt about 00 Dutchmen were taken, they did not have to
work and they were given extra rations, "or that they h'ld to have their
tasperaturo taken threo tin os daily and every two days had to give 10 cc
blood for a blodd count. %

"Hovein worked as ay deputy until ay permanent entranco in Buchenwald
in August 1943. In Septeober he was arrostod.

"In the year 1942 he had to work a lot by hiasclf since I contracted
typhus and aftor that was sent to a resthere. Right after that I had a
detail to the Pasteur Institution in Paris. During this tine the sick
reports carried the signature of Woven or Plaza."

(signed) Dr. Schuler

"This statement was written by ne on threo (3) pages on typewriter
in Freising, Ccrcany, on 20 July 1945 at 1400 hours, voluntarily and with-

Ottt font. _

"I swear by Cod, the «laignty, that I will say nothing but the pure
truth, and will add and withhold nothing."

(signed) Dr. Edwin Schulor.


6 Jnn-i*-vP-3-l-3eard


Court So. 1


The first pirt of this affidavit, of course, dorls with the nurder of a
nuabcr of prisoners with phenol; end, of course, tho; made that very abating
p.rd wonderful discovery — that you can kill a man with phenol in less that one
sac end. It is interesting to ..ot_, hewever, that Doctor Ding tolls us that thic
was carried out on the orders, and after a consultation octwoen Itoofossor
Schrelbor of the kilitary t eclical Academy in BcrUn, and the defendant Kru h o*rsk;
And, I will remind the Tribunal that Schreibor was one of tho principal subordi¬
nates of th. defendant riaxvdlosor. Haadloeor was, in fact, what you night call
tho Chiof of the Military odiccl Acndcoy by virtu*. of his .oaition ns Chief of
the edical Inspectorate of tho f^my. -*nd, so we so- that ono of his principal
subordinates, that is, to say, Handlooor's subordinates, is urging tho execution
of a nuaxr of peoplo in cn off or'- to djtomine the effoct of this ges-burn
s-riun on wcundod people. which apparently was a natter of s ojc interest to the
.j*ned Forces.

Tho second p*rt 0 f the offid-vit doals with tha activities of tho defen¬
dant Hovun in Block 1*6 at 3uchonwnld; and it was in Block L6 that the typhus
oxporiaonts, themselves, ore actually carriod o.t. It was thor- that tho vac¬
cines woro adninisUr-d, asd lat.r artificial inactions, through inj-ctions,
or through tho bitos of lice, ns clso done, .jid vj sec tnr.t Hov-n was Ding's
principal subordinate, and was in cnarg- of 31ock 1*6 when Ding wo away on
trips to B-rlin or to thu Pcstcur Institute in Paris.

TH5 PR-SI ENTi You ruf-r to Doctor Ding, do y>u noan Ding or Schuler?

i3. IfcHANEYi I aa sorry, your Honor, Ding is Doctor Sc.ivler. The man's
nano was Ding up until, I think, sovwtiw; in 1911, whereupon hf^oecurud
pc mission of tho appropriate Ci-ncy in th- Reich government to chcngo it to
Schuler. It is a r-thjr intarusting story, but I think I will wait and have one
of our witnesses tell the Tribunal when this was done.

Schuler alap tell us that 'oven, in feet, s-lccted or s-cur-d tho prisoners
*o -tort oxp-riav_ntud upon with typ'aus. -nd, of c-aursu, Hovon also adoinis-
torud the phenol injections which kill-d tho five unfortunate .people, and


ac j ana adaittod as much in his Win affidavit.


1097


6 J{u>45-JF-3-2-Beird
Court Ho. 1


C


I aa edvised.t this ti o ih-.t t.V interpreters arc pr_p cr - d to interpret

into Tranch—

JUDGE SIBRING: TA: Tribunal has a question. !!r. cHanoy, I s-vn to lose

tit 0ignif2nee of this affidavit. The first p“rt of it teals with euthanasia

with ,-henol at Buchenwald, and tho daieOdant 'Irugowsky is nritd in the affidavit

Hear, is it >our view that this ffid'vit t-ndi- to shew sass culpability on tlie

part of the defendant >Tugaws'cy in relation to the Euthanasia rrogran?

.R. MciiJiETt I <L. not th-nk th-t Krugowaky is indict-li as being a

participant in tho Euthanasia Prograa ss such.

JUDGE SEEKING* That is the reason Z propounded the question.

>S. IfeHJBTi Honcver, I take it that tho affidavit docs incriminate

ixugcwsky in surdcr, if nothin .sore. In other words, the way this was brought

about, was, that :Yugowsky and Schuler had a discussion about the offoct of gas-

burn seri’ja on the wounded, and as a result of this, rugowsky suspocted that

the phenol contents of t.k. series had sceothing to do with the f r.tal results

%

that they wore experiencing; and, that was the reason Schuler was ordered to --
in fact, -xocute four peopl- with .twnol. And, that, as he st-t.s, v.o^dono.
■«o», while ‘Yugowsky is not formally indicted und^r the Euthanasia Irogran, I
tako it h_ ir prob bly indicted for participating in tho .nird-rs and atrocities
through a-died exp-ria;nt'ti^.s, cnJ I tnko it that this proof falls within
tho scope of the affidavit with respect to irugowsky.

THE RESIDENT* Is it your position Counsel that this affidavit convoys

any inforaation at all as to the rrtienaiity of those victims of phenol?

rV

!5. MoHAMZX* If I understood tho question, I do not think the affidavit
does rovoal the n.atiorvaiitie3 of th- docoacod victims, As he st“tos, thuir na¬
tionality patches could not oc cos.rvcd because th.y w„ro — that portion of
their bodies wuTo naked. So, I tku it that it proboly could not and would
not be assumed by the Tribunal t*vt these people necessarily w_re n'-n-Gonaan

nnti innlitica.

JUDG- SLSRI.iGi TToll, it is ; air view that this affidavit may tend to


6 Jan - U- J? - 3- 3“ Board (AG)

1

Coart So. 1


.stabliab culpability aa against the defendant lirugtxrsky under the
prulkiinary charges that are not particularized; . cstly under Count
2 and Count 3, is t:iat correct?

' UR. KcBAXKT: Yes, indeed, the prulinlmxy portion of ;>aragraph
6, as I r-call it.

JUDGE SEME: And, also 11.

UR. McHAHZT: Yes induod, 11.

I a.- advisod at this ti o, the Intel prutora are prepared to
interpret fra. Preneh into English and fra. English into Gcr.anj so,
at this ti. e, the Prosecution wculd lik« to*have th- witness
Henri-J-an Grandjean called to th- stand.

TK£ 5-RESIDSrT: The Marshal will naren tho Prosecution's
witness H-nri-J-an GrandJean.

H-nri-Jean Grand Joan, a witneso, took the stand and testified
as follows: . •

BY TOE PRESIDSfT:

Q. Hold up ycur rl$ht hand. You will repent the oath after :u>:

I swear by God, the- Almighty and 0 nisclent, that I will sp-ok
the pure truth and will withhold and odd nothing.

(TOe wit.-ieos repeated the oath.)

Q. ilow, I will ad inister the oath to the Interpreter. The
interpreter will rise anj raise her right hand, and r-peit after *.o:

I, Margaret Abraha , do sole. nly svoar that I will perfor:. ry
duty as interpreter to the Tribunal to th- best of .y ability and
skill, so help u God.

(Tl-.e interpreter repeated the oath) .

The Frcs-cution will proceed rdth the -xa. inaticn of this
witness.

EERECT LIALLiATION

3Y :R. UcHAlEY:

Q. Tour nar*i is Hcnri-Joan Grand jean?


- 1099 -


6 Jaa-*-J?->3-Board (AG)
Court So. 1


C


A. To*.

Q. Tou aro born on 19 April 1906 in Faria?
A. Tea.

&


-1099A-


6 Jaiv-S*-JP-3-Ji-Beard

Court .Ho. 1


C


Q. You arc a French eitison?

A. Tea.

Q. W you now r,aidi n g at 13 Kue do Marivaux, Paris?

A. Tea.

Q. fitness, will you please tell the Tribunal whet your present occupation
is?

A. Act ini at ra tor — buainaaa aanegor.

Q. Are you an export to same of the French courts?

A. Only for buainesa natters.

Q. How, witness, did tioro couc a time in 19U3 when you wore arrested?

A. In Novoaber 19U3.

Q. 3y whoa wore ycu rrreat-.d, witness?

A. The Security police.

Q. The Gcrnan Security Police?

A. Tea, the Goman Security Police.

Q. Why wore you arrast d, witness?

A. .ia an officer in the Frorch ..r y — as a fightin* officer, I was arres¬
ted, ns a rxvnch sdlit-ry.

Q. # Tore ywi an officor in the so-callod FFC?

A. les.

Q. .ind, that was a rosist-nco movement, I take it?

A. Tos; wu had a special task in France.

Q. Now, what hap cnod to you as r. result of this arrost? Were you givon
a trial?

A. I was tortured by the Gestapo in Furls; later I was sent »W> Reins for
two months.

QH. SERVATIUS: Mr. Fro si dent, may I nako a tachnic'l sug v-ation? The
interpreter is translating incorrectly there, and is not repeating tho words
of tho witness, would it be possible for the witness to speak loud enough so
■c can understand him In French — to bo -ole to chock the French. If the mi¬
crophone could be sovud ov,,r a littl_, the interpreter is speaking too low as


6 Jan tf-JP-3-5-Bcard. (AO)
Court No. 1


if she waa carrying on a private cmvcrsaticn.

THZ ?R2SID3fT: The witr-.ee nillsp-ik louder and into tho
aicropfccno. Tho interpreter will alao apeak in a little louder tono.
BT la. McflAJCT:

Q. Witnoaa, I had just aaked whether ojr net you wdro tried by
any court because of ycur participation in the reslstanco movement?

A. I wta arrested in 1943. I waa arrested by the Security

0

Folice in Paria. I waa subjected to a very a_vcro interrogation for
eight days. Later I woo transferred to Rhoiaa, but I waa kept in

custody for two months. I night add that I Buffered very much

• * •* • • • •

because an attempt waa sadu to sake no betray ay cooradoo. On the
2nd of January 1944, I « transferred to the Hotzweilcr actcrmin-
ation Camp.

Q. TTero you ever tried, witness, by a court?

A. No.

Q. And, you were sent to the Kats;iwilcr Concentration Caop in
January 1944?

A. On the 2nd or 4th cf January 19'',.

Q. '..'hat work did you p_rfor= in the Natxweilor Zznpl
A. I did various kinds of work. I waa a grouid worker. I built
walls for tho 7-1; and, in April I entered the infirmary aa nodical

assistant.


-1101-


- -


t,


6 Jan-M-dS-4-1 -Lea a er
Cenrt la. 1.


Q. Wall, ware yau erer triad, witneaa, by a court, ar vere you Juat....
A io.

v .ird you vara tant to tha Satxweilar Concentration Carp ia J rruary
19J. ia that cor.act.

On tea 2d or 4th of January 19-4.
q. ttx. t work did you perfors in tha Sataweiler CaapT
A. I did rarioua kladt of work, I waa a ground workar, I built walla
for tha T-X, -ad in ~pril I aatarad tha lnfinaary aa a aadic*J aaalatant.
q. Tou wara a aria ouraa in tha infirraryt
x. Taa, I w. a a aala nuraa

q. oara you abla to obaarra wnether or not any aadlcal axpariaanta wara
carriad out at jiatiwallart


— So-etltea.

q. Do you anow wnatner any axpariaanta with nuatard or loat
parforaad on concantration cusp lnaataa at Katxwallar!


gaa were


-• la tdi» regard I waa aaalgnod to 3look 5 to taka taaperaturaa

-od yulaca of 5 paraona vno had baan ia a gaa chaaber and who had aurvivod.

q. a'ow wara ; on abla to talk to tha*a 5 aurrivora about what had
happened to tuao.7

a- Taa. I waa aola to talk to ona or two of thaj
q. And what did they tall you had happanad to than?

-»• Ona of tha aurrlwora waa a gypsy rad ha told oa th t ha had baan
takan wita 15 of hia cooradea and put into a gaa chasber for experiments at
St ruth Of. Tnc SS gars hia capaulaa w-ich thay wore to break when a aign waa
giran froa outaida. aftar aoea tiaa tha door woa opanod and the # '*> aurrivora
r«ra brought for observation to Block 5. Boon 2. I waa told to taka thoir
ta-paraturaa three tinea a day.

q. bow do you know what happanad to the other 10 paraona vno voro
axperinented on with gaa?
a. Thay h^d died .
q. Bow do you know th.t they died?

... Their surviving coaradca said tuat they had died. Some of thoo were

1102


6 2-I*«ior

Court io. 1.


dissected by Dr. 33gc.rlx fros Brusrels. me bodies shoved palcontry edoms.

x- Sid you know the etc was dissected these bodies?

... T«s. it was Dr. 3og> rts who worked witn ae.

<• How as to these 5 survivors vfcoc you saw and wnose teoporaturos :;nd
julse you took to whoa did you »:ke a report in the citp about tholr
condition?

A. The C-po of tne hospital.

<1- Is tne oaiw Dr. Haagcn foci liar to you?

A. Tes.

Did he nave any connection with these ges expericonts to your know¬
ledge?

a- He was inter* ted in tne development of tco curvos end tosperaturos.

X

Do you know whether taese temperature charts wore given to Baagon?

«. Yes, Certainly, bocouse tne Capo askod for thoa every tiao Dr.

Haagon ca-e to tne ea~p.

Eow u. ny tiaes did you see Dr. Heagon in Hatsvoller?

... rivo or six tinos.

sA now did you know it was Dr. Efuigcn?

... roe Capo did orderly s.rvico one. therefore ho fcuv that, this was
Dr. Haugen.

Q. .aid nc told you that this sen that you saw was 3n<gon? ,

A. It was tne hospital Capo who said that it was Dr. Baagon and I
personally h-d no connection with Dr. Hru-gun.

Did tn.se ir.EDtcs wno underwent the gas oxperlaop^, suffer such pain?

A. They wore completely exhausted.

x- Jell but in Obs-rving these survivors and in talking to thon, did
tnoy toll you teat they had suffered such physical pain?

-- I didn't soo t..ct isnediately aft.r tnoy caao out of the gas
chaabvr, only son^woat later wnon tuoy wtr* already soaewhat calaod dowa.

They Wur. cos.pl1t.l7 exhausted.

.itacss, did you ever have occasion wnile you were in the infinnery


to obs.rvo cas*s of typhus?


6 Jaa-»^G£3-4->-LesBer.
Court >o. 1.


a. !-■. any.

V _ds went did you hare to do with rospect to these typeus cases?

A. Bio typhus block was a closed block Waich was risltcd by Senas
doctors, only drew up special charts — they were not nodical charts
but contained general Information.

q. idiat did these charts show?

-*• Tncy worv drawn charts, .o drew on than wita Indio Ink the too-
peraturo cur-re «r»S the pulss of the patlonts.

q. jd thwse w-r- typhus patlonts, Is that ri^htl

-. T-s.

q. 2 o waoa were thes« tonperature churts £lvcn?

-• Oor-m doctors. Dr.Hna*«n, vao was Interested In these nutters,

Jid Dr. Herts fro u Strut hour*.

— Vow you said there wus a typhus block.

-> Tus.

q. -ere you ever in toe typhus? *

— Vever in Hutswcller becauto th« block was closod: it was forbidden
to enter It.

v Do you know from any source wnat they were doln« In the typhus
block?

A. Nothin* In particular that wo knew of usldo fron special attention
glron to the charts of the patient.

q. Was it an experimental block?

Pernups experiments wore carried out there because thero wore very
■any. dead.


11C4


6 Jan L7 - H - 5-1 - LX - Fitzgerald
Court Mo. 1


A. You do not knew, do you, how toese patients which you say came
to have typhus?

A. These people ccjuj from the ca=p and froa the various canoanda.

The epidemic broke out suddenly in «Xine or July.

Do you remember that there was a typhus epidemic in the canp
ir. June or July, 19U2?

A. That is that I was talking about.

Q. And as far as you knew, these typhus patients rtiich you observed,
could havo caught typhus in the coup raturally, Is that right?

j\. Yes. They do not leave the canp. That wus especially astonish¬
ing bocause we had all been vaccinated against typhus; at least, we had
boen told we had been.

MR. McKaKEXz I have no furthor questions at this Uno.

FRESIDISG JUDGE BEALS: Do dofense counsel h-vo any questions to ask
this witness on croas-c xa n in ation?

There beii^ no questions propounded to the witness on cross-
oxrmination, tho witness will bo oxcusod.

(Witness Excusod)

MR. McHAHEY: I shall now return to the typhus experiments in
Bucherxwald. I crae to Document Nurbor 578 which will be Prosecution
Exhibit 28U.

PRESIDING JUGS BEATS: On rtiat page?

MR. McHnNET: Thera is on insert on Page 13. The photostat io
inserted in the front of K-x ark.'It is Exhibit 28U. If tho<ribunal please,
this is a chart which shows the course of innoculations givan to certain
people. We see in the upper left-hand corner that a steep of tho "Hygiene
Institute of the rfaffen-SS" appears. It is followed by "Typhus and Virus
Resoarch Department. Telephone: -eioar 6311." That indicates that
this aocunent wa one prepared by Typhus and Virus Institute at Buchenwald.

The Tribunal will recall that it was a part of the Hygiene Institute of
the Saffun-SS. You *.iill also note the ffeinar number. The Buchenwald
Concentration Ccap immediately adjoined the town of Weinar, as I understand

1103


C urt So. l


C

6 Jen U7 - M - 5-2 - LJO - Fittgerald


it.

Consequently, wo subsit, that this document is, in fact, a chart
showing that various vaccines were lnnoculnted into sore 15 persons over
a period of three tenths, froa Novcmbor 8, 19U3, until January 17, 19UI*.
Tou see in the lower left-hand comer the signature of Dr. Ding, who,
as wa know, was the head of the Typhus and Virus Research Department of
the Hygione Institute of the Jaffon-SS at the Buchonwald Concentration
Canp. The chart shows that tho innoculaticn of the vaccines was made
ovor various periods of tins. The innoculations wore increasod as they
went along. Wo also get the temperature and pulse reaction of tho
individuals who wore subjected to the innoculations.

We do not claim that this chart fhows that any of those individuals
wero infected with typhus or with any othor diseaso following those Innocu¬
lations. iis a atter of fact, I think tho contrary is truo as wo will soo
from tho Ding Diary. You will note these vaccinations wore mado with scr*
preparation called "Fraonkel"; that appears in the upper left-hand corner
of tho chart, to the right. Just under the (Lite, November 22, 19U3. Wo
will be ablv to key in this name "Praenkol" with the Dir* Diary ontreos
for tho days corresponding to this.

It appears that they had obtained these preparations known as
"Fraenkel" and they wishod to test instability of tho human body to
the vaccine. Consequently, they mado this course of innoculations.

I come, now, to Document Nui^r 571 rtiich will be Prosecution Exhibit
Nurijor 285. This is a very interesting document because —

MR. FLOMIlDt Attorney Flerrdng for the Defendant Mrugowsky.

I ask that this docusant not be admitted in evidence. The document
is not signed. It is not really a document. It is a draft. The Tribunal
3«*>s that the so-called work report on the last page is not signed. It
is prepared for a signature. It wasto be signed by Ding, apparently.

On the first page of the document, a dateline is prepared, but not filled
in. The contents of the report is such, that the document can only be
considered a so-called secret matter or a military secret. The Tribmal

-_- . . uo6


Court So. 1


6 Jar. U7 - H - 5-3 - LJI - ?ltrgorald Q

prcfcebly knows the regulations for submitting secret otters. They oust
bear a stamp, "Secret." The nurber of the secret diary must be included
on all copies. Neither of these precautions was taken in the present
caao. This dews that this is only a draft. In the case of such a draft,
ono can never ascertain who drew it up. One never knows whether the
person concerned had adequate knowledge for the preparation of the draft .

In the cose of this draft in question, I call the attention of iho
Tribunal to Page 5. There a little below th. middle of the page, there
is an ontry of the 25th of Aina to the 15th of august, 191*3, oriorod 8 ick
leave.

If the Tribunal free* Exhibit 283, which "as submitted now, were to
compare the last paragraph they would find that Dr. Ding, whoso siok
leave is questioned, stated t.ere that ho had this sick loavo in 191*2.

This inaccuracy, alone, shows that the draft, which is boing submitted
hare, is absolutely unreliable. It noither boars a signature nor a date.

I on convinced it cannot bo admitted in ovidonc*.

UR. McHaNEY: If tho Tribunal please, I would Just like to cfcsurvo
that tho objection Is based on conjecture. It was Just as reasonable to
assume that the docuasnt is a duplicate copy; tho original having boon
signed, ns a matter of fact, if we are to indulge in supposition about
tho matter, I submit that that is perhaps is a moro reasonoblo conculsion
to draw because tho original of the document, which I have before to,
has a hand-written note up at tho top lhich reads in translation,

"To Urugowsky." . r*

As for there being no date on the doc muni., the original clearly
shows that there is a date, which was January, 19tl, and there certainly
is no blank for the inclusion of any date; that is the date of the day
either before or after the word, "January." This document is a work
report for a full y«ar, 1931*. It is not at all umsual that they did
not put the date of the day on the document, whether or not this is a draft

copy or a final copy as submitted, sems to me to be beside the point.

1107


-C


6 Jan U7-H - 5-U - LJG - Fltsgarmld

Court So. 1


The document is adaissable for *at it is worth.

If Counsel for the Defense wishes to attack the weight of the docuaent
or to show any inaccuracies free other documents, he is, of course, at
liberty to do so. I as not sure I got the full Inport of the so-called
inaccuracy to which he purported to draw tte court's attention. If
there is any inaccura-y, it slipped by ne. I assure that Dr. Ding could
hare had a sick leave in 19U3 as well as in 19U2. So, we submit that the
docuaent is adnissable. I would like to pass it to the Tribunal for
their inspection.

FPJJSIDIH3 XTX3B BE/vLSj The Tribunal will bo glad to hear anything
as the materiality of this docuaentj Just what does it purport to provo?

'®. McH^NEf i Tho docuaent. Tour Honors, is a m>rk report of tho
Department for Typhus and Virus Research of the Hygiono Institute of
tho Wof fin-68 at Sue ho maid for tho year 15tii3. Tho docucont glvos us
n very detailed picture of exactly what they were doing in tho Buchonwnld
Concentration Camp in the Typhus and Virus Research Institute for that
yuor.

Wo learned how rjmy people they experimented upon with typhus and
hew many wero infected. I do not recall that this tells us tho nurrbor
of porsons who diod. Wo will picC that information up from a lotor
document. It also shears the persons who tado inspections of tho Dopart-
nont for Typhus ard Virus Research at Buchenwald on Pago 17 of tho English
Document Book. We find cut what visiters they had at tho Institute who
know what was going on th.rConsequently, I submit, it is T'vory
important document for tho Prosecution.


11C8


6 jar. Ii7-#CnTF-6-l-Enabuck
Court Vo. 1

TIv ■.'.‘SSTDOT: Trie obj.ction to the aiaission of the document is
overruled. The exhibit trill bo aidttod.

• IS. IIcHANeT: This is Prosecution Exhibit 285. Up it the top wo scj the
pondUe* notation, "To -iru^owsky, Ryrieno Institute of tho Yaffen SS, i)epart-
ront for Spotted sv_r and Virus Hcsorxch Yoiaor-Buchortwald, January 19U.
Fork Report for tho y-ar 19U3."

.4

Tho first part of too report Is head-d "Dapart»:nt for Spottod F*vvr end
7irus Research, Clinical Section, ■ and then follow a mwbor of entries civinit
the dates th-rcof and wh - 1 tock place on those days, and I would like to read
a mother of than.

On 1 Oocuibor l?l2 to 20 ?obuttry 19U3 t tho entry is rv.da, ^2xporinont
with spotted fevor vaccines »E« of the Bohrinr *orks, carried out on 20 ox-
perinontal porsons; 10 January to 20 -otnuiry, -jcpcrimrt with spotted fever
thorapjutics 'Akri&n' aivJ « tetijylen-bluo', carried out on 1*7 experimental
persons; 10 January to 17 *’ay, Tosts with yellow fovor vaccines, carried out
on U35 ox.\.riacntcl parsons; 25 January to 28 April, Experiments with spotted
fovor vaccines ’'ti/a* and ’Zucrich' carried out on 1*0 ^xpcrinental arsons;

21* larch to 20 April, ?orfoncnco of a lir. o-scalo experiment accordinr to
tho schco-a of the Hy .iono Institute cf tho Yaffoa SS,carried' out by
S c Stan J “.r*vnfuehrer l.cturor Dr. ’{rur;cnrsky .rith small-pox, typhus, parityphuc
and I nay say parenthetically th-.t that should road puntyphoid instead of
para typhus, "paratyphoid .% and' B, cholera, spotted fever and dyptlwria, on 1*5
exrcrlivjntal pjrsons." I li ht als- rovrip'.iasiro to tho Court th't whan wo como
to the words 'spotted fov^r' which appjar.in some of thoso trTJtel'tions, that
should not be construed to scan tho disease which Is known in our om country

0

Q3 Rocky fountain Spotted -ever. *e arc tore talkinr of classical typhus end


1109


6 Jan u7-#-r^-S-2 Blnabock
Court He. 1


C


it codd better bo translated spotted fever typhus or Just typhus clone.

Jtowevor, t vosa words always apjxsar in the ori^nal Corr-an docuiS3r,t
available to tM da fondants as Fleckflebcr, so there can bo no misunderstanding
on thrt score. I continue with reading of Prosecution Exhibit 235.

”31 arch to 11 April, Experiment with spotted fever therapeutics VVtcridir.
Grtmlato* end 'Rutonol* carried out on bO persons; 11 April to 2b ‘‘ay,
ProlisdrxsY oxperiaants with fresh blood infected with spotted f-vvr for tho
purpose of investigatin', an infallible node of infection, carried out on bl
porsona; 11 April, not yot ten-inrtod. Infections with spotted fovor, so far
applied to b7 persons; 2b April to 1 Juno, Exp-ri^nt 'tith spotted fover
therapeutics '.Jcrldin-Oranuiatu' and •Itutjncl 1 carrl.-d out on bO oxperi'Lontal
persons; 28 “ay to 9 Sopfconb-r, Sxporixont with spotted fovor vaccineUtid*
'.^id-..dsor5at' end nroi.l* carriod cut on 70 persons; 10 Juno to 3 ..u*ust,
Sxpuriaxnt with typhus thorcpautics 'Othroiin' carried out on bO oxp-riwantol
persona; 8 November, not yjt t^reinat-d, Gangrene - hi"h iniunization
oxp-ri?jnt, carri-l out on 15 orp-rlnontel persons; 19 Novombor, not yet
timinct^rf, 'xperirunts with bums by means of phosphorus-caoutchouc incendiary
bombs, carried cut on 5 persons-... Tho Tribunal will recall that-one of tho
paragraphs in tho indictnont deals with inconliary boob experiments end this
little entry of 19 November 19b3 is the first bit of cvidunco we hr.vo had on
t'iXtt char-a in fho indictment.

"21 November, not yot tcr.iinntod, Control of blood conservation; 23
Doc caber to 31 December, Sp.clal cxp-ri.iont c’-rried out on b persons." "o shall
soo fren tho Dirv: diary -nd also fro»i the tosM.iony of the *±tnoss th“t this
sp-dal experiment was ono of ttw ;?ison experiments char-od in .ha indictment.

rdS TSnrafT: ,.t this tioo tho Tribunal will recess for 15 minutes.

(Ti_CeS3 was taken.)


1110


6 Jtn i.7-lfr-S.-7 J LrrP«rr in
Court So. 1


Da. f?JTC (Counsel for the defendant Rose): Mr. President, ay client
drew ay attention -to the .following*.This.aiming tM.wita.ss Grand;} esn. was


cxaiiA.*d. H«> *..s continually asked by the Prosecution about typhus, or Fleck-
fi.ber which is translated to typhus ir. ongliah. The intcrproUr t lways
translated that word to tho witness as typhoid lever which is a completely
different disense, wurine the entire oxv.irfction of this witness, both witness
and Prosecution wore spweking about two entirely different cotter a. I sysulf
a rjt sufficiently -ducttod in ctdicine end ay client has caked me to ask .
tho Hi?h Trlburiftl so thet he any be able to explain the difference. This,
hoHtvur, would niC-s^itato anothor s M . nl nation of th- witness in order to
clrrify this diiforenoe, and I should like to ask you tho following:

The witnecs towards the end testified that » wo w-ru surprised that tho


pooplo..." in English...ecu id got typhoid fuvor.. .".aocning in German Typhus
.."elthoafh ad. ox us w*>ro innoculrted egainst." PieCkfivbor which in
English is typhus, hew over, could not oo innoculctcd against since there
nnmt enough tyohua vaccines available.

TH3 ??.£SID2NT: I would nak the Prosecution if tho witness is still
cvcilabic?

J?., licdAwSY: I think it v.y bo possible to rocull tho witness, Your
Honor. H- Is tryi.g to get nvay to Peris, I think, on the train this ajtor-
r.oon. I ca not our- he is still in tho courthouse.

THS PnoSlDST.T: Vill you nscortain if tho procuro.ao-.t of the witness
is oo-siblo?

I

IS. UcHkKEY: Y-s, indeed. I think it will toko five «Un min-

•

ut«-s for us to sake a s-arch of the courthousu to s-e if he is still horo.
In tho juantiau, I suggest that I continue with the presentation.

TKJ PR3EEKT: If tho witness ir not in tho courthouso, will you
take fiwftjdiatu steps to find whore he' is «nd procure his c tendance here as
s on cs oassi'ole?

if.. McHAiwY: Yes, ixri-ed, Your Honor, wo Certainly shad.

THE PHSS1DEKT: Y>u any proceed acanwhilo.

1111


6 JSc t7-ir-S--7-2- Perrin
Court to. 1


C

1®. MUST: Before the recess, I was reading document NO-571 which
is Prosecution Exhibit 285. I had finished reading the first part of the ex¬
hibit which dealt with the department for spotted fever end virus research,
the so-called clinical section. His. sec-rri part of this .ork report is en-

• -l.d the Department lor Spotted Fever and v irus Reasearch, production of

Vaccines. - And on 10 "uguat, wc find the following entry: "Termination of the
exterior alteration works on the orisoners' barrack 50 in Buchonwald Concon-
tr tion Camp.” •

"16 August. Opening of tho 'Doptrtamt :or Spotted Fever nnd Virus
Research.' Transfer of tho Head of tho L*epartm-nt, SS-Sturabannfuehrer Dr.
Ding to Buchonwald. Beginning of tho preliminary work for production.

"20 September. First infection of 3 guinea pigs with spottod fovor
infected blood, strain Bu I. Up to the ond of tho year 8 successful infect¬
ions from this strain and positive adaptation of the strain to aico (with
only two infections due to lack of those experimental animals), os well os
to tho lungs of rabbits through mice with the brains of guinea pigs cs start¬
ing »' terial.

"2A SopUaber. Isolation of tho strain Bu II on 3 guinea pigs with
spottod fever inf-ctod blood. *ftcr successful adaptation at the end of tho
yter 8th inflection. Performance of U infections of mice. Croat quantities of
standard type rlckettsia. Furthermore successful adaptation of the strain Bu
II to the lungs of rabbits through aico.

"9 October. Du- to lrck of nice exp*riix>nt to adapt the mixed strains
Bu I “r.d Bu II dir-ctly 1 ram i;uect d brains of guinea pigs to the lungs of
rabbits. At the end of th- year this 3train is contained fully v^julent in the
6th infection of rabbits. Since tho 5th infection particularly great quantit-
i-s of rickottsia on the lungs of rabbits. *ho r-sults of the direct ad?ptat-
ian -xporiffients art being checked b; pathogenic and skin virulence tests.

"12 October. Reported to the Hygiene Institute of the »alfen-SS that
tho experiments for th- br-eding of rickcttsia strains on the lungs of rabbits
wer* successful and production was only handicapp-d by the lack ol the refrig-

* rat or and of th, CaLabeius c^at-triturator model.

1112


6 Jan t,?-!£-S.-7-3- Perrin
£ oart :.o. 1


C


22 October. Isolation and transfer to guinea pigs of the strain 3u
IV of subjects infected with spotted fever alter strain 3u III had aied dur¬
ing the first inlectuon. In this case the lack of sice was o:»ce aoro espec¬
ially noticeable.

"First Half ' ..ovuaber. Outbreak of an epideaic aaong 375 recently
supoli.d sico to which 289 a niseis succunbed within a few days. «s the rc-
ac thing sico -ere not healthy either, they wora killed.

"11 Koveflbcr. Vcccinctio.'i of rabbits it!; infected lunge of «iico.

Later on pcrforxr.ee of two nor- infections of rabbits. nxporisents arc a
coaploto success, Lfrgo quantities >f rickcttsin -.nth Well-developed bacilli-

9

shaped elo.xnts on the lungs of thJ rabbits.

"30 hov-sber. Successful direct adaptation ol the strain Bu IV frem the
brains of inf.ct d cuirv-o ;igs to the lungs of mbbits. *lter performance of
another i..faction of rrbbits, .oixinr ol the strain with the strains 3u I
and’Bu II. All infections continue to be successfully carried out.

"U Decesb-r. -xperiioent, by mailing use of the night frosts and by
uein* the hrndshnke techciqu. without refriger. tor -nd without Calnbvius, to
iroduco tfv. first soaple of vaccine. to r this purpose lunge of rabbits of
the 5th or 6th infection Series of the mixed strain 3u I and Bu II, which
are rich in rickettsin, were used.

"1A “oceaber. Centrifugation of the suspension produced on U ^ccenbor.

"15 uecexber. Startin; o: the refrigerator which hnd arrived in tho
r~r. ntiwe. R-sult of the ex aim lion of the s.distant of the vcccirv. produced
on U LeCeib-r: clt^r 2 hou--s centrlfug-tion great qu'-ntiti*}! ol rickott-
sia (vcci111-sharped, point-shaped, du.ub-be 11 snapped). *ha sterility control
orov.d th- suspension free from bacteria.


1113


C'. -.-t Ho* 1

6 Jan U7-M - 8-l_ - LJG - Putty


C


o


17 Decesfcer Four guinea pigs were given intraperitoneal injections of
1 cifcic cm. of vaccine each in order to check whether the
vaccinea produced on L December agreed with then. The guinea
pigs did not show any alterations of veracity nor of tempera¬
ture and were still alive at the end of the year.

2b December Vaccination of a series of ten guinea pigs with each our own
vaccine and Qiroud vaccine in order to infect then later on
with spotted feven-infected blood.

29 Dec ocher The reactions for skin virulence according to Oiroud show
a virulence of- the suspension at a dilution of 1.2:000 to
ltb.000.

For the performance of the brooding experiment* fifty-six mice, one
hundred thrity four guinea pigs and one hundred twelve rabbits were used
up to the present date.

In the serological department 1226 proteus OX 19 agglutinations, 3 Orebor-

m

nidal testa and U Takata-Ara-reactions wore porfornod for tho SS Infirmary
and Buchonwald Concentration Caep and its branch camps.

For our own requirements up tothis date about 1500 ethic cn. of typhus-
paratyphus B deposits have been producod in order to reduce tho power of
resistance of tho experimental animals."

The 4 tness, Henri Joan Grand Jean, is now waiting outside. I think
it night add to the continuity if I completed this docurcnt, and we will


then call hin to the stand.

• • ^

Tho part which I have Just re3d fron Prosecution Exhibit 285, of
course deals lith the production of typhus vaccines which was carried on
in stations known as Block 50 of the °uchenwald Concentration Camp, and


I night say that the guinea pigs which they rake reference to here are,
in fact, real guinea pigs because these animals, rabbits and guinea pigs,
and so forth, are necessary in the production of typhus vaccines.

The important part of the docuaent for our own purpose ie that
dealing with the so-called clinical section where the infection experiments
were carried out. That which was noted as the "Clinical* was, in fact,

1114


6 Jan Ii7 - M - 3-2 - LJ5 - Putty
Court No. 1


C


Block U6 of the 3uchenwald Concentration Casp«

*a conn now to Fart III of this doc merit which is entitle d "Inspections
of the Dgpartcent for Spotted Fever and Virus Research", and I think that
this part of the dec merit is particularly important because it shows who
'■as cooing to the Typhus and Virus Research Institute, Buchenwald, and
who was interested in it, and the first entry on 8 February 19U3 shows
the inspection of the Clinical Section by Cberatabsarzt Dr. Eyer of the
Institute for Spotted Fever and Virus Research of the OKH Krakow and by
Cberstabsarzt Dr. Schmitt of the Medical Inspectorate of the Airy. I ask
the Tribunal tc note that they were not visiting the so-called Production
Soction where they wero manufacturing the vaccines in Block 50. They
visited the Clinical Section whoro they wore carrying on tho curderous
infection experiments with typhus; and who aide thoso visits? Dr. Eyor:
tho Tribunal will roc allthat in tho chart of tho organization of tho
Chiof of tho nodical Sorvico of tho V.ohrnacht drawn by tho Do fondant
Handlosor, ho showed very prcdxxjntly that this Institute for Spotted Fever
and Virus Rosoarch of tho OKH at Krakow was undor his control, that is
to say, it fu,l within tho jurisdiction of his office. Tho Institute, as
ho also showod on his chart, was directly controlled by this sane Dr. Eyer
who was payin? a visit to Dr. Ding (Schuler) to observe the infoction
oxporlaunts at Buchonwald.

And whe always cam there? Dr. Schuitt of tho Medical Inspoctorato
of the Amy. And »fco was the Chief of the Medical Inspectorate of tho
Airy on 8 February 19U3? -x -sits in the Defendants' dock and tts name
is Handloser. Ke also observed the operations of the typhus infection experi¬
ments in Block U6 at Buchenwald.

On the 2uth of August, 19l»3, we find; "Inspection of the department
by the Director cf the Central Building Section of the naffen-SS and
Felice, SS-Cbersturafuehrer Huehnefeld, and discussion of necessary
improvementsOn the 26th of August: "Inspection by the higher SS and


Police leader in Kassel. SS-Cbergruppenfuehrer and General of the waffen-SS


the Prince of haldeck and FVrsont, and by the Corcandant

1115


of Bucher


nwald


" -rt So. 1

6 Jsn U7-M - 8-3 - LJO - Putty


Concentration Can?. 3 Septerfjer: Inspection by the head of the Hygiere
Institute of the Haffen-SS, SS-Standartenfuehrer lecturer Dr. krugowsky."

Of course. It is net strange to find krugowsky there since his
Institute *ich was being run directly by Ding was under his control by
virtue of the fact that he was Chief of the Hygiene Institute of the
.laffon-sS of *ich the Typhus and Virus Research Institute was a part.

■29 September Inspection by the Chief of Office D III in the SS Economic
and Administrative Main Office ( .VHk), SS-Ctoerstuixhann-
fuehrer Dr. Lolling and Professor Dr. Schonk."

Part IV of the Exhibit is entitled: "Official Trips by tho Head of
tho Dupartoont for Spotted Fovor and Virus Research."


1116


3 <1* -»T-3-la-Putty
COJTt So. 1


*28 7obruary to

5 -'rch


27 April to

1 Jfay


2 : June to
15 Au ust

27 August


U Soptor-bor


3 Siptenfcjr
U Scpto.bor

23 Sopteabor

29 Soptc-'Axr to
ix October

13 October

21 October

25 Octoxsr to
15 ovjifcvr


SS-Cbcrstiir ’ vannfuchrer Dr. Ding ordered to Hris for
the parch - . s_ of laboratory equipment for the Department
for ^potted /over and Virus Research, ..oir.or-Buchs.nwald,
and for the Hygiene Institute of tho*1 affcn-S£.

Once uorc on do tee hod service to f-.ris fer the sane
purpose.

Ordered sick lo'.v*, -1 Sellin on Ruegon.

Conference with the Zeiss ?iln ct ocna, with the
Landosgewortorrst and in tnc University liorary.

Inspection in the village of "X" with the Hoad of the
Kyjglono Institute SJ-St?ndartonfuohrur locturor Dr.
'Iragorrsky, with the St-.ndort'rzt of the Tieffon-SS Weimr-
Buehcnrnld and with tho idjut - nt of the ccuvuiduit of
the Buc'ronwald Concentration Canp.

Anoth-r inspection in the village of "X".

Purchase ol laboratory requisites at Jena, conference
with the Zeiss fir t concerning the alteration of t*o
nicroscopes.

Purchase if laboratory requisites at firfurt.

Ccnic.xr.cu in D-rlin with the Head of the Hygiono Institute
of tlvj .-I on-Sf, SS-Standartenfuoliror lecturer Dr.
Hru^owaky.

Insp-c.' :.i at "Dor - ".and laura" with thA.cor/a-ndnnt of
tho Auci.ar.ialQ Concentration Cvp.

Inspection of the orcnch coa-ands Leipzig, Wnigorodo,
Schov-neixck and "Dora" with tho c- - . p coj ancient.

On detected 3^rvico with the Gen-nn Hy-i^no Institute for
tho Zastom Territories in Riga end subsequently conference
with the . ad?us fir. in Dresden at thu ir.st-ncc of S5-
Oborgrup cnf-__ tcc and General of the Vaffen-SS von keyrsch.


1117


6 J-n-.S-JP-e-2-a-Putty
Court So* 1

»


SS-Sturuoannfuchrcr"


-nd this docu^rnt is obviously prepared for the signature of Ding.

too little point to xwto finally is that on these official trips of
Ding whon he was away frc . the Tjpnus and Virus Research I-'-stituto at


c.xnwald, it was the Defendant Hoven who w»s in charge of the Institute in
his absence, and thus is the position of the Prosecution that he also bears
prijnry responsibility for tho criuea which were there coireitted.

•* n d I think wo nay now cell the witness, HonriJcan G^mdjcen, to tho
stand again.

THE ffcLSIDSKT: Tho arahal will sui'on the witnoss, Honri-Joan


Grandjc-n.


13t. itH-JET: I t~Jc_ it that his roappoar«nco cn tho stend is for the
solo purpoa- to clarify L e transl tion question rrisod by Dofonso Counsel,
and that n. further direc. or cross examination will bo p-raittod.

THE FRESIDEf.T: The witness is remanded that ho is still under oath.
THE >IT:IESSi Tea.

Tx. ra-SIDcHT: She is also rc-indod that she is still undor oath.


■


A.


1118


S J ;>-./-G£S-S-lb-Putty.

Court m3. 1.

j

s


JH3 ISTZSFHST23: Te«.

rsi FRZSIDE.T: Doe* Counsel for the Prosecution desire to ask any
questions in the first instance?

kS. HCE..K5T: So, Tour Honor. Ihe Tribunal plans to clarify tais
point vitn the vitness.

13 PSSSZSXn: Counsel for tne Defense say exauino the witness.

H2SHI-JS_S 0R . IDJ1J , a witness, took the stand and testified further
as follows;

HS-CS3S-

3Y DB. FRITZ:

Dr. Frits, Counsel for the defendant Roso: Vitness, during your
examination tnis aorning tne prosecutor Asked you continually about Flock-
fiober waica is translated in tuo Knglisn with -typhus-. The interpreter
however, did not correctly designate tr.ls dlsoase anl translated it with
-t7pnold fever, 1 wuich in Genian is c/1 led -Abdouinal typhus-. During
; our entire exa. ination the Prosecutor was spoaklng about Flockflobor —
English: -typhus- — und you. Vitnoss, *oro always talking about typhoid
fever. ,

iH. Wca.J3T: If the Tribunal pleaso, I object to tho forn of tho
question. The quostion now before the Tribunal is whether or not tho Pro¬
secutor -ad the vitnoss understood ono another in the use of tho word,
"typnuo", and I oojcct to his stating the proposition in such a aannor that
it appears th-.t I was talking about »ad thinking of typhus while t.iu wit¬
ness was talking about tdi.iking of typeoid. This is tho p»bIon which
wo are now trying to clarify, ..d I would appreciate it if tho Defense
Counsol would so state the probloa so ns to got an answer froa this vitnoss.

THS F32SIDZ,.r: It is clear th t Counsel for tho Dcfenro is ondovoring

e •

t- clarify the t-sti-^ny of tais witness, but th*. quoetion in fora is
r tnor obj.ctionablc. C -.not Counsel rofruao th t question . r A ascertain
ir, asking t».o witness want no intended to testify to, whnt particular

1119


fora of fever.


6 jac^S-i-frtTD-Beard ’
Court No. 1


C


Q I an new asking you witness, when giving your answer to the question
of the Prosecutor, were you speaking about fleckbieber, that is, typhus, or
were you speaking about abdominal typhus, which is. In English, typhoid fever?

A There seeos to have been a misunderstanding here between the English
and the German expression, However, there was no doubt in sy Kind, I was
icing to speak about fleckfiober — typhus. The question hero was not typhoid,
and I never thought abiut typhoid at all,

Q That is, you always s.xko about flackfieber — typhys?

A I should again like to oephasizo that I was speaking about typhus
cxanthiaaticus because I was mrsin, 1200 patients who wars infected with
this disease, and I am quite convinced it was always a question of typhus and
not typhoid,

Q It seems to re this rd sunders tandlry; is clcarod up and I havo no
further questions.

Tffi FT^SirEKTi Any further questions by any of the Counsol for tho
dofonso on this onttor?

(Apparently none.)

Doos tho Prosocution have any furthor questions?

0

(Apparently none,)

The witness is excused.

Ml. ICHAKETi I cone row to Document No. 582 which is on pago 21 of

the English Document 3ook. This will bo Prosocution’s Exhibit No. 286. I an

skipping for tho cocaont Docuajnt No. 859 because, your Honor, the Document

Book doos not have the translation contained in the book. It is simply a

• ^

certification which roos cn tho Docuncntj thcrafore, I am ..oing to No. 582
which will be Prosecution's Exhibit Jfo, 286.

This is a letter from th; defendant ? f rugowsky to Schulor at the Depart-
aant for Spotted Fever and Virus Research at 3ucherwnld. Tou soo at tho top
tho date, 17 November 19Ui, and tho letterhead of the office in which tho
defendant Urugowsky was active at that time, and which was* Reich Plysician SS
and Police, the Chief Hygienist, who Mrugowsky. The letter reads as follows«


1120


6 J:in^.?-2-H-ATD-8eard

-=urt Do. 1


C


"Soar Comrade SchulerI

"Enclosed I return your work on acridin with the notes of approval*

“The merger of tha weeklies sake a publication in its prosont fora
(11 pages without references and 1 curve) impossible for the Medical Journal"
bocause the editor acceptsonly articles of 8 ncroal type-written pages, o.g.

2 pages in print. There remains tho alternative of shortening it or publishing
it in anotter papor, for instance 'Archlvo for Hyjieno* or * Journal for
I'r.unity Research'. I would does tho first alternative the hotter ono.

"Boat regards and

"Hoil Hitler!

"Tours

"Mrugowsky"

And, we coas to tho attaclnant to this lottor which is part of tho
sane Docuaont, and wo soc that it is tho papor writton by tho deceased Ding
or Schuler, concernin' oxperinents ho had nado on tho troataont of typhus with
'.cridin dorivates. I call tho Tribunal's attention to tho stanp that is con¬
tained on this papor writton by Ding. "Proa tho Nodical Sorvico Officially.

Jfo objoctions." Moanir. , I tako it, that thoro was no objection to tho public .
cation of this papor. And tho star*), "Tho Roich Physician SS and Police, Borlin,
29 Septoahcr 19UU, by ordor of A. ftoppondlck, SS-Sturabannfuehrer." So, we
soe that the defendant Poppondlck is offering- his approval of tho publication
of this papor written by Ding. Poppoivdick, tho Tribunal will recall, is hoad
of th: personnel staff and with Doctor Grawitz in tho Roich Physician SS and
Policoj and, of course, in the sane officawith Mrugowsky.

JUIXIE SSB3DC! Do y u maintain that A. Poppendick and H. Poppondick
are tho ono and same parson?

"CR.’EY: Yes, I aa certain of that your Honor. I do not know if
tha translation in both arc correct. I think it would be best if I passed tho

* m • *

Docuttnt up for the Tribunal to inspect. It is not clear locking at it — this

initial before tba none Poppondick, it is not clear whether it is an H or an A.

I tako it, it could be translated either way. I think the explanation is, if

the Tribunal pleases, that the .initials IA scans by order. You are looking at

1121


t 7 n. .s-3-tWTD-Board

Court Sc. 1 *’

/*

Q

the original, and I think you will find there ore the initials IA rather than
jast go, really it aeans by the order of Poppendick.

I say, before reading portions of this paper written by Dine that it
will not be apparent that is, the paper, that or i g in a l experiments wero beinp
conduced, but we shall prove very shortly after I finish reading portions of
Document that they were, in fact, original experiments which resulted in
tho death of a nurfcer of the experimental persons. Of course, the paper would
not include the fact that they had artificially infected tho oxporinontal sub-
Joe te booause it was going to bo iublished in a nodical Journal, but I submit
tho fact it was submitted to tho Offico of tho Hoich Physician SS and Police,
and noro specifically, to Popponlick to get their approval indicates those
gontlerwn wore in a position Vo know what actually took placo duriiv; tho courso
of those cccperlments. The pa par roods in part as follows i

"to Treatment of Typhus with Acridln Derivatos by Dr, ilodiclno Erwin
Ding, SS-Sturnfcannfuchror Waffon-SS.

"Publication of H3M83ts and Z.'.JITSC!£X*a • A vary succoosful, strictly
casual-pathogenetic thorapy of Typhus* (1) indueos us to mako a roport about
thorapoutic experiments which wo mado with tho same drugs Rutoiwl and Nitro-
acriiin 3582 on 30 persons, as long as half a yocr boforo tho two authors did,
"PUSS&.EfllS3 aw’. '.•'2SSH (2) hod used theso two dru^s for tho troatraont
of nice, which woro infoctod with aurino typhus. 70% of tho animals thus
treated survived in contrast to an optimum of 6% of the untrontod controls.

Tho result of thoso oxporimor.ts iras so encouraging that wo considored our¬
selves justified in startin dinioal tests of tho two acridin derivatos on
human bednr-s afflicted wit'.i ,yphu3 0

"Frcn April to 'My 19U, 39 persons, whoso spotted fover disease had
been ascertained serologically and clinically, cane to tho clinical station
attached to the "Department for Spotted Fever and Virus lesoarch' of tho
rtyr-lcnic Institute of the rfaffen SS for treatment.


1122


i Jta h7-::-6'r-10-l- 31aklcy
iourt h'o. 1


_th regard to the central nervous systen, circulation and cxanthcaa,

' nc i rtocHy grave synptcea of the disease were observed during the course of
this cpid-nic. Accordingly thorc uas also a lethal exitus in over fifty
percent of the eases.

"Thanks to striclty obsorvod quarantine, the day of infection could
be ascertained in a series of eases of tho disease. This is particularly
important for the determination of the tiac of incubation as we stressed
elsewhere and tho start of a spocific trcatcc.it. In those cases it was
possible to administer the drugs at a very early stage, a fact nhich pernitted
a norc complete judgment."

Of couroo. Ding is saying here that they, r^ro ablo to experiment on
thirty-nine porsons who had, so far as appears free this paper, naturally/
contracted typhus. Koto the date, .’.pril to .ay, 19li3, bocauso it will bo
inportant in c few oenents. Ho says that they ircro ablo to dote mine the date
of infection and consequently’ the;* could make a good experiment on these
pooplo.

Tho rooort continues: "At tho tiac in question, 19U3, tho thorapy
of our petionts covorod hydro-th .rapoutic measures, heart circulation supp¬
ort, as trail as s~othing of grave doliria. Pyranidon and .ethylono Hluo
didn't provo particularly effective to us. .

"In tiic n can tire we devclopc-' a heart circulation therapy for cur
pation 3 -.friich we used with rood sueee3s although lethal cases occurred also
occasicnelly in spite of all ncdicaia.ital and nursin ncasurcs."

T cn follows seme natcr'al about tha clinical observations -hat they
did, which I shall c«dt reading and cent!: to cn tho niddlc of Pago 2h of
t!ic English Document Book.

"It is quite clear to us that elsewhere and seoctincs other experiences
.'.‘.eh di_for strongly fren ours can be nadc with this therapy. The syrtptcos
c; 3pott/.d fever arc sc nan .fold and dependent upon so many facts that ’t is
'linecessary to add anythin, to the critical rcaari.s of IlrugoOTky, ohlrnb,

2nd Aschonbronner.


1123


c


6 Jan 47-4t-Srf-10-2-3 lakloy (AC)
Court !*c. 1


"According to the instructions of the firm Bayer at Honest,

Ritenol Has adm in istered in the fern of a granulate, of which a heaped
teaspoonful roughly corresponds to a single dose of four grans. The
treatment included a normal series of six to ton single doses at
intervals of six hours. In the case of Nitro Acridin, sugar coated,
it was one to two tablets three times a day, possibly fron the start
of the disease. Patients whose infection could be regarded as rather
certain w«rc given Rutenol, respectively Acridin already durin., the
incubation tine. If the pati-nt could take it even only to suno de¬
gree, we continued the treatment beyond ten doses.

"lodalitieS and results of the therapy can be seen from the
following charts."

J.'cw, there is n certificate of translation at the betteo cf that
page which docs not belong thero. That is not the end of tho document.
The sane certificate appears later cr. at the end of the document. I
will ask the Tribunal just to disregard this. The chart on Pago 25
gives a chart whero they administered the drug Rutunol by the south
and glv-s this tabl. shewing the age of the experimental subject,
the incubation period, the foror days, the ccuroe of the disease,
the resuLt of it—that is to say, whether he recovered or whether
he dies—the complications, tin, of treatment, the daily quantity
of medicaments in grans, and the tolerableneas of the subject to
thu drug.

The next page, 26, gir_s a chart summary of the results ot
treating the typhus patients by Rutenol. Tou will note that they
treated fifteen cf the thirty-nino with Rutenol through the mouth;
and the reports say "complications w.re bronchial pneumerda,
nephritis, int .sti-v-.l bleeding, and subcutaneous phl_goeiis bclcw
the larynx.

"light cf the fifteen patients vccited after Rutenol up to Seven
times a day.

L'ortality was extraordinarily high, with 53-3 per cent. No connection

-1124-


c


’ 7->10-3- Hlaklcy
Court !.'o. 1


shawjd between tolerable ness and death rate. Feur patients rospondod well
to Rutcnbl and regained their health; three respendod and died. IU> ccn-
plicaticRS appear_d in any of these cases, -ight patients vcuitocl after
Rutcncl; three cf tha: rcgairvxl their health; the five ethers died.

■The absolute qaantity of the prescript!:ns adniniatored varied bet-
■'- :n - cur twenty-four grans; hence the prescribed rdniiain quantity of
sir single doses of four grass each tcs in no ease undercut. In nest casos
total dosing was considerably higher. The noxLac was reached with 2lt,llj,
and 17, 6 grans in the eases 1,2,3,!:, and 7, whero Hntoiu.1 \ras
already used as a prophylactic during the incubation tine (tne of those
patients regained their health; tec died), as ';cll as in Caso Jhuibcr 10,
who steed the drug, after it was rcduc-d tr nc to two grant a day in spito
of vaulting and nausea, and recovered n-co his spotted fever of nediun
sovority."

I road this tc shew tho ex -ont tc x*ich thoso patients sufforod,
not c.ily fret- tho disease itsolf but fr.u tho drugs which they wero adnin-
iotoreng to then, .o can soo free this tho ccuplicati-ns cf b-cnchial pneu-
taenia, nephritis, intestinal blccdin^, and subcutan ous phlo^acns below tho
larynx.

On the next page, that is, P.go 27, you sco the fifteen so-called
typhus patients whe wero given tho dm; Acridin, 3552, by r.outh; and on
Page 26 vro havo a short account of their educations. "The corpUcatiens
wore .crotltls, nephritis, in -nc ease gangrene cf tho shank, furunculosis,
bronchitis, and dccubital seres.

"Tho tolerance v s by dor loss fav rablc than with Rutonol. Thirteen

patients veuitod after taking it (up to seven linos a day).

•

"Again ncrtality was very high with 53.3 per cent. Aiaang tho dead
•••oro also the -nly twe patients whe steed, the prescription well. Cf these who
vettLtod after its acLuilstraticn, seven reervered their health while six
icd. -Iso in this rcsp.ct no elucidating conclusions whatever ray *. c drawn.

7 "Tho prescribed absolute- quantities cf the drug aa.untod to between

1125


6 Jan U7-4I-6 7-1W*- Blakley

2 urt Ko. 1


C


2.5 grans and 17.25 grans. In fivo cases it was already adninistcred as a
prcpfr^'lactic during the incubation tine,"

At tho better* cf th. pago i»c find that they had nine so-called typhus
patients vho ware net adr’ . in istored either ol these drugs. They roro tho so-
caTIcd control group. They ocro tho peer unfortunates who ware given Typhus
and nothing to help then cocbat the disease. s o wo find that fifteen were given
the drug Hutenol; fifteen, Acridin; and nine waro given nothing whets c-cvor.

to the next page,29, wo seo the rcacti n which they observed cn tho
control group: r .7ith the persons net treated 1 specifically with Acridin
derivates," venitin. ov_r three days occurred in cno case. This is proof also
for tills cpldcnic that there are eases cf cerebral venitin;, which arc not
to bo traced back to treataant with drugs. Still, tho cxtracrrti.iary frequency
of venitin', of persons treated with Acridin and Futcnol a ecus to us net to
bo corobrally guidod tut st -nachally.

":brtality ornng tho third group cf spotted fever patients, who, during
tho sane opidoaic, regained without fhitcncl or Hitro-acridin troatnent, was,
as can bo soca fro tho tablo, ni. tir. ,<r cent highor; that is to say, fifty-
six per cont. Considering tho s n ai l nuaber of persons unior observation, re¬
ference in pcrcontago was nly used on account of the better .> osibility of
comparison—we are roll aware of the uodiivi errer. The coj>llcaticns—bron¬
chitis and docubital seres—laist not bo held responsible fir tho lethal
-xitus of the casos. Death occurred cither due to acute weakness of tho h-art
or as a rsult of gradual failure of the circulation.

"To obtain a ce^porisen bet-eon the off -cts of Uic two drtfcs and tho
course of the n> n-lrcatcd eases as regar-'s tc^craturc and pulse, we drew
up an average fever and pulse curve for each group on top of nc another.

plication of the photographic shadow nothod tc- obtain an averago curve was
r»:t possible."

I cr_it reading tho rest cf the docunant. I d'.n't thick it would bo

useful. ..c n-tc that this report was cincluded on 20 August 19U:. There arc

a nunber cf charts attached to the dccuucnt and it is co.iplctcd by Page 37

1126


6 Jan 47-H-*-10-5- Blakloy (AG)
Court Ho. 1.


of the* English Document Bock,

Mew, the only question which wo havo ritfc respect to this exhibit
is whother or not this disease, typhus, was naturally or artificially
c octree tod by the thirty-nino expariaontai subjects. I take it no
crime was cemitted if in fact these thirty-nino unfortunate people
Just contracted the dis.aoo in the Buchenwald Concentration Camp and
than wore used as cxperiax-ntal subjects to test the reactions of those
two drugs, Rutenol and ..cridin. I say the prosecution will so assume.
But that was not the cose. Thoao non wore artifically infected and in
fact curdored; and to prove that I would like at this tlno to introduco
Docuc.nt HO-265, Prosecution Exhibit 287.

DR. FRITZ FiailDC: Dr. Fleming, ccunsol for tho defendant
Urugowsky. I object to the submission of the Document 265 sinco it
is a fraud. I should like the Tribunal to note the entry of tho 29th
of December, 1941. In this entry, tho defendant ."rugowsky is called
an SS-Standarte.nfuehrer. In Exhibit Nuctocr 29 cf the prose-cution,
which was printed by the Prosecution, it was estcblisnod that
Krugeffsky was only cn t;>. 1st of June 1942 appointed a Standarten-
fuehrur. "rugcusky s the direct superior cf Ding fro a .*h;m this
docuc-nt allegedly originates. Ding certainly kn-v tho rank of his
iosodi to superior and kne it exactly. It is thurofire cut of the
question that he would call ILrugowsky cn the 29th of D-cuab.r, 1941, a
StondcrtenfUvhzvr and would call his so in an entry in his diary.

If in fact hrugewsky was only promoted to a Standart£nfuehr«r
months later, in the sane entry cf tho 29th of December, 1941, tho
president professor Gildcneist-r is Pentier.ed, and he is mentioned as
the president cf the Robert Koch Institute (Reichs Institution To
Combat Contagious Diseases). Prof. Gildeineister cn tho 29th of
DeC»*±ur, 1941, was not yet the president but merely tho vicc-
president; and the Robert Koch Institute at that time was not yet n
Reichs institution, but it was Dere-ly a Prussian institute which had
the other name of Prussian. Institute To Ccobat Contagious Disease and

-1127-


6 Jan 47-T-S-10-5- Binkley (AC)
Court Ho. 1


tr^n as "Robert Koch" only on the 1st of April, 1942; that is, throo
aonths liter tno Robert Loch Institute was prcoctuJ as i Reich insti¬
tution, and Reich


L127-A


- _ :-ic-6- si^klcy

J urfc 1


rex, Qlldgncistcr its n.ainatcd president.


6 Jenuary-*-DJG-ll-l-Bl?klcy
Court So. 1


C


I should further like to drrw the attention of the Tribunal
to the entry of th.. 9th of January, 1943; end I quote: "3y order of
the Surgeon General of the Weifen SS, SS Gruppenfuehrer and iajor
Central of the '..affen SS Dr. Gcnzkcn, the hitherto existing Spotted
Fever Research St. tion *t the concentration camp Buch^nwald becomes the
"D-pertoent for Spotted Fever -nd Virus Research." It can be seen from
that th;t until the 9th of January, 1943, the deportment headed by Ding

in Buchea*eld had the none of Spotted Fever ixpcriccnt-.l St-tion in
the concentration canp of Buchenwald.

I ask the High Tribunal now to lock at the heading of the
dicry. It says, "Dirry of the division for research of spotted fc-vcr
and virus at the Institute of Hygiene cf the Waffon SS." This titlo
must hevo been written befor: the dete of the 29th of December, 1941,
more than one year before the division cctu. lly received tho n:no of
Division for Research of Spotted Fever and Virus; end at tta t time el-
ready this n'mc is used in the heeding. Since Ding must have known
th« nuao ol the department of which he was tho head, it is quito out
of the question that this diary can hav* originated frera him; and it
is impossible that it was written on those days as nro design ted
in the diary.

I then csk the High Tribunal to look onco more at the cntiy of
the 9th of Jenu 1 - 7 , 1943- Dr. Genakun is called SS Gruppenfuehrer and
Uajor General of the \ affor. SS. However, looking at the exhibit of
the prosecution. Number 2/., which ho 3 been submitted to the Tribunal,
it cen be seen th t Dr. Gnzkcn was only on the 30th of January, 1943,
promoted to SS Gruppcnfuchr-r and kajor General of the i.rffcn SS.
Genzkcn was the discipline ry superior of Ding. Ding oust have known
his rank exactly for that reason. For that reason, too, it is out of
the question th^t this diary can* hove originated from Ding and that
it^^s actually used as a diary.

The particular point of a dicry is th; t entries arc being made
currcctly end that the- entries arc aede at the ti-w when the acn who
docs nakc tr.a entries has them completely in rds auaory nd in addition


6 Jasui ry-M-DJ0-ll-2-31akley s
Court Kc. 1 V.


the aor. who is asking the entries, when writing down the individual
feets, docs net know whrt effect these fects will have -t a lrtcr date.
So that a diary always represents an assumption of an objective report.

If scaoonc acre than one ytar later, as has been done in the
ease which is beofre us, makes an entry, and i i this entry then gives
tho artificial appearance of / di ry, and if ho then in addition adds
the title of "Di-ry," then tho reason can only be an intuition of de¬
ceit; and if ouch a deceit was intended rnd lor this purpose, c nock
diary was created, then the individual entries in this diary arc made
in ouch e manor as serve the purposes of the sen who wants to-coondt
a deceit. ..ccording to ay opinion, such a fraud cannot bo admitted
into evidenco.

In order to ccefjicto ey statement, I ary mention that furthor
improbabilities fr« contained in this di/ry which, however, ere not of
such illustrative n turc as the ones which 1 ..evu Just mentioned; and
I therefore will not aention the others t the moment.

I should ag.-isx like to point cut th t the di. ry was written with
a typewriter, so wo arc not concerned with a dicry in •- bcok form but
we are ;'.nccx-ned with flyleaves, looso flyleaves; and the possibility
has ai»M/ existed that they were eh nged ov.r. For that reason, I ask
the High tribunal before deciding the admissibility of this document
to order tno prosecution thrt th.y submit the origin; 1 of th t sc-
callcd li ry and in addition trut they 3t t- in whet manner this di-ry
reached their hands. If they received it from c third perty, then there
is a possibility nd danger th t leaves xarc exchanged.

Lffv. XH.JJZY: Kay it please the Tribunal, 1 might rux rk th t the
prosecution somewhat resents the light use of the word "fraud" without
seme further explan-ticn cf whrt th- dofer.se ttomey has in mind. I
do not knew precisely where this dccuscnt was obtained. It purports
tc be an original. I shall 'sccrtrin in the interim between the recess
new and 1:30 precisely where it c-aac from rnd the facts surrounding it.

JUDGE S3&I.&: Do you have in your hands the original?

1130


6 Janus ry-M-OJG-U-3-Blakley
Court Ko. 1 _


c


MF.. Ue&jKT: I have it in =y hand, yes; end on each page or sub¬
stantially each page you will see the nare of Dr. Ding or Dr. Schuler,

w

after he changed his rvno. I would also like to point up the very ob¬
vious weakness cf the argument aide by defense counsel. It is she6r
supposition that th-.se entries wor*. nrda irca day to day. ,.a t natter
of fact, tho diary itself conclusively shows th: t thwy were not so atdo
i. great nuab.r of these experiments which were c'rricd out sho*.. in the
oitrios that they were not nado from day to day. For instance, just
take, as an oc aplo Page 49 of ycur English Document Book. There you
see a certain typhus experisentel series running free the 8th of J; rch,
1944, to the 18th cf it rch, 194 a, tho entry Appearing undor those dates
So quito obviously wo Just re arguing cbout senctidng we don't know
when we try to conjecture cs to when ttaso entiles were made.

JUDGE SEBHlNGs Jr. McHsncy, do you have in evidence or in the
possession of the prosecution oth-r docucw.its sigr.vd by Dr. Ding in
whet is admittedly his handwriting so that tho Court msy tavo tho opper
tunity to coop;re the sign turcs with the sign tures appearing in this
purported dlcry?

IX'LJiZY: Vo do, your Honor. Tho Prosecution Exhibit 283 is,
as yett viU -c e-all, an affidavit signed by the deceased Dr. Schuler;
and i*. !i'« • vc-7 pronounced and iistinguistable char;.ctcristic. Now,
in the 'Jcry you will find ttat the gr- t-.r p~rt of it is signed by
Dr. Ding tut tne l:st mtab.r cf entries, beginning lrto in 194/., are
eigned by Dr. Schuler, although they arc erroneously transit t«M in
the translation before tne Ttioun'l as Dr. Klub«.r. Th t is bocousc it
is very difficult to road his sign ture; but it is Dr. Schuler, who
is tho 3AT.o M Dr. Ding.

I do net know offhand if we h. v. a sample of the sign ture of Dr.

Ding in -vilcr.cc. I rather think that we 1c have one end can possibly

put it- in evidence. I would also like to point out, though, thrt this

argument .-.bcut Urugcwsky not being c Stsndsrtonfurhrer on such and such

•

a Iat_; that he was an Cberfuchr-.r or some thing of ttat sort, while it

’ 1131


6 Ji-.u£ry-*'-0JG-ll-<,-31aklcy
Court He. 1


say indicate thrt the entries were not made- on thet articular day,
iniic tea noticing acre end curt* inly points tc no freud.

I was Just about to point to entries ado on this report of Ding's
which I have already read into evidence as Prosecution Exhibit 286,
which, as you will recall, dealt with thirty-nine experiments on persons
afflicted with typhus with the drigs .'.criiin end Rut-nol free ,.pril
to Jty, 19 L$i end I can point to the very piece in thrt diiry which
substantiates this r-pert written by Ding, which certainly is net con¬
tested by the defense; end the entry in the di: ry corroborates this,
the t they did cn the Aate hero mentioned oeperia-nt on prociswly thirty-
nine people, fifteen with ..criiin, flfte-n vith Rut*nol, Just as it is
reported in Prosecution Exhibit 28t>. .uk* so it . ppcare in tho diary;
end it rise epp- rs th t all thirty-nine were artificially infected
with typhus on4 that acre then naif of thua were so murdered.

So if wo ore to engage in ergumunts :bout whtn theso entries wore
aado, I subait th t th't is r fcirly forceful argument for the authen¬
ticity cf this document.

V. TJOillXjt I ary point out that ns a arttor of course it is
pos'- 1 hot route cf th- entries actually arc in couplicr.co with tho

fcc.a: tz\ feet alone Uvt aorc than one y. r s -lapsed b.forc
the dii.•/an received th-ir reel name and thrt this wrong name was used
in the title, this fct alcn-. shows th-1 it ccnnot bo a diary. It is
Quite pcasible end I subait thrt it ir a matter of course th't the pre-
sccuV.cn has receive! this dipry 'nd it wes called a diary whan they
received it; bat I still Maintain that the person who produced this
diory has falsified it fer certain purposes. I think thrt I hiv- proved
t»u.t threugh the inexactitudes which cannot be expl'ined.

T:1 PRESIDENT: he will now adjourn for the noon recess. In the
meantime thw prosecution may find scae signatures of Dr. Ding which
=ight conveniently b- introduced in evidence. Tno Court will resume
an . trk- up its ruling on this natter t 1:30 o'clock. c will now
recess until then.

(.. recess was t-ken until 1330 hours.)


1132


6 Jar.-«-l£A^-X2-I-?itzgcr2ld (FL)
Court So. I


CORRECTED COPY

^ • ^^mrnrn

.-STB HOCK SESSION


THE hlARSKAL: The Tribunal is again in sossion.

Ur. 2*cKIJ£T: If tho Tribunal please, before the luncheon recess,
tho Promotion had offered Docuoor.t Number 265 es Prosecution Exhibit
Nuabor 178. This offer nod been contested by Dr. Planing, Counsel
for tho Defendant ?2rugowaky. I told tho T r ibunol I would ascertain tho
source of this document during tho rocoss.

This document was secured by cgor.ts of the Office of Chief Coir.sol
from one Sugoai Sagan. Kogan will teko to stand and tesUfy l-.tcr in
the afternoon and will tell you that ho was the First Clerk to tho
deceased Dr. Ding-Schulor, and Uvat this document was s-curod by him
2 April 1945 in toe Buchcmald Concentration Cnap, ar.d that it has boor,
in his custody since that d-.to with the oxccption of a short tioo when
it was cicrofiLaoc' by cn organization town ns FIAT which is a Joint


Intelligence oporntion ,t the United States and British kray.

It was continuously in his possession up until tho tiax, tho CXfico

of Chief of Counsol socurod it from Wsu However, this ourporst to te

/

an original C-uruan document. It is sigix-d by the deceased Dr, Ding-
Schuler; accordingly, for reasons which are satisfactory to the Prose¬
cution, wo Imvo offered it beforo Ko#m takes the stand on th-j growx*


that it is an original and that it is admissible under the certificate
•c customarily attach to captured Gvnaan docum>nts.


Tho Tribunal also requested that I secure samples of the jrtgr.aturo
of Dr. Ding; staples of Ids signature when he was known as Dr. Schuler

of trt record I find that we hove sables of
thu- record -nc I take it th*.t the gonrinosa
by Defense Counsel.

284 contains ir. the lower loft-


- 1133 -


6Jar>-A-HAA-L2-2-Fit rgerald (PL)
Court Ho. I


C


be cornjr the signature of Dr, Ding. Prosecution Exhibit Husbor 2£3
contains tix signature of Dr. Schuler end I subsit that both of those
signatures ere rather unique. Now we will pass up Docuaent !!uabcr 265

which has been offered as Prosecution Exhibit Number 287 rad which is

•

the Diary kept by the docoaaod Schuler on experiments at Buchcrsiald.

On substantially all of tho pages of this dlery thero appears either
the signature of Dr. Ding or Dr. Schulor. I will again pass this do¬
cument to tho Tribu.nl, I will point out the first tine tho rano Dr.
"Schuler" appoers in on p je 25 of thie Document Nirzbor 265.

'■1

On too procoding pr res appear tho noK, "Dr. Ding". I think that
you will find that the similarity between the unepntoeted signatures of
Ding and Schulor and those appearing in tfx, contested exhibit rt almost

similar.

THE ?I.'3nu.T: The objections to Uw ednission in evidence of thi3
exhibit are overruled. Tho docuaent will bo admitted.

Mr. IicHAMET: Before reading the ocriior portions of tho Ding Diary,

I would like to remind the Tribunal that Prosecution Exhibit 286 was
tho paper writton by Dr, .Ding on his ojq>orimonts on typhus petionts
with tile drugs Acric'ln and Rutenol. Thu Tribunal will recall tact lho
paper sta.toa that those experiments wore or do fr .a April to ’toy, 1913, an<:
that 39 persons were used in tbuso experiments.

You will also recall that 15 were given the drug Rutcnol and 15
Acriein; 9 «oro givon noithor and retained ao a so-called corttrol.

9

I would thorof ore ask the Tribunal t; turn t > Pago 46 of tho juvilish

c

Document Book which sh;ws the entries on 13 and 14 April 1943 ir. Jho
Ding Diary. *..c shall a-u what an ingc:iious thought :.-.is Ding Dior' is
inasmuch as it very exactly reports tr*. experiments in Ding’s papers
suhaitted to Roichorzt and S3


- 1134 -


6 Jcn-A-ltU-Ii-S-FittgBrald (PL)
Court Xo. I


Police x. the 17 of Novcaber, 1944- Permission was then asked to pu¬
blish a sapor.


<


- 1135 -


6 January-..—D JG-13-l-l.es a er
Court So. 1


C


This entry roads!

"Unit of SS-Stunab-'nnfuchr^r Dr* Dins ordered to I. G. Farbcnin-ustr-.
n . G. Hcechst. Confer once with Prof. Lcut-nsc'laeger, Dr. ..ober, end
Dr. Pussgcenger about the experimental series
'Jeridin G: anulat and nut end 1
in the con-^atrrtion camp Buchenweld.

"Visit to Geheiarat Otto and Prof Prigge in the institute fer ex¬
perimental therapeutics in FrenkfUrt-on-Uain.

"2 U ..pril 1943s *

"Therapeutic experiments .Jcridin-Granul-.t (..-GK2) and Rutcnol (h-2)

"To carry out the therapeutic experiments .Jcridin-Granul t and Ruten^

,; » •• " • •

30 porsens (15 each) and 9 persons for control were infected by intra¬
venous injection of 2 cubic contimeters each of fresh blood of a spotted
fever sick person. .21 experimental persons get v.ry serious spotted
fever.

"1 June 194.3:

"Charts of caao history completed.

Thu experimental series was concluded

21 de-ths (8 with /Jcridin-Granulat)

(8 with Rutcnol)

(5 control)

(signed) Dr. Ding

SS-Stunobannfuehcr"

New I say to the Court th/t it is absurb to urge th-t this docu-

i

nent is anything in the n-ture of a frauf. Here wo have two completely
independent documents reporting about the selfsame experiments carried
out in April and -ay of 194-3, the s<jc-_ number of persons, the- same number
cf controls, the seme drugs, th- sax- date, and see that these 39
'unfortunate people- did not contract this disccsc naturally. The first
entry here makes very clear that all 39 were infe-ctcd by ifttr-.venu.-us
injections of 2 cubic centimeters oach of fre-sh bloc-u cf a spotted
fever sick person, It can, therefore, see that th. -tamp with thw nemo


- 1136 -


6 Janxiary-«-DJG-13-2-Lesser
Court No. 1


Pcppendick on the original paper submitted by Dr. Ding for his approve!
fcr publication carried scaewhct acre than usu -1 signifies;:-*.. I light
else remark with respect to this paper written by Dr. Dir.g :nd siitindttcd
to Poppendick for approval th.t it stat v s therein th-t the treauec.it
through the use cf these drugs was started during the incub'tion period.

I as advised, and I suggest to the Tribunal and to the defendants thrt
th. t in and of itself indicates on the free of the pepor that tneso
people were artificially infected with typhus and that evor. if we Id
not have the v<;ry interesting Ding Diary it would be sufficient to prove
that these experiments w^ra criminal, and why is thet? The incub?tion ’
period scans before the symptoms of th- disuse appeared. Now, hew could
thesa men know that these persons in the Buchan-old' Concentration Camp
h Sd typhus during the incubation period unless tncy themselves had in¬
fected these persons? If they had contracted the disease naturally,
during the incubation period nc syaptaas appeared and it was .iot pcssiolv
to ascertain that they had th- disease typhus ct that time. But wo
ncod not rely upon sue., scdical fects bee: use wo hav- the Ding Diary
and that saxes perfectly dear whet was dene during the course of those
particular oeperia-nts in ..pril and i*ay of 1943-

I would like at this time to go beck to ti.e beginning of the Diary
and read frem it at seme length. On the first page we find the years
19U./L2, "Diary of the division for research cf opottod ftecr end
virus rt the Insituto of Hygiene of the Vaf:en SS." This is on page
38 cf the English document bock. Th. first entry, and certainly a most
interesting one, is dat-.d 28 December 19U:

"Conference between r.rcy sanitation inspector, G-nortl-
Chief Surgeon Pre.-ssor Dr. Handlcs-r; stct.s secretary fcr the
dep rtmvnt of h-alth of the ncich-SS Gruppenlu-hrer Dr. C.nti;
president Professor Gilccmvister of the Hcb.rt Koch Insitut^

(P.cichs Institution to ccebct csr.tr.gious iisveses) and SS-Stend-
r-rte:.fuohrer and lecturer Dr. -jugcwsxy of thw Institute of Hygiene
;.&ffcn-SS, Berlin.


- 113 ?-


6 January-~-0JG-13-3-I.e3ser
Court No. 1


C


"It h“8 been establishod that the need exists, tc test *.ho
efficecy of, end resistance of the huaca body tc, the spotted
fever serum extracted free egg yolks.. Since tests on animals
are net of sufficient value, tests on human beings rauat b,. carried

\ f

out."

Here wo see a Quoting of these distinguished gentluaen in which
it is decided that animal tosts have not been sufficient and tc work
on huaan beings. ixA what are they going to do? they just going
to inject this scrua and sec what tho reaction of th- huaan body to the
scrua alone is? Not rt all. They art testing the efficacy of the human
body, the efficacy of thl s.nc as well as the resistance of the-human
body tc the scrua. ..nd that, if Your Honors cl-aso, means simply that
they were going to infect the test subj-cts with typhus following the
innoculation to t-st how cffici.nt the vr.ccin- was. - «r.d thet is pre¬
cisely whet happened. The defendant Hendloser prrticipated in this
conference, Professor Gildoacistur o! the ixb-rt Koch Inaitute partici-
p.ted in this ccnferonco and Ms closest cclltbor. ter in this field was
tho defendant Rose, ti.c vico-president of tho Robert Koch Institute.

The defendant Nrugowsky ncs til-re, the dec v sod Dr. Conti, the superior
cf the defendant aioac was there-; on! all tog.th.r, s thu responsible
agents of the Gena^n gev^rreent, they decided that th-s- criminal experi¬
ments should be carried cut. The Diary continues:

"2 Jen. U2t

"Tnc concentration camp Buchenwald i3 chosen for testing the spotted
fever seruae. SS-Hauptsturafu^hrer Dr. Ding is charged with those t sts.
"5 Jan. 02:

"Preliminary test

"Preliminary tost, tc determine th« surest and :©3t practice-1 way
of infecting hur 2 n beings artificially. Five humans for test purposes
rcceiv_d intraaiscul: r end subcutaneous injections of virus in dcscs
of 1 cubic centimeter. Infection was not possible..."

.mi the signature cf Ding app-ers alter these 3 -ntri-s.


- 1136 -


6 Jasuary-«-DJG-13-l-Lesser
Court So. 1


The first step they took in carrying cut thv project decided uocn
st this conference was to find cut hew they could crtificicliy LrJ
these unfortunrte experiment.-1 subjects with typhus. Sc let us not hear
the def_nse urge that this Institute was established sinply for the
purpose of testing the reaction of the huasn body to the serum itsalf.
"10 Jon. 12:

"Preliminary test B:

"Preliminary test to establish a sure a-ans of infection:

".iuch as in sail pox vaccination, 5 persons wcr*. inf veto!
with virus through 2 superficial rnd 2 iio<.pir cuts in the upper


".11 of the humans used for this test fell ill with truo
spotted fever. Incubation period 2 to 6 deys.

"20 Jan. 12:

"Preliminary report of reactions cf v.ccim tions Through
continually pre ’uccd blocd counts a strong r.vutrcphilc Linksver-
schijbung Stebkemige was ilscov-.rod.

"2 Fob. 12:

"Chart of ccso history of the prvli-.da'.ry tvsts vc vstoblich
c sure ac-ns of infection wore sent to B-.rlin.

"1 death out of 5 sick."

"6 Jan 12
"1 Feb 12

"Spotted fever vaccination mat rid - heserreh Series I

"Execution cf vaccinrticn for the irr-unizrtion fren sotted
fever, using the fell owing vaccines:

• "1) 31 purser s *. ith t.cigl-vacci.-o froa the intestines cf

lieu cf the institute for spotted ver and virus rescTC'i at the
Supreme C«xr.nd ..ray (CtC!) Crakew..."

.jvi if I a^y pass over we ern note th't their vccinc was being obt inod
fra- the s at Dr. Eycr who I mentioned earlier, the subordinate cf tho
defendant Handles®r, who hrd p-rticipetui in the meeting which decided


- 1139 -


6 Jar.U£ry-A-DJG-13“5-I*«sser
Court Mo. 1


upon these experlaent- net JO days earlier.

"2) 35 persons with vaccine freo Huehncreidcttcrsackkulturon
sude by the process Cox. Gildoacister & Hcigcn.

"3) 35 persons with vaccine 'Behring -Comal' (1 egg bloc.ted
(cuTgoschwcaat) to 450 cubic centlaetcrs ceccino. fixture of 70*
Rickottsi: ifcoseri and 30% Ricksettsie Prowczcki).

"4) 34 persons »ith (Behring Normal ' 'Behring Strong'. (1 1
egg bloated to 250 cubic ccntiaet-rs).

"5) 10 persons for control..."

..lweys wc find wo have these unfortunate ocntrol persons who received
no protective innofculntion whrtsocvir.


-1:40-


6 Jar 47-^-:
Court So. 1


r


always ve fled that vo have these unfortunate control scmom,
who received no protective tnnoculatlons whatsoever.

•3 March 1942:

■All persons vaccinated for iemunixation between 6 January 1942
and 1 February 1942, and the tan persons for control, vere Infected with a
virus cultura of Eickettslc-Provaxeki, In the pretence of president,
Professor Gildeaetster. SS Hauptaturafuehrcr (Capteln) Dr. Din/; Infected
hintelf in the process (laboretay accident)."

Sc here ve find thit not only was Professor Gildecolstcr in the
sooting that outlined this progroc hut he also ernoerad in person on
March 3rd, 1942, to see h>v things vere gcin« and in his pro»c.:c»> ir.cse
persons vere infected vlth typhus.

"17 Kn-eh 1942:

■Visit cf Prvf. Gildeaelstor and Prof. Rose (Department head
fer tr.pical eedlciae of the Robert X'ch Institute at the experimental
station. All persons exoorIsontod on fell sick with soottod fever, exooot
tve, vho, the fact ves established later, already hed boon sick vith spotted
fever during an epldesic at the polioo oris-n in Berlin. SS Eauptsture-
fuehrer Dr. Dln« fell sick vith spotted fever and lies at the hospital In
Berlin. SS Kauptsturafuohrer Hoven, station nodical officer of the Vaffon
SS in Voiaar. supervisee in the neantiae the stations (Block 44 and 49)."

So vo find that the Defendant Reso visited Buchonvald with his friem.
and superior, Prvf. Gildeoeistcr and watched these experiments, which In¬
cluded the injections »n the concentration comp innate, ‘Jo also Si froc
this entry that the defendant Hoven took over far the first tint in the

experimental staticn and the defendant Rost won’t deny that he made this

• *
visit to Buchonvald. Kc vill adait now that he wee there.

"19 April 1942:

■Final report on the first spotted fever vaccine research
series: The stone block *45 ves cade available for the compose f these
spotted fever experincuts.


- Uhl-


5 Jan 47-A-I3t-l+-2-Keehar
Court !«.. 1


k


5 deaths (3 under control)

1 with “Behring Boraal*

1 with 'Behring Streep (stark)

•19 August 1942 *

4 September 1942:

"Spotted fewer vaccina, retearch series 11:

■Execution of vaccination for the inmunlratlsn from spotted
fevor, using the fcll-wlng vaccines:

•1) 20 pers'.ns with vaccines, nade by the process of Burar.e and
Glroud (Pasteur Institute, Paris) from rabbit lines.

■2) 20 persons with vaccine, nade by the process of Coablcscu,
Zctta and collaborators free dog lungs. (Producer: Contacurine, Bucharest).
(This vaccine was Bade available by Prof. Aose, who recolved It from Navy
Doctor Prof. Ruge from Bucharest)."

So w# -ay conclude that Prof, Base was Impressed by what he saw *n
Karch 17, 1942, and la now aiding In the crlalnal conspiracy by supplying
then with vacclno to be tested.

"15 October 1942:

■artificial Infection of all persons, vaccinated for immunisation
between 19 September 1942 ax* 4 October 1942, aid 19 persons fer contrsl
with ildottersack Virus (Blckcttsia Prewaiekl)."

■25 October 1542:

"The Infection has started on all per^ns experimented on."

•24 Kay 1942; . x

•Charts of case history sent te Berlin.

"4 deaths af control persons."

I would llkt to pause her* to refer again to the objection to this
document. It ie<si to be rather obvieus that this diary was net kept 'n
a day to day btsIs because free the 20th of May 1942 ts 19 August 1942
apoear only about four entries and to them there is anly tho signature of

a

Dr. Ding, so I assume it is entirely possible that inasmuch as six or seven
months elapsed before tht f.rcal entries were cede In the diary, these


6 Ju 47-A-iRk—14-3-H e ekan
Court Ic. 1


entries were culte cbvl.usly aade free work note* vhich were kept by Dr.

31b«.

•10 Septeaber 1942 to 10 October 1942:

•Unit of SS Eauptsturnfuehrer Dr. Ding (ordered) to the Pasteur
Institute In Psrl* to Prof. Glroud."

■22 October 1942 to 5 Hoveober 1942:

♦

■Spotted fever vecclne Research Series 111.

■Vaccination for laounlzatlon froo spotted fever of 20 persons
with vaccine aade according to the process cf Glroud, Paris. This xacclnc
vas taken by SS Hauptsturafuehrer Dr. Ding froa Paris Immediately t fter
production." ‘ . .. •

"30 Ssvcaber 1942:

■Artificial infection with Huehntr ldcttersackcaterlaj " (and

thoygfcu the naae cf the virus) "free the Robert Koch Inetltuto of tho 20

persons vaeciru ted dor ioruMxation and of 6 control persons. Thio resoarch
sorles vas observed fer six weeks and hhen abandoned without rosults, as no
sickness broke eut an eng the control group."

■27 October 1942 to 8 Sovcsbor 1942:

"Spettod fever vaccine. Research Series IV:

"Vaccination fer lesunlratlon -f 20 pers-ns with a vaccine from
intestines of lict aade by the process of VSigel (sent by lecturer Dr. Haas
of the spotted research Institute 'Rail v. Rohrlng 1 In Leaborg)."

"30 Kcvcaber 1942:

■To test the affect of the ianunixatU-n, the infection shall be
aede with lice, sick with spotted fever. The llco and their cagos must bo
bdtr.‘ lsaedlately, as the latter bec-ces leaky during transput and there¬
fore ropreeonte a danger of t-pidealc In Caac Buchenvald."

■3 Deceaber 1942:

■R'cvly sent lice are applied to 15 persons (5 innunized and 10
persons fee* control). The lice egaln aust be destroyed a* hi*® cages arc
not tight.

■The report is again aade that an infection with live spotted


-UL3-


8 Jam 47-A-lEX-l4-4-Meehan

Cwrt Be. 1


c


fever lira la not possible because the danger to caap Innates la too
great*"

•4 January 1943:

■Due to Infection by lice on 3 December 1942, fire persona ahev
short tera illness,

■The research series vas concluded."

So we see by this series cf entries that they developed a second
means of Injection. The first v* saw was that ccaperable to soallpex
vaccines, vhere they nade snail incision on the upocr arn. Bov they are
using a second nethod of Injection through lice.

■18-18 Decsober 1942:

■Unit ef SS Happtstumfuehrer Dr.. Dirg (ordered) ts tho opening
of the spotted fever research foundation in the Coneral-Oevernaont 'toil
v. Behring' la Leoberg (Lecturer (Dosent) Dr. Haas)."

■28-31 Dececber 1942:

■Vaccination for the ia;unirotion froo diphtheria of tho Reserve
Bn. ef the Leitatandarte SS 'Adelf Hitler' (apcroxinctely 2600 ocn)
because of toutbreak of an epldenlc, ,

■Inspectios. of quarters and advice to the nedlccl eificcr for
th« fighting against epidcalc.*

•1 Dcecaber 1942 to 20 Dccoobcr 1942:

■Spotted fever vaccine. Research Series V:

■Te. detcrain* the iasuniration effect, 20 persons were actively
vaccinated f«r iacunixation with vaccine 'a 1 of the Behrigg Vorks - Df.
SBKVZTZ - (vaccine, where b«sido the chicken cnbryos were used)."

■26 January 1943:

■Artificial infection with LidotUr-Virus Op Be 223 and 226
frea Robert Sock Institute.”

Ve see that the Robert Koch Institute through the Defendant Rose
was supplying the virus with which these unfortunate victlas were injected
with typhus..

*

■9 January 1943:

-llUi-


Court He. 1

6 Jan U7— - lii-5 - LJO - Meehan s'

"By erdar cf the surgeon general of the Maffen SS, SS-Gruppenfuchrer
and :iajcr General (Generalleutnant) cf the i-affen SS, Dr. GENZKEN, the
hitnerto existing spotted fever research station at the concentration
eacp ouchemald bee cuss the *

n 'Departoent for spotted fever and virus research'

"The head of the department will be sS-Stunnbannfuehrcr Dr. DING.
During his absence, the station nodical officer cf the Waffan SS,
t-HH* 2 , SS-Hauptsturofuohror H'VDi will supervise the production of 1
vaccines. The chiof of the oconaaic and administrative headquarters,•

SS-Cfcorgrupponfuohror and Lt. Gen (Gonoral) of the ..affon SS POHL, ordors
the extension cf block of stone buildings. * •

"SS-Stur=hinnfuahr«r Dr, DlfC is appointed at . the saao tiao as
chief department head for special xissions in «MT XVI (Hygiene), of
tho .croup ooparttent («Bts i Tuppe) D (Medical affairs of the Wcffen SS)
of the SS kain Headquarters."


-Ilii5-


CoS? iS-l--lnr.-mck


c


' 3 J'-nuspy 19-3; lhorcpoutio experiments J.kridln and
ethylene Blue: On suggestion of the I G Perbonindua trio AC,
c * '’- MC5od fovor <*«rnpouticun wore tested: r.) Preparation 3582
’■•-krldlr.i of the chowlcal pfccnv.couticel ,-nd adro-bcctoriologicr
do;x rtnort In Fhonkfurt-on- -ain-Hoochat Prof, fcutonachlaogor
md Dr. l/obor - (Thonpoutlc experiment i.); b) ethylene blue,
tested in an experiment cn alee by Prof. Klokuth, Elberfeld
(Therapou^ oxporit-ont :i).


•26 January 1M; ..rtlflci.-.l infection with Eidotter-
Vlrus 0, Ho 223 and 226: 2- porsons for tfcorepoutio oxportaont*
a: .Jtridin; 2 - poi-sons fir tfcer .poutle experiment H: lethylono
bluo * end 7 pcracra for control.


'■20 Po ruarv 19d3: Pro:: the spotted fover infections of the
26 J nunry 43 the persons for control shon nc typical spotted


fever syuptOLU, . Iso in the group V.-.cclno 'B‘< ot the Bohrlng
■orks, .dcrldl:, etl yleno Blue, abort ’ r.ro without sickness,
the reminder have nodlun spotted fever. The research series
designate to manufacturer r.s -negativo', ... the porsons
for control could not be infected clearly. One death in there-
politic oxpwriiiont ;.krldin.


"10 January 1S-.3: Y.llcnfo.er acclno tests: Die 'Bel rln £
■erks --r-ir’/i.ln 1 , the'Ho ert ICoch instltuto Borlin', and tho
■Institute for spotted fever anl virus research of the Supreno
Oozz i.-nd of the '-my(Old )' i„ Crake- wore conslasionoJvby tho
Suproue Cones, of the -my (Ola:) to .manufacture yellow fover
vaccine of Bcltier ond collnbor. tors. Since r. live virus is bein
handled. Tor safety's s.-.ko from or.ch vo.ccir.o charge a tost is to
porfcr-icd on flvo persona.

■ ..t-tho s-io tino 50 persons arc to bo vaccinated cnco rith
9p e. 25 cf the-Robert Koch Institute' which already has boon
tested for its hamlcssness, to dotemino tho docr.a-e of working

cr.pj.cit:-.


-IU6-


5 J.n *17-..- .u -15-2-. inabiick
Court !*o. 1

C

• Tbo results 'of chu yellow fovor vc.cclno tests arc tc bo
sent to Dopartnont XVI in thu ££ 'Iain 1 oadqunrtors, in duplicate,
"tc Kill forward one to tbo manufacturer, and ono to the supror.o
co-ajnnd of the ar.jy (013), r.ttontion tlr.jor Jr. Schmidt (iOny
' lodler.l Inspoc terete ) ; *

And thoro follows a list of tested 0 ? numbers which wo nood
not road.

,! 3 February 19*,3: Storility experiment with an ogg vaccino.
i. package was sont with r. snail bottlo of 20 ccn spotted fovor
vaccine from ogg yollow crltur^s. Op No 35 from It October '12.

/. soconrt injection on 0 Dooombor -12, a third injoction on 13

• .* • • — • *

December 42 of a spotted fovor vaccination for i 2 luniz:\ticn was
carried out on Sister uilli Doohn, bom cr. 3 April, 1912 by
rosidont aurgoon Dr. von Eysmend. Towards ovening n temper-turo
of 104° P. 43 hours after tho last vaccination doath in corn; in
thu Oor.vn clinic in-X..uon #

"Suction protocol: Spot tod fovor (No 2033, Unviorrity of
X uen, pathologic: 1 institute, Locturor Dr. Starkua," And then h
gives i'T. investigation on material vaccinr.tod on and so forth.
"During animal experiments, guinoa pigs nd nice woro '-r.ccinatod
lntra-puritonorl rnd undor thu skin of tho back. No pathological
symptoms at r.ll. Results: Iho vaccino not rospcnciblo for tho
death. The vaccination still took plrco during tho incubation
period..

*8 Pobrur.ry 1943: Visit of iU-Jcr Dr. Eyor frdn tho institute
fer spotted fever .Jid virus rosiK.rci of tho OXT in Crakew rnd
::.jor Dr. Seknidt fren tho army nodical inspectorate."

There again wo havo twe of the chiof subordinates of tho
defendant K ndlosor visiting the murder factory at Buchonwald.

22 February 1943: Exr-dnaticn cf unknown brctorirlo.gical
• to rial: burin.-: -urust 42, Soviet par chutist w.-s brought into
the district -L rionburg; ho earned in his bag^o tho /--.phirlcn


-11A7-


5 Jen 47-X.-1D .-15-3-iiincbuo'k
Court So. 1

C

to riel, wric! wc.s turned over by tho R£F L,

(Dopertinent IV *./3 on 25 Fobrurry 03) H-ay wore Rulirbcktoriopbrn
(Dyaunt.ry 3...), wi lch cculd bo dir.^ioaod without dcubt by
r.nirir.l c.ni culture oxp_rinonta, :.nd rLich cm bo usod fer tl orr.-
poutic purpcaoa in cc.au cf dic.rrh.cor..

"23 Fubru. ry 43 to 6 "c.rcl 43: Unit of S£ Sturnbnnnfuohror
Dr. Ding erdorod tc P:.rla \o procure lr.berr.tory nr.torir.l of tho
dopr.rtrient for apottod fovor .v.l. virus roaorrch, end tho lnatitut

f

cf hygiene.

• •

"23 . rcl 43: Conference botwoon ££ Sturnbr.nnfuohror 3r.rno-

i

w .Id, SS Stur .bmnfuol-rcr Dr. Ding end SS Hr.uptacherfuohror
Sc! lesingor fro:* Dop;.rt::ont. V/ 5, tV.V.H.A. c.bout the brooding of
rr. bits, -uln r pi':a n-. :.-ico r.a oxporiMor.tr.l rninnls for tho
uxporiewntt 1 dopc.rtn>nt.

“25 J nur.r; 43 to 28 Pu rur.ry 43: Spotted fever vr.ccino
Rcaor.rc) Sorica VI. To lot.r'ino the lijnunitf.ticn effect ti e
following re ..ctlvcly 7T.ccinr.tud fer i •..unir/ticn. 2- persona
witl vr.ccino 'Zurich 1 frv.j the hygi.ro Institute of tho Unlvor3lt
«‘f Zuricl ( lungs of :deo), nd 2 - persona vlth vr.ccino 'Rigr. »
fre-u the coruu institute cf the. Uni er3ity of Riga.

•'31 :*rcl 43: -rtifici: 1 infection with ogg-Rlckottain-
?roTw.zucJ:i cf t! - Robert Dee.* Institute, Berlin.

‘11 .-pril -.3* Tie infection of 31 rrch -,3 l:ra not roault-
in : ny sickness sc f. r.

‘2C ..pril 43: 2xperl :entr 1 reries r.brnuonol.

»

"8 rcl 43: 2x -in ticn <f th. trr.tcr ;ni inspoction of

tie concentration cr. :p Vu-^-.t nc r H-rregonbusch.

“8 • rcl 43 to 1- .L-rcl 43: Inspection cf billots in j.pcl-
dcum-.-ml-ei nd vicinity. --.dvico cf eh iof surgocn of tho
c°t. ender of tie -uth.rlndc in rospoct tc r. Diphthorir.-opidonic
in -peldcom.

"24 Il-.rck -x3 tc 2- . pril 43: Cr.rrying cut cf r. lnrrro acr.lo


- 112 : 8 -


S i n 47-i- . -15-4-Kinc.buok
Ccurt -o. 1


C


export:ant cn it porsens by tfc« procors of tho Hygiono Institute
c_‘ the '.."nffon SC by S£ £trndr.rtonf uol re-r lecturer Dr. l'.ru"n»s!:y f
Vr.ccinr.ticna were ando or. 3 different drya within four wooks
. r.inst sar.llpcx, typhus, typheiJ A r.ni B, cholor:-., apottod
fwVur, diphthi.rif-. Ccnprtibiiity wr.s gonorr.lly gcod. Exr.ct
protocol end report wore dolivorod on 27 A pril 19-.3 to ilopr.rt-
nont cl iof o f dopdTteiint XVI.

a It lepertly tt r. atrciv: lucrorco of working cr.pacity,
losin of strongth, incror.so cf tonpor turo end ewollin:; of tho
lynph clnr.'ie. It nuet .bo c^nsidor».u, typhus end snr.llpox woro
net vr.ccirr.tv,d cn the srxu* sido of the bedy, ethurvrlao strongest
swellings or tho lyrph glendi trko plc.co.

“The dlpi thorlr.-..’.scrV.t vr.ccino let. to r.brut 20 cr.cca of
atren• feme. tier. cf r.bcoaeoe. If still In tho orap, the poraon3
wo^e r.grm vr.ceinr.tod for sn.-.llpcx within * yorr."

V.*o thor ccnc to 31 Kerch, 19<3, thorr.pcutic oxp.nncr.ta
“Akridin Orcnulr.t" end “Butcncl - *.

:, Pcr the oxcovtion of thorr.poutic experinonts '/Jtridin
Grr.nulr.t' r.nd 'Rutoncl* 40 persons woho lnfoctol with e £
Klckottaiun.

"11 April 43: ..fter ebaerv .fcicn of aeverrl wooko, no aick-

I

noss strrtul. Uoport to SS St;r.urrtonfuohrer Lecturer Dr. rus-'w*

sky ..n. .-roait’.ont Pr c£. Glldo.joister. fh.j typo 'Ilr.tulek: ' of

»

the Kr'ciri «rch Institute, which will lo: .i to spotted fovor sick¬
ness with cortr.inty.

‘11 April 43: ?roH.iin..rv 2x^.ri:x)nt C: Tc dotorru.no r.
suro uomr cf infectirn, oxporlnunts witl whole blorj fren person:
stricken with spotted fovor, woro nr.do. Infocticn tcck plr.ee r.s
f Hews: 3 persons - 2 ecu or.ch cf whole fresh blood intrnven-
*cus; 2 persons - 2 ecu o. eh cf rhclo fresh bicod inbrr.ius c U lrr;

2 persons - 2 ccr. or.cfc rf wide fros) bleed subcutnnurusly; 2
persons - r.ft*.r serrifienti cr.; 2 pvrscr.s - with “ vr.cclnr.tin£


15-5-.iinabuck


J.n 47-1-
curt Ho.- 1


acapol cutmeoualy. Ihoao infected intrr.vonoously sot typical,
acrioua epcttod fovcr, end died bocauec of fciluro c- t' «- circu¬
latory ays ton. Tt o othor oxporir.ontnl peracna conpl-inod only
about nincr diaccnforta, without boocnins hospital cr.sos.

13 April -13: Prolininrry Bxporir.ent_D. Thv, following
woro infoctud. 6 p-ra^na with 2 ecu oach whole froal blood
intrr.vonorua; 6 pcraor.a with 2 ccr oach wl olo fruah blood lntrr-

muaculor; 6 persona by norns of a vaccination scrlpol cutrnooua.

%

•"IVu six mtravonooualy infoctud poraons ognin got v^ry
aoricua aprtto'l fever, 5 diod.

"Of tl u six, infoctud intrauusculr.rly, one person get nocliur
apottod fever. Tie othora woro without nr y rocaona-'le diffi-
cultiea, end wore not h.oapitr.l cr.aca. IVe suroat norma of in¬
fection to produce spotted fovcr in hrunna is thorofero the intrr
voneoua injection of 2 ecu apottod fever whole blood."

I think by rondiiy: thia portion of the DU|g t>iary the Court
h..a yetton r. pretty nood picture of how tlcao oxp^riuonta woro
conducted r.t 3uch.onwr.ld, rnd the dor the which occurred tloro.
Accordingly, bof.ru ronling into tl o record the ror.ialndor of the
diary which is oqurlly interesting, I ahcull like r.t this tino
tc cr.ll tc the atrnd Eugen Keyon.

J tjr Sdrru >'v Uitm.es hr. Bug on Kegon will fcnko tie at rnd,

Sl-Gd KOG ? a witnoaa, too!- tie stand and toatifiod o.a
follows:

JUJi; SdM.UL G* The witnoai will hold up i:is right h-nd rnd
be sworn, reportin' after r.e tie following or.th.

I ewe. r by God, tfcw Alaigfcty rnd Onniacier.t, that I will
apo.-k the puru trutl and will withheld and add netting.

CPhe witnosa reported the or.th.)

JUDO' S23:JKG: Y' u nay bo soatod.


- 1150 -


6 Jar>-A-K;-;-l>-6-Kinabuck (FL)
Coart to. I


DIRECT SLutI!t»TIO?i'

BT Ur. lfcHJJBI:

Q.- ifitnoee, your nsse is Eugcn Kogon?

A.- Too.

Q.- You wore torn on February 2, 1903, at Munich, Bavaric, Gcmr.ny?

A.- Tos.

Q.- Whet is yoiff citizenship, Witness?

A.- I an an Austrian c it iron.

Q.- What is your present eddross?

A.- Ooorursol noar rr'nkfurt, A«a Hang 26.

Q.- And what is your occupation at present, V/itnoss?

A^- I WE a publicist, editor of the monthly for cult mo and poli¬
tics, "Frankfurter Hofto."

Q.- toi long hare you held that position?

A.- Sinco April, 1946.

Q.- And what wore you doir^ for the year prior to that tino?

A.- Fro* April 1945 until July 1945 I was working with tho Psycho-
logical Ifarfaro Division and later for Control Division in Peris an*.
Bad-Haraturg and free then on I was an indopondont author.

Q.- New, It. Kogon will you toll tho Mbuhel something about you
education?

A.- I attended primary school in Ilunich, oleracntr.ry school in Mu¬
nich; a socondory school with the Bonodictines mi Dooinicens I studied

at tho Universities of Ifcmich, Florence arc Vienna, nr.tionnl oconoray

. >

and sociology. Frti 1927, I was in Virnna dn• w.rkcd on tho Catholic
weekly, 'Schooner* Zukunft* as ucit-r. At the sas*-- tine I wee a vie or
t: the central ccaaittc* of Chr’ *ti-r. Unions in Vienna. In 1932 I be capo
editor in chiof of tho paper S tht Christian Unions in Vienna until
tho end of 1>33. Fx<« 1934 on I wes ejinistrr.t jt of the A us t r i an-Hunga-


rien Princo


6 J««-A-itU-15-7-!iinabuck (FL)
Court Ho. I


C


S^-CAorg Clothe m& » to. 12th of llarch 1938 .hen the Lionel So-
cinlisto norchod into inotrin I «. arreted. I put in the police
prin* in Viorrn; in thfc fell of 1939 I *c® sent to tho concontrotlon
c=e* Buchonncln chore I »«. » poUticol ^oonor until the liborctlon

on the 12th of April 1915.


6 16—l^-^TT>-?orrln

Court Sc. 1


C


Q few, witness. Will you UU tte Tribunal in a little acre detail
about your relationship with Prince ti» *ortc you did thero, and will

you also toll the Tribunal about any previous arrests to which you have been
subjected?

A I was adninistrator of tho property of this Austrian-Hungarian
Prince Coburg, and as such, I repeatedly had business in Go many. Ho had con¬
siderable blocked accounts in Go nanny. I was arrested twice-Germany by tho
Gestapo. Once in 1936 for one day only. The second tine in March 1937 by tho
Gestapo. In both cases an attocot was aado to involve ne in violations of
Goman foreign currency laws an 1 to prove that I had supported tho lnrdRrante
In Austria by ny collaboration with antl-Fascists abroad. In Czechoslovakia
and in Switzerland. Tho second tire, I wns arrested and put pn probation aft*
12 days, but I could not leave Oomany. After four and a half oonths, thoro
was a trial in T/iosbaden at which I, as a representative of Prince Coburg, was
triod for oxtoneiblo violation of tho Goman foreign Cu money laws and for
financial support of a largo Catholic publishing house in Germany from abroad,
I was given a fino of ten thousand narks.

Q Who paid that fino, witness?

A Prince Coburg. ©

q was this a responsible position which you had with Prlnco Coburv7

A Yes.

q Did you havo to handle and a biinister largo suns of money?

A Yes, I had all the free fortune in Austria, Hilary, Czecho¬
slovakia and Switzerland under cy charge, As trustee, I was in charge of the
Vienna private bark of this prince.

Q tow large an os tato was that?

A The estate of this prince in Austria included about 25 :tlllion
schillings, of which I had about two and a half to three million under ny
.tM id otration.

Q Is this Prince Coburg with whoc you had this relationship the sane
one who was an Obergruppenfbehrer in the SA?


6 Juv-l6-2-*-^TTV?errln
Court So. 1

A No, ha had nothing to do with him.

q This family Coburg is tha one free which rulers of various countrioi

in Europe have ccae?

A Tea, it is the sa&j f adly.

Q Now, as I rcamber your earlier statenent, you were sent to
Bucbnrald in Septcnber 1939, is that right?

A Tea.

q !fcw, what -/ork did you do whllo you were in the camp. Doctor Kogorj?

A At first, I was used a s a ground worker and after about six month*
ns a tlackardth, later a tailor. In the beginning of »U3, I cane to the
pattolopy section aM a secretary-clerk, and from th-i spring of *U3, I was
first doctor 1 a clerk, working for Stumbannfuehrer, Who was lator Hauptsturn*
bannfuohror. Dr. "Ding. Ho lator assumed tho name of Schuler for the newly
created vaocino station in tho Buchomald Concentration Canp.

Q That ma In tho spring of 19U3 that you bacano chiof dork to

Schulor?

A In April 19U3.

q What *»ro your dutios as clork to Schuler-Dlng?

A I war in charge of all his oorrospondonco. I had to toko all tho
dictation frca Dr.. Ding, I had to take oaro of tho fllos, and I had to pass on
his orders.

q few, woro ytu working in Block U6 or Block $0?

A In 31>ck 50.

q :hw, TTiU you explain to the Tribunal Just what work Ding-Schulor
was doing in Buchessrald, that is, over which blocks he'had Jurisdiction and
what was being done in oach of the blocks?

A Dr. Din-, in 1939, was canp physician in Buchonwald. Then ho wont
to the ity lone Institute of the faff on SS in Berlin and returned about the end
of »hl as head of tlw newly created experinental station. Heeretumcd to
3uchonwal J . In 19U3, or tto end of *U2, he suggested that typhis vaccine for
the fi--fating treope at the front should be produced in the Buchcrsrald Concen¬
tration Cacp, and for this purpose a station within the Ry,giene Institute cf


6 Jan*-l6-3-^-m.TD-?erria
Court Jfa. 1


C

t ic ..'affcn SS should be founded. Actually, in the first months of 19U3, a
section for typhus and virus research was set up in the Buchenwald Concen¬
tration Caap with the two blocks, lj6 and 50. Block U6 was called the
"Clinical Station for Typhus and Virus Research" anler the Hygiene Institute
of the Waff on SS-Berlin. Block 50 was oalled "Section for Typhus Vaccine
Production,’ 1 Dr. [Hnp was tte hoed of the Block U6 and of Block 50. Both the
two blocks had nothin? to do with eaoh other as far as personnel was con¬
cerned. Tho prisoners in Block 50 for the aost part were onerdos of tho Block
1^ Dietach. Dr. Dine issuod the instructions for Bloc* U6 directly to Arthur
Diotech, CATO of block U6. Only whon there were visits or roports which had
to bo tide wrp I told to ask for tho material free Capo Arthur Diotsch to
drew up tho roports or to anneunco visits in Blook 1*6, Dr- Dinti-Schulor
whon ho was not in Berlin ^rsonnally usod to writo roports to ’Iru-ownky
over/ throo months. Dr. Diir.-Schulor frea tho fall cf 19U3 on-eras also opoclal
doFuty of tho so-callod block districts of the SS» Especially for Block Aroa
"B" in tho flirti JJcuntains,


- 1155 -


c


6 Jan. 47-A-.-£P-17-l- Putty
Court iio.

'.iurt there wor. about fifteen auxiliary caaps of Eucheiwcld, ho had to
control the hygienic conditions there because about twenty-five thousand
irm'tas of Buchonwald wort- Sent there --s workers in subten: nuan
inst:notions, especially the Junkers works.

Q. Now, Ur. Kogon, staso inter-st has be-tn shown in th- chango of the
na ai of Ding to Schuler, kill you explain to the Tribunal whet you know
about Ding's having his n a- changed to Schuler, and if, in fact, they ro
oru end the sane person?

A. Dr. Ding is identical with Schuler. From the Spring or Sur-r of
1944 on he generally usoc. the double nan- Ding-Schul-r, outwardly only tho
na-j« Schuler. Urugowsky, however, wished hin to use the nano Ding with tho
nan- Schulor, or to c--11 hiascli Schuler, too, b-enuoo there was nother
SS officer in 5vrlin who had the nr.Se Schuler. Tho n“ae Ding also is not
the real nme of this SS Physician. H- was the illigitiaot. child of n
girl nroned Braun. A ocrchant at Bieiofold later hdopteu him, * r.d that is
how he got tho nar.e Ding. His f ther was •; physician. Dr. Von Schuler
end Ding endeavored froo 1936 or. to get the noble nano Von Schuler. When
tho » r broke out, changes In non-s were prohibited by th. i^nistry of tho
Interior. Dir.g, however, cic not atop his • tteepts tc ch‘nge his none, and
through Hfaralur personally in 194e he managed to have r.ic ittac changed. Ho
wolccocd this f'ct in 1944 very particularly bec'ur. he hoped th-1 in this
way he would be ble to achieve tho ndvar.tf.go •'fter the end of the w*r,
after the victory — the victory of tho Alli-s whiah he no longer doubted -
th t he would be * ble to dis.pp.--r. •

Q. Now, Ur. Kagcn, I beli.ve you st ted that Block 50 began the.
production of typhus vaccines seedtime in tho crly p'rt of 1943, it
correct?

A. In 1943-

Q. Now, we re the typnus -xp-rL^ents c- rrie-d on in th. Clinical Blank,
that is. Block 46?

A. Only in Block 4b.

Q. And when did th. se vxporisknts,be*in, do you know?


6 WA-f*P-l7--2-Patty (FL)
Court Ho. 1


c


A.- I know free Dr. Ding-Schuler, Iruaay cab-ados afao nor


&'in


the prisoners' hospital, and later frco Arthur Dietach the first
experiments took place A out the turn of the year 1941, '42.

Q._ tkfBg you hat: stated what your duties wore with Dr, Ding, Can
you tell us so.-xj of tho persona with whoo Ding ted correspondence in
connection uith the typhus oxporinenta at aichsiwald?

A.- The correspondence was carried on primarily with Hrug^isky
as the no ad of Office XVI and later Chief Hygienist of the SS, also
partly — officially partly orivately with Grupper.fuchror Gonskon,
furthomoro, with the Military Medical Academy in Berlin, with the Ino-
titufcc for Typhus artf Virus Roscarch of tho OKH in Krakow, vdth tho Beh¬
ring Works in Marburg with the I.G. Farbon Industry, the Hoochst La¬
boratory in Hocchat on tte Main, and with a nuabor of soallor firns,
fimlly »tith tho SS Hospital in Berlin, I’ntor den Eiehun 125, and
with a for doctors personally, for example, Professor Hugo in Rumania,


and a fow other doctors.

Q.- Do you rcccr.bcr if ho hod any correspondence with tho Insti¬
tute at Leipzig under Poppendick?


- 1157 -


6 Jar.-A-S.'-17-1-Putty (FL)
Court Ho. I


C


A.- Toa. There was also correspondence between the firm Hauthajiscn
& C zapeny in Drcs-Icn/Ratorpoil, the experimental section 5 in Leipzig.

This corrospo-Zcnco was in pert through Poppcn-Iick in Berlin r.d rrt

through Oberstursbamf u ohrer Dr, Kirchort in Leipzig. This concerned ex-

* * *

perir._..ts — tno !;inds of experiments/ In the first place, phosphorous,
kautchuk, incendiary bomb experiments in Buchermald, and in the second
place, experiments of a Danish Sturabennfuehrer Dr.Wgrnet who triod to
oake homosexuals sexually potent through gland treatment. Thoso two
experiments wont through the Section 5 in Leipzig.

Q.- Wo will discuss in core detail those two experiments lator on.
Witness, now, did Ding confido in you with rorpoct to his work in those
typhus experiments?

«i- Fr:o the tine when I had to w>rk with Dr. Ding-Schulcr, I loamod.
virtually every icportar.t detail concerning the experiments in Block 46.

Q.- Did you havo nr. opportunity to road secret roports on thoso ex¬
periments?

A.- •.'hat roperta?

Q.- Secret roports on tho experiments.

A.- There was no correspondence, whether private, from Dr. Dioig

Schuler, or official,, epen or secret which did not go through ay hands,

es far as this correspondence originated from Block 50 in 3uchomr.lt'..

Q.- Jlo«, were you able to obtain any kn^tledgc of raodicino? Did, you

oaks any study of medicine because of the position you had in Buchcnwald?

A.- "bon on th* 6th of June, 1946, I was called for the first time

^ •

to tak- dictation from Dr. Ding, I was in extremely great difficulties
because I had only very littio primitive medical kn.w ledge in tho — which
I had acquired in the prec-.ing weeks in tJ* Pathological Section. From
then on I began to study oiology and infect', jus diseases at nitht, firet
in order to learn the technical expressions, an', second, in ardor to gain
-n understanding of the material. Personally, I was Interested in learning
a fieL’ of natural science. Dr. Ding gave me- the necessary literature to
Jo this free


- 1158 -


6 Jan-A-S;-17-2-A-?utty (FL)
Csurt S3. I


tho clinics in Jena. 0nl7 iator did I havo an opportunity to talk '..ith

a noober of important bacteriologists in Block 50. They wore priority

foreigners, French, Czechs, Polos, Russians. Tho gonor' 117 could not

talk to tho Sturabannf'johrcr and thuy asked esc to present the results

of their «roi-riaonta to the Sturabannfuohrer. Tho so-called scientific

M^rk of Dr. Ding-Schulor — I hed to writ- it which was to bu published.
/C*»

in Goxaan nodical publications since Dr. DING wanted to bee Xjf. a 1 c-


turor. In such casos he give ac '’iroctivcs and hints and instructed an
to wrk out a subject with the bccterivlo&ists, tho biologists and


the other sciontiAts in


the work and to suboit


Block .50, end possibl
it• to 1 -ftia. In this wr.j


ibly in tho Camp, to up


wr.y ir. the course of tt/o end


a tolf years I was able to learn a ainixua of a-dical kn»l«: 3 u by vir¬
tue of which I was eblu to understand tho thirds that happened in Block


Q.- Mow, I'r. Kog «n did you ever write any reports for Ding or. tho
uoporiaonte in Block 46?

A.- Yos.4


- 1159 -


*


6 Jiu>-A-DJG-1*-1-Beard (FL)

Court Ha. I


c


Q.- Sow, IS-. Kogan did y^u ev«r write any reports far Jin*, t. tho
experiments in Black A6?

«.- ? 03 ; the results A tho series of experioents conducted ir.

Black 46, I heel ta sun then up an tho basis of the material which Ulock
46 turned into a.. I had ta submit thoa to Dretor Ding, then he dictated
ta mo the reports, which wore generally sent ta Doctor Itrugowsky ir.
Berlin.

Q.- Do you know whet-tar Doctor Dir^ was under instructianc to typo
up these secret roperts dins elf?

A.- Tho re wore such casts. Doctar Ding t aid me then, "Kogan, hero
is cnathcr case -.hero I must report jx-rsrr.ally. It is a wry socrot raat-
tor. I will dictate to y-u now. You will write thu thing xi tr>o typo-
writer, but without a diary number an', without your initials, end op'

n few typewriting mistakes in it so that it will look outhontic, so that
H rugwisky will not think somebody else wrote it." I did tint and Ding-
Schuler sent thoo. letters porsanally.

Q.- Did you ever see Ifrug-wsky at Buchorwold?

A.- Yos; as far as I can recall, I saw .‘frugawsky probably tt<roo
times, nt loast twice in Buchcnwald.

Q.- Will you look at tho d of on 'ants in the dock to your right ard
tell =» if you coo itrug-wsky thoro?

A.- Tho first frm t*» right in the lower row.

Ur. UcHAI2Y: ft ask that the record show that the witness has pro¬
perly identified the defend'nt Urugowsky.

THE P.-iolDE’iT: The record will show the witness prooerly* identified
the defendant Urugowsky in the dock.

Q.- Did you ever take any dictation from Mrugowsky?

A.- As far as I can recall, once.

Q.- Kew, I -rill ask you again — strike that. Do you know a man
by the name of Kovon?


- 1160 -


6 Jan-A-QJj-18-l-9eard (FL)
Court No. I


C


A.- Tea.

Q.- Vhafc do 70 U know about Hoven? That is, what he was doing in
3uchermld?


• - 1160 a -


6 Jan-A-DJG—1^2-3eard (FL)


Court No. I


c


A.- Boren had a double function in the concentretion cazp 3uohen;mlc.
He was ceap physician, end he was the deputy of Doctor Ding-Schuler
for the experimental station 46.

Q.- Will you look at the dock of defendants and tell ne if you see


Hover.?

A.- The fifth free the right in the upper r».

Ur. UcHAIEY: Ve will ask that the record shew that the witness pro¬
perly identified the defendant Hoven.

THS PRESIDENT: The record will shew that the witness has correctly
identified the defendant Hoven in the dock. \

Q.- Now, Hr. Kogoo, before going into the details of some of the
things that occurred at Buche:s»ald, I would like to ask you to tell tho
Tribunal briefly »Ut types of experiments on the concentration canp
i mates took oiace or wore carried out at Buchenreld while you wore


there?

A.- Tho nnin exocriflonts in tho concentration caap Buchomald con¬
cerned t;phus, the so-called typhus exantinaticus. Thoro woro also ox-
porinonta with yellow fever: with m&U poj.; dysentry; typhoid feror —
typhoid A and a; convalesunco acriu-a; blood durability of blood plasma,

A series of experiments with Fraonkcl - toxius was introduced. Tho con¬
tents of tho phosphorus - Kautchuk - incendiary boobs. And, iood vva
taker, fren invalids to produce blood for the SS hospital in Berlin. Ti»
typhus exportmants were extended to tho cost varied moans of condoling
typhus. Tho following vaccines woro used; A typhus vaccino of tho Beh¬
ring works, produced fran ogg yolk cultur according to tho process of
Cox, Glideccistcr and Hasgcn. Also a vaccire from Rabbit lunge, accor¬
ding to tho process of Professor Giraud of the Pcst^ur Institute in Pa¬
ris. And, in tho third place a vaccirc of tho OKH Institute in Krakow,
tho. so-celled Vcigolsche vaccino frea the intestines of lice. Then a
vaccine fren mouse liv_r. A Danish vaccine free Copenhagen. And, various
cheat cal tho rape utica 1 agents, for ex a mple, Msthylene blue, Persic ol,
Ruthenol, ifro-Acredinc.

- 1161 -


6 Jan-A-DJG-i8-3-3csrd (FL)
Court }fe. I


Q._ 3oforo wo go into the details of the typhus exoerLacr.ts, I would
1 lie to ask you if you kr.cn anything about the manner in which subjects
were selected for the experiments which you have mentioned end which took
place in Buchenwald?

A.- Tho selection of experimental subjects was not the sa.-n at
different tires. In the very first period the inmates of the camp wore
called upon to volunteer. They were told that it was a harmless affair;
that tho peoplo would gut additional food. After one or two experiments
it bo cam impossible to ret any volunteers whatever. From then on, Doc¬
tor Ding asked tho crop physician or tho SS cam? Director to scloct tho
suitable persons for the experiments. Ho hod no spocial directives lor

this. Tho crop administration choso people arbitrarily frxa among tho
prisoners, \ tetter they were criminals, or political prisonors, or ho¬
mosexuals. Intrigue amongst the prisoners thensolves also played n-rolo
in tho selection, end occasionally peoplo cornu who had — for whoa there
wao no special roason, but they came into tho ej^perimonts. From the fall


of 19A3> approximately, tho crop loodors did not want to keep the res¬
ponsibility for the ol lection of exporirxjntal subjocts. Doctor Din;.,
hinsolf, no longer wish to have verbal, instructions from iirugowsky to
carry out tho experiments, but he doaandod written orders. For this pur¬
pose ho approach^ Jlruguwi:-'/ with tr^ rcqu-3t thet tho Rcichsfuohrer SS
should appoint hio own p-.cpLj for the exp-rim^nts. SS Gruppenfuehror lx be
of tho Reich Criminal Police Office in Berlin then, according to a di¬
rective from Himmler, which I saw, ordered that only ‘hose poo.>le wore
to be used who had at least a ten years sentence to work out. Then, the
officials ol tte mulch Criminal Police Office in 3erlin twice selected
110 end 99 people in Bucnenwild, who wjro made available for the expe¬
riments. They were exclusively criminals rho red been punished oeforo.

In the last period, pecplo were selected Irom various concentration camps
and prisons ir. Go many. Transports came to Buc.-v-nwald with ttesc people.
In addition to this, political prisoners fror the ca ap itself were almost
always included in these


6 January-«-DJG-18-4-Bcard
Court Sc. 1


*


C „

aeries of experiments which, because they »er«j inconvenient to tho SS
in scat way or because they wore victims of camp intrigues.

Q boro all of these experimental subjects condemned to death, who
wer® experiment©! on in Block 46?

i I do not know of a single case in which scoe on«. came to tho
experimental station in Block 46 bee.use he had been condemned to
death. Once in the case of four Russian prisoners of war, it was claimed
that they were to be shet, but there was no Judjpnent, no sentence.

Thoy belonged to the crtcgcry of Hussion prisoners of war, of when
about 9500 who were pertly shot, p rtly h'.ngul or strangled in Buchcnwald
Q hero any special consideration or favors granted to the experi¬
mental subjects whe survived these experiments?

A The experimental subjects in the first twe or throe weeks be¬
fore the experiments were carried out received better food in order
to get thus into tho condition of a normal G rman scliicr. In addition
to that, ncnc of those prisoners, as for as they survivod, had received
no advantages, and they wore never premised any such thing.

Q *>as en effort ackv to pick experimental subjects who wore in
good physical health, that is, ccmpcrabl. to a i.ohraccht soldier?

A Tho conditions did exist cs for ca was prob bly with tho other
conditions of selection it was fulfilled.

Q Did I understand ycu to say that Urugowsky issufcd orders to
Schuler with respect to the selection of inootes end the experiments
thans Gives?

Doctor Ding tql'i me in the first period, when I was working for
him, that the instructions for the execution of tho experiments had
come from Ifrugcwsky in Berlin. He said nothing about the special
method of how the people were to be selected.


6 J rj -«-DJC-19-1-B1 kl ey

Ccurt Sc. 1


C

Q ld.tr.css, arc you faaili'r Kith r. iary kept by Dr. Ding cn

a

the experiaents in Block 46 tt Buchenwaii?

U ICS.

Q I will ask ycu if ycu have over s.en the document which 3 will
now have handed to you. Document NO-265, which tea bv.cn adnittod as
Prosecution Exhibit 287.

(Dccu pc nt nrnded tc witness).

It is tho original dicry which was kept in Block 46.

Q Dii ycu ever have ccntrcl of th't beak yourself?

7. In United way. Tho diary was kept in Sleek 46 by..tho herd
clerk there under tho instructions cf Dr. Ding nd under tho c.ntrcl
of C'pc ..rthur Di-tsch. Dr. Ding generally every six aonths, sdnetinos
every three ta-nths, n-dc reports to Strn^r.rtenfurhr-r 1 -ur Ob.rfuehrcr
drugewsky. For'the latter purposo, thj diary v.ia taken frea Block 46
tc Block 50; and 1 used it ts control lccurrent in sotting up tho -dates
which were to bo included in the reports rnd which concerned net cnly
Blcck 46 but also Block 50.

few days before the end of tho c;ncontraticn carp Buchcnwcld,

all SS documents which were in the caap were burned by the SC ace..

• * %

Dr. Dine e vo oc instructions tc t kc the files cf Sleek 50 tc Block

46. These lid net include this 'li.-ry. This "i ry was kept in 31cck

46. I went to Block 46 with hin; end he and Cape ..rthur Dietsch in

ay presence begrn to lock through tho fil -8 cl the patients in Blcck

46. Every record which secaed langercus to hia ho put intc a sack.

Cape ..rthur. Dietsch later teak thaa to the crtoatcriua end burned then

•

there. hen the two aon were in the next rc-.ni fer r aeuent, I took
a bundle of these records, quite arbitrarily, just *.s they weru lying
there, end the- !i*ry which I s'.w lying there. I took tiiea cut rnJ threw
thee intc a box.

Tw; lays lrter I tali Dr. Ding that i ha-' rut bamo! the i.ry.

He was quite astonished at this. He asxoi no whether I believed th: t
this diary was net r. terrible indic^sent against hia. I tel. ~i.,


6 Jonuar7-«-DJG-19-2-31nkley
Court Nc. 1


C

"If It be proved befcrc :■ court th t you, Sturttbonnfuehr-r, went
so far rs tc save this diary, th*t is conclusive evidence th -1 ycu
wore really honest in ycur intentions." Then ho gave ao permission tc
get the diary fro a Block 46, tc get it cut of th-rc end tc keep it. I
took the di.-ry with nc out of the c-ap; £-*r until the f 11 cf 1945 I
kept it in my possession.

Then I turned it ov.r to th- .ttlitcry intelligence Service Center
ary* the Document Center in Oberursd? Frea then on it was no leng-r
in ay henda.

Q ' '.hun lid ycu turn this document cv.r to the Office of Chief
Counsel hero in Numberg?

I cannot say exactly. I bulitvo it was in the fall -f 1945.

<»t least at th-t time it v»a used to prep-ru phetest tic copies. It
xay be th: t it was given back tc nc cnee acr- end th*t 1 grvo it to
one of the cany .jtcrican officers ogrin lrter. I must scy in th-t con¬
nection that during this one end threo-qur rters years I wis -xtremuly
busy and was ccnccmod with a greet nuaber cf iccuacnto sc th-t 1 nc
lengor knew exactly rhon I turned over the document tc the Office cf
Chief cf Counsel. In any ccso it wte in Obvrursel.

Q Did ycu ci.ango or Iter this document in any nay while it w:.s
in ycur possession?

*» Why should I have deno thot?

Q Then ycur answer tc the question is "No" is that right?

A Nc. ..bsolutoly no.

Q Is this document still in the same con-iiticr. it wes .hen ycu
turned it ever to the Office cf Chi-f cf Counsel?

- '-hen I just locked at it n^w, it looked exactly the sene, the
some cclcr, the seac f.ns, the sign-tun. of Din^, Inter Scnul-r, the
k-cc p?.per, the sme typewriter-type.

(Document hnritltxl tc witness.)

*fcs, it is absolutely the sine copy.

Q .jvd these sign tures rppcn^|ng then in there are the signatures


6 Januar7-A-DJG-19-3-Bleicley
Court So. 1

' C

of Ding and Schuler?

A. It is the original handwriting of Dr, Ding and later
Schuler.

Q. Witness, getting hack for a accent to the selection of the
experimental subjects, can you tell the Tribunal whether or not the
defendant Hoven played any part in the selection of innates for the
typhus expertcents in Block 46?

A. There were cases in which Dr. Ding cskod the canp physician
to ste to it that the necessary nuaber of cxporincntal subjects should
be selected froa the prisoners. AsYar as I am infornod, tho camp
physician passed or. this roquest to the csjp administration *hich in

. * . • I * h

the first years carriod out the selection until the Reich Crininrl
Police Office solocted the people or sent tho pooplo,

THE PRSSIDHJT: As it was announced this morning, tho Tribunal
will now rccoss until 9:30 tomorrow turning; and tho gentlemen whom
I havo requested to moot tho members of tho Tribunal will report in
five minutes at tho consultation room.

THE MARSHAL: The Tribunal will bo rocossod until 9:30 tonerrow
morning.

(Tho Tribunal adjourned until 7 January 1947 at 0930 hours.)


MICROCOPY


ROLL
