Sea rent asa scconmmacats Riel Leneetenrnrerromnn Rom AONE! A teh he gh RES PERN TS assy

> pA v es DS Brain a ek aE Ee eG Ci tien ire, <P ee

lana 
Qwicat Cer eee 
alesis 
ft. ).

THE GNOSTIC RELIGION

The Message of the Alien God and the 
Beginnings of Christianity

by Hans Jonas

Beacon Press Beacon Hill _ Boston

© 1958 by Hans Jonas. Library of Congress catalog card number: 58-6246. Printed 
in the United States of America

BARD COLLEGE LIBRARY 
ANNANDALE-ON-HUDSON, Wi.\.

Contents

Preface xiii 
1. Introduction: East and West in Hellenism 3 
(a) The Part of the West 4 
Greek Culture on the Eve of Alexander's Conquests 5 
Cosmopolitanism and the New Greek Colonization 6 
The Hellenization of the East f 
Later Hellenism: The Change from Secular to Religious Culture 9 
The Four Stages of Greek Culture 10

(b) The Part of the East 11 
The East on the Eve of Alexander’s Conquests 13 
The East Under Hellenism 17 
The Re-emergence of the East 23

Part I. Gnostic Literature—Main Tenets, Sym-

bolic Language 29

2. The Meaning of Gnosis and the Extent of the Gnostic 
Movement 31 
(a) Spiritual Climate of the Era 31 
(b) The Name “Gnosticism” 32 
(c) The Origin of Gnosticism 33 
(d) The Nature of Gnostic “Knowledge” 34 
(e) Survey of Sources 37 
Secondary or Indirect Sources 37 
Primary or Direct Sources 39 
(£) Abstract of Main Gnostic Tenets 42 
Theology 42 
Cosmology 43 
Anthropology 44 
Eschatology 44 
Morality 46 
3. Gnostic Imagery and Symbolic Language 48 
(a) The “Alien” 49 
(b) “Beyond,” “Without,” “This World,” and “The Other World” 51 
(c) Worlds and Aeons 51

CONTENTSCONTENTS

(d) The Cosmic Habitation and the Stranger’s Sojourn 
(e) “Light” and “Darkness,” “Life” and “Dea A . 
(£) “Mixture,” “Dispersal,” the “One,” and the ‘Many’ 
(g) “Fall,” “Sinking,” “Capture” 
(h) Forlornness, Dread, Homesickness 
(i) Numbness, Sleep, Intoxication 
(j) The Noise of the World 
(k) The “Call from Without” 
(1) The “Alien Man” 
(m) The Content of the Call 
(n) The Response to the Call 
(0) Gnostic Allegory 
Eve and the Serpent 
Cain and the Creator 
Prometheus and Zeus 
Appendix to Chapter 3: Glossary of Mandaean Terms

Part II. Gnostic Systems of Thought

4. Simon Magus

5. The “Hymn of the Pearl”

(a) The Text 
(b) Commentary 
Serpent, Sea, Egypt 
The Impure Garment 
The Letter 
The Conquering of the Serpent and the Ascent 
The Heavenly Garment; the Image 
The Transcendental Self 
The Pearl

6. The Angels That Made the World. The Gospel of Mar-

cion 
(a) The Angels That Made the World 
(b) The Gospel of Marcion 
Marcion’s Unique Position in Gnostic Thought 
Redemption According to Marcion 
The Two Gods 
“Grace Freely Given” 
Marcion’s Ascetic Morality 
Marcion and Scripture

CONTENTS

7. The Potmandres of Hermes Trismegistus

(a) The Text 
(b) Commentary 
The Origin of the Divine Man 
The Descent of Man; the Planetary Soul 
The Union of Man with Nature; the Narcissus Motif 
The Ascent of the Soul 
The First Beginnings

8. The Valentinian Speculation

(a) The Speculative Principle of Valentinianism 
(b) The System 
Development of the Pleroma 
The Crisis in the Pleroma 
Consequences of the Crisis. Function of the Limit 
Restoration of the Pleroma 
Events Outside the Pleroma 
Sufferings of the Lower Sophia 
Origination of Matter 
Derivation of the Single Elements 
Demiurge and Creation of the World 
Salvation 
Appendix I to Chapter 8: The Position of Fire Among the Elements 
Appendix II to Chapter 8: The System of the Apocryphon of John9. Creation, World History, and Salvation According to Mani 
(a) Mani’s Method; His Vocation 
(b) The System 
The Primal Principles 
The Attack of the Darkness 
The Pacifism of the World of Light 
The First Creation: Primal Man 
The Defeat of Primal Man 
The Sacrifice and Adulteration of the Soul 
The Second Creation: The Living Spirit; Liberation of Primal Man 
Creation of the Macrocosmos 
The Third Creation: The Messenger 
Origin of Plants and Animals 
Creation of Adam and Eve 
Mission of the Luminous Jesus; the Jesus Patibilis 
Practical Conclusions; Mani’s Ascetic Morality 
The Doctrine of the Last Things 
(c) Recapitulation: Two Types of ‘Dualism in Gnostic Speculation

Vil

147

148 
153 
154 
156 
161 
165 
169

174

174 
179 
179 
181 
183 
184 
185 
187 
188 
189 
190 
194 
197 
199

206

206 
209 
210 
213 
215 
216 
218 
219 
221 
224 
225 
225 
226 
228 
231 
233 
236

Vili

10.

11.

CONTENTS

Part IIL Gnosticism and the Classical Mind 239

The Cosmos in Greek and Gnostic Evaluation

(a) The Idea of “Cosmos” and Man's Place in It 
The Greek Position 
Cosmos-Piety as a Position of Retreat 
The Gnostic Revaluation 
The Greek Reaction 
(b) Destiny and the Stars 
Forms of Sidereal Piety in the Ancient World 
The Gnostic Revaluation 
The Greek Reaction; the Brotherhood of Man and Stars 
The Acosmic Brotherhood of Salvation

Virtue and the Soul in Greek and Gnostic Teaching

(a) The Ideal of Virtue: It’s Absence in Gnosticism 
(b) Gnostic Morality 
Nihilism and Libertinism 
Asceticism, Self-Abnegation, the New “Virtue” 
Areté and the Christian “Virtues” 
Virtue in Philo Judaeus 
(c) Gnostic Psychology 
The Demonological Interpretation of Inwardness 
The Soul as Female 
Ecstatic Illumination 
(d) Conclusion: The Unknown God

Corrections and Additions 
Bibliography 
Index

241

241 
241 
247 
250 
253 
254 
255 
260 
262 
264

266

266 
270 
270 
274 
277 
278 
281 
281 
283 
284 
288

290 
291 
300

AcknowledgmentsCorrections and Additions 
Bibliography 
Index

241

241 
241 
247 
250 
253 
254 
255 
260 
262 
264

266

266 
270 
270 
274 
277 
278 
281 
281 
283 
284 
288

290 
291 
300

Acknowledgments

The publishers thank the following for giving permission to

‘quote or translate from the works mentioned:

Clarendon Press: The Republic of Plato, trans. FM. Cornford: 
W. Kohlhammer: 4 Manichaean Psalm-book, ed. and trans, CRC. 
Allberry, and Kephalaia, ed. and trans. H. J. Polotsky and A. 
Bohlig; Oxford University Press: The Dialogues of Plato, trans. B. 
Jowett, and The Student’s Oxford Aristotle, ed. W. D. Ross ; Rascher 
& Cie. and the C. G. Jung-Institut: Evangelium Veritatis, ed. and 
trans. M. Malinine, H. C. Puech, G. Quispel; Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, Ltd.: Plato's Cosmology, F. M. Cornford; University Press, 
Cambridge: Origen: Contra Celsum, trans. H. Chadwick; Aka- 
demie-Verlag, Berlin: Die gnostischen Schriften des koptischen 
Papyrus Berolinensis 8502, ed. and trans. W. Till.

Special acknowledgment is made to the generosity shown b 
W. Kohlhammer, Stuttgart, and by Rascher «Cie, Ziirich, in ws) 
muitting extensive quotation from the Manichaean Psalm-book and 
the Evangelium Veritatis respectively, either of them editio prin- 
ceps of most important new texts in the field.

PREFACE XvPREFACE Xv

gnostic sects, Epiphanius of Salamis, wrote in the fourth century 
aD. From then on, with the danger past and the polemical interest 
no longer alive, oblivion settled down on the whole subject, until 
the historical interest of the nineteenth century returned to it in the 
spirit of dispassionate inquiry. By reason of subject matter it still 
‘ fell into the domain of the theologian, like everything connected 
with the beginnings of Christianity. But the Protestant theologians 
(mostly German) who engaged in the new investigation ap- 
proached their task as historians who are no longer party to the 
conflict, though intellectual trends of their own time might sway 
their sympathies and judgments.It was then that diverse schools of thought about the historical 
nature of Gnosticism began to spring up. Naturally enough, the 
Hellenic, and more particularly “Platonic,” thesis of the Church 
Fathers was revived, and not merely on their authority, for sugges- 
tive aspects of the literary evidence, including gnostic use of phil- 
osophical terms, as well as the general probabilities of the age, 
almost inevitably at first point in that direction. Indeed there hardly 
seemed to be a choice of alternatives as long as only Judaeo- 
Christian and Greek thought were reckoned with as the forces 
which could exert influence in that period. But somehow the divi- 
sion of the quantity that is Gnosticism by these known factors leaves 
too large a remainder, and from the early nineteenth century the 
“Hellenic” school was confronted by an “oriental” one which argued 
that Gnosticism derived from an older “oriental philosophy.” 
Though this position reflected a correct instinct, it suffered from the 
weakness that it operated with an ill-defined and really unknown 
magnitude—that oriental philosophy the nature and previous exist- 
ence of which were inferred from the facts of Gnosticism itself 
rather than independently established. The position gained firmer 
ground, however, once the mythological rather than the philosophi- 
cal character of what was felt to be oriental in Gnosticism was) 
recognized and the search for the mysterious philosophy abandoned. 
It is generally true to say that to this day the “Greek” and 
“oriental” emphases shift back and forth according to whether the 
philosophical or the mythological, the rational or the irrational facet 
of the phenomenon is seen as decisive. The culmination of the 
Greek and rational thesis may be found at the end of the century

xvi PREFACE

in Adolf von Harnack’s famous formula that Gnosticism is “the 
acute Hellenization of Christianity.”xvi PREFACE

in Adolf von Harnack’s famous formula that Gnosticism is “the 
acute Hellenization of Christianity.”

Meanwhile, however, the scientific scene changed with the clas- 
sical scholar and the orientalist entering the field where before the 
theologian had been alone. The investigation of Gnosticism be- 
came part of the comprehensive study of the whole age of later 
Antiquity in which a variety of disciplines joined hands. Here it 
was the younger science of the orientalists which could add most to 
what theology and classical philology had to offer. The vague con- 
cept of generally “oriental” thought gave way to a concrete knowl- 
edge of the several national traditions mingling in the culture of the 
time; and the concept of Hellenism itself was modified by the inclu- 
sion of these distinct heterogeneous influences in its hitherto pre- 
dominantly Greek picture. As to Gnosticism in particular, the 
acquaintance with such massively mythological material as the 
Coptic and Mandaean texts dealt a blow to the “Greek-philosophi- 
cal” position from which it never fully recovered, though in the 
nature of the case it can never be entirely abandoned either. Diag- 
nosis became largely a matter of genealogy, and for this the field 
was thrown wide open: one by one, or in varying combinations, the 
different oriental filiations suggested by the rainbow colors of the 
material—Babylonian, Egyptian, Iranian—were elaborated to deter- 
mine the principal “whence” and “what” of Gnosis, with the overall 
result that its picture became more and more syncretistic. The 
latest turn in the quest for one dominant line of descent is to derive 
Gnosticism from Judaism: a needful correction of a previous neg- 
lect, but in the end probably no more adequate to the total and 
integral phenomenon than other partial and partially true explana- 
tions. Indeed, so far as traceable pedigrees of elements go, all inves- 
tigations of detail over the last half century have proved divergent 
rather than convergent, and leave us with a portrait of Gnosticism 
in which the absence of a unifying character seems to be the salient 
feature. But these same investigations have also gradually enlarged 
the range of the phenomenon beyond the group of Christian here- 
sies originally comprised by the name, and in this greater breadth, 
as well as in the greater complexity, Gnosticism became increas- 
ingly revealing of the whole civilization in which it arose and' whose all-pervading feature was syncretism.

4 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

had envisioned and which Hellenism had made possible, although 
the Persian renascence beyond the Euphrates had diminished its 
geographical scope. The parallel division of Christendom into a 
Latin and a Greek Church reflects and perpetuates the same cultural 
situation in the realm of religious dogma.

It is this spatio-cultural unity, created by Alexander and existing 
in turn as the kingdoms of the Diadochi, as the eastern provinces 
of Rome, as the Byzantine Empire, and concurrently as the Greek 
Church, a unity bound together in the Hellenistic-oriental synthesis, 
which provides the setting for those spiritual movements with 
which this book is concerned. In this introductory chapter we have 
to fill in their background by saying something more about Hellen- 
ism in general and by clarifying on the one hand some aspects of 
its two components, namely, Hellas and Asia, and on the other the 
manner of their meeting, marriage, and common issue.

(2) THE PART OF THE WEST

What were the historical conditions and circumstances of the 
development we have indicated? The union which Alexander’s 
conquest initiated was prepared for on both sides. East and West 
had each progressed previously to the maximum degree of unifica- 
tion in its own realm, most obviously so in political terms: the East 
had been unified under Persian rule, the Greek world under the 
Macedonian hegemony. Thus the conquest of the Persian monarchy 
by the Macedonian was an event involving the whole “West” and 
the whole “East.”No less had cultural developments prepared each side, though 
in a very different manner, for the roles they were destined to play 
in the new combination. Cultures can best mix when the thought 
of each has become sufficiently emancipated from particular local, 
social, and national conditions to assume some degree of general 
validity and thereby become transmissible and exchangeable. It is 
then no longer bound to such specific historical facts as the Athe- 
nian polis or the oriental caste society but has passed into the freer 
form of abstract principles that can claim to apply to all mankind, 
that can be learned, be supported by argument, and compete with

\ others in the sphere of rational discussion.

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 5

Greek Culture on the Eve of Alexander's Conquests

When Alexander appeared, Hellas had, both in point of fact 
and in its own consciousness, reached this stage of cosmopolitan 
maturity, and this was the positive precondition of his success, 
which was matched by a negative one on the oriental side. For 
more than a century the whole evolution of Greek culture had been 
leading in this direction. The ideals of a Pindar could hardly have 
been grafted onto the court of a Nebuchadnezzar or an Artaxerxes 
and the bureaucracies of their realms. Since Herodotus, “the father 
of history” (fifth century B.c.), Greek curiosity had interested itself 
in the customs and opinions of the “barbarians”; but the Hellenic 
way was conceived for and suited to Hellenes alone, and of them 
only those who were freeborn and full citizens. Moral and political 
ideals, and even the idea of knowledge, were bound up with very

definite social conditions and did not claim to apply to men in gen-definite social conditions and did not claim to apply to men in gen-

eral—indeed, the concept of “man in general” had for practical 
purposes not yet come into its own. However, philosophical reflec- 
tion and the development of urban civilization in the century pre- 
ceding Alexander led gradually to its emergence and explicit formu- 
lation. The sophistic enlightenment of the fifth century had set the 
individual over against the state and its norms and in conceiving the 
opposition of nature and law had divested the latter, as resting on 
convention alone, of its ancient sanctity: moral and political norms 
are relative. Against their skeptical challenge, the Socratic-Platonic 
answer appealed, not indeed to tradition, but to conceptual knowl- 
edge of the intelligible, ic, to rational theory; and rationalism 
carries in itself the germ of universalism. The Cynics preached a 
revaluation of existing norms of conduct, self-sufficiency of the pri- 
vate individual, indifference to the traditional values of society, such 
as patriotism, and freedom from all prejudice. The internal decline 
of the old city-states together with the loss of their external inde- 
pendence weakened the particularistic aspect of their culture while 
it strengthened the consciousness of what in it was of general spirit- 
ual validity.

In short, at the time of Alexander the Hellenic idea of culture |

had evolved to a point where it was possible to say that one was a

Hellene not by birth but by education, so that one born a barbarian |

6 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISMhad evolved to a point where it was possible to say that one was a

Hellene not by birth but by education, so that one born a barbarian |

6 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

| could become a true Hellene. The enthroning of reason as the 
highest part in man had led to the discovery of man as such, and 
at the same time to the conception of the Hellenic way as a general 
humanistic culture. The last step on this road was taken when the 
Stoics later advanced the proposition that freedom, that highest 
good of Hellenic ethics, is a purely inner quality not dependent on 
external conditions, so that true freedom may well be found in a 
slave if only he is wise. So much does all that is Greek become a 
matter of mental attitude and quality that participation in it is open 
to every rational subject, ic. to every man. Prevailing theory placed 
man no longer primarily in the context of the polis, as did Plato and 
still Aristotle, but in that of the cosmos, which we sometimes find 
called “the true and great polis for all.” To be a good citizen of the 
cosmos, a cosmopolites, is the moral end of man; and his title to this 
citizenship is his possession of Jogos, or reason, and nothing else— 
that is, the principle that distinguishes him as man and puts him 
into immediate relationship to the same principle governing the 
universe. The full growth of this cosmopolitan ideology was 
reached under the Roman Empire; but in all essential features the 
universalistic stage of Greek thought was present by Alexander's 
time. This turn of the collective mind inspired his venture and was 
itself powerfully reinforced by his success.

Cosmopolitanism and the New Greek Colonization

Such was the inner breadth of the spirit which Alexander carriedCosmopolitanism and the New Greek Colonization

Such was the inner breadth of the spirit which Alexander carried

, into the outward expanses of the world. From now on, Hellas was 
everywhere that urban life with its institutions and organization 
flourished after the Greek pattern. Into this life the native popula- 
tions could enter with equal rights by way of cultural and linguistic 
assimilation. This marks an important difference from the older 
Greek colonization of the Mediterranean coastline, which estab- 
lished purely Greek colonies on the fringes of the great “barbarian” 
hinterland and envisaged no amalgamation of colonists and natives. 
The colonization following in the footsteps of Alexander intended 
from the outset, and indeed as part of his own political program, a 
symbiosis of an entirely new kind, one which though most obvi- 
ously a Hellenization of the East required for its success a certain 
reciprocity. In the new geopolitical area the Greek element no

INTRODUCTION; EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 7INTRODUCTION; EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 7

longer clung to geographic continuity with the mother country, and 
generally with what had hitherto been the Greek world, but spread 
far into the continental expanses of the Hellenistic Empire. Unlike 
the earlier colonies, the cities thus founded were not daughter cities 
of individual metropoles but were fed from the reservoir of the 
cosmopolitan Greek nation. Their main relations were not to one | 
another and to the distant mother city but each acted as a center of 
crystallization in its own environment, that is, in relation to its 
indigenous neighbors. Above all, these cities were no longer sover- 
eign states but parts of centrally administered kingdoms. This 
changed the relation of the inhabitants to the political whole. The 
classical city-state engaged the citizen in its concerns, and these he 
could identify with his own, as through the laws of his city he gov- 
erned himself. The large Hellenistic monarchies neither called for 
nor permitted such close personal identification; and just as they 
made no moral demands on their subjects, so the individual de- 
tached himself in regard to them and as a private person (a status 
hardly admitted in the Hellenic world before) found satisfaction of 
his social needs in voluntarily organized associations based on com- 
munity of ideas, religion, and occupation.The nuclei of the newly founded cities were as a rule consti- 
tuted by Greek nationals; but from the outset the inclusion of com- 
pact native populations was part of the plan and of the charter by 
which each city came into being. In many cases such groups of 
natives were thus transformed into city populations for the first 
time, and into the populations of cities organized and self-adminis- 
tering in the Greek manner. How thoroughly Alexander himself 
understood his policy of fusion in racial terms as well is shown by 
the famous marriage celebration at Susa when in compliance with 
his wishes ten thousand of his Macedonian officers and men took 
Persian wives.

The Heilenization of the East

The assimilating power of such an entity as the Hellenistic city 
must have been overwhelming. Participating in its institutions and 
ways of life, the non-Hellenic citizens underwent rapid Helleniza- 
tion, shown most plainly in their adoption of the Greek language: 
and this in spite of the fact that probably from the beginning the

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 9INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 9

still going on at a time when movements of renascence of national 
languages and literatures were already under way. The earliest, 
indeed anachronistic, example of such a situation is provided by the 
familiar events of the Maccabaean period in Palestine in the second 
century B.c. Even as late as the third century a.p., after five hundred 
years of Hellenistic civilization, we observe a native of the ancient 
city of Tyre, Malchus son of Malchus, becoming a prominent Greek 
philosophic writer and at the instance of his Hellenic friends chang- 
ing (or suffering them to change) his Semitic name first to the 
Greek Basileus,| then to Porphyrius? thereby symbolically declaring 
his adherence to the Hellenic cause together with his Phoenician 
extraction. The interesting point in this case is that at the same 
time the counter-movement was gathering momentum in his native 
country—the creation of a Syrian vernacular literature associated 
with the names of Bardesanes, Mani, and Ephraem. This move- | 
ment and its parallels everywhere were part of the rise of the new 
popular religions against which Hellenism was forced to defend | 
itself,

Later Hellenism: The Change from Secular 
to Religious CultureLater Hellenism: The Change from Secular 
to Religious Culture

With the situation just indicated the concept of Hellenism 
underwent a significant change. In late antiquity the unchallenged 
universalism of the first Hellenistic centuries was succeeded by an 
age of new differentiation, based primarily on spiritual issues and 
only secondarily also of a national, regional, and linguistic character. 
The common secular culture was increasingly affected by a mental 
polarization in religious terms, leading finally to a breaking up of 
the former unity into exclusive camps. Under these new circum- 
stances, “Hellenic,” used as a watchword within a world already 
thoroughly Hellenized, distinguishes an embattled cause from its 
Christian or gnostic opponents, who yet, in language and literary 
form, are themselves no less part of the Greek milieu. On this 
common ground Hellenism became almost equivalent to conserva- 
tism and crystallized into a definable doctrine in which the whole

2“King”—the literal translation of Malchus.

*“The purple-clad’—an allusion to his original name as well as to the 
major industry of his native city, purple-dyeing.

10 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM*“The purple-clad’—an allusion to his original name as well as to the 
major industry of his native city, purple-dyeing.

10 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

tradition of pagan antiquity, religious as well as philosophical, was 
for the last time systematized. Its adherents as well as its opponents 
lived everywhere, so that the battlefield extended over the whole 
civilized world. But the rising tide of religion had engulfed “Greek” 
thought itself and transformed its own character: Hellenistic secular 
culture changed into a pronouncedly religious pagan culture, both 
in self-defense against Christianity and from an inner necessity. 
This means that in the age of the rising world-religion, Hellenism 
itself became a denominational creed. This is how Plotinus and 
still more Julian the Apostate conceived their Hellenic, i.c., pagan, 
cause, which in Neoplatonism founded a kind of church with its 
own dogma and apologetic. Doomed Hellenism had come to be a 
particular cause on its own native ground. In this hour of its 
twilight the concept of Hellenism was at the same time broadened 
and narrowed. It was broadened in so far as, in the final entrench- 
ment, even purely oriental creations like the religions of Mithras or 
of Attis were counted in with the Hellenistic tradition that was to 
be defended; it was narrowed in that the whole cause became a 
party cause, and more and more that of a minority party. Yet, as 
we have said, the whole struggle was enacted within a Greek frame- 
work, that is, within the frame of the one universal Hellenic culture 
and language. So much is this the case that the victor and heir in 
this struggle, the Christian Church of the East, was to be pre- 
dominantly a Greek church: the work of Alexander the Great tri- 
umphed even in this defeat of the classical spirit.

The Four Stages of Greek CultureThe Four Stages of Greek Culture

We can accordingly distinguish four historical phases of Greek 
culture: (1) before Alexander, the classical phase as a national 
culture; (2) after Alexander, Hellenism as a cosmopolitan secular 
culture; (3) later Hellenism as a pagan religious culture; and (4) 
Byzantinism as a Greek Christian culture. The transition from the 
first to the second phase is for the most part to be explained as an 
autonomous Greek development. In the second phase (300 3.c— 
first century B.c.) the Greek spirit was represented by the great rival 
schools of philosophy, the Academy, the Epicureans, and above all 
the Stoics, while at the same time the Greek-oriental synthesis was

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM ll

progressing. The transition from this to the third phase, the turn- 
ing to religion of ancient civilization as a whole and of the Greek 
mind with it, was the work of profoundly un-Greek forces which, 
originating in the East, entered history as new factors. Between 
the rule of Hellenistic secular culture and the final defensive posi- 
tion of a late Hellenism turned religious lie three centuries of revo- 
lutionary spiritual movements which effected this transformation, 
among which the gnostic movement occupies a prominent place. 
With these we have to deal later.

(4) THE PART OF THE EAST(4) THE PART OF THE EAST

So far we have considered the role of the Greek side in the 
combination of West and East, and in doing so started from the 
internal preconditions that enabled Hellenic culture to become a 
world civilization following upon Alexander’s conquests. These 
preconditions had of course to be matched by preconditions on the 
oriental side which explain the role of the East in the combination 
—its apparent or real passivity, docility, and readiness for assimila- 
tion. Military and political subjection alone is not sufficient to ex- 
plain the course of events, as the comparison with other conquests 
of areas of high culture shows throughout history, where often 
enough the victor culturally succumbs to the vanquished. We may 
even raise the question whether in a deeper sense, or at least par- 
tially, something of the kind did not also happen in the case of 
Hellenism; but what is certainly manifest at first is the unequivocal 
ascendancy of the Greek side, and this determined at least the form 
of all future cultural expression. What, then, was the condition of 
the oriental world on the eve of Alexander’s conquest to explain its 
succumbing to the expansion of Greek culture? And in what shape 
did native oriental forces survive and express themselves under the 
new conditions of Hellenism? For naturally this great East with its 
ancient and proud civilizations was not simply so much dead matter 
for the Greek form. Both questions, that concerning the antecedent 
conditions and that concerning the manner of survival, are incom- 
parably harder to answer for the oriental side than the parallel ones 
were for the Greek side. The reasons for this are as follows.

12 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM12 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

In the first place, for the time before Alexander, in contrast 
with the wealth of Greek sources we are faced with an utter paucity 
of oriental ones, except for the Jewish literature. Yet this negative 
fact, if we may take it as a sign of literary sterility, is itself a histori- 
cal testimony which confirms what we can infer from Greek sources 
about the contemporary state of the Eastern nations.

Moreover, this vast East, unified in the Persian Empire by sheer 
force, was far from being a cultural unity like the Greek world. 
Hellas was the same everywhere; the East, different from region to 
region. Thus an answer to the question regarding cultural precon- 
ditions would have to fall into as many parts as there were cultural 
entities involved. This fact also complicates the problem of Hellen- 
ism itself as regards its oriental component. Indeed, Gustav Droy- 
sen, the originator of the term “Hellenism” for the post-Alexandrian 
Greek-oriental synthesis, has himself qualified the term by stating 
that in effect as many different kinds of Hellenism evolved as there 
were different national individualities concerned. In many cases, 
however, these local factors are little known to us in their original 
form. Nevertheless, the overall homogeneity of the ensuing Hellen- 
istic development suggests some overall similarity of conditions. In 
fact, if we except Egypt, we can discern in the pre-Hellenistic 
Orient certain universalistic tendencies, beginnings of a spiritual 
syncretism, which may be taken as a counterpart to the cosmopoli- 
_ tan turn of the Greek mind. Of this we shall have more to say.Finally, in the period after Alexander the supremacy of pan- 
Hellenic civilization meant precisely that the East itself, if it aspired 
to literary expression at all, had to express itself in the Greek lan- 
guage and manner. Consequently the recognition of such instances 
of self-expression as voices of the East within the totality of Hellen- 
istic literature is for us frequently a matter of subtle and not un- 
equivocally demonstrable distinction: that is to say, the situation 
created by Hellenism is itself an ambiguous one. With the inter- 
esting methodological problem this presents we shall have to deal 
later.

These are some of the difficulties encountered in any attempt 
to clarify the picture of the Eastern half of the dual fact which we 
call Hellenism. We can nonetheless obtain a general though partly

14 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM14 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

as petrifaction could also be regarded as a mark of the perfection 
which a system of life has attained—this consideration may well 
in the case of Egypt. 
PS aysatan, the poageiad and Babylonian practice of expatri- 
ating and transplanting whole conquered peoples, or more —e 
rately their socially and culturally leading strata, had destroyed 4 
forces of cultural growth in many of the regions outside the ol 
centers. This fate had in many cases overtaken peoples of a more 
youthful cultural age who were still to unfold their potentialities. 
For the imperial manageability thus gained, the central power paid 
with the drying up of the potential sources of its own regeneration. 
Here we have doubtless one of the reasons for the torpor of the old 
centers we mentioned before: by breaking the national and regional 
vital forces throughout the kingdom, they had as it were surrounded 
themselves with a desert, and under these conditions the isolated 
summit of power was denied the benefit of whatever rejuvenating 
influences might have come from below. This may in part an 
the state of paralysis in which the East seems to have been sun 
prior to Alexander and from which it was delivered by the revivify- 
ing influence of the Hellenic spirit. : 
Beginnings of Religious Syncretism. Yet this same state © 
affairs contained also some positive conditions for the role which the 
East was to play in the Hellenistic age. It is not just that the pre- 
vailing passivity, the absence of consciously resisting forces, facili- 
tated assimilation. The very weakening of the strictly local aspects 
of indigenous cultures meant the removal of so many obstacles to a 
merging in a wider synthesis and thus made possible the entry of 
these elements into the common stock. In particular, the uprooting 
and transplantation of whole peoples had two significant effects. On 
the one hand, it favored the disengagement of cultural contents 
from their native soil, their abstraction into the transmissible form 
of teachings, and their consequently becoming available as elements 
in a cosmopolitan interchange of ideas—just as Hellenism could use 
them. On the other hand, it favored already a pre-Hellenistic syn- 
cretism, a merging of gods and cults of different and sometimes 
widely distant origins, which again anticipates an important feature 
of the ensuing Hellenistic development. Biblical history offers ex- 
amples of both these processes.INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 15

The earliest description of the genesis of an intentional religious 
syncretism is found in the narrative in II Kings 17:2441 concern- 
ing the new inhabitants settled by the Assyrian king in evacuated

Samaria, that well-known story of the origin of the Samaritan sect 
which closes with the words:

So these nations feared the Lord, and served their graven images, 
both their children and their children’s children: as did their fathers, so 
do they unto this day.

On a world-wide scale religious syncretism was later to become a 
decisive characteristic of Hellenism: we see here its inception in the 
East itself.

Beginnings of Theological Abstraction in Jewish, Babylonian, 
and Persian Religion. Even more important is the other develop- 
ment we mentioned, the transformation of the substance of local 
cultures into ideologies. To take another classic example from the 
Bible, the Babylonian exile forced the Jews to develop that aspect of 
their religion whose validity transcended the particular Palestinian 
conditions and to oppose the creed thus extracted in its purity to 
the other religious principles of the world into which they had been 
cast. This meant a confrontation of ideas with ideas. We find the | 
position fully realized in Second Isaiah, who enunciated the pure | 
principle of monotheism as a world cause, freed from the specifically | 
Palestinian limitations of the cult of Jahweh. Thus the very uproot- | 
ing brought to fulfillment a process which had started, it is true, 
with the older prophets.The uniqueness of the Jewish case notwithstanding, certain 
parallels to these developments can be discerned elsewhere in the 
political disintegration of the East or can be inferred from the later 
course of events. Thus, after the overthrow of Babylon by the 
Persians the Old-Babylonian religion ceased to be a state cult at- 
tached to the political center and bound up with its functions of 
rule. As one of the institutions of the monarchy it had enjoyed a 
defined official status, and this connection with a local system of 
secular power had supported and at the same time limited its role. 
Both support and restriction fell away with the loss of statehood. 
The release of the religion from a political function was an uproot- 
ing comparable to the territorial uprooting of Israel. The fate of

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 17

process in some ways analogous to the contemporary creation of the 
Talmud. Thus in the homeland and in the diaspora as well the 
changing conditions produced a similar result: the transformation. 
of traditional religion into a theological system whose characteris- 
tics approach those of a rational doctrine.We may suppose comparable processes to have taken place 
throughout the East, processes by which originally national and 
local beliefs were fitted to become elements of an international 
exchange of ideas. The general direction of these processes was 
toward dogmatization, in the sense that a principle was abstracted 
from the body of tradition and unfolded into a coherent doctrine. 
Greek influence, furnishing both incentive and logical tools, every- 
where brought this process to maturity; but as we have just tried 
to show, the East itself had on the eve of Hellenism already initi- 
ated it in significant instances. The three we have mentioned were 
chosen with particular intent: Jewish monotheism, Babylonian as- 
trology, and Iranian dualism were probably the three main spiritual 
forces that the East contributed to the configuration of Hellenism, 
and they increasingly influenced its later course.

So much for what we called “preconditions.” We may just 
pause to note the fact that the first cosmopolitan civilization known 
to history, for so we may regard the Hellenistic, was made possible 
by catastrophes overtaking the original units of regional culture. 
Without the fall of states and nations, this process of abstraction 
and interchange might never have occurred on such a scale. This 
is true, though less obviously, even for the Greek side, where the 
political decline of the polis, this most intensive of particularistic 
formations, provided a comparable negative precondition. Only in 
the case of Egypt, which we omitted in our survey, were conditions 
entirely different. In the main, however, it was from Asia, whether 
Semitic or Iranian, that the forces issued that were actively operative 
in the Hellenistic synthesis together with the Greek heritage: thus 
we can confine our sketch to the Asiatic conditions.

The East Under HellenismThe East Under Hellenism

Having dealt with the preconditions, we must briefly consider 
the destiny of the East under the new dispensation of Hellenism. 
The first thing we note is that the East became silent for several

——

18 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

centuries and was all but invisible in the overpowering light of the 
Hellenic day. With regard to what followed from the first century 
A.D. onward, we may call this opening stage the period of latency 
of the oriental mind and derive from this observation a division of 
the Hellenistic age into two distinct periods: the period of manifest 
Greek dominance and oriental submersion, and the period of reac- 
tion of a renascent East, which in its turn advanced victoriously in 
a kind of spiritual counterattack into the West and reshaped the 
universal culture. We are speaking of course in terms of intellectual 
' and not of political events. In this sense, Hellenization of the East 
prevails in the first period, orientalization of the West in the sec- 
ond, the latter process coming to an end by about 300 a». The 
result of both is a synthesis which carried over into the Middle 
Ages.The Submersion of the East. About the first period we can 
be brief. It was the age of the Seleucid and Ptolemaic kingdoms, 
particularly characterized by the efflorescence of Alexandria. Hel- 
lenism triumphed throughout the East and constituted the general 
culture whose canons of thought and expression were adopted by 
everyone who wished to participate in the intellectual life of the 
age. Only the Greek voice was heard: all public literary utterance 
was in its idiom. In view of what we said about the entering of 
orientals into the stream of Greek intellectual life, the muteness 
of the East cannot be construed as a lack of intellectual vitality on 
the part of its individuals: it consists rather in its not speaking for 
itself, in its own name. Anyone who had something to say had no 
choice but to say it in Greek, not only in terms of language but 
also in terms of concept, ideas, and literary form, that is, as ostensi- 
bly part of the Greek tradition.

To be sure, the Hellenistic civilization, wide open and hospi- 
table, had room for creations of the oriental mind once they had 
assumed the Greek form. Thus the formal unity of this culture 
covered in fact a plurality, yet always as it were under the official 
Greek stamp. For the East, this situation engendered a kind of 
mimicry which had far-reaching consequences for its whole future. 
‘The Greek mind on its part could not remain unaffected: it was the 
recognition of the difference in what was called “Greek” before and 
after Alexander that prompted Droysen to introduce the term “Hel-

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 19

lenistic” in distinction to the classical “Hellenic.” “Hellenistic” was | 
intended to denote not just the enlargement of the polis culture to 
a cosmopolitan culture and the transformations inherent in this 
process glone but also the change of character following from the 
reception of oriental influences into this enlarged whole.However, the anonymity of the Eastern contributions makes

"hese influences in the first period hard to identify. Men like Zeno,

whom we mentioned before, wished to be nothing but Hellenes, 
and their assimilation was as complete as any such can be. Phi- 
losophy generally ran on very much in the tracks laid down by the 
native Greek schools; but toward the end of the period, about two 
centuries after Zeno, it too began to show significant signs of change 
in its hitherto autonomous development. The signs are at first by 
no means unambiguous. The continuing controversy about Posei- 
donius of Apameia (about 135-50 B.c.) well illustrates the diffi- 
culty of any confident attribution of influences and in general the 
uncertainty as to what in this period is genuinely Greek and what 
tinged with orientalism. Is the fervent astral piety that pervades his 
philosophy an expression of the Eastern mind or not? Both sides 
can be argued, and probably will continue to be, though there can 
be no doubt that, whether or not he was Greek by birth, to his 
own mind his thought was truly Greek. In this case, so in the 
general picture: we cannot demand a greater certainty than the 
complex nature of the situation admits. Faced with the peculiar 
anonymity, we might even say pseudonymity, that cloaks the orien- 
tal element, we must be content with the general impression that 
oriental influences in the broadest sense were at work throughout 
this period in the domain of Greek thought.A clearer case is presented by the growing literature on “the 
wisdom of the barbarians” that made its appearance in Greek let- 
ters: in the long run it did not remain a matter of merely anti- 
quarian interest but gradually assumed a propagandist character. 
The initiative of Greek authors in this field was taken up in the 
old centers of the East, Babylon and Egypt, by native priests, who 
turned to composing accounts of their national histories and cultures 
in the Greek language. The very ancient could always count on a 
respectful curiosity on the part of the Greek public, but as this was 
increasingly accompanied by a receptivity toward the spiritual con-

ae

20 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

tents themselves, the antiquarians were encouraged imperceptibly 
to turn into teachers and preachers.

The most important form, however, in which the East con- 
tributed at this time to the Hellenistic culture was in the field not 
of literature but of cult: the religious syncretism which was to be- 
come the most decisive fact in the later phase begins to take shape 
in this first period of the Hellenistic era. The meaning of the term 
“syncretism” may be extended, and usually is, to cover secular phe- 
nomena as well; and in this case the whole Hellenistic civilization 
may be called syncretistic, in that it increasingly became a mixed 
culture. Strictly speaking, however, syncretism denotes a religious 
phenomenon which the ancient term “theocrasy,” ic. mixing of 
gods, expresses more adequately. This is a central phenomenon of 
the period and one to which we, otherwise familiar with the inter- 
mingling of ideas and cultural values, have no exact parallel in our 
contemporary experience. It was the ever-growing range and depth 
of just this process that eventually led over from the first to the 
second, the religious-oriental, period of Hellenism. The theocrasy| expressed itself in myth as well as in cult, and one of its most 
_ important logical tools was allegory, of which philosophy had al-

ready been making use in its relation to religion and myth. Of all 
the phenomena noted in this survey of the first period of Hellenism, 
it is in this religious one that the East is most active and most itself. 
The growing prestige of Eastern gods and cults within the Western 
world heralded the role which the East was to play in the second 
period, when the leadership passed into its hands. It was a religious 
role, whereas the Greek contribution to the Hellenistic whole was 
that of a secular culture.

In sum, we may state of the first half of Hellenism, which lasts 
roughly until the time of Christ, that it is in the main characterized 
by this Greek secular culture. For the East, it is a time of prepara- 
tion for its re-emergence, comparable to a period of incubation. We 
can only guess from its subsequent eruption at the profound trans- 
formations that must have occurred there at this time under the 
Hellenistic surface. With the one great exception of the Maccabaean 
revolt, there is hardly any sign of oriental self-assertion within the 
Hellenistic orbit in the whole period from Alexander to Caesar. 
Beyond the borders, the founding of the Parthian kingdom and the

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 21

revival of Mazdaism parallel the Jewish case. These events do little 
to disturb the general picture of Hellas as the assimilating and the 
East as the assimilated part during this period.revival of Mazdaism parallel the Jewish case. These events do little 
to disturb the general picture of Hellas as the assimilating and the 
East as the assimilated part during this period.

Greek Conceptualization of Eastern Thought. Nevertheless, 
this period of latency was of profound significance in the life his- 
tory of the East itself. The Greek monopoly of all forms of intellec- 
tual expression had for the oriental spirit simultaneously the aspects 
of suppression and of liberation: suppression because this monopoly 
deprived it of its native medium and forced a dissimulation upon the 
expression of its own contents; liberation because the Greek concep- 
tual form offered to the oriental mind an entirely new possibility of 
bringing to light the meaning of its own heritage. We have seen 
that the lifting of generally communicable spiritual principles out

of the mass of popular tradition was under way on the eve ofof the mass of popular tradition was under way on the eve of

Hellenism; but it was with the logical means provided by the Greek 
spirit that this process came to fruition. For Greece had invented the 
logos, the abstract concept, the method of theoretical exposition, the 
reasoned system—one of the greatest discoveries in the history of the 
human mind. This formal instrument, applicable to any content 
whatsoever, Hellenism made available to the East, whose self- 
expression could now benefit from it. The effect, delayed in its 
manifestation, was immeasurable. Oriental thought had been non- 
conceptual, conveyed in images and symbols, rather disguising its 
ultimate objects in myths and rites than expounding them logically. 
In the rigidity of its ancient symbols it lay bound; from this im- 
prisonment it was liberated by the vivifying breath of Greek 
thought, which gave new momentum and at the same time ade- 
quate tools to whatever tendencies of abstraction had been at work 
before. At bottom, oriental thought remained mythological, as 
became clear when it presented itself anew to the world; but it had 
learned in the meantime to bring its ideas into the form of theories 
and to employ rational concepts, instead of sensuous imagery alone, 
in expounding them. In this way, the definite formulation of the 
systems of dualism, astrological fatalism, and transcendent mono- 
theism came about with the help of Greek conceptualization. With 
the status of metaphysical doctrines they gained general currency, 
and their message could address itself to all. Thus the Greek spirit 
delivered Eastern thought from the bondage of its own symbolism

az INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

and enabled it in the reflection of the Jogos to discover itself. And 
it was with the arms acquired from the Greek arsenal that the East, 
when its time came, launched its counteroffensive.and enabled it in the reflection of the Jogos to discover itself. And 
it was with the arms acquired from the Greek arsenal that the East, 
when its time came, launched its counteroffensive.

The Eastern “Underground.” Inevitably the blessings of a 
development of this kind are not unmixed, and the dangers in- 
herent in it for the genuine substance of oriental thought are obvi- 
ous. For one thing, every generalization or rationalization is paid 
for with the loss of specificity. In particular, the Greek ascendancy 
naturally tempted oriental thinkers to profit from the prestige of 
everything Greek by expressing their cause not directly but in the 
disguise of analogues gleaned from the Greek tradition of thought. 
Thus, for instance, astrological fatalism and magic could be clothed 
in the garments of the Stoic cosmology with its doctrines of sym- 
pathy and cosmic law, religious dualism in the garment of Plato- 
nism. To the mentality of assimilation this was certainly a rise in 
the world; but the mimicry thus initiated reacted upon the further 
growth of the Eastern mind and presents peculiar problems of inter- 
pretation to the historian. The phenomenon which Oswald Speng- 
ler called, with a term borrowed from mineralogy, “pseudomorpho- 
sis” will engage our attention as we go on (see below, Ch. 2, 2).There was another, perhaps still profounder, effect which Greek 
ascendancy had upon the inner life of the East, an effect which was 
to become manifest only much later: the division of the oriental 
spirit into a surface and a sub-surface stream, a public and a secret 
tradition. For the force of the Greek exemplar had not only a 
stimulating but also a repressive effect. Its selective standards acted 
like a filter: what was capable of Hellenization was passed and 
gained a place in the light, that is, became part of the articulate 
upper stratum of the cosmopolitan culture; the remainder, the 
radically different and unassimilable, was excluded and went under- 
ground. This “other” could not feel itself represented by the con- 
ventional creations of the literary world, could not in the general 
message recognize its own. To oppose its message to the dominant 
one it had to find its own language; and to find it became a process 
of long toil. In the nature of things it was the most genuine and 
original tendencies of the spirit of the East, those of the future rather 
than of the past, that were subjected to this condition of subterranean 
existence. Thus the spiritual monopoly of Greece caused the growth

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 23

of an invisible East whose secret life formed an antagonistic under- 
current beneath the surface of the public Hellenistic civilization. 
Processes of profound transformation, far-reaching new departures, 
must have been under way in this period of submergence. We do

_ not know them, of course; and our whole description, conjectural

as it is, would be without foundation were it not for the sudden 
eruption of a new East which we witness at the turn of the era and 
from whose force and scale we can draw inferences as to its incuba- 
tion.

The Re-emergence of the EastThe Re-emergence of the East

What we do witness at the period roughly coinciding with the ) 
beginnings of Christianity is an explosion of the East. Like long- | 
pent-up waters its forces broke through the Hellenistic crust and 
flooded the ancient world, flowing into the established Greek forms 
and filling them with their content, besides creating their own new 
beds. The metamorphosis of Hellenism into a religious oriental 
culture was set on foot. The time of the breakthrough was probably 
determined by the coinciding of two complementary conditions, the 
maturing of the subterranean growth in the East, which enabled it 
to.emerge into the light of day, and the readiness of the West for a 
religious renewal, even its deeply felt need of it, which was 
grounded in the whole spiritual state of that world and disposed 
it to respond eagerly to the message of the East. This complemen- 
tary relation of activity and receptivity is not unlike the converse 
one which obtained three centuries earlier when Greece advanced 
into the East.

The Novelty of Revived Eastern Thought. Now it is important 
to recognize that in these events we are dealing, not with a reaction 
of the old East, but with a novel phenomenon which at that crucial 
hour entered the stage of history. The “Old East” was dead. The 
new awakening did not mean a classicist resuscitation of its time- 
honored heritage. Not even the more recent conceptualizations of 
earlier oriental thought were the real substance of the movement. 
Traditional dualism, traditional astrological fatalism, traditional 
monotheism were all drawn into it, yet with such a peculiarly new 
twist to them that in the present setting they subserved the repre- 
sentation of a novel spiritual principle; and the same is true of the |

—=

24 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM—=

24 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

use of Greek philosophical terms. It is necessary to emphasize this 
fact from the outset because of the strong suggestion to the contrary 
created by the outer appearances, which have long misled historians 
into regarding the fabric of thought they were confronted with, 
except for its Christian part, as simply made up of the remnants of 
older traditions. They all do in fact appear in the new stream: 
symbols of old oriental thought, indeed its whole mythological 
heritage; ideas and figures from Biblical lore; doctrinal and termi- 
nological elements from Greek philosophy, particularly Platonism. 
It is in the nature of the syncretistic situation that all these different 
elements were available and could be combined at will. But syncre- 
tism itself provides only the outer aspect and not the essence of the 
phenomenon. The outer aspect is confusing by its compositeness, 
and even more so by the associations of the old names. However, 
though these associations are by no means irrelevant, we can discern 
a new spiritual center around which the elements of tradition now 
crystallize, the unity behind their multiplicity; and this rather than 
the syncretistic means of expression is the true entity with which 
we are confronted. If we acknowledge this center as an autonomous 
force, then we must say that it makes use of those elements rather 
than that it is constituted by their confluence; and the whole which 
thus originated will in spite of its manifestly synthetic character 
have to be understood not as the product of an uncommitted 
eclecticism but as an original and determinate system of ideas.Yet this system has to be elicited as such from the mass of dis- 
parate materials, which yield it only under proper questioning, that 
is, to an interpretation already guided by an anticipatory knowledge 
of the underlying unity. A certain circularity in the proof thus ob- 
tained cannot be denied, nor can the subjective element involved in 
the intuitive anticipation of the goal toward which the interpreta- 
tion is to move. Such, however, is the nature and risk of historical 
interpretation, which has to take its cues from an initial impression 
of the material and is vindicated only by the result, its intrinsic con- 
vincingness or plausibility, and above all by the progressively con- 
firmatory experience of things falling into their place when brought 
into contact with the hypothetical pattern.

Major Manifestations of the Oriental Wave in the Hellenistic 
World. We have now to give a brief enumeration of the phenom-

INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM 25

\ 
ena in which the oriental wave manifests itself in the Hellenistic 
world from about the beginning of the Christian era onward. They 
are in the main as follows: the spread of Hellenistic Judaism, and 
especially the rise of Alexandrian Jewish philosophy; the spread of 
Babylonian astrology and of magic, coinciding with a general 
growth of fatalism in the Western world; the spread of diverse 
Eastern mystery-cults over the Hellenistic-Roman world, and their 
evolution into spiritual mystery-religions; the rise of Christianity; 
the efflorescence of the gnostic movements with their great system- 
formations inside and outside the Christian framework; and the 
transcendental philosophies of late antiquity, beginning with Neo- 
pythagoreanism and culminating in the Neoplatonic school.All these phenomena, different as they are, are in a broad sense 
interrelated. Their teachings have important points in common and 
even in their divergences share in a common climate of thought: the 
literature of each can supplement our understanding of the others. 
More obvious than kinship of spiritual substance is the recurrence of 
typical patterns of expression, specific images and formulas, through- 
out the literature of the whole group. In Philo of Alexandria we 
encounter, besides the Platonic and Stoic elements with which the 
Jewish core is overlaid, also the language of the mystery-cults and 
the incipient terminology of a new mysticism. The mystery- 
religions on their part have strong relations to the astral complex of 
ideas. Neoplatonism is wide open to all pagan, and especially East- 
ern, religious lore having a pretense to antiquity and a halo of 
spirituality. Christianity, even in its “orthodox” utterances, had 
from the outset (certainly as early as St. Paul) syncretistic aspects, 
far exceeded however in this respect by its heretical offshoots: the 
gnostic systems compounded everything—oriental mythologies, as- 
trological doctrines, Iranian theology, elements of Jewish tradition, 
whether Biblical, rabbinical, or occult, Christian salvation-eschatol- 
ogy, Platonic terms and concepts. Syncretism attained in this period 
its greatest efficacy. It was no longer confined to specific cults and 
the concern of their priests but pervaded the whole thought of the 
age and showed itself in all provinces of literary expression. Thus, 
none of the phenomena we have enumerated can be considered 
apart from the rest.

Yet the syncretism, the intermingling of given ideas and

26 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISMYet the syncretism, the intermingling of given ideas and

26 INTRODUCTION: EAST AND WEST IN HELLENISM

images, i.¢., of the coined currencies of the several traditions, is of 
course a formal fact only which leaves open the question of the 
mental content whose external appearance it thus determines. Is 
there a one in the many, and what is it? we ask in the face of such 
a compound phenomenon. What is the organizing force in the 
syncretistic matter? We said before by way of preliminary assertion 
that in spite of its “synthetic” exterior the new spirit was not a 
directionless eclecticism. What then was the directing principle, and 
what the direction?The Underlying Unity: Representativeness of Gnostic Thought. 
In order to reach an answer to this question, one has to fix one’s 
attention upon certain characteristic mental attitudes which are 
more or less distinctly exhibited throughout the whole group, ir- 
respective of otherwise greatly differing content and intellectual 
level. If in these common features we find at work a spiritual prin- 
ciple which was not present in the given elements of the mixture, 
we may identify this as the true agent of it. Now such a novel 
principle can in fact be discerned, though in many shadings of 
determinateness, throughout the literature we mentioned. It appears 
everywhere in the movements coming from the East, and most con- 
spicuously in that group of spiritual movements which are com- 
prised under the name “gnostic.” We can therefore take the latter 
as the most radical and uncompromising representatives of a new 
spirit, and may consequently call the general principle, which in 
less unequivocal representations extends beyond the area of gnostic 
literature proper, by way of analogy the “gnostic principle.” What- 
ever the usefulness of such an extension of the meaning of the 
name, it is certain that the study of this particular group not only 
is highly interesting in itself but also can furnish, if not the key to 
the whole epoch, at least a vital contribution toward its understand- 
ing. I personally am strongly inclined to regard the whole series of 
phenomena in which the oriental wave manifests itself as different 
refractions of, and reactions to, this hypothetical gnostic principle, 
and I have elsewhere argued my reasons for this view.2 However 
far such a view may be granted, it carries in its own meaning the 
qualification that what can be thus identified as a common denomi-

SH. Jonas, Gnosis und spdtantiker Geist, 1 and Il, 1, passim; see especially 
the introduction to vol, I, and Ch. 4 of vol. II, 1.

LEGE LIBRARY 
es ON-HUDSON, N.YSH. Jonas, Gnosis und spdtantiker Geist, 1 and Il, 1, passim; see especially 
the introduction to vol, I, and Ch. 4 of vol. II, 1.

LEGE LIBRARY 
es ON-HUDSON, N.Y

Chapter 2. The Meaning of Gnosis and 
the Extent of the Gnostic Movement

(2) SPIRITUAL CLIMATE OF THE ERA

At the beginning of the Christian era and progressively 
throughout the two following centuries, the eastern Mediterranean 
world was in profound spiritual ferment. The genesis of Christian- 
ity itself and the response to its message are evidence of this fer- 
ment, but they do not stand alone. With regard to the environment 
in which Christianity originated, the recently discovered Dead Sea 
Scrolls have added powerful support to the view, reasonably certain 
before, that Palestine was seething with eschatological (i.e., salva- 
tional) movements and that the emergence of the Christian sect was 
anything but an isolated incident. In the thought of the manifold 
gnostic sects which soon began to spring up everywhere in the wake 
of the Christian expansion, the spiritual crisis of the age found its 
boldest expression and, as it were, its extremist representation. The 
abstruseness of their speculations, in part intentionally provocative, 
does not diminish but rather enhances their symbolic representative- 
ness for the thought of an agitated period. Before narrowing down 
our investigation to the particular phenomenon of Gnosticism, we 
must briefly indicate the main features that characterize this con- 
temporary thought as a whole.First, all the phenomena which we noted in connection with 
the “oriental wave” are of a decidedly religious nature; and this, as 
we have repeatedly stated, is the prominent characteristic of the 
second phase of Hellenistic culture in general. Second, all these 
currents have in some way to do with salvation: the general religion 
of the period is a religion of salvation. Third; all of them exhibit 
an exceedingly transcendent (ie., transmundane) conception of God 
and in connection with it an equally transcendent and other-worldly 
idea of the goal of salvation. Finally, they maintain a radical dual- 
ism of realms of being—God and the world, spirit and matter, soul 
and body, light and darkness, good and evil, life and death—and

31

MEANING OF GNOSIS AND EXTENT OF GNOSTIC MOVEMENT 33

Simon Magus). Modern research has progressively broadened this | 
traditional range by arguing the existence of a pre-Christian Jewish 
and a Hellenistic pagan Gnosticism, and by making known the | 
Mandaean sources, the most striking example of Eastern Gnosticism 
outside the Hellenistic orbit, and other new material. Finally, if we 
take as a criterion not so much the special motif of “knowledge” 
as the dualistic-anticosmic spirit in general, the religion of Mani too , 
must be classified as gnostic.

(c) THE ORIGIN OF GNOSTICISM(c) THE ORIGIN OF GNOSTICISM

Asking next the question where or from what historical tradi- 
tion Gnosticism originated, we are confronted with an old crux 
of historical speculation: the most conflicting theories have been 
advanced in the course of time and are still in the field today. The 
early Church Fathers, and independently of them Plotinus, empha- 
sized the influence upon a Christian thinking not yet firmly consoli- 
dated of Plato and of misunderstood Hellenic philosophy in general. 
Modern scholars have advanced in turn Hellenic, Babylonian, Egyp- 
tian, and Iranian origins and every possible combination of these 
with one another and with Jewish and Christian elements. Since 
in the material of its representation Gnosticism actually is a product 
of syncretism, each of these theories can be supported from the 
sources and none of them is satisfactory alone; but neither is the 
combination of all of them, which would make Gnosticism out to be 
a mere mosaic of these elements and so miss its autonomous essence. 
On the whole, however, the oriental thesis has an edge over the 
Hellenic one, once the meaning of the term “knowledge” is freed 
from the misleading associations suggested by the tradition of classi- 
cal philosophy. The recent Coptic discoveries in Upper Egypt (see 
below, sec. ¢) are said to underline the share of a heterodox oc- 
cultist Judaism, though judgment must be reserved pending the 
translation of the vast body of material.’ Some connection of Gnos- 
ticism with the beginnings of the Cabbala has in any case to be as- 
sumed, whatever the order of cause and effect. The violently anti- 
Jewish bias of the more prominent gnostic systems is by itself not 
incompatible with Jewish heretical origin at some distance. Inde-

+ Nothing so far presented has to my mind proven the Judaistic thesis.

34 GNOSTIC LITERATURE—MAIN TENETS, SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE+ Nothing so far presented has to my mind proven the Judaistic thesis.

34 GNOSTIC LITERATURE—MAIN TENETS, SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE

pendently, however, of who the first Gnostics were and what the 
main religious traditions drawn into the movement and suffering ar- 
bitrary reinterpretation at its hands, the movement itself transcended 
ethnic and denominational boundaries, and its spiritual principle 
was new. The Jewish strain in Gnosticism is as little the orthodox 
Jewish as the Babylonian is the orthodox Babylonian, the Iranian 
the orthodox Iranian, and so on. Regarding the case made out for 
a preponderance of Hellenic influence, much depends on how the 
crucial concept of “knowledge” is to be understood in this context.

(d) THE NATURE OF GNOSTIC “KNOWLEDGE”(d) THE NATURE OF GNOSTIC “KNOWLEDGE”

“Knowledge” is by itself a purely formal term and does not 
specify what is to be known; neither does it specify the psychologi- 
cal manner and subjective significance of possessing knowledge or 
the ways in which it is acquired. As for what the knowledge is 
about, the associations of the term most familiar to the classically 
trained reader point to rational objects, and accordingly to natural 
reason as the organ for acquiring and possessing knowledge. In 
the gnostic context, however, “knowledge” has an emphatically reli- 
gious or supranatural meaning and refers to objects which we 
nowadays should call those of faith rather than of reason. Now 
although the relation between faith and knowledge (pistis and 
gnosis) became a major issue in the Church between the gnostic 
heretics and the orthodox, this was not the modern issue between 
faith and reason with which we are familiar; for the “knowledge” 
of the Gnostics with which simple Christian faith was contrasted 
whether in praise or blame was not of the rational kind. Gnosis 
meant pre-eminently knowledge of God, and from what we have 
said about the radical transcendence of the deity it follows that 
“knowledge of God” is the knowledge of something naturally un- 
knowable and therefore itself not a natural condition. Its objects 
include everything that belongs to the divine realm of being, 
namely, the order and history of the upper worlds, and what is to 
issue from it, namely, the salvation of man. With objects of this 
kind, knowledge as a mental act is vastly different from the rational 
cognition of philosophy. On the one hand it is closely bound up 
with revelationary experience, so that reception of the truth either

MEANING OF GNOSIS AND EXTENT OF GNOSTIC MOVEMENT 35MEANING OF GNOSIS AND EXTENT OF GNOSTIC MOVEMENT 35

through sacred and secret lore or through inner illumination re- 
places rational argument and theory (though this extra-rational basis 
may then provide scope for independent speculation); on the other 
hand, being concerned with the secrets of salvation, “knowledge” 
is not just theoretical information about certain things but is itself, 
as a modification of the human condition, charged with perform- 
ing a function in the bringing about of salvation. Thus gnostic 
“knowledge” has an eminently practical aspect. The ultimate “ob- 
ject” of gnosis is God: its event in the soul transforms the knower / 
himself by making him a partaker in the divine existence (which | 
means more than assimilating him to the divine essence). Thus in 
the more radical systems like the Valentinian the “knowledge” is I 
not only an instrument of salvation but itself the very form in which ly 
the goal of salvation, i.e., ultimate perfection, is possessed. In these 
cases knowledge and the attainment of the known by the soul are 
claimed to coincide—the claim of all true mysticism. It is, to be 
sure, also the claim of Greek theoria, but in a different sense. 
There, the object of knowledge is the universal, and the cognitive 
relation is “optical,” ie. an analogue of the visual relation to objec- 
tive form that remains unaffected by the relation. Gnostic “knowl- 
edge” is about the particular (for the transcendent deity is still a 
particular), and the relation of knowing is mutual, ic. a being 
known at the same time, and involving active self-divulgence on 
the part of the “known.” There, the mind is “informed” with the 
forms it beholds and while it beholds (thinks) them: here, the 
subject is “transformed” (from “soul” to “spirit”) by the union with | 
a reality that in truth is itself the supreme subject in the situation | 
and strictly speaking never an object at all.These few preliminary remarks are sufficient to delimitate the 
gnostic type of “knowledge” from the idea of rational theory in 
terms of which Greek philosophy had developed the concept. Yet 
the suggestions of the term “knowledge” as such, reinforced by the 
fact that Gnosticism produced real thinkers who unfolded the con- 
tents of the secret “knowledge” in elaborate doctrinal systems and 
used abstract concepts, often with philosophical antecedents, in 
their exposition, have favored a strong tendency among theologians 
and historians to explain Gnosticism by the impact of the Greek 
ideal of knowledge on the new religious forces which came to the

38 GNOSTIC LITERATURE——-MAIN TENETS, SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE

tolian”) branch. Of its Italic branch Epiphanius has preserved an 
entire literary document, Ptolemaeus’ Letter to Flora. In the case 
of such complete, or almost complete, renderings of the subject of 
the attack (among which may be counted also Hippolytus’ reports 
on the Naassenes and on the book Baruch), our distinction between 
secondary and primary sources of course becomes blurred. It is in 
the nature of the case that all the originals preserved through this 
medium, whether whole or in part (the latter is the rule), were 
Greek. Taken together, these patristic sources give information 
about a large number of sects, all of them at least nominally Chris- 
tian, though in some cases the Christian veneer is rather thin. A 
unique contribution from the pagan camp concerning this group is 
the treatise of Plotinus, the Neoplatonic philosopher, Against the 
Gnostics, or against those who say that the Creator of the World 
is evil and that the World is bad (Enn. II. 9). It is directed against 
the teachings of one particular Christian gnostic sect which cannot 
be definitely identified with any individual one named in the patris- 
tic catalogues but clearly falls into one of their major groupings.2. After the third century the anti-heretical writers had to con- 
cern themselves with the refutation of Manichacism. They did not 
consider this new religion as part of the gnostic heresy, which in 
its narrower sense had by then been disposed of; but by the broader 
criteria of the history of religion it belongs to the same circle of 
ideas. Of the very extensive Christian literature we need name only 
the Acta Archelai, the works of Titus of Bostra (Greek), of St. 
Augustine (Latin), and of Theodore bar Konai (Syriac). Here too 
a philosophically trained pagan author, Alexander of Lycopolis (in 
Egypt), writing one generation after Mani, supplements the Chris- 
tian chorus.

3. In a qualified way, some of the mystery-religions of late an- 
tiquity also belong to the gnostic circle, insofar as they allegorized 
their ritual and their original cult-myths in a spirit similar to the 
gnostic one: we may mention the mysteries of Isis, Mithras, and 
Attis. The sources in this case consist of reports by contemporary 
Greek and Latin, mostly pagan, writers.

4. A certain amount of veiled information is scattered in rab- 
binical literature, though on the whole, unlike the Christian prac-

42 GNOSTIC LITERATURE—MAIN TENETS, SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE

an abstraction. The leading Gnostics displayed pronounced intellec- 
tual individualism, and the mythological imagination of the whole 
movement was incessantly fertile. Non-conformism was almost a 
principle of the gnostic mind and was closely connected with the 
doctrine of the sovereign “spirit” as a source of direct knowledge

, and illumination. Already Irenaeus (Adv. Haer. I. 18. 1) observed

that “Every day every one of them invents something new.” The

| great system builders like Ptolemacus, Basilides, Mani erected, and illumination. Already Irenaeus (Adv. Haer. I. 18. 1) observed

that “Every day every one of them invents something new.” The

| great system builders like Ptolemacus, Basilides, Mani erected

ingenious and elaborate speculative structures which are original 
creations of individual minds yet at the same time variations and 
developments of certain main themes shared by all: these together 
form what we may call the simpler “basic myth.” On a less intellec- 
tual level, the same basic content is conveyed in fables, exhortations, 
practical instructions (moral and magical), hymns, and prayers. In 
order to help the reader to see the unity of the whole field before 
entering into the detailed treatment, we shall outline this “basic 
myth” that can be abstracted from the confusing variety of the 
actual material.

(f) ABSTRACT OF MAIN GNOSTIC TENETS

Theology

The cardinal feature of gnostic thought is the radical dualism 
that governs the relation of God and world, and correspondingly

“that of man and world. The deity is absolutely transmundane, its

—

nature alien to that of the universe, which it neither created nor 
governs and to which it is the complete antithesis: to the divine 
realm of light, self-contained and remote, the cosmos is opposed as 
the realm of darkness. The world is the work of lowly powers 
which though they may mediately be descended from Him do not 
know the true God and obstruct the knowledge of Him in the 
cosmos over which they rule. The genesis of these lower powers, the 
Archons (rulers), and in general that of all the orders of being 
outside God, including the world itself, is a main theme of gnostic 
speculation, of which we shall give examples later. The transcend- 
ent God Himself is hidden from all creatures and is unknowable 
by natural concepts. Knowledge of Him requires supranatural

>

— 7

—

MEANING OF GNOSIS AND EXTENT OF GNOSTIC MOVEMENT 43>

— 7

—

MEANING OF GNOSIS AND EXTENT OF GNOSTIC MOVEMENT 43

revelation and illumination and even then can hardly be expressed 
otherwise than in negative terms.

Cosmology

The universe, the domain of the Archons, is like a vast prison 
whose innermost dungeon is the éarth, the scene of man’s life. 
Around and above it the cosmic spheres are ranged like concentric

enclosing shells. Most frequently there are the seven spheres of the ©

planets surrounded by the eighth, that of the fixed stars. There 
was, however, a tendency to multiply the structures and make the

7)

2 
i

fe:

‘

. *7° 7 , 
scheme more and more extensive: Basilides counted no fewer than} “» '¥

365 “heavens.” The religious significance of this cosmic architec- | 
ture lies in the idea that everything which intervenes between here 
and the beyond serves to separate man from God, not merely by 
spatial distance but through active demonic force. Thus the vast- 
ness and multiplicity of the cosmic system express the degree to 
which man is removed from God.The spheres are the seats of the Archons, especially of the! 
“Seven,” that is, of the planetary gods borrowed from the Baby-\ 
lonian pantheon. It is significant that these are now often called 
by Old Testament names for God (Iao, Sabaoth, Adonai, Elohim, 
E] Shaddai), which from being synonyms for the one and supreme 
God are by this transposition turned into proper names of inferior 
demonic beings—an example of the pejorative revaluation to which 
Gnosticism subjected ancient traditions in general and Jewish tra-_ 
dition in particular. The Archons collectively rule over the world, | 
and each individually in his sphere is a warder of the cosmic prison. 
Their tyrannical world-rule is called heimarmene, universal Fate, 
a concept taken over from astrology but now tinged with the 
gnostic anti-cosmic spirit. In its physical aspect this rule is the law 
of nature; in its psychical aspect, which includes for instance the 
institution and enforcement of the Mosaic Law, it aims at the 
enslavement of man. As guardian of his sphere, each Archon bars

the passage to the souls that seek to ascend after death, in order,

to prevent their escape from the world and their return to God. 
The Archons are also the creators of the world, except where this 
role is reserved for their leader, who then has the name of demi-

44 GNOSTIC LITERATURE—MAIN TENETS, SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE

urge (the world-artificer in Plato’s Timaeus) and is often painted 
with the distorted features of the Old Testament God.

Anthropology44 GNOSTIC LITERATURE—MAIN TENETS, SYMBOLIC LANGUAGE

urge (the world-artificer in Plato’s Timaeus) and is often painted 
with the distorted features of the Old Testament God.

Anthropology

Man, the main object of these vast dispositions, is composed of 
flesh, soul, and spirit. But reduced to ultimate principles, his origin 
is twofold: mundane and extra-mundane. Not only the body but 
also the “soul” is a product of the cosmic powers, which shaped the 
body in the image of the divine Primal (or Archetypal) Man and 
animated it with their own psychical forces: these are the appetites 
and passions of natural man, each of which stems from and corre- 
sponds to one of the cosmic spheres and all of which together make 
up the astral soul of man, his “psyche.” Through his body and his 
soul man is a part of the world and subjected to the Acimarmene.

| Enclosed in the soul is the spirit, or “pneuma” (called also the

_

_“spark”), a portion of the divine substance from beyond which has 
fallen into the world; and the Archons created man for the express

purpose of keeping it captive there. Thus, as in the macrocosm man 
is enclosed by the seven spheres, so in the human microcosm again 
the pneuma is enclosed by the seven soul-vestments originating

, from them. In its unredeemed state the pneuma thus immersed in

soul and flesh is unconscious of itself, benumbed, asleep, or intox- 
icated by the poison of the world: in brief, it is “ignorant.” Its 
awakening and liberation is effected through “knowledge.”

Eschatology

The radical nature of the dualism determines that of the doc- 
trine of salvation. As alien as the tr